The Sacred Books of the East, Vol. 25: The Laws of Manu (Georg Bühler (trans.), 1886)
=====================================================================================
SBE Vol. 25: the Mânava Dharma-shâstra (Laws of Manu). Completes the SBE series gap. Public domain. Internet Archive.

TTEffa SW1WR

L.B.S. National Academy of Administration
MUSSbORIE

LIBRARY

3T*Tfcr^T
Accession No.

?FT flSlTT
Class No. _

3**W*r©TT
Book No. _

1017*7

GL 294.544
LAW

101797

UBSNAA

SACRED BOOKS OF THE EAST

[25] a

bonbon

HENRY FROWDE

Oxford Univkrshy Press Wareiio'
Amen Corner, E.C.

THE

SACRED BOOKS OF THE EAST

TRANSLATED

BY VARIOUS ORIENTAL SCHOLARS

AND EDITED BY

F. MAX MULLER

VOL. XXV

AT THE CLARENDON PRESS

i 886

[All rights reserved ]

THE LAWS OF MANU-

TRANSLATED

WITH EXTRACTS FROM SEVEN COMMENTARIES

G. BUHLER

<Wor&

AT THE CLARENDON PRESS
1886

[All rights reserved ]

CONTENTS.

INTRODUCTION.

PACE

I. The origin of the Manu-smr/ti according to the Hindus. xi
The Manu-smr/ti based on a Dharma-sfitra of the

M&navas.. • xviii

II. The Manava Dh. S. converted into a metrical Smr/ti by
• a special school of lawyers . x ^ v

The Manava Dh. S. chosen for conversion on account

of the myths current regarding Manu . . . Ivi

Old and new parts of the work.Ixvi

The sources of the additions made by the editor of

the metrical version.lxxiv

The position of Bhr/gu’s Sa/whita among the various

metrical recensions ...... xcii

The probable date of Bhr/gu's Sawhita . . . evi

III. The commentaries of Manu and principles of translation cxviii

THE LAWS OF MANU.

The Creation ....

.i

Summary of Contents

. 26

Sources of the Law .

29 ,

Sacraments ....

.33

Initiation.

.37

Studentship ....

.43

Householder ....

.74

Marriage .....

.75

viii

CONTENTS.

I'AGK

Daily Rites.87

5 r£ddhas.97

Mode of Subsistence.129

Rules for a Sn&taka.131

Veda-Study.143

Rules for a Snataka.149

Lawful and Forbidden Food.169

Impurity. 177

Purification.187

Duties of Women.195

Hermits in the Forest.199

Ascetics. r . 205

The King . . . ..216

Civil and Criminal Law :—

Titles of.253

Judicial Procedure.254

Recovery of Debts . . . . .262

Witnesses.264

Weights of Gold, &c.277

Recovery of Debts. .278

Deposits.286

Sale without Ownership . . . , . .289

Concerns among Partners.291

Subtraction of Gifts . . . . . .292

Non-payment of Wages . . . . .293

Non-performance of Agreement .... 293

Rescission of Sale and Purchase . . . .294

Masters and Herdsmen.295

Disputes concerning Boundaries . . . .298

Defamation.301

Assault and Hurt ....... 303

Theft.306

Violence (Sahasa).314

Adultery.315

CONTENTS.

IX

PAGE

Miscellaneous Rules

. 3 21

Duties of Husband and Wife .

■ 3*7

Inheritance and Partition

■ 345

Gambling and Betting

380

Miscellaneous Rules

382

Times of Distress:—

Mixed Castes ....

.

401

Occupations and Livelihood

• 419

Gifts.

• 430

Sacrifices.

432

Necessity of Penances

• 439

Classification of Crimes .

. 441

Penances.

• 445

Transmigration ....

483

Supreme Bliss ....

502

Doubtful Points of Law

508

Conclusion.

Appendix : —

. 511

Quotations from Manu in the translated Law-Books 515

Synopsis of Parallel Passages.533

Index .583

Additions and Corrections.613

Transliteration of Oriental Alphabets adopted for the

Translations of the Sacred Books of the East . 617

INTRODUCTION.

I.

Difficult as the historical problems are which the
Dharma-sutras translated in vols. ii and xiv of this Series
offer, they are infinitely less complicated than those con¬
nected with the metrical law-books and especially with
the Manu-smr/ti, or, to speak more exactly, with BhWgu’s
version of the Institutes of the Sacred Law proclaimed by
Manu. Though mostly the materials available for the
inquiry into the history of the Dharma-sfttras are scanty,
and in part at least belong to the floating traditions
which are generally current among the learned, but of
uncertain origin, they not only exhibit no extravagancies,
but agree fully with the facts known from strictly historical
sources. Moreover, and this is the most important point,
though the text of the Dharma-sfitras has not always been
preserved with perfect purity, they have evidently retained
their original character. They do not pretend to be any¬
thing more than the compositions of ordinary mortals,
based on the teaching of the Vedas, on the decisions of
those who arc acquainted with the law, and on the customs
of virtuous Aryas. In some cases their authors say as
much in plain words. Thus Apastamba repeatedly laments
the sinfulness and the weakness of ‘ the men of later times/
and Gautama warns against an imitation of the irregular
conduct of the ancients whose great ‘lustre’ preserved them
from falling. It is, further, still possible to recognise, even
on a superficial examination, for what purpose the Dharma-
stitras were originally composed. Nobody can doubt for
a moment that they are manuals written by the teachers of
the Vedic schools for the guidance of their pupils, that at
first they were held to be authoritative in restricted circles,
and that they were later only acknowledged as sources of

XU

LAWS OF MANU,

the sacred law applicable to all Aryas. This fact is fully
acknowledged by the Hindu tradition, even in cases where
the Dharma-sfttras no longer arc the property of particular
Vedic schools.

The metrical SmWtis, on the other hand, are surrounded
by clearly fictitious traditions, by mythological legends
which either may have grown up spontaneously, because
the real origin had been forgotten, or may have been
fabricated intentionally in order to show that these works
possess divine authority and, hence, have a claim to implicit
obedience on the part of all Aryas. Nay, what is more,
such legends or portions of them have been introduced
into the text, and obscure the real character of the
Smrztis. These peculiarities arc particularly marked in the
M&nava Dharma^astra, where the whole first chapter is
devoted to the purpose of showing the mighty scope of the
book, and of setting forth its divine origin as well as the
manner in which it was revealed to mankind. Its opening
verses narrate how the great sages approached Manu, the
descendant of self-existent Brahman, and asked him to ex¬
plain the sacred law. Manu agrees to their request, and
gives to them an account of the creation as well as of his
own origin from Brahman. After mentioning that he learnt
‘these Institutes of the Sacred Law’ from the creator who
himself produced them, and that he taught them to the ten
sages whom he created in the beginning, he transfers the
work of expounding them to Bhrzgu, one of his ten mind-
born sons. The latter begins his task by completing, as
the commentators call it, Manu’s account of the creation.
First he gives the theory of the seven Manvantaras, the
Yugas, and other divisions of time, as well as an incidental
description of the order of the creation. Next he briefly
describes the duties of the four principal castes, passes then
to an encomium of the Brahnw/as and of the Institutes of
Manu, and winds up with an enumeration of the contents
of all the twelve chapters of the work, which he promises
to expound ‘ exactly as it was revealed to him.’ In the
following chapters we find frequent allusions to the situation
which the first describes. In about forty passages a new

INTRODUCTION.

Xlll

topic is introduced by a prefatory verse which contains
phrases like ‘ such and such a matter has been explained
to you, now listen to/ &c., or ‘ I will next declare/ &c.

Twice (V, 1-3 and XII, 1-2) the sages are represented
as interrupting Bhngu’s discourse and expressing their
desire to be instructed on particular points, and on both
occasions Bhrigu is again named as the narrator. More¬
over in a number of verses 1 Manu is particularly mentioned
as the author of certain rules, and II, 7 the authoritative¬
ness of Manu’s teaching is emphatically asserted, ‘ because
he was omniscient.’ In two other passages Manu appears,
however, in different characters. VII, 42 he is enume¬
rated among the kings who gained sovereignty by their
humility, and XII, 123 he is identified with the supreme
Brahman.

This account of the origin of our Manu-smWti would have
to be slightly modified by those who accept as genuine the
verse 2 which stands at the beginning of the Smriti accord¬
ing to the commentators GovindarA^-a, NArAya//a, and RAgha-
vAnanda, as well as according to the Kajmir copy and other
MSS. As this verse contains an invocation of the self-
existent Brahman, and a promise to explain the laws which
Manu taught, it indicates, as GovindarA^a says 3 , that ‘some
pupil of Bhrigu recites the work which had descended to
him through an unbroken line of teachers/ According to
this version we have, therefore, a triple exordium instead
of a double one, and our Manu-sm^/ti does not contain the
original words of Bhrigu, but a recension of his recension
such as it had been handed down among his pupils. The
additional verse is apparently intended to make the story
more plausible.

The remarks which the commentators make on this
narrative are scanty, and, though they are meant to sup¬
port its credibility, they are, partly at least, calculated to
discredit it. MedhAtithi states in his remarks on Manu 1 ,1,
that the Pra^Apati Manu was ‘a particular individual, perfect

1 See the index s. v. Manu.

3 See note on Manu I, 1.

r 11

XIV

LAWS OF MANU.

in the study of many branches of the Veda, in the know¬
ledge (of its meaning) and in the performance (of its
precepts), and known through the sacred tradition which
has been handed down in regular succession 1 .’ Govinda-
ra^a closely agrees, and says that Manu is c a great sage,
who received his name on account of his acquaintance with
the meaning of the whole Veda, who is known to all learned
men through the tradition handed down in regular suc¬
cession, and who is entrusted with causing the creation,
preservation, and destruction (of the world) 2 / Kulluka, on
the other hand, though he agrees with respect to the ety-
mology and explanation of Manu’s name, deriving it from
man,‘to know (the meaning of the Veda),’ and though he
admits the human character of his vSastra, somewhat differs
in the description of the person. Referring to XII, 123, he
declares Manu to be a manifestation or incarnation of the
supreme Soul. Further, Medhfitithi and Kulluka adduce in
their remarks on the same verse various passages from the
/>ruti and the Smrzti, tending to prove the authoritative¬
ness of the Manu-smr/ti. Both quote slightly varying ver¬
sions of the famous Vedic passage which declares that ‘All
Manu said is medicine.’ Medhatithi adds only one more
anonymous verse, to the effect that ‘the Vedas were pro¬
claimed by the great sages, but the Smarta or traditional
lore by Manu 3 .’ Kulluka gives two other passages, one
from the Br/haspati-smr/ti which places Mann’s wSastra at
the head of all works of the same class, and another from
the Mahabharata which declares that ‘ the Pura//as, Manu’s
laws, the Vedas, and the medical works must not be op¬
posed by (adverse) reasoning.’ Both commentators men¬
tion also that the pre-eminence of Manu’s teaching is
admitted in other passages of the Vedas, the Purd;/as, the

ntxmufas: u

^33Rw: 11

* Trmrftr *r*rr ^ i iraiHfe mfri g

n

INTRODUCTION.

XV

Itih&sas, and the Smr/tis. Finally, in the notes on Manu
I, 58, they discuss the question, how the Smrzti can A>e
called the M&nava Dharmaicistra, though, as is admitted in
the work itself, Brahman was its real author. Medhdtithi
offers two explanations. First he contends that Brahman
produced only‘the multitude of injunctions and prohibi¬
tions,’ while the work itself was composed by Manu. Next
he says that, according to others, the S &stra may be called
Manu’s, even if it were first composed by Brahman. In
proof of this assertion he points to the analogous case of
the river Ganges, which, though originating elsewhere, i.e. in
heaven, is called Haimavatt, because it is first seen in the
Himavat or Himalaya, and to that of the Ka/^aka .Sakhd,
which, though studied and taught by many others, is named
after Ka/ 7 /a. In conclusion, he adds, ‘ Narada also records,
“ This work, consisting of one hundred thousand verses,
was composed by Pra^apati (Brahman); it was successively
abridged by Manu and others 1 .”’ KullAka, who gives a
somewhat insufficient' abstract of Medhatithi’s discussion,
refers to the same passage of N&rada, and bases on it his
own explanation of I, 58, according to which it means that
Brahman first composed the law-book, and that Manu con¬
densed its contents in his own language and taught it in
that form to his pupils.

This is, as far as I know, all that the commentaries say
about Manu and the history of the Manava Dharma^astra,
and their remarks contain also the substance of all that has
been brought forward in other discussions on the same
subject, with which we meet elsewhere 2 . Important as they
may appear to a Hindu who views the question of the origin
of the Manu-smr/ti with the eye of faith, they are of little
value for the historical student who stands outside the circle
of the Brahmanical doctrines. The statements regarding
the person of Manu can, at the best, only furnish materials

1 'imps srcfir i u^mfrTHr f?r: *

ftf* u

9 See e. g. the passages translated in Professor Max Muller’s Ancient Sanskrit
Literature, pp. 87-94.

XVI

LAWS OF MANU.

for mythological research. The arguments in support of
tlje authenticity and authoritativeness of the Manu-sm^zti
- are extremely weak. For the Vedic passage which the
commentators adduce is, strictly speaking, a misquotation.
It occurs in four slightly differing versions in three Sa///hitas
and in one Brahma//a J . But in all the four places it refers ,
in the first instance, to Vedic Mantras which Manu is said to
have revealed or seen. As, however, the assertion of the
wholesomeness of Manu’s teaching is couched in general
terms, it may probably be inferred that many sayings,
attributed to the father of mankind, were known to the
authors of the four Vedic works, and it is not improbable
that legal maxims were included amongst them 2 . But
Medh&tithi’s and Kullfika’s assumption that our Manu-smWti
is meant in the passages quoted would require very strong
special proof, as its language and part of its doctrines by no
means agree with those of the Vedic times. Of course* no
such proof is offered, and it is not probable that it ever will
be offered. The quotations made by the commentators
from the Mah&bharata and from the Br/haspati-smrzti, as
well as their well-founded assertion that in the Purawas and
in many Smr/tis Manu is frequently referred to as an
authority on the sacred law, are of greater importance. It
is undoubtedly true that the two works mentioned by
Kulltika refer to a particular Dharma^astra attributed to
Manu, and the same remark holds good with respect to
those passages of the Pura/^as and of the Smrftis where,
in enumerations of the authors of Dharma^stras, Manu is
placed at the head of the list. Yet even this evidence is of
little use, because on the one hand the antiquity of many
of the works in which Manu’s name occurs is extremely
doubtful, and on the other hand the existence of several
recensions of Manu’s laws is admitted, and can be shown to
have been a fact. Hence a reference to a Manu-smrzti in a

1 KSMaka XI, 5 (apparently quoted by Medhatithi); Maitrayawtya Sawhita
I, i, 5; TaittirlyS Sawhita II, 2, io, a; and Ta«</ya Brahmawa XXIII, 16, 7
(quoted by Kullftka).

a I would not infer with Professor Max Muller, India, what can it teach us ?
p. 364, that a legal work ascribed to a Manu was known to the authors of the
four works; see also below, p. lx.

INTRODUCTION.

XVII

Purctwa or a Smriti does not prove much for Bhrzgu’s
Sawhita, if, at the same time, it is not made evident that
the latter is really meant, and that the work in which it is
contained really has a claim to be considered ancient. In
illustration of this point it may suffice to remark here
that the Brihaspati-smriti, which Kulltika adduces as a
witness, is by no means an ancient work, but considerably
later than the beginning of our era, because it gives a defini¬
tion of golden dinaras, an Indian coin struck in imitation of
and called after the Roman denarii h Regarding Manu and
the Mahabharata more will be said below. Medhatithi’s
quotation from Narada is very unlucky; for it is inexact,
and worded in such a manner as to veil the serious dis¬
crepancy which exists between the stories told in the
Manava Dharma.rastra and in the Narada-smrz'ti. The
introduction to the latter, as read in the MSS. of the
vulgata, docs not state that the original law-book of one
hundred thousand verses was composed by Pra^*apati
and abridged by Manu and others, but alleges that its
author was Manu Pra^apati, and that Narada .and Sumati
the son of Bhrzgu summarised it 2 . The text of Narada,
which is accompanied by Kalyaz/abhatfa’s edition of Asa-
haya’s commentary, names one more sage, Marka/^/eya,
who also tried his hand at Manu Pra^apati’s enormous
work. Whichever of the two versions may be the original
one, it is evident that Medhatithi’s representation of
Narada’s statement is inexact, and that the latter differs
considerably from the story in our Manu-smrzti, which
asserts that it is the original work composed by Brahman,
and revealed by Manu to Bhr/gu, who explains it to the
great sages 4 exactly as he received it.’ Hence N&rada’s
story discredits the details of the account given in the
Manava Dharma^astra. It might, at the best, be only
quoted to prove the existence of the general belief that
Manu was the first lawgiver of India. These remarks will

1 West and Biihler, Digest, p. 48, third edition.

a See Jolly, Narada, p. 2, and Tagore Lectures of 1883, p. 46. My conjec¬
ture that the introduction to Narada belongs to Asahdya, not to the Sm/vti
itself (West and Buhler, Digest, p. 49), is not tenable.

05 ] ' lt? b

XV111

LAWS OF MANU.

suffice to show that the explanatory notes offered by the
Indian commentators on the origin and history of the
Manu-smnti are not suited to furnish a basis for a critical
discussion of these questions, and that hence they have been
deservedly set aside by most modern Sanskritists who have
written on the subject. As regards the theories of the
latter, it would be useless to enumerate those preceding
Professor Max Muller’s now generally accepted view,
according to which our Manu-smnti is based on, or is in fact
a recast of an ancient Dharma-sfttra. But, well known as are
his hypotheses and the later discoveries confirming them, an
introduction to the laws of Manu would, I think, be incom¬
plete without a full restatement of his arguments and of
their additional supports furnished by others.

The considerations on which Professor Max Muller based
his explanation of the origin of the Manu-snWti may be
briefly stated as follows h The systematic cultivation of
the sacred sciences of the Brahmans began and for a long
time had its centre in the ancient Sutra£ara//as, the schools
which first collected the fragmentary doctrines, scattered
in the older Vedic works, and arranged them for the con¬
venience of oral instruction in Sutras or strings of aphorisms.
To the subjects which these schools chiefly cultivated, be¬
longs besides the ritual, grammar, phonetics, and the other
so-called Angas of the Veda, the sacred law also. The latter
includes not only the precepts for the moral duties of all
Aryas, but also the special rules regarding the conduct of
kings and the administration of justice. The Stitra treatises
on law thus cover the whole range of topics, contained in
the metrical Smr/tis attributed to Manu, Ya^vmvalkya, and
other sages. Though only one Dharma-sutra, that of the
Apastambiyas, actually remains connected with the aphor¬
isms on the ritual and other sacred subjects, the existence
of the Dharmai-astras of Gautama, Vasish/Vfca, and Vishnu,
which are likewise composed in Stitras, proves that formerly

1 See his letter to Mr. Morley, reprinted in Sacred Books of the East, vol. ii,
pp. ix-xi, and Hist. Anc. Sansk. Lit. pp 132-134, Compare also the ana¬
logous views formed independently by Professors Weber and Stenzler, Indische
Studien, vol. i, pp. 69, 143, 243-4.

INTRODUCTION.

XIX

they were more numerous. The perfectly credible tradi¬
tion of the Mimd/^sa school, which declares that originally
each Vedic school or Karana possessed a peculiar work on
Dharma, confirms this assumption. While the Dharma-
sfitras possess a considerable antiquity, dating between 600-
200 B. c., the metrical Smrflis cannot be equally ancient,
because there is much in their form that is modern, and espe¬
cially because the epic Anush/ubh .Sloka, in which they are
written, was not used for continuous composition during the
Siltra period. As the metrical Sm^/tis are later than the
Dharma-sfitras, it is, under the circumstances stated, very
probable that each of them is based on a particular Dharma-
sfitra. The Manava Dharma^astra in particular may be
considered as a recast and versification of the Dharma-sfttra
of the M&nava Sutra£ara;/a, a subdivision of the Maitrayawiya
school, which adheres to a redaction of the Black Ya^ur-veda.

Considering the state of our knowledge of Vedic litera¬
ture thirty years ago, the enunciation of this hypothesis
was certainly a bold step. The facts on which it rested
were few, and the want of important links in the premises
laid it open to weighty objections. No proof was or could
be furnished that the Sfitras of Gautama, Vasishrta, and
Vish/m originally were manuals of Vedic schools, not codes
promulgated for the guidance of all Aryas, as the Hindu
tradition, then known, asserted. The assumption that it
was so, rested solely on the resemblance of their form and
contents to those of the Apastambiya Dharma-sfitra. No
trace of a Manava Dharma-sfitra could be shown, nor
could any connexion between the Manava Dharma^stra
and the school of the Manavas, except through their titles,
be established. The assertion that the Brahmans had
turned older Sfitras, and especially Dharma-sfitras, into
metrical works, written in epic Alokas, had to be left with¬
out any illustration, and no cause was assigned which would
explain this remarkable change. As a set ofif against these
undeniable weaknesses, Professor Max Muller’s hypothesis
possessed two strong points which secured for it from the
outset a favourable reception on the part of all Sanskritists
of the historical school. First, it substituted a rational theory

XX

LAWS OF MANU.

of historical development for the fantastic fables of the
Jlindu tradition and for the hopeless uncertainty which
characterised the earlier speculations of European scholars
concerning the origin of the so-called Indian codes of law.
Secondly, it fully agreed with many facts which the begin¬
ning exploration of Vedic literature had brought to light,
and which, taken as a whole, forced on all serious students
the conviction that the systematic cultivation of all the
Indian S&stras had begun in the Vedic schools. Subsequent
events have shown that Professor Max Muller was right to
rely on these two leading ideas, and that his fellow Sanskrit-
ists did well to follow him, instead of taking umbrage at the
minor flaws. Slowly but steadily a great number of the
missing links in the chain of evidence has been brought to
light by subsequent investigations. We now know that the
Sfttra works of other schools than the Apastambiyas in¬
cluded or still include treatises on the sacred law. ’The
Dharma-sutra of the Baudhayaniyas, the oldest Sutra-
Z'ara//a of the Taittiriya Veda, has been recovered. Though
the connexion between the several parts of the great body
of Sutras has been severed, it is yet possible to recognise
that it once was closely joined to the Gr/hya-sfltra 1 . The
recovery of the entire collection of Hiraz/yakeri-sutras has
proved that these too include a Dharma-sutra, which in this
instance has been borrowed from the earlier Apastam¬
biyas 2 . The mystery which surrounded the position of the
Dharmaj^stras of Gautama, Vishz/u, and Vasish///a has been
cleared up. To the assertion that they were composed by
ancient Azshis for the welfare of mankind, we can at present
oppose another tradition according to which they were at
first studied and recognised as authoritative by particular
schools only, adhering respectively to the Sama-veda, Black
Ya^ur-veda. and the Rig-veda 3 . Internal evidence confirm¬
ing this tradition has been found in the case of Gautama's
Dharma^astra and of the Vishzzu-smrzti, or, more correctly.

1 Sacred Books of the East, vol. xiv, p. xxxi.

8 Sacred Books of the East, vol. ii, p. xxiii.

3 Sacred Books of the East, vol. ii, pp. xlv-xlviii; vol. vii, pp. x-xvi; vol.
xiv. pp. xl-xlv.

INTRODUCTION.

XXI

of the K&//zaka Sfitras. These latter discoveries are of par¬
ticularly great importance, because they fully establish the
truth of the assumption, underlying Professor Max Muller’s
theory, that in post-Vedic times the Br&hmans did not
hesitate to change the character of ancient school-books and
to convert them into generally binding law-codes, either by
simply taking them out of their connexion with the Srauta
and Grzhya-sfitras or by adding besides matter which, in
the eyes of orthodox Hindus, must greatly increase the
sentiment of reverence felt for them. It is especially
the case of the so-called Vish/m-smrzti, which deserves the
most careful attention. The beginning and the end of the
work distinctly characterise it as a revelation of the god
Vishz/u. Vish/zu, Vaish/zava worship and philosophy arc on
various occasions praised and recommended in the course
of the discussions. Yet the difference in the style of the
introductory and concluding chapters leaves no doubt
that they are later additions, and the perfectly credible
tradition of the Pa/zz/its of Pu/za and Benares, the occurrence
of particular sacred texts known to the Kanakas alone, as
well as the special resemblance of its contents to those of
the Ka//zaka Grzhya-shtra, make it perfectly certain that
the work is only a Vaish/zava recast of the Ka/Zzaka Dharma-
siltra 1 . We thus obtain in this case the confirmation of almost
every fact which the conversion of the Dharma-sutra of the
M&navas into the revealed code of the Pra^apati Manu
presupposes, with the sole exception of the substitution of
epic 51 okas for aphoristic prose. With respect to the last
point, the further exploration of the Smriti literature has
furnished numerous analogies. As an instance to the point
we can now cite the fragments of the so-called Brzhat
Sankha Dharma^astra, which, as the quotations show, must

1 A quotation in Govindara^a’s SmWtimatf^arf, fol. 12 b , 1 . 8 (India Office Collec¬
tion, No. 1736), contains a very small portion of this work. When explaining
the penance for the murder of a Brahma/za, mentioned Manu XI, 74, GoViiida'

Tig* says, PT 3 ( 4 *pl$<U [w] I WggPftig iWTTft

fffc H HP1 [i^] Hirer® H The quotation shows that the

Dharma-s&tra of the Ka//zas mentioned the fanciful expiations ending in death,
which are given in all the ancient law-books, but omitted in the Vishwu-smn'ti.

XXII

LAWS OF MANU.

formerly have consisted of prose and verse, while the avail¬
able MSS. show Stitras and Anush/ubhs in one chapter
only, and wS'lokas alone in the remainder 1 . There are,
further, such works like the two Axvaldyana Smrztis and
the .Saunaka-smr/ti, evidently versifications of the corre¬
sponding GWhya-sfitras, with or without the additions of
extraneous matter 2 . In short, among all the general
propositions concerning the origin of the metrical Smrztis,
which Professor Max Muller advanced, only one, the asser¬
tion that during the Sfitra period of 600-200 13 .C. works
written in continuous epic verse were unknown, has proved
untenable in its full extent. It seems no longer advisable to
limit the production of Sfitras to so short and so late a period
as 600-200 B.C., and the existence of metrical school-manuals
at a much earlier date has been clearly demonstrated 3 . It is
now evident that the use of the heroic metre for such works
did not begin all of a sudden and at a certain given date. "But
it seems, nevertheless, indisputable that the use of aphoristic
prose was adopted earlier than that of verse. For in all
known cases a Sutra, not a metrical Sawgralia, Varttika, or
K&rika, stands at the head of each series of school-books,
and some of the most salient peculiarities of the Sutra
style reappear in that of the metrical manuals 4 . With
respect to the conjectures specially affecting the Manava
Dharma^astra, the former existence of a Manava Dharma-
sfitra, consisting of prose mixed with verses in several
metres, has been established by the discovery of some
quotations in the Vdsish///a Dharma-sfitra, and their con¬
tents show that the work known to the author of the latter
wSastra was closely related to our Manu-smrzti. As regards
the connexion of this Dharma-siltra, and consequently of
our Manu-snwti with the Sfitra^arawa of the Manavas, the
results of the late researches have not been equally satis¬
factory. The recovery of the writings of the Manavas has
not only not furnished any facts in support of the supposed
connexion, but, on the contrary, has raised difficulties, as it

1 West and Biihler, Digest of H L. p. 40, third edition.

8 West and Biihler, loc. cit. p. 51.

5 Goldstiicker, Manavakalpa-stitra, p. 78.

4 West and Biihler, loc cit. pp. 42.44.

INTRODUCTION.

XX111

appears that the doctrines of the Manava Gnhya-sfltra differ
very considerably from those of our Mdnava Dharma^astiji.
All that has been brought forward in substantiation of this
portion of Professor Max Muller’s hypothesis is that as close
an affinity exists between the Vish/zusmrzti, the modern
recension of the Kanaka Dharma-sfttra, and our Manu-
smrzti, as is found between the Kanaka and Minava
G^zhya-stitras and between the Ka//zaka and Mdnava
Sa;zzhitas, and that hence the Vedic original of the Manu-
smrzti may be supposed to have belonged to the Mdnava
school 1 . The conclusive force of this argument is no doubt
somewhat weakened, as Dr. von Bradke has pointed out, by
the fact that the Vishzzu-smz'zti is not the original Ka//zaka
Dharma-sutra. But to reject it altogether on account of
this circumstance would be going too far. For the agree¬
ment between the Smrztis of Manu and Vishzzu extends to
many subjects where the latter shows no traces of recasting,
and may be reasonably supposed to faithfully represent the
original Dharma-sutra. Nevertheless a full reconsideration
of this point is indispensable. Before we proceed to that,
it will, however, be advisable first to supplement Professor
Max Muller’s arguments against the antiquity of our Manu-
smriti by the discussion of some of its passages which
clearly admit an acquaintance with a large body of older
legal literature and particularly with Dharma-stitras, and,
secondly, to re-examine and complete the proof for the
former existence of a Mdnava Dharma-sdtra and for its
having been the precursor of the metrical law-book.

Among the passages of the Manu-smrzti which disprove
the claim, set up by its author, to be the first legislator,
and which show that he had many predecessors, the first
place must be allotted to its statements regarding con¬
troversies and conflicting decisions on certain points of the
ritual and of the law. Such cases are by no means rare.
Thus the observances of ‘ some/ with respect to the order
of the several ceremonies at a Sr&ddha 2 and to the disposal

1 Professor Jolly, Sacred Books of the East, vol. vii, pp. xxvi-xxvii; and
Dr. von Bradke, Jour. Germ. Or. Soc. vol. xxxii, pp. 47,8-441.

8 The same difference of opinion is mentioned in ^ankhayana Gnhya-Butra
IV, i, 10.

XXIV

LAWS OF MANU.

of the funeral cakes, are mentioned Manu III, 261. Dis¬
cussions of the ancient sages, exactly resembling those
met with in the Dharma-stitras 1 , are given IX, 31-55 re¬
garding the long-disputed question whether a son begotten
on a wife by a stranger, but with the husband’s consent,
belongs to the natural parent or to ‘ the owner of the soil.’
In the same chapter it is stated, just as in Gautama’s
Dharma-sfltra 2 , that ‘ some 5 permit the procreation of a
second son with an appointed widow. Manu X, 70-71,
we find a decision on the question whether, as ‘some’
assert, the seed be more important, or, as ‘others’ state,
the soil, or, as ‘again others’ maintain, the seed and the
soil have equal importance, and, XI, 45, we are told that
the sages, i. e. all sages, are convinced of the efficacy of
penances for atoning unintentional offences, while ‘some’
declare that they even destroy the guilt of him who sinned
intentionally. The latter point is discussed in exactly
the same manner Gaut. XIX, 3-6. In other cases the
author is less explicit. He merely places conflicting
opinions side by side without indicating that they belong
to different authorities, and hence he has mostly succeeded
in misleading the commentators as to his real meaning.
Thus we read Manu II, 145, that the teacher is less
venerable than the father and the mother, while the next
following verses teach exactly the contrary doctrine. The
commentators are much perplexed by this contradiction.
But if we turn to Gautama II, 50-51, where it is said, ‘ The
teacher is chief among all Gurus; some say (that) the
mother (holds the first place),’ it is not doubtful that the
Manu-smrz'ti gives in the first verse the opinion of Gautama’s
‘ some ’ as the purvapaksha, and adduces the following one
in order to prove its incorrectness. A similar case occurs
Manu III, 23-25, where three opinions regarding the per¬
missibility of certain marriage-rites are enumerated, the last
of which is the siddhAnta or the author’s own view.

It might be contended that these passages, the list of

1 See especially Vas. XVII, 6-9, where one of the verses of the Manu-smrzti
occurs.

* Gaut. XVIII, 8.

INTRODUCTION.

XXV

which might be considerably enlarged, do not necessarily
force on us the conviction that they refer to actual law¬
books which preceded our Manu-smrzti. If they stood by
themselves, they might possibly be explained as showing
nothing more than that legal and ritual questions had long
engaged the attention of the learned. But this subterfuge
becomes impossible, as we find in other verses the explicit
confession that the author of the Manu-smnti knew
Dharma^astras. Three passages allude to their existence
in general terms. The first occurs in the definition of the
terms 5 ruti and Smr/ti, Manu II, 10, ‘ But by Sruti
(revelation) is meant the Veda, and by Smrzti (tradition)
the Institutes of the sacred law.’ In the text the last
word, dharmajastram, stands in the singular. But it must
doubtlessly be taken, as Kulluka 1 and Naraya;/a 2 indicate,
in a collective sense. Another mention of law-books
is found Manu XII, iii, where a dharmapa/Z/aka/^, ‘one
who recites (the Institutes of) the sacred law,’ is named
among the members of a parishad or assembly entitled to
depide difficult points of law. The commentators are
unanimous in explaining dharma, literally ‘ the sacred law/
by‘the Institutes of the sacred law’ or ‘the Smr/tis of Manu
and others/ and it is indeed impossible to take the word in
any other sense than that of ‘law-books 3 .’ The third
passage is perfectly explicit, as the word Dharma^astra is
used in the plural. It occurs in the section on funeral
sacrifices, Manu III, 232, ‘At a (sacrifice in honour) of the
manes he must let (his guests) hear the Veda, the Insti¬
tutes of the sacred law (dharma.rastra//i)/ &c. 4 Here the
existence of many earlier law-books is plainly acknow¬
ledged. The character of the Institutes of the sacred
law, known to the author of our Manu, may be inferred

1 TOifinrotf u

1 invrSNf 1 rrstf»

s Medh. Vifrnwt *^^WffT5?nEarTOTWrnil Gov. H T r RTf^ vft 1 U TflT H

KuII. ^ II Nand. || The full significance

o*\this passage will be shown below, p. Iii.

*\See also Professor Stenzler in the IndUche Studien, vol. i, p. 245; Dr.
Johann tgen, Das Gesctzbuch des Manu, p. 76.

XXVI

LAWS OF MANU.

from some other passages which reveal an acquaintance
wifh the Angas of the Veda 1 . Manu II, 141, and IV, 98,
these auxiliary sciences are mentioned in a general way.
From Manu III, 185, where it is said that a Brdhma^a who
knows the six Angas sanctifies the company at a Sraddha
dinner, we learn that their number, as known to our author,
did not differ from that mentioned in all Vedic works.
Further, the name of the first Anga, the Kalpa, occurs
III, 185, and the mention of a Nairukta among the members
of a parishad shows that the fourth, the Nirukta, was also
known. With the latter and the remaining four, which the
author of the Manu-smrrti in all probability also knew, we
are not immediately concerned. But the first, the Kalpa,
possesses a very great interest for our purposes. This
term, as is well known, denotes collectively those Sfttras
of the Vedic schools which teach the performance of the
.Srauta sacrifices, the rites especially described in the Sruti,
Hence both Srauta-sfitras and, of course, also Sutra-
karanas must have preceded the Manu-smrz'ti. If it is
now borne in mind that according to the Hindu tradition,
mentioned above, all Sutra^araz/as formerly possessed
Dharma-sfttras, and that in some existing Kalpas the
Dharma-sfttras are closely connected with the .Srauta-sutras,
it becomes exceedingly probable, nay, certain, that our
M&nava Dharma^astra is later than some of the Dharma-
sfttras. This conclusion is further corroborated by those
passages of the Manu-smr/ti where the author quotes
the opinions of individual predecessors. Manu III, 16
we read, ‘ According to Atri and (Gautama) the son of
Utathya 2 he who weds a Sd dra woman becomes an out¬
cast, according to .Saunaka on the birth of a son, and
according to Bhrt'gu he who has (male) offspring from a
(.Sildra female alone).* Under the above explanation,
which is adopted by the majority of the commentators,

1 See also Professor Stenzler, loc. cit.; Dr. Johanntgen, loc. cit. p. 74.

9 The form Utathya is a corruption of the Vedic Utathya, and shows the
substitution of a dental for a palatal, which is not uncommon in the Prakrit
dialects. Hence it possesses a certain value as an additional proof for the post-
Vedic origin of the Manu-smmi.

INTRODUCTION.

XXV11

and is confirmed by an analogous passage of the aphoristic
Dharma^stra of U^anas \ the author adduces there the
opinions of four older authorities, all of which are credited
by the Hindu tradition with the revelation of law-books.
We still possess several Smrztis attributed to Atri, .Saunaka,
and to Gautama, as well as one said to belong to Bhrzgu.
With the exception of the aphoristic Gautamiya Dharma-
j&stra all these works arc modern, some being metrical
recensions of older Sutras, and some of very doubtful
origin. It is, therefore, impossible that any of the existing
Dharnmastras, Atri, S'aunaka, and BIWgu, can be referred
to by Manu, and, as a matter of fact, the opinions quoted
cannot be traced in them. But if we turn to Gautama’s
Sdtra we find among those persons who defile the company
at a JSraddha dinner, and who are thus excluded from the
community of the virtuous, the jftdrapati, literally * the
husband of a Sfidra female 2 .’ The real signification of the
compound seems, however, to be, as Haradatta suggests,

‘ he whose only wife or dharmapatni is a SMrV As it
appears from Manu III, 17-19, that the opinion attributed
to the son Utathya was the same, it is not at all unlikely
that the Manu-smrzti actually quotes the still existing Sutra
of Gautama. Another reference to a lost Sfttra occurs at
Manu VI, 21, where it is said of the hermit in the forest,

‘ Or he may constantly subsist on flowers, roots, and fruit

a l°ne., following the rule of the (Institutes) of

Vikhanas.’ The original Sanskrit of the participial clause
is ‘ vaikhanasamate sthita^/ and means literally ‘abiding
by the Vaikhanasa opinion.’ The commentators, with the
exception of Narayawa, are unanimous in declaring that

1 Vs. Dharma.faslra, chap. Ill, tjfrTfft I ^ I mUUm

hiSit nftre i miff*

tfjnr: ■ tnnftfi! i spnrrannftfir i

nhm II Thongh Uranas’ statements regarding the opinions of the
ancient lawyers do not agree with those of the Manu-snWti, except in the case
of Saunaka, they are yet important, because they show that differences of
opinion regarding the effects of a marriage with a Shdri did occur. See also
Jolly, Tagore Lectures, p, 53.

a Gautama XV, j 8 ; Sacred Books of the East, vol. if, p, 355.

XXV111

LAWS OF MANU.

the word Vaikh&nasa here denotes a ^Sstra or SQtra
promulgated by Vikhanas, in which the duties of hermits
were described at length 1 . The correctness of this opinion
seems to me indisputable. For the word mata, ‘ opinion,’
in Manu’s verse, requires that the preceding part of the
compound should denote either a person, or a school, or a
work. If we take vaikhanasa in the sense of hermit in the
forest, we obtain the meaningless translation, ‘ a hermit
may subsist on flowers, &c., following the opinion of
hermits.’ It is, therefore, necessary to interpret vaikhanasa
with the commentators in the sense of vaikhanasa ^astra, and
to refer it to a particular work which taught the duties of
hermits. The existence of such a book is attested not only
by Manu’s commentators, but also by other ancient and
modern authors. Baudhayana mentions it explicitly 2 , and
seems to give a short summary of its contents in the third
chapter of the third Pra^na of his Dharmaj-astra. Hara-
datta, the commentator of Apastamba and Gautama, also
appears to have known it. In his notes on Gautama III, 2,
he gives the derivation of vaikhanasa, a hermit in the forest,
saying, ‘ The vanaprastha is called vaikhanasa, because he
lives according to the rule promulgated by Vikhanas,’ and
adds, ‘For that (sage) chiefly taught that order*.’ If the
statements made to me by Indian Pandits are to be trusted,
we may even hope to recover the work in course of time.
It must be an exceedingly ancient book, as the secondary
meaning of vaikhanasa, a hermit, which can have arisen
only in the manner suggested by Haradatta 4 , occurs in the

1 Medh. vSt f¥?in*pri u

Gov. ffcnr:» kuii. qnnrer : i

ffcra: n Nand.

whis [q rnt f? » Nar.

II

a Baudh. Dharma. II, n, 14; Sacred Books of the East, vol. xiv, p. 259.

• IlSPWft l f^R*T ffill ff H

mpiR TrffRTf^iT: II

4 The double v/zddhi in vaikhanasa is according to the analogy of the words
enumerated in the ak;vti-ga//a anujatikadi, Pa*. VII, 3, 20.

INTRODUCTION.

XXIX

oldest known Dharma-sfitra. Under these circumstances it'
is not advisable to assume that it had any connexion with
the Vaikhanasa Sutra^arazza, a subdivision of the Taitti- '
riyas, which seems to have been one of the youngest
schools adhering to the Black Ya^ur-veda 1 . But it is
evident that the ancient Vaikhanasa Sfttra, which treated
of an important portion of the sacred law, preceded our
Manu-smr/ti.

Another reference to the opinion of a person who is the
reputed author of a still existing Dhafma-sfltra is found at
Manu VIII, 140, where the rate of legal interest on secured
loans is thus described : ‘ A money-lender may stipulate,
as an increase on his capital, for the interest allowed by
Vasish/Zza, and take monthly the eightieth part of a hun¬
dred.’ If we turn to the Vasish/Zza Dharma^astra, we read,
III, 51 2 , k Hear the interest for a money-lender, declared by
Vasish/Zza, five mashas (may be taken every month) for
twenty (karshapa/zas).’ Though the wording of the Manu-
smrzti differs from that adopted in the Vasish/Zza Dharma-
^astra, the meaning of both passages is the same. The
eightieth part of one hundred is one and a quarter per cent,
and the same rate is obtained if five mashas are charged for
twenty karshapaz/as, i. c. for four hundred mashas 3 . Both
law-books, therefore, evidently refer to the same rule of
Vasish/Zza. But the correctness of the further inference that
the author of the Manu-smz'zti used the Vasish/Zza Dharma-
j-astra is not so easily demonstrable as might seem from the
extracts given above. Por Vas. Ill, 51 itself is a quotation,
marked as such by its final iti (left untranslated) and the
phrase,‘Now they quote also,’which is prefixed to Sfitra
48. Hence it might be argued that the agreement of the

1 See Professor Max Muller, Anc. Sansk. Lit. p. 199; Professor Weber, Indische
Studien, vol. i, p. 83. A portion of the Vaikhanasa Arauta-sdtia is preserved
in the modern tianscripts, belonging to the Bombay University and the Munich
Royal Libraries, which Professor Haug had made from a Barova MS.

2 Sacred Books of the East, vol. xiv, p. 16 ; according to Dr. Fvihrer’s edition,
Vas. Ill, 50

3 (Pagannatha, in Col. Dig I, 25, gives a somewhat different calculation.
But the general sense remains the same. I follow Kmh#apa«dUa and Hara-
datta on Gautama XII, 29.

XXX

LAWS OF MANU.

two passages furnishes no stringent proof for the posteriority
of the Manu-smrzti to that which bears Vasish/Aa’s name,
ttfat, on the contrary, it perhaps merely indicates the de¬
pendence of both works on a common source, be it on some
older work or on the tradition current in the Brahma/zical
schools. Such an objection would in most similar cases be
perfectly legitimate, but in the present one it is, I think,
barred by some peculiar circumstances. From the above-
mentioned Hindu tradition, preserved by Govindasvamin 1 ,
we learn that the Vasish///a Dharmai*astra originally be¬
longed to a school of Azg-vedins who ascribed the settle¬
ment of their laws to the famous Vedic AYshi Vasish//*a.
The rule limiting the monthly interest on secured loans to
one and a quarter per cent is found also in Gautama’s
Dliarma-sfitra XII, 29, a work which, as has been shown
elsewhere 2 , is older than the Vasish//za-smrzti. But neither
there nor in any other work where it occurs a is its enuncia¬
tion attributed to Vasish///a. Hence it is most probable
that this addition was made by those who attributed their
Jaws to VasishMa, and who, therefore, had an interest in
vindicating the invention of an important legal maxim for
their spiritual head. If their law-book gives the rule in the
form of a quotation , they probably do not mean to indicate
that an older verse ascribing it to Vasish///a existed, but
that the rule itself was an ancient one, and had been taken
from a law-book or from the tradition of the Brahmazzical
schools. With this explanation the mention of Vasish/^a’s
name, made in Manu VIII, 140, still remains an indication
that its author knew and referred to the existing Vasish//za
Dharmajastra.

These passages are far too numerous to be set aside as
possibly later interpolations, and there is, indeed, no circum¬
stance connected with any of them which could lead to
such a supposition. We must, therefore, admit that they
clearly disprove the claim of the Manu-sm?Yti to the first

1 See above, p. xx.

* Sacred Books of the East, vo\. ii, pp. liii, Uv.

8 See e. g. Yagtf. II, 37, and the texts of Bnhaspati and Vy&sa quoted in Col.
Dig. I, 26-27.

INTRODUCTION.

XXXI

place among Indian law-books which the first chapter sets
up, and that they furnish a strong support to the vigw
according to which the Manu-smriti belongs to a later stage
of literary development than the Dharma-stitras.

In turning to the second point of our supplement, it will
be advisable to reconsider in detail the passages of the
Vasish/Z/a-smriti, which prove the former existence of a
M&nava Dharma-stitra, and which, as the preceding dis¬
cussion has established the priority of the Vasish///a-smrfti
to our Manu, possess a particularly great importance. The
chief passage occurs Vasish/fta IV, 5-8 1 , where we read :

5. The Manava (Sfitra states), ‘ Only when worshipping
the manes and the gods, or when honouring guests, he may
certainly do injury to animals. ,

6. ‘On offering the honey-mixture (to a guest), at a
sacrifice and at the rites in honour of the manes, but on
thc'Sc occasions only, may an animal be slain; that (rule)
Manu proclaimed /

7. ‘Meat can never be obtained without injury to liv¬
ing beings, and injury to living beings does not procure
heavenly bliss: hence (the sages declare) the slaughter (of
beasts) at a sacrifice not (to be) slaughter (in the ordinary
sense of the word).’

8. ‘Now he may also cook a full-grown ox or a full-
grown he-goat for a Brahma;/a or a Kshatriya guest; in
this manner they offer hospitality to such (a man).’

As has been stated in the introduction to Vasish///a 2 , all
the four Sutras must be taken as a quotation, because the
particle iti, ‘ thus/ occurs at the end of IV, 8, and because
the identity of Shtra 6 with Manu V, 41, as well as the close
resemblance of Sutra7 to Manu V, 48, shows that the quota¬
tion is not finished with Sutra 5. If we accept this explanation

1 n m u

i ■srifaig: n % n

•iPpwT urftor«rt fiNt i «t ^ nrftuw. tim¬
ing Tftw. «s h ’?rofq wwam s w p ito

^ ’wrffrs*} n t n

* Sacred Books of the East, vol. xiv, pp. xviii xix.

XXXll

LAWS OF MANU.

we have in our passage the usual arrangement followed in
tfye Dharma-sAtras. First comes the prose rule, next the
verses which confirm it, and finally a Vedic passage on
which both the rule and the verses rest. It may be added
that the explanation of the passage given by Krishna-
pa^/ita Dharmadhik&rin in his commentary on Vasish/Z/a,
according to which the word Manavam, explained above by
‘the Manava (SAtra),’ is to mean ‘the (opinion) of Manu’
(manumatam), cannot be upheld, for several reasons.
First, the wording of the text of Sutra 5 looks like a real
quotation, not like a summary of Manu’s views by Vasish-
tka . This becomes quite clear, if we compare Vasish^a
I, 17, where undoubtedly a rule of Manu, corresponding to
Manava Dh. VII,. 203, and VIII, 41, is given in Vasish^/za’s
words, ‘ Manu has declared (that) the (peculiar) laws of
countries, castes, and families (may be followed) in the
absence of (rules of) the revealed texts 1 .’ Secondly,‘the
great differences between several other passages, quoted by
Vasish/ 7 /a as Manu’s, and the corresponding passages of the
text of our Manu-smrzti, as well as the fact that the latter,
as we have seen, refers to the Vasish/Z*a Dharma^astra, do not
permit us to assume, with Krishnapandita, that Vasish/Z/a
knew and referred to our Manu.

If it is thus necessary to admit that Vasish/Z/a’s quotation
is taken from a Manava Dharma-sutra, the agreement of
the doctrine taught in the quotation and of a portion of the
text with those of our Manu-smrzti show further that this
Dharma-sAtra must have been the forerunner of our metrical
law-book. An examination of the other quotations from
Manu, which occur in the VasishZZ/a-smr/ti, will show that
this agreement was, though pretty close, not complete.
The identity of the view, ascribed to Manu by Vasish/Zm
I, 17, with the contents of Manu VII, 203, and VIII, 41,
has already been mentioned. Vasish/Z/a III, 2, a Mdnava
vSloka is quoted which agrees literally with Manu II, 168.
The same remark applies to the quotation at Vasish/ 4 a
XX, 18, which is found Manu XI, 152. Another passage,

1 u

INTRODUCTION.

XXX111

Vas. XIII, id, shows considerable verbal differences.
According to Vasish/ 7 /a, Manu’s verse is: ‘Be it fruit, or
water, or sesamum, or food, or whatever be (the gift) at a
.Sr&ddha, let him not, having just accepted it, recite the
Veda; for it is declared in the Smrzti that the hands of
Brahma«as are their mouths/ while we read Manu IV, 117,
‘Be it an animal or a thing inanimate, whatever be the
(gift) at a Sraddha, let him not, having just accepted it,
recite the Veda; for it is declared in the Smrfti that the
hand of a Brahmawa is his mouth 1 .’ The last quota¬
tion which occurs Vas. XIX, 37, and refers to the julka,
(exemptions from) taxes and duties 2 , is in the TrishAxbh
metre, and, hence, cannot have a place in our Manu-sm^/ti.
But it is remarkable that the latter does not even show a
corresponding Anush/ubh verse, and that the contents of
the quotation do not quite agree with the teaching of
our Manu. The latter mentions the exemption of a sum
less than a karsliapaz/a incidentally X, xao. It agrees also
with Manu’s doctrines that 5 rotriyas, ascetics, alms, and
sacrifices should not be taxed. But there are no indica¬
tions that infants, messengers, and ambassadors, or the
remnant left to a plundered trader, should go free. With
respect to those living by arts (.silpa), our Manu teaches,
VII, 138, and X, 120, just like most other ancient authors,
that artisans are to do monthly one piece of work for the
king. Though this corvee amounts to a pretty severe tax,
it is, of course, possible to contend that Manu’s rule does
not exactly contradict that quoted by Vasish/ 7 /a. Besides
these passages, there are some other verses 3 which contain
the well-known phrase, ‘ manur abravit, thus Manu spoke/

1 vas. mwi 1

1 q m i sa .itw: win n Manu,

nrfttr *n vf?sf ! sp^Tfg3; i ma ture: *n-

wrwft ii

2 ‘No duty (is paid) on a sum less than a karsMpawa, there is no tax on a
livelihood gained by arts, nor on an infant, nor on a messenger, nor on what
has been received as alms, nor on the remnants of property left after a robbery,
nor on a .Srotriya, nor on an ascetic, nor on a sacrifice.*

3 Vas. XI, 23; XII, 16; XXIII, 43; XXVI, 8.

C 2 5 ] C

XXXIV

LAWS OF MANU.

and mention Manu as the authority for the rule taught.
With respect to these references it seems to me not
probable that they have been taken from the Manava
Dharma-sdtra. We shall see below 1 that from the earliest
times the mythical Manu, the father of mankind, was
considered as the founder of the social and moral order,
and that he was considered to have first taught or revealed
religious rites and legal maxims. Hence I believe that
these four verses give nothing more than an expression of
the belief that their doctrines go back to the first progenitor
of men 2 . The first three among them either contradict or
find no counterpart in our Manu-smr/ti. The fourth agrees
in substance with Manu XT, 360-261. But it occurs in a
chapter which is probably spurious, or, at least, full of
interpolations. Whatever view may be taken concerning
these passages, the allegation that the Manava Dharma-
siltra, known to Vasish/Vfca, closely resembled, but was not
identical with our Manu, need not be modified.

If we look for other traces of the Sutra, quoted by Vasish-
tha, it is possible that Gautama, who mentions an opinion of
Manu, XXI, 7, refers to it. His Dharma-siltra is even older
than Vasish/^a’s, and long anterior to our Manu-smr/ti. But
the possibility that Gautama refers not to a rule of the
Mdnava Dharma-siltra, but to a maxim generally attributed
to the mythical Manu, is not altogether excluded. Gautama
says, ‘Manu (declares that) the first three (crimes, the
intentional murder of a Brahma//a, drinking Surd, and the
violation of a Guru’s bed) cannot be expiated 3 .* The
wording of the Sfitra shows that it is not a quotation, but a
summary of Manu’s opinion. Our Manu-smrzti explicitly
teaches, XI, 90, the same doctrine with respect to the
intentional murder of a Brahma//a, and, if my explanation
of XI, 147 is accepted, also with respect to the intentional
drinking of Surd. As regards the third offence, there is no

1 See p. lviii.

* The meaning of the phrase in the verse, occurring in the quotation from the
Manava Dharma-siltra, is probably the same.

3 14 VW 1 *4JH The same opinion is expressed in the

Mah&bhdrata XII, 165, 34, but not attributed to Manu.

INTRODUCTION.

XXXV

direct statement. But the expiations, prescribed XI, 104-
105, amount to a sentence of death. Hence our Manu-
smriti, too, practically declares the crime to be inexpiable
during the offender’s lifetime. Its original, the Dharma-
stitra, may, therefore, be supposed to have had the rule
which Gautama attributes to Manu. Nevertheless, owing
to the circumstances mentioned above, Gautama’s passage
cannot be adduced as a perfectly certain proof of the early
existence of the Manava Dharma-sutra.

Among the remaining Dharma-sfttras 1 there is only
the fragment attributed to LLyanas which seems to quote a
S&tra of Manu. At the beginning of the first chapter 54 we
find a very corrupt passage containing a prose-quotation
which according to two of my MSS. belongs to Manu, but
according to a third to Sumantu. As the latter copy is,
however, clearly more incorrect than the other two, and
as a Sutra by Sumantu is not known from other sources,
the reading of the first two seems to be preferable. The
contents of the quotation which apparently prescribes thr t
on the death of an infant, of an emigrant, of one who keeps
no sacred fires, of one who kills himself by starvation or by
self-cremation, and of one slain in battle, no period of im¬
purity need be kept, agree with the teaching of our Manu-
smrfti, V, 78, 89, 94, 98.

There is, further, one among the Vedic books on the
ritual, the 6'drikhayana Grzhya-sutra, which possibly refers
to the Manava Dharma-siltra. This work quotes the verse,
Manu V, 41, which, as has been shown above, occurred
also in the Dharma-siltra as well as several other 61 okas of

1 Regarding the passage of Apastamba II, 16,1, which ascribes the revelation
of the .Sraddhas to Manu, see below, p. lix.

2 I transcribe the whole beginning of the work, ?T*

$rte wnftr^wi: u -

11 (?)

* TOt II *rNr?|S *Ni^ll Thus

two MSS.; the third reads, ^ tj I and further on,

Vrflf WTfW^T° I It is impossible to restore the whole passage. The end of the
quotation may have been II

C 2

XXXVI

LAWS OF MANU.

our Manu-smrzti, partly in better versions 1 . As the Gr*hya-
sfitra agrees also in a number of its rules very characteris¬
tically with Manu, it is not improbable that its author may
have drawn on the original of the latter. But before one
can be perfectly confident on this point, it is necessary that
some difficult questions regarding the critical condition of
6*tnkh&yana’s text should be cleared up more fully than
has been done hitherto. More important than the passages
from the last work is the evidence which the Kdmandakiya
Nitisdra furnishes, where twice opinions of the ManavaA
and once an opinion of Manu arc quoted, but rejected in
favour of the views of the author’s teacher, Aanakya
Kaurilya. In one case the doctrine, attributed to the
Manava/z, agrees with the teaching of our Manu-smr/ti.
We read in the discussion on the number of the prakrrtis,
the constituent elements of the masala or political circle
to which a king must pay attention, Kam. Nit. VII, 24-25,
‘ With respect to this (question) the Mdnavas record that
five constituent elements, the ministers and the rest, belong
severally to each of the twelve kings. But those original
twelve (kings) and those (others), the ministers and the
rest, (are) seventy-two (in number, and form) the whole
circle of constituent elements 2 / Our Manu-snWti states,
VII, 155-156, that twelve kings belong to the mam/ala,
and adds ver. 157, 1 The minister, the kingdom, the fortress,
the treasury, and the army are five other (constituent
elements of the circle); for these are mentioned in con¬
nexion with each (of the first twelve); thus the whole circle
(consists), briefly (speaking, of) seventy-two (constituent
parts)/ The other two passages differ. According to
Kdmandaki II, 3, the Manavas teach that the sciences,
which a king must study, are three only, the threefold
(Veda), the theory of professions and trades, and the

1 Oldenbcrg, -Sankh. G ri. S, in the Indische Stndien, vol. xv, p. 11.

' aT«sir»ri to to i wnwrarra

htwt: us$» ifon qrcwin qm m ra ren n ^ *n: i Hwf?tsrfwr

11 s$ II I read according to the commentary
instead of the senseless flflfiHJliVSFT of the text.

INTRODUCTION.

XXXV11

science of government, ‘ because the science of dialectics or
reasoning is a subdivision of the threefold (Vedic lore 1 ^’
while Manu VII, 43 enumerates five branches of learning,
or at least four, if either Medhatithi’s or Naraya/*a’s
explanation of the term dtmavidya, rendered in the transla¬
tion by ‘ the knowledge of the (supreme) Soul 5 is accepted 2 .
Again, we hear, K&mandaki XI, 67, that Manu fixed the
number of ministers (amatya), which the king must appoint,
at twelve. But according to Manu VII, 54 > no more than
seven or eight arc required. These quotations show that
Kamandaki knew a work, attributed to Manu, which con¬
tained rules on the duties of kings, and in some respects
agreed with the seventh chapter of our Manu-smr/ti. If I
conclude that this must have been the old Manava
Dharma-sfitra, it is because Kamandaki twice alludes to it
by the title Manava/*, literally £ those who study a work
proclaimed by Manu/ or, more freely rendered, c the
Manava school. 5 It is a very common practice of Indian
authors to refer in this manner to the books restricted to
special schools. But I know of no case where the doctrines
of the Manava Dharma^astra, or of any other work which
is destined for all Aryans and acknowledged as authorita¬
tive by all, are cited in the same or in a similar way. Nor is
it usual to contrast, as Kamandaki docs, the rules taught
by Manu with those of other teachers and afterwards to
reject them 3 * . If a Hindu writer on law finds it necessary
to set aside an opinion of Manu, he either passes by it in
silence or he interprets the passage where it occurs in
accordance with the principles of some other Smr/ti with

1 ttHh fTOT i * , srnn tht ftwnW

*nn 11311

2 With respect to Medhatithi’s and N&raya;/a*s explanations, see the note to
the translation. I will add that Kim. Nit. II, 7,

* The science of dialectics (is) a means of fully recognising the Soul or Self/
speaks in favour of Nar&yawa’s explanation, and that it would perhaps have
been better if I had placed the latter in the text.

* As the learned editor of the Nltis&ra (Preface, p. 2) asserts that its author
was a Buddhist, it might be conjectured that the latter treated Manu with small
respect, because he belonged to a heterodox sect. But it ought to be noted
that no proof is offered for the above assertion, and that the work contains no

trace of Buddhism.

xxxviii LAWS OF MANU.

which he himself agrees. Hence it is not doubtful that
Kcimandaki’s references point to a work of Manu which,
though highly esteemed, did not hold the same paramount
position as Bhrzgu’s version of Manu’s laws. In other
words, K&mandaki’s Manu must have been the property of
a particular school, and that was just the case with the
Manava Dharma-sfttra. The fact that all the known
Dharma-stitras contain a more or less detailed description
of the duties of kings agrees well with this supposition, and
so does the circumstance that Kamandaki’s Nitis&ra is
either really an ancient work, composed long before the
beginning of our era, or at least a later recension of such
an old book 1 . These are all the certain indications of the
former existence of a Manava Dharma-siltra which I have
been able to find. It is possible that the same work is
also alluded to in some verses of the twelfth and thirteenth
Parvans of the Mahabh&rata. But this question is, as we
shall sec below, surrounded with great difficulties, and its
solution somewhat doubtful. Among the passages, dis¬
cussed above, none are so important as Vasish^a’s quota¬
tions. The remainder contribute, however, to give a more
definite idea of the range of subjects included in the lost
work, and they confirm the conclusion, drawn from the
former, that the Manava Dharma-sutra closely resembled
our Manu-smrfti.

The investigations concerning the last point, the question
if any traces of a connexion of our Manu-smriti with the
writings of the Manava school are discoverable, have
hitherto led, as stated above, to a negative result. They
were, of course, directed to a comparison of the Manava
Gr/hya-sutra with the Dharmajastra, as both works of

1 The work claims to be the composition of a pupil of A'andragupta’s famous
minister, A'a//akya Kaurilya or Kau/alya, to whom a portion of the Mangala-
£ara#a is dedicated, and who is frequently referred to as the Guru or teacher.
Though there is no clear evidence corroborating this statement, there is also
none to rebut it. In favour of this claim speaks the fact that the name of the
author is a nomen gentile. For among the ancient writers the practice of
signing their books with the family-name is almost universal. Later it seems to
have fallen into disuse. The Nitisara is quoted by the oldest commentator of
Manu, Medhatithi.

INTRODUCTION.

XXXIX

necessity frequently treat of the same subjects. On com¬
paring the corresponding portions of the two works, Pro¬
fessor Jolly 1 found no special agreement with respect to
the ages prescribed for the performance of the Sa///skaras,
with respect to the marriage-rites and to the rules for the
conduct of students and of Snatakas. Nor was he able to
discover in the Manu-snWti any of the curious technical
terms and phrases used in the Grzhya-stitra, while the
somewhat closer resemblance in the Mantras of the Vauva-
deva ceremony and in a few other points turned out to
be without conclusiveness on account of the concurrent
agreement of other Gr/hya-sutras. Dr. von Bradke’s re¬
examination of the question 2 did not yield any other result.
I can only bear witness to the general correctness of these
remarks. Though it is possible to adduce some passages,
not mentioned by Professor Jolly 3 , in which the Gr/hya-
siltra shows a special affinity with the Smrz’ti, the very
great differences which occur in other sections 4 , the absence
of an agreement in particularly characteristic rules 5 , and the

1 On the Vishwu Dharma-siltra and the Kanaka; Transactions of the Royal
Bavarian Academy, 1879, h* P- 82 seq.

2 Journal of the German Oriental Society, vol. xxxii, p. 438.

3 Among the rules which specially agree, I may mention one from the section

on the Initiation, Man. G ri. Sfl. 1 , 22 (end), [*«iVi^] I *TTrTT^-

1 *rpgr*n: m 11 ‘Next he shall

go out to beg, first, to his mother and to other females who are friendly, or to
as many as may be near.* These Sutras correspond to Manu II, 50, ‘ Let him
first beg food of his mother, or of his sister, or of his own maternal aunt, or of
(some other) female who will not disgrace him (by a refusal).’ I am not aware
that this rule occurs in any other Smr/ti.

4 Among the very great discrepancies I would point to such as those occurring
in the section on the marriage-rites. The Manu-smr/ti III, 20-34, describes the
well-known eight modes by which a woman may be obtained from her family.
But the Manava Grfhya-siUra I, 7-8, knows two only, the Brahma and the Aaulka
rites, the latter of which corresponds to the Asura or Manusha rite of the other
Smr/tis, and sanctions the purchase of the bride from her parents.

’ The absence of an agreement in characteristic rules is particularly notice¬
able in the chapter on the study of the Veda and the stoppages of the Veda
study. There the general rules, e. g. regarding the beginning, length, and end¬
ing of the school-term, which are found also in other Smrz'tis, agree in both
works. But none of those special prescriptions which the Manava Grfhya-sfitra
gives for the time when and the ceremonies with which particular portions of
the Maitr&ya/ri Sa/rchita are to be learnt can be traced in the Manu-smrzti.

xl

LAWS OF MANU.

non-occurrence of Mantras, peculiar to the Maitraya«lya-
Manava school in the Manu-snmti, do not permit us to
consider them as decisive for the settlement of the question.
On the other hand, this negative result does not preclude
the possibility that the supposed connexion between the
original of the Manu-smr/ti and the Manava school may
nevertheless have existed. For the examples of the Haira-
;zyakc^as and Madhya;//dinas show that the Sfttras, adopted
by a school, are not always composed by one and the
same teacher, but sometimes are made up of fragments
originally belonging to different authors. In the case of
the Madhya/;/dinas the author of the JSrauta-sutra is a
Katyayana, while the Gr/hya-siitra bears the name of a
Faraskara. In the case of the Haira;/yakc^as the Dharma-
sutra, though it is ascribed to Hirawyakcrin Satyashad%a,
is in reality the work of Apastamba, and differs both in
its language and in its contents very much from the
Grzhya-stitra \ Moreover, the Haira«yakc.ra Aayana-
sfltra has been taken over, as its colophon clearly proves,
from the Bharadva^as. It is, therefore, still possible that
the ancient Manava Dharma-sfltra was considered as the
special property of the M&navas, but was not composed
by the same teacher as the Gr/hya-sfttra, or that, though
both works had the same author, the materials for their
composition were borrowed from different sources. Either
supposition would explain the discrepancies between the
two works. If we now could show that some other work
belonging to the Manava Aara;/a shows a special affinity
to the Manu-smnti, the view that the original of the latter
was first the property of that school might be still upheld.
A renewed examination of the various treatises, studied
and claimed as their own by the Mdnavas, has convinced
me that such a connecting link is actually found among
them. This is the Sraddhakalpa, a description of the
ordinary funeral sacrifices which the Manava Grihya-
sdtra does not treat in detail, but barely touches in the
sections on the Ash/akd rites (II, 8-9). If this treatisehas
not been taken into consideration by Professor Jolly and

1 Sacred Books of the East, vol. ii, p. xxiii.

INTRODUCTION. xli

Dr. von Bradke, the reason is that it is not contained in
Professor Haug’s collection of the M&nava Sfttras, the
only one which has hitherto been accessible to European
students. In my copy of the works of the Manava school
it stands after the Pravar&dhydya \ It consists of four
short Kha//^as. The first begins with the words, ‘ Now we
will explain the rules for the funeral sacrifices/ and treats of
the following points : the invitation of qualified Brahmawas,
their hospitable reception with the Argliya in the house of
the sacrificer, the invocations asking the Vuvcdevas and the
manes to attend, and the burnt oblations offered to Soma,
Yama, and Agni. The Mantras which are to be used
seem, if not all, at least for the greater part, to have been
taken from the Maitraya;/! Saw/hita. This section shows
hardly any special agreement with the Manu-smrfti, except
in the rule, known also from other Dharma-sfttras, which
prescribes the entertainment of two guests at the rite in
honour of the gods, and of three at the offering to the
manes or of one on either occasion, as well as in the
number and the deities of the burnt oblations which precede
the vSraddha (Manu III, 123, 211). But the second Kha/ft/a,
which contains the description of the Srdddha ceremony,
opens with a couple of verses, the first of which corres¬
ponds almost literally 2 with Manu III, 274. The only im¬
portant difference is that at the end the words 4 in the rainy
season and under (the constellation) Magha>£ ’ take the
place of Manu’s ‘ when the shadow of the elephant falls
towards the east/ It must be noted that, though Vishnu
LXXVIII, 52-53 and Vasish//*a XI, 40 have passages which
contain similar prayers of the manes, their wording differs
very considerably from that of the Sraddhakalpa and of

1 My MS. of the writings of the Manava Aarawa, which was copied in 1864-65
at N&sik, includes, besides the Sawhita and the Upanishad, counted as the fifth
Ka*</a, all the portions of the 6’rauta-sfitra, known from Professor Haug’s MSS.
together with the Kumara or Kum&rila Bhashya and portions ofra later vrftti
by Mijra Balakr*sh«a, as well as the Grfhya-sfitra with its Bhashya, the P&ratt£-
khya, by Bha//a Ash/avakra (not by Kumarila, as I conjectured in West and
Biihler’s Digest, p. 46, note a), and the ^Sraddhakalpa.

xlii

LAWS OF MANU.

the Manu-smnti. The second verse 1 bears a faint resem¬
blance to Manu III, 202, as it declares that water offered
in vessels of gold, silver, or Udumbara ‘ becomes imperish¬
able.’ The following prose portion has little in common
with Manu’s rules. Curiously enough, it prescribes that
the funeral cakes are to be offered after the guests have
finished their meal, a custom which Manu III, 261 attri¬
butes to ‘ some.’ The section closes with some .Slokas 2 , the
last of which is nearly identical with Manu III, 283. The
chief difference is, that in the first line the word Sraddhc, 4 at
a SrAddha,’ occurs instead of sn&tvA, 4 after his bath.’ The
second var.lect. samAhita^, ‘with a concentrated mind, 5 instead
of dvi^ottama/z,‘ a Brahma;*a,’is found in the Southern MSS.
of Manu. The next section, which is not numbered in the
colophon as Khanda 3, but separately, treats of the Abhyu-
daya, or Vmldhi-jraddha, the funeral oblations which must
be offered on all joyful occasions, such as the celebration of
the birth of a son, a wedding, and so forth 3 . As Manu
mentions this variety of the 6'rAddha only incidentally, III,
254, the contents of this Khanda. find no counterpart in the
Snm'ti. But among its numerous .Slokas one line agrees
literally with Manu IX, 186 a 4 . The fourth and last section
of the Kalpa, which is marked as the Parisishta, the addenda,
gives miscellaneousrules regarding the times when .Sraddhas
may be performed, the manner in which the fulfilment of
certain special wishes may be secured, and the persons to
be entertained on such occasions. It consists chiefly of

^ (sic) U

a (sic) I

ifcfcw: 11 mi ^ * q gi frqypm (sic) i

mftn fagpri wroi 11 ^ i

f^ggrfgsgi'iRwfufir n w:

3 Beginning gpi ‘M II Colophon, fis

M

4 Txfi f*g fire: inffr n

INTRODUCTION.

xliii

verses, seven 1 of which are either quite or nearly identical
with passages of the Manu-smrzti III, 82, 125-136, 145,
185, 148, and 186, while another, which teaches that the
invited Brahma/zas and the sacrificer must remain chaste
‘because the manes dwell with them 2 , 5 agrees in substance
with Manu III, 189. Two among the seven 51 okas, those
corresponding to Manu III, 125-126, occur also in the V&-
sish//za and BaudMyana Dharmajastras. The remainder
are not traceable in the ancient Sutras.

These remarks show that the M&nava vSr&ddhakalpa
consists, like many other handbooks of Vedic schools, of
several pieces, which probably have been composed succes¬
sively at different times. Even the whole treatise may be
possibly later than the Grzhya-sutra, and may have been
added in order to supplement its too curt rules on funeral
sacrifices. But in spite of these admissions, the fact that it
contains so many verses partly or wholly agreeing with the
Manu-smrzti, keeps its importance for the point under
consideration. If an adherent of the Manava school found
it necessary to compose a treatise on a subject like the
vSraddhas, he would, as a matter of course, base it on the
usage and the teaching of his school. Hence it may be
assumed that the verses which he inserted were current in

1 a. wr i fnipt: jff-

f«nn^ II In the corresponding verse of Manu, Medh. and Gov. read
instead of Kullfika’s s?nr 5 ^u b. si Vtfsqs [w] sn

s tows firerci pt] 11 sfiawT s ■5*}

1 ssHfft? [jrrf^r] srd [wig] fssri [t] 11

C. ^STTTT I SI *RT-

ftpi^ii d. urcnfnf m [ss] fwfs^>ii:

wwtsT'jimst ss s 11 e. nm*ii*n(p§ i

fs^sfir s«r [^] s t. fsss^r

s sssift [ss] seri f^nrr: [n:] 1 $r«ngshr fsssT sraran:

II The fifth and sixth verses have been transposed by a mistake of
the copyist.

* fat: finre: ibrafu 11 Tmniro m Tif*'*'

(sic) II.

xliv LAWS OF MANU.

the latter, and it is not improbable that they may have
occurred in one of its written works. As, further, the
Manu-smrfti rests on a Mclnava Dharma-sutra, and has
derived from the latter a number of its verses, the most
natural explanation of the partial agreement between the
.Srciddhakalpa and the Smr/ti is that both have drawn on
the same source, the Manava Dharma-sutra. If that is so,
the latter must have been considered as authoritative by the
Mdnavas, and have been their peculiar property. Though
several links in this chain of arguments must unfortunately
remain hypothetical, it seems to me, especially if taken
together with Professor Jolly’s and Dr. von Schroder’s
above-mentioned discoveries regarding the relation of the
books of the Ka/ 7 /aka school to those of the Maitrayazziya-
Mftnavas and of the Vish/m-smr/ti to the Manu-smrfti, suffi¬
ciently strong to show that also this part of Professor Max
Muller’s hypothesis is more than an ingenious conjecture.

In conclusion, I may mention that two other circum¬
stances—a certain agreement between the Maitrayaz/a-
bralimaz/opanishacl and the Manu-smz'/ti, as well as the
preference which the latter shows for North-western India
in its description of the countries where pure Aryan cus¬
toms prevail (II, 17-22)—may also point to a connexion
of the Manu-smz'fti and of its original with the Mdnava
school. In the Upanishad VI, 37, we find quoted, as a
generally known maxim, a verse which occurs Manu
III, 76. Two other verses, Manu VI, 76-77, agree in
substance with Maitr. Up. Ill, 4 1 , and some of Manu’s
statements regarding the Atman and the results of the guzzas
or qualities closely correspond to the doctrines taught in
the Upanishad 2 . On a closer examination these resem¬
blances lose, however, a good deal of their significance.
For the ideas expressed in Manu III, 76 are likewise
traceable in a Vedic passage quoted in Vasish///a f s Dharma-
stitra. The comparison of the human body to an impure
dwelling (Manu VI, 76-77) reappears even in Buddhistic
works 3 . The corresponding philosophical tenets, finally,

1 Sacred Books of the East, vol. xv, p. 298, note 1. 2 See below, p. lxxiii.

3 Dhaiqmapada, 147-150; Johanntgen, Das Gesetabuch dcs Manu, p. 93.

INTRODUCTION.

xlv

occur in a portion of the Manu-smnti which probably is
not ancient 1 , and they are held by several of the special
schools of philosophy. As regards the passages in Manu’s
second chapter which praise the holiness of the districts
between the Dr/shadvati and the Sarasvati, and between
the Yamund and the Gangd, they may indicate, as Dr.
Johanntgen thinks 2 , that the home of the school which
produced the Manava Dharma-sfitra lies in those districts.
If that were certain, it would agree well enough with the
facts known regarding the ancient seats of the Manavas.
The latter are a North-western sect, and extended, as the
Mahar//ava asserts 3 , from the May&ra hill to Gujarat.
Unfortunately, however, the Dharma-sfitras of Vasish/ 7 /a and
Baudhayana contain almost exactly the same statements
as Manu, and hence the verses of the latter possibly mean
nothing more than that the Manavas, like many other
Vcdic schools, considered India north of the Vindhyas, and
especially the districts adjoining the sacred rivers, as the
true home of Brahmanism and of Aryan purity.

II.

While the preceding discussion has shown that our
Manava Dharma^astra is based on a Manava Dharma-stitra
which probably was the exclusive property of the Maitra-
ya«iya- Manava school, wc have now to consider some
questions connected with the conversion of the locally
authoritative Sutra into a law-book claiming the allegiance
of all Aryans and generally acknowledged by them. The
problems which now have to be solved, or at least to be
attempted, are the following: i. what circumstances led to
the substitution of a universally binding Manava Dharma-
sustra for the manual of the Vcdic school ? 2. why was so
prominent a position allotted to the remodelled Smriti?

1 See below, p. lxix.

a Loc. cit. pp. 109-110.

3 Sacred Books of the East, vol. ii, p. xxxi; and L. von Schroder, Maitr&yafff
Sa/«h. I, pp.xxiv-xxviii. The ancient inscriptions name Maitrayawa Brahma«as
as donees in the Central India Agency and Gujarat. The M&nava school still
exists in the latter country and in Kh&ndesh.

xlvi

LAWS OF MANU.

3. how was the conversion effected? and 4. when did it
probably take place ?

Though the absence of all historical information, and
even of a trustworthy tradition, makes it impossible to
give full and precise details in answering the first question,
it is yet, I think, possible to recognise the general cause
which led to the production of that class of secondary
Smr/tis to which the Manava Dharmajastra belongs l .
This cause lies, it seems to me, in the establishment of
special law schools which were independent of any parti¬
cular Aakha of the Veda, and which supplanted the Vedic
7 Tara;/as as far as the teaching of the sacred law is con¬
cerned. Evident as it is that the Vedic schools first
systematised and cultivated the six sciences which, on
account of their close connexion with the Veda, are called
its Angas or limbs, it is no less apparent that, as the
materials for each of these subjects accumulated and the
method of their treatment was perfected, the enormous
quantity of the matter to be learnt, and the difficulty of its
acquisition depressed the Vedic schools from their high
position as centres of the intellectual life of the Aryas, and
caused the establishment of new special schools of science,
which, while they restricted the range of their teaching,
taught their curriculum thoroughly and intelligently. In
the Vedic schools a full and accurate knowledge of the
sacred texts was, of course, always the primary object.
In order to gain that the pupils had to learn not only the
Sa^hita text of the Mantras and Brahma;/as, but also their
Pada, Krama, and perhaps still more difficult pa///as or
modes of recitation. This task no doubt required a con¬
siderable time, and must have fully occupied the twelve
terms of four and a half or five and a half months which
the Smr/tis give as the average duration of the studentship
for the acquisition of one Veda 2 . As long as the Angas
consisted of short simple treatises, it was also possible to

1 Regarding the various classes of secondary Smrftis, see West and Biihler,
Digest, p. 32, third edition.

2 See Manu III, i, and IV, 95, as well as the parallel passages quoted in the
notes.

INTRODUCTION.

xlvii

commit them to memory and to master their contents in
the twelve terms, consisting of the seven or eight dark
fortnights from the month Pausha to Vaudkha 1 . But
when the Kalpa or ritual alone reached dimensions as in
the Sfitras of the Baudhayaniyas and Apastambiyas, while
the grammar developed into as artificial a system as that
of Pdmni, it became a matter of sheer impossibility for one
man to commit to memory and to fully understand the
sacred texts together with the auxiliary sciences, especially
as the number of the latter was increased in early times by
the addition of the Nydya or Piirvd Mima///sa, the art of
interpreting the rules of the VedaThe members of the
Vedic schools were then placed before two alternatives.
They might either commit to memory all the Vedic texts
of their Sakhas together with the Angas, renouncing the
attempt at understanding what they learnt, or they had to
restrict the number of the treatises which they learnt by
heart, while they thoroughly mastered those which they
acquired. Those who adhered to the former course be¬
came living libraries, but were unable to make any real use
of their learning. Those who adopted the second alterna¬
tive might become great scholars in the science of the
.sacrifice, grammar, Jaw or astronomy, but they could not
rival with the others in the extent of the verbal knowledge
of the sacred books. Thus the Vedic schools ceased to be
the centres of intellectual, and were supplanted by the
special, schools of science.

The present state of learning in India proves beyond
doubt that this change actually took place in the manner
described, and direct statements in the ancient text-books,
as well as their condition, allow us to recognise the various
stages which led up to it. The true modern representa¬
tives of the ancient ATarawas are the so-called Vaidiks, men
who, mostly living on charity, devote their energy exclu¬
sively to the acquisition of a verbal knowledge of the

1 See Manu IV, 98, and the parallel passages quoted in the note. According to
some Smrftis the Angas might be studied at any time out of term (Vas. XIII, 7).

2 Regarding the early existence of the Pftrva Mlmawsd, see Sacred Books of
the East, vol. ii, p. xxvii; and the verse on the constitution of a'Parishad,
quoted Baudh. I, i, 8; Vas. Ill, 20.

xlviii

LAWS OF MANU.

sacred texts and of the Arigas of their Sdkhds as well as of
spme other works, more or less closely connected with the
Veda. A perfect Vaidik of the A^valdyana school knows
the Rig-veda according to the Sawhitd, Pada, Krama, Gata
and Ghana Pa/yfcas, the Aitareya Brdhma;/a and Ara^yaka,
the ritualistic Stitras of Afvalayana, 5aunaka’s Pratijdkhya
and the 5ikshd, Yaska’s Nirukta, the grammar of Pacini,
the Vedic calendar or Gyotisha, the metrical treatise called
the AVzandas, Ya^Tavalkya’s Dharmasastra, portions of the
Mahabharata, and the philosophical Sfttras of Kawada,
Caimini, and Badardya;/a. Similarly the Vaidiks of the
Ya^us, Sdman, and Atharvan schools are able to recite,
more or less perfectly, the whole of the works of their
respective .Sdkhds as well as some other non-Vedic books 1 .
But it would be in vain to expect from such men an ex¬
planation of the literary treasures which they possess. It
is not the professional Vaidik who can perform the great
sacrifices according to the Arauta-sutras, interpret the intri¬
cate system of Pd/rini's grammar, or decide a knotty point
of law according to the Dharma-sutra or the secondary
Smr/ti which he knows by heart. For these purposes one
must go to quite different classes of men. The performance
of the great Srauta sacrifices lies in the hands of the Srotriya
or Srauti, who unites with a thoroughly verbal knowledge of
the sacred texts of his 5dkha a full acquaintance with the
meaning of the 6rauta-s&tras and with the actual kriyd or
manual work, described in the Prayogas. The .Srautt, as
well as his humbler fellow-worker, the so-called Yd^/Hka or
Bha/fa^i, who knows the G^/hya-sCltras and performs the
rites prescribed for domestic occurrences, likewise both
belong to the representatives of the Vedic schools. They
make, however, no pretence to a knowledge of the whole
range of the Angas, but content themselves with studying
the Kalpa, or parts of it, and perhaps the Sikshd 2 . Real

1 Regarding the necessity for a Vaidik to leam non-Vedic books, see Vas.
XXVII, 6.

2 Regarding the present condition of the Vedic schools and of Vedic learning,
see Haug, Brahma und die Brahmanen, p. 47 ; and R. G. Bhara/drkar’s careful
paper, ‘The Veda in India’ (Ind. Ant. Ill, 132 sqq.) From personal observa-

INTRODUCTION.

xlix

proficiency in the other still surviving Angas, grammar,
law, and astronomy is to be found only with those Pa/zdStg
who fulfil their duty of studying the Veda by committing
to memory a few particularly important sections, such as
the Pctvam&nt-hymns of the Rig-veda or the iatarudriya
of the Ya^ur-veda, or by confining themselves to the few
verses which occur in the Brahmaya^a and the Sa/«dhy4-
vandana 1 . Their chief aim is to be perfect in one or more
of the special sciences which they study, without reference
to a particular Vedic school. Thus, though a Vaiidit who
chiefly devotes himself to the sacred law may belong to the
Vedic school of Baudhdyana or Apastamba, he will not
make Baudh&yana’s or Apastamba’s Dharma-sutra the
starting-point of his studies. On the contrary, it will fre¬
quently happen that he possesses no knowledge of the
Dharma-sutra of his school, except a few passages quoted
in the commentaries and digests. If he has read the whole
work, he will consult it only as one of the many utterances
of the ancient sages. He will not attribute to it a higher
authority than to other Smr/tis, but interpret it in accord¬
ance with the rules of the secondary Dharma^Astras of
Manu or Y&^avalkya. A good illustration of this state
of things is furnished by Sdya;/a-Madhava’s treatment of
Baudhayana in hisVyavah&ram&dhava, a treatise on civil and
criminal law supplementing his commentary on Parlrara’s
Smrzti. Though he himself tells us, in the introduction to
the Paraj’ara - smr/ti - vydkhyd 2 , that he belonged to the
school of Baudh&yana, and though he seems to have written
a commentary on Baudhayana’s Sutras, he relies, e. g. for
the law of Inheritance, not on Baudhdyana’s Dharma-
sutra, but on Vi^74nejvara’s exposition of Y4^*/7avalkya.
He quotes Baudhayana only in three places 3 . As far as
the law is concerned, Slya^a follows the theories of the

tion I can add to Professor Bhawf/arkar’s statements that Vaidiks of the White
Ya$nr-veda are found also in Northern India. I have also heard of Vaidiks of
the Sama-veda among the Parvatiyas in the Panjab, and of the Atharva-veda
in the Central India Agency.

1 Bha#</arkar, loc. cit. p. 132 note.

9 Faraj-aia-snmti-vyakhya, p. 3, ver. 7 (Calcutta edition).

8 Burnell, Dayavibhaga, pp. 9, 39,41.

[*5] d

1

LAWS OF MANU.

special law school of his time and of his country, without
{particular reference to the teaching of his Vedic Karaua.

This depression of the Vedic Karanas through special
schools, which took over the scientific cultivation of a most
important portion of the Angas, is not of modern date. It
goes back to a time which lies long before the beginning of
the historical period of India. We have various indications
in the ancient books which force us towards this conclusion.
Thus Yaska’s Nirukta, a work which undoubtedly belongs
to a very early period, quotes Vaiyakara//as, grammarians;
Nairuktas, etymological exegetes ; and Y&^mkas, ritualists ;
and contrasts their conflicting opinions 1 . If these schools
were at issue with respect to grammatical or exegetical
questions, it follows that the subjects which they taught
were no longer cultivated by the same persons as auxiliary
branches of the Vedic lore, but that each had received in a
special school a separate development as an independent
science. The actual condition in which the various Angas
have been preserved, fully agrees with this view. It shows
that two at least, grammar and astronomy, slipped away
from the control of the Vedic Afara//as in very early times.
For not one of those schools, the text-books of which have
survived, possesses a grammatical or an astronomical hand¬
book of its own. Pa/rim’s Ash/adhyayi is the sole repre¬
sentative of the Vyakara;/a class of the Angas, and is
equally acknowledged by the followers of all Vedas. But
grammar, as taught by Pa/rini, is no longer a mere hand¬
maiden of the Vcdavidyd. It is an independent science
which lays down the laws, applicable to the-whole Sanskrit
language, and treats what we now call the classical San¬
skrit as the standard of Aryan speech, the Vedic forms as
anomalies. As the numerous quotations of older schools
and older teachers in Pamni’s own work, in the Pr&twdkhyas,
and in Yaska’s Nirukta clearly show, a very considerable
number of more ancient works did precede the Ash/a-
dhy&yi, and the latter is undoubtedly the final outgrowth
of a long scientific development 2 . A good many of the lost

1 Nirukta I, 12 ; V, n ; VII, 4 ; XIII, 9.

* See Max Muller, History of Ancient Sanskrit Literature, p. 150, who says

INTRODUCTION.

li

works seem to have treated grammar from the same stand¬
point as P&wini’s book. But it may be reasonably supposed
that the earliest among them mainly or even exclusively
taught the rules applicable to the Vedic texts, studied by
the several Zi/ara/zas to which the authors belonged. This
stage of grammatical research belongs, however, to a remote
past. Indian grammar, as it first becomes known to us, is
no longer entirely subservient to the wants of the Veda-
study, but works, though it still takes account of the Veda,
for its own ends.

The science of astronomy is still more loosely connected
with the Vedic schools. All the traces of its really having
been an Anga consist in the small treatise, entitled Gyotisha,
of which two slightly different recensions arc extant, one
belonging to the Rig-veda and one to the Ya^ur-veda. All
the other works on this subject, even the ancient ones such
as the G&rgi Sa;;/hita, as well as the Vasish/Z/a Sa;//hita
and Siddhanta, show no connexion with the Veda or Vedic
schools, except that their authorship is ascribed to ZcVsliis
or descendants of the families of Z?zshis.

As regards the sacred law, the fact that such late off¬
shoots of the Vedic tree, as the Apastambiyas and the
Hairawyakesas, possess Dharma-sutras, proves that this
subject much longer formed part of the curriculum of
the Vedic schools. But already one of the most ancient
grammarians of the historical period of India, Pata^ali,
hints that in his times the Dharma was taught not only
in the Vedic but also in special schools. For on the one
hand he refers to the Dharma-sutras 1 , on the other he
teaches the formation of a special word, dharmavidya,
which denotes c a person who studies or knows the dharma-
vidyd, the science of the sacred law 2 / Possibly the word
dharnm&stra, the Institutes of the sacred law, which occurs

most appropriately that the Hindus ought to speak not of the Pamnyadya
* vaiyakarawa^, but of the P 3 «inyantfL 6 . *

1 See the remarks on Pawini I, i, 47.

9 See the remarks on P&wini IV, 2 , 60 (vol. ii, p. 248, Kielhom). I follow
Dr. Kielhom, who prints the words * vidya Hnangak&hatradharmatripflrva ’ as
a remark of Patatf^ali, not as a VSrttika of Katyayana.

d 2

lii

LAWS OF MANU.

occasionally in his Bhashya 1 * , may also point to manuals,
Studied by the special schools, which differed from the
Dharma-sfitras. But it is not absolutely conclusive, as a
Dharma-sutra too may be called a Dharma^stra, because
it teaches the sacred law. If we go back to still earlier
times we find the existence of special law schools clearly
indicated even in some of the Dharma-sfttras. The passages
which are most explicit on this point are those which
describe the constitution of a Parishad or an assembly of
learned men, entitled to decide doubtful law cases. For we
read, Vasish///a III, 20 , and Baudhayana I, 1 , 8, * Four men
who each know one of the four Vedas, a student of the
Mima///sa, one who knows the Aiigas, one who recites (the
works on) the sacred law (dharmapaMaka), and three
Brahma//as belonging to (three different) orders (constitute)
an assembly consisting of, at least, ten (members) V Here
the reciter or teacher of the sacred law is named side by
side with him who knows the Aiigas. As the two works
in which the verse occurs arc Dharma-sutras belonging to
the Kalpa section of the Aiigas, it is evident that the
teacher of the sacred law must be a person who specially
devotes himself to the study of that subject, and knows
more than one Dharma-sCitra. Hence it follows that
special law schools must have existed at the time when
these two Dharma-sfitras were composed 3 . It may also be
that already then these special schools had elaborated

1 See Katyayana’s Varttika 39 on Pawini I, 2, 64, and Pata/z^ali’s remarks
thereon (Kielhorn, Mah. vol. i, p. 242).

8 Sec also Manu XII, 111; and above, p. xxv.

3 The s'gniiicanca of the passage quoted comes out still stronger, if we com¬
pare Gautama’s rule (XXVIII, 49), which differs very considerably: ‘They
declare that an assembly (parishad, shall consist) at least (of) the ten follow¬
ing (members, viz.) four men who have completely studied the four Vedas, three
men belonging to the (three) orders enumerated first, (and) three men who
know (three) different (institutes of) law.’ Gautama says nothing of men speci¬
ally devoted to the study of the sacred law. He requires three persons, knowing
three different Dharma-sfltras. lie and Apastamba are perfectly aware of <
the fragmentary character of their rules, and particularly refer their pupils
(Gaut. XVI, 49; Ap. I, 3,11, 38) in certain cases to the teaching of other
schools, which, being comprised under the general term Snmti, have authority,
provided the teachers were oithodox Aish/as (Gaut. I, 2 ; Ap. I, i, 1, 2 ; Vas.
I, 4; Baudh. I, 1,1, 3).

INTRODUCTION.

liii

manuals of their own which differed from the Dharma-
stitras. In favour of this opinion the metrical quotation a£
Baudhdyana II, 4, 14-15 may be adduced, as it seems to
have been taken from a work in Anushftibh-Slokas 1 .
Though the unsatisfactory state of the text’of Baudhayana
docs not allow us to insist too strongly on this passage, it
is undeniable that the formation of special law schools must
inevitably lead after a short time to the composition of
manuals for their use. It is, no doubt, true that their
founders possessed in the Dharma-stitras, the number
of which, to judge from the quotations, must have been
very great, plentiful materials on which they could base
their investigations. But the treatment of a science from
a new point of view was in itself an incentive to the
production of new manuals, and there were in the case of
the special law schools also other reasons which made such
a course desirable. Minute as the Dharma-sutras generally
are on the majority of the topics connected with the moral
duties of Aryas, their arrangement of the rules is fre¬
quently unsystematic, and their treatment of the legal
procedure, the civil and the criminal law, with the excep¬
tion of one single title, the dayavibhaga, i. e. the law of
inheritance and partition, extremely unsatisfactory. With
respect to the other titles, the Dharma-sfttras give nothing
more than a few hints, intended to indicate the general
principles, but they never proceed systematically, and
always show most embarrassing omissions. From the
standpoint of the Vedic schools, a more detailed and
orderly treatment of these matters was, of course, irrele¬
vant, as their chief aim was to point out the road to the
acquisition of spiritual merit, and to guard their pupils
against committing sin. Though some of their members
might be called upon, and no doubt actually were destined
in later life, to become practical lawyers, as Dharmadhi-
k&rins, i. e. legal advisers of kings and chiefs, or as judges,
and to settle the law between man and man, the few
general principles which they had learnt during their course
of instruction would suffice for their wants. For the details

1 Sacred Books of the East, vol. xiv, p. xli.

liv

LAWS OF MANU.

were settled according to the law of custom, which, as the
Dharma-sfttras themselves indicate, was in ancient times
even a greater power in India than it is in our days.
When the sacred law became a separate science to which
men devoted all or the best part of their energy, the case
became different. However much the specialists might be
convinced of the supreme importance of the moral side
of the Dharma, they could not possibly shut their eyes
against the glaring deficiencies of the old text-books, and
they were, of a necessity, driven to remedy them. In
order to effect this, two courses were open to them. They
might cither remodel the old existing works or compose
entirely new ones. As might be expected from the
universal tendency, observable throughout the whole of the
sacred literature of India, they gave preference to the
former alternative, and the result of their work was that
class of the secondary SmrZtis, the chief surviving repre¬
sentatives of which are the Dharma^astras of Manu and
Ya£v7avalkya. These works reveal their origin by the
following marks. They are the exclusive property of the
special law schools, and they show a fuller and more
systematic treatment of all legal topics, while, at the
same time, more or less clear traces of older redactions,
connected with the Vedic schools, arc to be found. They
are free from all signs of sectarian influence, or of having
been composed, like many of the later Digests, at royal
command. They, finally, exhibit unmistakable marks of
being school-books. If we examine our Manu-smr/ti with
respect to these points, its connexion with an older Vcdic
work has been shown above, and the fact that it is, and has
been ever since we have any information regarding its
existence, in the keeping of the Pa/zdfits, who especially
devote themselves to the study of law, will be patent to
every student of the Dharmaj’dstras. That it treats all
legal topics more fully and more systematically than the
Dharma-sutras, and especially devotes much more space to
those subjects which are briefly noticed in the latter works,
is no less evident. It will suffice here to point out the
fact that the description of the duties of the king, including

INTRODUCTION.

lv

the administration of justice and the civil and criminal law,
occupies considerably more than one-third of the whol^.
For chapters vii-ix contain no less than 982 verses, while
the total number amounts to 2,684 K None of the older
law-books devotes more than one-fifth of its text to such
matters 1 2 . The freedom of the Manu-smrzti from all
sectarian influence is perfect. It nowhere teaches the
performance of other rites than those prescribed in the
Vedic writings, and it nowhere inculcates the exclusive
worship of one of the deities of the Paitra//ik sects as we
find it recommended, for instance, in the Vish;/u-smr/ti.
Nor is there any hint that it was written by order of some
king or chief with the purpose of serving as a Digest of the
sacred law. Finally, the marks of its being a school-book,
intended for the instruction of all Aryas, are unmistakable.
We arc told, Manu I, 103, that ‘a learned Brahma//a
must carefully study these (Institutes), and must duly
instruct his pupils in them,’ but that ‘ nobody else (shall do
it).’ Who the pupils, entitled to learn the work, are, is
explained II, 16. There it is said that ‘he for whom
(the performance of) the rites, beginning with the Garbha-
dhana and ending with the Antycshd, is ordained together
with recitation of sacred formulas, is entitled to study it,
but no other man whatsoever.’ Hence Brahmans are to
teach the Aastra, and all Aryas may learn it. It further
agrees with its character as a school-book, if the phalajruti
or statement of the rewards to be gained by its study,
Manu XII, 126, asserts that a twice-born man, who is able
to recite ‘ these Institutes, will be always virtuous in con¬
duct, and will reach (i. e. after death) whatever condition he
desires.’ The first object which the student may gain is
self-improvement, and the second happiness after death 3 .

1 About the same ratio, 367 : 1009 is found in Ya^avalkya’s Smr/ti.

a Thus in the Gautamiya, seven pages of the text out of thirty-four are filled
with legal matters; in the VasishMa, twelve pages out of eighty-one; in the
Apastambiya, ten out of ninety-eight; and in the Baudhayaniya, about seven
out of a hundred and fifteen.

3 Other secondary SmWlis, e. g. Ya^avalkya’s (III, 330-334), give much
more detailed statements regarding the rewards to be obtained. But in
substance they always agree with Manu.

lvi

LAWS OF MANU.

If we accept the conclusion which the preceding discussion
t^nds to establish, that the special law schools produced
the first and the most ancient division of the secondary
Smrztis on the basis of older Dharma-stitras, and that one
among these schools, which, however, cannot be further
specified, turned the Manava Dharma-sfitra into our
metrical Smr/ti 1 , we obtain also satisfactory answers to two
other questions. First, it becomes explicable why the
latter work shows so little connexion with the special
doctrines and usages of the Manavas. If adherents of the
Vedic Manava school, as Professor E. Hopkins conjectures 2 ,
had undertaken the revision of their Dharma-sutra, they
would not have forgotten to mention such ceremonies as
those which, according to their Grfhya-siltra, must be per¬
formed on beginning the study of particular portions of their
Saw/hita 3 , and, above all, they would have allowed Man¬
tras belonging to the Maitrayawi .Sakha to stand. Again,
if the task had fallen to the share of the members of some
other Vedic school, we should find some points mentioned
which were of special interest to them. The entire absence
of all distinctive marks of any Vedic school which the
Manu-smrfti exhibits can only be explained on the hypo¬
thesis that it was remodelled by persons for whom such
minute distinctions had no interest, and who concentrated
their attention on those rules which they considered
essential for all Aryas. Secondly, the view expressed
above furnishes us with an answer to the question why the
Manu-smWti, like all other works of its class, emphatically
claims the allegiance of all Hindus. It is obvious that
every special law school must assert, if its labour is not to
be in vain, the general applicability of its doctrines and
rules to all mankind.

If we now turn to the second point, what reasons
induced the special law schools to select just the M&nava
Dharma-sfitra among the large number of similar works

1 This view, which I first taught in my lectures on the Hindu law, delivered in
the Vienna University during the winter, 1881-82, has been accepted by Professor
J. Jolly, Tagore Lectures, p. 41, and Lecture II passim, as well as p. 347 (end).

3 Proceedings of the American Oriental Society, October, 1883, p. xix.

3 See above, p. xxxix, note 5.

INTRODUCTION.

lvii

for the basis of their studies and to recast it, the answer
is not difficult to find. The reason for this selection,
and for the high veneration in which the Manu-smrzti has
been held and is still held by Hindus, lies, without doubt,
in the myths which, since very early times, have clustered
round the name of Manu, and in progress of time have been
more and more developed and brought into a system.

In Vedic mythology, Manu, or Manus, as he is also
called in the Rig-veda, is the heros eponymos of the
human race, and by his nature belongs both to gods and
to men. As a divine being he is described as the son of
the Aditya Vivasvat and of 1 * * 4 * the female of equal colour/
whom Vivasvat’s wife, Sara//yu, made to take her place 1 ,
or as the offspring of Svayambhfi, self-existent Brahman 2 .
In the same quality he is invoked at the sacrifices as
pra^apati, the Lord of created beings 3 , and in Kuts&-
yana’s hymn of praise, which is quoted in the Maitr&ya/za
Brahmattopanishad (V, i), he is identified with Brahman,
the supreme Soul 4 . In the systematised theology of the
Nairuktas he appears as one of the deities residing in
heaven r \ His human character comes out still more
frequently. He is named in the Rig-veda together with
other sages of a remote antiquity 6 , the Taittiriya-sawhit&
speaks of him as of the father of a family who divides his
estate among his sons 7 , and the Satapatha-brahma//a opens
one of its legends regarding him with a passage which repre¬
sents him as following the usual daily customs of men 8 .

Manu’s position as the progenitor of mankind is usually

1 Valakhilya IV, i; Atharva-veda VIII, io, 24; 6at. Br. XIII, 4, 3, 3; and
Nirukta XII, 10.

* See the Vedic jloka quoted Nirukta III, 4, about which more will be said
below. A third account, Valakhilya III, i, makes him the son of Satf*vara»a,

who possibly may be identical with the AYshi mentioned RV. V, 33, 10.

8 Taitt. Sawh. Ill, 2,8,1; IV, 1,9, 1; Va^. Sawh. XI, 66; Maitr. Sawh.II, 7,7.

* The edition reads anna m, food. But Professor Max Muller’s MS. has cor¬
rectly Manu (S. B. E. XV, p. 303 note). My copy has

* Nirukta XII, 33-34. 6 RV. I, 80, 16 ; 1 ,112,16, &c.

7 Taitt. Sawh. Ill, 1, 9, 4.

8 .Sat. Br. I, 8,1; Sacred Books of the East, vol. xii, p. 216, 'In the morning
they brought to Manu water for washing, just as they (are wont to) bring
(water) for washing the hands.*

Iviii

LAWS OF MANU.

indicated in general terms only. In the Rig-veda he is
repeatedly called ‘ Father Manu V In other passages we
meet frequently with the assertion that ‘ the five tribes,’ or
‘ these created beings/ or ‘ the races of men ’ are his off¬
spring 1 2 3 . But in the famous legend of the flood, given by
the JSatapatha-brahmaz/a y , we have a circumstantial account
of the manner in which he produced the human race.
According to that Brahmaz/a, Manu alone was saved by
the advice of a fish from a great flood which destroyed all
created beings. Being desirous of offspring he engaged in
worshipping and in performing austerities. During this
time he offered a Paka-ya^/Ta. His oblations produced a
woman, I//a or I/a, a personification of the lWa ceremony
and of c the blessing of the sacrifice.’ Though solicited by
Mitra and Varuz/a to become theirs, she acknowledged
herself Mann’s daughter, and stayed with him. ‘ With her/
the Brahmaz/a concludes in somewhat ambiguous terms,
‘ he went on worshipping and performing austerities.
Through her he generated this race, which is called the
race of Manu/ Though this legend is alluded to in another
Brahmaz/a 4 * , and repeated in later Sanskrit works, it maybe
reasonably doubted whether it contains the original version
of the production of mankind through Manu. It seems
more probable that an older myth ascribed to him not a
reproduction, but the first creation or procreation of the
human race.

Being the father of mankind, Manu is naturally con¬
sidered as the founder of social and moral order, as a ruler
of men, and as a AVshi to whom sacred texts were revealed,
as the inventor of sacrificial rites, and the author of legal
maxims. We find, therefore, passages which assert that he
was a king 6 , which speak of his coronation, or make him

1 RV. I, 80, 16 ; 1 ,124, 2 ; H 33 > T 3, &c.

3 RV. Ill, 24, 3; Taitt. Samh. 1 , 5 ,1,3; I, 5, 6,1; 111,4,22; 111,4,3,7;
VI, 1, 5,6, &c.; .Sat. Br. XIII, 4, 3, 3.

3 Sacred Books of the East, vol. xii, pp. 216-219.

4 Weber, Indische Streifen, vol. i, p. 11, note 3.

3 See e.g. Aatapatha-brdhma;/a XIII, 4, 3, 3, and RV. I, 112, 8. In the

latter passage the epithet jura, the hero, characterises Manu as a royal personage.

INTRODUCTION.

lix

the ancestor of kings. Thus a Mantra, recited at the
Abhisheka of a king \ asserts that Pra^Apati formerly
anointed Indra, Soma, Varu/za, Yama, and Manu, and
among the mythical kings vSaryata is called Manu’s son 2 ,
while Purfiravas is the offspring of Manu’s daughter, Id a or
I/a 3 . In later times this ancient idea, which makes Manu
the first king of men and the ancestor of kings, has led to
his being placed at the head of mythical and of partly
historical genealogies. From him springs Ikshvaku, the
first king of the solar dynasty and the historical Z^alukya,
and Afola kings name Manu as the founder of their families.

Much more frequently the Veda alludes to, or explicitly
mentions, Manu as the inventor of sacrificial rites. The
Rig-veda contains a very large number of passages 4 * 6 which
speak of Manu’s sacrifices, and of his having kindled the
sacred fire, or invoked the gods to accept the offerings of the
Azshis just as they accepted those of Manu. The same
assertions are repeated in the Ya^*ur-veda r> , and the Aata-
patha-brahma/za (I, 5, 1-7) says very explicitly, ‘ Manu,
indeed, worshipped with sacrifices in the beginning ; imitat¬
ing that, this progeny (of his now) sacrifices/ In addition
to the fire-worship, Manu is also said to have invented the
6raddhas or funeral sacrifices. The chief passage bearing
on this point occurs in Apastamba’s Dharma-sutra II, 18, 1,
where it is stated that the gods went to heaven in reward
of their sacrifices, and that Manu, seeing men left behind,
‘ revealed this ceremony, which is designated by the word
Sr&ddha.’ Though this passage is not marked as a
quotation, its style clearly shows that it has either been
borrowed from a Brahmazza, or that it gives a summary of

1 Ait. Br. VIII, 8,1.

2 Sat Br. IV, 1, 5, 2 ; compare also Ait. Br. IV, 32; VIII, 21, where the
name is 6’aryata.

3 RV. I, 31, 4; X, 95 ; and Sat Br. XI, 5, i, 1. In the first passage I take
manave in the sense of manavaya.

4 See Bergaigne, Religion Vedique, I, 62-70, where, it seems to me, a great
many difficult passages have been explained more successfully than in the
translations of other Vedists, who take the word manu too freely in the sense

of man.

6 See e. g. Taitt. Sawh. I, 7, i, 3; II, 5, 9, 1 ; III, 3, 2,1; V, 4, 10, 5.

lx

LAWS OF MANII.

a longer story contained in such a work 1 . It is probably
qn account of this legend that 4 Manu, the offspring of the
Sun/ receives in the Mahabharata 2 the epithet 6r&ddha-
deva, which may be rendered either 4 the deity of the
Sraddha/ or, perhaps better, 4 he whose deity is the Sr&ddha,
i. e. the •STuddlm-worshipper/ Closely connected with
Manu’s position as inventor of sacrifices is the ancient myth,
mentioned above, which makes him the father of L/d; and
from the same idea spring probably the legends regarding
his bull, whose voice destroyed the demons, and regarding
the sacrifice of his wife, Man&vi 3 .

That Manu was credited with the revelation of Mantras
has been stated above 4 in the remarks on the passages
from the three redactions of the Ya^ur-veda and of the
Td//^ya-brahma«a. The older works, however, nowhere
attribute to him entire hymns, but mostly small numbers
of verses only. The same is the case in the Index of the
A/shis of the White Ya^ur-veda, while the Sarvanukrama//i
of the Rig-veda ascribes five entire Suktas, VIII, 27-31, to
Manu Vaivasvata, as well as a few verses to Manu Apsava
and to Manu Sa;;/vara;/a. An interesting passage in the
beginning of the last section of the A 7 /andogyopanishad 5
informs us that that work was revealed by Brahma (Hira-
//yagarbha) to Pra^apati (Kajyapa), by Pra^dpati to Manu,
and by Manu to mankind. This legend proves that the
ancient Vedic schools believed Manu to have taught more
than a few verses and hymns. It also helps us to under¬
stand better the phrase of the four Vedic books quoted, 4 All

1 If Professor Max Muller, India, What can it teach us? pp. 234-235 and
365, thinks that Apastamba’s passage betrays a consciousness of the later origin
of the «Sraddha rites, I am unable to follow him. It seems to me more pro¬
bable that it is only intended to explain the holiness and efficacy of the funeral
sacrifices, and why they secure heaven for the worshipper and the worshipped
ancestor. In the Brahmawas similar introductions, in which the Dcvas play the
part of Manu, are prefixed to the descriptions of most sacrifices. As the Sraddhas
specially concern men, the father of mankind is very appropriately represented
as their inventor.

2 Mali. XII, 121, 29.

3 Sacred Books of the East, vol. xii, pp. 29-30; see also the passages and
essays quoted there in note 1.

4 See p. xvi.

5 Sacred Books of the East, vol. i, p. 144.

INTRODUCTION*

lxi

Manu said is medicine/ As has been pointed out above,
the assertion contained in this sentence is so general that it
makes us suspect the existence of many sayings of Manu
on religious subjects. Though the AV/andogya is probably
not as ancient as the Sa;^hitds of the Ya^ur-veda, or even
as the Ta;/dya, and though it hence would be more than
hazardous to assume that this very passage is alluded to in
the latter, the idea that Manu acted as mediator between
Brahman and mankind, and that he taught the way to
final liberation, may yet belong to very early times, and
may have been one of the causes which led to the
sweeping generalisation. The same passages probably
testify also to the early existence of the belief that Manu
first settled the Dharma, which, as the preceding discussion
shows, is but a natural outgrowth from the conceptions
which make him the founder of the moral and social order
of the world. The published Sawhit&s and Brahma/zas
contain, as far as I know, no explicit statement on this
subject. But an allusion to it seems to occur in the
passage of the Taittiriya-sa;/*hit& which declares that Manu
divided his estate among his sons. Baudhayana 1 , at least,
has taken it in this sense, as he places it at the head of his
rules on inheritance. The oldest direct testimony on this
point is the .Sloka quoted in Yaska’s Nirukta III, 4, which
says, ‘ According to the sacred law the inheritance goes
without a distinction to the children of both sexes, (that)
Manu, the offspring of the Self-existent (Svdyambhuva),
has declared at the beginning of the creation 2 / The text
shows the Vedic accents, the use of which appears to be
confined to the Saz/zhitcis and Brahmazzas. As the verse is
emphatically called a 6Ioka, it cannot have been taken

1 Sacred Books of the East, vol. xiv, p. 224.

2 I do not share Professor von Roth’s misgivings (Nirukta, Notes, pp. 24-26)
regarding the genuineness of this verse, and of the whole legal discussion in
sections 4-6 of the third book of the Nirukta. We know now that the views of
the ancient authors on the succession of daughters differed very considerably.
Hence the incidental discussion of this vexed question in the Nirukta need not
raise any suspicion. Similar digressions are not uncommon in other Vedic
works. The difficulty with respect to the compound r^lwlokibhydm, in the
words introducing the verse, disappears if it is taken as a Dvandva, and not, as
Professor von Roth seems to do, as a Karmadharaya.

lxii

LAWS OF MANU.

from a work of the former class. It probably belongs to
$ne of the lost accented Brdhma;ms. That it did not form
part of the Manava Dharma-stitra follows, not only from the
use of the accents, but also from its contents. Its doctrine
does not agree with that of our Manu-snmti, which, with
respect to the greater part of the rules on inheritance, may
be considered as a faithful representative of the original
Dharma-sutra. Though Manu IX, 131-139 strongly insists
on the right of an appointed daughter, and, indeed, of every
daughter who has no brothers, to succeed to the paternal
estate, he nowhere lays down the rule, which, according to
Yaska, is taught in our verse, that daughters under all
circumstances share equally with sons. To daughters who
have brothers Manu allots one-fourth of a share.

In the Dharma-sfttras the verses which contain the phrase
c manur abravit, thus Manu has said,’ or equivalents thereof,
become more frequent. The passages of Vasish///a and of
5 ankhayana in which it occurs have been discussed above.
Two verses of this description arc found in Baudhayana’s
Dharma-sutra (IV, 1, 13; 2, 15), and a considerable number
in U-ranas’ aphoristic Dharma^astra 1 . In the Mahabharata 2 ,
in our Manu-smrzti itself, in the Narada-smr/ti 3 , and in
other secondary law-books it is also of common occurrence.
Its real meaning is, as Professor Hopkins (loc. cit.) has
pointed out, no other than that the rule to which it is
appended was thought to be ancient and indisputable.
Hence it is sometimes used vicariously for appeals to the
teaching of the Veda 4 and of Pra^apati. That the cause of

1 Instances of this kind occur, especially in the Sraddhakalpa, chapter IV,

TOfir tot 1 (sic) n-

(sic) M and in chapter VI, TO'. TOtftl 1

11 wsjffmrftr vnuasr:

im i -^ fjipwiV

a Proceedings of the American Oriental Society, October, 1883, p. xix.

3 J. Jolly, Tagore Lectures, p.' 46.

4 Compare e.g. Vas. XVII, 10-11, and Manu IX, 183-3.

INTRODUCTION.

lxiii

its adoption was not the existence of a primeval M&nava
Dharma-sfttra or S&stra, but the belief in the revelation cjf
the law by Manu is proved also by the wide divergence of
the doctrines attributed to the father of mankind from each
other and from the teaching of the Manu-smr/ti.

These legends and mythological conceptions are amply
sufficient to show why the special law schools should have
directed their attention to the Manava Dharma-stitra, and
should have chosen that in preference to other similar works
as the basis of one of their text-books. Even if the author of
the Sutra, who in the tradition of the MAnavas 1 is sometimes
called Manv&Mrya and sometimes Manav&fcarya, really was
a historical personage named after the progenitor of men, and
was considered as such by the adherents of his own school,
yet a confusion between him and his mythical namesake
was in course of time inevitable. Even Apastamba, who
himself claims to be no more than a common sinful mortal,
has not escaped the fate of being turned into a half-divine
being by the authors of the Mahabh&rata 2 and of the Pura//as.

1 All I can adduce regarding the tradition of the Manavas is found in some
not very clear verses of the MarigalaJ ara;/as, prefixed to the two books of
Ash/avakra’s commentary on the GWhya-sutra. In the beginning of the
prathamapurushabhashya he says, according to Professor Haug’s MS. (Munich

Roy. Lib. Sansk. MSS., No. 51), HPHTO [tf] TO I TOTJ

mprn'pn $r^n*prfn<j (?) fip i (?) h: *ng

My MS. omits the invocation of the Bhashyakara and of Manava-
£arya and reads in the last line *T° H The dvitiyapuru-

shabhashya begins, according to my MS., TC 33 TOTC I

wren*»r*rai'iH$: pm inr^n: 11^11 in 9 ?t I (?)

1 3 u*u TOSidfa irf

tot nmmr: 1 tttr ?] ^ 3 ^Tfwnra^ii|n

In the first line of the second verse I propose to read ■«TVT c f rfifQ

and to translate, 'As the venerable Manava/rarya composed this
(Stitia) by the favour of Sarasvati, (even so) the (commentary) called Pftraz/a
was carefully written by Ash/avakradcva after he had pleased Sarasvati, when
one hundred years (of the Lokakala) were completed, in the season called the
dewy one.* These verses seem to indicate that, according to the tradition of
the Manavas, a historical Mdnava^arya or Manva^arya composed the Grfhya-
sutra, which was also called Bnhaddharma, by the special favour of the goddess
Sarasvati.

8 See Mah. XIII, 66 , tj.

lxiv

LAWS OF MANU.

A Manu who composed a treatise on the sacred law which
gained some notoriety was, therefore, sure of divine honours.
As soon as the identification of the author of the Siltra
with the father of mankind was made, it was a matter of
course that the Manu-smrzti obtained a particularly high
position, and was accepted as the paramount authority on
the sacred law.

The legends given above render us yet another service.
They explain the origin of the seemingly contradictory
statements of the Smrz'ti regarding Manu. When he is
represented there as a descendant of self-existent Brahman
and a Pra^dpati who takes a prominent part in the creation,
or as identical with the supreme Brahman 1 , and on the
other hand as a 7 ?fshi and as a king of the remotest
antiquity, it is now patent that these conceptions have been
taken over from Vedic literature and that, different as they
are, they have all grown out of the one fundamental idea
which makes the first man and progenitor a half-divine and
half-human being, an assistant in the work of creation, and
the founder of moral and social order among men. Some of
the remaining elements of the myth of Manu, as told in the
Smrfti, are likewise clearly developments of Vedic ideas.
Thus the interposition of the androgynous VirA^ in Manu’s
genealogy (I, 32-33) is foreshadowed by a curious passage
of the Atharva-veda, VIII, 10, where the female Vira£*is said
to have been ‘ in the beginning this (whole world),’ and to
have yielded blessings to various classes of beings. According
to verse 24, * Manu, the son ofVivasvat, was her calf 2 , when
Pr/thi Vainya milked from her agriculture and grain-bearing
plants.* It would, therefore, seem that Virag-, who repeatedly
plays a part in Vedic cosmogony, was already there connected
with Manu. Further, the substitution of seven or more
Manus for one, has probably been caused, as the Peters¬
burg Dictionary (s. v. manu) suggests, by the diversity of the
genealogies found in the various Vedic passages. It is even
not improbable that the Vedic schools believed, when K&tyi-

1 The same identification occurs Mah. I, 1, 32.

2 This statement alludes to the fact that Indian cows do not allow themselves
to be milked, except when their calves stand by.

INTRODUCTION.

lxv

yana composed his Sarv&nukramazzikd of the Rig-veda,
in the existence of several distinct Manus. Finally, the.
association of the ten great sages whom Manu Sv&yam-
bhuva created, and who in turn created other Manus
(I, 34-36), in the work of creation, rests on such passages
as those quoted by Apastamba II, 24 , 3-6, 13, where suc¬
cessive destructions of the world are mentioned, and ‘ this
creation is declared to be the work of Pra^&pati and of the
sages.’ But the complete development of the myth of
Manu belongs to the schools of the Paur&;/ikas and
Aitihdsikas, and we find in the Purd/zas and in the
Mahdbhirata many legends which are partly identical with
or closely related to that told in our Sm riti l .

The third problem, to say how the conversion of the
M&nava Dharma-sutra into our Manu-smrzti was effected,
presents very considerable difficulties, and admits of an
approximative solution only. It involves the consideration
of three questions. First, which portions of our Manu-
smrzti are ancient and which arc later additions? secondly,
whence have the additions been derived? and thirdly,
whether they have been added at one time or successively ?
In our attempts to distinguish between the old and the
modern elements in our Manu-sa///hit& we must be
guided, except where we have quotations from the old
Dharma-sutra, by the analogies which the other existing
Dharma-sfttras furnish. For it may be assumed as a
general maxim, that rules and other statements of our
Manu, which find counterparts in the critically unsus¬
picious portions of the Sfitras of Gautama, Baudh&yana,
Apastamba, and Vasish^/za, probably occurred also in the
M&nava Dharma-stitra. Single exceptions are, of course,
possible, because, though the Dharma-sutras show a very
decided class-affinity, they yet differ in the details. The
one devotes greater attention to one subject, and the other
to others. Hence it may be, that occasionally a rule
which is found in the Dharma-sfitras, nevertheless did
not occur in the M 4 nava-sutra, but was added on its

1 See H. H. Wilson, Vish«u-pura«a, vol. i, pp. 104-5 (ed. Hall); Professor
Hopkins, Journal of the American Oriental Society, vol. xi, pp. 247-256.

Os] e

LAWS OF MANU.

lx«vi

revision. To a certain extent we may also avail ourselves
«of the Vishwu-snWti for the same purpose. But a greater
degree of caution will be necessary, as this work, though in
the main a representative of the K 4 ///aka Dharma-sfitra,
contains also an admixture of modern elements. On the
other hand, those rules and discussions which cannot be
traced in one of the old SCitras, are at least suspicious,
and require careful consideration. The ultimate decision,
if such passages have indeed to be considered as additions,
must depend on various collateral circumstances. The
safest criterion will always be the character of the ideas
which they express. If these are entirely foreign to the
Sfitras or to Vedic literature, they may be confidently
rejected as interpolations. A good deal depends also on
their position and on the manner in which they fit into the
context. Numerous cases will, however, remain doubtful.

If we examine Manu’s text according to these principles,
the more important results will be as follows:—The whole
first chapter must be considered as a later addition. No
Dharma-sutra begins with a description of its own origin,
much less with an account of the creation. The former, which
would be absurd in a Dharma-siitra, has been added in order
to give authority to a remodelled version. The latter has
been dragged in, because the myths connected with Manu
presented a good opportunity £ to show the greatness of the
scope of the work/ as Medh&tithi says. The table of con¬
tents, given at the end of chapter I, was, of course, also
foreign to the original Sutra. Chapters II-VI, on the
other hand, seem to represent with tolerable faithfulness
the contents of the corresponding sections of the M&nava
Dharma-sfitra. Nearly all the rules are found in the other
Dharma-sutras and in the Vish;zu-smrfti, and more than
three-fourths of the verses find counterparts in the aphorisms
and verses of the older law-books. Nevertheless, the hand of
the remodeller is not rarely visible. There are, besides the
verses which announce the transition from one subject to
the other 1 , a considerable number of smaller and some

1 These verses probably mark the subdivisions of the Adhyayas, the Ka«</ikas
or Kham/as of the ancient Sutra.

INTRODUCTION.

Ixvii

larger interpolations. To the latter belong, in the second
chapter, vv. i-ii and vv. 88-100. The first passage gives*
a philosophical account of the origin of actions (1-5), such
as is not found in any older law-book ; further, a verse (v. 6)
stating the sources of the sacred law, which is unnecessary
on account of v. 12, and suspicious on account of the double
description of the third source of the law, by the synonymous
terms jlla and 4 Mra x . The contents of the remaining
verses, the praise of the Manu-smrz'ti (v. 7), the advice how
the different authorities are to be studied (v. 8), the decla¬
ration of the reward for obedience to the revealed texts
(v. 9), the definition of the terms vSruti and Sm^/ti, and the
declaration of their authoritativeness, are likewise super¬
fluous, and clearly later enlargements. The second passage
(vv. 88-100), which enumerates the organs of sensation and
action and teaches the necessity of controlling them, inter¬
rupts the continuity of the text very needlessly, and has
nothing whatsoever to do with the matter treated of.
Among the smaller interpolations in this chapter, vv. 13,
16, 27, 28, 142, 143, 213-215, 221, and 239 must certainly be
reckoned. It also seems probable that the passage on the
importance of the syllabic Om, of the Vy&hr/tis, and of
the Sdvitri (vv. 76—87), as well as that on the humility and
meekness required of a Br&hma//a (vv. 160-163), and that
on the worship due to parents and a teacher (vv. 225-237),
have been enlarged, though in each case something of the
kind may have occurred in the Dharma-sutra. In the third
chapter, there is one longer passage (vv. 192-201) which,
beyond all doubt, has been added by a later hand. For
the classification of the Manes, which it contains, is in this
form foreign to Vedic literature. More doubtful arc the
discussions on the duty of conjugal intercourse (vv. 46-50),
on the honour due to women (vv. 55-60), on the excellence
of the order of householders (vv. 79-80), and on the results of
inviting sinners and men of bad conduct to .Sr&ddhas (vv.
169-182). Possibly the ancient Sfitra contained hints on
some of these subjects, but it is most improbable that it

1 See note to the translation.

e 2

lxviii

LAWS OF MANU.

should have entered into all the details which our text gives.
•The passage on the householders has probably been placed
wrongly. Most of its verses ought to stand in the discussion
on the relative importance of the orders at the end of chapter
VI. In the fourth chapter the first section on the means by
which a Brcthma//a may subsist (vv. 1-24) is exceedingly
suspicious. The Dharma-sfitras, e.g. Vasish///a XII, 2-4, no
doubt sometimes prefix brief hints on the manner in which
a Sn&taka may support himself, to the rules regarding his
behaviour. But they do not mention the curious classifica¬
tion of the means of subsistence, IZtta, Anm'ta, Mrz’ta,
Pramr/ta, and Svavr/tti (vv. 5 , 6), which, though common
in the Pur£;/as and other later works, is unknown in Vedic
literature. As, moreover, Vasish/Z/a’s rules, which enumerate
the persons by whom a Sn&taka may be supported, occur
further on (IV, 33-34), it is not improbable that the whole
section consisting of the first twenty-four verses is a later
addition. With still greater certainty the same may be said
of vv. 85-91, which describe the heinousness of the offence
committed by him who accepts gifts from a royal usurper and
other wicked persons, and enumerate the twenty-one hells
which will be the offender’s portion. For it is not doubtful
that, even if the Sutrak&ras were acquainted with a classifi¬
cation of the regions of punishment, their enumeration ought
not to stand here, but, as in the Vish/m-smr/ti, at the
beginning of the section on crimes and penances. Other
probable interpolations are vv. 172-174 on the results of sin,
vv. 180-185 on the reasons why quarrels with near relatives
should be avoided, vv. 238-243 on the reasons why spiritual
merit should be accumulated. Finally, the section on gifts
and the acceptance of gifts (vv. 186-197) seems to be
strongly mixed with modem elements. The next fol¬
lowing two chapters present fewer suspicious passages.
Nevertheless, the preamble to the section on forbidden
food, V, 1-4, the verses 19-21, which prescribe the penances
for eating mushrooms, onions, leeks, and so forth, must be
certainly rejected. For the former belong to the artificial
framework which has been placed round the old Sfitra,and the
latter ought to stand in chapter XI. From the quotation in

INTRODUCTION. lxix

Vasish/^a IV, 5-8, it is further evident that the rules on the
permissibility of meat have been much altered and enlarged*
in accordance with the growing repugnance against the
slaughter of animals. The last section of the same chapter,
on the duties of women, has probably had the same fate.
The example of the V 4 sish//^a Dharma^stra shows that
some of the old Sutrak&ras treated the duties of women in
two separate sections l . But it also proves that they did
not, as our Manu-smrzti does, go twice over the same matter.
It is evident that either here or in the beginning of the ninth
chapter the same verses have been needlessly repeated by
the author of the remodelled version. In the sixth chapter
there is only one passage, vv. 61-83, which goes beyond
the range of the Dharma-stitras. None of the latter enters
into such details regarding the meditations to which an
ascetic must give himself up in order to attain salvation.
The subject naturally tempted the remodeller of the Smrfti
to expand the shorter notes of the original. Very different
is the case of the next three chapters, VII-IX, which treat
of the duties of a king, and of civil and criminal law.
These sections probably bear only a faint resemblance to
the corresponding portions of the original work. Among
the 226 verses of the seventh chapter there are only fifty-four
to which passages of the Dharma-sutras and the Vishz/u-
smriti correspond. If one pays attention to the rules
regarding the king’s duties, given in the Dharma-sAtras of
Gautama, Apastamba, and Vasish///a, as well as to the
references to the opinions of the M&navas and of Manu,
made in the Kdmandakiya Nitis&ra 2 , it would seem probable
that the contents of this section of the M&nava Dliarma-
sdtra cannot have differed very much from those of the
third chapter of Vish/m, and that about two-thirds of
the seventh Adhy&ya of our Manu-smrzti have been added
when it was recast. With respect to the eighth chapter and
the first 224 verses of the ninth, which give the rules
regarding the eighteen titles of the law, the remcdeller
seems to have been equally active. We must ascribe to

1 See Vas. V and XVII, 55-80.

2 See above, p. xxxvi.

lxx

LAWS OF MANU.

him the systematic arrangement of the legal rules, which is
•not found in any of the ancient Dharma-s&tras, and is even
neglected in the Vishwu-sm^'ti. He is most probably also
responsible for more than one-half of the verses of these
chapters. In the eighth Adhy&ya only three-sevenths of
the rules of our Manu can be traced in the Dharma-sutras
or in the Vish/m-smr/ti, which latter, as far as these topics
are concerned, may be considered a faithful representative
of the KA///aka Dharma-sutra \ Two of Manu’s titles, con¬
cerns among partners 1 2 and the resumption of gifts, are
not mentioned in the older works ; and the rules under a
third, rescission of purchase and sale, have no resemblance
to those of Vish;/u. In the ninth chapter the chief topics,
treated under the head, duties of husband and wife, are
discussed or at least touched on in the Sutras. But the
latter place them differently, and give them much more con¬
cisely. The notes to the translation show that only one-fourth
of Manus verses corresponds to utterances of the ancient
teachers. The section on inheritance has probably suffered
much less, since upwards of eighty verses out of one hundred
and seventeen agree with the teaching of the Sutras, and since
among those, the contents of which are not represented in
the older works, only eleven, vv. 108-110,128-129, 133, 138,
147, 184, 215, and 217, are really suspicious or clearly inter¬
polated. Most of these latter contain clumsy repetitions of
matters discussed in other places, and v. 217 gives a supple¬
mentary rule which but ill agrees with the spirit pervading
the remainder of the section. Some of the other, apparently
unsuspicious, verses may, of course, possibly be interpola¬
tions. But their contents are in harmony with the spirit of
the Dharma-stitras, and with the eliminations, proposed
above, Manus theory of inheritance and partition is self-
consistent. The views, expressed under the eighteenth title,
on gambling and betting, agree with those of Gautama and
Baudh&yana, who both strongly disapprove of these prac-

1 To this conclusion points the absence of systematic arrangement in Vish#u
III-V.

2 Manu’s rules on this subject have probably been borrowed from a Srauta-
sfitra, where the distribution of the sacrificial fees is usually explained.

INTRODUCTION.

lxxi

tices. The former enumerates the gambler among the men
who defile the company at a vS'rdddha, and the latter names,
gambling among the crimes which render men impure.
Though Apastamba and Vishwu are less puritanical, and
permit gambling under royal, i.e. police-supervision, or pro¬
vide only punishments for cheating (Vish/m V, 134-135), the
teaching of our Smrzti is, nevertheless, probably ancient.
But the section has been enlarged by the addition of mis¬
cellaneous rules and by the allusion to the evil results of
gambling c in former ages/ i. e. to those exemplified by the
fate of Yudhish///ira and Nala. The last 106 verses of the
ninth chapter which, according to the table of contents in the
first chapter, teach the removal of (men nocuous like) thorns
(ka;//akoddhara;/a), correspond to a part of the praldr//aka
or miscellaneous rules of Y&^Vifavalkya and N&rada. This
section seems to have grown out of those legal rules in the
M&nava Dharma-sutra which did not fit into the system of
the eighteen titles. But, as very few verses only correspond
to rules of the Dharma-sutras, its ancient portion is probably
small. The greater part of its contents is made up of
repetitions and additions inserted by the author of the
remodelled version.

The rules on times of distress, given in chapter X, differ
considerably from those of the Dharma-sutras, as they in¬
clude also the theory of the descent of the mixed castes.
The older works treat this subject either in connexion with
the law of marriage or with the rules of inheritance.
Considering the great inequality which the Siitras show in
the arrangement of the various topics, it is, however, not
impossible that the Manava Dharma-sutra placed the section
on the mixed castes just before the apaddharmas, and that
the author of the metrical version combined both in one
chapter and gave them a common title. But it is not in
the least doubtful that the treatment of the subject in the
former work must have been very different from that which
it receives in vv. 1-74. The Dharma-sfitras enumerate
either one or two sets of mixed castes, briefly indicating
their origin, and, sometimes, their modes of life. They
also add a few verses or rules regarding the changes to be

lxxii

LAWS OF MANU.

attained in successive generations, as well as regarding the
•manner in which men of low descent may be detected.
Our Manu-smrfti, on the other hand, is much more minute
in its details, and introduces a good many new names of
which the Sfitras know nothing. These additions have
probably expanded the section to three times its original
extent. The immediately following rules, vv. 75-100, on
the occupations of the castes and their manner of subsisting
in times of distress, agree, in the main, with the Sfitras, and
seem to have been changed very little. But the supple¬
mentary notes on the same subject, vv. 101-131, are
probably additions made on the revision of the work. The
few ancient rules which they contain are partly repetitions
of matters already discussed (e. g. vv. 113-114) and partly
misplaced (c. g. vv. 111,115-117,119) 1 .

The eleventh chapter is again, like chapters II-VI, in
all probability a faithful representative of the corresponding
portion of the Manava Dharma-sutra. We find here again
that the great majority of the rules corresponds to those of
the Dharma-sfitras and of the Vish//u-smr/ti. The agreement
with the latter is particularly close, and appears especially
in the classification of crimes, the enumeration of the
diseases caused by offences committed in a former life, and
in many details referring to penances. Curious and against
the practice of the older works is the combination of the
rules on gifts and the performance of sacrifices, vv. 1-43,
with the section on penances. The excuses which the
commentators offer for this anomaly 2 are, I fear, insufficient
to explain it. It seems more probable that here, as in the
preceding chapter, two separate sections of the original
work have been welded together into one Adhydya. In
favour of this view it may be pointed out that in Gautama’s
Dharma-sfilra, XVIII, 28-32, a number of rules, corres*
ponding to Manu XI, 11-23, stand just before the Pr&ya-
sk ittakd/ftfa. A passage of the Mah&bh&rata, which will be

1 A characteristic sign of the great changes which chapters VII-X have
undergone consists in the allusions to legends famous in the Purawas and the
Mahibharata; see also below, p. lxxix.

* See note on Manu XI, 1.

INTRODUCTION.

Ixxiii

discussed below, shows exactly the same combination as
our Smr/ti. •

The twelfth chapter, finally, is certainly almost entirely
due to the author of the metrical version. Its contents are
partly foreign to the Dharma-sutras and partly repetitions.
The classification of actions and existences as s&ttvika,
ra^asa, and tamasa, i. e. as modified by the three qualities
of Goodness, Activity, and Darkness, finds no place in the
older law-books. It is based on the doctrines which are
taught in the Sawkhya, Yoga, and Vedanta systems, and
some traces of which are found in the Maitraya//abrahma«o-
panishad 1 . Equally or similarly minute details are, how¬
ever, to be met with only in the Purd//as, the Mahabharata,
and some of the metrical Smr/tis, which blend philosophical
ideas with the sacred law. The next following discussion
on the karmavipaka, the results of sinful acts in future
births, vv. 51-81, is altogether wrongly placed. It evidently
ought to stand in the beginning of the section on penances,
where Vish/m and Ya^avalkya have a number of corres¬
ponding Sfttras and verses. As it is found in the Manu-
smr/ti in a different position, it is most probably an
addition made on the revision of the work. The section
on the means of attaining supreme bliss, vv. 82-104, returns
to the questions which have already been discussed in the
fourth and sixth chapters, and adds nothing that is new.
The long peroration at the end, vv. 116-126, cannot have
formed part of the Dharma-sfitra, as it again refers to the
myth concerning the origin of the ^dstra, narrated in the
spurious first chapter. But the small piece on the manner
of deciding doubtful legal questions, vv. 105-115, belonged
probably to the original work. To this conclusion point
its close agreement with the rules of the Dharma-sfitras,
and the circumstance that Gautama also places the corres¬
ponding Stitras just at the end of his work.

If thus it is extremely probable that the contents of
more than half the verses in our Manu-smrzti cannot have
been derived from the ancient Mdnava Dharma-sfttra, we

1 Maitr. Up. Ill, 3, 5, 6; compare Manu XII, xii, 32-33.

lxxiv

LAWS OF MANU.

have now to face the question whence this large amount of
additional matter has been taken. A clue to the solution
of this problem is furnished by the peculiar relation of the
Manu-smr/ti to the Mahabh&rata, which undoubtedly is
one of the most ancient metrical works of Indian literature,
and the great storehouse of the earliest forms of post-Vedic
mythology and doctrine. The connexion existing between
these two works, and its importance for the history of the
Institutes of Manu, has been recognised by most San-
skritists who have directed their attention to the investiga¬
tion of the origin of the secondary Smr/tis. Many years
ago Professor Weber 1 pointed out that the Mahabh&rata
contains not only a number of quotations from Manu, some
of which are found either with or without variations in the
existing Smr/ti, while others are not traceable, but also a
considerable number of verses, not attributed to Manu,
which, nevertheless, are included in the Dharmajastra.
He inferred from these facts that the existing Manu-smr/ti
cannot have been extant in its present shape even at the
period to which the later portions of the Mahabharata
belong, and that the author or authors of the latter work
must have known and used an older redaction of Manu’s
law-book. Another conclusion, based on the agreement of
numerous 61 okas, especially in the twelfth and thirteenth
Parvans of the great epic with verses of the Manu-smr/ti,
has been drawn by Rao Saheb V. N. Mawrflik 2 , who is
convinced that the editor of the latter has drawn, to a
large extent, on the former work. Of late Professor
Hopkins 3 has made a careful analysis of the quotations
from Manu found in the Mahabharata. According to him,
their number is thirty-three, among which seventeen are
traceable, five being verbal quotations, the rest agreeing in
doctrine only. I~Iis explanation for the untraceablc quota¬
tions is not that they have been taken from an older
recension of the Manu-smr/ti, but that a floating mass of

1 History of Indian Literature, p. 279; compare also Professor Stenzler in the
Indische Studien, vol. i, p. 245.

a The Maydkha and Ya^tfavalkya, introd. to Y&gft. p. xlvii.

8 Proceedings of the American Oriental Society, October, 1883, pp. xix-xx,
and now Journal of the American Oriental Society, vol. xi, p. 257 seqq.

INTRODUCTION.

lxxv

unwritten sayings of Manu existed, some of which were
incorporated with the Dharma-sCitra of the M&navas in its
revision, while others were not. He also notices the fact
that our Manu-smrz'ti contains many verses which occur
also in the Mahabharata without being attributed to Manu,
as well as some which are ascribed to other authorities.

These somewhat divergent results of my predecessors
show very clearly that the Mahabharata may be expected
to render some assistance for the solution of our problem.
But they indicate also that the utilisation of the facts which
it offers requires some caution.

In resuming the enquiry into the relation of the two works
and its bearing on the history of our Manu text, the first
point to be ascertained is, whether the Mahabharata really
mentions a law-book of Manu, and whether this work is
identical cither with the ancient Dharma-sutra or with the
existing Smr/ti, or if it differed from both. According
to what has been said above 1 regarding the ancient belief
ascribing the settlement of social and religious institutions
to the Father of mankind, and the real meaning of the phrase
‘thus Manu has spoken, 5 it is evident that Professor Hopkins
has correctly distinguished between sayings of Manu on
religious and legal matters, and law-books attributed to
him, and that he is right in refusing to recognise in every
mention of Manu’s name a reference to a Smrzti of his.
Hence the number of passages useful for comparison is very
much restricted. Those only which explicitly mention a
6astra of Manu arc really indisputable evidence. The
estimation of the value of the remainder must depend on
collateral circumstances. Quotations of the former kind
are not numerous in the Mahabharata. Nevertheless, some
do occur in the twelfth and thirteenth Parvans, and they
clearly prove that the authors of these books knew a
M&nava Dharmajastra not identical but closely connected
with our Smrzti. Thus we read, Mah. XII, 56, 23-25,
where the power of Br&hma;/as is being described, ‘ High-
minded Manu likewise, O king of kings, sang two Slokas in
his Laws (sveshu dharmeshu), those, O descendant of Kuru,

1 See p. lx.

lxxvi

LAWS OF MANU.

thou shouldst keep in thy heart (23). Fire sprang from
water, Kshatriyas from Brdhma^as, iron from stone, the
all-penetrating power of these (three) has no effect on that
whence they were produced (24). When iron strikes stone,
when fire meets water, when a Kshatriya shows hostility to
a Brahma//a, then these (three assailants) perish. 5 Again,
Mah. XIII, 46, 30-36, in a discussion on the prerogatives of
a Br*thma//a’s Brahma;/i wife who, we are told, is alone
entitled to attend her husband and to assist him in the
performance of his religious duties, the conclusion runs as
follows: ‘And in those Institutes which Manu proclaimed
(manunabhihita;// .rastram), O great king, descended from
Kuril, this same eternal law is found (35). Now if (a man)
out of love acts differently, O Yudhish/Aira, he is declared
to be (as despicable as) a Afa//<tfala (sprung from the)
Brahmawa (caste 36).’ Nothing can be clearer than these
two passages. The second speaks plainly of a *S*&stra pro¬
claimed by Manu, and the first of his Dharmd//, a word in
the plural, very commonly used to denote a book on the
sacred law. Moreover, the second is clearly a paraphrase
of Manu IX, 87, and reproduces its second line to the
letter. Of the two verses quoted in the first, one agrees
with Manu IX, 321, but the other one is not traceable.
While these two quotations would seem to indicate a very
close connexion between the Manava S&stra of the Maha-
bh&rata and our Smrzti, a third from the R^adharmas
of Manu Prd^etasa—i. e. from the section on the duties of
kings belonging to the Manava 1 —reveals a greater dis-

1 Though I will not deny that some show of argument might be made for
the supposition that the Ra§adharmas of Manu Pra£etasa were a separate work,
different from the Sastra referred to in the preceding quotations, because the
epithet PnUetasa is here added to Manu’s name, and because at Mah. XII, 38, 2,
we find Manu Pra^etasa named as the author of a Ra^uastra in company with
Bnhaspati and ILranas, to whom separate Nitbastras were attributed, 1 yet hold
this to be improbable. For the legends regarding the descent of the lawgiver
Manu vary in the MahSbharata. lie is in other passages sometimes called
Sv&yambhuva, and sometimes (e. g. XII, 349, 51) Vaivasvata. Further, a sepa¬
rate Nitirastra of Manu is not quoted elsewhere. On the other hand, the section
on the duties of kings bears in every law-book the separate title R&^ndharmjM,
and the commentators of our Manu-smrfti call its seventh chapter expressly by
this name.

INTRODUCTION.

lxxvii

crepancy. We read, Mah. XII, 57, 43-45, ‘ And the
following two verses are pronounced 1 by Manu Pra^ctasn
in the Law of kings, listen to them attentively, O lord of
kings 1 (43.) A man should abandon, like a leaky ship in
the ocean, the following six persons,—a teacher who does
not instruct, a priest unable to recite the Veda, a king who
affords no protection, a quarrelsome wife, a herdsman who
loves to stay in the village, and a barber who seeks the
forest.’ Neither of these verses is found in our Manu,
though the latter inveighs against kings who do not protect
their subjects (VII, 143-144).

If we turn to the passages in which Manu—not his
vSastra—is named as an authority, I know only of one that
may be confidently considered to contain a reference to a
law-book. In the .Sakuntalopakhyana, Mah. I, 73, 8-13,
king Dushyanta tries to persuade the reluctant object of
his affections to consent to a Gandharva union by a dis¬
cussion of the law of marriage. He first briefly mentions
the number of the marriage-rites (v. 8 a ) and their names
(vv. 8 b ~9 a ) in the same order as Manu, and then goes on,
‘ Learn that among these (rites), as Manu Svayambhuva
has formerly declared, the first four are lawful and recom¬
mended for a Brahmaz/a; know, O blameless one, that six,
according to their order, are lawful for a Kshatriya (9 b -io).
But the Rakshasa rite also is ordained for men of the royal
caste, and the Asura rite is prescribed for VaLyas and
wStidras. But among the (last) five, three are declared
lawful and two unlawful (v. 11). The Paii&ta and Asura
(rites) must never be used. According to this rule
(marriages) must be concluded, this is the path of duty
(v. 12). Do not question the legality of the Gandharva and
Rakshasa (rites) for Kshatriyas. Without a doubt they
may be used, be it separate or mixed ’ (v. 13).

The close verbal agreement of this passage with Manu
III, 20 - 26 , on the one hand, and its serious discrepancy
with respect to a portion of the doctrine, make it, I think,
very probable that it is a paraphrase or adaptation of a part

1 The original has udahrriau, which is ambiguous and may also mean
' quoted.*

lxxx LAWS OF MANU.

these ‘ latest portions of the epic.’ The latter conclusion
is, it seems to me, confirmed by some indications in the
Smrfti which point to an acquaintance with the Mah&bhci-
rata. The warning regarding the consequences of gambling,
Manu IX, 227, certainly presupposes a knowledge of the
legend of the Kurus and Pd/^avas. When it is stated
there that ‘ in a former Kalpa the vice of gambling has been
seen to cause great enmity/ this assertion can only point
in the first instance to the match played between Yudhish-
//fcira and Duryodhana, which was the immediate cause of
the great war. It may also contain, as some commentators
think, an allusion to the fate of king Nala, but that can only
be a secondary meaning, because war was not the result of
his gambling. More significant than this passage is the
fact that in chapters VII-X of the Manu-smr/ti a number
of legends are quoted in illustration or in support of rules
which, as the commentators repeatedly assert l , are taken
from the Mah&bharata, and that in one case just those
which are mentioned in one verse of Manu (IX, 314) are
found close together in the same chapter of the Mahd-
bhdrata.

This relative position of the two works might induce us to
assume with Rao Salieb V.N. Mawrflik that the Mahabharata
had a direct influence on the final redaction of the Manu-
smrfti, and that the author of the latter appropriated from
the former the very large number of identical verses which
in the Mahdbh&rata are not ascribed to Manu.

Tempting as the hypothesis of the dependence of the
Smr/ti on the epic is, because it would account for
the adoption of the Anush/ubh metre in the latter, a
careful examination of the corresponding passages leads
to a very different result. On going over the third, twelfth,
and thirteenth Parvans of the Mahdbharata I have succeeded
in identifying upwards of 260 verses or portions of verses, not
attributed to Manu, with 6"lokas of the Manu-smrzti. This
number, which corresponds to about one-tenth of the bulk
of the latter work, would no doubt be considerably swelled
by a comparison of the remaining portions of the epic, and

1 See notes to VII, 41; VIII, no; IX, 23,129, 314-315, &c.

INTRODUCTION.

lxxxi

it may be That even in the Parvans examined some iden¬
tical pieces have escaped my notice. The number of the
verses which has to be compared is so enormous that
mistakes are easily possible; but the identifications made
are amply sufficient for the purpose of illustrating the rela¬
tion between the two works. The corresponding passages
vary considerably in extent, from a single p&da or a single
line to sections of twenty to forty verses. Where larger
sections agree, it is rare that more than half-a-dozen verses
stand in the same order in both works, and it happens not
rarely that a series of identical .Slokas is interrupted by the
expansion of one verse into two, or by a contraction of two
into one. Further, the purpose which an identical line or
verse is made to serve sometimes differs, and sometimes
a various reading alters its sense entirely. The various
readings are exceedingly numerous, and the better one is
sometimes found in the Mahabharata and sometimes in
Manu. If we enter on a more detailed analysis of the
corresponding passages, there are three cases in which one
or two consecutive chapters of the Mahabhdrata contain
from twenty to forty verses which occur in our Manu.
Mah. XII, 232-333 include the greater portion of Bhr/gu’s
account of the creation and some of the verses, said to have
been enunciated by Manu himself on the same subject, i. e.
Manu I, i8 b , 20, 28-29, 64-78, 81-86.

Further, Mah. XIII, 48, 14-44 gives a portion of Manu’s
definitions of and rules regarding the mixed castes, and
contains the verses X, 27-32, 33 a , 34-37, 3# a , 39~4°> 5 °, 5 ^ b >
58-60, and 63, mostly with considerable variations, and
6fokas resembling Manu X, 42-43 are found Mah. XIII,
33, 21-22, and 35, 17-18.

Finally, Mah. XII, 165, which treats of gifts, sacrifices,.
and penances much in the same manner as the eleventh
chapter of Manu, exhibits, mostly in the beginning, the fol¬
lowing verses, partly in somewhat different versions, XI, 3 b ,
3 b , 4 a , 7, 11-17, 30, 32 b , 23% 37% 39 - 31 , 34-40, 9* b , 105,150,

177 b , j 8 i , 207. The general sense of some other .Slokas
corresponds without a real agreement in words, and the
same chapter of the Mah. contains also vv. 31* and 32®,

[25] f

lxxxii

LAWS OF MANU.

three-quarters of Manu II, 238, and v. 68 a the first half of
JManu III, 172. Equivalents of Many, XI, 44, 74, 76 a , 77,
84 are found Mah. XII, 34, 2; 35, 4-6; 263, 45 b - 4 < 5 tt .
Among other somewhat longer corresponding passages the
following are the most noteworthy. Portions of the discus¬
sion on the reverence due to parents and teachers, Manu II,
229-234, occur Mah. XII, 108, 5-12. The rules regarding
the disposal of the fee at an Arsha wedding and the respect
to be shown to females are found Mah. XIII, 45, 20; 46,
1-7, and some verses, Manu III, 134-135, 140-142, 158-
159, 172, 180-181, 184-185, from the section on Sr&ddhas,
Mah. XIII, 90, as well as fragments of III, 267-274 in the
beginning of Mah. XIII, 88. The warning against quarrels
with relatives, Manu IV, 179-185, is repeated Mah. XII, 244,
I4 b -2i a . A number of the rules applicable to the ascetic,
Manu VI, 42-48, 57^ 58% reappears in the beginning of
Mah. XII, 246 and 279, while Manu VI, 49 is read Mah.

XII, 331, 30. The sketch of the state administration, Manu
VII, 115-122, is given mostly in the same words, Mah. XII,
87, 3-11% and the same chapter contains also closely
agreeing precepts regarding taxation together with the
verses Manu VII, 127 and 139*. The remainder of the
corresponding passages ranges between triplets and single
feet of Slokas, and is scattered over all the twelve chapters
of Manu. The portions of the Mahabharata where we chiefly
meet with them, are III, 94, 180; XII, 15, 244-245, 265;

XIII, 44-46, 90, 104-105, 115, 152 \

In order to complete this sketch of the relation in which
the two works stand towards each other, it will be advisable
to give one of the three longest corresponding passages in
full, and to carefully note both the points of contact and of
difference. The piece most suitable for such a comparison
is that from the first book of Manu. For the latter doubt¬
lessly belongs to the additions made by the editor of the
metrical version, and its account of the creation presents
numerous problems which have sorely puzzled the com-

1 It is impossible to give here more than these general indications. A more
complete list of the verses of the Manu-smr/ti occurring in the Mah. will be
found in the Appendix.

INTRODUCTION.

lxxxiii

mentators. The solution of some of these difficulties is
furnished by the corresponding passage of the Mah&bhdrata.*
This passage occurs in an account of the creation, com¬
municated by Vyasa-K>zsh//a-Dvaipayana to his son Suita,
which Bhishma narrates to Yudhish//zira.

MahAbharata XII, 232 .

11. Vy&sa said: In the com¬
mencement exists the Brahman
without beginning or end, un¬
born, luminous, free from decay,
immutable, eternal, unfathom¬
able by reasoning, not to be
fully known.

12. Fifteen nimeshas^
(twinklings of the eye arc)
one kash/M\ but thirty kash-
/Ms one should reckon as one
kala; moreover, thirty kalas
and that which may amount
to the tenth part of a kala
shall be one muhhrta;

13. Thirty muliurtas shall
make a day and a night—that
number has been fixed by the
sages; a month is declared (to
consist of) thirty nights and days,
and a year of twelve months. /

14. But those acquainted with
calculations call two progresses
of the sun, the southern and the
northern one, a year 2 .

15. The sun divides the days
and nights of the world of
men 3 , the night (being intended)

Manu I.

64. Eighteen nimeshas
(twinklings of the eye are
one kashM a 1 ), thirty kash/Ms
one kala, thirty kalas one
muhurta, and as many (mu*
hhrtas) one day and night.

65. The sun divides days and
nights, both human and di¬
vine, the night (being intended)

1 Regarding the difference between the two computations, see Wilson,
Vish«u-purd«a I, 47 (ed. Hall).

' The verse marked as 14 in the Bombay edition consists of a single line
only.

9 The reading of the Mahabharata, manushalaukike for m&nushadaivike,
seems the better one.

f 2

Ixxxiv

LAWS OF MANU.

for the repose of created beings
•and the day for exertion.

16. A month is a day and a
night of the manes, but their
division (is as follows): the
bright (fortnight) 1 is their
day for active exertion, the
dark (fortnight) their night
for sleep.

17. A year is a day and a
night of the gods; the division
is (as follows): the half year
during which the sun progresses
to the north will be the day, that
during which it goes southwards
the night.

18. Counting the sum of
years (consisting) of those hu¬
man days and nights which have
been mentioned above, I w\W
declare (the duration of) a day\
and night of Brahman.

19. I will declare severally
and in due order the totals of
the years in the Kr/ta, Tretft.
Dv£para, and Kali ages 2 . t

20. They declare that the
Kr/ta age (consists of) four
thousand years (of the gods);
the twilight preceding it con¬
sists of as many hundreds, and
the twilight following it of the
same number.

21. In the (other) three ages,

for the repose of created beings
and the day for exertion.

66. A month is a day and a
night of the manes, but the
division is according to
fortnights. The dark (fort¬
night) is their day for active
exertion, the bright (fort¬
night) their night for sleep.

67. A year is a day and a
night of the gods; the division
is (as follows): the half year
during which the sun progresses
to the north will be the day, that
during which it goes southwards
the night.

6ft. But bear now the bnd
(description of) the duration of
a night and day of Brahman
and of the several ages (of the
world) according to their order.

69. They declare that the
Krfta age (consists of) four
thousand years of the gods;
the twilight preceding it con¬
sists of as many hundreds, and
the twilight following it of the
same number.

70. In the (other) three ages,

1 The reading of the Mahabharata is obviously faulty, as it is well known
that the dark fortnight is, according to the Hindus, the day of the manes. The
fault has probably arisen by an accidental transposition of the words j-ukla//
and kr/sh«a^. The second var. lect. of the Mah. tayo /5 puna /5 for tu pakshayo//
is less intelligible than Manu’s, because a substantive is required to which jukla^
and kr/shwaA can be referred.

2 It is a particularly significant fact that in spite of the great difference
between the two works, both show the intercalation of a fresh exordium.

INTRODUCTION.

lxxxv

with the preceding twi¬
lights and in the twilights
following them, the thousands
and hundreds are diminished by
one-fourth (in each) 1 .

22. These support the eternal,
everlasting worlds; this is known
as the eternal Brahman to those
who know Brahman.

23. In the Kr/ta age Dharma
is four-footed and entire, and (so
is) Truth; nor does any gain
which -is opposed to that
(spirit of justice) accrue by
unrighteousness 2 .

24. In the other (three ages),
by reason of (unjust) gains,
Dharma is deprived successively
of one foot, and unrighteous¬
ness increases through theft,
falsehood, and fraud.

25. (Men are) free from dis¬
ease, accomplish all their aims,
and live four hundred years in
the Kri'ta (age); but in the
Tretd age (and the follow¬
ing ones) their life is lessened
by one quarter in each 3 ;

26. And the doctrines of
the Veda decrease, as we

with their twilights pre¬
ceding and following, th^
thousands and hundreds are
diminished by one (in each).

81. In the Kr/ta age Dharma
is four-footed and entire, and
(so is) Truth; nor does any gain
accrue to men by unrighteous¬
ness.

82. In the other (three ages),
by reason of (unjust) gains,
Dharma is deprived successively
of one foot, and through (the
prevalence of) theft, falsehood,
and fraud the merit (gained
by men) is diminished by
one-fourth (in each).

83. (Men arc) free from dis¬
ease, accomplish all their aims,
and live four hundred years in
the Kn'ta (age), but in the
Treta and (in each of) the
succeeding (ages) their life is
lessened by one quarter.

84. The life of mortals, men¬
tioned in the Veda, the de-

1 The reading of Manu, sasawdhydwjeshu to for sawdhaz/weshu tata//, seems
preferable, but his ekapayena is inferior to the ekap&dena of the Mahabhdrata.

2 NilakawMa explains dgama in this verse and the next by * doctrine.’ I
translate it by 'gain/ in accordance with the rendering adopted for Manu, but
willingly acknowledge that the other rendering is possible in both works, and
that the meaning may be ' nor does any unrighteous doctrine, opposed to that
(Dharma), prevail’ (Mah.), 'nor is any unrighteous doctrine spread among
men ’ (Manu).

3 The reading krite tret£yuge tvesh&m instead of Manu’s krite tretadishu
hyesham is more archaic.

lxxxvi

LAWS OF MANU.

hear, in each successive age,
e as well as the lives (of men),
their blessings (a^isha^), and
the rewards which the Veda
yields 1 .

27. One set of duties (is pre¬
scribed) for men in the Kr/'ta
age, different ones in the Tretd
and in the Dvapara, and (again)
another (set) in the Kali age, in
proportion as (those) ages de¬
crease in length.

28. In the Kr/'ta age the chief
(virtue is the performance
of) austerities, in the Treta (di¬
vine) knowledge is most ex¬
cellent, in the Dvapara they
declare sacrifices (to be best), in
the Kali liberality alone.

29. The wise know such
(a period of) twelve thousand
(divine) years (to be understood
by) the term an age (of the
gods); that (period) being multi¬
plied by one thousand is called
a day of Brahman.

30. (Know his) night to be
as long 2 . At the beginning of
that (day) the lord who is the
Universe finally awakes, after
having entered deep meditation

sired results (ajisha^) of sacri¬
ficial rites, and the (super¬
natural) power of embodied
(spirits) are fruits propor¬
tioned among men accord¬
ing to (the character of) the
age 1 .

85. One set of duties (is pre¬
scribed) for men in the Kr/'ta age,
different ones in the Treta and
in the Dvapara, and again an¬
other (set) in the Kali age, in
proportion as (those) ages de¬
crease in length.

86. In the Kr/'ta age the chief
(virtue) is declared to be (the
performance of) austerities, in the
Treta (divine) knowledge, in the
Dvapara (the performance of)
sacrifices, in the Kali liberality
alone.

71-72. These tvrelve thousand
(years), which thus have been
mentioned above as the
total of four (human) ages,
are called one age of the gods.
B u t k n o w that the sum of one
thousand ages of the gods
(makes) one day of Brahman,
and that his night has the same
length 2 .

1 The Sanskrit text of the two .S’lokas agrees somewhat better than the trans¬
lation. It looks as if neither of them was the oiiginal veision, which probably
declared that the age of men, their blessings, and the lewards of deeds, such as
they are promised in the Veda, diminish in each successive age. Another ver¬
sion, which almost exactly agrees with Manu’s, occurs Mah. Ill, 200,115.

2 both the Mah. and Manu have the accusative case ratrim, which docs not
agree with the pieceding verb gfle yam (Manu) u^yate (Mah.) It would seem
that both give adaptations of an older verse, where a word like ahu//, which
governed the accusative, occurred. Though the verb was changed, the further
alteration of the case was forgotten.

INTRODUCTION.

lxxxvii

and having slept during the
period of destruction.

31. Those (only) who know
that Brahman's day ends after
(the completion of) one thousand
ages (of the gods) and that his
night lasts a thousand ages,
are (really) men acquainted with
(the length of) days and nights.

32. When imperishable Brah¬
man awakes at the end of his
night, he modifies himself and
creates the element (called) the
Great One (and) from that mind
which is discrete.

Mahabiiarata II, 233.

1. Luminous Brahman is the
seed from which single element
this whole twofold creation, the
immovable and the movable,
has been produced.

2. Awaking at the beginning
of his day, he creates the world
by means of Ignorance—even
first the element, (called) the
Great One, (next) speedily mind
which is discrete;

3. And conquering here re¬
splendent (mind) which goes
far, enters many paths, and has
the nature of desire and doubt,
creates the seven mind-born
ones.

4. Mind, impelled by the de¬
sire to create, performs the work
of creation by modifying itself;
thence ether is produced; they
declare that sound is the quality
of the latter.

73. Those (only) who know
that the holy day of Brahman,
indeed, ends after (the com¬
pletion of) one thousand ages
(of the gods), and that his night
lasts as long, are (really) men
acquainted with (the length of)
days and nights.

75. Mind, impelled by the de¬
sire to create, performs the work
of creation by modifying itself;
thence ether is produced; they
declare that sound is the quality
of-the latter.

lxxxviii

LAWS OF MANU.

5. But from ether, modifying
•itself, springs the pure, powerful
wind, the vehicle of all perfumes;
touch is considered to be
its quality.

6. Next from wind, modifying
itself, proceeds the brilliant light
which illuminates and is white;
that is declared to possess the
quality of colour ;

7. And from light, modifying
itself, (comes) water which pos¬
sesses taste; from water smell
and earth; (such) is declared
(to be)the creation of (them)
all.

8. The qualities of each
earlier-named (element) en¬
ter each of the later-named
ones, and whatever place (in
the sequence) each of them oc¬
cupies, even so many qualities it
is declared to possess 1 .

9. If some, perceiving a smell
in water through a want of care,
attribute (that quality to water),
one must know that it belongs
to earth alone, (and that it is)
Adventitious in water and wind.

10. Those Atmans of seven
kinds 2 , which possess various
powers, were severally unable
to create beings without fully
uniting themselves.

11. These great Atmans,
uniting and mutually combining

76. But from ether, modifying
itself, springs the pure, powerful
wind, the vehicle of all perfumes;
that is held to possess the
quality of touch.

7 7. Next from wind, modifying
itself, proceeds the brilliant light
which illuminates and dispels
darkness; that is declared to
possess the quality of colour.

78. And from light, modifying
itself, (is produced) water, de¬
clared to possess the quality
of taste; from water earth,
which has the quality of
smell; such is the creation
in the beginning.

20. Among them each
succeeding (element) ac¬
quires the quality of the pre¬
cedi n g o n e, and whatever place
(in the sequence) each of them
occupies, even so many qualities
it is declared to possess.

1 The position of this verse in the Mahabharata makes the conjecture, put
forward in the note to the translation, that the correct position of Manu I, 20
is after verse 78, exceedingly probable.

a According to N!laka/;/Zn, the seven Atmans, called above, ver. 3, the seven
mind-born ones, are Mahat, Aha;/Hcara, and the five subtile elements.

INTRODUCTION.

lxxxix

with each other, entered the

body; hence one speaks of Pu- •

rusha [i. e. him who resides
(usha) in a fortress (pur)].

12. In consequence of that
entering (jrayawa), the body
(jartra) becomes endowed with
a (perceptible) form, and con¬
sists of sixteen 1 (constituent
parts).

That the great elements 2 enter i8 b . That the great elements
together with the karman (merit enter together with their func-
and demerit). tions (karman) 3 .

13. Taking with him all the
elements, that first creator of
created beings (enters it) in
order to perform austerities;
him they call the lord of created
beings.

14. He, indeed, creates the
creatures, both the immovable
and the movable; then that
Brahma creates gods, sages,
manes, and men,

15. The worlds, rivers, oceans,
the quarters of the compass,
mountains, trees, men, Kinnaras,

Rakshas, birds, tame and wild
beasts, and snakes, the imperish¬
able and the perishable, both the
immovable and the movable.

16. Whatever course of 28. But to whatever course
action they adopted in a of action the Lord at first
former creation, even that appointed each (kind of

1 The sixteen constituent parts are, according to Nilaka«Ma, the five gross
elements and the eleven organs.

a NilakawMa takes mahanti bhfitdni, * the great elements/ in the sens? of
* the subtile elements, and the great ones, the mahattattvas’ (bhfitani sukshm&wi
mah&nti mahattatattvani).

* This line is a good example, showing how the same words of the ancient
school*tradition were made to serve different purposes.

xc

LAWS OF MANU.

alone they adopt in each suc¬
ceeding creation.

17. They turn to noxious¬
ness or harmlessness, gentleness
or ferocity, virtue or sin, truth or
falsehood, according to the
disposition with which they
were (first) created; hence
that (particular course of action)
pleases each.

beings), that alone it has
spontaneously adopted in
each succeeding creation.

29. Whatever he assigned
to each at the (first) crea¬
tion, noxiousness or harmless¬
ness, gentleness or ferocity,
virtue or sin, truth or falsehood,
that clung (after wards) spon¬
taneously to it.

The remainder of Vyasa’s narrative, which continues
through the following twenty-six verses, may be omitted,
as, further on, it presents few points of contact with our
Smrzti. It must, however, be noticed that, according to
verses 25-26, ‘the Lord assigned to his creatures their
names and conditions, in accordance with the words of the
Veda. 5 This idea agrees with Manu I, 21, but the wording
of the two passages differs very considerably.

The lesson which the facts, revealed by the above dis¬
cussion, teach, is a double one. First, they clearly show
that the editor of our metrical Manu-smr/ti has not drawn
on the Mahabharata, but that the authors of both works
have utilised the same materials. Secondly, they make it
highly probable that the materials, on which both works
arc based, were not systematic treatises on law and philo¬
sophy, but the floating proverbial wisdom of the philoso¬
phical and legal schools which already existed in metrical
form. The first point is so evident that it seems to me
unnecessary to waste any more words on it. With respect
to the second conclusion, I would point out that it is made
unavoidable by the peculiar character of the differences
found in closely connected .Slokas, by the occurrence of
identical lines and padas in verses whereof the general
sense differs, and by the faint, shadowy resemblance in
weyds and ideas, observable in other pieces. I may add,
further, that the supposition that each special school pos¬
sessed such a body of metrical maxims is perfectly well
founded.

INTRODUCTION.

XC1

As has been repeatedly stated, the text-books of the
ancient Vedic schools, the Stitras and the Upanishads, con-,
tain already a not inconsiderable proportion of Anush/ubh
verses which sometimes recur in identical or slightly varying
forms. Hence it is no more than might be expected that
the teachers of the special schools should have continued
in the path of their predecessors, and should have gradually
augmented the stock of their ‘ Spruchweisheit/ until it
extended to all legal and philosophical topics, and the
accumulation of these detached verses made it easy and
tempting to convert the old aphoristic handbooks into
metrical treatises 1 . The answer, which we are thus obliged
to give to the question whence the editor of our Manu-smr/ti
took his additional materials, agrees very closely with Pro¬
fessor Hopkins’ hypothesis, who, as mentioned above, con¬
siders the law-book to be a conglomerate of the M&nava
Dharma-sutra and of the floating sayings attributed to
Manu, the father of mankind. The latter restriction seems
to me unadvisable, because among the mass of correspond¬
ing pieces found in the Mahabh&rata comparatively few are
attributed to the Pra^&pati, and because a Hindu who was

1 The probability of the existence of such a body of metrical maxims would
become still more apparent, if it were possible to enter here on a comparison
of portions of the older Pur&z/as with the Mahabharata and the metrical
Smrz'tis, as well as on a detailed consideration of the ancient Buddhist litera¬
ture. Though the difficulty and magnitude of such a task forbid its being
attempted in this Introduction, I cannot refrain from inserting a few general
hints. The Purazzas contain a good deal that is identical with or similar to
passages of the Mahabharata and Manu, and it is in many cases impossible to
assume that the corresponding verses have been borrowed fiom the latter
works. The Purazzas, some of which, like the Vayu, even in their present
shape, go back to a very respectable antiquity, are popular sectarian compila¬
tions of mythology, philosophy, history, and the sacred law, intended, as they
are now used, for the instruction of the unlettered classes, including the upper
divisions of the Sudra var/za, the so-called SaK’/zudras. It was only natural that
their authors should have appropriated suitable portions of the floating metrical
wisdom of the philosophical and legal schools.

The comparison of the ancient Buddhist literature is particularly instructive,
because the Buddhists are a special philosophical school, and because their
oldest works, though mostly consisting of prose, include a considerable number
of .Slokas, among which a certain number, as, for instance, in the Dhamma-
pada, shows affinities to verses of the Mahabh&rata and even of Manu. They
probably took over a certain stock of ancient metrical maxims, and added a
great number of new ones.

XC11

LAWS OF MANU.

thoroughly convinced of the truth of the dogma that Manu
.first taught the sacred law, would not hesitate to ascribe to
that sage all the maxims which seemed to him to bear the
stamp of authenticity, even if others attributed them to
different authorities.

The answer to the next question, whether the conversion
of the Manava Dharma-sfitra was effected at one time or by
degrees, and whether Bhngu’s recension has to be considered
as the immediate offspring or as a remoter descendant of the
SOtra, must, I think, be answered, as has been tacitly assumed
in the preceding discussion, in the sense of the first alterna¬
tive. Not long ago it seemed that the contrary opinion was
the more probable one. But the closer one examines the
facts which at first sight seem to lead up to the inference that
Blmgu’s Manu-sawhita forms the last link in a long chain of
metrical Manu-smrztis, the more one sees that they possess
no, or very little, importance. On the other hand, those
arguments which speak in favour of our text being, if not
the first, at least one of the first attempts at a conversion
of a Vedic school-book into a special law-book, gain by
the same process in force and increase in number.
The points which have been brought forward in order to
prove that the existing text of Manu has suffered many
recasts are, first, its numerous contradictory passages;
secondly, the explicit statement of the Hindu tradition in
the preface to the N&rada-smrz'ti; thirdly, the quotations
from a Brzhat Manu and a W/ddha Manu met with in the
medieval Digests of law; and fourthly, the untraceable or
partly traceable quotations from Manu’s Dharmajastra
found in some of the older Sanskrit works. The existence
of these facts is undeniable. But it is not difficult to show
that they are partly useless as arguments, and partly, under
a better interpretation, lead to quite other conclusions.
Thus in weighing the value of the argument drawn from the
occurrence of contradictory passages, two circumstances,
which mostly have been left out of account, must be kept
in mind: first, that it is a common habit of Indian authors
to place conflicting opinions, supported by authorities of
equal weight, side by side, and to allow an option, or to

INTRODUCTION.

XC111

mention time-honoured rules, legal customs, and social
institutions, and afterwards to disapprove of them; and*
secondly, that, as our Smr/ti is in any case a recast of an
earlier Sfltra, that fact alone is sufficient to account for
contradictions. It has been shown above 1 , that some con¬
tradictory passages, such as those concerning the respective
rank of the mother and the teacher, or regarding the per¬
missibility of certain marriage-rites, express conflicting
views, mentioned also in the Dharma-sfitras. The Manu-
smnti only reproduces the ancient opinions, but omits,
possibly for metrical reasons, to mark them as belonging to
different authors or schools. In other cases we may hesi¬
tate between two explanations. If we find, for instance,
that our text in the third and ninth chapters 2 violently
inveighs against Asura marriages, and in the eighth and
ninth 3 lays down rules which presuppose the legality of the
sale or purchase of a bride, we may assume that the first
utterance is due to the editor of the metrical version, and
that the second represents the more archaic doctrine of
the Dharma-sfltra. In favour of this supposition it may be
urged that the Manava Grzhya-sutra unhesitatingly admits
the acquisition of a bride by purchase 4 . But it is also
possible that the Dharma-sfitra itself contained both the
condemnation of the custom and the rules regulating it.
For similar contradictions occur also in other Sfltras. Thus
Apastamba expressly forbids, in his sections on Dharma,
the sale and gift of children and the procreation of Kshe-
tra^*a sons 5 . Yet, in his 5 rauta-stitra I, 9, 7, he gives a rule
showing how the Pk^apitrzya^via is to be performed by
the son of two fathers (dvipitd). Such a person can only
be a Kshetra^a, a Dvyamushy&ya//a Dattaka, or a Putrika-
putra. If it is borne in mind that Baudhayana, on whose
works Apastamba’s Sutras are based, admits the affiliation
which the later member of his vidy^va;;wa rejects, the
obvious explanation of the contradiction is that Apastamba,
in spite of his disapproval of other than Aurasa sons, did

1 Seep. xxiv. 2 Manu III, 25, 51-54; IX, 98-100.

3 Mann VIII, 204, 224-225 ; IX, 97. 4 See above, p. xxxix.

8 Ap. Dh. S. II, 13, 11; 27, 2.

XC1V

LAWS OF MANU.

not venture to change the prescriptions which he found in
^he older JSrauta-sfitra. Similarly, the supposition that the
author of the Manava Dharma-sfttra, though condemning
Asura marriages, was unwilling to expunge the rules regu¬
lating the sale, is not at all improbable. It seems to be
even better than the explanation proposed first. For the
prohibition of the Asura rite occurs in the quotation found
in the Sakuntalopakhyana, and the latter, as we shall see
presently, in all probability refers to the M&nava Dharma-
sfitra. Hence I think that at least the remarks made Manu
III, 26 did stand in the ancient text. The other repetitions of
the same sentiments may have been added on the revision.
Another famous instance of a contradiction, Manu IX, 58-
70, where the appointment of a widow is first permitted
and next forbidden, has probably to be explained in the
same manner. If I here differ from Professor Jolly 1 and
others, who ascribe the prohibition to the remodcller of the
Dharina-svltra, and if I adhere to the view expressed by
Br/haspati and some Indian commentators, my reasons are
that, as the conflicting statements of the Dharma-sfltras show,
the propriety of the Niyoga was not generally acknow¬
ledged even in ancient times, and that the medieval Niban-
dhakdras frequently follow the strange method of teaching
adopted by Manu. They, too, describe various antiquated
customs, and afterwards add the remark that the matter
taught is forbidden in the Kali age. Among the clear cases
where a conflict of statements has been caused by additions
of the editor, I may mention the rule, Manu IV, 222 , pre¬
scribing a penance for an unlawful acceptance of food, which
differs from that given XI, 153. PI ere the former must be
considered spurious, because it occurs in a chapter which
has nothing to do with penances. It is evident that neither
the instances just mentioned, nor indeed any other, where
our Smr/ti exhibits either two ancient conflicting rules or a
modern precept contradicting an ancient one, can be used
as arguments showing that the Mdnava Dharma-sfitra under¬
went more than one revision. Under these circumstances
it might appear advisable to rely on those contradictions

1 Tagore Lectures, pp. 48, 61.

INTRODUCTION.

xcv

which occur in the .decidedly modern portions of our text,
in the additions to the ancient Dharma-sfitra, and to main-*
tain that e. g. the differences in the two accounts of the
creation 1 , Manu I, 7-58 and 62-86, indicate that the first
chapter owes its present shape to two different authors.
Such a mode of reasoning would, no doubt, be correct if
the additions to the Dharma-sutra were independent, ori¬
ginal productions. But as the preceding discussion on the
sources of this additional matter has shown that the first
chapter is a compilation from older versus memoriales,
which certainly contained portions and possibly even the
whole of both accounts, it becomes inconclusive. The
contradictory verses may either have been strung together,
as Medhatithi seems to suggest 2 , merely because they really
are or were considered paraphrases of Vedic passages, or
they may have been reconciled with each other by one of
those ingenious methods of interpretation of which the
Indian schoolmen are such great masters.

As regards the second argument, the assertion of the
Narada-smrzti 3 , that Manu composed a Dharma^astra in
100,000 verses arranged in 1080 chapters, which was suc¬
cessively reduced by Narada to 12,000, by Marka;/^/eya to
8,000, and by Bhr/gu’s son, Sumati, to 4,000 verses, is so
circumstantial that, in spite of its obvious exaggerations,
it might be considered to have a substratum of truth,
and to be important for the history of Manu’s law-book.
Abridgments of larger works 4 are in literature as common as
expansions of shorter ones. Yet the only assertion in the
above account, which we can test, is certainly not true, that
Narada’s version of Manu’s laws is more ancient than that
by Sumati Bh&rgava or Bhr/gu. The actual position of the

1 See also Dr. Johanntgen, Uber das Gesetzbuch des Manu, p. 15.

2 In his discussion on the aim of the first chapter Medh&tithi says (comm, on

i,6):- 1

anft * 1 irer. 1 11

3 See above, p. xvii; and Jolly, Tagore Lectures, p. 57.

4 The two versions of N&rada furnish an interesting instance; see Jolly, loc.
cit. p. 57.

XCV1

LAWS OF MANU.

two works has been inverted. N^r^las Vyavaharam&tr/kd
shows a far fnore advanced development of the judicial
theories than -Blwgu’s Sawhitd, and contains matter which
conclusively proves that it cannot date from an earlier time
than the fourth or fifth century of our era \ As this test
fails, Narada’s statement cannot be used for the determina¬
tion of the order in which the various versions of Manu’s
laws were composed. It becomes m6re probable that it
has been framed, with a view to enhance the importance of
the Narada-sm^'ti, on the model of such purely fictitious
stories respecting the origin of the Dharma, as that given
in the MaMbharata XII, 59, 22, and 80 seqq., where we are
told that Brahman, assisted by the gods, first produced a
Dharma^stra in 100,000 chapters, which was successively
abridged by *Sa;//kara in 10,000, by Indra in 5,000, by
Brzhaspati in 3,000, and by Kavya in 1,000 Adhy&yas.
Against the genuineness of Narada’s story we may also
adduce the Paura;/ik statement, according to which Manu’s
laws were remodelled first by Bhr/gu, secondly by Narada,
thirdly by B^'haspati, and fourthly by Aiigiras 2 .

The third argument, drawn from the fact that the medie¬
val Nibandhas and commentaries quote passages from a
BWhat (great) and VWddha (old) Manu, has still less value.
Professor Jolly has of late asserted in his able discussion 3
of the quotations from these works that they are later, not
earlier, than the existing text of Manu, because some of
their rules resemble the advanced teaching of Ya^vlavalkya
and Narada, while others contradict our Manu on points
where he holds archaic views. Moreover, a passage of
VWddha Manu, to which Professor Max Muller has first called
attention 4 , possibly indicates an acquaintance with Greek
astrology. I can only agree with Professor J oily’s conclusions,
and add that a comparison of the quotations from Br/hat
and VWddha Manu with BhWgu’s Sawhitd produces the
impression that both works — if indeed the titles refer

1 West and Buhler, Digest, pp. 48-50, third edition; Jolly, Tagore Lectures,
p. 56; Preface to the Translation of Narada, pp. xv-xvii.

a Mawadik, the Vyavgdi&ramaydkha and Yayfl., p. xlvii; Jolly, Tagore
Lectures, p. 44.

8 'Tagore Lectures, pp. 65-66. 4 India, what can it teach us? p. 366.

INTRODUCTION,

XCV1I

to two and not to one—must have been enlarged versions
of the latter 1 . As it thus appears that there existed,
recensions posterior to our Manu-smrzti, the existence of
untraceable or partly traceable quotations from Manu’s
Dharmaj-astra in A^vaghosha’s Va^rasui’i 2 and from Manu
in Varahamihira’s Brzhat-sawhiti 3 possesses no great
significance. With respect to Varahamihira’s reference, it
must be noted that,* according to Albirtini’s Indica, two
astrological Sawhitas, called after Manu, existed in the
eleventh century A.D., the smaller of which was an abridg¬
ment made by a perfectly well-known human author 4 .
Hence Varahamihira may have taken his verses on the
character of women from the latter. In both quotations
the 51 okas, not found in our Smr/ti, have a very modern
lookr The case is, however, different with the quotations
from Manu, which, as has been shown above, occur in the
Mahabharata. Wc have been compelled to admit that
the existing text of our Smr/ti is younger than the epic.
If, therefore, the law-book referred to in the latter is not
the ancient Dharma-sutra, we must also concede the
existence of a secondary recension which preceded BhWgu’s
Sa;;/hita. The solution of this question is, owing to the

1 In order to enable the reader to form his own judgment on this point, I add
a list of the quotations which I have noted. Those from Rr/hat Manu occur,

1. Col. Dig. II, 3, 26 ; 2. Col. Dig. V, 428 = Gi. Day. XI, 6 , 34; 3. Datt. Mtm.

II, 8 ; 4. May. IV, 5, 53 ;—those from Vmldha Manu, 1. Col. Dig. Ill, 1, 69;

2. Col. Dig. Ill, 1, 83 = May. XI, 5 -Viv. A'int. p. 99; 3. Col. Dig. Ill, 1, 86
= Viv. Amt. p. 89; 4. Col. Dig. Ill, 1, 90 = May. XI, 5 — Viv. A’mt. p. 100;
5. Col. Dig. Ill, 1, 93 — Viv. A'int. p. 103; 6. Col. Dig. V, 162 = Viv. Afint.
p. 272 = Varad. p. 21 = Gi. Day. IX, 17 (where attrib. to Br/hat M.) ; 7. Col.
Dig. V, 408 - Sm ri. A'and. XI, 1,15= Sar. Vil. 504 = Varad. pp. 33,40 = Viram.

III, 1, 2 = Gi. Day. XI, t, 7 and Viv. A'int. p. 289 (where attrib. to BWhat M.);
8. Mit. II, 5,6 — Viv. Amt. p. 289 and Varad. p. 37 (where attrib. to Br/hat M.) =
Sar.Vil. 591 (where attrib. to M.); 9. Viv. ATint. pp. 126-7; ro.Viv. ATiit. p. 180;
11. Varad. p. 50; 12. Varad. p. 28, where in reality Manu IX, 206 seems to be
quoted.

a Weber, Indische Slreifen, vol. i, pp. 190,192, 198.

8 Kern, Br/hat-sawhita, chapter 74, vv. 7-15, and Preface, p. 43.

4 Albirhni, Indica, chapter xiv; see also Kern, loc. cit. p. 42, where the
probability of the existence of a Manavi Sawhita has been shown. Albtrdnt
says that the title of the two works was Manasa (Manavi ?), and that the
shorter one had been composed by one PNA'L, a native of Southern India.
I owe these notes to the kindness of Professor Sachau, the learned editor and
translator of Albinoni's important work.

[*5] g

XCV111

LAWS OF MANU.

shortness of the extracts, very difficult. But, considering
all things, I feel inclined to assume that the author or
authors of the Mahabharata knew only the Dharma-stitra.
The character of the four verses and a half, quoted verbally,
as well as of the paraphrase in the Sakuntalopakhy&na
agrees well enough with this assumption, because the
M&nava Dharma-sfitra, as we have seen, certainly did
contain numerous Slokas. It is further corroborated by
the fact that the Mahabhdrata does not differ in its arrange¬
ment, or rather in its want of an arrangement of the civil
and criminal law, from the Dharma-sutras. Though the epic
contains numerous verses on these topics, it nowhere shows
an acquaintance with the eighteen titles of the law which
arc so characteristic of the secondary Smr/tis, the hand¬
books of the special law schools. On the other side it may
be urged that the Mahabharata says nothing of Dharma-
sfttras, and that its general view of the origin of the sacred
law coincides with that expressed in the later law-books.
It holds that the moral and legal doctrines were revealed
for the benefit of the human race, first by Brahman to
various mythical 7 ?/shis, and by them to mankind. This
objection may, however, be met by the not unreasonable
assumption that at the time when the Mahabharata was
composed, the real origin of the old Stitras had been for¬
gotten, while the text had not yet been materially altered.
What has been said above regarding the rise of the
special law schools, and the facts known regarding the
change in the tradition concerning the Sfltras of Gautama
and Vasish/yfca, make the hypothesis of such a transitional
period not at all improbable. Should, nevertheless, the
possibility of the existence of a metrical redaction of the
Mdnava-stitra, preceding that ascribed to Bhr/gu, be
considered as not altogether excluded, it would at least
be necessary to concede that it could not have contained
the present arrangement of the Vyavahfira portion under
titles.

While there is thus no proof for the opinion that the
modern portions of the Manu-smr/ti have been gradually
added one to the other, or that the present text is one of

INTRODUCTION.

XC1X

the last links in a long chain of metrical recensions, there
are several points which tend to show that our Manu-sawhit 4 *
is one of the first attempts at remodelling a Dharma-sutra.
The most important argument for its comparatively early
date is furnished by the incompleteness and awkwardness
of its rules on judicial procedure and on civil law 1 . If we
compare these rules with those of the Dharma-sfttras and
with those of the other metrical Sm/vtis, they are some¬
what more explicit than the former, but very much inferior
to the latter. As regards procedure, the Manu-smrzti pays
more attention to the moral side of the duties, incumbent
on the judge and the other persons concerned, than to the
technicalities, which arc much more clearly and minutely
described in the Dharma^astras of Ya^/favalkya and
Narada. In this respect it comes close to the Dharma-
sfitras, with which it particularly agrees in the absence of
all mention of written plaints and of documentary evi¬
dence, as well as in the shortness of its remarks on ordeals.
Among the ancient law-books the Vasish///a Dharmai*astra
is the only one which has allusions to written documents,
and names them, XVI, xo, 14-15, as one of the means of
legal proof. In the other Dharma-sutras there is no indica¬
tion that their authors were acquainted with the art of
writing. I have already pointed out in the Introduction to
my translation of VasislV//a 2 that most probably this
omission has to be explained not by the assumption that in
the times of Gautama, Baurihayana, and Apastamba writing
was unknown or little used in India, but by the considera¬
tion that the general character of the Dharma-sutras, which
principally pay attention to the moral side of the law, does
not require the introduction of matters belonging more
properly to the customs of the country or to the Artha-
.rastra. Whatever may be thought of the prevalence of
writing during the earlier times and of the value of my
explanation, it may be regarded as perfectly certain that

1 See on this subject and the following discussion, Weber, History of Indian
Literature, pp. 279-281; Stenzler,Y&§7/avalkya, pp. vii-x; Journal of the German
Or. Soc. vol. ix, on the Indian Ordeals ; and Jolly, Tagore Lectures, pp. 45-49.

a Sacred Books of the East, vol. xvi, p. xxvi.

g 2

c

LAWS OF MANU.

Bhrzgu’s Manu-saz/zhita belongs to a period when the art of
• writing was known and generally practised. For, first, we
find two clear references to written documents, ‘ what has
been caused to be written by force ’ (lekhita, VIII, 168)
and royal edicts (iasana, IX, 232). Secondly, we have the
expression nibandh, ‘ to record, 5 in a passage (VIII, 255)
where the context leaves no doubt that a written entry is
referred to. When it is said there, that in a boundary-
dispute the king shall record the boundary, according to
the unanimous declaration of the witnesses, together with
their names, it is impossible to imagine how he can do so
without drawing up a written document, which, of a
necessity, must have legal force for the future. This use of
the verb nibandh makes it further probable that Medhatithi
is not altogether wrong, when he explains (VIII, 76) the
compound anibaddha/z, ‘a person not appointed (to be a
witness to a tiansaction),’ by f a person not entered (as a
witness in the document),’ and refers the rule to cases of
loans and other commercial transactions. Thirdly, there is
the term karazza (VIII, 34 and 154), which, though less
explicit, likewise points to the use of written bonds for
loans. The former passage declares that ‘ a debt which is
proved by karazza 5 (kara/zena vibhavitam) must be paid,
and the commentators explain karazza to mean ‘written
bonds, witnesses, and so forth.’ Hence it has been rendered
in the translation by ‘ good evidence.’ Verse 154 prescribes
that a debtor ‘ who, unable to pay a debt (at the fixed
time), wishes to make a new contract, may renew (lit.
change) the karazzam (karazzam parivartayet 1 ).’ Two com¬
mentators, Kullfika and Raghava, take the word here in the
sense of ‘a written bond, 5 while the older ones, Govinda,
Nardyazza, and probably also Medhdtithi, explain it by
‘ bonds and so forth,’ and make it include agreements before
witnesses. From these explanations and the use of the
word karazza in other legal works it would appear that
karazza may also be cited as a witness for the acquaintance
of our author with the art of writing. To the conclusion
that writing must have been extensively used in business-

1 Nandana’s reading karawam is clearly erroneous; see below, p. cxxxiv.

INTRODUCTION.

Cl

dealings points, finally, the whole state of civilisation to
which Manu’s rules are adapted. The highly developed*
trade by land and by sea 1 , on which ad valorem duties
were imposed 2 , the existence of official lists of prices which
were renewed periodically 3 , the complicated system of
calculations of interest, among which we find compound
interest 4 , and the occurrence of mortgages 5 , would be im¬
possible without written documents. These facts appear to
me so eloquent that even though all the passages adduced
above, which explicitly mention written documents, could be
proved to be late interpolations, the general aspect of this
question would remain unchanged. If, under these cir¬
cumstances, Manu’s rules on evidence contain nothing
definite on the admissibility of documents, and if he
agrees in this particular with the Dharma-siitras and differs
strongly from the Dharma^dstras of Yagv/avalkya and
Ncirada as well as other metrical Smrztir, this omission
gains a great importance for the historical position of the
Sawhitd. Whether we explain it by an oversight of the
editor or by the assumption that he left the determination
of the value of written documents to custom or to another
vSastra, it shows that he was acquainted with the Dharma-
sutras alone or with Dharma-sfitras and such metrical
Smr/tis as excluded the section on documents. As he
certainly was an adherent of a special law school, and bent
on making his work as complete as possible, ho would not
have omitted so important a point if he had known law¬
books like the Y '<ign avalkya-sm; 71 i.

The omission of the details regarding ordeals is no
less significant. Manu VIII, 109-116 describes only the
administration of oaths more fully, and mentions the ordeals
by fire and water in a cursory manner. Among the Dhar-
ma-stitras there is only the Apastambiya which (II, 29, 6)
recommends the employment of divine proof (daiva) or
ordeals in a general way without adding any particulars.
The secondary law-books of Ya^/iavalkya and Narada
describe five kinds of ordeals, and enter, the second more

1 VIII, 156-157. 2 VII, 127-128; VIII, 348.

3 VIII, 401-402. 4 VIII, 139-142, 151-153. 3 VIII, 165.

LAWS OF MANU.

cii

fully than the first, on descriptions of the manner in which
•they must be performed. Even the Vishwu-sm^iti agrees
with them, and the fragments of the lost metrical Smr/tis
show that most of the latter, too, contained sections re¬
sembling those of Ya^vTavalkya and Narada. It would be,
in my opinion, a mistake to infer from the silence of Gau¬
tama, Baudhayana, and Vasish///a that in ancient times
ordeals were unknown in India. Traces of such practices,
which were formerly prevalent in various forms also among
other Indo-European races, are found, as might be expected,
even in Vcdic works. If the authors of the Dharma-sutras
ignore them or just indicate their existence, the correct
explanation of this fact, too, is that they considered the
subject not important enough for giving details, and left it
to custom. The authors of the secondary Smrztis, as a
matter of course, were anxious to fill up the blank left by
their predecessors. But they probably did nothing more
than bring the various local customs into a system which
gradually was made more and more complete. Under
these circumstances the fact that Manu’s rules stand mid¬
way between those of the Dharma-sutras and of the other
metrical law-books is another argument for allotting the
first place to his Sa/whita. In the treatment of the civil
and criminal law the inferiority of the Manu-smr/ti to the
other Dharma^astras of the same class, even to Ya^ 7 a-
valkya’s, which contains a much smaller number of verses
on Vyavahara, manifests itself in various ways. In spite of
the attempt at a scientific classification of the rules under
certain heads, the arrangement of these sections is cumbrous
and disorderly. Twice, at the end of the eighth and ninth
chapters, we find collections of miscellaneous rules, which,
as a comparison of the works of Ya^/zavalkya and Narada
shows, might for the greater part have been easily fitted
in to the one or the other of the eighteen titles. Under the
single titles the rules are sometimes badly arranged. This
is particularly visible in the chapter on inheritance, where,
to mention only one most conspicuous instance of this want
of care, the verse asserting the right of the mother and grand¬
mother to take the estate of a predeceased son or grandson,

INTRODUCTION.

is placed so awkwardly that it is absolutely impossible to
guess which place in the sequence of heirs the author meant*
to allot to them. As stated above, the verse most probably
was inserted by the editor of the ancient Dharma-sutra. If
he had cared at all for order and intelligibility, he ought
not to have contented himself with the enunciation of the
maxim that these persons do inherit, but he ought to have
indicated where the preceding close series of heirs has to be
broken in order to admit them. Very significant, too, are
the constant mingling of moral exhortations with the legal
rules and the occasional recommendation of quaint judicial
devices which are common in the earlier stages of the de¬
velopment of the law. Though the duty of kings to protect
their subjects and to restrain the wicked has been fully
explained in the seventh chapter, yet in the sections on
theft (VIII, 302-311), on violence (VIII, 343-347), and on
adultery (VIII, 386-387), the author expatiates again and
again on the necessity of eradicating such offences. In the
second case the specific rules, providing for the punishment
of sahasa crimes, are left out, the omission being repaired
at the end of the ninth chapter. Both Ya^avalkya and
Narada think it unnecessary to recur to the moral obliga¬
tions of the king after pointing them out once. Both
refrain also from mentioning the curious expedient which
Manu recommends (VIII, 182-184) for the decision of
doubtful disputes regarding deposits. Another important
point is that Manu’s rules on some titles are exceedingly
incomplete, and touch one particular case only, from which
it is not always easy to deduce the general principle. Thus,
in treating of the subtraction or resumption of gifts, Manu
(VIII, 212-213) confines his remarks to pious gifts which are
not applied in the manner stipulated. Ya^vlavalkya (II,
175-177) gives under this head at least some general prin¬
ciples, showing what is required for the validity of gifts;
while Narada 1 offers a fairly full and systematic treatment
of the whole law of gifts. A similarly gradual development
is visible under other heads, especially concerns among

1 Professor Jolly’s Tianslation, pp. 59-60.

civ '

LAWS OF MANU.

partners, and rescission of sale and purchase, the rules under
•which latter head Manu gives partly in their proper place
and partly among the miscellaneous precepts at the end of
the eighth chapter. A third point, finally, which deserves
to be noted here, is the fact that legal definitions are almost
entirely wanting in the Manu-smr/ti, become more frequent
in Y^^avalkya’s work, and are regularly given by Narada,
as well as that many single rules which are common to
M&nu and Ya^V/avalkya, or to Manu, Ya t £v7avalkya, and
N&rada, are framed in the latter works with much greater
precision than in the former 1 . The inferiority of the Manu-
smritx in all these points can only be explained by the
assumption that it was composed at a time when the syste¬
matic treatment of the law had been begun, but had not
reached a high state of perfection, while the superiority of
the other metrical Smr/tis permits us to infer that they
belong to a much later period when the special law schools
had made a considerable progress in the elaboration of their
theories. This argument is, it seems to me, the strongest
which can be brought forward as a firm basis for the
universally prevalent belief of all European and Indian
Sanskritists in the priority of our Manu to all other known
secondary law-books. For wherever we are able to trace
larger portions of the history of a special Brahmanical
science, as c.g. in the case of grammar, we find that the
later authors, though belonging to different schools and
creeds, and though differing in the actual doctrines, invari¬
ably avail themselves of the method of their predecessors,
developing and refining it more and more. Retrogressive
steps, examples of which seem to occur in the handbooks
of the Vedic schools 2 , have hitherto not been found 3 . All

1 Compare e. g. the rules regarding lawful interest, Manu VIII, 140-142, and
Ya^; 7 . II, 34.

8 Compare e. g. the case of the Gautamfya and Baudh&yaniya Dharma-sutras,
where the second and later work is inferior in method to the earlier one.

8 Should it be objected that the Vishwu-smr/ti, though certainly younger
than Manu’s and Ya£v 7 avalkya’s Dharma^stras, is deficient in a systematic
arrangement of the rules on civil and criminal law, the answer would be that
the editor of this work appears to have been a Vaishwava sectarian, not an
adherent of a school which made the law its special object of study.

INTRODUCTION.

cv

the other arguments which have been or can be adduced to
prove the antiquity of our Manu-smrzti are less conclusive.*
If it has been said that this work contains some very archaic
doctrines 1 which are not found in the other secondary law¬
books, that is perfectly true. But the inference regarding
its age becomes doubtful, because on other subjects Manu
is ahead of the other Smr/tis 2 , and because in general the
development of the actual doctrines seems to have been not
quite steady arid continuous. Still more precarious are the
arguments, based on the language of the Manu-smnti, on
its not mentioning the Greek astrology or Greek coinage
and similar points. As we have to deal with a recast of
a very ancient book, and as its editor has utilised a good,
many ancient verses in compiling his recension, it is only
to be expected that a number of archaic forms and phrases
should be found. But it is evident that they prove nothing
with respect to the period when the compilation was made,
because it is impossible to decide in each case to which of
its component parts the archaism belongs. As regards the
remaining argumenta a silentio, they are equally incon¬
clusive. Even if we grant, for argument’s sake, the correct¬
ness of the assertion that our Manu contains no allusion to
the Greek order of the planets, to the zodiac, to judicial
astrology, and to Greek or Scythian dinaras, drammas, and
nawakas, while all the other secondary law-books mention
one or the other of these foreign importations, the omission
may be purely accidental. These and similar points can
be used for no other purpose than to show that there is
nothing in Manu’s text that compels us to place it in or
after the period between 300-500 A.D., during which Greek
influence made itself strongly felt in India. They possess

1 One of the clearest instances of this kind is Manu’s doctrine with regard to
the succession of females to the estate of males, where the exclusion of the wife
agrees with the teaching of the Dharma-sfttras (Jolly, Tagore Lectures, p. 48).
The assertion of Professor Ilopkins (Castes according to the M. Dh. p. 108
seqq.), that the prerogatives of Brahmawas are greater according to Ya^#. than
according to Manu, seems to me erroneous, and chiefly based on an inadmissible
interpretation of some passages of Manu. In my opinion the mutual relations
of the castes, as described in the two law-books, cannot be used to prove a
priority of the one to the other.

a E. g. in the doctrine concerning the Niyoga.

cvi

LAWS OF MANU.

a certain importance only as auxiliaries to the chief argu¬
ment derived from the imperfect development of the method
or formal treatment of the law. But considering all that
has been said in the preceding discussion, it is, I think, not
too much to say that there is no obstacle against, and some
reason for, our accepting as true the assertion, which is made
in the Manu-smrzti itself and supported by the tradition
preserved in the Skanda-pura//a, that Bhrzgu’s 1 Sa/;/hita is
the first and most ancient recast of a Dharma^astra attri¬
buted to Manu, which latter, owing to the facts pointed out
in the first part of this Introduction, must be identified with
the Manava Dharma-sutra. Though this recast must be
considered the work of one hand, the possibility that single
verses may have been added later or altered, is of course
not excluded. A perfectly intact preservation of an Indian
work which has been much studied, is a priori improbable,
and the divergence of the commentators with respect to
certain verses shows that some of those contained in our
text were suspected by the one or the other of them. But
the number of vSlokas with regard to which real doubts can
be entertained is comparatively small, and hardly amounts
to more than a dozen 2 .

The above discussion has also to a certain extent defined
the relative position of our Manu-smrzti in Brahmanical
literature, and has thus opened the way for the consideration
of the last remaining problem, the question when the conver¬
sion of the Manava Dharma-sutra into a metrical law-book

1 A clear and definite explanation of the question why the Hindu tradition
ascribes the promulgation of Manu’s laws to BhWgu has hitherto not been
traced, Bhr/gu’s only connexion with Manu is that mentioned in the text,
according to which he is one of the mind-born sons or creatures of the father of
mankind. This version of the legend of his origin is, however, by no means
common. In the Mahabharata XII, 182-192, we find ‘a condensed Dharma-
jastra,’ which is said to have been revealed by Bh/Vgu to Bharadva^a. It in¬
cludes an account of the creation, but makes no mention of Manu. As Bhr/gu
appears also elsewhere as the author of a Dharmajastra, it is just possible that
the legend may be based on Bh/'fgu’s fame as a legislator and as the offspring
of Manu.

a Many more verses are left out partly in Medhatithi’s Bhashya and partly in
Nandana’s commentary. But see below, pp. cxxvi and cxxxv, where it has been
shown that omissions in the accessible MSS. of these two works alone do not
mean much.

INTRODUCTION#

CV1I

may have taken place. The terminus a quo which has
been gained for the composition of Bhrzgu’s Sawhita is #
the age of the Mahdbharata, and the terminus ad quern
the dates of the metrical Smrztis of Y&^avalkya and
Narada. Though we are at present not in a position to
assert anything positive regarding the period when the
Mahabharata and especially its twelfth and thirteenth
Parvans were written, and though the date of Ya^y/avalkya’s
Dharma^astra is very doubtful, yet some facts known
regarding the Narada-sm/Vti are not without importance for
framing our answer to the difficult question now proposed.
Both Professor Jolly and myself 1 have lately discussed the
significance of the mention of golden dinaras or denarii in
the longer and more authentic version of Narada and of the
circumstance that Asahaya, a predecessor of Manu’s earliest
commentator, Medhatithi, explained it and have arrived at
a very similar conclusion, viz. that the Narada-smrfti dates
either shortly before or shortly after the middle of the first
thousand years of our era. If that is so, Bhr/gu’s Sawhita
must, in consideration of the arguments just stated, be
placed not only earlier, but considerably earlier, and the
assertion that it must have existed at least in the second
century of our era is not unwarranted. This latter inference
is also made inevitable by the discovery that we have to
admit the former existence of very ancient commentaries,
and of at least one ancient Varttika or Karika which referred
to the text of Manu, known to us. With respect to the
commentaries, Medhatithi, the author of the Manubhashya,
is a most valuable and clear witness. This author, who
probably wrote in the ninth century A.D. 2 , very frequently
quotes opinions and various readings, expressed or men-

1 Jolly, Tagore Lectures, p. 56; West and Buhler, Digest, p. 48. To the
arguments adduced there I would add that Ba//a, the friend of .Srtharsha-
Harshavardhana (606-7-648 A.D.), makes a pretty clear allusion to the Nara-
dtya Dharmaj&stra in the Kadambari, p. 91, 1 . 13 (Peterson’s edition), where he
calls a royal palace naradiyam ivavarwyamanara^adharmam, * similar to the
N&radlya (Dharmarastra), because there the duties of kings were taught (by
the conduct of the ruler) just as they are taught (in the law-book).*
u For the details, see below, pp. cxxi-cxxiii.

CV1U

LAWS OF MANU.

tioned by his predecessors, and shows by the number of the
•conflicting explanations which he sometimes adduces for
a passage of the text, that in his time a very large number
of commentaries on the Manu-smrzti existed. Among the
persons thus quoted, he designates some by the terms Purva
and A"ira//ztana. Pftrva, which means both ‘ former ’ and
‘ancient,’ is an ambiguous word. It can be applied to all
persons who wrote before the author, though it frequently
is used in speaking of those who lived centuries ago.
ATira;/ztana, ‘long previous or ancient,’ is much stronger,
and, according to the usage of Indian authors, denotes a
predecessor belonging to a remote antiquity. As Medhfi-
tithi, writing in the ninth century, knew of commentaries
to which he was compelled to assign a remote antiquity, it
is only a moderate estimate if we assume that the earliest
among them were in his time from three to four hundred
years old. But if in the sixth or even in the fifth century
A.D. glosses on our text existed, its composition must go
back to much earlier times. For the widely divergent and
frequently very questionable explanations of the more diffi¬
cult passages, which Medhatithi adduces from his prede¬
cessors, indicate that even the earliest among them were
separated by a considerable interval from the compilator of
the Manu-sa///hit&, an interval so great that the real meaning
of the text had been forgotten.

The merit of the discovery that one of the lost metrical
Dharmajastras, the Br/haspati-smr/ti, was a V&rttika on our
text of Manu, belongs to Professor Jolly, whose careful
investigation of the fragments of the lost law-books, con¬
tained in the modern Digests, has contributed very mate¬
rially to the elucidation of a difficult chapter in the history
of Indian legal literature. He shows 1 that Brzhaspati not
only allots to Manu’s Smrzti the first place among all law¬
books, but that he explains, amplifies, and occasionally
corrects its rules on various portions of the Vyavah^ra.
The particulars from Manu which Br/haspati mentions are
such as to leave no doubt that the text which he knew in

1 Tagore Lectures, pp. 60-62 ; see also above, p. xvi.

INTRODUCTION. C1X

no way differed from that known to us. He explains, as Pro¬
fessor Jolly points out, the curious terms, used Manu VIII,*
49, for the various modes by which a creditor may recover
a debt, as well as the expression asvamin, which occurs in
the title of law, called Asv&mivikraya. He further mentions
that Manu IX, 57-68 first teaches and afterwards forbids
the practice.of Niyoga, and gives, as it seems to me 1 , the
correct explanation of this contradiction.* He also notes
that Manu IX, 221-228 forbids gambling, which other
writers on law permit under due supervision, and he corrects
Manu’s rules regarding the indivisibility of clothes and other
objects enumerated IX, 219. An apparent contradiction
in Br/haspati’s rules with respect to subsidiary sons 2 proves
that he knew and accepted Manu’s teaching on this subject.
He declares that the substitutes for a legitimate son of the
body are forbidden in the Kaliyuga, and yet admits the rights
of a Putrika or appointed daughter, who mostly is reckoned
among the substitutes. This difficulty is easily solved, if it
is borne in mind that Manu, differing from the other ancient
law-books, does not reckon the Putrika among the subsidiary
sons. He separates her, IX, 127-140, from the Gau;/a
Putras, IX, 158-181, and strongly insists on her rights,
while he restricts those of the others very much. The list
of instances where Br/haspati alludes to, annotates, or
amplifies rules of Manu might, I think, be enlarged still
further, and it seems to me that a comparison of those
verses of his, which Colcbrooke’s Digest contains, with
Manu gives one the impression that Brriiaspati’s work is
throughout a revised and enlarged edition of the Bhrzgu-
sawhita, or, to use the Indian expression, a Manuvarttika
or Manukarika. Professor Jolly, finally, has pointed out
that this evidence concerning the relation between Manu
and Br/haspati agrees with and gives some weight to the
tradition preserved in the Skanda-pur4;/a, according to
which Br/haspati composed the third of the four versions
of Manu’s Dharma^astra. The age of the Brzhaspati-smr/ti

1 See also above, p. xciv.

2 Jolly, Tagore Lectures, p. 158.

cx

LAWS OF MANU.

is circumscribed by its definition of the value of golden
»dindras, and by the quotations from it which occur already
in the oldest commentaries and Nibandhas from the ninth
century A.D. downwards. Since the latter period it has
been considered as a work of divine origin, revealed by the
teacher of the gods. Hence Professor Jolly’s supposition,
that it must have existed some two or three hundred years
earlier, places it # not too early, but, in my opinion, rather
too late. But even if the Brzhaspati-smrzti dates only about
600 A.D., its statements regarding the high authority of
Manu’s teaching show that our version of the latter must
have preceded it by many centuries.

The three points just discussed are, in my opinion, the
only ones that are really useful for fixing the lower date of
our Manu-smrzti. All the other facts known to me which
bear on the question are made valueless by flaws of one
kind or the other. Thus if we find that another metrical
Dharmaj-astra,the Katyayana-sm;Vti,which probably belongs
to the same period as the Brzhaspati-smrzti, repeatedly
quotes doctrines of Manu or Bhrzgu found in our text, it is
nevertheless not permissible to assume confidently with
Kulluka on Manu VIII, 350 1 , that its author knew and
explained our text. For, as Professor Jolly has shown 2 ,
there arc other cases in which the teaching attributed by
K&tyayana to Bh/Tgu or Manu differs from the opinion
advanced in our Smnti. It is, of course, possible that the
author, who assumes the name of Katyayana, may have
made a slip, or may have known several Manu-smrztis or
Bhrzgu-smr/tis, and have referred in different places to
different works. But, making every allowance for such
possibilities, it cannot be said that his references furnish a
really conclusive argument. Again, it has been pointed
out 3 that the author of the Bhavishya-purawa has largely
drawn on the first three chapters of our Manu, whom he
also names, and nobody who carefully compares the two

8 Tagore Lectures, p. 62,11. 22 and 24, Br/haspati has been printed twice by
mistake for Katyayana.

8 Professor Aufiecht's Catal. Sansk. MSS. Bodl. Libr. p. 30.

INTRODUCTION.

CXI

texts can have any doubt who the borrower is, as the
Pura//a regularly substitutes easy readings for difficult'
ones, and adds numerous explanatory verses. Besides,
Naraya;*a, as well as Kulluka 1 , quotes verses of the Bhavi-
shya-purd;/a from a section on penances not found in the
accessible MSS., which likewise are clearly intended to
explain the text of our Sa;//hita. All this is however
useless, as for the present it is impossible to determine the
date of the Pura//a even approximative^. Professor H. H.
Wilson 2 , who has a very mean opinion of the book, declares
that it cannot lay claim to a high antiquity, and seems to
consider it a production of the ninth or tenth century A.n.
Professor Aufrecht’s discovery 3 that the Matsya-pura;/a,
which mentions a Bhavishya-pura//a in 14,500 verses, con¬
tains actually several sections which have been borrowed
from the portions of the latter work preserved in the MSS.,
makes Professor Wilson’s estimate improbable. For the
Matsya-pura//a was considered a canonical work about the
year 1000 A. D., and used by Albiruni for his work on
India 4 . Though it, therefore, becomes probable that the
Bhavishya-pura;za is much older than Professor Wilson
was inclined to assume, the data thus gained arc much too
vague for inferences regarding the age of our Manu-smr/ti.

Equally unsatisfactory are the results which an examina¬
tion of the quotations from the Manu-smr/ti, found in
various Sanskrit works, yields us. Perfectly indisputable
quotations are not very common, and they occur mostly in
works of comparatively recent date, e. g. in the Ya^astilaka
of the Digambara-Caina poet Somadeva, 959 A. D. 5 , in
^ankara^arya’s 5 arirakabhashya, 804 A. D.°, and in Kshi-

1 See e. g. his remarks on Manu XI, 101, and Naraya;m’s on XI, 131.

2 Vishwu-purawa, vol. i, pp. lxii-lxiv, and Reinaud, Memoire stir l’lnde,

r- 39 6 -

3 Catalogue, p. 43.

4 I owe the knowledge of this fact also to the kindness of Professor Sachau.

5 See Professor Peterson’s Report on the Search for Sanskrit MSS., 1883-84,
pp. 42-43.

6 Deussen, Vedanta, p. 36. With respect to the date of .SankaraHrya’s work,
I follow the Hindu tradition, which places the birth of the author in 788 A. d.
According to the statement of the late Ya^/Zejvara iastrl, with whom I discussed
the passages which he adduces in the Aryavidyasudhakara, p. 226, the sampra-

CX11

LAWS OF MANU.

rasv&min’s Amarakoshodgh&fona 1 . Other cases, where we
•find verses from the Manu-sawhitd quoted in ancient works,
are made inconclusive by the vagueness of the reference or
by the circumstance that the same passages occur also in
other works. Thus we find Manu VIII, 416, with a slight
verbal difference at the end of the first line 2 , in the Sahara-
bhdshya on Mini. Sft.VI, 1, 12. Though the exact date
of the latter work is uncertain, we know that it preceded
KumarilabhaZ/a’s Tantravarttika, and its style, which closely
resembles that of Pata/T^ali’s Mahabhashya, makes it
probable that its author lived not much later than the
beginning of our era. Hence its testimony would be of the
greatest interest, provided it were perfectly clear. Un¬
fortunately the Bhashya introduces the verse merely by
the words eva in ka smarati, ‘ and thus he records or states
in the Smr/ti/ without specifying the author. As the
doctrine of the verse which declares a wife, a son, and a
slave to be incapable of holding and acquiring property is
found, though expressed differently, also in the Narada-
smnti, Vivadapada V, 39, it may be that Sahara took the
passage from some other work than the Manu-smr/ti.
Again, though Pata^ali in the Vyakara;/amahabhdshya
on Pawini VI, 1, 84 adduces Manu II, 120 without any
variant 3 , it would be extremely hazardous to conclude that
he quotes from our text of Manu. For the Mahabharata
(XIII, 104, 64 b -65 a ) has exactly the same words.

day a, referred to in his work, is that of .Sringeri, where also documentary evi¬
dence for its correctness is said to exist. Hence I hesitate to accept Mr. Telang’s
conclusions, who places .Sankara in the latter half of the sixth century, Mudra-
rakshasa, Appendix, and Ind. Ant. vol. xiii, p. 95 seqq.

1 Aufrecht, Journal of the Germ. Or. Soc. vol. xxviii, p. 107. The date of
this author, who used to be identified with the teacher of £ 7 aylpir/a of Kasmir
(779-813 a.d.), seems, according to the latest researches, more recent.
a See the edition in the Bibl. Ind. vol. i, p. 611: gro

fcrihn: » nit TOfvn^fa- tot ^ to m At the end

of the first line Manu has CTnFTtt It

8 See vol. iii, p. 58 of Professor Kielhom’s edition. I may add that the same
work on Pawini II, 3, 35 (vol. i, p. 457, Kielhom) quotes another verse, the
first line of which agrees with Manu IV, 151% while the second entirely differs.
In this case, too, the Mahabharata XIII, 104,82 has a version closely resembling
that of Manu.

INTRODUCTION.

CXlll

More important are some allusions to the laws of Manu
found in several works of considerable antiquity, and in*
inscriptions. Taken by themselves they would, indeed, not
prove much. But considered in conjunction with the results
of the three chief arguments, they certainly furnish a con¬
firmation of the latter. The clearest case, perhaps, occurs
in the Kirdtar^uniya of Bharavi, a poet, whose fame on the
evidence of the Aihole inscription was well established in
634 A. D., and who, therefore, cannot possibly have lived
later than in the beginning of the sixth century, but may
be considerably older. He makes (Kir. I, 9) Yudhish/^ira’s
spy say, ‘ He (Duryodhana), conquering the six (internal)
foes, desiring to enter on the path, taught by Manu, that is
difficult to tread, and casting off (all) sloth, since by day
and by night he adheres to the (prescribed) division (of the
royal duties), shows increased manly energy in accordance
with the Niti.’ At first sight it might seem as if this
passage contained nothing more than an expression of the
ancient belief according to which Manu settled the duties of
mankind, and among them also those of kings. But if we keep
in mind the inferences made unavoidable by Medhatithis
statements regarding the ancient commentaries and by the
character of the Br/haspati-smrzti, it becomes more probable
that Bharavi alludes to the seventh chapter of BhzYgu’s
version of the Manu-sm/Yti, which declares vinaya, humility
or self-conquest, i. e. the conquest of the six internal foes,
to be one of the chief qualities requisite for a king, and
which carefully and minutely describes the employment of
each watch of the day and the night. Other much less
explicit allusions occur in the land-grants. It will suffice
to adduce those found in the commencement of the
Valabhi inscriptions of Dhruvasena I, Guhasena, and
Dharasena II, to which I have called attention some time
ago 1 . The oldest of them is dated Sawvat 207, i. e. not
later than 52 6 A. D. 2 There it is said in the description

1 See West and Biihler, Digest, p. 46, and for the inscriptions, Indian Antiquary,
vols. iv, p. 104; v, 28 ; vi, 11; vii, 67, 69, 71: viii, 302. For other passages,
see Hopkins, Journal of the American Oriental Society, vol. xi, pp. 243-246.

8 This is on the‘supposition that the era of the Valabhi plates began in
319 A. D., the latest date ever assigned to it.

[*5] h

CX1V

LAWS OF MANU.

of Dronasiwha, the first Mah&n\£*a of Valabhi and the
- immediate predecessor of Dhruvasena I, that ‘ like Dharma-
r&^a (Yudhish///ira) he observed as his law the rules and
ordinances taught by Manu and other (sages).’ Strictly
interpreted, the passage says nothing more than that in
Dronasitf/ha’s times various law-books existed, one and the
chief of which was attributed. But, considering what we
know from other sources, it is not improbable that it refers
to our Sa;//hit&, which is acknowledged by Bnhaspati as
the paramount authority. This is all I am able to bring
forward in order to fix the lower limit of the Manu-smrzti.
But the facts stated are, I think, sufficient to permit the
inference that the work, such as we know it, existed in
the second century A. D.

For an answer to the question whether our Manu-sm/'fti
can go back to a higher antiquity, and how much older it
may be, we have at present very scant data. Its pos¬
teriority to the twelfth and thirteenth Parvans of the Maha-
bharata teaches us, as already stated, nothing definite.
But there is a passage in its tenth chapter, w. 43-44, which
has been frequently supposed to convey, and probably does
contain, a hint regarding its lower limit. There the Kam-
bo^as, Yavanas, .Sakas, and Pahlavas arc enumerated among
the races which, originally of Kshatriya descent, were
degraded to the condition of .Siidras in consequence of
their neglect of the Brahma;/as l . As the Yavanas are
named together with the Kambo^as or Kabulis exactly in
the same manner as in the edicts of Ajoka 2 , it is highly
probable that Greek subjects of Alexander’s successors,
and especially the Bactrian Greeks, are meant. This point,
as well as the mention of the Sakas 3 or Scythians, would

The verse contains also the name of the Ainas, which formerly has been
taken to be valuable as a chronological landmark. More modem researches
have proved this view to be untenable ; see A. von Gutschmid, Journal of the
German Or. Soc. vol. xxxiv, pp. 202-208; Max Muller, India, what can it teach
us? p. 131 ; Rig-vcda, vol. iv, p. li.

* ^ ce e * £• Ike fifth rock-edict, where the Yona-Kawbo^-Ga/wdhSra or Ga
dhala are mentioned as Anoka’s neighbours, the most distant being placed first.

8 The earliest mention of the Sakus probably occurs in a V&rttika of Katyi-
yana on P&w.VI, 1, 94,where jakandhu is explained by jaka + andhu. According
to the traditional explanation the compound means ‘ the well of the 5aka king.*

INTRODUCTION.

cxv

indicate that the 51 okas could in no case have been written
before the third century B. C. This limit would be still*
further and very considerably contracted if the mention of
the Pahlavas were quite above suspicion, and if the deduc¬
tions of my learned friend, Professor Noldeke 1 , regarding
the age of this word were perfectly certain. Pahlava and
its Iranian prototype Pahlav are, according to the con¬
current testimony of the most distinguished Orientialists,
corruptions of Parthava, the indigenous name of the
Parthians 2 . Relying on the fact that the change of the
Iranian th to h is first traceable in the name Mchcrdates,
mentioned by Tacitus, and in the word Miiro, i. e. Mihira,
on the coins of Kanishka or Kanerki 3 , Professor Noldeke
concludes that the form Pahlav cannot have originated
among the Iranians earlier than in the first century A. D.,
and that it cannot have been introduced into India before
the second century of our era. If this inference were un¬
assailable, the remoter limit of the Manu-srmvti would fall
together with its lower one. Put, with all due deference to
the weight of Professor Noldeke’s name, I must confess that
it appears to me very hazardous. For, first, the foundations
of his theory are very narrow: secondly, one of his own facts
is not quite in harmony with his assertions. However late
we may place Kanishka, he cannot be later than the last
quarter of the first century A. D. Kanishka was not a
Parthian, and his coins probably were struck in the North
of India. Hence it would appear that Iranian word-forms
with the softening of th to h were known in India towards the
end of the first century. Moreover, the word Pahlava occurs
in the Girndr inscription of Rudradaman 4 , which was incised
shortly before the year 73 of the era of the Western Ksha-
trapas. This era, as has been long ago conjectured, and is now
incontestably proved by Mr. Fleet’s important discoveries, is

1 Weber, History of Indian Literature, pp. 1S7-8, note 201*.

3 Olshausen, Parthava und Pahlav, Mada und Mah (Monatsberichte der
Berliner Akademie, 1877), and Noldeke, Journal of the German Oriental
Society, vol. xxxi, p. 557.

8 Sallet, Die Nachfaiger Alexanders des Gr. p. 197.

4 Ind. Ant. vol. vii, p. 261. Rudradaman’s lieutenant at Girair was the
Pahlava Kulaipa (Khoraib ?), son of SuvLakha.

h 2

CXV1

LAWS OF MANU.

the so-called Vikramasawvat or, more correctly, the Sawvat
‘ of the Malave^as, the lords of Malava, which began in 57
B. C. Rudradaman’s inscription consequently dates from the
year 21-22 A.D., and it is thus certain that the word Pahlava
was used in India at the beginning of the first century A. IX
These circumstances make it impossible to accept Professor
Noldeke’s inferences from the occurrence of the softened
Iranian forms. But the mere mention of the Pahlavas
would show that Manu’s verse cannot have been composed
before the beginning of the first century B.c. The Parthian
dynasty of the Arsacides was founded in the middle of the
third century B. c., and its sixth ruler, Mithradates I,
according to some classical authors, invaded India about
the middle of the second century 1 . Coins of an Arsaces
Thcos and of an Arsaces Dikaios, who uses also the Prakrit
language and the North-Indian alphabet, have been found
in the Panjab, and belong to the same or a little later
times 2 . As the Brahmans arc ever ready to give foreign
nations, with which they come into contact, a place in their
ethnological system, it is quite possible that about the
beginning of the first century B. C. an Indian origin might
have been invented for the Pahlavas. But even this reduc¬
tion of the remoter limit of the Manu-smr/ti is, in my opinion,
not quite safe. For though the evidence for the genuine¬
ness of Manu X, 43-44 is as complete as possible, and
though the varia lectio for Pahlava, which Govinda offers,
probably deserves no credit 3 , there is yet a circumstance
which raises a suspicion against the latter reading. Parallel
passages, closely resembling Manu’s two verses, are found
in the Mah&bharata XIII, 33, 21-23* and XIII, 35, 17-18,
where the names of the degraded Kshatriya races are like¬
wise enumerated, and the cause of their degradation is stated

1 Lassen, Indische Alterthumskundc, II 3 , 334.

3 Sallet, Die Nachfalger Alexanders des Gr. pp. 51, 156-157.

* The commentators and MSS. all give the two verses. If some MSS. of
Medh&tithi read Pahnava for Pahlava, that is a clerical mistake caused by the
similarity of the subscribed Devanagari la and na. Govinda s var. lect. Pallava
is improbable, because the other races mentioned in the second line of verse 44
all belong to the North of India, while the Pallavas are, as far as we know,
confined to the South.

INTRODUCTION.

cxvii

in exactly the same or similar words. Both passages name
the Yavanas, and one also the *Sakas. But neither men-,
tions the Pahlavas. Hence it becomes doubtful if the
original version of these Slokas really did contain the latter
name. It is further not impossible that its insertion is not
due to the first remodeller of the M&nava Dharma-sfitra, but
has crept in later accidentally, in the place of some other name.
The Indian Pa/^its are not strong in ethnology and history,
and habitually careless with respect to the names of peoples
and countries, which they frequently alter, or substitute
in their works one for the other. I have, therefore, not the
courage to reduce the terminus a quo by more than a
hundred years on the strength of this single word, which
occurs in a verse that evidently has had originally a different
form. I think it safer to rely more on the mention of the
Yavanas, Kambo^as, and 6'akas, and to fix the remoter
limit of the work about the beginning of the second century
A. D., or somewhat earlier.

This estimate of the age of the Bhr/gu Sawhita, according
to which it certainly existed in the second century A. D., and
seems to have been composed between that date and the
second century 13 . C., agrees very closely with the views
of Professor Cowell 1 and Mr. Talboys Wheeler 2 . It differs
considerably from that lately expressed by Professor Max
Muller, who considers our Manu to be later than the fourth
century 3 , apparently because a passage quoted from VWddha
Manu, which he takes to be a predecessor of our Sa;//hit&,
mentions the twelve signs of the zodiac. I do not think
that it has been proved that every work which enumerates
the ra,ris must be later than the period when Ptolemy’s
astronomy and astrology were introduced into India. But
irrespective of this objection, Professor Max Muller’s opinion
seems to me untenable, because, according to Professor
Jolly’s and my own researches 4 , the VWddha or Brzhat Manu,
quoted in the digests and commentaries, is not earlier, but
later than Bhrzgu’s Sa;/zhita. Whatever may be thought

1 Elphinstone, History of India, p. 249 (edition of 1874).

3 History of India, vol. ii, p. 422.

3 India, what can it teach us ? p. 366. 4 See above, p. xcvii.

CXV111

LAWS OF MANU.

of the details of my inferences and conclusions, I believe
€ that the rudimentary state of the legal theories in our
Sawhitd, as compared with Ya^tfavalkya and Narada (fourth
or fifth century A. D.), the fact that the Brfhaspati-smrfti of
the sixth or seventh century A. D. was a Varttika on our
text, and the assertion of Medhatithi, that he knew in the
ninth century commentaries belonging to a remote antiquity,
force us to place it considerably before the term mentioned
by Professor Max Muller.

III.

It now remains to give an account of the materials on
which my translation is based, and of the manner in which
they have been used. Among Sanskrit works the com¬
mentaries of Medhatithi, Govindara^a, Sarva^/ 7 a-Nardya/za,
Kullftkabha//a, Raghavananda, and Nandana/fcarya, as well
as an anonymous 7 "ippa«a, contained in a Ka^mir MS. of
the Manu-sawhita, arc the sources on which I have chiefly
relied. Among the earlier translations, Sir William Jones’
famous versio princeps and Professor J. Jolly’s annotated
German translation 1 of chapter VIII and chapter IX, i-
ioa have been carefully used. Occasionally Mr. Loiscleur
Deslongchamps’ well-known edition of the text, the Eng¬
lish translation of chapters I—III, 33 by Tara/fcand A"akra-
varti (A"uckerbutty) 2 , and the Mara//d translation of Gandr-
dan Vdsudev Gur^ar 3 have been consulted. Sir G. C.
Haughton’s edition and various Indian reprints of the text
have been left aside, because they mostly repeat Kullfika’s
readings or give variae lectiones for which no sufficient
authority is shown.

Among the Sanskrit commentaries on the Manu-smrz'ti
the oldest extant is the voluminous Manubhdshya of Bha//a

1 Published in the Zeitschrift fiir vergleichende Rechtswissenschaft, vol. iii.

2 I have used the copy of the India Office Library, 19-27, 17. The name
of the author is given by Professor Goldstiicker, On the Deficiencies, &c., p. 5,
note.

3 Published with the text of Manu, at the Nirwayasagar Press, Bombay, 1877.

INTRODUCTION.

CX1X

Medh&tithi, the son of Bha//a Virasvamin. As its title,
bhashya, indicates, it is not a gloss which paraphrases every #
word of the text. Its aim is to show the general sense of
Manu’s dicta, to elucidate all really difficult passages, and
to settle all doubtful points by a full discussion of the
various possible interpretations, and of the opinions ad¬
vanced by others. In carrying out this plan Medhatithi
displays a great amount of learning and not inconsiderable
ability. He carefully uses a number of more ancient com¬
mentaries on Manu, and shows a full acquaintance with the
vSastras requisite for the successful explanation of his text,
with Vcdic literature, grammar, Mima;//sa, the Dharma-
stitras 1 and other Smr/tis, Ved&nta, and the Mahabharata.
At the same time he avoids the common fault of Sanskrit
commentators,—an undue copiousness in quotations which
bear only remotely on the subject under consideration.
Moreover, he frequently enhances the value of his explana¬
tions by illustrating Manu’s rules by instances taken from
every-day life, a point which most Hindu writers on law
and on kindred subjects entirely neglect. Finally, he fre¬
quently takes up a much more independent position
towards his author than the other commentators dare to
assume. Thus he does not shrink from declaring that
many verses are arthavadas, without legal force, and that
many single words have been inserted merely vr/ttapti-
ra/zartham, ‘in order to make up the verse.’ His chief
weakness, on the other hand, which is not unfrequently
observable, and which has drawn on him Kulltlka’s stric¬
ture 2 that he brings forward ‘both valuable and valueless’
remarks, consists in a disinclination to decide between con¬
flicting interpretations and in his sometimes placing side

1 Medh&tithi quotes the Dharma-siHras in general, and Gautama, Baudhayana,
Apastamba, and VasishMa, as well as some other lost works, in particular.
Among the lost Dharma-sfitras which he used, is a Katyayaniya-sfitra, quoted on
Manu VIII, 215, which seems to have treated the civil law in detail, and pro¬
bably is the original of the metrical Katyayana-smrfti, from which the digests
give so numerous extracts.

8 See the concluding verses of Kulldka’s commentary. Sir W. Jones* state¬
ment that Medhatithi's work is reckoned ‘ prolix and unequal ’ (Preface to the
Translation, p. xvii, St. Grady) is probably based on this remark of KullOka.

cxx

LAWS OF MANU.

by side, as equally admissible, widely divergent opinions.

, This vacillation is perhaps justified in a restricted number
of passages, where the text is really ambiguous or very
obscure. But more commonly it seems to be due solely to
an excessive veneration for the views of his predecessors \
whose commentaries, in part at least, possessed a high
antiquity and a great reputation, or whom he had personal
reasons to respect. On several occasions he mentions
certain explanations as those of the Pftrvas or ATira/fttanas,
i. e. of the ancient commentators. Thus he remarks on
Manu IV, 223, ‘But the exposition given above is the view
of the Ancients ; hence it has also been given by us 2 .’ In
another case, when explaining Manu IX, 141 and 147, he
notes that his interpretation is that of upadhyaya, i. e. of
his own teacher from whom he learnt the Manu-sawhita.
Disagreeable as this want of decision may be to those who
look to a commentary for a concise and authoritative
explanation of its text, yet it is not without advantages.
His copiousness in quoting the opinions of his predecessors
makes his work extremely important for the student of
the history of the Manu-smrzti and of the Hindu law. The
Bh&shya clearly proves that Manu’s text had been made
for centuries an object of deep research, and that many of
its verses had given rise to widely different interpretations.
It shows, further, that a good many various readings
existed. Finally, a comparison of the later still extant
commentaries leaves no doubt that these in general arc
based on the Manubh&shya, and that even their divergent
opinions and readings are frequently derived from the
earlier work. Under these circumstances the question of

1 Though the opinions of ‘others’ are mentioned very frequently, and though
sometimes those of three or four predecessors are contrasted, Medh&tithi gives
only once the name of an earlier commentator, Manu IX, 253,
^nfsrrura^fir: *t (?) [v.i. (?>] fcpipnift 1

ns* The name seems to be Vishwusvamin. But it

is uncertain what the corrupt word, preceding it, may hide.

* nn«rrprm t anM u Compare also

the remark on Manu V, 128, fHT II

INTRODUCTION.

CXX1

Medh&tithis date acquires great importance. It is a
matter of regret that in this, as in so many other cases, we*
do not possess any trustworthy historical information, but
have to depend on such circumstantial evidence as can
be collected from Medhatithi’s own quotations and from
the quotations made by other authors from the Bhashya.
If we begin with the latter, the lower limit for the com¬
position of Medhatithi’s work is fixed by Vi^dne^vara’s
reference to his explanation of Manu IX, 118 1 . Vij^ 7 ane-
sv ara wrote his commentary on Ya£7?avalkya in the reign of
the Kklukya king, Vikramaditya VI, who ruled at Kalyd;/a
from 5 akasa;;/vat 997-1048, or 1073-1126-7 A.D. 2 The
manner in which Vi£v 7 ane.fvara’s reference is made, shows
that in his times the Bhashya possessed an established repu¬
tation. Hence it may be inferred that it was then not of
recent date. To the same conclusion points also a passage
in Kulluka’s commentary on Manu VIII, 184 3 , where, in a
remark on the arrangement of verses 181-184, Medhatithi’s
name is placed before that of Bho^ara^a. As in enu¬
merating their predecessors the commentators usually
adhere to the natural order, and place the oldest name first,
it is very probable that Kulluka means to indicate that
Medhatithi preceded Bho^ara^a. If, as again is most
likely, the latter is identical with the royal polyhistor
who reigned at Dhara during the first half of the eleventh
century A. D., it follows that Medhatithi cannot have
written later than in the tenth century. With respect to
the remoter limit for the composition of the Bhashya, I
have formerly stated 4 that Mcdhdtithi quotes Kum&rila
and Sankara^arya, the great authorities on Mima;/zsa and
Vedanta. The former is mentioned by name in the
remarks on Manu I, 3, and by his usual title Bha//apdd&A,

1 Colebrooke, Mit. I, 7, 13.

a See Joum. Bo. Br. Roy. As. Soc. vol. ix, pp. 134-138, and West and Buhler,
Digest of Hindu Law, pp. 15-17, third edition.

11 See also Jolly, Tagore Lectures, p. 8.

4 West and Biihler, Digest, p. v, first edition.

CXX11

LAWS OF MANU.

‘the venerable Bha#a,’ in the commentary on Manu II, 18 \
*As regards Sankar&fcarya, I find that Medhatithi’s ac¬
quaintance with his writings is by no means as certain as I
formerly thought. For in the passage where my own copy,
a transcript of a Pu//a MS., makes Mcdhatithi quote the
Sirirakabhashya, the older and better MSS. of the India
Office read .Sariraka, which probably implies a reference to
the 6ariraka-sutras 2 . Under these circumstances it is no
longer possible to assert that the Bh&shya is later than the
works of the great Ved&ntist, who wrote in the beginning
of the ninth century A. D. We have now only the quota¬
tions from Kumarila to fall back upon, whose date is much
less certain. We know that Kum&rila preceded .Sankara-
£arya 3 , but the length of time which lies between them has
hitherto not been exactly ascertained. Mr. Colebrooke,
Dr. Burnell, and Professor Max Muller believe, for various
reasons, that he lived in the seventh century or not later
than 700 A.D. 4 Though, as far as his quotations go. Me*
dhatithi might have written earlier than the ninth century
A.D., I still feel inclined to adhere to my former opinion.
For a closer examination of the Bhashya has revealed
some other points which speak in favour of my view.
Mcdhatithi repeatedly quotes the metrical law-books of
Ya^v/avalkya, Narada, and Para^ara, as well as the version
of the Ka///aka Dharma-sfitra, known as the Vishwu-smrfti,
and considers all as canonical. None of these works has,
however, a claim to a high antiquity; and the Vishmi-smriti,
in particular, which mentions the Greek name of a week¬
day, cannot be older than the fifth or sixth century A.D.

1 1, 5 , u n, 18, 1 fi^wr w fhn'hn

w firth fi^rc^ [in?] 1 wfirt ffif<5T wren [mrer] [it]
wrergfit: 11

1 Manu XII, 19, W M^TV^TftfT^T wfif [rl]

Thnt i wwt [v.i. of my ms. urefoswro] trer

inifwi ^ifw n ^ i mi M ' g i wnwrel nw

u

8 See Professor Cowell’s note to Colebrooke’s Essays, I, p. 333.

4 See Professor Max Muller, India, what can it teach us ? p. 308. note.

INTRODUCTION.

CXX111

If Medhatithi, nevertheless, considers it to be an inspired
work, revealed by the god Vishnu, it is only reasonable
to assume that a very considerable interval lies between
the date of its composition and his own times. This is so
much more probable, as the Vish/m-smrzti was probably
written in Ka^mir, which, as will be shown presently, was
also Medh&tithi’s home. A more definite result with
respect to Mcdhatithi’s date is, I fear, at present not
obtainable. His references to other works, such as a
V&kyapradipa by one—rim bra 1 , an Abhidhanakosha 2 , Pin-
gala’s treatise on metrics 3 , a work of the ancient writer on
S&;//khya, Vindhyavasin, and so forth, arc, in the present
state of our knowledge of the history of Sanskrit literature,
not particularly useful. The Bhashya furnishes, however,
two interesting details regarding Medhatithi’s personal
history. First, we hear that he wrote a metrical treatise on
the sacred law, called Smrztiviveka. Secondly, it appears
that the valley of Kajmir, which has produced so many
Indian men of letters, was his native country. The Smrzti-
viveka is mentioned repeatedly in the Bhashya as a com¬
prehensive work in which difficult legal questions were
fully discussed 4 . As regards the other point, there is no
direct statement in the Bh&shya which mentions Mcdhd-
tithi’s birthplace. But the author refers so frequently to
Ka^mir, its laws, its Vedic Sakh&, and even to its language,
that the inference that it was his native country becomes
unavoidable. Thus in explaining the word svarash/re, £ in
his own kingdom’ (Manu VII, 32),and the term^anapadaA,
‘ country or province ’ (Manu VIII, 41), he introduces the

fefirt: inr |i$n i gr# ^ i n ^ n

Professor Kielhom informs me that the verse does not occur in Ilari’s Vakyapa-
diya, which sometimes is called Vakyapradipa.

a Manu IX, 185-6 ; the words quoted are, II

3 Manu IX, 42, i [s] n Pingala

VIII, 1 ; see Weber, Indische Studien, VIII, 147.

4 See e. g. comm, on II, 6, I and

ibidem, n ^ I fiTOTSJ II

CXX1V

LAWS OF MANU.

name of Ka^mir as an illustration l . Again, in giving
l examples of royal monopolies in the remarks on Manu
VIII, 399, he states correctly that the sale of saffron is a
prerogative of the king of Karniir. Further, he repeatedly
refers to the Ka///aka Sakha of the Black Ya^ur-veda,
which for a long time has been confined to Ka.rmir alone;
and, when trying to prove in the notes on Manu I, 58, that
the Mdnava Dharma^astra may be called Manu’s, though
it was first taught by Hira/*yagarbha, he adduces as an
analogous instance the Kd///aka, which, though studied and
taught by many others, is named after Ka///a. Such an
illustration would hardly occur to anybody but a student
of the Ka///aka Sakha. Still more decisive, finally, is hig
remark in the commentary on Manu IV, 59. where he says
that the rainbow is called in Ratmir vina£//aya 2 .

As regards the history of the text of Mcdhatithi’s com¬
mentary, Mr. Colebrookc states in the preface to the
Digest, p. xv (Madras edition), that c the Bhashya 5 having
been partly lost, has been completed by other hands at the
court of Madanapala, a prince of Digh. This assertion
probably rests on the authority of a stanza in the Sardula-
vikrk/ita measure, found in a number of copies at the end
of a good many chapters, which says that ‘the Bhdshya
being mutilated, prince Madanapala, the son of Sahdra;/a,
brought a MS. from another country and made a ^irnod-
dhdra, or restoration of the ruin, by causing copies to be
taken from that V Considering the wording of the verse,

1 vii, 22, i

u: ’i’rosRT iNtcst: ii viii, 4 i,

m

I must note that

Professor Jolly, Tagore Lectures, p. 6, offers a different opinion, and takes
Medhatithi to be a southerner. His reasons—the termination svdmin in the
name of Medhalithi’s father’s name, Virasvamin, and the attention paid by
the ancient southern authors to the Bhashya - do not seem to me sufficiently
strong. For, as the Karmirian name Kshirasv&min and scores of Svamins in
the northern inscriptions show, the title was, at least, formerly not confined
to the south. Further, the intercourse between Ka^mir and southern India in
the time of Bilhawa and of Ilarshadeva accounts for the introduction of a Kar-
mfrian work to the notice of the southern Pa«</its.

3 Professor Jolly states, Tagore Lectures, p. 7, that he has found the verse,

INTRODUCTION.

cxxv

I can only agree with Professor Jolly (loc. cit.) that Mada-
nap&la did not cause portions of the Bhashya to be recom- •
posed, but merely completed the defective MS. of his
library from a copy purchased in some other part of India.
The place where this g in/oddhdra was made, was Kash/M,
near Delhi. For as the verse says that Madana was the
son of Sahara//a, it is not doubtful that this person is
identical with Madana or Madanap&la, the patron of
Vnve.yvarabha//a, who wrote the Subodhini on the Mit&-
kshard and the Prayoga- or Madanapari^ata. Vnvervara
gives, in the introduction to the latter work, a portion of his
patron’s genealogy \ and states that Madana belonged to
the family of the chiefs of Kash/ 7 /a, and was the second son
of one Sadharawa. It is easy to see that in the verse
quoted above the Prakritic form Sahara//a has been used
instead of Sadhara/za for metrical reasons. This Madana has
been identified by Mr. Colebrookc with the homonymous
author of the Madanavinoda, which is dated in Vikrama-
sa//2vat 1431 or 1375 A. D., and Mr. Sarvadhikari 2 confirms
this identification, by telling us that the Madanavinoda
contains the same pedigree of Madana as the Pari^ata.
Hence ‘ the restoration ’ of the Bhashya must have occurred
about five hundred years ago.

more or less correctly given, in seven old MSS. from various parts of India. In
my opinion it should be read as follows:

«r mi HVTfrro: *t i

II I differ from Professor Jolly at the end of the second pada, where he
reads with a Benares MS. UTO «T and at the end of the third

pada, where he changes the reading of the MSS. 'elid'd or -su^dl to
1 Aufrecht, Cat. Sansk. MSS. of the Bodleian Library, p. 274.
a Tagore Lectures of 1880, p. 389. Mr. Sarvadhikari wishes to read the date
brahma (i)^agat (3) yuga (4) indu (1), (Magha sudi 6 , Monday,) as 1231. He
thinks that yuga may also denote the figure 2, and that the reading Vikrama-
sawvat 1231 is necessary, because the Paryfala is quoted by Aawf/ejvara, who
wrote in the thirteenth century. He is, however, mistaken, as the astronomical
calculation shows that Magha sudi 6 of Vikramasawvat 1431 did fall on a
Monday (Jan. 8, 1375), while the same day in V. S. 1231 was a Thursday. The
Pari^ata quoted by A^awrfervara must, therefore, be some other work on law.
The title is a not uncommon one. •

cxxvi LAWS OF MANU.

It would, however, seem that it either was not thorough,
* or that its effects were not lasting. For all the copies
of Medh&tithi’s commentary which I have seen or used
are throughout more or less corrupt, and in some parts,
especially in chapters VIII and IX, as well as at the
end of chapter XII, in a desperate condition. The latter
portion is in great confusion, some pieces being missing,
and others being given twice over. In chapters VIII
and IX many verses are left out, though it is evident
from cross-references, or from remarks made by Kulluka,
that they must have been explained by Medhatithi.
In the parts of the commentary still extant, the cor¬
ruptions are often very bad, and the sense frequently
doubtful or only to be made out conjecturally. Under
these circumstances I believe that it would be unwise to
attach too much weight to the omission of verses with
respect to which the Bhashya stands alone. Before we
can attempt to come to a decision regarding the exact
state of the Manu-smrzti in Medh&tithi’s times, we
require, I think, better MSS. of his work. The officers
in charge of the search for Sanskrit MSS. in India could
render a very great service to the history of the Indian
law, if they would direct their efforts to the acquisition of
really good MSS. of the Bhashya, and if thus a competent
scholar were enabled to publish a trustworthy edition.
The MSS. used for the notes to my translation arc, my
own apograph of chapters I-VI and X-XII, made in 1864
from a Pu/*a MS., and the copies of the India Office
Library, Nos. 934-935. 1407-1409. I 4 I 4. 1 55 i~* 552 - All
of them go back to one codex archetypus, derived from
Madana’s restored copy, and the best is that contained in
the Indian Office Library, Nos. 1551-1552, which is dated
Sawvat 1648, mdrga^irsha sudi 3, somavclsare, or Monday,
November 18, 1591 A.D. 1

Next, after the Manubhashya, but probably at a con¬
siderable interval, follows the Manu/ikd of Govindara^a,

1 For this and some other calculations of dates I have to thank Dr. Schram,
Frivat-Docent of astronomical chronology in the Univeisity of Vienna.

INTRODUCTION.

CXXV1I

the son of Bhatfa Madhava. The exact date of this author
is likewise not ascertainable. He is extremely reticent*
about himself and his predecessors, and quotes, with the
exception of Snrntis, not a single work on law except his
own Smr/ti-ma^ari or Smrzti-ma^ r aripa> 7 ^k&, a compila¬
tion of rules on penances 1 , derived from various Dhar-
ma^istras. The remoter limit of his age can, however,
be deduced from Kullfika’s remarks on Manu VIII, 184,
whence it appears that Govindar^a was later than
Bhcga of Dhara (first half of the eleventh century). The
lower limit is fixed by the mention of his name in
Cimfitavahana’s D&yabhaga 2 and in Stilapd/zi’s work on
penances 3 . I can only agree with Professor Jolly, who
thinks that he lived in the twelfth or thirteenth century 4 .
The termination of Govindara^a’s name has induced several
scholars (see Jolly, loc. cit.) to assume that he was a prince,
and it has been proposed to identify him with a Govinda-
£andra of Benares or with a homonymous king of Kano^.
But the son of a Bha#a can only be a Brahmawa, and it
must not be forgotten that Govindard^a is the equivalent
of Govindrdo, a name very common among the Mara/ 7 /d
Brahma/zas.

The Manu/ikd is a very concise, but by no means obscure 5

1 Commentary on Manu III, 247 and 248; see also Kulluka on Manu IV, 212.
A copy of this work, written at Vasuravi in Saw vat 1467, arvina badi — janau,
during the reign of Maharawa Udayasiwha, is preserved in the India Office
Library, No. 1736. Colebrooke thought that the date had to be referred to the
Vikrama era, and the editors of the series of facsimiles issued by the Palaeogra-
phical Society, No. Ill, have followed him. But it is not doubtful that the prince
mentioned in the colophon is Maharaja Udayasiwha of Mevch/, who ascended
the throne in 1541 a. d. Hence the date of the MS. refers to the 6aka era, and
corresponds to 1545 A. I). The Smrfti-ma^ari contains no quotations from other
law-books than Smr/tis, The name of Govindara^a’s father, Bhatfa Madhava,

occurs frequently in the colophons of the several sections.

3 Colebrooke, Day. XI, 2, 31, where Govinda’s name is also placed after
Bho^ara^a’s.

3 Aufrecht, Cat. Sansk. MSS. of the Bodleian Library, p. 283®.

4 Jolly, Tagore Lectures, p. 9.

5 ‘Obscure 1 is the epithet applied to it by SirW. Jones, Pref. to the transl.ofManu,

p. xvii. (St. Grady). This estimate is probably derived from Kullfika’s utterance
in the concluding verses of his commentary, fr|B<2 HIsftf^-

^mrft'SPTh It is only what might be expected from a plagiary who bitterly
hated the man whose work he wished to supersede.

CXXV111

LAW$ OF MANU,

verbal paraphrase of Manu’s text. In the main it is
an abstract of Medhdtithi’s Bhdshya from which Govinda
has appropriated whatever seemed to him most valuable.
He has discarded the greater number of his predecessor's
optional explanations, as well as his lengthy* controversial
disquisitions on difficult points of law, while he has greatly
condensed others. He has added explanations of those
words on which Medhatithi does not comment, and he
sometimes also puts forward opinions, not traceable in the
earlier work, which may be either his own or derived from
sourcite inaccessible to us. But in such cases he is occa¬
sionally unlucky, and arrives at results which his successor
Kullftka ridicules, not without reason. Thus in his remarks
on Manu III, 50, where the text says that a man who
restricts conjugal intercourse to a minimum, is equal in
chastity to a student ‘in whichever, order he may live,’
Govinda takes the last words in too literal a sense and
enunciates the, for a Hindu, monstrous doctrine that
Manu intends to permit ascetics, whose children have all
died, to return to conjugal life and to repair the loss which
they have suffered. Some other strange errors have been
pointed out by Professor Jolly in his Tagore Lectures, p. 9,
note 1. These occasional eccentricities do not, however,
seriously diminish the usefulness of the Manu/ika. It re¬
mains not only the earliest, but the best complete explana¬
tion of Manu’s text. It frequently assists the student to
find his way through the tangled forest of the Bhashya,
and it contains many valuable interpretations of words left
unexplained by Medhdtithi. The MS. used for the notes
is the unique copy, acquired by myself for the Government
of Bombay (Deccan College Library, Coll, of 1879-1880,
No. 239). It is in a very fair condition, and contains the
whole text and the commentary, excepting that on IX, 71-
336. It was written at Stambhatirtha or Cambay, probably
about 250-300 years ago.

The chronological position of the next commentary on .
our list, Sarva^/ia-Ndraya^a’s Manvarthavivnti or Manvar-
thanibandha, is fixed, as Professor Jolly has first pointed
out, by a passage in the introduction to Rdghavananda’s

INTRODUCTION.

CXX1X

commentary 1 . The latter author says there that £ he has
taken cognisance of (the opinions) approved by Kullftka
and Ndraya;/a, and of those entertained in their hearts
by Govinda^and Medhatithi.’ As it is evident that in the
second group the later author has been placed first, the
assumption that the same order has been observed with
respect to the first pair, and that Raghavdnanda, applying
the principle of uttarottaragariyastva, i. e. naming the more
important persons later, intends the whole series to be read
backwards 2 , is not unreasonable. In its favour speaks also
the fact that Nardya;*a quotes Govindara^a on ManuWJII,
133. In order to fix the date when Ndraya/za wrote, we
have to rely chiefly on some quotations. His opinions on
law are first quoted by Kamalakara, who wrote in the
beginning of the seventeenth century 3 . But a Namani-
dhdna by Naraya//a Sarva^a is mentioned by Rayamuku/a
in his commentary on the Amarakosha, which was com¬
posed in 1431 A. D. 4 The only MS. of the Manvarthavi-
vrzti 5 hitherto found (Deccan College Collection of 1879-
1880, No. 238) bears at the end of Adhydya VIII, the date
Saw. 1544 £aitra badi 9 ravau, which- corresponds to
Sunday, March 27, 1497 A. D. Hence it follows that
Nardya/za cannot have written later than in the last half
of the fourteenth century. Possibly he may be somewhat
older.

The Manvarthavivwti is not a running commentary
which explains every word of the text. It confines itself
to the elucidation of selected difficult passages and words.
It was written with the avowed intention of undoing the
work of the author’s predecessors. At the end of chapters

1 Jolly, Tagore Lectures, p. 11; the passage has been printed in Dr. Burnell's
Tanjore Catalogue, p. 126.

a This manner of enumerating a series of persons or of arguments is also found
occasionally in older Sanskrit works ; see e. g. VasishMa XIII, 58.

3 Aufrecht, Catalogue Sansk. MSS. Bodl. Libr. p. 279.

4 See Professor Aufrecht’s Analysis in the Journal of the German Oriental
Society, vol. xxviii, p. 114.

5 This MS., which has been used for the notes to the translation, is a very fair
copy, containing the commentary alone. Fols. 1-8 have been half eaten by rats.
I'ols. 192-3 have been lost.

[ 25 ]

1

cxxx

LAWS OF MANU.

I, VI, and VIII we find a verse, apparently belonging to
Ncirayawa, which says, ‘ This commentary of the Manu-smr/ti,
composed by the illustrious N&r&yaz/a Sarva^Ta, thrusts far
away the exposition given in contemptible compilations V
Again, at the end of chapter IV we read, ‘ Direct your atten¬
tion to the good words of Naraya/za Sarva^vTa, which
propound the real meaning of Manu and repel the exposi¬
tion given in contemptible compilations 2 / As might be
expected from these utterances, Ndraya/za shows a great
anxiety to find explanations differing from those of Medhi-
tithi and Govinda. Sometimes he attains this aim by
returning to views which Medhatithi mentions and rejects;
but more frequently his explanations have been either
taken from commentaries inaccessible to us, or represent
opinions formed by him independently. All his peculiar
interpretations deserve careful attention. In many cases
they arc decidedly preferable to those of the other com¬
mentators, and have therefore been not rarely followed in
the translation. Nftrdya;/a seems to have been not only
deeply versed in the sacred law, but to have possessed also
a knowledge of various other .Sastras. As we learn from
his commentary on Manu V, 56, 80, 104, XI, 72, he also
wrote two other works on Dharma, a Kamadhenudipika
and a vSuddhidipika. Ik’s Kosha has been mentioned above.
Commentaries of his on parts of the Mahabharata, e. g. on
the Udyogaparvan, on the Svargarohaz/aparvan 3 , and on the
Sanatsugfitiya, arc still extant 4 .

•rgwff: 1 fat-

chapter I; in the other two passages the
MS. has the faulty form fVfCWllh

* f ifH jB I^BfrrgTT^fa^I^ f jlinT I^TT ^ I ^TtPTOtH

wn-pvraii Three other boastful verses occur at the end, 1. of chapter

in, i [t] ufairsir

*fty: n 2 . of chapter v, ^afamytratg fa 1%i nraffa; i

fa*H -0* II 3. of chapter IX,

U^fa^sy^ I vW fTO s|7T y[fa]fy hW ^ [«Tt] II

8 Weber, Berlin Catalogue, Nos. 304, 399; Aufrecht,Catalogue, Bodl. Libr. p. 2 .

4 Telang, Sacred Books of the East, vol. viii, p. 148.

*ifir 11 Thus at the end of

INTRODUCTION.

CXXX1

The fourth work on our list, the well-known Manvartha-
muktdvali of Kullilkabha#a, the son of Divdkarabha//a, was
considered until lately the most trustworthy guide for the
exposition of Manu. In the introductory verses to his
commentary Kulluka informs us that he was a Gauz/a or
Bengali by birth, his father residing in Nandana in Va-
rendrf 1 , and that he wrote his work at Benares with the
assistance of other Pa/zz/its. As regards his times, we only
know that N&raya/za Sarva^a and another commentator,
Dharazzidhara 2 , stood between him and Govindara^a, and
that Raghunandana, who wrote in the beginning of the
sixteenth century, is the earliest author who quotes him 3 .
H£, therefore, lived probably in the fifteenth century.

The Manvarthamuktavali is, as Professor Jolly has been
the first to recognise 4 , little more than an improved edition
of Govindara^a’s Manu/ika. In spite of the asperity with
which Kulluka repeatedly inveighs against his predecessor,
he has not disdained to copy very large portions of the
Manu/ika, sometimes verbatim and sometimes in very in¬
sufficient extracts, where the omissions make the meaning
obscure. Moreover, even where the wording of the two
commentaries differs, the influence of Govinda is distinctly
visible. Under these circumstances the value of the Muktd-
vali is, since the recovery of the Manu/ika, not very great,
though it is undeniable that in certain cases Kullilka's inde¬
pendent remarks or criticisms of the earlier works are useful.
Its great fame in India and its frequent occurrence in the
libraries of native lawyers in all parts of the Peninsula may
be explained by the fact that it was written and approved
at Benares, which town has, since remote times, been a most
important literary centre and the chief source from which
the Pazz^its draw their supplies of books. For the notes I

1 In the colophon of chapter XII, the place is called Virendranandana. The
district of Varendra lies between Dinajpur and the Ganges, Cunningham, Arch.
Reports, XV, Plate i, and p. 40.

8 See concluding verses at the end of chapter XII.

3 Aufrecht, loc. cit. p. 292.

4 Die Juristischen Abschnitte aus dem Gesetzbuche des Manu, p. 3, des
Separatabdrucks; Tagore Lectures, p. 10.

CXXX11

LAWS OF MANU.

have used no MSS. of the Muktavali; but two editions,
Gtb&nand’s reprint of the earlier Calcutta edition 1 and the
Bombay lithographed edition of 5 akasa^vat 1780. The
latter is by far the better one, but leaves, like all other
editions which I have seen, much to desire from a critical
point of view. There are a good many passages in which
the text does not agree with the commentary.

On the Manvarthamukt&vali rests the Manvartha^an-
drikd, written by R&ghavAnanda Sarasvati, an ascetic of
•SankarAMrya’s school 2 , and a pupil of one Vuve^vara-
bhagavatp&da. Though the author asserts, as stated above,
that he used four older commentaries, he mostly adheres to
Kulltika’s opinions. It is only rarely that he prefers N&ra-
ya;/a*s interpretations or recurs to views of Govindard^a and
Medh&tithi, which Kulltika refuted or left unnoticed. His
exposition of the philosophical portions of the text is, how¬
ever, mostly independent, and he interprets them throughout
in such a manner as to agree with the Ved&nta doctrines of
his school. The .ATandrikS. is not a running commentary
which paraphrases every word of Manu, but gives mostly,
besides a short summary of the general meaning, merely
remarks on difficult words and passages. It is probably a
modern work, dating from the sixteenth or the beginning of
the seventeenth century 3 . I have not met with any quota¬
tions from it in other law-books. The oldest known MS. is
that brought by Anquetil from Gujarat and deposited in
the Biblioth^que Nationale at Paris (Devan&gari 49, fonds
d'Anquetil, No. 16). Its date, Sawvat 1706 varshe karttika
badi 10 somadine, corresponds, according to Dr. Schram’s

1 The reason why I used this very incorrect text, was that Professor Jolly
kindly lent me his copy in which he has entered the various readings of Medh.,
Gov., N&r., Ragh., of the Kamir copy and other MSS.

a According to H. H. Wilson, Works, I, pp. 202-3 (ed. Rost), the ascetics,
bearing the title Sarasvati, follow the sawpradaya of •S’ahkanLfcarya. See also
Aufrecht, Catalogue Sansk. MSS. Bodl. Libr. p. 227.

3 Mr. Loiseleur Deslongchamps’ attempt (Lois de Manou, p. xvi) to identify
R&ghavananda with Raghunandana, the bhatfjl&arya of the sixteenth century, is
an unlucky guess. It seems to me that the author of the Aandrika is identical
with the ascetic Raghavananda, pupil of Advayananda, pupil of Virvexvara,
who is mentioned as an author on Sawkhya and Ved&nta philosophy by Dr. F. E.
Hall, Catalogue, pp. 6,91, &c.

INTRODUCTION.

CXXX111

calculation, to Monday, November 29, 1649. Another old
MS. of about the same date is mentioned by Dr. Bur- •
nell, Tanjore Catalogue, p. 126. For the notes I have used
the Paris MS., which was kindly lent to me by the French
Government, as far as Manu IX, 187. It contains both the
commentary and the text, the former being, however, left
out on I, 45-78. For the remaining portion I have con¬
sulted a very old, but much damaged copy of the Deccan
College Collection of 1882-1883, acquired by Professor
Bha/^arkar for the Government of Bombay.

The name of the sixth commentary is, according to the
MS., the loan of which I owe to the courtesy of Divan
Bah&dur Raghunathrao of Madras, Manuvyakhy&na, but
according to Dr. Burnell, Tanjore Catalogue, p. 126,
Nandini. Its author calls himself Nandana (Nandana^arya
according to Dr. Burnell), the son of Lakshmawa, a member
of the Bharadva^a gotra, and the dear friend of the illus¬
trious Viramalla 1 . In all probability he was a native of
Southern India. For his work is, as far as I am aware,
known in Southern India alone; its MSS. are met with only
in the Madras Presidency, and Professor Jolly (loc. cit.,
p. 12) has found that many of his peculiar readings agree
with those found in Southern MSS. of the Manu-smrzti.
As his name is not quoted in any commentary on Manu or
in any work on law, known to me, it would seem that he is
either of very modern date or that his opinions were not
held in any great esteem. Mr. Raghunathr&o’s MS. is
dated 5 akasa;wat 1724, Magha sudi pratipad, or 1803 A.D.
The Manuvydkhydna is a very short commentary, which
mostly repeats and explains only a few words or phrases of
the text. It dismisses many verses which stand in need of
elucidation with the curt remark spash&//, ‘clear/ and

1 The colophon of chapter XII runs as follows:

>pjifa»rnri snrptainr: n Viramalla was probably a prince or

chief, and the mention of his name will eventually aid to ascertain Nandana’s
time. A third variety of the latter’s name occurs in the Madras edition of Cole-
brooke’s Digest, p. xv, note 6, where the editor speaks of a commentary on Manu,
Nandara^krit (?) by Nandara^a.

CXXX1V

LAWS OF MANU.

passes by others without any note. Though no names are
•ever quoted, most of the explanations have been taken on
purely .eclectic principles from the earlier commentaries,
among which the first four of our list must certainly be
reckoned. The favourite among them is the Manvartha*
vivrzti. The notes to the translation show a considerable
number of cases where ‘Nar. and Nand.’ form a separate
group, and on important points advocate opinions opposed
to those of Medhdtithi, Govinda, and Kulluka. But there
are also other passages, concerning which Nandana agrees
either with Medhdtithi alone, or with ‘others/ quoted by
Medhdtithi, with Kulldka or even with Govinda. Finally,
he offers in a certain number of cases expositions not
traceable elsewhere, some of which, especially those on the
philosophical pieces, deserve attention. The text which
Nandana follows, differs not inconsiderably from the
vulgata. It shows, besides very numerous, more or less
important variae lectiones, some omissions, additions, and
transpositions of entire verses. Many of Nandana’s various
readings are derived from Medhdtithi, Naraya/za, and other
older commentators, who either themselves follow them or
at least mention their existence. As regards those which
Nandana alone offers, the majority seem to be either cor-
ruptelae or conjectures, and sometimes very unlucky ones 1 .
The transpositions, which partly occur in passages regarding
the order of which the other commentators agree, appear
to have sometimes at least no better authority than guesses
made by Nandana. Thus if he places Manu I, 27 after
verse 19, and X, 14 after verse 6, and adds in each case
that, ‘ if some read the verses further on, that must be due
to an error of the copyists/ I can only see in this remark a

1 To the first class belongs for M. Ill, 114, the sense¬
less for M. VIII, 154 (not given in the notes), v for

IX, 202, and so forth ; to the second, for

5 , for MC fyj fl 1 *^ M. VII, 54, xt nl for V(ii|ii!

M. VIII, 162, 5 nfron: for qi fevmm : M. VIII, 283 (not given in the notes),
for Tjvftj M. IX, 126, (loc. sing, of

for WPPSPiTf^M. X, 28, and so forth.

INTRODUCTION.

CXXXV

confession of his having done violence to the traditional
text. The verses which Nandana adds are, I think, all*
interpolations, some of which perhaps go back to early
times, as they occur also in the Southern MSS. and in the
Kajmir copy. With respect to the omissions, Nandana
sometimes follows one or several of the other commen¬
tators. In other cases he agrees with the Southern MSS.
alone, and again in others he stands quite by himself. One
of the omissions of the last class, Manu V, 61, is, as has
been pointed out in the notes, purely due to an accidental
lacuna in the MS. which Nandana used. With respect to
numerous other cases it must be noted that the two copies
of the Manuvyakhyana which European scholars have
examined, Mr. Raghunathrao’s and Dr. Burnells (chapters
VIII-IX, now in the India Office Library), differ very con¬
siderably. Thus in chapter VIII, Dr. Burncirs copy omits,
according to Professor Jolly’s collation 1 , verses 8, ti, 14,
74, 81, 103, 227-228, 231, 332, while Mr. Raghunathrao’s
MS. has them all excepting verses 8, 228, and 231, and
gives even notes on 11, 14, 8r, 103, 227. These differences
between the two copies seem to extend also to readings in
Manu’s text and to explanations. But it is not rarely
difficult to give a definite opinion on these points, because
Mr. Raghunathr&o’s MS. sometimes gives only the Pratikas
of the verses, and is often so corrupt that the sense can be
made out only by means of conjectural emendations.

Under these circumstances it will not be advisable to
attach too much weight to variae lectiones, derived from
the Manuvydkhyana, which are not supported by the
authority of other commentaries.

The anonymous 71 ppa/*a, or collection of detached ex¬
planatory remarks, in the Ka^mir birch bark MS. 2 is of
very small importance. It looks as if it owed its origin to
the marginal notes of some learned Pa;/*/it, which, later,
were copied with the text and placed after the verses to

1 Compare also Professor Hopkins, Notes on the Nandini, Proceedings of the
American Oriental Society, October, 1883, p. xviii, where, however, only verses
8, 11, 74, 81, and 332 are enumerated as missing.

8 Deccan College Collection of 1876-1877, No. 355.

CXXXV1

LAWS OF MANU.

which they refer. Professor Jolly 1 has pointed out that in
tone case it characteristically agrees with Govindar^a ; and
other instances, e.g. the remarks on Manu I, 52, may be
added. There are also some cases (see e.g. the explanation
of dfimbha, Manu V, 91) where the Ka^mir commentary
agrees with curious explanations given by Nandana. The
text also agrees occasionally with peculiar readings adopted
by Nandana or by Naraya;/a and Nandana 2 . But I should
consider it hazardous to draw from these instances any
conclusions regarding the sources of the 7 "ippa;*a. The
Ka^mir MS., which has been very carefully written and
corrected, is mutilated at the end, about one-third of each
of the last dozen leaves being torn off. The loss falls on
Manu XI, 218-XII, 126.

The above remarks on the materials which I had at my
disposal show that, in spite of their undeniable importance,
they were insufficient for a radical change in the treatment
of Manu’s text. As the recension, given by Kullftka, was
the only one accessible in its entirety and in tolerably trust¬
worthy copies, I could not do anything else than take that
for the basis of my translation. Practical reasons, too, espe¬
cially the consideration that the Indian public has been accus¬
tomed to Kulltika’s text, and that the numerous references
in the translations of Hindu law-books point to the Manu of
Kulffika, made the adoption of this principle highly desir¬
able. I have, therefore, retained every verse which Kullftka
explains, though the weight of the authorities might be
against its genuineness, and I have refrained from receiving
into the text any verse which he omits. In cases of the
former kind the names of the dissenting commentators have
been given in the notes, where also translations of the best
accredited and more important additional verses, given by
other commentators, will be found 3 . I have, moreover,

1 Tagore Lectures, p. n.

a See e.g. notes on Manu I, 2; III, 59, 73, 195.

3 I may add that I have paid no attention to those verses which the medieval
Nibandhas on law quote as Manu’s, but which are not traceable in the recension
approved of by the commentators. These verses are in my opinion all spurious.
In most cases we have simply to deal with misquotations caused by the careless-

INTRODUCTION.

cxxxvi 1

adhered to Kullfika’s order of the verses, except in some
cases where he is evidently in the wrong, and the transposi¬
tion causes no great inconvenience. On the other hand,
I have tried to remove the numerous palpable blunders in
the readings of the editions, which are mostly due,-not to
Kullfika himself, but to the editors of his text. The notes
show what has been changed, and on whose authority it has
been done. I have, finally, added a selection of the more
important various readings given in the other commentaries.

With respect to the translation, my proceeding has been
somewhat different. Though I should have liked to follow
in the text Kullftka’s commentary alone, and to give the
renderings of the other commentators in the notes, I found
that to be impracticable. The bulk of my volume would
have become enormous, and in very many passages I should
have been compelled to declare the rendering placed in the
text to be utterly erroneous. In order to escape these
difficulties I have generally, except in very doubtful
passages, translated in accordance with that exposition
which seemed to me most reasonable, and have placed
some of the other particularly noteworthy explanations in
the notes. In a certain number of verses where the real
meaning of the text is very doubtful, I have not gone
beyond a literal rendering of Manu’s words, which, like the
original, may be interpreted in different ways. In such
cases the notes exhibit all the various interpretations
found in the commentaries. In a very small number of
verses the explanations of the commentators have been set
aside altogether for reasons duly stated in the notes. The
length of my notes varies very much, according to the
interest or difficulty of the subject treated in the text.
Thus the summary of the opinions of the commentators
on the practically important titles of the Hindu law, Manu
IX, 1-319, is as complete as the state of the MSS. allowed
me to make it. Almost all the explanations of the difficult
philosophical portions of chapters I and XII have likewise

ness of the Nibandhak&ras, who are as little to be depended upon for accuracy
as Indian writers on other scientific subjects or as the European medieval writers
on classical philology. They quoted mostly, if not invariably, from memory.

l 2 5l k

CXXXV111

LAWS OF MANU.

been given. But the extracts from the commentaries
on the easier sections referring to the duties of students,
householders, Snatakas, and so forth, have been made very
short, as for the right understanding of the greater part of
their verses little more is wanted than the parallel passages
of the other ancient Smrztis. Among the latter, those
translated in vols. ii, vii, and xiv of this scries have been
quoted everywhere. If Narada has been excluded, the
reason is that the new translation, which Professor Jolly
will soon publish according to recently discovered materials,
would have made the references useless. The quotations
from Manu, which occur in the translated Nibandhas on
Hindu law, have been collected, for the convenience of
practical lawyers, in the Appendix. As regards the rela¬
tion of my version to those of earlier translators, it will be
evident to everybody how much I am indebted to Sir
William Jones’ great work, which, in spite of the progress
made by Sanskrit philology during the last hundred years,
still possesses a very high value. I have also to acknowledge
my obligation to the German translation of chapter VIII
and of vv. T-102 of chapter IX by Professor Jolly, which
is based on the materials used by myself. If no reference
has been made to the translation lately published by
Drs. Burnell and Hopkins, the reason is that the printing
of mine was complete some time before its appearance.

In conclusion, I must express my thanks to several col¬
leagues, especially to Professors Jolly and Kiclhorn, for
assistance rendered in various ways, as well as to Dr. R.
Rost, Chief Librarian at the India Office; to K. M. Chat-
field, Esq., Director of Public Instruction, Bombay; to the
Director of the Biblioth^que Nationale of France; and to
Divan Bahadur Raghun&th Rao of Mylapur, Madras, for
liberal loans of MSS.

LAWS OF MANU.

LAWS OF MANU.

Chapter I.

1. Tiie great sages approached Manu, who was
seated with a collected mind, and, having duly
worshipped him, spoke as follows :

2. ‘ Deign, divine one, to declare to us precisely
and in due order the sacred laws of each of the (four
chief) castes (varwa) and of the intermediate ones.

3. ‘For thou, O Lord, alone knowest the purport,
(i. e.) the rites, and the knowledge of the soul,
(taught) in this whole ordinance of the Self-existent
(Svayambhu), which is unknowable and unfathom¬
able.’

1. i. Kull. thinks that pratipfi^ya, ‘ having worshipped,’ may also
mean ‘ after mutual salutations/ and he connects, against the opinion
of the other commentators,‘duly’ with ‘spoke/ Gov., Nar., Ragh.,
and K., as well as various MSS. (Loiseleur I, p. 313 ; Bikaner Cat.
p. 419), begin the Sawhita with the following verse, omitted by
Medh., Kull., and Nand.: ‘ Having adored the self-existent Brahman,
possessing immeasurable power, I will declare the various eternal
laws which Manu promulgated/

2. After this verse Nand. inserts four lines, the first and last of
which are also found in K.: (a) * The origin of the whole multi¬
tude of created beings, of those born from the womb, of those
born from eggs, of those produced from exudations and from ger¬
minating seeds, and their destruction (b) ‘ The settled rule of all
customs and rites deign to describe at large, according to their
times and fitness/

3. ‘The ordinance of the Self-existent/ i.e. ‘the Veda’ (Kull.,
Ndr., and Ragh.), or ‘ the Veda or the prescriptive rules (vidhi)

[25] B

2

LAWS OF MANU.

I, 4 .

4. He, whose power is measureless, being thus
‘ asked by the high-minded great sages, duly honoured

them, and answered, ‘ Listen !’

5. This (universe) existed in the shape of Dark¬
ness, unperceived, destitute of distinctive marks,
unattainable by reasoning, unknowable, wholly im¬
mersed, as it were, in deep sleep.

contained in it’ (Medh.), or 4 the institutes’ (Gov.). A&ntya, 4 un¬
knowable/ i. e. 4 the extent of which is unknowable’ (Kull. and
Ragh.), or 4 unknow able on account of its depth’ (Gov.), or 4 the
meaning of which cannot be known by reasoning’ (Nar.), or 4 not
perceptible by the senses’ (Medh.), or 4 difficult to understand'
(Nand.). Aprameya, 4 unfathomable/ i.e. 4 not to be understood
without the help of the Mimawsa and other methods of reasoning*
(Kull.), or 4 unfathomable on account of its extent’ (Gov., Nand.),
or 4 unfathomable on account of its extent, or not directly know-
able but to be inferred as the foundation of the Smrzti’ (Medh.),
or 4 difficult to understand’ (Ragh.). Kull. and Ragh. explain karya-
tattvartha by 4 the purport, i.e. the rites, and the nature of the soul;’
Medh., Gov., and Nand. by 4 the true purport, i.e. the rites.’ Nand.
takes sarvasya, 4 whole/ as depending on 4 ordinance,' and in the
sense of 4 prescribed for all created beings.’

In the commentary on verse 11 Medh. gives still another explana¬
tion of this verse, according to which it has to be translated as
follows: 4 For thou, O Lord, alone knowest the nature and the object
of the products employed in the creation of this universe, which is
unthinkable on account of its greatness, and unknowable/ This
version belongs to ‘other’ commentators, who explain Manu’s whole
account of the creation purely on Sawkhya principles.

5. The account of the creation given in verses 5-13 bears, as
Dr.Muir remarks(SanskritTexts, IV, p. 26), some resemblance to that
contained in some passages of the -Satapatha-brahma/za, especially
XI, 1, 6, 1 seqq., and is probably founded on some Vedic work,

4 with an intermixture of more modern doctrines.’ In explanation
of the wording of verse 5, Medh. and Kull. point to passages like Rv.
X, 129, 3, and Taittiriya-brahmazza II, 8, 9, 4. S&yazza, too, quotes
the verse in his commentary on the latter passage.

The commentators Medh. and Gov. explain the fact that Manu,
being asked to expound the law, gives an account of the creation,

THE CREATION.

3

I, 6.

6 . Then the divine Self-existent (Svayambhft,.
himself) indiscernible, (but) making (all) this, the
great elements and the rest, discernible, appeared
with irresistible (creative) power, dispelling the
darkness.

by the supposition that it is intended to show what a great scope
the work has, and how necessary its study is, as the production of
the various created beings depends on merit and demerit. KulL,
on the other hand, tries to prove that the account of the creation,
which belongs to the knowledge of the supreme soul, is part of the
sacred law, and hence properly finds its place here. All the com¬
mentators, with the exception of Ragh., explain tama^, ‘ darkness/
by mfilaprakr/ti//, ‘the root-evolvent 1 of the Samkhya philosophy,
and tamobhfitam, ‘ in the shape of darkness,’ by 4 absorbed in the
root-evolvent.’ Ragh., who throughout explains Manu’s sayings in
the sense of the Vedanta school, takes it for an equivalent of
avidya, 1 ignorance/ The explanation of the four adjectives, which
express in different terms the impossibility of knowing the mfila-
prak/Yti, differs very much in the six commentaries. The most
reasonable appears to be Kulluka’s view, who assumes that the four
words refer to the impossibility of attaining a knowledge of the
prakrfti by the three means mentioned below, XII, 105, and ‘by
reasoning’ (tarka). He paraphrases apra^ata, ‘unperceived/ by
‘imperceptible by the senses;’ alakshawa, ‘destitute of marks/
by ‘ uninferrible;’ avi^meya, ‘ unknowable/ by ‘ undefinable by words
or authoritative statement/

6. The above translation follows Gov., Nar., and Kull. The other
three commentators take mahabhutadivmtau^d// as a relative com¬
pound. On this supposition the translation would run as follows :
‘ Then the divine Self-existent, (himself) undiscernible, (but) making
this (universe) discernible, appeared,— he whose (creative) power
works in the great elements and the rest, and who dispels the
darkness/

‘ Then/ i. e. at the end of the period of destruction. Avyakta^,
‘(himself) undiscernible/ i. e. ‘not to be known except by Yogins*
(Medh.), or ‘ not perceptible by the external senses’ (Gov., Kull.,
Ndr.), or ‘ not to be known except through the texts of the Upani-
shads*(Rdgh.), or ‘difficult to know'(Nand.). Medh. would prefer to
read avyaktam, ‘this indiscernible (universe)/ ‘The great elements
and the rest/ i.e. ‘the other principles, the great one and so forth'

B 2

4

LAWS OF MANU.

M-

7. He who can be perceived by the internal organ
(alone), who is subtile, indiscernible, and eternal,
who contains all created beings and is inconceivable,
shone forth of his own (will).

(Medh., Gov., Ndr., KuII., Nand.), or ‘ egoism’ (Ragh.). ‘Appeared,’
i.e. ‘ assumed a body of his own free will, not in consequence of
His karman, his acts in a former existence 1 (Medh., Gov., Kull.,
Nand.), or ‘ became discernible' (vyakta), (Nar.), or ‘became ready
to create' (karyonmukha), (Ragh.). Gov. explains vn'ttau^a^,
‘ with irresistible power,’ by ‘ who obtained power’ (praptazrc bala m
yena). Kull. explains tamonuda/z, ‘ dispelling the darkness (i. e. of
destruction)/by ‘giving an impulse to the root-evolvent/ and Ragh.
takes it in a similar way.

The commentators whose opinion Medh. adduces under verse 11,
explained this verse also as a description of the self-evolution which
the praknti performs according to the Sazzzkhyas. They took sva-
yambhfi^, ‘ the self-existent/ in the sense of ‘ which modifies itself of
its own accord bhagavan/divine/ in the sense of‘which is power¬
ful enough to perform its business’ (svavyapara uvara/z). The other
words presented, of course, no great difficulties.

7. ‘ By the two pronouns yo 'sau, “ he who,” he indicates the
supreme soul, known in the whole world, in the Vedas, Pura/zas,
Itihasas, and so forth’ (Kull. in accordance with Medh.). The latter
proposes, besides the explanation of atindriyagrahya/z, ‘ who can be
perceived by the internal organ (or the mind alone)/ which Gov.,
Kull., and Nand. adopt, another one, ‘ who, being beyond the cog¬
nisance of the senses, can be perceived by Yoga-knowledge alone.’
Nar. and Ragh., too, differ from the interpretation given above.
‘Subtile/ i.e. ‘who is beyond all distinctions, such as small and
great’ (Medh.), or ‘who is unperceivable by the external senses’
(Kull.), or ‘ who is perceivable by subtile understanding only’ (Gov.),
or ‘who is without limbs or parts’ (Ragh.). Nand. points to the
common epithet of the supreme soul, ‘ smaller than small’ (KaM.
Up. II, 20; Bhagavadgita VIII, 9). Avyakta^, ‘indiscernible/ is
taken by Kull. to mean ‘ destitute of limbs or parts.’ Sarvabhuta-
maya/z, ‘who contains all created beings/ means, according to
Medh., either ‘ that he conceives the idea of creating all beings,' or
‘ that, in accordance with the Advaita Ved&nta, all beings are illusory
modifications of him/ The latter view seems to be the one adopted
by all the other commentators. ‘ Shone forth/ i.e. either ‘ assumed

THE CREATION.

5

I, 10.

8. He, desiring to produce beings of many kinds
from his own body, first with a thought created the*
waters, and placed his seed in them.

9. That (seed) became a golden egg, in brilliancy
equal to the sun ; in that (egg) he himself was born
as Brahman, the progenitor of the whole world.

10. The waters are called ndr 46 , (for) the waters
are, indeed, the offspring of N ara; as they were his
first residence (ayana), he thence is named N&ra-
ya«a.

a visible body ’ or ‘ was self-luminous’ (Medh.), ‘ assumed a body’
(Gov.), ‘appeared in the form of the evolutes, the great one, and
so forth' (Kull.), ‘became discernible' (Nand.).

8. Besides the passages quoted under verse 5, compare also the
Paura/fik story of the mundane egg, Wilson, Vish7/u-pura«a I,
pp. 39-40 (ed. Hall). ‘He' is according to Medh. and Ragh. ‘Hira-
wyagarbha,' according to the other commentators, ‘the supreme
soul.' Medh. refers to Rig-veda X, 121, 1. According to Medh.
(verse n) those who understood the whole passage to refer to the
unintelligent prakr/ti, explained abhidhyaya, ‘ with a thought,' to
mean ‘ independently of all external action, just as a man performs
an act merely by a thought.’ They also asserted that the waters
were produced as the first element only, but noL before the great
one and the other principles. Kull., on the other hand, sees in the
expressions, used in this verse, the proof that Manu was an
adherent of the non-dualistic Vedanta.

9. Medh., Kull., and Raghava take the epithet ‘golden’ figura¬
tively, and consider it to be intended to convey the idea of purity or,
as Ragh. also proposes, of brilliancy. Instead of ‘ he himself was
born as Brahman (masc.)/ the translation may also be ‘ Brahmd
himself was born.’ Medh. gives both explanations. The other
commentators adopt that given in the text. The being produced
is, according to all except Ragh., Hirawyagarbha. Ragh., as a
strict Vedantin, thinks that it is Vira/. All the commentators
point out that pitamaha, ‘ the progenitor,' lit. the grandfather, is
a common name of Brahman (masc.).

10. This punning explanation of Brahman’s name Narayawa
occurs in most of the Purawas, see Wilson, Vishmi-pur£taa I, p. 56
(ed. Hall). Both Medh. and Gov. seem to have read £po nara//,

6

LAWS OF MANU.

I, ii.

11. From that (first) cause, which is indiscernible,
•eternal, and both real and unreal, was produced that
male (Purusha), who is famed in this world (under
the appellation of) Brahman.

12. The divine one resided in that egg during
a whole year, then he himself by his thought (alone)
divided it into two halves;

13. And out of those two halves he formed
heaven and earth, between them the middle sphere,
the eight points of the horizon, and the eternal
abode of the waters.

14. From himself (dtmana Ji) he also drew forth
the mind, which is both real and unreal, likewise
from the mind egoism, which possesses the function
of self-consciousness (and is) lordly ;

15. Moreover, the great one, the soul, and all

‘ the waters are called nar&A.’ Nara is another name of the supreme
soul.

It. All our commentators except Rftgh., whose explanation is
wide off the mark, understand by the * (First) cause * the supreme
soul. Sadasadatmaka, ‘ who is both real and unreal/ means ac¬
cording to JVTedh., Gov., and Kull. ‘ who is existent or real, because
he can be known through the Veda and Vedanta, but non-existent
or unreal, as it were, because he cannot be perceived by the senses/
Nand/s explanation, ‘who is both the real, the efficient cause and the
unreal the products, matter and the rest/ seems, however, preferable.
He says, sad iti kdrawam asad iti prakr/tyadi karyam. Regarding
the ancient Vedic term Purusha, 4 the male * or ‘ spirit/ see Muir,
Sanskrit Texts, V, pp. 367-377.

12. Kull. explains the term 4 a year ’ by ‘ a year of Brahman/ But
Medh. and Gov., who say that a human year is meant, are in
accordance with *Satapatha-br&hma//a XI, 1, 6, 2.

13. The number ‘ eight * is obtained by adding to the four cardinal
points, ‘ the intermediate ones/ north-east, south-east, &c.

14-15. The commentators offer two entirely different explana¬
tions of these two difficult verses. According to Medh,, Gov.,
Kull., and Ragh. they describe the production of the Tattvas, the

THE CREATION.

7

(products) affected by the three qualities, and, in
their order, the five organs which perceive the*
objects of sensation.

principles of the Sa/rckhya system, the first three of which, Mahat,
Aha///k&ra, and Manas, have been placed in an inverted order.
Though Manu clearly states (verse 14) that the creator drew the
Manas (which they take to mean the internal organ) from the
dtman (i. e. according to Mcdh. and Gov. ‘from the Pradhana/
which is his own shape [tatpradhanad atmana/* svasvarfipat,
Medh.], or according to Gov., Kull., and Ragh. 1 from the Paramat-
man/ the supreme soul, or according to another explanation of
Ragh. ‘from himself’ [svasmat | ^ivasya bhogarthaw va]), that he
drew the Ahawkara, egoism, from the Manas, and that he after¬
wards created the mahantam atmanam, ‘the great one, the soul;'

(i. e. according to Medh. the Mahat which is called the soul
because like the soul it is found in all bodies, or according to Kull.
the Mahat which is called the soul because it is produced from
the soul or is useful to the soul), yet they think that it must be
understood that the Mahat was produced first, from it the
Ahawkara, and from the latter the Manas. The next term sarva//i
triguwani, ‘ all the products modified by the three qualities/ they
refer to all products or evolutes named and to be named hereafter.
They are thus obliged to disregard the fa, ‘ and/ at the end of
verse 15 a, and Ragh. states distinctly that fa indicates there a
stress to be laid on the preceding word (fakaro 'vadhara/zartha/*).
Finally, Gov., Kull., and Ragh. are of opinion that the third fa,
‘and/ at the end of verse 15 b indicates that the organs of action
and the subtile elements have to be added in accordance with
the doctrine of the Sawkhya, while Medh. holds that the subtile
elements alone have to be understood.

Nand. and, to judge from the fragments of his commentary,
Nar. also give a far different explanation. According to them the
first created Manas is another name for the principle usually called
Mahat. In proof of this assertion Nand. adduces a passage from
a Purawa, which Medh. quotes on verse 74, where Manas is given
as a synonym of Mahat (see also Cowell, Sarvadanrana-sawgraha,
p. 222, note 1). They farther take mahantam dtmanam,‘the
great one, the soul/ to denote the Manas or internal organ
([mahantam] fa mano nama tattvam atmanam atmano gavasyd-
vafafadakatvad vyapadeja^, Ragh.). By the expression sarvdm tri-
guwSni Nand. seems to understand the subtile elements (tanmatra),

8

LAWS OF MANU.

I, 1 6 .

16. But, joining minute particles even of those six,
' which possess measureless power, with particles of
himself, he created all beings.

and he too believes that the particle Xa at the end of verse 15 b
shows that the organs of action have to be understood. The object
of the two verses is, according to Nand., not to give an account of
the actual order of creation, but to show that the material cause
of all created beings consists of portions of the creator’s body, of
the Mahat, Aha;/zkara, the Manas, the Tanmatras, and the organs
of sensation and action which belong to him; (anena jlokadva-
yenaitad ukta m bhavati | atmiyanam mahadahawkaramanastan-
matra£? 7 anakarmendriya;/am a?nsah sarvabhfitopadanam iti n) It
would seem that Nand. and Nar/s view, as regards the explana¬
tion of Manas (verse 14), is correct, but it may be doubted
whether, with respect to the terms in verse 15, mahan atma
and sarvam trigu//ani, they have been equally lucky. The
explanation of the first four commentators seems altogether
inadmissible. In conclusion, it may be stated that Nand. gives
also the most acceptable explanation of the epithet of the Manas,
sadasadatmakam, which, he says, means 4 partaking of the nature
of an evolvent and of an evolute’ (prakntivikrztyatmakam), and of
irvaram, * lordly,’ ‘ which causes all actions to be done ’ (sarva-
karmapravartakam).

16. The translation follows Nand., Ragh., and Vi^manabhikshu
(Sawkhyasara, p. 19, ed. Hall), who agree that the verse derives
the subtile or rudimentary bodies of individual beings from the
subtile body of the creator, and the individual souls from his soul.
They explain atmamatrdsu by apariXXXinnasyaikasyatmana up&-
dhivaj&d avayavavatpratiyamaneshu atmasu (Ragh.), sva^ivaz^eshu
(Nand.), and sva/waXetaneshu (Vfcfi.). But they differ with respect
to the meaning of ‘ the particles of those six/ ‘ Those six ’ are,
according to Ragh. and Vi^w., ‘the six senses/ i.e. the five organs
of sensation and the mind (which by implication indicate the whole
subtile body, Vi^> 7 .) ; according to Nand., the six classes of tattvas,
which he believes to be mentioned in the preceding two verses, viz.
(1) the great one, (2) egoism, (3) mind, (4) the subtile or rudi¬
mentary elements, (5, 6) the organs of sensation and action.

Mcdh., Gov., and Kull., on the other hand, take the verse as
follows: ‘Joining minute particles of those six (i.e. of egoism and of
the five subtile elements) which possess immeasurable power to par¬
ticles of the same (i.e, of evolutes from the same six [Gov., Kull.],
i.e. of the gross elements produced from theTanm^tras and the organs

1 , 17 .

THE CREATION.

9

17. Because those six (kinds of) minute particles,
which form the (creators) frame, enter (£-m) these
(creatures), therefore the wise call his frame ^arira,
(the body.)

produced from egoism [Medh.]), he framed all beings.* It would
seem that Nand.'s explanation comes nearest to the truth, though,
as stated above, his manner of showing that six principles or classes
of principles are mentioned in the preceding verses is not altogether
satisfactory. But, at all events, he has seen that the expression 4 those
six’must refer to the enumeration in the preceding two verses.

17. The translation again follows Nand., with whom Nar. seems
to have agreed. lie says, 4 Because six (kinds of) particles of his
frame, i.e. the six before-mentioned portions of the body of Brah¬
man, the Mahat, and the rest, enter, i.e. pervade these—all the
creatures mentioned in the preceding verse arc referred to—on
account of that entering (^rayawat), they call the body of that, i.e.
of Brahman, jarira. The meaning is as follows: The body of
Hirawyagarbha is called jarira, because it enters (jrayati) all beings
by means of its portions, being (their) material cause; but it is not
destroyed (jiryate) like a common body.’ Nand. thinks, therefore,
that the punning explanation of the word jarira from sha</ a^ri, or
sri, is given in order to show that the other etymology, which derives
it from sri , 4 to destroy/ is not applicable to the body of Brahman.

Medh.. Gov., and Kull. take the verse very differently. They agree
in supposing that the body is called jarira, because the six elements
mentioned enter into or produce the gross elements and the organs.
Medh. reads tanimani for tasyemani, and according to his interpre¬
tation the translation would be, 4 Because the six (kinds of) minute
particles producing the body enter into (being their cause) or produce
these (i.e. because egoism, the before*mentioned organs and the sub¬
tile elements enter the gross elements which wdl be mentioned here¬
after), therefore the wise call the body, which is the visible shape of that
(Pradh&na), .rarira/ Kull., who reads tasya, differs from this version
only therein that he refers tasya to Brahman. Ragh. finally gives,
in accordance with his explanation of 4 those six/ the following ver¬
sion, ‘Because the six (kinds of) fine particles constituting the
subtile frame of that (Hira#yagarbha, i.e. the mind and the rest)
enter these (gross bodies as their place of enjoyment), therefore
the wise call the visible frame of that (i. e. of the individual soul) the
jarira.’ He agrees, therefore, with Medh., Gov., and Kull. so far that
he, too, refers the verse to the gross bodies.

IO

LAWS OF MANU.

I, 18.

18 . That the great elements enter, together with
their functions and the mind, through its minute
parts the framer of all beings, the imperishable one.

18. The commentators give five different versions of this verse:

(1) Medh.,‘That (i.e. the Pradhana is) the producer of all beings
and imperishable, because these, (viz.) the gross elements with their
functions (and before them) the mind with its minute particles (i.e.
the subtile elements, intelligence, egoism, and the organs), enter it.*

(2) Gov. and Kull., ‘From that (i.e. the Brahman, which has the
form of the subtile elements and of egoism) are produced the gross
elements, together with their functions and the mind, which is the
producer of all beings through its minute (i.e. imperceptible) portions
(i.e. its products, good and bad thoughts, pleasure and pain, and so
forth, the world being produced by the good and evil actions origi¬
nating in the mind) and imperishable.' (3) Ragh.,‘That (i.e. the
gross body) the gross elements enter (as producers [or produce])
and the mind, which is the producer of all beings and imperishable,
together with the actions (i.e. merit and so forth) and with the
(organs which are chiefly) limbs.' (4) Nand., ‘ (As) that (body of
Hiraz/yagarbha), though through its small portions it produces all
beings, yet is imperishable, (even thus) the great beings (egoism,
mind, the triguwas, the organs of sensation and action) and the
mind (i.e. the principle, called the great one), with the actions (i.e.
the individual souls) enter it.' (5) Nar.'s explanation is mutilated,
but seems to have been as follows, ‘That (i.e. the subtile body)
the gross elements (which produce the gross body) enter, together
with the karman (i.e merit and demerit) and the mind, (which is)
the producer of all beings and imperishable, together with (its
functions, knowledge, desire, hatred, &c., which are, as it were, its)
minute portions.'

It seems to me that not one of the above explanations can be
accepted in its entirety. I agree with Nar. in thinking that the
word ‘that' refers to the subtile body and that the verse describes
the origin of the gross body as the result of the union of the
great, i.e. the gross elements and of the manas with the subtile
body. If the mahanti bhutani are the gross elements, it will, how¬
ever, be necessary to understand by karmabhi^, ‘ their functions,'
which, as Medh. and Kull. mention, are ‘ the function of supporting
for the earth, of ripening or cooking for fire and so forth.' By
manas I understand here the internal organ which forms the con-

THE CREATION.

II

T, 20.

19. But from minute body (-framing) particles of
these seven very powerful Purushas springs this
(world), the perishable from the imperishable.

20. Among them each succeeding (element) ac¬
quires the quality of the preceding one, and whatever
place (in the sequence) each of them occupies, even
so many qualities it is declared to possess.

necting link between the gross senses or the gross body and the
individual soul, and thus may be said to frame or fashion all beings.
As its nature is atomic, it is necessary to connect avayavai// sftksh-
mai^ with sarvabhfttakr/'t and to take avayava either in the manner
proposed by Kull., or to assume that the several mind-atoms are
referred to, which belong each to a different individual.

19. With respect to the explanation of the expression ‘the
seven Purushas/ the commentators differ as much as regarding
‘ the six’ in ver. 16. Medh., Gov., and Kull. add ‘ the great one ’ or
the Mahat to their previous enumeration, ‘egoism and the five
subtile elements/ while Nar. and Nand. add the ‘portions of the
Atman’ (ver. 16) to those elements which they understand to be com¬
prised by ‘ the six.’ That is, probably, the meaning of Ragh. also,
who says, purushawa;/* manaadipurushantanam saptanam, ‘ of the
Purushas, i. e. of those seven, the first of which is the mind, and the
last of which is the Purusha.’ All the commentators agree that the
term Purusha, ‘male or spirit/ is applied to the principles in a
metaphorical sense, but they give various reasons for the fact,

‘ because they are for the sake of the soul/ purusha (Medh.), or
‘ because they were produced by the Purusha, the Atman’ (Kull.).
Nar. understands ‘and’ with avyay&t and says, ‘and from the im¬
perishable, i.e. from Prakrui/ ‘The perishable’ designates, of
course, ‘the gross bodies/

20. This verse expresses the doctrine that the first element
ether (dk&ja) possesses one quality, sound, alone; the next, wind
two, sound and tangibility; the third, fire or light, three and so forth;
see also Sawkhyasara, p. 18. Nand. places ver. 27 before this verse,
and asserts that ‘ if some read the latter seven verses further on,
that is only due to an error of the copyists/ Though vers. 20 and
27 are without any connexion with what precedes and follows, I do
not think it advisable to adopt Nand/s proposal, which I fear is
based on nothing but a clever guess, against the authority of all
the other commentators. If it were permissible to transpose the

12

LAWS OF MANU.

I, 21 .

21. But in the beginning he assigned their several
names, actions, and conditions to all (created beings),
even according to the words of the Veda.

22. He, the Lord, also created the class of the
gods, who are endowed with life, and whose nature
is action; and the subtile class of the Sadhyas, and
the eternal sacrifice.

23. But from fire, wind, and the sun he drew forth
the threefold eternal Veda, called Rik, Ya^ms, and
Saman, for the due performance of the sacrifice.

24. Time and the divisions of time, the lunar
mansions and the planets, the rivers, the oceans,
the mountains, plains, and uneven ground,

25. Austerity, speech, pleasure, desire, and anger,
this whole creation he likewise produced, as he
desired to call these beings into existence.

verses, I would propose to insert here ver. 27 and to place this verse
(20) after ver. 78.

22. The commentators differ very much regarding the explana¬
tion of this verse. Medh. proposes, 4 And the Lord created (for
the sake) of men who are intent on performing sacrificial rites (the
multitude) of the gods, the subtile class of the Sadhyas and the
eternal sacrifice/ 4 Others’ mentioned by him, Gov. and Kull., insert
another ‘and* between karmatmanam and pramn&m, and explain,
4 The Lord created the multitude of the gods whose nature is the
sacrifice and of those endowed with life/ By the 4 gods whose
nature is the sacrifice’ they understand the inanimate implements,
used at sacrifices, but frequently addressed in the Veda as divine
beings, while the gods endowed with life are said to be Indra, and
so forth. R&gh., with whom Nar. seems to have agreed, says,
‘And the Lord created among beings endowed with life the to us
invisible multitude of the gods, who by the results of their actions
have obtained their divine station, or who subsist on offerings/
None of these speculations is of much use. But it may be that
karman means 4 sacrificial rites,’ and karmatman&m may be trans¬
lated by 4 whose nature is the sacrifice/ or 4 whose divinity depends
on the performance of sacrifices/ Regarding the Sadhyas, see
Wilson, Vish»u-purd«a II, p. 22 (ed. Hall).

THE CREATION.

13

I. 31*

26. Moreover, in order to distinguish actions, he
separated merit from demerit, and he caused the
creatures to be affected by the pairs (of opposites),
such as pain and pleasure.

27. But with the minute perishable particles of
the five (elements) which have been mentioned, this
whole (world) is framed in due order.

28. But to whatever course of action the Lord
at first appointed each (kind of beings), that alone
it has spontaneously adopted in each succeeding
creation.

29. Whatever he assigned to each at the (first)
creation, noxiousness or harmlessness, gentleness or
ferocity, virtue or sin, truth or falsehood, that clung
(afterwards) spontaneously to it.

30. As at the change of the seasons each season
of its own accord assumes its distinctive marks, even
so corporeal beings (resume in new births) their
(appointed) course of action.

31. But for the sake of the prosperity of the

26. Other pairs of opposites are desire and anger, passionate
attachment and hatred, hunger and thirst, sorrow and delusion,
and so forth (Kull.).

27. ‘The nv'nutc perishable particles of the five (elements)’ are
according to Medh., Gov., and Kull. the subtile or rudimentary ele¬
ments which may be called ‘ perishable,’ because they are changed
to gross elements. Ragh. explains the epithet ‘perishable’ by
adding ‘ because they have been produced.’ The commentators
offer various explanations in order to account for the insertion of
this verse which interrupts the continuity of the text. Medh. thinks
that it is a r£sum< 5 . Gov. and Kull. state that it is meant to remove
the doubt, whether Brahman’s mental creation was effected without
the help of the ‘ principles,’ and Ndr. asserts that it is meant to teach
that atoms are not eternal. Nand., as stated above, note on ver. 20,
places the verse immediately after ver. 19.

31. Ndr. explains lokavivrfddhyartham, ‘ for the sake of the

14

LAWS OF MANU.

1,32-

worlds, he caused the Brdhmawa, the Kshatriya,
' the Vaisya, and the 6itdra to proceed from his
mouth, his arms, his thighs, and his feet.

32. Dividing his own body, the Lord became
half male and half female; with that (female) he
produced Vi rdf.

33. But know me, O most holy among the twice-
born, to be the creator of this whole (world), whom
that male, Virdf, himself produced, having per¬
formed austerities.

34. Then I, desiring to produce created beings,
performed very difficult austerities, and (thereby)
called into existence ten great sages, lords of created
beings,

35. Marini, Atri, Angiras, Pulastya, Pulaha, Kratu,
Pra/6etas, VasishMa, Bhr/gu, and Narada.

36. They created seven other Manus possessing
great brilliancy, gods and classes of gods and great
sages of measureless power,

prosperity of the worlds/ by var/zair lokarakshawasawvardhanartham,
‘ in order to protect the world by means of the castes and to make
it prosperous/ Medh., Gov., and Kull., who interpret the compound
by ‘ in order that (the inhabitants of) the worlds might multiply/
point to the benefits conferred by sacrifices of householders, III,
76. Nand. says with reference to the bearing of the verse, ‘Now
he speaks of the creation of the deities representing the four
castes/ Regarding the origin of the castes,-see Rig-veda X, 90, 12.

32-33. ‘Produced/ i. e. ‘ begat’ (Medh., Kull.), Wilson, Vishmi-
purawa I, p. 104, note 2 (ed. Hall).

34-35. Wilson, Vish;/u-pura«a I, p. 100, note 2 (ed. Hall).

36. ‘Manus/ i.e. ‘creators in the several Manvantaras’ (Medh.,
Gov.,Kull., Ragh.). ‘ Gods/i.e.‘such gods as had not been created
by Brahman’ (verse 22, Medh., Kull.); devanik&yan, ‘ classes of
gods ’ (Nand., Nar.), means according to Medh., Kull., and Ragh.
‘the abodes of the gods* (devasthan&ni). Rdgh. gives also the
meaning ‘ the servants of the gods/

THE CREATION.

15

I, 44.

37. Yakshas (the servants of Kubera, the demons
called) Rdkshasas and Pbci^as, Gandharvas (or
musicians of the gods), Apsarases (the dancers of
the gods), Asuras, (the snake-deities called) Nigas
and Sarpas, (the bird-deities called) Supar«as and
the several classes of the manes,

38. Lightnings, thunderbolts and clouds, imperfect
(rohita) and perfect rainbows, falling meteors, super¬
natural noises, comets, and heavenly lights of many
kinds,

39. (Horse-faced) Kinnaras, monkeys, fishes, birds
of many kinds, cattle, deer, men, and carnivorous
beasts with two rows of teeth,

40. Small and large worms and beetles, moths,
lice, flies, bugs, all stinging and biting insects and
the several kinds of immovable things.

41. Thus was this whole (creation), both the im¬
movable and the movable, produced by those high-
minded ones by means of austerities and at my
command, (each being) according to (the results of)
its actions.

42. But whatever act is stated (to belong) to (each
of) those creatures here below, that I will truly
declare to you, as well as their order in respect to
birth.

43. Cattle, deer, carnivorous beasts with two
rows of teeth, R&kshasas, Pii'a/C’as, and men are
born from the womb.

44. From eggs are born birds, snakes, crocodiles,

37. The several classes of manes are enumerated below, III,
194-199.

38. Rohita is said to be an imperfect rainbow which appears
to be straight, known according to Gov. by the name fastrotp&ta.

LAWS OF MANU.

b 45 *

16

fishes, tortoises, as well as similar terrestrial and
aquatic (animals).

45. From hot moisture spring stinging and biting
insects, lice, flies, bugs, and all other (creatures) of
that kind which are produced by heat.

46. All plants, propagated by seed or by slips,
grow from shoots; annual plants (are those) which,
bearing many flowers and fruits, perish after the
ripening of their fruit;

47. (Those trees) which bear fruit without flowers
are called vanaspati (lords of the forest); but those
which bear both flowers and fruit are called vr/ksha.

48. But the various plants with many stalks,
growing from one or several roots, the different
kinds of grasses, the climbing plants and the creepers
spring all from seed or from slips.

49. These (plants) which are surrounded by multi¬
form Darkness, the result of their acts (in former
existences), possess internal consciousness and expe¬
rience pleasure and pain.

50. The (various) conditions in this always terrible
and constantly changing circle of births and deaths
to which created beings are subject, are stated to

46. I read, with Medh., Gov., Nand., and Kull., tarava// instead
of the sth&var&A of the editions, and translate it, as required by the
context, by ‘ plants.’

47. My translation of ubhayata//, ‘both,’ is based on Gov.'s com¬
ment ‘ vr/ksha/i puna/i pushpaphalcnobhayen&pi yukta bhavanti,’
with which Nar. and Nand. agree. The latter, however, proposes
to read ‘ ubhayatha.’

49. ‘ Multiform Darkness,’ see below, XII, 42.

50. Bhftta, ‘ created beings,’ means according to Gov. and Kull.
kshetra^fia, ‘embodied souls.' According to Gov. and Nar. nityam,
‘ always,’must be construed with ghore, ‘ terrible.’ Nar., however,
considers nitye, ‘in this eternal,’ to be a better reading, which Nand.
also gives.

55^

THE CREATION.

17

begin with (that of) Brahman, and to end with (that
of) these (just mentioned immovable creatures).

51. When he whose power is incomprehensible,
had thus produced the universe and me, he dis¬
appeared in himself, repeatedly suppressing one
period by means of the other.

52. When that divine one wakes, then this world
stirs ; when he slumbers tranquilly, then the universe
sinks to sleep.

53. But when he reposes in calm sleep, the cor¬
poreal beings whose nature is action, desist from
their actions and mind becomes inert.

54. When they are absorbed all at once in that
great soul, then he who is the soul of all beings
sweetly slumbers, free from all care and occupation.

55. When this (soul) has entered darkness, it
remains for a long time united with the organs (of

51. 4 Disappeared in himself,’ i.e. 4 he divested himself of the body
which he had assumed at his own will' (Medh., Gov., Kull.).
‘One period by means of the other,’i.e. 4 the period of creation by
means of the period of destruction’ (Medh., Gov., Kull.).

52. Instead of the figurative nimilati, 4 closes the eyes, sinks to
sleep,' Gov. and K., read praliyate, 4 is absorbed.'

53. *Sariri«ah, ‘corporeal beings,' means according to Medh.,
Gov., and Kull. ‘embodied souls.' Karmatmana^, ‘whose nature
is action,’ i.e. who are endowed with actions (Nand., Nar.), means
according to Medh., Gov., and Kull. 4 who in consequence of their
actions became incorporate.'

54. According to Gov. and Kull., this verse describes the maha-
pralaya, the great or total destruction at the end of a kalpa, while
the preceding referred to the antar&lapralaya, the intermediate or
incomplete destruction. Medh. explains 4 he who is the soul of all
beings' by the Sawkhya term Pradhana, 4 the chief cause or Nature/
while Gov. and Kull. refer this expression as well as mahdtman 4 to
the supreme soul or supreme lord ’ of the Vedanta.

55-56* The commentators offer three different explanations of
these two verses. Medh., Gov., and Kull., whom the translation

[25] . C

18 LAWS OF MANU. 1,56.

sensation), but performs not its functions; it then
leaves the corporeal frame.

56. When, being clothed with minute particles
(only), it enters into vegetable or animal seed, it
then assumes, united (with the fine body), a (new)
corporeal frame.

57. Thus he, the imperishable one, by (alter¬
nately) waking and slumbering, incessantly revivifies
and destroys this whole movable and immovable
(creation).

given above follows, think that ayam, * this (soul)/ refers to the
individual soul, and that the two verses incidentally mention what
happens to it on the death of the individual in which it re¬
sides. First, they say, it enters darkness, i.e. knowledge (£#ana)
ceases, and, though for some time the soul's connection with
the organs continues, it does not perform its functions of
breathing, and so forth. Next it leaves the old body. It then is
enveloped by the elementary body, consisting of the puryash/aka,
the eight constituents, i.e. the rudimentary elements (bhuta) and
organs (indriya), mind (manas), intelligence (buddhi), memory of
past actions (v&sana), merit or demerit (karman), the vital airs
(vayu), and avidya. In this condition it enters the seed of some
plant or the embryo of some animal and then assumes a new gross
body. Nar., on the other hand, considers that the first verse gives
a description of the fate of the individual soul during a swoon
(mtir/^a), and the second alone refers to its migration after death.
Under this supposition verse 56 must be translated as follows:

* Being of atomic size (the soul) enters vegetable or animal seed
and, united (with the rudimental body), leaves its (former) corporeal
frame.' Nand. finally understands by ayam, ‘ this (soul),' the creator
(bhagavan), and thinks that the first verse describes his behaviour
during the time of destruction, while the second refers to a new
creation. He says, ‘When he has entered darkness,' i.e. the root-
evolvent or nature, * and has remained there for a long time,' i.e. as
long as the period of destruction lasts, ‘ then, endowed with organs,
he assumes a visible shape/ i.e. he appears in the shape of the
creation. His note on verse 56, where he reads sa/wsrfsh/au for
sawsr/sh/a^, is too short to make it intelligible how he gets over
the difficulties opposed to his interpretation.

THE CREATION.

19

I, 64.

58. But he having composed these Institutes
(of the sacred law), himself taught them, according
to the rule, to me alone in the beginning; next I
(taught them) to Marini and the other sages.

59. Bhr/gu, here, will fully recite to you these
Institutes; for that sage learned the whole in its
entirety from me.

60. Then that great sage Bhrz'gu, being thus
addressed by Manu, spoke, pleased in his heart, to
all the sages, ‘Listen!’

61. Six other high-minded, very powerful Manus,
who belong to the race of this Manu, the descendant
of the Self-existent (Svayambhft), and who have
severally produced created beings,

62. (Arc) Svaro/'isha, Auttami, Tamasa, Raivata,
Aakshusha, possessing great lustre, and the son of
Vivasvat.

63. These seven very glorious Manus, the first
among whom is Svayambhuva, produced and pro¬
tected this whole movable and immovable (creation),
each during the period (allotted to him).

64. Eighteen nimeshas (twinklings of the eye, are
one kash/ 7 /a), thirty kash//zas one kala, thirty kalas
one muhhrta, and as many (muhftrtas) one day and
night.

58. ‘According to the rule,’ i. e. ‘with the subsidiary ceremonies
enjoined in the Aastra ’ (Kull.), or ‘ with due attention, carefully ’
(Medh., Gov.).

61. ‘Who belong to the race of this Manu Svayambhuva,’ i.e.'who
were born in the same race or family, for they were all immediately
created by Brahman and thus belong to one race ’ (Medh.).

64. As tavataA, ‘ as many,’ stands in the accusative, Medh., Gov.,
and Kull. understand vidyat ‘ one should know to be.’ But Nar.
is probably right in assuming a vibhaktivyatyaya, i. e. that the author
used the accusative because the nominative did not suit the metre.

C 2

20

LAWS OF MANU.

I, 65.

65. The sun divides days and nights, both human
and divine, the night (being intended) for the repose
of created beings and the day for exertion.

66. A month is a day and a night of the manes,
but the division is according to fortnights. The
dark (fortnight) is their day for active exertion, the
bright (fortnight) their night for sleep.

67. A year is a day and a night of the gods; their
division is (as follows): the half year during which
the sun progresses to the north will be the day, that
during which it goes southwards the night.

68. But hear now the brief (description of) the
duration of a night and a day of Brahman and of the
several ages (of the world, yuga) according to their
order.

69. They declare that the Krz'ta age (consists of)
four thousand years (of the gods); the twilight pre¬
ceding it consists of as many hundreds, and the
twilight following it of the same number.

70. In the other three ages with their twilights
preceding and following, the thousands and hundreds
are diminished by one (in each).

71. These twelve thousand (years) which thus
have been just mentioned as the total of four
(human) ages, are called one age of the gods.

72. But know that the sum of one thousand ages
of the gods (makes) one day of Brahman, and that
his night has the same length.

73. Those (only, who) know that the holy day of

Nand., who merely substitutes ‘tavanta/z’ for ‘tavataA,’ seems to
have held the same opinion.

66. Thus the moon regulates time for the manes.

69-71. Wilson, Vish»u-purd«a I, pp. 49-50 (ed. Hall).

73. According to the commentators the word pu»ya, ‘ holy,’is

THE CREATION.

21

h 77 -

Brahman, indeed, ends after (the completion of) one
thousand ages (of the gods) and that his night lasts
as long, (are really) men acquainted with (the length
of) days and nights.

74. At the end of that day and night he who was
asleep, awakes and, after awaking, creates mind,
which is both real and unreal.

75. Mind, impelled by (Brahmans) desire to
create, performs the work of creation by modifying
itself, thence ether is produced; they declare that
sound is the quality of the latter.

76. But from ether, modifying itself, springs the
pure, powerful wind, the vehicle of all perfumes ; that
is held to possess the quality of touch.

77. Next from wind, modifying itself, proceeds
the brilliant light, which illuminates and dispels

used in order to indicate that the knowledge of the duration of
Brahman's day is ‘ meritorious/

74. Two explanations of the second half of the verse are offered
by the commentators. It may mean either that Brahman on
awaking from his sleep first creates the great principle (mahat),
which here, as elsewhere, is called manas, ‘ mind,' or that he
appoints (sn^ali) his own internal organ or mind (manas), which
at an intermediate destruction (avantara or antaralapralaya) remains
in existence, to create the world. Medh. and Kull. give both
explanations, and prefer the former. Gov. gives the second alone,
while Nar. and Nand. adhere to the first. The latter takes manas
as denoting the three principles, the great one, egoism, and mind,
and explains sadasadatmakam, ‘which is both real and unreal/
as in verse 14, by prakr/tivikrftydtmakam, ‘being both an evolvent
and an evolute/

75. ‘Thence/ i.e. ‘from mind changed to egoism/ Nar. (simi¬
larly Kull.), or ‘ from Brahman/

76. As the S&wkhya doctrine (S^wkhyakarikd, ver. 25) makes all
the rudimentary elements proceed from egoism, Medh. takes the
first words of the verse to mean, ‘ But from egoism which modifies
itself, wind springs next after ether/ He, of course, adopts the
same trick of interpretation in the following three verses.

22

LAWS OF MANU.

I, 78.

darkness; that is declared to possess the quality
of colour;

78. And from light, modifying itself, (is produced)
water, possessing the quality of taste, from water
earth which has the quality of smell; such is the
creation in the beginning.

79. The before-mentioned age of the gods, (or)
twelve thousand (of their years), being multiplied by
seventy-one, (constitutes what) is here named the
period of a Manu (Manvantara).

80. The Manvantaras, the creations and destruc¬
tions (of the world, are) numberless; sporting, as it
were, Brahman repeats this again and again.

81. In the Knta age Dharma is four-footed and
entire, and (so is) Truth; nor does any gain accrue to
men by unrighteousness.

82. In the other (three ages), by reason of (unjust)
gains (agama), Dharma is deprived successively of

78. ‘In the beginning,’ i.e, ‘after a total destruction’(roaha-
pralaya), (Kull.); ‘after an intermediate destruction' (Gov., Nar.);
‘before the creation of the mundane egg’ (Nand.).

81. The reason why Dharma, ‘justice or law/ is said to be
^atushpat is explained, as Kull. points out, by Manu VIII, 16. Re¬
garding the ulterior signification of the myth which represents
Dharma as a four-footed animal, the following opinions are ad¬
vanced: 1. The four feet represent the four principal priests
at the sacrifice (Medh.); 2. or the four chief castes (Medh., Nand.);
3. or the four chief means of gaining merit, austerities, knowledge,
sacrifices, and liberality, see below, verse 86 (Medh., Kull., Nar.,
K.); 4. or finally the four kinds of speech, mentioned Rig-veda I,
164, 45 (Medh.). All the commentators agree in stating that
Truth, though comprised in the Dharma, is mentioned specially
in order to show its paramount importance. Nand. reads the last
words nadharmo n&gama^ ka^in, &c., and explains, ‘ Neither any
demerit nor any sacred lore, *Sastra, approached men, i. e. no
Institutes of the law were necessary.*

82. Medh. explains the first half-verse differently, ‘In the other
three ages, Dharma, the sacred law, (which is derived) from the

1 ,8$.

THE CREATION*

23

one foot, and through (the prevalence of) theft,
falsehood, and fraud the merit (gained by men) is •
diminished by one fourth (in each).

83. (Men are) free from disease, accomplish all
their aims, and live four hundred years in the Krita
age, but in the Treta and (in each of) the succeeding
(ages) their life is lessened by one quarter.

84. The life of mortals, mentioned in the Veda,
the desired results of sacrificial rites and the (super¬
natural) power of embodied (spirits) are fruits pro¬
portioned among men according to (the character
of) the age.

85. One set of duties (is prescribed) for men in
the Krita age, different ones in the Treta and in the

sacred lore (agama), i.e. the Veda, is made to withdraw one foot
after the other, one foot in each age, i.e. disappears (gradually)
because the power of men to learn and to remember the sacred
texts diminishes.’ Gov. says, ‘But in the Treta and the other
ages, Dharma, the sacred law, (derived) from the sacred lore
(agama), the Sastra, i.e. the performance of sacrifices and so forth,
is made to withdraw, i.e. is diminished successively by one
quarter in each age, through (the prevalence of) theft, falsehood,
and fraud.’ Nand. finally differs still more, ‘In the other three
ages, i.e. the Treta and the rest, Dharma, (virtue or justice is
determined) by means of the sacred lore (agama),’ the -Sastra, but
this Dharma is lessened by one quarter in each; ‘lessening the
Dharma’ is intended to convey the meaning of‘lessening the
determination of the Dharma.’ The translation follows Kull., Nar.,
and Ragh.

83. In order to reconcile this statement regarding the age of
men in the Kr/ta age with various passages of the Mahabharata
and the Purawas, which attribute to certain heroes and sages lives
of many thousand years, the commentators explain our passage
as meaning that four hundred years were the natural term of
life, which, however, might be lengthened through the performance
of austerities. They further assert that in the passage Kanaka
34, 5 , which names one hundred years as the term of human
existence, the numeral is used in the sense of ‘ many.’

24

LAWS OF MANU.

I, 86.

Dvdpara, and (again) another (set) in the Kali, in
proportion as (those) ages decrease in length.

86. In the Krfta age the chief (virtue) is declared
to be (the performance of) austerities, in the Tretd
(divine) knowledge, in the Dvdpara (the performance
of) sacrifices, in the Kali liberality alone.

87. But in order to protect this universe He, the
most resplendent one, assigned separate (duties and)
occupations to those who sprang from his mouth,
arms, thighs, and feet.

88 . To Brahmawas he assigned teaching and
studying (the Veda), sacrificing for their own benefit
and for others, giving and accepting (of alms).

89. The Kshatriya he commanded to protect the
people, to bestow gifts, to offer sacrifices, to study
(the Veda), and to abstain from attaching himself to
sensual pleasures;

90. The Vai^ya to tend cattle, to bestow gifts, to
offer sacrifices, to study (the Veda), to trade, to lend
money, and to cultivate land.

91. One occupation only the lord prescribed to
the .Vddra, to serve meekly even these (other) three
castes.

92. Man is stated to be purer above the navel
(than below); hence the Self-existent (SvayambhO)
has declared the purest (part) of him (to be) his
mouth.

93. As the Brdhma/za sprang from (Brahman’s)

87. See above, verse 31.

88-91. See below, X, 75-79, 99.

89. I read with Medh., Ragh., and K. sarnddijat, ‘he com¬
manded/ for samasata^, f briefly/ Nand. reads akalpayat.

92. See below, V, 132.

93. Dharmata^ prabhu/6, 4 by right the lord/agrees with Nar.’s
and Nand. s glosses. Medh., Gov., Kull., and Rdgh. say, ‘ he is with

1,98.

THE CREATION.

25

mouth, as he was the first-born, and as he possesses
the Veda, he is by right the lord of this whole ‘
creation.

94. For the Self-existent (Svayambhd), having
performed austerities, produced him first from his
own mouth, in order that the offerings might be
conveyed to the gods and manes and that this
universe might be preserved.

95. What created being can surpass him, through
whose mouth the gods continually consume the
sacrificial viands and the manes the offerings to
the dead ?

96. Of created beings the most excellent are said
to be those which are animated; of the animated,
those which subsist by intelligence; of the intel¬
ligent, mankind ; and of men, the Brdhmaraas;

97. Of Brdhmawas, those learned (in the Veda);
of the learned, those who recognise (the necessity and
the manner of performing the prescribed duties); of
those who possess this knowledge, those who per¬
form them ; of the performers, those who know the
Brahman.

98. The very birth of a Brdhmawa is an eternal
incarnation of the sacred law; for he is born to
(fulfil) the sacred law, and becomes one with
Brahman.

respect to the law the lord, i.e. entitled to prescribe their duties to
this whole creation.’

94. Tapas taptvfi, ‘ having performed austerities,’ is added, as
Nand. says, in order to show ‘particularly great consideration’(tapas
taptvety adaratirayaA). See above, verses 33, 34, 41.

95. Medh., Nar., and Nand. explain krrtabuddhayaA, ‘ who recog¬
nise (the necessity and the manner of performing the prescribed
duties),’ by ‘who know the meaning of the Veda.’ ‘ Those who know
the Brahman,’ i.e.‘ the sacred lore which leads to final emancipation.’

26

LAWS OF MANU.

I. 99 -

99. A Br 4 hma«a, coming into existence, is born as
‘ the highest on earth, the lord of all created beings,

for the protection of the treasury of the law.

100. Whatever exists in the world is the property
of the Brahma/Ja; on account of the excellence of
his origin the Brfihma^a is, indeed, entitled to it all.

101. The Br&hmawa eats but his own food, wears
but his own apparel, bestows but his own in alms;
other mortals subsist through the benevolence of
the Brahmawa.

102. In order to clearly settle his duties and those
of the other (castes) according to their order, wise
Manu sprung from the Self-existent, composed these
Institutes (of the sacred law).

103. A learned Br&hma«a must carefully study
them, and he must duly instruct his pupils in them,
but nobody else (shall do it).

104. A Brahmawa who studies these Institutes
(and) faithfully fulfils the duties (prescribed therein),
is never tainted by sins, arising from thoughts,
words, or deeds.

105. He sanctifies any company (which he may
enter), seven ancestors and seven descendants, and
he alone deserves (to possess) this whole earth.

106. (To study) this (work) is the best means of
securing welfare, it increases understanding, it pro¬
cures fame and long life, it (leads to) supreme bliss.

100. ‘ On account of the excellence of his origin,’ i.e. because he
sprang from Brahman’s mouth.

103. The verse is not intended to exclude Kshatriyas and Vai.ryas
from the right of studying the Manusawhita, but merely from
teaching it.

104. SawritavrataA, * who faithfully fulfils the duties,’ is based on
Gov.’s full explanation etadarthavabodhena sawritavrato virishAt-
yamaniyamaA san, with which Medh. closely agrees.

I, III.

SUMMARY OF THE CONTENTS.

2 7

107. In this (work) the sacred law has been fully
stated as well as the good and bad qualities of
(human) actions and the immemorial rule of conduct,
(to be followed) by all the four castes (varwa).

108. The rule of conduct is transcendent law,
whether it be taught in the revealed texts or in the
sacred tradition; hence a twice-born man who pos¬
sesses regard for himself, should be always careful
to (follow) it.

109. A Brahmawa who departs from the rule of
conduct, does not reap the fruit of the Veda, but he
who duly follows it, will obtain the full reward.

no. The sages who saw that the sacred law is
thus grounded on the rule of conduct, have taken
good conduct to be the most excellent root of all
austerity.

hi. The creation of the universe, the rule of
the sacraments, the ordinances of studentship, and
the respectful behaviour (towards Gurus), the most
excellent rule of bathing (on return from the teacher’s
house),

107. ‘The good and bad qualities of (human) actions/ i. e. ac¬
cording to Medh., Gov., Kull., and Nand. 4 the good and the bad
results of actions/ or according to Ragh. and Nar. 4 the prescribed
actions which arc good and the forbidden ones which are bad/
to8. My translation of atmavan, 4 who possesses regard for him¬
self/ follows Medh. and Kull. Gov. explains it by 4 of excellent
disposition/ Nar. by 4 endowed with firmness/ and Ragh. by 4 who
believes in a life after death/

109. Vedaphalam, 4 the fruit of the Veda/ i.e. 4 the rewards for the
acts prescribed by the Veda' (Medh., Gov., Kull., and Nar.).

no. Vas. VI, 1-8. 4 The rule of conduct or good conduct*

(aHra), mentioned here and id the preceding verses, comprises the
numerous usages prescribed partly in the Veda and partly in the
Dharma^dstras, such as anointing oneself with butter on the occasion
of particular sacrifices or sipping water on certain occasions.

28

LAWS OF MANU.

I, 112.

112. (The law of) marriage and the description of
the (various) marriage-rites, the regulations for the
great sacrifices and the eternal rule of the funeral
sacrifices,

113. The description of the modes of (gaining)
subsistence and the duties of a Snataka, (the rules
regarding) lawful and forbidden food, the purification
of men and of things,

114. The laws concerning women, (the law) of
hermits, (the manner of gaining) final emancipation
and (of) renouncing the world, the whole duty of a
king and the manner of deciding lawsuits,

115. The rules for the examination of witnesses,
the laws concerning husband and wife, the law of
(inheritance and) division, (the law concerning)
gambling and the removal of (men nocuous like)
thorns,

116. (The law concerning) the behaviour of
Vauyas and .Sfldras, the origin of the mixed castes,
the law for all castes in times of distress and the
law of penances,

117. The threefold course of transmigrations, the
result of (good or bad) actions, (the manner of at¬
taining) supreme bliss and the examination of the
good and bad qualities of actions,

it8. The primeval laws of countries, of castes
(^iti), of families, and the rules concerning heretics
and companies (of traders and the like)—(all that)
Manu has declared in these Institutes.

119. As Manu, in reply to my questions, formerly
promulgated these Institutes, even so learn ye also
the (whole work) from me.

SOURCES OF THE LAW.

29

II, fi.

Chapter II.

1. Learn that sacred law which is followed by men
learned (in the Veda) and assented to in their hearts
by the virtuous, who are ever exempt from hatred
and inordinate affection.

2. To act solely from a desire for rewards is not
laudable, yet an exemption from that desire is not (to
be found) in this (world): for on (that) desire is
grounded the study of the Veda and the performance
of the actions, prescribed by the Veda.

3. The desire (for rewards), indeed, has its root in
the conception that an act can yield them, and in con¬
sequence of (that) conception sacrifices are performed;
vows and the laws prescribing restraints are all
stated to be kept through the idea that they will
bear fruit.

4. Not a single act here (below) appears ever to
be done by a man free from desire; for whatever
(man) does, it is (the result of) the impulse of desire.

5. He who persists in discharging these (prescribed
duties) in the right manner, reaches the deathless

II. 2. Ap. I, 6, 20, 1-4. ‘ Is not laudable/ because such a dispo¬
sition leads not to final liberation, but to new births' (Gov., Kull.).

3. Nand. takes the beginning of the verse differently, 4 The desire
for rewards is the root of the resolve to perform an act’ (sawkalpa).
'Vows,' i.e. 4 acts to be performed during one's whole lifetime, like
those of the Snataka' (chap. IV), Medh., Gov., Nar.; ‘the vows of
a student,' Nand.; ‘the laws prescribing restraints,' i.e. ‘the pro¬
hibitive rules, e. g. those forbidding to injure living beings/ Medh.,
Gov., Nftr.; ‘the rules affecting hermits and Sawnyasins/ Nand.
Kull. refers both terms to the rules in chap. IV.

5. ‘ In the right manner/ i. e. ‘ as they are prescribed in the Vedas
and without expecting rewards.' ‘ The deathless state,' i.e. ‘final
liberation.'

30

LAWS OF MANU.

II, 6.

state and even in this (life) obtains (the fulfilment
of) all the desires that he may have conceived.

6. The whole Veda is the (first) source of the
sacred law, next the tradition and the virtuous con¬
duct of those who know the (Veda further), also the
customs of holy men, and (finally) self-satisfaction.

7. Whatever law has been ordained for any (per¬
son) by Manu, that has been fully declared in the
Veda : for that (sage was) omniscient.

8. But a learned man after fully scrutinising all
this with the eye of knowledge, should, in accordance
with the authority of the revealed texts, be intent on
(the performance of) his duties.

6. Ap. I, 1, 1, 1-3; Gaut. I, 1-4; XXVIII, 48; Vas. I, 4-6;
Baudh. I, 1,1, 1-6 • Ya ign. I, 7.

•Sfla, ‘virtuous conduct/ i.e. ‘the suppression of inordinate affec¬
tion and hatred/ Medh., Gov.; ‘ the thirteenfold jila, behaving as
becomes a Brahmawa, devotedness to gods and parents, kindli¬
ness/ &c., Kuli.; ‘ that towards which many men who know the
Veda naturally incline/ Nar.; ‘ that which makes one honoured by
good men/ Nand. ‘ Customs/ e. g. such as lying at marriages a
thread round the wrist of the bride (Medh., Gov.), wearing a blanket
or a garment of bark (Kull.). Though the commentators try to
find a difference between jila and a£ara, it may be that both terms
are used here, because in some Dharma-sutras, e.g. Gaut. I, 2, the
former and in some the latter (e.g.Vas. I, 5) is mentioned. The
‘self-satisfaction/ i.e. of the virtuous (Medh., Gov., Nand.), is the
rule for cases not to be settled by any of the other authorities
(Nar., Nand.), or for cases where an option is permitted (Medh.,
Gov., Kull.).

7. The last clause is taken differently by Gov., who explains it,
‘ for that (Veda) is made up, as it were, of all knowledge.’ Medh.
gives substantially the same explanation.

8. ‘All this/ i.e.‘the *Sastras’ (Medh.,Gov., Kull.); ‘these Insti¬
tutes of Manu’ (Nar.); ‘these different authorities' (Nand.). ‘With
the eye of knowledge/ i.e. ‘with the help of grammar, of the
Mim&wsEl, &c.’ (Medh., Kull.).

IT, 14.

SOURCES OF THE LAW.

31

9. For that man who obeys the law prescribed in
the revealed texts and in the sacred tradition, gains
fame in this (world) and after death unsurpassable
bliss.

10. But by .Sruti (revelation) is meant the Veda,
and by Smr/ti (tradition) the Institutes of the sacred
law: those two must not be called into question in
any matter, since from those two the sacred law
shone forth.

11. Every twice-born man, who, relying on the
Institutes of dialectics, treats with contempt those
two sources (of the law), must be cast out by the vir¬
tuous, as an atheist and a scorner of the Veda.

12. The Veda, the sacred tradition, the customs
of virtuous men, and one’s own pleasure, they
declare to be visibly the fourfold means of defining
the sacred law.

13. The knowledge of the sacred law is prescribed
for those who are not given to the acquisition of
wealth and to the gratification of their desires; to
those who seek the knowledge of the sacred law the
supreme authority is the revelation (.SYuti).

14. But when two sacred texts (.SYuti) are con-

11. ‘Relying on the Institutes of dialectics,’ i.e. ‘ relying on the
atheistic institutes of reasoning, such as those of the Bauddhas and
A'arvdkas’ (Medh); ‘relying on methods of reasoning, directed
against the Veda’ (Kull., Nar.).

12. The first half of this verse agrees literally with Ydgjt. I, 7.

13. According to ‘another’ commentator, quoted by Medh., and
according to Gov., Kull., and Nar., the meaning of the first half is,
‘ the exhortation to learn the sacred law applies to those only who
do not pursue worldly objects, because those who obey (or learn,
N&r.) the sacred law merely in order to gain worldly advantages,
such as wealth, fame, &c., derive no spiritual advantage from it
(because they will not really obey it,’ Nar.). Medh., on the other
hand, thinks that vidhiyate, ‘ is prescribed,’ means ‘ is found with.’

32

LAWS OF MANU.

II, 15.

flicting, both are held to be law; for both are pro¬
nounced by the wise (to be) valid law.

15. (Thus) the (Agnihotra) sacrifice maybe (op¬
tionally) performed, at any time after the sun has
risen, before he has risen, or when neither sun nor
stars are visible ; that (is declared) by Vedic texts.

16. Know that he for whom (the performance of)
the ceremonies beginning with the rite of impregna¬
tion (Garbhadh&na) and ending with the funeral rite
(Antyesh/i) is prescribed, while sacred formulas are
being recited, is entitled (to study) these Institutes,
but no other man whatsoever.

17. That land, created by the gods, which lies
between the two divine rivers Sarasvati and D ri-
shadvati, the (sages) call Brahm&varta.

18. The custom handed down in regular succes¬
sion (since time immemorial) among the (four chief)
castes (var«a) and the mixed (races) of that country,
is called the conduct of virtuous men.

19. The plain of the Kurus, the (country of the)
Matsyas, Pa«/’alas, and .Sitrasenakas, these (form),
indeed, the country of the Brahmarshis (Brahmanical
sages, which ranks) immediately after Brahm£varta.

15. The Agnihotra, here referred to, consists of two sets of
oblations, one of which is offered in the morning and the other in
the evening. The expression samayadhyushite, rendered in accord¬
ance with Kull.'s gloss, 4 when neither sun nor stars are visible/ is
explained by Medh. as * the time of dawn’ (ushasa^ kala^), or ‘ as
the time when the night disappears/ with which latter interpretation
Gov. agrees.

16. The persons meant are the males of the three Aryan varwas.
The sacraments may be performed for women and Stidras also,
but without the recitation of mantras (II, 66 ; X, 127).

19. This tract comprises the Doab from the neighbourhood of
Delhi as far as Mathuid, the capital of the ancient ^hrasenakas.

II, 2 6 .

SOURCES OF THE LAW; SACRAMENTS.

33

20. From a BrAhmazza, born in that country, let
all men on earth learn their several usages.

21. That (country) which (lies) between the Hi-
mavat and the Vindhya (mountains) to the east of
PrayAga and to the west of Vina^ana (the place where
the river Sarasvati disappears) is called Madhyadei'a
(the central region).

22. But (the tract) between those two mountains
(just mentioned), which (extends) as far as the eastern
and the western oceans, the wise call Aryavarta (the
country of the Aryans).

23. That land where the black antelope naturally
roams, one must know to be fit for the performance
of sacrifices; (the tract) different from that (is) the
country of the MleA£/zas (barbarians).

24. Let twice-born men seek to dwell in those
(above-mentioned countries); but a .Sudra, distressed
for subsistence, may reside anywhere.

25. Thus has the origin of the sacred law been
succinctly described to you and the origin of this
universe; learn (now) the duties of the castes (varzza).

26. With holy rites, prescribed by the Veda, must
the ceremony on conception and other sacraments
be performed for twice-born men, which sanctify the
body and purify (from sin) in this (life) and after
death.

21. The place where the river Sarasvati disappears lies in the
Hissar districts. Prayaga, i.e. Allahabad.

22. Yas. I, 9; Baudh. I, 2,10.

23. Vas. 1 ,13-15; Baudh. I, 2,12-15; Y ign. I, 2.

25. Gov. explains dharma, ‘ the sacred law,’ by * spiritual merit.'

26-35. Gaut.VIII, 14-20; Vi. XXVII, 1-12; Y&gn. 1,10-13.

26. Medh. mentions another explanation for the first words,

‘ With holy rites, accompanied by the recitation of Vedic texts,’ and
Gov. thinks that ‘vaidika’ is to be taken in both meanings.

C 2 5 l D

34

LAWS OF MANU.

II, 27-

27. By burnt oblations during (the mothers)
pregnancy, by the G&takarman (the ceremony after
birth), the Aauafa (tonsure), and the Mau^ibandhana
(the tying of the sacred girdle of Mu^a grass) is
the taint, derived from both parents, removed from
twice-born men.

28. By the study of the Veda, by vows, by burnt
oblations, by (the recitation of) sacred texts, by the
(acquisition of the) threefold sacred science, by
offering (to the gods, Hi ’shis, and manes), by (the
procreation of) sons, by the great sacrifices, and
by (£rauta) rites this (human) body is made fit
for (union with) Brahman.

29. Before the navel-string is cut, the Gatakarman
(birth-rite) must be performed for a male (child);
and while sacred formulas are being recited, he must
be fed with gold, honey, and butter.

27. ‘The burnt oblations during the mother's pregnancy'are the
Puwsavana, Simantonnayana, and so forth; see A sv. Grzliya-sfitra

I,

28. ‘By vows/i.e. ‘the vows undertaken by the student when
he learns particular portions of the Vedas, such as the Savitrivrata’
(Medh., Gov., Ndr .); ‘ voluntary restraints, such as the abstention
from honey, meat, &c.' (Kull., Ragh .); ‘ vows such as the Pra^apatya
penance' (Nand.). ‘By burnt oblations,' i.e. ‘the daily offerings of
fuel' (II, 108). Traividyena, ‘by the acquisition of the threefold
sacred science,' i.e. ‘by learning the meaning of the three Vedas'
(Medh., Nand.) ; ‘ by undertaking the vow to study the three Vedas
during thirty-six years'(III, 1; Gov., Kull., Ndr., Ragh.). Igyayd,
‘ by offering to the gods, /?z'shis, and manes,' i.e. by performing the
so-called Tarpa/za (Medh., Gov., Kull., Rdgh.), or ‘by offering the
Pdkaya^was' (Ndr., Nand.). Medh. takes brdhmi,‘ fit for union with
Brahman,' to mean ‘connected with Brahman/ but gives our version,
which all the other commentators adopt, as the opinion of‘others/

29. A sv. Grzhya-sfitra I, 15, 1; Manava Gr/hya-sutra I, 17, 1;
Pdraskara Gnhya-sfitra 1 ,16, 4. Though the text clearly says that
the child is to be fed with gold, honey, and butter, it appears from
the Grzhya-sfttras, as also some of the commentators point out,

II, 33 *

SACRAMENTS.

35

30. But let (the father perform or) cause to be
performed the Ndmadheya (the rite of naming the '
child), on the tenth or twelfth (day after birth), or
on a lucky lunar day, in a lucky muhfirta, under an
auspicious constellation.

31. Let (the first part of) a Br&hma/za’s name
(denote something) auspicious, a Kshatriya’s be con¬
nected with power, and a VaLsya’s with wealth, but
a .SYidras (express something) contemptible.

32. (The second part of) a Br 4 hma#a’s (name)
shall be (a word) implying happiness, of a Ksha-
triya’s (a word) implying protection, of a Valyas
(a term) expressive of thriving, and of a .Sildra’s
(an expression) denoting service.

33. The names of women should be easy to pro¬
nounce, not imply anything dreadful, possess a plain
meaning, be pleasing and auspicious, end in long
vowels, and contain a word of benediction.

that the last two substances only are to be given to the child, after
they have been touched with a piece of gold, or a golden ring.

30. A sv. Grfhya-sfttra I, 15, 4-10 ; Paraskara I, 17, 1-6. Nar.
and Nand. are in doubt whether the numerals ‘the tenth or twelfth'
refer to lunar or solar days, because they stand in the feminine
gender and either tithi or ratri may be supplied. Kull. gives an
alternative version of the date, ‘ after the tenth (the last day of im¬
purity, i. e.) on the eleventh or twelfth/ which Medh. also mentions,
but rejects. Kull. considers that the third and fourth va, ‘or/
which stand after muhhrta and nakshatra, have the sense of ‘just/
and do not introduce a third alternative.

31-32. K. omits 31b and 32a. N&r. and Ragh. think that the
second part of a Brahmawa's name must contain the word jarman
and no other, while the general opinion of the others is that it may
be carman or some synonym, implying ‘happiness or refuge/
Medh. expressly rejects the former view, and gives as examples of
correct formations, Svamidatta, Bhavabhfiti, Indrasv&min, Indr&-
jrama, Indradatta.

33. Medh. irreverently, but pertinently, remarks that there is no

D 2

36

LAWS OF MANU.

IT, 34-

34. In the fourth month the Nishkramawa (the
first leaving of the house) of the child should be
performed, in the sixth month the Annapr&sana
(first feeding with rice), and optionally (any other)
auspicious ceremony required by (the custom of)
the family. .

35. According to the teaching of the revealed
texts, the A'tWdkarman (tonsure) must be performed,
for the sake of spiritual merit, by all twice-born men
in the first or third year.

36. In the eighth year after conception, one should
perform the initiation (upanayana) of a Brdhma«a,
in the eleventh after conception (that) of a Kshatriya,
but > n the twelfth that of a Vaisya.

37. (The initiation) of a Br&hmawa who desires
proficiency in sacred learning should take place in
the fifth (year after conception), (that) of a Kshatriya
who wishes to become powerful in the sixth, (and
that) of a VaBya who longs for (success in his)
business in the eighth.

38. The (time for the) Savitrl (initiation) of a

difference between ‘auspiciousness’ (mangala) and ‘benediction’
(dftrvilda), and that the latter word has been added merely in order
to complete the verse.

34. A sv. Gr/hya-sutra I, 16 ; Paraskara I, 17, 5; 19,1-6. The
last clause, which permits the adoption of particular family-customs,
refers, according to Medh., Gov., and Kull., to all sacraments.

35. Arv. Grzhya-stJtra I, 17, 1; P&raskara II, 1. Nar. and
Nand. explain dharmata/z, ‘for the sake of spiritual merit,’ by
‘according to the law of the family’ (see A sv. Grfhya-sfitra,
loc. cit.).

36-37. Ap. 1 ,1,5, 8-21; Gaut. I, 5-14 ; Vas. II, 3 ; XI, 49-73;
Baudh. I, 3, 7-12; Vi. XXVII, 15-28; Yd^re. 1 ,14.

37. As the commentators point out, the person who has the par¬
ticular wish is not the boy, but his father.

38-40. Ap. I, 1, 22-2, io; Gaut. XXI, 11; Vas. XI, 74-79;

II, 4^*

SACRAMENTS ; INITIATION.

37

Brdhmawa does not pass until the completion of the^
sixteenth year (after conception), of a Kshatriya
until the completion of the twenty-second, and of
a Vaisya until the completion of the twenty-fourth.

39. After those (periods men of) these three
(castes) who have not received the sacrament at the
proper time, become Vratyas (outcasts), excluded
from the S&vitrl (initiation) and despised by the
Aryans.

40. With such men, if they have not been purified
according to the rule, let no Br&hmazja ever, even
in times of distress, form a connexion either through
the Veda of by marriage.

41. Let students, according to the order (of their
castes), wear (as upper dresses) the skins of black
antelopes, spotted deer, and he-goats, and (lower
garments) made of hemp, flax or wool.

42. The girdle of a Brahma«a shall consist of a
triple cord of Mu%a grass, smooth and soft; (that)
of a Kshatriya, of a bowstring, made of Murva fibres ;
(that) of a Vaisya, of hempen threads.

Baudh. 1 ,16,16; Vi.,loc.cit.,andLIV, 26; Yagii. I, 37-38. ‘Some’
take the preposition a, ‘ until,’ in the sense of ‘ until the beginning
of,’ Kull.

40. ‘Connexion through the Veda,’ i.e. teaching them or study¬
ing under them, sacrificing for them, or electing them to be priests,
accepting religious gifts from them or giving them. Rlgh. omits
verse 40.

41. Ap. I, 2, 39-3, 9; Gaut. 1,16, 21; Vas. XI, 61-67 5 Baudh.
I, 3,14; Vi. XXVII, 19-20. Ragh. explains ruru, ‘ a spotted deer,’
by ‘ a tiger.’

42. Ap.I, 2, 33-37; Gaut. 1,15; Vas. XI, 58-60; Baudh. 1,3,13;
Vi. XXVII, 18; Yagri. 1 ,29. Medh. and Gov. think that the girdle
of a Kshatriya is not to consist of three separate strings twisted
together, and Kull. apparently holds the same opinion. Rfigh. and
Nfir. say that every bowstring naturally consists of three stdngs.

38

LAWS OF MANU.

II, 43-

43. If Mu»^a grass (and so forth) be not pro-
' curable, (the girdles) may be made of Kura, Asman-

taka, and Balbafa (fibres), with a single threefold
knot, or with three or five (knots according to the
custom of the family).

44. The sacrificial string of a Br&hmawa shall be
made of cotton, (shall be) twisted to the right, (and con¬
sist) of three threads, that of a Kshatriya of hempen
threads, (and) that of a Vabya of woollen threads.

45. A Brdhmawa shall (carry), according to the
sacred law, a staff of Bilva or Palara; a Kshatriya,
of Va/a or Khadira; (and) a Vaisya, of Pilu or
Udumbara.

46. The staff of a Brahmawa shall be made of
such length as to reach the end of his hair; that of
a Kshatriya, to reach his forehead; (and) that of a
Vaiyya, to reach (the tip of his) nose.

47. Let all the staves be straight, without a
blemish, handsome to look at, not likely to terrify
men, with their bark perfect, unhurt by fire.

48. Having taken a staff according to his choice,
having worshipped the sun and walked round the

43. ‘ With a single threefold knot’ seems to mean that each of
the strings of the girdle shall first be knotted, and the three knots
be afterwards tied together in one. Nfir. and Ragh., however, take
trivMa, ‘ threefold,’ separately,.and refer it to the string. They thus
support^ Sir W. Jones’ translation, ‘ in triple strings, with one, &c.’

44. Ap. II, 4, 22; Gaut. I, 36; Vas. XII, 14; Baudh. I, 5, 5;
Vi. XXVII, 19.

45-47. Ap. I, 2, 38; Gaut. I, 22; Vas. XI, 52-57; Baudh. I,
3, 15; Vi. XXVII, 22-24; Y figii. I, 29.

47. Anudvegakara^, ‘ not likely to terrify anybody’ (Medh., Gov.,
Kull.), means according to Nar. ‘not causing displeasure (to the
wearer) by faults such as roughness.’

48-57. Ap. I, 3, 25-4, 4; Gaut. II, 35-41; Vas. XI, 68-70;
Baudh. I, 3, 1 6-i 8 ; Vi. XXVII, 25; Yagn. I, 30; 51-57. Ap. II,

Hi 54*

INITIATION.

39

fire, turning his right hand towards it, (the student)
should beg alms according to the prescribed rule.

49. An initiated Brahmawa should beg, beginning
(his request with the word) lady (bhavati); a Ksha-
triya, placing (the word) lady in the middle, but a
Vaisya, placing it at the end (of the formula).

50. Let him first beg food of his mother, or of his
sister, or of his own maternal aunt, or of (some other)
female who will not disgrace him (by a refusal).

51. Having collected as much food as is required
(from several persons), and having announced it
without guile to his teacher, let him eat, turning his
face towards the east, and having purified himself
by sipping water.

52. (His meal will procure) long life, if he eats
facing the east; fame, if he turns to the south;
prosperity, if he turns to the west; truthfulness, if
he faces the east.

53. Let a twice-born man always eat his food
with concentrated mind, after performing an ablu¬
tion; and after he has eaten, let him duly cleanse
himself with water and sprinkle the cavities (of his
head).

54. Let him always worship his food, and eat it
without contempt; when he sees it, let him rejoice,

I. 2-3; 3,11; Gaut. IX, 59; Vas. Ill, 69 ; XII, 18-20; Baudh.

II, 5,18, 21-6, 2; 13, 12 ; Vi. LVIII, 34-35, 40-44; Ya^w. I, 27,
31, 112.

52. Medh. and Nar. propose for n'tam, ‘truthfulness,’ an alter¬
native explanation, ‘ the sacrifice/

53. The word nityam, ‘ always,’ indicates that this rule refers to
householders also (Gov., Kull., Nar., Nand.).

54 - ‘ Worship,’ i.e. ‘ consider as a deity’ (Medh., Gov., Nand.), or
‘ meditate on its being required to sustain life’(Medh., Gov., Kull.),
or ‘praise it with the verse,’ Rig-veda 1,187, 1 (Nar.).

40

LAWS OF MANU.

II, 55 .

show a pleased face, and pray that he may always
obtain it.

55. Food, that is always worshipped, gives
strength and manly vigour; but eaten irreverently,
it destroys them both.

56. Let him not give to any man what he leaves,
and beware of eating between (the two meal-times);
let him not over-eat himself, nor go anywhere with¬
out having purified himself (after his meal).

57. Excessive eating is prejudicial to health, to
fame, and to (bliss in) heaven; it prevents (the
acquisition of) spiritual merit, and is odious among
men; one ought, for these reasons, to avoid it
carefully.

58. Let a Brdhma«a always sip water out of the
part of the hand (tirtha) sacred to Brahman, or out
of that sacred to Ka (Praffipati), or out of (that)
sacred to the gods, never out of that sacred to the
manes.

59. They call (the part) at the root of the thumb
the tirtha sacred to Brahman, that at the root of the

55. TJrg'am, ‘manly vigour’ (Gov., Kull.), or ‘energy’ (Nar.,
Nand.), or ‘bulk’ (Medh.).

56. Medh. reads nddySd etat tathantara, and gives, besides the
explanation adopted in the translation, two alternative interpretations:
(1) ‘let him not eat after interrupting his meal;’ (2) ‘let him not
eat taking away his left hand from the dish.' Nand. reads nadya/i’
£aitat tathantara, ‘ and let him not eat such a (remnant) given to
him during (a meal by one of the company).’

58-62. Ap. I, 15, 1—16; Vas. Ill, 26-34; Baudh. I, 8, 12-23;
Vi. LXII, 1-9; Yagii. I, 18-21.

58. Though the text speaks of the Brahmawa only, the rule refers,
as the commentators remark, to other Aryans too.

59. Angulimfile, ‘at the root of the little finger’ (Kull., Ndr.,
Ragb.), means according to Medh. and Nand. ‘ at the root of the
fingers.’

11 , 64 .

INITIATION.

41

(little) finger (the tirtha) sacred to Ka (Pra^tpati),
(that) at the tips (of the fingers, the tlrtha) sacred to
the gods, and that below (between the index and the
thumb, the tirtha) sacred to the manes.

60. Let him first sip water thrice; next twice wipe
his mouth; and, lastly, touch with water the cavities
(of the head), (the seat of) the soul and the head.

61. He who knows the sacred law and seeks
purity shall always perform the rite of sipping
with water neither hot nor frothy, with the (pre¬
scribed) tirtha, in a lonely place, and turning to
the east or to the north.

62. A Brahmawa is purified by water that reaches
his heart, a Kshatriya by water reaching his throat,
a Vaisya by water taken into his mouth, (and) a
.Sfldra by water touched with the extremity (of his
Hps).

63. A twice-born man is called upavitin when his
right arm is raised (and the sacrificial string or the
dress, passed under it, rests on the left shoulder);
(when his) left (arm) is raised (and the string, or the
dress, passed under it, rests on the right shoulder, he
is called) prfiiin&vitin ; and nivltin when it hangs
down (straight) from the neck.

64. His girdle, the skin (which serves as his upper
garment), his staff, his sacrificial thread, (and) his
water-pot he must throw into water, when they
have been damaged, and take others, reciting
sacred formulas.

60. ‘ (The seat of) the soul,’ i. e.'the heart ’(all except Medh.,who
adds, or ‘ the navel ’).

61. ‘ Neither hot,’ i. e. ‘ not boiled or heated on the fire ’ (Medh.,
Gov., Kull., N$r., Nand.).

63. Baudh. I, 8, 5-10.

64. Baudh. I, 6, 7; Vi. XXVII, 29.

42

LAWS OF MANU.

II, 65.

65. (The ceremony called) Keiinta (clipping the
hair) is ordained for a Brdhma«a in the sixteenth
year (from conception); for a Kshatriya, in the
twenty-second; and for a Vaiiya, two (years) later
than that.

66. This whole series (of ceremonies) must be
performed for females (also), in order to sanctify
the body, at the proper time and in the proper
order, but without (the recitation of) sacred
texts.

67. The nuptial ceremony is stated to be the
Vedic sacrament for women (and to be equal to
the initiation), serving the husband (equivalent to)
the residence in (the house of the) teacher, and the
household duties (the same) as the (daily) worship
of the sacred fire.

68. Thus has been described the rule for the
initiation of the twice-born, which indicates a (new)
birth, and sanctifies; learn (now) to what duties they
must afterwards apply themselves.

69. Having performed the (rite of) initiation,
the teacher must first instruct the (pupil) in (the
rules of) personal purification, of conduct, of the
fire-worship, and of the twilight devotions.

65. YSgii. I, 36. This is the ceremony also called Godana; Arv.
Grfhya-sfltra I, 18; Paraskara II, 1, 3-7.

66-67. Arv. Grihya-sfitra I, 16, 16; Vi. XXVII, 13-14; Y&gn.
I, 13. ‘ The Vedic sacrament,’ i.e. ‘ the sacrament performed with
sacred texts’ (Nand., R&gh.), or ‘having for its object the study
of Vedic texts' (Medh., Nar.). Hence women must not be initiated.
As the parallel passage of Arv. shows, the sacraments preceding
the tonsure alone are to be given to them.

68. ‘ Which indicates their (real) birth, because an uninitiated
man is equal to one unborn' (Medh., Gov.).

69-73. Gaut.I, 46-56; Vi. XXX, 32; Y &gn. I, 15, 27.

II, 74*

INITIATION J STUDENTSHIP.

43

70. But (a student) who is about to begin the
study (of the Veda), shall receive instruction, after
he has sipped water in accordance with the Insti¬
tutes (of the sacred law), has made the Brahmi^ali,
(has put on) a clean dress, and has brought his organs
under due control.

71. At the beginning and at the end of (a lesson
in the) Veda he must always clasp both the feet of
his teacher, (and) he must study, joining his hands;
that is called the Brahmi%ali (joining the palms for
the sake of the Veda).

72. With crossed hands he must clasp (the feet)
of the teacher, and touch the left (foot) with his left
(hand), the right (foot) with his right (hand).

73. But to him who is about to begin studying,
the teacher, always unwearied, must say: Ho, recite !
He shall leave off (when the teacher says): Let a
stoppage take place!

74. Let him always pronounce the syllable Om
at the beginning and at the end of (a lesson in) the
Veda; (for) unless the syllable Om precede (the
lesson) will slip away (from jiim), and unless it follow
it will fade away.

70. Laghuvasa/$, * (has put on) a clean dress' (Medh., Kull.), or
‘ a dress which is not gorgeous’ (Gov., Mr., Nand.), i.e. less valuable
than the teacher’s (Ragh.).

71-72. Ap. I, 5, 19-23; Baudh. I, 3, 38; Vi. XXVIII, 14-16.

73. Mr. and Nand. read adhyeshyamaras tu gurum, &c. ‘ But
the pupil, desiring to study, shall say to his teacher, Venerable
Sir, recitel &c.,’ and this agrees with Gaut. I, 46. Mr. mentions also
the reading translated above, which the other commentators give.

74. Ap. 1,13,6-7; Gaut. 1,57; Vi. XXX, 33. Viriryate,translated
according to Kull. by * will fade away,’ means according to Medh.
* will become useless for practical purposes;’ according to Gov. and
Mr. ‘ will not be properly understood during the-lesson.’ Medh.
adds that the two terms contain similes, taken from boiling milk,

44

LAWS OF MANU.

75*

75. Seated on (blades of Kura grass) with their
points to the east, purified by Pavitras (blades of
Kura grass), and sanctified by three suppressions of
the breath (Prazz&y&ma), he is worthy (to pronounce)
the syllable Om.

76. Pra^apati (the lord of creatures) milked out
(as it were) from the three Vedas the sounds A, U,
and M, and (the Vy&hmis) Bhft/z, Bhuva/z, Sva/z.

77. Moreover from the three Vedas Pra/Spati,
who dwells in the highest heaven (ParameslV/zin),
milked out (as it were) that AYk-verse, sacred to
SavitzY (Savitrl), which begins with the word tad,
one foot* from each.

78. A Brahmazza, learned in the Veda, who recites
during both twilights that syllable and that (verse),
preceded by the VyahzYtis, gains the (whole) merit
which (the recitation of) the Vedas confers.

79. A twice-born man who (daily) repeats those
three one thousand times outside (the village), will
be freed after a month even from great guilt, as a
snake from its slough.

80. The Brahmazza, the Kshatriya, and the Vawya
who neglect (the recitation of) that AYk-verse and the

and that one speaks also of the virara«a, i.e. the spoiling of boiled
milk.

75. Gaut. I, 48-50; Ya^n. I, 23. ‘Purified by Pavitras,’i.e.
‘ having touched the seat of the vital airs with blades of Kura grass'
(Medh., Gov., Nar.); see Gaut. I, 48. Medh. mentions another
explanation of Pavitra, adopted by Nand. also, according to which
it means ‘ purificatory texts.’ Regarding the term ‘ suppression of
the breath,’ see Vas. XXV, 13; Vi. LV, 9.

76. Vi. LV, 10.

77. Vi. LV, ir. The Savitrl, i.e. the verse tat savitur varewyam,

, Rig-veda III, 62, 10.

78. Vi. LV, 12; B,.udh. II, 11, 6.

79. Vi. LV, 13; Baudh. IV, 1, 29; Vas. XXVI, 4.

80. Vi. LV, 14.

STUDENTSHIP.

45

n, 85 .

timely (performance of the) rites (prescribed for) them,
will be blamed among virtuous men.

81. Know that the three imperishable Mah&vya-
hrz'tis, preceded by the syllable Om, and (followed) by
the three-footed S&vitrf are the portal of the Veda
and the gate leading (to union with) Brahman.

82. He who daily recites that (verse), untired,
during three years, will enter (after death) the high¬
est Brahman, move as free as air, and assume an
ethereal form.

83. The monosyllable (Om) is the highest Brah¬
man, (three) suppressions of the breath are the best
(form of) austerity, but nothing surpasses the Savitri;
truthfulness is better than silence.

84. All rites ordained in the Veda, burnt oblations
and (other) sacrifices, pass away; but know that the
syllable (Om) is imperishable, and (it is) Brahman,
(and) the Lord of creatures (Pra^apati).

85. An offering, consisting of muttered prayers, is
ten times more efficacious than a sacrifice performed

81. Vi. LV, 15. Brahmaao mukham, literally, ‘the mouth of
Brahman,’ is probably meant to convey the double sense given in
the translation. Both interpretations are given by Medh., Kull.,
and Ragh., while Gov., Nar., and Nand. explain it merely by ‘the
beginning or portal of the Veda;’ see also Ap. I, 13, 6 .

82. Vi. LV, 16. 83. Vi. LV, 17.

84. Vi. LVI, 18. ‘ Pass away,’ i.e. ‘ as far as their results are con¬
cerned ’ (Medh., Gov., Kull., Nar.), ‘ as far as their form and their
results are concerned ’ (Nand.). Sacrifices procure only the perish¬
able bliss of heaven, while the constant recitation of the syllable Om
secures union with Brahman. According to Medh., Gov., Kull., and
Ragh., Brahman is here a neuter; according to Ndr. and Nand., a
masculine. The words ‘and (it is) Brahman (and) Pra^dpati’(Medh.,
Gov., Ndr., Rdgh.) are taken by Kull. as ‘ since it is Brahman (and)
Pra^apati,’ by Nand. as ‘just like Brahman, the Lord of creatures.’

85. Vi. LVI, 19; Vas. XXVI, 9. The sacred texts meant are,
of course, Om, the Vydhrz'tis, and the Gdyatri.

4 6

LAWS OF MA^U.

II, 86.

according to the rules (of the Veda); a (prayer) which
is inaudible (to others) surpasses it a hundred times,
and the mental (recitation of sacred texts) a thousand
times.

86. The four Pakaya/«as and those sacrifices
which are enjoined by the rules (of the Veda) are
all together not equal in value to a sixteenth part
of the sacrifice consisting of muttered prayers.

87. But, undoubtedly, a Brdhma^a reaches the
highest goal by muttering prayers only; (whether)
he perform other (rites) or neglect them, he who
befriends (all creatures) is declared (to be) a (true)
Brihmawa.

88. A wise man should strive to restrain his organs
which run wild among alluring sensual objects, like
a charioteer his horses.

89. Those eleven organs which former sages have
named, I will properly (and) precisely enumerate in
due order,

90. (Viz.) the ear, the skin, the eyes, the tongue,
and the nose as the fifth, the anus, the organ of gene¬
ration, hands and feet, and the (organ of) speech,
named as the tenth.

86. Vi. LVI, 20; Vas. XXVI, 10. ‘The Pakaya^?~as,’ i.e. ‘the
so-called great sacrifices to gods, manes, goblins, and men (III, 70)
excluding the Brahmaya^«a’ (Medh., Kull., Nar., Nand.). Gov. and
Rdgh. understand the term as indicating ‘ all SmSrta and Vrauta
rites;’ see also Jolly on Vishwu, loc. cit.

87. Vi. LVI, 21; Vas. XXVI, ix. Maitra//,‘one who befriends
(all creatures),’ i.e. ‘does not offer animal sacrifices.’ Ragh. proposes
also the interpretation ‘ he who worships Mitra, the Sun.’ Brah-
ma»aA, ‘a (true) Brdhmawa,' i.e. ‘one connected with Brahman,'
‘one who will be absorbed in Brahman’ (Kull.), ‘the best of
Brahma«as ’ (brahmish/AaA, Ragh.). Medh. and Gov. take the last
clause differently, ‘ it is declared (in the Veda that) a Brahmawa
(shall be) a friend (of all creatures).’

II, 97*

STUDENTSHIP.

47

91. Five of them, the ear and the rest according
to their order, they call organs of sense, and five of
them, the anus and the rest, organs of action.

92. Know that the internal organ (manas) is the
eleventh, which by its quality belongs to both (sets);
when that has been subdued, both those sets of five
have been conquered.

93. Through the attachment of his organs (to
sensual pleasure) a man doubtlessly will incur guilt;
but if he keep them under complete control, he will
obtain success (in gaining all his aims).

94. Desire is never extinguished by the enjoyment
of desired objects; it only grows stronger like a fire
(fed) with clarified butter.

95. If one man should obtain all those (sensual
enjoyments) and another should renounce them all,
the renunciation of all pleasure is far better than the
attainment of them.

96. Those (organs) which are strongly attached to
sensual pleasures, cannot so effectually be restrained
by abstinence (from enjoyments) as by a constant
(pursuit of true) knowledge.

97. Neither (the study of) the Vedas, nor libera-

92. ‘ By its quality/ i.e. by the quality called sawkalpa, the power
of determining or shaping the impressions of the senses.

93. Dosham, 4 guilt’ (Nar.), is taken by Medh., Gov., and Kull. in
the sense of drfsh/ddrfsh/aw dosham, ‘misery and guilt;’ by R&gh.
as saws&r&khyam, * the misery of repeated births.’ * Success (in
gaining all his aims),’ i.e. * the rewards of all good works and rites’
(Medh.), or 1 final liberation ’ (N&r., R&gh.), or 1 all the aims of
men, final liberation and the rest’ (Gov., Kull.).

96. AsevayS, 4 by abstinence from enjoyments ’ (Gov., NSr.,
Nand.), means according to Medh. and Kull. ‘ by avoiding places
where enjoyments are to be obtained,’ i.e. ‘by dwelling in the
forest’ (Medh.).

48

LAWS OF MANU.

II, 98 .

lity, nor sacrifices, nor any (self-imposed) restraint,
' nor austerities, ever procure the attainment (of re¬
wards) to a man whose heart is contaminated (by
sensuality).

98. That man may be considered to have (really)
subdued his organs, who on hearing and touching
and seeing, on tasting and smelling (anything) nei¬
ther rejoices nor repines.

99. But when one among all the organs slips away
(from control), thereby (man’s) wisdom slips away
from him, even as the water (flows) through the one
(open) foot of a (water-carrier’s) skin.

100. If he keeps all the (ten) organs as well as
the mind in subjection, he may gain all his aims,
without reducing his body by (the practice) of Yoga.

101. Let him stand during the morning twilight,
muttering the Savitri until the sun appears, but (let
him recite it), seated, in the evening until the constel¬
lations can be seen distinctly.

102. He who stands during the morning twilight
muttering (the Savitri), removes the guilt contracted
during the (previous) night; but he who (recites it),

99. ‘ Wisdom,’ i.e. ‘ power of control over the senses ’ (Medh.,
Gov., Ragh.), or ‘ knowledge of the truth ’ (Kull.). I read with
Medh., Gov., Nar., Nand., Ragh,, K., and the Bombay edition
p&d&t, instead of pat rat. The explanation of the simile has
been given correctly by Haughton in his note on Sir W. Jones’
translation.

100. Nar. and Nand. take yogata/z, ‘by the practice of Yoga,’
with the chief clause, and Medh. mentions this construction too.

iox. Ap. I, 30, 8; Gaut. II, 10-n ; Vas. VII, 16; Baudh. II, 7,
Vi. XXVIII, 2-3; Yagn. I, 24-25.

102. Vas. XXVI, 2-3; Baudh. II, 7, 18, 20. Medh. and Gov.'
point out that only trifling faults can be expiated in this manner,
otherwise the chapter on penances would be useless.

II, toy.

STUDENTSHIP.

49

seated, in the evening, destroys the sin he committed
during the day.

103. But he who does not (worship) standing in
the morning, nor sitting in the evening, shall be
excluded, just like a 6udra, from all the duties and
rights of an Aryan.

104. He who (desires to) perform the ceremony
(of the) daily (recitation), may even recite the Savitri
near water, retiring into the forest, controlling his
organs and concentrating his mind.

105. Both when (one studies) the supplementary
treatises of the Veda, and when (one recites) the daily
portion of the Veda, no regard need be paid to for¬
bidden days, likewise when (one repeats) the sacred
texts required for a burnt oblation.

106. There are no forbidden days for the daily
recitation, since that is declared to be a Brahma-
sattra (an everlasting sacrifice offered to Brahman) ;
at that the Veda takes the place of the burnt
oblations, and it is meritorious (even), when (natural
phenomena, requiring) a cessation of the Veda-study,
take the place of the exclamation Vasha/.

107. For him who, being pure and controlling his
organs, during a year daily recites the Veda according
to the rule, that (daily recitation) will ever cause sweet
and sour milk, clarified butter and honey to flow.

103. Baudh. II, 17, 15.

104. Baudh. II, 11,6. ‘Even,’ i.e. ‘if he is unable to recite other
Vedic texts.’

105-106. Ap. 1 ,12,1-9; Vas. XIII, 7. The last clause of verse
106 finds its explanation by the passage from the .Satapatha-brah-
ma»a, quoted by Ap. 1 ,12, 3. Anadhvaya/; (‘ not studying ’) means
‘ a cause for the interruption of the study, such as thunder or a
violent wind, which takes the place of the exclamation Vasha/.’

107. Vi. XXX, 34-38; I, 41-46. Nar. and Nand.

explain the four terms ‘ sweet and sour milk, clarified butter and

05] E

50

LAWS OF MANU.

n,io8.

108. Let an Aryan who has been initiated, (daily)
offer fuel in the sacred fire, beg food, sleep on the
ground and do what is beneficial to his teacher, until
(he performs the ceremony of) Sam&vartana (on re¬
turning home).

109. According to the sacred law the (following)
ten (persons, viz.) the teacher’s son, one who desires
to do service, one who imparts knowledge, one who
is intent on fulfilling the law, one who is pure, a per¬
son connected by marriage or friendship, one who
possesses (mental) ability, one who makes presents
of money, one who is honest, and a relative, may be
instructed (in the Veda).

no. Unless one be asked, one must not explain
(anything) to anybody, nor (must one answer) a per¬
son who asks improperly; let a wise man, though
he knows (the answer), behave among men as (if he
were) an idiot.

in. Of the two persons, him who illegally explains
(anything), and him who illegally asks (a question),
one (or both) will die or incur (the other’s) enmity.

honey/as symbolical of the four objects of human existence, merit,
wealth, pleasure, and liberation. Medh. quotes this interpretation as
the opinion of ‘ others.’

108. Ap. I, 4,16, 23, 25, 28, 32 ; Gaut. II, 8, 30, 35; Vas. VII,
9, 15; Vi. XXVIII, 4, 7, 9, 12 ; Baudh. I, 3, 16, 4, 4-8; Ya gn. I,
25. Regarding the Samavartana, see below, III, 3-4.

109. Ya gn. I, 28. Dharmata/fc, 4 according to the sacred law ’
(Kull., Nand.), means according to Medh., Gov., and Nar. ‘for the
sake of spiritual merit.*

no. Ap. I, 32, 22-24; Vas. II, 12; Baudh. I, 4, 2; Vi. XXIX, 7.
G&dzik, ‘ an idiot/ means according to Medh. and Kull. 6 dumb.’

hi. Vi. XXIX, 7. The person who will die is in either case
the offender. If both offend, both will die. Vidvesha*» vadhi-
ga^ati, 4 will incur (the other’s) enmity/ means according to
Medh. and Gov. ‘will incur odium among men;* according to
R£gh. i will lose the reward/

II, 119 .

STUDENTSHIP.

51

112. Where merit and wealth are not (obtained
by teaching) nor (at least) due obedience, in such
(soil) sacred knowledge must not be sown, just as
good seed (must) not (be thrown) on barren land.

113. Even in times of dire distress a teacher of
the Veda should rather die with his knowledge than
sow it in barren soil.

114. Sacred Learning approached a Brihmawa and
said to him: * I am thy treasure, preserve me, deliver
me not to a scorner; so (preserved) I shall become
supremely strong.’

115. ‘But deliver me, as to the keeper of thy
treasure, to a Brahmawa whom thou shalt know to
be pure, of subdued senses, chaste and attentive.’

116. But he who acquires without permission the
Veda from one who recites it, incurs the guilt of
stealing the Veda, and shall sink into hell.

117. (A student) shall first reverentially salute
that (teacher) from whom he receives (knowledge),
referring to worldly affairs, to the Veda, or to the
Brahman.

118. A Br&hmawa who completely governs him¬
self, though he know the Savitrl only, is better than
he who knows the three Vedas, (but) does not con¬
trol himself, eats all (sorts of) food, and sells all
(sorts of goods).

119. One must not sit down on a couch or seat

112. Baudh. I, 4, 1 ; Vi. XXIX, 8.

113. This verse shows, as Medh. and Gov. point out, that under
ordinary circumstances a learned man must teach what he knows.

114-115. Vas. II, 8-10; Vi. XXIX, 9-10; Nirukta II, 4.
u6. Vi. XXX, 41-42.

117. Ap.1, 14, 7-9; Gaut. VI, 1-3, 5; Vas. XIII, 41-43; Baudh. I,
3, 25-28; Vi. XXXII, 1-4. This rule refers to any casual meeting.
119. Ap. I, 8, 11, 14, 17; Gaut. II, 21, 25.

E 2

LAWS OF MANU.

II, 120.

5*

which a superior occupies; and he who occupies a
couch or seat shall rise to meet a (superior), and
(afterwards) salute him.

120. For the vital airs of a young man mount
upwards to leave his body when an elder ap¬
proaches ; but by rising to meet him and saluting
he recovers them.

121. He who habitually salutes and constantly
pays reverence to the aged obtains an increase of
four (things), (viz.) length of life, knowledge, fame,
(and) strength.

122. After the (word of) salutation, a Br&hma«a
who greets an elder must pronounce his name, say¬
ing, ‘ I am N. N.’

123. To those (persons) who, when a name is
pronounced, do not understand (the meaning of) the
salutation, a wise man should say, ‘ It is Iand (he
should address) in the same manner all women.

124. In saluting he should pronounce after his
name the word bho/i; for the sages have declared
that the nature of bho/j is the same as that of (all
proper) names.

125. A Brahmawa should thus be saluted in re¬
turn, ‘ May’st thou be long-lived, O gentle one! ’

121. Ap. I, 5, 15 ; Baudh. I, 3, 26. Instead of vidya or pra^wd,
* knowledge/ Medh. reads dharma//, ‘ spiritual merit/ and the same
reading is given sec. man. in the text of Gov.

122. Ap. I, 5,12 ; Gaut. VI, 5 ; Vas. XIII, 45; Baudh. I, 3, 27;
Vi. XXVIII, 17 ; Ya.gn. I, 26. ‘After the word of salutation/ i. e.
after the word abhivadaye, ‘ I salute’ (Gov., Kull., Nar., Nand.).

123. Vas. XIII, 46. I.e. to those who either are unacquainted
with grammar or with the Dharmasdstra (Medh.). Nand. places
this verse after verse 126.

124. yi. XXVIII, 17.

125. Ap. I, 5,18; Vas. XIII, 46. The translation of the second
half of the verse is based on the reading ‘ ptirvaksharapluta^/ which

II, 128.

STUDENTSHIP.

S3

and the vowel 'a’ must be added at the end of
the name (of the person addressed), the syllable
preceding it being drawn out to the length of three
moras.

126. A Brdhma^a who does not know the form
of returning a salutation, must not be saluted by a
learned man; as a 6ttdra, even so is he.

127. Let him ask a Br&hma/Ja, on meeting him,
after (his health, with the word) kurala, a Kshatriya
(with the word) anamaya, a Vabya (with the word)
kshema, and a 5 udra (with the word) anarogya.

128. He who has been initiated (to perform a
6rauta sacrifice) must not be addressed by his name,
even though he be a younger man; he who knows

Nand. gives, and Nar. mentions as adopted by ‘ some.’ It follows
the interpretation of these two commentators which agrees in sub¬
stance with the rule of Vasish//m. The meaning is that Devadatta
is to be pronounced ‘ Devadatti^a,* Harabhftte, ‘ Harabhfita^ya,’ &c.

Medh. and Kull. take the passage as follows : ‘ and the vowel
(i.e.) “a” (and so forth) at the end of the name, (or in case the
word ends in a consonant) that of the preceding syllable, must be
drawn out the length of the three moras.’ According to this in¬
terpretation, which requires the reading 4 purvakshara^ pluta//,’
Manu’s rule agrees with Ap. and Pawini VIII, 2, 83. The obvious
objection is that Medh. and Kull. are forced to take akara, ‘ the
vowel a,’ in the sense of ‘ a vowel such as a,’ and to understand
with pftrvakshara/* the word svara//, which does not occur in the
verse. Gov. and Ragh. go far off the mark. Most commentators
think that the word vipra//, 1 a Brahma;/a,’ is meant to include other
Aryans also; but see Ap. I, 14, 23.

126. It follows from this verse that ^Sttdras must never be greeted
in the manner prescribed in the preceding rule.

127. Ap. I, 24, 26-29. The rule refers to friends or relatives
meeting, not to every one who returns a salute (Gov.).

128. Gaut. VI, 19. The rule refers to the time between the
performance of the Dikshamyesh/i or initiatory ceremony and the
final bath on completion of the sacrifice (Medh., Kull.). Besides
bho^ and bhavat, the titles dikshita or ya^amdna are to be used.

54

LAWS OF MANU.

II, 139.

the sacred law must use in speaking to such (a man
the particle) bho h and (the pronoun) bhavat (your
worship).

129. But to a female who is the wife of another
man, and not a blood-relation, he must say, ‘ Lady’
(bhavati) or ‘ Beloved sister! ’

130. To his maternal and paternal uncles, fathers-
in-law, officiating priests, (and other) venerable per¬
sons, he must say, ‘ I am N. N.,’ and rise (to meet
them), even though they be younger (than himself).

131. A maternal aunt, the wife of a maternal
uncle, a mother-in-law, and a paternal aunt must be
honoured like the wife of one’s teacher; they are
equal to the wife of one’s teacher.

132. (The feet of the) wife of one’s brother, if she
be of the same caste (varwa), must be clasped every
day; but (the feet of) wives of (other) paternal and
maternal relatives need only be embraced on one’s
return from a journey.

133. Towards a sister of one’s father and of one’s
mother, and towards one’s own elder sister, one must
behave as towards one’s mother; (but) the mother is
more venerable than they.

134. Fellow-citizens are called friends (and equals
though one be) ten years (older than the other), men

129. Vi. XXXII, 7.

130. Ap. I, 14, 11; Gaut. VI, 9; Vas. XIII, 41; Baudh. I, 4,
45; Vi. XXXII, 4. Gurftn, ‘ (other) venerable persons, i. e. those
venerable on account of their learning and austerities’ (Kull., Ragh.),
or * his betters, because they are richer and so forth, e. g. the son of
a sister ’ (Medh.), or ‘ the husband of a maternal aunt and so forth,
but not those more learned than himself’ (Gov.), or ‘ the teacher
and the rest ’ (Nand.), or the * sub-teachers ’ (upadhyaya, Nar.).

131-132. Gaut. VI, 9; Ap. I, 14; Vi. XXXII, 2-3.

134. Ap. I, 14, 13; Gaut. VI, 14-17. Those who are ‘friends’

II, 139 -

STUDENTSHIP.

55

practising (the same) fine art (though one be) five
years (older than the other), •Srotriyas (though)
three years (intervene between their ages), but
blood-relations only (if the) difference of age be
very small.

135. Know that a Brdhma«a of ten years and
Kshatriya of a hundred years stand to each other
in the relation of father and son ; but between those
two the Br£hma«a is the father.

136. Wealth, kindred, age, (the due performance
of) rites, and, fifthly, sacred learning are titles to
respect; but each later-named (cause) is more
weighty (than the preceding ones).

1 37. Whatever man of the three (highest) castes
possesses most of those five, both in number and
degree, that man is worthy of honour among them ;
and (so is) also a -S’fidra who has entered the tenth
(decade of his life).

138. Way must be made for a man in a carriage,
for one who is above ninety years old, for one dis¬
eased, for the carrier of a burden, for a woman, for
a Snataka, for the king, and for a bridegroom.

139. Among all those, if they meet (at one time),
a Snataka and the king must be (most) honoured;

and equals may address each other with the words bhoA, bhavat,
or vayasya, ‘ friend.’ The explanation of the verse, which is sub¬
stantially the same in all the commentaries, is based on Gaut.’s
passage, while Haradatta’s interpretation of Ap. somewhat differs.

135. Ap. I, 14, 25; Vi. XXXII, 17.

136. Gaut. VI, 20; Vas. XIII, 56-57; Vi. XXXII, 16; Y&gn.
I, 116.

137. Gaut. VI, xo; Ya^il. I, 116.

1 38-139. Ap. 11,11,5-7; Gaut.VI, 24-25; Vas. XIII, 58-60;
Baudh. II, 6, 30; Vi. LXIII, 51; Yagn. I, 117. For the explana¬
tion of the term Sn&taka, see below, IV, 31.

56

LAWS OF MANU.

II, 140.

and if the king and a Sn&taka (meet), the latter
receives respect from the king.

140. They call that Brahma^a who initiates a
pupil and teaches him the Veda together with the
Kalpa and the Rahasyas, the teacher ( 4 /C’arya, of the
latter).

141. But he who for his livelihood teaches a
portion only of the Veda, or also the Angas of
the Veda, is called the sub-teacher (upidhyaya).

142. That Brihmawa, who performs in accord¬
ance with the rules (of the Veda) the rites, the
Garbh&dhana (conception-rite), and so forth, and
gives food (to the child), is called the Guru (the
venerable one).

143. He who, being (duly) chosen (for the pur¬
pose), performs the Agnyadheya, the P&kaya^was,
(and) the (SYauta) sacrifices, such as the Agnish-
/oma (for another man), is called (his) officiating
priest.

144. That (man) who truthfully fills both his ears
with the Veda, (the pupil) shall consider as his
father and mother; he must never offend him.

145. The teacher (a£arya) is ten times more

140-141. Ap.1,1,13; Gaut. I, 9-10; Vas. Ill, 21-23; Vi.XXIX,
i-2; Yag'ji. I, 34-35. Kalpa, i. e. the S(liras referring to sacrifices.
Rahasyas, lit.‘the secret portions,’i.e. the Upanishads and their
explanation (Medh., Gov., Kull., Nand., Ragh.), or ‘the extremely
secret explanation of the Veda and Angas, not the Upanishads,
because they are included in the term Veda’ (Nar).

142. Yaffil. I, 34. The person meant is the natural father.

143 - Vi- XXIX, 3 ; Y&gn. I, 35.

144. Ap. I, 1, 14; Vas. II, 10; Vi. XXX, 47. ‘Truthfully,’ i.e.
in such a manner that there is no mistake in the pronunciation
or in the text of the Veda.

145. Vas. XIII, 48; Yaffil. I, 35. The commentators try to
reconcile the meaning of this verse and the next following one by

II, l&O.

STUDENTSIIIP.

57

venerable than a sub-teacher (up&dhy&ya), the father
a hundred times more than the teacher, but the*
mother a thousand times more than the father.

146. Of him who gives natural birth and him who
gives (the knowledge of) the Veda, the giver of the
Veda is the more venerable father; for the birth
for the sake of the Veda (ensures) eternal (rewards)
both in this (life) and after death.

147. Let him consider that (he received) a (mere
animal) existence, when his parents begat him
through mutual affection, and when he was born
from the womb (of his mother).

148. But that birth which a teacher acquainted
with the whole Veda, in accordance with the law,
procures for him through the Savitri, is real, exempt
from age and death.

149. (The pupil) must know that that man also
who benefits him by (instruction in) the Veda, be
it little or much, is called in these (Institutes) his
Guru, in consequence of that benefit (conferred by
instruction in) the Veda.

150. That Brahma«a who is the giver of the birth

assuming, cither that the term a^arya refers in this case to one
who merely performs the rite of initiation and teaches the G&yatri
only (Medh., Kull.), or that the word ‘ father ’ denotes a father who
initiates his own child and teaches it the Veda (Gov., Nai\). But
it is more probable that two conflicting opinions are here placed
side by side, because both are based on an ancient tradition; see
Gaut. II, 50-51.

146-148. Ap. I, 1, 15-17; Gaut. I, 8; Vas. II, 3-5; Vi. XXX,
44 ~ 45 * N&r. and Nand. read utpadakabrahmapitro^, ‘of the
two fathers, i. e. him who procreates the body and him who (gives
the birth) for the Veda/

149. Iha, lit. ‘here/ i.e. in these Institutes (Kull.), or ‘in the
chapter on saluting 9 (Gov.), But it may also mean ‘in this
world/

58

LAWS OF MANU.

^ igt*

for the sake of the Veda and the teacher of the
prescribed duties becomes by law the father of an
aged man, even though he himself be a child.

151. Young Kavi, the son of Arigiras, taught
his (relatives who were old enough to be) fathers,
and, as he excelled them in (sacred) knowledge, he
called them ‘ Little sons.’

152. They, moved with resentment, asked the
gods concerning that matter, and the gods, having
assembled, answered, ‘ The child has addressed you
properly.’

153. ‘For (a man) destitute of (sacred) know¬
ledge is indeed a child, and he who teaches him
the Veda is his father; for (the sages) have always
said “ child ” to an ignorant man, and “ father” to a
teacher of the Veda.’

154. Neither through years, nor through white
(hairs), nor through wealth, nor through (powerful)
kinsmen (comes greatness). The sages have made
this law, * He who has learnt the Veda together with
the Arigas (AntiMna) is (considered) great by us.’

155. The seniority of Br£hma«as is from (sacred)
knowledge, that of Kshatriyas from valour, that of
VaLyas from wealth in grain (and other goods), but
that of Yftdras alone from age.

igi. Baudh. I, 3, 42. .Suu,‘young,’ seems to be aname or nick¬
name in Baudh.'s passage. Parigr/hya,‘as he excelled them’ (Nand.),
means according to Medh., Gov., Kull., Nar., and Ragh. ‘as on
account of his learning he had received them (as his) pupils.’
Pitrrn, lit. ‘ fathers,' means according to Nar. ‘ the manes, i.e. the
Agnishvattas and the rest.’

154. AnManaA, ‘who has learnt the Veda and the Angas’
(Kull., N&r., Nand., Ragh.), means according to Medh. and Gov.
‘ who teaches the Veda and the Angas.’

155. Vi. XXXII, 18.

II, i6i.

STUDENTSHIP.

59

156. A man is not therefore (considered) venerable
because his head is gray; him who, though young, *
has learned the Veda, the gods consider to be
venerable.

157. As an elephant made of wood, as an antelope
made of leather, such is an unlearned Brahma«a;
those three have nothing but the names (of their
kind).

158. As a eunuch is unproductive with women, as
a cow with a cow is unprolific, and as a gift made
to an ignorant man yields no reward, even so is a
BrAhma^a useless, who (does) not (know) the Rik as.

159. Created beings must be instructed in (what
concerns) their welfare without giving them pain, and
sweet and gentle speech must be used by (a teacher)
who desires (to abide by) the sacred law.

160. He, forsooth, whose speech and thoughts are
pure and ever perfectly guarded, gains the whole
reward which is conferred by the Vedanta.

161. Let him not, even though in pain, (speak
words) cutting (others) to the quick; let him not
injure others in thought or deed; let him not utter
speeches which make (others) afraid of him, since
that will prevent him from gaining heaven.

156. Nar. and Nand. read slhaviro bhavati, K. sthaviro gneyo
for vrz'ddho, ‘ venerable.’

157. Vas. Ill, 11; Baudh. I, 1, 10.

158. Rik as, i.e. the Veda (Gov., Nar.).

159. Ap. I, 8, 25-30; Gaut. II, 42. This and the following
verses refer in the first instance to the behaviour of the teacher
towards his pupils; see also below, VIII, 299-300.

160. The Ved&nta are the Upanishads, and the reward meant
is ‘final liberation’ (Gov., Kull., Nar., Nand., Ragh.). Medh.,
however, prefers to take Vedanta in the sense of‘the maxims or
teaching of the Veda,’ and thinks that the reward includes all
rewards for Vedic rites.

6o

LAWS OF MANU.

II, 162.

162. A Brahma^a should always fear homage as
' if it were poison; and constantly desire (to suffer)
scorn as (he would long for) nectar.

163. For he who is scorned (nevertheless may)
sleep with an easy mind, awake with an easy mind,
and with an easy mind walk here among men; but
the scorner utterly perishes.

164. A twice-born man who has been sanctified
by the (employment of) the means, (described above)
in due order, shall gradually and cumulatively per¬
form the various austerities prescribed for (those
who) study the Veda.

165. An Aryan must study the whole Veda to¬
gether with the Rahasyas, performing at the same
time various kinds of austerities and the vows pre¬
scribed by the rules (of the Veda).

166. Let a Brihmawa who desires to perform
austerities, constantly repeat the Veda; for the study

162. This verse contains an advice to the pupil who must go
begging (Medh.).

164. ‘The means (described above),’ i. e. ‘the various sacra¬
ments.’ Vedadhigamikaw tapa/j, ‘ the (various) austerities (pre¬
scribed) for (those who study) the Veda,’ means according to Nar.
and Nand. ‘ the austerities, consisting in the study of the Veda; ’
see also Ap. I, 12, 1-2.

165. ‘The whole Veda,’ i.e. ‘the Veda with the Angas’ (Medh.,
‘others,’ Nar.), or ‘ one entire .Sakha consisting of the Mantras and
the Brahma«a ’ (Medh., Gov., Kull.). ‘ Rahasyas,’ i. e. ‘ the Upa-
nishads' (Medh., Gov., Kull., Nand.), or ‘the secret explanation of
the Veda’ (NSr.). ‘Various kinds of austerities,’ i.e. ‘fasting,
KriWn&s, &c.’ (Medh., Nar., Nand.), or ‘the restrictive rules
applicable to students ’ (Medh., ‘ others,’ Gov., Kull.), or ‘ particular
observances, such as feeding a horse while one reads the Arvamedha
texts’ (Ragh.). ‘The vows,’ i.e. the Mahanamnivrata, &c .; see
Aankhayana Gnhya-sfttra II, n-13.

166. Ap. I, 12, 1-2; Ya^ii. I, 40.

II, if**

STUDENTSHIP.

61

of the Veda is declared (to be) in this world the
highest austerity for a Brahmawa.

167. Verily, that twice-born man performs the
highest austerity up to the extremities of his nails,
who, though wearing a garland, daily recites the
Veda in private to the utmost of his ability.

168. A twice-born man who, not having studied
the Veda, applies himself to other (and worldly
study), soon falls, even while living, to the condition
of a v^hdra and his descendants (after him).

169. According to the injunction of the revealed
texts the first birth of an Aryan is from (his natural)
mother, the second (happens) on the tying of the
girdle of Mu%"a grass, and the third on the initiation
to (the performance of) a (.Srauta) sacrifice.

170. Among those (three) the birth which is sym¬
bolised by the investiture with the girdle of Mu«fa
grass, is his birth for the sake of the Veda; they
declare that in that (birth) the S&vitri (verse) is his
mother and the teacher his father.

171. They call the teacher (the pupil’s) father
because he gives the Veda; for nobody can perform
a (sacred) rite before the investiture with the girdle
of Mu«fa grass.

172. (He who has not been initiated) should not
pronounce (any) Vedic text excepting (those required
for) the performance of funeral rites, since he is on a
level with a < 5 fldra before his birth from the Veda.

167. Satapatha-brShmarta XI, 5, 7, 4.

168. Vas. Ill, 2; Vi. XXVIII, 36.

169-170. Vi. XXVIII, 37-38; Vas. II, 3; Y&gn. I, 39;
Aitareya-brahma»a I, 1; Max Mttller, Hist. Anc. Sansk. Lit.,
p. 390 seq. a

• 171-172. Ap. II, 15,19 ; Gaut. 1 ,10; II, 4-5; Vas. II, 4, 6-7;
Baudh. I, 3, 6; Vi. XXVIII, 40.

62

LAWS OF MANU.

II, 173.

173. The (student) who has been initiated must
be instructed in the performance of the vows, and
gradually learn the Veda, observing the prescribed
rules.

174. Whatever dress of skin, sacred thread, girdle,
staff, and lower garment are prescribed for a (student
at the initiation), the like (must again be used) at the
(performance of the) vows.

175. But a student who resides with his teacher
must observe the following restrictive rules, duly
controlling all his organs, in order to increase his
spiritual merit.

176. Every day, having bathed, and being purified,
he must offer libations of water to the gods, sages
and manes, worship (the images of) the gods, and
place fuel on (the sacred fire).

177. Let him abstain from honey, meat, perfumes,
garlands, substances (used for) flavouring (food),
women, all substances turned acid, and from doing
injury to living creatures,

178. From anointing (his body), applying colly-

173—174. Vi. XXVII, 28. ‘The vows,’i.e.‘the observances and
the restrictive rules, such as offering fuel, the prohibition of
sleeping in the day-time’ (Kull., Nar.), or ‘the Veda-vows, the
Godana, &c.’ (Medh., Gov., Ragh.), or ‘penances, such as the
Pr^ffpatya’ (Nand. and Nar.). In the second verse Kull. also
adopts the explanation of Medh. and Gov.

176-182. Ap. I, 2, 17, 23-30; 3, n-25; 4, 13-23; Gaut. II,
8-9, 12-17; Vas. VII, 15, 17; Baudh. I, 3, 19-20, 23-24; Vi.
XXVIII, 4-g, n, 48-51; Yagn. I, 25, 33.

177. RasSn, ‘substances (used for) flavouring,’i.e. ‘molasses and
the like' (Gov., Kull., N&r.), ‘clarified butter, oil, and the like’
(Nand.). N&r. adds that others interpret rasan to mean the
poetical rasas or sentiments. Medh. mentions the same ex¬
planation and two more: (1) spices; (2) juicy fruits and canes
like sugar-cane.

II, 184-

STUDENTSHIP.

63

rium to his eyes, from the use of shoes and of an
umbrella (or parasol), from (sensual) desire, anger, J
covetousness, dancing, singing, and playing (musical
instruments),

179. From gambling, idle disputes, backbiting,
and lying, from looking at and touching women, and
from hurting others.

180. Let him always sleep alone, let him never
waste his manhood; for he who voluntarily wastes
his manhood, breaks his vow.

181. A twice-born student, who has involuntarily
wasted his manly strength during sleep, must bathe,
worship the sun, and afterwards thrice mutter the

verse (which begins), * Again let my strength
return to me.’

182. Let him fetch a pot full of water, flowers,
cowdung, earth, and Kura grass, as much as may be
required (by his teacher), and daily go to beg food.

183. A student, being pure, shall daily bring food
from the houses of men who are not deficient in (the
knowledge of) the Veda and in (performing) sacrifices,
and who are famous for (following their lawful)
occupations.

184. Let him not beg from the relatives of his
teacher, nor from his own or his mother’s blood-
relations ; but if there are no houses belonging to

179. Ganavada, ‘idle disputes’ (Medh., Gov., Kull., Ragh.), or
‘gossiping’ (Medh., Nar.).

180. Vi. XXVIII, 48. Regarding the consequences of com¬
mitting such an offence, see below, XI, 119-124.

181. Vi. XXVIII, 51. The verse occurs Taitt. Ar. I, 30.

182. Nand. reads udakumbhan, ‘pots filled with water.’

183. Baudh. I, 3, 18; Vi. XXVIII, 9; Ap. I, 3, 25; Gaut.
II) 35 -

184. Gaut. II, 37-38.

6 4

LAWS OF MANU.

II,

strangers, let him go to one of those named above,
taking the last-named first;

185. Or, if there are no (virtuous men of the kind)
mentioned above, he may go to each (house in the)
village, being pure and remaining silent; but let him
avoid Abhii'astas (those accused of mortal sin).

186. Having brought sacred fuel from a distance,
let him place it anywhere but on the ground, and
let him, unwearied, make with it burnt oblations to
the sacred fire, both evening and morning.

187. He who, without being sick, neglects during
seven (successive) days to go out begging, and to
offer fuel in the sacred fire, shall perform the penance
of an Avakimin (one who has broken his vow).

188. He who performs the vow (of studentship)
shall constantly subsist on alms, (but) not eat the
food of one (person only); the subsistence of a
student on begged food is declared to be equal (in
merit) to fasting.

189. At his pleasure he may eat, when invited,
the food of one man at (a rite) in honour of the

186. ‘From a distance,’ i.e. ‘from a lonely place in the forest
not defiled by any impurities.’ Vihayasi, ‘ anywhere but on the
ground,’ means lit. ‘ in the air,’ and is explained variously by ‘ on
the roof of the house’ (Medh., Gov., Kull.), ‘on a platform and
the like’ (Nar.), ‘in the open air’ (Nand.), ‘in any pure place
except on the ground’ (Rfigh.). The purpose is, as most com¬
mentators think, to preserve the wood from defilement. But,
according to ‘ others,’quoted by Medh., with whom Nand. seems
to agree, the object is to let it become dry in the open air.

187. Vi. XXVIII, 52; Ya gii. Ill, 281. The penance for an
Avakirmn is mentioned below, XI, 119-120.

188. Y &gii. I, 32.

189. Y'dgn. I, 32. ‘Observing the conditions of his vow,’i.e.
‘ avoiding honey, meat, and the like.’ AVshivat, * like a hermit ’
(Medh., Gov., Nar., Nand.), or ‘like an ascetic’ (yati, Kull.).

II, 194-

STUDENTSHIP.

65

gods, observing (however the conditions of) his vow,
or at a (funeral meal) in honour of the manes, be¬
having (however) like a hermit.

190. This duty is prescribed by the wise for a
Brihma»a only; but no such duty is ordained for
a Kshatriya and a Vauya.

191. Both when ordered by his teacher, and with¬
out a (special) command, (a student) shall always
exert himself in studying (the Veda), and in doing
what is serviceable to his teacher.

192. Controlling his body, his speech, his organs
(of sense), and his mind, let him stand with joined
hands, looking at the face of his teacher.

193. Let him always keep his right arm uncovered,
behave decently and keep his body well covered,
and when he is addressed (with the words), ‘ Be
seated,’ he shall sit down, facing his teacher.

194. In the presence of his teacher let him always
eat less, wear a less valuable dress and ornaments

According to Gov., Nar., and Nand., the last phrase means that
the student is to eat at a funeral dinner a little wild-growing rice
and other food fit for a hermit (munyanna), while Medh. and
Kull. think that the two phrases prohibit the eating of forbidden
food only.

190. ‘This duty’ refers to the permission given in verse 189.
According to Nar. ‘others,’ however, thought that this verse
annulled the rule given in verse 188.

191. Ap. I, 5, 27, 4, 23; Gaut. I, 54; II, 29-30; Vi. XXVIII,
.6-7; Ya^ra. I, 27.

193. Ap. I, 6, 18-20. I read, with Medh., Kull., and Ragh.,
sussu»vnia/i, and translate it according to the latter two, ‘keep
his body well covered.’ Medh. explains it, ‘ well guarding himself
(in his speech).’ N£r. and K. read like the editions, susawyataA,
and Nand. samahitaA, ‘ concentrating his mind.' Gov. seems to
have had the same reading as Nfir.

194. Ap. I, 4, 22, 28; Gaut. II, 21; Baudh. I, 3, 21; Vi.
XXVIII, 13.

[25]

F

66

LAWS OF MANU.

II, 193.

(than the former), and let him rise earlier (from his
bed), and go to rest later.

195. Let him not answer or converse with (his
teacher), reclining on a bed, nor sitting, nor eating,
nor standing, nor with an averted face.

196. Let him do (that), standing up, if (his teacher)
is seated, advancing towards him when he stands,
going to meet him if he advances, and running after
him when he runs;

197. Going (round) to face (the teacher), if his
face is averted, approaching him if he stands at a
distance, but bending towards him if he lies on a
bed, and if he stands in a lower place.

198. When his teacher is nigh, let his bed or seat
be low ; but within sight of his teacher he shall not
sit carelessly at ease.

199. Let him not pronounce the mere name of
his teacher (without adding an honorific title) behind
his back even, and let him not mimic his gait, speech,
and deportment.

200. Wherever (people) justly censure or falsely
defame his teacher, there he must cover his ears or
depart thence to another place.

201. By censuring (his teacher), though justly, he

I 95 “ I 97 « Ap. I, 6, 5-9; Gaut. II, 25-28; Vas. VII, 12 ; Baudh.
I, 3, 38; Vi. XXVIII, 18-22.

197. Nidexe tishMata//, ‘if he stands in a lower place* (N&r.,
Nand.), means according to Medh., Gov., Kull., and R&gh. ‘ if he
stands close.*

198. Ap. I, 2, 21,6,13-17; Gaut. II, 14-15,21; Vi. XXVIII, 12,23.

199. Gaut. II, 23; Vi. XXVIII, 24-25. The epithets to be
added to the teacher's name are upadhyaya, bha//a (Medh.), a&irya
(Kull.), or Tarawa and the like (Nar.).

200. Vi. XXVIII, 26.

201. Paribhokd, * he who lives on his teacher*s substance,’ means.

II, 206.

STUDENTSHIP.

67

will become (in his next birth) an ass, by falsely
defaming him, a dog; he who lives on his teacher's
substance, will become a worm, and he who is envious
(of his merit), a (larger) insect.

202. He must not serve the (teacher by the inter¬
vention of another) while he himself stands aloof,
nor when he (himself) is angry, nor when a woman
is near; if he is seated in a carriage or on a (raised)
seat, he must descend and afterwards salute his
(teacher).

203. Let him not sit with his teacher, to the
leeward or to the windward (of him); nor let him
say anything which his teacher cannot hear.

204. He may sit with his teacher in a carriage
drawn by oxen, horses, or camels, on a terrace, on
a bed of grass or leaves, on a mat, on a rock, on a
wooden bench, or in a boat.

205. If his teacher’s teacher is near, let him be¬
have (towards him) as towards his own teacher; but
let him, unless he has received permission from his
teacher, not salute venerable persons of his own
(family).

206. This is likewise (ordained as) his constant
behaviour towards (other) instructors in science,
towards his relatives (to whom honour is due),

according to Nar. and Nand. ‘he who cats without the teacher’s
permission the best food, obtained by begging.’ The latter ex¬
planation is supported by the meaning of the preposition ‘ pari ’
in parivelta and paryadhata.

202. ‘Nor when a woman is near,’ i.e. ‘if the teacher is in the
company of his wife.’

203. Ap. I, 6, 15.

204. Ap. I, 7, 7, 12-13 > Vi. XXVIII, 27-28.

205. Ap. I, 7, 29-30, 8, 19-20; Vi. XXVIII, 29-30.

206. Ap. I, 8, 28.

F 2

68

LAWS OF MANU.

II, 207.

towards all who may restrain him from sin, or may
give him salutary advice.

207. Towards his betters let him always behave
as towards his teacher, likewise towards sons of his
teacher, born by wives of equal caste, and towards
the teacher’s relatives both on the side of the father
and of the mother.

208. The son of the teacher who imparts in¬
struction (in his father’s stead), whether younger
or of equal age, or a student of (the science of)
sacrifices (or of other Angas), deserves the same
honour as the teacher.

209. (A student) must not shampoo the limbs
of his teacher’s son, nor assist him in bathing,
nor eat the fragments of his food, nor wash his
feet.

210. The wives of the teacher, who belong to
the same caste, must be treated as respectfully as

207. Ap. I, 7, 29-30; Baudh. I, 3, 44. Aryeshu, ‘bom by wives
of the same class/ i.e. of the Brahma«a caste (Medh., Kull., Gov.),
means according to Nar. and Nand. ‘who are virtuous/ It is,
however, probable that it has its literal meaning, ‘ who are Aryans,
i.e. born by wives of the first three castes/ Medh. prefers another
reading, guruputre tatha^&rye, ‘towards the teacher's son who
(takes the place of his father as) teacher/ R&gh. gives the same
reading.

208. Ap. I, 7, 30; Vi. XXVIII, 31. The translation, given
above, follows Medh., Gov., and N&r. Nand. differs only slightly,
‘ The son of the teacher who imparts instruction (while his father
is engaged) in a sacrifice (or the like), whether younger or of
the same age, or a student, deserves, &c/ Kull. and R£gh. con¬
strue quite differently, ‘ The son of the teacher, whether younger
or of equal age, or a student, if he (be able to) teach the Veda,
deserves the same honour as the teacher, when (he is present) at
the performance of a sacrifice/

209-212. Ap. I, 7, 27; Gaut. II, 31-34; Baudh. I, 3, 33-37;
Vi. XXVIII, 32-33; XXXII, 2, 5-7.

II, 219*

STUDENTSHIP.

69

the teacher; but those who belong to a different
caste, must be honoured by rising and salutation.

211. Let him not perform for a wife of his teacher
(the offices of) anointing her, assisting her in the
bath, shampooing her limbs, or arranging her hair.

212. (A pupil) who is full twenty years old, and
knows what is becoming and unbecoming, shall not
salute a young wife of his teacher (by clasping) her
feet.

213. It is the nature of women to seduce men in
this (world); for that reason the wise are never
unguarded in (the company of) females.

214. For women are able to lead astray in (this)
world not only a fool, but even a learned man, and
(to make) him a slave of desire and anger.

215. One should not sit in a lonely place with
one’s mother, sister, or daughter; for the senses are
powerful, and master even a learned man.

2x6. But at his pleasure a young student may
prostrate himself on the ground before the young
wife of a teacher, in accordance with the rule, and
say, ‘ I, N. N., (worship thee, O lady).’

217. On returning from a journey he must clasp
the feet of his teacher’s wife and daily salute her (in
the manner just mentioned), remembering the duty
of the virtuous.

218. As the man who digs with a spade (into the
ground) obtains water, even so an obedient (pupil)
obtains the knowledge which lies (hidden) in his
teacher.

219. A (student) may either shave his head, or

216-217. Vi. XXXII, 13-15.

219. Gaut. I, 27 ; Vas. VII, 11; Vi. XXVIII, 41; Ap. I, 30, 8;
Gaut. II, 10. Instead of‘while (he sleeps) in the village’ (Medh.

70

LAWS OF MANU.

II, 230 ,

wear his hair in braids, or braid one lock on the
crown of his head; the sun must never set or rise
while he (lies asleep) in the village.

220. If the sun should rise or set while he is
sleeping, be it (that he offended) intentionally or
unintentionally, he shall fast during the (next) day,
muttering (the Savitri).

221. For he who lies (sleeping), while the sun
sets or rises, and does not perform (that) penance, is
tainted by great guilt.

222. Purified by sipping water, he shall daily
worship during both twilights with a concentrated
mind in a pure place, muttering the prescribed
text according to the rule.

223. If a woman or a man of low caste perform
anything (leading to) happiness, let him diligently
practise it, as well as (any other permitted act) in
which his heart finds pleasure.

224. (Some declare that) the chief good consists
in (the acquisition of) spiritual merit and wealth,
(others place it) in (the gratification of) desire and
(the acquisition of) wealth, (others) in (the acqui-

* others,’ Kull., Ragh.). Mcdh., Gov., Nar., and Nand. give ‘while
(he stays) in the village.’ The former explanation is, however,
more probable on account of the following verse.

220. Ap. II, 12, 13-14; Gaut. XXIII, 21; Vas. XX, 4; Baudh.
II, 7, 16; Vi. XXVIII, 53. The translation of the last words follows
Gov. and Kull., while Medh., Nar., and Ragh. state that the penance
shall be performed during * the (next) day (or night),’ and that he
who neglects the evening prayer, shall fast in the evening and repeat
the Gayatri during the night. The parallel passages show that a
difference of opinion existed with respect to the performance of
this penance.

221. Vas. 1 ,18; Ap. II, 12, 22.

222. Ap. I, 30, 8; Gaut. II, 11 ; Baudh. II, 7 ; Vi. XXVIII, 2.

223. Ap. 11,29,11.

II, 231. STUDENTSHIP.

7 i

sition of) spiritual merit alone, and (others say that
the acquisition of) wealth alone is the chief good
here (below); but the (correct) decision is that it
consists of the aggregate of (those) three.

225. The teacher, the father, the mother, and an
elder brother must not be treated with disrespect,
especially by a Br&hmawa, though one be grievously
offended (by them).

226. The teacher is the image of Brahman, the
father the image of Pra^apati (the lord of created
beings), the mother the image of the earth, and an
(elder) full brother the image of oneself.

227. That trouble (and pain) which the parents
undergo on the birth of (their) children, cannot be
compensated even in a hundred years.

228. Let him always do what is agreeable to
those (two) and always (what may please) his
teacher; when those three are pleased, he obtains
all (those rewards which) austerities (yield).

229. Obedience towards those three is declared to
be the best (form of) austerity; let him not perform
other meritorious acts without their permission.

230. For they are declared to be the three worlds,
they the three (principal) orders, they the three
Vedas, and they the three sacred fires.

231. The father, forsooth, is stated to be the
Gcirhapatya fire, the mother the Dakshiwdgni, but

225. Ap. I, 14, 6; Vi. XXXI, 1-3. This verse is placed by
Kull. alone after the following one, while all the other com¬
mentators as well as K. observe the order followed above.

229. Vi. XXXI, 6.

’ 230. Vi. XXXI, 7. ‘The three worlds,’ i.e. ‘the earth, the
middle sphere, and the sky;’ ‘the three orders,’ i.e. ‘the first three
orders ’ (Kull., Nar., Nand.), ‘ the last three orders ’ (Medh., Gov.).

2 3I . Ap.I, 3,44; Vi. XXXI, 8.

72

LAWS OF MANU.

II, 232.

the teacher the Ahavaniya fire ; this triad of fires is
most venerable.

232. He who neglects not those three, (even after
he has become) a householder, will conquer the
three worlds and, radiant in body like a god, he will
enjoy bliss in heaven.

233. By honouring his mother he gains this
(nether) world, by honouring his father the middle
sphere, but by obedience to his teacher the world of
Brahman.

234. All duties have been fulfilled by him who
honours those three; but to him who honours them
not, all rites remain fruitless.

235. As long as those three live, so long let him
not (independently) perform any other (meritorious
acts); let him always serve them, rejoicing (to do
what is) agreeable and beneficial (to them).

236. He shall inform them of everything that
with their consent he may perform in thought, word,
or deed for the sake of the next world.

237. By (honouring) these three all that ought to
be done by man, is accomplished; that is clearly the
highest duty, every other (act) is a subordinate
duty.

238. He who possesses faith may receive pure
learning even from a man of lower caste, the highest

232. Vi. XXXI, 9. 233. Vi. XXXI, xo.

238. Ap. II, 29, 11. ‘The highest law,’ i.e.‘the means of
obtaining final liberation ’ (Kull.); but Medh., Gov., and Ragh.
refer the expression to advice in worldly matters. ‘ From a base
family,’ i.e. ‘ from a family where the sacred rites are neglected ’
(Medh.), ‘ from one that is lower than oneself’ (Kull.), ‘ from the
family of a potter or a similar (low caste),’ (Gov.) But probably
the rule refers to the practice to take particularly desirable brides
even from the families of outcasts; see Vas. XIII, 51-53.

II, 245 -

STUDENTSHIP.

73

law even from the lowest, and an excellent wife
even from a base family.

239. Even from poison nectar may be taken,
even from a child good advice, even from a foe (a
lesson in) good conduct, and even from an impure
(substance) gold.

240. Excellent wives, learning, (the knowledge
of) the law, (the rules of) purity, good advice, and
various arts may be acquired from anybody.

241. It is prescribed that in times of distress (a
student) may learn (the Veda) from one who is not a
BrOhma«a; and that he shall walk behind and serve
(such a) teacher, as long as the instruction lasts.

242. He who desires incomparable bliss (in
heaven) shall not dwell during his whole life in
(the house of) a non-Brahmazzical teacher, nor with
a BrOhmazza who does not know the whole Veda
and the Angas.

243. But if (a student) desires to pass his whole
life in the teacher’s house, he must diligently serve
him, until he is freed from this body.

244. A BrOhmazza who serves his teacher till
the dissolution of his body, reaches forthwith the
eternal mansion of Brahman.

245. He who knows the sacred law must not
present any gift to his teacher before (the Samovar-
tana) ; but when, with the permission of his teacher,
he is about to take the (final) bath, let him procure

240. Striyo ratnSni, ‘ excellent wives ’ (Kull., Ragh.), means ac¬
cording to Medh. and Gov. ‘ wives and gems.’

241. Ap. II, 4, 25; Gaut. VII, 1-3; Baudh. I, 3, 41-43.

243. Ap. II, 21, 6 ; Gaut. III. 5-6; Vas. VII, 4; Baudh. II, 11,

13; Vi. XXVIII, 43; 1,49-

245. Ap.1,7, 19; Gaut.II, 48-49; Vi. XXVIII, 42; Yag-n. 1 , 51.

74

LAWS OF MANU.

II, 246.

(a present) for the venerable man according to his
ability,

246. (Viz.) a field, gold, a cow, a horse, a parasol
and shoes, a seat, grain, (even) vegetables, (and
thus) give pleasure to his teacher.

247. (A perpetual student) must, if his teacher
dies, serve his son (provided he be) endowed with
good qualities, or his widow, or his Sapmda, in the
same manner as the teacher.

248. Should none of these be alive, he must
serve the sacred fire, standing (by day) and sitting
(during the night), and thus finish his life.

249. A Br&hma/za who thus passes his life as a
student without breaking his vow, reaches (after
death) the highest abode and will not be born again
in this world.

Chapter III.

1. The vow (of studying) the three Vedas under
a teacher must be kept for thirty-six years, or for

246. Most commentators read pritimaharct for dvahet, and with
this reading the translation must be, ‘ A field, gold .... he should
give to the teacher in order to please him/

247. Gaut. Ill, 7; Vi. XXVIII, 44-45; Ya gn. 1,49. Regarding
the term Sapi«</a, see below, V, 60.

248. Gaut. Ill, 8; Vas. VII, 5-6; Vi. XXVIII, 46 ; Yag?~i. I, 49.
Sarirazrc sadhayet, ‘ shall finish his life * (Medh., Gov.), means ac¬
cording to Kull. * shall make the soul connected with his body
perfect, i.e. fit for the union with Brahman/ N&r. and Ragh. take
the word similarly.

249. VI XXVIII, 49; Y%& I, 50.

III. 1. Ap. I, 2, 12-16; Gaut. II, 45-47; Vas.VIII, 1; Baudh.
I, 3 , Vi. XXVIII, 42; Y t&L I, 36.

The three Vedas meant are the j?zg-veda, Ya.gnr-veda, and
S£ma-veda. The Atharva-veda is here, as in most of the ancient
Dharma-sfitras, left out altogether. Baudhayana, alone, states that

Ill, 5.

householder; marriage.

75

half that time, or for a quarter, or until the (student)
has perfectly learnt them.

2. (A student) who has studied in due order the
three Vedas, or two, or even one only, without break¬
ing the (rules of) studentship, shall enter the order
of householders.

3. He who is famous for (the strict performance
of) his duties and has received his heritage, the Veda,
from his father, shall be honoured, sitting on a couch
and adorned with a garland, with (the present of) a
cow (and the honey-mixture).

4. Having bathed, with the permission of his
teacher, and performed according to the rule the
Samavartana (the rite on returning home), a twice-
born man shall marry a wife of equal caste who is
endowed with auspicious (bodily) marks.

5. A (damsel) who is neither a Sapmafa on the
mother’s side, nor belongs to the same family on

the term of studentship extends over forty-eight years, and that rule
includes the Atharva-veda.

2. Ya git. I, 52.

3. The meaning is, that the student who, after completing his
term, has become a Snataka, shall receive first, i.e. before his mar¬
riage, the honour of the Madhuparka (Ap. II, 8, 5-9) from the
person who instructed him. The phrase * who has received his
heritage, the Veda, from his father,’ indicates, according to the
commentators, that, as a rule, the father is to teach his son. As,
however, the teacher is considered the spiritual father of his pupil,
pitu^ might also be translated { from his (spiritual) father/

4. Gaut. IV, 1; Vas. VIII, 1; Ya gn. I, 52. Regarding the ‘aus¬
picious bodily marks/ see *$ahkhayana, Grfhya-stitra I, 5,10. See
also below, vers. 7-10.

5. Ap. II, 11, 15-16; Gaut. IV, 2-5; Vas. VIII, 1-2; Baudh.
II, 1, 32-38; Vi. XXIV, 9-10; Y igh. I, 53.

Asagotra kz. yd pitu^, ‘who does not belong to the same family
on the father’s side/ means according to Medh. and Kull. ‘between
whose father’s and the bridegroom’s family no blood-relationship is

76

LAWS OF MANU.

Ill, 6 .

the father’s side, is recommended to twice-born men
for wedlock and conjugal union.

6. In connecting himself with a wife, let him care¬
fully avoid the ten following families, be they ever
so great, or rich in kine, horses, sheep, grain, or
(other) property,

7. (Viz.) one which neglects the sacred rites, one
in which no male children (are born), one in which
the Veda is not studied, one (the members of) which
have thick hair on the body, those which are sub¬
ject to hemorrhoids, phthisis, weakness of digestion,
epilepsy, or white and black leprosy.

8. Let him not marry a maiden (with) reddish
(hair), nor one who has a redundant member, nor
one who is sickly, nor one either with no hair (on
the body) or too much, nor one who is garrulous or
has red (eyes),

9. Nor one named after a constellation, a tree,
or a river, nor one bearing the name of a low caste,
or of a mountain, nor one named after a bird, a

traceable.’ It is, however, very probable that gotra has a double mean¬
ing, vaidika and laukika gotra, and that, in the case of Brahmawas,
intermarriages between families descended from the same Z?fshi, and,
in the case of other Aryans, between families bearing the same name
or known to be connected, are forbidden. Kull.,Nar.,and Ragh. hold
that the first ka,, ‘ and,’ indicates that asagotra refers to the mother’s
side also, and Medh., Gov., Kull., Nar., and R&gh. think that on
account of the second ka, the word asapiWa must be taken to
refer to the father’s side also, and that thus intermarriages with the
daughter of a paternal aunt or with the paternal grandfather’s sister’s
descendants are forbidden. Maithune, ‘for conjugal union’ (Medh.,
Gov., Nar.), means according to Kull. and Ragh. ‘for the holy rites
to be performed by the husband and wife together.’ Nand. reads
amaithuni, ‘ one who is a virgin.’ Regarding the term Sapi»</a, see
below, V, 60.

7. Vi. XXIV, 11; Y &gn. I, 54.

8. Y ign. I, 53; Vi. XXIV, 12-16.

Ill, 13.

householder; marriage.

77

snake, or a slave, nor one whose name inspires
terror.

10. Let him wed a female free from bodily defects,
who has an agreeable name, the (graceful) gait of a
Hamsa or of an elephant, a moderate (quantity of)
hair on the body and on the head, small teeth, and
soft limbs.

it. But a prudent man should not marry (a
maiden) who has no brother, nor one whose father
is not known, through fear lest (in the former case
she be made) an appointed daughter (and in the
latter) lest (he should commit) sin.

12. For the first marriage of twice-born men
(wives) of equal caste are recommended; but for
those who through desire proceed (to marry again)
the following females, (chosen) according to the
(direct) order (of the castes), are most approved.

13. It is declared that a .Sildra woman alone (can
be) the wife of a .Sfidra, she and one of his own caste
(the wives) of a Vaisya, those two and one of his
own caste (the wives) of a Kshatriya, those three
and one of his own caste (the wives) of a Brdhmawa.

11. Y &gn. 1 ,53. ‘Lest he should commit sin,’ i. e. marry a Sagotra
or one sprung from an illicit union. The translation follows Kull.,Ndr.,
R&gh., and ‘others’ mentioned by Medh. But Medh. himself takes the
verse differently,‘A prudent man should not marry a (maiden) who
has no brother, if her father is not known (i.e. is dead or absent),
through fear lest she be made an appointed daughterwhile Gov.
explains it as follows, ‘A prudent man should not marry a (maiden)
who has no brother or whose father is not known, through fear lest
she be made an appointed daughter.’ According to the latter it
would be possible, in case the father is not known, that she might
be only the half-sister of her brother, and her real father, having no
children, might make her an appointed daughter.

12. Vi. XXIV, 1-4; Baudh. 1 ,16, 2-5.

13. Y $gn. I, 56 ; Vas. I, 25-26.

78

LAWS OF MANU.

Ill, r 4 .

14. A .SCtdra woman is not mentioned even in
any (ancient) story as the (first) wife of a Br£h-
ma/za or of a Kshatriya, though they lived in the
(greatest) distress.

15. Twice-born men who, in their folly, wed wives
of the low (iSttdra) caste, soon degrade their families
and their children to the state of .Sttdras.

16. According to Atri and to (Gautama) the son
of Utathya, he who weds a 6Yidra woman becomes an
outcast, according to .Saunaka on the birth of a son,
and according to Bhrt'gu he who has (male) offspring
from a (.SMra female, alone).

17. A Brahma^a who takes a Slidra wife to his
bed, will (after death) sink into hell; if he begets
a child by her, he will lose the rank of a Brahmawa.

18. The manes and the gods will not eat the
(offerings) of that man who performs the rites in

14. Vas. I, 27; Gaut. XV, 18; Ap. I, 18, 33.

15. Vi. XXV, 6.

16. Baudh. II, 2-7. The above translation follows Medh., Gov.,
Nand., and Ragh. But Kull. takes the last clause differently, ‘accord¬
ing to Bhr/gu on the birth of a son’s son.’ This version is supported,
as a quotation given by Nar. shows, by the Bhavishya-pura/za, which,
as usual, paraphrases Manu’s text, putrasya putram dsadya *Saunaka^
jfidrata/w gataA l bhngv&dayo *py evam eva patitatvam av&pnuyu^ n
There was, moreover, as this passage shows, an ancient explanation
of our verse, according to which the various names of ifrshis do
not refer to authors of law-books, but to founders of Gotras. This
view is adopted by Nar., and, according to him, the translation
should run as follows: * (A man of the family) of Atri who weds a
.Sftdra female, becomes an outcast, (one of the race) of Utathya's
son, on the birth of a son, and (one of) *Saunaka’s or Bhngu’s
(Gotras) by having no other but .Sftdra offspring/ It ought to be
noted that, according to Kull. alone, the three clauses refer to
Brahmawas, Kshatriyas, and Vahyas respectively. R&gh. particularly
objects to this opinion, which, according to him,‘some’ hold.

18. Vas. XIV, n; Vi. XXV, 7.

Ill, 24-

HOUSEHOLDER ; MARRIAGE.

79

honour of the gods, of the manes, and of guests
chiefly with a (.Sildra wife’s) assistance, and such
(a man) will not go to heaven.

19. For him who drinks the moisture of a .Sftdr&’s
lips, who is tainted by her breath, and who begets
a son on her, no expiation is prescribed.

20. Now listen to (the) brief (description of) the
following eight marriage-rites used by the four castes
(var#a) which partly secure benefits and partly pro¬
duce evil both in this life and after death.

21. (They are) the rite of Brahman (Brahma), that
of the gods (Daiva), that of the /?/shis (Arsha),
that of Pra^apati (Pra^apatya), that of the Asuras
(Asura), that of the Gandharvas (Gandharva), that
of the Rakshasas (Rakshasa), and that of the Pba-
/tas (PabaX-a).

22. Which is lawful for each caste (var»a) and
which are the virtues or faults of each (rite), all
this I will declare to you, as well as their good
and evil results with respect to the offspring.

23. One may know that the first six according to
the order (followed above) are lawful for a Brah-
ma«a, the four last for a Kshatriya, and the same
four, excepting the Rakshasa rite, for a Vai-sya and
a 6ildra.

24. The sages state that the first four are approved
(in the case) of a Brahmawa, one, the R&kshasa (rite

21-34. Ap. II, 11, 17-21; Gaut. IV, 6-15; Vas. I, 17-35;
Baudh. I, 20, 1-21, 23; Vi. XXIV, 18-28; Y&gii. I, 58-61.

23. It seems extremely probable that this and the next three
verses contain, as Sir W. Jones thinks, several conflicting opinions
on the permissibility of the different marriage rites. The commen¬
tators, however, try to reconcile them by various tricks of inter¬
pretation.

8 o

LAWS OF MANU.

HI, 25.

in the case) of a Kshatriya, and the Asura (marriage
in that) of a Vaurya and of a .S’ftdra.

25. But in these (Institutes of the sacred law)
three of the five (last) are declared to be lawful
and two unlawful; the Paua/va and the Asura
(rites) must never be used.

26. For Kshatriyas those before-mentioned two
rites, the G&ndharva and the Rakshasa, whether
separate or mixed, are permitted by the sacred
tradition.

27. The gift of a daughter, after decking her
(with costly garments) and honouring (her by pre¬
sents of jewels), to a man learned in the Veda and
of good conduct, whom (the father) himself invites,
is called the Br&hma rite.

28. The gift of a daughter who has been decked
with ornaments, to a priest who duly officiates at
a sacrifice, during the course of its performance,
they call the Daiva rite.

29. When (the father) gives away his daughter
according to the rule, after receiving from the bride¬
groom, for (the fulfilment of) the sacred law, a cow
and a bull or two pairs, that is named the Arsha rite.

30. The gift of a daughter (by her father) after

26. ‘ Mixed,’ i. e. when a girl is forcibly abducted from her father’s
house after a previous understanding with her lover.

27. Nar. and Ragh. refer ariayitva, ‘ after honouring,’ to the
bridegroom, and take it in the sense of* after honouring (the bride¬
groom with the honey-mixture).’

29. ‘ For the (fulfilment of) the sacred law,’ i. e. ‘ not with the
intention of selling his child’ (Medh.); see also below, vers. 51-54.
‘According to the rule/ i. e. 1 pronouncing the words prescribed for
making a gift’ (Ndr.).

30. ‘Has shown honour/i.e.‘to the bridegroom by the honey-
mixture’ (Nar., Nand.).

HI, 34-

HOUSEHOLDER ; MARRIAGE.

8l

he has addressed (the couple) with the text, ‘ May
both of you perform together your duties,’ and has
shown honour (to the bridegroom), is called in the
Sm/'fti the Prafapatya rite.

31. When (the bridegroom) receives a maiden,
after having given as much wealth as he can afford,
to the kinsmen and to the bride herself, according
to his own will, that is called the Asura rite.

32. The voluntary union of a maiden and her
lover one must know (to be) the Gandharva rite,
which springs from desire and has sexual intercourse
for its purpose.

33. The forcible abduction of a maiden from her
home, while she cries out and weeps, after (her kins¬
men) have been slain or wounded and (their houses)
broken open, is called the Rakshasa rite.

34. When (a man) by stealth seduces a girl who
is sleeping, intoxicated, or disordered in intellect,
that is the eighth, the most base and sinful rite
of the PhaXas.

31. ‘ According to his own will/ i. c. ‘ not in accordance with the
injunction of the sacred law, as in the case of the Arsha rite’
(Medh., Gov., Kull., Nar., Nand.)

32. Gov. and Nar. here enter on a discussion of the question
whether the prescribed offerings and wedding ceremonies are to be
performed in the case of the Gandharva, Rakshasa, and Paija^a
rites. Relying on a passage of Devala and of the Bahvrz^a Gnhya-
paruishta (Saunaka) they are of opinion that the homas must be
performed, at least in the case of Aryan couples. But they hold
on the strength of Manu's dictum, VIII, 226, which restricts the
use of the Mantras to women, married as virgins, that the Vedic
nuptial texts must not be recited. From the comment of Medh.
on verse 34 it would appear that the opinions on the subject were
divided, and that some held weddings with the recitation of Mantras
to be permissible, while others denied the necessity of any
wedding.

[25]

G

82

LAWS OF MANU.

in. 35*

35. The gift of daughters among Br&hma«as is
most approved, (if it is preceded) by (a libation of)
water; but in the case of other castes (it may be
performed) by (the expression of) mutual consent.

36. Listen now to me, ye Brdhmawas, while I
fully declare what quality has been ascribed by
Manu to each of these marriage-rites.

37. The son of a wife wedded according to the
Brdhma rite, if he performs meritorious acts, libe¬
rates from sin ten ancestors, ten descendants and
himself as the twenty-first.

38. The son born of a wife, wedded according to
the Daiva rite, likewise (saves) seven ancestors and
seven descendants, the son of a wife married by the
Arsha rite three (in the ascending and descending
lines), and the son of a wife married by the rite of
Ka (Pra"-&pati) six (in either line).

39. From the four marriages, (enumerated) suc¬
cessively, which begin with the Br&hma rite spring
sons, radiant with knowledge of the Veda and
honoured by the .Slsh/as (good men).

40. Endowed with the qualities of beauty and
goodness, possessing wealth and fame, obtaining as

35. Itaretarak&myayd, ‘ by (the expression of) mutual consent,’
i.e. by the parents, means according to Medh. ‘in consequence of
the mutual desire of the bride and the bridegroom.’ He mentions,
however, the other explanation too. The text refers probably to
customs like the sending of a cocoa-nut, which is usually adopted
by Kshatriyas.

37-42. Vi. XXIV, 29-32; Gaut. IV, 29-33; Baudh. I, 21, 1;
Ap. II, 12, 4 ; Ya Igii. I, 58-60, 90.

39. Regarding the explanation of the term Yisli/as, see below,
XII, 109.

40. Gov. and Kull. take the first adjective differently,' endowed
with beauty, goodness, and other excellent qualities.’ Regarding
the term ‘goodness’ (sattva), see below, XII, 31.

Ill, 46. HOUSEHOLDER ; MARRIAGE. 83

many enjoyments as they desire and being most
righteous, they will live a hundred years.

41. But from the remaining (four) blamable mar¬
riages spring sons who are cruel and speakers of
untruth, who hate the Veda and the sacred law.

42. In the blameless marriages blameless chil¬
dren are born to men, in blamable (marriages)
blamable (offspring); one should therefore avoid the
blamable (forms of marriage).

43. The ceremony of joining the hands is pre¬
scribed for (marriages with) women of equal caste
(var«a); know that the following rule (applies) to
weddings with females of a different caste (var;za).

44. On marrying a man of a higher caste a
Kshatriya bride must take hold of an arrow, a
VaLsya bride of a goad, and a .SYulra female of the
hem of the (bridegroom’s) garment.

45. Let (the husband) approach his wife in due
season, being constantly satisfied with her (alone);
he may also, being intent on pleasing her, approach
her with a desire for conjugal union (on any day)
excepting the Parvans.

46. Sixteen (days and) nights (in each month),

43. Vi. XXIV, 5-8 ; Ya gn. I, 62.

44. The bridegroom takes hold of the other end of the arrow or
of the goad, pronouncing the same texts which are recited on taking
the hand of a bride of equal caste (Nar.).

45. Ya gn. I, 80-81; Ap. II, i, 17-18; Gaut. V, 1-2 ; Vas. XII,
21-24 ; Vi. LXIX, 1; Baudh. IV, 17-19. Tadvrata^, 4 being intent
on pleasing her* (Medh., Kull.), means according to N&r. ‘being
careful to keep that rule (regarding the Parvans).’ With respect to
the Parvans, see below, IV, 128.

46. Y agn. I, 79. The days which the virtuous declared to be
unfit for conjugal intercourse are the first four after the appearance
of the menses.

G 2

8 4

LAWS OF MANU.

Ill, 47.

including four days which differ from the rest and
are censured by the virtuous, (are called) the natural
season of women.

47. But among these the first four, the eleventh
and the thirteenth are (declared to be) forbidden;
the remaining nights are recommended.

48. On the even nights sons are conceived and
daughters on the uneven ones; hence a man who
desires to have sons should approach his wife in due
season on the even (nights).

49. A male child is produced by a greater quan¬
tity of male seed, a female child by the prevalence
of the female; if (both are) equal, a hermaphrodite or
a boy and a girl; if (both are) weak or deficient in
quantity, a failure of conception (results).

50. He who avoids women on the six forbidden
nights and on eight others, is (equal in chastity to)
a student, in whichever order he may live.

51. No father who knows (the law) must take
even the smallest gratuity for his daughter; for a
man who, through avarice, takes a gratuity, is a
seller of his offspring.

52. But those (male) relations who, in their folly,
live on the separate property of women, (e. g. appro¬
priate) the beasts of burden, carriages, and clothes of
women, commit sin and will sink into hell.

48. Y &gn. I, 79.

50. 1 In whichever order he may live/ i.e.‘whether he be a house¬
holder or a hermit in the woods' (Kull., Nar.). Medh. thinks that
it is- merely an arthavada, and refers to no other order but that of
householders, while Govinda thinks that the verse permits even to
an ascetic who has lost all his children, to approach his wife during
two nights in each month. Kull. justly ridicules the last opinion.

51. Ap. II, 13, 11; Vas. I, 37-38 ; Baudh. I, 21, 2-3.

52. Medh. gives in the first place another explanation of this

Ill, 59.

HOUSEHOLDER; MARRIAGE.

85

53. Some call the cow and the bull (given) at an
Arsha wedding ‘a gratuity;’ (but) that is wrong,
since (the acceptance of) a fee, be it small or great,
is a sale (of the daughter).

54. When the relatives do not appropriate (for
their use) the gratuity (given), it is not a sale; (in
that case) the (gift) is only a token of respect and
of kindness towards the maidens.

55. Women must be honoured and adorned by
their fathers, brothers, husbands, and brothers-in-law,
who desire (their own) welfare.

56. Where women are honoured, there the gods
are pleased; but where they are not honoured, no
sacred rite yields rewards.

57. Where the female relations live in grief, the
family soon wholly perishes; but that family where
they are not unhappy ever prospers.

58. The houses on which female relations, not
being duly honoured, pronounce a curse, perish
completely, as if destroyed by magic.

59. Hence men who seek (their own) welfare, should
always honour women on holidays and festivals with
(gifts of) ornaments, clothes, and (dainty) food.

verse, which Nar. and Nand. consider the only admissible one:
‘ But those (male) relations who, in their folly, live on property ob¬
tained by (the sale of) women, (e. g.) carriages or beasts of burden
and clothes (received for) females, commit sin, &c.’ Nand. and K.
read narir yanani, ‘ female slaves, carriages, &c.’ The objection to
Nar.’s explanation is that nariyfinani can hardly mean ‘ carriages
received for females.’ The reading ‘ rurW is obviously a conjec¬
tural emendation.

53. Ap. II, 13, 12 ; Vas. I, 36.

55-60. Ya gn, I, 82.

58. Some copies of Medh. omit verses 58-66.

59. Instead of satkareshu (sawkareshu, Gov.), * on holidays/ like
the Kaumudi, the Mahanamni, and so forth (Gov., K11IL, Ragh.),

86

LAWS OF MANU.

Ill, 60.

6 0. In that family, where the husband is pleased
with his wife and the wife with her husband, happi¬
ness will assuredly be lasting.

61. For if the wife is not radiant with beauty, she
will not attract her husband; but if she has no
attractions for him, no children will be born.

62. If the wife is radiant with beauty, the whole
house is bright; but if she is destitute of beauty, all
will appear dismal.

63. By low marriages, by omitting (the per¬
formance of) sacred rites, by neglecting the study
of the Veda, and by irreverence towards Br&hma/zas,
(great) families sink low.

64. By (practising) handicrafts, by pecuniary trans¬
actions, by (begetting) children on 6Yidra females
only, by (trading in) cows, horses, and carriages, by
(the pursuit of) agriculture and by taking service
under a king,

65. By sacrificing for men unworthy to offer sacri¬
fices and by denying (the future rewards for good)
works, families, deficient in the (knowledge of the)
Veda, quickly perish.

66. But families that are rich in the knowledge
of the Veda, though possessing little wealth, are
numbered among the great, and acquire great
fame.

Nar. and Nand. read satkarewa, which, according to the former,
means ‘ by kind speech/

64. Baudh. I, 10, 28. Nar. says, * by (keeping) beasts of burden,
such as bullocks and horses/

65. Baudh. I, 10, 26. Instead of kulany a^u vi/zajyanti, f families
. . . perish quickly* (Gov., Kull.), Nar., Nand., and Ragh. read
kulany akulataw yanti, * (great) families lose their rank/

66. Baudh. 1,10, 29.

Ill, 70.

householder; daily rites.

87

67. With the sacred fire, kindled at the wedding,
a householder shall perform according to the law
the domestic ceremonies and the five (great) sacri¬
fices, and (with that) he shall daily cook his food.

68. A householder has five slaughter-houses (as
it were, viz.) the hearth, the grinding-stone, the
broom, the pestle and mortar, the water-vessel,
by using which he is bound (with the fetters of
sin).

69. In order to successively expiate (the offences
committed by means) of all these (five) the great
sages have prescribed for householders the daily
(performance of the five) great sacrifices.

70. Teaching (and studying) is the sacrifice
(offered) to Brahman, the (offerings of water and
food called) Tarpawa the sacrifice to the manes, the
burnt oblation the sacrifice offered to the gods, the

67. Ya gn, I, 97; Gaut. V, 7; Vi. LIX, 1; Baudb. II, 4, 22.
* The domestic ceremonies,’ i. e. ‘.all the rites prescribed in the
Grzhya-sfttras.’

68. Vi. LIX, 19. The translation of upaskara/z, ‘ the broom/rests
on the authority of Nar., \vho says, pesha/zena upakhaty a^uddhanity
upaskaro ’vaskarahetu/z 1 sa/zzmarfani bhftyishMapipilik&dihizzzsahe-
tu^ 11 The other commentators seem to take upaskara^ in its usual
sense, ‘ a household implement/ as they explain it by kuzzdfaka/'ahadi,
‘ a pot, a kettle, and the like’ (Medh.), kuzz</asazzzmar^anyadi, ‘ a pot,
a broom, and the like’ (Kull.), sawmar^anyadi, * a broom and the
like’ (Ragli.), ulftkhalamusaladi, ‘ a mortar and pestle and the like’
(K.). But it is clear from the context that one implement only is
meant.

69. yi. LIX, 20.

70. Ap. I, 12,15-13, 1; Gaut. V, 3, 9; Baudh. II, 5, n; II, ir,
1-6; Vi. LIX, 21-25; Y&gn. 1 , 102. By Bhfttas either ‘the gob¬
lins’ or ‘the living creatures’ may be understood. Medh. takes it
in the former sense. Nand. reads adhyayanam for adhy&panam,
and adds adhyayanam eva ’dhyayanam, ‘adhy&yana is the same as
adhyayana, studying.’

88

LAWS OF MANU.

III ) 7 r.

Bali offering that offered to the Bhfttas, and the
hospitable reception of guests the offering to men.

71. He who neglects not these five great sacri¬
fices, while he is able (to perform them), is not
tainted by the sins (committed) in the five places of
slaughter, though he constantly lives in the (order
of) house(-holders).

72. But he who does not feed these five, the
gods, his guests, those whom he is bound to main¬
tain, the manes, and himself, lives not, though he
breathes.

73. They call (these) five sacrifices also, Ahuta,
Huta, Prahuta, Brahmya-huta, and Pradta.

74. Ahuta (not offered in the fire) is the muttering
(of Vedic texts), Huta the burnt oblation (offered to
the gods), Prahuta (offered by scattering it on the
ground) the Bali offering given to the Bhfttas,
Brahmya-huta (offered in the digestive fire of Brah-
ma«as), the respectful reception of Brahmawa
(guests), and Praj.ita (eaten) the (daily oblation to
the manes, called) Tarpawa.

75. Let (every man) in this (second order, at least)
daily apply himself to the private recitation of the
Veda, and also to the performance of the offering to
the gods; for he who is diligent in the performance

72. ‘Those whom he is bound to maintain,’i.e. ‘aged parents
and so forth’ (Medh., Gov., Kull.), or ‘animals unfit for work’
(Medh.), or ‘ the BlifUas, goblins or living beings’ (Nar., Ragh.).
Nand. reads bhfitanam for bhn'tydnam, as Nar. and Ragh. seem to
have done.

73. Medh. remarks that these technical terms must belong to some
particular Aakhd of the Veda. Two of them occur in the beginning
of Baudhayana’s Grfhya-sfitra, Sacred Books of the East, vol. xiv,
p. xxxi, and four in I’araskara’s Gr/hya-sutra I, 4,1, as well as in
.Sdnkhdyana’s, I, 5,1. Nar., Nand., and K. read Brdhmahuta in
this and the next verses.

Ill, 8l. HOUSEHOLDER ; DAILY RITES. 89

of sacrifices, supports both the movable and the
immovable creation.

76. An oblation duly thrown into the fire, reaches
the sun; from the sun comes rain, from rain food,
therefrom the living creatures (derive their sub¬
sistence).

77. As all living creatures subsist by receiving
support from air, even so (the members of) all orders
subsist by receiving support from the householder.

78. Because men of the three (other) orders are
daily supported by'the householder with (gifts of)
sacred knowledge and food, therefore (the order of)
householders is the most excellent order.

79. (The duties of) this order, which cannot be
practised by men with weak organs, must be carefully
observed by him who desires imperishable (bliss in'*
heaven, and constant happiness in this (life).

80. The sages, the manes, the gods, the Bhfttas,
and guests ask the householders (for offerings and
gifts); hence he who knows (the law), must give to
them (what is due to each).

81. Let him worship, according to the rule, the
sages by the private recitation of the Veda, the gods
by burnt oblations, the manes by funeral offerings

76. Vas. XI, 13.

77-78. Vas. VIII, 14-16; Vi. LIX, 27-28.

78. Medh. points out that this verse indicates that householders
alone are, as a rule, to be the teachers of the Veda, not hermits or
ascetics. He adds, however, that the Institutes of the Bhikshus
prescribe that men of the latter two orders, too, shall teach. Simi¬
larly Nar. and Nand. point out that householders alone shall be
teachers, ‘except in times of distress’ (Nand.).

79. ‘ Of weak organs,’ i.e. ‘of uncontrolled organs’ (Medh., Gov.,
Kull.). Some MSS. of Medh. and Nand. read atyantam, ‘ exces¬
sive/ for nityam, ‘ constant/

80. Vi. LIX, 29.

81. Y&gn. I, 104.

go

LAWS OF MANU.

Ill, 83.

(.SY&ddha), men by (gifts of) food, and the Bhfttas
by the Bali offering.

82. Let him daily perform a funeral sacrifice with
food, or with water, or also with milk, roots, and
fruits, and (thus) please the manes.

83. Let him feed even one Brahma«a in honour
of the manes at (the .Srdddha), which belongs to the
five great sacrifices; but let him not feed on that
(occasion) any Brahma«a on account of the Vaisva-
deva offering.

84. A Br&hmawa shall offer according to the rule
(of his Grfhya-sfitra a portion) of the cooked food
destined for the Vabvadeva in the sacred domestic
fire to the following deities :

85. First to Agni, and (next) to Soma, then to
both these gods conjointly, further to all the gods
(VLve Dcva/z), and (then) to Dhanvantari,

86. Further to Kuhii (the goddess of the new-
moon day), to Anumati (the goddess of the full-moon
day), to Prafapati (the lord of creatures), to heaven
and earth conjointly, and finally to Agni Svish/akrft
(the fire which performs the sacrifice well).

82. Vi. LXVII, 23-25.

83. The object of the second part of the verse is to forbid that
two sets of Brahma/zas are to be fed at the daily Sraddha, as is done
at the Parvaz/a *Sraddha, see below, verse 125 seq. Nar. adds,
virveshaw devan &m nitya^raddhe pri/zanaw ndstiti dawitam 11 ‘ It is
indicated (hereby) that the Vhvedevas are not gladdened at the
daily *Sraddha/ Medh., Nand., and Ragh. read ki////£it, ‘ any (food)/
for kazra&t, ‘ any (Brahma/za)/

84. Ap. II, 3,16; Gaut. V, 10; Vi. LXVII, 3 (see also the Grzhya-
sutras, quoted by Professor Jolly on the last passage). The term
* a Brahmawa' is not intended to exclude other Aryans (Medh.,
Nand., Kull., Ragh.).

85. Each offering must be presented with a mantra, consisting
of the name of the deity in the dative case and the word ( svaha/

Ill, 9 x.

HOUSEHOLDER; DAILY RITES.

91

87. After having thus duly offered the sacrificial
food, let him throw Bali offerings in all directions
of the compass, proceeding (from the east) to the
south, to Indra, Yama, Varuwa, and Soma, as well
as to the servants (of these deities).

88 . Saying, 4 (Adoration) to the Maruts,’ he shall
scatter (some food) near the door, and (some)
in water, saying, 4 (Adoration to the waters; ’ he
shall throw (some) on the pestle and the mortar,
speaking thus, 4 (Adoration) to the trees.’

89. Near the head (of the bed) he shall make
an offering to Yri (fortune), and near the foot (of
his bed) to Bhadrakali; in the centre of the house
let him place a Bali for Brahman and for Vastoshpati
(the lord of the dwelling) conjointly.

90. Let him throw up into the air a Bali for all
the gods, and (in the day-time one) for the goblins
roaming about by day, (and in the evening one) for
the goblins that walk at night.

91. In the upper story let him offer a Bali to
Sarvatmabhtiti; but let him throw what remains
(from these offerings) in a southerly direction for
the manes.

87-92. Ap. II, 3, 12-15, 18-4, 9; Gaut. V, 11-17 ; Vi. LXVII,
4-22, 2 6.

89. U/Wirshake, ‘ near the head of the bed ’ (Medh., ‘ others,’
Ndr., Nand.), means according to Gov., Kull., and Rdgh. ‘in the
north-eastern portion of the house, where the head of the Vastu-
purusha, “the Lar,” is situated.’ Medh. says that the spot is
known as the devarara«a. The same authorities refer padataA, ‘at
the foot,’ to a spot in the south-west part of the building where the
Lar keeps his feet.

91. Prz'sh^avastuni, ‘ in the upper story,’or (if the house has
only one) ‘on the top of the house’ (Medh.), may also mean
according to Gov. and Nar. ‘behind the house,’ or according
to Nand. ‘ outside the house.’ Instead of ‘ Sarvatmabhftti ’ (Kull.,

92

LAWS OF MANU.

Ill, 92 .

92. Let him gently place on the ground (some
food) for dogs, outcasts, Kand&bas (.SVapa/£), those
afflicted with diseases that are punishments of former
sins, crows, and insects.

93. That Brahma;*a who thus daily honours all
beings, goes, endowed with a resplendent body, by
a straight road to the highest dwelling-place (i. e.
Brahman).

94. Having performed this Bali offering, he shall
first feed his guest and, according to the rule, give
alms to an ascetic (and) to a student.

95. A twice-born householder gains, by giving
alms, the same reward for his meritorious act which
(a student) obtains for presenting, in accordance with
the rule, a cow to his teacher.

Ragh.), Nar. and Nand. have ‘ Sarvanubhftti,’ Gov. ‘ Sarvannabhfiti.’
Nar. mentions a various reading 4 SarvannabhCita/ which seems
to have been also Medh.’s version. The same deity occurs
•Sankhdyana Grihya-sfitra II, 14, where Professor Oldcnberg has
Sarvannabhffii, while the Petersburg Diet, gives Sarvanubhdti.
Probably one of the last two readings is the original one, but
without further parallel passages it is difficult to say which has to
be chosen.

93. Instead of te^omCirti//, ‘ endowed with a resplendent body/
Kull. and Ragh. read te^omftrti, ‘ (to the highest) resplendent
(dwelling-place, i.e. Brahman).*

94. Vi. LIX, 14; LXVII, 27; Vas. XI, 5; Baudh. II, 5,15; Y&gfi.
I, 107. Bhikshave brahma£ari;/e, ‘ to an ascetic and to a student*
(Kull., Ragh.), may mean according to Medh. (who gives Kull/s
view also), either 4 to a begging student ’ or * to an ascetic who
is chaste.’ Gov. adopts the former explanation. ‘ According to
the rule/ i. e.‘ making him wish welfare ’ (Medh., Nand.); see also
Gaut. V, 18.

95. For vidhivad gurau or guro h , 6 according to the rule, to his
teacher/ Nand. reads agor yath&vidhi, ‘ according to the rule to
one who has no cow.’ The var. lect. is mentioned by Medh. also.
The 4 rule ’ referred to is, according to Gov. and Kull., that given

I, 204.

Ill, 102.

HOUSEHOLDER ; DAILY RITES.

93

96. Let him give, in accordance with the rule, to
a Brahmazza who knows the true meaning of the
Veda, even (a small portion of food as) alms, or a
pot full of water, having garnished (the food with
seasoning, or the pot with flowers and fruit).

97. The oblations to gods and manes, made by
men ignorant (of the law of gifts), are lost, if the
givers in their folly present (shares of them) to
Br&hmazzas who are mere ashes.

98. An offering made in the mouth-fire of Brah-
mazzas rich in sacred learning and austerities, saves
from misfortune and from great guilt.

99. But let him offer, in accordance with the rule,
to a guest who has come (of his own accord) a seat
and water, as well as food, garnished (with seasoning),
according to his ability.

100. A Bnihmazza who stays unhonoured (in the
house), takes away (with him) all the spiritual merit
even of a man who subsists by gleaning ears of corn,
or offers oblations in five fires.

101. Grass, room (for resting), water, and fourthly
a kind word; these (things) never fail in the houses
of good men.

102. But a Brahmazza who stays one night only
is declared to be a guest (atithi); for because he
stays (sthita) not long (anityam), he is called atithi
(a guest).

96. Satkn'tya, ‘having garnished, &c.’ (Kull., Ragh.), means
according to Medh. and Gov. * having honoured the recipient ’
(with fruits and flowers, Gov.).

97. Vas. Ill, 8.

99-118. Ap. II, 4, 11, 13-20; 6, 5-9; Gaut. V, 25-45; Vas.
VIII, 4-5, 11-15; Baudh. II, 5, 11-18; 6, 36-37; Vi. LXVII,
28-46; Y SgfL I, 104-109, 112-113.

94

LAWS OF MANU.

Ill, 103.

103. One must not consider as a guest a Brah-
ma»a who dwells in the same village, nor one who
seeks his livelihood by social intercourse, even though
he has come to a house where (there is) a wife, and
where sacred fires (are kept).

104. Those foolish householders who constantly
seek (to live on) the food of others, become, in con¬
sequence of that (baseness), after death the cattle of
those who give them food.

105. A guest who is sent by the (setting) sun in
the evening, must not be driven away by a house¬
holder; whether he have come at (supper-)time or
at an inopportune moment, he must not stay in the
house without entertainment.

106. Let him not eat any (dainty) food which he
does not offer to his guest; the hospitable recep¬
tion of guests procures wealth, fame, long life, and
heavenly bliss.

107. Let him offer (to his guests) seats, rooms,

103. Sawgalika^, ‘one who seeks his livelihood by social inter¬
course,’ is, according to Gov., Kull., and Rdgh., ‘one who makes
his living by telling wonderful or laughable stories and the like/
Medh. explains the word first by ‘he who stays being a fellow-
student (sahadhyayi)/ and afterwards by ‘ a Vawya, or ASfidra, or
a friend who makes friends with everybody, possessing wonderful
or laughable stories and the like, which are indicated by the word
sawgati/ N&r. says that sawgati means sambandha, ‘ connexion/
that s&wgatika is ‘ one who comes for such a reason/ Perhaps
the term might be rendered ‘a visitor on business or pleasure/
According to Kull. and Ragh., the last clause, ‘ where (there is)
a wife and sacred fires (are kept)/ indicates, that a householder
who has neither, need not entertain guests. But the words are
taken differently by Gov. and Nar., ‘nor him who travels with
his wife or his fires 9 (tatha yatra yasya pravasino ’pi bhary£gnayo
v& saha ga^^anti 1 etadanyatamaw svagrzha upasthitam Sgatam
apyathi atithiw na vidyat I n&tithidharmercar&iyet II N&r.).

107. Gaut.V, 38. ‘The rule refers to the case when many guests

HI, ii 3 -

householder; daily rites.

95

beds, attendance on departure and honour (while
they stay), to the most distinguished in the best
form, to the lower ones in a lower form, to equals
in an equal manner.

108. But if another guest comes after the Valsva-
deva offering has been finished, (the householder)
must give him food according to his ability, (but)
not repeat tire Bali offering.

109. A Brahmawa shall not name his family and
(Vedic) gotra in order to obtain a meal; for he who
boasts of them for the sake of a meal, is called by
the wise a foul feeder (vantasin).

no. But a Kshatriya (who comes) to the house
of a Brahmawa is not called a guest (atithi), nor a
Vaisya, nor a .Shdra, nor a personal friend, nor
a relative, nor the teacher.

in. But if a Kshatriya comes to the house of
a Brahmawa in the manner of a guest, (the house¬
holder) may feed him according to his desire, after
the above-mentioned Brahmawas have eaten.

112. Even a Vaisya and a -Sfldra who have ap¬
proached his house in the manner of guests, he may
allow to eat with his servants, showing (thereby) his
compassionate disposition.

113. Even to others, personal friends and so forth,
who have come to his house out of affection, he may

come at the same time.’ Upasanam, ‘ honour (while they stay),’
i. e. ‘ sitting with them and talking to them ’ (Medh.).

108. ‘When the Vauvadeva offering has been finished,’ i.e.
‘ when the dinner of the guests is over.’

nx. ‘In the manner of a guest,’ i.e. ‘having consumed his
provisions while on a journey, being an inhabitant of another
village or arriving at meal-time ’ (Medh., Gov., Kull.).

xi2. Nar. says, ‘he may cause them to be fed by his servants
in the same manner.’

96

LAWS OF MANU.

in, 114 .

give food, garnished (with seasoning) according to
his ability, (at the same time) with his wife.

114. Without hesitation he may give food, even
before his guests, to the following persons, (viz.) to
newly-married women, to infants, to the sick, and
to pregnant women.

115. But the foolish man who eats first without
having given food to these (persons) does, while he
crams, not know that (after death) he himself will
be devoured by dogs and vultures.

116» After the Brahmawas, the kinsmen, and the
servants have dined, the householder and his wife
may afterwards eat what remains.

xi 7. Having honoured the gods, the sages, men,
the manes, and the guardian deities of the house, the
householder shall eat afterwards what remains.

118. He who prepares food for himself (alone),
eats nothing but sin ; for it is ordained that the
food which remains after (the performance of) the
sacrifices shall be the meal of virtuous men.

119. Let him honour with the honey-mixture a
king, an officiating priest, a Sndtaka, the teacher,
a son-in-law, a father-in-law, and a maternal uncle,
(if they come) again after a full year (has elapsed
since their last visit).

114. Suvasini//, ‘to newly-married women,’ i.e. ‘ daughters-in-
law and daughters,’ may also mean according to ‘ others,’ quoted
by Medh. and Gov., ‘ females whose fathers or fathers-in-law live.’
Nand. reads svavasim// and explains it by ‘ sisters.’

1x9-120. Ap. II, 8, 5-9 ; Gaut.V, 27-30; Vas. XI,1-2; Baudh.
H, 6, 36-37; Ya gn. I, 110.

119. GuruA, ‘the teacher,’ means according to Nar. ‘the teacher
or the sub-teacher.’ Priya/x, which according to Gov., Kull., and
Ragh, means ‘a son-in-law,’ is taken by Nar. and Nand. in its
etymological sense, ‘ a friend.’

Ill, 123-

HOUSEHOLDER; SRADDHAS.

9 7

120. A king and a .Srotriya, who come on the
performance of a sacrifice, must be honoured with
the honey-mixture, but not if no sacrifice is being
performed; that is a settled rule.

121. But the wife shall offer in the evening (a
portion) of the dressed food as a Bali-oblation, with¬
out (the recitation of) sacred formulas; for that (rite
which is called the) Vaisvadeva is prescribed both
for the morning and the evening.

122. After performing the Pitrzya^/za, a Br&hmazza
who keeps a sacred fire shall offer, month by month,
on the new-moon day, the funeral sacrifice (6raddha,
called) Pi/zz/anvaharyaka.

123. The wise call the monthly funeral offering
to the manes Anvaharya (to be offered after the

120. According to one opinion, given by Medh., and according
to Gov., Kull., Nar., this rule is a limitation of verse 119, and
means that the two persons mentioned shall not receive the honey-
mixture, except when they come during the performance of a
sacrifice, however long a period may have elapsed since their last
visit. According to another explanation, mentioned by Medh.,
and according to Nand. and Ragh., the verse means that a king
and a Arotriya, who come before a year since their last visit
elapsed, on the occasion of a sacrifice, shall receive the madhu-
parka. The term Arotriya refers according to Medh. to a Snataka
or to an officiating priest, according to others quoted by him to
all the persons mentioned in the preceding verse, according to
Gov., Kull., Ndr., and Ragh. to a Sndtaka. The latter is probably
the correct opinion, as a Arotriya, i. e. one who knows a whole
recension of the Veda, must be a Sndtaka. Medh. approves of the
reading ya^nakarma^y upasthite.

121. Nand. omits this verse.

122. Yd^n. I, 217; Gaut. XV, 2. The sacrifice intended by
the term Pitnyagwa, 1 sacrifice offered to the fathers/ is the so-
called Pi^apitr/ya^na, a Arauta rite (Arvalayana, Arauta-sfitra II,.
6-7), and Pim&nvdharyaka is another name for the monthly
Ardddha.

C 2 S] H ,

98

LAWS OF MANU.

Ill, 124.

cakes), and that must be carefully performed with
the approved (sorts of) flesh (mentioned below).

124. I will fully declare what and how many
Brihma^as must be fed on that (occasion), who
must be avoided, and on what kinds of food (they
shall dine).

125. One must feed two (Br&hmawas) at the
offering to the gods, and three at the offering to
the manes, or one only on either occasion; even
a very wealthy man shall not be anxious (to enter¬
tain) a large company.

126. A large company destroys these five (advan¬
tages), the respectful treatment (of the invited, the
propriety of) place and time, purity and (the selec¬
tion of) virtuous Brahmawa (guests); he therefore
shall not seek (to entertain) a large company.

127. Famed is this rite for the dead, called (the
sacrifice sacred to the manes (and performed) on
the new-moon day; if a man is diligent in (per¬
forming) that, (the reward of) the rite for the
dead, which is performed according to Smarta rules,
reaches him constantly.

125. Vas. XI, 27; Baudh. II, 15, 10; Vi. LXXIII, 3-4; Gaut.
XV, 8, 21; Y&gn. I, 228. The offering to the gods, mentioned in
this verse, is an Anga or subsidiary rite preceding the offering to
the manes. Medh. takes the first part of this verse in a peculiar
manner, ‘ One must feed two (Brahmawas) at the offering to the
gods, and three (for each ancestor, or nine in all) at the offering
to the manes, or one on either occasion (i.e. one at the offering
to the gods and at the offering to the manes, one for each ancestor,
or three in all).’

126. Vas. XI, 28; Baudh. II, 15, 11.

127. Gov. reads vidhi^ kshaye for vidhukshaye, ‘on the new-
moon day,’ and explains the first half of the verse as follows:
‘ The ceremony called the (sacrifice) to the manes (is) a rite for
the benefit of the dead, (and) prescribed on the new-moon day

Ill, 132-

HOUSEHOLDER ; SRADDIIAS.

99

128. Oblations to the gods and manes must be
presented by the givers to a .Srotriya alone; what
is given to such a most worthy Brcihma«a yields
great reward.

129. Let him feed even one learned man at (the
sacrifice) to the gods, and one at (the sacrifice) to
the manes; (thus) he will gain a rich reward, not
(if he entertains) many who are unacquainted with
the Veda.

130. Let him make inquiries even regarding the
remote (ancestors of) a Brdhma«a who has studied
an entire (recension of the) Veda; (if descended from
a virtuous race) such a man is a worthy recipient of
gifts (consisting) of food offered to the gods or to
the manes, he is declared (to procure as great rewards
as) a guest (atithi).

131. Though a million of men, unacquainted with
the Rikz.s, were to dine at a (funeral sacrifice), yet
a single man, learned in the Veda, who is satisfied
(with his entertainment), is worth them all as far as
the (production of) spiritual merit (is concerned).

132. Food sacred to the manes or to the gods
must be given to a man distinguished by sacred

or in the house, i.e. to be performed by householders, not by men
of other orders.’ Medh., too, mentions another reading, which he
explains much in the same way as Gov., and which therefore may
have been vidhiA kshaye, though the MSS. read tithikshaye.

128. Vas. Ill, 8 ; Gaut. XV, 9.

130. Vi. LXXXII, 2. The examination must extend, as in
the case of officiating priests, to ten ancestors on the mother’s
and the father’s side (Medh., Gov.).

131. ‘The Rik as,’ i.e. ‘the Veda.’ Nar. reads instead of prltaA,
* who is satisfied,’ yuktaA, and combines it with dharmata/i, ‘ who
is properly invited.’ Nand. has vipraA, ‘ a Brahmawa,’ for pritaA.
K. has prima manu vipra/;, sec. manu yukta/i.

H 2

IOO

LAWS OF MANU.

HI, .33-

knowledge ; for hands, smeared with blood, cannot
be cleansed with blood.

133. As many mouthfuls as an ignorant man swal¬
lows at a sacrifice to the gods or to the manes, so
many red-hot spikes, spears, and iron balls must (the
giver of the repast) swallow after death.

134. Some Br&hmawas are devoted to (the pur¬
suit of) knowledge, and others to (the performance
of) austerities; some to austerities and to the reci¬
tation of the Veda, and others to (the performance
of) sacred rites.

135. Oblations to the manes ought to be care¬
fully presented to those devoted to knowledge, but
offerings to the gods, in accordance with the reason
(of the sacred law), to (men of) all the four (above-
mentioned classes).

136. If there is a father ignorant of the sacred
texts whose son has learned one whole recension
of the Veda and the Angas, and a son ignorant of
the sacred texts whose father knows an entire recen¬
sion of the Veda and the Angas,

133. Nar. thinks that the eater, not the giver of the feast will
bear the punishment. Medh. gives both this explanation and that
adopted in the translation. Nar. explains n'sh/i, ‘ spear,’ by kha</ga,
‘ sword.’ Nand. reads hulan for guc/an, ‘ balls,’ and says that hula
means ‘ a double-edged sword.’

134. ‘Knowledge,’i.e. ‘the knowledge of the supreme soul’
(Medh., Gov., Kull., N&r., Ragh.). Medh. and Nar. say that
ascetics, hermits, students, and householders are intended by the
four divisions mentioned in the text.

135. Vas. XI, 17; Baudh. II, 14, 3. The vferse indicates that
ascetics are particularly desirable guests.

1 36—137. Kull. remarks that the object of the verse is to teach
that at a .Sraddha the learned son of a learned father is to be
entertained, but not to permit the admission of a fool whose father
is learned.

Ill,i 43 . householder; sraddiias. ioi

137. Know that he whose father knows the Veda,
is the more venerable one (of the two); yet the other
one is worthy of honour, because respect is due to
the Veda (which he has learned).

138. Let him not entertain a personal friend at
a funeral sacrifice; he may gain his affection by
(other) valuable gifts; let him feed at a .Sraddha
a Br4hma«a whom he considers neither as a foe
nor as a friend.

139. He who performs funeral sacrifices and offer¬
ings to the gods chiefly for the sake of (gaining)
friends, reaps after death no reward for .Sr&ddhas
and sacrifices.

140. That meanest among twice-born men who
in his folly contracts friendships through a funeral
sacrifice, loses heaven, because he performed a
•SrSddha for the sake of friendship.

141. A gift (of food) by twice-born men, con¬
sumed with (friends and relatives), is said to be
offered to the Pba/fas; it remains in this (world)
alone like a blind cow in one stable.

142. As a husbandman reaps no harvest when
he has sown the seed in barren soil, even so the
giver of sacrificial food gains no reward if he pre¬
sented it to a man unacquainted with the Rik as.

143. But a present made in accordance with the
rules to a learned man, makes the giver and the

138-148. Ap. II, 17, 4-6; Gaut. XV, 12-14; Baudh. II, 14, 6;
Yagii. I, 220.

141. Ap. II, 17, 8-9. According to Medb., Gov., Kull., and
R&gh. pairaii means ‘offered after the manner of the Piraias.’
But the version given above, which follows N£r. and Nand., is
supported by the ancient verse, quoted by Apastamba, from which
Manu’s 51 oka is probably derived.

T02

LAWS OF MANU.

Ill, 144 .

recipient partakers of rewards both in this (life) and
after death.

144. (If no learned Br&hmawa be at hand), he
may rather honour a (virtuous) friend than an
enemy, though the latter may be qualified (by
learning and so forth); for sacrificial food, eaten by
a foe, bears no reward after death.

145. Let him (take) pains (to) feed at a Yraddha
an adherent of the 7 ?z'g-veda who has studied one
entire (recension of that) Veda, or a follower of the
Yafur-veda who has finished one .Sakha, or a
singer of Samans who (likewise) has completed (the
study of an entire recension).

146. If one of these three dines, duly honoured,
at a funeral sacrifice, the ancestors of him (who
gives the feast), as far as the seventh person, will
be satisfied for a very long time.

147. This is the chief rule (to be followed) in
offering sacrifices to the gods and manes; know
that the virtuous always observe the following sub¬
sidiary rule.

148. One may also entertain (on such occasions)
one’s maternal grandfather, a maternal uncle, a
sister’s son, a father-in-law, one’s teacher, a(
daughter’s son, a daughter’s husband, a cognate
kinsman, one’s own officiating priest or a man for
whom one offers sacrifices.

149. For a rite sacred to the gods, he who knows
the law will not make (too close) inquiries regarding
an (invited) Brahmazza; but when one performs a

148. Bandhum, ‘a cognate kinsman’ (Kull., Ragh.), is taken by
Medh. and Gov. in its widest sense, ‘ any remoter kinsman’ (sago-
tritdiA).

149 - Vi. LXXXII, 1-2.

Ill, 154.

householder; srAddhas.

103

ceremony in honour of the manes, one must care¬
fully examine (the qualities and parentage of the
guest).

150. Manu has declared that those Br&hma«as
who are thieves, outcasts, eunuchs, or atheists are
unworthy (to partake) of oblations to the gods
and manes.

151. Let him not entertain at a Jraddha one who
wears his hair in braids (a student), one who has not
studied (the Veda), one afflicted with a skin-disease,
a gambler, nor those who sacrifice for a multitude
(of sacrificers).

152. Physicians, temple-priests, sellers of meat,
and those who subsist by shop-keeping must be
avoided at sacrifices offered to the gods and to the
manes.

153. A paid servant of a village or of a king, a
man with deformed nails or black teeth, one who
opposes his teacher, one who has forsaken the
sacred fire, and a usurer;

154. One suffering from consumption, one who
subsists by tending cattle, a younger brother who

150-182. Ap. II, 17, 21; Gaut. XV, 16-19, 30-31; Vas. XI,
19; Vi. LXXXII, 3-30; Yagii. I, 222-224.

150. For the term ndstikavnlti, ‘ atheist,’ Medh. proposes, besides
the explanation given above, the other equally possible one, ‘ he who
derives his livelihood from atheists.’

151. Anadhiyanaw, ‘ one who has not studied the Veda,’ i. e.
‘ one who has been initiated only, but has not studied ’ (Kull.), or
‘ one who has not mastered the Veda ’ (Medh.), or ‘ one who has left
off studying’ (Nar.). Medh. and Nand. read durvdlam for durbalam,
‘ afflicted with a skin-disease,’ and the former explains his var. lect.
by ‘a bald or a red-haired man.’ ‘Those who sacrifice for a
multitude,’ i.e. ‘who offer the (forbidden) Ahina sacrifices, for on
that occasion there are many sacrificers’ (Nar.).

154. Nirakrfti/; ; ‘one who neglects the five great sacrifices’(Medh.,

104

LAWS OF MANU.

Ill, 155.

marries or kindles the sacred fire before the elder,
one who neglects the five great sacrifices, an enemy
of the Brihmawa race, an elder brother who marries
or kindles the sacred fire after the younger, and one
who belongs to a company or corporation,

155. An actor or singer, one who has broken the
vow of studentship, one whose (only or first) wife is
a .SYldra female, the son of a remarried woman, a
one-eyed man, and he in whose house a paramour
of his wife (resides);

156. He who teaches for a stipulated fee and he
who is taught on that condition, he who instructs
6Yldra pupils and he whose teacher is a .Stodra, he who
speaks rudely, the son of an adulteress, and the son
of a widow,

157. He who forsakes his mother, his father, or
a teacher without a (sufficient) reason, he who has

Kull., Ragh.), means according to Gov. ‘one who forsakes the
Vedas (and the rest)/ according to Nar. and Nand. ‘one who does
not recite the Veda privately/or ‘who has forgotten it/ Ga«&-
bhyantaraA, ‘ one who belongs to a company or corporation/ i.e.

‘ of men who live by one trade * (Medh., Gov., N&r.), is further ex¬
plained by Nar. by ‘ the headman of a village/ or ‘ the leader of
a caravan/ According to Kull. and Ragh. it means ‘one who
misappropriates the money of a corporation/

155. Kusilava, ‘an actor or singer/ is, as Medh. states, a very
wide term, including all ‘ bards, actors, jugglers, dancers, singers,
and the like/ Kull. wrongly understands by avakirwln, ‘ one who
has broken the vow of studentship/ an ascetic also who has become
unchaste. Such an ascetic is called &rftd£apatita.

156. V&gdush/a^, ‘one who speaks rudely/ means according to
‘ others/ quoted by Medh. and Kull., ‘ one who is accused of a
great crime' (abhuasta).

157. According to N&r. guro^, ‘a teacher/ denotes the £$irya
alone. Medh. blames this explanation, and refers it to the sub¬
teacher. The same explains kurn^Ui, ‘ he who eats the food of the
son of an adulteress/ by ‘ a glutton who eats sixty Palas of rice/

Ill, 160 . HOUSEHOLDER ; SRAdDHAS. 105

contracted an alliance with outcasts either through
the Veda or through a marriage,

158. An incendiary, a prisoner, he who eats the
food given by the son of an adulteress, a seller of
Soma, he who undertakes voyages by sea, a bard,
an oil-man, a suborner to perjury,

159. He who wrangles or goes to law with his
father, the keeper of a gambling-house, a drunkard,
he who is afflicted with a disease (in punishment of
former) crimes, he who is accused of a mortal sin, a
hypocrite, a seller of substances used for flavouring
food,

160. A maker of bows and of arrows, he who
lasciviously dallies with a brother s widow, the be¬
trayer of a friend, one who subsists by gambling,
he who learns (the Veda) from his son,

158. Agaradahi, 'an incendiary/ includes according to a verse,
quoted by Nand. also, * one who burns corpses for money/ Kfi/a-
karaka^, ‘a suborner to perjury’ (Gov., Kull.), means according
to Medh. and Ragh. ‘a false witness/ according to Nar. and
Nand. 'any one who commits fraud/ e.g. a forger, a falsifier
of weights and measures. ‘ Others ’ quoted by Medh. explain
somavikrayin as ' one who sells (the merit gained by) Soma
(sacrifices).’

159. 'He who wrangles or goes to law with his father/ e. g.
who forces him to divide the family estate (Medh.), see Gaut. XV,
19. Kitava^,‘the keeper of a gambling-house’ (Medh.), means
according to Gov. and Nand. 'one who makes others play for
himself/ according to Nar. 'a gambler for pleasure/ and according
to Nand.'a rogue/ ' Others/ however, read kekara^, 'a squinting
man/ and construe it with madyapa^,' a drunkard ’ (Medh., Gov.,
Kull., N&r., Nand., Ragh.). Rasa, ‘ substances used for flavouring
food/ e.g.' sugar-cane juice ’ (Gov., Kull., Ragh.), 'molasses' (Nar.).
Medh. explains rasada^ by vishada^, ‘ a poisoner/

160. I accept Gov/s and Rdgh/s explanation of agredidhishft-
pati, who believe it to be equivalent to didhishfipati explained
below, verse 173. Kull. and Nand. take it as 'the husband of
a younger sister married before the elder/ and Medh. as an

106 LAWS OF MANU. Ill, 161.

161. An epileptic man, one who suffers from scro¬
fulous swellings of the glands, one afflicted with
white leprosy, an informer, a madman, a blind man,
and he who cavils at the Veda must (all) be
avoided.

162. A trainer of elephants, oxen, horses, or
camels, he who subsists by astrology, a bird-fancier,
and he who teaches the use of arms,

163. He who diverts water-courses, and he who
delights in obstructing them, an architect, a mes¬
senger, and he who plants trees (for money),

164. A breeder of sporting-dogs, a falconer, one
who t defiles maidens, he who delights in injuring
living creatures, he who gains his subsistence from
^Sttdras, and he who offers sacrifices to the Gawas,

165. He who does not follow the rule of conduct,
a (man destitute of energy like a) eunuch, one who
constantly asks (for favours), he who lives by agri-

irregular compound consisting of agredidhishupati and didhishft-
pati, see Gaut. XV, 16. Though in some Smrztis agredidhishft-
pati has the meaning given by Kull., it seems here inadmissible,
on account of verse 173, which is meaningless, if it is not meant
to explain this term. Dyfttavrz'tti^, ‘ one who subsists by gambling/
means according to Medh. * one who makes others play for his
profit/ according to Gov., Kull., and Ragh. ‘the keeper of a
gambling-house/ Nar. and Nand. take it in its literal meaning.

162. Pakshizzazzz poshaka^, ‘a bird-fancier/ means according to
Medh. ‘ a trainer of hunting-falcons and hawks/

164. The commentators mention a var. lect. vr/shalaputra//, ‘one
who has only sons by a *Sudra wife/ for * one who gains his subsist¬
ence from Sfidras.’ Nar. and Nand. explain gazzanaz/z ydg-akaA by
‘one who sacrifices for gazzas/ i.e. many people or guilds. Accord¬
ing to the explanation of Medh., Gov., Kull., and Ragh., which has
been translated above, the performance of the Vin&yaka or Gazze^a-
homa (Ya^n. I, 270-294) may be meant. But it is also possible
to think of the Gazzahomas, which according to Baudh. IV, 8, 1
must not be performed for others.

Ill, 171. HOUSEHOLDER ; SRADDHAS. IO7

culture, a club-footed man, and he who is censured
by virtuous men,

166. A shepherd, a keeper of buffaloes, the hus¬
band of a remarried woman, and a carrier of dead
bodies, (all these) must be carefully avoided.

167. A Brdhmazza who knows (the sacred law)
should shun at (sacrifices) both (to the gods and to
the manes) these lowest of twice-born men, whose
conduct is reprehensible, and who are unworthy (to
sit) in the company (at a repast).

168. As a fire of dry grass is (unable to consume
the offerings and is quickly) extinguished, even so
(is it with) an unlearned Brahmawa; sacrificial food
must not be given to him, since it (would be) offered
in ashes.

169. I will fully declare what result the giver
obtains after death, if he gives food, destined for the
gods or manes, to a man who is unworthy to sit in
the company.

170. The R&kshasas, indeed, consume (the food)
eaten by BrAhmazzas who have not fulfilled the vow
of studentship, by a Parivettrz and so forth, and by
other men not admissible into the company.

171. He must be considered as a Parivettrz who

168. According to Medh. and Gov. the object of this verse is
to admit virtuous and learned men, afflicted with bodily defects,
as guests at rites in honour of the gods; see Vas. XI, 20. Kull.
thinks that the injunction to avoid ignorant men is repeated here
in order to show that they are as unfit as real ‘defilers of the
company.’

170. Avratai/z, ‘who have not fulfilled the vow of studentship’
(Gov., Kull., Rlgh.), means according to Medh. ‘ of bad conduct,’
and according to Nar. ‘ who do not observe the rules prescribed
for a Snataka and so forth.’

171. Usually a person who kindles the sacred fire before his elder
brother is called a Paryadhair/, and the elder brother a Paryahita.

108 LAWS OF MANU. Ill, 172.

marries or begins the performance of the Agnihotra
before his elder brother, but the latter as a Parivitti.

172. The elder brother who marries after the
younger, the younger brother who marries before
the elder, the female with whom such a marriage is
contracted, he who gives her away, and the sacri¬
ficing priest, as the fifth, all fall into hell.

173. He who lasciviously dallies with the widow
of a deceased brother, though she be appointed (to
bear a child by him) in accordance with the sacred
law, must be known to be a Didhishftpati.

174. Two (kinds of) sons, a Kunda and aGolaka,
are born by wives of other men; (he who is born)
while the husband lives, will be a Kunda, and (he who
is begotten) after the husband’s death, a Golaka.

175. But those two creatures, who are born of
wives of other men, cause to the giver the loss (of
the rewards), both in this life and after death, for the
food sacred to gods or manes which has been given
(to them).

176. The foolish giver (of a funeral repast) does
not reap the reward for as many worthy guests as a
man, inadmissible into company, can look on while
they are feeding.

177. A blind man by his presence causes to the
giver (of the feast) the loss of the reward for ninety
(guests), a one-eyed man for sixty, one who suffers
from white leprosy for a hundred, and one punished
by a (terrible) disease for a thousand.

178. The giver (of a .Sriddha) loses the reward,

172. Baudh. II, 1, 39.

177. Regarding the diseases which are punishments for sins
committed in a former life, see below, XI, 49 seq.

178. Paurtikam,‘ due for such a non-sacrificial gift,' i.e. ‘for one

ni, 183.

householder; sraddhas.

109

due for such a non-sacrificial gift, for as many Br&h-
mawas as a (guest) who sacrifices for .Sfidras may
touch (during the meal) with his limbs.

179. And if a Br&hmawa, though learned in the
Veda, accepts through covetousness a gift from such
(a man), he will quickly perish, like a vessel of
unburnt clay in water.

180. (Food) given to a seller of Soma becomes
ordure, (that given) to a physician pus and blood,
but (that presented) to a temple-priest is lost, and
(that given) to a usurer finds no place (in the world
of the gods).

18x. What has been given to a Brdhmawa who
lives by trade that is not (useful) in this world and
the next, and (a present) to a Brahmawa born of
a remarried woman (resembles) an oblation thrown
into ashes.

182. But the wise declare that the food which
(is offered) to other unholy, inadmissible men, enu¬
merated above, (is turned into) adipose secretions,
blood, flesh, marrow, and bone.

183. Now hear by what chief of twice-born men

which is given outside the sacrificial enclosure’ (Medh., Gov.), or
‘for the gift of food at a .Sraddha’ (Kull., Ragh.).

179. ‘From such a man,’ i. e. ‘from one who sacrifices for Sfidras.’

180. The meaning is that the giver will be born in his next life
among the animals, feeding on the unclean substances enumerated
(Medh., Gov., Kull., Ragh.), or that the food will be rejected by
the manes and the gods as impure (N&r.). Apratish//iam, ‘ finds no
place’ (Medh., Gov., Kull., RSgh.), means according to Nar. and
Nand. ‘ secures no fame (to the giver).’

182. According to Medh., Gov., Kull., and Ragh., it must be
understood that the giver will be born in his next existence as a
worm, feeding on the substances mentioned.

183-186. Ap. II, 17, 22; Gaut. XV, 28, 31; Vas. Ill, 19;
Baudh. II, 14, 2-3; Vi. LXXXIII; Ya^rL. I, 219-221.

no

LAWS OF MANU.

Ill, 184.

a company defiled by (the presence of) unworthy
(guests) is purified, and the full (description of) the
Br&hma«as who sanctify a company.

184. Those men must be considered as the sanc¬
tifiers of a company who are most learned in all the
Vedas and in all the Angas, and who are the
descendants of 6Yotriyas.

185. A Tri«4^iketa, one who keeps five sacred
fires, a Trisupama, one who is versed in the six
Angas, the son of a woman married according to
the Brahma rite, one who sings the G'yesh/^asiman,

186. One who knows the meaning of the Veda, and
he who expounds it, a student, one who has given
a thousand (cows), and a centenarian must be con¬
sidered as Br&hma»as who sanctify a company.

187. On the day before the ^raddha-rite is per¬
formed, or on the day when it takes place, let him
invite with due respect at least three Brahmawas,
such as have been mentioned above.

188. A Brahmawa who has been invited to a (rite)
in honour of the manes shall always control himself
and not recite the Veda, and he who performs the
►Srdddha (must act in the same manner).

185. Regarding the term Triwd&keta, see Ap. II, 17, 22, note.
Pafi^agni//, ‘ one who keeps five sacred fires’ (Medh., ‘others,’ Gov.,
Hull., Nand., Ragh.), means according to Medh. and Nar. ‘ one
who knows the panHgnividyd, taught in the A 7 /dndogyopanishad
IV, io seq. Trisuparwa means according to Medh., Ndr., and Nand.
‘ one who knows the texts Taitt. Ar. X, 38-40 ; but according to
Gov., Kull., and Ragh. ‘one who knows the portion of the Rig-veda
called Trisupar#a, Rig-veda X, 114, 3-5.

186. Nand. explains brahmaidri, ‘a student,’ by ‘a chaste man’
(see above, verse 50).

187. Ap. II, 17,11-15; Vas. XI, 17; Y&gfi,. I, 225.

188. Gaut. XV. 23; Y &gii. I, 225. ‘Control himself,’i.e. ‘remain
chaste.’

ITT, 195-

HOUSEHOLDER; srAddhas.

Ill

189. For the manes attend the invited Brdhma«as,
follow them (when they walk) like the wind, and sit
near them when they are seated.

190. But a Br£hma»a who, being duly invited to
a rite in honour of fhe gods or of the manes, in
any way breaks (the appointment), becomes guilty
(of a crime), and (in his next birth) a hog.

191. But he who, being invited to a .Sriddha,
dallies with a -S'ftdra woman, takes upon himself all
the sins which the giver (of the feast) committed.

192. The manes are primeval deities, free from
anger, careful of purity, ever chaste, averse from
strife, and endowed with great virtues.

193. Now learn fully from whom all these (manes
derive) their origin, and with what ceremonies they
ought to be worshipped.

194. The (various) classes of the manes are de¬
clared to be the sons of all those sages, Marl/-i and
the rest, who are children of Manu, the son of
Hirawyagarbha.

195. The Somasads, the sons of Vira^ - , are stated
to be the manes of the Sadhyas, and the Agnish-

189. ‘Like the wind/ i.e. ‘like the vital air, the breath' (Medh.,
Gov., Kull.). Medh. thinks that the manes enter the body of the
invited guests.

190. Medh. explains atikraman, ‘ breaks the appointment’(Gov.,
Kull., Nar., R&gh.), by ‘breaks the rules of chastity and the like.’
Medh. mentions a second ‘ improper’ explanation given by ‘others/
‘ does not accept the invitation.’

191. Medh., Gov., Nand., and RSgh. take vrfshali, ‘a .Sftdra
woman/ in the sense of ‘ his lascivious wife/ Probably the word
is used in its proper sense and indicates, as N&r. states, that inter¬
course with a *Sfldra wife is the worst offence in such a case.

194. ‘ Marini and the rest/ see above, I, 35.

195. Nar., Nand., and K. prima manu read Somasuta^ for
Somasada£.

112

LAWS OF MANU.

m, 196.

v&ttas, the children of Marini, are famous in the
world (as the manes) of the gods.

196. The Barhishads, born of Atri, are recorded
to be (the manes) of the Daityas, Danavas, Yakshas,
Gandharvas, Snake-deities, Rdkshasas, Supar/zas, and
Kiwnaras,

197. The Somapas those of theBr&hma«as,theHa-
virbhu^s those of the Kshatriyas, the A^yapas those
of the Vaiyyas, but the Sukilins those of the iSYldras.

198. The Somapas are the sons of Kavi (Bhrzgu),
the Havishmats the children of Angiras, the Afyapas
the offspring of Pulastya, but the Sukalins (the issue)
of Vasish/'//a.

199. One should know that (other classes), the
Agnidagdhas, the Anagnidagdhas, the Kavyas, the
Barhishads, the Agnishvittas, and the Saumyas, are
(the manes) of the Brffhmawas alone.

200. But know also that there exist in this (world)
countless sons and grandsons of those chief classes
of manes which have been enumerated.

201. From the sages sprang the manes, from the
manes the gods and the Danavas, but from the gods
the whole world, both the movable and the immov¬
able in due order.

202. Even water offered with faith (to the manes)

199. Medh. and Gov. place the Anagnidagdhas first. Nar. reads
at the end of the first half-verse bahun, ‘ many,’ instead of tatha,
and Nand. has vahan. The translation follows the explanation
given by Gov., Kull., and Ragh. The other three commentators
say that this verse gives partly different names for the several classes
of manes, enumerated in the preceding verses. But their explana¬
tions are not very clear, and they are forced to ignore or transpose
the particle eva which stands after viprdwSm. The verse probably
contains a second classification of the manes, which differs from
the preceding, because it is based on a different tradition.

202. Akshay&yapakalpate, ‘produces endless (bliss),’ (Gov., Kull.),

Ill, *07. HOUSEHOLDER; SRAdDHAS. 113

in vessels made of silver or adorned with silver,
produces endless (bliss).

203. For twice-born men the rite in honour of
the manes is more important than the rite in honour
of the gods; for the offering to the gods which pre¬
cedes (the .SYaddhas), has been declared to be a
means of fortifying (the latter).

204. Let him first invite a (Brdhma^a) in honour
of the gods as a protection for the (offering to the
manes); for the Rakshasas destroy a funeral sacri¬
fice which is left without such a protection.

205. Let him make (the .Srdddha) begin and end
with (a rite) in honour of the gods; it shall not begin
and end with a (rite) to the manes ; for he who makes
it begin and end with a (rite) in honour of the
manes, soon perishes together with his progeny.

206. Let him smear a pure and secluded place
with cowdung, and carefully make it sloping towards
the south.

207. The manes are always pleased with offerings
made in open, naturally pure places, on the banks
of rivers, and in secluded spots.

means according to Medh. ‘affords to them imperishable satis¬
faction.’

203. The rite in honour of the gods meant is the Vauvadeva
which precedes each -Sraddha.

204. The above translation of the first half-verse follows Medh.,
Gov., and Kull. It is, however, not impossible to take, with Sir
W. Jones, daiva/& as a neuter, and to translate, ‘ Let him first per¬
form the rite in honour of the gods as a protection for the (Sraddha).*

205. The meaning of the verse is that the Brahmazzas, fed at the
Vairvadeva which precedes the *$raddha, must be invited and served
before and dismissed after the Brahma/zas entertained in honour of
the manes (Medh., Kull., Nar.). See also below, verse 209.

206. Ap. II, 18,14; Gaut. XV, 25; Y&gn. I, 227.

207. Vi. LXXXV, 54-63. jfifoksheshu, * naturally pure’ (Medh,,

05] I

LAWS OF MANU.

Ill, 208.

114

208. The (sacrifice!-) shall make the (invited)
Brahmawas, who have duly performed their ablu¬
tions, sit down on separate, prepared seats, on which
blades of Kara grass have been placed.

209. Having placed those blameless Br&hma«as
on their seats, he shall honour them with fragrant
garlands and perfumes, beginning with (those who
are invited in honour of) the gods.

210. Having presented to them water, sesamum
grains, and blades of Kiua grass, the Brahma«a
(sacrificer) shall offer (oblations) in the sacred fire,
after having received permission (to do so) from
(all) the Brahmawa (guests) conjointly.

211. Having first, according to the rule, performed,
as a means of protecting (the Yraddha), oblations to
Agni, to Soma, and to Yama, let him afterwards
satisfy the manes by a gift of sacrificial food.

212. But if no (sacred) fire (is available), he shall
place (the offerings) into the hand of a Brahma;za;
for Br&hmawas who know the sacred texts declare,
‘ What fire is, even such is a Brahmawa.’

213. They (also) call those first of twice-born men
the ancient deities of the funeral sacrifice, free from
anger, easily pleased, employed in making men
prosper.

Gov., Kull., Nar.) or ‘lovely’ (Nand., Ragh.), ‘ such as forest glades’
(Kull.).

208. I, 226. 209. Vi. LXXIII, 2; Ya gn. I, 231.

210. Vi. LXXXIII, 5; Ap. II, 17, 17-19; Baudh. II, 14, 7;
Yagn. I, 229.

211. Vi. LXXIII, 12; Baudh. II, 14, 7.

212. Ajvaliiyana G/rhya-stitra IV, 8, 5-6. Cases, where a sacred
fire is wanting, are those in which a child, an unmarried man, or a
widower perform a Araddha (Mcdh., Kull., Nar.).

213. The object of the verse is to show why the offerings may

m,2i7. householder; sraddhas. 115

214. After he has performed (the oblations) in
the fire, (and) the whole series of ceremonies in such
a manner that they end in the south, let him sprinkle
water with his right hand on the spot (where the
cakes are to be placed).

215. But having made three cakes out of the
remainder of that sacrificial food, he must, concen¬
trating his mind and turning towards the south, place
them on (Kussl grass) exactly in the same manner
in which (he poured out the libations of) water.

216. Having offered those cakes according to the
(prescribed) rule, being pure, let him wipe the same
hand with (the roots of) those blades of Ku$a grass
for the sake of the (three ancestors) who partake
of the wipings (lepa).

217. Having (next) sipped water, turned round
(towards the north), and thrice slowly suppressed

be placed into the hands of the guests. The epithet ‘ ancient’ is
explained to mean ‘ produced in the kalpa when the Sadhyas were
created’ (Medh.), or "those whose succession has been uninterrupted
since immemorial times’ (Gov., Kull., Ragh.), or "those who were
produced before all other castes’ (Nar.), or ‘those who receive
gifts before others’ (Ragh.). Medh. prefers, however, to read pura-
tana//, ‘ the ancients call,’ &c., and this seems to have stood in
Nand.’s text too.

214. " The whole series of ceremonies,’ i.e." the acts of sprinkling
water and strewing Kuxa grass round the fire and so forth, which
are subsidiary to the oblations in the fire.* Apasavyam," in such a
manner that they end in the south’ (dakshiwasawstham), means
according to Nar., prcU’inavitena," passing the sacrificial string over
the right shoulder and under the left arm.’ Apasavyena hastena,
‘with his right hand’ (Medh. ‘others,’ Kull., Ragh.), means accord¬
ing to Medh., Gov., Nar., and Nand.," out of the Tirtha of the right
hand which is sacred to the manes’ (see above, II, 59).

216. The three ancestors meant are the great-grandfather, his
father and grandfather; see Vi. LXXIII, 22.

217. The texts to be pronounced are,‘Adoration to Spring l’&c.,

I 2

LAWS OF MANU.

Ill, 218.

116

his breath, (the sacrificer) who knows the sacred
texts shall worship (the guardian deities of) the six
seasons and the manes.

218. Let him gently pour out the remainder of
the water near the cakes, and, with fixed attention,
smell those cakes, in the order in which they were
placed (on the ground).

219. But taking successively very small portions
from the cakes, he shall make those seated Brah-
mawas eat them, in accordance with the rule, before
(their dinner).

220. But if the (sacrificer’s) father is living, he
must offer (the cakes) to three remoter (ancestors);
or he may also feed his father at the funeral' sacri¬
fice as (one of the) Brihmawa (guests).

221. But he whose father is dead, while his grand¬
father lives, shall, after pronouncing his father’s
name, mention (that of) his great-grandfather.

222. Manu has declared that either the grand¬
father may eat at that .Sraddha (as a guest), or (the

and afterwards, ‘ Adoration to you, oh manes ! ’ &c. Before he recites
the latter texts, the worshipper must turn round towards the south.

218. Vi. LXXIII, 23. ‘The remainder of the water,’ i. e. ‘ which
is contained in the vessel from which he took the water for sprinkling
the ground’ (verse 214).

2x9. ‘Those seated Brdhmawas,’ i.e. ‘those invited for the
funeral rite, not those invited for the preceding rite in honour of
the gods.’ * According to the rule,’ i. e. ‘ giving to the representa¬
tive of the father a piece from the cake offered to the manes of the
father and so forth ’(KulL), or 1 after they have sipped water and so
forth’ (Nar.). Nand. inserts here verse 223, and states that it is
explanatory of the term ‘ according to the rule.’

220. Vi. LXXV, 1, 4. N&r. adds that this case happens when
a son has kindled the sacred fire during his father’s lifetime,
because then the Piw^apitn'ya^jla and afterwards the Parva«a
Araddha must be performed.

221-222. Vi. LXXV, 6.

Ill, 229. HOUSEHOLDER ; SR ADD HAS. 1 1 7

grandson) having received permission, may perform
it, as he desires.

223. Having poured water mixed with sesamum,
in which a blade of Kusa grass has been placed,
into the hands of the (guests), he shall give (to each)
that (above-mentioned) portion of the cake, saying,
‘ To those, Svadhi ! ’

224. But carrying (the vessel) filled with food
with both hands, the (sacrificer) himself shall gently
place it before the Brahmawas, meditating on the
manes.

225. The malevolent Asuras forcibly snatch away
that food which is brought without being held with
both hands.

226. Let him, being pure and attentive, carefully
place on the ground the seasoning (for the rice),
such as broths and pot herbs, sweet and sour milk,
and honey,

227. (As well as) various (kinds of) hard food
which require mastication, and of soft food, roots,
fruits, savoury meat, and fragrant drinks.

228. All this he shall present (to his guests), and,
being pure and attentive, successively invite them
to partake of each (dish), proclaiming its qualities.

229. Let him on no account drop a tear, become
angry or utter an untruth, nor let him touch the
food with his foot nor violently shake it.

223. Vi. LXXIII, 23. This rule is a supplement to verse 220.
Instead of the pronoun the names are to be used (Medh., Gov.).
225. Vas. XI, 25; Baudh. II, 15, 3.

229. Vi. LXXIX, 19-21; LXXXI, 1; Y kgn. I, 239. Avadhft-
nayet, ‘nor violently shake it,’ is explained according to Medh.
by ‘ others,’' nor remove the dust with his dress.’ Nand. places
verse 230 immediately after verse 228.

118

LAWS OF MANU.

Ill, 230.

230. A tear sends the (food) to the Pretas, anger
to his enemies, a falsehood to the dogs, contact with
his foot to the Rakshasas, a shaking to the sinners.

231. Whatever may please the Brahma was, let
him give without grudging it; let him give riddles
from the Veda, for that is agreeable to the manes.

232. At a (sacrifice in honour) of the manes, he
must let (his guests) hear the Veda, the Institutes
of the sacred law, legends, tales, Purawas, and
Khilas.

233. Himself being delighted, let him give delight
to the Brdhmawas, cause them to partake gradually
and slowly (of each dish), and repeatedly invite
(them to eat) by (offering) the food and (praising)
its qualities.

234. Let him eagerly entertain at a funeral sacri¬
fice a daughter’s son, though he be a student, and
let him place a Nepal blanket on the seat (of each
guest), scattering sesamum grains on the ground.

231. Yiiffu. I, 239. Brahmodya// katha^, ‘let him give riddles
from the Veda,’ such as those collected in the Ajvalayana -SVauta-
sutra X, 9, 2 (Medh., Nand.). Mcdh. thinks that the term
brahmodya may also refer to Vedic stories, such as that of the
fights of the Devas and Asuras, or of Sarama and the Pawis,
and he mentions a var. lect. brahmadya//, ‘conversations regard¬
ing the Brahman, the supreme soul.’ This latter explanation is
adopted by Gov., Kull., Nar., and Ragh., though the text every¬
where has brahmodya//. As the Brahmodya-riddles were a favourite
recreation of the priests during the tedious performance of their
sacrifices, it is not doubtful that the explanation given in the trans¬
lation is the only admissible one.

232. Baudh. II, 14, 5; Vi. LXXIII, 16 ; Yd^gn. I, 239.^ ‘ Khilas,’
i. e. ‘ the apocrypha of the Veda, such as the .SVisfakta.’ ‘ Akhyanani
legends, such as the Sauparwa, the Maitrdvdruwa’ (Medh., Gov.,
Kull., Ragh.), or ‘ such as occur in the Brahmawas’ (Nar.), or ‘ the
death of Kama and so forth’ (Nand.).

Ill,242. householder; srAddhas. 119

235. There are three means of sanctification, (to
be used) at a -SVacldha, a daughter’s son, a Nepal
blanket, and sesamum grains; and they recommend
three (other things) for it, cleanliness, suppression
of anger, and absence of haste.

236. All the food must be very hot, and the
(guests) shall eat in silence; (even though) asked
by the giver (of the feast), the Brahmawas shall not
proclaim the qualities of the sacrificial food.

237. As long as the food remains warm, as long
as they eat in silence, as long as the qualities of the
food are not proclaimed, so long the manes partake
(of it).

238. What (a guest) eats, covering his head, what
he eats with his face turned towards the south, what
he eats with sandals on (his feet), that the Rakshasas
consume.

239. A Kand&ia, a village pig, a cock, a dog, a
menstruating woman, and a eunuch must not look
at the Brahma/zas while they eat.

240. What (any of) these sees at a burnt-oblation,
at a (solemn) gift, at a dinner (given to Brahmawas),
or at any rite in honour of the gods and manes, that
produces not the intended result.

241. A boar makes (the rite) useless by inhaling
the smell (of the offerings), a cock by the air of his
wings, a dog by throwing his eye (on them), a low-
caste man by touching (them).

242. If a lame man, a one-eyed man, one deficient

235. Vas. XI, 35-36. 236. Vi. LXXXI, 11, 20.

237. Vi. LXXXI, 20; Vas. XI, 32.

238. Vi. LXXXI, 12-14.

239. Ap. II, 17, 20; Gaut. XV, 24.

241. ‘A low-caste man,’ i.e. ‘a .Sudra,’

242. Vi. LXXXI, 15-16. According to Medh., Gov., and Kull.,

120

LAWS OF MANU.

ill, 243 -

in a limb, or one with a redundant limb, be even
the servant of the performer (of the ^Sriddha), he
also must be removed from that place (where the
■Sr&ddha is held).

243. To a Br&hma«a (householder), or to an
ascetic who comes for food, he may, with the per¬
mission of (his) Brahmawa (guests), show honour
according to his ability.

244. Let him mix all the kinds of food together,
sprinkle them with water and put them, scattering
them (on Ku.ya grass), down on the ground in front
of (his guests), when they have finished their meal.

245. The remnant (in the dishes), and the portion
scattered on Kiua grass, shall be the share of
deceased (children) who received not the sacrament
(of cremation) and of those who (unjustly) forsook
noble wives.

246. They declare the fragments which have fallen
on the ground at a (6raddha) to the manes, to be
the share of honest, dutiful servants.

the word api, ‘ even,’ indicates that others, e. g. Atidras, must also
be sent away.

2 43- Vi. LXXXI, 18. Medh., Gov., and Kull. take the first
words differently, ‘To a Brahma«a who comes as a guest (atithi)
or any other mendicant.’ Nar. and Ragh. give the explanation
adopted above.

244. Vi. LXXXI, 21.

245. Vas. XI, 23-24; Vi. LXXXI, 22. Regarding the burial
of children, see below, V, 69. Tydgindw kulayoshitdw, ‘ of those
who unjustly forsook noble wives’ (Medh., Kull.), may also mean,
according to Ragh. and to ‘others,’ quoted by Medh. and Kull.,

‘ of those who forsook their Gurus and of unmarried maidens; ’
according to Gov., ‘of women who forsook their families;’
according to Nar., ‘of suicides and childless women.’ Nand.
explains the first word by ‘ of ascetics.’

246. Vi. LXXXI, 23.

Ill, 251-

HOUSEHOLDER ; iSRADDHAS.

121

247. But before the performance of the Sapim/1-
kara»a, one must feed at the funeral sacrifice in
honour of a (recently-)deceased Aryan (one Br&h-
ma#a) without (making an offering) to the gods, and
give one cake only.

248. But after the Sapi^lkara«a of the (deceased
father) has been performed according to the sacred
law, the sons must offer the cakes with those cere¬
monies, (described above.)

249. The foolish man who, after having eaten a
■SVciddha(-dinner), gives the leavings to a Ahdra, falls
headlong into the Kalasfitra hell.

250. If the partaker of a .Sraddha(-dinner) enters
on the same day the bed of a .Sfidra female, the
manes of his (ancestors) will lie during that month
in her ordure.

251. Having addressed the question, ‘Have you
dined well ?’ (to his guests), let him give water for
sipping to them who are satisfied, and dismiss them,
after they have sipped water, (with the words) * Rest
either (here or at home)! ’

247. Vi. XXI, 2-12, 19; Y kgn. I, 250. The Sapi«<fikara»a, ‘the
solemn reception of a dead person among the partakers of the
funeral oblations,’ is performed either on the thirteenth day or a
year after the death. Up to the time of its performance the
Yraddhas are so-called Ekoddish/as, ‘ performed for one person
only.’ Mcdh., Gov., Nar., Nand., and K. read the first word of the
verse asapi«</akriyakarma, and according to this var. lect. the trans¬
lation must be, ‘ The rite for persons not made Sapi»</as (i. e. the
Ekoddish/a Yraddha, must be performed) for an Aryan (recently)
deceased; (on that occasion) one must,’ &c.

250. Medh., Gov., Kull., and Ragh. take vnshalt, ‘a Sftdra
female’ (Nar.), in the sense of‘a seducing woman’ (vn'shasyanti).

251. Y &gn. I, 242 ; Vi. LXXIII, 26-27. Kull. reads abhi bho
ramyatam, ‘Ho, take rest I’ and Ragh., abhito gamyatam, ‘Go
where you please 1’

122

LAWS OF MANU.

Ill, 252.

252. The Brdhma«a (guests) shall then answer
him, ‘ Let there be Svadhdfor at all rites in
honour of the manes the word Svadhd is the highest
benison.

253. Next let him inform (his guests) who have
finished their meal, of the food which remains ; with
the permission of the Brdhmawas let him dispose
(of that), as they may direct.

254. At a (.Srdddha) in honour of the manes one
must use (in asking the guests if they are satisfied,
the word) svaditam; at a GoshMi-.yra.ddha, (the word)
su^rutam ; at a VWddhi-jraddha, (the word )sampan-
nam; and at (a rite) in honour of the gods, (the word)
ru/Htam.

255. The afternoon, Kura grass, the due prepara¬
tion of the dwelling, sesamum grains, liberality, the
careful preparation of the food, and (the company
of) distinguished Brahma/ras are true riches at all
funeral sacrifices.

256. Know that Kura grass, purificatory (texts),
the morning, sacrificial viands of all kinds, and those
means of purification, mentioned above, are blessings
at a sacrifice to the gods.

252. Y agii. I, 243. Medh., Gov., Nand., and Ragh. read sva-
dhetyeva, (shall then answer him) ‘ Svadha ! ’

254. ‘One must ask,’ i. e. ‘the giver of the feast or any other
person who comes’ (Medh., Gov.), the former only (Kull.). Medh.
and Gov. explain gosh//;e, ‘ at a Gosh/^i-rraddha’ (Kull., Ragh.), by
‘ in a cow-pen’ (goshu tish/Aantishu, gogawamadhye), and Nar. by
gosh//;e goma«</alartha»/ gosh/^e brahma n abh oga. ne. Abhyudaya
or Vrfddhi-rraddhas arc those performed on joyful occasions, such
as marriages.

256. Pavitram, ‘purificatory texts,’ means according to Nfir.
‘other means of purification, such as barley and water.’ Nand.
reads darbhapavitraw, ‘ blades of Kura grass.’ ‘ Those means of
purification mentioned above,’ i.e. ‘the preparation of the house

Ill, 261.

HOUSEHOLDER ; SRADDIIAS.

123

257. The food eaten by hermits in the forest,
milk, Soma-juice, meat which is not prepared (with
spices), and salt unprepared by art, are called, on
account of their nature, sacrificial food.

258. Having dismissed the (invited) Brahma^as,
let him, with a concentrated mind, silent and pure,
look towards the south and ask these blessings of
the manes:

259. ‘May liberal men abound with us! May (our
knowledge of) the Vedas and (our) progeny increase!
May faith not forsake us! May we have much to
give (to the needy)!’

260. Having thus offered (the cakes), let him,
after (the prayer), cause a cow, a Bitthmawa, a goat,
or the sacred fire to consume those cakes, or let him
throw them into water.

261. Some make the offering of the cakes after
(the dinner); some cause (them) to be eaten by
birds or throw them into fire or into water.

and so forth.’ Nand. reads havishya/n £a jaktita^, 4 sacrificial viands
(prepared) according to one’s ability.’

257. Anupaskmam, * which is not prepared (with spices),’ (Gov.,
Nar.), means according to Nand. ‘ not dressed as people usually
do,’ according to Kull. and Ragh. ‘ not tainted by a bad smell,’ and
according to Medh. ‘ not forbidden, such as meat from a slaughter¬
house.’ ‘ Salt unprepared by art,’ i.e. ‘rock salt or salt from the
sea’ (but not Bu/a, N&r.).

259. Y igiL I, 245; Vi. LXXIII, 28.

260. Y agn. I, 256. ‘Thus,’ i.e. as described in verse 215.

261. Baudh. II, 14, 9. According to the MSS. and editions
the word translated in accordance with the clear explanations
of Medh., Kull., and K., and with the requirements of the
context, by ‘after (the dinner),’ is purastdt. As purast&t always
means ‘ before,’ it would seem that the real reading of the three
commentators was like that of Rdgh.’s commentary ‘ parastat,*
the sense "of which perfectly agrees with their explanation.

124

LAWS OF MANU.

Ill, 262.

262. The (sacrifker’s) first wife, who is faithful and
intent on the worship of the manes, may eat the
middle-most cake, (if she be) desirous of bearing
a son.

263. (Thus) she will bring forth a son who will
be long-lived, famous, intelligent, rich, the father of
numerous offspring, endowed with (the quality of)
goodness, and righteous.

264. Having washed his hands and sipped water,
let him prepare (food) for his paternal relations and,
after giving it to them with due respect, let him
feed his maternal relatives also.

265. But the remnants shall be left (where they
lie) until the Brahmawas have been dismissed;
afterwards he shall perform the (daily) domestic Bali-
offering ; that is a settled (rule of the) sacred law.

266. I will now fully declare what kind of sacri¬
ficial food, given to the manes according to the rule,
will serve for a long time or for eternity.

267. The ancestors of men are satisfied for one
month with sesamum grains, rice, barley, rnasha
beans, water, roots, and fruits, which have been
given according to the prescribed rule,

268. Two months with fish, three months with
the meat of gazelles, four with mutton, and five
indeed with the flesh of birds,

NSr. and Nand. clearly read purastat, and explain it by prak,
‘ before.’ But the meaning, thus obtained, is not good, because it
stands to reason that the custom mentioned here should differ from
that described above, verse 218 seq.

264. This is to be done after the cakes have been made and
placed (Medh., Nand.). Medh., Gov., Nand. read p%ayet, ‘let him
honour,’ instead of ‘ let him feed.’

267-272. Ap. II, 16, 23-17, 3; Gaut. XV, 15; Vi.LXXX; Y §gn.
I, 257-259-

Ill, 274.

HOUSEHOLDER ; SRADDHAS.

125

269. Six months with the flesh of kids, seven
with that of spotted deer, eight with that of the
black antelope, but nine with that of the (deer called)
Ruru,

270. Ten months they are satisfied with the meat
of boars and buffaloes, but eleven months indeed
with that of hares and tortoises,

271. One year with cow-milk and milk-rice; from
the flesh of a long-eared white he-goat their satisfac¬
tion endures twelve years.

272. The (vegetable called) Kila^aka, (the fish
called) MaMsalka, the flesh of a rhinoceros and that
of a red goat, and all kinds of food eaten by hermits
in the forest serve for an endless time.

273. Whatever (food), mixed with honey, one
gives on the thirteenth lunar day in the rainy
season under the asterism of MaghM, that also
procures endless (satisfaction).

2 74. ‘ May such a man (the manes say) be born in
our family who will give us milk-rice, with honey and
clarified butter, on the thirteenth lunar day (of the
month of Bhadrapada) and (in the afternoon) when
the shadow of an elephant falls towards the east.’

269. Gov. states the Rum is the .SVunbara, or Sambar stag.

271. Nar. explains vardhrbzasa, which Medh., Gov., Kull., and
RSgh. declare, on the strength of a verse, to be a white goat, by
‘ a black-necked, white-winged bird with a red head,’ and quotes
another nigama in favour of his view; see also Ap. II, 17, 3, where
the crane called VdrdhrSwasa (var. lect. Vardhri/zasa) is mentioned.

272. Another name of the pot-herb K&laraka is according to
Medh. Knshwavdsudeva, according to Nand. Knshwanimba. The
Mahaxalka is the prawn. Others mentioned by Medh. read
saralkan.

273. Vi. LXXVI, 1; Y&gn. I, 260. The day meant is Bha¬
drapada Badi 13.

274. Vi. LXXVIII, 51-52; Vas. XI, 40. Gov. omits this verse.

126

LAWS OF MANU.

Ill, 275.

275. Whatever (a man), full of faith, duly gives
according to the prescribed rule, that becomes in the
other world a perpetual and imperishable (gratifica¬
tion) for the manes.

276. The days of the dark half of the month,
beginning with the tenth, but excepting the four¬
teenth, are recommended for a funeral sacrifice; (it
is) not thus (with) the others.

277. He who performs it on the even (lunar)
days and under the even constellations, gains (the
fulfilment of) all his wishes; he who honours the
manes on odd (lunar days) and under odd (constella¬
tions), obtains distinguished offspring.

278. As the second half of the month is prefer¬
able to the first half, even so the afternoon is better
for (the performance of) a funeral sacrifice than the
forenoon.

Medh. says that* others ’ improperly explain prak^Mye kim^arasya,
* (in the afternoon) when the shadow of an elephant falls towards
the east* (Kull., Nar., Ragh.), by * during an eclipse/ He also
mentions a var. lect. prak^ayam. It seems, however, by no means
certain that the explanation, adopted by him and most commen¬
tators, is the correct one. It is much more probable that a
particular day (see Vi^ibincj'vara on Y&gn. J, 217) is meant. The
thirteenth lunar day is, of course, the thirteenth of the dark half
of Bhadrapada, the day of the Mahalaya *Sraddha.

276. Ap. II, 17, 6 ; Gaut. XV, 3; Ya gn. I, 263; Vas. XI, 16.
The reason why the fourteenth is excepted, is given Vi. LXXVIII,
50, and Ya gn. loc. cit.

277. Ap. II, 17, 8-22; Gaut. XV, 4 ; Vi. LXXVIII, 8-49; Ya gn.
I, 267. I read with Medh., Gov., Nand., Ragh., and K. pitr/n
ar£an, which, to judge from the commentary, must have been
Kull/s reading also, instead of the senseless pit rtn sarvan of the
editions. Nand. adds five verses and a half which give the details
with respect to the rewards obtained by performing the *Sraddhas
on particular lunar days. They are clearly an interpolation.

278. Ap. II, 17, 5.

ITI, 284- HOUSEHOLDER; SRADDHAS. 127

279. Let him, untired, duly perform the (rites) in
honour of the manes in accordance with the pre¬
scribed rule, passing the sacred thread over the right
shoulder, proceeding from the left to the right
(and) holding Kiua grass in his hands, up to the
end (of the ceremony).

280. Let him not perform a funeral sacrifice at
night, because the (night) is declared to belong to
the Rakshasas, nor in the twilight, nor when the
sun has just risen.

28t. Let him offer here below a funeral sacrifice,
according to the rule given above, (at least) thrice a
year, in winter, in summer, and in the rainy season,
but that which is included among the five great
sacrifices, every day.

282. The burnt-oblation, offered at a sacrifice to
the manes, must not be made in a common fire; a
Brfthmawa who keeps a sacred fire (shall) not (per¬
form) a funeral sacrifice except on the new-moon
day.

283. Even when a Brahmawa, after bathing, satis¬
fies the manes with water, he obtains thereby the
whole reward for the performance of the (daily)
6Vaddha.

284. They call (the manes of) fathers Vasus,
(those of) grandfathers Rudras, and (those of) great¬
grandfathers Adityas; thus (speaks) the eternal
Veda.

279. Gov., Kull., and Ragh. explain apasavyam, * proceeding
from left to right ’ (Nar.), by ‘ with the Tirtha of the hand, that is
sacred to the manes.’ Medli. and Gov. think that a nidhanat, ‘ up
to the end (of the ceremony),’ (Kull., Nar., Nand., Ragh.), means
‘ until death.’

280. Ap. II, 17, 23.

284. Y &gn. I, 268.

128

LAWS OF MANU.

Ill, 285.

285. Let him daily partake of the vighasa and
daily eat amrz'ta (ambrosia); but vighasa is what
remains from the meal (of Brdhmawa guests) and
the remainder of a sacrifice (is called) amrita.

286. Thus all the ordinances relating to the five
(daily great) sacrifices have been declared to you;
hear now the law for the manner of living fit for
Br 4 hma«as.

Chapter IV.

1. Having dwelt with a teacher during the fourth
part of (a man’s) life, a Brahmawa shall live during
the second quarter (of his existence) in his house,
after he has wedded a wife.

2. A Brdhmazza must seek a means of subsistence
which either causes no, or at least little pain (to
others), and live (by that) except in times of distress.

3. For the purpose of gaining bare subsistence,
let him accumulate property by (following those)
irreproachable occupations (which are prescribed for)
his (caste), without (unduly) fatiguing his body.

4. He may subsist by Rita, (truth), and Amrz’ta

285. Medh. and Nar. seem to have read bhr/tyareshaw, ‘what
remains after those who must be supported (have been fed).’ The
former mentions the other reading too.

IV. 2. Medh., Gov., Kull., Nar., and Ragh. particularly state that
droha and adroha are not equivalent to hiz»s£ and ahi;/zsa, because
‘injury to living beings ’ is forbidden under any circumstances. What
is meant by droha is the pain caused to others by importunate
begging. Hence the meaning of Manu is that householders shall,
if possible, not subsist by begging, but rather by gleaning corn.
Nand., however, explains droha by hiws&, and the following verses
favour his opinion.

3. ‘For the purpose of gaining bare subsistence, but not in
order to procure many enjoyments for himself.’

IV, 9 .

HOUSEHOLDER ; SUBSISTENCE.

129

(ambrosia), or by Mn'ta (death) and by Pramrz'ta
(what causes many deaths); or even by (the mode)
called Saty&nrzta (a mixture of truth and falsehood),
but never by .SVavWtti (a dog’s mode of life).

5. By Rita, shall be understood the gleaning of
corn ; by Amrzta, what is given unasked; by MWta,
food obtained by begging; and agriculture is declared
to be Pramrzta.

6. But trade and (money-lending) are Satydimta,
even by that one may subsist. Service is called
.SVawz’tti; therefore one should avoid it.

7. He may either possess enough to fill a granary,
or a store filling a grain-jar; or he may collect what
suffices for three days, or make no provision for the
morrow.

8. Moreover, among these four Brahmawa house¬
holders, each later-(named) must be considered more
distinguished, and through his virtue to have con¬
quered the world more completely.

9. One of these follows six occupations, another
subsists by three, one by two, but the fourth lives
by the Brahmasattra.

7. Y&gn. I, 128. The first two clauses are variously interpreted.

The first means according to Medh., 1 he may keep a store of grain
or other property, sufficient to maintain a large family, many
servants and animals during three yearsaccording to Gov., ‘a store
of grain sufficient for twelve days; ’ according to Kull. and R&gh.,
1 a store sufficient to fill a granary which holds a supply for three
years or moreand according to Nar., * a store sufficient for a year,
six months, or three months.’ The second clause is interpreted
by Medh. as ‘a store sufficient for six monthsby Gov. and Ndr.
as ‘ a store sufficient for six days; 7 * 9 and by Kull. and R&gh. as ‘ a
sufficiency for one year.’ For other explanations of the term Kum-
bhtdh&pya, see Baudh. I, 1, 5 note. Nand. reads dvyahaihika^, ‘ or
he may collect what suffices for two days/

9. ‘Six occupations/ i.e. ‘gleaning corn, acceptance of gifts

[*5] ^

130 LAWS OF MANU. IV, io.

10. He who maintains himself by picking up
grains and ears of corn, must be always intent on
(the performance of) the Agnihotra, and constantly
offer those Ishris only, which are prescribed for the
days of the conjunction and opposition (of the moon),
and for the solstices.

11. Let him never, for the sake of subsistence,
follow the ways of the world; let him live the pure,
straightforward, honest life of a Br&hma/za.

12. He who desires happiness must strive after
a perfectly contented disposition and control himself;
for happiness has contentment for its root, the root
of unhappiness is the contrary (disposition).

13. A BrShmawa, who is a Snataka and subsists
by one of the (above-mentioned) modes of life, must

given unasked, begging, agriculture, trade, and teaching * (Medh.),
or 4 those mentioned in verses 5-6 * (Gov.), or 4 those mentioned
in verses 5-6, excepting service and with the addition of money-
lending ’ (Kull., Ragh.), or 4 those enumerated in verses 5-6, and
those six, mentioned above, I, 88 * (Nar.), or ‘those mentioned
above, I, 88' (Nand.). 4 Subsists by three,’ i. e. 4 by the first three,
mentioned in verses 5-6’ (Medh.), or 4 by teaching, sacrificing,
and accepting gifts’ (Gov., Kull., Ragh., Nand.), or 4 by teaching,
sacrificing* and accepting gifts, and by the first three, mentioned
in verses 5-6 ’ (N;tr.). 4 One by two,*’ i. e. 4 by gleaning and ac¬
cepting voluntary gifts ’ (Medh.), or 4 by sacrificing and teaching'
(Gov., Kull., Ragh., Nand.), or 4 by gleaning ears and single
grains * (Nar.). 4 The Brahmasattra,’ i. e. 4 gleaning either ears or
single grains’ (Nar.), or ‘teaching’ (Gov., Kull., Ragh., Nand.).
Elsewhere the term Brahmasattra is applied to the daily recitation
of the Veda, and it probably means here 4 teaching.’

10. The Agnihotra, i.e. the daily morning and evening oblations
in the sacred fire or fires. The sacrifices intended are the Darra-
paurwamasas and the Agrayawas.

11. Y &gn. I, 123.

12-17. Y &gn. I, 129.

13. Nand. places verse 15 immediately after verse 12. Regard¬
ing the term Sn&taka, see below, verse 31, Ap. I, 30, 1-3,

IV, 19-

HOUSEHOLDER; RULES FOR A SlfATAKA. I3I

discharge the (following) duties which secure heavenly
bliss, long life, and fame.

14. Let him, untired, perform daily the rites pre¬
scribed for him in the Veda; for he who performs
those according to his ability, attains to the highest
state.

15. Whether he be rich or even in distress, let
him not seek wealth through pursuits to which men
cleave, nor by forbidden occupations, nor (let him
accept presents) from any (giver whosoever he
may be).

16. Let him not, out of desire (for enjoyments),
attach himself to any sensual pleasures, and let him
carefully obviate an excessive attachment to them, by
(reflecting on their worthlessness in) his heart.

17. Let him avoid all (means of acquiring) wealth
which impede the study of the Veda; (let him main¬
tain himself) anyhow, but study, because that (de¬
votion to the Veda-study secures) the realisation of
his aims.

18. Let him walk here (on earth), bringing his
dress, speech, and thoughts to a conformity with his
age, his occupation, his wealth, his sacred learning,
and his race.

19. Let him daily pore over those Institutes of
science which soon give increase of wisdom, those

ig. Prasangena, ‘through pursuits to which men cleave,’ e.g.
‘music and singing’ (Medh., Gov., Kull., Ragh., Nand.). Nar.
interprets the word by 1 with too great eagerness.’

17. Vi. LXXI, 4.

18. Y&gn. 1 ,123; Vi. LXXI, 5-6. ‘His race,’ e.g. let him wear
his hair in the manner prescribed by the usage of his family
(Vas. II, 21).

19. Y&gn. I, 99; Vi. LXXI, 8. The various sciences meant are
the Itihasas, Purarcas, and Nyaya, the Arthardstra, medicine, and

K 2

132

LAWS OF MANU.

IV, 20.

which teach the acquisition .of wealth, those which
are beneficial (for other worldly concerns), and like¬
wise over the Nigamas which explain the Veda.

20. For the more a man completely studies the
Institutes of science, the more he fully understands
(them), and his great learning shines brightly.

21. Let him never, if he is able (to perform
them), neglect the sacrifices to the sages, to the
gods, to the Bhfttas, to men, and to the manes.

22. Some men who know the ordinances for
sacrificial rites, always offer these great sacrifices
in their organs (of sensation), without any (external)
effort.

23. Knowing that the (performance of the) sacri¬
fice in their speech and their breath yields im¬
perishable (rewards), some always offer their breath
in their speech, and their speech in their breath.

24. Other Br£hma«as, seeing with the eye of
knowledge that the performance of those rites has
knowledge for its root, always perform them through
knowledge alone.

25. A Brdhma^a shall always offer the Agnihotra
at the beginning or at the end of the day and of
the night, and the Dana and Paumamdsa (Ish/is) at
the end of each half-month,

26. When the old grain has been consumed the

astrology. The Nigamas are the Angas (Medh.). Gov., Kull., and
Ndr. consider the Nigamas to be a separate class of works, teaching
the meaning of the Veda, i. e. the naigamaka»(fa of the Nirukta.

22. This and the next two verses refer to various symbolical
ways of performing the great sacrifices, which are mentioned in
the Upanishads.

23. Kaushttaki-Up. II, 5. 24. Nand. omits this verse.

25-27. Gaut. VIII, 19-20; Vas. XI, 46; Vi. LIX, 2-9; Baudh.

II, 4, 23; Yd^ft. I, 97, 124-125.

iy, 3 i. householder; rules for a snAtaka. 133

(Agraya#a) Ish/i with new grain, at the end of the
(three) seasons the (A'ci.turmasya-)sacrifices, at the
solstices an animal (sacrifice), at the end of the year
Soma-offerings.

27. A Br&hmawa, who keeps sacred fires, shall, if
he desires to live long, not eat new grain or meat,
without having offered the (Agrayawa) Ish/i with
new grain and an animal-(sacrifice).

28. For his fires, not being worshipped by offer¬
ings of new grain and of an animal, seek to devour
his vital spirits, (because they are) greedy for new
grain and flesh.

29. No guest must stay in his house without being
honoured, according to his ability, with a seat, food,
a couch, water, or roots and fruits.

30. Let him not honour, even by a greeting,
heretics, men who follow forbidden occupations, men
who live like cats, rogues, logicians, (arguing against
the Veda,) and those who live like herons.

31. Those who have become Sn&takas after
studying the Veda, or after completing their vows,
(and) householders, who are -Srotriyas, one must
worship by (gifts of food) sacred to gods and manes,
but one must avoid those who are different.

30. Y&gii. 1 ,130. Pasha««'ina/z, ‘ heretics,’ i.e. ‘ non-Brahmanical
ascetics ’ (vahyalingina/z, Medh.), or * ascetics wearing red dresses
and the like’ (Gov.), or *non-Brahmamcal ascetics, such as
Bauddhas’ (Kull., Nar.), or ‘those who do not believe in the
Vedas’ (Righ.). The term does not necessarily refer to the
Buddhists and G'ainas, though the latter may be designated by
it. The correct explanation of the word pashaw^a or pasha/zzfin,
‘a sectarian,’ has been given by Kern, Jaartelling der zuidelijke
Buddhisten, p. 67. Regarding the men who act like cats or herons,
see below, verses 195-196.

31. Nand. reads grz'ham dgatan, ‘who have come to his house,’
instead of grzhamedhina/z, ‘ who are householders.’

134

LAWS OF MANU.

IV, 32.

32. A householder must give (as much food) as
he is able (to spare) to those who do not cook for
themselves, and to all beings one must distribute
(food) without detriment (to one’s own interest).

33. A Snitaka who pines with hunger, may beg
wealth of a king, of one for whom he sacrifices, and
of a pupil, but not of others ; that is a settled rule.

34. A SnAtaka who is able (to procure food) shall
never waste himself with hunger, nor shall he wear
old or dirty clothes, if he possesses property.

35. Keeping his hair, nails, and beard clipped,
subduing his passions by austerities, wearing white
garments and (keeping himself) pure, he shall be
always engaged in studying the Veda and (such acts
as are) conducive to his welfare.

36. He shall carry a staff of bamboo, a pot full of
water, a sacred string, a bundle of Kara, grass, and
(wear) two bright golden ear-rings.

32. Ap. II, 4, 14; Gaut. V, 22 ; Baudh. II, 5, 20. ‘ Those who

do not cook for themselves/ i.e. students and ascetics. According
to Gov. Pasha»</as are included by this term.

33. Gaut. IX, 63-64; Vas. XII, 2; YSg-n. I, 130. ‘A king/
i.e. ‘a Kshatriya king who rules in accordance with the Sastras;’
see below, verse 84.

34. Vas. XII, 4; Vi. LXXI, 9; Gaut. IX, 3; Ap. I, 30,13. S’aktaA,
‘who is able (to procure food)/ (Nar.), means according to Nand.
‘ he who is able to dine, shall not stint himself through avarice/
Gov., Kull., and K. explain the phrase, ‘ A Snataka, who is a fit
(recipient of gifts), must not pine with hunger (as long as the king
has anything to give)/ i. e. he must be relieved. Rfigh. reads
yuktaA instead of jakta^, ‘ A Snataka who is suffering hunger shall
not despair.’ If taken in the second sense the rule is identical
with that given Ap. II, 25, 11; Gaut. X, 9-10; Vi. Ill, 79.

35. Ap. I, 30, 10-12; Gaut. IX, 4, 7; Y&gri. I, 131; Baudh.
b S> 7 -

36. Vas. XII, 14-17 ; Baudh. I, 5, 3-5; 6,1-5; II, 6, 7 ; Vi.
LXXI, 13-16; Y &gn. I, 133.

IV, 44* HOUSEHOLDER ; RULES FOR A SNATAKA.

135

37. Let him never look at the sun, when he sets
or rises, is eclipsed or reflected in water, or stands
in the middle of the sky.

38. Let him not step over a rope to which a calf
is tied, let him not run when it rains, and let him not
look at his own image in water; that is a settled
rule.

39. Let him pass by (a mound of) earth, a cow,
an idol, a BrAhmawa, clarified butter, honey, a cross¬
way, and well-known trees, turning his right hand
towards them.

40. Let him, though mad with desire, not ap¬
proach his wife when her courses appear; nor let
him sleep with her in the same bed.

41. For the wisdom, the energy, the strength, the
sight, and the vitality of a man who approaches a
woman covered with menstrual excretions, utterly
perish.

42. If he avoids her, while she is in that condi¬
tion, his wisdom, energy, strength, sight, and vitality
will increase.

43. Let him not eat in the company of his wife,
nor look at her, while she eats, sneezes, yawns, or
sits at her ease.

44. A BrAhmawa who desires energy must not

37. Ap. I, 31, 20; Vas. XII, io; Baudh. II, 6, 10; Vi. LXXI,
17-21;Y &gn. I, 135.

38. Ap. I, 31, 15; Vas. XII, 9; Baudh. II, 6 , 15; Vi. LXXI,
23; LXIII, 41 - 43 -

39. Gaut. IX, 66; Vi. LXIII, 26-28; Y%«. I, 133.

40-42. Gaut. IX, 29-30; Vas. XII, 7; Vi. LXIX, 11.

42. Medh. and Nand. read lakshmi, ‘luck,’ instead of izgzh,
‘ energy.’

43. Vas. XII, 31; Vi. LXVIII, 46; Ya^n. 1 ,131; Gaut. IX, 32.

44. Gaut. IX, 32.

136

LAWS OF MANU.

IV, 45-

look at (a woman) who applies collyrium to her eyes,
has anointed or uncovered herself or brings forth
(a child).

45. Let him not eat, dressed with one garment
only; let him not bathe naked; let him not void
urine on a road, on ashes, or in a cow-pen,

46. Nor on ploughed land, in water, on an altar
of bricks, on a mountain, on the ruins of a temple,
nor ever on an ant-hill,

47. Nor in holes inhabited by living creatures,
nor while he walks or stands, nor on reaching the
bank of a river, nor on the top of a mountain.

48. Let him never void faeces or urine, facing the
wind, or a fire, or looking towards a Br&hma»a, the
sun, water, or cows.

49. He may ease himself, having covered (the
ground) with sticks, clods, leaves, grass, and the like,
restraining his speech, (keeping himself) pure, wrap¬
ping up his body, and covering his head.

50. Let him void faeces and urine, in the day¬
time turning to the north, at night turning towards
the south, during the two twilights in the same
(position) as by day.

45. Ap. I, 30, 18; Gaut. IX, 40, 45; Vas. XII, 11; Baudh. II,
6, 24, 39; Vi. LXVIII, 14; LXIV, 5; LX, 11, 16, 19; YsLgn. I,
131, 134. Govra^e, ‘in a cow-pen’ (Gov., Kull.), means according
to Medh.‘ a place where cows graze.’

« 46. Ap. I, 30, 18; Gaut. IX, 40; Vi. LX, 4, 21, 10. ‘Some
omit verses 46-47 ’ (Nar.), and they are not found in Nand.

47 - Vi. LX, 9.

48. Ap. I, 30, 20; Gaut. II, 12; Vi. LX, 22; Y&gn. I, 134.
< Looking at (things moved by) the wind ’ (Medh., Kull.). Medh.
places verse 52 immediately after this.

49- Ap. I, 30, 14-15; Gaut. IX, 37-38, 41-43; Vas. XII, 13;
Vi. LX, 2-3, 23.

50. Ap. I, 31, 1; Vi. LX, 2-3.

IV, 57- householder ; rules for a snAtaka. 137

51. In the shade or in darkness a Br&hmawa may,
both by day and at night, do it, assuming any
position he pleases; likewise when his life is in
danger.

52. The intellect of (a man) who voids urine
against a fire, the sun, the moon, in water, against a
Br&hmawa, a cow, or the wind, perishes.

53. Let him not blow a fire with his mouth; let
him not look at a naked woman; let him not throw
any impure substance into the fire, and let him not
warm his feet at it.

54. Let him not place (fire) under (a bed or the
like); nor step over it, nor place it (when he sleeps)
at the foot-(end of his bed); let him not torment
living creatures.

55. Let him not eat, nor travel, nor sleep during
the twilight; let him not scratch the ground; let
him not take off his garland.

56. Let him not throw urine or faeces into the
water, nor saliva, nor (clothes) defiled by impure
substances, nor any other (impurity), nor blood, nor
poisonous things.

57. Let him not sleep alone in a deserted dwell¬
ing ; let him not wake (a superior) who is sleeping;
let him not converse with a menstruating woman;

52. Medh. and Nar. mention a var. lect. for prativatam,
‘ against the wind,’ pratisawdhyaw, ‘ in the twilights,’ which Nand.
adopts.

53. Ap. I, 15, 20-21; Gaut. IX, 32; Vas. XII, 27 ; Vi. LXXI,
32 - 34 . 371 Y&gn. I, 137.

54. Vi. LXXI, 36; Y&gn. I, 135, 137; Gaut. IX, 73.

55. Vi. LXIII, 8; LXVIII, 12; LXXI, 41, 55.

56. Ap. I, 30, 19; Vi. LXXI, 35; Y&gn. I, 137.

57 - Gaut. IX, 54-551 Vas. XII, 42; Vi. LXIII, 21; LXX, 13;
LXXI, 58; 138.

138

LAWS OF MANU.

IV, 58.

nor let him go to a sacrifice, if he is not chosen (to
be officiating priest).

58. Let him keep his right arm uncovered in a
place where a sacred fire is kept, in a cow-pen, in
the presence of Brahmawas, during the private reci¬
tation of the Veda, and at meals.

59. Let him not interrupt a cow who is suckling
(her calf), nor tell anybody of it. A wise man, if he
sees a rainbow in the sky, must not point it out to
anybody.

60. Let him not dwell in a village where the
sacred law is not obeyed, nor (stay) long where
diseases are endemic; let him not go alone on a
journey, nor reside long on a mountain.

61. Let him not dwell in a country where the
rulers are .Sfodras, nor in one which is surrounded
by unrighteous men, nor in one which has become
subject to heretics, nor in one swarming with men
of the lowest castes.

62. Let him not eat anything from which the oil
has been extracted; let him not be a glutton; let
him not eat very early (in the morning), nor very
late (in the evening), nor (take any food) in the
evening, if he has eaten (his fill) in the morning.

63. Let him not exert himself without a purpose;
let him not drink water out of his joined palms; let

58. Baudh. II, 6, 38; Vi. LXXI, 60.

59. Ap. I, 31, 10, 18; Gaut. IX, 23; Vas. XII, 33 ; Baudh. II,
6, 11, 17; Vi. LXIII, 2 ; LXXI, 62. All the commentators except
Ragh. explain dhayantim, ‘ who is suckling (her calf),’ by pibantim,
‘who is drinking’ (milk or water, see Yagn. I, 140).

60-61. Ap. I, 15, 22, 32, 18 ; Gaut. IX, 65; Baudh. II, 6, 21,
31; Vi. LXXI, 64-68.

62. VL LXV11I, 27, 48; see above, II, 56—57.

63. Gaut. IX, 9, 50, 56 ; Baudh. II, 6, 5; Vi. LXXI, 69.

IV, 69- HOUSEHOLDER ; RULES FOR A SNATAKA. 1 39

him not eat food (placed) in his lap; let him not
show (idle) curiosity.

64. Let him not dance, nor sing, nor play musical
instruments, nor slap (his limbs), nor grind his teeth,
nor let him make uncouth noises, though he be in a
passion.

65. Let him never wash his feet in a vessel of
white brass; let him not eat out of a broken
(earthen) dish, nor out of one that (to judge) from
its appearance (is) defiled.

66. Let him not use shoes, garments, a sacred
string, ornaments, a garland, or a water-vessel which
have been used by others.

67. Let him not travel with untrained beasts of
burden, nor with (animals) that are tormented by
hunger or disease, or whose horns, eyes, and hoofs
have been injured, or whose tails have been dis¬
figured.

68. Let him always travel with (beasts) which
are well broken in, swift, endowed with lucky marks,
and perfect in colour and form, without urging them
much with the goad.

69. The morning sun, the smoke rising from a
(burning) corpse, and a broken seat must be avoided.
Let him not clip his nails or hair, and not tear his
nails with his teeth.

64. Ap. II, 20, 13; Vi. LXXI, 70-71. Na kshveafet, ‘let him
not grind his teeth,’ means according to Nar., ‘ let him not roar
like a lion;’ according to Nand., ‘ let him not snap his fingers.’ Na
spho/aye/, ‘ he shall not slap (his limbs),’ means according to Nand.,

' he shall not make his fingers crack.’

65. Vi. LXVIII, 20; LXXI, 39.

66. Vi. LXXI, 47. 67-68. Vi. LX 111 ,13-18.

69. Vi. LXXI, 44, 46; Ya^n. 1 ,139. Bal&tapaA, ‘the morning

sun,’ is according to ‘some,’ mentioned by Nfir., and according to

140

LAWS OF MANU.

IV, 70.

70. Let him not crush earth or clods, nor tear off
grass with his nails; let him not do anything that is
useless or will have disagreeable results in the
future.

71. A man who crushes clods, tears off grass, or
bites his nails, goes soon to perdition, likewise an
informer and he who neglects (the rules of) purifi¬
cation.

72. Let him not wrangle; let him not wear a
garland over (his hair). To,ride on the back of
cows (or of oxen) is anyhow a blamable act.

73. Let him not enter a walled village or house
except by the gate, and by night let him keep at a
long distance from the roots of trees.

74. Let him never play with dice, nor himself take
off his shoes; let him not eat, lying on a bed, nor
what has been placed in his hand or on a seat.

Ragh. ‘the sun in the sign of Kanya, or Virgo,’ i.e. ‘the sun in
autumn.’ The same explanation is mentioned by Nandapa»<fita
in his comment on the parallel passage of Vishwu. It is, however,
probably wrong: see the Introduction. ‘ Let him not clip his nails
or hair,’ i. e. ‘ not himself, but let him employ a barber ’ (Medh.,
Gov.), or ‘ before they have grown long ’ (Kull.), or ‘ except at the
proper time for clipping ’ (Nand.).

70. Ap. I, 32, 18; Gaut. IX, 51; Vi. LXXI, 42-43.

72. Ap. I, 32, 5; Gaut. IX, 32 ; Baudh. II, 69. I read with all the
commentators ‘ vign'hya ’ instead of the ‘ vigarhya ’ of the editions.
‘Let him not wear a garland over (his dress),’ (Medh.), or ‘let
him not wear a garland outside (the house),’ or * one that is not
fragrant’ (others, Medh.).

73. Ap. 1 , 31, 23; Gaut. IX, 32; Baudh. II, 6,13; Y&gn. 1 , 140.

74. Gaut. IX, 32; Vas. XII, 36; Baudh. II, 6, 6; Vi. LXVIII,
23; Vi. LXXI, 45; Y&gn. 1 ,138. * Nor what has been placed in his *
hand,’ i.e. ‘ in his left hand or in a vessel held in that hand ’ (Nfir.).
This is no doubt the best explanation, as Hindus always eat with
the fingers of the right hand, and the left hand is considered un¬
clean for very good reasons.

IV, 82. HOUSEHOLDER ; RULES FOR A SNATAKA. 141

75. Let him not eat after sunset any (food) con¬
taining sesamum grains ; let him never sleep naked,
nor go anywhere unpurified (after meals).

76. Let him eat while his feet are (yet) wet (from
the ablution), but let him not go to bed with wet
feet. He who eats while his feet are (still) wet, will
attain long life.

77. Let him never enter a place, difficult of access,
which is impervious to his eye; let him not look at
urine or ordure, nor cross a river (swimming) with
his arms.

78. Let him not step on hair, ashes, bones, pot¬
sherds, cotton-seed or chaff, if he desires long life.

79. Let him not stay together with outcasts, nor
with K&nd&. las, nor with Pukkasas, nor with fools,
nor with overbearing men, nor with low-caste men,
nor with Anty&vas&yins.

80. Let him not give to a .Stidra advice, nor the
remnants (of his meal), nor food offered to the gods;
nor let him explain the sacred law (to such a man),
nor impose (upon him) a penance.

81. For he who explains the sacred law (to a
6ftdra) or dictates to him a penance, will sink to¬
gether with that (man) into the hell (called) Asa m-
wz'ta.

82. Let him not scratch his head with both hands

75. Gaut. IX, 60; Vi. LXVIII, 29; LXXI, 3; see above, II, 56.

76. Vi. LXVIII, 34; LXX, 1.

77. Ap. I, 32, 26; Gaut. IX, 32; Vas. XII, 45; Baudh. II, 6,
26; Vi. LXIII, 46.

78. Ap. II, 20,11; Gaut. IX, ig; Baudh. II, 6,16; Yagti. I, 139.

79. Regarding the Pukkasas and Antyavasayins, see below, X,
*8. 39 -

80. Ap. I, 31, 24; Vi. LXXI, 48-52; Vas. XVIII, 14.

81. Vas. XVIII, 15. 82. Vi. LXXI, 53.

142

LAWS OF MANU.

IV, 83.

joined; let him not touch it while he is impure, nor
bathe without (submerging) it.

83. Let him avoid (in anger) to lay hold of (his
own or other men’s) hair, or to strike (himself or
others) on the head. When he has bathed (sub¬
merging) his head, he shall not touch any of his
limbs with oil.

84. Let him not accept presents from a king who
is not descended from the Kshatriya race, nor from
butchers, oil-manufacturers, and publicans, nor from
those who subsist by the gain of prostitutes.

85. One oil-press is as (bad) as ten slaughter¬
houses, one tavern as (bad as) ten oil-presses, one
brothel as (bad as) ten taverns, one king as (bad as)
ten brothels.

86. A king is declared to be equal (in wicked¬
ness) to a butcher who keeps a hundred thousand
slaughter-houses; to accept presents from him is a
terrible (crime).

87. He who accepts presents from an avaricious
king who acts contrary to the Institutes (of the
sacred law), will go in succession to the following
twenty-one hells:

88. T&misra, Andhatctmisra, Maharaurava, Rau-
rava, the KAlashtra hell, Mahanaraka,

89. Sa/«£ivana, Mahivfii, Tapana, Samprat&pana,
Sa/»ghcLta, SakcLkola, Kuafaiala, Pfttimrzttika,

83. Vi. LXIV, £2. ‘When he has bathed (submerging) his
head’ should be according to others (mentioned by Kull. and
R£gh.) ‘ when he has anointed his head with oil.’

84. YAgn.'I, 140.

85. YI, 141. Medh., Gov., Nar., and Nand. say,‘one
king as bad as ten prostitutes ’ (verya).

88-90. Vi. XL 1 II, 2-22. Nar. and Gov. say expressly that nara-
ka« kalasfitraOT fa means ‘ the KalasfJtra hell,’ and Nar. that ‘ Vaita-

IV, 96*

VEDA-STUDY.

143

90. Lohasanku, Alisha, Pathin, the (flaming)
river, • 5 'dlmala, Asipatravana, and Loha^iraka.

91. Learned Brihmawas, who know that, who
study the Veda and desire bliss after death, do not
accept presents from a king.

92. Let him wake in the muhflrta, sacred to
Brahman, and think of (the acquisition of) spiritual
merit and wealth, of the bodily fatigue arising there¬
from, and of the true meaning of the Veda.

93. When he has risen, has relieved the neces¬
sities of nature and carefully purified himself, let
him stand during the morning twilight, muttering
for a long time (the Gayatri), and at the proper time
(he must similarly perform) the evening (devotion).

94. By prolonging the twilight devotions, the sages
obtained long life, wisdom, honour, fame, and excel¬
lence in Vedic knowledge.

95. Having performed the Upikarman according
to the prescribed rule on (the full moon of the month)
vS'rdvawa, or on that of PraushMapada (Bh&drapada),

rawt ’ must be understood with nadi, 1 the river/ while Gov. speaks
of a hell called Nadi, ‘ the river/ The corresponding passage of
Vishmi shows that the Dipanadt is meant. ‘The editions read
Sawhata instead of Sawghata, *Salmali instead of *SSlmala, and
Lohadaraka, which R&gh. has also, instead of Lohadaraka.

92. Vas. XII, 47; Vi. LX, 1. Kull. and Ragh. say, ‘ in the
muhflrta, sacred to Brahmt,’ or Bharatt, the goddess of speech. But
this explanation is wrong, as the expression prSg&patya muhflrta,
used in other Smntis, shows.

93. Vi. LXXI, 77.

94. I read with Gov., Nand., and K., avapnuvan, ‘obtained,’
instead of avSpnuyud (Medh., Kull., Nar., Ragh.).

95-97. Ap. I, 9, 1-3, 10, 2 ; Gaut. XVI, 1-2, 40; Vas. XIII,
1-5; Baudh. I, 12-16 ; Vi. XXX, 1-2, 24-25 ; Y&gn, I, 142-144.

The Upakarman is the solemn opening of the Brflhmamcal
school-term, and the Utsar^ana or Utsarga its closing. Their

144

LAWS OF MANU.

IV, 9 6 .

a Brihma^a shall diligently study the Vedas during
four months and a half.

96. When the Pushya-day (of the month Pausha),
or the first day of the bright half of M&gha has
come, a Brahmawa shall perform in the forenoon
the Utsar^ana of the Vedas.

97. Having performed the Utsarga outside (the
village), as the Institutes (of the sacred law) pre¬
scribe, he shall stop reading during two days and
the intervening night, or during that day (of the
Utsarga) and (the following) night.

98. Afterwards he shall diligently recite the
Vedas during the bright (halves of the months), and
duly study all the Angas of the Vedas during the
dark fortnights.

99. Let him not recite (the texts) indistinctly, nor
in the presence of •S'hdras; nor let him, if in the
latter part of the night he is tired with reciting the
Veda, go again to sleep.

100. According to the rule declared above, let
him recite the daily (portion of the) Mantras, and
a zealous Brdhma«a, (who is) not in distress, (shall
study) the Brahjnawa and the Mantrasawhitd.

xoi. Let him who studies always avoid (reading)
on the following occasions when the Veda-study is

description is found in the Gnhya-sfttras, e.g. .SankMyana IV, 5-6.
The Pushya-day is the sixth lunar day of each month: >Srdva«a,
July-August; Bhddrapada, August-September; Pausha, December-
January; Magha, Jariuary-February.

97. But see below, verse 119.

98-129. Ap. I, 9, 4-11, 38; 32, 12-15 5 Gaut. I, 58-60; XVI,
5-49; Vas. XIII, 6-40; XVIII, 13; Baudh. I, 2r, 4-22 5 Vi. XXX,
3-30; Y Sgn. I, 144-151-

100. ‘ The daily (portion of the) Mantras,’ i.e. ‘the Gayatrt and
other portions of the Rik as,Ya^us, and Sdmans.’

IV, io6.

VEDA-STUDY.

145

forbidden, and (let) him who teaches pupils according
to the prescribed rule (do it likewise).

102. Those who know the (rules of) recitation
declare that in the rainy season the Veda-study
must be stopped on these two (occasions), when the
wind is audible at night, and when it whirls up the
dust in the day-time.

103. Manu has stated, that when lightning,
thunder, and rain (are observed together), or when
large fiery meteors fall on all sides, the recitation
must be interrupted until the same hour (on the next
day, counting from the occurrence of the event).

104. When one perceives these (phenomena) all
together (in the twilight), after the sacred fires have
been made to blaze (for the performance of the
Agnihotra), then one must know the recitation of
the Veda to be forbidden, and also when clouds
appear out of season.

105. On (the occasion of) a preternatural sound
from the sky, (of) an earthquake, and when the
lights of heaven are surrounded by a halo, let him
know that (the Veda-study must be) stopped until
the same hour (on the next day), even if (these phe¬
nomena happen) in the (rainy) season.

106. But when lightning and the roar of thunder
(are observed) after the sacred fires have been made
to blaze, the stoppage shall last as long as the light
(of the sun or of the stars is visible); if the remain¬
ing (above-named phenomenon, rain, occurs, the
reading shall cease), both in the day-time and at
night.

105. Medh. proposes as another explanation of^yotish&w Aopa-
sargane, ‘ when the heavenly lights trouble each other/ i. e. obscure
each other, and Nar., Kull., and Ragh. refer the phrase to eclipses.

[ 2 5] R

146

LAWS OF MANU.

IV, 107.

107. For those who wish to acquire exceedingly
great merit, a continual interruption of the Veda-
study (is prescribed) in villages and in towns, and
(the Veda-study must) always (cease) when any kind
of foul smell (is perceptible).

108. In a village where a corpse lies, in the pre¬
sence of a (man who lives as unrighteously as a)
■ 5 * 0 dra, while (the sound of) weeping (is heard), and
in a crowd of men the (recitation of the Veda must
be) stopped.

109. In water, during the middle part of the
night, while he voids excrements, or is impure,
and after he has partaken of a funeral dinner,
a man must not even think in his heart (of the
sacred texts).

no. A learned Brdhma«a shall not recite the
Veda during three days, when he has accepted an
invitation to a (funeral rite) in honour of one ancestor
(ekoddish/a), or when the king has become impure
through a birth or death in his family (sfttaka), or
when Rdhu by an eclipse makes the moon impure.

in. As long as the smell and the stains of the
(food given) in honour of one ancestor remain on
the body of a learned Brdhmawa, so long he must
not recite the Veda.

112. While lying on a bed, while his feet are
raised (on a bench), while he sits on his hams with
a cloth tied round his knees, let him not study, nor
when he has eaten meat or food given by a person
impure on account of a birth or a death,

107. With respect to this verse, see especially Baudh. II, 6,33-34.

109. Medh. mentions a var. lect. udaye, ‘ at sunrise,’ for udake,
‘ in water.’

no. Eclipses of the sun are of course included.

IV, Ii8.

VEDA-STUDY.

*47

113. Nor during a fog, nor while the sound of
arrows is audible, nor during both the twilights, nor
on the new-moon day, nor on the fourteenth and
the eighth (days of each half-month), nor on the full-
moon day.

114. The new-moon day destroys the teacher, the
fourteenth (day) the pupil, the eighth and the full-
moon days (destroy all remembrance of) the Veda;
let him therefore avoid (reading on) those (days).

115. A Brihma;za shall not recite (the Veda)
during a dust-storm, nor while the sky is preter-
naturally red, nor while jackals howl, nor while the
barking of dogs, the braying of donkeys, or the
grunting of camels (is heard), nor while (he is seated)
in a company.

116. Let him not study near a burial-ground, nor
near a village, nor in a cow-pen, nor dressed in a
garment which he wore during conjugal intercourse,
nor after receiving a present at a funeral sacrifice.

117. Be it an animal or a thing inanimate, what¬
ever be the (gift) at a .Sraddha, let him not, having
just accepted it, recite the Veda; for the hand of a
Br&hma;/a is his mouth.

118. When the village has been beset by robbers,
and when an alarm has been raised by fire, let him
know that (the Veda-study must be) interrupted
until the same hour (on the next day), and on (the
occurrence of) all portents.

113. Va«a,‘arrows/may also mean ‘ a large lute/

115. Panktau,‘in a company’(Gov., Kull., Nar., ‘others’), means
according to Medh., N&r., and Ragh.‘ in the midst of dogs, donkeys,
or camels/ Nar. mentions a third explanation, ‘ in the company
of unworthy persons’ (apanktya).

11*7. I.e. it is as sinful to recite the Veda after accepting a pre¬
sent at a -Sr&ddha, as to study after partaking of a funeral dinner.

L 2

148

LAWS OF MANU.

IV, 1x9.

119. On (the occasion of) the Upikarman and
(of) the Vedotsarga an omission (of the Veda-study)
for three days has been prescribed, but on the
Ash/ak&s and on the last nights of the seasons for
a day and a night.

120. Let him not recite the Veda on horseback,
nor on a tree, nor on an elephant, nor in a boat (or
ship), nor on a donkey, nor on a camel, nor standing
on barren ground, nor riding in a carriage,

121. Nor during a verbal altercation, nor during
a mutual assault, nor in a camp, nor during a
battle, nor when he has just eaten, nor during an
indigestion, nor after vomiting, nor with sour
eructations,

122. Nor without receiving permission from a
guest (who stays in his house), nor while the wind
blows vehemently, nor while blood flows from his
body, nor when he is wounded by a weapon.

123. Let him never recite the i?/g-veda or the
Ya^ur-veda while the Saman (melodies) are heard;
(let him stop all Veda-study for a day and a
night) after finishing a Veda or after reciting an
Arawyaka.

124. The Rig-va da is declared to be sacred to
the gods, the Ya,fur-vcda sacred to men, and the
Selma-veda sacred to the manes; hence the sound of
the latter is impure (as it were).

119. The Ash/akas are the three or four days for the Ash/akd
*Sr£ddhas, which are placed differently by different writers; see
Weber, Die Nakshatras II, 337.

121. Nar. interprets na vivade na kalahe by ‘neither during a
dispute on legal matters nor during an altercation/

124. ‘Is impure (as it were)/ i.e. ‘it is not really impure, but
when it is heard, one must not study, just as in the presence of
some impure thing or person* (Medh.).

IV, 130. VEDA-STUDY ; RULES FOR A SNAtAICA.

I49

125. Knowing this, the learned daily repeat first
in due order the essence of the three (Vedas) and
afterwards the (text of the) Veda.

126. Know that (the Veda-study must be) inter¬
rupted for a day and a night, when cattle, a frog,
a cat, a dog, a snake, an ichneumon, or a rat pass
between (the teacher and his pupil).

127. Let a twice-born man always carefully inter¬
rupt the Veda-study on two (occasions, viz.) when
the place where he recites is impure, and when he
himself is unpurified.

128. A twice-born man who is a Sn&taka shall
remain chaste on the new-moon day, on the eighth
(lunar day of each half-month), on the full-moon day,
and on the fourteenth, even (if they fall) in the period
(proper for conjugal intercourse).

129. Let him not bathe (immediately) after a
meal, nor when he is sick, nor in the middle of the
night, nor frequently dressed in all his garments,
nor in a pool which he does not perfectly know.

130. Let him not intentionally step on the shadow
of (images of) the gods, of a Guru, of a king, of a
Snataka, of his teacher, of a reddish-brown animal,
or of one who has been initiated to the performance
of a .Srauta sacrifice (Dlkshita).

125. ‘The essence of three (Vedas),' i.e. the syllable Om and the
G&yatri; see above, II, 76-77.

128. Vi. LXIX, 1; Vas. XII, 21. According to others, quoted
by Medh., the word brahmaiari translated by ‘chaste’ indicates
that a Snataka must also in other respects behave like a student.
Medh. thinks it possible that the abstention from honey and meat
may also be indicated.

129. Ap. I, 32, 8 ; Baudh. II, 6, 25 ; Vi. LXIV, 3-4, 6. ‘ Not

frequently,’ i.e. ‘only for particular reasons, such as being touched
by a Aanrfala.’

130. Y agii. I, 152; Vi. LXIII, 40. Babhru, ‘a reddish-brown

LAWS OF MANU.

IV, ,31.

150

131. At midday and at midnight, after partaking
of meat at' a funeral dinner, and in the two twilights
let him not stay long on a cross-road.

132. Let him not step intentionally on things
used for cleansing the body, on water used for a
bath, on urine or ordure, on blood, on mucus, and
on anything spat out or vomited.

133. Let him not show particular attention to an
enemy, to the friend of an enemy, to a wicked man,
to a thief, or to the wife of another man.

134. For in this world there is nothing so detri¬
mental to long life as criminal conversation with
another man’s wife.

135. Let him who desires prosperity, indeed,
never despise a Kshatriya, a snake, and a learned
BrAhmawa, be they ever so feeble.

136. Because these three, when treated with dis¬
respect, may utterly destroy him ; hence a wise man
must never despise them.

137. Let him not despise himself on account of
former failures ; until death let him seek fortune,
nor despair of gaining it.

x 38. Let him say what is true, let him say what
is pleasing, let him utter no disagreeable truth, and
let him utter no agreeable falsehood; that is the
eternal law.

animal,’ is not clearly explained by Gov., Kull., and Ragh. Medh.
thinks that ‘a brown cow’ or ‘the Soma creeper’ may be meant.
Nand. adopts the former view, and Nar. explains it by ‘ a brown
creature.’

132. Vi. LXIII, 41; Y&gii. I, 152. Apasnanam, ‘ water used for
a bath,’ means according to Nar. and Nand. ‘ water used for wash¬
ing a corpse.’

i 35 -I 3 6 - Y^gn. I, 153. 137. Vi. LXXI, 76; Ya^n. 1 ,153.

138. Gaut. IX, 68; Vi. LXXI, 73-74; Ya^ii. 1,132.

IV, 145 - RULES FOR A SNATAKA. 151

139. (What is) well, let him call well, or let him
say ‘well’ only; let him not engage in a useless
enmity or dispute with anybody.

140. Let him not journey too early in the
morning, nor too late in the evening, nor just during
the midday (heat), nor with an unknown (com¬
panion), nor alone, nor with .Sftdras.

141. Let him not insult those who have re¬
dundant limbs or are deficient in limbs, nor those
destitute of knowledge, nor very aged men, nor
those who have no beauty or wealth, nor those who
are of low birth.

142. A Brahmawa who is impure must not touch
with his hand a cow, a Brahmaraa, or fire; nor,
being in good health, let him look at the luminaries
in the sky, while he is impure.

143. If he has touched these, while impure, let
him always sprinkle with his hand water on the
organs of sensation, all his limbs, and the navel.

144. Except when sick he must not touch the
cavities (of the body) without a reason, and he must
avoid (to touch) the hair on the secret (parts).

145. Let him eagerly follow the (customs which
are) auspicious and the rule of good conduct, be
careful of purity, and control all his organs, let him
mutter (prayers) and, untired, daily offer oblations in
the fire.

139. Ap. I, 32,11—14; Gaut. IX, 19-20 ; Vi. LXXI, 57; Ysi^n.
1,132 ; Gaut. IX, 32. ‘ Only,’ i.e. even if things go wrong. I follow
N&r.’s explanation, which is the only correct one: bhadraw vastuto
ya/W/iobhanaw I bhadram ity eva va ’bhadram api, ‘ (let him call)
well what is really well; or (let him call) well even that which is
not well.’

140. Baudh. II, 6, 22-23; Vi. LXIII, 4, 6-7, 9.

141. Vi. LXXI, 2. 142. Yagii. 1 ,155. 144. Vi. LXXI, 79.

*52

LAWS OF MANU.

IV, 14 6 .

146. No calamity happens to those who eagerly
follow auspicious customs and the rule of good con¬
duct, to those who are always careful of purity, and
to those who mutter (sacred texts) and offer burnt-
oblations.

147. Let him, without tiring, daily mutter the
Veda at the proper time; for they declare that to be
one’s highest duty; (all) other (observances) are
called secondary duties.

148. By daily reciting the Veda, by (the observance
of the rules of) purification, by (practising) austeri¬
ties, and by doing no injury to created beings, one
(obtains the faculty of) remembering former births.

149. He who, recollecting his former existences,
again recites the Veda, gains endless bliss by the
continual study of the Veda.

150. Let him always offer on the Parva-days ob¬
lations to Savit^z and such as avert evil omens, and
on the Ash/ak&s and Anvash/akas let him constantly
worship the manes.

151. Far from his dwelling let him remove urine
(and ordure), far (let him remove) the water used
for washing his feet, and far the remnants of food
and the water from his bath.

152. Early in the morning only let him void

146. Vas. XXVI, 14. 147. Gaut. IX, 72.

150. Vi. LXXI, 86. Nand. reads sdvitryS, 1 with the Savitri,’ for
sSvitriln, ‘ to Savitn',’ and Nar. has the same explanation.

151. Ap. I, 31, 2-3; Gaut. IX, 39; Y &gn. I, 153. Avasatha,
‘ his dwelling,’ means according to Kull. ‘ the room where the fires
are kept.’ Kull. explains nishekam, ‘the water from his bath,’ by
‘ seminal impurity.’ Gov. and Nar. read uMAish/innanishekaw fa,
and explain nisheka by tySga, ‘ throwing away.’'

152. According to Medh.,‘others’ explained maitram,‘defecation,’
by ‘ friendly service,’ or by ‘ the worship of Mitra.’

IV, 1 59*

RULES FOR A SNATAKA.

153

faeces, decorate (his body), bathe, clean his teeth,
apply collyrium to his eyes, and worship the gods.

153. But on the Parva-days let him go to visit
the (images of the) gods, and virtuous Brahmazzas,
and the ruler (of the country), for the sake of pro¬
tection, as well as his Gurus.

154. Let him reverentially salute venerable men
(who visit him), give them his own seat, let him
sit near them with joined hands and, when they
leave, (accompany them), walking behind them.

155. Let him, untired, follow the conduct of vir¬
tuous men, connected with his occupations, which
has been fully declared in the revealed texts and in
the sacred tradition (Smrz’ti) and is the root of the
sacred law.

156. Through virtuous conduct he obtains long
life, through virtuous conduct desirable offspring,
through virtuous conduct imperishable wealth; vir¬
tuous conduct destroys (the effect of) inauspicious
marks.

157. For a man of bad conduct is blamed among
people, constantly suffers misfortunes, is afflicted
with diseases, and short-lived.

158. A man who follows the conduct of the vir¬
tuous, has faith and is free from envy, lives a
hundred years, though he be entirely destitute of
auspicious marks.

159. Let him carefully avoid all undertakings
(the success of) which depends on others; but let

153. Ap. I, 31, 21-22. Medh. omits verses 153-158.

154. Baudh. II, 6 , 35. 155. Vas. LXXI, 90; 1 ,154.

156. Vas. VI, 7; Vi. LXXI, 91. 157. Vas.VI, 6.

158. Vas. VI, 8; Vi. LXXI, 92.

154

LAWS OF MANU.

IV, i Co,

him eagerly pursue that (the accomplishment of)
which depends on himself.

160. Everything that depends on others (gives)
pain, everything that depends on oneself (gives)
pleasure; know that this is the short definition of
pleasure and pain.

161. When the performance of an act gladdens
his heart, let him perform it with diligence ; but let
him avoid the opposite.

162. Let him never offend the teacher who in¬
itiated him, nor him who explained the Veda, nor
his father and mother, nor (any other) Guru, nor
cows, nor Brahma^as, nor any men performing
austerities.

163. Let him avoid atheism, cavilling at the
Vedas, contempt of the gods, hatred, want of
modesty, pride, anger, and harshness.

164. Let him, when angry, not raise a stick against
another man, nor strike (anybody) except a son or a
pupil; those two he may beat in order to correct
them.

161. This rule refers to indifferent acts or cases where there is
an option; see above, II, 12.

162. Ya ign. I, 157-158. Na hiwsyat, Met him never offend’
(Medh., Kull,, Nar., Nand.), means according to Gov. 4 let him
never injure them, though they attempt his life, when self-defence is
permitted’ (see VIII, 350). Tapasvina^ means according to Medh.
and Gov. ‘all those engaged in the performance of austerities,*
e.g. even sinners who perform penances (Medh.), while the other
commentators understand it to denote ‘ ascetics.’

163. Ap. I, 30, 25; Vas. XIII, 41; Vi. LXXI, 83. I read with
all the commentators instead of dambham, ‘hypocrisy/ stam-
bham, which according to Medh., Gov., and Nar. means ‘ want of
modesty,’ and according to Kull. ‘ want of energy in the fulfilment
of duties.*

164. Vi. LXXI, 81-82. See also below, VIII, 299-300.

IV, 17 *.

RUT.ES for a snataka.

*55

165. A twice-born man who has merely threat¬
ened a Brihma«a with the intention of (doing him)
a corporal injury, will wander about for a hundred
years in the Tamisra hell.

166. Having intentionally struck him in anger,
even with a blade of grass, he will be born during
twenty-one existences in the wombs (of such beings
where men are born in punishment of their) sins.

167. A man who in his folly caused blood to flow
from the body of a Brahmawa who does not attack
him, will suffer after death exceedingly great pain.

168. As many particles of dust as the blood takes
up from the ground, during so many years the spiller
of the blood will be devoured by other (animals) in
the next world.

169. A wise man should therefore never threaten
a Brdhmawa, nor strike him even with a blade of
grass, nor cause his blood to flow.

170. Neither a man who (lives) unrighteously, nor
he who (acquires) wealth (by telling) falsehoods, nor
he who always delights in doing injury, ever attain
happiness in this world.

171. Let him, though suffering in consequence of
his righteousness, never turn his heart to unrighte¬
ousness; for he will see the speedy overthrow of
unrighteous, wicked men.

172. Unrighteousness, practised in this world,
does not at once produce its fruit, like a cow; but,
advancing slowly, it cuts off the roots of him who
committed it.

165-167. Gaut. XXI, 20-22; Yagri. 1,155.

172. ‘Like a cow,' i.e. ‘which at once yields benefits by its
milk, &c.’(Gov., Nar., Nand.). Medh., Kull., and Ragh. take gau.4

LAWS OF MANU.

IV, 173.

156

173. If (the punishment falls) not on (the offender)
himself, (it falls) on his sons, if not on the sons, (at
least) on his grandsons; but an iniquity (once) com¬
mitted, never fails to produce fruit to him who
wrought it.

174. He prospers for a while through unrighte¬
ousness, then he gains great good fortune, next he
conquers his enemies, but (at last) he perishes
(branch and) root.

175. Let him always delight in truthfulness, (obe¬
dience to) the sacred law, conduct worthy of an
Aryan, and purity; let him chastise his pupils accord¬
ing to the sacred law; let him keep his speech, his
arms, and his belly under control.

176. Let him avoid (the acquisition of) wealth
and (the gratification of his) desires, if they are
opposed to the sacred law, and even lawful acts
which may cause pain in the future or are offensive
to men.

177. Let him not be uselessly active with his hands
and feet, or with his eyes, nor crooked (in his ways),
nor talk idly, nor injure others by deeds or even
think of it.

178. Let him walk in that path of holy men

in its other sense, ‘the earth,’ i.e. ‘which does not at once yield a
harvest,' but mention the first explanation too. It is not impossible
that the word has to be taken both ways, and that the author wishes
to give with it both a sadharmya and a vaidharmyadrzsh/anta.

175. Gaut. IX, 50, 68-69.

176. Gaut. IX, 47, 73; Vi. LXXI, 84-85; Y &gii. 1,156. As an
example of ‘ a lawful act causing pain in the future,’ Medh. adduces
‘ the gift of one’s whole property.’

177. The last portion of the verse, ‘nor injure others, &c.,’ may
also be translated, ‘ let him not be intent on deeds (calculated) to
injure others.’

IV, 184 .

RULES FOR A SNAtAKA.

157

which his fathers and his grandfathers followed;
while he walks in that, he will not suffer harm.

179. With an officiating or a domestic priest, with
a teacher, with a maternal uncle, a guest and a de¬
pendant, with infants, aged and sick men, with
learned men, with his paternal relatives, connexions
by marriage and maternal relatives,

180. With his father and his mother, with female
relatives, with a brother, with his son and his wife,
with his daughter and with his slaves, let him not
have quarrels.

181. If he avoids quarrels with these persons, he
will be freed from all sins, and by suppressing (all)
such (quarrels) a householder conquers all the fol¬
lowing worlds.

182. The teacher is the lord of the world of
Brahman, the father has power over the world of
the Lord of created beings (Pra^apati), a guest rules
over the world of Indra, and the priests over the
world of the gods.

183. The female relatives (have power) over the
world of the Apsarases, the maternal relatives over
that of the Vbve Devds, the connexions by marriage
over that of the waters, the mother and the maternal
uncle over the earth.

184. Infants, aged, poor and sick men must be
considered as rulers of the middle sphere, the eldest

I79“ l8 4- Y & gn . I, 157-158.

179. VaidyaiA, ‘with learned men,’ may also mean ‘with
physicians.’

181. Instead of etair gitau ka, ‘ by suppressing (all) such (quarrels),’
(Medh., Gov., Kull., Ragh.), Nar. and Nand. read etair ghas ka,
‘allowing himself to be conquered by these,’ i.e. ‘by bearing with
these persons.’ This reading, though less well attested than the
vulgata, is perhaps preferable.

158 LAWS OF MANU. IV, 185.

brother as equal to one’s father, one’s wife and one’s
son as one’s own body,

185. One’s slaves as one’s shadow, one’s daughter
as the highest object of tenderness ; hence if one is
offended by (any one of) these, one must bear it
without resentment.

186. Though (by his learning and sanctity) he
may be entitled to accept presents, let him not
attach himself (too much) to that (habit); for through
his accepting (many) presents the divine light in him
is soon extinguished.

187. Without a full knowledge of the rules, pre¬
scribed by the sacred law for the acceptance of
presents, a wise man should not take anything, even
though he may pine with hunger.

188. But an ignorant (man) who accepts gold,
land, a horse, a cow, food, a dress, sesamum-grains,
(or) clarified butter, is reduced to ashes like (a piece
of) wood.

189. Gold and food destroy his longevity, land
and a cow his body, a horse his eye(sight), a gar¬
ment his skin, clarified butter his energy, sesamum-
grains his offspring.

190. A Brdhmawa who neither performs austerities
nor studies the Veda, yet delights in accepting gifts,
sinks with the (donor into hell), just as (he who
attempts to cross over in) a boat made of stone (is
submerged) in the water.

191. Hence an ignorant (man) should be afraid of
accepting any presents; for by reason of a very small
(gift) even a fool sinks (into hell) as a cow into a
morass.

186. Vi. LVII, 6-7.
188. Y&gv. I, 201.

187. Vi. LVII, 8.
191. Ya gn. I, 202.

IV, Ip8.

RULES FOR A SNATAKA.

159

192. (A man) who knows the law should not offer
even water to a Brdhmawa who acts like a cat, nor
to a BrAhmawa who acts like a heron, nor to one
who is unacquainted with the Veda.

193. For property, though earned in accordance
with prescribed rules, which is given to these three
(persons), causes in the next world misery both to
the giver and to the recipient.

194. As he who (attempts to) cross water in a
boat of stone sinks (to the bottom), even so an igno¬
rant donor and an ignorant donee sink low.

195. (A man) who, ever covetous, displays the
flag of virtue, (who is) a hypocrite, a deceiver of the
people, intent on doing injury, (and) a detractor
(from the merits) of all men, one must know to be
one who acts like a cat.

196. That Brahmawa, who with downcast look, of
a cruel disposition, is solely intent on attaining his
own ends, dishonest and falsely gentle, is one who
acts like a heron.

197. Those BrAhmawas who act like herons, and
those who display the characteristics of cats, fall in
consequence of that wicked mode of acting into (the
hell called) Andhatamisra.

198. When he has committed a sin, let him not

192. Vi. XCIII, 7. 195. Vi. XCIII, 8.

196-200. Vi. XCIII, 9-13.

196. I have everywhere translated the word baka or vaka by
‘ heron,’ though, like its modern representative bagld, it is used also
as a name of the white ibis and of the bittern. But from other verses,
which speak of the baka cautiously wading in the water as if it
were afraid of hurting the aquatic animals, it would seem that the
proceedings of the heron, which one can watch in India at every
village tank, gave rise to the proverbial expressions bakavrata and
bakavratin.

x98. Several penances, e.g. the A’andrdyawa or the lunar penance,

160 LAWS OF MANU. TV, 199 .

perform a penance under the pretence (that the act
is intended to gain) spiritual merit, (thus) hiding his
sin under (the pretext of) a vow and deceiving women
and .Sttdras.

199. Such Brahma^as are reprehended after death
and in this (life) by those who expound the Veda,
and a vow, performed under a false pretence, goes
to the R&kshasas.

200. He who, without being a student, gains his
livelihood by (wearing) the dress of a student, takes
upon himself the guilt of (all) students and is born
again in the womb of an animal.

20X. Let him never bathe in tanks belonging to
other men; if he bathes (in such a one), he is tainted
by a portion of the guilt of him who made the tank.

202. He who uses without permission a carriage,
a bed, a seat, a well, a garden or a house belonging
to an(other man), takes upon himself one fourth of
(the owner’s) guilt.

203. Let him always bathe in rivers, in ponds,
dug by the gods (themselves), in lakes, and in water-
holes or springs.

204. A wise man should constantly discharge the
paramount duties (called yama), but not always the
minor ones (called niyama); for he who does not

may be performed either by a sinner in order to atone for a crime
or by a guiltless man in order to gain spiritual merit; see Baudh.
Ill, 8, 27-31.

201. Vi. LXIV, 1; Ya gn. 1 , 159; Baudh. II, 5, 6.

202. Y tgn. I, 160; Baudh. II, 6, 29.

203. Vi. LXIV, 16; Ya^fi. I, 159. Garta, ‘water-holes’ (Gov.,
Niir.), means according to Kull., who quotes a verse of the JSTMn-
dogya-pariiish/a, Nand., and Ragh., * a brook.’

204. Regarding the two classes of duties, see Y ign. Ill, 313-
314. Though the commentators give various explanations of yama

IV, 2io. RULES FOR A SNATAKA. l6l

discharge the former, while he obeys the latter alone,
becomes an outcast.

205. A Brdhma«a must never eat (a dinner given)
at a sacrifice that is offered by one who is not a
.Srotriya, by one who sacrifices for a multitude of
men, by a woman, or by a eunuch.

206. When those persons offer sacrificial viands
in the fire, it is unlucky for holy (men) and it dis¬
pleases the gods ; let him therefore avoid it.

207. Let him never eat (food given) by intoxi¬
cated, angry, or sick (men), nor that in which hair
or insects are found, nor what has been touched
intentionally with the foot,

208. Nor that at which the slayer of a learned
Brahmawa has looked, nor that which has been
touched by a menstruating woman, nor that which
has been pecked at by birds or touched by a dog,

209. Nor food at which a cow has smelt, nor par¬
ticularly that which has been offered by an invitation
to all comers, nor that (given) by a multitude or by
harlots, nor that which is declared to be bad by a
learned (man),

210. Nor the food (given) by a thief, a musician,
a carpenter, a usurer, one who has been initiated
(for the performance of a .Srauta sacrifice), a miser,
one bound with fetters,

and niyama, it is highly probable that Kull. is right in supposing
Manu to have held the same opinion as Ya gn.

205. Nar. mentions a var. lect. jftdrewa, 4 by a *Sudra/ for ‘ by
a eunuch/

209. Gov. and Kull. give as an instance of ‘ a multitude,’ ‘ a fra¬
ternity of Brdhmawas inhabiting a monastery/

210. I translate baddhasya niga^asya according to Kull. by
1 one bound with fetters/ because in the older Sanskrit the genitive
is occasionally used for the instrumental with passive perfect parti-

l>5] M

162

LAWS OF MANU.

IV, 211.

211. By one accused of a mortal sin (Abhuasta),
a hermaphrodite, an unchaste woman, or a hypocrite,
nor (any sweet thing) that has turned sour, nor what
has been kept a whole night, nor (the food) of a
.SCtdra, nor the leavings (of another man),

212. Nor (the food given) by a physician, a hunter,
a cruel man, one who eats the fragments (of another’s
meal), nor the food of an Ugra, nor that prepared
for a woman in childbed, nor that (given at a dinner)
where (a guest rises) prematurely (and) sips water,
nor that (given by a woman) whose ten days of im¬
purity have not elapsed,

213. Nor (food) given without due respect, nor
(that which contains) meat eaten for no sacred pur¬
pose, nor (that given) by a female who has no male
(relatives), nor the food of an enemy, nor that (given)
by the lord of a town, nor that (given) by outcasts,
nor that on which anybody has sneezed;

ciples, and because niga<fa does not mean ‘ bound with fetters,’ as
the other commentators assume. Nand. adds that the correct
reading is nigalena, which is found in some southern MSS.

211. .S'ftdrasyo&JAish/am eva ka, ‘nor (the food) of a ATidra, nor
the leavings (of any other man),’ (Kull., Ndr.) ; or, ‘the leavings of
a .Sftdra,’ which are mentioned in order to show that a very heavy
penance has to be performed (Medh., Rdgh.); or, ‘ that food of
which a .Sudra has eaten, and has left a remnant in the dish’
(Gov., Nand., Medh., ‘ others’). Medh. mentions also a var. lect
u&i/dsh/am aguros tatha, ‘ nor the leavings of any man excepting
a Guru’

212. Ugra is explained variously as ‘ a man of the Ugra caste’
(Medh., Gov., Ndr., Nand., Rdgh.); or, ‘a king’ (Medh., Gov. in
the Ma«gari); or,‘a man who perpetrates dreadful deeds’ (Kull.,
Rdgh.).

2x3. Kull. and Gov. seem to take nagaryannam, * food given by
the lord of a town,’ i.e. a king (Medh., Ndr., Rdgh.), in the sense of
nagardnnam, ‘ food given by a whole town.’

TV, 221.

RULES FOR A SNATAKA.

163

214. Nor the food (given) by an informer, by one
who habitually tells falsehoods, or by one who sells
(the rewards for) sacrifices, nor the food (given) by
an actor, a tailor, or an ungrateful (man),

215. By a blacksmith, a Nishada, a stage-player,
a goldsmith, a basket-maker, or a dealer in weapons,

216. By trainers of hunting dogs, publicans, a
washerman, a dyer, a pitiless (man), and a man in
whose house (lives) a paramour (of his wife),

217. Nor (the food given) by those who knowingly
bear with paramours (of their wives), and by those
who in all matters are ruled by women, nor food
(given by men) whose ten days of impurity on
account of a death have not passed, nor that which
is unpalatable.

218. The food of a king impairs his vigour, the
food of a .STidra his excellence in sacred learning,
the food of a goldsmith his longevity, that of a
leather-cutter his fame ;

219. The food of an artisan destroys his offspring,
that of a washerman his (bodily) strength ; the food
of a multitude and of harlots excludes him from (the
higher) worlds.

220. The food of a physician (is as vile as) pus,
that of an unchaste woman (equal to) semen, that
of a usurer (as vile as) ordure, and that of a dealer
in weapons (as bad as) dirt.

221. The food of those other persons who have

215. According to ‘ others,’ quoted by Mcdh., Nand., and Ragh.,
railusha, ‘ an actor,’ may also mean ‘ one who prostitutes his wife.’

216. Nmawsa, ‘a pitiless man’ (Medh., Gov., Kull., Nand.,
Ragh.), may also mean 1 a bard’ (Medh., N&r., Ragh.).

220. I.e. it causes him to be reborn as an animal feeding on pus
or other impure substances (Gov.).

M 2

164

LAWS OF MANU.

IV, 222.

been successively enumerated as such whose food
must not be eaten, the wise declare (to be as impure
as) skin, bones, and hair.

222. If he has unwittingly eaten the food of one
of those, (he must) fast for three days; if he has
eaten it intentionally, or (has swallowed) semen,
ordure, or urine, he must perform a Y^rikklixo.
penance.

223. A Brahma«a who knows (the law) must
not eat cooked food (given) by a .S’Ctdra who
performs no .Sraddhas; but, on failure of (other)
means of subsistence, he may accept raw (grain),
sufficient for one night (and day).

224. The gods, having considered (the respective
merits) of a niggardly .SYotxiya and of a liberal
usurer, declared the food of both to be equal (in
quality).

225. The Lord of created beings (Pra^apati) came
and spake to them, ‘ Do not make that equal, which
is unequal. The food of that liberal (usurer) is
purified by faith; (that of the) other (man) is
defiled by a want of faith.’

226. Let him, without tiring, always offer sacri¬
fices and perform works of charity with faith; for
offerings and charitable works made with faith
and with lawfully-earned money, (procure) endless
rewards.

227. Let him always practise, according to his

222. Gaut. XXIII, 23-24. Regarding the Kr/'K-Ara penance,
see below, XI, 211.

2 24. Nar. explains arrdddhina//, 1 who performs no Araddhas,’ by
‘ destitute of faith,’ and Nand. writes arraddhina^.

324-225. Baudh. 1 ,10, 5 ; Vas. XIV, 17.

226-227. Gov. gives and explains 226a and 227b only.

IV, 234 - RULES FOR A SNATAKA. 165

ability, with a cheerful heart, the duty of liberality,
both by sacrifices and by charitable works, if he finds
a worthy recipient (for his gifts).

228. If he is asked, let him always give some¬
thing, be it ever so little, without grudging; for a
worthy recipient will (perhaps) be found who saves
him from all (guilt).

229. A giver of water obtains the satisfaction (of
his hunger and thirst), a giver of food imperishable
happiness, a giver of sesamum desirable offspring,
a giver of a lamp a most excellent eyesight.

230. A giver of land obtains land, a giver of gold
long life, a giver of a house most excellent mansions,
a giver of silver (rftpya) exquisite beauty (rupa),

231. A giver of a garment a place in the world
of the moon, a giver of a horse (asva) a place in the
world of the Asvins, a giver of a draught-ox great
good fortune, a giver of a cow the world of the sun ;

232. A giver of a carriage or of a bed a wife,
a giver of protection supreme dominion, a giver of
grain eternal bliss, a giver of the Veda (brahman)
union with Brahman;

233. The gift of the Veda surpasses all other
gifts, water, food, cows, land, clothes, sesamum, gold,
and clarified butter.

234. For whatever purpose (a man) bestows any
gift, for that same purpose he receives (in his next
birth) with due honour its (reward).

226-235. Vas. XXX; Vi. XCI-XCII; Y&gn. I, 201, 203-212.

234. Mcdh., Gov., Nar., and Ragh. take the verse differently.
‘ With whatever disposition (a man) bestows any gift, with that
same disposition he receives (in his next birth its reward), being
duly honoured.’ Nand. omits it. K. follows Kull.’s explanation,
which is mentioned by Medh. also.

166

LAWS OF MANU.

IV, 235.

235. Both he who respectfully receives (a gift),
and he who respectfully bestows it, go to heaven;
in the contrary case (they both fall) into hell.

236. Let him not be proud of his austerities; let
him not utter a falsehood after he has offered a
sacrifice; let him not speak ill of Brcihma»as, though
he be tormented (by them); when he has bestowed
(a gift), let him not boast of it.

237. By falsehood a sacrifice becomes vain, by
self-complacency (the reward for) austerities is lost,
longevity by speaking evil of Brahmawas, and (the
reward of) a gift by boasting.

238. Giving no pain to any creature, let him
slowly accumulate spiritual merit, for the sake (of
acquiring) a companion to the next world, just as
the white ant (gradually raises its) hill.

239. For in the next world neither father, nor
mother, nor wife, nor sons, nor relations stay to be
his companions; spiritual merit alone remains (with
him).

240. Single is each being born; single it dies;
single it enjoys (the reward of its) virtue; single
(it suffers the punishment of its) sin.

241. Leaving the dead body on the ground like
a log of wood, or a clod of earth, the relatives de¬
part with averted faces; but spiritual merit follows
the (soul).

242. Let him therefore always slowly accumu¬
late spiritual merit, in order (that it may be his)
companion (after death); for with merit as his
companion he will traverse a gloom difficult to
traverse.

243. (That companion) speedily conducts the man
who is devoted to duty and effaces his sins by

RULES FOR A SNATAKA.

167

austerities, to the next world, radiant and clothed
with an ethereal body.

244. Let him, who desires to raise his race, ever
form connexions with the most excellent (men), and
shun all low ones.

245. A Brahma«a who always connects himself
with the most excellent (ones), and shuns all inferior
ones, (himself) becomes most distinguished; by an
opposite conduct he becomes a .Sftdra.

246. He who is persevering, gentle, (and) patient,
shuns the company of men of cruel conduct, and
does no injury (to living creatures), gains, if he con¬
stantly lives in that manner, by controlling his
organs and by liberality, heavenly bliss.

247. He may accept from any (man), fuel, water,
roots, fruit, food offered without asking, and honey,
likewise a gift (which consists in) a promise of pro¬
tection.

248. The Lord of created beings (Praffipati) has
declared that alms freely offered and brought (by
the giver himself) may be accepted even from a
sinful man, provided (the gift) had not been (asked
for or) promised beforehand.

249. During fifteen years the manes do not eat
(the food) of that man who disdains a (freely-offered
gift), nor does the fire carry his offerings (to the
gods).

250. A couch, a house, Kara grass, perfumes,

247. Ap. 1 ,18,1; Gaut. XVII, 5; Vas. XIV, 12 ; Vi. LVII, 11.

248. Ap. 1 ,10, 12-14; Vas. XIV, 16 ; Vi. LVII, n; Y&gn. I, 215.
Medh., Gov., and Nar. take apra^oditam, ‘not asked for or pro¬
mised/ in the sense of ‘not promised’ only, and so does Nand.,
who reads apraveditam.

249. Ap. 1 ,19, 14 ; Vas. XIV, 18 ; Vi. LVII, 12.

250. Gaut. XVII, 5; Vas. XIV, 12; Vi. LVII, 11; Y §gn. I, 214.

LAWS OF MANU.

IV, 251.

168

water, flowers, jewels, sour milk, grain, fish, sweet
milk, meat, and vegetables let him not reject, (if they
are voluntarily offered.)

251. He who desires to relieve his Gurus and
those whom he is bound to maintain, or wishes to
honour the gods and guests, may accept (gifts) from
anybody; but he must not satisfy his (own hunger)
with such (presents).

252. But if his Gurus are dead, or if he lives
separate from them in (another) house, let him,
when he seeks a subsistence, accept (presents) from
good men alone.

253. His labourer in tillage, a friend of his family,
his cow-herd, his slave, and his barber are, among
^Cldras, those whose food he may eat, likewise (a
poor man) who offers himself (to be his slave).

254. As his character is, as the work is which he
desires to perform, and as the manner is in which
he means to serve, even so (a voluntary slave) must
offer himself.

255. He who describes himself to virtuous (men),
in a manner contrary to truth, is the most sinful
(wretch) in this world ; he is a thief who makes away
with his own self.

256. All things (have their nature) determined by
speech; speech is their root, and from speech they
proceed; but he who is dishonest with respect to
speech, is dishonest in everything.

251. Ap. T, 7, 20; Gaut. XVII, 4; Vas. XIV, 13; Vi. LVII,
13 ; Yagii. I, 216.

252. Vi. LVII, 15.

253. Ap. 1 ,18,14; Gaut. XVII, 5-6 ; Vi. LVII, 16.

255. I. e. by denying who he really is, he destroys his own
identity.

V, 2. LAWFUL AND FORBIDDEN FOOD. 1 69

257. When he has paid, according to the law, his
debts to the great sages, to the manes, and to the
gods, let him make over everything to his son and
dwell (in his house), not caring for any worldly
concerns.

258. Alone let him constantly meditate in solitude
on that which is salutary for his soul; for he who
meditates in solitude attains supreme bliss.

259. Thus have been declared the means by
which a Brahma^a householder must always subsist,
and the summary of the ordinances for a Snataka,
which cause an increase of holiness and are praise¬
worthy.

260. A Brahma/za who, being learned in the lore
of the Vedas, conducts himself in this manner and
daily destroys his sins, will be exalted in Brahman’s
world.

Chapter V.

1. The sages, having heard the duties of a Snataka
thus declared, spoke to great-souled Bhrzgu, who
sprang from fire:

2. ‘How can Death have power over Brahma^as

257. Regarding the three debts, see Vas. XI, 48. This verse and
the next describe, as Medh. points out, a kind of informal saw-
nyasa.

260. Vas. VIII, 17; Baudh. II, 3, 1; Gaut. IX, 74.

V. 1. Medh., Gov., and Ragh. state correctly that Bhr/gu, though
above, I, 35, he is said to have been created by Manu, and has there¬
fore been named Manava below, V, 3, is here called the offspring of
Fire, in accordance with other passages of the Veda and of the
Mah&bharata.

2. I.e. ‘how can they be deprived of the length of life, one
hundred years, allotted to men in the Veda?' (Gov., Kull.)

170

LAWS OF MANU.

3 *

who know the sacred science, the Veda, (and) who
fulfil their duties as they have been explained (by
thee), O Lord ?’

3. Righteous Bhzz'gu, the son of Manu, (thus)
answered the great sages : ‘ Hear, (in punishment)
of what faults Death seeks to shorten the lives of
Br&hmawas! ’

4. ‘ Through neglect of the Veda-study, through
deviation from the rule of conduct, through remiss¬
ness (in the fulfilment of duties), and through faults
(committed by eating forbidden) food, Death be¬
comes eager to shorten the lives of Br£hma«as.’

5. Garlic, leeks and onions, mushrooms and (all
plants), springing from impure (substances), are unfit
to be eaten by twice-born men.

6. One should carefully avoid red exudations from
trees and (juices) flowing from incisions, the .Selu
(fruit), and the thickened milk of a cow (which she
gives after calving).

7. Rice boiled with sesamum, wheat mixed with
butter, milk and sugar, milk-rice and flour-cakes
which are not prepared for a sacrifice, meat which
has not been sprinkled with water while sacred texts
were recited, food offered to the gods and sacrificial
viands,

8. The milk of a cow (or other female animal)
within ten days after her calving, that of camels,

5 - 25 - Ap. 1 ,17,18-39; Gaut. XVII, 22-36; Vas. XIV, 33-48;
Baudh. I, 12, 1—15; Vi. LI, 3-6, 21—42; Ya gn. I, 169-178. .Selu,
i.e. Cordia Myxa.

7. ‘Food offered to the gods/ i.e. the so-called Naivedya. This
and sacrificial viands, i.e. those destined for burnt-oblations, must
not be eaten before the offering has been made, afterwards the
remnants may be eaten (Medh., Gov., Kull.).

8. Sandhini, ‘ a cow in heat 1 (Kull., N&r., R&gh.), means according

v, 15.

LAWFUL AND FORBIDDEN FOOD.

171

of one-hoofed animals, of sheep, of a cow in heat,
or of one that has no calf with her,

9. (The milk) of all wild animals excepting buffalo-
cows, that of women, and all (substances turned)
sour must be avoided.

10. Among (things turned) sour, sour milk, and
all (food) prepared of it may be eaten, likewise
what is extracted from pure flowers, roots, and fruit.

11. Let him avoid all carnivorous birds and those
living in villages, and one-hoofed animals which are
not specially permitted (to be eaten), and the Titti-
bha (Parra Jacana),

12. The sparrow, the Plava, the Ha;»sa, the
Brdhmawi duck, the village-cock, the S&rasa crane,
the Ra^gxtdala, the woodpecker, the parrot, and the
starling,

13. Those which feed striking with their beaks,
web-footed birds, the Koyash/i, those which scratch
with their toes, those which dive and live on fish,
meat from a slaughter-house and dried meat,

14. The Baka and the Baldka crane, the raven,
the Khaw^ari/aka, (animals) that eat fish, village-
pigs, and all kinds of fishes.

15. He who eats the flesh of any (animal) is

to Medh. and Gov. ‘ one who gives milk once a day only,’ and
according to Nand. and K. ‘ one big with a calf.’

11. The permission to eat one-hoofed animals is, as the com¬
mentators observe, not given in the Smr/'ti. The expression refers
to the cases where the Veda prescribes horses, &c., to be slain and
eaten at sacrifices.

12. I read with all the commentators Raggaid&la instead of
Ra^g-uvala, which the printed editions give. The Ra^udala is
according to Vi^ildncrvara the jungle-fowl, according to Nar. an
aquatic bird.

14. Regarding the Vaka or Baka, see above, IV, 196.

172

LAWS OF MANU.

y, 16.

called the eater of the flesh of that (particular
creature), he who eats fish is an eater of every
(kind of) flesh ; let him therefore avoid fish.

16. (But the fish called) PaY/zina and (that called)
Rohita may be eaten, if used for offerings to the gods
or to the manes; (one may eat) likewise Ra^ivas,
Siz/zhatuzzz/as, and Sasalkas on all (occasions).

17. Let him not eat solitary or unknown beasts
and birds, though they may fall under (the categories
of) eatable (creatures), nor any five-toed (animals).

18. The porcupine, the hedgehog, the iguana, the
rhinoceros, the tortoise, and the hare they declare
to be eatable ; likewise those (domestic animals) that
have teeth in one jaw only, excepting camels.

19. A twice-born man who knowingly eats mush¬
rooms, a village-pig, garlic, a village-cock, onions, or
leeks, will become an outcast.

20. He who unwittingly partakes of (any of) these
six, shall perform a Sazzztapana (K rikkhxz) or the
lunar penance (Aandrdya/za) of ascetics ; in case (he
has eaten) any other (kind of forbidden food) he
shall fast for one clay (and a night).

21. Once a year a Brahmazza must perform a
Kz'z'/'/’/zra penance, in order to atone for uninten¬
tionally eating (forbidden food); but for intentionally
(eating forbidden food he must perform the penances
prescribed) specially.

22. Beasts and birds recommended (for con-

16. Nar. explains eka&iran, ‘ solitary animals/ by ‘those who go
in herds ’ (sawghaMritfa^).

20. Regarding the Sa/wtapana TLrikkhxz. and the lunar penance
of ascetics, see below, XI, 213 and 219.

21. Regarding the Y^rikkhxz. penance, see below, XI, 212.

22. Vas. XIV, 15.

■V, 30 . LAWFUL AND FORBIDDEN FOOD. I 73

sumption) may be slain by Br&hma«as for sacrifices,
and in order to feed those whom they are bound
to maintain; for Agastya did this of old.

23. For in ancient (times) the sacrificial cakes were
(made of the flesh) of eatable beasts and birds at
the sacrifices offered by Brahmawas and Kshatriyas.

24. All lawful hard or soft food may be eaten,
though stale, (after having been) mixed with fatty
(substances), and so may the remains of sacrificial
viands.

25. But all preparations of barley and wheat, as
well as preparations of milk, may be eaten by twice-
born men without being mixed with fatty (substances),
though they may have stood for a long time.

26. Thus has the food, allowed and forbidden to
twice-born men, been fully described; I will now
propound the rules for eating and avoiding meat.

27. One may eat meat when it has been sprinkled
with water, while Mantras were recited, when Br&h-
ma«as desire (one’s doing it), when one is engaged
(in the performance of a rite) according to the law,
and when one’s life is in danger.

28. The Lord of creatures (Pra^&pati) created this
whole (world to be) the sustenance of the vital spirit;
both the immovable and the movable (creation is)
the food of the vital spirit.

29. What is destitute of motion is the food of
those endowed with locomotion; (animals) without
fangs (are the food) of those with fangs, those with¬
out hands of those who possess hands, and the
timid of the bold.

30. The eater who daily even devours those

27-56. Vas. IV, 5-8; Vi. LI, 59-78; YS^w. I, 178-181.

27. Meat is sprinkled with water at the .Srauta sacrifices.

174

LAWS OF MANU.

V, 31.

destined to be his food, commits no sin; for the
creator himself created both the eaters and those
who are to be eaten (for those special purposes).

31. ‘The consumption of meat (is befitting) for'
sacrifices, ’that is declared to be a rule made by the
gods ; but to persist (in using it) on other (occasions)
is said to be a proceeding worthy of Rakshasas.

32. He who eats meat, when he honours the gods
and manes, commits no sin, whether he has bought
it, or himself has killed (the animal), or has received
it as a present from others.

33. A twice-born man who knows the law, must
not eat meat except in conformity with the law ; for
if he has eaten it unlawfully, he will, unable to save
himself, be eaten after death by his (victims).

34. After death the guilt of one who slays deer
for gain is not as (great) as that of him who eats
meat for no (sacred) purpose.

35. But a man who, being duly engaged (to
officiate or to dine at a sacred rite), refuses to eat
meat, becomes after death an animal during twenty-
one existences.

36. A Brihmawa must never eat (the flesh of)
animals unhallowed by Mantras; but, obedient to
the primeval law, he may eat it, consecrated with
Vedic texts.

37. If he has a strong desire (for meat) he may
make an animal of clarified butter or one of flour,
(and eat that); but let him never seek to destroy an
animal without a (lawful) reason.

34. ‘ Of one who slays deer for gain,’ i. e. of a professional
hunter of the .Sahara or other low castes.

35 - Vas. XI, 34.

37. Sange, ‘ if (he has) a strong desire (for meat),’ (Kull., R&gh.),

V,44.

LAWFUL AND FORBIDDEN FOOD.

175

38. As many hairs as the slain beast has, so often
indeed will he who killed it without a (lawful) reason
suffer a violent death in future births.

39. Svayambhfl (the Self-existent) himself created
animals for the sake of sacrifices; sacrifices (have
been instituted) for the good of this whole (world);
hence the slaughtering (of beasts) for sacrifices is
not slaughtering (in the ordinary sense of the
word).

40. Herbs, trees, cattle, birds, and (other) animals
that have been destroyed for sacrifices, receive (being
reborn) higher existences.

41. On offering the honey-mixture (to a guest), at
a sacrifice and at the rites in honour of the manes,
but on these occasions only, may an animal be slain ;
that (rule) Manu proclaimed.

42. A twice-born man who, knowing the true
meaning of the Veda, slays an animal for these pur¬
poses, causes both himself and the animal to enter
a most blessed state.

43. A twice-born man of virtuous disposition,
whether he dwells in (his own) house, with a teacher,
or in the forest, must never, even in times of distress,
cause an injury (to any creature) which is not sanc¬
tioned by the Veda.

44. Know that the injury to moving creatures and
to those destitute of motion, which the Veda has

means according to Medh. and K. ‘ if an occasion (arises to slay
an animal at a non-Vedic rite),’ according to Gov. ‘ in case (one
suffers from) an attack by evil spirits (Bhfitas and the like),’ and
according to Nand. ‘ on the occasion of social meetings.’ Ragh.
mentions Medh.'s view as an optional explanation, and Nar.
objects to Gov.’s interpretation. His own explanation sange-
tyantekayam is corrupt, but is probably intended for atyanteX’/Wa-
yflm, and thus agrees with Kull.’s.

176

LAWS OF MANU.

V, 45 -

prescribed for certain occasions, is no injury at all;
for the sacred law shone forth from the Veda.

45. He who injures innoxious beings from a wish
to (give) himself pleasure, never finds happiness,
neither living nor dead.

46. He who does not seek to cause the sufferings
of bonds and death to living creatures, (but) desires
the good of all (beings), obtains endless bliss.

47. He who does not injure any (creature), attains
without an effort what he thinks of, what he under¬
takes, and what he fixes his mind on.

48. Meat can never be obtained without injury to
living creatures, and injury to sentient beings is
detrimental to (the attainment of) heavenly bliss;
let him therefore shun (the use of) meat.

49. • Having well considered the (disgusting) origin
of flesh and the (cruelty of) fettering and slaying
corporeal beings, let him entirely abstain from eating
flesh.

50. He who, disregarding the rule (given above),
does not eat meat like a Pisa/ia, becomes dear to
men, and will not be tormented by diseases.

5r. He who permits (the slaughter of an animal),
he who cuts it up, he who kills it, he who buys or
sells (meat), he who cooks it, he who serves it up,
and he who eats it, (must all be considered as) the
slayers (of the animal).

52. There is no greater sinner than that (man)
who, though not worshipping the gods or the manes,
seeks to increase (the bulk of) his own flesh by the
flesh of other (beings).

46. The latter part of the verse may also be translated ‘will
obtain endless bliss, because he is a man who desires the good
of all creatures ’ (Gov.).

V, 58. LAWFUL AND FORBIDDEN FOOD; IMPURITY. 177

53. He who during a hundred years annually
offers a horse-sacrifice, and he who entirely abstains
from meat, obtain the same reward for their meri¬
torious (conduct).

54. By subsisting on pure fruit and roots, and by
eating food fit for ascetics (in the forest), one does
not gain (so great) a reward as by entirely avoiding
(the use of) flesh.

55. ‘Me he (mam sa It)' will devour in the next
(world), whose flesh I eat in this (life); the wise
declare this (to be) the real meaning of the word
‘ flesh’ ( m&msa/t ).

56. There is no sin in eating meat, in (drinking)
spirituous liquor, and in carnal intercourse, for that
is the natural way of created beings, but abstention
brings great rewards.

57. I will now in due order explain the purifica¬
tion for the dead and the purification of things as
they are prescribed for the four castes (var«a).

58. When (a child) dies that has teethed, or that
before teething has received (the sacrament of) the
tonsure (A’Wakarawa) or (of the initiation), all rela¬
tives (become) impure, and on the birth (of a child)
the same (rule) is prescribed.

54. Munyannani, ‘food fit for ascetics (in the forest)/ i.e. ‘wild
rice and other produce of the forest/

56. ‘There is no sin/ i.e. in doing these things when they are
permitted by law.

58-104. Ap. I, 15, 18; II, 15, 2-11; Gaut. XIV; Vas. IV, 16-37;
Baudh. I, 11, 1-8, 17-23, 27-32; Vi. XXII; Yagn. Ill, 1-30.

58. Medh. and Gov. explain anu^ate, translated freely by 1 before
teething/ as the conventional designation of 4 a child that is younger
than one that has teethed 1 (^dtadantad balatara iti smaranti), and
N&r. and Ragh. agree to this interpretation. Kull., however, seems
to take it in the sense of ‘ after teething/ and Nand. explains it as
‘one who has been born again, i.e. has been initiated/ Gov.,

[*5] N

178

LAWS OF MANU.

V, 59*

59. It is ordained (that) among Sapi/^as the im¬
purity on account of a death (shall last) ten days,
(or) until the bones have been collected, (or) three
days or one day only.

60. But the Sapi;^a-relationship ceases with the
seventh person (in the ascending and descending
lines), the Samanodaka-rclationship when the (com¬
mon) origin and the (existence of a common family)-
name are no (longer) known.

61. As this impurity on account of a death is pre¬
scribed for (all) Sapi/^as, even so it shall be (held) on
a birth by those who desire to be absolutely pure.

62. (Or while) the impurity on account of a death
is common to all (Sapi/^as), that caused by a birth
(falls) on the parents alone; (or) it shall fall on the
mother alone, and the father shall become pure by
bathing;

Nar., Kull., and Ritgh. think that on account of the second £a, ‘or/
the words ‘of the initiation' must be understood.

59. The bones of a Brahmawa are collected on the fourth day;
see Vi. XIX, 10. The commentators are of opinion that the
length of the period of impurity depends, in accordance with the
express teaching of other Smr/tis, on the status of the mourner,
and that a man who knows the Mantras only of one Aakha shall
be impure during four days, one who knows a whole *Sakh& (or
two Vedas) during three days, one who knows the Veda (or three
Vedas) and keeps three or five sacred fires, during one day. Medh.,
however, mentions another interpretation, according to which the
four periods correspond to the four ages of the deceased, which
have been mentioned in the preceding verse. According to this
view the SapiWas shall mourn for an initiated person ten days,
for one who had received the tonsure four days, &c. But see
verse 67.

61-62. Medh. and Gov. have only one verse instead of the
two: ^anane 'py evaw syan mat&pitros tu sfitakam l sfitakaw
m&tur eva syad upaspr/sya pitd suk\h 11 ‘Even thus it shall be
(held) on a birth, or the impurity shall fall on the parents alone,

Y, 66 .

IMPURITY.

179

63. But a man, having spent his strength, is puri¬
fied merely by bathing; after begetting a child (on
a remarried female), he shall retain the impurity
during three days.

64. Those who have touched a corpse are purified
after one day and night (added to) three periods of
three days; those who give libations of water, after
three days.

65. A pupil who performs the Pitmrtedha for his
deceased teacher, becomes also pure after ten days,
just like those who carry the corpse out (to the
burial-ground).

66. (A woman) is purified on a miscarriage in as
many (days and) nights as months (elapsed after
conception), and a menstruating female becomes
pure by bathing after the menstrual secretion has
ceased (to flow).

or it shall fall on the mother alone, and the father (shall become)
pure by bathing.’ Nand. leaves out the first half of verse 61, and
combines the second half of 61 with the first half of 62. He
continues in this manner down to 65, the second half of which he
takes by itself. Hence his interpretation of the following verses
is perfectly useless.

63. The translation given above follows Gov., Kull., Nar., and
Ragh. Medh. differs.

64. According to Gov. and Nar. the rule refers to such
Brahmawas who for money carry a dead body to the cemetery;
according to Kull. and Ragh. to Sapi#</as who in any way touch
a corpse out of affection. Medh. thinks that it applies to all who
touch or carry out a dead body, be it for love or for money.
Ragh. thinks that the text mentions three alternative periods of
impurity, one day, three days, and ten days.

65. The Pitrfmedha, i.e. the Antyesh/i (Medh., Gov., Kull.,
R&gh.), or ‘ the whole of the obsequies' (‘ others/ Medh.).

66. Thus according to Kull.; Nar. and Ragh. think that this rule
refers to miscarriages which happen during the first six months
of pregnancy; and that from the seventh month, whether the child

N 2

l 80 LAWS OF MANU. V, 67.

67. (On the death) of children whose tonsure (A’il-
dclkarman) has not been performed, the (Sapiwdas)
are declared to become pure in one (day and) night;
(on the death) of those who have received the
tonsure (but not the initiation, the law) ordains (that)
the purification (takes place) after three days.

68. A child that has died before the completion
of its second year, the relatives shall carry out (of
the village), decked (with flowers, and bury it) in pure
ground, without collecting the bones (afterwards).

69. Such (a child) shall not be burnt with fire,
and no libations of water shall be offered to it;
leaving it like a (log of) wood in the forest, (the re¬
latives) shall remain impure during three days only.

70. The relatives shall not offer libations to (a
child) that has not reached the third year; but if it
had teeth, or the ceremony of naming it (Namakar-
man) had been performed, (the offering of water
is) optional.

71. If a fellow-student has died, the Smmi pre¬
scribes an impurity of one day; on a birth the puri¬
fication of the Samanodakas is declared (to take
place) after three (days and) nights.

72. (On the death) of females (betrothed but) not
married (the bridegroom and his) relatives are puri¬
fied after three days, and the paternal relatives
become pure according to the same rule.

lives or not, the full period of impurity must be kept. Nar., more¬
over, asserts that in the first and second months the impurity shall
last three days. Sadhvi, ‘ becomes pure,’ i.e. ‘ fit to perform sacred
rites ’ (Gov.). Nar. takes the word in the sense of ‘ chaste.’

67. Nand. inserts verse 78 immediately after verse 66.

72. ‘According to the same rule,’ i.e. ‘according to that given
in verse 67’ (Medh., Gov., Nand.), or ‘just as the husband’s
relatives, i.e. after three days’ (Kull., Nar., Ragh.).

V, 8o.

IMPURITY.

181

73. Let (mourners) eat food without factitious
salt, bathe during three days, abstain from meat,
and sleep separate on the ground.

74. The above rule regarding impurity on ac¬
count of a death has been prescribed (for cases
where the kinsmen live) near (the deceased); (Sa-
pi?zrfa) kinsmen and (Samdnodaka) relatives must
know the following rule (to refer to cases where
deceased lived) at a distance (from them).

75. He who may hear that (a relative) residing
in a distant country has died, before ten (days after
his death have elapsed), shall be impure for the
remainder of the period of ten (days and) nights
only.

76. If the ten days have passed, he shall be im¬
pure during three (days and) nights; but if a year
has elapsed (since the occurrence of the death), he
becomes pure merely by bathing.

77. A man who hears of a (Sapi«r/a) relative’s
death, or of the birth of a son after the ten days (of
impurity have passed), becomes pure by bathing,
dressed in his garments.

78. If an infant (that has not teethed), or a (grown¬
up relative who is) not a Sapiwr/a, die in a distant
country, one becomes at once pure after bathing in
one’s clothes.

79. If within the ten days (of impurity) another
birth or death happens, a Brahma«a shall remain
impure only until the (first) period of ten days has
expired.

80. They declare that, when the teacher (&£&rya)
has died, the impurity (lasts) three days; if the

73. Nand. reads anvaham, (bathe) ‘ daily ’ instead of ‘during three
days.’

182

LAWS OF MANU.

V, 81.

(teacher’s) son or wife (is dead, it lasts) a day and
a night; that is a settled (rule).

81. For a -SYotriya who resides with (him out of
affection), a man shall be impure for three days;
for a maternal uncle, a pupil, an officiating priest,
or a maternal relative, for one night together with
the preceding and following days.

82. If the king in whose realm he resides is
dead, (he shall be impure) as long as the light (of
the sun or stars shines), but for (an intimate friend)
who is not a *Srotriya (the impurity lasts) for a
whole day, likewise for a Guru who knows the Veda
and the Ahgas.

83. A Brahma/za shall be pure after ten days, a
Kshatriya after twelve, a Vabya after fifteen, and
a 6'itdra is purified after a month.

84. Let him not (unnecessarily) lengthen the
period of impurity, nor interrupt the rites to be
performed with the sacred fires; for he who per¬
forms that (Agnihotra) rite will not be impure,
though (he be) a (Sapiwda) relative.

81. Upasampanne, ‘who resides with (him out of affection),’
may according to Medh. also mean ‘who is virtuous.’ According
to Nfir. it means ‘ who is a neighbour.’

82. Anfi&ine tatha gurau, ‘ likewise for a Guru who knows the
Veda and Ahgas,’ i.e. ‘such a one who is mentioned above, II,
149’ (Gov., Kull., R:fgh.). Nar. takes the two words separately.
Medh. connects anfU’ane with arrotriye, and thinks that a man
is meant who does not know the Veda, but the Ahgas. He also
mentions the explanation adopted above. Nand. finally reads
anfiX’ane tatha ’gurau, ‘likewise for one who knows the Veda and
the Ahgas, but is not a Guru.’

84. According to Medh. the meaning of the first clause is that,
if there is an option between shorter or longer periods of impurity,
the mourner is not to choose the longer one in order to escape
the performance of his sacred duties. He adds, that others think

V, 88.

IMPURITY.

183

85. When he has touched a Afa/zrfala, a men¬
struating woman, an outcast, a woman in childbed,
a corpse, or one who has touched a (corpse), he
becomes pure by bathing.

86. He who has purified himself by sipping water
shall, on seeing any impure (thing or person), always
mutter the sacred texts, addressed to Sftrya, and the
Pavamanl (verses).

87. A Brahma;^a who has touched a human bone
to which fat adheres, becomes pure by bathing; if it
be free from fat, by sipping water and by touching
(afterwards) a cow or looking at the sun.

88. He who has undertaken the performance of a
vow shall not pour out libations (to the dead) until
the vow has been completed; but when he has

it to be an exhortation not to delay the bath which must be taken
at the expiration of the period of impurity. The other com¬
mentators mention the first explanation only. The second clause,
which refers to the continued offering of the .Srauta Agnihotra,
means according to Medh., Gov., and Nand., that an Agnihotrin
who is in mourning shall not perform the offerings in person, but
make others, who may even be his near relatives, do it for him.
Kull., Nar., and Ragh. think that the performer himself may also
offer them. Nand. explains sanabhya/;, ‘a Sapiz/t/a’ (Gov., Kull.,
Nar., Ragh.), by sahodara//, 4 a full brother/

85. Tatsprish/inam, ‘one who has touched a (corpse),’ (Medh.,
‘ others;’ Gov., Kull., Ragh), means according to Medh., Nar.,
and Nand. * one who has touched any of those enumerated before,
a Aaz/t/ala and so forth/

86. ‘ He who has purified himself,’ i. e. ‘ before he begins to
worship the gods or manes’ (Medh., ‘others;’ Kull., Nar., Ragh.).
‘An impure (thing or person)/ i.e. ‘ those mentioned above/ Medh.
and Gov. take the verse differently, ‘ On seeing one of those impure
persons mentioned above, let him sip water and, thus purified,
recite, &c/ The texts addressed to Sftrya are found Rig-veda I,
50, 1 scq.; the Pavamanis in MaWala IX.

88. The rule refers to a student, who must not during his
studentship perform the last rites for any deceased relative except

184

LAWS OF MANU.

V,8 9 .

offered water after its completion, he becomes pure
in three days only.

89. Libations of water shall not be offered to
those who (neglect the prescribed rites and may be
said to) have been born in vain, to those born in
consequence of an illegal mixture of the castes, to
those who are ascetics (of heretical sects), and to
those who have committed suicide,

90. To women who have joined a heretical sect,
who through lust live (with many men), who have
caused an abortion, have killed their husbands, or
drink spirituous liquor.

91. A student does not break his vow by carrying
out (to the place of cremation) his own dead teacher
(aMrya), sub-teacher (upadhy4ya), father, mother, or
Guru.

92. Let him carry out a dead .Stidra by the
southern gate of the town, but (the corpses of)

his mother (Medh.), or except his mother and father (Gov.), or
except his parents and his teacher; see below, verse 91 (Kull.,
RSgh.). According to K. ‘others’ think that the rule refers to
those performing a lunar penance or other vows.

89. ‘ To those who (neglect the prescribed rites and may be said
to) have been born in vain’ (Gov., Kull., Nand., Ragh.), i.e. ‘to
those who for a year belonged to no order’ (Medh.), or ‘to
eunuchs ’ (Nar.). The term samkaraoa/i, ‘ bom in consequence
of an illegal mixture of the castes,’ includes besides those sprung
from mothers of a higher and fathers of a lower caste, sons of
widows not appointed and of adulteresses (Medh., Gov., Nand.).
‘Ascetics (of heretical sects),’ i.e. Kapalikas, those wearing red
garments, &c. (Medh.). Nar. and Ragh. refer the term to orthodox
ascetics.

90. P&shaWam, ‘ a heretical sect,’ i.e. the Kapalikas, those wearing
red garments ’ (Medh.), or ‘ Bauddhas and so forth ’ (Nar,).

91. ‘Guru,’ i.e.‘one who explains the Veda’ (Nar., Kull.), or
‘him who is mentioned above, II, 149’ (Medh., Gov.).

92. I.e. a Vairya by the western gate, a Kshatriya by the

V, 97 -

impurity.

185

twice-born men, as is proper, by the western,
northern, or eastern (gates).

93. The taint of impurity does not fall on kings,
and those engaged in the performance of a vow, or
of a Sattra; for the (first are) seated on the throne
of Indra, and the (last two are) ever pure like
Brahman.

94. For a king, on the throne of magnanimity,
immediate purification is prescribed, and the reason
for that is that he is seated (there) for the protection
of (his) subjects.

95. (The same rule applies to the kinsmen) of those
who have fallen in a riot or a battle, (of those who
have been killed) by lightning or by the king, and (of
those who perished fighting) for cows and Brahma-
»as, and to those whom the king wishes (to be pure).

96. A king is an incarnation of the eight guardian
deities of the world, the Moon, the Fire, the Sun,
the Wind, Indra, the Lords of wealth and water
(Kubera and Varuwa), and Yama.

97. Because the king is pervaded by (those)

northern, and a Brahmawa by the eastern (Medh., Gov., Kull.,
Nand., Ragh.).

93. ‘A vow/ i.e. ‘the studentship (Nar.), also a lunar penance
and the like’ (Medh., Gov., Kull.); ‘a Sattra/ i.e. ‘a long sacrifice
such as the Gavamayana/ Brahmabhfita^, 4 pure like Brahman ’
(Kull., Nar., Ragh.), means according to Medh. ‘they have reached
Brahmahood/

95. Nand. and K. explain </imbha, 4 in a riot/ to mean 4 by in¬
fants/ 4 Whom the king wishes (to be pure)/ i.e. 4 his servants and
ministers whom he wants for his affairs/ Nar. inserts another
class, 4 (the kinsmen of those who have been killed) by Br&hma#as,
i.e. by incantations/ But I do not understand how the word could
be made to suit the verse.

96. See below, VII, 4.

97. Medh. reads loke^aprabhavdpyayau, and the second half

186

LAWS OF MANU.

V) 98.

lords of the world, no impurity is ordained for him ;
for purity and impurity of mortals is caused and
removed by (those) lords of the world.

98. By him who is slain in battle with brandished
weapons according to the law of the Kshatriyas, a
(.Srauta) sacrifice is instantly completed, and so is
the period of impurity (caused by his death); that
is a settled rule.

99. (At the end of the period of impurity) a Br&h-
ma»a who has performed the necessary rites, be¬
comes pure by touching water, a Kshatriya by
touching the animal on which he rides, and his
weapons, a Vaisya by touching his goad or the
nose-string (of his oxen), a .Sfidra by touching his
staff.

100. Thus the purification (required) on (the
death of) Sapi«nhs has been explained to you, O
best of twice-born men; hear now the manner in
which men are purified on the death of any (relative
who is) not a Sapiwrfa.

101. A Brahmawa, having carried out a dead

verse must then be translated ‘ purity and impurity affect mortals,
they are caused and removed by the guardians of the world.’
Nar., Nand., and K. read lokeraprabhavo hy ayam, ‘ but he (the)
king springs from the guardians of the world.’ Nar. mentions
also a reading lokeraprabhave ’pyaya h, ‘for him who springs
from the guardians of the world, (purity and impurity) do not
exist’

98. According to Medh. some contend that this rule refers only
to those who die on the battle-field, not to those who die later of
their wounds. Yagnah, ‘ a (.S'rauta) sacrifice ’ (Medh., Kull., Ragb.),
means according to Nar. ‘the funeral sacrifice.’

99. ‘Touching water,’ i.e. ‘bathing’ (Medh.,Kull., Nar.), ‘washing
his hands ’ (Gov.).

101. ‘The relatives of his mother and (the Sagotras of his
father), or connexions by marriage, are meant’(Nar.).

V, 10 6.

IMPURITY.

187

Br&hmawa who is not a Sapiw^a, as (if he were) a
(near) relative, or a near relative of his mother,
becomes pure after three days;

102. But if he eats the food of the (Sapi«dfas of
the deceased), he is purified in ten days, (but) in
one day, if he does not eat their food nor dwells in
their house.

103. Having voluntarily followed a corpse, whether
(that of) a paternal kinsman or (of) a stranger, he
becomes pure by bathing, dressed in his clothes, by
touching fire and eating clarified butter.

104. Let him not allow a dead Brahmawa to be
carried out by a iTCidra, while men of the same caste
are at hand; for that burnt-offering which is defiled
by a .Sftdra’s touch is detrimental to (the deceased’s
passage to) heaven.

105. The knowledge (of Brahman) austerities, fire,
(holy) food, earth, (restraint of) the internal organ,
water, smearing (with cowdung), the wind, sacred
rites, the sun, and time are the purifiers of corporeal
(beings).

106. Among all modes of purification, purity in
(the acquisition of) wealth is declared to be the best;
'for he is pure who gains wealth with clean hands,
not he who purifies himself with earth and water.

102. In case he stays in the house of the mourners, he becomes
impure for three days (Gov., Kull., Ragh., K.).

104. According to Nar. the rule refers exclusively to Br&hmawas,
according to Medh. and Kull. to all Aryans. The burning of the
body is euphemistically called a burnt-offering.

105. Vi. XXII, 88; Y&gn. Ill, 31; Baudh. I, 8, 52. Mana/i
kshamfikhyaA (?) niyamayuktaw? mano ^ivasya (Nar.). The other
commentators take mana//, ‘ the mind or internal organ,’ in the sense
of ‘ a sanctified heart.’

106. Vi. XXII, 89; Y&gn. Ill, 32.

LAWS OF MANU.

y, 107.

188

107. The learned are purified by a forgiving
disposition, those who have committed forbidden
actions by liberality, secret sinners by muttering
(sacred texts), and those who best know the Veda
by austerities.

108. By earth and water is purified what ought
to be made pure, a river by its current, a woman
whose thoughts have been impure by the menstrual
secretion, a BrAhmawa by abandoning the world
(sawny&sa).

109. The body is cleansed by water, the internal
organ is purified by truthfulness, the individual soul
by sacred learning and austerities, the intellect by
(true) knowledge.

no. Thus the precise rules for the purification of
the body have been declared to you; hear now the
decision (of the law) regarding the purification of
the various (inanimate) things.

nr. The wise ordain that all (objects) made of
metal, gems, and anything made of stone are to be
cleansed with ashes, earth, and water.

112. A golden vessel which shows no stains,
becomes pure with water alone, likewise what is
produced in water (as shells and coral), what is made
of stone, and a silver (vessel) not enchased.

107. Vi. XXII, 90; Yagil. III, 33.

108. Vi. XXII, 91; Vas. Ill, 58 ; Ya^«. Ill, 32.

109. Vi. XXII, 92 ; Vas. Ill, 60; Ya gri. Ill, 33-34.
no. Vi. XXII, 93.

111-126. Ap. 1 ,17,8-13; 11,3,9; Gaut. 1 ,29-34; Vas.Ill,44-57,
59 . 61-63; Baudh. I, 8, 32-53, 9,1-4, 7-12, 10, 1-9; 13,11-14,
19; Vi. XXIII, 2-46, 56 ; Yagii. I, 182-190.

112. Anupaskntam, ‘ not enchased,’ may also mean according to
Medh. and Nand. * not defiled very much.’ Medh. and Nar. add

V, n8.

PURIFICATION.

189

113. From the union of water and fire arose the
glittering gold and silver; those two, therefore, are
best purified by (the elements) from which they
sprang.

114. Copper, iron, brass, pewter, tin, and lead
must be cleansed, as may be suitable (for each
particular case), by alkaline (substances), acids or
water.

115. The purification prescribed for all (sorts of)
liquids is by passing two blades of Kura grass
through them, for solid things by sprinkling (them
with water), for (objects) made of wood by planing
them.

116. At sacrifices the purification of (the Soma
cups called) Aamasas and Grahas, and of (other)
sacrificial vessels (takes place) by rubbing (them)
with the hand, and (afterwards) rinsing (them with
water).

117. The Aaru and (the spoons called) Sru/6 and
Sruva must be cleaned with hot water, likewise (the
wooden sword, called) Sphya, the winnowing-basket
(.SYtrpa), the cart (for bringing the grain), the pestle
and the mortar.

118. The manner of purifying large quantities of
grain and of cloth is to sprinkle them with water;

that this last term applies to all the various objects mentioned in
the verse.

113. Medh., Gov., and Kull. quote a Vedic passage which
derives the origin of gold from Agni and the goddess VaruTzani.

1x5. Utpavanam or utplavanam (Gov., Kull., Rlgh.), ‘passing
two blades of Kura grass through them,’ means according to
Medh., ‘others,’ and K. ‘purifying by pouring them into another
vessel, filled with pure liquids of the same kind,’ according to Nfir.
by ‘straining through a cloth.' ‘ Solid things,’ i.e. ‘a couch, a seat,
and the like.'

190

LAWS OF MANU.

V, 119.

but the purification of small quantities is prescribed
(to take place) by washing them.

119. Skins and (objects) made of split cane must
be cleaned like clothes; vegetables, roots, and fruit
like grain;

120. Silk and woollen stuffs with alkaline earth;
blankets with pounded Arish^a (fruit); Awmpa/^as
with Bel fruit; linen cloth with (a paste of) yellow
mustard.

121. A man who knows (the law) must purify
conch-shells, horn, bone and ivory, like linen cloth,
or with a mixture of cow’s urine and water.

122. Grass, wood, and straw become pure by being
sprinkled (with water), a house by sweeping and
smearing (it with cowdung or whitewash), an earthen
(vessel) by a second burning.

123. An earthen vessel which has been defiled
by spirituous liquor, urine, ordure, saliva, pus or
blood cannot be purified by another burning.

124. Land is purified by (the following) five
(modes, viz.) by sweeping, by smearing (it with cow-
dung), by sprinkling (it with cows’ urine or milk),
by scraping, and by cows staying (on it during a
day and night).

125. (Food) which has been pecked at by birds,

119. Vaidalanam, ‘ objects made of split cane' (Kull., K., Ragh.,
Nar., Nand.), means according to Medh. and Gov. ‘made of the
bark of trees and the like.’ Medh. remarks that this and other
rules, where skins and so forth are mentioned, apply also to objects
made of such things, e.g. shoes.

120. Arish/a, i.e. Sapindus detergens, the soap-berry tree.
Amupa//a means according to Gov., Nand., and Nar. ‘ cloth made
of thinned bark,’ according to Kull. and Ragh. ‘ upper garments
for women (Saris) made of fine cloth ’ (pai'/ara/aka, pa//ara/i).

125. ‘By birds,’ i.e. ‘by parrots and the like, not by crows,

V, 129 -

PURIFICATION.

191

smelt at by cows, touched (with the foot), sneezed
on, or defiled by hair or insects, becomes pure by
scattering earth (over it).

126. As long as the (foul) smell does not leave
an (object) defiled by impure substances, and the
stain caused by them (does not disappear), so long
must earth and water be applied in cleansing (in¬
animate) things.

127. The gods declared three things (to be) pure
to Brdhma«as, that (on which) no (taint is) visible,
what has been washed with water, and what has
been commended (as pure) by the word (of a
Brahmawa).

128. Water, sufficient (in quantity) in order to
slake the thirst of a cow, possessing the (proper)
smell, colour, and taste, and unmixed with impure
substances, is pure, if it is collected on (pure)
ground.

129. The hand of an artisan is always pure, so
is (every vendible commodity) exposed for sale in

vultures, and other impure ones ’ (Medh., Gov., Kull.). Avadhfitam,
‘ touched (with the foot),’ (Kull., R&gh.), means according to Medh.
‘ blown upon with the mouth,' or ‘ dusted with a dress,’ according
to Gov. • dusted with a dress,’ according to Nar. ‘ moved by the
wind (caused by the motion) of a cloth, the foot or the like,’
according to Nand. ‘ defiled by the dust of a broom or of the air
moved by the wings (of a bird).’

127. Vas. XIV, 24; Baudh. I, 9, 9; Vi. XXIII, 47; Yagn. I,
191. In conformity with the opinion of the commentators I
translate pavilrdwi by ‘ pure.’ But the word has also the meaning
of ‘means of purification,' in which I have taken it in the
translations of the parallel passages. The general sense re mains
the same.

128. Vas. Ill, 35-36, 47; Baudh. I, 9, 10; Vi. XXIII, 43;
YS^m. I, 192.

129. Baudh. I, 9, 1; Vi. XXIII, 48.

192

LAWS OF MANU.

V, 130.

the market, and food obtained by begging which
a student holds (in his hand) is always fit for use;
that is a settled rule.

130. The mouth of a woman is always pure, like¬
wise a bird when he causes a fruit to fall; a calf
is pure on the flowing of the milk, and a dog when
he catches a deer.

131. Manu has declared that the flesh (of an
animal) killed by dogs is pure, likewise (that) of
a (beast) slain by carnivorous (animals) or by men
of low caste (Dasyu), such as Ka.nd$\a.s.

132. All those cavities (of the body) which lie
above the navel are pure, (but) those which are
below the navel are impure, as well as excretions
that fall from the body.

133. Flies, drops of water, a shadow, a cow, a
horse, the rays of the sun, dust, earth, the wind, and
fire one must know to be pure to the touch.

134. In order to cleanse (the organs) by which
urine and faeces are ejected, earth and water must
be used, as they may be required, likewise in remov¬
ing the (remaining ones among) twelve impurities
of the body.

130. Baudh. I, 9, 2 ; Vi. XXIII, 49; Y %gn. I, 193.

131. Vas. Ill, 45; Vi. XXIII, 50; Y&^m. 1 ,192.

132. Vi. XXIII, 51; Yagn. 1 ,194.

133. Vi. XXIII, 51; Y igii. 1,193. ‘Drops of water,’ i.e. ‘such
as are only perceptible by the touch'(Medh., Gov.), or ‘such as
come from the mouth, i.e. of saliva’ (Kull., Ragh., Nar.). R&gh.
adds, ‘ and a continuous stream of water.’

134. Ap. 1,16,15 ; Gaut. I, 43 ; Vas. VI, 14; Y ign. 1 ,17. ‘As
they may be required,’ i.e. ‘for removing the first six kinds of
impurities enumerated in the next verse, as much water and earth
as may be required, and for the last six water only’ (Gov., Kull.,
N&r., R&gh.).

V, 140 .

PURIFICATION.

193

135. Oily exudations, semen, blood, (the fatty sub¬
stance of the) brain, urine, faeces, the mucus of the
nose, ear-wax, phlegm, tears, the rheum of the eyes,
and sweat are the twelve impurities of human
(bodies).

136. He who desires to be pure, must clean the
organ by one (application of) earth, the anus by
(applying earth) three (times), the (left) hand alone
by (applying it) ten (times), and both (hands) by
(applying it) seven (times).

137. Such is the purification ordained for house¬
holders ; (it shall be) double for students, treble for
hermits, but quadruple for ascetics.

138. When he has voided urine or faeces, let him,
after sipping water, sprinkle the cavities, likewise
when he is going to recite the Veda, and always
before he takes food.

139. Let him who desires bodily purity first sip
water three times, and then twice wipe his mouth;
but a woman and a .SCldra (shall perform each act)
once (only).

140. .Sttdras who live according to the law, shall
each month shave (their heads); their mode of
purification (shall be) the same as that of Vaiyyas,
and their food the fragments of an Aryan’s meal.

136. Vas. VI, 18; Vi. LX, 25.

137. Vas. VI, 19 ; Vi. LX, 26.

138. Gaut. I, 36; Baudh. I, 8, 26; Vi. LXII, 8. ‘The cavities,’
i. e. of the head (Gov.), and also the navel, the heart, and the
crown of the head (Nar., Kull.).

139. Ap. I, 16, 3-8; Gaut. I, 36; Vas. Ill, 27-28; Baudh. I, 8,
20-22; Vi. LXII, 6-8; Y&gfi. I, 20.

140. Ap. II, 3, 4-6. ‘ Who live according to the law,’ i.e. ‘ who
serve Aryans’ (Medh., Gov., Kull., Ragh.). Nand. thinks that
m&sikam vapanam karyam, ‘ shall shave each month,’ means ‘ shall
offer the monthly .SrSddha.’

05 ]

0

t94

LAWS OF MANU.

V, 141 .

141. Drops (of water) from the mouth which do
not fall on a limb, do not make (a man) impure,
nor the hair of the moustache entering the mouth,
nor what adheres to the teeth.

142. Drops which trickle on the feet of him who
offers water for sipping to others, must be con¬
sidered as equal to (water) collected on the ground;
they render him not impure.

143. He who, while carrying anything in any
manner, is touched by an impure (person or thing),
shall become pure, if he performs an ablution, with¬
out putting down that object.

144. He who has vomited or purged shall bathe,
and afterwards eat clarified butter; but if (the attack
comes on) after he has eaten, let him only sip water;
bathing is prescribed for him who has had intercourse
with a woman.

145. Though he may be (already) pure, let him sip
water after sleeping, sneezing, eating, spitting, telling
untruths, and drinking water, likewise when he is
going to study the Veda.

146. Thus the rules of personal purification for
men of all castes, and those for cleaning (inanimate)
things, have been fully declared to you: hear now
the duties of women.

141. Ap. 1 ,16,13; Gaut. I, 38-41; Vas. Ill, 37,40-41; Baudh.
I, 8, 23-25; Vi. XXIII, 53; YSgn. I, 195. I read with Medh.,
Gov., N&r., Nand., and K., ahgam na yanti y&h, instead of ange
patanti, ‘which fall on a limb,’ the reading of Kull. and Ragh.

142. Vas. Ill, 42; Vi. XXIII, 54.

143. Gaut. I, 28; -Vas. Ill, 43; Baudh. I, 8, 27-29; Vi.
XXIII, g 5 .

145. Ap. I, 16, 14; Gaut. I, 37; Vi. XXII, 75; Yign. I, 196.
According to Medh., some refer this verse to a repeated sipping of
water.

v, t 5 2 .

PURIFICATION ; WOMEN.

T 95

. 147. By a girl, by a young woman, or even by an
aged one, nothing must be done independently, even
in her own house.

148. In childhood a female must be subject to
her father, in youth to her husband, when her lord
is dead to her sons; a woman must never be in¬
dependent.

149. She must not seek to separate herself from
her father, husband, or sons; by leaving them she
would make both (her own and her husband’s)
families contemptible.

150. She must always be cheerful, clever in (the
management of her) household affairs, careful in
cleaning her utensils, and economical in expenditure.

151. Him to whom her father may give her, or
her brother with the father’s permission, she shall
obey as long as he lives, and when he is dead, she
must not insult (his memory).

152. For the sake of procuring good fortune
to (brides), the recitation of benedictory texts
(svastyayana), and the sacrifice to the Lord of
creatures (Pra^&pati) are used at weddings; (but)
the betrothal (by the father or guardian) is the cause
of (the husband’s) dominion (over his wife).

147-149. See below, IX, 2-3; Vi.XXVI, 12-13; Y%w. 1 ,85-86.

150. Vi. XXVI, 4-6 ; Y&gii. I, 83.

151. Vi. XXVI, 14; Y &gn. I, 63. •

152. Svastyayanam, ‘the recitation of benedictory texts,’ i. e. ‘of
those intended for averting evil omens’ (Gov., Kull.); or ‘the
PuttyahaviUuna and the rest’ (Nar.); or ‘ the recitation of the
texts which precede the nuptial burnt-oblation’ (Rfigh., Nand.).
Medh. connects the word with ya.gud.fi, and explains it by ‘that
whereby welfare is obtained.’ Medh. explains the expression ‘the
sacrifice to Pra^-apati ’ by stating that ‘ some’ prescribe at a wedding
an oblation with the verse Pra^apate na tvad evanyaA (? tvadet&ny,
Rig-veda X, 121, 10), and that the offerings to the other gods are

0 2

196

LAWS OF MANU.

V, 153 -

153. The husband who wedded her with sacred
texts, always gives happiness to his wife, both in
season and out of season, in this world and in the
next.

154. Though destitute of virtue, or seeking
pleasure (elsewhere), or devoid of good qualities,
(yet) a husband must be constantly worshipped as
a god by a faithful wife.

155. No sacrifice, no vow, no fast must be per¬
formed by women apart (from their husbands); if
a wife obeys her husband, she will for that (reason
alone) be exalted in heaven.

156. A faithful wife, who desires to dwell (after
death) with her husband, must never do anything
that might displease him who took her hand, whether
he be alive or dead.

157. At her pleasure let her emaciate her body
by (living on) pure flowers, roots, and fruit; but she
must never even mention the name of another man
after her husband has died.

158. Until death let her be patient (of hardships),
self-controlled, and chaste, and strive (to fulfil) that
most excellent duty which (is prescribed) for wives
who have one husband only.

159. Many thousands of Br&hmawas who were
chaste from their youth, have gone to heaven with¬
out continuing their race.

implied by this expression. Ndr. thinks that the Pra^dpati called
Manu is the guardian deity of the bride, and hence the nuptial
oblations are called ‘ the sacrifice to Pra^dpati.’

155. Vi. XXVI, 15; Yagn. I, 77 -

156-166. See below, IX, 64-68 ; Y &gn. I, 75, 87.

157. Medh. takes this opportunity to strongly object to the prac¬
tice of widows burning themselves with their husbands* corpses.

159. Gov. and Kull. think that the verse refers to the Vdlakhilya
jftshis.

V, i66.

WOMEN.

197

160. A virtuous wife who after the death of her
husband constantly remains chaste, reaches heaven,
though she have no son, just like those chaste
men.

161. But a woman who from a desire to have
offspring violates her duty towards her (deceased)
husband, brings on herself disgrace in this world, and
loses her place with her husband (in heaven).

162. Offspring begotten by another man is here
not (considered lawful), nor (does offspring begotten)
on another man’s wife (belong to the begetter), nor
is a second husband anywhere prescribed for vir¬
tuous women.

163. She who cohabits with a man of higher
caste, forsaking her own husband who belongs to
a lower one, will become contemptible in this world,
and is called a remarried woman (paraphrvd).

164. By violating her duty towards her husband,
a wife is disgraced in this world, (after death) she
enters the womb of a jackal, and is tormented by
diseases (the punishment of) her sin.

165. She who, controlling her thoughts, words,
and deeds, never slights her lord, resides (after
death) with her husband (in heaven), and is called
a virtuous (wife).

166. In reward of such conduct, a female who
controls her thoughts, speech, and actions, gains in
this (life) highest renown, and in the next (world)
a place near her husband.

160. Vi. XXVI, 17.

162. Medh., Nar., and Nand. take the first part of the verse dif¬
ferently : ‘ Offspring begotten by another man does not belong (to
the mother).’ The other explanation is given by Gov. and Kull.
165. Medh. omits verses 165-166.

198

LAWS OF MANU.

V, 167.

167. A twice-born man, versed in the sacred law,
shall burn a wife of equal caste who conducts herself
thus and dies before him, with (the sacred fires used
for) the Agnihotra, and with the sacrificial imple¬
ments.

168. Having thus, at the funeral, given the sacred
fires to his wife who dies before him, he may marry
again, and again kindle (the fires).

169. (Living) according to the (preceding) rules,
he must never neglect the five (great) sacrifices,
and, having taken a wife, he must dwell in (his
own) house during the second period of his life.

Chapter VI.

1. A twice-born Sndtaka, who has thus lived
according to the law in the order of householders,
may, taking a firm resolution and keeping his organs
in subjection, dwell in the forest, duly (observing
the rules given below).

2. When a householder sees his (skin) wrinkled,
and (his hair) white, and the sons of his sons, then
he may resort to the forest.

167-168. Y&gii. I, 88.

VI. 1-32. Ap. II, 21, 18-23, 2; Gaut. Ill, 26-35; Vas. VI,
19-20; IX; Baudh. II, u, 14-15; HI, 18-4, 22; Vi. XCIV-
XCV; Y&gn. Ill, 45 - 55 -

1. Niyata^, ‘taking a firm resolution’(Gov.,Kull.), means accord¬
ing to Nar. ‘devoted to the restrictive duties, austerities, reciting
the Veda, and so forth.’ Kull. connects yathavad, ‘ duly observing,’
&c. (Gov., Nar.), with ‘ keeping his organs in subjection.’

2. Medh. notes particularly that the .Sish/as insist on the neces¬
sity that he who takes to forest-life must have sons and sons’ sons,
and that hence apatya, ‘ offspring,’ is to be taken in this restricted
sense. NSr. holds that the verse gives three separate grounds for
entering the third order, each of which is sufficient by itself, while

THE HERMIT IN THE FOREST.

199

VI, 8.

3. Abandoning all food raised by cultivation, and
all his belongings, he may depart into the forest,
either committing his wife to his sons, or accom¬
panied by her.

4. Taking with him the sacred fire and the
implements required for domestic (sacrifices), he
may go forth from the village into the forest and
reside there, duly controlling his senses.

5. Let him offer those five great sacrifices accord¬
ing to the rule, with various kinds of pure food fit
for ascetics, or with herbs, roots, and fruit.

6. Let him wear a skin or a tattered garment;
let him bathe in the evening or in the morning;
and let him always wear (his hair in) braids, the
hair on his body, his beard, and his nails (being
unclipped).

7. Let him perform the Bali-offering with such
food as he eats, and give alms according to his
ability; let him honour those who come to his
hermitage with alms consisting of water, roots, and
fruit.

8. Let him be always industrious in privately
reciting the Veda; let him be patient of hardships,
friendly (towards all), of collected mind, ever liberal

Medh. thinks that the three conditions must exist together. Others,
however, mentioned by Medh., took the verse to give a description
of the approach of old age, which entitles the householder to turn
hermit.

3. ‘ If his wife desires to accompany him, she may do so. But
others say that he is to leave his wife behind if she is young, but
shall take her with him if she is aged ’ (Medh.).

6. Afram,.‘a tattered garment’ (vastrakha«</am, Medh., Gov.,
Kull.), may also mean ‘ a dress made of bark, Kura grass, or the
like’ (Gov., N£r., RSgh.).

8. Danta^, ‘ patient of hardships,’ means according to Medh. and
Ndr. * free from pride.’ Gov. reads in the beginning of the second

200

LAWS OF MANU.

VI,!).

and never a receiver of gifts, and compassionate
towards all living creatures.

9. Let him offer, according to the law, the Agni-
hotra with three sacred fires, never omitting the
new-moon and full-moon sacrifices at the proper
time.

10. Let him also offer the Nakshatresh/i, the
Agrayawa, and the Actturm&sya (sacrifices), as well
as the Turdya»a and likewise the Dclksh&yawa, in
due order.

11. With pure grains, fit for ascetics, which grow
in spring and in autumn, and which he himself has
collected, let him severally prepare the sacrificial
cakes (purodasa) and the boiled messes (£aru), as
the law directs.

12. Having offered those most pure sacrificial
viands, consisting of the produce of the forest, he
may use the remainder for himself, (mixed with)
salt prepared by himself.

half-verse, tyaktadvandvo ’nisam data, ‘let him not care for the pairs
of opposites, let him be ever liberal and compassionate towards all
creatures.’

9. Yogata^, ‘at the proper time’(Kull., Rdgh.), means according
to Medh. and Gov. ‘ as required by law; ’ according to Nar. ‘ dili¬
gently.'

10. Medh. reads Darresh/i for i?fksheshd, ‘ the Nakshatresh/i.’
I read with Medh., Nar., Nand., and Rdgh., Turdyawa (see •S’dnkh.
.Srauta-sfitra IV, n) instead of Uttarayana, ‘the sacrifice at the
winter-solstice,’ which Gov., Kull., and K. give. The first reads also
more consistently than Kull. and K.: Dakshi«dya«a»z, ‘ the sacrifice
at the summer-solstice,'for Dakshasydya»am,‘the Ddkshdyawa.' The
Nakshatresh/i is a .SYauta sacrifice offered to the lunar mansions.
Regarding the variety of the Darrapaur«amasa, called Ddkshdyana,
see Arv. Srauta-sfitra II, 14.

la. According to Kull., the hermit is to collect the salt from
fisharas, i.e. salt-marshes; according to Ndr., he is to prepare it
from the kshdra, * salt or alcaline elements’ of trees and the like.

VI, i8.

THE HERMIT IN THE FOREST.

201

13. Let him eat vegetables that grow on dry land
or in water, flowers, roots, and fruits, the productions
of pure trees, and oils extracted from forest-fruits.

14. Let him avoid honey, flesh, and mushrooms
growing on the ground (or elsewhere; the vegetables
called) Bhtistriwa, and .Sigruka, and the kSleshm&n-
taka fruit.

15. Let him throw away in the month of Alvina
the food of ascetics, which he formerly collected,
likewise his worn-out clothes and his vegetables,
roots, and fruit.

16. Let him not eat anything (grown on) ploughed
(land), though it may have been thrown away by
somebody, nor roots and fruit grown in a village,
though (he may be) tormented (by hunger).

17. He may eat either what has been cooked
with fire, or what has been ripened by time; he
either may use a stone for grinding, or his teeth
may be his mortar.

18. He may either at once (after his daily meal)
cleanse (his vessel for collecting food), or lay up a

14. Bhfistnna, i.e. Andropogon Schoenanthus,.Sigruka, according
to Nar., the same as the •SobhanaMgana, i.e. Moringa Pterygosperma,
the horse-radish tree, the leaves of which are said to be used as a
vegetable. According to Medh., these two vegetables are known
among the B&hikas, in the Panjab; according to Gov., Kull., Ragh.,
the former is found in Malvd. 6'leslimantaka, i.e. Cordia Myxa.
According to Medh., bhaumdni, 1 those which grow on or come from
the ground,' has to be taken as a separate word, and denotes a
plant, known to the woodmen, named Gog-ihvika, Phlomnis or
Premna Esculenta. Gov., Nar,, and Kull. give the construction
adopted above, and the latter two declare that mushrooms growing
on trees are likewise forbidden.

16. ‘Though he may be in distress,’ i.e. ‘tormented by hunger’
(Gov., Kull.), or ‘sick’ (N£r.).

18. ‘He may either at once (after his daily meal) cleanse (his

202

LAWS OF MANU.

VI, 19.

store sufficient for a month, or gather what suffices
for six months or for a year.

19. Having collected food according to his ability,
he may either eat at night (only), or in the day-time
(only), or at every fourth meal-time, or at every
eighth.

20. Or he may live according to the rule of the
lunar penance (Aandriya^a, daily diminishing the
quantity of his food) in the bright (half of the month)
and (increasing it) in the dark (half); or he may eat
on the last days of each fortnight, once (a day only),
boiled barley-gruel.

21. Or he may constantly subsist on flowers,
roots, and fruit alone, which have been ripened by
time and have fallen spontaneously, following the
rule of the (Institutes) of Vikhanas.

22. Let him either roll about on the ground, or
stand during the day on tiptoe, (or) let him alter¬
nately stand and sit down ; going at the Savanas (at
sunrise, at midday, and at sunset) to water in the
forest (in order to bathe).

23. In summer let him expose himself to the
heat of five fires, during the rainy season live under
the open sky, and in winter be dressed in wet
clothes, (thus) gradually increasing (the rigour of)
his austerities.

vessel for collecting food),’(NSr,), means ‘he may either gather
only as much as suffices for one day.’ This mode of subsistence
is apparently the same as that called Samprakshdlani vrz'tti by
Baudhdyana, III, 2,11.

21. All the commentators except NSr. expressly state that the
text refers to a particular set of Sfttras, ascribed to the J?*shi
Vikhanas, which contained rules for hermits. Medh. adds that the
hermit is to learn other practices also from that work.

23. ‘Five fires,’ i.e. * four fires and the sun from above.’

VT, 39.

THE HERMIT IN THE FOREST.

203

24. When he bathes at the three Savanas (sunrise,
midday, and sunset), let him offer libations of water to
the manes and the gods, and practising harsher and
harsher austerities, let him dry up his bodily frame.

25. Having reposited the three sacred fires in
himself, according to the prescribed rule, let him-
live without a fire, without a house, wholly silent,
subsisting on roots and fruit,

26. Making no effort (to procure) things that give
pleasure, chaste, sleeping on the bare ground, not
caring for any shelter, dwelling at the roots of trees.

27. From Brahma was (who live as) ascetics, let
him receive alms, (barely sufficient) to support life,
or from other householders of the twice-born (castes)
who reside in the forest.

28. Or (the hermit) who dwells in the forest may
bring (food) from a village, receiving it either in a
hollow dish (of leaves), in (his naked) hand, or in a
broken earthen dish, and may eat eight mouthfuls.

29. These and other observances must a Br&h-
ma«a who dwells in the forest diligently practise,
and in order to attain complete (union with) the
(supreme) Soul, (he must study) the various sacred
texts contained in the Upanishads,

24. Gov. says that these harsher austerities are those prescribed
in the Vaikh&nasa .S'astra. Medh. gives as instances, standing with
uplifted arms, fasting for a month, and the Dvadajaratra.

25. ‘According to the rule,’ i.e. ‘by swallowing ashes and so forth’
(Medh., Gov., Kull.), which mode has to be learned from the .Sr£-
vawaka [^rSmawaka Sfltra] (Medh.), or by reciting the text ‘ Y£ te
agne yagiiiya,’ Taitt. Sawh. II, g, 8, 8 (Nar.).

29. Atmasawsiddhaye, ‘ in order to attain complete (union with
the (supreme) Soul,’ may also mean ‘ in order to make himself or
his soul perfect.’ Nlr. gives the correct etymology of Upanishad,
explaining upanisha««a yo^yata ity upanishat, ‘Upanishad means (a
text) which is recited (while the pupils are) seated near (the teacher).’

204

LAWS OF MANU.

VI, 30.

30. (As well as those rites and texts) which have
been practised and studied by the sages (j?zshis),
and by Brdhma^a householders, in order to increase
their knowledge (of Brahman), and their austerity,
and in order to sanctify their bodies ;

31. Or let him walk, fully determined and going
straight on, in a north-easterly direction, subsisting
on water and air, until his body sinks to rest.

32. A Br&hmafta, having got rid of his body by
one of those modes practised by the great sages, is
exalted in the world of Brahman, free from sorrow
and fear.

33. But having thus passed the third part of (a

30. Gov. and Kull. separate the two words ‘ Brahmana house¬
holders/ The former explains Brahmaz/a by ‘hermit/ and the
latter by ‘ acquainted with the Brahman, i. e. ascetic/ By ‘ house¬
holders' Kull. understands ‘ hermits in the forest/ Ragh. explains
Br&hmawa by ‘ those who know Brahman/

31. Gov. and Kull. take yukta, ‘ firmly resolved' (Nar., R&gh.),
in the sense of‘intent on the practice of Yoga/ Gov. and Kull.
(see also Medh. on the next verse) say that a man may undertake
the Mah&prasthana, or ‘ Great Departure/ on a journey which ends
in death, when he is incurably diseased or meets with a great mis¬
fortune, and that, because it is taught in the S&stras, it is not
opposed to theVedic rules which forbid suicide. From the parallel
passage of Ap. II, 23, 2, it is, however, evident that a voluntary
death by starvation was considered the befitting conclusion of a
hermit's life. The antiquity and general prevalence of the'practice
may be inferred from the fact that the Gaina ascetics, too, consider
it particularly meritorious.

32. ‘By one of those modes/i.e.‘drowning oneself in a river,
precipitating oneself from a mount, burning oneself or starving
oneself to death'(Medh.); or ‘by one of those modes of practising
austerities, mentioned above, verse 23' (Gov., I£ull., Ndr., Nand.).
Medh. adds a long discussion, trying to prove that ‘ the world of
Brahman/ which the ascetic thus gains, is not the real complete
liberation.

33-85. Ap. II, 21, 2-17; Gaut. Ill, 11-25; Vas. VI, 19-20; X;

VI, 39 - HERMIT IN THE FOREST; THE ASCETIC. 205

man’s natural term of) life in the forest, he may live
as an ascetic during the fourth part of his existence,
after abandoning all attachment to worldly objects.

34. He who after passing from order to order,
after offering sacrifices and subduing his senses,
becomes, tired with (giving) alms and offerings of
food, an ascetic, gains bliss after death.

35. When he has paid the three debts, let him
apply his mind to (the attainment of) final libera¬
tion ; he who seeks it without having paid (his debts)
sinks downwards.

36. Having studied the Vedas in accordance with
the rule, having begat sons according to the sacred
law, and having offered sacrifices according to his
ability, he may direct his mind to (the attainment
of) final liberation.

37. A twice-born man who seeks final liberation,
without having studied the Vedas, without having
begotten sons, and without having offered sacrifices,
sinks downwards.

38. Having performed the Ish/i, sacred to the
Lord of creatures (Pra^flpati), where (he gives) all
his property as the sacrificial fee, having reposited
the sacred fires in himself, a Br£hma#a may depart
from his house (as an ascetic).

39. Worlds, radiant in brilliancy, become (the por¬
tion) of him who recites (the texts regarding) Brah¬
man and departs from his house (as an ascetic), after
giving a promise of safety to all created beings.

Baudh. II, 11, 16-26; 17, 1-18, 27; Vi. XCVI-XCVII; YS^.
HI, 56-65.

33. Nar. takes asariga, ‘ attachment’ (Gov., Kull.), in the sense
of ‘ possessions.’

38. The description of the rites to be performed on entering the
order of ascetics is given in detail in Baudh. II, 17.

206

LAWS OF MANU.

VI, 4*

40. For that twice-born man, by whom not the
smallest danger even is caused to created beings,
there will be no danger from any (quarter), after he
is freed from his body.

41. Departing from his house fully provided with
the means of purification (Pavitra), let him wander
about absolutely silent, and caring nothing for enjoy¬
ments that may be offered (to him).

42. Let him always wander alone, without any
companion, in order to attain (final liberation), fully
understanding that the solitary (man, who) neither
forsakes nor is forsaken, gains his end.

43. He shall neither possess a fire, nor a dwelling,
he may go to a village for his food, (he shall be)

' indifferent to everything, firm of purpose, meditating
(and) concentrating his mind on Brahman.

44. A potsherd (instead of an alms-bowl), the roots
of trees (for a dwelling), coarse worn-out garments,

41. Pavitropa&ta^, ‘ provided with the means of purification/
i. e. * his staff, his water-pot, and so forth' (Gov., Kull., Nand.),
means according to Medh. either ‘ applying himself to the recitation
of purificatory texts and provided with the means of purifications,
i.e. a staff, &c./ or 4 performing penances which purify/ Nar. takes
it to mean, ‘ having been made most eminent during his life as
a householder by acts which purify, i.e. austerities and recitals of
the Veda and so forthand Ragh., * possessing a rich store of sanc¬
tifying knowledge taught in the Upanishads.’ N&r. takes muni^,
‘ wholly silent' (Gov., Kull.), in the sense of‘ intent on meditation.'
Nand. explains samupo<///eshu, ‘which may be offered to him'
(Medh., Gov., Kull.), by ‘which he collected in his house;' and Nar.
by ‘ which he has duly enjoyed.'

43. Medh. explains muniA, ‘ meditating' (Gov., Kull.), by ‘wholly
silent.' Instead of asawkasuka^ or a^awkasukaA, ‘ firm of purpose'
(Gov., Kull.), Nar., Nand., and K. prima manu read asaw^ayika^,
‘ destitute of any store of provisions,' and Ragh. ajankasfika> 5 , * free
from doubts.' Medh., whose text now reads asa/rckasuka^, gives
this word as the var. lect. of others, and probably originally read,
like NSr. and Nand., asaw£ayik&£.

VT. 49 -

THE ASCETIC.

207

life in solitude and indifference towards everything,
are the marks of one who has attained liberation.

45. Let him not desire to die, let him not desire
to live; let him wait for (his appointed) time, as a
servant (waits) for the payment of his wages.

46. Let him put down his foot purified by his
sight, let him drink water purified by (straining
with) a cloth, let him utter speech purified by truth,
let him keep his heart pure.

47. Let him patiently bear hard words, let him
not insult anybody, and let him not become any¬
body’s enemy for the sake of this (perishable) body.

48. Against an angry man let him not in return
show anger, let him bless when he is cursed, and let
him not utter speech, devoid of truth, scattered at
the seven gates.

49. Delighting in what refers to the Soul, sitting
(in the postures prescribed by the Yoga), indepen¬
dent (of external help), entirely abstaining from
sensual enjoyments, with himself for his only com¬
panion, he shall live in this world, desiring the bliss
(of final liberation).

45. The correct reading is nirvej*am(Medh. ; Nar.,var. lect., Nand.)
instead of nirdejam (Gov., K.) or nidejaw (Kull., R&gh.). The
latter reading can, as Nar. remarks, only mean ‘ command/

46. I.e. ‘let him look before he puts down his foot, lest he
injure any small animal, see ver. 68' (Gov., Medh., Ragh.), or ‘lest
he step on something impure* (Kull.).

48. ‘The seven gates* are, according to Medh. and Gov.,
* Dharma, Artha, and Kama separately, Dharma and Artha, Dharma
and Kdma, Artha and Kama, and finally Dharm&rthakama con¬
jointly; according to Kull. and Medh., ‘mind, intellect, and the five
senses ;* and according to Ndr., ‘ the five senses, mind, and Ahaw-
kdra, or egoism/ Kull. mentions another explanation, ‘ the seven
worlds,* and Medh. gives as a third meaning, ‘ the seven vital airs
located in the head/ The general sense, ‘ what refers to worldly
matters,* remains always the same.

208 '

LAWS OF MANU.

VI, SO.

50. Neither by (explaining) prodigies and omens,
nor by skill in astrology and palmistry, nor by
giving advice and by the exposition (of the .S&stras),
let him ever seek to obtain alms.

51. Let him not (in order to beg) go near a
house filled with hermits, Br&hma»as, birds, dogs,
or other mendicants.

52. His hair, nails, and beard being clipped,
carrying an alms-bowl, a staff, and a water-pot, let
him continually wander about, controlling himself
and not hurting any creature.

53. His vessels shall not be made of metal, they
shall be free from fractures; it is ordained that they
shall be cleansed with water, like (the cups, called)
Aamasa, at a sacrifice.

54. A gourd, a wooden bowl, an earthen (dish), or
one made of split cane, Manu, the son of Sva-
yambhu, has declared (to be) vessels (suitable) for
an ascetic.

55. Let him go to beg once (a day), let him not
be eager to obtain a large quantity (of alms); for
an ascetic who eagerly seeks alms, attaches himself
also to sensual enjoyments.

50. According to Nar. and Ragh., angavidyfi, ‘ palmistry’ (Medh.,
Hull., Nand.), means * the science of grammar and the other five
Angas of the Veda.’ Gov. takes nakshatrangavidya as a determi¬
native compound, meaning ‘ astrology.’ Aniuasana, ‘ giving advice ’
(Medh., Gov., Kull., Ragh,), means according to Nar. and Nfind.
‘ teaching the Veda.’ Vida, ‘ the exposition (of the Aastras),’ (Gov.,
Kull.), means according to Medh. and N&r. ‘ disputations;’ accord¬
ing to Nand. and Ragh. ‘ the science of dialectics.’ This verse,
which occurs also in Vas. X, 21, is historically important, as it
shows that in ancient as in modern times, ascetics followed worldly
pursuits and were the teachers or advisers of the people.

55. ‘ Let him not go oftener to beg’ is Gov.’s explanation, instead
of ‘ let him not be eager to obtain a large quantity of alms/

VI, 6 3 .

THE ASCETIC.

209

56. When no smoke ascends from (the kitchen),
when the pestle lies motionless, when the embers
have been extinguished, when the people have
finished their meal, when the remnants in the dishes
have been removed, let the ascetic always go to
beg.

57. Let him not be sorry when he obtains nothing,
nor rejoice when he obtains (something), let him
(accept) so much only as will sustain life, let him
not care about the (quality of his) utensils.

58. Let him disdain all (food) obtained in conse¬
quence of humble salutations, (for) even an ascetic
who has attained final liberation, is bound (with the
fetters of the Saws&ra) by accepting (food given) in
consequence of humble salutations.

59. By eating little, and by standing and sitting
in solitude, let him restrain his senses, if they are
attracted by sensual objects.

60. By the restraint of his senses, by the destruc¬
tion of love and hatred, and by the abstention from
injuring the creatures, he becomes fit for immor¬
tality.

61. Let him reflect on the transmigrations of men,
caused by their sinful deeds, on their falling into
hell, and on the torments in the world of Yama,

62. On the separation from their dear ones, on
their union with hated men, on their being over¬
powered by age and being tormented with diseases,

63. On the departure of the individual soul'from
this body and its new birth in (another) womb, and

57. Matra, ‘utensils,’ i.e. his staff, water-pot, &c. (Medh., Gov.,
Kull,, Ragh.), means according to Nar. and Nand. * a portion,
•e.g. a mouthful’ (kavaladi^, Nar.), or ‘a portion, i.e. enough to fill
his stomach’ (udarapftra«avadhir matri),

05] ?

210

LAWS OF MANU.

VI, 64.

on its wanderings through ten thousand millions of
existences,

64. On the infliction of pain on embodied (spirits),
which is caused by demerit, and the gain of eternal
bliss, which is caused by the attainment of their
highest aim, (gained through) spiritual merit.

65. By deep meditation let him recognise the
subtile nature of the supreme Soul, and its presence
in all organisms, both the highest and the lowest.

66. To whatever order he may be attached, let
him, though blemished (by a want of the external
marks), fulfil his duty, equal-minded towards all
creatures; (for) the external mark (of the order) is
not the cause of (the acquisition of) merit.

67. Though the fruit of the Kataka tree (the
clearing-nut) makes water clear, yet the (latter) does
not become limpid in consequence of the mention of
the (fruit’s) name.

68. In order to preserve living creatures, let him
always by day and by night, even with pain to his
body, walk, carefully scanning the ground.

69. In order to expiate (the death) of those
creatures which he unintentionally injures by day
or by night, an ascetic shall bathe and perform six
suppressions of the breath.

6g. Nand. omits this verse. ‘The highest aim’ is ‘the recogni¬
tion of the Brahman’ (Kull.), and the good fortune of attaining that
falls only to the lot of those who have accumulated a rich store
of merit.

66 . Instead of dQshito 'pi, * though blemished (by a want of the
external marks of the order),’ (Kull., Nand., Ragh.), Medh., Gov.,
NSr., and K. read bhfishito ’pi, * though adorned (with garlands and
the like).’

69 . Regarding the term * suppression of the breath,’ see Vas.
XXV, 13, and Wilson,Vish«upura«a,V, p. 231 (ed. Hall).

VT, 74.

THE ASCETIC.

211

70. Three suppressions of the breath even, per¬
formed according to the rule, and accompanied with
the (recitation of the) Vy&hmis and of the syllable
Om, one must know to be the highest (form of)
austerity for every Br&hma^a.

71. For as the impurities of metallic ores, melted
in the blast (of a furnace), are consumed, even so
the taints of the organs are destroyed through the
suppression of the breath.

72. Let him destroy the taints through suppres¬
sions of the breath, (the production of) sin by fixed
attention, all sensual attachments by restraining (his
senses and organs), and all qualities that are not
lordly by meditation.

73. Let him recognise by the practice of medita¬
tion the progress of the individual soul through
beings of various kinds, (a progress) hard to under¬
stand for unregenerate men.

74. He who possesses the true insight (into the

71. Vas. XXV, 6; Baudh. IV, 1, 24.

72. Regarding the term dharawa, ‘ fixed attention/see Wilson,
Vishmipurawa, V, p. 237 (ed. Hall), and Jacob, Veddntasara, p. 109.

Anfavar&n gu«an, ‘ all qualities that are not lordly/ Medh. ex¬
plains the qualities by ‘ goodness, passion, and darkness/ and the
epithet ‘not lordly* by ‘ depending upon another/ and adds that

* the conceit (abhimana) of the soul (purusha) that it possesses quali¬
ties and is affected by pleasure or pain and the like must be
destroyed/ Gov. and K. assert that the qualities opposed to ‘ virtue,
knowledge, absence of passion and power* (Davies, S&wkhya, p. 81)
are to be destroyed by 4 meditation/ as defined in the Yogaj&stra.
Similarly N&r.,who (as also Nand.) reads anairvaran, says that the
qualities that are opposed to true knowledge and power, and are
modifications of passion and darkness, must be destroyed by medi¬
tating on the formless. Kull. and Ragh., on the other hand, interpret
the passage on VedSnta principles, and explain the qualities as

* such which do not belong to the lord, Brahman, i.e, anger, greed,
envy, and so forth.*

LAWS OF MANtJ.

. VI. 76 -

212

nature of the world), is not fettered by his deeds;
but he who is destitute of that insight, is drawn into
the circle of births and deaths.

75. By not injuring any creatures, by detaching
the senses (from objects of enjoyment), by the rites
prescribed in the Veda, and by rigorouslypra ctising
austerities, (men) gain that state (even) in this
(world).

76-77. Let him quit this dwelling, composed of
the five elements, where the bones are the beams,
which is held together by tendons (instead of cords),
where the flesh and the blood are the mortar, which
is thatched with the skin, which is foul-smelling, filled
with urine and ordure, infested by old age and
sorrow, the seat of disease, harassed by pain, gloomy
with passion, and perishable.

78. He who leaves this body, (be it by necessity)
as a tree (that is torn from) the river-bank, or (freely)
like a bird (that) quits a tree, is freed from the
misery (of this world, dreadful like) a shark.

79. Making over (the merit of his own) good actions
to his friends and (the guilt of) his evil deeds to his
enemies, he attains the eternal Brahman by the prac¬
tice of meditation.

80. When by the disposition (of his heart) he

75. 'By the rites prescribed in the Veda/ i.e. the daily rites
(Medh., Gov., Kull.), or ' the daily rites and those prescribed for
certain occasions' (Nar., Nand.). ' That state/ i.e. 'the union with
Brahman’ (Gov., Kull., Ragh.), means according to Medh. 'that
place, i.e. the world of Brahman/ N&r. and Nand. read tatparam,

* that highest (Brahman)/

76-77, Maitr. Up. Ill, 4.

79. ' Making over (the merit of his own) good actions’ means
according to Gov. and Medh. ‘(the merit of anybody's) good actions/

80, ' In this world/ i.e. he becomes a Givanmukta, one liberated
during this life (Ndr.).

VI, 84.

THE ASCETIC.

213

becomes indifferent to all objects, he obtains eternal
happiness both in this world and after death.

81. He who has in this manner gradually given
up all attachments and is freed from all the pairs (of
opposites), reposes in Brahman alone.

82. All that has been declared (above) depends
on meditation; for he who is not proficient in the
knowledge of that which refers to the Soul reaps not
the full reward of the performance of rites.

83. Let him constantly recite (those texts of) the
Veda which refer to the sacrifice, (those) referring
to the deities, and (those) which treat of the Soul
and are contained in the concluding portions of the
Veda (Vedanta).

84. That is the refuge of the ignorant, and even

81. ‘ The pairs of opposites/ i.e. hunger and satiety and so forth
(Gov.), or honour and dishonour (Kull.).

82. I follow Gov., Nar., and Nand., who explain the verse to
mean that all the teaching of the preceding chapters with respect
to the four orders depends, as far as its ultimate result is concerned,
on meditation, because, however well a man may fulfil the pre¬
scribed rites, he cannot reap the full reward without knowing and
meditating on the Brahman. Kull. refers the phrase ‘ Ail that has

•been declared’ to the contents of the last verse, and says that ‘the
complete freedom from all attachments and the repose in Brah¬
man’ depend on the recognition of the unity of the individual soul
and of Brahman. He understands by kriyaphalam, ‘ the reward for
the act of meditating/ Medh. begins with an explanation similar
to that of Kull., but he takes finally kriyaphalam in the same sense
as Gov., N&r., and Nand. , R&gh. explains yad etad abhuabditam
by ‘ what can be expressed by words.’

83. ‘Which refer to the sacrifice/ i.e. ‘the Brdhmawas’ (Medh.,
Gov., Nand.), or ‘the Brahmaveda’ (Kull., Nar.), or ‘the Karma-
laindsL, e.g. ishe tv& fir^e tv& (V^. Sawh. I, 1), R&gh. ‘Those
referring to the deities/ i.e. ‘Mantras describing the various deities’
(Medh., Gov.), e. g. Rig-veda VIII, 44,16 (Gov.). The third class of
texts mentioned is that of the Upanishads; but see also Goldstticker,'
Sansk. Diet., s. v. adhydtma,

214

LAWS OF MANU.

VI, 85.

that (the refuge) of those who know (the meaning
of the Veda); that is (the protection) of those who
seek (bliss in) heaven and of those who seek endless
(beatitude).

85. A twice-born man who becomes an ascetic,
after the successive performance of the above-men¬
tioned acts, shakes off sin here below and reaches
the highest Brahman.

86. Thus the law (valid) for self-restrained ascetics
has been explained to you ; now listen to the (par¬
ticular) duties of those who give up (the rites pre¬
scribed by) the Veda.

87. The student, the householder, the hermit, and
the ascetic, these (constitute) four separate orders,
which all spring from (the order of) householders.

88. But all (or) even (any of) these orders, assumed
successively in accordance with the Institutes (of the
sacred law), lead the Br&hmawa who acts by the
preceding (rules) to the highest state.

89. And in accordance with the precepts of the
Veda and of the Smrzti, the housekeeper is declared

86. Gov. is of opinion that the persons named above, IV, 22,
are here intended. But from what follows, verses 94,95, it appears
that those Br&hma»as are meant who, though solely intent on the
acquisition of supreme knowledge, and retired from all worldly
affairs, continue to reside in their houses; see also IV, 257. Gov.
and Nar. assume that they remain householders, while KulL counts
them among the ascetics.

87-93- Ap. II, 23-24; Gaut. Ill, 36; Vas.VIII, 14-16; X, 30;
Baudh. II, 11, 9-34; Vi. LIX, 27-29.

According to the commentators, the following discussion is intro¬
duced in order to show, (i) that there are four orders only, and
that the Vedasawnyisika belongs to these, and does not form a
. fifth order, or stand outside the orders; (2) that as the order of
the householders is the most distinguished, it is proper that a man
may continue to live in his house under the protection of his son.

VI, 95-

THE ASCETIC.

215

to be superior to all of them; for he supports the
other three.

90. As all rivers, both great and small, find a
resting-place in the ocean, even so men of all orders
find protection with householders.

91. By twice-born men belonging to (any of) these
four orders, the tenfold law must be ever carefully
obeyed.

92. Contentment, forgiveness, self-control, absten¬
tion from unrighteously appropriating anything, (obe¬
dience to the rules of) purification, coercion of the
organs, wisdom, knowledge (of the supreme Soul),
truthfulness, and abstention from anger, (form) the
tenfold law.

93. Those Br<ihma»as who thoroughly study the
tenfold law, and after studying obey it, enter the
highest state.

94. A twice-born man who, with collected mind,
follows the tenfold law and has paid his (three)
debts, may, after learning the Vedinta according to
the prescribed rule, become an ascetic.

95. Having given up (the performance of) all
rites, throwing off the guilt of his (sinful) acts, sub¬
duing his organs and having studied the Veda, he
may live at his ease under the protection of his son.

92. Dhrz'ti//, ‘ contentment,’ means according to Nar., Nand., and
Ragh. ‘ firmness of purpose or in the discharge of duties.’ DamaA,
‘self-control,’ means according to Medh. and Nand. ‘humility;’
according to Gov. and Nar. ‘ patience under sufferings;’ according
to Kull. and Rfigh. ‘ the subjugation of the internal organ.’ DhfA,
‘wisdom,’ means according to Medh. and Gov. ‘freedom from
doubts and errors;’ according to Kull. and Ragh. ‘knowledge of
the true meaning of the Astras.’ Nar. and Nand. read hrM,

* modesty or shame.’

94. Vas. X, 26.

95. * Having studied the Veda,’ i. e. ‘ the Upanishads’ (Kull.).

2 l6

LAWS OF MANU.

VI, 96.

96. He who has thus given up (the performance
of) all rites, who is solely intent on his own (parti¬
cular) object, (and) free from desires, destroys his
guilt by his renunciation and obtains the highest
state.

97. Thus the fourfold holy law of Brdhma«as,
which after death (yields) imperishable rewards, has
been declared to you; now learn the duty of kings.

Chapter VII.

1. I will declare the duties of kings, (and) show
how a king should conduct himself, how he was
created, and how (he can obtain) highest success.

2. A Kshatriya, who has received according to
the rule the sacrament prescribed by the Veda,
must duly protect this whole (world).

3. For, when these creatures, being without a
king, through fear dispersed in all directions, the
Lord created a king for the protection of this whole
(creation),

4. Taking (for that purpose) eternal particles of
Indra, of the Wind, of Yama, of the Sun, of Fire,
of Varuwa, of the Moon, and of the Lord of wealth
(Kubera).

Gov., Ndr., Nand., Ragh., and K. read abhyasyan, ‘ studying the
Veda,’ and the same reading is mentioned by Medh. as a var. lect.

96. ‘ His own object,’ i. e. ‘ final liberation.’

97. According to Medh. the word * Brdhmawa’ is not intended
to exclude other Aryans; but according to Gov., Kull., and Ndr. it
is meant to prescribe that asceticism is permissible for Brdhmawas
alone.

VII. 2. * The sacrament,' i. e.' the initiation’ (Medh., Gov., Ndr.,
Kull.), or ‘ the initiation and the rest’ (Rdgh.), or ‘ the sacrament of
the coronation’ (Nand.). The last opinioi*seems the correct one.

VII, IS.

THE KING.

217

5. Because a king has been formed of particles
of those lords of the gods, he therefore surpasses
all created beings in lustre;

6. And, like the sun, he burns eyes and hearts;
nor can anybody on earth even gaze on him.

7. Through his (supernatural) power he is Fire and
Wind, he Sun and Moon, he the Lord of justice
(Yama), he Kubera, he Varuwa, he great Indra.

’ 8. Even an infant king must not be despised,

(from an idea) that he is a (mere) mortal; for he
is a great deity in human form.

9. Fire burns one man only, if he carelessly
approaches it, the fire of a king’s (anger) consumes
the (whole) family, together with its cattle and its
hoard of property.

10. Having fully considered the purpose, (his)
power, and the place and the time, he assumes by
turns many (different) shapes for the complete
attainment of justice.

il He, in whose favour resides Padmd, the
goddess of fortune, in whose valour dwells victory,
in whose anger abides death, is formed of the lustre
of all (gods).

12. The (man), who in his exceeding folly hates
him, will doubtlessly perish; for the king quickly
makes up his mind to destroy such (a man).

5 - The commentators explain te^as, ‘lustre,’ by ‘prowess or
valour’ (virya). The next verse, however, shows that at least a
play on the word is intended.

10. According to the commentators, the verse is meant as a
warning to those who are too confident of possessing a king’s favour.

11. ‘PadmS, the goddess of fortune,'must be taken according to
Nar. and Nand. as ‘ who carries a lotus in her hand,’ and according to
Ragh. ‘whose dwelling is the lotus.’ According to Medh.,Gov., and
Kull., the epithet is added in order to give the idea of greatness.

LAWS OF MANU.

VII, 13.

2l8

13. Let no (man), therefore, transgress that law
which the king decrees with respect to his favourites,
nor (his orders) which inflict pain on those in disfavour.

14. For the (king’s) sake the Lord formerly cre¬
ated his own son, Punishment, the protector of all
creatures, (an incarnation of) the law, formed of
Brahman’s glory.

15. Through fear of him all created beings, both
the immovable and the movable, allow themselves’
to be enjoyed and swerve not from their duties.

16. Having fully considered the time and the
place (of the offence), the strength and the know¬
ledge (of the offender), let him justly inflict that
(punishment) on men who act unjustly.

13. Medh. gives the following instances. If a king orders that
during the celebration of a wedding in the house of a minister or
other favourite, a public festival is to be held in the town, that
everybody is to appear on the occasion, or that during so and so
many days no animals are to be killed, no birds to be snared, and
no debtors to be imprisoned by their creditors, everybody must
obey. The same shall be the case if the king orders with respect
to persons in disfavour that they are to be shunned by everybody,
that nobody is to enter their houses. Gov., Kull., and Ragh. give
the same explanation, and they as well as Medh. add, that this rule
refers to lawful orders in worldly matters only. Nar. seems to have
taken the verse differently, in a sense similar to that contained in Sir
W. Jones’ translation.

14. Y&gn. I, 353.

15. Bhog&ya kalpante, 'allow themselves to be enjoyed’ (Medh.,
Gov., N&r., Nand., R&gh.), means according to Kull. ' are able to
enjoy their own/ Gov. says, ^edanadibhayena vr/kshadisth&var&«y
api phalapushpadidvareflopabhog&rtha/rc sawpadyante niyatakalam
pushpddid&navyavasth&w ndtikrdmanti,' through fear of being cut
down and the like immovable things such as trees become fit to
be enjoyed by means of their fruit, flowers, and so forth, (i. e.) they
transgress not the law according to which they must give flowers, &c.
at the appointed time;’ see also below, verse 23.

16. Gaut. XII, si; Vas. XIX, 9; Vi. Ill, 91; YI, 367.

vn, 24.

THE KING.

219

17. Punishment is (in reality) the king (and) the
male, that the manager of affairs, that the ruler, and
that is called the surety for the four orders’ obe¬
dience to the law.

18. Punishment alone governs all created beings,
punishment alone protects them, punishment watches
over them while they sleep; the wise declare punish¬
ment (to be identical with) the law.

19. If (punishment) is properly inflicted after (due)
consideration, it makes all people happy; but inflicted
without consideration, it destroys everything.

20. If the king did not, without tiring, inflict
punishment on those worthy to be punished, the
stronger would roast the weaker, like fish on a spit;

21. The crow would eat the sacrificial cake and
the dog would lick the sacrificial viands, and owner¬
ship would not remain with any one, the lower ones
would (usurp the place of) the higher ones.

22. The whole world is kept in order by punish¬
ment, for a guiltless man is hard to find; through
fear of punishment the whole world yields the enjoy¬
ments (which it owes).

23. The gods, the D&navas, the Gandharvas, the
Rclkshasas, the bird and snake deities even give
the enjoyments (due from them) only, if they are
tormented by (the fear of) punishment.

24. All castes (var#a) would be corrupted (by
intermixture), all barriers would be broken through,

17. ‘That is the male,’ i.e. ‘compared with him all others are
(weak) women’ (Kull.).

19. Y&gn. I, 355.

23. The commentators quote in explanation of this verse a pas¬
sage from the Ya^ur-veda, ‘ Through fear the fire warms, through
fear the sun shines, through fear move Indra, the Wind, and Death,
as the fifth.’

220

LAWS OF MANU.

VII, 2g.

and all men would rage (against each other) in con¬
sequence of mistakes with respect to punishment.

25. But where Punishment with a black hue and
red eyes stalks about, destroying sinners, there the
subjects are not disturbed, provided that he who
inflicts it discerns well.

26. They declare that king to be a just inflicter
of punishment, who is truthful, who acts after due
consideration, who is wise, and who knows (the re¬
spective value of) virtue, pleasure, and wealth.

27. A king who properly inflicts (punishment),
prospers with respect to (those) three (means of
happiness); but he who is voluptuous, partial, and
deceitful will be destroyed, even through the (un¬
just) punishment (which he inflicts).

28. Punishment (possesses) a very bright lustre,
and is hard to be administered by men with unim¬
proved minds; it strikes down the king who swerves
from his duty, together with his relatives.

29. Next it will afflict his castles, his territories,
the whole world together with the movable and
immovable (creation), likewise the sages and the
gods, who (on the failure of offerings) ascend to
the sky.

30. (Punishment) cannot be inflicted justly by
one who has no assistant, (nor) by a fool, (nor)
by a covetous man, (nor) by one whose mind is
unimproved, (nor) by one addicted to sensual
pleasures.

25. Vi. Ill, 96. 26. Gaut. XI, 2.

27. VishamaA, * partial’ (N&r.), means according to Gov., Kull.,
and RSgh. ‘ wrathful.’

28 ‘ By men with unimproved minds,’ i. e. ‘ who have not learnt
the Astras’ (Gov., Kull).

30-31. Gaut. XI, 4; Yagn. I, 308-309, 334.

VII, 3 8.

THE KING.

221

31. By him who is pure (and) faithful to his
promise, who acts according to the Institutes (of the
sacred law), who has good assistants and is wise,
punishment can be (justly) inflicted.

32. Let him act with justice in his own domain,
with rigour chastise his enemies, behave without
duplicity towards his friends, and be lenient towards
Brdhmawas.

33. The fame of a king who behaves thus, even
though he subsist by gleaning, is spread in the world,
like a drop of oil on water.

34. But the fame of a king who acts in a contrary
manner and who does not subdue himself, diminishes
in extent among men like a drop of clarified butter
in water.

35. The king has been created (to be) the protector
of the castes (var«a) and orders, who, all according
to their rank, discharge their several duties.

36. Whatever must be done by him and by his
servants for the protection of his people, that I will
fully declare to you in due order.

37. Let the king, after rising early in the morn¬
ing, worship Br£hma«as who are well versed in the
threefold sacred science and learned (in polity), and
follow their advice.

38. Let him daily worship aged Brdhma^as who
know the Veda and are pure; for he who always
worships aged men, is honoured even by Rctkshasas.

31. Pure, i. e. ‘ with respect to the acquisition of wealth,’ or ‘ not
covetous’ (Medh., Gov., Kull., Nar., Ragh.). Satyasawdha/ faithful to
his promise' (Gov., Kull., Ragh.), means according to Medh.' who
cares for truth alone.’

32. Vi. Ill, 96; Yagn. 1 , 333. 33. Vt. HI,

37-38. Vi. Ill, 76-77.

222

LAWS OF MANU.

VII, 39 *

39. Let him, though he may already be modest,
constantly learn modesty from them; for a king
who is modest never perishes.

40. Through a want of modesty many kings have
perished, together with their belongings; through
modesty even hermits in the forest have gained
kingdoms.

41. Through a want of humility Vena perished,
likewise king Nahusha, Sudds, the son of Pi^avana,
Sumukha, and Nemi.

42. But by humility Prfthu and Manu gained sove¬
reignty, Kubera the position of the Lord of wealth,
and the son of Gddhi the rank of a Brdhmawa.

• 43. From those versed in the three Vedas let him
learn the threefold (sacred science), the primeval
science of government, the science of dialectics, and
the knowledge of the (supreme) Soul; from the
people (the theory of) the (various) trades and
professions.

44. Day and night he must strenuously exert him¬
self to conquer his senses; for he (alone) who has
conquered his own senses, can keep his subjects in
obedience.

45. Let him carefully shun the ten vices, springing

41. I read with Medh., Gov., N&r., R&gh., and K., Suda// pai^a-
vanaj £aiva, instead of Sudaso yavanar £aiva (Kull.). Nand. has
Vai^avana, a mere clerical mistake. As Medh. remarks, the legends
regarding the worthies mentioned here occur in the Mahabharata.

42. The son of Gfidhi, i. e. Virvamitra; see Muir, Original
Sanskrit Texts, I, p. 83 seqq.

43. Gaut. XI, 3; Y &gH. I, 310. Nar. takes anvikshikiw ka.i-
mavidyfim to mean ‘ and the science of dialectics, i. e. the Nyaya,
Sawkhya, and so forth, which is useful for obtaining final libera¬
tion.’ Medh. too is not certain if Snvikshiki is to be taken by itself,
but proposes ‘ the science of dialectics which will be useful to him.’

45-48. Vi. Ill, 50-51.

VII, 5®*

THE KING.

223

from love of pleasure, and the eight, proceeding from
wrath, which (all) end in misery.

46. For a king who is attached to the vices
springing from love of pleasure, loses his wealth
and his virtue, but (he who is given) to those
arising from anger, (loses) even his life.

47. Hunting, gambling, sleeping by day, censori¬
ousness, (excess with) women, drunkenness, (an
inordinate love for) dancing, singing, and music,
and useless travel are the tenfold set (of vices)
springing from love of pleasure.

48. Tale-bearing, violence, treachery, envy, slan¬
dering, (unjust) seizure of property, reviling, and
assault are the eightfold set (of vices) produced by
wrath.

49- That greediness which all wise men declare
to be the root even of both these (sets), let him
carefully conquer; both sets (of vices) are produced
by that.

50. Drinking, dice, women, and hunting, these
four (which have been enumerated) in succession,
he must know to be the most pernicious in the
set that springs from love of pleasure.

51. Doing bodily injury, reviling, and the seizure
of property, these three he must know to be the
most pernicious in the set produced by wrath.

52. A self-controlled (king) should know that in
this set of seven, which prevails everywhere, each

49. * Greediness (lobha) is the root of all (these vices), because
(the king) acts in some (of these cases) from a desire for money,
and in others from a greediness of sensual pleasures 1 (Gov.).

52. Medh., Nand., and K. read StmanaA instead of Stmav&n, and
in that case the translation must be, * Let him know that in this set
• . . each earlier-named vice is more pernicious for him (than ...).’

224 LAWS OF MANU. VII, 53.

earlier-named vice is more abominable (than those
named later).

53. (On a comparison) between vice and death,-
vice is declared to be more pernicious; a vicious
man sinks to the nethermost (hell), he who dies,
free from vice, ascends to heaven.

54. Let him appoint seven or eight ministers
whose ancestors have been royal servants, who are
versed in the sciences, heroes skilled in the use of
weapons and descended from (noble) families and
who have been tried.

55. Even an undertaking easy (in itself) is (some¬
times) hard to be accomplished by a single man;
how much (harder is it for a king), especially (if he
has) no assistant, (to govern) a kingdom which yields
great revenues.

56. Let him daily consider with them the ordinary
(business, referring to) peace and war, (the four sub¬
jects called) sth&na, the revenue, the (manner of)
protecting (himself and his kingdom), and the sanc¬
tification of his gains (by pious gifts).

54. Vi. Ill, 71 ; Ya gn. I, 311. Labdhalakshan, ‘skilled in the
use of weapons’ (Kull., Nar.), means according to Medh., Gov.,
Nand., and Ragh. ‘who fail not in their undertakings/ Pari-
kshitdn (Gov., Kull., and K.), or suparikshitdn (Medh., Ndr.), ‘ who
have been tried/ i. e. by tempting them in various ways (Medh,),
or ‘if they are incorruptible’ (Nar.), or ‘who have been examined
by spies' (Gov.), or ‘ who have been bound to fidelity by touching
images of the gods, &c/ (Kull., Ragh.). Nand. reads parikshak&n,

‘ who examine (the state-affairs)/

55. The correct reading is kimu, ‘how much harder’ (Medh., Gov.,
sec, manu, Ndr., Nand., Rdgh., K.), instead of the ki m tu,‘but/ of
the editions.

56. Ydgfi, 1 ,311. Sthdna means according to Gov., Kull., Ndr.,
Rdgh. ‘ the army, the treasury, the town, and the kingdom;’ accord¬
ing to Medh. either that or ‘ the loss of his kingdom / according to
Nand. ‘ halting’ (dsana).

VII, 6 3 .

THE KING.

22 5

57. Having (first) ascertained the opinion of each
(minister) separately and (then the views) of all
together, let him do what is (most) beneficial for
him in his affairs.

58. But with the most distinguished among them
all, a learned Brdhma«a, let the king deliberate on
the most important affairs which relate to the six
measures of royal policy.

59. Let him, full of confidence, always entrust to
that (official) all business ; having taken his final
resolution with him, let him afterwards begin to act.

60. He must also appoint other officials, (men)
of integrity, (who are) wise, firm, well able to collect
money, and well tried.

61. As many persons as the due performance of
his business requires, so many skilful and clever
(men), free from sloth, let him appoint.

62. Among them let him employ the brave, the
skilful, the high-born, and the honest in (offices for
the collection of) revenue, (e.g.) in mines, manufac¬
tures, and storehouses, (but) the timid in the interior
of his palace.

63. Let him also appoint an ambassador who is
versed in all sciences, who understands hints, ex¬
pressions of the face and gestures, who is honest,
skilful, and of (noble) family.

58. Y &gn. I, 311.

60. N&r. mentions kulodgatan, ‘ of noble families,’ as a var. lect.
for avasthitin, ‘ firm.’

62. Vi. Ill, 18, 91. Medh. refers karmanta, literally ‘manage¬
ment,’ to ‘sugar-mills, distilleries, and so forthGov. and Kul'. add
‘storehouses of grain;’ NSr. explains it by ‘manufactories of orna¬
ments and weapons and so forth.’ It is, however, not impossible that
the compound fikarakarmdnte may mean ‘for superintending mine 9
and manufactories.’ Akara has very frequently that double meaning.

C>5] Q

826

LAWS OF MANU.

VII, 64.

64. (Such) an ambassador is commended to a
king (who is) loyal, honest, skilful, possessing a good
memory, who knows the (proper) place and time (for
action, who is) handsome, fearless, and eloquent.

65. The army depends on the official (placed in
charge of it), the due control (of the subjects) on the
army, the treasury and the (government of) the realm
on the king, peace and its opposite (war) on the
ambassador.

66. For the ambassador alone makes (kings’) allies
and separates allies ; the ambassador transacts that
business by which (kings) are disunited or not.

67. With respect to the affairs let the (ambassador)
explore the expression of the countenance, the ges¬
tures and actions of the (foreign king) through the
gestures and actions of his confidential (advisers),
and (discover) his designs among his servants.

68. Having learnt exactly (from his ambassador)
the designs of the foreign king, let (the king) take
such measures that he does not bring evil on himself.

64. AnuraktaA, ‘loyal’ (Medh., Gov., Ragh.), means according to
Kull. ‘who is beloved among the people.’

66. Instead of bhidyante yena va na vd, * by which (kings) are
disunited or not’ (Kull., Rdgh.), Medh., Nand., and K. read bhid¬
yante yena mdnavdA, and Gov. bhidyante yena bandhavaA, ‘ by,
which men or relatives are disunited.’

67. NigfW< 4 ehgita£esh/itai< 4 , ‘ through the gestures and actions of
his confidential (advisers),’ (Kull., Rdgh,), means according to Medh.
and Gov. ‘ by his own hidden gestures and actions,' or perhaps
‘ while suppressing all significant gestures and actions on his own
part;’ according to Nand. ‘through men who hide their own ges¬
tures and actions.’

68. Medh., Gov., Nand., and Ragh. take the verse differently.

‘ Having learnt exactly the designs of the foreign king, (the ambas¬
sador) shall take such measures that he does not bring evil on
himself (and his master).’

VII, 74 .

THE KING.

227

69. Let him settle in a country which is open and
has a dry climate, where grain is abundant, which is
chiefly (inhabited) by Aryans, not subject to epi¬
demic diseases (or similar troubles), and pleasant,
where the vassals are obedient and his own (people
easily) find their livelihood.

70. Let him build (there) a town, making for his
safety a fortress, protected by a desert, or a fortress
built of (stone and) earth, or one protected by water
or trees, or one (formed by an encampment of armed)
men or a hill-fort.

71. Let him make every effort to secure a hill-
fort, for amongst all those (fortresses mentioned) a
hill-fort is distinguished by many superior qualities.

72. The first three of those (various kinds of for¬
tresses) are inhabited by wild beasts, animals living
in holes and aquatic animals, the last three by
monkeys, men, and gods respectively,

73. As enemies do not hurt these (beings, when
they are) sheltered by (their) fortresses, even so foes
(can)not injure a king who has taken refuge in
his fort.

74. One bowman, placed on a rampart, is a match
in battle for one hundred (foes), one hundred for ten

69. Vi. Ill, 4-5; Y &gn. 1 ,320. The full definition of ^angala^,
‘which is open and has a dry climate/ is, according to a verse
quoted by Gov., Ragh., and Kull.,‘That country is called j'lhgala,
which has little water and grass, where strong breezes prevail, the
heat is great, where grain and the like are abundant.’ Anavila, ‘ not
subject to epidemic diseases (or similar troubles),’ (Kull. and Righ.),
means according to Medh. ‘where the people are not quarrelsome
according to Nar. and Nand. ‘ free from defilement such as a mix¬
ture of the castes.’

70. Vi. Ill, 6.

Q 2

228

LAWS OF MANU.

VII, 75.

thousand; hence it is prescribed (in the Astras that
a king shall possess) a fortress.

75. Let that (fort) be well supplied with weapons,
money, grain and beasts of burden, with Brihma«as,
with artisans, with engines, with fodder, and with
water.

76. Let him cause to be built for himself, in the
centre of it, a spacious palace, (well) protected,
habitable in every season, resplendent (with white¬
wash), supplied with water and trees.

77. Inhabiting that, let him wed a consort of
equal caste (varea), who possesses auspicious marks
(on her body), and is born in a great family, who
is charming and possesses beauty and excellent
qualities.

78. Let him appoint a domestic priest (purohita)
and choose officiating priests (ritvxg) ; they shall
perform his domestic rites and the (sacrifices) for
which three fires are required.

79. A king shall offer various (6rauta) sacrifices
at which liberal fees (are distributed), and in order

75. YantraM,* with engines/ i.e. ‘with catapults and so forth’
(kshepy&dibhM, Nar.), or ‘made of iron and so forth’ (Rdgh.).

76. Ap. II, 25, 2-3. Sarvartukam, ‘habitable in every season’
(N&r., Nand.), means according to Medh., Gov., Kull., and Rdgh.
‘ supplied with the produce of every season/

78. Gaut. XI, 12-18 ; Vas. XIX, 3-6; Baudh. I, 18, 7-8 ; Vi.
Ill, 70; Y8gn. I, 312-313. Medh., Gov., Ragh., and K. read, as
the sense requires, rftvi^a^, ‘ officiating priests,’ while Kull. alone
gives the singular.

79. Ap. II, 26,1; Vi. Ill, 81, 84 ; Y &gn. I, 314. ‘ Enjoyments,’
i. e.‘garlands, perfumes, unguents, and so forth’ (Medh.), or ‘ houses,
couches, and so forth’ (Gov., RSgh.), or ‘ gold, clothes, &c/ (Kull.),
or ‘wives, houses, clothes, and so forth’ (N£r.), or ‘cows and
buffalos’ (Nand.).

vn, 85.

THE KING.

229

to acquire merit, he shall give to Br£hma»as enjoy¬
ments and wealth.

80. Let him cause the annual revenue in his
kingdom to be collected by trusty (officials), let him
obey the sacred law in (his transactions with) the
people, and behave like a father towards all men.

81. For the various (branches of business) let him
appoint intelligent supervisors; they shall inspect all
(the acts) of those men who transact his business.

82. Let him honour those Brdhmawas who have
returned from their teacher’s house (after studying
the Veda); for that (money which is given) to
Brdhmawas is declared to be an imperishable trea¬
sure for kings.

83. Neither thieves nor foes can take it, nor can
it be lost; hence an imperishable store must be
deposited by kings with Br£hma#as.

84. The offering made through the mouth of
a BrfLhmawa, which is neither spilt, nor falls (on the
ground), nor ever perishes, is far more excellent than
Agnihotras.

85. A gift to one who is not a Brihma«a (yields)
the ordinary (reward; a gift) to one who calls him¬
self a Brihma^a, a double (reward); a gift to a well-

80. I, 321. * Let him obey the sacred law in (his trans¬

actions with his) people,’ i. e. ‘ let him not take higher taxes and
duties than the law permits.’

83. Y&gn. I, 314.

84. Vas. XXX, 7 ; Y&gn. I, 315. Na vyathate, * nor falls (on the
ground),’ (Gov., Nar.), means according to Hull. * nor is dried up.'
Medh. reads £yavate, ‘ falls (on the ground),’ and Nar. prefers that
reading. Nand. explains na vyadhate (sic) by ‘ is not spoilt by hairs
or insects falling into it.’ Ragh. takes it, like Knshnapandita in his
comm, on Vas. XXX, 7, in the sense of * nor causes pain.’

85. Gaut. V, 20 ; Vi. XCIII, 1-4. Samam plialam, ‘ the ordinary

230

LAWS OF MANU.

VII, 86.

read Br&hma«a, a hundred-thousandfold (reward);
(a gift) to one who knows the Veda and the Angas
(Vedap&raga, a reward) without end.

86. For according to the particular qualities of the
recipient and according to the faith (of the giver)
a small or a great reward will be obtained for a gift
in the next world.

87. A king who, while he protects his people,
is defied by (foes), be they equal in strength, or
stronger, or weaker, must not shrink from battle,
remembering the duty of Kshatriyas.

88. Not to turn back in battle, to protect the
people, to honour the Br&hmawas, is the best means
for a king to secure happiness.

89. Those kings who, seeking to slay each other
in battle, fight with the utmost exertion and do not
turn back, go to heaven.

90. When he fights with his foes in battle, let him
not strike with weapons concealed (in wood), nor
with (such as are) barbed, poisoned, or the points
of which are blazing with fire.

91. Let him not strike one who (in flight) has

reward,’ i.e. ‘just as much as the Veda promises for the object
given’ (Gov., Kull., Ragh.). Medh. takes samam in the sense of
* middling,’ and Nar. explains it by ‘ a reward equal to the kindness
shown.’ Instead of prSdhite, ‘ to a well-read Brahma«a,’ Medh.,
Gov., Ndr., and K. read iterye, ‘ to the teacher,' and Nand. rrotriye,
‘to a A’rotriya.’ Moreover, Gov., K., and Nand. have sahasra-
gunam or sahasraw .. danam, ‘ a thousandfold reward.’

87-89. Ap. II, 26, 2; Gaut. X, 16; Baudh. I, 18, 9; Vi. Ill,
43-46 ; 1 , 322-323.

90. Baudh. I, 18, 10. Kfi/aiA, ‘concealed (in wood),’ (Medh.,
Gov., Kull., N&r., Ragh.), means according to Nand. ‘ treacherous.’

91-93. Ap. II,io,ii; Gaut. X,18; Baudh. 1,18,n1,325.

91. Sthal&rArfAam, ‘ one who (in flight) has climbed on an emi¬
nence’ (NSr.), means according to Medh., Kull., and R$gh. * one

VII, 97 .

THE KING.

23I

climbed on an eminence, nor a eunuch, nor one who
joins the palms of his hands (in supplication), nor
one who (flees) with flying hair, nor one who sits
down, nor one who says ‘ I am thine

92. Nor one who sleeps, nor one who has lost his
coat of mail, nor one who is naked, nor one who is
disarmed, nor one who looks on without taking part
in the fight, nor one who is fighting with another (foe);

93. Nor one whose weapons are broken, nor one
afflicted (with sorrow), nor one who has been griev¬
ously wounded, nor one who is in fear, nor one who
has turned to flight; (but in all these cases let him)
remember the duty (of honourable warriors).

94. But the (Kshatriya) who is slain in battle,
while he turns back in fear, takes upon himself all
the sin of his master, whatever (it may be);

95. And whatever merit (a man) who is slain in
flight may have gained for the next (world), all that
his master takes.

96. Chariots and horses, elephants, parasols,
money, grain, cattle, women, all sorts of (market¬
able) goods and valueless metals belong to him who
takes them (singly) conquering (the possessor).

97. A text of the Veda (declares) that (the
soldiers) shall present a choice portion (of the booty)
to the king; what has not been taken singly, must
be distributed by the king among all the soldiers.

who has alighted on the ground,’ i. e. ‘ while the assailant stands on
his chariot.’

92. Medh. mentions a var. lect. bhagnam, ‘ who is broken’ (?),
for nagnam, ‘ who is naked.’

94-95. YS^n. I, 324. 9 6 “97- Gant. X, 20-23.

97. According to the commentators the Vedic text alluded to
is Aitareya-br&hmawa III, 21.

232

LAWS OF MANU.

VII, 98.

98. Thus has been declared the blameless, primeval
law for warriors; from this law a Kshatriya must not
depart, when he strikes his foes in battle.

99. Let him strive to gain what he has not yet
gained; what he has gained let him carefully pre¬
serve ; let him augment what he preserves, and
what he has augmented let him bestow on worthy
men.

100. Let him know that these are the four means
for sequring the aims of human (existence); let him,
without ever tiring, properly employ them.

101. What he has not (yet) gained, let him seek
(to gain) by (his) army ; what he has gained, let him
protect by careful attention; what he has protected,
.let him augment by (various modes of) increasing

it; and what he has augmented, let him liberally
bestow (on worthy men).

102. Let him be ever ready to strike, his prowess
constantly displayed, and his secrets constantly con¬
cealed, and let him constantly explore the weaknesses
of his foe.

103. Of him who is always ready to strike, the
whole world stands in awe; let him therefore make
all creatures subject to himself even by the employ¬
ment of force.

104. Let him ever act without guile, and on no

99. Y&gri. I, 316; Vas. XVI, 6.

101. Medh., Gov., Ragh., Nand., and K. read at the end of the
verse pStreshu nikshipet, * let him bestow on worthy recipients,’ and
this may have been Kull.’s reading too.

102. Nityam udyatada«</aA syat, Met him be always ready to
strike’ (NSr., Nand.), means according to Medh., Gov., and Kull.

‘ let him keep his army always ready or exercised.’

X04. I read with Gov., Ndr., Nand., Righ., and K., susa«m'ta/$,

‘ carefully guarding himself.’ Medh. reads atandrita^, * untired.'

vn, 112.

THE KING.

233

account treacherously; carefully guarding himself,
let him always fathom the treachery which his foes
employ.

105. His enemy must not know his weaknesses,
but he must know the weaknesses of his enemy; as
the tortoise (hides its limbs), even so let him secure
the members (of his government against treachery),
let him protect his own weak points.

106. Let him plan his undertakings (patiently
meditating) like a heron; like a lion, let hyn put
forth his strength; like a wolf, let him snatch (his
prey); like a hare, let him double in retreat.

107. When he is thus engaged in conquest, let
him subdue all the opponents whom he may find,
by the (four) expedients, conciliation and the rest.

108. If they cannot be stopped by the three first
expedients, then let him, overcoming them by force
alone, gradually bring them to subjection.

109. Among the four expedients, conciliation and
the rest, the learned always recommend conciliation
and (the employment of) force for the prosperity of
kingdoms.

no. As the weeder plucks up the weeds and
preserves the corn, even so let the king protect
his kingdom and destroy his opponents.

hi. That king who through folly rashly oppresses
his kingdom, (will), together with his relatives, ere
long be deprived of his life and of his kingdom.

112. As the lives of living creatures are destroyed
by tormenting their bodies, even so the lives of kings
are destroyed by their oppressing their kingdoms.

106. The position of the second and fourth clauses is interchanged
according to Medh., Gov., Nand.

234

LAWS OF MANU.

VII, 113.

113. In governing his kingdom let him always
observe the (following) rules; for a king who governs
his kingdom well, easily prospers.

114. Let him place a company of soldiers, com¬
manded (by a trusty officer), in the midst of two,
three, five or hundreds of villages, (to be) a protec¬
tion of the kingdom.

115. Let him appoint a lord over (each) village,
as well as lords of ten villages, lords of twenty, lords
of a hundred, and lords of a thousand.

116. The lord of one village himself shall inform
the lord of ten villages of the crimes committed in
his village, and the ruler of ten (shall make his re¬
port) to the ruler of twenty.

117. But the ruler of twenty shall report all such
(matters) to the lord of a hundred, and the lord of
a hundred shall himself give information to the lord
of a thousand.

118. Those (articles) which the villagers ought
to furnish daily to the king, such as food, drink, and
fuel, the lord of one village shall obtain.

114. Kull. says, ‘ in the midst of two, three, or five hundred vil¬
lages.’ Nar. remarks that the plural ‘hundreds’ is used in order
to leave the number doubtful. It is, however, not impossible that
here, as elsewhere in ancient Sanskrit, jatdndm means ‘a hundred.’
Medh. explains sawgraha, ‘ protection,’ by ‘ an official,’ or ‘ a royal
granary.' Gov. states correctly that the pickets mentioned are the
so-called SthSnakas, the Thitii s of modern India.

115-124. Ap. II, 26, 4-5; Vi. Ill, 7-15; Y&gn. I, 337.

116. The rule refers, as Medh., Gov., Kull., and R&gh. remark,
to offences with which the persons who report them, are unable to
deal. Nar. thinks that chiefly refusals to pay the revenue or dis¬
putes on such matters are meant.

118. The lord of one village is apparently the modern Pd/fl, the
Pa//aktla or Gr&makft/a of the inscriptions, and the articles to be
furnished to him the so-called c haks.* The other officials correspond

VII, 124 .

THE KING.

235

119. The ruler of ten (villages) shall enjoy one
kula (as much land as suffices for one family), the
ruler of twenty five kulas, the superintendent of
a hundred villages (the revenues of) one village,
the lord of a thousand (the revenues of) a town.

120. The affairs of these (officials), which are
connected with (their) villages and their separate
business, another minister of the king shall inspect,
(who must be) loyal and never remiss;

121. And in each town let him appoint one super¬
intendent of all affairs, elevated in rank, formidable,
(resembling) a planet among the stars.

122. Let that (man) always personally visit by
turns all those (other officials); let him properly
explore their behaviour in their districts through
spies (appointed to) each.

123. For the servants of the king, who are
appointed to protect (the people), generally become
knaves who seize the property of others; let him
protect his subjects against such (men).

124. Let the king confiscate the whole property of

to the modern Naib-sfibas, SGbas, or Mahalkaris, M&mlatdars, and
so forth, and to the Vishayapatis, Rdsh/rapatis, Ra^asth&niyas, &c. of
the inscriptions.

119. Kulam, 4 (as much land as suffices for one) family/ is really
a technical term which Medh. explains by gha«/a, a term known
‘ in some districts/ Gov., Kull., N&r., and R&gh. state that it is the
double of a ‘ middling plough/ i. e. as much as can be cultivated
with twelve oxen, while Nand. interprets it by ‘the share of one
cultivator/

120. N&r. explains prfthakkSrySwi, ‘separate affairs/ by ‘quarrels
among each otherNand. by ‘ the separate affairs of the villagers/
Snigdha^, ‘ loyal' (Kull., R&gh.), means according to Medh. ‘ im¬
partial/

121. Graham, ‘a planet* (Kull., R&gh.), or ‘the planet Mars'
(Medh.), or ‘the sun' (Gov.), or ‘the moon' (N&r.).

236 LAWS OF MANU. VII, i2j£

those (officials) who, evil-minded, may take money
from suitors, and banish them.

125. For women employed in the royal service
and for menial servants, let him fix a daily main¬
tenance, in proportion to their position and to their
work.

126. One pa«a must be given (daily) as wages
to the lowest, six to the highest, likewise clothing
every six months and one dro«a of grain every
month.

127. Having well considered (the rates of) pur¬
chase and (of) sale, (the length of) the road, (the
expense for) food and condiments, the charges of
securing the goods, let the king make the traders
pay duty.

128. After (due) consideration the king shall
always fix in his realm the duties and taxes in
such a manner that both he himself and the man
who does the work receive (their due) reward.

129. As the leech, the calf, and the bee take
their food little by little, even so must the king
draw from his realm moderate annual taxes.

130. A fiftieth part of (the increments on) cattle

126. ‘One pa»a;’ see below, VIII, 136. ‘A drowa,'i.e. ‘four
takas’ (Medh., Kull., Ragh.), or ‘512 palas’ (Gov.); see below,
VIII, 135. Gov., Kull., N&r., and Ragh. state that the highest ser¬
vants shall receive six times as much grain and clothes as the
lowest, and they add that the middle-class servants, of course,
receive three times as much as the lowest,

127. ‘ The food and condiments,’ i.e. ‘what is consumed by the
people employed by the merchants.’ According to Kull. and Nfir.,
yoga means ‘ the net profits,’ and kshema ‘ the charges for securing
the goods against robbers and so forth.’ According to Medh., Gov.,
and High., the whole compound denotes the latter charges alone.

130-132. Ap. II, 26,9; Gaut. X, 24-27; Vas. XIX, 26-27;
Baudh. 1 ,18,1,13,15; Vi. Ill, 22-25, 29-30.

vn, i 37 .

THE KING.

237

and gold may be taken by the king, and the eighth,
sixth, or twelfth part of the crops.

131. He may also take the sixth part of trees,
meat, honey, clarified butter, perfumes, (medical)
herbs, substances used for flavouring food, flowers,
roots, and fruit;

132. Of leaves, pot-herbs, grass, (objects) made
of cane, skins, of earthen vessels, and all (articles)
made of stone.

133. Though dying (with want), a king must not
levy a tax on .Srotriyas, and no 6rotriya, residing
in his kingdom, must perish from hunger.

134. The kingdom of that king, in whose domi¬
nions a .Srotriya pines with hunger, will even, ere
long, be afflicted by famine.

135. Having ascertained his learning in the Veda
and (the purity of) his conduct, the king shall pro¬
vide for him means of subsistence in accordance with
the sacred law, and shall protect him in every way,
as a father (protects) the lawful son of his body.

136. Whatever meritorious acts (such a Brih-
ma«a) performs under the full protection of the
king, thereby the king’s length of life, wealth, and
kingdom increase.

137. Let the king make the common inhabitants
of his realm who live by traffic, pay annually some
trifle, which is called a tax.

132. Medh. and Kull. add * from the profits (made on the seven¬
teen articles enumerated).’

133. Ap. II, 26, 10; 25,11; Gaut. X, 9; Vas. XIX, 23; Vi.
Ill, 26, 79.

135-136. Y&gii. Ill, 44.

137. Prrthagganaw,‘the common inhabitants,’i. e. small dealer?
in vegetables, leaves, and so forth (Kull., Ragh.), or iir cakes (Gov.).

LAWS OF MANU.

VII, 138.

238

138. Mechanics and artisans, as well as ►S'&dras
who subsist by manual labour, he may cause to
work (for himself) one (day) in each month.

139. Let him not cut up his own root (by levying
no taxes), nor the root of other (men) by excessive
greed; for by cutting up his own root (or theirs),
he makes himself or them wretched.

140. Let the king, having carefully considered
(each) affair, be both sharp and gentle; for a king
who is both sharp and gentle is highly respected.

141. When he is tired with the inspection of the
business of men, let him place on that seat (of
justice) his chief minister, (who must be) acquainted
with the law, wise, self-controlled, and descended
from a (noble) family.

142. Having thus arranged all the affairs (of)
his (government), he shall zealously and carefully
protect his subjects.

143. That (monarch) whose subjects are carried
off by robbers (Dasyu) from his kingdom, while
they loudly call (for help), and he and his ser¬
vants are (quietly) looking on, is a dead and not
a living (king).

144. The highest duty of a Kshatriya is to pro¬
tect his subjects, for the king who enjoys the
rewards, just mentioned, is bound to (discharge
that) duty.

145. Having risen in the last watch of the night,
having performed (the rite of) personal purification,

138. Gaut. X, 31; Vas. XIX, 28; Vi. Ill, 32.

141. Vi. Ill, 73-74; Y &gn. II, 1-3. Medh. reads jantam, ‘of
a tranquil disposition,’ for pra^uam, * wise.’

1 4 2-144. Ap. II, 10, 6 ; Gaut. X, 7-8; Vas. XIX, 1 ; Baudh. I,
18,1; Vi. Ill, 1; Y &gn. I, 334 - 335 *

VII, 15 *-

THE KING.

239

having, with a collected mind, offered oblations in the
fire, and having worshipped Br&hmawas, he shall enter
the hall of audience which must possess the marks
(considered) auspicious (for a dwelling).

146. Tarrying there, he shall gratify all subjects
(who come to see him by a kind reception) and
afterwards dismiss them; having dismissed his
subjects, he shall take counsel with his ministers.

147. Ascending the back of a hill or a terrace,
(and) retiring (there) in a lonely place, or in a solitary
forest, let him consult with them unobserved.

148. That king whose secret plans other people,
(though) assembled (for the purpose), do not dis¬
cover, (will) enjoy the whole earth, though he be
poor in treasure.

149. At the time of consultation let him cause to
be removed idiots, the dumb, the blind, and the
deaf, animals, very aged men, women, barbarians,
the sick, and those deficient in limbs.

150. (Such) despicable (persons), likewise animals,
and particularly women betray secret council; for
that reason he must be careful with respect to
them.

151. At midday or at midnight, when his mental
and bodily fatigues are over, let him deliberate,
either with himself alone or with his (ministers), on
virtue, pleasure, and wealth,

152. On (reconciling) the attainment of these

147-148. Yign. I, 343.

147. NL$saldke r ‘solitary’ (Nar., Kull., Ragh.), means according
to Medh., Gov., and Nand. * free from grass and so forth.’

149. ‘Animals,’ i.e. ‘parrots, starlings, and other talking birds’
(Kull., Gov., Ragh., Nand.), ‘for such creatures divulge secret
plans’ (Medh.).

240

LAWS OF MANU.

vxi, 153-

(aims) which are opposed to each other, on be¬
stowing his daughters in marriage, and on keeping
his sons (from harm),

153. On sending ambassadors, on the completion
of undertakings (already begun), on the behaviour
of (the women in) his harem, and on the doings of
his spies.

154. On the whole eightfold business and the
five classes (of spies), on the goodwill or enmity
and the conduct of the circle (of neighbours he
must) carefully (reflect).

155. On the conduct of the middlemost (prince),
on the doings of him who seeks conquest, on the
behaviour of the neutral (king), and (on that) of the
foe (let him) sedulously (meditate).

154. 4 The eightfold business’ consists according to Medh. either
of * conciliation, division, employment of force, gifts,’ or 4 of agri¬
culture, trade, building bridges and embankments, building fort¬
resses or repairing them, catching elephants, digging mines, settling
desert districts, cutting down forests/ or 4 of collecting revenue, ex¬
penditure, dismissing bad servants, prohibiting bad conduct on the
part of the castes and orders, deciding difficult points in one’s own
affairs, deciding legal cases, punishing, and imposing penances.’
The second explanation, which is said to belong to Antaka (Yama),
is adopted by Nand.; the third, which is taken from the Nitwastra
of Ufanas, by Gov., Kull., Ndr., and Ragh. 4 The five classes (of
spies)/ i. e. 4 kdrpa/ika, a pilgrim or a rogue, an ascetic who has
violated his vows, a distressed agriculturist, a decayed merchant,
and a fictitious devotee’ (Medh., Gov., Kull, Rdgh.). Ndr. and
Nand. explain panto varga by 4 the collection of the five (requisites
for an undertaking)/ Regarding 4 the circle/ see the following
verses.

I 55 -I 59 > Vi. 38; Y&gn. I, 344.

155. ‘The middlemost prince’ is he whose territory lies between
that of the king seeking conquest and that of his foe, and who,
though unable to resist both, may become dangerous to them when
they are at war with each other ; see Kdmandaki, Nitisdra VIII, i 8 ,
which passage the commentators quote- * The foe’ may be of three

VJI, 161 .

THE KING.

241

156. These (four) constituents (prakmi, form),
briefly (speaking), the foundation of the circle (of
neighbours); besides, eight others are enumerated
(in the Institutes of Polity) and (thus) the (total) is
declared to be twelve.

157. The minister, the kingdom, the fortress, the
treasury, and the army are five other (constituent
elements of the circle); for, these are mentioned in
connexion with each (of the first twelve; thus the
whole circle consists), briefly (speaking, of) seventy-
two (constituent parts).

158. Let (the king) consider as hostile his imme¬
diate neighbour and the partisan of (such a) foe, as
friendly the immediate neighbour of his foe, and as
neutral (the king) beyond those two.

159. Let him overcome all of them by means of
the (four) expedients, conciliation and the rest, (em¬
ployed) either singly or conjointly, (or) by bravery
and policy (alone).

160. Let him constantly think of the six measures
of royal policy (gu«a, viz.) alliance, war, marching,
halting, dividing the army, and seeking protection.

161. Having carefully considered the business (in
hand), let him resort to sitting quiet or marching,

kinds, 4 natural/ 4 artificial* (i. e. one who has a particular reason for
his enmity), and ‘an immediate neighbour* (see below, verse 158).

156. 4 The eight other constituents* are according to Kdmandaki
VIII, 16-17, (a) in front beyond the foe*s territory, 1. a friend,
2. the foe’s friend, 3. the friend’s friend, 4. the foe’s friend’s friend;
(b) in the rear, 1. he who attacks in the rear (p£rshwigr£ha), 2. he
who restrains the latter (akranda), 3, 4. the supporters of these two.
All the commentators except Medh. quote Kamandaki more or less
correctly. Kamandaki VIII, 24 states that this doctrine, with respect
to the constituent parts of the system of states which requires the
attention of each king, is peculiar to the M&navas.

160-161. Vi. Ill, 39; YI, 345 - 346 *

[25] R

LAWS OF MANU.

VII, 162.

242

alliance or war, dividing his forces or seeking pro¬
tection (as the case may require).

162. But the king must know that there are two
kinds of alliances and of wars, (likewise two) of both
marching and sitting quiet, and two (occasions for)
seeking protection.

163. An alliance which yields present and future
advantages, one must know to be of two descriptions,
(viz.) that when one marches together (with an ally)
and the contrary (when the allies act separately).

164. War is declared to be of two kinds, (viz.)
that which is undertaken in season or out of season,
by oneself and for one's own purposes, and (that
waged to avenge) an injury done to a friend.

165. Marching (to attack) is said to be twofold,
(viz. that undertaken) by one alone when an urgent
matter has suddenly arisen, and (that undertaken)
by one allied with a friend.

163. Medh. proposes besides the explanation given above

another, ‘ An alliance one must know to be of two kinds, (viz.) that
where (the allies) share the danger and the fruits of the expedition
and the contrary* (yanaphalasahitau samanaphalabhd-

gitayd na k& tvay&ham uttambhaniyo yatnato lipsite tatas tava
bh£go bhavishyati). N&r. thinks that the adjective tadatv&yatisaw-
yukta^, too, refers to two different cases, and means ‘ which yields
either immediate or future advantages.* Nand. adopts the latter
view as well as Medh.*s second explanation of the first part of
the verse.

164. Regarding the expression ‘in season,* see below, verse 182.
Medh. takes ‘out of season* with the second clause, ‘and (that
waged) out of season (in order to avenge) an injury done to a friend.*
He also mentions a var. lect. mitrew&pakrfte (which Gov. has
adopted), with the following explanation, * and that waged out of
season when the enemy has been weakened by an ally.* Gov.
agrees with this latter view except that he takes ak&le with the first
clause. The other commentators give the explanation adopted in
the translation.

VII, 170.

THE KING. .

243

166. Sitting quiet is stated to be of two kinds,
(viz. that incumbent) on one who has gradually been
weakened by fate or in consequence of former acts,
and (that) in favour of a friend.

167. If the army stops (in one place) and its
master (in another) in order to effect some purpose,
that is called by those acquainted with the virtues
of the measures of royal policy, the twofold division
of the forces.

168. Seeking refuge is declared to be of two
kinds, (first) for the purpose of attaining an ad¬
vantage when one is harassed by enemies, (secondly)
in order to become known among the virtuous (as
the proteg6 of a powerful king).

169. When (the king) knows (that) at some future
time his superiority (is) certain, and (that) at the
time present (he will suffer) little injury, then let
him have recourse to peaceful measures.

170. But when he thinks all his subjects to be

166. Pfirvakri'tena , 1 in consequence of former acts/ i. e. ‘in con¬
sequence of acts committed in a former existence, or in consequence
of former imprudence* (Medh., Gov., Kull.). Nand. and R&gh. give
only the second explanation; Nar. says * by an enemy whom he
formerly made/

167. The text really mentions only one method of ‘division/
Hence Medh. thinks that, in order to obtain the two kinds required,
it must be understood that the measure may be resorted to either for
one’s own sake or for the sake of somebody else. Nar. makes the
two methods out by supposing that in the one case the army stops
in front of the enemy under the command of a general, while the
king marches with a portion of his forces, and that in the other
case the contrary takes place. Gov., after giving the explanation
adopted in the translation, quotes K&mandaki, Nitisara XI, 24,
where a different meaning, ‘duplicity/ is attributed to the term dvai-
dhibhdva. Nand/s whole explanation consists of this quotation.

170. I read with all the commentators and K., prahnsh/a instead
of prakn’sh/d (editions).

R 2

244 LAW S OF MANU. VII, 171.

exceedingly contented, and (that he) himself (is)
most exalted (in power), then let him make war.

171. When he knows his own army to be cheerful
in disposition and strong, and (that) of his enemy the
reverse, then let him march against his foe.

172. But if he is very weak in chariots and beasts
of burden and in troops, then let him carefully sit
quiet, gradually conciliating his foes.

173. When the king knows the enemy to be
stronger in every respect, then let him divide his
army and thus achieve his purpose.

174. But when he is very easily assailable by the
forces of the enemy, then let him quickly seek refuge
with a righteous, powerful king.

175. That (prince) who will coerce both his (dis¬
loyal) subjects and the army of the foe, let him ever
serve with every effort like a Guru.

176. When, even in that (condition), he sees (that)
evil is caused by (such) protection, let him without
hesitation have recourse to war.

177. By all (the four) expedients a politic prince
must arrange (matters so) that neither friends, nor
neutrals, nor foes are superior to himself.

178. Let him fully consider the future and the
immediate results of all undertakings, and the good
and bad sides of all past (actions).

179. He who knows the good and the evil (which
will result from his acts) in the future, is quick in
forming resolutions for the present, and under¬
stands the consequences of past (actions), will not
be conquered.

176. I read with Gov. and K. sa yuddham instead of suyuddham
(Medh., Kull., Righ., Nand.), * let him fight bravely.’

VII, i8s.

THE KING.

245

180. Let him arrange everything in such a manner
that no ally, no neutral or foe may injure him; that
is the sum of political wisdom.

181. But if the king undertakes an expedition
against a hostile kingdom, then let him gradually
advance, in the following manner, against his foe’s
capital.

182. Let the king undertake his march in the
fine month Mdrgai'irsha, or towards the months of
Phftlguna and A'aitra, according to the (condition
of his) army.

183. Even at other times, when he has a certain
prospect of victory, or when a disaster has befallen
his foe, he may advance to attack him.

184. But having duly arranged (all affairs) in his
original (kingdom) and what relates to the expedi¬
tion, having secured a basis (for his operations) and
having duly dispatched his spies ;

185. Having cleared the three kinds of roads, and
(having made) his sixfold army (efficient), let him
leisurely proceed in the manner prescribed for war¬
fare against the enemy’s capital.

182. Vi. Ill, 40; Y &gn. I, 347. ‘Fine,’ i.0.‘when fodder and
grain are abundant and the roads dry’ (Gov., Kull., Ragh.).
Marga/irsha, i. e. November-December; Phalguna, i. e. February-
March; ATaitra, i. e. March-April.

184. ‘Having secured a basis (for his operations),’ i.e. ‘having
won over the servants of his foe who may be at enmity with their
master’ (Medh.,Gov.,Kull., Ragh.), or ‘having established a camp
in the country which he intends to attack’ (Nar.).

185. ‘ The three kinds of roads,’ L e. ‘ through the open country,
through marshy ground or such as is cut by watercourses, and
through forests’ (^angalanfjpa/avika), (Medh., Gov., Kull., R£gh.,
Nand.). Nar. gives the same explanation, but adds that the proper
interpretation is ‘ through villages, forests, and hills.' ‘ The sixfold
army,’ i. e. consisting of ‘elephants, horses, chariots, infantry, the

246

LAWS OF MANU.

VII, 186.

186. Let him be very much on his guard against
a friend who secretly serves the enemy and against
(deserters) who return (from the enemy’s camp); for
such (men are) the most dangerous foes.

187. Let him march on his road, arraying (his
troops) like a staff (i.e. in an oblong), or like a waggon
(i.e. in a wedge), or like a boar (i.e. in a rhombus),
or like a Makara (i.e. in two triangles, with the apices
joined), or like a pin (i. e. in a long line), or like a
GarWa (i. e. in a rhomboid with far-extended wings).

188. From whatever (side) he apprehends danger,
in that (direction) let him extend his troops, and let
him always himself encamp in an array, shaped like
a lotus.

189. Let him allot to the commander-in-chief, to
the (subordinate) general, (and to the superior officers)
places in all directions, and let him turn his front
in that direction whence he fears danger.

general, and workmen’ (Medh., Gov., Kull., Ragh.). Medh. adds
that some name as the fifth component ‘the treasury,’ and that
others explain the term by ‘the sixfold division, mentioned by
Kamandi,’ Nitisara XVI, 6. The latter view is adopted by Nand.
Nar. enumerates besides elephants, horses, chariots, and infantry,
the riders on elephants and sastropanayakas (?).

187. The details regarding the various ways of arranging the
troops are found in the Kdmandaki, Nitisara XIX.

188. My translation of the last clause follows Gov., Nar., and
R£gh. Medh. says that the king shall leave the town with his army
in the lotus-array, and Kull. speaks of a ‘feigned encampment’
(kapa/aniveranawz kuryat). The lotus-array is stated to be ‘ equally
extended on all sides and perfectly circular, the centre being
occupied by the king.’

189. Medh. remarks that, as the subordinate general and the
commander-in-chief are only two persons, they cannot possibly be
stationed ‘ in all directions,’ as the text prescribes, and that hence
their servants (i. e. the superior officers) must also be intended. "

VII, 195- THE KING. 247

190. On all sides let him place troops of soldiers,
on whom he can rely, with whom signals have been
arranged, who are expert both in sustaining a charge
and in charging, fearless and loyal.

191. Let him make a small number of soldiers
fight in close order, at his pleasure let him extend
a large number in loose ranks; or let him make
them fight, arranging (a small number) in the needle-
array, (and a large number) in the thunderbolt-array.

192. On even ground let him fight with chariots
and horses, in water-bound places with boats and
elephants, on (ground) covered with trees and shrubs
with bows, on hilly ground with swords, targets, (and
other) weapons.

193. (Men born in) Kurukshetra, Matsyas, Pa n-
£alas, and those born in .SYirasena, let him cause to
fight in the van of the battle, as well as (others who
are) tall and light.

194. After arranging his troops, he should en¬
courage them (by an address) and carefully inspect
them; he should also mark the behaviour (of the
soldiers) when they engage the enemy.

195. When he has shut up his foe (in a town);
let him sit encamped, harass his kingdom, and con¬
tinually spoil his grass, food, fuel, and water.

190. Nar. explains gulman, ‘troops of soldiers,’ by gulmade-
jasthSn, ‘(soldiers) standing in thickets’ (?).

192. Sthale, ‘on hilly ground’ (nimnonnate, Righ.), means
according to Medh., Gov., and Kull. ‘ on ground free from stones,
trees, creepers, thorns, pits, and the like.’

193. Kurukshetra, i.e. the neighbourhood of Delhi; Matsyas,
i. e, the inhabitants of Baira/a or Vaira/a, north of Jepur (Bhoga-
pure, Medh.); Pan&ilas, i. e. the inhabitants of KSnyakub^a (Ka-
no g ); Sfirasenas, i. e. the inhabitants of the country near MathurS.
(AhiMatra, Gov.).

248

LAWS OF MANU.

VII, 196.

196. Likewise let him destroy the tanks, ramparts,
and ditches, and let him assail the (foe unawares)
and alarm him at night.

197. Let him instigate to rebellion those who are
open to such instigations, let him be informed of
his (foe’s) doings, and, when fate is propitious, let
him fight without fear, trying to conquer.

198. He should (however) try to conquer his
foes by conciliation, by (well-applied) gifts, and by
creating dissension, used either separately or con¬
jointly, never by fighting, (if it can be avoided.)

199. For when two (princes) fight, victory and
defeat in the battle are, as experience teaches,
uncertain; let him therefore avoid an engagement.

200. (But) if even those three before-mentioned
expedients fail, then let him, duly exerting himself,
fight in such a manner that he may completely
conquer his enemies.

201. When he has gained victory, let him duly
worship the gods and honour righteous Br&hma«as,
let him grant exemptions, and let him cause promises
of safety to be proclaimed.

201-205. Vi. Ill, 47-49; Y kgn. I, 342, 348-351.

201. ‘The gods,’ i.e. of the conquered country. - PariMr&n,

‘ exemptions,’ i. e. ‘ from taxes and dues for a year or two’ (Medh.,
Nand.), means according to Gov, ‘gifts to .Srotriyas and others’
(rrotriyadigatSvaryadaneshu mayaitad anu^natam ity evam); ac¬
cording to Kull. ‘ gifts to gods and Br&hmawasaccording to Nar.

‘ Agraharas or villages presented to Brahmarcas;’ according to
R&gh. ‘ gifts of clothes and ornaments to the inhabitants.’ The
term parihSra occurs very frequently in the inscriptions (see e. g.
Arch. Reports of Western India, vol. iv, p. 104 seq.), and means,
as the details adduced there show, 1 exemption from taxes and pay¬
ments as well as other immunities.’ These pariharas were regularly
attached to all grants to Brihmawas or temples. In our passage a,
general temporary remission of the taxes is probably intended.

VII, aoy.

THE KING.

249

202. But having fully ascertained the wishes of
all the (conquered), let him place there a relative
of the (vanquished ruler on the throne), and let him
impose his conditions.

203. Let him make authoritative the lawful (cus¬
toms) of the (inhabitants), just as they are stated (to
be), and let him honour the (new king) and his chief
servants with precious gifts.

204. The seizure of desirable property which
causes displeasure, and its distribution which causes
pleasure, are both recommendable, (if they are) re¬
sorted to at the proper time.

205. All undertakings (in) this (world) depend
both on the ordering of fate and on human exertion;
but among these two (the ways of) fate are unfathom¬
able ; in the case of man’s work action is possible.

206. Or (the king, bent on conquest), considering
a friend, gold, and land (to be) the triple result (of
an expedition), may, using diligent care, make peace
with (his foe) and return (to his realm).

207. Having paid due attention to any king in
the circle (of neighbouring states) who might attack
him in the rear, and to his supporter who opposes

20g. Yagii. I, 348. ‘ Action,’ i. e. ‘ careful investigation,’ hence

one should strive to attain one's ends by exertion (Gov., Kull.), or
‘remedial action' (pratikriyd, Nar.), or ‘an effort' (purushak&ra,
Ragh.). Nand. takes the last clause differently, ‘if there is a
human effort, the action of fate takes place’ (manushe purushakare
sati daivasya kriyi vidyate).

206. According to Gov., Kull., and N&r. the meaning is that, if
the foe is willing to make an alliance, to pay tribute, and to cede some
territory, the king, bent on conquest, may also make peace with him
without actually fighting and return home. In the MSS. of Medh.
this and the next verses down to verse 211 are wanting, and the
commentary on verse 211 is partly given.

207. The meaning of the verse is according to Gov., Kull, and

250

LAWS OF MANU.

Vn,ao8.

the latter, let (the conqueror) secure the fruit of the
expedition from (the prince whom he attacks), whether
(he may have become) friendly or (remained) hostile.

208. By gaining gold and land a king grows not
so much in strength as by obtaining a firm friend,
(who), though weak, (may become) powerful in the
future.

209. A weak friend (even) is greatly commended,
who is righteous (and) grateful, whose people are
contented, who is attached and persevering in his
undertakings.

210. The wise declare him (to be) a most dangerous
foe, who is wise, of noble race, brave, clever, liberal,
grateful, and firm.

211. Behaviour worthy of an Aryan, knowledge
of men, bravery, a compassionate disposition, and
great liberality are the virtues of a neutral (who
may be courted).

212. Let the king, without hesitation, quit for his
own sake even a country (which is) salubrious, fertile,
and causing an increase of cattle.

R&gh. that the king, bent on conquest, shall secure his back before
he undertakes an expedition. The prince immediately in his rear,
who in the terms of the Niti is called the parshtfigraha, * the heel-
catcher,’ may be supposed to be hostile to him and may be expected
to invade his territory during his absence. It is, therefore, essential
for the conqueror either to settle matters with him beforehand, or
to secure the support of the next neighbour of the p£rshmgr&ha,
who is technically called the akranda and may be supposed to be
inclined to check the pirshaigriha.

208. Y Sign. I, 351.

211. Sthaulalakshyam,‘great liberality ’(Kull.,N£r.,R&gh.,Nand.),
i$ explained, as Kull, asserts, by Medh. and Gov. ‘being not sharp-
sighted.’ The Government copy of Gov. has, however, just the
contrary, sflkshmadanitvam. Medh.’s explanation is not deci¬
pherable. |

VII, 318 .

THE KING.

251

213. For times of need let him preserve his wealth;
at the expense of his wealth let him preserve his
wife; let him at all events preserve himself even by
(giving up) his wife and his wealth.

214. A wise (king), seeing that all kinds of mis¬
fortunes violently assail him at the same time,
should try all (the four) expedients, be it together or
separately, (in order to save himself.)

215. On the person who employs the expedients,
on the business to be accomplished, and on all the
expedients collectively, on these three let him ponder
and strive to accomplish his ends.

216. Having thus consulted with his ministers
on all these (matters), having taken exercise, and
having bathed afterwards, the king may enter the
harem at midday in order to dine.

217. There he may eat food, (which has been
prepared) by faithful, incorruptible (servants) who
know the (proper) time (for dining), which has been
well examined (and hallowed) by sacred texts that
destroy poison.

218. Let him mix all his food with medicines
(that are) antidotes against poison, and let him
always be careful to wear gems which destroy
poison.

215. ‘The person who employs the expedients,’i.e.‘himself’
(Gov., Kull., Nar., Righ.); ‘his minister or the like’ (Nand.).
Arritya, ‘let him ponder on’ (manasa baldbaladidvara nirlitya,
Nar., Ragh.), means according to Medh., Gov., Kull. ‘let him
depend on.’

217-220. Vi. Ill, 85,87-88; Y&gfi. I, 326.

218. Medh., Gov., Nar., and Nand. read ne^ayet, and R&gh. jq-
dhayet, ‘ let him purify,’instead of yo^ayet (Kull., K.), ‘let him mix.'
N&r. explains niyataA (Medh., Ndr., Ragh.) or prayata 4 , ‘careful’
(yatnavan, Gov., Kull., R&gh.), by ‘ being pure.’

252 LAWS OF MANU. VII, 419.

219. Well-tried females whose toilet and orna¬
ments have been examined, shall attentively serve
him with fans, water, and perfumes.

220. In like manner let him be careful about
his carriages, bed, seat, bath, toilet, and all his
ornaments.

221. When he has dined, he may divert himself
with his wives in the harem; but when he has
diverted himself, he must, in due time, again think
of the affairs of state.

222. Adorned (with his robes of state), let him
again inspect his fighting men, all his chariots and
beasts of burden, the weapons and accoutrements.

223. Having performed his twilight-devotions, let
him, well armed, hear in an inner apartment the
doings of those who make secret reports and of
his spies.

224. But going to another secret apartment and
dismissing those people, he may enter the harem,
surrounded by female (servants), in order to dine
again.

225. Having eaten there something for the second
time, and having been recreated by the sound of
music, let him go to rest and rise at the proper time
free from fatigue.

226. A king who is in good health must observe
these rules; but, if he is indisposed, he may entrust
all this (business) to his servants.

223. Yagn. I, 329. ‘Of those who make secret reports,’i.e.
‘ of the ministers and the rest' (N£r.), or ‘ of citizens who may have
come’ (Medh.).

* 225. Y&gn, I, 330. * Something,’ i.e. * not too much.’

VIII, 6 .

CIVIL AND CEREMONIAL LAW.

253

Chapter VIII.

1. A king, desirous of investigating law cases,
niust enter his court of justice, preserving a digni¬
fied demeanour, together with Brihmawas and with
experienced councillors.

2. There, either seated or standing, raising his
right arm, without ostentation in his dress and *
ornaments, let him examine the business of suitors,

3. Daily (deciding) one after another (all cases)

which fall under the eighteen titles (of the law)
according to principles drawn from local usages and
from the Institutes of the sacred law. *

4. Of those (titles) the first is the non-payment of
debts, (then follow), (2) deposit and pledge, (3) sale
without ownership, (4) concerns among partners, and
(5) resumption of gifts,

5. (6) Non-payment of wages, (7) non-performance
of agreements, (8) rescission of sale and purchase,
(9) disputes between the owner (of cattle) and his
servants,

6. (10) Disputes regarding boundaries, (11) assault
and (12) defamation, (13) theft, (14) robbery and vio¬
lence, (15) adultery,

VIII. 1. Vi. Ill, 72; Y&gn. I, 359; II, 1; Gaut. XIII, 26;
Vas. XVI, 2.

2. ‘Standing,’ i.e. ‘in important cases’ (Medh., Gov., Kull.,
Rlgh.). ‘ Raising his right arm,’ i. e. ‘ keeping it uncovered’ (N£r.,
Nand., Ragh., Gov.). Regarding the meaning of the action, see
above, IV, 58.

3. Gaut. XI, 19-24; Vas. XVI, 4-5. ‘ Local usages,’ i. e. ‘ the
law of custom which is not opposed to the Sastras’ (Medh., Gov.,
Kull., N&r.).

4. * Non-payment of debts’ (n'«asya adanam, NSr., Nand.) may
also be translated ‘recovery of debts' (rin&sya. SdSnam).

254

LAWS OF MANU.

vm, 7.

7. (16) Duties of man and wife, (17) partition (of
inheritance), (18) gambling and betting; these are
in this world the eighteen topics which give rise to
lawsuits.

8. Depending on the eternal law, let him decide
the suits of men who mostly contend on the titles
just mentioned.

9. But if the king does not personally investigate
the suits, then let him appoint a learned Brdhma#a
to try them.

10. That (man) shall enter that most excellent
court, accompanied by three assessors, and fully
consider (all) causes (brought) before the (king),
Cither sitting down or standing.

11. Where three Br&hmawas versed in the Vedas
and the learned (judge) appointed by the king
sit down, they call that the court of (four-faced)
Brahman.

12. But where justice, wounded by injustice, ap¬
proaches and the judges do not extract the dart,
there (they also) are wounded (by that dart of
injustice).

13. Either the court must not be entered, or the
truth must be spoken; a man who either says nothing
or speaks falsely, becomes sinful.

7. Vyavaharasthitau, ‘ which give rise to lawsuits’(Gov.), means
according to Nar. ‘ in deciding lawsuits.'

8. The word ‘ mostly’ is intended to show that there are other
titles besides, as Narada declared (Medh., Gov., Kull., N&r., Ragh.).
Nand. omits this verse.

9. Vi. Ill, 73; Y&gn. II, 3; Gaut. XIII, 26; Vas. XVI, 2.

10. Medh. says * by (at least) three assessors.’

13. ‘Must not be entered,’ i.e. ‘for the purpose of deciding
causes’ (Gov., Kull., Ragh.), But the further details show that the
verse is intended as a general maxim, applicable to witnesses also.

VIII, ao.

CIVIL AND CEREMONIAL LAW.

255

14. Where justice is destroyed by injustice, or
truth by falsehood, while the judges look on, there
they shall also be destroyed.

15. ‘Justice, being violated, destroys; justice,
being preserved, preserves: therefore justice must
not be violated, lest violated justice destroy us.’

16. For divine justice (is said to be) a bull
(vWsha); that (man) who violates it (kurute 'lam)
the gods consider to be (a man despicable like) a
.Sfldra (wfshala) ; let him, therefore, beware of vio¬
lating justice.

17. The only friend who follows men even after
death is justice; for everything else is lost at the
same time when the body (perishes).

18. One quarter of (the guilt of) an unjust (deci¬
sion) falls on him who committed (the crime), one
quarter on the (false) witness, one quarter on all the
judges, one quarter on the king.

19. But where he who is worthy of condemnation
is condemned, the king is free from guilt, and the
judges are saved (from sin); the guilt falls on the
perpetrator (of the crime alone).

20. A Br4hma«a who subsists only by the name
of his caste (£&ti), or one who merely calls himself
a Brihmawa (though his origin be uncertain), may,
at the king’s pleasure, interpret the law to him, but
never a •Sttdra.

15. This admonition must be addressed by the assessors tb a
judge who acts against the law (Gov., Kull., RSgh.). Nand. reads
va£,‘you,’ instead of naA, ‘us.’

18. Gaut. XIII, 11; Baudh. 1 ,19, 8. Sabhasada^, ‘the judges,’
means according to Gov. ‘ all those in court who look on.’ The
judge and his assessors are, however, the persons really Intended.

20. ‘One who subsists only by the name of his caste,’ i.e. ‘a man
of Brtthmana descent, who neither studies nor performs any other

256

LAWS OF MANU.

VIII, 31 .

21. The kingdom of that monarch, who looks on
while a SCldra settles the law, will sink (low), like
a cow in a morass,

22. That kingdom where £\idras are very nume¬
rous, which is infested by atheists and destitute of
twice-born (inhabitants), soon entirely perishes,
afflicted by famine and disease.

23. Having occupied the seat of justice, having
covered his body, and having worshipped the
guardian deities of the world, let him, with a col¬
lected mind, begin the trial of causes.

24. Knowing what is expedient or inexpedient,
what is pure justice or injustice, let him examine
the causes of suitors according to the order of the
castes (varaa).

act required by the sacred law'(Kull., R£gh.),or ‘one who has not
been initiated’ (N&r.). Brahmawabruva^, ‘one who merely calls
himself a Brdhmawa (though his origin be doubtful/ Kull., Ragh.),
means according to N£r. ‘an initiated Brdhmawa who does not
study the Veda.’ Medh. and Gov. take the two terms as referring
to one person only, ‘Even a despicable Brahmawa, who subsists
merely by the name of his race/ i. e. neither studies the Veda, nor
performs the rites, &c. The commentators point out that, as the
employment of a -S’&dra is emphatically forbidden, Kshatriyas and
Vawyas may be employed in cases of necessity.

22. .Sfidrabhtiyish/fom, ‘where £ftdras are very numerous’ (Gov.,
Kull., R£gh.), means according to Medh. ‘where .SUdras mostly
decide the law-cases/ according to Nand. ‘where *Sftdras are
mostly employed in high offices/ N&r. adds that each of the
blemishes enumerated is sufficient to cause destruction.

24. Medh. and R&gh. give another optional explanation of the
participial clause, ‘ Understanding that pure justice secures advan¬
tages and mere injustice disadvantages/ According to Kull. it
means ‘Knowing what is expedient and what inexpedient, but
paying attention to justice and injustice alone/ Nar. and Nand.
give still more unacceptable interpretations. Gov., who considers
the explanation adopted above the only correct one, explains ‘what
is expedient* by ‘what will please the people/ and ‘what is inex-

VIII, 28. CIVIL AND CRIMINAL LAW. 257

25. By* external signs let him discover the in¬
ternal disposition of men, by their voice, their colour,
their motions, their aspect, their eyes, and their
gestures.

26. The internal (working of the) mind is per¬
ceived through the aspect, the motions, the gait,
the gestures, the speech, and the changes in the eye
and of the face.

27. The king shall protect the inherited (and
other) property of a minor, until he has returned
(from his teachers house) or until he has passed
his minority.

28. In like manner care must be taken of barren
women, of those who have no sons, of those whose
family is extinct, of wives and widows faithful to
their lords, and of women afflicted with diseases.

pedient’ by ‘what will make them angry;' Kull. and R&gh. by
‘what will protect the people’ and ‘what will destroy them.*

25-26. Y&gn. II, 15.

25. Gov. omits svara, ‘ voice/ and writes mukha, ‘by the colour
of the face.’ Ingita, ‘ motions/ i. e. ‘ trembling, horripilation, &c/
(Medh., Gov., Ragh.), or ‘looking down, &c.’(Kull.), or‘unin¬
tentionally moving the arms, &c.’ (N&r.). Akara, ‘aspect/ i.e.
‘ pallor, &c/ (Gov.), or ‘ sweating, horripilation, &c.' (Kull., N&r.).
Medh. and Ragh. take akara to mean ‘the manner’ of the voice, &c.,
not as a separate class of signs. ATesh/ita, ‘ gestures/ i. e. ‘ moving,
wringing the hands, &c.' (Gov., Kull., Ragh.), or ‘ intentional move¬
ments’ (Nar.).

27-29. Gaut. X, 48; Vas. XVI, 8; Vi. Ill, 65.

27. ‘The minority ends with the sixteenth year’ (Kull., Ndr.);
see N&rada III, 37. The second term is intended to provide for
the case of those who finish their Veda-study before the sixteenth
year (Medh., Kull.), or of Sfidras (Medh.).

28. ‘ Those whose family is extinct/ i. e. * maidens in that con¬
dition' (Gov.), or ‘ those who have quitted their families and become
harlots' (Medh. ‘others’). ‘ Wives faithful to their lords/i. e. ‘those
whose husbands are absent' (Gov., Rdgh.). The conditions

[25] S

258

LAWS OF MANU.

VIII, 39.

29. A righteous king must punish like thieves
those relatives who appropriate the property of such
females during their lifetime.

30. Property, the owner of which has disappeared,
the king shall cause to be kept as a deposit during
three years; within the period of three years the
owner may claim it, after (that term) the king may
take it.

31. He who says, ‘This belongs to me,’ must be
examined according to the rule; if he accurately
describes the shape, and the number (of the articles
found) and so forth, (he is) the owner, (and) ought (to
receive) that property.

32. But if he does not really know the time and
the place (where it was) lost, its colour, shape, and
size, he is worthy of a fine equal (in value) to the
(object claimed).

33. Now the king, remembering the duty of
good men, may take one-sixth part of property
lost and afterwards found, or one-tenth, or at least
one-twelfth.

of the king’s protection are in every case that the relatives are
either dead or unable to provide for the females or try to oppress
them.

30—34. Ap. II, 28, 7-9 ; Gaut. X, 36-38; Vas. XVI, 20; YXgii.
II. 33-

30. ‘Property the owner of which has disappeared’ means ac¬
cording to the commentators, ‘property, found by the royal servants
(in a forest or elsewhere, Medh.), the owner of which is not known.’
Such property shall be proclaimed by beat of drum (Gov., Kull.).
‘ Others,’ quoted by Medh., think that after three years the king
may use it as his own, but has still to restore it, if the owner
appears. Nand. points out that the rule does not refer to Brah-
ma«ical property (see Gaut loc. cit.).

33. The amount to be taken by the king depends according to
Medh. on the length of time for which it has been kept (so also

VIII, 39-

CIVIL AND CRIMINAL LAW.

259

34. Property lost and afterwards found (by the
king’s servants) shall remain in the keeping of
(special) officials; those whom the king may con¬
vict of stealing it, he shall cause to be slain by an
elephant.

35. From that man who shall truly say with
respect to treasure-trove, ‘ This belongs to me/ the
king may take one-sixth or one-twelfth part.

36. But he who falsely says (so), shall be fined
in one-eighth of his property, or, a calculation of
(the value of) the treasure having been made, in
some smaller portion (of that).

3 7. When a learned Brahmawa has found treasure,
deposited in former (times), he may take even the
whole (of it); for he is master of everything.

38. When the king finds treasure of old concealed
in the ground, let him give one half to Brahmawas
and place the (other) half in his treasury.

39. The king obtains one half of ancient hoards
and metals (found) in the ground, by reason of

Ragh.), or on the trouble which it gave (so also Gov.) and the
king’s compassion; according to Kull. and Nar., on the virtues of
the owner. Medh. places this verse after verse 34.

35 - 39 - Gaut. x > 43 ~45 5 Vas. HI, 13-14; Vi. Ill, 56-64;
Ya^n. II, 34-35.

35. ‘ Treasure-trove,’ i.e.‘valuables secretly buried in the ground’
(Medh.). The amount to be taken depends on the ‘virtues’ of the
finder (Medh., Gov., Kull., Ragh.), or on his caste (Nar.), or on the
place and time, the caste, &c. (Gov.).

36. The amount of the fine depends on the circumstances of
the case or the ‘ virtues’ of the offender (Medh.), or on the * virtues ’
of the offender alone (Gov., Kull., R&gh.).

37. Medh., Gov., N 5 r. take, as Kull. points out, most improperly
pfirvopanihitam, ‘ deposited in former times,’ to mean ‘ deposited by
his ancestors.’ The parallel passages of Vishwu and others are
perfectly clear on the point.

39. I take the last clause, which might also be translated ‘ (and)

26 o

LAWS OF MANU.

VIII, 40.

(his giving) protection, (and) because he is the lord
of the soil,

40. Property stolen by thieves must be restored
by the king to (men of) all castes (var#a); a king
who uses such (property) for himself incurs the
guilt of a thief.

41. (A king) who knows the sacred law, must
inquire into the laws of castes (^dti), of districts,
of guilds, and of families, and (thus) settle the
peculiar law of each.

42. For men who follow their particular occupa¬
tions and abide by their particular duty, become
dear to people, though they may live at a distance.

43. Neither the king nor any servant of his shall

because he is the lord of the earth,’ as a distinct recognition of the
principle that the ownership of all land is vested in the king. Medh.
says, * he is the lord of the soil (bhftrni); it is just that a share should
be given to him of that which is found in the soil belonging to him
(tadiyayd bhuvo yallabdham).’

40. Ap. II, 26, 8; Gaut. X, 46-47 ; Vi. Ill, 66-67 > Y%«. II,
36. I.e. ‘if he recovers it’ (Medh., Gov., Kull., Nar., Ragh.,
Nand.). Medh. reads ^aurihrftam, and mentions another reading,
■faurahn'tam, which Ragh. has, and thinks that it may mean that the
king must make good stolen property which is not recovered.

41. Ap. II, 15, 1; Gaut. XI, 20; Vas. XIX, 7; Baudh. I, 2,1-8;
Vi. Ill, 3; Y&gn. I, 360. Gati, ‘ castes,’ i. e. ‘ Brahmawas and so
forth’ (Kull., Nar., Ragh,, Nand.). Ganapada, ‘ the laws of districts,
e. g. of the Kuru, Kdri or Karmira countries’ (Medh.), or ‘of certain
districts’ (dera, Gov., Kull., Ragh.), or 1 of the inhabitants of one
and the same village’ (Nar.). Medh. gives also other explanations
of the compound g-atiganapadan, ‘ of local castes ’ or ‘ natives of
different countries.’ Grc«i,‘ guilds,’ i. e. ‘ of merchants, &c.’ (Medh.
Kull., N£r., Ragh.), or ‘ of merchants and husbandmen, &c.’ (Gov.),
or ‘ of merchants and actors, &c.’ (Nand.). Ragh. reads paripalayet,

‘ and protect the peculiar law of each.’ It must, of course, be under¬
stood that the customs are not opposed to the sacred law (Medh.,
Gov., Kull., RS g h.).

43. Gaut. XIII, 27. ‘(Some) other (man),’ i.e. ‘the plaintiff*

VIII, 46 .

CIVIL AND CRIMINAL LAW.

26 l

themselves cause a lawsuit to be begun, or hush up
one that has been brought (before them) by (some)
other (man).

44. As a hunter traces the lair of a (wounded)
deer by the drops of blood, even so the king shall
discover on which side the right lies, by inferences
(from the facts).

45. When engaged in judicial proceedings he
must pay full attention to the truth, to the object
(of the dispute), (and) to himself, next to the wit¬
nesses, to the place, to the time, and to the aspect.

46. What may have been practised by the vir¬
tuous, by such twice-born men as are devoted to
the law, that he shall establish as law, if it be not

(Medh.), or ‘the plaintiff or the defendant’ (Kull.), or c any suitor.’
8 Others’ explain the second half of the verse according to Medh.,
as follows, 8 and let him not appropriate money brought to him
in any other manner than for the suit.’

44. Thus Kull. and Ragh. But Medh. and Gov. take the verse
a little differently, 8 As the hunter tracks the steps of (a wounded)
deer/ &c.

45. 8 The truth/ i. e. 8 removing all fraud’ (Kull., Ragh.), or 8 what
portion (of this suit) is based on truth’ (Nar., Nand.). Artham,
8 the object of the dispute/ i. e. 8 if it be not too insignificant, in
which case the plaint must not be accepted’ (Medh., Gov., Kull.,
R&gh.). N&r. explains artha by 8 the money realised by a fine and
the like/ Nand. by 8 the aim.’ 8 Himself/ i. e. 8 that he will obtain
heaven by a just decision’ (Kull., R&gh.). 8 The place and the time/
i. e. 8 what is befitting the place and the time’ (Kull.), or 8 the place,
e. g. Ban£ras, and the time (e. g. of a famine) where and when the
offence has been committed, and which may make the case lighter
or heavier’ (Medh., R&gh.), or 8 the customs of the country and
what is befitting the time 9 (N 4 r.), or 8 the place where the offence was
committed and the age of the offender’ (Gov.). Rfipam, 8 the aspect/
i. e. 8 the nature of the object’ (Medh., Nand.), or 8 the nature of the
case’ (Kull.), or ‘the looks of the parties* (Medh. ‘others/ Gov.,
N&r., R&gh.).

46. Thus Kull., Nar., R&gh., and Nand. But Medh. takes the
verse differently, 8 What has been practised by the virtuous and by

262

LAWS OF MANU.

VIII, 47.

opposed to the (customs of) countries, families, and
castes (g 4 ti).

47. When a creditor sues (before the king) for
the recovery of money from a debtor, let him make
the debtor pay the sum which the creditor proves
(to be due).

48. By whatever means a creditor may be able
to obtain possession of his property, even by those
means may he force the debtor and make him pay.

49. By moral suasion, by suit of law, by artful
management, or by the customary proceeding, a
creditor may recover property lent; and fifthly, by
force.

50. A creditor who himself recovers his property
from his debtor, must not be blamed by the king for
retaking what is his own.

51. But him who denies a debt which is proved
by good evidence, he shall order to pay that debt

Iwice-born men .... that he shall establish as law for countries,
families, and castes, if it is not opposed (to texts of the Sruti and
Smr/ti)/ Gov. reads anurfipam,‘ conform with/ instead of avirud-
dham, ‘ not opposed/ and seems to agree with Medh. He says,
‘And thus let him punish in lawsuits the litigant who acts in a con¬
trary manner; and as here the phrase “ what is practised by the
virtuous” is used, this (rule) must refer to good conduct/ But the
rule, given in verse 41, must refer to laws other than ‘(those re¬
lating to) good conduct/

49. Vyavaharewa, ‘by suit of law' (Gov., Kull., Nar.), or ‘by
threatening a lawsuit* (Nand.), or ‘ by forced labour* (Medh.), or ‘ by
a forcible sale of property* (R&gh.). A&irita, ‘ the customary pro¬
ceeding/ i. e. ‘ by killing one’s wife, children, and cattle, and sitting
at the debtor's door/ Brfhaspati, quoted by Kull. and Ragh., or ‘ by
fasting* (Gov.), or ‘by the creditor’s starving himself to death*
(Ndr.). This custom corresponds to the so-called pr&yopavejana,
or Dhar«a, and to the Traga of the bards.

50. Vi. VI, 19; Y 5 gn. II, 40.

51. ‘In this case self-help must not be used’ (Medh.). Regard¬
ing the amount of the fine, see below, verse 139.

VIII, 57 -

CIVIL AND CRIMINAL LAW;_ DEBTS.

263

to the creditor and a small fine according to his
circumstances.

52. On the denial (of a debt) by a debtor who
has been required in court to pay it, the complainant
must call (a witness) who was present (when the loan
was made), or adduce other evidence.

53. (The plaintiff) who calls a witness not present
at the transaction, who retracts his statements, or
does not perceive that his statements (are) confused
or contradictory;

54. Or who having stated what he means to prove
afterwards varies (his case), or who being questioned
on a fact duly stated by himself does not abide by it;

55. Or who converses with the witnesses in a place
improper for such conversation; or who declines to
answer a question, properly put, or leaves (the court);

56. Or who, being ordered to speak, does not
answer, or does not prove what he has alleged; or
who does not know what is the first (point), and
what the second, fails in his suit.

57. Him also who says ‘ I have witnesses/ and,

52. Instead of deryam, * (a witness) who was present (when the
loan was made,’ K., Ragh., Kull.), Medh., Gov., Nar., and Nand.
read deram, ‘ (must point out) the place.’

53-5 6 - Yagn. II, 16.

53. Medh., Gov., Nar., and Nand. read apaderam, ‘ a wrong or
impossible place,’ instead of aderyam, ‘ a witness not present.’
Kull. reads according to the editions, ‘ aderyam,’ but his explanation
agrees with the other reading.

54. Pramhitam, * duly stated (by himself),' (Kull., Nand.), i. e. ‘ in
the plaint’ (Gov.), means according to Ragh. and Nar. ‘duly
ascertained.’

56. ‘ Who does not know what is the first (point) and what is the
second,’ i.e. ‘ what is the proof and what the matter to be proved’
(Kull., Ragh.), or ‘what ought to be said first and what later’
(NUr., Nand.).

264

LAWS OF MANU.

VIII, 58.

being ordered to produce them, produces them not,
the judge must on these (same) grounds declare to
be non-suited.

58. If a plaintiff does not speak, he may be
punished corporally or fined according to the law;
if (a defendant) does not plead within three fort¬
nights, he has lost his cause.

59. In the double of that sum which (a defendant)
falsely denies or on which (the plaintiff) falsely de¬
clares, shall those two (men) offending against
justice be fined by the king.

60. (A defendant) who, being brought (into court)
by the creditor, (and) being questioned, denies (the
debt), shall be convicted (of his falsehood) by at
least three witnesses (who must depose) in the pre¬
sence of the Brihmawa (appointed by) the king.

61. I will fully declare what kind of men may be
made witnesses in suits by creditors, and in what
manner those (witnesses) must give true (evidence).

62. Householders, men with male issue, and indi¬
genous (inhabitants of the country, be they) Ksha-
triyas, VaLsyas, or .SYldras, are competent, when
called by a suitor, to give evidence, not any persons
whatever (their condition may be) except in cases
of urgency.

58. * If a plaintiff does not speak,’ i. e. * after bringing a suit ’
(Kull.). Corporal punishment is for heavy cases (Kull.).

59. Y&gn. II, 59.

60. Thus Gov., Kull., R&gh., but the last words may also mean
1 in the presence of the king and of the Brahmawas/

61-72. Ap. II, 29, 7; Gaut. XIII, 1-4; Vas. XVI, 28-30; Baudh.
1 ,19,13; Vi. VIII, 7-9; Y §gn. II, 68-72.

62. Medh. and N£r. refer the expression * not any person what¬
ever (their condition may be),’ to such as volunteer to give evidence
without being summoned. The * cases of urgency’ are those men¬
tioned below, verse 69.

VIJI, 66. CIVIL AND CRIMINAL LAW; DEBTS.

265

63. Trustworthy men of all the (four) castes
(var/za) may be made witnesses in lawsuits, (men)
who know (their) whole duty, and are free from
covetousness; but let him reject those (of an)
opposite (character).

64. Those must not be made (witnesses) who
have an interest in the suit, nor familiar (friends),
companions, and enemies (of the parties), nor (men)
formerly convicted (of perjury), nor (persons) suffer¬
ing under (severe) illness, nor (those) tainted (by
mortal sin).

65. The king cannot be made a witness, nor
mechanics and actors, nor a .Srotriya, nor a student
of the Veda, nor (an ascetic) who has given up (all)
connexion (with the world),

66. Nor one wholly dependent, nor one of bad
fame, nor a Dasyu, nor one who follows forbidden

64. * Who have an interest in the suit' (Nar.) means according
to Medh., Gov., Kull., and Ragh.‘ connected by money, i. e. credi¬
tors or debtors of the parties/ or according to Nand. ‘ men who
have received benefits from one of the parties/ Sah&ya, * compa¬
nions/ i.e. ‘ sureties and the like’ (Medh.), or ‘servants'(Kull., Nar.).
Dr/sh/adosha, ‘ men formerly convicted (of perjury)/ (Medh., Gov.,
Kull., N&r., Ragh., Nand.), may according to Medh. also mean * men
who have been convicted (of any serious offence)/ Men afflicted
with serious illnesses must not be made witnesses, because such
men are liable to become angry or to forget and thus to give false
evidence (Medh.). Dfishita, ‘tainted/ i.e. by mortal crimes or
numerous smaller offences (Medh., Kull., R&gh.), means According
to N£r. and Nand. Abhijastas, ‘ those accused of such crimes/

65. Kurilava, ‘ actors' (Nar.), or * dancers, musicians, and singers'
(Medh.), or ‘ actors and so forth' (Gov., Kull.), or ‘ singers' (Nand.).

A .Srotriya, or Br&hma«a learned in the Vedas, cannot be made
a witness, because he has to attend to his studies and to the Agni-
hotra (Medh., Kull., Nar., Rdgh., Gov., Nand.). The same remark
applies to the last two classes. Lingastha, * a student/ includes #
according to N&r., Gov., Nand., Medh. also * ascetics/

66. * One wholly dependent/ i. e.‘ a slave by birth' (Medh., Gov.,

266

LAWS OF MANU.

VIII, 67.

occupations, nor an aged (man), nor an infant, nor
one (man alone), nor a man of the lowest castes, nor
one deficient in organs of sense,

67. Nor one extremely grieved, nor one intoxi¬
cated, nor a madman, nor one tormented by hunger
or thirst, nor one oppressed by fatigue, nor one
tormented by desire, nor a wrathful man, nor a
thief.

68 . Women should give evidence for women, and
for twice-born men twice-born men (of the) same
(kind), virtuous .SYldras for .Stidras, and men of the
lowest castes for the lowest.

69. But any person whatsoever, who has personal
knowledge (of an act committed) in the interior
apartments (of a house), or in a forest, or of (a crime
causing) loss of life, may give evidence between the
parties.

70. On failure (of qualified witnesses, evidence)

KulL, Nar., Rdgh.). Vaktavya, 4 one of bad fame/may according
to Medh. also mean ‘one afflicted with leprosy or some other bad
disease/ Dasyu, i. e. 4 a servant for wages' (Medh., Gov., Ragh.),
or ‘a hard-hearted man’ (Medh.), or ‘an angry man’ (Kull.), or ‘a
murderer’ (R&gh.), or 4 a low-caste man’ (Nand.). The term denotes,
however, properly the aboriginal robber-tribes, and probably includes
all those resembling them. 4 One who follows forbidden occupa¬
tions/ i. e. 4 a Brdhmawa who has become a warrior or a trader and
the like' (Medh.), or 4 a butcher and the like’ (Nar.).

68. Vas. XVI, 30. 4 Women should give evidence for women only
in cases between women or in matters concerning the female sex,
which they alone may be supposed to know’ (Medh., Gov., Kull.).
4 Twice-born men of the same kind/ i. e. 4 of the same caste' (Kull.,
Nar., Nand.), or 4 of the same caste and equally virtuous' (Gov.), or
4 of the same place/ or 4 of the same caste, occupations, &c/ (Medh.).

69. 4 Of (a crime causing) loss of life/ i.e. 4 of robberies, murders,
and the like' (Medh., Gov., Kull.).

70. The rule refers to the cases mentioned in verse 69 (Gov.,
Kull.), or to the last only (N&r.).

VIII, 75 - CIVIL AND CRIMINAL LAW; PROCEDURE. 267

may be given (in such cases) by a woman, by an
infant, by an aged man, by a pupil, by a relative, by
a slave, or by a hired servant.

71. But the (judge) should consider the evidence
of infants, aged and diseased men, who (are apt to)
speak untruly, as untrustworthy, likewise that of
men with disordered minds.

72. In all cases of violence, of theft and adultery,
of defamation and assault, he must not examine the
(competence of) witnesses (too strictly).

73. On a conflict of the witnesses the king shall
accept (as true) the (evidence of the) majority; if
(the conflicting parties are) equal in number, (that
of) those distinguished by good qualities; on a dif¬
ference between (equally) distinguished (witnesses,
that of) the best among the twice-born.

74. Evidence in accordance with what has actually
been seen or heard, is admissible; a witness who
speaks truth in those (cases), neither loses spiritual
merit nor wealth.

75. A witness who deposes in an assembly of
honourable men (Arya) anything else but what he
has seen or heard, falls after death headlong into
hell and loses heaven.

73. Vi. VIII, 39; Ya gii. II, 78, 80. ‘The best of the twice-
born/ i.e. ‘Brahma«as' (Gov., Nar.), or ‘particularly distinguished
Brdhma/zas, who fulfil their sacred duties' (Kull., Ragh.).

74-75. Ap. II, 29, 9-10; Gaut XIII, 7; Baudh. I, 19,14-15;
Vas. XVI, 36; Vi. VIII, 13-14.

74. ‘Nor wealth,' i.e. ‘ he will not be fined.'

75. ‘In an assembly of honourable men,'i.e. in court (Medh.),
or ‘ in an assembly of Br&hma#as' (Gov.). ‘And loses heaven,' i. e.
which he may have earned by good works (Medh., Gov., Kull.,
Nand.), or ‘ ev^n after passing through hell, he cannot get into
heaven, because his merit is extinct' (N£r.).

268

LAWS OF MANU.

VIII, 7 6 .

76. When a man (originally) not appointed to be
a witness sees or hears anything and is (afterwards)
examined regarding it, he must declare it (exactly)
as he saw or heard it.

77. One man who is free from covetousness may
be (accepted as) witness; but not even many pure
women, because the understanding of females is
apt to waver, nor even many other men, who are
tainted with sin.

78. What witnesses declare quite naturally, that
must be received on trials; (depositions) differing
from that, which they make improperly, are worth¬
less for (the purposes of) justice.

79. The witnesses being assembled in the court
in the presence of the plaintiff and of the defendant,
let the judge examine them, kindly exhorting them
in the following manner:

80. ‘ What ye know to have been mutually trans¬
acted in this matter between the two men before us,
declare all that in accordance with the truth; for
ye are witnesses in this (cause).

81. ‘A witness who speaks the truth in his evi¬
dence, gains (after death) the most excellent regions
(of bliss) and here (below) unsurpassable fame; such
testimony is revered by Brahman (himself).

76. ‘(Originally) not appointed (to be a witness),' i.e. ‘not entered
as a witness in the document’ (Medh.), ‘ but accidentally present at
the transaction’ (Kull., Nar., Nand.).

78. ‘Quite naturally,’ i.e. ‘not out of compassion, in the belief of
gaining merit, or depending on women’ (Medh.), or ‘ not out of fear
and the like’ (Kull.), or * without hesitation, quickly’ (Nar.). Gov.
and Nand. explain it ‘ in accordance with the truth.'

79. Gaut.XIII, 5.

80-101. Ap. II, 29, 9-10 ; Gaut. XIII, 14-22; Vas. XVI, 32-34;
Baudh. 1 ,19,9—12 ; Vi. VIII, 19-37 > YSgw. II, 73-75.

VIII, 88. CIVIL AND CRIMINAL LAW; PROCEDURE. 269

82. ‘ He who gives false evidence is firmly bound
by Varuwa’s fetters, helpless during one hundred
existences; let (men therefore) give true evidence.

83. ‘ By truthfulness a witness is purified, through
truthfulness his merit grows; truth must, therefore,
be spoken by witnesses of all castes (varwa).

84. ‘ The Soul itself is the witness of the Soul, and
the Soul is the refuge of the Soul ; despise not thy
own Soul, the supreme witness of men.

85. ‘The wicked, indeed, say in their hearts, “No¬
body sees us;” but the gods distinctly see them and
the male within their own breasts.

86 . * The sky, the earth, the waters, (the male in)
the heart, the moon, the sun, the fire, Yama and the
wind, the night, the two twilights, and justice know
the conduct of all corporeal beings.’

87. The (judge), being purified, shall ask in the
forenoon the twice-born (witnesses) who (also have
been) purified, (and stand) facing the north or the
east, to give true evidence in the presence of
(images of) the gods and of Brihmawas.

88. Let him examine a Brihmawa (beginning
with) ‘ Speak,’ a Kshatriya (beginning with) ‘ Speak
the truth,’ a Vaisya (admonishing him) by (mention¬
ing) his kine, grain, and gold, a Yfidra (threatening

82. ‘Varuwa’s fetters,’ i. e. ‘terrible snake-bonds or dropsy’
(Medh., Kull.). Gov. mentions the snake-bonds alone, and Ragh.
says that the verse threatens the punishment of hell. Dropsy is a
disease specially attributed to Varuwa, see Rig-veda VII, 89, 1, and
the story of 6'una//sepha, Ait. Brahm. VII, 15. The fetters of Varu/za
are mentioned as the punishment of liars, Atharva-veda IV, 16, 6.

86. ‘ (The male in) the heart,’ i. e. * the male or spirit (purusha)
who resides in the human heart, clothed with a rudimentary body’
(Medh.), and similarly the other commentators.

88. ‘(Admonishing him) by (mentioning) his kine, grain, or gold,’
i e. ‘ threatening him with the guilt of all offences committed against

270

LAWS OF MANU.

VIII, 89.

him) with (the guilt of) every crime that causes loss
of caste;

89. (Saying), ‘ Whatever places (of torment) are
assigned (by the sages) to the slayer of a Brdhma»a,
to the murderer of women and children, to him who
betrays a friend, and to an ungrateful man, those
shall be thy (portion), if thou speakest falsely.

90. ‘(The reward) of all meritorious deeds which
thou, good man, hast done since thy birth, shall be¬
come the share of the dogs, if in thy speech thou
departest from the truth.

91. ‘If thou thinkest, O friend of virtue, with re¬
spect to thyself, “ I am alone,” (know that) that sage
who witnesses all virtuous acts and all crimes, ever
resides in thy heart.

92. ‘If thou art not at variance with that divine
Yama, the son of Vivasvat, who dwells in thy heart,
thou needest neither visit the Ganges nor the (land
of the) Kurus.

93. ‘ Naked and shorn, tormented with hunger
and thirst, and deprived of sight, shall the man who
gives false evidence, go with a potsherd to beg food
at the door of his enemy.

94. ‘ Headlong, in utter darkness shall the sinful
man tumble into hell, who being interrogated in a
judicial inquiry answers one question falsely.

95 - ‘ That man who in a court (of justice) gives
an untrue account of a transaction (or asserts a fact)
of which he was not an eye-witness, resembles a
blind man who swallows fish with the bones.

96. ‘ The gods are acquainted with no better man

kine, &c.’ (Medh.), or ‘ with the guilt of the theft of kine, &c.’ (Gov.,
Kull., RSgh.), or ‘with the loss of his kine, &c.' (Nar.), or ‘ by mating
him touch a cow, &c.’ (Nand.).

VIII, ioi. CIVIL AND CRIMINAL LAW; PROCEDURE. 2 JI

in this world than him, of whom his conscious Soul
has no distrust, when he gives evidence.

97. ‘ Learn now, O friend, from an enumeration
in due order, how many relatives he destroys who
gives false evidence in several particular cases.

98. ‘ He kills five by false testimony regarding
(small) cattle, he kills ten by false testimony re¬
garding kine, he kills a hundred by false evidence
concerning horses, and a thousand by false evidence
concerning men.

99. * By speaking falsely in a cause regarding
gold, he kills the born and the unborn; by false
evidence concerning land, he kills everything; be¬
ware, therefore, of false evidence concerning land.

100. ‘ They declare (false evidence) concerning
water, concerning the carnal enjoyment of women,
and concerning all gems, produced in water, or con¬
sisting of stones (to be) equally (wicked) as a lie
concerning land.

101. ‘ Marking well all the evils (which are pro-

97. Hanti, ‘destroys or kills,’ i. e. ‘causes to fall into hell’ (Medh.,
Gov., Kull., Nar.), or ‘ causes to fall from heaven and to be reborn
in the wombs of animals’ (Ragh.). Medh. and Kull. (verse 99) give
another explanation of this expression, viz. ‘incurs a guilt as great
as if he had killed them.’

98. ‘ Men,’ i. e. ‘ slaves.’

99. ‘Everything,’ i.e. ‘everything animated’ (Gov., Kull), or
‘even more than a'thousand' (Nar., Ragh.).

100. ‘ Water,’ i. e. ‘ wells, tanks, &c.’ ‘ Gems produced in water,’
i. e. ‘ pearls, coral, &c.’

Verse 99 is placed by Nand. before verse 100, and some
others are inserted between and after them, but the confusion
is probably owing merely to clerical errors, as no commentary
is given.

101. Anga.s&, ‘openly,’ means according to Gov. and Kull. ‘truly,’
according to NSr. ‘ quickly.'

272

LAWS OF MANU.

VIII, 103.

duced) by perjury, declare thou openly everything
as (thou hast) heard or seen (it).’

102. Brcihma^as who tend cattle, who trade, who
are mechanics, actors (or singers), menial servants
or usurers, the (judge) shall treat like .Sfldras.

103. In (some) cases a man who, though knowing
(the facts to be) different, gives such (false evidence)
from a pious motive, does not lose heaven; such
(evidence) they call the speech of the gods.

104. Whenever the death of a .Sftdra, of a VaLrya,
of a Kshatriya, or of a Brihma^a would be (caused)
by a declaration of the truth, a falsehood may be
spoken; for such (falsehood) is preferable to the
truth.

105. Such (witnesses) must offer to Sarasvatl obla¬
tions of boiled rice (/£aru) which are sacred to the god¬
dess of speech, (thus) performing the best penance
in order to expiate the guilt of that falsehood.

106. Or such (a witness) may offer according to
the rule clarified butter in the fire, reciting the
Kfishma^a texts, or the Rik, sacred to Varu#a,
‘ Untie, O Varu«a, the uppermost fetter,’ or the
three verses addressed to the Waters.

107. A man who, without being ill, does not give
evidence in (cases of) loans and the like within three
fortnights (after the summons), shall become respon-

102. Vas. Ill, 1.

103-104. Gaut. XIII, 24-25; Vas. XVI, 36; Vi. VIII, 15; Ya^.

II, 83.

103. Nand. omits this verse.

105-106. Baudh. 1 ,19,16; Vi. VIII, 16; YagiL II, 83.

106. The KtishmaWa texts are found Taitt. Ar. X, 3-5; the
verse addressed to Varuwa, Rig-veda I, 24,15; and the three verses
addressed to the Waters, Rig-veda X, 9,1-3.

107. Y &gn. II, 76.

VIII, 112. CIVIL AND CRIMINAL LAW; PROCEDURE. 273

sible for the whole debt and (pay) a tenth part of
the whole (as a fine to the king).

108. The witness to whom, within seven days
after he has given evidence, happens (a misfortune
through) sickness, a fire, or the death of a relative,
shall be made to pay the debt and a fine.

109. If two (parties) dispute about matters for
which no witnesses are available, and the (judge)
is unable to really ascertain the truth, he may cause
it to be discovered even by an oath.

no. Both by the great sages and the gods oaths
have been taken for the purpose of (deciding
doubtful) matters; and Vasish/^a even swore an
oath before king (Sudas), the son of Pi^avana.

in. Let no wise man swear an oath falsely,
even in a trifling matter; for he who swears an oath
falsely is lost in this (world) and after death.

112. No crime, causing loss of caste, is committed
by swearing (falsely) to women, the objects of ones
desire, at marriages, for the sake of fodder for a
cow, or of fuel, and in (order to show) favour to a
Br&hma/za.

108. Ya gn. II, 113.

109. Gaut. XIII, 12-13; VI- IX, 2-9. According to Medh.
-rapatha, * oath/ is used for the whole daiva anumdna, ‘ divine proof/
and thus includes the ordeals.

110. Medh. and Gov. point out that the seven sages purified them¬
selves by oaths when they mutually accused each other of a theft of
lotus-fibres (Mah. XIII, 93,13 seqq.), and that Indra swore an oath
when he was accused of an intrigue with Ahalyd, the wife of Gau¬
tama. VasishMa finally cleared himself of the accusation which
Vixvdmitra brought against him before king Sudds, that he was a
R&kshasa and had devoured his hundred sons (Medh., Gov., Kull.,
Ndr., Rdgh., Nand.). See Sayawa on Rig-veda VII, 104, and espe¬
cially on verse 15, which is considered to contain the oath sworn.

112. Gaut. XXIII, 29; Vas. XVI, 35. * Fuel/ i. e. ‘ for a burnt-
[25] T

274 LAWS OF MANU. VIII, 113.

113. Let the (judge) cause a Brahmawa to swear
by his veracity, a Kshatriya by his chariot or the
animal he rides on and by his weapons, a Vai-rya by
his kine, grain, and gold, and a -Stodra by (impre¬
cating on his own head the guilt) of all grievous
offences (pataka).

114. Or the (judge) may cause the (party) to
carry fire or to dive under water, or severally to
touch the heads of his wives and children.

115. He whom the blazing fire burns not, whom
the water forces not to come (quickly) up, who meets
with no speedy misfortune, must be held innocent on
(the strength of) his oath.

116. For formerly when Vatsa was accused by his
younger brother, the fire, the spy of the world,
burned not even a hair (of his) by reason of his
veracity.

117. Whenever false evidence has been given in
any suit, let the (judge) reverse the judgment, and
whatever has been done must be (considered as)
undone.

oblation’ (Medh., Gov., Kull., Nar.). In the last cases the sacredness
of the purpose excuses the crime.

ir3. The Kshatriya and Vaifya must touch the things men¬
tioned, and say, ‘May they become useless to me!’ (Medh.,Gov.,
Kull.)

114. This verse refers, as the commentators assert, to the two
ordeals described by Vi. XI-XII, and Y&gii. II, 103-109. Medh.,
Gov., and Kull. assert that ordeals are to be used in particularly
important cases only; see also Vi. IX, ro-14.

116. Maitreya, the step-brother of Vatsa, accused the latter of
being the offspring of a ■Sudra woman. In order to prove the
falseness of this allegation, Vatsa passed through a fire (Medh.,
Gov., Kull., Nar., Ragh.). I read spajaA instead of spraaA.

117. Vi. VIII, 40. ‘Fines imposed must be remitted' (Gov.,
Kull., Ndr.).

VIII, 124- CIVIL AND CRIMINAL LAW; PROCEDURE. 275

118. Evidence (given) from covetousness, distrac¬
tion, terror, friendship, lust, wrath, ignorance, and
childishness is declared (to be) invalid.

119. I will propound in (due) order the particular
punishments for him who gives false evidence from
any one of these motives.

120. (He who commits perjury) through covetous¬
ness shall be fined one thousand (pa«as), (he who
does it) through distraction, in the lowest amerce¬
ment ; (if a man does it) through fear, two middling
amercements shall be paid as a fine, (if he does it)
through friendship, four times the amount of the
lowest (amercement).

121. (He who does it) through lust, (shall pay)
ten times the lowest amercement, but (he who does
it) through wrath, three times the next (or second
amercement); (he who does it) through ignorance,
two full hundreds, but (he who does it) through
childishness, one hundred (pawas).

122. They declare that the wise have prescribed
these fines for perjury, in order to prevent a failure
of justice, and in order to restrain injustice.

123. But a just king shall fine and banish (men
of) the three (lower) castes (varwa) who have given
false evidence, but a Brahmawa he shall (only)
banish.

124. Manu, the son of the Self-existent (Svayam-
bhu), has named ten places on which punishment

119-123. Y&gn. II, 81.

120. Regarding the three amercements, see below, verse 138.

123. Vivasayet, ‘he shall (only) banish’ (Kull., Nar., R£gh.,
Nand.), means according to Medh. ‘ he shall deprive him of his
clothes or of his house.’ Gov. gives Medh.’s first explanation only.

124. Ap. II, 27; 8,17-19; Gaut. XII, 46-47; Vi. V, 3-8.

276

LAWS OF MANU.

VIII, 125.

may be (made to fall) in the cases of the three
(lower) castes (var»a); but a Br&hma»a shall depart
unhurt (from the country).

125. (These are) the organ, the belly, the tongue,
the two hands, and fifthly the two feet, the eye, the
nose, the two ears, likewise the (whole) body.

126. Let the (king), having fully ascertained the
motive, the time and place (of the offence), and
having considered the ability (of the criminal to
suffer) and the (nature of the) crime, cause punish¬
ment to fall on those who deserve it.

127. Unjust punishment destroys reputation
among men, and fame (after death), and causes
even in the next world the loss of heaven; let him,
therefore, beware of (inflicting) it.

128. A king who punishes those who do not
deserve it, and punishes not those who deserve it,
brings great infamy on himself and (after death)
sinks into hell.

129. Let him punish first by (gentle) admonition,
afterwards by (harsh) reproof, thirdly by a fine, after
that by corporal chastisement.

130. But when he cannot restrain such (offenders)
even by corporal punishment, then let him apply to
them even all the four (modes conjointly).

131. Those technical names of (certain quantities
of) copper, silver, and gold, which are generally used

126. Gaut. XII, 51; Y&gn. I, 367. Anubandham, ‘the motive,'
includes according to Gov. and Kull. also ‘ the frequency of the
offence/ N&r. gives the latter meaning alone. Nand. reads
apar&dham, ‘the offence/ Instead of sarapanldhau Nand. reads
sarasaram, ‘ the strength or weakness (of the offender)/

127-128. Y ign. I, 356; Vi. XIX, 43.

129-130. Y agn. I, 366.

131-138. Vi. IV, 1-14; Yagn. I, 361-365.

VIII, 139 * CIVIL AND CRIMINAL LAW; PROCEDURE. 277

on earth for the purpose of business transactions
among men, I will fully declare.

132. The very small mote which is seen when
the sun shines through a lattice, they declare (to be)
the least of (all) quantities and (to be called) a tra-
sarezzu (a floating particle of dust).

133. Know (that) eight trasarezzus (are equal) in
bulk (to) a likshd (the egg of a louse), three of those
to one grain of black mustard (r 4 ^asarshapa), and
three of the latter to a white mustard-seed.

134. Six grains of white mustard are one middle-
sized barley-corn, and three barley-corns one k ri-
shzzala (raktiki, or guzzfa-berry); five kz'z’shzzalas
are one masha (bean), and sixteen of those one
suvarzza.

• 135. Four suvar/zas are one pala, and ten palas
one dharazza; two krzshwalas (of silver), weighed to¬
gether, must be considered one mashaka of silver.

136. Sixteen of those make a silver dharazza, or
purazza; but know (that) a karsha of copper is a
kdrsh&pazza, or pazza.

137. Know (that) ten dharazzas of silver make one
satamana; four suvarzzas must be considered (equal)
in weight to a nishka.

138. Two hundred and fifty pazzas are declared
(to be) the first (or lowest) amercement, five (hun¬
dred) are considered as the mean (or middlemost),
but one thousand as the highest.

139. A debt being admitted as due, (the defendant)

134. The kmh«ala or raktika (ratti) is still used by jewellers and
goldsmiths. It corresponds to 0.122 grammes, or 1.875 grains.
136. A karsha = i6 mashas=8o krz'shwalas.

139. Vi. VI, 20-21; Y &gii. II, 42. According to N&r. ‘ some'
only have this verse.

278

LAWS OF MANU.

VIII, 140.

shall pay five in the hundred (as a fine), if it be
denied (and proved) twice as much; that is the
teaching of Manu.

140. A money-lender may stipulate as an increase
of his capital, for the interest, allowed by VasishMa,
and take monthly the eightieth part of a hundred.

141. Or, remembering the duty of good men, he
may take two in the hundred (by the month), for
he who takes two in the hundred becomes not a
sinner for gain.

142. Just two in the hundred, three, four, and
five (and not more), he may take as monthly interest
according to the order of the castes (varaa).

143. But if a beneficial pledge (i. e. one from
which profit accrues, has been given), he shall
receive no interest on the loan ; nor can he, after
keeping (such) a pledge for a very long time, give
or sell it.

140. Gaut. XII, 29; Ya gn. II, 37. The rule occurs in our
Vasish/fta Dharma^astra II, 51. The amount is fifteen per cent
per annum. According to Kull. (on verse 141), Nar., Ragh., and
Nand. this rule refers to a debt secured by a pledge, and the cor¬
rectness of this view is proved by the parallel passage of Yagw.

141-142. Vas. II, 48; Vi. VI, 2 ; Ya^il. II, 37. This rule refers,
according to the same commentators, to unsecured loans. A
Brahmawa is to pay two per cent per month, a Kshatriya three,
a Vaijya four, and a -STklra five. Med. and Gov. think that the rule
refers to cases where the creditor is unable to live on the smaller
interest.

143. Gaut. XII, 32 ; Vi. VI, 5. * A beneficial pledge,’ i.e. ‘ land,
cattle, slaves, &c/ According to Medh., Gov., and N&r., the last
clause refers to pledges which are not used. But Kull. objects
that this is contrary to the common practice of the Sish/as, and
K&gli. refers to Y%w. II, 58, where it is clearly stated that beneficial
pledges only are never lost, while those which are merely kept are
lost when the original debt is doubled by unpaid interest.

VIII, 149 * CIVIL AND CRIMINAL LAW; DEBTS. 279

144. A pledge (to be kept only) must not be used
by force, (the creditor), so using it, shall give up his
(whole) interest, or, (if it has been spoilt by use) he
shall satisfy the (owner) by (paying its) original
price; else he commits a theft of the pledge.

145. Neither a pledge nor a deposit can be lost
by lapse of time; they are both recoverable, though
they have remained long (with the bailee).

146. Things used with friendly assent, a cow, a
camel, a riding-horse, and (a beast) made over for
breaking in, are never lost (to the owner).

147. (But in general) whatever (chattel) an owner
sees enjoyed by others during ten years, while,
though present, he says nothing, that (chattel) he
shall not recover.

148. If (the owner is) neither an idiot nor a minor
and if (his chattel) is enjoyed (by another) before his
eyes, it is lost to him by law; the adverse possessor
shall retain that property.

149. A pledge, a boundary, the property of in¬
fants, an (open) deposit, a sealed deposit, women,
the property of the king and the wealth of a .Srotriya
are not lost in consequence of (adverse) enjoyment.

144. Vi. VI, 5 ; Yagn. II, 59. According to Medh. clothes, &c.,
are meant; according to Kull. and Ragh. clothes, ornaments, &c.;
according to Nar. beds and so forth. Nar. thinks that the expression
‘ the value ’ refers to the profit made by the use of the pledge.

145. Vi. VI, 7-8; Y&gn.Il, 58. According to Medh. the pledge

spoken of here is ‘ a pledge for keeping which is forcibly used.’
Upanidhi, ‘a deposit,’ means according to Medh., Gov., Kull. (who
however refers the term also to deposits), Ragh., and Nand. ‘ any¬
thing lent to another out of friendship;’ according to Nar. ‘an
additional pledge, given subsequently, in order to complete the
security for the loan.’ *

147-148. Gaut. XII, 37; Vas. XVI, 16-17; Yagn. II, 24.

149. Vas. XVI, 18; Gaut. XII, 38-39; Ya^-n. II, 25. ‘ Women,'

28o

LAWS OF MANU.

VIII, 150.

150. The fool who uses a pledge without the per¬
mission of the owner, shall remit half of his interest,
as a compensation for (such) use.

151. In money transactions interest paid at one
time (not by instalments) shall never exceed the
double (of the principal); on grain, fruit,, wool or
hair, (and) beasts of burden it must not be more than
five times (the original amount).

152. Stipulated interest beyond the legal rate,
being against (the law), cannot be recovered ; they
call that a usurious way (of lending); (the lender)
is (in no case) entitled to (more than) five in the
hundred.

153. Let him not take interest beyond the year,
nor such as is unapproved, nor compound interest,
periodical interest, stipulated interest, and corporal
interest.

i. e. * female slaves and the like.’ Ragh. adds that their offspring is
not lost to the owner. UpanidhiA, * a sealed deposit* (Gov., Kull.,
N&r., and Ragh.).

150. According to the commentators this is the consequence,
resulting from the secret unpermitted use of a pledge in ordinary
cases, while the loss of the whole interest ensues in the case of a
forcible use in contravention of a special prohibition.

151. Gaut. XII, 31, 36; Vi. VI, 11—15; Ya gm II, 39. The
interest here intended is such which is not paid by instalments,
but becomes due together with the principal. According to the
commentators, the whole sum payable, i. e. the interest together
with the principal, shall not exceed the double of the sum lent, or,
in the special cases mentioned, five times that amount.

152. According to Gov. and Nar. this verse entitles the money¬
lender to take five per cent from Aryans, not from iSfidras only.

153. Gaut. XII, 30, 34-35. ‘A creditor may take for the term
of a year interest which has been settled by the following agree¬
ment, “ When one, two, or three months have passed, the interest
on the (capital) shall be calculated and be paid to me at one time;”
but he shall not take the interest according to the agreement after

VIII, 156. CIVIL AND CRIMINAL LAW ; DEBTS.

281

154. He who, unable to pay a debt (at the fixed
time), wishes to make a new contract, may renew the
agreement, after paying the interest which is due.

155. If he cannot pay the money (due as interest),
he may insert it in the renewed (agreement) ; he
must pay as much interest as may be due.

156. He who has made a contract to carry goods
by a wheeled carriage for money and has agreed to a
certain place or time, shall not reap that reward, if he
does not keep to the place and the time (stipulated).

a year has passed' (Kull., Ragh.). According to Gov. this clause
means, 4 If (the creditor) does not take the money (due) for two or
three years and (the debtor) pays then, (the creditor) shall not take
more interest than for one year.' Nar. says, 4 atisaz/zvatsarim (“ be¬
yond the year ”) means that (interest) which after the lapse of one
year only is redundant,’ i. e. ‘exceeds that which has been doubled’
(see verse 151). Adr/sh/am, 4 unapproved,’ i.e. 4 in the law-books*
(Kull., Ragh),* or 4 in the law-books and in daily life’ (Nand.),
means according to Medh. and Gov. anupa&tam, 4 which has not
accumulated,’ i. e. 4 which is taken for one, two, or three days.’ Nar.
agrees with the latter view. Kalavrzddhi^, ‘periodical interest,’i.e.
‘monthly interest’ (Gov., Nar.), or ‘interest in contravention of
verse 151 ’ (Kull., Ragh.). Karita, 4 stipulated interest/ i.e. ‘an illegal
rate of interest, or interest which runs on after the principal has
been doubled, agreed to by the debtor on account of distress’
(Medh., Gov., Nar., Kull., Ragh.). Kayika, ‘corporal interest/ i.e.
4 to be paid by bodily labour or by the use of the body of a pledged
animal or slave’ (Medh.). Kull., Rdgh., and Nand. give the
second explanation. According to 4 some/ quoted by Medh. and
Nar., the last four kinds of interest are not forbidden. Medh. and
Gov. .think all or some of them are permissible for merchants. See
also for the explanation of the terms, Gaut. XII, 34-35, notes; and
Colebrooke I, Digest 35-45.

154. Karawa, ‘the agreement/ i.e. ‘the written bond’ (Kull.,

Rdgh.), or 4 the written bond and so forth ’ (Gov., Ndr.). According
to the latter two, with whom Medh. seems to agree, karawa may
also refer to a verbal agreement before witnesses. „ *

155. ‘Pay/ i. e. promise to pay in the new agreement.

156. Thus Medh., Gov., Kull., and R&gh. But Ndr. and Nand.

282

LAWS OF MANU.

VIII, 157.

157. Whatever rate men fix, who are expert in
sea-voyages and able to calculate (the profit) accord¬
ing to the place, the time, and the objects (carried),
that (has legal force) in such cases with respect to
the payment (to be made).

158. The man who becomes a surety in this
(world) for the appearance of a (debtor), and pro¬
duces him not, shall pay the debt out of his own
property.

159. But money due by a surety, or idly pro¬
mised, or lost at play, or due for spirituous liquor,
or what remains unpaid of a fine and a tax or
duty, the son (of the party owing it) shall not be
obliged to pay.

160. This just mentioned rule shall apply to
the case of a surety for appearance (only); if a
surety for payment should die, the (judge) may
compel even his heirs to discharge the debt.

161. On what account then is it that after the
death of a surety other than for payment, whose

explain £akravn'ddhi, ‘ a contract to carry goods by a wheeled car¬
riage,’ by ‘ compound interest;’ and Medh. on verse 157 mentions
this opinion too.

• 157. The expression ‘in sea-voyages’ includes voyages by land
(Medh., Gov., Kull., Ragh.), or all voyages (Nar.). The commen¬
tators, who explain the preceding verse as referring to compound
interest, explain this to mean that merchants trading by sea must
pay any rate of interest for money borrowed which experts may fix .
(see Yign. II, 38). The Others, of course, understand by ‘ the rate’
(vr/ddhi) the carrier’s or shipowner’s wages.

158-160. Gaut. XII, 42; Vi. VI, 41; YII, 47, 63 ” 54 -

159. ‘Idly promised,’ i.e. ‘to clowns and so forth’ (Kull.), or
‘to bards and the like’ (Nar,), or ‘not for a religious purpose, but
to singers and the like’ (Nand.), or *iti jest, to bards and the like’
(R&gh.), or ‘ a pour-boire and the like 1 (Gov.).

161. ‘Whose affairs are fully known/i.e. ‘the cause for which

VIII, 1 66 . CIVIL AND CRIMINAL LAW; DEBTS. 283

affairs are fully known, the creditor may (in some
cases) afterwards demand the debt (of the heirs) ?

162. If the surety had received money (from him
for whom he stood bail) and had money enough (to
pay), then (the heir of him) who received it, shall
pay (the debt) out of his property; that is the
settled rule.

163. A contract made by a person intoxicated, or
insane, or grievously disordered (by disease and so
forth), or wholly dependent, by an infant or very
aged man, or by an unauthorised (party) is invalid.

164. That agreement which has been made con¬
trary to the law or to the settled usage (of the
virtuous), can have no legal force, though it be
established (by proofs).

165. A fraudulent mortgage or sale, a fraudulent
gift or acceptance, and (any transaction) where he
detects fraud, the (judge) shall declare null and
void.

166. If the debtor be dead and (the money bor¬
rowed) was expended for the family, it must; be paid
by the relatives out of their own estate even if
they are divided.

he became a surety (e. g. for appearance or good behaviour) being
fully known’ (N&r., Ragh,).

162. Alawdhana^, ‘ had money enough (to pay),’ i.e. ‘had received
a sum equal to the loan contracted by him for whose appearance
he stood surety’ (Medh., Gov., Kull., Nar.). According to Ragh.
the adjective refers to the heir, and means ‘ if he has money enough
to pay.’ Nand. reads alakshita/i, ‘if a surety who received money
be not found’ (i. e. has died or disappeared, &c.).

163. Y &gn. II, 32.

164. ‘The sale of wife and children, giving away one's whole
property, though one may have issue’ (Medh.).

166. Vi. VI, 39; Y$g» 1 . II, 45. The meaning is, as Nand. points
out, that if a debt was contracted for the benefit of a united family.

284

LAWS OF MANU.

VIII, 167.

167. Should even a person wholly dependent
make a contract for the behoof of the family, the
master (of the house), whether (living) in his own
country or abroad, shall not rescind it.

168. What is given by force, what is enjoyed by
force, also what has been caused to be written by
force, and all other transactions done by force, Manu
has declared void.

169. Three suffer for the sake of others, witnesses,
a surety, and judges; but four enrich themselves
(through others), a Brahma^a, a money-lender, a
merchant, and a king.

170. No king, however indigent, shall take any¬
thing that ought not to be taken, nor shall he,

it must be repaid by the members of the family, though they may
have separated afterwards.

167. AdhyadhinaA, 4 a person wholly dependent,’ i. e. * a servant
(Nar.), or 4 a slave* (Kull.), or 4 the youngest (brother) or one in a
similar position’ (Ragh.). Gov. reads va instead of api, and for
viHlayet (Medh., Kull., Ragh.) or vi&arayet (Nand.), vilambayet;
and with this reading the translation must be, ‘or one wholly
dependent, who makes a contract for the sake of the family, must
wait for (the arrival of) the master of the house, whether he be at
home or abroad.*

168. Vi. VII, 6; Ya^n. II, 89.

169. Kulam, ‘the judges* (Medh., Gov., Kull.), has, according to
Nar., Nand., and Ragh., its usual meaning, 4 the family.* Nar. and
Nand. say that the undivided relatives have to suffer by paying the
debts of a deceased coparcener; and R&gh. explains the sufferings
of a family by the ruin caused through a bad son. Medh., Gov.,
and Kull. state that the object of the verse is to inculcate that men
must not be forced to become witnesses and so forth against their
will, and that Brahmawas, &c., must not force others to those trans*
actions from which they gain advantages, e. g. to lawsuits. (R£gh.
similarly.) N&r. takes the first half as a warning not to become a
witness or surety or to remain undivided.

170. Vas. XIX, 14-15.

VIII, 177 - CIVIL AND CRIMINAL LAW; DEBTS. 285

however wealthy, decline taking that which he ought
to take, be it ever so small.

171. In consequence of his taking what ought not
to be taken, or of his refusing what ought to be
received, a king will be accused of weakness and
perish in this (world) and after death.

172. By taking his due, by preventing the con¬
fusion of the castes (var«a), and by protecting the
weak, the power of the king grows, and he prospers
in this (world) and after death.

173. Let the prince, therefore, like Yama, not
heeding his own likings and dislikings, behave
exactly like Yama, suppressing his anger and con¬
trolling himself.

T74. But that evil-minded king who in his folly
decides causes unjustly, his enemies soon subjugate.

175. If, subduing love and hatred, he decides
the causes according to the law, (the hearts of) his
subjects turn towards him as the rivers (run) towards
the ocean.

176. (The debtor) who complains to the king
that his creditor recovers (the debt) independently
(of the court), shall be compelled by the king to
pay (as a fine) one quarter (of the sum) and to his
(creditor) the money (due).

177. Even by (personal) labour shall the debtor
make good (what he owes) to his creditor, if
he be of the same caste or of a lower one; but

171. ‘For if a king takes from his subjects what he ought not
to take, they will say, “ He fines us, because he is unable to over¬
come the vassals, neighbours, and the forest tribes (and to obtain
money from them),’” Medh.

176. Vi. VI, 19. See above, verses 49-50.

177 - The last clause refers to Brahma«as (Medh., Kull., Ragh.).

286

LAWS OF MANU.

VIII, 178.

a (debtor) of a higher caste shall pay it gradually
(when he earns something).

178. According to these rules let the king equit¬
ably decide between men, who dispute with each
other the matters, which are proved by witnesses
and (other) evidence.

179. A sensible man should make a deposit
(only) with a person of (good) family, of good con¬
duct, well acquainted with the law, veracious, having
many relatives, wealthy, and honourable (arya).

180. In whatever manner a person shall deposit
anything in the hands of another, in the same
manner ought the same thing to be received back
(by the owner); as the delivery (was, so must be)
the re-delivery.

181. He who restores not his deposit to the
depositor at his request, may be tried by the judge
in the depositor’s absence.

182. On failure of witnesses let the (judge) actu¬
ally deposit gold with that (defendant) under some
pretext or other through spies of suitable age and
appearance (and afterwards demand it back).

183. If the (defendant) restores it in the manner
and shape in which it was bailed, there is nothing

178. Pratyaya, ‘(other) evidence,’ i.e. ‘by inference and divine
proof’ (Medh.), or ‘by inference, oaths, and so forth’ (Gov.), or.
‘ by oaths’ (Nar., Nand.).

180. Y ign. II, 65. See also below, verse 195. Nand. omits

184, and places the other verses as follows: 180, 195, 188b,

185, 186, 189, 194, 187, 188 a, 181, 182, 183, 196, 190, 191,
192, 193.

181. The order of the verses referring to the trial of the bailee, is
according to Gov. 181, 183, 184, 182, and according to Nfir. 181,
183, 182, 184.

VIII, 189. CIVIL AND CRIMINAL LAW; DEPOSITS. 287

(of that description) in his hands, for which others
accuse him.

184. But if he restores not that gold, as he ought,
to those (spies), then he shall be compelled by force to
restore both (deposits); that is a settled rule of law.

185. An open or a sealed deposit must never be
returned to a near relative (of the depositor during
the latter’s lifetime); for if (the recipient) dies (with¬
out delivering them), they are lost, but if he does not
die, they are not lost.

186. But (a depositary) who of his own accord
returns them to a near relative of a deceased
(depositor), must not be harassed (about them) by
the king or by the depositor’s relatives.

187. And (in doubtful cases) he should try to
obtain that object by friendly means, without (having
recourse to) artifice, or having inquired into the
(depositary’s) conduct, he should settle (the matter)
with gentle means.

188. Such is the rule for obtaining back all those
open deposits; in the case of a sealed deposit (the
depositary) shall incur no (censure), unless he has
taken out something.

189. (A deposit) which has been stolen by thieves

185. Pratyanantare, ‘to a near relative,’i.e. ‘to his son, brother,
or wife’ (Medh.).

187. According to Nar., this verse refers to cases when one
believes a deposit to be with another, but has not made it over
oneself; according to Gov. and Kull., to cases where there may be
an error. Gov. and Kull. think that the person who should act in
the manner described is the king, and they explain anvi^et, ‘ one
should try to obtain,’ by ‘ he should decide.’ Nar. and Ragli., on
the other hand, think that the depositor should act thus. The former
explanation is perhaps preferable.

189. Yign. II, 66.

288

LAWS OF MANU.

VIII, 190.

or washed away by water or burned by fire, (the
bailee) shall not make it good, unless he took part of
it (for himself).

190. Him who appropriates a deposit and him
(who asks for it) without having made it, (the judge)
shall try by all (sorts of) means, and by the oaths
prescribed in the Veda.

191. He who does not return a deposit and he
who demands what he never bailed shall both be
punished like thieves, or be compelled to pay a fine
equal (to the value of the object retained or claimed).

192. The king should compel him who does not
restore an open deposit, and in like manner him who
retains a sealed deposit, to pay a fine equal (to its
value).

193. That man who by false pretences may
possess himself of another’s property, shall be pub¬
licly punished by various (modes of) corporal (or
capital) chastisement, together with his accomplices.

190. ‘ By all (sorts of) means/ i. e. * by the four expedients, kind¬
ness and so forth' (Gov., Kull., Ragh.), or ‘by spies and so forth'
(N&r.), or ‘by blows, imprisonment, and so forth'(Medh.). ‘By
the oaths prescribed in the Veda/ i. e. ‘ by the ordeals, such as
carrying fire' (Gov., Kull., Nar.). Nar. quotes a passage of the
Veda, in which it is prescribed that the accused shall take hold of
a hot axe.

191. Vi. V, 169-171. The former punishment, which consists
of mutilation and other corporal punishments (Medh., Nar., Rdgh.),
or the highest amercement and the like (Gov.), shall be inflicted on
others than Brahma»as in particularly bad cases and for a repetition
of the offence (Medh., Gov., Kull, Nar., Ragh.).

192. Medh., Gov., and Kull. refer this rule to first offences. N&r.
takes avijeshe»a, ‘ in like manner/ to mean ‘ without making a dis¬
tinction on account of the caste of the offender.' Medh. explains
upanidhi, ‘ a sealed deposit/ by ‘ an object lent in a friendly
manner.'

* 93 ' ‘By false pretences/ i.e. 'by frightening others with the

VIII, 198. DEPOSITS ; SALE WITHOUT OWNERSHIP. 289

194. If a deposit of a particular description or
quantity is bailed by anybody in the presence of a
number (of witnesses), it must be known to be of
that particular (description and quantity; the de¬
positary) who makes a false statement (regarding
it) is liable to a fine.

195. But if anything is delivered or received
privately, it must be privately returned; as the
bailment (was, so should be) the re-delivery.

196. Thus let the king decide (causes) concern¬
ing a deposit and a friendly loan (for use) without
showing (undue) rigour to the depositary.

197. If anybody sells the property of another
man, without being the owner and without the
assent of the owner, the (judge) shall not admit him
who is a thief, though he may not consider himself
as a thief, as a witness (in any case).

198. If the (offender) is a kinsman (of the owner), he
shall be fined six hundred pawas ; if he is not a kins¬
man, nor has any excuse, he shall be guilty of theft.

king’s anger, by promising to obtain for them favours from the
king, or the love of a maiden, and so forth’ (Medh.). ‘By (various)
modes of corporal chastisement,’ i. e. ‘ by cutting off his hands, feet,
or his head, &c.’ (Gov., Kull., High.), or ‘ by decapitating or impaling
the offender, or having him trampled to death by elephants, and so
forth’ (Medh.).

194. I. e. the witnesses must be examined regarding it, and their
evidence is conclusive.

196. This conclusion makes it somewhat doubtful if the term
upanidhi, which occurs verses 185 and 191, and has been translated
by ‘ a sealed deposit ’ in accordance with the opinion of most
commentators, has really that meaning.

198. ‘Any excuse,’e.g. ‘that he received it as a present, or
bought it from the son or other relative of the owner, and so forth ’
(Gov., Kull.). Nar. reads anavasare, ‘ and buys at an improper
(time or place).'

I>5] u

290

LAWS OF MANU.

yiii, 199.

199. A gift or sale, made by anybody else but
the owner, must be considered as null and void,
according to the rule in judicial proceedings.

200. Where possession is evident, but no title
is perceived, there the title (shall be) a proof (of
ownership), not possession; such is the settled rule.

201. He who obtains a chattel in the market
before a number (of witnesses), acquires that chattel
with a clear legal title by purchase.

202. If the original (seller) be not producible,
(the buyer) being exculpated by a public sale,
must be dismissed by the king without punish¬
ment, but (the former owner) who lost the chattel
shall receive it (back from the buyer).

203. One commodity mixed with another must
not be sold (as pure), nor a bad one (as good), nor
less (than the proper quantity or weight), nor any¬
thing that is not at hand or that is concealed.

199. Nand. omits this verse, and inserts instead, ‘ He who igno¬
rantly makes a sale without ownership shall be punished according
to the above rule (i. e. be fined); but he who does it knowingly
shall be punished like a thief.’ Nar. has no trace of verse 199, but
quotes the beginning of the verse just translated (anena vidhineti).

aoo. Nand. places this verse after 202. .

201-202. Vi. V, 164-166; Y&gii. II, 168-170.

202. Thus Medh., Kull., Nar., and Ragh. (Kull., however,taking
jodhita, ‘exculpated,’ in the sense of nij/Sita, ‘ determined.’) But Gov.
takes the first part differently. ‘ If the price cannot be produced by
him (the seller)—because he has gone to another country—then the.
buyer must not be punished by the king, being held to be guiltless
on account of the open sale, in accordance with the rule of the pre¬
ceding verse;’ similarly Nand. The difference is caused thereby that
Gov. apparently objects to the explanation of mfilam (mfilyam,
Nand.) by ‘the original (seller).’ According to Kull. the buyer
receives half the value from the original owner.

203. Y&gii, II, 245. ‘ Concealed,’ i.e. ‘in a cloth’ (Medh., N£r.), or
‘ in the earth’(Nand.), or ‘ covered with paint’ (Gov., Kull., R&gh.).

VTII, aop.

CONCERNING PARTNERS.

291

204. If, after one damsel has been shown, another
be given to the bridegroom, he may marry them both
for the same price; that Manu ordained.

205. He who gives (a damsel in marriage), having
first openly declared her blemishes, whether she be
insane, or afflicted with leprosy, or have lost her
virginity, is not liable to punishment.

206. If an officiating priest, chosen to perform a
sacrifice, abandons his work, a share only (of the
fee) in proportion to the work (done) shall be given
to him by those who work with him.

207. But he who abandons his work after the
sacrificial fees have been given, shall obtain his full
share and cause to be performed (what remains) by
another (priest).

208. But if (specific) fees are ordained for the
several parts of a rite, shall he (who performs the
part) receive them, or shall they all share them?

209. The Adhvaryu priest shall take the chariot,
and the Brahman at the kindling of the fires (Agnyd-
dh&na) a horse, the Hot ri priest shall also take a
horse, and the Udgdtrf the cart, (used) when (the
Soma) is purchased.

204. This rule is rather astonishing after what has been said, III,
51-54, regarding the sale of daughters, and it proves that, in spite
of all directions to the contrary, wives were purchased in ancient
India as frequently as in our days.

207. Y&gfi. II, 265. ‘After the sacrificial fees have been given,’
i.e. ‘at the midday oblation and so forth’ (Medh., Kull., Gov.).
According to Medh. the sacrificcr is to pay the substitute, according
to the other commentators the priest who receives the fee.

208. Medh. mentions that specific fees are prescribed at the Rl^a-
sfiya and similar sacrifices; see Ajv.A'rauta-sutralX, 3,14-15; 4,7-20.

209. According to Medh. and Kull. all the three first-mentioned
gifts are given according to the precepts of some j’fikhls at the
Agnyadhdna, the kindling of the fires. But Gov. says that the

U 2

292 LAWS OF MAtfU. VIII, 210.

210. The (four) chief priests among all (the six¬
teen), who are entitled to one half, shall receive a
moiety (of the fee), the next (four) one half of that,
the set entitled to a third share, one third, and those
entitled to a fourth a-quarter.

211. By the application of these principles the
allotment of shares must be made among those men
who here (below) perform their work conjointly.

- 212. Should money be given (or promised) for a
pious purpose by one man to another who asks for
it, the gift shall be void, if the (money is) afterwards
not (used) in the manner (stated).

213. But if the (recipient) through pride or greed
tries to enforce (the fulfilment of the promise), he
shall be compelled by the king to pay one suvarwa
as an expiation for his theft.

214. Thus the lawful subtraction of a gift has

Brahman priest receives a swift horse at the AgnySdMna, and
Nar. adds that the Hotrz' receives a horse at the ( 7 yotish/oma.

210. The four classes of priests, regarding whose functions see
Max Miiller, History Anc. Sansk. Lit., p. 468 seqq., are: x. Hot/-?',
Adhvaryu, Brahman, Udgatrz'; 2. MaitrSvaruzza, Pratiprasthatrz',
Brahmazza/v/Wawzsin, Prastotn'; 3. AXvMavaka, Nesh/rz) Agnidhra,
Pratihartrz'; 4. Potrz', Subrahmazzya, Gravash/ut, Netzx Medh. gives
the total as 112, and the shares as 56, 28, 1 6 ,12 ; Gov., Kull., Nar.,
and Ragh. the total as 100, and the shares as 48, 24, 16, 8. But
Nand. says that the total of the fee, whatever it may be, shall be
divided into 25 shares, and the several classes shall receive 12, 6,
4, and 3 such shares respectively. See also Arv. Arauta-sfltra IX,
4 > 3~5- The rule, given in this verse, applies to all ordinary cases.

211. Y&gn. II, 259, 265. I. e. each is to be paid according to
the amount of work which he performs.

212. ‘For a pious purpose,’ i.e. ‘for a sacrifice or a wedding’
(Medh.).

213. Sawsadhayet, ‘ tries to enforce (the fulfilment of the promise),’
i. e. ‘ by a complaint before the king’ (Medh.), or ‘ tries to obtain the
money forcibly or refuses to return it’ (Kull., Ragh., Gov.).

VIII, 220.

NON-PAYMENT OF WAGES.

=93

been fully explained; I will next propound (the law
for) the non-payment of wages.

215. A hired (servant or workman) who, without
being ill, out of pride fails to perform his work
according to the agreement, shall be fined eight
krfshwalas and no wages shall be paid to him.

216. But (if he is really) ill, (and) after recovery
performs (his work) according to the original agree¬
ment, he shall receive his wages even after (the
lapse of) a very long time.

217. But if he, whether sick or well, does not
(perform or) cause to be performed (by others) his
work according to his agreement, the wages for that
work shall not be given to him, even (if it be only)
slightly incomplete.

218. Thus the law for the non-payment of wages
has been completely stated; I will next explain the
law concerning men who break an agreement.

219. If a man belonging to a corporation inha¬
biting a village or a district, after swearing to an
agreement, breaks it through avarice, (the king)
shall banish him from his realm,

220. And having imprisoned such a breaker of
an agreement, he shall compel him to pay six

215. Ap. II, 28, 2-3; Vi. V, 153-154; Y 5 gn. 11,193. ‘Eight
knshwalas,’ i. e. ‘ of gold, silver or copper, according to the case’
(Medh., Gov.), or ‘ of gold’ (Kull.).

216. I read with Medh., Gov., N&r., Ragh., and K. sudtrghasya
for sa dirghasya (Kull., Nand.).

219. Vi. V, 168; Y&gii. II, 192. By ‘corporations inhabiting
a village or district ’ are meant according to Medh., village com¬
munities and corporations of merchants, mendicants or monks,
Aaturvedis and so forth, and he mentions regulations regarding
the grazing of the cattle on a common as one of the agreements
which all must observe.

220. According to others mentioned by Medh. the translation

294

LAWS OF MANU.

VIII, 231 .

nishkas, (each of) four suvar/zas, and one .ratam&na
of silver.

221. A righteous king shall apply this law of
fines in villages and castes (^dti) to those who break
an agreement.

222. If anybody in this (world), after buying or
selling anything, repent (of his bargain), he may
return or take (back) that chattel within ten days.

223. But after (the lapse of) ten days he may
neither give nor cause it to be given (back); both
he who takes it (back) and he who gives it (back,
except by consent) shall be fined by the king six
hundred (pa«as).

224. But the king himself shall impose a fine of
ninety-six pa«as on him who gives a blemished
damsel (to a suitor) without informing (him of the
blemish).

225. But that man who, out of malice, says of a
maiden, ‘ She is not a maiden,’ shall be fined one
hundred (pa«as), if he cannot prove her blemish.

226. The nuptial texts are applied solely to vir¬
gins, (and) nowhere among men to females who
have lost their virginity, for such (females) are
excluded from religious ceremonies.

should be ‘ four suvar«as or six nishkas or one jatamana.’ Kull. and
Ragh. also think it possible that three separate fines may be inflicted
according to the circumstances of the case.

222. Yagn. II, 177. According to Medh., Gov., Kull., the rule
refers to things which are not easily spoilt, such as land, copper,
&c., not to flowers, fruit, and the like; according to Nar., to grain
and seeds, ‘ because in other Smr/tis different periods are mentioned
for other objects ’ (see Yagn. loc. cit.).

224—225. Y agii. 1,66.

224. Regarding the blemishes, see above, verse 205.

226. K. omits this verse.

VITT, 332. RESCISSION OF SALE AND PURCHASE.

227. The nuptial texts are a certain proof (that a
maiden has been made a lawful) wife; but the
learned should know that they (and the marriage-
ceremony) are complete with the seventh step (of
the bride around the sacred fire).

228. If anybody in this (world) repent of any
completed transaction, (the king) shall keep him on
the road of rectitude in accordance with the rules
given above.

229. I will fully declare in accordance with the true
law (the rules concerning) the disputes, (arising) from
the transgressions of owners of cattle and of herdsmen.

230. During the day the responsibility for the
safety (of the cattle rests) on the herdsman, during
the night on the owner, (provided they are) in his
house ; (if it be) otherwise, the herdsman will be
responsible (for them also during the night).

231. A hired herdsman who is paid with milk,
may milk with the consent of the owner the best
(cow) out of ten; such shall be his hire if no (other)
wages (are paid).

232. The herdsman alone shall make good (the
loss of a beast) strayed, destroyed by worms, killed
by dogs or (by falling) into a pit, if he did not duly
exert himself (to prevent it).

227. Nand. omits this verse and the next. After the seventh
step has been made the marriage cannot be rescinded (Medh., Gov.,
Kull., Nar.).

228. I.e.he maybe allowed to rescind a contract for wages and
the like within ten days, but not later (Gov., Kull.).

231. Nand'. omits this verse.

232. Vi. V, 137-138; Y &gn. I, 164-165. ‘By worms,’ i.e.
according to Medh. by a kind called Arohakas, who enter the
sexual parts of the cows and destroy them; Ragh. says, ‘ by snakes
and the like.’ ‘ By dogs,’ the word is according to Medh. merely
intended as an instance for any wild animal.

296

LAWS OF MANU.

VIII, 233..

233. But for (an animal) stolen by thieves, though
he raised an alarm, the herdsman shall not pay,
provided he gives notice to his master at the proper
place and time.

234. If cattle die, let him carry to his master
their ears, skin, tails, bladders, tendons, and the
yellow concrete bile, and let him point out their
particular marks.

235. But if goats or sheep are surrounded by
wolves and the herdsman does not hasten (to their
assistance), he shall be responsible for any (animal)
which a wolf may attack and kill.

236. But if they, kept in (proper) order, graze
together in the forest, and a wolf, suddenly jumping
on one of them, kills it, the herdsman shall bear in
that case no responsibility.

237. On all sides of a village a space, one hun¬
dred dhanus or • three samya-throws (in breadth),
shall be reserved (for pasture), and thrice (that
space) round a town.

238. If the cattle do damage to unfenced crops
on that (common), the king shall in that case not
punish the herdsmen.

2 39. (The owner of the field) shall make there a
hedge over which a camel cannot look, and stop

234. I read with Medh. and Gov. ankam £a, ‘their particular
•marks,’ instead of arigani, * their (other) limbs’ (Ragh., Nand., K.,
and the editions). To judge from the commentary, Kull. must
have had the same reading as Medh. and Gov.

235 - Vi. V, 137.

2 37- Y ign. II, 167. Dhanus, literally ‘a bow’s length’=4 hastas
or about 6 feet. The jamyfi is a short, thick piece of wood, used
at sacrifices. A samya-throw is mentioned as a measure also by
Ap. I, 9, 6 .

.VIII, 243. DISPUTES — MASTER AND SERVANTS. 297

every gap through which a dog or a boar can thrust
his head.

240. (If cattle do mischief) in an enclosed field
near a highway or near a village, the herdsman
shall be fined one hundred (pa/zas); (but cattle),
unattended by a herdsman, (the watchman in the
field) shall drive away.

241. (For damage) in other fields (each head of)
cattle shall (pay a fine of) one (pazza) and a quarter,
and in all (cases the value of) the crop (destroyed)
shall be made good to the owner of the field; that
is the settled rule.

242. But Manu has declared that no fine shall be
paid for (damage done by) a cow within ten days
after her calving, by bulls and by cattle sacred to
the gods, whether they are attended by a herdsman
or not.

243. If (the crops are destroyed by) the husband¬
man’s (own) fault, the fine shall amount to ten
times as much as (the king’s) share; but the fine
(shall be) only half that amount if (the fault lay)
with the servants and the farmer had no knowledge
of it.

240-242. Ap. II, 28, 5; Gaut. XII, 19-26; Vi. V, 140-150;
Y &gn. II, 161-163.

241. ‘The cattle,’ i.e. ‘the herdsman shall pay for the cattle.’
‘ In all cases,’ i. e. ‘ whether the cattle were attended by a herdsman
or not’ (Medh., Gov., Kull., Ragh.).

242. A cow is, according to N&r., during the first days after
calving utterly unmanageable. ‘ Bulls,’ i. e. * those set at liberty
(see Vi. LXXXVI) are meant’ (N 3 r., Kull.), which may be met with
near many Indian villages and in many towns. ‘ Cattle sacred to
the gods,’ i. e. either ‘such as are set apart for sacrifices,’ or ‘such
as are dedicated to temples’ (Medh.). The other commentators
prefer the second explanation.

243. Ap. II, 28,1. ‘ The husbandman’s (own) fault,’ i.e. ‘if he

298

LAWS OF MANU.

VIII, 244..

244. To these rules a righteous king shall keep
in (all cases of) transgressions by masters, their
cattle, and herdsmen.

245. If a dispute has arisen between two villages
concerning a boundary, the king shall settle the
limits in the month of ( 9 yaish^a, when the land¬
marks are most distinctly visible.

246. Let him mark the boundaries (by) trees, (e.g.)
Nyagrodhas, Ai'vatthas, Kitfwukas, cotton - trees,
.Sedas, Palmyra palms, and trees with milky juice,

247. By clustering shrubs, bamboos of different
kinds, .Samis, creepers and raised mounds, reeds,
thickets of Kubanka; thus the boundary will not be
forgotten.

248. Tanks, wells, cisterns, and fountains should
be built where boundaries meet, as well as
temples,

249. And as he will see that through men’s igno¬
rance of the boundaries trespasses constantly occur
in the world, let him cause to be made other hidden
marks for boundaries,

250. Stones, bones, cow’s hair, chaff, ashes, pot¬
sherds, dry cowdung, bricks, cinders, pebbles, and
sand,

has allowed his crops to be eaten by cattle, or has not sown the
field in proper time, &c.’ (Medh., Gov., Kull., Nar., Ragh.).

245. Gyaish/Aa, i. e. May-June, ‘ when the grass has been dried
up by the heat’ (Medh., Kull., RUgh.).

246. Yign. II, 151. Nyagrodha, Ficus Indica; Arvattha, Ficus
Religiosa; Kimuka, ButeaFrondosa; .Sala, Shorea Robust a. ‘Trees
with milky juice,’i.e. ‘Arka (Calatropis Gigantea), Udumbara (Ficus
Glomerata), &c.’

247. .Sami, Acacia Suma; ‘ mounds,’ i. e. the heaps of earth are
meant which now are used generally as landmarks in British
districts. Instead of Kubgaka Nand. reads Kulyaka.

•VIII, 257 -

BOUNDARY DISPUTES.

299

251. And whatever other things of a similar kind
the earth does not corrode even after a long time,
those he should cause to be buried where one
boundary joins (the other).

252. By these signs, by long continued posses¬
sion, and by constantly flowing streams of water
the king shall ascertain the boundary (of the land)
of two disputing parties.

253. If there be a doubt even on inspection of
the marks, the settlement of a dispute regarding
boundaries shall depend on witnesses.

254. The witnesses, (giving evidence) regarding
a boundary, shall be examined concerning the land¬
marks in the presence of the crowd of the villagers
and also of the two litigants.

255. As they, being questioned, unanimously
decide, even so he shall record the boundary (in
writing), together with their names.

256. Let them, putting earth on their heads,
wearing chaplets (of red flowers) and red dresses,
being sworn each by (the rewards for) his meritorious
deeds, settle (the boundary) in accordance with the
truth.

257. If they determine (the boundary) in the

251. According to Kull., who relies on a passage of Brfhaspati,
these objects are to be placed in jars.

254. According to the commentators the verse refers to a dis¬
pute between two villages, and the two litigants are persons deputed
by each village to conduct the case (see also below, verse 261).

255. All the commentators explain nibadhniyat by ‘he shall
record in writing,’ and as it is specially mentioned that the names
of the witnesses shall be given, it seems impossible to take the
word in any other sense. Medh. says that, if the witnesses dis¬
agree, the opinion of the majority shall be taken.

256-260. Y §gn. II, 150-152.

3oo

LAWS OF MANU.

VIII, 258.

manner stated, they are guiltless (being) veracious
witnesses; but if they determine it unjustly, they
shall be compelled to pay a fine of two hundred
(pa«as).

258. On failure of witnesses (from the two vil¬
lages, men of) the four neighbouring villages, who
are pure, shall make (as witnesses) a decision con¬
cerning the boundary in the presence of the king.

259. On failure of neighbours (who are) original
inhabitants (of the country and can be) witnesses
with respect to the boundary, (the king) may hear
the evidence even of the following inhabitants of
the forest,

260. (Viz.) hunters, fowlers, herdsmen, fishermen,
root-diggers, snake-catchers, gleaners, and other
foresters.

261. As they, being examined, declare the marks
for the meeting of the boundaries (to be), even so the
king shall justly cause them to be fixed between the
two villages.

262. The decision concerning the boundary-marks
of fields, wells, tanks, of gardens and houses depends
upon (the evidence of) the neighbours.

263. Should the neighbours give false evidence,

258. Men from the four surrounding villages arc meant, as
Hull, suggests. The correctness of this opinion is proved by the
fact that the land-grants usually mention ‘the four boundaries’
(£aturaghd/anani) of the villages given away. Medh, and Nand. read
gramasamantavasina^, ‘ four men living in, &c.’

259. Maulanam, ‘original inhabitants,’ i.e. ‘whose ancestors have
lived there since the settlement of the village’ (Medh., Gov., Kull.,
R%h.).

260. ‘Other foresters,’ i.e. ‘those who collect flowers, fruit, and
fuel’ (Medh., Gov., Kull.), or ‘.Sabaras and the rest’ (Nir.).

262. Vas.XVI, 13-15; YS^w.II, 154.

263. YSgn. 1,153.

VIII, 270- boundary disputes ; defamation. 301

when men dispute about a boundary-mark, the
king shall make each of them pay the middlemost
amercement as a fine.

264. He who by intimidation possesses himself
of a house, a tank, a garden, or a field, shall be
fined five hundred (pazzas); (if he trespassed) through
ignorance, the fine (shall be) two hundred (pazzas).

265. If the boundary cannot be ascertained (by
any evidence), let a righteous king with (the inten¬
tion of) benefiting them (all), himself assign (his)
land (to each); that is the settled rule.

266. Thus the law for deciding boundary (dis¬
putes) has been fully declared, I will next propound
the (manner of) deciding (cases of) defamation.

267. A Kshatriya, having defamed a Brahmazza,
shall be fined one hundred (pazzas); a Vaisya one
hundred and fifty or two hundred; a Aiklra shall
suffer corporal punishment.

268. A Brahmazza shall be fined fifty (pazzas) for
defaming a Kshatriya ; in (the case of) a Vabya the
fine shall be twenty-five (pazzas); in (the case of)
a .SYldra twelve.

269. For offences of twice-born men against those
of equal caste (varzza, the fine shall be) also twelve
(pazzas) ; for speeches which ought not to be uttered,
that (and every fine shall be) double.

270. A once-born man (a ^fidra), who insults a

265. Y<V»\H, 153-

267-277. Ap. II, 27, 14; Gaut. XII, 1, 8-14; Vas. IX, 9; Vi.
V, 23-39; Yd^w. II, 204-211.

269. ‘Speeches that ought not to be uttered,’i.e. ‘insinuations
against the honour of another’s female relatives, especially mothers
and sisters’ (Medh., Gov., Kull., Ragh.), with which the Hindus, like
other Orientals, are very ready.

270. The last clause refers, according to the commentators, to the

302

LAWS OF MANU.

VIII, 271.

twice-born man with gross invective, shall have his
tongue cut out; for he is of low origin.

271. If he mentions the names and castes (fdti)
of the (twice-born) with contumely, an iron nail, ten
fingers long, shall be thrust red-hot into his mouth.

272. If he arrogantly teaches Brahmawas their
duty, the king shall cause hot oil to be poured into
his mouth and into his ears.

273. He who through arrogance makes false
statements regarding the learning (of a caste-fellow),
his country, his caste (^fati), or the rites by which his
body was sanctified, shall be compelled to pay a fine
of two hundred (pawas).

274. He who even in accordance with the true
facts (contemptuously) calls another man one-eyed,
lame, or the like (names), shall be fined at least one
k&rsh&pawa.

275. He who defames his mother, his father, his
wife, his brother, his son, or his teacher, and he who
gives not the way to his preceptor, shall be com¬
pelled to pay one hundred (pawas).

276. (For mutual abuse) by a Br&hmawa and a

origin of the .Sfidra from Brahman’s feet; see above, I, 31. Accord¬
ing to Medh. the expression * once-born’ includes men born from
high-caste fathers and low-caste mothers.

271. I.e. if he says ‘re Ya^wadatta,’ or ‘thou scum of the
Brdhmawas.’

273. ‘(Of a caste-fellow),’ (Kull., Ragh.), Gov. too states that
the rule cannot refer to Yfidras, because the punishment is too light.
Medh. explains karma by ‘ occupation,’ and fSriram by ‘ bodily (de¬
ficiencies),’ while the others refer karma r&riram to a denial of the
initiation.

275. AksMrayati, ‘defames,’ i.e. ‘accuses them of a mortal
sin’ (Gov., Kull., Rlgh.), or ‘of incest’ (Nar.), or ‘causes dissen¬
sions between them and others’ (Medh.), or ‘makes them angry*
(Nand.).

VIII, 282.

ASSAULT AND HURT.

303

Kshatriya a fine must be imposed by a discerning
(king), on the Brdhmawa the lowest amercement, but
on the Kshatriya the middlemost.

277. A Vaisya and a .Sftdra must be punished
exactly in the same manner according to their re¬
spective castes, but the tongue (of the .S'ftdra) shall
not be cut out; that is the decision.

278. Thus the rules for punishments (applicable to
cases) of defamation have been truly declared ; I will
next propound the decision (of cases) of assault.

279. With-whatever limb a man of a low caste
does hurt to (a man of the three) highest (castes),
even that limb shall be cut off; that is the teaching
of Manu.

280. He who raises his hand or a stick, shall have
his hand cut off; he who in anger kicks with his foot,
shall have his foot cut off.

281. A low-caste man who tries to place himself
on the same seat with a man of a high caste, shall
be branded on his hip and be banished, or (the king)
shall cause his buttock to be gashed.

282. If out of arrogance he spits (on a superior),
the king shall cause both his lips to be cut off; if
he urines (on him), the penis; if he breaks wind
(against him), the anus.

277. I.e. if a Sfldra defames a Vairya his tongue is not cut out,
but he pays the middlemost amercement.

279-280. Vi. V, 19; Y&gn. II, 215.

280. Praharet, ‘ kicks,’ i. e. ‘ lifts his foot in order to kick’ (Medh.,
Nar., Nand.).

281. Ap. II, 27, 15; Gaut. XII, 7; Vi. V, 20. According to
Medh., Gov., Kull., the rule refers to a Brahmarca and a Sftdra;
according to Righ., to the latter and an Aryan ; according to Nar.,
to a Kshatriya, Vairya, or Ahdra offending against a Brahmana.

282. Vi.V, 21-22.

304

LAWS OF MANU.

VIII, 283.

283. If he lays hold of the hair (of a superior),
let the (king) unhesitatingly cut off his hands, like¬
wise (if he takes him) by the feet, the beard, the
neck, or the scrotum.

284. He who breaks the skin (of an equal) or
fetches blood (from him) shall be fined one hundred
(pa»as), he who cuts a muscle six nishkas, he who
breaks a bone shall be banished.

285. According to the usefulness of the several
(kinds of) trees a fine must be inflicted for injuring
them ; that is the settled rule.

286. If a blow is struck against men or animals
in order to (give them) pain, (the judge) shall inflict
a fine in proportion to the amount of pain (caused).

287. If a limb is injured, a wound (is caused), or
blood (flows, the assailant) shall be made to pay (to
the sufferer) the expenses of the cure, or the whole
(both the usual amercement and the expenses of the
cure as a) fine (to the king).

284. Vi. V, 66-70; Yagn. II, 218. ‘(Of an equal),’ (Medb., Kull.,
Nand.) According to Ragh., the rule refers to Audras assaulting
•Sfidras. According to Nftr., the last offender’s property shall be
confiscated.

285. Vi. V, 55-59 ; Y &gii. II, 227-228. The expression ‘ trees ’
includes all plants (Medh., Kull.). According to Gov., the fine for
injuring trees which give shade only is to be very small; in the case
of flower-bearing trees, middling; in the case of fruit-trees, high (see
Vi.loc.cit.). Medh. remarks that the position of the trees, e.g. whether
they are boundary-marks, or stand on a 'cross-road, in a hermitage,
&c., has to be taken into account (see Ya gn. loc. cit.).

286-287. Vi. V, 75-76; Yd^gw. II, 219, 222.

287. Instead of vra«a,‘a wound’ (Kull., Nar.), Medh., Gov.,
Ragh., Nand., and K. read pra«a. Medh. explains the latter reading
by * if the vital strength is injured,’ and Gov. and Ragh. by ‘ if the
breathing power is injured by gagging.’ ‘ Or the whole (as a) fine,’
i. e. if the person injured refuses the compensation. Nar. says, * and.
shall pay the whole fine, mentioned above.’

VIII, 295 -

ASSAULT AND HURT.

305

288. He who damages the goods of another, be
it intentionally or unintentionally, shall give satis¬
faction to the (owner) and pay to the king a fine
equal to the (damage).

289. In the case of (damage done to) leather, or
to utensils of leather, of wood, or of clay, the fine
(shall be) five times their value; likewise in the case
of (damage to) flowers, roots, and fruit.

290. They declare with respect to a carriage, its
driver and its owner, (that there are) ten cases in
which no punishment (for damage done) can be
inflicted; in other cases a fine is prescribed.

291. When the nose-string is snapped, when the
yoke is broken, when the carriage turns sideways or
back, when the axle or a wheel is broken,

292. When the leather-thongs, the rope around
the neck or the bridle are broken, and when (the
driver) has loudly called out, ‘ Make way,’ Manu
has declared (that in all these cases) no punishment
(shall be inflicted).

293. But if the cart turns off (the road) through
the driver’s want of skill, the owner shall be fined, if
damage (is done), two hundred (pa»as).

294. If the driver is skilful (but negligent), he
alone shall be fined; if the driver is unskilful, the
occupants of the carriage (also) shall be each fined
one hundred (pa»as).

295. But if he is stopped on his way by cattle or

288. ‘ The goods,’ i.e. * such objects as are not mentioned spe¬
cially’ (Medh., Gov., Kull., Ragh.).

291-295. Y $gn. II, 298-299.

291. ‘When the carriage turns sideways or backwards,’ i.e. ‘off
the road owing to its badness, to the animals taking fright, &c.’
(Medh., Gov., Kull., Ragh.).

295. There are two readings, avi£&rita£, ‘ without doubt’ (lit. ‘ not

[25] X

306 laws of manu. viti, 296.

by (another) carriage, and he causes the death of
any living being, a fine shall without doubt be
imposed.

296. If a man is killed, his guilt will be at once
the same as (that of) a thief; for large animals such
as cows, elephants, camels or horses, half of that.

297. For injuring small cattle the fine (shall be)
two hundred (pawas); the fine for beautiful wild
quadrupeds and birds shall amount to fifty (pa#as).

298. For donkeys, sheep, and goats the fine shall
be five mishas; but the punishment for killing a
dog or a pig shall be one m&sha.

299. A wife, a son, a slave, a pupil, and a
(younger) brother of the full blood, who have com¬
mitted faults, may be beaten with a rope or a split
bamboo,

300. But on the back part of the body (only),
never on a noble part; he who strikes them other¬
wise will incur the same guilt as a thief.

301. Thus the whole law of assault (and hurt)
has been declared completely; I will now explain
the rules for the decision (in cases) of theft.

302. Let the king exert himself to the utmost to

considered’), and viidrita^, ‘is considered (to be just).’ Medh.
gives besides the explanation, adopted in the translation according
to Kull., another one, 1 is not considered (just).’ He mentions also
the second reading, which Gov., Ragh., Nar., and Nand. have, and
explains it with them by ‘ is considered (to be just).’

296. * The same as that of a thief,’ i. e. * he must pay the highest
amercement, or 1000 pawas’ (Medh., Gov., NSr, Kull, R£gh,
Nand.).

297-298. Vi. V, go-54.

299-300. ip. I, 8, 31; Gaut. II, 43-44.

300. ‘ Not on a noble part,’ i. e. ‘ not on the chest or the head,
&c.’ (Medh, Kull.).

VIII, 307-

THEFT.

307

punish thieves; for, if he punishes thieves, his fame
grows and his kingdom prospers.

303. That king, indeed, is ever worthy of honour
who ensures the safety (of his subjects); for the
sacrificial session (sattra, which he, as it were, per¬
forms thereby) ever grows in length, the safety (of
his subjects representing) the sacrificial fee.

304. A king who (duly) protects (his subjects) re¬
ceives from each and all the sixth part of their
spiritual merit; if he does not protect them, the
sixth part of their demerit also (will fall on him).

305. Whatever (merit a man gains by) reading the
Veda, by sacrificing, by charitable gifts, (or by) wor¬
shipping (Gurus and gods), the king obtains a sixth
part of that in consequence of his duly protecting
(his kingdom).

306. A king who protects the created beings in
accordance with the sacred law and smites those
worthy of corporal punishment, daily offers (as it
were) sacrifices at which hundred thousands (are
given as) fees.

307. A king who does not afford protection, (yet)
takes his share in kind, his taxes, tolls and duties,
daily presents and fines, will (after death) soon sink
into hell.

303-311- Ap- n, 25. *s; Vas. I, 42-44; Vi. V, 196; I,
335-336i 358 ; see also below, IX, 252 seqq.

307. ‘ The share in kind,’ i. e. ‘ the sixth part of the harvest'
(Medh., Gov., Kull., Nar., Ragh.), or ‘ the choice portions of fruit,
grain, &c. to be given to the king.’ ‘Taxes,’ i.e. ^anghadana
(Medh.), or the land-tax paid in money (Nar.), ‘ monthly taxes, or
taxes payable in certain months by the villagers’ (Gov., Kull.,R 4 gh.).
-Sulka, i. e. ‘ the tolls and duties payable by merchants and traders ’
(Medh., Gov., Kull., NS r., RSgh.). For pratibhagam, i. e. ‘ the daily
presents of fruit, vegetables, &c.,’ the so-called Dalis (Nledh., 'K.vSL'),

x 2

3 o8

LAWS OF MANU.

VIII, 308.

308. They declare that a king who affords no
protection, (yet) receives the sixth part of the pro¬
duce, takes upon himself all the foulness of his
whole people.

309. Know that a king who heeds not the rules
(of the law), who is an atheist, and rapacious, who
does not protect (his subjects, but) devours them,
will sink low (after death).

310. Let him carefully restrain the wicked by
three methods,—by imprisonment, by putting them
in fetters, and by various (kinds of) corporal
punishments.

311. For by punishing the wicked and by
favouring the virtuous, kings are constantly sancti¬
fied, just as twice-born men by sacrifices.

312. A king who desires his own welfare must
always forgive litigants, infants, aged and sick men,
who inveigh against him.

313. He who, being abused by men in pain, par¬
dons (them), will in reward of that (act) be exalted
in heaven; but he who, (proud) of his kingly state,

Nar. and Ragh. read pratibhogam, Gov. bhfitibhogam, and Nand.
pritibhogam, but the explanation of the first two var. lect. is the
same. Pntibhoga would however denote all ‘ benevolences,’ which
usually are called pritid&na and are levied on particular occasions.

308. Medh. and Nar. read arakshitaram attaram, ‘ (a king) who
affords no protection, (yet) devours (his subjects and) takes, &c.’

309. Nand. reads at the end of the verse asatyam ka. nripam
tyaget, ‘ Let him forsake a king who heeds not the rules .... and
is untruthful.’ This var. lect. is mentioned by Medh. Vipralumpa-
kam (or °lopakam), ‘ rapacious,’ means according to Nar., Nand.,
and Rfigh. ‘ who takes the goods of Brahma«as or injures them.’

310. ‘The wicked,’ i.e. ‘thieves, because the topic (is theft),’
(Medh.).

311. * Twice-bom men,’ i. e. ‘ Brfihmawas’ (Medh., Nfir.).

VIII, 319-

THEFT.

309

forgives them not, will for that (reason) sink into
hell.

314. A thief shall, running, approach the king,
with flying hair, confessing that theft (and saying),
‘Thus have I done, punish me;’

315. (And he must) carry on his shoulder a pestle,
or a club of Khadira wood, or a spear sharp at both
ends, or an iron staff.

316. Whether he be punished or pardoned, the
thief is freed from the (guilt of) theft; but the king,
if he punishes not, takes upon himself the guilt of
the thief.

317. The killer of a learned Br£hma»a throws
his guilt on him who eats his food, an adulterous
wife on her (negligent) husband, a (sinning) pupil or
sacrificer on (their negligent) teacher (or priest), a
thief on the king (who pardons him).

318. But men who have committed crimes and
have been punished by the king, go to heaven,
being pure like those who performed meritorious
deeds.

319. He who steals the rope or the water-pot
from a well, or damages a hut where water is distri-

314-316. Ap. I, 25, 4-5; Gaut. XII, 43-45; Vas - XX, 41;
Baudh. II, 1,16-17 > V'- LII, 1-2 ; Y%«. Ill, 257.

314. Medh. and Nand. read instead of dhavatl, ‘ running,’
dhimata, (shall approach the king) ‘ with firm determination.’ But
Medh. mentions the other reading too, the correctness of which is
attested by Vas. loc. cit. According to the commentators and the
parallel passages, a repentant thief is meant who has stolen gold
belonging to a Brahma«a; see also below, XI, 199-201.

317. Vas. XIX, 44. Medh. gives verse 317 after 318, but remarks
that the order ought to be inverted. He says that a priest must
leave a disobedient sacrificer; else the guilt of irregularities com¬
mitted by the latter will fall upon the priest.

319. ‘ Damages,’ i.e. ‘ takes away the wood belonging to it’(Nar.).

3io

LAWS OF MANTJ.

VIII, 320.

buted,-shall pay one m&sha as a fine and restore the
(article abstracted or damaged) in its (proper place).

320. On him who steals more than ten kumbhas
of grain corporal punishment (shall be inflicted); in
other cases he shall be fined eleven times as much, and
shall pay to the (owner the value of his) property.

32t. So shall corporal punishment be inflicted for
stealing more than a hundred (palas) of articles sold
by the weight, (i. e.) of gold, silver, and so forth, and
of most excellent clothes.

322. For (stealing) more than fifty (palas) it is
enacted that the hands (of the offender) shall be cut
off; but in other cases, let him inflict a fine of eleven
times the value.

323. For stealing men of noble family and especially
women and the most precious gems, (the offender)
deserves corporal (or capital) punishment.

324. For stealing large animals, weapons, or
medicines, let the king fix a punishment, after con¬
sidering the time and the purpose (for which they
were destined).

‘One masha,’ i.e. ‘of copper’ (Medh.), ‘of gold’ (Gov., Kull., Nar.,
Ragh.).

320. Vi. V, 12. ‘Akumbha is equal to 20 or 22 prasthas of 32
palas each’ (Medh.), or ‘to 20 dro»as of 200 palas each’ (Gov.,
Kull., R£gh.), or ‘ to 200 palas’ (Nar.). Vadha/2, ‘ corporal punish¬
ment,’ i.e.‘flogging, mutilation, or even capital punishment, accord¬
ing to the quality of the person robbed' (Gov., Kull., Rftgh.).

321. Vi. V, 13. According to N&r. and Ragh., other things than
gold and silver are to be understood by dharima, ‘ sold by the weight;’
But Medh., Gov., and Kull. explain as above.

322. Vi. V, 81-82. Nar. thinks that this rule refers to copper
and the like metals of small value. But it is also possible to remove
the seeming inconsistency, by explaining the term vadhaA in the
preceding verse by ‘ capital punishment.’

324-325- Vi. V, 77-78.

324. ‘The purpose for which the object was destined,' i.e.‘whether

VIII, 33°• THEFT.

325. For (stealing) cows belonging to Brahmawas,
for piercing (the nostrils of) a barren cow, and for
stealing (other) cattle (belonging to Br 4 hma«as, the
offender) shall forthwith lose half his feet.

326. (For stealing) thread, cotton, drugs causing
fermentation, cowdung, molasses, sour milk, sweet
milk, butter-milk, water, or grass,

327. Vessels made of bamboo or other cane, salt
of various kinds, earthen (vessels), earth and ashes,

328. Fish, birds, oil, clarified butter, meat, honey,
and other things that come from beasts,

329. Or other things of a similar kind, spirituous
liquor, boiled rice, and every kind of cooked food,
the fine (shall be) twice the value (of the stolen
article).

330. For flowers, green corn, shrubs, creepers,
trees, and other unhusked (grain) the fine (shall be)
five krz'slmalas.

weapons were stolen during a combat, or medicines from a very
sick man’ (Medh., Gov., Ragh.).

325. Instead of the reading of the editions, *>JMrikfiyir ka. bhe-
dane,’ Medh., Nar,, Ragh., Nand., and K. have ‘ sthfirikaya-f ka
bhedane,’ which is no doubt the correct version, the vulgata being
caused by a mislecture of the old form of the letter ‘ tha.’ Kull.
and Ragh. explain the phrase in the manner given above, and Gov.,
who reads ‘ nasa[si]kay;u ka. bhedane,’ agrees with them. Medh.,
on the other hand, says that sthilrika means ‘an ox’(balivardaA),
and the phrase must be taken ‘ for pricking with a goad (and using
for one’s purpose) the ox (of another man).’ Nar. finally asserts
that sthfirika means ‘ a load placed on an ox,’ and interprets the
words by * for cutting open a sack carried by an ox and abstracting
its contents.’

326-331. Vi. V, 83-86.

328. * Other things that come from beasts,’ i. e. ‘ skins, horns,
goro^anfi, &c.’ (Gov., Nar., Kull., Ragh.).

329. ‘ Other things of a similar kind,’ L e. * red arsenic, red lead,
&c.’ (Gov., Kull.), or * other eatables’ (Nand.).

330. Gaut. XII, 18. Gov. reads alpeshu, ‘ for a little unhusked

312

LAWS OF MANU.

VIII, 331 .

331. For husked grain, vegetables, roots, and
fruit the fine (shall be) one hundred (pawas) if there
is no connexion (between the owner and the thief),
fifty (pa«as) if such a connexion exists.

332. An offence (of this description), which is
committed in the presence (of the owner) and with
violence, will be robbery; if (it is committed) in his
absence, it will be theft; likewise if (the possession
of) anything is denied after it has been taken.

333. On that man who may steal (any of) the
above-mentioned articles, when they are prepared
for (use), let the king inflict the first (or lowest)
amercement; likewise on him who may steal (a
sacred) fire out of the room (in which it is kept).

334. With whatever limb a thief in any way
commits (an offence) against men, even of that
(the king) shall deprive him in order to prevent
(a repetition of the crime).

(grain)/ instead of anyeshu, ‘ other.’ ‘ Five kn'shwalas/ i. e. ‘ of gold’
(Medh.), ‘ of gold or silver’ (Gov., Kull., Ragh.).

331. Niranvaye, ‘if there be no connexion (between the owner
and the thief),’ means according to Medh. either ‘if there be no
connexion by friendly mutual leading,’ or ‘ if there be no connexion
such as residence in the same village,’ or ‘if there was no watch¬
man in the field.’ Gov. and Nfir. agree with the first explanation,
Kull. and Ragh. with the second; but see above, verse 198.

332. Y &gn. II, 230. Medh. and Nar. place this verse after the
next.

+

333- * Prepared for use,* i.e. * for eating* (Medh., NSr.), or ‘ thread
worked into cloth* (Medh., Gov., Kull., R&gh.). ‘Fire/ i.e. either
the sacred fire (Medh., Kull., N&r., R£gh.), or also the common fire
(Gov.). Medh. and Nand. read jatam, f one hundred pawas,* instead
of £dyam, ‘ the lowest amercement,* which latter reading Medh.
mentions too.

334. Pratyadej&ya, 1 in order to prevent (a repetition of the
offence)/ (Gov., Kull., R£gh„ Nand.), means according to Medh.
and N&r. ‘ in order to deter (others).*

VIII, 341.

THEFT.

313

335. Neither a father, nor a teacher, nor a friend,
nor a mother, nor a wife, nor a son, nor a domestic
priest must be left unpunished by a king, if they do
not keep within their duty.

336. Where another common man would be fined
one kdrsh&pa«a, the king shall be fined one thou¬
sand ; that is the settled rule.

337. In (a case of) theft the guilt of a .Shdra
shall be eightfold, that of a Vairya sixteenfold, that
of a Kshatriya two-and-thirtyfold,

338. That of a Brihmawa sixty-fourfold, or quite
a hundredfold, or (even) twice four-and-sixtyfold;
(each of them) knowing the nature of the offence.

339. (The taking of) roots and of fruit from trees,
of wood for a (sacrificial) fire, and of grass for feed¬
ing cows, Manu has declared (to be) no theft.

340. A Brihmawa, seeking to obtain property
from a man who took what was not given to him,
either by sacrificing for him or by teaching him, is
even like a thief.

341. A twice-born man, who is travelling and
whose provisions are exhausted, shall not be fined,
if he takes two stalks of sugar-cane or two (esculent)
roots from the field of another man.

335 - I, 357.

336. The king shall throw the money, due as a fine for an
offence he may have committed, into the water or give it to Brah-
ma»as (Medh., Gov., Kull.), in accordance with IX, 245.

337 “ 33 8 - Gaut XII, 15-17.

337. ‘ The guilt’ means of course that the offender has to pay
a fine in proportion.

339. Ap. I, 28, 3; Gaut XII, 28; Y &gn. II, 166. According to
Medh., Gov., Kull., Nar., and Rfigh., the condition is that the things
taken were unenclosed.

341. Gaut. XII, 49-50; see also below, IX, 239, 241.

3*4

LAWS OF MANU.

VIII, 343 .

342. He who ties up unbound or sets free tied
up (cattle of other men), he who takes a slave,
a horse, or a carriage will have incurred the guilt
of a thief.

343. A king who punishes thieves according to
these rules, will gain fame in this world and after
death unsurpassable bliss.

344. A king who desires to gain the throne of
Indra and imperishable eternal fame, shall not, even
for a moment, neglect (to punish) the man who
commits violence.

345. He who commits violence must be con¬
sidered as the worst offender, (more wicked) than
a defamer, than a thief, and than he who injures
(another) with a staff.

346. But that king who pardons the perpetrator
of violence quickly perishes and incurs hatred.

347. Neither for friendship’s sake, nor for the
sake of great lucre, must a king let go perpetrators
of violence, who cause terror to all creatures.

348. Twice-born men may take up arms when
(they are) hindered (in the fulfilment of) their
duties, when destruction (threatens) the twice-born
castes (varaa) in (evil) times,

342. * Takes a slave, &c.,’ i. e. ‘ makes them do his work’ (Nar.).
The other commentators think of actual theft.

344. Sahasa, ‘ violence,’ comprises according to Medh. robbery
(see also above, verse 332), rape, arson, cutting clothes, or forcibly
destroying property.

348 - 35 1 - Gaut. VII, 25; Vas. Ill, 15-18, 24 ; Baudh. 1 ,18-23 >
Vi. V, 189-192.

348. I. e. when robbers and so forth do not allow the twice-born
to offer sacrifices or to fulfil other sacred duties (Medh.), or when
in times of a foreign invasion (Gov., Kull., Nfir., Rfigh.), or of a
famine (Nar.), the twice-born castes are threatened by an improper
intermixture (samkara).

VIII, 355-

ADULTERY.

5

349. In their own defence, in a strife for the fees
of officiating priests, and in order to protect women
and Br&hmawas; he who (under such circumstances)
kills in the cause of right, commits no sin.

350. One may slay without hesitation an assassin
who approaches (with murderous intent), whether (he
be one’s) teacher, a child or an aged man, or a Brih-
ma«a deeply versed in the Vedas.

351. By killing an assassin the slayer incurs no
guilt, whether (he does it) publicly or secretly; in
that case fury recoils upon fury.

352. Men who commit adultery with the wives of
others, the king shall cause to be marked by punish¬
ments which cause terror, and afterwards banish.

353. For by (adultery) is caused a mixture of the
castes (varaa) among men; thence (follows) sin,
which cuts up even the roots and causes the destruc¬
tion of everything.

354. A man formerly accused of (such) offences,
who secretly converses with another man’s wife,
shall pay the first (or lowest) amercement.

355. But a man, not before accused, who (thus)
speaks with (a woman) for some (reasonable) cause,
shall not incur any guilt, since in him there is no
transgression.

350. According to Kull. the condition is that one must be unable
to save oneself by flight, according to Nar. one must not wound
such a man 4 excessively.'

351. 4 Secretly,’ i.e. ‘by incantations or spells’ (Gov., Nflr.,
Nand.).

353. I. e. if a mixture of the castes takes place, the sacrifices
cannot be offered properly, because duly qualified sacrificers are
wanting. If sacrifices are not duly offered, no rain will fall (see
above, III, 76), and everything will perish (Medh., Gov., Kull.,
Rfigh.).

354-358. Ap. II, 26,18-19; II, 284.

316

LAWS OF MANU.

vin, 356.

356. He who addresses the wife of another man
at a Tirtha, outside the village, in a forest, or at
the confluence of rivers, shall suffer (the punishment
for) adulterous acts (sawgraha^a).

357. Offering presents (to a woman), romping
(with her), touching her ornaments and dress, sitting
with her on a bed, all (these acts) are considered
adulterous acts (sa#zgraha#a).

358. If one touches a woman in a place (which
ought) not (to be touched) or allows (oneself to be
touched in such a spot), all (such acts done) with
mutual consent are declared (to be) adulterous (sa m-
grahawa).

359. A man who is not a Brfihma«a ought to
suffer death for adultery (sawgraha«a); for the
wives of all the four castes even must always be
carefully guarded.

360. Mendicants, bards, men who have performed
the initiatory ceremony of a Vedic sacrifice, and arti¬
sans are not prohibited from speaking to married
women.

356. ‘A Tirtha,' i. e. ‘ a place on the river-bank where the women
fetch water’ (Medh., Nar., Ragh.). The punishment is the highest
amercement (Kull.). Nand. places this verse after 357.

358. Nand. says, ‘ If one touches a woman in a lonely place.’
Gov. also mentions this explanation.

359. According to Gov., Kull., Ragh. this rule refers to adultery
committed by a .Sfidra with a Bnihmam (Ragh.) or to the violation
of a Brfihmant by a Sfidra (Gov., Kull.). Medh., too, thinks that
a ■S’ftdra alone is to suffer capital punishment for adultery with an
Aryan woman. Nand., finally, says that Kshatriyas, Vanyas, and
•Sftdras are meant, who offend with a female of a higher caste.
Possibly the correct explanation of prawanta/w da#</am, ‘death,’ may,
however, be * a punishment, even death.’ This rendering at least
removes all the difficulties created by the parallel passages and
the following verses.

VIII, 365-

ADULTERY.

317

361. Let no man converse with the wives of
others after he has been forbidden (to do so); but
he who converses (with them), in spite of a prohi¬
bition, shall be fined one suvarwa.

362. This rule does not apply to the wives of
actors and singers, nor (of) those who live on (the
intrigues of) their own (wives); for such men send
their wives (to others) or, concealing themselves,
allow them to hold criminal intercourse.

363. Yet he who secretly converses with such
women, or with female slaves kept by one (master),
and with female ascetics, shall be compelled to pay
a small fine.

364. He who violates an unwilling maiden shall
instantly suffer corporal punishment; but a man who
enjoys a willing maiden shall not suffer corporal
punishment, if (his caste be) the same (as hers).

365. From a maiden who makes advances to a
(man of) high (caste), he shall not take any fine;
but her, who courts a (man of) low (caste), let him
force to live confined in her house.

361. Y&gn. II, 285.

362. Baudh. II, 4, 3. I translate £&ra»a according to the com¬
mentators by ‘ actors and singers,’ but it may also be the name of
a caste which is well known in Western India.

363. * Female ascetics,’ i. e. * Rakshakas (?), N'ilamitras (?), and so
forth’ (Medh.), or ‘Buddhist nuns’ (Gov., Kull., Ragh.). Nar. says
‘ female mendicants.’ It deserves to be noted that according to a
passage attributed by Gov. and Nar. to Baudhayana, but not found
in our text, ‘ some’ permitted even orthodox females to become
ascetics. Female ascetics were probably in ancient India as common
as they are now, and were considered equally disreputable.

364-368. Y &gn. II, 288.

365. ‘From a maiden,’ i.e. ‘from her relatives or guardians’
(Medh.). According to Kull. and N£r. the girl is to be fettered,
according to Medh. to be guarded by her relatives. The confine¬
ment is to last until she is cured of her attachment

3 i8

LAWS OF MANU.

VIII, 366 .

366. A (man of) low (caste) who makes love to
a maiden (of) the highest (caste) shall suffer corporal
punishment; he who addresses a maiden (of) equal
(caste) shall pay the nuptial fee, if her father
desires it.

367. But if any man through insolence forcibly
contaminates a maiden, two of his fingers shall be
instantly cut off, and he shall pay a fine of six
hundred (pa«as).

368. A man (of) equal (caste) who defiles a
willing maiden shall not suffer the amputation of
his fingers, but shall pay a fine of two hundred
(pawas) in order to deter him from a repetition (of
the offence).

369. A damsel who pollutes (another) damsel
must be fined two hundred (pa«as), pay the double
of her (nuptial) fee, and receive ten (lashes with
a) rod.

370. But a woman who pollutes a damsel shall
instantly have (her head) shaved or two fingers cut
off, and be made to ride (through the town) on
a donkey.

371. If a wife, proud of the greatness of her
relatives or (her own) excellence, violates the duty
which she owes to her lord, the king shall cause

366. The meaning of the second clause is that if the father
wishes it, the offender is to marry the girl, after paying the nuptial
fee (Kull., Nir.). If the father does not wish to receive the fee,
the offender is to pay an equal sum as a fine to the king (Medh.,
Gov., R&gh.).

370. According to Medh. and N&r. the verse prescribes three
different punishments, and a Brahma«i offender is to be shaved, a
Kshatriyi to be led through the streets on a donkey, while women
of other castes are to lose two fingers. According to Gov., Kull., and
R&gh. the punishment is to be regulated by the circumstances.

371-372. Gaut. XXIII, 14-15; Vi. V, 18.

Vni, 377. ADULTERY. 319

her to be devoured by dogs in a place frequented
by many.

372. Let him cause the male offender to be burnt
on a red-hot iron bed; they shall put logs under it,
(until) the sinner is burned (to death).

373. On a man (once) convicted, who is (again)
accused within a year, a double fine (must be in¬
flicted); even thus (must the fine be doubled) for
(repeated) intercourse with a Vr&tyd and a Kand&\l.

374. A .Sfidra who has intercourse with a woman
of a twice-born caste (varaa), guarded or unguarded,
(shall be punished in the following manner): if she
was unguarded, he loses the part (offending) and all
his property; if she was guarded, everything (even
his life).

375. (For intercourse with a guarded Br&hmawi)
a VaBya shall forfeit all his property after imprison¬
ment for a year; a Kshatriya shall be fined one
thousand (pa«as) and be shaved with the urine (of
an ass).

376. If a VaBya or a Kshatriya has connexion
with an unguarded Brahmawi, let him fine the
VaLrya five hundred (pa«as) and the Kshatriya one
thousand.

377. But even these two, if they offend with a

373. ‘A Vr&tyd,* i.e. ‘ the wife of an Aryan who has not been ini*
tiated’ (Gov., Kull., R&gh.); see above, II, 39; or ‘ one not married
in proper time’ (N&r. and Medh.), which latter attempts also another
explanation, ‘a public woman’ or ‘one common to several men/
The fine intended is two thousand pa»as (Gov., Kull., Rfigh.).

374. Ap. II, 26, 20; 27, 9; Gaut. XII, 2-3; Vas. XXI, 5, 5;
Baudh. II, 3, 52; Y &gn. II, 286, 294. ‘Guarded/ i.e. ‘by her
husband or relatives’ (Medh., Kull., R&gh.).

377. Ap. II, 26, 20; Vas. XXI, 2-3; Y%n. II, 286. ‘Like a
St dra/ see verse 374,

320

LAWS OF MANU.

vni, 378.

Brihmawi (hot only) guarded (but the wife of an
eminent man), shall be punished like a .Sitdra or
be burnt in a fire of dry grass.

378. A Brdhmawa who carnally knows a guarded
Br&hmawl against her will, shall be fined one thou¬
sand (pa#as); but he shall be made to pay five
hundred, if he had connexion with a willing one.

379. Tonsure (of the head) is ordained for a
Br&hmatta (instead of) capital punishment; but (men
of) other castes shall suffer capital punishment.

380. Let him never slay a Brihma«a, though he
have committed all (possible) crimes; let him banish
such an (offender), leaving all his property (to him)
and (his .body) unhurt.

381. No greater crime is known on earth than
slaying a Brdhmawa; a king, therefore, must not
even conceive in his mind the thought of killing
a Br&hmawa.

382. If a Vaisya approaches a guarded female
of the Kshatriya caste, or a Kshatriya a (guarded)
Vabya woman, they both deserve the same punish¬
ment as in the case of an unguarded Brihmawa
female.

383. A Brahmawa shall be compelled to pay a
fine of one thousand (pa«as) if he has intercourse
with guarded (females of) those two (castes); for
(offending with) a (guarded) vSildra female a fine of
one thousand (pa»as shall be inflicted) on a Ksha¬
triya or a Vai-sya.

384. For (intercourse with) an unguarded Ksha-
triyi a fine of five hundred (pa#as shall fall) on a

382. According to the commentators the rule of verse 376
applies.

VIII, 390 .

MISCELLANEOUS RULES.

321

Vawya; but (for the same offence) a Kshatriya shall
be shaved with the urine (of a donkey) or (pay) the
same fine.

385. A Brihma«a who approaches unguarded
females (of the) Kshatriya or Vaiyya (castes), or
a .SYldra female, shall be fined five hundred (pa#as);
but (for intercourse with) a female (of the) lowest
(castes), one thousand.

386. That king in whose town lives no thief, no
adulterer, no defamer, no man guilty of violence,
and no committer of assaults, attains the world of
.Sakra (Indra).

387. The suppression of those five in his domi¬
nions secures to a king paramount sovereignty
among his peers and fame in the world.

388. A sacrificer who forsakes an officiating
priest, and an officiating priest who forsakes a
sacrificer, (each being) able to perform his work
and not contaminated (by grievous crimes), must
each be fined one hundred (pa«as).

389. Neither a mother, nor a father, nor a wife,
nor a son shall be cast off; he who casts them off,
unless guilty of a crime causing loss of caste, shall
be fined by the king six hundred (pa«as).

390. If twice-born men dispute among each other

385. ‘A female of the lowest castes,’i.e. • a ATawrfali’ (Gov., Kull.,
Ragh.), or ‘ belonging to the castes of washermen, leather-workers,
actors, basket-makers, fishermen, Medas, or Bhillas ’ (Nar.).

386. Vi. V, 196.

388. ‘An officiating priest,’ i. e. ‘ one who has sacrificed for his
family since many generations’ (Gov., Nar.).

389. Vi. V, 163; V^w. II, 237. ‘ Shall not be cast off,’i. e. ‘ shall
not be refused maintenance or the due respect' (Medh., Gov., Kull.).

390. ‘Of the orders,’ i.e. ‘of the four orders’ (Nfir., R&gh.), or
‘of die householders ’ (Gov., Kull.). Medh. and Nand. take firrama

[*5] v ;

322

LAWS OF MANU.

VIIT, 391 .

concerning the duty of the orders, a king who desires
his own welfare should not (hastily) decide (what is)
the law.

391. Having shown them due honour, he should,
with (the assistance of) Br4hma«as, first soothe
them by gentle (speech) and afterwards teach them
their duty.

392. A Br£hma«a who does not invite his next
neighbour and his neighbour next but one, (though)
both (be) worthy (of the honour), to a festival at
which twenty Brdhmaraas are entertained, is liable
to a fine of one mdsha.

393. A .SYotriya who does not entertain a virtuous
iSrotriya at auspicious festive rites, shall be made to
pay him twice (the value of) the meal and a masha
of gold (as a fine to the king).

394. A blind man, an idiot, (a cripple) who moves
with the help of a board, a man full seventy years
old, and he who confers benefits on .Srotriyas, shall
not be compelled by any (king) to pay a tax.

not in the sense of ‘ order,’ but of ‘ hermitage,’ and ‘ twice-born men ’
in the sense of ‘hermits.’ Nar. explains na vibrflyat, ‘shall not
(hastily) decide,’ by ‘ shall not wrongly decide by himself.’

392. Vi. V, 94; Y^ji. II, 263. ‘A festival,'i.e. ‘a wedding
and so forth’ (Medh.), or ‘at which a dinner is given’ (Nand.).
Anuverya, ‘his next neighbour but one’ (Kull., Nar., Ragh.), means
according to Medh., Gov., and Nand. ‘ he who lives at the back of
his house,’ while the neighbour living opposite is the prativerya.
‘ Twenty,’ i.e. ‘ twenty or more other Brahmawas’ (Gov.). ‘A masha,’
i. e. ‘ of silver’ (Gov., Kull., Ragh.), or ‘ of gold’ (Medh., Nar.).

393. ‘A virtuous Srotriya,’ i. e. ‘ a neighbour’ (Gov., Kull., Ragh.),
or ‘ living in the same village’ (Nar.). Medh. says, ‘ one who is not
a neighbour.’

394. Ap. II, 26, 10-15; Vas. XIX, 23-24. ‘(A cripple) who
moves with the help of a board’ is not an uncommon sight in the
streets of Indian towns. ‘By any (king),’ i.e. ‘even by one whose
treasury is empty.’

VIII, 399-

MISCELLANEOUS RULES.

3 a 3

395. Let the king always treat kindly a .Srotriya,
a sick or distressed man, an infant and an aged or
an indigent man, a man of high birth, and an honour¬
able man (Arya).

396. A washerman shall wash (the clothes of his
employers) gently on a smooth board of .Salmali-
wood; he shall not return the clothes (of one person)
for those (of another), nor allow anybody (but the
owner) to wear them.

397. A weaver (who has received) ten palas (of
thread), shall return (cloth weighing) one pala more;
he who acts differently shall be compelled to pay
a fine of twelve (pa«as).

398. Let the king take one-twentieth of that
(amount) which men, well acquainted with the settle¬
ment of tolls and duties (and) skilful in (estimating
the value of) all kinds of merchandise, may fix as
the value for each saleable commodity.

399. Let the king confiscate the whole property of
(a trader) who out of greed exports goods of which
the king has a monopoly or (the export of which is)
forbidden.

396. Y agn. II, 238. .Salmali, or cctton-tree wood, is naturally
soft (Medh.).

397. Y'lgn. II, 179. Instead of ‘twelve (pa«as),’ (Kull., Rdgh.),
Medh. proposes ‘ twelve (palas),’ Gov. * twelve (times the value of
tlje thread),’ and Nar. ‘ one-twelfth (of the value of the thread).’
Nand. reads daraphalam and ekaphalddhikam, and says that the
weaver is to pay to the king the profit of each eleventh piece of
work which he performs.

398. Y&gn. II, 261. Instead of‘of that (amount),’ (Medh., Ndr.),
Gov., Kull., and Rdgh. say ‘ of the profit on that.’

399. Y&gh. II, 261. Medh. gives as instances of monopolies,
elephants; in Karmlr, saffron; in the east, fine cloth and wool; in
the west, horses; in the south, precious stones and pearls. Saffron
is still a royal monopoly in Karmlr.

V 2

324

LAWS OF MANU.

VIII, 400.

400. He who avoids a custom-house (or a toll), he
who buys or sells at an improper time, or he who
makes a false statement in enumerating (his goods),
shall be fined eight times (the amount of duty) which
he tried to evade.

401. Let (the king) fix (the rates for) the purchase
and sale of all marketable goods, having (duly) con¬
sidered whence they come, whither they go, how long
they have been kept, the (probable) profit and the
(probable) outlay.

402. Once in five nights, or at the close of each
fortnight, let the king publicly settle the prices for
the (merchants).

403. All weights and measures must be duly
marked, and once in six months let him re-examine
them.

404. At a ferry an (empty) cart shall be made to pay
one pa«a, a man’s (load) half a pa«a, an animal and
a woman one quarter of a (pawa), an unloaded man
one-half of a quarter.

405. Carts (laden) with vessels full (of merchan¬
dise) shall be made to pay toll at a ferry according
to the value (of the goods), empty vessels and men
without luggage some trifle.

400. Ya gn. II, 262. ‘At an improper time,’ i.e. ‘at night and
so forth’ (Medh., Gov., Nar., Kull., Ragh.).

402. Y fign. II, 251. Gov. and Kull. say, ‘let the king settle the
price in the presence of those (experts.’ see verse 398). The trans¬
lation follows Ragh. The length of the periods depends thereon,
whether the goods vary much in price. Medh. omits this and the
next four verses.

403. Vas. XIX, 13.

405. ‘Empty vessels,’ i.e. such as serve for the transport of
merchandise, jars, leather-bags, baskets, &c. AparUMadaA, ‘ men
without luggage,’ may also be translated ‘ men without attendants.’
Kull. and Ragh. say, * poor men.’

VIII, 412.

MISCELLANEOUS RULES.

325

406. For a long passage the boat-hire must be
proportioned to the places and times; know that
this (rule refers) to (passages along) the banks of
rivers; at sea there is no settled (freight).

407. But a woman who has been pregnant two
months or more, an ascetic, a hermit in the forest,
and Brahma/zas who are students of the Veda,
shall not be made to pay toll at a ferry.

408. Whatever may be damaged in a boat by the
fault of the boatmen, that shall be made good by the
boatmen collectively, (each paying) his share.

409. This decision in suits (brought) by passen¬
gers (holds good only) in case the boatmen are
culpably negligent on the water; in the case of
(an accident) caused by (the will of) the gods, no
fine can be (inflicted on them).

410. (The king) should order a Vabya to trade,
to lend money, to cultivate the land, or to tend
cattle, and a .Sudra to serve the twice-born castes.

411. (Some wealthy) Brdhma^a shall compassion¬
ately support both a Kshatriya and a Vabya, if they
are distressed for a livelihood, employing them on
work (which is suitable for) their (castes).

412. But a Br&hma«a who, because he is powerful,
out of greed makes initiated (men of the) twice-born
(castes) against their will do the work of slaves, shall
be fined by the king six hundred (pawas). ’

407. Vi. V, 132. According to Medh., heterodox monks must
pay, because the word Brahma»a (taken above with students) refers
to all the persons mentioned.

408. ‘ Whatever,’ i. e. ‘ merchandise’ (Medh., Nar.), or * luggage’
(Gov., Kull., Ragh.).

411. I.e. he shall employ a poor Kshatriya as watchman, and
a Vairya as-herdsman (Medh.). If he employs them in this way,
he is not punishable (Gov., Kull.).

326

LAWS OF MANU.

yin, 413.

413. But a .Sttdra, whether bought or unbought,
he may compel to do servile work; for he was
created by the Self-existent (Svayambhft) to be the
slave of a Br&hma#a.

414. A .Stodra, though emancipated by his master,
is not released from servitude; since that is innate
in him, who can set him free from it ?

415. There are slaves of seven kinds, (viz.) he
who is made a captive under a standard, he who
serves for his daily food, he who is born in the
house, he who is bought and he who is given, he
who is inherited from ancestors, and he who is
enslaved by way of punishment.

416. A wife, a son, and a slave, these three are
declared to have no property; the wealth which they
earn is (acquired) for him to whom they belong.

413. ‘ Whether bought or unbought,* i. e. * whether maintained in
consideration of service or not* (Gov*, Kull., Ragh.), or ‘whether
bought or hired* (Nar.).

414. Medh. says that the last clause is ‘an arthavada, because
further on it will be shown that a slave can be emancipated.* Kull.
thinks that an emancipated Stidra must still serve Brahma»as or
other Aryans in order to gain spiritual merit.

415. Medh. rejects the notion that a captive Kshatriya can be
made a slave, and thinks that a captured .Sttdra must be meant; but
see Y8gn. II, 183, where it is laid down that Kshatriyas may become
the slaves of Brahmawas and Vaijyas of Brdhmawas and Kshatriyas.
Nar. explains dhva^ahn'taA, ‘ one made a captive under a standard,*
by ‘ one who has become a slave by marrying a female slave.’ ‘ En¬
slaved by way of punishment,* i. e. ‘ because he cannot pay a debt
or a fine* (Medh., Gov., Kull., R&gh.), or * also because he left a
religious order’ (see Vi. V, 152), (Ndr., Nand.)

416. According to Medh., Gov., Kull., Ragh., the verse means
only that these persons are unable to dispose of their property
independently. Ndr.’s short note (adhiga^Mawti parakarmakara-
#£din&) seems to indicate that he took it to refer to their incapacity
to earn money by working for others.

IX, a.

DUTIES OF HUSBAND AND WIFE.

327

417. A Brihmawa may confidently seize the goods
of (his) .Stodra (slave); for, as that (slave) can have
no property, his master may take his possessions.

418. (The king) should carefully compel Vaisyas
and .Sftdras to perform the work (prescribed) for
them; for if these two (castes) swerved from their
duties, they would throw this (whole) world into
confusion.

419. Let him daily look after the completion of
his undertakings, his beasts of burden, and car¬
riages, (the collection of) his revenues and the dis¬
bursements, his mines and his treasury.

420. A king who thus brings to a conclusion all
the legal business enumerated above, and removes
all sin, reaches the highest state (of bliss).

Chapter IX.

1. I will now propound the eternal laws for a
husband and his wife who keep to the path of
duty, whether they be united or separated.

2. Day and night women must be kept in depend-

417. ‘Confidently* means according to Mcdh., Nar., and Nand.
‘ without fearing that he commits the sin of accepting a present
from a *S&dra.'

419. Karmant&n, ‘the completion of his undertakings* (Kull.,
Rdgh.), means according to Medh., Gov., and Nand. ‘ the works/
i.e. ‘agriculture, offices for collecting tolls and duties, and so forth'
(Medh., Gov.), according to N&r. ‘ the workshops, e.g. for making
arms.' The last explanation is perhaps the best.

IX. 1. According to Medh., Gov., and Kull. the duties of husband
and wife are placed in the section on civil and criminal law, because
the king can and even is bound to enforce their observance by
punishments, if either of the two raises a complaint. ‘ Separated,'
i. e. * when the husband is absent or dead* (Ndr., Rdgh.).

2-3. Gaut. XVIII, 1; Vas. V, 1-2; Baudh. II, 3, 44-45; Vi. V,
1-2; Y&gn. I, 85.

328 LAWS OF MANU. IX, 3.

ence by the males (of) their (families), and, if they
attach themselves to sensual enjoyments, they must
be kept under one’s control.

3. Her father protects (her) in childhood, her
husband protects (her) in youth, and her sons pro¬
tect (her) in old age; a woman is never fit for
independence.

4. Reprehensible is the father who gives not (his
daughter in marriage) at the proper time; reprehen¬
sible is the husband who approaches not (his wife in
due season), and reprehensible is the son who does
not protect his mother after her husband has died.

5. Women must particularly be guarded against
evil inclinations, however trifling (they may appear);
for, if they are not guarded, they will bring sorrow
on two families.

6. Considering that the highest duty of all castes,
even weak husbands (must) strive to guard their -
wives.

7. He who carefully guards his wife, preserves (the
purity of) his offspring, virtuous conduct, his family,
himself, and his (means of acquiring) merit.

2. ‘ Must be kept under one’s control,’ i. e. ‘ they must be restrained
from their vicious attachment’ (atmano vare sthapya yatha na sa-
^yante), (Nar.)

4. Y&gn. I, 64. ‘At the proper time,’ i. e. before she is marriage¬
able; see Gaut. XVIII, 21; Vas. XVII, 67-71. ‘The husband,’
see Baudh. IV, 1,17-19, and above, III, 45. After this verse K.
inserts another, not mentioned by the commentators, ‘ If the wife is
guarded, the (purity of the) offspring is secured thereby; if the
(purity of the) offspring is secured, oneself is secure.’

6. Y &gn. I, 81. ‘Weak husbands,’ i.e. ‘blind, lame, or poor
ones, &c.’ (Kull., Ragh.).

7. ‘ His family,’ i. e. ‘ his ancestors,’ because legitimate sons alone
can offer the Sr&ddhas (Medh.,Gov.,Kull.), or ‘his relatives,’ because
adultery brings dishonour (Medh., RSgh.), or ‘the position of the

IX, I 3 .

DUTIES OF HUSBAND AND WIFE.

329

8. The husband, after conception by his wife, be¬
comes an embryo and is born again of her; for that
is the wifehood of a wife (g& yi), that he is born
(iffiyate) again by her.

9. As the male is to whom a wife cleaves, even
so is the son whom she brings forth; let him there¬
fore carefully guard his wife, in order to keep his
offspring pure.

10. No man can completely guard women by
force; but they can be guarded by the employment
of the (following) expedients :

11. Let the (husband) employ his (wife) in the
collection and expenditure of his wealth, in keeping
(everything) clean, in (the fulfilment of) religious
duties, in the preparation of his food, and in looking
after the household utensils.

12. Women, confined in the house under trust¬
worthy and obedient servants, are not (well) guarded;
but those who of their own accord keep guard over
themselves, are well guarded.

13. Drinking (spirituous liquor), associating with
wicked people, separation from the husband, ram¬
bling abroad, sleeping (at unseasonable hours), and
dwelling in other men’s houses, are the six causes
of the ruin of women.

family’ (Nar.), or ‘his property’ (Ragh.). ‘ Himself,’ i. e. ‘ because
legitimate children alone can offer the Sr&ddhas’ (Gov., Kull.,
Rffgh.), or ‘ because an adulteress and her paramour are likely to
attempt his life’ (Medh.). ‘ His (means of acquiring) merit,’ i. e.
* because the husband of an adulteress is not entitled to kindle the
sacred fire’ (Gov., Kull, Righ.). Nar. says, ‘ his duty (as a house¬
holder).’

8. Y Sgft. I, 56. The idea is taken from the Veda; see e.g. Aita-
reya-br&bmarca VII, 13, to which Kull. refers.

13. * Associating with wicked people,’ i. e. ‘with other unfaithful
wives’ (Nfir.), or ‘with adulterers’ (Ragh.).

330

LAWS OF MANU.

IX, 14.

14. Women do not care for beauty, nor is their
attention fixed on age; (thinking), ‘(It is enough
that) he is a man,’ they give themselves to the hand¬
some and to the ugly.

15. Through their passion for men, through their
mutable temper, through their natural heartlessness,
they become disloyal towards their husbands, how¬
ever carefully they may be guarded in this (world).

16. Knowing their disposition, which the Lord of
creatures laid in them at the creation, to be such,
(every) man should most strenuously exert him¬
self to guard them.

17. (When creating them) Manu allotted to
women (a love of their) bed, (of their) seat and
(of) ornament, impure desires, wrath, dishonesty,
malice, and bad conduct.

18. For women no (sacramental) rite (is per¬
formed) with sacred texts, thus the law is settled;
women (who are) destitute of strength and destitute
of (the knowledge of) Vedic texts, (are as impure
as) falsehood (itself), that is a fixed rule.

19. And to this effect many sacred texts are sung
also in the Vedas, in order to (make) fully known
the true disposition (of women); hear (now those
texts which refer to) the expiation of their (sins).

20. ‘ If my mother, going astray and unfaithful,
conceived illicit desires, may my father keep that
seed from me,’ that is the scriptural text.

18. The sacramental rites meant are the birth-ceremony and so
forth; see also above, II, 66. ‘Destitute of strength’ (Gov.), i.e.
‘of firmness, intelligence, bodily strength, &c.’ (Medh., Nand.).
The second half verse is closely allied to that quoted Baudh. II,
3, 46, and, like the latter, probably a modification of a Vedic
passage.

ao. The verse is a slightly altered - Mantra which occurs in the

IX, 24-

DUTIES OF HUSBAND AND WIFE.

331

21. If a woman thinks in her heart of anything
that would pain her husband, the (above-mentioned
text) is declared (to be a means for) completely re¬
moving such infidelity.

22. Whatever be the qualities of the man with
whom a woman is united according to the law, such
qualities even she assumes, like a river (united) with
the ocean.

23. Akshamild, a woman of the lowest birth,
being united to VasishMa and S&rangl, (being
united) to Mandapdla, became worthy of honour.

24. These and other females of low birth have

*Sankhayana Gnhya-sfttra III, 13, and in the Aaturmasya portion of
the Ka/Aaka recension of the Black Ya^nr-veda. According to the
former work it is to be recited by an Anyatrakarawa, * the son of a
paramour.’ But the Ka/y&as prescribe its use by every sacrificer who
offers a A'aturm&sya sacrifice. Medh., Gov., and Kull. probably
allude to the custom of the latter school when they say that the
Mantra must be recited by every sacrificer, and that its viniyoga or
destination is to be repeated at the ATaturmasya and at the Anvash-
/akd-jraddha. Gov., Kull., Ragh., Nar., and Nand. explain reta£,
‘ seed,’ by matrzra^orfipa/# skannam, and vrmktam, * may he keep
away/ either by bha^atam (svikarotu, Nar., Nand.), 4 may he take for
himself/ or by jodhayatu, ‘may he purify’ (Gov., Kull., R&gh.).
Medh. likewise knows the last explanation. But he gives also
another, retaA pituA sambandhi yad retaA rukram, and vrznkt&m,
apanudatu, which comes nearer to that given above. Nidarranam,
‘a scriptural text/ means according to Medh., dr/sh/dntaA, ‘an
example/ and the other commentators explain it similarly.

22. I.e. as a river becomes salt after uniting with the ocean. It
must be borne in mind that, according to the Indian poets, the
rivers are the wives of the ocean.

23. Aksham&ld or Arundhati was a Kindi It (Gov., R 3 gh.), and
became, as the -Sruti states (Ragh.), with the permission of the
i?/shis, the wife of the sage Vasish/Aa. The story of Mandapdla is
told in the Mah&bhdrata I, 8335 seq. (Adhy. 229). Medh., Gov.,
and K. read £$rngl instead of iS&rahgt or S&rangi.

332

LAWS OF MANU.

IX, 25.

attained eminence in this world by the respective
good qualities of their husbands.

25. Thus has been declared the ever pure
popular usage (which regulates the relations) be¬
tween husband and wife; hear (next) the laws con¬
cerning children which are the cause of happiness in
this world and after death.

26. Between wives (striya^) who (are destined)
to bear children, who secure many blessings, who
are worthy of worship and irradiate (their) dwel¬
lings, and between the goddesses of fortune (sriya^,
who reside) in the houses (of men), there is no
difference whatsoever.

27. The production of children, the nurture of
those born, and the daily life of men, (of these
matters) woman is visibly the cause.

28. Offspring, (the due performance of) religious
rites, faithful service, highest conjugal happiness
and heavenly bliss for the ancestors and oneself,
depend on one’s wife alone.

29. She who, controlling her thoughts, speech, and
acts, violates not her duty towards her lord, dwells
with him (after death) in heaven, and in this world
is called by the virtuous a faithful (wife, sidhvl).

30. But for disloyalty to her husband a wife is
censured among men, and (in her next life) she is
born in the womb of a jackal and tormented by
diseases, the punishment of her sin.

27. Instead of pratyaham, ‘ the daily (life of men),’ Medh. and
N&r. read pratyartham, ‘(the life of men) in all its details,’and Gov.
prityartham, ‘ the friendly intercourse of men,’ because he who has
no wife cannot entertain others (Gov.,Kull,,Ragh.). Medh.mentions
also another reading, pratyardham,

29. Identical with V, 165.

30. Vas. XXI, 14; see also above, V, 164.

IX, 3 6.

DUTIES OF HUSBAND AND WIFE.

333

31. Listen (now) to the following holy discussion,
salutary to all men, which the virtuous (of the pre¬
sent day) and the ancient great sages have held
concerning male offspring.

32. They (all) say that the male issue (of a
woman) belongs to the lord, but with respect to the
(meaning of the term) lord the revealed texts differ ;
some call the begetter (of the child the lord), others
declare (that it is) the owner of the soil.

33. By the sacred tradition the woman is declared
to be the soil, the man is declared to be the seed;
the production of all corporeal beings (takes place)
through the union of the soil with the seed.

34. In some cases the seed is more distinguished,
and in some the womb of the female; but when
both are equal, the offspring is most highly
esteemed.

35. On comparing the seed and the receptacle
(of the seed), the seed is declared to be more im¬
portant ; for the offspring of all created beings is
marked by the characteristics of the seed.

36. Whatever (kind of) seed is sown in a field,
prepared in due season, (a plant) of that same kind,

33. Ap. II, 13, 6-7; Gaut. XVIII, 9-14; Vas. XVII, 6-9,63-64,
Thus Gov., Kull., Ragh., and Nand. But Medh., Nar., and K.
(prima manu) read kartari instead of bhartari, and with this reading
the verse has to be translated as follows: ‘ They (all) declare that a
(lawfully begotten) son belongs to the husband, but with respect to
the begetter (of a child on another’s wife) there is a conflict between
the revealed texts; some declare the begetter (to be the owner of
the son), others that (he belongs to the) owner of the soil.’

34. The commentators point out the cases of Vydsa and 2 ?ishya-
fl-inga as instances of the truth of the first proposition, and of
Dhn'tarash/ra and other Kshetra^as as instances of the second.
‘ Equal,’ i. e. ‘ belonging to the same owner and to the same class’
(Medh.).

334

LAWS OF MANU.

K, 37.

marked with the peculiar qualities of the seed,
springs up in it.

37. This earth, indeed, is called the primeval
womb of created beings ; but the seed develops not
in its development any properties of the womb.

38. In this world seeds of different kinds, sown
at the proper time in the land, even in one field,
come forth (each) according to its kind.

39. The rice (called) vrihi and (that called) J&li,
mudga-beans, sesamum, misha-beans, barley, leeks,
and sugar-cane, (all) spring up according to their
seed.

40. That one (plant) should be sown and another
be produced cannot happen ; whatever seed is sown,
(a plant of) that kind even comes forth.

41. Never therefore must a prudent well-trained
man, who knows the Veda and its Angas and desires
long life, cohabit with another’s wife.

42. With respect to this (matter), those acquainted
with the past recite some stanzas, sung by V&yu
(the Wind, to show) that seed must not be sown
by (any) man on that which belongs to another.

43. As the arrow, shot by (a hunter) who after¬
wards hits a wounded (deer) in the wound (made by

37. ‘ Develops not any properties of the womb,’ i. e. ‘ shows no
properties such as being composed of earth’ (Medh., Gov., Kull.).

39. Vrthi, i.e. such rice as ripens in sixty days (shash/ika); r&li,
i.e. ‘ red rice, which ripens in the cold season’ (Gov., Nar.). Mudga,
i. e. Phaseolus Mungo (mfig); masha, i. e. Phaseolus Radiatus.

41. VigTi&na, ‘the knowledge of the Angas’ (Kull.), means
according to Medh. and N&r., ‘ profane knowledgeaccording to
R&gh., * the tradition.’ Nand. inverts the order, and says, ‘ profane
and sacred learning.’

43. Or, according to a second explanation offered by Medh., ‘ As
the arrow of the hunter who hits a wounded deer is shot into the
air (as it were) and becomes useless.’

IX, 47-' DUTIES OF HUSBAND AND WIFE. 335

another), is shot in vain, even so the seed, sown on
what belongs to another, is quickly lost (to the
sower).

44. (Sages) who know the past call this earth
(pmhivi) even the wife of Prz’thu; they declare a
field to belong to him who cleared away the timber,
and a deer to him who (first) wounded it.

45. He only is a perfect man who consists (of
three persons united), his wife, himself, and his off¬
spring ; thus (says the Veda), and (learned) Brah-
ma«as propound this (maxim) likewise, ‘The hus¬
band is declared to be one with the wife.’

46. Neither by sale nor by repudiation is a wife
released from her husband; such we know the law
to be, which the Lord of creatures (Pra^&pati) made
of old.

47. Once is the partition (of the inheritance)
made, (once is) a maiden given in marriage, (and)
once does (a man) say, ‘ I will give;’ each of those
three (acts is done) once only.

44. ‘Though the earth, after she belonged to IVzthu, was
possessed by many kings, yet she is called IVzthivi, or Przthvi,
after her first owner Prz'thu’ (Medh., Nar.).

45. In confirmation of the first maxim the commentators adduce
a passage of the Va^asaneyi-brahmawa; see also Ap. II, 14,16.

46. The meaning is that a wife, sold or repudiated by her hus-
hand, can never become the legitimate wife of another who may
have bought or received her after she was repudiated (Medh.).

47. YS^w. I, 65. ‘ A partition (of the inheritance),’ i. e. ‘ one
which has been made in accordance with the law, not one made
unjustly’ (Gov., Kull., Rfigh.). Medh. mentions two other ex¬
planations: 1. ‘ if one of the coparceners complains afterwards that
he has received too little, he is entitled only to have the particular
point readjusted, not to annul the whole division;’ 2. * if after the
division it appears that one of the coparceners was disqualified by
bodily defects and ought not to have received a share, the portion

336 LAWS OF MANU. IX, 48,

48. As with cows, mares, female camels, slave-
girls, buffalo-cows, she-goats, and ewes, it* is not the
begetter (or his owner) who obtains the offspring,
even thus (it is) with the wives of others.

” 49. Those who, having no property in a field, but
possessing seed-corn, sow it in another’s soil, do
indeed not receive the grain of the crop which may
spring up.

50. If (one man’s) bull were to beget a hundred
calves on another man’s cows, they would belong to
the owner of the cows; in vain would the bull have
spent his strength.

51. Thus men who have no marital property in
women, but sow their seed in the soil of others,
benefit the owner of the woman; but the giver of
the seed reaps no advantage.

52. If no agreement with respect to the crop has
been made between the owner of the field and the
owner of the seed, the benefit clearly belongs to the
owner of the field; the receptacle is more important
than the seed.

53. But if by a special contract (a field) is made
over (to another) for sowing, then the owner of the
seed and the owner of the soil are both considered
in this world as sharers of the (crop).

54. If seed be carried by water or wind into

made over to him cannot be resumed by the others.’ Nar. refers
the phrase ‘I will give’ to a verbal promise to give a girl, made
without a libation of water. I read with Medh., Gov., Ragh.,
Nand., and K. sakrrt sakn't, instead of satSw sakn't, ‘ those three
(acts are done) once among good men.’ The object of the verse
is to show that a marriage is indissoluble, because a girl can be
given once only (Kull., Nand.).

50. Vas. XVII, 8.

54. I read with Gov., Ragh., and K. blgi, ‘ the owner of the

JX.,S9. 'DUTIES OF HUSBAND AND WIFE. 337

somebody’s field and germinates (there), the (plant
sprang from that) seed belongs even to the owner
of the field, the owner of the seed does not receive
the. crop.

55. Know that such is the law concerning the
offspring of cows, mares, slave-girls, female camels,
she-goats, and ewes, as well as of females of birds
and buffalo-cows.

56. Thus the comparative importance of the seed
and of the womb has been declared to you; I will
next propound the law (applicable) to women in
times of misfortune.

57. The wife of an elder brother is for his
younger (brother) the wife of a Guru ; but the wife
of the younger is declared (to be) the daughter-in-
law of the elder.

58. An elder (brother) who approaches the wife
of the younger, and a younger (brother who ap¬
proaches) the wife of the elder, except in times
of misfortune, both become outcasts, even though
(they were duly) authorised.

59. On failure of issue (by her husband) a woman
who has been authorised, may obtain, (in the) proper
(manner prescribed), the desired offspring by (coha¬
bitation with) a brother-in-law or (with some other)
Sapiwda (of the husband).

seed,’ instead of vapt£, ‘ the sower of the seed’ (Medh., Kull.,
Nand.).

55. ‘ Such is the law,’ i.e. what has been stated in verses 48-54.

56. ‘ In times of misfortune,’ i.e. ‘ when there is no male offspring.’

57. Guru means here, according to Ragh., * the father.’ As the
younger brother’s wife is called ‘ the daughter-in-law’ of the elder,
the explanation is probably correct.

58-63. Gaut. XVIII, 4-8 ■, Vas. XVII, 56-61; Baudh. II, 4,
9—10; Y &gH. I, 68-69.

59. A woman can be authorised by her husband, or after his

05] 2

338

LAWS OF MANU.

IX, 60.

60. He (who is) appointed to (cohabit with) the
widow shall (approach her) at night anointed with
clarified butter and silent, (and) beget one son, by no
means a second.

61. Some (sages), versed in the law, considering
the purpose of the appointment not to have been
attained by those two (on the birth of the first),
think that a second (son) may be lawfully procreated
on (such) women.

62. But when the purpose of the appointment
to (cohabit with) the widow has been attained in
accordance with the law, those two shall behave
towards each other like a father and a daughter-
in-law.

63. If those two (being thus) appointed deviate
from the rule and act from carnal desire, they will
both become outcasts, (as men) who defile the bed
of a daughter-in-law or of a Guru.

64. By twice-born men a widow must not be
appointed to (cohabit with) any other (than her hus¬
band) ; for they who appoint (her) to another (man),
will violate the eternal law.

death by his relatives. ‘On failure of issue,’i.e.‘of sons’ (Gov.,
RSgh., Nand.), or ‘ of sons and of an appointed daughter’ (Medh.).
If the son bom is not fit to offer the .Siiddhas, a second may be
begot (Medh., Kull., Nar.).

60. According to the commentators, the expression ‘ the widow’
is not intended to prohibit an appointment by a diseased or
impotent husband.

61. ‘ Because the ^ish/as say, “ He who has one son only, has no
son” ’ (Medh., Gov., Kull., R&gh.).

62. ‘ Those two,’ i.e. * the elder brother and the female appointed.'

63. ‘ Those two,’ i. e. ‘ an elder or younger brother.’ ‘ The rule,’
see verse 60. For the last clause, compare verse 57.

64-68. These verses flatly contradict the rules given in the pre¬
ceding ones. But it by no means follows that they are a modem

IX, 7o.

DUTIES OF HUSBAND AND WIFE.

339

65. In the sacred texts which refer to marriage
the appointment (of widows) is nowhere mentioned,
nor is the re-maiTiage of widows prescribed in the
rules concerning marriage.

66. This practice which is reprehended by the
learned of the twice-born castes as fit for cattle is
said (to have occurred) even among men, while
Vena ruled.

67. That chief of royal sages who formerly
possessed the whole world, caused a confusion of
the castes (var«a), his intellect being destroyed
by lust.

68. Since that (time) the virtuous censure that
(man) who in his folly appoints a woman, whose
husband died, to (bear) children (to another man).

69. If the (future) husband of a maiden dies after
troth verbally plighted, her brother-in-law shall wed
her according to the following rule.

70. Having, according to the rule, espoused her
(who must be) clad in white garments and be intent

addition. For the same view is expressed by Ap. II, 27, 2-6, and
was held, according to Baudh. II, 3, 34, by Aupa^andhani. More¬
over the Brrhaspati Smrfti states expressly (Colebrooke IV, Dig.
CLVII) that the contradictory statement occurred in the M&nava
Dharmaj&stra, known to its author.

65. In his commentary on verse 66 Medh. points out that in
other sacred texts, Rig-veda X, 40, 2, the Niyoga is mentioned.

66. According to the epic and Pauramc tradition Vena was the
father of Prfthu, and a godless king, who demanded that the sacri¬
fices should be offered to himself, not to the gods. He was, there¬
fore, cut to pieces by the Brahmawas with blades of Kuja grass.
But hitherto no other passage has been found where it is stated
that he introduced the practice of Niyoga. Possibly the assertion
of the Manava may have grown out of the etymological import of
the word vena, ‘ full 0/ desire or lust/

70. The child born by a female thus married belongs, as the
Commentators point out, to her deceased betrothed.

Z 2

34 ©

LAWS OF MANU.

TX,7i.

on purity, he shall approach her once in each proper
season until issue (be had).

71. Let no prudent man, after giving his daughter
to one (man), give her again to another; for he who
gives (his daughter) whom he had before given,
incurs (the guilt of) speaking falsely regarding a
human being.

72. Though (a man) may have accepted a damsel
in due form, he may abandon (her if she be)
blemished, diseased, or deflowered, and (if she have
been) given with fraud.

73. If anybody gives away a maiden possessing
blemishes without declaring them, (the bridegroom)
may annul that (contract) with the evil-minded giver.

74. A man who has business (abroad) may de¬
part after securing a maintenance for his wife; for a
wife, even though virtuous, may be corrupted if she
be distressed by want of subsistence.

75. If (the husband) went on a journey after pro¬
viding (for her), the wife shall subject herself to
restraints in her daily life ; but if he departed with¬
out providing (for her), she may subsist by blame¬
less manual work.

71. Y a.gn. I, 65; Vi. XXV, 9-10. Regarding the guilt incurred,
see above, VIII, 98. Medh. and Nand. say that the verse is meant
to forbid the marriage of a girl whose betrothed died. But Kull.
thinks that it refers to all cases where a betrothal has taken place,
and that it removes a doubt which might arise through a too strict
interpretation of VIII, 227.

72. ‘In due form,’ i.e. ‘with a libation of water and in the
presence of Brdhma»as’ (Medh., Kull., Ragh.). ‘Blemished,’ i.e.
‘by evil bodily marks’ (Medh., Kull., Rdgh., Nand.), or ‘by being
of a base family’ (Nar.).

73. See above, VIII, 205, 224.

- 74 - Nand. inserts verses 95-96 after this.

7 5 - Ya^n. 1 ,84. ‘ Shall subject herself to restraints in her daily

IX, 8o.

DUTIES OF HUSBAND AND WIFE.

341

76. If the husband went abroad for some sacred
duty, (she) must wait for him eight years, if (he
went) to (acquire) learning or fame six (years), if (he
went) for pleasure three years.

77. For one year let a husband bear with a wife
who hates him; but after (the lapse of) a year let
him deprive her of her property and cease to cohabit
with her.

78. She who shows disrespect to (a husband) who
is addicted to (some evil) passion, is a drunkard, or
diseased, shall be deserted for three months (and be)
deprived of her ornaments and furniture.

79. But she who shows aversion towards a mad
or outcast (husband), a eunuch, one destitute of
manly strength, or one afflicted with such diseases as
punish crimes, shall neither be cast off nor be de¬
prived of her property.

80. She who drinks spirituous liquor, is of bad

life,’i.e. ‘shall not adorn herself, nor visit the houses of strangers,
or go to festivals’ (Medh., Kull., Ragh.).

76. Gaut. XVIII, 15, 17; Vas. XVII, 75-80. Kull., Nar., and
Ragh. declare that after the expiration of the terms mentioned the
wife shall go to seek her husband. Nand. says, * the meaning is
that no sin is committed if she afterwards takes another husband.’
Medh. holds that she shall support herself, as before, by blameless
occupations and remain chaste. He mentions the opinion of
others, according to which she may take another husband in
accordance with Narada’s and Parajara’s precepts, but rejects it.
‘ For pleasure,’ i. e. ‘ in order to gain the favours of another woman
whom he prefers’ (Medh., Kull., Ragh.).

77. 4 Her property,’ i.e. ‘ the ornaments and other wealth given to
her by himself'(Kull., Ragh., Nand.), or‘her separate property,
which he may have given to her’ (stridhana, Nar.). The com¬
mentators add that she must, however, be maintained.

78. ‘Addicted to (some evil) passion,’i.e.‘to gambling and so
forth’(Kull., NSr.), or ‘to avarice’ (Ragh.).

80-81. Baudh. II, 4, 6; Y&gn. I, 73.

80. ‘Diseased,* i.e. ‘afflicted with leprosy or the like'(Kull.);

342

LAWS OF MANU.

IX, 8r.

conduct, rebellious, diseased, mischievous, or waste¬
ful, may at any time be superseded (by another
wife).

81. A barren wife may be superseded in the
eighth year, she whose children (all) die in the tenth,
she who bears only daughters in the eleventh, but
she who is quarrelsome without delay.

82. But a sick wife who is kind (to her husband)
and virtuous in her conduct, may be superseded
(only) with her own consent and must never be
disgraced.

83. A wife who, being superseded, in anger de¬
parts from (her husband’s) house, must either be
instantly confined or cast off in the presence of the
family.

84. But she who, though having been forbidden,
drinks spirituous liquor even at festivals, or goes to
public spectacles or assemblies, shall be fined six
krrshwalas.

85. If twice-born men wed women of their own
and of other (lower castes), the seniority, honour,
and habitation of those (wives) must be (settled)
according to the order of the castes (var«a).

86. Among all (twice-born men) the wife of equal
caste alone, not a wife of a different caste by any
means, shall personally attend her husband and
assist him in his daily sacred rites.

87. But he who foolishly causes that (duty) to be

‘ mischievous,’ i.e. ‘ who beats or ill-treats her children, servants, &c.’
(Medh., Nar., Kull.).

83. 'Of the family,’i. e.‘of her own and the husband’s family’
(Medh.), or ‘ of her own family’ (Kull., NSr.).

86. Vi. XXVI, 1; Yagrl. 1 ,88. ‘ Personally attend,’ i. e. ‘prepare
and bring his food, &c.’ (Medh., Kull., Ragh.).

87. Vi. XXVI, 2. Instead of‘by the ancients ’ (Kull., R&gh.,

IX, 93-

duties OF HUSBAND AND WIFE.

343

performed by another, while his wife of equal caste
is alive, is declared by the ancients (to be) as (despi¬
cable) as a K&nd&i la (sprung from the) Brahma^a
(caste).

88. To a distinguished, handsome suitor (of) equal
(caste) should (a father) give his daughter in ac¬
cordance with the prescribed rule, though she have
not attained (the proper age).

89. (But) the maiden, though marriageable, should
rather stop in (the father’s) house until death, than
that he should ever give her to a man destitute of
good qualities.

90. Three years let a damsel wait, though she be
marriageable; but after that time let her choose for
herself a bridegroom (of) equal (caste and rank).

91. If, being not given in marriage, she herself
seeks a husband, she incurs no guilt, nor (does) he
whom she weds.

92. A maiden who choses for herself, shall not
take with her any ornaments, given by her father or
her mother, or her brothers; if she carries them
away, it will be theft.

93. But he who takes (to wife) a marriageable

Nand.), Medh. says, ‘ since olden times,’ Ndr. ‘ in the Pura«a.’
Regarding the origin of the Kindi las, see below, X, 12.

88-92. Gaut. XVIII, 20-23; Vas. XVII, 69-71; Baudh. IV, 1,
11-14; Vi. XXIV, 40-41; Y ign. I, 64.

88. ‘ Though she have not attained (the proper age),’ i. e. ‘ the age
of eight years’(Kull., N&r., Rdgh.), or ‘before she is bodily fit for
marriage’(Medh., Nand.). Medh. specially objects to the first opinion,
‘ because men greedy of money give even an infant in marriage.’

92. I read with Medh. and Nand., steyaw syat, instead of stena
sydt,‘she will be a thief’ (Kull., Rdgh., K.). Medh. mentions
another reading, stena^ sydt, ‘ he, i. e. the bridegroom, will be a thief.’

93. Medh. says that this verse, according to ‘ some,’ does not
belong to Manu (ke/v’id dhuA amdnavo ’ya m dokaA).

344

LAWS OF MANU.

IX, 94 .

damsel, shall not pay any nuptial fee to her father;
for the (latter) will lose his dominion over her in
consequence of his preventing (the legitimate result
of the appearance of) her menses.

94. A man, aged thirty years, shall marry a
maiden of twelve who pleases him, or a man of
twenty-four a girl eight years of age; if (the per¬
formance of) his duties would (otherwise) be im¬
peded, (he must marry) sooner.

95. The husband receives his wife from the gods,
(he does not wed her) according to his own will;
doing what is agreeable to the gods, he must always
support her (while she is) faithful.

96. To be mothers were women created, and to
be fathers men; religious rites, therefore, are or¬
dained in the Veda to be performed (by the hus¬
band) together with the wife.

97. If, after the nuptial fee has been paid for a
maiden, the giver of the fee dies, she shall be given
in marriage to his brother, in case she consents.

94. Medh. and Kull. point out that this verse is not intended to
lay down a hard and fast rule, but merely to give instances of suit¬
able ages. ‘ If (the performance of) his duties would be impeded,
&c.,*’i. e. ‘ if he has finished his studentship earlier, he must marry
at once in order to be able to fulfil his duties as a householder*
(Kull, Mr., R&gh.).

95. ‘ From the gods,* i. e. 4 from those mentioned in the Mantras
recited at the wedding, e. g. from Bhaga, Aryaman, Savitrf, &c.*
(Kull., R£gh.), or ‘from Agni* (Mr.), or ‘from Soma, the Gan-
dharva, and Agni* (Medh., Nand.). Medh. reads vindetani£May&,
‘ shall wed without a wish on. his part,* but mentions the other
reading, vindate nfc£^ay&, too. According to Medh., Kull., and
R£gh,, a faithful wife must be supported, even if she does not love
her husband.

97. ‘ His brother,* i. e. ‘ his full brother, who is even (as) the
deceased himself* (Mr.). Regarding the nuptial fee, and the

IX, I 04 >

DUTIES OF HUSBAND AND WIFE.

345

98. Even a .Sfidra ought not to take a nuptial fee,
when he gives away his daughter; for he who takes
a fee sells his daughter, covering (the transaction by
another name).

99. Neither ancients nor moderns who were good
men have done such (a deed) that, after promising
(a daughter) to one man, they gave her to another;

100. Nor, indeed, have we heard, even in former
creations, of such (a thing as) the covert sale of a
daughter for a fixed price, called a nuptial fee.

101. ‘ Let mutual fidelity continue until death,’
this may be considered as the summary of the
highest law for husband and wife.

102. Let man and woman, united in marriage,
constantly exert themselves, that (they may not be)
disunited (and) may not violate their mutual fidelity.

10,3. Thus has been declared to you the law for a
husband and his wife, which is intimately connected
with conjugal happiness, and the manner of raising
offspring in times of calamity; learn (now the law
concerning) the division of the inheritance.

104. After the death of the father and of the
mother, the brothers, being assembled, may divide
among themselves in equal shares the paternal (and
the maternal) estate; for, they have no power (over
it) while the parents live.

contradiction between’ this and the next verses, see note on
VIII, 204.

99. Nand. places this verse after the next.

104. Gaut. XXVIII, 1; Baudh. II, 3, 8; Y&gn. II, 117. The
father’s estate is to be divided after the father’s death, and the
mother’s estate after the mother’s death (Kull., N&r., R&gh.,
Nand.). The mother’s estate devolves on the sons only on failure
of daughters (N£r.). The word firdhvam, ‘after/ indicates by
implication that the rule holds good in the case of the (father’s)

346

LAWS OF MANU.

IX, 105 .

105. (Or) the eldest alone may take the whole
paternal estate, the others shall live under him just
as (they lived) under their father.

106. Immediately on the birth of his first-born a
man is (called) the father of a son and is freed from
the debt to the manes; that (son), therefore, is
worthy (to receive) the whole estate.

107. That son alone on whom he throws his debt
and through whom he obtains immortality, is be¬
gotten for (the fulfilment of) the law; all the rest
they consider the offspring of desire.

108. As a father (supports) his sons, so let the
eldest support his younger brothers, and let them
also in accordance with the law behave towards their
eldest brother as sons (behave towards their father).

109. The eldest (son) makes the family prosperous
or, on the contrary, brings it to ruin; the eldest (is
considered) among men most worthy of honour, the
eldest is not treated with disrespect by the virtuous.

no. If the eldest brother behaves as an eldest
brother (ought to do), he (must be treated) like a

turning ascetic (R&gh.). The equal division takes place if the
eldest does not desire to receive an additional share (Kull.). The
last clause shows that a division of the property may take place
with the parents' permission during their lifetime (Kull., N&r.,

Rftgh.).

105. Gaut. XXVIII, 3 ; Baudh. II, 3, 13. Le. if the eldest son
is virtuous (Kull., R&gh.), or possesses particularly eminent qualities,
while the others are less distinguished (N&r.).

106. Regarding the debt, see Vas. XI, 48.

107. This verse alludes to the Vedic text quoted, Vas. XVII, 1;
Vi. XV, 45.

108. I.e. if they make no division and the eldest takes the whole
estate (Kull.). Nand. places this verse after the next.

no. ‘Behaves as an eldest brother (ought to do),’i.e. ‘duly
protects and educates the younger ones ’ (Medh.,Kull., Ndr., R&gh.).

IX, n4«

INHERITANCE.

347

mother and like a father; but if he behaves in a
manner unworthy of an eldest brother, he should
yet be honoured like a kinsman.

hi. Either let them thus live together, or apart,
if (each) desires (to gain) spiritual merit; for (by
their living) separate (their) merit increases, hence
separation is meritorious.

ti2. The additional share (deducted) for the
eldest shall be one-twentieth (of the estate) and
the best of all chattels, for the middlemost half of
that, but for the youngest one-fourth.

113. Both the eldest and the youngest shall take
(their shares) according to (the rule just) stated;
(each of) those who are between the eldest and the
youngest, shall have the share (prescribed for the)
middlemost.

114. Among the goods of every kind the eldest
shall take the best (article), and (even a single
chattel) which is particularly good, as well as the
best of ten (animals).

‘Like a kinsman,’ i. e. * like a maternal or paternal uncle’(Medh.,
Kull., Ragh.); see also below, verse 213.

hi. Gaut. XXVIII, 4. ‘(Their) merit increases,’ i.e. ‘each of
them has to kindle the sacred fire, to offer separately the Agni-
hotra, the five great sacrifices and so forth, and hence each gains
separately merit’ (Medh., Kull.).

112. Gaut. XXVIII, 5-7; Baudh. II, 3, 9; Vi. XVIII, 37;
Y&gii. II, 114. ‘The remainder shall be divided equally,’ see verse
116 (Medh., Kull., N&r., Ragh.). Medh. says that ‘some’ declare
that the rules on the unequal partition refer to past times, and
have no authority for the Kaliyuga. But he rejects this view.

113. The object of the verse is to show that no difference shall
be made between sons intervening between the eldest and the
youngest, however great their number may be (Kull., Ragh.).

114. Gaut. XXVIII, 11-13; Baudh. II, 3, 6. ‘(Even a single
chattel) which is particularly good,’ i.e. ‘a dress or an orna¬
ment* (Medh.), or ‘something impartible like an idol’ (Nand.).

348 LAWS OF MANU. IX, 115.

115. But among (brothers) equally skilled in their
occupations, there is no additional share, (consisting
of the best animal) among ten; some trifle only shall
be given to the eldest as a token of respect.

116. If additional shares are thus deducted, one
must allot equal shares (out of the residue to each);
but if no deduction is made, the allotment of the
shares among them shall be (made) in the following
manner.

117. Let the eldest son take one share in excess,
the (brother) born next after him one (share) and a
half, the younger ones one share each ; thus the law
is settled.

1x8. But to the maiden (sisters) the brothers shall
severally give (portions) out of their shares, each out
of his share one-fourth part; those who refuse to
give (it), will become outcasts.

4 The best of ten animals,' thus Kull., Nar., Ragh., according
to Gaut. XXVIII, 12, where they read da^ata^ pa^hnam, instead
of dajatam. Medh. gives the same explanation, but applies the
rule also to clothes and ornaments. He adds, that 4 ethers '
explain the text in accordance with Vas. XVII, 43, ‘And a tithe (of
the cattle and horses)/ Nand. nearly agrees with Mcdh/s opinion,
as he says that everything shall be divided into ten shares, and the
eldest shall take one in excess. All the commentators agree that
this additional share belongs to an eldest brother only, if he is endowed
with particularly good qualities and the rest are inferior to him.

115. Ap. II, 13, 13. 4 Their occupations/ i. e. 4 reciting the Veda
and so forth' (Kull., Ragh.). According to Nar., the phrase 4 no
additional share (consisting of the best animals) among ten' indi¬
cates that none of the other additions, mentioned in verse 114, shall
be given. Nand. omits this verse.

116. Gaut. XXVIII, 8.

117. Gaut. XXVIII, 9-10; Vas. XVII, 42. ‘One share in
excess/ i. e. ‘two shares' (Medh., Kull., Nar., Ragh.,Nand.). The
latter four point out that this division is to be made when the eldest
and the second brothers are more eminent than the rest.

*18. Vi. XVIII, 35; Y&gn. II, 124. According to all the com-

IX, 120.

INHERITANCE.

349

119. Let him never divide (the value of) a
single goat or sheep, or a (single beast) with un¬
cloven hoofs; it is prescribed (that) a single goat or
sheep (remaining after an equal division, belongs) to
the eldest alone.

120. If a younger brother begets a son on the
wife of the elder, the division must then be made
equally; thus the law is settled.

mentators the meaning is that, if a man leaves children by wives of
different castes, the brothers are to provide for the dowry of the
unmarried sisters of the same caste, i. e. a Brahmawa’s sons by
a Brahmawa wife for the daughters of the latter, the sons by a
Kshatriya wife for the daughters of the latter, &c. This meaning
is more clearly expressed by Medh/s reading, svabhya^ svabhyas
tu kanyabha^, ‘ But the brothers shall give (portions) to the maiden
(sisters), each to those of his own (caste)/ Kull. adds, that the
duty of providing for sisters devolves in the first instance on
brothers of the full blood, and in default of such on half-brothers.

As regards the expression ‘ a fourth share,* Medh. says that
a brother shall receive three-fourths and the sister one-fourth, and
that, if there are many sisters, they shall receive one-fourth of the
share of a brother of equal caste. Kull. agrees with the first part
of the explanation, but adds, 4 Hence it must be understood that
even if there are many brothers and sisters of the same caste, but
born of different mothers, one-fourth part must be given to the
sisters of the full blood * (i. e. by their full brothers). N&r. says,
‘ They shall give each one-fourth part of their share, and take three
parts; and the same division must be made if there are many
daughters. But if there are many sons and one daughter, they
must deduct from their several shares as much money as will be
equal to a fourth part of one brother's share and give that/ Medh.
censures those commentators who think that one-fourth share need
not be actually given, but only as much as will suffice to defray the
marriage expenses.

119. I.e. such an animal is not to be sold and the proceeds to
be divided; nor shall its value be made good to the other brothers
by giving them other objects (Medh.. Kull., N&r., Rdgh.).

120. I.e. the Kshetra^a receives no preferential share, as his
father would have done. Kyll. infers from this verse that, though

350

LAWS OF MANU.

IX, 121.

121. The representative (the son begotten on the
wife) is not invested with the right of the principal
(the eldest brother to an additional share); the
principal (became) a father on the procreation (of
a son by his younger brother); hence one should
give a share to the (son begotten on the wife of
the elder brother) according to the rule (stated
above).

122. If there be a doubt, how the division shall
be made, in case the younger son is born of the
elder wife and the elder son of the younger wife,

123. (Then the son) born of the first wife shall

above, verse 104, brothers (i.e. sons of the deceased) only are
named, grandsons inherit, also according to Manu, just like sons
and with sons; see also below, verse 186.

121. Thus Kull.; Nand. agrees with respect to the first half-
verse, but explains the second as follows, ‘The father is the
principal in the procreation of children; hence one must give a
share to the (son begotten on the wife of the eldest) according to
the law (declared above). 1 Nar. also differs, ‘ The subsidiary (son)
does not by law take the place of the principal, (and cannot for that
reason receive an additional share); his father (the eldest was) the
principal for continuing the line; hence one should give a share (to
his subsidiary son) in accordance with the law/ Ragh. goes off still
further, ‘ The principal (the eldest) must according to the law not
be treated like the substitute (i. e. not be deprived of an additional
share, yet as) the father is the chief person in the procreation (of
children), one should give a share to the (son of the wife) in accord¬
ance with the law (applicable to his real father)/ Medh. has a
similar explanation, ‘(To say) that the substitute (i. e. the Kshetra^a)
is equal to the principal is not proper according to the sacred law;
the father (i. e. the begetter) is the principal in the procreation of
children, hence one must give a share (to the Kshetrag-a) in accord¬
ance (with the law declared above)/

122. The point to be decided is, if the seniority is to be accord¬
ing to the mothers or according to actual birth. The eldest wife is,
of course, the one married first.

123. Gaut. XXVIII, 14.

IX, 126.

INHERITANCE.

351

take as his additional share one (most excellent)
bull; the next best bulls (shall belong) to those
(who are) inferior on account of their mothers.

124. But the eldest (son, being) born of the eldest
wife, shall receive fifteen cows and a bull, the other
sons may then take shares according to (the seniority
of) their mothers; that is a settled rule.

125. Between sons born of wives equal (in caste)
(and) without (any other) distinction no seniority in
right of the mother exists ; seniority is declared (to
be) according to birth.

126. And with respect to the Subrahma^yfi (texts)
also it is recorded that the invocation (of Indra shall
be made) by the first-born, of twins likewise, (con¬
ceived at one time) in the wombs (of their mothers)
the seniority is declared (to depend) on (actual) birth.

124. Gaut. XXVIII, 15. ‘May take shares/ i.e. ‘may divide the
(other) cows* (Medh., Kull.), or ‘shall each receive one bull, a very
good one, a less excellent one, in due order, according to the
seniority of their mothers* (Nar.).

125. As this verse and the following one contradict the rules
given in verses 123-124, the commentators try to reconcile them
in various ways. Medh. thinks that verses 123-124 are an artha-
v£da and have no legal force, and R&gh. inclines to the same
opinion. N&r. and Nand. hold that the seniority according to the
mother’s marriage is of importance for the law of inheritance (verses
123-124), but that it has no value with respect to salutations and
the like or to prerogatives at sacrifices (verses 125-126). Kull.,
finally relying on Gov/s opinion, thinks that. the rules leave ail
option, and that their application depends on the existence of good
qualities and the want of such. It is, however, probable that,
according to the custom of Hindu writers, the two conflicting
opinions are placed side by side, and that it is intended that the
learned should find their way out of the difficulty as they can.

126. The Subrahma»ya texts contain an invitation, addressed
to Indra, to partake of the Soma; see Aitareya-br&hmaaa VI, 3.
Nand. reach yamayoj /foikagarbhe 'pi.

352

LAWS OF MANU.

IX, 127-

127. He who has no son may make his daughter
in the following manner an appointed daughter
(putriki, saying to her husband), ‘ The (male) child,
born of her, shall perform my funeral rites.’

128. According to this rule Daksha, himself, lord
of created beings, formerly made (all his female
offspring) appointed daughters in order to multiply
his race.

129. He gave ten to Dharma, thirteen to Kas-
yapa, twenty-seven to King Soma, honouring (them)
with an affectionate heart.

130. A son is even (as) oneself, (such) a daughter
is equal to a son; how can another (heir) take the
estate, while such (an appointed daughter who is
even) oneself, lives ?

131. But whatever may be the separate property
of the mother, that is the share of the unmarried
daughter alone; and the son of an (appointed)
daughter shall take the whole estate of (his ma¬
ternal grandfather) who leaves no son.

127. Gaut. XXVIII, 18; Vas. XVII, 17; Baudh. II, 3,15; Vi.
XV, 5.

128. The story of Daksha’s fifty, sixty, or twenty-four daughters
occurs in the Mahabharata and the Purdwas. The twenty-seven
given to King Soma, the moon, are the lunar mansions or
Nakshatras.

130. ‘A son is even (as) oneself;’ see the verse quoted,'Baudh.
II, 3,14. The commentators state that the word duhita, ‘ daughter,’
means here putrika, * an appointed daughter.’ Medh. adds that in
accordance with this verse, an appointed daughter who has no son,
when her father dies, does not inherit his property (?).

131. Gaut. XXVIII, 2 4; Vi. XVII, 21. The correctness of the trans¬
lation of the term yautakam by * separate property’ (Medh.), follows
from its being used below, verse 214, to denote the separate hoard
made by an elder brother. According to Medh., Kull., and Nir. all
stridhana is meant; according to ‘others’ mentioned byMedh.,Nand.,
and Rfigh., the so-called saudSyikam or property derived from the

IX, 135*

INHERITANCE.

353

132. The son of an (appointed) daughter, indeed,
shall (also) take the estate of his (own) father, who
leaves no (other) son; he shall (then) present two
funeral cakes to his own father and to his maternal
grandfather.

133. Between a son's son and the son of an
(appointed) daughter there is no difference, neither
with respect to worldly matters nor to sacred duties ;
for their father and mother both sprang from the
body of the same (man).

134. But if, after a daughter has been appointed,
a son be born (to her father), the division (of the
inheritance) must in that (case) be equal; for there
is no right of primogeniture for a woman.

135. But if an appointed daughter by accident dies
without (leaving) a son, the husband of the appointed
daughter may, without hesitation, take that estate.

father's family. Kumari, ‘ an unmarried daughter' (Medh., Kull.),
means according to Nar. ‘ a daughter who has no sons.' Dauhitra^,
literally ‘the son of a daughter,' means according to the com¬
mentators ‘ the son of an appointed daughter,' putrikaputra^. The
,first rule is, according to Kull., Nar., and Nand., a general maxim,
which refers not merely to the case of a putrikd. The second rule
shows, according to Nand., that the appointed daughter herself does
not inherit her father’s estate, if she has a son.

132. Medh. mentions a var. lect., aputrasya hared yadi, ‘If the
son of an (appointed) daughter takes the entire estate of (his
maternal grandfather), &c.,’ which is also found in Gov.'s text, but
considers it to be wrong.

I33» Y&gil. II, 128. Loke dharmata^, ‘neither with respect to
worldly affairs nor to sacred duties’(Kull.), means according toR&gh.
and Nand. ‘with respect to sacred duties, according to the law/

135. ‘That estate,* i.e. ‘what the appointed daughter received from
her father either during his lifetime or after his death' (N&r.). Kull.
adds that the verse is intended to forbid the father's inheriting his
pre-deceased daughter’s property, on the plea that she was like a
son (see verse 185). Nand. says that the paternal uncles &c. shall
not take the putriki’s estate.

[25]

a a

354

LAWS OF MANU.

IX, 136 .

136. Through that son whom (a daughter), either
not appointed or appointed, may bear to (a hus¬
band) of equal (caste), his maternal grandfather (has)
a son’s son; he shall present the funeral cake and
take the estate.

137. Through a son he conquers the worlds,
through a son’s son he obtains immortality, but
through his son’s grandson he gains the world of
the sun.

138. Because a son delivers (tr&yate) his father
from the hell called Put, he was therefore called
put-tra (a deliverer from Put) by the Self-existent
(SvayambhO) himself.

139. Between a son’s son and the son of a
daughter there exists in this world no difference;
for even the son of a daughter saves him (who has
no sons) in the next world, like the son’s son.

136. Kull. explains akrfta va kr/ta v&pi by ‘(a daughter) either
appointed not (explicitly but by a mental reservation), or appointed
(explicitly, at the betrothal, according to verse 127).’ He adds that
Gov. takes the word akr/'tfi in its usual sense, and asserts that the
verse allows the son of a daughter not appointed to inherit his
maternal grandfather’s estate. The latter opinion is held also by
Nfir., who remarks that the son of a daughter not appointed inherits
on failure of a wife or of daughters of his grandfather; and by
Nand. RSgh. and Medh. side with Kull., whose explanation is
supported by Gaut. XXVIII, 20, and still more by Vi. XV, 6. The
latter passage clearly prescribes that the daughter of a man who
has no sons is in every case ‘ an appointed daughter.’

137. Vas. XVII, 5; Vi. XV, 46; Ya^n. I, 78. ‘ The worlds,’

i. e. ‘ the ten, called viroka (free from sorrow), the first of which is
svarga’ (Medh.). * Immortality, i. e. a very long residence in those
same (worlds),’ (Medh., Kull.) * The sun,’ i. e. ‘ Hirawyagarbha ’
(Ndr.). The verse shows that sons and grandsons inherit, though
a wife and the rest may be living (Kull.).

138. Vi. XV, 44. .

139. Vi. XV, 47. According to Medh. and Kull., dauhitra^, * thg

IX, 142 *

INHERITANCE.

355

140. Let the son of an appointed daughter first
present a funeral cake to his mother, the second to
her father, the third to his father’s father.

141. Of the man who has an adopted (Datrima)
son possessing all good qualities, that same (son)
shall take the inheritance, though brought from
another family.

142. An adopted son shall never take the family
(name) and the estate of his natural father; the
funeral cake follows the family (name) and the
estate, the funeral offerings of him who gives (his
son in adoption) cease (as far as that son is con¬
cerned).

son of a daughter/ means here also ‘the son of an appointed
daughter.' Nand. reads putravat, ‘like a son;' Gov, pftrva^an,
‘(and) the ancestors/

140. Baudh. II, 3, 16. Medh. mentions a var. lect., pitus tasya,
‘ the second to his father/ which he, however, justly considers to
be bad.

141. Vas. XV, 9-10; Baudh. Parhish/a 16. Medh., Kull., and
Ragh. refer this rule to the case where a man has a legitimate son
and an adopted son, and think that in such a case the latter, being
eminently virtuous, shall receive, like a Kshetra^a (see verse 146),
a fifth or sixth part of the estate. Medh. remarks that some think
he is to have half, but that their opinion is improper, and finally that
Upadhyaya, i.e. his teacher, allots to the adopted son less than to the
Kshetra^a. Kull. and R&gh. state that Gov. took the verse to mean
that an eminently virtuous adopted son shall inherit on failure of a
legitimate son and of the son of the wife, but that this explanation
is inadmissible on account of verse 165. Nevertheless R&gh. repro¬
duces Gov.’s opinion. Nar. says, ‘It has been declared that an
adopted son receives a share like the chief son, when he is emi¬
nently virtuous/ Nand. reads at the end of the second line, sam-
prapto 'sya na putraka^, ‘ shall take the inheritance, (provided) the
(adoptive father) has no son/

142. Medh. mentions another ‘ improper ’ explanation, according
to which haret, ‘ shall take/ is to mean h&rayet, ‘ shall allow to be
taken/ and the purport of the verse is that ‘ he is to benefit both
(fathers) like a Dvyamushyayawa/

A a 2

356

LAWS OF MANU.

IX, 143.

143. The son of a wife, not appointed (to have
issue by another), and he whom (an appointed
female, already) the mother of a son, bears to her
brother-in-law, are both unworthy of a share, (one
being) the son of an adulterer and (the other) pro¬
duced through (mere) lust.

144. Even the male (child) of a female (duly)
appointed, not begotten according to the rule (given
above), is unworthy of the paternal estate; for he
was procreated by an outcast.

145. A son (legally) begotten on such an ap¬
pointed female shall inherit like a legitimate'son of
the body; for that seed and the produce belong,
according to the law, to the owner of the soil.

146. He who takes care of his deceased brother’s
estate and of his widow, shall, after raising up a son
for his brother, give that property even to that (son).

147. If a woman (duly) appointed bears a son
to her brother-in-law or to another (Sapi«ah), that
(son, if he is) begotten through desire, they declare
(to be) incapable of inheriting and to be produced
in vain.

148. The rules (given above) must be understood
(to apply) to a distribution among sons of women of
the same (caste); hear (now the law) concerning

144. ‘The rule (given above),’ i.e. that given above, verse 60.
Nand. omits this verse.

145. Medh. and Kull. state that the object of this verse is to
teach that a Kshetra^a, if endowed with good qualities, may even re¬
ceive (against verse 120) the additional share of an eldest son, because
it is said that he inherits ‘ like a legitimate son.’ Nar. says, ‘ (the
expression) like a legitimate son (is used) in order to establish
(the title to) an equal share.’ Nand. omits this verse.

146. ‘ This rule refers to the case where the two brothers are
divided, while verse 120 refers to those who live in union’ (Medh.,
Kull., RSgh.). Nand. places this verse after 147.

IX, 152.

INHERITANCE.

357

those begotten by one man on many wives of
different (castes).

149. If there be four wives of a Br&hma«a in the
direct order of the castes, the rule for the division
(of the estate) among the sons born of them is as
follows:

150. The (slave) who tills (the field), the bull kept
for impregnating cows, the vehicle, the ornaments,
and the house shall be given as an additional por¬
tion to the Brdhmawa (son), and one most excellent
share.

151. Let the son of the Brihma#! (wife) take
three shares of the (remainder of the) estate, the son
of the Kshatriya two, the son of the Vaisya a share
and a half, and the son of the •S'fidrd may take one
share.

152. Or let him who knows the law make ten
shares of the whole estate, and justly distribute them
according to the following rule :

149-156. Gaut. XXVIII, 35-39 ; Vas. XVII, 48-50; Baudh. II,
3, 10; Vi. XVIII, 1-33, 38-40; Ya gn. II, 125.

150. ‘The ornaments,’i.c. ‘ the ring which the father used to
wear, and the like’ (Medh., Kull.). * The house,’ i. e. ‘ the principal
mansion’ (Medh., Kull., R&gh.). Ekamsas ka pradhanata/;, ‘ one
most excellent share’(Medh., Kull.), means according to Ndr., with
whom Nand. agrees, ‘ and one share consisting of the chief, i. e.
best property ’ (pradhanato mukhyadhanad utkrfsh/ad ity arthaA),
and according to Ragh. ‘ and one share, because he is the chief
person.’ According to N&r. this ‘one share’ must be equal in
value to one of the three shares mentioned in the next verse.

151. Medh. and Kull. remark that the rule holds good also if
there are more sons than one in each class.

152. According to N&r. this rule refers to the case when each of
the wives has several sons, while the preceding one is applicable
when each wife has one son only. R&gh. thinks that the first rule
shall be followed when the son of the Br£hma«i possesses good
qualities, the second when he is destitute of them.

358

LAWS OF MANU.

IX, 153 *

153. The Brdhma^a (son) shall take four shares,
the son of the Kshatriyd (wife) three, the son of the
VaLryi shall have two parts, the son of the .Sttdrd
may take one share.

154. Whether (a Brdhma^a) have sons or have
no sons (by wives of the twice-born castes), the (heir)
must, according to the law, give to the son of a .Sftdra
(wife) no more than a tenth (part of his estate).

155. The son of a Brahma^a, a Kshatriya, and a
VaLrya by a .Sftdra (wife) receives no share of the
inheritance; whatever his father may give to him,
that shall be his property.

156. All the sons of twice-born men, born of
wives of the same caste, shall equally divide the
estate, after the others have given to the eldest an
additional share.

157. For a .Stidra is ordained a wife of his own
caste only (and) no other ; those born of her shall
have equal shares, even if there be a hundred sons.

153. Medh. points out that according to other Smrftis the Brah-
ma«a son alone receives land, given to his father, and that the
*Sfidra son receives no share in land, if there is other property.

154. Hence on failure of other sons the other heirs, the Sapi#</as
(Medh.), or the widow and the rest(N 3 r.), shall take the rest of the
estate. N&r. adds that he may obtain more than a tenth, if his
father give it to him.

155. The son of a -Sfldra wife receives no share of his father's
estate in case the mother was not legally married (Medh. ‘ others,'
Kull.), or in case he is destitute of good qualities (Kull., Ragh.).
According to Medh. and N&r., na rikthabh&k, * receives no share of
the inheritance,' means ‘ receives no (larger) share (than one-tenth,
except if the father himself has given more to him).' But it seems
more probable, that the verse is intended to inculcate the maxim
that a son by a *Sftdra wife cannot claim any fixed portion of the
inheritance from his father who divides his estate.

156. Medh., Gov., and K. read v&, ‘or,' instead of ye (g&tih),
but this gives no good sense, as Medh. remarks.

IX, I<>2.

INHERITANCE.

359

158. Among the twelve sons of men whom Manu,
sprung from the Self-existent (Svayambhft), enu¬
merates, six are kinsmen and heirs, and six not
heirs, (but) kinsmen.

159. The legitimate son of the body, the son
begotten on a wife, the son adopted, the son made,
the son secretly born, and the son cast off, (are) the
six heirs and kinsmen.

160. The son of an unmarried damsel, the son
received with the wife, the son bought, the son
begotten on a re-married woman, the son self-given,
and the son* of a .Sttclra female, (are) the six (who
are) not heirs, (but) kinsmen.

161. Whatever result a man obtains who (tries to)
cross a (sheet of) water in an unsafe boat, even that
result obtains he who (tries to) pass the gloom (of
the next world) with (the help of) bad (substitutes
for a real) son.

162. If the two heirs of one man be a legitimate

i 58-i 59 > Gaut. XXVIII, 31-33; Vas. XVII, 25, 38; Baudh.
II, 3, 31-32-

158. I. e. the first six inherit the family estate and offer the
funeral oblations, the last six do not inherit, but offer libations of
water and so forth as remoter kinsmen (Kull., NSr., Ragh., Nand.
‘some’). Medh., Nar., and Nand. take adayadabandhavd/^ to
mean * not heirs nor kinsmen.’ But Kull. rightly objects that the
parallel passage of Baudh. proves this explanation to be wrong.
N£r. finally interprets bandhudayada/i, ‘ heirs and kinsmen,’ as ‘ heirs
to the kinsmen,’ i.e. ‘inheritors of the estate of kinsmen, such as
paternal uncles, on failure of sons, wives, and so forth.’ Nfir. and
Nand., as well as Medh. in his commentary on verse 166, add
that the son of an appointed daughter is not mentioned, because he
has been declared above to be equal to a legitimate son.

161. Medh. mentions another explanation of the expression
kuputraiA, ‘ by bad (substitutes for a real) son,’ according to which
‘sons of a wife or widow not duly appointed’ are meant.

162. According to Medh. and Gov. (quoted by Kull. and R&gh.),

36 o

LAWS OF MANU.

IX, 163.

son of his body and a son begotten on his wife, each
(of the two sons), to the exclusion of the other,
shall take the estate of his (natural) father.

163. The legitimate son of the body alone (shall
be) the owner of the paternal estate; but, in order
to avoid harshness, let him allow a maintenance to
the rest.

164. But when the legitimate son of the body
divides the paternal estate, he shall give one-sixth
or one-fifth part of his father’s property to the son
begotten on the wife.

~™ ” ’ ' •
the rule refers to the case where a legitimate son and. the son
of a wife not appointed both claim the inheritance. But ‘ others/
quoted by Medh., Kull., and Ragh., think that it applies to the case
where a wife first was appointed by her husband to procreate a son
with his brother, and afterwards a legitimate son was born. The
difficulty which under this explanation arises with respect to verse
164, is removed by assuming that the latter applies to the case
where the natural father of the Kshetra^a has likewise sons, while
verse 162 presupposes that he has none. Nar. and Nand. say that
the case which the rule contemplates, is that two brothers were
undivided, and when the one died, the other, who himself had sons,
begat with the widow a Kshetra^a son. On the death of the second
brother, the Kshetra^a is entitled to receive only the share of the
husband of his mother, not to claim a portion of the estate of his
natural father. Under this supposition the translation would be,
‘ If a legitimate son (of one brother) and the son of the wife (of
another) have a claim to one (undivided) estate, each shall receive
the share of his father.’

163-165. Vi. XV, 28-30; Ya gn. II, 132.

163. This rule refers to the case where one man leaves several
substitutes for sons and a legitimate son (Medh., Kull., N&r.,
R&gh.). ‘To the rest,’i.e.‘to all except the son begotten on the
wife’ (which latter is exempted by verses 164-165; Medh., Kull.,
Ragh., Nand.). ‘ He who does not maintain them, commits sin’
(Medh., Kull.); but not, if they have other means of subsistence (Nand.).

164. This rule refers to the case where a Kshetra^a was begotten
before the legitimate son, and received no property from his natural
father (Ragh.); see^lso Kull/s notes on verses 162-163. According

IX, 168.

INHERITANCE.

361

165. The legitimate son and the son of the wife
(thus) share the fathers estate; but the other ten
become members of the family, and inherit according
to their order (each later named on failure of those
named earlier).

166. Him whom a man begets on his own wedded
wife, let him know to be a legitimate son of the
body (Aurasa), the first in rank.

167. He who was begotten according to the pecu¬
liar law (of the Niyoga) on the appointed wife of a
dead man, of a eunuch, or of one diseased, is called
a son begotten on a wife (Kshetra^a).

168. That (boy) equal (by caste) whom his mother
or his father affectionately give, (confirming the gift)

to Nar. it refers, however, to the case where a man died, leaving
several widows, and one was appointed to bear a son by her brother-
in-law, while another afterwards proved to be pregnant and bore a
legitimate son. ‘The Kshetra^a receives one-fifth, if he is endowed
with good qualities, else one-sixth’ (Medh., Kull., Nar., Ragh.,
Nand.).

165. Vas. XVII, 39. Gotrarikthamabhagina^, ‘become mem¬
bers of the family (i. e. succeed to the family rights and duties) and
inherit’ (Medh., Kull., Nand.), may also be translated, ‘ share the
family estate,’ as Nar. proposes. But his suggestion that the family
estate is here mentioned in order to exclude them from their father’s
self-acquired property is doubtlessly wrong. Equally inadmissible
seems another explanation, mentioned by Nar. and Nand., accord¬
ing to which a/zwabhagina^, ‘ they share,’ is to mean ‘ they obtain
(such) a share (as will suffice for their maintenance).’

166. Ap. II, 18,1; Vas. XVII, 13 ; Baudh. II, 3,14 ; Vi. XV, 2 ;
Ya gn. II, 128. I read prathamakalpikam with Medh., Gov., Nar.,
and K. Ragh. gives prathamakalpikam. Kull. and Nar. think
that the wife must be of equal caste, while Medh. says that sva
means ‘his own,’ not ‘of his own caste.' Medh. mentions Kull.’s
opinion as that of ‘ others.’

167. Vas. XVII, 14; Baudh. If, 3,18; Vi. XV, 3; Y &gn. I, 69,
II, 127-128.

168. Vas. XVII, 29; Baudh. II, 3, 20; Vi. XV, 18-19; Yigii.

362

LAWS OF MANU.

IX, i 6 g .

with (a libation of) water, in times of distress (to a
man) as his son, must be considered as an adopted #
son (l^atrima);

169. But he is considered a son made (KWtrima)
whom (a man) makes his son, (he being) equal (by
caste), acquainted with (the distinctions between)
right and wrong, (and) endowed with filial virtues.

170. If (a child) be born in a man’s house and his
father be not known, he is a son born secretly in the
house (Gtidhotpanna), and shall belong to him of
whose wife he was born.

171. He whom (a man) receives as his son, (after
he has been) deserted by his parents or by either of
them, is called a son cast off (Apaviddha).

II, 130. Sadmam, 4 equal (by caste)/ (Kull., Nar., Righ., Nand.),
means according to Medh. 4 equal by virtues, not by caste/ 4 His
mother or his father/ i. e. 4 after mutually agreeing’ (Kull.), 4 the
mother, if there is no father’ (Ragh.). Medh. and Nand. read
mitd pita £a, 4 his mother and his father/ but Medh. adds that va
is the proper reading. 4 Affectionately/ i. e. 4 not out of avarice'
(Medh.), or 4 not out of fear and so forth’ (Kull., Nand.), or 4 not
by force or fraud’ (Ragh.). 4 In times of distress/ i.e. 4 if the adopter
has no son' (Kull., Ragh.), or 4 if the adoptee’s parents are in
distress' (Ndr.).

169. Baudh. II, 3, 21; Ya gn. II, 131. Medh. again says, ‘equal
by qualities/ 4 Acquainted with (the distinctions between) right
and wrong/ i. e. 4 by performing or not performing -Sr&ddhas and
other sacred rites merit or sin will follow’ (Kull.), or ‘I am now
the son of so and so, and if I do not serve him I shall become an
outcast’ (R£gh.), or ‘not an infant' (Medh. ‘some/ Ndr.). N&r.
adds that some read gu«adoshavi£aksha«a^, and refer the adjective
to the adopter, who is thereby warned not to take an outcast or
the like.

170. Vas. XVII, 24; Baudh. II, 3, 22; Vi. XV, 13-14; Y $gn.
II, 129. According to the commentators the condition is that
there is no suspicion that the wife had intercourse with a man of
lower caste. Nar. says that the case contemplated is, that a wife
had intercourse with several men of equal caste.

171. Vas. XVII, 37; Baudh. II, 3, 23; Vi. XV, 24-25; Y%«.

IX, IJ 6 . INHERITANCE. 363

172. A son whom a damsel secretly bears in the
house of her father, one shall name the son of an
unmarried damsel (Kdnina, and declare) such off¬
spring of an unmarried girl (to belong) to him who
weds her (afterwards).

173. If one marries, either knowingly or un¬
knowingly, a pregnant (bride), the child in her womb
belongs to him who weds her, and is called (a son)
received with the bride (Sahoa^a).

174. If a man buys a (boy), whether equal or
unequal (in good qualities), from his father and
mother for the sake of having a son, that (child)
is called a (son) bought (Kritaka).

175. If a woman abandoned by her husband, or a
widow, of her own accord contracts a second mar¬
riage and bears (a son), he is called the son of a
re-married woman (Paunarbhava).

176. If she be (still) a virgin, or one who returned
(to her first husband) after leaving him, she is
worthy to again perform with her second (or first
deserted) husband the (nuptial) ceremony.

II, 132. The reason of the desertion maybe either extreme dis¬
tress of the parents, or the commission of some fault on the part of
the boy (Medh.). ‘ Provided the father of the child was of equal
caste’(N^r., Nand.).

172. Vas. XVII, 22-23 » Baudh.II, 3, 24; Vi. XV, xo-n ; Y &gn.
II, 129. ‘Provided the lover was of equal or higher caste ’ (Nar.).

173. Vas. XVII, 26-27; Baudh.II, 3, 25 ; Vi. XV, 15-16; Y &gii.
II, 131. Medh.’s commentary on verses 173-178 is missing in the

I. O. copies.

174. Vas. XVII, 30-32; Baudh. II, 3, 26; Vi. XV, 20-21; Y &gn.

II, 131. ‘ Equal or unequal,’ i. e. ‘ by good qualities, not by caste'

(Kull., Righ.), means according to NSr. ‘ whether of equal or of
lower caste.’

175. Vas. XVII, 18; Baudh. II, 3, 27; Vi. XV, 7-9; Y igfi.
II, 130-

176. Vas. XVII, 74. ‘Hence a re-married woman, who is not a

3^4

LAWS OF MANU.

ix, *77-

177. He who, having lost his parents or being
abandoned (by them) without (just) cause, gives
himself to a (man), is called a son self-given (Sva-
yawzdatta).

178. The son whom a Br&hma^a begets through lust
on a . 5 'Gdra female is, (though)alive (parayan), a corpse
(?ava), and hence called a Pirasava (a living corpse).

179. A son who is (begotten) by a vS’hdra on a
female slave, or on the female slave of his slave,
may, if permitted (by his father), take a share (of
the inheritance); thus the law is settled.

180. These eleven, the son begotten on the wife
and the rest as enumerated (above), the wise call
substitutes for a son, (taken) in order (to prevent) a
failure of the (funeral) ceremonies.

181. Those sons, who have been mentioned in
connection with (the legitimate son of the body),

virgin, is unworthy of the sacrament* (Nar.). Ragh., relying on
Y agn. II, 130, expresses the contrary view, and thinks that the word
vd, ‘ or/ at the end of the first half-verse, permits the insertion of
4 or not a virgin/

177. Vas.XVII,33-35; Baudh. II, 3, 28; Vi.XV, 22-23; Y sign.
II, 131.

178. Vas. XVII, 38; Baudh. II, 3, 30; Vi. XV, 27. ‘On a
.Sfidra-female * i. e. ‘one married to him 9 (Kull.). The designation
‘ a corpse * indicates that his father derives imperfect benefits from
his offerings (Kull., Nar., Rdgh.), or that he is blameable (Rdgh.).
The term Brdhmawa includes Kshatriyas by implication (Ndr.).

179. Y&gii. II, 133. ‘A share/ i. e. ‘a share equal to that of a
legitimate son* (Kull.), in case the division is made in the father's
lifetime, else half a share according to Y&gn. (Medh.).

180. Kriydlopdt, ‘in (order to prevent) a failure of the (funeral)
ceremonies/ means according to Medh. ‘ in (order to prevent) a
failure of the duty (to beget offspring)/ Kull. mentions this
explanation also. Nand. says, ‘ when there is no legitimateness in
consequence of the absence of the action of begetting one/

181. Ap. II, 13, 7; Baudh. II, 3, 34-35. Hence they should not

IX, 185.

INHERITANCE.

365

being begotten by strangers, belong (in reality) to
him from whose seed they sprang, but not to the
other (man who took them).

182. If among brothers, sprung from one (father),
one have a son, Manu has declared them all to have
male offspring through that son.

183. If among all the wives of one husband one
have a son, Manu declares them all (to be) mothers
of male children through that son.

184. On failure of each better (son), each next
inferior (one) is worthy of the inheritance; but if
there be many (of) equal (rank), they shall all share
the estate.

185. Not brothers, nor fathers, (but) sons take the
paternal estate; but the father shall take the in¬
heritance of (a son) who leaves no male issue, and
his brothers.

be taken, if there is a legitimate son (Medh.), or an appointed
daughter (Kull.).

182. Vas. XVII, 10; Vi. XV, 42. Hence no subsidiary sons
(Kull., R&gh.), or no Kshetrn^as (Nar.), are necessary in such a case.
Kull. and R&gh. add that the brother will take estate and give the
funeral offerings on failure of a wife, daughters, and so forth (Y &gn.
II, 135 )-

183. Vas. XVII, 11; Vi. XV, 41. Hence no adoption or other
substitution (Kull., RSgh.), or no appointment (Nar.), shall be made
in such a case.

184. ‘Each better (son),’ i.e.‘each earlier named among the
twelve’ (Kull., N&r., Ragh., Nand.). Kull. and Ragh. add that, as the
son of a 5fidra wife is enumerated among the twelve, and not con¬
sidered like the son of Kshatriya and Vairya wives a legitimate son,
he inherits only on failure of all other subsidiary sons. ‘ Many (of)
equal rank,’i.e. ‘many Paunarbhavas and so forth’ (Kull., R£gh.).

185. Kull. and RSgh. insert after ‘who leaves no son,’ ‘nor
widow and daughters,’ and before ‘brothers,’ ‘who leaves no
parents.’ Nar., who (as also Gov., Nand., and K.) reads eva vi,
‘ or brothers,’ says that the father inherits the estate of an undivided

366

LAWS OF MANU.

IX, 18 6 .

186. To three (ancestors) water must be offered,
to three the funeral cake is given, the fourth
(descendant is) the giver of these (oblations), the
fifth has no connection (with them).

187. Always to that (relative within three de¬
grees) who is nearest to the (deceased) Sapmda the

son, leaving no male issue, or the brothers with his permission,
and that the estate of a divided son descends to his wife, and other
heirs mentioned by Y&gn. II, 135-136. All these interpolations
are most probably improper, as Manu nowhere mentions the right
of a wife or a daughter, not appointed, to the estate. The verse can
only refer to a divided coparcener or to the separate property of an
undivided one, and Manu’s opinion seems to be that on failure of
sons, grandsons, and great-grandsons, whose rights are indicated
by verse 137, the father shall inherit, and after him the brothers.

186. ‘ To three/ i. e.‘ to the father, the grandfather, and the great¬
grandfather' (Kull., Ndr., Ragh., Nand.). To these same three the
cakes are offered (Kull., Ragh.). Kull. and Ragh. state that the object
of the verse is to indicate the right of Kshetra^as and other sub¬
sidiary sons to inherit the estate of a grandfather and so forth
deceased without leaving issue. Kull. adds that the right of sons and
grandsons of a legitimate son is indicated by verse 137. Nand.,
however, thinks that the verse serves to prove the right of grand¬
sons and great-grandsons to inherit before ‘ brothers and the rest. 1

187. Vas. XVII, 81-82; Gaut. XXVIII, 33; Ap. II, i 4 , 2-3.
The above translation does not fully agree with any of the explan¬
ations given by the four commentators. On philological grounds
it seems to me improbable that anantara^ sapi^dat can mean any¬
thing else than ‘ nearest to the Sapi«</a,' and that this Sapi«</a can be
anybody else than the deceased. Further, as verse 186 apparently
contains a definition of the term, limiting Sapiwda-relationship
to three degrees, and as in the second half of verse 187 the
Sakulyas, ‘ those belonging to the same family/ are mentioned as
the next heirs, it seems certain that ‘the nearest' here meant is
‘the nearest Sapi#</a or relative within three degrees/ Practically
the proposed translation is not much different from that extracted
by Kull. and others by the grammatically inadmissible expedient of
taking sapWat for sapWamadhy&t, ‘ among the Sapi#</as/ The
correctness of the above explanation is also attested by the closely
allied parallel passage of Baudh&yana 1,11, 9-13, the first Sfitra of

IX, 187. INHERITANCE. 367

estate shall belong; afterwards a Sakulya shall be
(the heir, then) the spiritual teacher or the pupil.

which corresponds to verse 186, while the other four express the
same sense as verse 187. There too the term Sakulya occurs,
which (rimtitav&hana takes to denote the three descendants beyond
the great-grandson and the three ascendants beyond the great¬
grandfather, while others explain it as a general term,‘ members of
one family.’ What Manu's precise acceptation of the word was
cannot be said with certainty. But, as no technical definition is
given by him, it will be safest to take it in its etymological and
widest sense, ‘the (remoter) members of the family/ and to
assume that the principle of nearness to the deceased regulated
the succession.

As regards the explanations of the commentators, Kull. says,

‘ As this general rule would be meaningless, if it were referred to
the legitimate son and those other Sapi«</as alone, who have already
been mentioned, its object must therefore be (to teach) that the
wife and the rest, who have not been mentioned, shall inherit. 1 o
that Sapiwfifo who is the nearest among the Sapi«</as, be he a male
or a female, the estate of the deceased shall belong/ He then goes
on to enumerate the heirs in the following order: 1. the legitimate
son, sharing with a Kshetra^a (verse 164), and a virtuous adoptive
son (verse 141) ; 2. the appointed daughter and her son; 3. the
Kshetra^a and the other ten subsidiary sons, each on failure of the
earlier named, with the proviso that the son of a -Sfidra wife receives
one-tenth of the estate only (verse 154); 4- the widow (on this point
a great many passages are quoted, and Medh. is censured, because
in his commentary, which is missing in the I. O. MSS., like the
whole passage 182-201, he denied her right to inherit); 5. the
daughter, not appointed; 6. the father and the mother; 7. full
brothers; 8. sons of full brothers; 9. the paternal grandmother
(verse 227); 10. any other near Sapi/wfo, (a) of the grandfather’s
line, (b) of the great-grandfather’s line, and so forth; n. the
Sam&nodakas, or relatives allied by libations of water (Kull. con¬
sidering Sakulya as equivalent to Sam&nodaka); 12. the teacher;
13. the pupil. According to Kull. the translation should be, ‘To
the nearest among the SapWas (male or female) the estate shall
belong; afterwards (on failure of Sapi«dfas) a Samanodaka shall be
(the heir), next the teacher, and (then) the pupil.’ Righ. in sub¬
stance agrees with this explanation, but in order to make the rule
still more fully agree with Y igfi. II, 135-136, he asserts that the

368

LAWS OF MANU.

IX, 188.

188. But on failure of all (heirs) Br£hma»as (shall)-
share the estate, (who are) versed in the three
Vedas, pure and self-controlled; thus the law is not
violated.

Bandhus or cognates are also implied by the term Sakulya. His
explanation of the first words also differs from Kull.’s, and is more
in accordance with the rules of grammar, ‘ He who is the nearest to
the Sapi«</a, i.e. to the legitimate son and the son of the daughter
—(viz.) the five, the wife and the rest (mentioned by Y agn. II,
135-136)* ’ R&gh. and Kull. are clearly under the spell of Y%m.,
and most improperly transfer into Manu’s text the ideas of the
latter. Nar/s short disjointed remarks are not very clear. He
explains the first words by eshaw madhye sapiw</anam ato
tho[yo]nantaro yath& putrasya pita tasya tatpitetyadi tasya tasya
taddhanam, ‘Among those Sapitf</as the nearest to him, i.e. the
father to his son, his father to him, and so forth; always to him that
estate (shall belong).’ He then enumerates, on failure of the father,
the brother and his son, the grandfather, the Samanodaka, the
Sagotra, and the ‘Bandhu, i.e. the maternal uncle and the rest/ as
successive heirs, and explains Sakulya by Bandhu.

Nand., whose text has a faulty reading sapiw^arha^, asserts
that piwda (sapi#da ?) means ‘ the deceased/ and explains the first
line by saying, ‘ Always to him who is the Sapi#</a nearest to the
deceased the wealth, the estate, shall belong—the repetition (of the
word tasya) shows the successive order.’ The Sakulyas are, accord¬
ing to him, the Samanodakas. He reads sakulyd^ syu^, ‘ Sakulyas
shall be the heirs/

188. Gaut. XXVIII, 41; Vas. XVII, 84-86 ; Baudh. 1 ,13,14; Vi.
XVII, 13-14. The phrase‘on failure of all (heirs)/i.e.‘of those
mentioned’ (Righ.), or ‘ of all males and females, related in any way
(to the deceased)/ (Nand.), indicates according to Kull. that other
unnamed persons, such as fellow-students, are also entitled to
inherit. ‘Brahmawas/ i.e. ‘ such as live in the same village’ (Nar.).
‘ Pure/ i. e. ‘ careful of external and internal purity ’ (Kull.), or
better ‘who are of good conduct’ (N&r.). According to Kull. and
R£gh., the meaning of the last clause is that the Brahmawas who
inherit the estate will offer the funeral sacrifices, and thus no
violation of the law regarding the Sraddhas will occur. N&r. points
out that this rule, as the following verse shows, refers solely to the
property of a Brahma^a.

iX 191..

INHERITANCE.

369

* 189. The property of a Brdhma^a must never be
taken by the king, that is a settled rule; but (the
property of men) of other castes the king may take
on failure of all (heirs).

190. (If the widow) of (a man) who died without
leaving issue, raises up to him a son by a member
of the family (Sagotra), she shall deliver to that
(son) the whole property which belonged to the
(deceased).

191. But if two (sons), begotten by two (different
men), contend for the property (in the hands) of
their mother, each shall take, to the exclusion of the
other, what belonged to his father.

189. Ap. II, 14, 5 ; Gaut. XXVIII, 42 ; Vas. XVII, 83; Baudb.
I, 13, 15-16. According to Kull. and Ragh., the repetition of the
prohibition to take the property of a Brahmawa shows that, if no
learned and virtuous Brahmawas are to be found, the king shall
give the estate of a Brahmawa deceased without heirs, even to men
who have nothing but the name of the Brahmawa caste.

190. According to Kull. and Ragh., this verse refers to the case
in which a duly authorised widow bears a son to a relative of her
husband, and repeats the rule given above, verse 146, which here
however is made imperative on the* widow. Kull. adds that the
object of the repetition is to show that not only a brother-in-law or
a' Sapi^a, as stated above, verse 59, but also a remoter relative, a
Sagotra, may beget a son for a man deceased without issue. N&r.,
on the other hand, thinks that in accordance with this verse a child
which a widow bears, even without authorisation, to a Sagotra shall
inherit the estate of the widow’s deceased husband (sagotrad yadi
tantu m sa^tdnam Shared aniyukt&pi strt tad£ golakatve 'pi tasya
^watyantardbhave kshetrapatidhanaharitvam ity artha^). He adds
that some apply this rule to -Stldra females only, and that in the
opinion of these persons G^d%a^as, K&ninas, and Saho^as also
are considered as sons in the case of *Sfidras only, not in the case
of Aryans.

191. Kull. and Nand. think that the verse refers to the case in
which a woman married successively two husbands and bore a son
to either. If the two husbands died and their property jemained in

[aS] B b

370

LAWS OF MANU.

IX, 192

192. But when the mother has died, all the
uterine brothers and the uterine sisters shall equally
divide the mothers estate.

193. Even to the daughters of those (daughters)
something should be given, as is seemly, out of the
estate of their maternal grandmother, on the score
of affection.

194. What (was given) before the (nuptial) fire,
what (was given) on the bridal procession, what was

the hands of the wife, she is to make over the entire property of
her first husband to his son, and the property of the second hus¬
band to the son of the latter. Ragh. gives the same explanation,
but proposes as an alternative, ‘ If two (sons), begotten by two
(different men), contend for the separate property of their mother,
&c.’ For a twice-married woman will have received nuptial and
other presents from both husbands. After her death her sons shall
each receive what came to her from his father. Nar. finally holds
that the verse refers to a contention between a legitimate son and
a Golaka or a Paunarbhava for the estates of their respective fathers
which their mother holds. • He construes striya^ with g-atau, ‘ be¬
gotten by two (different men) on one woman.’

192. Kull. and Ragh. restrict this rule, in accordance with a
passage of B/7'haspati, to unmarried daughters, and*hold that mar¬
ried daughters receive merely ‘a token of respect/ The latter
amounts according to Kull. to ‘one-fourth of a share;' see above,
verse 118. Nar. says that the term ‘the mother’s estate’ refers to
‘ other property than stridhana or separate property/ and adds to
the expression ‘the sisters’ aputra^, ‘those who have no sons/
He, however, gives the opinion, held by Kull. and Ragh. also,
stating that it belongs to ‘some/

193. Kull. holds that the granddaughters should be unmarried.
Nar. says, ‘ When the married daughters are dead, their daughters
shall be presented at will by their maternal uncles with the share
which their mothers would have received as a token of respect/
Rdgh., too, thinks that ‘on the score of affection’ means ‘at the
pleasure (of the heirs)/ But Nand. deduces from the same term
the absolute necessity of the gift.

194. Vi. XVII, 17 ; Ya^n. II, 143. ‘What was given in token .
of love/ i.e. ‘ by the husband’ (ratikdle, N&r.).

IX, 198 . INHERITANCE. 371

_ i --- - -

given in token of love, and what was received from
her brother, mother, or father, that is called the six¬
fold property of a woman.

195. (Such property), as well as a gift subsequent
and what was given (to her) by her affectionate hus¬
band, shall go to her offspring, (even) if she dies in
the lifetime of her husband.

196. It is ordained that the property (of a woman
married) according t© the Brahma, the Daiva, the
Arsha, the G&ndharva, or the Pr&^apatya rite (shall
belong) to her husband alone, if she dies without issue.

197. But it is prescribed that the property which
may have been given to a (wife) on an Asura mar¬
riage or (one of the) other (blamable marriages,
shall go) to her mother and to her father, if she dies
without issue.

198. Whatever property may have been given by
her father to a wife (who has co-wives of different
castes), that the daughter (of the) Br&hma/zi (wife)
shall take, or that (daughter s) issue.

195. Ya \gii. II, 144. Kull. and Nar. state that both the separate
property of a^ woman, enumerated in verse 194, and that named in
verse 195, descend to her children, i.e, ‘to her sons and the rest'
(Ragh.), or * to her sons or daughters’ (Nand.). Nar. remarks
that ‘a gift subsequent’ and ‘the husband’s affectionate gift’ are
not stridhana, or separate property, and that hence the wife has no
right of free disposal with respect to these two.

196-197. Vi. XVII, 19-20; Ya gn. II, 145.

196. Nar. adds to the term ‘property,’ stridhan&stridhanarfipam,

‘ whether separate property or not.’

198. I.e.if a Br&hmawa has wives of the Brahmawa and Ksha-
triya castes, property given in any way to the Kshatriya wife by
her own family, goes to the daughter of the Brdhmawa wife,, or if
that daughter of the Brdhma^a wife is dead and has left issue, to
the latter. ‘ Thus the sons of the Brahmawa wife are excluded*
(Kull., Nar.). Nar. states expressly that the term ‘ issue* refers to
daughters alone.

K b 2

372

LAWS OF MANU.

IX, 199.

199. Women should never make a hoard from
(the property of) their families which is common to
many, nor from their own (husbands' particular)
property without permission.

200. The ornaments which may have been worn
by women during their husbands' lifetime, his heirs
shall not divide; those who divide them become
outcasts.

201. Eunuchs and outcasts* (persons) born blind
or deaf, the insane, idiots and the dumb, as well as
those deficient in any organ (of action or sensation),
receive no share.

199. Kull. and Rdgh., whose explanation the translation given
above follows, take the first clause to refer to the property of a
united family, and the second to the separate property of the hus¬
bands. But according to Nar. and Nand. the translation should
"be as follows, ‘ Wives should never take anything (for their private
expenses) from (their husbands’ property, destined for the support
of) their families, on which many have a claim, nor from their own
property (which is not strMhana), without the consent of their hus¬
bands/ Nar/s explanation of nirharaw kuryu^, ‘should (never)
take anything/ seems preferable to that given by Kull. and Ragh.

200. Vi* XVII, 22. ‘His heirs,’ i. e. ‘the sons and the rest’
(Kull., Nar.). Nand., who differs from the above explanation,
says, ‘ Since the ornaments are the husband’s property, because
they have not been mentioned as strtdhana, the object of this
utterance is to forbid their going to the heirs, while the husband
lives’(alawkarasya stridhane ’nudish/atvdd bhartr/’dhanatvena bhar-
trzbhdve ddyadandm praptyapavdddrtho ’yam arambha^). Nand.
appears, therefore, to construe patyau ^ivati with bha^eran, just a$
Nandapaw^ita does in the parallel passage of Vishmi (see Professor
Jolly’s note).

201-203. Ap. II, 14,1,15 ; Gaut. XXVIII, 23, 40, 43; Vas. XVII,
52-53 ; Baudh. II, 3, 37-40; Vi. XV, 32-37 ; YSgn.Il, 140-141.

2Qi. ‘Eunuchs/i.e. ‘those who are incurable;’ ‘outcasts/i.e.

‘ those guilty of a mortal sin (mahdpdtaka) before they perform a
penance;’ ‘the insane/ i. e. ‘those who are incurable’ (Ndr.).

* Those deficient in any organ, i. e. of action' (Nand.), such as
lame men (KulL, Nand.), such as men without hands (Rdgh.), or

IX, 204.

INHERITANCE.

373

202. But it is just that (a man) who knows (the
law) should give even to all of them food and rai¬
ment without stint, according to his ability; he who
gives it not will become an outcast.

203. If the eunuch and the rest should somehow
or other desire to (take) wives, the offspring of such
among them as have children is worthy of a share.

204. Whatever property the eldest (son) acquires
(by his own exertion) after the father’s death, a
share of that (shall belong) to his younger (brothers),
provided they have made a due progress in
learning.

also ‘ of sensation/ such as men who have lost the faculty of touch
(N&r.).

202. Medh. and Kull. take atyantam, ‘without stint/ in the sense
of ‘ for life/ Nar. construes the word with adadat, and explains
‘he who does not give it at all/ Nand. reads abhyangam, ‘oint¬
ments/ for atyantam, ‘ without stint/

203. Medh. is of opinion that some of the persons disqualified
from inheriting, the vataretas kliba, those born blind and the lame,
may marry, while outcasts, madmen, and the rest cannot do so.
Hence the conditional clause may be taken in the sense adopted
above in the translation. He, however, adds that the rule may
also refer to cases in which the cause of the disqualification
arose after marriage. Nar/s explanation is substantially the same.
But he considers that a eunuch and an outcast cannot contract
a legal marriage, and that the expression klibadaya^, literally ‘ those
among whom the eunuch is the first/ refers to ‘ men born blind and
the rest/ He admits also the rights of the Kshetra^a sons of
eunuchs and outcasts who contracted a marriage before their dis¬
qualification arose. Kull. says, ‘ By the employment of the term
“somehow or other” it is indicated that a eunuch and the rest are
not worthy to marry/ In the sequel he explains the word ‘ off¬
spring' by Kshetra^a. Ragh. and Nand. follow him with respect to
the latter point.

204. The rule refers of course to a united family only (Kull.).
Medh. infers from the expression vidy&nup&lina^, ‘provided they
have made a due progress in learning/ that * persons subsisting by
learning, mechanics and artisans, such as physicians, actors, singers/

374

LAWS OF MANU.

IX, 205.

205. But if all of them, being unlearned, acquire
property by their labour, the division of that shall
be equal, (as it is) not property acquired by the
father; that is a settled rule,

206. Property (acquired) by learning belongs
solely to him to whom (it was given), likewise the
gift of a friend, a. present received on marriage or
with the honey-mixture.

are meant. N&r. and Nand. hold that no part of an acquisition,
made under the same circumstances by the youngest brother, can
be claimed by the eldest, because this verse specifies the eldest
alone, and because the next verse declares that the acquisitions
only made by any member of an unlearned family, shall be
partible.

205. Gaut. XXXVIII, 31. This rule refers to acquisitions by
trade (Medh., Kull., Nar.), by agriculture (Medh., Kull. Nand.), or
by royal service (Medh.). 4 As the division is to be equal, the
eldest receives no preferential share' (Medh., Kull., Nand.). Medh.
adds that, since the expression 4 as it is not property acquired by
the father,* gives the reason for the equal division, the same rule
holds good for the division of the estate of any other person de¬
ceased without issue. Nand. takes apitrya iti for apitrya h iti and
explains it by ‘since (the division) has not been made by the father.*

206. Y&gii. II, 118-119. ‘Property acquired by learning,* i. e.

4 a fee for teaching or money received for proficiency in an art*
(Medh., Nand.), includes according to a text of K&tyayana, quoted
by Kull. and R&gh. (see Colebrooke V, Digest CCCXLVII), gifts
from pupils, gratuities for performing a sacrifice, a fee for answer¬
ing a difficult question in casuistfy, or for ascertaining a doubtful
point in law, rewards for displaying knowledge or for victory in a
learned contest, or for reciting the Veda with transcendent ability.
Instances in which land was given as vidyadhana occur in the
inscriptions, see e. g. Indian Antiquary, XII, p. 195 b, 1 . 6. 4 A

present received on marriage/ i. e. 4 what (the bridegroom) receives
from the relatives of his wife* (Medh., N&r.), or ‘from any o’ther
person* (Medh.‘others'), means according to Nand., 4 stridhana
received at the time of marriage’ (?). 4 A present received with the

honey-mixture* is explained by Medh. and, as Kull: asserts, by
Gov. also, by 4 the fee given for the performance of a sacrifice.*
But the explanation given by Kull., N&r., R&gh., and Nand., 4 any

IX, 2og.

INHERITANCE.

375

207. But if one of the brothers, being able (to
maintain himself) by his own occupation, does not
desire (a share of the family) property, he may be
made separate (by the others) receiving a trifle out
of his share to live upon.

208. What one (brother) may acquire by his
labour without using the patrimony, that acqui¬
sition, (made solely) by his own effort, he shall not
share unless by his own will (with his brothers).

209. But if a father recovers lost ancestral pro¬

present received, in token of respect, with the honey-mixture,’ e. g.
a silver vase (Ragh.), is preferable. Regarding the persons worthy
of the honey-mixture, see above, III, 119-120. Kull. points out
that this rule is a restriction of that given above, verse 204. Ragh.
adds that, as the parallel passage of Yagn. shows, such acquisi¬
tions become the private property of the donee, only if they were
obtained ‘without detriment to the paternal estate see also below,
verse 208.

207. Ya^w. II, 116. The translation given above follows the
second explanation offered by Medh., and the glosses of Kull.
and Nar. According to Medh.’s first explanation, with which
Nand. agrees, the translation would agree with Sir W. Jones's, ‘.he
may debar himself from his share.’ The reason why a trifle should
be given is, according to all commentators, that future disputes
may be prevented.

208. Yagw. II,n8; Yi. XVIII, 42. ‘By his labour,’ i.e. ‘by
agriculture and the like’ (Medh., Kull., Nand.), or ‘by any occupa¬
tion entailing trouble’ (jrama^anyakarma^, N&r.). Anupaghnan,
‘without using’ (Nand.), or ‘without living upon’ (Ragh.), is ex¬
plained by Kull. ‘ without detriment to,’ and Nand. mentions this
interpretation also. Nar. remarks that acquisitions made without
labour or trouble are liable to partition. Nand. says that the rule,
given in this verse, may be reconciled with that contained in verse
205, by assuming that the latter presupposes that all brothers exert
themselves according to their ability (pfirva/w sarveshu yathdsd-
marthyam ihamaneshu bhr&trzshu labdhasya samavibhaga ukta ity
avirodho ’nusawdheya^).

209. Y&gn. II, 119 ; Vi. XVIII, 43. The translation of paitn-
kam, lit. ‘ paternal,’ by ‘ ancestral,’ is based on N&r.’s gloss svapitr*-

376

LAWS OF MANU.

IX, 2IO.

perty, he shall not divide it, unless by his own will,
with his sons, (for it is) self-acquired (property).

210. If brothers, (once) divided and living (again)
together (as coparceners), make a second partition,
the division shall in that case be equal; in such a
case there is no right of primogeniture.

211. If the eldest or the youngest (brother) is
deprived of his share, or if either of them dies, his
share is not lost (to his immediate heirs).

212. His uterine brothers, having assembled to¬
gether, shall equally divide it, and those brothers
who were reunited (with him) and the uterine sisters.

sambandhi and on Ragh.’s pitr/pitamahadisambandhi. The latter
refers also to the parallel passage of Ya ign. Anavaptam, ‘lost,’
means literally ‘ not obtained (by his father)/ The translation of
svayamargitam by ‘for it is self-acquired* agrees with Nand/s
remark, svayamargitatvad ity artha//. Nar. adds, * And thus it has
been declared that property of the father which has not been
acquired by him with exceedingly great trouble must be divided at
the will of the sons, and to this refers the passage of Yag^. II, 121,
“ Over land acquired by the grandfather, &c.** * Medh., whose com¬
mentary on this verse is very corrupt, seems likewise to have
inferred from it that Manu admitted the equal ownership of a
father and his sons in ancestral property (see also Colebrooke V,
Digest XCI). But he combats the theory that sons may without
a violation of their duty force the father to divide the ancestral
property.

*210. Vi. XVIII, 41.

211. ‘Be deprived of his share/ i. e. ‘because he has become an
outcast or the like* (Medh.), or ‘ because he has become an ascetic*
(Kull., Nand.), or ‘because he has emigrated* (Nand.), or ‘because
he has become a eunuch after the (first) partition* (Nar.). Na
lupyate, ‘ is not lost (to his immediate heirs)/ is explained by Nar.
as follows, ‘ His share, being formerly determined, is not lost, i. e.
must not be divided by all the reunited coparceners and thus be
made to disappear * (see also the text of Br/haspati, Colebrooke
V, Digest CCCCVII, 2). ‘ What is to be done with the share is
shown in the next verse’(Medh., N&r., Ragh., Nand.).

212. Vi. XVII, 17; Gaut. XXVIII, 21; Ya gn. II, 138. The

IX, 214*

INHERITANCE.

377

213. An eldest brother who through avarice may
defraud the younger ones, shall no (longer hold the
position of) the eldest, shall not receive an (eldest
son’s additional) share, and shall be punished by
the king.

214. All brothers who habitually commit for¬
bidden acts, are unworthy of (a share of) the pro¬
perty, and the eldest shall not make (anything his)
separate property without giving (an equivalent) to
his younger brothers.

meaning of the verse is: 1. according to Medh., with whose opinion
the not very clear glosses of Kull. and Ragh. seem to agree, ‘ the
share of a deceased reunited brother goes first to the reunited
brothers of the full blood and to such sisters of the full blood who
are not married (aputra//, MSS. for apratta^)—married sisters
(pravr/tta//, MSS. for pradatta//) being excluded, because they
belong to another family—next to not reunited brothers of the full
blood, finally to reunited half-brothers2. according to Nar., ‘the
share of a reunited brother devolves first on reunited brothers of
the whole blood, next on reunited half-brothers, further on sisters
of the full blood, then on the sons of brothers [of the whole
blood ?], and finally on sons of half-brothers [? tadabhave tvasoda-
rady api]/ Nand. has the same order of heirs as Nar., but stops
with ‘ the sisters of the whole blood/ Nar/s and N and/s explana¬
tion, which strictly follows the order of the enumeration in the text,
agrees with Brihaspati’s rule (Colebrooke V, Digest CCCCVII, 3),
which likewise seems to be a paraphrase of Manu's words. Kull.,
Ragh., and Nar. hold that the heirs, named in the verse, inherit
only on failure of sons, wives, daughters, and parents. Nar. further
remarks that some refer this verse and the preceding one to the
division of the estate of one who died before partition, while others
believe that it applies to the estate of a reunited brother only. *

213. ‘ Shall no (longer hold the position of) the eldest/ i.e. ‘ shall
not receive the honours, e. g. in saluting, due to the eldest brother *
(Medh., Kull., Nar., Ragh.). The insertion of the words ‘ an eldest
son's additional* before ‘ share/ is made on the authority of Medh.
and Kull. ‘ Shall be punished/ i. e. ‘ by reprimand (vagdawdadhig-
da«</&bhy&m) or by a fine as the case may require* (Medh.).

214. Ap. II, 14,15; Gaut. XXVIII, 40; Baudh. II, 3, 38. ‘Who

378

LAWS OF MANU.

IX, 215.

215. If undivided brethren, (living with their
father,) together make an exertion (for gain), the
father shall on no account give to them unequal
shares (on a division of the estate).

216. But a son, born after partition, shall alone
take the property of his father, or if any (of the
other sons) be reunited with the (father), he shall
share with them.

217. A mother shall obtain the inheritance of a
son (who dies) without leaving issue, and, if the
mother be dead, the paternal grandmother shall
take the estate.

habitually commit forbidden acts/ i. e. c who are addicted to gam¬
bling, drinking, and the like vices’ (Kull., Ragh.) t or ‘who, being
Brahmawas, follow despicable modes of living, such as tending
cattle, serving .Sftdras and the like’ (Nar.). Na . . . . kurvita
yautukam, 1 shall not make (anything his) separate property/ means
according to Nand. ‘ shall not give a marriage-portion to his
daughter without having made a division of the estate/ The correct
interpretation is, however, that given by the other commentators,
according to which the eldest is not to appropriate anything out
of the common stock for himself ‘without giving an equivalent to
the others’ (kanish/^ebhyas tavad adattvd, Nar.).

215. Ya gn. II, 120. Medh. remarks that this rule is a restric¬
tion of the general power of the father to make an unequal division
(Ya^w.II, 116), and thinks that it is not necessary that all the brothers
should have been associated in the same kind of work. According
to him it is sufficient that all have exerted themselves to gain
money. Nar. and Nand. clearly express the contrary view (sahot-
thdnaw sambhtiyavdwi^y&dind vittarganam, Nar.).

216. Gaut. XXVIII, 29 ; Vi. XVII, 3 ; YSgn. II, 122.

217. Vi. XVII, 7; Ya gn. II, 135. Kull., Ndr., and Nand. all
three hold that the mother inherits only on failure of sons [grand¬
sons and great-grandsons, Nand.], widows, and daughters. But
they disagree with respect to the sequence of the next follow¬
ing heirs. Kull. holds that the mother and the father, whose
right has been mentioned above, verse 185, follow next, inherit¬
ing conjointly, then brothers, afterwards brothers’ sons, and after

IX, 2i9*

INHERITANCE.

379

218. And if, after all the debts and assets have
been duly distributed according to the rule, any
(property) be afterwards discovered, one must
divide it equally.

219. A dress, a vehicle, ornaments, cooked food,
water, and female (slaves), property destined for
pious uses or sacrifices, and a pasture-ground, they
declare to be indivisible.

them the paternal grandmother. Ndr. gives the following order:
1. mother, 2. father, 3. brothers, 4. brothers* sons, 5. maternal
grandmother. Medh. says that this verse has been explained
formerly. The portion of his commentary where the explanation
occurred, has, however, been lost; see note on verse 187.

218. Ya gn. II, 126. Medh., Kull., and Nar. point out that on the
division of property discovered after partition, the eldest, according
to this text, receives no preferential share. Nar. adds that this rule
applies also to debts, discovered after partition. Nar. inserts this
verse after verse 219.

219. Gaut. XXVIII, 46-47 ; Vi. XVIII, 44. Instead of pattram,

* a vehicle/ i. e. * a horse or cart, used exclusively by one of the
coparceners during union' (Medh., Kull., Nar., Ragh.), Nand.
reads patram,* a drinking-vessel/ Striya/z, 4 female (slaves)/ means
according to Nar. * wives.' My translation of yogakshemam, which
I take with Medh., Nar., and Nand. as a copulative compound in
the neuter gender, by ‘ property destined for pious uses and sacri¬
fices/ rests on the explanation given by Vigwane^vara (Colebrooke,
Mit. I, 4, 23), and adopted by Haradatta and Nandapa/wfita on the
parallel passages of Gaut. and Vi. I prefer it to all others, chiefly
on account of the explicit passage of Laug&kshi which Vig-wdnejvara
quotes. In its favour speaks also that numerous royal grants allow
villages or land to Brahmazzas and their descendants for the per¬
formance of certain sacrifices, or for charitable purposes, such as
the daily distribution of food (annasattra or sadavrata), and that,
the occurrence of a rule in the Smn'tis, declaring property given
under such conditions to be impartible, is no more than might be
expected. The commentators on Manu, on the other hand, give
the following explanations: 1. ‘ the means of securing protection,
i.e. royal councillors, family priests, ministers, old women (vnddhd?),
a house, and a £ara, a spy (?), or a pasture-ground (?) and the like'
(Medh.); 2. 4 a royal councillor, a domestic priest and the like' (Kull.

380 LAWS OF MANU. IX, 220.

220. The division (of the property) and the rules
for allotting (shares) to the (several) sons, those be¬
gotten on a wife and the rest, in (due) order, have
been thus declared to you; hear (now) the laws
concerning gambling.

221. Gambling and betting let the king exclude
from his realm; those two vices cause the destruc¬
tion of the kingdoms of princes.

222. Gambling and betting amount to open theft;
the king shall always exert himself in suppressing
both (of them).

223. When inanimate (things) are used (for
staking money on them), that is called among men
gambling (dyftta), when animate beings are used
(for the same purpose), one must know that to be
betting (sam&hvaya).

224. Let the king corporally punish all those
(persons) who either gamble and bet or afford (an

and Ragh., which latter reads, however, yogakshemapraHram);
3. ‘ means of gain, i. e. a grant and the like, received from a king
and the like, and gained by oneself, and means of protection'
(prakare to ish/aka di/i? Nar.); 4. ‘sources of gain, i.e. persons
for whom one sacrifices and the like, sources of protection, i. e.
doorkeepers and the like, and sources of gain and protection,
i.e. lords of villages and the like’ (Nand.). Pra£ara, ‘a pasture-
ground,’ means according to Nar. and Nand. ‘a road leading to
a field, a garden and the like.'

Medh., Kull., and Nar. state that the first four articles shall in
general be kept by the coparcener who used them or for whose use
they were prepared, but that articles or quantities of exceptional
value must be sold or exchanged for other property. Wells and so
forth are to be used by all the coparceners (Kull., Nand.). Female
slaves are to do work for all coparceners (Kull.).

221-229. Ap. II, 25, 12-15 ; Gaut. XXV, 18 ; Baudh. II, 2,16;
Y&gn. II, 199-203. In the I. O. MSS. Medh.'s commentary on
verses 221-227 is missing.

224. Y 5 gn. II, 304. * The distinctive marks of twice-born men/

IX, 228. GAMBLING AND BETTING. 381

opportunity for it)r likewise 6ildras who assume the
distinctive marks of twice-born (men).

225. Gamblers, dancers and singers, cruel men,
men belonging to an heretical sect, those following
forbidden occupations, and sellers of spirituous liquor,
let him instantly banish from his town.

226. If such (persons who are) secret thieves,
dwell in the realm of a king, they constantly harass
his good subjects by their forbidden practices.

227. In a former Kalpa this (vice oQ gambling
has been seen to cause great enmity; a wise
man, therefore, should not practise it even for
amusement.

228. On every man who addicts himself to that
(vice) either secretly or openly, the king may inflict
punishment according to his discretion.

i. e. ‘ the sacrificial thread and the like’ (Kull., Nar.). ‘ Shall punish
corporally,’ i. e. 4 shall cause them to be flogged, &c.’ (N&r.), or ‘ shall
cause their hands and feet to be cut off and so forth according to
the gravity of the offence’ (Kull., Ragh.).

225. Instead of krftran, ‘cruel men,’i.e. ‘those who hate men
learned in the Veda’ (Kull.), Nar. and Ragh. read keran, which the
former explains by ‘ men of exceedingly crooked behaviour/ and
the latter in accordance with Kull.’s explanation of krfiran. Nand.
reads kail&n, ‘given to sports’ (keluilan), and K. £or&n, ‘thieves/
Sautf<fik&n, ‘ distillers or sellers of spirituous liquor’ (Kull., N&r.),
may also mean.‘ drunkards,’ as Nand. explains it.

226. Instead of‘who are secret thieves’ (Kull.), N&r. says,
‘and secret thieves/ Badhante, ‘harass’ (Kull.), means according
to Nar., R&gh., and Nand. ‘ corrupt/

227. N&r. explains pur&kalpe, ‘in a former Kalpa/by ‘in the*
ancient stories/ and Ragh. and Nand. point to the adventures of
king Nala and Yudhish/^ira, which, no doubt, are alluded to in
the text.

• •

228. R&gh. and Nand. point out that not only corporal punish¬
ment (according to verse 224), but also a fine may be inflicted; see
also the next verse.

382 LAWS OF MANU. * IX, 229 .

229. But a Kshatriya, a VaBya, and a .Sildra who
are unable to pay a fine, shall discharge the debt by
labour; a Br&hma^a shall pay it by instalments.

230. On women, infants, men of disordered mind,
the poor and the sick, the king shall inflict punish¬
ment with a whip, a cane, or a rope and the like.

231. But those appointed (to administer public)
affairs, who, baked by the fire of wealth, mar the
business of suitors, the king shall deprive of their
property.

232. Forgers of royal edicts, those who corrupt
his ministers, those who slay women, infants, or
Brahmawas, and those who serve his enemies, the
king shall put to death.

2 33. Whenever any (legal transaction) has been
completed or (a punishment) been inflicted according
to the law, he shall sanction it and not annul it.

229. Yagn. II, 43. Compare the rule giveji at VIII, 177.

230. *Siphit, * a whip/ is explained by Ragh. as ‘ a rod measuring
five fingers/ or ‘the pendent root of a fig-tree/ Nar. and Nand.
give the latter meaning. Medh., Nar., and Nand. read daridranatha-
rogitfam, ‘ the poor, the unprotected, and the sick/

231. See above, VII, 124; Vi. V, 180. * Those appointed, &c./

i.e. viceroys and so forth (Medh.), or judges and so forth (N&r.).
‘Baked by the fire of wealth’ is a simile taken from the burning of
earthen pots,,and means that such persons by the influence of
wealth undergo a change for the worse, just as a pot heated in a
fire changes its colour, or, as the Vaijeshikas hold, its nature. Ac¬
cording to Medh., ‘others’ read ye ’niyuktds tu, and referred the
verse to non-official persons meddling with administrative or
judicial business.

232. Y&gii. II, 240; Vi. V, 9,11.

233. Medh. and Kull. refer this prohibition to cases which have
been properly .decided in the king’s courts, while Ndr. thinks that
it applies to orders passed by former kings. Nand. gives a different
explanation of the words tirita and amwish/a. He adduces a verse
of Kfity&yana, according to which the former means ‘ a cause or

IX, 237.

MISCELLANEOUS PUNISHMENTS.

383

234. Whatever matter his ministers or the judge
may settle improperly, that the king himself shall
(re-)settle and fine (them) one thousand (pa«as).

235. The slayer of a Brihmawa, (a twice-born
man) who drinks (the spirituous liquor called) Surd,
he who steals (the gold of a Br£hma«a), and he who
violates a Guru’s bed, must each and all be con¬
sidered as men who committed mortal sins (mahi-
pataka).

236. On those four even, if they do not perform
a -penance, let him inflict corporal punishment and
fines in accordance with the law.

237. For violating a Guru’s bed, (the mark of) a
female part shall be (impressed on the forehead
with a hot iron); for drinking (the spirituous liquor
called) Sura, the sign of a tavern; for stealing (the
gold of a Brahmawa), a dog’s foot; for murdering a
Brdhmawa, a headless corpse.

plaint declared to be just or unjust by the assessors/ and the latter
‘ a cause or plaint confirmed by witnesses.'

234. Y Sign. II, 305. Medh. and Kull. think that this rule refers
to cases where the cause of the unjust decision is not a bribe, be¬
cause the punishment of corrupt judges has been prescribed above,
verse 231. But Nar. and Ragh. think that it applies to cases of
bribery also, and that the fine shall vary according to the nature
of th$ case, 1000 pawas being the lowest punishment.

235-242. Baudh. 1 ,18, 18; Vi. V, 3-7.

235. Instead of ‘(a twice-born man) who drinks the spirituous
liquor, &c.' (Kull., Nar.), Medh. and Ragh. say, * a Brahmawa who,
&c.;' but see below, XI, 94.

236. Medh. remarks that ‘others' refer this rule, on account of
the word api, ‘ even, likewise/ to the fifth Mahapatakin also, i. e. to
him who associates with one of the other four (see below, XI, 55);
and R&gh., as well as Nand., approves of this explanation.

237. ‘ The sign of a tavern/ i. e. ‘ a wine-cup/ It follows from

the rule given in verse 240, that the forehead is the place where
they shall be branded. »

384

LAWS OF MANU.

IX, 238.

238. Excluded from all fellowship at meals, ex¬
cluded from all sacrifices, excluded from instruction
and from matrimonial alliances, abject and excluded
from all religious duties, let them wander over (this)
earth.

239. Such (persons) who have been branded
with (indelible) marks must be cast off by their
paternal and maternal relations, and receive neither
compassion nor a salutation ; that is the teaching of
Manu.

240. But (men of) all castes who perform the
prescribed penances, must not be branded on the
forehead by the king, but shall be made to pay
the highest amercement.

241. For (such) offences the middlemost amerce¬
ment shall be inflicted on a Brahma«a, or he may
be banished from the realm, keeping his money and
his chattels.

242. But (men of) other (castes), who have unin¬
tentionally committed such crimes, ought to be de¬
prived of their whole property; if (they committed
them) intentionally, they shall be banished.

238. Medh. reads asa.myogy$Jt, ‘ excluded from all intercourse,’
instead of asa»jy 3 ^yd^, ‘ excluded from all sacrifices.’

240. ‘ All castes/ i. e. * the three Aryan castes.' Nar. and Nand.
read pfirve, ‘ the before-mentioned castes.’ ‘ The highest amerce¬
ment,’ see above, VIII, 138.

241. According to Medh., the meaning of the verse is that a
Brahma«a, endowed with good qualities, who unintentionally (verse
242) committed a mortal sin, shall either be fined in the middle¬
most amercement and be made to perform the prescribed penance,
or, if he refuses to do that, be banished without the infliction of a
fine. Kull. and Nand. partly agree, but think that the offender is
to be banished, if he committed the crime intentionally.

242. The translation follows Nar. and Nand., who think that
persons, performing no penance, shall be deprived of their whole

IX, 347 *

MISCELLANEOUS PUNISHMENTS.

385

243. A virtuous king must not take for himself
the property of a man guilty of mortal sin; but if
he takes it out of greed, he is tainted by that guilt
(of the offender).

244. Having thrown such a fine into the water,
let him offer it to Varuwa, or let him bestow it on a
learned and virtuous Brahmawa.

245. Varu#a is the lord of punishment, for he
holds the sceptre even over kings; a Brdhmawa
who has learnt the whole Veda is the lord of the
whole world.

246. In that (country), where the king avoids
taking the property of (mortal) sinners, men are
born in (due) time (and are) long-lived,

247. And the crops of the husbandmen spring
up, each as it was sown, and the children die not,
and no misshaped (offspring) is born.

property, if the offence was committed unintentionally, and be
banished after being branded, if their crime was intentional. N&r.,
moreover, adds, 4 this refers to light cases; it has been declared
that he shall slay the offender in bad cases/ Kull. and Ragh. think
that confiscation of the whole property shall be inflicted in particu¬
larly bad cases, instead of the fine of 1000 pa«as prescribed in
verse 240; and Medh. says that this is the opinion of 4 some/
Medh., Kull., and Ragh. explain pravasanam, 4 shall be banished,'
by ‘shall be punished corporally/ Though it is not absolutely
impossible that pravas may mean 4 to hurt, or punish corporally/ it
seems not advisable to take the word in the latter sense, on account
of verses 238 and 241; compare also VIII, 284. Medh. remarks
that a Sftdra who offends unintentionally, shall be branded and be
deprived of his whole property, else he shall be put to death.

244. Y &gn. II, 307.

245. Vanwa is the supreme ruler (adhir^a) of kings; see
Taittiriya-brdhmawa III, 1, 2, 7. Regarding, the position of a
learned Brdhmawa, see above, I, 98-101.

246. Instead of k&lena, ‘in (due) time/ i.e. ‘after the full period
of gestation' (Kull., Ndr., Ragh.), Nand. reads loke tu, * but in that
country/

05 ] c c

386

LAWS OF MANU.

IX, 248.

248. But the king shall inflict on a base-born
(.Sftdra), who intentionally gives pain to Brahmawas,
various (kinds of) corporal punishment which cause
terror.

249. When a king punishes an innocent (man), his
guilt is considered as great as when he sets free a
guilty man; but (he acquires) merit when he punishes
(jusdy).

250. Thus the (manner of) deciding suits (falling)
under the eighteen titles, between two litigant
parties, has been declared at length.

251. A king who thus duly fulfils his duties in
accordance with justice, may seek to gain countries
which he has not yet gained, and shall duly protect
them when he has gained them.

252. Having duly settled his country, and having
built forts in accordance with the Institutes, he shall
use his utmost exertions to remove (those men who
are nocuous like) thorns.

253. By protecting those who live as (becomes)
Aryans and by removing the thorns, kings, solely
intent on guarding their subjects, reach heaven.

254. The realm of that king who takes his share

248. See above, VIII, 279-284. Though all the commentators
take avara^aw in the sense of ‘ a base-born 6’ddra,’ the word may
have its etymological meaning, ‘a man of lower caste.’ Medh.
explains ‘who gives pain’ by ‘who takes their property or wives;’
Nar., ‘ who causes exceedingly great misery.’

249. See above, VIII, 19, 310-311, 317.

250. ‘ This verse is the conclusion of the section on the eighteen
titles of the law’ (Medh.), ‘and now follows a supplement on the
duties of a king’ (Nar.).

252. See above, VII, 69-70.

2 53~W- Section VllJjjefi 386-387,

IX, 258* DUTIES OF A KING. 387

in kind, though he does not punish thieves, (will be)
disturbed and he (will) lose heaven.

255. But if his kingdom be secure, protected by
the strength of his arm, it will constantly flourish
like a (well)-watered tree.

256. Let the king who sees (everything) through
his spies, discover the two sorts of thieves who
deprive others of their property, both those who
(show themselves) openly and those who (lie) con¬
cealed.

257. Among them, the open rogues (are those)
who subsist by (cheating in the sale of) various
marketable commodities, but the concealed rogues
are burglars, robbers in forests, and so forth.

258. Those who take bribes, cheats and rogues,
gamblers, those who live by teaching (the per¬
formance of) auspicious ceremonies, sanctimonious
hypocrites, and fortune-tellers,

258. Aupadhika^, ‘ cheats,’ means according to Medh. 4 persons
of crooked behaviour who promise kindnesses, but secretly do evil
to others/ or 4 such as take money under false pretences/ or
4 such as extort money by threats.’ The last explanation is adopted
by Kull. and Ragh., while Nar. and Nand. interpret the term to
mean ‘persons who cheat by using false weights and measures/
Vafi£ak&//, 4 rogues/ i.e. 4 men who promise to transact business for
others, and do not keep their word ’ (Medh.), or 4 alchemists who
pretend to change base metals into precious metals’ (rasa m vidya m
[rasavidyaya] tamradi ra^atadirtipez/a danrayitva suvanzadikaw
gnh«anti, Ragh., Kull.), or 4 men who take money on false pre¬
tences 1 (Nar.). Mangaladejavr/tta^, 4 those who live by teaching
the performance of, or by performing for others, auspicious cere¬
monies ’ (Medh., Kull., Ragh.), means according to N&r. ‘men who
live by reciting auspicious hymns’ (mangalastutipaMo vmtam
Marita m yesham), and Medh. proposes a similar alternative expla¬
nation. Medh. reads bhadrapreksha«ikai>£ saha, and explains the
compound by ‘eulogists’ (prasawsikapurushalakshansUi). Nar.
explains ikshawM^, ‘ fortune-tellers/ by 4 actors and jugglers/

C C 2

388

LAWS OF MANU.

IX, 259.

259. Officials of high rank and physicians who
act improperly, men living by showing their pro¬
ficiency in arts, and clever harlots,

260. These and the like who show themselves
openly, as well as others who walk in disguise (such
as) non-Aryans who wear the marks of Aryans, he
should know to be thorns (in the side of his
people).

261. Having detected them by means of trust¬
worthy persons, who, disguising themselves, (pre¬
tend) to follow the same occupations and by means
of spies, wearing various disguises, he must cause
them to be instigated (to commit offences), and
bring them into his power.

259. Mah&m&tra, * officials of high rank/ i.e. ‘ courtiers such as
councillors and domestic priests’ (Medh.), or ‘ministers’ (N&r.), is
taken by Kull. and R&gh. in its other sense, ‘ elephant-breakers/
*Silpopa^&rayukt&^, ‘men living by showing their proficiency in
arts/ i. e. * such as cut figures out of chips of cane and the like ’
(Medh., Ragh.), or ‘ painters and the like ’ (Kull.). N&r. and
Nand. read jilpopakarayukta^, i. e. ‘ artists such as painters and
persons adorning (upak&ra) people such as hairdressers’ (N&r.),
or ‘umbrella and fan makers’ (Nand.). Medh. says that asam-
yakk&ri/za/z, ‘ who act improperly/ must be taken with all the four
classes of persons enumerated.

260. N&r. and Nand. read vi^&tiy&n, ‘ such and the like open
(rogues) of many kinds/ and connect the accusatives in this verse
with viditv& in the next. Kull. takes vi^&niy&t, ‘ let him know (to
be)/ in the sense of ‘ let him discover (through spies).'

261. The translation follows N&r.’s explanation, who reads
protsahya (likewise found in Gov., R&gh., and K.) instead of
prots&dya, found in the editions, in Kull/s and probably also in
Medh.’s version. The reading prots&dya, ‘ having destroyed them/
is objectionable on account of the following verse. R&gh. ex¬
plains prots&hya differently; he says, ‘ having inspired them with
energy by saying, “you must give up this livelihood and earn
money by agriculture, trade, and the like,” he shall induce to adopt
a honest mode of line through desire for money.’ Nand. seems to

l v , 268.

DUTIES OF A KING.

339

262. Then having caused the crimes, which they
committed by their several actions, to be proclaimed
in accordance with the facts, the king shall duly
punish them according to their strength and their
crimes.

263. For the wickedness of evil-minded thieves,
who secretly prowl over this earth, cannot be re¬
strained except by punishment.

264. Assembly-houses, houses where water is dis¬
tributed or cakes are sold, brothels, taverns and
victualler’s shops, cross-roads, well-known trees,
festive assemblies, and play-houses and concert-
rooms,

265. Old gardens, forests, the shops of artisans,
empty dwellings, natural and artificial groves,

266. These and the like places the king shall
cause to be guarded by companies of soldiers, both
stationary and patrolling, and by spies, in order to
keep away thieves.

267. By the means of clever reformed thieves,
who associate with such (rogues), follow them and
know their various machinations, he must detect
and destroy them.

268. Under the pretext of (offering them) various
dainties, of introducing them to Br&hmawas, and on
the pretence of (showing them) feats of strength, the
(spies) must make them meet (the officers of justice).

read protsarya (protsarya, MS.). Kull. explains anekasawsthanai^,
‘wearing various disguises’ (Nar., Nand.), by ‘stationed in various
places.’ Medh.’s commentary on the end of verse 261 and on
verses 262-274 is missing in the I. O. MSS.

267. Instead of utsadayet, ‘ he shall destroy them ’ (Kull., K.,
editions), Gov., Nar., Nand., and Ragh. read utsahayet, i.e. ‘ he shall
incite them to commit (crimes,’ Nar., Rdgh.).

390

LAWS OF MANU.

IX, 269.

269. Those among them who do not come, and
those who suspect the old (thieves employed by
the king), the king shall attack by force and slay
together with their friends, blood relations, and
connexions.

270. A just king shall not cause a thief to be
put to death, (unless taken) with the stolen goods
(in his possession); him who (is taken) with the
stolen goods and the implements (of burglary), he
may, without hesitation, cause to be slain.

271. All those also who in villages give food to
thieves or grant them room for (concealing their
implements), he shall cause to be put to death.

272. Those who are appointed to guard pro¬
vinces and his vassals who have been ordered (to
help), he shall speedily punish like thieves, (if they
remain) inactive in attacks (by robbers).

273. Moreover if (a man), who subsists by (the
fulfilment of) the law, departs from the established
rule of the law, the (king) shall severely punish him
by a fine, (because he) violated his duty.

269. Mfilaprarcihita/i, < who suspect the old thieves employed
by the king ’ (Kull., Ragh.), means according to Nar. ‘ who have
been sent by ministers and the like staying in his kingdom,’ and
according to Nand. * who have discovered the root, i. e. the reasons
(of the proceedings of the spies).’ All the three explanations are,
however, doubtful.

271. Bhaw<favakajadaA, ‘who give them room for (concealing)
their implements (Kull.), means according to Ndr. ‘ who give
them money (for buying arms and the like) and shelter.’

272. The commentators take samantan, ‘his vassals,’ in its
etymological sense of ‘neighbours.’ But it has here no doubt the
usual technical meaning.

273. According to the commentators officiating priests and
other Brahma«as are meant, who subsist by obtaining alms on
the strength of their piety.

IX, 278.

DUTIES OF A KING.

391

274. Those who do not give assistance according
to their ability when a village is being plundered, a
dyke is being destroyed, or a highway robbery com¬
mitted, shall be banished with their goods and
chattels.

275. On those who rob the kings treasury and
those who persevere in opposing (his commands),
he shall inflict various kinds of capital punishment,
likewise on those who conspire with his enemies.

276. But the king shall cut off the hands of those
robbers who, breaking into houses, commit thefts at
night, and cause them to be impaled on a pointed
stake.

277. On the first conviction, let him cause two
fingers of a cut-purse to be amputated; on the second,
one hand and one foot; on the third, he shall suffer
death.

278. Those who give (to thieves) fire, food, arms,
or shelter, and receivers of stolen goods, the ruler
shall punish like thieves.

274. Vi.V, 74. Instead of hitabhange, ‘ when an embankment
is destroyed ’ (Kull., editions), Ragh. reads hu/abhange, and Gov.
as well as Nand. idabharige with the same explanation. Nar. has
tadagabhange, probably a mistake for idabhange, and mentions a
var. lect. hi//abhange, adding that hi//a is ‘ a dam thrown across
a river/ K. finally reads setubhange.

276. Ya gn. II, 273.

277. Vi.V, 136 ; Ya gn. II, 274. c Two fingers/ i. e. ‘the thumb
and the index* (Kull., Ragh., Nar.), or ‘ the index and the middle
finger* (Nand.).

278. Y&gn. II, 276. ‘Those who give (to thieves) fire/i.e.‘in

order that they may warm themselves, or for similar purposes*
(Medh.), or ‘in order that they may put fire to houses' (Ndr.).
Moshasya sawnidhitrfn, ‘receivers of stolen goods* (Kull.),
means according to N&r. ‘ those who conduct thieves to the place
where they can commit their crime, or helpers and abettors/ The
best copy of Medh. has mokshasya, both in the text and in the

392

LAWS OF MANU.

IX, 279.

279. Him who breaks (the dam of) a tank he
shall slay (by drowning him) in water or by (some
other) simple (mode of) capital punishment; or the
offender may repair the (damage), but shall be made
to pay the highest amercement.

280. Those who break into a (royal) storehouse,
an armoury, or a temple, and those who steal ele¬
phants, horses, or chariots, he shall slay without
hesitation.

281. But he who shall take away the water of a
tank, made in ancient times, or shall cut off the
supply of water, must be made to pay the first (or
lowest) amercement.

282. But he who, except in a case of extreme
necessity, drops filth on the king’s high-road, shall
pay two k&rshapa«as and immediately remove (that)
filth.

283. But a person in urgent necessity, an aged
man, a pregnant woman, or a child, shall be repri¬
manded and clean the (place); that is a settled rule.

284. All physicians who treat (their patients)
wrongly (shall pay) a fine; in the case of animals, the

commentary, and the other gives it in the text, while the expla¬
nation is rakshitiira/?, ‘ protectors or abettors.’ Nand., too, reads
in the text mokshasya, and says, ‘mokshasya moshitadravyasya
mokshasadhanasyeti va.’ It would, therefore, seem that an ancient
var. lect. mokshasya really existed.

279. Ya .gn. II, 278. ‘By (some other) simple (mode of) capital
punishment,’ i. e. ‘ by cutting off his head ’ (Nar., Ragh.).

280. Y&gn. II, 273. This verse and the next are omitted in
the I. O. MSS. of Medh.

281. Nar. says that the offender must also make good the
damage done.

282. Vi.Y, 106-107. Medh. says that he shall pay the -ffawrf&la,
i.e. the sweeper, to remove the filth.

284. Vi. V, 175—177 ; Ya gn. II, 242. Nar. adds, ‘But this

IX, 290.

DUTIES OF A KING.

393

first (or lowest); in the case of human beings, the
middlemost (amercement).

285. He who destroys a bridge, the flag (of a
temple or royal palace), a pole, or images, shall
repair the whole (damage) and pay five hundred
(pa»as).

286. For adulterating unadulterated commodities,
and for breaking gems or for improperly boring
(them), the fine is the first (or lowest) amercement.

287. But that man who behaves dishonestly to
honest (customers) or cheats in his prices, shall be
fined in the first or in the middlemost amercement.

288. Let him place all prisons near a high-road,
where the suffering and disfigured offenders can
be seen.

289. Him who destroys the wall (of a town), or
fills up the ditch (round a town), or breaks a (town)-
gate, he shall instantly banish.

290. For all incantations intended to destroy life,

refers to cases when death is not (the result of the wrong treat¬
ment) ; for if that is the case the punishment is greater.’

285. Vi.V, 174; Y agn. II, 297. ‘A pole,’ i. e. the flagstaff of
a village (Nar.), or * such as stand in tanks and the like * (Kull.).
‘ Images/ i.e. ‘statues of men; but death as the punishment for
destroying images of the gods, because (above, verse 280) capital
punishment has been prescribed for breaking into temples ’ (Nar.).
Kull. and Ragh. say 4 common images, made of clay and so forth/

286. Vi. V, 124 ; II, 245-246. Medh. thinks that the fine

must be proportionate to the value of the spoiled gem, and Kull.
adds that in every case the owner of the spoilt article shall receive
compensation.

287. Thus Kull. and Nar. But Medh. takes the first clause
differently: * That man who gives unequal (quantities) for (such
goods as ought to be bartered for) equal (quantities).’

288. Nand. reads kash/ani, ‘where the treatment is severe/
instead of sarvarn,‘all/

290. According to the commentators the sbhiter&ti ^comprise

394

LAWS OF MANU.

IX, 291.

for magic rites with roots (practised by persons) not
related (to him against whom they are directed), and
for various kinds of sorcery, a fine of two hundred
(pa#as) shall be inflicted.

291. He who sells (for seed-corn that which is)
not seed-corn, he who takes up seed (already sown),
and he who destroys a boundary(-mark), shall be
punished by mutilation.

292. But the king shall cause a goldsmith who
behaves dishonestly, the most nocuous of all the
thorns, to be cut to pieces with razors.

293. For the theft of agricultural implements, of
arms and of medicines, let the king award punish¬
ment, taking into account the time (of the offence)
and the use (of the object).

all incantations and sacrifices, taught either in the Veda or in
secular works, which are intended to destroy life. The magic
rites, performed with roots, are those which are intended to bring a
person into one’s power. These are permitted, if practised against
a husband or a relative (Nar.). The krz'tya//, 4 sorcery/ are such
spells as produce diseases, or cause the failure of an adversary’s
undertakings. If the abhi&Lras are successful, the punishment is
that of murder (Medh., Kull.).

291. Instead of bi^otkrfsh/am (Kull.), which is explained ‘who
sells seed-corn placed (at the top of a bag of worthless grain)/ the
correct reading seems to be bi^otkrash/d, ‘ he who takes up seed
(already sown)/ Bi^otkrash/a occurs in Nar.'s commentary only,
where it is explained bi^-akale mah&rghatak&motkarshakari, ‘he
who at sowing time plucks (the seed) out, desiring to raise the
price of grain/ All the other commentators give more or less cor¬
rupt readings, which, however, all point to the form blgotkrash/a,
viz. Medh., big-etkrush/a^ or bt^otkn'ptyaA, explained by vandhysU
niti kshetra ^watu [kshetram kartuw] bi^am utkarshati jobhanaw
yad b\ga.m kshetre [ta]devoddhrftya nayati; Gov., bi^otkrfsh/d^;
Nand., bi^otkr/sh/o^ and bi^otkrfsh/a, explained by b^&n&m upta-
ndm uddhartS,; K., biryStkrash/a, marked as corrupt.

293. Xhus a theft of a plough in the season for ploughing, or of

IX, 399 -

DUTIES OF A KING.

395

294. The king and his minister, his capital, his
realm, his treasury, his army, and his ally are the
seven constituent parts (of a kingdom); (hence) a
kingdom is said to have seven limbs (anga).

295. But let him know (that) among these seven
constituent parts of a kingdom (which have been
enumerated) in due order, each earlier (named) is
more important and (its destruction) the greater
calamity.

296. Yet in a kingdom, containing seven con¬
stituent parts, which is upheld like the triple staff
(of an ascetic), there is no (single part) more im¬
portant (than the others), by reason of the importance
of the qualities of each for the others.

297. For each part is particularly qualified for
(the accomplishment of) certain objects, (and thus)
each is declared to be the most important for that
particular purpose which is effected by its means.

298. By spies, by a (pretended) display of energy,
and by carrying out (various) undertakings, let the
king constantly ascertain his own and his enemy’s
strength;

299. Moreover, all calamities and vices; after¬
wards, when he has fully considered their relative
importance, let him begin his operations.

arms just before or during a fight, should be punished more heavily
than if it had been committed at any other time.

294. See above, VII, 257 ; Ya gn. I, 352.

296. The verse is meant, as the commentators remark, to show
that one must not infer from verse 295 that the Angas, named later
in the enumeration, may be neglected. According to Nar., the
simile is not taken from the triple staff of an ascetic, but from
the three beams of a house and the like.

298. See above, Vlf. Medh., Gov., Nar., Nand., and K. read
at the end of the line, paratmano/5, instead of mahipatiA.

299. ‘ All calamities and vices,’ i. e. ‘ those affecting hte enemy

396

LAWS OF MANU.

IX, 300.

300. (Though he be) ever so much tired (by
repeated failures), let him begin his operations again
and again; for fortune greatly favours the man
who (strenuously) exerts himself in his urtder-
takings.

301. The various ways in which a king behaves
(resemble) the Krz'ta, Treti, Dvapara, and Kali
ages; hence the king is identified with the ages (of
the world).

302. Sleeping he represents the Kali (or iron
age), waking the Dvapara (or brazen) age, ready to
act the Tretcl (or silver age), but moving (actively)
the Krzta (or golden) age.

303. Let the king emulate the energetic action of
Indra, of the Sun, of the Wind, of Yama, of Varu«a,
of the Moon, of the Fire, and of the Earth.

304. As Indra sends copious rain during the four
months of the rainy season, even so let the king,
taking upon himself the office of Indra, shower
benefits on his kingdom.

305. As the Sun during eight months (imper¬
ceptibly) draws up the water with his rays, even so
let him gradually draw his taxes from his kingdom;
for that is the office in which he resembles the Sun.

306. As the Wind moves (everywhere), entering
(in the shape of the vital air) all created beings,
even so let him penetrate (everywhere) through his

and his enemy’s party’ (Nar.), or ‘ those affecting both his own
and the enemy’s parties’ (Kull.). Nand. reads the second line as
follows, gurulaghavato ^Mtva tataA karma sama^aret.

302. This verse closely agrees with the fourth exhortation,
addressed by Indra to Rohita, Aitareya-brlhmawa VII, 15.

305. Instead of nityam, ‘ gradually,’ Nand. reads samyak,
‘ duly.’

IX, 313- DUTIES OF A KING. 397

spies; that is the office in which he resembles the
Wind.

307. As Yama at the appointed time subjects to
his rule both friends and foes, even so all subjects
must be controlled by the king; that is the office in
which he resembles Yama.

308. As (a sinner) is seen bound with ropes by
Varu«a, even so let him punish the wicked ; that is
his office in which he resembles Varu«a.

309. He is a king, taking upon himself the office
of the Moon, whose (appearance) his subjects (greet
with as great joy) as men feel on seeing the full
moon.

310. (If) he is ardent in wrath against criminals
and endowed with brilliant energy, and destroys
wicked vassals, then his character is said (to re¬
semble) that of Fire.

311. As the Earth supports all created beings
equally, thus (a king) who supports all his subjects,
(takes upon himself) the office of the Earth.

312. Employing these and other means, the king
shall, ever untired, restrain thieves both in his own
dominions and in (those of) others.

313. Let him not, though fallen into the deepest
distress, provoke Brahma«as to anger ; for they,

308. Nand. reads the first line differently, Varuwenfipi pfirair £a
badhyate vfiruwair naraA, ‘ As men are bound by Varuwa with
Varu«a’s fetters.’ The expression ‘ the fetters of Varu/za ’ is a
common designation of dropsy.

310. Nfir. adds, ‘As the fire at an ordeal injures wicked men,
even so he should destroy wicked neighbours.’

312. ‘In (those of) others,’ i.e. ‘ those thieves who live in other
kingdoms, and come to rob in his own’ (Kull., Nar.). Nand. omits
this and the next two verges.

313. ‘Let him not provokeBr&hmawas to anger,’ i.e.‘by taking their

398

LAWS OF MANU.

IX, 314.

when angered, could instantly destroy him together
with his army and his vehicles.

314. Who could escape destruction, when he pro¬
vokes to anger those (men), by whom the fire was
made to consume all things, by whom the (water of
the) ocean was made undrinkable, and by whom the
moon was made to wane and to increase again ?

315. Who could prosper, while he injures those
(men) who provoked to anger, could create other
worlds and other guardians of the world, and deprive
the gods of their divine station ?

316. What man, desirous of life, would injure them
to whose support the (three) worlds and the gods ever
owe their existence, and whose wealth is the Veda ?

317. A Brihmawa, be he ignorant or learned, is a
great divinity, just as the fire, whether carried forth
(for the performance of a burnt-oblation) or not
carried forth, is a great divinity.

318. The brilliant fire is not contaminated even
in burial-places, and, when presented with oblations
(of butter) at sacrifices, it again increases mightily.

property’ (Medh., Nar.), or ‘ treating them with contumely’ (Medh.).

‘ They could destroy him,’ i. e. ‘ by magic rites and curses’ (Kull.).

3x4. This verse refers to certain stories, told, as Medh. and
Nar. point out, in the section of the Mahabharata, called Moksha-
dharmd^ XII, 344, 55, 57-58, 60-61. There it is said that Bhr/gu
made the fire consume all things, that' the moon became ‘ con¬
sumptive’ in consequence of the curse of Daksha, and that VWavil-
mukha made the ocean salt in punishment for his disobedience.

315. This verse also contains allusions to the Mahabharata.
Vijv&mitra tried to create other worlds (Medh.), the Valakhilyas
another Indra and Vayu, and others deprived the gods of their
station. With respect to the latter point, Ragh. quotes the story of
Mi«</avya cursing Yam a (MahabhSrata I, 108, 16), and causing
him to be born as a Sftdra.

316. See above, I, 93-95.

IX, 3*3*

DUTIES OF A KING.

399

319. Thus, though Brahmawas employ them¬
selves in all (sorts of) mean occupations, they must
be honoured in every way; for (each of) them is a
very great deity.

320. When the Kshatriyas become in any way
overbearing towards the Br&hmawas, the Brahma was
themselves shall duly restrain them; for the Ksha¬
triyas sprang from the Brahmawas.

321. Fire sprang from water, Kshatriyas from
Brihmawas, iron from stone; the all-penetrating
force of those (three) has no effect on that whence
they were produced.

322. Kshatriyas prosper not without Br&hmawas,
Brahmawas prosper not without Kshatriyas; Brah-
mawas and Kshatriyas, being closely united, prosper
in this (world) and in the next.

323. But (a king who feels his end drawing nigh)
shall bestow all his wealth, accumulated from fines,
on Br&hmawas, make over his kingdom to his son,
and then seek death in battle.

321. ‘Fire sprang from water, thus speak the Paurdwikas’
(Nand.); ‘(that origin is) visible in the case of lightning and in that
of the (submarine) Va</avdgni’ (Rdgh.). According to Ragh., the
statement that the Kshatriyas sprang from the Brdhma»as is based
on a Vedic passage. But Ndr. thinks that it alludes to a Paurdwik
story, according to which the Brdhma«as produced with the Ksha-
triyd females a new Kshatriya race after the destruction of the
second var«a by Parajurama.

322. Gaut. XI, 14 ; Vas. XIX, 4.

323. Medh. says that others explain the expression ‘all his
wealth, accumulated from fines,' as including ‘all the king’s
possessions, excepting horses and chariots, arms, land, and slaves,'
but that this is improper. He adds that, if the king cannot die in
battle, he may burn or drown himself. Kull. says that he may kill
himself by starvation. In later times kings followed this rule; see
e.g. Vikramahkaiarita IV, 44-68.

400

LAWS OF MANU.

IX, 3*4.

324. Thus conducting himself (and) ever intent on
(discharging) his royal duties, a king shall order all
his servants (to work) for the good of his people.

325. Thus the eternal law concerning the duties
of a king has been fully declared; know that the
following rules apply in (due) order to the duties of
Vaii'yas and •Sttdras.

326. After a VaLsya has received the sacraments
and has taken a wife, he shall be always attentive
to the business whereby he may subsist and to
(that of) tending cattle.

327. For when the Lord of creatures (Pra^apati)
created cattle, he made them over to the Vai-sya;
to the Brahmawa, and to the king he entrusted all
created beings.

328. A VaLya must never (conceive this) wish,

‘ I will not keep cattleand if a VaLya is willing (to
keep them), they must never be kept by (men of)
other (castes).

329. (A Vaiyya) must know the respective value
of gems, of pearls, of coral, of metals, of (cloth) made
of thread, of perfumes, and of condiments.

* 330. He must be acquainted with the (manner of)
sowing of seeds, and of the good and bad qualities
of fields, and he must perfectly know all measures
and weights.

331. Moreover, the excellence and defects of
commodities, the advantages and disadvantages of
(different) countries, the (probable) profit and loss
on merchandise, and the means of properly rearing
cattle.

332. He must be acquainted with the (proper)

326. Regarding the ‘ business whereby a Vawya may subsist,’
see below, X, 77-78.

X, I. TIMES OF DISTRESS, MIXED CASTES. 4 OI

wages of servants, with the various languages of
men, with the manner of keeping goods, .and (the
rules of) purchase and sale.

333. Let him exert himself to the utmost in order
to increase his property in a righteous manner, and
let him zealously give food to all created beings.

334. But to serve Brahmawas (who are) learned
in the Vedas, householders, and famous (for virtue)
is the highest duty of a .Sftdra, which leads to
beatitude.

335. (A .Sttdra who is) pure, the servant of his
betters, gentle in his speech, and free from pride,
and always seeks a refuge with Brahmawas, attains
(in his next life) a higher caste.

336. The excellent law for the conduct of the
(four) castes (var«a), (when they are) not in distress,
has been thus promulgated; now hear in order their
(several duties) in times of distress.

Chapter X.

1. Let the three twice-born castes (var«a), dis¬
charging their (prescribed) duties, study (the Veda) ;
but among them the Brihmawa (alone) shall teach
it, not the other two; that is an established rule.

333. ‘ If a rich Vairya is not liberal, he shall be punished by the
king' (Medh.).

334-336. See below, X, 121-129.

335. I read with Medh., Gov., and N&r., brdhmawapajrayo
nityam.

X. 1. Medh. has one line more in the beginning, ‘Hereafter
I will declare the rules applicable to that which must be studied.’
According to N&r., the expression svakarmasth&A, ‘discharging
their prescribed duties,’ means ‘if they follow their prescribed
[25] D d

402

LAWS OF MANU.

X, 2.

2. The Brdhma^a must know the means of sub¬
sistence (prescribed) by law for all, instruct the
others, and himself live according to (the law).

3. On account of his pre-eminence, on account
of the superiority of his origin, on account of his
observance of (particular) restrictive rules, and on
account of his particular sanctification the Br&h-
ma#a is the lord of (all) castes (var«a).

4. The Br&hma«a, the Kshatriya, and the Vai-sya
castes (varwa) are the twice-born ones, but the fourth,
the .Sttdra, has one birth only; there is no fifth
(caste).

5. In all castes (var«a) those (children) only which
are begotten in the direct order on wedded wives,
equal (in caste and married as) virgins, are to be

occupations,’ and indicates that those who follow forbidden occupa¬
tions, i. e. live like Afidras, shall not study the Veda. The com¬
mentators entirely forget to mention that, according to II, 241-242,
a Brahmawa may learn the Veda from a non-Brahma#ical teacher,
and that hence this rule is not absolute.

2. Gaut. XI, 25; Vas. I, 39-41. Medh. points out that this rule
gives an exception to IV, 80, where it is said that a Brahmawa
shall not give spiritual advice to a -Sftdra.

3. See above, I, 93. ‘On account of his pre-eminence/ i. e.

‘ through his qualities ’ (Medh.), or ‘ by race * (Gov., Kull., Mr.,
Ragh.). Niyamasya £a dharawat, ‘ on account of his observance of
(particular) restrictive rules/ i.e. ‘of the rules prescribed for a
Snataka* (Medh., Gov., Mr., Ragh.), means according to Kull.
‘on account of his possessing a particularly great knowledge of
the Veda.’ ‘ On account of his particular sanctification/ i.* e.
‘because special observances are required from him in sipping
water and so forth, or because he must be initiated earlier than
a Kshatriya’ (Medh.). The other commentators give the second
explanation only. ‘ The lord/ i. e. ‘ the adviser and instructor.’

4. Ap. 1 ,1, 3; Vas. II, 1-2 ; Baudh. 1 ,16,1; Yfigft. I, 10.

5. Ap. II, 13,1; Vi. XVI, 1; Y ign. I, 90. ‘ In the direct order/
i. e. ‘ by a Brahma^a on a Brahma#!, by a Kshatriya on a Kshatriyfi,
and so forth ’ (Medh., Gov., Kull.), means according to Mr., that

MIXED CASTES.

403

X, 8.

considered as belonging to the same caste (as their
fathers).

6. Sons, begotten by twice-born men on wives of
the next lower castes, they declare to be similar (to
their fathers, but) blamed on account of the fault
(inherent) in their mothers.

7. Such is the eternal law concerning (children)
born of wives one degree lower (than their hus¬
bands); know (that) the following rule (is applica¬
ble) to those born of women two or three degrees
lower.

8. From a Brahma^a with the daughter of a
Vaisya is born (a son) called an AmbashMa, with the
daughter of a .Sftdra a Nish&da, who is also called
a PAra^ava.

in each case the bridegroom must be older than the wife. He adds,
‘ Hence it has been declared that the son of a woman who is older
than (her husband) is not a Brahmawa, though she may have been
legally married, and may be of the same caste (as her husband).’
The commentators are at great pains to prove that subsidiary sons,
such as Saho^as, Kaninas, and so forth, and all offspring of illicit
unions are outcasts. Medh. and Gov. even take the trouble to
discuss the Vedic story of Gab&la Satyakama (AT^andogya Up.
IV, 4), whose mother did not know by whom he was begotten,
and who, nevertheless, was admitted to be a Br&hmawa. They
are of opinion that Gabala had been legally married, and had for¬
gotten her husband’s family-name during her troubles.

6-56. Gaut. IV, 16-28; Vas. XVIII; Baudh. I, 16, 6-17,15;
Vi. XVI, 2-15 ; Ya gn. I, 91-95.

6. ‘ Blamed,’ i. e. ‘ excluded from the fathers’ caste ’ (Nar.). With
the expression ‘similar,’ compare Baudh.’s term ‘savar«a.’ Nand.
places verse 14 immediately after this, and adds that if the latter
is placed lower down, that is owing to a mistake of the copyists.

7. Regarding the term Parajava, see above, IX, 178. Gov.
and N&r. remark that the second name Par&java is added in order
to distinguish this Nish&da from the other Nishada, who is a Pra-
tiloma, and subsists by catching fish.

8. Medh. does not give this verse.

D d 2

404

LAWS OF MANU.

X, 9 .

9. From a Kshatriya and the daughter of a
.Stldra springs a being, called Ugra, resembling
both a Kshatriya and a .SYldra, ferocious in his
manners, and delighting in cruelty.

10. Children of a Brihmawa by (women of) the
three (lower) castes, of a Kshatriya by (wives of)
the two (lower) castes, and of a Vaisya by (a wife
of) the one caste (below him) are all six called
base-born (apasada).

ix. From a Kshatriya by the daughter of a Brih-
ma«a is born (a son called) according to his caste
(^&ti) a Sfita; from a VaBya by females of the royal
and the Brlhmawa (castes) spring a Magadha and a
Vaideha.

12. From a .Sudra are born an Ayogava, a
Kshattrf, and a /Candala, the lowest of men, by
Vaisya, Kshatriya, and Brahmawa females, (sons
who owe their origin to) a confusion of the castes.

13. As an Ambash/^a and an Ugra, (begotten) in
the direct order on (women) one degree lower (than
their husbands) are declared (to be), even so are a
Kshattrf and a Vaidehaka, though they were born
in the inverse order of the castes (from mothers one
degree higher than the fathers).

14. Those sons of the twice-born, begotten on
wives of the next lower castes, who have been
enumerated in due order, they call by the name

12. N6r. and K. read Ayogava. Medh. and Nand. read A^aflo'ala,
instead of K&nd&\& (Gov., Kull.).

13. The meaning is that the Kshattri and the Vaidehaka, though
Pratilomas, hold the same position with respect to sacred rites, but
not with respect to studying and so forth, and are as fit to be
touched as the two Anulomas (Medh.). Gov. and Kull. mention
the second point of equality only.

14. The meaning is that they are reckoned as belonging to the

X, so.

MIXED CASTES.

405

Anantaras (belonging to the next lower caste), on
account of the blemish (inherent) in their mothers.

15. A Brdhmawa begets on the daughter of an
Ugra an Avrz’ta, on the daughter of an AmbashMa
an Abhira, but on a female of the Ayogava (caste)
a Dhigva«a.

16. From a .Sudra spring in the inverse order
(by females of the higher castes) three base-born
(sons, apasada), an Ayogava, a Kshattrz, and a
A'd/ztf'ala, the lowest of men;

17. From a Vai-sya are born in the inverse order
of the castes a Mdgadha and a Vaideha, but from
a Kshatriya a SClta only; these are three other base-
born ones (apasada).

18. The son of a Nishdda by a .Sudra female
becomes a Pukkasa by caste (gcLti), but the son of
a .Sudra by a Nishada female is declared to be a
Kukku/aka.

19. Moreover, the son of a Kshattr/ by an Ugra
female is called a 6vapdka; but one begotten by
a Vaidehaka on an Ambash/zia female is named a
Vezza.

20. Those (sons) whom the twice-born beget on
wives of equal caste, but who, not fulfilling their

mothers’ caste and receive the sacraments according to the law
prescribed for the mothers’ caste (Medh., Gov., Kull., Nar., Nand.);
see also below, verse 41.

15. The Abhira is the modern Ahir.

16-17. Kull. thinks that the Pratilomas are enumerated once
more, ‘ in order to show that they are unfit to fulfil the duties of
sons.’ Nand. places these two verses before verse 15.

18. Nand. reads Pulkasa instead of Pukkasa.

19. Gov., Nand., and K. read Vena instead of Vena. R&gh.
adds that the modern name is Baruo'a, the name of caste of
basket-makers.

20. Gov. and Nand. read at the end of the first line sutfin for

406

LAWS OF MANU.

X, 2T.

sacred duties, are excluded from the S&vitri, one
must designate by the appellation Vr&tyas.

21. But from a Vratya (of the) Br&hma#a (caste)
spring the wicked Bhr^fakaw/aka, the Avantya, the
VA/adhdna, the Pushpadha, and the 6aikha.

22. From aVr&tya (of the) Kshatriya (caste), the
G^alla, the Malla, the Li>£^ivi,the Na/a, the Kara^a,
the Khasa, and the Draviafa.

tu y&n (Medh., Kull., K.), * not fulfilling their sacred duties/ i. e.

‘ not being initiated at the proper time see above, II, 39. Medh.
mentions a var. lect. avrata^, 1 Those sons whom men neglecting
their sacred duties, &c.’ But he rejects it.

a 1. I read with Medh., Gov., Nar., and K., Bhrz^akaw/aka
instead of Bhfir^akaw/aka (editions), or Bhfttyakaw/aka (Nand.); see
also Gaut. IV, 20, where the form Bhr^yakaw/a occurs. Regarding
the Avantya (Apaw&i, Nand.), see also Baudh. I, 2, 13. Instead of
Va/adhana Nand. has Va^aghana, and K. Va^adhana, marked as
corrupt. Medh. reads (one MS. Pushpa-raikhara^) Pushpajekhara
instead of pushpadha/2 raikha eva to (editions). Gov. has in the text
Pushya^ jaikhakastatha, in the commentary pushyavasaijakha; K.
pushpa... kharas tathd; Nand. Pushpajibaka eva to . It would seem
that according to Medh. and Nand. only four tribes, sprung from a
Vr&tya Brahmawa, are enumerated. But the form of the last name
remains doubtful. The commentators think all the races named
are descended from a Vr&tya Brahma/za and a female of his own
caste. Gov. remarks that according to lianas’ Nitwastra the
Bhr/^akaw/as live by sorcery, the Avantyas and Va/adhanas serve
in war, and all other Vr&tyas are spies. It is very probable that all
these names originally denote nations, but the Avantyas, the
inhabitants of Western Malva, and the Va/adh&nas, who are
enumerated among the northern tribes, are alone traceable in
other works.

22. I read with Medh. and Gov. Lito/iivi instead of Ni^^ivi
(editions). K. has lAkhwx (&to being marked as corrupt), and
Nand. Li&fcikhi. As * a * and * i ’ in thesi are constantly exchanged,
Li££Mvi may be considered as a vicarious form for Li/fcMavi, and
it may be assumed that the Manusawhit^ considered the famous
Kshatriya race of Magadha and Nepdl as unorthodox. Gov. says
that, according to U^anas, the Na/as and Karazzas are spies, and

X, 27 -

MIXED CASTES.

407

23. From a Vratya (of the) Vauya (caste) are
born a Sudhanvan, an A/£ 4 rya, a Kdrusha, a Vi^an-
man, a Maitra, and a S 4 tvata.

24. By adultery (committed by persons) of (dif¬
ferent) castes, by marriages with women who ought
not to be married, and by the neglect of the duties
and occupations (prescribed) to each, are produced
(sons who owe their origin) to a confusion of the
castes.

25. I will (now) fully enumerate those (sons) of
mixed origin, who are born of Anulomas and of
Pratilomas, and (thus) are mutually connected.

26. The Sftta, the Vaidehaka, the KandaXa, that
lowest of mortals, the Mdgadha, he of the Kshattr?
caste (^4ti), and the Ayogava,

27. These six (Pratilomas) beget similar races
(var«a) on women of their own (caste), they (also)
produce (the like) with females of their mother’s
caste (^ati), and with females (of) higher ones.

the Khasas and Dravu/as are water-carriers and distributors of
waters at drinking fountains.

23. K. reads Pdrusha, and Nand. Kdru^a, instead of Kdrusha
(Medh., Gov., Kull). Instead of Vi^anman Nand. has Ni^angha.
Gov. remarks that, according to Uxanas, A^dryas and Sdtvatas
subsist by worshipping the gods, or serving as temple-priests
(d&iryasatvataiA devap%anam).

25. * Anulomas/ see above, verse 8.

27. Thus Nar. and Nand., with whom Kull. agrees, except that he
adds 4 on higher and (on lower) castes/ Medh. reads in the second
line matn^atyd^ prasfiyante pravardsu k& yonishu, and explains as
follows, 4 Those who belong to the mother's caste, i.e. the Anulo¬
mas, called Anantara (verse 14), beget similar sons on females of
their own caste, and (more degraded children) on females of higher
castes/ He mentions that others read matn^dtau prasfiyante, and
says that the meaning then is, 4 The Anulomas beget sons of their
own race on females of their own and of their mothers' castes/
Gov. reads matr^dtau svayonyaw tu sadmaw ^anayanti vai, and

408

LAWS OF MANU.

X, 28.

28. As a (Br&hma^a) begets on (females of) two
out of the three (twice-born castes a son similar to)
himself, (but inferior) on account of the lower degree
(of the mother), and (one equal to himself) on a
female of his own race, even so is the order in the
case of the excluded (races, vdhya).

29. Those (six mentioned above) also beget, the
one on the females of the other, a great many*
(kinds of) despicable (sons), even more sinful than
their (fathers), and excluded (from the Aryan com-'
munity, vahya).

30. Just as a . 5 udra begets on a Brahma^a
female a being excluded (from the Aryan com¬
munity), even so (a person himself) excluded pro-

likewise refers the line to the Anulomas. ‘But (the Anulomas)
beget similar sons on females of their mothers’ and of their own
castes.’ Ragh. likewise differs.

28. I read with all the commentators and K., krama^ instead
of kramdt (editions). ‘Even so is the order in the case of the
excluded (races),’ means according to Gov. and KulL, that there is
a difference in rank between Pratilomas, similar to that existing
between Anulomas, and that Pratilomas sprung from Aryan fathers
are more respectable than those begotten by *Shdra fathers, accord¬
ing to Medh., whose opinion is controverted by Gov., Kull., and
R&gh., that Pratilomas,. sprung from Aryan fathers and mothers,
are to be considered Aryans, and worthy of being initiated just as
Anulomas. According to Ndr. and Nand., the translation should
be as follows : ‘ As among the three castes a (man) produces (a son
similar to) himself on two wives, (i. e.) on her who belongs to his
own caste and on her who belongs to the next lower one, even so
is the order with those excluded (from the four chief castes)/ i. e.
even so is it with Anulomas, e. g. with a Mfirdh&vasikta, who begets
a Mfirdhdvasikta on a Mfirdhdvasikta female and on an Avantya
female (Ndr.), and with Pratilomas, e. g. with a Kshattri who begets
a Kshattri both on a female of his own caste and on a ATam&lf
(Nand.). It must be added that Nand. reads anantary&m instead of
Snantarydt.

X, 3 i-

MIXED CASTES.

409

creates with (females of) the four castes (var;/a, sons)
more (worthy of being) excluded (than he himself).

31. But men excluded (by the Aryans, v&hya),
who approach females of higher rank, beget races
(varwa) still more worthy to be excluded, low men
(hina) still lower races, even fifteen (in number).

31. In order to show that fifteen lower castes are produced, the
commentators propose various interpretations of the verse, among
which those of Kill]., Nar., and Ragh. alone deserve to be men¬
tioned. Kull. thinks that the terms vahya and hina may either refer
to two sets of men or to one only. Under the former supposition,
the Vahyas must be understood to be the Pratiloma offspring of a
*Sttdra, i. e. Ayogavas, Kshattr/s, and Aa//dalas; and the Hinas,
the Pratiloma offspring of Kshatriyas and Vawyas, i. e. Sfitas,
Magadhas, and Yaidehas. Each of these two sets produce fifteen
lower races by unions with women of the four chief castes and of
their own (verse 27), i. e. Ayogavas beget five, with Brahmawa,
Kshatriya, Vauya, Sfidra, and Ayogava women; Kshattns like¬
wise five, with Brahma^a, Kshatriya, Vauya, -Sfidra, and Kshattr/
women, and so forth. But if the two terms vahya and hina are
referred to one set of males only, they must be understood to
denote the six Pratilomas, Aaw^alas, Kshattrfs, Ayogavas, Vaidehas,
Magadhas, and Sutas; and it must be assumed that the verse refers
to unions between these six Pratiloma races alone. Then the
lowest among them, the Aa«</ala, may produce with females of the
five higher Pratiloma tribes five more degraded races; the Kshattr/,
with the four above him, four; the Ayogava, the three above him,
three; the Vaideha, two; and the Magadha, one. The total of
5 + 4 + 3 + 2 + 1 is thus ig, Ragh. agrees with this interpreta¬
tion. Nar., on the other hand, refers the terms vahya and hina to
one set of males, the three Pratilomas sprung from the Sfidra, and
assumes that the verse refers to unions of these three with females
of the four principal castes and of their own. According to the
calculation given under Kull.’s first explanation, the total of more
degraded races which may be thus produced, is thirty. It seems
to me that Kull.’s second explanation is the best, though I am not
prepared to deny that his first explanation, and even Nar.’s version,
may be defended. The commentators point out that van/a is used
here in a figurative sense, because it has been declared above,
verse 4, that there are only four real var/ias.

410

LAWS OF MANU.

X, 3 2,

32. A Dasyu begets on an Ayogava (woman) a
Sairandhra, who is skilled in adorning and attending
(his master), who, (though) not a slave, lives like a
slave, (or) subsists by snaring (animals).

33. A Vaideha produces (with the same) a sweet¬
voiced Maitreyaka, who, ringing a bell at the
appearance of dawn, continually praises (great)
men.

34. A Nishdda begets (on the same) a M&rgava
(or) Ddia, who subsists by working as a boatman,
(and) whom the inhabitants of Aryavarta call a
Kaivarta.

35. Those three base-born ones are severally
begot on Ayogava women, who wear the clothes of
the dead, are wicked, and eat reprehensible food.

32. I read with Medh., Gov., Nar., Nand., and K., Sairandhra
instead of Sairandhri (editions). * A Dasyu,’ i.e. * one of those tribes
described below, verse 45 ’ (Medh., Gov., Kull.), or ‘ one of the
afore-mentioned fifteen Pratiloma races’ (Nar., Nand.). Prasa-
dhanopaHragfiam, 4 skilled in adorning and attending (his master),’
i.e.‘in dressing hair, anointing him with oil and so forth, and in
shampooing’ (Gov., Nar., Nand.), means according to Kull., who
takes prasddhanopaHra, not as a copulative, but as a tatpurusha
compound, ‘ skilled in serving (his master) at his toilet.* Medh.’s
explanation is ambiguous. With respect to his second occupation,
‘ snaring animals,’ Medh., Gov., and Kull. say that the Sairandhra
resorts to it in order to support himself in times of distress, or in
order to obtain meat for the worship of the gods and manes, or at
the order of the king. Nand. remarks, ‘ As the Dasyus are many>
there are also many Sairandhras, and that is indicated by the addi¬
tion of a different mode of subsistence.’

34. Gov. and K. read Magadha instead of Mdrgava. Gov. thinks
that, as the section treats of Pratilomas, the Nish&da mentioned here
is the Pratiloma NishSda enumerated by Vyasa.

35- I follow Medh., Gov., N£r., Nand., and K., who read mrrta-
vastrabhr/tsvan&ryasu, ‘who wear the clothes of the dead, are
wicked,’ instead of mretavastrabhnt&u nirishu, * women who wear
the clothes of the dead’ (editions'). Kull. also seems to have had the

X, 40 . MIXED CASTES. 411

36. From a N ishada springs (by a woman of the
Vaideha caste) a K&r&vara, who works in leather;
and from a Vaidehaka (by women of the K&rivara
and Nish4da castes), an Andhra and a Meda, who
dwell outside the village.

37. From a Afawd&la by a Vaideha woman is born
a Pa#<Aisopaka, who deals in cane; from a Nishada
(by the same) an Ahmttfka.

38. But from a A'a^ala by a Pukkasa woman is
born the sinful Sopaka, who lives by the occupations
of his sire, and is ever despised by good men.

39. A Nishada woman bears to a K&ndSXa. a son
(called) Anty&vasayin, employed in burial-grounds,
and despised even by those excluded (from the
Aryan community).

40. These races, (which originate) in a confusion
(of the castes and) have been described according
to their fathers and mothers, may be known by
their occupations, whether they conceal or openly
show themselves.

former reading, as he copies the explanation sukrfirasu, ‘ very cruel,’
which Gov. gives. Mcdh. explains anary&su by ' not to be touched
by Aryans.’

36. Thus according to Medh. and Kull. But Gov. and Ragh.
understand in the second line with ‘from a Vaidehaka,’ the words
‘ by women of the Vaideha caste.’ Nar., who in the preceding verse
takes the words ete tray a A, ‘those three,’ in the sense of‘the follo'wing
three other races,’assumes of course that the mothers of Karavaras,
Medas, and Andhras are Ayogava females. The latter two ‘ castes ’
are the well-known nations inhabiting Meva</ (Medapa/a) in south¬
eastern RS^puUtna, and the eastern Dekkan.

38. Ragh. and Nand. read Paulkasa instead of Pukkasa. Mftla-
vyasanavr/'ttiman means according to Gov., Kull., and Ragh. * who
lives by executing criminals,’ according to Nar. and Nand. ‘ who
lives by digging roots,’ i.e. ‘ in order to sell them as medicine,’ or ‘ by
curing hemorrhoids’ (Nand.). Medh. gives both explanations. The
translation, given above, follows the Petersburg Diet., sub voce.

412 LAWS OF MANU. X, 4t.

41. Six sons, begotten (by Aryans) on women of
equal and the next lower castes (Anantara), have the
duties of twice-born men; but all those born in con¬
sequence of a violation (of the law) are, as regards
their duties, equal to .Stidras.

42. By the power of austerities and of the seed
(from which they sprang), these (races) obtain here
among men more exalted or lower rank in successive
births.

43. But in consequence of the omission of the
sacred rites, and of their not consulting Brahma^as,
the following tribes of Kshatriyas have gradually
sunk in this world to the condition of .Sfidras ;

44. (Viz.) the Pau/^rakas, the AWas, the Dra-
viafas, the Kambo^as, the Yavanas, the .Sakas, the
Paradas, the Pahlavas, the Ainas, the Kiratas, and
the Daradas.

41. Medh. adds, ‘The mention of the Anantaras is intended to
include all Anulomas.*

42. ‘These/ i. e. ‘those born of wives of equal castes and
Anantaras* (Gov., Kull.). Medh. and Nar. include all Anulomas, and
R&gh. even Pratilomas, sprung from Aryan fathers. Yuge yuge,
‘in successive births* (Medh., Nar., Nand.), means according to
Kull. ‘ in each of the ages of the world/ Kull. refers to the stories
regarding VLrvdmitra and ifrshyajrmga, while Medh. points to the
discussion, given below, verse 64 seq.

43. Medh. and Gov. read brdhma«atikrame«a, ‘by disrespect
towards Brahma/ias/ instead of brahmaw^damnena, ‘ by not con¬
sulting Brdhmawas* (Kull., N&r., Nand., Ragh., K.).

44. Instead of Pau«</rakas (Kull.), Medh., Nar., Nand., and K.
read Puw/rakas, and Gov. Pauw^rakas. My reading Afodas is a
correction of Komdx^ which is found in some MSS. of Medh. and
in K. We have plainly Afola in Nand., while some MSS. of Medh.
and Gov. read ATawdra or Afawdfra, and the editions give ATau^ra.
Sir W. Jones* opinion that £au<fra stands for k a Ch/ra is improbable,
because the particle ‘and’ is clearly not wanted after the first
word. Instead of Pahlava, some MSS. of Medh. and some editions

X, 4 8.

MIXED CASTES.

4 T 3

45. All those tribes in this world, which are ex¬
cluded from (the community of) those born from the
mouth, the arms, the thighs, and the feet (of Brah¬
man), are called Dasyus, whether they speak the
language of the Mle^£/«is (barbarians) or that of
the Aryans.

46. Those who have been mentioned as the base-
born (offspring, apasada) of Aryans, or as produced
in consequence of a violation (of the law, apadhvaw-
sa^a), shall subsist by occupations reprehended by
the twice-born.

47. To Shtas (belongs) the management of
horses and of chariots; to AmbashMas, the art of
healing; to Vaidehakas, the service of women; to
M&gadhas, trade ;

48. Killing fish to NisMdas; carpenters’ work to
the Ayogava; to Medas, Andhras, Kunkus, and
Madgus, the slaughter of wild animals;

read Pahnava. Gov. gives Pallava. The editions give the Khasas
after the Daradas. But Medh., Gov., Nand., and K. have tathd at
the end of the verse. The commentators state that the names
enumerated in the first instance denote countries, and next,
particular races living in them.

45. ‘ Those born from the mouth, &c.,’ i. e. the four Vanzas; see
above, I, 87.

46. ‘Base-born offspring of Aryans;’ see above, verses 17
and 41.

47. ‘The service of women,’ i.e. ‘the office of guardians in the
harem/

48. Instead of Kunku (editions, Ragh.), Medh., Gov., and Nar.
seem to have read K&k u. Nand. reads Maw^u for Madgu. N&r.
says that these two words are synonyms of (r^alla and Malla; see
above, verse 22. But Gov. quotes a verse of Yama, according to
which the A'Muka is the son of a Vai^ya by a Kshatriya female,
and the Madgu the offspring of a -Sfidra and a Kshatriyd. Kull/s
and R&gh/s reference to Baudh. is, according to the MSS. of the
Baudh. Dharmasfitra, erroneous.

414

LAWS OF MANU.

X, 49.

49. To KshattWs, Ugras, and Pukkasas, catching
and killing (animals) living in holes; to Dhigvawas,
working in leather; to Venas, playing drums.

50. Near well-known trees and burial-grounds, on
mountains and in groves, let these (tribes) dwell,
known (by certain marks), and subsisting by their
peculiar occupations.

51. But the dwellings of /Candelas and .SVapa^as
shall be outside the village, they must be made
Apapfitras, and their wealth (shall be) dogs and
donkeys.

52. Their dress (shall be) the garments of the
dead, (they shall eat) their food from broken dishes,
black iron (shall be) their ornaments, and they must
always wander from place to place.

53. A man who fulfils a religious duty, shall not
seek intercourse with them ; their transactions (shall
be) among themselves, and their marriages with
their equals.

54. Their food shall be given to them by others
(than an Aryan giver) in a broken dish; at night
they shall not walk about in villages and in towns.

49. Nand. omits this verse.

50. Nand. places verse 50 after verse 52.

51. Medh. and Nar. read avapatra// instead of apapatra/; (Kull.,
Ragh., K., and Gov. ?), and Medh. gives three explanations of the
term: 1. vessels used by them must be thrown away; 2. if food is
given to them, it must not be placed in vessels which they hold in
their hands, but in such as stand on the ground or are held by
others; 3. they shall use bad, i. e. broken vessels, as is stated in
the next verse. The other commentators adopt the first explana¬
tion, which is no doubt the correct one.

53. Gov. and Nand. say, 4 A righteous man,’ instead of 4 A man
who fulfils a religious duty.'

54. Gov. and Nar. take the beginning of the verse differently,

X, 6i.

MIXED CASTES.

415

55. By day they may go about for the purpose of
their work, distinguished by marks at the king’s
command, and they shall carry out the corpses (of
persons) who have no relatives; that is a settled
rule.

56. By the king’s order they shall always execute
the criminals, in accordance with the law, and they
shall take for themselves the clothes, the beds, and
the ornaments of (such) criminals.

57. A man of impure origin, who belongs not to
any caste, (var«a, but whose character is) not known,
who, (though) not an Aryan, has the appearance
of an Aryan, one may discover by his acts.

58. Behaviour unworthy of an Aryan, harshness,
cruelty, and habitual neglect of the prescribed duties
betray in this world a man of impure origin.

59. A base-born man either resembles in character
his father, or his mother, or both ; he can never
conceal his real nature.

60. Even if a man, born in a great family, sprang
from criminal intercourse, he will certainly possess
the faults of his (father), be they small or great.

61. But that kingdom in which such bastards,
sullying (the purity of) the castes, are born, perishes
quickly together with its inhabitants.

‘ Their food shall be given to them by others in a broken vessel,’
i. e. ‘ they shall not cook for themselves in their houses.’

55. ‘Distinguished by marks,’ i. e. ‘ by a thunderbolt and the like,
or by axes, adzes, and so forth, used for executing criminals, and
carried on the shoulder ’ (Medh.), or ‘ by sticks and so forth ’ (Gov.),
or ‘by iron ornaments and peacock’s feathers and the like’ (Nir.).
Ragh. thinks that they are to be branded on the forehead and on
other parts of the body. In olden times the depressed races of
Gujarat used to wear a horn as their distinguishing mark.

57-59. Vas. XVIII, 7; Vi. XVI, 17.

416 LAWS OF MANU. X, 62,

62. Dying, without the expectation of a reward,
for the sake of Br&hma^as and of cows, or in the
defence of women and children, secures beatitude to
those excluded (from the Aryan community, v&hya).

63. Abstention from injuring (creatures), veracity,
abstention from unlawfully appropriating (the goods
of others), purity, and control of the organs, Manu
has declared to be the summary of the law for the
four castes.

64. If (a female of the caste), sprung from a
Brdhma^a and a .Sfidra female, bear (children) to
one of the highest caste, the inferior (tribe) attains
the highest caste within the seventh generation.

62. Vi. XVI, 18.

63. Gaut. VIII, 23; Ya gn. I, 122; and above, IV, 246, V, 107.
Nand. reads sarvavar/ze, ‘ for all castes/ instead of Hturvarwye, f for
the four castes/

64. Ap. II, 10—11; Gaut. IV, 22 ; Ya gn. I, 96. According to
Medh., Gov., Kull., and Ragh., the meaning is that, if the daughter
of a Brahmazza and of a *Sfidra female and her descendants all marry
Brdhmazzas, the offspring of the sixth female descendant of the
original couple will be a Brahmazza. While this explanation agrees
with Haradatta’s comment on the parallel passage of Gautama,
Ndr. and Nand. take the verse very differently. They say that if a
Pdrajava, the son of a Brahmazza and of a Audra female, marries
a most excellent Para java female, who possesses a good moral
character and other virtues, and if his descendants do the same,
the child born in the sixth generation will be a Brdhmazza. Nand.
quotes in support of his view Baudhdyana I, 16, 13-14 (left out in
my translation of the Sacred Books of the East, II, p. 197), nishadena
nishddydm d pan£amd£^ater apahanti f^dto 'pahanti] jfidratdm 1 tam
upanayet shash/^azzz yd^ayet, ‘ (Offspring), begotten by a Nishdda.
on a Nishddi, removes within five generations the Sfidra-hood;
one may initiate him (the fifth descendant), one may sacrifice for
the sixth/ This passage of Baudhdyana, the reading of which
is supported by a new MS. from Madras, clearly shows that
Baudhdyana allowed the male offspring of Brdhmazzas and *Sfidra
females to be raised to the level of Aryans. It is also not impossible

x;6 7 .

MIXED CASTES.

417

65. (Thus) a .Sttclra attains the rank of a .BrAh-
mawa, and (in a similar manner) a BrAhma«a sinks to
the level of a .Sildra; but know that it is the same
with the offspring of a Kshatriya or of a Vaisya.

66 . If (a doubt) should arise, with whom the pre¬
eminence's, whether) with him whom an Aryan by
chance begot on a non-Aryan female, or (with the
son) of a BrAhmawa woman by a non-Aryan,

67. The decision is as follows : ‘He who was
begotten by an Aryan on a non-Aryan female, may
become (like to) an Aryan by his virtues; he whom
an Aryan (mother) bore to a non-Aryan father (is
and remains) unlike to an Aryan.’

that the meaning of Manu’s verse may be the same, and that the
translation should be, ‘ If the offspring of a Br&hmana and of a
Sfidra female begets children with a most excellent (male of the
Brahmawa caste or female of the Para^ava tribe), the inferior (tribe)
attains the highest caste in the seventh generation.’ The chief
objection to this version, which consists in the fact that jregasa,
‘with a most excellent,’ stands in the masculine, may be met by
Manu’s peculiar use of the masculine instead of the feminine above
in verse 32, where ayogave is used for ayogavyam.

65. The manner in which a Brahma«a sinks to the level of a
*Sudra is, according to Medh., Gov., and Kull., the following. If
the son of a Brahmawa and of a .Sftdra female and his descendants
marry .Sfidra wives, the seventh descendant will be a pure *Stidra.
Medh., Gov., and Kull. hold that the offspring of a Bnihma«a and
of a Kshatriya female obtains the higher or lower rank in the third
generation, and the offspring of a Brahmawa and of a Vauya female
in the fifth. Medh. and Gov. expressly state that ‘they/ i.e. the older
commentators, give this explanation.

66. ‘A non-Aryan female/i. e. ‘ a Sfidra female ’ (Medh., Gov.,
Kull., Ragh., Nand.), or ‘the daughter of a Vratya and the like’
(Nar.). * By chance/ i. e. even on an unmarried one (Medh., Gov.,

. Kull., Ragh., Nand.), or ‘ unknowingly ’ (N&r.). ‘An Aryan female/
i. e. ‘a Brdhma«i’ (Medh., Gov., Kull., R&gh., Nar., Nand.).

67. ‘May become (like to) an Aryan by his virtues/ i. e. ‘may
become most excellent or praiseworthy by offering the Pdkaya^was

[®5] E e

41 8 LAWS OF MANU. X,68.

68. The law prescribes that neither of the two
shall receive the sacraments, the first (being ex¬
cluded) on account , of the lowness of his origin, the
second (because the union of his parents was)
against the order of the castes.

69. As good seed, springing up in good soil,
'turns out perfectly well, even so the son of an
Aryan by an Aryan woman is worthy of all the
sacraments.

70. Some sages declare the seed to be more
important, and others the field ; again others (assert
that) the seed and the field (are equally important);
but the legal decision on this point is as follows :

71. Seed, sown on barren ground, perishes in it;
a (fertile) field also, in which no (good) seed (is
sown), will remain barren.

72. As through the power of the seed (sons)
born of animals became sages who are honoured
and praised, hence the seed is declared to be more
important.

73. Having considered (the case of) a non-Aryan
who acts like an Aryan, and (that of) an Aryan who
acts' like a non-Aryan, the creator declared, ‘ Those
two are neither equal nor unequal.’

and the like, which according to other Smrziis are permitted to
him’(Medh., Gov., Kull., Nar.), ‘Unlike to an Aryan,’ i. e. ‘un¬
worthy of praise or respect ’ (Gov., Kull.).

69-72. See also the discussion which occurs above, IX, 33-41.

7x1 Gov., Kull., and Nand. say‘a field in which no seed (is
sown) remains barren.’ The translation follows Medh. The
commentators refer to the stories of Mandapala and 7 ?fshyarrmga,
see above, IX, 23.

72. ‘Not equal,’i.e. because they differ in caste; ‘not unequal,’
i. e. because both do what is forbidden to them. Hence nobody
should do acts which are not permitted to him (Gov., Kull., Ragh.).

X, 79*

OCCUPATIONS OF THE CASTES.

419

74. Brahmawas who are intent on the means (of
gaining union with) Brahman and firm in (discharg¬
ing) their duties, shall live by duly performing the
following six acts, (which are enumerated) in their
(proper) order.

75. Teaching, studying, sacrificing for himself,
sacrificing for others, making gifts and receiving
them are the six acts (prescribed) for a Brdhmawa.

76. But among the six acts (ordained) for him
three are his means of subsistence, (viz.) sacrificing
for others, teaching, and accepting gifts from pure
men.

77. (Passing) from the Brdhmawa to the Ksha-
triya, three acts (incumbent on the former) .are
forbidden, (viz.) teaching, sacrificing for others, and,
thirdly, the acceptance of gifts.

78. The same are likewise forbidden to a Vaisya,
that is a settled rule ; for Manu, the lord of creatures
(Pra^&pati), has not prescribed them for (men of)
those two (castes).

79. To carry arms for striking and for throwing
(is prescribed) for Kshatriyas as a means of sub¬
sistence ; to trade, (to rear) cattle, and agriculture

74-80. Ap. II, 10, 4-7; Gaut. X, 1-7, 49; Vas. II, 13-19;
Baudh. 1 ,18, 1-4 ; Vi. II, 1-7 ; Y 3 gn. 1 ,118-119; see also above,
I, 88-90.

74. Brahmayonisth&A, * who are intent on the means of gaining
union with Brahman’ (Medh., Gov., Kull.), means according to
N&r. and Ragh. ‘ who are of pure Brdhmawical race,’ according to
Nand. ‘who abide by that which springs from the Veda, i.e. the
sacred law,’ or ‘ who are the dwelling-place of the Veda.’

77. Nar. reads brahmawaA kshatriyaw prati, ‘To a Kshatriya
three acts incumbent on a Br&hmawa’ are forbidden,’ instead of
brdhmanit kshatriyas prati. Nand., whose text is corrupt, seems
to have had the same reading as Nar.

E e 2

420

LAWS OF MANU.

X, 80 .

for VaLyyas ; but their duties are liberality, the study
of the Veda, and the performance of sacrifices.

80. Among the several occupations the most
commendable are, teaching the Veda for a Brah-
ma«a, protecting (the people) for a Kshatriya, and
trade for a.Vawya.

81. But a Brdhma^a, unable to subsist by his
peculiar occupations just mentioned, may live ac¬
cording to the law applicable to Kshatriyas; for
the latter is next to him in rank.

82. If it be asked, ‘ How shall it be, if he cannot
maintain himself by either (of these occupations ? ’
the answer is), he may adopt a Vauya’s mode of life,
employing himself in agriculture and rearing cattle.

83. But a Brdhma«a, or a Kshatriya, living by
a Vaisya’s mode of subsistence, shall carefully avoid
(the pursuit of) agriculture, (which causes) injury to
many beings and depends on others.

84. (Some) declare that agriculture is something
excellent, (but) that means of.subsistence is blamed

80. Vartta, * trade ’ (Nand.), means according to Kull. ‘ trade and
rearing cattle,’ and according to Gov. ‘ trade, rearing cattle, and
agriculture.’ But the context makes it probable that one occu¬
pation only is intended.

81-98. Ap. I, 20,10-21, 4; Gaut.VII, 1-26; Vas. II, 22-39;
Baudh. II, 4, 16-21; Vi. II, 15 ; LIV, 18-21; Ya.gii. Ill, 35-40.

82. N&r. thinks that krrshi, ‘agriculture/ means here asvayazw-
krM, ‘at which the Brahmawa does not work personally,’ while
Gov. and Kull. hold the contrary opinion. For according to them
the asvayawkrda kr/shi/i has been permitted even for ordinary
times, above, IV, 4-5.

83. * Depends on others,’ i. e. * on bullocks and so forth ’ (Gov.,
Kull.). It has been taught above, IV, 159-160, that a Snataka is
to avoid all that depends upon others.

84. Medh. points out that this verse is directed against the
teaching of Vas. II, 32-36.

X, 90

OCCUPATIONS OF THE CASTES.

421

by the virtuous; (for) the wooden (implement) with
iron point injures the earth and (the beings) living
in the earth.

85. But he who, through a want of means of sub¬
sistence, gives up the strictness with respect to his
duties, may sell, in order to increase his wealth, the
commodities sold by Vabyas, making (however) the
(following) exceptions.

86 . He must avoid (selling) condiments of all
sorts, cooked food and sesamum, stones, salt, cattle,
and human (beings),

87. All dyed cloth, as well as cloth made of hemp,
or flax, or wool, even though they be not dyed, fruit,
roots, and (medical) herbs ;

88. Water, weapons, poison, meat, Soma, and per¬
fumes of all kinds, fresh milk, honey, sour milk,
clarified butter, oil, wax, sugar, Kusa-grass;

89. All beasts of the forest, animals with fangs
or tusks, birds, spirituous liquor, indigo, lac, and
all one-hoofed beasts.

90. But he who subsists by agriculture, may at
pleasure sell unmixed sesamum grains for sacred

86. Medh. says, ‘ and cooked food, mixed with sesamum grains/
The same commentator thinks that, as salt which is also a condi¬
ment is specially forbidden, other condiments may be sold optionally.
But Gov. and Kull. point out that it is specially named, because
the penance is heavier. Nar. explains rasan, ( condiments/ by
‘ exudations of leaves, wood, and so forth/

88. Nar. reads ksharam, 4 alcaline substances/ instead of kshiram,
‘ fresh milk/ but mentions the latter reading, and Nand. ksharam
for kshaudram.

89. Ndr. reads ma^d, ‘ marrow/ instead of madyam, 1 spirituous
liquor/ Medh. says that some read ekajaphdn bahhn, ‘ many one-
hoofed beasts/ and permit the sale of a single one. Nand. reads
pajftn, ‘ animals/

90. *Suddhdn, ‘ unmixed ’ (Medh., Gov., Kull., Rdgh.), means

422

LAWS OF MANU.

X, 91.

purposes, provided he himself has grown them and
has not kept them long.

91. If he applies sesamum to any other purpose
but food, anointing, and charitable gifts, he will be
born (again) as a worm and, together with his
ancestors, be plunged into the ordure of dogs.

92. By (selling) flesh, salt, and lac a Brdhmawa
at once becomes an outcast; by selling milk he
becomes (equal to) a .S'tidra in three days.

93. But by willingly selling in this world other
(forbidden) commodities, a Brahmawa assumes after
seven nights the character of a Vaisya.

94. Condiments may be bartered for condiments,
but by no means salt for (other) condiments;
cooked food (may be exchanged) for (other kinds
of) cooked food, and sesamum seeds for grain in
equal quantities.

95. A Kshatriya who has fallen into distress, may
subsist by all these (means); but he must never
arrogantly adopt the mode of life (prescribed for
his) betters.

according to Nand. ‘ white,’ according to Nar. ‘ of good quality.’
‘ Provided he has not kept them long,’ i. e. ‘ if he has not kept them
long after the harvest, in order to increase his profit ’ (Medh., Gov.,
Kull., Nar.).

91. K. reads kr/mir bhfitva sa vish/Mydm, ‘he will be plunged
into ordure;’ and Medh. seems likewise to have read sa, ‘ he,’ for
rva, ‘ dog.’

93. KdmataA, ‘ willingly,’ means according to Medh. and Nand:
‘ not in times of distress, but in ordinary times.’

94. I read with Medh. and Nand., krftannawt £a krftdnnena
instead of /fakrftannena (Gov., Kull., Nar.), ‘for undressed grain,’
because all the other Smntis have the former rule. K. reads vd
krj'tdnnena, and thus shows how the misreading arose. Nand.
reads na tveva lavawa m tilaiA, ‘ but not salt for sesamum grains,’
and Medh. mentions the reading as a var. lect.

X, ioi.

OCCUPATIONS OF THE CASTES.

423

96. A man of low caste who through covetous¬
ness lives by the occupations of a higher one, the
king shall deprive of his property and banish.

97. It is better (to discharge) one’s own (ap¬
pointed) duty incompletely than to perform com¬
pletely that of another; for he who lives according
to the law of another (caste) is instantly excluded
from his own.

•98. A VaLsya who is unable to subsist by his
own duties, may even maintain himself by a Odra’s
mode of life, avoiding (however) acts forbidden
(to him), and he should give it up, when he is able
(to do so).

99. But a •S'tldra, being unable to find service
with the twice-born and threatened with the loss
of his sons and wife (through hunger), may main¬
tain himself by handicrafts.

100. (Let him follow) those mechanical occupa¬
tions and those various practical arts by following
which the twice-born are (best) served.

101. A Brdhma«a who is distressed through a
want of means of subsistence and pines (with hunger),
(but) unwilling to adopt a VaBya’s mode of life and
resolved to follow his own (prescribed) path, may act
in the following manner.

97. Nar. gives as an instance of an ill or incomplete performance
of a Brahmawa’s duty, which is better than completely discharging
the duties of another caste, the acceptance of alms from an impure
person. Nand. omits this verse, which, indeed, is here out of place
and ought to stand in the discussion beginning verse 101.

98. ‘Acts forbidden to him,’ i. e. ‘ eating the leavings of the others
and so forth'(Gov., Kull., Nar.), or 1 eating forbidden food and
the like ’ (Nand.).

99-100. Vi. Ill, 14; Gaut. X, 60.

424

LAWS OF MANU.

X, 102.

102. A Br&hmarca who has fallen into distress
may accept (gifts) from anybody; for according to
the law it is not possible (to assert) that anything
pure can be sullied.

103. By teaching, by sacrificing for, and by ac¬
cepting gifts from despicable (men) Br&hma«as (in
distress) commit not sin; for they (are as pure) as
fire and water.

104. He who, when in danger of losing his life,
accepts food from any person whatsoever, is no more
tainted by sin than the sky by mud. '

105. A^lgarta, who suffered hunger, approached
in order to slay (his own) son, and was not tainted
by sin, since he (only) sought a remedy against
famishing.

106. Vamadeva, who well knew right and wrong,
did not sully himself when, tormented (by hunger),
he desired to eat the flesh of a dog in order to save
his life.

107. Bharadva^a, a performer of great austeri¬
ties, accepted many cows from the carpenter Brfbu,
when he was starving together with his sons in a
lonely forest.

102. ‘Anything pure,’ i. c. ‘ the Ganges and the like ’ (Medh.,
Gov., Kull.), or ‘ fire and the like ’ (Ndr., Ragh.).

103. Vas. XXVII, 9.

rog. Regarding the story of Agigarta, see Aitareya-brdhmawa
VII, 13-16.

107. I read with Gov. and Sdyami on Rig-veda VI, 45, 3r,
Bnbu instead of Vrfdhu (Kull., Rdgh., K.), and Brz’bat (Ndr., Nand.).
The corrected copies of Medh. have Vrfdhu, but the oldest reads
vrv'ddha in the text, and in the commentary dribu, i. e. brfbu. It
is not doubtful that Brfbu is the correct reading. For in the hymn
quoted that personage is described as the carpenter of the Pams,
and his liberality is highly prai.sed. Moreover the jdnkhdyana

X, 113-

OCCUPATIONS OF THE CASTES.

425

108. Visvdmitra, who well knew what is right
or wrong, approached, when he was tormented by
hunger, (to eat) the haunch of a dog, receiving it
from the hands of a A'aW&la.

109. On (comparing) the acceptance (of gifts from
low men), sacrificing (for them), and teaching (them),
the acceptance of gifts is the meanest (of those acts)
and (most) reprehensible for a Brahmawa (on account
of its results) in the next life.

no. (For) assisting in sacrifices and teaching
are (two acts) always performed for men who have
received the sacraments; but the acceptance of gifts
takes place even in (case the giver is) a •S’lldra of
the lowest class.

hi. The guilt incurred by offering sacrifices for
teaching (unworthy men) is removed by muttering
(sacred texts) and by burnt offerings, but that in¬
curred by accepting gifts (from them) by throwing
(the gifts) away and by austerities.

112. A Br&hmawa who is unable to maintain
himself, should (rather) glean ears or grains from
(the field of) any (man); gleaning ears is better than
accepting gifts, picking up single grains is declared
to be still more laudable.

113. If Br&hmawas, who are Snatakas, are pining
with hunger, or in want of (utensils made of) com¬
mon metals, or of other property, they may ask the

•SVauta-stitra (see the Petersburg Dictionary, sub voce Br/bu)
alludes to the legend mentioned by Manu.

108. Regarding the legend of Virvamitra, see Mahabh. XII, 141,
28 seqq.

no. Ndr. says,‘aS'ftdra(or)one of the lowest class, i.e. a Ka.nd&\a..'

hi. Ap. I, 28, iij Vas. XX, 45 ; Vi. LIV, 28. ‘By austerities,’
i.e. ‘by penances/ see below, XI, 194.

113. Kupyam, ‘(utensils made of) common metals/ includes

426

LAWS OF MANU.

X, 114.

king for them ; if he is not disposed to be liberal, he
must be left.

114. (The acceptance of) an untilled field is less
blamable than (that of) a tilled one; (with respect
to) cows, goats, sheep, gold, grain, and cooked food,
(the acceptance of) each earlier-named (article is less
blamable than of the following ones).

115. There are seven lawful modes of acquiring
property, (viz.) inheritance, finding or friendly dona¬
tion, purchase, conquest, lending at interest, the
performance of work, and the acceptance of gifts
from virtuous men.

according to Medh. 1 pots, kettles, wooden stools, and the like ;
according to Gov. ' all property of small value such as beds, seats;'
according to Kull., Ragh., and Nand. 'also grain and clothes/
But Nar. takes it in its usual sense, c common metals such as brass
and copper/ I translate the last clause according to the first expla¬
nation of Medh., Gov., Nar., and Ragh., who think that all Brah-
ma«as should leave the realm of a king who does not support
famishing Sndtakas. Nand., however, says that such a king is to
be excluded from instruction and admission to sacrifices. Medh/s
second interpretation, according to which tyaga// means dharma-
hani^, * a loss of spiritual merit/ agrees with Nand/s view. Kull.
finally takes the phrase very differently, * but he who does not wish
to give anything, being known for his avarice, must be left to him¬
self, i.e. must not be asked/ Kull. and Gov. hold that 'the
prince 9 meant here is a Kshatriya king who does not follow the
.Sastras, or a *Sfidra king (see note on IV, 33), and that the verse
thus rescinds the prohibition given above, IV, 84 seq.

114. Vas. XII, 3.

115. Gaut.X,39-42. Labha,'finding or friendly donation’ (Medh.,
Gov., Kull.), refers according to Nar. and Nand. to the acquisition of
treasure-trove alone, not to the acceptance of presents from friends,
from a father-in-law, &c. Gaya, ' conquest/ means according to
Nand.'gaining lawsuits/ The same commentator takes prayoga,

' lending money at interest/ in the sense of' teaching/ and karma-
yoga,' performance of labour/ in the sense of' sacrificing for others/
All the commentators, except Nand., point out that the first three
modes of acquisition are lawful for all castes, the fourth for Ksha-

TIMES OF distress; the king.

X, 120.

427

. ti6. Learning, mechanical arts, work for wages,
service, rearing cattle, traffic, agriculture, content¬
ment (with little), alms, and receiving interest on
money, are the ten modes of subsistence (permitted
to all men in times of distress).

117. Neither a Brdhmawa, nor a Kshatriya must
lend (money at) interest; but at his pleasure (either
of them) may, in times of distress (when he requires
money) for sacred purposes, lend to a very sinful
man at a small interest.

118. A Kshatriya (king) who, in times of distress,
takes even the fourth part (of the crops), is free
from guilt, if he protects his subjects to the best of
his ability.

119. His peculiar duty is conquest, and he must
not turn back in danger; having protected the
Vabyas by his weapons, he may cause the legal
tax to be collected ;

120. (Viz.) from Vai-syas one-eighth as the tax on

tfiyas, the fifth and sixth for Vairyas (or the fifth for VaLryas, the
sixth for .STulras, Nar.), and the seventh for Brahmawas.

116. ‘ Learning,'i. e. (teaching) other than Vedic sciences, e. g.
logic, exorcising evil spirits, or charms against poison (Mcdh., Kull.,
Nar., Ragh.). Gov. thinks that ‘ teaching for a stipulated fee ’ is
also permissible under this rule.

117. Vas. II, 40-43. Gov., Nar., and K. read alpakam instead
of alpikam, and with this var. lect. the last clause might be trans¬
lated with Nar. by 1 . .. (either of them) . . . may lend a small (sum)
to a very sinful man/

119. I read with Gov. and K. na bhaye instead of nahave
(editions). Medh/s text has the latter reading, but the com¬
mentary bhaye upasthite paranmukho yuddhe na syfit, ‘ when
danger threatens he shall not turn back in battle,’ indicates that
his reading was bhaye. The same inference may be drawn from
Kull.’s commentary. Nand. gives na bhave, probably a mistake
for na bhaye.

120. According to Medh., the first line refers to the profits of

428

LAWS OF MANU.

X, 121.

grain, one-twentieth (on the profits on gold and
cattle), which amount at least to one K&rshclpawa;
.Sfidras, artisans, and mechanics (shall) benefit (the
king) by (doing) work (for him).

121. If a .Sttdra, (unable to subsist by serving
Brclhmawas,) seeks a livelihood, he may serve Ksha-
triyas, or he may also seek to maintain himself by
attending on a wealthy Vahya.

122. But let a (.Sftdra) serve Brdhmawas, either

subjects dealing in corn or in gold. From the former the king
may take in times of distress one-eighth, and from the latter one-
twentieth. The second line indicates that artisans who, according
to VII, 138, in ordinary times furnish one piece of work in each
month, may be made to work more for the king. According to
Gov. and Kull., husbandmen (krfshi^ivinam, Gov.) shall give from
the increments on grain (upa&iya) one-eighth (instead of one-
twelfth, and in the direst distress one-fourth, according to verse 118,
Kull.), from all increments on gold and so forth amounting to more
than a Karshdpawa one-twentieth instead of one-fiftieth, as prescribed
above, Vll, 130. Ragh. in substance agrees with this explanation.
Nar. and Nand. read, as it would seem, vi;^atkarshapa«avaraw
(waparaw, Nand.), and take the verse differently. Nar. says that
the tax on grain is to be one-fourth in the case of -Sftdras, and one-
eighth in the case of Vauyas, that the tax on everything else is to
be at least one Karshapawa in twenty, and that artisans who work
for wages shall pay the same rate (viwjatkarshapanam iti * dhdnyad
anyeshu vimad vimatikdrshapawamftlyara tadwaldbhe karsha-
pa»a eko ra^? 7 a grahya ity avara h paksha/* 1 sambhave tv adhikam
api grahyam ity artha^ 1 dharmopakarawa// [karmo°] dharmibhir
[karmabhir] vijvam upakurvantas tantuvayddaya^ l *ftdraA karavo
varwavahya na/a/£itrakaradya// l jilpinax £a rathakdradyds te 'pi
karma krz'tva bhr/titve 'pi vi;;watikarshapa«alabhe kdrshdpawdvarafli
julkaw dadyur iti .reshai). According to Nar. the translation would
be: * (Viz.) one-eighth as the tax (payable) by Vawyas on grain,
(and on everything else) at least one Kdrshapawa out of twenty;
*Sftdra artisans and mechanics who benefit (men) by their work
(shall pay the same rate).’ Nar. adds that some read triwjatkarshd-
'pawdvaram, ‘ at least one Kdrshdpa#a out of thirty/

121-129. Gaut. X, 50-65; Y&gii. 1 ,120-121.

X, 128. TIMES OF DISTRESS ; sOdRAS. 429

for the sake of heaven, or with a view to both (this
life and the next); for he who is called the servant
of a Brcihma«a thereby gains all his ends.

123. The service of Br&hma#as alone is declared
(to be) an excellent occupation for a .Sfldra; for
whatever else besides this he may perform will bear
him no fruit.

124. They must allot to him out of their own
family(-property) a suitable maintenance, after con¬
sidering his ability, his industry, and the number of
those whom he is bound to support.

125. The remnants of their food must be given
to him, as well as their old clothes, the refuse of
their grain, and their old household furniture.

126. A .Sudra cannot commit an offence, causing
loss of caste (pataka), and he is not worthy to re¬
ceive the sacraments; he has no right to (fulfil)
the sacred law (of the Aryans, yet) there is no pro¬
hibition against (his fulfilling certain portions of)
the law.

127. (.Sttdras) who are desirous to gain merit, and
know (their) duty, commit no sin, but gain praise, if
they imitate the practice of virtuous men without
reciting sacred texts.

128. The more a (S'fidra), keeping himself free
from envy, imitates the behaviour of the virtuous,
the more he gains, without being censured, (exalta¬
tion in) this world and the next.

126. ‘Cannot commit an offence causing loss of caste/i.e. ‘by
eating garlic and the like forbidden fruit' (Gov., Kull.), or ‘ by (keep¬
ing) a slaughter-house' (R6gh.).

127. In what particulars the practice of the Aryans may be imi¬
tated by Siidras, may be learnt from the parallel passages quoted
above.

430

LAWS OF MANU.

X, 129.

129. No collection of wealth must be made
by a .Sttdra, even though he be able (to do it);
for a .Shdra who has acquired wealth, gives pain
to BrcLhmawas.

130. The duties of the four castes (var»a) in
times of distress have thus been declared, and if
they perform them well, they will reach the most
blessed state.

131. Thus all the legal rules for the four castes
have been proclaimed; I next will promulgate the
auspicious rules for penances.

Chapter XI'.

1. Him who wishes (to marry for the sake of
having) offspring, him who wishes to perform a sa¬
crifice, a traveller, him who has given away all his
property, him who begs for the sake of his teacher,
his father, or his mother, a student of the Veda, and
a sick man,

2. These nine Br&hma«as one should consider as

129. ‘Gives pain to Biahmawas/ i. e. ‘by becoming proud and
not serving them’ (Gov., Kull., Ragh.).

XI. 1. Ap. II, 10, 1-2; Gaut. V, 21; Baudh. II, 5, 19. ‘He
who has given away all his property/ i. e. ‘ on performing a VLrva^it
sacrifice’ (Medh., Gov., Kull., Ragh.), or ‘other Kratus’ (Nar.).
‘ For the sake of his teacher, his father, or’ his mother/ i. e. ‘ in
order to maintain them’(Gov., Kull., Ragh.), or ‘in order to pro¬
cure the fee for the teacher' (Ragh., Nar.). The commentators try
to excuse the introduction of the miscellaneous rules, contained in
verses 1-43, before the discussion of the penances, which according
to X, 131 ought to follow at once, either by assuming that the
object is to show the necessity of performing penances in case these
rules are violated, or by pointing out that, as gifts are the means
► for removing sin, the enumeration of the Patras or worthy recipients
is required.

XI, 6.

PENANCES; GIFTS AND SACRIFICES.

431

Sn&takas, begging in order to fulfil the sacred law;
to such poor men gifts must be given in proportion
to their learning.

3. To these most excellent among the twice-born,
food and presents (of money) must be given; it is
declared that food must be given to others outside
the sacrificial enclosure.

4. But a king shall bestow, as is proper, jewels of
all sorts, and presents for the sake of sacrifices on
Brihmawas learned in the Vedas.

5. If a man who has a wife weds a second wife,
having begged money (to defray the marriage ex¬
penses, he obtains) no advantage but sensual enjoy¬
ment; but the issue (of his second marriage belongs)
to the giver of the money.

6. One should give, according to one’s ability,
wealth to Brahmawas learned in the Veda and living
alone; (thus) one obtains after death heavenly bliss.

3. Gaut. V, 22; Baudh. II, 5, 20. The translation follows
Medh., Gov., and Nar. The interpretation adopted by Kull. is, ‘ To
these most excellent Brahma«as food together with presents must
be given (inside the sacrificial enclosure).’ Nand. reads etebhyo
'pi instead of etebhyo hi, and thinks that bahirvede is to be con¬
strued with api, ‘ To these most excellent among the twice-born
food .... must be given even outside the sacrificial enclosure.’
The correct explanation of the force of the word bahirvedi, ‘ out¬
side the sacrificial enclosure,’ is given by Nar., who adds, vedy am
tu y&fcita m sarvam eva deyam, ‘ but near the fire-altar everything
asked for must be given to them.’ The meaning of the verse,
therefore, is that the nine mendicants, mentioned in verses 1-2,
shall always receive what they ask for, and other mendicants ordi¬
nary food only, but that if they beg at the performance of a sacri¬
fice, other property also must be given to them.

5. Ap. II, 10,3. The object of the verse is to forbid that alms shall
be asked or given for such a purpose (Gov., Kull.). Medh., Gov.,
N&r., Ragh., and K. omit this verse. It looks very much like an
interpolation, intended to explain the preceding rule.

432

LAWS OF MANU.

XI, 7.

7. H.e who may possess (a supply of) food suffi¬
cient to maintain those dependant on him during
three years or more than that, is worthy to drink
the Soma-juice.

8. But a twice-born man, who, though possessing
less than that amount of property, nevertheless
drinks the Soma-juice, does not derive any benefit
from that (act), though he may have formerly drunk
the Soma-juice.

9. (If) an opulent man (is) liberal towards
strangers, while his family lives in distress, that
counterfeit virtue will first make him taste the
sweets (of fame, but afterwards) make him swallow
the poison (of punishment in hell).

10. If (a man) does anything for the sake of his
happiness in another world, to the detriment of those
whom he is bound to maintain, that produces evil re¬
sults for him, both while he lives and when he is dead.

11. If a sacrifice, (offered) by (any twice-born)
sacrificer, (and) especially by a Brihma;za, must
remain incomplete through (the want of) one requi¬
site, while a righteous king rules,

7. Vas. VIII, 10; Vi. LIX, 8; Ydg»i. 1,124. ‘ Drink the Soma-
juice,’i. e. ‘ perform a Soma-sacrifice, in order to obtain the fulfil¬
ment of some wish’ (Medh., Gov., Kull., Ragh.).

8. ‘Though he formerly may have drunk the Soma,’ i.e. ‘at the
nitya (i.e, the annual, see above, IV, 26, VI, 10) Soma-sacrifice’(Gov.,
Kull., Ragh.). The same commentators and Medh. point out that
this and the preceding verses do not forbid the performance of the
nitya Soma-sacrifices, but only of those called kamya. He who
performs the latter without possessing the requisite property, loses
also the rewards for the former.

11-15. Gaut. XVIII, 24-27.

11. ‘While a righteous king rules,’ i. e. ‘because such a king
will not punish a man who acts in accordance with the .Sastras’
(Medh., Gov., Kull., Ndr.).

XI, 16. PENANCES ; GIFTS AND SACRIFICES. 433

12. That article (required) for the completion of
the sacrifice, may be taken (forcibly) from the
house of any Vaisya, who possesses a large number
of cattle, (but) neither performs the (minor) sacri¬
fices nor drinks the Soma-juice;

13. (Or) the (sacrificer) may take at his pleasure
two or three (articles required for a sacrifice) from
the house of a .SYldra ; for a ^ddra has no business
with sacrifices.

14. If (a man) possessing one hundred cows,
kindles not the sacred fire, or one possessing a
thousand cows, drinks not the Soma-juice, a (sacri¬
ficer) may unhesitatingly take (what he requires)
from the houses of those two, even (though they be
Br&hmawas or Kshatriyas);

15. (Or) he may take (it by force or fraud) from
one who always takes and never gives, and who
refuses to give it; thus the fame (of the taker) will
spread and his merit increase.

16. Likewise he who has not eaten at (the time
of) six meals, may take at (the time of) the seventh
meal (food) from a man who neglects his sacred

12. Nar. and Nand. think that ‘the king’ is the agent to be
understood with the verb ‘ may be taken.’ The latter relies on the
parallel passage of the Mahabharata, where the last Pada of the
verse is ya^nartham parthivo harct. ‘The (minor) sacrifices,’ i.e. ‘ the
Pakaya^jias and so forth’ (Kull.), or ‘ the five great sacrifices’ (Nar.).

14. Gov. thinks that this verse refers to a Kshatriya alone, while
Medh., Kull., Ragh. refer it to Brahma«as also.

15. Gov.,Kull., and Rlgh. explain adananitya, ‘one who always
takes,’ by ‘ a Brahmawa who always accepts presents,’ while Medh.
and Nfir. refer the word to men of all castes who constantly amass
wealth.

16-23. Gaut. XVIII, 28-32 ; Y ign. Ill, 43-44.

16. ‘At the seventh meal-time,' i.e. ‘on the fourth day of his
starving.’

M F f

434

LAWS OF MANU.

XI, 17.

duties, without (however) making a provision for the
morrow,

17. Either from the threshing-floor, or from a
field, or out of the house, or wherever he finds it;
but if (the owner) asks him, he must confess to him
that (deed and its cause).

18. (On such occasions) a Kshatriya must never
take the property of a (virtuous) Brahmawa; but he
who is starving may appropriate the possessions of
a Dasyu, or of one who neglects his sacred duties.

19. He who takes property from the wicked and
bestows it on the virtuous, transforms himself into a
boat, and carries both (over the sea of misfortune).

20. The property of those who zealously offer
sacrifices, the wise call the property of the gods;
but the wealth of those who perform no sacrifices is
called the property of the Asuras.

21. On him (who, for the reasons stated, appro¬
priates another’s possessions), a righteous king shall
not inflict punishment; for (in that case) a Br&h-
ma»a pines with hunger through the Kshatriya’s
want of care.

22. Having ascertained the number of those de¬
pendent on such a man, and having fully considered
his learning and his conduct, the king shall allow
him, out of his own property, a maintenance whereon
he may live according to the law;

23. And after allotting to him a maintenance, the

18. ‘A Dasyu,’ see above, X, 45. According to Nar., this verse
too refers to the king.

19. ‘Both,’i.e. ‘him from whom he takes it by saving him from
sin (or, from the trouble of protecting his property, Gov.), and the
recipient’ (Kull., Gov.). Nand. omits verses 19-21.

21-22. See above, VII, 134-135.

23. See above, VIII, 304.

XI, 29. l’ENANCES; GIFTS AND SACRIFICES. 415

king must protect him in every way; for he obtains
from such (a man) whom he protects, the sixth part
of his spiritual merit.

24. A Br4hma7*a shall never beg from a .Suidra
property for a sacrifice; for a sacrificer, having
begged (it from such a man), after death is born
(again) as a A'a«dcLla.

25. A Br&hmawa who, having begged any pro¬
perty for a sacrifice, does not use the whole (for that
purpose), becomes for a hundred years a (vulture of
the kind called) Bhdsa, or a crow.

26. That sinful man, who, through covetousness,
seizes the property of the gods, or the property of
Brahmawas, feeds in another world on the leavings of
vultures.

27. In case the prescribed animal and Soma-
sacrifices cannot be performed, let him always offer
at the change of the year a Vaisvanarl Ish/i as a
penance (for the omission).

28. But a twice-born, who, without being in dis¬
tress, performs his duties according to the law for
times of distress, obtains no reward for them in the
next world ; that is the opinion (of the sages).

29. By the Visve-devas, by the Sadhyas, and by
the great sages (of the) Brdhma^a (caste), who were
afraid of perishing in times of distress, a substitute
was made for the (principal) rule.

24. Vi. LIX, 11 ; Ya \gn. I, 127.

25. Ya^n. I, 127. Medh., Gov., and Nar. say,‘A Brahmawa
who .... does not give the whole of it (to Brahmawas)/

26. Pare loke, * in another world/ means according to Gov. and
Kull., ‘ in his next birth.’

27. Vi. LIX, 10; Y&gn. 1 ,126. The VaLrvdnari Ish/i is accord¬
ing to Medh., a rite described in the Grzhya-sfitras. Regarding the
prescribed *Srauta sacrifices, see above, IV, 25-26.

F f 2

436

LAWS OF MANU.

XI, 30.

30. That evil-minded man, who, being able (to
fulfil) the original law, lives according to the
secondary rule, reaps no reward for that after
death.

31. A Brihma«a who knows the law need not
bring any (offence) to the notice of the king ; by his
own power alone he can punish those men who
injure him.

32. His own power is greater than the power of
the king; the Brihma^a, therefore, may punish his
foes by his own power alone.

33. Let him use without hesitation the sacred
texts, revealed by Atharvan and by Angiras; speech,
indeed, is the weapon of the Brahmawa, with that
he may slay his enemies.

34. A Kshatriya shall pass through misfortunes
which have befallen him by the strength of his
arms, a VaLya and a .SYldra by their wealth, the
chief of the twice-born by muttered prayers and
burnt-oblations.

35. The Brahmawa is declared (to be) the creator
(of the world), the punisher, the teacher, (and hence)
a benefactor (of all created beings); to him let no
man say anything unpropitious, nor use any harsh
words.

31. This and the following verses rescind the rules given above,
IX, 290.

32. See above, IX, 313-321.

33. ‘ The sacred texts, revealed by Atharvan and Angiras,’ i. e.
the charms and incantations contained in the Atharva-vcda. Nar.
reads abhi/'&rayan, ‘using magic,' instead of avi^arayan (Medh.,
Gov., KulL, K.). Nand. reads, rrutir atharvdngirasM kuryad ity
abhiMritam.

34. Vas. XXVI, 16.

35 .1 read with Medh., Gov., Nar., R 4 gh., Nand., and K.,maitro for
maitrl, and ruktdm for fushk 4 m (editions). The commentators differ

XI, 37*

penances; sacrifices.

437

36. Neither a girl, nor a (married) young woman,
nor a man of little learning, nor a fool, nor a man
in great suffering, nor one uninitiated, shall offer
an Agnihotra.

37. For such (persons) offering a burnt-oblation
sink into hell, as well as he to whom that (Agni¬
hotra) belongs ; hence the person who sacrifices (for
another) must be skilled in (the .performance of)
Vaitina (rites), and know the whole Veda.

much with respect to the explanation of the first line. VidhatS, ‘ the
creator (of the world/ Medh., Nar.), means according to Gov. and
Kull.‘the performer of the prescribed rites;’ according to Ragh. ‘able
to do, to undo, and to change ;’ according to Nand. ‘ the performer
of magic rites and so forth.’ .Sasita, ‘ the punisher’ (Medh. Kull.,
Ragh.), i. e. ‘ of others, of the king’ (Medh.), or ‘ of his sons, pupils,
and so forth’ (Kull.), is interpreted by Nar. to mean ‘ the instructor
in the sacred law/ by Nand. ‘the instigator (of incantations)
VaktS, ‘the teacher’ (Gov., Nar.), means according to Medh. ‘ the
giver of good advice/ according to Kull, and Ragh. ‘ the expounder
of the sacred law.’ The explanations of Gov. and Kull. allow also
the translation adopted by Sir W. Jones, ‘ He who performs his
duties.... is truly called a Brahmawa.’ As regards the second line
Medh. offers two explanations. First he interprets it ‘ to him, i. e.
when he uses magic, let no man say anything unpropitious, i. e. he
must not punish him, nor use any harsh words, i. e. admonish or
sharply reprimand him.’ Gov. and Kull. agree with this explana¬
tion, but omit the specification ‘ when he uses magic.’ According
to Medh.’s second rendering the line contains an advice, addressed
to men of all castes, not to anger or disquiet a Brahma/za; and this
view is adopted by R&gh. and Nand., who explain akuralam,

‘unpropitious/by anish/am, ‘anything disagreeable.’ Nar.’s read¬
ings seem to have differed. He has kury&t instead of brfiy&t, and
explains the first phrase, ‘to him let no man do anything unpro¬
pitious,’ i. e. anything unbecoming, such as a bodily injury. In the
second clause he reads juktam (suktam, MS.), which he explains by
paryushitam, ‘ stale/ but he does not give the remainder of his text.

36-37. Ap. II, 15,18-19; Gaut. II, 4; Vas. II, 6: see also
above, II, 172; V, 155; IX, 18. The Vaitana rites are those per¬
formed in the vit&na, the three sacred fires. Hence it follows that
the Agnihotra meant here is the 6rauta Agnihotra.

438

LAWS OF MANU.

XI, 38 .

38. A Br£hma«a who, though wealthy, does not
give, as fee for the performance of an Agnyadheya,
a horse sacred to Pra/apati, becomes (equal to one)
who has not kindled the sacred fires.

39. Let him who has faith and controls his
senses perform other meritorious acts, but let him
on no account offer sacrifices at which he gives
smaller fees (than those prescribed).

40. The organs (of sense and action), honour,
(bliss in) heaven, longevity, fame, offspring, and
cattle are destroyed by a sacrifice at which (too)
small sacrificial fees are given; hence a man of
small means should not offer a (.Srauta) sacrifice.

41. A Br&hma«a who, being an Agnihotrin,
voluntarily neglects the sacred fires, shall perform
a lunar penance during one month; for that
(offence) is equal to the slaughter of a son.

42. Those who, obtaining wealth from .Vftdras,
(and using that) offer an Agnihotra, are priests
officiating for .Sildras, (and hence) censured among
those who recite the Veda.

38. The translation of prd^Spatya, ‘ sacred to Pra^apati,’ follows
Gov., Kull., Nar., and R&gh. Medh. says that the epithet may be
used merely by way of laudation, or may mean that the animal is
to be neither very good nor very bad, or that it may be derived
from a phrase current among the people. Nand. explains it by
‘ to be given to the Brahman priest.’

40. Gov. and Kull. explain, here and above, IV, 94, ya-ra^,
‘ honour,’ by ‘ a good name during one’s life,’ and kfrtim, ‘ fame,’
by ‘ fame after death.’ Nar. takes the former as ‘ being known to
others for one’s virtues,’ and the latter as ‘ being praised by others.'

41. Gaut. XXII, 34; Vas. 1 ,18 ; XXI, 27; Vi. LIV, 13. Nand.
explains vira, ‘ son’ (Gov., Kull., Nar., Ragh.), by a Kshatriya, and
Ragh. says that it may also mean * a deity.’

42. See above, XI, 24.

XT, 48.

penances; gifts and sacrifices.

439

43. Treading with his foot on the heads of those
fools who worship a fire (kindled at the expense) of a
•Sildra, the giver (of the wealth) shall always pass
over his miseries (in the next world).

44. A man who omits a prescribed act, or per¬
forms a blamable act, or cleaves to sensual enjoy¬
ments, must perform a penance.

45. (All) sages prescribe a penance for a sin
unintentionally committed; some declare, on the
evidence of the revealed texts, (that it may be
performed) even for an intentional (offence).

46. A sin unintentionally committed is expiated
by the recitation of Vedic texts, but that which
(men) in their folly commit intentionally, by various
(special) penances.

47. A twicc-born man, having become liable t'
perform a penance, be it by (the decree of) fate or
by (an act) committed in a former life, must not,
before the penance has been performed, have inter¬
course with virtuous men.

48. Some wicked men suffer a change of their

43. Nand. reads the first line differently, pfipanaw satatam teshfim
agnizra s fidrasya jj'uhvatfim, but the general sense remains the same.

44-46. Gaut. XIX; Vas. XX, 1-3; XXII; Baudh. Ill, 10; Ya-w.
Ill, 219, 226.

45. Vedic texts which prescribe penances for offences committed
intentionally, are quoted Gaut. XIX, 7-ro. The commentators
adduce also Aitareya-br&hmawa VII, 28.

47. Daivat, ‘by (the decree of) fate,' i.e. ‘through carelessness’
(Medh., Nar., Kull., Ragh.). Medh. mentions a var. Icct. mohfit,
‘ through delusion of mind.’ ‘ By (an act) committed in a former
life,’ i. e. ‘ if he has black teeth or some other bodily defect from
which his having committed a crime in a former birth may be
inferred.’

48-54. Vas. I, 18; XX, 6; XXI, 43-44; Vi. XLV; Yign. III,
207-215.

440

LAWS OF MANU.

XI, 49 .

(natural) appearance in consequence of crimes com¬
mitted in this life, and some in consequence of those
committed in a former (existence).

49. He who steals the gold (of a Br£hma#a) has
diseased nails; a drinker of (the spirituous liquor
called) Surd, black teeth ; the slayer of a Brdhmawa,
consumption; the violator of a Guru’s bed, a dis¬
eased skin;

50. An informer, a foul-smelling nose; a calum¬
niator, a stinking breath; a stealer of grain, defi¬
ciency in limbs; he who adulterates (grain),redundant
limbs;

. 51. A stealer of (cooked) food, dyspepsia; a
stealer of the words (of the Veda), dumbness; a
stealer of clothes, white leprosy; a horse-stealer,
lameness.

52. The stealer of a lamp will become blind; he
who extinguishes it will become one-eyed; injury
(to sentient beings) is punished by general sickli¬
ness ; an adulterer (will have) swellings (in his
limbs).

53. Thus in consequence of a remnant of (the
guilt of former) crimes, are born idiots, dumb, blind,
deaf, and deformed men, who are (all) despised by
the virtuous.

54. Penances, therefore, must always be per¬
formed for the sake of purification, because those

51. ‘A stealer of the words (of the Veda),’ i. e. ‘ one who learns
the Veda without permission, by hearing another man recite it’
(Gov., Kull., Ragh.), means according to Nar. ‘ a plagiator.’

52. Gov., Nar., Nand., and K. omit this verse, and Rdgh. says
that it is found kvapi, in some MSS.

53. I read with Ndr., Nand., and K., karmdvajeshewa instead of
karmavueshewa (editions). The explanations of Medh., Gov., and
Kull. likewise point to the former reading.

XI, 59*

RETRIBUTION FOR OFFENCES.

441

whose sins have not been expiated, are born (again)
with disgraceful marks.

55. Killing a Brdhma»a, drinking (the spirituous
liquor called) Sura, stealing (the gold of a Brah-
ma#a), adultery with a Guru’s wife, and associating
with such (offenders), they declare (to be) mortal
sins (mahdpataka).

56. Falsely attributing to oneself high birth,
giving information to the king (regarding a crime),
and falsely accusing one’s teacher, (are offences)
equal to slaying a Brahmawa.

57. Forgetting the Veda, reviling the Vedas,
giving false evidence, slaying a friend, eating for¬
bidden food, or (swallowing substances) unfit for
food, are six (offences) equal to drinking Sura.

58. Stealing a deposit, or men, a horse, an 1
silver, land, diamonds and (other) gems, is declared
to be equal to stealing the gold (of a Br&hmawa).

59. Carnal intercourse with sisters by the same
mother, with (unmarried) maidens, with females of

53-71. Ap. I, 21, 7-19; Gaut. XXI, 1-12; Vas. I, 19-23;
Baudh. II, 2, 1-8; 12-13; 15-16; Vi. XXXIV, 1; XXXV-
XXXVIII, 6; XXXIX-XLII; Y kgn. Ill, 227-242.

55. See above, IX, 235.

56. Guror /.’alikanirbandha/z, ‘falsely accusing one’s teacher’
(Medh., Gov., Kull.), may also mean according to Medh. ‘ wrong¬
fully going to law with the teacher.’ Nar. and Nand. explain it
by ‘ persevering in doing what is disagreeable to the teacher.’

57. Garhitdn&dya, ‘forbidden food and (substances) unfit for food ’
(Gov., Kull., Rfigh.), means according to Medh. ‘forbidden food
and such which one has resolved not to eat;’ according to Nfir.
and Nand. ‘ food blemished by the contact with impure men or
things, and such as is by its nature unfit for eating, e. g. garlic.’

59. The commentators point out that, though the crimes
enumerated in verses 56-59 are stated to be equal to mortal sins,
the penances are not always the same, but frequently less heavy.

442

LAWS OF MANU.

XI, 60 .

the lowest castes, with the wives of a friend, or of a
son, they declare to be equal to the violation of
a Guru’s bed.

60. Slaying kine, sacrificing for those who are un¬
worthy to sacrifice, adultery, selling oneself, casting
off one’s teacher, mother, father, or son, giving up
the (daily) study of the Veda, and neglecting the
(sacred domestic) fire,

61. Allowing one’s younger brother to marry
first, marrying before one’s elder brother, giving a
daughter to, or sacrificing for, (either brother),

62. Defiling a' damsel, usury, breaking a vow,
selling a tank, a garden, one’s wife, or child,

63. Living as a Vr&tya, casting off a relative,
teaching (the Veda) for wages, learning (the Veda)
from a paid teacher, and selling goods which one
ought not to sell,

64. Superintending mines (or factories) of any

60. * Selling oneself,’ i. e. ‘ for money into slavery ’ (Medh.),
‘refers to Aryans only ’ (N&r.). Medh. mentions another reading,
paradaryam avikraya^, ‘adultery and the sale of forbidden mer¬
chandise/ Medh. and Nar. say, ‘forgetting the sacred texts
required for the daily private recitation;’ and Medh. adds that,
as the same offence has been mentioned above, verse 57, ‘for¬
getting the Veda,’ may be either reckoned as equal to a Mahd-
pataka or as an Upap&taka crime. Nar. refers the term ‘ the fire ’
to the three sacred -Srauta fires.

62. ‘Breaking a vow/ i.e. ‘any vow voluntarily undertaken'
(Medh., Nar.), means according to Gov., Hull., and R&gh. ‘break¬
ing the vow of studentship.’

63. ‘Living as a Vr&tya/ see above, X, 20. ‘Casting off a
relative/ i. e. ‘ not supporting him in distress, though one possesses
money enough to do so ’ (Medh.). Medh. takes b&ndhava in the
sense of ‘ maternal relatives/ and understands that it includes the
mother, sisters, maternal uncles, &c., while the other commentators
take it in a wider sense.

64. Mahdyantrapravartana, ‘ executing great mechanical works/

XI, 67.

CLASSIFICATION OF OFFENCES.

443

sort, executing great mechanical works, injuring
(living) plants, subsisting on (the earnings of) one's
wife, sorcery (by means of sacrifices), and working
(magic by means of) roots, (and so forth),

65. Cutting down green trees for firewood, doing
acts for one s own advantage only, eating prohi¬
bited food,

66. Neglecting to kindle the sacred fires, theft,
non-payment of (the three) debts, studying bad
books, and practising (the arts of) dancing and
singing,

67. Stealing grain, base metals, or cattle, inter-

e. g.‘ constructing dams across rivers in order to stop the water’
(Medh., Gov., Kull., Ragh., K.), means according to Nar. ‘making
machines for killing great animals such as boars/ according to
Nand. ‘(making) great machines such as sugar-mills/ Strya^lva,
‘ subsisting on (the earnings of) one's wife, i. e. by making her go
into service (Nar., Nand.), or by forcing her to become a harlot'
(Kull.), means according to Medh. ‘subsisting on (the separate
property of) one’s wife,’ according to Ragh. ‘living on (the money
obtained by selling one’s wife/ Nand. reads hizrcsraushadhistry-
upa^iva//, ‘ subsisting on (money earned by the sale of) noxious
herbs or on (the earnings of) one’s wife.'

65. ‘ Doing acts for one’s own advantage only,' i. e. ‘ cooking
only for oneself, and so forth ’ (Medh., Nar., Kull., Nand., Ragh.);
see above, III, 118. By ninditanna, ‘ forbidden food,’ Medh. under¬
stands the same kinds, mentioned above, verse 57; Kull.,‘for¬
bidden food such as garlic;’ N&r., Ragh., and Nand., ‘food given
by persons from whom it must not be accepted, e. g. by a king, a
gambler, &c.’ Medh. and Kull. state expressly that, if such food
be eaten once and unintentionally, the offence is an Upapsitaka,
but in worse cases equal to a Mahapataka.

66. ‘ Theft/ i. e. ‘ of valuable objects' (Kull.), ‘ excepting gold
and the other articles specially mentioned ’ (Medh., R&gh.), e. g.
‘of clothes’ (N&r,). Regarding the three debts, see Vas. XI, 45.
‘Bad books/ i.e.‘those of the Aarv&kas, Nirgranthas (Gainas/
Medh.), or ‘of heretics in general’ (N^r.).

67. ‘Cattle/ i.e. other than cows; see above, verse 60.

444

LAWS OF MANU.

XI, 68.

course with women who drink spirituous liquor,
slaying women, .SYldras, VaLyas, or Kshatriyas, and
atheism, (are all) minor offences, causing loss of
caste (U papa taka).

68. Giving pain to a Brihmawa (by a blow),
smelling at things which ought not to be smelt at,
or at spirituous liquor, cheating, and an unnatural
offence with a man, are declared to cause the loss
of caste (6&tibhra#«a).

69. Killing a donkey, a horse, a camel, a deer,
an elephant, a goat, a sheep, a fish, a snake, or a
buffalo, must be known to degrade (the offender) to
a mixed caste (Sawkarikarawa).

70. Accepting presents from blamed men, trading,
serving .Sudras, and speaking a falsehood, make (the
offender) unworthy to receive gifts (Apatra).

71. Killing insects, small or large, or birds, eating
anything kept close to spirituous liquors, stealing
fruit, firewood, or flowers, (are offences) which make
impure (Mal&vaha).

72. Learn (now) completely those penances, by
means of which all the several offences mentioned
(can) be expiated.

73. For his purification the slayer of a Br&hmarca
shall make a hut in the forest and dwell (in it)

68. ‘ Things which ought not to be smelt at,’ e. g. ‘ garlic, onions,
ordure, &c.’ (Medh., Gov., Kull., Nar.).

70. ‘ Blamed men,’ i. e. those from whom no gifts must be
accepted; see above, IV, 84 seq.

73-87. Ap. I, 24, 10-23; 25, ii-ia; 28, 21-29, 1; Gaut.
XXII, 2-10; Vas. XX, 25-28; Baudh. II, 1, 2-6; Vi. XXV, 6;
L, 1-6,15; Y &gn. Ill, 243-250.

73. According to Kull., N&r., and Ragh.- this penance is to be
performed in case the homicide was committed unintentionally.

XI, 77-

penances FOR MURDER.

445

during twelve years, subsisting on alms and making
the skull of a dead man his flag;

74. Or let him, of his own free will, become (in a
battle) the target of archers who know (his pur¬
pose); or he may thrice throw himself headlong into
a blazing fire;

75. Or he may offer a horse-sacrifice, a Svai^it, a
Gosava, an Abhi^it, a Vii’va^it, a Tri vrzt, or an
Agnish/ut;

76. Or, in order to remove (the guilt of) slaying
a Brdhma^a, he may walk one hundred yo£*anas,
reciting one of the Vedas, eating little, and con¬
trolling his organs;

77. Or he may present to a Brdhma^a, learned in

74. Vidusham, ‘who know (his purpose),' (Medh., Gov., Kull.),
may also mean according to Medh. ‘ who are expert in archery, 1
and Nand. adopts this explanation. Ndr. thinks that this penance
must be performed by one who intentionally murdered a Brahmaz/a,
and that it must end in his death. According to the Bhavishya-
purazza which Kull. and Rdgh. quote, these two penances and that
mentioned in the next verse are to be performed by a Kshatriya
who slew a Brahmazza, those ending in death by an offender who
himself, destitute of good qualities, killed a learned Srotriya, and
the lighter ones by an eminent king who unintentionally caused
the death of a worthless Brahmazza.

75. According to- the Bhavishyapurazza, Ndr. and Kull., Svar^it
is the name of a sacrifice, but Medh. (on verse 78) and Rdgh. take
the word as an adjective qualifying Gosava. Regarding the Gosava,
see Katydyana Sr. Sfitras XXII, 11,3; regarding the Abhi^it, A sv.
Sr . Sfitras VIII, 5, 13. According to Gov. and Ndr., Trivrzt is
equivalent to Trivrztstoma, and to be taken separately; but accord¬
ing to Medh. and Ragh., trivrUa qualifies Agnish/ut. Regarding
the Agnish/ut, see Asv. *Sr. Sfitras IX, 7, 22-25.

76. According to Ndr., Kull., and Rdgh. (the latter two quoting
the Bhavishyapurazza as their authority), this penance suffices to
expiate the unintentional slaughter of one who has nothing but the
name of a Brdhmaz/a.

77. I read with Medh., Gov., and K., dhanazra hi instead of

446

LAWS OF MANU.

XI, 78 .

the Vedas, his whole property, as much wealth as
suffices for the maintenance (of the recipient), or a
house together with the furniture;

78. Or, subsisting on sacrificial food, he may
walk against the stream along (the whole course
of the river) Sarasvatl; or, restricting his food
(very much), he may mutter thrice the Sa^hita of
a Veda.

79. Having shaved off (all his hair), he may
dwell at the extremity of the village, or in a cow-pen,
or in a hermitage, or at the root of a tree, taking
pleasure in doing good to cows and Brahma^as.

dhanazzz va (Nar., Nand., Ragh., editions), ‘ or as much wealth as/
Kull/s explanation, too, points to the former reading, the meaning
of which is that * the whole property* must be sufficient to maintain
the recipient. According to the Bhavishyapurazza, quoted by Kull.
and Ragh., the penance is prescribed for the case that a rich, un¬
learned Brahmazza who keeps no sacred fire, unintentionally slew
an utterly worthless Br&hmazza.

78. According to the Bhavishyapurazza, quoted by Kull. and
Ragh., the first penance is to be performed by an unlearned
Brahmazza who intentionally killed an utterly worthless caste-
fellow, the second by an exceedingly distinguished *SYotriya who
unintentionally caused the death of a man merely a Brahmazza in
name. Medh. and Gov. attach their views regarding the particular
cases to their explanations of this Sfttra. Gov. does not go beyond
generalities. But Medh. says that the penance mentioned in verse 73
and the first described in verse 74 may be optionally performed for
intentionally slaying an ordinary Brahmazza. If a -Srotriya or one
who is performing a £rauta sacrifice has been killed, the offender
is to burn himself. The sacrifices will atone for the guilt of a
homicide committed unintentionally, by a most distinguished
member of the Aryan castes, provided that the person slain was
a Br&hmazza in name only.

79. Medh., Kull., and Gov. think that the rule allows an option
with respect to the residence during the penance of twelve years
(verse 73). N&r. says that the verse contains a general rule for all
penances.

XI, 8fi.

PENANCES FOR MURDER.

447

80. He who unhesitatingly abandons life for the
sake of Brahmawas or of cows, is freed from (the
guilt of) the murder of a Brdhmawa, and (so is he)
who saves (the life of) a cow, or of a Brahmawa.

81. If either he fights at least three times (against
robbers in defence of) a Brdhmawa’s (property), or
reconquers the whole property of a Brdhma«a, or if
he loses his life for such a cause, he is freed (from
his guilt).

82. He who thus (remains) always firm in his
vow, chaste, and of concentrated mind, removes after
the lapse of twelve years (the guilt of) slaying a
Brahmawa.

83. Or he who, after confessing his crime in an
assembly of the gods of the earth (Brahma«as), and
the gods of men (Kshatriyas), bathes (with the
priests) at the close of a horse-sacrifice, is (also)
freed (from guilt).

84. The Brahma«a is declared (to be) the root
of the sacred law and the Kshatriya its top; hence
he who has confessed his sin before an assembly of
such men, becomes pure.

85. By his origin alone a Brdhma«a is a deity even
for the gods, and (his teaching is) authoritative for
men, because the Veda is the foundation for that.

80. This holds good also before the twelve years’ penance is
finished (Gov., Kull., Nar.).

83. Gov. holds that this penance is efficacious only if the
offender is engaged in the performance of the twelve years' pen¬
ance. Kull. and Rdgh. think that it is a separate penance, because
the subject of the twelve years’ penance has been finished in the
preceding verse, and because the Bhavishyapurdaa specially pre¬
scribes it for an eminent Brdhmawa who unintentionally causes the
death of a worthless caste-fellow. Medh. mentions both opinions,
and states that he believes the penance to be efficacious in any
case.

448

LAWS OF MANU.

XI, 86.

86. (If) only three of them who are learned in
the Veda proclaim the expiation for offences, that
shall purify the (sinners); for the words of learned
men are a means of purification.

87. A BrAhma^a who, with a concentrated mind,
follows any of the (above-mentioned) rules, removes
the sin committed by slaying a Br&hma^a through
his self-control.

88. For destroying the embryo (of a Brdhma^a,
the sex of which was) unknown, for slaying a Ksha-
triya or a VaLrya who are (engaged in or) have offered
a (Vedic) sacrifice, or a (Brihma^a) woman who has
bathed after temporary uncleanness (Atreyl), he must
perform the same penance,

89. Likewise for giving false evidence (in an
important cause), for passionately abusing the
teacher, for stealing a deposit, and for killing (his)
wife or his friend.

90. This expiation has been prescribed for unin-

88-89. Ap. I, 24, 6-9, 23 ; Gaut. XXII, 11—14 ; Vas. XX, 34-36 ;
Baudh. II, 1,12 ; Vi. L, 7-10 ; LII, 4 ; Y agn. Ill, 251.

88. Medh. and several other commentators propose, in explana¬
tion of the term Atreyt, besides the interpretation given above, also
the erroneous one, ‘ a female of the tribe of Atri. 5

89. ‘Giving false evidence,’ i.e. ‘in a case where the life of the

accused is involved’ (Medh., Gov., Nar.), or ‘where gold, land
and the like is at stake’ (Kull., Ragh.). ‘Abusing the teacher,'
see above, verse 56. ‘ Stealing a deposit,' i. e. ‘ gold belonging to

a Kshatriya or Vauya, or silver and other property belonging to a
Brdhma«a' (Kull., Nar., Ragh.), or property belonging to a poor
Brdhma«a (Medh.). Stri, ‘his wife’ (Nar., Nand.), means according
to Gov., Kull., and Rdgh. ‘the virtuous wife of a distinguished
Brdhmawa who keeps sacred fires.’ Medh. (on verse 88) seems to
agree to a similar explanation. ‘His friend,’ i.e. ‘though he may
not be a Brdhma^a’ (Ndr.).

90. The verse is identical with Baudh. II, 1, 6. The correct

XI, 93 -

penances FOR DRINKING SPfRITS.

449

tentionally killing a Brdhma^a ; but for intentionally
slaying a Brdhma/za no atonement is ordained.

91. A twice-born man who has (intentionally)
drunk, through delusion of mind, (the spirituous
liquor called) Surd shall drink that liquor boiling-
hot; when his body has been completely scalded
by that, he is freed from his guilt ;

92. Or he may drink cow’s urine, water, milk,
clarified butter or (liquid) cowdung boiling-hot, until
he dies;

93. Or, in order to remove (the guilt of) drinking
Surd, he may eat during a year once (a day) at
night grains (of rice) or oilcake, wearing clothes
made of cowhair and his own hair in braids and
carrying (a wine cup as) a flag.

interpretation of this verse is that Manu, just as Ap. I, 24, 24, held
the intentional murder of a true Brahmawa to be inexpiable during
the criminal’s life, and meant to teach that the murderer had either
to perform a penance which caused his death or to live according
to the twelve years' rule during the term of his natural life. This is
the doctrine attributed to Manu by Gaut. XXI, 7. While Gov. and
N&r. agree with this explanation, Medh., ‘ others * quoted by Gov.,
Hull., Nand., and Ragh. refer iyam, 4 this,' to verse 73, and hold
that in the case of wilful murder the penance has only to be made
severer by doubling or trebling the term of twelve years.

91-98. Ap. I, 25, 3, 10; 27, 10; Gaut. XXIII, 10-12; Vas. XX,
19, 22 ; Baudh. II, 1, 18-22 ; Vi. LI, 1-4 ; Ya gn. Ill, 253-254.

91. This and the next penances are prescribed for an inten¬
tional offence; see below, verse 147. According to Medh., Gov.,
Kull., and R&gh. (the latter two quoting the Bhavishyapuni/za), the
spirituous liquor here intended is the paish/ikl sura, that distilled
from ground rice. According to Nar. the penance ending in death
must be performed by all Aryans who have cfyunk paish/ikl sur£,
and by Brahma/zas who have drunk any of the three kinds of sur&
mentioned in verse 95. Nand. reads amohat, and explains it by
matipflrvakam, 1 intentionally.’

93. According to Gov., Kull., Nand., and R&gh., this penance is
prescribed for drinking unintentionally paish/ikl sur&; according

[ 25 ] G g

45°

LAWS OF MANU.

XI, 94-

94. Surd, indeed, is the dirty refuse (mala) of
grain, sin also is called dirt (mala); hence a
Brflhmawa, a Kshatriya, and a VaBya shall not
drink Surfi.

95. Surd one must know to be of three kinds,
that distilled from molasses (gauafi), that distilled
from ground rice, and that distilled from Madhhka-
flowers (mddhvi); as the one (named above) even
so are all (three sorts) forbidden to 'the chief of
the twice-born.

96. Surd, (all other) intoxicating drinks and de¬
coctions and flesh are the food of the Yakshas,
Rdkshasas, and Pisfi/Sas; a Brahmawa who eats (the
remnants of) the offerings consecrated to the gods,
must not partake of such (substances).

97. A Brdhmawa, stupefied by drunkenness, might
fall on something impure, or (improperly) pronounce
Vedic (texts), or commit some other act which ought
not to be committed.

98. When the Brahman (the Veda) which dwells
in his body is (even) once (only) deluged with
spirituous liquor, his Brahmanhood forsakes him
and he becomes a .Sfidra.

to‘others’ quoted by Medh. and Rfigh., for drinking gau</i or
madhvi sura; according to Nir., for intentionally drinking water
mixed with madhusura. Medh. himself says idam prarcatyaya
aushadMrtham, ‘ this (is intended) as a medicine for death.’

94. This verse shows, as the commentators point out, the dis¬
tinction between spirituous liquor distilled from ground grain,
paisb/iki sura, and the other two sorts mentioned in the next verse.
The first alone is forbidden to all Aryans, the other two sorts to
Brfihmawas; see also Gaut. II, 20.

95. Madhvi, ‘distilled from Madhftka (Maud) flowers’ (Kull.),
means according to Medh. ‘distilled from honey,’ according to
Ndr. ‘distilled either from grapes or from Madhftka flowers or
ii Qrn honey.’

XI, 104-

PENANCES FOR DRINKING SPIRITS.

451

99. The various expiations for drinking (the
spirituous liquors called) Suri have thus been ex¬
plained; I will next proclaim the atonement for
stealing the gold (of a Br 4 hma«a).

100. A Br 4 hma«a who has stolen the gold (of a
Br 4 hma#a) shall go to the king and, confessing his
deed, say, * Lord, punish me!’

101. Taking (from him) the club (which he must
carry), the king himself shall strike him once, by his
death the thief becomes pure; or a Br4hma#a (may
purify himself) by austerities.

102. He who desires to rempve by austerities the
guilt of stealing the gold (of a Br 4 hma«a), shall per¬
form the penance (prescribed) for the slayer of a
Br 4 hma«a, (living) in a forest and dressed in (gar¬
ments made of) bark.

103. By these penances a twice-born man may
remove the guilt incurred by a theft (o.f gold); but
he may atone for connexion with a Guru’s wife .by
the following penances.

104. He who has violated his Guru’s bed, shall,

ioo-ioi. See above, VIII, 314-316.

101. At the end of the verse Gov., Kull., Nar., Ragh., Nand.,
and K. read va instead of tu (Medh.(?) editions), which is
variously explained. According to Nar. and Nand., it means
‘but.’ Kull. thinks that it indicates that, while a Br&hmawa must
never be. slain by the king, other Aryans also may perform aus¬
terities. According to Righ., it refers to the optional recitation
of the Gayatri, repeated 700,000 times; according to Nar., to other
penances, even such as end in death. But Gov. is probably right
in assuming that ‘the austerities’ meant are those prescribed in
the next verse.

102. Ap. I, 25,10; Yagn. Ill, 258 ; Vi. LII, 3. According to
N&r., this verse refers to an ‘ unintentional’ offence; according to
Kull. and Ragh., to the theft of a small sum.

104-107. Ap. I, 25, 1-2,10; 28, 15-18; Gaut. XXIII, 8-12;

G g 2 •

452

LAWS OF MANU.

XI, log.

after confessing his crime, extend himself on a heated
iron bed, or embrace the red-hot image (of a woman);
by dying he becomes pure;

105. Or, having himself cut off his organ and his
testicles and having taken them in his joined hands,
he may walk straight towards the region of Nirrz’ti
(the south-west), until he falls down (dead);

106. Or, carrying the foot of a bedstead, dressed
in (garments of) bark and allowing his beard to
grow, he may, with a concentrated mind, perform
during a whole year the Y^rikkhxz. (or hard, penance),
revealed by Pra^apati, in a lonely forest;

107. Or, controlling his organs, he may during
three months continuously perform the lunar penance,
(subsisting) on sacrificial food or barley-gruel, in order
to remove (the guilt of) violating a Guru’s bed.

108. By means of these penances men who have
committed mortal sins (Mah&pataka) may remove
their guilt, but those who committed minor offences,
causing loss of caste, (Upap&taka, can do it) by the
various following penances.

Vas. XX, 13-14; Baudh. II, 1, 13-15; Vi. XXXIV, 2 ; LIII, 1;
Y &gn. Ill, 259-260.

104. According to Medh., the term ‘Guru’ denotes here ‘the
teacher or the father;’ according to Kail., Ndr., and Ragh., ‘the
father;' and Nar. particularly excludes an offence with a step¬
mother.

106. According to Medh., Kull., Ragh., this penance expiates
incest committed by mistake; according to N&r., the rule applies to
the case when the offence was committed with a stepmother. Re¬
garding the Kr/AMra penance, see below, verse 212.

107. According to Medh. and Ragh., the rule refers to anoffence
committed with the wife of a paternal or of a maternal uncle, or of
other minor Gurus; according to Kull., to an offence*wifR-.an ua^
faithful or low-caste wife of a Guru. Regarding the lunar penance
or ATindriya»a, see below, verse 217.

108. Nar. takes mahapatakina/z, ‘ those who committed mortal

XI,n6.

PENANCES FOR MINOR OFFENCES.

453

109. He who has committed a minor offence by
slaying a cow (or bull) shall drink during (the first)
month (a decoction of) barley-grains ; having shaved
all his hair, and covering himself with the hide (of
the slain cow), he must live in a cow-house.

110. During the two (following) months he shall
eat a small (quantity of food) without any factitious
salt at every fourth meal-time, and shall bathe in the
urine of cows, keeping his organs under control.

11 t. During the day he shall follow the cows and,
standing upright, inhale the dust (raised by their
hoofs); at night, after serving and worshipping them,
he shall remain in the (posture, called) vlrasana.

112. Controlling himself and free from anger, he
must stand when they stand, follow them when they
walk, and seat himself when they lie down.

113. (When a cow is) sick, or is threatened by
danger from thieves, tigers, and the like, or falls, or
sticks in a morass, he must relieve her by all pos¬
sible means:

114. In heat, in rain, or in cold, or when the wind
blows violently, he must not seek to shelter himself,
without (first) sheltering the cows according to his
ability.

115. Let him not say (a word), if a cow eats
(anything) in his own or another’s house or field or
on the threshing-floor, or if a calf drinks (milk).

116. The slayer of a cow who serves cows in this

sins,’ in the sense of ‘ those equal to mortal sinners,’ i. e. those
offenders who have been enumerated above, verse 56 seq.

109—117. Ap. I, 26,1; Gaut. XXII, 18 ; Vi. L, 16—24; Ya^n. Ill,
263-264.

xn. ‘In the (posture, called) virasana,’ i.e. ‘seated without
leaning against a wall or the like’ (Kull., Nand.).

454

LAWS OF MANU.

XI, 1 x 7 .

manner, removes after three months the guilt which
he incurred by killing a cow.

117. But after he has fully performed the pen¬
ance, he must give to (BrAhma^as) learned in the
Veda ten cows and a bull, (or) if he does not
possess (so much property) he must offer to them
all he has.

118. Twice-born men who have committed (other)
minor offences (U papa taka), except a student who
has broken his vow (Avakfmin), may perform, in
order to purify themselves, the same penance or
also a lunar penance.

119. But a student who has broken his vow shall
offer at night on a crossway to Nirmi a one-eyed
ass, according to the rule of the Pakayaf»as.

120. Having offered according to the rule obla¬
tions in the fire, he shall finally offer (four) oblations
of clarified butter to Vata, to Indra, to the teacher
(of the gods, Brzhaspati) and to Agni, reciting the
Rik verse ‘ May the Martits grant me,’ &c.

121. Those who know the Veda declare that a
voluntary effusion of semen by a twice-born (youth)
who fulfils the vow (of studentship constitutes) a
breach of that vow.

122. The divine light which the Veda imparts to

117. Y tgh. Ill, 265.

118-124. Ap. I, 26, 8; Gaut. XXV, 1-4; Vas. XXIII, 1-4;
Baudh. II, x, 30-35 ; Vi. XXVIII, 49-50; Y &gn. Ill, 280.

118. According to Nar. and Nand., the lunar penance is to be
performed if the offence was committed unintentionally.

119. ‘According to the rule of the Pakaya^nas,’ i. e. ‘according
to the Parukalpa, found in Arval&yana’s and other Gnhya Sfitras,’
Arv. Gn'. Sfftras 1 ,11 (NSr.).

120. The verse is found Taittiriya Arawyaka II, 18, 4.

122. I read with Medh., Gov., and K., marutaA, instead of maru-
ta m (Nand., editions).

XI, 12?. PENANCES FOR MINOR OFFENCES. 455

the student, enters, if he breaks his vow, the Maruts,
Puruhhta (Indra), the teacher (of the gods, IWhas-
pati) and Pdvaka (Fire).

123. When this sin has been committed, he shall
go begging to seven houses, dressed in the hide of
the (sacrificed) ass, proclaiming his deed.

124. Subsisting on a single (daily meal that
consists) of the alms obtained there and bathing at
(the time of) the three savanas (morning, noon, and
evening), he becomes pure after (the lapse of) one
year.

125. For committing with intent any of the
deeds which cause loss of caste (C&tibhrawsakara),
(the offender) shall perform a Samtapana Kr/Z'Mra ;
(for doing it) unintentionally, (the K.rikkhra) revealed
by Pra/apati.

126. As atonement for deeds which degrade to a
mixed caste (Sawkara), and for those which make a
man unworthy to receive gifts (Apatra), (he shall
perform) the lunar (penance) during a month; for
(acts) which render impure (Malintkarattlya) he shall
scald himself during three days with (hot) barley-
gruel.

127. One-fourth (of the penance) for the murder
of a Brahmawa is prescribed (as expiation) for
(intentionally) killing a Kshatriya, one-eighth for

125. Regarding the offences called Gdtibhrawrakara, see above,
verse 68. The Sawtapana Kr/X/Mra is described below, verse 213.

126. Regarding the three classes of offences, see above, 69-71.
The penance of subsisting on barley-gruel is described Vi. XLVIII;
Baudh. Ill, 6^

127-131. Ap. I, 24,1-4; Gaut. XXII, 14-16; Vas. XX, 31-33;
Baudh. I, 19, 1-2; II, 8-10; Vi. L, 12-14 5 Y ign. Ill, 266-267.

127. The word ‘virtuous’ is, according to the commentators, to
be understood with ‘a Kshatriya’ and ‘a Vauya,’ and the rule

LAWS OF MANU.

XT, 128.

; 456.

killing a Vatf^a; know that it is onersixteenth for
killjng a virtuouS .Sildra.

1 58 . But if a Brdhma«a unintentionally kills a
Kshatriya, he shall give, in order to purify himself,
one thousand cows and a bull;

129. Or he may perform the penance prescribed
for the murderer of a Brahma^a during three years,
controlling himself, wearing his hair in braids/
staying far away from the village, and dwelling at
the root of a tree.

130. A Brahma/za who has slain a virtuous
Vaisya, shall perform the same penance during one
year, or he may give one hundred cows and one
(bull).

(verse 66), according to which the murder of a -Sttdra, a Vauya,
and a Kshatriya is an Upapdtaka, to be expiated by a three months’
Govrata or a lunar penance, refers to the cases of persons who do
not live in accordance with the sacred law.

128. I read with Medh., Gov., Kull. (commentary), Nand., K.,
.mddhyartham atmana//, instead of su/fcaritavrata/* (editions), which
latter reading is evidently wrong.

129. According to Medh. and Ragh., this verse is merely a repe¬
tition of the rule given in verse 127. But others, mentioned by
him, Gov., Kull., and Nar., think that the special observances pre¬
scribed during the twelve years’ penance, e. g. carrying a skull
instead of a flag, which this verse does not expressly mention,
need not be kept. Nand. reads dvyabdam, c two years,’ instead of
tryabdam.

130. I read with Gov., Kull., Ndr., Rdgh., Nand., and K. dadyad
vaika^atam, instead of dadya^aikajatam (Medh., editions, and pro¬
bably mentioned by Nar.). According to Gov. and Kull. the two
penances are to be performed optionally, in case a virtuous Vaijya
has been killed unintentionally. Ragh. seems to hold the same
opinion. But Medh. says that the first penance is to be performed
for the murder of a Vawya who was less distinguished than the one
referred to in verse 127. Ndr. finally thinks that the verse refers to
a Vabya engaged in the performance of a sacrifice, and that the

XI, 134 -

PENANCES FOR MINOR OFFENCES.

457.

131. He who has slain a vSttdra; shall perform
that whole penance during six rribnths, or he giay^
also give ten white cows and one bull to a Brah-
ma^a.

132. Having killed a cat, an ichneumon, a blue jay,
-la frog, a dog, an iguana? an owl, or a crow, he shall

perform the penance for the murder of a 6ftdra;

“ 133. Or he ma-y drink milk during three days, or

walk one hundred yo^anas, or bathe in a river, or
mutter the hymn addressed to the Waters.

134. For killing a snake, a Brahma//a shall give
a spade of black iron, for a eunuch a load of straw
and a masha of lead ;

particle va/or,’ takes the place of the copula, and thus one penance
only is prescribed.

131. Gov. and Kull. hold that these penances, too, are to 1 e
performed in the case of an unintentional homicide. Medh. explains
sita^, ‘white/ to mean ‘ not white in colour, but (called so) because
they resemble in purity (white substances), and give much milk and
are accompanied by their calves/

132. Ap. I, 25, 13 ; Gaut. XXII, 19; Vas. XXI, 24 ; Vi. L, 30-32?
Y&gn. Ill, 270. Gov., Kull., Nand. expressly state that the penance
for the murder of a A'hdra is to be performed for intentionally (thus
also Nar.) killing any single one of these animals, while Medh. thinks
that the rule holds good only if one has killed all of them. The
penance intended is, according to Gov., Kull., Nar., and Ragh., not
that mentioned in the preceding verse, but the lunar penance (Gov.,
Kull., R&gh.), or the Govrata (Gov., Kull.), or the Tapta KriA/thra.
(Ndr.).

133. According to Gov., Kull., Nar., Ragh., these penances are
to be performed if the animal has been killed unintentionally;
according to Medh. they serve to expiate the slaughter of a single
animal. The choice among the four penances depends according
to Kull. and R&gh. on the strength of the offender, according to
Gov. and Nir. on his caste and other circumstances. ‘A yqgana/
i. e. 21-9 miles. The hymn mentioned is found Rig-veda X, 9.

134. Gaut. XXII, 23, 25; Vi. L, 34-35 5 Ill, 273. ‘A

Brdhmawa/ i.e. ‘even a Br&hma«a' (Nar.). The recipient of the
gift is in every case a Brahma«a.

45»

LAWS OF MANU.

XI, 135 .

135. For a boar a pot of clarified butter, for a
partridge a dro#a of sesamum-grains, for a parrot
a calf two years old, for a crane (a calf) three
years old.

136. If he has killed a Haw«sa, a Bal&ka, a heron,
a peacock, a monkey, a falcon, or a Bh&sa, he shall
give a cow to a Brdhma«a.

137. For killing a horse, he shall give a garment,
for (killing) an elephant, five black bulls, for (killing)
a goat, or a sheep, a draught-ox, for killing a donkey,
(a calf) one year old;

138. But for killing carnivorous wild beasts, he
shall give a milch-cow, for (killing) wild beasts that
are not carniv.orous, a heifer, for killing a camel, one
kmhwala.

139. For killing adulterous women of the four
castes, he must give, in order to purify himself,
respectively a leathern bag, a bow, a goat, or a
sheep.

140. A twice-born man, who is unable to atone
by gifts for the slaughter of a serpent and the other
(creatures mentioned), shall perform for each of
them, a Kr/At/zra (penance) in order to remove his
guilt.

141. But for destroying one thousand (small)

135. Gaut. XXII, 24; Vi. L, 36-39; Y&gn. Ill, 271, 273-274.
Kumbha, ‘a pot,* i. e. ‘of 200 palas* (Nar.). A drowa, i. e. four
a^akas (Medh.), or 128 palas (Nar.).

136. Vi. L, 33; Yagn. Ill, 272.

137. Vi. L, 25-28; Yagn. Ill, 271, 274.

138. Vi. L, 29, 40-41; Yagn. III, 272-273. ‘A knshwala,’
i.e. ‘of gold* (Medh., Gov., Kull., Nar., Nand., R&gh.).

139. Gaut. XXII, 26; Y &gn. Ill, 268. ‘Respectively,* i. e.
according to the order of the castes. Rdgh. adds ‘ unintentionally.*

140. Y&gn. Ill, 274; Vas. XXI, 26.

XI, 146.

PENANCES FOR MINOR OFFENCES.

459

animals that have bones, or a whole cart-load of
boneless (animals), he shall perform the penance
(prescribed) for the murder of a ►S'fidra.

142. But for killing (small) animals which have
bones, he should give some trifle to a Brdhma«a;
if he injures boneless (animals), he becomes pure by
suppressing his breath (prd«£y£ma).

143. For cutting fruit-trees, shrubs, creepers,
lianas, or flowering plants, one hundred Rik as must
be muttered.

144. (For destroying) any kind of creature, bred
in food, in condiments, in fruit, or in flowers, the
expiation is to eat clarified butter.

145. If a man destroys for no good purpose
plants produced by cultivation, or such as spon¬
taneously spring up in the forest, he shall attend a
cow during one day, subsisting on milk alone.

146. The guilt incurred intentionally or uninten¬
tionally by injuring (created beings) can be removed
by means of these penances; hear (now, how) all

Y Agn. Ill, 269. ‘(Small) animals that have bones,’ i.e. ‘lizards
and the like’ (Gov., Kull., Nar.).

142. Vi. L, 47; YfL^re. HI, 275; Gaut. XXII, 22. The rule

refers in each case to the destruction of a single animal (Medh.,
Gov., Kull, Ragh.), or of a number less than that mentioned in
the preceding verse (Mr.). ‘ Something,’ i. e. one pa«a (Nar.) or

‘eight handfuls of grain’ (Nand.).

143. Vi. L, 48; Y tgn. Ill, 276. According to Kull. this
penance must be performed for an offence committed once and
unintentionally, because ‘ the cutting of green trees’ has been de¬
clared above, verse 65, to be an Upapataka for which at least a
lunar penance has to be performed. ‘ One hundred Rik as,’ ‘ the
G&yatrt and the like’ (Kull.), or ‘the Gayatri one hundred times’
(Mr.).

144. Vi. L, 49; Y ign. Ill, 275. Rasa, ‘condiments,’ i.e. ‘mo¬
lasses, butter-milk and the like ’ (Medh., Gov., Kull.).

145. Vi. L, 50; Y^n. Ill, 144.

460

LAWS OF MANU.

XI, 147*

(sins) committed by partaking of forbidden food (or
drink, can be expiated).

147. He who drinks unintentionally (the spiri¬
tuous liquor, called) V&ru nt, becomes pure by being
initiated (again); (even for drinking it) inten¬
tionally (a penance) destructive to life must not
be imposed; that is a settled rule.

148. He who has drunk water which has stood
in a vessel used for keeping (the spirituous liquor,
called) Sura, or other intoxicating drinks, shall
drink during five (days and) nights (nothing but)
milk in which the .Sankhapushpl (plant) has been
boiled.

147. Ap. I, 25, 10; Gaut. XXIII, 2 ; Vas. XX, 19; Baudh. II,

1,19; Vi. LI, 1, 4; Y &gn. Ill, 255. ‘ Varum/ i. e. ‘ liquor distilled

from molasses or Maua flowers (gam/i madhvi £a), not that
distilled from ground grain, because another penance has been
prescribed above, verse 93 ’ (Medh., Gov.). The other com¬
mentators agree with this explanation, as well as with the additional
rule that a Tapta Krikkkra. must be performed before the second
initiation. Ragh. and Kull. quote also the Bhavishyapura//a, which
gives the same interpretation. The explanation of the second part of
the verse is everywhere that which the translation follows except in
Medh/s and Nand/s commentaries,where it is rendered‘(for drinking
even these two kinds of Sura) intentionally (this penance) must not
be prescribed, (but) one whereby death ensues/ In my opinion the
commentators are totally wrong. I think that Varuwi means here,
as elsewhere, Sura, and that the first half of the verse prescribes the
performance of a second initiation after the penance, mentioned
in verse 93, has been performed, while the second line teaches that
the intentional drinking of Sur& can be expiated by death alone.
I would therefore propose, ‘ If a man unintentionally drinks Sur&,
he becomes pure only by being initiated again; but (the guilt of
him who drinks it) intentionally, cannot be expiated, it remains as
long as he lives, that is a settled rule/ The correctness of my
interpretation of the words anirdejyam prdwantikam follows from
Gaut. XXI, 7.

148. Vas. XX, 21; Vi. LI, 23-24; Baudh. II, 1, 22.

XT, 153-

PENANCES FOR MINOR OFFENCES.

461

149. He who has touched spirituous liquor, has
given it away, or received it in accordance with the
rule, or has drunk water left by a »S6dra, shall drink
during three days water in which Kusa-grass has
been boiled.

150. But when a Brdhma«a who has partaken of
Soma-juice, has smelt the odour exhaled by a
drinker of Surd, he becomes pure by thrice sup¬
pressing his breath in water, and eating clarified
butter.

151. (Men of) the three twice-born castes who
have unintentionally swallowed ordure or urine, or
anything that has touched Sura, must be initiated
again.

152. The tonsure, (wearing) the sacred girdle,
(carrying) a staff, going to beg, and the vows (in¬
cumbent on a student), are omitted on the second
initiation of twice-born men.

153. But he who has eaten the food of men,
whose food must not be eaten, or the leavings of
women and -Sfodras, or forbidden flesh, shall drink
barley(-gruel) during seven (days and) nights.

149. ‘According to the rule,’ i. e. ‘pronouncing a benediction
(on the giver)/ (Gov., Kull., Nar., Ragh.), or ‘ at a Sautrdma«i sacri¬
fice’ (Nand.).

150. Gaut. XXIII, 6 ; Vi. LI, 25.

151. Gaut. XXIII, 3 ; Vas. XX, 20 ; Vi. LI, 2 ; Y &gn. Ill, 235.

152. Vas. XX, 18; Baudh. II, 1, 20; Vi. LI, 5. ‘The vows/
i. e. ‘ serving the fire, avoiding meat, honey and so forth * (Gov.,
Kull., Ragh.), and ‘the Veda-vows’ (Nar.).

153. Vas. XIV, 33; Vi. LI, 50, 54, 56. See above, IV, 222,
where another penance is prescribed for unknowingly eating food
given by persons whose food must not be eaten. According to
Kull. the two penances may be performed optionally, but accord¬
ing to Medh. and N&r. this rule refers to an offence committed
intentionally.

462

LAWS OF MANU.

XI, 154.

154. A twice-born man who has drunk (fluids
that have turned) sour, or astringent decoctions,
becomes, though (these substances may) not (be
specially) forbidden, impure until they have been
digested.

155. A twice-born man, who has swallowed the
urine or ordure of a village pig, of a donkey, of a
camel, of a jackal, of a monkey, or of a crow, shall
perform a lunar penance.

156. He who has eaten dried meat, mushrooms
growing on the ground, or (meat, the nature of)
which is unknown, (or) such as had been kept in a
slaughter-house, shall perform the same penance.

157. The atonement for partaking of (the meat
of) carnivorous animals, of pigs, of camels, of cocks,
of crows, of donkeys, and of human flesh, is a
Tapta YLrikkhra. (penance).

158. If a twice-born man, who has not returned

154. ‘Astringent decoctions,’ i.e. ‘those known to physicians
are prepared from various herbs ’ (Medh.). Ragh. and Nand.
think that pitvamedhyanyapi stands for pitva amedhyani api, and
explain amedhya by ‘ garlic and the like.’

156. Vi. LI, 27, 34. Gov. and Ragh. take a^raltam, ‘ the nature
of which is unknown,’ to mean ‘ unintentionally.’ Ragh. takes
bhaumani, ‘ growing on the ground,’ separately, and interprets kava-
kani, ‘ mushrooms,’ by ‘ mushrooms growing on trees.’ But Medh.
says ‘ the word bhaumani is used in order to exclude those growing
in the holes (of trees) from the prohibition,’ while Nar. thinks that
according to another Smrfti another penance, the Prasrftiyavaka,
shall be performed for eating the latter.

157. Gaut. XXIII, 4-5; Vas. XXIII, 30; Vi. LI, 3-4. With
respect to this verse and the preceding one, see also above, V,
19-21, where other penances are prescribed. Kull. and Ragh.
think that this rule refers to an offence committed once, while those
given in the fifth chapter apply to a relapse. Regarding the Tapta
KriikAr&, see below, verse 215.

158. Vi. LI, 43-44. The commentators state that the term

XT) ifia.

PENANCES FOR MINOR OFFENCES.

463

(home from his teacher’s house), eats food, given at
a monthly (.Srdddha), he shall fast during three days
and pass one day (standing) in water.

159. But a student who on any occasion eats
honey or meat, shall perform an ordinary Krikkhra
(penance), and afterwards complete his vow (of
studentship).

160. He who eats what is left by a cat, by a
crow, by a mouse (or rat), by a dog, or by an ich¬
neumon, or (food) into which a hair or an insect has
fallen, shall drink (a decoction of) the Brahmasu-
var/’ala (plant),

161. He who desires to be pure, must not eat for¬
bidden food, and must vomit up such as he has
eaten unintentionally, or quickly atone for it by
(various) means of purification.

162. The various rules respecting penances for
eating forbidden food have been thus declared;
hear now the law of those penances which remove
the guilt of theft.

masika, ‘a monthly (.Sraddha),’ refers to a so-called Ekoddish/a
.Sraddha. According to Medh., ‘others’ thought that, because a
student is allowed to partake of a .Sraddha by II, 189, the inviter
should perform the penance. According to Medh., the student
shall on the fourth day stand in water; but according to Gov., Kull.,
on one of the three fast days ; according to Nar., on the first.

159. Vi. LI, 45; Vas. XXIII, 12; Y sign. Ill, 282. Instead of
brahma/i’ari, ‘a student,’ Medh., Gov., Nar., and Nand. read vrata-
^ari, ‘ a man performing a vow,’ and Nar. explains it by ‘ a student,
a hermit, a widow, an ascetic and so forth,’ while the other com¬
mentators refer fhe term to a student alone.

160. Vi. LI, 46; Vas. XXIII, 11. ‘Food into which an insect
or a hair has fallen,’ i. e. ‘ without scattering earth on it ’ (Gov.,
Kull., Rtgh.). N&r. adds during one day.

161. Gaut. XXIII, 26. ‘ Means of purification,’ i. e. ‘ penances ’
(Medh., Gov., Kull., Ragh.), or ‘purgative decoctions’ (‘others,’
Medh., NSr., Nand.).

464

LAWS OF MANU.

XI (1 B 3 .

163. The chief of the twice-born, having volun¬
tarily stolen (valuable) property, grain, or cooked
food, from the house of a caste-fellow, is purified by
performing YLrikkhxa. (penances) during a whole
year.

164. The lunar penance has been declared to be
the expiation for stealing men and women, and (for
wrongfully appropriating) a field, a house, or the
water of wells and cisterns.

165. He who has stolen objects of small value
from the house of another man, shall, after restoring
the (stolen article), perform a Sctwztapana Ylrikkkra.
for his purification.

166. (To swallow) the five products of the cow
(paw/C’agavya) is the atonement for stealing eatables
of various kinds, a vehicle, a bed, a seat, flowers,
roots, or fruit.

163. Vi. LII, 5. According to Medh. and Nar. it is meant that
others stealing the same articles from caste-fellows must perform
the same penance. Medh., Gov., Kull., Nand., and Nar. think that
the verse gives the extreme limit of the penance, and that under
special circumstances it may be reduced.

164. Vi. LII, 6. 'Men and women/ i. e. 'slaves' (Medh.).
R&gh. mentions a var. lect. tad&gan&m, 'or a tank/ instead of
^alfinam, ‘ of the water/ Nar. and Ragh. think that the penance is
intended for an offence committed unintentionally.

165. Vi. LII, 7. 'Objects of small value/ i. e. ‘earthen vessels,

wooden ones, e. g. a trough, or iron utensils, e. g. a hoe' (Medh.),
or 'tin, lead and the like' (Gov., Kull., Ragh.), or 'straw and the
like' (Nar.). K. omits * after restoring/ and reads tatpapasya vLmd-
dhaye,' for the expiation of that sin/ •

166. Vi. LII, 8. Medh. says that the penance is to last one
day only. N£r. thinks that the Mahisdwtapana penance is indicated
by the mention of the pa?i£agavya, and th&t this holds good in the
case of an unintentional offence only. Nand. adds, ‘ With this and
the following rules the words “ after restoring the property” have
still their force;’ so also Kull. on verge 165.

XI, 171.

PENANCES FOR MINOR OFFENCES.

465

167. Fasting during three (days and) nights shall
be (the penance for stealing) grass, wood, trees, dry
food, molasses, clothes, leather, and meat.

168. To subsist during twelve days on (uncooked)
grains (is the penance for stealing) gems, pearls,
coral, copper, silver, iron, brass, or stone.

169. (For stealing) cotton, silk, wool, an animal
with cloven hoofs, or one with uncloven hoofs, a
bird, perfumes, medicinal herbs, or a rope (the
penance is to subsist) during three days (on) milk.

170. By means of these penances, a twice-born
man may remove the guilt of theft; but the guilt of
approaching women who ought not to be approached
(agamyd),he may expiate by (the following) penances.

171. He who has had sexual intercourse with
sisters by the same mother, with the wives of a
friend, or of a son, with unmarried maidens, and
with females of the lowest castes, shall perform the
penance, prescribed for the violation of a Guru's bed.

167. Vi. LII, 9. According to Nar. the rule refers to an unin¬
tentional offence.

168. Vi. LII, ro. AccordingtoMedh. the penance maybe shortened
according to the special circumstances of the case. Nar. says,‘This
refers to cases when the theft is not committed in times of distress/

169. Vi. LII, n. According to Nar. this rule holds good if the
theft is committed in times of distress and very small quantities are
taken. Gov. and Kull. observe on this verse and the preceding
ones, that the apparent inequality of the penances, which are pre¬
scribed equally for great and small things, will disappear if special
circumstances, such as the frequency of the offence, time and place,
the character of the owner and so forth, are taken into account.

171. Gaut. XXIII, 12-13, 3 2 > Vas. XX, 15-16; Baudh. II, 1,13;
Vi. XXXIV, 2; XXXVI, 7; LIII, 1; Ya gn. Ill, 233. See also
above, verse 59. According to Medh., Gov., Kull., and Ragh., the
penance to be performed is that mentioned above in verse 106, while
self-immolation is prescribed for repeated intentional offences only.
Nar. speaks of a twelve years’ penance.

[25] h h

466

LAWS OF MANU.

XI, 172.

172. He who has approached the daughter of his
father’s sister, (who is almost equal to) a sister, (the
daughter) of his mother’s sister, or of his mother’s
full brother, shall perform a lunar penance.

173. A wise man should not take as his wife any
of these three; they must not be wedded because
they are (Sapi«d?a-)relatives, he who marries (one of
them), sinks low.

174. A man who has committed a bestial crime,
or an unnatural crime with a female, or has had
intercourse in water, or with a menstruating woman,
shall perform a Sawztapana ¥Lrikkhx-&.

175. A twice-born man who commits an unnatural
offence with a male, or has intercourse with a female
in a cart drawn by oxen, in water, or in the day-time,
shall bathe, dressed in his clothes.

176. A Brahma?za who unintentionally approaches
a woman of the //awt/ala or of (any other) very low
caste, who eats (the food of such persons) and accepts

172. I read with all the commentators and K. in the second line
m£tur kz bhratur aptasya (&pta m kz, Nand.)insteadofmatur kz bhratus
tanayam (editions). According to Kull. and Nar. the rule refers to an
offence committed by mistake and, as the former says, once only.

173. This verse is directed against the custom of the southerners,
mentioned by Baudh. I, 2, 3. ‘Sinks low,’ i.e. ‘falls into hell or
begets base-born offspring’ (Medh.). Gov. and Kull. adopt the former
explanation, while N&r. says * he becomes an outcast.'

174. Gaut. XXII, 3 6; XXIII, 34; Vi. LIII, 4, 7; Yagn. Ill,
288. A bestial crime with a cow is excepted, see Vi. LIII, 3.
Medh. mentions a var. lect., ^ale khe kz., instead of ^ale £aiva, which
agrees with Vishwu’s text.

175. Vi. LIII, 4; Y S.gn. Ill, 291. Nar. says that the verse
refers to an unintentional offence.

176. Vas. XXIII, 41; Baudh. II, 4,13-14; Vi. LIII, 5-6. ‘ Very
low caste/ i.e. ‘M)e£<Mas or barbarians, Sabaras and so forth’
(Medh., Gov., Kull.), or * Sfftas and the like ’ (Nar.), or * (Havanas

XI, i8i.

PENANCES FOR MINOR OFFENCES.

467

(presents from them) becomes an outcast; but (if he
does it) intentionally, he becomes their equal.

177. An exceedingly corrupt wife let her husband
confine to'one apartment, and compel her to perform
the penance which is prescribed for males in cases
of adultery.

178. If, being solicited by a man (of) equal
(caste), she (afterwards) is again unfaithful, then a
Krikk/ira. and a lunar penance are prescribed as
the means of purifying her.

179. The sin which a twice-born man commits
by dallying one night with a W/shali, he removes
in three years, by subsisting on alms and daily
muttering (sacred texts).

180. The atonement (to be performed) by sinners
(of) four (kinds) even, has been thus declared; hear
now the penances for those who have intercourse with
outcasts.

181. He who associates with an outcast, himself
becomes an outcast after a year, not by sacrificing

(i. e. Mahommedans) and the like ’ (Ragh.). In the first case the
penance for a Patila must be performed; in the second, no penance
can be prescribed.

177. Vas. XXI, 8, 12-13; Vi. LIII, 8. Adultery is an Upapa-
taka according to verse 60, and to be expiated, according to verse
118, by a Govrata or a Afandrayawa, which latter seems to be here
intended. The commentators add that the penance must be lighter
or heavier, according to the caste of the male offender.

178. I read with Gov., Nar. upamantrita instead of upayantritd
(editions, K., Nand.). Medh. seems to have read anumantritd.

179. Ap. I, 27,11; Baudh. II, 2,11; Vi. LIII, 9. ‘ A Vrfshali,’
i. e. a ATawddli (Medh., Kull., Ragh.). But others, mentioned by
Medh., Gov., and Nar., think that a Ahdra female is meant. Nand.
places this verse before verse 178.

181. Gaut. XXI, 3 ; Vas. I, 22 ; Baudh. II, 2,35; Y&gfl. Ill, 261;
Vi. XXXV, 3-5. Gov. and Nar. explain the verse differently, ‘ He
who associates with an outcast by sacrificing for him or by forming

H h 2

468

LAWS OF MANU.

XI, 183.

for him, teaching him, or forming a matrimonial
alliance with him, but by using the same carriage
or seat, or by eating with him.

182. He who associates with any one of those
outcasts, must perform, in order to atone for (such)
intercourse, the penance prescribed for that (sinner).

183. The Sapiwahs and Samanodakas of an out¬
cast must offer (a libation of) water (to him, as if he
were dead), outside (the village), on an inauspicious
day, in the evening and in the presence of the rela¬
tives, officiating priests, and teachers.

184. A female slave shall upset with her foot
a pot filled with water, as if it were for a dead
person; (his Sapittfl'as) as well as the Samanodakas
shall be impure for a day and a night;

185. But thenceforward it shall be forbidden to
converse with him, to sit with him, to give him
a share of the inheritance, and to hold with him such
intercourse as is usual among men;

186. And (if he be the eldest) his right of primo¬
geniture shall be withheld and the additional share,

a matrimonial alliance with him, himself becomes an outcast after a
year, but not by using the same carriage or seat or eating with
him/ In the latter case four years are required. The parallel
passage of Vishwu shows, however, clearly what is meant.

182. Vi.LIV, 1.

183-186. Gaut. XX, 4-7; Vas. XV, 12-16 ; Baudh. II, 1, 36 ;
Yagn. Ill, 29s.

183. ‘In the presence of the relatives, &c.,’ i.e.‘of those who
perform the ceremony, not of those of the outcast’ (Medh.).

184. ‘As if it were for a dead person,’ i. e. ‘ saying, “This is for
N. N 7 ” (Medh.), ‘turning to the south’ (Gov., Kull., Nar., Nand.,
R&gh.).

185. I prefer K/s reading nivarterams tatas tasmat. According
to Medh. ‘ others’ explained d&yadya, ‘ a share of the inheritance,’
by ‘ money,’ and thought that all sums due to him were to be given
to his heirs.

XI, 193. EXCOMMUNICATION AND RE-ADMISSION. 469

due to the eldest son; and in his stead a younger
brother, excelling in virtue, shall obtain the share
of the eldest.

187. But when he has performed his penance,
they shall bathe with him in a holy pool and throw
down a new pot, filled with water.

188. But he shall throw that pot into water, enter
his house and perform, as before, all the duties in¬
cumbent on a relative.

189. Let him follow the same rule in the case of
female outcasts; but clothes, food, and drink shall
be given to them, and they shall live close to the
(family-)house.

190. Let him not transact any business with un¬
purified sinners; but let him in no way reproach
those who have made atonement.

191. Let him not dwell together with the mur¬
derers of children, with those who have returned
evil for good, and with the slayers of suppliants
for protection or of women, though they may have
been purified according to the sacred law.

192. Those twice-born men who may not have
been taught the Savitri (at the time) prescribed by
the rule, he shall cause to perform three Kn'MAra.
(penances) and afterwards initiate them in accord¬
ance with the law.

187-188. Gaut XX, 10-14; Vas. XV, 17-21; Baudh. II, 1, 36;
Y ign. Ill, 296.

188. Thus Gov., Kull., Ragh., and others quoted by Medh. But
the latter commentator himself refers sa tu, ‘ but he,’ to one of the
relatives, and Nar. seems to agree with him.

189. Y&gn. Ill, 297.

190-191. Vi. LIV, 32-33; Y &gn. Ill, 299.

192. Ap. 1 ,1, 23-2, xo; Vas. XI, 76-79 > Vi.LIV, 26. Regard¬
ing the times of the initiation, see above, II, 38.

470

LAWS OF MANU.

XI, 193.

193. Let him prescribe the same (expiation) when
twice-born men, who follow forbidden occupations or
have neglected (to learn) the Veda, desire to perform
a penance.

194. If Brdhmawas acquire property by a repre¬
hensible action, they become pure by relinquishing
it, muttering prayers, and (performing) austerities.

195. By muttering with a concentrated mind the
Sdvitrl three thousand times, (dwelling) for a month
in a cow-house, (and) subsisting on milk, (a man) is
freed from (the guilt of) accepting presents from
a wicked man.

196. But when he returns from the cow-house,
emaciated with his fast, and reverently salutes,
(the Brahmawas) shall ask him, 1 Friend, dost thou
desire to become our equal ?’

197. If he answers to the Brahmawas, ‘ Forsooth,
(I will not offend again),’ he shall scatter (some) grass
for the cows ; if the cows hallow that place (by eating
the grass) the (Br4hma«a) shall re-admit him (into
their community).

193. Vi. LIV, 27.

194. Vi. LIV, 24, 28; Ya gn. Ill, 290. ‘By a reprehensible
action,’ i.e. ‘ by receiving presents from wicked men or, according to
others, by acquiring money in any manner forbidden to him. The
latter extend the rule to other Aryans’ (Medh.). Gov., Kull., and
Nar. refer the verse to Brahma#as and to their accepting presents
from wicked men and similar acts.

195. Medh. remarks that according to some the offender shall
daily recite the Gayatri three thousand times, according to others
three thousand times in the whole month.

196-197. Y &gn. Ill, 300.

197* The beginning of the verse is explained differently by NSr.
and Nand.: * If he tells the truth to the Brahmawas, i.e. with respect
to his offence and his penance.’ Medh. takes tirtha in its usual
sense, * a bathing-place,’ and connects it with pratigraham kuryuA,

XI, 201. PENANCES FOR MINOR OFFENCES. 471

198. He who has sacrificed for Vr 4 tyas, or has per¬
formed the obsequies of strangers, or a magic sacri¬
fice (intended to destroy life) or an Ahina- sacrifice,
removes (his guilt) by three YLrikkkra. (penances).

199. A twice-born man who has cast off a sup¬
pliant for protection, or has (improperly) divulged
the Veda, atones for his offence, if he subsists
during a year on barley.

200. He who has been bitten by a dog, a jackal,
or a donkey, by a tame carnivorous animal, by a man,
a horse, a camel, or a (village-)pig, becomes pure by
suppressing his breath (Pr 4 « 4 y&ma).

201. To eat during a month at each sixth meal¬
time (only), to recite the Sawhitd (of a Veda), and (to
perform) daily the .Sakala oblations, are the means
of purifying those excluded from society at repasts
(Apdnktya).

‘ they shall re-admit at the bathing-place.* Nar. says it means vya-
vaharavartman. The translation follows Gov., Kull., and Ragh.

198. Ap. I, 26, 7 ; Vi. LIV, 25; Ya^n. Ill, 289. Vratyas, see

above, X, 20. * A magic rite (intended to destroy life)/ i. e. 'a

iSyena sacrifice and the like.’ The Ahina sacrifices are those last¬
ing between two and twelve days; see Weber, lnd. Stud. X, 355.
Medh. thinks that the rule refers to the person who offers the sacri¬
fices (ya^amdna), while others mentioned by him hold that it applies
to the officiating priests.

199. Y 8 gn. Ill, 289. Veda#* viplavya, ‘having (improperly)
divulged the Veda/ i. e. ‘ having taught people who ought not to
be taught* (Medh., Gov., Kull., Nand.), means according to Ndr.
‘ having improperly interpreted the Veda or perverted its sense by
omitting Anusvaras, Visargas, and the like/ according to Rdgh.

4 having intentionally forgotten it/

200. Gaut. XXIII, 7 ; Vas, XXIII, 31; Vi. LIV, 12 ; Y Sgn. Ill,
277. ‘A tame carnivorous animal/ i.e.‘a cat, an ichneumon,
and so forth* (Medh., Gov., Kull., Rdgh.). Ndr. reads agrdmyai^
('grdmyai^) kravyddbhi^, and gives as an instance 1 a wolf/

201. Regarding the Apdnktyas, elsewhere called Panktidfisha#as,

472

LAWS OF MANU.

XI, 302 .

202. A Br&hmawa who voluntarily rode in a
carriage drawn by camels or by asses, and he
who bathed naked, become pure by suppressing
his breath (Prff«&yfima).

203. He who has relieved the necessities of
nature, being greatly pressed, either without (using)
water or in water, becomes pure by bathing outside
(the village) in his clothes and by touching a cow.

204. Fasting is the penance for omitting the daily
rites prescribed by the Veda and for neglecting the
special duties of a Snataka.

205. He who has said ‘ Hu»/ to a Brdhmawa, or
has addressed one of his betters with ‘ Thou,’ shall
bathe, fast during the remaining part of the day,
and appease (the person offended) by a reverential
salutation.

206. He who has struck (a Brahmawa) even with
a blade of grass, tied him by the neck with a cloth,
or conquered him in an altercation, shall appease
him by a prostration.

‘defilers of the company,’ see above, III, 151 seq. Nar. remarks
that this penance is to be performed by those only for whom
no other expiation is specially prescribed. The Aakala-homas
are oblations offered with the eight verses Vagasaneyi-sawhita
VIII, 13.

202. Vi. LIV, 23; Y&gn. III, 291. Medh. and Kull. remark
that he who rides on the back of camels or donkeys has to perform
more than one Pranayama.

203. Vi. LIV, 10. ‘Outside the village,’ i.e. ‘in a river or the
like’ (Medh., Gov., Kull., Ragh.).

204. Vi. LIV, 29. The rules for a Snataka are those given in
the fourth chapter. The daily rites are the Agnihotra and so forth.
The fasting is to last one day (Medh., Kull., Nfir.).

205. Y &gn. Ill, 292. ‘ One’s betters ought to be addressed with
“You”'(Medh.).

206. Ysi gii. Ill, 292. See above, IV, 166. Gov. and Nar. say,
‘ a Brfihmawa more venerable than himself.’

XI, 212.

DESCRIPTION OF PENANCES.

473

207. But he who, intending to hurt a Brihmawa,
has threatened (him with a stick and the like) shall
remain in hell during a hundred years; he who
(actually) struck him, during one thousand years.

208. As many particles of dust as the blood of
a Brahmawa causes to coagulate, for so many thou¬
sand years shall the shedder of that (blood) remain
in hell.

209. For threatening a Brahmawa, (the offender)
shall perform a 'Krikkhra., for striking him an Ati-
krikk/ira., for shedding his blood a Krtkk/ira and an
Atikrikk/ira..

210. For the expiation of offences for which no
atonement has been prescribed, let him fix a pen¬
ance after considering (the offender’s) strength and
the (nature of the) offence.

211. I will (now) describe to you those means,
adopted by the gods, the sages, and the manes,
through which a man may remove his sins.

212. A twice-born man who performs (the K rik-
khra. penance), revealed by Pra^apati, shall eat
during three days in the morning (only), during
(the next) three days in the evening (only), during
the (following) three days (food given) unasked, and
shall fast during another period of three days.

207-208. See above, IV, 165,167-169, where slightly different
versions of these verses occur. I read with all the commentators
and K. dvi^anmana^, ‘of a Brahmawa,’ instead of mahitale, ‘on
the ground* (editions).

209. Vi. LIV, 30 ; Ya ,gn. Ill, 293. Medh. points out that these
offences have already been dealt with above in verses 67 and 125,
and thinks that the penance prescribed in the latter verse may be
performed optionally instead of those mentioned here.

210. Vi. LIV, 34; Y &gn. Ill, 294.

212. Ap. I, 27, 7; Gaut. XXVI, 2-5; Vas. XXI, 20; Baudh. II,

474

LAWS OF MANU.

XI, 213.

213. (Subsisting on) the urine of cows, cowdung,
milk, sour milk, clarified butter, and a decoction of
Kusa-grass, and fasting during one (day and) night,
(that is) called a S&wztapana Kri&Mra..

2x4. A twice-born man who performs an Atik rik-
khra. (penance), must take his food during three
periods of three days in the manner described above,
(but) one mouthful only at each meal, and fast
during the last three days.

215. A Brihmawa who performs a Taptakr/^^ra
(penance) must drink hot water, hot milk, hot clari¬
fied butter and (inhale) hot air, each during three
days, and bathe once with a concentrated mind.

216. A fast for twelve days by a man who controls
himself and commits no mistakes, is called a Parika
’Krikkkra., which removes all guilt.

217. If one diminishes (one’s food daily by) one

2, 38; IV, 5, 6-7; Vi. XLVI, 10; YXgn. Ill, 320. According to
Medh., food which a wife brings unasked is also ‘ food given un¬
asked.’

213. Baudh. IV, 5, 13 ; Vi. XLVI, 19; Y&gfi. Ill, 313. There
are two ways of performing this penance : Either the penitent may
eat the six substances during one day and fast on the next, or he
may subsist one day on each of the six and fast on the seventh day
(Medh., Gov.). The other commentators give the first explanation
only.

214. Gaut. XXV, 18-19; Vas. XXIV, 1-2; Baudh. II, 2,40;
IV, 5, 8; Ya^n. HI, 320. ‘ Above,' i. e. in verse 213.

2x5. Vas.XXI, 18; Baudh. II, 2, 37; IV, 5,10; Vi. XLVI,n;
Y&gii. Ill, 318.

2x6. Baudh. IV, 5,15; Vi. XLVI, 18; Y ign. Ill, 221. ‘Com¬
mits no mistakes,’ i. e. ‘ with respect to the general rules to be
followed during the performance of a YLrikkhra.,’ see Vas. XXIV, 5
(Medh., Nfir.).

217-226. Gaut. XXVII; Vas. XXIV, 45-47; XXVII, 21;
Baudh. Ill, 8; IV, 5, 17-21; Vi. XLVII; Ya^n. Ill, 324-327.

217. The form of the lunar penance described in this verse is

XT, 223.

DESCRIPTION OF PENANCES.

475

mouthful during the dark (half of the month) and
increases (it in the same manner) during the bright
half, and bathes (daily) at the time of three libations
(morning, noon, and evening), that is called a lunar
penance (AT&ndrcLyawa).

218. Let him follow throughout the same rule at
the (■A'dndrdya/za, called) yavamadhyama (shaped
like a barley-corn), (but) let him (in that case) begin
the lunar penance, (with a) controlled (mind), on the
first day of the bright half (of the month).

219. He who performs the lunar penance of as¬
cetics, shall eat (during a month) daily at midday
eight mouthfuls, controlling himself and consuming
sacrificial food (only).

220. If a Br&hma/ta, with concentrated mind, eats
(during a month daily) four mouthfuls in a morning
and four after sunset, (that is) called the lunar
penance of children.

221. He who, concentrating his mind, eats during
a month in any way thrice eighty mouthfuls of
sacrificial food, dwells (after death) in the world of
the moon.

222. The Rudras, likewise the Adityas, the Vasus
and the Maruts, together with the great sages, prac¬
tised this (rite) in order to remove all evil.

223. Burnt oblations, accompanied by (the recita¬
tion of) the Mahavy&hrftis, must daily be made (by

the so-called pipilikamadhya or ant-shaped one, where the fast or
lean days lie in the middle.

218. It will be advisable to read with Medh. and Gov., in the
second line, £aret instead of feran. Gov. has £aran in the first
line. Nand. reads the last words quite differently, (niyataj) ££ndr&-
yawam athaparam.

221. ‘In any way,’ i. e. ‘without observing any particular limit as
to the number of mouthfuls to be eaten on each day’ (N&r.).

476

LAWS OF MANU.

XX) 224*

the penitent) himself, and he must abstain from in¬
juring (sentient creatures), speak the truth, and keep
himself free from anger and from dishonesty.

224. Let him bathe three times each day and
thrice each night, dressed in his clothes; let him on
no account talk to women, .Sftdras, and outcasts.

225. Let him pass the time standing (during the
day) and sitting (during the night), or if he is unable
(to do that) let him lie on the (bare) ground; let him
be chaste and observe the vows (of a student) and
worship his Gurus, the gods, and Br&hmawas.

226. Let him constantly mutter the Sfivitrl and
(other) purificatory texts according to his ability; (let
him) carefully (act thus) on (the occasion of) all
(other) vows (performed) by way of penance.

227. By these expiations twice-born men must be
purified whose sins are known, but let him purify
those whose sins are not known by (the recitation
of) sacred texts and by (the performance of) burnt
oblations.

224. Medh. remarks that the penitent may however talk to the
female members of his household, if an occasion requires it.

225. Vratf sy&t, ‘observe the vows (of a student),’ i.e. ‘wear
the girdle of Mu?%a-grass, a staff and so forth' (Gov., Kull. Nar.),
means according to Medh. ‘ let him resolve to abstain from that
which is not forbidden by good men.’

226. ‘ Purificatory texts,’ i. e. ‘ the Aghamarsha«a, the Favamanis
and so forth see Vi. LVI. * (Other) vows,' i. e. ‘ the Krz'XvWras,’

227. Vas. XXV, 3. Penances are usually imposed by a parishad,
an assembly of learned Brdhma«as. In the case of secret sins the
penances shall be settled by the learned in a general way, not with
reference to a special case. By this interpretation the commentators
get over the difficulty which the reading rodhayet, ‘ let him purify,’
offers. But Nar. reads an&vishkrftapdpir tu mantrair homair Xa
jodhanaiA, ‘ but those whose sins are not known, by sacred texts
and burnt oblations, (declared to be) means of purification.’

XI, 235. PENANCES ; THE POWER OF AUSTERITIES. 477

228. By confession, by repentance, by austerity,
and by reciting (the Veda) a sinner is freed from guilt,
and in case no other course is possible, by liberality.

229. In proportion as a man who has done wrong,
himself confesses it, even so far he is freed from guilt,
as a snake from its slough.

230. In proportion as his heart loathes his evil
deed, even so far is his body freed from that guilt.

231. He who has committed a sin and has re¬
pented, is freed from that sin, but he is purified only
by (the resolution of) ceasing (to sin and thinking)
‘ I will do so no more.’

232. Having thus considered in his mind what
results will arise from his deeds after death, let him
always be good in thoughts, speech, and actions.

233. He who, having either unintentionally or in¬
tentionally committed a reprehensible deed, desires
to be freed from (the guilt of) it, must not commit
it a second time.

234. If his mind be uneasy with respect to any
act, let him repeat the austerities (prescribed as a
penance) for it until they fully satisfy (his con¬
science).

235. All the bliss of gods and men is declared by
the sages to whom the Veda was revealed, to have

228. Apadi, ‘in case no other course is possible,’ i.e. ‘if the
offender is unable to perform penances or to recite Vedic texts.’

230. ‘ His body,’i. e. ‘the soul in his body’ (Medh., Gov., Kull.,
Nand.), or ‘the subtle body’ (Nar.).

231. Instead of naiva m, ‘so no (more),’ Nar. reads naina^ (‘I
will) not sin (any more),' and K.’s reading nainaw points to the
same var. lect. Gov., Nand., and the best MS. of Medh. read naitat
kuryat punar iti, and the translation would then be ‘ but he is puri¬
fied (only) by ceasing (to sin), thereby that he does so no more.’

235. ‘ To have austerity for its root, austerity for its middle, and

478

LAWS OF MANU.

XI, 236.

austerity for its root, austerity for its middle, and
austerity for its end.

236. (The pursuit of sacred) knowledge is the
austerity of a Brdhmawa, protecting (the people) is
the austerity of a Kshatriya, (the pursuit of) his
daily business is the austerity of a Vaisya, and
service the austerity of a .Sftdra.

237. The sages who control themselves and sub¬
sist on fruit, roots, and air, survey the three worlds
together with their moving and immovable (crea¬
tures) through their austerities alone.

238. Medicines, good health, learning, and the
various divine stations are attained by austerities
alone; for austerity is the means of gaining them.

239. Whatever is hard to be traversed, whatever is
hard to be attained, whatever is hard to be reached,
whatever is hard to be performed, all (this) may be
accomplished by austerities; for austerity (possesses
a power) which it is difficult to surpass.

240. Both those who have committed mortal sin
(Mah&p&taka) and all other offenders are severally
freed from their guilt by means of well-performed
austerities.

241. Insects, snakes, moths, bees, birds and beings,
bereft of motion, reach heaven by the power of
austerities.

austerity for its end,’ i. e. ‘ to be produced, to continue, and to end
in consequence of austerities performed’ (Medh., Kull., Nar.).

238. Medh. explains aushadhani, ‘ medicines,’ by ‘elixirs.’ Instead
of agado (Kull., K., Rdgh.) Medh., Gov., Nar., and Nand. read
agada/4, and explain it by ‘ medicines’ (Medh., Nand.), ‘remedies or
charms against poison’ (Gov., Ndr.).

241. Instead of ki/ar ka, ‘insects,’ Ndr. reads rvdnar ka, ‘dogs.’
Gov. and Nand. say that the verse refers to the Ki/opdkhydna and
the Kapotdkhydna, told in the Itihdsas (Mahdbhdrata XII).

XI, 249 *

penances; austerity; secret sins. 479

242. Whatever sin men commit by thoughts,
words, or deeds, that they speedily burn away by
penance, if they keep penance as their only riches.

243. The gods accept the offerings of that Brah-
ma«a alone who has purified himself by austerities,
and grant to him all he desires.

244. The lord, Pra^ipati, created these Institutes
(of the sacred law) by his austerities alone; the
sages likewise obtained (the revelation of) the Vedas
through their austerities.

245. The gods, discerning that the holy origin of
this whole (world) is from austerity, have thus pro¬
claimed the incomparable power of austerity.

246. The daily study of the Veda, the performance
of the great sacrifices according to one’s ability, (and)
patience (in suffering) quickly destroy all guilt, ever
that caused by mortal sins.

247. As a fire in one moment consumes with its
bright flame the fuel that has been placed on it,
even so he who knows the Veda destroys all guilt
by the fire of knowledge.

248. The penances for sins (made public) have
been thus declared according to the law; learn next
the penances for secret (sins).

249. Sixteen suppressions of the breath (Prd^dytf-
ma) accompanied by (the recitation of) the Vy&hrftis

245. I read with all the commentators and K. at the end of the
verse, udbhavam, instead of uttamam (editions).

24 6. Vas. XXVII, 7; Yigii. Ill, 311.

247. Vas. XXVII, 1-2.

248. Kull. and Ragh. state that Gov. omits this verse, while
Medh. gives it. The accessible MS. of Gov., however, shows it,
but without a commentary. Medh. says only that * some' read it.
Nar. and Nand. omit it.

249. Vas. XXVI, 4; Vi. LV, 5; Baudh. IV, 1, 29. The best

480 LAWS OF MANU. XI, 250.

and of the syllable Om, purify, if they are repeated
daily, after a month even the murderer of a learned
Br£hma»a.

250. Even a drinker of (the spirituous liquor
called) Surd becomes pure, if he mutters the hymn
(seen) by Kutsa, ‘ Removing by thy splendour our
guilt, O Agni,’ &c., (that seen) by Vasish/^a, * With
their hymns the Vasish/Zzas woke the Dawn,’ &c., the
Mdhitra (hymn) and (the verses called) .Suddhavatls.

251. Even he who has stolen gold, instantly be¬
comes free from guilt, if he once mutters (the hymn
beginning with the words) ‘ The middlemost brother
of this beautiful, ancient HotrZ-priest’ and the .Siva-
sa»*kalpa.

252. The violator of a Guru’s bed is freed (from
sin), if he repeatedly recites the Havishpdntlya
(hymn), (that beginning) ‘ Neither anxiety nor mis¬
fortune,’ (and that beginning) ‘ Thus, verily, thus,’
and mutters the hymn addressed to Purusha.

253. He who desires to expiate sins great or

explanation of the words ‘ accompanied by (the recitation of) the
Vy&hn'tis and (of) the syllable Om’ is Nar.’s, who asserts that they
indicate the necessity of reciting the Gayatri with the -S’iras text
during the performance of each Prawayama; see Vas. XXV, 13.

250. Vas. XXVI, 5. The hymn seen by Kutsa, i. e. Rig-veda I,
97 ; that .seen by Vasish//za, i. e. Rig-veda VII, 80. The Mahitra
hymn, i. e. Rig-veda X, 185. The .Suddhavatls, i. e. Rig-veda VIII,
84, 7-9. Medh., Gov., Nar., and K. read mahendram for mahi-
tram, and Nar. adds that some give the latter reading. The hymns
are to be recited during a month sixteen times (Gov., Kull., Ragh.),
or 108 times a day (Nar.).

251. Vas. XXVI, 6. The hymn is found Rig-veda 1 ,164; the
•Sivasawkalpa, V$g. Sawh. XXXIV, 1. ‘Once,’ i. e. ‘once daily
during a month’ (Gov., Kull., Nir.).

252. Vas. XXVI, 7; YSgn. Ill, 305. The four hymns are Rig-
veda X, 88; X, 126; X, 119 ; and X, 90.

253. The two verses are found Rig-veda I, 24,14, and VII, 89, 5.

XI, 2 5 8.

PENANCES FOR SECRET SINS.

481

small, must mutter during a year the Rik-ve rse
‘ May we remove thy anger, O Varu#a,’ &c., or
‘Whatever offence here, O Varu«a,’ &c.

254. That man who, having accepted presents
which ought not to be accepted, or having eaten
forbidden food, mutters the Taratsamandlya (Rik as),
becomes pure after three days.

255. But he who has committed many sins, be¬
comes pure, if he recites during a month the (four
verses) addressed to Sorua and Rudra, and the three
verses (beginning) ‘ Aryaman, Varuwa, and Mitra,’
while he bathes in a river.

256. A grievous offender shall mutter the seven
verses (beginning with) ‘ Indra,’ for half a year; but
he who has committed any blamable act in water,
shall subsist during a month on food obtained bv
begging.

257. A twice-born man removes even very great
guilt by offering clarified butter with the sacred texts
belonging to the ^kala-homas, or by muttering the
Rik, (beginning) ‘ Adoration.’

258. He who is stained by mortal sin, becomes
pure, if, with a concentrated mind,’ he attends cows
for a year, reciting the P&vamani (hymns) and sub¬
sisting on alms.

254. Gaut. XXIV, 2-3; Baudh. IV, 2, 4-5. The verses are
found Rig-veda IX, 58, 1-4.

255. The verses are found Rig-veda VI, 74, 1-4, and IV, 2,
4-6.

256. The verses are found Rig-veda I, 106, 1-7.

257. The Mantras for the ^dkala-homas, i. e. Vag\ Sawh. VIII,
13. The verse is found Rig-veda VI, 51,8. According to N&r.
the Mantras must be muttered 108 times.

258. The Pavamdnt hymns, i. e. the ninth Masala of the Rig-
veda.

482 LAWS OF MANU. XI, 259.

259. Or if, pure (in mind and in body), he thrice
repeats the Sawhitd of the Veda in a forest, sancti¬
fied by three Pardka (penances), he is freed from all
crimes causing loss of caste (p&taka).

260. But if (a man) fasts during three days, bath¬
ing* thrice a day, and muttering (in the water the
hymn seen by) Aghamarsha«a, he is (likewise) freed
from all sins causing loss of caste.

261. As the horse-sacrifice, the king of sacrifices,
removes all sin, even so the Aghamarshawa- hymn
effaces all guilt.

262. A Brahmawa who retains in his memory the
AYg-veda is not stained by guilt, though he may have
destroyed these three worlds, though he may eat the
food of anybody.

263. He who, with a concentrated mind, thrice
recites the AY£sawhit&, or (that of the) Ya^ur-veda, or
(that of the) Sama-veda together with the secrct(texts,
the Upanishads), is completely freed from all sins.

264. As a clod of earth, falling into a great lake,
is quickly dissolved, even so every sinful act is en¬
gulfed in the threefold Veda.

265. The Rik. as, the Ya^us(-formulas) which differ
(from the former), the manifold Saman(-songs), must

259. ‘ The Sawhita,’ i. e. the Mantras and Brahma«as‘ (Kull.,
Ragh.), the former alone (Nar.). ‘Par&ka penances,’ see above,
verse 216. The verse seems to refer to the Anarnatparayawa, fully
described by Baudh. Ill, 9.

260-261. Gaut. XXIV, 10-12; Vas.XXVI, 8; Baudh. Ill, 5;
IV, 2,15 ; Vi. LV, 7; Ya gii. Ill, 302. The Aghamarshawa is found
Rig-veda X, 190.

262. Vas. XXVII, 3. 263. Baudh. IV, 5, 29.

264. I read with Gov., Nand., and K. pr. manu ‘kshipram’ instead
of ‘ kshiptam ’ (Medh., K. sec. manu, editions).

265. Medh. and Gov. read Julyani, ‘chief,’ instead of anySni,

‘ which differ.’ Medh. explains it as ‘ either those found in the

XIT, 4.

TRANSMIGRATION.

48 3

be known (to form) the triple Veda; he who knows
them, (is called) learned in the Veda.

266. The initial triliteral Brahman on which the
threefold (sacred science) is based, is another triple
Veda which must be kept secret; he who knows that,
(is called) learned in the Veda.

Chapter XII.

1. ‘O sinless One, the whole sacred law, (appli¬
cable) to the four castes, has been declaredly thee ;
communicate to us (now), according to the truth, the
ultimate retribution for (their) deeds/

2. To the great sages (who addressed him thus)
righteous Bhr/gu, sprung from Manu, answered,
‘ Hear the decision concerning this whole connexion
with actions/

‘3. Action, which springs from the mind, from
speech, and from the body, produces either good or
evil results; by action are caused the (various) con¬
ditions of men, the highest, the middling, and the
lowest.

4. Know that the mind is the instigator here

Sawhita, not those read in the Brahma;/a or those recited according
to the Sawhitapa//*a, not those recited according to the Pada or
Kramapa//jas/ Gov. gives the first explanation only.

266. K. omits this verse, and inserts in its stead the following lines:
esha vo vadita['bhihita]s sarva^ prayaj^ittaviwirwaya^ 1
nai/wreyasaw karmavidhim viprasyaitaz/j nibodhata 11
ata^ param pravakshyami sa/wsaravidhim uttamam 1
Nand. gives the first two lines after verse 266, reading, however,
ityesha(?)bhihita^.

XII. 1. R&gh. takes tattvata^ param separately and explains the
second line as follows: * communicate to us (now) the retribution
for (their) deeds (and) supreme (liberation, which springs) from
(the recognition of) truth/

4. ‘ Of three kinds/ i. e. ‘ good, middling, or bad/ * Has three

I i 2

4§4

LAWS OF MANU.

XII, 5 .

below, even to that (action) which is connected with
the body, (and) which is of three kinds, has three
locations, and falls under ten heads.

5. Coveting the property of .others, thinking in
one’s heart of what is undesirable, and adherence
to false (doctrines), are the three kinds of (sinful)
mental action.

6.. Abusing (others, speaking) untruth, detracting
from the merits of all men, and talking idly, shall
be the four kinds of (evil) verbal action.

7. Taking what has not been given, injuring
(creatures) without the sanction of the law, and
holding criminal intercourse with another man’s
wife, are declared to be the three kinds of (wicked)
bodily action.

8. (A man) obtains (the result of) a good or evil
mental (act) in his mind; (that of) a verbal (act) in
his speech, (that of) a bodily (act) in his body.

9. In consequence of (many)"sinful acts committed
with his body, a man becomes (in the next birth)
something inanimate, in consequence (of sins) com-

locations,’ i. e. ‘ the mind, speech, and the body.’ ‘ Falls under ten
heads,’ i. e. * those mentioned in verses 5-7.’ The mind, which is
here called the instigator, is the internal organ, which has the faculty
of sawrkalpa, ‘ volition.’

5. ‘ Thinking in one’s heart what is undesirable,’ means accord¬
ing to Medh. cither ‘ thinking of or wishing anything that may be
injurious to others or what is forbidden.’ Gov. and Nar. give the
first explanation, the other commentators the second. Others
mentioned by Medh. explained vitath&bhiniveram, ‘ adherence to
false doctrines (i. e. the denial of a future state, of the authority of
the Vedas and so f. rth), by ‘ a constant deep hatred.' In their
remarks on this verse and the next two, the commentators point
out that the opposites of the acts mentioned are the different kinds
of good actions.

5-9. Yagn. Ill, 131, 134-136.

XII, I 3 .

TRANSMIGRATION.

485

mitted by speech, a bird, or a beast, and in conse¬
quence of mental (sins he is re-born in) a low caste.

10. That man is called a (true) tridawafin in whose
mind these three, the control over his speech (vag-
da nda), the control over his thoughts (manoda«^a),
and the control over his body (kayadawafa), are firmly
fixed.

11..That man who keeps this threefold control
(over himself) with respect to all created beings and
wholly subdues desire and wrath, thereby assuredly
gains complete success.

12. Him who impels this (corporeal) Self to action,
they call the Kshetra^wa (the knower of the field);
but him who does the acts, the wise name the
Bhhtatman (the Self consisting of the elements).-

13. Another internal Self that is generated with
all embodied (Kshetra^as) is called Clva, through
which (the Kshetra^a) becomes sensible of all
pleasure and pain in (successive) births.

10. Usually an ascetic who wears three staves (da//</a) tied to¬
gether, is called a trida;/</in. According to our verse this outward
sign avails nothing. That man only deserves the name tridaz/dfin
who keeps a threefold control (da«c/a) over himself.

11. 4 Complete success/ i. e. ‘ final liberation.’

12. ‘This (corporeal) Self/ i. e. ‘the body’ (Medh., Gov., Kull.),

or ‘the gross visible body which includes the three sheaths’ (Rdgh.,
Nar.). ‘ The Kshetra^na (the knower of the field)/ i. e. ‘the indivi¬
dual Soul ((-riva)/ (Medh. on verse 13, Nar.), the Paramdtman
(Nand.); Rdgh. quotes, in explanation of the term ‘the field/
Bhagavadgita XIII, 5-6. ‘ The Bhfitatman (the Self consisting of

the elements)/ i. e. ‘ the body which is composed of or a modifica¬
tion of the elements, i. e. of earth and so forth’(Medh., Gov., Kull.,
Rdgh.), ‘ the Self which has the form of the non-sentient, the ele¬
ments and so forth’ (Nar.), or ‘the G\v a’ (Nand.).

13. According to Medh. ‘some’ understand by the term (?lva
1 the subtile body (linga ^arira) which is overspread by Mahat, the
Great One/ because the individual soul, which is usually called

4«6

LAWS OF MANU.

XII, 14 .

14. These two, the Great One and the Kshetraf/fe,
who are closely united with the elements, pervade
him who resides in the multiform created beings.

Giva, has been mentioned in verse 12 under the appellation Kshe-
tragT^a. He adds that 4 others’ explain Giva by ‘the internal organ,
which has the form of mind, intelligence, and egoism.’ The former
view is adopted by Ragh., while Gov., who paraphrases Giva by
mana^, ‘ the mind,’ and Kull. as well as Nar., who render it by
‘ Mahat,’ ‘ the Great One or intelligence,’ lean towards the second.
Nand. says, ‘givasaw^wa^ means “ he who fully knows the Givas,”
i.e. the omniscient.’ Saha^-a^, ‘that is generated with,’ means
according to Medh. and Gov. ‘ that is associated with until the
period of destruction (pralaya) or until final liberation is obtained.’

14. The term mahan, ‘the Great One,’ is referred by Medh.,
Gov., Kull., Nar., Ragh. to the Giv a mentioned in the preceding
verse, and hence is explained by each in accordance with the view
expressed on verse 13. Bhfitasawprfktau, ‘closely united with the
elements’ (Medh., Gov., Kull.), or ‘enveloped by the elements’
(Ragh.), means according to Nar. ‘united with the Bhfttatman.’
Sthitaw taw vyapya tish/ 7 /ata/j, ‘pervade him who resides,’ i. c. ‘per¬
vade ’ (Gov.), or ‘ rest on ’ (Kull.), or ‘ conceal through illusion ’
(Nar.) him, i. e. ‘ the Paramatman, the Supreme Soul ’ (Gov., Kull.,
Nar.), ‘who resides in all created beings’ (Gov., Nar.) ‘as the wit¬
ness’ (Kull., Nar.). Gov. adds ‘or (the expression vyapya tish//;ata/z)
“ they pervade ” is used because the Supreme Soul pervades every¬
thing.’ This latter explanation probably refers to Medh.’s render¬
ing, according to which the verse must be translated ‘ Those two,
the Great One and the Knower of the Field, who are closely united,
rest on him who.resides in the multiform created beings, pervad¬
ing (them).’ Medh. expressly declares that tish/^ata// is to be taken
as a transitive verb (sarvakarmatvaz;/ [sakarmatvaw] tish/^ater ane-
k&rthatvat). He explains ‘him’ by ‘the Supreme Soul,’ and adds
that the expression ‘ rest on’ is justified, because the Paramatman is
the cause of the whole world, and the product rests on its cause.
Ragh. differs very much, and says, ‘ Those two, the Great One
(i. e. the Intelligence and by implication the subtile body) and the
Knower of the Field, i. e. the individual soul enveloped by the five
elements (and) pervading him who is found in the manifold created
beings, i. e. the gross bodies, and reside, i. e. there, as the enjoyers.’
Nand. finally has the following explanation: ‘ Those two, i. e. the

XII, VJ.

TRANSMIGRATION.

487

15. From his body innumerable forms go forth,
which constantly impel the multiform creatures to
action.

16. Another strong body, formed of particles (of
the) five (elements and) destined to suffer the tor¬
ments (in hell), is produced after death (in the case)
of wicked men.

17. When (the evil-doers) by means of that body
have suffered there the torments imposed by Yama,
(its constituent parts) are united, each according to
its class, with those very elements (from which they
were taken).

individual and the Supreme Soul; united with the elements, i. e.
residing in the body; the Great One, i. e. the Supreme Soul and
the Knower of the Field; in the manifold, i.e. in the gross and in
the subtile; him who is found, i.e. the field (kshetra), pervading
they reside. The meaning is that the individual soul pervades the
body and the Supreme Soul pervades the individual soul/

15. ‘ From his body/ i. e. ' from nature or the form of the Supreme
Soul (Paramatman, Medh/ Nar.) or from the body of Brahman
which is endowed with the qualities' (Ragh.), ' like waves from the
ocean or sparks from fire, in the manner mentioned in the Vedanta
philosophy' (Gov., KulL). 'Others/ mentioned by Medh., and
Nand. explain the expression by ‘ from the root-evolvent or matter
(prakrfti) which is the body of the Supreme Soul/ Mfirtaya^,
‘ forms/ i. e. ‘ Kshetra^#as' (Gov., Kull., Nar.), or ‘ souls limited by
subtile bodies’ (Ragh.), or ‘ portions which are the causes of the
production of forms’ (Nand.).

16. Dhruvam, 'strong/ i.e. 'able to withstand the supernatural
torments’ (Medh., Kull., R&gh.). Gov. and Nand. read dridh am.

17. The translation follows Medh., Gov., and Ragh., with whom
N&r. seems to agree, and it presupposes that the construction of the
verse is ungrammatical. Kull. and Nand., who wish to show that
Manu’s text does not depart from the ordinary rules of grammar,
assume that the subject of both clauses is dushkmino ^iva^, ' the
evil-doing souls/ The former says, ' The evil-doing souls that are
subtile, having suffered by means of that produced body those tor¬
ments imposed by Yama, are individually dissolved on the disap¬
pearance of the gross body, in those very constituent portions of

488

LAWS OF MANU.

XII, 18 .

18. He, having suffered for his faults, which are
produced by attachment to sensual objects, and
which result in misery, approaches, free from stains,
those two mighty ones.

the elements;’ the meaning is, ‘they remain being united with
them/ Nand/s explanation is more intelligible. According to
him the translation must be as follows: ‘ (The individual souls)
having suffered by means of that body the torments of Yama, are
dissolved (on the termination of their sufferings, as far as that body
is concerned), in those very (five) elements according to the pro¬
portion of their works’(vibhagasas tatkarmavibhaganurfipam). But
it seems to me that these attempts to save the grammatical reputa¬
tion of the author are useless.

18. The translation follows the reading of Gov. (comm.), Kull.j
Nand., and Ragh., anubhftyasukhodarkan. Medh., Gov. (text), and
K.read anubhfiya sukhodarkan, ‘ (after the expiation) of which hap¬
piness is the result’ (Medh.). ‘ He,’ i. e. * the individual soul’ (kshe-
tra^? 7 a, Medh., Gov., Nand.), or ‘ the individual soul limited by the
subtile body’ (Kull., Ragh.), refers according to Nar. to ‘the Great
One’ (Mahan). ‘ Those two mighty ones/ i. e. ‘ the Great One and
the Supreme Soul’ (Medh. ‘others,’ Gov., Kull.), arc accouling to
Medh. and Ragh. ‘the Great One and the Kshetra^na’ (mentioned
verse 14), according to Nar. and Nand. (on verse 19) ‘the Criva
and the Paramatman or Supreme Soul.’ Medh. adds that under
his explanation the verse looks as if it were self-contradictory, be¬
cause the end to be attained and the attainer are the same, but
that the distinction is merely figurative. For the expression ‘ he
approaches'means ‘ he becomes nothing else but that’[i. e. after
the dissolution of the body, assumed in order to suffer the punish¬
ments, he remains purely Kshetra^fa and Mahan]. His words
are, ata£ kshetrag-rlam abhyetiti pr&pta/// ta£ £a viruddhaw sa eva
prapya[//] prapakaj ka. 1 satyam aupaMriko bhedo ’bhipretaA 1
abhyetity ayam artha// I etavanmfltnuesho bhavati yad uta kshe-
tra^flataya praptadisawghatmakena mahan iti vyapadish/ena pha-
leshu t&vanmatra/j parhishyate I linga^iva.r ka. kshetra^aA 11 Ragh.,
the only other commentator, who occupies himself with the ulterior
meaning of the verse, renders abhyeti, ‘ he approaches/ by anu-
ga£/&$ati, ‘he follows/ and adds ‘in order to produce a new body*
(jarirdntarSrambhdya). He further quotes^atapatha-brdhmawa XIV,
7 » 2 » 5 > order to show that according to the Veda the individual
soul, united with the subtile body, makes for itself another body.

XII, 24 - TRANSMIGRATION. 489

19. Those two together examine without tiring
the merit and the guilt of that (individual soul),
united with which it obtains bliss or misery both
in this world and the next.

20. If (the soul) chiefiy'practises virtue and vice
to a small degree, it obtains bliss in heaven, clothSd
with those very elements.

21. But if it chiefly cleaves to vice and to virtue
in a small degree, it suffers, deserted by the elements,
the torments inflicted by Yama.

22. The individual soul, having endured those
torments of Yama, again enters, free from tainj,
those very five elements, each in due proportion.

23. Let (man), having recognised even by means
of his intellect these transitions of the individual soul
(which depend) on merit and demerit, always fix hi:
heart on (the acquisition of) merit.

24. Know Goodness (sattva), Activity (ra^as), and
Darkness (tamas) to be the three qualities of the

19. ‘Those two/ i. e. ‘ the Great One and the Supreme Soul’
(mahatparamatmanau, Gov., Kull.), are according to Medh., who
modifies the explanation given on the preceding verse, the
Mahan and the Paramatman; according to Ragli., the Malian
and the Kshetra^ota. Paryata//, ‘ examine/ means according to
Ragli. ‘ by their presence cause to be performed.’ ‘ The guilt/
i.e. ‘which remains after the sufferings (in hell/ Kull.). Nand.
explains the first line very differently: ‘Those two (merit and
demerit) watchfully attend him (the Kshetra^wa) who is bent on
performing good and evil.’ ‘ United with which/ i. e. ‘ with merit
and guilt’(Medh., Gov., Kull., Nand.), refers in Ragh.’s opinion to
the Mahan and the Kshetrajywa.

20. ‘ With those very elements/ i. e. ‘ with a gross body consisting
of the before-mentioned five elements/

21. ‘ Deserted by the elements,’ i. e. ‘ after death’ (Kull., Ndr.).

22. Medh. and K. read abhyeti for apyeti.

24. Ydg’n. Ill, 182. ‘Of the Self/ i.e.‘of the Mahat’ (Kull.,

490

LAWS OF MANU.

XII, 25 *

Self, with which the Great One always completely
pervades all existences.

25. Whfn one of these qualities wholly predomi¬
nates in a body, then it makes the embodied (soul)
eminently distinguished for that quality/

•26. Goodness is declared (to have the form of)
knowledge, Darkness (of) ignorance, Activity (of)
love and hatred; such is the nature of these
(three) which is (all-)pervading and clings to every¬
thing created.

27. When (man)'experiences in his soul a (feeling)
full of bliss, a deep calm, as it were, and a pure light,
then let him know (that it is) among those three
(the quality called) Goodness,

28. What is mixed with pain and does not give
satisfaction to the soul one may know (to be the
quality of) Activity, which is difficult to conquer,
and which ever draws embodied (souls towards
sensual objects).

Ragh., Nar., Nand.), the latter two saying mahattattvasya, ‘ of the
(Sawkhya) principle, called Mahat.’ Medh/s somewhat longer
discussion arrives at the same result.

25. ‘In a body/i.e. ‘in a subtile body’ (R&gh.). Medh. and
Gov. add to the first clause ‘ in consequence of acts done in a
former life/

26. Kull. takes etat, ‘such/ in the sense of‘as follows/ N&r.
and Nand. take the last line somewhat differently: ‘The nature of
these three is pervaded by the (three characteristics just mentioned
and) clings to all created beings/

27. ‘A (feeling) full of bliss/ i. e. ‘ without any particular cause for
such a sensation' (Gov.). I take tatra, which Gov. and Kull. explain
by tasmin and construe with atmani, in the sense of teshu, ‘ among
those three/ Ragh. says tatreti tribhi//.

28. Medh. has apratipam, which he explains by apratyaksham,
‘ not perceptible by the senses/ instead of apratigham, ‘ difficult to
conquer/

XII, 33-

TRANSMIGRATION.

491

29. What is coupled with delusion, what has the
character of an undiscernible mass, what cannot be
fathomed by reasoning, what cannot be fully known,
one must consider (as the quality of) Darkness.

30. I will, moreover, fully describe the results
which arise from these three qualities, the excellent
ones, the middling ones, and the lowest.

31. The study of the Vedas, austerity, (the pur¬
suit of) knowledge, purity, control over the organs,
the performance of meritorious acts and meditation
on the Soul, (are) the marks of the quality of
Goodness.

32. Delighting in undertakings, want of firmness,
commission of sinful acts, and continual indulgence
in sensual pleasures, (are) the marks of the quality
of Activity.

33. Covetousness, sleepiness, pusillanimity, cruelty,
atheism, leading an evil life, a habit of soliciting
favours, and inattentiveness, are the marks of the
quality of Darkness.

29. I follow Gov., Kull., Nar., Ragh., and K., who read avyakta-
vishay&tmakam instead of avyaktawz vishayatmakam (Nand., edi¬
tions). Medh.’s reading is doubtful. ‘ What is coupled with
delusion,’ i. e. ‘ where it is impossible to decide if the (thing) is real
or unreal’ (Gov., Kull., Ragh.). Avyaktavishayatmakam, ‘ what has
the character of an undiscernible mass’ (asphu/avishavakdrasva-
bhdvam, Kull., Ragh.), or ‘ what has the form of an undiscernible
mass and the nature of which is unreal’ (aspash/avishayakarasatsva-
bhavam, Gov.), means according to N dr. ‘ where the mass and the
soul are not luminous’ (apraka.ro vishaya atma k.x yatra).

31. The last words of the verse, which have been translated
according to Medh., mean according to Nar. literally ‘(are the
result) of Goodness (and) the marks of (that) quality’ (sdttvikaw
sattvaganyaw guwasya tasyaiva laksha«a?/z £ihnam).

32. Adhairyam, ‘want of firmness,’ means according to NUr.
‘ want of a contented disposition.’

33. Bhinnavmtita, ‘leading an evil life,’ i.e. ‘omitting to live

492

LAWS OF MANU.

XII, 34*

34. Know, moreover, the following to be a brief
description of the three qualities, each in its order,
as they appear in the three (times, the present, past,
and future),

35. When a (man), having done, doing, or being
about to do any act, feels ashamed, the learned may
know that all (such acts bear) the mark of the quality
of Darkness.

36. But, when (a man) desires (to gain) by an act
much fame in this world and feels no sorrow on fail¬
ing, know that it (bears the mark of the quality of)
Activity.

37. But that (bears) the mark of the quality of
Goodness which with his whole (heart) he desires
to know, which he is not ashamed to perform, and
at which his soul rejoices.

38. The craving after sensual pleasures is declared
to be the mark of Darkness, (the pursuit of) wealth
(the mark) of Activity, (the desire to gain) spiritual

according to the rule of conduct;’ pramada/z, ‘inattentiveness,’
i. e. ‘ to duty.’

34. Instead of trishu, ‘in the three (times,’ Medh., Gov., Kull.,
Ragh.), Nand. reads nz-zshu, ‘ in men.’ Nar., who reads trishu,
explains the words traya tt&rn guzzan&m, trishu as follows: ‘ of the
three,’ i. c. ‘ of the study of the Veda and so forth;’ ‘ of the guzzas,
i. e. ‘of the three classes of virtues;’ ‘in the three,’ i.c. ‘ in the three
original qualities.’

36. Nand. has rikkh ati instead of izMati. I read with Medh.,
Gov., Kull., Nar., Ragh., and Nand., na ka ro&iti instead of sa ha
sok ati (editions). K. reads naiva. ‘ And feels no sorrow on failing,’
i. e. ‘ if on failing to accomplish his undertaking he begins another,
but does not desist from it out of sorrow, that is the meaning’

(Ra g h.).

37. Instead of yat sarvewa (Gov., Kull.), Medh. and K. read yah
sarve«a, and Nand. sarva m yene°. ‘ Which with his whole (heart)
he desires to know,’ i. e. ‘ the meaning of the Veda and so forth’
(Kull., R&gh.j.

XIT, 44.

transmigration:

493

merit the mark of Goodness; each later (named
quality is) better than the preceding one.

39. I will briefly declare in due order what trans¬
migrations in this whole (world a man) obtains
through each of these qualities.

40. Those endowed with Goodness reach the state
of gods, those endowed with Activity the state of
men, and those endowed with Darkness ever sink
to the condition of beasts; that is the threefold
course of transmigrations.

41. But know this threefold course of transmigra¬
tions that depends on the (three) qualities (to be
again) threefold, low, middling, and high, according
to the particular nature of the acts and of the know¬
ledge (of each man).

42. Immovable (beings), insects, both small and
great, fishes, snakes, and tortoises, cattle and wild
animals, are the lowest conditions to which (the
quality of.) Darkness leads.

43. Elephants, horses, .SYtdras, and despicable bar¬
barians, lions, tigers, and boars (are) the middling
states, caused by (the quality of) Darkness.

44. -Afarawas, Suparwas and hypocrites, Rakshasas

40. Y &gn. Ill, 137-139.

41. ‘Of the knowledge (of each man)/ i. e. ‘if the acts were
committed intentionally or not’ (Medh.).

42. ‘ Immovable (beings),’ i. e. ‘ trees and so forth.’ ParavaA,
‘cattle,’ i. e. ‘ cows and so forth’(Nar.), or ‘dogs and so forth’ (RSgh.).
Instead of sakaHAapd^ (Gov., Kull., Ragh.), ‘ and tortoises,’ Medh.,
Nar., and Nand. read sarisr;'pa/i, ‘ creeping things/ i. e. ‘ scorpions
and the like’ (Nar.). Instead of mrigis X'aiva (Gov., Kull., Rdgh.),
* and wild animals (or deer),’ Medh. and Nand. have jrigaliLr £a,
‘and jackals.’

43. Ml eWi&h, ‘barbarians,’ i. e. ‘ Sabaras and so forth’ (N&r.).

44. ATdra«a may denote a caste of men, i.e. ‘bards, singers,
panders, and the like’ (Medh.), or ‘ rope-dancers’ (Nar.), or ‘ Na/as’

494

LAWS OF MANCJ.

XII, 45 .

and Pi^as (belong to) the highest (rank of) condi¬
tions among those produced by Darkness.

45. Gv&allas, Mallas, Na/as, men who subsist by
despicable occupations and those addicted to
gambling and drinking (form) the lowest (order of)
conditions caused by Activity.

46. Kings and Kshatriyas, the domestic priests of
kings, and those who delight in the warfare of dispu¬
tations (constitute) the middling (rank of the) slates
caused by Activity.

47. The Gandharvas, the Guhyakas, and the ser¬
vants of the gods, likewise the Apsarases, (belong
all to) the highest (rank of) conditions produced by
Activity.

48. Hermits, ascetics, Brahma/Jas, the crowds of
the Vaimdnika deities, the lunar mansions, and the
Daityas (form) the first (and lowest rank of the)
existences caused by Goodness.

(Gov., Kull.); but it may also, with Ragh., be referred to a class of
mythological beings. Suparwas are the bird-deities, mentioned
above, I, 37.

45. GV/allas, Mallas, i. e. ‘those mentioned above, X, 22 (KulL,
Nar.), who are fencers with sticks or wrestlers and jesters' (Medh.,
Kull.). Na/as, i. e. ‘ those exhibiting themselves on the stage *
(rahgavataraka/ 5 , Medh., Kull.). I read with Medh., Gov., Nar., and
Nand. purusha-y /t’a kuvn'ttaya//, ‘men who subsist by despicable
occupations/ instead of purusha^ jastravr/ttaya//, ‘men living by
the trade of arms’ (Kull., editions).

46. With respect to the low estimation in which domestic priests
are held, see the verse quoted Paw^atantra II, 63 (Bombay edition).
Nand. reads danayuddhapradh&naj £a, ‘very liberal men, and those
delighting in strife/

47. Guhyakas, i, e. ‘evil spirits who hurt children;’ Yakshas,
i. e. ‘the guardians of treasures’ (Nar.). Both are demigods, ser¬
vants of Kubera. * The servants of the gods/ i. e. ‘ Vidyddharas
and so forth/

48. Medh. mentions an opinion, held by ‘others/ according to

XII, 5 r.

TRANSMIGRATION.

495

49. Sacrificers, the sages, the gods, the Vedas, the
heavenly lights, the years, the manes, and the Sa-
dhyas (constitute) the second order of existences,
caused by Goodness.

50. The sages declare Brahma, the creators of
the universe, the law, the Great One, and the Un-
discernible One (to constitute) the highest order of
beings produced by Goodness.

51. Thus (the result) of the threefold action, the
whole system of transmigrations which (consists) of
three classes, (each) with three subdivisions, and
which includes all created beings, has been fully
pointed out.

which the Yatis, * ascetics/ are a people living on mount Meru.

1 The Vaimanika deities/ i. e. ‘ those who move in mid-air with
their palatial chariots, called vimanas.’* Instead of Daitya//, Nar.
mentions as a var. lcct. Siddha//.

49. ‘The Vedas/ i.e. ‘sounds placed in a certain sequence’
(Medh.), or ‘ the guardian deities or personifications of the Vedas,
such as are described in the Itihasas as belonging to the court of
Brahman’ (Medh. ‘others/ Gov., Kull., Nar., Rdgh.). With respect
to the next two tqrms the commentators vacillate whether the things
mentioned or their regents (adhish/ 7 /atri devata) are intended.

50. Brahmd, i. e. ‘ Hirawyagarbha ’ (Gov., Kull., Rdgh.). ‘ The
creators of the universe/ i.e. ‘Marini and the rest;’ see above, I,
35; ‘the law/ i. e. ‘either the meaning of the Veda or the incarnate
law’ (Medh.); according to the other commentators, the latter
only. ‘ The Great One/ i. e. ‘ the deity presiding over the principle
(of the Sdztfkhya philosophy) called the Great One (or Intellect/
Gov.,Kull., Rdgh.); ‘the Undiscernible One/ i.e. ‘ the deity presiding
over the root*evolvent or chief cause of the Sdmkhya philosophy’
(Gov., Kull., Rdgh.). Medh., who discusses and rejects these explana¬
tions of the last two terms, holds that they refer to the Supreme Soul
(paramdtman). Nar. explains ‘ the Undiscernible ’ by ‘ egoism.’ Medh.,
6ov., and K. read avyakta eva £a instead of avyaktam eva £a.

51. Medh. and K. read esha dharma^, ‘Thus the law with
respect to the threefold action, &c.' Nand. places verse 81 imme¬
diately after this.

496 ■ LAWS OF MANU. XII, 52 .

52. In consequence of attachment to (the objects
of) the senses, and in consequence of the non-per¬
formance of their duties, fools, the lowest of men,
reach the vilest births.

53. What wombs this individual soul enters in
this world and in’consequence of what actions, learn
the particulars of that at large and in due order.

54. Those who committed mortal sins (mahdpi-
taka), having passed during large numbers of years
through dreadful hells, obtain, after the expiration
of (that term of punishment), the following births.

55. The slayer of a Brahmawa enters the womb of
a dog, a pig, an ass, a camel* a cow, a goat, a sheep,
a deer, a bird, a Aa«r/ala, and a Pukkasa.

56. A' Brahma«a who drinks (the spirituous liquor
called) Sura shall enter (the bodies) of small and
large insects, of motHs, of birds, feeding on ordure,
and of destructive beasts.

57. A Br 4 hma«a who steals (the gold of a Brdh-
ma»a shall pass) a thousand times (through the
bodies) of spiders, snakes and lizards, of aquatic
animals and of destructive Pis 4 £as.

58. The violator of a Guru’s bed (enters) a hun- *
dred times (the forms) of grasses, shrubs, and creepers,
likewise of carnivorous (animals) and of (beasts) with
fangs and of those doing cruel deeds.

52. Y agil. Ill, 219. ‘Fools,’ i.e. ‘those who do not perform
penances' (Gov., Kull.).

55. Y%m. Ill, 207. Nand. reads Pulkasa, Medh. and Gov.
Pu/Wkasa with a Gihvamfiliya which looks like sh.

56. Y&gii. Ill, 207.

57. YIll, 208. ‘Aquatic animals,’ i.e. ‘crocodiles and so
forth’(Gov.). Gov. explains ltita, ‘spider,’ by ‘scorpion.' K. omits
this verse.

58. Y &gn. Ill, 208. The commentators explain ‘ carnivorous

XII, 6 3 .

TRANSMIGRATION.

497

59. Men who delight in doing hurt (become) car¬
nivorous (animals); those who eat forbidden food,
worms; thieves, creatures consuming their own kind;
those who have intercourse with women of the lowest
castes, Pretas.

60. He who has associated with outcasts, he who
has approached the wives of other men, and he who
has stolen the property of a 13 rahma#a become
Brahmarakshasas.

61. A man who out of greed has stolen gems,
pearls or coral, or any of the many other kinds of
precious things, is born among the goldsmiths.

62. For stealing grain (a man) becomes a rat, for
stealing yellow metal a Hawzsa, for stealing water
a Plava, for stealing honey a stinging insect, for
stealing milk a crow, for stealing condiments a dog,
for stealing clarified butter an ichneumon ;

63. For stealing meat a vulture, for stealing fat a
cormorant, for stealing oil a winged animal (of the

(animals)’ by ‘vultures and the like/ ‘(beasts) with fangs’ by ‘lions
or tigers and the like/ ‘Those doing cruel deeds’ are, according
to Gov., ‘men such as -Sabaras;’ according to Kulh, ‘animals such
as tigers/

59. ‘Creatures consuming their own kind/ i.e. ‘fish and the
like/ Nand. places verse 60 before verse 59.

60. Y&gn. Ill, 212. ‘A Brahmarakshasa/ lit. ‘a Br£hma«ical
Rakshasa/ is an evil spirit. K. omits this verse.

61. Yign. Ill, 213. According to another explanation, which
Medh. considers the only admissible one, and which the other
commentators mention as an alternative, hemakartrf, ‘ a goldsmith/
is the name of a bird.

62. YagTi. Ill, 214, 215; Vi. XLIV, 15-20. Rasam, ‘condi¬
ments,’ i. e. the juice of sugar-cane, &c. (Kulh), means according
to Ndr. ‘quicksilver/

63. Y&gn. Ill, 211, 215; Vi. XLIV, 21-25. I read with Medh.,
Gov., and Nand., vasam, 1 fat/ instead of vapam (Kull., editions);

[25] k k

498

LAWS OF MANU.

XII, 64 .

kind called) Tailapaka, for stealing salt a cricket, for
stealing sour milk a bird (of the kind called) BalSkcl,

64. For stealing silk a partridge, for stealing linen
a frog, for stealing cotton-cloth a crane, for stealing
a cow an iguana, for stealing molasses a flying-fox;

65. For stealing fine perfumes a musk-rat, for
stealing vegetables consisting of leaves a peacock,
for stealing cooked food of various kinds a porcu¬
pine, for stealing uncooked food a hedgehog.

66. For stealing fire he becomes a heron, for
stealing household-utensils a mason-wasp, for steal¬
ing dyed clothes a francolin-partridge ;

67. For stealing a deer or an elephant a wolf, for
stealing a horse a tiger, for stealing fruit and roots
a monkey, for stealing a woman a bear, for stealing
water a black-white cuckoo, for stealing vehicles a
camel, for stealing cattle a he-goat.

68. That man who has forcibly taken away any
kind of property belonging to another, or who has
eaten sacrificial food (of) which (no portion) had been
offered, inevitably becomes an animal.

which latter word Nfir. also gives, but explains by ineda/2. The
Tailapaka is probably the cockroach. A"rivaka, ‘ a cricket,’ may
also mean ‘a cicada.’ Nand. reads A^akravaka, ‘a Brahmawi
duck.’

64. Ya"f(. Ill, 215; Vi. XLIV, 25-30. Regarding Vagguda,
‘ the flying-fox,’ see note on Gaut. XVII, 34. Ragli. confirms the
explanation given there, as he says that it is a bird flying at night.
Medh. and Nand. seem to have had a different reading at the
end of the verse. The MSS. of the former have krauw/Jo godha
mawsashu valgutiA (?), and that of the latter godha gavyaw dado
.rallam (?).

65. Ydgii. Ill, 213; Vi. XLIV, 31-34.

66. Ya gii. Ill, 214-215; Vi. XLIV, 35-37.

67. Y Sgn. Ill, 214; Vi. XLIV, 38-43.

68. Y\gn. Ill, 217; Vi. XLIV, 44.

XII, 72.

TRANSMIGRATION.

499

69. Women, also, who in like manner have com¬
mitted a theft, shall incur guilt; they will become the
females of those same creatures (which have been
enumerated above).

70. But (men of the four) castes who have relin¬
quished without the pressure of necessity their proper
occupations, will become the servants of Dasyus,
after migrating into despicable bodies.

71. A Brahma;/a who has fallen off from his
duty (becomes) an Ulkamukha Preta, who feeds
on what has been vomited; and a Ksliatriya, a
Ka/aptitana (Preta), who eats impure substances
and corpses.

72. A VaLsya who has fallen off from his duty
becomes a Maitraksha<fyotika Preta, who feeds on
pus; and a vSfklra, a Aailasaka (Preta, who feeds on
moths).

69. Vi. XLIV, 45. ‘In like manner,’ i. e. ‘intentionally’ (Gov.,
Kull.).

70. I follow Medh., Gov., Nar., Nand., Ragh., and K., who read
dasyushu instead of jatrushu, ‘ of their enemies ’ (editions). Gov.
explains dasyushu by jalrushu, and the same explanation is given by
Kull.; while according to Medli., ‘thieves and robbers’ are meant;
and according to Nar., ‘forest-tribes, such as *Sabaras.’ Nand. reads
pretatam (MS. prenatam) for preshyalam, and explains it by ‘ will
become Pna^as among the Dasyus.’ Ilis reading looks like a
correction made on account of the next verses.

71. Ulk&mukha, i.e. ‘with flaming mouth’ (Medh.). Medh. pre¬
fers Kfl/apiitana, ‘ with a stinking nose,’ to Ka/apfitana (Kull., Nar.,
R&gh., Nand., K.). Gov. reads Ka// 5 apAtana.

72. Maitr&ksha^yotika is, according to Medh., Kull., and R&gh.,
to be explained as a kind of Preta who has a light in or sees with the
anus. Medh. gives another explanation, according to which it
simply means ‘ a Preta,’ and adds that ‘ others ’ explain it by ‘ an
owl.* A'ailajaka, ‘ a (Preta) who feeds on moths ’ (Gov.), means
according to Kull., ‘who feeds on body-lice.’ ATell?aka is the
reading of Gov., Ndr., and Nand.

K k 2

500

LAWS OF MANU.

XII, 73-

73. In proportion as sensual men indulge in
sensual pleasures, in that same proportion their
taste for them grows.

74. By repeating their sinful acts those men of
small understanding suffer pain here (below) in
various births;

75. (The torture of) being tossed about in dreadful
hells, Tamisra and the rest, (that of) the Forest with
sword-leaved trees and the like, and (that of) being
bound and mangled ;

76. And various torments, the (pain of) being
devoured by ravens and owls, the heat of scorching
sand, and the (torture of) being boiled in jars, which
is hard to bear;

77. And births in the wombs (of) despicable
(beings) which cause constant misery, and afflictions
from cold and heat and terrors of various kinds,

78. The (pain of) repeatedly lying in various
wombs and agonizing births, imprisonment in fetters
hard to bear, and the misery of being enslaved by
others,

79. And separations from their relatives and dear
ones, and the (pain of) dwelling together with the
wicked, (labour in) gaining wealth and its loss,
(trouble in) making friends and (the appearance of)
enemies,

80. Old age against which there is no remedy, the

73. I follow Medh. and Gov., who explain kuralatd, literally
* cleverness’ (Kull., RSgh.), by ekarasibhava//.

75-76. See above, IV, 88-89» Y &gn. Ill, 206, 221-225.

76. Medh. reads karambhavalukas taptaA, and explains karam-
b'naA by karmada// (kardama^?), ‘heated mud and sand(f)’. The
translation follows Kull.’s and Ragh.’s notes. Medh., Gov., Ragh.,
Nand., and K. read sudu^sahan, ‘very hard to bear,’ which has
been given above, instead of daruw&n, ‘terrible’ (Kull., editions).

XII, 86.

SUPREME BLISS.

501

pangs of diseases, afflictions of many various kinds,
and (finally) unconquerable death.

81. But with whatever disposition of mind (a man)
performs any act, he reaps its result in a (future)
body endowed with die same quality.

82. All the results, proceeding from actions, have
been thus pointed out; learn (next) those acts which
secure supreme bliss to a Brahmawa.

83. Studying the Veda, (practising) austerities, (the
acquisition of true) knowledge, the subjugation of
the organs, abstention from doing injury, and serving
the Guru are the best means for attaining supreme
bliss.

84. (If you ask) whether among all these virtuous
actions, (performed) here below, (there be) one which
has been declared more efficacious (than the rest) foi
securing supreme happiness to man,

85. (The answer is that) the knowledge of the
Soul is stated to be the most excellent among all of
them; for that is the first of all sciences, because
immortality is gained through that.

86 . Among those six (kinds of) actions (enumer-

81. E. g. if while a man performs an act his disposition is
sattvika, or ‘ chiefly penetrated by the quality of Goodness,’ he will
reap its reward in a body produced chiefly by that quality, e. g. that
of a god.

83. Yagn. Ill, 190.

84. Medh. omits this verse.

85. Yd gn. I, 199. ‘ The knowledge of the Soul,’ i. e. not that of
the Kshetra^Md, but that of the Supreme Soul, which is taught in
the Upanishads (Medh., Gov., Kull., Nand.), means according to
Nar., ‘meditation’ (dhyanam). Nand. asserts that the genitive
sarvesham, ‘among all,’ stands in the sense of the ablative. Ac¬
cording to him the translation should be, ‘ is more excellent than
all those.’

86. Medh. takes the genitive sha««am, ‘ among those six,’ in the

502

LAWS OF MANU.

XII, 87.

ated above, the performance of) the acts taught in
the Veda must ever be held to be most efficacious
for ensuring happiness in this world and the next.

87. For in the performance of the acts prescribed
by the Veda all those (others) are fully comprised,
(each) in its turn in the several rules for the rites.

88. The acts prescribed by the Veda are of two
kinds, such as procure an increase of happiness and

sense of an ablative, and according to him the translation would
be, ‘ The acts taught in the Veda must ever be held to be more
efficacious for ensuring happiness in this world and in the next
than all those six (kinds of) actions (enumerated above).’ He
proposes two explanations for karma vaidikam. ‘ The acts taught
in the Veda’ may either be * the *$rauta rites, such as the Gyo-
tish/oma,’ or ‘those called further on, in verses 88-89, nivritta,*i.e.

‘ rites performed as a matter of duty, without a desire for rewards.’
Nand. accepts the first explanation, and so does Gov., who, how¬
ever, takes the genitive in its usual sense, * among those six.’ Nar.
adopts Medh.’s second explanation, and says, 4 acts, taught in the
Veda,’ i. e. ‘sacrifices and so forth, performed without the intention
of (gaining) rewards,’ and construes the genitives like Gov. The
same construction is adopted by Kull., who explains karma vaidi¬
kam by ‘ the knowledge of the Supreme Soul.’ Medh.’s second
explanation seems to be the best, on account of verses 89 and 90,
where ‘ knowledge,’ i. e. ‘ the knowledge of the Supreme Soul’ (see
verse 85) and the performance of the nivn’ttam karma are said to
effect final liberation. The explanation of the genitives shawwam
etesham by ‘among those six’ may perhaps be defended, if
vaidikaw karma is taken to correspond to vedabhyasa^, * studying
the Veda (and obeying its rules),’ in verse 83. But Medh.’s ex¬
planation of the construction is quite possible.

87. Kull. alters his explanation of vaidikaw karma slightly, and
interprets it by ‘the worship of the Supreme Soul’(paramatmop&-
sana), and quotes Brfhadara«yaka-upanishad IV, 4, 22 in support
of his view. The other commentators find no difficulty in showing
that both * the *S*rauta sacrifices’ and ‘the nivr/’ttakhyaw karma*
include all the six points mentioned above, verse 83. I read in the
first line with K. hi instead of tu (Medh., Gov., Kull., Nand.).

88. Kull. again changes his explanation of the expression ‘ acts

XII, 91 .

SUPREME BLISS.

503

cause a continuation (of mundane existence, pra-
vrztta), and such as ensure supreme bliss and cause
a cessation (of mundane existence, nivrztta).

89. Acts which secure (the fulfilment of) wishes in
this world or in the next are called pravmta (such
as cause a continuation of mundane existence) ; but
acts performed without any desire (for a reward),
preceded by (the acquisition) of (true) knowledge, are
declared to be nivrztta (such as cause the cessation
of mundane existence).

90. He who sedulously performs acts leading to
future births (pravr/tta) becomes equal to the gods ;
but he who is intent on the performance of those
causing the cessation (of existence, nivrztta) indeed,
passes beyond (the reach of) the five elements.

91. He who sacrifices to the Self (alone), equally
recognising the Self in all created beings and all
created beings in the Self, becomes (independent like)
an autocrat and self-luminous.

taught in the Veda,’ and takes it to mean 4 sacrifices like the Gyo~
tish/oma and the worship of images.’

89. Medh. explains ^Mnapurvam, 4 preceded by (the acquisition
of true) knowledge,’ to mean 4 whereof knowledge is the chief (part/
^■nanam adya m mukhyaw yasya).

90. Kull. remarks that the expression ‘becomes equal to the
gods’gives only an instance of the rewards attainable by kamyani
karmawi. 4 Passes beyond (the reach of) the five elements,’ i. e. ‘ casts
off the subtile body’(Nar.), or ‘obtains final liberation’ (Medh.,
Gov., Kull.).

91. lya-upanishad, 6. ‘He who sacrifices to the Self (alone)/
i. e. ‘ who connects himself with the nature of one who consists of
all deities, i. e. thinks, 44 Not Agni, nor Aditya is the deity, I am here
the deity’” (atmanam eva sarvadevatamayatvena yo^ayate 1 manyate
n&stir [nagnir] ddityo va devatd 1 aham iha /£a devat& mati [ihaiva
devatd iti ?], Medh., similarly Gov. and Nar.), means according to
Kull., Ragh., and Nand., ‘ he who performs the Gyotish/oma and
the like (sacrifices) in the manner of the Brahm&rpawa/ i. e. in such

5°4

LAWS OF MANU.

XII, 92 .

92. After giving lip even the above-mentioned
sacrificial rites, a Brihmawa should exert himself in
(acquiring) the knowledge of the Soul, in extinguish¬
ing his passions, and in studying the Veda.

93. For that secures the attainment of the object
of existence, especially in the case of a Br&hmawa,
because by attaining that, not otherwise, a twice-
born man has gained all his ends.

94. The Veda is the eternal eye of the manes,
gods, and men ; the Veda-ordinance (is) both beyond
the sphere of (human) power, and beyond the sphere
of (human) comprehension ; that is a certain fact.

a manner that he understands Brahman to be the object of the
worship, and makes over the merit to Brahman. The participial
clause means, according to Medh. and Gov., thinking ‘I am con¬
tained in the whole creation, both the movable and the immovable ’
(vyavasthita/j, Gov.), or ‘ I am, as it were, the whole world ’ (aham
ivaita^agat, Medh.) and ‘ all created beings are contained in me *
(mayy avasthilani, Gov., mayi sthitani, Medh.). Kull., Ragh., and
Nand. (who reads sampajyan) explain it on pure Vedanta prin¬
ciples. The sacrificer is to recognise his identity with the Supreme
Soul, and that through this identity he is one with all created
beings, and that all created beings are one with him. The double
rendering of the term svaragyam is based on the double meaning
of the verb r&g, ‘to rule’ and ‘to shine/ Medh. alone points it
out. Kull. gives the second meaning alone, and takes the phrase
a little differently: ‘attains the state of the self-luminous (Brah¬
man)/ Gov., Nar., and Nand. give Medh/s first meaning only.

92. ‘Above-mentioned/ i.e. ‘as securing supreme bliss’ (Nand.),
or ‘the Agnihotra and the rest’ (Medh., Gov., Kull.). The last
three commentators point out that this verse is not intended, to
authorise an irregular discontinuance of the daily rites.

93. Nand. omits this verse. Kritakn'tya^, ‘ has gained all his
ends’ (Medh.), is taken by Gov. in its other .sense, ‘has done all he
ought to do’ (krftakarawiya^).

94. Instead of ajakyam, ‘ beyond (the sphere of human) power/
i. e. ‘ which cannot have been produced by men’ (Gov., Kull.), Ndr.
and Nand. read atarkyam, ‘ beyond (the sphere of human) reason¬
ing’ (tarkeflanyath£sambhavam, Nar.; fdrfsam ity adhyavas£tum

XII, 98.

SUPREME BLISS.

505

95. All those traditions (smnti) and all those
despicable systems of philosophy, which are not
based on the Veda, produce no reward after death;
for they are declared to be founded on Darkness.

96. All those (doctrines), differing from the (Veda),
which spring up and (soon) perish, are worthless and
false, because they are of modern date.

97. The four castes, the three worlds, the four
orders, the past, the present, and the future are all
severally known by means of the Veda.

98. Sound, touch, colour, taste, and fifthly smell
are known through the Veda alone, (their) production
(is) through the (Vedic rites, which in this respect
are) secondary acts.

a^akyam apaurusheyatvat, Nand.). Aprameyam, ‘beyond (*lie
sphere of human) comprehension,’ may, according to the com¬
mentators, mean either that the Veda can never be fully known, on
account of the number of its branches and of the depth of its
meaning, or that it cannot be understood by human reasoning alone,
but requires the help of grammar of the Mimawsa and so forth.

95. As an example of false traditions Medh. names ‘rules such
as “ Heavenly bliss is attained by worshipping Aaityas,” which
occur in the *Sobha and other Siddhantas of the Nirgranthas
(Digambara Fainas)/ ‘ Despicable systems of philosophy/ e. g.

* that of the Aarvakas ’ (Kull.). Pretya, ‘ after death ’ (paraloke, Gov.,
Kull.), means according to Medh. prakarsham prapya, * after attaining
eminence.’ Medh. mentions the explanation adopted above as that
of ‘ others/ and adds that it requires the reading prete.

97. Nar. and Ragh. explain prasidhyati, ‘are made known/ by
^ayate, ‘ are produced.’ Gov. and Kull. point to III, 76.

98. I read with all the commentators prasidhyanti instead ofprasfi-
yante (Indian editions). The last words of the verse are extremely
doubtful. Medh. reads prashtir gurcakarmata//, and Gov. seems to
have adopted the same version, though the text of the Pu#a MS. has
prabh(itagu«akarmata/*. Kull. and Ragh. give prasfttiguwakarmata^ ;
Nand. prasfitiguwakarmabhi//, and Nar. prasiitigu;zadharmata/2, with
which reading a var. lect, mentioned by Medh., prasftteguwadhar-
mata// may have originally agreed. In concluding his note on the

506 laws of manu. xii, 99 .

99. The eternal lore of the Veda upholds all
created beings; hence I hold that to be supreme,

verse Medh. remarks that many other varr. lectt. exist which he
omits, because they are useless (vai&tryapa/Mntarazzi nishprayog-a-
natvan na likhyante). The explanations differ still more than the
readings. The translation follows Medh.’s interpretation. Accord¬
ing to him the verse means that * sound and the rest are known to
be enjoyable and means of obtaining pleasure through the Veda, as
they are perceived in the form of melodies and so forth at the per¬
formance of Vedic rites/ but that 4 the Veda is not their material
cause, the Vedic rites being secondary actions only with respect
to their production' (rabdadinam bhogyatvena sukhasadhanana/zz
vedad eva prasiddhi/z l vaidikakarmanush/ 7 /anad gitadirabdopa-
patti^ . . . . na punar veda upadanakaraz/am .... etad aha prasfitir
guzzakarmata^ I prasuti^ rabdadinam utpatti/z l tadarthazzz guzza-
karma phalarthatvat pradhanakarme [ma] ^a ^itradishu guzzadharma
[karme] ty uktam). Gov/s short note in substance agrees with
this view (ye svargadiviprata [shaya] upabhogyatvenabhimata^ jab-
dadayo vishayas te ’bhimatavishayopabhogotpattyarthaz/z yad upa-
karakazzz karmagnihotradikaz/z tadanush/Mnadvarezza vedad eva
prasidhyanti). According to Kull. the meaning of the compound
is, * through the Vedic rites, (originating from) the (three) qualities
(Goodness and so forth, which are) the sources (of sound and so
forth)/ Ragh. gives two explanations : '(The elements which are the
substrata of) sound, touch, colour, taste, and fifthly (of) smell, are
known through the Veda according to their origin, their qualities, and
their actions/ Afterwards he gives for the last word an alternative
version which closely agrees with Kull/s view. Nand. says, 4 Sound
and so forth, together with their sources, i. e. ether and so forth,
with their qualities, i. e. their manifold subdivisions, e. g. the shaa^a
(note), and so forth, and with their actions, i. e. attracting the organs
of sensation and so forth, are known from the Veda alone/ Nar.
finally interprets his reading as follows: 4 (Sound and so forth) are
produced from the Veda alone, which is characterised—the affix
tasi has the meaning of the third and other cases—by the following,
(viz.) the origin, i. e. the cause of production, quality, i. e. exccssive-
ness and so forth, property, i. e. fragrance and so forth ’ (prasftti^
^anmahetu/z 1 guzza utka/atvddi 1 dharma^ surabhitvadi^ 1 tzv'tiy&di
tasi^ i etair upalakshitad vedat prasidhyanti ^ayante).

99. In explanation of the first line the commentators point to

SUPREME BLTSS.

XII, 103.

507

which is the means of (securing happiness to) these
creatures.

100. Command of armies, royal authority, the
office of a judge, and sovereignty over the whole
world he (only) deserves who knows the Veda-
science.

101. As a fire that has gained strength consumes
even trees full of sap, even so he who knows the
Veda burns out the taint of his soul which arises
from (evil) acts.

102. hi whatever order (a man) who knows the
true meaning of the Veda-science may dwell, he
becomes even while abiding in this world, fit for
the union with Brahman.

103. (Even forgetful) students of the (sacred)
books are more distinguished than the ignorant,
those who remember them surpass the (forgetful)
students, those who possess a knowledge (of the
meaning) are more distinguished than those who

III, 76, and the corresponding Vedic passages. Gov. and Kull.
explain asya ga.nloh, ‘ of these creatures,’ by ‘ of men entitled to
perform Vedic rites.’ Nar. takes the second line differently:
‘ Through that, i. e. the Veda alone, I know that highest, i. e.
meditation, which is the means, i. e. the means of securing final
liberation to these creatures’ (yad asya^-antO /4 sadhanam apavarga-
sadhanam I para/« dhyana?/z dhyeyadi I tad etasmad veddd eva
manye gimc).

100. Medh. places this verse later. The order in which the
remaining verses of the Sawhita are read in the MSS. differs very
much from that adopted by the other commentators. They stand
as follows: 106,107, 108, too, 101,102, 103, 104, iog, 109, no,
nr, 112, 113, 114, 115, 116, 117, 118, 119, 120, 121, 122; next
both the text and the commentary of 91, 92, 93 are repeated, and
then comes the last verse, 126.

101. Vas. XXVII, 2.

103. A^-nebhyaA, ‘ than the ignorant,’ i.e. ‘entirely ignorant’

5oS

LAWS OF MANU.

XII, 104.

(only) remember (the words), men who follow (the
teaching of the texts) surpass those who (merely)
know (their meaning).

104. Austerity and sacred learning are the best
means by which a Brahma^a secures supreme bliss ;
by austerities he destroys guilt, by sacred learning
he obtains the cessation of (births and) deaths.

105. The three (kinds of evidence), perception,
inference, and the (sacred) Institutes which comprise
the tradition (of) many (schools), must be fully un¬
derstood by him who desires perfect correctness
with respect to the sacred law.

106. He alone, and no other man, knows the
sacred law, who explores the (utterances) of the
sages and the body of the laws, by (modes of) rea¬
soning, not repugnant to the Veda-lore.

(Medh., Nar.), ‘who have not studied the Veda* (Nand.), means
according to Gov. and Kull., ‘ those who have learned a little.'
Granthina//, ‘(forgetful) students’ (Kull., Nand.), means according
to Medh. and Gov., ‘ students who learn the texts alone, but do
not take very great trouble with them; ’ according to Nar.,‘men who
know the text only.’ Dharbza//, ‘those who remember (the texts)’
(Kull., Nand.), are according to Medh. and Gov., ‘ men who are
very persevering in studyingaccording to Nar., ‘ those who know
the meaning of the texts.’ Nar. takes^nanin, ‘he who knows (the
meaning of the texts),’ in the sense of ‘ he who knows the Soul or
Self.’

104. Yagii. I, 200.

105. Sastram, ‘ the (sacred) Institutes,’ i. e. ‘ the Veda, which has
many *Sakhas’ (Gov., Nar.), or ‘ the Veda and the Smrfti’ (Medh.),
or ‘the Sm/7ti’ (Kull.). Nand. reads siddhim, ‘a complete know¬
ledge or accurate performance,’ instead of juddhim. The Pu»a
copy of Nir. stops with this verse, the remaining leaves being lost.

106. ‘ The utterances of the sages,’ i. e. ‘ the Veda.’ ‘ The body
of the laws/ L e. *the Smnli. ’ 1 The modes of reasoning’ are, accord¬
ing to Medh. and Kull., the Mimawsa of Gaimini; according to
‘ others’ quoted by 'Medh., all the philosophical schools, excepting

XII, 109.

DOUBTFUL POINTS OF LAW.

509

107. Thus the acts which secure supreme bliss
have been exactly and fully described; (now) the
secret portion of these Institutes, proclaimed by
Manu, will be taught

108. If it be asked how it should be with respect
to (points of) the law which have not been (specially)
mentioned, (the answer is), ‘ that which Brahma^as
(who are) £ish/as propound, shall doubtlessly have
legal (force)/

109. Those Brahma;zas must be considered as
.Sish/as who, in accordance with the sacred law, have
studied the Veda together with its appendages, and
are able to adduce proofs perceptible by the senses
from the revealed texts.

those which, like the Bauddhas, Nirgranthas, and Lokayatikas, de: y
the authority of the Vedas.

108-115. Ap. II, 29, 13-14; Gaut. XXVIII, 48-51 ; Vas. Ill,
20; Baudh. I, 1,5-13, 16; Ya gii. I, 9-10.

109. ‘In accordance with the sacred law,’ i. e. c while observing
the rules prescribed for a student.’ The expression jrutipratya-
kshahetava^, ‘who are able to adduce proofs perceptible by
the senses from the revealed texts/ is variously interpreted.
According to Medh. it means either ‘those who possess the re¬
vealed texts, (proof through) perception and argument’ (miti-
pratyakshe hetu$ £a jrutipratyakshahetava//), or ‘ those for whom
the revealed texts which are perceptible by the senses, are
the reason for distinguishing between virtue and sin ’ (athava
jrute^ pratyakshajrute^ l pratyaksha^abda// jraute pratyaye pratya-
kshatulyatvat prayukta// 1 sa £a hetur dharmadharmapari^ane
kara^aw yeshaw ta evam u^yantc); according to Gov., ‘ who are
the cause of the teaching of the subjects perceptible in the Veda’
(vedago^arapadarthopade^akarawabhuta/i); according to Kull., ‘who
are the causes of making the revealed texts perceptible, by reciting
the revealed texts;’ and according to Nand., ‘those for whose
knowledge and exposition of the law hearing and perception by
means of the senses are the causes’ (yeshdm s ravaraam pratyakshaw
k& dharma^w&nava&mayor hetus te). ‘ The appendages/ i. e. ‘ the
Itih&sas and Pura/ras’ (Medh. according to the MaMbharata,

LAWS OF MANU.

XTI, no.

510

110. Whatever an assembly, consisting either of
at least ten, or of at least three persons who follow
their prescribed occupations, declares to be law, the
legal (force of) that one must not dispute.

hi. Three persons who each know one of the
three principal Vedas, a logician, a Mimiwsaka, one
who knows the Nirukta, one who recites (the Insti¬
tutes of) the sacred law, and three men belonging
to the first three orders shall constitute a (legal)
assembly, consisting of at least ten members.

112. One who knows the i?/g-veda, one who knows
the Yafur-veda, and one who knows the Sama-veda,
shall be known (to form) an assembly consisting of
at least three members (and competent) to decide
doubtful points of law.

113. Even that which one Brdhmawa versed in
the Veda declares to be law, must be considered (to
have) supreme legal (force, but) not that which is
proclaimed by myriads of ignorant men.

114. Even if thousands of Brahma^as, who have

Nand.), or ‘ the Angas, Mimiwsa, the law-books, the Purawas, and
so forth’(Gov., Kull.).

no. Medh. and Gov. read viMrayet instead of vi&ilayet (Kull.,
Nand.).

hi. ‘ Three men belonging to the first three orders,’ i. e. ‘ a stu¬
dent, a householder, and a hermit’ (Gov., Kull., Nand.). Medh.
says that some think * a student, a householder, and an ascetic’ to
be meant, because the hermit must not enter a village, and because
Gautama, in the enumeration of the castes, places the ascetic before
the hermit, while others refer the words to Manu’s first three orders.
The reading traividyo, which all the commentaries give, is probably
incorrect. It ought to be traividyam, tis rt'nim vidyanaw? samahara^;
see Y &gn. I, 9, and compare Hturvidvam, X’aturvaidyam, Baudh.
1 ,1,1, 8, and Vas. Ill, 20.

114. Avratanam, ‘ who have not fulfilled their sacred duties,’ i. e.
‘ who have not fulfilled the vows incumbent on a student ’ (Gov.,
Kull.).

XIT, 118. THE KNOWLEDGE OF THE ATMAN.

5 1 1

not fulfilled their sacred duties, are unacquainted
with the Veda, and subsist only by the name of their
caste, meet, they cannot (form) an assembly (for set¬
tling the sacred law).

115. The sin of him whom dunces, incarnations
of Darkness, and unacquainted with the law, instruct
(in his duty), falls, increased a hundredfold, on those
who propound it.

1x6. All that which is most efficacious for secur¬
ing supreme bliss has been thus declared to you; a
Brahmawa who docs not fall off from that obtains
the most excellent state.

117. Thus did that worshipful deity disclose to
me, through a desire of benefiting mankind, this
whole most excellent secret of the sacred law.

118. Let (every Brahmawa), concentrating his mind,
fully recognise in the Self all things, both the real
and the unreal, for he who recognises the universe
in the Self, does not give his heart to unrighteous¬
ness.

115. Nand. gives yad for yam, instead of tamobhilta//, ‘incarna¬
tions of Darkness,’ the reading of the Dharma-sfttras, idsaomhdhih,

‘ perplexed by Darkness or ignorance.'

118. Samparyet, ‘ let (every Brfihmava) fully recognise,’ i. e. ‘ let
him clearly realise in his mind’ (sakshatkuryat, Medh., Kull.),
through devotional exercises (upasana, Medh.), or through deep
meditation (Kull.), or ‘ let him vow to be solely intent on that one
object of knowledge, to the exclusion of the knowledge of all other
knowable objects’ (^iteydntaravishayanirakarawena tadeka^weyanish-
//;;tm anubrfiyat, Medh.). Atmani, ‘ in the Self/ i. e. ‘ in the Supreme
Self’ (Kull., Nand.), or ‘ in his own individual Self’ (Gov.). Medh.
remarks that ‘the learned dispute regarding the meaning of the
term atman, and that besides the two explanations already given a
third was proposed by some, according to which it meant ‘the
corporeal Self.’ Medh. himself considers the first explanation to be
the correct one. Sadasat, ‘ the real and the unreal/ i. e. either * the

512

LAWS OF MANU.

XII, 119 .

119. The Self alone is the multitude of the gods,
the universe rests on the Self; for the Self pro¬
duces the connexion of these embodied (spirits)
with actions.

120. Let him meditate on the ether as identical
with the cavities (of the body), on the wind as iden¬
tical with the organs of motions and of touch, on the
most excellent light as the same with his digestive
organs and his sight, on water as the same with the
(corporeal) fluids, on the earth as the same with
the solid parts (of his body) ;

121. On the moon as one with the internal organ,
on the quarters of the horizon as one with his sense
of hearing, on Vish«u as one with his (power of)
motion, on Hara as the same with his strength, on
Agni (Fire) as identical with his speech; on Mitra
as identical with his excretions, and on Prafapati as
one with his organ of generation.

122. Let him know the supreme Male (Purusha, to
be) the sovereign ruler of them all, smaller even than
small, bright like gold, and perceptible by the intellect
(only when) in (a state of) sleep(-like abstraction).

123. Some call him Agni (Fire), others Manu, the

products and the causes,’ or * the intelligent and the non-intelligent ’
(Nand.), means according to Gov., 1 that which possesses a shape of
certain proportions and its opposite ’ (mtirtam przthivyadi yaWa-
mflrtam akaradi). Medh. proposes two other explanations, 1. ‘that
which is both existent and non-existent, i. e. comes into existence
and perishes;’ 2. ‘that which like the hare’s horn is non-existent,
and that which like ether is eternal.’ The word samiihitaA, ‘ concen¬
trating himself,’ may have, as Medh. thinks, a technical meaning, and
refer to the Samadhi, mentioned in the Yoga and Vedanta systems.

119. In this verse Gov., too, explains atmS by paramatma.

120. Medh. explains snehe, ‘on the (corporeal) fluids,’by‘on
the viscous substances/ e. g. ‘ the brain and so forth.’

XII, 126. THE KNOWLEDGE OF THE ATMAN. 513

Lord of creatures, others Indra, others the vital air,
and again others eternal Brahman.

124. He pervades all created beings in the five
forms, and constantly makes them, by means of birth,
growth and decay, revolve like the wheels (of a
chariot).

125. He who thus recognises the Self through the
Self in all created beings, becomes equal(-minded)
towards all, and enters the highest state, Brahman.

126. A twice-born man who recites these Insti¬
tutes, revealed by Manu, will be always virtuous
in conduct, and will reach whatever condition he
desires.

124. The five forms are the five great elements, which produce
all bodies (Gov., Kull., Nand.).

125. Instead of param padam, ‘the highest state,’ Nand. reads
sanStanam, ‘ the eternal (Brahman).’

[25]

Ll

APPENDIX

Quotations from the Institutes of Manu, in
the translated Hindu Law-books 1 .

I, ior. Col. Dig. II, 4, 4a.

II, 96. Mit. II, i, 22.

140. Sar. Vi. 421, 426, 436-7.

145. Col. Dig. V, 424; Viram. Ill, 4, 7.

146. D 4 y. XI, 4, 3.

172. Col. Dig. V, 123.

Ill, 4-11. Col. Dig. IV, 185.

5. Datt. Mi. VI, 27.

12. Col. Dig. V, 144; Day. IX, 2; Mit. I, 8, 7.
14. Col. Dig. V, 147.

15-7. Col. Dig. V, 145 ; Day. IX, 9; Viram. II, 1, 25.

18. Col. Dig. IV, 52.

20-1. Day. IV, 3, 4.

42. Viram. Ill, 1, 2.

49. Smn. K. XI, 2, 4; Sar. Vi. 138, 332, 336,
Varad. p. 41.

51. Day. IV, 3, 24.

55. Col. Dig. IV, 42.

56-9. Col. Dig. IV, 39.

60. Col. Dig. IV, 40, 189, 1; May. IV, 8, 21.
61-2. Col. Dig. IV, 189, 2-3.

81. Day. XI, 6, 17.

1 Colebrookc’s Digest (Col. Dig.); VyavaharamayQkha, by Borradailc (Vyav.);
Dayabhaga and Mitakshara on Inheritance, by Colebrooke (Day.; Mit.) ; Mita¬
kshara on Vyavahara, by Macnaghten (M. Mit.); Dayakramasawgraha, by
Wynch (Dayakr.); Dattakamimawsd and DattakalandrikSi, by Sutherland (Datt.
Ml.; Datt. .Kand.); Vivadaftntamafli, by Prosonno Koomar Tagore (Viv.JSTint.);
Vtramilrodaya on Inheritance, by Golapchand Sarkar (Vtram.); Smrili£andrik&,
by *T. Kristnaswamy Jyer ^Smn. K.) ; Sarasvatlvilasa, by Foulkes (Sar. Vi.);
Vyavaharamadhava and Varadara^iya on Inheritance, by Burnell (Madh. ;
Varad.).

L 1 2

APPENDIX.

5*6

IV, 162. M. Mit. II, 8, 2i.

V, 60. D&y. XI, 1, 42 ; XI, 6, 17 ; Datt. Mi. VI, 27.

127. Col. Dig. V, 321.

147-9. Col. Dig. IV, 86.

150. Col. Dig. IV, 89.

153-6. Col. Dig. IV, 103.

157. Col. Dig. IV, 139; Mit. I, 10, 9; Viram. II,

2, 4; Sar. Vi. 345.

158. Col. Dig. IV, 139; Mit. I, 10, 9; Viram. II,

2, 4.

159. Col. Dig. IV, 140; Mit. I, 10, 9; Viram. If,

2, 4.

160. Col. Dig. IV, 141 ; Mit. I, 10, 9; Datt. Mi.

I, 29; Viram. II, 2, 4.

161. Col. Dig. IV, 142 ; Mit. 1 ,10, 9 ; Viram. II, 2,

4; Sar. Vi. 34.5.

162. Col. Dig. IV, 143.

163. Col. Dig. IV, 161.

165. Col. Dig. IV, 105.

VII, 14-28. Viv. A'int. pp. 320-2.

82. Col. Dig. V, 163; Day. IX, 20.

85. Col. Dig. II, 4, 63.

127-40. Col. Dig. II, 2, 14, 1-13.

VIII, x—2. May. I, 1, 5.

4. Col. Dig. II, 1, 2; May. I, 1, 3; Viv. A'int. 4
p. 4.

5-7. Col. Dig. II, 1, 2; May. I, 1, 3; M. Mit. I,

3 , 5 -

11. M. Mit. I, 1, 12.

13. M. Mit. I, i, 15; VI, 1, 59.

27. Col. Dig. V, 449 ; Viv. Aint. p. 300.

28. Col. Dig. V, 480, 1.

29. Col. Dig. V, 480, 2; May. IV, 10, 10; Smri.

A. IX, 2, 27.

30. Col. Dig. II, 2, 60, 1; May. VII, 8; M. Mit.

V, 4.

31-2. Col. Dig. II, 2, 60, 2-3.

33 . May. VII, 8 j M.Mit.V,5.

54. Viv. JTmt p. ifo.

QUOTATIONS FROM MANU.

5 1 7

(VIII), 35. May. VII, io; M. Mit. V, ii.

37-8. M. Mit. V, 9.

40. May. VII, 11 ; M. Mit. V, 12.

43. M. Mit. I, 2, 7.

45. Col. Dig. II, 4, 68.

46. Col. Dig. I, 50, 233.

47. Col. Dig. I, 233.

48. Col. Dig. I, 234; Viv. A'int. p. 43.

49. Col. Dig. I, 235; Viv. ATint. p. 43.

50. Col. Dig. I, 254.

51. Col. Dig. I, 264.

59. Col. Dig. I, 265; Viv. A'int. p. 47.

68. M. Mit. VI, 1, 6,

70. May. II, 3, 8.

74. M. Mit. VI, 1, r.

79-80. May. II, 3, 14.

87. May. II, 3, 4.

102. May. II, 3, 17; M. Mit. VI, 1, 22.

107. M. Mit. VI, 1, 29.

108. May. II, 3, 20; M. Mit. VI, 1, 45.

113. May. II, 3, 17; III, 3; M. Mit. VI, i. 23;
VIII, 20, 1.

115. M. Mit. VIII, 10, 2.

117. M. Mit. VI, 1, 31.

120. M. Mit. VI, 1, 49 ; Viv. A'int. p. 221.
i2t. M. Mit. VI, x, 49 ; Viv. Aint. p. 222.

122. Viv. A'int. p. 221.

123. M. Mit. Ill, 4, 9; Viv. A'int. p. 222.

124-5. M. Mit. Ill, 4, 4.

128. M. Mit. I, 1, 6.

129. M. Mit. Ill, 4, 3.

132-4. Col. Dig. Ill, 1, 77, 1-3.

138. Viv. A'int. p. 222.

139. Col. Dig. I, 273 ; Viv. Aint. pp. 48, 221.

140. Col. Dig. I, 23, 29, 1.

141. Col. Dig. I, 29, 2; Viv. Aint. p. 7.

143. Col. Dig. I, 91, 117; II, 2, 7 ; Viv. Aint. pp.

31 , * 5 -

144. CoJ. Dig. I, 87; May. V, 2, 3.

APPENDIX.

518

(VIII), 146. May. II, 2, 7.

147. M. Mit. Ill, 2, 6.

150. Col. Dig. I, 78.

151. Col. Dig. I, 43, 6i ; May. V, 1, 7; Viv. Aint.

p. 17.

152. Col. Dig. I, 42.

153. Col. Dig. I, 41.

154. Col. Dig. I, 48, * 57 , i-

155. Col. Dig. I, 257, 2.

156. Col. Dig. I, 258.

157. Col. Dig. I, 33 ; Viv. Amt. p. 19.

139-60. Col. Dig. I, 151, 1-2.

i6r. Col. Dig. I, 154.

162. Col. Dig. I, 155.

163. Col. Dig. II, 2, 11 ; II, 4, 57.

165. May. IX, 10; Viram. V, 1, 2.

166. Col. Dig. I, 186.

167. Col. Dig. I, 190; Dayakr. XII, 1, I; Viv.

A'int. p. 39.

168. Col. Dig. II, 2, 10.

177. Col. Dig. I, 245; May. V, 4, 6.

179. Col. Dig. II, 1, 13 ; Viv. Aint. p. 49.

180. Col. Dig. II, 1, 16.

181-4. Col. Dig. II, 1, 47, 1-4.

185. Col. Dig. II, 1, 20.

186. Col. Dig. II, 1, 21 ; Viv. Aint. p. 51.

187. Col. Dig. II, 1, 46.

188. Col. Dig. II, 1,49.

189. Col. Dig. II, 1, 26; Viv. Aint. p. 51.

191. Col. Dig. II, 1, 37 ; May. VI, 2.

192. Col. Dig. II, 1, 38 ; May. VI, 5 ; Viv. Amt.

P- 54 -

193. Col. Dig. II, 1, 39 ; Viv. A'int. p. 53.

194. Col. Dig. II, 1, 48.

195. Col. Dig. II, 1, 17.

196. Col. Dig. II, 1, 50.

197. Col. Dig. II, 2, 5 ; Viv. Aint. p. 56.

198. Col. Dig. II, 2, 40; Viv. Aint. pp. 56, 222.
199 - Col. Dig. II, 2, 27.

QUOTATIONS FROM MANU.

519

(VIII), 201. Col. Dig. II, 2, 36.

202. Col. Dig. II, 2, 50 ; May. VII, 5 ; Viv. Amt.

p. 58.

203. Col. Dig. II, 2, 61 ; Viv. Aint. p. 119.

206. Col. Dig. II, 3, 32 ; Viv. Amt. p. 65.

207. Col. Dig. II, 3, 33.

208. Col. Dig. II, 3, 35, 1.

209. Col. Dig. II, 3, 35, 2 ; Viv. Aint. p. 67.

210. Col. Dig. II, 3, 35, 3 ; Viv. Aint. p. 66.

212. Col. Dig. II, 4, 48, 1; Viv. Aint. pp. 84, 223.

213. Col. Dig. II, 4, 48, 2.

213. Col. Dig. Ill, 1, 76 ; May. XI, 4 ; Viv. Aint.
p. 98.

21(5. Col. Dig. Ill, 1, 81 ; May. XI, 4; Viv. Aint.
p. 99.

217. Col. Dig. Ill, i, 78; May. XI, 4; Viv. Aint.

p. 99.

218. Col. Dig. Ill, 2, 1.

219-20. Col. Dig. Ill, 2, 15; Viv. Aint. p. no.

222. Col. Dig. Ill, 3, 7.; 23, 1 ; Viv. Aint. p. 113.

223. Col. Dig. Ill, 3, 23, 2; Viv. Aint. p. 113.
224-7. Col. Dig. IV, 166-9.

228. Col. Dig. Ill, 3, 24; Viv. Aint. p. 113.

229. Col. Dig. Ill, 4, 1.

230. Col. Dig. Ill, 4, 9; Viv. Aint, p. 105.

231. Col. Dig. Ill, 4, 2 ; Viv. A”int. p. 105.

232. Col. Dig. Ill, 4, 12 ; Viv. Aint. p. 106.

233. Col. Dig. Ill, 4, 7 ; Viv. Aint. p. 106.

234. Col. Dig. Ill, 4, 18.

335-6. Col. Dig. Ill, 4, 16.

237. Col. Dig. Ill, 4, 19 ; May. XV, 3 ; Viv. Aint.

p. 132.

238. Col. Dig. Ill, 4, 25; Viv. Aint. p. 132.

239. Col. Dig. Ill, 4, 32.

240. Col. Dig. Ill, 4, 29 ; May. XVII, 9.

241. Col. Dig. Ill, 4, 36; Viv. Aint. p. 133.

242. Col. Dig. Ill, 4, 54; Viv. Aint. p. 136.

244. Col. Dig. Ill, 4, 59.

345-53. Viv. Aint. p. 120.

520

APPENDIX.

(VIII), * 53 .

Viv. ATini. p. 121.

257 -

May. XV, 4.

259-61.

Viv. ATint. p. 121.

262.

Viv. ATint. p. 124.

264.

May. XV, 11; Viv. ATint. p.

126.

2 67.

May. XVI, 1, 3 ; Viv. ATint.

p. 140.

■268.

Viv. ATint. p. 140.

273 -

Viv. ATint. p. 142.

2 75 -

May. XVI, 1, 4.

276-7.

Viv. ATint. p. 141.

279.

May. XVI, 2, 4; Viv. ATint.

p. 150.

280-1.

May. XVI, 2, 4; Viv. ATint.

pp. 146,150.

00

W

1

Viv. ATint. pp. 146, 150.

283.

Viv. ATint. pp. 147, 150.

284.

Viv. ATint. p. 148.

285.

May. XVI, 2, 8 ; Viv. ATint.

p- * 55 -

286.

Viv. ATint. p. 149.

288-9.

Viv. ATint. p. 183.

296-8.

May. XXII (CCXLII).

299.

Col. Dig. Ill, 1, 11, 1; Viv.

ATint. p. 151.

Oo

O

O

Col. Dig. Ill, 1, 11, 2; M

. Mit. IV, 1,

Viv. ATint. p. 151.

302.

Col. Dig. II, 1, 59; Viv. Kint p. 157.

3 ° 3 -

Viv. Kin t. p. 157.

3 ° 4 -

Col. Dig. II, 2, 19; Viv. K int. p. 322.

3 ° 5 - 6 .

Viv. ATint. p. 322.

0

00

Col. Dig. II, 3, 58.

319-

Viv. ATint. p. 173.

320.

May. XVII, 8.

321.

May. XVII, 8; Viv. ATint. p

. 170.

322.

May. XVII, 8 ; Viv. ATint. p

. 171.

323-

May. XVII, 8 ; Viv. ATint. p

. 166.

324-5-

Viv. ATint. p. 167.

326-30.

Viv. ATint. p. 172.

33 1 -

Viv. ATint. p. 171.

333 -

Viv. ATint. p. 172.

335 - 6 -

Viv. ATint. p. 221.

337 - 8 -

Viv. ATint. p. 176.

339 -

Viv. ATint. p. 179.

Quotations from manu.

521

(VIII), 340. Mit. I, 1, 8 ; Viram. 1*14; Viv. Aint. p. 177 ;
M&dh. g. 4.

341. Viv. ATint. p. 179.

J542. Viv. ATint . p. 168.

348-9. M. Mit. II, 8, 20.

350. May. XVIII, 8; M. Mit. II, 8, 19, 20.

352. Viv. Kint. p. 203.

354. May. XIX, 3 ; Viv. Kint. p. 202.

355-6. Viv. ATint. p. 202.

359. Viv. K int. p. 203.

360. Viv. Kint. p. 200.

361. Viv. Kint. p. 202.

362. Viv. A'int. pp. 203-4.

363. Viv. K int. p. 203.

364. Viv. Kint. p. 205.

365. May. XV, 5.

366. Viv. ATint. p. 205.

367-7°. Viv. A"int. p. 206.

371-2. Viv. ATint. p. 207.

373. Viv. ATint. pp. 207-8.

374. May. XIX, 6; Viv. A'int. p. 209.

375. Viv. ATint. p. 209.

376. May. XIX, 7 ; Viv. A"int. p. 209.

377. May. XIX, 7 ; Viv. ATint. p. 210.

378. May. XVIII, 14; XIX, 6; Viv. ATint. p. 210.

379. Viv. ATint. p. 210.

380-1. M. Mit. VI, 1, 53; Viv. ATint. p. 211.

382. May. XIX, 7 ; Viv. ATint. p. 211.

383-4. Viv. ATint p. 211.

385. Viv. ATint. pp. 207, 211.

386-7. Viv. ATint. p. 322.

388. Col. Dig. II, 3, 42; Viv. Aint. pp. 69, 212.

389. Viv. ATint. pp. 185, 212.

390. May. I, 1, 14.

398. Viv. ATint. p. 161.

402. Col. Dig. Ill, 3, 48.

410. Col. Dig. I, 5.

411. Col. Dig. Ill, 1, 37, 15 May. X, 3; Viv.

ATint. p. 95.

522

APPENDIX.

(VIII), 413.

Col. Dig. Ill, 1, 37, 2 ; Viv. ATint. p. 95.

413-

Col. Dig. Ill, 1, 38 ; Viv. ATint.

P- 95 -

414.

Col. Dig. Ill, 1, 36; Viv. ATint.

P- 95 -

415-

Col. Dig. Ill, 1, 33.

416.

Col. Dig. II, 4, 5 6 ; HI. 1. 52 ,

, 1; May. IV,

10, 7; Viram. I, 12 ; V, 1, 2;

; Varad. p. 6 .

417.

Col. Dig. Ill, 1, 52, 2.

IX, 1-2.

Col. Dig. IV, 2-3.

3 -

Col. Dig. IV, 5.

4 -

Col. Dig. IV, 14.

5 ~ 7 -

Col. Dig. IV, 9, 1-3.

8-9.

Col. Dig. IV, 19-20.

IO-I.

Col. Dig. IV, 30, 1-2.

12.

Col. Dig. IV, 32.

1 3 -

Col. Dig. IV, 99.

14- 5 -

Col. Dig. IV, 22, 1-2.

16.

Col. Dig. IV, 23.

i 7 -

Col. Dig. IV, 24; Viv. ATint. p

. 220.

18-9.

Col. Dig. IV, 25-6.

22-4.

Col. Dig. IV, 33, 1-3.

35 -

Col. Dig. IV, 34.

26-8.

Col. Dig. IV, 35, 1-3.

3 °-

Col. Dig. IV, 109.

33 - 4 .

Col. Dig. V, 253, 1-3.

35 -

Col. Dig. V, 254; Day. XI, 3,

3; Dayakr. I,

5 , 2.

3 6 ~ 7 -

Col. Dig. V, 255-6.

38-40.

Col. Dig. V, 257, 1-3.

42-6.

Col. Dig. V, 252, 1-5.

47 -

Col. Dig. V, 252, 6 ; Day. XIII, 5 ; Dayakr.

VIII, 5; Smn. AT. XVI, 20

; Madh. p. 57.

4 «.

Col. Dig. V, 214, 1; 252, 7.

49.

Col. Dig. V, 214, 2; 252, 1

Viv. A'int.

p. 131.

5 o-i-

Col. Dig. V, 214, 3-4-

53 .

Col. Dig. V, 214, 5 I Mit. I,

10, 6 ; Viram.

II, 2, 4; Mddh. p. 23.

•

53 -

Col. Dig. V, 244; Mit. I, 10, 4

; Datt Aand.

II, 35 ; Viram. II, 2, 4; M&dh. p. 53.

QUOTATIONS FROM MANU.

523

(IX), 54.

Col. Dig. V, 236; D&yakr. XII, 2,

15 ; Viv.

/Tint. p. 131.

55 -

Dayakr. XII, 2, 15.

59 -

Col. Dig. IV, 146; V, 229; Mit.

I, 10, 8 ;

Datt. Mi. VII, 21 ; Viram. II, 2

, 4; Sar.

Vi. 342.

60.

Col. Dig. V, 228 ; Mit. I, 10, 8 ; Viram. II,

2, 4 ; Sar. Vi. 342 ; Midli. p. 23.

62.

Col. Dig. IV, 150.

6 3 -

Col. Dig. V, 227.

64-8.

Col. Dig. IV, 156, 1-5 ; Mit. I, 10, 8

; Viram.

II, 2, 4; Sar. Vi. 343 ; Madh. p. 23.

69.

Col. Dig. IV, 170, 1; Mit. I, 10, 10:

; Viram.

II, 2, 4 ; Madh. p. 24.

70.

Col. Dig. IV, 170, 2; D^y. IX, 28

; Mit. I,

10, xo; Viram. II, 2, 4; Madh. p.

24.

7 i-

Col. Dig. IV, 171.

73 - 3 .

Col. Dig. IV, 174, 1-2.

74 -

Col. Dig. IV, 45, t.

75 -

Col. Dig. IV, 45, 2 ; 116.

76.

Col. Dig. IV, 154.

77 •

Col. Dig. IV, 56.

78-9.

Col. Dig. IV, 57, 1-2.

80.

Col. Dig. IV, 67.

81.

Col. Dig. IV, 70.

82.

Col. Dig. IV, 73 -

« 3 -

Col. Dig. IV, 75 -

84.

Col. Dig. IV, 112.

85 -

86.

Col. Dig. IV, 46. -v A
„ , r ^. s | Day. XI, r, 47 :

Col. Dig. IV, 47 - - t ’ IO ’ 4/ '

; Viram.

87.

Col. Dig. V, 414. > 5 ’

89.

Col. Dig. IV, 179.

94 -

Viram. II, i, 2.

95-6.

Col. Dig. IV, 188, 1-2.

9 7 -

Col. Dig. IV, 172.

98-IOO.

Col. Dig. IV, 173, 1-3.

IOI-2.

Col. Dig. IV, 190, 1-2.

IO3.

Col. Dig. V, 2 ; D 4 y. I, 3 ; Viram. I, 2 ;

SmW. K. I, 1; Sar. Vi. 37.

5 2 4

APPENDIX.

(IX), 104. Col. Dig. V, 4; D&y. I, 14; II, 8; III, I;

Mit. I, 3, 3 ; 5 , 7 ; May. IV, 4, 1; D&yakr.

I, 1, 1; VII, i ; Viram. I, 10-21, 22, 27, 51;

II, 1,1-2; Viv. ATint. p. 224; SnW. K . 1 ,12,
18 ; Sar. Vi. 49 ; M&dh. p. 1; Varad. p. 6.

105. Col. Dig. V, 9 ; D&y. I, 36 ; III, 15; Mit. I,

3,3 ; Viram. II, 1, 7, 11 ; Viv. AHnt. p. 226;
Smr/. K. II, 2, 10; Madh. p. 8.

106. Col. Dig. V, 10, 1 ; D&y. I, 36; XI, 1, 32 ;

Mit. I, 11, 12 ; Datt. Afand. I, 5 ; Viram. II,

1, 7 ; Sar. Vi. 369 ; Madh. p. 44.

107. Col. Dig. V, 10, 2; Day. I, 36 ; Viram. II, 1,

7 ; Madh. p. 8.

108. Col. Dig. V, 12 ; D&y. VI, 1, 54; Viram. II, 1,7.

109. Col. Dig. V, 13 ; Viram. II, 1, 7.

110. Col. Dig. V, 14; Viram. II, 1, 7.

hi. Col. Dig. V, 18; Day. I, 27, 37 ; Viram. I,
21; II, i,7; Viv. Amt. p. 227; Smn. K. II,

2, 10-11.

112. Col. Dig. V, 34; Day. II, 37; Mit. I, 2, 4;

I 5 3 > 3 ; May. IV, 4, 9 ; Viram. II, 1, 9,11 ;
Viv. A'int. p. 234 ; Smr/. AT. II, 1, 25; III,
8; Madh. p. 8; Varad. p. 2.

113. Col. Dig. V, 36.

114. Col. Dig. V, 37 ; Viv. ATint. p. 234.

115. Col. Dig. V, 38; Day. II, 45 5 Smri. K. Ill, 5.

116. Col. Dig. V, 39, 1; D&y. II, 37 ; Mit. I, 3, 3 ;

May. IV, 4, 9 ; Viram. II, 1, 10; Sm ri, AT.

III, 10, 12 ; M&dh. p. 8.

117. Col. Dig. V, 39, 2; D&y. II, 37 ; Mit. I, 3, 3 ;

May. IV, 4, 9; D&yakr. VII, 18; Viram.
II, 1, 10; Smn. K . Ill, 12; M&dh. p. 8'.

118. Col. Dig. V, 120; D&y. Ill, 36; Mit. I, 7, 9 ;

Viram. II, 1, 21; V, 2, 1; Viv. Afint. p. 248;
Sm ri, K. IV, 32; Sar. Vi. 126, 133, 287;
Varad. p. 10.

119. Col. Dig. V, 70; Mit. 1 ,4, 18 ; May. IV, 7,17.

120. Col. Dig. V, 76,1; Mit. II, 1, 10; Viram. II,

2, 18 ; III, 1, 6 ,

QUOTATIONS FROM MANU.

525

(IX), 121. Col. Dig. V, 76, 2 ; Viram. II, 2, 18.

122-3. Col. Dig. V, 55, 1-2.

124. Col. Dig. V, 56.

125. Col. Dig. V, 57; D&yakr. VII, 14; Viv.

■ATint. p. 233.

126. Col. Dig. V, 64.

127. Col. Dig. V, 212 ; Day. X, 2 ; Datt. Ml. I, 9;

Viram. II, 2, 3; Varad. p. 23.

128. Col. Dig. V, 222, i; Viram. II, 2, 3 ; Varad.

P- 23.

129. Col. Dig. V, 222, 2; Viram. II, 2, 3.

130. Col. Dig. V, 210 ; D&y. XI, 2, 1 ; May. IV,

8, 10; Viram. Ill, 2, 1; Viv. /Cint. p. 292 ;
Smn. K. XI, 2, 7; Sar. Vi. 543, 552 ;
Varad. pp. 35-6.

13 x. Col. Dig. V, 209, 491 ; D&y. IV, 2,13 ; May.
IV, 10, 17; Viram. V, 2, 2, 4; Viv. Afint.
p. 267 ; Smn. K. IX, 3, 12 ; Sar. Vi. 288 ;
M&dh. p. 44; Varad. p. 44.

132. Col. Dig. V, 220, 3 ; D&y. XI, 2, 19 ; D&yakr.

I, 4, 1; Viram. Ill, 3, 2 ; Viv. /^int. p. 294.

133. Col. Dig. V, 220, 1; Day. XI, 2, 19; Varad.

PP- 35 ~ 6 -

134. Col. Dig. V, 206; D&y. II, 39 ; X, 2 ; Mit. I,

ii, 23; D&y. VII, 16; Viram. II, 2, 17;
Viv. K'mt. p. 286; Sar. Vi. 376, 558; Madh.
p. 20 ; Varad. p. 26.

135. D&y. XI, 2, 16; M&dh. p. 45 ; Varad. p. 48.

136. Col. Dig. V, 207 ; 220, 2 ; D&y. X, 3 ; XI, 2,

20; Mit. II, 2, 6; Datt. Afand. I, 22;
Viram. II, 2,17 ; III, 3, 1; Sar. Vi. 564,660,
667 ; M&dh. p. 26 ; Varad. p. 35.

137. Col. Dig. V, 11 ; D&y. XI, 1, 31 ; Viram.

Ill, 1, 11.

138. Col. Dig. V, 302; D&y. V, 6; XI, 1, 31 ;

Viram. Ill, 1, 11.

139. Day. IV, 2, 10; XI, 6, 9, 31; D&yakr. II, 4,

7; Datt. Ml. VII, 17 ; Varad. p. 36.

140. Col. Dig. V, 208; Viram. II, 2, 3.

526

APPENDIX.

(IX), 141. Col. Dig. V, 278; Datt. Afand. V, 20; Viram.

II, 2, 18; Smre. K. X, 13; Varad. p. 23.

142. Col. Dig. V, 181 ; Mit. I, 11, 32 ; May. IV,

5, 21 ; Datt. ML II, 8 ; VI, 6, 47 ; VIII,
1; Datt. A r and. II, 18 ; Viram. II, 2, 18 ;
Sm ri. K. X, 15; Sar. Vi. 388 ; Madh. p. 24;
Varad. p. 23.

143. Col. Dig. V, 234; Sm ri. K. V, 12.

144. Col. Dig. V, 226.

145. Col. Dig. V, 235.

146. Col. Dig. V, 232; Mit. II, 1, 10; Datt. Mi.

V, 51; Viram. II, 1, 18; III, 1, 6 ; Madh.

P- 3 1 -

147. Col. Dig. V, 233 ; Mddh. p. 40.

148. Col. Dig. V, 139, 1.

149. Col. Dig. V, 6o, 1 ; 139, 2; Madh. p. 16.

150. Col. Dig. V, 60, 2 ; 139, 3.

151. Col. Dig. V, 60, 3; 139, 4; Day. IX, 12 ;

Viram. II, 1, 25.

152. Col. Dig. V, 140, 1; Day. IX, 12; Viram. II,

1, 25 ; Madh. p. 16 ; Varad. p. 18.

153. Col. Dig. V, 140, 2; Day. IX, 12 ; Viram. II,

1, 25; Viv. Z\int. p. 271; Varad. p. 18.

154. Col. Dig. V, 166; Day. IX, 27; Mit. I, 11,

41; Dayakr. VII, 19; Viram. II, j, 25;
II, 2, 21 ; Viv. Kint p. 273 ; Sar. Vi. 394;
MAdh. p. 17 ; Varad. p. 20.

155. Col. Dig. V, 167; Day. IX, 27; Mit. I, 8,

10; May. IV, 4, 29; Viram. II, 1, 25; II,

2, 21 ; Viv. A'int. p. 273; Start. K . II, 2,
7; M&dh. p. 17; Varad. p. 20.

156. Col. Dig. V, 53.

157. Col. Dig. V, 66; Dayakr. VII, 22; Datt.

Afand. V, 32 ; Varad. p. 19.

158. Col. Dig. V, 188, 1 ; Datt. Mi. II, 56; Datt.

Afand. V, 11; Viv. Kint p. 279; Varad. p. 25.

159. Col. Dig. V, 188, 2; Mit. I, 11, 30; Datt.

Afand. V, n ; Viram. II, 2, 19; Viv. Afint.
p. 279 v Sar. Vi. 386 • MAdh. p. 22.

QUOTATIONS FROM MANU. 527

(IX), 160. Col. Dig. V, 188, 3; Mit. I, ii, 30; Datt.

K 'and. V, 11; Viram. II, 2, 19; Viv. ATint.
p. 279 ; Sar. Vi. 386; M&dh. p. 22 ; Varad.

p. 2 6.

162. DAy. X, 15; Viram. II, 2, 18.

163. Diy. X, 13; Mit. I, 11, 28; Viram. II, 2,18;

Viv. Afint. p. 286 ; Smn. AT. X, 2 ; Sar. Vi.
380, 383 ; M&dh. p. 21.

164. Ddy. X, 11 ; Mit. I, 11, 29; Viram. II, 2, 18;

Sar. Vi. 385 ; M&dh. p. 2 ; Varad. p. 25.

165. Datt. Mi. II, 57 ; Datt. ATand. V, 10.

166. Col. Dig. V, 194 ; Datt. Mi. I, 68 ; Viram. II,

2, 2.

167. Col. Dig. V, 231 ; Viram. II, 2, 4; Sm ri. K.

X, 4.

168. Col. Dig. V, 275 ; Mit. 1 ,11, 9 ; May. IV, 5, 1;

Datt. Mi. I, 7 ; II, 23 ; Datt. /Cand. I, 12;
Viram. II, 2, 8; Smn. AT. X, 4; Sar. Vi.
366 ; Varad. p. 23.

169. Col. Dig. V, 285 ; Viram. II, 2,10; Smrz. AT.

X, 4; Varad. p. 23.

170. Col. Dig. V, 250; Viram. II, 2, 5; Smn. AT.

X, 4; Varad. p. 23.

171. Col. Dig. V, 291; Smn. K. X, 4; Varad. p. 23.

172. Col. Dig. V, 263; Mit. I, 11, 7; Viram 11 , 2 ,

6 ; Smri. K. X, 4; Varad. p. 23.

173. Col. Dig. V, 288; Viram. II, 2, 12; Smn.

AT. X, 4; Varad. p. 23.

174. Col. Dig. V, 282; Mit. I, 11, 16; Datt. Mi.

II, 24; Viram. II, 2, 9 ; Smn. K. X, 4; Sar.
Vi. 372 ; Varad. p. 23.

175. Col. Dig. V, 269; Viram. II, 2, 7; Smn. AT.

X, 4; Varad. p. 25.

177. Col. Dig. V, 287; Viram. II, 2, 11; Smn. K.

X, 4; Varad. p. 23.

178. Col. Dig. V, 187 ; D ky. IX, 28 ; Viram. II, 2,

14; Smn. Af. X, 4; Varad. p. 25.

179. Col. Dig. V, 186 ; D^y. IX, 29 ; Datt. ATand.

V, 30; Viv. Afint. p. 274; Varad. p. 21.

APPENDIX.

528

(IX), 180. Col. Dig. V, 301; Datt. ML I, 33, 42, 5 6 5
Datt. ATand. I, 8 ; Viram. II, 3, 15 ; Varad.
P- 25.

181. Col. Dig. V, 371; Datt Mi. VI, 13.

183. Col. Dig. V, 3 76; D&y. XI, 5, 7; Mit. I, 11,
36; May. IV, 5, 19 ; Datt. Mi. II, 39, 65 :
Datt. ATand. I, 30 ; Viram. II, 3, 8 ; SmrA
AT. X, 8; Sar. Vi. 390 j Varad. p. 37.

183. Col. Dig. V, 506; D&y. IV, 3, 33; Datt. Mi.

II, 69; Datt. ATand. I, 33; Viram. II, 3 , 8;
V, 3, 14.

184. Col. Dig. V, 398 ; Datt. A'and. V, 8 ; Viram.

2, 2, 19.

183. Col. Dig. V, 333 ; Day. XI, 1, 40; XI, 5, 5;
Mit. I, 11, 33; II, I, 7, 9, 35; II, 4, 1 !
Datt. A'and. V, 8; Viram. Ill, 1, 6; III,
2, 3 i In » 4, 7 ! HI, 5, 1; Viv. ATint. p.
395; SmrA AT. X, 1 ; XI, 1, 1; XI, 3, 6 ;
XI, 4, 10; Sar. Vi. 485, 488, 491, 575;
Madh. pp. 33 , 37, 30; Varad. pp. 38-9.

186. Col. Dig. V, 370; Day. IV, 3, 36; XI, 1, 40;

XI, 6, 7, 10, 14, 17; Dayakr. I, 10, 5; II,
6 , 3 ; Viram. Ill, 1, 11.

187. Col. Dig. V, 434; D&y. XI, 6, 10, 14, 17, 31,

34 ; Mit. II, 3, 3 ; II, 4, 5; May. IV, 8, 19 ;
IV, 10, 38 ; D 4 yakr. I, 10, 15, 31, 38 ; II, 6,
3; III, 4, 3; III, 4, 11; III, 5, 3; III, 7,
5; Viv. ATint. p. 395; Sm«. AT. XI, 5,
9; Sar. Vi. 569; M&dh. p. 37; Varad.
P- 34 -

188. Col. Dig. V, 442 ; D 4 y. XI, 6, 36; Mit. II, 7,

4; Viram. Ill, 7, 8; Sn \ri. AT. XI, 6, '5;
Sar. Vi. 609; M&dh. p. 39.

189. Col. Dig. II, 3, 33, 1; V, 443 ; D ^y* XI, 6,

34; Mit. II, 4, 4; II, 7, 5-6; Viram. Ill,
7-8 ; Viv. ATint. p. 398; Smrt. AT. XI, 6, 6 5
Sar. Vi. 610, 613.

190. Col. Dig. II, 3, 33, 3; May. IV, 10, 8.

191. Col. Dig. V, 344; D&y. X, 16.

QUOTATIONS FROM- MANU.

529

(IX), 19*. Col. Dig. V, 485; D&y. IV, 3, 1; Mit. II, 11,
19 ; Viram. II, 1, 18 ; V, 3 , 1, 5; Viv. Afint.
pp. 326, 266 ; Sm«. Af. IX, 3, 6 ; Sar. Vi.
309; M4dh. p. 43 ; Varad. p. 43.

193. Col. Dig. V, 498; Mit. II, 11, 17; May. IV,

10, 16 ; Viram. V, a, 1; Sm ri. Af. IX, 3,10;
Sar. Vi. 385; Madh. p. 43 ; Varad. p. 43.

194. Col. Dig. V, 463; D 4 y. IV, 1, 4; Mit. II, 11,

4; May. IV, 10, 1; Viram. V, 1, 1 ; Viv.
Afint. p. 356 ; Smrt. AT. IX, 1, 1, 3; Sar.
Vi. 360 ; Madh. p. 44; Varad. p. 45.

195. May. IV, 10, 13; Viram. V, 3, 1 ; Smri. AT.

IX, 3, 1; Varad. p. 46.

196. Col. Dig. V, 503 ; DSy. IV, 3, 37 ; May. IV,

10, 39 ; Dayakr. II, 3, 14; II, 4,10; Viram.
V, 3, 9 ; Viv. Afint. p. 369 ; Smn. K. IX, 3,
38; Sar. Vi. 319; M 4 dh. p. 44; Varad. p. 46.

197. Col. Dig. V, 503; Day. IV, 3 , 37 ; May. IV,

10, 39 ; Dhyakr. II, 3, 19; Viram. V, a, 9 ;
Viv. Afint. p. 369; M 4 dh. p. 44; Varad.
P- 47 -

198. Col. Dig. V, 495 5 D 4 y. IV, 3 , 16; IV, 3, 3 ;

Mit. II, 11,23 ; May. IV, 10,19 ; Dayakr. II,
5, 3 ; Viram. V, 2, 5 ; Sm ri. Af. IX, 3, 40;
Sar. Vi. 307 ; Madh. p. 44; Varad. p. 45.

199. Col. Dig. V, 474; Viram. V, 1, 5; Smrt. K.

IX, T, 14.

200. Col. Dig. V, 473; Mit. I, 4, 19; II, 11, 34;

Viv. Afint. p. 260 ; Smn. Af. IX, 2, 375 Sar.
Vi. 201; M&dh. p. 50; Varad. p. 49.
aoi. Col. Dig. V, 329, 1 ; D ky. V, 7 ; Mit. II, 10,
5 ; May. IV, 11, 3 ; Dayakr. Ill, 1; Viram.
VIII, 1; Viv. Afint. p. 243 ; Smrr. Af. V, 4;
Sar. Vi. 148; Mddh. p. 39; Varad. p. 13.
303. Col. Dig. V, 329, 3 ; Mit. II, 10, 5; Viram.
VIII, 2; Viv. Afint. p. 243; Smr*. Af. V,
32 ; Sar. Vi. 159 ; Varad. p. 13.

203. Col. Dig. V, 339, 3; Viram. VIII, 9; Viv.
Afint. p. 243 ; Varad. p. 13.

M m

[* 5 ]

530

APPENDIX.

(IX), *04. Col. Dig. V, 341; DSy. VI, 1, 54; Mit. I, 4,
13 ; Varad. p. 30.

205. Col. Dig. V, 73; May. IV, 7, 14; Viv. Aint.
p. *54 5 Varad. p. 30.

306. Col. Dig. V, 345 ; Day. VI, 1, 9, 31,51; May.

IV, 7, 1; DAyakr. IV, 3 , 3 ; Viv. Amt. p.
349; Snm. A. VII, 36 ; Varad. p. 38.

307. Col. Dig. V, 107 ; D 4 y. Ill, 38; Viram. II, 1,

15 ; Viv. Amt. p. 337 ; Smri. A. II, 3 , 36 ;
Varad. p. 13 .

308. Col. Dig. V, 348; D&y. VI, 1, 3, 31; Mit. I,

4, 10; May. IV, 7, 4; Ddyakr. IV, 3 , 5;
Viram. VII, 1; Viv. Aint. p. 350; Smn.
A. VII, 37 ; Sar. Vi. 173; Varad. p. 39.

309. Col. Dig. V, 91; D 4 y. II, 3i ; VI, 3 , 33;

Mit. I, 5, 11 ; May. IV, 4, 5; Viram. II, 1,
17 ; Viv. Aint. p. 339 ; Sar. Vi. 333; Madh.
P- 13 -

310. Col. Dig. V, 35, 406, 1; Day. XII, 1 ; Mit. II,

9, 13; May. IV, 9, 3; Viram. IV, 1, 45
Smn. A. XII, 3; Madh. p. 34; Varad.
p. 53.

3 11. Col. Dig. V, 406, 3 ; Mit. II, 9, 13 ; May. IV,

9, 13; Viram. IV, 4; Smri. A. XI, 1, 51;
XII, 17 ; Sar. Vi. 767; Madh. pp. 35-6;
Varad. p. 53.

313 . Col. Dig. V, 406, 3 ; Day. XI, 6, 33: Mit. II,
9, 13; May. IV, 9, 13 ; Viram. IV, 4, 6 ;
Smri. A. XI, 1, 51; XII, 17; Sar. Vi.
767; Madh. pp. 35-6; Varad. p. 53.

31 3. Col. Dig. V, 53; Mit. I, 9, 5; May. IV, 7, 34;

Viram. II, 1, 7 ; VI, 3; Viv. Aint. p. 334;
Sar. Vi. 781; Madh. p. 53.

314. Col. Dig. V, 317; Day. V, 6; May. IV, u,

9; Viram. VIII, 11; Viv. Aint. p. 343;
Smri. A. V, 19; Varad. p. 13.

*15. Col. Dig. V, 39; Day. II, 86 ; Viram. II, i,
10; Viv. Aint. p. 335.

316. Col. Dig. V, 101; Day. I, 46; II, 3 ; VII, 1;

QUOTATIONS FROM MANU.

531

Mit. I, 6 , 4, 7 ; May. IV, 34; D 4 y. V, 14;
Vlram. II, 1, 24; Viv. ATint. p. 276, 305;
Smn. K. XIII, 15; Sar. Vi. 231, 234;
Mddh. p. 14.

(IX), 217. Col. Dig. V, 424 5 D 4 y. XI, 3, 2; Mit. II, 1,
7; II, 4, 4; II, 5, 1; May. IV, 8 , 18;
Dayakr. I, 10, 4; Vlram. Ill, 4, 7; III, 5,
1; III, 7, 1 ; Viv. Kint. p. 294; SmW. K.
XI, 4, 10; XI, 5, 6; Sar. Vi. 576,583,584,
7 65 5 Varad. pp. 36, 40.

218. Col. Dig. V, 375 ; Day. XIII, 1 ; D&yakr.

VIII, 2 ; Vlram. VI, 1; Sm«. K. XIV, 1;
Sar. Vi. 775 ; Mddh. p. 53.

219. Col. Dig. V, 343 ; D 4 y. VI, 2, 23; May. IV,

7, 15; Dayakr. IV, 2, 13 ; Vlram. VII, 2;
Smn'. K. VII, 39 ; Sar. Vi. 197; M&dh. p.
50; Varad. p. 30.

222-3. Viv. Kint. p. 317.

224. May. XXI, 2 ; Viv. Kint. p. 317.

229. Col. Dig. Ill, x, 34.

231—2. Viv. Kint. pp. 190-1.

237. Viv. Kint. p. 213.

254. Viv. Kint. p. 157.

262. Viv. Kint. p. 157.

272-4. Viv. Kint. p. 178.

275. May. XXII, (CCXLIII); Viv. Kint. p. 189.

276. Viv. Kint. p. 166.

277. Viv. icTint. p. 169.

278. Viv. Kint. p. 177.

282. May. XV, 9 ; Viv. -ATint. p. 125.

283. Viv. Kint. p. 126.

285-6. Viv. Kint. p. 188.

287. Viv. isfint. p. 159.

289. Viv. Kint. p. 189.

290. Viv. A'int. p. 187.

291. Viv. Kint. pp. 131, 157.

292. Viv. Kint. p. 163.

317. Col. Dig. II, 2, 22.

327. Col. Dig. II, 2, 24.

Mm2

532

APPENDIX.

X, 43 - Col. Dig. II, 3, 22, 3.

75 * CoJ. Dig. II, 3, 31.

? 5 . Col. Dig. I, ;, 3.

83. Col. Dig. II, 4, 32.

96. Col. Dig. II, 3, 32 ; Viv. A’iitt. p. 188.

97 . Col. Dig. I, 74.

115. Col. Dig. II, 4, 30 ; Mit. I, I, 1 6; Viv. ATint.

p. 76; Sar. Vi. 472; M&dh. p. 5.

116. Col. Dig. II, 4, 3i.

117. Col. Dig. I, 35; 11,4,23.

118. Col. Dig. II, 2, 23.

130. Col. Dig. II, 4, 26.

XI, 16. Viram. I, 4 6.

90. M. Mit. II, 8, 19.

111-5. Viram. I, 44.

1 77 - Col. Dig. IV, 83.

189. Viram. Ill, 1, 10; Sm«. K. XI, 1, 49.

228. Col. Dig. I, 206.

A.

SYNQPSIS

OF

PARALLEL PASSAGES.

By the advice of the editor I add a detailed synopsis of the parallel
passages from the six Dharma-sfitras and Smrftis, as well as of the
wholly or partly identical verses from the Mahabharata, Par&rara,
Mdnava .Srdddhakalpa, the Upanishads, and some other works.
I trust that, though references to the Smrrtis have already been
given in the notes to the translation, this addition will not be found
useless. The principle on which I have worked is a different
one, and this synopsis shows much more clearly which rules of
Manu’s work are represented in the older books and which are not.
It also shows at a glance which verses I have been able to trace
elsewhere, According to what has been said in the Introduction,
both points are of some importance. I have used this opportunity
to supply some omissions, and to correct the misprints occurring
in the figures of the quotations given in the notes. Wherever the
notes and the synopsis differ, the latter alone is to be relied on. The
addition of an asterisk (*) to a quotation means that the passage is
in verse, and that it is thus intimately connected with Manu's Sloka.
The passages quoted from the Mahabharata are all cognate verses.
Hence no asterisks have been added.

Abbreviations: Ga.=Gautamiya Dharmarastra; Ba.=Baudh&yaniya
Dharmardstra; Ap.=Apastambiya Dharma-sfitra; Va.= Vdsish/Aa
Dharmardstra; Vi.=Vish#u Smr/'ti; Yd.=Ya^tfavalkiya Dharma-
rdstra; Par.=Pararara Smrfti (Called.); Md^ £r.=Manava-*Srdddha-
kalpa (Introduction, pp. xl-xliii); A. Grf.=Ajvaldyana GWhya-sfltra
(Calc, ed.); *S , d.Gri.=*S'dhkhdyana Gnhya-stitra; Pa. Gn‘.=Paraskara
Gnhya-sfttra; Go. Gn*.=Gobhiliya Gnhya-sfttra (Calc, ed.); Mai*
Up. == Maitrdyamyabrdhma«opanishad; trd. Up.=Irdvdsyopanishad;
Sa. Up. = Sawhitopanishad; hfir, = Ninikta; Mah. = Mahdbhdrata;
V. P.=Vish#u-purd#a, Wilson's translation, edited by Dr. F. E. Hall.

534

LAWS OF MANU.

Manu I.

I.

39 .

2.

40 *

3 .

41 * 4 • t • 4 • •

4 .

42 . ••••••»

6.

43 * •••••••

6.

44 * •»•*.»■

7 .

45 * * * * *

8.

46.

9 .

47 .

IO. V.P. I, p. 56; Mah. XII,

48.

342 , 40 .

49 *

II. . ..

5 ®« • *•«...

12.<

fli. *»•••..

*3 .

52. •••••••

14 .

53 * ••••»..

i 5 .

54 * • *.

l6.

55 *

17 .

56. • 4 • 4 • . .

18. Mah. XII, 233, i2 b .

67 .

*9 .

58.

20. Mah. XII, 233, 8.

59 * ..

21. Mah. XII, 233, 26.

60. • •••..*

22.

6l. # • . 4 « . •

23.

62.

24. ......

63*.

25.

64. Mah. XII, 232, 12-13.

26.

65. Mah. XII, 232, 15.

27 .

66. Mah. XII, 232,16.

28. Mah. XII, 233, 16.

67. Mah. XII, 232,17.

29. Mah. XII, 233,17.

68. Mah. XII, 232, 18-19.

30.

69. Mah. XII, 232, 20.

3 i.

70. Mah. XII, 232, 21.

3 *.. •

71. Mah. XII, 232, 29.

33 .

72. Mah. XII, 232, 30.

34 .

73. Mah. XII, 232, 31.

33 .

74 * • • • •

36.

75. Mah. XII, 233, 4.

37 .

76. Mah. XII, 233, 5.

38 .

77 . Mab. XII, 2*3, 6.

SYNOPSIS OF PARALLEL PASSAGES.

535

78. Mah. XII, 233, 7.

98,

79 .

80 .

81. Mah. XII) 232, 23.

82. Mah. XII, 232, 24.

83. Mah. XII, 232, 25.

84. Mah. XII, 232, 26; III,
200, 16.

85. Mah. XII, 232, 27.

86. Mah. XII, 232, 28; Par. I,
23*.

87 .

88 .

89 .

90 .

9 1 .

92 .

93 .

94. Yd. 1,198-99.

95 .

96 .

97 .

99. Yd. 1 ,198.

100. • • • ■

101. . . 4 •

102 . • * • *

IO3.

I 04 * • • . •

IO^* • * 4 •

106. • . . •

I07» • • • •

108. Va. VI, i a *.

109. Va. VI, 2 *, 3-5

no.

in.

112 .

113 .

114 .

113* ....

116.

117. ....

118.

119. .44.

*.

Manu II.

1,

2 .
3 «
4 <
5 -

x 7 -

18,

r 9 ‘

20.

21.

6. Ba. I, 1, 1-6; Ga. I, 1-3;
Ap. I, 1,1-3; Va. I, 4-6.

7 .

8 .

9 -

22. Ba. I, 2,9-10; Va. I, 8-9.

23. Ba. I, 2, 12; Va. I, 13-15;
Yd. I, 2.

24. Ba. I, 2, 13-15; Ap. I, 32,
18; Vi. LXXXIV, 2,4.

10.

11.

12. Yd. I,

25.

26. Ga. VIII, 14; Yd. 1,10.

27. Yd. I, i3 a .

13. . . *a *

14. Ga. I, 4; Ap. I, 30, 9.

x 5 '

16,

29. Mah. Ill, 180, 34 a ; Vi.
XXVII, 4; Yd. I, 11; A. Gri .
I, * 5 > x -3; Si . Gri . I, 24,1-

53 $

LAWS OF MANU.

3; Pd. Gri. I, 16, 3-4; Go.
Gri. II, 7, 21.

30^ Vi. XXVII, 5; ya. I, 12;
A. Gri. I, 15, 4; Si. Gri. I,
34,4-5; Pa. Gri. 1,17,1; Go.
Gri. II, 8, 8.

3 1. Vi. XXVII, 6-9.

32. Pa. Gri. I, 17, 4.

33 .

34. Vi^XXVII, 10-11; Ya. I,
12; A. Gri. I, 16,1; Si. Gri.

I, 27,1; Pa. Gri. 1 ,17, 5; I,
19,1.

35. VL XXVII, 12; Yd. I, 12;
A. Gri. I, 17, 1; Sd. Gri. I,
28, 1-2; Pa. Gri. II, 1, 1-2 ;
Go. Gri. II, 9,1. ^

36. ^ Ga. 1 ,5,7, x 1; Ba. I, 3,7-9;
Ap. I, i, 18; Va. XI, 49-51;
Vi. XXVII, 15-17; Ya. 1,14;
A. Gri. I, 19, 1-4; Sa. Gri.

II, 1, 1, 4-5; Pd. Gri. II, 2,
1-3; Go. Gri. II, 10,1-3.

37. Ga. I, 6; Ap. I, 1, 19-20.

38. Vi. XXVII, 26*; Ga. 1 ,12-
14; Ba. I, 3, 12; A5. I, 1,
21; Va. XI, 71-73; A. Gri.
I> I 9> 5-6; Si. Grill, 1, 6-8;
Pi. Gri. II, 5, 36-38; Go.
Gri II, 10, 4.

39. Vi. XXVII, 27*; Ga. XXI,

11; Va. XI, 74; A. Gri 1,19,
6; Si. Gri. II, 1, 9-13; Pi.
Gri. II, 5, 39; Go. Gri. II,

10, 5.

40. Ap^I, 1, 28; 2,6; Va. XI,
76 ; A. Gri I, *9, 7; Pa. Gri.

11, 5, 40; Go. Gri. II, 10, 6.

41. A Ga. I, 16-21; Ba. I, 3, 14;
Ap. 1 > 2» 39 “ 3 » 9 5 v a- XI, 61-
67; Vi. XXVII, I9 -2o; Y 11 ,
*9; A. Gri. 1 ,19,8; Si. Gri. II,

1, 2, 4.-5; Pd. Gri. II, 5,16-
19; Go. Gri. II, 10, 8—9- A

42. Ga. 1,15; Ba. I, 3,13; Ap.

I, 2 . 33 - 37 J Va. XI, 58-6©;
Vi. XXVII, 18; Yd. 1 ,29; A.
Gri. 1 ,19,10-11; SI. Gri. II,
1,15-17; Pi.Gri.II, 5,21-33;
Go. Gri. II, 10, 10.

43* Pa* Gri. II, 5 , 24 .

44. Ba. I, 8, 5; Vi. XXVII, 19;
Yd. I, 29; Go. Gri. II, 10,
12.

45 v Ga. I, 22-24; Ba. I, 3, 15;
Ap. I, 2, 38; Va. XI, 52-54;
Vi. XXVII, 21,23; Ya.1,29;
A. Gri. I, 19, 12-13; S2.
Gri. II, 1, *8-20; Pi. Gri.
II, 5, 25-28; Go. Gri. II, 10,

II.

46. Ga. I, 26; Ba. I, 3, ®5 >
Va. XI, 55-57; Vi. XXVII,
22; A. Gri. I, 19, 13; Sa.
Gri. II, 1, 21-24.

47. Ga. I, 25; Vi. XXVII, 24.

48. ^ Ga. II, 8, 35; Ap. I, 3, 25;
A. Gri. I, 22, 5-6; Sa. Gri.
II, 6, 4; Pd. Gri. II, 5, 1;
Go. Gri'. II, 10, 41-42.

49 - A Ga. II, 36; Ba. I, 3,16-17;
Ap. I, 3, 28-30; Va. XI, 68-
70; Vi. XXVII, 25; Y 1 I,
30; A. Gri. I, 22, 8; Pd.
Gri. II, 5, 2-4.

50. A. Gri. I, 22, 7; Sa. Gri. II,
6, 5-6; Pd. Gri. II, 5, 5-7;
Go. Gri. II, 10, 43.

51. Ga. II, 39, 40; Ap. I, 3,
31-42; Vi. LXVIII, 46-41;
Yd. 1,31; A. Gri. 1,22,9; Sa.
Gri'. II, 6,7; Pd. Gri. II, 5,8;
Go. Gri. II, 10, 44.

52. Mah. XIII, 104, 57.

SYNOPSIS OF PARALLEL PASSAGES.

537

53* ^ 4 1 ! IX, 59 > II,

fi,ai; II, 12, 7 ; Vi,LXVIII,

34 - 35 -

54. Va, III, 69; Ba. II, 12, 7;
* Vi. LXVIII, 42-43; Yd. 1 ,31.

65 .

56. Ba. II, ia, 9; II, 13,11; Yd.
I, 112; Ap. II, 1, 3-3; Vi.
LXVIII, 48.

57 .

58. Ba. I, 8, 14; Va. Ill, 26;
Vi. LXII, 6; Yd. 1 ,18.

59. Ba. I, 8,15-16; Va.III, 26;
Vi. LXII, 1-4; Yd. 1 ,19.

60. Ba. I, 8,19-21; Ga. I, 36 ;
Ap, 1 ,16,2-1 o; Va. Ill, 27-29;
Vi. LXII,6-8; Yd. I, 20; Go.
Gri. I, 2, 5-9. a

61. Ba.I, 8,17; Ap. 1 ,15,4-7;
Va.III,31; Vi.LXII, 5; Yd.
I, 18,20; Go. Gri. I, 2, 5,
22-23.

6a. Ba. I, 8, 23*; Vi. LXII,
9*; Ga.1,36; Va. Ill, 31-
34; Yd.I,2i; Go.Gn.1,2,29.

63. Ba. I, 8, 5-10; Ap. I, 6,
18-19; Go. Gri. II, 2, 1-3.

64. Vi. XXVII, 29*; Ba. I, 6,

6—9.

65. Yd. I, 36; Ga. II, 9; A.
Gri. I, 18, 2; Pd. Gri. II, I,

3; Go. Gri. Ill, 1,1.

66 v Vi. XXVII, 135 Yd. I, 13;

A. Gri. 1 ,15,1a; 16,6; 17,18.
67. Vi. XXII, 33; XXVII, 14;
Yd. I, 13.

68 .

69^ Ga. II, 6, 8,10; Yd. 1 ,15 ;
A. Gri. I, 23, i-a,

70 .X * ’

71. Ba. I, 3, 35-28; Ap. I, 5,
19, 23; Vi. XXX, 32; Yd.

I, 26; SL Gri. II, 7,4-6; IV,
• 8 > * s -

72. Ga. I, 46 ; Ap. 1 ,15, 22.

73. Ga. I, 46; Si. Gri. IV, 8,
12,16-17.

74. Ga. I, 57; Ap. I, 13, 6-7;
Vi. XXX, 33; Si. Gri. IV,
8,12-13.

75. Ga. 1,48-go; Ba. II, 7,5-7.

76. Vi. LV, 10*.

77. Vi. LV, 11*.

78. Vi. LV,i2*; Ba. II, 11, 6.

79. Vi. LV, 13*; Ba. IV, 1, 29;
Va. XXVI, 4.

80. Vi. LV, 14*; Ba. 11 , 7 , r 5 -

81. Vi. LV, 15*.

82. Vi. LV, 16*; Ba. II, 7,

2 2 ,

83. Va. X, 5*; Vi. LY, If*.

84. Vi. LV, 18* ; Ba. IV, 1,26;
Va. XXV, 11.

8g. Vi. LV, 19*; Va. XXVI, 9*.

86. Vi. LV, 2 q* ; Va. XXVI,
10*.

87. Vi. LV, 21*; Va. XXVI,
11*.

88 . ...... .

89. ...... .

90 .

9 1 .

92. . ..

93 * •»•*•••

94 .

95 * •••••••

96 .

97 .

98 .

99 .

100.

101. Ga. II, ko-hk; Ba. II, 7,

13-M; Ap. I, 30, 8; Va.
VII, 16; Vi. XXVIII, 2-35

538

LAWS OF MANU.

YS. I, 23—25 ; SL G rt. II, 9,
*- 3 -

102. Ba. II, 7,18,20; Va. XXVI,
2-3.

103. Ba. II, 7,15.

104. Ba. II, if, 6.

105. Ap. 1 ,12, 9; Va. XIII, 7.

106. Ap. 1,12, 3-5.

107. Vi. XXX, 34-38; Yi.1,41-
46; A. G rt. Ill, 3, 2-3.

108. Ga. II, 8, 30, 35; Ba. I, 3,
16; 4, 4-8; Ap. I, 4, 16,
23; 5 . 25; Va.VII, 9, 15;
Vi. XXVIII, 4, 7, 9,12 ; YL
I, 26.

109. YL 1 , 28.

no. Ba. I, 4, 2; Ap. I, 32, 22-
24; Va. II, 12.
hi. Vi. XXIX, 7*.

112. Sa. Up. Ill* (p. 30, Bun);
Ba. I, 4, i»*j Vi. XXIX, 8*.

113. Ba. I, 4, i*>*.

114. Nir. II, 4*; Sa. Up. Ill*
(pp. 29-30, Bur.); Va. II, 8*;
Vi. XXIX, 9*.

115. Nir. II, 4*; Va. II, 9*; Vi.
XXIX, 10*.

116. Vi. XXX, 41-42.

117. Vi. XXX, 43*; Ga.VI, 1-3,
5; Ba. I, 3, 25-28; Ap. I, 5,
19-20; 14, 7-9; Va. XIII,
41-43; Vi. XXVIII, 14-17;
Go. G rt. Ill, 1, 27.

118.

119. Ga. II, 21, 25; Ap. 1,8,11.

120. Mah. XIII, 104, 648-65*.

121. Ap.I, 5,15; Ba. I, 3, 23 ;

122. Ga.VI,5; Ba. 1 ,3, 27; Ap.
I, 5, 12; Va. XIII, 44; Vi.
XXVIII, 17; Yl. I, 26; SL
Gri. IV, 12, 5.

123. Va. XIII, 45.

124. Vi. XXVIII, 17.

125. Ap. I, 5,18; Va. XIII, 46.

126.

127. Ga.V,41; Ap.I, 14,26-29.

128. Ga.VI, 19.

129. Vi. XXXII, 7.

130. Ga. VI, 9; Ba.1,3,45; Ap.
1 ,14, n; Va. XIII, 415 Vi.
XXXII, 4; Si. Gri. IV, 12,
*- 5 -

131. Ga. VI, 7; Ap. 1 ,14, 6-9;
Vi. XXXII, 2.

132. Ga. VI, 7-8; Vi. XXXII, 2.

133. Vi. XXXII, 3.

134. Ap.I,14,13*; Ga.VI,14-17.

135. Mah.XIII,8, 21; Ap.I, 14,
25*; Vi. XXXII, 17*.

136. Vi.XXXII,16*; Ga.VI,20;
Va.XIII, 56-57; Yl 1 ,116.

137. Ga.VI, 10; YL 1 ,116.

138. ^Ga. VI, 24; Ba. II, 6, 30;
Ap. II, 11, 7; Va. XIII, 58,60;
Vi. LXIII, 51 Yd. I, 117.

139. Ga.VI, 25; Ap.II, 11,5-6;
Va. XIII, 59; YL 1,117.

140. Ga. I, 9-10; Ap. I, 1, 13;
Va. Ill, 21; Vi. XXIX, 1;
YL I, 34.

141. Va. Ill, 22-23; Vi. XXIX,
2; Yi. I, 35.

142. YL I, 34.

143. Vi. XXIX, 3; YL I, 35.

144. Sa. Up. Ill* (p. 32, Bur.);
Nir. II, 4*; Va. II, 10*; Vi.
XXX, 47*5 Ap. 1 ,1,14. •

145. Va. XIII, 48*; Ga. VI, 51;
YL I, 35.

146. Vi. XXX, 44*; Ga. VI, 50;
Va. II, 3-5.

147. Vi. XXX, 45*; Ap. 1,1,17.

1 4 8. Vi. XXX, 46*; Ga. I, 8;

Ap. 1,1,16.

SYNOPSIS OF PARALLEL PASSAGES.

539

149. . . .

150. . . .

151. Ba. I, 3, 47.

15a. . . .

*53 .

154. Mah. Ill, 133,12.

155. Vi. XXXII, 18*.

156. Ga. VI, 21-23.

157. Mah. XII, 36, 46; Va. Ill,
11*; Ba. 1 ,1,10*; Par. VIII,

23*.

158. Mah. XII, 36,47; Par. VIII,
24*.

159. Ga. II, 42; Ap. I, 8, 25-30

160. ....

161. . . , .

162.

163 .

164 .

165. ....

166. Ap. 1 , 12,1-2; Yd. I, 40.

167. Ba. II, 11, 8.

168. Va. Ill, 2*; Vi.XXVIII,36.

169. Va.II, 3 *; Vi.XXVIII, 37;

Yd. I, 39.

170. Mah. Ill, 180, 34 b ; Va. II,
3*; Vi. XXVIII, 38.

171. Va. II, 6 a *; Ga. I, 10; Va.
II, 4-5; Ba. I, 3, 6 a ; Ap. II,
*5. *9-

172. Mah. Ill, 180, 35 a ; Va. II,
6 b *; Ba. I, 3, 6 b *; Ga. II,

4 - 5 -

*73 .

174. Vi. XXVII, 28*.

*75 .

176. Ga. 11 , 8 ; Va.VII.17; Vi.

XXVIII, 4-5; Yd. I, 22.
i77 u Ga. II, 13; Ba. 1 ,3,23-24 ;
Ap.1, 2, 23, 25-26; Yd. 1,33;
Pd. G ri. II, 5, 12 ; Go. G ri.
Ill, 1,17,19, 23.

178. Ga.II, 13; Ba.1,3,24; Ap.
I, 3 , **, * 7 - 24 ; 7 . 5 5 Va.
VII, 15; Vi. XXVIII, 11; Yd.

I, 33 i Go- G ri. Ill, 1,16,19,
25*26.

179. Ga. II, 13,16,17; Ba. I, 3,
20; Ap. I, 3,12-13; 7,3, 8-
10; Vi. XXVIII, 11; Yd. I,
33; Pd. G ri. II, 5, 12; Go.
G ri. Ill, 1,16.

180. Vi. XXVIII, 48.

181. Vi. XXVIII, 51*.

182. Ba.I,3,19; Ap.I,4,13-14;
A. G ri. I, 22, 5; SL G ri.

II, 6, 8; Pd. Gri. II, 5, 11;
Go. G ri. Ill, 1, 27.

*83. Ga. II, 35 J Ba. I, 3, *® J
Ap. I, 3, 25; Vi. XXVIII, 9;
Yd. I, 29.

184. Ga. II, 37-38.

185.. • •

186. Ba. I, 3, 19; Ap. I, 4,16;
Vi. XXVIII, 4; A. Gri. I, 22,
6; SLGri. 11 , 6 , 8 ; Pd.Gr/.II,
5, 9,11; Go. Gri. Ill, 1, 27.

187. Vi. XXVIII, 52*; Yd. Ill,
281.

188. Yd. I, 32.

189. Yd. I, 32.

190. Yd. I, 32.

191. Ga. II, 29-30; Ap. I, 5,
24-27; Va. VII, 13; Vi.
XXVIII, 6-7; Yd. I, 27; S&.
Gri. II, 6, 8; Pd. Gri. II, 5,
11; Go. Gri. Ill, 1, 15.

192. Ga. II, 22; Ap.1, 5,17.

193. Ap. I, 6,18-20.

194. Ga. II, 21; Ba. I, 3, 21;
Ap. 1 , 4,22,28; Vi. XXVIII,
I 3 -

195. Ga. II, 25; Ap. I, 6, 5; Vi.
XXVIII, 18.

549

LAWS OF MANU.

196. VLXXVIII, 19*; Ga.II,28;
Ba. I, 3, 38; Va. VII, 12; Ap.
1 ,6,6-9; Pd. Gri. II, 5,30.
•197. Vi. XXVIII, 20-22^

198. Ga. II, 14-15, 21; Ap. I, 2,
21; 3. *55 <*.13 ~ l 7l 8,8-10;
Vi. XXVIII, 23; Si. Gri. IV,
8, 5. t' 11 -

199. Ga. II, 18,23; Ap. I, 8,15;
Vi. XXVIII, 24-25.

200. Vi. XXVIII, 26.

201 .

202 .

203. Ap. I, 6, 15, 23.

204. Ba. I, 3, 34; Ap. I, 8, 12-
13; Vi. XXVIII, 27-28.

205. Va. XIII, 540*; Ga. VI,
3-4; Ap. I, 6 , 29-30; 8,19-
20; Vi, XXVIII, 29-30.

206. Ap. I, 7, 28-29.

207. Ga. II, 31; Ba. I, 3, 44;
Ap. I, 7 . 29-30; Va. XIII,
54; Vi. XXXII, i.

208. Vi. XXVIII, 31.

209. Ga. II, 32; Ba. 1,3, 36; Ap.
1,7,30; Vi. XXVIII, 32-33.

210. Ga. II, 31; Ba. I, 3, 37;
Ap.1,7,27; Vi. XXXII, 2, s.

211. Ga. II, 32; Ba. 1,3,37; Ap.
I, 7, 27; Vi. XXXII, 6.

212. Vi. XXXII, 13*; Ga. II,
34; Ba. I, 3, 33.

213. Mah. XIII, 48, 38.

214. Mah. XIII, 48, 37.

215.

216. Vi. XXXII, 14*.

2i7 v Vi. XXXII, 15 *; Ga.VI, 2 ;

Ap. 1,14, 8.

218.

219. Ga. I, 27; II, 10; Ap. I, 2,
31-32; 30. 8; Va. VII, *1;
Vi. XXVIII, 41.

220. Vi. XXVIII, 53*; Ga.
XXIII, 21; Ba. II, 7,16; Ap.

II, 12, I3-I4J Va. XX, 4.

221. Va. 1, 18; Ap. II, ia, 22.

222. Ga. II, 11; Ba. II, 7, 2; Vi.
XXVIII, 2.

223. Mah. XIII, 105,13; Ap.II,
29,11.

224..

225. Ga. XXI, 15; Ap. 1 ,14, 6;
Vi. XXXI, 1-3.

226 .

227 .

228. Vi. XXXI, 5.

229. Mah. XII, 108,5 b .

230. Mah. XII, 108, 6; Vi.
XXXI, 7 *•

231. Mah, XII, 108,7; Vi. X*XI,

8; Ap. I, 3,44-

232. Mah. XII, 108, 8 a .

233. Mah. XII, 108, 8b-9; Vi,
XXXI, 10 *.

234. Mah. XII, 108, 12; Yi.
XXXI, 9 *.

235. Vi. XXXI, 6.

236 .

237 ., . .

238. ^Mah. XII, 165, 31?, 32*;
Ap. II, 29, ix.

239. Mah. XII, 165, 3i b , 32a.

240.

241. Ga.VII, 1-3; Ba. 1 ,3,41—43;

Ap.II, 4,25.

242.

243* ^*2. HI, 5> 6; Ba. II, 11,13;
Ap.II, 21, 6; Va.VII, 4; Vi.
XXVIII, 43; YS.I, 49 .

244. Ga. Ill, 9; Yd. 1 ,50.

245* Ga. II, 48—49; Ap. I, 7,
19; Vi. XXVIII, 42; Yd. I,
51; A. Gri. Ill, 9,4; Go. Gri.

III, 4, It?.

SYNOPSIS OF PARALLEL PASSAGES.

541

246. 5 S. Gri. Ill, 1,18.

247. Ga. Ill, 7; Vi. XXVIII,
44-45; Yd. 1 ,49.

248. Ga. Ill, 8; Va. VII, 5-6;
Vi. XXVIII, 46; YS. I, 49.

249. Vi. XXVIII, 47*.

Manu III.

1. Ga. II, 45-47; Ba. 1 ,3,1-4;
Ap. I, 2,12-16; YS. 1,36; A.
Gri. I, 22, 3-4; PS. Gri. II,
5, 13-15; II, 6, 2-3.

2. Va. VIII, 1; YS. I, 52.

3. Si. Gri. Ill, 1, 5, 17; Go.
Gri. Ill, 4, 30-34.

4. Ga. IV, 1; Va. VIII, t; YS.
I, 52; A. Gri. I, 5, 3-6; III,
9, 4; .Sa. Gri. I, 5, 6-10; PS.
Gri. II, 6, 1, 4; Go. Gri. II,
1, 2.

5. Ga. IV, 2-5; Va. VIII, 1-2;
Ba. II, x, 37-38; Vi. XXIV,
9-10; YS. I, 53; Go. Gri.
Ill, 4, 4-5.

6. A. Gri. I, 5, 1.

7 - YS. I, 54.

8. Vi. XXIV, 12-16 ;YS. 1 ,53.

9 .

10.

11. YS. I, 53.

12.

13. Ba. 1 ,16, 2-5; Va. I, 24-25;
Vi. XXIV, 1-4; YS. I, 57;
PS. Gri. I, 4, 8-11.

14. Va. I, 26; YS. I, 56.

15. Vi. XXVI, 6*; Va. I, 27.

16. Ba. II, 2,7.

17. Va. 1 ,27.

18. Vi. XXVI, 7 *; Va. XIV, 11.

19 .

ao. Mah. I, 73, 8.

21. Mah. I, 73, 8-9; Ba. I, 20,
1; Va. I, 29; Vi. XXIV, 18.
22.

23. Mah. I, 73,10; Ga. IV, 15.

24. Mah. I, 73, io-iij Ga. IV,
14; Ba. I, 20,10; Ap. II, 12,
3; Vi. XXIV, 27-28.

25. Mah. I, 73,11-12.

26. Mah. I, 73, 13; Ba. I, 20,
12.

27. ^ Ga. IV, 6; Ba. I, 20, 2 ;
Ap. II, 11,17; Va. I, 30; Vi.
XXIV, 19; YS. I, 58; A. Gri.

1,6.

28. Ga. IV, 9; Ba. I, 20, 5;
Ap. II, 11,19; Va. I, 31; Vi.
XXIV, 20; YS. 1,59; A. Gri.

I, 6.

29. Ga. IV, 8; Ba. 1,20, 4; Ap.

II, 11, 18; Va. I, 32; Vi.
XXIV, 21; YS. I, 59; A. Gri.

1 , 6 .

30. Ga. IV, 7; Ba. I, 20, 3; Vi.
XXIV, 22; YS. 1 ,60; A. Gri.
I, 6.

31. Ga. IV, 11; Ba. I, 20, 6 1 ;
Ap. II, 12,1; Va. I, 35; Vi.
XXIV, 24; YS. I, 61; A. Gri.

1 , 6 .

32. Ga. IV, 10; Ba. I, 20, 7 1 ;
Ap. II, 11, 20; Va. 1,33; Vi.
XXIV, 23; YS. I, 61; A. Gri.
I, 6.

1 The order of the SQtrat followed here ii that adopted by Dr. Hnltzsch in hh
edition of the text.

542

LAWS OF MANU.

33. Ga. IV, 12; Ba.1,20,8; Ap.
11,12,2; Va. 1 ,34; Vi. XXIV,
25; Ya. I, 61; A. Gri. I, 6.
,34. Ga. IV, 13; Ba. I, 20, 9;
Vi. XXIV, 26; Yl I, 61;
A. Gri. 1,6.

35 .

3 6 .

37. Ga. IV, 33; Vi. XXIV, 29;

Yd. I, 58; A. Gri. I, 6.

38. Ga. IV, 29-32; Vi. XXIV,
30-32 ; Ya. 1,59-60; A. Gri.

I, 6.

39 .

40 .

4 1.

42. Ba. I, 21,1; Ap. II, 12, 4.

43. Vi. XXIV, 5 ; Ya. I, 62.

44. Vi. XXIV, 6-8; Y 11 , 62.

45. Ga.V, 1-2 ;Ba. IV, 1,18-19;
Ap. II, 1, 17-18; Va. XII,
21-24; Vi. LXIX, 1; Ya.I,
79-81; Ya. Gri IV, 11, 16;
Pa. Gri. 1 ,11, 7-8.

46. Ya. 1,79.

47- Ya. 1,79.

48. Ya. 1,79.

49.

50. Ya. 1,79.

51. Ba.I, 21, 2-3; II, 2, 27; Ap.

II, 13,11; Va. I, 37-38.

5 2 . A

53. Mah. XIII, 45, 20; Ap. II,
13,12; Ya. I, 36.

54. Mah. XIII, 46,1 b -2 a .

55. Mah. XIII, 46, 3; Ya.1,82.

56. Mah. XIII, 46, 5 b -6 a .

57. Mah. XIII, 46, 6 b .

58. Mah. XIII, 46, 7.

59 .

60 .

61. Mah. XIII, 46, 4.

62.

63. Ba. I, 10, 26*.

64. Ba. 1 ,10, 28»*.

65. Ba. 1 ,10,28b*.

66. Ba. 1 ,10, 29.

67. Ga. V, 7-8; Ba. II, 4, 22;
Vi. L1X, 1-2; Ya.1,97.

68. Par. II, 11*; Vi. LIX, 19.

69. Vi. LIX, 20.

70. Ga. V, 3-4,9; Ba. II, 5,11;
11,11, ij^vi. lix, 20-25; va.
1 ,102 ; A. Gri. Ill, 1,1-4.

7 *.

72. Vi. LIX, 26*.

73. Ya. Gri. I, 5,1; Pa. Gri. I,
4>i-

74. A. Gri. I, 1, 3; YS. Gri. I,
10, 6.

75. A. Gri. Ill, 2, 2.

76. Mah. XII, 264,11; Mai. Up.
VI, 3J; Va. XI, 13.

77 .

78. Va. VIII, 14-16; Vi. LIX,
27-28.

79.

80. Vi.LIX,2 9 *; Ya.Gr/.II,16,6.

81. Ya. 1,23, 104.

82. Mah. XIII, 97,8b-9»; Ml
Yr.IV*; Vi. LXVII, 23-25.

83-

84.

85.

86 .

' Ga. V, 10; Ba. II, 5, 11;
Ap. 11,3,12,16-17; Va.
XI, 3; Vi. LXVII, 1-3;
A. Gri. I, 2,1-2; Ya. Gri.
II, 14, 1-4; Pa. Gri. II,

V 9,1-™-

/ Ga. V, 11-17; Ap. II, 3,

87. 12,15,18-23; II, 4,1-8;

8 8 Va. XI, 4; Vi. LXVII, 4-
8 0 V 22 i A. Gri. I, 2, 3-10;
Ya. Gri. II, 14, 5-17; pa.
Gri. II, 9, 3-10; Go.
Gri. I, 4, 8-12.

90.

91.

SYNOPSIS OF PARALLEL PASSAGES.

543

92. Ap. II, 9, 5-6; Vi. LXVII,
26; Yd. I, 103; S&. Gri. II,
14,22.

93. Ap. II, 4,9 J Vi. LXVII, 28,
3 ^) 44 > 46. A

94. Ba. II, 5,1 g ; Ap. II, 4, 10-
11; Va.XI, 5; Vi. LIX, 14;
LXVII, 27 ; Ya. I, 108 ; S&.
Gri. II, 14, 20; Pd. Gri. II,
9,11-12.

95 .

96. Ga. V, 18; Yd. 1 ,108; «Sd.
Gri. II, 14,19.

97. Va. Ill, 8.

98.

99. Ga. V, 31-34; Va. VIII,
12; Ap. II, 4, 13, 16; II, 6,
7-14; Vi. LXVII, 45; Yd. I,
107.

ioo. 6a. Gri. II, 17, 1*; Vi.
LXVII, 33.

xoi. Ap. II, 4,14*; Ga. V, 35-
36; Yd. 1 ,107.

102. Va. VIII, 7*; Vi. LXVII,
34*; Ga. V, 40.

103. Va. VIII, 8 8 *; Vi. LXVII,
35*; Par. I, 43*; 6a. Gri.
II,i 6,3*; Ga.V, 40; Ap. II,
5 , g.

104. Yd. 1 ,112.

105. Va. VIII, 8»>*; Ga. V, 40;
Va. VIII, 4-5 5 Vi. LXVII,
29-30; Yd. 107.

106. Ga. V, 38-39; Ap. II, 8,
2-4; Yd. 1 ,104.

107. Yd. 1,107.

108. Ap. II, 6, 16-17; Va. XI,
12.

109.

no. Ga.V, 43.

in. Vi. LXVII,36*; Ga. V,44.

112. Vi. LXVII. a-?*: Ga. V.

45; Ba. II, 5,14; Ap. II, 4,
18-20.

113. Vi. LXVII, 38*; Yd. 1 ,108.

114. Vi. LXVII, 39*; Ga.V, 25 ;
Ba H,i3,5 8 -*>; Ap. 11,4,12;
Yd. I, 105; .Sa. Gri. II, 14,
21; Pd. Gri. II, 9,13.

115. Ba. II, i 3 ,S°- d *; Vi. LXVII,
40*; Ba. II, 5,18.

n6. Vi. LXVII, 41*; Ap.II, 8,
2 ; Yd. I, 105; Pd. Gri. II,
9, 14.

117. Vi. LXVII, 42*; Ba. II,
13, fi¬
ne. Vi. LXVII, 43*; Ba. II,
I 3 > 2 -

119. Ga.^V, 27-28; Ba.II, 6,36-
38; Ap. II, 8, 5-9 ;Va. XI,
1-2; Yd. 1,109-10; A. Gri. I.
24,1-4; 6d. Gri. II, 15,1-9 ;
Pa. Gri. I, 3, 1-3; Go. Gri.
IV, 10, 24-26.

120. Ga. V, 29-30; Ba. II, 6,
37; Yd. I, no; 6a. Gri'. II,
i 5 ,10.

121. Go. Gri. I, 4,19.

122. Ga. XV, 2; Yd. I, 217.

123. . . . . . .

124.

125. Ba.II, 15,10*; Va.XI, 27*;
Md. 6'r. IV*; Ga. XV, 21; Vi.
LXXIII, 3-4; Yd. I, 228;
A. Gri. IV, 7, 2; 6a. Gri.
IV, x, 2.

126. Ba.II,15,n*; Va.XI,28*;
Md. Si. IV*.

127.

128. Va. Ill, 8“*; A. Gri. IV,
7,2.

129. Ga. XV, 21; Va. XI, 29.

130. Vi. LXXXII, 2.

iai.

544

LAWS OF MANU.

132.

>33 .

134. Mah. XIII, 90, 50; Va. VI,
26; Vi. LXXXIII, 9-13; Yd.
I, 221.

135. Mah. XIII, 90, 51 8 .

136 .- •

137 .

138. Ga. XV, 12; Ba. II, 14, 6;
Af>. II, 17, 4; Va. XI, 17.

139. Ap. 11,17,9-

140. Mah. XIII, 90, 42.

141. Mah. XIII, 90, 46; Ap. II,
17,8*.

142. Mah. XIII, 90, 44.

M3. A - • •

144. Ba. II, 14, 4; Ap. II, 17,
5-6; Va. XI, 18.

145. Ml St. IV*; Ba. II, 14, 4.

M6.

M7- • .

148. Ml*. IV*; Ga. XV, 20;
Vi. LXXXIII, 17-18; Y! I,
220.

149. Vi. LXXXII, 1-2.

150. Ga. XV, 16; Va. XI, 19;
Y 11 , 223-224.

151. Ga.XV,i6,i8; Vi.LXXXII,
13 -

152. Ga. XV, 18; Vi. LXXXII,
8-9.

153. Ga. XV, 16, 18; Va. XI,
19; Vi. LXXXII, 26; Y 1 I,
222.

154. Ga.XV, 16,18; Va.XI, 19;
Y 11 , 223.

155. Ga. XV, 17-18; Y 1 I,
222.

156. Vi. LXXXII, 20-21; Y 1 I,
222, 223.

157- Vi. LXXXII, 23,29; Y 1 I,
224.

158. Mah. XIII, 90, 7; Ga. XV,
18; Y 11 , 223-224.

159. Mah. XIII, 90, 8; Ga. XV,
19; Vi. LXXXII, 5, 28; Y 1
I, 222, 223.

160. Ga. XV, 18; Vi. LXXXII,
18; Y 11 , 223.

161. Ga. XV, 18; Ap. II, 17 , 21 ;
Va. XI, 19; Vi. LXXXII, 19;
Y 11 , 222.

162. Ap. 11 , 17 , 21; Vi. LXXXII,

7 -

163.

164. Ga. XV, 18; Vi. LXXXII,
22; Y 11 , 223.

165. Yd. I, 223.

166. Ga. XV, 16; Y! I, 224.

167. .

168. . . .

169.

ixh_ia».

68*; Ba.II,
19*.

170. Mah. XIII, 90,

171. Par. IV, 20.

172. Mah. XII, 165,

1,39*; Par. IV,

173 - •

174. Par. IV, 17 *

175 -

176.

177.

178.

179.

180. Mah. XIII,

181. Mah. XIII,

182.

183.

184. Mah* XIII, 90, 36; Ga.
xv, 9, 28 ; Ap. 11, 17 ,
22; Vi. LXXXIII, 5; Yd. I,

i3 b -i4 a .

I4 b -i5»

219..

185. Mah. XIII, 90, 26^-27 8 ;
Ml*.IV*; Ga.XV, 28; Ba.
M> 2; Ap. II, 17, 22; Vi.

SYNOPSIS OF PARALLEL PASSAGES.

545

LXXXIII, 2-4,15,16; Yd. I,
219-221.

186. Md. -Sr. IV*; Yd. I, 219.

187. Ba. II, 14, 6; Ap. II, 17,
11-15; Va. XI, 17; Vi.
LXXIII, 2; Yd. I, 225.

188. Ga. XV, 23; Yd. I, 225.

189. Md. Sr. IV.

190.

191. Ga. XV, 22.

192 .

193 .

194 .

195 .

196 .

197 .

198 .

199 .

200 .

201 .

202. Md. Sr. II; Ap. II, 19,3-5;

Vi.LXXIX, 24; Ya. I, 236.

203 .

204 .

205. Vi. LXXIII, 27; Yd. I,
244.

206. Ga. XV, 25 ; Ap. II, 18, 6 ;
Yd. I, 227; Vi. LXXXV, 62.

207. Vi. LXXXV, 54-61.

208. Vi. LXXIII, 2 ; Yd, I, 226 ;
A. Gri. IV, 7, 2.

209. Ba. II, 14, 7; Vi. LXXIII,
12; Yd. I, 231; A. Gri. IV, 8,
1 ; Sa. Gri, IV, 1, 5.

210. Ba. II, 14, 7; Ap. II, 17,
17-19; Vi. LXXIII, 12; Yd.
I, 235 J A.. Gri. IV, 7, 5-7;
SL Gri. IV, 1, 2-3.

2ir. Ba. II, 14,7; A. Gri. IV, 8,
4 SL Gri. IV, i, 6.

2i2. A. Gri. IV, 8, 5-6.

213.

214. A. Gri. IV, 7,9.

215. Vi. LXXIII, 17-19; Yi I,
241; 5 a. Gri. IV, 1,10. .

216. Vi. LXXIII, 22.

217.

218. Vi. LXXIII, 23.

219.

220. Vi. LXXV, r.

221. Vi. LXXV, 4.

222.

224. Ap. II, 19,9; Va. XI, 26.

225. Ba. II, 15, 3*; Va. XI, 25*.

226 f^P- n > l6 > 2 3 - 24 J II, 19,

{ 19-22; Vi. LXXIII, 21,

227. I

' \ 23 - 24 .

228. Ap. 11,17,4.

229. Ap. II, 18, 3; Vi. LXXIX,
19-21; LXXXI, 2.

230.

231. Ba. II, 14, 5;* Vi. LXXIX,
5-15; Yd. I, 239.

232. Vi. LXXIII, 16; A. Gri. IV,
8, 10; Sa. Gri. IV, i, 8.

2 33.

234. Vi.LXXIX, 16; LXXXIII,
18.

235. Va. XI, 35*, 36; Yd. I,
235 -

236. Vi. LXXXI, 11,19.

237. Va. XI, 32*; Vi. LXXXI,
20*.

238. Mah. XIII, 90, 19; Vi.
LXXXI, 12-1 3 . a

239. Ga. XV, 24; Ap.II, 17, 20;
Vi. LXXXI, 6-9.

240 .

241 .

242. Vi. LXXXI, 15.

243. Vi. LXXXI, 18.

244. Vi. LXXXI, 21*; Yd. I,
240; A. Gri. IV, 8,14.

[25]

n n

546

LAWS OF MANU.

245. Vi. LXXXI, 22*; Va. XI,

23 *•

246. Vi. LXXXI, 23*; Va. XI,
2^* t

247. Vi. XXI, 2-3; Yd. II, 250;
Si. G ri. IV, 2,1-4.

248 .

249 .

250. Mah. XIII, 90, 1 2 b -i3 a ;
Va. XI, 37*.

251. Vi. LXXIII, 26; VI I, 240;
A. G ri. IV, 8,11; £&. G ri.
IV, 2, 5-7.

252. Yd. I, 243; A. G ri. IV, 8,
15 ;

253. A. G ri. IV, 8, xi; Si. G ri.
IV, 1,12 ; Yd. I, 240.

254. Va. Ill, 69-71; Si. G ri. IV,
2, 5 > IV, 4,14.

255

256

257 .

258. Vi. LXXIII, 27.

259. Vi. LXXIII, 28*; Yd. I,
245 *-

260. Yd. I, 256; Go. Gri. IV, 3,
3 I ~ 34 -

261. Ba. II, 14, 9; A. Gri. IV,
8,12-13; *SS. Gri. IV, 1, 9.

262. Go. Gri. IV, 3, 27.

263

264 .

265. Va. XI, 21-22; Yd. I, 256.

266.

267. Mah. XIII, 88, 3; Ga. XV,

15; Vi. LXXX, 1; Yd. I,
2 at.

268. Mah. XIII, 88, 5; Ga. XV,
15; Vi. LXXX, 2-5; Yd. I,
257 -

269. Mah. XIII, 88, 7; Ga. XV,
15; Vi. LXXX, 6-9; Yd. I,
257 - 258 .

270. Ga. XV, 15; Ap.II, 16, 27;
Vi. LXXX, 10; Yd. I, 258.

271. Mah. XIII, 88, 9*>; Ga. XV,
15; Ap. II, 16,26; Vi.LXXX,
11-12 ; Y 1 I, 257.

272. Ga.XV, 15; Ap. II, 17,1-3;
Vi. LXXX, 14; Y L I, 259.

273. Mah. XIII, 88, 15; Ap. II,
19, 22; Ya. I, 260.

274. Mah. XIII, 88,12 a ; Ma.£r.
II; Va. XI, 40 *; Vi. LXXVIII,

261-267.

278. Ap. II, 16, 5; Va. XI, 36;
Vi. LXXIII, 2.

279. Y! I, 232.

280. Ap. II, 17, 23; Vi. LXXVII,

8 .

284. Y&. I, 268.

283. Mah. Ill, 2, 60; XII, 244,
12®*-13k.

286.

52 - 53 -

276. Ga. XV, 3; Ap. II, 16, 6;
Va. XI, 16.

277. Ga. XV, 4; Ap. II, 16, 8-22 ;
Vi. LXXVIII, 8-49; Ya. I,

281 .

282 ..

283. M 15 r.II; Ba.II. 11,3; Ap.

1.13. i-

SYNOPSIS OF PARALLEL PASSAGES.

547

Manu IV.

1. Mah. XII, 244,1.

2. Mah. XII, 263, 6.

3 .

4 .

5. Yd. Gri. IV, 11,13.

6. Si. Gri. IV, 11, 15.

7. Yd.1,128.

8. Yd. 1 ,128.

9. Mah. XII, 244, 4.

10 .

11 .

12. Yd. 1 ,129.

13.

14. Va. XXVII, 8*; Si. Gri.
IV, 11,16.

15. Ya. I, 129.

16.

17. Ba. 1 ,10,30; Vi. LXXI, 4;
Yd. 1,129.

18. Vi. LXXI, 5-6; Yd. I, 123.

19. Vi. LXXI, 8; Yd. I, 99.

20.

21. Ga. V, 3.

22 .

23 .

24 .

25. Ba. II, 4, 23; Va. XI, 46;
Vi. LIX, 4; Yd. 1 ,124.

26. Ba. II, 4, 23 ; Va. XI, 46;
Vi. LIX, 5-7, 9; Yd. 1,125;
Si. Gri. Ill, 8,1.

27 .

28 .

29 .

30. Yd. I, 130.

31. Yd. Gri. I, 2.

32. Ga.V, 22; Ba. II, 5,19-20;
Ap. II, 4,13.

33. Ga. IX, 63-64; Va. XII, 2 ;
Vi. LXIII, 1; Yd. 1 ,130.

34. Ga. IX, 3; Ap. I, 30, 13;
Va. XII, 4; Vi. LXXI, 9.

35. Ga.IX, 4,6, 7,71-72; Ba.I,
5 . 7 i Ap- L 3®, 10—12; Yd. I,
131-

36. Ba. I, 5, 3 — 5 J I? 6,1; 11 ^ 6 ,
7; Va. XII, 14, 37-38; Ap.
I, 8, 2; Vi. LXXI, 13-16; Yd.

I, 133; Yd. Gri. IV, 11,21-22;
Go. Gri. Ill, 4, 25-27.

37. Mah. XIII, 104, i7 b -i8 a ;
Ba. II, 6, 10; Ap. I, 31, 20;
Va. XII, io ; Vi. LXXI, 17-
21; Ya. I, 135; Yd. Gri. IV,

II, 2; Pd. Gri II, 7,6.

38. Ga. IX, 52; Ba. II, 6, 15;
Ap. I, 31,15; Va. XII, 9; Vi.
LXXI, 23 ; LXIII, 42-43 J
A. Gri III, 9, 6 ; Pd. Gri II,
7, 8; Go. Gri III, 5,11.

39. Ga. IX, 66; Vi. LXIII, 26-
30; Yd. 1 ,133; Yd. Gri IV,
12,15.

40. Ga. IX, 29-30 ; Va. XII, 6;
Vi. LXIX, ir; Go. Gri III,
5 , 5 -

41 .

42 .

43. Vi. LXV 1 II, 46*; Ga. IX,
32; Va. XII, 31; Vi. LXXI,
25; Yd. 1,131; Yd. Gri IV,
11,10.

44. Ga. IX, 32, 48; Vi. LXXI,
26; Yd. 1 ,135.

45. Ga. IX, 40, 61; Va. VI,
12; XII, 11; Ba. II, 6, 24;

N n 2

548

LAWS OF MANU.

Ap. I, 30,18; Vi. LX, 11,16,
19; LXIV, 6; LXVIII, 14;
YS. I, 131, 134; A. G ri Ill,
9, 6; PS. G ri. II, 7 - 6.

46. Va.VI,12*; Ga.IX,40; Ap.
I, 30,18; Vi. LX, 4,10, 21;
YS.1,134; PS. Gri. II, 7,15.

47. Vi. LX, 8-9, ig ; YS. 1 , 134.

48. Ga. IX, 12; Ap. I, 30, 20 ;
Vi. LX, 22 ; YS. I, 134; SL
Gri IV, 12, 23.

49. Ga. IX, 37-38,41-43; Ba.I,
10,10; Ap.I, 30 ,14-15; Va.
XII, 13; Vi.LX, 1,3, 23; YS.
1 ,16; PS. Gri II, 7,15; .Sa.
Gr«. IV, 12, 20-22.

50. Va.VI, 10*; Ba. I, I0 , 10;
Ap. I, 31,1 ; Vi. LX, 2 ; YS. I,
16; SL Gri. IV, 12, 25.

51. Va.VI, 13*.

52. Va. VI, 11 *. ^

53. Ga. IX, 32; Ap. I, 1 g, 20;

I, 30, 22 ; Va. XII, 27; Vi.
LXXI, 26, 32-34, 37 ; YS. I,
I 35 > 13 7 ; A. Gri III, 9, 6 ;
SL Gri IV, 11,1.

54. Ga. IX, 73; Ap. I, 15, 21;

II, 12, 6; Vi. LXXI, 36; YS.
I. * 37 -

55. Vi. LXIII, 8; LXVIII, 12;
LXXI, 41, 55; see above, II,
IV, 220-221.

56. Ap. I, 30, 19 ; Vi. LXXI,
32 - 35 ; YS. 1 , 137 J *Sa. Gri
IV, 12, 26.

57. Ga. IX, 54-55; Va. XII, 42;
Vi.LXX, 13; LXXI, 56, 58;
YS. 1 ,138; *Sa. Gri IV, 11,6;
IV, 12,7.

58. Mah. XII, 193, 20; XIII,
163- 5 ° a ; II. 6.38* 5 Vi.
LXXI, 60; SL Gri IV, 7,48.

59. Ga. IX, 22-23; B a - U» 6,
11,17; Ap.1,31,10,18; Va.
XII, 32-33; Vi. LXXI, 62;
YS. 1 ,140.

( Ga. IX, 65; Ba. II, 6, 2r,
31; Ap. 1,15, 22; I, 32,
18; Vi. LXIII, 2; LXXI,
64-68.

62. Ga. IX, 58; Vi. LXVIII,
27; see above, II, 56-57; -Sa.
Gri IV, ri, 8.

63. Ga. IX, 9. 5 ®. 5 <>. Ba. II,
6,5; Vi.LXVIII, 2i; LXXI,

69.

64. Ga. IX, 51; Ap. II, 20,13;
Vi. LXXI, 70-71; PS. Gri
II, 7, 3-4-

65. Vi. LXVIII, 20; LXXI, 39.

66 . Ga. IX, 4; Vi. LXXI, 47 !

.Sa. Gri IV, 11, 9.

67. Vi. LXIII, 13-15, 17.

68 .

69. Vi. LXXI, 44,46; Yd. 1 ,139.

70. Ga. IX, 51; Ap. I, 32, 28;

Vi. LXXI, 42-43.

71. Mah. XIII, 104, 15“.

72. Ga. IX, 32; Ba. II, 6, 9;
Ap. I, 32, 5; Vi. LXIII, 16 ;
SL Gri. IV, 12,11.

73^Ga. IX, 32 ; Ba. II, 6,13 ;
Ap.I, 31, 23 ; YS.1,140; PS.
Gri. II, 7,6; Go. Gr/. Ill, 5,35.

74. Ga. IX, 32; Ba. II, 6, 6;
Va. XII, 36; Vi. LXVIII, 19,
23; LXXI, 45; YS. I, 138;
Go. Gri III, 5,12.

75. Ga. IX, 60; Vi. LXVIII,
29; LXX, 3; A. Gri III,
9, 6.

76. Mah. XIII, 104, 61 *>-62 !1 ;

Vi. LXVIII, 34; LXX, r.

77. Ga. IX, 32; Ba. II, 6, 26;

SYNOPSIS OF PARALLEL PASSAGES.

549

Va. XII, 45 1 Vi. LXIII, 46;
Yd. 1,135; A. Gri'. Ill, 9, 7 ;
6’d. Gri. IV, iz, 19; Pd. Gri.
II, 7, 6.

78. Ga. IX, ig; Ba. II, 6, 16;
Ap. II, 20, 11; Vi. LXIII,
24-25; Yd. 1 , 139.

80. Va. XVIII, 14*; Ap. I, 31,
24; Vi. LXXI, 48-52.

81. Va. XVIII, 15*.

82. Mah. XIII, 104, 69; Vi.
LXVIII, 38; LXXI, 53.

83. Vi. LXIV, 12.

84. Yd. 1 ,140.

8g. Yd. 1,141.

86 .

87.

88. Vi. XLIII, 2-7.

89. Vi. XLIII, 8-15.

90. Vi. XLIII, 16-22.

9 i.

92. Mah. XIII, 104, i6 a ; Va.
XII, 47; Vi. LX, 1; Si. Gri.
IV, 11, 19.

93. Vi. LXXI, 77.

94. Mah. XIII, 104,18 b.

95. Ga. XVI, 1-2; Ba. I, 12,
16; Ap. I, 9, 1, 3; Va. XIII,
i-g; Vi. XXX, 1; Yd. I,
142; A. Gri. Ill, 5, 2-3, 14;
id. Gri. IV, g, 1-2; Pd. Gri¬
ll, 10, 1-2; II, 11, 10-11;
Go. Gri. Ill, 3, l 13.

96. Ba. I, 12, 16; Ap. I, 9, 2;
Vi. XXX, 2; Yd. 1 ,143 J id.
Gri. IV, 6, 1; Pd. Gri. II,
12, 1; Go. Gri. Ill, 3,14.

97. Ga. XVI, 40; Vi. XXX, 4;
Si. Gri. IV, 6, 9.

98. Va. XIII, 6-7; Vi. XXX, 3.

99. Ga. XVI, 19; Ba. I, 21,15 ;

Ap. I, 9, 9-11; Va. XVIII,
12-13; Vi. XXX, 14, 27; Yd.
I, 148; id. Gri. IV, 7, 20.

100. .......

101. Va. XIII, 8.

102. Ga. XVI, 5-6.

103. Ga. XVI, 22; Ba. I, 21, 6;
Va. XIII, 36-37; Vi. XXX,
8, 9; Yd. I, 145, 149; Si.
Gri. IV, 7,4; Pd. Gri'. II, 11,
2; Go. Gri. Ill, 3,17,19.

104. Ga. XVI, 10, 23; Ap. 1 ,11,
8, 27-28, 31.

105. Ga. XVI, 15-16, 22; Ba. I,
21, 4; Ap. I, 11,30-31; Va.
XIII, 32-33, 35; Vi. XXX,
9; Yd. I, 145; Pd. Gri. II, 11,
2-3 ; Go. Gn'. Ill, 3,18-19.

106. Ba. I, 21, 7 ; Ap. I, 9, 20-
24; I, 11, 29; Va. XIII, 9 ,
Ya. 145.

107. Ga. XVI, 19, 45; Ba. I, 21,
4; 11 , 6, 33-34; Ap. I, 10,
22; I, 11, 31; Va. XIII, 17;
Yd. 1,150; -SI Gn'. IV, 7, 27.

108. Ga. XVI, 7, 19; Ba. I, 21,
5; Ap. I, 9, 14; I, 10, 17;
Va. XIII, 11; Vi. XXX, 10;
Yd. I, 148; Si. Gri. IV, 7,
24, 37; Pd. Gri. II, 11, 4, 6;
Go. Gri. Ill, 3, 28.

109. Ga. XVI, 11,12,18,34, 46;
Ba. I, 21, 8, 21; Ap. I, 10,
25-26; I, 11, 17, 25-26; I,
32, 12; Vi. XXX, 16; Yd. I,
149; id. Gri'. IV, 7, 5, 36;
Pd. Gri. II, 11, 2, 4.

no. Ga.XVI, 22; Ap. 1 ,11,30;
Va. XIII, 34; Vi. XXX, 5;
Yd. 1 ,146; Go. Gri. Ill, 3,25.
hi. Ap. 1,10, 26; 1,11,25; Yd.
1,146.

550

LAWS OF MANU.

112. Ga. XVI, 17, 34; Va. XIII,
14, 23; Vi. XXX. 17; SL
G ru IV, 7, 45.

113.. Ga. XVI, 7, 12, 35; Ba. I,

21, 4, 5,17,22; Ap.I, 9, 28;
If Ilf i 5 > 2 5 > 3 1 * Va.XIII, 10,
21-22 ; Vi. XXX, 4; YS. I,
146, 148, 150; *SS. Grr. IV,
7, 7-8, 17, 31; PI Gri. II,
11, 1, 4, 6; Go. Gri. Ill, 3,
20-21.

114. Ba. I, 21, 22 *.

115. Ga. XVI, 8; Ba. I, 21, 16;
Ap. 1,10,17; I, 11, 33 ; Va.
XIII, 35; Vi. XXX, 9, 12;
YS. I, 148, 150; Pa. Gri. II,
11, 6.

116. Ga. I, 61; XVI, 18; Ba. I,
21,8; Ap.I, 9,6; I, 11, 9;
Va.XIII, 13,26-27; Vi.XXX,
15; YS.I, 146,148; £a.Gr/.
IV, 7,12, 22, 50; Pa. Gr/. II,
11, 6.

117. Ga. XVI, 48; Va. XIII, 16*;
*Sa. Gri. IV, 7, 55 *; Ba. I, 21,
10-11.

118. Ga. XVI, 34; Ba. I, 21,20;
*S$. Gri. IV, 7, 2-3 ; Pa. Gri.
11,11,2,5.

119. Si. Gri. IV, 5,17*; Ap. I,
10,1-2; Ga. XVI, 36,38; Vi.
XXX, 5, 24-25; YS. I, 144)
146; PS. Gri. II, 10, 23;
II, 11, 2; Go. Gri ; III, 3,

22 .

120. Ga. XVI, 17; Ap.I, 9, 27; I,
11,16; Va. XIII, 17-19; Vi.
XXX, 18-21; YS. 1,151 ;£S.
Gri. IV, 7, 23, 32, 34.

121. Ga. XVI, 20,34; Ap. 1 ,10,
20; Va.XIII, 20, 28, 31; Vi,
XXX, 11,19-21; Yi. 1,149;

Si. Gri. IV, 7, 40, 48; Pa.
Gri. II, 11, 4.

122. Ap. I, 11, 8; Vi. XXX, 7;
Yi. 1 ,149; Si. Gri. IV, 7, 28,
38; PS. Gri. II, 11, 1; Go.
Gri. Ill, 3, 28.

123. Ga. XVI, 21; Ba. I, 21, 5 ;
Ap. 1, 10, 17-18; Va. XIII,
30; Vi. XXX, 26; YS. 1 ,145,
148; *SS. Gri. IV, 7, 21; PS.
Gri. II, 11, 6.

124 .

125 .

126. Ga. I, 59; Vi. XXX, 22;
Ya. 1, 147; aSS. Gri. IV, 7, 33.

127. Ya. 1,149; A. Gri. Ill, 4, 7;
aSS. Gri. IV, 7, 6, 9-11, 13-
14 ; Pa. Gri. II, 11, 7-9 ; Go.
Gri. Ill, 3, 24-27.

128. Mah. XIII, 104, 29; Ba. I,
21, 18; Ap. I, 31, 21; Va.
XII, 21; Vi. LXIX, 1; YS. I,
79 -

129. Ba. II, 6, 25 ; Ap. I, 32, 8 ;
Vi. LXIV, 3-4, 6; A. Gri.
Ill, 9, 6.

130. Vi. LXIII, 40; YS. 1 ,152.

131. Mah. XIII, 104, 27 b -28 a ;«
Vi. LXIII, 19.

132. Vi. LXIII, 41; YS. 1,152.

T 33 .

134. Mah. XIII, 104, 21.

135. YS. 1 ,153.

13 6 .

137. Vi. LXXI, 76; YS. 1 , 153 -

138. Ga. IX, 68; Vi. LXXI, 73-
74; YS. 1,132.

139. Ga. IX, 20, 32; Ap. I, 31,
13-14; Vi. LXXI, 57; YS. I,
132 ; Go. Gri. Ill, 5, 19-20.

140. Mah. XIII, 104, 24 b -25 a ;
Ba, II, 6, 21-23; Va. XII,

SYNOPSIS OF PARALLEL PASSAGES.

55 r

43; VLLXIII, 4> 6-7, 9; Si.

17 1 .

Gri. IV, 12,12; Go. Gri. Ill,

172.

5.32-34-

173.

141. Mah. XIII, 104, 35; Vi.

174. Mah. Ill, 94, 4.

LXXI, 2.

175. Ga. IX, 50, 68-70.

142. Ap. 1,15,18; Yd. I, 155.

176. Ga. IX, 47, 73; Vi. LXXI,

143. Ap. 1 ,16,14.

84-85 ; Yd. 1, 156.

144. Vi. LXXI, 79.

177. Va. VI, 42 *.

i 45 .

178.

146. Va. XXVI, 14*.

179. Mah. XII, 244, I4 b -i5 ft ;

M 7 .

Yd. 1 ,157.

148.

180. Mah. XII, 244, I5 b -i6 a ;

149 .

Yd. 1 ,158.

150. Vi. LXXI, 86; LXXVI, 1;

181. Mah. XII, 244, i6 b -i7 a .

Yd. I, 217.

182. Mah. XII, 244, i7 b -i8 a .

igi. Mah. XIII, 104, 82; Ga.IX,

183. Mah. XII, 244, i8 b -i9 a .

39 5 Ap- 3 r > 2 i Yd. 1 ,154.

184. Mah. XII, 244, i9 b -20 a .

152. Mah. XIII, 104, 23.

185. Mah. XII, 244, 20 b —21 a .

153. Ap. I, 31, 21-22.

186. Vi. LVII, 6-7.

154. Mah. XIII, 104, 65 b -66 a ;

187. Vi. LVII, 8.

Ba.II, 6, 35; Ap.II, 1,1-11.

188. Va. VI, 32*; Ya. I, 201-

i5S- Vi. LXXI, 90*; Ya. 1 ,154.

202.

156. Mah. XIII, 104, 6; Vi.

189.

LXXI, 91*; Va.VI, 7*.

190.

157. Va. VI, 6 *.

191. Yd. I, 202.

158. Mah. XIII, 104,13; Va. VI,

192. Vi. XCIII, 7 *.

8*; Vi. LXXI, 92*.

193 .*

159 .

i 94 .

l60.

195. Vi. XCIII, 8 *.

l6l.

196. Vi. XCIII, 9 *.

162. Ap. I, x, 14; Ga. XXI, ig.

197. Vi. XCIII, 10*.

163. Mah. XIII, 104, 36 ; Ap. I,

198. Vi. XCIII, 11 *.

31, 25; Va. XII, 41; Vi.

199. Vi. XCIII, 12 *.

LXXI, 83.

200. Vi. XCIII, 13 *.

164. Mah. XIII, 104, 37; Vi.

201. Ba. II, 5, 6; Vi. LXIV, i;

LXXI, 80—82.

Yd. 1 ,159.

165. Ga. XXI, 20.

202. Ba. II, 6, 29; Yd. 1 ,160.

166. Ga. XXI, 2i.

203. Vi. LXIV, 16; Yd. 1,159.

l6 J -1 Ga. XXI, 22.

168. /

204. Yd. Ill, 313-314.

205. Ga. XVII, 18; Ap. 1 ,18,27.

I69.

206. .......

1*70 .

207. Ga. XVII, g-10; Ap. 1 ,16,

552

LAWS OF MANU.

23-27; 1 ,19, x; Va. XIV, 3,
22-23 J Vi. LI, 19; Yd. 1 ,162,
167,168.

208. Ga.XVII, io-ii ; Ap. 1,16,
29; Vi. LI, 17-18; Yd. I,
167, 168.

209. Ga. XVII, 12,17; Ap. 1 ,18,
16-17; Va. XIV, 9-10; Vi.
LI, 7, 9,17; Yd. 1 ,161,168.

210. Mah. XII, 36, 29 a ; Ga.
XVII, 17-18; Ap. I, 18, 18,
22-26; I, 19, 1; Va. XIV,
2-3; Vi. LI, 7-9; Yd. I,
161.

211. Ga. XVII, 14,16, 17 ; Ap.I,
if, 17-20; I, 18, 13; I,, 19,
15 ; Va. XIV, 2, 4, 20, 28-29;
Vi. LI, 9,10 ; Yd. I, 161-162,
167; SL Gri. IV, 11,11; Go.
Gri. Ill, 5, 9.

212. Ap. I, 19, i5 a *; Va. XIV,
i 9 a *; Ga. XVII, 17, 19; Ap.
I, 16,19; I, 17, 3; I, 18, 21;
Va. XIV, 2 ; Vi. LI, 10; Yd.
1,162.

213. Ga. XVII, 17-19, 20; Ap.
I, 17, 4; II, 6, 19-20; Va.
XIV, 2; Vi. LI, 11, 18, 20;
Yd. I, 162-164, 167.

214. Ga. XVII, 18; Ap. I, 18,
30; Va. XIV, 3 ; Vi. LI, 12;
Yd. 1,161,164,165.

215. Ap. 1 ,18, 19; Va. XIV, 5;
Vi. LI, 14; Yd. 1 ,161,163.

216. Ga. XVII, 18; Va. XIV, 3,
11; Vi. LI, 15-16; Yd. 1 ,163,
164.

217. Mah. XII, 36, 28k; Ga.
XVII, 18; Ap. I, 16, 18; Va.
XIV, 6,11; Yd. 1 ,163.

218. Mah. XII, 36, 27; Va. XIV,
2; Vi. LI, 8.

219. 4 .

220. Mah. XII, 36, 28 a .

221.

222. Ga. XXIII, 23-24.

223. Ap. 1 ,18, 3-8,14.

224. Mah. XII, 265, n b -i2 a ;
Ba. 1,10,5*; Va. XIV, 17.

225. Mah. XII, 265, i2 b -i3 a ;
Ba. 1,10,5*; Va. XIV, 17.

226.

227. Vi. XCII, 32; Yd. I, 201.

228. Yd. I, 203.

229. Va. XXIX, 8; Vi. XCI, 3,
15, 16; XCII, 21, 23; Yd.
I, 210.

230. Vi. XCII, 13, 14; Yd. I,
210.

231. Vi. XCII, 5, II, 12; Yd. I,
204-206, 210.

232. Va. XXIX, 12 ; Vi. XCII,
22, 27 ; Ya. I, 211.

233. Va. XXIX, 19; Yd. 1 ,212.

234 .

235 .

236 .

23 1 .

238 .

239 .

240. Mah. XIII, hi, 11 b —12 a .

241. Mah. XIII, in, io b , I3 b ,
14.

242. Mah. XIII, hi, 15a.

243 .

244 .

245 .

246 .

247. Ga. XVII, 3; Ap. 1 ,18, 1;
Va. XIV, 12 ; Vi. LVII,io;
Yd. 1,214.

248. Va. XIV, 16*; Ap. I, 19,

14*; Vi. LVII, 11*; Yd. I*
215. %

SYNOPSIS OF PARALLEL PASSAGES.

553

249. Va. XIV, 18*5 Ap. I, 19,
14*; Vi. LVII, 12*.

250. ^ Ga. XVII, 3; Ba. I, 9, 8 ;
Ap. I, 18,1; Va. XIV, 12 ;
Vi. LVII, 10; Yd. I, 214.

251* Va. XIV, 13*; Vi. LVII,
i 3 * 5 Ga. XVII, 4; Ap. I, 7,
20; Yd. I, 216.

252. Vi. LVII, 15*.

253. Vi. LVII, 16*; Ga. XVII,

5-6; Ap. I, 17, 14; Yd. I,
166.

254 .

255 .

256 .

257 .

258 .

259 .

260. Ga. IX, 74; Ba. II, 3, 1;

Va. VIII, 17.

Manu V.

3 .

4 .. . .

5. Ga. XVII, 32; Ap. I, 17,
26, 28 ; Va. XIV, 33 ; Vi. LI,
3. 34, 36; Yd. 1 ,171.

6. Ga. XVII, 32, 33 ; Va. XIV,
33; Vi. LI, 36; Yd. 1,171.

7. Ga. XVII, 31; Vi. LI, 37;
Yd. 1, 171,173.

8. Ga. XVII, 22-26; Ba. I,
12, 9-11 ; Ap. I, 17, 22-24;

Va. XIV, 34-35; Vi. LI, 38-

40; Yd. I, 170.

9. Ga. XVII, 14; Ba. 1 ,12,15;
Ap. I, 17,18 ; Va. XIV, 37-
38; Vi. LI, 38, 42; Yd. I,
167,170.

10. Ga. XVII, 14; Ba. 1, 12,14;
Ap.1, 17,19; Vi. LI, 42 ; Yd
1, 169.

ix. Ga. XVII, 28-29; Ba. I,
12, 1-2 ; Ap. I, 17, 29, 34;
Va. XIV, 48 ; Vi. LI, 28, 29,
30; Yd. 1, 172.

12. Ga. XVII, 28-29; Ba. 1 ,12,
3; Ap. 1, 17, 32-33, 35; Va.

XIV, 48; Vi. LI, 3, 29J Yd.
I, 172, 173, 174.

13. Ga. XVII, 35; Va. XIV, 48;
Vi.LI, 27; Ya.1,172,174,175.

14. Ga. XVII, 29,34; Ba. 1 ,12,
3, 8 ; Va. XIV, 48; Vi. LI,
21, 29; Yd. I, 173, 174,175.

15 .

16. Ga. XVII, 36-37; Ba. 1 ,12,
8; Vi. LI, 21; Ya. 1 ,177-178.

17. Ga. XVII, 27; Ba. 1 ,12, 5 ;
Ap. I, 17, 37 5 Va. XIV, 39,
44; Vi. LI, 6, 27; Yd. 1 ,174.

18. Ga. XVII, 27; Ba. 1 ,12,4-
5; Ap. 1 , 17 , 37 ; Va. XIV,
39, 40, 47 J Vi. LI, 6, 26;
Yd. I,! 7 7.

19. Ga. XXIII, 5; Vi. LI, 3-4;
Yd. I, 176.

20. Yd. 1 ,176.

23.

24. Vi. LI, 35; Yd. 1 ,169.

25. Vi. LI, 35; Yd. 1 ,169.

26. Yd. 1 ,178.

27. Yd. 1 ,179.

28. Mah. XII, 10,6.

21.

22. Va. XIV, 15.

554

LAWS OF MANU.

29. Mah. XII, 99,15.

3 °.

3 i.

32. , . . . . . .

33.

34. Vi. LI, 62*.

35. Va. XI, 34 *.

36. Vi. LI, 59 *.

37 .

38. Vi. LI, 60*; Yd. 1 ,180.

39. Vi. LI, 61*.

40. Vi. LI, 63*.

41. Va. IV, 6*; Vi. LI, 64*;
Si. Gri. II, 16,1*.

42. Vi. LI, 65*.

43. Vi. LI, 66*.

44. Vi. LI, 67*.

45. Vi. LI, 68*.

46. Vi. LI, 69 *.

47. Vi. LI, 70*; Yd. 1 ,181.

48. Vi. LI, 71* ; Va. IV, 7*.

49. Vi. LI, 72*.

50. Vi. LI, 73*.

51. Vi. LI, 74*.

52. Mah. XIII, 115, 14", 3 6»;
1x6,11 n ; Vi. LI, 75*.

53. Mah. XIII, 115,10,16; Vi.
LI, 76*; Y! I,i8i.

54. Vi. LI, 77*.

55. Vi. LI, 78*.

56 .

57 - • • • A . • • •

58. Par.III,2i*;Ap. 11,15,4-5;
Vi. XXII, 26-27; Yd. Ill,
18,23.

59. Ga. XIV, 1; Ba. I, 11, 1;
Va. IV, 16; Vi. XXII, 1; Yd.
Ill, 18; L Gri. IV, 4, 18;
Si. Gri. IV, 7, 6.

60. Ga. XIV, 13; Ba. I, u, 2 ;
Ap. II, 15, 2-3; Va. IV, 17-
18; Vi. XXII, 5.

61. Va. XIV, 20*; Ga. XIV,
14; Ba. 1 ,11, 1.

62. Par. Ill, 31*; Ga.XIV, 15-
16; Ba. I, 11, 19-23; Va.
IV, 21-22; Yd. Ill, 19.

63 .

64. Ga. XIV, 23, 25, 27.

65. Vi. XXII, 85*; A. Gri. IV,

4 , 19 -

66. Ga. XIV, 17; Ba. 1 ,11,31;
Vi. XXII, 72; Yd. Ill, 20.

67. Vi. XXII, 29-30; Yd. Ill,
2 3 '

68. Ba. 1,11,4; Yd. Ill, 1.

69. Ba. 1 ,11,4; Ap. II, 15,6-7;
Va. IV, 34; Vi. XXII, 28;
Yd. Ill, 1; A. Gri. IV, 4, 24;
Pd. Gri. Ill, 10, 4-7.

7 °.;

71. Ga. XIV, 20; Ba. 1 ,11,30’;
A. Gri. IV, 4, 26; Si. Gri.
IV, 7, 13; Pa. Gri. II, 11, 8;
Go. Gri. Ill, 3, 24.

72. Ba. I, 11,8*; A. Gri.IV, 4,
23 -

73. Ga.XIV, 37-39; Ba. 1 ,11,
24; Ap. II, 15, 9-10; Yd.
Ill, 16; A. Gri. IV, 4,16.

74.

75. Vi. XXII, 39 ; Yd. Ill, 21;
Pd. Gri. Ill, 10,44.

76. Ga. XIV, 44; Va. IV, 36;
Vi. XXII, 40-41; Yd. Ill, 21;,
Pd. Gri. Ill, 10, 45.

77. Yd. III,2i.

78. Ga. XIV, 19,44.

79. Ga. XIV, 6; Ba. I, 11, 17-
18; Va. IV, 24; Vi. XXII,
35; Yd. Ill, 20.

80. Ga. XIV, 28; Ba. 1 ,11,28 •
Vi. XXII, 42-44; Yd. ip,
24; A. Gri. IV, 4, 21; Si.

SYNOPSIS OF PARALLEL PASSAGES.

555

Gri. IV, 7, 9-10; PS. G ri.
II, 11, 7; Go. Gri. Ill, 3,
26.

81. Ga. XIV, 20, 22; Ba. 1 ,11,
29-30; Vi. XXII, 44; Yd. Ill,
24.

82. Vi. XXII, 45-46; Y 1 Ill,
24-25; Go. Gri. Ill, 3, 25.

83. Ga. XIV, 2-5; Va. IV, 27-
30; Vi. XXII, 1-4; Yd. III,
22.

84.

85. Ga. XIV, 30; Ba. I, 9, 5;
I, 11, 36; Va. IV, 38; Vi.
XXII, 69; Yd. Ill, 30.

86. Ba. 1 ,15, 31.

87 .

88. Vi. XXII, 87 *; Ya. Ill,
5 -

-89. Vi. XXII, 56; Yd. III, 6.

90. Ya. Ill, 6.

91. Vi. XXII, 86*; Ya. Ill,
15 - '

92 .

93. Va. XIX, 48*; Ga. XIV, 1,
45-46; Ba. I, 11, 1; Vi.
XXII, 48-50; Ya. Ill, 27,
28.

94. Va. XIX, 47 *.

95. Ga. XIV, 9-11; Vi. XXII,
47, 52; Ya. Ill, 21,27.

96 .

97 .

98. Yd. Ill, 29.

99 .

100.

101. Ba. 1 ,11, 33.

102. Vi. XXII, 8; Yd. Ill, 15.

103. Par. Ill, 48*; Ga. XIV,
31; Vi. XXII, 64; Yd. Ill,
26.

104.

105. Vi. XXII, 88*; Ba. I, 8,
52; Yd. 1 ,194; III, 31.

106. Vi. XXII, 89 *.

107. Vi. XXII, 90*; Yd. Ill, 32,
33.

108. Va. Ill, 58 *; Vi. XXII,
91*; Par. VII, 4*; Yd. Ill,
3 2 -

109. Ba. I, 8, 2 *; III, 1, 27 *;
Va. Ill, 60 *; Vi. XXII, 92*-
Yd. Ill, 33-34.

no. Vi. XXII, 93*.
in. Ga. I, 29-30; Ba. I, 8, 32,
46-47; I, 14, 4; Ap. I, 17,
ri; Va. Ill, 49, 50. %

112. Ba. I, 8, 33,46-47; Va.III,
61-62; Vi. XXIII, 7; Yd. I,
182.

”3- -.

114. Ba. I, 8, 33; Va. Ill, 58,
63; Vi. XXIII, 25, 26; Yd.
1,190.

115. Ga. I, 29; Ba. I, 8, 35; I,

13, 27; I, i4, 16-17; Ap. I,

17, 12; Va. Ill, 49; Vi.
XXIII, 27, 29-30; Yd. I,
190.

116. Par. VII, 2*; Ba. I, 8, 50-
51; I, 13, 26, 29-32 ; Ap. I,
17,13; Vi. XXIII, 8,10; Yd.
I, 182-183.

117. Par. VII, 3»*; Vi. XXIII,
9,11; Yd. 1 ,183-184.

118. Par. VII, 286-29**; Ga. I,
29; Ba. I, 8, 42; I, 13, 11;
I, 14, n-12; Va. Ill, 49;
Vi. XXIII, 13-14,18; Yd. I,
184.

119. Ga. I, 33; Ba. I, 8, 36, 38,
43 5 I. 13. 13; Va. Ill, 53;
■Vi. XXIII, 14-15, 18; Yd. I,
182.

556

LAWS OF MANU.

120. Ba. I, 8, 39-42; Va. Ill,
55; Vi. XXIII, 19-22; Ya.I,
186-187.

121. Ga. I, 30-31; Ba. I, 8, 45-
47; Va. Ill, 51-52; Vi.
XXIII, 23; Ya. I, 185.

122. Vi. XXIII, 56 •; Ga. I, 29;
Ba. I, 8, 34; I, 13,21-25; I,
14, 2; Ap. I, 17,10; Va. Ill,
49, 58; Vi. XXIII, 16, 18,
33; Ya. 1 ,187-188.

123. Va. Ill, 59*; Ga. I, 34;
Ba. I, 8, 49; I, 14, 3; Vi.
XXIII, 5.

124. Va. Ill, 57*; Ga. I, 31-32 ;
Ba. I, 9, 11; I, 13, 16-20;
Va. Ill, 56; Yd. 1 ,188.

125. Vi. XXIII, 38*; Va. XIV,
23; Yd. 1 ,189.

126. Ga. I, 42 ; Va. Ill, 48; Yd.
I, 191.

127. Mah. XIII, 104, 40; Ba. I,
9, 9*; Va. XIV, 24*; Vi.
XXIII, 47*; Yd. 1 ,191.

128. Ba. I, 9, 10*; Va. Ill, 35-
36, 47*; Vi. XXIII, 43; Yd.
1,192.

129. Ba. I, 9, 1*; Vi. XXIII,
48*; Va. Ill, 46; Yd. I,
187.

130. Ba. I, 9, 2*; Va. XXVIII,
8*; Vi. XXIII, 49*; Va.Ill,
45-46; Yd. 1 ,187,193.

131. Vi. XXIII, 50*; Va. Ill,
45; Yd. 1 ,192.

132. Vi. XXIII, 51*; Yd. I,
194.

133. Vi. XXIII, 52*; Yd. 1 ,193.

134. Ga. I, 43; Ba. I, 10, 11-
15; Ap. I, 16, 15; Va. VI,
14; Vi. LX, 24; Yd. I,iJ.

135. Vi. XXII, 81*.

136. Va. VI, 18*; Vi. LX, 23;
Ba. 1 ,10,12-14.

137. Va. VI, 19*; Vi. LX, 26*.

138. Ga. I, 36, 44 - 45 ; Ba. I, 8,
26; Ap. 1 ,16, 7; Va. Ill, 28;
Vi. XXII, 75 ; LXII, 8.

139. Ga. I, 36; Ba. I, 8,19-22;
Ap. I, 16, 2-6; Va. Ill, 26-
27; Vi. LXII, 6-7; Yd. I,
20; see also above, II, 60.

140. Ap. II, 3, 4-8.

141. Vi.XXlII, 53*; Ga.1,38-
41; Ba. I, 8, 24-25; Ap. I,
16, 11-13; Va. Ill, 37; Ya.
1 , 195 -

142. Ba. I, 10, 34*; Va. Ill,
42*; Vi. XXIII, 54*; Yd.
I, 195 -

143. Vi. XXIII, 55*; Ga. I, 28;
Ba. I, 8, 27-29; Va. Ill, 43.

144. Ap. II, i,23j Vi. XXII, 67.

145. Ga. I, 37; Ap. I, 16, 14;
Va. Ill, 38; Vi. XXII, 75;
Yd. 1 ,196; Go. Gri. I, 2, 32.

146.

147. Ga. XVIII, 1; Ba. II, 3,

44; Va. V, 1; Vi. XXV, 12;
see also below, IX, 2. ^

148. Ba. II, 3, 45; Va. V, 3;
Vi. XXV, 13; Yd. I, 85; see.
also below, IX, 3.

149. Yd. I, 86.

150. Vi. XXV, 4-6; Yd. I, 83. .

151. Vi. XXV, 13-14; Yd. I, 75,
83-

152.

i53.

154. Yd. I, 77.

155. Vi. XXV, x 5 *;

156.)

I57-J

ifi8.

Yd. I, 75.

Yd. I, 77.

SYNOPSIS OF PARALLEL PASSAGES.

557

159. Ap. ii, 23,5.

160. Vi. XXV, 17*;
26*; Yd. I, 75.

161 .

162 .

163 .

Par. IV,

164. Va. XXI, 14b.

165. .

166. Yd. I, 87.

Sb 11 ' 8 *-

169.

Manu VI.

! Ga. Ill, 1; Ba. II, 17, 2-
5; Ap. II,21,1-5,19; II,
22, 6-7; Vi. XC 1 V, 1-2;
Yd. Ill, 45 -

3. Ga. Ill, 28; Ba. II, 11, 15;
Ap. II, 2i, 8-9; Vi. XCIV,
3; Yd. Ill, 45-

4. Ga. Ill, 27 ; Ba. II, ij, 15;
Va. IX, 9; Vi. XC, 4; Yd.
Ill, 45-

5. Ga. Ill, 29; Ba. II, ir, 15;
Va. IX, 12; Vi. XCIV, 5;
Yd. Ill, 46.

6. Ga. Ill, 34; Ba. II, 11,15;
HI, 3, *9 5 Ap. II, 22, i,
13-14, 17; Va. IX, 1; Vi.
XCIV, 8-10; Yd. Ill, 46..

7. Ga. Ill, 29, 30; Ba. II, ri,
15; HI, 3, 5-7, 20; Ap. II,
22, 7 ; Va. IX, 7. ^

8. Ba. Ill, 3, 19; Ap. II, 21,
21; II, 22, ii ; Va. IX, 8;
Vi. XCIV, 6; Ya. Ill, 48.

9. Ba. Ill, 3, 5-7, 20; Ap. II,
22,12 ; Va. IX, 10.

10.

11. Ap. II, 22,17-18.

12.

13. Ga. Ill, 26; Ba. II, 11, 15;
Ap. II, 22, 2, 17; II, 23, 2;
Va. IX, 4; Vi. XCV, 7-11;
Yd. HI, 49*

ig. Ap. II, 22, 24; Vi. XCIV,
12 ; Yd. Ill, 47.

16. Va. IX, 4 ; Yd. Ill, 46.

17. Ba. Ill, 3, 2, 9-12; Vi.
XCV, 14-15; Yd. Ill, 49:

18. Ga. Ill, 35; Ba. II, 11, 15;
III, 2, 11; Ap.II, 23, 1; Vi.
XCIV, 11; Yd. Ill, 47.

19. Vi. XCV, 5-6; Yd. Ill, 50.

20. Vi. XCV, 12-13 i Yd. Ill,

5 °.

21. Ba. Ill, 2, 9, 11; Ap. II,
23 > 2.

22. Ga. Ill, 26; Ba. II, 11,15;
Va. IX, 9; Vi. XCIV, 10;
Yd. Ill, 48, 51.

23. Vi. XCV, 1-4; Yd. Ill, 52.

2 4 - A .

25. Ap. II, 21, 21; Va. IX, 11;
Yd. Ill, 54.

26. Va. IX, 5, 11; Vi. XCIV,
7; Yd. Ill, 45, 51, 54.

27. Yd. Ill, 54.

28. Vi. XCIV, 13*; Yd. Ill, 55.

29.

3 °.. •

31. Ba. Ill, 3, 9, 13-14; Ap.
II, 23, 4 > II> 23, 2; Ya.
III> 55 *

32.

33. Ba. II, 17,1-6; Vi. 5 CCV 1 ,1.

558

LAWS OF MANU.

34. Ba. II, 17,16*; II, 17,15.

Ba. II, 11,34; Ap. II, 24,
8; Yd. Ill, 57 -

38. Ba. II, 17,18-28; Vi. XCVI,
1-2; Yd. III, 56.

39. Mah. XII, 245, 28; 279, 22 ;
Ba. II, 17, 29 ; Va. X, 1.

40. Ba. II, 17, 30; Va. X, 2-3.

41. Ga. Ill, 16; Ba. II, ir, 24;
II, 17, 31; Va. X, 12, 28.

42. Mah. XII, 246, 4 ll -5 a .

43. Mah. XII, 246,5 b ; Ga. Ill,
11, 14; Ba. II, 11, 16; Ap.
II, 21, 10; Va. X, 6; Vi.
XCVI,2.

44. Mah. XII, 246, 7; Ga. Ill,
18-19, 25; Ba. 11,11,19,21;
II. i 7 .‘ 44 i Ap. II, 21, 11;
Va. X, 9-10, 13, 27; Vi.

II,i 8,4-6; Va. X, 7-8; Vi.
XCVI, 6; Yd. III, 59.

57. Mah. XII, 279, io; Va. X,
22*; Vi. XCVI, 4.

58. Mah. XII, 279, n b ; Vi.
XCVI, 9.

59. Ba. II, 18, 10-13; Va. X,
25 -

60. Ba. II, 18, 2-3 ; Ya. Ill, 61.

61. Vi. XCVI, 36, 38; Ya. Ill,
63-64.

62. Vi. XCVI, 27-29, 37; Yd.
Ill, 63-64.

63. Vi. XCVI, 39; Yd. Ill, 63-

64.

64. Vi. XCVI, 40-42; Yd. Ill,
63-64.

65. Va. X, 14; Yd. Ill, 63-64.

66. Va. X, 18; Yd. Ill, 65.

6 7 .

XCVI, 10—11.

45. Mah. XII, 246, 15; Vi.
XCVI, 18.

46. Ba. II, 11, 25; II, 17, 43 ;
II, 18, 2; Vi. XCVI, 14-17.

47. Mah. XII, 279,6 a ; Ga. Ill,
24; Ba. II, ii, 23; Va. X,
29; Vi. XCVI, 19-20, 23.

48. Mah. XII, 279, 6 b ; Ba. II,
l8, 3 -

49. Mah. XII, 331, 30; Ap. II,

21, 13; Va. X, 17, 20.

50. Va. X, 21*.

51. Vi. XCVI, 5; Yd. 111,59.

52. Ga. Ill, 22; Ba. II, 11,18;

II, i7,io-ii; Va. X, 6; Yd.

III, 58.

53. Vi. XCVI, 8; Yd. Ill, 60.

54. Vi. XCVI, 7; Yd. Ill, 60.

55. Ba. II, 18, 12 ; Va. X, 24-
25; Vi. XCVI, 3 5 Yd. Ill, 59.

56. Ga. Ill, 15; Ba. II, ti, 22 ;

68 .

69.

70. Va. X, 5.

71. Va. XXV, 6, Ba. IV, 1, 24.

72. Vi. XCVI, 24.

73. Vi. XCVI, 25.

75. Ap. II, 21, 14-16. 4

76. Mah. XII, 330, 42; Mai.Up.
111,4; Vi. XCVI, 43-63.

77. Mah. XII, 330, 43; Mai.
Up. Ill, 4; Yi. XCVI, 43-
53 -

78 .

79 .

80 .

81 .

82 ..

83. Ba. II, 18, 20-27 5 ^p. II,

21, 4; Va. X, 4.

84 .

85 .

SYNOPSIS OF PARALLEL PASSAGES.

559

86 .

87. Ga. Ill, 2-3; Ba. II, 11,12;
Ap. II, 21,1. a

88. Ga. Ill, 1; Ap. II, 21, 2.

89. Ga. Ill, 36; Va. VIII, 14;
Vi. LIX, 27-29.

90. Va.VIII, 15*; VIII, 16.

9i.

92. Va. X, 30; Ya. 111 , 66 .

93. . . .

94. . . ,

95. Va. X, 26.

96. . . .

97 .

Manu VII.

1,

2 ,

29.

30 -

3 -

4 -

5 -

31. Ga. XI, 4.

32. Vi. IV, 96*; Yd. I, 333.

33. Vi. IV, 97*.

6 .

7 -

8,

9 -

10.

34

35 -

36. . . .

37. Vi. Ill, 76.

38. Vi. Ill, 77.

11.

39 '

12 .

13 .

14. Yi I, 353.

iS.

16. Ga. XII, 51; Va. XIX, 9;
Vi. Ill, 91; Ya. I, 367.

40 .

41 .

42 .

43. Ga. XI, 3; Y6. I, 310.

44 .

45 .

17 .

18. Mah. XII, 15, 2.

19. Yi. I, 355.

20 .

21 .

22. Mah. XII, ig, 34.

23 .

24 .

25. Mah. XII, ig, 11; Vi. IV,
95 **

26. Ga. XI, 2; Yd. I, 308-
3 ^ 9 -

£} Vi. Ill, 50.
48. Vi. Ill, 51-52.

49 .

50- -.

5 1 .

52 .

53 .

54. Vi. Ill, 71; Ya. I, 3 y.

55 -

56. Ya. 1,311.

57.

27,

28.

58. Ya. 1,311.

59 . .

560

LAWS OF MANU.

I Vi. Ill, 16-21.

60.

61

62

63.

64.

65.

66 .

67.

68 .

69. Vi. Ill, 4-5 ; Ya. I, 320.

70. Mah. XII, 86, 5; Vi. Ill, 6.

71 .

72 .

73 .

74 .

76 *.

76. Ap. II, 25, 2-3.

77 .

78. Ga. XI, 12-18; Ba. I, 18,
7-8; Va. XIX, 3-6; Vi. Ill,
70J Y&. I, 312-313.

79. Ap. II, 26,1; Vi. Ill, 78, 81,
84; Ya. I, 313.

80. Ya. I, 321.

81.

96.

Ga. X, 20-23.

97 -

98.

99. Va. XVI, 6; Y L I, 316.
100.

101. . . * .

102. Mah. XII, 140, 7.

103. Mah. XII, 140, 8.

104.

iog. Mah. XII, 83, 49; 140, 24
106. Mah. XII, 140, 25.

107.

108.

109.

no.

in.

112 .

113 .

1 r 4. A • ■

115. Mah. XII, 87, 3; Ap. IIj
26, 4-5 5 Vi. HI, 7-10.

116. Mah. XII, 87, 4; Vi. III.
11-12.

117. Mah. XII, 87, 5; Vi. Ill,
i3“i5-

} Ya. !. 3...

84. Va. XXX. 7*; Ya. I,
3i5-

85. Ga. V, 20; Vi.XCIII, 1-4.

86 . ...

87. Ga. X, 16; Ba. 1,18,9 ; Vi.
HI, 43-

88. Vi. Ill, 44; Yd. I, 322.

89. Ap. II, 26, 2-3; Vi. Ill, 45 ;
Yd. I, 3*3-

90. Ba. I, 18,10; Yd. I, 323.

9 1- 1 Ga. X, 18; Ba. I, 18, n ;

92 ‘ ( Ap. II, 10, x 1; Yd. 1,325.
93-

94. Ap. II, 26, 3 5 Ya. I, 324.
95- Yd. I, 324.

118. Mah. XII, 87, 6 a .

119. Mah. XII, 87, 6 b -8 a .

120. Mah. XII, 87, 9 b -io a .

121. Mah. XII, 87,io b -n a ; Ap.
II, 26, 4-

122. Mah.XII, 87, n b -i2 a ; Yd.
I, 337*

123. Mah.XII,87,12 b -i3 n ; Yd.
I, 337*

124. Yd. I, 337.

125 .

126 .

127. Mah. XII, 87, i3 b -i4 a .

128. Ba. 1,18,15; Ap. II, 26, 9.

129. .

130. Ga. X, 24-25; Ba. 1,18, i;
Va. I, 42; Vi. Ill, 22, 24.

SYNOPSIS OF PARALLEL PASSAGES.

131. Ga. X, 27; Va. I, 42 ; Vi.
111 , 25 .

132. Ga. X, 27; Vi. Ill, 23,
2 S*

133. Ga. X, 11; Ap. II, 26,10;
Va.1,43; XIX, 23; Vi. Ill,

26.

134. Mali. XIIIj 61, 30; Ga. X,
9; Ap. II, 25, 11; Vi. Ill,
79 *

135. Yd. Ill, 44.

136. Va. I, 44; Vi. Ill, 27.

137. Va. XIX, 26-27.

138. Ga.X, 31-32; Va.XIX,28;
Vi. Ill, 32.

139. Mah. XII, 87, i8 b .

140.

141. Vi. Ill, 73; Yd. II, 3.

142. Ga. X, 7-8; Ba. I, 18, 1;
Ap. II, 10, 6; Va. XIX, 1;
Vi. Ill, 2 ; Yd. I, 334-

143. Mah. XIII, 61, 31.

144 .

M 5 .

146.

I 5 I- ..

152 .

153 .

154 .

1 55-"I

l Vi. Ill, 38; Yd. I, 344-

158. J

159. Vi. Ill, 38; Yd. I, 345.

160. Vi. 111,39; Yd. I, 346.

161 .

162 .

16a.

164 .

165 .

166 .

167 .

168 .

169 .

170 .* .

171. Yd. I, 347.

172. .....

173 .’

174 .

175 .

176 .

177 .

178 .

179 .

180 .

181 .

182. Vi. Ill, 40; Yd. I, 347

183. Vi. Ill, 41.

184 .

185 .

186 .

187 .

188 .

189 .

190 .

191. Mah. XII, 100, 47.

192 .

193 .

194 .

195 .

196 .

197 .

198 .

199 .

202. Vi. Ill, 47.

203. Vi. Ill, 42; Yd. I, 342.

204.

20K. Ya. I, 348.

o o

562

LAWS OF MANU.

206.

217.

207.

218. Vi. Ill, 87.

208. Ya. I, 351.

219. Vi. Ill, 88.

209.

220. Vi. Ill, 85.

210.

221. Ya. I, 328.

2 11.

222. YL I, 328.

212.

H 3 ' } Yd.1, 329.

213 .

224. J 9 ° *

214.

225. Yd. 1 , 330.

215 .

226.

216. YL I, 326.

Manu VIII.

1.

Ga. XIII

26

Va. XVI, 2;

24 .

Vi. Ill, 72;
2.

Yd. I, 359; II, 1.

It:} YS.H.U-S.

3 -

Ga. XI, 19-24; Va. I, 17;

27. Ga. X, 48; Va. XVI, 8—9 j

XVI, 4-5-

Vi. Ill, 63.

4 -

.

28. Vi. Ill, 65.

5 -

.

29 .

6.

30. Ga. X, 36-38; Va. XVI, 19-

7 *

20; Yd. II, 33.

8.

.

3 i- Y 111 , 33 -

9 -

Ga. XIII,

26;

Va. XVI, 2;

32. Yd. II, 33.

Vi. Ill, 73

Ya

II, 3 -

33 .

10.

.

.

34 .

II.

.

.

35. Vi. Ill, 63; Yd. II, 35.

12.

.

.

36. Vi. Ill, 64; Yd. II, 35.

r 3 -

.

.

37. Ga. X,44;Va.III,i 4 ; Vi.

14 .

.

.

111,58; Yd. II, 34.

i 5 -

Mah. Ill,

3 i 3 )

28; XII, 90,

38. Ga. X, 43; Vi. Ill, 56-57;

rS b -°-

Yd. II, 34.

16.

.

.

. . . .

[ 39. Ga. X, 45; Va. Ill, 13 ; Vi.

r 7 *

.

.

Ill, 58-62 ; Yd. II, 35. •

18.

Ba. 1 ,19, 8* ;

Ga. XIII, 11.

40. Ga. X, 46-47 ; Ap. II, 26,8;

19 -

Ba. 1 ,10,8*.

Vi. Ill, 66-67; Yd. 11,36.

20.

.

.

.

41. Ga. XI, 11, 20; Ba. 1 ,2,1-8;

21.

.

.

.

Ap. II, 15,1; Va. 1 ,17; XIX,

22.

•

.

.

7; Vi. Ill, 3; Yd. 1 ,360.

* 3 -

• •

.

42.

SYNOPSIS OF PARALLEL PASSAGES.

563

43. Ga. XIII, 27.

44. Ga. XI, 23-24; Ap. II, 29, 6;
Va. XVI, 4-5-

45 .

46 .

47 .

48 .

75. Ga. XIII, 7; Ba. I, 19, 14-
15; Ap. II, 29,9-10.

76. Vi. VIII, 12.

77. Yd. II, 72.

78. ...... .

79. Ga. XIII, 5 ; Ap. II, 29, 7 ;
Vi. VIII, 24 ; Yd.II, 73.

49 .

50. Vi. VI, 18 ; Yd. II.40.

5 *

52.

53 -^

54 -

55 -

Yd. II, 16.

80.

81.

82.
83 -
84.
85 -
86 .

56 -J

57 .•

58 .

59. Yd. II, 11.

60.

61. Ga. XIII, 1.

62. Ba. I, 19, 13 ; Vi. VIII, 8;
Yd. II, 68.

63. Ga. XIII, 2 ; Ap. II, 29, 7 ;
Va. XVI, 28 ; Vi. VIII, 8 ; Yd.
II, 68.

64. Ga. XIII, 2 ; Vi. VIII, 3 ;
Yd. II, 70-71.

65. Ba. 1 ,19, 13 ; Vi. VIII, 2 ;
Yd. II, 70.

66. Ba. 1 ,19, 13 ; Vi. VIII, 2, 3;
Yd. II, 70-71.

67. Ba. I, 19, 13; Vi. VIII, 2;
Yd. II, 70.

68. Va. XVI, 30*.

69. Va. XVI, 29 ; Yd. II, 69.

7 °.

7 1 .

72. Ga. XIII, 9; Vi. VIII, 6;

Yd. II, 72.

73. Vi. VIII, 39*; Yd. II,-78,

80.

87. Ap. II, 29, 7 ; Vi. VIII, 19.

88. Vi. VIII, 20-23.

89. Vi. VIII, 25; Yd. 11 , 73 - 74 -

90. Ba. I, 19,10; Vi. VIII, 26;
Yd. II, 75.

91 .

92 .

93 . Va. XVI, 33*.

94 .

95 .

96 .

97 .. •

98. Ba. 1 ,19, i2 b - c * ; Va. XVI,
34* ; Ga. XIII, 14-15.

99. Ba. I, 19, 1 ad*; Ga. XIII,
16.

100. Ga. XIII, 18-19.

101.

ro2. Ba. 1 ,10, 24 *.

103.

104. Ga. XIII, 24-25; Va. XVI,
36; Vi. VIII, 15; Yd. 11,83.

105. Yd. II, 83.

106. Ba. 1 ,19, 16 ' f Vi. VIII, 16.

107. Ga. XIII, 6; Yd. II, 76.
xo8. Yd. II, X13.

109. Ga. XIII, 12-13; Vi. VIII,

74. Ba. 1 ,19,7; Vi. VIII, 13-14. I 19.

0 0 2

5 6 4

LAWS OF MANU.

no.

in.

112. Va. XVI, 36*; Ga. XXIII,

149. Va. XVI, 18*; Ga. XII, 38-
39 > Ya. 2 5*

150.

29.

113. Vi. VIII, 22-23,

114. ) Vi. XI—XII * Yd. II, 103-

115/ 109.

116.

117. Vi. VIII, 40*.

118. . . .

II 9 * \

120.

121. yYL II, 81.

122.

123. >

124. Ga. XII, 46-47 ; Vi. V, 2-8.

125.

126. Ga. XII, 51; Y 1 1,367.
;X}va.XIX, 43; Y11, 356.

* 3 *-\

132

133
134 .
* 35 -
136.

Vi. IV, 1-13 ; Yd. I, 361-
3 6 4 -

137 '

138. Vi. IV, 14*; Yd. 1 ,365.

139. Vi. VI, 20-21; Yd. II, 42.

140. Ga. XII, 29; Va. II, 51;
Yd. II, 37 -

141. Yd. II, 37 -

142. Va. II, 48*; Vi. VI, 2; Yd.
II, 37-

143. Ga. XII, 32 ; Vi. VI, 5.

144. Vi. VI, 6 j Yd. II, 59.

145. Vi. VI, 7-8; Yd. II, 58.

146.

147-1 Ga.XII, 37; Va.XVI,i6-
148J 17; Yd. II, 24.

151. Ga. XII, 31,36; Vi.VI, it-
14, 16-17 ; Yd. H. 39 -

152.

153. Ga. XII, 30, 34 - 35 -

1 54 .

1 55 .

1 5 6 .

157 .

158. Vi. VI, 41; Yd. II, 53 -

159. Va. XVI, 31*; Ga. XII,
41 ; Vi. VI, 41; Yd. II, 47,
53 -

160. Vi. VI, 41; Yd. II, 54.

161 .

162 .

163. Yd. II, 32.

164. Vi. VII, 11.

165. Vi. VII, 7; Ya. II, 89.

166. Vi. VI, 39; Ya. II, 45 -

167.

168. Vi, VII, 6; Ya. II, 89.

169.

170. Va. XIX, 14-15.

171 .

172 .

173 .

174 .

175 .

176. Vi. VI, 19; Yd. II, 40.

177 .

178 .

179 .. .

180. Yd. II, 65.

181 .

182 .

183 .

184 .

185 .

186 .

SYNOPSIS OF PARALLEL PASSAGES.

565

187.

188

189. YL

190.

191. Vi,
J92.

194.

195 -

196.

197.

198.

228.

, II, 66.

V, 169-171.

229.

230. Vi. V, 137; Ya. II, 164.

231. Vi. V, 139.

232. Vi. V, 138; Ya. II, 164.

233 .

234 .

235- Vi. V, I37 “ i 3 8 *
236.

237. Ya. II, 167.

238. .

239 -

199. Yd. II, 168.

200.

201.

202. Vi. V, 164-165; Ya. II,
169-170.

203. Ya. II, 245.

204 . Ya. I, 66 .

205.

206.

207. Ya. II, 265.

208.

209.

210.

211. Yd. II, 259.

212 .

213. .

214.

215.

216.

217.

218.

240. Ga. XII, 19-20; Ap. II, 28,
5; Vi. V, 140-146; Ya. II,

l62.

241. Ga. XII, 21-26; Vi. V,
147-149 ; YL II, 161.

242. Vi. V, 150; Ya. II, 163.

243. Ap. II, 28,1.

244 .

245 .

246.

247 .

248.

249 . . . .

250. Ya. II, 151.

251. .

J;} Yi 11 , i 5 i.

252.

253-

254 -

255 -
256.
257 -

Ap. II, 28, 2-3; Vi. V,
153 — x 54 ; Yd. II, 193.

Yd. II, 152.
Ya. II, 153.

219. Vi. V, 168; Yd. II, 192.

220 .

221 .

222. Yd. II, 177.

223.

224.

225.

226.

22 * 7 .

258.

259 -

260.

*'Jy1 I, 66.

261

262

263

264.

265

. Va. XVI, 13-15; Yd. U,
154 -

. Yd. II, 153.

Yd. II, 153.

566

LAWS OF MANU.

266.

267. Ga. XII, I, 8, 10; Y L II,
207.

268. Ga. XII, 11-13; Ya. II, 207.

269. Vi. V, 33-35, 37-38; YL
II, 205-206.

270. Ga. XII, 1; Ap. II, 27,14 ;
Vi* V, 23.

271. Vi. V, 25.

272. Vi. V, 24.

273. Vi. V, 26.

274. Vi. V, 27 ; YL II, 204.

275. Vi. V, 28.

276 .

277 .

278 .

279. Ga. XII, 1; Vi. V, 19; YL
11,215.

280. Yd. II, 215.

281. Ga. XII, 7 ; Ap. II, 27,15 ;
Vi. V, 20.

282. Vi. V, 21-22.

283. Vi.V, 65.

284. Vi.V, 66-72; Yd. II, 218-
220.

283. Vi. V, 55-59.

286. Vi.V, 75-76.

287. Vi. V, 75-76; Yd. II, 222.

288 .

289 .

290 .

291. Yd. II, 299.

292. Yd. II, 298-299.

293 .

294 .

295 .

296. ..

302. Ap. II, 25, 15; Vi.V, 196;
Yd. I, 335 -

303.

304. Yd. 1,334.

305. Mah. XII, 75, 7; Va. 1,44.

306. Yd. I, 334. •

3 ° 7 .

308. Yd. I, 336.

309 .

3 1 ®.

3 ".

312 .

313 .

314. Ga. XII, 43; Ba. II, 1,16;
Ap. I, 25, 4; Va. XX, 41; Vi.
LII, 1; Yd. Ill, 257.

315. Ba. II, 1,17; Va. XX, 41.

316. Ba. U, 1,17*; Ga. XII, 44-
45 i Ap. I, 25, 4-5; Va. XX,
41; Vi. LII, 2; Yd. 111,257.

3x7. Va. XIX, 44*; Ap. I, 19,
16*.

318. Va. XIX, 45*.

3 i 9 - • • -

320. Vi. V, 12.

321. Vi.V, 13.

322. Vi. V, 81-82.

323- • • •

} Vi - v - ”-» 8 -
326.^

327-

328.

329-

33°-
33 1 - J

332. Yd. II, 230.

I Vi.V, 83-86.

299. ) Ga. II, 43-44; Ap. I, 8,

300. / 30.

aoi.

333 .

334 .

335. Mah. XII, 121, 60; Ya. I,

357 *-

.

SYNOPSIS OF PARALLEL PASSAGES.

567

3 g;} G a. XII, 15-17.

339. Ga. XII, 28; Ap. I, 28, 3;
Yd.II, 166.

340. Ga. XII, 49 - 6 °-

34 i- ..

342 .

343 .

344 .

345 .

346 .

372. Mah. XII, 165, 65; Ga.
XXIII, 15; Va. XXI, 1-3.

373. Mah. XII, 165,66 b .

374 - a Ga. XII, 2; Ba. II, 3, 52 ;
Ap. II, 27, 9 J Va. XXI, i,5J
Yd. II, 286, 294.

375 .

376 -.

377. Ap. II, 26, 20; Va. XXI,
2-3; Yd. II, 286.

378. Vi. V, 40; Yd. 11,286.

347 -

379

348. Ba. II, 4,18; Va. Ill, 24.

349. Ga. VII, 25; Ba. II, 4, 18;
Va. Ill, 24.

350. Va. HI, 17*; Ba. 1 ,18,12-
13; Va. Ill, 15-16; Vi. V,
191-192; V, 189*.

351. Va. Ill, 18*; Ba. 1 ,18,13;
Va. Ill, 17; Vi.V, 190*.

352 .

353 - A .

354. Ap. II, 26,19; Yd. II, 285.

355. Ap. II, 26,18.

356 .

380. Ga. VIII, 13; Ba. 1 ,18,17 ;
Vi.V, 2.

381 .

382 .

383 .

384 .

385. Vi.V, 41,43; Yd. 11, 294.

386. Vi.V, 196*.

387 .

388 .

389. Vi.V, 163; Yd. II, 237.

39 °.

39 1 .

359. Ba. II, 4, 2*; II, 4, 1; Ap.

392. Vi.V, 94; Yd. II, 263.

393 - A .

394. Ap. II, 26, 16-17.

II, 26, 20.

360.

361. Yd. II, 285.

362. Ba. 11 , 4 . 3 *-

363. Yd. II, 293.

364 . )

3 6 5-1 Yd. II, 288.

366. [

367 -j

368 .

369 .

370 .

371. Mah. XII, 165, 64 ;

XXIII, 14 J Vi. V, 18.

395 .

396. Yd. II, 238.

397. Yd. II, 179.

398. Ya. II, 261.

399. Vi. V, 130; Yd. II, 261.

400. Yd. II, 262.

401. Yd. II, 252.

402. Yd. II, 251.

403. Va. XIX, 13.

Ga.

404.

405.

406.

407. Vi.V, 132-133.
408.

568

LAWS OF MANU.

409.

410.

411.

412. ‘

4 * 3 -

414.

• 415

. 416.

. 417.

. 418.

. 419*

. 420.

Manu IX.

2. Ga. XVIII, 1; Ba. II, 3,44;
Va. V, 1; Vi. XXV, 12-13;
Ya. I, 85 ; see also above, V,
147-148.

3. Mah. XIII, 46, 14; Ba. II,
3, 45 *; Va. V, 3 *.

4. Ga. XVIII, 22; Ba. IV, i,
12, 17-19; Va. XVII, 69-
70; Ya. I, 64.

5 .

6. Mah. 111/12, 68. ,

7 .

8. Ya. I, 56.

9. Y 11 , 81.

10 .

11 .

12 .

*3 ..

14.

*5 .

16.

17. Mah. XIII, 40, i2 b -i3 a .

18. Mah.XIII,40, n b -i2 a ; Ba.
I, 11, 7 ; see also above, II, 66.

*9. A • •

20. S&. Gri. Ill, 13,5; Ap. *Sr.

L 9 > 9-

2,1 .

22 .

2 3 .

24 .

25 .

26 .

27. Mah. XIII, 46,11.

28.

29. See above, V, 165.

30. Va. XXI, 14 ; see above, V,
164.

32. Ga. XVIII, 9-14; Ap. II,
i 3 > ^“ 7 ; Va. XVII, 6-9, 63-
64.

33 .

34 .

35 .

36 .

37 .

38 .

39 .

40 .

4 1 .

42 .

43 .

44 - A .

45. Ap. II, 14,16.

46 .\

47. Vi. V, 160; Ya. I, 65.

48 .

49 .

50. Va. XVII, 8 *.

5 i.

52 .

SYNOPSIS OF PARALLEL PASSAGES. 569

54. Par. IV, 16*.

1, 14 a-b * ; Ga. XVIII, 20;

55 .

Va. XVII, 67-68 ; Vi. XXIV,

56.

40; Yd. I, 64.

57 ..

9 i.

58.

92. Ga. XVIII, 20.

59. GatX VIII, 4-5; Ba. II, 4,9-

93. Vi. XXIV, 41.

10; Va. XVII, 56; Yd. I,

94. Mah. XIII, 44, 14 a .

68.

95. Mah. XIII, 44, 2 7 a .

60. Va. XVII, 61; Yd. I, 68.

96.

61. Ga. XVIII, 8.

97 - A .

£}**•*>«»•

98. Ap. II, 13,11.

99 .

64.

100.

65 .

IOI.

66.

102.

67 .

103.

68.

104. Ga. XXVIII, 1; Ba.II,3, 3,

6 9 .

8; Vi. XVIII, 36; Yd. II,

70.

117.

71. Vi. V, 160-161; Ya. I, 65.

105. Ga. XXVIII, 3; Ba. II, 3,

73-} Vi'V> i^ 2 > Yd. I, 66.

13; Ap. II, 14, 6.

106. . . . ' .

74 .

107. Va’ XVII, 1; Vi. XV, 45.

75. Vi. XXV, 9-10; Yd. I, 84.

108.

76. Ga. XVIII, 15, 17; Va.

109. Mah. XIII, 105, 6 a .

XVII, 75-80.

no.

77 .

hi. Ga. XXVIII, 4.

78 .

112. Ga. XXVIII, 5-7; Ba. II,

79 .

3, 4 ; Vi. XVIII, 37 ; Yd. II,

80. Yd. I, 73.

114.

81. Ba. II, 4, 6 *.

113.

82.

114. Ga. XXVIII, 11-13 ; Ba.II,

83.

3, 6; Va. XVII, 43; Yd. II,

84 .

114.

86.

115. Ap. II, 13,13.

86. Vi. XXVI, 1; Yd. I, 88.

116. Ga. XXVIII, 8.

87. Mah. XIII, 46, 36b; Vi.

117. Ga. XXVIII, 9-10; Va.

XXVI, 2-3.

XVII, 42.

88. Ga. XVIII, 21; Va. XVII,

118. Vi. XVIII, 35; Yd. II,

70; Ba. IV, 1, 11.

124.

89.

119. Ba. II, 3, 9.

90. Mah. XIII, 44.16 ; Ba. IV,

120.

570

LAWS OF MANU.

121.I 154. Vi. XV1II, 3 2.

122.

123. Ga. XXVIII, 14.

124. Ga. XXVIII, 15.

125. Ga. XXVIII, 16.

126.

127. Ga. XXVIII, 18; Ba. II, 3,
x 5 ; Va. XVII, 15-17; VL
XV, 5.

128 .

129 .

130. Mah. XIII, 45, II ; Ba. II,
3 . 14 -

131. Mah. XIII, 45, 12; Ga.
XXVIII, 24; Ba. II, 3, 43;
Va. XVII, 46; Vi. XVII, 21.

132.

133. Mah. XIII, 45, 13b; Yd. II,
128.

134 .

135 .

136. Ga. XXVIII, 19.

137. Ba. II, 16, 6*; Va. XVII,
5*; Vi. XV, 46*; Ya. I, 78.

138. Vi. XV, 44*.

139. Vi. XV, 47 *.

140. Ba. II, 3,16*.

141. Va. XV, 9-10; Ba. Par. 16.

142.

Y44. } Ga " XXVHI, 23.

145 .

146 .

H 7 .

148.

149. Va. XVII, 47.

150. Mah. XIII, 47,11.

.

152. Vi. XVIII, 1.

153. Ba. II, 3,10; Va. XVII, 48-
50; Vi. XVIII, 2-5; Yd. II,
125.

155. Ga. XXVIII, 39.

156. Vi. XVIII, 28-30, 36-37.

157. Mah. XIII, 47, 56; Vi.
XVIII, 31.

158. Vi. XV, 1.

159. Ba. II, 3,31 *; Ga. XXVIII,
32; Va. XVII, 25.

160. Ba. II, 3, 32 *; Ga. XXVIII,
33; Va. XVII, 38.

161.

162. Vi. XVII, 23*.

163. Vi. XV, 28-30.

164. Ba. II, 3, 11.

165. Ga. XXVIII, 34; Yd.II, 132.

166. Ba. II, 3, 14; Ap. II, 13,1;
Va.XVlI, 13; Vi. XV, 2; Yd.
II, 128.

167. Ba. 11,3,17-18; Va. XVII,
14; Vi. XV, 3; Yd. 1 ,69; II.
127-128.

168. Ba. II, 3, 20; Va. XVII, 29;
Vi. XV, 18-19; Yd. II, 130.

169. Ba. II, 3, 21; Ya. II, 131.

170. Ba. II, 3, 22 ; Va. XVII, 24 ;
Vi. XV, 13-14; Ya. 11,129.

171. Ba. II, 3, 23 ; Va. XVII, 37;
Vi. XV, 24-25 ; Yd. II, 132.

172. Ba. II, 3, 24; Va.XVIl, 22-
23; Vi. XV, 10-11; Yd. II,

129.

173. Ba. II, 3, 25; Va. XVII, 26-
27; Vi. XV, 15-16; Yd. II,
I 3 1 *

174. Ba. II, 3, 26; Va. XVII; 30-
32; Vi. XV, 20-21; Yd. II,
r 3 r *

175. Ba.11,3,27; Va. XVII, 18-
19; Vi. XV, 7-9; Yd. II,

130.

176. Ba. IV, 1,16 b-°*; Va. XVII,
74; Vi. XV, 8.

SYNOPSIS OF PARALLEL PASSAGES.

571

177 - Ba.II, 3. 28; Va. XVII, 33-
35; Vi. XV, 22-23; Ya. II,

131-

178. Ba. II, 3, 30; Va. XVII, 38 ;
Vi. XV, 27.

179. Yi II, 133.

l80.

181. Ba. II, 3, 33-35; Ap. II, 13,
6-10.

182. Va. XVII, 10 * ; Vi. XV, 42.

183. Va. XVII, 11 *; Vi. XV, 41.

184. Va. XVII, 39, 81; Vi. XV,
28-29.

185. Vi. XVII, 6, 8; Ya. II,
135 -

186. Ml A. IIP; Ba. 1 ,11,9.

187. Ga. XXVIII, 21; Ba.I, n,
10-13; Ap- II, 14, 2 - 3 ! Ya.
XVII, 81-82; Vi. XVII, 11 ;

Y 1 II, 135-

188. Ga. XXVIII, 41; Ba.I, 11,
14; Va. XVII, 84-86; Vi.
XVII, 14.

189. Ga. XXVIII, 42; Ba. 1 ,11,
15-16; Ap. II, 14, 5; Va.
XVII, 83; Vi. XVII, 13.

190.

’ 4 !:} «•"■■■»•

194. Vi. XVII, 18; Y! II, 143.

195 .

196. Vi. XVII, 19; Yin, 145.

197. Vi. xvii, 20; Ya. 11,145.

198. Mah. XIII, 47, 25.

199. Mah. XIII, 47, 24 b .

200. Vi. XVII, 22*.

201. Ga. XXVIII, 43; Ba. II, 3,
37-40; Ap. II, 14, 1; Va.
XVII, 52-53; Vi. XV, 32;
Yd. II, 140.

202. Ga. XXVTTT. aa : Ba. II. a.

37-40; Va. XVII, 54; Vi. XV,

33; Ya. 11,140.

203. Ga. XXVIII, 44; Vi. XV,
34-36; Ya. II, 141.

204.

205. Ga. XXVIII, 31.

206. Ga. XXVIII, 30; Ya. II,

II8-II9.

207. Yd. II, 116.

208. Mah. XIII, 105, 11; Vi.
XVIII, 42*.

209. Vi. XVIII, 43*; Ya. II,

119.

210. Vi. XVIII, 41 *; Ya. II, 120.

211.

212. Vi. XVII, 17; Ya. 11,138.

213. Mah. XIII, 105, 7.

214. Mah. XIII, 105, 10; Ga.
XXVIII, 40; Ba. II, 3, 38;
Ap. II, 14,15.

215. Mah. XIII, 105, 12; Y 1 IJ,

120.

216. Ga. XXVIII, 29; Vi. XVII,
3; Ya. 11,122.

217. vi. xvii, 7; va. 11,135.

218. Ya. 11,126.

219. Vi.XVIII, 44*; Ga.XXVIII,
46-47.

220 .

221 .

222 .

223..

224. Ya. II, 304.

225 .

226 .

227 .

228 .

229. Ya. II, 43.

230.

231. Vi. V, 180.

232. Vi. V, 9,11; Yd. II, 240.

2 ^a.

572

LAWS OF MANU.

234. Y 1 II, 305.

276. Yd. II, 273.

235 .

277. Vi.V, 136.

236.

278. Yd. 11 , 276.

237. Ba. 1 ,18,18; Vi.V, 3-7.

279. Yd. II, 279.

238.

280. Yd. II, 273.

2 39 .

281.

240.

282. Vi. V, 106-107.

241.

283.

242.

284. Vi. V, i 75 _1 77 -

243.

285. Vi.V, 174.

244 .

286. Vi. V, 124; Yd. II, 245-

245.

246.

246.

287.

247.

288.

248.

289.

249.

290.

250.

291.

251.

292. Yd. II, 297.

252.

293 .

253.

294. Y! I, 352.

254.

295 .

255.

296.

256.

297 .

257.

298.

258.

299 .

259.

3 00 .

260.

3 01 .

261.

3°2 .

262.

3°3 .

263.

3°4 .

264.

305 .

265.

3 ° 6 .

266.

307 .

267.

308 .

268.

309 .

269.

3 10 .

270.

3 ii.

271.

3 12 .

272.

3 J 3 .

273 .

3 i 4 .

274. Vi. V, 74.

315. Mah. XIII, 152,16.

316.

SYNOPSIS OF PARALLEL PASSAGES.

573

317. Mah. XIII, 152, 21.

318. Mah. XIII, 152, 22.

319. Mah. XIII, 152, 23.

320. Mah. XII, 78, 21.

321. Mah. XII, 56, 24; 78, 22.

322. Ga. XI, 14; Va. XIX, 4.

3 2 3 .

324 .

3 2 5 .

32 6 .

327. Mah. XII, 60, 23 b -24 a

328. Mah. XII, 60, 26 b —27 a

329.

330. .....

331 .

332 .

333 .

334 .

335 .

336 .

Manu X.

4. Mali. XIII, 46, i8 a ; Ap. I,
1, 3 - 5 ; Ba. I, 16, 1; Va. II,
1-2 ; Yd. I, 10.

5. Ap. I, 13, 1 ; Vi. XVI, 1;
Yd. I, 90.

6. Ba. I, 16,6; Ap. II, 13, 4-5.

7. Ga. IV, 16; Ba. I, 16, 7 ;
Va. XVIII, 8 .

8. Ga. IV, 16 ; Ba. I, 16, 7 ; I,
17, 3; Va. XVIII, 8; Yd.
I, 91.

9. Ga. IV, 16; Ba. 1 ,16, 7 ; I,
17, 4; Va. XVIII, 8; Yd.
I, 92.

10.

11. Ga. IV, 17; Ba. I, 16, 8; I,
!7, 7-8; Va. XVIII, 6; Vi.
XVI, 5-6; Yd. I, 93-94.

12. Ga. IV, 17; Ba. I, 16, 8;
Vi. XVI, 4, 6; Yd. I, 93-
94.

13 .

14 .

.

16. Ba. I, 17, 7; Va. XVIII,

I- 3; Vi. XVI, 4; Yd. I,
93 - 94 *

17. Ba. I, 17, 8; Vi. XVI, 5-6 ;
Yd. I, 93-94.

18. Ga. IV, 19; Ba. 1 ,16, 8,1 j-
12 ; 1 ,17,13-14; Va.XVIII,
5; Vi. XVI, 5.

19. Ba. I, 16, 8, 9-10; I, 17,

II- 12; Va. XVIII, 2.

20. Ba. I, 16, 16 *.

21. Ga. IV, 20.

22. Ga. IV, 21.

23.

24. Yd. I, 96.

25 .

26 .

27. Mah. XIII, 48, 14.

28. Mah. XIII, 48,15.

29. Mah.XIII,48,16; Vi.XVI, 7.

30. Mah. XIII, 48,17.

31. Mah. XIII, 48, 18.

32. Mah. XIII, 48, i9 c -20 ft .

33. Mah. XIII, 48, 20 b .

34. Mah. XIII, 48, 21 a .

35. Mah. XIII, 48, 24 b -25 ft .

36. Mah. XIII, 48, 25 b -26 a .

37. Mah. XIII, 48, 26 b -27 a .

38. Mah. XIII, 48, 27 b

574

LAWS OF JHANU.

39. Mah. XIII, 48, 28b; Va.
XVIII, 3.

40. Mah. XIII, 48, 29; Vi.
XVI, 17*.

41 .

4 2 .

43. Mah. XIII, 33, 21; 35, 17.

44. Mah. XIII, 33, 22; 35, 18.

45 .

46 .

47. Vi. XVI, 10,12-13.

48. Vi. XVI, 8.

49. Vi. XVI, 9.

50. Mah. XIII, 48, 32 a , 33 *

51. Vi. XVI, 14.

52. Mah. XIII, 48, 32Vi.
XVI, 14.

53 .

54 .

55 .

56. Vi. XVI, 11.

57. Va. XVIII, 7; Vi. XVI,
i 7 -

58. Mah. XIII, 48, 41.

59. Mah. XIII, 48, 42.

60. Mah. XIII, 48, 44.

61.

62. Mah. XIII, 48, 34 a , 35 a ;
Vi. XVI, 18*.

63. YA. a I, 122*; Ga. VIII,
23; Ap. I, 23, 6; Vi. II, 16-
i7-

64. Ga. IV, 22; Yd. I, 96.

65 .

66 .

67 .

68 .

69.

7 ®.

7i.

7 a .

73 .

74. Va. II, 13.

75. Ga. X, 1-2 ; Ba. I, 18, 2;
Ap. II, 10, 4; Va. II, 13-14;
Vi. II, s, 9,11; Yd. 1 ,118.

76. Vi. II, 11.

77. Ga. X, 1; Ba. 1,18, 3; Ap.
II, 10, 6; Va. II, 15-16 ; Vi.
II, 9 ; Yd. 1 ,118.

78. Ga. X, 1; Ba. I, 18, 4; Ap.

II, 10, 7'; Va. II, 18; Vi. 11,9.

79. Ga. X, 7,15, 49; Ba. 1 ,18,
3-4 5 Ap- II, 10, 6-7; Va. II,
17, 19; Vi. II, 6-7, 12-13;
Yd. 1 ,119.

80.

81. Ga. VII, 6; Ba. II, 4,16;
Va. II, 22; Vi. II, 15; Yd.

III , 35 -

82. Ga. VII, 7; Ba. II, 4, 19-
21; Va. II, 24, 32-36; Yd.
111,35 5 -SI Gn. IV, 11,15.

83.

84. Mah. Ill, 208,23; XII, 263,
45 b ~ 4 <> a ; Ba. II, 4, 20-21;
Va. II, 32-36^

85. Ga.VII, 8; Ap. I, 20,10-11;
Yd. Ill, 39.

86. Ga.VII, 9, 14-15; Ba. II,
2, 27; Ap. I, 20, 12-13; Va.
II, 24, 26, 29; Vi. LIV, 18,
21; Yd. Ill, 36,38.

87. Ga. VII, 9, 10; Va. II, 24-
26; Vi. LIV, 18,20; Yd. Ill,
36-38.

88. Ga.VII, 9, 11-12; Ap. I,
20, 12-13; Va. H, 26; Vi.
LIV, 18-19, 21; Yd. Ill, 36-
3 8 -

89. Ga.VII, 13-15; Ap. I, 20,
12; Va. II, 28; Vi. LIV, 21;
Yd. Ill, 37-38.

00. Va. II. 21: Yd. III. 20.

SYNOPSIS OF PARALLEL PASSAGES.

575

91. Ba.11,2, 26*} Va.11,30*.

92. Va. II, 27*; Yd. III, 40.

93. Yd. Ill, 40.

94. Ga.VII, 16-17, 21 ! Ap. I,
20,15; Va. II, 37-39.

95. Ga. VII, 26; Vi. II, 15.

96. Va. II, 23.

97.

98. Va. II, 23; Vi. II, 15.

99.I Ga. X, 57, 60; Vi. II, 14;
100. J Yd. I, 120.

101.

102. Ga. VII, 4; Ap. I, 18, 5-8,
14-15.

103. Va. XXVII, 9.

104. Yd. Ill, 41.

105 .

106 .

107 .

108 .

109 .

no..

hi. Ap. I, 28, 11 ; Va. XX, 45-

46; Vi. LIV, 28 ; see below,
XI, 194.

112 .

113 .

114. Va. XII, 3.

115. Ga. X, 39-42.

116. Yd. Ill, 42.

117. Va. 11 , 40 - 43 -

118.

119. Ga. X, 16, 41 ; see also
above, VII, 88.

120. Va. XIX, 37.

121. Ga. X, 56 ; Yd. I, 120.

122 .

123 .

124. Ga. X, 61.

125. Ga. X, 58-59.

126. \ Ga. X, 64-65 ; Yd. 1 ,121,

127. J 262.

128.

129. Ga. X, 63.

13°.

! 3 i.

Manu XI.

1. Mah. XII, 165, 1; Ga. V,
21; Ba. II, 5, 19; Ap. II,
10, 1-2.

2. Mah. XII, 165, 2b

3. Mah. XII, 165,3b; Ga.V,
22 ; Ba. II, 5, 20.

4. Mah. XII, 165, 4.

5. Ap. II, 10, 3.

6 .

7. Mah. XII, 165, 5 b -c; Va.
VIII, 10; Vi.LIX, 8-9; Yd.
1,124.

8 .

9.

10.

n. Mah. XII, 165,6.

12. Mah. XII, 165, 7; Ga.
XVIII, 25.

13. Mah. XII, 165, 8; Ga.
XVIII, 24.

14. Mah. XII, 165, 9; Ga.
XVIII, 26-27.

15. Mah. XII, 165,10.

16. Mah. XII, 165, 11 ; Ga.
XVIII, 28-29; Yd. Ill, 43.

17. Mah. XII, 165, 12 ; Ga.
XVIII, 30; Yd. Ill, 43.

18.

19 * •.

20.

21. Mah. XII, 165, 13; Ga.
XVIII, 32.

57 6

LAWS OF MANU.

22. Mah. XII, 165, 14 11 ; Ga.
XVIII, 31 ; Yd. Ill, 44.

23. Mah. XII, 165,i4 b .

24. Vi. LIX, 11; Yd. 1 ,127.

25. Yd. I, 127.

26.

27. Mah. XII, 165, 15“; Vi.
LIX, 10; Yd. 1 ,126.

28. Mah. XII, 165, 15 b .

29. Mah. XII, 165,16.

30. Mah. XII, 165,17.

31. Mah. XII, 165,18.

3 2 .

33 .

34. Mah. XII, 165, 20 b -2i a ;
Va. XXVI, 16.

35. Mah. XII, 165, i9 b -20 a .

36. Mah. XII, 165, 2i b -22 a ;
Ga. II, 4; Ap. 11,15,18-19;
Va. II, 6.

37. Mah. XII, 165, 22 b -22 c ,

38. Mah. XII, 165, 23.

39. Mah. XII, 165, 24.

40. Mah. XII, 165, 25.

41. Ga. XXII, 34; Va. I, 18;

XXI, 27; Vi. LIV, 13.

42 .

43 .

44. Mah. XII, 34, 2 ; Ga. XIX,
2; Ba. Ill, 10, 2 ; Va. XXII,
1; Yd. Ill, 219-220.

45. Ga. XIX, 3-6; Va. XX,
1-2; Ba. Ill, 10, 3-5; Va.

XXII, 3-5 ; Yd. Ill, 226.

46. Yd. Ill, 226.

47 .

48. Va. XX, 43; Vi. XLV, 1.

49. Va. 1 ,18; XX, 6; XX, 44;
Vi. XLV, 3-6; Yd. Ill; 209.

50. Vi.XLV,7-10; Yd.III,2ii.

51. Vi. XLV, 11-14; Yd. Ill,
210.

52. Vi. XLV, 20-21,31.

53. Vi. XLV, 32*.

54. Yd. Ill, 220.

55. Ga. XXI, 1; Ap. I, 21, 8;
Va. I, 19-21; Vi. XXXV,
i-2 ; Yd. Ill, 227.

56. Ga. XXI, 10; Vi. XXXVI,
x; XXXVII, 1-3; Yd. Ill,
228.

57. Ga. XXI, 1; Ap. I, 21, 8 ;
Vi. XXXVI, 2; XXXVII,
4-5; Yd. Ill, 228-229.

58. Ba. II, 2, 3-4; Vi. XXXVI,
3; Yd. 111,230.

59. Ga. XXI, 1; Ba. II, 2, 13;
Ap. I, 21, 8-9, 17-18; Vi.
XXXVI, 4-7; Yd. Ill,
231.

60. Ga. XXI, 1,11; Ap. I, 21, 9-
10; Va. I, 23; Vi. XXXVII,
6, 9 -i°. r 3 J Yd. Ill, 234,235,

237, 239-240.

61. Ga. XXI, 11; Vi. XXXVII,
15-18; Yd. Ill, 234-235,

238.

62. Ga. XXI, 11; Ba. II, 2,13 ;
Yd. Ill, 236-238.

63. Ga. XXI, 11; Ba. II, 2, 5 ;•
Vi. XXXVII, 14,19-21; Yd.
Ill, 234-235.

64. Ga. XXI, 11; Vi. XXXVII,
22-26; Yd. Ill, 240, 242.

65. Ga. XXI, 11 ; Ap. I, 21,
14-15; Vi. XXXVII, 7, 24/
27 ; Yd. Ill, 239-240. .

66. Ga. XXI, 11; Ba. II, 2, 13 ;
Vi. XXXVII, 28-30, 32; Yd.
Ill, 234, 242.

67. Ga. XXI, 1,11; Va. I, 23;
Vi. XXXVII, 13,31, 33; Yd.
Ill, 236-237,239.

68. Vi. XXXVIII, 1-6.

SYNOPSIS OF PARALLEL PASSAGES.

577

69. Vi. XXXIX, 1.

70. Ba. II, 2,6 ; Vi. XL, 1.

71. Ba. II, 2, 15-16; Ap. I, 21,
12-17; Vi. XLI, 1-4.

72. Ga. XXII, 1; Ba. II, 1,1.

73. Ga. XXII, 4-6; Ba. II, 1,
2-3; Ap.I, 24,11-20; I, 28,
21-29,1; Vi. L, 1-6,15; Yd.
Ill, 243.

74. Mah. XII, 35,4 ; Ga. XXII,
2-3; Ap. I, 25, 11; Ya. Ill,
248.

75. Ga. XXII, 10; Ba. II, i, 4.

76. Mah. XII, 35, 5».

77. Mah. XII, 35, 5 b-6a; Yd.
Ill, 250.

78. Ya. Ill, 249.

79. Ap. I, 24,18.

80. Par. VIII, 42 *; Ga. XXII, 7;
Va.XX, 27 ;Yd.III, 244-245.

81. Ga. XXII, 8; Ap. I, 24, 21;
Va. XX, 28; Yd. III, 246.

82.

83. Ga. XXII, 9; Ba. II, i, 5;
Ap. I, 24, 22 ; Vi. XXXV, 6 ;
Yd. Ill, 244.

84 .

85. See above, IX, 317; 1 ,93-95.

86. See below, XII, 112.

87 .

88. Ga. XXII, 12-13 > Ba. II)
x, 12; Ap. I, 24, 6-9; Va.
XX, 23-24,34-36; Vi, L, 7-
9 ; YL III, 251.

89. Vi. L, 10.

90. Ga. XXI, 7; Ba. II, 1, 6.

91. Mah. XII, 165, 48 a; Ga.
XXIII, 1; Ba. II, 1, 18; Ap.
I, 25, 3; Va. XX, 22; YL |
HI, 2 53-

92. YL III, 253.

93. Vi. LI, 1; YL III, 254.

05]

94 .

95. Vi. XXII, 82*.

9<5 .

97 .

98 .

99 .

100. )

101. / See above ’ VTII > 314-316.

102. Ap. I, 25, 10; Vi. LII, 3;
YL III, 258.

103.

104. Ga. XXIII, 8-9; Ba. II, 1,
13-14; Ap. I, 25, 2; Va.
XX, 14; Vi. XXXIV, 2; YL
III, 259.

105. Mah. XII, i65,5o b -5i a ; Ga.
XXIII, 10-11; Ba. II, 1, 15;
Ap. I, 25, 1; Va. XX, 13;
Yd. Ill, 259.

106. Vi. LIII, 1; YL III, 260.

107. Vi. LIII, 6; YL III, 260.

108.

109. Ga. XXII, 18; Ap. I, 26, 1;

Va. XXI, 18; Vi. L, 16; Yd.

hi, 263.

no. Vi. L, 22.

in. Vi. L, 16; Ya. Ill, 263.

112. Vi. L, 17-1S.

113. Par. VIII, 41 *; Vi. L, 19-20.

114. Par. VIII, 39*; Vi. L, 21.

115. Par. VIII, 40*.

116. Vi. L, 24.

117. YL III, 263.

118. Vi. XXXVII, 35.

119. Ga. XXIII, 17; Ba. II, 1,
31-33 ; Ap. 1, 26, 8-9 ; Va.
XXIII, 1-3; Yd. Ill, 280; P 5 .
Gri. Ill, 12, 1-3.

120. Ga. XXV, 4; Ba. II, 1, 35.

121. Vi. XXVIII, 48*; Ba. II,
1,30; Va. XXIII, 4.

122. Ga. XXV, i-2.

578

LAWS OF MANU.

123. Vi. XXVIII, 49*; Ga. XXIII,
18; PL Gri. Ill, 12, 6-8.

124. Vi.XXVIII,50*; Ga.XXIII,
19; PL Gri. JII, 12, 8.

125. Vi. XXXVIII, 7*.

126. Vi. XXXIX, 2; XL, 2;
XLI, 5.

127. Ga. XXII, 14-16; Ba. II, 1,
8-10; Va. XX, 31-33; Vi.
L, 12-15; YL III, 266-267.

128. ^Ga. XXII, 14; Ba. 1 ,19,1;
Ap. I, 24, 1,4; Yd. III, 266.

129. YL III, 266.

130. Ga. XXII, 15; Ba. 1,19, 2 ;
Ap. I, 24, 2, 4; YL III, 267.

131. Ga. XXII, 16; Ba. I, 19, 2;
Ap. I, 24, 3-4 ; Yd. Ill, 267.

132. ^ Ga. XXII, 19; Ba. 1 ,19, 6;
Ap. I, 25,13; Va. XXI, 24;
Vi. L, 30-32; Yd. Ill, 270.

133. Yd. Ill, 270.

134- Ga. XXII, 23, 25; Vi. L,
34-36 J Yd. Ill, 273.

135. Ga. XXII, 24; Vi. L, 36-
39; YL III, 271, 273-274.

136. Ba. 1 ,19,6; Vi.L/33; Yd.
Ill, 272.

137. Ba. I, 19, 4; Vi. L, 25-28;
YL III, 271.

138. Vi. L, 29, 40-41; Yd. Ill,
272-273.

139. Ga. XXII, 26; Yd. Ill, 268.

140. Va. XXI, 26; Yd. Ill, 274.

141. Vi. L, 46 *; Ga. XXII, 20-
21; Ap. I, 26, 2; Va. XXI,
25 ; Yd. Ill, 269.

142. Vi. L, 47 *; Ga. XXII, 22;
Yd. Ill, 275.

143- Vi. L, 48 *; YL 111,276.
144. Yi. L, 49 *; YL 111,275.
145 - Vi. L, 50 *; YL III, 276.
M6.

147. Ga. XXIII, 2; Ba.II, 1,19,
21; Va. XX, 19; Vi. LI, 4;
Yd. Ill, 255.

148. Ba. II,x,22*; Va. XX, 21;
Vi. LI, 23-24.

i 49 .

150. Mah. XII, 165, 76 b ; Ga.
XXIII, 6; Vi. LI, 25.

151. Ga. XXIII, 3; Va. XX, 20;
Vi. LI, 2; Yd. Ill, 255.

152. Va. XX, 18*; Par. XII, 3*;
Ba. II, 1, 20; Vi. LI, 5.

153. Va. XIV, 33; Vi. LI, 50,
54, 56; see above, IV, 222.

154 .

155 .

156. Vi. LI, 27, 34.

157. Ga. XXIII, 4-5; Va. XXIII,
30; Vi. LI, 3-4.

158. Va.XXIII, 12; Vi.LI,43-44.

159. Va. XXIII, 11; Vi. LI, 45;
Yd. Ill, 282.

160. Va. XXIII, 11; Vi. LI, 46-47.

161. Ga. XXI 11 , 26.

162.

163. Ap. I, 25,10; Vi. LII, 5.

164. Vi. LII, 6.

165. Vi. LII, 7.

166. Vi. LII, 8.

167. Vi. LII, 9.

168. Vi. LII, 10.

169. Vi. LII, ir, 13.

170.

171. Ga. XXIII, 12-13, 32; Ba.‘

II, 2,13-14; Va. XX, 15-16;
Vi. XXXIV, 2 ; LIII, 1; Yd.

III, 233.

172.

173. Ba. II, 1, 37-38.

174. A Ga. XXII, 36; XXIII, 34;
Ap. I, 26, 7; Vi. LIII, 4, 7;
YL III, 288.

SYNOPSIS OF PARALLEL PASSAGES.

579

175. Vi. LIII, 4; YI. Ill, 291.

176. Ba. II, 4, 14 *; II. 4 , 13;
Va. XXIII, 41; Vi. LIII, 5-6.

177. Mah. XII, 163, 6 3 »>; Vi.
LIII, 8.

ns . A - • •

179. Vi. LIII, 9*; Ap. I, 27,
11*; Ba. II, 2,11*; Par. VII,
10*.

180.

181. Mah. XII, 165, 37; Ba. II,
2,35*; Va. I, 22*; Ga. XXI,
3; Vi. XXXV, 3-5 ; Yd. Ill,
261.

182. Vi. LIV, 1.

183. Ga. XX, 4-6; Ba. II, 1, 36;
Va. XV, 12-13; Yd. Ill, 295.

184. Ga. XX, 4, 7 ; Va. XV, 12,
14; Vi. XXII, 57.

185. Ga. XX, 8-9; Va. XV, 15-
16; Yd. Ill, 295; see above,
IX, 201.

186. See above, IX, 201.

187. Ga. XX, 10; Ba. II, 1, 36;
Va. XV, 17-21; Yd. Ill, 296.

188. Ga. XX, 11-14; Ba. II, 1,
36 ; Yd. Ill, 296.

189. Yd. Ill, 297.

190. Vi. LIV, 31 *.

191. Vi. LIV, 32*; Yd. 111,299.

192. Vi. LIV, 26 *; Ap. I, 1, 23-
2,10; Va. XI, 76-79.

193. Vi. LIV, 27 *.

194. Vi. LIV, 28 *.

195. Vi. LIV, 24*; Yd. 111,290.

196 - iBa.II, 1,36; YI. Ill, 300.

1 97- f

198. Vi. LIV, 25 *; Ap.I, 26, 7;
YI. Ill, 289.

199. YI. Ill, 289.

200. Ga. XXIII, 7; Va. XXIII,
31; Vi. LIV, 12; YI.Ill,277.

201.

202. YI. Ill, 291.

203.

204. Vi. LIV, 29 *.

205. Par. XI, 49 *; YI. Ill, 292.

206. Par. XI, 50*; YI. Ill, 292.

207.

208. Mah. XII, 165, 45 b -46 a .

209. Ba. II, 1, 7*; Vi. LIV, 30*;
Par. XI, 51 *; YI. Ill, 293.

210. Vi. LIV, 34*; YI. Ill, 294.

211.

212. Ga. XXVI, 2-5; Ba. II, 2,
38; IV, 5, 6-7; Ap. I, 27, 7 ;
Va. XXI, 20; Vi. XLVI, 10;
YI. Ill, 320.

213. Ba. IV, g, 11*; Va. XXVII,
13*; Par. X, 29*; Vi. LIV,
19; YI. Ill, 315.

214. Ba. IV, 5, 8*; Ga. XXVi,
18-19; Ba. II, 2, 40; Va.
XXIV, 1-2 ; YI. Ill, 320.

215. Ba. II, 2, 37; IV, g, 10; Va.
XXI, 21; Vi. XLVI, 11; YI.
Ill, 318.

216. Ba. IV, g, ig*; Vi. XLVI,
18 ; YI. Ill, 321.

217. Va. XXVII, 21*; Par. X,
2*; Ga. XXVII, 12-13; Ba.
Ill, 8, 10,19-23; Va. XXIII,
43; Vi. XLVII, 4 -g; YI. Ill,
3 2 4 -

218. Ga. XXVII, 14; Ba. Ill, 8,
26; IV, g, 17; Va. XXVII,
21; Vi. XLVII, 3, 6.

219. Ba.IV,g,i 9 *;Vi.XLVII,7.

220. Ba. IV, g,i8*; Vi. XLVII,8.

221. Ba. IV, g, 20 * ; Ga. XXVII,
18; Ba. Ill, 8,31; Vi.XLVII,
9; YI. Ill, 325, 327.

222. Ba. Ill, 8, 30; Vi. XLVII,

IO.

P p 2

5Bo

LAWS OF MANU.

223. Ga. XXVI, 1-6; XXVII, 2;

247. Va. XXVII, 1-2.

Ba. Ill, 8,3, 7-9,12-13.

248.

224. Ba. Ill, 8,17; YLIII, 326.

249. Ba. IV, 1, 29*; Va. XXVI,

225. Ba. Ill, 8,14-16.

4 *; Vi. LV, 2.

226. Va. XXIV, 46; Yi. Ill, 309.

250. Va. XXVI, 5*; Vi. LV, 4 ;

227. Va. XXV, 3.

Yi. Ill, 304.

928. .......

251. Va. XXVI, 6*; Y 4 .III, 304.

229.

252. Va. XXVI, 7*; Vi. LV, 6;

230. Mah. XIII, 112, 5.

Yi. Ill, 305.

231.

253 .

232.

254. Ga. XXIV, 2-3; Ba. IV, 2,

?33 .

4 ” 5 -

234.

255.

235.

256.

236.

257.

237.

258.

238.

259.

239. Vi. XCV, 17*.

260. Ga. XXIV, 10,12 ; Ba. Ill,

240.

5, 2-5; Va. XXVI, 8; Yi.

241.

Ill, 302.

242.

261. Vi.LV,7* ; Ba.IV,2,15.

243.

262. Va. XXVII, 3*.

244 .

263. Ba. Ill, 9, 1-21; IV, 5, 29.

2 45 .

264.

246. Va. XXVII, 7*; Yi. III,

265.

in.

266.

Manu

XII.

t .1

1 14.

2.

15.

3 .

16.

4 .

17 .

6- Yi III, 134.

18.

6. YI III, 135.

19 .. .

7. Yi. Ill, 136.

20.

8.

21.

9. Yi. Ill, 131,134-136.

22.

IO.

2 3 .

II.

24. YL III, 182.

12. Maitr. Up. Ill, 3.

2 5 .

a6.

SYNOPSIS OF PARALLEL PASSAGES.

581

27. Mah. XII, 194, 31; 219, 29.

28. Mah. XII, 194, 32 ; 219, 30.

29. Mah. XII, 194, 33; 219, 31.

30.

3 1. Y 1 III, 137.

32. Maitr.Up.Ill,5; Yd.Ill, 138.

33. YL III, 139.

34 .

35 .

36 .

37 .

38 .

39 .

40. Ya. Ill, 137-139*

41 .

42 .

43 .

44 .

45 .

46 .

47 .

48 .

49 .

66. Vi. XLIV, 35-37; Y 4 . Ill,
214-215.

67. Vi. XLIV, 38-43; Ya. Ill,
214.

68. Vi. XLIV, 44* ; Ya. 111,217.

69. Mah. XIII, hi, 130; Vi.
XLIV, 45*.

7 o.

7 1 -

72.

73 *

74 *

75 *

76.

77 *

Ya. Ill, 206;
IV, 88-89.

see above,

78 .

79 *

80.

81.

82.

83. Ya. Ill, 190.

84. . . .

85.

50. . . .

51. . . .

52. Ya. Ill, 219.

53 • • • •

86 .

87.

88 .

89.

54. . . .

55. YL III, 207.

56. YL III, 207.

57. Ya. Ill, 208.

58. YL III, 208.
59 *

90.

60. YL III, 212.

61. YL III, 213.

62. Vi. XLIV, 14-20; YS. Ill,
214-215.

63. Vi. XLIV, 21-25; YL III,
211, 215.

64. Vi.XLIV,26-30; Ya.HI, 215.

65. Vi. XLIV, 31-34; Ya. Ill,

91. tsL Up. 6 ; Ap. I, 23,1.

92 .

93 .

94 .

95 .

96 .

97 .

98 .

99 .

100.

101. Va. XXVII, 2*.

102 .

103 .

104 .

5 82

LAWS OF MANU.

.

106 .

107 .

108. Ga. XXVIII, 48.

109. Va. VI, 43* ; Ba. I, 1, 5-6;
Ap. II, 29,13-14; Va. I, 6-7.

no. Ga. XXVIII, 49; Ba.1,1,7,9.
hi. Ba. I, 1,8*; Va. Ill, 20*;
Par. VIII, 34*.

112. Yd. I, 9.

113. Ga. XXVIII, 50.

114. Ba. I, 1, 16* ; Va. Ill, 5* ;
Par. VIII, 12*.

115. Ba. I, 1, n *; Va. Ill, 6*;
Par. VIII, 13*.

116.

.

118.

ir 9 .

120 .

121 .

122 .

123 .

124 .

125 .

126 .

I N DEX.

INDEX.

Abhi^it sacrifice, xi, 75.

Abhira caste, x, 15.

Abhbasta, one accused of mortal sift,
ir, 185; in, 159 J iv, an-
Abortion, v, 90. See Penance for
destroying embryo.

Actions, classification of, xii, 1-11.
Activity, quality of nature or of Self,
xn { 24, 26, 28, 32, 36, 38.

— conditions caused by, xn, 40,

45-47.

Actor, excluded from Sraddha, ill,
155 .

— food of, forbidden, iv, 214, 215.

— not qualified to be witness, vm,

65.

— punishment for adultery with

wife of, vm, 362-363.

Adhvaryu priest, receives a chariot,
vm, 209.

Adityas, in, 284; xi, 222.

Adoption. See Son, adopted.
Adulteration of merchandise, vm,
203; ix, 286; xi, 50.
Adulteress, son of, excluded from
.Sraddha, 111, 156, 174-175.

— food of, forbidden, 111, 158; iv,

217.

— husband of, m, 155.

Adultery, a great crime, iv, 133-134;

vm, 352-353.

— an Upap&taka, xi, 60.

— definition of, vm, 356-358.

— penance for, xi, 177-179.

— punishments of females for, vm,

371; in next life, v, 164; ix, 30;
of males, viii, 359, 363, 372-379,
382-385; in next life, xi, 52;
xii, 60.

— witnesses in cases of, vm, 72.

See Guru, Wife.

Agastya, a sage, v, 22.

Ages of the world, 1, 68-73, 81-86;
ix, 301-302.

Aghamarsha#a hymn, xi, 260-261.
A^igarta, a sage, x, 105.

Agni, hi, 85, 86, 211; xi, 120, 122 ;
xii, 121, 123; king to behave
like, ix, 303, 310. See Fire.
Agnidagdha manes, ill, 199.
Agnihotra sacrifice, 11, 15; iv, 10,
25; v, 167; vi, 9; xi, 42; Add.
and Gorr. p. 613.

Agnish/oma sacrifice, II, 143.
Agnish/ut sacrifice, xi, 75.
Agnishvatta manes, 111, 195, 199.
Agnyadheya sacrifice, II, 143 ; vm,
A 209; xi, 38.

Agrayawasacrifice, iv, 26-28; vi, 10.
Agreements. See Non-performance
of.

Agriculture, called Pramrita, iv,
4-5-

— excludes from Sr&ddhas, III, 165.

— forbidden to Brahmana, III, 64,

x, 83-84.

— obligatory on Vaijya, I, 90; x, 79.

— one of the ten modes of subsist¬

ence, x, 116. See Cultivator,
Seed-corn.

A,g-yapa manes, in, 197.

Ahina sacrifices, xi, 198.

AhiWika caste, x, 37.

A&imana. See Sipping-water.
A&lrya. See Teacher.

A^arya caste, x, 23.

Akshamala, wife of Vasish^a, ix, 2 3.
Ambash/£a caste, x, 8, 13, 15, 19,
48.

Ambassador, vn, 63-68.
Anagnidagdha manes, m, 199.
Anantara sons, x, 6, 14, 41.
Andhatamisra hell, iv, 88, 197.
Andhra caste, x, 36, 48.

Afigas of the Veda, p. xxvi; 11, 141,
242; in, 184, 185; iv, 98.
Angiras, 1, 35; 11, 151; III, 198.

— sacred texts of, xi, 33.

Animals, classes of, 1, 43-45.

— eatable andibrbidden. See Food.

— slaying of, xi, 60, 69, 71. See

Meat, Penance for killing.

586

LAWS OF MANU.

AnnapnLrana rite, n, 34,
Antyavasayin caste, iv, 79 ; x, 39.
Antyesh/i rite, 11, 16.

Anulomas. See Castes, mixed.
Anvash/aka days, iv, 150.

Apapatra races, x, 51.

Apastambiya Dharma-sfitra, pp. xi,
xviii, xlix, li, lix, lxv, lxix, lxxi,
xciii, xcix, ci, cxix.
ApStrtkara»a sins, xi, 70. See Pen¬
ance for.

Apaviddha. See Son, cast off.
Appointment of daughters. See
Daughter appointed.

— of widows and wives, pp. xciv,

cix; hi, 160, 173.

— forbidden, ix, 64-68.

— permitted, ix, 57-63, 120-121,

145-146,159,162-165,167, 190-

191.

Apsarases, 1, 37; xir, 47.

Architect, excluded from Sraddha,
hi, 163.

Arms, trade of, excludes from Srad-
dha, hi, 162. See King, Ksha-
triya, duties of.

Arsha marriage, III, 21, 53.

— affects succession to woman’s

property, ix, 196.

— description of, 111, 29.

— permitted to whom, ill, 23-24.

— results of, ill, 38-40, 42.

Arson. See Incendiary.

Artisan, disqualified to be witness,
vm, 65.

— food of, forbidden, iv, 219.

— hand of, always pure, v, 129.

— may speak to married women,

vm, 360.

— to do work for king, vn, 138; x,

12°.

Aryan, acting like non-Aryan, and
non-Aryan like Aryan, x, 73.

— has three births, 11, 169.

— lawful residence of, 11, 24.

— may take roots &c. on a journey,

vm, 341.

— may take up arms, vm, 348-351.

— offspring of Aryan father and

non-Aryan mother preferable
to offspring of non-Aryan father
and Aryan mother, x, 66-72.

— to be witness for Aryan of the

same kind, vm, 68.

Aryavarta, x, 34; boundaries of, 11,
23-23.

Asahaya, commentator of Narad a,
pp. xvii, evii.

Asawvr/ta hell, iv, 81.

Ascetic, dress and utensils, vi, 41,
44 , 52 - 54 -

— duty of meditation and Veda-

study, vi, 49, 61-84.

— dwelling and manner of life, vi,

41-43.

— entrance into order, vi, 33-40.

— food and manner of begging,

VI, 43, 50-51, 55 - 59 -
general disposition, vi, 41,44-49,
60.

— not to be made a witness, vm, 65.

— pays no toll at ferry, vm, 407.

— personal purification, v, 137.

— produced by Goodness, xn, 48.

— receives alms atVauvadeva, ill, 94.

— informal, IV, 257-258; VI, 86,

94-96.

— punishment for intercourse with

female, vm, 363.

Ashfaka days, manes worshipped on,
iv, 150.

— Veda-study interrupted on, iv,

119.

Asipatravana hell, iv, 90; xn, 75.
Assassin. See Self-defence.

Assault, results of, on a Brahma»a,
iv, 165-169; xi, 207-208.

— to be avoided by Snataka,iv, 83,

164.

— a title of the law, vm, 6, 279-301.

— witnesses in cases of,.vm, 72.

See Homicide, Hurt, Mischief.
Assembly legal. See Parishad.
Assessors in a law-court, vm, 1, 10-
* 9 -

Astrologer excluded from Sraddha, /
hi, 162.

Astrology, practice of, forbidden to
ascetics, vi, 50.

Astronomy, science of, p. li.

Asura marriage, m, 21.

— affects succession to woman’s

property, ix, 197.

— description of, m, 31.

— permitted to whom, pp. Ixxvii-

Ixxviii; ill, 23-25.

— results of, in, 41-42. See Daugh¬

ter, sale of.

Asuras, 1, 37; m, 225; xi, 20.
Amlayana-smriti, p. xxii.

Ajvamedha. See Horse-sacrifice.
Atharvan, sacred texts of, xi, 33.

INDEX.

587

Atheism, -ist, 11,11; ill, 150; 1 v, 16 3;

viii, 22 ; xi, 67.

Atikr/M&ra penance, xi, 209; de¬
scription, xi, 214.

Atri, a sage, 1, 35; in, 196 ; quoted,
p. xxvii; hi, 16.

Aurasa. See Son, legitimate.
Austerity, best form of, 11,166; iv,
148.

— leads to final liberation, xn, 83.

— power of destroying guilt and

producing other effects, iv, 148;
xi, 228, 234-235.

— sole duty in Kr/ta age, 1, 86 .

— to be performed by ascetic, vi,

75; by hermit, vi, 8, 22-23, 3°*
Auttami Manu, 1, 62.

Avakir/nn. See Penance for breach
of student’s vow, Student.
Avantya caste, x, 21.

Avr/ta caste, x, 15,

Ayogava caste, descendants of, x,
15, 26, 32, 35.

— occupation, x, 48.

— origin of, x, 12,16.

Bali offering, ill, 70, 74, 108,265.

-- description of, ill, 87-94, 12 *•

— duty of performing for house¬

holder, III, 80-81; for hermit,
vi, 7.

Barber, food of, permitted to Brah-
ma»a, iv, 253.

Bard, excluded from Sraddha, 111,
158; may speak to married
woman, viii, 360. See Singer.
Barhishad manes, hi, 196, 199.
Basket-maker, food of, forbidden,
iv, 215.

Bathing, rules of, iv, 45, r29, 152,
201-203; a penance, vi, 69.
Baudh&yaniya DharmajSstra, pp. xx,
xlix, li-liii, lxv, xciii, xcix, cii,
civ, cxix.

Begging, a mode of subsistence, iv,
4-5 ; x, 116.

— rule of, for ascetic, vi, 43, 50-51,

55-58; for hermit, vi, 27-28; for
student, 11,48-50,108,182-185,
187; when permitted to SnS-
taka, iv, 33; xi, 1-6.

Bestial crime, xi, 174.

Betrothal, manner of, hi, 35.

— once made binding, ix, 47, 71;

except when bride is blemished,

ix, 72-73.

Betrothal, source of husband’s power,
V, 15 2. See Bride, Bridegroom.
Betting, ix, 221-228.

Bhadrak&li, in, 89.

Bharadva^a, a sage, x, 107.
Bhavishya-purawa, pp. cx-cxi.
Bhr/gu, expounds Manu’s laws, pp.
xii-xiii, xvii; 1, 59-60; v, 1-3;
xii, 2, 126.

— origin of, 1, 35.

— opinion of, quoted, p. xxvi; m,

16.

Bhfitas, hi, 70, 74, 80-81, 90.
Bhfitatman, xii, 12.

Birth. See Impurity, Transmigra¬
tion.

Blacksmith, food of, forbidden to
Brahma#a, iv, 215.

Blind man, excluded from inherit¬
ance, ix, 201; from Sraddha,
hi, 161, 177.

Boatmen, hire of, viii, 406; liability
for damage, viii, 408-409.
Bond, renewal of, viii, 154-155.
Booty, distribution of, vn, 96-97.
Boundary, disputes, a title of the
law, viii, 6, 245-266.

— not lost by lapse of time, viii,

149.

— punishment for destroying mark

of, ix, 291.

Brahma marriage, ill, 21.

— affects succession to woman’s

property, ix, 196.

— description of, III, 27.

— permitted to whom, ill, 23-24.

— results of, in, 37, 39-40, 42, 184.
Brahman, 1, 50 ; n, 82-84 ; ill, 70,

89; iv, 182, 260; vi, 32, 79,
81, 85; vn, 14; viii, 81; XII,
102, 123,125.

— composed Manu-smr/ti, p. xii; 1,

58.

— court of, viii, 11.

— day and night of, I, 68-73.

— muhfirta of, iv, 92.

— origin of, 1, 11; xii, 50.

— tfrtha of, 11, 58-59. See Purusha,

Svayambhfi, Soul.

Brahman priest, receives a horse,
viii, 209.

Br&hmafla, a class of works, iv, 100.
Brahmawa (caste), definition of a
true, 11, 87.

— duties, livelihood, and occupa¬

tions of, 1, 88, io2~iio; iv, 2-

538

LAWS OF MANU.

13; x, 1-3, 74-76; in times of
distress, viii, 339; xi, 11-23;

x, 81-94, 101-114, 116-117;
following forbidden occupa¬
tions, hi, 64-65, 150-166; VIII,
102; or neglecting duty, xn,
71. See Penance for following
forbidden occupations.

Brahma/za, feeding of, ill, 96-109,12 5-
129; iv, 29-30, 192-197.

— gifts to. See Gift, King, duties of.

— inherits property of Brahma«a,

ix, 188-189.

— judicial functions of, to be as¬

sessors in court, viii, 1, 10-11,
391; judges, viii, 9, 20; present
at examination of witnesses,
viii, 87; to impose penances,

xi, 86; to settle doubtful points
of law, xii, 108-116.

— manes of, m, 197, 199.

— marriage-rites lawful for, 111, 23-

24.

—may forcibly appropriate property,
viii, 339; xi, 11-21.

— offences against: (1) killing a, a

mortal sin, ix, 235; xi, 55;
also execution, viii, 380-381 ;
see Penances for; punishment,
criminal, for, ix, 237; in an¬
other life, xi, 49; xii, 55.
(2) other offences, assaulting
and threatening, iv, 165-169;
xi, 68; see Penance for threat¬
ening, &c.; defaming, vm,
267; seizing property of, xi,
26.

— offences by, acceptance of pro¬

perty from thieves makes Brah-
ma»a a thief, vm, 340; adultery
and rape, vm, 378-379, 383-
385; defamation of equal caste,
vm, 269; of lower, vm, 268,
276 ; not inviting virtuous
neighbours to a festival, vm,
39a; perjury, viii, 123-124;
theft, greatness of guilt, vm,
338 .

— origin of, 1, 31, 87, 93 J xii, 48.

— power and rank of, 1, 93-101;

n,i35; ix, 245,313-322; x, 3;

xi, 3i-35.

— reverence due to, iv, 39, 52, 58,

142, 162; see King,
duties of; irreverence towards,
degrades, x, 43.

Brahma^as, seniority among, 11,

155.

— shall employ indigent Kshatriya

and Vabya, vm, 411-412.

— special rules for, of administration

of oath, viii, 113; betrothal,
hi, 35; burial, v, 92; of ex¬
amination as witness, vm, 88;
of impurity, v, 83, 99; of
initiation, 11, 36-38, 41-42, 44-
46; of KejSnta, n, 65; of
naming, 11, 31-32; of payment
of fine, ix, 229; of purification,
11, 58, 62 ; of saluting, 11, 12a-
127; of studentship, 11, 49,
190.

— why subject to death, v, 4.

— wives permitted to, III, 13-19.

See Snataka, Srotriya, Sons by
wives of several castes.
Brahma%ali, ceremony, 11, 70-71.
Brahmawi, daughter of, inherits from
co-wives, ix, 198.

— prerogatives of, wife, p. lxxiv;

ix, 85-87.

— punishment of adultery with, vm,

374-378.

Brahmarakshasa, xii, 60.
Brahmarshis, country of, 11, 19;

customs, 11, 20.

Brahmasattra, 11, 106: iv, 9.
Brahmavarta, boundaries, 11, 17;
customs, II, 18.

Bride, defamation of, vm, 225.

— given away by whom, v, 151.

— open declaration of blemishes

required, vm, 205 ; fine for
concealment of blemishes, vm,
224. See Betrothal, Marriage,
Wife.

Bridegroom, receives honey-mix¬
ture, in, 119; way to be made
for, 11, 138.

Br/haspati, xi, 120, 122.
Brihaspati-smr/ti, pp. xvi-xvii, xciv,
xcvi, cviii-cx.

Br/hat Manu, pp. xcii, xcvi-xcvii.
BWhat Saiikha-smr/ti, pp. xxi-xxii.
Brother, begetting son with pre¬
deceased brother's bride or
widow, in, 160, 173; ix, 57-
68, 120-121, 143-147.

— gives sister in marriage, v, 151.

— must give one-fourth share to

unmarried sister, ix, 118.

—* elder, honour shown to, 11, 225-

INDEX.

5**9

226; iv, 180, 184; IX, no;
marrying or sacrificing after
younger, in, 154, 170-172; xi,
61 ; punished for cheating his
younger brother, ix, 213;
punishment for defaming, vm,

275.

Brother, younger, marrying or sa¬
crificing before elder, in, 154,
170-172; xi, 61.

Brothers have all male offspring
through one son, ix, 182.
Brother's wife, manner of saluting,
11, 132. See Inheritance, Par¬
tition, Sons, eldest, second,
younger, youngest.

Burglary. See Robbery.

Burial. See Infants; Brahmarca,
Kshatriya,Vaijya, Sfidra, special
rules for.

Carpenter, food of, forbidden, iv,
210.

Caste, change of, vn, 42 ; x, 42-43,
64-65.

— exclusion from, xi, 183-186.

—- readmission to, xi, 187-191, 196-
197.

Castes, four original, x, 4; their
origin, 1, 31, 87; x, 45.

— mixed, enumeration, origin and

occupation of, x, 6-56; signs
for detecting them, x, 57-61.

— duties of all, x, 63.

— law of castes, vm, 41-42, 46. See

Aryan, Brahmawa, Kshatriya,
Vaijya, Stidra, Occupations.
Cattle, rearing or tending, duty of
Vakya, 1,90; vm, 114; ix, 326-
328; x, 79.

— forbidden to Br&hma#a, 111, 154,

166; viii, 102; except in times
of distress, x, 82. See Damage,
Herdsman.

Coins. See Weights of copper, &c.
Concerns among partners, a title of
the law, vm, 4, 206-211.
Conduct, rule of, most important, 1,
107-110; iv, 145-146, 156-158,
i 75 .

— of those who know Veda authori¬

tative, 11, 6, 18; iv, 145.
Confession destroys guilt, xi, 228-
229.

Connubial intercourse, duty of, Hi,
45-50; ix, 4.

Connubial intercourse, when for-
bidden, in, 45-47; iv, 40-42,
128.

Conquest, duty of king and Ksha¬
triya, vii, 94-110; ix, 251; x,
119; duties after — has been
made, vn, 201-203.

— one of the modes of acquiring

property, x, 115.

Contract, for carriage, vm, 156-157.

— regarding crops, ix, 52-53.

— when null and void,vm, 163-168.

See Bond, Debt.

Coparcener. See Partition.

Cow, food smelt at by, impure, iv,
209.

— killing an Upapataka, xi, 60. See

Penance for.

— reverence towards, iv, 38,45, 48,

52, 58 - 59 > 72, 142, 162.
Creation, account of, pp. lxxxiii-xc;
by Manu, I, 1-59; by Bhr/gu,
I, 60-110.

Cultivator, food of SGdra, lawful for
Brahma»a, iv, 253.

— negligent, punished for loss of

crop, viii, 243. See Agricul¬
ture, Boundary, Damage by
cattle.

— shares crop, ix. 53.

Custom, source or the law, II, 6, 12,
18; viii, 41-42, 46.

— of conquered country, to be up¬

held, vii, 203.

Daityas, xn, 48 ; manes of, ill, 196.
Daiva marriage, ill, 21.

— affects succession to woman's

property, ix, 196.

— description of, 111, 28.

— permitted to whom, 111, 23-24,

— results of, in, 38-40, 42.

Daksha, a Pra^apati, ix, 128-129.
Daksh£ya«a sacrifice, vi, 10.
Dakshiwl. See Sacrificial fee.
Damage done by boatmen, vm,

408-409; by cattle, vm, 240-
242, See Hurt, Mischief.
Damages for injury to person, vm,
287.

Dancers, to be banished, ix, 225.
Darada race, x, 44.

Darkness, quality of nature or of
Self, 1,5 5 XII, 34,39,33,33,38.

— conditions produced by, I, 49;

xii, 40, 42-44.

590

LAWS OF MANU.

Darjap(Jr«amasa sacrifices, iv, 25 ;
vi, 9.

Daja caste, x, 34.

Dasyu race, v, 131; vm, 66; x, 32 ;
xi, 18; xii, 70.

— definition of term, x, 45.
Dattaka. See Son, adopted.
Daughter, inherits from mother, ix,

192, 195; of Brahmam wife
inherits from co-wives, ix, 198 ;
unmarried, inherits fourth-
share from father, ix, 118;
separate property of mother,
ix, 131.

— position and treatment of, iv,

180, 185; ix, 130.

— sale of, forbidden, 111, 51-54;

ix, 98-100; rule regarding,
vm, 204. See Asura marriage,
Nuptial fee.

— to be married at proper time,

ix, 4, 88-89, 94; or to choose
husband, ix, 90-93.

— appointed, p. cix ; ill, 11; ix,

127; inherits, ix, 130; husband
of, inherits, ix, 135; son of,
inherits from maternal grand¬
father, ix, 131-134, 136; offers
funeral sacrifice, ix, 140.
Daughter’s daughter inherits from
maternal grandmother, ix,

193.

— son, entertained at Sraddha, in,

148, 234-235; inherits from
maternal grandfather, ix, 136,
139 -

Dealer in weapons, excluded from
.Sraddha, ill, 160 ; food of, for¬
bidden to Brahmawa, iv, 215,
260.

Debt, non-payment of or recovery
Of, VIII, 4, 47-60, 139-143, 151-
155 . 158-167, 176-177.

Debts, three, to gods, &c., iv, 257;
vi, 35-37; non-payment of, xi,
66 .

Defamation, vm, 6, 225, 267-

278.

— anybody may be witness in cases

of, viii, 72.

Defiling a maiden, xi, 62; punish¬
ments for, vm, 367-370.
Deposits, vm, 4, 149, 179-196.
Dhanvantari, 111, 85.

Dharai/a, value of, vm, 135-137.
Dharma, duty, law or justice per¬

sonified, 1, 81-82 ; vm, 15-16 ;
ix, 129; xii, 50.

Dharmaj&stra, pp. xxv, li-liv; 11,10;

in, 232; XII, III.
Dharma-sfitras, pp. xi-xii, xviii-xix,
xxiv, xxvi, lii-liii, lxii, xciv, cxix.
Dhigva^a caste, x, 15, 49.
Dialectics, institutes of, 11,11; science
of, vii, 43. See Logician.
Dikshita. See Sacrifices, Srauta,
one initiated for.

DinSras, pp. xvii, cv, cvii.

Diseases, punishments of crimes, xi,
49-53; exclude from Sraddhas,
ill, 151, 153-155, 159,165,177.

Disputes between owners of cattle
and herdsman. See Herdsman.

— regarding boundaries. See Boun¬

daries.

Documents, written, pp. xcix-ci;
viii, 154-155, 168, 255; ix,

232.

Domestic priest, iv, 179; vii, 78;
xii, 46.

Dravh/a caste, x, 22, 44.

Dress, indivisible property, ix, 219.

— of ascetic, vi, 44, 52.

— of hermit, vi, 6, 15.

— of Snataka, IV, 34-36, 66.

— of student, II, 41, 64, 174.
Drinking spirituous liquor, a mortal

sin, ix, 235; xi, 55.

— punishment for, ix, 237: in

another life, xi, 49 ; xii, 56;
other consequences, ill, 159;
iv, 207.

— women addicted to, v, 90; ix,

13, 80.

— sins equal to, xi, 57. See Penance

for drinking spirituous liquor.
Drishadvati river, p. xlv; 11,17.
Duties, on traders, vm, 398, 400.

See Taxes, Tolls.

Dvapara age, 1,85-86; ix, 301-302.

Earth, creation of, 1, 13; king be¬
having like, ix, 303, 311.
Eating, rules of, 11, 51-57; in, 116-
117; for Snataka, iv, 43, 45,
55, 58, 62-63, 65, 74-76.

— purification after, v, 145.

Edicts, royal, ix, 232.

Egg, mundane, 1, 9-13.

Ekoddish/a Sraddha, ill, 247; iv,

IIO-III.

Elements, 1, 6, 75-78.

INDEX.

591

Emigrant, wife of, ix, 74-76.
Eunuch, excluded from inheritance,
ix, 201; from sacrificing, iv,
205-206; from Sraddhas, 111,
150.

— food of, forbidden to Brahmawa,

iv, 205.

— son of, inherits, ix, 203.
Evidence, punishment for refusal of,

vm, 107; what is admissible
as, vm, 74. See Penance for
giving false evidence, Perjury,
Witness.

Exclusion from caste, see Caste;—
from inheritance, see Inherit¬
ance.

Families, law of, authoritative, vm,

41-

Fasting, v, 155; a penance, xi, 167,
204. See Paraka.

Father, gives daughter in marriage,
V, 151; must do so at proper
time, ix, 4, 88-89; loses power
over daughter, ix, 93.

— impure on birth of child, v, 62-

63.

— inherits from childless son, ix,

185; from childless daughter,
ix,197.

— offences against, in, 157, 159;

xi, 60; punishment for defam¬
ing, viii, 275; for forsaking,
vm, 389. See Daughter, Son.

— keeps recovered property, ix,

209.

— partition by, ix, 215.

— reverence towards, and vener-

ability of, 11, 145-148,225-237;
iv, 162, 179-180, 182. See
Guru, Sale, Son.

Father-in-law, entertained at Srad-
dha, hi, 148.

— how saluted, 11, 130.

— receives the honey-mixture, ill,

” 9 -

Fellow-student, impurity on death
of, v, 71.

Field, acceptance of, x, 114.

— settlement of boundaries of, vm,

262.

Fines, amounts of three degrees of,
viii, 138.

— how to be paid, ix, 229.

— son not liable for unpaid, vm,

159 *

Fire, reverence to be shown towards,
IV > 48, 53 - 54 , 58, 142. See
Agni, Sacred fire.

Flag, punishment for destroying, ix,
285.

Food, forbidden and lawful, iv, 205-
225, 247-250, 253; v, 5-56;
in times of distress, x, 104,106-
108.

— eating forbidden, an Upapataka,

xi, 65; punishment for, in next
life, xii, 59. See Penance for
eating forbidden food.

— indivisible property, ix, 219.

— lawful for hermits, vi, 3, 12-21,

27-28.

— obtained by begging, always pure,

v, 129.

Force, vitiates all transactions, vm,
168.

Forgery, ix, 232.

Fornication, xi, 59.

— excludes from Sraddhas, ill, 164.

— penance for, xi, 171.

— punishments for, viii, 364-366.
Fortress, royal, vn, 70-76; ix, 252
Fortune-tellers, to be punished, ix,

258.

Fraud, vitiates every transaction,
vm, 165; punishment of, vm,
193. See Brother, eldest;
T rader.

Friend, betrayer of, excluded from
.Sraddha, ill, 160.

— disqualified to be witness, vm,

64.

— impurity on the death of, v, 82.

— killing, xi, 57.

— not to be fed at Sraddha, hi, 138-

141.

— wife of, adultery with, xi, 171.
Funeral ceremonies. See Antyesh/i;

Impurity, behaviour of mourn¬
ers.

Funeral sacrifices. See Sriddhas.

G&dhi, son of, vn, 42.

Gambling, pp. lxx-Ixxi; excludes
from Srlddha, 111,151,159,160.

— forbidden to Snatakas, iv, 74;

to kings, vii, 47, 50.

— punishable, ix, 226-228, 258.
Gandharva marriage, ill, 21; affects

succession to woman’s property,
ix, 196; description of, 111, 32;
permitted to whom, p. lxxvii;

592

LAWS OF MANU.

hi, 23-24,26; results of, 111,41-
42.

Gandharvas, vii, 23 ; origin of, 1,37;

xii, 47 ; manes of, 111,196.
Garbhadh&na, rite of conception, 11,
16, 26,142.

Garden, boundaries of, vm, 262;

selling, a crime, xi, 62.
Gautama, a lawgiver, quoted, p. xxvi;
hi, 16.

Gautamiya Dharmajastra, pp. xviii,
xx, xxiv, xxxiv, Ixv, lxix-lxx,
lxxii, xcviii, xcix, cii, civ, cxix.
G&yatri. See Savitri
Gift, acceptance of, lawful for Brah-
ma«a, 1, 88; x, 75-76,115; but
dangerous, iv, 186-191; from
wicked or low men forbidden,
ill, 179; iv, 84-91; xi, 24-25,
42, 70; except when offered
unasked or in times of distress,
iv, 247-250, 251-252; x, 102-
114.

— made once only, ix, 47.

— obligatory, iv, 31-32, 226-228;

vii, 82; xi, 1-6.

— of friends, on marriage and with

honey-mixture is separate pro¬
perty, ix, 206.

— rewards for making, ill, 95; iv,

329-335; vii, 83-86; xi, 23.

— void, vm, 159, 165, 168. See

Resumption of gift.

— worthy recipients of, ill, 96-97,

128-137,142-143, 149, 168; iv.
31. See Liberality.

Girdle, sacred of student, 11, 42-43,
64, 174.

Goblins, 111, 90. See Bhutas.

Gods, age of the, 1, 71 ; creation or
origin of, 1, 36; in, 201; xii,
40, 49 -

— daily offerings and worship, hi,

70-90; iv, 152; vi, 24.

— debt due to. See Debts, three.

— images of, iv, 39, 130; vm, 87.

See Temple.

property of, xi, 20; punishment
for seizing, xi, 26.

— tSrtha of, n, 59.

Goldsmith, impure, iv, 215, 218;
xii, 61.

— punishment of fraudulent, ix, 292 ;

of negligent, ix, 286.

Goodness, quality of nature or of
Self, xii, 24-26,37-38.

Goodness, conditions produced by,
xii, 40, 48-50.

Gosava sacrifice, xi, 75.
Gosh/M-jr&ddha, hi, 254.
Government. See King, Ministers,
Officials, Police, Policy.
Govindara^a, a commentator of
Manu, pp. xiii-xiv, cxxvi-cxxviii.
Grammar, science of, pp. 1 -li.

Great one, the, 1,15 ; xii, 14,24, 50.
Guardian. See Minor, Woman.
Guest, definition of, in, 102, 103,
no.

— duty of feeding for householder,

in, 70, 72-74, 80, 94, 100, 115,
118 ; iv, 29; by hermit, vi, 7-8.

— manner of reception, hi, 99-113.

— persons not to be received as, iv,

30.

— quarrels with, forbidden, iv, 179,

182. See Honey-mixture.
Guhyakas, xii, 47.

Guilds, law of, authoritative, vm, 41.
Guru, definition of term, 11, 142,149.

— duty of maintaining, iv, 251-252 ;

xi, 1.

— impurity on death of learned, v,

82.

— manner of saluting, n, 130.

— reverence towards, iv, 130,162 ;

xii, 83. See Father, Mother,
Teacher, &c.

— adultery with wife of, a mortal

sin, ix, 235; xi, 55; punish¬
ment for, ix, 2 3 7; in next birth,
xi, 49; xii, 58. See Penance
for adultery with wife of Guru.

Gatakarman, birth-rite, 11, 27, 29.
G&tibhratfwa sins, xi, 68. See Pen¬
ance for Gatibhra^jakara.
G^alla caste, x, 22 ; xii, 45.

Glva, xii, 13.

Gyaish/^a, month, vm, 245.
Gyesh//6a-saman, in, 185.

Hara, xii, 121.

Havirbhqg manes, 111,197.
Havishmat manes, hi, 198.
Havishpantiya hymn, xi, 252.

Hells, hi, 249; iv, 81,165,197; ix,
138; xii, 16-22, 54.

— enumeration of, iv, 88-90.
Herdsman, food of •S'tidra, lawful

for Br 4 hma#a, iv, 253.

— disputes from transgressions of

INDEX,

593

owners of cattle and, vm, 5,
229-243.

Heretics, iv, 61; no libations offered
to dead, v, 89-90; not to be
fed, iv, 30; to be banished, ix,
225.

— doctrines and books of, XI, 66;

xii, 95-96.

Hermit, dress of, vi, 6, 15; duties:
must not accept anything, vi,
8; may beg, vi, 27-28; may
keep sacred fire and offer sacri¬
fices, vi, 4-5, 7, 9-12 ; may give
up both, vi, 25 ; must be hos¬
pitable, vi, 7-8 ; must perform
austerities, vi, 8, 22-24; must
recite Veda and study Upani-
shads, VI, 8, 29-30.

— food of, vi, 3,12-21, 27-28.

— may starve himself to death, vi,

— mode of personal purification, v,

137 .

— pays no toll at a ferry, vm,

407.

— produced by the quality of Good¬

ness, XII, 48.

High-treason, punishment of, ix.

275.

Himalaya, II, 21.

Hirawyakeji Dharma-sfitra, pp. xx,
xl, li.

Homicide, xi, 55, 57, 67.

— punishment of, vm, 296; ix, 235.

See Penance for killing, Self-
defence.

Honey-mixture, III, 3, 119-120; v,
4 1 *

— present received with, is separate

property, ix, 206.
Horse-sacrifice, xi, 75, 83.
Hospitality. See Guests.
Hotr/’-priest, receives a horse, vm,
209.

House, decision concerning bound¬
aries of, vm, 262.

Householder, duties of: marriage,
111,5-44; connubial intercourse,
ill, 45-50; treatment of female
relatives, in, 51-62; perform¬
ance of daily and domestic rites,
hi, 67-121; of Sraddhas, in,
122-286.

— entrance into order, m, 2; iv, 1.

— excellence of order of, ill, 77-78;

iv, 89-90.

Householder, livelihood of, iv, 1-12.

— mode of personal purification,

v, 136-137. See Occupations,
Snataka.

Hunter, food of, forbidden to Brah-
ma«a, iv, 212.

Hurt, done by carriage, vm, 290-
298. See Assault.

Husband, duties of, ix, 2, 5-16, 74,
101-102.

— one with wife, ix, 45-46.

— inherits from childless wife, ix,

196. See Connubial intercourse,
Marriage, Son of wife, Wife;
Woman, treatment of.

— power over wife, v, 147-154; ix,

3; source of that power, v, 152.
Hypocrite, excluded from hospitality,
iv, 30,192-197; from Sniddha,
in, 159.

— food of, forbidden to Brahmawa,

iv, 211.

— produced by Darkness, xii, 44.

— sanctimonious, to be punished,

ix, 258, 273.

Idiot, excluded from inheritance, ix,
201.

— property of, not lost by lapse of

time, vm, 148.

Images, punishment for destroying,
ix, 285. See Gods, images of.
Impurity (Sfitaka), on birth, v, 58,
61-63, 71, 77 , 79 -

— on carrying out corpse, v, 64-65,

85.

— on death of SapiWa, v, 58, 60,

75-77, 83-84; of teacher, v, 65,
80; of teacher’s son or wife,

v, 80; of infants, v, 67, 69;
of fellow-student, v, 71; of un¬
married females, v, 72; of re¬
mote relative, v, 78; ofSrotriya,
v, 81; of pupil, v, 81; of ma¬
ternal uncle, v, 81; of officiating
priest, v, 81; of maternal rela¬
tive, v, 81; of king, v, 82; of
friend, v, 82; of learned Guru,
v, 82.

— on following corpse, v, 103.

— on miscarriage, v, 66.

— on touching corpse, v, 64, 85.

— on two deaths or births following

each other, v, 79.

— behaviour of mourners during,

v ,7 3 .

594

LAWS OF MANU.

Impurity, exceptions to rules of, v,

89-90, 93-98.

— rite at end of period of, v, 99.

— causes interruption of Veda-

study, iv, 109-110, 127.

— makes food of giver unaccept¬

able, iv, 212.

Impurities of the body, v, 135. See

v Purification.

Incantations. See Magic.

Incest, xi, 59, 171. See Guru,
adultery with wife of.

Indivisible property. See Property.

Indra, in, 87; iv, 182 ; v, 96; vir,
4, 7; viii, 344; xi, 120, 122;
xii, 123.

Infant, burial of, v, 68-69.

— committing nuisance, ix, 283.

— disqualified to be witness, viii,

66 ; exceptions, viii, 70-71; to
sacrifice or recite Veda, 11,171-
172 ; xi, 36-37.

— no libations offered to, v, 70.

— special punishment for, ix, 230.

— treatment of, 111, 114; iv, 179;

viii, 312. See Impurity, Minor.

Informer, excluded from Sraddha, in,

161; food of forbidden, iv, 212 ;
punishment in next life, xi, 50.
See Spy.

Inheritance, a mode of acquiring
property, x, 115. (1) Succes¬
sion to male: sons, ix, 104,156-
157, 185; eldest son alone, ix,
105, 108; unmarried daughter
inherits one-fourth share, ix,
118; appointed daughter, ix,
130; son of appointed daughter,

ix, 131-134,136; husband of ap¬
pointed daughter, ix, 135; son
of daughter not appointed, ix,
136,139; adopted son, ix, 141-
142; son of appointed widow
or wife, ix, 120-121, 145-146,
190-191; six kinds of subsidiary
sons, ix, 158; among subsidiary
sons each better one inherits
before the rest, ix, 165, 184 ;
illegitimate son of Sfidra, ix,
179; father and brotheis, ix,
185; Sapi»</as, Sakulyas, teacher
and pupil, ix, 187; learned
Brahmawas, ix, 188-189; the
king, ix, 189; children of
eunuch, &c., ix, 203; son born
after partition, ix, 216; mother

and paternal grandmother, ix,
217. (2) Succession to fe¬

male; son, ix, 104, 192, 195;
daughter, ix, 192, 195; un-<
married daughter, ix, 131;
daughter of BrShma/n wife, ix,
198; daughter’s daughter, ix,
193 ; husband, ix, 196; mother
and father, ix, 197. (3) Suc¬
cession to reunited coparcener,
ix, 21 p-212. (4) Exclusion from
inheritance, ix, 143-144, 147,
201, 213 (?), 214; xi, 185-186.

Initiation, a second birth, 11, 148,
169-170.

— description of, ir, 36-47.

— neglect of. See Penance for

neglect; Vratya.

— second, xi, 147, 151-152.

Injury to living beings, excludes

from Sraddha, Hi, 164.

— forbidden, iv, 148,170, &c.; par¬

ticularly to ascetics, vi, 39, 46,
52, 68-69, 75. See Animals.

Institutes of dialectics. See Dia¬
lectics.

— of the sacred law. See Dharma-

jastra.

— of science, iv, 19-20.

Interest, kinds and rate of, p. xxix;

viii, 140-143, 150-155, 156
note, 157.

Judge, takes king’s place on the
bench, viii, 9, 11; must be a
Brahmawa, never a Stidra, viii,

9, 20-21; must be just, viii,
12-19; ^ unjust, to be fined,

ix, 234; behaviour in court,
viii, 23.

Judicial procedure, pp. xcix, ciii;
constitution of the court, viii,
1-2,9-12,20-23; eighteen titles
of the law, viii, 3-7; decisions
to be just, viii, 12-19; suits to
be heard according to the order
of plaintiffs caste, viii, 24; law
of castes, families, &c., authori¬
tative, viii, 41-42, 46; lawsuits
not to be begun or hushed up
by king or his servants, vm, 43 ;
causes of failure of suits, vm,
53-58; method of judicial in¬
vestigation ; inferences from
facts, vm, 25-26, 44-46, wit¬
nesses, viii, 45, 52-55, 61-108,

INDEX.

595

117-123, oaths, vm, 109-113,
ordeals, vm, 114-116, special
trial in disputes regarding de-

- posits, vm, 182-184; punish¬
ments, degrees of, vm, 124-
130; technical names of metal-
weights or coins, vm, 131-137;
three degrees of fines, vm, 138;
void legal transactions, vm,
16^168; fines, how paid, ix,
229; reversal of unjust decisions
by king, ix, 234 ; thief to be
executed only, if taken ‘ in fla¬
grantly ix, 270. See Parishad.

Kaivarta caste, x, 34.

Kalasfitra hell, in, 249; iv, 88.

Kali age, 1, 85-86; ix, 301-302.

Kalpa, a vedaiiga, p. xxvi; 11, 140.

Kamadhenudipika of Narayawa, p.
cxxx.

KamandakiyaNitisara, quotes Manu,
pp. xxxvi-xxxvii.

Kambo^a caste, pp. cxiv, cxvii; x,
44.

Kanina. See Son of unmarried
daughter.

Karawa caste, x, 22.

Karavara caste, x, 36.

Karshapawa, value of, vm, 136.

Karusha caste, x, 23.

Kajyapa, ix, 129.

Kanaka Dharma-sfftra, pp. xxi,xxiii;
quotation from p. xxi, note.

Kanaka school, pp. xv, cxxiv.

K&tyayana-smriti, p. cx.

Kltyayaniya Dharma-sfitra, p. cxix.

Kavi, father of manes, ill, 198; son
of Angiras, 11, 151-15 4.

Kejanta rite, clipping the hair, 11,65.

Khasa caste, x, 22.

Khila texts, ill, 232,

King, cannot be made a witness,
viii, 65.

— duties of: to protect and not to

oppress subjects, vn, 2-3, 35,
80, 88, in-112, 142-144; vm,
172, 303-309; JX, 253; x, 80,

119; to punish the wicked, vn,
14-34; viii, 302-303, 310-311,
335 , 343-3475 ix,252-293, 312;
to honour, support, and make
gifts to learned Brahma was,
VII, 37-38, 79 , 82-86, 88, 134-
136, 145; vm, 395; IX, 3T3-
323; xi, 4,21-23; to be humble,

p. cxiii; vn, 39-42; to study the
Veda and sciences, vn, 43; to
shun the eighteen vices, vii, 44-
53; to appoint ministers, vn,
54-58 ; and other officials, vn,
59-68,80-81,114-126; to select
a residence and to build fortress,
vii, 69-76; to wed a queen,
vii, 77; to appoint a domestic
and officiating priests, vn, 78-
79; to fight bravely and honour¬
ably, vn, 87-95, 184-200; x,
119 ; distribution of booty, vir,
96-97; to make conquests, vn,
99-100, 201-203 J ix, 251; x,

115, 119; to settle taxes and
duties, vii, 127-133, 137-140;
x, 118, 120; to sacrifice, vii,
79) T 45 ; to give audience, vii,
145-146, 223; to consult re¬
garding state affairs and to
follow the principles of Niti,

vii, 146-183, 205-216; ix, 294-
299; to inspect army, vn, 222 ;
to decide lawsuits either per¬
sonally, viii, i-8; ix, 233-234,
or through judge, vm, 9-10; to
be just,vm, 18-19,126-129,170-
175; ix, 2 49; to protect minors
and women, viii, 27-29; to
deal with found property, vm,
30-34; and with treasure-trove,

viii, 35-39; to restore or make
good stolen property, vm, 40-
44; to uphold law of castes, &c.,

vii, 203; vm, 41-42, 46; not
to begin or hush up lawsuits,

viii, 43; to settle rates of sale,

viii, 401-402 ; to have weights
and measures examined, viii,
403 ; to avoid taking property
of men guilty of mortal sins,

ix, 243-247; to be active and
energetic, ix, 301-311; to seek
death in battle, ix, 323.

King, food of, forbidden to Brah-
mawa, iv, 218.

— gifts of wicked, not to be ac¬

cepted, iv, 84-91.

-— impurity of, causes interruption
of Veda-study, iv, no.

— impurity on death of, v, 82.

— incarnation of eight deities, v, 96;

vii, 4-7.

— majesty of, vn, 8-13.

— never impure, v, 93-94, 97* ' *

Q q 2

596

LAWS OF MANU.

King, offences by, viii, 336.

— receives the honey-mixture, 111,

119-120.

— receives sixth part of subject's

demerit or merit, vm, 304-305 ;
of Brahmawa’s merit, xi, 23.
recreations allowed to, vn, 216-
217, 224-225.

— service under, forbidden to Brah-

ma»a, 111,64,153.

— shadow of, not to be trod on, iv,

130.

— Sfidra, iv, 61. See Edicts, High-

treason, Kshatriya, Vassals.
Kirata race, x, 44.

Kratu, a Pra^apati, 1, 35.

KriAk&n, or hard penance, v, 21;
xi, 106,125,140,159,163,178,
192, 198, 209.

— description of, xi, 212.

Kr/shwala, value of, vm, 134-135.
Krita age, I, 81, 83, 85-86; ix, 301-

302.

Krita. See Son, bought.

Kritrima. See Son, made.
Kshatriya caste, and Brahmawa, 11,
135; tv, 135-136; ix, 313-322.
causes of degradation of, x, 43-
45 -

— duties and occupations, 1, 89; x,

77-79, 1 15; in battle, vii, 87-
95, 144; in times of distress,
vm, 411-412; x, 83, 95, 117;
punishment of neglect of, in
next life, xii, 71.

— guilt of, in case of theft, vm, 337.

— killing man of, xi, 67. See

Penance for killing.

— manes of, ill, 197.

— not a guest, but to be fed, in,

IIO-III.

— ongin of, 1, 31, 87; xn, 46.

— punishment for adultery, vm,

375-377, 382 ; for defamation,
viii, 267, 269, 276.

— special rules, of administration of

‘oath, viii, 113; of burial, v, 92 ;
of examination as witness, vm,
88; of impurity, v, 83, 99; of
initiation, 11, 36-38, 41-42, 44-
46; of Kej&nta, 11,65; of mar¬
riage, hi, 44; of naming, 11, 31-
32; of purification, 11, 62 ; of
saluting, 11,127; of studentship,
n, 49,190.

— wives permitted to, in, 13-14.

See King, Sons by wives of
several castes.

Kshatriyas, seniority among, 11,155.
Kshatriyi, female, punishment for
adultery with, vm, 382-385.
Kshattri caste, x, 13, 19, 26.

— occupations of, x, 49.

— origin of, x, 12,16.

Kshetra^a. See Son, begotten on

widow of wife.

Kshetra^a, xii, 13-14.

Kubera, v, 96; vii, 4, 7, 42.
KuAnala hell, iv, 89.

Kuhfi, goddess, in, 86.

Kukku/aka caste, x, 18.
Kulltikabhaf/a, a commentator of
Manu, pp. xiv-xvii, xxv, c, cx,
cxi, cxxi, cxxxi-cxxxii.
Kumarilabhatttf, pp. cxxi-cxxii; Add.

and Gorr. p. 613.

Kurus, plain of, 11, 19; vii, 193.
KGshmWa texts, vm, 106.

Kutsa, hymn of, xi, 250.

Kaitra, month, vii, 182.

Kakshusha Manu, 1, 62.

Kandala caste, 111, 92, 239; iv, 79;
v, 131; ix, 87; x, 108; xii, 55.

— castes descended from, x, 26-31,

37 - 39 -

— intercourse with female of, pen¬

ance, xi, 176; punishment, vm,
373 -

— origin of, x, 12, 16.

— position and occupations of, x,

51-56.

— purification on touching, v, 85.
Kandraya«a, or lunar penance, v,

20; vi, 20; xi, 41, 107, 155 -
156, 164, 172, 178.

— description of, xi, 217-226.
Tarawa, demigods, xii, 44.
Katurmasya-sacrifices, iv, 26; vi, 10.
K/fclndogya-upanishad, pp. lx-lxi.
.Kina race, x, 44.

Koda race, x, 44.

KfWakarman, tonsure, 11, 27, 35 ; v,
58, 67.

Kuflku caste, x, 48.

Land, false evidence concerning,
viii, 99, 263.

— wrongful appropriation of, xi, 58.
Languages, of MleM&as and Aryans,

X, 45 ; various, of men, ix, 332.
Law, eighteen titles of, vm, 3-7.

INDEX.

597

Law, institutes of. See Dharma-
jastra.

— manner of investigation of, xii,

105-106.

— of castes, families, &c., vm, 41-

42, 46.

— settlement of doubtful points, xii,

108-115.

— sources of, 11, 6-25.

— special schools of, pp. xlix, li-lvii,

— the tenfold, vi, 91-93. See

Dharma.

Lawsuits. See Judicial procedure.
Learning, property acquired by, ix,
206.

Leather-cutter, impure, iv, 218.
Lending money, occupation ofVai-
jya, 1,90; 1x^326; x, 115.

— permitted to Brahmawa and Ksha-

triya in times of distress, x, 117.
See Debt, Interest,Usury.
Libations to the dead, v, 69-70, 88-
90; to the manes, 11, 176 ; 111,
70, 74, 81-82, 283; vi, 24.
Liberality, duty of, 1, 86 ; ix, 333 ;

x, 79.

— destroys guilt, xi, 228. See Gift.
Liberation, final, VI, 36-37, 42, 44,

74, 75, 78-8i, 85; xii, 83-104.
lAkktAsi race, x, 22.

Limitation, law of, viii, 145-149.
Livelihood, various means of, p.
lxviii; iv, 2-13. See Occupa¬
tions.

Logician, member of Parishad, xii,
111; not to be entertained as
guest, iv, 30.

Loha^araka hell, iv, 90.

Lohajanku hell, iv, 90.

Lunar penance. See Xandrayawa.

Madanapala, prince of Kash^E, pp.

cxxiv-cxxv.

Madgu caste, x, 48.

Madhuparka. See Honey-mixture.
Madhyadeja, boundaries of, 11, 21.
Madman, excluded from inheritance,
ix, 201, from SrEddha, hi, 161.

— special punishment for, ix, 230.
Magadha caste, x, 26.

— occupation of, x, 47.

— origin of, x, 11,17.

Magic, practice of, an Upapataka,

xi, 64; punishable, ix, 258, 290;
permitted to BrEhma«a, xi, 31-
34 *

MahEbhErata and Manu’s laws, pp.
xiv, xvi, xxxviii, lx, ixii-lxiii,
lxxiv-xcii, xcvii-xcviii, cvii.
Mahanaraka hell, iv, 88.
Mahapataka, mortal sin, enumera¬
tion of, ix, 235; xi, 55; punish¬
ments for, ix, 236-242. See
BrEhma«a, offences against;
Drinking spirituous liquor;
Guru, adultery with wife of;
Theft of gold.

Maharaurava hell, iv, 88.

MahavUi hell, iv, 89.

Mahitra hymn, xi, 250.
Maintenance, allowed to outcast
women, xi, 189; to subsidiary
sons, ix, 163 ; to those excluded
from inheritance, ix, 202.
Maitrayawa - brahma^opanishad, pp,
xliv-xlv.

Maitraya«iya school. See MEnava
school.

Maitreyaka caste, x, 33.

Malavaha sins, xi, 71. See Penance
for.

Malla caste, x, 22 ; xii, 45.

Manava Dharmajastra, traditional
account of origin of, pp. xii-
xviii; 1, 58-60, 102, 119; xi,
244.

— recast of a Dharma-sfitra, pp.

xviii-xlv.

— composed by a special law-school,

pp. xlvi-lvi.

— causes of sanctity of, pp. lvi-

lxv.

— old and modem parts of, pp. Ixvi-

lxxiii.

— sources of modern parts, pp.

lxxiv-xcii.

— successive recasts of, pp. xcii-

xcviii,

— antiquity and date of, pp. xcix-

cxviii.

— commentaries on, pp. cix-cxxxvi.

— by whom to be studied, 1, 103;

II, 16; to be taught, 1,103.

— rewards for studying, 1,104-106.

— contents of, 1, 111-118, agree

with Veda, 11, 7.

— secret portion of, xii, 107.
Minava-sawhitE,astrological,p.xcvii.
Manava Dharma-sfitra, quoted, pp.

xv-xxiii, xxx-xxxii, xxxv, xxxvii.
Manava Gr/hya-sfitra, pp. xxxix-xl,
xciii.

598

LAWS OF MANU.

Manava school, pp. xviii, xxxvii, xlv;
works of, p. xli.

Manava Sraddhakalpa, pp. xl-xliv.
Manava^arya, p. lxiii.

Mandapala, a sage, ix, 23.

Manes, Bali-offering for, 111, 91.

— classes and origin of, 1, 37; in,

194-201, 284; xii, 49.

— day and night of, 1, 66.

— debt due to, iv, 257.

— libations to. See Libations*

— sacrifices to. See Sr&ddha.

— tirtha of, 11, 59.

MantrasawhitS, iv, 100* See Saw-

hita.

Manu, descended from Brahman,
pp. xii, Ivii; I, 33, 63; vi, 54.

— etymology of the name, p. xiv.

— identified with Brahman, pp. xiii,

lvii; xii, 123.

— king, pp. xiii, Iviii-Iix ; vn, 42.

— lawgiver, pp. xiii-xviii, Ixi-Ixii;

1,1-4, 58,102,119; 11, 7.

— Pra^Spati, p. lvii; 1, 34; ix, 17.

— other myths regarding, pp. lvii-

lxiii.

— quoted in the Manava Dharma-

jastra, III, 222 ; iv, 103; v, 41,
1315 vi, 54; viii, 124,139,168,
204, 242,279,292, 339 ; ix, 158,
182-183, 239; x, 63, 78.

Manus, seven, 1, 36, 61-63.
Manvaiarya, p. lxiii.

Manvantara, period of a Manu, I,
79-80.

MargaArsha, month, vu, 182.
MSrgava caste, x, 34.

MarUi, a Pra^Spati, 1, 35, 58; in,
195 ’

M&rkaWeya, author of a recast of
Manu’s laws, pp. xvii, xcv.
Marriage, expenses of first, may be
obtained by begging, xi, 1, 5.

— forbidden degrees and impedi¬

ments, in, 5-9,11; xi, 1 7 2-1 73.
See Outcasts.

— intermarriage between different

castes, 111,12-19,43-44, 64. See
Sons by wives of several castes;
Wives of several castes.

— present received on, is separate

property, ix, 206,

— punishment for substitution of

another bride, viii, 204.

— results of low, in, 63.

— rites, pp.xxxix note,lxxvii-lxxviii;

description, .111, 20-42, 51-54;
affect succession, ix, 196-197.
Marriage, second, of widows, forbid¬
den, v, 161-164; ix, 65 ; of vir¬
gin widows permitted, ix, 69-70,
176. See Woman, re-married.

— suitable ages of men for, ix, 94;

of women, ix, 4, 88, 90-94.

— when complete, viii, 227.

— with sacred texts for virgins, viii,

226.

— the Vedic sacrament of women,

11,67. See Betrothal, Husband;
Wife, repudiation and super-
session.

Maruts, in, 88; xi, 120,122, 222.
Masha, value of, viii, 134.

Maternal aunt, 11, 50,131.

Maternal grandfather,entertained at
*Sraddha,ni,i48. See Daughter’s
son.

Maternal uncle, entertained at Sv&d-
dha, in, 148.

— impurity on death of, v, 81.

— manner of saluting, n, 130.

— quarrels with, forbidden, iv, 179,

183.

— receives the honey-mixture, in,

119.

Maternal uncle’s wife, 11,131.
Matsya-pura«a, p. cxi.

Matsyas, a tribe, 11,19; vn, 19*.
Measures, examined by the king,
viii, 403.

Meat, allowed to be eaten, v, 16,18,
22-23, 27-33,36, 39-42.

— forbidden to be eaten, iv, 213 ; v,

7,11-15,17-18,34,36-38,43-56.

— sale of, disqualifies for Sraddha,

in, 152; forbidden toBrahma^a,

X. 88.

Medhatithi, a commentator of Manu,
pp. xiii-xvii, xcv, cvii-cviii,
cxviii-cxxvi.

Merchants. See Traders.

Mimawsa, pp. xlvii, lii, cxix.
Mimawsaka, member of Parishad,
XII, III.

Ministers, royal, ix, 294.

— chief of, to be a Brahmawa, vn, 58;

takes king’s place, vn, 141, 226.

— consultations with, vii, 56-59,

146-216.

— number of, p. xxxvii; vn, 54.

— punishment of, for unjust deci¬

sions, ix, 234. See Officials.

INDEX.

599

Minor, cannot make a contract, vm,
163.

— property of, not lost by lapse of

time, vm, 148-149; protected
by king, vm, 27. See Infants.
Mischief, punishment of, vm, 285,
288-289; ix, 279, 281,'285, 289,
291.

Miser, food of, forbidden to Brah-
ma«a, iv, 210.

Mitra, deity, xn, 121.

Mle^as, barbarians, 11, 23; x, 45.
Monopoly, royal, vm, 399.

Mortal sin. See Mahapataka.
Mortgage, vm, 165.

Mother, begging from, 11, 50.

— forsaking, a crime, ill, 157; xi,

60; punishment for, vm, 389.

# — impurity of, on birth, v, 62.

— inherits from daughter, ix, 197;

from son, ix, 217.

— punishment for defaming, vm,

275.

— reverence towards and venerabi-

Jityof,n, 145, 225-237; iv, 162,

180,183. See Daughter, Son.
Mother’s sister, 11, 133.
Mother-in-law, 11,131.

Mrita, alms, iv, 4-5.

Murder. See Homicide, Penance
for killing.

Musician, food of, forbidden, iv,
210.

Muttered prayers, efficacy of, 11, 85-
87. See Veda-study, private.

N&gas, snake-deities, 1, 37; in, 196;
vii, 23.

Nahusha, a king, vn, 41.

Nairukta, pp. xxvi, lvii; xii, 111,
Nakshatresh/i sacrifice, vi, 10.
Namadheya, rite of naming child, 11,
30-33; v, 70.

Nandanay&arya, a commentator of
Manu, pp. cxxxiii-cxxxv.

Narad a, a Pra^apati, 1, 35.
Narada-smr/ti, pp. xv, xvii, xcii, xcv-
xcvi, ci-cii, civ, cvii, cxii, cxxii.
NMya«a, commentator. See Sar-
va^a-Naraya^a.

Nlr&ya#a, deity, 1, 10.

Nafa caste, x, 22; xn, 45.

Nemi, a king, vn, 41,

Nigama, iv, 19.

Nirriti, deity, xi, 105, 119.

Nirukta, pp. xxvi, 1 ; xn, in.

Nishada caste, descendants of, x, 18,
34 , 36 “ 37 , 39 *

— food of, forbidden to BrShma«a,

iv, 215.

— occupation of, x, 48.

— origin of, x, 8.

Nishka, value of, vm, 137.
Nishkrama«a, first leaving the house,

n, 34.

Niti. See Policy, royal.

Niyoga. See Appointment of
widows; Son begotten on
widow or wife.

Non-payment of wages. See Wages.
Non-performance of agreements,
vm, 5, 218-221.

Nuisance, punishment for commit¬
ting, ix, 282-283.

Nuptial fee, julka, vm, 204; ix, 100.
See Daughter, sale of.

Oath, administered in doubtful cases,
vm, 109; in boundary disputes,
vm, 256.

— formerly sworn by gods and sages,

vm, no.

— manner of swearing, vm, 113-

114.

— sanctity of, viii, in. See Per¬

jury.

Occupations, of four castes, 1, 88-91;
x, 74-80; in times of distress,

x, 81-117. See Brahma*a,
Kshatriya, 5 fidra,Vauya.

— ofhighercaste never to be adopted

by lower, x, 95-96.

— of mixed castes, x, 32-39, 47-

52.

— pursuit of forbidden, punishable,

ix, 225; results of, iv, 30. See
Penance for forbidden occupa¬
tions.

Officials, royal, appointment and
classes of, vii, 60-68, 80-81,
114-121.

— punishment of corrupt, vii, 123-

124; viii, 34 ; ix, 231, 259; of
negligent, ix, 272.

— supervised by spies, vii, 122.
Officiating priest, definition of term,

11, 143.

— entertained at Snlddha, hi, 148.

— impurity on death of, v, 81.

—- manner of saluting, 11,130.

— payment of fees to, viii, 206-210;

xi, 38-39.

6oo

LAWS OF MANU,

Officiating priest, punishment of, for
forsaking sacrifices vui, 388.

— punishment of sacrificer for for¬

saking, viii, 388.

— quarrels with, forbidden, iv, 179,

183.

— receives the honey-mixture, 111,

119.

— to be chosen by king, vn, 78.
Oilman, impure, in, 158; iv, 84-85.
Om, syllable, vi, 70; xi, 249.

— is a secret Veda, xi, 266.

— origin of, 11, 76.

— pronounced in beginning recita¬

tion of Veda, 11, 74-75.

— sanctity of, 11, 83-84.

Ordeals, pp. ci-cii.

— by fire and water, viii, 114-116.
Orders, four, vi, 87-88.

— comparison of, 111,77-78 ; vi, 89-

90.

— disputes regarding duties, how

settled, viii, 390-391.

— duties of all, vi, 91-93. See

Ascetic, Hermit, Householder,
Student.

Organs, enumeration of, 11, 90-92.

— deficiency in, disqualifies for

.Sr&ddhas, 111,161,177-178, 242 ;
excludes from inheritance, ix,
201.

— duty of restraining, 11, 88, 92-

100; IV, 246; v, 105; vi, 4,52,
60, 72, 92 ; x, 63, &c.

Outcast, associating with, forbidden,
in, 150, 157; iv, 79, 213; IX,
238-239; xi, 185,190; a mortal
sin, xi, 55; punishment for, in
next life, xn, 60. See Penance
for associating with outcast.

— food laid on the ground for, ill,

92.

— marriage with daughter of, 11,

238, 240 note.

— purification on touching, v, 85.

— treatment of female, xi, 189.

See Abhijasta; Caste, exclusion
from, readmission into.

Pahlava race, pp. cxiv-cxvii; x, 44.
Paija^a marriage, in, ai.

— description of, ill, 34.

— forbidden, pp. lxxvii-lxxviii; in,

23, 25.

— results of, in, 41-43.

Pffiiay^as, 11, 86, 143 ; xi, 119.

Pala, value of, viii, 135.

Pa»a, value of, viii, 136.
PaWusopaka caste, x, 37.
Pa^agavya, the five products of the
cow, xi, 166.

Pa^alas, a tribe, 11, 19; vii, 193.
Pahktidushaaa, defiler of a company,
hi, 150-182.

— penance for, xi, 201.
Pahktipavana, sanctifier of a com¬
pany, in, 183-186.

P&rada race, x, 44.

Parajava caste, x, 8 ; son, ix, 178.
Parents. See Father, Mother.
Parishad, legal assembly, p. lii; xn,
108-115.

Parivettri. See Brother, younger,
marrying, &c.

Parivitta. See Brother, elder, mar¬
rying, See .

Partition, made after parents* death,
ix, 104, or by father, ix, 215;
meritorious, ix, hi.

— once made final, ix, 47.

— between brothers legitimate, of

equal caste, ix, 104, 156-157;
shares, ix, 112-119, 213.

— between younger brother and son

begotten on widow of elder, ix,
120. •

— between sons of elder and younger

wives, ix, 122-126.

— between twins, ix, 126.

— between son and appointed

daughter, ix, 134.

— between sons of wives of different

castes, ix, 148-155.

— between legitimate and subsidiary

sons, ix, 162-165.

— between sons by different fathers,

ix, 191.

— of acquisitions by brothers, ix,

204-208, 215.

— of property of reunited copar¬

ceners, ix, 210-212.

— of property afterwards disco¬

vered, ix, 218. See Inherit¬
ance ; Property, indivisible, self-
acquired of father; separate of
sons.

Partners. See Concerns among.
Parva-days, 111, 45; iv, 150, 153.
Pasture-ground, around villages and
towns, viii, 237.

— indivisible, ix, 219.

Pata^gali, pp. li-lii, cxii.

INDEX.

601

Paternal aunt, manner of saluting,
n, i 3 r > x 33 *

— grandmother, inherits, ix, 217.

— uncle, manner of saluting, 11,130.
Pathin hell, iv, 90.

Pautfiraka race, x, 44.

Plvam&m texts, v, 86; xi, 258.
Pavitra, means of purification, vi, 41.
Penance, for adultery with Guru’s
wife, xi, 104-107 ; with other
women and for other carnal
offences,, xi, 171-179.

— for Apatrikara«a sins, xi, 126.

— for associating with outcasts, xi,

180-182.

— for bite of impure animals and

men, xi, 200.

— for breach of student’s vows, 11.

181,187,220-221; xi, 119-124,
158-159.

— for casting of supplicant, xi, 199.

— for cutting or destroying plants,

xi, 143, 145.

— destroying embryo of Brahmawa,

xi, 88.

— for drinking spirituous liquor, xi,

91-99, 147-152.

— for eating forbidden food, iv,

222 ; v, 20-21; xi, 153-162.

— for false evidence, vm, 105-106;

xi, 89.

— for following forbidden occupa¬

tions, xi, 193.

— for Gatibhrawjakara sins, xi, 125.

— for improperly divulging Veda,

xi, 199*

— for injuring living beings, vi,

69.

— for killing Brahma«a, xi, 73-87,

90; menstruating Brahmawi, xi,
88; friend, xi, 89; Kshatriya
or Vaijya engaged in sacrifice,
XI, 88; wife, xi, 89; cow, xi,
109-117; Kshatriya, xi, 127-
129; Vaijya, xi, 127, 130;
•Stidra, xi, 127, 131; various
animals, xi, 132-134, 135-138,
140-142, 144; eunuch, xi, 134;
adulterous women, xi, 139.

— for Malavaha sins, xi, 126.

— for neglecting duties of Snataka,

xi, 202-204; initiation, xi, 192;
sacred fire, xi, 41; twilight de¬
votions, 11, 220-221.

— for offences against teacher, xi,

89.

Penance, for performing forbidden
sacrifices, xi, 198.

— for performing obsequies of a

stranger, xi, 198.

— for Sa»ikadkara»a sins, xi, 126.

— for secret sins, xi, 248-266.

— for swallowing ordure, &c., xi,

x 5 i.

— for teaching and sacrificing for

wicked men, x, in; xi, 194,
198-199.

— for theft of deposit, xi, 89; of

gold, xi, 100-103; of other
property, xi, 163-170.

— for those excluded from social

repasts, xi, 201.

— for threatening, striking, or hurt¬

ing a Brahmawa, xi, 205-209.

— for unlawfully accepting gifts, x,

hi ; xi, 194-195, 198.

— for Upapataka sins, xi, 118.
Penances, description of various, xi,

212-247.

— how imposed, xi, 86, 210.

— necessity of and reasons for per-

forming, XI, 44-47, 54.

— not to be performed under the

pretence of vows, iv, 198.

— vicarious for punishments, ix,

235, 240-242.

Perjury, equal to drinking spirituous
liquor, xi, 57.

— permissible in certain cases, vm,

103-105, 112.

— punishments for, vm, 119-123,

257, 263.

— suborner to, excluded from Srad-

dha, hi, 158. See Oath, Pen¬
ance for perjury, Witness.
Phalguna, month, vn, 182.
Physician, impure, 111,152,180; iv,
212, 220.

— unskilful, punished, ix, 259,

284.

PijaJas, in, 141; v, 50; xi, 96; xii,
57 .

— origin of, 1, 37, 43 J xn, 44.
Pitr/medha, v, 65.

Pledge, viii, I 43 -M 5 , i 49 , 150.
Pole, punishment for destroying, ix,

285.

Police, patrols and stations, where
to be placed, vii, 114; ix, 264-
266.

Policy, royal, four expedients of,
vii, 159.

602

LAWS OF MANU.

Policy, royal, six measures of, vn,
160-215.

— theory of, ix, 294-300.

Possession without title no proof

of ownership, vm, 200. See
Limitation, law of.

Pra^apati, the lord of creatures, 11,
76-77, 84, 226; iv, 225, 248;
v, 28; ix, 46, 327; xi, 244;
xii, 121.

— horse sacred to, xi, 38.

— ishri sacred to, vi, 38.

— oblation to, in, 86.

*— penance revealed by. See Krz£-
khra. penance.

— sacrifice of, v, 152.

— world of, iv, 182.

Pra^ipatis, I, 35; xii, 50.
Pra^apatya marriage, III, 21.

— affects succession to women’s

property, ix, 196.

— description of, m, 30.

— permissibility of, ill, 23-24.

— results of, ill, 38-40, 42.

Pratetas, a Pra^apati, 1, 35.
Pramrita, agriculture, iv, 4-5.
Prawayama, suppression of breath, 11,

75; vi, 69-71; xi,200, 202, 249.
Pratilomas. See Castes, mixed.
Praushr^apada, month, iv, 95.
Prayaga (Allahabad), n, 21.

Pretas, in, 230; xii, 59, 71-72.
Prices of merchandize, fixed by
king, vm, 401-402.

Priests. See Adhvaryu, Brahman,
Domestic priest, Officiating
priests, Udgatri.

Primogeniture. See Son, eldest.
Prisoner, excluded from Sraddha,
in, 158.

— food of, forbidden to Brahmazza,

iv, 210.

Prisons, where to be placed, ix, 288.
Prithu, a king, vil, 42 ; ix, 44.
Property, acquisition of, ix, 44;
seven modes of, x, 115.

— indivisible, ix, 200, 219.

— lost and found, vm, 30-34.

— self-acquired, of father, ix, 209.

— separate, of sons, ix, 206.

•— stolen, to be restored or made
good by king, vm, 40. See
Limitation; Minor, Woman,
property of.

Prostitute, food of, forbidden to
BrShma»a, iv, 209, 219.

Prostitute, to be punished, ix, 259.
Publican, food of, forbidden to
Br&hmawa, iv, 216.

— to be banished, ix, 225.

Pukkasa caste, iv, 79; x, 38; xn,55.

— occupation of, x, 49.

— origin of, x, 18.

Pulaha, a Pra^apati, 1, 35.

Pulastya, 1, 35; ill, 198.

Pulkasa, varia lectio for Pukkasa.
Punarbhfi. See Woman remarried.
Punishment, degrees of, vm, 129-

130, 310.

— places for inflicting, vm, 124-

125.

— purifies offender, vm, 318. See

King, duties of.

Pupil, impurity on death of, v, 81.

— inherits, ix, 187.

— may be asked for money, iv, 33.

— may be beaten, iv, 164; vm,

299-300.

— who may become, II, 109-115.

See Student, Teacher.

Purawa, value of, vm, 136.

Pura«as, pp. xvi, Ixv, xci; ill, 232.
Purchase, one of the modes of ac¬
quiring property, x, 115. See
Rescission of sale and purchase,
Sale.

Purification, of persons, 11, 53; v,
85-87, 134-145. See Sipping
water.

-—means of, v, 105-109, 127-128;
of ascetic, vi, 41.

— of things, v, 111-126.

Purohita. See Domestic priest.
Purusha, the Male, 1, n, 19; vn,

17; xii, 122.

— hymn, addressed to, xi, 252.
Pushpadha caste, x, 21.

Pushya-day, iv, 96.

Put hell, ix, 138.

Ptitimrittika heli, IV, 89.

Qualities, three, of nature or of self,

I, 15; xii, 24-50.

Ra^as. See Activity.
Raghavananda, commentator of
Manu, pp. xii!, c, cxxxii-cxxxiii.
Rahasya, secret portion of the Veda,

II, 140, 165. See Upanishad.
Raivata Manu, 1, 62.

R&kshasa marriage, 111, 21.

—- description of, in, 33.

INDEX.

603

R^kshasa, permissibility of,pp. lxxvii-
lxxviii; 111, 23-24, 26.

— results of, in, 41-42.

Rakshasas, 111, 170, 204, 230, 280;

iv, 199; vii, 23, 38; xi, 96.

— manes of, in, 196.

— origin of, i, 37, 43; xii, 44.
Rape, punishment of, viii, 364,378,
Raurava hell, iv, 88.

Receivers of stolen goods, ix, 278.
Repentance, removes guilt, xi, 228,
230-232.

Repudiation. See Wife.

Rescission of sale and purchase, viii,
5, 222-228.

Resumption of gifts, vm, 4, 212-214.
Reunited coparceners, ix, 210-212.
Rig-veda, 11,158; hi, 131,142,145 ;

iv, 124; xi, 262-265; xii, 112.

— origin of^ 1, 23.

— passages quoted from, n, 181 ;

v, 86; vm, 106; xi, 250-258,

260- 261.

Rifg-isha hell, iv, 90.

R/'shis. See Sages.

Rita, gleaning corn, iv, 5.

Robbers, manner of discovering, ix,

261- 269.

Robbery, vm, 6. See Violence.

— definition of, vm, 332.

— punishment of, ix, 275-276, 280;

of those who give no assistance
in cases of, ix, 274.

Rogues, classes of, ix, 257-260.

— duty and manner of discovering

and punishing, ix,252-255,261-
293.

Rudra, hymn to, xi, 255.

Rudras, in, 284; xi, 222.

Sacraments, for males, 11, 26-47;
for females, 11, 66-67.

— not allowed to mixed castes, x,

68; nor to Sfidras, x, 126.
Sacred fire, kindling,’ rule for, ill,
67; neglect of, xi, 66.

— neglecting or extinguishing, in,

153 ; xi, 60. See Penance for.

— offerings to, 11,108,176,186-187;

iv, 145-146; vii, 145. See
Agnihotra.

— repositing in oneself, vi, 25, 38.

— reverence shown towards, iv, 58,

See Fire, reverence to.

Sacred fires, keeper of five, sanctifies
company, ill, 185.

Sacrifices, not to be performed by
fools, infants, women, &c., u,
171-172; iv, 205-206; xi, 36-
37 .

Sacrifices, great daily, enumeration
of, in, 70-74.

— description of, in, 81-121.

— duty of performing, for house¬

holders, hi, 75-80, 93; iv, 21-
24; for hermits, vi, 5.

— reason for performing, 111, 68-69.

— remove guilt, xi, 246.

Sacrifices, forbidden, in, 151, 164;

ix, 290; xi, 64. See Penance
for performing forbidden sacri¬
fices.

Sacrifices, Srauta, 11,28. See Sattra,
Soma-sacrifices.

— duty of performing, iv, 25-28;

by a king, vii, 78-79.

— forbidden to eunuchs, women,

&c., iv, 205-206; to poor men,

xi, 38-40.

— initiation to, a third birth, II, 169.

— materials for, may be taken by

force, xi, 11-15; not to be
begged from Sfidras, xi, 24.

— property destined for, is indi¬

visible, ix, 219; seizing such
property, xi, 26.

— person initiated for, 11, 128; iv,

130, 210; vm, 360. See Pen¬
ance for killing.

— substitute for, xi, 27-30.
Sacrificer, produced by Goodness,

xii, 49.

— punishment for forsaking, vm,

388.

Sacrificial fee, due, must be given,
xi, 38-40.

— payment and distribution of, vm,

206-210.

Sacrificial string (thread), 11, 44,63-
64, 174; iv, 36.

Sacrificing for oneself, duty of, 1,
88-90; x, 75, 77 - 78 .

Sacrificing for others, occupation of
Brahmawa, 1, 88 ; x, 75-76.

— for unworthy men, forbidden, in,

65 ; xi, 60; permitted in times
of distress, x, 103, 109-111.
See Penance for teaching and
sacrificing for wicked men;
SGdra, sacrificing for.

Sadhya, deities, 1, 22; in, 195; xi,
29; xii, *9.

604

LAWS OF MANU.

Sages, or great sages, address Manu,
I, 1-4; Bhrigu, v, 1-2; xil, 1.

— debt due to. See Debts, the

three.

— fathers of the manes, ill, 201.

— origin of, I, 34-36; xii, 49.

— worship of, 11,176.

Sagotra relative, ix, 190.

S&hasa. See Violence.

Saho^/6a. See Son of pregnant bride.
Sairandhra caste, x, 32.

Sakakola hell, iv, 89.

Sakulya relative, ix, 187.

Sale, forbidden of adulterated goods,

viii, 203; of children, xi, 62 ; of
daughter, see Daughter; of gar¬
den, tank, &c., xi, 62; of wife,

ix, 46; xi, 62.

— forbidden to BnUima«a, various

goods, in, 152, 159; x, 86-94;
xi, 63.

— fraudulent, forbidden, vm, 203 ;

void, vm, 165. See Trader.
Sale without ownership, vm, 4,197-
202.

Saluting, duty of, 11, 117, 120-121;

iv, 154.

— various modes of, II, 12 2-137.
Saman, xi, 265. See Gyesh/>6asa-

man, Sama-veda.

Samanodaka relative, xi, 183.

— definition of term, v, 60.

— impurity on birth or death of,

v, 64, 71, 74, 78.

Samavartana, student’s rite on re¬
turning home, 11, 108; hi, 4.
Sama-veda, 1, 23; in, 145; iv, 123-
124 ; xi, 263; xii, 112.
Sawdhya worship. See Twilight
devotions.

Sawghata hell, iv, 89.

Sawgivana hell, iv, 89.

Sawhita of Veda, xi, 78, 201, 259.

See Mantrasawhiti.
Sa#ikarikara#a sins, xi, 69. See
Penance for.

Sampratapana hell, iv, 89.

Sajwsk&ras. See Sacraments.
Sawtapana Krikkhra. penance, v, 20;
xi, 135 , 1 ^ 5 , i 74 .

— description of, xi, 213.

SapWa relative, 11, 247; xi, 183.

— begetting son with widow of

SapWa,ix, 59,147.

— definition of term, v, 60; another

definition, ix, 186.

SapWa, impurity on birth or death
of, V, 58-59,61-64, 67-70,72-79,
83-84.

— inherits, ix, 187.

— marriage with female, forbidden,

hi, 5; xi, 172-173.
Sapim/ikarawa, 111, 247-248.

S&rafigt, wife of Mandaplla, ix, 23.
Sarasvati, goddess, oblation to, vm,

105.

— river, p. xlv; 11, 17; xi, 78.
Sarpas, snake-deities, 1, 37.
Sarva^a - Naraya^a, commentator

of Manu, p. xiii, xxxvii, c, cxi,
cxxviii-cxxx.

Sarvatmabhfiti, deity, in, 91.

Sattra, performer of, sacrifice never
impure, v, 93.

Sattva. See Goodness.

Satvata caste, x, 23.

Satyanr/ta trade, iv, 4, 6.

Saumya manes, in, 199.

Savitri rite. See Initiation, Vratya.
Savitri verse, 11,148; xi, 195, 226.

— efficacy of recitation, 11, 78-82,

102, 118.

— manner of recitation, 11,101,104.

— mother of the student, 11, 170.
Saya»a-Madhava, p. xlix.

Sea, trade by, vm, 157, 406.

— voyages by, forbidden, 111, 158.
Seed-corn, offences with respect to,

ix, 291.

Self. See Soul.

Self-defence permitted, vm, 348-
35 i.

Seniority. See Brahmawa, Ksha-
triya, Srotriya, Sudra, Vaijya,
Wife.

Service, excludes from Sraddhas,

in, 153.

— forbidden to BrEhmawa, iv, 4, 6.

— with Stldras, a sin, xi, 70. See

King, service of; Stidra, duties
of.

Singer, adultery with wife of, vm,
362-363.

«— excluded from Sriddha, 111,155.

— following profession of, an Upa-

p&taka, xi, 66.

— to be banished, ix, 225. See

Bard.

Sins, classification of, xi, 55-71. See
Penance.

Sipping water, n, 2 22; v, 86-87,138,

143-145*

INDEX.

605

Sipping water, manner of, 11,58-62;

v » * 39 - o „ ,

Sister, 11, 50, 133. See Brother,
Incest.

Skanda-puraaa, pp. xcvi, cvi.

Slave, classes of, iv, 253-256 ; vnr,
415.

— disqualified to earn property, vm,

416-417; to be witness, vm,
66 ; exception, vm, 70.

— food of Stidra, eatable, iv, 253.

— quarrels with, forbidden, iv, 180,

185.

— offspring of female, ix, 55. See

Son, illegitimate, of Sfidra.

— sexual intercourse with female,

vm, 363.

Sleeping, purification after, v, 145.

, — rules regarding, for student, 11,
108; for Snataka, iv, 57, 75,92.

— at sunset and sunrise forbidden,

11, 219-221; iv, 55.

Smr/ti. See Tradition.
Smr/tima/T^ar!, of Govindara^a, pp.
xxi, cxxvii.

Smr/tiviveka,of Medhatithi, p. cxxiii,
Snataka (Brahma^a who has com¬
pleted his studentship).

— definition of term, iv, 31.

— duties of: acceptance of food,

iv, 205-225, 250, 253; of gifts
and begging, iv, 33 "34, 84-
91, 186-191, 247-252; x, 113-
114; xi, 1-6; bathing, iv, 45,
129, 152, 201-203; dress, iv,
18, 34-36, 66; eating, rules
for, iv, 43, 45, 55, 58, 62-63,
65, 74-7 6 > general behaviour,
righteousness, truthfulness, &c.,
iv, 15-16, 18, 72, 145-146,155-
185, 204, 236-246; hospitality,
iv, 29-32; liberality, iv, 192-
197, 227-235; interruptions of
Veda-study, iv, 101-127; per¬
formance of daily rites, iv, 14,
21-24, 92-94, 152; of Srauta-
sacrifices, iv, 25-28, 226; resi¬
dence, iv, 60-61; sleeping, IV, 57,
75,92; studying the Veda, &c.,
iv, 17-20, 95-100, 146-149;
voiding excrements, iv, 45-52,
152; miscellaneous rules, iv,
37 - 42 , 44 > 53 - 59 , 63-83, 128,

130-144, 150-154.

— may retire from the world, iv,

257-258.

Snataka, receives the honey-mix¬
ture, hi, 119.

— way to be made for, 11,138-139.
Soma, deity, in, 87, 211; ix, 129 ;

xi, 255.

— plant, sale of, forbidden, in, 158,

180; x, 80.

Somapa manes, m, 197-198.
Soma-sacrifices, iv, 26; xi, 7-10.
Somasad manes, hi, 195.

Son, duties towards parents, 11,
145-148, 225-227. See Father,
Mother.

— duty of begetting a, 11, 28; re¬

ward for fulfilment of, ix, 137-
138. See Debts, the three.

— forsaking, an Upapataka, xi, 60;

punishment for, vm, 389.

— has no property, vm, 416; ex¬

ceptions, ix, 206.

— has no right to parents' estate

during their lifetime, ix, 104.

— inherits from father, ix, 104,156-

157, 185; from mother, vm,
104, 192, 195.

— liable for father's debts and ex¬

ceptions, vm, 159, 166.

— may be beaten, iv, 164; vm,

299-300.

— offences against parents, in, 157,

159. See Father, Mother.

— punishment for defaming, vm,2 7 5.

— quarrels with, forbidden, iv, 180,

184.

— adopted, ix,141-142,159,168.

— begot on wife or widow, ix, 31-

56; ix, 143 - 147 , i 59 , 162-165,
167, 190-191. See Appoint¬
ment of widows.

— born after partition, ix, 216.

— born secretly, ix, 159,170.

— bought, ix, 160, 174.

— cast off, ix, 159,171.

— eldest, excellence of, ix, 106-107,

109; inherits alone, ix, 105,108-
109; share of, ix, 112-114,115,

117, 119. See Brother, eldest.

— illegitimate, of Sfidra, ix, 179.

— legitimate, ix, 159, 162-166.

— made, ix, 159, 169*

— middlemost, share of, ix, 112-113.

— of appointed daughter. See

Daughter, appointed.

— of pregnant bride, ix, 160,173.

— of remarried woman, ill, 155,181;

ix, 160, 175-176,

6 o6

LAWS OF MANU.

Son, of Sfidri wife, ix, 151, 153-155,
160, 178.

— of unmarried daughter, ix, 160,

172.

— second, share of, ix, 117.

— self-given, ix, 160, 177.

— youngest, share of, ix, 112-113.’
Sons, by wives of different castes,

share of, ix, 148-155.

— seniority among, by wives of

equal caste, ix, 122-126, 156-
157 *

— subsidiary, enumeration, ix, 159-

160 ; character of, ix, 161, 181;
right to inherit or share, 1,
165, 180.

Son-in-law, entertained at Sraddha,
in, 148. See Bridegroom.
Sopaka caste, x, 38.

Sorcery. See Magic.

Soul, xii, 12-14.

— knowledge of supreme, leads to

final liberation, vi, 29, 49, 82-
84; xii, 83, 85,91-93,118-125.
Spiritual guide. See Teacher.
Spirituous liquor, kinds of, xi, 94-
95 .

— debt for, not recoverable, vm,

159. See Drinking spirituous
liquor; Publican; Woman,fine
for drinking spirituous liquor.
Spy, employed by king, vn, 122,153-
154, 223 ; ix, 256,261,298.
Staff, of Snataka, iv, 36.

— of student, 11, 45-47, 64, 174.
Stridhana. See Woman, property

of.

Student, breach of vow of, 111, 155.
See Penance for.

— cannot be made a witness, vm, 65.

— does not become impure by births

and deaths, v, 93.

— duration of residence with teacher,

Hi, 1.

— duties of and restrictions imposed

on, 11, 41-75,108,117*139,144-
150,161-162,173-212, 216-240.

— entertained at Sraddha, 11, 189-

190; in, 186; not to be'enter-
tained, in, 151.

— may perform obsequies ofteacher,

parents, &c., v, 65, 91, but must
not offer libations to other rela¬
tives, v, 88.

—- mode of personal purification, v,
137 .

Student, must not pay stipulated fee,
11, 245; hi, 156.

— pays no toll at ferry, vm, 407.

— personating a student, an offence,

iv, 200.

— receives alms at Vaimdeva, 111,

94.

— perpetual or professed, 11, 242-

244, 247-249.

— returned home, 11, 245-246; 111,

2-4. See Pupil, Teacher.
SubrahmawyG texts, ix, 126.
Sub-teacher. See Upadhyava.
Subtraction of gifts. See Resump¬
tion.

Sudas, a king, vn, 41; vm, no.
Sudhanvan caste, x, 23.

Suicide, no libations offered to, v, 89.
Sukalin manes, ill, 197.

Sumati Bhargava, recast of Manu’s
laws by, pp. xvii, xcv.

Sumukha, a king, vn, 41.

Suparwas, bird-deities, vn, 23.

— manes of, ill, 196.

— origin of, I, 37 ; XII, 44.
Supersession. See Wife.
Suppression of breath. See Prawa-

yama.

Sura. See Spirituous liquor.
Surety, vm, 158-162,169.

SGta caste, x, 26.

— occupation of, x, 47.

— origin of, x, n, 17.

Suvarwa, value of, vm, 134, 137.
Svargit sacrifice, xi, 75.

Svaro&sha Manu, 1, 62.

Svayambhu, 1, 3, 6, 92, 94; v, 39;

ix, 138. See Brahman.
Svayawdatta. See Son, self-given.

Sabara-bhashya, p. cxii.

Saikha caste, x, 21.

Saka race, pp. cxiv, cxvii; x, 44.
.Sakala oblations, xi, 201, 257.
.SSlmala hell, iv, 90.

■Sivasawkalpa text, xi, 251.

Sraddha, funeral sacrifice, causes
interruption of Veda-study, in,
188; iv, no-in, 117.

— offered by son of appointed

daughter, ix, 127,132, 140; by
adopted son, ix, 142 ; to three
ancestors, ix, 186.

— daily, in, 70, 72, 74, 80-83, 283.

— for lately deceased person. See

Ekoddishta.

INDEX.

607

Sr&ddha, monthly, description of, 111,
187, 203-253, 256-265,279, 282.

-materials for, 111,123, 267-272.

-number of guests at, hi, 12 5-

126, 129.

-persons not to be fed at, hi,

150-167.

-persons to be fed at, n, 189-

190; 111,128-149,183-186.

-results of feeding unworthy

guests at, hi, 133, 168-182.
-rewards for performing, in,

127, 277, 282.

-times for performing, hi, 122,

273-282.

— special kinds of, hi, 254.
Srauta-sacrifices. See Sacrifices.
Sravawa, month, iv, 95.

o Srt, deity, in, 89.

J Srotriya, a learned Brahmawa, pp.
xlviii-xlix; iv, 205; vm, 394.

— cannot be made a witness, vm, 65.

— descendant of, sanctifies com¬

pany, hi, 184.

— fine for not entertaining virtuous,

vm, 393.

— free from taxes, vn, 133.

— gift of food to, iv, 31.

— impurity on death of, v, 81.

— niggardly, and liberal usurer, iv,

224-225.

property of, not lost by law of
limitation, vm, 149.

— receives the honey-mixture, hi,

120.

— to be honoured and supported by

king, vn, 134-136; vm, 395.
Srotriyas, seniority among, 11, 134.
Sruti. See Veda.

■Suddhidipika, of Narayawa, p. cxxx,
iSudra, caste, cannot commit an of¬
fence causing loss of caste, x, 126.

— disabilities, not allowed to be

initiated, x, 4; to be judge,
viii, 20-21; to carry out dead
Brahmawa, v, 104; to fulfil
the sacred law except certain
portions, iv, 223; x, 126-
127; to hear, learn, recite, or
teach Veda, in, 156; iv, 99;
x, 127; to receive leavings at
£r&ddha, in, 249; to receive
spiritual advice from Brahmawa,
iv, 80-81; exception, x, 2
to sacrifice, hi, 178; to travel
with Snataka, iv, 140,

5fidra, duties and occupations, 1,91;
viii, 410, 418; ix, 334-335; in
times of distress, x, 99-100,
121-129.

— food and gifts of, unlawful for

Brahmawa, in, 164; iv, 211,218,
223; xi, 24-25; exception, iv,
253.

— forcible appropriation of Sfidra’s

property by Brahmawa, vm,
417; xi, 13.

— guilt of, in cases of theft, vm, 337.

— killing a, an Upapataka, xi, 67.

See Penance for killing.

— kings, iv, 61.

— labourers to work for king,vii, 138.

— manes of, in, 197.

— origin of, 1, 31, 87; XII, 43.

— position of, naturally a slave, vm,

413-414.

— presence of many, destroys a

country, vm, 22.

— punishment for adultery with

Aryan woman, viii, 374; for
assaulting men of higher caste,
viii, 279-283; ix, 248 ; for de
faming men of higher caste,
vm, 267, 270-277; for neglect
of duty in next birth, xn, 72.

— residence of, 11, 24.

— rules of inheritance, ix, 157,179.

— special rules of administration of

oath, vnr, 113 ; of burial, v, 92 ;
of examination as witness, vm,
88; of impurity, V, 83, 99; of
marriage, in, 44; of naming,
11, 31-32; of purification, 11,62 ;
of saluting, 11, 127, 137; of
shaving, v, 140; of sipping water,
v, 139-140.

— visitor not a guest, but fed, ill,

no, 112.

— witness for Sfidras, viii, 68.

— wives permitted to, m, 13; ix, 157.
Sfidras, seniority among, 11,155.
Sfidra, female, marriage and sexual

intercourse of Aryans with, p.
xxvii; III, i3“ I 9> 44 , 64, 155,
191, 250; viii, 383-385; xi,
179. See Son of Sfidril wife.
Sulka. See Nuptial fee.

SGrasenakas, a tribe, 11,19; vn, 193.
iSvapaka caste, 111, 92.

— origin of, x, 19.

— position and occupation of, x, si-

56.

6 o8

LAWS OF MANU.

.Svavritti, service, iv, 4, 6.

Tailor, food of, forbidden to Br&h-
mawa, iv, 214,

Tamas. See Darkness.

T&masa, Manu, 1, 62.

T&misra hell, iv, 88,165; xn, 75 *
Tank, punishment for destroying,

ix, 279.

— sale of, a crime, xi, 62.

— settlement of boundary of, vm,

262. See Water.

Tapana hell, iv, 89.

Taptakr/Wra penance, xi, 157, 215.
Taratsamandtya hymn, xi, 254.
Tarpawa. See Libation to the manes.
Taxes, vii, 118, 127-132, 137-139;

x, 118, 120.

— exemptions from, vii, 133-136;

vm, 394.

— son not liable for unpaid, vm, 159.
Teacher, a^arya, definition of term,

11,140. *

— duties of, 11, 69, 73,159-161; iv,

164.

— duties towards. See Student.

— entertained at Sr&ddha, 111,148.

— fee of, 11, 245-246 ; 111,95; stipu¬

lated fee forbidden, in, 156;

xi, 63.

— impurity on death of, v, 80.

— inherits from pupil, ix, 187.

— non-Brahmanical, 11,238,241-242.

— not a guest, 111, no.

— offences against, ill, 153; xi, 56,

60; punishment for offences,
viii, 275. See Penance for
adultery with Guru's wife.

— presents a cow and the honey-

mixture to student, m, 3.

— receives the honey-mixture, ill,

119.

— reverence towards and venera-

bility of, 11, 144-154, 170-171,
225-235 ; iv, 130,162,179,182.

— selection of pupils by. See Pupil.

— Sfidra, hi, 156.

Teacher's son, behaviour towards,
11, 208-209, 247.

— impurity on death of, v, 80.
Teacher's teacher, 11, 205.

Teacher’s wives, behaviour towards,

11, 210-212, 216-217, 247.

— impurity on death of, v, 80.
Teaching, duty of the Br&hmaua, I,

88; x, 1-2, 75-76, 80.

Teaching, unworthy men permitted,
X, 103,109-111.

Temple, punishment for violation
of, ix, 280, 285.

Temple-priest, excluded from Sr£d-
dha, hi, 152, 180.

Theft, vm, 6.

— anybody may be witness in cases

of, viii, 72.

— definition of, viii, 332; excep¬

tions, viii, 339, 341; xi, 11-23.

— guilt of men of various castes in

cases of, viii, 336-337.

— punishments for, criminal, viii,

314 - 315 , 3 I 9 - 33 L 333 - 334 ; ix,
277, 280, 293; in next life, xi,
50-52; xii, 60-68. See Pro¬
perty, stolen.

Theft of gold, a mortal sin, ix, 235 ; e
xi, 55 .

— penance for. See Penance.

— punishment for, criminal, ix, 237;

in next life, xi, 49; xn, 57.

— sins equal to, xi, 58.

Thief, disqualified to be a witness,
vm, 67.

— excluded from Sraddha, in, 150.

— food of, forbidden to Brahmawa,

iv, 210.

— to be executed only, if taken with

stolen goods, &c., ix, 270.
Thieves, abettors of, to be punished,
ix, 271, 278.

— manner of discovering, ix, 261-

269. See Rogues.

Time, divisions of, 1, 24, 64-73.

— origin of, I, 24.

Times of distress. See Castes mixed,
Occupations; Teacher, non-
Brahmanical.

Tirthas, parts of the hand, 11, 58-
59 -

Tolls, at a ferry, vm, 404-405, 407.
Town, pasture-ground around, vm,
237.

— punishment for destroying, -wall,

gate, &c. of, ix, 289.

— to be built by king, vii, 70.
Trade, degrades BrShma#a, 111, 64,

152,181; viii, 102.

— obligatory on Vai/ya, 1, 90; viii,

410, 418; ix, 326, 329-333 ;
X, 79.

—- permitted to Brihma«a, iv, 4, 6 ;
in times of distress, x, 85; re¬
strictions, x, 86-94.

INDEX.

609

Trade, permitted to Kshatriya in
time of distress, x, 95.

— regulated by king, vm, 401-402.

See Contract, Duties, Sea,
Taxes.

Trader, punishments of dishonest,
viii, 399; ix, 257,286-287, 291.
Trades, theory of, vn, 43.

Tradition, sacred, definition of, 11,10.

— source of the sacred law, n, 6,

9-12.

Trainer of dogs, elephants, &c., ex¬
cluded from Sr&ddha, ill, 162,

164.

— food of, forbidden to Brahman a,

IV, 216.

Transmigration, 1, 28-29, 55-56; v,
164; vi, 61-65; ix, 30; xi, 25;
xii, 15-22, 41-81.

Treasure-trove, vm, 35-39.

TretS age, 1, 83,85, 86; ix, 301-302.
TridaWin, definition of, xii, 10.
TriwsUiketa, III, 185.

Trisuparwa, ill, 185.

Trivr/t sacrifice, xi, 75.

Truthfulness, duty of, II, 179; iv,
i 38-i39, 170-178, &c.

Turayawa sacrifice, vi, 10.

Twice-born man. See Aryan.
Twilight-devotions, 11,101-104, 222;
iv, 93-94. See Penance for
neglect of.

Udgatr/ priest, receives a cart, vm,
209.

Ugra caste, x, 13,15,19.

— food of, forbidden to Brahma«a,

iv, 212.

— occupation of, x, 49.

— origin of, x, 9.

Unnatural crime, xi, 174-175.
Up&dhyaya, sub-teacher, definition

of, 11, 141.

— may be buried by student, v, 91.

— venerability of, 11,145.

Up&karman, opening of school-term,

iv, 95, 119.

Upanishads, vi, 29; xi, 263. See
Rahasya.

Upapltaka sins, enumeration of, xi,
60-67. See Penance for.
Ujanas-smr/ti, pp. xxvii, xxxv, lxii.
Usurer, excluded from Sraddha, in,
i53> 180.

— food of, forbidden to Brahma^a,

iv, 210, 220.

[ 35 ] R r

Usurer, liberal and niggardly Sro-
triya, iv, 224-225.

Usury, an Upapataka, xi, 62. See
Interest, Lending money.
Utathya, son of, p. xxvi; hi, 16.

Vaideha caste, x, 19.

— descendants of, x, 26, 31, 33, 36-

37 .

— occupation of, x, 47.

— origin of, x, 11, 17.

— position of, X, 13.

Vaidiks, pp. xlvii-xlviii.

Vaikh&nasa. See Hermit.

— Sfitra, pp. xxvii-xxix; vi, 21.
Vaimanika deities, xii, 48.
Vaijvadeva offering, in, 83,108,121.

— description of, in, 84-86.
Vaijvanari ish/i, xi, 27.

Vanya, caste, duties and occupations
of, 1, 90; vm, 410, 418; ix,
326-333; x, 78-80; in times of
distress, x, 98.

— forcible appropriation of Vaijya's

property by Br&hma»a, XI, 12.

— guilt in cases of theft, vm, 337.

— indigent, to be employed by

Brahmawa, viii, 411-412.

— killing a, an Upapataka, xi, 67.

See Penance for killing.

— manes of, hi, 197.

— origin of, I, 31, 87.

— punishmentofVanyafor adultery,

VIII, 375-377, 382, 384; for
defamation, vm, 267, 269, 277;
for neglect of duty, in next life,
xii, 72.

— special rules of administration

of oath, viii, 113; of burial,
v, 92 ; of examination as wit¬
ness, viii, 88 ; of impurity, v,
83, 99 ; of Kejanta, 11, 65; of
naming, n, 31-32; of purifica¬
tion, 11, 62 ; of saluting, n, 127;
of studentship, n, 41,42, 44, 45,
46, 49,190.

— visitor not a guest, but fed, in,

no, 112.

— wives permitted to, in, 13.

Vaijyi female, punishment for adul¬
tery with, viii, 382-383, 385.

Vanyas, seniority among, 11, 155.
See Sons, by wives of several
castes.

Vaivasvata Manu, 1, 62.

Vamadeva, a sage, x, 106.

6io

LAWS OF MANU.

Varahamihira, p. xcvii.

Varuwa, in, 87; v, 96; vil, 4, 7;
viii, 82,106; ix, 244-245, 303,
308 ; xi, 253, 255.

Vasish^a, lawgiver, quoted, pp. xxix-
xxx; viii, 140.

— Pra^-apati, 1, 35; ill, 198.

— sage, viii, no; ix, 23.

— hymn of, xi, 250.

V&sish//>a Dharmajastra, pp. xviii-xx,
xxii, xxx-xxxiv, lii, lxviii, lxix,
xcix, cii, cxix.

Vassals of king, punishment of neg¬
ligent, ix, 272.

VSstoshpati, deity, ill, 89.

Vasus, hi, 284; xi, 222.

V&adh&na caste, x, 21.

Vatsa, sage, viii, 116.

V 3 yu, deity, v, 96; VII, 4, 7; IX, 42,
303, 306; XI, 120.

Veda, conflicting passages of, all
authoritative, n, 14-15.

— definition of the term, 11, 10.

— first source of the law, II, 6-15.

— greatness and power of, I, 21;

xii, 94-104.

— offences against, cavilling at, in,

161; IV, 163 ; xi, 57; divulging,
see Penance for; Sfidra, dis¬
abilities; forgetting, xi, 57;
scorning, II, 11.

— origin of, 1, 23; XII, 49.

— purifying power of, xi, 264. See

Veda-study.

— recitation of. See Veda-study.

— riddles from, ill, 231.

— stealing the, 11,116; xi, 51. See

Atharvan; Bnihmawa, Mantra-
samhita, Rahasya, Rig-veda,
Samhita, Saman, Sama-veda,
Upanishads, Ya^ur-veda.
Vedanta, 11, 160; vi, 83, 94.
Vedasawnyasika. See Ascetic, in¬
formal.

Veda-study, ceremonies on begin¬
ning, 11, 70-74; v, 145.

— destroys guilt, xi, 246-247. See

Veda, purifying power.

— duration of annual term, pp. xlvi-

xlvii; iv, 95-96.

— duty of, 11, 28,156-158,164-168;

iv, 17-20, 35; vi, 36-37, 83;
vii, 43; x, 1, 75-78; xii, 83.

— general rule of, iv, 99-100.

— interruptions of, m, 188; iv, 101-

127; exceptions, ii, 105-106.

Veda-study, neglect of, in, 151. See
Penance for neglecting.

— private daily, duty of, 11,106,166-

167; in, 70,74,81; IV, 58,145“

149; VI, 8.

-neglect of, an UpapStaka, xi,

60; results of, in, 63. See
Penance.

-rewards for, II, 107; ill, 66.

See Muttered prayer, Vows.
Vcdic schools, development and dis¬
ruption of, pp. xlvi-liii.
Vedotsarga, iv, 96-97,119.

Vena, king, vii, 41; ix, 66-67.

Ve«a caste, x, 19, 49.

Vice, the eighteen vices of a king,

vii, 45-53.

Vi^anman caste, x, 23.

Vikhanas, institutes of. See Vai*
khanasa-sfitra.

Village, boundaries of. See Boun¬
daries.

— pasture-ground around, viii, 237.
Vinajana, a place, 11, 21.

Vindhya mountains, II, 21.

Violence, anybody may be witness

in cases of, viii, 72.

— a title of the law, viii, 6, 344-

35 1 *

Vira^g, deity, p. lxiv; 1, 32-33; in,
* * 195 *

Virasana, a posture, XI, 111.

Vish«u, xii, 121.

Vishwu-smr/ti, pp. xxi-xxiii, xliv, lv,
lxvi, lxx-lxxi, lxxiii, cxxii.
Vijva^it sacrifice, xi, 75.

Vijvamitra, sage, vii, 42 ; x, 108,
Vijvejvara-bhatta, p. cxxv.

Vows, for the Veda-study, 11, 28,
165, 173 - 174 .

Vr&tya, 11, 39; x, 20; xi, 63.

— descendants of, x, 21-23.

— intercourse with,forbidden, 11,40.

— sacrificing for, xi, 198.

— sexual intercourse with female,

viii, 373. See Initiation; Pen¬
ance for neglect of initiation.

Vriddha Manu, pp. xcii, xcvi-xcvii.
Vr/ddhi-jrSddha, ill, 254.

VyShr/tis, 11, 76, 78, 81; vi, 70 5 xi,
223, 249.

Wages, non-payment of, viii, 5,
215-218.

— of herdsmen, viii, 231.

— of royal servants, vii, 125-126.

INDEX.

611

Warfare, rules of, vn, 87-94, 164-

167, 170-171, 181-199.
Washerman, food of, forbidden to

Br&hmawa, iv, 219.

— rules for washing, vm, 396.

Water, indivisible property, ix,

219.

— penance for stealing, xi, 164.

— prohibition against defilement of,

iv, 46, 48, 56; xi, 174.

— punishment for diverting or steal¬

ing, hi, 163; ix, 274, 281.
Water-pot, duty of carrying, iv, 36.

— how replaced, 11, 64.

Way, right of, 11,138-139.

Weaver, amount of cloth to be re¬
turned by, vm, 397.

Weights, enumeration of, of copper,
silver, and gold, vm, 131-137.

•— to be examined by king, vm,
403.

Well, boundaries of, vm, 262.
Widow, duties of faithful, v, 156-
160, 165-166.

— keeps ornaments, worn during

husband’s lifetime, ix, 200.

— son of, excluded from Sraddha,

hi, 156,174-175. See Appoint¬
ment of widow; Marriage, se¬
cond ; Son begotten on widow;
Son of remarried woman.

Wife, acquires qualities of husband,
ix, 22-24.

— and husband indissolubly united,

ix, 45-46.

— dines separately, iv, 43.

— duties and position of, v, 148-151,

153-156; ix, 2-7, 10-11, 26-30,
96, 101-102; of wife of emi¬
grant, ix, 74-76.

— explanation of term, ix, 8.

— fine for drinking spirituous liquor,

&c., ix, 84.

— has no property, vm, 416; ex¬

ceptions. See Woman, pro¬
perty of.

— inherits, ix, 187 note.

— manner of burning dead, v, 167-

168.

— may be beaten, vm, 299-300.

— not to make hoard from husband’s

property, ix, 199.

— penance for unfaithful, xi, 177-

178.

— punishment for defaming, vm,

275; for forsaking, vm, 389.

R r

Wife, qualifications required for, m,
4-11; exceptions, 11, 238-240.

— repudiation and supersession, ix,

46* 77-85, 95.

— sale of, ix, 46; an Upap&aka,

xi, 62.

Wind. See VSyu.

Witnesses, conflict of, vm, 73.

— duty of speaking the truth, vm,

74, 76.

— exhortation of, vm, 79-86, 89-

ior.

— manner of examination, vm, 87-

88 .

— moral guilt of perjured, vm, 75,

82, 89,93-101; exceptions, vm,
103-106, 112.

— number of, required, vm, 60, 66,

77.

— persons disqualified to be, vm,

64-67.

— persons qualified to be, vm, 62-

63 ; in special cases, vm, 68-72,
2 54, 2 56, 258-262.

— punishment of, for refusal of evi¬

dence, viii, 107; for perjury,
see Perjury.

— suffer for others, viii, 169.

— to whom misfortune happen, pay

debt, viii, 108. See Evidence.
Wives, all mothers through one son,
ix, 183.

— of several castes, nr, 12-13; ix,

85-87.

— seniority among, of equal caste,

ix, 124-125. See Adultery,
Connubial intercourse, Hus¬
band, Marriage, Son begotten
on widow or wife.

Woman, adhering to heretical sect,
receives no libation, v, 90.

— always dependent, v, 147-149;

ix, 2-3.

— causing abortion, receives no liba¬

tion, v, 90.

— impure on birth of child, iv, 212;

v, 85.

— impurity on death of, v, 72.

— killing a, an Upapataka, xi, 67;

disqualifies for readmission into
caste, xi, 191. See Penance
for killing.

— killing husband, receives no liba¬

tion, v, 90.

— menstruating, 111,45-46; iv, 40-41,

57,208 ;v, 66, 85,108; XI, 174*

2

612

LAWS OF MANU.

Woman, mouth of a, always pure, v,
130.

— naked, not to be looked at, iv,

53# *

— names of, 11, 33; ill, 9.

— naturally wicked nature of, 11,

213-215; ix, 17-20.

— not allowed to recite Veda, ix,

18; nor to sacrifice, iv, 205-
206; xi, 36-37.

— pregnant, committing a nuisance,

ix, 283; pays no toll at a ferry,
viii, 407.

— property of, appropriation by

males punishable, viii, 29; de¬
finition of, ix, 194; succession
to, ix, 104, 131,192-193, 195-
198.

— punishment of wicked, in next

life, xii, 69.

— remarried, husband of, excluded

from Sraddha, in, 166. See
Marriage, second; Son of re¬
married woman.

— rights to, not lost by law of limi¬

tation, viii, 149.

— rule of sipping water for, v, 139.

— sacraments for, performed with¬

out Mantras, 11, 66.

Woman, six causes of the ruin of, ix,
13.

— special punishment for a, ix, 230.

— unchaste, food of, forbidden to

Brahma»a,iv,2ii, 220; receives
no libation, v, 90.

— without guardian, protected by

king, viii, 28.

— without male relative, food of,

forbidden, iv, 213.

Women, treatment of, ill, 55-62;
witnesses for women, viii, 68.
See Betrothal, Bride, Daughter,
Marriage, Mother, Sister, Wi¬
dow, Wife.

Writing, pp. xcix-ci; viii, 154 note,
168. See Documents, Edicts.

Yag^avalkya-smriti, pp. xlviii, xlix,
lv, lxxiii, xcix, ci-civ, cvii, cxxifi
Yagmkas, pp. xlviii, 1.

Ya^ur-veda, pp. xvi, lx; I, 23; iv,
124; xi, 263, 265; xii, 112.

— quoted, viii, 106; xi, 251, 257,
Yakshas, r, 37; ill, 196; xi, 96.
Yama, ill, 87, an; v, 96; vi, 61;

vii, 4, 7 J viii, 86, 92; ix, 303,
307 ; xii, 17, 21-22.

Yavana race, pp. cxiv, cxvii; x, 44.

ADDITIONS AND CORRECTIONS.

Page xx, 11. 26-33. The tradition which asserts that the Gautamiya and
Vasish/^a Dharmajfistras originally were the property of Vedic
schools, studying the Sama-veda and the Rig-veda, has already been
mentioned by Colebrooke in his Essay on the Mimawsi. It goes
back to Kumarila, who adduces it in his Varttika on Mimawsi-sfitra,
I, 3,11 (Tantra-varttika, p. 179, Benares Sanskrit Series). The same
author states there that the Dharmajastra of Sahkha and Likhita
belonged to the Va^asaneyins.

P. xxxix, add at the end of note 3 : 4 It is, however, found in some
other Grihya-sfitras/

P. lvii, add at the end of note 4: 4 The copy of the Munich MS.
No. 83 has

P. cxii, 1. 1. More important is the fact that Kumarila, who, as I hold
with Professor Max Muller, cannot be placed later than 700 A.D.,
knew our Manu-smr/ti. In the portions of the Tantra-varttika, pub¬
lished in the Benares Sanskrit Series, I find the following verses
quoted, i, 2i b (p. 203, 1. 14); ii, 140 (p. 178, 1. 8); iv, 178 (p. 138,
1. 17); v, 56 (p. hi, 1. 11); viii, 57 (p. i99> 1- 23); ix, 182 (p. 135,
1. 2); xi, 30 (p. no, 1. 19); xi, 93 (p. 136,1. 19); xi, 94 (p. 136,1.24);
xi, 96* (p. 137, 1. 7); xii, 95 (p. 117, 1. 20); xii, 105, io6 b (p. 80,
1. 18). Most of these quotations show some variae lectiones,
which, however, are not very important, and possibly, nay probably,
are due to inaccuracy on Kumarila’s part. One verse, quoted p. 241,

I. 22, is not traceable in our Manu. Kumarila names Manu through¬
out as the first and most venerable authority on the sacred law. His
predecessor, the author of the metrical Tika, on the MimGwsa-sGtra,
which he quotes at great length, holds the same opinion, and clearly
and frequently alludes to our Manu-smr/ti.

P. 11, ch. I, ver. 19, add at the end of the note: 4 The idea that seven
Purushas make up man, occurs £atapatha-brahma»a vi, 1, 1, 3,
and 6.’

P. 32, ch. II, v. 15, add at the end of the note: 4 The passages referred
to in the text are quoted in the Sabarabhashya on Mim&wsa-sfitra,

II, 4, 8.*

P. 33, ch. 11, v. 21 ,/or 4 to the east of Pray&ga and to the west of
Vinasana ’ read 4 to the west of Prayaga and to the east of Vinajana/

P. 39, ch. 11, v. 52, for 4 truthfulness, if he faces the east* read 4 truth¬
fulness, if he faces the north/

P. 58, ch. 11, v. 151, for 4 old enough to be) fathers 9 read 4 old enough
to be his) fathers/

6 14 LAWS OF MANU.

P. 94, ch. ill, v. 103 note, read at the end: ‘ agatam apy atithiw na
vidyat.*

P. 101, ch. in, v. 141 note, for *paisa£i* read ‘ PaijaR*

P. 105, ch. ill, v. 159, for ‘ substances used for flavouring* read t con¬
diments.*

P. 112, ch. hi, v. 202 note, for ‘akshay&yakalpate * read ‘ akshay&yopak.*
P. 121, ch. in, v. 251 yfor ‘Rest either (here or at home)* read ‘Take
rest.*

P. 126, ch. hi, v. 274 note. The passage quoted by Vi^wanejvara on
Y&gft. 1, 217, is to the following effect: ‘When the moon stands in
the (asterism) sacred to the manes (Magha/>) and the sun in the
(asterism) Hasta, that lunar day is sacred to Yama; it is called the
elephant’s shadow.’ Another explanation of the same term from
the Malamasatattva, quoted in the Petersburg Dictionary, asserts that
it means an eclipse of the sun.

P. 137, ch. iv, v. 55, after ‘ let him not take off his garland ’ add ‘ (with
his own hands).’

P. 141, ch. iv, v. 80 note, add 1 Regarding the consequences of giving
spiritual advice to a SGdra, see also Mah. xm, 10, 55.’

P. 144, ch. iv, note to vv. 95-97, for ‘ The Pushya-day is the sixth lunar
day of each month ’ read ‘ The Pushya-day of the month of Pausha
is the day of the full moon; see Bapudeva Sastri, note on Suryasid-
dh&nta, p. 94, s. 16.*

P. 147, ch. iv, v. 113 note, add ‘ Some parallel passages make the latter
meaning more probable.’

P. 172, ch. v, v. 16 note, add ‘For Sajalkas on all (occasions,* Medh.,
Gov.) Ku. proposes ‘ Sajalkas of all (kinds).*

P. 182, ch. v, v. 82 note,jfor ‘such a one who is mentioned’ read ‘such
a one as is mentioned.*

P. 189, ch. v, v. 11 5 > for ‘for solid things* r&id ‘for things piled up.’
The commentators give as examples ‘ couches, beds, and the like,*
and apparently refer to the cushions and mattresses used for such
purposes.

P. 199, ch, vi, v. 6. The translation *a dress made of bark or grass’
ought to be placed in the text, instead of ‘ a tattered garment.*

P. 206, ch. vi, v. 43 note, for the first ‘ asawkasuka^ * read ‘asaw-
kusuka/*.*

P. 222, ch, vii, v. 43. In accordance with the explanation of Medh.,
‘ the science of dialectics, (which gives) self-knowledge * ought to be
inserted in the text, instead of ‘the science of dialectics and the
knowledge of the (supreme) Soul ;* see Introduction, p. xxxvii.

P. 234, ch. vii, v. 118 note, insert ‘or Mahattara* after ‘Gr&makG/a,*
and ‘ are 5 before ‘ the so-called haks.*

P. 241, ch. vii, v. 157, for ‘consists) * read ‘(consists).*

Pages 253, 255, superscription, for ‘ ceremonial * read ‘ criminal.*

P. 253, ch. viii, v. 4 note, insert at beginning ‘ -K/V/asyadanam.’

P. 257, ch. viii, v. 25 note, for ‘ Skara * read ‘ a>&ra * (twiceJ.

ADDITIONS AND CORRECTIONS.

615

P. 263, ch. viii, v. 53 note, for ‘ apadejam 1 read ‘ adejam.’

P. 265, ch. viii, v. 65 note, for ‘ includes according to Nar., Gov.,
Nand., Medh. also ascetics,* read ‘ includes according to NSr., Gov.,
Medh. also ascetics, or, refers to the latter alone, Nand.*

P. 288, ch. viii, v. 192 note, for ‘ N&r. takes * read ‘ Nar. and Nand. take.*
P. 292, ch. viii, v. 210 note. Add after the quotation from Ajv.

Srauta-sGtra, ‘ Ap. Srauta-sutra xm, 5, 12/

P. 295, ch. viii, v. 227 note, dele ‘ Nand. omits this verse and the next.*
P. 295, ch. viii, v. 228 note, add ‘Nand. omits this verse.*

P. 296, ch. viii, v. 237 note, add after ‘The jamyS is,* ‘either the
wedge at the yoke, or.*

P. 308, ch. viii, v. 309 note, for ‘who takes the goods of Brahmawas or
injures them* read ‘who takes the goods of Brahma«as, injures, or
abandons them.*

P. 331, ch. ix, v. 20 note, add ‘ The Pratika of this verse is quoted by
Vi. lxxiii, 12; see also Ap. Srauta-siitra 1, 9, 9, where a somewhat
different version occurs.*

P. 339, ch. ix, vv. 64-68 note, for ‘ Aupag-andhani * read ‘ Aupa^anghani,*
which latter is the correct form of the name.

P. 352, ch. ix, v. 128 note, add ‘ The story agrees exactly with Mah.

xii, 343, 57 ; see also Vish»u-pura«a, vol. ii, p. 10 (ed. Hall).*

P. 362, ch. ix, v. 170, for ‘ Gfidhotpanna* read ‘ Gu^otpanna.*

P. 398, ch. ix, v. 315 note, add at end , ‘ see also Mah. XIII, 33, 17.*

P. 399, ch. ix, v. 323. Mah. xii, 65, 1 seq. recommend ahave deha-
tyagam, ‘ death in battle,* for a king.

P. 405, ch. x, v. 19 note, for ‘ the name of caste ’ read ‘ the name of the
caste.*

P. 406, ch. x, v. 22. The form lAkkhisi for LiM£avi actually occurs.
P. 407, ibid., for ‘ waters * read ‘ w’ater.*

P, 416, ch. x, v. 64 note* for ‘Sacred Books of the East, 11,* read
‘ S. B. E. xiv.’

P. 425, ch. x, v. hi, for ‘offering sacrifices for teaching’ read ‘offering
sacrifices for, or, teaching.*

P. 443, ch. xi, v. 64 note, add ‘ Ya. in, 240 favours Nar.’s explanation
of mah&yantrapravartana.*

P. 457, ch. xi, v. ii4> for ‘ a spade of black iron * read ‘ a mattock of black
iron.*

P. 479, ch. xi, v. 242, for ‘penance* read ‘austerity* (twice).

P. 480, ch. xi, v. 250, for ‘ (that seen) by Vasish/^a * read* the three verses
(seen) by Vasish/^a.* Make the same correction in the note) and add)
‘ the correct reading in the text is prati tryr/^am.*

P. 481, ch. xi, v. 253, add at the end , or, ‘ Thus, verily thus.*

P. 512, ch. xii, v. 120 note, add ‘ Compare for this verse and the next,
Rig-veda x, 90, 13-14.*

Transliteration of Oriental Alphabets adopted for the Translations
of the Sacred Books of the East.

TRANSLITERATION OF ORIENTAL ALPHABETS.

J

• •• • W.. ...

• * .( * 5 • • •

Hebrew.

fn'i'ip. ! cusc^c! • ’ ‘ !

Arabic.

D • • • '0 • - — • • • fc)iL !

Persian.

D *N) • *0 • - - L)oJ*L) • u) *. fcjuo 1

PehlevL

^ s» «W : • =» • ' * ’ I e} • £ • •

Zend.

* .__ <—' ^ • ' • • • • ••

^sjoj : g&jr : : : : : ^ \ ^ \ \

• i .

!

\t % K P . Y» w * |tr Hr |* Hr

MISSIONARY ALPHABET.

III Class.

II Class.

I Class.

•fl * • .

1

4

1

1

G-utturales.

1 Tenuis .

2 „ aspirata.

3 Media..

4 ,, aspirata . .

5 Gutturo-labialis .

6 Nasalis .

7 Spiritus asper .

8 „ lenis .

9 » asper faucalis ....

10 »» lenis faucalis ....

11 „ asper fricatus ....

12 ,, lenis fricatus ....

G-utturales modifieatae
(palatales, &c.)

13 Tenuis .

14 „ aspirata .

15 Media.

16 „ aspirata .

17 «. Nasalis ........

FOR THE. SACRED BOOKS OF THE EAST.

619

56 Spiritus as per

57 ,, lenis,

58 Anusvara. . .

59 Visarga • . . ,

2 Lazyngo

620 TRANSLITERATION OF ORIENTAL ALPHABETS.

25 Palatalis fracta ....

26 Labialis fracta . . • •

27 Gutturo-labialis fracta

Sacred Books of the East

TRANSLATED BY

VARIOUS ORIENTAL SCHOLARS

AND EDITED BY

F. MAX MULLER

%* This Series is published with the sanction and co-opt) ation of the Secretary of
State for India in Council.

REPORT presented to the ACADEMIE DES INSCRIPTIONS, May 11,
1883, hy M. ERNEST RENAN.

<M. Renan pr&ente trois nouveaux
volumes de la grande collection des
“Livres sacnte de /Orient ” (Sacred
Books of the East), que dirige & Oxford,
avec une si vaste Erudition et une critique
si sfire, le savant associd de l’Acad^mie
des Inscriptions, M. Max Muller. ... La
premiere serie de ce beau recueil, com-
posee de 24 volumes, est presque achevde.
M. Max Muller se propose d’en publier

une seconde, dont l’interet historique et
religienx ne sera pas moindre. M. Max
Muller a su se procurer la collaboration
des savans les plus eminens d’Europe et
d’Asie. I/Universitd d’Oxfoid, que cette
grande publication honore au plus haut
degie, doit tenir k continuer dans les plus
larges proportions une oeuvre aussi philo-
sophiquement con^ue que savamment
execute/

EXTRACT from the QUARTERLY REVIEW.

* We rejoice to notice that a second
series of these translations has been an¬
nounced and has actually begun to appear.
The stones, at least, out of which a stately
edifice may hereafter arise, are here being
brought together. Prof. Max Muller has
deserved well of scientific history. Not
a few minds owe to his enticing words
their first attraction to this branch of
study. But no work of his, not even the

great edition of the Rig-Veda, can com¬
pare in importance or in usefulness with
this English translation of the Sacred
Books of the East, which has been devised
by his foresight, successfully brought so
far by his persuasive and organising
power, and will, we tiust, by the assist¬
ance of the distinguished scholars he has
gathered round him, be carried in due
time to a happy completion/

Professor E. HARDY, Inaugural Lecture in the University of Freiburg, 1887.

‘Die allgemeine vergleichende Reli- internationalen Orientalistencongress in
gionswissenschaft datirt von jenem gross- London der Grundstein gelegt worden
artigen, in seiner Art einzig dastehenden war, die Ubersetzung derheiligen Bucher
Unternehmen, zu welchem auf Anregung des Ostens’ ( the Sacred Books of the
Max MUllers im Jahre 1874 auf dem East).

The Hon. ALBERT S. G. CANNING, 1 Words on Existing Religions.’

‘ The recent publication of the " Sacred a great event in the annals of theological

Books of the East” in English is surely literature/

©rforfc

AT THE CLARENDON PRESS
LONDON: HENRY FROWDE

OXFORD UNIVERSITY PRESS WAREHOUSE, AMEN CORNER, E.C.

%

SACRED BOOKS OF THE EAST:

FIRST SERIES.

Vol. I. The Upanishads.

Translated by F. Max Muller. Part I. The Khi ndogya-
upanishad, The Talavakdra-upanishad, The Aitareya-&ra#yaka,
The Kaushitaki-brahmawa-upanishad, and The V&^asaneyi-
sawhitd-upani&had. 8vo, cloth, ioj. 6 d.

The Upanishads contain the philosophy of the Veda. They have
become the foundation of the later Veddnta doctrines , and indirectly
of Buddhism. Schopenhauer , speaking of the Upanishads , says:

1 In the whole world there is no study so beneficial and so elevating
as that of the Upanishads. It has been the solace of my life , it will
be the solace of my death *

[See also Vol. XV.]

Vol. II. The Sacred Laws of the Aryas,

As taught in the Schools of Apastamba, Gautama, Vasish/^a,
and Baudh&yana. Translated by Georg BUhler. Part I.
Apastamba and Gautama. 8vo, cloth, ios. 6 d.

The Sacred Laws of the Aryas contain the original treatises on
which the Laws of Manu and other lawgivers were founded .

[See also Vol. XIV.]

Vol. III. The Sacred Bocks of China. %

The Texts of Confucianism. Translated by James Legge.
Part I. The Shfl King, The Religious Portions of the Shih
King, and The Hsiao King. 8vo, cloth, 12 s. 6 d.

Confucius was a collector of ancient traditions, not the founder of
a new religion. As he lived in the sixth and fifth centuries B. C.
his works are of unique interest for the study of Ethology.

[See also Vols. XVI, XXVII, XXVIII, XXXIX, and XL.]

Vol. IV. The Zend-Avesta.

Translated by James Darmesteter. Part I. The Vendfd£d.
8vo, cloth, 10s. 6 d .

The Zend-Avesta contains the relics of what was the religion of
Cyrus, Darius, and Xerxes , and, but for the battle of Marathon,

EDITED BY F. MAX MULLER.

3

might have become the religion of Europe . It forms to the present
day the sacred book of the Parsis, the so-called fire-worshippers.
Two more volumes will complete the translation of all that is left us
of Zoroaster's religion .

[See also Vols. XXIII and XXXI.]

Vol. V. Pahlavi Texts.

Translated by E. W. West. Part I. The Bundahij, Bahman
Ya st, and Shdyast la-shdyast. 8 vo, cloth, 12J. 6 d .

The Pahlavi Texts comprise the theological literature of the revival
of Zoroaster's religion , beginning with the Sassanian dynasty. They
are important for a study of Gnosticism.

Vols, VI and IX. The Qur in.

Parts I and II. Translated by E. H. Palmer. 8 vo, cloth, 2 is.

This translation , carried out according to his own peculiar views
of the origin of the Qurdn, was the last great work of E. H. Palmer,
before he was murdered in Egypt .

Vol. VII, The Institutes of Vishmi.

Translated by Julius Jolly. 8 vo, cloth, 10s. 6 d.

A collection of legal aphorisms , closely connected with one of the
oldest Vedic schools , the KaMas, but considerably added to in later
time . Of importance for a critical study of the Laws of Manu.

Vol. VIII. The Bhagavadgitci,with The Sanatsu^dtlya,
and The Anugitd.

Translated by KAshinath Trimbak Telang. 8vo, cloth,
10 s. 6 d.

The earliest philosophical and religious poem cf India. It has been
paraphrased in Arnold's ‘Song Celestial!

Vol. X. The Dhammapada,

Translated from Pdli by F. Max Muller; and

The Sutta-Nip&ta,

Translated from Pali by V. FausbOll ; being Canonical Books
of the Buddhists. 8 vo, cloth, ioj. 6 d.

The Dhammapada contains the quintessence of Buddhist morditty.
The Suiia-Nipdta gives the authentic teaching of Buddha on some
of thefundamental principles of religion.

4

SACRED BOOKS OF THE EAST:

Vol. XI. Buddhist Suttas.

Translated from Pdli by T. W. Rhys Davids, i. The Mahd-
parinibbdna Suttanta; 2. The Dhamma-£akka-ppavattana

Sutta. 3. The Tevi^a Suttanta; 4. The Akahkheyya Sutta;
5. The Aetokhila Sutta; 6. The Maha-sudassana Suttanta;
7. The Sabbdsava Sutta. 8vo, cloth, 10 s. 6d.

A collection of the most important religious , moral } and philosophical
discourses taken from the sacred canon of the Buddhists .

Vol. XII. The .5atapatha-Br&hma«a, according to the
Text of the M&dhyandina School.

Translated by Julius Eggeung. Part I. Books I and II.
8vo, cloth, 12 s. 6 d.

A minute account of the sacrificial ceremonies of the Vedic age.
It contains the earliest account of the Deluge in India .

[See also Vols. XXVI, XLI.]

Vol. XIII. Vinaya Texts.

Translated from the Pali by T. W. Rhys Davids and Hermann
Oldenberg. Part I. The Patimokkha. The Mahdvagga, I-IV.
8vo, cloth, 10 s. 6d.

The Vinaya Texts give for the first time a translation of the moral
code of the Buddhist religion as settled in the third century B. C.
[See also Vols. XVII and XX.]

Vol. XIV. The Sacred Laws of the Aryas,

As taught in the Schools of Apastamba, Gautama, Vdsish/^a,
and Baudhayana. Translated by Georg Buhler. Part II.
Vdsish/^a and Baudhayana. 8vo, cloth, 10 s. 6d.

Vol. XV. The Upanishads.

Translated by F. Max Muller. Part II. The KaMa-upanishad,
The Muwdaka-upanishad, The Taittirfyaka-upanishad, The
Br&addrawyaka-upanishad, The *SVetfovatara-upanishad, The
Praj/la-upanishad, and The Maitrdya«a-brdhma#a-upanishad.
8vo, cloth, ioj. 6d.

Vol. xvi. The Sacred Books of China.

The Texts of Confucianism. Translated by James Legge.
Part II. The Yt King. 8vo, cloth, iqs. 6 d.

[See also Vols. XXVII, XXVIII.]

Vol. XVII. Vinaya Texts.

Translated from the Pali by T. W. Rhys Davids and Hermann
Oldenberg. Part II. The Mah&vagga, V-X. The Aullavagga,
I—III. 8vo, cloth, 1 or. 6 d.

EDITED BY F. MAX MULLER,

5

Vol. XVIII. Pahlavi Texts.

Translated by E. W. West. Part II. The DaflTistdn-i Dmik
and The Epistles of Mdnttafcihar. 8vo, cloth, 12X. 6d.

Vol. XIX. The Fo-sho-hing-tsan-king.

A Life of Buddha by Axvaghosha Bodhisattva, translated from
Sanskrit into Chinese by Dharmaraksha, a.d. 420, and from
Chinese into English by Samuel Beal. 8 vo, cloth, iox. 6d.

This life of Buddha was translated from Sanskrit into Chinese,
A.D. 420. It contains many legends , some of which show a certain
similarity to the Evangelinm infantiae, fyc.

Vol. XX. Vinaya Texts.

Translated from the Pali by T. W. Rhys Davids and Hermann
Oldenberg. Part III. The ATullavagga, IV-XII. 8vo, cloth,
1 ox. 6d.

Vol. XXI. The Saddharma-puWarlka; or, The Lotus
of the True Law.

Translated by H. Kern. 8 vo, cloth, 12X. 6d.

* The Lotus of the true law,’ a canonical book of the Northern
Buddhists , translated from Sanskrit. There is a Chinese transla¬
tion of this book which was finished as early as the year 286 A.D.

Vol. XXII. £aina-S£itras.

Translated from Prakrit by Hermann Jacobi. Part I. The
AHranga-Sfitra and The Kalpa-Sfitra. 8vo, cloth, iox. 6d.

The religion of the Gainas was founded by a contemporary of Buddha.
It still counts numerous adherents in India , while there are no
Buddhists left in India proper .

[See Vol. XLV.]

Vol. XXIII. The Zend-Avesta.

Translated by James Darmesteter. Part II. The Slrdzahs,
Yaxts, and Nydyix, 8vo, cloth, iox. 6 d\

Vol. XXIV. Pahlavi Texts.

Translated by E. W. West. Part III. Dtnd-i Maindg-
Khira</, -Sikand-gfimdntk Vi^dr, and Sad Dar. 8vo, cloth,
iox. 6d .

6

SACRED BOOKS OF THE EAST:

SECOND SERIES.

Vol. XXV. Manu.

Translated by Georg Buhler. 8vo, cloth, 2 it.

This translation is founded on that of Sir William Jones, which has been
carefully revised and corrected with the help of seven native Commentaries.
An Appendix contains all the quotations from Manu which are found in the
Hindu Law-books, translated for the use of the Law Courts in India.
Another Appendix gives a synopsis of parallel passages from the six
Dharma-sfitras, the other Smrftis, the Upanishads, the Mah&bharata, &c.

Vol. XXVI. The £atapatha-Br&hma#a.

Translated by Julius Eggeling. Part II. Books III and IV.
8vo, cloth, 12s. 6 d.

Vols. XXVII and xxviii. The Sacred Books of China.

The Texts of Confucianism. Translated by James Legge. Parts
III and IV. The Li K \, or Collection of Treatises on the Rules
of Propriety, or Ceremonial Usages. 8vo, cloth, 25$.

Vol. XXIX. The GWhya-Sfitras, Rules of Vedic

Domestic Ceremonies.

Part I. .Sankhayana, Ajvaldyana, Pdraskara, Kh&dira. Trans¬
lated by Hermann Oldenberg. 8vo, cloth, 12 s. 6 d.

These rules of Domestic Ceremonies describe the home life of the ancient
Aryas with a completeness and accuracy unmatched in any other literature.
Some of these rules have been incorporated in the ancient Law-books.

Vol. XXX. The Grzhya-SCltras, Rules of Vedic

Domestic Ceremonies.

Part II. Gobhila, Hirawyakejin, Apastamba. Translated by
Hermann Oldenberg. Apastamba, Ya^a-paribhdshd-sfitras.
Translated by F. Max Muller. 8 vo, cloth, 12J. 6 d.

Vol. XXXI. The Zend-Avesta.

Part III. The Yasna, Visparad, Afrinagdn, Gdhs, and
Miscellaneous Fragments. Translated by L. H. Mills. 8vo,
cloth, 12$. 6 d.

Vol. XXXII. Vedic Hymns.

Translated by F. Max Muller. Part I. 8vo, cloth, 1 8 s . 6 d .

EDITED BY F. MAX MOLLER.

7

-p--—----

Vol. XX X I II. The Minor Law-books.

Translated by Julius Jolly. Part I. N&rada, Bnhaspati.
8 vo, cloth, i or. 6 d.

Vol. XXXIV. The Ved&nta-Stitras, with the Com¬
mentary by *Sankar4/&rya. Part I.

Translated by G. Thibaut. 8vo, cloth, jas. 6 d.

VOL8. XXXV AND XXXVI. The Questions of King
Milinda.

Translated from the Pali by T. W. Rhys Davids.
Part I. 8vo, cloth, ior. 6 d. Part II. 8vo, cloth, i2r. 6 d.

Vol. xxxvii. The Contents of the Nasks, as stated
in the Eighth and Ninth Books of the Dlnkard.

Part I. Translated by E. W. West. 8 vo, cloth, I5r.

Vol. XXXVIII. The Ved&nta-Sutras. Part II. 8vo,
cloth, i2r. 6 d. ,

Vols. xxxix and XL. The Sacred Books of China.
The Texts of Taoism. Translated by James Legge. 8vo,
cloth, 2ir.

Vol. XLI. The .Satapatha- Br&hma»a. Part III.
Translated by Julius Eggeling. 8 vo, cloth, i2r. 6 d.

Vol. XLII, Hymns of the Atharva-veda.

Translated by M. Bloomfield. [In preparation .]

Vols. XLIII and XLIV. The .5atapatha-Brfihma«a.
Parts IV and V. \ln preparation .]

Vol. XLV. The Caina-Stitras.

Translated from Prakrit, by Hermann Jacobi. Part II. The
Uttaradhyayana Sfttra, The Sutrakn'tanga Sfttra. 8vo, cloth,
12 r. 6 d.

Vol. XLVI. The VedAnta-SGtras. Part III.

[In preparation .]

Vol. XLVII. The Contents of the Nasks. Part II.

[In preparation .]

Vol. XLVIII. Vedic Hymns. Part II. [Inpreparation^

Vol. XLIX. Buddhist Mahiyilna Texts. Buddha-
£arita, translated by E. B. Cowell. Sukhavali-vyQha,Va£raiMe-
dM, &c., translated by F. Max Muller. Amitayur-Dhy&na-
Sfltra, translated by J. Takakusu. 8vo, cloth, izs, 6 d.

8

RECENT ORIENTAL WORKS.

gtnecbota ©.tomensta.

ARYAN SERIES.

Buddhist Texts from Japan. I. V &grd.kkhtC\ki ; The
Diamond-Cutter.

Edited by F. Max Muller, M.A. Small 4to, 3J. 6 d.

One of the most famous metaphysical treatises of the Mahayana Buddhists.

Buddhist Texts from Japan. II. Sukh&vati-Vyflha:
Description of Sukhdvati, the Land of Bliss.

Edited by F. Max Muller, M.A., and Bunyiu Nanjio. With
two Appendices: (i) Text and Translation of Sanghavarman’s
Chinese Version of the Poetical Portions of the Sukhdvati-*
Vyftha; (2) Sanskrit Text of the Smaller Sukhavati-Vytiha.
Small 4to, 7<r. 6 d.

The editio princeps of the Sacred Book of one of the largest and most
influential sects of Buddhism, numbering more than ten millions of followers
in Japan alone.

Buddhist Texts from J apan. III. The A ncient Palm-
Leaves containing the Pra^wa- PSramitd- H rz'daya-
Sutra and the Ushwisha-Vi^aya-Dhara/zi.

Edited by F. Max Muller, M.A., and Bunyiu Nanjio, M.A.
With an Appendix by G. Buhler, C.I.E. With many Plates.
Small 4to, io s.

Contains facsimiles of the oldest Sanskrit MS. at present known.

Dharma-Sa^graha, an A ncient Collection of Buddhist
Technical Terms .

Prepared for publication by Kknjiu Kasawara, a Buddhist
Priest from Japan, and, after his death, edited by F. Max
Muller and H. Wenzel. Small 4to, (id.

K&ty&yana’s Sarvdnukramawi of the Rigve da.

With Extracts from Shadgurujishyas Commentary entitled
Veddrthadipikd. Edited by A. A. Macdonell, M.A., Ph.D. i-6j.

Oxford .

AT THE CLARENDON PRESS
LONDON: HENRY FROWDE

OXFORD UNIVERSITY PRESS WAREHOUSE, AMEN CORNER, E.C.

0 .. m^ih **iltf*T 3*cnPT*T*T

La! Bahadur Shastrf National Academy of Administration Lit

MUSSOORIE }ol~} 0 l'7
3^R> gTfT® ^ «rTpTH sfRift I I

This book is to be returned on the date last stamped

Date

^STR^ctf

Borrower's

No.

Date

^srR*P?rf

wrr

Borrower's

No.

—

i

1

i

!

j

'

Gl_ 294.544

294.544

Law

ST^rH-cT T'o \

ACC. NoXpJLTJ.fL^-
'^cTT’T.

Class No...... Book No.

Author.

°v r

W'tn? ihe laws of Manu :

Title.

294-5<i«i

, LIBRARY

L^W tAL BAHADUR 8HA8TRI

National Academy of Administration

MUSSOORIE

Accession Na,_ ion c ?7

1. Books are Issued for 15 days only but
may have to be recalled earlier If urgen-
fly required.

2* An over-due charge of 25 Palse per day
per volume will be charged.

3. Books may be renewed on request, at
the discretion of the Librarian.

4. Periodicals, Rare and Refrence books
may not be issued and may be con¬
sulted only In the Library.

. Books lost, defaced or ln|ured In any
way shall have to be replaced or Its
double price shall be paid by the

h Arrow a r.

5 .