The Sacred Books of the East, Vol. 20: Vinaya Texts, Part 3 (T. W. Rhys Davids; Hermann Oldenberg (trans.), 1885)
=================================================================================================================
SBE Vol. 20: Vinaya Texts Part 3 (Kullavagga IV-XII, Pâtidesanîya). Completes the SBE series gap. Public domain. Internet Archive.

I DOMUMEiN;
>'VSlTIO I’
1UVMEA

Press Warehouse

A.ME X CORNER,

THE

SACRED BOOKS OF THE EAST

TRANSLATED

BY VARIOUS ORIENTAL SCHOLARS

AND EDITED BY

F. MAX MULLER

VOL, XX

OPjrfortr

AT THE CLARENDON PRESS

1885


f

VINAYA TEXTS

TRANSLATED FROM THE PALI

T. W. RHYS DAVIDS

HERMANN OLDENBERG

PART III

'0 2'3'o” THE ATULLAVAGGA, IV— XII

(vA io )

■ P-P. n

AT THE CLARENDON PRESS

A’- 1 -

[ All rights reserved ]

CENTR \L ARC \ A F.0L0G1GAL
LIBRARY, N*-W

A oo. N®.

u&m. . 3 - 3 - .• V '

Call Uo«*BLQ £ ;

S3 -

• ••

CONTENTS.

PAGE

The Zullavagga,

Fourth Khandhaka (The Settlement of Disputes among

the Fraternity) i

Fifth Khandhaka (On the Daily Life of the Bhikkhus) . 66

Sixth Khandhaka (On Dwellings and Furniture) . . 157

Seventh Khandhaka (Dissensions in the Order) . . 224

Eighth Khandhaka (Regulations as to the Duties of the

Bhikkhus towards one another) .. . . .272

Ninth Khandhaka (On Exclusion from the Patimokkha

Ceremony) . 299

Tenth Khandhaka (On the Duties of Bhikkhunis) . 320

Eleventh Khandhaka (On the Council of Ra^agaha) . 370

Twelfth Khandhaka (On the Council of Ves&li) . . 386

Note on the Bharaavaras . . . * .415

Index of Subjects . ,421

Index of Proper Names ,428

Index of Pali Words explained or referred to in the Notes . 433

Transliteration of Oriental Alphabets adopted for the Trans-
lations of the Sacred Books of the East . , .441

ATULLAVAGGA.

FOURTH KHANDHAKA.

THE SETTLEMENT OF DISPUTES AMONG
THE FRATERNITY.

1 .

i. Now at that time the Blessed Buddha was
dwelling at Savatthi, in the Arama of Anatha-
pmt/ika. And at that time the A/kabbaggiya
Bhikkhus used to carry out the formal Acts— the
Ta^aniya, and the Nissaya, and the Pabba-
^•aniya, and the Pa/isara»iya, and the Ukkhe-
paniya against Bhikkhus who were not present.

Then those Bhikkhus who were modest were
annoyed, murmured, and became indignant, saying,
‘ How can the A'iabbaggiya Bhikkhus [act thus] 1 ?’
And those Bhikkhus told the matter to the Blessed
One.

‘ Is it true, O Bhikkhus, as they say, that the
jOabbaggiya Bhikkhus carry out the (aforesaid ) 1
formal Acts against Bhikkhus who are not present ?’

‘It is true, Lord!’

The Blessed Buddha rebuked them, saying, ‘This
is improper (&c., as in I, i, 2, down to the end).’

And when he had thus rebuked them, and had

1 The words above are repeated.

[ 2 °] v? B

kullavagga.

IV, 2, I.

delivered a religious discourse he addressed the
Bhikkhus, and said : ‘ The formal Acts, O Bhikkhus,
theTap'P'aniya-, the Nissaya-, the Pabba^amya-,
the Pa/isira^iya-, and the Ukkhepaniya-kam-
mas, ought not to be carried out against
who are not present. Whosoever does so, shall be

guilty of a dukka^a offence.

2 .

i. The single Bhikkhu who speaks not in ac-
cordance with the right, the many who speak not in
accordance with the right, the Sa^gha which speaks
not in accordance with the right. The singe
Bhikkhu who speaks in accordance with the right
the many who speak in accordance with the ; right
the Sa^gha which speaks in accordance with the

ng Now (it may happen that) the one Bhikkhu who
speaks not in accordance with the rl g^ may point
out (the right course) to a single Bhikkhu who
speaks in accordance with the right, or gives him
to understand what it is 2 , or urges him to see or
consider the matter in that light 3 , or teaches him, or

* This short enumeration of the different categories occurring
in the subsequent paragraphs is quite m the style of the Abhi
dhamma texts, in which such lists are accustome oe
matika; compare the expression matika-dharo as aPP* ied 0
learned Bhikkhu in the stock phrase at Mahavagga X, 2 , ,

ATullavagga I, n; IV, 14. 25, &c - . , . tb * so

2 The Samanta PMdM here says: m^apetiti yatha so

taw atthaw ni^Myati oloketi evaw karoti.

* Pekkheti anupekkhetiti yatha so taw atthaw pekkhati
It eva punappunaft & pekkhati evaw karoti. (Samanta Pasadika.)

iv, 3 -

THE SETTLEMENT OF DISPUTES.

5

instructs him, saying, ‘This is the Dhamma, this the
Vinaya, this the teaching of the Master. Accept this,
and approve this.’ If the dispute should be thus
settled, it is settled contrary to the Dhamma, and
with a mere counterfeit of the Vinaya rule of pro-
cedure (that cases of dispute must be settled before
a duly constituted meeting of the Sawzgha, and in
the presence of the accused person) 1 .

[And in like manner, if he instruct the many, or
the Samgha, who speak according to the right ; — or
if the many or the Samgha who speak not according
to the right instruct the one, or the many, or the
Sawgha who speak according to the right; — then
the dispute is settled contrary to the Dhamma (&c.,
as before).]

End of the nine cases in which the wrong
side decides.

3 .

[This chapter is the contrary of the last; the cases
put being those in which the three last members of

1 Sammukha- vinaya -pa/irupakena. The rule of proce-
dure, called SammukM-vinaya, hereafter rendered ‘ Proceeding
in Presence/ is one of the seven modes of settling disputes already
referred to in the closing chapter of the P&timokkha (‘Vinaya
Texts/ vol. i, p. 68), and is more fully described below in iTulla-
vagga IV, 14, 16, and following sections.

It will be seen below, from §§ IV, 14, 27-30, that it is involved
in, or rather is supposed to accompany, each of the other Pro-
ceedings mentioned in this chapter.

B 2

4

ZULLAVAGGA.

IV, 4, i.

the matika in the first paragraph of chapter 2 in-
struct, &c., the three first members.]

End of the nine cases in which the right
side decides.

4 1 .

1. Now at that time the Blessed Buddha was
staying at Rafagaha, in the Kalandaka N ivapa, in
the Bamboo Grove.

Now at that time the venerable Dabba the Mal-
lian, who had realised Arahatship when he was
seven years old, had entered into possession of
every (spiritual gift) which can be acquired by a
disciple ; there was nothing left that he ought still
to do, nothing left that he ought to gather up of
the fruit of his past labour 2 . And when the vener-
able Dabba the Mallian had retired into solitude,
and was sunk in thought, the following consideration
presented itself to his mind : ‘Arahatship had I

1 The whole of the following story of Dabba down to the end
of section 9 (except the last sentence) recurs in the Sutta-vibhahga
as the Introductory Story to the Eighth SawzgMdisesa. The
Samanta P&sadika has therefore no commentary upon it here, and
the few extracts that we give from it are taken from the notes of
that work on the corresponding passage in the Sutta-vibhahga.
The stupidity of Ud&yi, who once supplanted Dabba the Mallian in
the performance of his duty as bhattuddesaka, forms the burthen
of the Introductory Story to the C?ataka on ‘ the Measure of Rice ’
(No. g in the G&taka book; ■ Buddhist Birth Stories,’ pp. 172 and
following).

2 On this phrase compare Mahavagga V, 1, 21, and the verses
at V, r, 2 7.

iv, 4, 3-

5

THE SETTLEMENT OF DISPUTES.

acquired when I was seven years old. I have
o-ained everything that a learner can reach to.
There is nothing further left for me to do, nothing
to gather up of the fruit of that which I have done.
What service is it possible for me to render to the
Samgha?’ And it occurred to the venerable Dabba
the Mallian : ‘It would be a good thing for me to
regulate the lodging-places for the Sawgha, and to

apportion the rations of food.’

2. And when, at eventide, the venerable Dabba
the Mallian had arisen from his meditations, he
went to the place where the Blessed One was ; and
when he had come there he saluted the Blessed
One, and took his seat on one side ; and when he
was so seated the venerable Dabba the Mallian
spake thus to the Blessed One :

‘When I had retired, Lord, into solitude and was
sunk in thought, the following consideration pre-
sented itself to my mind (&c., as before, down to)
It would be a good thing for me to regulate the
lodging-places for the Sauwgha, and to apportion the
rations of food. I desire, Lord, [so to do].

‘Very good, Dabba. Do you then regulate the
lodging-places for the Sawgha, and apportion the
rations of food !’

‘It is well, Lord,’ said the venerable Dabba the
Mallian, accepting the word of the Blessed One. ,

3. And the Blessed One on that occasion and m
that connection, when he had delivered a religious
discourse, addressed the Bhikkhus, and said :

‘ Let then the Sawgha, O Bhikkhus, appoint
Dabba the Mallian as the regulator of lodging-
places, and as the apportioner of rations. And
thus, O Bhikkhus, should the appointment be made.

6

5TULLAVAGGA.

IV, 4 , 4*

‘ First Dabba should be asked (whether he is
willing to undertake the office). When he has
been asked, some able and discreet Bhikkhu should
lay the resolution before the Sazzzgha, saying,

‘ “ Let the venerable Sazzzgha hear me.

“‘If it be convenient to the Sawgha, let the
Sazzzgha appoint Dabba the Mallian as regulator
of lodging-places, and as apportioner of rations.

‘ “This is the resolution (zzatti).

‘ “Let the venerable Sawzgha hear me.

‘ “The Sazzzgha appoints the venerable Dabba the
Mallian as regulator of lodging-places, and as ap-
portioner of rations. Whosoever of the venerable
ones agrees that Dabba should be so appointed,
let him remain silent ; whosoever does not agree,
let him speak. The venerable Dabba is appointed
by the Sawzgha as regulator of the lodging-places,
and as apportioner of rations. The Sazzzgha ap-
proves thereof. Therefore is it silent. Thus do
I understand.” ’

4. And the venerable Dabba the Mallian, being
so chosen, appointed one lodging-place in the same
place for the Bhikkhus who belonged to the same
division. For those Bhikkhus who were repeaters
of the Suttantas he appointed a lodging-place to-
gether, thinking, ‘ They will be able to chant over
the Suttantas to one another.’ For those Bhikkhus
who were in charge of the Vinaya he appointed a
lodging-place together, thinking, ‘ They will be able
to discuss the Vinaya one with another.’ For those
Bhikkhus who were preachers of the Dhamma he
appointed a lodging-place together, thinking, 1 They
will be able to talk over the Dhamma one with
another.’ For those Bhikkhus who were given to

IV, 4. 4.

THE SETTLEMENT OF DISPUTES.

7

meditation 1 he appointed one lodging-place together,
thinking, ‘ They will not disturb one another For
those Bhikkhus who were wise m worldly lore,
and abounding in bodily vigour 2 , he appointed one
lodging-place together, thinking, ‘ These venerabl
ones, too, will thus remain settled according to their
pleasure.’ And for such Bhikkhus as came m late,
for them he caught fire s , and by the light of the
flame thereof he pointed out to them a lodging-place
So much so 4 that Bhikkhus of set purpose would
come in late, thinking, ‘We shall thus behold the
' power of the Iddhi of the venerable Dabba the
Mallian.’ And they went up to the venerab e
Dabba the Mallian, and said: ‘Appoint us, O
venerable Dabba, a lodging-place.’

And to them the venerable Dabba the Maluan
would speak thus: ‘Where do the venerable ones
desire to rest ? Where shall I appoint it ?

And they of set purpose would designate some
place afar, saying, ‘May the venerable Dabba ap-
point us a lodging-place on the Vulture s Pea , may
the venerable one appoint us a lodging-place at the
Robber’s Cliff; may the venerable one appoint us a
lodging-place at the Black Rock on the Isigili Passa ;
may the venerable one appoint us a lodging on the
Vebhdra Passa ; may the venerable one appoint us
a lodging-place in the Sattapa*»i Cave; may the

1 GMyino possibly used with the technical connotation of being
addicted to the practice of the Four -G^ana meditations ; ut com-
pare Mahavagga I, x, 3, 5; 1 -

2 See the comment as quoted by H. O. . A M , *

2 Compare the use of te^odh&tUM samapa^itva at Maba-

vagga I, 1 6 , 4-

4 Compare api ssu at iTullavagga I, 9 , 1 .

8 XULLAVAGGA. IV, 4, 4.

venerable one appoint us a lodging-place in the
mountain cave of the Snake’s Pool in Sita’s Wood ;
may the venerable one appoint us a lodging-place
in the Goma/a Grotto ; may the venerable one ap-
point us a lodging-place in the cave of the Tinduka
Tree ; may the venerable one appoint us a lodging-
place at the Tapoda Ghat; may the venerable one
appoint us a lodging-place in the Tapoda Arama ;
may the venerable one appoint us a lodging-place
in Givaka’s Mango Grove; may the venerable
one appoint us a lodging-place in the deer-park
at Maddaku/bb£i.’

And the venerable Dabba the Mallian would
burst into flame, and walk on in front of them
with his finger burning, and they by the light
thereof would follow close upon the venerable
Dabba the Mallian. And the venerable Dabba
the Mallian would appoint them a lodging-place,
saying, ‘This is the couch, and this the stool, and
this the mat, and this the pillow, and this the privy
place, and this the drinking-water 1 , and this the
water for washing, and this the staff 2 , and this
the form of (the result of) the consultation of the
Sa»zgha 8 , that at such and such a time are you
to enter thereon, and at such and such a time
are you to depart therefrom 3 4 . 5 And when the

3 That paribho^aniya^ does not mean drinking-water, as
Childers renders it, is clear from VIII, i, 2, where it is implied
that it is to be used for washing feet. Our translation of Mahd-
vagga II, 20, 5 should be corrected accordingly.

2 Compare below, VIII, 6, 3.

3 Katika-sa#/Mnaffz. Compare (x&taka I, 81, and MaM-
vagga VIII, 32, and JiTullavagga VIII, 1, 2.

4 That this is the correct rendering of this otherwise doubtful

IV, 4? 5.

THE SETTLEMENT OF DISPUTES.

9

venerable Dabba the Mallian had thus appointed
unto them their lodging-place, he would return back
again to the Bamboo Grove.

5. Now at that time the Bhikkhus who were
followers of Mettiya and Bhumma^aka 1 had been
but recently received Into the Sa^gha, and were
wanting in merit, and such among the lodging-
places appertaining to the Sa^gha as were inferior
fell to their lot, and the inferior rations 2 .

Now at that time the people of Ra^agaha were
desirous of presenting to the Thera Bhikkhus a
wishing-gift 3 , to wit, ghee and oil and dainty bits 4 ;
while to the Bhikkhus who were followers of Mettiya
and Bhumma^aka they used to give an ordinary
gift according to their ability, to wit, scraps of food
and sour gruel with it 6 .

passage is clear from the closing words of VIII, 1, 2, where most
of these phrases recur. In the text, for the last word nikkhi-
pitabbazzz read nikkhamitabbazrc, as pointed out in the note
at p. 363 of the edition of the text.

1 These were two of the six leaders of the notorious jffXabbag-
giya Bhikkhus.

2 Compare the 22nd Nissaggiya.

3 Abhisatfzkh&rika^z; that is, a gift by the giving of which
the donor expressly wished that a particular result (as, for in-
stance, that the donor should be re-born as a king or queen, or
should enter the paths, or have opportunity to hear a Buddha
preach) should be brought about by the normal effect of that good
act in a future birth. There are not a few instances of such
wishes, and of their fulfilment, recorded in various parts of the
sacred literature.

4 Uttaribhahgam. See the passages quoted in the note on
Mahavagga VI, 14, 3. These three things are also mentioned
together at VIII, 4, 4.

6 These expressions recur at (jr&taka I, 228. The Samanta Pasa-
dika says merely kawa^akan ti sakuntaka-bhattaw. Bilan ga-
dutiyan ti kai^ika-dutiya^.

IO

KULLAVAGGA.

IT, 4, 6.

When they had returned from their receipt of
alms, and had eaten their meal, they asked the
Thera Bhikkhus, ‘What did you get. Sirs, at the
place of alms ; what did you get ? ’

Some of the Theras answered, ‘We had ghee,
Sirs ; we had oil ; we had dainty bits.’

The Bhikkhus who were followers of Mettiya and
Bhumma^aka replied : ‘We got nothing at all, Sirs ;
just an ordinary gift such as they could manage,
scraps of food, and sour gruel with it.’

6. Now at that time a certain householder, pos-
sessed of good food 1 , used to give a perpetual alms
to the Sa^zgha, a meal for four Bhikkhus. He with
his wife and children used to stand at the place of
alms and serve ; and offer to some Bhikkhus boiled
rice, and to some congey, and to some oil, and to
some dainty bits.

Now at that time the meal for the Bhikkhus who
were followers of Mettiya and Bhumma^aka had been
fixed for the morrow at the house of this prosperous
householder. And the prosperous householder went
to the Ararna for some business or other, and went
up to the place where the venerable Dabba the
Mallian was. And when he had come there, he
saluted the venerable Dabba the Mallian, and took
his seat on one side. And him so seated did the
venerable Dabba instruct, and arouse, and gladden,
and incite with religious discourse.

And w'hen the prosperous householder had thus
been instructed, and aroused, and gladdened, and
incited by the venerable Dabba the Mallian with

1 The Samanta Pasadika says simply kalya»am bhattaw assa ti
kaly£»a-bhattiko.

IV, 4> 7-

THE SETTLEMENT OF DISPUTES.

II

religious discourse, he said to the venerable Dabba
the Mallian : ‘ For whom, Sir, has the meal been
appointed to-morrow at our house ?

« The meal has been appointed, my friend, at your
house to-morrow for those Bhikkhus who are fo -
lowers of Mettiya and Bhumma^aka.’

Then the prosperous householder was ill-pleased,
thinkincr, « How can bad Bhikkhus enjoy themselves
at our house ?’ And going home he gave command
to the slave-girl : ‘ For those who come to-morrow
for the meal, spread out the mats in the entrance
hall \ and serve them with scraps of food, and with

sour gruel with it !’ .

‘Even so, Sir!’ said the slave-girl, accepting the
word of the householder.

7. Then the Bhikkhus who were followers ot
Mettiya and Bhummafaka spake one to another:
‘Yesterday a meal has been appointed for us at
the house of the prosperous householder. To-
morrow he, with his wife and children, will attend
upon us at the place of alms, and serve us. And he
will offer to some of us boiled rice, and to some
congey, and to some oil, and to some dainty bits.
And through joy thereat they slept uneasily that

night. .

Then the Bhikkhus who were followers of Mettiya

and Bhumma^aka, having robed themselves in the
early morning, went duly bowled and robed to the
dwelling-place of the prosperous householder. And
that slave-girl saw the Bhikkhus who were followers

1 Ko/^alce, which means the battlemented gateway which
formed the entrance to an important house ; and in which there
was a room. See ffataka I, 227.

12

JsTULLAVAGGA.

iv, 4, 7-

of Mettiya and Bhumma^aka approaching from afar;
and spreading out the mats in the entrance hall, she
said to them, ‘ Be seated, Sirs . 5

And the Bhikkhus who were followers of Mettiya
and Bhumma^aka thought: ‘ For a certainty the
meal cannot yet be ready, since we are told to take
our seats in the entrance.’

Then the slave-girl coming up with scraps of
food, and sour gruel with it, said to them, 1 Eat,
Sirs!’

‘We, sister, are of those for whom perpetual meals
are provided.’

‘ I know, Sirs, that you are so. But only yester-
day I received command from the householder that
for them who should come to-morrow for the meal I
was to spread out the mats in the entrance hall, and
serve them with scraps of food, and some gruel with
it. Eat, Sirs ! ’

Then the Bhikkhus who were followers of Mettiya
and Bhumma^aka thought : ‘ It was yesterday that
the householder, the prosperous one, came to the
Arama to visit Dabba the Mallian. For a certainty
the householder must have been set against us by
Dabba the Mallian.’ And through sorrow thereat
they ate uneasily. And the Bhikkhus who were
followers of Mettiya and Bhumma^aka, when they
had finished their meal, returned from the receipt of
alms, went to the Arama, and laid aside their bowls
and their robes, and sat down outside the porch
of the Arama, squatting against their waist cloths *,

• 1 Samgha/i-pallatthik&ya. There is a misprint in the text
(°ttikaya). On this curious expression, see below, V, 28, 2.

IV, 4, 8.

THE SETTLEMENT OF DISPUTES.

13

silent, and ashamed, with fallen hearts \ and sunken
faces, moody, and bewildered 1 2 .

8. Now the Bhikkhuni Mettiya came up to the
place where the Bhikkhus who were followers of
Mettiya and Bhummavaka were : and when she had
come there she said to them : ‘ My salutation to you,
Sirs 3 ! ’

When she had so said the Bhikkhus who were
followers of Mettiya and Bhumma^aka did not
speak to her. So a second time she said to them :

‘ My salutation to you, Sirs ! ’ and they did not
speak. And a third time she said to them : ‘ My
salutation to you. Sirs ! ’ Still the third time the
Bhikkhus who were followers of Mettiya and Bhum-
ma^aka did not speak. And she said : ‘ Wherein
have I offended you, Sirs ? Wherefore do you not
speak to me ? ’

£ Are you then so indifferent 4 , sister, when we are
tormented by Dabba the Mallian ? ’

‘ But what can I do, Sirs ? ’

1 Pattakkhandha, which the Samanta Pasadika explains by
patitakkhandha. Khandha here seems to mean ‘ faculties.’ Com-
pare the use of Dhamma in a similar connection at Maha-parinib-
bana Sutta II, 32— Mahavagga V, 13, 9 ; and see Buddhaghosa’s
commentary on that passage, quoted by Rh. D. in ‘ Buddhist Suttas
from the P&li,’ p. 36.

2 Appa/ibhdnd. Pa/ibhanaw is the rapid suggestion of an
idea in a case of doubt or difficulty, an illumination; so that pa-
zbbhanako, the man of ready wit, may be compared with upiya-
kusalo, the man fertile in resource. ‘Absent-minded’ would be
an incorrect rendering; they had no idea what to think or do,
and the appearance of the nun on the scene (in the next para-
graph) supplied the want. Till then they hesitated, drifted.

3 The following narrative, down to § 9, is repeated almost word
for word in V, 20, only that the person there persuaded to bring the
false accusation is different.

4 Ag^Aupekkhati. Compare <?ataka I, 147-

14

XULLAVAGGA.

IV, 4 , 9-

‘ If you like, sister, you could this very day make
the Blessed One expel the venerable Dabba the
Mallian.’

‘ But what shall I do, Sirs ? What is it that it is
in my power to do ? ’

‘ Come now, sister ; do you go to the place where
the Blessed One is, and when you have come there say
as follows : “This, Lord, is neither fit nor proper that
the very quarter of the heavens which should be
safe, secure, and free from danger, that from that
very quarter should come danger, calamity, and
distress — that where one might expect a calm, one
should meet a gale. Methinks the very water has
taken fire. I have been defiled, Lord, by Dabba
the Mallian!”’

‘Very well, Sirs!’ said the Bhikkhuni Mettiya,
accepting the word of the followers of Mettiya and
Bhumma^aka. And she went to the Blessed One
[and spake even as she had been directed].

9. Then the Blessed One, on that occasion and in
that connection, convened a meeting of the Sawgha,
and asked the venerable Dabba the Mallian :

‘ Are you conscious \ Dabba, of having done such
a thing as this Bhikkhuni says ? ’

‘ Even as my Lord, the Blessed One, knows me.’
[And a second and a third time the Blessed One
asked the same question, and received the same
reply.]

1 Literally, ‘ Do you recollect ? 9 But it is quite clear from the

technical words at the close of this section that the verb sarati

had already acquired the secondary meaning f to be conscious of/

The whole story is peculiarly valuable as illustrating the growth of

the connotation of the verb and its allied meanings, and indirectly

the origin and growth of the idea of* conscience 1 * * * * * 7 which has played

so great a part in theological and ethical speculation.

IV, 4, 9- THE SETTLEMENT OF DISPUTES.

15

Then said the Blessed One : ‘ The Dabbas, O
Dabba, do not thus repudiate 1 2 . If you have done
it, say so. If you have not done it, say you have
not/

‘Since I was born, Lord, I cannot call to mind 3
that I have practised sexual intercourse even in a
dream, much less when I was awake ! ’

And the Blessed One addressed the Bhikkhus,
and said : ‘ Expel then, O Bhikkhus, the Bhikkhum
Mettiyd, and examine those Bhikkhus about it.
And so saying he rose from his seat and entered
into the Vihara.

Then those Bhikkhus expelled the Bhikkhuni
Mettiyl But the Bhikkhus who were followers of
Mettiya and Bhumma^aka said to those Bhikkhus :

‘ Do not, Sirs, expel the Bhikkhuni Mettiya. She
has not committed any offence. She has been set
on by us with angry and bitter intentions of causing
his fall/

‘What then, Sirs? is it you who are thus
harassing the venerable Dabba the Mallian with a
groundless charge and breach of morality ?

* That is true, Sirs/

Then those Bhikkhus who were moderate were
indignant and annoyed and complained, saying,

1 How can these Bhikkhus the followers of Mettiya
and Bhummag'aka harass the venerable Dabba the
Mallian with a groundless charge of breach of

1 That is, ‘Men of character and standing such as yours,
O Dabba, are not in the habit of repudiating a charge in so
indirect a manner by adverting merely to their standing and known
character/

2 Here the word used is abhi^&nami.

rULLAVAGGA.

TV, 4j io.

morality ? * And they told the matter to the Blessed
One.

4 Is this true, O Bhikkhus ? *

4 It is true, Lord/

Then he rebuked them, and when he had de-
livered a religious discourse, he addressed the
Bhikkhus, and said :

4 Let then the Sa^gha grant to Dabba the
Mallian, whose conscience in respect of this matter
is quite clear, the Proceeding for the consciously
innocent \

io. 4 And thus, O Bhikkhus, is it to be granted.

4 Let that Dabba the Mallian go before the
Sa^gha, and having arranged his robe over one
shoulder, let him bow down at the feet of the senior
Bhikkhus, and crouching down 1 2 , let him stretch

1 Dabbassa sati-vepulla- ppattassa sati -vinayazrc detu.
The explanation of the compound sati-vepulla-ppatto given by
Childers, though it rests on so good an authority as that of Vlge-
sizrcha Mudaliar, cannot be right. He makes it mean £ a man of
great intellectual development’ But sati must here refer to the
fact that Dabba has been formally called upon to remember
(s&rito) whether he did or did not commit the offence. And
though the exact sense of the compound is subject to some doubt,
the general sense of the clause must be very much as we have con-
jecturally rendered it. On this formal appeal to the conscience, or
memory (sati), of a Bhikkhu charged with an offence, or sup-
posed to have offended, see Zullavagga I, 2, and 5 at the end;
and X, 20.

2 Ukku/ikaw nisiditva. This verb does not mean ‘ to sit on the
hams/ as rendered by Childers. The exact posture, unknown in
Europe, is to crouch down on the feet (keeping both toes and heels
on the ground) in such a way that the hams do not touch the
ground, but come within an inch or two of it. Europeans find it
very difficult to retain this posture for any length of time, but the
natives of India find it easy, and it is regarded in the Pi/akas as a
posture of humility.

IV, 4. 10.

THE SETTLEMENT OF DISPUTES.

forth his hands with the palms joined together, and
let him say, “ These Bhikkhus, Sirs, the followers of
Mettiya and Bhumma^aka, are harassing me by a
groundless charge of breach of morality. But I,
Sirs, in respect thereof have a clear conscience, and
I ask the Sa^zgha for the acquittal to be accorded
to those who are conscious of innocence.” Then
some able and discreet Bhikkhu is thus to lay the
resolution (»atti) before the Sa;;zgha. “ Let the
venerable Saz/zgha hear me. These Bhikkhus, Sirs,
the followers of Mettiya and Bhummagaka, are
harassing the venerable Dabba the Mallian with
a groundless charge of a breach of morality, and the
venerable Dabba the Mallian has in respect thereof
a conscience that is clear, and asks the Sazzzgha for
the acquittal of those who are conscious of innocence.
If the time is convenient to the Sawgha, let the
SaMgha accord to the venerable Dabba the Mallian
the acquittal of those who are conscious of inno-
cence. This is the resolution. Let the venerable
Sawgha hear me. These Bhikkhus (&c., as before,
down to) asks the Saragha for the acquittal of those
who are conscious of innocence. The Savzgha
accords to the venerable Dabba the Mallian the
acquittal of those who are consciously innocent.
Whosoever of the venerable ones approves of the
grant to Dabba the Mallian of the acquittal of
those who are conscious of innocence, let him keep
silence. Whosoever approves not thereof, let him
,, -speak. And a second time I say the same thing.
And a third time I say the same thing. Let the
venerable Sawgha hear me. These Bhikkhus (&c.,
as before, down to) let him speak. The acquittal of
those who are conscious of innocence has been
[20] c

i8 A'ULLAVAGGA. IV, 4, II.

granted by the Sazwgha to Dabba the Mallian.
The Sawgha approves thereof. Therefore is it
silent. Thus do I understand 1 .’”

it. ‘ There are five things which make a grant of
acquittal to those who are conscious of innocence to
be according to law. The Bhikkhu must be inno-
cent and without offence, others must have censured
him, he must ask the Sawgha for acquittal as being
conscious of innocence, the Sawgha must grant it,
the Sawgha must be duly held and duly constituted.
These, O Bhikkhus, are the five things which make
a grant of the acquittal of those who are conscious
of innocence to be according to law.’

5 2 .

i. Now at that time the Bhikkhu Gagga was
insane and out of his mind ; and by him, when so
insane and out of his mind, many things unworthy of
a samara had been committed, as well in speech as
in act 3 . The Bhikkhus warned the Bhikkhu Gagga
of a fault so committed by him when insane and out
of his mind, saying, ‘ Does the venerable one call to

1 This section is repeated below, chap. 14, § 27, with the neces-
sary alterations for a general rule instead of a particular case.

2 The particular decision given in this chapter for the particular
case is elaborated in chap. 14, § 28 below into a general rule for
every similar case.

2 Buddhaghosa explains this word as follows: ‘Bh&sitapa-
rikantan ti vSHya bhasitazra kayena parikkantazw parikkametvd
katan ti attho.’ The similar word Parikantaw, which occurs in the
Sutta-vibhahga, Paragika IV, 1, 2, in the sense of lacerated, is from
the root krint.

IV 5 s> I.

THE SETTLEMENT OF DISPUTES.

19

mind that he has committed such and such an
offence ? ’

He replied, ‘ I, my friends, was insane and out of
my mind. (No doubt) many things unworthy of a
samara, as well in speech as in act, may have been
committed by me when so insane and out of my
mind. But I do not recollect it. It was done by
me by reason of my insanity/

But though they received that answer from him 1 ,
they warned him still, saying, ‘ Does the venerable
one call to mind that he has committed such and
such an offence ? ’

‘Those Bhikkhus who were moderate were an-
noyed, murmured, and became indignant, saying,
“ How can those Bhikkhus warn the Bhikkhu Gagga
. . . saying . . . such and such an offence ? ” And when
he replies, “ I, my friends, was insane ... by
reason of my insanity” — how can those Bhikkhus
still warn him, saying ... of such and such an
offence ? ’

And those Bhikkhus told the matter to the
Blessed One.

‘Is it true, O Bhikkhus, that those Bhikkhus (&c.,
as before, down to) such and such an offence ? ’

‘ It is true, Lord.’

Then he rebuked them, and when he had delivered
a religious discourse he addressed the Bhikkhus,
and said :

‘ Let then the Samgha grant to Gagga the

1 Naw in the text is correct. It is identical with the na.m
so frequently found in Jain Prakrit ; on which see Weber in his
Bhagavati ‘ Abhandlungen der Berliner Akadamie,’ 1865, pp. 42a
and foil

C 2

20

A'U LLAVAGG A.

Bhikkhu who is now sane the dispensation for
those who are no longer insane.

2. ‘And thus, O Bhikkhus, should it be granted.

‘ Let that Bhikkhu Gagga [here follow the words
of the formal request, of the resolution, and of the
grant by decision of the Sa^zgha, exactly in the
same way as in the last case, chapter 4, § 10].’

6 .

1. ‘There are three cases, O Bhikkhus, in which
grants of dispensation for those who are no longer
insane are not valid : and three cases in which such
grants are valid.

‘ What are the three cases in which grants of
dispensation for those who are no longer insane
are not valid ?

‘ In the first place, O Bhikkhus, in case a Bhikkhu
have committed an offence : and in respect thereof
either the Sa^zgha, or a number of Bhikkhus, or
a single Bhikkhu, warn him, saying, “ Does the
venerable one call to mind that he has been guilty
of such and such an offence ? ” And he, notwith-
standing that he does remember it, says, “ I do not
remember, Sirs, that I have been guilty of such and
such an offence.” Then if the Sazzzgha grant him
the dispensation of those who are no longer insane,
that grant is not valid.

‘Again, O Bhikkhus, in case a Bhikkhu (&c., as
before, down to) And he, notwithstanding that he
does remember it, says, “ I remember it, Sirs, but
as if in a dream.” Then if the Sawgha grant him

IV, 6, 2.

THE SETTLEMENT OF DISPUTES.

21

the dispensation of those who are no longer insane,
that grant is not valid.

‘ Again, O Bhikkhus, in case a Bhikkhu have
committed an offence, and in respect thereof either
the Sawgha, or a number of Bhikkhus, or a single
Bhikkhu, warn him, saying, “Does the venerable
one call to mind that he has been guilty of such
and such an offence ?” And he, though he is not
insane, acts in the (deceptive) way of an insane
person 1 , saying, “ I act so, and you act so likewise.
It beseems me, and it likewise beseems you.” Then
if the Samgha grant him the dispensation of those
who are no longer insane, that grant is not valid.

‘ These are the three cases, O Bhikkhus, in which
a grant of the dispensation for those who are no
longer insane is not valid.

2. ‘What are the three cases in which grants of
dispensation for those who are no longer insane are
valid ?

‘ In the first place, O Bhikkhus, in case a Bhikkhu
be insane and out of his mind ; and by him, when so
insane and out of his mind, many things unworthy of
a samasa have been committed, as well in speech
as in act. And either the Sawgha, or a number of
Bhikkhus, or a single Bhikkhu, warns him in re-
spect thereof, saying, “ Does the venerable one call
to mind that he has committed such and such an
offence ?” And he really not remembering it,
answers, “ I do not remember, Sirs, that I have
been guilty of such and such an offence.” Then if
the Sawgha grants him the dispensation for those
who are no longer insane, that grant is valid.

1 Ummattakalayaw karoti, on which Buddhaghosa says
nothing. The word recurs in the following section.

‘Again, O Bhikkhus, in case a Bhikkhu be insane
and out of his mind (&c., as before, down to) And
he, not really remembering it, answers, “ I remember
it, Sirs, but as if in a dream.” Then if the Sawgha
grants him the dispensation for those who are no
longer insane, that grant is valid.

‘ Again, O Bhikkhus, in case a Bhikkhu be insane
and out of his mind (&c., as before, down to) “ Does
the venerable one call to mind that he has been
guilty of such and such an offence ?” And he, being
still insane, acts in the way of an insane person,
saying, “ I act so, and you act so likewise. It
beseems me, and it likewise beseems you.” Then
if the Sawgha (afterwards) grant him the dispensa-
tion for those who are no longer insane, that grant
is valid.

‘ These are the three cases, O Bhikkhus, in which
the grant of the dispensation for those who are no
longer insane is valid.’

i. Now at that time the AAabbaggiya Bhikkhus
carried out official acts against Bhikkhus who had
not confessed themselves guilty — the Ta^aniya-
kamma, or the Nissaya-kamma, or the Pabba-
^•aniya-kamma, or the Pa/is&ramya-kamma, or
the Ukkhepaniya-kamma.

Those Bhikkhus who were moderate were an-
noyed, murmured, and became indignant, saying,
‘ How can the AAabbaggiya Bhikkhus (&c., as
before).’ And those Bhikkhus told the matter to
the Blessed One.

IY, 8, i.

THE SETTLEMENT OF DISPUTES.

23

‘ Is it true, O Bhikkhus, that the A7zabbaggiya
Bhikkhus do so ?’

‘ It is true, Lord.’

Then he rebuked them, and when he had de-
livered a religious discourse, he addressed the
Bhikkhus, and said :

‘ No official act, O Bhikkhus, — whether the Taf-
^aniya-kamma, or the N issaya-kamma, or the
Pabba^aniya-kamma, or the Pa^is&ramya-
kamma, or the Ukkhepaniya-kamma, — is to
be carried out against Bhikkhus who have not con-
fessed themselves guilty 1 . Whosoever does so,
shall be guilty of a dukka/a offence.’

8 .

1 . ‘ N ow, O Bhikkhus, an official act carried out
against a Bhikkhu who has confessed himself guilty
is invalid as follows, and is valid as follows. And
how does such an official act become invalid ? In
case a Bhikkhu have committed a Para^ika offence,
and in respect thereof either the Sawgha, or a
number of Bhikkhus, or a single Bhikkhu warns
him, saying, “ The venerable one has been guilty of
a Parafika.” And he replies thus, “ I have not,
Sirs, been guilty of a Paragika. I have been guilty
of a Sawghidisesa.” And in respect thereof the
Samgha deals with him for a Sa»zghadisesa. Then
that official act is invalid.’

1 The mode in which such a confession ought to be made is
set out in full in IV, 14, 30-34.

24

■STULLAVAGGA.

IV, 8, 2 .

[And so also if on being warned of any one of
tlie seven offences 1 * he confesses himself to be guilty
of any one of the offences different from the one
charged, then the official act is invalid.]

2. ‘ And when, O Bhikkhus, is such an official act
valid ? In case a Bhikkhu have committed a Para-
,fika offence, and in respect thereof the Sa»zgha, or
a number of Bhikkhus, or a single Bhikkhu warns
him, saying, “ The venerable one has been guilty
of a Parafika.” And he replies, “ Yea, Sirs, I have
been guilty of a Pardfika.” And in respect thereof
the Sazzzgha deals with him for a Pdrd^ika. Then
that official act is valid V

[And so for each of the other offences mentioned
in § i, the whole of § 2 is repeated.]

9 3 .

Now at that time the Bhikkhus in chapter
(Sawgha) assembled, since they became violent,
quarrelsome, and disputatious, and kept on wound-
ing one another with sharp words 4 , were unable

1 The same, namely, as those in the list given at MaMvagga IV,

l6, 12, &c.

3 In other words, if a Bhikkhu confesses an offence different
from that with which he has been charged, the confession cannot
be used against him even as regards a decision with respect to the
offence confessed.

8 On this chapter, see further below, IV, 14, r 6.

4 Annamannam mukhaisattthi vitudantS viharanti.
Literally, ‘ with mouth-javelins.’ Vitudati, and not vitudati as
Childers gives, is the right spelling. So Fausboll reads at Gataka
II, 185, 186.

IV, g. THE SETTLEMENT OF DISPUTES. 25

to settle the disputed question (that was brought
before them).

They told this matter to the Blessed One.

1 ‘ I allow you, O Bhikkhus, to settle such a dis-
pute by the vote of the majority. A Bhikkhu who
shall be possessed of five qualifications shall be
appointed as taker of the voting tickets — one who
does not walk in partiality, one who does not walk
in malice, one who does not walk in folly, one who
does not walk in fear 1 2 , one who knows what
(votes) have been taken and what have not been
taken.

‘ And thus shall he be appointed.

‘ First the Bhikkhu is to be requested (whether
he will undertake the office). Then some able and
discreet Bhikkhu is to bring the matter before the
Sazzzgha, saying,

‘ “ Let the venerable Sazzzgha hear me. If the
time seems meet to the Sazzzgha, let the Saz/zgha
appoint a Bhikkhu of such and such a name as
taker of the voting tickets.

‘ “ This is the motion (zzatti).

‘ “ Let the venerable Sawzgha hear me. The
Sawgha appoints a Bhikkhu of such and such a
name as taker of the tickets. Whosoever of the
venerable ones approves of the Bhikkhu of such
and such a name being appointed as taker of the

1 From here to the end of the chapter recurs in IV, 14, 24.

2 These are the qualifications always ascribed to one who
rightly fills any judicial offence, and are called the four A gat is.
They are the especial attributes of a good king sitting as judge,
and are mentioned elsewhere (Sa»ghadisesa XIII ; Mahavagga
VIII, 5, 2; VIII, 6, 1; and below, VI, xi, 2) of other officials
of the order with duties similar to those in the text.

26

KULLAVAGGA.

IV, io, l.

tickets, let him keep silence. Whosoever approves
not thereof, let him speak. The Bhikkhu of such
and such a name is appointed by the Sawzgha as
taker of the voting tickets. Therefore is it silent.
Thus do I understand.’ ”

10 h

x. ‘There are ten cases, O Bhikkhus, in which the
taking of votes is invalid; and ten in which the
taking of votes is valid.

‘ Which are the ten in which the taking of votes
is invalid ? When the matter in dispute is trivial 2
— when the case has not run its course (that is,
when the necessary preliminaries- of submission to
arbitration have not been carried out 3 ) — when re-
garding the matter in dispute the Bhikkhus have
not formally remembered, or been formally called
upon to remember, the offence 4 — when the taker of
votes 5 knows that those whose opinions are not in
accordance with the law will be in the majority,

f On this chapter, see further below, IV, 14, 24-26.

2 Oramattakawz. Compare the English law maxim, De
minimis non curat lex.

3 Buddhaghosa says, Na ia gatigatan ti dve tayo avase na
gataw, tattha tatth’ eva va dvitikkhattum axinikkhit&m. See on
these proceedings above.

4 Buddhaghosa says, Na ka. sarita-saritan ti dvitikkhattum
tehi bhikkhuhi sayam saritaw va aiwiehi saritawz va, na hoti.

s GSnSti ti saltkaw gahento ^anati. (S. P.)

IV, II, i.

THE SETTLEMENT OF DISPUTES.

27

or probably 1 2 may be in the majority — when, he
knows that the voting will result in a schism in
the Sawzgha — when he is in doubt whether the
voting will result in a schism in the Samgha — when
the votes are irregularly given 3 — when all do not
vote equally 3 — and when they do not vote in ac-
cordance with the view (which they really hold).
These are the ten cases in which the voting is
invalid 4 5 .

2. ‘ And which are the ten cases in which the
voting is valid ?’

[The ten cases are precisely the reverse of the
other ten.]

11 .

1. Now at that time the Bhikkhu Uva/a 6 , being
examined in the midst of the Sa»zgha with an
offence, when he had denied then confessed it,
when he had confessed it then denied it, made

1 App eva nama. That this phrase does not merely mean
1 perhaps ’ is clear from its use in § 2.

2 Adhammena gawhantt ti adhammavSdino eva m maya m
bahu bhavissama ti dve dve salakayo ga»hanti. (S. P.)

3 On vaggS, here = vi + agga, compare our note on the 21st
Pdiittiya, and Wullavagga I, 2, 1. Buddhaghosa here says,
Vagga garahand ti dve dhammavadino eka vi dhammavadi-
salakaw garahanti evawz dhammavidino na bahu bhavissantl ti
mamwamdnt.

4 With this chapter the 26th section of chapter 14 should be
compared, where very curious means are inculcated for avoiding
some of the votes here stated to be invalid.

5 In the Burmese MSS. the name of this monk is written

UpavSla.

28 A'ULLAVAGGA. IV, u, 2 .

counter-charges 1 2 , and spoke lies which he knew
to be such

Those Bhikkhus who were moderate were an-
noyed, murmured, and became indignant, saying,

‘ How can the Bhikkhu Uva/a do so?’ And they
told the matter to the Blessed One.

‘Is it true, O Bhikkhus, as they say that the
Bhikkhu [&c., as before].’

‘ It is true, Lord.’

Then he rebuked him, and when he had delivered
a religious discourse he addressed the Bhikkhus,
and said :

‘ Then, O Bhikkhus, let the Sawgha carry out
the Tassa-pdpiyyasikd-kamma (the Proceeding
in the case of the obstinately wrong) 3 .’

2. ‘And thus, O Bhikkhus, is it to be carried out.
In the first place the Bhikkhu Uvi/a must have been
warned ; when he had been warned, he must have
been called upon to remember (whether he has, or
has not, consciously committed the offence) ; when
he had been called upon to remember, he must
have been caused (by being put on his trial with
respect to the offence) to bring upon himself a new

1 Awwena znnzm pa/i/£arati. We follow Wijesmha Mudali-
yar’s interpretation of this phrase as given by Childers (s. v. tassa-
p&piyyasika).

2 Chapter 14, section 29 below, is in fact an elaboration of this
paragraph, giving instances of the kind of prevarication here in-
tended to be referred to.

3 The exact meaning of the phrase is somewhat doubtful, owing
to the ambiguity of the tas sa. It should probably be analysed 4 the
proceeding against one who is more sinful (papiyo) than that
(tassa);’ that is, who adds sin to sin. Childers gives a long note

on the Proceeding drawn by Wijesiwha Mudaliyar from this chapter,
but does not analyse the word.

IV, XI, 2.

29

THE SETTLEMENT OF DISPUTES.

offence (namely, of obstinacy or prevarication) ; when
he has brought upon himself this new offence, some
discreet and able Bhikkhu ought to lay the matter
before the Sawgha, saying,

‘“Let the venerable Sawgha hear me. This
Bhikkhu Uva/a, being examined in the midst of the
Savzgha with an offence, when he has denied it then
confesses it, when he has confessed it then denies it,
makes counter-charges, and speaks lies which he
knows to be such. If the time seems meet to the
Sawgha, let the Savzgha carry out the Tassa-
p&piyyasikd-kamma against the Bhikkhu Uv&/a.

‘ “ This is the motion.

‘ “ Let the venerable Sazwgha hear me. This
Bhikkhu Uva/a (&c., as before). The Savzgha car-
ries out the Tassa-papiyyasikd-kamma against
Uva/a the Bhikkhu. Whosoever of the venerable
ones approves of the Tassa-papiyyasikct-kamma
being carried out against Uvi/a the Bhikkhu, let him
keep silence. Whosoever approves not thereof, let
him speak.

‘ “ A second time I say the same thing. This
Bhikkhu Uva/a. (&c., as before, down to) let him
speak. A third time I say the same thing (&c.,' as
before, down to) let him speak.

‘“The Tassa-pdpiyyasikd-kamma has been
carried out by the SaiWgha against Uva/a the
Bhikkhu. Therefore is it silent. Thus do I under-
stand V’ ’

1 This KammavIM is precisely the same as is laid down in
/sTullavagga I, i, 4, &c. in the case of all the other penal Kammas,

30

•EULLAVAGGA.

IV, 12, r.

12 .

1. ‘There are five things, 0 Bhikkhus, which are
necessary to the valid carrying out of the Tassa-
p&piyyasika-kamma. To wit — he is impure, he
is shameless — a censure has been set on foot against
him 1 — the Sawgha carries out the Kamma — it
carries it out lawfully, and in a full quorum.

2 . ‘ There are three things, O Bhikkhus, by which,
when a Tassa-pcfpiyyasikd-kamma is character-
ised, it is against the Dhamma, and against the
Vinaya, and difficult to be -settled ; (that is to say),
when it has not been carried out in a full assembly
of properly qualified persons, according to law and
justice, and in the presence of the litigant parties —
when it has been carried out without the accused
person having been heard — when it has been carried
out without the accused person having confessed
himself guilty.

‘ These are the three things, O Bhikkhus, by
which, when a Tassa-pipiyyasika-kamma is
characterised, it is against the Dhamma, and against
the Vinaya, and difficult to be settled.

‘ There are three things by which (and as in last
paragraph) it is in accordance with the Dhamma,
and in accordance with the Vinaya, and easy to be
settled ; (that is to say), when it has been [&c., the
rest of this paragraph is the reverse of the last] 2 .’

1 Compare the use of anuvado in iifullavagga I, 5.

4 These paragraphs exactly correspond to paragraphs at JTulla-
vagga I, 2 . It is probably merely owing to this re etition that
it is here also prescribed that the accused person must confess

iv, 13, I.

THE SETTLEMENT OF DISPUTES.

31

3. [This paragraph exactly corresponds to Aulla-
vagga I, 4, paragraph 1, as to the three cases in
which the Sa#2gha, if it likes, may carry out the
Tassa-papiyyasiki-kamma against a Bhikkhu.]

4. [In this paragraph the ‘right conduct’ for a
Bhikkhu who has been subjected to this Kamma is
laid down precisely as in I, 5 for a Bhikkhu sub-
jected to the Ta^aniya-kamma.]

Then the Sawgha carried out the Tassa-pd-
piyyasiki-kamma against Uva/a the Bhikkhu.

13 h

1. Now at that time, while the Bhikkhus were
continuing in quarrels, strifes, and disputes, they
had been guilty of many things unworthy of a
Sama«a, as well in word as in deed, and it occurred

to the Bhikkhus, ‘Whilst we were continuing, &c

we have been guilty, &c. ... as well in word as in
deed. If we now deal one with another for those
offences, it may happen that that proceeding may
result in harshness, in ill-feeling, in divisions. How
now should we manage ? ’

And they told the matter to the Blessed One.

‘ In case, O Bhikkhus, whilst the Bhikkhus are
continuing, &c. . . . they are guilty, &c. ... as well
in word as in deed. And it occurs to them, “ Whilst
we were continuing, &c. . . .we have been guilty,
&c. ... If we now deal, &c. . . . How now shall

himself guilty, as it must be evident from the Introductory Story,
that he will not do so.

1 The whole of this chapter recurs below, IV, 14, 33.

A'ULLAVAGGA.

we manage ?” I enjoin upon you, O Bhikkhus, to
settle a matter of this kind by Tiwavatth&raka
(the Covering over as with grass) 1 .

2. 5 And thus, O Bhikkhus, is it to be settled.
All are to meet together in one spot. When they
have met together some able and discreet Bhikkhu
is to bring the matter before the Saw/gha, saying,

‘ “ Let the venerable Sawzgha hear me. While we
were continuing, &c. ... we have been guilty, &c. . . .
as well in word as in deed. And it occurred to us
(&c., down to) If we now deal one with another,
&c. ... it may result in harshness, in ill-feeling, in
divisions. If the time seems meet to the Sawzgha,
let the Sawzgha settle this matter by the Covering
over as with grass — except only as regards serious
offences 2 * * , and as regards those things in which the
laity have been concerned.”

‘ Then some discreet and able Bhikkhu among
those Bhikkhus who belong to the one party is to
bring the matter before his own party, saying,

‘ “ May the venerable ones hear me. While we
were continuing, &c. . . . we have been guilty, &c.
... as well in word as in deed. And it occurred
to us, &c. . . . (down to) in divisions. If the time
seems meet to you, venerable Sirs, I would confess
in the midst of the Sawgha, both on your behalf,
venerable Sirs, and on my own behalf, both such
offence as is yours, venerable Sirs, and such offence

1 Buddhaghosa’s commentary on this expression will be found
in the notes to H. O.’s edition of the text, pp. 313, 3x4.

2 Buddhaghosa (H. O. loc. cit.) explains this as meaning either

P&rsl^ika or Sa?»ghadisesa offences. So also he explains

Du/Z/mlla Spatti at Mahavagga X, 5, 4.

IY, 13, 2. THE SETTLEMENT OF DISPUTES. 33

as is mine own, to the end that it may be covered
over as with grass, except only as regards serious
offences, and as regards those things in which the
laity have been concerned.”

‘And some discreet and able Bhikkhu among the
Bhikkhus belonging to the other party is to bring
the matter before his own party, saying, “ May the
venerable ones hear me [&c., as before in the last
paragraph, down to the end].”

‘ Then the discreet and able Bhikkhu among the
Bhikkhus belonging to the one party is to bring the
matter before the Sa^zgha, saying, “ May the vene-
rable Sa^zgha hear me. While we (&c., as before,
down to) in divisions. If the time seems meet to
the Sawgha, I would confess 1 in the midst of the
Sawgha, both on behalf of these venerable ones
and on my own behalf, both such offence as is theirs
and such offence as is mine own, to the end that it
may be covered over as with grass, except only as
regards serious offences, and as regards those things
in which the laity have been concerned. This is
the motion (Vlatti). May the venerable Sawzgha
hear me. While we (&c., as before, down to) in
divisions. I confess (&c., as before, down to) in
which the laity have been concerned. Whosoever
of the venerable ones approves of the confession of
these our offences, to the end that they may so be
covered over as with grass, except as before men-
tioned, let him keep silence. Whosoever approves
not thereof, let him speak. These our offences are
confessed in the midst of the Sawgha, to the end
that they may be covered over as with grass, except

1 Deseyya m. Compare IV, 14, 33, at the end.

[20] D

34 rULLAVAGGA. IY, 14, 1.

as before mentioned. The Sa?«gha approves thereof.
Therefore is it silent. Thus do I understand.”

‘And the discreet and able Bhikkhu among the
Bhikkhus belonging to the other party is to bring
the matter before the Samgha, saying, “Let the
venerable Sawzgha hear me (&c., as before in the
last paragraph, down to the end).”

‘Then thus, O Bhikkhus, those Bhikkhus are
absolved of those offences, except as regards serious
offences, and as regards those things in which the
laity have been concerned, and except also as
regards those who express their disapproval of the
proceedings, or who are not present at them V

14 .

1. Now at that time Bhikkhus had disputes with
Bhikkhus, and Bhikkhunls with Bhikkhus. And
the Bhikkhu ATamia 1 2 , forcing his way (into the
apartments) of the Bhikkhunls 3 , took the part of the
Bhikkhunls and disputed with the Bhikkhus.

1 On these phrases Buddhaghosa has the following note :
Di//£stvikamman ti ye pana na me taw khamatl ti anna.ma.nnk
di//Mvikammaw karonti tehi vS. saddhiw dpatti»z dpa^gitvi pi,
tattha an&gatd SgantvS va khan&am datvS pariverc&disu nisinnt, te
ipattihi na vu#Aahanti. This is more an exegesis on the rule
than an explanation of the words Di//Mvikamma»* MapetvS,
the exact meaning of which remains doubtful. The literal render-
ing would be ‘ except as regards the manifestation of opinion.’

2 It was with reference to this conduct of Khamcia that the
Buddha is stated in the MaM-parinibb&na Sutta VI, 4 to have
imposed a penalty upon him. He is also mentioned above, I,
25-31, and below, XI, x, 12-14.

3 Compare the 16th and 43rd Pa&ttiyas. Buddhaghosa says
here, Bhikkhuninajw anupakha^S ti bhikkhunlnaw anto-
pavisitva.

IY, 14, 2.

THE SETTLEMENT OF DISPUTES.

35

Those Bhikkhus who were moderate were in-
dignant, &c. . . . told the Blessed One, &c. ... he
addressed the Bhikkhus, and said :

2. ‘There are, O Bhikkhus, the following four
kinds of legal questions that require formal settle-
ment by the Sawgha ; (that is to say), legal questions
arising out of disputes, legal questions arising out of
censure, legal questions arising out of offences, legal
questions arising out of business h

‘ Among these, what is a legal question arising
out of dispute ? This, O Bhikkhus, is when
Bhikkhus dispute, saying, “ This is Dhamma,” or
“ This is not Dhamma,” or “ This is Vinaya,” or
“ This is not Vinaya,” or “ This is taught and
spoken by the Tathagata,” or “This is not taught
nor spoken by the Tathagata,” or “ This has been
practised by the Tathagata,” or “ This has not been
practised by the Tathagata,” or “ This has been
ordained by the Tathagata,” or “This has not been
ordained by the Tath&gata,” or “This is an offence,”
or “ This is not an offence,” or “ This is a slight
offence,” or “ This is a grievous offence,” or “ This
is an offence which can be done away,” or “ This is
an offence which cannot be done away 1 2 ,” or “ This is
a most grave offence,” or “ This is not a most grave

1 The various ways of settling these four kinds of legal questions
are recapitulated in §§ 27-34 of this chapter.

2 Sdvasesa-anavasesa-dpatti. The Parivdra IX, 1, 10 says,
Yd sd dpatti anavasesd sd dpatti na katamena adhikarawena
na katamamhi /Mne na katamena samathena sammati. It is
practically equivalent therefore to Pai%ika. Those offences
which can be done away, but only by the Sa«wgha, are called
accordingly in the Buddhist Sanskrit Sawghdvaresha, which cor-
responds to the Pdli Saraghadisesa. The translation and note at
Mahdvagga X, 2, 4 should be altered accordingly.

A'ULLAVAGGA.

IV, 14, 2.

36

offence.” Whatsoever quarrel, strife, controversy,
difference of opinion, contradiction, opposition, can-
tankerousness \ or contention there may be on such
a matter, this is called a legal question arising out of
dispute.

‘And among these, which is a legal question arising
out of censure ? This, O Bhikkhus, is when Bhikkhus
charge a Bhikkhu with a fault of morality, or of
conduct, or of opinion, or of means of livelihood.
Whatsoever charge, censure, incrimination 1 2 , ad-
monition 2 , candid opinion 3 , making of excuses 4 for
a person, or making fun of him, there may be, that
is called a legal question arising out of censure.

‘And among these, what is a legal question
arising out of offence ? The five groups of offences 5
are subjects of legal questions of offences, and the
seven groups of offences 6 are subjects of legal
questions of offence. This is what is called a legal
question arising out of offence.

‘ And among these, what is a legal question of
business ? Whatsoever is to the Sa»zgha a matter
which ought to be done, an obligation, a matter for
which leave ought to be formally asked, the pro-

1 VipaHat&ya voharo ti iitta-dukkhatthaya voharo pharusa-
va^anan ti attho (S, P.).

2 Anullapanaanubha^an^ti ubhayazrc anuvadana-veva^ana-
mattam eva (S. P.).

3 Anusampavankat a ti punappuna^z Hya-$ttaz« v&Mhi tatth*
eva sampavankatd anuvadanabMvo ti attho (S. P.).

4 Abbhussahanata ti kasm& eva m na upavadiss&ml upava-
dissami yev& ti ussahaw katva anuvadana (S. P.).

5 That is to say, Paragika, Sa^ghadisesa, Paiittiya, Pa/idesa-
niya, and Dukka/a, as below, in IV, 14, 14; IX, 3, 3.

r ‘ That is to say, the five mentioned in the last note, and
besides them, Thulla&fcaya and Dubbhasita.

IV, 14, 3-

THE SETTLEMENT OF DISPUTES.

posal of a resolution 1 , the proceeding by «atti-
dutiya-kamma 2 , or by ?zatti-/£atuttha-kamma 2 ,
that is called a legal question of business.

3. ‘What is that which gives rise to a legal
question of dispute ? There are six causes of dis-
pute that give rise to legal questions of dispute.
And there are three causes of wrong-doing that give
rise to legal questions of dispute, and three causes
of right-doing that give rise to legal questions of
dispute. And which are these six ?

‘ In the first place, O Bhikkhus, there is the
Bhikkhu who is angry, and who bears enmity in his
heart. Whatsoever Bhikkhu, O Bhikkhus, is such
an angry man bearing enmity in his heart, he re-
mains without reverence for, and without delight in
the Teacher, the Dhamma, and the Sa;;zgha, and does
not fulfil all the duties of a disciple. And what-
soever Bhikkhu, O Bhikkhus, remains without reve-
rence for, and without delight in the Teacher, the
Dhamma, and the Sazzzgha, and does not fulfil all
the duties of a disciple, he causes disputes to arise
in the Sawzgha, and such a dispute becomes a cause

1 Apalokana-kamman ti-adi panatass’ eva pabheda-va^anan.
Tattha apalokana-kamman n&ma sima/Makam sanghan so-
dhetva bandar ahanan Randan aharitva samaggassa anumatiya
tikkhattun savetval katabba-kamman (S. P.).

2 See our note at Mahavagga I, 28, 3. The Samanta Pas&-
dika here says, wattidutiyakamman pana apaloketvd kattab-
ba m pi atthi akattabban pi atthi. Tattha simasammuti sima-
samhhanana kathinaddnan kathinubbharo kft/avatthudesan& vih&ra-
vatthudesana ’ti imani khz. kammani garukani apaloketvsl katu?;/ na
va//ati, ?iattidutiyakammava^an savetvd 'va katabbani, avasesa te-
rasa sammutiyo senasanagahakamataka (Ppatta) $varad&n&ti(°di 0 ?)~
sammutiyo £a ’ti evarupani lahukakammani apaloketva pi katun
va//anti.

JL'ULLAVAGGA.

IT, 14, 4-

38

of woe, and of want, and of disaster to the great
multitudes, of woe and of want to gods and men.
If you, therefore, O Bhikkhus, perceive such a
one, a root of disputes both internal and external,
do you exert yourselves, O Bhikkhus, to put away
from you so evil a person, the root of those dis-
putes. If you perceive, O Bhikkhus, no such per-
son, take pains lest any such evil root of disputes
should thereafter arise among you. Thus will so
evil a root of disputes be put away from you, and
thus will no such evil person, the root of disputes,
arise hereafter among you.

‘Again, O Bhikkhus, there is the Bhikkhu, who
is a hypocrite 1 , and who hides his faults ; who is
envious and jealous ; who is crafty and treacherous ;
who has sinful desires and false beliefs ; who is
tarnished by love of worldly gain, devoted to getting
and taking, for whom to renounce a thing is hard.
Whatsoever Bhikkhu, O Bhikkhus, is thus a hypo-
crite, who hides his faults, he remains [&c., as before,
the whole of the last paragraph down to the end
being repeated in each of the cases here enume-
rated],

4. ‘ And which are the three causes of wrong-doing
which give rise to legal questions of dispute ?

‘ Herein, O Bhikkhus, men of greedy mind are
given to dispute, men of evil mind are given to dis-
pute, men of foolish mind are given to dispute, say-
ing, “ This is Dhamma,” or “ This is not Dhamma ”
[&c., as before, in § 2 , down to] or “ This is not a

1 Palest; no doubt connected with the primary meaning of the
word ‘leaf/ as is also its use in the sense of ‘covering, lining,' in
eka-palSsikd up§,han& at Mahavagga V, 1, 29. The expression
forms the subject of Puggala II, 2. See also Gataka III, 259.

IV, 14, S'

THE SETTLEMENT OF DISPUTES.

39

most grave offence.” These are the three causes of
wrong-doing which give rise to legal questions of
dispute.

‘ And which are the three causes of right-doing
which give rise to legal questions of dispute ?

* In the first place, O Bhikkhus, men not of greedy
mind [&c., as in the last paragraph, inserting the
word “ not”].

5. ‘ And what is that, O Bhikkhus, which gives rise
to legal questions of censure ? There are six causes
of censure that give rise to legal questions of cen-
sure. And there are three causes of wrong-doing
that give rise to legal questions of censure. And
there are three causes of right-doing that give rise
to legal questions of censure. And the body gives
rise to legal questions of censure, and speech gives
rise to legal questions of censure.’

[The six are word for word the same as in the
last section, reading ‘ censure ’ for ‘ dispute.’]

‘ And which are the three causes of wrong-doing
that give rise to legal questions of censure ?

‘ Herein, O Bhikkhus, men of greedy mind are
given to censure, men of evil mind are given to
censure, men of foolish mind are given to censure,
accusing others of breaches of morality, or of be-
haviour, or of error in doctrine, or of adopting a
wrong means of livelihood. These are the three
causes of wrong-doing that give rise to legal ques-
tions of censure.’

[There follow the three causes of right-doing,
reading ‘ men not of greedy mind,’ &c., as before,
end of § 4.]

‘ And how does the body give rise to legal ques-
tions of censure ? In case a man be ill-favoured,

IK

. ■ v;- . .v. . ; ; 7

40

rULLAVAGGA.

iv, 14, 6 .

or ugly, or a dwarf 1 , or diseased, or blind of
one eye, or lame, or humpbacked, or crippled,
people find fault with him on that account. This
is how the body gives rise to legal questions of
censure.

‘ And how does speech give rise to legal questions
of censure ? In case a man have a bad voice, or
be indistinct, or harsh in speech 2 , then people find
fault with him on that account. This is how speech
gives rise to legal questions of censure.

6. ‘ And what is it that gives rise to legal ques-
tions of offence ? There are six origins of offence
that give rise to legal questions of offence. There
is an offence that originates in deed, but not in word
nor in thought. There is an offence that originates
in word, but not in deed nor in thought. There is
an offence that originates in deed and in word, but
not in thought. There is an offence that originates
in deed and in thought, but not in word. There is
an offence that originates in word and in thought,
but not in deed. There is an offence that originates
in deed and in word and in thought. These are
the six (&c.)

7. ‘ And what is that which gives rise to legal
questions of business ? There is one thing that
gives rise to legal questions of business, that is to
say, the Saswgha,

3 Buddhaghosa has no explanation of these terms here, but on
Anguttara Nikaya III, 2, 3, where the whole list recurs, he says
(as Dr. Morris is good enough to inform us) that oko/imako is
equal to lakun/ako ; and the same explanation is given by the
commentary on Puggala IV, 19. Compare the use in English of
‘ a mere dot of a man,’ in a similar sense.

2 These three epithets of the voice are no doubt intended to be
the opposites of the three in Mahavagga V, 13, 9.

IV, 14 , 10. THE SETTLEMENT OF DISPUTES.

41

8. ‘ Legal questions of dispute. Right. Wrong.
Undetermined 1 .

‘ A legal question arising out of dispute may be
right, and it may be wrong, and it may be un-
determined. Of these, which is the legal question
arising out of dispute which is right ?

‘ In case, O Bhikkhus, the Bhikkhu of right mind
discuss, saying, “ This is the Dhamma,” or “ This
is not the Dhamma” (&c., as before, in § 2, down to)
or “ This is not a most grave offence.” Whatsoever
quarrel, strife, contention, difference of opinion, con-
tradiction, opposition, cantankerousness, or conten-
tion there may be in such a discussion is called a
legal question arising out of dispute that is right.’

[And so when the Bhikkhus have a wrong mind,
or an undetermined mind, the legal question arising
out of such dispute is respectively a legal question
arising out of dispute that is wrong or undetermined.]

9. ‘ Legal questions of censure. Right. Wrong.
Undetermined.’

[It may be either of the three, according as the
Bhikkhus censuring (as in § 5) have a right, wrong,
or an undetermined mind. The form of the para-
graph corresponds to § 8 throughout.]

10. ‘ Legal questions of offence. Right. Wrong.
Undetermined.

‘ There may be a legal question whether an
offence is wrong, and there may be a legal question

1 We have already pointed out (above, IV, 1, 2) that this mode
of the commencement of a discussion by setting out a list of the
points to be discussed and compared is found also in some of the
Abhidhamma books. There it was only the objects themselves,
here we have all the predicates which it is proposed to apply (as
in § 8 ), or to declare inapplicable to the object (as in § 10), which
are set out, but the principle is the same.

42

JTULLAVAGGA.

IV, 14, ri.

whether an offence is undetermined. There is no
legal question whether an offence be right.

‘ Of these, which is a legal question whether ah
offence be wrong ? Whatsoever transgression be
committed knowingly, consciously, and deliberately,
this is called a legal question whether an offence
be wrong.

‘ And of these, which is a legal question whether an
offence be undetermined ? Whatsoever transgression
be committed not knowingly, not consciously, not de-
liberately, this is called a legal question whether an
offence be undetermined.

11. ‘ Legal questions of business. Right. Wrong.
U ndetermined.’

[It may be all three, according as the Bhikkhus per-
forming the business specified, as in § 2, are right-
minded, wrong-minded, or of undetermined mind.
The form of the paragraph as in § 8 throughout.]

12. ‘Disputes, legal questions arising out of dis-
putes. Dispute which is no legal question. Legal
question which is no dispute. Matter which is both
legal question and dispute.

‘ There may be a dispute which is a legal ques-
tion of dispute. There may be a dispute which is
no legal question. There may be such a legal
question which is no dispute. There may be such a
legal question and also a dispute.

‘ Of these, which is the dispute which is a legal
question of dispute requiring formal settlement ?
In case Bhikkhus discuss, saying, “This is Dhamma”
[&c., as before, in § 2], or “ This is not a most grave
offence.’’ Whatsoever quarrel, strife [&c., as in § 2]
there may be on such a matter is a dispute which is a
legal question of dispute requiring formal settlement.

IV, 14, 14* THE SETTLEMENT OF DISPUTES.

43

‘ And of these, which is a dispute which is not a
legal question requiring formal settlement? When
a mother disputes with her son, or a son with his
mother, or a father with his son, or a son with his
father, or a brother with a brother, or a brother
with a sister, or a sister with a brother, or a friend
with a friend. Such a dispute is not a legal question
requiring formal settlement by the Samgha.

‘ And of these, which is a legal question that is not
a dispute ? A legal question of censure, or a legal
question of offence, or a legal question of business.
This is a legal question which is not a dispute.

‘ And of these, which is a legal question requiring
formal settlement which is also a dispute ? A legal
question of dispute that requires formal settlement
by the Sawzgha is both such a legal question and
also a dispute.’

1 3. [The same distinction drawn between censure,
and a legal question of censure requiring formal
settlement.]

14. ‘ Offence. Legal question arising out of an
offence. Offence which is not subject of a legal
question. Legal question and no offence. Legal
question and offence too.

‘ There may be an offence which is subject of a legal
question of offence. There may be an offence and no
legal question. There may be legal question and no
offence. There may be legal question and offence too.

‘ Of these, which is the offence which may be
subject of a legal question ? The five groups of
offences are subjects of legal questions of offence ;
the seven groups of offences are subjects of legal
questions of offence. These are offences which may
be subject of a legal question.

44

JTULLAVAGGA.

IV, 14 , IS-

£ And of these, which is an offence (A patti) which
is not subject of a legal question ? Conversion, higher
attainment (sot-apatti, sam-dpatti), these are
apattis which are not subjects of a legal question 1 .
These are apattis not subjects of a legal question.

'And of these, what is the legal question where there
is no offence ? A legal question of official duty, a legal
question of censure, a legal question of dispute. These
are legal questions where there may be no offence.

‘ And of these, which is the case in which there is
both a legal question and an offence too ? A legal
question regarding an offence is a case in which
there is both a legal question and an offence too.

15. ‘ Official duty which is subject of a legal ques-
tion of business. Duty and no legal question. Legal
question and no duty. Legal question and duty too.

‘ There may be [each of these four].

£ Of these, which is official duty which is subject
of a legal question ? Whatsoever is to the Sawgha
a thing which ought to be done, an obligation, a
matter for which leave ought to be formally asked,
the proposal of a resolution, the proceeding by
«atti-dutiya-kamma, or by watti-^atuttha-
kamma, that is official duty which may be the
subject of a legal question of business.

1 This is merely a play upon words. Apatti is literally ‘ at-
tainment to/ Standing alone it is always used with the connotation
of ‘ attainment to guilt, sin, offence/ so that its etymological mean-
ing is always lost sight of. Sotapatti is the ‘attainment to/ the
‘entering upon’ the stream, that is, the course of the Excellent
Way. The Sam&pattis, literally, ‘complete, or higher, attain-
ments/ are eight successive states of ecstatic insight or meditation
practised by Arahats and other men of advanced spiritual culture.
The question stated is in fact a riddle, like so many of the questions
stated in the Pariv&ra and the Puggala-pa?matti.

IV, 14, 16. THE SETTLEMENT OF DISPUTES.

45

‘ And of these, which is the official duty which is
not subject of legal question ? The duties of an
d^ariya, of an upajq^Mya, of a fellow pupil under
the same upa^/^aya or d^ariya, that is business,
but not subject of a legal question of business.

‘ And of these, which is a legal question but not
official duty ? A legal question arising out of dis-
pute, a legal question arising out of censure, a legal
question arising out of offence. This is a legal
question of business, but not official duty.

‘And of these, which is both legal question and
official duty too ? A legal question arising out of
official business is both legal question of business
and official duty too 1 .

1 6, .‘But by what kind of settlements is a legal
question arising out of dispute brought to settle-
ment? By two kinds of settlement, by the Pro-
ceeding in presence 2 , and by the Proceeding by
majority of the Sa^zgha 3 .

‘ If one should ask, “ Can it be that a legal question
arising out of dispute without recourse having been
had to the one mode of settlement — to wit, the Pro-
ceeding by majority of the Sawgha — can it be that
it may be settled by the other mode of settlement,
to wit, by the Proceeding in presence ?” He should
be told “Yes, it can.” (If he should say), “ How may
that be ?” the answer should be as follows : “In

1 Here again the whole section depends upon a play upon the
various meanings of the word kiMa m. In the technical phrase
ki£Mdhikara«a», the word means solely the business or the
agenda at the formal meetings of the Sarogha (compare above, § 7).
In the problems or riddles of this section its more common meaning
of ‘duty’ is brought into play.

2 Sammukhd-vinayena. See above, chapter 2.

3 Yebhuyyasikena. See above, chapter 9.

46

& r ULLAVAGGA.

IV, 14, 16.

the case when the Bhikkhus dispute, saying, ‘ This
is the Dhamma,’ or 1 This is not the Dhamma 5 (&c.,
as before, in § 2, down to), or ‘ This is not a most
grave offence.’” If, O Bhikkhus, those Bhikkhus,
are able to settle their own dispute, that is called,
O Bhikkhus, the settlement of the dispute.

‘ 1 And how has it been settled ? By the Proceed-
ing in presence.

‘ And what must there be in such a Proceeding
in presence ? There must be the presence of the
Sawgha, the presence of the Dhamma, the presence
of the Vinaya, and the presence of the particular
person.

‘And therein, what is the presence of the Sawgha ?
As many Bhikkhus as are capable of taking part in
the proceeding 2 * , they must be present. The formal
consent must be produced of those who are in a fit
state to convey their consent s . Those who are
present must have lodged no objection (against any
one of them taking part in the proceeding) 4 . This
is the “ presence” in such a matter of the Sawgha.

‘ And of these, what is the presence of the
Dhamma, and the presence of the Vinaya ? The
Dhamma, and the Vinaya, and the teaching of the
Master by the aid of which that legal question is
settled. That is the “presence” in such a matter
of the Dhamma, and of the Vinaya.

‘ And of these, what is the presence of the par-

1 The following five paragraphs recur in IV, 14, §§ 24, 27, and
four of them in IV, 14, 21, 30.

2 Kammappatti. See Parivara XIX, 1, 7, et seq.

8 See above, Mah&vagga II, 23.

1 Or rather, perhaps, ‘ against the proceedings which are being

carried out.’

IV, 14, 18. THE SETTLEMENT OF DISPUTES.

47

ticular person ? He who disputes, and he with
whom he disputes — both friends and foes — must be
present. That is the “ presence ” in such a matter
of the particular person.

‘When a legal question, O Bhikkhus, has been
thus settled, if a disputant re-open the question,
such re-opening of the question is a Pi/Httiya 1 . If
one who has conveyed his consent complain of the
decision, such complaint is a Pa/’ittiya 2 .

17. ‘If those Bhikkhus, O Bhikkhus, are not able
to settle the legal question within their own resi-
dence (Avasa), those Bhikkhus should go, O Bhik-
khus, to some residence in which there are a larger
number of Bhikkhus. Then if those Bhikkhus, O
Bhikkhus, should succeed, whilst on their way to
that residence, in settling the legal question, that, O
Bhikkhus, is called a settlement of it. And how
has it been settled ? (&c., as in the last paragraph of
the previous section, down to the end.)

18. ‘If those Bhikkhus are not able, O Bhikkhus,
to settle the legal question whilst they are on their
way to that residence, then those Bhikkhus, on
their arrival at that residence, are to address the
Bhikkhus at that residence thus : “ Such and such a
legal question, Sirs, has arisen thus, and has been
carried on thus amongst us. It would be well if
you, Sirs, would settle that legal question for us
according to the Dhamma, and according to the
Vinaya, and according to the teaching of the Master,
to the end that that legal question may be thoroughly
settled.” If the Bhikkhus dwelling in that residence

1 This is the 63rd Pa&ttiya.

2 This is the 79th Pa&ttiya. The whole paragraph is repeated
several times below in this chapter.

48

iTULLAVAGGA.

TV, 14, 18.

are the senior, and the incoming Bhikkhus are junior,
then the Bhikkhus dwelling in that residence are, O
Bhikkhus, to address the incoming Bhikkhus thus :

“ Pray, Sirs, rest a moment apart until we take
counsel together ! ” If, on the other hand, the
Bhikkhus dwelling in that residence are junior, and
the incoming Bhikkhus are senior, then the Bhikkhus
dwelling in that residence are, O Bhikkhus, to ad-
dress the incoming Bhikkhus thus : “ Then remain
here, Sirs, a moment until we take counsel together.”
Then if, O Bhikkhus, the Bhikkhus dwelling in that
residence should, on consideration, think thus : “We
shall not be able to settle this legal question ac-
cording to the Dhamma, and according to the
Vinaya, and according to the teaching of the
Master,” then that dispute is not to be entrusted
to them. If, on the other hand, O Bhikkhus, the
Bhikkhus dwelling in that residence should, '"on"
consideration, think thus: “We shall be able to
settle this legal question in accordance with the
Dhamma, and in accordance with the Vinaya, and
in accordance with the teaching of the Master,”
then, O Bhikkhus, the Bhikkhus dwelling in that
residence are to address the incoming Bhikkhus
thus : “ If you, Sirs, let us know about this legal
question, how it arose, and how it was carried on,
and if you agree that in the manner in which we
may settle the legal question according to the
Dhamma, and according to the Vinaya, and ac-
cording to the teaching of the Master, in that
manner it shall be settled, then we will thus accept
the legal question at your hands. But if not (&c.,
the whole being repeated), then we will not accept
it.” When they have thus, O Bhikkhus, brought

IV, 14, 19.

THE SETTLEMENT OF DISPUTES.

49

it about that the proper way of putting the legal
question (the point at issue) has been settled, the
Bhikkhus dwelling in that residence should under-
take that legal question. And then the Bhikkhus
dwelling in that residence should be addressed, O
Bhikkhus, by the incoming Bhikkhus thus : “ We
inform you, Sirs, how this legal question arose
and how it was carried on. If you, Sirs, are able
in such and such a time 1 to settle this legal ques-
tion according to the Dhamma, and according to
the Vinaya, and according to the teaching of the
Master, then will we entrust this legal question to
you. But if you, Sirs, should not be able to do so,
then will we ourselves retain the custody of the
case.” Thus, O Bhikkhus, is that legal question
to be entrusted by the incoming Bhikkhus to the
Bhikkhus dwelling in that residence, causing them
duly to accept it. If those Bhikkhus, O Bhikkhus,
are able to settle the case, that, O Bhikkhus, is
U called a settlement of the legal question. And how

has it been settled? (&c., as in last paragraph of § 16,
down to the end.)

19. ‘ If, O Bhikkhus, whilst the case is being
enquired into by those Bhikkhus, pointless speeches
are brought forth, and the sense of any single utter-
ance is not clear 2 , I enjoin upon you, O Bhikkhus,
to settle the case by referring it (to a jury or com-
mission) 3 .

1 Ettakena va antarena, on which Buddhaghosa has nothing.
On va = eva, see Bohtlingk-Roth s. v. va, No. 4.

2 These words recur at XII, 2, 7, where an instance occurs of
the mode of proceeding here laid down.

3 Ubbahikaya. Childers has quite misunderstood both the
meaning and the derivation of this term. It must be derived

[20] E

JS'ULL AVAGG A

fromud + vah; and means simply 'reference' — the turning over
of a difficult or intricate case from the general Sawgha to a
special committee, as was done at Vesali (below, XII, 2, 7).

1 With this passage (so far) compare the Akankheyya Sutta, § 2
(translated in Rh. D.’s 'Buddhist Suttas,' p. 210), where the wording
is somewhat different. See, however, the various readings here,

2 We prefer to translate, in accordance with IX, 5, 1 below,
s&tthazw savyaw^anazrc as given in the corrections to the text on
p. 303 ; thus making the phrase ' in the spirit and in the letter ’
refer to the brahma-^ariyaw, and not to the dhammi. But it
should be pointed out that the parallel passage in .the stock
description of a Buddha (for instance in Tevi^a Sutta I, 46,
translated in Rh. D.’s c Buddhist Suttas,’ p. 187) would support the
reading given here in the text, referring the phrase in question
to the dhamma, and not to the brahma-^ariya^.

3 See the various readings, and compare SigalovMa Sutta, p. 301;
Gataka II, 247, 293; Mahavagga VI, 25, 1.

* Though ditfki is usually found in its bad sense of 'delusion’
(it never means ' heresy/ as Childers renders it), it is also used,
especially in older texts, in the good sense of ' insight.' Compare
the ' Book of the Great Decease/ I, 11.

' A Bhikkhu to be chosen on such a jury must be
possessed of ten qualities — he must be virtuous —
he must be living enclosed by the restraint of the
rules of the Patimokkha — he must be upright in
life, trained according to the precepts, taking them
upon himself with a sense of the danger in the
least offence 1 — he must be versed in the tradition,
a custodian of the tradition, a storehouse of the
tradition — whatsoever truths, lovely in their origin,
lovely in their progress, lovely in their consumma-
tion, set forth the higher life, both In its spirit and
in its letter, in all its purity and in all its perfectness 2 ,
in such truths must he be well versed, of such must he
be full, they must be laid up in his words 3 , and dwelt
on in his heart, being penetrated throughout through
right insight 4 — both the Patimokkhas must have

IV, 14 , 20. THE SETTLEMENT OF DISPUTES. 5 1

been completely handed down to him in their full
extent, he must have well divided them, well esta-
blished them, well investigated them, both sutta by
sutta and in every detail 1 — further he must be an
expert in the Vinaya, irrefutable therein 2 — he must
be competent to point out (the right course) to both
friends and foes, to get them to understand a thing,
get them to see it and recognise it 3 , able to pacify
them — he must be clever (in judging) both as to the
origin and as to the settlement of disputes — he must
understand legal questions, the origin thereof, the
close thereof, and the way that leads to the close
thereof.

‘ I enjoin upon you, O Bhikkhus, to appoint on the
jury a Bhikkhu possessed of these ten qualities 4 .

20, ‘ And thus, O Bhikkhus, is he to be ap-
pointed. First, the Bhikkhu should be asked
(whether he be willing to undertake the office).
Then some discreet and able Bhikkhu should ad-
dress the Sawgha thus :

‘ “ May the venerable Sa/?2gha hear me. Whilst
this case was being enquired into pointless speeches
were brought forth amongst us, and the sense of no
single utterance was clear. If the time seems meet

1 Perhaps this may mean ‘ both as to the Suttas themselves and
as to the Old Commentary upon them’ — suttato anuvyare^anaso.
See ‘Vinaya Texts,’ vol. i, p. xviii, and note 2, p. xxix.

* Vinaye i/teko hoti asajwhtro. Compare on the use of
these words, Gataka I, 290; II, 161; Sutta Nip&ta V, 18, 26.

3 On all these terms, which have occurred above at IV, 2, r,
see the commentary as there quoted in the notes.

* It is of course to be understood that the committee or jury
does not consist of only one such Bhikkhu. In the instance
already referred to as occurring in XII, 2, 7, four are chosen from
each side.

E 2

52

KV LLA V AGG A.

IY, 14, 21.

to the venerable Sawgha, let it appoint Bhikkhus of
such and such a name, and of such and such a name
on a committee. This is the motion.

‘ “ Let the venerable Saswgha hear me. Whilst
(&c., . . . down to) no single utterance was clear.
The Sawgha appoints Bhikkhus of such and such
names on a committee to settle this case. Who-
soever of the venerable ones approves of the ap-
pointment of such and such Bhikkhus on the
committee for the settlement of this case, let him
be silent. Whosoever approves not thereof, let him
speak.

* “ Such and such a Bhikkhu is appointed by the
Sawzgha on the committee for the settlement of this
case. Therefore is it silent. Thus do I under-
stand.”

21. ‘If then, O Bhikkhus, those Bhikkhus are able
on the reference (or on the committee) to settle the
case, that, O Bhikkhus, is called a case that is
settled. And how is it settled ? By the Pro-
ceeding in Presence 1 . And what therein is meant
by the Proceeding in Presence ? The Dhamma is
represented, and the Vinaya is represented, and the
particular person is represented 2 .

‘ And of these, what is the presence of the
Dhamma (&c., as in § 16, down to the end).

‘ If a dispute, O Bhikkhus, has been thus settled,
if a disputant re-open the question, such re-opening
is a Pa^ittiya *.

22. ‘ If, O Bhikkhus, whilst the case is being

1 Sammukhl-vinayena. See chapter 2.

2 This is the same as in § 16 of this chapter, except that ‘the
presence of the Sawgha ’ is omitted.

5 See the 63rd Pa&ttiya, and § 17 above.

IV, 14, 24- THE SETTLEMENT OF DISPUTES.

53

enquired into by those Bhikkhus, there should
be there a Bhikkhu who is a preacher of the
Dhamma, but neither has the Sutta 1 been handed
down to him nor the Sutta-vibhahga, and he not
regarding the point of the case, reject the sense for
the shadow of the letter, then should the matter be
laid before those Bhikkhus by some discreet and
able Bhikkhu thus :

1 “Let the venerable ones hear me. This Bhikkhu
of such and such a name is a preacher of the
Dhamma, but neither has the Sutta been handed
down to him nor the Sutta-vibhahga. And he, not
regarding the point of the case, is rejecting the
sense for the shadow of the letter. If the time
seems meet to the venerable ones, let them send
away 2 the Bhikkhu of such and such a name, and
let the rest of us settle this case.”

‘ If those Bhikkhus, O Bhikkhus, should be able,
after having sent away that Bhikkhu, to settle the
case, that is called a case that is settled. And how
has it been settled ? By the Proceeding in Presence
(&c., as in last section, down to the end).’

23. (The same decision if the Sutta has been
handed down to him, but not the Sutta-vibhahga.)

24. ‘ If those Bhikkhus, O Bhikkhus, are not able
by the committee to settle that case, those Bhikkhus,

0 Bhikkhus, ought to hand over the case to the
Sawgha, saying, “We, Sirs, are not able by a com-
mittee to settle this case, let the Samgha settle it.”

1 enjoin upon you, O Bhikkhus, to settle such a case
by vote of the majority (&c., as in chapter 9 to the

1 That is, the Patimokkha,

2 Literally, ‘ cause him to arise/

I

54

STULLAVAGGA.

IV, 14, ag.

end, as to the appointment of a taker of the voting
tickets). By that Bhikkhu, the taker of the voting
tickets, are the votes to be collected. And according
as the larger number of Bhikkhus who are guided
by the Dhamma shall speak, so shall the case be
decided. This, O Bhikkhus, is called a legal
question that has been settled.

‘ And how has it been settled ? By the Proceed-
ing in Presence and by the vote of the majority.
And what herein is meant by Proceeding in Pre-
sence ? The presence of the Sawgha, and the
presence of the Dhamma, and the presence of the
Vinaya, and the presence of the particular person.
And of these, what is the presence of the Sawgha ?
(&c., as in § 16 , down to) That is the presence in
such a matter of the particular person.

‘ And what herein is meant by the vote of the
majority ? The carrying out of, the accomplish-
ment of, the proceeding by, the undertaking of, the
acceptance of, the pacification by the official act (the
Kamma) by the vote of the majority 1 2 . That is
what is meant herein by the vote of the majority.

‘ When a legal question, O Bhikkhus, has been
thus settled, if a disputant re-open the question, such
re-opening is a P&iattiya. If one who has conveyed
his consent complain of the decision, such complaint
is a Pa/§ittiya V

25. Now at that time a certain legal question had
arisen in such and such a manner, and had grown up
in such and such a manner at Savatthi. And those

1 This sentence is also used of the other modes of settlement
below, §§ 27, 29.

2 So also above, § 16.; and below, §§ 27-29.

IV. 14, 35. THE SETTLEMENT OF DISPUTES.

55

Bhikkhus were discontented with the settlement of the
case by the Samgha at Savatthi. And they heard
that in a certain residence there were dwelling a
number of Theras versed in the traditions ; men to
whom the Agamas 1 had been handed down ; re-
citers of the Dhamma, of the Vinaya, and of the
Matikas 2 , learned, discreet, wise, modest, conscien-
tious, anxious to learn. And they thought, ‘ If those
Theras would settle this case according to the
Dhamma, and according to the Vinaya, and ac-
cording to the teaching of the Master, then would
this case be indeed well settled.’ So those
Bhikkhus went to that residence, and spake to
those Theras thus : 1 This legal question, Sirs,
has arisen in such and such a manner, and has
grown up in such and such a manner. It would be
well if the venerable Theras would settle the case
according to the Dhamma, and according to the
Vinaya, and according to the teaching of the
Master ! ’ Then those Theras, saying, ‘ Even as
the case has been settled by the Sa»2gha at Savatthi,
so is it well settled ! ’ decided the case in the same
way. Then those Bhikkhus who had been dis-
contented with the decision of the Sawgha at Sa-
vatthi were discontented with the decision of the
number of Theras.

[The paragraph is repeated with the necessary
alterations of consecutive applications to three, two,
and one Thera with the same result]

Then those Bhikkhus, discontented with the
decision of the Sawgha. at Savatthi, discontented
with the decision of the number of Theras, dis-

1 That is, the Four Nikayas, now forming the Sutta Pi/aka.

2 See our note above on A'ullavagga IV, i, 2.

IV, 14? 2 6*

contented with the decision of the three Theras,
discontented with the decision of the two Theras,
discontented with the decision of the single Thera,
went up to the place where the Blessed One was,
and told the matter to the Blessed One.

‘ This case, O Bhikkhus, is done with ; having
been once settled, it is settled for good.

26 \ ‘1 enjoin upon you, O Bhikkhus, three ways
of taking votes, in order to appease such Bhikkhus 2
— the secret method, the whispering method, and
the open method.

‘ And how, O Bhikkhus, is the secret method of
taking votes ? The Bhikkhu who is the teller of
the votes is to make the voting tickets of different
colours, and as each Bhikkhu comes up to him he is
to say to him thus : “ This is the ticket for the man
of such an opinion ; this the ticket for the man of
such an opinion. Take whichever you like.” When
he has chosen (he is to add), “ Don’t show it to
anybody.” If he ascertains that those whose opinion
is against the Dhamma are in the majority, he is to
reject the vote as wrongly taken. If he ascertains
that those whose opinion is in accordance with the
Dhamma are in the majority, he is to report the
vote as well taken. This, O Bhikkhus, is the secret
method of taking the votes.

‘ And how, O Bhikkhus, is the whispering method
of taking votes ? The Bhikkhu who is the teller of
the votes is to whisper in each Bhikkhus ear, “This
is the ticket of those of such an opinion ; this is the
ticket of those of such an opinion. Take whichever

1 On the following section, compare chapters 9 and 10 above.

2 On SaMattiyS, see our note below on VII, 4, 1.

XY, 14, 27. THE SETTLEMENT OF DISPUTES.

57

you like.” When he has chosen (he is to add),

“ Don’t tell anybody (which way you have voted).”
If he ascertains that those whose opinion is against
the Dhamma are in the majority, he is to reject the
vote as wrongly taken. If he ascertains that those
whose opinion is in accordance with the Dhamma
are in the majority, he is to report the vote as well
taken. Thus, O Bhikkhus, is the whispering method
of taking the votes.

‘ And how, O Bhikkhus, is the open method of
taking votes ? If he ascertains (beforehand) that
those whose opinion is in accordance with the
Dhamma are in the majority, the vote is to be taken
undisguisedly, openly. Thus, O Bhikkhus, is the
open method of taking the votes.

‘ These, O Bhikkhus, are the three methods of
taking the votes V

27. ‘By how many kinds of settlement is a legal
question arising out of censure settled ? A legal
question arising out of censure can be settled by
four kinds of settlement — by the Proceeding in
Presence — by the Proceeding for those who are
consciously innocent — by the Proceeding for those
who are no longer out of their mind — by the
Proceeding for those who are obstinate.

‘ I f one should ask, “ Can it be that a legal question
arising out of censure, without recourse being had to
two modes of settlement — to wit, the Proceeding for
those who are no longer out of their mind, and the

1 This naive chapter would seem to show that the pi a fraus was
not unknown to the Buddhist monks at the time when the
jSTullavagga was composed. Buddhaghosa’s note (given at p. 315
of H. O/s edition of the text) specifies the different occasions when
each of the three methods should be used.

58

ZULLAVAGGA.

IV, 14, 27;

Proceeding for those who are obstinate — may be
settled by the two other modes of settlement — to
wit, the Proceeding in Presence, and the Proceeding
for those who are consciously innocent ? ” he should
be told, “Yes, it can.” (If he should say), “How
may that be ?” the answer should be as follows :

‘ In case the Bhikkhus bring a groundless charge
against a Bhikkhu of a breach of morality. In
respect thereof, O Bhikkhus, to that Bhikkhu whose
memory in regard to the matter is quite clear, the
Proceeding for the consciously innocent is to be
accorded.

‘ And thus, O Bhikkhus, is to be granted (&c., as
in chapter 4, § 10, down to the end, with the ne-
cessary alterations for a general rule instead of a
particular case).

‘ This, O Bhikkhus, is called a legal question that
has been settled. And how settled ? By the Pro-
ceeding in Presence, and by the Proceeding for the
consciously innocent. And what therein belongs to
the Proceeding in Presence ? The presence of the
Sawgha, and the presence of the Dhamma, and
the presence of the Vinaya, and the presence of
the particular person. And therein what is the
presence of the Sa»zgha (&c., as in § 16, down
to the end)? And what therein belongs to the
Proceeding for the consciously innocent ? The
carrying out of, the accomplishment of, the pro-
ceeding by, the undertaking of, the acceptance of,
the pacification of the Proceeding for the consciously
innocent 1 . That is what belongs herein to the
Proceeding for the consciously innocent.’

1 This clause corresponds to the one above, in § 24, and below,
in § 29.

IV, 14, 3 9-

THE SETTLEMENT OF DISPUTES.

59

28. [This section bears exactly the same relation
to chapter 5 as the last section does to chapter 4,
the form of the two sections being exactly the same
throughout.]

29 1 11 . 1 If one should ask, “ Can it be that a legal
question arising out of censure, without recourse
being had to two modes of settlement — to wit, the
Proceeding for those who are consciously innocent,
and the Proceeding for those who are no longer out
of their mind — may be settled by the two other
modes of settlement — to wit, the Proceeding in
Presence, and the Proceeding for those who are
obstinate?” he should be told, “Yes, it can.” If
he should say, “ How may that be ? ” the answer
should be as follows :

‘ In case a Bhikkhu warn another Bhikkhu in the
midst of the Sawgha of a grievous offence, and call
upon him to recollect (whether he have committed it
or not), saying, “ Has the venerable one been guilty
of such and such a grievous offence — a Parafika
offence, or an offence equivalent to a Para^ika
offence ?” And he replies thus, “ I do not, Sir, call
to mind that I have been guilty of such and such a
grievous offence — a Para^ika offence, or an offence
equivalent to a Paravika offence.” To him thus
denying the other insists, saying, “ Come now, Sir,
ascertain for certain whether you are conscious of
having been guilty of such and such a grievous

1 This section again bears exactly the same relation to chapter

11 as the previous ones have done to chapters 4 and 5 respec-
tively. The outline of the form is the same, but as in the in-
troductory part (containing the description of the offence) the
present section is much fuller than the chapter to which it refers,
we prefer to give that part of this section in full.

6 o

JTULLAVAGGA.

IV, 14, 29.

offence — a Parayika offence, or an offence equivalent
to a P&r&yika offence.” And he replies thus : “I do
not, Sir, call to mind that I have been guilty of such
and such a grievous offence — a Parayika offence, or
an offence equivalent to a Parayika offence. But I
do, Sir, recollect that I was guilty of such and such
a trifling offence.” To him thus denying the other
insists [as before]. And he replies thus : “ Seeing
that I am willing, Sir, though you did not ask me, to
confess myself guilty of that trifling offence, why
should I not confess, when asked, such and such a
grievous offence — a Parayika offence, or an offence
equivalent to a Parayika offence ?” And the other
rejoins, “ But you do not confess, Sir, even that
trifling offence without being asked. How should
you confess, if you were not asked, the commission
of such and such a grievous offence — a Parayika
offence, or one equivalent to a Parayika offence ?
Come now, Sir, ascertain for certain whether you
are conscious of having been guilty of such and such
a grievous offence — a Parayika offence, or one equi-
valent to a Pdrayika offence?” And he replies,
“Yes, I am conscious, Sir, of having committed
such and such an offence — a Parayika offence, or
one equivalent to a P&rayika offence. In sport did
I say, in fun did I say that I was not conscious
thereof.”

‘ Then, O Bhikkhus, the Proceeding for those
who are obstinate should be carried out against

o

that Bhikkhu.

‘ And thus should it be carried out (&c., as
chapter ix, § 2, down to the end, reading “such
and such a Bhikkhu” for “ Upavala,” and “grievous
offence ” for “ offence ”).

IV, 14, 3°-

THE SETTLEMENT OF DISPUTES.

61

‘ This, O Bhikkhus, is called a legal question that
has been settled. And how has it been settled ?
By the Proceeding in Presence, and by the Pro-
ceeding for those who are obstinate. And what
therein belongs to the Proceeding in Presence ?
The Presence of the Sawgha (&c., as in § 16). And
what therein belongs to the Proceeding for those
who are obstinate ? The carrying out of, the ac-
complishment of, the proceeding by, the undertaking
of, the acceptance of, the pacification of the official
act (the Kamma) by the Proceeding for those who
are obstinate. That is what belongs therein to the
Proceeding for those who are obstinate.

‘When a legal question, O Bhikkhus, has been
thus settled, if a disputant re-open the question, such
re-opening is a Pa/fittiya. If one who has conveyed
his consent complain of the decision, such complaint
is a Paiittiya.

30. ‘ By how many modes of settlement is a legal
question arising out of offence settled ? A legal
question arising out of offence is settled by three
modes of settlement — to wit, by the Proceeding in
Presence, and by the Proceeding on confession of
guilt, and by the Proceeding by covering over as
with grass.

‘ If one should ask, “ Can it be that a legal
question arising out of offence, without recourse
being had to the one mode of settlement — to wit,
the Proceeding by covering over as with grass —
may be settled by the other two modes — to wit, the
Proceeding in Presence, and the Proceeding on con-
fession of guilt?” he should be told, “Yes, it can.”
If he should say, “How may that be?” the answer
should be as follows :

6 2

-5TULLAVAGGA.

IV H, 3°-

‘ In case a Bhikkhu has been guilty of a minor
offence. That Bhikkhu, O Bhikkhus, should go up
to another Bhikkhu, and having arranged his upper
robe over one shoulder, and squatted down on his
heels, and stretched forth his hands with the palms
held together, should speak as follows : “ I, Sir, have
been guilty of such and such an offence ; and that I
confess.” He should say, “Do you acknowledge it?”
“Yes; I acknowledge it.” “May you restrain your-
self in future 1 !”

‘ This, O Bhikkhus, is called a legal question
which has been settled. And how has it been
settled ? By the Proceeding in Presence, and by
the Proceeding on confession of guilt. And what
therein belongs to the Proceeding in Presence ? The
presence of the Dhamma, and the presence of the
Vinaya, and the presence of the particular individual.
And what therein is the presence of the Dhamma,
and of the Vinaya ? The Dhamma, and the Vinaya,
and the teaching of the Master, by the aid of which
that legal question is settled. That is the presence
in such a matter of the Dhamma, and of the Vinaya.
And what therein is the presence of the particular
individual ? He who confesses, and he to whom he
confesses, both are present. That is the presence
of the particular individual in such a proceeding.
And what therein belongs to the Proceeding on con-
fession of guilt ? The carrying out of, the accom-
plishment of, the proceeding by, the performance of,
the acceptance of, the pacification of the official act
(the Kamma) by the Proceeding on confession of

1 Ayatiw samvareyySsi. So again in the next section.
Compare V, 20, 5.

IV, 14, 32- THE SETTLEMENT OF DISPUTES.

guilt. That is what belongs therein to the Pro-
ceeding on confession of guilt.

‘When a legal question, O Bhikkhus, has been
thus settled, if a disputant re-open the question, such
re-opening is a P&iittiya 1 .

31. ‘ If he should thus receive (absolution), it is
well. If he should not receive it, that Bhikkhu, O
Bhikkhus, should go up to a number of Bhikkhus,
and having arranged his upper robe over one
shoulder, and bowed down before the elder Bhik-
khus, and squatted down on his heels, and stretched
forth his two hands with the palms held together, he
should speak as follows : “ I, Sirs, have been guilty
of such and such an offence, and that I confess.”
Then some discreet and able Bhikkhu should lay the
matter before those Bhikkhus, saying, “ Let the vener-
able ones hear me. This Bhikkhu, of such and such
a name, is conscious of an offence ; and he discloses
it, reveals it, confesses it. If the time seems meet
to the venerable ones, I would absolve 2 that Bhik-
khu’s offence.” And he should say, “ Do you ac-
knowledge it?” “Yes; I acknowledge it.” “In
future may you restrain yourself!”

‘ This, O Bhikkhus, is called a legal question
which has been settled. And how has it been
settled ? (&c., as in last section, down to the end.)

32. ‘ If he should thus receive absolution, it is
well. If he should not receive it, that Bhikkhu,
O Bhikkhus, should go before the Sawzgha (&c.,
as in last section, down to the end, then adding) :
And if one who has given his consent to the pro-

1 See §§ 16, 29, &c. of this chapter.

2 Pa/iga«heyya«. See V, 20, 5.

6 4

iSTULLAVAGGA.

IV, 14, 33.

ceeding thereafter make complaint thereof, that is a
Pa^ittiya.

33. ‘ If one should ask, “ Can it be that a legal
question arising out of offence, without recourse
being had to the one mode of settlement — to wit,
the Proceeding on confession of guilt — may be
settled by the other two modes — to wit, by the
Proceeding in Presence, and by the Proceeding by
covering over as with grass ?” he should be told,
“Yes, it can.” If he should say, “How may that
be ? ” the answer should be as follows :

‘If while the Bhikkhus are continuing in quarrels
(&c., as in chapter 1 3, §§ 1, 2, and 3, down to the end).

‘ This, O Bhikkhus, is called a legal question that
has been settled. And how has it been settled ? By
the Proceeding in Presence, and by the Proceeding
by the covering over as with grass.

‘ And what therein belongs to the Proceeding in
Presence? The presence (&c., as in § 16, down to)
And what therein is the presence of the particular
person ? He who confesses, and he to whom the
confession is made 1 , both are present. This is the
presence of the particular individual in such a case.

‘And what therein belongs to the Proceeding by
covering over as with grass ? The carrying out of,
the accomplishment of, the proceeding by, the per-
formance of, the acceptance of, the pacification of the
official act (the Kamma) by the Proceeding by cover-
ing over as with grass. That is what belongs therein
to the Proceeding by covering over as with grass.

1 This refers to the technical term of the Proceeding in question,
tiflavatth&rakena deseyyazs (IV, 13, 2); and the singular of
course includes the plural, as the confession usually took place
before a number of Bhikkhus.

IV, 14, 34- THE SETTLEMENT OF DISPUTES.

65

‘When a legal question, O Bhikkhus, has been
thus settled, if a disputant re-open the question,
such re-opening is a Paiittiya. If one who has
conveyed his consent complain of the decision, such
complaint is a P&iittiya.

34. ‘ By how many modes of settlement is a legal
question arising out of business settled ? A legal
question arising out of business is settled by one
mode of settlement only — to wit, by the Proceeding
in Presence.’

End of the Fourth Khandhaka, on the Settle-
ment of Legal Questions.

[ 20 ]

F

A'ULLAVAGGA.

On the Daily Life of the Bhikkhus,

i. Now at that time the Blessed One was staying
at Rafagaha, in the Bamboo Grove, in the Kalandaka
Nivapa. And at that time the A7zabbaggiya Bhik-
khus, when bathing, used to rub 1 their bodies — thighs,
and arms, and breast, and back — against wood. The
people were annoyed, murmured, and became indig-
nant, saying, ‘ H ow can the Sakyaputtiya Samaras
do so, like wrestlers, boxers, or shampooers 2 ?’ The
Bhikkhus heard the people so murmuring, &c. ; and
they told the matter to the Blessed One.

Then the Blessed One, on that occasion and in
that connection, having convened a meeting of the
Bhikkhu-savzgha, asked the Bhikkhus : ‘Is this true,
O Bhikkhus, what they say, that the A7/abbaggiya
Bhikkhus, when bathing, rub (&c., as before)?’

‘ It is true, Lord.’

1 Uggha»zseti. The simple verb occurs below, V, 9, 2, 4,
X, 10, 2, and at (?ataka, vol. i,. p. 190. It is the Sanskrit root
gharsh.

2 On malla-mu/Aikfi Buddhaghosa merely says mu/ASika-
malla. His note on gama-poddavt (already given by H. 0 .
at p. 315 of the edition to the text) says, ‘town’s people given to
adorning themselves by painting their skin’ (on which compare
below, V, 2, 5). But it is difficult to see how that fits in with the
connection here.

ON THE DAILY LIFE OF THE BHIKKHUS.

|

f

V, i, 3-

6 7

The Blessed Buddha rebuked them, saying, ‘This
is improper, O Bhikkhus (&c., as usual, see I, 1, 2,
down to the end).’ And when he had rebuked them,
and had delivered a religious discourse, he addressed
the Bhikkhus, and said : ‘ A Bhikkhu, when bathing,
is not, O Bhikkhus, to rub his body against wood.
Whosoever does so, shall be guilty of a dukka/a.’

2. Now at that time the /Wabbaggiya Bhikkhus,
when bathing, used to rub their bodies — thighs, and
arms, and breast, and back — against a pillar — against
a wall (&c., as in last section, down to the end).

3. Now at that time the AYabbaggiya Bhikkhus
used to bathe on an A //an a (a sort of shampooing
stand 1 ). The people (&c., as before). The Bhik-
khus (&c., as before). Then the Blessed One (&c.,
as before, down to) addressed the Bhikkhus, and
said: ‘You are not to bathe, O Bhikkhus, on an
A//ana. Whosoever does so, shall be guilty of
a dukka/a.’

[Paragraphs similar in every respect to the last
follow as to

Using a Gandhabba-hatthaka 2 when bathing.

Using a Kuruvindaka-sutti 3 when bathing.

Rubbing their bodies, when under water, up
against each other 4 .

1 So Buddhaghosa loc. cit.

2 A wooden instrument in the shape of a hand, which was first
covered with chunam (fine lime), and then rubbed over the body.
See Buddhaghosa’s note at p. 315 of H, O.’s edition of the text.

3 Apparently a string of beads which was first covered with the
chunam made from Kuruvindaka stone (a ruby-coloured stone),
and then held at both ends and rubbed over the body. See
Buddhaghosa’s note loc. cit.

4 As Buddhaghosa, loc. cit., explains this by ‘ rubbing their

F 2

68

■STULLAVAGGA,

Y, i, 4.

Using a Mallaka 1 when bathing.]

4, Now at that time a certain Bhikkhu had the
scab, and he could not bathe with comfort without
a Mallaka 1 .

They told the matter to the Blessed One.

‘I allow, O Bhikkhus, to a sick man the use of a
Mallaka not (artificially) made 2 .’

5. Now at that time a certain Bhikkhu who was
weak through old age was not able to shampoo his
own body.

‘I allow you, O Bhikkhus, the use of an Uk-
kasika 3 .’

Now at that time the Bhikkhus, (fearing to offend
against these rules,) were afraid to shampoo one
another.

‘ I allow you, O Bhikkhus, the ordinary mode of
shampooing with the hand 4 .’

2 .

1. Now at that time the .Oabbaggiya Bhikkhus

bodies up against each other’(!), vigayha has here probably nothing
to do with gah, but is simply vigrfhya.

1 A kind of back-scratcher, made according to Buddhaghosa,
loc. cit., by placing together, by the roots, hooks made of the teeth of
crocodiles (makara-dantaka ; see V, ir, 6 ; VI, 3, 2), which had
previously been split. Such hooks of split crocodiles’ teeth are
mentioned in the text itself below, V, 9, 2 ; and pins or hooks
made of naga’s teeth at V, 9, 5, and VI, 3, 5 (n&ga-dantaka),
and V, 11, 7 (naga-danta).

2 Buddhaghosa, loc. cit., makes this phrase mean only ‘ made of
teeth that had not been previously split.’

5 Buddhaghosa, loc. cit., explains this word by vat tava//i; which
is to us equally unintelligible.

'* Pudhu-pazukan ti hattha-parikammazs vu/hSati. Tasma
sabbesazzz hatthena pi//$i-parikamma?M katum va//ati (B.).

Y, 2, 3. ON THE DAILY LIFE OF THE BHIKKHUS. 69

used to wear ear-rings *, and ear-drops 1 2 , and strings
of beads for the throat, and girdles of beads 3 , and
bangles 4 , and necklaces 5 , and bracelets, and rings.

The people murmured, &c. .... The Bhikkhus

heard, &c They told the Blessed One (&c., as

in V, 1, 1, down to) he addressed the Bhikkhus,
and said ;

4 You are not, O Bhikkhus, to wear any of these
things. Whosoever does so, shall be guilty of a
dukka/a.’

2. [A similar paragraph concluding]

You are not, O Bhikkhus, to wear long hair.
Whosoever does so, shall be guilty of a dukka/a.
I allow you, O Bhikkhus, hair that is two months
old, or two inches long.’

3. [Similar paragraph concluding]

'You are not, O Bhikkhus, to smooth 6 the hair

1 Vallika ti kazz/zato nikkhanta-mutt-olambaHdinazzz eta?;z adhi-
va/fcana m. Na kevalafi ^a vallika eva, ya m k mki kawza-pilandha-
na m antamaso tala-pannazzz pi na va//ati (B.). Compare sata-
vallikaw at V, 29, 4.

2 Pamanga. The meaning of which is not clear from Buddha-
ghosa 7 s note loc. cit. It occurs also at Dipavawsa XII, 1, and
below in Buddhaghosa 7 s note on maddavizza at V, 29, 2 (twice).

8 Ka/i-suttakazzz. This is not mentioned in the similar para-
graph at Y, 29, 2, where all special kinds of girdles are enume-
rated. It is forbidden below to the Bhikkhunts at X, 16.

4 Ova//ika. ‘This word is explained by Buddhaghosa as the
same as valayazzz. Ova/7iya occurs, apparently in a different
sense, at Mahavagga VII, 1, 5, and the present word in Buddha-
ghosa on sata-vallikaz;z at V, 29, 4.

5 K&yura, on which Buddhaghosa, loc. cit., merely says that the
meaning of this, and of the following words, is evident. But the
Gataka commentary (Fausboll III, 437, 14) says kayuran ti
givaya pilandhana-pasadhanazzz.

6 Osazzheti. Compare the Sanskrit jlaks h way at i. The art

of hair-dressing had, at the time when the Zullavagga was com-

70

XULLAVAGGA.

V, 2, 4.

with a comb, or with a smoothing instrument shaped
like a snake’s hood 1 , or with the hand used as such
an instrument 3 , or with pomade 3 , or with hair-oil of
beeswax 3 . Whosoever does so, shall be guilty of a
dukka/a.’

4. [Similar paragraph concluding]

'You are not, O Bhikkhus, to look at the image
of your faces in a looking-glass, or a bowl of water 4 .
Whosoever does so, shall be guilty of a dukka/a/

Now at that time a certain Bhikkhu had a sore in
his face. He asked the Bhikkhus what kind of a
sore he had. ‘ Such and such a kind of sore,’
replied they. He did not believe what they said.
They told this matter to the Blessed One.

‘ I allow you, O Bhikkhus, on account of a disease,
to look at your faces in a looking-glass, or in a bowl
of water/

5. Now at that time the W/zabbaggiya Bhikkhus
(&c., down to)

posed, been already carried to a high state of efficiency in the
valley of the Ganges, as may reasonably be concluded from the
numerous kinds of head-dresses figured in bas-relief on some of
the oldest Buddhist sculptures.

3 Pha^akena ti dantamayadisu yena kena# (B.).

2 Hattha-pha/zakenati hatthen 5 eva phawaka-kiAfafl* karonti,
angulihi osawhenti (B.). It is clear from this last explanation that
the p ha;/ aka was a kind of very primitive brush, but without
bristles. In passing the fingers through the hair the fingers are
naturally held separate, slightly forward, and stiff-— precisely as one
would hold them if one wished to imitate the hood of a cobra.
To make a real brush with bristles was evidently beyond the
mechanical appliances of those times, or such an article would
certainly have been mentioned in this connection,

3 On the use of Tela ka, compare Mah&vagga VI, 13, 1, and
Sittha-telaka at isfullavagga IV, 3, 1.

4 Compare Zullavagga X, 10, 4.

Y, 2, 6. ON THE DAILY LIFE OF THE BHIKKHUS.

71

‘You are not, O Bhikkhus, to anoint your faces,
nor to rub (ointment, &c.) into your faces, nor to put
chunam on your faces, nor to smear red arsenic on
your faces, nor to paint your bodies, nor to paint
your faces V

Now at that time a certain Bhikkhu had disease
in his eyes. They told the matter to the Blessed
One.

‘ I allow you, O Bhikkhus, on account of disease,
to anoint your faces.’

6 1 2 . Now at that time there was a festival on the
mountain-top 3 at Ri^agaha ; and the AYabbaggiya
Bhikkhus went to see it.

The people murmured, were annoyed, and became
indignant, saying, ‘ How can the Sakyaputtiya Sa-
maras go to see dancing, and singing, and music,
like those who are still enjoying the pleasures of the
world ? ’ And they told this matter to the Blessed
One.

‘ You are not, O Bhikkhus, to go to see dancing,
or singing, or music. Whosoever does so, shall be
guilty of a dukka^a.’

1 All these practices are seriatim forbidden to the Bhikkhunis
also in Afullavagga X, xo, 3.

2 The following section recurs, almost word for word, of the
Bhikkhunis, in the Bhikkhuni-vibhanga, Pdiittiya X (Sutta-vibhanga,
vol. ii, p. 267).

3 Giragga-sama^a. Compare Dipavama XXI, 32, and
Mahavarosa, p. 214, line 2. It occurs also in the Introductory-
Story in the Sutta-vibhanga on the 37th Pa£ittiya, and Buddha-
ghosa there explains it as follows: Giragga-sam a.ggo ti girimhi
agga-samaggo girissa va agga-dese samaggo. He is evidently in
doubt about the word, which is probably connected with ancient
local worship or custom, a worship in high-places, as little allied
to Vedic Brahmanism as it was to Buddhism.

7 2 A'ULLAVAGGA. V, 3 , 2 .

3 .

1. Now at that time the WAabbaggiya Bhikkhus
used to sing the Dhamma with the abrupt transi-
tions of song-singing.

The people murmured, were annoyed, and became
indignant, saying, ‘ How can the Sakyaputtiya Sa-
maras [do so] ?’ The Bhikkhus heard (&c., as usual,
down to) he addressed the Bhikkhus, and said :

‘ These five dangers, O Bhikkhus, befall him who
sings the Dhamma with the abrupt 1 transitions of
song-singing. — He himself becomes captivated with
respect to the sound thereof. — Other people become
captivated with respect to the sound thereof. — The
laymen are shocked. — The meditation of one who
strains after accuracy in the sound is broken. — The
common 'people fall into heresy 2 3 . — These five dan-
gers, O Bhikkhus, befall him who sings the Dhamma
with the abrupt transitions of song-singing. The
Dhamma is not, O Bhikkhus, to be sung [in that
manner]. Whosoever does so, shall be guilty of a
dukka/a/

2. Now at that time the Bhikkhus were afraid to
make use of intoning®. They told this matter to
the Blessed One.

‘ I allow you, O Bhikkhus, to intone/

1 Ayatakena gita-ssarena. Compare dyataken’ eva papdto
at iTullavagga IX, r, 3.

2 Probably this is supposed to result because dhamma being
sung and not said is not intelligible to them — a complaint often
made against the singing of prayers among Protestant Christians.
On pa£^im& g’anati, compare the closing words ofV, 21, 2;
and on the rest of the phrase, Puggala III, 10, 14. The trans-
lation of sarakutti® is also very doubtful.

3 Sara-bhamia«. So in the Mahavagga we hear that So«a

V, 5, I. ON THE DAILY LIFE OF THE BHIKKHUS.

73

i. Now at that time the Wiabbaggiya Bhikkhus
used to wear woollen cloth with long fleece to it b
The people murmured . . . (&c., down to) They
told this matter to the Blessed One.

‘You are not, O Bhikkhus, to wear woollen cloth
with long fleece to it. Whosoever does so, shall be
guilty of a dukka/a.’

5.

i. Now at that time the mangoes were ripe in the
park of Seniya Bimbisara, the king of Magadha.
And Seniya Bimbisara, the king of Magadha, had
given command, saying , 1 Let the venerable ones have
as much fruit as they like.’ Then the iWabbaggiya
Bhikkhus plucked even the young fruits and ate
them.

Now Seniya Bimbisira, the king of Magadha,
wanted a mango ; and he gave orders, saying, ‘ Go,

intoned before the Buddha a chapter from the Sutta Nipata. The
expression there used is sarena abh&si, of which our word is used
as the verbal noun, the roots bha n and bhas being not only
synonymous but interchangeable. (See, for instance, Vin. Pit.
vol. iv, p. 353.) Perhaps ‘ recitative ’ would be a good rendering.
I have several times heard the Dhamma thus recited by living
Buddhists in accordance with the traditional interpretation of this
passage, and their Sara-bhaimaOT was precisely like the intoning
of prose passages as practised in our cathedral churches (Rh. D.).

1 Bahira-lomm-awwim. Literally, ‘ with the fleece outside.’
Compare MaMvagga V, 10, 4, and the Magg-liima Sila, § 5 (p. 193
of Rh. D.’s ‘ Buddhist Suttas ’).

74

iTULLAVAGGA.

v, S> 2 -

my good men, to the park, and bring me hither a
mango.’

‘ Even so, Lord,’ said the men in assent to Seniya
Bimbisara, the king of Magadha : and they went to
the park, and said to the park-keepers, ‘ Our lord,
good friends, has need of a mango. Give us one ! ’

‘ There are no mangoes, Sirs. The Bhikkhus
have plucked even the young ones, and eaten
them.’

Then those men told the matter to Seniya Bim-
bisara, the king of Magadha, and he said : ‘ The
mangoes have been well used, my good men, by the
venerable ones. Notwithstanding it is moderation
that has been exalted by the Blessed One.’

The people murmured, were shocked, and were
indignant, &c., saying, ‘ How can the Sakyaputtiya
Samaras, knowing no moderation, use up the king’s
mangoes?’ The Bhikkhus heard .those men mur-
muring, shocked, and indignant. Then those Bhik-
khus told this matter to the Blessed One.

1 Y ou are not, O Bhikkhus, to eat mangoes. Who-
soever does so, shall be guilty of a dukka/a.’

2. Now at that time it was the turn of a certain
multitude to provide the Samgha with a meal.
Mango-peal was put into the curry. The Bhikkhus,
fearing to offend, would not partake of it.

1 T ake it, O Bhikkhus, and eat. I allow you, O
Bhikkhus, to eat the peal of the mango.’

Now at that time it was the turn of a certain
multitude to provide the Samgha with a meal.
They did not get so far as to make (curry with) the
peal, but went about in the dining-hall with whole
mangoes. The Bhikkhus, fearing to offend, would
not accept them.

V, 6, I. ON THE DAILY LIFE OF THE BHIKKHUS. 75

‘Take them, O Bhikkhus, and eat. I allow you,
O Bhikkhus, to eat fruit which has become allowable
to Samaras in any one of these five ways — when
it has been injured by fire 1 — or by sword 2 — or by
nails — when it has not yet had any seed in it— and
fifthly, when it has no more seed in it 3 . I allow
you, O Bhikkhus, to eat fruit which has become
allowable to Samaras in any one of these five
ways/

6 4 .

i. Now at that time a certain Bhikkhu died of
the bite of a snake. They told the matter to the
Blessed One.

1 Buddhaghosa gives in the Samanta Pasadika on the nth
Pa&ttiya the following explanations of these terms. Aggi-pari-
g-itan ti aggin& partita?# abhibhuta?# faddham phu//^an ti attho.
The reading pari^itazra is correct and should be inserted in the
text for pariiita m.

2 Sattha-parfgdtan ti satthena pari^itaw abhibhuta?# Min-
na?# viddha?# va ti attho. Esa nayo nakha-parigite (B., loc. cit.).

3 These last two clauses have already occurred at Mahavagga
VI, 2i. The principle of the injunction throughout its five
divisions is one and the same— -the seed, or the capacity of fructi-
fication, must either have never existed, or have passed away, or
have been destroyed.

4 This ancient legend has been expanded into a Gataka story,
under the title of Khandha-vatta (S&taka, No. 203 in Professor
Fausboll’s edition (vol. ii, pp. 144-148), in which recur all the
verses here given as a snake-charm. The names of the serpents
are derived from the ancient mythology, and are not to be sup-
posed to refer to actual breeds of real snakes. Below, ATullavagga
VI, 2, 5, where a Bhikkhu is bitten by a snake, the simple pre-
caution enjoined is the use of a higher bedstead.

76

ffULLAVAGGA.

v, 6, I.

‘ Now surely, that Bhikkhu, O Bhikkhus, had not
let his love flow out over the four royal breeds of
serpents ! Had he done so, he would not die of the
bite of a snake. And which are the four royal
breeds of serpents ? The Viriipakkhas are a
royal breed. The Er&pathas are a royal breed.
The AT^abydputtas are a royal breed. The
Kawhclgotamakas are a royal breed. Now surely
that Bhikkhu, O Bhikkhus, had not let his love flow
out over the four royal breeds of serpents ! Had
he done so, he would not die of the bite of a snake.
I allow you, O Bhikkhus, to make use of a safeguard
for yourselves for your security and protection, by
letting your love flow out over the four royal breeds
of serpents. And thus, O Bhikkhus, are you to
do so.

“‘I love Virupakkhas, the Erapathas I love.

“‘ I love A/zabyaputtas, the KaHiagotamakas I
love.

‘ “ I love live things that have no feet, the bipeds
too I love.

‘ “ I love four-footed creatures, and things with
many feet.

‘ “ Let no footless thing do hurt to me, nor thing
that has two feet.

‘ “ Let no four-footed creature hurt, nor thing with
many feet.

‘ “ Let all creatures, all things that live, all beings
: of whatever kind,

i ‘ “ Let all behold good fortune \ and let none
1 fall into sin.

1 This phrase occurs in the passage at MahS-parinibbana
Sutta I, 31, by -which Buddhaghosa is so much perplexed.

Y, 7, I. ON THE DAILY LIFE OF THE BHIKKHUS. 77

4 “Infinite is the Buddha, infinite the Truth, infi-
nite the Order. Finite are creeping things ; snakes,
scorpions and centipedes, spiders and lizards, rats
and mice.

4 44 Made is my safeguard, made my defence. Let
living things retreat,

4 4 4 Whilst I revere the Blessed One, the Buddhas
seven supreme L” 7

4 1 allow you, O Bhikkhus, to let blood V

7 .

i. Now at that time a certain Bhikkhu, tormented
by distaste (for meditation, &c.), castrated himself 1 2 3 .
They told this matter to the Blessed One.

4 When one thing wanted cutting off, O Bhikkhus,
that foolish fellow has cut off another! You are

1 This is only one of the many passages from which it is
evident that in the oldest Buddhism only the seven Buddhas, from
Vipassi down to Gotama inclusive, were known by name to the
members of the Buddhist community. Compare Rh. D.’s £ Hib-
bert Lectures, 1881/ p. 142. It is nevertheless probable that,
with their ideas as to the infinite number of worlds which had
succeeded one another in the past, they considered that the
number of previous Buddhas had also been infinite.

2 This last injunction, which comes in here so tamely, is omitted
in the <9ataka story, and is merely a hook on which to hang an
excuse for introducing this ancient and evidently favourite pre-
scription into the Vinaya. That it is quite out of place is suffi-
ciently evident from the fact that it has already been laid down in
identical terms in the Mahavagga VI, 14, 4, where it is found in
its natural connection.

3 Anabhiratiyd pi/ito attano ahga^atam £Mndi. This
anabhirati is constantly referred to, and always as the result of
falling in love, or in connection with sexual desire.

78

XULLAVAGGA.

V, 8, l.

not, O Bhikkhus, to castrate yourselves. Whoso-
ever does so, shall be guilty of a thullai/fcaya.’

8 '.

i. Now at that time the Se A/n of Ra^agaha had
acquired a block 2 of sandal-wood of the most
precious sandal-wood flavour. And the Se///d of
Raj r agaha thought, ‘ How would it be if I were to
have a bowl carved out of this block of sandal-wood,
so that the chips 3 shall remain my property, and I
can give the bowl away ? ’ And the SettAi of
Ragagaha had a bowl turned out of that block of
sandal-wood, and put it in a balance, and had it
lifted on to the top of a bamboo 4 , and tying that
bamboo at the top of a succession of bamboos, he let
it be known, saying, 1 If any Samara or Brahman be
an Arahat and possessed of Iddhi, let him get down
the bowl. It is a gift to him ! ’

Then Phra»a Kassapa went to the Se///£i of
R%agaha, and said to him, ‘1,0 householder, am

1 A Burmese version of the following legend is translated by
Bishop Bigandet in his ‘ Legend of the Burmese Buddha,’ vol. ii,
pp. 212-216 (Third Edition).

2 A'andana-gawMI uppanni hoti ti /i’andana-ghaMM up-
pannd hoti (B.). Compare gaw/zikd at <?&taka I, i5o=ga«fik& at
ibid. II, 124, and our note below on that word at Y, 29, 3.

3 L e k h a m. It is clear from V, 9, 2, below, and Buddha-
ghosa’s note there, that likhituwz is used in the sense of ‘to plane’
or ‘ to adze ’ wood or metal ; and the Sinhalese MSS. read here
likhawz instead of lekhaw. It cannot be ‘to turn,’ as the turning
lathe is quite a modern invention.

4 A similar proceeding is related of a Bhikkhu at 24, 1.

V, 8, l. ON THE DAILY LIFE OF THE BIIIKKHUS.

79

an Arahat and possessed of Iddhi. Give me the
bowl.’

‘ If, Sir, you are an Arahat and possessed of
Iddhi, let your reverence get down the bowl !’

Then Makkhali Gosala, and A^ita Kesa-kambali,
and Pakudha Kaiiayana, and Sazzjfaya Bela ttJi\-
putta, and N iga;z//za Nata-putta went severally to
the Se^/zi of Ragagaha, [and preferred the same
request, and received the same reply.]

Now at that time the venerable Maha Moggallana
and the venerable Pi/zzfola Bharadva^a, having
dressed themselves early in the morning, went into
Ragagaha, duly bowled and robed, for alms. And
the venerable Pizzzfola Bharadvaga said to the
venerable Maha Moggallina : ‘ The venerable Maha
Moggallana is both an Arahat and possessed of
Iddhi. Go, friend Moggallina, and fetch down this
bowl, for this bowl belongs to thee.’

‘ The venerable Pizzzfola Bharadvaga also is both
an Arahat and possessed of Iddhi. Go, friend
Bharadvaga, and fetch down the bowl, for this bowl
belongs to thee.’

Then the venerable Pizzzfola Bharadvaga, rising up
in the air, took the bowl, and went thrice round
Ragagaha (in the air). And at that time the S&tiki
of Ragagaha stood in his dwelling-place with his
wife and children, and holding up his clasped hands
in reverent salutation, he exclaimed, ‘ May the
venerable Bharadvaga be pleased to descend upon
our dwelling-place.’ And the venerable Bharadvaga
descended into his dwelling-place. Then the Se///zi
of Ragagaha took the bowl from the hands of the
venerable Bharadvaga, and filled it with costly food,
and presented it to the venerable Bharadvdga. And

8o

iTULLAV AGGA.

V, 8, 2 .

the venerable Bhdradvafa took the bowl, and de-
parted to his Arama.

2 . Now the people heard, 1 The venerable Y\ndo\a.
Bharadvafa, they say, has got down the Ri^agaha
Semi’s bowl.’ And those people, with shouts loud
and long, followed in the steps of Ymdola, Bharad-
vi^a. And the Blessed One heard the shouts loud
and long, and on hearing them he asked the vene-
rable Ananda, ‘What now, Ananda, does this so
great shouting mean ? ’

‘ The venerable Pmdola Bharadv&^a, Lord, has
got down the Ra/agaha SeA/zi’s bowl ; and the
people thereof are following in his steps with shouts
loud and long.’

Then the Blessed One, on that occasion and in
that connection, convened a meeting of the Bhikkhu-
Sazzzgha, and asked P'mdola. Bharadvag r a, ‘ Is it true,
as they say, that you, Bharadva^a, have got down
the Rd^agaha SeA/zi's bowl ? ’

‘ It is true, Lord.’

The Blessed Buddha rebuked him, saying, ‘ This
is improper, Bharadva^a, not according to rule,
unsuitable, unworthy of a Samara, unbecoming, and
ought not to be done. How can you, Bhiradvd^a,
for the sake of a miserable wooden pot, display
before the laity the superhuman quality of your
miraculous power of Iddhi ? Just, Bharadvafa, like a
woman who displays herself for the sake of a miserable
piece of money 1 , have you, for the sake of a miserable

1 Masaka-rupassa. On the masaka, see Rh. D.’s ‘Ancient
Coins and Measures, &c.,’ p. 13. It is evident from the use of
the word rftpa here that stamped pieces of money were known
in the valley of the Ganges as early as the time when the ATulla-

V, 9» I- ON THE DAILY LIFE OF THE BHIKKHUS. 8 1

wooden pot displayed before the laity the super-
human quality of your miraculous power of Iddhi.
This will not conduce, Bh&radv&fa, either to the
conversion of the unconverted, or to the increase of
the converted; but rather to those who have not
been converted remaining unconverted, and to the
turning back of those who have been converted.’

And when he had rebuked him, and had delivered
a religious discourse 1 , he addressed the Bhikkhus,
and said: ‘You are not, O Bhikkhus, to display
before the laity the superhuman power of Iddhi.
Whosoever does so, shall be guilty of a dukka/?a 2 .
Break to pieces, O Bhikkhus, that wooden bowl ;
and when you have ground it to powder, give it to
the Bhikkhus as perfume for their eye ointments 3 .
And you are not, O Bhikkhus, to use wooden bowls.
Whosoever does so, shall be guilty of a dukkaifa 4 .’

9 .

i. Now at that time the AVzabbaggiya Bhikkhus
used to use bowls of various kinds, made of gold
and silver.

The people murmured (&c., as usual, down to)
They told this matter to the Blessed One.

‘You are not, O Bhikkhus, to use bowls made

vagga was composed. The word occurs also below at ATullavagga
XII, x, i.

1 See iTullavagga I, i, 2.

2 Compare the 4th Para^ika.

3 The use of sandal-wood for this purpose is allowed by the
closing words of MaM vagga VI, 1 1.

4 This injunction is repeated below in the summary at V, 37.

[ 20 ] G

82

JTULLAVAGGA.

V, 9, 2.

of gold, or made of silver, or set with jewels, or
made of beryl (ve/uriya 1 ), or made of crystal, or
made of copper, or made of glass 2 , or made of tin,
or made of lead, or made of bronze. Whosoever
does so, shall be guilty of a dukka/a. I allow you,
O Bhikkhus, bowls of two kinds, — those made of
iron, and those made of clay.’

2 . Now at that time the support at the bottom
of the bowls wore out 3 .

They told this matter to the Blessed One.

‘ I allow you, O Bhikkhus, to use circular (pieces
of metal) as the supports for your bowls.’

Now at that time the Wifabbaggiya Bhikkhus
used to have various kinds of circular supports
to their bowls, — silver ones, and gold ones..

The people murmured (&c., down to) They told
this matter to the Blessed One.

1 ‘ You are not, O Bhikkhus, to have various kinds

of circular supports to your bowls. Whosoever does

1 It is clear from verses 192-196 of the 13th chapter of the
Ra^a-nighaTz/u* written by Narahari of Kashmir in the thirteenth
century a. ix, that at that time Vai^&rya meant ‘cat’s-eye/ But
it is uncertain whether that was the only meaning of the word
ve/uriya at the time when this passage was composed. (See
especially V. 124, p. 25, of Dr. Richard Garbe’s edition in his
work, ‘Die Indischen Mineralien,’ Leipzig, 1882.) See also Pro-
fessor Max Muller's interesting note at p. 26.6 of his. ‘What can
India teach us?’

2 KaJamayo. There was probably no glass in our modem
sense of the word when the isaillavagga was written. But ka£a
is a silicious earth, and some sort of glass-like earthenware may
very well have been in use. The phrase has already occurred,
together with all the others in this passage, at Mahavagga V, 8, 3,
of foot-coverings, but is omitted in the list atKhudda Sikkh& V. 10.

3 Ghazzzsiyati. Literally, ‘were rubbed/ See below, § 3, and
our note below on Y, 9, 2, 4.

V, 9, 2. ON THE DAILY LIFE OF THE BHIKKHUS. 83

so, shall be guilty of a dukka/a. I allow you,
O Bhikkhus, two kinds of circular supports to your
bowls, — tin ones, and lead ones/

The thick circular supports could not be inserted 1 .
They told this matter to the Blessed One.

‘ I allow you, O Bhikkhus, to shape them 2 3 (until
they get to be the right size to fit in) V
They would not stay in (?) 4 .

‘ I allow you, O Bhikkhus, to split little pieces
of crocodiles’ teeth (to fit them in with) 5 /

Now at that time the iOlabbaggiya Bhikkhus
had painted circular linings to the bottoms of their
bowls, with painted figures scattered over them, or
painted in patches of colour 6 , and they used to
walk about the streets exhibiting them.

People murmured (&c., down to) They told this
matter to the Blessed One.

‘ You are not, O Bhikkhus, to have painted cir-
cular supports to the bottoms of your bowls, covered

1 A^Mfipiyanti. On the use of this word, compare Maha-
vagga VIII, 14, 1, where it is used of inserting a slip of cloth in a
torn garment.

2 See our note above on V, 8, 1. Buddhaghosa says here
likhitun ti tanu-kara«-atthdy’ etaw vuttazs. The ‘shaping’ may
be by carving, adzing, or planing.

3 Compare above, V, 8, 1, and see Buddhaghosa’s note at
p. 316 of the edition of the text.

4 The reading is corrupt ; and therefore this rendering is merely
conjectural. See H. O.’s note at p. 316 of his edition of the text.

5 On these split crocodiles’ teeth, see our note above on V, 1, 4.

6 Rfipakoki«»ini bhati-kamma-kat&ni. Buddhaghosa has
nothing on these words. On the second, see below, VI, 2, 7, and
H. O.’s note on that passage at p. 321 of the edition of the text.
It is most probable that the reading in both passages should be
bhatti-kamma, ‘patchwork,’ as further explained in our note
below on VI, 2, 7; and we have translated accordingly.

84

A'ULLAVAGGA.

V, 9> 3-

with figures, and painted in patches of colour.
Whosoever shall do so, shall be guilty of a dukka/a.
I allow you, O Bhikkhus, only ordinary linings.’

3. Now at that time the Bhikkhus put away their
bowls with water in them, and the bowls were split.

They told this matter to the Blessed One.

‘You are not, O Bhikkhus, to put away your
bowls with water in them. Whosoever does so,
shall be guilty of a dukka/a. I enjoin upon you,
O Bhikkhus, to dry your bowls in the sunshine 1
before putting them away.’

Now at that time the Bhikkhus dried their bowls
in the sunshine, with water in them ; and the bowls
became evil-smelling.

They told this matter to the Blessed One.

‘You are not, O Bhikkhus, to dry your bowls in
the sunshine with water in them. WTosoever does
so, shall be guilty of a dukka/a. I allow you, O
Bhikkhus, to empty out the water 2 , and then warm
the bowls, before you put them away/

Now at that time the Bhikkhus put their bowls
away in a warm place ; and the colour of the bowls
was spoilt.

They told this matter to the Blessed One.

‘You are not, O Bhikkhus, to put your bowls
away in a warm place. Whosoever does so, shall
be guilty of a dukka/a. I allow you, O Bhikkhus,
to dry your bowls for a short time in a warm place,
and then to put them away.’

1 Otapetva. The word has already occurred in MaMvagga I,
25, 16. Compare Khudda SikkM V. 6.

2 V odakaw katvt. Vodakaw bears, of course, the same relation
to sa-udaka«, used just before, as vagga does to samagga.
The expression has occurred already at MaMvagga I, 25, 13.

V,9» 4-

ON THE DAILY LIFE OF THE BHIKKHUS. 85

4. Now at that time a number of bowls were left
in the open air without supports ; and the bowls
were turned over by a whirlwind \ and broke.

They told this matter to the Blessed One.

‘ I allow you, O Bhikkhus, the use of supports
for your bowls (when they are left out).’

Now at that time the Bhikkhus put their bowls
away at the edge of the sleeping-benches in the
verandahs 2 , and the bowls fell down and were broken.

They told this matter to the Blessed One.

‘You are not, O Bhikkhus, to put your bowls
away on the edge of the sleeping-benches in the
verandah. Whosoever does so, shall be guilty of
a dukka/a.’

Now at that time the Bhikkhus put their bowls
away on the edge of the Paribha^t/a 3 , and the
bowls fell down and were broken.

They told this matter to the Blessed One.

‘ You are not, O Bhikkhus, to put your bowls
away on the edge of the Paribha^t/a. Whosoever
does so, shall be guilty of a dukka/a.’

Now at that time the Bhikkhus turned their
bowls upside down 4 on the ground, and the lips
wore out.

1 Vata-ma«</alikflya. So also in the next section and in the
Bhikkhuni-vibhanga, Pfl&ttiya 96. The reading at Gataka I, 72
is vSta-maK(fala»2.

2 Mi^Aante. This word recurs below in VI, 2, 3, where see
our note. Buddhaghosa’s note is given at p. 317 of the edition of
the text. See also Khudda Sikkha V. 7.

3 Used of a house, this probably means a plastered flooring of
scented earth or dried cowdung. See ^Tullavagga VI, 17, 1, and
Buddhaghosa’s note there. On the use of the word in tailoring, see
Mah&vagga VII, x, 5, VIII, 21. Buddhaghosa, loc. cit. (p. 317},
uses the expression mattika-paribha^a-kat&ya-bhfimiyii

4 Nikku^anti. See the use of this word at V, 20, 3.

86

rUIXAVAGGA.

V, 9, 4 -

They told this matter to the Blessed One.

‘ I allow you, O Bhikkhus, the use of a mat made

of grass V

The grass-mat was eaten- by white ants.

They told this matter to the Blessed One.

< i allow you, O Bhikkhus, the use of a small

cloth 1 2 .’

The small cloth was eaten by the white ants.

They told this matter to the Blessed One.

‘ 1 allow you, O Bhikkhus, the use of a raised
parapet (?) (on which to put your bowls) 3 4 .

The bowls fell down from the parapet and were

broken.

They told this matter to the Blessed One.

‘ I allow you, O Bhikkhus, the use of a wicker-

work stand

On the wicker-work stand the bowls wore out
They told this matter to the Blessed One.

‘ I allow you, O Bhikkhus, the use of bags to
carry your bowls in.

They had no shoulder-straps 5 6 .

1 Ti«a-santh&raka». That this word means a mat, and not
a layer, of grass is clear from its use at Gataka I, 360, and below,
V, 11, 3.

2 iifoiaka. The meaning of the word is doubtful, but see
MaMvagga VIII, 18. . In the uddana (at p. 143) the correspond- ,
ing word is £ola. See also below, VI, 3, x, VI, 19, VI, 20, 2.

3 Patta- ma/akaw. Buddhaghosa says merely, ‘It should be
made either of bricks or of wood.’ He confirms the reading of the
text (with l as against Childers’s reading m filak 0).

4 Patta-ka«(folikl ti maha-mukha-ku^a-saw/Mna bhandak-

ukkha/ika vuttati (B.). Ka^ola is a wicker-work basket; see
Bbhtlingk-Roth, sub voce.

6 See H. O.’s note on the reading here ; and compare the table
of contents to this chapter (at p. i43)> where the reading awzsa-
baddhaw confirms the suggested alteration. If there were any

V, 9) 5- ON THE DAILY LIFE OF THE BHIKKHUS. 87

They told this matter to the Blessed One.

‘ I allow you, O Bhikkhus, the use of a shoulder-
strap (by which to carry the bag), or of a piece
of string (by which to tie it on).’

5. Now at that time the Bhikkhus hung up their
bowls on pins in the walls, or on hooks 1 . The
pins or hooks falling down, the bowls were broken.

They told this matter to the Blessed One.

‘ Y ou are not, O Bhikkhus, to hang your bowls up.
Whosoever does so, shall be guilty of a dukka^a.’

Now at that time the Bhikkhus put their bowls
down on a bed 2 , or a chair ; and sitting down
thoughtlessly 3 they upset them, and the bowls were
broken.

They told this matter to the Blessed One.

‘You are not, O Bhikkhus, to put your bowls on
the bed, or on a chair. Whosoever does so, shall
be guilty of a dukka/a-.’

Now at that time the Bhikkhus kept their bowls
on their laps ; and rising up thoughtlessly they
upset them, and the bowls were broken.

further doubt it would be removed on comparing the closing words
of Mahivagga VI, 1 2, 4, which are identical with the present passage
and contain the correct reading. The same remarks apply to
other passages, where the same words occur below, V, n, 5,
V, 12, VI, 12, 3.

1 The use of these appliances is formally allowed at VI, 3, 5.

3 Mafi/fca. Compare Rh. D.’s note at p. 277 of the ‘Buddhist
Birth Stories,’ and Khuddha Sikkhl V. 7.

3 Sati-sammosa. The word occurs at Milinda-pa«ha (ed.
Trenckner), p. 260. It must be connected with mu/rta-sati, of
which the Buddhist Sanskrit equivalent is mushita-smrz'ti/z (see
Kath& Sarit Sagara 56, 289). It is evident that Childers’s original
explanation of mu//Aa-sati from mu Ik a was wrong, and that
both words must be referred to the root mush, as he points out at
p. 618 of his Dictionary.

88

JTULLAVAGGA.

V, io 3 i.

They told this matter to the Blessed' One.

‘ You are not, O Bhikkhus, to keep your bowls
on your laps. Whosoever does so, shall be guilty
of a dukka/fa.’

Now at that time the Bhikkhus put their bowls
down on a sunshade ; and the sunshade being lifted
up by a whirlwind, the bowls rolled over, and were
broken.

They told this matter to the Blessed One.

‘You are not, O Bhikkhus, to put your bowls
down on a sunshade. Whosoever does so, shall be
guilty of a dukka^a.’

Now at that time the Bhikkhus, when they were
holding the bowls in their hands, opened the door 1 .
The door springing back the bowls were broken.

They told this matter to the Blessed One.

‘You are not, O Bhikkhus, to open the door
with your bowls in your hands. Whosoever does
so, shall be guilty of a dukka/a.’

10 .

i. Now at that time the Bhikkhus went on their
round for alms, carrying water-jugs made out of
gourds 2 , or water-pots s .

1 Kava/ara pawametva. The construction of doors is de-
scribed in detail at V, 14, 3, with reference to the bath-house, and
again at VI, 2. That para&meti is to open, and not to shut, is
clear from VIII, 1, 1, just as patta m pa»ameti at VIII, 5, 2 is
to uncover, disclose, the bowl." Compare Khuddha Sikkhi V. 8.

2 Tumba-ka/ahan ti ldpu-ka/aha« vuWati (B.). Tumba
is gourd, according to Bohtlingk-Roth. See Khuddha Sikkha V. 1 x.

8 Gha/i-ka/ahan ti gha/i-kapilaw (B.). The whole section
is repeated in the text of each kind of vessel.

T, io, 3. ON THE DAILY LIFE OF THE BHIKKHUS. 89

People murmured, were shocked, and indignant,
saying, * As the Titthiyas do.’

They told this matter to the Blessed One.

‘ You are not, O Bhikkhus, to go on your rounds
for alms with water-jugs, or pots. Whosoever does
so, shall be guilty of a dukka/a.’

2. Now at that time a certain Bhikkhu, who had
taken upon himself a vow to wear or use nothing
except what he could procure from dust-heaps or
cemeteries, went on his rounds for alms carrying a
bowl made out of a skull. A certain woman saw
him, and was afraid, and made an outcry 1 , saying,

* O horror ! This is surely a devil ! ’

People murmured, were shocked, and indignant,
saying, ‘ How can the Sak yaputtiya Samaras carry
about bowls made out of skulls, as the devil-wor-
shippers 2 do ? ’

They told this matter to the Blessed One.

| ‘ You are not, O Bhikkhus, to use bowls made

out of skulls. Whosoever does so, shall be guilty
of a dukka/a. And you are not, O Bhikkhus, to
take a vow to wear or to use nothing except what
you procure from dust-heaps or cemeteries. Who-
soever does so, shall be guilty of a dukka/a,’

3. Now at that time the Bhikkhus carried out
odd bits, and bones, and dirty water 3 in their bowls.

■ People murmured, were shocked, and were in-

dignant, saying, ‘ The very vessel out of which

1 Vissaraw ak&si, on the use of which idiom see the passages
quoted below, Afullavagga VIII, i, i.

2 PisOillikt. See below, 27, 5, and MaMvagga III, 12, 3.

3 This list recurs in the Old Commentary on the roth Pd&ttiya
in the Bhikkhuni-vibhanga. As an explanation of vighasa, Buddha-
ghosa says here u£/Wittodakan ti mukha-vikkhllanodakaOT.

90

JtULLAVAGGA.

V, n, i.

these Sakyaputtiya Samaras eat, that they use as
a waste-tub !’

They told this matter to the Blessed One.

‘You are not, O Bhikkhus, to carry out odd bits,
and bones, and dirty water in your bowls. Whoso-
ever does so, shall be guilty of a dukka/a. I allow
you, O Bhikkhus, the use of a waste-tub 1 /

11 .

i. Now at that time the Bhikkhus sewed their
robes together after tearing the cloth with their
hands 2 ; and the robes became jagged.

They told this matter to the Blessed One.

‘ I allow you, O Bhikkhus, the use of a blade and
of a sheath (for the blade) made of felt 3 .’

Now at that time a blade with a haft to it 4 had
come into the possession of the Sawgha.

They told this matter to the Blessed One.

1 Pa/iggaho. Slop-basin, waste-tub, ‘receptacle’ for odd
bits. It is so used below at VIII, 4, 4.

2 Vipa/etva. The three MSS. read vippadetva, the same
corrected to vipphMetvS, and vipph&metvjL M for L is a
common mistake in Sinhalese MSS., and the correct reading may
possibly be vipphaletvS, if it is not vipphd/etva, as suggested
in IT. O.’s note, vol. v, p. 259.

s Namatakan ti satthaka-vez^anakawz pilotika-kha«fa»z (B.).
The word occurs again below at V, 19, 1, V, 27, r, and X, 10, 4
(where the nuns are forbidden to use it). Namata is felt; and
namatika-anga, the wearing of felt, is inserted by some Sanskrit
Buddhist writers in the list of Dhutangas. (Burnouf, Introduction,
&c., p. 306.)

4 Da«(fa-satthakan ti vippalikaw va anna.m pi va ya m ki nki
&&nda,m yogetvi kata-satthakawz (B.). Compare da«a'a-ka//nna»z
at V, 11, 3, and dawrfa-parissavanaw at V, 13, 3.

Y, II, 2. ON THE DAILY LIFE OF THE BHIKKHUS.

‘ I allow you, O Bhikkhus, the use of a blade
with a haft to it.’

Now at that time the JOabbaggiya Bhikkhus
used various kinds of long handles to their blades,
made of silver, and made of gold.

People murmured (&c., as usual, down to) They
told this matter to the Blessed One.

■ Y ou are not, O Bhikkhus, to use various kinds
of handles to your blades. Whosoever does so, shall
be guilty of a dukka^a. I allow you, O Bhikkhus,
the use of handles to your blades made of bone, or •
ivory, or horn, or of the na/a reed, or of bamboo,
or of hard wood, or of lac, or of the shells of fruit,
or of bronze, or of the centre of the chank-shell V I

2. Now at that time the Bhikkhus sewed their j
robes with quills or bits of bamboo rind, and the !
robes were badly sewn.

They told this matter to the Blessed One.
i ‘I allow you, O Bhikkhus, the use of needles.’

The needles got blunted 2 .

‘ I allow you, O Bhikkhus, the use of a needle- !
case made of bamboo V ‘

Even in the needle-cases the needles became blunt. !

§; f

1 This list is given in the Mahavagga VI, 12, 1 (where see our
notes), as the materials of which ointment-boxes may be made;
and below, V, 11, 5, of thimbles.

2 Kazakh a honti ti malagga-kM (B.), Mala may

[ probably here mean ‘rust/ if the needles were made of iron.

Ka^wakita, ‘spoiled/ is used of plastered walls and the floors of
a Vihara at Mahavagga I, 25, i5=j&fullavagga VIII, 1, 3; and
pawsu-kita occurs just below in our present passage. Compare
also the note on vika^^a^ in the following section.

3 Sfl^i-na/ikaw. On these needle-cases compare the Intro-
ductory Story to the 20th (r&taka. It is Pa&ttiya to have them
made of ivory, horn, or bone. (Both Pa^ittiya, but they are there
called SM-gharaw.)

fc- ■ J

92

rULLAVAGGA.

V, li, 3.

< I allow you, O Bhikkhus, to fill the cases with
chunam 1 .

Even in the chunam the needles became blunt. .

< 1 a iiow you, O Bhikkhus, to fill the cases with

barley-meal 2 * 4 * 6 * .’ i

Even in the barley-meal the needles became blunt.

< I allow you, O Bhikkhus, the use of powdered
stone V

Even in the powdered stone the needles became
blunt.

‘ I allow you, O Bhikkhus, to mix (the powder)
with beeswax V

The powder still did not cohere.

‘ I allow you, O Bhikkhus, to mix sipa^ika gum
with the powder

3. Now at that time the Bhikkhus sewed their
robes together by planting stakes here and there,
and uniting them (with strings). The robes became
out of shape V

They told this matter to the Blessed One.

‘ I allow you, O Bhikkhus, the use of a Kalina 8 ,

1 Kircraena £u««ena (B.).

2 Satthuya ti halidda-missakena pi#Aa-&i««ena (B.).

8 SaritakantipMna-^u»«a»? vu^ati (B.).

4 Madhu-sitthakena s&retun ti madhu-sitthakena makkhe-

tu m (B.). . ,

6 The use of this gum for medicine purposes is allowed at

Mahavagga VI, 7, where see our note. The present use is again

mentioned below, V, 27, 1.

6 Sarita-sibbd/ikan ti madhu-sitthaka-pilotikaffi (B.).

1 Vika««aw hoti. See the note on this expression at Maha-
vagga VI, ai, 1. The ‘ robes ’ were lengths of cloth, and ‘ out of
shape’ (yika»«aw) must mean either that one side was larger
than the other, so that each comer (ka««o) was not a right angle,
or perhaps that each edge (kawrao) was not straight.

8 What Kalina may mean in this connection is not exactly

V, IT, 3 . ON THE DAILY LIFE OF THE BHIKKHUS.

93

and that you are to sew the robes together after
tying down Ka/^ina-strings here and there.’

They spread out the Ka/iina on uneven (ground),
and the Kalina fell to pieces 1 .

'You are not, O Bhikkhus, to spread out the
Kalina on uneven (ground). Whosoever does
so, shall be guilty of a dukka/a.’

They spread out the Kalina on the ground,
and the Ka/^ina became dirty.

‘ I allow you, O Bhikkhus, the use of a grass-mat’

The edge of the Kalina decayed through age.

' I allow you, O Bhikkhus, to strengthen it by a
doubling or a binding along the edge 2 .

The Kalina was not large enough 3 .

' I allow you, O Bhikkhus, the use of a dan da-

clear to us, but it is evidently a sort of framework, or bench, for
the tailors to lay out their work upon. Our notes above on the
1 st Nissaggiya and on Mah&vagga VII, 1, 3, refer to a different
and secondary use of the word in the K a /Ain a ceremonies — •
so-called doubtless because the Ka/Aina-dussa (the supply of
cloth to be dyed, sewn, and made up into robes, and distributed,
on one and the same day) was to be so sewn with the aid of the
Ka/Aina here referred to. Buddhaghosa says here, Ka/Ainan ti
nissem pi tattha attharita-ka/asaraka-kilawAanaw a^matara^z pi
ka/Aina;^ vuAAati yaya dupa//a-Aivaraw sibbenti ka/Aine Aivara m pi
bandhanti. On Dupa//a, see Mahavagga VIII, 14, 1.

The use of obandhitv&(in reference to the Ka/Aina), in oppo-
sition to sambandhitva, (in reference to the mere stakes), is
worthy of notice.

1 Paribhi^ati. Perhaps we should translate, ‘ did not hold
together/ See the last section.

2 Anuvataw paribha«^aw. See MaMvagga VII, 1, 5,
VIII, 21, iTullavagga V, 9, 4, VI, 17, 1, XI, 1, 14, and our
notes there.

3 Ka/Ainazrc na ppahott ti dighassa bhikkhuno pama/zena
kata m ka/Ainaw tattha rassassa bhikkhuno Aivaraw patthariya-
mana/tf na ppahoti anto yeva hoti (B.).

94

ZULLAVAGGA.

V, II, 4 .

ka//zina\ of a pidalaka 1 , of a ticket, of binding
strings, and of binding threads 2 * ; and that you sew
your robes together after binding them therewith.’

The interstices between the threads became irre-
gular in length 8 .

* I allow you, O Bhikkhus, the use of little marks
(of the leaf of the talipot palm, or such-like things) 4 * .’

The threads became crooked.

‘ I allow you, O Bhikkhus, the use of false threads
(laid along the cloth to show where it is to be cut
or sewn) *.’

4. Now at that time the Bhikkhus got on to the
Kalina with unwashen feet, or wet feet, or with
their shoes on 6 * , and the Kalina was soiled.

They told this matter to the Blessed One.

‘You are not, O Bhikkhus, to get on to the
Kalina with unwashen feet, or with wet feet, or
with your shoes on. Whosoever does so, shall be
guilty of a dukka^a.’

5. Now at that time the Bhikkhus, when sewing

1 On these terms, which we do not attempt to translate, see
Buddhaghosa’s notes as quoted by H. O. at p. 317 of the edition
of the text. The first seems to be a KaMina with a cross-bar,
but da«</a at V, 11, 1, and V, 13, 3, means handle.

2 Vinandhana-ra^tm vinandhana-suttakawz. See Bud-
dhaghosa’s notes loc. cit., and compare Mahavagga V, n.

s Visamft honti ti kSii khuddakfi honti k££i mahantS (B.).
Sutta here probably means those threads or strings just referred to
by which the stuff was to be tied on to the KaMina.

4 Ka/imbhakaw : so explained by Buddhaghosa, loc. cit.

6 Mogha-suttaka«. Buddhaghosa says, ‘the making of a
mark with a green thread, as carpenters do on wood with a black
thread.’ Compare also our notes 2 and 3 on Mahavagga VII,

■h 5 -

* The whole section is repeated in the text at length for each of

these three cases.

V, II, g. ON THE DAILY LIFE OF THE BHIKKHUS. 95

their robes, held the stuff with their fingers, and
their fingers were hurt.

They told this matter to the Blessed One. ,

‘ I allow you, O Bhikkhus, the use of a thimble V J

Now at that time the W//abbaggiya Bhikkhus ‘
used various kinds of thimbles, — gold ones, and
silver ones.

People murmured, &c. The Bhikkhus heard, &c.
They told this matter to the Blessed One.

* Y ou are not, O Bhikkhus, to use various kinds
of thimbles. Whosoever does so, shall be guilty
of a dukka/a. I allow you, O Bhikkhus, thimbles (
made of bone, or ivory, or horn, or of the na/a
reed, or of bamboo, or of hard wood, or of lac, or of
the shells of fruit, or of bronze, or of the centre
of the chank-shell V

Now at that time the needles, and scissors, and
thimbles got lost.

They told this matter to the Blessed One.

‘ I allow you, O Bhikkhus, the use of a box or
drawer 3 in the workshop.’

They got crowded together in the workshop box.

They told this matter to the Blessed One.

‘ I allow you, O Bhikkhus, the use of a thimble
bag (to carry the thimbles about in).’

They had no shoulder-strap.

1 Pa/iggaho, ‘ receptacle ’ for the finger. See our note above
on V, 10, 3, where the same word means a waste-tub. For other
secondary uses of the word, see <?&taka I, 146, II, 9, 26. Buddha-
ghosa says here, pa/iggahan ti ahguli-kosakajw.

2 So of ointment-boxes, Mahavagga VII, 1 2, 1 ; and of scissors,
above, V, xi, 1.

3 Asevana-(sic)vitthaka#z n&ma yam ki«£i piti-^ango/akddi

(B.).

96

■ETULLAVAGGA.

y, ii 3 6.

They told this matter to the Blessed One.

‘ I allow you, O Bhikkhus, the use of a shoulder-
strap, or of a piece of string, to tie the bags on
with 1 .’

6 2 . Now at that time the Bhikkhus, when sewing
their robes in the open air, were distressed by heat
and by cold.

They told this matter to the Blessed One.

‘ I allow you, O Bhikkhus, the use of a hall or
of a shed for the K a Mina.’

The KaMina hall had too low a basement, and
it was inundated with water.

They told this matter to the Blessed One.

‘ I allow you, O Bhikkhus, to make it with a high
basement 3 .’

The facing (of the basement) fell in.

‘I allow you, O Bhikkhus, to line the basement
with facing of three kinds 4 5 — brick facing, stone
facing, or wooden facing.’

They found difficulty in getting up into it.

‘ I allow you, O Bhikkhus, the use of stairs of
three kinds — brick stairs, stone stairs, or wooden
stairs.’

As they were going up them they fell off.

‘ I allow you, O Bhikkhus, the use of a balustrade V

1 See our note above on V, 9, 4.

s The whole of this paragraph is repeated below, though not in
the same order, of the ATankama or cloister, and of the Gantaghara,
or bath-house. (See V, 14, 2, 3.)

* That is, to build it on a raised platform, the technical term for
which is £aya.

* See our note below on V, 14, 3. The whole passage recurs
of the lining of a well at V, 16, 2, and of Vihdras themselves at

VI, 3, 3-

5 Alambana-bahawz. At Maha-sudassana Sutta I, 59, there is

V, II? 7. ON THE DAILY LIFE OF THE BHIKKHUS, 97

Straw and plaster fell (from the walls and roof)
into the KaMina-hall.

‘ I allow you, O Bhikkhus, to first cover over
(the walls and roof with skins 1 ), and then plaster
them within and without. (And 1 allow the use of)
whitewash, and blacking, and red colouring 2 , and
wreath-work, and creeper-work, and bone hooks, and
cupboards 3 , and bamboos to hang robes on, and
strings to hang robes on/

7 . Now at that time the Bhikkhus, when they
had sewn the robes together, left the KaMina as
it was, and went away ; and the robes were eaten
by rats and white ants.

They told this matter to the Blessed One.

4 1 allow you, O Bhikkhus, to fold up the Kalina/
The KaMina came to pieces.

a description of flights of stairs (sop&n&), each of which had
thambha, evidently posts or banisters; su^iyo, apparently cross-
bars let in to these banisters ; and r mhis a?;?, either a head-line
running along the top of the banisters, or a figure-head at the
lower end of such a head-line. (See Rh. D.’s ‘Buddhist Suttas/
p. 262.) This and the previous paragraphs are repeated below,
Y, 14, 2, of the JYahkama.

1 See Mahavagga V, 11, where the same technical term
(ogumpheti) is used. Buddhaghosa’s note is given at p. 317 of
the text. See also V, 14, 3, below.

2 Geruka-parikamma?/z. This reading, and not gerika, is
confirmed by VI, 3, 1, VI, 17, 1, where the two previous words
also occur. On this mode of preparing walls and floors, see our
note below on VI, 20.

3 PafU*a-pa/ika;/z or -pa/Mikasw, a term of doubtful signi-

fication which recurs, together with all the previous words, in the
Old Commentary on the 19th PaHttiya. Compare pa^Ua-
prastha in B.R. The word is perhaps however connected with
Sanskrit pa//ika, as k e la-pa ttik am at V, 21, 2 undoubtedly is.
It occurs below, in a similar connection, at VI, 3, 1. *

[20] H

98

iTULLAVAGGA.

V, ii, 7.

* I allow you, O Bhikkhus, to fold up the KaMina
in a cow-hide (?)V

The Kalina got uncovered.

‘ I allow you, O Bhikkhus, the use of strings to
tie it up with.’

Now at that time the Bhikkhus went away, putting
the K a Mina up against the wall or a pillar; and
the K a Min a, falling over, was broken.

They told this matter to the Blessed One.

‘ I allow you, O Bhikkhus, to hang it on a stake
of the wall, or on a hook V

12 .

1. Now the Blessed One, when he had stayed at
Rd^agaha as long as he thought fit, set out on his
journey toward Vesili 1 2 3 .

Now at that time the Bhikkhus went along, carry-
ing their needles and scissors and drugs in their
bowls.

They told this matter to the Blessed One.

‘ I allow you, O Bhikkhus, the use of a bag to
carry the drugs in 4 .’

1 Go-gha;wsikaya. Compare pdda-ghawsani at 22. 1; and
on the use of sa?»harati in a similar connection, see VI, 2, 7.

2 Naga-dante. See the note on Mallaka at iTullavagga V,

ij 4*

3 This is merely introduced to show that the following rules or
privileges in this and the next chapter (§§ i, 2) were to be in force
when the Bhikkhus were on a journey.

* Neither here nor in V, 11, 5 are we to understand that the
needles and scissors are to be carried in bags. They are men-
tioned in both passages merely to show the inconvenience of having
no separate receptacles for the thimbles and the drugs.

Y, 13, i.

ON THE DAILY LIFE OF THE BHIKKHUS. 99

V

I

t:

:

They had no shoulder-strap.

‘ I allow you, O Bhikkhus, the use of a shoulder-
strap or of a string to tie the bags on with.’

Now at that time a certain Bhikkhu . tied his
sandals on to his girdle, and then entered the village
for alms 1 2 . A certain U pisaka, when saluting that
Bhikkhu, knocked up against the sandals with his
head. The Bhikkhu was annoyed ; and when he
had returned to the Arama, he told this matter to
the Bhikkhus. They told this matter to the Blessed
One.

‘ I allow you, O Bhikkhus, the use of a bag to
carry your sandals in.’

They had no shoulder-strap.

‘ I allow you, O Bhikkhus, the use of a shoulder-
strap, or of a string to tie the bags on with.’

13 .

1. Now at that time the water as they went along
could not be drunk without breaking the rules 3 , as
they had no strainers.

They told this matter to the Blessed One.

‘ I allow you, O Bhikkhus, the use of a strainer.’

The little cloth (that was used for a strainer)
was not sufficient (to filter enough water for the
whole party).

1 See the note on V, 9, 4.

2 He would require the sandals only when he came, in his
journey, to rough places ; not on the smooth, well-trodden, village
paths.

3 The rule, that is, against destroying the life of living things.

H 2

i

]

lOO

KULLAVAGGA.

V, 13, 2.

‘ I allow you, O Bhikkhus, the use of a strainer
fixed on to a ladle 1 2 .’

Still the little cloth was not sufficient for the
purpose. •

‘ I allow you, O Bhikkhus, the use of a regulation
water-pot V

2. Now at that time two Bhikkhus were travelling
along the high-road in the Kosala country. One
of the Bhikkhus was guilty of some transgression.
The other one said to him, ‘ Do not, my friend, do
such a thing. It is not becoming.’ The first one
bore a grudge against him 3 . Afterwards the other
Bhikkhu, being tormented with thirst, said to the
Bhikkhu who bore the grudge, ‘Give me, friend,
your strainer. I am going to drink some water.’
The Bhikkhu who bore the grudge would not give
it to him. The other Bhikkhu died of thirst 4 .
Then that Bhikkhu, when he had arrived at the
Arama, told this matter to the Bhikkhus.

1 Ka/a^Mu-parissavanaw nama tfeu da^akesu vinandhitva
kata m (B.).

2 Dhamma-karakaw. Doubtless a water-pot with a strainer
so fixed into it that a quantity of water could be filtered quickly.
The word occurs at Mahava»2sa, p. 90, and below, VI, 21,3.

3 So tasmi;;z up an and hi. The Introductory Story in the
Sutta-vibhahga on the 36th P&httiya is, so far, word for word the
same as this section. Buddhaghosa there explains upanandhi
by ^anita-upanaho. See vol. iv, p. 359, of H. O.’s edition of
the Vinaya Pi/aka. The Introductory Story to the 31st drdtaka is
also based on a similar incident, and there the corresponding
expression is vivada^z aka^su. (FausbolFs <?£itaka, vol. i,
p. 198.)

4 In the Gdtaka commentary this tragic result of the refusal is
absent. The Bhikkhu who has no strainer merely drinks without
straining. (Rh. D.’s ‘Buddhist Birth Stories/ vol. i, p. 278.)

v, 13 , 3-

ON THE DAILY LIFE OF THE BHIKKHUS.

IOI

‘ What then, Sir ? when asked for your strainer,
would you not lend it ? ’

‘ It is even so, Sirs.’

Those Bhikkhus who were moderate were an-

noyed and vexed, and murmured, saying, ‘ How can
a Bhikkhu, when asked for his strainer, refuse to
lend it ?’ And they told this matter to the Blessed
One.

Then the Blessed One on that occasion and in
that connection (&c., as usual, see for instance in
ATullavagga I, i, 2, down to) addressed the Bhik-
khus, and said :

‘ A Bhikkhu who is on a journey is not, O Bhik- r
khus, to refuse to lend his strainer, when he is asked
for it. Whosoever does so, shall be guilty of a \
dukka/a. And (a Bhikkhu who is) not provided
with a strainer, O Bhikkhus, is not to undertake a
journey. Whosoever does so, shall be guilty of a
dukka/a. If there be no strainer nor regulation
water-pot, the corner of the upper robe is to be
adopted 1 for the purpose of straining before drinking.’

3. Now the Blessed One, journeying straight on,
arrived in due course at Vesali. And there at
Vesili the Blessed One lodged in the Mahavana, in
the Ku/agara Hall.

Now at that time the Bhikkhus were engaged in
building 2 ; and the strainer did not act 3 .

1 Adhi//Mtabbo, that is, the Bhikkhu is to determine in his
mind that that part of his robe is a strainer for the time.

2 Navakammara karonti. On the use of this and allied
idioms, see frataka I, 92, line 22 ; ATullavagga I, 18, 1, VI, 5, 2;
Bhikkhuni-vibhanga, Paragika I, 1; Indian Antiquary XI, 29;
Senart’s KaMayana, p. 189.

3 Na sammati, which is curious. For ‘did not suffice,’ the
standing expression would be na ppahoti.

102

ZULLAVAGGA.

V, 14, 1.

They told this matter to the Blessed One.

I « 1 allow, O Bhikkhus, the use of a double strainer 1 .’

The double strainer did not act.

• ‘ I allow, O Bhikkhus, the use of a filter 2 3 * * .’

Now at that time the Bhikkhus were troubled 8

by mosquitoes.

They told this matter to the Blessed One. .

< 1 a llow, O Bhikkhus, the use of mosquito cur-
tains V

14 .

1. Now at that time at Vesali a regular service
of sweet food had been established, the laity taking
the duty in turns. The Bhikkhus, eating the sweet
food, became very sick with superfluity of humors
in their body 6 * .

Now Crivaka KomarabhaMa went to Vesali on

1 DaM^a-parissavanaw. Apparently a long box, both ends
of which strain the water, which is poured into the middle, y
means of a pipe (da«iaka). Buddhaghosa says, Dawrfa-pansa-
van an ti (sic ; only one s) ra^anakanam khira-parisivanaw viya
£atusu padesu baddha-nisemkaya sVaka m bandhitva. magghe da»-
<fake udakam asm&tabbaw. Tam ubhohi koAAasehi puretva pan-
sivati. Compare da«<fa-satthakaOT and da»^a-kathinaw,

above, V, 11, I, 3. . A , , , , .

2 Ottharaka/w nama ya m udake otthantva ghaJakena^udakaro
gawhanti. Taw hi Musu dawiakesu vetthaw bandhitvS. sabbe
pariyante udakato mo^etva ma . gght ottharitva gha/ena udakaw
gawhanti (B.).

3 Ubba/M. See Mah&vagga III, 9, i- 4 > an( i pataka I, 300.

* Makasa-ku/ika ti Aivara-kuAka (B.). Literally, a ‘mos-

quito hut,’ the walls of which are to be of cloth.

3 Ab h i s a it n a k a y a ti semh&di-dos’-ussanna-kaya (B.). This
word has already occurred at Mahavagga VI, 14, 7, where Buddha-

ghosa’s explanation is much the same. See also Mahavagga

VIII, x, 30.

Y, 14, 1. ON THE DAILY LIFE OF THE BHIKKHUS. IO3

some business or other. And on seeing the Bhik-
khus very sick with superfluity of humors, he went
up to where the Blessed One was ; and when he
had come there, he saluted the Blessed One and
took his seat on one side. And when so seated he
said to the Blessed One : ‘ The Bhikkhus, Lord, are
now very sick with superfluity of humors. It would
be well if the Blessed One were to prescribe, Lord,
for the Bhikkhus the use of the cloister 1 and of the
bath-room 2 . Thus will the Bhikkhus become con-
valescent.’

Then the Blessed One instructed, and aroused,
and incited, and gladdened Civaka KomarabhaA£a
with religious discourse. AndCivaka KomarabhaA§a,
so instructed, and incited, and aroused, and gladdened
with religious discourse, arose from his seat and
saluted the Blessed One, and keeping him on his
right hand as he passed him, departed thence. And
the Blessed One, on that occasion and in that con-
nection, convened an assembly of the Bhikkhu-
sawgha, and addressed the Bhikkhus, and said, ‘ I

1 ATankama. A straight piece of ground cleared and levelled
for the purpose of walking up and down upon for exercise and
meditation. See our note on this word at Mahivagga V, i, 14.

2 (?antaghara. See our note above on Mahavagga I, 25, 12.
It was not ordinarily used for cold baths, which were taken in the
rivers or tanks, but for a kind of hot-water bath, or perhaps steam
bath, the exact mode of taking or administering which is not as
yet certain. Several Bhikkhus took the bath at the same time, but
it is not likely that they got into the water (though the expression
uttarati is used, loc. cit, of their leaving the bath), as they
scarcely would have made vessels large enough to contain a man.
It rather seems that they sat on stools close to a large fire, and
had water poured over them. The use of this kind of bath is
forbidden to the Bhikkhunis at Afullavagga X, 27, 4.

104

tfULLAVAGGA.

V, 14 , 2 .

prescribe, 0 Bhikkhus, the use of the cloister and
of the bath-room.’

2 . Now at that time the Bhikkhus walked up and
down on a cloister on uneven ground ; and their
feet were hurt.

They told this matter to the Blessed One.

‘ I allow you, O Bhikkhus, to make it level.’

The cloister had too low a basement, and was
inundated with water h

They told this matter to the Blessed One.

‘ I allow you, O Bhikkhus, to make it with a high
basement.’

The facing of the basement fell in 2 .

‘ I allow you, O Bhikkhus, the use of facing of
three kinds — brick facing, stone facing, and wooden
facing.’

They found difficulty in getting up into it.

‘ I allow you, O Bhikkhus, the use of stairs of
three kinds — brick stairs, stone stairs, and wooden
stairs.’

As they were going up them, they fell off.

‘ I allow you, O Bhikkhus, the use of a balus-
trade.’

Now at that time the Bhikkhus, when walking up
and down in the cloister, fell down.

They told this matter to the Blessed One.
f ‘ I allow you, O Bhikkhus, to provide a railing 3
| for the cloister.’

1 All the following paragraphs are the same as above, V, 11, 6 ,
where see our notes.

* As we have pointed out above, in our note on Mahavagga V,
t, 14, it is not probable that the ATankama at first had a roof
and stairs and balustrade. These were later improvements.

3 V edika. See Maha-sudassana Sutta I, 60, and Rh. D.’s
note there (‘Buddhist Suttas,’ p. 262), and below, VI, 2, 2.

Y, 14 , 3 . ON THE DAILY LIFE OF THE BHIKKHUS. 105

r

*

■i

*

t

# 4 ,

9 "

Now at that time the Bhikkhus, when walking
up and down in the open air, were distressed by
heat and by cold.

They told this matter to the Blessed One.

‘ I allow you, O Bhikkhus, the use of a hall for
the cloister V 1

Straw and plaster fell (from the walls and roof)
into the cloister-hall.

‘ I allow you, O Bhikkhus, to first cover over
(the walls and roof with skins), and then plaster
them. (And I allow the use of) whitewash, and
blacking, and red colouring, and wreath-work, • and
creeper-work, and bone hooks, and cupboards, and
bamboos to hang robes on, and strings to hang
robes on.’

3. [The whole of the above, from the basement
down to the balustrade, is repeated of the hot-bath
house.]

The bath house had no door.

‘ I allow you, O Bhikkhus, the use of a door, with ]
door-posts and lintel 2 , with hollows like a mortar i
(for the door to revolve in 3 ), with projections to

ji 1 jTahkamana-s&lst, already referred to at MaMvagga III, 5.
i; 2 Pi/Ma-sawzgM/ara. See Childers under sanghd/'a, and
the Samanta P&sfidikfi on the 19th P&£ittiya, Kavi/a-pi/Ma
occurs in Mahavagga I, 25, 15, and in the Samanta Psis&dikt on
Pfi&ttiya 19 (compare upari-pi//Aiti at .fiullavagga VIII, 1, x),
and this and the two following phrases below, VI, 2, 1. Buddha-
ghosa has nothing on them, either here or there ; and they were
probably therefore in quite common use even in his day. The
whole of this paragraph recurs below, VI, 3, 7.

3 Udukkhalikaw. Presumably the door had no hinges, but
the upper and lower ends of one side projected into hollows pre-
pared for them in the lintel and the threshold. This suggestion is
confirmed by the connection in which these words are used at VI,
2, 1.

iOJLLAVAGGA.

V, 14, 3 *

106

,5

revolve in those hollows 1 , with rings on the door
for the bolt to work along in 2 , with a block of wood
fixed unto the edge of the door-post and containing
a cavity for the bolt to go into (called the monkey’s
head 3 ), with a pin 4 (to secure the bolt by), with a
: connecting bolt 5 , with a key-hole 6 , with a hole for
; the string with which the door can be closed, and
; with a string for that purpose V

1 Uttara-p&sakaw. See the last note. P&saka recurs also
in the next but one. Compare aggala-p&saga in Ayarahga
Sutta II, 1, 5, 2.

3 Aggala-va//i nama dvara-baMye samappama^o yeva aggalat- ,
thambho vuMati yattha tini Mttari Midd&ni katva sMiyo denti (B.).

3 Kapi-sisakaw n&ma dvstra-Mhaw v\ggh\iv& tattha pavesito
aggala-p&sako vuMati (B.). The word recurs in the Mahi-
parinibMna Sutta V, 32, where it is said of Ananda that he
kapisisakaw alambitvd a//Msi, just as in the Maha-sudassana
Sutta II, 24 it is said of the queen under similar circumstances
that she dvara-bahaw dlambitvd a//Msi. Buddhaghosa's
commentary on the word in the former of these two passages is
given by Rh. D. in his note at p. 95 of the ‘Buddhist Suttas.’

* Su£ika ti tattha (that is, kapi-sisake) ma^e Middaw katvi
pavesiti (B.). Apparently a pin to pass through the monkey's
head so as to secure the bolt in its place after it has been shot into
the cavity. See the next note and below, VI, 2, 1.

6 Gha/ika ti upari-yo^ita (B.). At (?ataka I, 360 (compare
ATullavagga IX, 1, 2), we are told of a man who dvar&ni pida-
hanto sabba-dv&resu sftMgha/ikadayo datvd talaw (sic,
query t&la m) abhiruhitva tattha pi dvaram pidahitvd nisidi.
As the principal bolt was probably called aggala (unless that were
the name for the whole machinery), this was some smaller bolt.
And in ATullavagga VIII, x, 1 an instance is given of a man
undoing the bolt (gha/ikam ugghd/etvd) of an uninhabited
vMra, such as is referred to in VI, 2, 1.

6 T&laM’/^iddaw. See the end of VI, 2, 1, and Childers under
the word t&lo. Buddhaghosa says nothing. The word tala
occurs in the last note.

7 AvmMana-M^iddam avmy&^ana-ra^uw. These are
said in VI, 2, 1 to be necessary because the door could not be put

V, 14, 3« ON THE DAILY LIFE OF THE BHIKKHUS. 107

The lower part of the wattle and daub wall 1 of
the bath-room decayed (through damp).

They told this matter to the Blessed One.

‘ I allow you, O Bhikkhus, to face round the |
lower half of the wall (with bricks 2 )/

The bath-room had no chimney 3 .

'■ I allow you, O Bhikkhus, the use of a chimney/ \
Now at that time the Bhikkhus made a fire-place j
in the middle of a small bath-room, and there was
no room to get to (the bath).

‘ I allow you, O Bhikkhus, to make the fire-
place at one side of a small bath-room, and in the

middle of a large one V

The fire in the bath-room scorched their faces.

* 1 allow you, O Bhikkhus, the use of clay to
spread over your faces V

They moistened the clay in their hands.

4 1 allow you, O Bhikkhus, the use of a trough
to moisten the clay in 6 /

to, and doubtless have the meaning above assigned to them. Avinki
(or avm^i?) at Sutta-vibhanga, Sa^ghadisesa II, 4, 9, means he
drew towards himself; and Avm£an& (avi^ana?), ibid. II, 2, 2, is
used as an equivalent of dka^^ana, which is much the same thing.

1 Ku<f<fa-pado. Compare Rh. D/s note on Maha-parinibbana
Sutta V, 41. The phrase recurs below of Viharas at VI, 3, 4.

2 Mawfi?alika^ katun ti nUa-vatthukaw &nituw (B.). Ainati
is the technical word for laying bricks one above another; the
comment therefore means ‘to line or face the lower part with
bricks/ (Compare pokkharaniyo i//^ik&hi ^inituw at Maha-
sudassana Sutta 1 , 58; Rh. D/s ‘Buddhist Suttas/p. 262, ‘to face the
ponds with bricks or tiles/ and on facing a well below, V, 16, 2.)

3 Dh&ma-nettan ti dhuma-nikkhamana-Midda?# (B.). The
word is used of a surgical instrument at Mahavagga VI, 13, 2.

4 A similar paragraph occurs below, VI, 3, 3, of Viharas.

6 Mukha-mattikaw. See our note 4 on Mahavagga I, 25, 12.

• MattikS-doflikaw. See the last w r ords of V, 16, 2.

io8

rULLAVAGGA.

V, 14, 3-

The clay had a bad smell.
c I allow you, O Bhikkhus, to scent it.

The fire in the bath-room scorched their bodies.

< 1 allow you, O Bhikkhus, to have water poured

over you.’

They poured the water out of dishes and alms-
bowls.

< 1 allow you, O Bhikkhus, a stand for the water,

and saucers 1 to pour it from.

A bath-room with a thatched roof did not pro-
duce perspiration.

< 1 allow you, O Bhikkhus, to cover the roof of
the bath-room (with skins 2 ), and to plaster it
within and without.

The bath-room became swampy.

< I allow you, O Bhikkhus, to lay the floor with
flooring of three kinds— brick flooring, stone floor-
ing, and wooden flooring.’

It still became swampy.

‘ I allow you, O Bhikkhus, to wash the floor.

The water settled on the floor.

‘ I allow you, O Bhikkhus, the use of a drain

to carry off the water 3 .’

Now at that time the Bhikkhus sat in the bath-
room on the ground, and they had pins and needles
in their limbs 4 .

1 SaMvaka?». See MaMvagga VI, 12 , 1 , and <?ataka, vol. 1, p. 8.

2 OgumphetM. See above, V, 11, 6, and our note there.

3 Udaka-niddhamanaOT. See Gataka I, 175, 4°9. 425. 4 8 9>
in which passages an entrance to, or an exit from, a palace or a
city is effected respectively niddhamana-mukhena, mddha-
mana-dv&rena, niddhamanena, and niddhamana-maggena.
Our phrase here recurs below, V, 35, 4-

* Gattani kawtfuvanti. Gatt&ni is nominative, not accu-
sative. Compare MaMvagga VI, x 4, 5. where ka*r/uv at 1 is used
in the neuter sense. The sore was irritable. )

Y, 14, 5. ON THE DAILY LIFE OF THE BHIKKHUS. IO9

■

V

■;

|f|

i

-

‘ I allow you, O Bhikkhus, the use of stools for
the bath-room.’

Now at that time the bath-room had no enclosure.

‘ I allow you, O Bhikkhus, to enclose it with
three kinds of enclosures — brick walls, and stone
walls, and wooden fences.’

4. There was no antechamber 1 (in which the
water could be kept).

‘ I allow you, O Bhikkhus, to have an antechamber.’

The basement of the antechamber was too low,
and it was inundated with water [and so on, as in
ii. 6, and in the last section down to the end of
the description of the door, followed by the closing
words of ii. 6 and of § 2 from ‘straw and plaster
fell, &c.,’ down to ‘cupboards 2 ’].

5. The cell 3 became swampy.

‘ I allow you, O Bhikkhus, to spread gravel 4 over it.’

1 Ko///iako. This word means a room without a window; and
it is used either of 1. ‘a room over a gateway,’ or 2. ‘ a room used
as a store-room.’ (Compare Mahavagga III, 5, 6, 9 ; iTullavagga

IV, 4, 6, 7, VI, 3, 7, 9, VI, 4, 10, IX, 1, 2; and Gdtaka I, 179,
227, 230, II, 168.) The whole of this paragraph recurs below,

V, 35, 4, of the ko/Zfiaka to a privy; and the two passages taken
together show that an entrance room or passage, a porch or ante-
chamber, is meant, in which the water was kept ready for use.
For that reason this particular kind of ko/Maka is elsewhere
called, in both connections, udaka-ko/Maka (Mahtvagga VI,
14, 3, of the bath-room— where see Buddhaghosa’s note quoted in
our ‘ Vinaya Texts,’ vol. ii, p. 57— and Dhammapada, p. 103, of
the privy). Buddhaghosa explains it here by dv&ra-kol/^ako ;
and it occurs again below, VIII, 8, 2, in the same sense.

2 The last two items in § 2 are supplied for this case also in the
next chapter but one.

3 Pariverca is doubtless here, and below at VIII, 8, 2 in the
same connection, a cell used as a cooling-room, after the steam bath.
Buddhaghosa says nothing here, but gives a note below, V, 35, 4.

4 Marumba. This word occurs in a description of different
kin ds of earths in the Old Commentary on the 10th Pa&ttiya

I

no

jTCJLLAV AGG A.

V, 15, 1.

They did not succeed in getting any 1 .

< 1 a Uow you, O Bhikkhus, to flag it with stone.
The water settled on the floor. _ . ,

‘ I allow you, O Bhikkhus, to have a drain to it.

15 .

1. Now at that time the Bhikkhus, when naked 2 ,
saluted one another, and received salutes ; did ser-
vice to one another, and received services ; gave to
one another, and accepted ; ate, both hard food and

soft ; tasted ; and drank.

They told this matter to the Blessed One.

< a man, O Bhikkhus, when naked, is not to give
salutations, nor receive them ; is not to do services,
nor to accept them 3 ; is not to give, nor to receive ;
is not to eat either hard or soft ; is not to taste ;
is not to drink. Whosoever does so, shall be guilty
of a dukka/a.’

16 .

1. Now at that time the Bhikkhus in the bath-
room put the robes down on the ground, and the
robes became dirty.

(Sutta-vibhanga, Pa/dttiya X, 2, 1); and in a similar connection at
Dipava«sa XIX, 2. Also below, V, 35 , 4 , VI, 3, 8.

1 Na pariyipuwanti. See the use of this phrase at ATulla-

^That is, while in the Gantaghara, which explains the other-
wise inexplicable fact of this chapter being inserted here instead of
at the commencement of 16. 2.

5 In Mah&vagga I, 25, 13, services are to be rendered to a
B hiivk.h u who is in the bath. This is permitted by 16. 2 below.

Y, 1 6 , 3. ON THE DAILY LIFE OF THE BHIKKHUS. 1 1 1

They told this.matter to the Blessed One.

‘ I allow you, O Bhikkhus, the use of a bamboo
to hang your robes on, and of a string to hang your
robes on 0

When rain fell, it fell over the robes.

‘ I allow you, O Bhikkhus, to have a hall to the
bath-room.’

The basement of the bath-room hall was too low
[&c, as in 1 1. 6 ; 14. 2 as to basement, roof-facing,
stairs, and balustrade, followed by the closing words
of 11. 6 and 14. 2, down to the end].

2. Now at that time the Bhikkhus were afraid 1 2 3
to do service to one another, both when in the bath-
room and in the water.

They told this matter to the Blessed One.

‘ I allow you, O Bhikkhus, three kinds of cover-
ings — the covering of the bath-room, the covering
of the water, and the covering by clothes V

Now at that time there was no water in the
bath-room.

They told this matter to the Blessed One.

‘ I allow, O Bhikkhus, a well.’

The facing of the well fell in 4 .

‘ I allow you, O Bhikkhus, to line the well with

1 So also above, 11. 6 (at the end), and 14. 2 (at the end).

2 On account of the rule laid down in chapter 15.

3 This rule abrogates that laid down in chapter 15, so far as
regards bathing and shampooing. Buddhaghosa says accordingly,
Tisso pa/i^Mdayo ti. Ettha ^antdghara-pa/iWMdi ka. udaka-
pa/i&£Mdi £a parikammaM karontass’ eva va//ati, sesesu abhi-
vadanadisu na va//ati. Vattha-pa/i/WMdi sabba-kammesu val/ati.

4 Kulaw lu^ati. (The reading is not without doubt.) Com-
pare Palu^ati. The same expression occurs below, V, 17, 2;
and lu^ati at MaMvagga VIII, 21, 1.

112

JTULLAVAGGA-

Y, 16, 2®

facings of three kinds 1 — brick facing, stone facing,
and wooden facing.’

[Then follow the paragraphs as to the high base-
ment, the facing of the roof, the stairs, and the
balustrade, as in n. 6 ; 14. 2 ; and above, § 1 2 .]

Now at that time the Bhikkhus drew water with
jungle-rope 3 , or with their waistbands.

I allow you, O Bhikkhus, the use of a string
rope to draw water with.’

Their hands were hurt (by the rope).

4 I allow you, O Bhikkhus, the use of a long pole
balanced as a lever 4 , of a bullock machine 5 , or of a
wheel and axle 6 .’

1 Jfimtum tayo iaye. See our note 4 above on V, 14, 3, and
the passages there quoted. The whole passage occurs V, 11, 6.

2 All this refers doubtless to the kind of shed or portico to be
erected over the well (See below.) One would expect that the
formal licence for such ama«^apa would have been inserted here
in due course as above, n. 6, for the Ka/Mna-sItlsL

3 This is the usual Anglo-Indian term for the creepers so com-
monly used for such purposes. The Pali word is vallika., which
occurs in a different sense at V, 2, 1.

4 Tula. This is the ordinary and simple machine, so common
in all countries where irrigation is carried on, for raising water from
canals or from shallow wells. Buddhaghosa says here: Tulan
ti pmnikknam viya udaka-abbMhana-tull Pazz^ika is e florist ’
(see (rataka I, 41 1, II, 180). Abb hah ana must be wrong (see Sutta
Nip&ta III, 8, 8) ; possibly abbhav&hana is the correct reading.

6 The name of this machine is spelt differently in the MSS.
(karaka/ahka the Sinhalese MS., and karaka^aka the Bur-
mese MSS.), and the reading is doubtful. Buddhaghosa says :
Dakadaka/ako (sic! In the next note but two the same MS.
reads ka/adaka/ake) vuMati gozze va yo^etva hatthehi vi gahetvl
digha-varatt&dihi &ka</d7zana-yanta;v2, We can only say negatively
that the word can have nothing to do either with karka/aka, a hook
in the form of a crab’s claw; or with kara-kazz/aka, finger-nail
6 ATakkava/Zakaw, on which Buddhaghosa has the unintelli-
gible note arahatta(!)-gha/i-yantaw.

Y, 1 6 , 2 . ON THE DAILY LIFE OF THE BHIKKHUS. 1 1 3

A number of pots were broken.

‘ I allow you, O Bhikkhus, water-vessels 1 of three {
kinds — brass pots, wooden pots, and skins V ' j

Now at that time the Bhikkhus, when drawing
water in the open air, suffered from heat and cold.

‘ I allow you, O Bhikkhus, to build a shed over
the well V

Straw and plaster fell into the building over
the well.

‘ I allow you, O Bhikkhus, to cover the shed with
skins, and to plaster it within and without ; and I
allow the use of whitewash, blacking, red-colouring,
wreath work, creeper work, cupboards, bamboos to
hang robes on, and strings to hang robes on.’

The well was uncovered, and it was littered over
with grass, and plaster, and dirt.

‘I allow you, O Bhikkhus, a lid 4 to the well.’

Water- vessels were found wanting.

‘ I allow you, O Bhikkhus, the use of troughs 5
and basons.’

1 Varake. The spelling of this word in Childers’s Dictionary
(variko) is a misprint. Both the passages he quotes read
varako. Other water-vessels, besides these three, are allowed by
the closing rule of this chapter.

2 Jfa.mma-kha.nda.m nama thlaya va ka/adakazhke vei yo^etab-
bawz Zi'amma-bhag-anaM (B.). The rendering adopted by Childers
from Tumour (MaMva^sa, p. 3) is therefore incorrect.

3 The following passage has already occurred above, V, 11, 6
and V, 14, 3.

* Apidh&na»z. See Mahavagga VI, 12, 2.

5 Udaka-dowiw. At (?&taka I, 450, such a dorai is said to
have been made out of the trunk of a tree. Compare the use of
mattikS.-do«ika»z at V, 14, 3.

C^°]

l

H4

rULLAVAGGA.

V, 17, I.

17 .

i Now at that time the Bhikkhus used to bathe
anywhere all over the Arima, and the Artaia be-
came muddy.

They told this matter to the Blessed One.

‘I allow you, O Bhikkhus, a pool (at the entrance

to the Arama).’

The pool was public, and the Bhikkhus were

ashamed to bathe in it. _

‘I allow you, O Bhikkhus, to surround it with
enclosures of three kinds— brick walls, stone walls,
and wooden fences *.

The pool became muddy.

< i allow you, O Bhikkhus, to flag it with three
kinds of flooring— brick flooring, stone flooring, or
wooden flooring/

The water settled.

I *1 allow yotvO Bhikkhus, a drain.

I Now at that time the Bhikkhus limbs became cold.
They told this matter to the Blessed One.

‘ I allow you, O Bhikkhus, to make use, of a
towel 1 2 , and to wipe the water off with a cloth.’

2 . Now at that time a certain Upasaka was
desirous of making a tank for the use of the
Sawgha.

They told this matter to the Blessed One.

| ‘ X allow you, O Bhikkhus, a tank.

' The sides of the tank fell in 3 .

1 So also the closing words of V, 14, 3.

2 Udaka-punMani. This is also mentioned in the Old
Commentary on the 86th Pa&ttiya. The verb recurs in the same
sense below, VI, 3, 1.

3 Kftlam lu^ati. See V, 16, 2.

V, 18, i. ON THE DAILY LIFE OF THE BHIKKHUS. 115

‘ I allow you, O Bhikkhus, to line the tank with
facing of three kinds — brick facing, stone facing, and
wooden facing.’

They found difficulty 1 in getting into it.

‘ I allow you, O Bhikkhus, flights of stairs of three
kinds — brick steps, stone steps, and wooden steps.’

While going up them, they fell down.

‘ I allow you, O Bhikkhus, a balustrade.’

The water in the tank became stale.

1 1 allow you, O Bhikkhus, the use of pipes to lay
on the water 2 , and to drain the water off 3 /

Now at that time a certain Bhikkhu was desirous
of erecting a bath-room with a nillekha 4 roof for
the use of the Sa»zgha.

They told this matter to the Blessed One.

‘ I allow you, O Bhikkhus, a bath-room with such
a roof to it.’

18 .

1 . Now at that time the .Oabbaggiya Bhikkhus
separated themselves from the mats on which they
sat down for four months 5 .

They told this matter to the Blessed One.

‘ Y ou are not, O Bhikkhus, to separate yourselves
for four months from the mats on which you sit

1 Viha?Mianti. See V, 11,6.

2 Udakdyatikan ti udakassa dgamana-mattikazs (B.). Com-
pare dyataka at IX, 1, 3.

3 See above our note on V, 14, 3.

4 Nillekha-^antdgharaffz ndma dviddha-pakkha-pasakazs
vu&Sati. Gopdnastnazs upari-masrfale pakkha-pasake ^apetvd
kata-ku/a-MAadanass' etaw namazs (B.).

8 Compare the 2nd Nissaggiya.

I 2

XULLAVAGGA. Y> 19, 1.

down. Whosoever does so, shall .be guilty of a

Now at that time the jOabbaggiya Bhikkhus lay
down to sleep on beds scattered over with flowers.

People who came on a visit to the Vihdras saw
it, and murmured, &c., saying, ‘ Like those w o sti
live in the pleasures of the world.’

They told this matter to the Blessed One.

‘You are not, O Bhikkhus, to sleep on beds
scattered over with flowers. Whosoever does so,

shall be guilty of a dukka^a.’ a

Now at that time people came to the Arama,
bringing perfumes and garlands. The Bhikkhus,
fearing to offend, would not accept them.

They told this matter to the Blessed One.

< I allow you, O Bhikkhus, to accept the perfume,
and to apply it to the door for a space of five finger-
breadths 1 ; and to accept the flowers, and put them
on one side in the Vihara.

19 .

i. Now at that time a sheath of felt 2 had come
into the possession of the Sawgha.

They told this matter to the Blessed One.

‘ I allow you, O Bhikkhus, a sheath.

The Bhikkhus considered whether a sheath was a
thing which each one might keep for himself, or a
thing which ought to be handed over from time to
time by one Bhikkhu to another.

1 Kava/e paw£angulika»2 datuw, on which Buddhaghosa has
no note. This measure occurs in (rttaka I, 166, 192 ; Fausboll s
* Five (ratakas ’ 6 ; and Mahavamsa, p. 193.

2 Namatakaw. See V, n, 1.

ON THE DAILY LIFE OF THE- BHIKKFIUS. 1 1 7

‘A sheath, O Bhikkhus, is neither to be appro-
priated nor to be handed over V

Now at that time the A^abbaggiya Bhikkhus
used to eat lying on decorated divans.

People murmured, See saying, ‘ Like those

still living in the pleasures of the world/

They told this matter to the Blessed One.

‘You are not, O Bhikkhus, to eat lying on decor-
ated divans 1 2 . Whosoever does so, shall be guilty of
a dukka/a.’

Now at that time a certain Bhikkhu was sick, and
when eating he was not able to hold his bowl in his
hand.

They told this matter to the Blessed One.

* I allow, O Bhikkhus, the use of a stand for the
bowl 3 /

Now at that time the W/zabbaggiya Bhikkhus
used to eat out of one dish, to drink out of one
vessel, and to lie on one bed, one coverlet, or
one mat 4 .

The people murmured, &c

They told this matter to the Blessed One.

1 Na adhi//Mtabba»z na vikappetabbawz. That is, it is
always to be kept as common property of the Sawgha (Sawzghika).
See MaMvagga VIII, 20, 2, where the same expressions occur.

2 Asittakfipadhanawz nama tamba-lohena v& ra^-atena va
kat&ya pe/aya (MS. belaya) etavz adhivaianazw. The use of an
ubhato-lohitakupadhanazzz is condemned, among other things
of a like kind, in the MaggMma, Sila, § 5 (Rh. D.’s ‘Buddhist
Suttas,’ p. 193), and above, Mahavagga V, xo, 2.

* Ma/oriki ti dazz</adMrako vu&feti. Ya#/zh 4 dh&raka-pa«?za-
dh&raka-pa&Wita-pi//Mni pi etth’ eva pavi///zani. Adharaka-sawz-
khepana-gamanato hi pa/^aya Middazzz viddhazzz pi aviddhazzz pi
va//ati yeva (B.).

* All these words have already occurred above at Aullavagga I,

13, 1. ‘ Sitting on one seat’ is there added to the list.

JtUIXAVAGGA.

V, 20, i.

u8

< You are not, O Bhikkhus, [to do any of these
things.] Whosoever does so, shall be guilty of a
dukka/a.’

20 .

l. Now at that time Vaddka the Uikkhavi was
a friend of the Bhikkhus who were followers of
Mettiya and Bhumma^aka 1 . Now V addha the
Uikkhavl went up to the place where those Bhik-
khus were, and on arriving there he said to them,
‘My salutation to you, Sirs!’ When he had thus
spoken, the Bhikkhus who were followers of Mettiya
and Bhumma^'aka gave him no reply. And a second
and a third time [he said the same words, and still
received no reply].

‘ Wherein have I offended you, Sirs ? Why do
you give me no reply?’

‘ Therein, that you, friend, sit contented while we
are being molested by Dabba the Mallian.’

‘ But what, Sirs, can I do ? ’

‘ If you wished it, friend, to-day even would the
Blessed One expel Dabba the Mallian.

‘ But what shall I do, Sirs ? What is that it is in
my power to do ?’

‘ Come then, friend V addha . Do you go up to the
place where the Blessed One is, and when you have
come there, say as follows: “This, Lord, is neither
fit nor becoming that the very quarter of the heavens
which ought to be safe, secure, and free from danger,

1 These are two of the Z^abbaggiya Bhikkhus; and the evil
deeds -of the followers form the subject of Aullavagga IV, 4, 5 and
following sections. Our sections x, 2 are nearly the same as
§§ 8, 9 there.

V, 20, 3- ON THE DAILY LIFE OF THE BHIKKHUS. I 1 9

that from that very quarter should arise danger,
calamity, and distress — that where one ought to
expect a calm, that just there one. should meet a
gale ! Methinks the very water has taken fire 1 My
wife has been defiled by Dabba the Mallian ! ” ’

2. ‘Very well, Sirs!’ said Vz.ddhz. the LiM^avi,
accepting the word of the followers of Mettiya and
Bhumma/aka. And he went up to the Blessed One
[and spake even as he had been directed].

Then the Blessed One, on that occasion and in
• that connection, convened a meeting of the Bhikkhu-
sa^zgha, and asked the venerable Dabba the Mallian :

‘ Are you conscious \ Dabba, of having done such
a thing as this Vadd/iSL says ?’

‘As my Lord, the Blessed One, knows.’

[And a second, and a third time, the Blessed
One asked the same question, and received the
- same reply.]

‘The Dabbas, O Dabba, do not thus repudiate.
If you have done it, say so. If you have not done
it, say you have not.’

‘ Since I was born, Lord, I cannot call to mind
that I have practised sexual intercourse, even in a

I dream, much less when I was awake !’

3. Then the Blessed One addressed the Bhikkhus,
and said ; ‘ Let then the SaMgha, O Bhikkhus, turn
the bowl down 2 in respect of Va ddka the LL&£iavi,

1 See the note above on IV, 4, 9.

2 Patta m nikku^atu. This phrase is used in the ordinary
signification above, V, 9, 4. It is characteristic of the mildness of
early Buddhism that this should be the only penalty imposed upon
a layman. Compare H. 0 /s remarks in his 4 Buddha, sein Leben,
seine Lehre, seine Gemeinde,’ pp. 391-393. The house of such a
layman becomes then an agoiaro, an 4 unlawful resort/ (iTulla»
vagga VIII, 1,2.)

120 irULLAVAGGA. V, 20, 4.

and make him incapable of granting an alms to the
Sawgha 1 .

‘ There are eight things, 0 Bhikkhus, which when
they characterise an Up is aka, the bowl is to be
turned down in respect of him ; — when he goes
about to bring loss of gifts on the Bhikkhus, when
he goes about to bring harm to the Bhikkhus,
when he goes about to cause the Bhikkhus to
want a place of residence, when he reviles or
slanders the Bhikkhus, when he causes divisions
between Bhikkhus and Bhikkhus ; — when he speaks
in dispraise of the Buddha ; — when he speaks in dis-
praise of the Dhamma ; — when he speaks in dispraise
of the Samgha. I allow you, O Bhikkhus, to turn
down the bowl in respect of an Upasaka who is
characterised by these eight things 2 /

4. ‘And thus, O Bhikkhus, is the bowl to be
turned down. Some able and discreet Bhikkhu is
to lay the matter before the Saiwgha, saying,

1 Asambhogawz sawzghena karotu. This phrase is used in
regard to a Bhikkhu at ATullavagga I, 25, 1, as the distinctive mark
of the Act of Suspension (Ukkhepaniya-kamma), and there
means * depriving him of his right to eat and dwell with the other
Bhikkhus.’ Sambhoge an&patti at MaMvagga I, 79, 2 (at the
end), means that it is not an offence for the Bhikkhus to eat and
dwell together with a guilty Bhikkhu under certain conditions there
specified. As an Up&saka never, under any circumstances, either
eats or dwells together with the Bhikkhus (in P&iittiya 5 the refer-
ence is to sfimaraeras), the meaning here must be to make him one
who has no dealings with the Sawzgha, to withdraw his privilege of
providing food or lodging for the Samgha. The sabho^anaw
kulawz in the 43rd Pa&ttiya has probably nothing to do with this.

* When a Bhikkhu behaves towards the laity in any one of the
first five of these eight ways the Pa/is£ra»iya-kamma is to be
carried out against him— that is to say, he has to ask pardon of
the layman against whom he has offended. See I, 20. The
whole eight recur below, § 6.

V, 20 , g. ON THE DAILY LIFE OF THE BHIKKHUS. 1 2 I

‘“Let the venerable Sa»zgha hear me. V addha
the Wkkhaxi has brought a groundless charge
against the venerable Dabba the Mallian of a
breach of morality. If the time seems meet to
the Sa^zgha, let the Sawgha turn down the bowl
as respects V addha the lAkkkavi, and make him
as one who has no dealings with the Sa»zgha.

‘ “ This is the motion (watti).

‘ “V addha the XJ\kkhav\ has brought a groundless
charge against Dabba the Mallian of a breach of
morality. The Sawgha turns down the bowl as
respects V addha the lAkkkavi, and makes him as
one who has no dealings with the Sa?»gha. Who-
soever of the venerable ones approves of the bowl
being turned down as regards Yaddka the hikkkavi,
and of making him as one who has no dealings with
the Sawzgha, let him keep silence. Whosoever ap-
! proves not thereof, let him speak.

‘ “ The bowl is turned down by the Sa^zgha as
regards V addha the YAkkhaxl, he is as one who has
no dealings with the Sawgha. The Samgha ap-
proves thereof. Therefore is it silent. Thus do
I understand.” ’

5. Then the venerable Ananda, having dressed
himself early in the morning, went, duly bowled
and robed, to the residence of V addha the Lihhhavi.
And when he had come there he spake to V addha-
the Likkkavl, and said: ‘The bowl, friend \ T addha,
has been turned down by the Sawzgha as regards
you, and you are as one who has no dealings with
the Sa»zgha. ; And N addha the Wkkhaxx, on hearing
that saying, immediately 1 fainted and fell.

1 Literally, ‘ on that very spot.’

122

ffULLAVAGCA.

V, 20, 5.

Then the friends and companions oiNaddha the
Lfoiiavp and his relatives of one blood with him,
said to_ him : ‘ It is enough, friend Vaddha. Weep
not, neither lament. We will reconcile 1 the Blessed
One to you, and the Order of Bhikkhus.’

And VaddAa.' the Lik&havi, with his wife and his
c nldren, and with his friends and companions, and
with his relatives of one blood with him, went up,
with wet garments and with streaming hair, to the
place where the Blessed One was ; and when he had
come there, he cast himself down with his head at
the feet of the Blessed One, and said : ‘ Sin has
oveicome me, Lord — even according to my weak-
ness, according to my folly, according to my un-
righteousness— in that without ground I brought a
charge against Dabba the Mallian of a breach of
morahty In respect thereof may my Lord the
Blessed One accept the confession I make of my
sm m its sinfulness 3 , to the end that I may in
future restrain myself therefrom 3 .’

Verily, O friend ~\faddka, sin hath overcome
you— even according to your weakness, and ac-
cording to your folly, and according to your un-
rig teousness— m that you brought without ground
against Dabba the Mallian a charge of breach of
morality. But since you, O friend Va, Ufa, look
upon your sin as sin, and make amends for it as is
meet we do accept at your hands your confession of
it For this, O friend Vaddka, is the advantage of

1 “ 1S 18 P^cisely the expression made use of in the convert
a Bhlkkhu has offended against the laity. See I, 22, 3
a ^ayato pa%a«hStu. See the parallel D as-

""TvapL ^ ^ 9 ’ VII > 3. 6, L P "

khu IV xl Sa ^ Varaya ‘ So also a ' 30ve of an offending Bhik-

V, so, 7- ON THE DAILY LIFE OF THE BHIKKHUS. 1 23

the discipline of the noble one, that he who looks
upon his sin as sin, and makes amends for it as is
meet, he becomes able in future to restrain himself
therefrom V

6. Then the Blessed One addressed the Bhikkhus,
and said : ‘ Let then the Saswgha turn up the bowl
again as regards Varf& the Li^Mavi, and make
him as one who has dealings with the Sawgha.

‘ There are eight things, O Bhikkhus, which when
they characterise an Upisaka the bowl should be
turned up again as regards him ; — when he goes
not about to bring loss of gifts on the Bhikkhus,
when he goes not about to bring harm to the
Bhikkhus, when he goes not about to cause the
Bhikkhus to want a place of residence, when he
reviles or slanders not the Bhikkhus, when he
causes not divisions between Bhikkhus and Bhik-
khus ; — when he speaks not in dispraise of the
Buddha; — when he speaks not in dispraise of the
Dhamma ; — when he speaks not in dispraise of the
Sa;;?gha.

7. ‘And thus, O Bhikkhus, is the bowl to be
turned up 1 2 . That Vaddha the LiiMavi should go
before the Saz/zgha, with his upper robe arranged
over one shoulder 3 , and squatting down, and raising

1 Sa.mva.ra.rn apa^ati. Compare the use of vikappara
ipaggeyya in the 8th Nissaggiya.

2 The following paragraphs are precisely the same as those in
which the revocation of the Ta^aniya-kamma is described in
the reverse case of a Bhikkhu, above, I, 8.

3 Ekawsa« uttarasahgazrc karitva. Unless these words
have been introduced by mistake from the corresponding pas-
sage in I, 8 (which is not probable), they show that the ut-
tarasanga (on which see the note on Mahtvagga VIII, 13, 4)
was also worn by laymen. But this is the only passage known to

iTULLAVAGGA.

V, 20, 7.

124

his hands with the palms joined together, should
speak as follows :

‘ “ The bowl has been turned down against me,
Sirs, by the Sazzzgha, and I am become as one
having no dealings with the Sawgha. I am con-
ducting myself, Sirs, aright in accordance thereto,
and am broken in spirit 1 , and I seek for release ;
and I request the Sawgha for a turning up again of
the bowl.”

‘And a second time he is to prefer the same
request, and a third time he is to prefer the
same request in the same words.

‘Then some discreet and able Bhikkhu should
lay the matter before the Samgha, saying,

Let the venerable Sawgha hear me. The bowl
has been turned down by the Sawzgha against V addha
the Likkhavi, and he is conducting himself aright in
accordance thereto, and is broken in spirit, and
seeks for release, and requests the Sawgha for a
turning up again of the bowl. If the time seems
meet to the Sa/zzgha, let the Sawgha turn up the
bowl again as regards Vaddha. the Li/bb&avi, and make
him as one who has dealings with the Sawgha.

‘ “ This is the motion (zzatti).

‘ “ Let the venerable Samgha hear me. The bowl
has been turned down (&c., as before), and he is
conducting himself (&c., as before), and he requests
the Samgha (&c., as before). The Samgha turns
up again the bowl as regards Vaddha the Hkkhavx,
and makes him as one who has dealings with the

us in the earlier literature in which such a use of it is mentioned or
implied. Compare Rh. D.’s note on the ‘Book of the Great
Decease,’ VI, 26.

1 Lomaw patemi. See the note on -Vullavagga I, 6, 1.

Y, 21, I. ON THE DAILY LIFE OF THE BHIKICHUS.

125

Sazzzgha. Whosoever of the venerable ones ap-
proves thereof, let him keep silence; whosoever
approves not thereof, let him speak.

‘ “ The bowl is turned up again by the Sazzzgha as
regards Va.ddka. the IJikkh^vi, and he is as one who
has dealings with the Saz/zgha. The Sazzzgha ap-
proves thereof. Therefore is it silent. Thus do I
understand.” '

21 .

1. Now the Blessed One, when he had stayed at
Vesdli as long as he thought fit, set out on his
journey toward Bhagga \ And journeying straight
on he arrived in due course at Bhaggi. And there
at Bhagga the Blessed One resided on the Dragon’s
Hill, in the hermitage in the Bhesaka/a Wood 1 2 .

Now at that time Bodhi the king’s son’s mansion,
which was called Kokanada, had just been finished,
and had not as yet been used 3 by Samazza, or by
Brdhman, or by any human being. And Bodhi the
king’s son gave command to the young Brahman,
the son of the Sazzgika woman 4 , saying, ‘ Come

1 Bhaggesu. Compare Buddhaghosa’s note on a similar plural
at MaM-parinibbana Sutta III, 5, quoted in Rh. D.’s ‘ Buddhist
Suttas from the Pali,’ p. 24.

2 This place is also mentioned in the Sutta-vibhanga on the 55th
and 56th Sekhiyas.

8 Ana^Mvuttho, literally, no doubt, ‘dwelt in.’ But itr is
clear that the meal afterwards taken in it by the Buddha was sup-
posed to be the dedication, so to say, or the house-warming, after
which it was a^Mvuttho.

4 On this habit of naming people after the family or tribal (not
the personal) name of their mothers, see Rh. D.’s note in his
‘Buddhist Suttas,’ p. 1.

126 SULLA' VAGGA. V, 21 , 2 .

now, my friend Sa?Xgika-putta, go thou to the place
where the Blessed One is, and when you have come
there, bow down in salutation at his feet on my
behalf, and enquire in my name whether he is free
from sickness and suffering, and is in the enjoyment
of ease and comfort and vigorous health, saying,

“ Bodhi the king’s son, Lord, bows down in saluta-
tion at thy feet, and enquires [as I have said] \ and
asks : ‘ May my Lord the Blessed One consent to
take his to-morrow’s meal with Bodhi the king’s son,
together with the Sawgha of Bhikkhus.’ ” ’

‘ Even so, Sir ! ’ said the young Brahman Sa%ik&-
putta, in assent to Bodhi the king’s son. And he
went up to the place where the Blessed One was,
and when he had come there he exchanged with the
Blessed One the greetings and compliments of
friendship and civility. And when he had done
so, he took his seat on one side, and so seated he
[delivered to him the message even as the king’s
son had commanded]. And the Blessed One gave,
by silence, his consent.

2. And when the young Brahman Sa^ikd-putta
had perceived that the Blessed One had consented,
he arose from his seat, and went up to the place
where Bodhi the king’s son was. And when he had
come there, he said to him : ‘We have spoken, Sir,
in your behalf to that venerable Gotama, saying
(&c., as before), and have received the consent of
the Samara Gotama.’ .

Then Bodhi the king’s son made ready at the end

1 So far this conversation is the stock phrase for a message
from a royal personage to the Buddha. See 4 Book of the Great
Decease,’ I, 2 (Rh. D.’s 1 Buddhist Suttas,’ p. 2).

V, 21, 2. ON THE DAILY LIFE OF THE BHIKKHUS. 12/

of that night sweet food, both hard and soft; and
had the mansion Kokanada spread over with white
cloths even unto the last planks in the flight of
steps (at the entrance) 1 ; and gave command to the
young Brahman Sa«ybka-putta, saying, ‘ Come now,
my friend Saw/ika-putta, go thou up to the place
where the Blessed One is ; and when you have come
there, announce the time, saying, “ The meal, Lord,
is ready, and the time has come.” ’

‘ Even so, Lord,’ said Sa%ikct-putta in assent
[and went to the Blessed One and announced
accordingly].

Now the Blessed One, having dressed himself
early in the morning, went, duly bowled and robed,
to Bodhi the king’s son’s mansion. And Bodhi the
king’s son stood at that time at the portico over the
outer door to welcome the Blessed One. And he
saw the Blessed One coming from afar; and on
seeing him he went forth thence to meet him, and
when he had saluted the Blessed One, he returned
again to the mansion Kokanada.

Now the Blessed One stopped at the last plank
on the flight of steps at the entrance. And Bodhi the
king’s son said to the Blessed One, ‘ May my Lord
the Blessed One walk over the cloths. May the
Happy One walk over the cloths, that the same
may be to me for a long time for a weal and for
a joy.’

And when he had thus spoken, the Blessed One
remained silent. And a second time he [preferred
the same request in the same words with the same

1 Sopana-ka/ingara. Compare the Sanskrit Ivaiafikara
(also written kadahgara). The correct reading is doubtless /,
not 1.

128

•STULLAVAGGA.

V, 21, 3.

result]. And a third time he [preferred the same
request]. Then the Blessed One looked round at
the venerable Ananda.

And the venerable Ananda said to Bodhi the
king’s son, ‘ Let them gather up, O prince, these
cloths. The Blessed One will not walk on a strip
of cloth (laid down for ceremonial purposes) 1 . The
Tath&gata has mercy even on the meanest thing.’

3. Then Bodhi the king’s son had the cloths
gathered up, and spread out a seat on the top of
Kokanada. And the Blessed One ascended up into
Kokanada, and sat down on the seat spread out
there with the Sa?;zgha of Bhikkhus. And Bodhi
the king’s son satisfied the Bhikkhu-sa»zgha with
the Buddha at their head with the sweet food, both
hard and soft, waiting upon them with his own
hand 2 . And when the Blessed One had cleansed
his bowl and his hands, he (Bodhi) took his seat
on one side. And the Blessed One instructed, and
roused, and incited, and gladdened him thus sitting
with religious discourse. And when he had been thus
instructed, and roused, and incited, and gladdened

1 iTela-pattikS ti /£ela-santhara?«, says Buddhaghosa. See
paZ/ikS. in Childers, and compare paw/la-pa/Mikaw at V, n, 6.
.STela is not merely ordinary cloth ; it is cloth regarded as a means
of giving a decorative or festive appearance to a house by spread-
ing canopies, &c. See (Jataka I, 178, and Maha-parinibbana
•Sutta VI, 26 (p. 64). On such festive occasions the whole house
(or the Mandapa, erected in special honour of the guest) is
covered with lengths of clean cotton cloth — the same as are other-
wise used for ordinary apparel — white being the colour signifying
peculiar respect. It is such lengths of cloth so used honoris
causS. that are called ^ela-pattikS, Compare Rh. D.’s note in
‘ Buddhist Suttas,’ p. 122.

2 See the note above on Mah&vagga I, 8, 4. •

V, 21, 4. ON THE DAILY LIFE OF THE BHIICKHUS.

129

with religious discourse, Bodhi the king’s son rose
from his seat and departed thence.

Then the Blessed One, on that occasion and in
that connection, convened an assembly of the
Bhikkhu-sawgha, and after he had delivered a
religious discourse, he addressed the Bhikkhus and
said :

‘You are not, O Bhikkhus, to walk upon cloth
laid down (for ceremonial purposes). Whosoever
does so, shall be guilty of a dukkazfa.’

4. Now at that time a certain woman who had
had a miscarriage, and had invited the Bhikkhus,
and spread cloths in their honour, said to them,
‘ Step, Sirs, over the cloth.’

The Bhikkhus, fearing to offend, would not
do so.

‘ Step, Sirs, over the cloth, for good luck’s sake.’

The Bhikkhus, fearing to offend, would not
do so.

Then that woman murmured, was annoyed, and
was indignant, saying, ‘ How can their reverences
refuse to step over the cloth when they are asked
to do so for good luck’s sake V

The Bhikkhus heard of that woman’s murmuring,
and being annoyed, and indignant. And they told
this matter to the Blessed One.

‘I allow you, O Bhikkhus, when asked to do so
for the sake of good luck to laymen, to step over
cloth laid down for ceremonial purposes.’

Now at the time the Bhikkhus were afraid to step
on to a mat to be used for wiping the feet 1 .

They told this matter to the Blessed One.

1 Dhota-p&daka.
[20] K

130

isTULLAVAGGA.

y, 22, i.

‘ I allow you, O Bhikkhus, to step on to a mat to
be used for wiping the feet.’

Here ends the second Portion 1 for Recitation.

22 .

i. Now when the Blessed One had remained at
Bhagga as long as he thought fit, he set out on his
journey towards Savatthi. And journeying straight
on he arrived in due course at Sivatthi, and there,

A

at Savatthi, he stayed in the Aetavana, in the Arama
of Anatha-pmAka.

Now Visdkhd the mother of Migara, bringing
small jars 2 , and earthenware foot-scrubbers 3 , and
brooms, went up to the place where the Blessed
One was ; and when she had come there, she
saluted the Blessed One, and took her seat on
one side. And so sitting, Vi sakha the mother of
Migara said to the Blessed One, ‘ May the Blessed
One accept these things at my hands, that that may
be to me for long for a blessing and a joy.’ And the
Blessed One accepted the small jars and the brooms ;
but the Blessed One did not accept the earthenware
foot-scrubbers.

1 There is no mention in the text of where the first such Portion
(Bh&zzav&ra) ends. There is also no division into Bhsiwavaras
in the previous books of the Afullavagga.

2 Gha/akaffz. At (xataka I, 32 this word seems to mean the
capital of a pillar. We have taken it as the diminutive of gha/a,
especially as Buddhaghosa says nothing; but this is doubtful.

8 Katakawz. To the note quoted at p. 318 of the text, which
shows that this is a kind of foot-rubber, Buddhaghosa adds that
this article is forbidden bfthulikfinuyogattfi. This injunction
is repeated below at V, 37, where kataka is mentioned as a kind
of earthenware.

V, 23, i. ON THE DAILY LIFE OF THE BHIKKHUS. 1 3 1

Then the Blessed One instructed (&c., as usual,
see 21. 2, down to) she departed thence. And the
Blessed One, on that occasion and in that con-
nection, after having delivered a religious discourse,
addressed the Bhikkhus, and said :

‘ I allow you, O Bhikkhus, small jars and brooms. !
You are not, O Bhikkhus, to make use of earthen-
ware foot-scrubbers. Whosoever does so, shall be
guilty of a dukka/a. I allow you, O Bhikkhus,
three kinds of things to rub the feet with — to wit,
sandstone l 2 , gravel \ and sea-foam V
2. [A similar paragraph ending]

‘ I allow you, O Bhikkhus, the use of fans and '
flower-stands 3 .’ ‘‘

23 .

1. Now at that time a mosquito-fan had come
into the possession of the Sawgha.

They told this matter to the Blessed One.

‘ I allow you, O Bhikkhus, the use of mosquito-
fans.’

A chhmara (a tail of the Bos Gruniens or
Tibetan ox, mounted on a stick, to be used by

1 Sakkhard and ka/Aala, the exact distinction between which
two terms is not stated.

2 Samudda-phewaka. By this name are designated the bones

of the cuttle-fish which, when cast up by the waves on the sea-
shore, are not unlike petrified foam, and have actually been in-
troduced from the East into use in Europe as a kind of rough
natural soap ; and are now sold for that purpose in most chemists’
shops in England (compare Meerschaum). The same word is
found in later Sanskrit works. _ »

3 Ta.la.vd.nta.rn. See Gataka I, 2 6, g (at the end); and com-
pare tdlavaw/akaw below, V, 29, 4.

K 2

132

isTULLAVAGGA.

V, 23, 2.

an attendant to whisk off flies) had come into the
possession of the Samgha.

They told this matter to the Blessed One.

‘You are not, O Bhikkhus, to make use of a
chamara. Whosoever does so, shall be guilty of
I a dukka^a 1 . I allow, O Bhikkhus, three kinds
of fly-whisks — those made of bark, those made of
j Uslra-grass, and those made of peacocks’ tails 2 * * .’

2. [Similar paragraph ending]

‘ I allow you, O Bhikkhus, the use of sun-shades 8 .’

Now at that time the AYabbaggiyas went about
with sun-shades up. And at that time a certain
Updsaka went to a garden with a number of men
who were followers of the A^ivakas (naked ascetics).
And those followers of the Agdvakas saw the Kkah-
baggiya Bhikkhus coming along in the distance with
sun-shades held over them ; and on seeing them,
they said to that Upisaka:

‘Are these, Sir, the men whom you reverence
coming along, like lords of the treasury, there with
sun-shades held over them ?’

‘ No, Sirs. These are not Bhikkhus ; they are
Paribbag'akas (wandering mendicants).’

So they made a bet whether they were Bhikkhus
or not. And when that Upasaka recognised them,
when they came up, he murmured, was annoyed,
and was indignant, saying, * How can their rever-
ences go about with sun-shades held over them ?’

The Bhikkhus heard of that U pasaka’s thus mur-

1 Probably because this, like a white umbrella, was considered
an appanage of royalty;

2 Mora-piwMa. This word is spelt piw^a by Childers, and

by Fausboll, G&taka I, 38, 207.

8 See the note at the end of the chapter.

Y, 23, 3- ON THE DAILY LIFE OF THE BHIKKHUS. 1 33

muring, &c. And those Bhikkhus told the matter to
the Blessed One.

‘ Is it true, O Bhikkhus, as they say?’

* It is true, Lord.’

The Blessed Buddha rebuked them, saying (&c., t
as usual, see I, i, 2, 3). And when he had rebuked j
them, and had delivered a religious discourse, he f
addressed the Bhikkhus, and said :

‘You are not, O Bhikkhus, to have sun-shades ■;
held over you. Whosoever does so, shall be guilty i
of a dukka?a.’

3. Now at that time a certain Bhikkhu was sick,
and without a sun-shade (being held over him) he
was ill at ease.

They told this matter to the Blessed One.

‘I allow, O Bhikkhus, a sun-shade for the sick.’ 1

Now at that time the Bhikkhus, thinking, ‘ It is
for the sick only that sun-shades have been allowed
by the Blessed One, and not for those who are not
sick,’ were afraid to use sun-shades in the Arama,
or in the precincts of the Arama.

They told this matter to the Blessed One.

‘ I allow, O Bhikkhus, either a sick man, or one
who is not sick, to have a sun-shade held over
him either in the Ardma, or in the precincts of the
Ardma 1 .’

1 There is an ambiguity, either hrthe use of the word Matt a,
or in the use of the verb dhareti, or both, running through this
chapter. As a matter of fact, the Bhikkhus now use sun-shades
(usually those made of paper in China) of the same shape as the
umbrellas now used in England; and they make no distinction as
to the place in which they use them. But there is another shape
for shades, to be carried by a dependant walking behind the
person to be shaded, in which the handle is fastened to the rim at
the side of, and not in the middle underneath that part of it which

1

*34

iTULLAVAGGA.

V, 24 , 1 .

24 .

1. Now at that time a certain Bhikkhu tied his
bowl with a string, and suspending it on a staff 1 ,
went after noon out of a certain village gate. The
people calling out, 1 There goes a thief ; his sword
is glistening,’ fell upon him, and seized him. But
on recognising him, they let him go. That Bhikkhu,
returning to the Ar&ma, told this matter to the
Bhikkhus.

‘ What then, Sir, did you carry a staff with a
string to it?’

‘It is even so, Sirs.’

Those Bhikkhus who were moderate murmured
(&c., as usual, see I, 1, 2, 3) ... . told the Blessed
One .... he addressed the Bhikkhus, and said :

‘ Y ou are not, O Bhikkhus, to carry a staff with a
string to it. Whosoever does so, shall be guilty of
a dukkaZa.’

2. Now at that time a certain Bhikkhu was sick,
and he could not wander about without a staff.

They told this matter to the Blessed One.

actually keeps off the sun. Both kinds are figured on the most
ancient Buddhist sculptures. The Old Commentary on the cor-
responding rule for the nuns (Bhikkhuni-vibhanga, PsUittiya
LXXXIV, 2, 1) says that sun-shades are either white, or made of
matting, or made of leaves (doubtless of the talipot palm) ; and it
adds that they are either mazz^ala-baddha/zz or salaka-
baddhazzz, which apparently refers to these two ways in which
the handle was joined on to the shading-part In the 57th Se~
khiya (compare also the 23rd and the 67th), and in JTullavagga
VIII, 1, i, will be found rules of etiquette which show that it was
a sign of courtesy or of respect to put down a sun-shade,

1 See the similar phraseology at V, 8, 1. On u//itv£, compare
oddtti.

V, 2 6, i. ON THE DAILY LIFE OF THE BHIKKHUS.

135

‘ I allow you, O Bhikkhus, to give to a sick
Bhikkhu the permission (license) to use a staff. And
thus, O Bhikkhus, should it he given. That sick
Bhikkhu, O Bhikkhus, should go up to the Sawgha
[here follow the words of a Kamma vkki, precisely
as in V, 20, 7].’

3. [Similar paragraphs ending with Kammava/Ms
for license to lift the bowl with a string, and with
both a staff and a string.]

25 .

1. Now at that time a certain Bhikkhu was a
ruminator 1 , and he, continually ruminating, used to
chew the cud.

The Bhikkhus murmured, were annoyed, and were
indignant, saying, ‘ This Bhikkhu eats food out of
hours V And they told this matter to the Blessed
One.

‘ This Bhikkhu, O Bhikkhus, has but lately fallen
from the condition of being an ox. I allow, O
Bhikkhus, to a ruminator the chew of the cud.
But nothing, O Bhikkhus, brought from the door
of the mouth to the outside thereof is to be so
chewed 3 . Whosoever does so, shall be dealt with
according to the law V

26 .

1. Now at that time a certain multitude had

1 Romanthaka,

2 Which is against the rule laid down in the 27th Pa&ttiya.

8 That would be a breach of the 30th Pa&ttiya.

4 That is, according to the s^th, 28th, or 30th Pa&ttiya.

2TOIXAVAGGA.

A , 27, t *

x 3 6

arranged for the privilege of supplying food to
the Savzgha, and in the dining-hall many fragments
of rice were allowed to fall.

The people murmured, were annoyed, and were
indignant, saying, ‘ How can the Sakya-puttiya Sa-
maras, when food is being given to them, take it
so carelessly. Each single ball of rice is the result
of hundredfold labour ! ’

The Bhikkhus heard of the people thus mur-
muring, &c., and they told the matter to the Blessed
One.

‘ I allow you, O Bhikkhus, whatever thing falls
■when it is being given to you, yourselves to pick
it up and eat it. That has been presented, O
Bhikkhus, by the givers.’

27 .

1. Now at that time a certain Bhikkhu went on
his round for alms with long finger-nails. A certain
woman, seeing him, said to that Bhikkhu : 1 Come
along, Sir, and have connection with me.’

‘ Nay, Sister, that is not becoming.’

‘ If you do not, Sir, I will at once scratch 1 my
limbs with my own nails, and will make as if I were
angry, saying, “ This Bhikkhu has ill-treated me.” ’

‘ Settle that with yourself, Sister.’

That woman did as she had said, and people
running up seized that Bhikkhu. Then they saw
skin and blood on the woman’s nails ; and on seeing
that, they let the Bhikkhu go, saying, ‘ This is the

1 On vilikhati, compare VI, 20.

Y, 27 , 3 . ON THE DAILY LIFE OF THE BHIKKHUS. 1 37

work of the woman herself. The Bhikkhu has not
done it.’

Then that Bhikkhu, returning to the Arama, told
the matter to the Bhikkhus.

1 What then, Sir, do you wear long nails ?’

‘ It is even so, Sirs.’

The Bhikkhus who were moderate murmured
(&c ) told the matter to the Blessed One.

‘You are not, O Bhikkhus, to wear long nails.
Whosoever does so, shall be guilty of a dukka^a.’

2. Now at that time the Bhikkhus tore off their
nails with the nails, bit them off with their teeth, or
rubbed them down against the wall ; and their fingers
were hurt.

They told this matter to the Blessed One.

‘ I allow you, O Bhikkhus, nail-cutters.’ 1

They cut their nails down to the blood, and their
fingers were hurt.

‘ I allow you, O Bhikkhus, to cut your nails
according to the length of the flesh.’

Now at that time the iWabbaggiya Bhikkhus
had all the twenty nails (on their hands and feet)
polished.

People murmured, &c., saying, ‘Like those who
still live in the pleasures of the world.’

They told this matter to the Blessed One.

‘You are not, O Bhikkhus, to have the twenty-
nails polished. I allow you, O Bhikkhus, to remove
the dirt only.’

3. Now at that time the Bhikkhus’ hair grew long.

They told this matter to the Blessed One.

‘Are the Bhikkhus able, O Bhikkhus, to remove
one another’s hair ?’

‘ They are, Lord.’

JsTULLAVAGGA.

V, 27, 4-

138

Then the Blessed One, on that occasion and in
that connection, after he had delivered a religious
discourse, addressed the Bhikkhus, and said :

‘ I allow you, O Bhikkhus, the use of razors, of a
hone to sharpen the razors on, of powder prepared
with Sipdiika-gum to prevent them rusting 1 , of a
sheath to hold them in 2 * , and of all the apparatus of
a barber V

4. Now at that time the iOlabbaggiya Bhikkhus
wore (&c., as usual, down to)

‘ Y ou are not, O Bhikkhus, to have your beards
cut (by barbers) 4 , nor to let them grow long, nor to
wear them long on the chin like a goat’s beard 5 6 7 8 , nor
so cut that they have four corners °, nor to cut off the
hair growing on your breast T , nor to cut the hair on
your bellies into figures s , nor to wear whiskers 9 , nor
to remove the hair from your private parts 10 . Who-
soever does so, shall be guilty of a dukkaz'a.’

1 Khura-sipaVikaw. See the notes on V, 11, 2, and Buddha-
ghosa’s note at p. 319 of the text.

2 Namatakaw. See above, V, ix, 1, and V, 19, 1.

8 Khura-b ha Ma'am. Compare MaMvagga VI, 37.

4 Massum kapplpenti ti kattariyd massum Med&penti (B.).
On Kattari (a knife), see (?& taka I, 223. It is clear from the
first words of the next section that Buddhaghosa’s explanation

' here is not quite accurate.

5 Go-lomikan ti hanukamhi digham katvd /^apitaw e/aka-
massum mbfcati (B.).

6 -Vaturassan ti ^atu-konam (B.).

7 Parimukhan ti ure loma-samhara«am (B.).

8 A<fA$arfikam. See the various readings and Buddhaghosa’s
note at p. 319 of the text.

9 D&Mika m. It is the Sanskrit dfiz%ikd or dawsh/rika ; and
occurs at Gsitaka I, 305.

10 On the corresponding rule in the Bhikkhuni-vibhanga, the
2nd Pi^ittiya, the Old Commentary has sambfidho nfima ubho
upakaM^akt mutta-karanam.

Y, 27, 5. ON THE DAILY LIFE OF THE BHIKKHUS. I 39

Now at that time a certain Bhikkhu had a fistula 1 ,
and the ointment would not stick to it.

They told this matter to the Blessed One.

‘ I allow you, O Bhikkhus, on account of disease,
to remove the hair from the private parts.’

5. Now at that time the ATzabbaggiya Bhikkhus
(&c., as before, down to)

‘You are not, O Bhikkhus, to have your hair cut
off with a knife 2 . Whosoever does so, shall be guilty
of a dukka^a.’

Now at that time a certain Bhikkhu had a sore
on his head, and the hair could not be removed with
a razor.

They told this matter to the Blessed One.

‘ I allow you, O Bhikkhus, on account of disease,
to have your hair cut off with a knife.’

Now at that time the Bhikkhus wore the hair in
their nostrils long.

People murmured, &c., saying, ‘ Like the devil-
worshippers V

They told this matter to the Blessed One.

‘You are not, O Bhikkhus, to wear the hair in
your nostrils long. Whosoever does so, shall be
guilty of a dukka/a.’

Now at that time the Bhikkhus had the hair in
their nostrils pulled out with a potsherd 4 , or with
beeswax ; and their nostrils were hurt.

1 Compare MaMvagga VI, 22, 2.

2 Kattarikaya ti garat/a-rudhi-fsic MS.)-slsa-rog’-aMdha-pa£-
£ay& va#ati, which is simply a repetition of the next paragraph, is
all that Buddhaghosa here says. See note above on § 4.

3 PislUillikl So also V, 10, 2, of carrying a skull about;
and MaMvagga III, 12, 3, of living in the hollow of a tree.

4 Sakkharika, said at MaMvagga VI, 14, 5 t° be used as a
lancet.

140

.KULLAVAGGA.

V, 27, 6.

They told this matter to the Blessed One.

‘ I allow you, O Bhikkhus, the use of pincers V
Now at that time the W/zabbaggiya Bhikkhus
(&c., as before, ending with)

‘You are not, O Bhikkhus, to have the white
hairs pulled out (off your heads). Whosoever does
so, shall be guilty of a dukka/a.’

6. Now at that time a certain Bhikkhus ears were
stopped with the wax.

They told this matter to the Blessed One.

‘ I allow you, O Bhikkhus, the use of an instru-
ment to remove the wax from the ear 1 2 * 4 * .’

[Then a paragraph as to the substances of which
it may be made, word for word, as in Mahavagga
VI, 6, 21 ; 12, 3 ; Wullavagga V, 5, 2 ; 29, 2, &c.]

28 .

1. Now at that time the W/zabbaggiya Bhikkhus
laid up much store of brass ware and copper ware.

People who came on a visit to the Vihdras, seeing
it, murmured, &c., saying, ‘ Like those who spread
out copper (for sale) 8 .’

They told this matter to the Blessed One.

‘ Y ou are not, O Bhikkhus, to lay up much store
of brass ware and copper ware. Whosoever does
so, shall be guilty of a dukka^aV

1 Sa«<fasa. So at (?ltaka I, 138, 4, a barber pulls out a white
hair from the king’s head, suvaw«a-sa«<fasena.

s This license is repeated in the next chapter.

8 Kawsa-pattharika ti kawsa-bha»(/a-va?2g4 (B.).

4 They might have all kinds of brass ware, except certain

articles, according to chapter 37 below.

Y, 28, 2. ON THE DAILY LIFE OF THE BHIKKHUS. 141

2 . Now at that time the Bhikkhus were afraid to
use boxes to put eye-ointment in 1 , and little flat
sticks to lay it on with 2 , and instruments for re-
moving wax from the ear 3 , and handles (for razors,
staves, &c.) 4 .

They told this matter to the Blessed One.

4 1 allow you, O Bhikkhus, the use of these things/

Now at that time the i^abbaggiya Bhikkhus sat
down lolling up against their waist-cloths (arranged
as a cushion) 5 , and the edges of the waist-cloths
wore out 6 .

They told this matter to the Blessed One.

‘You are not, O Bhikkhus, to loll in this way.
Whosoever does so, shall be guilty of a dukka^a/

Now at that time a certain Bhikkhu was sick, and
without some handicraft 7 he was ill at ease.

1 Kng&nwi. The use of these has been already allowed at
Mahavagga VI, 12, 1, 2, 4.

2 In the text read af^ana-salakaw, on which see MaMvagga
VI, 12, 3, 4.

3 Already allowed in the last chapter.

4 Bandhana-mattan ti vasi-kattara-ya/Z^i-adina/Tz va bandhana-

matta m (B.). It is clear from this note, and the repetition of the
pi in the text, that we have to do here with a special object, and
not a mere qualification of the other three.

6 Sawgha/i-paliatthikaya nisiditvd. See IV, 4, 7 at the
end, and the Old Commentary on the 26th Sekhiya. Childers
translates it as if it were the same as ukku/ika^ nisfditvd ; but
it must be different from it as that was allowed and constantly
practised.

6 Pa tii lu^anti. So read (not pattS, as in the text) in
accordance with our note 3 on Mahavagga VIII, 21, 1. The
second word occurs also above, V, 16, 2; 17, 2. From this pas-
sage here it is probable that a/Ma-p&daka at Mahavagga VIII,
21, means a stool.

7 Ayogajvz. Compare the Sutta-vibhanga, Pa&ttiya LXXXVIII,
2, 2 ; Cr&taka III, 447, 6,

142

XULLAVAGGA.

V, 29, 1.

They told this matter to the Blessed One.

* I allow you, O Bhikkhus, the use of a loom, and
of shuttles, strings, tickets, and all the apparatus
belonging to a loom.’

29 .

1. Now at that time a certain Bhikkhu entered
the village for alms without a girdle on, and in the
highway 1 his waist-cloth fell down 2 3 . The people
made an outcry, and that Bhikkhu was abashed.

On his return to the Arama, that Bhikkhu told
this matter to the Bhikkhus, and the Bhikkhus told
it to the Blessed One.

‘You are not, O Bhikkhus, to enter the village
without a girdle on. Whosoever does so, shall
be guilty of a dukka/a. I allow, O Bhikkhus, a
girdle V

2. Now at that time the AYabbaggiya Bhikkhus
wore (&c., as usual, ending with)

‘You are not, O Bhikkhus, to wear special
girdles 4 — those made of many strings plaited to-

1 Rathiyaya. The Old Commentary on the Bhikkhunt-

vibhanga, PMittiya XIV, says, Rathiya ti raK-M. The -word
recurs, ibid., PMittiya LXXXVI, XCVI (the last of which is nearly
the same as our passage here). For the more usual form ra-
thikd, see /dullavagga X, 12.

3 Pabhassittha. Compare Sutta-vibhahga, Pa&ttiya LXXXIII,
1, 2. It is from the root bhrams, not blits.

3 The use of this has already been enjoined at Mahavagga I, 25,
9, 10. It was to be tied on round the waist, over the waist-cloth,
to keep it in its place.

* It is curious that ka/i-suttaka«, a kind of girdle which
would seem properly to belong here, has been included in a former
list of forbidden articles at V, 2, x.

V, 29, 2. ON THE DAILY LIFE OF THE BHIKKHUS. 143

gether 1 , those made like the head of a water-
snake 2 , girdles with tambourines on them 3 , girdles
with beads on (or with ornaments hanging from
them) 4 . Whosoever does so, shall be guilty of a
dukka/a. I allow you, O Bhikkhus, girdles of
two kinds — those made of strips of cloth, and
those . . . . 5 ’

The borders of the girdles decayed through age.

‘ I allow, O Bhikkhus, an edging of brighter
material 6 7 and strengthening at the ends V

The end of the girdle where the knot was tied
decayed through age 8 .

‘ I allow, O Bhikkhus, a buckle 9 .’

[A paragraph on the substances of which it may
be made, as usual, see Mahavagga VI, 12, 3 ; Wulla-

i

1 Kal&bukatfz. See Buddhaghosa’s note at p. 319 of the text,
and compare Bohtlingk-Roth under kalapa, kalapaka.

2 De^ubhakaw nama udaka-sappi-sisa-sadisazra (B.). T)ed~
i/ubha corresponds to the later Sanskrit duw^ubha, an older form
of which is d undub ha.

3 Mura^a, literally, ‘tambourines/ but see Buddhaghosa’s
note, loc. cit.

4 Maddavinasw nama pamanga-saw/Mnaw (B.). On pd-
manga, see our note at iiTullavagga V, 2, 1.

9 Sfikarantakazzz. See Buddhaghosa’s note at p. 319 of the
text. We do not venture to translate the term.

6 Sobhawam nama ve//>fcetva mukha-va//i-sibhanaffz (B.). In
the Maggvhma Sila, § 3, sobhazzakam or sobhawa-kara^am
(so Rh. D.’s MS.) is a kind of game or show.

7 Gu7zaka»z nama mudika(? muddhika)-san/Mnena sibbanaw
(B.). Clough, under guwa, gives inter alia, 1. fastening; 2. a
plant of the fibres of which bow-strings are made; 3. bow-string.

8 Pavananto ti p&santo (B.).

9 Vidho. But both the reading and the explanation are un-
certain, and Buddhaghosa says nothing. The word occurs also,
and apparently in the same sense, in the Old Commentary on the
86th Pibittiya.

1 44

KULLAVAGGA.

V, 29, 3.

v agga. V, 5, 2, &c., adding at the end ‘and made
of string.’]

3. Now at the time the venerable Ananda went
into the village for alms with light garments on 1 ;
and his garments were blown up by a whirlwind.

■ The venerable Ananda, on returning to the
A ram a, told this matter to the Bhikkhus ; and
the Bhikkhus told this matter to the Blessed One.

‘ I allow, O Bhikkhus, a block 3 (to be used as a
weight) or a chain V

[Similar paragraph to that just above as to the
substances of which the block may be made.]

Now at that time the Bhikkhus fastened the
block or the chain immediately on to their robes ;
and the robes gave way.

They told this matter to the Blessed One.

‘I allow, O Bhikkhus, a piece of phalaka cloth 4 •
to attach the block or the chain to.’

They fastened the phalaka cloth for the block
or the chain on to the edge of the robe ; and the
corner came open 6 .

1 Samgha/iyo in the plural must mean garments and not waist-
cloths only. See the parallel passage in the Bhikkhuni-vibhahga,
Pa&ttiya XCVI.

2 GawMikawz. The use of this article is referred to in VIII,

4, 3, and at Dhammapada, p. 372. That ga.nM means a block,
usually of wood, is clear from the use of dhamma-ga«h$ikaM at
<?£taka I, 150 (spelt ga«<fika however at II, 124), compared with
ganihi (block of sandal-wood) above, V, 8, 1. The word occurs
also in the Old Commentary on the 86th PSiittiya.

3 P&sakawz, which does not correspond to Sanskrit prasaka
here, but to pataka = plra (Bohtlingk-Roth give inter alia,

‘ Sahl oder Leiste am Anfange eines Gewebes’). Compare pasanta
in Buddhaghosa on maM/zava/akaOT in the next section.

* See our note on this word at Maha vagga VIII, 28, 2.

5 That is, perhaps, the weight dragged the robe to one side and
the legs were visible through the opening.

V, 29, 4 - ON THE DAILY LIFE OF THE BIIIKKHUS. 1 45

They told this matter to the Blessed One.

‘ I allow you, O Bhikkhus, to fasten the phalaka
cloth for the block on the edge of the robe, and to
fasten the phalaka cloth for the chain seven or
eight finger-breadths up the robe.’

4. Now at that time the iOlabbaggiya Bhikkhus
wore (&c., as usual, ending with)

‘ You are not, O Bhikkhus, to wear your under
garments arranged as laymen do, nor arranged with
appendages ^ like elephant-trunks 1 , nor arranged like
fishing-nets 2 , nor arranged with four corners show-
ing 3 , nor arranged like flower-stands 4 5 , nor arranged
like rows of jewelry 6 . Whosoever does so, shall be
guilty of a dukka/a/

[Similar paragraph, ending]

‘ You are not, O Bhikkhus, to wear your upper 6

1 Hatthi-sowa'akaw nama nabhi-mfilato hatthi-so«<Za-sa«ZM-
na»2 olambakaw katvfi nivatthaw, ko/ika-itthinaw nivasanaw viya
(»•)•

2 Ma£/^a-va/akawz nama ekato dasantaz# ekato pasantam
olambitva nivattham (B.).

8 A’atu-ka»naka»j upari dve heZZfeto dve evam Its. tt&ro ka»«e
dassetvfi nivatthaw (B.).

4 T&la-va«Zaka»z nama talavaw/’-ak&rena stZakawz olambitva
nivisanawz (B.). See our note on t&lavazzZa above, V, 22, 2, and
on &ma/aka-va»/ika-piMa» below, VI, 2, 4.

5 Sata-vallikam nsima digha-sitakaw aneka-kkhattuw obhaw-
.gitva ovaZZikazra karontena nivatthaz» va, padakkhiraa-passesu va
nirantaraw valiyo dassetvfi nivattham. Safe pana g&nuto paZZZz&ya
eko va dve va valiyo pamiayanti, vaZZati (B.). Compare vallika
and ovaZZikazzz at V, 2, 1. Buddhaghosa’s second explanation
would be possible if the reading were sata-valikaw, and is
probably only a pis a Her, due to the difficulty of the first, which
we have adopted doubtfully.

6 Pirupati as opposed to nivaseti above. Compare Dham-
mapada, pp. 114, 37 6; Gataka, vol. i, p. 57, line 16.

[20] L

146

iTUIXAVAGGA.

Y, 29, 5.

garments as the laymen do. Whosoever does so,
shall be guilty of a dukka/a.’

5. [Similar paragraph, ending]

‘ You are not, O Bhikkhus, to wear your under
garments 1 as the king’s porters do h Whosoever
does so, shall be guilty of a dukka^a.’

30 .

1 . Now at that time the W/zabbaggiya Bhikkhus
carried a double pingo (a yoke over the shoulders
with the weight to be carried on both sides).

People murmured, &c., saying, ‘ Like the king’s
porters 2 .’

They told this matter to the Blessed One.

‘You are not, O Bhikkhus, to carry a double pingo.
Whosoever does so, shall be guilty of a dukka/a.
I allow you, O Bhikkhus, to carry a single pingo,
a pingo for two bearers 3 * , and to carry weights on
your head, or your shoulders, or against your hips i ,
and suspended over your backs.’

31 .

1. Now at that time the Bhikkhus did not use
tooth-sticks 5 6 , and their mouths got a bad odour.

1 Saravelliyara ni vasetabba»z See Buddhaghosa’s note at
p. 319 of the text.

2 Mu»s'a-va//i or -ve/Mi. See the note from the Samanta
PSsddikd at p. 319 of the text.

s Antara-ka^-a»z ndina va&gg/ie laggetva dvlhi vahitabbaw
bharaw (B.),

1 That is held round by the arm, and resting against the side of
the hips. Women in India commonly carry their children so, the

children sitting on the hip, -with one leg in front and one behind.

6 Danta-ka/Z/zaw, not ‘ tooth-brushes,’ as Childers translates.

V, 31. 2.

ON THE DAILY LIFE OF THE BHIKKHUS. 1 47

They told this matter to the Blessed One.

‘ There are these five disadvantages, O Bhikkhus,
in not using tooth-sticks— it is bad for the eyes 1 —
the mouth becomes bad-smelling — the passages by
which the flavours of the food pass are not pure —
bile and phlegm get into 2 the food— and the food
does not taste well 3 to him (who does not use
them). These are the five disadvantages, O Bhik-
khus, in not using tooth-sticks.’

1 There are five advantages, O Bhikkhus, (&c.,
the converse of the last).’

‘ I allow you, O Bhikkhus, tooth-sticks.’

2. Now at that time the jOabbaggiya Bhikkhus
used long tooth-sticks ; and even struck the Sdma-
?zeras with them.

They told this matter to the Blessed One.

‘You are not, O Bhikkhus, to use long tooth-

Mechanical skill had not advanced so far in those days ; and we
hear nothing of brushes of any kind (see above, V, 2, 3, as to hair-
dressing). The ‘tooth-sticks’ were bits of sweet-smelling wood
or root, or creeper (see (rataka I, 80 ; Mahavawzsa, p. 23), the
ends of which were to be masticated as a dentifrice, not rubbed on
the teeth. After using them the mouth was rinsed out with
water; and so in all other passages in the Khandhakas where
they are mentioned (always in reference to the duty of providing
them), it is in connection with the bringing of water for that
purpose.

1 This has of course nothing to do with keeping the teeth white
and beautiful; that was not the purpose which the tooth-sticks
were designed to effect. There seems to have been really some
idea that the use of them was good for the eye-sight. So Buddha-
ghosa says here, a^akkhussan ti X’akkhhnaw hitawz ma hoti, pari-
M rivrn ganeti, quite in accordance with the Sanskrit £akshushya.
The words recur below, VI, 2, 2, in the same sense.

2 Pariyonandhanti. Literally, ‘ envelope,’ ‘ cover.’

s Na kkh& deti. This is a different word from Madeti, ‘to
cover.’ It is Mad No. 2 in Bohtlingk-Roth.

L 2

JsTULLAVAGGA.

V, 3 1 2 > !•

148

sticks. Whosoever does so, shall be guilty of a
dukka^a. I allow you, O Bhikkhus, tooth-sticks
up to eight finger-breadths in length. And Si-
ma»eras are not to be struck with them. Who-
soever does so, shall be guilty of a dukka/a.’

Now at that time a certain Bhikkhu, when using
too short a tooth-stick, got it stuck in his throat.

They told this matter to the Blessed One.

‘You are not, O Bhikkhus, to use too short a
tooth-stick. Whosoever does so, shall be guilty of
a dukka/a. 1 allow you, O Bhikkhus, tooth-sticks
four finger-breadths long at the least.’

32 .

1 . Now at that time the W^abbaggiya Bhikkhus
set the woods on fire.

People murmured, &c., saying, ‘ Like the charcoal
burners.’

They told this matter to the Blessed One.

‘You are not, O Bhikkhifs, to set woods on fire.
Whosoever does so, shall be guilty of a dukka/a.’

Now at that time the Viharas were hidden
under masses of grass *, and when the woods were
set on fire the Vihiras were burnt. The Bhik-
khus, fearing to offend, would not make a counter-
fire for their own protection.

They told this matter to the Blessed One.

‘ I allow you, O Bhikkhus, when the woods are

1 Ti»a-gahan&. Not covered with thatch, the word for which

is ti»a-^/$adan&. See V, n, 6 ; V, 14, 3, &c.

V, 33, I- ON THE DAILY LIFE OF THE BHIKKHUS. 1 49

on fire to make a counter-fire 1 , and thus afford your-
selves protection.’

2. Now at that time the iLfebbaggiya Bhikkhus
climbed up trees, and jumped from tree to tree.

People murmured, &c., saying, ‘ Like monkeys.’

They told this matter to the Blessed One.

‘ You are not, O Bhikkhus, to climb up trees.
Whosoever does so, shall be guilty of a dukka/a.’

Now at that time, when a certain Bhikkhu in the
Kosala country was going to S&vatthi, an elephant
pursued him on the way. And that Bhikkhu, when
he had run up to the foot of a tree, fearing to offend,
did not climb up. The elephant passed on another
way.

That Bhikkhu, on arriving at Savatthi, told this
matter to the Bhikkhus (and the Bhikkhus told this
matter to the Blessed One 2 ).

1 1 allow you, O Bhikkhus, when there shall be
something to be done to ascend a tree to the
height of a man; and in cases of misfortune as
high as you like.’

83 .

1. Now at that time there were two brothers,
Bhikkhus, by name Yame/u and Tekula 3 , Brdh-

1 Pa/aggi?« d&tu m. See the story at ffataka I, 212, and foil.

2 Omitted in the text.

3 Yame/utekuli. It is possible that this compound should be
dissolved into Yame/a and Utekula. Compare the word Yame/e
at verse 35 of the Uddana (which stands where a nominative
should stand, judging by the form of the other words in the
Udd&na). A comma has there been omitted by misprint after
Yame/e.

rULLAVAGGA.

mans by birth, excelling in speech, excelling in
pronunciation. These went up to the place where
the Blessed One was, and when they had come
there, they saluted the Blessed One, and took their
seats on one side. And so sitting those Bhikkhus
spake to the Blessed One thus :

‘ At the present time, Lord, Bhikkhus, differing
in name, differing in lineage, differing in birth, differ-
ing in family, have gone forth (from the world).
These corrupt the word of the Buddhas by (repeating
it in) their own dialect. Let us, Lord, put the word
of the Buddhas into (Sanskrit) verse V

t How can you, O foolish ones, speak thus, say-
ing, “ Let us, Lord, put the word of the Buddhas
into verse ?” This will not conduce, O foolish ones,
either to the conversion of the unconverted, or to
the increase of the converted ; but rather to those
who have not been converted being not converted,
and to the turning back of those who have been
converted.’

And when the Blessed One had rebuked those
Bhikkhus, and had delivered a religious discourse 1 2 ,
he addressed the Bhikkhus, and said :

1 We think that in these words (Mandaso aropema) there
does lie a reference to the earlier Sanskrit. And this especially
for four reasons : firstly, this is required by the antithesis to ‘^their
own dialect; ’ secondly, the use of the word ^//andasi in Pamni,
where it always means precisely ‘ in the V eda-dialect, requires it ,
thirdly, it is difficult to understand otherwise the mention of
‘ Brihmans by birth;’ and fourthly, this is in accordance with the
traditional interpretation of the passage handed down among the
B hikkh us. Buddhaghosa says, Mandaso aropema ti Vedazre

vivo catta Ai -hhftsS va va£ana.-masrsra/» Sropema. Sakka/a is of

V, 33j 2- ON THE DAILY LIFE OF THE BHIKKHUS. 151

‘You are not, O Bhikkhus, to put the word of
the Buddhas into (Sanskrit) verse. Whosoever does
so, shall be guilty of a dukka?a. I allow you, O
Bhikkhus, to learn the word of the Buddhas each in
his own dialect V

2. Now at that time the iWzabbaggiya Bhikkhus
learnt the Lok&yata system 2 .

People murmured, &c., saying, ‘ Like those who
still enjoy the pleasures of the world !’

The Bhikkhus heard of the people thus murmur-
ing ; and those Bhikkhus told the matter to the
Blessed One.

‘ Now can a man w r ho holds the Lokayata as
valuable reach up, O Bhikkhus, to the full ad-
vantage of, or attain to full growth in, to full
breadth in this doctrine and discipline 3 ?’

‘ This cannot be, Lord.’

‘ Or can a man who holds this doctrine and disci-
pline to be valuable learn the Lokayata system ?’

1 On the historical conclusions which may be drawn from this
tradition, see H. O.’s introduction to the text of the MaMvagga,
pp. xlix and following.

2 This is mentioned also in the Assalayana Sutta (at the begin-
ning), and in the same terms in the Milinda Paraha, p. 10, as one
of the branches of learning distinctive of well-educated Brahmans.
It is condemned among other 1 low arts ’ in the very ancient Maha
Sila, § 5. (See Rh. D.’s ‘ Buddhist Suttas from the Pali/ p. 199,
and his note on the age of this work, ibid. p. 188.) Among later
works, the Nepalese Buddhists refer to it as one of the things with
which a Bodhisattva will not condescend to occupy himself (Lotus
of the Good Law, ch. xiii, Burnoufs version, p. 168), and in
which good disciples will take no pleasure (ibid. p. 280). Buddha-
ghosa has a note on the passage in the MaM Sila (quoted by
Childers sub voce), which shows that it was understood in his time
to be, or rather to have been, a system of casuistry.

8 So also in the Zetokhila Sutta 2 (translated in Rh. D.’s
‘ Buddhist Suttas from the Pali,’ p. 223).

‘ This cannot be, Lord.’

‘You are not, O Bhikkhus, to learn the Lo-
kctyata system. Whosoever does so, shall be guilty
of a dukka/a.’

Now at that time the W/^abbaggiya Bhikkhus
taught the Lok&yata system.

People murmured, &c., saying, ‘ Like those still
enjoying the pleasures of the world ! 5

They told this matter to the Blessed One.

‘You are not, O Bhikkhus, to teach the Lo-
kayata system. Whosoever does so, shall be
guilty of a dukka/a.’

[Similar paragraphs to the last, ending]

‘You are not, O Bhikkhus, to learn — to teach —
the low arts 1 (of divination, spells, omens, astrology,
sacrifices to gods, witchcraft, and quackery)/

3. Now at that time the Blessed One when, sur-
rounded by a great assembly, he was preaching the
Dhamma, sneezed. The Bhikkhus raised a great
and mighty shout, ‘ Long life to our Lord the
Blessed One! Long life to the Happy One!’ and
by the sound thereof the discourse was interrupted.
Then the Blessed One said to the Bhikkhus :

‘Now if when a man has sneezed, O Bhikkhus,
some one says, “ Long life to you,” can he live or
die on that account ?’

‘ Not so, Lord.’

1 TiraHMna-vi^sL Literally, * brutish, or beastly, wisdom.’
These are set out in full in the seven sections of the Mah& Sila
(translated in Rh. D.’s ‘ Buddhist Suttas from the Pali/ pp. 1 96-
zoo). As noticed above, the LokSyata system is there mentioned
(§ 5) as one of them. Learning or teaching these things are for-
bidden in almost identical terms to the Bhikkhunis in the Bhik-
khuni-vibhanga, PS&ttiyas XLIX and L.

V, 34,1- ON THE DAILY LIFE OF THE BHIKKHUS. 1 53

‘You are not, O Bhikkhus, when one has sneezed,
to call out, “ Long life to you.” Whosoever does
so, shall be guilty of a dukka/a V

Now at that time people said to the Bhikkhus
when they sneezed, ‘ Long life to your reverence ! ’
and the Bhikkhus, fearing to offend, gave no reply.
The people murmured, were annoyed, and were
indignant, saying, ‘ How can the Sakya-puttiya
Samawas omit to reply when people say, “ Long life
to your reverence?’”

They told this matter to the Blessed One.

‘ Laymen, O Bhikkhus, are given to lucky phrases 1 2 .
I allow you, O Bhikkhus, to reply, “ May you live
long!” to laymen who say to you, “Long life to
your reverence!’”

34 .

x. Now at that time the Blessed One when,
surrounded by a great assembly, he was preaching
the Dhamma, was seated. And a certain Bhikkhu,
who had eaten onions, sat down apart, thinking,
‘ Let not the Bhikkhus be annoyed 3 !’

The Blessed One saw that Bhikkhu sitting apart ;
and on seeing him, he said to the Bhikkhus, ‘ Why
now, O Bhikkhus, is that Bhikkhu seated apart ?’

‘ This Bhikkhu, Lord, has eaten onions, and has

1 This story forms the Introductory Story also to the Gagga
(Jataka (No. 155 in Fausboll’s edition).' On the superstition here
condemned, see Dr. Morris’s remarks in the ‘ Contemporary Review ’
for May, 1881.

2 Gihi bhikkhave mahgalikt.

3 Vyabdhizssu is for vy&badhiMsu. See p. 320 of the edition
of the text.

154

KULLAVAGGA.

V, 34, 2.

seated himself apart in order not to annoy the
Bhikkhus.’

* But ought, O Bhikkhus, anything to be eaten,
that will cause the eater to keep away from such
a preaching of the Dhamma as this ?’

‘ No, indeed, Lord.’

‘ You are not, O Bhikkhus, to eat onions. Who-
soever does so, shall be guilty of a dukka^a 1 2 .’

2. Now at that time the venerable Sariputta
had wind in his stomach. And the venerable Maha
Moggallana went up to the place where the vener-
able Sariputta was, and when he had come there,
he said to the venerable Sariputta :

I How did you formerly, friend Sariputta, get
relief, when you had wind in the stomach ? ’

‘ By eating onions, my friend V

They told this matter to the Blessed One.

I I allow you, O Bhikkhus, to eat onions on ac-
count of disease.’

35 .

x. Now at that time the Bhikkhus made water
here and there in the Ardma, and the Ardma
was defiled.

They told this matter to the Blessed One.

‘ I allow you, O Bhikkhus, to make water at one
side (of the A rim a).’

1 There is a similar rule for the Bhikkhunis in the Bhikkhuni-
vibhanga, PiL&ttiya I. So also onions are mentioned among the
things a (?ain Bhikkhu may not accept (Ay&ranga Sutta II, i,

8, 13).

2 It is gruel of various kinds that is prescribed for this malady
in Mahavagga VI, 16, 3-17, 2.

V, 37, I. ON THE DAILY LIFE OF THE BHIKKHUS. 1 55

The Ardma became offensive.

[The rest of this chapter is scarcely translateable.
It records in like manner the various sanitary diffi-
culties which arose from the living together of a
number of Bhikkhus. Each such difficulty is quite
solemnly said to have been reported to the Blessed
One, and he is said to have found a way out of it.
The result of the whole is, that the building of
privies is enjoined, and all the contrivances, such as
seats, doors, steps, plastering, &c., already men-
tioned with respect to the bath-room, above, V, 14,
are here repeated verbatim *.]

36 .

Now at that time the iOabbaggiya Bhikkhus
followed evil practices such as these — they used to
plant [&c., word for word as in the long list at I, 13,
1, 2, down to the end].

They told this matter to the Blessed One.

‘You are not, O Bhikkhus, to follow manifold evil
practices. Whosoever does so, shall be dealt with
according to the law.’

37 .

1. Now at the time when the venerable Kassapa
of Uruve/a went forth (from the world), much pro-
perty in brass and wood and earthenware came
into the possession of the Sawgha 1 2 . And the

1 For some of the details, compare MaMvagga V, 8, 3, and
MaMvagga I, 25, i9=Zullavagga VIII, 1, g, and Zullavagga
VIII, 9 and 10.

2 See MaMvagga I, 20, 19-21.

KV LL AV AGGA.

V, 37, i.

156

Bhikkhus thought, ‘What kinds of brass ware — of
wooden things — of earthenware 1 — -has the Blessed
One allowed, and what kinds has he not allowed ?’

They told this matter to the Blessed One.

Then the Blessed One, on that occasion and in
that connection, when he had delivered a religious
discourse, addressed the Bhikkhus, and said :

‘ I allow you, O Bhikkhus, all kinds of brass ware,
except weapons 2 — all kinds of wooden things, except
divans 3 , and long-armed chairs 3 , and bowls 4 * , and
shoes 6 , — and all kinds of earthenware, except ka-
takas 6 , and large earthen vessels to be used as
huts to live in 7 .’

Here ends the Fifth Khandhaka, on
minor details.

1 See .Sullavagga VIII, 3, 1.

2 Pahararaatthara kataw paharawi ti vuMati. Yassa kassa k\
Svudha-samgMtass’ eta m adhivaianaw (B.).

8 See Mah&vagga V, 10, 4, 5.

4 See JTullavagga Y, 8, 2. ,

6 See MaMvagga V, 6, 4.

6 On this word see our note above at Y, 22, 1.

7 This is the only one of the things here mentioned not re-
ferred to in previous rules. Buddhaghosa says, Kumbha-karikS
ti Dhaniyass’ eva sabba-mattikamaya-ku/i vuttati. The story of
Dhaniya is given in the text of the Vinaya, vol. iii, pp. 42 and
following.

VI, I, 2.

ON DWELLINGS AND FURNITURE.

157

SIXTH KHANDHAKA.

On Dwellings and Furniture.

1 .

1. Now at that time the Blessed Buddha 1 was
staying at Ra^agaha in the Ve/uvana, in the i
Kalandaka N ivapa 2 . And at that time no per- 1
mission had been given to the Bhikkhus by the
Blessed One with respect to dwellings. So the
Bhikkhus dwelt now here, now there — in the woods,
at the foot of trees, on hill-sides, in grottoes, in
mountain caves, in cemeteries, in forests, in open
plains, and in heaps of straw. And at early morn I
they came in from this place or from that place —
from the woods (&c., as before) decorous in their
walking and turning, in their looking on or looking
round, in stretching out their arms or in drawing
them back, with eyes cast down, and dignified in
deportment 3 .

2. Now at that time the SzttM of Rafagaha went
at early morn to his garden. And the SetlM of

1 Our readers will have noticed that the phrase at the beginning
of each Khandhaka is ‘ the Blessed Buddha/ and not merely 4 the
Blessed One/ It recurs besides only in the constantly-repeated
paragraph ‘The Blessed Buddha rebuked them, saying, &c/
(see, for instance, -ffullavagga I, i, 2, where the connection is
given in full).

2 Compare the note on Mahavagga III, 1,1.

3 So also Mahavagga I, 23, 2, and frequently in the Suttas.

i5 8

jtullavagga.

vi, I, 3-

R^agaha. saw those Bhikkhus coming in from this
place and from that place, from the woods (&c., as
in § i, down to the end), and on seeing them he
took pleasure therein 1 . And the Setthi of Rdg"a-
gaha went up to those Bhikkhus, and said to them .

< if, Sirs, 1 were to have dwellings erected for
you, would you take up your abode in those
dwellings ?’

< Not so, O householder. Dwellings have not
been allowed by the Blessed One.’

‘Then, Sirs, ask the Blessed One about it, and

let me know.’

‘ Very well, O householder, said they, in assent
to the Se«*i of R&fagaha. And they went up to
the Blessed One, and saluted him, and took their
seats on one side. And when they were so seated,
they said to the Blessed One :

‘The Szttfn of Rag'agaha, Lord, wishes to have
dwellings erected for us. What, Lord, should be
done?’

Then the Blessed One, on that occasion and in
that connection, when he had delivered a religious
discourse, addressed the Bhikkhus, and said :

‘ I allow you, O Bhikkhus, abodes of five kinds
1 Viharas, AaW/zayogas, storied dwellings, attics,

1 caves 2 .’

3. Then those Bhikkhus went up to the S&tthx of
R&fagaha, and said to him : ‘ The Blessed One,
Sir, has allowed us dwellings ; do, therefore, what
seemeth to thee good.’ And the S&tt/ix of Ra^agaha
had sixty dwelling-places put up in one day.

1 So also of Bimbisara in the Gataka Commentary, I, 66.

s Buddhaghosa’s note on these paw^a lenani has already been
given in our note above, Mah&vagga I, 30, 4.

VI, i, 5.

ON DWELLINGS AND FURNITURE.

159

:

4. And when the Sztihi of Ra^agaha had com-
pleted those sixty dwelling-places, he went up to
the place where the Blessed One was, and [invited
him and the Bhikkhu Sawgha for the morrow’s
meal ; and so on, as usual \ down to the time
when, after the meal, the said to the Blessed

One :

‘ I have had, Lord, these sixty dwelling-places
made for the sake of merit, and for the sake of
heaven. What am I to do, Lord, with respect to
them ?’

‘ Then, O householder, dedicate 1 2 3 these sixty
dwelling-places to the Sawgha of the four directions,
whether now present, or hereafter to arrive.’

‘ Even so, Lord !’ said the S&tthi of Ragagaha, in
assent to the Blessed One, and he dedicated those
sixty dwelling-places to the use of the Samgha of
the four directions whether present or to come V

5. Then the Blessed One gave thanks to the
S&ttfc. of Ragugaha in these verses 4 :

1 1. Cold he wards off and heat, so also beasts of
prey,

And creeping things and gnats, and rains in
the wet season.

And when the dreaded heated winds arise,
they are kept off.

1 See, for instance, Mahavagga VI, 30, or Ki lllavagga V, 27.

1 Literally, ‘establish’ (pa/i//Mpehi).

3 This formula of dedication has been constantly found in rock-
inscriptions in India and Ceylon over the ancient cave-dwellings of
Buddhist hermits. See Rh. D. in the ‘Indian Antiquary’ for
May, 1872.

4 The following verses recur below at VI, 9, a ; and also m
that connection in the G&taka Commentary, I, 93.

5TULLAVAGGA.

VI, i, 2.

160

2. To give .Vih&ras to the Sawgha, wherein in

safety and in peace

To meditate and think at ease, the Buddha
calls the best of gifts.

3. Let then the able man, regarding his own weal,
Have pleasant monasteries built, and lodge

there learned men k

4. Let him with cheerful mind give food' to them,

and drink,

Raiment, and dwelling-places, to the upright
in heart.

5. Then shall they preach to him the Truth —
The Truth dispelling every grief —

Which Truth when here that man perceives
He sins no more, and dies away 1 2 !’

And when the Blessed One had given thanks to
the Se///zi of Ra^agaha in these verses, he rose
from his seat, and departed thence.

2 .

1 1. And the people heard, saying, ‘ Viliaras have

j been allowed by the Blessed One.’ And they
| built Vihctras zealously. Those Vih&ras had no
doors 3 , and snakes, scorpions, and centipedes got in.

1 This verse forms the subject of one of the ‘Questions of
Milinda’ (ed. Trenckner, p. 211).

! The above verses may have stood originally in a different con-
text from that in which they have been handed down, as the
opening phrase sitaw pa/ihanti would be more intelligible if the
word viMro occurred in the immediately preceding clause.

8 Kav&/a. This is the special word for door.. Dv&ra often
roughly translated door, is not really ‘ door,’ but ‘ door- ’ or ‘ gate-
way,’ with special reference to the aperture and not to that by
which the aperture could be closed. The latter word is also

VI, 2 , r. ON DWELLINGS AND FURNITURE. l6l

They told this matter to the Blessed One.

‘ I allow, O Bhikkhus, a door V

They made holes in the wall, and tied the door on '
with string or with creepers, These were eaten by
mice and white ants ; and when the things by which
the doors had been tied on had been eaten away,
the doors fell.

They told this matter to the Blessed One.

‘ I allow, O Bhikkhus, door-posts and lintel, hollow
like a mortar, for the door to revolve in, and pro-
jections to the door for it to revolve on.’

The doors would not come to.

‘ I allow, O Bhikkhus, a hole to pass a string j
through with which to pull the door to, and a string
for that purpose.’

The doors could not be made fast 2 .

* I allow, O Bhikkhus, rings on the door for the
bolt to work along in, blocks of wood fixed to the j
edge of the door-post and containing a cavity for
the bolt to go into, a pin to secure the bolt by, and
a bolt.’

Now at that time the Bhikkhus w r ere not able
to open the door.

They told this matter to the Blessed One.

different from c door,’ in that it is never used for the entrance into
an inner chamber. It is always the outer entrance (and the en-
trance at the front as distinguished from the entrance at the back)
of a house, or one of the principal entrances to a walled town or
village. See, for instance, Pa&ttiya XIX ; Ziullavagga VIII, 5, 1,
VIII, 8, 1 ; (rataka I, 63, 114, 346, 361, II, 63, 140.

1 On this and the following details, compare V, 14, 3, and the
notes there.

2 Thakiyanti: literally, ‘covered, or stopped, up/ The
same word is used at lullavagga VIII, 1, 5, of closing up the
lattices mentioned in the next section (VI, 2, 2).

[ao] , M

1 62 ATOLAVAGGA. VI, 2, 2.

‘ I allow, O Bhikkhus, key-holes, and keys of three
kinds — bronze keys, and keys of hard wood, and
keys of horn.’

When anybody unlocked them 1 > and entered,
the Vih&ras became unprotected.

They told this matter to the Blessed One.

‘ I allow, O Bhikkhus, a y an taka, and a pin to it 2 .’

2. Now at that time the Viharas were thatched;
and in the cold season they were cold, and in the
hot season hot.

They told this matter to the Blessed One.

‘ I allow you, O Bhikkhus, to cover them (with
skins) 3 , and to plaster them within and without.’

Now at that time the Vi h dr as had no windows,
and they were bad for the eyes, and had a dis-
agreeable odour.

They told this matter to the Blessed One.

‘ I allow, O Bhikkhus, windows of three kinds —
windows made with railings 4 5 * * 8 , windows made with
network s , and windows made with slips of wood a .’

1 Ugghl/etvi, an expression used in VIII, 1, x of undoing the
bolt (gha/ika) just referred to.

2 Yantakaw sMikaw, which is the only expression here used
which has not already occurred above at V, 14, 3. Buddhaghosa
says, Yantaka-su/tikan ti ettha yaw yaw ^ansiti taw taw yanta-
kaw. Tassa vivara-sMikaw kun&kaw k&tuw va//ati.

3 See the note at V, 14, 3.

4 Vediki-vttap&naw nama ^etiye vedikS-sadisaw (B.). See
our note on vedikS above, V, 14, 2. These windows or lattices
are mentioned in Afullavagga VIII, 1, 5; Mahavagga I, 25, 18.

5 <?Sla-v&tapanaw nama ^-alaka-baddhaw (B.). Galam,
literally ‘net,’ is given as a word for ‘window’ at AbhidMna-
ppadipika, verse 216. The expression probably corresponds to

our ‘lattice,’ and does not mean that an actual net was used.

Compare the Anglo-Indian ‘jalousie.’

8 Salaka-v&tap&naw n&ma thambhaka-v&tap&naw (B.). Pos-

VI, 2, 3-

ON DWELLINGS AND FURNITURE.

163

Squirrels and bats 1 entered through the opening
for the window.

1 1 allow, O Bhikkhus, window-blinds (or curtains) 2 .’

The squirrels and bats still got in through the
interstices between the blind (and the wall).

‘ I allow, O Bhikkhus, shutters, and rolls or bags
(to fill up interstices with) s .

3 . Now at that time the Bhikkhus slept on the
floor, and both their limbs and their robes became
dirty.

They told this matter to the Blessed One.

' I allow, O Bhikkhus, mats made of grass.’

The mats were eaten by mice and white ants.

‘ I allow, O Bhikkhus, a solid bench or divan
(built up against the wall of a room, or under
the verandah against the outside wall of the
house) 4 .

sibly this means with slips of wood arranged horizontally as in our
Venetian blinds.

1 Vagguliyo. This habit of the bat and its harmlessness are
referred to in Milinda Pawha, p. 404. Compare the Sanskrit
valguli.

2 jTakkalikan ti. Ettha Maka-pada-puft/Wanaw bandhitu?«
anu^anami ti attho (B.). The word £akkali occurs below, VI,
19, probably in the sense here meant.

3 Vataplna-bhisi ti vatapana-pamawena bhisiw katvd bandhi-
tuwz anu^animi ti attho (B.). Probably like the sand-bags used in
England to keep out draughts. On the use of the word in other
connections, see our note on Mahavagga VIII, 131 t> sind the
Old Commentary on Paiittiya XIV (where five kinds are named)
with the Kankha-vitara»i on the last passage quoted by Minayeff,

p. 86.

1 Midhim. See the note on V, 9, 4. Native huts in Ceylon
always have such solid benches (of brick or mud covered with
plaster) built up against the wall under the verandah : and they
are commonly used as sleeping-places for the unmarried males

M 2

164

JSTULLAVAGGA.

VI, 2, 3.

On the solid bench their limbs ached.

4 1 allow, O Bhikkhus, bedsteads made of laths
of split bamboo V

Now at that time a bier-like masaraka 2 bed-
stead — a masaraka chair — a bier-like bundika-
baddha 3 bedstead — a bundikabaddha chair — a
bier-like kullra-pldaka 4 bedstead — a kullra-p&-
daka chair — a bier-like iha/§ia-pidaka 5 bedstead
— an aha^/^a-padaka chair — had come into the
possession of the Sawgha.

in the house. Waska(/uwa Subhftti has this in his mind in the
explanation he gives in English of vedika (Abhidhana-ppadipika,
verse 222), though he applies it to the wrong word.

1 Bidala-ma^akazrc nama vetta-ma nk&m, ve/u-vilivahi vd
vita^z (B.). The word occurs in the Pataka Commentary I, 9,
lines 26, 34. Compare the Sanskrit bidala and vidala.

2 Masarako, on which Buddhaghosa says nothing here; but on
the Old Commentary to the 14th Pd&ttiya, where all the four
words in this paragraph also occur, he has the following note
(see Minayeff, p. 68): Mas drake ti ma^U’a-pdde vi^^itvd tattha
a/aniyo pavesetvd kato — just the opposite therefore of dhaMa-
padako below. On a/ani, compare our note to the 87th Pa&t-
tiya. The four names recur, of chairs only, in the Old Com-
mentary on the 87th and 88th Pa&ttiyas.

s Buddhaghosa, loc. cit., says, Bundikabaddho ti a/anihi
ma?~.Avpade ^/amsdpetva pallahka-sa^khepena kato. The first
word, bundika, may mean a small bolt.

4 Kulira-padako ti assa-me^dfadina^ pada-sadisehi pddakehi
kato : yo va pana koA vanka-padako ayaw kulira-padako (B. loc.
cit). A bedstead or chair with curved or carved legs, especially
when carved to represent animals 9 feet. K ultra is a crab.

5 AhaH’a-padako ti. Aya//z pana ahaAfca-pddako nama manfc
ahge vlgghitvi kato hotiti eva m parato paliya^ yeva vutto. Tasmd
a/aniyo vig^itvd tattha pada-sikhaw pavesetvd upari anim datvd
kata-maiUo ahaMa-pddako ti veditabbo (B. loc. cit.). This is in
agreement with the Old Commentary on the 18th Pd&ttiya in
which this word already occurs. Compare dha£/£a in the Ayd-
ranga Sftya II, 1, 1, 2, II, 1, 10, 6.

VI, 2, 4 '

ON DWELLINGS AND FURNITURE.

165

They told this matter (in each case) to the
Blessed One.

* I allow you, O Bhikkhus, (each of these things)/

4. Now at that time a rectangular chair 1 — an
arm-chair 2 — a sofa 3 — a sofa with arms to it 4 — a
state chair 5 6 — a cushioned chair G — a chair raised on
a pedestal 7 — a chair with many legs 8 — a board (to
recline on) 9 — a cane-bottomed chair 10 — a straw-
bottomed chair — had come into the possession of
the Sa^zgha.

They told this matter (in each case) to the
Blessed One.

‘ I allow you, O Bhikkhus, (each of these things). 5

1 Asandiko. Buddhaghosa says, Asandako (sic) ti iaturassa-
\AiImn vuMati. An asandi (cushioned chair) is forbidden at Ma-
havagga V, 10, 4.

2 UH’aka m pi asandi lean ti vaAanato ekato-bhagena digha-
pi/Aam eva hi a//Aangul a-padaka w va//ati (B.).

3 Sattango nama tisu disasu apassayaw katv& mato (B.).
On ap ass ay aw, compare note 9.

4 UM’ako pi sattango. Compare note 2.

6 Bhadda-pi/Aan ti vetta-mayaw pithaw vuAAati (B,). We

follow Bohtlingk-Roth sub voce bhadra-pi/Aa.

6 Pi/Aika ti pilotika-baddhazw pitham eva (B.). Childers says
‘bench, stool/ Compare Sanskrit pi/Aaka (in the addenda to
the Petersburg Dictionary).

7 E/aka-p&daka-pI/Aaw nama daru-pa//ikdya upari pade
/Aapetva bho^ana-phalakaw viya kata~pi/Aaw vuAAati (B.).

8 Ama/aka-vazz/ika-pi/Aaw nama ama/akakarena yogitaw
bahu-pada-pi/Aam (B.). Compare t^lava^/a at V, 22, 2, and
taia-va?z/aka at V, 29, 4.

9 Phalakaw. Compare apassena-phalakaw at Mahavagga
I, 25, 12, and below, ATullavagga VI, 20, 2.

10 Kokkkzm nama vakamayaw va usiramayaw va mu?%a-
mayaw va babba^amayaw va anto sawve/Aetva baddhaw hoti, says
the Old Commentary on the 14th PaAittiya. Buddhaghosa gives
here the same explanation, omitting vaka.

1 66 KULLAVAGGA. VI, 2 , g,

5. Now at that time the jOabbaggiya Bhikkhus
slept on lofty beds.

People coming on a visit to the Vihira, when
they saw them, murmured, &c., saying, ‘ Like those
who still live in the pleasure of the world.’

They told this matter to the Blessed One.

‘ You are not, O Bhikkhus, to sleep on lofty beds.
Whosoever does so, shall be guilty of a dukka/a V

Now at that time a certain Bhikkhu, when sleep-
ing on a low couch, was bitten by a snake 2 .

They told this matter to the Blessed One.

‘ I allow you, O Bhikkhus, supports to your
bedsteads 3 .’

Now at that time the AYabbaggiya Bhikkhus used
lofty supports to their bedsteads, and rocked them-
selves with these bedstead supports, backwards and
forwards 4 .

‘You are not, O Bhikkhus, to use lofty supports
to your bedsteads. Whosoever does so, shall be
guilty of a dukka/a. I allow you such supports up
to eight inches in length.’

6. Now at that time a quantity of string had
come into the possession of the Sawgha.

They told this matter to the Blessed One.

‘ I allow you, O Bhikkhus, to weave (a texture
of string across) the bedstead.’

Much string was taken up by (passing it round)
the sides of the bedstead.

1 Compare the 8th jVftla Sila (Rh. D.’s 1 Buddhist Suttas,’
p. 191).

2 Compare Zullavagga V, 6.

s Maw^a-pa/ipidakaw mentioned in Mah&vagga I, 25, 16.

4 Pavedhenti. The reading is doubtful, but the suggestion
at p. 321 of the text must be withdrawn.

ON DWELLINGS AND FURNITURE.

VI, 2) 6.

‘ I allow you, O Bhikkhus, to pierce the sides of
the bedstead, and thus to weave the string across
and across V

A cloth had come into their possession.

‘ I allow you, O Bhikkhus, to use it as a carpet V

A mattress stuffed with cotton 1 2 3 had come into
their possession.

‘ I allow you, O Bhikkhus, to comb out the cotton,
ancl make the cotton up into pillows 4 if it be of
any of these three kinds — cotton produced on trees,
cotton produced on creepers, cotton produced from
Po/aki-grass.’

Now at that time the A7zabbaggiya Bhikkhus
made use of pillows half the size of a man’s body.

People who came on a visit to the Vih&ras mur-
mured, &c., on seeing this, saying, ‘ Like those who
still enjoy the pleasures of the world.’

1 A/Z/zapadakaw vetu»z. Buddhaghosa says nothing, either
here or at Mahavagga VIII, 2r, where the word also occurs.
A/*apada-//Mpana at Gataka II, 5, 14 , is a mode of dressing the
hair, probably in broad plaits crossing each other so as to re-
semble the squares of a chessboard.

2 Or ‘rug.’ /ulimika ti nama parikammakataya bhftmiyft
Mavi-sawrakkhanatthaya attharazzaw vuMati (B.). It is pro-
bably the same word as, or connected with, £imilikd, used by
Buddhaghosa in note g on MaMvagga VII, 1, 5, and explained
by him (in Minayeff, p. 87, line g) as tdla-pawraidihi kata.
Both words are possibly diminutives of X’ola, and it is not im-
probable that the reading should be £ilimik& in both cases, as
Buddhaghosa so' spells the word again in his note below on
VI, 2, 7.

3 Tulika. This is undoubtedly what is meant to be for-
bidden in § g of the Maxima Sila, although Grimblot, ‘Sept
Suttas Palis,’ p. 9, reads kulikam. See Mahavagga V, 10, 4.

4 Compare IV, 4, 4, VIII, 1, 3, where such pillows are men-
tioned among the ordinary belongings of a Vihara. The present
rule is repeated below in VI, 14.

1 68 JHJLLAVAGGA. VI, 2, 7.

: ' '• • ’ ' ' • ’ ' . . • ■ '

They told this matter to the Blessed One.

* You are not, O Bhikkhus, to make use of pillows
half the size of a man’s body. Whosoever does so,
shall be guilty of a dukka^a. I allow you, O
Bhikkhus; to have pillows the size of a man’s head.’

7. Now at that time there was a festival on a
high place 1 at Ragagaha. The people provided for
the use of high officials bolsters stuffed with wool,
or cotton cloth, or bark, or grass, or leaves. When
the festival had been held they tore open the covers
of skin and carried them off. And the Bhikkhus
saw much wool, and cotton cloth, and bark, and
grass, and leaves thrown away on the spot where
the festival had been held ; and on seeing this, they
told the matter to the Blessed One.

1 1 allow, O Bhikkhus, bolsters 2 of five kinds —
those stuffed with wool, or cotton cloth, or bark, or
grass, or talipot leaves.’

Now at that time a bed coverlet had come into
the possession of the Sawgha.

They told this matter to the Blessed One.

‘ I allow you, O Bhikkhus, to cover a bolster
with it’

Now at that time the Bhikkhus folded up bed
bolsters on to chairs 3 , and chair bolsters on to bed-
steads, and the bolsters came to pieces.

They told this matter to the Blessed One.

‘ I allow you, O Bhikkhus, chairs and bedsteads
covered (with upholstered cushions to fit them).’

1 Giragga-sama^o. See our note above on V, 2, 6.

2 Bhisi. See the note on this ■word at MaMvagga VIII, 13, 1.

3 Buddhaghosa says here maw/$a-bhisi»z pi ikt sawharanti ti
ma«.£a-pi/Ae attharanti attharanattMya haranti ti yuggati (B.).
On this use of sawharati compare above, V, n, 7.

VI, 2 , 7-

ON DWELLINGS AND FURNITURE.

169

They covered the bedsteads and chairs without
putting a cloth beneath them 1 , and the stuffing
came out from below.

‘ I allow you, O Bhikkhus, first to spread out
a cloth under the bedsteads or chairs, and then to
upholster them.’

They tore off the coverings 2 3 , and took them away.

‘ I allow you, O Bhikkhus, to bespatter (the
coverings with dye) V

They still took them away.

‘ I allow you, O Bhikkhus, to use coverings
coloured in patches 4 .’

They still took them away.

‘ I allow you, O Bhikkhus, to colour the coverings
in patches only the size of a man’s hand 6 . 5

1 Ulloka?« akaritva hetthd I'ilimikam adatva (B.). The
word occurs again at Mahavagga I, 25, 15 = ATullavagga VIII,
1, 3, where cobwebs are to be removed with a cloth (ullokal).

2 Khw\m ; but perhaps not necessarily of leather. See the
commencement of this section.

3 So that the coverings would be useless for other purposes.
The Pali word is posituw, which Buddhaghosa explains thus —
hesitun ti (so the Berlin MS.) ra^anena v& haliddhaya vS
upari pusit&ni datu»z. The word is evidently connected not with
the root push, but with the roots prz'sh and prush, ‘to be-
spatter;’ and is the same as phositun at MaMvagga VI, 14, 5,
which is probably the better reading of the two.

4 Bhatti-kammawz. The meaning is doubtful, because the
reading is uncertain. Buddhaghosa says, Bhitti-kamman ti (sic)
bhisi-MaviyS upari bhitli-kammaw. The word is probably
analogous in formation to our English ‘patchwork,’ though the
‘patches’ are not of pieces of different coloured stuffs, but of
bits of different colour spread over the same stuff, and whatever
its meaning, it is probably the same word as bhati-kamma at
V, 9 , 2 .

5 Again both reading and interpretation are open to question.

Hattha-bhittin ti paiU’ahgula-bhittisw is all that Buddhaghosa

1 70 A'ULLAVAGGA. VI, 3 , I.

3 .

1 . Now at that time the sleeping-rooms of the
Titthiyas were whitewashed, the floors of their
rooms were coloured black, and the walls coloured
with red chalk h Much people went to look at their
sleeping-rooms.

They told this matter to the Blessed One.

\ ‘I allow, O Bhikkhus, the use in yourViharas
of whitewash, black colouring, and red colouring.’

Now at that time the whitewash would not lie on
to the rough walls.

They told this matter to the Blessed One.

‘ I allow you, O Bhikkhus, to apply the husks of
grain made up into little balls ; and when you have
thus removed the unevenness with your hands 2 , to
lay on the whitewash.’

The whitewash would not adhere.

They told this matter to the Blessed One.

1 1 allow you, O Bhikkhus, to apply soft clay; and
when you have thus removed the unevenness with
your hands 2 , to lay on the whitewash.’

(Still) the whitewash would not adhere.

‘ I allow you, O Bhikkhus, the use of slime 3 (of
trees) or of paste 4 .’

says; and we have followed in our translation the reading of the
Sinhalese MS. (see p. 321 of the edition of the text), which brings
the word into connection with the preceding phrase.

1 See V, 11, 6, where all these words recur.

2 Pdwikaya. Buddhaghosa says nothing.

3 Ikk&sa, on which we have nothing to add to Buddhaghosa’s
note at p. 321 of the edition of the text. It recurs below again
in this section.

4 Pi/rta-maddan ti piZ/fo-khala/rc (B.). Compare the San-
skrit mrz'd.

VI, 3 , r.

ON DWELLINGS AND FURNITURE.

1 7 1

Now at that time the colouring matter of red chalk
would not lie on the rough walls.

They told this matter to the Blessed One.

‘ I allow you, O Bhikkhus, to apply the husks of
grain made up into little balls ; and when you have
thus removed the unevenness with your hands, to
lay on the colouring matter of red chalk.’

The red colour would not adhere.

‘ I allow you, O Bhikkhus, to apply clay mixed
with the red powder which adheres to the grain
of rice under the husks 1 2 ; and when you have so
taken off the unevenness with your hands to lay on
the red colouring matter.’

Still the red colouring matter would not adhere.

* I allow you, O Bhikkhus, the use of a paste
made of mustard seed 3 , and of oil of beeswax V

It lay on the wall too thickly in great drops 4 .

1 1 allow you, O Bhikkhus, to wipe it down with a
cloth 5 .’

Now at that time the black colouring matter did
not lie on the rough ground.

1 1 allow you, O Bhikkhus, to apply husks of grain

1 Ku«<faka-mattikan ti kuwrfaka-missaka - mattikaw (B.).
Compare kurciaka-pfivaiw in the Gataka Commentary I, 423
(cakes made of flour mixed with this powder).

2 S&sapa-ku//an ti sasapa-pi//^am. The word has occurred
already at Mahlvagga VI, 14, 5, where the reading is ku//a in-
stead of kualfa given in the text here. The latter should be
altered in accordance with that passage, and with Buddhaghosa
here.

3 Sittha-telakan ti vilina-madhu-sitthakaw (B.). It is men-
tioned as used for hair-oil at Afullavagga V, 2, 3.

* AMussannaw hoti ti binduw binduwi hutvsl ti//Aati, says
Buddhaghosa.

5 ATolakena paWuddharituw. Buddhaghosa says paMut-
tharitun ti muMtum ; but compare for the right form V, 17, 1.

172

iTULLAVAGGA.

VI, 3, 3 .

made up into little balls ; and when you have thus
removed the unevenness with your hands, to lay on
the black colouring matter/

The black colouring matter would not adhere.

They told this matter to the Blessed One.

‘ I allow you, O Bhikkhus, to apply clay mixed
with (the excrement of) earth-worms 1 2 ; and when
you have thus removed the unevenness with your
hands, to lay on the black colouring matter.’

Still the black colouring matter would not adhere.

They told this matter to the Blessed One.

‘ I allow you, O Bhikkhus, the use of slime and
astringent liquid V

2. Now at that time the JOabbaggiya Bhikkhus
had imaginative drawings 3 painted on their Viharas
—figures of men, and figures of women.

People, when they saw them on going to visit the
Viharas, murmured, &c., saying, ‘ Like those who
still enjoy the pleasures of the world.’

They told this matter to the Blessed One-

‘You are not, O Bhikkhus, to have imaginative
drawings painted — figures of men, and figures of

1 Ga^ifu-mattikan ti ga#</upp&da-gfttha-mattikaz» (B.).

2 Kas&van ti amalaka-hari/akanaw kasavaw (B.). Compare
Mahavagga VI, 4.

3 Pa/ibhana-T’ittazrc. The Bhikkhunis were forbidden by the
41st Pa/dttiya of the Bhikkhuni-vibhahga to go and see such paint-
ings. (Sutta-vibhahga II, 298, where a picture gallery, iTitt-
&ga,ra, belonging to King Pasenadi of Kosala, is mentioned.)
We are not quite sure of the connotation of the term, which
appears to imply some reproach. Perhaps it means ‘suggestive/
Figures as such were not forbidden; and remains of statues and
bas reliefs erected in the Viharas, illustrative of every-day life, have
been found in great numbers. In the introductory story to the
26th Pa&ttiya it certainly means ‘ indecent/

VI, 3, 3-

ON DWELLINGS AND FURNITURE.

173

women. Whosoever does so, shall be guilty of a
dukka/a. I allow you, O Bhikkhus, representa-
tions of wreaths and creepers and bone hooks and
cupboards V

3 . Now at that time the Vih&ras had too low a
basement (&c., as in V, 11 , 6 as to roofing, stairs,
and balustrade).

Now at that time the Viharas were crowded '
with people 1 2 . The Bhikkhus were ashamed to lie
down to sleep.

‘ I allow you, O Bhikkhus, the use of curtains.’ i

They lifted up the curtains and looked in.

They told this matter to the Blessed One.

1 1 allow you, O Bhikkhus, to put up a lath and
plaster wall half the height of the Vihara.’

They looked on from over this half-wall.

‘ I allow you, O Bhikkhus, to make inner chambers
of three kinds — chambers in shape like a palankeen 3 4 ,
chambers in shape like a quart measure *, and cham-
bers on an upper storey 5 .’

1 All these words occur above at V, it, 6, and V, 14, 4. The
meaning of the two last is very doubtful. Perhaps it is intended
that these should occupy the space on the walls instead of any
ornamentation.

2 Alakamandd, literally, ‘like Kuvera’s city in heaven.’ Bud-
dhaghosa tells us why. A/akamanda ti ekangana manussabhi-
kiraa. Akiwraa-yakkhd, corresponding to this last word, recurs
in the standing description of A/akamandi at Mahd-parinibbana
Sutta V, 43 = Maha Sudassana Sutta I, 3. The name of the
city is spelt in both those passages with l not 1.

3 Sivikd-gabbho ti iaturassa-gabbho says Buddhaghosa.

4 Na/iki-gabbho ti vittharato dvigUKa-tiguw-ayamo digha-
gabbho (B.). That na/ika is used like na/i for a bushel measure
follows from a comparison of (?ataka 1, 124, last lines, with I, 126,
line 3.

15 Hammiya-gabbho ti Ikasa-tale ku/agara-gabbho muda«rfa-

174

XULLAVAGGA.

VI, 3 . 4 -

Now at that time the Bhikkhus made inner cham-
bers in the middle of small Viharas, and there was
no room to move about in.

They told this matter to the Blessed One.

1 1 allow you, O Bhikkhus, to make the inner
chambers at one side of small Viharas, and in the
middle of large ones V

4. Now at that time the lower part of the lath
and plaster wall of the Vihara decayed.

They told this matter to the Blessed One.

‘ I allow you, O Bhikkhus, buttresses of timber V

Rain leaked through on to the lath and plaster
wall of the Vihdra 3 .

‘ I allow you, O Bhikkhus, a protecting arrange-
ment 4 and cement 5 .’

Now at that time a snake fell from the roof on to
the back of a certain Bhikkhu. He was ternfied,
and made an outcry 6 . The Bhikkhus, running up,
said to that Bhikkhu : ‘Why, Sir, do you make an
outcry?’ Then that Bhikkhu told the matter to

£&&adana-gabbho va (B.). Compare our note on Mahavagga I,

1 There is a similar injunction at V, 14, 3, with respect to fire-
places in bath-rooms.

2 Rulahka-pfidakaw. See Buddhaghosa’s note at p. 321 of
the edition of the text. The remedy here is different from that
provided in the similar case, at V, 14, 3, with respect to bath-
bouses.

8 On the use of ovassati compare V, i6, i, and VIII, 3, 3.

4 Parittana-ki/ikan ti tassa parittfinattha« ki/ikaw is all that
Buddhaghosa says. Compare the end of § 5.

6 Uddha-sudhan ti vaM&aka-gomayena ka. Marikava k& sad-
dhim maddita-mattikam (B.).

6 Vissaram aka si. See the note on Zullavagga VIII, 1, 1,
•where the whole incident is similar.

VI. 3. 5-

ON DWELLINGS AND FURNITURE.

1 75

the Bhikkhus, and they told the matter to the
Blessed One.

‘ I allow you, O Bhikkhus, a ceiling-cloth.’ |

5 . Now at that time the Bhikkhus hung their
bags at the feet of the bedsteads, and at the feet of
the chairs ; and they were gnawed by the mice and
white ants.

They told this matter to the Blessed One.

‘ I allow you, O Bhikkhus, pins in the wall, and
bone hooks V

Now at that time the Bhikkhus laid aside their
robes on the bedsteads and on the chairs, and the
robes were torn.

They told this matter to the Blessed One.

‘ I allow you, O Bhikkhus, bamboos to hang your
robes on, and strings to hang your robes on V

Now at that time the Vihiras had no verandahs,
and no defences 1 2 3 .

They told this matter to the Blessed One.

‘ I allow you, O Bhikkhus, verandahs 4 , covered
terraces 5 , inner verandahs 6 7 , and over-hanging
eaves V

1 The use of these has been already referred to at V, 9, 5.

2 These have already been allowed in ATullavagga V, n, 6, and
V, 14, 3. The license under the present rule extends only to their
use in Vih&ras.

8 Apa/issarana, which must have some special, technical,
meaning unknown to us. Buddhaghosa says nothing.

* Alin do n&ma pamukham vuX’iati (B.). Compare Abhidh&na-
ppadipikd, verse 218.

5 Paghanam nama yam nikkhamantd ka. pavisanta ka. pMehi
hananti. Tassa viMra-dv&re ubhato ku#am (?) niharitvsi kata-
padesass’ etaw adhiva&mam. Paghanan ti pi vuAfcati (B.).

6 Paku//an ti ma ggh<z gabbhassa samantd pariyagaro vuttati.
Paku/an ti pi pa/Ao (B.).

7 Osarako ti antt/indake vihare va7«saw datvi tato Aand-al

176

STULLAVAGGA.

VI, 3, <?.

The verandahs were too public ; and the Bhik-
khus were ashamed to lie down in them to sleep.

‘ I allow you, O Bhikkhus, an arrangement in
form of a curtain that can be drawn aside 1 , or an
arrangement in form of a moveable screen V

6. Now at that time the Bhikkhus, when taking
their midday meal in the open air, were troubled
by cold and heat.

They told this matter to the Blessed One.

‘ I allow you, O Bhikkhus, a Service Hall.’

The Service Hall had too low a basement (&c.,
as in V, 11, 6, down to the end).

Now at that time the Bhikkhus spread their robes
out on the ground in the open air, and they became
dirty.

1 1 allow, O Bhikkhus, bamboos to hang robes on,
and strings to hang robes in, in the open air.

7. The water became warm.

‘ I allow, O Bhikkhus, a water-room and a water-
shed.’

The water-room had too low a basement (&c., as
in V, tt, 6, down to the end).

There were no vessels for the water.

‘ I allow, O Bhikkhus, chank shells and saucers
for the water.’

8. Now at that time the Viharas had no fence
round them.

‘ I allow you, O Bhikkhus, to enclose them with

oslretvd kata m A 5 adana-pamukha»z (B.). At G&taka III, 446, it
is said of a dying man 1 niharitva osarake nipa°g 4 pesuffz.’

1 Sawzsarawa-ki/iko n&ma Aakkala-yutto ki/iko (B.). ATak-
kala should be compared with AakkhalikS at VI, 2, 2, and
.Jakkhali at VI, 19.

2 Ugghi/ana-kiAko, on which Buddhaghosa says nothing.

3 » 9 -

ON DWELLINGS AND FURNITURE.

1 77

ramparts (P&k&ra) of three kinds — brick walls,
stone walls, and wooden fences.’

There was no store-room \

‘ I allow, O Bhikkhus, a store-room.’

The store-room had too low a basement, and it
was flooded with water.

‘ I allow you, O Bhikkhus, to make it with a high
basement. 5

The store-room had no door.

4 1 allow, O Bhikkhus, a door ; with door-posts
and lintel, with hollows like a mortar for the door
to revolve in, with projections to revolve in those
hollows, with rings on the door for the bolt to
work along in, with a block of wood fixed into the
edge of the door-post, and containing a cavity for
the bolt to go into (called the Monkey’s Head), with
a pin to secure the bolt by, with a connecting bolt,
with a key-hole, with a hole for a string with which
the door may be closed, and with a string for that
purpose V

Grass and plaster fell from the store-room.

‘ I allow you, O Bhikkhus (&c., as in V, 14, 4,
down to the end of V, 14, 5, as to roofing, flooring,
drains, &c.).’

9. Now at that time the Bhikkhus made fire-
places here and there in the Parive»a, and the
Parive^a was covered with the remains of the fires 8 .

1 K*o/A$aka. See our note above on V, 14, 4, as to the various
allied meanings of this word. Perhaps ‘gateway’ should be
chosen as the rendering here, as it clearly must be in the closely
allied passage in the next section but one (§ 10). As the chamber
supposed always to be built over the gateway could be used as a
store-room, the difference is not very essential.

2 The whole as above in V, 14, 3, where see the note.

3 Uklapo. On this use of the word compare Aullavagga VIII, r, 3.

[20] N

176

rULLAVAGGA.

n, 3 , 6.

The verandahs were too public; and the Bhik-
khus were ashamed to lie down in them to sleep.

‘ I allow you, O Bhikkhus, an arrangement in
form of a curtain that can be drawn aside 1 , or an
arrangement in form of a moveable screen 2 .’

6. Now at that time the Bhikkhus, when taking
their midday meal in the open air, were troubled
by cold and heat.

They told this matter to the Blessed One.

‘ I allow you, O Bhikkhus, a Service Hall.’

The Service Hall had too low a basement (&c.,
as in V, n, 6, down to the end).

Now at that time the Bhikkhus spread their robes
out on the ground in the open air, and they became
dirty.

‘ I allow, O Bhikkhus, bamboos to hang robes on,
and strings to hang robes in, in the open air.

7. The water became warm.

‘ I allow, O Bhikkhus, a water-room and a water-
shed.’

The water-room had too low a basement (&c., as
in V, it, 6, down to the end).

There were no vessels for the water.

‘ I allow, O Bhikkhus, chank shells and saucers
for the water.’

8. Now at that time the Vih&ras had no fence
round them.

1 1 allow you, O Bhikkhus, to enclose them with

osaretva kata m Madana-pamukhaw (B.). At Gltaka III, 446, it
is said of a dying man 1 niharitva osarake nipag§ 4 pesu»z.’

1 Sa«zsara«a-ki/iko nama fekkala-yutto ki/iko (B.). K, ak-
kala should be compared with /t'akkhalikd, at YI, 2, 2, and
^akkhali at VI, 19.

2 UggkS/ana-ki/iko, on which Buddhaghosa says nothing.

VI, 3 . 9 -

ON DWELLINGS AND FURNITURE.

177

ramparts (P&kira) of three kinds — brick walls,
stone walls, and wooden fences.’

There was no store-room \

‘ I allow, O Bhikkhus, a store-room.’

The store-room had too low a basement, and it
was flooded with water.

‘ I allow you, O Bhikkhus, to make it with a high
basement.’

The store-room had no door.

‘ I allow, O Bhikkhus, a door ; with door-posts
and lintel, with hollows like a mortar for the door
to revolve in, with projections to revolve in those
hollows, with rings on the door for the bolt to
work along in, with a block of wood fixed into the
edge of the door-post, and containing a cavrty for
the bolt to go into (called the Monkey’s Head), with
a pin to secure the bolt by, with a connecting bolt,
with a key-hole, with a hole for a string with which
the door may be closed, and with a string for that
purpose V

Grass and plaster fell from the store-room.

‘ I allow you, O Bhikkhus (&c., as in V, 14, 4,
down to the end of V, 14, 5, as to roofing, flooring,
drains,

9. Now at that time the Bhikkhus made fire-
places here and there in the Parive^a, and the
Parivewa was covered with the remains of the fires 8 .

1 K,o///;aka. See our note above on V, 14, 4, as to the various
allied meanings of this word. Perhaps ‘gateway’ should be
chosen as the rendering here, as it clearly must be in the closely
allied passage in the next section but one (§ 10). As the chamber
supposed always to be built over the gateway could be used as a
store-room, the difference is not very essential.

2 The w'hole as above in V, 14, 3, where see the note.

3 Uklapo. On this use of the word compare A’ullavagga VIII, 1,3.

[20] N

TULLAVAGGA.

YI, 3, to.

178

They told this matter to the Blessed One.

‘I allow you, O Bhikkhus, to make a separate
room for the fire at one side.’

The fire-room had too low a basement (&c., as in
V, 11, 6, as to flooring, stairs, and balustrade, fol-
lowed by the paragraph as to the door, and the
facing, as in V, 14, 3, &c.).

10. Now at that time the Aramas had no fences
to them, and goats and cattle injured the plantations 1 .

They told this matter to the Blessed One.

‘ I allow you, O Bhikkhus, to surround them with
fencing of three kinds — bamboo fences, thorn fences,
and ditches/

There was no gateway (ko//iaka), and goats
and cattle, even so, injured the plantations.

‘ I allow, O Bhikkhus, a gateway, with gates made
of stakes interlaced with thorny brakes 2 , with fences
(across the gateway) made of the akka plant 3 , with
ornamental screen-work over the gateway 4 , and with
bars. 5

[Then the paragraphs allowing the roofing, &c.,
of this ko/Maka as in V, 11, 6, and drains for the
Ar&ma, as in V, 14, 3.]

11. Now at that time Seniya Bimbisara, the king
of Magadha, wanted to build a pasada 5 (residence),

1 Uparope. Compare Uparopaka at (Jitaka II, 345.

2 Apesiyam. See p. 321 of the edition of the text, reading

of course kawMaka. t

3 Akkavi/a, on which Buddhaghosa says nothing. A kind of
dress made from the stalks of the akka plant is mentioned in
MaMvagga VIII, 28, 2.

* Tosawa, which is the ornamental erection over a gateway of
which such excellent examples in stone have been found at the
S inchi and Bharhut Topes.

° The exact meaning of the word Pisada at the time when this

71,4,1. ON DWELLINGS AND FURNITURE. 1 79

covered with cement and clay, for the use of the
Saiwgha. And it occurred to the Bhikkhus, ‘ What
kind of roof now has been allowed by the Blessed
One, and what kind of roof has not been allowed ?’
They told this matter to the Blessed One.

‘ I allow, O Bhikkhus, roofing of five kinds — brick
roofing, stone roofing, cement roofing, straw roofing, '
and roofing of leaves.’

End of the First Bharaavara (or Portion for
Recitation).

4 .

i. Now at that time the householder An&tha
Pmnfika was the husband of the sister of the Raga-
gaha Setthi. And Anatha PiWika the householder
went to R&gagaha on some business or other. Now
at that time the Savzgha, with the Buddha at its
head, had been bidden by the S&ttki of Rag’agaha
for the morrow’s meal. And the S tit hi of Rh^a-
gaha gave command to his slaves and work-people,
saying, ‘ So get up at early morn, my men, and cook
congey, and cook rice, and prepare curries, and pre-
pare delicacies 1 ! ’

book was written has not yet been precisely ascertained. In later
times it meant a building of several storeys, each successive storey
being smaller in superficial area than, the one immediately beneath
it. Compare the Mahi-loha-pSsida so often mentioned in the
MaMvamsa (pp. 161-257), the stone pillars of the lowest stories of
which are still one of the sights of Anuradhapura.

1 Uttari-bhangaw. Childers sub voce uttari is in doubt what
the meaning of this phrase is. It is no longer uncertain that the
word means ‘ delicacy’ of some sort. Whether the term was more

N 2

A'ULLAVAGGA.

VI, 4 , 2-

180

And it occurred to Anatha Pmiika the house-
holder, ‘ Now formerly this householder was wont,
when I arrived, to lay aside all other business, and
exchange the greetings of courtesy with me; but
now he appears excited, and is giving orders to
his slaves and work-people. How can it be ? Is he
taking in marriage, or is he giving in marriage, or
has he set a great sacrifice on foot, or has he invited
the Magadhan Seniya Bimbisira, together with his
retinue, for to-morrow’s meal?’

2. Now when the S ttthl of Ragagaha had given
commandment to his slaves and his work-people, he
went up to the place where An&tha Pmtifika the
householder was, and exchanged with him the
greetings of courtesy, and took his seat on one
side. And when he was so seated, Anatha PMAka
the householder [told him the thoughts that had
passed through his mind].

‘ I am neither taking nor giving in marriage, O
householder’ (was the reply), ‘nor have I invited
the Magadhan Seniya Bimbisira to to-morrow’s meal.
But a great sacrifice I have set on foot, for the
Sawgha, with the Buddha at its head, has been
invited for to-morrow’s meal at my house.’

‘ Did you, O householder, say “ the Buddha ?”’

‘ Yes, it was “ the Buddha” that I said.’

precise, and denoted some particular delicacy or not, is still doubt-
ful. Compare the passages quoted in our note above on Maha-
vagga VI, 14, 3 (adding Gltaka I, 186, and Zullavagga IV, 4 , 5,
VIII, 4, 4), which show that it was eaten with boiled rice or
congey; is mentioned along with ghee and oil; and could be made
from the flesh (or other parts) of a sucking-pig. If it were not for
the latter circumstance (ffataka I, 197) it might well be pickles or
chutney,

VI, 4 , 3 -

ON DWELLINGS AND FURNITURE.

181

[And thrice the same question was put, and the
same reply was given.]

‘ Hard is it, O householder, to meet even with
the mere expression in the world — the news, that is,
of “a Buddha, a Buddha 1 .” Would it be possible
for us, at this very time, to go and visit that Blessed
One, the Arahat, the very Buddha 2 3 ?’

e It is not now, O householder, the proper time to
pay a visit to the Blessed One; but early on the
morrow you shall go and visit him.’

Then Anatha PiWika, pondering of the visit
he was about to pay, lay down to sleep with
his thoughts so bent upon the Buddha that thrice
in the night he arose, thinking the daylight had
appeared.

3. And Anatha Pi/^ika the householder went up
to the gate leading to the Sitavana, and celestial
beings opened the gate. And as he emerged from
the city, the light disappeared and a thick darkness
arose, and fear and trembling and consternation
sprang up within him, so that a longing came upon
him to turn back again from that spot. But Sivaka
the Yakkha, himself the while invisible, caused a
sound to be heard, saying :

‘ A hundred elephants, a hundred steeds, a hun-
dred chariots with mules s ,

‘A hundred thousand virgins with their jewelled
earrings on, —

1 ‘Much more so with the reality ’is to be understood. Com-
pare MaM-parinibMna Sutta VI, 63 (at the end).

2 On this rendering of Samm&-sambuddha»/, see Rh. D.'s
‘ Hibbert Lectures,’ pp. 145-147.

3 Assatari. Compare va^Matari at Mahavagga V, 9, r, 3.
The word recurs below at VII, 2, 5.

XULLAVAGGA.

YI, 4, 4.

182

‘These are not worth, O householder, the six-
teenth portion of one single stride.

‘Go on, go on, O householder! Advance, and
not retreat, shall profit thee.’

Then the darkness disappeared before Anatha
Pindika the householder, and a bright light arose,
and the fear and trembling and consternation that
had sprung upon within him were appeased.

[And a second and a third time the same thing
happened, and the same words were heard, and with
the same result.]

4. And Anatha Pindika the householder arrived
at the Sitavana ; and at that time the Blessed One,
who had arisen at early dawn, was walking up and
down (meditating) in the open air. And the Blessed
One saw Anatha Pindika the householder when he
was coming from afar ; and the Blessed One left the
place where he had been walking up and down, and
sat himself down on the seat put out for him. And
when he was so seated, he addressed Anatha Pindika
the householder, and said :

‘ Come hither, Sudatta !’

Then Anatha Pindika, glad and happy at the
thought that the Blessed One had addressed him by •
his name, went up to the place where the Blessed
One was, and bowed down before him, falling at his
feet, and said :

‘ I trust my lord the Blessed One has slept in
peace !’

‘He ever sleeps in peace, the Arahat who is
free 1 ,

1 Brahma«o parinibbuto. To translate the first of these
words by 1 Brahman’ would mislead English readers. It is con-
stantly used in early Buddhist texts for Arahat. On the use of

VI, 4, 5. ON DWELLINGS AND FURNITURE.

‘Who is not touched by lusts, but calm and free
from sin 1 ,

‘Has broken all the bars (to freedom of the mind) 2 ,
has quenched the anguish in his heart,

‘ Has fixed peace in his mind, and peaceful, sleeps
in peace V

5 4 . Then the Blessed One discoursed to Anatha
Pi/^ika the householder in due order; that is to
say, he spake to him of giving, of righteousness, of
heaven, of the danger, the vanity, and the defilement
of lusts, and of the advantages of renunciation. And
when the Blessed One saw that Anatha Pmdika the
householder had become prepared, softened, un-
prejudiced, and upraised and believing in heart, then
he proclaimed that which is the special doctrine of
the Buddhas ; that is to say, Suffering, its Origin,
its Cessation, and the Path. And just as a clean
cloth from which all stain has been washed away
will readily take the dye, just even so did Anatha

parinibbuto not in the sense of ‘ dead,’ but of a living man in the
sense of ‘ spiritually free/ compare Dhammapada, verse 89; Sutta
Nipata II, 13, 1, 12, III, 12, 35; and Maha-parinibbana Sutta
IV, 3.

1 Nirftpadhi, i.e. free from Kama, Kilesa, and Kamma,

2 Sabba asattiyo kketvL Having cut or broken all the
asatti’s (from the root saf^, to hang), the things which hang on
to and burden a man in his spiritual progress. Compare the figure
of speech at Gataka I, 5 (asattaw ku^apaw ^addetvd). Buddha-
ghosa says sabba; Asattiyo khetv& ti . . . , hadaye daraihazw
kitte kilesa-daratham ^inetvL

8 Vineyya and appuya are no doubt gerunds. In a corre-
sponding passage of the Anguttara Nikaya the Phayre MS. reads
appeyya, which smoothes over a difficulty at the expense of the
better reading. #

4 The following section is in identical terms with MaMvagga I,
h 5, 10, V, 1, 9, 10, VI, 26, 8, 9.

184

JsTULLAVAGGA.

VI, 4 , 6.

Pbidika. the householder obtain, even while sitting
there, the pure and spotless Eye of the Truth ; (that
is to say, the knowledge that) whatsoever has a
beginning, in that is inherent also the necessity of
dissolution. Thus did An&tha Plndxka. the house-
holder see, and master, and understand, and pene-
trate the Truth; and he overcame uncertainty, and
dispelled all doubts, and gained full knowledge,
becoming dependent upon no one else for his
knowledge of the doctrine of the Teacher. And
he addressed the Blessed One, and said:

‘ Most excellent, Lord (are the words of thy
mouth), most excellent ! J ust as if a man were to
set up that which is thrown down, or were to reveal
that which is hidden away, or were to point out the
right road to him who has gone astray, or were to
bring a light into the darkness so that those who had
eyes could see external forms— just even so, Lord,
has the Truth been made known to me, in many a
figure, by the Blessed One. And I, even I, betake
myself, Lord, to the Blessed One as my refuge, to
the Truth, and to the Order. May the Blessed One
accept me as a disciple, as one who, from this day
forth as long as life endures, has taken his refuge in
him. And may the Blessed One consent to accept
at my hand the to-morrow’s meal for himself and for
his Order of Bhikkhus.’

Then the Blessed One, by silence, granted his
consent. And when Anatha Vindlka. the house-
holder perceived that his request had been granted,
he rose from his seat, and bowed down before the
Blessed One, and keeping him on his right hand as
he passed him, he departed thence.

6. Now the SeA/zi of Ragagaha heard that the

Order of Bhikkhus which has the Buddha at its
head had been invited by Anatha Pindika. the
householder for the morrow’s meal. And the Se///d
of Rag'agaha said to Anatha PiwAka the house-
holder : 1 * * * * * * They say, O householder, that you have
invited the Bhikkhu-sawgha, with the Buddha at
its head, for the morrow’s meal, and you are but
a stranger here. I will provide the means 1 , O
householder, for you to provide the Order of
Bhikkhus, which has the Buddha at its head, with
food.’

‘It is not necessary, O householder; I have
means sufficient for the purpose.’

[And the townsman of Rafagaha 8 , and Seniya
Bimbisara the Raga of Magadha, made the same
offer in the same words, and received the same
reply.]

7. Then Anatha Pindika the householder, when
the night was far spent, made ready in the house of
the Se///d of Rafagaha sweet food both hard and
soft, and had the time announced to the Blessed
One, saying, ‘ The time, Lord, has come ; and the
meal is ready.’

And the Blessed One, when he had dressed him-
self in the early morning, went duly bowled and

1 Veyydyikats formed from vyaya, expenditure. VeyyS.-
yikan ti vayakaranawi vu&feti (B.).

a R^agahako negamo. This person has been already men-
tioned, and there also in intimate connection with the Se///d of

R^agaha, in the Mahavagga VIII, 1, 2, 16. It is tolerably clear

from the connection that this is no ordinary citizen, but one hold-

ing a distinct and semi-official position. In this respect the word

is an exact parallel to its neighbour the Se///d. For instances of

the word in its more general sense, see Kal’Myana (ed. Senart),

p. 219, and Diu 7 *ava»isa III, 3.

1 86

itULLAVAGGA.

VI, 4, 8 .

robed to the house of the Stttki of Rifagaha, and
sat down there on the seat spread out for him,
together with the Order of Bhikkhus. And An&tha
Pbzz/ika the householder offered to the Order of
Bhikkhus which had the Buddha at its head the
sweet food both hard and soft, waiting upon them
with his own hand 1 . And when the Blessed One
had finished his meal, and had cleansed his hands
and his bowl, Anatha Pm^ika took his seat on one
side ; and, so seated, he said to the Blessed One :

‘ May the Blessed One consent to spend the rainy
season of Was at Savatthi, together with the Order
of Bhikkhus.'

‘The Tathagatas, O householder, take pleasure in
solitude.’

‘ I understand, O Blessed One ; I understand, O
Happy One’ (was the reply) 2 .

Then the Blessed One, after he had instructed
and aroused and incited and gladdened Anatha
Pbzz/ika the householder with religious discourse,
arose from his seat, and departed thence.

8. Now at that time Anatha PizzAka the house-
holder had many friends and large acquaintance,
and his word was held of weight 3 . When he had

1 Compare the note on Mahdvagga I, 8 , 4 .

2 Aw«.dtawz bhagavd a«mdta»z sugatd ti. The first word
is the standing expression used when the Buddha or a Thera has
signified a request, not in so many words, but in some phrase
from which the request may be implied, and the person addressed
desires to express that he has perceived the intended implication.
Compare Dipavawsa XIV, 6 5, XV, 5.

3 Adeyyava/’o ti tassa va&na m bahugand mdnetabbaw ma?i-
wantt ti attho (B.). In Puggala III, xx, we have the phrase tassa
va^anawz adheyyawz gaiMati, which the commentary explains by
hadaye ddhdtabbam A4apitabba«.

VI, 4, 9 - ON DWELLINGS AND FURNITURE. 187

brought the business he had in hand at Rifagaha to
its conclusion, he set out towards Savatthi ; and on
the way he gave orders to people, saying, ‘ Build
dwellings, my good men, and make rest-houses
ready, and prepare gifts. A Buddha has appeared
in the world, and that Blessed One has been invited
by me, and by this road will he come.’ And those
people [did all even as they were commanded].

And when Anatha PmaTika the householder had
arrived at Savatthi, he examined all the region
round about it, saying 1 , ‘ Where now shall I fix the
place for the Blessed One to stay in, not too far
from the town and not too near, convenient for
going and for coming, easily accessible for all who
wish to visit him, by day not too crowded, by night
not exposed to too much noise and alarm, protected
from the wand 2 , hidden from men, well fitted for a
retired life ?’

9. And Anatha Pi^dTika the householder saw that
the garden of (feta the Kumara had [all these
advantages]. And when he saw that, he went to
6-eta the Kumara, and said to him, 1 Sir, let me
have your garden to make an Arama on it.’

‘ It is not, Sir, for sale, even for (a sum so great
that the pieces of money would be sufficient to
cover it if they were) laid side by side.’

‘ I take, Sir, the garden at the price.’

* No, O householder, there was no bargain meant 3 .’

1 The following speech is identical with that put into Bim-
bis&ra’s mouth on choosing the Ve/uvana, above MaMvagga I,
22, 16, 17.

2 Vi^-anavataw, of which neither the reading nor the meaning
is certain. See the various forms given from the commentaries
in the notes on the text of the passage in the Mahavagga, loc. cit.

8 Na gahito ; literally, ‘ it is not taken.’

1 88

A'ULLAVAGGA.

YI, 4, 10.

Then they asked the lords of justice whether a
bargain of sale had been made or not. And the
lords decided thus: ‘The Ardma is taken, Sir,
at the price which you fixed.’

And Andtha Ymdika the householder had gold
brought down in carts, and covered the Aetavana
with (pieces) laid side by side 1 .

io. Now the gold that he had brought down the
first time did not suffice (after the rest of the
garden was covered) to cover one small space close
by the gateway. So Andtha Pindika the house-
holder told his servants to go back and fetch more
gold, saying he would cover that piece also.

Then thought Geta the Kumara, ‘ This can be
no ordinary matter 2 , for which this householder is
ready to lavish so much gold !’ And he said to
Anatha Piwt/ika the householder, ‘ It is enough, O
householder. You need not have that space covered.
Let me have that space, and it shall be my gift.’

Then Andtha Pindika the householder thought 3 ,

‘ This Ceta the Kumara is a very distinguished and
illustrious person. Great would be the efficacy of
the adherence of so well known a man as he to this
doctrine and discipline.’ And he gave up that

1 It is evident from the illustration of this story on a bas relief at
the Bharhut Tope that these pieces of money were supposed to be
square, not round. See Cunningham’s ‘The Stupa of Bharhut’
Plate No. LVII and pp. 84-86.

Na oraka m bhavissati. Compare Mahavagga I, 9, 1, and
the commencement of our next chapter below. The idiom recurs

111 Vi I, 3, 3.

^The following phrase is identical with that put into the mouth
of Ananda, at Mahavagga VI, 36, 3, with respect to Ro^a the
alia. In the text here there is a slight misprint; the full-stop
after Mtamanusso should be struck out.

VI, 5, I.

ON DWELLINGS AND FURNITURE.

189

space to £eta the Kumara. And Ceta the Prince
erected thereon a gateway, with a room over it.

And Anatha Ymdiks. the householder built

1 u

dwelling-rooms, and retiring-rooms, and store-rooms \
(over the gateways), and service halls, and halls
with fire-places in them, and storehouses (outside
the Vih&ra) 2 , and closets, and cloisters, and halls
for exercise, and wells, and sheds for the well 3 , and
bath-rooms, and halls attached to the bath-rooms,
and ponds, and open-roofed sheds 4 .

5 .

1. Now when the Blessed One had stayed at
Rafagaha as long as he thought fit, he set out
towards Vesali ; and journeying straight on he in
due course arrived there. And there at V esali the
Blessed One stayed in the peak-roofed hall at the
Mahavana.

Now at that time the people were zealously en-
gaged in putting up new buildings (for the use of
the Order) ®, and as zealously provided with the

3 With the following list should be compared the list of things jl.
that laymen build for themselves given in Mahavagga III, 5, 7,

2 Kappiya-ku/iyo. See Mahavagga VI, 33.

8 UdapIna-s&lSyo. See above, V, 16 , 2.

4 Ma«<fape. See Mahavagga VIII, 7, 1, and above, JTulla-
vagga VI, 3, 7.

8 Navakammaw karonti. This idiom always connotes
buildings for the use of the Order. See the passages quoted in
our note on iTullavagga I, 18, 1. If the buildings were for the
Bhikkhus, then a Bhikkhu, if for the Bhikkhunts, then a Bhikkhunt,
was appointed to superintend the works in order to ensure the

XULLAVAGGA.

VI, 5, 2.

i go

requisite clothes, and food, and lodging, and medi-
cine for the sick, all such Bhikkhus as superintended
their work.

Now a certain poor tailor thought, ‘This can be
no every-day matter on which the people are so
zealously engaged. Let me too set to work on a
new building.’ And that poor tailor himself kneaded
the clay, and laid the bricks, .and raised the walls.
But by his want of experience the laying was out
of line and the wall fell down. And a second and
a third time he [repeated his work, and with the
same result].

2. Then that poor tailor murmured, was annoyed,
and became indignant, saying, ‘ These Sakyaputtiya
Samaras exhort and teach those men who provide
them with the requisite clothes, food, lodging, and
medicine, and superintend their buildings for them.
But I am poor, and no one exhorts or teaches me,
or helps me in my building !’

The Bhikkhus heard him so murmuring, and told
the matter to the Blessed One. Then the Blessed
One on that occasion and in that connection made
a religious discourse, and gave command to the
Bhikkhus, saying, ‘ I permit you, O Bhikkhus, to
give new buildings in course of erection (for the use
of the Order) in charge (to a Bhikkhu who shall
superintend 1 the work). And the Bhikkhu who

buildings being in accordance with the rules of the Order as to
size, form, and object of the various apartments.

The buildings referred to in this section are no doubt intended
to be the same as those referred to in ATullavagga V, 13, 3.

1 Navakammawt ddtuwz. For the works which ought not to
be included, and for those which might be lawfully included in
this term, see below, Afullavagga VI, 17. Hence the overseer is
called navakammika.

VI, 6, i. ON DWELLINGS AND FURNITURE. 191

is overseer shall zealously exert himself to the end
that the work on the Vihara may be brought to a
rapid conclusion, and shall afterwards cause repairs
to be executed wherever the buildings have become
broken or worn out 1 .

3. ‘ And thus, O Bhikkhus, is the work to be
given in charge. In the first place a Bhikkhu is to
be asked (whether he will undertake the duty).
When he has been asked, some able and discreet
Bhikkhu is to lay the matter before the Sazzzgha,
saying, “ Let the venerable Sawzgha hear me. If
the time seems meet to the Sawzgha, let the Savzgha
give in charge to such and such a Bhikkhu the
Vihdra of such and such a householder as a
navakammavz. This is the motion (zzatti). Let
the venerable Saz/zgha hear me. The Sawzgha
hereby gives in charge .... (&c., as before). Who-
soever of the venerable ones approves thereof,
let him keep silence ; whosoever approves not
thereof, let him speak. The Sawzgha has given in
charge .... (&c., as before). Therefore is it silent.
Thus do I understand.’”

6 2 .

1. Now when the Blessed One had stayed as
long as he thought fit at Vesili he set out towards
Savatthi.

1 Kha«(fan ti bhinnokaso : phullan ti phalitokSso (B.). The
expression recurs below at VI, 17, x.

2 The incident related in the following chapter is identical with
the 37th ( 7 &taka (including the Introductory Story there given)
already translated by Rh. D, in the ‘Buddhist Birth Stories,’
pp. 3 1 0-3 1 4.

192

A'ULLAVAGGA.

VI, 6, 2 .

Now at that time the pupils of the AAabbaggiya
Bhikkhus went on in front of the Bhikkhu-sawgha
which had the Buddha at its head, and occupied the
rooms, and occupied the sleeping-places, saying,
‘This will do for our superiors (upaggvl&yas), this
for our teachers (a^ariyas), this for ourselves.’ And
the venerable Sariputta who had followed after the
Bh ikkhu-sa wgh a which had the Buddha at its head,
since all the rooms and all the sleeping-places had
been occupied, found no place to sleep in, and took
his seat at the foot of a certain tree.

Now the Blessed One, at early dawn, after he
had risen, coughed. The venerable Sariputta
coughed also.

‘ Who is this ?’ (said the Blessed One.)

It is I, Lord ; Sariputta.’

‘ ^ ow do you come to be sitting here, Sariputta?’

Then the venerable Sdriputta told the matter
to the Blessed One.

2. Then the Blessed One on that occasion and in
that connection convened a meeting of the Bhikkhu-
saawgha, and asked, 1 Is it true, as I have been told,
O Bhikkhus, that the pupils of the /Wabbaggiya
Bhikkhus have (acted in this way) ?’

‘ It is true, Lord.’

Then the Blessed One rebuked them, saying (as
usual see A ullavagga I, i, 2, 3), and he said to the
Bhikkhus, ‘Who is it, O Bhikkhus, who is worthy of
the best seat, and the best water, and the best food?’

Some of the Bhikkhus said, ‘ One who belonged
to a Ivshatriya family before he entered the Order’
Others of the Bhikkhus said, ‘ One who belonged to
a Brahman, family before he entered the Order.’
Others again said, ‘ One who belonged to a Gaha-

ON DWELLINGS AND FURNITURE.

pati 1 family before he entered the Order— one
versed in the Suttas — one versed in the Rules of
the Order — an expounder of the Dhamma 2 — one
who has attained the first, second, third, fourth
Girina — one who has entered the first, second, third
Path — an Arahat — one who has the threefold
wisdom 3 * 5 — one who has the six powers V

3. Then the Blessed One addressed the Bhikkhus,
and said, ‘ Long ago, O Bhikkhus, there was a great
banyan tree on the lower slopes of the Himalaya
range ; and near it there dwelt three friends — a
partridge, a monkey, and an elephant. And they
dwelt together without mutual reverence, confidence,
and courtesy 6 . Then, O Bhikkhus, it occurred to
those friends, “ Come now, let us find out which of
us is the elder by birth ; and let us agree to honour
and reverence and esteem and support him, and
by his counsels let us abide.” So, Bhikkhus, the
partridge and the monkey asked the elephant,

‘ “ How far back can you, friend, remember ?”

‘ “ F riends ! when I was little I used to walk over

1 Oh this mention of gahapati as the name of a caste or rank,
compare the passage in the Tevigga Sutta I, 47 = Samaimaphala
Sutta, p. 1 33 (translated by Rh. D. in ‘ Buddhist Suttas from the
Pali/ S. B. E, vol. xi, p. 187), where the word is opposed to
awrlatarasmiw kule paK’lg&to,

2 Dhamma is here possibly already used in the special sense
to which the term Abhidhamma was afterwards applied. So
Fww&, who in the Ahguttara NiMya I, 14, is called the chief of
the expounders of the Dhamma (compare Dipavawsa IV, 4), says
of himself in the Apadana abhidhammanayafmo 'hzm.

3 Tevfg^o. See Rh. D/s remarks in * Buddhist Suttas/ pp,
161, 162.

* This list contains one or two terms which are omitted in the
G$taka introduction.

5 These terms recur at Mahavagga I, 25, 6.

194

•ETULLAVAGGA.

VI, 6 >3 .

this banyan tree, keeping it between, my thighs, and
its topmost twig brushed against my stomach. So
far back, friends, can 1 remember.”

‘ Then, O Bhikkhus, the partridge and the elephant
asked the monkey [the same question],

‘ “ Friends ! when I was little, sitting once on the
ground, I gnawed at the then topmost twig of this
banyan. So far back can I remember.”

* Then,, O Bhikkhus, the monkey and the elephant
asked the partridge [the same question],

‘ “ F riends ! there was formerly a lofty banyan
tree in yonder open space. One day after eating
one of its fruits, I voided the seed here ; and from
that this banyan tree grew up. So I must be older
than either of you.”

‘ Thereupon, O Bhikkhus, the elephant and the
monkey said to the partridge, “ You, friend, are the
oldest of us all. Henceforth we will honour and
reverence and esteem and support you,, and by
your counsels will we abide.”

‘Thenceforth, O Bhikkhus, the partridge kept the
monkey and the elephant in obedience to the Five
Precepts, and observed them also himself. And
dwelling together in. mutual reverence, confidence,
and courtesy, at the dissolution of the body after
death they were reborn unto a happy state in heaven.
And this (perfect life of theirs) became known as
“ the good life of the partridge V’

’Tis those who reverence the old
That are the men who Dhamma know,

1 Tittiriyaw brahma£ariya«. It is quite possible that a
covert sarcasm is here intended to be understood against the
Taittirlya Brahmans.

VI, 6, g.

ON DWELLINGS AND FURNITURE. 1 95

Worthy of praise while in this life
And happy in the life to come.

4. ‘ So that, O Bhikkhus, since even animals can
live together in mutual reverence, confidence, and
courtesy, so much more, O Bhikkhus, should you so
let your light shine forth 1 that you, who have left
the world to follow so well taught a doctrine and
discipline, may be seen to dwell in like manner
together.’ And when he had delivered a religious
discourse (as in I, I, 3), he said to the Bhikkhus :

‘ I enjoin upon you, O Bhikkhus, that paying of
reverence, rising up in reverence, salutation, proper
respect, and apportionment of the best seat and
water and food, shall be according to seniority.
But property belonging to the Sa^gha shall not be
exclusively appropriated according to seniority 2 .
Whosoever does so, shall be guilty of a dukka/a.

5. ‘ These ten, O Bhikkhus, are not to be saluted
— a Bhikkhu afterwards admitted unto the higher
grade of the Order by one previously admitted — a
person not admitted — a senior Bhikkhu when he
belongs to a different community, and does not
speak according to the Dhamma — a woman 3 — a
eunuch 4 — a Bhikkhu who has been placed under
probation 5 — one who, having been so placed, is

1 Tam sobhetha yaw . . .. On this idiom compare MaM-
vagga X, 2, 20.

2 Compare chapter 7 and also chapter 12, It would seem from
these passages that the prohibition to reserve exclusively according
to seniority the use of property belonging to the whole Sawgha
was held to imply that the temporary use of it was to go accord-
ing to seniority. Compare X, 18.

3 See JTullavagga X, 3.

4 Compare MaMvagga I, 61, 2.

* See JTullavagga II, 1, 2.

O 2

196 JTU LL A V AGG A . VI, 7, 1.

liable to be thrown back to the beginning of his
probationary term 1 — one who is liable to have a
penance (Minatta) imposed upon him — one who is
undergoing a penance — one who, so undergoing a
penance, is fit to be rehabilitated.

‘And these three, O Bhikkhus, ought to be
saluted — one previously admitted into the higher
grade of the Order by one afterwards admitted —
the senior in a different community when he speaks
according to the Dhamma — and, O Bhikkhus,
throughout the worlds of men and gods, of Maras
and of Brahmas, by all creatures Samaras and
Br&hmans, gods and men, the Arahat Sammd-
sambuddha.’

7 .

1. Now at that time people provided arbours
(ma»rfapas), and couches, and room for the use
of the Sawzgha. And the pupils of the AVzab-
baggiya Bhikkhus, saying, ‘ It has been laid down
by the Blessed One that that which pertains (wholly)
to the Sawgha shall be used according to seniority,
but not that which is given only for the temporary
use of the Samgha,’ went on in front of the Sa»zgha
and occupied the ma«iapas, and occupied the
couches, and occupied the room, saying, ‘ This shall
be for our superiors, and this for our teachers, and
this for ourselves.’

And Sariputta (&c., as in last chapter, §§ i, 2,
down to) Then the Blessed One rebuked them,
&c., and said to the Bhikkhus, ‘ Even that which
has been set aside only for the temporary use of

* See Aullavagga III, 14.

ON DWELLINGS AND FURNITURE.

the Sawgha is not, O Bhikkhus, to be reserved for
exclusive use according to seniority.’

i. Now at that time people arranged in the
eating-rooms, or in the interior courtyards of their
houses, lofty and large couches, such as [here follows
the list of things forbidden in Mahavagga V, io, 4].
The Bhikkhus, fearing to offend, would not sit down
upon them.

They told this thing to the Blessed One.

‘ I allow you, O Bhikkhus, to sit down on seats
arranged by laymen — excepting three, (that is to
say) large cushions, divans, mattresses 1 2 — but not to
lie down upon them.’

Now at that time people put in the eating-
rooms, or in the courtyards, stuffed couches and
stuffed chairs. The Bhikkhus, fearing to offend,
would not sit down on them.

They told this matter to the Blessed One.

‘ I allow you, O Bhikkhus, to sit down on any
[such] things arranged by laymen, but not to lie
down upon them

1. Now the Blessed One, proceeding on his
journey, arrived in due course at Savatthi; and there,

1 These are Nos. 1, 2, and 7 in the list just referred to, and
may be kept if treated in the way laid down in VI, 14, 2 below.

2 This rule has already occurred in identical terms at MaM-
vagga V, 11. Probably both here and there the word such, which
we have here added in brackets, is to be understood.

1 98

XULLAVAGGA.

YI, 9, 2.

at S&vatthi, the Blessed One stayed in the (Jetavana,
the park of Anatha Pmdika. Then Anatha Pindika
the householder [invited the Blessed One for the
morrow’s meal, and when the meal was over, he
said to the Blessed One x ] :

‘What, Lord, shall I do with regard to the
£etavana ?’

‘ You may dedicate it, O householder, to the use
of the Samgha of the four directions 1 2 either now
here present, or hereafter to arrive.’

‘ Even so, Lord, 5 said Anatha Pindika the house-
holder in assent to the Blessed One, and he did so.

2. Then the Blessed One gave thanks to Anatha
Piw^ika the householder in these verses. [Here
follow the same verses as were used above in VI,
1, 5 on the presentation of the 6htavana 3 .]

10 .

1. Now at that time it had been settled that
a certain high official at court, a follower of the
A^ivakas, should provide the day’s meal for the
Samgha. And the venerable Upananda the S&kyan,
coming late, but before the meal was over, made
the Bhikkhu next (junior to him in seniority 4 ) get

1 The usual terms are here followed throughout : see, for in-
stance, above, VI, 4, 6 , 7.

2 That is ‘ of all the world.’ See our note above on MaM-
vagga VIII, 2 7, 5, where the phrase has already occurred.

3 The verses are quoted in the account of Anatha PiMka’s gift
given in the Gataka commentary (Fausboll I, 93; Rh. D.’s ‘ Bud-

dhist JBirth Stories,’ I, 131).

* Anantarikam ; perhaps ‘the Bhikkhu (who happened to be)

VI, 10, 2. ON DWELLINGS AND FURNITURE. 1 99

up out of his seat ; and the dining-hall was thrown
into confusion.

Then that minister became indignant, murmured,
and was annoyed : ‘ How can the Sakyaputtiya Sa-
maras behave so ! Is it not then lawful for any
one, unless he have been seated, to eat as much
as he requires ?’

And the Bhikkhus heard him murmuring, &c.
And they told the matter to the Blessed One.

‘ Is it true as they say, &c. ? ’

‘ It is true, Lord.’

Then the Blessed One rebuked him, &c., and he
said to the Bhikkhus, * A Bhikkhu is not, O Bhik-
khus, to be made to get up ? out of his seat before
the meal is over. Whosoever does so, shall be
guilty of a dukka/a. And if any one causes
another to get up, and be then invited to partake
of the meal, he shall be ordered to go and fetch
water. If he shall thus receive the place, it is
well ; if not, the other one shall first complete his
swallowing of the rice, and shall then give up the
place to his senior. But in no case, O Bhikkhus,
do I say that a place properly belonging to a senior
Bhikkhu is to be taken (by a junior). Whosoever
does so, shall be guilty of a dukka^a 1 .’

2. Now at that time the jOabbaggiya Bhikkhus
made sick Bhikkhus get up (from their seats). The
sick men said, ‘ We cannot, Sirs, get up ; for we
are sick.’

‘We insist upon your getting up,’ said they; and

next (to him).’ The text reads anantarikaw, which is a mis-
print. Compare Mahavagga IX, 4, 8, and isfullavagga VII, 3, 9,
VIII, 4, 1.

1 Compare the rule for Bhikkhunis at X, 18.

2CO

A'ULLAVAGGA.

VI, ii, i.

seizing them, and pulling them up, they let them
go as they were standing. The sick men, as soon
as they were let go, fell down.

They told this matter to the Blessed One.

‘ A sick man, O Bhikkhus, is not to be made to
get up. Whosoever does so, shall be guilty of a
dukka^a.’

Now at that time the AYabbaggiya Bhikkhus,
saying, ‘We are sick, and cannot be turned out,’
took possession of the best sleeping-places.

They told this matter to the Blessed One.

‘ I enjoin, O Bhikkhus, that you allot to sick
Bhikkhus suitable sleeping-places.’

Now at that time the AAabbaggiya Bhikkhus,
on pretext of some slight indisposition 1 , took ex-
clusive possession of sleeping-places.

They told this matter to the Blessed One.

1 You are not, O Bhikkhus, to do so. Whosoever
does so, shall be guilty of a dukkaifa.’

11 2 .

, i. Now at that time the Sattarasa-vaggiya Bhik-
j khus made ready a certain large Vi h dr a in the
neighbourhood », with the intention of dwelling- in

• O'..

it And when the Avhbbaggiya Bhikkhus saw
what they were doing, they said : ‘ These vener-
able ones, the Sattarasa-vaggiya Bhikkhus, are

1 Lesak append ti appakena sfsabadhadimattena (B,),

2 1 he story in this section forms also the introductory story to
the 17 th Paiittiya.

8 Pa££antima 772 ; perhaps £ in the border-country/ Compare
*pa£$anta#2 nagara m 9 a frontier fort at Dhammapada, p. 56*

VI, II, I.

ON DWELLINGS AND FURNITURE.

201

1

:

1

i ,M

|||.;

}i

getting a Vih&ra ready; come, let us turn them
out.’ Some of them said : ‘ Let us stay here 1
whilst they get it ready, and turn them out when
it is prepared.’ So the /v/zabbaggiya Bhikkhus
said to the Sattarasa-vaggiyas : ‘ Depart, Sirs ; the
Vihira has fallen unto us.’

‘Why did you not, Sirs, say so sooner; and we
would have got some other one ready ?’

‘Is not, then, this Vihira the common property
of the Sawgha ?’

‘ Y es, Sirs ; that is so.’

‘Then depart, Sirs; for the Vih&ra has fallen
unto us.’

‘It is large, Sirs, this Vihira. You can dwell in
it, and we as well.’

Then, full of anger and displeasure, they re-
peated, ‘ Depart, Sirs; this Vihira has fallen unto
us.’ And seizing them by the throat, they cast them
out. And the others, being ejected, wept.

The Bhikkhus asked, ‘Why, Sirs, do you weep?’

Then they told them ; and the moderate Bhik-
khus murmured, &c., and told the matter to the
Blessed One.

‘ Is it true, as they say, &c. ?’

‘ It is true, Lord.’

Then he rebuked them ; and when he had
delivered a religious discourse, he said to the
Bhikkhus :

‘A Bhikkhu is not, O Bhikkhus, to be cast out
of a Vih&ra, the common property of the Sawgha,
in anger and vexation. Whosoever does so, shall

1 Agametha yiva. Compare the introductory story to the
46th PSiittiya.

202

rULLAVAGGA.

VI, XI, 2.

be dealt with according to the law 1 . I allow you,
O Bhikkhus, to allot the lodging-places (common to
the Saragha to those who have need of them) 2 .’

2 . Now the Bhikkhus thought, ‘How then shall
the lodging-places be allotted ?’

They told this matter to the Blessed One.

‘ I allow you, O Bhikkhus, to appoint as an ap-
portioner of lodging-places a Bhikkhu possessed of
these five qualifications — one who does not walk in
partiality, who does not walk in malice, who does
not walk in stupidity, who does not walk in fear (and
so on, as in Khandhaka IV, chapter io, down to the
end of the Kammavaii).’

3- Now the apportioners of lodging-places thought,
‘How then ought the lodging-places to be appor-
tioned ?’

They told this matter to the Blessed One.

‘ I allow you, O Bhikkhus, in the first place to
count the Bhikkhus, then to count the sleeping-
places, then to apportion accordingly 3 .’ &

When apportioning according to the number of
sleeping-places, some remained unallotted 4 .

* That is, under the i^th Pa&ttiya.

..." Seilasanai n glhetu?«, Buddhaghosa has nothing on this
idiom, but its meaning is sufficiently clear from the connection
. SeyjaSSena gtoetum. Buddhaghosa has no special expla-
nation of agga here, but in his explanation of the passage says
that this is to be so done that each Bhikkhu receives room for a
couch (ma«-a//Mna4 Agga must here be agra, to which
Bohtlmgk-Roth give, from Indian lexicographers, the subsidiary
meaning of ‘ multitude.’ So below in XII, x, x, the Va^iputtakas
divide money amongst themselves bhikkhu-aggena, ‘according
to the number of the Bhikkhus.' Seyya is here used in the same
meaning as that in which senSsana is used throughout the rest
of this chapter and the next. See VIII, i, 4 .

* Ussadi yi»su. Buddhaghosa says ussaraymsd ti maw-

VI, II, 3- ON DWELLINGS AND FURNITURE, 203

‘ I allow you, O Bhikkhus, to apportion according
to the number of apartments (Vi haras).’

When so apportioning, some apartments (Vi h a r a s)
remained unallotted.

‘ I allow you, O Bhikkhus, to apportion according
to the number of buildings (Parive^as) V

When so apportioning, some buildings (Parive«tas)
remained unallotted.

‘ I allow you, O Bhikkhus, to give a supplementary
share to each Bhikkhu 2 .’

When more than one share had been allotted,
another Bhikkhu arrived.

‘ In that case a share need not be allotted to him,
if the Bhikkhus do not wish to do so V

Now at that time they allotted sleeping-places
to a Bhikkhu who was then staying outside the
boundary (of the district in which the building
was situate) 4 .

They told this matter to the Blessed One.

k&iih&a&xa atirekSni ahesu»i. His reading is in a copy of his work
in Burmese characters, and is supported, both here and in P&iitliya
XL VI, 2, where the word recurs, by a Burmese copy of the text.
The Sinhalese reading is the correct one, but one may compare the
idiom g&na.m, or parisaw, ussdreti at Mahavagga VIII, 1, 22,
and (?&taka I, 4x9, 434. So at IX, 1, 3, 4, the reading ussareti
given in the text is corrected at p. 363 into ussadeti, in accord-
ance with the reading of the Sinhalese MS.

1 The relation of the Vihara to the Parivewa is here curious.
In the later language parivewa means ‘ cells.’ Here it evidently
includes several vih&'ras.

2 Anubh&gan ti puna aparaw pi bhagaw ddtu« (B.).

8 Na akims! is used here in a sense precisely parallel to that in
which it occurs at Mahavagga VII, 24, 4. See the passages
quoted in our note there.

4 Nissime I/iitassa. See on this phrase above, Mahavagga
VII, 1, 5, and VIII, 2, 3. It is repeated below, VI, 17, 2.

204

iTULLAVAGGA.

YT,

ii.

‘You are not, O Bhikkhus, to [do so]. Whoso-
ever does so, shall be guilty. of a dukka/a.’

Now at that time the Bhikkhus, after the lodging-
places had been allotted, kept them to the exclusion
of others for all time.

They told this matter to the Blessed One.

You are not, O Bhikkhus, to do so. Whosoever
does so, shall be guilty of a dukka/a. I allow you
to retain them for the three months of the rain}",
but not for the dry season/

4- Then the Bhikkhus thought, ‘ What is (it now
that constitutes) an allotment of lodging-places ?’

They told this matter to the Blessed One.

Theie are. these three allotments of lodging-
paces, O Bhikkhus, the earlier, the later, and
the intermediate. The earlier is to be held on
the day after the full moon of Asa//za (June—
July); the later, a month after that full moon';
the. intermediate (literally that which involves a
giving up during the intervening time) is held on
the day after the Pav4ra»4 ceremony, with refer-
ence to the rainy season of the following year.
These, O Bhikkhus, are the three allotments of
lodging-places/

Here ends the Second Portion for Recitation.

12 .

i. Now the venerable Upananda the Sakyan
after having had a lodging allotted to him i n

.f r t ' V ° ^ es are "f da ys on which the earlier and the
later Vassa begins. See MaMvag ga In 2

j VI, 12 , i. ON DWELLINGS AND FURNITURE. 205

S&vatthi, went to a certain country-place where a
community of the Sawzgha resided, and there also
had a lodging allotted to him. Then the Bhikkhus
there thought, ‘ Now this brother, Upananda the
Sakyan, is a maker of strife, quarrelsome, a maker
of disputes, given to idle talk, a raiser of legal
questions in the Sawgha 1 . If he should spend
the rainy season here, then shall we all dwell in
discomfort. Come, let us question him.’ And they
asked the venerable Upananda the Sakyan :

‘ Have not you, friend Upananda, had a lodging
allotted to you in Savatthi ? ’

‘ That is so, Sirs.’

‘What then do you, friend Upananda, being
one, yet take exclusive possession of two (lodging-
places) ? ’

‘Well, I do now, Sirs, set (the lodging) here free,
and take the one there.’

Those Bhikkhus who were moderate murmured,
&c., and they told the matter to the Blessed One.

Then the Blessed One, on that occasion and in

I , .

that connection, convened a meeting of the Bhikkhu-
| sawzgha, and asked the venerable Upananda the

S&kyan :

j, ‘ Is it true, Upananda, that you, being one, have

i taken possession of two places ?’

‘It is true, Lord.’

Then the Blessed One rebuked him, saying, ‘How
can you, O foolish one, do such a thing ? What you
took there, O foolish one, has been lost here ; what
you took here, has been lost there 2 . Thus, O

■ 1 These are the acts which render a Bhikkhu liable to the

y Ta^aniya Kamma. See /sTullavagga I, 1, 1.

2 That is, by taking a lodging here you ipso, facto renounced

Jr 1

206

STULLAVAGGA.

VI, 13, 1.

foolish one, you are deprived of both.’ And when
he had delivered a religious discourse, he said to the
Bhikkhus :

‘ One man is not, O Bhikkhus, to take two
lodging-places. Whosoever does so, shall be guilty
of a dukka/a.’

13 .

i. Now at that time the Blessed One spake in
many a figure concerning the Vinaya, speaking in
praise of the Vinaya, in praise of learning the
Vinaya, and again and again in reference thereto
in praise of the venerable Upali. Then said the
Bhikkhus : ‘ The Blessed One speaks (&c., down to)
U pali. Come, let us learn the Vinaya under the
venerable Upali.’ And many Bhikkhus, senior and
junior, and of medium standing, went to learn the
Vinaya under the venerable Updli. The venerable
Upali taught them standing, out of reverence for the
senior Bhikkhus, and the senior Bhikkhus heard him
standing, out of reverence for the law ; and thereby
both the senior Bhikkhus grew weary, and the
venerable Upili.

They told this matter to the Blessed One.

‘ I allow, O Bhikkhus, a junior Bhikkhu, when
giving instruction, to sit on a seat of equal height,
or higher, out of reverence for the law; and a senior
Bhikkhu, when receiving instruction, to sit on a seat

your right to a lodging there, and by taking one there you ipso
facto renounced your right to get one here.

VI, I 3 , 2.

ON DWELLINGS AND FURNITURE.

207

!

i

■

of equal height, or lower, out of reverence for the
law V

2. Now at that time a number of Bhikkhus stood
around Up&li, waiting for seats 1 2 ; and they grew
weary.

They told this matter to the Blessed One.

‘ I allow you, O Bhikkhus, to sit down together
with brethren entitled to sit on seats of equal
height’

Then the Bhikkhus thought, ‘ How many of us
are entitled to sit on seats of equal height ? ’

They told this matter to the Blessed One.

‘ I allow you, O Bhikkhus, to sit on the same seat
with those who are within three years of one another
in seniority.’

Now at that time a number of Bhikkhus, entitled
to sit on the same seat, sat down on a couch, and
broke the couch down ; or sat down on a chair, and
broke the chair down.

‘ I allow, O Bhikkhus, the use of a couch, or a
chair, for three persons.’

Even when three sat on the couch, or chair, it
broke.

‘ I allow, O Bhikkhus, two to sit on a couch or a
chair.’

Now at that time Bhikkhus who were not entitled
to seats of equal height, were afraid they would
offend if they sat together on a long seat.

They told this matter to the Blessed One.

1 Compare the fifteen rules of a similar character, Sekhiyas 5f~
5 2, and especially No. 69.

2 Onlookers apparently, not strictly learners. On the force of
pa/im&neti, compare the Bhikkhuni-vibhanga, Par&gika I, i, and
Pataka II, 423.

208 rULLAVAGGA. VI, 14, 1.

‘ I allow you, O Bhikkhus, to sit together on a
long seat with others not entitled to sit on seats of
equal height, unless they are women, or eunuchs, or
hermaphrodites.’

Then the Bhikkhus thought, ‘What is the limit
of length which is included under the term “long
seat?’”

‘ I allow the term “ long seat ” to be used, O
Bhikkhus, of any seat long enough to accommo-
date three persons.’

14 .

1. Now at that time Visikhi the mother of
Migara was anxious to have a storeyed building
(pasada), with a verandah (alinda) to it, supported
on pillars with capitals of elephant heads 1 , built for
the use of the Sawgha. Then the Bhikkhus thought,

‘ Of things which appertain to a storeyed building,
which has been permitted by the Blessed One, and
which not 2 ?’

They told this matter to the Blessed One.

j; 1 Hatthi-nakhakaw, ‘supported on the frontal globes
(kumbhe) of elephants,’ says Buddhaghosa.

2 On the meaning of paribhoga here compare VI, 18, 1.
The doubt here expressed is curious, as a storeyed building
(pdssida) is one of the five kinds of abodes (lenfini) specially
sanctioned by Mahavagga I, 30, 4, and iTullavagga VI, 1, 2 ; and
a verandah (alinda) has been also authorised by JTullavagga VI,
3, 5. No doubt the special point here is as to the carved pillars :
but, even so, that this rule should be thus separated from the other
rules as to buildings, in the commencement of this book (VI, 1-4),
is a proof of the unsystematic way in which the Khandhakas have
been put together. Even the final redaction which we have now
before us contains much similar evidence of the gradual growth of
these rules. See note 3 on the next paragraph.

VI, IS, I.

ON DWELLINGS AND FURNITURE.

209

‘ I allow, O Bhikkhus, the use of all appurtenances
to a storeyed building.’

Now at that time the grandmother of Pasenadi of
Kosala had died, and many unauthorised things had
come into the hands of the Sawzgha, such as couches,
divans (&c„ as in chapter 8 above, and Mahavagga
V, 10, 4).

They told this matter to the Blessed One.

‘I allow you, O Bhikkhus, to use the stuffed
couches (asandi) after having broken off the legs 1 ,
and the divans (pallanka) after having removed
the hair, and to comb out the cotton of the mat-
tresses and make pillows of it 2 3 , and to use all the
rest as floor covering V .

15 .

x. Now at that time the Bhikkhus who dwelt in a
certain country residence, not far from Savatthi, were
worried by having constantly to provide sleeping
accommodation for travelling Bhikkhus who came
in (from country-places). And those Bhikkhus

1 Compare the 87th PaZ’ittiya.

2 This rule has already been given in VI, 2, 6. *

3 It is distinctly laid down without any reservation in Mahavagga

V, 10, 5 (in the paragraph erroneously numbered V, 10, 4 in
vol. ii, p. 2*8, of the present work), that the use of any of these
things is a dukka/a offence. That this relaxation of that rule
should be inserted only here, looks very much like an after- thought,
even though the former passage merely refers to the use of these
things as seats. This is more especially noteworthy from the fact
mentioned in the last note, a- ■

The rules as to new rugs or mats to be used for sitting upon, are
contained in the nth to the 15th Nissaggiya Pa&ttiyas*

[20] P

210

A'ULLAVAGGA.

VI, is, 2.

thought: ‘[This being so,] let us hand over all
the sleeping accommodation which is the property
of the Samgha to one (of us), and let us use it as
belonging to him.’ And they [did so x ].

. Then the incoming Bhikkhus said to them : ‘ Pre-
pare, Sirs, sleeping accommodation for us.’

‘ There are no beds, Sirs, belonging to the Samgha.
We have given them all away to one of us.’

‘ What, Sirs ? Have you then made away with
property belonging to the Samgha ?’.

‘ That is so, Sirs.’

The moderate Bhikkhus murmured, &c., and told
this matter to the Blessed One.

‘ Is it true, O Bhikkhus, as they say, that Bhikr
khus make away with Samgha property?’

‘ It is true, Lord.’

2. Then the Blessed One rebuked them, &c., and
said to the Bhikkhus : ‘ These five things, O Bhik-
khus, are untransferable; and are not to be dis-
posed of either by the Samgha, or by a company of
two or three Bhikkhus (a Gana), or by a single in~

; | dividual. And what are the five ? A park (Arhma), ]
< or the site for a park — this is the first untransferable
thing, that cannot be disposed of by the Samgha, or J
. ; by a Gana, or by an individual. If it be disposed of,
such disposal is void ; and whosoever has disposed
of it, is guilty of a thullai/^aya. • A Vihara, or the
site for a Vihhra — this is the second, See. (as before).
A bed, or a chair, or a bolster, or a pillow — this is the
third, &c. A brass vessel, or a brass jar, or a brass
pot, or a brass vase, or a razor, or an axe, or a

1 This is a direct infringement of the 82nd Pa&ttiya, which for-
bids property dedicated to the Sawgha being diverted to the use
of any individual.

VI, i6, 1.

ON DWELLINGS AND FURNITURE.

211

hatchet, or a hoe, or a spade — this is the fourth, &c.
Creepers, or bamboos, or mua/a, or babba^a grass,
or common grass, or clay, or things made of wood,
or crockery— this is the fifth, &c. (as before, down
to) thullaiiaya.’

16 .

i. Now when the Blessed One had dwelt at
Savatthi as long as- he thought fit, he went on on
his journey towards the Ki/a Hill with a great
multitude of Bhikkhus — to wit, with about five hun-
dred Bhikkhus, besides Sariputta and Moggallana.

And the Bhikkhus who were followers of Assayi
and Punabbasu 1 hearing the news, said one to
another, ‘ Come, Sirs ; let us divide all the sleeping
accommodation belonging to the Sawzgha. Sariputta
and Moggallana are men of sinful desires, and are
under the influence of sinful desires. We will not
provide sleeping-places for them.’ And they did so.

Now the Blessed One, proceeding on his journey,
arrived at the Ki/a Hill. And he addressed a
number of Bhikkhus, saying, ‘ Do you go, O Bhik-
khus, to the followers of Assay! and Punabbasu, and
say: “The Blessed One, Sirs, has arrived with a
large number of Bhikkhus — to wit, with about five
hundred Bhikkhus, besides Sariputta and Moggal-
lana. Make ready sleeping-places, Sirs, for the
Blessed One, and for the Bhikkhu-samgha, and for
Sariputta and Moggallana.'”

1 On these Bhikkhus and their relations with Sariputta and
Moggallana, see above, Zullavagga I, 13-16.

212

JEULLAVAGGA.

VI, 1 6, 2.

1 Even so, Lord,’ said those Bhikkhus in assent to
the Blessed One ; and they did so.

‘There is no sleeping accommodation belonging
to the Sawgha. We have divided it all ’ (was the
reply). ‘The Blessed One, Sirs, is welcome: and
he may stay in whatever Vihara he chooses. But
S&riputta and Moggallana are men of sinful desires,
and under the influence thereof ; for them we will
provide no sleeping-places.’

2. ‘ What then, Sirs ? Have you divided sleeping
accommodation that is the property of the Sawgha?’

‘ That is so, Sirs.’

The moderate Bhikkhus murmured, &c. (down to)
The Blessed One said to the Bhikkhus :

‘ These five things, O Bhikkhus, are unapportion-
able, and are not to be divided either by the Saz/zgha,
or by a Ga?za, or by an individual. If divided, the
division is void ; and whosoever does so, shall be
guilty of a thulla/’iaya. And what are the five
(&c., as in VI, 15, 2) 1 ? ’

17 .

1. Now when the Blessed One had remained at
the Ki/a Hill as long as he thought fit, he proceeded
on his journey towards A/avi ; and in due course he
arrived at A/avi, and there, at A/avi, the Blessed
One stayed at the Agga/ava Shrine.

Now at that time the Bhikkhus of A/avi 2 used to

1 These expressions s untransferable ? (avissa^iy&ni) and
‘ unapportionable ’ (avebhangiyani) have already occurred above
at Mahavagga VIII, 27, 5.

1 The Bhikkhus of A/avi are frequently mentioned in connection

VI, 17 , t. ON DWELLINGS AND FURNITURE.

213

give new building operations in charge (to one or
other • of their number) *, such as the following 2 :
when some clay or earth had merely to be put
aside in heaps, when a wall had merely to be re-
plastered, when a door had merely to be made,
when the socket for a bolt had merely to be made,
when some joinery-work had merely to be done to a
window, when some whitewashing merely had to be
done, or some black colouring laid on, or some red
colouring 3 , or some roofing-work, or some joinery,
or a bar had to be fixed to a door 4 , when breaches
or decay had merely to be repaired 5 , or the flooring
to be re-plastered 6 ; and they assigned this office to
one another for terms of twenty or thirty years, or

with offences in relation to the navakamma?#. See, for instance,
Para^ika III, 5, 30.

1 For the rule authorising such giving in charge in general cases,
see above, VI, 5. *

2 For most of the following technical terms in building, see our
notes above on Ahillavagga V, 1 1, and V, 1, 2.

8 See our note on this phrase above, V, 11, 6.

4 G andik a d ha n a- ma 1 1 e n & ti dvara-baMnaw upari-kapo/a-
ga^ika-yo^ana-mattena (B.). G&ndi is used in this sense at
(rataka I, 237. Compare the use of Dhamma-gara^ika, ‘block
of execution/ at (rataka I, 150, II, 124. The word gandiM
occurs also at (rataka I, 474 (last line), in the sense of 1 bunch ; *
but it is there probably a misprint ; for Oldenberg, in the parallel
passage at Bhikkhuni-vibhahga, Paiittiya I, 1, reads bha^ike.
That the two words are easily confused in Burmese writing is
shown by the fact that the Berlin (Burmese) copy of Buddhaghosa
reads here also bha#z^ikadhana-mattena ti, &c., and again
afterwards bha^/ika,

6 See our note on this phrase above, VI, 5, 2.

6 Paribha^a-kara#a~matten& ti gomaya-paribha^a-kasava-
parikara/ra-mattena (B.). The very same expression is used in a
wholly doubtful sense, and of some process of tailoring, in Maha~
vagga VII, 1, 5.

214

JsTULLAVAGGA.

"VI 9 1*1 1

for life ; or they gave in charge a completely finished
Vihara to a Bhikkhu for such time as should elapse
till the smoke rose (from the funeral pyre on which

his body should be burnt 1 ).

The moderate Bhikkhus murmured, &c. (as usual,
down to) The Blessed One said to the Bhikkhus :

‘You are not, O Bhikkhus, to confer the office of
buildincr overseer when clay has merely to be put
aside in heaps .... (&c„ as before, down to) body
•shall be burnt. Whosoever shall so confer it, shall
• be guilty of a dukka/a. I allow you, O Bhikkhus,
to o-ive a Vihara not yet begun, or not yet finished 2 ,
in charge as a new building. And with reference to
the work on a small Vihara, it may be given in charge
as a navakamma for a period of five or six years,
that on an A^ayoga for a period of seven or eight
years, that on a large Vihdra or a Pisada for ten or
twelve years/

2. Now at that time the Bhikkhus gave the whole
of a Vih&ra as a navakamma (to one Bhikkhu to
superintend)— or two Viharas to one Bhikkhu— or
the Bhikkhu who had taken the work in charge got
another (Bhikkhu to live there and take charge for
} 1 i rn ) — or the Bhikkhu who had taken in charge a

1 Dhftmakalikan ti idaw y&v’ assa fttaka-dhftmo na pa«Mya-
titi tava aya m viharo etass’ evi ti eva m dhuma-kale apaloketva
kata-pariyosita?» viMra m denti (B.). The word recurs below, ap-
plied to sikkhapadaw, in XI, i, 9- A .

s Vippakatan ti ettha vippakato nditia ySva gopanasiyo na
arohanti. Gopanaslsu pana aruMsu bahukato nama hoti :
tasmi tato pa/^ya na databbo (B.). The use of bahukato is
noteworthy, for in the only other passage where we have found the
word (Mah&vagga VI, 36, 2), it has a totally different application.
There is possibly a misreading in the one MS. available.
(? pakato.)

VI, 17 , 3 .

ON DWELLINGS AND FURNITURE.

215

building belonging to the Sawgha kept exclusive
possession of it — or the Bhikkhus gave work in
charge to one not at that time within the boundary 1
— or Bhikkhus who had once taken charge kept
exclusive possession for all time.

They told [each of] these matters to the Blessed
One.

‘ You are not, O Bhikkhus, to do [any one of these
things]. Whosoever does, he is guilty of a duff-
le a /a. And the Bhikkhu in charge may take one
good sleeping-place into his exclusive possession
for the three months of the rainy, but not during
the dry season.’

3. Now at that time Bhikkhus who had taken
charge of building operations left the place [or
otherwise became incompetent in one or other of
the twenty and three ways set out in the next
paragraph 2 ].

They told this matter to the Blessed One.

* In case that occurs, O Bhikkhus, as soon as he
has taken charge, or before the building has been
completed, let the office be given to another lest
there should be loss to the Sawgha. In case the
building has been completed, O Bhikkhus, if he
then leaves the place, it (the office and its privi-
leges) is still his — if he then returns to the world,
or dies, or admits that he is a sdmawera, or that
he has abandoned the precepts, or that he has
become guilty of an extreme offence, the Sa?;zgha

1 See above, VI, 11, 3.

2 See Mahavagga II, 22, 3, and II, 36, 1-3* In the latter of
these two passages the three cases axe omitted* In MaMvagga
IX, 4, 2, and 8, the whole 23 are given.

2x6 XsTULLAVAGGA. ■ "VI, 18, I.

becomes the owner 1 — if he then admits that he is
mad, or that his mind is unhinged, or that he is
afflicted with bodily pain, or • that he has been
suspended for his refusal to acknowledge an of-
fence, or to atone for an offence, or to renounce a
sinful doctrine, it* (the office and its privileges) is
still his — if he then admits that he is a eunuch,
or that he has furtively attached himself to the
Samgha., or that he has gone over to the Titthiyas,
or that he is an animal, or that he has murdered his
mother, or his father, or an Arahat, or that he has
violated a Bhikkhunt, or that he has caused a schism
in the Sa^gha, or that he has shed (a Buddha’s)
blood, or that he is an hermaphrodite, then the
Sawgha becomes . the owner.’

18 .

i. Now at that time the Bhikkhus made use else-
where of beds which were appurtenances 2 3 to the
Vihara of a certain lay-disciple (upasaka).

Then that up&saka murmured, &c.

They told the matter to the Blessed One.

‘ Things appurtenant to one place are not, O
Bhikkhus, to be used in another. Whosoever does
so, shall be guilty of a dukka/a.’

Now at that time the Bhikkhus, fearing to offend
if they took (things to sit upon) even into .the

1 That is, the riavakammiko loses his privileges (his lien on

the best sleeping-place, &c.).

3 Vihara-paribhogaw. 1 Meant for nse only in that Vihara/
Compare above, VI, 14, 1.

VI, I 9) I.

ON DWELLINGS AND FURNITURE.

217

Uposatha Hall, or the meeting-place, sat on the
ground ; and their legs and robes got soiled.

They told the matter to the Blessed One.

‘ I allow you, O Bhikkhus, to take things away
for a certain time only 1 .’

Now at that time a large Vihara belonging to
the Sawgha went to ruin 2 . The Bhikkhus, fearing
to offend, did riot take the bedding in it away.

They told this matter to the Blessed One.

‘ I' allow you, O Bhikkhus, to take away things
in order to save them from destruction.’

19 .

1. Now at that time there was a very valuable
rug, and a very valuable piece of cloth, among the
bedding furniture belonging to the Sawgha.

They told this matter to the Blessed One 3 4 .

‘ I allow you, O Bhikkhus, to barter either of
these things in order to increase the stock of legally
permissible furniture V'

Now at that time the Sa?;?gha had received a

1 Tavakalikaw. The word occurs in (Pataka I, iai, 393
(on which see Rh. D. in ‘Buddhist Birth Stories,’ p. 170, and
‘Buddhist Suttas,’ p. 241), in Buddhaghosa’s notes on Mahdvagga
VII, 5, 1 (above, II, 154, note 7), in the Bhikkhuni-vibhanga,
Pd&ttiya XXV, 2, and in .A’ullavagga X, 16, 1.

2 Sawzghassa viharo udriyati. The whole phrase has
already occurred at Mahdvagga III, 8.

3 Because such things were forbidden by Mahdvagga V, 10, 4,
though kambala is not there specially mentioned.

4 Phdtikammatthayd ti vaa^ikammatthaya ti. Vaddhikam-
matthdya phdtikammazrc k’ ettha samakaw vd atirekazs vd aggha-
nakajw manfe-pi/Aadi-sendsanam eva vatfati (B.).

2l8

ETULLAVAGGA.

VI, 20, I.

bear -skin, and a ^akkali 1 rug, arid a iolaka
cloth- 2 .

They told this matter to the Blessed One.

‘ I allow you, O Bhikkhus, to use them as mats
to wipe your feet r on K 9

20 .

t. Now at that time the Bhikkhus walked over
the mats used for sleeping upon with unwashen
or wet feet, or with their sandals on ; and the
matting was soiled.

They told these matters to the Blessed One.

4 You are not, O Bhikkhus, to do so. Whosoever
does, shall be guilty of a dukka/aV

2. Now at that time the Bhikkhus spat on the
newly prepared floor 5 , and the colour was spoilt.

1 According to VI, 2 , 2 , and VI, 3 , 5> this could also be used as
a screen or curtain over the space in a wall left for a window.

2 According to Mahavagga VIII, 18, this might be used to wipe
faces with; and according to Zuilavagga V, 9, 4, VI, 19, to
place crockery or furniture on. The word £ola means simply
cotton cloth, but it is clear from these passages that /£olaka has
some special connotation.

3 Not to sit upon.

4 With this should be compared the other rule in Mahavagga V,
6, 1, according to which the Bhikkhus were to wear sandals when
getting upon bedsteads or chairs, lest these should become soiled.
The two passages are parallel in wording throughout.

5 Parikammakat&ya. The floors were of earth, not of wood,
and were restored from time to time by fresh clay or dry cowdung
being laid down, and then covered with a whitewash, in which
sometimes black or red (geruka) was mixed. See above, V,
11, 6; VI, 3, 1 ; 1 7, 1 ; 27. From the parallel passage at Maha-

1 1 vagga I, 25, 15, and JVullavagga VIII, 3, 1, it would seem that the
f\| red colouring was used rather for walls, and the black one for
l*[ floors. ' TC .

VI, 20, 2. ON DWELLINGS AND FURNITURE. 2ig

They told this matter to the Blessed One.

‘ Y ou are not, O Bhikkhus, to do so. Whosoever
does, shall be guilty of a dukka/a. I allow, O
Bhikkhus, the use of a spittoon.’

Now at that time the legs of the bedsteads and
chairs made scratches on the newly prepared floor.

They told this matter to the Blessed One.

‘ I allow you, O ' Bhikkhus, to cover it up with
floor-cloth;.’

Now at that time the Bhikkhus leant up against
the newly prepared walls \ and the colouring was
spoilt.

They told this thing to the Blessed One.

‘ You are not, O Bhikkhus, to do so. Whosoever
does, shall be guilty of a dukka/a. • I allow you,
O Bhikkhus, the use of a board to lean up against 1 2 .’

The board scratched the floor at the bottom, and
ruined the wall at the top.

‘ I allow you, O Bhikkhus, to cover it at the top
and bottom with cloth.’

Now at that time, fearing to offend, they would
not lie down on places over which it was permissible
to walk with washen feet 3 .

1 The walls were no doubt usually made with ‘ wattle and daub ; ’
that is, sticks with clay between the interstices. This was treated
from time to time like the flooring (see last note).

2 Apassena-phalakaw. This article of furniture is mentioned,
with the spittoon, in Mahavagga I, 25, 15, 16, and in the parallel
passage at A’ullavagga VIII, 1, 3. We have rendered it in the
Mah&vagga by ‘board to recline on.’ Compare the use of a pas -
say a m in Buddhaghosa’s note on Aullavagga VI, 2, 4 (above,
p. 153, note 3) of an arm-chair or sofa.

3 Dhotap&dak& ti dhotapSdaH hutvd dhotehi padehi akkamitab-
ba//Mne nipaggituiw kukkdlHyanti. Dhotapadake ti pi pa/Zo.
Dhotehi pSdehi akkamitabba//Mnass’ eva eta m adhiva/’anaw (B.).

220

JTULLAVAGGA.

VI, 2T, i.

They told this matter to the Blessed One.

‘ I allow you, O Bhikkhus, to lie down in such a
place when you have spread something over it.’

21 .

i. Now when the Blessed One had remained
at A/avi as long as he thought fit, he set out on his
journey towards Ragagaha. And proceeding straight
on, he arrived in due course at Ragagaha. And
there, at Ragagaha, the Blessed One stayed at the
Ve/uvana in the Kalandaka Nivapa.

Now at that time there was a scarcity of food
at Ragagaha h The people were unable to provide
food for the (whole) Savzgha ; and they were de-
sirous of providing food 1 2 (to be sent to the Vihara)
for the use of a special Bhikkhu (designated by the
donor) 3 , or for special Bhikkhus invited (by the
donor in his own house) 4 * , or for (single Bhikkhus)
appointed by ticket (issued by the Sawgha) s , or of
providing food during a fortnight 6 , or on Uposatha

1 Other special rules for times of scarcity will be found at Mahl-
vagga VI, 17, 7 ; 18, 4 ; 19, 2 ; 20, 4 (repealed for times of plenty
in VI, 32). Compare also Par^gika IV, 1, 1.

2 The above modes of receiving food (instead of collecting in a
. bowl morsels of food given in alms) are the dispensations allowed

by Mah&vagga I, 30, 4.

3 Uddesa-bhattasz Mtu«. Compare the story of Upananda
at Mahavagga VI, 19, 1.

4 Nimantanazra kat-ujw. The word is only used in this special
technical sense. Compare the whole story of itfulla-panthaka
at G’ataka I, 1 16, and especially the last line.

8 Salika-bhattaw Mtu in. See especially above, isfullavagga
IV, 9; IV, 10.

6 Pakkhikaw kUtu m. Both Childers sub voce and Frankfurter

(‘ Pali Handbook,’ p. x 65), in interpreting the passage at Mahavagga
I, 30, 4, take this to mean a feast given on the eighth day of the
month. But paksha is the half-month. The expression much
more probably means, therefore, to provide food either during the
whole of a half-month for one or more specially invited Bhikkhus,
or for a larger number on any one day of the half-month to be
chosen by the Saragha.

1 Compare above, isfullavagga IV, 4, 1.

2 Buddhaghosa says, Sal&kdya v& pa/ik&ya v& upanibandh-
itvS. opu«Mitv& uddisitun ti va^anato rukkhasSramayitya salS-
kiya vi ve/uvilivatilapa«»ldinaydya pa/Mya va asukassa nSma
salakabhattan ti eva m akkharani upanibandhitvsl pa^Myaw va
<Hvarabhoge vi katvd sabba salakayo omuflWitvd [sic] punappu-
nam he//Aa-vasena ft/olelval . . . databM.

VI, at, 2. 01^ DWELLINGS AND FURNITURE. 221

days (that is, on the last days of each fortnight) or
on the first days of each fortnight.

They told this matter to the Blessed One.

‘ I allow you, O Bhikkhus, each of three ways of
obtaining food.’

Now at that time the /f 7 zabbaggiya Bhikkhus
having received good food for .themselves, gave
over the worse food (which they had also received),
to the other Bhikkhus.

They told this matter to the Blessed One.

‘ I allow you, O Bhikkhus, to appoint as ap~
portioner of rations 1 a Bhikkhu who is possessed
of the following five qualifications — (&c„ as in IV,
9, down to the end of the Kammavai’a).’

Now the Bhikkhus who were apportioned of
rations, thought : ‘How then are the rations to be
apportioned ?’

They told this matter to the Blessed One.

‘ I allow you, O Bhikkhus, to apportion them by
arranging the food in small heaps, and fastening
tickets or marks upon them V

2. Now at that time the Sawzgha had no dis-

222

XULLAVAGGA.

VI, 2i, 3-

tributor of lodging : places — no overseer of stores—
no receiver of robes — no distributor of robes, of
congey, or of fruits— and no distributor of dry foods,
and through not being distributed it went bad.

They told each of these ' matters 1 to the Blessed
One.

‘ I allow you, O Bhikkhus, to appoint as dis-
tributor of lodging-places, See., a Bhikkhu who has
(&c., as in § i , down to the end of the Kammava/£a,
inserting throughout the appropriate variations in
the fifth qualification).

3. Now at that time articles of trifling value, had
accumulated in the storehouse of the Sawzgha.

They told this matter to the Blessed One.

‘I allow you, O Bhikkhus, to appoint as disposer
of trifles a Bhikkhu who has (&c., as before, down
to the end of the Kammavh/ta). Each separate
needle, and pair of scissors, and pair of sandals, and
girdle, and pair of braces, and filtering cloth, and
regulation strainer 2 , and plait 3 , and half-plait 3 , and
gusset 3 , and half-gusset 3 , and binding 4 , and braiding 4 ,
is to be given away. If the Sawgha has any ghee,
or oil, or honey, or molasses, he is to give it away
for personal consumption only, and if it be wanted,
he is to give it a second and a third time 5 .’

1 There is another officer (asana-pa^^apaka) mentioned at
Aullavagga XII, 2, 7, whose omission from the list here is worthy
of notice.

2 Dhamma-karako. See V, 13, 1.

8 On these words, see Mahavagga VIII, 12, 2.

4 On these two words, see Mahavagga VIII, 1, 5.

s These things were to be used only as medicines, according to
Mahavagga VI, 1, x— 5, where butter is also added. That would
be under the charge of the distributor of dry foods (§ 2), as if kept
It would go bad. According to VI, 15, 10, none of these five

VI, 21 , 3 -

ON DWELLINGS AND FURNITURE.

223

Now at that time the Sawgha had no receiver 1
of under-garments 1 , or of bowls, — no superintendent :
of those who kept the grounds in order (the Arh- i
mikas), and the Aramikas not being looked after,
the necessary work was not done; — no superintend- j
ent of simaweras, and the sima»eras not being j
looked after did not perform their duties.

They told each of these matters to the Blessed
One.

‘ I allow you, O Bhikkhus, to appoint as receiver
of under-garments, &c., a Bhikkhu who has (& c., as
before, down to the end of the KammavaZ’a).’

End of the Sixth Khandhaka, on Sleeping
Arrangements, &c.

kinds of medicine were to be kept for a period exceeding seven
days, but that was a rule that was not very probable to be strictly
followed.

1 Sa/iya; no doubt the same as is spelt elsewhere sa/ika or
sa/aka, and is used for such purposes as bathing in.

2 24

SULLAVAGGA.

YII, i, i.

SEVENTH KHAN DHAKA.

Dissensions in the Order.

i Now at that time the Blessed One was stay-
ing ‘at Anupiya i 2 . Anupiya is a town belonging
to the Mallas 3 . Now at that time the most
distinguished of the young men of the Sakya
clan had renounced the world in imitation of the

Blessed One. A A .

Now there were two brothers, Mahanama the
Sakyan, and Anuruddha the Sakyan. Anuruddha
the Sakyan was delicately nurtured ; and he had
three storeyed residences, one for the cold season,
one for the hot season, and one for the season of
the rains 4 . During the four months spent in the

i With the whole of the following story compare the, in many
respects, fuller account given by the commentator on the Dham-

mapada (Fausboll, pp. 13-9 and following).

. This was the spot where Gotama spent the first week after his
renunciation of the world, before he went on to R%agaha (Rh. D. s
< Buddhist Birth Stories,’ I, 8-?). Professor Fausboll *ere (Gataka
I 65) reads Anftpiyaa, but all his MSS. have the u short. It is
noteworthy that in our text the locative is formed as if the wor
were feminine, though the neuter form is used for the nominative,

3 The more usual mode of adding this description m simi ar
passages at the commencement of all the Suttas would lead us to

expect here Mallanaw nigame. .

1 Compare Mahavagga I, 7, i, where the same thing is said of

Yasa. ■ ■ v a'/c-v

'VII, i, 2. . DISSENSIONS IN THE ORDER. 225

residence for the season of the rains, he was waited
upon by women performing music 1 , and came not
down from the upper storey of his residence.

Then Mah&n&ma the Sakyan thought : ‘ Now the
most distinguished of the young men of the Sikya
clan have already renounced the world in imitation
of the Blessed One, but from our own family no
one has gone forth from the household life into the
houseless state. Let therefore either I, or Anu-
ruddha, renounce the world.’ And he went to
Anuruddha the Sakyan, and said [so to him, add-
ing], ‘ Either therefore do you go forth, or I will
do so.’

‘ I am delicate. It is impossible for me to go
forth from the household life into the houseless
state. Do you do so.’

2. ‘ But come now, O beloved Anuruddha, I will
tell you what is incident to the household life.
First, you have to get your fields ploughed. When
that is done, you have to get them sown. When
that is done, you have to get the water led down
over them. When that is done, you have to get
the water led off again. When that is done, you
have to get the weeds pulled up 2 . When that is
done, you have to get the crop reaped. When that
is done, you have to get the crop carried away.
When that is done, you have to get it arranged

1 Nippurisehi turiyehi. That Childers’s rendering, ‘ without
men, without people,’ is inadequate is clear from the context at the
passage which he quotes from (Sataka I, 53.

2 NicW&peti. Buddhaghosa says, ‘ Pull up the weeds ’ (tis&ni).
The word occurs also at (Jataka I, 215, where there is a similar list
of farming operations, which, though smaller, contains one or two
items not given here.

[20] Q

226

kullavagga.

VII, I, 2.

into bundles. When that is done, you have to get
it trodden out 1 . When that is done, you have to
aet the straw picked out. When that is done, you
have to get all the chaff removed. When that is
done, you have to get it winnowed. When that is
done, you have to get the harvest garnered 2 . When
that is done, you have to do just the same the
next year, and the same all over again the year
after that.

< The work is never over : one sees not the end
of one’s labours. O ! when shall our work be over ?
When shall we see the end of our labours ? When
shall we, still possessing and retaining the plea-
sures of our five senses, yet dwell at rest ? Yes .
the work, beloved Anuruddha, is never over; no
end appears to our labours. Even when our fathers
and forefathers had completed their time 3 , even then

was their work unfinished.

‘Then do you take thought for the household
duties. 1 will go forth from the household life

into the houseless state.

And Anuruddha the Shkyan went to his mother,
and said to her : ‘ I want, mother, to go forth from
the household life into the houseless state. Grant

me thy permission to do so. _

And when he had thus spoken, his mother replied

1 Madd&peti. There is mention of threshing (prati-han)
already in the Vedas. See the passages collected by Zimmer,

* Altindisches Leben,’ p. 238. But treading out is even still a very
common, if not the more usual, process throughout India and

* Atiharapeti. See Milinda Pafiha, p. 66. The simple verb
occurs also in a similar connection^ in the Bhikkhum-vibhanga m
the introductory story to Pd&ttiya VII.

* That is, had died.

VII, 1,3-

DISSENSIONS IN THE ORDER.

227

to Anuruddha the Sakyan, and said: ‘You two,
O beloved Anuruddha, are my two only sons, near
and dear to me, in whom I find no evil. Through
death I shall some day, against my will, be separated
from you ; but how can I be willing, whilst you are
still alive, that you should go forth from the house-
hold life into the houseless state ?’

[And a second time Anuruddha the Sakyan made
the same request, and received the same reply.
And a third time Anuruddha the S&kyan made the
same request to his mother.]

3. Now at that time Bhaddiya the Sakya Ra/a
held rule over the Sakyas ; and he was a friend
of Anuruddha the Sakyan’s. And the mother of
Anuruddha the Sakyan, thinking that that being
so, the Ri/a would not be able to renounce the
world, said to her son: ‘If, beloved Anuruddha,
Bhaddiya the Slkyan Ra^a will renounce the
world, thou also mayest go forth into the house-
less state.’

Then Anuruddha the S&kyan went to Bhaddiya
the Sakyan Ri^a, and said to him : ‘ My renuncia-
tion of the world, dear friend, is being obstructed
by thee.’

‘ Then let that obstruction, dear friend, be re-
moved. Even with thee will 1 1 — renounce thou
the world according to thy wish.’

* Come, dear friend, let us both renounce the
world together !’

1 Ahaw taya, Buddhaghosa explains that the R&ga. is begin-
ning to say that he will go with his friend. But a desire for the
glory of sovereignty comes over his heart, and he leaves the sen-
tence unfinished. (The Pali is given in the notes on the text,
P- 323-)

228

•ETULLAV AGGA.

YII, i, 4.

‘ I am not capable, dear friend, of giving up the
household life. Whatsoever else you can ask of
me, that I will do \ Do you go forth (alone).’

‘ My mother, dear friend, has told me that if thou
dost so, I may. And thou hast even now declared
“ If thy renunciation be obstructed by me, then let
that obstruction be removed. Even with thee will
I — renounce thou the world, according to thy wish.”
Come, then, dear friend, let us both renounce the
world.’

Now at that time men were speakers of truth,
and keepers of their word which they had pledged.
And Bhaddiya the Sakya Rajm said to Anuruddha
the Sakyan : ‘ Wait, my friend, for seven years.
At the end of seven years we will renounce the
world together. 5

‘ Seven years are too long, dear friend. I am not
able to wait for seven years.’

[And the same offer was made successively of six
years and so on down to one year, of seven months
and so on down to one month, and even of a fort-
night, and still there was ever the same reply. At
last the Ratrn said,]

‘ Wait, my friend, for seven days, whilst I hand
over the kingdom to my sons and my brothers.’

* Seven days is not too long. I will wait thus
far’ (was the reply).

4. So Bhaddiya the Sikya Ra^a, and Anuruddha,
and Ananda, and Bhagu, and Kimbila, and De-
vadatta — just as they had so often previously gone

1 Tyaham. See Dr. Morris’s remarks on this elision in his intro-
duction to the A’ariyS, Pi/aka (Pali Text Society, 1882), where he
makes it equal to tad aha m. This seems to us open to question,
at least in this passage, where it may possibly stand for te a haw.

VIT, i, 4. DISSENSIONS IN THE ORDER. 229

out to the pleasure-ground with fourfold array —
even so did they now go out with fourfold array,
and Upali the barber went with them, making
seven in all.

And when they had gone some distance, they sent
their retinue back, and crossed over into the neigh-
bouring district, and took off their fine things, and
wrapped them in their robes, and made a bundle of
them, and said to U pali the barber : ‘ Do you now,
good U pali, turn back. These things will be sufficient
for you to live upon.’

But as he was going back, U pali the barber
thought : ‘ The Sakyas are fierce. They will think
that these young men have been brought by me
to destruction, and they will slay me. But since
now these young men of the Sakya clan can go
forth from the household life into the houseless
state, why indeed should not I ?’ And he let down
the bundle (from his back), and hung the bundle on
a tree, saying, ‘ Let whoso finds it, take it, as a gift,’
and returned to the place where the young Sakyans
were.

And the Sakya youths saw him coming from afar,
and on seeing, they said to him : ‘ What have you
come back for, good Upali ?’

Then he told them [what he had thought, and
what he had done with the bundle, and why he was
returned].

‘ Thou hast done well, good Up&li (was the reply),
in that thou didst not return ; for the Sakyas are
fierce, and might have killed thee.’

And they took Upali the barber with them to the
place where the Blessed One was. And on arriving
there, they bowed down before the Blessed One, and

230

KTJLLAVAGGA.

VII, i, 4.

took their seats on one side. And so seated they
said to the Blessed One : ‘ We S&kyas, Lord,
are haughty. And this U pali the barber has
long been an attendant, Lord, upon us. May the
Blessed One admit him to the Order before us,
so that we may render him respect and reverence,
and bow down with outstretched hands before him
(as our senior), and thus shall the Sakya pride be
humbled in us Shkyans 1 .’

Then the Blessed One received first Updli the
barber, and afterwards those young men of the Sakya
clan, into the ranks of the Order. And the venerable
Bhaddiya, before that rainy season was over, became
master of the Threefold Wisdom 2 , and the vener-
able Anuruddha acquired the Heavenly Vision 3 ,
and the venerable Ananda realised the effect of
having entered upon the Stream 4 , and Devadatta
attained to that kind of Iddhi which is attainable
even by those who have not entered upon the Ex-
cellent Way 5 .

1 This reputation of the Sakya family for pride is referred to in
Gataka I, 88, 89.

2 Tisso vi gg%, see Rh. D.’s remarks at pp. 16 1, 162 of
‘Buddhist Suttas from the Pali’ (S. B. E., vol. xi). They are
probably here the three vi^as referred to in the Sutta-vibhahga,
P&rS^ika I, 1, 6-8, as the second of those is the Heavenly Vision,
here mentioned in the next clause.

3 Dibba£akkhu, a full description of the details of which will
be found in the stock paragraph translated by Rh. D. in ‘ Buddhist
Suttas from the Pali’ (S. B. E., vol. xi, pp. 216-218).

* Sot&pattiphala ; that is, he became free from the delusion
of self (sakkayadiZ/Ai), from doubt (vi$ki kkhi), and from depend-
ence upon ceremonies or works (silabbata-paramasa). See Rh. D.’s
manual, ‘ Buddhism,’ pp. x 08-1 10.

5 Pothu^g'aniki iddhi. What this may be is unknown to
us. A fourfold Iddhi is described in detail in the stock passage

VII, 1,6. DISSENSIONS IN THE ORDER. 231

5 *. Now at that time the venerable Bhaddiya,
who had retired into the forest to the foot of a tree,
into solitude, gave utterance over and over again to
this ecstatic exclamation : ‘ O happiness ! O happi-
ness !’ And a number of Bhikkhus went up to the
place where the Blessed One was, and bowed down
before him, and took their seats on one side. And,
so seated, they [told the Blessed One of this], and
added, ‘For a certainty, Lord, the venerable Bhad-
diya is not contented as he lives the life of purity;
but rather it is when calling to mind the happiness of
his former sovranty that he gives vent to this saying.’

Then the Blessed One addressed a certain Bhik-
khu, and said : ‘ Do you go, O Bhikkhu, and in my
name call Bhaddiya the Bhikkhu, saying, “ The
Teacher, venerable Bhaddiya, is calling for you.’”

‘ Even so, Lord/ said that Bhikkhu, in assent to
the Blessed One. And he went to Bhaddiya, and
called him [in those words].

6. ‘Very well/ said the venerable Bhaddiya, in

translated by Rh. D. in ‘ Buddhist Suttas from the Pali,’ S. B. E.,
vol. xi, p. 214, and the fourfold Iddhi of the ideal king in the
similar passage, loc. cit., pp. 259-261. The Iddhi here referred to
may be the former of these two, though that list does not include
the power ascribed to Devadatta in the next chapter. At Gataka I,
140, the expression of our text here is replaced by gh an a, though
the account there is otherwise the same.

It is worthy of notice that Devadatta, though a Bhikkhu, is not
honoured with the standing epithet, ‘ venerable,' always used of the
other members of the Order, even when they are represented to
have been of bad character.

1 The following incident, with a summary of the preceding sec-
tions, forms the introductory story to the 10th Gataka (Rh. D.’s
‘Buddhist Birth Stories,’ i. pp. 190-19 3). The legend may have
first arisen as an explanation of the name Bhaddiya, which means
‘ the fortunate one.’

232

JTULLAVAGGA.

vn, i, 6 .

assent to that Bhikkhu ; and he came to the Blessed
One, and bowed down before him, and took his
seat on one side. And when he was so seated, the
Blessed One said to the venerable Bhaddiya :

c Is it true, as they say, that you Bhaddiya, when
retired into the forest to the foot of a tree, into
solitude, have given utterance over and over again
to this ecstatic exclamation, “ O happiness ! O happi-
ness ! ” What circumstance was it, O Bhaddiya, that
you had in your mind when you acted thus ?’

‘Formerly, Lord, when I was a king, I had a
guaid completely provided both within and without
my private apartments, both within and without the
town, and within the (borders of my) country. Yet
though, Lord, I was thus guarded and protected, I
was fearful, anxious, distrustful, and alarmed. But
now, Lord, even when in the forest, at the foot of a
tree, in solitude, I am without fear or anxiety, trustful
and not alarmed ; I dwell at ease, subdued 1 , secure 2 ,
with mind as peaceful as an antelope’s 3 . It was when
calling this fact to mind, Lord, that I gave utterance
over and over again to that cry, “ O happiness ! O
happiness!’”

Then the Blessed One, on hearing that, gave
utterance at that time to this song :

o

Pannalomo. See our note 2 on Wullavagga I, 6, 1 (above
vol. ii, p. 339).

2 Paradavutto. This is the reading of the Sinhalese MS., and
is the correct one. See Oldenberg’s note at p. 363 of the edition
of the text. Our translation is conjectural.

Migabhhtena ^etasfi. The meaning of miga in this
phrase is not certain ; and the figure may be drawn from the care-
less mind of any animal in its natural state. We have not noticed
the idiom elsewhere; but compare the converse figure, bhanta-
raiga-sappadbh&go sdsane anabhirato, at G&taka I, 303, 6.

VII, 2, r. DISSENSIONS IN THE ORDER. 233

‘ The man who harbours no harsh thoughts within
him,

\A/ ho cares not whether things are thus or thus,
His state of joy, freedom from grief or care,
The very gods obtain not to behold 1’

2 .

i. Now when the Blessed One had stayed at
Anupiya as long as he thought fit, he set out on
his journey towards Kosambi. And journeying
straight on he arrived in due course at Kosambi,
and there, at Kosambi, he stayed at the Ghosita H
Arama. J

Now the following thought occurred to Devadatta,
when he had retired into solitude, and was plunged
in meditation : ‘ Whom now 1 can I so gain over that,
he being well pleased with me, much gain and
honour may result to me? And it occurred to
him, ‘ Now this prince A^atasattu is young, and
has a lucky future before him. Let me then gain
him over ; and he being well pleased with me,
much gain and honour will result.’

Then Devadatta folded up his sleeping-mat, and
set out, fully bowled and robed, for Rfi^agaha ; and
in due course he arrived at Rifagaha. Then he
laid aside his oum form, and took upon himself the
form of a child clad in a girdle of snakes, and ap-
peared on the lap of prince A^atasattu 2 . Then was

1 In the text, for kin nu read kawz no.

2 This taking upon oneself another shape is not one of the
powers of Iddhi included in the first list referred to at note 5,
p. 230-

234

XULLAVAGGA.

VII, 2, 2.

prince Af&tasattu terrified, and startled, and anxious,
and alarmed.

And Devadatta said to prince A^atasattu, ‘Are
you afraid of me, O prince ?’

‘Yes, I am. Who are you ?’

‘ I am Devadatta.’

‘ If you, Sir, are really the worthy Devadatta, be
good enough to appear in your own shape.’

Then Devadatta, laying aside the form of the
child, appeared there before prince A^atasattu with
his inner and outer robes on, and with his bowl in
his hand. And prince A^atasattu was well pleased
with Devadatta by reason of this marvel of Iddhi,
and morning and evening he used to go in five
hundred chariots to wait upon him, and food was
brought and laid before him in five hundred dishes.

Then there arose in Devadatta’s mind, possessed
and vanquished by gain and hospitality and fame \
some such thought as this : ‘It is I who ought to
lead the Bhikkhu-sawgha.’ And as the idea rose up
within him, (that moment) was Devadatta deprived
of that his power of Iddhi.

2. Now at that time a Koliyan, by name Kakudha,
who had been (as Bhikkhu) the attendant on Moggal-
lana, had just died, and had appeared again in a
certain spiritual body 1 2 3 , possessed of a personality as
large as two or three of the common rice-fields of a
Magadha village, and yet so constituted 3 that he was

1 Compare Mahavagga V, x, 22, on this expression. Also
below, § 5.

2 Ariwataraw manomaya»z k&ya m upapanno. Perhaps ‘in
a mode of existence in which his body was changeable at will.’
(See Childers, sub voce manomayo.)

* Attabh&vo. See IX, 1, 3.

VIT, 2,3.

DISSENSIONS IN THE ORDER.

235

not in the way either of himself or of others k And.
this celestial being, Kakudha, went to the venerable
Moggallana, and bowed down before him, and took
his stand on one side. And so standing, he told the
venerable Moggallana [of the thought that had arisen
in Devadatta’s mind, and of the result thereof]. And
when he had told him, he bowed down before the
venerable Moggallana, and keeping him on his right
side as he passed him, he vanished away.

And the venerable Moggallana went to the place
where the Blessed One was, and told him [the whole
matter] 1 2 .

‘What then, Moggallana, have you so penetrated
the mind of that celestial being Kakudha, that you
know that whatsoever he speaks, that will be accord-
ingly, and not otherwise 3 ?’

‘ I have, Lord.’

1 Keep that saying, Moggallana, secret ; keep that
saying secret. Even now that foolish man will
himself make himself known.

3 4 ‘ There are, Moggall&na, these five kinds of
teachers now existing in the world. What are the
five ?

‘ In the first place, Moggall&na, there is one kind
of teacher whose conduct not being pure, he yet

1 Vy£bMheti. He could occupy the same space as other
beings without incommoding them. The word occurs in the same
sense in the passage quoted from Buddhaghosa in Rh. D.’s note 1
on the Mah&-parinibbana Sutta V, 10, but originally occurring in
the Anguttara Nik&ya,

2 The last paragraph is here repeated in the text.

3 On the use here of £etas& £eto pari^a, compare MahS-pari-
nibb&na Sutta I, 16, 17.

■ 4 The following two sections are repeated below, VII, 3, 10, to
all the Bhikkhus.

236

^ULLAVAGGA.

VII, 2, 4.

gives out that he is a person of pure conduct, one
whose conduct is pure, and innocent, and without
stain. His disciples know that that is so, but they
think, “If we announce the fact to the laity, he will
not like it. And how can we conduct ourselves
towards him in a way that is displeasing to him?
And besides he is honoured with gifts of the
requisite clothing, food, lodging, and medicine for
the sick. He will sooner or later become known
by that which he himself will do.” Such a teacher,
Moggallhna, do his disciples protect in respect of his
own conduct. And being as he is, he expects 1 to be
protected by his disciples in respect of his own
conduct.

4. ‘ Again, Moggallana,’ &c. [as before, putting
successively 1 mode of livelihood,’ 1 preaching of the
Dhamma,’ ‘system of exposition,’ &c., ‘insight arising
from knowledge,’ for ‘ conduct’]. ‘These, Moggallana,
are the five kinds of teachers now existing in the
world. But I being pure in conduct, mode of liveli-
hood, preaching of the Dhamma, system of expo-
sition, and insight arising from knowledge, give out
that I am so, that I am pure, innocent, and without
stain in all these things. And neither do my disciples
protect me In respect of my own conduct, nor do I
expect them to do so.’

5. Now when the Blessed One had remained at
Kosambi as long as he thought fit, he set out on his
journey towards Rafagaha. And journeying straight
on, he arrived in due course at Rafagaha ; and there,
at Ra/agaha, he stayed at the Ve/uvana in the Ka-
landaka N ivapa.

1 PaK’asiffzsati. Perhaps this word here means ‘he requires,
needs.’

VII, 2, 5. DISSENSIONS IN THE ORDER. 237

And a number of Bhikkhus went to the Blessed
One, and bowed down before him, and took their
seats on one side. And when so seated, they said
to the Blessed One : ‘ Prince A^atasattu is in the
habit of going morning and evening with five
hundred carts to wait upon Devadatta, and food is
brought and laid before him in five hundred
dishes.’

‘ Envy not, O Bhikkhus, the gain and hospitality
and fame of Devadatta. So long, O Bhikkhus, as
A^&tasattu [so waits upon him and gives him alms]
so long may we expect Devadatta not to prosper, but
to decline in virtuous qualities 1 . Just, O Bhikkhus,
as if you were to burst a gall (bladder ) 2 before the
nose of a fierce dog, the dog would thereby become
so much the fiercer, just so long, O Bhikkhus (&c.,
as before). To his own hurt, O Bhikkhus, has this
gain, hospitality, and fame come to Devadatta, to
his own destruction. Just, O Bhikkhus, as a plan-
tain, or a bamboo, or a reed gives fruit to its own
hurt and its own destruction 3 , just so to his own
hurt (&c., as before). Just as a young she-mule
conceives to her own hurt and her own destruction 4 ,
just so, O Bhikkhus, to his own hurt has this gain,
&c., come to Devadatta.

‘ Its fruit destroys the plantain-tree ; its fruit the
bamboo and the reed.

1 This phrase runs in the same mould as the one so constantly
repeated at the commencement of the Maha-parinilMna Sutta
(I, §§4-11).

2 Pittara bhindeyyuw. Literally, ‘ should break a gall.’

8 These three plants die after producing fruit.

4 Because she would die if she did. On assatari, compare
above, VI, 4, 3, and our note there.

2 38 5TUIXAVAGGA. VII, 3, I.

‘ Honour destroys the evil man, just as its foal
destroys the young she-mule.’

Here endeth the First Portion for Recitation.

3 .

x. Now at that time the Blessed One was seated
preaching the Dhamma, and surrounded by a great
multitude, including the king and his retinue. And
Devadatta rose from his seat, and arranging his
upper robe over one shoulder, stretched out his
joined hands to the Blessed One, and said to the
Blessed One :

‘ The Blessed One, Lord, is now grown aged, he
is old and stricken in years, he has accomplished a
long journey, and his term of life is nearly run h
Let the Blessed One now dwell at ease in the
enjoyment of happiness reached even in this world.
Let the Blessed One give up the Bhikkhu-sawgha
to me, I will be its leader.’

‘ Thou hast said enough, Devadatta. Desire not
to be the leader of the Bhikkhu-sawgha.’

[And a second time Devadatta made the same
request, and received the same reply. And a third
time Devadatta made the same request.]

‘ I would not give over the Bhikkhu-sawgha,
Devadatta, even to Sariputta and Moggallana.

1 This string of epithets recurs in Par%ika I, i, 2, of old and
venerable Brlhmans.

VII, 3, 2. DISSENSIONS IN THE ORDER. 239

How much less, then, to so vile and evil-living a
person as you 1 .’

Then Devadatta thought : ‘ Before the king and
his retinue the Blessed One denies me, calling me
“ evil-living,” and exalts S&riputta and Moggallina.’
And, angry and displeased, he bowed down before
the Blessed One, and keeping him on his right hand
as he passed him, he departed thence.

This was the first time that Devadatta bore
malice against the Blessed One.

2. And the Blessed One said to the Bhikkhus,
‘ Let then the Sawgha, O Bhikkhus, carry out
against Devadatta the Act of Proclamation 2 * in
Ravagaha, to the effect that whereas the nature of
Devadatta used to be of one kind it is now of an-
other kind, and that whatsoever he shall do, either
bodily or verbally, in that neither shall the Buddha
be recognised, nor the Dhamma, nor the Sawgha,
but only Devadatta.

‘ And thus, O Bhikkhus, shall the Act be car-
ried out. Some discreet and able Bhikkhu (&c.,

1 In the text read Mavassa khe/apakassa. On the first word,
compare V, 2, 8. For the second the Dhammapada commentator
(Fausboll, p. 143) reads, as does the Sinhalese MS. in our passage,
khe/asika. Buddhaghosa, explaining it, says, ‘In this passage
(we should recollect) that those who obtain the requisites (of a
Bhikkhu) by an evil mode of life are said by the Noble Ones to be
like unto spittle. The Blessed One calls him khe/apaka (to ex-
press that) he eats, (that is, 4 gains a living) in sin like that/ (For
the Pali, see the edition of the text, p, 323, where the comma after
khe/asadisfi should be before it)

2 Pakasaniya-kammaw. This is not one of the regular
official acts of the Sawgha, as described in Aullavagga I, and is

only mentioned in this passage. It is not referred to by the

Dhammapada commentator.

240

iTULLAVAGGA.

VII, 3 , 3 -

in the same form as in I, i, 4, down to the end of
the Kammav&M).’

And the Blessed One said to the venerable Sari-
putta, ‘ Do you then, Sariputta, proclaim Devadatta
throughout Ragagaha.’

•' In former times, Lord, I have sung the praises
of Devadatta in Ragagalia, saying, “ Great is the
power (Iddhi) of the son of Godhi ! Great is the
might of the son of Godhi !” How can I now pro-
claim him throughout Rlgagaha ? ’

‘ Was it not truth that you spoke, Sariputta, when
you [so] sang his praises ?’

‘Yea, Lord !’

‘ Even so, Sariputta, do you now, speaking the
truth, proclaim Devadatta throughout Ragagaha.’

‘ Even so, Lord,’ said S&riputta, in assent to the
Blessed One.

3. And the Blessed One said to the Bhikkhus :

1 Let then the Saszgha appoint Sariputta to the
office of proclaiming Devadatta throughout Raga-
gaha to the effect (&c., as before, § 2). And thus,
O Bhikkhus, should he be appointed. First, Sari-
putta should be asked, &c. (as usual in official ap-
pointments 1 , down to the end of the Kammava/i).’

Then Sariputta, being so appointed, entered R&ga-
gaha with a number of Bhikkhus, and proclaimed
Devadatta accordingly. And thereupon those people
who were unbelievers, and withoutdevotion or insight,
spake thus : ‘ They are jealous, these Sakyaputtiya
Samaras ! They are jealous of the gain and hospi-
tality that fall to Devadatta !’ But those who were
believers, full of devotion, able, and gifted with in-

1 See, for instance, I, 22, 2.

DISSENSIONS IN THE ORDER,

sight, spake thus : * This cannot be any ordinary
affair 1 , in that the Blessed One has had Devadatta
proclaimed throughout Ra^agaha ! ’

4. And Devadatta went to A^itasattu the prince,
and said to him : ‘ In former days, prince, people
were long-lived, but now their term of life is short.
It is quite possible, therefore, that you may com-
plete your time while you are still a prince. So
do you, prince, kill your father, and become the
Rafa ; and I will kill the Blessed One, and become
the Buddha.’

And prince A/atasattu thought, * This worthy
Devadatta has great powers and might ; he will
know (what is right).’ And fastening a dagger 2
against his thigh, he entered with violence and at
an unusual hour 3 , though fearful, anxious, excited,
and alarmed, the royal chamber. And when the
ministers who were in attendance in the private
chamber saw that, they seized him. And when, on
searching him, they found the dagger fastened on
his thigh, they asked him :

‘ What were you going to do, O prince ?’

‘ I wanted to kill my father.’

‘ Who incited you to this ?’

‘ The worthy Devadatta.’

Then some of the ministers advised ‘ The prince
should be slain, and Devadatta, and all the Bhik-
khus.’ Others of them advised ‘ The Bhikkhus
ought not to be slain, for they have done no wrong;

1 Na orakaw bhavissati. See Mah&vagga I, 9, 1 , and
JSTullavagga VI, 4, 10, and our note on the latter passage.

2 Potthanikaw. This word has already occurred at MaM-
vagga VI, 23, 3.

3 Divadivassa. See the use of this word at G$taka II, 1.

XULLAVAGGA.

VII, 3, 5-

242

but only the prince and Devadatta.’ Others of
them again said, ‘ Neither should the prince be
slain, nor Devadatta, nor the Bhikkhus. But the
king' should be told of this, and we should do as

the king shall command. _

5. So these ministers, taking the prince with them,
went to the Rafa of Magadha, to Seniya Bimbisara,

and told him what had happened.

‘What advice, my friends, did the ministers
P y

[When they had told him all (as before) he said] :

‘ What, my friends, can the Buddha, or the Sawgha,
or the Dhamma have to do with this ? Has not
the Blessed One had a proclamation already made
throughout Ragagaha concerning Devadatta, to the
effect that whereas his nature used to be of one
kind, it is now of another ; and that whatsoever he
shall do, either bodily or verbally, in that shall
neither the Buddha, nor the Dhamma, , nor the
Sa^zgha be required, but only Devadatta ?

Then those ministers who had advised that the
orince and Devadatta and all the Bhikkhus. should
be slain, them he made incapable (of ever again hold-
ing office). And those ministers who had advised
that the prince should be slain, and Devadatta,
them he degraded to lower offices. But those
ministers who had advised that neither should the
prince be slain, nor Devadatta, nor the Bhikkhus,
but that the king should be informed of it, and his
command be followed, them he advanced to high
positions.

And the Rafa of Magadha, Seniya Bimbisdra,
said to prince A^atasattu : ‘Why did you want to
kill me, O prince ?’

VII, 3. 7- DISSENSIONS IN THE ORDER. 243

‘ I wanted a kingdom, O king ! ’

‘ If you then want a kingdom, O prince, let this
kingdom he thine!’ And he handed over the
kingdom to A^atasattu the prince 1 .

6. Then Devadatta went to prince 2 A^&tasattu,
and said, ‘ Give such orders, O king, to your men
that I may deprive the Samara Gotama of life.’
And A/itasattu the prince gave orders to his
men : ‘ Whatsoever the worthy Devadatta tells you,
that do !’

Then to one man Devadatta gave command :

‘ Go, my friend, the Samara Gotama is staying at
such and such a place. Kill him, and come back
by this path.’ Then on that path he placed other
two men, telling them, ‘Whatever man you see
coming alone along this path, kill him, and return
by that path.’ Then on that path he placed other
four men [and so on up to sixteen men].

7. And that man took his sword and shield, and
hung his bow and quiver at his back, and went to
the place where the Blessed One was, and when at
some little distance from the Blessed One, being

1 The early literature already mentions that A^atasattu eventually
killed his father. (See, for instance, Sama?ma-phala Sutta, p, 154.)
Bigandet I, 261 (3rd edition) adds that the mode adopted was by
starving him to death in prison.

2 The Buddhist writers being so especially careful in their ac-
curate use of titles, it is particularly noteworthy that Agitasattu is
here called prince (kum&ra) and not king (rag*a). It is almost
impossible to avoid the conclusion that this paragraph stood
originally in some other connection ; and that the events it de-
scribes must then have been supposed to have taken place before
A^itasattu actually became king. That the Dhammapada com-
mentator says here (Fausboll, p* 143) tasmm (that is, A^atasattu)
ra.gg$ pati//Mte, is no evidence the other way; for that account
is either taken from this, or depends ultimately upon it.

244

OTLLAVAGGA.

VII, 3, IT-

terrified, anxious, excited, and alarmed, he stood
stark still and stiff 1 .

On the Blessed One seeing him so, he said to
the man : ‘ Come hither, friend, don’t be afraid.

Then that man laid aside his sword and his
shield, took off his bow and his quiver, and went
up to the Blessed One ; and falling at his feet, he
said to the Blessed One : ‘ Transgression, Lord, has
overcome me even according to my folly, my
stupidity, and my unrighteousness, in that I have
come hither with evil and with murderous intent.
May the Blessed One accept the confession I make
of my sin in its sinfulness, to the end that in future
I may restrain myself therefrom !

‘Verily, my friend, transgression has overcome
thee [&c., down to] intent. But since you, my
friend, look upon your sin as sin, and duly make
amends for it, we do accept (your confession of) it.
For this, O friend, is progress in the discipline of
the Noble One, that he who has seen his sin to be
sin makes amends for it as is meet, and becomes
able in future to restrain himself therefrom V

Then the Blessed One discoursed to that man in
due order, that is to say (&c., as usual in conver-
sions 3 , down to) May the Blessed One accept me
as a disciple, as one who, from this day forth as long
as life endures, has taken his refuge in him.

And the Blessed One said to the man : 1 Do not,
my friend, leave me by that path. Go by this
path,’ and so dismisse d him by another way.

1 Patthaddha; that is, prastabdha. See Sutta-vibhahga,
PSr^ikal, io, 17 , 2i.

a This confession and acceptance are in a standing form, which
occurs, for instance, at MaMvagga IX, i, 9 ; ATullavagga V, 20, 5.

3 See, for instance, Zullavagga VI, 4, 5.

VII, 3 , 9 -

DISSENSIONS IN THE ORDER.

245

8. But the two men thought, ‘Where now can
that man be who was to come alone? He is
delaying long.’ And as they were going to meet
him, they caught sight of the Blessed One sitting at
the foot of a certain tree. On seeing him they
went up to the place where he was, and saluted
him, and took their seats on one side. To them
also the Blessed One discoursed, [and they were con-
verted as the other man had been, and he sent
them back by another way. And the same thing
occurred as to the four, and the eight, and the
sixteen men b]

9. And the one man returned to Devadatta, and
said to him : * I cannot, Lord, deprive the Blessed
One of life. Great is the power (Iddhi 2 ) and might
of the Blessed One.’

‘ That will do, friend. Y ou need not do so. I will
slay the Blessed One myself.’

Now at that time the Blessed One was walking
up and down (meditating) in the shade below 3 the
mountain called the Vulture’s Peak. And Deva-
datta climbed up the Vulture’s Peak, and hurled
down a mighty rock with the intention of depriving
the Blessed One of life. But two mountain peaks
came together and stopped that rock, and only
a splinter 4 falling from it made the foot of the
Blessed One to bleed ®.

1 The last two paragraphs of § 7 are repeated in full in the text
in each case.

2 The Iddhi here must be the power of religious persuasion.

3 Pa£Haydya«. See Mahdvagga V, 1, 5, and MaM-parinib-
bana Sutta II, 31 (p. 22 of the text).

4 PapatikH. In the text, by a misprint, this and the preceding
word have been joined together.

‘ Pade ruhiram uppadesi, where ruhira is equal to lohita.

246

-STULLAVAGGA.

VII, 3, ro.

Then the Blessed One, looking upwards, said to
Devadatta : ‘ Great, O foolish one, is the demerit
you have brought forth for yourself 1 , in that with
evil and murderous intent you have caused the
blood of the Tath&gata to flow.’

And the Blessed One said to the Bhikkhus :

‘ This is the first time that Devadatta has heaped
up (against himself) a Karma which will work out
its effect in the immediate future 2 , in that with evil
and murderous intent he has caused the blood of
the TatMgata to flow.’

10. And the Bhikkhus having heard that Deva-
datta was compassing the death of the Blessed One,
walked round and round the Vihara, making recita-
tion in high and loud tones, for a protection and
guard to the Blessed One. On hearing that noise
the Blessed One asked the venerable Ananda what
it was. And when Ananda [told him], the Blessed
One said : ‘ Then, Ananda, call the Bhikkhus in my

It is so used at Gataka II, 275, in the Milinda Pawha, p. 125, and
in the account of the present incident in the Dhammapada com-
mentary (p. 144). In MaMvagga I, 67, -where it is said that one
who has shed (a Buddha’s) blood cannot be received into the
Order, the expression is lohitaw upp&deti : and in numerous
passages elsewhere it is added that such a lohituppadako be-
comes ipso facto discharged from one or other of the duties and
privileges of a member of the Order, just as if he had thrown off
the robes.

1 Pasutaw. By a misprint the text has pasuta?;2. Compare
the end of § 16 below.

2 Anantarika-kammawz. That is, that will work out its
effect, (not in the next birth, as is the case of all other Karma,)
but immediately, in the present life. There are five such deeds
(see Childers, sub voce pa»i 0 , and Milinda Pafiha, p. 25). The
Bodisats, according to (Jataka I, 45 (verse 256), are free from
such sms.

YII, 3, ii. DISSENSIONS IN THE ORDER. 247

name, saying, “ The Teacher sends for the venerable
ones.” ’

And he [did so], and they came, and saluted the
Blessed One, and took their seats on one side.
And when they -were so seated, the Blessed One
said to the Bhikkhus : 4 This, O Bhikkhus, is an
impossible thing, and one that cannot occur, that
one should deprive a Tathagata of life by violence.
The Tathagatas, O Bhikkhus, are extinguished (in
death) in due and natural course.

* There are, O Bhikkhus, these five kinds of
teachers now living in the world (&c., as in VII, 2,

3, 4, down to the end). And this, O Bhikkhus,
Is an impossible thing, and one that cannot occur,
that a Tathagata should be slain by any act set on
foot by any one besides himself. The Tathagatas,
O Bhikkhus, are extinguished (in death) in due
course (of nature). Go, therefore, O Bhikkhus, each |
one to his Vihara, for the Tathagatas require no
protection.’

11. Now at that time there was at Ri/agaha an
elephant named Nalagiri, fierce, and a manslayer.
And Devadatta went into R&gagaha, and to the
elephant stables, and said to the elephant-keepers 1 :

‘ I, my friends, am a relative of the rhea’s, and am
able to advance a man occupying a low position to
a high position, and to order increase of rations or
of pay. Therefore, my friends, when the Samara
Gotama shall have arrived at this carriage-road 2 ,
then loose the elephant Nalagiri, and let him go
down the road.’

1 Hatthi-bha»<£e. See the note on Mahtvagga VI, 37, 2,

! Ra£Ma«; that is, rathy&m. Compare Gataka I, 346, and
the Old Commentary on the Bhikkhuni-vibhanga, Pifcittiya VII.

248 AULLAVAGGA. VII, 3, 12.

‘ Even so, Sir,’ said those elephant-keepers in
assent to Devadatta.

And when the Blessed One early in the morning
had dressed himself, he entered Ra^agaha duly
bowled and robed, and with a number of Bhikkhus,
for alms ; and he entered upon that road. On
seeing him the elephant-keepers loosed N&lctgiri,
and let it go down the road. And the elephant
saw the Blessed One coming from the distance ;
and as soon as it saw him, it rushed towards the
Blessed One with uplifted trunk, and with its tail
and ears erect.

When those Bhikkhus saw the elephant Nalagiri
coming in the distance, they said to the Blessed
One : ‘ This elephant, Lord, Niligiri, is fierce, and
a manslayer, and it has got into this road. Let
the Blessed One, Lord, turn back : let the Happy
One turn back.’

‘ Come on, O Bhikkhus. Be not alarmed. There
is, O Bhikkhus, no possibility [&c., as in last section,
down to the end].’

[And a second and a third time the Bhikkhus
made the same appeal, and received the same
reply.]

12. Then at that time the people climbed up on
to the upper storeys of the houses, and on to the
balconies, and on to the roofs. And those of
them who were unbelievers and without faith or
insight, said, ‘Truly the countenance of the great
Samara is beautiful ; but the elephant will do him
a hurt 1 .’ But those who were believers, full of

1 The setting of this paragraph is parallel to § 3 above in this
chapter; the speech of the unbelievers is the same as that of the
Gahlas at Mah&vagga I, 15, 4.

VII, 3, 12- DISSENSIONS IN THE ORDER. 249

devotion, able, and gifted with insight, said, ‘ 'Twill
be long e’er the elephant can fight a fight with the
elephant (of men) ! ’

And the Blessed One caused the sense of his
love to pervade the elephant Ndldgiri 1 ; and the
elephant, touched by the sense of his love, put down
his trunk, and went up to the place where the
Blessed One was, and stood still before him. And
the Blessed One, stroking the elephant’s forehead
with his right hand, addressed him in these stanzas :

‘ Touch not, O elephant, the elephant of men ; for
sad, O elephant, is such attack 2 ,

‘For no bliss is there, O elephant, when he is
passed from hence, for him who strikes the
elephant of men.

‘ Be not then mad, and neither be thou careless 3 ,
for the careless enter not into a state of bliss,

‘ Rather do thou thyself so act, that to a state of
bliss thou mayest go.’

And Nalagiri the elephant took up with his
trunk the dust from off the feet of the Blessed One,
and sprinkled it over its head, and retired, bowing
backwards the while it gazed upon the Blessed
One.

And Nil&giri the elephant returned to the ele-
phant stables, and stood in its appointed place, and

1 Mettena -fittena phari; literally, ‘he suffused him with
loving heart.' Compare Rh. D.’s ‘Buddhist Birth Stories,’ i. p. 112.

2 In n&gam&sado the m is inserted for euphony. See the in-
stances given by Kuhn, ‘ Beitrage zur Pdli-grammatik,’ p. 63.
Many others might be added; siva-m-aft^ase, (Tataka, vol. i,
verse 27; samana-m-a^ala, Childers sub voce, &c. Compare
the curious use of dsadeti at Afullavagga I, 27.

3 A play on the words is here lost in English (md mado mi
I’ a pamado).

250 JTULLAVAGGA. VII, 3, 13.

became once more the tame N&l&giri. And at that
time the people sung these verses :

‘They can be tamed by sticks, and goads, and
whips,

‘ But the great Sage has tamed this elephant with-
out a weapon or a stick.’

13. The people were angry, murmured, and be-
came indignant, saying, ‘ How wicked is this Deva-
datta, and how wretched 1 2 , in that he can go about
to slay the Samara Gotama, who is so mighty
and so powerful.’ And the gain and honour of
Devadatta fell off, while that of the Blessed One
increased.

2 Now at that time, when the gain and honour of
Devadatta had fallen off, he went, surrounded by
Bhikkhus, to people’s houses, appealing for alms 3 .

The people were angry, murmured, and became
indignant, saying, ‘ How can the Sakyaputtiya Sa-
maras live on food that they ask for at people’s
houses ? Who is not fond of well-cooked food ?
Who does not like sweet things ?’

The Bhikkhus heard (&c., down to) the Blessed
One said to the Bhikkhus : ‘ Therefore do I lay
down this rule, O Bhikkhus, for the Bhikkhus that

1 Alakkhiko ti ettha na lakkhetiti alakkhiko na^anatiti attho.
Apakata-kammaw karomiti na ^anatiti na lakkhitabbo ti alakkha/zo
passitabbo ti attho (B.). We venture to differ from both of these
explanations, and to follow rather the derivation of the word, and
the meaning of the corresponding Sanskrit term alakshmika.

2 From here down to the ‘decision’ is identical with the intro-
ductory story in the Sutta-vibhahga to the 32nd Pa&ttiya, — a rule
the previous existence of which is implied in the decision given
here.

3 Vmwapeti is continually used in the Sutta-vibhahga in this
sense, and even occurs already in the P&timokkha, Pa&ttiya 39.

VII, 3. M-

DISSENSIONS IN THE ORDER.

2 5I

(not more than) three shall enjoy an alms (together)
at people’s houses — and this for the sake of three
reasons ; (to wit) for the restraint of the evil-minded,
and for the ease of the good *, lest those who have
evil desires should, in reliance upon a particular
party (among the Bhikkhus), break up the Samgha tt ,
and (lastly) out of compassion for the laity 1 * 3 4 5 . (A
Bhikkhu) who shall enjoy an alms in parties of
more than three, shall be dealt with according to
law V

14 s . Now Devadatta went to the place where
Ivokalika, and Ka/amoraka-tissaka, and the son of
Khanda-devi and Samudda-datta were, and said to
them, ‘ Come, Sirs, let us stir up a division in the
Samara Gotama’s Sa^zgha, and in the body of his
adherents 6 .’

When he had thus spoken, -Kokalika said to
Devadatta, ‘ The Samara Gotama, Sir, is mighty
and powerful. How can we [do such a thing] ?’

‘ Come, Sirs, let us go to the Samara Gotama,
and make the following five demands, saying,

1 This whole phrase recurs in Sutta-vibhanga, Pai%ika I, 5, 11,
and in the Anguttara Nikdya II, 17, 2. In the latter passage
Dr. Morris reads dummatiiidna®; see his note at pp. 12 7, 128.
But the Sanskrit Buddhist vocabulary Vyutpatti (teste Bohtlingk-
Roth, s. v. manku) authorises the use of dummanku.

8 So the Anguttara, loc. cit., has, in the same connection,
gihlna m anukampfiya p&piMMnaw pakkhupa^j^edSya.

8 See last note. The idea is here, of course, lest any particular
layman should be burdened by providing for many Bhikkhus.

4 That is, under the 32nd Pfi&ttiya, on which rule the Sutta-
vibhanga explains the phrase gasa-bho^ana.

5 Sections 14, ig, and the greater part of 16 recur, word for
word, as the introductory story to the xolh Sawghddisesa.

6 In £akka-bheda« the first word no doubt connotes ‘king-
dom, lordship,’ as in dhamma-Aakka, lakkavatti, &c.

252

STULLAVAGGA.

VII, 3, *4-

“ The Blessed One, Lord, has declared in. many a
figure the advantages of the man who wishes for
little, who is easy to satisfy in the matter of support
and nourishment, who has eradicated evil from his
mind, has quelled his passions, and is full of faith,
of reverence, and of the exercise of zeal \ The fol-
lowing five things, Lord, conduce to such a con-
dition 2 . It would be good, Lord, if the Bhikkhus
should be, their lives long, dwellers in the woods —
if whosoever goes to the neighbourhood of a village
should thereby commit an offence. It would be
good if they should, their lives long, beg for alms —
if whosoever should accept an invitation, should
thereby commit an offence. It would be good if
they should clothe themselves, their lives long, in
cast-off rags — if whosoever should accept a gift of
robes from a layman 3 4 , should thereby commit an
offence. It would be good if they should dwell,
their lives long, under the trees' 1 — if whosoever
should (sleep) under a roof, should thereby commit
an offence. It would be good if they should, their
lives long, abstain from fish 5 — if whosoever should

1 This is part of the standing * religious discourse ’ so often as-
cribed to the Buddha in the Vinaya texts, and given at full in the
Avila vagga I, 1-3.

2 It was on precisely the same reasoning that a certain Bhikkhu
in Mahivagga VIII, 28, 1, endeavoured to get the Buddha to con-
vert to the rejection of all clothing.

3 At Mahavagga VIII, 1, 35, it is laid down that a Bhikkhu may
either dress in cast-off rags, or accept robes from a layman,
according as he likes.

4 This dwelling under trees is expressly forbidden, as regards
the season of the rains, in Mahfivagga III, 1 2, 5.

0 The rule of the Order is merely that no one may knowingly
eat fish which he has seen or heard or suspected to have been
caught for that purpose. See Mahavagga VI, 31, 14.

VII, 3, 16. DISSENSIONS IN THE ORDER. 253

eat fish, should thereby commit an offence.” The
Samawa Gotama will not grant these things. Then
will we gain over the people by means thereof.’

‘Yes; it may be possible so to stir up divisions
in the Sa»zgha, and in the party of the Samara
Gotama. F or the people believe in rough measures.’

15. And Devadatta went to the Blessed One, sur-
rounded by his friends, and made these demands
[in the words just set out].

1 No, Devadatta. Whosoever wishes to do so,
let him dwell in the woods ; whosoever wishes to do
so, let him dwell in the neighbourhood of a village.
Whosoever wishes to do so, let him beg for alms ;
whosoever wishes to do so, let him accept invitations
from the laity. Whosoever wishes to do so, let him
dress in rags ; whosoever wishes to do so, let him
receive gifts of robes from laymen. Sleeping under
trees has been allowed by me, Devadatta, for eight
months in the year; and the eating of fish that is
pure in the three points — to wit, that the eater has
not seen, or heard, or suspected that it has been
caught for that purpose.’

And Devadatta, pleased and delighted that the
Blessed One had refused the five demands, arose
from his seat, and keeping him on his right hand as
he passed him, departed thence with his friends.
And he entered into Ragagaha, and urged his view
upon the people by means thereof, saying, ‘Such
and such things did we ask, Sirs, of the Samara
Gotama. He would not allow them, but we live in
accordance with them.’

16. Then those of the people who were un-
believers, and without reverence or insight, said,
‘These Sakyaputtiya Samaras have eradicated evil

254

KULLAVAGGA.

MCI, 3l 16 .

from their minds, and have quelled their passions,
while on the other hand the Samara Gotama is
luxurious, and his mind dwells on abundance 1 .’
But those of the people who were believers, and full
of reverence and insight, were indignant, became
vexed, and murmured, saying, ‘ How can Devadatta
go about to stir up division in the Sawgha of the
Blessed One, and in the party that is subject to him.’

The Bhikkhus, hearing them so murmuring, told
the matter to the Blessed One.

‘ Is it true, O Devadatta, as they say, that thou
goest about to stir up division in the Sawgha, and
in the body of my adherents ?’

‘ It is true, Lord.’

‘(Thou hast gone far) enough, Devadatta. Let
not a division in the Sawzgha seem good to thee 2 ;
— grievous is such division. Whosoever, O Deva-
datta, breaks up the Samgha, when it is at peace,
he gives birth to a fault (the effect of) which en-
dures for a kalpa 3 , and for a kalpa is he boiled in
niraya. But whosoever, O Devadatta, makes peace
in the Samgha, when it has been divided, he gives
birth to the highest merit, and for a kalpa is he
happy in heaven 4 . Thou hast gone far enough,

1 Bahulliko bihulliya ^’eteti. Both these expressions occur
above in Mahivagga VI, 15, 9, 10, and elsewhere (see, for in-
stance, the introductory stories to Crataka, Nos. 6 and 32) as the
standing expression for the opposite of the state of mind in which
a good Bhikkhu ought to live.

2 Mi te ru££i saznghabhedo. For the connotation of this
phrase, compare below, VII, 4, 4.

3 Kappa/Mikaro kibbisaw. At (r&taka I, 172, 213, 215,
Prof. Fausboll reads kappa/fMya. In saying that the fault itself
(kibbisam) is to endure for a kalpa, the meaning of course is
that its effects on the Karma will endure so long.

* Either the text has here preserved (as in other cases elsewhere)

VII, 3, 17-

DISSENSIONS IN THE ORDER.

255

Devadatta. Let not a division in the Samgha, O
Devadatta, seem good to thee. Grievous, O Deva-
datta, is such division.’

1 7. Now the venerable Ananda, having dressed
himself early in the morning, went duly bowled and
robed into Ra^agaha for alms. And Devadatta
saw the venerable Ananda proceeding through Ra^a-
gaha for alms. On seeing that he went up to the
venerable Ananda, and said to him : ‘ At once, from
this day forth, friend Ananda, I intend to perform
Uposatha, and to carry out the formal proceedings
of the Order, without either the Blessed One or the
Bhikkhu-sawgha.’

And when the venerable Ananda had gone through
Rafagaha for alms, and had returned from his
rounds, and had finished his meal, he went to the
Blessed One, and bowed down before him, and took
his seat on one side. And when he was so seated,
he told the Blessed One [what Devadatta had said,
and added], ‘ This very day, Lord, Devadatta will
break up the Sawgha.’

Then the Blessed One, when he heard that,
gave utterance at that time to this expression of
strong emotion :

‘ Easy is a good act to the good, a good act is
hard to the wicked ; .

‘ Easy is evil to the evil, but evil is hard for the
Noble Ones to do.’

Here ends the Second Portion for Recitation.*

the fragments of earlier verses, or the poetical forms of the verses
below at VII, 5, 4, have crept into the prose here, where we
should otherwise expect sagge and niraye.

ZULLAVAGGA,

x. Now Devadatta on that day, which was Upo-
satha day, arose from his seat, and gave out voting-
tickets h saying, ‘We went, Sirs, to the Samara
Gotama and asked for the Five Points, saying —
(8zc., as above in VII, 3, 14 and 15). These the
Samara Gotama will not allow; but we live in ac-'
cordance therewith. Whosoever of the venerable
ones approves of the Five Things, let him take a
ticket.’

Now at that time there were five hundred Bhik-
khus, Vesaliyans, and belonging to the V ayg'ian
clan 1 2 , who had but recently joined the Order, and
were ignorant of what he had in hand 3 . These
took the voting-tickets, believing [the Five Points
to be according to] the Dhamma, and the Vinaya,
and the teaching of the Master. And Devadatta,
having thus created a division in the Sawgha, went
out to the hill Gaya-sisa, taking those five hundred
Bhikkhus with him.

Then Sariputta and Moggallana went to the
Blessed One, and bowed down before him, and took
their seats on one side. And when they were so
seated, Sariputta said to the Blessed One : ‘ Deva-

1 It may be noticed that Devadatta here takes upon himself the
office of asai&ka-gahapako without having been appointed to
it in the manner required by the rule laid down in iTullavagga IV,
9 and 10. On the process to be followed when voting with tickets,
see IV, 4, 26.

2 So it is the Va^ians from Vesali who are represented, below
XII, 1, i, to have put forward those Ten Points which gave rise to
the Council and the schism at Vesali a hundred years after the
Buddha’s death.

s Apakatafmuno.

VII, 4, 2.

DISSENSIONS IN THE ORDER.

257

datta, Lord, has gone forth to Gaya-sisa, taking five
hundred Bhikkhus with him.’

‘Verily, Sariputta and Moggallana, there must be
a feeling of kindness towards those young Bhikkhus
among you both. Go therefore, both of you, before
they have fallen into entire destruction.’

* Even so, Lord,’ said Sariputta and Moggallana,
in assent to the Blessed One. And rising from their
seats, they bowed down before him, and keeping
him on their right hand as they passed him, they set
out for Gaya-sisa.

Then at that time a certain Bhikkhu, standing not
far from the Blessed One, began to weep. And
the Blessed One said to him : ‘ Why, O Bhikkhu,
dost thou weep ?’

‘Those, Lord, who are the Blessed One’s chief
disciples, Sariputta and Moggallana, even they have
gone to Devadatta’s side, approving the Dhamma of
Devadatta.’

‘ That, O Bhikkhu, would be impossible, that
Sariputta and Moggallana should approve his teach-
ing. They are gone only to gain those Bhikkhus
over again 1 .’

2. Now at that time Devadatta, surrounded by a
great number of adherents, was seated, preaching
the Dhamma. And when he saw from afar Sari-
putta and Moggallana coming towards him, he said
to the Bhikkhus : ‘ See, O Bhikkhus, how well
preached must be my doctrine, in that even the two
chief disciples of the Samara Gotama — Sariputta

1 Bhikkhu-saftnattiyL The phrase occurs above at IV,
14, 26, and below XII, 2, 8, and corresponds to the expression
ga.na.rn sawMpeti (above, VII, 3, 14), used of Devadatta’s trying
to gain the people over to his views.

[20] S

XULLAVAGGA.

VII, 4 , 3-

258

and Moggallina — are coming to join me, being

pleased with my Dhamma. _ .

When he had thus spoken Kokilika said to De-
vadatta : ‘ O venerable Devadatta, trust not Siri-
putta and Moggallana, for they are inclined towards
evil, and under the influence of evil desires.’

■ Nay, my friend, let us bid them welcome, since
they take pleasure in my teaching (Dhamma).

And Devadatta invited Sariputta to share his
own seat, saying, ‘ Come, friend Sariputta. Sit thou

here!’ . „ .

‘ Nay (there is no need of that),’ said Sdriputta ;

and taking another seat, he sat down on one
side. And Devadatta instructed and incited and
aroused and gladdened the Bhikkhus far into the
night with religious discourse ; and then made re-
quest to Sariputta, saying, ‘The assembly, friend
Sariputta, is still alert and sleepless. Will you,
friend Sariputta, be so good as to think of some
religious discourse to address to the Bhikkhus 1 ? .My
back is tired, and I would stretch myself a little.’

‘ E v en so, friend,’ said the venerable Sariputta, in
assent to Devadatta. And Devadatta spread his
waist-cloth folded in four on the ground, and lay
down on his right side. And in a moment even
sleep overcame him who was tired, and had lost his
presence of mind and his self-consciousness 2 .

3. Then the venerable S&riputta taught and ex-
horted the Bhikkhus in a religious discourse touch-
ing the marvels of preaching, and th e venerable

1 Pa/ibh&tu ta m bhikkhfinaw dhammt kathl See our

note above on Mahavagga V, 13, 9* , A

* Compare MaMvagga VIII, 16 = Sutta-vibhanga, Samgha-

• disesa I, 2, 1.

VII, 4, 4-

259

DISSENSIONS IN THE ORDER.

MoggaMna taught and exhorted the Bhikkhus in a
religious discourse touching the marvels of Iddhi.
And whilst they were being so taught and exhorted
those Bhikkhus obtained the pure and spotless Eye
of the Truth 1 — (that is, the knowledge that) what-
soever has a beginning, in that is inherent also the
necessity of dissolution. Then the venerable S&ri-
putta addressed the Bhikkhus, and said : ‘ Let us
go, my friends, to the Blessed One’s side. Whoso-
ever approves of his doctrine (Dhamma), let him
come. ;

And Sariputta and MoggallAna went back to the
Ve/uvana, taking those five hundred Bhikkhus with
them. But Kokalika awoke Devadatta, and said :
‘Arise, friend Devadatta ! Your Bhikkhus have been
led away by Sariputta and Moggallana. Did I not
tell you, Devadatta, not to trust Sariputta and
Moggallana, in that they were inclined towards evil,
and were under the influence of evil desires ?’

Then hot blood came forth from Devaclatta’s
mouth 2 .

4. But Sariputta and Moggallana went to the
place where the Blessed One was, and bowed down
before him, and took their seats on one side. And
when they were so seated, Sariputta said to the
Blessed One:

* It were well, Lord, that Bhikkhus who have
turned aside to schism should be received afresh
into the higher grade of the Order.’

‘ Nay, Sariputta, let not the reordination of schis-

1 This expression is the standing one in conversions; see, for
instance, Mahavagga I, 7, 6 ; JSTullavagga VI, 4, 5, VII, 3, 6.

2 The later legends preserved in Spence Hardy and Bigandet
say that Devadatta died on the spot.

260 tfULLAVAGGA. VII, 4, g.

matical Bhikkhus seem good to thee. But rather
cause such Bhikkhus to confess that they have com-
mitted a thullaiiaya offence. And how, Sari-
putta, did Devadatta treat you ?’

‘When Devadatta, Lord, had instructed and
aroused and incited and gladdened the Bhikkhus
far into the night with religious discourse, he then
made request to me, saying, “ The assembly, friend
Sariputta, is still alert and sleepless. Will you, friend
Sariputta, think of some religious discourse to ad-
dress to the Bhikkhus ? My back is tired, and 1
would stretch myself a little.” This, Lord, was the
way in which Devadatta behaved to me.’

5. Then the Blessed One addressed the Bhikkhus,
and said : ‘ Once upon a time, O Bhikkhus, there
was a great pond in a forest region. Some ele-
phants dwelt beside it ; and they, plunging into the
pond, plucked with their trunks the edible stalks of
the lotus plants, washed them till they were quite
clean 3 , masticated them 1 2 without any dirt, and so
eat them up. And that produced in them both
beauty and strength, and by reason thereof they
neither went down into death, nor into any sorrow
like unto death. Now among those great elephants,
O Bhikkhus, there were young elephant calves, who
also, in imitation of those others, plunged into that
pond, and plucked with their trunks the edible stalks
of the lotus plants ; but they did not wash them till
they were clean, but masticated them, dirt and all,
and so eat them up. And that produced in them

1 The last three lines have occurred word for word in MaM-
vagga VI, 20, 2.

2 SawkhaditvL Compare the use of this word at Gataka

*

VII, 4, (5.

DISSENSIONS IN THE ORDER.

26l

neither beauty nor strength ; and by reason thereof
they went down into death, and into sorrows like
unto death. Just so, O Bhikkhus, will Devadatta
die who, poor creature, is emulating me.

‘ Like the elephant calf who eateth mud in imi-
tation of the great beast 1 2

That shakes the earth, and eats the lotus plant,
and watches through the night among the waters'- —
So will he, poor creature, die that emulateth me.’
6. ‘A Bhikkhu who is possessed of eight quali-
fications is worthy, O Bhikkhus, to do the work of
an emissary. And what are the eight ? The Bhik-
khu, O Bhikkhus, must be able to hear and to make
others listen, able to learn, able to bear in mind,
able to discern and to make others discern, skilful
to deal with friends and foes, and no maker of
quarrels. These are the eight qualifications of

which when a Bhikkhu is possessed, he is worthy,
O Bhikkhus, to do the work of an emissary.

‘ Sariputta, O Bhikkhus, being possessed of eight
qualifications, is worthy to do the work of an
emissary. What are the eight (& c., as in last
paragraph) ?

‘ He who on entering a company that is violent of
speech,

1 Mah^-varaha. At Abhidhinappadipiki, verse 1115, var&ha
is said to mean ‘ elephant ’ as well as ‘ boar ; ’ and so here Buddha-
ghosa says Mahd-varahassa mahS-nSgassa. As this explana-
tion possibly rests only on such passages as the present, we have
chosen an ambiguous rendering.

2 Nadisu ^aggato ti. Ettha so kira hatthi-nago s;tya«ha-
samayaw taw nadi-namakazw pokkharam/a ogahetvS kilanto sabba-
rattiffl vitinamesi ^dlikam karoti. Tena vuttaw nadisu ^aggato
ti(B.).

Kl JLLAVAGGA.

VII, 4, 7.

262

Fears not, forgoes no word, disguises not his
message,

Is unambiguous in what he says, and being
questioned angers not,

Of such is surely the Bhikkhu worthy to go on a
mission V

7. * Devadatta, O Bhikkhus, being overcome, his
mind being taken up by eight evil conditions 2 , is
irretrievably (doomed to) remain for a Kalpa in
states of suffering and woe 3 . And what are the
eight? He is overcome, his mind is taken up by
gain, by want of gain, by fame, by want of fame, by
honour, by want of honour, by his having wicked
desires, and by his having wicked friends. These, O
Bhikkhus, are the eight evil conditions by which
Devadatta being overcome, and his mind being taken
up, he is irretrievably (doomed to) remain for a Kalpa
in states of suffering and woe.

‘It would be well, O Bhikkhus, that Bhikkhus
should continue in complete ascendancy over any
gain or loss, any fame or the reverse, any honour or

1 On these lines compare some similar expressions at Mahavagga
X, 6, 3.

2 Asaddhamma. It is very difficult to find a proper rendering
for this expression. Dhamma here means, no doubt, 4 quality /

4 condition 7 (as it does in the title of the Sanskrit work Saddharma-
pu^aiika, unhappily rendered by Burnouf, £ Lotus de la bonne
loi 7 ). But the details of the various particulars suggest rather the
rendering c surrounding occurrences 7 or £ matters, 7 for they are ob-
jective, external, and not (or only incidentally and secondarily)
subjective, internal.

3 Apayiko nerayiko. 4 Liable to re-birth in apaya and in
niraya.’ Of these the former includes the latter, and also the states
of being an animal, a disembodied ghost (pet a), or an a sura. Hell,
though a convenient, is a misleading translation of the latter of the
two words, for the reasons given by Rh. D. on Maha-parinibbana
Sutta I, 23. All the expressions used here recur below at VII 5, 4.

Ml, 4, 7 -

DISSENSIONS IN THE ORDER.

263

dishonour, any evil longing or evil friendship, that
may accrue to them. And for what reason 1 ? For
as much, O Bhikkhus, that bad influences (flsavas)
arise, full of vexation and distress 2 , to one who is
not continuing in complete ascendancy over each of
these eight things, but to one, who is so continuing,
such influences arise not. This is the reason, O
Bhikkhus, why it would be well (&c., as before).
Let us then, O Bhikkhus, continue in complete
ascendancy over any gain or loss, any fame or the
reverse, any honour or dishonour, any evil longing
or evil friendship, that may accrue to us. And thus,
O Bhikkhus, should you train yourselves.

‘ There are three evil conditions, O Bhikkhus, by
which Devadatta being overcome, and his mind
being taken up, he is irretrievably doomed to re-
main for a Kalpa in states of suffering and woe.
And what are the three ? His having wicked de-
sires, and his having wicked friends, and his having
come to a stop on his way (to Nirv&wa or Arahat-
ship) because he had already attained to some lesser
thing 3 . These are the three (&c., as before).’

1 Kim (read kam) atthavasawz pa/iMa. So also above,
Mahavagga VIII, 15, 7; Aullavagga VII, 1, 6, and in the Maha-
parinibMna Sutta V, 28, and Dhammapada, verse 289. The
whole of the previous sentence is here repeated in the text.

2 V i g h a t a - p a r i /I h L This is a standing epithet of the Asavas,
recurring, for instance, many times in the Sabbasava Sutta, §§ 18-
37 (Rh. D.’s 1 Buddhist Suttas,’ pp. 302 and following). The word
‘influence,’ here chosen as a rendering for Usava, is suggested by
Dr. Morris as being similar, both in its derivation and in the history
of its meaning, to the Pali one. The principal objection against it
is that it has never acquired the bad connotation of asava, and re-
quires, therefore, to be supplemented by some epithet.

3 Oramattakena visesldhigamena antart vos&nam
&p&di. On this phrase, which recurs in full in the Mah^-parinib-

264

ZULLAVAGGA.

VII, 4, 8.

8. “Verily! let no wicked desire whatever arise
within you !

Know rather from this what is the outcome
thereof.

* Known was he as wise, reputed to be trained ;

Aglow with glory did Devadatta stand ’ (thus have
I heard).

He gave himself to vanity, to attacking 1 the Ta-
thagata :

He fell into the Aviii hell, guarded fourfold and
terrible 2 .

The injurer of the good, of the man who does no
wrong,

Him sin pervades, the man of cruel heart, and void
of love.

Though one should think the ocean to befoul with
but one poison pot,

Yet could he not befoul it, for awful 3 is the sea,
and great ;

Just so though one should Injure the Tathagata by
words, —

bana Sutta I, 7, see Buddhaghosa’s note there, quoted by Rh. D.,
f Buddhist Suttas,’ p. 7. The 4 lesser thing ’ here referred to is
doubtless the pothug^anik^ iddhi mentioned above in § 4.

1 Annkinno Isa^anam. On the former of these two words
the passages at Dipava#zsa I, 18, and < 2 ataka I, 20 (verse 126),
and below, VII, 5, 2 = Mahavagga X, 5, 4, may be referred to.
The latter seems to bear the same relation to asadana, £ attack,’ as
vikubbana does to vikara^a, Buddhaghosa’s notes (text,
p. 325) presuppose different readings of both words.

3 c Guarded fourfold’ is £atudva,raw, that is, f having gates
and the ramparts (through which they pass) on all four sides.’ On
the general sentiment of these stanzas, and especially of this line,
compare the Kokaliya Sutta in the Sutta Nipata (III, 10).

3 Bhasma is explained by Buddhaghosa as equal to bhaya-
nako. ' ' ..Ta;.- ' d ; -V:

VII, g, I.

DISSENSIONS IN THE ORDER.

265

That perfect one, that peaceful heart, — against him
the words would not avail.

Let the wise Bhikkhu make a friend of, and resort
to him

By following whose way he will come to the end of
griefs !”

5 .

1. Now the venerable Upili went up to the
Blessed One, and bowed down before him, and took
his seat on one side. And when he was so seated,
the venerable Upili said to the Blessed One:

' The expressions, Lord, “ disunion in the Sawgha,”
and “schism in the Sawgha,” are used 1 . How much,
Lord, goes to make disunion and not schism in the
Sawzgha, and how much goes to make both disunion
and schism in the Sawzgha ?’

‘ If one is on one side, Upali, and two on the
other side, and a fourth makes a formal proposition,
and gives them voting-tickets, saying, “ This is
according to the Dhamma, and according to the
Vinaya, and according to the teaching of the Master.
Take this (ticket) and give your sanction to this
(opinion)” — then this, Upali, is disunion in the
Sawgha, and not schism.

‘ If, Upili, two are on one side, and other two
are on the other side, and a fifth .... (and so on
up to) and an eighth tell them something (&c., as
before) — then this, Upili, is disunion in the Sawgha,
and not schism.

* If, Upili, four are on one side, and other four

1 Sawgha-rig-i and sa»rgha-bhedo. See Mahavagga X,
x, 6, where other expressions, not here referred to, are also used.

266

JtULLAVAGGA.

VII, 5 , “•

are on the other side, and a ninth tell them (&c., as
before) — then this, Upali, is both disunion in the
Sa^gha, and it is schism 1 2 .

‘ (A separation) of nine, U pili, or of more than nine,
is both disunion in the Sajwgha, and it is schism.

‘ A Bhikkhuni, Upali, cannot make (one of the
requisite number to cause) a schism, though she
may help to produce a schism — nor a woman novice,
nor a Samawera, male or female, nor a layman, nor
a Iaywoman. It is only a Bhikkhu who is in full
possession of all his privileges, and belongs to the
same communion, and is domiciled in the same
district 3 who can make (one of the number requisite
to form) a schism.’

2. ‘ There is the expression, Lord, “ schism in
the Sa»zgha.” How much, Lord, does it require
to constitute a schism in the Sawzgha ?’

‘They put forth 3 , U pili, what is not Dhamma
as Dhamma (i), or what is Dhamma as not
Dhamma (2), or what is not Vinaya as Vinaya (3),
or what is Vinaya as not Vinaya (4), or what has
not been taught and spoken by the T athagata as
taught and spoken by him (5), or what has been
taught and spoken by the T athagata as not taught

1 That is, stated shortly, it requires the breaking up of a body of
at the least nine Bhikkhus to make a schism.

2 Pakatatto s a m an a - s a?/2 va s ako samana-simaya //nto.
On the two last of these expressions, see our notes on Mahavagga
IX, 4, 8. The first is there wrongly rendered, and should be
translated as it is here; see the frequent passages in which the
word occurs (e.g. JTullavagga I, 5, 1 ; I, 6, 1 ; I, 27, x ; II, 1, &c.,
where we have rendered it shortly ‘ a regular Bhikkhu ’).

3 The first ten of the following list recur word for word in the
Anguttara Nik&ya I, n, 1-20 (Adhamm&di-vagga), and the whole
eighteen above in the Mahavagga X, 5, 4, 5.

YIT, 5, 4. DISSENSIONS IN THE ORDER. 2 67

and spoken by him (6), or what has not been
practised by the T athagata as practised by him (7),
or what has been practised by the Tathagata as not
practised by him (8), or what has not been ordained
by the T athagata as ordained by him (9), or what
has been ordained by the T athagata as not or-
dained by him (10), or what is no offence as an
offence (n), or what is an offence as no offence
(12), or what is a slight offence to be a grievous
offence (13), or what is a grievous offence to be a
slight offence (14), or what is (a rule regarding) an
offence to which there is an atonement as without
atonement (15), or what is (a rule regarding) an
offence to which there is no atonement as admitting
of atonement (16), or what is a grave offence as
not a grave offence (17), or what is not a grave
offence as a grave offence (18). In these Eighteen
Points they hinder and mislead (their followers ) 1 2 , and
perform independently Uposatha, and Pavarawa, and
(official) acts of the Sawgha. So much, Upali, does
it require to constitute a schism in the Sawgha.’

3. ‘ There is the expression, Lord, “ concord in
the Sawgha.” What, Lord, does it require to con-
stitute concord in the Sawgha ?’

‘They put forth, Upali, what is not Dhamma as
not Dhamma’ (and so on through the Eighteen
Points down to the end).

2 4. ‘To what (result of Karma), Lord, does that

1 Both the exact Pali form and the interpretation of these terms
are uncertain. Buddhaghosa’s notes will be found at p. 325 of
H. O.’s edition of the text, and most probably we should there read
parisam in both cases.

2 On the whole of the following section, compare above, VII,
3, 16, where much of the phraseology recurs.

268

■5TULLAVAGGA.

vn, 5, 5 .

man give rise who brings about a schism in the
Sawgha when it is in concord ?’

‘ He gives rise, Upali, to a fault (the result of
which) endures for a Kalpa, and for a Kalpa is
he boiled in Niraya.’

“ He who breaks up the Sawgha is (doomed) to
remain for a Kalpa in states of suffering and woe 1 .

He who delights in party (strife), and adheres not
to the Dhamma, is cut off from Arahatship :

Having broken up the Sawzgha when it was at
peace he is boiled for a Kalpa in Niraya.”

‘To what (result of Karma), Lord, does that man
give rise who brings about reconciliation in the
Sawgha when it has been split up ? ’

‘He gives rise, Upali, to the highest merit, and
for a Kalpa is he happy in heaven.

“Blessed is concord in the Sawgha, and the
support of those who are at peace !

He who delights in peace, adhering to the
Dhamma, is not cut off from Arahatship :

On reconciling the Samgha, when it was at strife,
he is happy for a Kalpa in heaven.” ’

5. ‘ Can it be, Lord, that one who breaks up the
Saragha is irretrievably (doomed) to remain for a
Kalpa in states of suffering and woe ?’

‘Yes, U pali, that can be.’

‘ Can it be, Lord, that one who breaks up the
Sawgha is not doomed to be reborn in states either
of suffering or of woe ; that he is not doomed to
remain so in such states for a Kalpa ; and that he
(his position) is not irretrievable ?’

‘Yes, U pdli, that can be.’

1 On this line see our note above on VII, 4, 7.

VII, s, 5. DISSENSIONS IN THE ORDER. 269

e Who then, Lord, [comes under the first head ?]’

‘ In case, Upali, a Bhikkhu gives out what is not
Dhamma as Dhamma, directing his opinion and
his approval and his pleasure and his intention 1 (to
what he says and does) ; and in belief that the
doctrine (he propounds) is against the Dhamma,
and that the schism resulting therefrom would be
against the Dhamma 2 3 ; and makes publication
thereof®, giving out tickets, and saying, “Take
this (voting -ticket) : approve this (opinion) 4 . This
is Dhamma; this is Vinaya; this is the teaching
of the Master,” — a man, Updli, who thus divides
the Sawgha, is irretrievably doomed to remain for a
Kalpa in states of suffering and woe.’

[The above paragraph is then repeated in full,
reading successively for ‘ in belief that the doctrine
(he propounds) is against the Dhamma, and the
schism resulting therefrom would be against the
Dhamma,’ each of the following clauses : —

( 5 ) . . . in belief that the doctrine is against the
Dhamma, but that the schism resulting therefrom
would be in accordance with the Dhamma . . .

1 VinidhSya Aitthim, vinidhSya khanti®!, vinidhSya
rnkim, vinidhaya bhava?«. These expressions all recur in the
Sutta-vibhanga, Pa&ttiya I, 2, 2 and following sections, where the
question at issue is whether an erroneous statement is, or is not, a
conscious lie. The meaning of the whole is clear, though each of
the words is used in a rather uncommon sense. On khanti,
compare di tlhz sute khantim akubbamS.no (of the Arahat) at
Sutta Nipata IV, 13, 3, and the standing use of the verb khamati,
at the end of the KammavSMs.

2 Bhede adhamma-di//M; literally, ‘in the schism (there
will be) doctrine that is against the Dhamma.’

3 Anuss&veti, which is here equivalent to the technical ‘ pub-
lication ’ required in the English law of libel and slander.

* See the note above on VII, 4, 1 .

XULLAVAGGA.

VII, s, 6.

270

(c) . . . in belief that the doctrine is against the
Dhamma, but in uncertainty whether the schism
resulting therefrom would be against the Dhamma
or not ...

(d) ... in belief that the doctrine is in accord-
ance with the Dhamma, but that the schism result-
ing therefrom would be against the Dhamma . . .

(e) . . . in belief that the doctrine is in accord-
ance with the Dhamma, but in uncertainty whether
the schism resulting therefrom would be against
the Dhamma or not . . .

(/) ... in uncertainty whether the doctrine is
against the Dhamma or not, but in the belief that
the schism resulting therefrom would be against
the Dhamma . . .

(g) ... in uncertainty whether the doctrine is
against the Dhamma or not, and in the belief that
the schism resulting therefrom would be against the
Dhamma ...

(Ji) . . . in uncertainty whether the doctrine
would be against the Dhamma, and in uncertainty
whether the schism resulting therefrom would be
against the Dhamma or not . . .]

[The whole paragraph is then again repeated,
reading successively for 1 gives out that which is not
Dhamma as Dhamma’ each of the Eighteen Points
given in full in VII, 5, 2.]

6. ‘Who then, Lord, is one who breaks up the
Sawgha, and yet is not doomed to be reborn in
states either of suffering or of woe ; is not doomed
to remain in such states for a Kalpa ; and is not so
doomed that his position is irretrievable ?’

‘In case, Upili, a Bhikkhu gives out what is
not Dhamma as Dhamma [and so on successively

DISSENSIONS IN THE ORDER,

271

VII, 5, 6.

through the whole Eighteen Points] without direct-
ing his opinion and his approval and his pleasure
and his intention thereto, and in the belief that the
doctrine he propounds is in accordance with the
Dhamma, and that the schism resulting therefrom
would be so too 1 /

Here ends the Third Portion for Recitation.

Here ends the Seventh Khandhaka, on Divisions
in the Sa^gha.

1 The sum of the last two sections seems to come to this, that
practically such a schism as would have the awful effects set out
above in § 4 would be impossible in Buddhism. For not only is a
formal putting forward and voting on the false doctrine essential to
schism as distinct from mere disagreement, but the offending Bhikkhu
must also be quite aware that the doctrine so put forth is wrong,
or at least doubtful, and also that the schism resulting from his
action will be, or will probably be, disastrous to the Dhamma. In
other words, the schism must be brought about by deliberately
putting forward a doctrine known to be false, or at least doubtful,
or with the express intention or hope of thereby injuring the cause
of the Dhamma (that is, of the Truth).

2 72 STULLAVAGGA. VIII, 1, 1.

the eighth khandhaka.

Regulations as to the Duties of the
Bhikkhus towards one another.

1 .

i. Now at that time the Blessed One was staying
at S&vatthi, in Anitha PmaTika’s Ar&ma.

A Now at that time incoming Bhikkhus entered the
Arama with their sandals on 1 , or with sunshades
held up over them 2 , or with their heads muffled up 3 ,
or with their upper robe carried in a bundle on
their heads 4 5 ; and they washed their feet in the
drinking-water; and they did not salute resident
Bhikkhus senior to them, nor ask them where they
(the incomers) should sleep.

And a certain incoming Bhikkhu undid the
bolt 6 of an unoccupied room (Vihara), and opened
the door 6 , and so entered by force ; and a snake fell

1 That this was a sign of disrespect is clear from MaMvagga V,
12, and the 61st and 62nd Sekhiyas.

See our discussion of the sunshade question in the note on
iTullavagga V, 23, 2.

8 Ogun/MtL See the 23rd and the 67th Sekhiyas,

4 Sise katvL Compare VIII, 6, 3.

5 Gha/ikl* This word is discussed at Zullavagga V, 14, 3.

6 Such an act has been already guarded against by the rule laid
down at the end of iTullavagga V, 9, 5, where the same expression
is made use' of. ■ : ■ ■■•'

Till, i, 2. REGULATIONS AS TO DUTIES OF BHIICKHUS. 273

on to his back from the lintel above 1 , and he was
terrified, and made an outcry 2 .

The Bhikkhus, running up, asked him why he
did so. He told them that matter. Then those
Bhikkhus who were moderate in their desires were
vexed and indignant, and murmured, saying, ‘ How
can incoming Bhikkhus enter the Arama . . . . ?
(&c., as before, down to) ... . where they should
sleep V

They told the matter to the Blessed One (&c., as
usual, I, 1, 2, 3, down to) he addressed the Bhikkhus,
and said, ‘ Therefore, O Bhikkhus, do I establish a
rule of conduct for incoming Bhikkhus, according to
which they ought to behave.

2. ‘ An incoming Bhikkhu, O Bhikkhus, when he
knows he is about to enter an Arama, ought to take
off his sandals, turn them upside down 4 , beat them
(to get the dust) off, take them (up again) in his

1 Upari-pi///nto. On pi ///2a (which we should possibly read
here), as the lintel of a door, see our note above at Zullavagga V,
14, 3. It recurs immediately below, VIII, 1, 3.

2 Vissaraw aka si. As Childers, sub voce, expresses doubt
as to the meaning of this word, it may be well to note that this
phrase occurs above, Afullavagga V, 10, 2 and VI, 3, 4, and also
in the Bhikkhuni-vibhanga, Pa/dttiya LX, and always in the sense
here given. The meaning of the allied idiom, vissaro me bha-
vissati, might be just doubtful as used in a peculiar connection at
Bhikkhuni-vibhanga, Par%ika I, 1, and Sa^ghadisesa III, 3, were
it not clear from ibid., Pa&ttiya LXXXVI, that it means simply
4 there will be an outcry against me/

3 The form of this speech bears very clear testimony to the
artificial way in which these introductory stories are put together,
for the speech does not arise out of the story. Similar instances
are not infrequent. See VIII, 5, 1.

4 Ni£aw kat vL So also at VIII, 6, 2. The word is used
below and at Mahavagga I, 25, 11 and 15 of a bedstead and
chair, and below, VIII, 4, 4, of a bowl when it is being washed.

[20] T .

KULLAVAGGA.

vni, x, 2 .

274

hand, put down his sunshade, uncover his head,
arrange his upper robe on his back 1 , and then care-
fully and slowly enter the Arama.

‘ When he enters the Arama he ought to notice
where the resident Bhikkhus are gone to ; and
whithersoever they are gone — whether to the ser-
vice hall, or to the portico (maWapa), or to the foot
of a tree — thither he ought to go, and laying his
bowl on one side, and his robe on one side, he
ought to take a suitable seat, and sit down.

‘ He ought to ask as to the drinking-water, and
the water for washing 2 , which is appropriated to the
one use, and which to the other. If he has need of
drinking-water, he ought to fetch it and drink. If
he has need of water for washing, he ought to fetch
it, and wash his feet. In washing his feet he ought
to pour the water over them with one hand, and
wash them with the other; he ought not to pour
the water over them and wash them with one and
the same hand.

‘ He ought to ask for the cloths with which
sandals are cleaned, and clean his sandals. In
• cleaning his sandals he ought first to wipe them
with a dry cloth, and afterwards with a wet cloth :
and then he ought to wash the cloths, and lay them
on one side 3 .

1 See the note below on VIII, 8, 2.

2 On these expressions, compare the note above on Aullavagga
IV, 4, 4 (at the end), and ATullavagga VIII, x, 5 = Mahavagga I,
25, 19.

3 These cloths (iolaka»z) are not specially permitted anywhere
in the Khandhakas, as cloths for wiping the face and feet are in
Mahavagga VIII, 18, and jffullavagga VI, 19, respectively. The
word is used for ‘duster’ below, VIII, x, 3, and for ‘tinder’ at
Milinda Panha, p. 53.

VIII, 1,3. REGULATIONS AS TO DUTIES OF BHIKKHUS. 275

‘ If the resident Bhikkhu be senior, he ought to be
saluted; if junior, he ought to be made to salute
(the incomer). The incomer ought to ask as to the
lodging-place, which has fallen (to his lot) 1 , and
whether it is occupied or unoccupied. He ought to
ask as to lawful and unlawful resorts 2 , and as to
what families have been officially declared to be
in want 3 4 .

4 ‘ He ought to ask as to the retiring-places,
(where they are), and as to the drinking-water, and
as to the water for washing, and as to the staves
for walking with, and as to the place for the con-
ferences of the Sawzgha, (and as to) the time at
which he ought to enter (it) and at which he ought
to leave it.

3. ‘ If the Vihara be unoccupied, he ought to
knock at the door, then to wait a minute, then to
undo the bolt, and open the door, and then, still
standing outside, to look within.

‘ If that Vihara is covered with dust 5 , or the beds
or chairs are piled one upon another, and the
bedding put in a heap on the top of them 6 , — then if

1 See the rules as to the division of lodging-places according to
the number of applicants at A’ullavagga VI, 21, 2, and especially

VI, n, 3 .

2 Gokz.ro agof’aro. There were some places or families to
•which the Bhikkhus of a particular residence were not allowed to
resort for alms. See the rule as to ‘ turning down the bowl ’ with
respect to a person at ATullavagga V, 20.

8 Sekha-sammat&ni kulini. See the note on the 3rd Pa/i-
desaniya.

4 All the following expressions have occurred together at iTulla-
vagga IV, 4, 4, where an example is given of the course of pro-
ceeding here laid down. And they are repeated below, VIII, 2, 2.

8 Uldapo. Compare Aullavagga VI, 3, 9, and below, § 5.

6 This was the way in which a Bhikkhu, on going away from it,

276

XULLAVAGGA.

VIII, I, 3.

he can do so he ought to clean up the Vihara.

1 And when cleaning the Vihara, he ought to take
the floor matting out and put it down on one
side, and the supports of the bedsteads 2 , and the
bolsters 3 and pillows, and the mat which is used as
a seat. Putting the bedsteads and chairs down on to
the ground, and carefully avoiding scratching (the
floor with them) or knocking them up against (the
door-posts), he ought to take them outside the door,
and put them down on one side. The spittoon and
the board to lean up against 4 ought to be taken
out, and put down on one side 5 .

‘ If the Vihara is covered with cobwebs, they
should first be removed with a cloth 6 . The case-
ments should be dusted, especially in the corners
and joints.

‘ If the wall which had been plastered and red-
washed, or the floor which had been laid (with
earth) and black-washed 7 , has become dirty in
the corners 8 , they should be wiped down with a

was to leave his Vihara. See below, VIII, 3, 2, and on the details
of the terms used, see our note below on VIII, 1,4.

1 The rest of this section is repeated in full below, VIII, 7, 2.

B Pa/ipadaka. Doubtless the same . as forms part of the
&ha£j£a-ma«£a mentioned in the 18th Piiittiya and above, VI,
2, 5 -

8 Bhisi. See the note on Mah&vagga VIII, 13.

4 A p a s s e n a - p h a 1 a k a to . See the note on Aullavagga VI,
20, 2.

5 All the expressions in this sentence and the next are the same
as those used in a similar connection at Mah&vagga I, 25, 15.

8 Ullokd. See the note at A'ullavagga VI, 2, 7, according to
which our rendering at Mahavagga I, 25, 15 should be corrected.

7 On this mode of preparing walls and floors, see the notes
above on Aullavagga VI, 20.

8 Kawwakita. See our note above on Afullavagga V, n, 3.

VIII, 1 , 3 - REGULATIONS AS TO DUTIES OF BHIICKHUS. 277

duster 1 that has been first wetted and wrung out. If
the floor has not been so prepared, it should be
sprinkled over with water and swept 2 , lest the
Vih&ra should be spoilt 3 by dust The sweepings
should be gathered together, and cast aside*

The translation of our present passage at Mahavagga I, 25, 15,
must be corrected accordingly.

1 ATolaka. See the note on this word in last section.

2 Samma^ati is to sweep (not to scrub), as is apparent from
Mahavagga VI, 34, 1.

8 TJhawfd. So also at Mahavagga I, 25, 15. At Mah&vagga
i, 49, 4, we should have rendered ‘defiled their beds' instead of
‘threw their bedding about/ correcting uhananti of the text
there into uhadanti. Uhan (originally ‘ to throw up/ ‘ raise/ &c.)
seems, like samuhan, to have acquired the meaning of to destroy,
injure, spoil. From this meaning of spoiling, fihan evidently came
to be used for, or confounded in the MS. with, fthad, ‘to defile
(with excrement).’ So the phrase ‘ (ihananti pi ummihanti pi’
(at MaMvagga I, 49, 4) exactly corresponds in meaning to ‘omut-
tenti pi fihadayanti pi’ in Dhammapada, p. 283. There are
other passages showing the same confusion. (1) The gerund,
uhaH’a, which occurs in Gataka II, p. 71 (‘idani kho (ahan)
ta m uhaK>a’), is explained by the commentator to mean ‘vaH’an
te sise katva.’ (2) uhanti, in Gataka II, p. 73 (‘ aggihuttaft £a
uhanti, tena bhinnfi, katna;z^aluti’), must mean the same and
be = uhadeti. For the monkey here referred to is said to have
been guilty of the following dirty trick : — ‘kundiki bhindati,
aggisalaya va^a m karoti/ (3) mutteti ohaneti at /fariyd
Pi/aka II, 5, 4, represents uH’ara-pas&vam katva at Gataka II,
385. In the first of these passages uha^a may well be a copyist’s
blunder, arising from the similarity of the words, for uha^a.
Dr. Morris, to whom we owe the comparison of these passages
and the suggested emendation of Mahavagga I, 49, 4, is rather of
opinion that the words were confounded by the writers. For it is
not an uncommon thing to find two words, not very remote in
form or meaning, confounded together. It is well known that the
English word livelihood properly and originally meant ‘liveliness/
and has only afterwards replaced the earlier live lode, to which the
sense of livelihood properly belongs, And something of this kind

278

rULLAVAGGA.

VIII, 1 , 4.

4. 'The floor coverings 1 should be dried in the
sun, cleaned, beaten to get the dust out, taken back,
and spread out again in the place to which they be-
longed 2 . The supports of the bed should be dried
in the sun, dusted, taken back, and put in the place
to which they belonged. The bed (ma?1ia) and
the chairs (pt* 7 za) should be aired in the sun,
cleaned, beaten to get the dust out, turned upside
down, taken back, carefully avoiding scratching
them against the floor, or knocking them up against
the door-posts, and then put in the place to which
they belonged 3 . The bolsters and pillows, and the

must have occurred, he thinks, in Pali in the use of ft ban for ft had.
The past participle ft hat a occurs at JVullavagga VIII, 10, 3.

3 BhummattharawaTK ; usually, no doubt, matting of various
binds, but occasionally also skins or rugs of the kinds specially
allowed by VI, 14, 2.

2 Yathabhagaz?z. The use of this word here constitutes the
only variation between our passage and that in the Mahavagga I,
25 = below, VIII, 7, 2, where it is replaced by yathsU/Mne or
yath&paymattaff*.

3 This passage throws a welcome light on the meaning of
mail/’ a and pl/^a ; for as they were to be beaten to get the dust
out, it is clear that they were upholstered. The mafU’a, or bed,
must have been a wooden framework, stuffed (probably with
cotton), covered at the top with cotton cloth, and made underneath
and at the sides of wood. It had no legs fixed to it, but was sup-
ported on movable tressels — the pa/ip&daka. When using it,
the sleeper covered it with a mat, or a cotton sheet, and had over
him a coverlet of some kind ; and these articles, which he would
also use if he slept on the ground, constituted, together with the
bolster and pillows, the sen&sanazra or bedding, — that is, in the
more special and limited use of that term (as, for instance, above,
§ 3, and perhaps below, 7, 1). In its larger sense the same word is
used, putting the part for the whole, for the whole sleeping ap-
paratus, and is nearly equivalent to seyydyo (so, for instance, in
VI, 11 and 12, and below, VIII, 2, 1 ; 6, 2 ; and perhaps VIII, 7, 1 ;
whereas the latter term is used in the same connection at VI, 6,

VIII, 1 , 5 - REGULATIONS AS TO DUTIES OF BHIKKHUS. 279

mats used as seats', should be aired in the sun,
cleaned, beaten to get the dust out, taken back, and
put in the place to which they belonged. The spit-
toon, and the board for leaning up against, should
be put in the sun, dusted, taken back, and put in
the place to which they belonged.

1 5. ‘ (Then the incoming Bhikkhu) should put away
his bowl and his robe. In putting away his bowl,
he should hold it in one hand while he feels under
the bed or the chair with the other, and then put it
away; and he should not put it on a part of the
floor which has been left bare. In putting away his
robe, he should hold it in one hand while he feels
along the bamboo or the rope used for hanging
robes on with the other ; and then hang it up with
the border turned away from him, and the fold
turned towards him.

2 ‘ If the winds, bearing dust with them 3 , blow
from the East, West, North, or South, the window
spaces 4 on the side in question should be closed up
(with shutters or lattices). If it is cold weather, the
lattices should be opened by day, and closed by

and VI, xi, 3). Say ana, in VI, 8, is a generic term including
bed, couch, sofa, and divan, but probably with special reference to
these three latter things used in the day-time.

1 The following paragraph occurs, word for word, at Mahavagga
I, 25, ix, and below, VIII, 7, 2.

2 The following paragraph is the same as Mahdvagga I, 25, 1 8.

s Sara^a v&t£. These are the well-known hot winds (like the

sand-bearing simoom that blows from North Africa over Italy),
against which modern residents endeavour to protect themselves
by the use of ‘ tats.’

4 There were, of course, no windows in our modern sense, but
only spaces left in the wall to admit light and air, and covered by
lattices of three kinds allowed by VI, 2, 2.

28 o

iSTULLAVAGGA.

VIII, 2, I.

night: if it is hot weather, they should be closed
by day, and opened by night.

1 ‘ If the cell, or the store-room, or the refectory,
or the room where the fire is kept, or the privy, is
covered with dust, it should be swept out. If there
is no drinking-water, or water for washing, they
should be provided. If there is no water in the
rinsing-pot 1 2 , water should be poured into it.

‘This, O Bhikkhus, is the rule of conduct for
incoming Bhikkhus, according to which they ought
to behave.’

2 .

I x. Now at that time resident Bhikkhus, on seeing
j incoming Bhikkhus, did not prepare seats for them,

! nor provide water and footstools and towels for
| them to wash their feet, nor go to meet them and
take charge of their bowls and their robes, nor ask
; them whether they wanted drinking-water 3 , nor
i salute such of the incoming Bhikkhus as were their
seniors, nor make beds ready for them.

The moderate Bhikkhus murmured, &c., and told
the matter to the Blessed One, &c., (down to) he
said to the Bhikkhus : ‘ Therefore, O Bhikkhus,

1 The following paragraph is the same as Mahavagga I, 25, 19,
and part of it is repeated below, VIII, io, 3.

2 Ataman a -kumbhi. This formed part of the sanitary ap-
paratus for use in the privy. See above, Mahavagga V, 8, 3, and
below, ATullavagga VIII, 9 and 10.

3 All the above expressions are used at the opening of Maha-
vagga IX.

VIII, 2,3- REGULATIONS AS TO DUTIES OF BHIKKHUS. 28 1

do I establish a rule of conduct for resident Bhik-
khus, according to which they ought to behave.

2. ‘A resident Bhikkhu, on seeing an incoming
Bhikkhu, who is senior to him, ought to make
ready a seat for him, provide water and a footstool
and a towel for him to wash his feet, go to meet
him, and take charge of his robe and his bowl, ask
him if he wants water to drink, and if he can
(bring himself to do so), he ought to wipe his
sandals. In wiping the sandals, they should be first
wiped with a dry cloth, then with a wet one, and
the cloths ought then to be washed, and put
aside.

1 ‘ An incoming Bhikkhu ought to be saluted. A
bed should be laid for him, saying, “ This bed is for
you.” He should be informed whether (the bed-
room) is occupied or not, what are lawful and what
are unlawful resorts, and what families have been
officially declared to be in want. He should be
told where the retiring-places are, and the drinking
and washing water, and the staves, and the place
for the conferences of the Sawgha, and what is
the time when he ought to enter, and ought to
leave (it).

3. ‘ If (the incoming Bhikkhu) be junior to him,
then (the resident Bhikkhu), keeping his seat,
should tell him where he is to put his bowl and
his robe away, and on which mat he is to sit down.
The incoming Bhikkhu should be informed where
the drinking and washing water are, and the cloths
to clean sandals with ; he should be allowed to
salute the resident Bhikkhu : and he should be told

1 This paragraph corresponds to the last paragraph of VIII, I, 2.

282 A'ULLAVAGGA. VIII, 3, 1.

where his bed is, saying, “ That bed is for you.”
He should be informed whether (that bedroom) is
occupied or not (and so on, as in last paragraph,
down to the end).

‘ This, O Bhikkhus, is the rule of conduct for
resident Bhikkhus, according to which they ought
to behave.’

3 .

1. Now at that time Bhikkhus, about to leave,
started without setting; the wooden articles and
crockery in order, leaving doors and lattices open,
and without giving the sleeping-places in charge to
any one. The wooden articles and crockery were
spoilt, and the sleeping-places were unprotected.

The moderate Bhikkhus murmured, &c

told the Blessed One, &c (down to) He said

to the Bhikkhus : ‘ Therefore, O Bhikkhus, do I
establish a rule of conduct for Bhikkhus about to
leave, according to which they ought to behave.

2. ‘A Bhikkhu about to leave should, O Bhik-
khus, put the wooden articles and earthenware in
order, close the doorways and lattices, give the
sleeping-places in charge 1 (to some one, and only)
then set out. If there be no Bhikkhu remaining,
a Sdmawera should be put in charge. If there be
no Samawera remaining, the attendant who keeps
the grounds in order 2 should be put in charge. If

1 Senasanaw tpu kkh&. Compare the Old Commentary on
the 14th and 15th Pa&ttiyas. The lengthening of the last vowel in
dpu kkht is noteworthy.

2 Aramiko. In Mahavagga VI, 15, the king wishing to pre-
sent a man for this purpose, it is there laid down that the Bhikkhus

TUT, 3, 3. REGULATIONS AS TO DUTIES OF BHIKKHUS. 283

there be neither Bhikkhu, nor S&ma»era, nor
Aramika, the bed frame should be laid on four
stones 1 , the other bed frames put on the top of it,
the chairs should be put one on the top of the
other, the bedding piled in a bundle on the top, the
wooden articles and the earthenware should be put
away in order, and the doorways and lattices should
be closed 3 , and then should be set out.

3. ‘If the Vihira leaks, it should be repaired if
he can, or he should exert himself to get the Vihara
roofed. If he should thus succeed, it is good. If
not, he should put the bed frame on four stones in
that part of the Vihara which does not leak, and
then put the other bed frame (&c., as in last para-
graph, to the end). If the whole of the Vihara
leaks, he should if he can take all the bedding to
the village, or should exert himself to get it taken
there. If he should succeed, it is good. If not, he
should lay a bed frame on four stones in the open
air, put the others on the top of it, put the chairs
one on another, pile the bedding on the top, lay the
wooden and earthenware utensils in order by them,
and cover the whole up with grass or leaves, so that
at least the principal articles of furniture might re-
main (uninjured) 3 ; and (only) then go away.

‘ This, O Bhikkhus, is the rule of conduct for

may accept him ; and at Zullavagga VI, 2 r, 3, a superintendent of
such slaves is mentioned as one of the officials of the Order.

1 This is the usual method still adopted by native servants as a
safeguard against white ants, who would eat up into the legs of
furniture left standing on the ground.

2 This arrangement is referred to above at VIII, 1,3.

3 Angani pi seseyyuw. See Buddhaghosa’s note as appended
to the, edition of the text (p. 325).

284 ffULLAVAGGA. VIII, 4, 1.

Bhikkhus about to leave, according to which they
should behave themselves.’

4 .

1. Now at that time the Bhikkhus did not give
thanks in the place where a meal was served.
People murmured, &c. ; the Bhikkhus heard, &c. ;
the Blessed One on that occasion, &C. 1 said to the
Bhikkhus :

‘ I allow, O Bhikkhus, the giving of thanks.’

Then the Bhikkhus thought, ‘By whom should
the thanks be given ?’

They told this matter to the Blessed One.

‘I allow, O Bhikkhus, the elder Bhikkhu (present)
to give thanks in the place where a meal is served.’

Now at that time (the turn to provide) the
Sawgha with a meal had fallen to a certain com-
pany 2 ; and the venerable Sariputta was the senior
(Bhikkhu in that) Sawgha. The Bhikkhus, think-
ing, ‘ The Blessed One has permitted the senior
Bhikkhu to return thanks in the place where a meal
is served,’ went away, leaving the venerable Sari-
putta alone. And the venerable Sariputta gave
thanks to those people, and then came away alone.

The Blessed One saw the venerable Sariputta
coming from the distance ; and on seeing him, he
said to him : ‘ Did the meal, then, Sariputta, pass
off well 3 ?’

1 For the passages here implied, see I, 1, 2, 3.

2 A««atarassa pftgassa. This sentence has already occurred
at V, 5, 2.

3 On this use of iddho, compare ovado iddho in the Bhik-
khuni-vibhanga, Plfcittiya LVI.

VIII, 4, 2* regulations as to duties of bhikkhus. 285

' The meal, Lord, passed off well. But the Bhik-
khus went away and left me alone.’

Then the Blessed One, in that connection, having"
delivered a religious discourse, said to them :

‘ I allow, O Bhikkhus, four or five of the Bhik-
khus, who are senior or next to the seniors, to
wait.’

Now at that time a certain elder waited in the
dining hall, though he wanted to retire, and through
holding himself back, he fainted and fell.

They told this matter to the Blessed One.

‘ I allow you, O Bhikkhus, if necessity should
arise, to leave the hall after informing the Bhikkhu
sitting immediately next 1 (to the one who wants
to go).’

2. Now at that time the /OJabbaggiya Bhikkhus
went to the place where a meal was to be served
with their under-garments or their robes improperly
put on, and not decently attired; and turning aside 2 ,
they pushed on in front of the senior Bhikkhus ; and
they encroached on (the space intended for) the
senior Bhikkhus 3 when taking their seats, and they
compelled the junior Bhikkhus to give up their
seats to them ; and spreading out their upper robes

1 Anantarikaw bhikkhuw. See the note on this phrase at
VI, 10, 1. Anantarikaw in the text (with long &) is a mis-
print. X.:;.: . .

■ 2 Vokkamma, which is not, as Childers supposes, equal to

okkamma with euphonic v, but to vyavakramya or vyut-
kramya.

3 Anupakha^a: which is here used, not in the sense it has at
IV, 14, x, but in the sense in which it is used in the 16th and 43rd
PfUittiyas, in both which passages it is explained by the Old Com-
mentary by anupavisitvL This clause and the next occur also
at MaMvagga I, 25, 13.

286

A'ULLAVAGGA.

VIII, 4, 3.

(as mats) 1 they took their seats in the space be-
tween the houses 2 3 .

The moderate Bhikkhus murmured, &c. , . . told
the Blessed One, &c. ... he said to the Bhikkhus :

* Therefore, O Bhikkhus, do I establish a rule of
conduct for the Bhikkhus at a meal, which they are
to observe thereat.

3 3. ‘ When time has been called in the Ar&ma, a
Bhikkhu should put on his waistcloth so as to cover
himself all round from above the navel to below the
knees, tie his belt round his waist, fold 4 his upper
robes and put them on, fasten the block on 5 , wash
(his hands), take his alms-bowl, and then slowly and
carefully proceed to the village. He is not to turn
aside (from the direct route) and push on in front of
senior Bhikkhus 6 . He is to go amidst the houses
properly clad, with (his limbs) under control, with
downcast eye, with (his robes) not tucked up, not
laughing, or speaking loudly, not swaying his body
or his arms or his head about, not with his arms
akimbo, or his robe pulled over his head, and with-
out walking on his heels. And he is to take his

1 SaOTghi/iw ottharitvd. This use of the Sa»zgh&/i is re-
ferred to at Crataka I, 212, and above, I, 13, 2.

2 Antaraghare. See Sekhiyas 3-26, repeated in the next sec-
tion. It is perhaps doubtful whether this word may not mean here
(as in Sekhiya 27 = below, § 6) the inner courtyard of a house
which is surrounded by buildings ; but we follow the interpretation
we have adopted, loc. cit.

3 The following section repeats the Sekhiyas, Nos. 3-26, where
see further notes. Much of it recurs below in VIII, 5, 2.

4 Saguwaw katva. Compare Mah&vagga I, 25, 9.

5 Ga»/£ika»z. See the note on V, 29, 3. It was to prevent
the robe being blown up by the wind. The word occurs again in
VIII, 5 , 2.

6 The following sentence is repeated, word for word, below, § 6.

VIII, 4, 4- REGULATIONS AS TO DUTIES OF BHIICKHUS. 287

seat amidst the houses properly clad (&c., all as
before, down to) not with his arms akimbo, or his
robes pulled over his head, and without lolling, and
without encroaching on (the space intended for) the
senior Bhikkhus, or ejecting the junior Bhikkhus
from the seats, or spreading his upper robe out (as
a mat).

4. ‘ When the water is being given out (before
the meal), he is to hold his bowl with both hands,
receive the water (in it), lower the bowl carefully
down to the ground so as to avoid scratching the
floor, and then wash it. If there be (a person there)
whose duty it is to take away the water (which has
been so used), (the Bhikkhu) should lower (his bowl
on to the ground) and pour the water into the waste
tub 1 without splashing the person in question, nor
the Bhikkhus near, nor (his own) robes. If there
be no such person, he should lower his bowl on to
the earth and pour the water away, without splash-
ing the Bhikkhus near or (his own) robes.

‘ When the boiled rice is being given out, he
should hold his bowl with both hands, and receive
the rice in it. Room should be left for the curry.
If there is ghee, or oil, or delicacies 2 , the senior
Bhikkhu should say : “ Get an equal quantity for
all.” The alms (given) are to be accepted with
mind alert, paying attention to the bowl, with equal
curry, and equally heaped up 3 . And the senior

1 Pa/iggahe. See the note on V, io, 3. Avakkara-pati, at
Mahavagga IV, 1,2 = ATulIavagga VIII, 5, 3, seems to have very
nearly the same meaning. The whole of this paragraph is re-
peated below, § 6.

2 Uttaribhangaw. See the note on VI, 4, 1.

8 On the expressions in this sentence, compare the notes on
Sekhiyas 27-32,

288 A'ULLAVAGGA. VIII, 4, g.

Bhikkhu is not to begin to eat until the boiled rice
has been served out to all.

1 5. ‘The alms given are to be eaten with mind
alert, paying attention to the bowl, with equal curry,
and equally heaped up ; without pressing down from
the. top ; without covering up the curry or the con-
diment with the rice, desiring to make it nicer ; and
without asking for either rice or curry for the Bhik-
khu’s own particular use, unless he be sick. Others’
bowls are not to be looked at with envious thoughts.
The food is not to be rolled up (by the fingers) into
balls that are too large, but into round mouthfuls.
The door of the mouth is not to be opened till
the ball is brought close to it. When eating, the
whole hand is not to be put into the mouth. He is
not to talk with his mouth full, nor to toss the food
into his mouth as he eats, nor to nibble at the balls
of food, nor to stuff his cheeks out as he eats, nor to
shake (particles of food off) his hands, nor to scatter
lumps of rice about, nor to put out his tongue, nor
to smack his lips, nor to make a hissing sound as he
eats, nor to lick his fingers, or his bowl, or his lips.
And the jar containing drinking-water is not to be
taken hold of with hands soiled with food.

6. ‘ The senior Bhikkhu is not to accept water (to
rinse out his bowl with) until all Bhikkhus have
finished eating. When water is being given but
(after the meal .... &c., as in the first paragraph of
§ 4, down to the end). The water that has been
used for washing the bowl is not to be thrown with
the rinsings in it into the inner court 1 2 .

1 This paragraph repeats Sekhiyas 31-55, 'where see our notes.

2 This is the 57th Sekhiya.

VIII, 5, r. REGULATIONS AS TO DUTIES OF BHIKKHUS. 289

‘ In returning, the junior Bhikkhus are to go back
first, and the senior Bhikkhus after them. Each
Bhikkhu is to pass amidst the houses properly
clad .... (&c., as above, § 3, down to) without walk-
ing on his heels.

‘ This, O Bhikkhus, is the rule of conduct that I
establish for Bhikkhus at a meal, which they are to
observe thereat.’

Here ends the First Portion for Recitation.

5 .

1. Now at that time Bhikkhus who were going
on their rounds for alms did so with their under gar-
ments or their robes improperly put on, and not
decently attired, and they entered dwellings without
deliberation, and left them without deliberation, and
they entered dwellings roughly, and left them
roughly, and they stood at too great a distance or
too near, and they stood too long or turned back
too soon.

And a certain Bhikkhu, on his round for alms,
entered a dwelling without noticing where he was
going to, and taking (a doorway) for a house-door
he passed into an inner chamber. A woman was
'lying asleep naked on her back in that chamber ;
and when the Bhikkhu saw her he went out again,
perceiving that that was no house-door, but a
chamber. Now the husband of that woman, seeirg
his wife in that position in the chamber, thought :

‘ My wife has been defiled by that Bhikkhu.’ And
he seized him, and beat him.

[20] u

290

KULLAVAGGA.

VIII, 6, 2 .

But the woman, being woke up by the noise,
said to the man, * Why, Sir, are you beating this
Bhikkhu ?’

‘ You have been defiled by this Bhikkhu.’

1 Not so, Sir. This Bhikkhu has done nothing’
(said she), and had the Bhikkhu set free.

Then the Bhikkhu, on going to the Ardma, told
the matter to the Bhikkhus .... murmured ....
told the Blessed One .... he said to the Bhik-
khus :

‘ Therefore, O Bhikkhus, do I establish a rule of
conduct for Bhikkhus going their rounds for alms,
which they are to observe therein.

2. ‘ A Bhikkhu, O Bhikkhus, who intends to go
his round for alms, should put on his waistcloth
(&c., as in chapter 4, § 3, sentences x and 3, down
to the end).

‘ When he enters a dwelling, he should take
notice (where he goes, saying to himself), “ By this
way will I go in, and by this way will I come out.”
He should not go in, nor come out, roughly. He
should not stand too far off, nor too near, nor too
long ; and he should not turn back too easily.

‘ As he stands still he should notice where (the
people in the house) seem willing or not willing to
give (him food). If she lays aside her work, or
rises from her seat, or wipes a spoon, or wipes or
puts ready a dish, he should stand still, perceiving
that she seems willing to give.

‘When food is being given to him, he should lift
up his robe (SamgM/i) with his left hand so as to
disclose his bowl 1 , take the bowl in both his hands,

1 The bowl is always carried by the left hand under the- robe.
On patt&meli, see the note at V, 9, 5.

VIII, 5 , 3 - REGULATIONS as to duties of bhikkiius. 291

and receive the food into it. And he should not
look into the face of the woman who is giving the
food.

‘ He should take notice whether she seems willing
or not to give curry. If she wipes a spoon, or
wipes or puts aside a dish, he should stand still, per-
ceiving that she seems willing to give.

‘ After the food has been given, he should cover
up the bowl with his robe, and turn back slowly and
carefully. He should pass through the houses (on
his way back) properly clad .... (&c., as in § 3,
sentence 3, down to the end).

1 3. ‘He who comes back first from the village,
from his round for alms, should make seats ready,
and place the water and footstools and towels ready
there for washing feet, and clean the waste-tub 1 2
and put it ready, and put ready water to drink and
water for washing.

‘He who comes back last from the village, from
his round for alms, may eat if there be any food left
(from the meal of the other Bhikkhus), if he desires
to do so. If he does not desire to do so, he should
throw away the leavings on the (ground at a place)
which is free from grass, or pour them away into
water in which there are no living things. He
should put away the water, footstools, and towels-
used for washing feet, clean the waste-tub and put
it away, put away the drinking-water and the water

1 The following section is, word for word, parallel to Mahavagga
IV, x, 2-4.

• 2 Avakk&ra-patt. We have had pa/iggaha usrd just above
(VIII, 4, 4) in a very similar sense and connection. The present
word occurs also at Mah&vagga IV, 1, 2.

V' U 2

STULLAVAGGA.

VIII, 6, i.

292

for washing, and sweep the room where the meal
was eaten.

‘ Whosoever sees a pot for drinking-water or for
washing-water, or a chamber utensil empty and
void, should put it in its proper place. If he is not
able to do so single-handed, he should call some one
else, and they should put it away with their united
effort, and silence should not be broken on that
account 1 .

‘ This, O Bhikkhus, is the rule of conduct which
I establish for Bhikkhus going their rounds for
alms, which they are to observe therein.’

6 .

1. Now at that time a number of Bhikkhus dwelt
in the woods ; and they provided neither drinking-
water, nor water for washing, nor fire, nor drill
sticks nor tinder (for starting a fire) 2 ; nor did they
know the stations of the constellations, nor the
divisions of the (ten) ‘ directions’ (of the sky).

Thieves went there and said to the Bhikkhus,
* Have you, Sirs, got drinking-water ?’

1 Yah m bhindati. To break silence by speaking. See
Mahavagga IV, i, 3, where it makes good sense.

>2 Arazzi-sahitajw, on which Buddhaghosa merely says aram-
sahite sati aggizzz katu^ pi va//ati. In the (?&taka Commentary
(I, 2i2, ed. Fausboll) we have the phrase arazzi-sahitazzz n!ha~
ritv& aggizzz karonti. At p. 34 of the Assal&yana Sutta (ed.
Pischel) we hear of there being an upper and lower stick to the
arazzi ; and at p. 53 of the Milinda Paf&ha (ed. Trenckner) we find
the same upper and lower sticks, the thong by which to turn the
latter, and the piece of rag for tinder mentioned as the constituent
parts of this. ancient means of producing fire. The expression in
the text is probably a collective term for the whole of these.

VIII, 6,2- REGULATIONS AS TO DUTIES OF BHIKKHUS. 293

‘No, friends, we have not.’

‘ Have you, Sirs, got water for washing ?’

‘ N o, friends, we have not.’

‘ Have you, Sirs, got fire ?’

‘ No, friends, we have not.’

‘ Have you, Sirs, got sticks and tinder for pro-
ducing fire ?’

‘ No, friends, we have not.’

‘With what (constellation is the moon now in)
conjunction?’

‘ That, friends, we do not know.’

‘ Which direction is this ? ’

‘ That, friends, we do not know.’

[On hearing these answers] 1 , the thieves said,

‘ These are thieves. These men are no Bhikkhus.’
And they beat them, and went away.

The Bhikkhus told this matter to the Bhikkhus.
The Bhikkhus told it to the Blessed One. Then
the Blessed One, on that occasion and in that con-
nection, after delivering a religious discourse, said to
the Bhikkhus :

‘ Therefore, O Bhikkhus, do I establish a rule of
conduct for Bhikkhus dwelling in the woods, accord-
ing to which they are to behave themselves therein.

2. ‘A Bhikkhu, O Bhikkhus, who is dwelling in
the woods, should rise betimes, place his bowl in the
bag 2 , hang it over his shoulder, arrange his upper
robe over his back (over both shoulders) 3 , get on

1 They .are all repeated in the text.

2 Thavika. This is possibly one of the bags referred to in the
permission granted by Mahavagga VIII, 20, but it was only to be
used when the bowl had to be carried a long distance, and not
when passing through a village. (See the beginning of the next
section.)

3 JTivara m khandhe katvd: either in contradistinction

2 94

A’ULLAVAGGA.

VIII, 6 , 3 -

liis sandals, put the utensils of wood and earthen-
ware in order, close the doorway and lattice, and
then leave his lodging-place.

‘ When he perceives that he is about to enter a
village, he should take off his sandals, turn them
upside down 1 , beat them to get the dust out, put
them into a bag, hang it over his shoulder, put on
his waistcloth [and so on as laid down for a
Bhikkhu entering the village for alms above, VIII,
5, 2, paragraph i, to the end].

3. 1 On leaving a village he should put the bowl
into its bag, hang it over his shoulder, roll his robes up,
put them on his head 2 , get on his sandals, and then go.

‘ A Bhikkhu living in the woods, O Bhikkhus,
should keep drinking-water, and water for washing,
and fire, and drill sticks and tinder, and walking
staves ready. He should learn the stations (of the
moon) in the constellations, either in the whole or in
part, and he should know the directions of the sky.

‘ This, O Bhikkhus, is the rule of conduct that
I lay down for Bhikkhus dwelling in the woods,
according to which they should behave themselves
therein.’

7 .

1. Now at that time a number of Bhikkhus
carried on robe-making in the open air. The
AYzabbaggiya Bhikkhus beat their bedding to get

ekawsaw ^ivara^ katvi (on which question there is a great
division among modern Buddhists. Compare Rh. D/s note on the
MaM-parinibbana Sutta VI, 47), or possibly e put it in a roll on his
back/

1 On this expression, see above, VIII, 1, 2.

2 See MaMvagga VIII, 13, 1.

VIII, 7, 2. REGULATIONS AS TO DUTIES OF BHIKKHUS. 295

the dust out in the open space 1 to windward of
them, and covered the Bhikkhus (who were at
work) with dust.

The moderate Bhikkhus murmured, &c told

the Blessed One, &c and he said to the Bhik-

khus :

‘ Therefore, O Bhikkhus, do I establish a rule of
conduct for the Bhikkhus in respect of lodging-
places, according to which they are to behave them-
selves in respect thereof.

2. 1 In whatever Vih&ra he is staying, if that
Vih&ra is dirty, he should, if he can, make it clean.
When cleaning the Vihira, he should first take out
his bowl and his robe and the mat used for sitting
upon, and the bolster and pillows, and put them
down on one side. Taking the bed-frame down
(from its stand), he should carry it out [and so on as
in VIII, 1, 2, down to the end] 2 . .

1 He should not beat the bedding to get the dust
out close to the Bhikkhus, or to the Vihara, or to
the drinking-water, or to the water for washing, or
in the open space (in front of the Vihdra) to wind-
ward of it or the Bhikkhus, but to leeward.

1 Angana. This is not ‘ courtyard,’ as Childers renders it, but
a part of the Arama, immediately in front of the hut or VihSra,
which is kept as an open space, and daily swept. The Sinhalese
name for it is midula; there those who sleep in the hut spend the
greater part of the day, and not even grass is allowed to grow upon
it. The term is a very common one, and its meaning is not doubt-
ful. Compare the (rataka book, I, 124, 151, 421; II, 249, 250,
345. Ekanganawz bhavati, at ibid. I, 53, 12, is to become one
open space, as ekahganaw karoti at II, 357, is to clear a forest,
and turn it into an open space.

2 The order is slightly different, but all the details are the same.
The only addition is that in speaking of taking out the floor cover-
ings, he is directed to notice where they lay.

296

3TULLAVAGGA.

VIII, 7, 4 .

3. ‘ The floor coverings should be dried in the
sun [and so on as in VIII, 1, 4, and 5, to the end,
reading “ in the place where it stood (or lay) ” for “ in
the place to which it belongs”].

4. ‘ If he is dwelling in the same Vihara with .an
older (Bhikkhu), no recitation should be given,
nor examination held, nor exhortation made, nor
Dhamma spoken 1 (to a pupil), without leave being
asked of the senior. Nor should a lamp be lighted
or extinguished, nor the lattices opened or closed,
without his leave.

‘ If he is walking up and down on the same
ifankama with an older (Bhikkhu), then he should
turn back at the spot, where his senior turns back ;
and he should not touch his senior even with the
corner of his robe.

‘ This, O Bhikkhus, is the rule of conduct that I
lay down for the Bhikkhus in respect of lodging-
places, according to which they are to behave them-
selves therein.’

8 .

1. Now at that time the AVabbaggiya Bhikkhus,
on being hindered by the senior Bhikkhus in (their
use of) the hot bath-room, out of spite piled up a
quantity of sticks (in the fireplace), set fire to them,
closed up the doorway, and sat down in the door-,
way. The Bhikkhus, scorched by the heat, and
not being allowed a way out, fell down in a faint.

The sober Bhikkhus murmured, &c told

the Blessed One, 8 zc He said to the Bhik-

1 All the preceding expressions have occurred at Mahavagga I,
26, 1 ; see also 32, x, and 38, 6.

VIII, 8, 2. REGULATIONS AS TO DUTIES OF BHIKKHUS. 297

khus, ‘ No one, O Bhikkhus, is to [do so]. Whoso-
ever does, shall be guilty of a dukka/a.

2. ‘ Therefore, O Bhikkhus, do I establish a rule
of conduct for the Bhikkhus, in respect of the hot
bath-room 1 , according to which they ought to
behave themselves therein.

‘ Whosoever first enters the bath-room, if ashes
have accumulated (in the fireplace) should throw the
ashes out. If the hot bath-room, or its prepared
flooring, or the cell, or the ante-chamber of the
bath, or the cooling-room, or the hall are dirty,
they should be swept. The chunam should be
pounded, the clay moistened with water, and water
poured into the water-jar.

‘ When entering the hot bath-room, the face
should be smeared over with clay, and the person
well covered up in front and behind before enter-
ing. A seat is not to be taken so as to hustle the
senior Bhikkhus, and junior Bhikkhus are not to be
ousted from their seats. If possible, shampooing is
to be performed for the senior Bhikkhus in the hot
bath-room.

• ‘ When leaving the hot bath-room, the chair (that
has been used to sit on before the fire) should be
carried off, and the person well covered up before
and behind before leaving. If possible, shampooing
is to be performed for the senior Bhikkhus in the
water also.

‘ A bath is not to be taken in front of the senior
Bhikkhus, nor above them. One who has bathed

1 Gantaghara, not simply bath-room, but room in which hot
or steam baths were taken. Most of the following expressions
occur in Mahavagga I, 25, 12, or above at V, 14, 3.

29B JTULLAVAGGA. Till, 9-14.

and is getting up out (of the water) is to make way
for one who is getting down into the water.

‘ Whoso comes last out of the hot bath-room is to
wash it, if it be dirty ; to wash the vessel in which
the clay is kept, to put the chairs used in the hot
bath-room in order, to extinguish the fire, to close
up the doorway, and then come out.

‘ This, O Bhikkhus, is the rule of conduct which
I lay down for the Bhikkhus, in respect of the hot
bath-room, according to which they are to behave
themselves therein.’

9 and 10 .

[These chapters deal with the manner of using
the privies, and other sanitary arrangements de-
scribed in V, 35, where see our note.]

11 , 12 , 13 , and 14 .

[These chapters simply repeat, word for word,
Mah&vagga I, 25, 14-24; I, 26, 1-11; I, 32, 3;
and I, 33 respectively.]

Here ends the Eighth Khandhaka, containing
the Rules for Conduct.

IX, i, x. ON EXCLUSION FROM THE l’ATIMOKKHA.

299

NINTH KHANDHAKA.

On Exclusion from the Patimokkiia Ceremony.

1 .

1. Now at that time the Blessed One was staying
at Savatthi, in the Eastern Ardma, the mansion of
the mother of Migira. And at that time, it being
Uposatha Day, the Blessed One was seated in the
midst of the Bhikkhu-sawgha. And the venerable
Ananda, when the night was far spent, when the
first watch was passing away, arose from his seat,
arranged his robe over one shoulder, and stretching
out his joined hands towards the Blessed One, said
to the Blessed One :

‘ The night, Lord, is far spent. The first watch
is passing away. For a long time has the Bhikkhu-
sa»2gha been seated here. Let my lord the Blessed
One recite to the Bhikkhus the Patimokkha.’

When he had thus spoken, the Blessed One re-
mained silent. And a second time, when the second
watch was passing away [he made the same request
with the same result]. And a third time, when the
third watch had begun, and the dawn was breaking 1
[he made the same request].

‘ The assembly, Ananda, is not pure 2 .’

1 NandimukhiyS, rattiyi ti aru«adhata-kdle piti-mukM viya
ratti kh&yati ten’ iha nandimukhiyft ti (B,). See also our note on
this at Mahavagga VIII, 13, 1.

2 That is, there is some one present who is disqualified by some

KU LLAVAGGA.

IX, I, 2.

300

2 . Then the venerable Maha Moggallana
thought, * What individual can the Blessed One
be referring to in that he says, “ The assembly,
Ananda, is not pure.’” And the venerable Mahh
Moggallana considered the whole Bh ikkhu- sawgha,
penetrating their minds with his. Then .the vener-
able Maha Moggallana perceived who was that in-
dividual, — evil in conduct, wicked in character, of
impure and doubtful 1 behaviour, not a Samazza
though he had taken the vows of one, not a re-
ligious student though he had taken the vows of
one, foul within, full of cravings, a worthless
creature, — who had taken his seat amongst the
Bhikkhu-sazzzgha. On perceiving which it was, he
went up to that individual, and said to him,

‘ Arise, Sir ! The Blessed One has found you out.
There can be no communion 2 between you and the
Bhikkhus ! ’

When he had thus spoken, that man kept silence.
And a second and a third time the venerable Mahd
Moggallana addressed to him [the same words, and
with the same result]. Then the venerable Maha
Moggallana took that man by the arm and made
him go out beyond the porch 3 , and bolted the door,

fault from taking part in the proceedings, which would therefore be
invalid.

1 Sa;«kassara. See the passages quoted by Dr. Morris in the
introduction to his edition of the Anguttara (pp. viii, ix), though
we cannot accept his conclusions. We may add that the Tibetan
rendering of Dhammapada 312, given in Rockhill’s ‘ Udana-varga,’
p. 49, from which we might expect some help, throws no light on the
exact meaning of the word, the translator contenting himself with
an ambiguous phrase.

2 SaOTvaso. See Mah&vagga I, 79, 2, and Zullavagga.

8 On these expressions, see the notes above, V, 14, 3, in accord-
ance with which we should read here, in the text sfUi, for su£i.

IX, 1,3- ON EXCLUSION FROM THE PATIMOICKHA. 30I

and went up to the place where the Blessed One
was, and said to him, ‘ Lord, I have made that man
go out. The assembly is now undefiled. May my
lord the Blessed One recite the Patimokkha to the
Bhikkhus.’

‘ How astonishing and curious a thing it is, Mog-
gallana, that that foolish fellow should have waited
up to the very point when he had to be taken by
the arm. 5

3. And the Blessed One said to the Bhikkhus :

‘ There are, O Bhikkhus, in the great ocean, then,
eight astonishing and curious qualities, by the con-
stant perception of which the mighty creatures take
delight in the great ocean. And what are the
eight ?

* The great ocean, O Bhikkhus, gets gradually
deeper, slope following on slope, hollow succeeding
hollow, and the fall is not precipitously abrupt 1 .
This is the first [of such qualities] 2 .

‘Again, O Bhikkhus, the great ocean remains of
the same nature 3 , and passes not beyond the shore.
This is the second [of such qualities].

‘Again, O Bhikkhus, the great ocean will not
brook association with a dead corpse. Whatsoever
dead corpse there be in the sea, that will it — and
quickly — draw to the shore, and cast it out on the
dry ground 4 . This is the third [of such qualities].

‘ Again, O Bhikkhus, all the great rivers — that is
to say, the Gangd, the Yamuna, the A/hravati, the

1 Na &yataken’ eva. See Zullavagga V, 3, 1, and V, 17, 2.'

s Paragraph 1 is here, and in the succeeding paragraphs, re-
peated in full.

s 7 %ita-dhammo, ‘has characteristics which are stable.’

1 For uss&reti read ussSdeti, See our note on VI, 11,3.

302 JTULLAVAGGA. IX, j, 4.

Sarabhu, and the Mahi — they, when they have
fallen into the great ocean, renounce their names
and lineag-e, and are reckoned thenceforth as the ■
great ocean. This is the fourth [of such qualities].

‘Again, O Bhikkhus, though all the streams in
the world flow on till they reach the great ocean,
and all the waters of the sky fall into it, yet does it
not thereby seem to be the more empty or more
full. This is the fifth [of such qualities].

‘ Again, O Bhikkhus, the great ocean has only
one taste, the taste of salt. This is the sixth [of
such qualities].

* Again, O Bhikkhus, the great ocean is full of
gems, of gems of various kinds ; among which are
these gems — that is to say, the pearl, the diamond,
the catseye, the chank, rock, coral, silver, gold, the
ruby, and the cornelian h This is the seventh [of
such qualities].

‘ Again, O Bhikkhus, the great ocean is the
dwelling-place of mighty beings, among which are
these — that is to say, the Timi, the Timingala, the
Timitimingala, the Asuras, the Nagas, and the Gan-
dhabbas. There are in the great ocean creatures
so constituted that they stretch from one to five
hundred leagues 2 . This is the eighth [of such
qualities].

4. 1 And just in the same way, O Bhikkhus, there
are in this doctrine and discipline eight marvellous
and wonderful qualities, by the constant perception

1 On these gems, compare Rh. D.’s note on the Maha-sudassana
Sutta I, 4, in ‘ Buddhist Suttas from the Pali,’ pp. 249, 250.

a On this belief, compare above, VII, 2, 2, of land creatures,
where the same term, attabhava, is used.

IX, 1,4. ON EXCLUSION FROM THE PATIMOKKHA. 303

of which the Bhikkhus take delight in this doctrine
and discipline. What are the eight ?

‘Just, O Bhikkhus, as the great ocean gets
gradually deeper, slope following on slope, hollow
succeeding hollow, and the fall is not precipitately
abrupt — -just so, O Bhikkhus, in this doctrine and
discipline is the training a gradual one, work follow-
ing on work, and step succeeding step ; and there is
no sudden attainment to the insight (of Arahat-
ship) h This is the first [of such qualities].

‘ J ust, O Bhikkhus, as the great ocean remains of
the same nature, and passes not beyond the shore —
just so, O Bhikkhus, is the body of precepts which I
have established for those who are hearers of my
word, and which they, their lives long, do not pass
beyond. This is the second [of such qualities].

‘ J ust, O Bhikkhus, as the great ocean will not
brook association with a dead corpse ; but whatso-
ever dead corpse there be in the sea that will it —
and quickly — draw to the shore, and cast it out upon
the dry land — just so, O Bhikkhus, if there be any
individual evil in conduct, wicked in character, of
impure and doubtful behaviour, not a Samawa
though he have taken the vows of one, not a re-
ligious student though he have taken the vows of
one, foul within, full of cravings, a worthless
creature ; with him will the Saswgha brook no asso-
ciation, but quickly, on its meeting together, will it
cast him out. And what though that man should
himself be seated in the midst of the Bhikkhu-
sa^zgha, verily, both is he afar off from the Sa»?gha,

1 A?l?va~pa/ivedho. On the use of an# a, standing alone, in
this sense, see the note above on Mahavagga V, i, 19.

304 KULLAVAGGA. . IX, i, 4.

and the Samgha from him. This is the third [of
such qualities].

‘ J ust, O Bhikkhus, as the great rivers — that is to
say, the Ganga, the Yamuna, the A/firavati, the
Sarabhu, and the Mahi — when they have fallen
into the great ocean, renounce their name and
lineage and are thenceforth reckoned as the great
ocean- — -just so, O Bhikkhus, do these four castes —
the Khattiyas, the Brahmans, the Vessas, and the
Suddas — when they have gone forth from the world
under the doctrine and discipline proclaimed by the
Tathagata, renounce their names and lineage,
and enter into the number of the Sakyaputtiya j
Samaras. This is the fourth [of such qualities].

‘Just, O Bhikkhus, as though all the streams in
the world flow on till they reach the great ocean,
and all the waters of the sky fall into it, yet does it
not seem thereby to be either more empty or more
full — -just so, O Bhikkhus, though many Bhikkhus
pass entirely away in that kind of passing away
which leaves not a' trace behind, yet does not [the
Savzgha] thereby seem to be either more empty or
more full. This is the fifth [of such qualities].

‘Just, O Bhikkhus, as the great ocean has only
one taste, the taste of salt — -just so, O Bhikkhus,
has this doctrine and discipline only one flavour,
the flavour of emancipation. This is the sixth [of
such qualities].

‘Just, O Bhikkhus, as the great ocean is full of
gems, of gems of various kinds — that is to say, the
pearl, the diamond, the catseye, the chank, rock,
coral, silver, gold, the ruby, and the cornelian — -just
so, O Bhikkhus, is this doctrine and discipline full
of gems, of gems of various kinds, among which are

IX, I, 4. ON EXCLUSION FROM THE PATIMOICKHA. 305

these gems, — that is to say, the four Earnest Medi-
tations, the fourfold Great Struggle, the four Roads
to Iddhi, the five Moral Powers, the five Moral
Senses, the seven kinds of Wisdom, and the noble
eightfold Path. This is the seventh [of such
qualities].

‘Just, O Bhikkhus, as the great ocean is the dwell-
ing-place of mighty beings, among which are the
Timi, the Timingala, the Timitimingala, the Asuras,
the Nigas, and the Gandhabbas; just as there are in
the great ocean creatures so constituted that they
stretch from one to five hundred leagues — just so,
O Bhikkhus, is this doctrine and discipline the resort
of mighty beings, among whom are he who has en-
tered the First Path (the converted man, the Sota-
panno) and he who has realised the fruit thereof, he
who has entered the Second Path (the Sakadagamin)
and he who has realised the fruit thereof, he who has
entered the Third Path (the Anagamin) and he who
has realised the fruit thereof, the Arahat, and he
who has realised the fruit of Arahatship. This is
the eighth *[of such qualities].

‘ These, O Bhikkhus, are the eight marvellous
and wonderful qualities in this doctrine and dis-
cipline by the constant perception of which the
Bhikkhus take delight therein.’

And the Blessed One, on perceiving that matter,
gave forth at that time this ecstatic utterance :

‘ The rain falls heavily on that which is covered,
not upon that which is revealed,

‘ Reveal, therefore, what thou hast concealed,
and the rain shall touch thee not V

1 This enigmatical saying amounts apparently to this: ‘As a
usual thing, no doubt, the rain falls not on that which is covered
[20] X

XULLAVAGGA.

IS, 2, i.

306

2 .

jsfow the Blessed One addressed the Bhikkhus,
and said : ‘ Now henceforth I, O Bhikkhus, will not
hold Uposatha, nor recite the Patimokkha ; let you
yourselves, O Bhikkhus, henceforth hold Uposatha
and recite the Patimokkha. It is, O Bhikkhus,
an impossible thing and an inexpedient that the
Tathagata should hold Uposatha and. recite the
Patimokkha before an assembly which is not pure.
And the Patimokkha, O Bhikkhus, is not to be
listened to by one wlio has committed an offence.
Whosoever shall so listen to it, shall be guilty of a
dukka^a. I' allow you, O Bhikkhus, for whomso-
ever shall listen to the Patimokkha at a time when
he is guilty, to interdict for him the Patimokkha 1 .

‘ And thus, O Bhikkhus, is it to be interdicted.
On the day of Uposatha, on the fourteenth or fif-
teenth day of the month, and at a time when that
individual is present, thus shall it be proposed in the

midst of the Samgha : ■

‘ “ Let the venerable Sawgha hear me. . Such and
such an individual is guilty of an offence. For him

with a roof; but in morals it is precisely where there is already a
fault concealed, unconfessed, that new faults rain in upon him w 0
adds deceit to his fault’ Buddhaghosa says, fiannas ativas-
satiti &patti m apa^itva pa/i^Mdento anna. m nava m apathy
^pap-^atiti idam eta m sandb&ya vutta m. Viva/aw nativassatiti
&i»tti* : &p«*itrf vivaranto annam n’apa^atiti ida« etafli san-

dhava vutta m. A

1 Patimokkha»J Mapetuw : exactly analogous to pavarawaro
A&apetum at Mahavagga IV, 16, 2. H. O. has already pointed
out (in his ‘ Buddha,’ p. 381, note 2) that we have evidently here a
later innovation. The whole frame of the Patimokkha shows -that
it was at first intended that a guilty Bhikkhu should confess his
offence dur ing the recitation, if he had not done so before.

IX, 3, 2. ON EXCLUSION FROM THE PATIMOKKHA. 307

do I interdict the P&timokkha to the effect that it
shall not be recited -when he is present. The P&ti-
mokkha is accordingly interdicted.” ’

3 .

1. Now at that time the Aviiabbaggiya Bhikkhus
thinking, ‘ No one knows that we are guilty,’
listened to the P&timokkha. The Thera Bhikkhus,
who understood the thoughts of other men, told the
Bhikkhus, saying, ‘ Such and such a one, Sirs, and
such and such a one, AVzabbaggiya Bhikkhus, think-
ing, “ No one knows that we are guilty,” are listening
to the Patimokkha.’

When the Avzabbaggiya Bhikkhus heard that,
they, thinking ‘ the good Bhikkhus will (otherwise)
first interdict the Patimokkha to us,’ interdicted the
Patimokkha to the Bhikkhus who were pure and
innocent before (they had time to do so to them),
and this without ground and without cause.

Those Bhikkhus who were moderate murmured,
&c., .... (as usual, down to) told the matter to
the Blessed One.

‘ Is it true, O Bhikkhus, that the ATabbaggiya
Bhikkhus. have [acted thus] ? ’

‘ It is true, Lord !’

Then he rebuked them, and when he had de-
livered a religious discourse, he said: ‘The P&ti-
mokkha is not, O Bhikkhus, to be interdicted to
pure and innocent Bhikkhus without ground and
without cause. Whosoever does so, shall be guilty
of a dukka^a.

2. ‘There is one kind of inhibition of the Pati-
mokkha, O Bhikkhus, which is illegal, and one

x 2

3°8

KULLAVAGGA.

3 > 3 -

which is legal. There are two . , three • • • • >

four (&c., up to) ten kinds of inhibition of the Pati-
mokkha which are illegal and one, two (&c., up to)
ten which are legal.

3. ‘Which is the one kind of inhibition of the
Patimokkha which is illegal ? When one inhibits
the Patimokkha for a breach of morality without
ground. This is the one kind, &c.

‘ And which is the one kind of inhibition of the
Patimokkha which is legal ? When one inhibits the
Patimokkha for a breach of morality with good
ground. This is the one kind, &c.

< And which are the two kinds of inhibition of the
Pitimokkha which are illegal ? When one inhibits
the Patimokkha for a breach of morality, or for an
offence against conduct, and each of them without
ground. These are the two kinds, &c - _ _

‘ And which are the two kinds of inhibition of the
Patimokkha which are legal ? When one inhibits
the Patimokkha for a breach of morality, and for an
offence against conduct, and each of them with good
ground. These are the two kinds, &c.

1 And which are the three kinds, &c. ? [as the last
two, adding “ offence against doctrine.”]

‘ And which are the four kinds, &c. ? [as the last,
adding “ offence against the right mode of live-
lihood.”]

‘ And which are the five kinds of inhibition of the
Pdtimokkha which are illegal ? When one inhibits
the Pdtimokkha for a Pdra^ika, or for a Sawghd-
disesa, or for a Pa/futtiya, or for a PdAdesaniya,
or for a Dukka/a, and each of them without
ground. These are the five kinds, &c.

•< And which are the -five kinds of inhibition of the

IX, 3 , 3 * ON EXCLUSION FROM THE PATIMOKKHA. 309

Patimokkha which are legal ? [Same as the last,
“ with good ground.”]

‘ And which are the six kinds of inhibition of the
Patimokkha which are illegal ? When one inhibits
the Patimokkha for an offence against morality ....
conduct .... doctrine 1 .... without ground, the
offence being one of emission — when one inhibits the
Patimokkha for an offence against morality .... con-
duct .... doctrine .... without ground, the offence
being one of commission 2 . These are the six, &c.

‘ And which are the six kinds of inhibition of the
Patimokkha which are legal ? [Same as the last,
“ with good ground.”]

‘ And which are the seven kinds of inhibition of
the Patimokkha -which are illegal ? When one in-
hibits the Patimokkha for a Pirigika, or for a
Sawghcidisesa, or for a ThullaMaya, or for a
Pdiittiya, or for a Paridesaniya, or for a Duk-
ka/a, or for a Dubbh&sita, and each of them with-
out ground. These are the seven kinds, &c.

‘And which are the seven kinds of inhibition of
the Patimokkha which are legal ? [Same as the
last, “ with good ground.”]

‘And which are the eight kinds of inhibition of
the Patimokkha which are illegal ? [The same as
the six, adding “ offence against the right means of
livelihood.”]

1 The paragraph is repeated in the section full for each of
these cases.

2 Kata .... akatS, .... katftkat&we have rendered here
and below as offence of omission — of commission — of both, as
seems imperatively demanded by the context. Buddhaghosa, how-
ever, says, Akatsly & ti tena puggalena s£ vipatti kat& v& hotu akata
vS patimokkha-Z^apanakassa sa nnt amhlika-vasena amulika hoti.
KatSkatSysl ti kataw k& akataw £a ubhaya m gahetva vuttaw.

3io

rULLAVAGGA.

IX, 3, 3.

‘And which are the nine kinds of inhibition of
the Patimokkha which are illegal .... legal ? [The
same as the six, adding for each kind of offence,

“ the offence being one both of omission and of
commission.”]

‘And which are the ten kinds of inhibition of
the Patimokkha which are - illegal ? When (a
Bhikkhu) who has been guilty of a Para^ika is not
seated in that assembly 1 , — when no discussion is
still going on (in the assembly) as to a Para/ika
offence (supposed to have been committed by a
Bhikkhu then present),— when (a Bhikkhu) who
has abandoned the precepts 2 is not seated in that
assembly, — when no discussion is still going on (in*
the assembly) in respect of (a Bhikkhu then present
having been charged with) abandoning the pre-
cepts, — when (the person charged) submits himself
to the legally prescribed concord (of the assembly) 8 ,
— when (the person charged) does not withdraw his
acceptance of the legally prescribed concord (of the
assembly) 4 , — when no discussion is still going on
(in the assembly) in respect of the withdrawal of
(any member’s) acceptance of the legally (pre-
scribed) concord (of the assembly), — when (the
Bhikkhu charged) has not been suspected of an
offence against morality, nor seen (to have com-
mitted one), nor heard (to have committed one) —
.... of an offence against conduct — • . . . . of an

1 This and the following phrase are further enlarged upon in § 4

and the following sections. ,

2 See our note oft Mahavagga II, 22, 3.

8 See Mahavagga X, 5, 13, &c.

* Pa^Mdiyati. Buddhaghosa says here, paMadiyati ti puna
katabbawz kammaw paiMdtyati. Tena tikko/anake paftttiya m

IX, 3, 4- ON EXCLUSION FROM THE PATIMOKKHA. 3 1 I

offence against doctrine These are the ten

kinds, &c.

‘ And which are the ten kinds of inhibition of the
Patimokkha which are legal ? [The same as the
last, positive instead of negative.]

4. ‘And how (can it be legally said that) a
Bhikkhu who has been guilty of a Paragika offence
is seated in the assembly ?

‘ In case, O Bhikkhus, a Bhikkhu sees that
(another) Bhikkhu is incurring a Para^ika offence
by those means, marks, and signs by which the in-
curring of a Par&gika offence is brought about. Or
in case a Bhikkhu does not himself see that
(another) Bhikkhu is incurring a Parajuka offence,
but another Bhikkhu inform the (first-mentioned)
Bhikkhu, saying, “ Such and such a Bhikkhu, Sir,
has been guilty of a Para^ika offence.” Or in case a
Bhikkhu does not himself see that another Bhikkhu
is incurring a Para^ika offence, but that one him-
self inform the (first-mentioned) Bhikkhu, saying,
“ I, Sir, have been guilty of a Parh^ika offence.”

‘ (In either of these cases), O Bhikkhus, if he
seem to do so, the Bhikkhu may, on the ground of
what he has seen and heard and suspected, bring for-
ward the following resolution on an Uposatha day,
on the fourteenth or fifteenth day of the month, at a
time when that individual is present in the midst of
the Sawgha : “ Let the venerable Sawzgha hear me.
Such and such an individual has been guilty of a
Para^ika offence. I interdict for him the Piti-
mokkha, to the effect that the Patimokkha ought
not to be recited at a time when he is present.”
That is a legal inhibition of the Patimokkha.

‘If, when the Patimokkha has been inhibited for

3X2

KULLAVAGGA.

3 > 5 *

that Bhikkhu, the assembly should rise on account
of any one or other of the Ten Dangers 1 — danger
arising from the king, or from thieves, or from fire,
or from water, or from human beings, or from non-
human beings, or from beasts of prey, or from
creeping things, or danger of life, or danger against
chastity — the Bhikkhu may, if he desire to do so,
bring forward the following resolution, either in that
circle of residence or in another circle of residence,
at a time when that individual is present in the
midst of the assembly : “ Let the venerable Sawgha
hear me. A discussion had commenced with re-
gard to a Paracuka offence of such and such a
person, but that matter was not decided. If the
time seems meet to the Sa7«gha, let the Samgha de-
cide that matter.” If he thus succeed, it is well. If
not, then on an Uposatha day, on the fourteenth or
fifteenth day of the month, at a time when that
individual is present in the midst of the Samgha, let
him bring forward the following resolution: “Let
the venerable Samgha hear me. A discussion had
commenced with regard to a Parayika offence of
such and such a person, but that matter was not
decided. I interdict the Patimokkha for him to the
effect that the Pitimokkha ought not to be recited
at a time when he is present.” That is a legal inhi-
bition of the Patimokkha.

5. ‘ And how (can it be legally said that a
Bhikkhu) who has abandoned the precepts is seated
in the assembly ? ’

[The same as last, reading ‘ abandoned the pre-
cepts,’ &c., for ‘ Para^ika offence,’ &c.]

6. ‘And how (can it be legally said that the person

1 See the rule laid down in Mahavagga II, 15, 4.

IS, 4, i. ON EXCLUSION FROM THE PATIMOKKHA. 313

charged) does not submit himself to the legally
(prescribed) concord (of the assembly)?’

[Same as last, reading ‘ not submit himself to the
legally (prescribed) concord of the assembly,’ &c.,
instead of ‘ abandon the precepts,’ &c.]

7. ‘ And how ■ (can it be legally said that the
person charged) withdraws his acceptance of the
legally (established) concord (of the assembly)?’

[Same as last, reading ‘withdraws his accept-,
ance,’ &c., for 1 does not submit,’ &c.]

8. ‘And how can it be legally said that the
person charged has been seen or heard or sus-
pected of having committed an offence against
morality .... an offence against conduct ....
an offence against doctrine ?’

[Same as § 4, reading ‘ offence against morality,’
&c., for ‘ Paragika offence.’]

These are the ten kinds of the inhibition of Pati-
mokkha which are legal.

Here ends the First Portion for Recitation.

4.

1. Now the venerable U pali 1 went up to the
Blessed One, and bowed down before him, and took
his seat on one side. And when he was so seated,
the venerable Upili said to the Blessed One :

‘When a Bhikkhu, Lord, intends to take upon
himself the conduct (of any matter that has to be

1 No doubt in his r61e of a chief of the Vinaya-dharas, as in
Mahavagga IX, 6, &c.

3H

a’ULLAVAGGA.

IX, 4, r.

decided) 1 , under what conditions should he take the
conduct thereof upon himself 2 ? ’

■‘A Bhikkhu, .Upili, who intends to take upon
himself the conduct of any matter, should take such
conduct upon himself under five conditions.

‘ (In the first place.) A Bhikkhu, Upili, who in-
tends to take the conduct of any matter upon him-
self, should thus -consider : “The conduct of this
matter which I intend to take upon myself, is it now
the right time for the taking charge of the conduct
thereof, or is it not?” If that Bhikkhu, Upali, so
considering, come to the conclusion that it is not the
right time, he should not, Upali, take charge of it.

* (Secondly.) If that Bhikkhu, Upili, so consider-
ing, come to the conclusion that it is the right time,
he should, Upali, further consider thus : “ The con-
duct of this matter which I intend to take upon my-
self, is it just, or is it not ? ” If that Bhikkhu, U pili,
so considering, come to the conclusion that it would
not be just, he should not take charge of it.

‘(Thirdly.) If that Bhikkhu, Upili, so consider-
ing, come to the conclusion that it would be just, he
should, Upili, further consider thus : “ The conduct
of this matter which I intend to take upon myself,
would it tend to advantage, or would it not?” If
that Bhikkhu, U pili,' so considering, come to the
conclusion that it would not tend to advantage, he
should not, Upili, take charge of it.

‘(Fourthly.) If that Bhikkhu, Upili, so consider-
ing, come to the conclusion that it would tend to

1 As, for instance, in the last chapter (§§ 4 and following) the
Bhikkhu who lays the matter before the Sawgha.

2 AttadanaM idlyati, in our explanation of which we follow
Buddhaghosa.

IX, 5, i. ON EXCLUSION FROM THE PATIMOKKHA. 315

profit, he should, Upali, further consider thus :
“While I am taking the conduct of this matter
upon myself, shall I find that the Bhikkhus who are
my intimates and associates are on my side in ac-
cordance with the Dhamma and the Vinaya, or shall
I not?” If that Bhikkhu, Upali, so considering,
come to the conclusion that he will not, he should
not, U pali, take charge of it.

‘ (Fifthly.) If that Bhikkhu, Upali j so consider-
ing, come to the conclusion that he will find them
so, he should further, Upali, consider thus : “Whilst
I am taking the conduct of this matter upon myself,
will the Sa^zgha, as a result thereof, fall into strife,
quarrel, contention, or dispute, or will there arise a
split in the Sazzzgha, disunion in the Sazzzgha, diver-
sity of position in the Sawgha, diversity of action in
the Sawgha 1 ?” If that Bhikkhu, Upali, so con-
sidering, come to the conclusion that that will
happen, he should not take charge of it. But if
that Bhikkhu, Upali, thus considering, should come
to the conclusion that that will not happen, he
should take charge of it. The taking charge of a
matter, Upali, subject to these five conditions, will
not give cause to subsequent remorse.’

1. ‘When, Lord, a Bhikkhu who takes upon him-
self to warn another, is about to do so, of how many
qualities should he consider whether they are within
himself before he does sb ? ’

(a) ‘ A Bhikkhu who warns another should, Upali,

1 This list has occurred above, MaMvagga X, 1, 6; X, 5, 13 ;
ATullavagga VII, 5, 1.

3x6

JL'ULLAVAGGA.

5 ) I-

when he is about to do so, consider thus : “ Am I
pure in the conduct of my body ; pure therein with-
out a flaw, without a fleck ? Is this quality found
in me, or is it not ?” If, Upaii, the Bhikkhu is not
so, there will be some who will say to him : “ Come,
now, let your reverence continue still to train your-
self in matters relating to the body!” — thus will
they say.

(b) ‘ And further, a Bhikkhu who warns another
should, Upaii, when he is about to do so, consider
thus : “ Am I pure in the conduct of my speech ;
pure therein without a flaw, without a fleck ? Is
this quality found in me, or is it not ?” If, Upili,
the Bhikkhu is not so, there will be some who will
say to him : “ Come, now, let your reverence con-
tinue still to train yourself in matters relating to
speech ! ” — thus will they say.

(c) ‘And further, a Bhikkhu who warns another
should, U pali, consider thus : “ Is a kindly mind
ever present in me, one without anger against those
who are my companions in the religious life ? Is
this quality found in me, or is it not?” If, Upaii,
such a mind is not in that Bhikkhu, there will be
some who will say to him : “ Come, now, let your
reverence continue still to cultivate a friendly feel-
ing towards those who are your companions in the
religious life ! ” — thus will they say.

(d) ‘And further, a Bhikkhu who warns another
should, Upili, consider thus: “Am I a man versed
in the tradition, a custodian of the tradition, a store-
house of the tradition ? Whatsoever truths, lovely
in their origin, lovely in their progress, lovely in
their consummation, magnify the higher life, both
in the spirit and in the letter, and in all its points, in

IX, 5, 2. ON EXCLUSION FROM THE pAtIMOKKHA. 3x7

all its perfectness, — in such truths am I well versed,
of such am I full, are such laid up in my words,
dwelt on in my heart, penetrated throughout through
right insight 1 ? Is this quality found in me, or is it
not ? ” If that Bhikkhu, Upili, is not such a man,
there will be some who will say to him : “ Come,
now, let your reverence continue still to learn the
faith ! ” — thus will they say.

(e) ‘ And further, a Bhikkhu who warns another
should, Upili, consider thus: “ Have both the Piti-
mokkhas been completely handed down to me in
their full extent ; have I well divided them, well
established them, well investigated them, both Rule
by Rule 2 , and in every detail? Is this quality
found in me, or is it not ? ” If, Upali, that is not
so, then when he is asked, “ Where has this, Sir,
been declared by the Blessed One ?” he will not be
able to explain 3 , and there will be some who will
say to him : “ Come, now, let your reverence continue
still to learn the Vinaya!” — thus will they say.

‘These are the five qualities, Upali, of which a
Bhikkhu about to warn another should consider
before he does so, whether they are within himself
or not.’ . '

2. ‘ When, Lord, a Bhikkhu who takes upon him-
self to warn another, is about to do so, how many
qualities should he call up (establish) within himself
before he does so ? ’

1 On the whole of this and of the next paragraph, which have
occurred already above at IV, 14, 19, see our notes there.

2 That is, ‘ Sutta by Sutta.’ On the whole stock phrase, compare
our remarks in p. xviii of the Introduction ; and above, Mahi-
vagga I, 36, 14 Zullavagga IV, 14, 19.

3 Read na sampayati, in accordance with H.O/s note at p. 364
of the text.

318

EULLAVAGGA.

IX, S, 3 -

« A Bhikkhu, Upali, who is about to warn another,
should call up within himself five qualities before he
does so, (saying to himself): “At the right time
will I speak, not at the wrong time. In truth will I
speak, and not in falsehood. Gently will I speak,
and not in harshness. To profit will I speak, and
not senselessly. In kindly spirit will I speak, and
not in anget 1 .

‘ These, Upali, are the five,’ &c.

3. ‘ In how many ways, Lord, is repentance to be
brought home to a Bhikkhu who has wrongfully
warned another Bhikkhu ? ’

‘ In five ways, Up&li, is repentance to be brought
home to a Bhikkhu who has wrongfully warned
another Bhikkhu, (that is to say, by saying to him) :

“ At the wrong time did you warn him, Sir, not at
the right time c wherein is need of repentance.

U ntruthfully did you warn him, Sir, and not accord-
ing to fact : wherein is need of repentance. In
harshness did you warn him, Sir, and not gently :
wherein is need of repentance. Senselessly did you
warn him, Sir, and not in a way redounding to
profit : wherein is need of repentance. In anger
did you warn him, Sir, and not in kindly spirit:
wherein is need of repentance.

‘ In these five ways, Upali, should repentance be
brought home to a Bhikkhu who has wrongfully
warned another Bhikkhu. And why? That no_
other Bhikkhu may think that warning is to be'
given not according to fact.’

4, ‘ In how many ways, Lord, is it to be brought

1 On these phrases, compare the j 5 Tula Sila#z, translated by Rh. D.
in { Buddhist Suttas/ p. 190,

IX, 5, 7- ON EXCLUSION FROM THE PATIMOKKHA.

319

about that repentance shall not be brought home to
a Bhikkhu who has been wrongfully warned ? ’

‘ In five ways, Upali, (that is to say, by saying to
him) : “ At the wrong time, Sir, were you warned,
and not at the right time : there is no need of re-
pentance,’” [&c., as in § 3, paragraph 2, with similar
alterations.]

5. ‘ In how many ways, Lord, is the contrary of
repentance to be brought home to a Bhikkhu who
has rightfully warned another Bhikkhu ? ’

[The answer is the exact contrary of § 3.]

6. [This section is the contrary of § 5.]

7. ‘When, Lord, a Bhikkhu who warns another
Bhikkhu, is about to do so, how many things should
he call to mind before he does so ? ’

‘ Five things, U pali — to wit : mercy, seeking the
good of others, compassion, the giving up of
offences, and deference towards the Vinaya. These
are the five/ &c.

‘ And a Bhikkhu, Lord, who is warned, in how
many qualities should he keep himself firm ? ’

.‘In two things, Upali — to wit : in truth and in
freedom from anger.’

Here ends the Ninth Khandhaka, on the
Interdiction of the Patimokkha.-

20 .

XULLAVAGGA.

X, i, i.

TENTH -KHANDHAKA.

On the Duties of BHiKKHUNis.

1 .

i Now at that time the Blessed Buddha was
staying among the Sikyas in Kapilavatthu, in the
Nio-rodharama. And Maha-pa^apati the Gotami
went to the place where the Blessed One was, and
on arriving there, bowed down before the. Blessed
One, and remained standing on one side. And so
standing she spake thus to the Blessed One •

‘It would be well, Lord, if women should be
allowed to renounce their homes and enter the
homeless state under the doctrine and discipline

proclaimed by the Tathagata.

< Enough, O Gotami ! Let it not please thee that

women should be allowed to do so.

[And a second and a third time did Maha-pa^a-
pati the Gotami make the same request in the
same words, and receive the same reply.]

Then Mah4-pa/apatl the Gotami sad and' sor-
rowful for that the Blessed One would not permit
women to enter the homeless state, bowed down
before the Blessed One, and keeping him on her
right hand as she passed him, departed thence
weeping and in tears.

2 . Now when the Blessed One had remained at
Kapilavatthu as long as he thought fit, he set
out on his journey towards Vesall ; and travelling

X, i, 3. ON THE DUTIES OF BHIKICHUNfs. 32 1

straight on he in due course arrived thereat. And
there at Ves&li the Blessed One stayed, in the Mahd-
vana, in the K&^&g&ra Hall.

And Maha-pa/apati the Gotami cut off her hair,
and put on orange-coloured robes, and set out, with
a number of women of the Sikya clan, towards
V esali ; and in due course she arrived at V esali, at
the Mahavana, at the Ku/agara Hall. And Maha-
pag"apati the Gotami, with swollen feet and covered
with dust, sad and sorrowful, weeping and in tears,
took her stand outside under the entrance porch.

And the venerable Ananda saw her so standing
there, and on seeing her so, he said to Maha-pag'a-
pati : ‘ Why standest thou there, outside the porch,
with swollen feet and covered with dust, sad and
sorrowful, weeping and in tears ?’

‘ Inasmuch, O Ananda, as the Lord, the Blessed
One, does not permit women to renounce their
homes and enter the homeless state under the doc-
trine and discipline proclaimed by the Tathagata.’

3. Then did the venerable Ananda go up to the
place where the Blessed One was, and bow down
before the Blessed One, and take his seat on one
side. And, so sitting, the venerable Ananda said
to the Blessed One :

1 Behold, Lord, Maha-pag'apati the Gotami is
standing outside under the entrance porch, with
swollen feet and covered with dust, sad and sorrow-
ful, weeping and in tears, inasmuch as the Blessed
One does not permit women to renounce their
homes and enter the homeless state under the doc-
trine and discipline proclaimed by the Blessed One.
It were well, Lord, if women were to have per-
mission granted to them to do as she desires.’

[20] Y

32 2 XULLAVAGGA. X, i, 4 .

1 Enough, Ananda ! Let it not please thee that
women should be allowed to do so.’

[And a second and a third time did Ananda make
the same request, in the same words, and receive
the same reply.]

Then the venerable Ananda thought : ‘ The
Blessed One does not give his permission, let me
now ask the Blessed One on another ground.’ And
the venerable Ananda said to the Blessed One :

‘ Are women, Lord, capable — when they have
gone forth from the household life and entered the
homeless state, under the doctrine and discipline
proclaimed by the Blessed One — are they capable
of realising the fruit of conversion, or of the second
Path, or of the third Path, or of Arahatship ?’

‘ They are capable, Ananda.’

‘ If then, Lord, they are capable thereof, since
Maha-papapati the Gotami has proved herself of
great service to the Blessed One, when as aunt and
nurse she nourished him and gave him milk, and on
the death of his mother suckled the Blessed One at
her own breast, it were well, Lord, that women should,
have permission to go forth from the household life
and enter the homeless state, under the doctrine and
discipline proclaimed by the Tath&gata 1 .’

4. ‘ If then, Ananda, Maha-papapati the Gotami
take upon herself the Eight Chief Rules 2 3 , let that
be reckoned to her as her initiation.’

3 [They are these] : (i) ‘ A Bhikkhuni, even if of

1 Ananda’s conduct in this matter was afterwards charged
against him as a dukka/a. See below, XI, i, 10.

2 The Ktih& Garudhamma, on which see further our note
above on the 21st P&iittiya, and below, X, 9.

3 The whole of the following eight paragraphs recur in the

X, i, 4. ON THE DUTIES OF BHIKKHUNIS. 323

a hundred years standing, shall make salutation to,
shall rise up in the presence of, shall bow down
before, and shall perform all proper duties towards
a Bhikkhu, if only just initiated. This is a rule to be
revered and reverenced, honoured and observed,
and her life long never to be transgressed.

(2) ‘ A Bhikkhuni is not to spend the rainy season
(of W as) in a district 1 in which there is no Bhikkhu.
This is a rule .... never to be transgressed.

(3) ‘ Every half month a Bhikkhuni is to await from
the Bhikkhu-sawgha two things, the asking as to (the
date of) the U posatha ceremony 2 , and the (time when
the Bhikkhu) will come to give the Exhortation 3 .
This is a rule .... never to be transgressed.

(4) ‘After keeping the rainy season (of Was), the
Bhikkhuni is to hold Pavarazza (to enquire whether
any fault can be laid to her charge) before both
Sa»zghas — as well that of Bhikkhus as that of Bhik-
khunis — with respect to three matters, namely, what
has been seen, and what has been heard, and what
has been suspected 4 . This is a rule .... never to
be transgressed.

Sutta Vibhanga, PMittiya XXI, 3, 1. It is very instructive to notice
the curious blunders -which the Tibetan writers (translated by Rock-
hill in his ‘ Life of the Buddha,’ pp. 62, 63) make in the rendering
of the difficult technical terms in these Eight Rules.

1 AvSsa. Compare Afullavagga I, 18, r, VI, 15, x, VIII, 1, 2.
This rule is the 56th Bhikkhuni Pa/iittiya.

2 The Bhikkhunis are to ask two or three days beforehand
whether the Uposatha is to be held on the 14th or igth day of the
month, says Buddhaghosa here. Compare also the 59th Bhik-
khuni P&£ittiya, where the whole passage recurs.

3 Compare thS 21st Pa&ttiya, and our note there.

4 See Mahlvagga IV, 1, 13, 14. This rule is the same as the
57th Bhikkhuni Pa&ttiya. The mode of carrying out this rule is
explained in detail below, X, 19.

KV LL A V AGG A. X > i, g.

(5) ‘ A Bhikkhuni who has been guilty of a serious
offence is to undergo the Manatta discipline towards
both the Sawghas (Bhikkhus and Bhikkhunis). This
is a rule .... never to be transgressed.

(6) ‘When a Bhikkhuni, as novice, has been trained
for two years in the Six Rules \ she is to ask leave
for the upasampada initiation from both Sawghas
(as well that of Bhikkhus as that of Bhikkhunis 1 2 ).
This is a rule .... never to. be transgressed.

(7) * A Bhikkhuni is on no pretext to revile or
abuse a Bhikkhu 3 . This is a rule .... never to
be transgressed.

(8) ‘ From henceforth official admonition 4 by
Bhikkhunis of Bhikkhus is forbidden, whereas the
official admonition of Bhikkhunis by Bhikkhus is
not forbidden. This is a rule .... never to be

transgressed. — ^ ~

‘If, Ananda, Mahi-pa^apati the Gotamf take
upon herself these Eight Chief Rules, let that be
reckoned to her as her initiation.

5 Then the venerable Ananda, when he had
learnt from the Blessed One these Eight Chief
Rules, went to Maha-pa^apati the Gotaml and [told
her all that the Blessed One had said].

1 jOasu dhammesu. The Six Rules for novices. They are
referred to in the Bhikkhuni Vibhanga, under P&Mtiyas LXlil-
LXVII.

a The actual ordination (upasampada) itself is not complete
till it has been conferred by Bhikkhus (see the rule at X, 2, 2).
The whole proceeding is fully set out below, X, 17. Compare also
the 63rd and 64th Bhikkhuni Pa&ttiyas. #

3 This is the 52nd Bhikkhuni Pa<6ittiya.

* Va^ana-patho. That is, literally, speech. But the reference
is, no doubt, to the various kinds of official admonitions given m
detail in chapter 20 below.

X, I, 6.

ON THE DUTIES OF BHIKKHUNis.

325

‘ Just, Ananda, as a man or a woman, when young
and of tender years, accustomed to adorn himself,
would, when he had bathed his head, receive with
both hands a garland of lotus flowers, or of jasmine
flowers, or of atimuttaka flowers, and place it on the
top of his head; even so do I, Ananda, take upon
me these Eight Chief Rules, never to be trans-
gressed my life long,’

6. Then the venerable Ananda, returned to the
Blessed One, and bowed down before him, and took
his seat on one side. And, so sitting, the venerable
Ananda said to the Blessed One : 1 Maha-pa/apati
the Gotaml, Lord, has taken upon herself the Eight
Chief Rules, the aunt of the Blessed One has re-
ceived the upasampada initiation.’

‘ If, Ananda, women had not received permission
to go out from the household life and enter the
homeless state, under the doctrine and discipline
proclaimed by the Tathagata, then would the pure
religion, Ananda, have lasted long, the good law
would have stood fast for a thousand years. But
since, Ananda, women have now received that per-
mission, the pure religion, Ananda, will not now last
so long, the good law will now stand fast for only five
hundred years. Just, Ananda, as houses in which
there are many women 1 and but few men are easily
violated 2 3 by robber burglars® ; just so, Ananda, under

1 Bahutthik&ni. The context shows that we are to understand
itthi andnotattha. Compare Rockhill’s ‘Life of the Buddha/ p.61.

2 Suppadhawsiyani. Compare Bhikkhunt Vibhanga, Sawghd-
disesa III, 1, 2, and see also JSTuIlavagga VII, g, 4.

3 ^Torehi kumbatthenakehi; on which Buddhaghosa has
the following note : — Kumbathenakehi ti kumbhe dipa»2 ^aletvd
ena ilokena paraghare bhaw;/a?;z vi&hitvi thenaka^orehi.

326 JSTULLAVAGGA. X, 2, 1.

whatever doctrine and discipline women are allowed
to p-o out from the household life into the homeless

o

state, that religion will not last long. And just,
Ananda, as when the disease called mildew falls upon
a field of rice in fine condition, that field of rice does
not continue long ; just so, Ananda, under whatsoever
doctrine and discipline women are allowed to go forth
from the household life into the homeless state, that
religion will not last long. And just, Ananda, as
when the disease called blight falls upon a field of
sugar-cane in good condition, that field of sugar-
cane does not continue long ; just so, Ananda, under
whatsoever doctrine and discipline women are
allowed to go forth from the household life into the
homeless state, that religion does not last long.
And just, Ananda, as a man would in anticipation
build an embankment to a great reservoir, beyond
which the water should not overpass ; just even so,
Ananda, have I in anticipation laid down these
Eight Chief Rules for the Bhikkhunis, their life
long not to be overpassed.’

Here end the Eight Chief Rules for the
Bhikkhunis.

2 .

1. Now Maha-pa^apati the Gotaml went up to
the place where the Blessed One was, and bowed
down before him, and stood respectfully on one side.
And, so standing, Maha-pa^apati the Gotaml spake
thus to the Blessed One : ‘ What course. Lord,

X, 3, r. ON THE DUTIES OF BHIKKHUNis. 327

should I pursue towards these women of the Sakya
clan ? ’

Then the Blessed One taught Maha-pa^apati the
Gotami and incited her, and aroused her, and
gladdened her with religious discourse ; and she,
so taught, incited, aroused, and gladdened, bowed
down before the Blessed One, and keeping him
on her right hand as she passed him, she departed
thence.

Then the Blessed One, in that connexion, deli-
vered a religious discourse, and said to the Bhikkhus,
‘ I allow Bhikkhums, O Bhikkhus, to receive the upa-
sampada initiation from Bhikkhus 1 .’

2. Now those Bhikkhums said to Maha-pa^apati
the Gotami : 1 Neither have you received the upa-
sampada initiation, nor have we; for it has thus
been laid down by the Blessed One : “ Bhikkhunls
are to be initiated by Bhikkhus.” ’

Then M aha-pa^apati the Gotami went to the
venerable Ananda, and [repeated their words to
him]. And the venerable Ananda went to the
Blessed One, and [repeated them to him].

‘ In that moment, Ananda, when Maha-pa^apati
the Gotami took upon herself the Eight Chief Rules,
that was to her as' the upasampada initiation.’

3 .

i. Now Maha-pa^apati the Gotami went up to the
plaice where the venerable Ananda was, and bowed
down before him, and stood respectfully on one side.

1 Compare the 6th Garudhamma above, X, i, 4.

328

1TULLAVAGGA.

X, 4, i.

And, so standing, M aha-pa^apati the Gotami said
to the venerable Ananda : ‘One thing, Ananda,
would I ask of the Blessed One. It were well, Sir,
if the Blessed One would allow the making of salu-
tations, the rising up in presence of another, the
paying of reverence, and the performance of proper
duties one towards another, to take place as between
both Bhikkhus and Bhikkhunis (equally) according
to seniority.’

And the venerable Ananda went to the Blessed
One [and repeated her words to him].

‘ This is impossible, Ananda, and unallowable,
that I should so order. Even those others, Ananda,
teachers of ill doctrine, allow not such conduct to-
wards women; how much less, then, can the Tatha-
gata allow it ? ’

And the Blessed One, on that occasion, having
delivered a religious discourse, addressed the Bhik-
khus, and said: ‘You are not, O Bhikkhus, to bow
down before women, to rise up in their presence, to
stretch out your joined hands . towards them, nor to
perform towards them those duties that are proper
(from an inferior to a superior). Whosoever does
so, shall be guilty of a dukka/a.’

4 .

i. Now Maha-pa^apati the Gotami went up to the
place where the Blessed One was, and bowed down
before him, and stood respectfully on one side.
And, so standing, Mahi-pa^&pati the Gotami said
to the Blessed One : ‘ What course, Lord, shall we
pursue with reference to those precepts for the

X, g, I. ON THE DUTIES OF BHIKKHUNis. 329

Bhikkhunis which are applicable also to the Bhik-
khus ■? ’

1 T rain yourselves, Gotami, therein in the same
manner as the Bhikkhus do.’

* And what course, Lord, should we pursue in re-
ference to those precepts for the Bhikkhunis which
are not applicable also to the Bhikkhus ?’

‘ Train yourselves, Gotami, therein according to
the substance thereof, as they are laid down.’

5 .

1. Now Maha-pavapati the Gotami went to the
Blessed One [&c., as before], and said: ‘May the
Blessed One preach to me the Dhamma (truth,
doctrine) in abstract ; so that, having heard the doc-
trine of the Blessed One, I may remain alone and
separate, earnest, zealous, and resolved V

‘ Of whatsoever doctrines thou shalt be conscious,
Gotami, that they conduce to passion and not to
peace, to pride and not to veneration, to wishing for
much and not to wishing for little, to love of society
and not to seclusion, to sloth and not to the exercise
of zeal, to being hard to satisfy and not to content 1 2
— verily mayest thou then, Gotami, bear in mind

1 These last words are the standing expression for the prepara-
tory stage to Arahatship. Compare Mahavagga I, 6, 16 ; Mahi-
parinibbana Sutta V, 68. The whole speech frequently occurs in
the Sazzzyutta Nikaya at the commencement of conversations with
the Buddha.

2 Most of these terms have already occurred in the standing
‘ religious discourse ’ which is related to have preceded the enun-
ciation of so many of the rules for Bhikkhus (Afullavagga I, 2, 3).

330

JsTULLAVAGGA.

X, 6, l.

that that is not Dhamma, that that is not Vinaya,
that that is not the teaching of the Master. But of
whatsoever doctrines thou shalt be conscious, Go-
tami, that they conduce to peace and not to passion,
to veneration and not to pride, to wishing for little
and not to wishing for much, to seclusion and not to
love of society, to the exercise of zeal and not to
sloth, to content and not to querulousness — verily
mayest thou then bear in mind that that is Dhamma,
and that is Vinaya, and that the teaching of the
Master.’

6 .

x. Now at that time the Pitimokkhawas not recited
to the Bhikkhunis.

They told this matter to the Blessed One.

‘ I allow the Patimokkha, O Bhikkhus, to be recited
to the Bhikkhunis.’

Now it occurred to the Bhikkhunis : ‘ By whom
should the Patimokkha be recited to the Bhik-
khunis ?’

They told this matter to the Blessed One.

‘ I allow, O Bhikkhus, the Patimokkha to be recited
to Bhikkhunis by Bhikkhus.’

Now at that time Bhikkhus went to the residence
of the Bhikkhunis and recited the Patimokkha to
the Bhikkhunis there. The people murmured, and
were indignant, saying : ‘ There are their wives,
there are their mistresses ; now will they take plea-
sure together.’

The Bhikkhus heard this, and told the matter to
the Blessed One.

‘ Bhikkhus are not, O Bhikkhus, to recite the

X, 6, 2. ON THE DUTIES OF BHIKKHUNIS. 33 I

Patimokkha to the Bhikkhunis at their residence.
Whosoever does so, shall be guilty of a dukka/a.
I allow Bhikkhunis, O Bhikkhus, to recite the Pati-
mokkha to the Bhikkhunis.’

The Bhikkhunis did not know how to recite the
Pitimokkha. They told this matter to the Blessed
One.

‘ I allow Bhikkhus, O Bhikkhus, to tell Bhik-
khunis how to recite the P&timokkha.’

2. Now at that time the Bhikkhunis did not con-
fess the faults (they had committed).

They told this matter to the Blessed One.

‘ A Bhikkhunl, O Bhikkhus, is not to leave a fault
unconfessed. Whosoever does so, shall be guilty of
a dukka^a.’

The Bhikkhunis did not know how to confess their
faults. They told this matter to the Blessed One.

‘ I allow Bhikkhus, O Bhikkhus, to tell Bhikkhunis
how they should confess their faults.’

Then it occurred to the Bhikkhus : ‘ By whom
ought the confession of a fault to be received from
the Bhikkhunis ?’ They told this matter to the
Blessed One.

‘ I allow Bhikkhus, O Bhikkhus, to receive the
confession of a fault from Bhikkhunis.’

Now at that time Bhikkhunis, on seeing a
Bhikkhu on the road, or in a street closed at one
end, or at the place where four cross-roads met,
would place their bowl on the ground, and arranging
their robes over one shoulder, would crouch down
on their heels, and stretch forth their joined hands,
and confess a fault. The people murmured, were
indignant, and complained, saying : ‘ There are their
wives, there are their mistresses ; they are asking

JTULLAVAGGA.

X, 6, 3.

o .'y n,

pardon now after having treated them scornfully
overnight.’

They told this matter to the Blessed One.

‘ Bhikkhus are not, O Bhikkhus, to receive the
confessions of a fault from Bhikkhunis. Whosoever
does so, shall be guilty of a dukka/a. I allow
Bhikkhunis, O Bhikkhus, to receive the confession
of a fault from Bhikkhunis.’

The Bhikkhunis did not know how to receive the
confession of a fault. They told this matter to the
Blessed One.

‘ I allow Bhikkhus, O Bhikkhus, to tell Bhik-
khunis how to receive the confession of a fault.’

3. Now at that time disciplinary proceedings I

(K am mas) were not carried out against Bhik-
khunis. They told that matter to the Blessed One. I

‘ I allow disciplinary proceedings, O Bhikkhus, to
be carried out against Bhikkhunis.’

Then the Bhikkhus thought : ‘ By whom ought
disciplinary proceedings to be carried out against
Bhikkhunis ?’ They told this matter to the Blessed
One.

* I allow Bhikkhus, O Bhikkhus, to carry out dis-
ciplinary proceedings against Bhikkhunis.’

Now at that time Bhikkhunis who had been sub-
jected to disciplinary proceedings, on seeing a
Bhikkhu on the road, or in a street closed at one
end, or at the place where four cross-roads met,
would place their bowls on the ground, and ar-
ranging their robes over one shoulder, would crouch
down on their heels, and stretching out their joined
palms would ask for pardon, thinking that that was
the proper time for doing so. The people mur-
mured [&c., as before].

X, 7, I.

ON THE DUTIES OF BHIKKHUNIS.

333

They told this matter to the Blessed One.

4 Bhikkhus are not, O Bhikkhus, to carry out
disciplinary proceedings against the Bhikkhunis.
Whosoever does so, shall be guilty of a dukka^a.’
I allow Bhikkhunis, O Bhikkhus, to carry out dis-
ciplinary proceedings against Bhikkhunis.’

The Bhikkhunis did not know how to carry out
the disciplinary proceedings. They told this matter
to the Blessed One.

* I allow Bhikkhus, O Bhikkhus, to tell the Bhik-
khunis how to carry out disciplinary proceedings.’

7 .

i . Now at that time Bhikkhunis in Samgha assem-
bled, having fallen into quarrel, strife, and dispute,
got to blows, and were unable to settle the point at
issue. They told this matter to the Blessed One.

‘ I allow Bhikkhus, O Bhikkhus, to settle for
Bhikkhunis a point at issue.’

Now at that time Bhikkhus were settling for
Bhikkhunis a point at issue, and as the point at
issue was being enquired into, it was found that
both Bhikkhunis competent to take part in an
official act 1 , and Bhikkhunis who had been guilty of
an offence (had taken part in the Sawgha during
the official act (the Kamma) at which the point in
issue arose).

The Bhikkhunis said : ‘ It would be well if you,
Sirs, would carry out disciplinary proceedings against
the guilty Bhikkhunis, or absolve their offence : for

1 Kammappatta ; on which see Parivara XIX, 6, 7.

334

£ULLAVAGGA.

X, 8, r.

thus has it been laid down by the Blessed One :

“ Bhikkhus are to settle for the Bhikkhunis a point
at issue.” ’

They told this matter to the Blessed One.

‘ I allow Bhikkhus, O Bhikkhus, to set on foot 1
an official act for Bhikkhunis, and then to give it in
charge for Bhikkhunis to carry out the official act
against Bhikkhunis. And I allow Bhikkhus to set
on foot the (dealing with an) offence for Bhikkhunis,
and then to give it in charge for Bhikkhunis to ac-
cept the confession thereof/

8 .

x. Now at that time a Bhikkhuni, a pupil of the
Bhikkhuni Uppalava nn&, followed the Blessed One
for seven years, learning the Vinaya ; but she, being
: forgetful, lost it as fast as she received it. And that

Bhikkhuni heard that the Blessed One was about to
go to Sivatthi. Then she thought: ‘For seven
years have I followed the Blessed One, learning the
' Vinaya ; and, being forgetful, I have lost it as fast as

. I received it. Hard is it for a woman to follow the

. Blessed One her life long. What now shall I do ?’

i And that Bhikkhuni told this matter to the Bhik-

khunis, and they told it to the Bhikkhus, and the
: Bhikkhus told it to the Blessed One.

1 I allow Bhikkhus, O Bhikkhus, to teach the
; Vinaya to Bhikkhunis/

Here ends the First Portion for Recitation.

1 R op etuzre, on which Buddhaghosa says: Ta^aniyadxsu im&m
nama kammam etissd katabban ti eva m rope tv L

X, 9, I. ON THE DUTIES OF BHIKKHUNIS. 335

9 .

i. Now when the Blessed One had stayed at
Vesdll as long as he thought fit, he sat out towards
Savatthi ; and, journeying straight on, he in due
course arrived thereat. And there, at Sivatthi, the
Blessed One remained in the Cetavana, Anatha
Pbzzfika’s Park.

Now at that time the AT/zabbaggiya Bhikkhus
threw dirty water over Bhikkhunls, thinking, per-
haps, they would fall in love with them 1 .

They told this matter to the Blessed One.

‘ A Bhikkhu is not, O Bhikkhus, to throw dirty
water at a Bhikkhuni. Whosoever does so, shall
be guilty of a dukka/a. I allow a penalty, O Bhik-
khus, to be imposed on that Bhikkhu.

Then the Bhikkhus thought : ‘ What penalty is it
that ought to be imposed on him ?’ They told this
matter to the Blessed One.

' That Bhikkhu is to be declared to be one who is
not to be saluted by the Bhikkhuni-sawgha 2 .’

Now at that time the AT/zabbaggiya Bhikkhus un-
covered their bodies, or their thighs, or their private
parts, and showed them to Bhikkhunls, or addressed
Bhikkhunls with wicked words, or associated with
Bhikkhunls, thinking, perhaps, they would fall in
love with them 3 .

They told this matter to the Blessed One.

1 On s&ra^eyyun compare s&ra^ati at V, 3, 1.

2 On this decision compare the 1 sending to Coventry ’ of
vOanna for levity of conduct towards Bhikkhus at Mahd-parinib-
bana Sutta VI, 4, and /Tullavagga XI, 1, 12 (where the penalty is
called Brahma -da«(/a).

8 On sampayog-eti compare ^Tullavagga I, 5, at the end.

336

rULLAVAGGA.

X, 9, 2.

‘ A Bhikkhu is not, O Bhikkhus, to do [any of
these things]. Whosoever does, shall be guilty of
a dukka/a. I allow, O Bhikkhus, a penalty to be
imposed on that Bhikkhu.’

Then the Bhikkhus thought : ‘ What penalty is it
that ought to be imposed on him ?’ They told this
matter to the Blessed One.

‘ That Bhikkhu is to be declared to be one who is
not to be saluted by the Bhikkhuni-sawgha.’

2. [The last section repeated of the /Ozabbaggiya
Bhikkhunis, the decision being the same down to]

Then the Bhikkhus thought : ‘ What penalty is it
that ought to be imposed on her ? ’ They told this
matter to the Blessed One.

‘ I allow you, O Bhikkhus, to prohibit her (from
entering a Vihara) V

When the prohibition was laid upon them, they
would not accept it. They told this matter to the
Blessed One.

‘ I allow you, O Bhikkhus, to inhibit them from
the Exhortation.’

3. Then the Bhikkhus thought : ‘ Is it lawful to
hold Uposatha with a Bhikkhuni who has been in-
hibited from the Exhortation, or is it not lawful ?’

They told this matter to the Blessed One.

‘You are not, O Bhikkhus, to hold Uposatha
with a Bhikkhuni who has been inhibited from the
Exhortation until such time as her case has been
settled.’

Now at that time the venerable Udiyi, after
having inhibited the Exhortation (to one or more
Bhikkhunis), went away on a journey. The Bhik-

1 Avarawan ti viharapavesane nivSrawaw, says Buddhaghosa.

X, 9, 4-

ON THE DUTIES OF BHIKKHUN1S.

337

khunis murmured, were indignant, and complained,
saying : ‘ How can the venerable Udayi [act so]?’

They told this matter to the Blessed One.

‘You are not, O Bhikkhus, to go on a journey
after having inhibited the Exhortation. Whosoever
does so, shall be guilty of a dukka/a,’

Now at that time foolish and incompetent Bhik-
khus inhibited the Exhortation.

They told this matter to the Blessed One.

‘ The Exhortation is not, O Bhikkhus, to be inhi-
bited by a foolish, incompetent Bhikkhu. When such
a one does so, he shall be guilty of a dukka/a.’

Now at that time Bhikkhus inhibited the Exhorta-
tion without grounds and without cause.

They told this matter to the Blessed One.

‘ You are not, O Bhikkhus, to inhibit the Exhorta-
tion without ground and without cause,' Whosoever
does so, shall be guilty of a dukka^a.’

Now at that time Bhikkhus, who had inhibited the
Exhortation, would not give a decision (on the
matter out of which the inhibition arose).

They told this matter to the Blessed One.

‘ When, O Bhikkhus, you have inhibited the Ex-
hortation, you are not to abstain from giving a deci-
sion (on the matter out of which the inhibition arose).
Whosoever does so, shall be guilty of a dukka/a.’

4. Now at that time Bhikkhunis did not go to
the Exhortation. They told this matter to the
Blessed One.

‘ A Bhikkhuni, O Bhikkhus, is not to omit going
to the Exhortation. Whosoever does so, shall _be
dealt with according to the rule V

1 Bhikkhuni PMttiya LVIII.
Z

[20]

338

EULLAVAGGA.

X, 9, 4.

Now at that time the whole Bhikkhuni-sawgha
went to the Exhortation together. The people
murmured, were indignant, and complained, saying :

‘ There are their wives, there are their mistresses ;
now will they take pleasure together.’

They told this matter to the Blessed One.

‘ The whole Bhikkhuni-sazzzgha is not, O Bhik-
khus, to go to the Exhortation together. And if it
should so go, it is guilty of a dukka/a. I allow,
O Bhikkhus, four or five Bhikkhunis to go together.'

[The same when four or five went the decision
ending,]

‘ I allow, O Bhikkhus, two or three Bhikkhunis
to go together to Exhortation ; and let them go up
to some one Bhikkhu, and arrange their robes over
one shoulder, and, sitting down on their heels, let
them stretch forth their joined palms, and thus ad-
dress him : “ The Bhikkhuni-savzgha salutes the
feet of the Bhikkhu -savzgha, and requests permission
to come for the purpose of the Exhortation being
held ; may that be granted, they say, to the Bhik-
. khuni-samgha.”

‘ Then he who is entrusted with the recitation of
the Patimokkha is to ask : “Is there any Bhikkhu
who has been appointed to hold the Exhortation of
the Bhikkhunis ?”

‘ If a Bhikkhu has been appointed thereto, the
reciter of the Phtimokkha is to .say : “ Such and
such a Bhikkhu has been appointed to hold Ex-
hortation to the Bhikkhunis. Let the Bhikkhuni-
sawzgha come to him accordingly.”

-‘If no Bhikkhu has been appointed thereto, the
reciter of the Patimokkha is to say: “Which of
the venerable ones is able to hold Exhortation to

x, 9. 5*

ON THE DUTIES OF BHIKKHUNis.

339

the Bhikkhunis ?” If any one is able to do so, and
is possessed of the eight qualifications 1 , he is to
appoint him thereto, and is to say : “ Such and
such a Bhikkhu is appointed to hold Exhortation
to the Bhikkhunis. Let the Bhikkhuni-sawgha
come to him.”

‘If no one is able to do so, the reciter of the
Patimokkha is to say : “ There is no Bhikkhu ap-
pointed to hold Exhortation to the Bhikkhunis.
May the Bhikkhuni-sawzgha obtain its desire in
peace 2 * .” ’

5. Now at that time Bhikkhus did not accept the
(office of holding) Exhortation. They told this
matter to the Blessed One.

‘ The Exhortation is not, O Bhikkhus, • to be de-
clined. Whosoever shall not accept it, shall be
guilty of a dukka?a.’

Now at that time a certain Bhikkhu was stupid.
T o him the Bhikkhunis went, and said : ‘ Sir, please
to accept the (duty of holding) Exhortation. 5

‘ I-, sister, am stupid. How can I accept the Ex-
hortation?’

4 You should take it, Sir; for thus has it been
laid down by the Blessed One : “ Bhikkhus are to
accept the (duty of holding) Exhortation to the
Bhikkhunis.” ’

They told this matter to the Blessed One.

‘ I allow, O Bhikkhus, all the rest, save the
stupid, to accept the Exhortation.’

[The same repeated of a sick Bhikkhu, and a

1 These are given at length in the Sutta Vibhahga, PS&ttiya
XXI, 2, 1.

2 Pdssldikena sampadetu, on which Buddhaghosa has no

note. Perhaps ‘ by means of faith ’ would-be a better rendering.

340

JTULLAVAGGA.

X, io, i.

Bhikkhu on a journey. The same case put of a
Bhikkhu living in the jungle. The decision is,]

‘ I allow a Bhikkhu living in the jungle, O Bhik-
khus, to accept the Exhortation, and to appoint a
time and place for the meeting 1 , saying: “There
will I perform it.’”

Now at that time Bhikkhus accepted the Ex-
hortation, but did not perform it. They told this
matter to the Blessed One.

‘The Exhortation, O Bhikkhus, is not to be
neglected. Whosoever does so, shall be guilty of a
dukka/a.’

Now -at that time Bhikkhunis did not attend at
the place appointed. They told this matter to the
Blessed One..

‘ A Bhikkhuni is not, O Bhikkhus, to omit attend-
ing at the place appointed. Whosoever does so,
shall be guilty of a dukka/a.’

10 . -

i. Now at that time Bhikkhunis wore long
girdles, and out of them they arranged fringes 2 .
The people murmured, were indignant, and com-
plained, saying : ' As the women who are still en-
joying the pleasures of the world do ! ’

1 On saznketaffl, see our note above on MaMvagga VIII, 23, 3.

2 Pdsuke namentiti gihidarikayo viya ghanapa/Aikena kiya-
bandhanena pasuke namanatthaya bandhanti, says Buddhaghosa.
Pasuka is probably equal to the Sanskrit p&rrvaka, and means a
•fringe arranged round the body, as shown in Plate LI of Cunning-
ham’s ‘ Bharhut Tope/ being so called from the rib-like arrange-
ment of the strings or cloth or other substance of which it was
made. On corresponding girdles worn by men and forbidden to
Bhikkhus, see -Xullavagga V, 29, 2.

X, 10, 2.

ON THE DUTIES OF BH IKK BUN IS.

341

‘ A Bhikkhuni is not, O Bhikkhus, to wear a long
girdle. Whosoever does so, shall be guilty of a
dukka/a. I allow a Bhikkhuni, O Bhikkhus, a
girdle that will go once round the body 1 , and
fringes are not to be arranged in it. Whosoever
does so, shall be guilty of a dukkazh.’

Now at that time Bhikkhunis arranged fringes in
cloth of bambu fibre 2 , or in leather, or in white
cotton cloth 3 , or in plaited cotton cloth 4 , or in
fringed cotton cloth 5 6 , or in white or in plaited or in
fringed iola cloth or in plaits or fringes made of
thread. The people murmured, were indignant, and
complained, saying : ‘ As the women who are still
enjoying the pleasures of the world do ! ’

They told this matter to the Blessed One.

‘ A Bhikkhuni is not, O Bhikkhus, to wear any of
these things. Whosoever does so, shall be guilty of
a dukka/a.’

2. Now at that time Bhikkhunis had their backs
scrubbed with the steak-bone of an ox, or slapped with
the jaw-bone of an ox; and had their fore-arms 7 ,

1 Ekapariytkatan ti ekavaraw parikkhipanakawz, says the
Samanta Pastdikd.

2 Vilivena pattenati (sic) sarfheti veZuvifivehi (sic) katapaZZena.

8 DussapaZZenfiti setavatthapaZZena.

4 Dussaveraiyiti dussena kataveniyS.

5 DussavaZZiyiti dussena katavaZZiy^.

6 ATolapaZZadisu Z’olakavasaw kolan ti veditabbazs.

7 Hatthara koZZapentiti agga m biham koZZapetvi morapat-
tddihi £ittakaw karonti, says Buddhaghosa. The meaning is not
clear. No. 10 of the tattoo marks figured on Plate LII of Cun-
ningham’s * Bharhut Tope,’ referred to in the note on the next sec-
tion, is a representation of a peacock’s feathers. On aZZ^illa, see
Buddhaghosa’s note at p. 327 of the text. Compare the prohibition
of the use by Bhikkhus of back-scratchers and other like things (ATil-
lavagga V, 1, 1) connected with shampooing or luxurious bathing.

IC U LL A V A G G A ,

X, 10, 3.

342

and the backs of their hands 1 , and their calves 2 ,
and the upper part of their feet 3 * * , and their thighs,
and their faces, and their gums, so slapped. The
people murmured, were indignant, and complained,
saying : * As the women who are still enjoying the
pleasures of the world do ! ’

They told this matter to the Blessed One.

‘ A Bhikkhuni is not, O Bhikkhus, to [do any of
these things]. Whosoever does so, shall be guilty
of a dukka/'a.’

3 Now at that time the /v/zabbaggiya Bhikkhunis

O*

[&c., down to]

‘ ^ A Bhikkhuni is not, O Bhikkhus, to anoint her
face, nor to rub ointments on to her face °, nor to
put chunam on to her face, nor to smear red arsenic
on to her face, nor to paint her body, nor to paint
her face, nor to paint her body and face. Whosoever
does so, shall be guilty of a dukka/a.’

4. [Similar paragraph concluding,]

‘ A Bhikkhuni is not, O Bhikkhus, to make (tattoo
marks) by the corners of her eyes 6 , or on her cheeks 7 ,
nor to peep out of window 8 , nor to stand in the

1 Hattha-koK’/zan ti pi///zi-hattha»z.

2 Padan ti^anghaw.

8 P&da-koM/zan ti pizVAi-padawz.

* This paragraph has already occurred above, V, 2, 5 of the

Bhikkhus. .

6 These two injunctions are found also in the 90th and 91st

Bhikkhuni Paiittiyas.

6 Avangawz karontiti avanga-dese adhomukhaw lekha m ka-
ronti (B.). Avan ga= Sanskrit apanga.

7 VisesakaOT karontiti ga?z<fa-padese vi£itra-sa»/Mna»z vise-
sakawz karonti (B.). A number of tattoo marks on the cheeks are
figured in Plate LII of Cunningham s ‘ Bharhut Tope.

8 Olokentiti vatapanara vivaritva vithiw olokenti (B.).

X, II, I.

ON THE DUTIES OF BIIIKKIIUnIs.

343

light (of a half-opened door) 1 , nor to have dances
performed, nor to keep courtesans, nor to keep a
tavern, nor to keep a slaughter-house, nor to open_
a shop, nor to practise usury, nor to supply men
slaves or women slaves, or men servants or maid
servants, or animals, nor to carry on the business of
florist and seedsman 2 3 , nor to carry the razor case V
[Similar paragraph concluding,]
e A Bhikkhuni is not, O Bhikkhus, to wear robes
that are all of a blue, light yellow, crimson, black,
brownish-yellow, or dark yellow colour ; nor to wear
robes with skirts to them which are not made of
torn pieces of cloth, or are long, or have flowers
worked on them, or cobras’ hoods ; nor to wear
jackets, nor dresses made of the fibre of the Tiri-
taka plant 4 5 . Whosoever does so, shall be guilty of
a dukkaifa.’

11 .

i. Now at that time a certain Bhikkhuni, when on
her death-bed, said : ‘ After I am gone, let my set
of necessaries 8 belong to the Sawzgha.’ Then the

1 Saloke ti^Mantiti dv&ro m vivaritva upacSaKa-kayaaz dassen-
tiyo tiiK&anti (B,). Compare Theri-gatha 73.

2 Haritaka-pawwikaw pakiwantiti haritakaw eva pa nnin
ks. pakiwanti, paki»«akapa«awz pasarentili vutta?« hoti (B.). Com-
pare panwika-updsako in the (?ataka I, 411 = 11, 180.

3 Namatakaw dhtreti. See V, 2 7, 3, and our note above on
V, 11, 1. The expression evidently means here ‘to be a barber.’

4 This paragraph has already occurred above, in respect to the
Bhikkhus (MaMvagga VIII, 29), where see our notes on the
various items.

5 Parikkharo; that is, the eight things over which a member

344

ffULLAVAGGA.

X 12, I.

Bhikkhus and the Bhikkhunis disputed as to it, say-
ing : ‘ It belongs to us ; it belongs to us.’

. They told this matter to the Blessed One.

‘ If, O Bhikkhus, a Bhikkhuni, or a novice under
training to become one (a Sikkhamana), when
on her death-bed, should say : “ After I am gone,
let my set of necessaries belong to the Saz/zgha,”
then it is the Bhikkhuni-sazzzgha it belongs to ; the
Bhikkhu-sazzzgha is not the owner thereof. If a
Bhikkhu, O Bhikkhus, or a novice under training
to become one (a Samazzera), when on his death-
bed, should say : “ After I am gone, let my set of
necessaries become the property of the Sazzzgha,”
then it Is the Bhikkhu-sawzgha it belongs to ; the
Bhikkhuni-sazzzgha is not the owner thereof 1 .’

12 .

i. Now at that time a certain woman, who had for-
merly belonged to the clan of the Mallas 2 , had
entered the Order of the Bhikkhunis. She, seeing
a weakly Bhikkhu on the road, struck up against
him with the edge of her shoulder, and knocked
him over. The Bhikkhus murmured, were indig-
nant, and complained, saying : ‘ How can a Bhik-
khuni assault a Bhikkhu ? ’

They told this matter to the Blessed One.

‘ A Bhikkhuni is not, O Bhikkhus, to assault a

of the Buddhist Order .was allowed proprietary rights — the three
robes, the alms-bowl, razor, needle, girdle, and water-strainer.

1 By the rule laid down in the Mah&vagga VIII, 27, the set of
robes and the bowl are to be assigned by the Sawzgha to those that
waited on the sick — at least in the case of Bhikkhus, — and the
analogy would doubtless hold good of the Bhikkhunis also.

! Well known as wrestlers.

X, 13 , I. ON THE DUTIES OF BHIKKHUNfs. 345

Bhikkhu, Whosoever does so, shall be guilty of a
dukka/a. I prescribe that a Bhikkhuni, O Bhik-
khus, on seeing a Bhikkhu, should get out of the
way when still at a distance, and make room for
him. 1

13 .

i. Now at that time a certain woman, while her
husband was on a journey, became with child by a
paramour: • She had a premature delivery, and
asked a Bhikkhuni, a confederate of hers, to carry
away the foetus in her bowl. And that Bhikkhuni
put it into her bowl, and, covering it over with her
upper robe, went away.

Now at that time a certain Bhikkhu, who was on
an alms-pilgrimage, had made a vow not to partake
of the first food given to him until he had already
given of it either to a Bhikkhu or to a Bhikkhuni.
On seeing the Bhikkhuni, that Bhikkhu said :
‘ Come, sister ! take some food.’

‘ No thank you, Sir.’

[And a second and a third time the Bhikkhu
made the same request, and received the same
reply. Then he said,]

‘ Sister ! I have made a vow not to partake my-
self of the first food given to me until I have already
given of it either to a Bhikkhu or to a Bhikkhuni.
Come, sister ! take the food.’

Then that Bhikkhuni, being so pressed by the
Bhikkhu, pulled out her bowl, and showed him what
was inside of it. And the Bhikkhu was indignant, and
annoyed, and remonstrated, saying: ‘ How can you
do such a thing ? ’ And he told the Bhikkhus, and
they were indignant, &c., and told the Blessed One.

346 A'ULLAVAGGA. X, ig, i.

‘ A Bhikkhuni is not, O Bhikkhus, to carry away
a foetus in her bowl. Whosoever does so, shall
be guilty of a dukka/a. I allow a Bhikkhuni, O
Bhikkhus, on seeing a Bhikkhu, to pull out her
bowl, and show it to him.’

The following short section will scarcely bear translating into
modern English.

15 .

i. Now at that time the people gave food to the
Bhikkhus, and the Bhikkhus gave to the Bhik-
khunis. The people murmured, were indignant,
and complained, saying : ‘How can their reverences
give away to others what was given for them to
have — as if we did not know how to give gifts ?’

They told this matter to the Blessed One.

‘ A Bhikkhu, O Bhikkhus, is not to give away to
others what was given for them themselves to have.
Whosoever does so, shall be guilty of a dukka/a.’

Now at that time the Bhikkhus had come into
the possession of some (meat for) food. They told
this matter to the Blessed One.

‘ I allow you, O Bhikkhus, to give it to the
Saazgha.’

Too much came into their possession.

They told this matter to the Blessed One.

‘ I allow you, O Bhikkhus, to give away that
which was given to special individuals (and to keep
that which had come into the possession of the
Sa??zgha as a whole 1 ).’

1 PuggalikaOT d&tu m. On this phrase compare the similar one
below at X, 24. Buddhaghosa has no note either here or there.

X, 1 6, 2. ON THE DUTIES OF BHIKKHUNis.

347

Now at that time food, which had been stored up
for the Bhikkhus, had come into their possession.

They told this matter to the Blessed One.

‘ I allow food that has been stored up to be en-
joyed by the Bhikkhunis after they have had it
given over to them by the Bhikkhus.’

2. [The same repeated, reading Bhikkhuni for
Bhikkhu, and vice verscl.]

16.

1. Now at that time the Bhikkhus had come into
the possession of some bedding, and the Bhikkhunis
had none. The Bhikkhunis sent a messenger to
the Bhikkhus, saying: 4 It would be well if their
reverences the Bhikkhus would give us some bed-
ding on loan V

They told this matter to the Blessed One.

‘ I allow you, O Bhikkhus, to give bedding to the
Bhikkhunis on loan.’

2. Now at that time Bhikkhunis, in their courses,
sat down or lay down on stuffed bedsteads and
chairs, and the stuffing was soiled with blood.

They told this matter to the Blessed One.

1 A Bhikkhuni is not, O Bhikkhus, to sit down or
lie down on a stuffed bedstead or chair. Whoso-
ever does so, shall be guilty of a dukka 7 a. I allow
the use, O Bhikkhus, of an indoor’s robe V

The indoor’s robe got soiled.

1 Tavakdlika7;z. See the passages quoted in our note above
on j£ullavagga VI, x8.

2 Avasatha-^ivara77z. See the Old Commentary on this
word as occurring in the 47th Bhikkhuni Pl^ittiya.

348

rULLAVAGGA.

X, 16, 2.

They told this matter to the Blessed One.

c I allow, O Bhikkhus, the use of a thigh-cloth (a
cloth to reach nearly down to the knee 1 ).’

The thigh-cloth slipped down.

They told this matter to the Blessed One.

‘ I allow it, O Bhikkhus, to be fastened by a
thread to be tied round the thigh.’

The thread broke.

They told this matter to the Blessed One.

‘ I allow, O Bhikkhus, a loin-cloth, and a string
going round the hips (to keep it up) 2 .’

Now at that time the iT/zabbaggiya Bhikkhunis
used to wear the hip-string always. The people
murmured, &c., saying : ‘ Like the women who still
enjoy the pleasures of the world ! ’ They told this
matter to the Blessed One.

‘ A Bhikkhuni is not, O Bhikkhus, to wear a hip-
string for constant use 3 . I allow its use to one who
is in her courses.’

1 Azzi- £olaka«. Buddhaghosa has no note on this. A«i
must be here 1 that part of the leg immediately above the knee, the
front of the thigh.’ Compare Bohtlingk-Roth s. v. No. 2.

3 Sawzvelliyaw ka/i- suttakaw. The sawvelliyazw is the
ordinary undress as worn for the sake of decency, even now, by a
labourer working in muddy paddy fields, or at any severe task. ■ It
is a wedge-shaped strip of cotton cloth about a foot and a half
long, about five inches wide at one end, and tapering down to one
' inch in width at the other. The broad end is fixed on to a string
going round the waist (£a/i-suttaka7»), and hangs down, when
put on, in front of the legs. When worn under other clothes, it
remains so ; but when the other clothes are taken off for work the
narrow end is passed under the body between the legs, and twisted
round the hip--string behind (at the small of the back) so as to keep
it fast. Its use is forbidden to Bhikkhus at V, 29, 5, where Bud-
dhaghosa says, 1 Such as wrestlers and labourers wear.’

3 Its use is also forbidden to Bhikkhus (above, Wullavagga
V, 2, 1).

X, 17 , t.

ON THE DUTIES OF BHIKKHUNIS.

349

17 .

i. Now at that time there were found among the
Bhikkhunis some who were [deformed in one or
other of eleven ways] 1 .

They told this matter to the Blessed One.

‘ I prescribe, O Bhikkhus, that a woman on whom
the upasampadi initiation is being conferred, is to
be questioned as touching the four-and-twenty Dis-
qualifications 2 . And thus, O Bhikkhus, is she to be
questioned :

(i-ii-) “ Have you anyone or other of the eleven
deformities [each repeated as above] ? ”

. (12-16) “Have you any of the following diseases- 1 —

leprosy, boils, dry leprosy, consumption, or fits ?”

(17) “ Are you a human being 3 ?”

(18) “ Are you a female ? ”

(19) “ Are you a free woman ? ”

(20) “ Are you free from debts ? ”

(2 1) “ Are you not in the king’s service ? ”

(22) “ Have your father and mother given their
consent ? ”

(23) “ Are you full twenty years of age ? ”

(24) “ Are you duly provided with robes and alms-
bowl ? ”

“ What is your name ? ”

1 Here follow a number of abnormities, deformities, or diseases,
all of which have reference to the womb or its accessories. Some
of them are unintelligible to us. Compare the corresponding sec-
tion in respect to Bhikkhus at Mahavagga I, 68.

2 Of these twenty-four, eleven are the deformities just referred
to, and the rest are the same as those for Bhikkhus at Mahavagga
I, 76. The number of questions is, in fact, twenty-six, but the last
two do not refer to Disqualifications.

3 For the reason of this, see Mahavagga I, 63.

350

isTULLAVAGGA.

X, 17, 2.

“ What is the name of your proposer 1 ? ” ’

2. Now at that time Bhikkhus put the questions
as touching the Disqualifications to Bhikkhunis 2 ,
and they who were seeking after the upasampadi
initiation became disconcerted and perplexed, and
were unable to answer.

They told this matter to the Blessed One.

‘ I prescribe, O Bhikkhus, that initiation is to be
conferred in the Bhikkhu-sawgha upon a Bhikkhum
who has been initiated on the one side in the Bhik-
khum-sa»zgha, and has there cleared herself (from
the Disqualifications).’

Now at that time the Bhikkhunis questioned
those who desired to receive the upasampada
initiation about the Disqualifications, without having
had them instructed beforehand (h.ow to answer).
The persons who desired to be ordained became
disconcerted and perplexed, and were not able to
answer 3 .

They told this matter to the Blessed One.

c I prescribe, O Bhikkhus, that you first instruct
the women about to be initiated (how to answer),
and that you then question them as to the Dis-
qualifications.’

Then they instructed the candidates in the midst
of the assembly, and they still became disconcerted,
and could not answer.

They told this matter to the Blessed One.

1 Pavattini; corresponding to upa^Aaya in the case of

Shikkhus. _

2 This is in accordance with the rule laid down in X, 2, 2, that
Bhikkhus, and not Bhikkhunis, are to confer the upasampada.

s This paragraph is word for word the same as Mahavagga I,
*76, 2 of the Bhikkhus,

1

X, i'J, 4. ON THE DUTIES OF BHIKKHUNIS. 35 1

‘ I prescribe, O Bhikkhus, that they be instructed
aside, and then questioned in the midst of the
assembly.

‘And thus, O Bhikkhus, ought they to be in-
structed : — First they ought to be made to choose
an instructor 1 ; when they have chosen an instructor
their robes and bowl must be shown to them :
“ This is your alms-bowl, this is your waist-cloth,
this is your upper garment, this is your under gar-
ment, this is your vest, this is your bathing dress 2 .
Go and stand in such and such a place.” ’

3. Ignorant and incompetent (Bhikkhunis) in-
structed them, and they became disconcerted, per-
plexed, and unable to answer.

They told this matter to the Blessed One.

* They are not to be instructed, O Bhikkhus, by
unlearned, incompetent Bhikkhunis. Whosoever
does so, shall be guilty of a dukka/a. I prescribe,
O Bhikkhus, that they be instructed by learned and
competent Bhikkhunis.’

4. Bhikkhunis not appointed (to the office of
doing so) instructed them.

They told this matter to the Blessed One.

‘ Let no one, O Bhikkhus,' instruct them without

1 XJ-pa.gghs.rn. It should be observed that this expression is
found only here, and in the corresponding section for the Bhikkhus,
at Mahavagga I, 76, 3. Elsewhere, throughout, Upa^Mya is
the form used for Bhikkhus, and Pavattini for Bhikkhunis. The
word is probably here also, as in the Mah&vagga I, 76, 3, to be
taken as a masculine.

2 These last two are omitted in the corresponding section for
the Bhikkhus, Mah&vaggg. I, 76, 3. On Sa#zkaMAika«, see the
note of the Old Commentator on the 96th Bhikkhuni Pa^ittiya,
and on Udaka-sS/ikS, the same on the 22nd Bhikkhuni
PSAttiya.

3 5 2

iTULLAVAGGA.

X, 17, 5-

having been appointed thereto. Whosoever does
so, shall be guilty of a dukka^a. I prescribe, O
Bhikkhus, that a Bhikkhuni appointed to the office
instruct them.

‘And thus, O Bhikkhus, ought she to be ap-
pointed— one may either appoint herself, or one may
be appointed by another. And how is a Bhikkhuni
to appoint herself ? Let a learned, competent
Bhikkhuni lay the following motion (watti) before
the Samgha: “Let the Sawgha, reverend Ladies, hear
me. N. N. desires to receive the upasampada
initiation from the venerable lady, M. M. If it seem
meet to the Sawgha, I will instruct N. N.” Thus
may a Bhikkhuni appoint herself.

1 And how is a Bhikkhuni to be appointed by
another ? Let a learned, competent Bhikkhuni lay
the following resolution before the Sazzzgha : 1 Let
the Sazzzgha, reverend Ladies, hear me. N. N. de-
sires to receive the upasampada initiation from
the venerable lady, M. M. If it seem meet to the
Sawzgha, let A. A. instruct N. N.” Thus may one
Bhikkhuni be appointed by another.

5. ‘ Then let that so appointed Bhikkhuni go to
the person who is seeking to be initiated, and thus
address her : “ Listen to me, N.N. This is the time
for you to speak the truth, to declare that which is.
When you are asked about what has happened be-
fore the Sawgha, you ought, if it is so, to answer.
« That is so ; ” if it is not so, to answer : “ That is
not so.” Be not perplexed, be not disconcerted. I
shall ask you thus : “ Are you deformed (&c.,^ down
to the end of the twenty-six questions in § 1).”’

(After the instruction was over, the instructor and
the candidate) returned together to the assembly.

X, 17 , 7 • ON THE DUTIES OF BHIKKHUNIS. 353

‘ They are not to return together. Let the in-
structor return first, and lay the following resolution
before the Samgha : “ Let the Samgha, reverend
Ladies, hear me. N. N. desires to receive the upa-
sampada initiation from the venerable lady, M. M. ;
and she has been instructed by me. If it seem
meet to the Sawgha, let N. N. come forward.”
Then let her be told to come forward. Then
let her be told to adjust her upper robe over
one shoulder only, to bow down before the Bhik-
khunis, to sit down on her heels, and stretching
forth her joined palms, to ask for the upasampadi
initiation, saying : “ I ask the Samgha, reverend
Ladies, for initiation. May the Sawgha, reverend
Ladies, raise me up (out of the worldly life), having
pity on me.” And a second and a third time is she
to repeat that request.

6. ‘ Then let a learned and competent Bhikkhuni
lay the following resolution before the Sawgha :
“ Let the Sawgha, reverend Ladies, hear me. This
person, N. N., desires to receive the upasampadi
initiation from M. M. ; and she has been instructed
by me. If it seem meet to the Samgha, let me
question N. N. as touching the Disqualifications.
Listen to me, N. N. [as before, down to the end of
the questions].”

7. ‘ Then let a learned and competent Bhikkhuni
lay the following motion before the Samgha : “ Let the
Sawgha, reverend Ladies, hear me. This person,
N. N., desires to receive the upasampadi initiation
from the venerable lady, M. M. She is free from
the Disqualifications, and is duly provided with alms-
bowl and robes. This person, N. N., asks the
Sawgha for the upasampadi initiation, the vene-

[20] A a.

354

AULLAVAGGA.

X, 17, 8.

rable lady, M. M., being her proposer. If it seem
meet to the Sawgha, let the Sawgha receive N. N.,
the venerable lady, M. M., being her proposer.
That, then, is the motion.

‘ “ Let the Sa^gha, venerable Ladies, hear me.
N. N. desires to receive the upasampada, the
lady, M. M., being her proposer.. The Sawgha
confers the upasampadd upon N. N., the lady,
M. M., being her proposer. Whosoever of the-
venerable ones agrees thereto, let her keep silence ;
whosoever agrees not thereto, let her speak. A
second time I say the same thing.” [The whole
of this paragraph repeated.] And a third time I
say the same thing. [Paragraph repeated.]

‘ The Sawgha has conferred the upasampada
upon N. N., the lady, M. M., being her proposer.
The Sawzgha agrees thereto. Therefore is it silent.
Thus do I understand.’

8. ‘ Then, further; let her be taken before the
Bhikkhu-sawgha, and there told to arrange her robe
over one shoulder only, to bow down before the
Bhikkhus, and, sitting down on her heels, to stretch
forth her joined palms, and say: “I, Sirs, N. N.,
who, being desirous of receiving the upasampada
initiation from M. M., have received it on the one
side (of the Sa?;zgha, from the Bhikkhunis), and
have there been declared free (from the Disqualifi-
cations), do hereby ask the Samgha for the upa-
sampada.” [The rest of the proceedings are the
same as before the Bhikkhum-sawgha.] “ May the
Sawzgha, reverend Sirs, raise me up (out of the
worldly life), having pity on me.” And a second
time do I hereby ask [&c., repeated]. And a third
time do I hereby ask [the same repeated].

X, i8. ON THE DUTIES OF BHIKKHUNis. 355

[The rest of the proceedings are the same as in
the last sections 6 and 7, putting ‘ Bhikkhu ’ for
‘ Bhikkhuni,’ and ‘ reverend Sirs ’ for ‘ reverend
Ladies.’]

‘ Then, further, let them (the Bhikkhus) measure
the shadow, tell (the newly-received Bhikkhuni)
what season and what date it is, tell her what part
of the day it is, tell her the whole formula 1 , and tell
the Bhikkhunis : “You are to teach her what are
the three things allowed 2 , and what are the eight
things interdicted 3 * * * * 8 .” ’

18 .

f Now at that time Bhikkhunis wasted their time

in the dining-hall, doubting as to which should take
which seat.

' They told this matter to the Blessed One.

’! ‘ I prescribe, O Bhikkhus, that the senior eight

Bhikkhunis shall take their seats according to
l seniority, and the rest as they happen to come in.’

I Now at that time Bhikkhunis, on the ground

w that the Blessed One had so prescribed, let the

1 eight senior Bhikkhunis in every other place take

I 1 Sawgiti. On the meaning of this curious use of the word,

, see our note on the corresponding section for the Bhikkhus- (MaM-

vagga I, 77).,

' 2 The three Nissayas, which are doubtless the same as the 1st,

2nd, and 4th of the four Resources mentioned in the corresponding

< paragraph for Bhikkhus (Mahavagga I, 77). The third is for-

bidden to Bhikkhunis, below, X, 23.

8 Alika, akarawiyani. These must bear the same relation to
the eight Bhikkhuni Para^ikas as the four Interdicts in the corres-
ponding paragraph for the Bhikkhus (Mah&vagga I, 78) do to the
four Bhikkhu ParSgikas.

A a 2

356

isTULLAVAGGA.

X, 19, 1.

exclusive possession (of the first eight seats), and the
rest arranged themselves as they came in.

They told this matter to the Blessed One.

‘ I prescribe, O Bhikkhus, as above, only in the
case of the dining-hall. Everywhere else let there
be no exclusive right to seats by seniority.’

19 .

1. Now at that time the Bhikkhunis did not hold
Pavara^d.

They told this matter to the Blessed One.

. ‘ A Bhikkhuni is not, O Bhikkhus, to omit holding
PavclraWcl. Whosoever does so, shall be dealt with
according to law V

Now at that time the Bhikkhunis held Pa vira^a
by themselves, and not in the Bhikkhu-sawgha.

They told this matter to the Blessed One.

‘ A Bhikkhuni is not, O Bhikkhus, to hold Pa-
v&ra » eL apart, and not in the Bhikkhu-sa»zgha.
Whosoever does so, shall be dealt with according
to law 1 2 .’

Now at that time Bhikkhunis holding Pavira n&
with the Bhikkhus only, and not apart by themselves,
disturbed (the meeting of the Bhikkhu-sawgha).

They told this matter to the Blessed One.

‘ A Bhikkhuni is not, O Bhikkhus, to hold Pava-
ra»a with the Bhikkhu-sawgha only. Whosoever
does so, shall be guilty of a dukka^a 2 .’

Now at that time Bhikkhunis spent all their time

1 The 57th Bhikkhuni PMttiya, which is the same as the 4th
Garudhamma above, X, 1, 4.

* See last note.

X, ip, 2.

ON THE DUTIES OF BHIKKIIUnIs.

357

before noon holding Pav&razza [and so had no time
left for the early meal].

They told this matter to the Blessed One.

‘ I prescribe, O Bhikkhus, that they hold Pav&-
xank in the afternoon.’

When holding Pav&ra n&. in the afternoon, they had
not time enough [to conclude their own ceremony
that day, and take part in that of the Bhikkhus].

They told this matter to the Blessed One.

‘ I allow them, O Bhikkhus, to hold their own
Pavarawa one day, and that with the Bhikkhus the
next day.’

2. Now at that time the whole of the Bhikkhuni-
samgha. declaring, each one for herself, her Pavarazza
before the Bhikkhu-sawzgha, disturbed (the pro-
ceedings).

They told this matter to the Blessed One.

‘ I prescribe, O Bhikkhus, that some one learned
and competent Bhikkhuni be deputed to make the
Pav&ram& invitation on behalf of the Bhikkhuni-
samgha before the Bhikkhu-saz/zgha. And thus,
O Bhikkhus, is she to be deputed :

‘ “ First, the Bhikkhuni is to be asked (whether
she be willing to serve). When that has been done,
a learned and discreet Bhikkhuni is to lay this motion
before the Samgha : Let the Sazzzgha, venerable
Ladies, hear me. If it seem' meet to the Samgha,
let the Samgha depute N. N. to make the Pavarazza
invitation on behalf of the B h ikkhu n i-samgh a before
the Bhikkhu-samgha. That is the motion.

* “ Let the Samgha, venerable Ladies, hear me.
The Samgha deputes N. N. to make the Pav&razza
invitation on behalf of the Bhikkhuni-sazzzgha before
the Bhikkhu-sazzzgha. Whosoever of the venerable

358

JSTULLAVAGGA.

X, 19, 3.

ones approves thereof, let her keep silence. Who-
soever approves not thereof, let her speak.

‘ “ N. N. is deputed by the Sa^gha to make the
Pavdra nk invitation on behalf of the Bhikkhuni-
sawgha before the Bhikkhu-sawgha. The Sawgha
approves thereof. Therefore is it silent. Thus do
I understand.” ’

3. ‘ When that Bhikkhunl has been deputed, she,
accompanied by the Bhikkhuni-sawgha, is to go
before the Bhikkhu-samgha, arrange her robe over
one shoulder, bow down before the Bhikkhus, and
sitting on her heels, to stretch forth her joined
palms, and say : “ The Bhikkhuni-sa;?zgha invites
the Bhikkhu-sawgha (to point out to them any
faults they may have committed) in respect of
things heard, or seen, or suspected. May the
Bhikkhu-sazzzgha speak to the Bhikkhunf-sawgha
(if there be anything wherein they have offended)
out of compassion toward them. Then will they, if
they perceive the offence, confess the same. And a

second time the Bhikkhuni-sawgha [the

whole repeated]. And a third time [the

whole repeated] h” ’

20 .

Now at that time Bhikkhunis inhibited Bhikkhus
from the Uposatha, or from the Pavara n&, or from
the Exhortation, or issued commands to them, or
asked them to give them leave to rebuke them, or
warned them of some offence they supposed they

1 This, of course, is the same form that each separate member of
the Order uses before his or her own Sazragha. Compare our notes
above on the corresponding passage in the Mahavagga, IY, r, 4.

X, 21.

ON THE DUTIES OF BHIKKHUNIS.

359

were committing, or called upon them to remember
whether or not they had committed an offence 1 .

They told this matter to the Blessed One.

‘ A Bhikkhuni is not, O Bhikkhus, to perform any
one of these official acts towards a Bhikkhu.
Should she do so, the act is itself invalid, and she
is guilty of a dukka/a.’

Now at that time Bhikkhus inhibited Bhikkhunls
[&c., as before, giving the contrary decision].

21 .

Now at that time the AT/mbbaggiya Bhikkhunls
had themselves carried in vehicles to which cows
were yoked with a bull between them 2 , or bulls
were yoked with a cow between them. People
were annoyed, murmured, and became indignant,
saying : ‘ That is what is done at the feast of the
Gangd, and the Mahl 2 .’

They told this matter to the Blessed One.

‘ A Bhikkhuni is not, O Bhikkhus, to be carried in
a vehicle. Whosoever does so, shall be dealt with
according to law 3 4 .’

Now at that time a certain Bhikkhuni was sick,
and unable to go on foot.

They told this matter to the Blessed One.

‘ I allow the use of a carriage, O Bhikkhus, to
a sick (Bhikkhuni) V

1 On all these official acts of a Bhikkhuni, see the notes above
on ^Tullavagga I, 5.

2 On all these expressions, see our notes above at Mahavagga V,
9, 3, where they recur word for word.

3 This is the 85th Bhikkhuni PaAittiya.

4 This is repeated from the 85th Bhikkhuni Pa&ttiya. The cor-
responding permission is given to Bhikkhus by MaMvagga V, 10, 2.

360 iHJLLAVAGGA. V, 22, 1.

N ow the Bhikkhunis thought : ‘ Should the carts
be yoked with cows or bulls ?’

They told this matter to the Blessed One.

‘ I allow, O Bhikkhus, a cart yoked with cows or
bulls, or drawn by hand V

Now at that time a certain Bhikkhuni was much
distressed by the jolting of the cart.

They told this matter to the Blessed One.

‘ I allow, O Bhikkhus, the use of a litter or
sedan chair 2 .’

22 .

1. Now at that time a courtesan named Addkn-
kdsi 3 had adopted the religious life under the Bhik-
khunis, and she wanted to go to Savattlii to be
received as full member of the Order (to receive
the upasampada initiation) by the Blessed One
himself. And men of abandoned life heard of it,
and beset the road. And when Azftf/zak&sl, the
courtesan, heard that they had done so, she sent a
messenger to the Blessed One, saying : 1 I want to
receive the upasampada initiation : what course of
action should I adopt ? ’

Then the Blessed One, in that connection, ad-
dressed the Bhikkhus, after delivering a religious
discourse 4 , and said : ‘ I allow you, O Bhikkhus, to
confer the upasampada initiation (upon Bhik-
khunis) even by a messenger 5 .’

1 Hattha-va//aka». See the note on MaMvagga V, io, 3.

2 So also for Bhikkhus at Mahavagga V, 10, 3.

3 On the meaning of this nickname or epithet, compare our note
on Mahavagga VIII, 2 (and see also VIII, 1,1, and 3).

* As set out in isTullavagga I, 1 ; Mahivagga I, 35, 6.

3 The ordinary rule, no doubt, required, as in the case of Bhik-

X, 22, 3-

ON THE DUTIES OF BHIKKHUNIs.

361

2. They conferred it by (sending) a Bhikkhu as
the messenger.

They told this matter to the Blessed One.

‘You are not, O Bhikkhus, to confer the upa-
sampadi initiation on a Bhikkhunl by sending a
Bhikkhu as messenger. Whosoever does so, shall
be guilty of a dukka/a.’

They conferred it by sending a female student

a male novice ..... a female novice an

ignorant, incompetent Bhikkhunl, as the messenger.

[Similar decision in each case.]

‘ I allow you, O Bhikkhus, to confer the upa-
sampadi initiation by sending a learned, competent
Bhikkhunl as a messenger.’

3. ‘ That Bhikkhunl messenger is to go before
the Sa»zgha, and arranging her robe over one
shoulder, is to bow down before the Sa^zgha, and
sitting on her heels, to stretch forth her joined
palms, and say : “ N. N., having been desirous of
receiving the upasampacla initiation with the lady,
M. M. (as her proposer), has received it on the one
hand from the Bhikkhunl-samgha, and has there
been declared free (from the Disqualifications 1 ).
But she is prevented by some danger or other from
coming before the Sawgha (to have her initiation
confirmed) 2 . N. N. asks the Saz/zgha for initiation.
Let the Sawgha raise her up (out of the worldly life)
out of compassion upon her.’ [To be said thrice.]

khus, a Sawzgha of not less than ten persons (Mahavagga I, 31, 2,
and IX, 4, 1), each of ten years standing or more (MaMvagga I,
31, 8). But even for Bhikkhus there were, under' special circum-
stances, certain relaxations of this rule (Mahavagga V, 13, 11),

1 See above, X, if, 1, for the twenty-four Disqualifications..

2 Compare above, X, 1, 4, and X, if,.

rULLAVAGGA.

X, 2 3 -

362

1 Then let a learned, competent Bhikkhu lay the
motion before the Sawgha. “ Let the Sawgha, vene-
rable Sirs, hear me. N. N., having been desirous

[statement of fact, as before]. If it seem

meet to the Sawgha, let the Samgha confer the
upasampadi initiation upon N. N., M. M. being
her proposer. That is the motion.

‘ “ Let the Sawzgha, venerable Sirs, hear me.

N. N., [statement of fact, as before]. The

Sawgha hereby confers the upasampadS. initiation
upon N. N., M. M. being her proposer. Whosoever
of the venerable ones approves thereof, let him keep
silence. Whosoever approves not thereof, let him
speak. And a second time I say the same thing.

N. N., (&c., down to) let him speak. And

a third time I say the same thing. N. N., . . . . .
(&c., down to) let him speak.

‘“The Sa«?gha has hereby conferred the upa-
sampadsl initiation upon N. N., M. M. being her
proposer. The Sa#2gha approves thereof. There-
fore is it silent. Thus do I understand.” ’

‘ Then, further, let them (the Bhikkhus) measure
the shadow, tell (the messenger that she may tell
the newly-received Bhikkhuni) what season and
what date it is, tell her what part of the day it is,
tell her the whole formula ; and tell the Bhikkhunis
to teach her what are the three things allowed, and
what are the eight things interdicted V

23 .

Now at that time Bhikkhunis dwelt in the forest,
and men of abandoned life violated them.

1 See above, X, 17, 8.

X, 24, i.

ON THE DUTIES OF BHIKKHUNIS.

363

They told this matter to the Blessed One.

‘A Bhikkhuni is not, O Bhikkhus, to adopt the
forest life. Whosoever does so, shall be guilty of a
dukfea/a 1 .’

24 .

1. Now at that time a certain lay disciple had
given to the Bhikkhuni-sawgha a servant’s lodge 2
(to live in).

They told this matter to the Blessed One.

‘ I allow, O Bhikkhus, the use of a stable.’

It did not satisfy (their wants) 3 . They told this
matter to the Blessed One.

‘ I allow, O Bhikkhus, a separate residence for
Bhikkhunis.’

That did not satisfy their wants. They told this
matter to the Blessed One.

‘ I allow, O Bhikkhus, building operations 4 (to be
carried on for the benefit of Bhikkhunis).’

1 Compare Mahavagga 1, 30, 4, and 1 , 77, and our note above on

X, 17, 8 .

2 This word has already occurred, -in a -list of various buildings,
at Mahavagga III, .5, 9, where we have rendered it stable. Bud-
dhaghosa says here uddositan (MS. udosita) ti bhawah-slla, and
as at Mahavagga I, 61, assa-bha«<f£ and hatthi-bha7?<fsi are
evidently grooms attending on horses or elephants (compare
Gataka I, 62, 3), bhawrfa-sala may mean a servant’s hall for the
use of that particular-class of servants. A lawsuit about an uddosita
forms the Introductory Story to the 1st Bhikkhuni SawgMdisesa, but
the passage throws no light on the special meaning of the term. See
also the Sutta-vibhahga on Nissaggiya II, 3, 5, and Khudda SikkM
III, 19. The Sanskrit equivalent might perhaps be udavasita, if
the reading of the Samanta Pastidiki had any traditional value ; but
the dd is not doubtful in the MSS. of the text at any of the passages
quoted. Assa-sdla is the word for stable at Gataka I, 62, 3.

3 Na sammati. See the note on V, 13, 3.

4 Navakammaw, See the note above at V, 13, 3.

364 KULLAVAGGA. X, 25, 1.

That did not satisfy their wants. They told this
matter to the Blessed One.

‘ I allow Bhikkhunis, O Bhikkhus, to assign cer-
tain places to live in to individual members of the
Order V

25 .

1. Now at that time a certain woman who had
already conceived, but did not know it, was received
into the Order among the Bhikkhunis. Afterwards
her womb moved within her 1 2 * * * * * 8 . Then that Bhik-
khuni thought : ‘ How shall I now conduct myself
towards this child ?’

They told this matter to the Blessed One.

‘ I allow her, O Bhikkhus, to bring it up till it
have attained to years of discretion V

Then the Bhikkhuni thought : ‘It is not per-
missible for me to live alone, nor for any other
Bhikkhuni to live with a male child. What course
ought I to pursue ?’

They told this matter to the Blessed One.

‘ I allow the Bhikkhunis, O Bhikkhus, to depute
any one Bhikkhuni, and give her as a companion to
that (first-mentioned) Bhikkhuni.!

1 Puggalika»z Mti \m. See the note above on X, 15, 1.

2 There is a touching story founded on a similar incident which

is given as the Introductory Story to No. 12 of the G&takas, trans-

lated in Rh. D.’s ‘Buddhist Birth Stories,’ pp. 199-205. By the

6 1 st Bhikkhuni PS&ttiya it is lawful or unlawful to initiate a preg-

nant woman according as she is unconscious or conscious of the

fact of her conception.

8 Vmwutam papu«lti. That is, no doubt, to puberty.
Compare the opening phrases of the Introductory Story referred to
in the last note (ffStaka I, 231) and also Gataka III, 437.

x, 96, 3-

ON THE DUTIES OF BHIKKHUNfs.

365

‘ And. thus, O Bhikkhus, is she to be appointed :
First that Bhikkhuni ought to be asked (whether
she be willing to undertake the duty). After she
has been asked, a learned and competent Bhikkhuni
ought to lay the motion before the Sa'^gha, saying :

‘ “ Let the Sawgha, venerable Ladies, hear me.
If it seem meet to the Sawgha, let the Sa-wgha
depute N. N. as a companion to M. M. That is
the motion.

‘ “ Let the Sawgha,” ’ [&c., as usual, to the end of
the KammaviM.]

2. Then that companion Bhikkhuni thought :
‘Now how should I conduct myself towards this
child?’

They told this matter to the Blessed One.

* I prescribe that the Bhikkhunis, O Bhikkhus,
conduct themselves towards that child precisely as
they would towards other men, save only as regards
the sleeping under the same roof 1 .’

3. Now at that time a certain Bhikkhuni, who
had been guilty of a grievous offence, was living
subject to the Manatta penance 2 . Then that
Bhikkhuni thought : ‘It is not permissible for me
to live alone, and it is not permissible for any
other Bhikkhuni to live with me. What now ought
I to do?’

They told this matter to the Blessed One.

‘ I allow the Bhikkhunis, O Bhikkhus, to depute
any one Bhikkhuni, and to give her as a companion
to that Bhikkhuni. And thus, O Bhikkhus, ought

1 gdgaram ; on which Buddhaghosa has no note.

2 For what this implied, see iTullavagga II, 1, 2, and II, 6, 1, and
compare the 5th Garudhamma above, X, 1, 4.

3 66

JTULLAVAGGA.

X, 26, r.

she to be deputed [&c., as in last section but one,
down to the end of the Kammavaid].’

26 .

1. Now at that time a certain Bhikkhuni first
abandoned the precepts, and then threw off the
robes 1 . Afterwards she came back, and asked the
Bhikkhunis to admit her into the Order again.

They told this matter to the Blessed One..

‘ A Bhikkhuni ought not, O Bhikkhus, to abandon
the precepts. But by having thrown off the robes
she is ipso facto incapable of being a Bhikkhuni.’

2. Now at that time a certain Bhikkhuni, though
still wearing the orange-coloured robe, joined a
sect of the Titthiyas. Afterwards she came back,
and asked the Bhikkhunis to receive her into the
Order again.

They told this matter to the Blessed One.

‘ A Bhikkhuni, O Bhikkhus, who, when still wear-
ing the orange-coloured robe, has gone over to the
Titthiyas, is not to be received again 2 .’

27 .

i . Now at that time Bhikkhunis, fearing to offend,
would not let men salute them, or cut their hair or
nails, or dress their wounds.

1 On the distinction between these two phrases, see the note on
Mah&vagga II, 22, 3.

2 For the similar rule in the case of Bhikkhus, see Mahavagga
I, 38, 1.

X, 27, 4 - ON THE DUTIES OF BHIKKHUNis.

367

They told this matter to the Blessed One.

‘ I allow them, O Bhikkhus, to permit those
things.’

2. Now at that time Bhikkhunls, when sitting on
a divan, allowed (other people thereon) to touch
them with their heels.

They told this matter to the Blessed One.

‘ A Bhikkhuni is not, O Bhikkhus, to sit on a
divan 1 2 . Whosoever does so, shall be guilty of a
dukka/a.’

Now at that time a certain Bhikkhuni was sick,
and without using a divan she could not be at ease.

They told this matter to the Blessed One.

‘ I allow Bhikkhunls, O Bhikkhus, to use a half-
divan V

3. [Rule as to construction of privies 3 .]

4. Now at that time the Bhikkhunls used chunam
at their baths.

People murmured, saying, ‘ As the women in the
world do ! ’

They told this matter to the Blessed One.

‘ A Bhikkhuni is not, O Bhikkhus, to use chunam
at her bath. Whosoever does so, shall be guilty
of a dukka/a. I allow, O Bhikkhus, the use of clay
and the red powder of rice husks i . >

1 Pallanka»z. Compare MahSvagga V, 10, 4, 5 ; JTullavagga V,
37, VI, 8, VI, 14 ; and the 42nd Bhikkhuni PtMtiya.

2 A<W/&a-pallanka»z. Probably a cushion, which only one
person could use at a time.

3 Compare the Rules for the Bhikkhus, Aullavagga VIII, 9, 10,
which we have also left untranslated. Buddhaghosa says here,
He//M-viva/e uparii^anne ti ettha sa^e kupo khato hoti
upari pana padaramattam eva sabba-disisu pawiiSyati evarhpe pi
vatfati.

* Kukkusaw. Buddhaghosa says here, Kukkusaw mattikan

3 68

XULLAVAGGA.

X, 27, 4.

[Similar paragraph, ending]

‘ A Bhikkhuni is not, 0 Bhikkhus, to use scented
clay at her bath h Whosoever does so, shall be
guilty of a dukka/a. I allow, O Bhikkhus, the use
of common clay.’

Now at that time Bhikkhunis bathing together in
the steam-bath room made a tumult.

They told this matter to the Blessed One.

1 Bhikkhunis are not, O Bhikkhus, to bathe in a
steam-bath. Whosoever does so, shall be guilty of
a dukkazfa.’

Now at that time Bhikkhunis bathing against the
stream allowed the rush of water against them.

They told this matter to the Blessed One.

‘ A Bhikkhuni is not, O Bhikkhus, to bathe
against the stream. Whosoever does so, shall be
guilty of a dukka^a.’

Now at that time Bhikkhunis bathed in a place
not a common bathing-place, and men of abandoned
life violated them.

They told this matter to the Blessed One.

‘ A Bhikkhuni is not, O Bhikkhus, to bathe at a
place not a common bathing-place. Whosoever does
so, shall be guilty of a dukka^a.’

Now at that time Bhikkhunis bathed at a bathing-
place used also by men. People murmured, were
indignant, and complained, saying, ‘ As those women
do who are still living in the pleasures of the
world V

They told this matter to the Blessed One.

ti ku^akaw H eva mattika^ ka. a The use of these last two was allowed
to Bhikkhus by JTullavagga VI ? 3, 1, for building purposes.

1 This is apparently covered by the 88th and 89 th Bhikkhuni
Pa&ttiya.

X, 27, 4- ON THE DUTIES OF BHIKKHUNis.

369

‘A Bhikkhuni is not, O Bhikkhus, to bathe at a
bathing-place used also by men. Whosoever does
so, shall be guilty of a dukka/a. I allow, Bhik-
khunis, O Bhikkhus, to bathe at a bathing-place
used by women.’

End of the Third Portion for Recitation.

End of the Tenth Khandhaka, the Bhikkhuni-
Khandhaka.

37 °

EULLAVAGGA.

XI, i, i.

ELEVENTH KHANDHAKA.

On the Council of RAgagaha.

I 1 .

i. Now the venerable Maha Kassapa addressed
the Bhikkhus, and said : ‘ Once I was travelling
along the road from Pava to Kusin&rA with a great
company of the Bhikkhus, with about five hundred
Bhikkhus. And I left the high road and sat myself
down at the foot of a certain tree.

‘Just at that time a certain naked ascetic
(clfivaka), who had picked up a Mandarava 2 flower
in Kusinhra, was coming along the road towards
PAvA. And I saw him coming in the distance, and
on seeing I said to him :

‘ “ O, friend ! surely thou knowest our Master ? ”
‘“Yea, friend, I know him. This day the Sa-
mara Gotama has been dead a week. That is
how I obtained this Mand&rava flower.” ’

‘ Then, Sirs, of those of the Bhikkhus who were
not yet free from their passions, some stretched out

1 The following section differs from the corresponding passage
in the ‘ Book of the Great Decease ' (VI, 36-41) in the very curious
and instructive way pointed out by H. 0 . in the Introduction to his
edition of the text, p. xxvi, on which see the remarks of Rh. D.
at p. xiii of the General Introduction to his ‘ Buddhist Suttas.’

2 This was a flower which was supposed to grow only in heaven,
and its appearance on earth showed that the devas, on some
special occasion, had been casting down heavenly flowers upon the
earth.

XI, 1 , 1 . ON THE COUNCIL OF rA<?AGAHA. 37 1

their arms and wept; and some fell headlong on
the ground ; and some reeled to and fro in anguish
at the thought: “Too soon has the Blessed One
died ! Too soon has the Happy One passed away !
Too soon has the Light gone out in the world ! ” ’

‘ But those of the Bhikkhus who were free from
the passions (the Arahats) bore their grief, collected
and composed at the thought : “ Impermanent are
all component things. How is it possible [that
they should not be dissolved] ? ”

‘Then I, Sirs, spake thus to the Bhikkhus:
“ Enough, Sirs ! Weep not, neither lament ! Has
not the Blessed One already declared to us that it is
the very nature of all things near and dear unto us
that we must divide ourselves from them, leave
them, sever ourselves from them ? How then, Sirs,
can this be possible — that whereas anything what-
ever born, brought into being and organised,
contains within itself the inherent necessity of dis-
solution— how then can this be possible that such a
being should not be dissolved ? No such condition
can exist ! ”

‘ Then at that time 1 , Sirs, one Subhadda, who
had gone out from the world in his old age, was
seated there in the company of Bhikkhus. And
Subhadda, the late-received one, said to the Bhik-
khus : “ Enough, Sirs ! Weep not, neither lament !
We are well rid of the great Samara. We used to
be annoyed by being told, * This beseems you, this
beseems you not.’ But now we shall be able to do
whatever we like ; and what we do not like, that we
shall not have to do 1 .”

1 In the ‘ Book of the Great Decease ’ the following speech comes
before the preceding one.

B b 2

372

rULLAVAGGA.

XI, I, 2.

‘ Come, Sirs, let us chant together the Dhamma
and the Vinaya before what is not Dhamma is
spread abroad, and what is Dhamma is put aside ;
before what is not Vinaya is spread abroad, and
what is Vinaya is put aside ; before those who argue
against the Dhamma become powerful, and those
who hold to the Dhamma become weak ; before
those who argue against the Vinaya become power-
ful, and those who hold to the Vinaya become weak ! ’

2. ‘ Let then the venerable Thera choose out
Bhikkhus.’

Then the venerable Maha Kassapa chose out five
hundred Arahats less one. And the Bhikkhus said
to the venerable Maha Kassapa : ‘ Lord, this vener-
able one, Ananda, although he have not yet attained
[to N irva«a], yet is he incapable of falling into error
through partiality, or malice, or stupidity, or fear,
and thoroughly have the Dhamma and the Vinaya
been learnt by him from the Blessed One himself.
Therefore let our Lord choose the venerable
Ananda. And the venerable Maha Kassapa chose
also the venerable Ananda.’

3. Then it occurred to the Thera Bhikkhus : ‘ In
what place shall we now chant over together the
Dhamma and the Vinaya ? ’ And it occurred to the
Thera Bhikkhus: ‘In Rafagaha is alms plentiful,
and there is abundance of lodging-places. What,
now, if we were to spend the rainy season at Raga-

:] gaha, and chant the Dhamma and the Vinaya

1 together there : and if no other Bhikkhus were to
I' go up to Ragagaha for the rainy season 1 ?’

4. Then the venerable Maha Kassapa laid the

1 This last was necessary, for if other Bhikkhus spent the Was
at R%agaha, either they must take part in the council, or its

XI, i, 6. ON THE COUNCIL OF rIgAGAHA. 373

resolution before the Sawgha : ‘ Let the venerable
Sawzgha hear me. If the time seems meet to the
Sawgha, let the Saswgha appoint that these five
hundred Bhikkhus take up their residence during
the rainy season at Ra^agaha, to chant over to-
gether the Dhamma and the Vinaya, and that no
other Bhikkhus go up to Ragagaha for the rainy
season. This is the resolution. Let the venerable
Sawgha hear. The Sawgha appoints accordingly.
Whosoever of the venerable ones approves thereof,
let him keep silence. Whosoever approves not
thereof, let him speak. The Sawgha has appointed
accordingly. Therefore is it silent. Thus do I
understand.’

5. So the Thera Bhikkhus went up to Ragagaha
to chant over together the Dhamma and the Vinaya.
And the Thera Bhikkhus thought : ‘ The Blessed
One has spoken in praise of the repair of dilapida-
tions. Let us, then, during the first month of the
rainy season repair such dilapidations, and during
the middle month let us chant over the Dhamma
and the Vinaya together.’ And during the first
month they repaired dilapidation.

6. And the venerable Ananda — thinking, ‘To-
morrow is the assembly, now it beseems me not to
go into the assembly while I am still only on the
way (towards Arahatship)’ — spent the whole night
with mind alert. And at the close of the night, in-
tending to lie down, he inclined his body, but before
his head reached the pillow, and while his feet were
still far from the ground, in the interval he became

decisions would have been invalid through its being incompletely
constituted (want of vaggatta).

374

^ULLAVAGGA.

XI, i, 7*

free from attachment to the world, and his heart was
emancipated from the Asavas (that is to say, from
sensuality, individuality, delusion, and ignorance) \

7. And the venerable Maha Kassapa laid the
resolution before the Samgha : ■ If the time seem
meet to the Samgha, I will question Upili concern-
ing the Vinaya.’ And the venerable Upali laid a
resolution before the Samgha : ‘ Let the venerable
Samgha hear me. If the time seems meet to the
Samgha, I, when questioned by the venerable Maha
Kassapa, will give reply.’

Then the venerable MaM Kassapa said to the
venerable Up&li : ‘ Venerable Updli, where was the
first Pctri^ika promulgated ? ’

‘ In Ves&li, Sir.’

‘ Concerning whom was it spoken ? ’

‘ Concerning Sudinna, the son of Kalanda.’

‘ In regard to what matter ? ’

‘ Sexual intercourse.’

Thus did the venerable Maha Kassapa question
the venerable Uphli as to the matter, as to the
occasion, as to the individual concerned, as to the
(principal) rule, as to the sub-rule 1 2 , as to who would
be guilty, and as to who would be innocent 3 * * * * 8 , of the
first Pdr&fika.

1 In other words, he became an Arahat. Some MSS. omit the
clause about the feet.

2 Anupaiiraatti. Tumour (Journal of the Asiatic Society of

Bengal, 1837, p. 19) translates this word, which is not in Childers,

by ‘ the sequel or application of the exhortation.’ We think the

pawwatti refers to the principal rule (as laid down in the Sutta

Vibhahga at the close of I, 5, 11), and the anupawwatti to the

additions made to it in the following sections.

8 This last clause doubtless refers to the closing words in the
account given in the Sutta Vibhanga of each rule.

XI, I, 7 .

ON THE COUNCIL OF RAGAGAHA.

375

i ‘Again, venerable Up&li, where was the second

j Parajuka promulgated ? ’

j ‘ At Rifagaha, Sir.’

j ‘ Concerning whom was it spoken ? ’

j ‘ Dhaniya, the potter’s son.’

j ‘In regard to what matter ? ’

j ‘ The taking of that which had not been given V

Thus did the venerable Maha Kassapa question
the venerable Upili as to the matter, and as to the
j occasion, and as to the individual concerned, and as

to the (principal) rule, and as to the sub-rule, and as
j to who would be guilty, and as to who would be

innocent of the second Pdr&^ika.

‘Again, venerable U pali, where was the third
Para^ika promulgated ?’

‘ At V esali, Sir.’

‘ Concerning whom was it spoken ?’

! ‘ A number of Bhikkhus.’

‘ In regard to what matter ?’

‘ Human beings 1 2 .’

Thus did the venerable Mahi Kassapa question
the venerable Upali as to [all the particulars, as be-
fore] of the third Parajfika.

‘Again, venerable Up&li, where was the fourth
Para^ika promulgated ?’

‘ At Vesali, Sir.’

‘ Concerning whom was it spoken ?’

‘ The Bhikkhus dwelling on the banks of the
Vaggumuda river.’

j ‘ In regard to what matter ?’

1 That is, ‘ theft.’

2 That is, murder or manslaughter. * The slaying of’ is to be
understood.

376 iTULLAVAGGA. XI, i, 8.

‘ Superhuman conditions.’

Thus did the venerable Mah& Kassapa question
the venerable Up&li as to [all the particulars, as
before] of the fourth Paragika. And in like manner
did he question him through both the Vinayas 1 2 ;
and as he was successively asked, so did Up&li
make reply.

8. Then the venerable Mahi Kassapa laid a reso-
lution before the Sawgha : ‘ Let the venerable
Sawgha hear me. If. the time seems meet to the
Saiwgha, I would question Ananda concerning the
Dhamma.’

And the venerable Ananda laid a resolution
before the Sawgha : ‘ Let the venerable Sawgha
hear me. If the time seems meet to the Sawgha,
I, as questioned by the venerable Maha Kassapa,
will give reply.’

And the venerable Maha Kassapa said to the
venerable Ananda : ‘Where, venerable Ananda,
was the Brahma/ala spoken ? ’

‘ On the way, Sir, between Ra^agaha and Nalanda,
at the royal rest-house at Ambala^Aika V

‘ Concerning whom was it spoken ? ’

‘ Suppiya, the wandering ascetic, and Brahma-
datta, the young Brahman.’

Thus did the venerable Mahi Kassapa question

1 Ubhato-vinaye. That is, relating on the one hand to Bhik-
khus, and on the other to Bhikkhunis (not Sutta Vibhanga and
Khandhakas). The Burmese MS. at Berlin reads ubhato-vi-
bhange, suggested possibly by Buddhaghosa’s expression in the
corresponding part of his accounts of this Council at the com-
mencement of the Sumahgala Vilasini and the Samanta Pasadika
(see Tumour, loc. cit., and H. O., Yinaya III, 290.)

2 In the text read ra^agarake, as suggested in the notes at
p. 329, and confirmed by the Sutta itself (ed. Grimblot).

XI, x, 9-

ON THE COUNCIL OF RAGAGAHA.

377

the venerable Ananda as to the occasion of the
Brahma^ala, and as to the individuals concerning
whom it was spoken.

* And again, venerable Ananda, where was the
Sctma»»a-phala spoken ? ’

* At Ra/agaha, Sir ; in Civaka’s Mango Grove.’

‘ And with whom was it spoken ?’

‘ With A^atasattu, the son of the Vedehl.’

Thus did the venerable Maha Kassapa question
the venerable Ananda as to the occasion of the
Sama^Ha-phala, and as to the individual concerned.
And in like manner did he question him through the
five N ikayas, and as he was successively asked, so
did Ananda make reply.

9. Then the venerable Ananda spake thus to the
Thera Bhikkhus : ‘ The Blessed One, Sirs, at the
time of his passing away, spake thus to me : “ When
I am gone, Ananda, let the Samgha, if it should so
wish, revoke all the lesser and minor precepts V’ ’

‘ Did you then, venerable Ananda, ask the Blessed
One which were the lesser and minor precepts ?’

‘ No, Sirs.’

Some Theras then said that all the rules save the
four Para^ikas ; others that all save those and the
thirteen Sawghhdisesas ; others that all save those
and the two Aniyatas; others that all save those
and the thirty Nissaggiyas ; others that all save
those and the ninety-two Piiittiyas ; others that all
save those and the four Paiidesaniyas were lesser
and minor precepts.

Then the venerable Maha Kassapa laid a reso-
lution before the Samgha : ‘ Let the venerable

‘ Book of the Great Decease,’ VI, 3.

37 8

XULLAVAGGA.

XI, i, io.

Sawgha hear me. There are certain of our pre-
cepts which relate to matters in which the laity are
concerned. Now the laity know of us that “such
and such things are proper for you Samaras who
are Sakyaputtiyas, and such and such things are
not.” If we were to revoke the lesser and minor
precepts, it will be said to us: “ A set of precepts
was laid down for his disciples by the Samawa
Gotama to endure until the smoke should rise from
his funeral pyre 1 . So long as their teacher re-
mained with these men, so long did they train
themselves in the precepts. Since their teacher has
passed away from them, no longer do they now train
themselves in the precepts.’

‘If the time seems meet to the Sawgha, not
ordaining what has not been ordained, and not
revoking what has been ordained, let it take upon
itself and ever direct itself in the precepts accord-
ing as they have been laid down. This is the
resolution.

‘Let the venerable Sawgha hear me. [These
things being so 2 ] the Sawgha takes upon itself the
precepts according as they have been laid down.
Whosoever of the venerable ones approves thereof,
let him keep silence. Whosoever approves not
thereof, let him speak. The Sa^gha has taken
upon itself the precepts according as they were
laid down. Therefore does it keep silence. Thus
do, I understand.’

io. Now the Thera Bhikkhus said to the vener-

1 Dhftmakdlikaw. See our note above on VI, 17, i. Buddha-
ghosa says here, Dhfimakdlikan ti ydva samanassa Gotamassa
parinibbana-^itika-dhumo pafmayati tavakalo ti attho.

2 The whole repeated.

XI, r, 10 . ON THE COUNCIL OF RAGAGAHA.

379

1 Compare Mahavagga X, i, 8, at the end.

2 It is worthy of notice that this episode is not referred to in the
* Book of the Great Decease ’ (VI, 23-26. Compare V, 46-51).

able Ananda : ‘ That was ill done by thee, friend
Ananda, in that thou didst not ask the Blessed One
which were the lesser and minor precepts. Confess
thy fault.’

* Through forgetfulness was it, Sirs, that I did not
ask that of the Blessed One. I see no fault therein.
Nevertheless, out of my faith in you, I confess that
as a fault V

‘ This also, friend Ananda, was ill done by thee,
in that thou steppedst upon the Blessed One’s rainy-
season garment to sew it. Confess thy fault.’

‘ It was not, Sirs, through any want of respect to
the Blessed One that I did so. I see no fault
therein. Nevertheless, out of my faith in you, I
confess that as a fault.’

‘ This also, friend Ananda, was ill done by thee,
in that thou eausedst the body of the Blessed One
to be saluted by women first 1 2 , so that by their
weeping the body of the Blessed One was defiled
by tears. Confess that fault.’

‘ I did so, Sirs, with the intention that they should
not be kept beyond due time. I see no fault
therein. Nevertheless, out of my faith in you, I
confess that as a fault.’

‘ This too, friend Ananda, was ill done by thee, in
that even when a suggestion so evident and a hint
so clear were given thee by the Blessed One, thou
didst not beseech him, saying, “ Let the Blessed One
remain on for a kalpa ! Let the Happy One remain
on for a kalpa for the good and happiness of the

380

atULLAVAGGA.

XT, 1, 11.

great multitudes, out of pity for the world, for the
good and the gain and the weal of gods and men 1 ! ”
Confess that fault.’

‘ I was possessed (by the Evil One) 2 , friends,
when I refrained from so beseeching him. I see
no fault therein. Nevertheless, out of my faith in
you, I confess that as a fault.’

1 This also, friend Ananda, was ill done by thee,
in that thou exertedst thyself to procure admission
for women into the Dhamma and Vinaya proclaimed
by the T athagata 3 . Confess that fault.’

‘ T hat did I do, friends, thinking of Maha Pa^a-
pati the Gotami, the sister of the Blessed One’s
mother ; his nurse and comforter, who gave him
milk ; how she, when she who had borne him was
dead, herself suckled him as with mother’s milk.
I see no fault therein. Nevertheless, out of my
faith in you, I confess that as a fault.’

ix. Now at that time the venerable Purina was
wandering through the Southern Hills with a great
company of Bhikkhus, with five hundred Bhikkhus.
And when the Thera Bhikkhus had completed the
chanting over together of the Dhamma and the
Vinaya, he, having stayed in the Southern Hills as
long as he thought fit, went on to Rafagaha to
the Ve/uvana, to the Kalandaka Nivapa, where
the Thera Bhikkhus were, and having greeted the
Thera Bhikkhus, he took his seat on one side.

1 This refers to the conversations in the ‘ Book of the Great

Decease/ III, 1-4, and 43-60 (especially 56).

3 Pariyn/Mita-^itto. The words in parentheses are supplied
from the ‘ Book of the Great Decease/ III, 4, where see Rh. D/s
note on the spelling of the word.

3 Pabba^aztf, admission into the Order.

XI, I, 12.

ON THE COUNCIL OF RAG AG AH A.

381

When he was so seated, the Thera Bhikkhus said
to him :

‘ The Dhamma and the Vinaya, friend Purd«a,
have been chanted over together by the Thera
Bhikkhus. Do thou, then, submit thyself to and
learn the text so rehearsed by them V

‘ The Dhamma and the Vinaya, Sirs, have been
well sung by the Theras. Nevertheless, even. in
such manner as it has been heard by me, and re-
ceived by me from the very mouth of the Blessed
One, in that manner will I bear it in my memory.’

12. Now the venerable Ananda said to the Thera
Bhikkhus : ‘ The Blessed One, Sirs, said to me at the
time of his death : “ Let then the Sawzgha, Ananda,
when I am dead, impose the higher penalty on
Zhanna the Bhikkhu 1 2 .”

1 Didst thou then, friend Ananda, ask the Blessed
One what the higher penalty was ?’

‘ I did, Sirs, (and the reply was) : ‘ Let Kh anna the
Bhikkhu, Ananda, say whatever he may wish ; but
the Bhikkhus should neither speak to him, nor ex-
hort him, nor admonish him.” ’ .

‘ Do thou, then, friend Ananda, let Khzxvsxa. the
Bhikkhu know that the higher penalty has been
imposed upon him.’

‘ How can I, Sirs, do so P Passionate is that
Bhikkhu, and rough.’

1 Go then, friend Ananda, in company with a
number of other Bhikkhus.’

‘ Even so, Sirs,’ said Ananda, in assent to the
Thera Bhikkhus. And he took with him a number

1 Sangitiw upehi.

2 See c Book of the Great Decease/ VI, 4,

382

&ULLAVAGGA.

XI, i, 13.

of Bhikkhus, to wit, five hundred Bhikkhus, and em-
barked on a "boat going up stream, and disembarked
at Kosambi, and not far from king Udenas park he
took his seat at the foot of a certain tree.

13. Now at that time king Udena was enjoying
himself in the park together with the ladies of his
palace. And the ladies heard that their teacher, the
venerable Ananda, was seated at the foot of a tree
not far from the park. And they said to king
Udena :

‘ They say that our teacher, the venerable Ananda,
is seated at the foot of a tree not far from the park.
We desire, Lord, to go and see him.’ ^

< Go, then, and see the Samara Ananda.’ And
they went and saluted the venerable Ananda, and
took their seats on one side. And he instructed,
and aroused, and incited, and gladdened them with
religious discourse. And when that discourse was
concluded, they presented the venerable Ananda
with five hundred robes, and exalted and thanked
him for his discourse, and arose from their seats,
and saluted him, and keeping him on their right
sides as they passed him, they departed thence.

14. And king Udena saw the ladies coming from
the distance. And on seeing them he said to them .

‘Well, did you succeed in seeing the Samara
Ananda ? ’

‘ We saw him, Sire.’

‘ Did you present the Samara Ananda with any
gift ? ’ A

‘ We gave, Sire, to the venerable Ananda five

hundred robes.’

Then king Udena was indignant and annoyed,
and became angry, saying :

XI, i, 14. ON THE COUNCIL OF RAGAGAHA. 383

‘ How can the Samara Ananda accept so many
robes? Would he set up as a hawker in cloths, or
would he open a shop 1 ? ’

And king Udena went to where the venerable
Ananda was, and after exchanging with him the
greetings and compliments of friendship and civility,
sat down by his side. And when he was so seated,
he said to him :

‘ Did our ladies come hither, Ananda ? ’

‘ Y es, great king.’

* Did they give anything to your reverence ? ’

‘ They gave me, great king, five hundred robes.’

‘ And what does your reverence intend to do with
those five hundred robes?’

‘ I shall divide them, great king, among those of
the Bhikkhus whose robes are worn out.’

‘ And what do you intend, Ananda, to do with
the worn-out robes ? ’

‘ Of those, great king, we shall make counterpanes.’

‘ And what do you intend to do, Ananda, with the
old counterpanes ? ’

‘ Of those, great king, we shall make bolster
cases.’

‘ And what do you intend to do, Ananda, with the
old bolster cases ? ’

‘ Of those, great king, we shall make carpets.’

* And what do you intend to do, Ananda, with the
old carpets ? ’

‘ Of those, great king, we shall make towels for
the washing of the feet.’

‘ And what do you intend to do, Ananda, with the
old towels ? ’

1 Paggahika-sala, on which Buddhaghosa says nothing.

384

E’ULLAVAGGA.

T ) T 5 *

‘ Of those, great king, we shall make dusters.’

‘ And what do you intend to do, Ananda, with the
old dusters ? ’

‘ Those, great king, we shall tear in shreds, and
beat up with mud, and use them for making flooring
of clay.’

Then king U dena thought : ‘ These Sakyaputtiya
Samaras make general use of everything in a con-
scientious way, and take nothing as one man’s
peculiar property 1 .’ And he presented other five
hundred pieces of cloth to the venerable Ananda.

15. But Ananda went on to the Ghosita Arama,
and sat down then on the seat spread out for him.
And the venerable Kh anna went to -the place
where he was and saluted him, and took his seat
beside him. And when he was so seated, Ananda
said to him :

‘ The Sawgha, friend Khanna, has imposed upon
you the higher penalty.’

‘ What then, friend Ananda, is the higher penalty ?’

‘You, friend Khanna, may say to the Bhikkhus
whatever you wish ; but the Bhikkhus are neither
to speak to you, nor exhort you, nor admonish
you.’

‘ Shall I not be even a slain man, friend Ananda,
so long as I am neither spoken to, nor exhorted, nor
admonished by the Bhikkhus ? ’ said Khanna, and he
fainted and fell.

Then the venerable Kh anna, pained, grieved, and
seized with remorse through the higher penalty, re-
mained alone and separate, earnest, zealous, and
resolved. And ere long he attained to that supreme

1 Na kul§.vaw gamenti, on which Buddhaghosa says nothing.

XI, I, 1 6 .

ON THE COUNCIL OF RAGAGAHA.

385

goal 1 of the higher life for the sake of which men even
of good family go out from all. and every household
gain and comfort to become houseless wanderers —
yea, that supreme goal did he, by himself, and while
yet in this visible world, bring himself to the know-
ledge of, and continue to realise, and to see face to
face ! And he became conscious that rebirth was at
an end for him, that the higher life had been ful-
filled, that all that should be done had been accom-
plished, and that, after this present life, there would
be no beyond 2 !

So the venerable Khz.m\z. became yet another
among the Arahats. And after he had attained to
Arahatship, the venerable JV/lanna went to the
venerable Ananda, and said :

‘ Remove from me now, friend Ananda, the higher
penalty.’

‘ From the moment, friend Kh anna, that you had
realised Arahatship, from that moment was the
higher penalty removed from you.’

16. Now whereas five hundred Bhikkhus, with-
out one failing, without one more, took part in
this rehearsal of the Vinaya, therefore is that re-
hearsal of the Vinaya called ■ ‘ that of the five
hundred 3 .’ •

Here ends the Eleventh Khandhaka, on the
Rehearsal by the Five Hundred.

1 That is, Arahatship, Nirvana.

s This Nirva«a paragraph is constantly recurring (e.g. ‘Book of
the Great Decease,' V, 68 ; Mahavagga V, 1, 18 ; Sawyutta VII, 1).
3 Compare XII, 2, 9.

c c

[20]

386

KULLAVAGGA.

XII, I, I.

TWELFTH KHANDHAKA. .

On the Council of VesAlL

1 .

i. Now at that time, a century 1 after the death
of the Blessed One, the Bhikkhus of Vesali, Vaf-
■§ians, promulgated at Vesali the ten theses : — (i)
that storing salt in a horn vessel was permissible ;

(2) that the midday meal might be eaten when the
sun’s shadow showed two finger breadths after noon ;

(3) that he who intends to go into the village could
begin to eat again after he had once left off ; (4)
that a number of Bhikkhus residing within the same
.boundary might hold Uposatha separately; (5) that
a Sawgha not at unity within itself might carry out
an official act, undertaking to inform Bhikkhus of
it ; (6) that it was permissible for a Bhikkhu to do
anything adopted as a practice by his U pagg’Mya ;
(7) that curds might be eaten by one who had already
finished his midday meal ; (8) that it was permis-
sible to drink unfermented toddy ; (9) that a rug or
mat need not be of the limited size prescribed if
it had no fringe ; (10) that it was permissible to
receive gold and silver 2 .

1 As pointed out at p. xxii of our Introduction, we believe this
number ought not to be taken too literally, but to be considered
a round, number.

s The above terms are explained below, .§§ x, 10, and 2, 8 .

ON THE COUNCIL OF VESALl

Now at that time the venerable .Yasa, the son
of K&kazzz/aka, who was wandering through the
Va^gian country, arrived at V esali ; and there the
venerable Yasa stayed at the Mahivana,' in the
Kd/agara Hall.

Now at that time the Vaggian Bhikkhus of Vesali,
on Uposatha day, filled a copper pot with water and
placed it in the midst of the Bhikkhu-sawgha, and
said to such of their Vesilian lay disciples as came
there : ‘ Give, Sirs, to the Sazzzgha a kah&pazza 1 , or
half a one, or a p&da, or a m&saka. It will be
wanted for the Sawzgha, .for the provision of various
utensils.’

When they had thus spoken, the venerable Yasa,
the son of Kakawz/aka, said to the lay disciples :

‘ Do, Sirs, nothing of the kind. The use of gold
and silver is .not allowed to the Sakyaputtiya Sa-
maras. The Sakyaputtiya Sama/zas neither allow
it to be given to them, nor take charge of it. The
Sakyaputtiya Samazzas are men whose gems and
jewelry have been laid- aside, and who are without
silver and without gold.’

Though the lay disciples from Vesdll had been
thus addressed by the venerable Yasa, the son
of Kakazzz/aka, they gave money to the Sazzzgha.
And the Vardan Bhikkhus of Vesali, at the close
of the night, reserving one portion 2 , divided that
money according to the number of the Bhikkhus.

1 About a penny ; on this and the following terms, see Rh. D.’s
Ancient Coins and Measures, &c.,’ p. 6.

2 Pa/iviso, See Mah&vagga VIII, 27, 4.

C C 2

iTULLAVAGGA.

XII, I, 2.

388

‘ I have no due portion in that money. I do not
allow any money to be given to me.’

2. Then the Vaggian Bhikkhus of Vesall said
one to another ; 1 This brother, Yasa, the son of
Kaka^aka, upbraids and reviles, and renders dis-‘
satisfied believing and faithful followers. Come, let
us carry out against him the Act of Reconciliation V
And they did so.

Then the venerable Yasa, the son of Kaka^^/aka,
said to them : ‘It has been laid down, Sirs, by the
Blessed One, that a companion shall be appointed
to go as messenger with a Bhikkhu against whom
the Act of Reconciliation has been carried out 2 . Ap-
point, Sirs, a Bhikkhu, as companion messenger to
me.’ And the Vagsfian Bhikkhus of Vesali deputed
a Bhikkhu to that work, and gave him as a com-
panion messenger to the venerable Yasa.

And the venerable Yasa, taking the companion
Bhikkhu with him, entered into Vesili, and said to
the believing laymen there : .

‘ I am ' said, Sirs, to be upbraiding and reviling,
and rendering dissatisfied believing and faithful
followers, thereby that I have said what is against
the Dhamma to be against the Dhamma, and what
is Dhamma to be Dhamma, and what is against
the Vinaya to be against the Vinaya, and what is
Vinaya to be Vinaya.

3. ‘ Now the Blessed One was once, Sirs, staying
at Savatthi in the Gbtavana, Anatha Pi^ika’s
pleasure-ground. And there, Sirs, the Blessed One
exhorted the Bhikkhus, and said :

1 Pa/is&ra«iya-kamma. See -/STullavagga I, 18.

2 On Anuduta, see iTullavagga I, 20-22.

XII, X, 3-

ON THE COUNCIL OF VESAlL

389

‘ “ There are, O Bhikkhus, four obstructions of
the sun and moon, by which when the sun and moon
are affected, they give no heat and they give no
light, and they are no longer glorious. And what
are the four ? They are clouds and fog and dusty
smoke and Rahu 1 , by which when the sun and the
moon are affected they give neither heat nor light
nor sheen. Just so, O Bhikkhus, there are four
stains by which when Samaras and Br&hmans are
affected they give neither heat nor light nor sheen.
And what are the four ? There are some Samaras
and Brahmans who drink strong drink, and things
intoxicating, abstaining not therefrom 2 . This is the
first of such stains. And further, O Bhikkhus, there
are some Samaras and Brahmans who .practise
sexual intercourse, and abstain not therefrom. This
is the second of such stains. And further, O "Bhik-
khus, there are some Sama?2as and ‘Brahmans who
accept silver and gold, abstaining not from the use
thereof. This is the third of such stains. And
lastly, O Bhikkhus, there are some Samaras and-
Brahmans who gain their livelihood by low arts 3 ,
abstaining not from such means of life. This is the
fourth of such stains.”

‘ Thus spoke, Sirs, the Blessed One : and when
the Happy One had thus spoken, the Master further
said :

‘ “ Stained by lust and malice, some Sama?2as and
Brahmans,

1 That is, eclipse.

2 It is’ curious that this matter is not, like all the following, re-
ferred to in the Silas. See Rh. D.’s ‘Buddhist Suttas,’ p. 190.

8 Those, namely, which are set out in the MaM Sila (Rh. D.’s ■
‘ Buddhist Suttas,’ pp. 196-203).

390

XULLAVAGGA.

XII, i, 4.

Men blinded by ignorance, praise things that
seem to have delight.

Strong drink they drink and fierce, indulge in
sensual acts,'

Devoid of wisdom, silver and gold they take.

And by low arts some Samaras and Brahmans
live.

Stains are such actions called by the Buddha
of the Solar race,

Stains — by which defiled some Samaras and
Br&hmans,'

Impure brutes and unclean, give neither heat
nor light.

Covered rather by darkness, purblind, enslaved
by craving lusts,

They enlarge the realm of death 1 , and dread
rebirth they gain.”

‘ It is for upholding this opinion that I, Sirs, have
been said to be upbraiding and reviling and render-
ing dissatisfied believing and faithful followers, in
that I have said what is against the Dhamma to be
against the Dhamma, and what is Dhamma to be
Dhamma ; what is against the Vinaya to be against
the Vinaya, and what is Vinaya to be Vinaya.

4. ‘ And once the Blessed One was staying, Sirs,
at Ra^agaha, in the V e/uvana, at the Kala^ahka
Nivapa. Now at that time among the royal atten-
dants sitting together in the women’s apartment in
the palace, the following -saying was heard : “Silver
and gold is allowed to the Sakyaputtiya Samaras.

1 That is, by being repeatedly reborn they continually die.
Va<ft?Aenti ka/asin ti punappunawz kalevara-nikkhipamana-
bhCliniOT va*&%enti, says Buddhaghosa. The word occurs at
(jrataka 1, 146.

XII, i, 4.

ON THE COUNCIL OF VESALt.

391

The Sakyaputtiya Samaras accept it, and take it in
charge.” Now at that time Ma»iM/aka, a village
headman, was present. And he said to the people
there: “Say not so, Sirs. Neither is silver and
gold allowed to the Sakyaputtiya Samaras, nor do
they accept it, nor take it in charge. The Sakya-
puttiya Samaras are men who have laid aside gems
and jewelry, and are without silver, and without
gold.” And the headman, Ma»L£ft/aka, succeeded
in satisfying them.

‘ Then the headman, Ma«i^d/aka, went to the
place where the Blessed One was and saluted him,
and took his seat on one side. . And he told the
Blessed One the whole matter 1 , and said :

“‘Now am I, Lord, in maintaining as I did, one
who speaks according to the word of the Blessed
One, one who does not falsely represent the Blessed
One, one who does not put forth minor matters in
the place of the true Dhamma ? And is there
anything that leads to blame in such discussion, this
way and that, as touching the observance of the
rules of the order 2 ? ”

.“‘Most certainly, MamM/aka, in maintaining
thus you speak in accordance with my word, and
do not represent me falsely, nor put forth minor
matters as the true Dhamma. Nor is there any-
thing leading to blame in such discussions. For
gold and silver is not allowed, Ma^iiu/aka, to the
Sakyaputtiya Samawas, nor ought they to accept it,
nor take it in charge. Men who have laid aside
gems and jewelry are the Sakyaputtiya Samaras,

1 The whole is repeated in the text.

2 The whole of this speech recurs, nearly word for word, in the
MaMvagga VI, 31, 4.

392

JTULLAVAGGA.

XII, i, 5 .

men without silver and without gold. For to
whomsoever, Mam/£fi/aka, gold and silver are
allowed, to him also the five kinds of sensual
pleasure 1 are allowed. And to whomsoever these
five kinds of pleasure are allowed, him you may
know of a certainty to be'following neither the rule
of the Samaras, nor the rule of the sons of Sakya.
Although, Ma»i/£u/aka, I have said that he who is
in need of grass may seek for grass, and he who is
in need of wood-may seek for wood, and he who is in
need of a conveyance may seek for a conveyance,
and he who is in need of a servant may seek for a
servant ; yet have I never said in any way what-
ever that gold or silver may be sought after of
accepted.”

‘ It is for maintaining this opinion that I, Sirs,
have been said to be upbraiding and reviling and
rendering dissatisfied believing and faithful fol-
lowers, in that I have said what is against the
Dhamma to be against the Dhamma, and what is
Dhamma to be Dhamma ; that what is against the
Vinaya is against the Vinaya, and what is Vinaya is
Vinaya.'

5. ‘ And once, Sirs, the Blessed One at the same
place, at Ra^agaha, on the occasion of the matter of
Upananda, the Sakyan, distinctly laid down a pre-
cept by which gold and silver were forbidden 2 .

‘It is for maintaining this opinion that -I, Sirs,
have been said to be upbraiding and reviling and
rendering dissatisfied believing and faithful fol-
lowers, in that I have said what is against the

1 Compare ifullavagga VII, 1,2.

2 This is set out in full in the Sutta Vibhanga in the Intro-
duction to the 1 8th Nissaggiya Paftttiya.

XII, I, 7 .

ON THE COUNCIL OF VESAlL

393.

Dhamma to be against the Dhamma, and what is
Dhamma to be Dhamma ; that what is against the
Vinaya is against the Vinaya, and what is Vinaya
is Vinaya.’

6. When he had thus spoken, the lay brethren
said to Yasa, the son of Kakawzfaka : ‘ There is but
one, Sirs 1 , who is a Sakyaputtiya Samara, our
master, Yasa, the son of KakaWaka. All the rest
are no Samaras, neither Sakyaputtiyas. Let the
venerable Yasa, the son of Kaka^aka, dwell among
us. We will exert ourselves to provide him with
robes, and food, and medicine, and the necessaries
for the sick.’

Then the venerable Yasa, the son of KcLka^daka,
having gained over the lay brethren, returned with
the companion Bhikkhu to the Arama.

7. And the Vagfian Bhikkhus of Vesali asked the
companion Bhikkhu : ‘ Did Yasa, the son of Ka-
ka/zahka, obtain, Sir, the forgiveness of the la*y
brethren ? ’ .

‘ Evil, Sirs, hath been wrought against us. Yasa,
the son of Kakazzahka, and he alone has been de-
cided to be a Sakyaputtiya Samara, and all of us
neither Samaras nor Sakyaputtiyas.’

Then the Vaj^ian Bhikkhus of Vesali said :
‘The venerable Yasa, the son of Kakazzz/aka,
without being deputed by us, has proclaimed to
. laymen (a false doctrine ) 2 : Come, let us carry
out the Act of Suspension 3 against him.’ And

1 They are speaking to Yasa and the anudftta.

2 This cannot refer to the 9th Pa&ttiya, which only speaks of
making known grievous offences. Anguttara II, 5, 2 refers to
laymen as well as to samazzeras.

s Ukkhepaniya-kamma. See JTullavagga I, 25.

394

2TULLAVAGGA.

XII, i, 8.

they assembled together with the intention of
doing so.

But the venerable Yasa, the son of K&ka^aka,
rose up into the sky and descended at Kosambl.
And he sent messengers to the Bhikkhus of the
Western country, and of Avanti, and of the Southern
country 1 , saying, ‘Let your reverences come! We
must take in charge this legal question before what
is not Dhamma is spread abroad, and what is
Dhamma is put aside ; before what is not Vinaya is
spread abroad, and what is Vinaya is put aside ;
before those who argue against the Dhamma be-
come powerful, and those who argue in favour of
the Dhamma become weak ; before those who
argue against the Vinaya become powerful, and
those who argue in favour of the Vinaya become
weak.’

8. Now at that time the venerable Sambhuta
Si^avcLsi 2 3 was dwelling on the Ahoganga' Hill 8 . And
thither the venerable Y asa, the son of. Kctkamfaka,
went ; and on his arrival he saluted the venerable
Sambhhta Sa^avasi, and took his seat on one side :
and being so seated he said to him : ■

‘Lord, these Va^ian Bhikkhus of V esali have

1 On these terms, compare note on Mahavagga VII, x, x.

2 Sawavasi is, literally, he who wears a hempen dress. In the
traditions of the Sanskrit Buddhist literature we find mentioned a
Sfi«av&sika, said to be a predecessor, in the teacher and pupil line,
of Upagupta (Wassilief, p. 44). The Nepalese call him Sowavasi
(RajendraMl Mitra, ‘ Sanskrit Buddhist Literature of Nepttl,’ p. 10).
He is the hero of the Sawavisi Avadana part of the Bodhisatva
Avadtna Kalpaiata (Mitra, p. 67, Bendall ‘ Catalogue of Cambridge
MSS.,’ p. 42), where the name is explained: ‘I wished for an
ochre-coloured robe (so»a) ; hence I was called Sawavfisi.’

3 See, for the position of this mountain, our note last quoted.

XII, i, 9«

ON’ THE COUNCIL OF VEsAlI

395

put forward ten theses.’ And he told him what
they were l 2 , and added : ‘ Come now, Lord, let us
take in charge this last question before what is not
Dhamma is spread abroad, and what is Dhamma is
put aside ; before what is not Vinaya is spread
abroad, and what is Vinaya is put aside ; before
those who argue against the Dhamma become
powerful, and those who argue in favour of the
Dhamma become weak ; before those who argue
against the Vinaya become powerful, and those who
argue in favour of the Vinaya become weak.’

‘ Even so. Lord,’ said the venerable Sambhuta
ScL«avisi, in assent to the venerable Yasa Kaka^-
tfaka-putta.

Then about sixty Bhikkhus from the Western
country, all of whom were hermits, all of whom
lived only on alms, all of whom dressed only in cast-
off clothes, and kept only three robes, and all of
whom were Arahats, assembled together at the
Ahoganga Hill. And about eighty-eight from
Avanti and the Southern country, some of whom
were hermits, and some of whom lived only on alms,
and some of whom dressed only in' cast-off clothes,
and some of whom kept only three robes, but all of
whom were Arahats, met together with them on the
Ahoganga Hill.

9. And the Thera Bhikkhus, consulting together,
came to this conclusion : ‘ This legal question, now,
is hard and subtle. How can we obtain such sup-
port that we may have the greater power at the
decision thereof??’

1 In the text the full words of I, 1 are here repeated.

2 Compare below, XII, a, 1.

39 6

JTULLAVAGGA.

XII, i, io.

Now at that time the venerable Revata was
dwelling at Soreyya, and he was wise in the tra-
ditions, one who had learned the Agamas (the four
Nikayas), and knew by heart the Dhamma, the Vi-
naya, and the Matikas ; intelligent, discreet, and wise,
modest, conscientious, devoted to the precepts h And •
the Thera Bhikkhus thought that if they could gain
him over to their side, they would attain their end.

And the venerable Revata, by the divine ear,
clear and surpassing that of men, heard the Thera
Bhikkhus as they were thus consulting together ;
and he thought : ‘ This legal question is both hard
and subtle, it would not become me to hold back
therefrom. But even now those Bhikkhus (the
Vagrans) will be coming. It would be unpleasant
travelling for me were I to fall in with them. Let
me go on before them.’

So the venerable Revata went from Soreyya to
Sawkassa. And when the Thera Bhikkhus went to
Soreyya, and asked: ‘Where is the venerable Re-
vata?’ they said : ‘ He is gone to Sawkassa.’

Now the venerable Revata had gone on from
Sawkassa to Ka?makugfa. And when the Thera
Bhikkhus came to Sawkassa, and asked : ‘ Where is
the venerable Revata ? ’ they said : ‘ He is gone on
to ’Ka.nna.kugga.’ And in the same way they fol-
lowed him thither, and to Udumbara, and to Agga-
lapura, and to Saha/ati, and there they met with the
venerable Revata.

io. And the venerable Sambhuta Sa^avasi said
to the venerable Y asa, the son of Kika^^aka :

1 These adjectives have occurred above at MaMvagga X, x, 2,
and ^Tullavagga I, 11, x.

■XII, I, IO. ON THE COUNCIL OF VESALt. 397

‘ Friend, the brother Revata is wise in the tradi-
tions, has learnt the Agamas, knows by heart the
Dhamma, the Vinaya, and the Matikas, he is intelli-
gent, discreet, and wise, modest, conscientious, and
devoted to the precepts. ' If we ask the venerable
Revata a puzzling question, he is capable of spending
the whole night on' that one question. And even
now the venerable Revata will call upon a Bhikkhu
who is an intoner 1 , and a pupil of his. Do you,
therefore, when the Bhikkhu has concluded, go to
the venerable Revata and ask him concerning these
ten theses (points).’

‘Even so, Sir,’ said the venerable Yasa, the son
of KAkaztflhka, in assent to the venerable Sambhuta
SiTzav&sk

And the venerable Revata called upon the
Bhikkhu, the pupil of his, the intoner. And when
the Bhikkhu had concluded, the venerable Yasa, the
son of KAkaWaka, went to the venerable Revata,
'and saluted him, and took his seat beside him.
And, so seated, he said to the venerable Revata 2 :

‘ Is the horn-salt-license, Lord, allowable ?’

‘ What, Sir, is this horn-salt-license ? ’

‘ Is it allowable, Lord, to carry about salt in a
horn with the intention of putting it into food which
has not been salted ? ’

‘ No, Sir, it is not allowable.’

‘ Is the two-inch-license, Lord, allowable?’

‘ What, Sir, is this two-inch-license ? ’

‘ Is it allowable, Lord, to eat the midday meal

1 SarabhawakaM. See our note above at .STullavagga V, 3, 2.

2 The whole of the following questions and answers recur below
at XII, 2 , 8, where the reasons of the answers also appear.

xullavagga.

XII, i, 10.

398

beyond the right time, provided only that, the shadow
has not yet turned two inches ? ’

‘ No, Sir, it is not allowable.’

< Is the village-trip-license, Lord, allowable.

‘ What, Sir, is this village-trip-license ?’•

< is it allowable, Lord, for one who has once
' finished his meal, and refused any more, to eat food

which has not been left over, on the ground that he
is about to proceed into the village ?

« No, Sir, it is not allowable.’ , j

‘ Is the circuit-license, Lord, allowable?

* What, Sir, is this circuit-license ? ’

‘ Is it allowable, Lord, for a number of Bhikkhus
who dwell within the same circuit, within the same
boundary, to hold separate Uposathas ?

‘ No, Sir, it is not allowable. ;

< is the indemnity-license, Lord, allowable .

‘ What, Sir, is this indemnity-license ? ’

« Is it allowable, Lord, for a Sawgha, which is not
legally constituted 1 , to perform an official act on the
©round that they will afterwards obtain the sanction
of such Bhikkhus who may subsequently arrive .

‘ No, Sir, it is not allowable.’ •

‘Is the precedent-license, Lord, allowable?

* What, Sir, is this precedent-license ? ’

‘ Is it allowable, Lord, to do a thing on the ground
that, “ My preceptor (upa^/zaya) has practised this;
or my teacher (Mariya) has practised that ?

‘ In some cases, Sir, this is allowable, and in

some not 2 .’.

1 Vaggena. See our note on the 21st Pa&ttiya, and Xulla-

vasrga V, 2, x. ■ .....

* That is, of course, according as the thing enjoined is, or is not,

XII, i } 10.

ON THE COUNCIL OF VEsAlI.

399

£

5

I

I

t

I

L

* Is the churn-license, Lord, allowable ?’

‘ What, Sir, is this churn-license ? 5

‘ Is it allowable, Lord, for one who has once
finished his meal, and has refused any more, to
drink milk not left over from the meal, on the
ground that it has left the condition of milk, and has
not yet reached the condition of curds 1 ?

‘ No, Sir, it is not allowable.’

‘ Is it allowable, Lord, to drink toddy ? ’

‘ What, Sir, is this toddy ? ’

‘ Is it allowable, Lord, to drink spirits which have
left the condition of not being spirits, and yet have
not acquired intoxicating properties 2 ?’

‘ No, Sir, it ds not allowable?’

‘Isa rug or mat (when it is beyond the prescribed
size) lawful, Lord, because it is unfringed ? ’

' No, Sir, it is not allowable.’

‘ Is gold and silver, Lord, allowable ? ’

‘ No, Sir, it is not allowable.’ .

‘ These are the ten theses, Lord, which these
Vagfian Bhikkhus of V esali have put forth. Come,
Lord, let us take this legal question in hand before
that which is not Dhamma is spread abroad, and
that which is Dhamma is put aside ; before that
which is not Vinaya is spread abroad, and that which
is Vinaya is put aside; before those who argue
against the Dhamma become powerful, and those

lawful EkaMo kappatt ti ida ?n dhammika^ akinmm sandhaya
vutta m, says Buddhaghosa.

1 That is, which is neither liquid nor solid : something appa-
rently like buttermilk.

2 It is a question constantly arising under the excise laws in
India and Ceylon, whether the liquor in the case has become
arrack, or is only arrack in the making, and unfermented. This
last is called unfermented toddy.

400 XULLAVAGGA. XII, 2 , 1 .

who argue in favour of the Dhamma become weak ;
before those who argue against the Vinaya become
powerful, and those who argue in favour of the
Vinaya become weak.’

‘Even so, Sir,’ said the venerable Revata, in assent
to the venerable Yasa, the son of KakaWaka.

. * • ,

Here ends the First Portion for Recitation.

2 .

1. Now the Vaggian Bhikkhus of Vesali heard
the rumour : ‘Yasa, they say, the son of K&kandaka,
wishing to take this legal question in hand, is seek-
ing about for support, and support they say he is
succeeding in getting.’ And they thought : ‘ This
legal question, now, is hard and subtle. How can
we obtain such support that we may have the
greater power at the decision thereof 1 ? ’

And they thought: ‘The venerable Yasa, who
dwells at Soreyya, is wise in the traditions, and is
one who has learnt the Agamas, who knows by
heart the Dhamma, the Vinaya, the Matikas, is in-
telligent, discreet, and wise, modest, conscientious,
and devoted to the precepts. If we could gain him
over to our side, we should attain our end.’

Then the Va^ian Bhikkhus of Vesali got to-
gether much property, requisites, a number of things
of the Samaras’ life — to wit, bowls and robes, and
rugs, and needlecases, and girdles, and filters, and
regulation-pots 2 . And, taking 'this property with

1 Compare above, XII, 1, 9.

1 On Dhamma-karaka, see our note at .STullavagga V, 13, x.

XII, 2, 3-

ON THE COUNCIL OF VESAlL

401

them, they went up stream by boat to Sahaf Ati, and
there disembarked, and took their meal at the foot
of a certain tree.

2. Now to the venerable Sa//za, who retired apart
and was plunged in meditation, there occurred this
doubtful problem : £ Are the Bhikkhus of the East,
or the Bhikkhus of the West, the more in accordance
with the Dhamma in the opinion that they hold ? ’
And having gone over the Dhamma and the Vinaya in
his mind, he came to the conclusion, ‘ The Bhikkhus
of the East are not, and the Bhikkhus of the West
are, in accordance with the Dhamma in the opinion
that they hold.’

And a certain one of the deities in the Pure Abode 1
perceived how this doubtful problem had arisen in
the venerable Sa//za’s mind, and as quickly as a
strong man could stretch forth his bent arm,, or draw
it in again when it was outstretched, so quickly did
that deity vanish from the Pure Abode, and ap-
peared before the venerable Sa//za ; saying to him :

‘ Thou art quite right, Sa//za ; it is the Eastern
Bhikkhus whose opinions are against the Dhamma,
and the Western Bhikkhus whose opinions accord
therewith. Do thou, therefore, O Sa//za, even as
the Dhamma is, so take thy stand ! ’

* Both formerly, O deity, and now, also, do I take
my stand even as the Dhamma is. Notwithstand-
ing, I shall not make manifest my opinion until (the
Sawzgha) shall have appointed me (judge) over this
question V

3. Now the Vaggian Bhikkhus of Vesili, taking
with them the aforesaid property, went to the place

1 The Heaven, so called.
[20]

Compare below, § 6.

rULLAVAGGA.

XII, 2, 3.

402

where the venerable Revata was, and said to him :

« Let the venerable Thera receive at our hands these

requisites of a Samara’s life.’ .

But he refused to receive it, saying, ^ Not so, my
friends. 1 have all the things 1 I want.

Now at that time a Bhikkhu named Uttar a who
had been twenty years admitted into the Order •
was the attendant upon the venerable Revata. And
the Vaoman Bhikkhus of Vesall went to him, and
said: *Let your reverence receive at our han s
these requisites of a Samara s life.

But he made the same reply.

Then they said: ‘ People used to offer such re-
quisites to the Blessed One. If he received them,
they were happy. If he did not receive them, they
used to offer them to the venerable Ananda, saym & ,

- Let the venerable Thera receive these requisites
of a Samara’s life : that will be just as if the Blessed
One had received them.” Let the venerable Uttara
receive these things : that will be as if the Thera

had received them.’ t ,

Then the venerable Uttara, being thus importuned
by the' Vaffiaa Bhikkhus of Vesfili, accepted one robe,
saying, ‘You may tell me, friends, what you want.

‘ Let the venerable Uttara say thus much for us
to the Thera : “ Let the venerable Thera say thus
much in the meeting of the Sa^gha-‘ It is in the
regions of the East that the Buddhas, the Blessed
Ones, are born. It is the Bhikkhus of the East
who hold opinions in accord with the Dhamma,
whereas the Bhikkhus of the West do not.

1 Literally, ‘ I have the three robes.’ ,

* Visativasso; that is, since his upasampada.

XII, 2, 4.

ON THE COUNCIL OF VESALt.

1 Pawamesi. That is, permanently from attendance upon him.
Compare Mahavagga I, 27, 2, where the word is used of the
formal dismissal or turning away of a pupil.

2 Garu-nissaya?» garchdma; on which Buddhaghosa has
nothing, though the phrase does not occur elsewhere in the Khan-
dhakas.

8 Compare the 63rd Pii’ittiya.

D d 2

1 Even so, Sirs,’ said the venerable Uttara, in
assent to the Vaggian Bhikkhus of Vesali. And he
went to Revata, and told him what they had said.

‘ Thou urgest me, O Bhikkhu, to that which is
against the Dhamma,’ said the Thera, and sent away
the venerable Uttara 1 2 .

And the Vaggian Bhikkhus of Vesali said to the
venerable U ttara : ‘ What, friend U ttara, did the
Thera say ? ’

‘ It is an evil you have wrought me, Sirs. The
Thera has sent me away, saying, “ Thou urgest
me, O Bhikkhu, to what is against the Dhamma.” 1

‘ Are you not, Sir, of full age, of twenty years
(since your upasampada) ? ’

‘ Y es, Sirs, I am.’

‘Then do we take the nissaya under you as
your pupils V

4. Now the Sawgha met together with the in-
tention of deciding the legal question. And the
venerable Revata laid a resolution before the
Sawgha, saying,

‘ Let the venerable Sawgha hear me. If we
were to settle this question, it might be that those
Bhikkhus who had at first taken the matter in hand
might raise it again 3 . If it seem meet to the
Sawgha, let the Sawgha settle it at that place
where it arose.’

404

XULLAVAGGA.

XIX, 2, 5.

Then the Thera Bhikkhus went to Ves&ll, with
the intention of settling the matter there.

Now at that time the eldest Thera in the world,
Sabbakdmi by name, one who was of a hundred and
twenty years’ standing from the date of his upasam-
padi, and who had been a pupil 1 of the venerable
Ananda, was living at Vesali. And the venerable
Revata said to the venerable Sambhuta Sa^avasi :

‘ I shall go to that Vihara in which the Thera
Sabbakimi dwells. Do you go betimes to the
venerable Sabbakami, and question him as touching
these ten points.’

‘ Even so, Lord,’ said the venerable Sambhuta
Si#avdsi, in assent to the venerable Revata.

And the venerable Revata came to that Vihara
in which the venerable Sabbakami lived ; and a
sleeping-place was made ready for the former in the
inner chamber, and for the latter in front thereof.
And the venerable Revata, thinking, ‘This Thera,
though so old, does not care to sleep,’ did not go to
rest. And the venerable Sabbakami, thinking,

‘ This Bhikkhu, though a traveller and tired, does
not care to sleep,’ did not go to rest.

5. Then when the night was far spent, the vene-
rable Sabbakami said to the venerable Revata :

‘ By what manner of life, beloved one, have you
lived now these so many years ?’

‘ By continuing in the sense of love, honoured
friend, have I continued thus so many years.’

‘ They say that you have continued thus, beloved
one, by easiness of life : and that indeed, beloved one,
is an easy life, (I mean) the continuing in love.’

1 Literally, ‘had dwelt in the same Vihara with.'

XII, 2, 6.

ON THE COUNCIL OF VESALt.

405

‘Even long. ago, Sir, when I was a layman, was
much love laid up in my heart, therefore is it that
now also I live much in the sense of love, and in-
deed since long I have attained to Arahatship. And
by what manner of life have you lived now these
many years ? ’

‘ By continuing in the sense of the emptiness (of
worldly things) have I, beloved one, lived these
many years.’

‘ They say that you, honoured friend, have con-
tinued thus by the sense of being a man born to
greatness 1 ; and that indeed, honoured friend, is the
same feeling, (I mean) the sense of the emptiness
of things.’

‘ Even long ago, beloved one, when I was a lay-
man, had I a strong sense of the emptiness of
things, therefore is it that now also I live much in
that feeling, and indeed since long I have attained to
Arahatship.’

6. Now 2 this conversation between the Thera
Bhikkhus was still unfinished when the venerable
Sambhuta Sawavasi arrived there. And he went up
to the venerable Sabbakami, and saluted him, and
took his seat beside him. And, so seated, he said
to the venerable Sabbakami :

‘These Va^gian Bhikkhus of Ves&li have put
forth in Vesalt these ten points ; ’ and he told them
all 3 . ‘Now you, O Thera, have mastered much
Dhamma and Vinaya at the feet of your preceptor.

1 Mahapurisa. On the subsequent history of which word, see
Senart’s ‘ Ldgende du Buddha,’ pp. 54, 107.

2 iTarahi. Compare ‘Book of the Great Decease,’ III, 53;
Childers, p. 32.

3 The text repeats XII, 1,1.

1

I

1

406

.KULLAVAGGA.

XII, 2,

What, then, is the conclusion to which you, O Thera,
come as you lay over in your mind the Dhamma
and the Vinaya ; — whose opinion is in accordance
with the Dhamma, that of the Bhikkhus of the East,
or that of the Bhikkhus of the West ? ’

4 You also, Sir, have mastered much Dhamma and
Vinaya at the feet of your preceptor. What, then,
is the conclusion to which you, Sir, come as you lay
over in your mind the Dhamma and the Vinaya ; —
whose opinion is in accordance with the Dhamma,
that of the Bhikkhus of the East, or that of the
Bhikkhus of the W est ? ’

1 The conclusion to which I come, Lord, as I so
lay over in my mind the Dhamma and the Vinaya,
is this — that the Bhikkhus of the East hold an
opinion that is not in accord with the Dhamma,
while the Bhikkhus of the West are in accord with
the Dhamma. Notwithstanding, I do not intend to
make manifest my opinion until (the Sa^gha) shall
have appointed me (referee) over this question V

‘ The conclusion to which I also have come, Sir, as
I lay over in my mind the Dhamma and the Vi-
naya, is this — that the Bhikkhus of the East hold an
opinion that is not in accordance with the Dhamma,
while the Bhikkhus of the West are in accord with
the Dhamma. Notwithstanding, I do not intend to
make manifest my opinion until (the Sawgha) shall
have appointed me (referee) over this question.’

7. Then the Sawgha met together with the in-
tention of enquiring into this legal question. But
while they were enquiring into it, both was much
pointless speaking brought forth and also the sense

J Compare above, § 2.

XII, 2,7-

ON THE COUNCIL OF VESAlI.

407

in no single speech was clear h Then the venerable
Revata laid a resolution before the Sawzgha :

‘ Let the venerable Sa»zgha hear me. Whilst we
are discussing this legal question, there is both much
pointless speaking, and no sense is clear in any
single speech. If it seem meet to the Sawzgha, let
the Sawgha settle this legal question by referring it
(to a jury) V

And he chose four Bhikkhus of the East and four
Bhikkhus of the West — from the Bhikkhus of the
East the venerable Sabbakami, and the venerable
Sa//za, and the venerable Khugga-sobhita, and the
venerable V dsabha-g&mika — and from the Bhikkhus
of the West, the venerable Revata, and the venerable
Sambhuta Sazzavasi, and the venerable Yasa, the son
of Kakazzzfaka, and the venerable Sumana. Then the
venerable Revata laid a resolution before the Sawzgha :

‘ Let the venerable Sawzgha hear me. During
the enquiry into this matter there has been much
pointless talk among us, and in no single utterance
is the sense clear. If it seem meet to the Sawgha,
let the Sa#zgha delegate four Bhikkhus of the East
and four Bhikkhus of the West to settle this
question by reference. This is the resolution.

‘ Let the venerable Savzgha hear me. During
the enquiry into this matter there has been much
pointless talk among us, and the sense in any single
utterance is not clear. The S&mgha. delegates four
Bhikkhus of the East and four Bhikkhus of the
West to settle this question by reference. Whoso-

1 So above in /bullavagga IV, 14, 19, where the proceeding
adopted in the subsequent sentences is laid down for use on such
an occasion.

2 Ubb&hik&ya. See the passage quoted in the last note.

408

rULLAVAGGA.

XII, 2, 8 .

ever of the venerable ones approves thereof, let him
keep silence. Whosoever approves not thereof, let
him speak. The delegation is made accordingly.
The Samgha approves thereof. Therefore is it
silent. Thus do I understand.’

Now at that time a Bhikkhu named A/ita, of ten
years’ standing, was the reciter of the Patimokkha to
the Samgha. Him did the Samgha appoint as seat
regulator 1 * to the Thera Bhikkhus.

Then the Thera Bhikkhus thought, ‘ At what
place, now, ought we to settle this legal question ? ’
And it occurred to them: ‘ This Vdlika Ar&ma is a
pleasant place, quiet and undisturbed. Let us settle
the matter there.’ And thither the Thera Bhikkhus
proceeded to enquire into the question.

8. Then the venerable Revata laid a resolution
before the Sawgha 3 : ‘ Let the venerable Samgha
hear me. If it seem meet to the Samgha, I will
question the venerable Sabbakami as touching the
Vinaya.’ And the venerable Sabbakami laid a reso-
lution before the Samgha : 1 If it seem meet to the
Samgha, I, when asked by Revata touching the
Vinaya, will give reply.’

And the venerable Revata said to the vener-
able Sabbakdmi: ‘Is the horn-salt-license, Lord,
allowable ?’

1 Asana-paffmapakaw.. This office is not mentioned in the
other Khandhakas. We should expect to find it at K iillavagga VI,

21,2. The reason of this is that it is no office of authority. The
different referees would take their seats in the order of their
seniority, and all that the ilsana-pafmapaka would have to do
would be to see that they were provided with everything they re-
quired (it was not much, chiefly mats or rugs to sit upon) in the
hall or grove where they met.

’ Here, of course, consisting of the eight referees.

XII, 2, 8.

ON THE COUNCIL OF VESALt.

409

‘What, Sir, is this horn-salt-license V
‘Is it allowable, Lord, to carry about salt in a
horn with the intention of putting it into food which
has not been salted ? ’

‘ No, Sir, it is not allowable.’

‘ Where was such a claim rejected ? ’

‘ At S&vatthi, in the Sutta Vibhanga.’

‘ Of what offence is the person, who does so,
guilty ? ’

‘ Of Pa/fittiya, in eating food which has been
put by V

‘ Let the venerable Sawgha hear me. This first
point, having been examined into by the Sawgha,
has been found to be false Dhamma and false
Vinaya, and not contained in the teaching of the
Master. Thus do I cast the first vote.’

‘ Is the two-inch-license, Lord, allowable?’

‘ What, Sir, is this two-inch-license ? ’

‘ Is it allowable, Lord, to eat the midday meal be-
yond the right time, provided only that the shadow
of the sun has not yet turned two inches ? ’

‘ No, Sir, it is not allowable.’

‘ Where has such a claim been rejected ? ’

‘ At Ra^agaha, in the Sutta Vibhanga.’

‘ Of what offence is he, who does so, guilty ?’

‘ Of P&iittiya, in eating at the wrong time V
‘ Let the venerable Saswgha hear me. This
second point, having been examined into by the
Sawgha, has been found to be false Dhamma and
false Vinaya, and not contained in the teaching of
the Master. Thus do I cast the second vote.’

‘ Is the village-trip-license, Lord, allowable ?’

1 PMttiya XXXVIII.

P^ittiya XXXVII.

‘ What, Sir, is this village-trip-license ?’

< is it allowable for one who has once finished his
meal, and has refused any more, to eat food which
has not been left over, on the ground that he is
about to proceed into the village ?

‘ No, Sir, it is not allowable.’

‘ Where was such a claim rejected ? ’

‘ At Sivatthi, in the Sutta Vibhanga.’

‘ Of what offence is he, who does so, guilty ?

‘ Of PaX’ittiya, in eating food which has not been
left over 1 2 .’

* Let the venerable Sa»zgha hear me. This third
point, having been examined into by the Sa/wgha,
has been found to be false Dhamma and false
Vinaya, and not contained in the teaching of the
Master. Thus do I cast the third vote.’

‘ Is the circuit-license, Lord, allowable?

‘ What, Sir, is this circuit-license ? ’

‘ Is it allowable, Lord, for a number of Bhikkhus
who dwell within the same circuit, within the same
boundary, to hold separate Uposathas ?

1 No, Sir, it is not allowable.’

‘ Where was such a claim rejected ?

‘ At Rifagaha,-in the Uposatha Samyutta ^

‘ Of what offence is he, who does so, guilty ?’

‘ Of Dukka/a, in neglecting the Vinaya.

‘ Let the venerable Samgha hear me. This
fourth point, having been examined into by the
Sawgha, has been found to be false Dhamma and
false Vinaya, and not contained in the teaching of
the Master. Thus do I cast the fourth vote.’

1 Paiattiya XXXV.

2 Sawyutta must here be used for Khandhaka. The passage
referred to is Mahavagga II (the Uposatha Khandhaka), 8, 3.

XII, 2, 8. ON THE COUNCIL OF VESAlI. 411

■ Is the indemnity-license, Lord, allowable?’

‘ What, Sir, is this indemnity-license ? ’

‘ Is it allowable, Lord, for a Samgha which is not
legally constituted to perform an official act, on the
ground that they will afterwards obtain the sanction
of such Bhikkhus as subsequently arrive ? ’

‘ No, Sir, it is not allowable.’

‘ Where was such a claim rejected ? ’

‘ In the Afampeyyaka section, in the body of the
Vinaya V

‘ Of what offence is he, who does so, guilty ?’

‘ Of Dukka?a, in neglecting the Vinaya.’

‘ Let the venerable Sawgha hear me. This fifth
point, having been examined into by the Sawgha,
has been found to be false Dhamma and false
Vinaya, and not contained in the teaching of the
Master. Thus do I cast this fifth vote.’

1 Is the precedent-license, Lord, allowable?’

‘ What, Sir, is this precedent-license ?’

‘ Is it allowable, Lord, to do a thing on the ground
that “ My preceptor (upa^Vaya) has practised this,”
or “ My teacher (aVariya) has practised that ? ” ’

‘ In some cases, Sir, it is allowable, and in some not 1 2 .’

‘ Let the venerable Sawgha hear me. This sixth
point, having been examined into by the Samgha.,
has been found to be false Dhamma and false
Vinaya, and not contained in the teaching of the
Master. Thus do I cast this sixth vote.’

‘ Is the churn-license. Lord, allowable?'

‘What, Sir, is this churn-license?’

1 Vinaya-vatthu. Here used as a title, apparently of the
Khandhakas. The passage referred to is in the -£"ampeyyaka
Khandhaka (MaMvagga IX, 3, 5).

* See the note above on XII, 1, 10.

:

I

j

f

I

i

412

CTJLLAVAGGA.

XIT, 2 , 8.

‘Is it allowable, Lord, for one who has once
finished his meal, and has refused any more, to
drink milk not left over from the meal, on the
ground that it has left the condition of milk and has
not yet reached the condition of curds ? ’

‘ No, Sir, it is not allowable/

‘ Where was such a claim rejected ? ’

‘ At Savatthi, in the Sutta Vibhanga/

‘ Of what offence is he, who does so, guilty ? ’

‘ Of P&iittiya, in eating food which has not been
left over V

‘ Let the venerable Sawgha hear me. This
seventh point, having been examined into by the
Sawgha, has been found to be false Dhamma and
false Vinaya, and not contained in the teaching of
the Master. Thus do I cast this seventh vote.'

‘ Is it allowable, Lord, to drink toddy ? ’

‘ What, Sir, is this toddy ? ’

‘ Is it allowable, Lord, to drink spirits which have
not yet become spirits and have not yet acquired
intoxicating properties ? ’

‘ No, Sir, it is not allowable/

‘ Where was it rejected ? ’

‘ At Kosambl, in the Sutta Vibhanga/

‘ Of what offence is he, who does so, guilty ? '

‘ Of Pa/Sittiya, in the drinking of fermented liquors
and strong drink V

‘ Let the venerable Sarngha. hear me. The eighth
point, having been examined into by the Sawgha,
has been found to be false Dhamma and false
Vinaya, and not contained in the teaching of the
Master. Thus do I cast this eighth vote/

1 Pa/Httiya XXXV.

4 Pa&ttiya LI.

XII, 2, 8. ON THE COUNCIL OF VESALf. 413

‘ Is the unfringed-seat, Lord, allowable 1 2 ?’

‘ No, Sir, it is not allowable.'

‘Where has it been rejected ? ’

‘ At Savatthi, in the Sutta Vibhahga.’

‘ Of what offence is he, who uses such a seat,
guilty ? ’

‘ Of Paiittiya, in using a thing which ought to be
cut down (to the proper size) V

‘ Let the venerable Sawgha hear me. This ninth
point, having been examined into by the Savzgha,
has been found to be false Dhamma and false
Vinaya, and not contained in the teaching of the
Master. Thus do I cast this ninth vote.’

‘ Is gold and silver, Lord, allowable ? ’

‘ No, Sir, it is not allowable.’

‘ Where was it forbidden ? ’

‘ At Ragagaha, in the Sutta Vibhahga.’

* Of what offence is he, who takes it, guilty ?’

* Of Paiittiya, in accepting gold and silver 3 .’

‘ Let the venerable Sa»zgha hear me. This tenth
point, having been examined into by the Savzgha,
has been found to be false Dhamma and false
Vinaya, and not contained in the teaching of the
Master. Thus do I cast this tenth vote.’

‘ Let the venerable Sawgha hear me. These ten
points, having been examined into by the Samgha,
have been found to be false Dhamma and false
Vinaya, and not contained in the teaching of the
Master.’

1 That is, does the fact of its being unfringed make legal a
mat or rug otherwise illegal by reason of its size? See above,
XII, x, 10.

2 Pa&ttiya LXXXIX.

5 The 18th Nissaggiya Pa&ttiya.

4X4

KVIXAVAGGA,

XII, 2, t>;

‘ i This legal question, Sir, has been concluded ;
and being settled, it is settled once for all. Never-
theless, Sir, do you question me on these ten points
in the midst also of the Sawgha 3 , in order to per-
suade those Bhikkhus 8 .’

So the venerable Revata questioned the venerable
Sabbakami on the ten points also in the midst of the
Sawgha, and as he was questioned on one after the
other, the venerable Sabbakdmi gave reply.

9. Now whereas at this rehearsal of the Vinaya
seven hundred Bhikkhus, without one more, with-
out one being wanting, took part, therefore is that
rehearsal of the Vinaya called 1 2 That of the seven
hundred 4 .’

Here ends the Twelfth Khandhaka, on the
Rehearsal by the Seven Hundred.

1 It is clear from the word tva m avuso, that Sabbakami is

here addressing Revata. „ , , _

2 That is not only of the referees, but of all the Bhikkhus there

at Vesali.

3 Bhikkhftriaw saftfcattiyft. See the use of this phrase at
jTuUavagga IV, 14, 26, and VII, 4, 1, and our note on the latter of
those two passages.

4 Compare XI, i, ig-

NOTE ON THE BHAAAVARAS.

As the division into Bhazzavaras or Portions for Recitation is
of some value in the history of the way in which the books were
handed down, and is now overshadowed by the more practical
division for modern purposes adopted in this translation into
chapters and sections, the following table may be of use : —

MAHAVAGGA.

Present division. Pali title.

Khandhaka L

Page in
text.

Extent
in text.

Chapter 6 . PaZ/zama-bMzzav&ratfz . . . .

*4

„ 14. Dutiyaka-bha;/avaraw ....

„ 21. Uruvela-pa/ihariya;;2tatiyaka~bhd-

24

10

Tzavara m niZZ/zitaw .....

35

II

„ 24. ATatutthaka-bh. ni/Z/zitazzz . . .

„ 30. Upa^/zaya - vatta - bh. niZZ/zitaw

44

9

pazU’amaz/z

5 8

*4

5J 33. Kh2J.th.2jn bhawavdrazzz ....

61

3

„ 38. Sattamazzz bha;zavdraw ....

7 i

10

„ 53. Abhayftvara-bh. niZZ/htazzz . . .

81

10

» 79 -

98

?i 7

Khandhaka II.

Chapter 16. Afma-titthiya-bh. Txtithxt&m . .

”5

16

„ 27, ifodana-vatthu-bh. ni/Z^itazzz . .

„ 36. Uposatha-khandhake tatiyazzzbha-

128

*3

7l2tf§X2M . , . . . . . .

I36

8

Khandhaka III.

Chapter 8. Vass&vasa-bh. ni///zita?;z . . .

I48

11

„ *4 • • *

*55

7

Khandhaka IV.

Chapter 6 . Pa//zama-bh. mtfhix&m , . . .

164

9

„ 18. ..... . . ... .

178

14

Khandhaka V has no Bhazzav&ras, and ends in the

text on page .

19S

20

416

tfULLAVAGGA.

Khandhaka VI.

Chapter 15. Bhesa^a-ann^ata-bh.pa/^amaw 209
30. Li&^avi-bh. mtthti&m . • • • 2 33

33. ATatu-visati-bh. mtMtem . , . 240

” *&' .

Khandhaka VII.

Chapter 7. Adaya-bh. mfthii&m .... 259

„ 26 5

Khandhaka VIII.

Chapter x. Pa*Samaka-bh. mtthatem . . ■ 281

„ ig. Vis&kM-bM?zav£lra»t .... 294

„ 3 2

Khandhaka IX.

Chapter 4. V asabha-gama-bha»avara»z pa^a-

ma 3 22

„ 6. Upali -pu^Ma - bhawavarara duti-

ya m 3 2 ^

„ 333

Khandhaka X.

Chapter 2. Dighavu-bhawavtram paMamaw 349

„ -359

10
24

7

11

7

6

14

13

16

11

6

5

13

10

JSTULL AV AGG A.

Khandhaka I-IV. None.

Khandhaka V.

Chapter 21. Dutiya-bha^avara^ 129

» 37— * 143

Khandhaka VI.

Chapter 3. Bha^av&raw xAithit^m pa/^ama m 154
„ 11. Dutiya-bha^avara;;z . . . • . *67

„ 21. . .

Khandhaka VII.

Chapter 2. Pa/^amaka-bha?2avaraw, mttlnXzm 188
v 3. Bhawaviraw ni//Maw dutiyazra . 198

J} 5. Bharcavaraw pittMiam tatiyazrc . 206

Khandhaka VIII.

Chapter 4. Bhtoav&raw pa/Samsuw . . . 2 *5

„ 12. Dutiya-bh^avdraw 231

» 14. • ' * 231

25

14

9

13

10

9

10
8

8

16

NOTE ON THE BHAn'AVArAS. 417

Khandhaka IX.

Chapter 3. Paramo bha?zavdro 1 .... 247

>> 5* • 251

Khandhaka X.

Chapter 8. Paz^ama-bhazzavarazra . . . . 261

„ 16. Dutiya-bhazzavara/# . . . . 271

„ 27. TatiyaT>hazzavara?;z 281

Khandhaka XI has none « 292

Khandhaka XII.

Chapter 1. Pa//2ama-bha?zav&ratf2 . . . . 301

» 2 307

On this it may be observed —

1. The last Bhazzavara in each Khandhaka is not referred to
either by name or by number, except in Mahavagga II, and in
ATullavagga VII and X. In the Mah&vagga fourteen of the
Bhazzav&ras have special titles, independent of their number in the
particular Khandhaka.

2. Probably two Bha/zavaras in Mahavagga V, all the Bhazza-
varas in ATullavagga I-IV, and the first in Zullavagga V, are not
noticed in the printed text.

3. Making allowance for these we have in the Mahavagga
31 (? 32) Bhazzavaras, occupying about 350 pages of Pali text, and
about 610 pages in our translation. In books V-XII of the
Aullavagga we have 20 Bhazzavaras, occupying about 200 pages of
Pali text, and about 350 pages in our translation. Total 51 (? 52)
Bhazzavaras, occupying about 550 pages of Pali, and about 960
pages of translation.

4. As in the printed text repetitions have been avoided by a
mode of reference to former passages which was impossible in the
MSS., the average length of the matter contained in a Bhazzavara,
as written much more in full in the MSS., would be somewhat
greater than its average length as actually printed. It would
probably amount to what, if printed verbatim, would occupy in
space not much less than a sheet of the size and type used in
the edition of the text. Thus the three Bh&zzavaras in Mahavagga
VIII, which owing to the subject-matter are printed with only
a few such contractions, occupy respectively 14, 13, and 16 pages
of the text.

1 Sic. This is the only instance in the Vinaya of a masculine
use of the word.

12

4

9

10

io

9

8

6

418

i^ULLAVAGGA.

5. The recital in the usual sara-bhayma (or intonation, see
JTullavagga V, 3) of such a ‘ portion for recitation 7 would occupy
in time about half-'an-hour.

6. Spence Hardy informs us in his ‘Eastern Monachism’
(p. 168) that the Digha Nikaya contains 64, the Ma^g^ima
Nikaya 80, the Saawyutta Nikaya 100, and the Ahguttara Nik&ya
120 Bhawavaras. In fact it is only a few of the longer Suttas
in the first two collections which are actually divided into
BM?zavaras in the MSS.; and only the longer Nipatas in the
Ahguttara. There are no Bha^avaras in the Eka- and Duka-
Nipatas of that collection; and there are also none in the
Sawyutta Nik&ya, and none in any of the books of the later
literature contained in the Abhidhamma Pi/aka (including all
those in the Ivluiddaka Nikaya) as yet published.

7. The division into Bha^avaras is not made use of in many

books of the Pi/akas themselves, or in the fifth-century commen-
taries of Buddhaghosa and others. In the Sutta-vibhanga it is
only used in Pdra^ikas I— III, and in the Parivara not at all. \V hen
Spence Hardy says therefore (loc. bit; p. 17 2 ) P^akas and

commentaries combined contain 5347 Bha/zavaras, he must be le-
ferring to a mere calculation and not to the actual use of the MSS.
On the other hand, the fact of Bha?zavaras being used in the
Dipavazwsa and the Khudda-sikkha may possibly afford some clue
to the age in which those works were composed.

INDEX TO VINAYA TEXTS,

PARTS I, II, HI,

VOLUMES XIII, XVII, XX.

e e 2

INDEX OF SUBJECTS.

References to the Introduction are in Roman numerals only, those to
the Text have P., M., or A. prefixed, according as they occur in the Pati-
mokkha, the Mahavagga, or the A r ullavagga, respectively. The nume-
rals refer after P. to the pages, after M. and A. to the chapters and
sections.

Absolution, M. ii, 27; A. iv, 14, 30-
32; Vj 20, 5; vii, 37.

Abuse, P. 32 ; A. x , 22, r.
Accoucheur, M. viii, 1, 4.

Acquittal of the consciously inno-
cent, A. i, 4.

Age ? when it begins to run, M. i, 75.
Agriculture forbidden to Bhikkhus,
P- 33-

— blight and mildew, K, x, i, 6.

— scare-crows, M. i, 50.

— ploughshares, M, vi, 26, 7.

— gleaning, M.vi, 32, 1.

- — shape of rice-fields, M. viii, 12.

— list of fanning operations, A. vii,

1, 2.

Ague, intermittent, M. vi, 14, 4; M.
i, 6, 1, 2.

Alligator’s fat, as medicine, M.vi, 2, 2.
Ambrosia of Arahatship, M. i, 5, 7,
12 ; 6, 8, 12.

Animals, conduct towards, P. 46;
M. iii, 1.

— not to be members of the order,

M, i, 63; ii, 22, 3.

— not to be killed, M. v, 9, 2 ; 10,

9 5 vi, 31, 14*

— various, not to be eaten, M. vi,

23 -

— song of love to, AT. v, 6.
Annihilation, sense in which Bud-
dha teaches, M. vi, 31, 7,

Aperient myrobolan, ML viii, 1, 28.
Arahatship, M. v, 1, 18-28; AT, i, 4,
1 ; xii, 2, 5.

Architecture (see also Rest-house).
Buddhist Vihara, size of, P. 8, 9.

— building of, P. 35 ; A.vi, 4, 10;

vi, 5 5 vi, 17.

— cleansing of, M. i, 25, 15.

— rooms, various, M. i, 25, 19 ; A.

vi, 33 ) 6.

— buildings, list of various, M.

iii, 5, 6; AT vi,(ijf£l

— the five kinds of, M. i, 30, 4 ;

ii, 8, 1; vi, 33, 2 ; viii, 7;
AT. vi, 1, 2.

— earthenware huts, M. iii, 1 2, 9 ;

*.v, 37 .

— loomsheds, AT. v, 1 1, 6.

— roofs of skins, AT v, 11, 6 ; 14,

2; vi, 2, 2 ; other kinds, A.
vi, 3, n.

— doors, drains, chimneys, A. v,

14, 3 ; vi, 1, 2 ; 3, 8,

— wells, building and machinery

of, A. v, 16, 2,

— artificial lakes, A. v, 17.

— windows, A. vi, 22 ; viii, 3, 5.

— plastering, &c., of walls, A. vi,

3 > 1*

— ceiling cloth, A. vi, 3, 5.

— entrance porch, A, v, 14, 4 ;

vi, 3* 9, 10.

— verandahs, A. vi, 14.
Arithmetic, M. i, 49.

Asceticism, definition of Buddhist,

M. vi, 31, 8.

Assemblies, fortnightly, duty of at-
tending, M. ii, r.

422

VINAYA TEXTS.

Astringent herbs, list of, M. vi, 4.
Astrology condemned, K. v, 33, 2.
Astronomy, elementary, to be learn-
ed, K. viii, 6, 3.

Back scratcher, K. v, 1, 4.

Banishment of guilty Bhikkhus, K.
h I 3 “ I 7 *

Barbers, M. vi, 37 ; JT. v, 27, 3 ;
Bhikkhunis net to be, K. x,
10, 4.

Bark garments forbidden, M. viii,
28, 2.

Barter, P. 21-24, when allowed to
Bhikkhus, K . vi, 19.

Bathing, P. 44; M. i, 25, 12; v, 13,
6 ; K . viii, 4, 2.

Shampooing, K . v, 1.

Steam baths, M. vi, 14, 3 ; K. v,
T 4 > 3 .

— etiquette in, £T. viii, $ ; forbidden
to Bhikkhunis, K. x, 27, 4.

Bathing dresses for nuns, M. viii,
15, 11.

Rules for Bhikkhunis at the bath,
K. x, 27.

F 01 bidden methods of, K. v, 1 .

— in the open air, K. v, 17.

Beans, eating of, M. vi, 16.

Bears’ fat as medicine, M. vi, 2, 2.

Beasts of prey, M. iii, 9, 1.

Bedsteads, K. vi, 2, 3 ; form of, K .
viii, 1, 4.

Bewitched, cure for those, M. vi,

■ 14, 7 ;

Bhikkhunis, eight chief rules for,
K. x, 1, 45 six rules for novices,
ibid. ; rules for reciting the Pati-
mokkha before, x, 6, 1 ; dis-
ciplinary proceedings against,
x, 6, 3 ; settlement of disputes
among, x, 7; inhibition of, x,
9, 2 ; exhortation of, x, 9, 3 ;
girdles, x, 10; shampooing, x,
2 ; dress of, x, 4, x, 16 ; devo-
lution of property of, x, 1 1 ; dis-
qualifications for initiation as,
x, 17, 1 ; rules for initiation, x,
17, x, 20; rules for Pavarawa
of, x, r 9 ; children of, x, 25, 1,
2 ; reinitiation of, x, 26.

Bladder, rice-milk good for the, M.
vi, 24, 5.

Bleeding, surgical, M, vi, 14, 4.

Bolsters, K. vi, 2, 7.

Boots, various forbidden kinds of,
M. v, 2, 3.

Border countries, list of, M. v, 1 3,
12.

Bowls, wooden, forbidden, K. v,

8 , 2.

— of iron and clay allowed, K . v,

9, 1.

— not to be painted, K. v, 9, 2.

— burning down’ of, K . v, 20.

— proper modes of carrying, K .

viii, 5, 2 ; 6, 3.

Boy-Bhikkhus, M. i, 49.

Brahman used for Arahat, M. i, 1,
3, 7 ; M. i, 2, 3.

Brass, K. v, 37, 1.

Brooms, K. v, 22.

Buddha, a, description of, M. i, 22,
2 ; vi, 34, 11.

Cannibalism, M. vi, 23, 9.

Castration forbidden, K. v, 7.
Casuistry, K. v, 33, 2.

Chain of Causation, M. i, 1, 2.
Chairs, M. v, 11 ; K. vi, 2, 4 ; vi, 8.
Chapter of five Bhikkhus, M. ix, 4.

— of ten, M. i, 3 r, 4.

— of twenty, P. 14.

Chicken, fable of, K. i, 18, 4.
Chunam, M. vi, 9, 2; K. v, 1-2 ; not

to be used at the bath by Bhik-
khunis, K. x, 27, 4.

Civil law, M. vi, 3, 9 ; K. iv, 9 ; vi,
4 ? 10.

Cloister, use of, for exercise, K> v,
T4, 1.

Cloths, not to be walked on, K. v,

21, 2, 3.

Clyster, use of, forbidden, M. vi,

22, 4.

Cobras’ hoods as ornament, M. viii,
29.

Cobwebs, M. i, 25, 15.

Commentary, the Old, xvi.

Common property of the order, K.
vi, 15.

Concealing offences, K, iii, passim.
Conscience, K. i, 4, 9.

Conversion, M. 1, 7, 10.

Corpse, belief that the sea always
throws out a, K, viii, 1, 3.
Council of R%agaha, K . xi, passim.

— Vesali, iT. xii, passim.

Covering over as with grass, K. i,

13 -

INDEX OF SUBJECTS.

423

Coverlets, used in South India, M,
v, 13, 6.

Cow and calf, story of, M. v, ro.
Crocodiles’ teeth as pins, X v, 1, 4;
v, 9, 2.

Cupping, for fever, M. vi, 14, 4.
Curds, not to be eaten after mid-
day, X xii, 1, 10.

Cuttle-fish bones for soup, X v, 22.

Dangers, the ten, M. ii, 15, 4; ii,
35 ; X ix, 3, 4.

Date of the Vinaya, xxi.

Debtors, imprisonment of, M. i, 4 6.

Dedication by water, M. i, 22, 18.

Demons troubling Bhikkhus, M. iii,
9, 2.

Devil- worshippers, K . v, 10, 2 ; v,
27, 5*

Disabilities, the eighteen, of a Bhik-
khu, X i, 5.

Discourse, to laymen, M. i, 75, 6.

— to the Bhikkhus, M. i, 35, 6; v,

1, 9 ; K. vi, 4, 5 ; i, 1, 3.

Diseases, the five, M. i, 39 ; i, 76, 1.

Disqualifications, the twenty-three,
after initiation, M. ii, 36 ; iv,
r 4 ;viii, 30.

— for initiation of men, M. i, 76.

— of women, K. x, 17, 1.

Dogs, not to be eaten, M. vi, 23, 12.

Doubts of conscience, M. iii, 6, 4.

Drains for water, X v, 14; v, 16 ;
v, x7.

Dress, P. 18-24, 28-30, 45, 54 ; M.
vii, viii, passim ; viii, 4, n. ; X v,
29 ; of women, X x, 10.

Drinks, list of, allowable, M. vi,
35> 6.

Dung, medical use of, M. vi, 9 ; vi,

14, 6 .

jDwarfs, X iv, 14, 5.

Dyeing robes, M. i, 26, n ; viii, ro.

Earth, diving into the, M, v, 1, 5.
Elephants, speaking, M. vi, 20, 2.

— not to be eaten, M. vi, 23, 10.

— fable of the old and young, X.

vii, 4, 5-

— story of the rogue, X vii, 3, 11,

— of men —Buddha, X vii, 3, 12.
Embryo, consciousness .of, M. i, 75.
Emissary, eight qualifications of a

good, X vii, 3, 6.

Emptiness of worldly things, X xii,
2, 5,

Etiquette, rules of, P. 59-67; M.
vi, 36, 4; X vi, 13; on arrival
at a ViMra, viii, 1; at meals,
viii, 4 ; when on begging rounds,
viii, 5 ; towards fellow-lodgers,
viii, 7.

Eunuchs, M. i, 38, 5 ; i, 61 ; iii, r r,
4 ; X v, 7.

Exhortation of Bhikkhunis, P„ 35, 36.

Expulsion of Bhikkhus, M. i, 60.

— of a nun, X i, 4, 9.

Extremes, the two, M. i, 617.

Eye of the Truth, M. i, 7, 6.

— ointments, M, vi, 1 1 .

Fairies, curious belief as to, M. vi,
28,8.

Faith, works, and insight, M. v, 1,
21-25.

False charges, P. 9, ro.

False pretensions, P. 5.

Famine, M. vi, 19, 2 ; vi, 32, 2 ; IC.

vi, 21.

Fat, as medicine, M. vi, 2.

Feathers, not to be used for dress,
M. viii, 28, 2.

Feet, washing of, M. i, 25, ir .

— the Buddha washes disciples, M.

x, 4> 3*

Festivals, the ash /aka, M. i, 20, 15.
Fever, M. vi, 14, 4 ; cure for, M. vi,
20.

Fines of money, M. vi, 36, 1.

Fire, sacred, M. i, 15, 2.

— sacrifice to, M.i, 20, 19; vi, 35, 8.

— sermon on, M. i, 21.

— by friction, X viii, 6, r.

Fistula, M. vi, 22; viii, 1, 14, X v,

27, 4.

Flowers, right and wrong use of, X.

' v, 18.

Ply whisks, three kinds of, allowed,

Food, P. 37-42, 56, 57 5 K, v, 5 ;

vii, 5-7.

Freedom, M. i, 6 , 46; i, 7, 11; i,
11, 1 ; K. vi, 4, 4.

Frescoes, X vi, 3, 2.

Fruits, which, may be eaten, X vi, 5.
Furniture, P. 34, 53, 54; M. i, 25,
16 ; X v, 19; v, 37 ; vi, passim.

— list of, inaVihara,Xviii^ r, 3 ; 3, 3.
Future life, M. v, 1, 20.

424

VINAYA TEXTS.

Gall bladder, K, vii, 2, 5.

Games, list of, forbidden toBhikkbus,
K . i, 13, 2.

Gems, list of the ten, K. ix, 1, 3.
Ghost stories, M. v, 6, 3.

Gift of a Vihara, M. i, 22, 18.
Girdles, rules for, K. v, 29.

Gleaning, M. vi, 32, 1.

Goblins in hollow trees, M. iii, 12, 2.
Gods envy the Arahats, K. vii, 1, 6.
Gold and silver, the Bhikkhus not to
accept, P. 26 ; if. xii, 1-7, 10.
Gotamaka ifetiya, M. viii, 13, 2.
Gotama’s Ford, M. vi, 28, 12.
Gotama’s Gate, M. vi, 28, 12.
Gotami, M. x, 5, 7 ; K. x, 1, 1 ; xi,
1, 9*

Gourds as water*pots, K. v, 10, 1.
Gx-avel, K. v, 14, 3 ; v, 22.
Grindstone, M. vi, 3, 2.

Gums, medical, list of, M. vi, 7.

Hair on the soles of the feet, M.
v, 1.

Hair-garments, forbidden, M. viii,
28, 2.

Hair, modes of wearing, forbidden,
if. v, 2, 3 ; v, 27, 4. .

Handicraft allowed to Bhikkhus, if.
v, 28.

Happiness, the highest, M. i, 3, 4.
Harmony of mental powers, M. v,
1, 17.

Headache, cures for, M. vi, 13.
Heresy of Bhikkhus, punishment of,
K. i, 32.

— of laymen, how to be treated, if.

v, 20.

Hermaphrodites, M. 3/69.

High places, worship on, K. v, 2, 6 ;

vi, 2, 7. ■

High treason, punishment for, M.

ix, 3 , 9 ; K. vii, 3, 4.

Horns to carry salt in, if. xii, i, io.
Horse-flesh not to be eaten, M. vi,

23, 11. ■

House-warming, if. v, 21.

Humours, of the body, M, vi, 14;

24, 5 ; viii, 1, 30 ; K . v, 14, 1.

Iddhi, M. v, 1, 5, 7; vi, 15, 8 ; of
laymen, vi, 34 ; iT. 1,4, 4; v, 8 ;
vii, 1, 4; 2, 1 ; 3, 2 ; of the
Buddha, vii, 3, 9 ; sermon on.

vii, 4, 3 ; a lesser thing than
Arahatship, vii, 4, 7 ; flying, if.
xii, 1,7.

Ill-will, P. 33.

Impurity, P. 7.

Initiation into the order, M. i, 12,
4 ; i, 28 and foil.

Insane offender, treatment of, K.

h 5 .

Insects, destruction of, M. v, 6, 3.
Insubordination, P. 12.
Interdictions, the form, M. i, 78.
Intoning, if. v, 3.

Inward struggles, M. iii, 6, 3.

Iron, M. vi, 26, 7.

Itch-cloth, M. viii, 17.

Jails, public, M. i, 42.

Jains, xi.

Jaundice, M. vi, 1 ; vi, 14, 7 ; viii,
1, 23.

Jewelry for men, K. v, 2, 1.

Judges, what four things they should
avoid, if. iv, 9.

— what ten characteristics they
should have, K, iv, 14, 19.

Judicial office, four qualifications
for, K . i, 9.

Jury in different cases, K. iv, 14, 19.

Karma, K f vii, 3, 9.

Kingdom of Righteousness, M. i, 6,
3 °.

Knives, K. v, u, 1.

Lamps, etiquette as to lighting, K.
viii, 7, 4.

Landmarks, M. ii, 6.

Language, each Buddhist to learn
the word in his own, K. v, 33.

Lattices for windows, K. vi, 2, 2 ;
etiquette as to, if. viii, 7, 4.

Legal questions, settlement of, P.
68, 69 ; if. i, 14.

Legend of Buddha, growth of, M,
h 7j 1 .

Lever used at wells, if. v, 16, 2.

Licenses, the ten, disallowed at
Vesali, if. xii, 1, 10.

Lies, P. 2, 32 ; M. ii, 7.

Life begins in the womb, M. i, 75.

Light (so let your light shine forth),
M. v, 4, 2 ; ix, 2, 20 ; K. vi, 6, 4.

INDEX OF SUBJECTS.

425

Lions’ flesh not to be eaten, M. vi,
23, 14.

Litigiousness, P, 46.

Lodging-places, regulation of, K. i,
4; vi, 11.

Longing of pregnant women, M. ix,
2, 4.

Looms, K. v, 11.

Love, power of, M. vi, 36, 4 ; sense
of, K. xii, 2, 5.

Luck, walking over cloths for good,
K . v, 21, 4.

Luck in sneezing, K. v, 33, 3.

Lunacy (?), M. vi, 10.

Lusts, K. i, 32, 2.

Lute, parable of the, M. v, 1, 15, 16.

Madness, rules in case of, M. ii, 25.
Magical powers (of laymen), M. vi,
34,1,2.

Matricide, M. i, 64, 69.

Measures of capacity, M. viii, 1, 11.
Medicaments, the five ordinary, M.
vi, 1, 3.

Medicine, P. 27 ; M. vi, passim ;

school of, M. viii, 1.

Mice, K. vi, 12.

Middle country, the boundaries of,
M. v, 13, 12.

Miracles by the Buddha, M. i, 15-
21 ; vi, 23, 6.

Miraculous powers. See Iddhi.
Mission of the sixty-one disciples,
M. i, 11.

Money changing, M. i, 49.

— pieces of, M. vi, 35, i ; viii, 1, 1,

3, 13; X. v, B, 2.

Mosquito curtains, K. v, 1 3.

— fans, K, v, 23, 1.

Mules, cannot produce young, K.

vii, 2, 5.

Murder, P. 4.

Nails, to be cut short, K. v, 27.

— custom of polishing, K. v, 27.
Nakedness forbidden, M. i, 70 ; viii,
28.

Names too venerable to be uttered,
M. i, 74 ? 1*

Needles, K. v, 11, 2.

Needle-cases, P. 86 ; K. v, 1 r .
Nirv&«a, M. i, 5, 2 ; i, 6, 8, 17, 18 ;
v, 1, 18, 28; K. xi, 1, 15 (see
also Arahatship),

Noble eightfold path, xii ; M. i, 6,

18.

Noble ones, discipline of, M. ix, 1, 9.
Noble states, the ten, M. i, 22, 13.
Noble truths, xii; M. i, 6, 19-22;
vi > 2 9 *

Non-human beings, M. i, 7, 3 ; u,
i5? 4-

— disease, M. vi, 10.

Nose, giving of medicine through
the, M. vi, 13 ; viii, 1, 13.
Novices, rules for, M. i, 56.

— punishment of, M. i, 57-70.

Nuns (see Bhikkhunis).

Ocean, parable of the, K. ix, 1, 3.
Offences, five kinds of and seven
kinds of, K. ix, 3, 3.

Onions, not to be eaten, K, v, 34.

Painting the face, K. v, 2, 5.

— bowls, K. v, 9, 3.

— walls, K. vi, 3, 2.

Paricide, M. i, 65, 69.

Parishes or districts, M. ii, 6-8.
Partridge, fable of, iv. vi, 6, 3.
Pasenadi, king, story of, M. iii, 14.
Patchwork coverlets, K. vi, 2, 7.
Patimokkha, x-xxiii; P. 2, 51; M.

i, 3 <b 14; ii? 3 - 5 ? 15-21 5 A",
ix, 2.

Pavarawa ceremony, M. iv, passim.
Penance and probation, distinctions
between, K. ii, 6.

Perfumes, list of, permitted, M. vi,

11.

Pestle and mortar, M. vi, 9, 2.
Pingoes, K. v, 30.

Pins and needles in one’s limbs, K .

v > 1 4 ? 3 * „ ^ .

Plants, injury of, M. iv, 1 ; v, 7, 1.

— ■ seeds of, not to be destroyed, K .

v, im-
practical joking, P. 44? 46*
Precedent, no ground for change of
rules, K . xii, 1-10.

Precepts, the ten, M. i, 56.

Present, who must be, at a judicial
proceeding before the Chapter,
K. iv, 14, 16.

Prevarication, P. 33.

Probation, P. 14; M. i, 38 ;
iii*

Property in a robe, when it passes,
M. Viii, 31.

426

VINAYA TEXTS.

Propriety of demeanour, P. 59-6 t.
Punishments, M. i, 40, 3 ; i, 44 ; ix,
2, 9.

Pupils and preceptors, duties of, M.
h 25-27.

Rations, apportioner of, K. i, 4 ; vi,

21 .

Rebuke of guilty Bhikkhus, K. i,
1 - 8 :

Reconciliation, act of, if . i, 18-24.
Refuges, the three, M. i, 4, 5 ; i,
38, 2.

Requisites, the four, P. 43.

| Reservoirs, if. v, 17.

Res judicata, X. iv, 14, 25.

Respect, want of, P. 33.

Rest-house, public, P. 37; M. vi,

28, 3.

Reviews not to be witnessed by
Bhikkhus, P. 43.

Rice-milk, praise of, M. vi, 24, 5.
Riddles in casuistry, X. i, 14, 15.
Rishis, Vedic, list of, M. vi, 35, 2.

| Rivers, ancient worship of, M. v, 9,
3 ; it. x, 2 r .

— list of principal, if . ix, x, 3.
Robes, donation of, eight grounds

for, M. viii, 32.

Roots, medical, lists of, M. vi, 3, 4.
Rugs, P. 24-27; M. v, 10; K. vi,

19*

Ruminator, story of the human, K.
v, 26.

Sabbath (see Uposatha).

Salt, M. x, 4, 1.

— various kinds of, M. vi, 8.
Samaras, xii.

Sandals, P. 66 ; if. viii, 1, 3 ; 6, 2.
Sanitary arrangements, if. v, 35.
Savages, M. iv, 15.

Savatthi (the hymn), M. vi, 35, 8.
Scabs, cure for, M. vi, 9.

Schism, P. xo, 11 ; distinguished
from disunion, K . vii, 5, 1.

* — eighteen kinds of, if. vii, 5, 2.
Schismatics, conduct towards, M.

x, 5, 8 ; K i, 4 ; vii, 4, 4.
Scissors, if. vi, 21, 3.

Sects, non-Buddhistic, P. 41.
Seedlings, ancient law of, M. vi,
39 .

Seeds, fruits containing life, not to
be eaten, K. v, 5.

Seif (or soul), M. i, 6, 38-41.

Sexual intercourse, P. 4 ; M. i, 78.
Shampooing, if. v, 1.

Shoes, M. i, 25, 8 ; v, 1, 29; 8, 3;

v, 12 ; V, 13, 13 ; K. v, 12.

Sick Bhikkhus, M. ii, 23; iii, 6 ; iv,

3 ; 17, 7 ; viii, 26, 27 ; if . vi, 10.

— relatives, M. iii, 7.

— Bhikkhu, story of the Buddha

nursing a, M. viii, 26.

Silence, vow of, forbidden, M. iv, 1.
Singing the Dhamma forbidden, if.
v, 3.

Skins, not to be used for dress, M.
viii, 28, 2.

— to be used for roofing, if. v, ri,

< 5 ; 14, 3 .

— for water-vessels, if. v, 16, 2.
Skulls as bowls, if. v, 10, 2.

Sky, walking in the, M. v, 1, 7.
Slander, P. 32.

Slaughter-house for oxen, M. v, t,

13.

Slaves, runaway, M. i, 47.

Snakes in form of men, M. i, 3, 3 ;
i, 63 ; vi, 23, 13.

— of supernatural power, M. i, 15.

— girdle of, if. vii, 2, 1.

— bite of, cure for, M. vi, 14, 6.
charm against, if. v, 6.

— not to be eaten, M. vi, 23, 13.

— in houses, K. vi, 2, 5 ; vi, 3, 4 ;

viii, i, i.

Sneezing, curious custom connected
with, K. v, 33, 3.

Snow, M. i, 20, 15.

Sodomy, M. i, 52.

Soldiers may not enter the ordei*,
M. i, 40.

Sorcery, M. vi, 14, 7.

Spittoon, if. viii, 1.

Spoons, if. viii, 5, 2.

Sporting in water, P. 44.

Staves, if. v, 24.

Subordination of guilty Bhikkhus,
K. i, 9-12.

Suffering, M. i, 6, 20-22.

Sugar, M. vi, 26.

Sunshades, if. v, 9, 5; v, 23; eti-
quette as to, P. 65 ; K. viii,
h 3 .

Suspension of Bhikkhus, M. i, 79 ;
K. i, 25.

Tailor, story of his building, if. vi, 5.
Tanks, if. v, 17. |«

INDEX OF SUBJECTS.

427

Tathagatas ( = Buddhas), habits of,
M. i, 4, 4-

— death of, K. vii, 3, 10.

Teetotalism, P. 44.

Theft, P. 4.

Thimbles, iT. v, 11, 5.

Thoughts, understanding their, M.
i, 22, 4; v, i, 7-

Titthiyas, M. i, 38 ; vi, 31 ; 34? 12 ;
35, 1 ; viii, 28.

Toddy drinking forbidden, X. xii,
T , 10.

Toleration, duty of, M. vi, 31, ir.

T ooth-sticks, rules for, K . v, 31.
Treasure trove, P. 53*

Upanishads, x.

Uposatha (seventh day), x ; M. ii,
passim.

Validity of official acts of the Saw-
gha, M. ix, passim.

Vedas, sacred verses of, M. vi, 3 5, 2, 8.
Vehicles, use of, forbidden, M. v, 9.
Vihara=cave, M. v, 1, 5.

Voting in the Chapters of the Order,
K . iv, 9-X0 ; 14, 25; vii, 4.
Vultures, training of, K . i, 32.

Walking up and down thinking, M.
v, 1, 14; K. ii, r, 4 ; v, 14, 1.

Wandering ascetics, non-Buddhistic,
M. i, 23.

' Was, keeping of, M. i, 13, 1 ; iii,
passim.

Waste tub, K. viii, 4, 4-

Water, pouring out of, as dedica-
tion ceremony, M. T, 22, 18;
viii, 30, 4; used as looking-
glass, X. v, 2, 4; strainers, K .
v, 13-

Weapons, P. 65 ; K . v, 37, 1 ; vii,
3? 4? 7.

Wells, K. v, 16, 2.

Wheel and axle machinery, K. v,
16, 2 *

White ants, K. v, 9, 4 ; vi, 1, 2 ; viii,
3,2.

Wind in the stomach, M. vi, 14, 1 ;

16, 3517; #.v, 34-
Window spaces, M. i, 25, 15, 18;
K. viii, r, 5 ; three kinds of lat-
tices for, K, vi, 2, 2.

Winter, M. i, 20, 15.

Wishing-gift, \vhat it is, iv. j, 4, 5.
Women, first disciples, M. i, 8, 3.

— See Bhikkhuni.

— story of the lost, M. i, 14.
Worldly talk, specimens of, M. v,
6, 3*

Worms in the head, M.viil, 1, 18,
Writing, xxxii-xxxv; M. i, 49.

INDEX OF PROPER NAMES.

Abhaya, M. viii, i, 4 seq., 13 seq.
A^i&akasi, A. x, 22, 1.
Agapalanigrodha, M. i, 2, 1 ; 3, 1 ; 5,1.
A^atasattu, A. vii, 2, 1, 5 ; 3, 4 seq.;
xi, 1, 7.

Agga/apura, A. xii, 1, 9.

Agga/ava £etiya, AT. vi, 17, 1.

Agita, A r . xii, 2, 7.

Agita Kesakambali, A”, v, 8, 1.
Ahiragakulani, A. v, 6.

Ahoganga pabbata, A. xii, r, 8.
Akasagotta, M.vi, 22, 1,

Ayfciravati, M. v, 9, 1; viii, 15, 11 ;

A. ix, 1, 3 seq.

A/ara Kalama, M. i, 6, 1, 2.

Aiavaka bhikkhu, A. vi, 17, 1.

A/avi, A. vi, 17, r ; 21, 1.

Arrian ussa, M, i, 6, 3 ; vii, 1,26.
Ambala£/Z>ika, A. xi, 1, 7.

Ambapali (°palika), M. vi, 30 ; viii,
1, r seq.

Ambapalivana, M. vi, 30, 6.

Ananda, M. i, 4, 9, 5 5 5i 5 53 5
13, 8; 9, 1 ; 17; 24, passim.
AnathapiWika, M. x, 5, 8 ; A. vi, 4 ;

9. See Sudatta and Getavana.
Andhakavinda, M.ii, 12, 1 ; vi, 24, 1 ;

26, 1 ; viii, 15, 10.

Andhavana, M. viii, 23, 3.

Anga, M. i, 15, 1, 3-
Aftgirasa, M. i, 15, 7 ; vi, 35, 2.
Anguttarapa, M. vi, 34, 17.
Ann 3 .kondd.nna., M. i, 6, 31 seq.
Anotattadaha, M. i, 19, 2, 4.

Antaka, M.i, n, 2 ; 13, 2. See Mara.
Anupiya, A. vii, t, 1 ; 2, r.
Amiruddha, M. x, 4 ; 5, 6 ; A. i, 18,

1 ; vii, 1, 1 seq.

Apa^am, M. vi, 35, 1 ; 36, 1.
Aramikagama, M. vi, 15, 4.

Arlttba, A. i, 32 seq.

Ariyawz iyatana m, M. vi, 28, 8.
Assagi, M. i, 6, 36 ; 23.
Assagipunabbasuka bhikkhu, A. i, 1 3
seq.; vi, 16.

Asura, A. ix, 1, 3.

Atf&aka, M. vi, 35, 2.

Atuma, M. vi, 37 ; 38.

Avanti, M. v, 13, 1.
Avantidakkhiwapatha, M. v, 13.
Avantidakkhbzapathaka bhikkhu, A.
xii, 1, 7, 8.

Balakalc>7zakaragama, M. x, 4, 1.
Bararaasi, M. i, 6, 6, 10, 30 ; 7, 1 ; 9,
1, 2 ; 14, 1 ; v, 7, 1 ; 8, 1 ; vi.
23, 1 seq.; 24, r; viii, 1, 22;
14, 1 ; 15, 1 ; x, 2, 3.

Belaya Katana, M. vi, 26.
Belata6asisa, M. vi, 9, 1 ; viii, *17.
BelatoMputta. See Sa%aya.
Bhaddasala, M. x, 4, 6 seq.
Bhaddavaggiya, M.i, 14.

Bhaddiya (the place), M. v, 8, 1 ; 9,
1 ; vi, 3, 4.

Bhaddiya (the Bhikkhu), M. i, 6, 33 ;

A. vii, 1, 3 seq.

Bhagga, A. v, 2 1, 1 ; 22, 1.

Bhagu, M. vi, 35, 2 ; viii, 24, 6 ; x, 4,
1; K. vii, 1, 4.

Bhallika, M. i, 4.

Bharadvaga, M. vi, 35, 2 ; A. v, 8.
Bhesaka/avana, A. v, 21, 1.

Bhnmrna deva, M.i, 6, 30.
Bhummagaka. See Mettiyabhum-
magaka.

Bhusagara, M. vi, 37, 4.

Bimbisara (rag& Magadha Seniya),
M. i, 22 ; 39 ; 40 ; 42 ; 46 ; ii. 1 ;
iii, 4, 3, passim ; A. v, 5 ; vi, 3, 1 1 ;
vii, 3, 5*

Bodhi, A. v, 21.

Brahma, A. vii, 3, 16.

Brahmadatta, M. x, 2, 3 seq. ; A. xi,

Brahmakayiki deva, M. i, 6, 30.
Brahrmi Sahampati, M. i, 5, 18 ; 6,
30 *

Dabba Mallaputta, A. iv, 4 ; v, 20.

INDEX OF PROPER NAMES.

429

Dakkhmagiri, M. i, 5, 3 ; viii, 12, 1 ;
i$T. xi, 1, 10.

Dakkhi«apatha. See Avantidakkh 0 .
Dakkhbzapathaka, K. i, 18, 3.
Devadatta, M. ii, 16, 8 ; K. vii, 1,4;

2 seq. See Godhiputta.
Devaputta, K. . vii, 2, 2.

Devata, M. i, 4 ; 6, 2, 4 ; 20 ; vi, 28,

7; 11 ; viii, 16, 3.

Dhaniya, Jt. xi, 1, 6.

Dighavu, M. x, 2, 8 seq.

Erapatha, K. v, 6.

Gagga, M. ii, 25 ; K. iv, 5.

Gaggara, M. ix, 1, 1.

Gandhabba, K. ix, 1, 3.

Ganga, M. v, 9, 4; vi, 28, 12 seq. ;

K. ix, 1, 3 seq.

Gavampati, M. i, 91, 2.

Gaya, M.i, 6, 7 ; 21, 1.

Gayakassapa, M, i, .15, 1 ; 20, 22.
Gayasisa, M, i, 21, 1 ; 22, 1 ; K. vii,

4) I*

Ghositarama, M. x, r, 1 ; K. i, 25, 1 ;

31; vii, 2, 1; xi, 1, 14.
Gi^^aku/a, M. ii, 1, 1 ; 5, 4 5 v, 1, 1,
3,14,17; K. iv, 4, 4 ; viii, 3, 9.
Gi%aHvasat.ha, M. vi, 30, 6.
Giribbqga, M. i, 24, 5, 6,7. See Ra-
^agaha.

Godhiputta, K. vii, 3, 2. See Deva-
datta,

Gomatakandani, K. iv, 4, 4,

Gopaka, M, viii, 24, 6.

Gosala. See Makkhali.

Gotama (Buddha), M. i, 2, 2, 6, 10,
15; 22, 2, passim; (Buddha’s
father), M. i, 54, 4.
Gotamadvara, M. vi, 28, 12.
Gotamaka Xetiya, M. viii, 13, 2.
Gotamatittha, M. vi, 28, 12.

Gotaini. See Mahapa^apatu

Gambudipa, M. i, 20, 7 seq.
Gatiyavana, M. v, 8, 1 ; vi, 34, 10.
Geta, K. vi, 4, 9 seq.

Getavana, M. i, 55 ; iii, 5, 1, passim ;

K* i, 1,1; 13,5; 18, 5, passim.
Givaka Komarabha^a, M. i, 39 ;

viii, 1, 4 seq,; 2 ; K. v, 14, 1.
Givakambavana, K . iv, 4, 4 ; xi, 1, 7.

Himavanta, K. vi, 6, 3,

Inda. See Sakka.

Isibhatta, M. viii, 24, 5.

Isidasa, M. viii, 24, 5.

Isigili, K. iv, 4, 4.

Isipatana, M. i, 6, 6, 10, 30; 7, 7 ;
v, 7, 1 ; vi, 23, 1 ; viii, 14, 1.

Ka^-angala, M. v, 13, 12,

Kaka, M. viii, t, 26 seq.

KakaWaka putta, AT. xii, 1, 1 seq. ;

2, 1 seq.

Katana, Ka^Myana. See Pakudha,
Belaya, MahakaX’Hna.

Kakudha, K. vii, 2, 2 ; (Devaputta),

K. vii, 2, 2 V
Kalama. See A/ara.
Kalaudakanivapa. See Ve/uvana.
Kalandaputta, K. xi, 1, 6.

Ka/asila, K. iv, 4, 4.

KaWaka, M. i, 52 ; 60.

Kanaka, M. i, 60.

Kawhagotama, K. v, 6.

Kankharevata, M, vi, 16,

Kawwaku^ga, K. xii, 1, 9.

Kapilavatthu, M. i, 54, 1 ; 55, 1 ; K.
x, 1, 1.

Kasi, M. i, 6, 8 ; vi, 17, 8 seq.; ix,

1, 1, 5, 7 ; Z, i, 13, 3 ; 18, 1.
Kasiraga, M. viii, 2 ; x, 2, 3 seq.
Kassapa, M.i, 15 seq. ; 22,5; vi, 35, 2.
Kassapagotta, M. ix, 1.
Ka/amorakatissaka, K. vii, 3, 14.
Keniya, M. vi, 35.

Kesakambali See Agita.
KhaWadevi, K. viii, 3, 14.
Khuggasobhita, K . xii, 2, 7.

Kimbila, M. x, 4 ; K, vii, 1, 4.
Khagiri, K. i, 13 seq. ; vi, 16 ; 17, r.
Kokalika, K. vii, 3, 14 ; 4, 2 seq.
Kokanada, K. v, 21.

Kolita, M. i, 24, 3.

Ko/ivisa. See So»a.

Ko/iyaputta, K. viii, 2, 2.
KomarabhaXXa. See Givaka.
KoWa##a, M.i, 6, 29, 31.

Kosala, M. i, 73, 1, 2 ; ii, 15, 3 ; iii,
5,1; 9, 1; 11, passim; iCv, 13,
2 ; 32, 2.

Kosalarqga, M. x, 2, 3 seq.
Kosambaka bhikkhd (up&saka), M.

x, 4, 6 ; 5.

Kosambi, M. viii, 1, 27; x, 1,153;
K . i, 25, 1; 28, 1 ; vii, 2, 1, 5;

xi, 1, 11 ; xii, 1, 7 ; 2, 8.
Kosinaraka Maila, M. vi, 36, 1.
Kodg&ma, M. vi, 29 seq.
KukkufMma, M. viii. 24, 6.

430

VINAYA TEXTS.

Kumarakassapa, M. i, 75.
Kuraraghara, M.v, 13, 1.

Kuru. See Uttarakuru.

Kusinara, M.vi, 36, 1 ,6; 37, 1 ; K .

. xi ’ x *

Ku/ikazzzza. See So;za.

JTampa, M. v, 1, 1 ; ix, 1 ; 2.
Aampeyyaka, K, xii, 2, 8.
isTatumaharagika deva, M. i, 6, 30.
ivMbyaputta, K. v, 6.

X&anna, K. i, 25 ; 28 ; 30 ; 31 ; iv, 14 ;

xi, 1, 11, 14.
iTitta, K. i, 18 ; 22 seq.

Xodanavatthu, M. ii, 17, 1 ; 18, 1.
ivorapapsita, K. iv, 4, 4.

La//v6ivanuyyana, M. i, 22, 1, 2.
LiMavi, M. vi, 30 ; 31, 1 ; K. v, 20.
Lohitaka. See PaWukalohitaka.

MaddakuA££i, M.ii, 5, 3 ; K. iv, 4, 4.
Magadh<% M. i, 5? 7 ; * 9 > 3 5 24, 5 ,

6 , 7 5 39 , 1*

Magadha. See Bimbisara.
Magadhaka, M. i, 22, 3 seq. ; 24, 5 ;
K . vii, 2, 2.

Magadha-khetta, M. viii, 12, 1.
Magadha-mahamatta, M. vi, 28, 7
seq.

Ma^/jimajganapada, K. i, 18 ; 22 seq.
Mahaka, M. i, 52.

Mahaka^ana, M. v, 13 ; x, 5, 6 ; K .
i, 18, 1.

Mah&kappina, M.v, 13 ; x, 5, 6 ; A.
i, 18, 1.

Mahakassapa, M. i, 74; ii, 12, 1 ;

viii, 21,1; x, 5, 6 ; K. xi, 1, 1 seq.
Mahakott&ita, M. x, 5, 6 ; K, i, 18, 1.
Mahaiunda, M. x, 5, 6 ; K. i, 18, 1.
Mahamoggallana, M. i, 23 ; 24 ; vi,
20; K. i, 18, ipv, 8, 1; 34^2;
vii, 2, 2 ; 4, 2 ; ix, 1. See Sari-
puttamoggallana.

Mahanama, M. i, 6, 36 ; it. vii, 1, 1.
Mahapa^apati Gotami, M. x, 5, 7 ;

K. xi, 1 seq.; xi, 1, 9.
Mabaragano, M. i, 4, 4 ; 16.
Mabasala, M. v, 13, 12.

Mahavana, M. vi, 30, 6 ; K. v, 13, 3 ;

vi, 5, 1 ; x, 1, 2 ; xii, 1, 1.

Mabi, K. ix, 1, 3 seq.

Makkbali Gosala, K . v, 8, 1.
yiakkhSkasanda, K/i, 18 ; 22 seq.
Malla, M. vi, 36 ; viii, 19 ; K. vii, 1,1.
Mallaputta. See Dabba,

Mailt, K. x, 12.

Mand&kini, M. vi, 20.

Mam^u/aka, K, xii, 1,4.

Mara, M. i, 6, 30 ; 11, 2 ; 13, 2 ; K.

xi, 1,9. See An taka.

Marasena, M. i, 1, 7.

Melaka, M. vi, 34.

Mettiya, K, iv, 4, 8.

M e tt i y abhumma^ak a, K. iv, 4, 5 seq. ;
v, 20.

Migaramata, K. ix, 1, 1. See Visa-
khl

Moggallana. See Mahamoggallana.
Mu/fcalinda, M, i, 3 ; 4, 1.

Nadi Kassapa, M. i, 15, 1; 20, 30.
Naga, M. i, 15 ; 63 ; K, ix, 1, 3.
Na/anda, K. xi, 1, 7.

Nanda, M. i, 54, 5.

Nataputta, M. vi, 31 ; K. v, 8, 1.
Natika, M. vi, 30, 6.

Nera/Tgani, M.i, 1, 1 ; 15, 6 ; 20, 15.
Nigrodharama, M. i, 54, 1 ; X. x, 1, 1.
Nilavasi, M. viii, 24, 25.
Nimmanarati deva, M. i, 6, 30.

Pa^ota (raga), M. viii, 1, 23 seq.;

A a 2 4 .

Pa^inaka (bhikkhu), K. xii, 2, 2 seq.
Paiinavawsadaya, M.x, 4, 1 seq.
Pa^antima ^anapada, M. v, 13, 16
seq.

Pakudba KaMayana, K. v, 8, 1.
Pazz^ukalohitaka, K. i, 1 ; 6, 8.
Paranimmitavasavatti deva, M. i, 6,
30.

Parileyyaka, M. x, 4, 6 seq. ; 5, 1.
Pasenadi (ra^a Kosala), M. iii, 14.
Pateligama, M. vi, 28.

Pajfaliputta, M. vi, 28, 8 ; viii, 24, 6.
Pa^eyyaka bhikkhu, M. vii, 1, 1
seq. ; K. xii, 1, 7, 8 ; 2, 2 seq.
Pava, if. xi, 1, 1.

Phalikasandana, M. viii, 24, 6.
Pilinda-gama, M. vi, 15, 4, 7.
Pilindava^Ai, M. vi, 13 seq.
PWolabharadvaga, K. v, 8.
Pisa^illika, K . v, 10, 3; 27, 5.
PubbSrama, K. ix, 1, 1.
Punabbasuka, See Assagipunabba-
suka.

Vxxnnagi, M. i, 9, 1, 2.

Purazza, K. xi, 1, 10.

Pura/za Kassapa, K. v, 8, 1.
Puratthima ^anapada, k. i, 18, 3 ;
. xii, 2, 3.

INDEX OF PROPER NAMES.

431

R%agaha, M, i, 22, 1, 2, 13 ; 23, 1
seq.; 28,2; 30,1; 49,1; 53,1,
passim; X iv, 4, 15; v, 1, 1;

2, 6, passim.

Ragagahaka, M. viii, 1, 2, 16 seq. ;

X v, 8 ; vi, 1 ; 4, 1, 6 seq.
Ragayatana, M. i, 4, 1, 2 ; 5, 1.

Rahu asurinda, K . xii, 13.

Rahula, M. i, 54 ; 55 5 x, 5, 6 ; K. i,
18, 1.

Rahulamata, M. i, 54.
Rakkhitavanasawi/a, M. x, 4, 6 seq.
Ramaputta. See Uddaka.

Revata, M. viii, 31, 1 ; x, 5, 6 ; X i,
18, 1 ; xii, 1, 9 seq.; 2, 1 seq.
See Kahkharevata.

Rog-a, M. vi, 36 ; viii, 19.

Sabbakami, K . xii, 2, 4 seq.

Sagata, M. v, 1, 3 seq.

Saha^ati, X xii, 1, 9; 2, 1.

Saketa, M. i, 66, 1; vii, 1,1; viii,
x, 8; 13, 7.

Sakiya, M. i, 38, xi ; X vii, 1, 4; x,
1, 2 ; 2, 1.

Sakka, M. i, 17 ; 20 ; 22, 13 seq.
Sakka, M. i, 54; X vii, 1, 1 seq.; x,
1, 1, 2,

Sakya, X vii, 1, 3.

Sakyakula, M. i, 22, 2; 23, 4; vi,
34 , 11 ; 35 , 1*

Sakyakumara, X vii, 1, 1 seq.
Sakyaputta. See Upananda.
Sa v kyaputtiya,M.i, 24, 7 seq., passim.
Sakyaraga, X vii, 1, 3 seq.

S&lavati, M. viii, t, 3 seq.

Sa/£a, X xii, 2, 2 seq.

Sailavati, M. v, 13, 12.

Sambhuta, K . xii, 1, 8 seq.; 2, 4 seq.
Sawkassa, X. xii, 1,9.
Samuddadatta, K . vii, 3, 14.

Sawa, M. viii, 24, 6.

Sawavasi, M. viii, 24, 6 ; X . xii, 1, 8
seq. ; 2, 4 seq.

Sa%aya, M. i, 23 ; 24 ; X v, 8, 1.
Sawgikaputta, X vi, 21,1 seq.
SappasoTz^ikapabbhara, X. iv, 4, 4.
Sarabhii, X ix, 1, 3 seq.

Sariputta, M. 1, 23; 24; 28, 2, 3;
54, passim; X i, 18, 1; v, 34;
2; vi, 6, 1 ; 7; vii, 3, 2 seq.; 4;
viii, 4, 1. See Sariputtamoggal-
lana.

Sariputtamoggallana, X i, 13, 16;

x6 ; vi, 16, 1 ; vii, 3, 1 ; 4 , 1 seq.
Sattapa^iguha, X iv, 4, 4.

Savatthi, M. 1, 55; 66, 1 ; 67 ; iii,
5, 1, f>assim; X i, 1, 1 ; 13, 3 ,

5 ; 18, 4, passim.

Senanigama, M. i, n, 1.

Seniya. See Bimbisara.

Setakawmka, M. v, 13, 12,

Seyyasaka, X i, 9 seq,

Siha, M. vi, 31.

Sitavana, M. v, 1, 12 seq.; 17; X
iv, 4, 4 ; vi, 4, 3 seq.

Sivaka (yakkha), X vi, 4, 3.
Siveyyaka, M. viii, 1, 29, 34.

So«a Ko/ivisa, M. v, 1.

So«a Kuxika«wa, M. v, 13.

Soreyya, X xii, 1, 9.

Sudatta, X vi, 4, 4. Cf. Anatha-
piWika.

Suddhavasa deva, Suddhavasakayika
devat&, X xii, 2, 2.

Suddhodana, M. i, 54.

Sudhamma, X r, 18; 22 seq.
Sudinna, X xi, x, 6.

Sumana, X xii, 2, 7.

Suwsumaragira, X v, 21, r.

Sunidha, M. vi, 28, 7 seq.

Supassa nagaraga, M. vi, 23, 13,
Supatirt&i Xtiya, M. i, 22, 1, 2.

Takkasila, M. viii, 1, 5 seq.
Tapodakandara, X iv, 4, 4.
Tapodarama, X iv, 4, 4.

Tapussa, M. i, 4.

Tavatiwsa, M. i, 6, 30; 20, 10; vi,
28, 8 ; 30, 5.

Tekula. See Yame/utekula.

Thuna, M. v, 13, 12.

Tissaka. See Katamorakatissaka.
Tusita deva, M. i, 6, 30.

Udayi, M. ii, 16, 7 ; X iii, 1 ; x, 9, 3
seq.

Uddaka R&maputta, M. i, 6, 3, 4.
Udena, M, iii, 5 ; X xi, 1, 11 seq.
Udumbara, X xii, 1, 9.

Uggeni, M, viii, 1, 23.

Ukkala, M. i, 4, 2.

Upaka, M. i, 6, 7 seq.

Upali, M. i, 62; 64; ix, 6 ; X i,
18, 1 ; ii, 2 ; 7, passim.

Upali (of Ragagaha), M, i, 49.
Upananda, M. i, 52; 60; iii, 14;
vi, 19; viii, 25; X vi, 10, 1 ;
12; xii, x, 5.

Upasena Vangantaputta, M. i, 31.
Upatissa, M. i, 24, 3.

Uppalavawwa, X x, 8.

432

VINAYA TEXTS.

Uruvela, M. i, x, i ; 6, 6 ; n, i ; 14,
1; 15, 1; 22, 4. .

Uruvelakassapa, M. i, 15; 22, 4;
K. v, 37.

XJsiraddhaja, M, v, 13, 2.

Uttara, K . xii, 2, 3.

Uttarakuru, M. i, 19, 2, 4,

Uva/a, K . iv, n ; 12, 5.

Va<^/>&a, JT. v, 20.

Vaggi, M. vi, 28.

Vagg-iputtaka, .ST. vii, 4, x ; xii, 1, 1
seq. ; 2, 1 seq.

Vaggumudatiriya, K. xi, 1, 6.
Valikarama, K. xii, 2, 7.

Vamadeva, M. vi, 35, 2.

Vamaka, M. vi, 35, 2.
Vangantaputta, M. i, 31.

Vappa, M. i, 6, 33.

Vasabhagama, M. ix, x, r, 5, 7.
Vasabhagamika, K. xii, 2, 7.
Vase/^a, M. vi, 35, 2.

Vassakara, M. vi, 28, 7 seq.
Vebhira, K , iv, 4, 4.

Vedehiputta, K. xi, 1, 7.

Ve/uvana, M. i, 22, r8 ; 24, 3; ill, r,

x; vi, 17, 1, 8; 22, 1; 27; viii,
1, 1 ; iT. iv, 4, 1, 4 ; v, 1, 1 ; vi,
1, x; 21, 1; vii, 2, 5 ; 4, 3 ; xi,
A i, it; xii, 1, 4.

Vesali, M. vi, 30, 31, 4, xo seq. ; 32,
1 ; viii, 1, 1 seq.; 13 ; 14, x ;
isT.v, 12, 1; 13,3; 14,1; 21,1;
vi, 5, 1 ; 6, x ; x, 1, 2 ; 9, 1 ; xi,

1, 6; xii, 1, 1 seq.; 2, 4 seq.
Vesalika, K vii, 4, 1 ; xii, 1, 1 seq.
Vessamitta, M. vi, 35, 2.

Videha. See Vedehiputta.

Vimala, M. i, 9, x, 2.

Virupakkha, K. v, 6.

Visakha Migaramati, M. iii, 13;
viii, 15; 18; x, 5, 9; K . v, 22;
vi, 14.

Yakkha, K. vi, 4, 3.

Yama deva, M. i, 6, 30.

Yamataggi, M. vi, 35, 2.
Yame/utekula, K. v, 33, 1.

Yamuna, K. ix, 1, 3 seq.

Yasa, M. i, 7 seq.; K. xii, 1, 1 seq.;

2, 1 seq.

Yasoj-a, M. vi, 33, 5.

INDEX OF PALI WORDS

EXPLAINED OR REFERRED TO IN THE NOTES.

The references are to parts i, ii, iii, and pages.

akappakata, part ii, p. 155.
akarareiya, iii, 355.
akuppa, ii, 435.
akkana/a, ii, 247.
akkavaia, iii, 178.
agga, iii, 202.
agga/a, ii, 215.
agga/avam, iii, 106.
angana, iii, 295.
a^akkhussa, iii, 147.
a^elaka, i, 41.
aHibaddha, ii, 207.
a££eka£ivara, i, 29.
a&6Mipiyati, iii, 83.
a^inakkhipa, ii, 247.
a%ana, ii, 50.
a%ani, iii, 141.
awza, ii, 10 ; iii, 303.
awzata, iii, 186.
ajtfana, iii, 67.

A#£aka, ii, 130.
ajf^akavagga, ii, 37.
atf^apadaka, iii, 167.
a/fMla, iii, 341.
aii/6akasika, ii, 195 seq.
a^akusi, ii, 209.
a^apallanka, iii, 367.
a^^ama«</ala, ii, 209.
a^//6ayoga, i, 174.
a^aruka, iii, 138.
attakamapari^ariya, i, 8.
attadana, iii, 313.
atthavasa, iii, 263.
atthara, ii, 148 seq.
attharaka, ii, 155,
adesan&gami, ii, 333.
addhina, i, 26.
adhiw&ihati, iii, 10 1, 117.
adhiwi>ita, ii, 40, 151, 152.
adhisila, ii, 23.
ana^ariya, i, 85.

C 2 °]

anantarika, iii, 285.
anapadana, ii, 272.
anabhava, ii, 113.
anabhirati, iii, 77*
anavasesa, ii, 316 ; iii, 35.
anadariya, i, 44.
anamanta^ara, ii, 150.
anika, ii, 13.

anupakha^a, i, 42 ; iii, 285.
anupa##atti, iii, 374*
anupada^eyya, i, 29.
anubhaga, iii, 203.
aiiullapana, iii, 36^
anuv&ta, ii, 154; ii, 2 3 1 ; iii, 93.
anuvivarta, ii, 209.
anusampavahkata, iii, 36.
ane/agala, ii, 37.
antaggahika, i, 344*
antaraghara, i, 56, 59, 65 ; iii, 286.
antaravasaka, ii, 212.
antaraka^a, iii, 146.
antimavatthu, i, 276.
apagabbha, ii, 1 1 1 , 1 1 2 .
apatissara/za, iii, 175.
apalokana, iii, 37.
apassenaphalaka, iii, 219.
appuyya, in, 183.
appo/£eti, ii, 349^
abbhussahanata, iii, 3 6.-*
abhaydvara, i, 207.
abhisawkharika, iii, 9 .
abhisanna, ii, 60.
abhisannakaya, iii, 102.
abhiha tifrum f i, 21; ii, 440.
ambaka, ii, 107.
ara»isahita, iii, 292.
ariyavasa, i, 141.
alakkhika, iii, 250.
alawkammaniya, i, 16,
avakkarapiti, iii, 287.
avaga^ak&rakaw, i, 64.

Ff

434

VINAYA TEXTS.

avaiiga, iii, 342.
avippav&sa, i, 20, 255.
asaddbamma, iii, 262.
asamadanaiara, ii, 151.
asambhoga, iii, 120.
ahiv&takaroga, i, 204.
Ahoganga, ii, 146.

agamma, ii, 237.
ataman akumbhi, iii, 280,
a^ariya, i, 178 seq.
a^ariyaka, ii, 140.
a£ara, i, 184.
a«i£olaka, iii, 348.
adeyyava^a, iii, 186.
anantarika, iii, 198, 246.
apayika, iii, 262.
ama/akava«dkapid?a, iii, 165.
amisa, i, 36.
amisakhara, ii, 60.
ayataka, iii, 72.
ayatika, iii, 1 1 5.
ayoga, iii, 14 1.
arama, i, 23.
aramika, iii, 282.
alambanabaha, iii, 96.
alinda, iii, 175.
avarawa, iii, 336.
avasathapi«^a, i, 37.
avasaparampara, ii, 371.
&vm/6£ana, iii, 106.
asaggcLnam, iii, 264.
asatti, iii, 183.
asanantarika, ii, 292.
asanapa^apaka, iii, 408.
asandi, ii, 27.
asandika, iii, 165.
asadeti, ii, 373.
asittakdpadhana, iii, 117.
asevanavitthaka, iii, 95.
aha^apadaka, iii, 164.
ahundarika, i, 205.

ikkasa, iii, 171*

iddhi, i, 119 ; ii, 136 ; iii, 230.
iadakhila, i, 52.

ukkapi^aka, ii, 70.
ukkasika, iii, 68.
ukku/ikaw, iii, 16.
ukkudka, i, 62.

* \1A6inatha, i, 194.
u^Aedavada, ii, 1 1 1 .
u«hisa, iii, 97,
utu, ii, 236.
uttarai^ada, ii, 27.

uttarapasaka, iii, 106.
uttarasanga, ii, 212 ; iii, 123.
uttaribhaiiga, iii, 9, 179.
ntti^apatta, i, 152.
udakaniddhamana, iii, 108.
udakasa?«gaha, ii, 147.
udakasarika, ii, 225.
udukkhalika, iii, 105.
udda, ii, 1 6.
uddesa, i, 12.
uddosita, iii, 363.
uddhasudha, iii, 174.
upa^a, iii, 351.

•upa^Mya, i, 178 seq.
upa^apeti, i, 49.
upadhi, i, 85, 138.
upanandhati, iii, 100.
upanikkhitta, i, 26.
uparipirt/Mta, iii, 273.
upalapeti, i, 49.
uposathapamukha, i, 252.
ubba/£a, ii, 314.
ubbahika, iii, 49.
ubbhaWita, ii, 210.
ubbhara, i, 19 ; ii, 157.
nbbhida, ii, 48.

ubhatolohitakupa, dhatna, ii, 28.

ubhatovinaya, iii, 376.

ubhatovibhanga, iii, 376.

ummattakalaya, iii, 21.

iira^Mda, ii, 348.

ullikhita, ii, 153.

ulloka, iii, 169.

uss&deti, iii, 202, 301.

ussavana, ii, 120.

ussira, ii, 23.

usse/£eti, ii, 349.

Shanni, iii, 277.

eka^iya, ii, 212.
ekapariyakata, iii, 341.
ekapalasika, ii, 13.
ekuddesa, i, 11.
eragu, ii, 35.

e/akapadakapiif/6a, iii, 165.

okirati, ii, 231.
okodmaka, iii, 40.
ogumphiyati, ii, 31.
otiwza, i, 7.
ottharaka, iii, 102.
onita, i, 83.
ono^ana, ii, 386.
opana, ii, 1 1 5.
obhoga, i, 156.

INDEX OF PALI WORDS IN THE NOTES.

435

ovatfika, iii, 69.
ovartiyakarazza, ii, 153. •
ovaddheyya, ii, r54.
ovada, i, 35.
osaraka, iii, 175,

kawsapattbarika, iii, 140.
kakka, ii, 58.

ka?a&££uparissavana, iii, 100.
ka?asi, iii, 390.
kadsuttaka, iii, 69, 142, 348.
ka/^ina, i, 18 seq. ; ii, 148 seqq. ; iii
92 seq.

kazzag-aka, iii, 9,
kazzzAisakarazza, ii, 153.
ka««akita, iii, 91.
katakata, iii, 309.
katikasa?z/£ana, iii, 8.
kattarada^a, ii, 20.
kattari, iii, 138.
kattarika, iii, 139.
kattika, i, 29 seq.
kapalla, ii, 50.
kapisisaka, iii, 106.
kappaw/dka, iii, 254.
kappiyakaraka, ii, 59.
kappiyakud, i, 303.
kaba/ika, ii, 58.
kamala, ii, 23.
kambala, ii, 23.
kambalamaddana, ii, 154.
kammarabbaWu, i, 200.
karakazfaka, iii, 112.
kaiabuka, iii, 143.
ka/ingara, iii, 127.
ka/imbhaka, iii, 94.
kavazfa, iii, 88, 160.
kavajfapi^M, iii, 105.
kasava, iii, 172.
ka£a, iii, 82.
kaya, ii, 224.
kayura, iii, 69.
kl/aka, i, 25.
ki^ana, i, 139,
kidka, iii, 174, 176.
kukkukata, ii, 154.
kukkusa, iii, 367.
kudz/apada, iii, 107.
kuzw/akamattika, iii, 17 1.
kuttaka, ii, 27.
kupita, i, 309.
kumbhakarika, iii, 156.
kumbhatthena, iii, 325.
kuruvindakasutti, iii, 67.
kulabkapadaka, iii, 174.
kulava, iii, 384.

kulirapadaka, iii, 164.
kusi, ii, 208.
ko, i, 138.

ko&kto, i, 34; iii, 165.

ko^apeti, iii, 341.

kota&aka, ii, 219; iii, 11, 109, 177

kopeti, ii, 435.

komudi, i, 324.

kha»z/a, iii, 19 r.
khandhakavatta, i, 185.
khallaka, ii, 15.
khadaniya, i, 39.
kharik%a, i, 132.
khuddanukhuddaka, i, 50.
kburabhaWa, ii, 141.
khurasipadkl, iii, 138.
khe^apaka, iii, 239.

gazzamagga, i, 269.
gazzjfAika, iii, 144.
gaWikadhana, iii, 2 1 3.
gazz^umattika, iii, 172.
gatigata, iii, 26.
gandhabbahatthaka, iii, 67.
gabbba, iii, 173.
gahapatiiivara, ii, 194.
gamapoddava, iii, 66.
gamupa^ara, i, 256.
giraggasama&ga, iii, 71.
giveyyaka, ii, 209.
guzzaka, iii, 143.

•guha, i, 174*
geruka, ii, 50.
gerukaparikamma, iii, 97.
gokazztaka, ii, 34.
gogba^zsika, iii, 98.
goiara, iii, 275,
gonisadika, ii, 12 1.
golomika, iii, 1 38.

gba^aka, iii, 130.
gbadka/aha, iii, 88.
ghadka, iii, 106.
gharadinnaka, ii, 60.

iakkabbeda, iii, 251,

^akkalika, iii, 163.
iakkavatfaka, iii, 112.

&ankama, ii, 7 ; iii, 103.
^atukazzzzaka, iii, 145.
^andanagazzdd, iii, 78.
^ammakhazzia, iii, 113.

MIeti, ii, 49.

£itta, ii, 224.

^imilika, iii, 167.

436

VINAYA TEXTS.

£ivara, ii, 199.
jfcetapeti ? i, 22.

Mapamka, iii, 128.
kokzi, ii, 132.

£olaka, iii, 86.

i/^akana, ii, 49.

A6atta, iii, 133.
i^adana, i, 35.
i^anda, i, 277.

^andaso, iii, 150.

A6ava, iii, 239.

A6avi, iii, 169.
iMdeti, ii, 42 ; iii, 147.
^inniriyapatha, i, 225.
££eppa, ii, 24.

^angheyyaka, ii, 209.

^arila, i, 118; ii, 129, 134.
ganata, iii, 72.

^antaghara, i, 157 ; in? 103.
gantu, ii, 35-
4 §-ala, iii, 162.
ge, ii, 217.

gb ayi, iii, 7*

?1atti, i, 169.

$atti£atuttha, i, 169,
wattidutiya,' i, 169.

ta/dka, ii, 35-
tathagata, i, 82.
tantibaddha, ii, 256.
talasattika, i, 51.
tassapapiyyasika, iii, 28.
tilalMdda, iii, 106.
talavaratfa, iii, 131? *45-
tavakalika,. iii, 217.
tiiivara, i, 20; i, 255.
tiaagahana,, iii, 148.
tkasantharaka, iii, 86.
tittirapattika, ii, 15.
Tittiriya, iii, i<h :
tira^anavigga, iii, 152*
tiritaka, ii, 248.^
tumbaka/aha, iii, 88.
tula, iii, 1 12.
tulika, iii, 167.
tula, i, 54.
tiilapuMTzika, ii, 15.
toraaa, iii, i7 8 *

thakiyati, iii, 161.
thavik^, iii, 293.
thinna, ii, 206.

thulla&fcaya, i, xxv.
thupato, i, 63.
theyyasa^khata, i, 4.

dakakow^aka, ii, 57.
daWakajf^ina, iii, 93.
da^aparissavana, iii, 102.
da^asatthaka, iii, 90.
dantaka#£a, iii, 146.
dantapowa, i, 40.
damaka, ii, 71.
da//dkara»a, ii, 153,
da/i>ika, iii, 138.
dijtfMvikamma, iii, 34.
dukka#a, i, xxv.
dukkha, ii, 224.
du^Mgabawika, ii, 60.
duff Mila, ii, 316.
dubba^a, i, 12.
dubbalya, i, 4.
dummanku, iii, 251.
dumma^u, iii, 251.
dei^ubhaka, iii, 143.
dvara, iii, 160.
dvarakosa, i, 35.

dhamanisantata, ii, 41.
dhamma, iii, 193, 262.
dhammakaraka, iii, 100.
dhana, ii, 28.
dhuvakara, ii, 254.
dhumakalika, iii, 214, 378.
dhumanetta, iii, 107.
dhotapadaka, iii, 219.

na m> iii, 19.
natthukamma, ii, 53^
natthukara^i, ii, 54.
nandimukhi, ii, 21 1; iii, 299.
namataka, iii, 90, 343.
naladka, ii, 349.
navakamma, iii, 10 1, 189 seq*
navakammika, ii, 359.
nagadanta, iii, 68, 98.
na/ikagabbha, iii, 173.
uasansi, i, 236.
naseti, ii, 377.
nigaw^a, i, 41.
uigg^apeti, iii, 2.
ni^apeti, iii, 225.
nippurisa, iii, 225.
nibbuggv&ati, ii, 349.
nimitta, ii, 9.
nimittakata, ii, 154.
nillekha^antaghara, iii, x 1 5.
nissaggiya, ii, 155.

INDEX OF PALI WORDS IN THE NOTES.

437

nissaya, ii, 337 ; iii, 355*
nekkhamma, i, 104.
negama, iii, 185.
nettha, ii, 339.
nerayika, iii, 262.

pawsukula, ii, 157.
pakata, ii, 343.
pakatatta, ii, 340; iii, 266.
pakasaniyakamma, iii, 239.
pakutta, iii, 175.
pakkhasaazkanta, i, 178.
pakkhika, iii, 220.
paggahikasala, iii, 383.
paghana, iii, 175.
paMakkhata, i, 275.
pa/bSakkhati, i, 4.
papaya, i, 146.
pa&kiddharati, ii, 152.
pataka, ii, 155.
pa?££apadka, iii, 97.
padka, ii, 3, 27.
padggaha, iii, 90, 95.
pad&££adaniya, ii, 81.
pa^Madi, iii, iii.
padbh&na, iii, 13.
padbhana&tta, iii, 172.
padbhaneyyaka, ii, 140.
padsara«iya, ii, 364.
parta, iii, 341.
pa«ameti, iii, 403.
pattakaWolika, iii, 86.
pattakkhandha, iii, 13.
pattama/aka, iii, 86.
patthaddha, iii, 244.
pannaloma, iii, 232.
para, ii, 307.
paradavutta, iii, 232.
paramparabhog-ana, i, 38.
parikathakata, ii, 154.
parikammakata, iii, 218.
parikkhara, iii, 343.
partita, iii, 75.
parittanakidka, iii, 174.
parinibbuta, iii, 183.
paribbag-aka, i, 41.
paribhaWa, ii, 154, 231;
paribhaw^akarawa, iii, 213,
paribhoga, iii, 208.
paribhog-aniya, iii, 8.
parimawialaw, i, 59.
parima^a, ii, 421.
parimukha, iii, 138.
panmixia, ii, 307.
pariyanta, ii, 386.
pariyaya, i, 47.

pariyu#£ita£itta, iii, 380.
pari ve«a, iii, 109; iii, 203.
parish, i, 12.
pala, ii, 178.
palasl, iii, 38.
palibodha, ii, 157*
pallanka, iii, 367.
pallatthika, i, 62; iii, 141.
pavattama^sa, ii, 81.
pavattinl, iii, 350.
pavananta, iii, 143.
pavara«£isa? 72 gaha, i, 353.
pavarita, i, 39.
pavareti, i, 2 1 .
pasata, ii, 178.
paharam, iii, 156.
paHttiya, i, 32.

Pa/£eyyaka, ii, 146.
patimokkha, i, xxvii seq.
padakathalika, i, 92; ii, 373.
p&dakhilabadha, ii, 19.
p^dapi^a, i, 92.
paparaika, ii, 157.
pamanga, iii, 69.
pi.ra.gika, i, 3.
parisuddhi, i, 242, 274.
paligu«^ima, ii, 15.
palibaddha, ii, 208.
pasaka, iii, 144. ,

p^sada, i, 174; iii, 178.
pasadika, iii, 339.
pasuka, iii, 340.
pi#£akhadaniya, ii, 139.
pittz&amadda, iii, 171.
pktf£asa»zghata, iii, 105.
piWukkhepakaw2, i, 64.
pitta, iii, 237.
pidalaka, iii, 94.
pilodka, ii, 157.
pisa&llika, i, 318 ; iii, 139.
pijfy&a, iii, 278.
p!/i>ika, iii, 165.
puii^ati (vassaw), i, 310.
pu^££an$, iii, 114.
pu/abaddha, ii, 15.
puthupawiya, iii, 68.
puva, i, 39.
peyyala, i, 291.
potthaka, ii, 247.
pothugganika, iii, 230.
posituw, iii, 169.

pbawaka, iii, 70.
phalaka, ii, 246; iii, 165.
phatikammattha, iii, 217.
phulla, iii, 191.

iii, 85, 93*

438

VINAYA TEXTS.

bandhana, ii, 153.
bandhanamatta, iii, 141.
bahukata, ii, 135 ; iii, 214.
blhanta, ii, 209.
b&huliika, iii, 254.
bidaIama?X6aka, iii, 164.
bila, ii, 48.
bilanga, iii, 9.
bundikabaddha, iii, 164.
bya, ii, 378.

bbaiiga, ii, 57.
bhafigodaka, ii, 57.
bha^agara, ii, 201.
bha^iika, iii, 213.
bhatikamma, iii, 83.
bhattikamma, iii, 169.
bhaddapi/£a, iii, 165.
bhasma, iii, 264.
bhikkhugatika, i, 312.
bhisi, ii, 210 ; iii, 163.
bhummatthararca, iii, 278.
bhqg-aniya, i, 39.
bho^ayagu, ii, 89.

makaradantaka, iii, 68.
makasaku/iH, iii, 102.
maAk&ava/aka, iii, 145.
ma^aru, ii, 35.
vnanfa, iii, 278.
manuka, ii, 140.
ma%arika, ii, 347.
ma%u, ii, 140.
maWala, ii, 209.
ma^alika, iii, 107.
mataka^ivara, ii, 151.
mattikado 7 zika, iii, 107.
maddavina, iii, 143.
madhusitthaka, iii, 92.
manaw-z, i, 254.
mantha, i, 39.
mandamukhi, i, 130.
marumba, iii, 109.
mallaka, iii, 68.
mallamu///6ika, iii, 66.
ma/orika, iii, 1 17.
mas&raka, iii, 164.
mahanama, ii, 14.
maharanga, ii, 14.
mahaseda, ii, 56.

Maht, ii, 25.

matika, i, 273 ; ii, 157 ; iii, 2.
xnasakarupa, iii, 80.
migabhuta, iii, 232.
mii£anta, iii, 85.
m\dh\, iii, 163,

missaka, ii, 432.
mukhamattika, iii, 107.
muttaharitaka, ii, 60.
me^avisawabandhika, ii, 15.
mokkha^ikS, ii, 184.
moghasuttaka, iii, 94.
raoia, ii, 132,
moragu, ii, 35.

yath&dhammo, i, 203.
yantaka, iii, 162,
y&gu, ii, 89.

ra^anapakka, ii, 49.
ratanasammata, i, 53.
rupa, i, 201.
rupiya^a^iaka, i, 27.
ruhati, ii, 414.
ropeti, iii, 334.

law£ivana, i, 136.
luggati, iii, 1 1 1 .
luka, ii, 1 6.
lekha, iii, 78.
lesakappa, iii, 200.

Iowa, ii, 48.
loma, ii, 339.

vagga, iii, 27.
vaggult, iii, 163.
va^anapatha, iii, 324.
vaA£apaduka, ii, 24.
va*a?rcsaka, ii, 347.
va ttij iii, 341.
va«;a, ii, 347.
vatthikamma, ii, 80.
varaha, iii, 261.
vallika, iii, 69.
vassupanayika, i, xxxvii.
vatapana, iii, 162.
vatamaWalika, iii, 85.
Vamaka, ii, 130.
varaka, iii, 113.
vaha, ii, 13.

vika»«a, ii, 230; iii, 92.
vikappana, i, 45.
yikaia, i, 53.
vikasika, ii, 59.
vigayha, iii, 68.
viA&iik&ika, ii, 16.
vinnu, i, 33.
vidha, iii, 143.
vidhutika, ii, 347.
vinandhana, iii, 94.
vinayapamokkha, i, xiii.
vinayavatthu, iii, 411.

INDEX OF PALI WORDS IN THE NOTES.

vinidhaya, iii, 269.
vineyya, iii, 183.
vipa^ataya, iii, 36.
vipariwata, i, 7.
vipafeti, iii, 90.
vippakata, iii, 214.
vibbhamati, i, 275.
vibhanga, ii, 325.
viva^a, ii, 209.
visibbana, i, 44.
visesaka, iii, 342.
visesadhigama, iii, 263.
vissara, iii, 273.
vihara, ii, 386.
vihesaka, 33.
viraa, ii, 8.

vuddhapabba^ita, ii, 140.
vupakaseti, i, 16 1.
vokkamma, iii, 285.
vodaka, iii, 84.
vezzi, iii, 341.
vedika, iii, 162.
veyyayika, iii, 185.
ve/uriya, iii, 82.
vylbadheti, iii, 235.

sa^velliya, iii, 348.
sawsara^akinka, iii, 176,
sawharati, iii, 168.
saguwa, i, 155- ..
sawka^Mka, iii, 351.
samkassara, iii, 300.
sawkapayati, i, 298.
sawketa, ii, 234.
sankhanabhi, ii, 51.
sawkhara, i, 76.
sawgiti, iii, 355-
sawzghad, ii, 212.
sawghadpallatthikS, iii, 12.
sawghadisesa, i, 7.
sajwatti, iii, 257.
saWasa, iii, 1 40.
satavallika, iii, 145.
sati, 1,119-

sativepullappatta, iii, 16.
sattanga, iii, 165.
sattalukha, ii, 209.
satthaharaka, i, 4*seq.
satthu, iii, 92.
santarnttara, i, 21 ; ii, 233.
sannidhikata, ii, 154.
sapadana, i, 63.
sabhqgana, i, 41.
samamiddesa, i, 48.^
samatittika, i, 62 ; ii, 104.
samanubhsisati, i, 11.

samasilpaka, i, 62.
samukase, i, xxvi, _
samuddaphewaka, iii, 131*
samodhana, ii, 405, 409.
sampavareti, i, no.
sambharaseda, ii, 56.
sambhinna, ii, 145.
sambhuw&ti, ii, 159.
sammukha, ii, 332.
sammukhavinaya, iii, 3.
sammosa, iii, 87.
say ana, iii, 279.
sarakutti, iii, 72.
sarati, iii, 14.
sarabha^wa, iii, 73.
saravaka, iii, 108.
saritaka, iii, 92.
saritasarita, iii, 26.
saritasipadka, iii, 92.
salaka, iii, 162.
salakabhatta, iii, 220 seq.
sal&kodhaniya, iii, 53.
savaianiya, ii, 338, 386.
sahadhammika^z, i, 12.
Sahampati, i, 86.
sadya, iii, 223.

Sawavasi, iii, 394.
saradika, ii, 41.
sarazziya, ii, 364.
saloka, iii, 343.
savasesa, ii, 316; iii, 35.
sasapakutfa, iii, 17 1.
sikkhasagiva, i, 4.
sitthatelaka, iii, 17 1.
sindhava, ii, 48.
sivadka, ii, 47.
sivikagabbha, iii, 173.
siveyyaka, ii, 190.
sitalo/i, ii, 60.
sila, i, 184.
sukha, ii, 224.
sugata, i, 54 seq.
sugatavidatthi, i, 8.
su^agara, ii, 101.
sutta, i, xxix.
suttadhara, i, xxviii.
suttanta, i, xxix seq.
suttalukha, ii, 209, 230.
suttavibhanga, i, xxix seq.
suddhaka, ii, 433.
suddhanta, ii, 417.
suppayayita, i, 28.
sukarantaka, iii, 143.
su£i, iii, 97.
su&ka, iii, 106, 162.
su/Hna/M, iii, 91.

439

44 ©

VINAYA TEXTS.

sekha, 1,185;
sekbasamm ata, i, 57 »
settMj h i° 2 *
seda, ii, s£*
senesika, ii, 4 2 *
seyyagga, iii, 20a.

sotapattiphala, in } 23 °-
sobhawa, iii, *43*

hatthabhitti, iii, 169*
hatthavartaka, ii, 27.

hatthavikara, 1, 326.

batthavilanghaka, 1, 3 ~ 6 *
hatthinakbaka, iii, 208.
battbiso«iaka, iii, 145*
hammiya, i, 17 4 * ...
hammiyagabbha, 111, * 7 ;»*
baritaka, ii, 6 o ; _
baritakapawwika, in, 343*
hintala, ii, 23. >

hubunka^atika, 1, 79 *
beta, i, 14 6 *

MISSIONARY ALPHABBT.

asperrimiis

asperrimus

24 Gutturalis fracta . . . .

25 Palatalis fracta . . . . .

26 Labiaiis fracta . . . . .

27 Gutturo-labialis fracta .

Otlatentrcm press, <©xfot&

A SELECTION OF

BOOKS

PUBLISHED FOR THE UNIVERSITY BY

HENRY FBOWDB,

AT THE OXFORD UNIVERSITY PRESS WAREHOUSE,

AMEN CORNER, LONDON.

ALSO TO BE HAD AT THE

CLARENDON PRESS DEPOSITORY, OXFORD.

{Every book is bound in cloth , unless otherwise described

LEXICON'S, GRAMMARS, &c.

(See also Clarendon Press Series, pp. 14, 18, 21, 24, 25.)
ANGLO-SAXON. — An Anglo-Saxon Dictionary , based on the

MS. Collections of the late Joseph Bosworth, D.D., Professor of Anglo-Saxon,
Oxford. Edited and enlarged by Prof. T. N. Toller, M.A. . (To he completed
in four parts.) Parts I and II. A— HWISTLIAN (pp. vi, 57 ^)* 1SS2. 4to.
15 s. each,

CHINESE.— A Handbook of the Chinese Language . Parts I
■ and II, Grammar and Chrestomathy. By James Summers. 1S63. 8vo.
half bound, il. 8s.

ENGLISH. — A New English Dictionary \ on Historical Prin-
ciples: founded mainly on the materials collected by the Philological Society.
Edited by James A, H, Murray, LLJD., President of the Philological Society ;
with the assistance of many Scholars and men of Science. Part I. A— ANT
(pp. xvi, 352). Imperial 4to. 12^. 6 d.

An Etymological Dictionary of the English Language .

By W, W. Skeat, M.A. Second Edition . 1884. 4to. 2/. 4s.

Supplement to the First Edition of the above, 1884.

4to. 2 s, 6d.

A Concise Etymological Dictionary of the English Lan-
guage. By W. W. Skeat, M.A. Second and Revised Edition. 1885. Crown
8vo. 5s. 6d .

Greek. — A Greek-English Lexicon , by Henry George

Liddell, D.D., and Robert Scott, D.D. Seventh Edition, Revised and Aug-
mented throughout. 1883. 4to. il. 16s.

A Greek-English Lexicon , abridged from Liddell and

ScotPs 4to. edition, chiefly for the use of Schools. Twenty-first Edition.
1884. Square 1 2mo. 7.?. 6d.

2

CLARENDON PRESS, OXFORD .

GREEK. — A copious Greek-E nglish Vocabulary , compiled from
the best authorities. 1850. 241110, $s.

* A Practical Introduction to Greek Accentuation , by H.

W. Chandler, M.A. Second Edition. 1881. Svo. ioj. 6d.

Hebrew,— T he Book of Hebrew Roots , by Abu 5 1-Walid

Marwan ibn Jan&h, otherwise called Rabbi Y6nah. Now first edited, with an
Appendix, by Ad. Neu bauer. 1875. 4to. 2 /. 'js. 6d.

• A Treatise on the use of the Tenses in Hebrew . By

S. R. Driver, D.D. Second Edition, Revised and Enlarged. 1881. Extra
fcap. 8 vo. 7-r. 6d.

Hebrew Accentuation of Psalms , Proverbs , and Job .

By William Wickes, D.D. 1881. Demy 8vo. stiff covers, 5 s.

ICELANDIC. — An Icelandic-English Dictionary , based on the
MS. collections of the late Richard Cleasby. Enlarged and completed by
G. Vigfi'isson, M.A, With an Introduction, and Life of Richard Cleasby, by
G. Webbe Dasent, D.C.L. 1874. 4to. 3/. fs.

A List of English Words the Etymology of which is

illustrated by comparison with Icelandic , Prepared in the form of an
Appendix to the above. By W. W. Skeat, M.A. 1876. stitched, 2 s.

An Icelandic Prose Reader, with Notes, Grammar and

Glossary, by Dr. Gudbrand Vigfusson and F. York Powell, M.A. 1879.
Extra fcap. 8vo. 10s. 6d .

LATIN. — A Latin Dictionary , founded on Andrews 5 edition

of Freund’s Latin Dictionary, revised, enlarged, and in great part rewritten
by Charlton T. Lewis* Ph.D., and Charles Short, LL.D. 1879. 4 to - I ^* 5 s *

SANSKRIT. — A Practical Grammar of the Sanskrit Language,
arranged with reference to the Classical Languages of Europe, for the use of
English Students, by Monier Williams, M.A. Fourth Edition, 1877. Svo. 15J.

A Sanskrit- English Dictionary , Etymologically and

Philologieally arranged, with special reference to Greek, Latin, German, Anglo-
Saxon, English, and other cognate Indo-European Languages. By Monier
Williams, M.A. 1872. 410. 4 L 14^. 6d.

Nalopdkhydnam . Story of Nala, an Episode of the

Maha-Bharata : th e Sanskrit text, with a copious V ocabulary. and an improved
version of Dean Milman’s Translation, by Monier Williams, M.'A. Second
Edition, Revised and Improved. 1879, 8 vo. 15s.

Sakuntald . A Sanskrit Drama, in Seven Acts. Edited

by Monier Williams, M.A. Second Edition, 1876. Svo. 2i.r.

Syriac. — Thesaurus Syriacus t collegerunt Quatrem&re, Bern-
stein, Lorsbach, Arnoldi, Agrell, Field, Roediger: edidit R. Payne Smith,
S.T.P. Fasc. I -VI. x 868-83. sm. fol. each, 1 L is. Vol. I, containing
Fasc. I-V, sm. fob 5/. zs.

The Book of Kalllah and Dimnah . Translated from Arabic

into Syriac. Edited by W. Wright, LL.D. 1884. 8vo. 21s,

3 '

CLARENDON PRESS, OXFORD.

GREEK CLASSICS, &e.

Aristophanes: A Complete Concordance to the Comedies

and Fragments. By Henry Dunbar, M.D. 4to. lj. is*

Aristotle: The Politics , translated into English, with Intro-
duction, Marginal Analysis, Notes, and Indices, by B. Jowett, M.A. Medium
8 vo. Nearly ready.

Heracliti Ephesii Reliquiae. Recensuit I. Bywater, M.A.

Appendicis loco additae sunt Diogenis Laertii Vita Heracliti, Particulae Hip-
pocratei De Diaeta Libri Primi, Epistolae Heracliteae. iS 7 7. 8vo. 6r.

Homer: A Complete Concordance to the Odyssey and
Hymns of Homer ; to which, is added a Concordance to the Parallel Passages
in the Iliad, Odyssey, and Hymns. By Henry Dunbar, M.D. 1880. 4to. il. is.

Scholia Graeca in Iliadem. Edited by Professor W.

Dmdorf, after a new collation of the Venetian MSS. by D. B. Monro, M.A.,
Fellow of Oriel College.

Vols. I. II. 1875. 8 vo. 24s.

Vols. III. IV. 1877. 8vo. 2 6s.

Vols. V. VI. In the Press .

Scholia Graeca in Odysseanu Edidit GuiL Dindorfius

T6xni.II. 1855. 8vo. 15 s.6d.

Plato : Apology , with a revised Text and English Notes, and

a Digest of Platonic Idioms, by James Riddell, M.A. 1878. 8vo. 8 j. 6d.

Philebus ) with a revised Text and English Notes, by

Edward Poste, M.A. i860. 8vo. 7 s. 6d.

Sophistes and Politicus , with a revised Text and English

Notes, by L. Campbell, M.A, 1867. 8vo. iBs.

Theaetetiis , with a revised Text and English Notes,

by L. Campbell, M.A. Second Edition. 8vo. 10s. 6d.

The Dialogues , translated into English, with Analyses

and Introductions, by B. Jowett, M.A. A new Edition in 5 volumes, medium
8vo. 1875, 3/. 10s.

The Republic , translated into English, with an Analysis

and Introduction, by B, Jowett, M.A. Medium Svo. I2.r. 6d .

Index to. Compiled for the Second Edition of Professor

Jowett’s Translation of the Dialogues. By Evelyn Abbott, M.A. 1875.
Svo. paper covers, 2 s. 6d.

Thucydides : Translated into English, with Introduction,
Marginal Analysis, Notes, and Indices. By B. Jowett, M.A. 2 vols. 1881.
Medium Svo. 1/. 12s.

B 2

4

CLARENDON PRESS, OXFORD,

THE HOLY SCRIPTURES, &c.

ENGLISH,, — The Holy Bible in the earliest English Versions ,

made from the Latin yulgate by John Wycliffe and his followers : edited by
the Rev, J. Forshall and Sir F. Madden. 4 vols. 1850, Royal 4to. 3/. 3.?.

[Also reprinted from the above» with Introduction and Glossary
by W. W. Skeat, M.A.

The Books of Job, Psalms , Proverbs , Ecclesiastes , and the

Song vf Solomon : according to the Wyclifftte Version made by Nicholas
de Hereford, about A.D, 1381, and Revised by John Purvey, about A.D. 1388.
Extra fcap. 8vo. 3^. 6d.

The New Testament in English , according to the Version

by John Wycliffe, about a.d. 1380, and Revised by John Purvey, about A.D.
1388. Extra fcap. 8vo- 6.?.]

The Holy Bible: an exact reprint, page for page, of the

Authorised Version published in the year 1611, Demy 4to. half bound, il. is.

7 'he Psalter , or Psalms of David \ and certain Canticles ,

with a Translation and Exposition in English, by Richard Rolle of Hampole.
Edited by H. R. Bramley, M.A., Fellow of S. M. Magdalen College, Oxford.
With an Introduction and Glossary. Demy 8vo. 1 L is,

GOTHIC. — The Gospel of St. Mark in Gothic , according to
the translation made by Wulfila in the Fourth Century. Edited with a
Grammatical Introduction and Glossarial Index by W. W. Skeat, M.A.
Extra fcap. 8vo. 4^.

Greek. — Vetus Testamentum ex Versione Septuaginta Inter-

pretum secundum exemplar VaticanumRomae editum. Accedit potior varietas
> Codicis Alexandrini. Tomi III. Editio Altera. i8mo. iSs.

Origenis Hexaplortim quae supersunt; sive, Veterum

Interpretum Graecorum in totum Vetus Testamentum Fragmenta. Edidit
Fridericus Field, A.M. 2 vols. 1875. 4U). 5/. 5J*.

The Book of Wisdom : the Greek Text, the Latin

Vulgate, and the Authorised English Version; with an Introduction, Critical
Apparatus, and a Commentary. By William J. Deane, M.A. Small 4to. 12^. 6d.

N ovum Te stamen turn Graece. Antiquissimorum Codicum

Textus in ordine parallelo dispositi. Accedit collalio Codicis Sinaitici. Edidit
E. H. Hansell, S. T. B. Tomi III. 1864. 8vo. half morocco, 2l.12s.6d.

Novum Testamentum Graece . Accedunt parallela S.

Scripturae loca, necnon vetus capitulorum notatio et canones Eusebii. Edidit
Carolus Lloyd, S.T. P.R, i8mo. %s.

The same on writing paper, with large margin, 10 s.

CLARENDON PRESS, OXFORD.

Greek. — Novum Testamentum Graece juxta Exemplar Millia-

num. i8mo. 2 s. 6d.

The same on writing paper, with large margin, 9 s.

Evangelia Sacra Graece . Fcap. 8vo. limp, is. 6 d.

The Greek Testament , with the Readings adopted by

the Revisers of the Authorised Version : —

(1) Pica type, with Marginal References. Demy 8vo. 10 s. 6d.

(2) Long Primer type. Fcap. 8vo. 4s. 6d.

(3) The same, on writing paper, with wide margin, 15s*

The Parallel New Testament , Greek and English ; being

the Authorised Version, 1611; the Revised Version, 1881; and the Greek
Text followed in the Revised Version. 8vo. 12 s.6d.

The Revised Version is the joint property of the Universities of Oxford and Cambridge*

Canon Muratorianus : the earliest Catalogue of the

Books of the New Testament. Edited with Notes and a Facsimile, of the
MS. in the Ambrosian Library at Milan, by Sv P. Tregelles, LL.D, 1867,
4to. IQs. 6d .

— — - Outlines of Textual Criticism applied to the New Testa-
ment . By C. E. Hammond, M.A. Fourth Edition. Extra fcap. 8vo.> 3^ 6d.

Hebrew, etc. — The Psalms in Hebrew without points. 1879,

Crown 8 vo. 3J. 6d.

* A Commentary on the Book of Proverbs . Attributed

to Abraham Ibn Ezra. Edited from a MS. in the Bodleian Library by
S. R. Driver, M.A. Crown 8vo. paper covers, $s. 6d .

** — — The Book of Tobit . A Chaldee Text, from a unique

MS. in the Bodleian Library ; with other Rabbinical Texts, English Transla*
tions, and the Itala. Edited by Ad. Neubauer, M.A. 1878. Crown 8vo. 6^.

Horae Hebraicae et Talmitdicae , a J. Lightfoot. A new

Edition, by R. Gandell, M.A, 4 vols. 1859. 8vo. iL

Latin. — Libri Psalmorum Versio antiqua Latina, cum Para-

phrasi Anglo-Saxonica. Edidit B. Thorpe, F.A.S. 1835. 8vo. ioj. 6d.

Old- Latin Biblical Texts: No. I. The Gospel according

to St. Matthew from the St. Germain MS. (g,). Edited with Introduction
and Appendices by John Wordsworth, M.A. Small 4to., stiff covers; 6s.

Old-French, — Libri Psalmorum Versio antiqua Galliea e

Cod. MS. in Bibl. Bodleiana adservato, una cum Versione Metrica aliisque
Monumentis pervetustis. Nunc primum deseripsit et edidit Franciscus Michel,
Phil. Doc. x86o. 8 vo. 10 s. 6d. '

•6

CLARENDON PRESS , OXFORD .

FATHERS OF THE CHURCH, &e.

St. Athanasius : Historical Writing's , according to the Bene-
dictine Text. With an Introduction by William Bright, D.D. 1S81. Crown
8vo. 10.?. 6af.

Orations against the Arians. With an Account of his

Life by William Bright, D.D. 1873. Crown 8vo. 9^.

St. Augustine : Select Anti-Pelagian Treatises , and the Acts

of the Second Council of Orange. With an Introduction by William Bright,

„ D.D. Crown 8vo. gs.

Canons of the First Four General Councils of Nicaea, Con-

stantinople, Ephesus, and Chalcedon. 1877. Crown 8 vo. 2 s.6d.

Notes on the Canons of the First Four General Councils .

By William Bright, D.D. 1882. Crown 8vo. 5 s. 6d.

Cyrilli Archicpiscopi Alexandrini in XII Prophetas. Edidit

P. E. Pusey, A.M. Tomi II. 1868. 8vo. cloth, 2/. 2 s.

— — in D. Joannis E vangelium . Accedunt Fragmenta varia

necnon Traetatus ad Tiberium Diaconum duo. Edidit post Aubertum P.
E. Pusey, A.M. Tomi III. 1872. 8vo. 2/. 5^

* Commentarii in Lucae Evangelium quae supersunt

'Syriace. E MSS. apud Mus. Britan, edidit R. Payne Smith, A.M. 1858.
4to. 1/. is.

- — — Translated by R. Payne Smith, M.A. 2 vols. 1859.

8vo. 145-.

Epkraemi Syri , Rabulae Eplscopi Edesseni, Balaei, aliorum-

que Opera Selecta. E Codd. Syriacis MSS. in Museo Britannico et Bibliotheca
Bodleiana asservatis primus edidit J. J. Overbeck. 1865. 8vo. it. is.

Eusebius’ Ecclesiastical -History , according to the text of
Burton, with an Introduction by William Bright, D.D. 1881. Crown 8vo.
8s. 6d.

Irenaetis : The Third Booh of St. Irenaeus, Bishop of Lyons,

against Heresies. With short Notes and a Glossary by H. Deane, B.D.
1874. Crown 8vo. 5 s. 6d.

Patrum Apostolicorum^ S. Clementis Romani, S. Ignatii,

S. Polycarpi, quae supersunt. Edidit Guil. Jacobson, S.T.P.R. Tomi II.
Fourth Edition, 1863. 8vo. 1/. is,

Socrates’ Ecclesiastical History , according to the Text of
Hussey, with an Introduction by William Bright, D.D. 1878. Crown 8vo.
7 s. 6d.

1

CLARENDON PRESS , OXFORD .

ECCLESIASTICAL HISTORY, BIOGRAPHY, &e.
Ancient Liturgy of the Church of England , according to the

uses of Sarum, York, Hereford, and Bangor, and the Roman Liturgy arranged
in parallel columns, with preface and notes. By William. Maskell, M.A.
Third Edition. 1882. 8vo. 15s.

Baedae Historia Ecclesiastica . Edited, with English Notes,

by G. H. Moberly, M.A. 1881. Crown Svo. ioj. 6d.

Bright ( W). Chapters of Early English Church History .

1878. 8vo. 12 s.

Burnet's History of the Reformation of the Church of England.

A new Edition. Carefully revised, and the Records collated with the -originals,
by N. Pocock, M.A. 7 vols. 1865. 8vo. Price reduced to it. 10s.

Councils and Ecclesiastical Documents relating to Great Britain

and Ireland, Edited, after Spelman and Wilkins, by A. W. Haddan, B.D.,
and W. Stubbs, M.A, Vols. I. and III. 1869-71. Medium-8 vo. each it. is.

Vol. II. Part I. 1873. Medium 8vo. r-os'. 6d.

Vol. II. Part II. 1878. Church of Ireland; Memorials of St. Patrick.
Stiff covers, 3s. 6d.

Hamilton ( John, Archbishop of St. Andrews). The Catechism
of. Edited, with Introduction and Glossary, by Thomas Graves Law. With
a Preface by, the Right Hon. W. E. Gladstone. Svo. 12.?. 6d.

Hammond (C. El). Liturgies , Eastern and Western. Edited,

with Introduction, Notes, and Liturgical Glossary. 1878. Crown Svo. 10 s.6d.
An Appendix to the above. 1879. Crown 8vo. paper covers, is. 6d.

John, Bishop of Ephesus . The Third Part of his Eccle-
siastical History. [In Syriac.] Now first edited by William Cureton, M.A.
1853. 4to. 1 /. 1 2S.

Translated by R. Payne Smith, M.A. i860. 8vo. 10s.

Reofric Missal, The , as used in the Cathedral of Exeter

during the Episcopates fits first Bishop, A.D. 1050-1072 ; together with some
Account of the Red Book of Derby, the Missal of Robert of Jumi£ges, and a
few other early MS. Service Books of the English Church. Edited, with In-
troduction and Notes, by F. E. Warren, B.D. 4to. half morocco, 35 s -

Monumenta Ritualia Ecclesiae Anglicanae. The occasional

Offices of the Church of England according to the old use of Salisbury, the
Prymer in English, and other prayers and forms, with dissertations and notes.
By William Maskell, M.A. Second Edition. 1882. 3 vols. 8vo. 2I. 10s.

Records of the Reformation. The Divorce, 533 * Mostly

now for the first time printed from MSS. in the British Museum and other libra-
ries. Collected and arranged by N. Pocock, M.A. 1870* 2 vols. 8vo. it. 16s.

8

CLARENDON PRESS, OXFORD.

Shirley ( W. W.). Some Account of the Church in the Apostolic

Age. Second Edition, 1874. fcap. Svo. 3 5. 6d .

Stubbs ( Wf Registrant Sacrum Anglic anum, An attempt

6^ ibit the C ° UrSe ° f E P isco P al Succession in England. 1858. Small 410.

Warren (F. E.). Liturgy and Ritual of the Celtic Church.
1881. Svo. 1 4s.

ENGLISH THEOLOGY.

Butler's Works , with an Index to the Ana lorry. 2 vols. 1874

Svo. IIS.

Also separately.

Sermons , $s. 6 d. Analogy of Religion , gs. 6 d.

Grcswells Harmonia Evangelica. Fifth Edition. 8vo. 1877

cjj. 6d.

Heurtley's Harmonia Symbolical Creeds of the Western

Church. 1858. Svo. 6 s. 6d.

Homilies appointed to be read in Churches. Edited bv
* J. Griffiths, M.A. 1859. 8vo. 7.?. 6d. J

Hookers Works, with his life by Walton, arranged by John

Keble, M.A. Sixth Edition, 1874. 3 vols. Svo. 1 /. us. 6d. J

the text as arranged by John Keble, M.A. 2 vols
1875. 8 vo. us.

Jewel's Works. Edited by R. W. Jelf, D.D. 8 vols. 1848

8vo. il. ics. ^

Pearson s Exposition of the Creed . Revised and corrected by

E. Burton, D.D. Sixth Edition, 1877. Svo. 10s. 6d. *

Waterland's Review of the Doctrine of the Eucharist with

a Preface by the late Bishop of London. Crown 8vo. 6s. 6 d.

Works, with Life, by Bp. Van Mildert. A new Edition

with copious Indexes. 6 vols. 1856. 8vo. 2/. iir. 5

Wheatly’s Illustration of the Book of Common Prayer. A new

Edition, 1846. 8vo. $s. y

Wyclif. A Catalogue of the Original Works of John Wvclif
by W. W. Shirley, D.D. 1865. Svo. fs. 6 d. J J ■

Select English Works. By T. Arnold, M.A. q vols.

1869-1871. 8vo. Price reduced to 1 1 . is^

- Tnalogus. With the Supplement now first edited.

By Gotthard Lechler. 2869. 8vo. Pricer educed to p.

CLARENDON PRESS, OXFORD

HISTORICAL AM DOCUMENTARY WORKS

British Barrows , a Record of the Examination of Sepulchral

Mounds in various parts of England. By William Greenwell, M.A., F.S.A.
Together with Description of Figures of Skulls, General Remarks on Pre-
■ historic Crania, and an Appendix by George Rolleston, M.D., F.R.S. 1877.
Medium 8vo, 25 s.

Britton . A Treatise upon the Common Law of England ,

composed by order of King Edward!. The French Text carefully revised,
with an English Translation, Introduction, and Notes, by F. M. Nichols, M.A.

2 vols, 1865. Royal 8vo. il. 16s.

Clarendons History of the Rebellion and Civil Wars in

England, 7 vols. 1839. x8mo. 1 L is.

Clarendon s History of the Rebellion and Civil Wars in

England. Also his Life, written by himself, in which is included a Con-
tinuation of his History of the Grand Rebellion. With copious Indexes.
In one volume, royal 8vo. 1842, il. is.

Clintons Epitome of the Fasti Hellenici. 1851. 8vo. 6s. 6d.

Epitome of the Fasti Romani. 1854. 8vo. js.

Corpvs Poeticvm Boreale. The Poetry of the Old Northern

Tongue, from the Earliest Times to the Thirteenth Century. Edited, clas-
sified, and translated, with Introduction, Excursus, and Notes, by Gudbrand
Vigfusson, M.A., and F. York Powell, M.A. 2 vols. 1883. 8vo. 42.?.

Freeman (E. A.). History of the Norman Conquest of Eng-

land; its Causes and Results. In Six Volumes. 8vo. 5/. $s. 6d .

Freeman (E. A .). The Reign of William Rufus and the

Accession of Henry the First. 2 vols. 8vo. il. 16.?.

Gascoigne's T heological Dictionary (“ Liber V eritatum ”) :

Selected Passages, illustrating the condition of Church and State, 1403-1458.
With an Introduction by James E. Thorold Rogers, M.P. Small 4to. io^. 6d.

Magna Carta, a careful Reprint. Edited by W. Stubbs, M.A.

1879. 4to. stitched, is.

Passio et Miracula Beati Olaui. Edited from a Twelfth-

Century MS. in the Library of Corpus Christi College, Oxford, with an In-
troduction and Notes, by Frederick Metcalfe, M.A. Small 4to. stiff covers, 6 j.

Protests of the Lords , including" those which have been ex-
punged, from' 1624 to 1874 ; with Historical Introductions. Edited by James
E. Thorold Rogers, M,A 1875. 3 vols. 8vo. 2/. 2s.

Rogers (f. E. T.). History of Agriculture and Prices in

England, A.D, 1259-1793.

Vols, I and II (1259-1400). 1866. 8vo. 2I.2S. ,

Vols. Ill and IV (1401-1582). 1882. 8vo. 2 /. 10s.

CLARENDON PRESS , OXFORD .

10

Saxon Chronicles {Two of the ) parallel \ with Supplementary
Extracts from the Others. Edited, with Introduction, Notes, and a Glos-
sarial Index, by J. Earle, M.A. 1865. 8vo. 16^.

Sturlunga Saga, including the Islendinga Saga of Lawman

Sturla Thordsson and other works. Edited by Dr. Gudbrand Yigfusson.
In 2 vols. 1878. 8vo. 2 1 . 2s.

York Plays . The Plays performed by the Crafts or Mysteries

of York on the day of Corpus Christi in the 14th, 15th, and 1 6th centuries.
Now first printed from the unique manuscript in the Library of Lord Ashburn-
ham. Edited with Introduction and Glossary by LucyToulmin Smith. 8vo.
21s. Just Published.

Statutes made for the University of Oxford, and for the Colleges

and Halls therein, by the University of Oxford Commissioners. 1882. Svo.

1 2 s. 6d.

Statu ta Universitatis Oxoniensis . 1884. 8vo. $s.

The Student's Handbook to the University and Colleges of

Oxford . Seventh Edition. 1883. Extra fcap. Svo. 2.?. 6<L

The Oxford University Calendar for the year 1885. Crown

8vo. 4s. 6d.

The present Edition includes all Class Lists and other University distinctions for
the five years ending with 1884.

Also, supplementary to the above, price 5s. (pp. 606),

The Honours Register of the University of Oxford. A complete

Record of University Honours, Officers, Distinctions, and Class Lists; of the
Heads of Colleges, See.. &c., from the Thirteenth Century to 1883.

MATHEMATICS, PHYSICAL SCIENCE, &c.

A eland (H. W., M.D., F.R.S.). Synopsis of the Pathological

Series in the Oxford Museum. 1867. 8vo. 2s. 6d.

Astronomical Observations made at the University Observ-

atory, Oxford, under the direction of C. Pritchard, M.A. No. 1. 1878.

Royal 8vo. paper covers, 3^. 6d.

De Bary {Dr* A.) Comparative Anatomy of the Vegetative

Organs of the Phanerogams and Ferns. Translated and Annotated by F. O.
Bower, M.A,, F.L.S., and D. H. Scott, M.A., Ph.D., E.L.S. With two
hundred and forty-one woodcuts and an Index. Royal Svo., half morocco,
1 /. 2 s. 6d.

Muller {Jf On certain Variations in the Vocal Organs of

the Passeres that have hitherto escaped notice. Translated by F. J. Bell, B. A.,
and edited, with an Appendix, by A. H. Garrod, M.A., F.R.S. With Plates.
1878. 4to. paper covers, 7s. 6 d.

CLARENDON PRESS , OXFORD .

Phillips ( John , M.A., F.RS .). Geology of Oxford and the
Valley of the Thames . 1871. 8vo. 2IJ.

Vesuvius . 1869. Crown 8vo. 105. 6^.

Price ( Bartholomew , M.A. } F.R.S.). Treatise on Infinitesimal

Calculus.

Vol. I. Differential Calculus. Second Edition. 8vo. 145-. 6a?.

Vol. II. Integral Calculus, Calculus of Variations, and Differential Equations.
Second Edition, 1865. 8vo. i8j*.

Vol. III. Statics, including Attractions; Dynamics of a Material Particle.
Second Edition, 1868. Svo. i6j.

Vol. IV. Dynamics of Material Systems ; together with a chapter on Theo-
retical Dynamics, by W. F. Donkin, M.A., F.R.S. 1862. 8vo. i6j.

Rigaud' s Correspondence of Scientific Men of the 17 th Century ,

with Table of Contents by A. de Morgan, and Index by the Rev. J. Rigaud,
M.A. 2 vols. 1841-1862. 8vo. 1 Si*. 6 d.

Rolleston ( George , M.D . , F.R.S.). Scientific Papers and Ad-
dresses.- Arranged and Edited by William Turner, M.B., F.R.SA With a
Biographical Sketch by Edward Tylor, F.R.S. With Portrait, Plates, and
Woodcuts. 2 vols. 8 vo. il. 4s.

Sachs' T ext- Book of Botany , Morphological and Physiological.
A New Edition. Translated by S. H. Vines, M.A. 1882. Royal 8vo., half
morocco, 1/. 11 j. 6 d.

Westwood (J. 0 . s M.A . , F.R.S. ). Thesaurus Entomologicus

Hofieianus, or a Description of the rarest Insects in the Collection given to
the University by the Rev. William Hope. With 40 Plates. 1S74. Small
folio, half morocco, 7/. ioj.

Translated by various Oriental Scholars, and edited by
F. Max Muller.

[Demy 8vo. cloth.]

Vol. I. The Upanishads. Translated by F. Max Muller.

Part I. The JTMndogya-upanishad, The Talavaktra-upanishad, The Aitareya-
&ra«yaka, The Kaushitaki-brahnwza-upanishad, and The V a^asaneyi-sa whita-
upanishad. xos. 6d. :

Vol. II. The Sacred Laws of the Aryas, as taught in the

Schools of Apastamba, Gautama, V&sishMa, and Baudh&yana. Translated by
Prof. Georg Biihler. Part I. Apastamba and Gautama. 10s. 6d.

12

CLARENDON PRESS , OXFORD .

Vol. III. The Sacred Books of China. The Texts of Con-
fucianism. Translated by James Legge, Part I. The Shu King, The Reli-
gious portions of the Shih King, and The Iisi&o King. 1 2^. 6 d.

Vol. IV. The Zend-Avesta. Translated by James Darme-

steter. Part I. The Vendtdad. ioj. 6 d.

Vol. V. The Pahlavi Texts. Translated by E. W. West.

Part I. The BundahLr, Bahman Yart, and Shayast la-shayast. 12 s. 6 d.

Vols. VI and IX. The Qur'cin. Parts I and II. Translated

by E. H. Palmer. 21 s,

Vol. VII. The Institutes of Vishnu. Translated by Julius

Jolly. 10 s. 6 d.

Vol. VIII. The Bhagavadgita, with The Sanatsu^atiya, and

The AnugitiL Translated by Kashinath Trimbak Telang. ioj-. 6 d.

Vol. X. The Dhammapada, translated from Pali by F. Max

Miiller; and The Sutta-Nipata, translated from Pali by V. Fausboll; being
Canonical Books of the Buddhists, ioj-. 6 d ,

Vol. XI. Buddhist Suttas. Translated from Pali by T. W.

Rhys Davids. 1. The Mahaparinibbana Suttanta ; 2. The Dhamma-^akka-
ppavattana Sutta ; 3. The. Tevigga Suttanta; 4. The Akahkheyya Sutta;
5. The Aetokhila Sutta ; 6 . The Maha-sudassana Suttanta ; 7. The Sabbasava
Sutta. 10s. 6 d.

Vol. XII. The vSatapatha-Brahma^a, according to the Text

of the Madhyandina School. Translated by Julius Eggeling. Part I.
Books I and II. 1 2s. 6 d.

Vol. XIII. Vinaya Texts. Translated from the Pali by

T. W. Rhys Davids and Hermann Oldenberg. Part I. The Patimokkha.
The Mahavagga, I -IV. ioj. 6 d.

Vol. XIV. The Sacred Laws of the Aryas, as taught in the

Schools of Apastamba, Gautama, VasishMa and BaudMyana. Translated
by Georg Biihler. Part II. Vasish/^a and Baudhayana. 10 s. 6 d.

Vol. XV. The Upanishads. Translated by F. Max Muller.

Part II. The Ka///a-upanishad, The Muw^aka-upanishad, The Taittiriyaka-
upanishad, The Brfhadarawyaka-upanishad, The Yvetarvatara-upanishad, The
Pra^la-upanishad, and The Maitrayawa-Brahmawa-upanishad. 10 s. 6 d.

Vol. XVI. The Sacred Books of China. The Texts of Con-

fucianism. Translated by James Legge. Part II. The Y1 King. 10 s. 6 d.

Vol. XVII. Vinaya Texts. Translated from the P&li by

T. W. Rhys Davids and Hermann Oldenberg. Part II. The Mahavagga,
Y-X. The ATullavagga, I— III. ioj. 6 d.

CLARENDON PRESS, OXFORD.

13

Vol. XVIII. Pahlavi Texts. Translated by E. W. West.

Part XI. The Ba^istan-i Dinik and The Epistles of Manu^ihar, 1 2 s. 6 d.
Vol. XIX. The Fo-sho-hlng-tsan-king. A Life of Buddha

by Ad'vaghosha Bodhisattva, translated from Sanskrit into Chinese by Bhar-
maraksha, a.d. 420, and from Chinese into English by Samuel Beal. 10s. 6 d.

Vol. XX. Vinaya Texts. Translated from the Pali by T. W.
Rhys Bavids and Hermann Oldenberg. Part III. The Aullavagga, IV-XII.
Svo. cloth, xos. 6 d.

Vol. XXL The Saddharma-piw^arika ; or, the Lotus of the

True Law. Translated by H. Kern. Svo. cloth, 12s. 6 c i.

Vol. XXII. £aina-Sutras. Translated from Prakrit by Her-
mann Jacobi. Part I. The AHranga-Sdtra. The Kalpa-Sutra. 8vo. cloth,
io^. 6 d.

Vol. XXIII. The Zend-Avesta. Translated by James Dar-

mesteter. Part IX. The Sirozahs, Yarts, and Nyaytr. Svo. cloth, 10s. 6 d.

Vol. XXIV. Pahlavi Texts. Translated by E. W. West.

Part III. BM-i Mainog-i IChirad, .Sikand-gumanik, and Sad-Dar. 8vo.
cloth, ios. 6 d.

Second Series,

The following Volumes are in the Press:-—

Vol. XXV. Manu. Translated by Georg Biihler.

Vol. XXVI. The Xatapatha-Brahmawa. Translated by

Julius Eggeling. Part II.

Vols. XXVII and XXVIII. The Sacred Books of China.

The Texts of Confucianism. Translated by James Legge. Parts III and IV.
The Li Ft, or Collection of Treatises on the Rules of Propriety, or Ceremonial
Usages.

Vols. XXIX and XXX. The Grzhya-sutras, Rules of Vedic

Bomestie Ceremonies. Translated by Hermann Oldenberg. Parts I and II.

Vol. XXXI. The Zend-Avesta. Part III. The Yazna,

Visparad, Afrtgfin, and Gahs. Translated by the Rev. L. H. Mills.

Vol. XXXII. Vedic Hymns. Translated by F. Max Muller.

Parti. .... ' /V

*** The Second Series will consist of Twenty-Four Volumes in all.

14

CLARENDON PRESS, OXFORD.

Ctoithtro Snies

I. EIGLISH.

A First Reading Rook . By Marie Eichens of Berlin ; and

edited by Anne J. Clough. Extra fcap. 8vo. stiff covers, 4 d.

Oxford Reading Book , Part L For Little Children. Extra

fcap. 8vo. stiff covers, 6 d.

Oxford Reading Book , Part II. For junior Classes. Extra

fcap. 8vo. stiff covers, 6 d.

An Elementary English Grammar and Exercise Book . By

O. W. Tancock, M.A. Second Edition. Extra fcap. 8vo. is. (d.

An English Grammar and Reading Book , for Lower Forms

in Classical Schools. By O. W. Tancock, M.A. Fourth Edition. Extra
fcap. 8 vo. %s. (d.

Typical Selections from the best English Writers , with Intro-
ductory Notices. Second Edition. In Two Volumes. Extra fcap. 8vo.
3-f. 6 d. each.

Vol. I. Latimer to Berkeley. Vol. II. Pope to Macaulay.

Shairp ( jF . C., LL.D.). Aspects of Poetry ; being Lectures

delivered at Oxford. Crown 8vo. ioj-. (d.

A Book for the Beginner in Anglo-Saxon . By John Earle,

M.A. Third Edition. Extra fcap. 8vo. 2^. 6 d.

An Anglo-Saxon Reader . In Prose and "Verse. With Gram-
matical Introduction, Notes, and Glossary. By Henry Sweet, M.A. Fourth
Edition, Revised and Enlarged. Extra fcap. 8vo. 8 s. 6 d .

An Anglo-Saxon P rimer , with Grammar , Notes , and Glossary .

By the same Author. Second Edition. Extra fcap. 8vo. 2 s. 6 d.

First Middle English Primer , with Grammar and Glossary .

By the same Author. Extra fcap. 8vo. 2 s.

The Philology of the English Tongue . , By J. Earle, M.A.

Third Edition. Extra fcap. 8vo. 7*r. 6 d.

A Handbook of Phonetics , including a Popular Exposition of

the Principles of Spelling Reform. By Henry Sweet, M.A. Extra fcap. 8vo
■ 4 s * 6 d. V " / ’

The Ormulum; with the Notes and Glossary of Dr. R. M.

White. Edited by R. Holt, M.A. 1878. 2 vols. Extra fcap. 8vo. 21.P.

CLARENDON PRESS, OXFORD . 15

English Plant Names from the Tenth to the Fifteenth

Century. By J. Earle, M.A. Small fcap. 8vo, 5 s.

Specimens of Early English . A New and Revised Edition.

With Introduction, Notes, and Glossarial Index. By R. Morris, LL.D,, and
W. W. Skeat, M.A.

Part I. From Old English Homilies to King Horn (a.d. 1150 to a.d. 1300).
Extra fcap. 8vo. gs.

Part'll. From Robert of Gloucester to Gower (a.d. 1298 to A.D. 1393).
Second Edition. Extra fcap. 8vo. 7-r. 6d.

Specimens of English Literature , from the c Ploughmans

Crede’ to the 4 Shepheardes Calender’ (a.d. 1394 to A.D. 1579)* With Intro-
duction, Notes, and Glossarial Index. By W. W. Skeat, M.A. Extra fcap.
8 vo. 7 r. 6d.

The Vision of William concerning Piers the Plowman , by
William Langland. Edited, with Notes, by W. W. Skeat, M.A. Third
Edition. Extra fcap. 8vo. 4s. 6d.

Chaucer . I. The Prologue to the Canterbury Tales; the
Knightes Tale ; The Nonne Prestes Tale. Edited by R. Morris, Editor of
Specimens of Early English, &c., &c. Fifty-first Thousand. Extra fcap. Bvo.
2s. 6d.

• II. The Prioresses Tale ; Sir Thopas ; The Montes

Tale ; The Clerkes Tale ; The Squieres Tale, &c. Edited by W. W. Skeat,
M.A. Second Edition. Extra fcap. 8vo. 4s. 6d .

III. The Tale of the Man of Lawe ; The Pardoneres

Tale ; The Second Nonnes Tale ; The Chanouns Yemannes Tale. By the
same Editor. Second Edition. Extra fcap. 8vo. 4 s. 6d.

Gamely The Tale of Edited with Notes, Glossary, &c., by

W. W. Skeat, M.A. Extra fcap. 8vo. Stiff covers, is. 6 d.

Spenser's Faery Qtieene. Books I and II. Designed chiefly
for the use of Schools. With Introduction, Notes, and Glossary. By G. W.
Kitchin, D.D.

Book I. Tenth Edition. Extra fcap. 8vo. 2 s. 6d .

Book II. Sixth Edition. Extra fcap. 8vo, 2 s. 6d.

Hooker. Ecclesiastical Polity , Book I. Edited by R. W.

Church, M.A. Second Edition. Extra fcap. 8vo. 2 r.

Marlowe and Greene . Marlowe's Tragical History of Dr.

Fimsius , and Greend s Honourable History of Friar Bacon and Friar Bungay .
Edited by A. W. Ward, M.A. 1878. Extra fcap. Svo. $s. 6d.

Marlowe. Edward II. With Introduction, Notes, &c. By

O. w. Tancock, M.A. Extra fcap. Svo. gr.

CLARENDON PRESS, OXFORD.

Shakespeare. Select Plays. Edited by W. G. Clark, M.A.,

and W. Aldis Wright, M.A. Extra fcap. 8vo» stiff covers.

The Merchant of Venice, is. Macbeth, is. 6d.

Richard the Second, is. 6d. Hamlet, is.

Edited by W. Aldis Wright, M.A.

The Tempest, is. 6d. A Midsummer Night’s Dream

As You Like It. is. 6d.

Julius Caesar, is.

Richard the Third, is. 6d.

King Lear, is. 6d.

Coriolanus. is. 6d.

Henry the Fifth, is.

Twelfth Night, is. 6d. Just Pub-
lished.

Shakespeare as a Dramatic Artist ; a popular Illustration of
the Principles of Scientific Criticism. By Richard G. Moulton, M.A. Crown
8vo. $s. Just Published,

Bacon. I. Advancement of Learning . Edited by W. Aldis

Wright, M.A. Second Edition. Extra fcap. 8vo. 4s. 6d.

II. The Essays. With Introduction and Notes. In

Preparation,

Milton. I. Areopagitica. With Introduction and Notes. By

J. W. Hales, M.A, Third Edition. Extra fcap. Svo. $s.

II. Poems. Edited by R. C. Browne, M.A. 2 vols.

Fifth Edition. Extra fcap. 8vo. 6s. 6d. Sold separately, Vol. 1 . 4^.; VoL II. 3 s.
In paper covers: —

Lycidas, 3 d. U Allegro, 3 d. II Penseroso, 4 d. Comus, 6d.

Samson Agonistes, 6d.

- III. Samson Agonistes. Edited with Introduction and

Notes by John Churton Collins. Extra fcap. 8vo. stiff covers, is.

Bunyan. I. The Pilgrim's Progress , Grace Abounding , Rela-
tion of the Imprisonment of Mr. John Bunyan. Edited, with Biographical
Introduction and Notes, by E. Venables, M.A, 1879. Extra fcap. 8vo. 5.?,

— - — II. Holy War , Edited by E. Venables, M.A.

In the Press.

Dryden. Select Poems . Stanzas on the Death of Oliver

Cromwell; Astrsea Redux; Annus Mirabilis ; Absalom and Achitophel ;
Religio Laid ; The Hind and the Panther, Edited by W. D; Christie, M.A,
Second Edition. Extra fcap. Svo, y. 6d.

Locke’s Condtict of the Understanding. Edited, with Intro-

duction, Notes, &c., by T. Fowler, M.A, Second Edition, Extra fcap. 8vo. is.

CLARENDON PRESS, OXFORD. 17

Addison. Selections from Papers in the Spectator. With

Notes. By T. Arnold, M.A. Extra fcap. 8vo. 4s*. 6 d.

Steele . Selections from . By Austin Dobson. Nearly ready .
Pope . With Introduction and Notes. By Mark Pattison, B.D.
I. Essay on Man. Sixth Edition. Extra fcap. 8vo.

is. 6 d .

II. Satires and Epistles. Second Edition. Extra fcap.

8vo. 2 s.

Parnell. The Hermit . Paper covers, 2d.

Johnson. I. Rasselas ; Lives of Pope and Dry den. Edited
by Alfred Milnes, B.A. (London). Extra fcap. 8vo. 4^. 6 d.

II. Vanity of Human Wishes. With Notes, by E. J.

Payne, M.A. Paper covers, 4 d.

Gray. Selected Poems. Edited by Edmund Gosse, Clark

Lecturer in English Literature at the University of Cambridge. Extra fcap.
8vo. Stiff covers, is. 6 d. In white Parchment, %s.

Elegy a 7 id Ode on Eto?i College. Paper covers, 2d.

Goldsmith . The Deserted Village . Paper covers, 2d.

Coivper. Edited, with Life, Introductions, and Notes, by
H. T. Griffith, B.A.

I. The Didactic Poems of 1782, with Selections from the

Minor Pieces, A.D. 1779-1783. Extra fcap. 8vo. 3 s.

II. The Task , zvith Tirocinium , and Selections from the

Minor Poems, A.D. 1784-1799. Second Edition. Extra fcap. 8vo. 3 s.

Burke. Select Works. Edited, with Introduction and Notes,

by E. J. Payne, M.A.

I. Thoughts on the Present Discontents ; the two Speeches

on America. Second Edition. Extra fcap. 8vo. 4.?. 6 d.

II. Reflections on the French Revolution. Second Edition.

Extra fcap. 8vo. 5 s.

— - — III. Four Letters on the Proposals for Peace with the

Regicide Directory of France. Second Edition. Extra fcap. 8vo. 5 s.

Keats . Hyperion , Book I. With Notes by W. T. Arnold, B.A.

Paper covers, $d.

Scott. Lay of the Last Minstrel . Introduction and Canto I,

with Preface and Notes by W. Minto, M.A. Paper covers, 6 d.

CLARENDON PRESS, OXFORD.

Rudimenta Latina. Comprising Accidence, ana exercises oi

a very Elementary' Character, for the use of Beginners. By John Barrow
Allen, M.A. Extra fcap. 2s.

An Elementary Latin Grammar . By the same Author.

Third Edition, Revised and Corrected. Extra fcap. 8 vo. 2s. o d.

A First Latin Exercise Book . By the same Author, Fouith

Edition. Extra fcap. 8 vo. 2s.6d.

A Second Latin Exercise Book . By the same Author. Extra
fcap. Svo. 3 6d.

Reddenda Minora, or Easy Passages, Latin and Greek, for

Unseen Translation. For the use of Lower Forms. Composed and selected
by C. S. Jerram, M.A. Extra fcap. is. 6d.

Anglic e Reddenda, or Easy Extracts, Latin and Greek, for

Unseen Translation. By C. S. Jerram, M.A. Third Edition, Revised and
Enlarged. Extra fcap. 8vo. 2*. 6d.

Passages for Translation into Latin . For the use of Passmen

and others. Selected by J. Y. Sargent, M.A. Fifth Edition. Extra fcap.
8 vo. 2s. 6d.

Exercises in Latin Prose Composition; with Introduction

Notes and Passages of Graduated Difficulty for Translation into Latin. By
G G Ramsay, M.A., LL.D. Second Edition. Extra fcap. Svo. 6d.

First Latin Reader. By T. J. Nunns, M.A. Third Edition.

Extra fcap, 8 vo. 2 $.

Caesar. The Commentaries (for Schools). With Notes and

Maps, By Charles E. Moberly, M.A.

Parti. The Gallic War. Second Edition. Extra fcap. 8 vo. 4*. *>d.

Part II. The Civil War. Extra fcap. 8vo. 3s. 6d.

The Civil War. . Book I. Second Edition. Extra fcap. Svo. 2*.

Cicero. Selection of interesting and descriptive passages. Witf
Notes. By Henry Walford, M.A. In three Parts. Extra fcap. 8vo. 4 s. 6a
Each Part separately, limp, is. 6d.

Part I. Anecdotes from Grecian and Roman History. Third Edition.

Part II. Omens and Dreams: Beauties of Nature. Third Edition.

Part III. Rome’s Rule of her Provinces. Third Edition.

Cicero. Selected Letters (for Schools). With Notes. By th
late C. E. Prichard, M.A., and E. R. Bernard, M.A. Second Ednioi
Extra fcap. 8vo. 3J.

CLARENDON PRESS, OXFORD.

Cicero. Select Orations (for Schools). In Verrem I. De
Xmperio Gn. Pompeii. Pro Archia. Phiiippica IX. With Introduction and
Notes by J. R. King, M.A. Second Edition. Extra fcap. 8vo. 2 s. 6d.

Cornelius Nepos . With Notes. By Oscar B’rowning, M.A.

Second Edition. Extra fcap. 8vo. 2 s. 6d.

Livy . Selections (for Schools). With Notes and Maps. By

H. Lee- Warner, MA. Extra fcap. 8vo. In Parts, limp, each is. 6d.

Part I. The Caudine Disaster.

Part II. Hannibal’s Campaign in Italy.

Part III. The Macedonian War.

Livy . Books V— VII. With Introduction and Notes. By

A. R. Clner, B.A. Extra fcap. 8vo. 3 j, 6d .

Ovid. Selections for the use of Schools. With Introductions

and Notes, and an Appendix on the Roman Calendar. By W, Ramsay, M.A.
Edited by G. G. Ramsay, M.A. Second Edition. Extra fcap. 8vo. $$. 6d.

Pliny. Selected Letters (for Schools). With Notes. By the

late C. E. Prichard, M.A., and E. R. Bernard, M.A. Second Edition. Extra
fcap. 8 vo. 3r.

Tacitus . The Annals . Books I-XV. Edited, with Introduc-

tion and Notes for the use of Schools and Junior Students, by H. Furneaux,
M.A. Extra fcap. 8vo. 5^.

Catulli Veronensis Liber. Iterum recognovit, apparatum cri-
licum prolegomena appendices addidit, Robinson Ellis, A. M. 1878. Demy
8 vo. 16s.

A Commentary on Catullus. By Robinson Ellis, M.A.

1876. Demy 8vo. 1 6 s.

Veronensis Carmina S electa > secundum recognitionem

. Robinson Ellis, A.M. Extra fcap. 8vo. 3^. 6 d.

Cicero de Oratore . With Introduction and Notes. By A. S.

■ Wilkins, M.A.

Book I. 1879. 8vo. 6s. Book II. 1881. 8vo. 5 s,

Philippic Orations. With Notes. By J, R. King, M.A.

Second Edition. 1879. 8vo. io.f. 6 d.

Select Letters. With English Introductions, Notes, and

Appendices. By Albert Watson, M.A. Third Edition. 1881. Demy 8vo. 18s.

Select Letters. Text. By the same Editor. Second

Edition. Extra fcap. 8vo. as. /.

CLARENDON PRESS.. OXFORD.

Cicero pro Chtentio. With Introduction and Notes. By W.

Ramky, M.A. Edited by G. G. Ramsay. M A. Second Edition. Extra fcap.

8vo. %s.

Horace With a Commentary. Volume I. The Odes, Carmen

Seclre and Epodes. By Edward C. Wickham. M.A. Second Edition.
1877. Demy Svo. 12^.

A reprint of the above, in a size suitable for the use

of Schools. Extra fcap. Svo. 5s. 6d.

Livy, Book I. With Introduction, Historical Examination,

and Notes. By J. R. Seeley, M.A. Second Edition. 18S1. 8-vo. 6s. .

■Ovid. P- Ovidii Nasonis Ibis ■ Ex Novis Codicibus edidit,

Scholia Vetera Commentarium cum Prolegomenis Appendice Indice addidit,
R. Ellis, A.M. Demy 8vo. tor. 6 d.

Persius. The Satires. With a Translation and Commentary.
By John Conington, M.A. Edited by Henry Nettleship, M.A. Second
Edition. 1874. Svo. p- 6d -

Plautus. The Trimmimus. With Notes and Introductions.
Intended for the Higher Forms of Public Schools. By C. E. h reeman, M. A.,
and A. Sloman, M.A. Extra fcap. 8vo. 3*.

Sallust. With Introduction and Notes. By W. W. Capes,

M.A. Extra fcap. 8vo. 4.?. 6 d.

Tacitus. The Annals - Books I- VI. Edited, with Intro-

duction and Notes, by H. Fumeaux, M.A. Svo. 18s.

Virgil. With Introduction and Notes. By T. L. Papillon,

M A. Two vols. crown 8vo. 10s. 6d.

Nettleship (H., M.A.). Lectures and Essays on Subjects con-

nected with Latin Scholarship and Literature. Crown 8vo. <s. 6d.

The Roman Saturn ■: its original form in connection with

its literary development. Svo. sewed, is.

Ancient Lives of Vergil . With an Essay on the Poems

of Vergil, in connection with his Life and Times. By H. Nettleship, M.A.
8vo. sewed, 2 s,

Papillon (T. L., M.A). A Manual of Comparative Philology.

Third Edition, Revised and Corrected. 1882. Crown 8vo. 6^.

Finder {North, M.A). Selections from the less known Latin

Poets. 1869. Demy 8vo. 15J.

Sellar ( W. Y., M.A). Roman Poets of the Augustan Age.

Virgil. By William Young Sellar, M.A., Professor of Humanity in the
University >of Edinburgh. New Edition. 1883. Crown Svo. 9 -f.

CLARENDON PRESS, OXFORD.

Sellar ( W. Y., M.A.). Roman Poets of the ■ Republic. New

Edition, Revised and Enlarged. 18S1. Svo. 14?.

Wordsworth M.A.). Fragments and Specimens of Early

Latin. With Introductions and Notes. 1S74. 8vo. i8j.

III. GREEK.

A Greek Primer , for the use of beginners in that Language.

By the Right Rev. Charles Wordsworth, D.C.L.* Seventh Edition. Extra fcap,
8vo, is. 6d.

Graecae Grammaticae Rudimenia in usum Scholarum. Auc-

tore Carolo Wordsworth. D.C.L. Nineteenth Edition, 1882. i2mo 4J.

A Greek-English Lexicon , abridged from Liddell and Scott’s

4to. edition, chiefly for the use of Schools. Twenty-first Edition. 1884.
Square 1 2mo. 7 s. 6d.

Greek Verbs, Irregular and Defective ; their forms, meaning,
and quantity; embracing all the Tenses used by Greek writers, with references
to the passages in which they are found. By W. Veitch. Fourth Edition.
Crown 8vo. 10s. 6ct.

The Elements of Greek Accentuation (for Schools) : abridged

from his larger work by H. W. Chandler, M.A. Extra fcap. 8vo. is. 6d .

A Series of Graduated Greek Readers: —

First Greek Reader . By W. G. Rushbrooke, M.L. Second

Edition. Extra fcap. Svo. 2s. 6d.

Second Greek Reader . By A. M. Bell, M.A. Extra fcapt

8vo. 3s. 6 d.

Fourth Greek Reader ; being Specimens of Greek Dialects ,

With Introductions and Notes. By W. W. Merry, M.A. Extra fcap. 8vo.

Fifth Greek Reader . Part I. Selections from Greek Epic

and Dramatic Poetry, with Introductions and Notes, By Evelyn Abbott,
M,A. Extra fcap. 8vo. 4s. 6d.

The Golden Treasury of Ancient Greek Poetry: being a Col-
lection of ihe finest passages in the Greek Classic Poets, with Introductory
Notices and Notes. By R. S. Wright, M.A. Extra fcap.. Svo. Ss. 6d.

A Gplden Treasury of Greek Prose , being a Collection of the

finest passages in the principal Greek Prose Writers, with Introductory Notices
and Notes. By R. S. Wright, M.A., and J. E. L. Shadwell, M.A. Extra fcap.
Svo, as. 6d ,

22

clarendon press, oxford.

Aeschylus. Prometheus Bound (for Schools). With Introduc-.

tion and Notes, by A. 0. Prickard, M. A. Second Edition. Extra fcap. 8 vo. 2s.

Agamemnon. With Introduction and Notes, by Arthur

Sidgwick, M.A. Second Edition. Extra fcap. 8 vo. y.

Choephoroi. With Introduction and Notes by the same

Editor. Extra fcap. Svo. 3 ^

Aristophanes. In Single Plays. Edited, with English Notes,

Introductions, &c., by W N W. Merry, M.A. Extra fcap. Svo.

I. The Clouds, Second Edition, 2 s.

IL The Acharnians, 2 s. III. The Frogs, 2 s.

Cedes. Tabula. With Introduction and Notes. By C. S.

Jerram, M.A. Extra fcap. 8 vo. is. 6d.

Euripides. Alcestis (for Schools). By C. S. Jerram, M.A.

Extra fcap. Svo. is. 6d.

Helena. Edited, with Introduction, Notes, and Critical

Appendix, for Upper and Middle Forms. By C. S. Jerram, M.A. Extra
fcap. 8 vo. 3 -f.

Iphigenia in T auris. Edited, with Introduction, Notes,

and Critical Appendix, for Upper and Middle B'orms. By C. S. Jerram, M.A.
Extra fcap. Svo. cloth, 3 .?. Just Published.

Herodotus , Selections from. Edited, with Introduction, Notes,

and a Map, by W. W. Merry, M.A. Extra fcap. 8 vo. 2 s. 6d.

Homer. Odyssey, Books I-XII (for Schools). By W. W.

Merry, M.A. Twenty-seventh Thousand. Extra fcap. 8 vo. y. 6d.

Book II, separately, is, 6d.

. Odyssey, Books XIII-XXIV (for Schools). By the

same Editor. Second Edition. Extra fcap. 8 vo. 5 .?.

Iliad, Book I (for Schools). By D. B. Monro, M.A.

Second Edition. Extra fcap. 8 vo. 2 *.

Iliad, Books I-XII (for Schools). With an Introduction,

a brief Homeric Grammar, and Notes. By D. B. Monro, M.A. Extra fcap.
Svo. 6s.

, Iliad, Books VI and XXL With Introduction and

Notes. By Herbert Hailstone, M.A. Extra fcap. Svo. 1 s.6d. each,

Lucian . Vera Historia (for Schools). By C. S. Jerram,

M.A. Second Edition. Extra fcap. Svo. is. 6d.

Plato. Selections from the Dialogues [including the whole of
the Apology and Crito ] . With Introduction and Notes by John Purves, M.A.,
and a Preface by the Rev. B. Jowett, M.A. Extra fcap. Svo. 6s. 6d.

CLARENDON PRESS, OXFORD .

23

Sophocles . In Single Plays, with English Notes, &c. By

Lewis Campbell, M.A., and Evelyn Abbott, M.A. Extra fcap. Svo, limp.
Oedipus Tyrannus, Philoctetes. New and Revised Edition, 2 s. each.
Oedipus Coloneus, Antigone, is. gd. each.

Ajax, Electra, Trachiniae, 2 s. each.

Oedipus Rex : Dindorfs Text, with Notes by the

present Bishop of St. David’s. Ext. fcap. Svo. limp, is. 6d.

Theocritus (for Schools). With Notes. By H. Kynaston,

D.D. (late Snow). Third Edition. Extra fcap. 8vo, 4s. 6d.

Xenophon . Easy Selections, (for Junior Classes). With a

Vocabulary. Notes, and Map. By J. S. Phillpotts, B.C.L., and C. S. Jerram,
M.A. Third Edition. Extra fcap. 8vo. gr. 6^.

Selections (for Schools). With Notes and Maps. By

J. S. Phillpotts, B.C.L. Fourth Edition. Extra fcap. 8vo. 3;*. 6 d .

— Anabasis , Book II. With Notes and Map. By C. S.

Jerram, M.A. Extra fcap. 8vo. 2 s.

*

' Cyropaedia, Books IV and V. With Introduction and

Notes by C. Bigg, D.D. Extra fcap. Svo. 2 s. 6d.

Aristotle's Politics. By W. L. Newman, M.A. [In preparation.]
Aristotelian Studies . L On the Structure of the Seventh

Book of the Nicomachean Ethics. By J. C. Wilson, M.A. 1879. Medium 8vo.
stiff, 5^.

Dejnosthenes and Aeschines . The Orations of Demosthenes

and iEschines on the Crown. With Introductory Essays and Notes. By
G. A. Simcox, M.A., and W. H. Simcox, M.A. 1872. Svo. 12 s.

Geldart (E. M.> B.A. ). The Modern Greek Language in its

relation to Andent Greek. Extra fcap. 8vo. 4s, 6d.

Hicks (. E . Z., M.A.). A Manual of Greek Historical Inscrip-

tions. Demy 8vo. 10^. 6d.

Homer, Odyssey, Books I-XII. Edited with English Notes,

Appendices, etc. By W. W. Merry, M.A., and the late James Riddell, M.A.
1876. Demy 8vo. 16s.

* — — A Grammar of the Homeric Dialect. By D. B. Monro,

M.A. Demy 8vo. 10.?. 6d.

CLARENDON PRESS, OXFORD.

Sophocles. The Plays and Fragments. With English Notes

and Introductions, by Lewis Campbell, M.A. 2 vols.

Vol. I. Oedipus Tyrannus. Oedipus Coloneus. Antigone. Second
Edition. 1879. Svo. 1 6s.

Yol. II. Ajax. Electra. Trachiniae. Philoctetes. Fragments. 1S81.
8 vo. i6j.

Sophocles. The Text of the Seven Plays. By the same

Editor. Extra fcap. 8vo. 4J. tsd.

IV. FRENCH AND ITALIAN.

Brae bet’s Etymological Dictionary of the French Language.

with a Preface on the Principles of French Etymology. Translated into
English by G. W. Kitchin, D D. Third Edition. Crown 8vo. p. 6d.

Historical Grammar of the French Language . Trans-
lated into English by G. W. Kitchin, D.D. Fourth Edition. Extra fcap.
Svo. 3^. 6d.

Works by GEORGE SAINTSBURY, M.A.

Primer of French Literature . Extra fcap. 8vo. as.

Short History of French Literature. Crown 8vo. 10 s.6d.
Specimens of French Literature , from Villon to Hugo. Crown

8vo. $s.

Corneille's Horace. Edited, with Introduction and Notes, by-

George Saintsbury, M.A. Extra fcap. 8vo. 2 s. 6 d.

Moliire's Les Pr Menses Ridicules . Edited, with Introduction
and Notes, by Andrew Lang, M.A. Extra fcap. Svo. is. 6d.

Voltaire's Merope . Edited, with Introduction and Notes, by

George Saintsbury. Fxtra fcap. 8vo. cloth, 2 s. Just Published .

Beaumarchais’ Le Barbier de Seville. Edited, with Introduction
and Notes, by Austin Dobson. Extra fcap. Svo. 2 s. 6d.

Musset's On ne badine pas avec V Amour, and Fantasio . Edited,

with Prolegomena, Notes, etc., by Walter Kerries Pollock. Extra fcap.
8yo. 2 $,

Quinefs Lettres a sa Mire. Selected and edited by George

Saintsbury. Extra fcap. 8vo, cloth, 2$. Just Published.

Sainte-Beuve. Selections fr dm the Causer ies dtt Lundi. Edited
by George Saintsbury. Jn the Press .

CLARENDON PRESS, OXFORD .

25

L Eloquence dela Chair e et de la Tribune Frangaises . Edited

by Paul Blouet, B.A. (Univ. Gallic.). Vol. I. French Sacred Oratory.
Extra fcap. 8vo. 2 s, 6d.

Edited by GUSTAVE MASSON, B.A.

Corneille's China, and Molifaes Les Femmes Sav antes. With

Introduction and Notes. Extra fcap. 8vo. 2 s. 6d,

Louis XIV and his Contemporaries ; as described in Extracts

from the best Memoirs of the Seventeenth Century. With English Notes,
Genealogical Tables, &c. Extra fcap. 8vo. 2J\ 6d.

Maistre, Xavier de . Voyage autour de rna Chambre . Ourika,

by Madame de Duras; La Dot de Suzette, by Fieveej Les Jumeaux de
PH6tel Corneille, by Edmond About; Mdsaventures d’un Ecolier, by Rodolphe
Topffer. Second Edition. Extra fcap. 8vo. 2 s. 6d.

M oli Ire's Les Fourberies de Seapin. With Voltaire’s Life of

Moliere. Extra fcap. 8vo. stiff covers, is. 6d.

Molihe's Les Fourberies de Seapin, and Racines Athalie .

With Voltaire’s Life of Moliere. Extra fcap. 8vo. 2 s. 6d.

Racine's Andromaque, and Corneilles Le Menteur • With

Louis Racine’s Life of his Father. Extra fcap. 8vo. 2 s. 6d.

Regnard's Le Joueur, and Brueys and Palaprafs Le Grondeur .

Extra fcap. 8vo. 2 s. 6d.

Sevigne, Madame de, and her chief Contemporaries, Selections
from the Correspondence of Intended more especially for Girls* Schools.
Extra fcap. 8vo. 3^.

Dante . Selections from the Inferno. With Introduction and

Notes. By H. B. Cotterill, B.A. Extra fcap. 8vo. 4s. 6d.

Tasso . La Gerusalemme Liber at a. Cantos i, ii. With In-
troduction and Notes. By the same Editor. Extra fcap. 8vo, 'is, 6d.

V. . GERMAIN.

GERMAN COURSE. By HERMANN LANGE.

The Germans at Home ; a Practical Introduction to German

Conversation, with an Appendix containing the Essentials of German Grammar.
Second Edition. 8vo. 2 s. 6d .

The German Manual; a German Grammar, Reading Book,

* and a Handbook of German Conversation. 8vo. 7 s. 6d,

26

CLARENDON PRESS, OXFORD.

Grammar of the German Language. Svo. 3 s.6d.

This ' Grammar ’ is a reprint of the Grammar contained in ‘The German Manual,’
.and, in this separate form, is intended for the use of Students who wish to make
themselves acquainted with German Grammar chiefly for the purpose of being
able to read German books.

German Composition ; A Theoretical and Practical Guide to

the Art of Translating English Prose into German, Svo. 4?. 6 c 4

Lessing's Laokoon. With Introduction, English Notes, etc.

By A. Hamann, Phil. Doc., M.A. Extra fcap. Svo. 4?. 6nT.

Schiller's Wilhelm Tell. Translated into English Verse by

E. Massie, M.A. Extra fcap. Svo. 5 s.

Also, Edited by C. A. BUCHHEIM, Phil, Boo,

Goethe's Egmont . With a Life of Goethe, &c« Third Edition,

Extra fcap. Svo. 3<f.

Iphigenie auf Tauris . A Drama. With a Critical In-

troduction and Notes. Second Edition. Extra fcap. Svo. 3-?.

Heine's Prosa, being Selections from his Prose Works. With

English Notes, etc. Extra fcap. Svo. 4?. 6d.

Lessing's Minna von Barnhehn . A Comedy. With a Life

of Lessing, Critical Analysis, Complete Commentary, &c. Fourth Edition.
Extra fcap. 8vo, 3 s. 6d.

Nathan der Weise . With Introduction, Notes, etc.

Extra fcap. Svo. 4s. 6 d.

Schiller'' s Historiscke Skizzen; Egmont' s Leben und Tod , and

Bdagerung von Antwerpen. Second Edition. Extra fcap. Svo. 2 s* 6d.

Wilhelm Tell \ With a Life of Schiller ; an his-
torical and critical Introduction, Arguments, and a complete Commentary,
and Map. Sixth Edition. Extra fcap. 8vo. 3*. 6d>

-■ — - Wilhelm Tell. School Edition. With Map. Extra fcap.

8vo. 2S.

Halms Griseldis. In Preparation.

Modern German Reader , A Graduated Collection of Prose

Extracts from Modern German writers : —

Part I, With English Notes, a Grammatical Appendix, and a complete
Vocabulary. Fourth Edition. Extra fcap. Svo. 2 s.6d.

Parts II and III in Preparation,

CLARENDON PRESS, OXFORD. , 27

VI. MATHEMATICS, PHYSICAL SCIENCE, &o.

, By LEWIS HENSLEY, M.A.

Figures made Easy : a first Arithmetic Book. (Introductory
to 4 The Scholar’s Arithmetic.’) Crown 8 vo. 6 d.

Answers to the Examples in Figures made Easy , tog-ether

with two thousand additional Examples formed from the Tables in the same,
with Answers. Crown 8vo. is.

The Scholars Arithmetic: with Answers to the Examples.

Crown 8 vo. 4-r. 6 d.

The Scholar's Algebra . An Introductory work on Algebra.

Crown 8vo. 4*. 6 d.

Baynes (R.E.,M.A.). Lessons on Thermodynamics . 1878.

Crown 8vo. 7 s. 6 d.

Chambers ( G . F., E.R.A.S.). A Handbook of Descriptive

Astronomy. Third Edition. 1877. Demy 8vo. 28^.

Clarke {Col. A. R.,C.B.,R.El). Geodesy . 1880. 8vo. 1 as. 6 d.
Donkin (W. F., M.A., F.R.S.). Acoustics . 1870. Crown 8vo.

7-y. 6 d.

Galton ( Douglas , C.B., E.R.S.). The Construction of Healthy

Dwellings ; namely Houses, Hospitals, Barracks, Asylums, &c. Demy 8vo,
10s. 6 d .

Hamilton (R. G . Cl), and J. Ball. Book-keeping . New and

enlarged Edition. Extra fcap. 8vo. limp cloth, 2 s.

Har court ( A . G. Vernon, M.A . ), and H. G. Madan , M.A.

Exercises in Practical Chemistry . Vol. I. Elementary Exercises. Third
Edition. Crown 8vo. 9^.

Maclaren ( Archibald ). A System of Physical Education :

Theoretical and Practical. Extra fcap. 8vo. fs. 6 d.

Madan (H G., M.A . ). Tables of Qualitative Analysis .

Large 4*0. paper, 4^. 6 d.

Maxwell (J. Clerk , M.A . , F.R.S.), A Treatise on Electricity

and Magnetism. Second Edition. 2 vols. Demy 8vo, tl. us. 6 d.

An Elementary Treatise on Electricity . Edited by

William Garnett, M.A. Demy 8vo. 7 s. 6 d.

28 'CLARENDON PRESS, OXFORD.

Minchin ( G . M„ M.A.). A Treatise on Statics. Third

Edition, Corrected and Enlarged. Vol. I. Equilibrium of Coplanar Forces .

8 vo. gs. Just Published Vol. II. In the Press.

Uniplanar Kinematics of Solids and Fluids . Crown 8vo.

7 s. 6 d.

R oiks ton (G., M.D., F.R.S.). Forms of Animal Life. Illus-

trated by Descriptions and Drawings of Dissections. A New Edition in the
Press,

Smyth . A Cycle of Celestial Objects . Observed Reduced,

and Discussed by Admiral W.H. Smyth, R. N. Revised, condensed, and greatly
enlarged by G. F. Chambers, F.R.A.S. i88t. 8vo. Price reduced to 12 s.

Stewart ( Balfour , LL.D F.R.S.). A Treatise on Heat , with

numerous Woodcuts and Diagrams. Fourth Edition. 1881. Extra fcap. 8 vo,
7r. 6 d.

S tory-M ask dyne (M. H. M.A.). Crystallography . In the

Press.

Vernon-Harcourt (L. F., M.A.). A Treatise on Rivers and

Canals, relating to the Control and Improvement of Rivers, and the Design,
Construction, and Development of Canals. 2 vols, (Vol. I, Text. Vol. II,
Plates.) 8vo. 21 s.

— Harbours and Docks ; their Physical Features, History,
Construction, Equipment, and Maintenance ; with Statistics as to their Com-
mercial Development. 2 vols, 8vo. 25 s.

Watson {H. W., M.A.). A Treatise on the Kinetic Theory

of Cases. 1876, 8vo. 3r. 6 d.

Watson (H. W„ M.A.), and S. H. Burbury, M.A. A Treci-

tise on the Application of Generalised Coordinates to the Kinetics of a Maternal
System . 1879. 8vo. 6r.

Williamson (A. W., Phil. Doc., F.R.S.). Chemistry for

Students . A new Edition, with Solutions. 1873. Extra fcap. 8vo. 8*, 6 d *

VII. HISTORY.

Finlay ( George , LL.D.). A History of Greece from its Con-
quest by the Romans to the present time, B.c. 146 to a.d. 1864. A new
Edition, revised throughout, and in part re-written, with considerable ad-
ditions, by the Author, and edited by H. F. Tozer, M.A. 1877. 7 vols. 8vo.

• 3/. 1 or.

Freeman ( E.A. , D.C.L.). A Short History of the Norman

Conquest of England. Second Edition. Extra fcap. 8vo. 2s. 6 d.

* A History of Greece . In preparation.

George (H. B ., M.A .). Genealogical Tables illustrative of Modern

History. Second Edition, Revised and Enlarged, Small 4to. I2r.

CLARENDON PRESS, OXFORD.

2'9

Hodgkin (7V). Italy and her Invaders , A.D. 37^ 47^* Illus-
trated with Plates and Maps. 2 vols. Bvo. l 4 I 3 J.

Yol. III. The Ostrogothic Invasion, and

Vol. IV. The Imperial Restoration, in the Press.

Kit chin (G. W., D.D.). A History of France. With numerous
Maps, Plans, and Tables. In Three Volumes. IS 73 - 77 - Crown Svo. each
lar. 61 .

Vol. i. Second Edition. Down to the Year 1453.

Vol. 2. From 1453-1624. Vol. 3. From 1624-1793.

Payne (E. M.A.). A History of the United States of

America. In the Press.

Ranke (L. von). A History of England, principally in the

Seventeenth Century. Translated by Resident Members of the University of
Oxford, under the superintendence of G. W. Kitchm, D.D., and C. W. Boase,
M.A. 1875. 6 vols. 8vo. 3/. 3«y.

Rawlinson {George, M.A.). A Manual of ’Ancient History.

Second Edition. Demy Svo. 14^.

Select Charters and other Illustrations of English Constitutional
History, from the Earliest Times to the Reign of-Edward I. Arranged and
edited by W. Stubbs, D.D. Fifth Edition. 1883. Crown Svo. Sr. erf.

Stubbs ( W., D.D.). The Constitutional History of England,

in its Origin and Development. Library Edition. 3 vols. demy 8vo. 2I. 8r.
Also in 3 vols. crown 8vo. price 12 s. each.

Wellesley. A Selection from the Despatches, Treaties, and

other Papers of the Marquess Wellesley. K.G., during his Government
of India. Edited by S. J. Owen, M.A. 1877. 8vo. il. 4 r.

Wellington. A Selection from the Despatches, Treaties, and

other Papers relating to India of Field-Marshal the Duke of Wellington, K.G.
Edited by S. J. Owen, M.A. 1SS0. Svo. 24.-.

A History of British India. By S. J. Owen, M.A., Reader

in Indian History in the University of Oxford. In preparation.

VIII. LAW.

Alberici Gentilis, I.C.D., I.C. Professoris Regii, De lure Belli

Librl Tres. Edidit Thomas Erskine Holland, I.C.D. 1877. Small 4to.
half morocco, 21s.

Anson {Sir William R., Bart., D.C.L.). Principles of the

English Law of Contract, and of Agency in its Relation to Contract . Second
Edition. Demy Svo. io s. 6 d.

Bentham {Jeremy). An Introduction to the Principles of

Morals and Legislation. Crown Svo. 6 s. 6 d.

Dio-by {Kenelm E.y III. A.). An Introduction to the History of

* the Law of Real Property. Third Edition. Demy Bvo. i<os. 6 d.

CLARENDON PRESS , OXFORD.

fZ/iii Tn c titu tionuifi ¥ uns Livilis Loni'inenia? vi u^uauiwr , ui,
^ Elects o f Roman fir by Ganjs « a T»M y d Commentary
by Edward Poste, M.A. Second Edition, 1875. 8\o. x8f.

Hall ( W. E.) M.A,). International Lazo. Second Edition.

Demy 8 vo. 21 jt.

Holland (T. E., D.C.L . ). The Elements' of Jurisprudence.

Second Edition. Demy 8vo. 10s. 6 d,

The European Concert in the Eastern Question , a Col-

, ' r ot w Public Acts. Edited, with Introductions anc

lection of Treaties ana otner 1 uuuu » r 7 T f p u uishcd .

Notes, by Thomas Erslane Holland, D.C.L. 8vo. 12s . 6rf. y«« / ums/iea.

Imperatoris Iustiniani Institutionum Libri Quattuor; wit*

Introductions, Commentary, Excursus and 1 ranslation. By J. B. Moyle, B.C.L.
M.A. 2 vols. Demy 8vo. 21^.

Justinian The Institutes of edited as a recension of th<

* Institutes of Gaius, by Thomas Erskine Holland, D.C.L. Second Editior

31

CLARENDON PRESS, OXFORD .

Berkeley , Selections from . With an Introduction and Notes-
For the use of Students in the Universities. By Alexander Campbell Fraser,
LL.D. Second Edition. Crown 8vo. fo. 6d.

Fowler ( T., M.A .). The Elements of Deductive Logic, designed
mainly for the use of Junior Students in the Universities. Eighth Edition,
with a Collection of Examples. Extra fcap. 8vo. 3-r. 6d.

The Elements of Indtictive Logic , designed mainly for

the use of Students in the Universities. Fourth Edition. Extra fcap. 8vo. 6s.

Edited by T. FOWLEB, M.A.

Bacon . Novum Organum . With Introduction Notes, &c.

1878. 8vo. 14J.

Lockes Conduct of the Understanding . Second Edition.

Extra fcap. 8vo. 2 s.

Green (T. H., M.A.). Prolegomena to Ethics. Edited by

A. C. Bradley, M.A. Demy 8vo. 12 s. 6d .

Hegel. The Logic of Hegel; translated from the Encyclo-
paedia of the Philosophical Sciences. With Prolegomena by William
Wallace, M.A. 1874. 8vo. 14s.

‘ Lotze's Logic , in Three Books ; of Thought, of Investigation,

and of Knowledge. English Translation; Edited by B. Bosanquet, M.A.,
Fellow of University College, Oxford. 8vo. cloth, 12s. 6d.

— — Metaphysic > in Three Books; Ontology, Cosmology,

and Psychology. English Translation; Edited by B. Bosanquet, M.A.,'
Fellow of University College, Oxford. 8vo. cloth, 1 2 s. 6d.

Martineau [James, D.D.). Types of Ethical Theory . 2 vols.

8vo. 24J.

Rogers [J. E. Thor old, M.A .). A Manual of Political Economy,

for the use of Schools. Third Edition. Extra fcap. 8vo. 4.?. 6d.

Smith's Wealth of Nations . A new Edition, with Notes, by

J. E. Thorold Rogers, M.A. 2 vols. 8vo. 1880. 21s.

X. AB.T, &e.

Hullak [John). The Cultivation of the Speaking Voice .

Second Edition. Extra fcap. 8vo. 2$. 6d.

Ouseley [Sir F. A. Gore, Bart), A Treatise on Harmony.

Third Edition. 4to. 10s.

A Treatise on Counterpoint, Canon, and Fugue, based

upon that of Cherubini. Second Edition. 4to. 1 6s.

— — A Treatise on Musical Form and General Composition.

4tO. IC.T.

33

CLARENDON PRESS, OXFORD.

Robinson (J. C-. F.S.A.). A Critical Account of the Drawings

by Michel Angelo and Rafaello, in the University Galleries , Oxford. 1870.
Crown 8vo. 4^.

Rttskin ( John , M.A . ). yJ Course of Lectures on Art , delivered

before the University of Oxford in Hilary Term, 1870. Svo. 6s.

Troutbech (f. s M. A .) and R. F. Dale , M. A . A Music Primer

(for Schools). Second Edition. Crown 8 vo. is.Gd.

Tyrwhitt (R. St. jf., Mull). A Handbook of Pictorial Art.

With coloured Illustrations, Photographs, and a chapter on Perspective by
A. Macdonald. Second Edition. 1875. Svo. half morocco, 18 s.

Vaitx { W. S. W M.A., F.R.S.). Catalogue of the Castcllani

Collection of Antiquities in the University Galleries , Oxford . Crown 8vo.
stiff cover, is.

The Oxford Bible for Teachers , containing supplemen-
tary Helps to the Study of the Bible, including Summaries
of the several Books, with copious Explanatory Notes and Tables
illustrative of Scripture History and the characteristics of Bible
Lands; with a complete Index of Subjects, a Concordance, a Diction-
ary of Proper Names, and a series of Maps. Prices in various sizes
and bindings from is. to 2 1 . 5 5-.

Helps to the Study of the Bible, taken from the
Oxford Bible for Teachers, comprising Summaries of the
several Books, with copious Explanatory Notes and Tables illus-
trative of Scripture History and the Characteristics of Bible Lands ;
with a complete Index of Subjects, a Concordance, a Dictionary
of Proper Names, and a series of Maps. Crown 8vo. cloth, $s. 6 d . ;
i6mo .cloth, is.

LONDON: HENRY FROWDE,

Oxford University Press Warehouse, Amen Corner,
OXFORD: CLARENDON PRESS DEPOSITORY,

, xi 6 High Street.

The Delegates OF the Press invite suggestions a?id advice front all fer$07is
interested in education ; and will be thankful for hints, &c. addressed to the
Secretary to the Delegates, Clarendon Press, Oxford.