The Sacred Books of the East, Vol. 13: Vinaya Texts, Part 1 (T. W. Rhys Davids; Hermann Oldenberg (trans.), 1881)
=================================================================================================================
SBE Vol. 13: Vinaya Texts Part 1 (Pâtimokkha, Mahâvagga I-IV). Completes the SBE series gap. Public domain. Internet Archive.

THE

SACRED BOOKS OF THE EAST

HKNRV FROWDK, M.A.

Pi:«I.ISIIKR XO I'HE tJNIVKRSl'rV OF OXFORI>

LOXDOK, ki>ixbijkc;h, ANJ> XICW VORK

THE

SACRED BOOKS OF THE EAST

TRANSLATED

BY VARIOUS ORIENTAL SCHOLARS

AND EDITED BY

F. MAX MULLER

VOL. XIII

#Ff0rli

AT THE CLARENDON PRESS
1881

[A// rights nsirvid']

VINAYA TEXTS

TRANSLATED FROM THE PALI

T. W. RHYS DAVIDS

AND

HERMANN OLDENBERG

PART I

THE PATDIOKKHA
THE MAHAVAGGA, I— IV

AT THE CLARENDON PRESS
' l88l

All rights reserved ]

CONTENTS.

PAGE

Introduction to the Vinaya Texts from the Pali . ix

The Patimokkha i

Niddna ......... i

The Par^ka Rules 3

The Sa^ghadisesa Rules ...... 7

The Aniyata Rules . . . . . . .16

The Nissaggiya Paiittiya Rules . . . .18

The Pa^ittiya Rules . . . . . . -32

The P4/idesaniya Rules 56

The Sekhiya Rules . . . . . *59

The Adhikarawa-samatha. Rules . . . . .68

The Mahavagga . . . . . . . .71

First Khandhaka (The Admission to the Order of

Bhikkhus) ........ 73

Second Khandhaka (The Uposatha Ceremony, and

the PStimokkha) ...... 239

Third Khandhaka (Residence during the Rainy Season) 298
Fourth Khandhaka (The Pavarawa Ceremony) . . 325

Transliteration of Oriental Alphabets adopted for the

Translations of the Sacred Books of the East . . 357

INTRODUCTION

TO THE

VINAYA TEXTS FROM THE PALI.

In the present MSS. the Vinaya Pi/aka is divided inta
the following books :

2 Pd^tttiy^ I called collectively the Sutta-vibhahga.

3. Mahdvagga, \ ^.^lled collectively the Khandhakas,

4. Aullavagga, )

5 . Parivara-pa/Aa.

These books constitute that part of the sacred literature of
the Buddhists which contains the regulations for the out-
ward life of the members of the Buddhist Sawgha — nearly
the oldest, and probably the most influential, of all Fra-
ternities of monks.

It is impossible to frame any narrower definition of the
Vinaya than this, since the gradual change of circumstances
in the Fraternity resulted in a gradual change also in the
Vinaya itself. To give any more detailed account of what
the Vinaya is, it will be necessary to trace what can be at
present ascertained of its history; to show — that is, so far
as it is yet possible to do so — the causes which led to the
esfablishment of the oldest Rules and Ceremonies of the
Order, and to follow step by step the accretions of new
literary work around this older nucleus.

F#r this purpose we propose to consider first the Rules
of the work called the Pdtimokkha; for the later texts
presuppose its existence. It is one of the oldest, if not
the oldest, of all Buddhist text-books; and it has been

VINAYA TEXTS FROM THE PALI.

inserted in its entirety into the first part of the
Vinaya, the Vibhanga^.

The Pitimokkha — the meaning of the name will bp dis-
cussed later on — seems to have owed its existence to the
ancient Indian custom of holding sacred two periods in
each month, the times of the Full Moon and of the New
Moon.

The Vedic ceremonies of the Darjapfirwamasa sacri-
fice, and of the feast or sacred day (Upavasatha) con-
nected with it, are known to have been very old, and the
custom of celebrating these days would naturally be handed
on from the Brahmans to the different Sama;/as, and be
modified and simplified (though, as it seems, sometimes
increased in number) by them, in accordance with their
creeds and their views of religious duty. According to
Buddhist tradition^ — and we see no sufficient reason for
doubting the correctness of the account — the monks of
other, that is, of non-Buddhistic sects, used to meet together
at the middle and at the close of every half-month, and
were accustomed then to proclaim their new teaching in
public. At such times the people would crowd together ;
and the different sects found an opportunity of increasing
their numbers and their influence.

The Buddhists also adopted the custom of these period-
ical meetings, but confined themselves to meeting twice in
each month And the peculiarity which gave to these
meetings among the Buddhists their distinguishing cha-
racter seems to have been borrowed by them neither from
the Brahmans nor from other dissenters, but to have been
an original invention of the Buddhists themselves. The
Brethren and Sisters made use of these half-monthly gather-
ings to confess to the assembled Order the sins and faults
which each of them had committed ; and to take upon him-
self, or herself, the penance which the transgressor had
thereby incurred. It would be unnecessary to dwell Jiiere
upon the details of these penitential meetings, as we can

* The opening sentence only is found in the Mahivagga. See below, •p. xv.

* Mahivagga II, i, i. » Ibid, II, 4, 2.

INTRODUCTION.

XI

refer the reader to the second book of the Mahivagga,
where he will find them fully set out.

It was for use at such penitential gatherings that the
text, now known as the Pdtimokkha, was composed. A list
was drawn up — which of course it would be necessary from
time to time to complete, and rectify — of those offences
which ought to be confessed and atoned for ; this list was
read out in the half-monthly meetings of the Order ; and
the Brethren and Sisters who were present were asked if
they were innocent of each one of the offences therein
mentioned.

The use of such a list must have already begun in very
early times. Tradition even ascribes the first laying down
of each clause to the Buddha himself. This tradition is of
course very far from being conclusive ; but neither should
we hold it impossible that the P&timokkha, either in its
present shape, or at least in its most essential p>arts, can
reach back to the Buddha's own time, or to that of his
personal disciples.

It is no doubt natural, through the influence of the his-
tory of early Christianity, or perhaps of the school of
Socrates, to imagine that early Buddhism was far removed
from all fixed and absolute forms, either of creed or of
liturgy; and to represent the intercourse of Gotama and
his disciples as purely and simply an interchange of
spiritual edification, where the spirit was all in all, and the
letter was nothing. But it should be remembered that
Gotama continued to live for many years, almost for two
generations, after he had formulated the essential points of
his system, and after he had founded the brotherhood of
his Order. And at that time the stream of scholastic and
legal ideas which emanated from the earlier Br&hmanism
was flowing in full force through the religious circles of
India. A rich phraseolc^ of sacred and ecclesiastical
expressions, an armoury of technical terms in philosophy
and ia theolc^ (still preserved in the Br&hmanas and Upani-
shads), had been developed and made ready for the use of
the Buddhists, and Gainas, and other reforming schools.
And earlier speculation had raised a whole series of pro-

Xll

VINAYA TEXTS FROM THE PALI.

blems, and long-continued custom had elaborated a multi-
farious system of ecclesiastical observances, which the newly
risen sects, orthodox or heretical, could grapple with, or
could adopt. It seems to us that Gotama’s disciples, from
the very beginning, were much more than a free and un-
formal union of men held together merely through their
common reverence for their Master, and through a common
spiritual aim. They formed rather, and from the first, an
organised Brotherhood.

But if we look upon the Sakyaputtiya Samaras —
for that is the name which the people in the earliest times
gave to the community — as from the first an organised
body, it is highly probable that the earliest formularies,
both of their creeds and of their liturgies, arose in a time, if
not during the life of Gotama, yet at most not long after
his decease. Now among the oldest expressions of belief
we may with certainty rank the four sentences known as
the Four Noble Truths and the summary of the so-called
Noble Eightfold Path : and the oldest liturgical formularies
preserved to us are, without any doubt, the P^timokkha
and the various Kammava/tas. It is true that these litur-
gical formularies, being so much more extensive, may
possibly have been modified or added to before they
reached the form in which we now possess them ; but there
is not the slightest trace of any other liturgies having ever
been in use in the Buddhist fraternity.

It is of course impossible to attempt to draw a line
between the part which Gotama himself may have had in
the settlement of the list of offences contained in the Pati-
mokkha, and the part that may have been taken by his
disciples. Nor indeed, considering the limited character of
our knowledge, is that a point of much importance. Bift it
should perhaps be noticed in this connection that Buddhist
tradition does ascribe to one among Gotama’s disciples — to
Upaii — an especial connection with the Vinaya. Thi# tra-
dition reaches back at least as far as the time when the
existing recension of the Pdli Pi/akas was made, for we
find it both in the Sutta- and in the Vinaya-Pi/akas,

INTRODUCTION.

Xlll

Thus in the ATullavagga (VI, 13 , j) we find the passage —

‘At that time the Blessed One proclaimed the Vinaya in
many a way to the Bhikkhus, exalted the Vinaya, exalted
the learning of the Vinaya, exalted again and again the
venerable Up^ili. Then thought the Bhikkhus, “The
Blessed One hath proclaimed the Vinaya in many a way,
hath exalted the Vinaya, hath exalted the learning of the
Vinaya, hath exalted again and again the venerable Upali.
Come now let us learn the Vinaya from the venerable
Upeili.” And so many Bhikkhus, old and middle-aged
and young, learnt the Vinaya from the venerable Up41i.’

And again in a Sutta of the Anguttara Nikiya\
where those Bhikkhus are enumerated who, in any par-
ticular respect, are the first and foremost in the Brother-
hood, Upali is mentioned as the first among the custodians
of the Vinaya (the Vinaya-dhara). And further, as is
well known, it is Up&li who, according to the tradition,
plays, at the First Council, the same part of propounder
with regard to the Vinaya Texts which Ananda does with
regard to the Dhamma Texts ^ There may well be some
truth in this very ancient tradition that Up&li was specially
conversant with the Rules of the Order ; but it would be
hazardous on that account to ascribe to Upali a share, not
only in the handing down of existing Rules, but in the
composition of the Pdtimokkha itself ^

As regards the order in which the various offences arc
arranged in the Patimokkha, the principal division cor-
responds to the division of the Order into Brethren and
Sisters: there is a Bhikkhu-p&timokkha and a Bhik-
Tchuni-pdtimokkha. In each of these two chief divisions
thg offences are divided into various classes, beginning w'ith
the heaviest •— with those, that is, that result in the exclu-

* Phayre MS., vol. i. fol. kau. » jrulla\*agga XII.

* 1» the Ceylon Chroniclers (Dlpavamsa, Bhfinav&ras 4 and 5) Updli even
becomes the first in a series of Vinayapamokkh&, or * Chiefa of the Vinaya;’
but no such office is known to the older tradition ; and had it existed it would
certainly have been mentioned in connection with the dispute about the so«
called Ten Points of the Vmaya at the Council of Vesfill.

XIV

VINAYA TEXTS FROM THE PALI.

sion of the offender from the Order. Inside each class the
sequence of the clauses follows no invariable rule. Some-
times offences of a related character are placed together in
groups ^ but sometimes those which would naturally come
together are found scattered in quite different parts of the
same class^. It is perhaps worthy of notice that there
sometimes seems, as in the two cases first mentioned in the
last note, to be an effort to arrange the offences in groups
(vagga) of ten : and in three cases we find regulations for-
mulated with the utmost brevity (the offences being merely
expressed by a locative case dependent upon pkkittiyaim)
at the commencement of such a vagga. It seems to us, at
least in the present state of our knowledge, quite impossible
to draw any conclusions from such peculiarities as to the
comparative age of any different parts of the Patimokkha.
The irregularities in arrangement may very well be due to
want of literary clearness in the compilers of the present
Form of Confession, and it would be hazardous to attempt
to trace in it any historical argument.

The various points in regard to the Patimokkha dealt
with in the foregoing paragraphs do not of themselves
show that it was at all older than the rest of the Vinaya
Pi/aka; and indeed the work, as a separate work, is not
considered among Buddhists to belong to the Pi/akas at
all, and is therefore not included in the list of works of
which the Pi/akas consist. But every single Rule or Clause
in the Patimokkha is in fact found word for word in the
Sutta-vibhahga, the quotations being so complete that the
Patimokkha might be entirely put together again by piecing
together extracts from the Vinaya Pi/aka. And it is not
possible that the Patimokkha originated merely by such a
process of dovetailing ; for the quotations in the Vinaya
Pi/aka, though not actually called quotations, bear the un-
mistakable stamp of being taken from some pre-existing
work. The cause which led to the Patimokkha, and the

^ For instance, regulations as to the conduct of Brethren towards Sisters
come together in P&^ttiya 21-30; those about meal- times in P&Httiya 31 --40 ;
about conduct in relation to armies in Paitiltiya 48-50.

* For instance, PiArittiya 5, 6, and 43-45 ; and again, P^Htiiya 20 and 62, &c.

INTRODUCTION.

XV

UpasampadA-kammavd^a, being separately preserved at
all, is the same as the cause which led to their exclusion
from the lists of the Pi/aka texts — the fact, that is, of
their being liturgical compositions.

We turn now to the consideration of the question how a
series of further literary productions were gradually de-
veloped out of, or added to the P^timokkha^.

Whoever reads through the Mah^vagga will at once be
struck by one section of it which differs completely both in
contents and in form from the rest of the work. This is the
section in the Second Book, Chapter III, paragraphs 4-8.

This passage is preceded by the opening words of the
Patimokkha; and in the passage itself those words are
separately paraphrased or explained. But the explanation
does not appear to be put into the mouth of the Buddha ; it
bears rather, without any historical or conversational form,
the impersonal shape of a simple commentary: and it only
differs from the later commentaries by peculiar solemn
diffuseness and rhetorical tautology.

If we were to consider the Mah^vagga only, the sudden
and unexplained appearance in this connection, and in this
connection only, of an isolated passage of this kind, would
have to remain an insoluble puzzle. But when we look
further into the other parts of the Vinaya Pi/ika, an answer
immediately suggests itself. In the portion of that Pi/aka
which is better called the Sutta-vibhahga, but is divided in
the MSS. into two divisions, under the somewhat misleading
titles of PAr^ika and P^ittiya, we find, at regularly recur-
ring intervals, passages of an exactly similar character, and
without any doubt of the same origin, as the isolated
passage in the Mahdvagga.

^he Sutta-vibhanga is occupied with laying down and
explaining all the Rules which are contained in the P 4 ti-
mokkha. Now, immediately after the text of each of these
Rules, there is found a word for word commentary upon

* With the following paragraphs should be compared H. Oldenbexg in the
Introduttion to his edition of the Fill text of the Vinaya, voL L pp. xvi
following.

XVI

VINAYA TEXTS FROM THE PALI.

them — precisely as a word for word commentary follows,
in the passage above cited in the Mah&vagga, upon the
quoted words of the Introductory Formular of the Pdti-
mokkha service. Here then lies the explanation. This
Introductory Formular is the only passage contained in the
P&timokkha which is not found also in the Sutta-vibhahga.
And with the explanation of the curiously isolated passage
in the Mahdvagga we have also a new fact of very great im-
portance. Not only does the Vinaya Pi/aka contain, word
for word, the whole of the Patimokkha, but it contains
also, and again word for word, the whole of an
ancient Commentary on the Pdtimokkha.

This commentary no longer exists as a separate work,
and it would indeed be strange if it did. It was not re-
quired in the simple liturgical services of Ordination and
Confession in use in the Order : and if any one wished to
refer to it, in order to refresh his memory as to the ex-
planation of any passage in the Patimokkha, he had only
to repeat, or to get repeated over to him, the corresponding
passage from the Sutta-vibhanga. There he would find the
Old Commentary (as we shall hereafter call it) word for
word, together with the additional commentary by which
it had been supplemented in later times.

A question may then possibly occur to the reader whether
we can be really sure that the Old Commentary has been
preserved complete, or whether what we have is a frag-
ment only. We think there can be but little doubt as to
the right answer. The Patimokkha, which the Old Com-
mentary deals with word by word, has been separately
preserved to us, and we know that no one phrase of it
remains uncommented upon. And further it is clear from
several passages that the words of the old commentator
were considered so sacred or authoritative that they have
been kept intact even in cases where they are in contra-
diction to the later parts of the Vinaya Pi/aka ^ It should
however be noted that this Old Commentary is philological

^ See, for instance, the comparison made by Oldenberg in the Introduction to
his edition of the text, vol. i. p. xviii. The Old Commentary follows of course
the passage there referred to in the Patimokkha.

INTRODUCTION.

XVU

and exegetical throughout, containing nothing of a le-
gendary or quasi-historical nature. It is just possible to
suggest that it may have originally contained not only such
an explanation of the meaning of each Rule, but an account
also of the occasion on which the Rule was laid down.
But it is difficult to see why greater sacredness should
have been attached to one part of the work than to
another ; or to explain how it was that, if any part was
changed, the contradictory passages above referred to were
not also altered. Every probability therefore points to the
conclusion that we have the complete work still before us,
and not fragments of it only.

It seems to us to have been precisely the absence of any
such historical account in the older Commentary which
probably led to the formation of what was practically
the new edition of the Pdtimokkha which now lies before
us in the first part of the Vinaya Pi/aka.

In the earliest books of the Sutta Pi/aka, which contains
the statement of Buddhist belief, we find — just as in the
Gospels and in the Socratic dialogues — that that belief is
not stated directly. The books profess to give, not simply
the belief itself, but the belief as the Buddha uttered it,
with an account of the time when, and the place at which,
he uttered it. The Buddha’s new method of salvation, his
new doctrine of what salvation was, did not present itself
to the consciousness of the early Buddhist community as
an idea, a doctrine, standing alone, and merely on its own
merits. In their minds it was indissolubly bound up with the
memory of the revered and striking personality of him who
had proclaimed it. So in the Sutta Pi/laka the actor and
speaker is almost throughout the Buddha himself : (occa-
sionally, but very seldom, one of his disciples.) Introduc-
tions often indeed short and tending in later times to
disappear — give a full account of where, and when, he
spolje ; what was the occasion which led to his uttering
that particular speech ; and to whom he uttered it. But,
throughout, the principal thing is what the Buddha said.

It is only natural that this distinguishing mark of the

If/' h

XVlll

VINAYA TEXTS FROM THE PALI.

literature of the Buddhist Dhamma — much of which was
no doubt in existence at a very early date — should have
reacted upon the literature of the Buddhist Vinaya. The
members of the Order were no longer contented to learn,
and to understand the meaning of, the various Rules of the
Patimokkha. A desire sprang up to have, for each one of
them also, a kind of historical basis ; to know the story of
how the Buddha himself came to lay down the Rule to his
disciples. And it was only the Brother who was properly
acquainted with all this who was accounted a real ‘ Doctor
of the Law.’

So it is said in the /Tullavagga (IX, 5, i): — Tf a Brother,
Upali, has not received gladly both the Pdtimokkhas in
their full extent, has not well divided them, well established
them, well investigated them, both sutta by sutta, and in
every detail; if when asked, “Where was this spoken by the
Blessed One?” he fail to solve the question: then there
will be some who will say to him, “ But then, let the
venerable one still devote himself to learning the Vinaya I”
thus will they say^.’

It is evident from this passage that, at the time when it
was written, such a tradition regarding each Rule was in
existence and that the knowledge of these traditions was
held in high esteem. It is therefore a reasonable con-
jecture that steps were taken to amalgamate these tradi-
tions with the Text and the Old Commentary in a complete
work, which should also contain what we may call Notes
on the Rules — that is, decisions on points of Law involved,
though not expressed in so many words, in the Rules ;
discussions on what cases were really included and what
were not, in particular regulations ; enumeration of excep-
tions to the Rules ; and so on.

Whether this conjecture be right or not, it is precisely
such a work that we iiave now before us in that part of the
Vinaya Pi/aka called the Sutta-vibhanga, and divided

— — — w

* No Upili bhikkhuno ubhayani Patimokkhani vitth^rena svigat^i honti
suvibhattani suppavatttni suvini^Mitini suttato anuvyaM^anaso, idam pan' iviiso
kattha vuttam Bhagavat^ 'ti iti pixttho na sampayatl, tassa bhavanti vatt^o :
Iiigha tava dyasm^ Vinayam pariy&puwassil 'ti ; iti 'ssa bhavanti vattdro.

INTRODUCTION.

XIX

in the present MSS., as above pointed out, into two books
called respectively — after the class of Rules with which they
begin — P^rd^ika and PciAittiya. And it is possible through-
out, without the possibility of mistake, to distinguish between
the three portions of which the present work is built up.
The historical basis comes first, leading up to the extract
from the Pdtimokkha, which is always placed in the
Buddha's own mouth ; then comes the Old Commentary,
with its verbal explanations ; and then, finally, the Notes
giving the exceptions to, and the extensions of, the Rule
in the Patimokkha.

The foregoing paragraphs show the way in which the
Sutta-vibhanga grew up on the basis of the Patimokkha.
The following books — the Khandhakas — give a detailed and
connected account of the admission into the Sa;«gha ; of
the ceremony of the Uposatha ; of the annually recurring
observances connected with the beginning and the end of
the rainy season ; of the principal disciplinary proceedings ;
and of miscellaneous details regarding the medicine, food,
dwelling-places, and daily life of the members of the Order
(Bhikkhus). As in the Sutta-vibhanga, so here also, the
outward form is arranged in such a way that in the case of
every regulation a history was given of the occasion upon
which the Buddha was supposed to have made it. These
histories again lead up, in most cases, to a liturgical formu-
lary by which the regulation was to be carried out.

While, however, in the case of the Sutta-vibhanga the
liturgy on which it has been founded has been preserved in
a separate shape, the formularies in the Khandhakas have
not as yet, except in some instances, been found in exist-
ence apart from the Khandhakas. The principal exception
is ithe Upasampada-kammavd^a (The Words of the
Act of Ordination), which recurs in its entirety in the First
Khandhaka of the MahAvagga (I, 76, 3 to I, 78, 5). It is
impcjpsible therefore as yet to trace the history of the gra-
dual formation of the Khandhakas as we think it already
possible to do in the case of the Sutta-vibhanga.

In the Khandhakas too, no doubt, the introductory

b 2

XX

VINAYA TEXTS FROM THE PALI.

histories are the latest part. But while some of the formu-
laries and regulations to which they lead up may well be very
old, others are probably additions to, or modifications of,
those older ones; and it is difficult to attempt to show,
even with regard to the exceptions above mentioned, which
are the older and which are the later. The misfortune that
these forms are not all now separately extant^ is probably
simply due to the fact that the formularies separately pre-
served (including the Patimokkha) are the only ones which
continued to be used in actual services among the mem-
bers of the Order.

Such being the nature and contents, and such’ — so far
as it can be traced — being the origin of the Sutta-vibhanga
and of the Khandhakas respectively, it follows that in all
probability they were composed, or put into their present
shape, at about the same period in the development of
early Buddhism — it is even possible that both works arose
in immediate connection.

The kind of narrative setting with which, in both cases,
the older material has been surrounded is alike in both.
Here and there in both works are included real fragments
of ancient legend or tradition — as, for instance, the account
of the events from the attainment of Buddhahood down to
the conversion of Siiriputta and Moggallana (Mahdvagga I,
1-24), the story of Devadatta (ATullavagga VII), the story
of the conversion and the sin of Sudinna (Vibhanga, First
Para^ika). But the greater number of these narratives arc
of the most meagre description, and have altogether the
appearance of being mere inventions.

There is little doubt that this is what they, in fact,
were. Actual remembrance of the Buddha, and of his
time, could have sufficed only in the rarest instances to
give a correct historical basis for the Rules or Ceremonies,
which had to be explained. We find a precisely similar

* Mr. Dickson has given us an excellent text of the Upasampada kamm'ivaila ;
and it were much to be wished that the rest of them should also be published.
Mr. Clough has given a translation of six others in 'Miscellaneous Translations
from Oriental Languages,* Loudon, 1834 ; and the Liverpool Free Library has
MSS. of others.

INTRODUCTION.

XXI

state of things leading, in the Introductions to the G^dtaka
Stories, to what were unquestionably inventions: and it
must be acknowledged that the compilers have not taken
the slightest trouble to conceal the evidently unsubstantial
character of most of these summary introductions. But it
does not follow that they were invented at the time when
the Sutta -vibhahga and the Khandhakas were compiled.
They may possibly have formed part of the traditional
explanatory teaching of the schools.

As to the time when the Sutta-vibhanga and the
Khandhakas were compiled, we have important evidence
in their silence regarding the well-known Ten Points.

The long-continued struggle on that question — as im-
portant for the history of Buddhism as the Arian contro-
versy for that of Christianity— agitated the whole Buddhist
world to its very centre ; and the attempted settlement of
it, at the Council of VesSH, led to a most serious schism in
the Buddhist Church. Now the ten expressions in which
the question was summarised or catalogued' are (as was
pointed out in the Introduction to the Pali Text of the
Mahdvagga) conspicuous by their absence from the
Vibhahga, and from all, except the last, of the Khan-
dhakas The first mention of most of them, and the first
use of any one of them as a distinctive war-cry, is found in
those last books, which are evidently an appendix to the
rest of the Khandhakas, and of an entirely different nature
from the earlier ones ; for they contain a regular historical
account of the two Councils, that of R&^gaha, and that of
Vesaii^.

^ Sii^gilona, dvai^gula, &c. (JS’ullavagga XII, i, lo).

^^That is, as war-cries ; gatardparagata occurs in the sense of the precious
metals.

* In the present division of the Khandhakas into two parts, called the Larger
and Smaller Divisions (Maha- and Kulla-vagga), there are ten Khandhakas in
the first Division, and ten, apart from this appendix, in the second Division.
With^t the appended two last Khandhakas the so-called smaller Division is
really considerably smaller than the larger Division ; and there is therefore a
good reason for the name which was given to it. With the two last Khan-
dhakas the difference in length of the two Divisions as a whole is not sufficiently
striking to account satisfactorily for the choice of their names ; and the smaller

XXll

VINAYA TEXTS FROM THE PALI.

But the Ten Points in dispute were all matters of ecclesi-
astical law, they all related to observances of the brother-
hood, they were in fact questions as to whether or not the
ancient Rules should be relaxed or not in these ten re-
spects. Is it possible that in a collection of works like the
Vibhahga and the Khandhakas, which seek to set forth,
down to the minutest detail, and even with hair-splitting
diflfuseness, all that has any relation to the daily life of the
Brethren, and the regulations of the Buddhist Order — is it
possible that in such a collection, if, when it was compiled,
the struggle on the Ten Points had already burst into flame,
there should be no reference at all, even in interpolations,
to any one of these ten disputes ? That the difference of
opinion on the Ten Points remains altogether unnoticed in
those parts of the collection where, in the natural order of
things, it would be obviously referred to, and that it is only
mentioned in an appendix where the Council held on its
account is described, shows clearly, in our opinion, that the
Vibhanga and the Khandhakas (save the two last) arc
older than the Council of Vesali — and, of course, a for-
tiori that the Patimokkha and the KammavaMs arc
so too.

The Council of Vesali is said in the Xllth Khandhaka
of the ATullavagga to have taken place a hundred years
after the Buddha s death. This is no doubt a round
number ; and the exact year of the date of the Buddha’s
death is open to question. If it be placed, according to
the Ceylon chronicles, at exactly 2 1 8 years before Asoka’s
coronation, it will fall in or about 483 b.c.

But the expression ^218 years’ can in no case be re-
garded as an absolutely reliable statement of actual fact,
and the date of 483 B.c. must therefore be taken subject to
a marginal allowance of some decades. And it appears to
one of us, for various reasons which he has elsewhere stated
at length, that the balance of probability leads to the con-
clusion that the date of the Buddha^s Parinibbdna mu€t be

Division actually contains two more Khandhakas than the larger. We lay no
stress upon these facts, but it confirms the general argument to find little points
of this kind tending in the same direction.

INTRODUCTION.

XXlll

brought down to the period from 420-400 B. C.^ We do not
enter upon that question here, as the details are intricate,
and the result uncertain ; and it is sufficient for our present
purpose to be able to fix the Council of VesciH, even after
making allowance for all possibilities, at within thirty years
of35oB.C.

We would only point out that there is really no ground
for discontent with a result which can be fixed, after all,
within a few decades. For what difference does that make
in this case ? If we had to deal with Grecian history, such
a result might well be deemed unsatisfactory. There are
differences, both personal and political, between Greece in
480, in 440, and in 400 — differences well known to us. But
whether we fix the date of an event in India in 480, or in
440, what does it, at present, matter ? Who would be bold
enough to say that the mention of India in 480 B.C. calls
up to his mind a condition of things different from that
suggested by the mention of India in 440 B. C., or even in
400 B.C. We need not therefore take too much to heart
the uncertainty of this chronological result ; though we
may regret that our comfort is drawn from no better
source than our want of knowledge.

The Vibhanga and the Twenty Khandhakas were at that
time (circa 350 B.C.) already held in such high repute that
no one ventured to alter them ; a sanctity of this kind is
not acquired without the lapse of a considerable time : and
we think it is not going too far to say, Firstly, that these
books must have been in existence, as we now have them,
within thirty years, earlier or later, of, at least, 360 or 370
B.C. ; Secondly, that the Old Commentary they have pre-
served must be considerably, perhaps fifty years, older ;
and Thirdly, that the Kammava>tas and the Patimokkha
must be older still.

The reader will notice that in the foregoing discussion no
mention has been made of the Fifth Book in the present

^ See the dissertation on this subject in Rhys Davids’s * Ancient Coins and
Measures of Ceylon;* and, more shortly, the close of the Introduction to his
' Buddhist Suttas from the Pali.'

XXIV

VINAYA TEXTS FROM THE pAlI.

division of the Vinaya Pi/aka — the Parivdra-pi///a. The
reason is that this work, an abstract of the other parts of the
Vinaya, is in fact a very much later compilation, and pro-
bably the work of a Ceylonese Thera. In some stanzas,
which are found at the end of the Parivira-pd/'/za, it is
stated to have been composed by ‘ the highly wise, learned,
and skilful Dipa, after he had inquired here and there
into the methods (literally, the way) followed by former
teachers

We have every hope that the foregoing argument will
commend itself to our fellow workers as being, in the main,
well founded. We now propose to test it by applying it
in explanation of several difficult terms and phrases found
in the Vinaya Pi/aka, which seem to have been hitherto
incorrectly interpreted.

It has been pointed out that, in the Patimokkha, the
offences are arranged in certain classes, called, with refer-
ence to the heinousness of the act committed, Pdrd^ika,
Sa;//ghddisesa, Pa^ittiya, Pa/idesaniya, and Se-
khiya. In other parts of the Vinaya, other offences are
called Thulla^^aya and Dukka/a. On this nomen-
clature the Rev. S. Coles has founded a trenchant attack
upon Buddhist morality. He says :

‘Beside the Parajikas there are lesser faults, the nature
of which is determined by various causes, as will subse-
quently appear. These are Sahghadisesa, Thullaccaya,
and Dukka/a faults, and can all be easily remedied, the
two latter especially ; as, after a fault of this kind has been
committed, the culprit has only to confess to his Upaj-
jhaya (ordaining priest) without much delay, and is then
exempted from all evil consequences ; but the Sahghd-
disesa being more serious (about half a PdrajikS), a course
of penance has to be submitted to, and confession without
delay made to tw^enty-five superior Bhikkhus. The nature

* Pubbafairiyamagga» Ara puHhiiyi ita tahiw tahim
DJpo nima mahapa^no sutadharo vilakkhano
Imam vittharasamkhepam sa^^A^maggena ma^

. likhApesi sissak&nam sukh&vaham.

INTRODUCTION.

XXV

and extent of these penances are not defined in the first
book of the Vinaya Pitaka, but in others, to which reference
will be made when these books are brought under con-
sideration. Suffice it to say, that they can possibly have no
deterring effect on crime, but rather form loop-holes through
which most enormous and disgusting misdeeds may be
committed, and yet the perpetrator may remain not only
as a Buddhist, but as a BhikkhuV

Mr. Coles then applies this argument to show that many
offences against morality, being only called Dukka/a and
not Pdri^ika, must have been looked upon very leniently,
not only by the Buddhists, but by Gotama himself ; and
that therefore his system of morality was not of the lofty
kind it has usually been supposed to be, but was, in fact,
a mere cloak and encouragement to wickedness and
crime !

If Mr. Coles had looked at the Pi/aka he was discussing
from a historical, instead of from a controversial, point of
view, he would scarcely have advanced this argument. The
use of the term Dukka/Sa does not arise from, nor is it
evidence of, a weakness in moral feeling ; but merely of
a difference in point of time. It occurs only in w^hat we
have ventured above to call the Notes : that is to say, in
the latest portion of the Pi/aka. When the author or
authors of the final recension of the Vinaya had to speak of
an offence not actually mentioned, though implied, in the
text before them, they did not presume to call it by any of
the names applied in the Patimokkha itself to the classifi-
cation of offences. They no more dared to add to the
number of Pdr^^ikSs, for instance, than a clergyman would
now venture seriously to propose an addition to the Ten
Commandments. They made use of two technical terms
(both entirely new ones), namely, Thulla>&y&aya and Duk-
ka/a (literally, Serious Transgression and Bad-deed), using
the former more 'sparingly, and for graver misdemeanours.
No*argument based on passages where the word Dukka/a
occurs can therefore have any force as to the teaching
of Gotama himself ; and the Bhikkhus, who did use the

* Journal of the Ceylon Asiatic Society, 1867-1870, p. 155.

XXVI

VINAYA TEXTS FROM THE PALI.

word, were restrained from using the older term PdrS^ika
by a feeling of reverence towards their sacred books— a
feeling surely deserving, not of censure, but of sympathy.

Again, there are certain terms applied to various parts of
the Vinaya itself on which the above historical analysis
may throw some light. When Asoka, in the Edict of
Bhabra, addressed to the Buddhist Order, exhorted them
to take as their authority, among other works, the Vi nay a -
Samukase, or Abstract of the Vinaya, he may fairly be
supposed to have referred to the Patimokkha, which that
epithet would very appropriately describe. If it be asked
why he did not then call it the Patimokkha, the ex-
planation may be either that that word is more especially
a term for the act to be performed, than for the liturgy
which shows the way to perform it (though it was also
undoubtedly used as a name of the liturgy), or else that
the work was known under both designations.

We would just add, in passing, that, in the passage in
question, the reading samukase (samutkarsha), instead
of the formerly accepted samakase, is quite clear in
General Cunningham’s lithograph ^ ; and the generally
accepted view that the Edict was addressed to a council,
and is therefore an authoritative confirmation of the Ceylon
traditions regarding the Council of Patna, ought to be re-
considered. The Edict merely says : ‘ King Devanampiya
of Magadha salutes the Sa;;/gha’ (that is, the Order, or
the Community, of Bhikkhus)^ Without desiring to throw
any doubt upon the reality of the Council of Patna, we arc
driven to the conclusion that such an expression as ‘the
Sa;;/gha ’ could not have been meant to describe a formal

' * Corpus Inscriptionum Indicarum/ pi. xv.

* Burnouf translated ‘ a Tassemblce du Magadha,’ and Wilson, 'to the vener-
able assembly of Magadha’ (see ‘ Corpus,’ &c., p, 131); but the reading is
clearly Magadhe in the ‘Corpus,' while the older facsimile in the JouiSial of
the Bengal Asiatic Society (ix. 618) had the impossible form Magdhcm.
Even if we could read Magadham samgham (an expression for which we
know no parallel), the above remarks would still hold good. Comj>are further
Professor Kem in the ' Jaartelling dcr Zuidclijke Buddhisten,' pp. 30-35.

INTRODUCTION.

XXVll

council. Surely, if the Edict had been addressed to such
a council, the fact would have been plainly intimated.

It is just possible that Vinaya-Samukase may refer to the
Old Commentary as well as to the Patimokkha ; but this
is not probable, for there is no reason to believe that in
Asoka’s time the Old Commentary any longer existed
apart from its setting in the Vibhahga. And Vinaya-
Samukase cannot for the reasons above stated mean, as
has been supposed, the Pariv&ra-pa//^a.

As regards the meaning of the w^ord Patimokkha we
have the explanation of the Old Commentator in that
single passage of his work found, as above pointed out,
in the Khandhakas^. He there describes it as ‘the origin,
the front (mukha), the chief of the good Dhammas where
the word Dhammd means ‘ qualities,’ and where the evident
inference is that the commentator^ derived Patimokkha
from mukha. But, on the other hand, the tradition of the
Northern Buddhists, in whose Sanskrit works the word is
replaced by Prdtimoksha, points to a derivation from the
root muk.

It seems scarcely open to doubt that we must, in ac-
cordance with this last interpretation, connect the word
with mu^’, and not with mukha. ‘Pratimukha’ means in
Sanskrit ‘ over against, standing close in front.’ How is it
possible to derive from that any meaning appropriate as a
title for the liturgy of confession called Patimokkha ? On
the other hand, the derivation from mu>& is straightforward
and simple. Prati-mu^ (dtmanep.) means ‘to free one-
self, to get rid of;’ and it is precisely through the recitation of
tills formular, and the answering of the questions contained
in it, that the conscience of the member of the Brotherhood

* ?atimokklian ti ddiw etaw muldiam etam pamukhawi etam kosal^am
dhammS.nam, tena vu^^ati p^timokkhan ti. Mahdvagga II, 3, 4*

* We use the phrase ‘ Old Commentator ’ for convenience only. The com-
mentary was, no doubt, handed down by tradition in the Buddhist schools ;
and there is no reason to believe that it was the work of any one mind.

XXVlll

VINAYA TEXTS FROM THE PALI.

was set f ree from the sense of the offence he had incurred^
Patimokkha or PrAtimoksha means therefore ‘Dis-
burdening, Getting free.’ The lengthening of the first
vowel in the PAli word is not without analogies which have
been already adduced by Childers. It is certain that the
word is older than the present shape of the Formulary now
so called ; for it is used several times in the Formulary
itself, as well as in many of the oldest Suttas.

The Old Commentator makes the Patimokkha ‘the
head of the good Dhammas.’ There is a curious passage
in the Patimokkha where the Dhammas are said to be
included in the Suttas:

‘ If a Bhikkhu at the half-monthly recitation of the Pdti-
mokkha should say, “Now for the first time do I notice
that this Dhamma, as one handed down in the Suttas,
embraced in the Suttas, gets recited every half-month!”
then ’ &c. ^

It is plain here that neither Dhamma nor Sutta is used
in the sense to which we are accustomed from the later
books. The Dhammas recited half-monthly are those con-
tained in the scheme of offences given in the Patimokkha,
and the Suttas must therefore mean the separate clauses of
that Formulary.

The fact is that the use of the word Sutta is by no
means confined in the oldest Pali to the texts of what was
afterwards the Sutta Pi/aka, nor is it exclusively used
either in earlier or later times ® in opposition to Vinaya.
Thus we find it used again, as we think, of the Rules of the
Patimokkha ; and in contrast, as in the rule above quoted,
to Dhamma, in Afullavagga IV, 14, 22, 23 :

‘ This Bhikkhu, of such and such a name, is a preacher

* Compare Mahavagga II, 3, 3.

^ Yo pana bhikkhu anvaddhamdsam Fatimokkhe uddissamane cvam vadeyya ;
idan* eva kho aham ganSmi, ayam pi kira dhammo suttagato suttapariya-
panno anvaddhamasam uddesam ^a^Maltli, ta/I Jlee , , . (the 73rd Pa^fftiya,
quoted in £’ullavagga III, 34, a).

® Though more especially concerned here with the earlier use of the word
Sutta, it may be well to remind our readers of the name Suttadhara applied
in the Sumangala Vilasinl to secular lawyers (see Alwis, ‘ Introd.’ &c., p. 100).

INTRODUCTION.

XXIX

of the D ham m a; but the Suttas have not been handed
down to him, nor the Sutta-Vibhanga/

‘ This Bhikkhu, of such and such a name, is a preacher
of the D ha mm a, and the Suttas have been handed down
to him, but not the Sutta-Vibhahga^’

So again in the constantly repeated phrase above re-
ferred to —

Tf the two PAtimokkhas are (or are not, as the connection
requires) thoroughly known to a Bhikkhu in their entirety
with all their divisions and explanations, if he have (or
have not) thoroughly mastered them Sutta by Sutta, and
Detail by Detail; then’ &c.^

— the word Sutta evidently refers t^the clauses of the
two Patimokkhas ; and we find also in the immediate
context the mention of Dhamma or of Vinaya, or of both.

It is no doubt true that in one passage of the Mahi-
parinibbdna Sutta (IV, 8-ii=pp. 39, 40), Sutta is opposed
to Vinaya in much the same way as Sutta Pi/aka w^as
afterwards opposed to Vinaya Pi/aka ; yet the contrast
between these two ideas is usually expressed by the appo-
sition of Dhamma to Vinaya®, and the passage in the
Mahd-parinibbelna Sutta stands, so far as we yet know,
quite alone. Indeed in the oldest tradition the discourses
or conversations now called Suttas seem not to have been
called by that name, but are referred to as Suttantas.

So in the Mahavagga III, 5, 9, 12 mention is made of
devout men, or of devout women, who may have been
accustomed to recite some well-known Suttanta^; and
in the next Khandhaka (IV, 15, 4) we find Suttanta,
Dhamma, and Vinaya all occurring in one context :

‘ It may happen. Brethren, that in some district on the
day of PavirawS. the night may have become far spent

^ Suttam tassa Sgatam na SuttavibhaAgaw. On the latter term see below.

Ubhayini nu kho Patimokkhani vitthdrena svdgatdni suvibhattdni suppa-
vattlni suviniWAitdni suttato anuvyail^anaso cMahdvagga I. 36. 14; I, 37, 14;
Xull^agga IV, 14, 19 ; IX, 5, 1). Anuvya^^ana may perhaps refer here to
the Old Commentary.

> Compare H. Oldenbei^’s Introduction to his edition of the Mahhvaesa
pp. 7 and following.

* Abhi»adtam vd Suttantam bhanati.

XXX

VINAYA TEXTS FROM THE PALI.

while the Brethren are in confusion — some reciting the
Dhamma, those versed in the Suttantas intoning some Sut-
tanta together, the custodians of the Vinaya discussing the
Vinaya, and the preachers of the Dhamma discoursing
about the Dhamma.’

The whole of these expressions recur in A^'ullavagga IV,
4, 4; and are found again, with others of a similar character,
in ySTullavagga VI, 6, 2. This last passage is in the Intro-
duction to a fable which of course recurs, as a CAtaka, in the
G^itaka collection, and with an introduction in almost the
same words. We should therefore expect to find there also
the epithet suttantika (^versed in the Suttantas*), if that
expression had remained in use as late as the fifth century
A.D.; but it is omitted, the Suttantikas having been then
long since replaced by those entrusted, not with the whole,
but with special portions only, of the Dhamma literature.
The word Suttanta was however still in common use at the
time when the presumably later books now contained in
the Pi/akas were composed ; for it occurs in the Anguttara
Nikaya\ and in a constantly recurring verse in theBuddha-
va;;/sa in which it is opposed to Vinaya^ and the word is
still used in the MSS. as the title of the more important
Suttas.

In the passage quoted above from the ATullavagga IV, 14,
22, 23 there is a term Sutta-vibhanga used as the name
of some part of the Vinaya literature apparently distinct

‘ The Anguttara Nikaya, Paw^aka Nipata (Phayre MS. vol. ii. fol.

Ye te Suttanta Tathagatassa bhavita gambhir«i gambMrattha lokuttard sum-
^atapa/isamyutta tesu bha»/lamanesu na susbissanti no sotarn odahissanti na
ajlua^ittam upa/Mapessanti na Icz. te dhamme uggahetabbam pariyapUMitabbam
ma/lAlissanti ; ye pana te suttantd kathitd kaveyya ilrittakkhard iittabyaMjfand
bahiraka sdvakabhasita tesu bha»«ainanesu sussissanti sotam odabissanti ; &c.

Ibid.fol.na^ : Ye te bhikkhCt bahussuta^dgatagamd dhaminadhara vinayadhnra
matikddhara te na sakka^^am sutlautam pmm'vatenti, tesam aUayena kh'in-
nain&lako suttanto hoti apa/isarano.

On the form compare the Sanskrit drish/anta, vritldnta, and siddhdntai
® Suttantam Vinayaa kkpi navangaat Satthusdsanam

Sabbam pariyapuaitvana sobhayi Ginas&sanam.

The phrase is used of various Buddhas in verses 317, 348, 594, 627, and 786
of the Buddhavawsa. This reference we owe to Dr. Morris.

INTRODUCTION.

XXXI

from the Suttas of the Pitimokkha. ‘The Suttas have
been handed down to him, but not the Suttavibhahga.’

The word recurs only in one other passage \ and that is
in the appended Khandhakas of the ATullavagga, in the
account of the Council of Vesaii ^ Seven passages are
there quoted from the Patimokkha in condemnation of
seven out of the Ten Points raised by the heretics ; and in
answer to the question, ‘ Where Avas it condemned ?’ and
before the passages are quoted, the place where the passage
was uttered is mentioned, and condemnation is stated to be
‘ in the Suttavibhahga.’ Thus

Revata says, ‘ Is it right. Lord, to drink ^alogi?’
Sabbakimi replies, ‘ What, Friend, is this^logi ? ’

Revata : ‘ Is it right. Lord, to drink strong drink which
not being fermented, is not yet intoxicating ? ’

Sabbakami: ‘No, my friend, it is not right.'

Revata : ‘ Where has it been condemned ? ’

Sabbakhmi : ‘ At Kosambi in the Suttavibhahga.’

Revata : ‘ What does he (who drinks ^logi) commit ?’
Sabbakami : * He commits the Ph^ittiya offence of drink-
ing strong drink and of drinking intoxicating liquors.’

This is a quotation of the Ph^ittiya Rule, No. 51 ; but
the words quoted do not in fact condemn the drinking of
toddy, and neither the Pdtimokkha nor the Old Com-
mentary contains any reference to the place, Kosambi,
where the words are here said to have been uttered.

It is only in the introduction afterwards appended (in
what is now called the Vibhahga) to the two older works,
that Kosambi is mentioned ; and in the appendix following
the Rule 51 in the Vibhahga there are no exceptions which
would include ^alogi. But Kosambi is mentioned in the
Introductory History. It is therefore most probable that
the term Sutta-vibhahga refers to what is now called the
Vibhahga ; or, if not, at least to that body of traditional
teaching (including the Phtimokkha and the Old Com-
mentary) out of which the present Vibhahga was composed.

' That is, of the Vinaya Pitaka. We aie not certain that it may not be
found in the Sutla Hi/aka.

‘ iTullavagga XII, 2 , 8.

xxxu

VINAYA TEXTS FROM THE PALI.

It may be convenient to make some reference here to
the question whether the literature above discussed was
handed down by memory only, or by writing. We are
justified in expecting to find, in texts dealing in such minute
detail with the daily life of the members of the Buddhist
Order, some distinct evidence — and it will be equally dis-
tinct whether it consists in actual statement, or in silence—
as to writing, and the use of written books. And this
expectation is not disappointed.

In the first place, there are several passages which con-
firm in an indisputable manner the existence of the art of
writing at the time when the Vinaya texts were put into
their present shape.

‘ A certain man, who had committed a theft, ran away,
and got ordained among the Bhikkhus. Now he was
written up in the king^s palace with an injunction that he
should be slain wheresoever he should be found —

‘But there occurred to the parents of Up&li this con-
sideration: “If Updli should learn writing ^ Upili might
thus after our decease live at ease, and not be troubled.”*

And in the Vibhanga we find an interesting explanation
of the Third Pdra^ika Rule, which lays down that whoso-
ever wilfully kills a man, or brings about his death, must
be expelled from the Order.

In the Notes on this Rule the Sutta-vibhanga discusses
the case of some one causing the death of another by per-
suading him that suicide is glorious, or that it results in
salvation. And in this connection the possibility is con-
sidered of these representations being made to the proposed
victim, not by word of mouth, and not by a messenger, but
by writing.

‘He engraves a writing to this effect: “Who so dies,
he acquires wealth, or acquires fame, or goes to heaven.”
By that writing he is guilty of a Dukka/a offence. The
other sees the writing, and, determining to die, is filled

^ A?mataro puriso Z-orikaw katvil paldyitvS bhikkhdsu pabba^ito hoti. So
^ raiiwo antepure likhito hoti yattha passitabbo tattha hantabbo ’ti (Mahd-
vagga I, 43).

* Sale kho Updli lekham sikkheyya (Mahdvagga I, 49, i).

INTRODUCTION.

XXXlii

with painful feelings. (The writer is) guilty of a Thul-
la^^aya offence. He does die. (The writer is) guilty of a
Pir^^ika offence^.*

And again, with respect to the injunction addressed to
the Sisters of the Order not to devote themselves to worldly
wisdom (tira^i Adna-vi^^a), the Vibhahga makes an
exception in favour of learning to write

It is evident therefore that writing was in vogue in the
.time when the Notes on the Rules were put into their
present form, that it was made use of for the publication of
official announcements, and for the drawing up of written
communications in private life ; and that while the know-
ledge of the art was a possible source of livelihood, it was
not confined to ‘clerks,^ but was acquired by ordinary
persons, and even by women.

But it is a long step from the use of writing for such
public or private notifications to the adoption of it for the
purpose of recording an extensive and sacred literature :
and our texts show — and show, as it seems to us, in an
equally indisputable manner — that for this latter purpose
writing, however well known, had not yet come into use.

Had the sacred texts been written down and read, books,
manuscripts, and the whole activity therewith connected,
must have necessarily played a very important part in the
daily life of the members of the Buddhist Order. Now the
texts of the Vinaya place clearly enough before our eyes
the whole of the 'personal property,’ so to speak, of the
Buddhist Aromas and Vihiras. Every movable thing,
down to the smallest and least important domestic utensils,
is in some way or other referred to, and its use pointed out ;
while the use of other articles, not usually found in the
Viharas, is mentioned, and condemned. But nowhere do
we find the least trace of any reference to manuscripts ;

* Ldlham lAindati yo evawi marati so dhanam vi labhati yasam v& labhati
saggam vd AkkharakkharSya dpatti dukka/assa. Lekham passitvS

marissimlti dukkham vedaoam uppideti. Apatti thullailitayassa. Marati.
Apatti pdr^i^ikassa.

^ Anipatti lekham pariydpun&ti (Bhikkhunt-Pitimokkha, Falitti)'a 49).

[13] C

XXXIV

VINAYA TEXTS FROM THE PALI.

much less of inks, or pens, or styles, or leaves, or other
writing materials.

And we do find, on the contrary, passages which show
the difficulties which arose every time that the memorial
tradition by word of mouth of any of the sacred texts was
interrupted, or threatened to be interrupted.

So, for instance, we find the case discussed of no one
Bhikkhu, among all the Brethren dwelling in some par-
ticular place, knowing the Pdtimokkha. There was no
other way out of the difficulty, save that of one of the
Bhikkhus being sent out to some neighbouring fraternity,
with the commission there to learn the Patimokkha by
heart, either in its full extent (that is, as we take it, all the
rules being learnt in full) or at least in abstract^

And again, in a passage already quoted, we hear of the
case of an Upasaka, who knows some important Suttanta,
and is afraid that the knowledge of it will fade away. So
he sends to a fraternity of Bhikkhus, and invites the
Brethren to come over to him ; and in that case an ex-
ception is made to the Rule forbidding the Brethren to
travel in the rainy season, provided only that they do not
stay away from home longer than seven days'-^.

We may quote in this connection a passage of the same
tendency from the Anguttara Nikaya, in which, among the
circumstances hurtful to the security and the propagation
of the Buddhist faith, the possibility is mentioned of the
well-instructed Bhikkhus neglecting to take pains to hand
on to others the Suttantas which they know. Then, when
they have passed away, ‘ the root of that Suttanta is cut
off, and it finds no place of refuged’

It is very plain from these last passages that the Bud-
dhist community in its earliest days did not think of the

^ MaMvagga II, 17, 5. 6. On this meaning of vittharena and sawkhit-
tena see also Mahdvagga II, 15, i. 2.

* Mahavagga HI, 5, 9/

* Xatukka-Nipata (Phayre MS. vol. i. fol. ni) ; and repeated in the Pafti^aka-
Nipata ^^ihjd. vol. ii. fol. i\ih ) : Ye te bhikkhd bahussuta ^gatagam^ dham-
madhara vinayadhara mitikadhar^ te na sakkal^Iram suttantam para;» v^enti
tesam a^^ayena A^/unnamhlako suttanto hoti apa/isarano.

INTRODUCTION.

XXXV

possibility of using writing as a means of guarding against
such painful accidents. Can this have arisen from any
belief that writing the books would have been an irreverent
treatment of them ? We cannot think that among such a
community as that of the Buddhists — who were so ad-
vanced in their views that they deliberately adopted the
language of the people, and even took no thought, within
the ranks of their community, of caste — any such con-
sideration would have prevailed. It seems much more
probable that, at the date referred to, the art of writing
had not been taken advantage of for the purposes of any
kind of literature ; but that its use was wholly confined to
recording short messages or notes, or private letters, or
advertisements of a public character — a result which may
well have been due to the want of any practical material
on which to engrave the letters that were nevertheless
evidently known ^

On the texts above quoted, and the inferences which
may fairly be drawn from them, we would base two re-
marks. Firstly, that there can be no reasonable ground
for doubting the correctness of the ancient tradition pre-
served in the well-known verse of the Ceylon Chroniclers,
when, speaking of the time of Va//a Gama//i, who began to
reign 88 B. c., they say,

‘ The text of the Three Pi/akas, and the Commentary too
thereon.

The wise Bhikkhus of former time had handed down by
word of mouth :

The then Bhikkhus, perceiving how all beings do decay,

Meeting together, wrote them in books, that the Dhamma
might last long

But, secondly, though we must therefore believe that the

^ Compare Burnell, * Elements of South Indian Palaeography,* p. lo.

^ Dif>ava/7isa XX, 20, 21 ; Mahavar/isa, p. 207. As the stanza is common to
both works it is taken in all probability, word for word, from the Old Com*
mentary in Sinhalese, the Sihala//Aakath&, preserved in the Mah&vihara in
Anuradhapura. See 11 . Oldenberg's Introduction to his edition of the Dipa-
vamsa.

C ?

xxxvi

VINAYA TEXTS FROM THE pAlI.

Vinaya, before it was reduced to writing, was handed down
for about three hundred years solely by memory, and that
it lived only in the minds of the VinayadharA, theBhikkhus
‘ who were versed in the Vinaya,’ we do not think it is at all
necessary, or even possible, to impugn the substantial accu-
racy of the texts handed down in a manner that seems, to
moderns, so unsafe. The Text, as it lies before us, stands
so well against all proofs, whether we compare its different
parts one with another, or with the little that is yet known
of its nor^^hern counterparts \ that we are justified in regard-
ing these Pali books as in fact the authentic mirror of the
old Magadhi text as fixed in the central schools of the
most ancient Buddhist Church. That text, in the dialect
of Magadha, may have been lost to us, once for all ; and
we can scarcely hope, unless some isolated sentences may
hereafter be found preserved here and there in Inscriptions,
that this loss will ever be, even partially, made good. But
we may well be thankful that the faithful zeal and industry
of these old monks has preserved for us a translation, in a
dialect so nearly allied to the original, and in so perfect and
trustworthy a state as the Pali version of the Vinaya still
undoubtedly presents.

We trust that the choice we have made from the litera-
ture of the Vinaya Pi/aka for insertion in this Collection of
Translations from the Sacred Books of the East will be
considered to need little justification. As the oldest and
in many respects most important material of the Vinaya
literature we have included a version of the Patimokkha ;
though confining ourselves to the Bhikkhu- Patimokkha,

* How little this is, is apparent from the fact that Rurnouf, who had studied
all those that were then accessible, did not even find the words p«ara^ika
and samghadisesa (Introduction, &c., p. 30O. To the Tibetan texts Csoma
Korosi has devoted a few pages (‘ Analysis of the Dulva ’ in Asiatic Researches,
vol. XX. pp. 45 and foil.) Of the Chinese we have only the brief notices of M.
Kemusat (Foe Koue Ki, pp. 104 and foil.) and of Mr. Real (in H. Oldenberg's
Introduction to the Vinaya, vol. i. pp. xliv, xlv). The last scholar also men-
tions several Vinaya works, of the contents of which however nothing further
is known, in his Catalogue of Chinese Buddhist Works now in the India Oilice
Library fpp. 67-71),

INTRODUCTION.

XXXVII

as our predecessors, Mr. Dickson and Professor Minayeff,
have done before us. We could not consider, even after
their labours, that a new translation of this difficult text
would be superfluous. And of the younger literature we
have confined ourselves to the Khandhakas, both because
these books, in their variety, and in the fulness of their con-
tents, are better calculated to afford a correct view of the
conditions, and the life, of that oldest and most influential
of the many monkish orders, the Buddhist Sawgha ; and
also because the Sutta-vibhanga is little more than an
expansion of the Patimokkha, which we have already, for
the reasons just stated, determined to included

T. W. RHYS DAVIDS.

H. OLDENBERG.

November, 1880.

' For the Upasampada-kamniavaira see the passages recurring in the
Khandhakas as pointed out above, p. xix.

Additional Note on Mahavagga III, 2, 2 (vassupanayika).

As entering upon Vassa is called vassa^zi upaga^^Aati or vassaxri
upeli, we believe that upanayika, the final member of the com-
pound vassupandyika (entrance upon Vassa), must not be derived
from upa-ni, but from upa-i (upan-i). Comp. S'atapatha-Brahma/ra
II, 3, 2, 2 : ahar-ahar vai Na^o Naishidho Yama/^i r&^nam dakshi-
»ata upanayati (Sdya^a: upaga^^^ati). The preposition upan
contained in upan-ayati will be treated of by Professor Joh. Schmidt
in the 26th volume of Kuhn's Zeitschrift.

p At I m o k k h a

THE PAtIMOKKHA.

THE WORDS OF DISBURDENMENT.

Reverence to the Blessed One, the Holy One,
THE Fully Enlightened One.

nidAna*.

Introduction.

May the Chapter reverend Sirs, hear me !

To-day is the sacred day (of the full, or new,
moon), the fifteenth day of the half-month If it be
convenient to the Chapter, let the Chapter hold Upo-
satha, let it repeat the PAtimokkha. How is it with
respect to the necessary preliminaries to a meeting
of the Order? Let the reverend brethren announce
their purity \ and I will rehearse the Pitimokkha !

We all gladly give ear and do attend® !

* The whole of this Introduction, with the ancient commentaiy
upon it (referred to above, in the Introduction), recurs in the MahS-
vagga II, 3, where further notes will be found. The previous
chapter in Dickson entitled the Pu^^^&vissa^^ana is not part
of the ancient text of the Patimokkha.

* Sawgho: of course not the whole Order, but those members
then present, spoken of collectively.

Uposatho pa««araso. See below, Mah&vagga, Book II,
and especially chap. 14.

* That is, their freedom from any of those disabilities which
are declared below, Book II, to incapacitate a member of the Order
from assembling at a formal meeting on the Uposatha day.

” On sabbe 'va sant& compare ubho *va sant& in the ninth
Nissaggiya, and the Old Commentary loc. cit.

[^3] B

2

pAtimokkha.

Whosoever have incurred a fault, let him de-
clare it ! If no fault have been incurred it is meet
to keep silence !

Now, venerable Sirs, it is by your silence, that I
shall know whether you are pure. As to each one
question put there must be an answer, so, in such a
meeting as this, each question is put^ as many as
three times. Then if any Bhikkhu, when it has been
three times put, knowingly omit to declare a fault
incurred, he is guilty of uttering a conscious lie.
Venerable Sirs, the uttering of a deliberate lie has
been declared by the Blessed One to be a condition
hurtful (to spiritual progfress) ^ Therefore a fault,
if there be one, should be declared by that Bhikkhu
who remembers it, and desires to be cleansed there-
from. For a fault, when declared, shall be light
to him.

Venerable Sirs, the Introduction is now recited.

Thus do I question you, venerable Sirs, ‘Are
you pure in this matter ? ’

A second time do I question you, ‘Are you pure
in this matter ?’

A third time do I question you, ‘Are you pure
in this matter ? ’

The venerable ones are pure herein. Therefore
do they keep silence. Thus I understand.

Here endeth the recitation of the Introduction.

* The spelling of the PSli word in the text should be anus-
sSvitaw, and so below, anussSviyamdne. By ‘the text’ we
refer throughout to Mr. Dickson’s very careful edition, jdl the
necessary corrections in which— they are mostly only misprints—
will be noticed in the following notes.

* See MahSvagga II, 3, 7.

pArAoikA dhammA.

3

pArA^pikA dhammA.

The Paragika Rules\

Here these four Rules, concerning those acts
which bring about Defeat ^ come into recitation.

I. Whatsoever Bhikkhu who has taken upon

^ The whole of the following portion of the Pdtimokkha, together
with the ancient commentary upon it, is contained in the first book
of the Vibhahga, also called the Pira^ikaw.

Dickson translates throughout Dhammi by ‘offences/ He is
no doubt right in taking the word, not in its ordinary sense of
condition or quality, but in a more strictly technical, legal, sense.
‘ Offences ' is however not the right direction in which to limit the
general sense. Dhamma must here be ‘Rules/ in accordance
with the passages quoted in our Introduction, pp. xxviii-xxx.

* Childers (sub voce) follows Bumouf (Introduction, &c.,
p. 301) in deriving the word Par^ka from AG with pari pre-
fixed, taking that compound in the sense of * to expel.’ Dickson's
translation ‘ deadly sin ’ rests upon the same basis. The Buddhist
commentators refer the word to the passive of Gl with pari pre-
fixed, in the sense of ‘ to suffer defeat.’ So the Samanta-Pisadika :
Par^iko hotiti par^to par^ya;?/ ipanno. Now the root AG
belongs to the Vedic dialect only, and is not met with in any
Buddhist expressions, and even in the Vedas it does not occur
with pari prefixed. The Buddhist forms of speech have quite
different and settled terms with which to convey the idea of ex-
pulsion. On the other hand, there was a considerable group of
words in use in the Buddhist community with which piri^ika
stands in close connection : pari^i, ‘to suffer defeat pari^ita,
‘defeated;’ pari^aya, ‘defeat’ We cannot therefore but think that
the native commentators are right in associating piri^ika also
with this group, and that the w’ord really means ‘ involving defeat. ’
This may mean specifically defeat in the struggle with M^ra the
Evil ; but more probably defeat in the struggle against evil
generally, defeat in the effort to accomplish the object for which
the Bhikkhu entered the Order, in the effort to reach the ‘ supreme
goal ’ of Arahatship.

B 2

4

pAtimokkha.

himself the Bhikkhus’ system of self-training and
rule of life, and has not thereafter withdrawn from
the training, or declared his weakness, shall have
carnal knowledge of any one, down even to an
animal, he has fallen into defeat, he is no longer
in communion ^

2. Whatsoever Bhikkhu shall take, from village
or from wood, anything not given — what men call
' theft ^ ’ — in such manner of taking as kings would
seize the thief for, and slay, or bind, or banish him,
saying, ‘ Thou art a thief, thou art stupid, thou art
a fool, thou art dishonest,’ — the Bhikkhu who in
that manner takes the thing not given, he, too, has
fallen into defeat, he is no longer in communion.

3. Whatsoever Bhikkhu shall knowingly deprive
of life a human being, or shall seek out an assassin
against a human being, or shall utter the praises of
death, or incite another to self-de struction, saying,

‘ Ho! my friend! what good do you get from this
sinful, wretched life ? death is better to thee than
life!’ — if, so thinking, and with such an aim, he, by
various argument, utter the praises of death or incite
another to self-destruction — he, too, is fallen into
defeat, he is no longer in communion \

> ‘Declared his weakness’ refers to the permission (on the
ground that it was better to leave the Order than to bum) for
i Bhikkhu to acknowledge himself unfit for the discipline, and
hrow off the robe. ‘ Withdrawn from the training ’ is the formal
sxpression for thus throwing off the Robes. See below, Mahd-
'agga II, 22, 3.

On sikkhisdftvaw, which is by no means only ‘Rules of the
Order,’ see the Vibhanga (Pdr. I, 8, r).

® The Vibhanga (Pdr. II, 3) takes theyya-sarakhdt^xn as
meaning ‘with dishonest intent’

’ The deviations here from Mr. Dickson’s version will, we hope,
justify themselves. There is no commentary on h&raka, though

DHAMMA.

4. Whatsoever Bhikkhu, without being clearly
conscious of extraordinary qualities, shall give out
regarding himself that insight into the knowledge
of the noble ones has been accomplished, saying,
‘Thus do I know,’ ‘Thus do I perceive:’ and at
some subsequent time whether on being pressed,
or without being pressed, he, feeling gfuilty, shall
be desirous of being cleansed from his fault, and
shall say, ‘ Brethren ! when I knew not, I said that
I knew ; when I saw not, I said that I saw — telling a
fruitless falsehood ;’ then, unless he so spake through
undue confidence he, too, has fallen into defeat, he
is no longer in communion

Venerable Sirs, the four Conditions of Defeat
have been recited, of which when a Bhikkhu has
fallen into one or other, he is no longer allowed to
be in co-residence with the Bhikkhus. As before, so
afterwards, he is defeated, he is not in communion®.

the Vibhahga (P&r. Ill, 3, 1) explains the different kinds of Sat t ha.
Pdpaka must be ‘sinful,’ not merely ‘poor;’ the suggestion is
‘ by destroying your life you will escape from the possibility of
sinning.’

' The extraordinary qualities (literally, ‘superhuman qualities’) are
defined to be the Vimokkhas, Samddhis, the SamSpattis, the
dassana, the having experienced the Noble Path, and ha\ing realised
the Fruit thereof ; that is to say, Arahatship and the highest forms of
spiritual emotion and intelligence which can accompany Arahatship.
They are in fact, therefore, superhuman only in the sense of extra-
ordinary; as it is precisely human beings, and only human beings,
who were supposed to be able to acquire these qualities.

Uddha^^a, ‘Self-righteousness,’ is also the last but one of the
ten Samyo^anas, or ‘Fetters,’ which the Arahat has to break.

* 'The sentences which follow in the text, but are not here trans-
lated, and in which it is declared that all the following portions
of the Pdtimokkha have already been heard, do not occur in the
Vibhahga. They are not part of the Pdtimokkha ; but only the

6

pAtimokkha.

In respect of them I ask the venerable ones,
‘ Are you pure in this matter ? ’

A second time I ask, ‘Are you pure in this
matter ? ’

A third time I ask, ‘Are you pure in this
matter ? ’

The venerable ones are pure herein. Therefore
do they keep silence. Thus I understand.

Here endeth the recitation of the PAri^ikas.

form to be used, when the Pdtimokkha cannot be recited in full,
and all the remaining Rules are to be omitted. According to Mahd-
vagga II, 15, 1, 4 this abridged recital may be used in certain cases
of danger.

On Yathd pure tatha pa^^'^d there is no explanation in the
Old Commentary. The phrase probably means that the Bhikkhu
is irrevocably defeated. He must remain for ever in the condi-
tion (of permanent exclusion from the Order) into which he has
brought himself.

SAilfGHADISESA DHAMmA.

7

sa-^ghAdisesA DHAMMA.

Rules which require, as well in their earlier
AS IN their later STAGES, FORMAL MEETINGS
OF THE Orders

Here, venerable Sirs, the thirteen matters, which,
as well in their earlier as in their later stages, require
formal meetings of the Order, come into recitation.

1. The emission of semen by design, except by
a person sleeping, is a Sawghadisesa.

2. Whatsoever Bhikkhu, being degraded*, shall,
with perverted * mind, come into bodily contact with
a woman, by taking hold of her hand, or by taking
hold of her hair, or by touching any part of her body —
that is a Sa^^ghAdisesa.

3. Whatsoever Bhikkhu, being degraded, shall,
with perverted mind, address a woman with wicked
words, exciting to passion as those of a young man
to a maid — that is a SawghAdisesa*.

* The expression is curious, but the authorities given by Childers
(sub voce) are decisive as to its meaning. Wliereas the PSrS^ka
offences were dealt with in one meeting of the Order, these thirteen
offences gave rise to the various Sawghakammas (formal resolu-
tions or proceedings at meetings of the Order), which are explained
in detail in the third Khandhaka of the jTullavagga.

The text of, and the ancient commentarj' on this portion of the
Pdtimokkha will be found in the Vibhahga in the Book on the
SawghSdisesas.

’ Oti»no, literally, ‘having gone down,’ which the old commen-
tator in the Vibhahga explains as ‘lustfully, or with a mind bound by
desire.’ Our word ‘degraded’ has often a very similar connotation.

’ Vipariwatena, literally, ‘changed;’ here ‘changed for the
worse.’ Compare Maht-sudassana Sutta II, 39, and the Old Com-
ment at Minayeff, p. 64.

* Compare the second Aniyata.

8

pAtimokkha,

4. Whatsoever Bhikkhu, being degraded, shall,
with perverted mind, magnify, in the hearing of a
woman, ministration to himself^ (by saying), ‘ This,
Sister, would be the noblest of ministrations, that
to so righteous and exalted a religious person as
myself you should ministrate by that act,’ (meaning)
sexual intercourse — that is a Sa;»ghAdisesa.

5. Whatsoever Bhikkhu shall act as a go-between
for a woman to a man, or for a man to a woman, or
for a wife, or for a paramour, or even for a harlot —
that is a Sa;»ghAdisesa.

6. A Bhikkhu who, begging (the materials) to-
gether, is having a hut put up for his own use, to
belong to no one (else), must have it made of due
measurement And herein this is the measurement —
in length twelve spans according to the accepted
span*, in breadth seven spans (measured) inside.

' AttaktmapSri^ariyS, perhaps ‘to his lusts;' but we follow
the old commentator.

* Sugata-vidatthiyd. Dickson translates ‘of the span of
Buddha,’ Sugata being one of the many epithets applied to the
Buddha in poetry, or poetical prose. Mr. James D’Alwis in the
Ceylon Asiatic Society’s Journal for 1874 has a long article to
show that this cannot be the correct meaning of the word ‘ Sugata’
in this connection ; and we think he is right, though his discussion
as to what it does mean (evidently more than a simple span) seems
to lead to no certain conclusion. The older Ceylon commentators
take the expression as being equal to one and a half carpenter’s
cubits, a ‘carpenter’s cubit’ (Sinhalese Warfu-riyana) being two
ordinary cubits, so that ‘ the Buddha’s span ’ (as they translate it)
would be four feet and a half 1 But the Bhikkhus of the present
day in Ceylon take it to be equal to the length of the supposed
foot-print of the Buddha on Adam’s Peak ; that is, four ordinary
cubits, or six feet. See Dickson’s note ; and compare Nissaggiya
iSi ^■nd Pi^ittiya 87-92.

There is no comment on the phrase in the Old Commentary,

SAJlfGHADISESA DHAMmA.

9

The Bhikkhus must be brought, to the place to
approve the site ; and those Bhikkhus shall approve
a site free from danger*, and with an open space
around it If a Bhikkhu shall, at his own request,
have a hut put up on a dangerous site, without the
open space around it, or shall not bring the Bhik-
khus to approve the site, or shall exceed the (due)
measure — that is a SamghAdisesa.

7. A Bhikkhu who is having a large * residence
made for his own use, and to belong (also) to others,
shall bring the Bhikkhus to the place to approve
the site ; and those Bhikkhus shall approve a site
free from danger, and with an open space around
it. If a Bhikkhu shall have a large residence made
on a dangerous site, without the open space around
it, or shall not bring the Bhikkhus to the place to
approve the site — that is a Sawghidisesa.

8. Whatsoever Bhikkhu ^ in harshness, malice,
or anger, shall harass (another) Bhikkhu by a ground-
less (charge of having committed) a PAr^ka offence,
thinking to himself, ‘ Perchance I may (thus) get him
to fall from this religious life ®’ — and then at some
later time, either when he is pressed, or without his
being pressed, the case turns out to be groundless.

which is especially curious if the word Sugata meant ‘the Bud-
dha’s,’ that is to say, the Buddha’s span, when that work was
composed.

' That is, either to living creatures (birds, ants, and so on) by
clearing the site ; or to the future resident after it is built See the
old commentator’s note on Sdrambha at Minayeff, p. 71.

* ‘ Sufficient for a cart drawn by a yoke of oxen to pass round
it,’ according to the old commentator.

* Mahallaka . Compare ATullavagga VI, ii, i.

* In the text read, of course, Bhikkhu, not Bhikkhft.

' 1. e. to throw off the robes, to leave the Order.

10

pAtimokkha.

and the Bhikkhu confesses his malice ' — that is a
Saw^ghidisesa.

9, Whatsoever Bhikkhu, in harshness, malice, or
anger, shall harass another Bhikkhu by a groundless
charge of having committed a PAr^ka offence, sup-
porting himself by some point or other of no im-
portance in a case that really rests on something
of a different kind ; thinking to himself, ‘ Perchance
I may thus get him to fall from this religious life ’
— ^and then at some later time, either when he is
pressed, or without his being pressed, the case turns
out to rest on something of a different kind, and
that Bhikkhu confesses his malice — that is a Sam-
ghidisesa*.

10. Whatsoever Bhikkhu shall go about to cause
division in a community ® that is at union, or shall
persist in calling attention to some matter calculated
to cause division, that Bhikkhu should thus be ad-
dressed by the Bhikkhus: ‘Sir, go not about to
cause division in a community that is at union;’
or, ‘ Persist not in calling attention to a matter
calculated to cause division ‘ Be, Sir, at one with
the community, for the community, being at unity,
in harmony, without dispute, dwells pleasantly under

‘ Dosam was probably meant here to refer to the doso at the
beginning of the rule.

’ For instance, the Bhikkhu has seen that A, who is a Khattiya,
has committed some offence. He says either that he has seen a
Khattiya commit that offence, and thus harasses an innocent
person; or he says that A has committed a Pa]%ika offence,
whereas the offence is of a lesser nature.

For ^aveyyan in the text read iiSveyyan.

’ Sawgha; that is, the company of the Brethren dwelling in one
place, or in one district.

sajitghAdisesA dhammA.

II

one authority^.’ If that Bhikkhu, when he has thus
been spoken to by the Bhikkhus, should persist as
before, then let that Bhikkhu be (formally) admo-
nished about it by the Bhikkhus as a body*, even
to the third time, to the intent that he abandon that
course. If, while being so admonished up to the
third time, he abandon that course, it is well : if he
abandon it not — that is a SawghAdisesa.

II. Now if other Bhikkhus, one, or two, or three,
become adherents of that Bhikkhu, and raise their
voices on his side ; if they should say thus : ‘ Say
not, Sirs, anything against that Bhikkhu ! That
Bhikkhu both speaks according to the Dhamma,
and he speaks according to the Vinaya ; it is our
wish, tod, and desire, that he adopts, and g^ves
expression to ; and he speaks, knowing that what
he says appears to us also to be right ; ’ — then let
those Bhikkhus be addressed by the Bhikkhus thus;
‘ Say not so. Sirs ! That Bhikkhu speaks not according
to the Dhamma, neither does he speak according to
the Vinaya. Let not. Sirs, the causing of division
in the community be pleasing to you ! Be, Sirs, at
one with the community ! for the community, being at
unity, in harmony, without dispute, dwells pleasantly
under one discipline.’ If those Bhikkhus, when
they have thus been spoken to by the Bhikkhus,
should persist as before, those Bhikkhus should be

^ Ekuddeso; that is, the authority of the rules recited in the
Pdtimokkha.

* SamanubhSsitabbo. We think ‘admonish’ is not too strong
a rendering of this term ; and not inconsistent with the equality of
the fraternity, as the admonition comes from the united body. The
preposition sam need not imply a Sarnghakamma, which appears
to have been necessary only after the Samghddisesa offence had
been completed. We occasionally render the word by ‘ adjure.’

12

pAtimokkha.

(formally) adjured by the Bhikkhus, as a body,
even to the third time, to the end that they
abandon that course. If, while being so adjured,
up to the third time, they abandon that course, it
is well : if they abandon it not — that is a Sa/«ghA-
disesa.

12. Should a Bhikkhu refuse to listen to what
is said to him and when spoken to by the Bhikkhus,
in accordance with the Dhamma ®, touching the pre-
cepts handed down in the body of recited law *, will
allow nothing to be said to him (objecting), ‘Say
nothing to me. Sirs, either good or bad : and I will
say nothing, either good or bad, to you. Be good
enough. Sirs, to refrain from speaking to me !’ — then
let that Bhikkhu be addressed by the Bhikkhus
thus: ‘Do not. Sir, make yourself a person who
cannot be spoken to : make yourself rather. Sir, a
person to whom we can speak. Speak to the
Bhikkhus, Sir, in accordance with the Dhamma ; and
the Bhikkhus, Sir, will speak in accordance with the
Dhamma to you. For thus has the church * of the
Blessed One grown large ; that is to say, by mutual
converse, and by mutual help®.’ If that Bhikkhu,
when he has thus been spoken to by the Bhikkhus,
should persist as before, then let that Bhikkhu be

^ Dubba^o is not ‘unruly,’ as Dickson has, following Childers,
who gives ‘ abusive, unruly, violent’ It means rather ‘ diiScuIt to
reason with, averse to instruction.’ Compare G’^taka 1, 151, 152.

‘ SahadhammikaxQ, which is here adverbial; and where the
Dhamma refers to the Rules, as is pointed out in the Introduction.

® Uddesa-pariy^pannesu; uddesa being here practically
the same as Pdtimokkha.

* Parish, ‘the retinue, the followers, the adherents,’ referring
here to the Samgha only.

® In the text read vu/Mdpanena.

sajitghAdisesA dhammA.

13

(formally) adjured by the Bhikkhus as a body, even
to the third time, to the end that he abandon that
course. If, while being so adjured, up to the third
time, he abandon that course, it is well : if he abandon
it not — that is a SawghAdisesa.

13. Should a Bhikkhu dwell near a certain village
or town, leading a life hurtful to the laity, and
devoted to evil, (so that) his evil deeds are seen
and heard, and the families led astray by him are
seen and heard, let that Bhikkhu be spoken to by
the Bhikkhus thus: ‘Your life. Sir, is hurtful to
the laity, and evil; your evil deeds, Sir, are seen
and heard ; and families are seen and heard to be
led astray by you. Be so good, Sir, as to depart
from this residence ; you have dwelt here. Sir, long
enough.’ If, when that Bhikkhu is thus addressed
by the Bhikkhus he should answer the Bhikkhus
thus : ‘ The Bhikkhus are walking in longing, the
Bhikkhus are walking in malice, the Bhikkhus are
walking in delusion, the Bhikkhus are walking in
fear; and, for a fault of a like nature, they send some
away, and some they send not away^:’ — ^then that
Bhikkhu should be spoken to by the Bhikkhus thus ;
‘ Say not so. Sir ! The Bhikkhus walk not in longing,
the Bhikkhus walk not in malice, the Bhikkhus walk
not in delusion, the Bhikkhus walk not in fear ; and
they send not some away, for a fault of a like nature,
while they send others not away. Your life, Sir,
is hurtful to the laity, and evil ; your evil deeds,
Sir, are seen and heard, and families are seen and
heard. Sir, to be led astray by you. Be so good.
Sir, as to depart from this residence ; you have dwelt

' On the use of Fabbd^eti in this sense comp, the and Pftr.

pAtimokkha.

14

here. Sir, long enough.’ If that Bhikkhu, when thus
spoken to by the Bhikkhus should persist as before,
that Bhikkhu should be (formally) adjured by the
Bhikkhus as a body, even to the third time, to the
end that he abandon that course. If, while being
so adjured, up to the third time, he abandon that
course, it is well : if he abandon it not — that is a
Sa^ghidisesa.

Venerable Sirs, the thirteen matters which require,
as well in their earlier as in their later stages, formal
meetings of the Order, have been recited; nine
which become offences at once, and four which are
not completed until the third admonition.

If a Bhikkhu have committed either one or other
of these for as many days as he knowingly con-
ceals his sin, for so many days must that Bhikkhu,
even against his will, remain in probation When
the probation is over, that Bhikkhu must, for six
further days, undergo the Mi,natta discipline ®
(Penance). When the Penance has been removed,
that Bhikkhu must be reinstated in some place where
the community of the Bhikkhus forms a body of
twenty. If a community of Bhikkhus forming a
body of less than twenty, even by one, should rein-
state that Bhikkhu, he is not reinstated, and that
community is blameworthy. This is the proper
course in that case.

* Literally, ‘ of which.’ In the text there should be no full stop
after ySvatatiyakS.

* On the regulations respecting Pari vdsa (Probation) , see ATulla-
vagga II, 1-3.

* On the regulations respecting M&natta (Penance), see iTuIla-

vagga II, 6-8. "

saji/ghAdisesA dhammA.

15

In respect of them I ask the venerable ones,
‘ Are you pure in this matter ?’

A second time I ask the venerable ones, ‘Are
you pure in this matter ?’

A third time I ask the venerable ones, ‘Are
you pure in this matter ?’

The venerable ones are pure herein. Therefore
do they keep silence. Thus I understand.

Here endeth the recitation of the Sa/^^ghAdisesas.

PATIMOKKHA.

i6

aniyatA dhammA^

Rules regarding Undetermined Matters.

Here, venerable Sirs, the two Rules regarding
undetermined matters come into recitation.

1. Whatsoever Bhikkhu shall take a seat with
a woman, one man with one woman, in secret, on a
secluded seat, suitable* (for sexual intercourse); and
if a believing woman, trustworthy of speech, who
has seen (them so), shall lay it to his charge under
one or other of three Rules, either under the Piri-
^ka®, or under the Sa»zghddisesa or under the Pi-
^ittiya ® Rules : — let then that Bhikkhu, if he acknow-
ledge that he has so sat, be dealt with (according to
the circumstances reported) for a Pdr^ka, or for a
Sawghidisesa, or for a P4i5ittiya ; or let that Bhikkhu
be dealt with under that one of those three Rules
under which the believing woman, trustworthy in
speech, shall lay it to his charge.

This rule relates to a matter undetermined.

2 . And furthermore, even if the seat be not se-
cluded, and not convenient (for sexual intercourse),
but be convenient for addressing a woman with
wicked words ®, then whatsoever Bhikkhu shall take

* The whole of the following portion of the Pdtimokkha, to-
gether with the Old Commentary on it, recurs in the Vibhahga,
Book IIL

® Alamkammaniye, an expression found only in this passage.
The Vibhahga interprets it as above (Aniyata I, 2, i).

* The ist Pir^ka. * The 2nd Samgh&disesa.

' Pi^ttiya 44, 45; and compare also 7, 27.

' Compare the 3rd SarnghMsesa, and probably the 4th is also
referred to.

aniyatA dhammA.

17

a seat with a woman, one man with one woman, in
secret, on such a seat, and a believing woman, trust-
worthy in speech, who has seen (them so), shall lay
it to his charge under one or other of two Rules,
either under the Sa/«ghAdisesa, or under the PA^it-
tiya Rule — ^let then that Bhikkhu, if he acknowledge
that he has so sat, be dealt with (according to the
circumstances reported) for a SawghAdisesa, or for
a PAj^ittiya ; or let that Bhikkhu be dealt with under
that one of those two Rules under which the believing
woman, trustworthy in speech, shall lay it to his
charge.

This rule relates to a matter undetermined.

Venerable Sirs, the two Rules regarding uncertain
matters have been recited.

In respect of them I ask the venerable ones, ‘Are
you pure in this matter ?’

A second time I ask the venerable ones, ‘Are
you pure in this matter ?’

A third time I ask the venerable ones, ‘ Are you
pure in this matter ?’

The venerable ones are pure herein. Therefore
do they keep silence. Thus I understand.

Here endeth the recitation of the Aniyatas.

pAtimokkha.

i8

nissaggiyA pAatittiyA dhammA.

PAriTTiYA Rules involving Forfeiture.

Here, venerable Sirs, the thirty PiZnttiya Rules
involving forfeiture come into recitation.

I. When the robes have been settled, when the
Ka/^ina has been taken up by the Bhikkhu, an extra
robe may be kept up to the end of a period of ten
days. To him who goes beyond that there is a
PAZ’ittiya offence involving forfeiture ^

^ The following Rules, most of which have long ago fallen into
abeyance, depend in great measure upon communistic customs of
the ancient Fraternity, which are now somewhat difficult to under-
stand. The following explanation of this rule, and more especially
of the first few words of it, is therefore submitted with diffidence. At
the end of the Vassa period (see below, Mahavagga, Books III and
VII) the Sawgha, or community of brethren in any place, was accus-
tomed to give over to some one of the Bhikkhus such store of robes
(KaMina-dussa) as it possessed; and it should here be observed
that no Bhikkhu had a separate personal ownership over his robes,
though nominally given to him for his own use, and really his own
subject to the rules, they were, technically speaking, the pro-
perty of the whole Sawgha (that is, here, of the Order as a whole,
not of the community residing together at that place). The Bhikkhu
above referred to then spread the store of robes out to dry (suriye
attharati) ; and afterwards satisfied out of it the wants of any
brother whose robes, through the dampness of the season or other
causes, had become spoiled. Meanwhile, each of the Bhikkhus
I had, of course, to wear something— it being one of the points
most frequently insisted upon that a Bhikkhu should be decently
I clad, in direct contradiction to certain then popular views as to the
i sanctity of nakedness — but, during the interval, some of the rules
I about the robes were temporarily relaxed.

Now the Mahfivagga(VII, i, 7) gives eight reasons by which the
Ka/^ina license would be extinguished for any one particular
Bhikkhu alone — as it would be for the community at that place

nissaggiyA pAjtittiyA dhammA.

19

2 . When the robes have been settled, after the
taking up of the Ka^>4ina by the Bhikkhu, if a
Bhikkhu be without his three robes, even for a
single night, unless with the permission of the
Bhikkhus — that is a PS^ittiya offence involving
forfeiture \

by the formal ‘taking up of the store of robes* (KaMinuddhira
or KaMinassa ubbhira); — and with it that Bhikkhtfs claim to
a share in the common store. These eight reasons are merely eight
ways in which that particular Bhikkhu's wants are already amply
supplied; and the necessity, in his case, for a relaxation of the
rules no longer exists.

One of these reasons is that his set of robes is settled or done
for (^ivaraw ni/Mita^z) ; which, according to the old commen-
tator on our rule here, means that his set has been made, or spoiled,
or destroyed, or burnt, or that his hope of receiving one from the
laity has been disappointed (ni///zitaitivarasmin ti kxszxdjn kata/« vS
hoti xaLiih 2 jii vd vina/Z/zaw dsiddMm v4 ^ivaras^ vi upa^^i^^innd, ac-
cording to which the Scholion in Dickson’s note must be corrected).
In each of these cases his wants are already supplied by the set of
robes he has retained for wear during the process of drying : only
the case of those Bhikkhus remains to be settled who have not
had new robes made, and whose old ones were still good enough
to wear during that process.

After the Ka/AinuddhSra, either particular or general, no
Bhikkhu can retain for his own use an atireka-^ivara, a spare
robe. He must give it up to any brother w^ho has need of it.

As to the ‘ ten days,' the Sutta Vibhahga has the following story.
Ananda, after the Ka/^iinuddhara, has a spare robe. He wants to
give it to Sariputta ; but the latter is in Saketa, and is not expected
back till the ninth or tenth day. So the Buddha, to meet such
cases, establishes the rule that the spare robe may be kept up to the
tenth day.

The words ‘ a Pd^ittiya offence involving forfeiture,' repeated at
the end of each of the Nissaggiyas, are intended to mean that that
offence involves, firstly, all that a Pd^ittiya involves ; and secondly,
forfeiture.

^ To this Rule there is the following story in the Sutta Vibhanga.
Certain Bhikkhus left their robes in charge of the other Bhikkhus,

C 2

20

patimokkha.

3. When the robes have been settled, when the
KaMina has been taken up by the Bhikkhu, if a
set of robes should be offered to a Bhikkhu out of
season, it may be accepted by that Bhikkhu, should
he so wish. But when he has accepted it, it must
be made up at once ; and if it be not sufficient for
him, it may be kept up to the end of a month by that
Bhikkhu should he have any hope that the deficiency
may be supplied. If he keep it beyond that time, even
if there be hope of (the deficiency) being supplied —
that is a Pdiittiya offence requiring forfeiture,

4. Whatsoever Bhikkhu shall have his soiled robe ^
washed, or dyed, or beaten by a Bhikkhunf (sister)®
who is not related to him — that is a Pi/^ittiya offence
involving forfeiture®.

5. Whatsoever Bhikkhu shall receive a robe from
the hands of a Bhikkhunl not related to him, except
in exchange — that is a Pii’ittiya offence involving
forfeiture.

6. Whatsoever Bhikkhu shall ask a householder,
or a householder’s wifeS not being related to him,

and went on a journey. The robes, being laid by for a long time,
became spoilt. The Buddha thereupon forbad a Bhikkhu, under
the circumstances stated in this Rule, to separate himself from his
robes (ti-^ivara).

As regards the permission we have the story that a sick Bhikkhu
was invited home that his friends might nurse him. He answers,

‘ The Blessed One has forbidden us to separate ourselves from our
robes. I am sick, and unable to travel in my robes.’ Then the
Blessed One allows a sick brother to obtain leave to dispense with
the Rule.

‘ Literally, ‘an old robe,’ which the Vibhahga (Nissaggiya IV, 2, i)
explains as one that has been once worn.

* And so, frequently, below.

* Compare the 17th Nissaggiya.

* Householder is here gahapati; that is, pater familias. See
Rh. D.’s note on Mahit-sudassana Sutta I, 41.

nissaggiyA pAa’ITTIYA dhammA.

21

for a robe, except at the right season — that is a
PA(^ittiya offence involving forfeiture.

Here the right season means when the Bhikkhu
has been robbed of his robe, or when his robe has
been destroyed. This is the right season in this
connection.

7. If the householder, or the householder s wife,
should offer him a choice* from (the materials for) many
robes, that Bhikkhu may have robes made out of it
up to the (due portion of) inner and outer robes. If
he has robes made beyond this limit — that is a
PA^ittiya offence involving forfeiture.

8. In case the value in barter of a set of robes
has been laid by, for a particular Bhikkhu, by a
householder who is not a relative of his, or a house-
holder’s lady, with the intention ‘ I will get a set of
robes in exchange for this robe-fund, and so provide
a dress for such and such a Bhikkhu — in that case.

’ One MS. of the Vibhahga reads abhiha/um ; but another
reads abhiha//Aum, as does Minayeif ; while the Samanta-PasSdiki
makes it equal to abhiharitum. The right reading is probably
abhiha//Aum. In any case, the unusual form and grammatical
construction throw some doubt on the exact meaning of the phrase.
The Samanta-Pasddikd, which explains it philologically as just men-
tioned, goes on in the next words to explain it sj’ntactically as
abhiharitvd, which it refers to the subject of pav&reyya, and
states could be done either actually, or by words. Dickson’s ren-
dering, ‘ arrange to supply him,’ does not accurately convey the
force of pavSreyya; but the right rendering may be ‘should offer
to bring forth for him (whatever he chose) from (amongst the
material for) many robes.’ The only possible alternative is ‘ should
make him an offer to take whatever he chose from amongst the
material for many robes.’ Compare the 34th Pi^ittiya.

Santar-uttara-paramaw is meant, according to the Vibhahga,
to imply ‘to the extent of one inner, and one outer robe;’ but we
preserve the ambiguity of the text.

22

PATIMOKKHA.

if that Bhikkhu, before the offer has been made to
him, go and give directions as to the make of the
robe, saying, ‘ It would be well. Sir, to get in ex-
change such and such a sort of robe with that robe-
fund to clothe me with ; ’ desiring something fine —
that is a Pi^ittiya offence involving forfeiture ^

9. In case two persons, householders or house-
holders’ ladies, have each laid by for a particular
Bhikkhu the value in barter of a set of robes, with
the intention, ‘We will each get a set of robes in
exchange for this robe-fund, and so provide a dress
for such and such a Bhikkhu — in that case, if that
Bhikkhu, before the offer has been made to him,
go and give directions as to the make of the robe,
saying, ‘ It would be well. Sirs, to get in exchange,
with the value in barter you have each laid by, such
and such a sort of robe to clothe me with, the two
becoming one:’ desiring something fine — that is a
Pi/^ittiya offence involving forfeiture.

10. In case a R^a, or a Khattiya, or a Brihman,
or a Gahapati should send by messenger, for a
particular Bhikkhu, the value in barter of a set of
robes, saying, ‘ Get a set of robes in exchange for
this robe-fund, and provide a dress for such and such
a Bhikkhu J’ if then that messenger should go to
that Bhikkhu and say, ‘ I have brought, Sir, this
robe-fund for your reverence. May your reverence

* Both Dickson and Childers have gone too far in rendering
^etdpetvi by ‘purchase,’ The Samanta-PasddikS (Minayeff, 78)
explains it by parivattetvi. So Rh. D., ‘Ancient Coins and
Measures of Ceylon,’ p. 6.

In the text read ATetlpanam (compare Ka/iHyana, p. 32a of
Senart’s edition); and it should not ^ rendered ‘money;’ see
Rh. D., loc. cit. The ‘ Robe-fund* consisted of things for barter.

In the text die vS after annitakassa should be omitted.

nissaggiyA pAiriTTivA dhammA.

23

accept the robe-fund!’ let then that monk answer
that messenger thus : ‘ We do not, my friend, accept
the value in barter for a set of robes ; but we may
accept a set of robes, at the right time, and of the
suitable kind.’ If then that messenger shall answer
that Bhikkhu thus : ‘ Has then your reverence a
person who attends (to such matters for you)?’
then, Bhikkhus let the Bhikkhu, to whom the robes
are to belong, point out, as his agent, the man who
keeps the ArAma in order ^ or some believer, saying,
‘ This man, my friend, is the Bhikkhus’ agent.’ If
then that messenger, when he has made an appoint-
ment with that agent, shall come to that Bhikkhu,
and say, ‘ I have made an appointment, Sir, with
that agent whom your reverence pointed out. Let
your reverence come, and he will clothe you with
the set of robes betimes!’ then, Bhikkhus \ let
that Bhikkhu, to whom the set of robes is to belong,
go to the agent and warn him and remind him two
or three times, saying, ' Sir, I have need of a set
of robes!’ If, while so warning and reminding®
two or three times, he should succeed in obtaining

* This word of address is most noteworthy as standing quite
isolated in the Fatimokkha. It must be meant as an address by
the Buddha himself to the Brethren ; for, if it were the address of
the Bhikkhu reciting the Pdtimokkha, the expression used would
necessarily be dyasmanto, as in the closing words of each chapter,
or other words to that effect. That it should have been left in is
a striking proof of the faithfulness with which the Pdtimokkha has
been preserved. Is it a survival of some form of words older even
than the Pdtimokkha ? or is it merely an ancient blunder ?

* The drdma is, literally, the grove or pleasure-ground in which
the monks*' residence stood; but it had probably before this already
come to include the residence, or vihdra, itself.

* In the text read ifcodayamdno, sdrayamdifb; the medial
participle with active sense, as often.

pAtimokkha.

24

the robes, it is well. Should he not succeed in
obtaining them, let him up to the fourth, fifth, or
sixth time go and stand silently on that matter ^
If, while so standing silently on that matter up to
the fourth, fifth, or sixth time, he should succeed
in obtaining the set of robes, it is well. Should
he not succeed in obtaining them (so), and then,
exerting himself beyond that point succeed in obtain-
ing them— that is a Pdiittiya offence involving for-
feiture, (But) if he should not succeed in obtaining
them, let him either go himself, or send a messenger
(to the place) whence the robe-fund was brought
to him, and say, ‘The robe-fund which your
reverences sent for a Bhikkhu, that has in no wise
advantaged that Bhikkhu. Take heed, your reve-
rences, of your own, that your own go not to ruin !’
This is the proper course in that case

Here ends the first section,
the ‘ Robe-section.’

II, Whatsoever Bhikkhu shall have a rug or
mat made with silk in it — that is a PAA’ittiya offence
involving forfeiture®.

^ In the text read ^^akkhattuparama/;2. This silent standing
is the only mode of asking for food permitted to a Bhikkhu.

® Both here, and in the Conclusion of the Sawghddisesa, and
further below in the 22nd Nissaggiya, where the same phrase
occurs, Mr. Dickson takes it to mean, ‘ This is the way to Nirvd«a.*
We are unable to see any foundation for such a rendering.

* The following rules were for use in a tropical climate, and
refer not to bed coverings, but to materials spread over a hard
seat or couch. The word translated 'rug or mat’ is a more
general term, meaning 'a thing spread;’ but there is no corres-

nissaggiyA pAzittiyA dhamma. 25

12. Whatsoever Bhikkhu shall have a rug or
mat made of pure black wool of goats’ hair^ — that
is a PcL^ittiya offence involving forfeiture.

1 3. In case a Bhikkhu is having a new rug made,
two parts should be taken of pure black wool of
goats' hair, the third part of white wool, and the
fourtii of the colour of oxen (reddish brown). If a
Bhikkhu should have a new rug made without taking
two parts of pure black wool, the third of white, and
the fourth of tawny — that is a Pcf^ittiya offence
involving forfeiture®.

14. When a BhikJ^hu has had a new rug made,
he should use it for six years. If he should have
another new rug made within the six years, whether
he has got rid, or has not got rid of the former one,
unless with the permission of the Bhikkhus ® — that is
a Pd/’ittiya offence involving forfeiture.

15. When a Bhikkhu is having a new rug made
to sit upon, a piece of the breadth of the accepted
span * must be taken from all round the old one in

ponding word in English, as ‘coverlet’ or ‘counterpane’ would
imply a different state of things.

* The Sutta Vibhahga says that kS/aka is of two kinds, either
^Stiy^ kS/aka or ra^ana-kd/aka; that is, that the wool is either
naturally black, or dyed of that colour. Elaka is a goat, not
a sheep.

* This is deliberately chosen as an ugly mixture, which would
lessen the commercial value of the rug, by making it unfashion-,
able.

* Regarding this permission the Vibhahga gives the following
story. A sick monk was asked by his relatives to come home,
that they might nurse him. He answered that he was too ill to
cany his rug, could not get on without one, and could not have a
new one made within six years. Then the Blessed One established
this exception to the general Rule.

* See the note on the 6th Samgh&disesa.

26

pAtimokkha.

order to disfigure it. If a Bhikkhu should have a
new seat-rug made without taking a span’s width
from all round the old one — that is a Piiittiya offence
involving forfeiture.

1 6. In case a Bhikkhu should get some goats’
wool whilst he is on a journey ^ let him accept it, if
he likes ; and when he has accepted it, he may carry
it in his own hand, if there are no porters, for the
distance of three leagues K Should he carry it further
than that, even if there are no porters — that is a
Pdiittiya offence involving forfeiture.

17. Whatsoever Bhikkhu s|;iall get goats’ wool
washed, or dyed, or combed out by a Bhikkhunf who
is not related to him — that is a PlL^ittiya offence
involving forfeiture ®.

18. Whatsoever Bhikkhu shall receive gold or
silver, or get some one to receive it for him, or allow
it to be kept in deposit for him * — that is a Pi/^ittiya
offence involving forfeiture.

^ Addhdna-magga-pa/ipanno; which the Kahkhd Vita-
ra«i (MinayefF, p. 80) explains as being on a long road, called
addhSna (high-road). But one may be on a high-road without
going a long journey.

^ Y Oxanas; a yo^ana being a trifle under eight miles. See
Rh. D., ‘Ancient Coins and Measures' &c., pp. 16, 17.

® Compare the 4th Nissaggiya.

* Upanikkhitta^z vd sidiyeyya; which cannot possibly mean
‘ if he thinks to appropriate money entrusted to him/ as Mr. Dick-
son translates. See Rh. D., ‘ Ancient Coins ' &c., p. 7.

The method of procedure on a breach of this rule, or of the
next, is thus described in the Vibhahga. The guilty Bhikkhu has to
give up the gold or silver to the community (Sa»2gha, not here, as
elsewhere in sentences concerning forfeiture, ‘ or to a gan a or to a
puggala'). Then when an &r&mika or an up&saka comes, it is
to be given to him, to buy ghee or oil with it for the Saingha ; and
whatever is bought is the common property of all the Samgha, save
the guilty Bhikkhu. Should the layman object to undertake the

nissaggiyA pA^ittiyA dhammA.

27

19. Whatsoever Bhikkhu shall engage in any one
of the various transactions in which silver is used —
that is a P^i^ittiya offence involving forfeiture.

20. Whatsoever Bhikkhu shall engage in any one
of the various kinds of buying and selling — that is
a PA/f’ittiya offence involving forfeiture.

End of the second section,
the ‘ Silk-section.’

21. A spare bowl maybe kept up to the limit
of ten days. To him who exceeds that there is a
PiX’ittiya offence involving forfeiture.

22. Whatsoever Bhikkhu shall get another new
bowl in exchange for an (old) one broken in less
than five places — that is a Pa^’ittiya offence involving
forfeiture.

That bowl must be forfeited by that Bhikkhu
to the company of Bhikkhus ; and whichever in that
company of Bhikkhus shall be the worst bowl, that
shall be given to that Bhikkhu with the words,
‘ This, Bhikkhu, is thy bowl ; it must be kept until
it breaks.’ This is the right course in that case.

23. Now those medicines which may be used by
the sick Bhikkhus — to wit, ghee, butter, oil, honey,
molasses — when they have received them, they may
enjoy them, storing them up to the seventh day.
To him who exceeds that there is a P^’ittiya
offence involving forfeiture.

spending of the gold or silver, he is to be asked to throw it away.
Or, if this cannot be managed, then, as a last resource, some
Bhikkhu is to be formally appointed ‘Bullion-remover’ (Rftpiya-
AHaidda.ka.), and he is to go and throw it away somewhere, ‘ani-
mittawi katvd,’ (without making any mark at the place !)

28

pAtimokkha.

24. When he sees that a month of the hot days
has yet to run, let a Bhikkhu provide himself with
the materials for robes for the rainy season : when
he sees that half a month of the hot days has yet
to run, let him make them, and wear them. Should
he provide himself with the materials for robes for
the rainy season when more than a month of the hot
days has yet to run ; or should he make them, and
wear them, when more than half a month of the
hot days has yet to run — that is a PA^^ittiya offence
involving forfeiture.

25. Whatsoever Bhikkhu, when he has himself
given a set of robes to another Bhikkhu, shall there-
after, being angry or displeased with him, take them
away, or get them taken away — that is a Pa/f’ittiya
offence involving forfeiture.

26. Whatsoever Bhikkhu shall himself ask for
yarn, and have it woven up by weavers into cloth
for a set of robes — that is a PA-^ittiya offence in-
volving forfeiture.

27. In case "a householder, who is not related
to him, or a householder’s lady, shall have the cloth
for a set of robes woven for a particular Bhikkhu
by weavers ; in that case, if that Bhikkhu, before the
offer has been made to him, shall go to the weavers,
and give directions as to the make of the robe, saying,
‘This robe-cloth, my friends, is being woven for
me. Make it long and broad, and make it thick,
and well woven, and evenly woven and with even
lines, and well carded. If you do so, ourselves will

* SuppavSyitam, literally, ‘well woven forth.' We follow the
Samanta-PisadikS in its explanation of this word, but with con-
siderable hesitation. Compare the relation between Sanskrit ota
and prota; and between English ‘web’ and ‘woof.’

nissaggiyA pAjtittiyA dhammA.

29

make it up to you, friends, in some way or other ! ’
If that Bhikkhu ^ having thus spoken, should make
it up ® to them in any way, even by the contents
of a begging bowl — that is a P 4 /^ittiya offence in-
volving forfeiture.

28. In case a robe should fall to the lot of a
Bhikkhu, as a special gift®, ten days before the
Kattika-temdsa® full moon, that Bhikkhu may
take it, considering it as a special gift : and when
he has it, he may keep it up till the robe time ®.

^ In the text read Evaw ia so bhikkhu.

® Anupada^^eyya is a double potential. Da^f^ma would be
equal to Sanskrit dadyama; and to that a second potential ter-
mination has been added.

® The expression in the Pdli is literally * should a special robe
come to a Bhikkhu,’ &c. ; where ‘special robe’ is a^^eka-^iva-
raw, explained in the Samanta-PasSdM (Minayeff, 83) as equal
to a^t^Syika-kivaraw. TheVibhahga says, ‘If a man wants to
join the army or to emigrate, or if a man has fallen sick, or a woman
is with child, or an unbeliever has come to believe, or a believer is
edified (pasado uppanno hoti); then, if such a one send a
messenger to the Bhikkhus, saying, “Let their reverences come
hither, I will give a gift for the rainy season” (vassavasikaw ; per-
haps, “ such a gift as the laity are wont to give to the Bhikkhus who
have spent the vassa among them”) — that is an a^^eka-^i varaw'
(Minayeff, 82, 83). A^t^taya is an immediate, threatening, danger:
compare the expression ‘ donatio mortis causa.* ‘ Special robe ' is,
no doubt, an inadequate rendering ; but we have chosen it in refer-
ence to the special circumstances under which the donation is
made, and in default of a better translation. Compare the 85th
Paitittiya.

The Kattika-temdsi-pu««amS is, according to the Vibhanga
(Minayeff, p, 82), the close of the Pav&ra«S, the ceremony at the
end of Vassa (see below, Book IV).

The robe time is the time when the robes were settled. The
Vibhanga says, ‘ Robe time is, if the robes have not been laid out
to dry (see the note to the first rule in this division of the PSti-
mokkha), the last month of the rains; if they have, it is five
months/

30

pAtimokkha.

Should he keep it beyond that — that is a PAiittiya
offence involving forfeiture.

29. When vassa is completed up to the full
moon in Kattika^ in case a Bhikkhu, who is dwell-
ing in a place belonging to the class of those forest
dwellings which are held to be insecure and
dangerous, should desire to do so, he may leave
one or other of his three robes in a hut inside a
village, and if there is any ground for that Bhikkhu
being separated from that robe, he may be separated
from it up to the sixth night. Should he separate
himself from it more than that, except by permission
from the Bhikkhus — that is a PiX’ittiya offence in-
volving forfeiture.

30. Whatsoever Bhikkhu shall cause to be diverted
to himself any benefit already dedicated to the Sa.m-
gha — that is a Pd^ittiya offence involving forfeiture.

Here ends the third section,
the ‘ Bowl-section.’

Venerable Sirs, the thirty Pd^ittiya Rules involving
forfeiture have been recited.

In respect of them I ask the venerable ones, ‘Are
you pure in this matter ?’

> This is a different date from that mentioned in the last rule,
and one month later. The Vibhahga explains the date here as
Kattika-^StumdsinJ, whereas the date in Rule 38 is temSsint,
and is called by the Samanta-Pflsddikd (Minayeif, p. 82) paMama-
kattika-pu««ami.

The same distinction is evident, from Mah&vagga IV, 14, 7—11,
between Pav^«& and the iTdtumdsin!. But how both these
full moons came to be called Kattika is not clear.

nissaggiyA pAjnTTivA dhammA.

31

A second time I ask the venerable ones, ‘Are
you pure in this matter ?’

A third time I ask the venerable ones, ‘Are you
pure in this matter?’

The venerable ones are pure herein. Therefore
do they keep silence. Thus I understand.

Here ends the recitation of the Nissaggiyas.

32

pAtimokkha.

pAatittiyA dhammA.

The PAeittiya^ Rules.

Now here, venerable Sirs, the ninety-two PA/6ittiya
Rules (Rules regarding matters requiring expiation)
come into recitation.

1 I, There is PA/^ittiya in a deliberate lie.

2. There is Pi/^ittiya in abusive language.

3. There is PAiittiya in slander of a Bhikkhu.

j 4. Whatsoever Bhikkhu shall cause one not re-
■ ceived into the higher grade (of the Order*) to recite
the Dhamma clause by clause * — that is a PA>^ittiya.

. 5. Whatsoever Bhikkhu shall, for more than two

or three nights, lie down (to sleep) in the same place
with one not received into the higher grade (of the
Order) — that is a PA^ittiya.

6. W’^hatsoever Bhikkhu shall lie down (to sleep)
in the same place with a woman — that is a PA^ittiya*.

7. Whatsoever Bhikkhu shall preach the Dham-
ma, in more than five or six words, to a woman,

* That is, ‘ requiring repentance.’ Compare the Sanskrit terms
FrAyar^ittika and PrAyar^ittiya .

* Literally, ‘one who has not received the upasampadA.’

* Anupasampannam padaso dhammam vA^eyya. This
rule is directed against a wrong method of teaching the Dhamma
to a SAmanera. See the extracts from the Old Commentary, and
from the Samanta-PAsAdikA, given by Minayeff on p. 84. Read
however in the second line osApenti for AsApenti ; and then go
on auvakkharaxn nAma, rilpam ani^^an ti vu>iiamAno ruppan ti
opAteti: anuvya^ganam nAma, rApam ani^^an ti vuiiiamAno vedanA
ani^^A ti sadda/n nii^^Areti, &c.

* For the text read mAtugAmena.

pAjcittiyA dhammA.

33

without a man arrived at years of discretion* (being
present) — that is a PAiittiya.

8. Whatsoever Bhikkhu shall tell one not re-
ceived into the higher grade (of the Order) that
the (speaker or any other Bhikkhu) has extraordi-
nary spiritual gifts, even when such is the case^ —
that is a PA/^ittiya.

9. Whatsoever Bhikkhu shall tell one not re-
ceived into the higher grade (of the Order) of a
Bhikkhu having fallen into any grave offence — that
is a PA^ittiya.

10. Whatsoever Bhikkhu shall dig the ground or
have it dug* — that is a PA>&ittiya.

Here ends the first section,
the ‘Falsehood-section.’

1 1. There is PA>^ittiya in destroying any vegetable.

1 2. There is PAAittiya in prevarication, or in wor-
rying (the assembled Bhikkhus; for instance, by
refusing to answer*).

1 3. There is PA^ittiya in stirring up ill-will against,
in speaking disrespectfully of (any Bhikkhu deputed
to any official duty®).

* Vi«wu. The Vibhahga says, ‘ a man able to understand what
is well said, and what is wrongly said ; what is wicked, and what is
not wicked.’ Compare the use of vinwutS at GAtaka I, 231.

* To do so when it was not the case, would be a Plr^ka.
See the 4th Fir^ka, and our note there on the meaning of utta-
rimanussa-dhammam. The ‘even’ here means that the truth
of the averment makes no excuse for it

' Because doing so might bring some living thing into danger.

* Vihesake; which must be understood as being done in a
formal meeting of the Samgha during an official enquiry.

* The words in parentheses are supplied from the explanations
in the Vibhahga.

Till

D

34

fAtimokkha.

14. Whatsoever Bhikkhu who has put out, or
got another to put out to air, a bedstead, or a chair,
or a mat, or a stool*, the common property of the
Sa«^gha ; and when going away shall not put it back,
or have it put back, but shall depart without saying
anything to anybody — that is a PA^ittiya.

15. Whatsoever Bhikkhu has put out, or got
another to put out, a bedstead in a dwelling-place
common to a Sa»«gha ; and when going away shall
not put it back, or have it put back, but shall de-
part without saying anything to anybody — that is a
PA^ittiya.

16. Whatsoever Bhikkhu, in a dwelling-place com-
mon to a Sawgha, shall lie down where he knows
that he is encroaching on (the space occupied by) a
Bhikkhu who arrived before him, thinking, ‘ If he
become inconvenienced he may go away’ — if he
does it for that object, and for no other® — that is
a PA>^ittiya.

17. Whatsoever Bhikkhu, being angry or dis-
pleased with another Bhikkhu, shall drive him out,
or get him driven out of a dwelling-place common
to a Sa»«gha — that is a PA^ittiya.

18. Whatsoever Bhikkhu shall hurriedly sit down,
or lie down, in the upper story of a dwelling-place
common to a Sa«?gha®, on a bedstead or chair with
removable legs — that is a PAiittiya.

^ Kokkhzm^ the meaning of which is not quite clear. The
Vibhahga says there are four kinds, made of bark, of ustra roots,
of muTi^a grass, and of bulrushes. It is apparently therefore of
wickerwork.

* That is, according to the Vibhahga, the rule does not apply
to an invalid, or to one suflfering from the heat, or the cold ; and
so on.

® Because if he does so,' he might unwittingly upset the furniture,.

pA^tittiyA dhammA.

35

19. In case a Bhikkhu is having a large dwelling-
place put up, he may have the work rectified, in a
place where straw is scarce, round the doors, and
where the bolts are put in, and the openings for
light are set, and till the roof has been twice or
thrice covered in^ Should he go beyond that, even
in such a place — that is a Pd^ittiya.

20. Whatsoever Bhikkhu shall sprinkle water
with living creatures in it, or shall cause such to be
sprinkled on grass or on clay — that is a Pa^ittiya.

Here ends the second section,
the ' BhfitagAma-section/

21. Whatsoever Bhikkhu, not thereto deputed,
shall exhort the Bhikkhunl's^ — that is a PAyf^ittiya.

or fall himself, to the injuiy of some one who was rightfully on the
ground floor.

‘ In the text read dvittiM^adanassa: Mite pi. This rule,
directed against too great luxury in the matter of a perfectly
finished dwelling, is somewhat obscure, owing to our want of
information as to the mode in which such dwellings should be
put up. It refers probably to a hut, albeit a large one, of
wattel and daub (kuV^/a: comp. Rh. D/s note on the Mahi-
parinibbdna Sutta V, 41), The Samanta-Pasadiki divides dvara-
kosa into dvara-okdsa, and quotes various estimates from the
old Sinhalese commentaries as to the proper extent of this space
(see Minayeff, p. 87).

* Ovadeyya; that is, shall preach to them the eight Garu-
dhamml On these see the passages mentioned in the Index
appended to the text of the Alullavagga ; and on the ovida see
^ullavagga X, 9, 2, and following. The mode of procedure is
laid down in the Vibhanga as follows : ‘ The Bhikkhu asks the
Bhikkhunt’s, ‘‘Are you all present, sisters, and db none raise
objections (that is, are you samaggd)?” If they say, “ That is so,
Sir!’* he asks, “Are the eight Garu-dhammd being kept up?**
If they say, “ They are. Sir ! *’ he is to say, “ That, sisters, is the
exhortation 1 '* and so deliver it to them. If they say, “ They are

D 2

36

pAtimokkha.

22. If a Bhikkhu, even when thereto deputed,
exhort the Bhikkhunl’s after the sun has set — that is
a P^ttiya.

23. Whatsoever Bhikkhu shall go to the dwell-
ing-place of Bhikkhunl’s, and there exhort the Bhik-
khuni’s*, except on the (right) occasion — that is a
P^ittiya.

Herein this is the right occasion ; (to wit), when
a Bhikkhunl is ill. This is the right occasion in this
passage.

24. Whatsoever Bhikkhu shall speak thus ; ‘ The
Bhikkhus exhort the Bhikkhunl’s for the sake of
gain*!’ — that is a Piliittiya.

25. Whatsoever Bhikkhu shall give a robe to a
Bhikkhunl who is not related to him, except in
exchange — that is a PS^ittiya.

26. Whatsoever Bhikkhu shall make up a robe,
or have it made up, for a Bhikkhunl who is not
related to him — that is a P^ittiya.

27. Whatsoever Bhikkhu, by appointment, shall
travel along a high road in company with a Bhik-
khunl, even to go as far as the village, except on the
right occasion — that is a Pi>^ittiya.

not. Sir I ” he should go all through them, saying, “ A sister who
has been received into the higher grade even one hundred years,
&c. (and so on to the end of the Garu-dhamm^).”

‘ If he preach any other Dhamma to those who say, “ We, Sir,
are all present, and none raise objections I ” he is guilty of a Duk-
ka/a. If he preach the eight Garu-dhamm& to those who say,
“No, Sir, that is not sol” (vagg’ amh’ ayy& ti, where vagga
is vyagra, the opposite of samagga), he is guilty of a Dukka/a.
If he preach another Dhamma, when the eight Garu-dhamm&
have not committed to their charge, he is g[uilty of a Dukka/h.’

* Compare iTullavagga X, 6, i.

* Amisa-hetu ; that is, in order that the sisters may be induced
to supply the preachers with food, medicine, &c.

pAirnTiYA dhammA. 37'

Herein this is the right occasion : (to wit), when
the road is so insecure and dangerous that travellers
on it have to carry arms. This is the right occasion
in this passage.

28. Whatsoever Bhikkhu, by appointment, shall
go on board the same boat, whether going up stream
or down stream, in company with a Bhikkhunl, ex-
cept for the purpose of crossing over to the other
side — that is a PA>^ittiya.

29. Whatsoever Bhikkhu, knowing it to be so,
shall eat food procured by the intervention of a
Bhikkhunl, unless the laity (who give the food) had
already undertaken (to give it to him)^ — that is a
PAy^ittiya.

30. Whatsoever Bhikkhu shall take a seat, one
man with one woman, in company with a Bhikkhunl,
in a secret place ® — that is a PA^ittiya.

Here ends the third section,
the ‘ Bhikkhunovida-section.’

31. A Bhikkhu who is not sick may take one
meal at a public rest-house ®. Should he take more
than that — that is a PAy^ittiya.

* The introductory story in the Vibhahga is of a Bhikkhu born
in R^agaha, who went to a relative’s house, and a meal was
there being prepared for him by his relatives. A kulupiki
bhikkhunl then arrives, and says, ‘ My friends, give the gentle-
man a meal 1’ Then the Bhikkhu was in doubt whether he ought
not to refuse it as being Bhikkhunl-paripd^ita/».

* Compare the Aniyatd Dhammd.

’ £ko ^vasatha-pimfo bhun^itabbo. An Svasatha is one
of those ‘chaultries,’ or public resting-places, which good Buddhists
were wont to put up in the villages or at cross roads. At some of

38

pAtimokkha.

32. There is PAv^ittiya in going in a body to
receive a meaP, except on the right occasion.

Herein the right occasion is this : (to wit), when
there is sickness, when robes are being given, when
robes are being made, when on a journey (on foot),
when on board a boat, when (the influx of Bhikkhus)
is great*®, when a general invitation is given to Sa-
ma»as®. This is right occasion in this passage.

33. There is PSX’ittiya in taking food in turn^
except on the right occasion.

Herein the right occasion is this: (to wit), when
there is sickness, when robes are being given, when

these a constant supply of rice was provided for travellers. See
the MahS-parinibbina Sutta I, 10; II, 5 (pp. 10, 16); Gdtaka,
No. 31 (‘Buddhist Birth Stories,’ pp. 280-285) ; MahS-sudassana
Sutta I, 63; Dhammapada Commentary apud Fausboll, 185. The
Samanta-Pisddika on this rule (Minayeff, p. 88) says that dvasatha-
pindo is alneal in such an avasatha.

^ On this rule compare A\illavagga VII, 3, 13. ‘In a body’
means four or more Bhikkhus going together to the same house.

® Maha-samayo. The Vibhahga relates how, when vassa
was over, the Bhikkhus repaired in great numbers to visit the
Buddha. On such occasions it was difficult or impossible for them
all, if they adhered to the strict rule, to obtain their meals.

® Samawa-bhatta-samayo. See the Vibhahga, and the Sa-
manta-PasddM, quoted by Minayeff, pp. 88, 89. ‘ Samawas,’ of
course, includes others besides Buddhists.

* Parampara-bho^ane ; that is, in picking and choosing
with regard to food, or in regard to different invitations. The
Bhikkhus were to eat straight on whatever was given, and to
accept invitations in the order in which they were received. But
a sick Bhikkhu might choose one morsel rather than another; and
Bhikkhus in health might accept an invitation to a house where
robes are going to be given, or made, rather than to a house where
only a meal was offered. The last exception was simply to guard
against the stock of robes falling short (Bhikkhft . . . n&dhiv&senti:
^ivaram parittam uppa^^ti, says the Vibhahga).

vXnmyX dhammA.

39

robes are being made. This is right occasion in this
passage.

34. In case people should offer a Bhikkhu, who
has gone to some house, to take as much as he chose
of their sweetmeats and cakes, that Bhikkhu, should
he so wish, may accept two or three bowls full^. If he
should accept more than that — that is a Pi^ittiya.

When he has accepted two or three bowls fulP, he
must take them away, and divide them up among the
Bhikkhus. That is the proper course in this case.

35. Whatsoever Bhikkhu, when he has once
finished his meal, though still invited (to continue
eating 2), shall eat or partake of ^ food that has not
been left over^ whether hard or soft® — that is a
Pa^Sittiya.

^ In the text read dvittipattapurS.

The word for sweetmeats, pftva, includes all those sweetmeats
which it was then (as it is now) the custom to send as presents from
one house to another at weddings, funerals, and such occasions.

‘Cakes’ (mantha) refers to those rice-cakes, &c., w^hich were
usually prepared as provision for a journey. Compare Gataka
I, 80.

‘Should offer to take as much as he chose’ is the phrase referred
to above in our note on the 7th Nissaggiya. The Vibhahga
says here, Abhiha/u/?^ pavareyyd ’ti yavataka;w ii^^^asi tSvatakawi
ga;;hahiti.

* PavSrito. The Vibhahga says, PavSrito ndma dsanax^ pail-
Tlayati bho^ana^Ti panMyati hatthapdse Mito abhiharati pa/ikkhepo
pawilayati, which means, we think, ‘ A seat for him is there, food is
there, (the host) standing near him still makes invitation, but there
takes place a refusal (of the proferred food).'

® Kh&deyya v& bhuil^eyya vS.

* The ‘ not left over' refers only to the case of a sick Bhikkhu.
A Bhikkhu in health, when he has once finished his meal, ought
not to eat what he has left.

^ Kh&daniya/n bho^aniyam vS. The former term is usedl
of hard food, such as biscuits, cakes, meats, fruits, &c.; the latter i

40

PATIMOKKHA.

36. Whatsoever Bhikkhu shall offer a Bhikkhu
who has finished his meal, though still invited to
continue eating, his choice of food, whether hard or
soft, that has not been left over, saying, ‘Come,
now, Bhikkhu ; take and eat !’ deliberately desiring
to stir up longing (in that Bhikkhu); then if that
Bhikkhu eats^ — that is a P^ittiya.

37. Whatsoever Bhikkhu shall take or eat any
food, whether hard or soft, at the wrong time ® —
that is a P^ittiya.

38. Whatsoever Bhikkhu shall eat food, whether
hard or soft, that has been put by — that is a P^ittiya.

39. Whatsoever Bhikkhu, when he is not sick,
shall request, for his own use, and shall partake of
delicacies — to wit, ghee, butter, oil, honey, molasses,
fish, flesh , milk, curds ® — that is a P^ittiya.

40. Whatsoever Bhikkhu shall place, as food,

within the door of his mouth, anything not given to
him, save only water and a tooth-cleaner * — that is a
Pel^ittiya. ’

Here ends the fourth section,
the ‘Bho^ana-section/

41. Whatsoever Bhikkhu shall, with his own

f term of soft foods, such as boiled rice, curries, &c. The two words
for eating correspond to these two ideas.

‘ Bhuttasmim pS^ittiya; that is, the offence is completed
when the eating has taken place; but the offer alone is not a
PtUittiya. So the Vibhanga.

* After sun-turn.

® In the text read tSni; madhu ph 4 «ita«.

* Dantapo«a; doubtless the same, perhaps an older expression
for, the dantaka/Ma referred to in iTullavagga V, 31. It is a piece
of fragrant root (cinnamon, betel, &c.) about eight inches long.

PAJCITTIYA DHAMMA.

41

hand, give food, whether hard or soft, to an A>§elaka
or to a Paribbi^aka or to a Paribb 4 ^ik 4 ^ — that
Is a Pd^ittiya.

42. Whatsoever Bhikkhu shall address a Bhikkhu
thus: ‘Come, brother; let us go, for a meal, to the
village, or the town!’ and then, whether after he
has got an alms for him, or without having got an
alms for him, shall send him away, saying, ‘ Go
away, brother! Talking with you, or sitting with
you, is not pleasant to me. Talking, or sitting each
one by himself, is more pleasant to me !’ — if he does
this for this cause, and for no other® — that is a
P^i^ittiya.

43. Whatsoever Bhikkhu shall force his way into
a house where a meal is going on and take a seat
there — that is a P^ittiya.

^ These are the various non-Buddhist religious teachers or
devotees, most of whom rejected the Vedas. The Paribbd^akas
were mostly, though not always, wandering logicians, willing to
maintain theses against all the world Panbba^kd is merely the
feminine of the last A Melaka, which naturally has no feminine,
were the naked ascetics.

The sect now called Gains are divided into two classes, S vet am- j
baras and Digambaras, the latter of which eat naked. They are |
known to be the successors of the school called Niga»Mas in the ^
Pdli Pi/akas; and it is not certain whether the Niga»Mas are
included in the A^elakas. It is probable that the Brahman ascetics,
the Vdnaprasthas, were not included under the term ParibbS-
^akas; but our information on the exact meaning of these terms j
is, as yet, very imperfect.

* That is merely to get rid of him, in order to gain any purpose
of his own. The Vibhahga gives as examples that the Bhikkhu
sees some valuable things, and wants to get them ; or sees some
woman, and wants to speak to her.

® Sabho^ane kule; the meaning of which is .not quite clear.
The Old Commentary says, ‘A sabho^ana kula is one where

42

PATIMOKKHA.

44. Whatsoever Bhikkhu shall take a seat, in
secret, with a woman, in a concealed place ^ — that is
a Pd^’ittiya.

45. Whatsoever Bhikkhu shall take a seat, in
secret, with a woman, one man with one woman —
that is a P^ittiya.

46. Whatsoever Bhikkhu, who has been invited
(to a house), and has been (thus already) provided
with a meal, shall, without having previously spoken
about it to a Bhikkhu, if there is one there, go on
his (begging) rounds among the families, either before
meal-time or after meal-time except on the right
occasion — that is a P^ittiya.

there is a husband and a wife; and they both, husband and wife,
are not gone forth from, are not devoid of lust ' (MinayefF, p. 89,
under P.; but for anatikkanti read anikkhant^). Then the
Samanta-Pdsddikd, doubtless to justify this suggested implication,
makes sabho^anaw equal to saha ubhohi ^anehi (I); or, in
the alternative, to sabhogaf«, since ‘the wife is the bhoga of a
man still given to passion, and the husband the bhoga of a wife/
The use of Bho^ana in any such sense is extremely forced, and
was perhaps only suggested by the following rules; but it is just
possible we should translate, ‘a household still given to pleasure*
(compare -^ullavagga VIII, 5, i), or ‘fond of good food* (compare
Milinda Pa?zha 76).

On anupakha^^a compare the 16th Pa/&ittiya.

^ Compare the 30th Pd<6ittiya, and the two Aniyata DhammS.

® The Vibhahga has the following stories in regard to these two
particulars. A family devoted to Upananda invited him and
another Bhikkhu. Before meal-time he went to attend on other
families (purebhattsww kulini payirupdsati). The people delayed
giving his meal to the other Bhikkhu till Upananda should
arrive. He came late ; and the other Bhikkhu was thereby dis-
comforted.

The family devoted to Upananda sent him food for his use ;
saying it was to be given to the Sawgha, with special reference to
him. He had- gone for an alms to the village. The messengers
delivered the food and the message, and asked where Upananda was.

pAiTITTIYA DHAMMA.

43

Herein the right occasion is this: (to wit), a time
of giving of robes, a time of making of robes. That
is right occasion in this passage.

47. A Bhikkhu who is not sick may accept a
(standing) invitation with regard to the requisites >
for four months. If he accept it for a period longer
than that — unless there be a second invitation, or a
perpetual invitation — that is a Pi^ittiya.

48. Whatsoever Bhikkhu shall go to see an army
drawn up in battle-array, except for a cause thereto
sufficient — that is a PSiittiya.

49. And if there be any reason for that Bhikkhu’s
going to the army, that Bhikkhu may remain there
for two or three nights. If he remain longer than
that — that is a PA^ittiya.

50. And if while remaining there for two or
three nights he should go to the battle-array, or to
the numbering of the forces, or to the drawing up
of the forces, or to a review* — that is a PA/^ittiya.

End of the fifth section,
the ‘A/ 5 elaka-section.’

The Bhikkhus told the matter to the Blessed One. He directed the
present to be accepted, and laid by till Upananda should return.
After Upananda returned, he nevertheless went out again to attend
on other families, and the food so sent went bad.

The Bhikkhu is to tell a resident Bhikkhu before, on account of
this rule, giving up his usual rounds, in order that he may still go if
a sick Bhikkhu wants medicine.

The exceptions are, as above, to prevent the stock of robes
falling short.

* These are usually four— clothing, food, residence, and medicine.
This rule refers more especially to medicine, as appears from the
explanation in the Vibhahga.

* On this rule compare the third section of the Ma^^Aima-Sila,

44

fAtimokkha.

51. There is P^’ittiya in the drinking of fer-
mented liquors, or strong drinks ^

52. There is P^iiittiya in poking (another person)
with the finger,

53. There is P^ttiya in sporting in the water*.

54. There is P^iittiya in disrespect

55. Whatsoever Bhikkhu shall frighten a Bhik-
khu * — that is a P^L^ittiya.

56. Whatsoever Bhikkhu, who is not sick, shall,
desiring to warm himself®, kindle a fire, or have a
fire kindled, without cause sufficient thereto — that
is a P^’ittiya.

57. Whatsoever Bhikkhu shall bathe at intervals
Df less than half a month, except on the proper
Dccasion — that is a P^ittiya.

Herein this is proper occasion : (to wit), the two
and a half months during which there is hot weather,
and during which there is fever namely, the last
month and a half of the heats, and the first month

and the third section of the Mahi-Sila (translated in Rh. D.’s ‘Bud-
dhist Suttas from the Pdli,’ pp. 192, 198). We follow the Vibhahga
in the interpretation of the various terms,

* The Old Commentary (quoted by Minayeff, p. 90) distinguishes
between surd and meraya by the former being derived from flour,
water, &c., and the latter from flowers, fruits, &c.

1 * Throwing water over one another, and chasing one another,
were common amusements at the public and private bathing-places.
Our MSS. read throughout hdsa-dhamme.

® Anddariye. That is, according to the Vibhahga, paying no
heed, when one’s attention is drawn by an upasampanna to the
fact that this or that action is against the rule laid down (pannat-
taw). But compare also ATullavagga VIII, 8, i.

* In the text read bhinisdpeyya.

* H.O.’s MS. reads visibbandpekho. AtMahdvaggal, 20, 15,
visibbesum occurs in the sense of ‘they warmed themselves.’
Trenckner at p. 47 of the Milinda Panha reads aggim ^aletvd
visivetvd; and at p.ioa, sawsibbitavisibbitattd sdkhdnam.

pAzittiyA dhammA.

45

of the rains when sick ; when there is work ; when
on a journey ; when there has been wind and rain.
This is right occasion in this connection.

58. A Bhikkhu who receives a new robe must
choose one or other mode of disfigurement out of
the three modes of disfigurement; either (making
part of it) dark blue, or (marking part of it with)
mud, or (making part of it) black. If a Bhikkhu |
should make use of a new robe without choosing
one or other mode of disfigurement out of the three |
modes of disfigurement ^ — that is a Pi^ittiya. ^

59. Whatsoever Bhikkhu who has made over®
his robe to a Bhikkhu, or to a Bhikkhuni, or to a
probationer, or to a SAma^era, or to a SAma^^er!,
shall continue to make use of it as a thing not
(formally) given — that is a P^ittiya.

^ The Vibhahga refers the first of these periods to the hot
weather, and the second to the fever weather.

® In the text insert a full stop after ki/asdmaw The
object of this rule, according to the Vibhahga, is to enable a
Bhikkhu to trace his robe should it get lost by being mixed up
with others. Compare the 15th Nissaggiya.

® The Vibhahga says, ‘There are two ways of appointment
(in making over, vikappan^), promising in the presence, and
promising in the absence (of the person to whom the appointment
is made). Promise in the presence is by the words, “ I make over
this robe to you, or to such and such a one (then present)!”
Promising in the absence is by the words, “ I give this robe to you
for you to appoint (to some one else).” Then the person spoken
to should say, “ Who is your friend, or intimate acquaintance ? ”
“Such a one, or such a one.” Then the other should say, “I
give this to them. This is their property. Wear it, or part with
it, or do with it as you like 1” '

These last are the formal words used on presenting a robe ; and
by their use the property in the robe is transferred. After that the
original owner, in spite of the formal words, may not, according to
our rule, continue to use the robe.

On apa^^uddhdraka/Ti see Childers, sub voce pai^uddb&ro.

46

PATIMOKKHA.

6o. Whatsoever Bhikkhu shall hide, or cause
another to hide, a Bhikkhu’s bowl, or his robe, or
the mat on which he sits, or his needle-case or his
girdle, even though in fun — that is a Pi^ittiya.

End of the sixth section,
the ‘ Suripina-section.’

6 1. Whatsoever Bhikkhu shall deliberately de-
prive any living thing of life — that is a PAiSittiya.

62. Whatsoever Bhikkhu shall, knowingly, drink
water with living things in it — that is a Pd/^ittiya.

63. Whatsoever Bhikkhu shall stir up for de-
cision again a matter which he knows to have
been settled according to the Dhamma* — that is
a Pd/’ittiya.

64. Whatsoever Bhikkhu, who knows of it, shall
conceal a serious offence® committed by a Bhikkhu —
that is a Pdiittiya.

65. Whatsoever Bhikkhu shall admit a person
under twenty years of age to the higher grade in
the Order, knowing him (or her) to be so — (while)
the person is not admitted to the higher grade, and
the other Bhikkhus (who assist) are blameworthy —
this is in him * a Pdj^ttiya.

66. Whatsoever Bhikkhu shall, by appointment,
journey along the same route with a caravan of

^ In the text read sftiiigharam.

* Compare the 79th PS^ttiya, and iTullavagga IV, 14 passim.

* That is, a Pdrd^ika, or a Saajghddisesa.

* The upaggAdya is guilty of a PiAittiya; the S^ariya, and
the ga»a, of a Dukka/la, says the Vibhahga.

pAxittiyA dhammA.

47

robbers, knowing it to be such, even as far as the 5*
next village* — that is a Pl^ittiya.

67. Whatsoever Bhikkhu shall, by appointment,
journey along the same route with a woman *, even
as far as the next village — that is a PA^ittiya.

68. Whatsoever Bhikkhu shall speak thus: ‘In
this wise do I understand that the Dhamma has ^
been proclaimed by the Blessed One : that to him ^
who cultivates those Qualities which have been ^
called “ dangerous ” by the Blessed One, there is not
sufficient danger (to prevent his acquiring spiritual
gifts) then that Bhikkhu should be addressed by
the Bhikkhus thus: ‘Say not so, brother! bear not
false witness against the Blessed One 1 For neither

is it seemly to bring a false accusation against the
Blessed One, nor could the Blessed One speak so.

By many a figure*, brother, have the Dangerous
Qualities been declared by the Blessed One to be
full of danger ®, and also to be sufficient to prevent
him who cultivates them (from attaining spiritual
gifts)®.’ If that Bhikkhu, when he has thus been
spoken to by the Bhikkhus, should persist as before,
then let that Bhikkhu be (formally) admonished
about it by the Bhikkhus as a body, even to the
third time, to the intent that he abandon that course.

* Compare the 27 th PS^ittiya. A caravan that sets out with
intent to steal or rob on the way is meant.

* Compare the 27th and a8th PS^ittiyas.

“ These are specified in detail in Mahdvagga II, 3, 7.

* Pariyfiya; fulness, extent, of illustration and explanation. Not
merely manner, or method, of statement, hluch of this pariyfiya
will be found in the various similes used in the ATullaN'agga loa cit

* In the text here, and in the corresponding clause of No. 70,
read anekapariyfiycna fivuso antarayikd dhammfi antarfi}'ikfi vuttfi
bhagavatfi, as in iTullavagga I, 32.

48

PATIMOKKHA.

If, while being so admonished, up to the third time,
he abandon that course, it is well. If he abandon
it not — ^that is a P^liittiya \

69. Whatsoever Bhikkhu, knowing him to be so,
shall eat in company with, or dwell together with
or sleep in one place with a Bhikkhu who talks thus
(as in 68), and has not been dealt with according to
the law ®, and has not laid aside his delusion — that
is a P^liittiya.

70. If a Sima«era* even should say thus: ‘In
this wise do I understand that the Dhamma has
been proclaimed by the Blessed One : that to him
who cultivates those Qualities which have been
called “ dangerous ” by the Blessed One there is not
sufficient danger (to prevent his attaining to spiritual
gifts) then that Silma«era should be addressed by
the Bhikkhus thus : ‘ Say not so, good Sdma^era !
Bear not false witness against the Blessed One. For
neither is it seemly to bring a false accusation against
the Blessed One, nor could the Blessed One speak
so. By many a figure, good Simawera, have the

* This rule is directed against the delusion that sin, to a very
holy man, loses its danger and its sinfulness. Compare the 4th
Sa/nghddisesa ; and, on the method of procedure here laid down,
the loth to the 13th SamghMsesas. At iTuliavagga I, 32 lust is
declared to be an antar&yiko dhammo; and falsehood another
at MahSvagga II, 3, 3. The Samanta-PSsidikd (quoted by Mina-
yeif, p. 92) gives five divisions of these ‘ dangerous qualities.’

’ This the Vibhanga explains as holding Uposatha, or Pavd-
ra»d, or a Saff2ghakamma with him.

* Ukkhitto anosdrito, says the Vibhanga. Compare Mahd-
vagga IX, 4, 10, II.

* Sama«uddeso ; which is explained by the Old Commentary
as equal to Sdma»era. Why, in the Pdtimokkha, now one and
now the other expression should be used, is not clear. In the
later texts Sdma»era is the usual form, but sama»nddeso is
found also in a few passages.

pA^ittiyA dhammA.

49

Dangerous Qualities been declared by the Blessed
One to be full of danger, and also to be sufficient to
prevent him who cultivates them (from attaining to
spiritual gifts).’ And if that SAma»era, when so
addressed by the Bhikkhus, shall persist in that
course, that SAma«era should be addressed by the
Bhikkhus thus : ‘ From this day forth, good SAma-
ncra., neither can that Blessed One be referred to^
by you as your Teacher, nor can the privilege, which
the other Sima»eras enjoy, of sleeping in the same
place with the Bhikkhus for two or three nights*,
any longer be yours ! Depart ! away with you *!’

Whatsoever Bhikkhu shall encourage ^ or sup-
port ®, or eat with, or sleep in the same place with, a
SAma«era thus expelled — that is a PA/^ittiya.

End of the seventh section,
the ‘SappA»aka®-section.’

' A^adisitabbo. Compare the four MabApadesA in the
MahA-parinibbAna Sutta IV, 7-1 1.

* Compare the sth PA^ittiya.

® In the text read iara pi re ; that is, ^ara api re, instead of
^ara pare. On vinassa compare MahAvagga I, 61, i.

* UpalApeyya. Compare MahAvagga I, 59, and MahA-parinib-
bAna Sutta I, 5, and the passages quoted in Rh. D.’s version of
the latter passage. The Old Commentary says, ‘Flatters him (talks
him over, tassa upalApeti) by saying, “ I will give you a bowl, or a
robe, or hear you repeat, or answer your questions." ’

* Upa/MApeyya. The Old Commentary says, ‘by providing
him with chunam, or clay, or a tooth-cleanser, or water to wash his
face with.’ No doubt upa/M Apeti is used in the sense of showing
such personal attentions to another, as the upa/MAkA did to the
Buddha ; and such services would very rightly come under this rule.
Yet here, as oflen, the comment is rather a scholastic exegesis of
the sentence, than a philologically exact explanation of the word.

* This title is taken from the second, not, as in all the other
cases, from the first rule in the section.

C13] E

50

pAtimokkha.

71. Whatsoever Bhikkhu, when admonished by
the Bhikkhus in respect of some precept in accord-
ance with the Dhamma, shall speak thus: ‘ I cannot
submit myself to that precept, brother, until I shall
have enquired touching it of another Bhikkhu, an ex-
perienced master of the Vinaya’ — that is a PAAittiya.

A Bhikkhu desirous of training, Bhikkhus^, should
learn, and enquire, and settle in his own mind. This
is the right rule in this connection.

\ 72. Whatsoever Bhikkhu, when the PAtimokkha

)is being recited, shall speak thus: ‘What comes of
I these minor ® precepts being here recited, save only
; that they tend to misgiving, and worry, and per-
Iplexity!’ — there is PA^ittiya in thus throwing con-
kempt on the precepts®.

73. Whatsoever Bhikkhu, when at the half
month the PAtimokkha is being recited, should say
thus : ‘ Now for the first time do I notice that this
rule, they say, is handed down in the Suttas, is
embraced in the Suttas !’ — then, if the other Bhikkhus
shall know concerning that Bhikkhu thus : ‘ This
Bhikkhu has taken his place at the recitation of the
PAtimokkha once, or twice, not to say oftener*’ —
that Bhikkhu is not only not made free on account of
his ignorance ®, but he is to be dealt with according
to the Dhamma for the offence into which he has
fallen, and furthermore he is to be charged with
foolishness (in the words), ‘ This is loss to thee.

® On this strange allocution see the note to the loth Nissaggiya.

* Khndddnukhuddakehi. Compare the Mahd-parinibbtna
Sutte VI, 3, and the passages quoted there in Rh. D.’s note.

* In the text read viva»»ake.

* In the text read ko pana vAdo bhiyyo.

* In the text read anfiAnakena.

PAilTTIYA dhammA.

51

brother, this is an evil to thee, in that when the
Pitimokkha is being recited you fail to take it to
your heart, and attend to it with care.’ There is
PA^ittiya in such foolish conduct.

74. Whatsoever Bhikkhu, being angry or dis-
pleased with another Bhikkhu, shall give a blow —
that is a PAiittiya.

75. Whatsoever Bhikkhu, being angary or dis-
pleased with another Bhikkhu, shall make use of
any threatening gesture * — that is a PA^ttiya.

76. Whatsoever Bhikkhu shall harass a Bhikkhu
with a (charge of) Sa/wghAdisesa without ground —
that is a PAj^ittiya.

77. Whatsoever Bhikkhu shall intentionally
suggest difficulties of conscience to a Bhikkhu, with
the idea of causing him uneasiness, even for a
moment ; if he does it to that end alone — ^that is
a PA^ittiya.

78. Whatsoever Bhikkhu shall stand by over-
hearing when Bhikkhus are quarrelling, or making
a disturbance, or engaged in a dispute, hoping to
hear what they shall utter; if he does it to that
end alone — that is a PA^ttiya.

79. Whatsoever Bhikkhu, when he has declared
his consent to formal proceedings conducted accord-
ing to the Dhamma, shall thereafter grumble (about
those proceedings)* — that is a PA/Kttiya.

’ Talasattikam uggireyya. The Old Commentary says,
Kiyam v 4 kSyapa/lbaddbam yi antamaso uppalapatta»i pi u^^ireti.
Compare AvudMni uggiritv 4 at Gdtaka 1 , 150.

’ If he should raise any formal objections so as to re-open the
question, that would fall under the 63rd F^ttiya. On ‘declaring
one’s consent’ in this and the following rule, see below, Mahivagga
II, 23. The whole rule, as well as on No. 63, is repeatedly referred
to in jTuUavagga IV, 14.

52

pAtimokkha.

8 0. Whatsoever Bhikkhu, when the Sa»;gha is
engaged in conducting a (formal) enquiry, shall rise
from his seat, and go away, without having declared
his consent — ^that is a PA^ttiya.

8 1. Whatsoever Bhikkhu, when, in a regfularly
constituted Sawgha he has given away a robe, shall
thereafter grumble about it, saying, ‘ The Bhikkhus
appropriate the property of the Sa»«gha according to
friendship ’ — that is a PAA’ittiya.

82. Whatsoever Bhikkhu shall divert to the use
of any individual property dedicated to the Sawgha,
knowing it to be so — that is a Pdiittiya.

Here ends the eighth section,
the ‘ Sahadhammika-section.'

83. Whatsoever Bhikkhu shall cross the threshold
of an anointed Khattiya king, when the king has not
gone forth, and the queen has not withdrawn, with-
out first having had himself announced ® — that is a
Pi^ttiya.

* Samaggena sawghena. See the note to the aistPi^ittiya.

* Indakhila, the word translated ‘ threshold,' is explained in the
Old Commentary by sayani-ghara, ‘sleeping chamber;’ but this
is rather a didactic gloss on the rule. Compare the note above on
the 43*^^ Paiittiya. The phrase ‘ when the queen has not gone in’
is somewhat doubtful. H. O.’s MS. of the Vibhahga reads (as
Minayeff does) aniggata-ratanake, instead of Dickson’s antha-
ta-ratanake. The former is the better reading; nihata is impos-
sible, it must be either nihata or n!ha/a. But ratanaka, though
the queen is one of the seven Ratanas of a king, is not found
elsewhere used absolutely for a queen : the use of rS^ake, too,
immediately after laiim, instead of ranAe or r&^ini, is curious.
A possible alternative rendering would be ‘ when the court has
not departed, and the regalia not laid aside but we prefer on

pajtittiva dhamma.

53

84. Whatsoever Bhikkhu shall pick up, or cause
another to pick up, except in a grove or in a
dwelling-place, a jewel, or anything deemed a jewel* —
that is a Pi^ittiya.

Should a Bhikkhu have picked up, either in a
grove or in a dwelling-place, a jewel, or anything
deemed a jewel, it is to be laid aside, that he to whom
it may belong may take it away. This is the right
course in such a case.

85. Whatsoever Bhikkhu shall, out of hours®,
enter a village, without having informed a Bhikkhu
if one is present®, except on account of business
of a special nature* thereto sufficient — that is a
Pd>^ittiya.

86. Whatsoever Bhikkhu shall have a needle-
case made of bone, or ivory, or horn, it shall be
broken up — and that is a PS/^ittiya.

87. When a Bhikkhu is having a new bedstead
or chair made, it should be made with legs eight
Inches in height, according to the accepted inch®,
exclusive of the lowermost piece of the bed frame ®.
To him who exceeds that limit there is a P^^ittiya,

the whole the Old Commentator’s explanation of rd^aka and
ratanaka.

^ Ratanasammatam; that is, a thing made of one of those
substances ranked with gems, such as jade, coral, &c.

* VikSle; that is, says the Old Commentary, from sun-turn in
one day till sun-rise in the next.

* Santam bhikkhum. If one is not present, he may go with-
out. The Old Commentary gives no such definition of being
present, as Mr. Dickson has supplied.

* A^^fiyika. Compare the note on the aSth Nissaggi 3 ra.

® Sugatahgulena. See the note on the 6th Sarnghfidisesa.

* A/ani. 'There is no explanation of this term, either in the
Old Commentary, or in the Samanta-P^sfidikl

54

pAtimokkha.

and (the legs of the piece of furniture) shall be cut
down (to the proper size).

88 . Whatsoever Bhikkhu shall have a bedstead
or a chair made, stuffed with cotton^, the stuffing
shall be torn out — and that is a Pii^ittiya.

89. When a Bhikkhu is having a rug or mat
to sit upon made, it must be made of the right
measure. Herein this is the measure : in length
two spans, according to the accepted span ; in breadth
one span; the border one span. To him who
exceeds that limit there is a PAA’ittiya, and (the
article) shall be cut down (to the proper size).

90. When a Bhikkhu is having an itch-cloth ^
made, it must be made of the right measure. Herein
this is the measure ; in length four spans, according
to the accepted span ; in width two spans. To him
who exceeds that limit there is a PAiittiya, and (the
cloth) shall be cut (down to the proper size).

91. When a Bhikkhu is having a garment made
for the rainy season, it must be made of the right
measure. Herein this is the right measure : in
length six spans, according to the accepted span ;
in breadth two spans and a half. To him who
exceeds that limit there is a PAA’ittiya, and (the
garment) shall be cut (down to the proper size).

92. Whatsoever Bhikkhu shall have a robe made
of the dimensions of a Sugata’s robe ®, or larger —

* Tdlaxn; which the Old Commentary expands into three
kinds — t<ila«n from a tree, tdlam from a creeper, and tUlam from
a yonng fowl

* When a Bhikkhu bad^ a boil, or running sore, or any such

disease, the use of an itch-cloth (so called from the first in the list
of skin complaints there mentioned) is laid down in Mahfivagga
VIII, 17. . .

\ * On the doubtful meaning of Sugata, see the note above on

pAjnTTiYA dhammA.

55

that is a PA>§ittiya, and (the robe) shall be cut down
to the proper size.

Herein this is the measure of the Sugata robe
of a Sugata : in length nine spans, according to the
accepted span; in breadth six spans. This is the
measure of the Sugata robe of a Sugata.

End of the ninth section,
the ‘Ratana-section.'

Venerable Sirs, the ninety-two rules regarding
matters requiring expiation have been recited.

In respect of them I ask the venerable ones, ‘Are
you pure in this matter ?’

A second time I ask the venerable ones, ‘Are
you pure in this matter ?’

A third time I ask the venerable ones, ‘Are you
pure in this matter.?’

The venerable ones are pure herein. Therefore
do they keep silence. Thus I understand.

Here endeth the recitation of the Pi/^iwiyas.

the 28 th Nissaggiya. There is no reason whatever to believe that
Gotama’s robe was larger, in proportion, than those worn by the
other members of his order. He exchanged robes with Mahl
Kassapa. Of the two sets of robes brought by Pukkusa, one was
given to Ananda, and one was reserved for the Buddha himself;
and no one can read the account in the MahS-parinibbSna Sutta
\nthout feeling that both are supposed to be of th£ same size.

56

pAtimokkha.

pAtidesaniyA dhammA.

Rules regarding Matters which ought to be
Confessed.

Here, venerable Sirs, the four rules regarding
matters which ought to be confessed come into
recitation.

1. Whatsoever Bhikkhu, when a Bhikkhunl not
related to him has entered within the houses ^ shall,
with his own hand, accept at her hands food, either
hard or soft, and eat or enjoy it — that is a matter
which ought to be confessed by that Bhikkhu, saying,
‘ I have fallen. Brethren, into a blameworthy offence,
unbecoming, which ought to be confessed ; and I
confess it!’

2. Now Bhikkhus, when they have been invited
to laymen’s houses, eat. If the Bhikkhun! stay there
giving directions, saying, ‘ Here give curry, give rice
here !’ the Bhikkhunl ought to be rebuked by those
Bhikkhus, saying, ‘ Stand aside. Sister, as long as
the Bhikkhus are eating!’ If it should not occur
to a single Bhikkhu to rebuke the Bhikkhunl, saying,
‘ Stand aside. Sister, as long as the Bhikkhus are
eating !’ — that is a matter that ought to be confessed
by those Bhikkhus, saying, ‘We have fallen. Brethren,
into a blameworthy offence, unbecoming, which ought
to be confessed ; and we confess it !’

3. Whatsoever Bhikkhu shall accept, with his

* Antaragharam pavi/Md; that is, during her alms-visit to
the village. Compare the 3rd Sekhiya; Mah&vagga I, 23, 3; and
AullavaggaVIII, 5, a.

PAriDESANIvA dhammA.

57

own hand, food, either hard or soft, in such house-
holds as have been (by a formal sammuti) declared
to be households, under discipline \ without having
been previously invited, and without being sick, and
eat it or enjoy it — that is a matter that ought to be
confessed by that Bhikkhu, saying, ‘ I have fallen.
Brethren, into a blameworthy offence, unbecoming,
which ought to be confessed ; and I confess it!’

4. Whatsoever Bhikkhu, while he is dwelling in
a place belonging to the class of those forest dwell-
ings which are held to be insecure and dangerous %
shall accept, with his own hand, at his home, food,
either hard or soft, without having previously given
notice (of the danger incurred by people that enter
that forest), unless he is sick, and shall eat it or enjoy
it — that is a matter that ought to be confessed by
that Bhikkhu, saying, ‘ I have fallen, Brethren, into
a blameworthy offence, unbecoming, which ought to
be confessed; and I confess it!’

Here end the PA^idesaniyas.

Venerable Sirs, the four rules regarding matters
which require confession have been recited.

In respect of them I ask the venerable ones, ‘Are
you pure in this matter?’

^ Sekha-sammatSni kul&ni; which the Vibhahga explains
as a household grown rich in faith, but poor in goods; where
whatever they get is given away to the Order, though the family
may be some days in want of it. Compare what is said of An&tha-
pindika in the Introduction to the 40th G^dtaka (Gataka I, 228);
though his lot had not reached the very lowest limit.

^ Compare the 29th Nissaggiya.

58

pAtimokkha.

A second time I ask the venerable ones, ‘Are you
pure in this matter ?’

A third time I ask the venerable ones, ‘Are you
pure in this matter ?’

The venerable ones are pure herein. Therefore
do they keep silence. Thus I understand.

Here endeth the recitation of the PA/idesaniyas.

sekhiyA dhammA.

59

SEKHIYA dhammA.

Rules regarding Matters connected with
Discipline.

Here, venerable Sirs, the rules regarding matters
connected with discipline come into recitation.

1. ‘I will put on my under garment all around
me^’ This is a discipline which ought to be observed.

2. ‘ I will put on my robe all around me.’ This
is a discipline which ought to be observed.

3. ‘ Properly clad will I go amidst the houses
This is a discipline which ought to be observed.

4. ‘ Properly clad will I take my seat amidst the
houses.' This is a discipline which ought to be
observed.

5. ‘(With my body) under proper control® will I
go amidst the houses.’ This is a discipline which
ought to be observed.

6. ‘(With my body) under proper control will I
take my seat amidst the houses.’ This is a discipline
which ought to be observed.

7. ‘ With downcast eye * will I go amidst the

* Parima»i/alam : ‘so as to cover the navel-mani/ala, and the
knee-ma»</ala,’ says the Old Commentary. Compare Childers
sub voce Tima»</alam; and ATulIavaggaVIII, 5, 2.

* Antaraghare. The antaragharam is the space in a village
between the huts ; not exactly the same, and yet in the following
rules practically the same, as the village ^Sma).

* Not, for instance, with dirty hands or feet, according to the
Vibhahga.

* The practical rule is for a Bhikkhu to look at a spot in the
ground about a plough’s length in front of him.

6o

PATIMOKKHA.

houses.’ This is a discipline which ought to be
observed.

8. ‘With downcast eye will I take my seat amidst
the houses.’ This is a discipline which ought to be
observed.

9. ‘ With robes not pulled up ^ will I go amidst
the houses.’ This is a discipline which ought to be
observed.

10. ‘ With robes not pulled up will I take my
seat amidst the houses.’ This is a discipline which
ought to be observed.

End of the first section.

11. ‘ Not with loud laughter will I go amidst the
houses.’ This is a discipline which ought to be
observed.

12. ‘Not with loud laughter will I take my seat
amidst the houses.’ This is a discipline which ought
to be observed.

1 3. ‘ Making but a little sound will I go amidst
the houses.’ This is a discipline which ought to be
observed.

14. ‘ Making but a little sound will I take my seat
amidst the houses.’ This is a discipline which ought
to be observed.

15. ‘Without swaying my body about will I go
amidst the houses.’ This is a discipline which ought
to be observed.

16. ‘ Without swaying my body about will I take

* Or perhaps ‘ thrown ofiF.’ He is to be fully dressed as laid
down in the ist and and Sekhiyas.

sekhiyA dhammA.

6i

my seat amidst the houses/ This is a discipline
which ought to be observed.

17. ‘Without swaying my arms about will I go
amidst the houses.’ This is a discipline which ought
to be observed.

18. ‘ Without swaying my arms about will I take
my seat amidst the houses.’ This is a discipline
which ought to be observed.

19. ‘ Without swaying my head about will I go
amidst the houses/ This is a discipline which ought
to be observed.

20. ‘ Without swaying my head about will I take
my seat amidst the houses.’ This is a discipline
which ought to be observed.

End of the second section.

21. ‘ With my arms not akimbo ' will I go amidst
the houses/ This is a discipline which ought to be
observed.

22. ‘ With my arms not akimbo will I take my seat
amidst the houses.’ This is a discipline which ought
to be observed.

23. ‘With my head uncovered* will I go amidst
the houses.’ This is a discipline which ought to be
observed.

24. ‘ With my head uncovered will I take my seat
amidst the houses.’ This is a discipline which ought
to be observed.

^ Nakkhambhakato: ‘putting the hands on the hips,’ says
the Old Commentary.

* Na oguffMito: which the Old Commentary applies to the
head.

62

pAtimokkha.

25. ‘Without walking on my heels or my toes^
will I go amidst the houses.’ This is a discipline
which ought to be observed.

26. ‘Without lolling* will I take my seat amidst
the houses.’ This is a discipline which ought to be
observed.

27. ‘With mind alert* will I receive an alms.’
This is a discipline which ought to be observed.

28. ‘ Paying attention to my bowl will I receive
an alms.’ This is a discipline which ought to be
observed.

29. ‘With equal curry* will I receive an alms.’
This is a discipline which ought to be observed.

30. ‘ Equally full * will I receive an alms.’ This
is a discipline which ought to be observed.

End of the third section.

31. ‘ With mind alert will I eat the alms placed
in my bowl.’ This is a discipline which ought to
be observed.

32. ‘ Paying attention to my bowl will I eat the

* Na ukku/ikdya; an unusual sense of the word ; but it is so
explained here by the Old Commentary.

* Na pallatthikUy a. ‘Without making a rest with his hands,
or with a cloth, ^ according to the Old Commentary. Compare the
Tipallattha-miga (rdtaka, and No. 65 below.

* Sakka^^aw. Satiw upa//ASpetvS,-says the Samanta-PM-
dikl See also No. 31.

* Samastlpakam. ‘When the curry is in quantity one-fourth
of the rice ’ explains the Samanta-PMdikl See No. 34.

* Samatittikarn. ‘Equally full, equally heaped up (samabhi-

I ritaw)’ explains the Samanta-PSsddM. Compare the several
passages quoted in Rh. D.'s note on Tevigya Sutta I, 24.

sekhiyA dhammA.

63

alms placed in my bowl.’ This is a discipline which
ought to be observed.

33. ‘ Begging straight on from house to house *
will I eat the alms placed in my bowl.’ This is a
discipline which ought to be observed.

34. ‘ With equal curry will I eat the alms placed
in my bowl.’ This is a discipline which ought to
be observed.

35. ‘Without pressing down from the top^ will I
eat the alms placed in my bowl.’ This is a discipline
which ought to be observed.

36. ‘ Neither the curry nor the condiment will
I cover up with the rice, desiring to make it nicer
This is a discipline which ought to be observed.

37. ‘ Neither curry nor rice will I ask for, for my
own particular use, unless I am sick.’ This is a
discipline which ought to be observed.

38. ‘ Not with envious thoughts will I look at
others’ bowls.’ This is a discipline which ought to
be observed.

39. ‘ Not into too large balls will I make (up
my food).’ This is a discipline which ought to be
observed.

40. ‘ Into round mouthfuls will I make up my

food.’ This is a discipline which ought to be
observed.

End of the fourth section.

' Sapad&nam. See Childers sub voce. The Vibhahga says,
iOabbaggiyd bhikkhh taham taha»t omadditvi pindapSxsMi bhu^
junti. The Samanta-PSsSdikS says, Sapadlinan ti tattha tattha
odhun akatvi anupa/ipIdyS.

* Na thhpato omadditvi; on which the Samanta-Fis&diki
has ‘ matthakato vema^^/iato ti.' He is not to pick and choose
what morsel he takes.

f Compare the 8th Nissaggiya. In the text read up&dSya.

64

pAtimokkha.

41. ‘Not till the ball is brought close will I open
the door of my mouth.’ This is a discipline which
ought to be observed.

42. ‘ Not the whole hand, when eating, will I put
into my mouth.’ This is a discipline which ought
to be observed.

43. ‘When the food is in my mouth will I not
talk.’ This is a discipline which ought to be
observed.

44. ‘Without tossing the food into my mouth
will I eat^.’ This is a discipline which ought to
be observed.

45. ‘Without nibbling at the balls of food will
I eat.’ This is a discipline which ought to be
observed.

46. ‘ Without stuffing my cheeks out will I eat
This is a discipline which ought to be observed.

47. ‘ Without shaking my hands about ® will I eat.’
This is a discipline which ought to be observed.

48. ‘ Without scattering the lumps of boiled rice
will I eat.’ This is a discipline which ought to be
observed.

49. ‘Without putting out my tongue will I eat.’
This is a discipline which ought to be observed.

50. ‘ Without smacking my lips * will I eat.’ This
is a discipline which ought to be observed.

End of the fifth section.

^ Pi;2{/ukkhepakan ti ^mdzm ukkhipitvd ukkhipitva, says the
Samanta<Pds£dikS.

* Avaga;;£/akdrakan ti makka/b viya ga;i^e katvd, says the Sa-
manta-PdsMk^ (Minayeff, p. 93).

^ That is, to disengage particles of the rice, to shake them off on
to the ground.

\ Literally, without making the sound * iSTapu-Aapu/

sekhiyA dhammA.

6s

51. ‘ Without making a hissing sound will I eat
This is a discipline which ought to be observed.

52. ‘ Without licking my fingers will I eat’ This
is a discipline which ought to be observed.

53. ‘Without licking my bowl will I eat’ This
is a discipline which ought to be observed.

54. ‘ Without licking my lips will I eat’ This is
a discipline which ought to be observed.

55. ‘ Not with a hand soiled with food will I take
hold of the water-jar.’ This is a discipline which
ought to be observed.

56. ‘ The rinsings of the bowl mixed with lumps
of boiled rice will I not throw into the inner court
This is a discipline which ought to be observed.

57. ‘ Not to a person with a sunshade in his hand,

unless he is sick, will I preach the Dhamma.’ This f
is a discipline which ought to be observed. !

58. ‘ Not to a person with a staff in his hand, ’
unless he is sick, will I preach the Dhamma.’ This ■
is a discipline which ought to be observed.

59. ‘ Not to a person with a sword in his hand, ,
unless he is sick, will I preach the Dhamma.’ This |
is a discipline which ought to be observed.

60. ‘ Not to a person with a weapon in his hand,
unless he is sick, will I preach the Dhamma.’ This
is a discipline which ought to be observed.

End of the sixth section.

61. ‘ Not to a person wearing slippers, unless he

' Literally, without making the sound ‘ Sum- sura. *

* Antaraghare, which here means the space, or small open
square in the middle of the house.

fill

F

66

pAtimokkha.

is sick, will I preach the Dhamma.’ This is a
discipline which ought to be observed.

62. ‘Not to a person wearing sandals , unless he
is sick, will I preach the Dhamma.’ This is a
discipline which ought to be observed.

63. ‘ Not to a person seated in a cart, unless he
is sick, will I preach the Dhamma.’ This is a disci-
pline which ought to be observed.

64. ‘ Not to a person lying on a couch, unless he
is sick, will I preach the Dhamma.’ This is a disci-
pline which ought to be observed.

65. ‘Not to a person lolling, unless he is sick,
will I preach the Dhamma.’ This is a discipline
which ought to be observed.

66. ‘ Not to a person with a turban on his head ,
unless he is sick, will I preach the Dhamma.’ This
is a discipline which ought to be observed.

67. ‘ Not to a person with his head covered,
unless he is sick, will I preach the Dhamma.’ This
is a discipline which ought to be observed.

68. ‘ Not to a person seated on a sea t, unless he
is sick, will I, seated on the earth, preach the
Dhamma.’ This is a discipline which ought to be
observed.

69. ‘ Not to a person seated on a high seat, unless
he is sick, will I, seated on a low seat, preach the
Dhamma.’ This is a discipline which ought to be
observed.

70. ‘Not to a person sitting, unless he is sick,
will I, standing, preach the Dhamma.’ This is a
discipline which ought to be observed.

End of the seventh section.

SEKHIYA DHAMMA.

67

71. ‘ Not to a person walking in front of me,
unless he is sick, will I, walking behind, preach the
Dhamma.’ This is a discipline which ought to be
observed.

72. ‘ Not to a person walking on a path, unless he
is sick, will I, walking by the side of the path, preach
the Dhamma.’ This is a discipline which ought to
be observed.

73. ‘Not standing will I ease myself, unless I
am sick.’ “Jhis is a discipline which ought to be
observed.

74. ‘ Not on growing grass will I ease myself, of
spit.’ This is a discipline which ought to be
observed.

75. ‘Not into water will I ease myself, or spit.’
This is a discipline which ought to be observed.

Venerable Sirs, the rules regarding matters of
discipline have been recited.

In respect of them I ask the venerable ones, ‘Are
you pure in this matter ? ’

A second time I ask the venerable ones, ‘ Are you
pure in this matter ? ’

A third time I ask the venerable ones, ‘ Are you
pure in this matter ?’

The venerable ones are pure herein. Therefore
do they keep silence. Thus I understand.

Here endeth the recitation of the Sekhiyas.

F 2

68

pAtimokkha.

THE ADHIKARA^VA-SAMATHA
dhammA.

The Rules regarding the Settlement of Cases.

Here, venerable Sirs, the seven rules regarding
the settlement of cases come into recitation.

For the decision and settlement of cases as they
from time to time arise, the Proceeding in presence’
must be performed, or the Proceeding for the con-
sciously innocent^, or the Proceeding in the case
of those who are no longer out of their mind or
the Proceeding on confession of guilt* or the Pro-
ceeding by majority of the chapter ®, or the Pro-
ceeding for the obstinate ®, or the Proceeding by
covering over as with grass

Venerable Sirs, the seven rules regarding the
settlement of cases have been recited.

In respect of them I ask the venerable ones, ‘ Are
you pure in this matter ?’

A second time I ask the venerable ones, ‘Are you
pure in this matter.?’

A third time I ask the venerable ones, ‘ Are you
pure in this matter ?’

* Sammukh^-vinaya. See ATuIlavagga IV, 14, 16, and fol-
lowing.

* Sati-vinaya. See .ffiillavagga IV, 14, 27.

* Amd/^a-vinaya. See A'ullavagga IV, 5, and following, and
rv, 14, 28.

* Pa/innilya. See A'ullavagga IV, 7, 8.

* Yebhuyyasikl See Aullavagga IV, 9, and IV, 14, 24.

* Tassap&piyyasikil. See Aullavagga IV, 11.

’ Ti«avatth&raka. See AuHavagga IV, 13.

ADHIKARAJVA-SAMATHA DHAMMA.

69

The venerable ones are pure herein. Therefore
do they keep silence. Thus I understand.

Here endeth the recitation of the
Adhikara^a-samathas.

Venerable Sirs ! Recited is the Introduction.

Recited are the four PArA^ika Rules.

Recited are the thirteen Sa«*ghAdisesa Rules.

Recited are the two Aniyata Rules.

Recited are the thirty Nissaggiya-PA^ittiya
Rules.

Recited are the ninety-two PA/^ittiya Rules.

Recited are the four PA/idesaniya Rules.

Recited are the Sekhiya Rules.

Recited are the seven Adhikara«a-samatha
Rules.

So much (of the words) of the Blessed One,
handed down in the Suttas, embraced in the Suttas,
comes into recitation every half month. It behoveth
all to train themselves according thereto in concord,
in pleasantness, without dispute !

Here endeth the recitation of the PAtimokkha
for the use of the Bhikkhus.

MAH AV A G G A.

THE MAHAVAGGA

Reverence to the Blessed One, the Holy One,
THE Fully Enlightened One.

FIRST KHANDHAKA.

(the admission to the order of bhikkhus.)

I. At that time the blessed Buddha dwelt at

' To this book is prefixed, as introduction, an account of the
first events after Gotama's attaining Buddhahood, down to the con-
version of his two chief disciples, Sdriputta and Moggallana (chaps.
1-24). Among the elements of historical or legendary character
with which, in the Vinaya Pi/^ka, the discussion of the monastic
discipline is interwoven, this account occupies by far the first place,
both in extent and in importance. For it contains the oldest ver-
sion accessible to us now and, most probably, for ever, of what the
Buddhist fraternity deemed to be the history of their Master's life
in its most important period.

The connection in which this legendary narration stands with the
main subject of the first Khandhaka is not difficult to account for.
The regulations regarding the admission to the fraternity, which
are discussed in this Khandhaka, could not but present themselves
to the redactors of the Pi/aka as being the very basis of their
religious discipline and monastic life. It was possible to fancy the
existence of the Sa^wgha without the Patimokkha rules, or without
the regulations about the Pavarana festival, but it was impossible to
realise the idea of a Sa»«gha without rules showing who was to be
regarded as a duly admitted member of the fraternity, and who was
not. It is quite natural, therefore, that the stories or legends con-
cerning the ordination of Bhikkhus were put in connection with the
record of the very first events of the history of the Sawgha.

Nor is it difficult to account for the theory formulated by the

74

MAHAVAGGA.

I, I, I.

Uruveli, on the bank of the river Neraw^ri^,
at the foot of the Bodhi tree (tree of wisdom), just
after he had become Sambuddha. And the blessed
Buddha sat cross-legged at the foot of the Bodhi
tree uninterruptedly during seven days, enjoying the
bliss of emancipation \

historians of the Buddhist ecclesiastical law, of different successive
forms in which the ordination of Bhikkhus had been performed.
In the beginning, of course, there was nobody but the Buddha him-
self who could ordain Bhikkhus ; to him those who desired to be
received, expressed their wish, and he conferred on them the
pabba^^d and upasampadi ordinations by the formula: ‘Ehi
bhikkhu,' &c. (see I, 6, 32, 34, &c.) It was a very natural concep-
tion that afterwards, as the Sa^zgha grew larger, the Buddha should
have transferred the power of admitting new members to the Bhik-
khus themselves, and should have instituted that form of ordination
which the redactors of the Pi/aka found valid at their own time.

The transition, however, from the supposed oldest form of ordi-
nation (the so-called ehi-bhikkhu-upasampadS) to that latter
form is in the Vinaya legends not represented as immediate. There
is described an intermediate stage between the two, the ordination
by the three sara«agamanas, or by the candidate’s three times
repeated declaration of his taking refuge in the Buddha, the
Dhamma, and the Sa»«gha (see MahSvagga I, 12). The reason
which has led the redactors of the Vinaya Pi/aka to this construc-
tion, was most probably the important part which in the upasam-
pada service of the later time devolved upon the preceptor (upa§^-
of the candidate. As only learned Bhikkhus, who had
completed the tenth year after their own upasampadS, could per-
form the function of upa^^^^ya at the upasampadi ordination
of other Bhikkhus (Mahdvagga I, 31, 8), it was natural that the
redactors of the Vinaya found it impossible to ascribe this form of
upasampadd service to the first times of Buddha’s teaching. For
these times, therefore, they recorded another form, the upasam-
padd by the three sarawagamanas, the introduction of which they
assigned, very naturally, to the time soon after the conversion of
Yasa’s friends, by which event the number of Bhikkhus had been
augmented at once from seven to sixty-one.

^ The Lilayan or Phalgu river in Behar ; see General Cunning-
ham’s map, Archaeological Reports, vol. i. plate iii.

® After having reached the sambodhi and before preaching to

1,1,2. ADMISSION TO THE ORDER OF BHIKKHUS. 75

2. Then the Blessed One (at the end of these
seven days) during the first watch of the night fixed
his mind upon the Chain of Causation ^ in direct and
in reverse order: * From Ignorance ^ spring the S2im-

the world the truth he has acquired, the Buddha remains, according
to the tradition, during some weeks at Uruvelft, ‘ enjoying the bliss
of emancipation/ The Mahivagga, which contains these legends
in their oldest forms, assigns to this stay a period of four times
seven days; the later tradition is unanimous in extending it to
seven times seven days (Buddhaghosa in the commentary on the
Mahdvagga; G^dtaka Atthav. vol. i. p. 77 seq.; Dipava; 72 sa I, 29,
30; Lalita Vistara, p. 488 seq.; Beal, Romantic Legend, p. 236
seq., &c.)

* The Chain of Causation, or the doctrine of the twelve nidanas
(causes of existence), contains, as has often been observed, in a more
developed form an answer to the same problem to which the
second and third of the four Noble Truths (ariyasa^^a) also try
to give a solution, viz. the problem of the origin and destruction of
suffering. The Noble Truths simply reduce the origin of suffer-
ing to Thirst, or Desire (TawhS), in its threefold form, thirst for
pleasure, thirst for existence, thirst for prosperity (see I, 6, 20). In
the system of the twelve nidanas Thirst also has found its place
among the causes of suffering, but it is not considered as the im-
mediate cause. A concatenation of other categories is inserted
between ta«h& and its ultimate effect; and on the other hand, the
investigation of causes is carried on further beyond tawhd. The
question is here asked. What does ta»h& come from ? and thus the
series of causes and effects is led back to avi^^d (Ignorance), as its
deepest root. We may add that the redactors of the Pi/akas, who
of course could not but observe this parallelity between the second
and third ariyasai^fes and the system of the twelve niddnas, go so
far, in one instance (Ahguttara-Nikdya, Tika-Nipdta, fol. ke of the
Phayre MS.), as to directly replace, in giving the text of the four
ariyasa^fes, the second and third of them by the twelve nidanas, in
direct and reverse order respectively. Professor Childers has fur-
nished a valuable note on the niddnas; see Colebrooke, Miscel-
laneous Essays (second edition), II, 453 seq.

^ In the Sammddi//iiisuttanta (Ma^^^ima-Nikdya, fol. khft of
Tumour’s MS.) we find the following explanation of what Ignor-
ance is : ^ Not to know Suffering, not to know the Cause of suffering,

76

mahAvagga.

I, I, a.

khdras \ from the sa;;/khiras springs Consciousness,
from Consciousness spring Name-and-Form, from
Name-and-Form spring the six Provinces (of the

not to know the Cessation of suflFering, not to know the Path which
leads to the cessation of suffering, this is called Ignorance.* The
same is repeated in the explanation of the niddna formula, which
is given in the Vibhahga (Abhidhamma-Pi/aka, Pa/i^^asamuppdda-
vibhahga, fol. k\ of the Phayre MS.), and we must accept it, there-
fore, as the authentic expression of Buddhistical belief. It is
obvious, however, that this explanation leaves room for another
question. Ignorance, we are told, is the source of all evil and of
all suffering, and the subject ignored is stated to be the four
Truths. But who is the subject that ignores them? All attri-
butes (as the vinwa«a, &c.), that constitute sentient beings and
enable them to know or tb ignore, are said to be first produced by
Ignorance, and we should conclude, therefore, that they cannot
exist before Ignorance has begun to act. Or are we to understand
that it is the Ignorance incurred by a sentient being in a preceding
existence, that causes the sawkhdras and Consciousness, the con-
necting links between the different existences, to act and to bring
about the birth of a new being ?

As is well known, this Ignorance (Avid yd) plays a great part
also in the Brahmanical philosophy of the Upanishads ; and the
Buddhist belief is, no doubt, founded to a considerable extent on
older theories. But we cannot venture in a note to touch upon one
of the most difficult and interesting questions which await the
research of Indianists.

* It is very frequently stated that there are three sawkhdras or
productions: kayasa/^khdra, va^isa^^^khdra, and ^ittasa;//-
khara, or, productions of body, of speech, and of thought (see, for
instance, the Sammddi//^isuttanta, Ma^^/^ima-Nikdya, fol. khfi of
Tumour's MS.) The kdyasa^^khara consists, according to the
Sa^khdra-Yamaka (Abhidhamma-Pi/aka), in inhalation and expira-
tion (assdsapassdsd); the vaiisa^/khdra in attention and in-
vestigation (vitakkaviidrd) ; the ^ittasa^khdra in ideas, sen-
sations, and all attributes of mind except attention and investigation
(sanfid ^a vedand ^a /^apetvd vitakkavi^dre sabbe pi
^ittasampayuttakd dhammd). The Vibhanga (Abhidhamma-
Pi/aka, Pafi^^asamuppddavibhanga, 1.1.) gives, when discussing the
sawkhdras, six categories instead of the three ; * Now which are

1,1,2. ADMISSION TO THE ORDER OF BHIKKHUS. 77

six senses' ), from the six Provinces springs Contact,
from Contact springs Sensation, from Sensation
springs Thirst (or Desire), from Thirst springs At-
tachment, from Attachment springs Existence, from
Existence springs Birth, from Birth spring Old Age
and Death, grief, lamentation, suffering, dejection,
and despair. Such is the origination of this whole
mass of suffering. Again, by the destruction of Igno-
rance, which consists in the complete absence of lust,
the sawkhiras are destroyed, by the destruction of
the sawkhiras Consciousness is destroyed, by the
destruction of Consciousness Name-and-Form are
destroyed, by the destruction of Name-and-Form the
six Provinces are destroyed, by the destruction of
the six Provinces Contact is destroyed, by the de-
struction of Contact Sensation is destroyed, by the
destruction of Sensation Thirst is destroyed, by the
destruction of Thirst Attachment is destroyed, by
the destruction of Attachment Existence is destroyed,
by the destruction of Existence Birth is destroyed,
by the destruction of Birth Old Age and Death, grief,
lamentation, suffering, dejection, and despair are

the sa/nkhtras that are produced by Ignorance? Sa^^tkhdras (or,
productions) that lead to righteousness, samkhdras that lead to
sinfulness, sanikhiras that lead to immovability, productions of
body, of speech, and of thought.’ The Plli words are : ‘ Tattha
katame avif^pa^jby& sa^rzkhlrd? punMbhisamkh&ro apwmabhi-
samkh&ro d»a%&bhisamkhiro k^yasamkhdro va^isa/;<khdro ^itta-
sawkhdro.’ The list of fifty-five categories belonging to the
samkhdra-khandha, which Sp. Hardy gives in his Manual
(p. 404 seq. ; comp, also Rh. D., ‘Buddhism,’ p. 91 seq., and
‘ Buddhist Suttas from the Pdli,' p. 242), is not founded, as far as
we know, on the authority of the Pi/akas themselves, but on later
compendia and commentaries.

* I. e. eye, ear, nose, tongue, body (or the faculty of touch), and
mind.

78

mahAvagga.

1 . 1 » 3 >

destroyed. Such is the cessation of this whole mass
of suffering.'

— ^3. Knowing this the Blessed One then on that
occasion pronounced this solemn utterance : ‘ When
the real nature of things becomes clear to the ardent,
meditating Brihma«a, then all his doubts fade away,
since he realises what is that nature and what its
cause.’

4. Then the Blessed One during the middle watch

of the night fixed his mind upon the Chain of Causa-
tion, in direct and reverse order: ‘From Ignorance
spring the sawkhAras, &c Such is the origi-
nation of this whole mass of suffering, &c

Such is the cessation of this whole mass of suffering.’

5. Knowing this the Blessed One then on that
occasion pronounced this solemn utterance: ‘When
the real nature of things becomes clear to the ardent,
meditating Br 4 hma«a, then all his doubts fade away,
since he has understood the cessation of causation.’

6. Then the Blessed One during the third watch
of the night fixed his mind, &c.

7. Knowing this the Blessed One then on that
occasion pronounced this solemn utterance: ‘W’hen
the real nature of things becomes clear to the ardent,
meditating Brihma«a, he stands, dispelling the hosts
of MAra, like the sun that illuminates the sky.’

Here ends the account of what passed
under the Bodhi tree.

1,2,3. admission to the order of BHIKKHUS. 79

2 .

1. Then the Blessed One, at the end of those
seven days, arose from that state of meditation, and
went from the foot of the Bodhi tree to the A^pila
banyan tree (banyan tree of the goat-herds'). And
when he had reached it, he sat cross-legged at the foot
of the A^pila banyan tree uninterruptedly during
seven days, enjoying the bliss of emancipation,

2. Now a certain Brdhmawa, who was of a haughty
disposition*, went to the place where the Blessed
One was; having approached him, he exchanged
greeting with the Blessed One ; having exchanged
with him greeting and complaisant words, he stationed
himself near him ; then standing near him that Brih-
ma«a thus spoke to the Blessed One : ‘ By what,
Gotama, does one become a Br 4 hma«a, and what are
the characteristics that make a man a Brihmawa?’

3. And the Blessed One, having heard that, on
this occasion pronounced this solemn utterance : ‘ That
Brihmawa who has removed (from himself) all sin-
fulness, who is free from haughtiness, free from
impurity, self-restrained, who is an accomplished
master of knowledge (or, of the Veda), who has
fulfilled the duties of holiness, such a Brihma«a may

' Buddhaghosa : * The goat-herds used to go to the shadow of
that banyan tree and to sit there; therefore it was called the
ban}ran tree of the goat-herds.’ The northern Buddhists say that
this tree had been planted by a shepherd boy, during the Bodhi-
satta’s six years’ penance, in order to shelter him; see Beal, Rom.
I^egend, pp. 192, 238, and the MahSvastu.

* ‘ Huhuhka^&tiko.’ Buddhaghosa: ‘Because he was di/Ma-
mahgalika, he became filled with haughtiness and wrath, and
went about uttering the sound “huhum.”’ Di/Mamangalika
(having seen something auspicious ?) is obscure to us.

8o

mahAvagga.

I. 3» I-

justly call himself a BrAhmawa, whose behaviour is
uneven to nothing in the world/

Here ends the account of what passed
under the A^pAla tree.

3 .

1. Then the Blessed One, at the end of those
seven days, arose from that state of meditation, and
went from the foot of the A^pila banyan tree to the
Mu^alinda tree. And when he had reached it, he sat
cross-legged at the foot of the Mu/6alinda tree unin-
terruptedly during seven days, enjoying the bliss of
emancipation.

2. At that time a great cloud appeared out
of season, rainy weather which lasted seven days,
cold weather, storms, and darkness. And the NAga
(or Serpent) king Mu^alinda came out from his
abode, and seven times encircled the body of the
Blessed One with his windings, and kept extending
his large hood over the Blessed One’s head, thinking
to himself : ‘ May no coldness (touch) the Blessed
One ! May no heat (touch) the Blessed Onel May
no vexation by gadflies and gnats, by storms and
sunheat and reptiles (touch) the Blessed One !’

3. And at the end of those seven days, when the
NAga king Muialinda saw the open, cloudless sky, he
loosened his windings from the body of the Blessed
One, made his own appearance disappear, created
the appearance of a youth, and stationed himself in
front of the Blessed One, raising his clasped hands,
and paying reverence to the Blessed One.

I, 4>2> ADMISSION TO THE ORDER OF BHIKKHUS. 8 1

4. And the Blessed One, perceiving that, on this
occasion, pronounced this solemn utterance : ‘ Happy
is the solitude of him who is full of joy, who has
learnt the Truth, who sees (the Truth). Happy is
freedom from malice in this world, (self-)restraint
towards all beings that have life. Happy is freedom
from lust in this world, getting beyond all desires ; the
putting away of that pride which comes from the
thought “ I am ! ” This truly is the highest happiness ! ’

Here ends the account of what passed
under the Mu^alinda tree.

4 .

1. Then the Blessed One, at the end of those
seven days, arose from that state of meditation, and
went from the foot of die Mu^alinda tree to the
RA^iyatana (tree^); when he had reached it, he
sat cross-legged at the foot of the Ri^yatana tree
uninterruptedly during seven days, enjoying the bliss
of emancipation.

2. At that time Tapussa and Bhallika, two mer-
chants, came travelling on the road from Ukkala
( Orissa) to that place. Then a deity who had been
(in a former life) a blood-relation of the merchants
Tapussa and Bhallika, thus spoke to the merchants

* Buddhaghosa says that Ri^Syatana (lit. a royal apartment)
was the name of a tree. It is the same tree which in the Lalita
Vistara (p. 493, ed. Calcutta) is called T&rSyana, and in the
Dtpavamsa (II, 50) KhtrapSla. The place where the two mer-
chants met Buddha, is thus described in the Mah&vastu: kshtri-
kdvanashantfe bahudevatake ^etiyc.

82

MAHAVAGGA.

I»4. .?•

Tapussa and Bhallika: ‘Here, my noble friends,
at the foot of the R^^yatana tree, is staying the
Blessed One, who has just become Sambuddha.
Go and show your reverence to him, the Blessed
One, by (offering him) rice-cakes and lumps of
honey. Long will this be to )x>u for a good and
for a blessing.’

3. And the merchants Tapussa and Bhallika took
rice-cakes and lumps of honey, and went to the
place where the Blessed One was ; having approached
him and respectfully saluted the Blessed One, they
stationed themselves near him ; standing near him,
the merchants Tapussa and Bhallika thus addressed
the Blessed One : ‘ May, O Lord, the Blessed One
accept from us these rice-cakes and lumps of honey,
that that may long be to us for a good and for a
blessing ! ’

|| 4. Then the Blessed One thought : ‘ The Tathi-

j gatas 1 do not accept (food) with their hands. Now

‘ The term Tathdgata is, in the Buddhistical literature, exclu-
sively applied to Sammisambuddhas, and it is more especially
used in the Pi/hkas when the Buddha is represented as speaking of
himself in the third person as ‘the Tathdgata.’ The meaning
‘sentient being,’ which is given to the word in the AbhidhSnap-
padipikii, and in Childers’s Dictionary, is not confirmed, as far as
we know, by any passage of the Pi/akas. This translation of the
word is very possibly based merely on a misunderstanding of the
phrase often repeated in the Sutta Pi^ka: hoti tathigato paraw
marana, which means, of course, ‘does a Buddha exist after
death?’ In the G^ina books we sometimes find the term tattha-
gaya (tatragata), ‘ he who has attained that world, ie. emancipa-
tion, applied to the &inas as opposed to other beings who are
called ihagaya (fdhagata), ‘living in this world.' See, for instance,
the Gmaiaritra, § 16. Considering the dose relation in which
ttost of the dogmatical terms of the Gainas stand to those of the
Bauddhas, it is difficult to believe that tathfigata and tatthagaya

I, 4, g. ADMISSION TO THE ORDER OF BHIKKHUS. 83

with what shall I accept the rice-cakes and lumps
of honey ?' Then the four Mahdr^^ gods^, under-
standing by the power of their minds the reflection
which had arisen in the mind of the Blessed One,
offered to the Blessed One from the four quarters
(of the horizon) four bowls made of stone (saying),
‘ May, O Lord, the Blessed One accept herewith the
rice-cakes and the lumps of honey!’ The Blessed
One accepted those new stone bowls ; and therein
he received the rice-cakes and honey lumps, and
those, when he had received, he ate.

5. And Tapussa and Bhallika, the merchants,
when they saw that the Blessed One had cleansed ^
his bowl and his hands, bowed down in reverence

should not originally have conveyed very similar ideas. We think
that on the long way from the original MSgadhi to the PSli and
Sanskrit, the term tatthagata or tatthigata (tatra + igata), ‘he
who has arrived there, L e. at emancipation,’ may very easily have
undergone the change into tathSgata, which would have made it
unintelligible, were we not able to compare its unaltered form as
preserved by the (Fainas.

‘ The four guardian gods of the quarters of the world; see
Hardy’s Manual, p. 24. Their Pili names, as given in the Abhi-
dhSnappadfpika, vv. 31, 32, the Dtpavawsa XVI, 12, &c., were,
Dhatara/Ma, Virfi/iaka, Virhpakkha, and Vessava»a or Kuvera.

‘ Onitapattap^Mi, which is said very frequently of a person
who has finished his meal, is translated by Childers, ‘ whose band
is removed from the bowl’ (comp, also Trenckner, Pali Miscellany,
p. 66). We do not think this explanation right, though it agrees
with, or probably is based on, a note of Buddhi^husa (‘ pattato
^a apanttapfiffim’). Onita, i.e. avantta, is not apanita, and
the end of the dinner was marked, not by the Bhikkhu’s removing
his hand from the bowl, but by his was^g the bowl (see JTalla-
vagga VIII, 4, 6), and, of course, his hands. In Sanskrit the
meaning of ava-ni is, to pour (water) upon something; see the
Petersburg Dictionary. We have tnuislated, therefore, ontta-
pattapfini accordingly.

(1 .?

84

MAHAVAGGA.

I. S, I*

at the feet of the Blessed One and thus addressed
the Blessed One : ‘ We take our refuge, Lord, in
the Blessed One and in the Dhamma; may the
Blessed One receive us as disciples who, from this day
forth while our life lasts, have taken their refuge (in
him).’ These were the first in the world to become
lay-disciples (of the Buddha) by the formula which
contained (only) the dyad^

Here ends the account of what passed
under the Rd^yatana tree.

5 .

1. Then the Blessed One, at the end of those
seven days, arose from that state of meditation, and
went from the foot of the R&/i4yatana tree to the
Ajfap&la banyan tree. And when he had reached
it, the Blessed One stayed there at the foot of the
A^pella banyan tree.

2 . Then in the mind of the Blessed One, who
was alone, and had retired into solitude, the
following thought arose: ‘I have penetrated this
doctrine which is profound, difficult to perceive and
to understand, which brings quietude of heart, which
is exalted, which is unattainable by reasoning, ab-
struse, intelligible (only) to the wise. This people, on
the other hand, is given to desire, intent upon desire,
delighting in desire. To this people, therefore, who

* Because there was no Sa»jgha at that time, their declaration of
taking refuge, by which they became up&sakas, could refer only
to the dyad (the Buddha and the Dhamma), instead of to the triad
of the Buddha, the Dhamma, and the Samgha.

1,5,4* ADMISSION TO THE ORDER OF BHIKKHUS. 85

are given to desire, intent upon desire, delighting
in desire, the law of causality and the chain of
causation will be a matter difficult to understand ;
most difficult for them to understand will be also
the extinction of all sa»«khdras, the getting rid of
all the substrata (of existence^), the destruction of
desire, the absence of passion, quietude of heart,
Nirvdwa! Now if I proclaim the doctrine, and other
men are not able to understand my preaching, there
would result but weariness and annoyance to me.’

3. And then the following .... * stanzas, unheard
before, occurred to the Blessed One : ‘ With great
pains have I acquired it. Enough ! why should I
now proclaim it ? This doctrine will not be easy to
understand to beings that are lost in lust and hatred.

‘Given to lust, surrounded with thick darkness,
they will not see what is repugnant (to their minds),
abstruse, profound, difficult to perceive, and subtle.’

4. When the Blessed One pondered over this
matter, his mind became inclined to remain in quiet,
and not to preach the doctrine. Then Brahmd

' The upadhis (substrata of existence) are specified in the com-
mentary on the Sutta-Nipata, ap. Dhammapada, p.433: ‘sabbfipadhi-
nam parikkhayfi ’ti sabbesam khandhakfimagu»akilesdbhisamkhdra-
bheddnam upadhinam parikkhinattd.’ Probably abhisa»>khira is
not co-ordinate with the other members of the compound, but is
determined by them, comp. pabba^|4bhisamkhdra, iddhdbhisav/-
khdra, gamikdbhisamkhdra. The upadhis, therefore, according to
this passage, consist: firstly, in the actions of mind that are directed
towards the khandhas (i. e. that have the effect of propagating
and augmenting the dominion of the khandhas); secondly, in
the actions tending to the fivefold pleasures of sense ; and thirdly,
in those connected with kilesa (evil passion).

* Buddhaghosa explains ana^^^ariya by anua^^^ariya, which
is alike unintelligible to us. The Lalita Vistara (p. 515, ed. Calcutta)
has abhikshffam ('repeatedly’).

86

mahAvagga.

1 . 5 > 5 -

SahampatiS understanding by the power of his
mind the reflection which had arisen in the mind
of the Blessed One, thought: ‘Alas I the world
perishes ! Alas ! the world is destroyed 1 if the mind
of the TathAgata, of the holy, of the absolute
Sambuddha inclines itself to remain in quiet, and
not to preach the doctrine.’

5. Then Brahmil Sahampati disappeared from
Brahma’s world, and appeared before the Blessed'
One (as quickly) as a strong man might stretch his
bent arm out, or draw back his out-stretched arm.

I 6. And BrahmA Sahampati adjusted his upper
■ robe so as to cover one shoulder, and putting his
right knee on the ground, raised his joined hands
towards the Blessed One, and said to the Blessed
One: ‘Lord, may the Blessed One preach the
doctrine ! may the perfect One preach the doctrine !
there are beings whose mental eyes are darkened
by scarcely any dust ; but if they do not hear the
doctrine, they cannot attain salvation. These will
understand the doctrine.’

7. Thus spoke Brahmi Sahampati ; and when he
had thus spoken, he further said : ‘ The Dhamma
hitherto manifested in the country of Magadha has
been impure, thought out by contaminated men. But
do thou now open the door of the Immortal*; let them
hear the doctrine discovered by the spotless One !

‘As a man standing on a rock, on mountain’s

’ It is difficult to believe that the Pdli name of BrahmS Saham-
pati, the ruler of the Brahma worlds (see Spence Hardy’s Manual,
PP- 43 » 56)* is not connected with the Brahman svayambhfl
of the Brahmanical literature. Perhaps the Sanskrit equivalent of
sahampati might be svayampati.

* Amata, an epithet of Arabatship, which may perhaps mean
simply ambrosia. See Rh. D., Buddhism, pp. 60, in, 184.

I, 5, 10. ADMISSION TO THE ORDER OF BHIKKHUS. 87

top, might overlook the people all around, thus, O
wise One, ascending to the highest palace of Truth,
look down, all-seeing One, upon the people lost in
suffering, overcome by birth and decay, — thou, who
hast freed thyself from suffering !

‘Arise, O hero; O victorious One! Wander
through the world, O leader of the pilgrim band,
who thyself art free from debt. May the Blessed
One preach the doctrine ; there will be people who
can understand it!’

8. When he had spoken thus, the Blessed One
said to Brahmd Sahampati : ‘ The following thought,
BrahmA, has occurred to me : “ I have penetrated
this doctrine, .... (&c., down to end of § 2).” And
also, Brahmi, the following . . . . ^ stanzas have pre-
sented themselves to my mind, which had not been
heard (by me) before : “ With great pains, .... (&c.,
down to end of § 3).” When I pondered over this
matter, Brahmd, my mind became inclined to remain
in quiet, and not to preach the doctrine.’

9. And a second time BrahmS. Sahampati said to
the Blessed One : ‘ Lord, may the Blessed One preach
the doctrine, .... (&c., as in §§ 6, 7).’ And for the
second time the Blessed One said to Brahmi Saham-
pati : ‘ The following thought .... (&c., as before).’

10. And a third time Brahmd Sahampati said

to the Blessed One : * Lord, may the Blessed One
preach the doctrine (&c., as before).’

Then the Blessed One, when he had heard Brah-
md’s solicitation, looked, full of compassion towards
sentient beings, over the world, with his (all-per-
ceiving) eye of a Buddha. And the Blessed One,
looking over the world with his eye of a Buddha,
^ See § 3 with our note for this omitted word.

mahAvagga.

1, 6» It*

saw beings whose mental eyes were darkened by
scarcely any dust, and beings whose eyes were
covered by much dust, beings sharp of sense and
blunt of sense, of good disposition and of bad dis-
position, easy to instruct and difficult to instruct, some
of them seeing the dangers of future life and of sin.

11. As, in a pond of blue lotuses, or water-roses,
or white lotuses, some blue lotuses, or water-roses,
or white lotuses, born in the water, grown up in
the water, do not emerge over the water, but thrive
hidden under the water ; and other blue lotuses, or
water-roses, or white lotuses, born in the water,
grown up in the water, reach to the surface of the
water; and other blue lotuses, or water-roses, or
white lotuses, born in the water, grown up in the
water, stand emerging out of the water, and the
water does not touch them, —

12. Thus the Blessed One, looking over the world
with his eye of a Buddha, saw beings whose mental
eyes were darkened,. . . . (&c., the text repeats § lo);
and when he had thus seen them, he addressed
BrahmA Sahampati in the following stanza : ‘ Wide
opened is the door of the Immortal to all who have
ears to hear; let them send forth faith to meet it.
The Dhamma sweet and good I spake not, BrahmA,
despairing of the weary task, to men.’

1 3* Then Brahmd Sahampati understood : ‘ The
Blessed One grants my request that He should
preach the doctrine.’ And he bowed down before
the Blessed One, and passed round him with his
right side towards him; and then he straightway
disappeared.

Here ends the story of Brahmd’s request.

1,6,4- ADMISSION TO THE ORDER OF BHIKKHUS. 89

6 .

1. Now the Blessed One thought : ‘To whom shall
I preach the doctrine first? Who will understand
this doctrine easily?’ And the Blessed One thought:
‘There is A/dra Kdldma’; he is clever, wise, and
learned ; long since have the eye of his mind been
darkened by scarcely any dust. What if I were to
preach the doctrine first to A/dra Kdldma? He will
easily understand this doctrine.’

2. Then an invisible deity said to the Blessed
One: ‘A/dra Kdldma has died. Lord, seven days
ago.’ And knowledge sprang up in the Blessed
One’s mind that A/dra Kdldma had died seven days
ago. And the Blessed One thought: ‘Highly noble
was A/dra Kdldma. If he had heard my doctrine,
he would easily have understood it.’

3. Then the Blessed One thought: ‘To whom
shall I preach the doctrine first? Who will under-
stand this doctrine easily?’ And the Blessed One
-thought: ‘There is Uddaka Rdmaputta^; he is
clever, wise, and learned ; long since have the eye of
his mind been darkened by scarcely any dust. What
if I were to preach the doctrine first to Uddaka Rdma-
putta ? He will easily understand this doctrine.’

4. Then an invisible deity said to the Blessed
One: ‘Uddaka RSmaputta has died. Lord, yesterday
evening.’ And knowledge arose in the Blessed
One’s mind that Uddaka Rimaputta had died the
previous evening. And the Blessed One thought:

^ A/ara K&l&ma and Uddaka Rdmaputta were the two teachers
to whom Gotama had attached himself first after his pabb^^'^
See Fausbdll's ^fitaka, vol. i. p. 66 ; Rh. D., Buddhism, p. 34.

90

mahAvagga.

S"

‘ Highly noble was Uddaka RAmaputta. If he had
heard my doctrine, he would easily have under-
stood it.’

5. Then the Blessed One thought: ‘To whom
shall I preach the doctrine first? Who will under-
stand this doctrine easily?’ And the Blessed One
thought: ‘The five Bhikkhus^ have done many ser-
vices to me*; they attended on me during the time
of my exertions (to attain sanctification by under-
going austerities). What if I were to preach the
doctrine first to the five Bhikkhus?’

6. Now the Blessed One thought: ‘Where do the
five Bhikkhus dwell now ?’ And the Blessed One
saw by the power of his divine, clear vision, surpass-
ing that of men, that the five Bhikkhus were living
at Benares, in the deer park Isipatana®. And the
Blessed One, after having remained at UruvelA as
long as he thought fit, went forth to Benares.

7. Now Upaka, a man belonging to the A^ivaka
sect (i. e. the sect of naked ascetics), saw the Blessed
One travelling on the road, between GayA and the
Bodhi tree ; and when he saw him, he said to the
Blessed One: ‘Your countenance, friend, is serene;
your complexion is pure and bright. In whose

^ See about the five companions of Buddha’s self-mortification,
in the time before the sambodhi, the G&taka, vol. i. p. 67 ; Hardy,
Manual, p. 165 ; Rh. D., Buddhism, p. 35. The names of the five
Bhikkhus were, Kont/anna, Vappa, Bhaddiya, Mah&n&ma,
Assail.

* Perhaps instead of kbo 'me (=kho ime) we should read
kho me.

* ‘ The Mrigaddwa, or Deer Park, is represented by a fine wood,
which still covers an area of about half a mile, and extends from
the great tower of Dhamek on the north, to the Chaukundi mound
on the south.’ Cunningham, Arch. Reports, I, p. 107.

1,6,10. ADMISSION TO THE ORDER OF BHIKKHUS. 9 I

name, friend, have you retired from the world?
Who is your teacher? Whose doctrine do you
profess?’

8. When Upaka the A^lvaka had spoken thus,
the Blessed One addressed him in the following
stanzas: ‘I have overcome all foes ; I am all-wise;
I am free from stains in every way ; I have left
everything ; and have obtained emancipation by the
destruction of desire. Having myself gained know-
ledge, whom should I call my master? I have no
teacher ; no one is equal to me ; in the world of men
and of gods no being is like me. I am the holy One
in this world, I am the highest teacher, I alone am
the absolute Sambuddha ; I have gained coolness (by
the extinction of all passion) and have obtained Nir-
vd»a. To found the Kingdom of Truth I go to the
city of the K^sis (Benares); I will beat the drum of
the Immortal in the darkness of this world.’

9. (Upaka replied); ‘You profess then, friend, to
be the holy, absolute Cina’.’

(Buddha said): ‘Like me are all ( 7 inas who have
reached extinction of the Asavas®; I have overcome
(^itd me) all states of sinfulness; therefore, Upaka,
am I the ( 7 ina.’

When he had spoken thus, Upaka the A^^fvaka
replied: ‘It may be so, friend ;’ shook his head, took
another road, and went away.

10. And the Blessed One, wandering from place
to place, came to Benares, to the deer park Isipatana,
to the place where the five Bhikkhus were. And

* Gina, or the victorious One, is one of the many appellations
common to the founders of the Bauddha and (Taina sects.

* Sensuality, individuality, delusion, and ignorance (Kama,
Bhava, "DUlhi, and K'Aggi).

92

MAHAVAGGA.

1 , 6 , It.

the five Bhikkhus saw the Blessed One coming from
afar ; when they saw him, they concerted with each
other, saying, ‘Friends, there comes the sama«a
Gotama, who lives in abundance, who has given up
his exertions, and who has turned to an abundant
life. Let us not salute him ; nor rise from our seats
when he approaches; nor take his bowl and his
robe from his hands. But let us put there a seat;
if he likes, let him sit down.'

11. But when the Blessed One gradually ap-
proached near unto those five Bhikkhus, the five
Bhikkhus kept not their agreement. They went
forth to meet the Blessed One ; one took his bowl
and his robe, another prepared a seat, a third one

I brought water for the washing of the feet, a foot-stool,
and a toweF. Then the Blessed One sat down
on the seat they had prepared; and when he was
seated, the Blessed One washed his feet. Now they
addressed the Blessed One by his name, and with
the appellation ‘ Friend.’

12. When they spoke to him thus, the Blessed
One said to the five Bhikkhus : ‘ Do not address, O
Bhikkhus, the Tathdgata by his name, and with the
appellation “Friend.” The Tathigata, O Bhikkhus,
is the holy, absolute Sambuddha. Give ear, O
Bhikkhus! The immortal (Amata) has been won
(by me) ; I will teach you ; to you I preach the doc-
trine. If you walk in the way I show you, you will,
ere long, have penetrated to the truth, having your-
selves known it and seen it face to face ; and you

‘ Buddhaghosa, in a note on ATulIavagga II, i, i, says that
p^daptMa is a stool to pat the washed foot on, pddakathalika
(or pidakathalikil?), a stool to put the unwashed foot on, or a
cloth to rub the feet with (p&dagha/usana).

I, 6, l6. ADMISSION TO THE ORDER OF BIIIKKHUS. 93

will live in the possession of that highest goal of the
holy life, for the sake of which noble youths fully
give up the world and go forth into the houseless
state.’

1 3. When he had spoken thus, the five monks
said to the Blessed One : ‘ By those observances,
friend Gotama, by those practices, by those austeri-
ties, you have not been able to obtain power surpass-
ing that of men, nor the superiority of full and holy
knowledge and insight. How will you now, living
in abundance, having given up your exertions, having
turned to an abundant life, be able to obtain power
surpassing that of men, and the superiority of full
and holy knowledge and insight.^’

14. When they had spoken thus, the Blessed One
said to the five Bhikkhus : ‘The Tathdgata, O Bhik-
khus, does not live in abundance, he has not given
up exertion, he has not turned to an abundant life.
The Tath%ata, O Bhikkhus, is the holy, absolute
Sambuddha. Give ear, O Bhikkhus; the immortal
has been won (by me); I will teach you, to you I
will preach the doctrine. If you walk in the way
I show you, you will, ere long, have penetrated to the
truth, having yourselves known it and seen it face to
face ; and you will live in the possession of that
highest goal of the holy life, for the sake of which
noble youths fully give up the world and go forth
into the houseless state.’

15. And the five Bhikkhus said to the Blessed
One a second time (as above). And the Blessed
One said to the five Bhikkhus a second time (as
above). And the five Bhikkhus said to the Blessed
One a third time (as above).

16. When they had spoken thus, the Blessed On^

94

mauAvagga.

I» 6, 17.

said to the five Bhikkhus : ‘ Do you admit, O Bhik-
khus, that I have never spoken to you in this way
before this day?’

‘ You have never spoken so, Lord.’

‘ The TathAgata, O Bhikkhus, is the holy, abso-
lute Sambuddha. Give ear, O Bhikkhus, &c. (as
above).’

And the Blessed One was able to convince the
five Bhikkhus ; and the five Bhikkhus again’ listened
willingly to the Blessed One ; they gave ear, and
fixed their mind on the knowledge (which the Buddha
imparted to them).

1 7. And the Blessed One thus addressed the five
Bhikkhus*: ‘There are two extremes, O Bhikkhus,
which he who has given up the world, ought to
avoid. What are these two extremes? A life given
to pleasures, devoted to pleasures and lusts : this is
degrading, sensual, vulgar, ignoble, and profitless ;
and a life given to mortifications: this is painful,
ignoble, and profitless. By avoiding these two ex-
tremes, O Bhikkhus, the TathAgata has gained the
knowledge of the Middle Path which leads to insight,
which leads to wisdom, which conduces to calm, to
knowledge, to the Sambodhi, to NirvA«a.

18. ‘ Which, O Bhikkhus, is this Middle Path the
knowledge of which the TathAgata has gained, which
leads to insight, which leads to wisdom, which con-

* As they had done before when they underwent austerities
together with the Bodhisatta at UruvelS.

* Of the literature that exists referring to th e discour^ which
follows now , (^fi Dhynm^kkappavattana Suttal. it wil!'*giifllif.e'tfr
quote M. Beer’s Etudes Bouddhiques, I, p. 189 seq., and Rh. D.,

‘ Buddhist Suitas from the KUi,’ pp. 137-156, and in the Port-
nightly Review for December 1879.

1,6,22. ADMISSION TO THE ORDER OF BHIKKHUS. 95

duces to calm, to knowledge, to the Sambodhi, to
Nirvi«a? It is the holy eight fold Path, namely.
Right Belief, Right Aspiration, Right Speech, Right
Conduct, Right Means of Livelihood, Right Endea-
vour, Right Memory, Right Meditation, This, O
Bhikkhus, is the Middle Path the knowledge of
which the Tathdgata has grained, which leads to in-
sight, which leads to wisdom, which conduces to
calm, to knowledge, to the Sambodhi, to Nirvdwa.

19. ‘This, O Bhikkhus, is the Noble Truth of
Suffering: Birth is suffering; decay is suffering:
illness is suffering ; death is suffering. Presence of
objects we hate, is suffering ; Separation from objects
we love, is suffering ; not to obtain what we desire,
is suffering. Briefly, the fivefold clinging to exist-
ence^ is suffering.

20. ‘This, O Bhikkhus, is the Noble Truth of the
Cause of suffering : Thirst, that leads to re-birth,
accompanied by pleasure and lust, finding its delight
here and there. (This thirst is threefold), namely,
thirst for pleasure, thirst for existence, thirst for
prosperity.

21. ‘This, O Bhikkhus, is the Noble Truth, of
the Cessation of suffering: (it ceases with) the com-
plete cessation of this thirst, — a cessation which
consists in the absence of every passion, — ^with the
abandoning of this thirst, with the doing away with
it, with the deliverance from it, with the destruction
of desire.

22. ‘This, O Bhikkhus, is the Noble Truth of
the Path which leads to the cessation of suffering:

* Clinging to the five elements of existence, rfipa, vedanfi,
sankhfirfi, vifififina. See § 38 seq.

96

mahAvagga.

I, 6 , 3 $.

that holy eightfold Path, that is to say, Right Belief,
Right Aspiration, Right Speech, Right Conduct,
Right Means of Livelihood, Right Endeavour, Right
Memory, Right Meditation.

23. ‘“This is the Noble Truth of Suffering;” —

thus, O Bhikkhus, of this doctrine, which formerly
had not been heard of, have I obtained insight,
knowledge, understanding, wisdom, intuition. “ This
Noble Truth of Suffering must be understood,” thus,
O Bhikkhus, of this doctrine (&c., down to in-

tuition). “This Noble Truth of Suffering I have
understood,” thus, O Bhikkhus, of this doctrine,
.... (&c., down to intuition).

24. ‘“This is the Noble Truth of the Cause of

suffering,” thus, O Bhikkhus, (&c.) “ This Noble

Truth of the Cause of suffering must be abandoned*
.... has been abandoned by me,” thus, O Bhikkhus,
(&c.)

25. ‘“ This is the Noble Truth of the Cessation of
suffering,” thus,' O Bhikkhus, (&c.) “This Noble
Truth of the Cessation of suffering must be seen
face to face .... has been seen by me face to face,”
thus, O Bhikkhus, (&c.)

26. ‘“ This is the Noble Truth of the Path which
leads to the cessation of suffering,” thus, O Bhikkhus,
(&c.) “ This Noble Truth of the Path which leads
to the cessation of suffering, must be realised ....
has been realised by me,” thus, O Bhikkhus, (&c.)

27. ‘As long, O Bhikkhus, as I did not possess
with perfect purity this true knowledge and insight
into these four Noble Truths, with its three modifi-

* I. e. the thirst (ta«hd), which is declared in this Noble Truth
to be the cause of suffering, must be abandoned.

I, 6, 30. ADMISSION TO THE ORDER OF BHIICKHUS. 97

cations and its twelve constituent parts so long, O
Bhikkhus, I knew that I had not yet obtained the
highest, absolute Sambodhi in the world of men and
gods, in Mira’s and Brahma’s world, among all
beings, Sama;2as and Brihma^as, gods and men.

28. ‘But since I possessed, O Bhikkhus, with per-
fect purity this true knowledge and insight into these
four Noble Truths, with its three modifications and
its twelve constituent parts, then I knew, O Bhikkhus,
that I had obtained the highest, universal Sambodhi in
the world of men and gods, .... (&c., as in § 27).

29. ‘And this knowledge and insight arose in my
mind : “ The emancipation of my mind cannot be
lost ; this is my last birth ; hence I shall not be born
ag^m!

Thus the Blessed One spoke. The five Bhikkhus
were delighted, and they rejoiced at the words of
the Blessed One. And when this exposition was
propounded, the venerable Kondauua, obtained the
pure and spotless Eye of the Truth (that is to say,
the following knowledge): ‘Whatsoever is subject
to the condition of origination, is subject also to the
condition of cessation.’

30. And as the Blessed One had founded the
Kingdom of Truth (by propounding the four Noble
Truths), the earth-inhabiting devas shouted : ‘Truly
the Blessed One has founded at Benares, in the deer
park Isipatana, the highest kingdom of Truth, which
may be opposed neither by a Sama»a nor by a Brih-
ma«a, neither by a deva, nor by Mira, nor by Brahma,
nor by any being in the world.’

^ The three modifications and twelve constituent parts are those
specified in §§ 23-26.

98

mahAvagga.

I, 6, 31.

Hearing the shout of the earth-inhabiting devas,
the y^itumahArAfika devas (gods belonging to
the world of the four divine mahdrA^as) shouted,

(&c., as above). Hearing the shout of the kktM-

mahArA^ika devas, the tivati»^sa devas’

the yAma devas, .... the tusita devas the

nimminarati devas the paranimmita-

vasavatti devas, .... the brahmakAyika devas
shouted: ‘Truly the Blessed One, . . . .’ (&c.,as above).

31. Thus in that moment, in that instant, in that
second the shout reached the Brahma world; and
this whole system of ten thousand worlds quaked,
was shaken, and trembled ; and an infinite, mighty
light was seen through the world, which surpassed
the light that can be produced by the divine power
of the devas.

And the Blessed One pronounced this solemn
utterance: ‘Truly Ko«^fa«»a has perceived it (“a«-
«Asi”), truly KoWa?Ha has perceived it !’ Hence
the venerable Ko«<fa««a received the name A««A-
takoMfl?a««a (Ko«a^a««a who has perceived the doc-
trine).

32. And the venerable hnnktaikonddinnz., having
seen the Truth, having mastered the Truth, having
understood the Truth, having penetrated the Truth,
having overcome uncertainty, having dispelled all
doubts, having gained full knowledge, dependent on
nobody else for knowledge of the doctrine of the
Teacher, thus spoke to the Blessed One: ‘Lord, let

* The thirty-three devas of the Vedic mythology. This enumera-
tion gives the gods who reside in the different worlds, beginning
from the lowest (the bhummi devi, who inhabit the earth), and
gradually ascending to the higher devalokas. See Hardy, Manual,
p. 25.

I, 6, 35. ADMISSION TO THE ORDER OF BHIKKHUS. 99

me receive the pabba^^d and upasampadd ordi-
nations from the Blessed One/

‘ Come, O Bhikkhu,’ said the Blessed One, ‘ well
taught is the doctrine ; lead a holy life for the sake
of the complete extinction of suffering/ Thus this
venerable person received the upasampadi ordi-
nation.

33. And the Blessed One administered to the
other Bhikkhus exhortation and instruction by dis-
courses relating to the Dhamma. And the venerable
Vappa, and the venerable Bhaddiya, when they
received from the Blessed One such exhortation and
instruction by discourses relating to the Dhamma,
obtained the pure and spotless Eye of the Truth
(that is to say, the following knowledge) : ‘ "WHiatso-
ever is subject to the condition of origination is
subject also to the condition of cessation/

34. And having seen the Truth, having mastered
the Truth, .... (&c., as in § 32), they thus spoke to
the Blessed One : ‘ Lord, let us receive the pabba^^d
and upSsampadi ordinations from the Blessed One.’

‘ Come, O Bhikkhus,’ said the Blessed One, ‘well
taught is the doctrine ; lead a holy life for the sake
of the complete extinction of suffering.’ Thus these
venerable persons received the upasampadd ordi-
nation.

35. And the Blessed One, living on what the
Bhikkhus brought him, administered to the other
Bhikkhus exhortation and instruction by discourse
relating to the Dhamma ; in this way the six persons
lived on what the three Bhikkhus^ brought home
from their alms pilgrimage.

< * Those three Bhikkhus of the five, who had been converted,

lOO

mahAvagga.

I, 6, 36.

36, 37. And the venerable Mahindma and the
venerable Ass^, when they received from the Blessed
One, .... (&c., as in 33, 34, down to :). Thus these
venerable persons received the upasampadA ordi-
nation.

38. And the Blessed One thus spoke to the five
Bhikkhus : ‘ The body (Rfipa), O Bhikkhus, is not
the self. If the body, O Bhikkhus, were the self,
the body would not be subject to disease, and we
should be able to say : “ Let my body be such and
such a one, let my body not be such and such a one.”
But since the body, O Bhikkhus, is not the self,
therefore the body is subject to disease, and we are
not able to say : “ Let my body be such and such a
one, let my body not be such and such a one.”

39-41. ‘Sensation (VedanA), O Bhikkhus, is not
the self, .... (&c.’) Perception (Sa»«i) is not the
self, .... The Sa««khiras* are not the self, ....
Consciousness (Vi««i«a) is not the self, .... (&c.’)

42. ‘ Now what do you think, O Bhikkhus, is the
body permanent or perishable ?'

went about for alms; while the Buddha remained with their two
companions, and instructed them.

* This is shown exactly in the same way and with the same
words that are used in § 38 with regard to the body. Body,
sensations, perceptions, sa^khdras, and consciousness are the well-
known five classes (khandha) of bodily and mental parts and
powers;' see Rh. D., ‘Buddhism,’ p. 90 seq. The self (attd),
which, if it exists at all, must be permanent and imperishable, is
not to be found in any one of these five classes, which are all
subject to origin and decay. This discourse of the Buddha’s, which
is frequently called the Anattalakkhana Sutta (Sutta of the not having
the signs of selQ, shows the perishable nature of the five khandhas,
and that the khandhas are not the self. But it does not deal with
the question, whether the self exists or not, in any other way.

* See the note on chap. i. 2.

1,6,47- ADMISSION TO THK ORDER OF BHIKKHUS. lOl

‘ It is perishable. Lord/

‘And that which is perishable, does that cause pain
or joy?’

‘ It causes pain, Lord.’

‘And that which is perishable, painful, subject to
change, is it possible to regard that in this way:

‘ This is mine, this am I, this is my self?’

‘ That is impossible, Lord.’

43. ‘ Is sensation permanent or perishable ?’....

(&C.0

44. ‘ Therefore, O Bhikkhus, whatever body has
been, will be, and is now, belonging or not belonging
to sentient beings, gross or subtle, inferior or superior,
distant or near, all that body is not mine, is not me,
is not my self : thus it should be considered by right
knowledge according to the truth.

45. ‘ Whatever sensation, .... (&c.*)

46. ‘Considering this, O Bhikkhus, a learned,
noble hearer of the word becomes weary of body,
weary of sensation, weary of perception, weary of the
Sa»«khdras, weary of consciousness. Becoming
weary of all that, he divests himself of passion ; by
absence of passion he is made free ; when he is free,
he becomes aware that he is free; and he realises
that re-birth is exhausted ; that holiness is completed ;
that duty is fulfilled; and that there is no further
return to this world®.’

47. Thus the Blessed One spoke ; the five Bhik-
khus were delighted, and rejoiced at the words of the
Blessed One. And when this exposition had been

* Here follow the same questions, answers, and rejoinders, with
regard to sensation, perception, the samkhdras, and consciousness.

® The same with regard to the other four khandhas.

’ Compare Bumouf, ‘ Lotus de la bonne Loi,’ p. 481.

102

mahAvagga.

I, 7 * '•

propounded, the minds of the five Bhikkhus became
free from attachment to the world, and were released
from the Asavas^

At that time there were six Arahats (persons who
had reached absolute holiness) in the world.

End of the first BhA«avira.

7 *

I. At that time there was in Benares a noble
1^ youth, Yasa by name, the son of a se/Mi (or
(treasurer®) and delicately nurtured. He had three
(palaces, one for winter, one for summer, one for the
. rainy season. In the palace for the rainy season
he lived during the four months (of that season),
surrounded with female musicians among whom no

^ See the note on § 9.

I A well-known scene in the life of the Bodhisatta has evidently
I been represented after the model of this story. See Gdtaka I,
Jp. 61; Laliia Vistara, p. 251; Bigandet, Life of Gaudama, p. 55.
\ Nowhere in the Pali Pi/akas is the story told about the Bodhisatta
himself.

® This was a position of honour among the merchants. In the
later literature we hear of an office of se/Mi (se /Mi -/Man a) in a
city, to which any one with the requisite wealth and talent was
eligible ((zataka I, 120— 122); and, according to the Mahavamsa,
the king appointed to an office called se/Z^iti, apparently at his
court (Mah. p. 69). The Gahapati, or Treasurer, one of the seven
jewels of a king, is explained by Buddhaghosa to be se//^i-
gahapati (see Rh. D.*s note on Maha-sudassana Sutta I, 41).
'The Se//^i,' standing alone, or ‘the Maha-se///ii,' means
AnStha Findika (Gataka I, 95, 227-230; Dhammapada Com-
mentary, p. 395). Below, in chapter 9, § i, it would seem that
the rank of se//^i was hereditary, and this is confirmed by the later
literature ; but this applies to the social rank only, and not to the
office.

I, 7, 3. ADMISSION TO THE ORDER OF BHIKKHUS. IO3

man was, and he did not descend from that palace
(all that time). Now one day Yasa, the noble youth,
who was endowed with, and possessed of the five
pleasures of sense while he was attended (by those
female musicians), fell asleep sooner than usual;
and after him his attendants also fell asleep. Now
an oil lamp was burning through the whole night.

2. And Yasa, the noble youth, awoke sooner than
usual ; and he saw his attendants sleeping ; one had
her lute leaning against her arm-pit ; one had her
tabor leaning against her neck ; one had her drum
leaning against her arm-pit; one had dishevelled
hair ; one had saliva flowing from her mouth ; and
they were muttering in their sleep. One would
think it was a cemetery one had fallen into When
he saw that, the evils (of the life he led) manifested
themselves to him ; his mind became weary (of
worldly pleasures). And Yasa, the noble youth,
gave utterance to this solemn exclamation; ‘Alas!
what distress ; alas I what danger I’

3. And Yasa, the noble youth, put on his gilt
slippers, and went to the gate of his house. Non-
human beings opened the gate, in order that no
being might prevent Yasa the noble youth’s leaving
the world, and going forth into the houseless state.
And Yasa, the noble youth, went to the gate of
the city. Non-human beings opened the gate, in
order that no being might prevent Yasa the noble
youth’s leav’ng the world, and going forth into the
houseless state. And Yasa, the noble youth, went
to the deer park Isipatana.

* Pleasures of the eye, ear, nose, tongue, and touch.

* Hatthappattaffi susfinam manue, literally, ‘one would
think a cemetery had (suddenly) come to one’s hand.’

104

mahAvagga.

I. 7. 4*

\ 4. At that time the Blessed One, having, arisen

; in the night, at dawn was walking up and down in
, the open air. And the Blessed One saw Yasa, the
noble youth, coming from afar. And when he saw
him, he left the place where he was walking, and
sat down on a seat laid out (for him). And Yasa,
the noble youth, gave utterance near the Blessed
One to that solemn exclamation: ‘Alas! what dis-
tress; alas! what danger!’ And the Blessed One
said to Yasa, the noble youth : ‘ Here is no distress,
Yasa, here is no danger. Come here, Yasa, sit
down; I will teach you the Truth (Dhamma).’

5. And Yasa, the noble youth, when he heard
that there was no distress, and that there was no
danger, became glad and joyful ; and he put off his
gilt flippers , and went to the place where the
6iessed One was; having approached him and
having respectfully saluted the Blessed One, he sat
down near him. When Yasa, the noble youth, was
sitting near him, the Blessed One preached to him
in due course : that is to say, he talked about the
merits obtained by alms-giving, about the duties of
morality, about heaven, about the evils, the vanity,
and the sinfulness of desires, and about the blessings
of the abandonment of desire

6. When the Blessed One saw that the mind of
Yasa, the noble youth, was prepared, impressible,
free from obstacles (to understanding the Truth),
elated, and believing, then he preached what is the
principal doctrine of the Buddhas, namely. Suffering,

* Nekkhftmina. is neither naishkrsmya nor nsishkarmya, but
naishkamya. Itivuttaka, fol. khi (Phayre MS.) : kdmdnam etam
nissaranam yad ida»i nekkhamma^f?, rfipdnam eta/n nissaranam yad
idam aruppaxn.

I, 7, 9. ADMISSION TO THE ORDER OF BHIKKHUS. IO5

the Cause of suffering, the Cessation of suffering,
the Path. Just as a clean cloth free from black 1
specks properly takes the dye, thus Yasa, the noble [
youth, even while sitting there, obtained the pure |
and spotless Eye of the Truth (that is, the know-
ledge) : ‘ Whatsoever is subject to the condition
of origination is subject also to the condition of
cessation.’

7. Now the mother of Yasa, the noble youth,
having gone up to his palace, did not see Yasa, the
noble youth, and she went to the se/Mi, the house-
holder (her husband), and having approached him,
she said to the se//<4i, the householder; ‘Your son
Yasa, O householder, has disappeared.’ Then the
se/Mi, the householder, sent messengers on horse-
back to the four quarters of the horizon ; and he
went himself to the deer park Isipatana. Then the
se///«i, the householder, saw on the ground the marks
of the gilt slippers; and when he saw them, he
followed them up.

8. And the Blessed One saw the se////i, the house-
holder, coming from afar. On seeing him, he)
thought: ‘What if I were to effect such an exercise
of miraculous power,, that the se///4i, the householder,
sitting here, should not see Yasa, the noble youth,
who is sitting here also.’ And the Blessed One
effected such an exercise of his miraculous power.

9. And the the householder, went to the

place where the Blessed One was; having approached
him, he said to the Blessed One : ‘ Pray, Lord, has
the Blessed One seen Yasa, the noble youth?’

‘Well, householder, sit down. Perhaps, sitting
here, you may see Yasa, the noble youth, sitting
here also.’

io6 mahAvagga. 1, 7, 10.

And the s&tihi, the householder, who thought:
‘ Indeed, sitting here I shall see Yasa.the noble youth,
sitting here also !’ became glad and joyful, and having
respectfully saluted the Blessed One, he sat down
near him.

10. When the se/Mi, the householder, was sitting

near him, the Blessed One preached to him in due
course ; that is to say, he talked about the merits
obtained by alms-giving, .... (&c., as at end of $ 5).
And the the householder, having seen the

Truth, having mastered the Truth, having penetrated
the Truth, having overcome uncertainty, having dis-
pelled all doubts, having gained full knowledge,
dependent on nobody else for the knowledge of the
doctrine of the Teacher, said to the Blessed One :

• ‘Glorious, Lord ! glorious. Lord ! Just as if one should
i set up. Lord, what had been overturned, or should
reveal what had been hidden, or should point out
the way to one who had lost his way, or should
bring a lamp into the darkness, in order that those
who had eyes might see visible things, thus has the
Blessed One preached the doctrine in many ways.
I take my refuge. Lord, in the Blessed One, and in
the Dhamma, and in the fraternity of Bhikkhus ;
may the Blessed One receive me from this day forth
while my life lasts as a disciple who has taken his
refuge in Him.’

This was the first person in the world who became
a lay-disciple by the formula of the holy triad.

11. And Yasa, the noble youth, while instruction
was administered (by the Buddha) to his father, con-
templated the stage of knowledge which he had
seen with his mind and understood ; and his mind
became free from attachment to the world, and was

I, 7, 13. ADMISSION TO THE ORDER OF BHIKKHUS. IO7

released from the Asavas. Then the Blessed One
thought: ‘ Yasa, the noble youth, while instruction
was administered to his father, has contemplated the
stage of knowledge which he had seen with his mind
and understood ; and his mind has become free from
attachment to the world, and has become released
from the Asavas. It is impossible that Yasa, the noble
youth, should return to the world and enjoy pleasures,
as he did before, when he lived in his house. What
if I were now to put an end to that exertion of my
miraculous power.’ And the Blessed One put an
end to that exertion of his miraculous power.

12. Then the se//; 4 i, the householder, saw Yasa,
the noble youth, sitting there. On seeing him he
said to Yasa, the noble youth ; ‘ My son Yasa, your
mother is absorbed in lamentation and grief ; restore
your mother to life.’

13. Then Yasa, the noble youth, looked at the*
Blessed One. And the Blessed One said to the

the householder : ‘ What do you think then,
O householder } That Yasa has (first) won only an
imperfect * degree of knowledge and insight into the
Truth, as you have yourself? Or that rather he
was contemplating the stage of knowledge which
he had seen with his mind and understood ; and that
his mind has thus become free from attachment to
the world, and has become released from the Asavas?
Now would it then be possible, O householder, that
Yasa should return to the world and enjoy pleasures
as he did before, when he lived in his house ?’

‘ Not so. Lord.’

‘ The stage of a sekha, i. e. a person who has attained to any
stage in the Noble Eightfold Path (such as sot&pattiphala, &c.)
inferior to the highest (Arahatship).

io8 mahAvagga. 1, 7, 14.

‘ Yasa, the noble youth, O householder, had (first)
won, like yourself, an imperfect degjree of knowledge
and insight into the Truth. But when he was con-
templating the stage of knowledge which he had
seen with his mind and^ understood, his mind has
become free from attachment to the world, and has
become released from the Asavas. It is impossible,
O householder, that Yasa, the noble youth, should
return to the world and enjoy pleasures as he did
before, when he lived in his house.’

14. ‘ It is all gain, Lord, to Yasa, the noble youth,
it is high bliss, Lord, for Yasa, the noble youth, that
the mind of Yasa, the noble youth, has become free
from attachment to the world, and has become re-
leased from the Asavas. Might, Lord, the Blessed
One consent to take his meal with me to-day together
with Yasa, the noble youth, as his attendant ?’

The Blessed One expressed his consent by remain-
ing silent. Then the se/Mi, the householder, when he
understood that the Blessed One had accepted his
invitation, rose from his seat, respectfully saluted the
Blessed One, and passing round him with his right
side towards him, departed thence,

15. And Yasa, the noble youth, soon after the
se//^i, the householder, was gone, said to the Blessed
One : ‘ Lord, let me receive the pabba^^A and
upasampadi ordinations from the Blessed One.’

‘ Come, O Bhikkhu,’ said the Blessed One, ‘ well
taught is the doctrine ; lead a holy life for the sake
of the complete extinction of suffering.’

Thus this venerable person received the upasam-
padA ordination. At that time there were seven
Arahats in the world.

End of the story of Yasa’s pabba;?’,fel.

I, 8, 3. ADMISSION TO THE ORDER OF BHIKKHUS. IO9

8 .

1. And in the forenoon the blessed One, having
put on his under-robes’, took his alms-bowl, and,
with his Mvara. on, went with the venerable Yasa
as his attendant to the house of the se//^i, the house-
holder. When he had arrived there, he sat down
on a seat laid out for him. Then the mother and
the former wife of the venerable Yasa went to the
place where the Blessed One was ; having approached
him and having respectfully saluted the Blessed One,
they sat down near him.

2. Then the Blessed One preached to them in due

course ; that is to say, he talked about the merits ob-
tained by alms-giving, (&c,, as in chap. 7.5,6, down

to ;) ; thus they obtained, while sitting there, the pure
and spotless Eye of the T ruth (that is, the knowledge) :
‘ Whatsoever is subject to the condition of origina-
tion is subject also to the condition of cessation.'

3. And having seen the Truth, .... {&c., as above,
§§ 5,6, down to :), dependent on nobody else for know-
ledge of the Teacher’s doctrine, they thus spoke to the
Blessed One : ‘ Glorious, Lord ! glorious Lord ! J ust
as if one should set up'(&c., as in chap. 7. 10, down to:).
We take our refuge, Lord, in the Blessed One, and in
the Dhamma, and in the fraternity of Bhikkhus;
may the Blessed One receive us from this day forth,
while our life lasts, as disciples who have taken their
refuge in Him.’

These were the first females in the w'orld who
became lay-disciples by the formula of the holy triad.

’ The rules about the dress of a Bhikkhu who is going to the
village are g^ven in the iSTullavagga VIII, 4, 3 ; 5, 2. Compare
Rh. D.’s note on the Mahfi-parinibb&na Sutta V, 45.

I [O

mahAvagga.

Ij 8) 4*

4. And the mother and the father and the former
wife of the venerable Yasa with their own hands
served and offered^ excellent food, both hard and
soft, to the Blessed One and to the venerable Yasa ;
and when the Blessed One had finished his meal,
and cleansed his bowl and his hands, they sat down
near him. Then the Blessed One taught, incited,
animated, and gladdened the mother, and father, and
the former wife of the venerable Yasa by religious
discourse ; and then he rose from his seat and went
away.

9 .

I. Now four lay persons, friends of the venerable
Yasa, belonging to the s^ttJn families of Benares,
and to the highest after the se//^i families, by name
Vimala, SubAhu, Pu««a^, and Gavampati, heard:
‘ Yasa, the noble youth, has cut off his hair and beard,
and has put on yellow robes, and has given up the
world, and gone forth into the houseless state.’ When
they had heard that, they thought : ‘ Surely that
cannot be a common doctrine and discipline, that
cannot be a common renunciation of the world, if
Yasa, the noble youth, has cut off his hair and beard,
and has put on yellow robes, and has given up the
world, and gone forth into the houseless state.’

> According to Subhfiti (in Childers’s Dictionary) sampaySreti
means that the host hands dishes to the guest until the latter says,
‘I have had enough.’ Childers accordingly translates sampavd-
reti, ‘to cause to refuse.’ But as pavareti means, ‘to cause to
accept. It is impossible that sampavdreti should have exactly the
opposite meaning. We prefer, therefore, to take it as an emphatic
synonym of pavareti

I, 9, 4. ADMISSION TO THE ORDER OF BHIKKHUS. Ill

2. Those four persons went to the place where
the venerable Yasa was; having approached him
and having respectfully saluted the venerable Yasa,
they stood by his side. And the venerable Yasa
went with his four lay-friends to the place where
the Blessed One was ; having approached him and
having respectfully saluted the Blessed One, he sat
down near him. Sitting near him the venerable
Yasa said to the Blessed One : ‘ Lord, here are
four lay-friends of mine, belonging to the se/Mi
families of Benares and to the highest after the
se//^i families: their names are Vimala, Subahu,
Puwwa^, and Gavampati. May the Blessed One
administer exhortation and instruction -to these four
persons.'

3. Then the Blessed One preached to them, ....
(&c., as in chap. 8. 2).

4. And having seen the Truth, .... {&c., down to :)
dependent on nobody else for the knowledge of
the Teacher’s doctrine, they thus spoke to the
Blessed One ; ‘ Lord, let us receive the pabba^^a
and upasampadd ordinations from the Blessed
One.’

‘ Come, O Bhikkhus,’ said the Blessed One, ‘ well
taught is the doctrine ; lead a holy life for the sake
of the complete extinction of suffering.’

Thus these venerable persons received the upa-
sampadi ordination. And the Blessed One admi-
nistered to these Bhikkhus exhortation and instruc-
tion by discourse relating to the Dhamma. While
they received exhortation and instruction from the
Blessed One by discourse relating to the Dhamma,
their minds became free from attachment to the
world, and were released from the Asavas.

II2

mahAvagga.

10.

At that time there were eleven Arahats in the
world.

Here ends the story of the ordination of
the four laymen.

10 .

Now fifty lay persons, friends of the venerable
Yasa, belonging to the highest families in the country

and to those next to the highest, heard (&c.,

as in chap. 9, §§ i, 2, 3, 4, down to:). While they
received exhortation and instruction from the Blessed
One by discourse relating to the Dhamma, their
minds became free from attachment to the world,
and were released from the Asavas.

At that time there were sixty-one Arahats in the
world.

11 .

I. And the Blessed One said to the Bhikkhus :

‘ I am delivered, O Bhikkhus, from all fetters, human
and divine. You, O Bhikkhus, are also delivered
from all fetters, human and divine. Go ye now,
O Bhikkhus, and wander, for the gain of the many,
for the welfare of the many, out of compassion for
the world, for the good, for the gain, and for the
welfare of gods and men. Let not two of you go
the same way \ Preach, O Bhikkhus, the doctrine

* This cannot be understood as a general rule, for it is repeated
nowhere where precepts for wandering Bhikkhus are given, and,
on the contrary, numerous instances occur in the Sacred Texts

I, II, 2. ADMISSION TO THE ORDER OF BHIKKHUS. 1 13

which is glorious in the beginning, glorious in the
middle, glorious at the end, in the spirit and in the
letter; proclaim a consummate, perfect, and pure
life of holiness. There are beings whose mental
eyes are covered by scarcely any dust, but if the
doctrine is not preached to them, they cannot attain
salvation. They will understand the doctrine. And
I will go also, O Bhikkhus, to Uruveli, to Senini-
nigama^, in order to preach the doctrine.'

2. And Mdra the wicked One went to the place'
where the Blessed One was; having approached
him, he addressed the Blessed One in the following
stanza: ‘Thou art bound by all fetters, human
and divine. Thou art bound by strong fetters.
Thou wilt not be delivered from me, O Sama«a.’

Buddha replied : ‘ I am delivered from all fetters,
human and divine. I am delivered from the strong
fetters. Thou art s truck down , O Death .*

(Mira said) : ‘ The fetter which pervades the sky,
with which mind is bound, with that fetter I will
bind thee. Thou wilt not be delivered from me,
O Sama«a.’

(Buddha replied): ‘Whatever forms, sounds, odours,
flavours, or contacts there are which please the

in which two or more Bhikkhus are mentioned as wandering
together, without any expression of disapproval being added. The
precept given here evidently is intended to refer onl y to the earliest
period in the spread of the new doctrine; just as in chap. 12
a form of upasampadS is introduced by Buddha which was re-
garded as inadmissible in later times.

* The correct spelling of this name appears to be Sendnini-
gama (‘the General’s Town '), and not Sendnigama (‘the Army’s
Town ’) ; the (rdtaka Atthava««and (vol. i. p. 68) and the Paris MS.
of the Mahdvagga (manu seconds) read Sendninigama. The
Lalita Vistara has Sendpatigrdma.

mahAvagga.

I, la, I.

1 14

senses, in me desire for them has ceased. Thou art
struck down, O Death.’

Then Mdra the wicked One understood: ‘The
Blessed One knows me, the perfect One knows me,’
and, sad and afflicted, he vanished away.

Here ends the story of Mdra.

12 .

1. At that time tlie Bhikkhus brought (to Buddha),
from different regions and different countries, persons
who desired to obtain the pabba^^A and upasam-
padi ordinations, thinking : ‘ The Blessed One will
confer on them the pabba^^i and upasampadd ordi-
nations.’ Thus both the Bhikkhus became tired (from
the journey), and also those who desired to obtain
the pabba/^d and upasampadS ordinations. Now
when the Blessed One was alone and had retired
into solitude, the following consideration presented
itself to his mind : ‘ The Bhikkhus now bring to me
from different regions and different countries persons
who desire to obtain the pabba^^d and upasam-
padA ordinations, thinking : “ The Blessed One will
confer on them the pabba^^d and upasampadi
ordinations.” Now both the Bhikkhus become tired,
and also those who desire to obtain the pabba^^A
and upasampadi ordinations. What if I were to
grant permission to the Bhikkhus, saying: “Confer
henceforth, O Bhikkhus, in the different regions,
and in the different countries, the pabba^^i and
upasampadi ordinations yourselves (on those who
desire to receive them).”’

2. And the Blessed One, having left the solitude

I, 13 , 4. ADMISSION TO THE ORDER OF BHIKKHUS. 1 1 5

in the evening, in consequence of that, and on this
occasion, after having delivered a religious discourse,
thus addressed the Bhikkhus : ‘When I was alone,
O Bhikkhus, and had retired into solitude, the follow-
ing consideration, &c. What if I were to permit,

. . . (&c., as in § i).

3. ‘I grant you, O Bhikkhus, this permission : |

Confer henceforth in the different regions and in the .
different countries the pabba^^i and upasampadd .
ordinations yourselves (on those who desire to receive
them). And you ought, O Bhikkhus, to confer the :
pabba^^d and upasampadd ordinations in this/
way: Let him (who desires to receive the ordina-/
tion), first have his hair and beard cut off ; let him ,
put on yellow robes, adjust his upper robe so as to
cover one shoulder, salute the feet of the Bhikkhus
(with his head), and sit down squatting ; then let him
raise his joined hands and tell him to say : .

4. “‘I take my refuge in the Buddha, I take my
refuge in the Dhamma, I take my refuge in the

Sawgha. And for the second time I take (&c

Sawgha). And for the third time I take my refuge
in the Buddha, and for the third time I take my
refuge in the Dhamma, and for the third time I take
my refuge in the Sawgha.”

‘ I prescribe, O Bhikkhus, the pabba^^d and
upasampadd ordinations consisting in the three
times repeated declaration of taking refuge (in the
holy triad).’

End of the account of the upasampadd ordination

by the threefold declaration of taking refuged

' On this ceremony, which is still gone through before the regular
ordination, see the remarks in the note on chapter i, § i.

MAnXWGGA.

h fj. t.

116

13 .

I. And the Blessed One, after having kept the
vassa residence*, thus addressed the Bhikkhus : ‘ By
wise contemplation, O Bhikkhus, and by wise firm-
ness of exertion have I attained the highest emanci-
pation, have I realised the highest emancipation.
Attain ye also, O Bhikkhus, the highest emancipation,
realise the highest emancipation, by wise contempla-
tion and by wise firmness of exertion.'

,/ 2. And Mira the wicked One went to the place

where the Blessed One was ; having approached
him, he addressed the Blessed One by the following
stanza : ‘ Thou art bound by Mira’s fetters, human
and divine. Thou art bound by strong fetters.
Thou wilt not be delivered from me, O Sama«a.’

(Buddha replied): ‘I am delivered from Mira’s
fetters, human and divine. I am delivered from the
strong fetters. 'Dm u art struck ^ wn. O Death.’

Then Mira the wicked ^OnT^nderet^dP The
Blessed One knows me, the perfect One knows me ;’
and, sad and afflicted, he vanished away.

I. And the Blessed One, after having dwelt at
enares as long as he thought fit, went forth to
nivell And the Blessed One left the road and
went to a certain grove; having gone there, and
having entered it, he sat down at the foot of a tree.

t fflat time there was a party of thirty friends, rich
young men, who were sporting in that same grove

* See about the vassa residence the rules given in Book HI.

14, 3. ADMISSION TO THE ORDER OF BHIKRHUS. 1 1 7

together with their wives. One of them had no wife; f
for him they had procured a harlot Now while they |
did not pay attention, and were indulging in their ,
sports, that harlot took up the articles belonging to,
them, and ran away.

2. Then those companions, doing service to their
friend, went in search of that woman ; and, roaming
about that grove, they saw the Blessed One sitting
at the foot of a tree. Seeing him they went to the
place where the Blessed One was ; having approached
him, they said to the Blessed One : ‘ Pray, Lord, has
the Blessed One seen a woman passing by?’

‘What have you to do, young men, with the
woman?’

‘We were sporting. Lord, in this grove, thirty
friends, rich young men, together with our wives.
One of us had no wife ; for him we had procured a
harlot. Now, Lord, while we did not pay attention,
and were indulging in our sports, that harlot has
taken up the articles belonging to us, and has run
away. Therefore, Lord, we companions, doing ser-
vice to our friend, go in search of that woman, and
roam about this grove.’

3. ‘Now what think you, young men? WTiich ’
would be the better for you ; that you should go in
search of a woman, or that you should go in search j
of yourselves?’

‘ That, Lord, would be the better for us, that we
should go in search of ourselves.’

‘ If so, young men, sit down, I will preach to you
the Truth (Dhamma).’

The rich young companions replied: ‘Yes^ Lord,’
and respectfully saluted the Blessed One, and sat
down near him.

mahAvagga.

* 4 » 4 '

ii8

4. Then the Blessed One preached to them

(&c., as in chap. 8. 2, or 9. 3).

5, And having seen the Truth, .... (&c., as in
chap. 9. 4 down to :). Thus these venerable persons
received the upasampadA ordination.

Here ends the story of the thirty rich young
companions.

End of the second Bhiwavira.

15 .

1. And the Blessed One, wandering from place to
place, came to Uruvell At that time there lived
in UruvelA three G^a/ilas*. UruvelA Kassapa, Nadi
Kassapa (Kassapa of the River, 1. e. the Nera»^rA),
and GayA Kassapa (Kassapa of the village GayA).
Of these the Ga/ila UruvelA Kassapa was chief,
leader, foremost, first, and highest over five hundred
6^a/ilas ; Nadi Kassapa was chief .... (&c., down to
highest over) three hundred G^a/ilas, GayA Kassapa
was chief .... (&c., down to highest over) two
hundred ( 7 a/ilas.

2. And the Blessed One went to the hermitage of

* The GaAlas (i.e. ascetics wearing matted hair) are Brah-
manical vSnaprasthas. The description of their ascetic life given
in many passages of the G^ataka Atthavannand and of the Apaddna
exactly agrees with the picture of the forest life of the which

so frequenUy occurs in the Mahdbhdrata. In the Mahdvagga (VI,
’fu 't 's expressly stated that the (raAIas recognised the authority
ot the Veda, and it is in keeping with this that the usual term for
a opmg» the state of a (rarila is ‘isipabba^^am pabbairati'

a'wshr^ ™ ** ^o*"*** “*1 becoming

I. IS» 3* ADMISSION TO THE ORDER OF BHIKKHUS. II 9

the Ca/ila Uruveld Kassapa; having gone there, he
said to the G^a^ila UruvelA Kassapa : ‘ If it is not 1
disagreeable to you, Kassapa, let me spend one
night in the room where your (sacred) fire is kept’

‘ It is not disagreeable to me, great Samara, but
there is a savage Niga (or Serpent) king of great
magical power a dreadfully venomous serpent ; let
him do no harm to you.’

And a second time the Blessed One said to the
^a/ila Uruveli Kassapa : ‘ If it is not disagreeable,’
&c

‘ It is not disagreeable,’ &c.

And a third time the Blessed One said : ‘ If it is
not disagreeable,’ &c

‘ It is not disagreeable,’ &c

‘ He is not likely to do any harm to me. Pray,
Kassapa, allow me a place in the room where your
fire is kept’

‘ Stay there, great Samara, as you wish it.’

3. Then the Blessed One entered the room where
the fire was kept, made himself a couch of grass, and
sat down cross-legged, keeping the body erect and
surrounding himself with watchfulness of mind®.
And the Ndga saw that the Blessed One had entered;
when he saw that, he became annoyed, and irritated,
and sent forth a cloud of smoke. Then the Blessed
One thought : ‘ What if I were to leave intact the
skin, and hide, and flesh, and ligaments, and bones,

‘ Iddhi. Compare the passages referred to by Rh. D. in * Bud-
dhist Suttas from the Pali,’ pp. a, 40, 259 ; and further Mahdvagga
VI, 15, 8, and ATulIavagga VII, i, 4, and VII, a, i. ,

* Satim upa/Mdpetvd. Sati is here a more precise idea than
memory.

120

mahAvagga.

I. IS» 4-

and marrow of this NAga ; but were to conquer the
fire, which he will send forth, by my fire.’

4. And the Blessed One effected the appropriate
exercise of miraculous power and sent forth a cloud
of smoke. Then the Ndga, who could not master
his rageS sent forth flames. And the Blessed One,
converting his body into fire®, sent forth flames.
When they both shone forth with their flames, the
fire room looked as if it were burning and blazing,
as if it were all in flames. And the 6^a/ilas, sur-
rounding the fire room, said : ‘Truly the countenance
of the great Samawa is beautiful, but the Ndga will
do harm to him®.’

5. That night having elapsed, the Blessed One,
leaving intact the skin and hide and flesh and liga-
ments and bones and marrow of that NAga, and con-
quering the Ndga’s fire by his fire, threw him into
his alms-bowl, and showed him to the Cra/ila Uru-
velA Kassapa (saying), ‘Here you see the Ndga,
Kassapa ; his fire has been conquered by my fire.’

Then the fra/ila UruvelA Kassapa thought: ‘Truly
the great Samara possesses high magical powers and
great faculties, in that he is able to conquer by his
fire the fire of that savage Ndga king, who is pos-
sessed of magical power, that dreadfully venomous
^rpent. He is not, however, holy (arahA) as I am.’
[_6*. Near the Neraw^ari river the Blessed One

Buddhaghosa explains makkha by kodha.

* Compare ^ullavagga IV, 4, 4, where Dabba also tej^odh^tum
samapa^^ati, that is, his finger is on fire.

Compare the Editor’s corrections at ATullavagga, p. 363.
hi §§ 6, 7 (excepting the last clause of § 7) the story related in
§§ r -5 is repeated in a more popular style. This appears to us to
be a more archaic redaction than the preceding. We do not know

1 , 15, 7. ADMISSION TO THE ORDER OF BHIKKHUS. 12 1

said to the 6'a^ila UruveU Kassapa: ‘If it is not
disagreeable to you, Kassapa, let me dwell this moon-
light night in your fire room,’

‘It is not disagreeable to me, g^eat Samara, but
in your own behalf I warn you off. There is a
savage Snake king there possessed of magical power,
a dreadfully venomous serpent ; let him do no harm
to you.’

‘ He is not likely to do any harm to me ; pray,
Kassapa, allow me a place in your fire room.’

When he saw that Kassapa had given his per-
mission, fearlessly He, who had overcome all fear,
entered. When the chief of Serpents saw that the
Sage had entered, he became irritated, and sent forth
a cloud of smoke. Then the chief of men ^ joyful
and unperplexed, also sent forth a cloud of smoke.
Unable to master his rage, the chief of Serpents sent
forth flames like a burning fire. Then the chief of
men^ the perfect master of the element of fire, also
sent forth flames. When they shone forth both with
their flames, the 6^a/ilas looked at the fire room {sa.y-
ing), ‘ Truly the countenance of the great Samawa is
beautiful, but the N^a will do harm to him.’

7. And when that night had elapsed, the flames
of the Naga were extinguished, but the various-
coloured flames of Him who is possessed of magical
powers remained. Dark blue and red, light red,
yellow, and crj’stal-coloured flames of various colours

any other instance in the PSU Pi/akas of a similar repetition, ex-
cepting a short passage at the end of chap. 24. 3 ; and one other
in the Mahil-padhina Sutta.

* Literally, ‘ the Snake among men,’ or ‘ the Elephant among
men ' (manussandgo).

122

mahAvagga.

I, i6, I.

appeared on the Angirasa’s^ body. Having put
the chief of Serpents into his alms-bowl, he showed
him to the Brihma«a (saying), * Here you see the
NAga, Kassapa; his fire has been conquered by
my fire.’

And the (ra/ila UruvelA Kassapa, having con-
ceived an affection for the Blessed One in con-
sequence of this wonder, said to the Blessed One :
‘ Stay with me. great Samara, I will daily provide
you with food.’

End of the first Wonder. |

16 .

1. And the Blessed One resided in a certain
grove near the hermitage of the (7a/ila UruvelA
Kassapa. And on a beautiful night the four
Mahar^s*, filling the whole grove with light by
the brilliancy of their complexion, went to the place
where the Blessed One was ; having approached
him and respectfully saluted the Blessed One, they
stood in the four directions like great firebrands.

2 . And when that night had elapsed, the 6^a/ila
UruvelA Kassapa went to the place where the
Blessed One was ; having approached him, he said
to the Blessed One : ‘ It is time, gjeat Sama«a, the
meal is ready. Who were they, great Sama»a, who
came, this beautiful night, filling the whole grove
with light by the brilliancy of their complexion, to

According to Vedic tradition the Gautamas, as is well known,
belong to the Ahgirasa tribe.

* See chap. 4. 4.

1 , 17, a. ADMISSION TO THE ORDER OF BIIIKKHUS. 123

the place where you were, and having approached
you and respectfully saluted you, stood in the four
directions like great firebrands ?’

‘ They were the four Mah^lrli^s, Kassapa, who
came to me in order to hear my preaching.’

Then the 6^a/ila Uruveli Kassapa thought : ‘ Truly
the great Sama«a possesses high magical powers
and great faculties, since even the four Mahir^as
come to hear his preaching. He is not, however,
holy like me.’

And the Blessed One ate the food offered by the
G^a/ila Uruveld Kassapa, and continued to stay in
that same grove.

End of the second Wonder.

17 .

1. And on a beautiful night Sakka (6akra or
Indra) the king of the devas, filling the whole grove
with light by the brilliancy of his complexion, went
to the place where the Blessed One was; having
approached him and respectfully saluted the Blessed
One, he stood near him like a great firebrand, sur-
passing in beauty and brilliancy the splendour of the
former appearances.

2. And when that night had elapsed (&c., as in
chap. 16. 2).

End of the third Wonder, If

124

mahAvagga.

I, i8.

18.

And on a beautiful night Brahmi Sahampati (&c,,
as in chap. 1 7).

End of the fourth Wonder. \

19.

1. At that time a great sacrifice which the ( 7 a/ila
UruvelA Kassapa used to celebrate was approaching,
and all the people of Anga and Magadha wished
to go to that sacrifice carrying abundant food, both
hard and soft. Now the GaAla Uruveld Kassapa
thought : ‘ Presently my great sacrifice is approaching,
and all the people of Anga and Magadha will come
and bring with them abundant food, both hard and
soft. If the great Samawa should perform a wonder
before that great assembly, gain and honour would
increase to the great Sama»a, and my gain and
honour would diminish. Well, the great Samara
shall not appear here to-morrow.’

2. Then the Blessed One, understanding by the
power of his mind this reflection which had arisen
in the mind of the Gaf\a UruvelA Kassapa, went
to Uttara Kuru ; having begged alms there, he took
the food (he had received) to the Anotatta lake ’ ;
there he took his meal and rested during the heat
of the day at the same place.

And when the night had elapsed, the 6^a/ila
Uruveli Kassapa went to the place where the Blessed
One was ; having approached him, he said to the

* One of the supposed seven great It^es in the Himavant.

I, 30 , 1. ADMISSION TO THE ORDER OF BHIKKHUS. 12$

Blessed One : ‘ It is time, great Samara, the meal
is ready. Why did you not come yesterday, great
Samara ? We have thought of you : “Why does
the great Sama;;a not come ?” and your portions of
food, both hard and soft, were served up for you.’

3. (Buddha replied) : ‘ Did you not think, Kassapa :
“ Presently my great sacrifice(&c., as above down to :).
Well, the great Samawa shall not appear here to-
morrow ?”

4, ‘ Now I understood, Kassapa, by the power of
my mind this reflection which had arisen in your
mind, and I went to Uttara Kuru ; having begged
alms there, I took the food to the Anotatta lake;
there I took my meal and rested during the heat
of the day at the same place.’

Then the 6^a/ila Uruveld Kassapa thought;
‘Truly the great Sama«a possesses high magical
powers and great faculties, since he is able to under-
stand by the power of his mind the thoughts of other
people. He is not, however, holy like me.’

And the Blessed One ate (&c., as in chap. i6. 2).

End of the fifth Wonder.

20 .

I. At that time the Blessed One had rags_
taken from a dust heap (of which he was going to
make himself a dress). Now the Blessed One
thought: ‘Where shall I wash these rags?’ Then
Sakka the king of the devas, understanding in his
mind the thought which had arisen in the mind of
the Blessed One, dug a tank with his own hand,

126

mahAvagga.

I, 20, 2.

and said to the Blessed One : ‘ Lord, might the
Blessed One wash the rags here.’

And the Blessed One thought : ‘What shall I rub
the rags upon ?’ Then Sakka the king of the devas,
understanding, &c., put there a great stone and said:
‘ Lord, might the Blessed One rub the rags upon
this stone.’

2. And the Blessed One thought : ‘ What shall
I take hold of when going up (from the tank)?’
Then a deity that resided in a Kakudha tree, under-
standing, &c., bent down a branch and said: ‘ Lord,
might the Blessed One take hold of this branch when
going up (from the tank).’

And the Blessed One thought : ‘ What shall I
lay the rags upon (in order to dry them)?’ Then
Sakka the king of the devas, understanding, &c.,
put there a great stone and said : ‘ Lord, might the
Blessed One lay the rags upon this stone.’

3. And when that night had elapsed, the GaJila.
Uruvela Kassapa went to the place where the
Blessed One was ; having approached him, he said
to the Blessed One : ‘It is time, great Sama«a,
the meal is ready. What is this, great Samawa ?
Formerly there was here no tank, and now here
is this tank. Formerly no stone was put here; by
whom has this stone been put here ? Formerly this
Kakudha tree did not bend down its branch, and
now this branch is bent down.’

4. ‘ I had rags, Kassapa, taken from a dust heap;
and I thought, Kassapa : “ Where shall I wash these
rags ?” Then, Kassapa, Sakka the king of the devas,
understanding in his mind the thought which had
arisen in my mind, dug a tank with his hand and
said to me : “ Lord, might the Blessed One wash the

I, 20 , 7. ADMISSION TO THE ORDER OF BHIKKHUS. I27

rags here.” Thus this tank has been dug by the
hand of a non-human being.

‘ And I thought, Kassapa : “ What shall I rub the
rags upon?” Then, Kassapa, Sakka, &c. Thus this
stone has been put here by a non-human being.

5. ‘And I thought, Kassapa : “What shall I take
hold of when going up (from the tank)?” Then,
Kassapa, a deity, &c. Thus this Kakudha tree has
served me as a hold for my. hand.

‘ And I thought, Kassapa : “ Where shall I lay the
rags upon (in order to dry them) ?” Then, Kassapa,
Sakka, &c. Thus this stone has been put here by
a non-human being.’

6. Then the 6^a?ila Uruveli Kassapa thought :
‘ Truly the great Samawa possesses high magical
powers and great faculties, since Sakka the king of
the devas does service to him. He is not, however,
holy like me.’

And the Blessed One ate (&c., as in chap. 16. 2).

7. And when that night had elapsed, the Ga/ila
Uruvelci Kassapa went to the place where the
Blessed One was ; having approached him, he
announced to the Blessed One that it was time,
by saying, ‘ It is time, great Samara, the meal is
ready.’

(Buddha replied) : ‘ Go you, Kassapa ; I will follow
you.’

Having thus sent away the Gafila Uruveli Kas-
sapa, he went to pluck a fruit from the ^mbu tree
after which this continent of G^ambudlpa (the Cambu
Island, or India) is named then arriving before

’ See about this ^ambu tree, which grows in the forest of Hima-
vant, Hardy’s Manual, p. 18 seq.

MAHAVAGGA.

I, 30, 8.

Kassapa he sat down in the room where Kassapa’s
(sacred) fire was kept \

8. Then the G^a/ila Uruvelel Kassapa saw the
Blessed One sitting in the fire room; seeing him
he said to the Blessed One : ‘ By what way have
you come, great Sama«a ? I have departed before
you, and you have arrived before me and are sitting
in the fire room.’

9. ‘ When I had sent you away, Kassapa, I went
to pluck a fruit from the /ambu tree after which
this continent of 6^ambudipa is named ; then I arrived
before you and sat down in the fire room. Here
is the /ambu fruit, Kassapa, it is beautiful, fragrant,
and full of flavour ; you may eat it, if you like.’

‘ Nay, great Sama«a, to you alone it is becoming
to eat it ; eat it yourself.’

And the Ga/ila. Uruveli Kassapa thought : ‘Truly
the g^eat Sama«a possesses high magical powers
and great faculties, since he is able, having sent
me away before him, to go and pluck a fruit from
the ^mbu tree after which this continent of
CPambudlpa is named, and then to arrive before
me and to sit down in the fire room. He is .not,
however, holy like me.’

And the Blessed One ate (&c., as in chap. 16. 2).

10. And when that night had elapsed (&c., as in
§ 7, down to:). Having thus sent away the G^a/ila
UruvelA Kassapa, he went to pluck a fruit from a
mango tree growing near the ^mbu tree after which
this continent of G^ambudlpa is named, &c. He

' Veiy probably it is this story in which a similar legend has
originated that the Ceylonese tell about Mahinda, the converter of
their island ; see Dipavamsa XII, 75.

I, 20, 13. ADMISSION TO THE ORDER OF BHIKKHUS. I 29

went to pluck a fruit from an emblic myrobalan
tree, &c., from a yellow myrobalan tree growing
near the ^mbu tree, &c. He went to the T4va-
tintsa. heaven to pluck a piri^^^attaka (or piri-
_^itaka) flower; then arriving before Kassapa he
sat down in the fire room. Then the Galila Uru-
veld Kassapa saw (&c., as in § 8).

11. ‘ When I had sent you away, Kassapa, I went
to the Tivatiwzsa heaven to pluck a piri>fei^attaka
flower; then I arrived before you and sat down in
the fire room. Here is the piri/^>^^attaka flower,
Kassapa ; it is beautiful and fragrant ; you may take
it, if you like,’

‘ Nay, great Sama«a, to you alone it is becoming
to keep it ; keep it yourself.’

And the 6^a/ila (&c., as in § g). ‘He is not,
however, holy as I am.’

12 , At that time one day the G^a/ilas, who wished
to attend on their sacred fires, could not succeed
in splitting fire- wood. Now these GatWas thought:
‘ Doubtless this is the magical power and the high
faculty of the great Samara that we cannot succeed
in splitting fire-wood.’ Then the Blessed One said
to the 6^a/ila Uruvel^ Kassapa : ‘ Shall the fire-wood
be split, Kassapa ?’

‘ Let it be split, great Sama»a.’

Then in a moment the five hundred pieces of
fire-wood^ were split. And the Gaiila Uruveli

' Bigandet (Life of Gaudama, p. 135) translates this passage
from the Burmese version : ‘ Gaudama split it in a moment, in five
hundred pieces.’ Doubtless the true meaning is, that there were
five hundred pieces of wood, one for each of the five hundred
Ga/ilas over whom was Kassapa chief. In the following two
stories (§§ 13, 14) we have five hundred sacred fires.

K

mahAvagga.

I, 30 , 13.

Kassapa thought: 'Truly the great Sama»a pos-
sesses high magical powers and great faculties, since
even the fire-wood splits itself (at his command). He
is not, however, holy like me.'

1 3. At that time the 6^a/ilas who wished to attend
on their sacred fires, could not succeed in lighting
up the fires (&c., as in the preceding story).

14. At that time the ( 7 a/ilas, after having attended
on their sacred fires, could not succeed in extinguish-
ing the fires (&c., as above).

1 5. At that time in the cold winter nights, in the
time between the ash/akd festivals when s now falls ,
the 6'arilas plunged into the river Neraw^ri, and
emerged again, and repeatedly plunged into the
water and emerged. And the Blessed One created
five hundred vessels with burning fire^; at those
the 6^a/ilas coming out of the river warmed them-
selves. And the 6^a/ilas thought: ‘Doubtless this
is the magical power and the high faculty of the
great v^amawa that these vessels with fire have been
caused to appear here.’ And the 6^a/ila Uruveli
Kassapa thought: ‘Truly the great Sama^^a pos-
sesses high magical powers and great faculties, since
he can create such great vessels with fire. He is
not, however, holy like me.’

16. At that time a great rain fell out of season ;
and a great inundation arose. The place where the
Blessed One lived was covered with water. Then

* The asli/akd festivals, about which accurate details are given
in the Gnhya Shlras, were celebrated about the wane of the moon
of the winter months mirgaxirsha, taisha, and mfigha ; see Weber,
Die vedischen Nachrichten von den Naxatra, II, p. 337, and
H. O.’s note on the .S'^khdyana Grihya, 3, 12, ap. Indische
Studien, XV, p. 145.

* Bttddhaghosa explains manddmukhiyo by aggibhfi^an&ni.

I, 20, 17. ADMISSION TO THE ORDER OF BHIKKHUS. I3I

the Blessed One thought : ‘ What if I were to cause
the water to recede round about, and if I were to
walk up and down in the midst of the water on
a dust-covered spot’ And the Blessed One caused
the water to recede round about, and he walked
up and down in the midst of the water on a dust-
covered spot.

And the G^a/ila Uruveld Kassapa, who was afraid
that the water might have carried away the great
Sama»a, went with a boat together with many
(7a/ilas to the place where the Blessed One lived.
Then the 6 ^a/ila Uruveli Kassapa saw the Blessed
One, who had caused the water to recede round
about, walking up and down in the midst of the
water on a dust-covered spot. Seeing him, he said to
the Blessed One : ‘Are you there, great Samawa.'*’

‘ Here I am, Kassapa,’ replied the Blessed One,
and he rose in the air and stationed himself in the
boat.

And the Carila Uruveli Kassapa thought : ‘Truly
the great Sama«a possesses high magical powers
and great faculties, since the water does not carry
him away. He is not, however, holy like me.’

1 7 . Then the Blessed One thought : ‘ This foolish
man will still for a long time think thus: “ Truly the
great Sama;Mi possesses high magical powers and
great faculties; he is not, however, holy like me.”
What if I were to move the mind of this 6 ^a^ila (in
order to show him my superiority).’

And the Blessed One said to the 6 ^a/ila Uruveld
Kassapa: ‘You are not holy (arahd), Kassapa, nor
have you entered the path of Arahatship, nor do you
walk in such a practice as will lead you to Arahatship,
or to entering the path of Arahatship.’

132

mahAvagga.

1 , 30, l8.

Then the <^a/ila UruvelA Kassapa prostrated
himself, inclining his head to the feet of the Blessed
One, and said to the Blessed One : ' Lord, let me
receive the pabba^^A and upasampadi ordina-
tions from the Blessed One.’

18. (Buddha replied): ‘You, Kassapa, are chief,
leader, foremost, first, and highest of five hundred
Gatihs ; go first and inform them of your intention,
and let them do what they think fit’

Then the 6^a/ila UruvelA Kassapa went to those
Ca/ilas; having gone to them, he said to those
6'adlas : ‘ I wish. Sirs, to lead a religious life under
the direction of the great Samawa; you may do.
Sirs, what you think fit’

(The fradlas replied) : ‘We have conceived. Sir,
an affection for the great Samawa long since ; if you
will lead. Sir, a religious life under the great Samara’s
direction, we will all lead a religious life under the
great Sama«a’s direction.’

1 9. Then the 6^a/ilas flung their hair*, their
braids, their provisions®, and the things for the
agnihotra sacrifice into the river, and went to the
place where the Blessed One was ; having approached
him and prostrated themselves before him, inclining
their heads to the feet of the Blessed One, they
said to the Blessed One : ‘ Lord, let us receive the
pabba^^i and upasampadi ordinations from the
Blessed One.’

Which they had cut oflf in order to receive the pabb^g'^S.
ordination, see chap. 12. 3.

* We are extremely doubtful about the meaning of kharikS^^a,
which Buddhaghosa explains by khSribhara. Perhaps it may
tnean provisions of any description of which each (raAla used to
keep one kh^ri (a certain drv measure).

I, 30 , 34. ADMISSION TO THE ORDER OF BHIKKHUS. 1 33

‘ Come, O Bhikkhus,’ said the Blessed One, ‘ well
taught is the doctrine ; lead a holy life for the sake
of the complete extinction of suffering.'

Thus these venerable persons received the upa-
sampadi ordination.

20. And the G^a^ila Nadi Kassapa saw the hair,
the braids, the provisions, the things for the agni-
hotra sacrifice, which were carried down by the
river; when he saw that, he became afraid that
some misfortune might have befallen his brother.
He sent some 6^a/ilas, saying, ‘ Go and look after
my brother,’ and went himself with his three hundred
6^adlas to the venerable Uruveli Kassapa; having
approached him, he said to the venerable Uruvela
Kassapa : ‘ Now, Kassapa, is this bliss ?’

(Uruvela Kassapa replied): ‘Yes, friend, this is
bliss.’

21. And the Ga/ilas (who had come with Nadi
Kassapa (&c., as in § 19).

22. And the (Ja/ila Gay 4 Kassapa saw (&c., as
in § 20) ; when, he saw that, he became afraid that
some misfortune might have befallen his brothers.
He sent some 6^a/ilas, saying, ‘ Go and look after
my brothers,’ and went himself with his two hundred
G^a/ilas to the venerable UruveH Kassapa (&c., as
above).

23. And the G^a/ilas (who had come with GayS
Kassapa (&c., as in § 19).

24. ' At the command of the Blessed One the
five hundred pieces of fire-wood could not be split
and were split, the fires could not be lit up and

‘ This is evidently a remark added to the text by a reader or
commentator.

^34

mahAvagga.

Ip itf !•

were lit up, could not be extinguished and were ex-
tinguished ; besides he created five hundred vessels
with fire. Thus the number of these miracles
amounts to three thousand five hundred.

21 .

1. And the Blessed One, after having dwelt at
Uruveli as long as he thought fit, went forth to
GaySsfsa *, accompanied by a great number of Bhik-
khus, by one thousand Bhikkhus who all had been
6^arilas before. There near GayS, at GayAsisa, the
Blessed One dwelt together with those thousand
Bhikkhus.

2 . There the Blessed One thus addressed the
Bhikkhus : ‘ Everything, O Bhikkhus, is burning.
And how, O Bhikkhus, is everything burning ?

‘ The eye, O Bhikkhus, is burning ; visible things
are burning; the mental impressions based on the
eye are burning ; the contact of the eye (with visible
things) is burning; the sensation produced by the
contact of the eye (with visible things), be it pleasant,
be it painful, be it neither pleasant nor painful, that
also is burning. With what fire is it burning.? I
declare unto you that it is burning with the fire of
lust, with the fire of anger, w'ith the fire of ignorance;
it is burning with (the anxieties of) birth, decay,

death, grief, lamentation, suffering, dejection, and
despair.

3* The ear is burning, sounds are burning, &c.

. . . . The nose is burning, odours are burning, &c.

r * General Cunningham, Gaydslsa (‘the head of

m V07* mountain of BrahmSyoni near Gayl Arch. Rep.

I, ai, 4. ADMISSION TO THE ORDER OF BHIKKHUS. I35

.... The tongue 4s burning, tastes are burning,

&c The body is burning, objects of contact are

burning, &c. .... The mind is burning, thoughts
are burning, &c *

4. ‘Considering this, O Bhikkhus, a disciple
learned (in the scriptures), walking in the Noble
Path, becomes weary of the eye, weary of visible
things, weary of the mental impressions based on
the eye, weary of the contact of the eye (with visible
things), weary also of the sensation produced by the
contact of the eye (with visible things), be it pleasant,
be it painful, be it neither pleasant nor painful. He

becomes weary of the ear (&c down to ... .

thoughts^). Becoming weary of all that, he divests
himself of passion ; by absence of passion he is made
free; when he is free, he becomes aware that he
is free ; and he realises that re-birth is exhausted ;
that holiness is completed; that duty is fulfilled;
and that there is no further return to this world.’

When this exposition was propounded, the minds
of those thousand Bhikkhus became free from at-
tachment to the world, and were released from the

A

Asavas.

Here ends the sermon on ‘ The Burning.’

End of the third Bhd;/avira concerning the
Wonders done at UruvelS.

* Here the same exposition which has been given relating to
the eye, its objects, the sensations produced by its contact with
objects, &c., is repeated with reference to the ear and the other
organs of sense.

136

mahAvagga.

I, 22, I.

* 22 .

1. And the Blessed One, after having dwelt at
GayAstsa as long as he thought fit, went forth to
RS^gaha, accompanied by a great number of Bhik-
khus, by one thousand Bhikkhus who all had been
Ga/ilas before. And the Blessed One, wandering
from place to place, came to RA^agaha. There the
Blessed One dwelt near Ri^gaha, in the La/// 4 i-
vana pleasure garden, near the sacred shrine of
Supati/Ma\

' 2 ' Then the Magadha king- Seniya BimbisAra
heard : ‘ The Sama«a Gotama Sakyaputta, an ascetic
of the Sakya tribe, has just arrived at RA^gaha and
is staying near Ri^agaha, in the La/Mivana pleasure
garden, near the sacred shrine of Supati// 4 a. Of
Him the blessed Gotama such a glorious fame is
spread abroad : “ Truly he is the blessed, holy, abso-
lute Sambuddha, endowed with knowledge and con-
duct, the most happy One, who understands all
worlds, the highest One, who guides men as a drive r
c urbs a bu llock, the teacher of gods and men, the
blessed Buddha. He makes known the Truth, which
he has understood himself and seen face to face, to
this world system with its devas, its MAras, and its
BrahmAs; to all beings, Samawas and BrAhmawas,

* La//^ivana (Sansk. yash/ivana), literally, ‘ stick forest,’ means a
forest consisting of bambus. General Cunningham has the following
note about this bambu forest: ‘In 1862, when I was at RSjgir
(i.e. RS^gaha), I heard the bambu forest always spoken of as
Jaktiban; ... I fixed the position of the bambu forest to the
south-west of R&jgir on the hill lying between the hot-springs of
Tapoban and old RS^gnha.' Reports, III, 140.

The word we have rendered sacred shrine is ATetiya.

I, 33, 4. ADMISSION TO THE ORDER OF BHIKKHUS. 1 37

gods and men ; he preaches that Truth (Dhamma)
which is glorious in the beginning, glorious in the,
middle, glorious at the end, in the spirit and in the
letter ; he proclaims a consummate, perfect, and pure
life.” It is good to obtain the sight of holy men
(Arahats) like that’

3. And the Magadha king Seniya Bimbisdra, sur-
rounded by twelve myriads of Magadha Brihma;2as
and householders^, went to the place where the
Blessed One was; having approached him and
respectfully saluted the Blessed One, he sat down
near him. And of those twelve myriads of Magadha
Brihmawas and householders some also respectfully
saluted the Blessed One and sat down near him ;
some exchanged greeting with the Blessed One,
having exchanged with him greeting and complaisant
words, they sat down near him; some bent their
clasped hands towards the Blessed One and sat
down near him ; some shouted out the ir name and
their family name before the Blessed One and sat
down near him ; some silently sat down near him.

4. Now those twelve myriads of Magadha Brih-
ma«as and householders thought ; ‘How now is
this? has the great Samawa placed himself under
the spiritual direction of Uruveld Kassapa, or has
Uruveld Kassapa placed himself under the spiritual
direction of the great Samawa ?’

And the Blessed One, who understood in his mind
the reflection which had arisen in the minds of those
twelve myriads of Magadha Brdhma/tas and house-
holders, addressed the venerable Uruveld Kassapa

' The word householder (gahapati) is used here, as is the case
not unfrequently, to denote householders of the third caste. Com-
pare Rh. D.’s note on MahS-sudassana Sutta, p. 26a

138

mahAvagga.

h 22 , S*

in this stanza : ' What knowledge have you gained,
O inhabitant of UruvelA, that has induced you, who
were renowned for your penances ^ to forsake your
sacred fire? I ask you, Kassapa, this question: How
is it that your fire sacrifice has become deserted?*

(Kassapa replied): ‘ It is visible things and sounds,
and also tastes, pleasures and woman that the sacri-
fices speak of because I understood that whatever
Eelongs to existence^ is filth, therefore I took no
more delight in sacrifices and offerings

5. * But if your, mind, Kassapa (said the Blessed
One "), found there no more delight, — either in visible
things, or sounds, or tastes, — what is it in the world
of men or gods in which ® your mind, Kassapa, now
finds delight? Tell me that/

(Kassapa replied): T have seen the state of peace
(i. e. Nirv&ua) in which the basis of existence
(upadhi^) and the obstacles to perfection (ki/^-

^ Literally, ‘who is known as emaciate/ This is said with
reference to the mortifications practised by the GaAlas or Vana-
prasthas. The Mahdbharata (III, 1499) uses the same adjective
(kwa) of a GaAla. Vadano we take for a participle, but it is
possible also to read vada no, * tell us,' which Professor Jacobi
(Zeitschrift der Deutschen Morg. Ges., XXXIV, p. 187) prefers.
Buddhaghosa takes kisakovadano for a compound of kisaka and
ovadana : tdpasana/7i ovadako anusdsako.

* The meaning is; The mantras which are recited at the
sacrifices contain praises of visible things, &c., and the rewards
that are promised to him who offers such sacrifices do not extend
beyond that same sphere.

® The Pali word is upadhi, which is translated by Childers,
‘substratum of being.’ See our note on chap. 5. 2. In this
passage upadhi is said to refer to the Khandhas (Buddhaghosa).

* Here we have the Vedic distinction of greater and smaller
sacrifices (ya^atayas and^uhotayas).

“ The words ‘said the Blessed One’ (ti Bhagavd avo^a) are
probably interpolated from a gloss, as they destroy the metre.

* Doubtless Buddhaghosa is right in explaining ko by kva.

I, 22, 8. ADMISSION TO THE ORDER OF BHIKKHUS, 1 39

have ceased, which is free from attachment
to sensual existence, which cannot pass over into
another state, which cannot be led to another state ;
therefore I took no more delight in sacrifices and
offerings.’

6. Then the venerable U ruveli Kassapa rose from
his seat, adjusted his upper robe so as to cover one
shoulder, prostrated himself, inclining his head to the
feet of the Blessed One, and said to the Blessed One :
‘ My teacher, Lord, is the Blessed One, I am his pupil ;
my teacher, Lord, is the Blessed One, I am his
pupil.’ Then those twelve myriads of Magadha
Brihmawas and householders understood : ‘ Uruvel4
Kassapa has placed himself under the spiritual direc-
tion of the great Sama«a.’

7, 8. And the Blessed One, who understood in

his mind the reflection that had arisen in the minds
of those twelve myriads of Magadha Brihmawas
and householders, preached to them in due course
(&c., as in chap. 7, 5, 6, down to;). Just as a clean

cloth free from black specks properly takes the dye,
thus eleven myriads of those Magadha Brihmawas
and householders with Bimbisdra at their head, while
sitting there, obtained the pure and spotless Eye
of the Truth (that is, the knowledge) : ‘ Whatsoever
is subject to the condition of origination is subject

' Akitl^ana here, and elsewhere, used as an epithet of
Arahatship, refers to the state of mind in which the kiil^anas,
that is, lust, malice, and delusion (so in the Samgiti Sutta of the
Digha Nik^ya), have ceased to be. It is literally ‘being without the
somethings,’ which are the things that stand in the way, the
obstacles to Buddhist perfection; and Buddhaghosa (in the Su-
mahgala Vildsini on the passage in the Samgtti Sutta) explains
accordingly kin^ana by pa/ibodha.

I, aa. 13 -

admission TO THE ORDER OF BHIKKHUS. I4I

And when the night had elapsed, the Magadha king
Seniya Bimbisdra ordered excellent food, both hard
and soft, to be prepared, and had dinner-time an-
nounced to the Blessed One in the words : ‘ It is
time. Lord, the meal is ready/ And in the forenoon
the Blessed One, having put on his under-robes,
took his alms-bowl, and with his ^'ivara on entered
the city of Rd^gaha accompanied by a great number
of Bhikkhus, by one thousand Bhikkhus who all had
been 6'a/ilas before.

13. At that time Sakka the king of the devas,
assuming the appearance of a young Brdhman, walked
in front of the Bhikkhu fraternity with Buddha
at its head, singing the following stanzas : ‘ The
self-controlled One with the self-controlled, with the
former 6^a/ilas, the released One with the released,
the Blessed One, gold-coloured like an ornament
of sihgl gold *, has entered R^agaha.

‘ The emancipated One with the emancipated, with
the former 6^a/ilas, &c.

‘ He who has crossed (the ocean of passion) with
them who have crossed (it), with the former GaJilas,
the released One with the released, the Blessed
One, gold-coloured like an ornament of singf! gold,
has entered Ri^gaha.

‘ He who is possessed of the ten Noble States®

^ Gold colour is one (the 17th) of the thirty-two lakkhana
which form the characteristics of Buddha as a mahSpurisa.

® The ten ariyavdsas. Buddhaghosa says : dasasu ariyavd-'
sesu vutthavdso. The Samgtti Sutta gives the ten Noble States,,
as follows : i. being free from the five bad qualifies (pafi^anga),
2. being possessed of the six good qualities (^^a/anga), 3. being
guarded in the one thing (ekdrakkha), 4. observing four things
(^aturdpassena), 5. rejecting each of the four false truths (pa-
nunna pa^^eka-sa^Aa), 6. seeking right things (samavayasa-

142 MAHAvAGGA. I, 22, 14.

and of the ten Powers*, who understands the ten
Paths of Kamma * and possesses the ten (attributes
of Arahatship) ®, the Blessed One, surrounded by
ten hundred of followers, has entered R^gaha.’

14. The people when they saw Sakka the king
of the devas, said : ‘ This youth indeed is handsome;
this youth indeed has a lovely appearance; this
youth indeed is pleasing. Whose attendant may
this youth be?’

When they talked thus, Sakka the king of the
devas addressed those people in this stanza : ‘He
who is wise, entirely self-controlled, the unrivalled
Buddha, the Arahat, the most happy upon earth :
his attendant am 1.’

15. And the Blessed One went to the palace
of the Magadha king Seniya BimbisAra. Having
gone there, he sat down with the Bhikkhus who
followed him, on seats laid out for them. Then the
Magadha king Seniya BimbisAra with his own hands
served and offered excellent food, both hard and soft,
to the fraternity of Bhikkhus with tlie Buddha at

dhesana), 7. having pure aims (anSvila-sa^T^kappa), 8. being
full of ease (passaddhak^iya-samkhdra), 9. being emancipated
in heart (suvimutta^itta), 10. being emancipated in ideas (suvi-
muttapanna). The Sawjgiti then further enlarges on the meaning
of each of these ten.

* The ten Balas, which are ten kinds of knowledge (»i&«a); see
Bumouf, Lotus, p. 781 and following, and compare G^ataka 1 , 78.

* Buddhaghosa explains dasadhammavidfi by dasakammapalha-
vidfl.

* Buddhaghosa explains dasabhi ^’flpeto by supplying ase-
khehi dhammehi. The first eight of the ten asekhfi dhammfi
consist in the full perfection of sammfidi/Mi (right belief) and the
other categories enumerated in the formula of the Noble Eightfold
Path; the ninth and tenth are the perfection of sammfirafiffa (right
knowledge) and sammfivimutti (right emancipation).

I, 22 , i 8 . ADMISSION TO THE ORDER OF BHIKKHUS. 1 43

its head; and when the Blessed One had finished
his meal and cleansed his bowl and his hands, he
sat down near him.

16. Sitting near him the Magadha king Seniyaj
Bimbis^ra thought : ‘ Where may I find a place for
the Blessed One to live in, not too far from the '
town and not too near, suitable for going and coming, i
easily accessible for all people who want (to see
him), by day not too crowded, at night not exposed '(
to much noise and alarm, clean of the smell of 1
people, hidden from men, well fitted for a retired '

life r

17. And the Magadha king Seniya Bimbis^ra
thought: ‘There is the Ve/uvana^, my pleasure
garden, which is not too far from the town and not

too near, suitable for going and coming (&c.,

down to a retired life). What if I were to make
an offering of the Ve/uvana pleasure garden to
the fraternity of Bhikkhus with the Buddha at its
head?’

1 8. And the Magadha king Seniya BimbisSra ■
took a golden vessel (with water in it, to be poured
over the Buddha’s hand); and dedicated (the garden)
to the Blessed One (by saying), ‘I give up this
Ve/uvana pleasure garden. Lord, to the fraternity
of Bhikkhus with the Buddha at its head.’ The
Blessed One accepted the drAma (park). Then
the Blessed One, after having taught, incited,
animated, and gladdened the Magadha king Seniya

‘ The site of the Ve/uvana (‘bambu forest’) near R%^aha has
not yet been discovered. ‘ It must have occupied about the position
where the ancient basements, marked K. K. K. and G. in Cunning-
ham’s map of R^grtha (pi. xiv. Reports, vol. i), were found by
him’ (Rh. D., ‘Buddhism,’ p. 62 note).

144

mahAvagga.

* 3 »

BimbisAra by religious discourse, rose from his seat
and went away.

And in consequence of this event the Blessed
One, after having delivered a religious discourse,
thus addressed the Bhikkhus : ‘ I allow you, O Bhik-
khus, to receive the donation of an ArAma (a park).’

23.

1. At that time Saw^ya, a paribbA^aka (wan-
dering ascetic), resided at RA^gaha with a great
retinue of paribbd/'akas, with two hundred and
fifty paribba^akas. At that time SAriputta and
MoggallAna (two young Brihma«as) led a religious
life as followers of Saw^ya the paribbA^aka ; these
had given their word to each other: ‘ He who first
attains to the immortal (amata, i.e. Nirvi;?a) shall
tell the other one.’

2. Now one day the venerable Assa^ in the fore-
noon, having put on his under-robes, and having
taken his alms-bowl, and with his iivara on, entered
the city of R^gaha for alms ; his walking, turning
back, regarding, looking, drawing (his arms) back,
and stretching (them) out was decorous ; he turned
his eyes to the ground, and was dignified in deport-
ment. Now the paribb^^ka Siriputta saw the
venerable Assa^, who went through R^gaha for
alms, whose walking, &c., was decorous, who kept his
eyes on the ground, and was dignified in deportment.
Seeing him he thought : ‘ Indeed this person is one
of those Bhikkhus who are the worthy ones ( Arahats)
in the world, or who have entered the path of Arahat-
ship. What if I were to approach this Bhikkhu and

I, 33, 4. ADMISSION TO THE ORDER OF BHIKKHUS. I45

to ask him: “In whose name, friend, have you retired
from the world? Who is your teacher? Whose
doctrine do you profess?’”

3. Now the paribb^faka Sdriputta thought : ‘ This
is not the time to ask this Bhikkhu ; he has entered
the interior yard of a house, walking for alms. What
if I were to follow this Bhikkhu step by step, accord-
ing to the course recognised by those who want
something

And the venerable Assa^, having finished his
alms-pilg^image through Ri^g^ha, went back with
the food he had received. Then the paribb^aka
Sciriputta went to the place where the venerable
Assa^ was ; having approached him, he exchanged
greeting with the venerable Assa^ ; having ex-
changed with him greeting and complaisant words,
he stationed himself at his side ; standing at his side
the paribbd^ka Siriputta said to the venerable
Assa^ : ‘Your countenance, friend, is serene; your
complexion is pure and bright. In whose name,
friend, have you retired from the world? Who is
your teacher? Whose doctrine do you profess®?’

4. (Assji^ replied) : ‘ There is, friend, the great
Sama»a Sakyaputta, an ascetic of the Sakya tribe ;
in His, the Blessed One’s, name have I retired from
the world ; He, the Blessed One, is my teacher ; and
His, the Blessed One’s, doctrine do I profess.’

^ This seems to us the meaning of atthikehi upanwdtaml
maggam. S^riputta followed Ass:^ as suppliants are accustomed)
to follow their proposed benefactor till a convenient season arrives j
for preferring their request.

® The same words as are put in the mouth of Upaka, when
addressing the Buddha, above, chap. 6, § 7 (and see below, § 6).

[13] I*

146

mahAvagga.

‘And what is the doctrine, Sir, which your teacher
holds, and preaches to you?’

‘ I am only a young disciple, friend ; I have but
recently received the ordination ; and I have newly
adopted this doctrine and discipline. I cannot explain
to you the doctrine in detail ; but I will tell you in
short what it means.’

Then the paribb«t^ka SAriputta said to the vener-
able Assj^ : ‘ Well, friend, tell me much or little as
j you like, but be sure to tell me the spirit (of the doc-
I trine) ; I want but the spirit ; why do you make so
i much of the letter ?’

5. Then the venerable Assa^ pronounced to the
paribb^aka SAriputta the following text of the
Dhamma: ‘Of all objects which proceed from a
cause, the TathAgata has explained the cause, and
He has explained their cessation also; this is the
doctrine of the great Sama»a*.’

And the paribbi^ka SAriputta after having heard
this text obtained the pure and spotless Eye of the
Truth (that is, the following knowledge) : ‘ Whatso-
ever is subject to the condition of origination is subject
also to the condition of cessation.’ (And he said) : ‘ If
this alone be the Doctrine (the Dhamma), now you
have reached up to the state where all sorrow ceases
(i. e. NirvA«a), (the state) which has remained unseen

* This famous stanza doubtless alludes to the formula of the
twelve I^id&nas '(see chap. i. 2) which explains the origination
and cessation of what are called here ‘dhamm^ hetuppabhavl’
Hetu and pa^^aya (the word so frequently used in the formula
of the Nid^nas) are nearly synonymous. Colebrooke (Life and
Essays, vol. ii. p. 419) says that the Bauddhas distinguish between
hetu, ‘ proximate cause,’ and pa^^aya (pratyaya), ' concurrent
occasion;’ but, in practical use, this slight difference of meaning, if
it really existed, has but little weight attached to it.

I, 24, 1. ADMISSION TO THE ORDER OF BHIKKHUS. I47

through many myriads of Kappas (world-ages) of the
past.'

6. Then the paribbl^ka Siriputta went to the
place where the paribb^^ka Moggalldna was. And
the paribbc^ka Moggallina saw the paribbcl^ka
Siriputta coming from afar; seeing him he said
to the paribbi^ka Siriputta: ‘Your countenance,
friend, is serene ; your complexion is pure and bright.
Have you then really reached the immortal, friend ?’

‘Yes, friend, I have attained to the immortal.'

‘And how, friend, have you done so

7-9. ‘ I saw, friend, the Bhikkhu Ass^ who went
through Ri^gaha for alms (&c.S down to:); “But
I will tell you in short what it means.”

“‘-Tell me much or little as you like, but be sure
to tell me the spirit (of the doctrine); I want but the
spirit; why do you make so much of the letter.^”

10. ‘ Then, friend, the Bhikkhu Assa^ pronounced
the following Dhamma sentence : “Of all objects
which proceed from a cause, the Tathigata has ex-
plained the cause, and He has explained their cessa-
tion also ; this is the doctrine of the great Sama;Ki.”’

And the paribbS^ka MoggallAna, after having
heard (&c., as in § 5, down to the end).

24 .

I. Then the paribb^raka MoggaMna said to the
paribb^i^ka Siriputta : ‘ Let us go, friend, and join

^ See §§ 2-4. Instead of * The paribbS^ka Sariputta/ of course,
the pronoun of the first person is to be read ; instead of * The
venerable Assajgi* read, ‘The Bhikkhu Assa^i;' and further, the
vocative ‘Friend’ (^vuso), addressed to Moggallana, is inserted
three or four times in the course of this narration.

148

mahAvagga.

I, 34, 3 .

the Blessed One; that He, the Blessed One, may
be our teacher.’

(SAriputta replied) : ‘ It is on our account, friend,
that these two hundred and fifty paribbA^kas live
here (as followers of Sa»^ya), and it is we whom
they regard; let us first inform them also of our
intention ; then they may do what they think fit.’

Then SAriputta and MoggallAna went to the place
where those paribbA^kas were ; having approached
them, they said to the paribb^akas : ‘ Friends, we
are going to join the Blessed One ; that He, the
Blessed One, may be our teacher.’

(The paribbA^kas replied) : ‘ It is on your account.
Sirs, that we live here, and it is you whom we regard ;
if you. Sirs, are about to place yourselves under the
spiritual direction of the great Sama;?a, we all will
place ourselves also under the spiritual direction of
the great Sama«a.’

2 . Then SAriputta and MoggallAna went to the
place where the paribbA^ka Sa^aya was ; having
approached him, they said to the paribbA^ka Sa«-
.^ya: ‘Friend, we are going to join the Blessed One ;
that He, the Blessed One, may be our teacher.’

I (Sa»^ya replied): ‘Nay, friends, do not go; let
us all three share in the leadership of this body (of
disciples).’

And a second time SAriputta and MoggallAna said,
&c. And a third time SAriputta and MoggallAna
said, &c. (And a third time he replied): ‘Nay,
friends, do not go ; let us all three share in the
leadership of this body (of disciples).’

3- But SAriputta and MoggallAna took with them
those two hundred and fifty paribb^kas and went
to the Ve/uvana. But the paribbA^ka Sa»^ya

I, *4, 3. ADMISSION TO THE ORDER OF BHIKKHUS. 1 49

began, on the spot, to vomit hot blood from his (
mouths

And the Blessed One saw them, Siriputta and
Moggalldna, coming from afar ; on seeing them he
thus addressed the Bhikkhus : ‘ There, O Bhikkhus,
two companions arrive, Kolita and Upatissa®; these
will be a pair of (true) pupils, a most distingfuished,
auspicious pair/

When® (Siriputta and Moggallina), who had
reached emancipation in the perfect destruction of
the substrata (of existence), which is a profound
subject accessible only to knowledge, came to the
Ve/uvana, the Teacher, who saw them, foretold about

‘ The later Burmese and Chinese works translated by Bigandet
(Life of Gaudama, p. 152) and by Beal (Romantic Legend,
p. 330) add that he died. This is not in the Fdli text, and the
Sinhalese account given by Hardy (Manual, p. 197) is directly
opposed to that statement.

® Upatissa was called Sariputta after his mother (‘The Son
of Sdri ’) ; Kolita had the family name Moggalldna (compare Beal,
Romantic Legend, pp. 324, 331). The name Upatissa occurs in
Asoka’s well-known edict which has been found at Bairat. The
king there quotes ‘ The Question of Upatissa ’ among the texts,
the study of which he recommends to the brethren and sisters
of the fraternity and to the laymen of either sex. This very
probably refers to the dialogue between Assa^i and Sariputta.

“ As to this repetition of what had been related before, comp,
the note on chap. 15. 6, 7. The words from gambhire do^vn to
upadhisa/nkhaye form a rloka. This is one of several instances
where an older passage in verse, and probably first composed in
some nearly related dialect, appears in the Pdli Pi/akas in prose.
It is this which explains the extraordinary grammatical construction
of the first seven words. Compare Rh. D.’s note on the similar
instance at Mahd-parinibbSna Sutta V, 62. The exclamation put
into the mouth of Sfiriputta, and afterwards of Moggallfina (above,
chap. 23, §§ 5, 10), ought also, perhaps, to be included in the
same category.

T50 MAHAvAGGA. 1, 34»4-

them : ‘ These two companions who are now coming —
Kolita and Upatissa — these will be a pair of (true)
pupils, a most distinguished, auspicious pair.’

4. Then SAriputta and MoggallAna went to the
place where the Blessed One was; having approached
him, they prostrated themselves, inclining their heads
to the feet of the Blessed One, and said to the
Blessed One : ‘ Lord, let us receive the pabba^^A
and upasampadA ordinations from the Blessed
One.’

‘ Come, O Bhikkhus,’ said the Blessed One, ‘ well
taught is the doctrine ; lead a holy life for the sake
of the complete extinction of suffering.’ Thus these
venerable persons received the upasampadi ordi-
nation.

5 . At that time many distinguished young Maga-
^ dha noblemen led a religious life under the direction

of the Blessed One. The people were annoyed,
murmured, and became angry (saying), ‘The Sa-
mara Gotama causes fathers to beget- no sons ; the
■ Samara Gotama causes wives to become widows ;
•the Samara Gotama causes families to become
; extinct. Now he has ordained one thousand 6^a/ilas,
and he has ordained these two hundred and fifty
paribb^^kas who were followers of Saw^ya; and
these many distinguished young Magadha noblemen
are now leading a religious life under the direction
of the-Sama^^a Gotama.’ And moreover, when they
saw the Bhikkhus, they reviled them in the following
stanza : ‘ The great Sama»a has come to Giribba^
(i. e. Rd^gaha) of the Magadha people, leading with
him all the followers of Sa«^ya ; who will be the
; next to be led by him ?’

6. Some Bhikkhus heard those people that were

1,25,1. ADMISSION TO THE ORDER OF BHIKKHUS. I 5 I

annoyed, murmured, and had become angry ; these
Bhikkhus told this thing to the Blessed One. (He
replied): ‘This noise, O Bhikkhus, will not last
long ; it will last only seven days ; after seven days
it will be over. And if they revile you, O Bhikkhus,
in this stanza : “ The great Samara has come, &c.,”
you should reply to the revilers in the following
stanza : “ It is by means of the true doctrine that the
great heroes, the Tathigatas, lead men. Who will
murmur at the wise, who lead men by the power of
the Truth

7. At that time the people, when seeing the Bhik-
khus, reviled them in the following stanza: ‘The
great Samawa has come, &c.’

Then the Bhikkhus replied to the revilers in the
following stanza : ‘ It is by means of the true doc-
trine, &c.’

Then the people understood : ‘ It is by truth, and
not by wrong, that the Sakyaputtiya Sama/^as lead
men;’ and thus that noise lasted only seven days,
and after seven days it was over.

Here ends the narration of the ordination of
Sdriputta and Moggalldna.

End of the fourth Bh^;;avira.

25 K

I. At that time some Bhikkhus, as they had no
(preceptors) and received no exhorta-

* The chief object of the' first book being to discuss the regu-
lations for the upasampadfi ordination, at which the preceptor

152 MAHAvaGGA. I, 2S.2.

tion and instruction, went on their rounds for alms
wearing improper under and upper garments (or,
wearing their under and upper garments improperly),
and in an improper attire. While people were
eating, they held out their alms-bowls in which were
leavings of food \ over the hard food (which the
people were eating), and held them out over soft
food, and held them out over savoury food, and
held them out over drinks. They asked for soup
and boiled rice themselves, and ate it ; in the dining
halls they made a great and loud noise.

2. The people were annoyed, murmured, and
became angry (saying), ‘ How can the Sakyaputtiya
Samaras go on their rounds for alms wearing im-
proper under and upper garments, .... (&c., as in
§ I, down to drinks)? How can they make so great
and loud a noise in the dining halls ? They behave
like BrAhma»as at the dinners given to them.’

3. Some Bhikkhus heard those people that were
annoyed, murmured, and had become angry. Those
Bhikkhus who were moderate, frugal, modest, con-

(upaggkiya) of the candidate has a principal part, the text now
goes on to relate the institution of the ofi&ce and upa^^Adyas,
and to explain the mutual duties incumbent on upa^^^dyas and
pupils (sa ddhiv ihdrikas) .

^ Buddbagbbsa has the following note on utti/Ziapatta: ‘utti///5a-
pattan ti pim/iya ^aranakapattam, tasmi/n hi manussd ukAUiAasa^
»ino (this word is spelt so in the Paris MS. as well as in the Berlin
MS. of the Samanta F^sidik^ ; the usual spelling is uJkiAi//Aa),
tasmS utti/ 4 iapattan ti vuttaxn. athav^ u//iahitvd pattam upanS-
menttti evam ettha attho daZ/iabbo.' We take the word, as the
former of Buddhaghosa's two explanations implies, for a com-
position of ukAAi/iAa. For the conversion of palatal consonants
into dentals, see E. Kuhn, BeitrSlge zur Fali-Grammatik, p. 36,
and on the use of the word compare Trenckner’s Milinda Fa»ho,
pp. 213, 214.

I, ag, 6. ADMISSION TO THE ORDER OF BHIKKHUS. 1 53

scientious, anxious for training, were annoyed, mur-
mured, and became angry: ‘ How can the Bhikkhus
go on their rounds for alms wearing improper under
and upper garments, &c. ? How can they make so
great and loud a noise in the dining halls ? ’

4. These Bhikkhus told this thing to the Blessed
One.

In consequence of that and on this occasion the
Blessed One, having ordered the fraternity of Bhik-
khus to assemble, questioned the Bhikkhus: ‘ Is it
true, O Bhikkhus, that some Bhikkhus go on their

rounds (&c., down to), that they make a great

and loud noise in the dining halls ?’

‘ It is true. Lord.’

5. Then the Blessed Buddha rebuked those Bhik-
khus: ‘It is improper, O Bhikkhus, what these
foolish persons are doing, it is unbecoming, indecent,
unworthy of Samaras, unallowable, and to be avoided.
How can these foolish persons, O Bhikkhus, go on
their rounds, &c. ? How can they make so great and
loud a noise in the dining halls? This will not
do, O Bhikkhus, for converting the unconverted, and
for augmenting the number of the converted; but
it will result, O Bhikkhus, in the unconverted being
repulsed (from the faith), and in many of the con-
verted being estranged.’

6. And the Blessed One rebuked those Bhikkhus
in many ways, spoke against unfrugality, ill-nature,
immoderation, insatiableness, delighting in society,
and indolence; spoke in many ways in praise of
frugality, good-nature, of the moderate, contented,
who have eradicated (sin), who have shaken off (sin),
of the gracious, of the reverent, and of the energetic.
And having delivered before the Bhikkhus a, religious

J54

MAHAVAGGA.

36. 7*

discourse in accordance to, and in conformity with
these subjects, he thus addressed the Bhikkhus :

‘ I prescribe, O Bhikkhus, (that young Bhikkhus
choose) an upa^^Aiya (or preceptor).

‘The upa^^^iya, O Bhikkhus, ought to con-
sider the saddhivihirika (i.e. pupil) as a son;
the saddhivihArika ought to consider the upa^-
ghtydi as a father. Thus these two, united by
mutual reverence, confidence, and communion of
life, will progress, advance, and reach a high stage
in this doctrine and discipline.

7. ‘And let them choose, O Bhikkhus, an upa^-
gkkydi in this way : Let him (who is going to choose
an upa^.^dya) adjust his upper robe so as to cover
one shoulder, salute the feet (of the intended up^-
ghkyd), sit down squatting, raise his joined hands,
and say: “Venerable Sir, be my upa^^^dya; vene-
rable Sir, be my upa^^^iya; venerable Sir, be
my upa^^^iya.” (If the other answer) : “ Well,” or,
“ Certainly,” or, “ Good,” or, “ All right,” or, “ Carry
on (your work) with friendliness (towards me),” or
should he express this by gesture (lit. by his body),
or by word, or by gesture and word, then the upa^-
gkkyz. has been chosen. If he does not express
this by gesture, nor by word, nor by gesture and
word, the upa^yJiya has not been chosen.

8. ‘ The saddhivihdrika, O Bhikkhus, ought to
observe a strict conduct towards his upa^^-^iya.
And these are the rules for his conduct : Let him
arise betimes, and having taken off his shoes ^ and
adjusted his upper robe so as to cover one shoulder,

^ If he had put on shoes for having a walk early in the morning
or for keeping his feet clean (Buddhaghosa).

I, as, 10. ADMISSION TO THE ORDER OF BHIKKHUS. 155

let him give (to the upa^^iya) the teeth-cleanser
and water to rinse his mouth with. Then let him
prepare a seat (for the upa^Mya). If there is rice-
milk, let him rinse the jug and offer the rice-milk
(to the upi^Mya). When he has drunk it, let him
give water (to the upagfi 44 ya), take the jug, hold
it down, rinse it properly without (damaging it by)
rubbing, and put it away. When the upa^^^iya
has risen, let him take away the seat. If the place
is dirty, let him sweep the place.

9. Tf the upa^^^dya wishes to go into the
village, let (the saddhivihdrika) give (to the upa^-
^^iya) his under garment, take (from him) his
second under garment (i.e. his house-dress?), give
him his girdle, lay the two upper garments upon
each other ^ and give them (to the upa^^ya), rinse
the alms-bowl, and give it him with some water
in it. If the upa^^^dya wishes (to go with) an
attendant Bhikkhu, let him put on his under garment
so as to conceal the three circles (viz. the navel and
the two knees) and as to cover the body all around ;
then let him put on his girdle, lay the two upper
gfarments upon each other and put them on, tie the
knots, take his alms-bowl, after having it rinsed, and
follow the upa^^^dya as his attendant. Let him
not go too far (from the upaj^.^dya) nor too near.
Let him take (from the upa^^Mya) what has been
put into his alms-bowl *.

10. ‘When the upa^^^dya speaks, let (the sad-

* Buddhaghosa explains sagunam katvi by ekato katvi.

* According to Buddhaghosa the meaning of these words is:
If the alms-bowl of the upa^^^dya has become too heavy or hot
by the food put into it, the saddhivihdrika ought to take it and
give his own bowl to the upa^^Adya.

mahAvagga.

®s>

156

dhivihdrika) not interrupt him. If the
ghky^ is in danger of committing an offence by the
words he says, let (the saddhivihirika) keep him
back. When (the upa^Mya) turns back (from his
alms-pilgrimage), let the saddhivihArika go back
(to the VihAra) before (the up^^Mya), prepare a seat,
get water for the washing of his feet, a foot-stool;
and a towel then let him go to meet the upa^-
ghkyz., take his bowl and his robe, give him his
second under gjarment (his house-dress ?), and take
his under garment. If the robe (of the upa^,^aya)
is wet with perspiration, let him dry it a while in
a hot place, but let him not leave the robe in a hot
place. Let him fold up the robe. When folding
up the robe, let him fold it up so as to leave (every
day) four inches (more than the day before) hanging
over at the corners, in order that no fold may arise
in the middle of it^. Let him .... the girdle ®. If
there is any food received in the alms-bowl, and the
upa^^^iya desires to eat it, let him give water (to
the upa^^^ Aya) and then offer him the food.

II. ‘ Let him offer to the upa^^/^Aya (water) to
drink. When the upa^^^Aya has finished his
meal, let (the saddhivihArika) give him water, take
his alms-bowl, hold it down, rinse it properly without
(damaging it by) rubbing, pour the water out, and
dry (the bowl) a while in some hot place, but let

* See Chap. 6 . 1 1, with the note.

‘ I. e. in order that the folds might not fall upon the same place
every day, and the robe might be worn out at that place (Buddha-
gbosa).

“ The P&li text is : ‘ Obhoge kiyabandhanam kdtabbam.’ Bud-
dhaghosa’s note runs as follows: ‘ K^yabandhanav; samgharitvd
(read saniharitvd) ^ivarabhoge pakkhipitvil /iiapetabbam.’ We do not
venture to offer any conjectures as to the meaning of this passage.

I, 35, 13. ADMISSION TO THE ORDER OF BHIKKHUS. I57

him not leave the bowl in the hot place. Let him
put away the alms-bowl and the robe. When he
puts away the alms-bowl, let him do so holding
the alms-bowl with one hand, and first feeling with
the other hand under the bed or under the chair
(where he is going to put the bowl), and let him
not put the bowl on the bare ground. When he
hangs up the robe, let him take the robe with one
hand and stroke with the other hand along the
bambu peg or rope on which the robe is to be
hung up, and hang up the robe so that the border
is turned away from him (and turned to the wall),
and the fold is turned towards him. When the
upa/^^^ya has risen, let him take away the seat
and put away the water for the washing of the feet,
the foot-stool, and the towel \ If the place is dirty,
let him sweep the place.

12. ‘ If the upa^^^iya wishes to bathe, let him
prepare a bath. If he wants cold water, let him
get cold water ; if he wants hot water, let him get
hot water. If the upa^^^ 4 ya wishes to go to the
^ntighara^, let (the saddhiviharika) knead the
powHer^ moisten the clay *, take up the chair
belonging to the ^antighara, follow the upa^-
gh^ya from behind, give him the chair, take his

* See Chap. 6. ii, with the note.

’ A ^antSghara(Sansk. yantragnlia, according to Dr.Bflhler’s
conjecture) is a bathing-place for hot silting baths. See A'uIIavagga
V, 14, 3 ; VIII, 8; Kuhn’s Zeitschrift filr vergleichende Sprachf.,
XXV, 335.

* It is first moistened by water and then kneaded into lumps
(Buddhaghosa), — no doubt to be rubbed over the person who is
bathing.

* The face was besmeared with moistened clay in order to pro-
tect it from the heat. See iTuIlavagga V, 14, 3.

158 mahAvagga. I, as, 13.

robe and put it aside, give him the powder and the
clay. If he is able*, let him also enter the /anti-
ghara. When he is going to enter the ^antA-
ghara, let him besmear his face with clay, cover
himself from before and behind, and thus enter the
^antAghara.

1 3. ‘ Let him not sit down so as to encroach on
senior Bhikkhus, nor let him dislodge junior Bhik-
khus from their seats. Let him wait upon the
upa^^^Aya in the^antAghara. When he is going
to leave the^antAghara, let him take up the chair
belonging to the ^antAghara, cover himself from
before and behind, and thus leave the /“antAghara.
Let him wait upon the upa^^^Aya also in the water.
When he has bathed, let (the saddhivihArika) go out
of the water first, let him dry his own body, put on
his dress, then wipe off the water from his upa/-
^AAya’s body, give him his under garment and his
upper garment, take the chair belonging to the^an-
tAghara, go before the upa/^ 4 Aya, prepare a seat
for him, and get water for the washing of his feet, a
foot-stool, and a towel*. Let him offer to the upa^-
ghty2i (water) to drink.

f 14. ‘If (the upa^AAya) likes being called upon to
Ideliver a discourse, let him call upon (the upa^/JAya
Ito do so). If (the upajjfMya) likes questions being
put to him, let him put questions (to the upa^AAya).

‘ If the VihAra, in which the upa^^^Aya dwells,
is dirty, let him clean that VihAra, if he is able to do
so. When cleaning the VihAra, let him first take
away the alms-bowl and the robe (of the upa^/JAya)

* I. e. if he is not prevented by indisposition (Buddhaghosa).

* See Chap. 6. 11, with the note.

I, as, ADMISSION TO THE ORDER OF BHIKKHUS. 1 59

and lay them aside. Let him take away the mat and
the sheet ^ and lay them aside. Let him take away
the mattress and the pillow and lay them aside.

1 5. ' Let him turn down the bed, take it away
properly without rubbing it (against the floor) and
without knocking it against door or doorpost, and
put it aside. Let him turn down the chair, take it
away properly without rubbing it (against the floor)
and without knocking it against door or doorpost,
and put it aside. Let him take away the supporters
of the bed® and put them aside. Let him take away !
the spitting-box and put it aside. Let him take away |
the board to recline on® and put it aside. Let him '
take away the carpet, after having noticed how it
was spread out, and put it aside. If there are cob-
webs in the Vihira, let him remove them as soon as
he sees them. Let him wipe off the casements* and
the comers of the room. If a wall which is coated
with red chalk, is dirty, let him moisten the mop,
wring it out, and scour the wall. If the floor is
coated black and is dirty, let him moisten the mop,
wring it out, and scour the floor. If the floor is not
blacked, let him sprinkle it with water and scrub it in
order that the Vihdra may not become dusty. Let
him heap up the sweepings and cast them aside.

16. ‘Let him bask the carpet in the sunshine,
clean it, dust it by beating, take it back, and spread
it out as it was spread before. Let him put the
supporters of the bed in the sunshine, wipe them.

‘ See VIII, 16, 3. 4.

* The bedstead rested on movable supporters. See iTullavagga
VI, 2, 5.

* See Aullavagga VI, 20, 2.

* See the Samanta P^dM, ap. Minayeff, Pr&dmoksha, p. 87.

i6o mahAvagga. 1, as , 17.

take them back, and put them in their place. Let
him put the bed in the sunshine, clean it, dust it
by beating, turn it down, take it back properly with-
out rubbing it (against the floor) and without knock-
ing it against door and doorpost, and put it in its
place. Let him put the chair in the sunshine, &c.^
Let him put mattress and pillow in the sunshine,
clean them, dust them by beating, take them back,
and lay them out as they were laid out before. Let
him put the mat and sheet in the sunshine, &c.*
Let him put the spittoon in the sunshine, wipe it,
take it back, and put it in its place. Let him put
in the sunshine the board to recline on, &c,^

1 7- ‘ Let him put away the alms-bowl and the robe.
When he puts them away (&c., as in J 1 1, down to :),
and hang up the robe so that the border is turned
away from him and the fold is turned towards him.

18. ‘If dusty winds blow from the East, let him
shut the windows on the East. If dusty winds blow
from the West, let him shut the windows on the
West, &c.^ If it is cold weather, let him open the
windows by day and shut them at night. If it is hot
weather, let him shut the windows by day and open
them at night.

19. ‘If the cell is dirty, let him sweep the cell.
If the store-room is dirty, let him sweep the store-
room. If the refectory, &c. If the fire room, &c.
If the privy is dirty, let him sweep the privy. If
there is no drinkable water, let him provide drinkable
water. If there is no food, let him provide food.
If there is no water in the waterpot for rinsing the
mouth with, let him pour water into the pot.

* As in the preceding clause.

* The same for North and South.

I, ag, ax. ADMISSION TO THE ORDER OF BHIKKHUS. l6l

20. ‘If discontent has arisen within the upa^-
ghty^s heart, let the saddhivihdrika appease
him^, or cause him to be appeased (by another), or
compose him by religious conversation. If indecision
has arisen in the upa^^^Aya’s mind, let the saddhi-
vihdrika dispel it, or cause it to be dispelled, or
compose him by religious conversation. If the
upa^^^iya takes to a false doctrine, let the sad-
dhivihSrika discuss it, or cause another to discuss
it, or compose (the upa^^^iya) by religious con-
versation.

21. ‘If the Vi^Bigghtya. is guilty of a grave offence,
and ought to be sentenced to parivisa discipline®,
let the saddhivihirika take care that the Sawgha
sentence the upa^^^dya to pari visa discipline.
If the upa^^^iya ought to be sentenced to recom-
mence his penal discipline, let the saddhivihirika
take care that the Sax»gha may order the upa^-
gh^yz. to recommence his penal discipline. If the
minatta discipline ought to be imposed on the
upa^^/ 4 iya, let the saddhivihirika take care
that the Sa«?gha impose the minatta discipline
on the upa^^^iya. If the upa^^^iya is to be
rehabilitated (when his penal discipline has been
duly undergone), let the saddhivihdrika take care
that the Sa;;;gha rehabilitate the

* Literally, make it (the discontentedness) clear. Baddhaghosa
reads vhpakilsetabbo vdpakdsdpetabbo, which he explains
thus : ' vhpakSsetabbo means, “ Let (the saddhivihdrika) lead him
to another place;” v^pakdsdpetabbo means,“Lethim tell another
Bhikkhu to take the Thera and go with him elsewhere.” ’

* The second and third books of the iTullavagga contain a de-
tailed explanation of parivdsa and of the other technical terms
contained in this paragraph.

[13] M

I62

mahAvagga.

I, 36 , 22.

22. ‘If the Sawgha wishes to proceed against
the upa^^^Aya by the ta/^aniyakamma^ or
the nissaya, or the pabbA^aniyakamma, or the
pa/isAra»iyakamma, or the ukkhepaniyakam-
ma, let the saddhivihirika do what he can in
order that the Sa»/gha may not proceed against the
upa^Mya or may mitigate the proceeding. Or if
the Sa»«gha has instituted a proceeding against
him, the ta,|^niyakamma, &c., or the ukkhepaniya-
kamma, let the saddhivihArika do what he can
in order that the upa^^^Aya may behave himself
properly, live modestly, and aspire to get clear of
his penance, and that the Sawgha may revoke its
sentence.

23. ‘If the robe of the upa^^^Aya must be
washed, let the saddhivihArika wash it or take
care that the upa^^^Aya’s robe is washed. If a
robe must be made for the upa^^^Aya, let the
saddhivihArika make it or take care that the

robe is made. If dye must be boiled
for the upa/-^^Aya, &c. If the robe of the upa^-
gktyzi must be dyed, &c. When he dyes the robe,
let him dye it properly and turn it whenever required,
and let him not go away before the dye has ceased
to drop.

24. ‘ Let him not give his alms-bowl to any one
without the permission of his upa^i^Aya. Let him
not accept an alms-bowl from any one else without
the permission of his w^zgghtydL. Let him not give
his robe to any one else, &c. Let him not accept
a robe from any one else ; let him not give articles

‘ The discussion about the ta^^aniyakamtna and the other
disciplinary proceedings alluded to in this paragraph is given in
the first book of the iSTullavagga.

I, 26, I. ADMISSION TO THE ORDER OF BHIKKHUS. 1 63

(required for a Bhikkhu) to any one else ; let him
not receive (such) articles from any one else ; let him
not shave the hair of any one else ; let him not have
his hair shaven by any one else ; let him not wait
upon any one else ; let him not have done service by
any one else ; let him not execute commissions for
any one else ; let him not have commissions executed
by any one else ; let him not go with any one else as
his attendant; let him not take any one else with
him as his attendant; let him not carry any one’s
food received by him in alms (to the VihAra); let
him not have the food received by himself in alms
carried by any one (to the Vihira) without the per-
mission of his upa^^^iya. Let him not enter the
village, or go to a cemetery, or go abroad on journeys
without the permission of his upa^Mya. If his
upa.£'£'AAya. is sick, let him nurse him as long as his
life lasts, and wait until he has recovered.’

End of the duties towards an upajgT^&ya.

26 .

I. ‘The upa^^^dya, O Bhikkhus, ought to ob-
serve a strict conduct towards his saddhivihdrika.
And these are the rules for his conduct: Let the
upa^^>4^lya, O Bhikkhus, afford (spiritual) help and
furtherance to the saddhivihSrika by teaching, by
putting questions to him, by exhortation, by instruc-
tion. If the upa^f/'^dya has an alms-bowl and the
saddhivih4rika has not, let the upa^^i4Aya give
the alms-bowl to the saddhivih^irika or take care

M 2

MAHAVAGGA.

164

If 3^f

tliat the saddhivih^lrika gets an alms-bowl. If the
upa^^y^dya has a robe and the saddhivih&rika
has not, let the upa^^^iya give the robe, &c. If
the upa^^^iya has the articles (required for a
Bhikkhu) and the saddhivihirika has not, &c.

2-6. ‘If the saddhivihirika is sick, let (the
upj^Mya) arise betimes and give him the teeth-
cleanser and water to rinse his mouth with. Then let
him prepare a seat (for the saddhivihirika). If there
is rice-milk (&c., as in chap. 25. 8, 9, down to :), and
give it him with some water in it. When he expects :
“ Now he must be about to return,” let him prepare
a seat, get water for the washing of his feet (&c.,
as in chap. 25. 10-13 ^ down to :). Let him offer to
the saddhivihirika water to drink.

7-10. ‘If the Vihdra in which the saddhivihi-
rika dwells, is dirty (&c., as in chap. 25. 14-22).

II. ‘If the robe of the saddhivihdrika must
be washed, let the upa^^^dya tell the saddhi-
vihirika: “Thus must you wash your robe,” or
let him take care that the saddhivihirika’s robe
is washed. If a robe must be made for the saddhi-
vihdrika, let the upa^^^dya tell the saddhivi-
hirika: “Thus must you make the robe,” or let
him take care that the saddhivihdrika’s robe is
made. If dye must be boiled for the saddhivi-
hdrika, &c. If the robe of the saddhivihirika
must be dyed, let the upa^^^dya tell, &c. When
he dyes the robe, let him dye it properly, and turn
it whenever required, and let him not go away before
the dye has ceased to drop. If the saddhivihirika

^ Instead of, ‘ Follow the wpzggh&ya. from behind’ (chap. 25. 12),
read here, ‘ Go (with the saddhiviharika).’

I, a7, I. ADMISSION TO THE ORDER OF BHIKKHUS. 165

is sick, let him nurse him as long as his life lasts,
and wait until he has recovered.’

End of the duties towards a saddhivihdrika.

27 .

I. At that time the saddhivihdrikas did not
observe a proper conduct towards their upa^^>5 ayas.
The moderate Bhikkhus ' were annoyed, murmured,
and became angry, saying, ‘ How can the saddhi-
vihdrikas not observe a proper conduct towards
their upa//^dyas?’ These Bhikkhus told this
thing to the Blessed One.

(Then Buddha questioned the Bhikkhus) : ‘ Is it
true, O Bhikkhus, that the saddhivihirikas do
not observe a proper conduct towards their upa/-
^^dyas ?’

(They replied) : ‘ It is true, Lord.’

Then the blessed Buddha rebuked those Bhik-
khus: ‘How can the saddhivihdrikas, O Bhik-
khus, not observe a proper conduct tow'ards their
upa/^^dyas ?’ Having rebuked them and deli-
vered a religious discourse, he thus addressed the
Bhikkhus*: ‘Let a saddhivihdrika, O Bhikkhus,
not forbear to observe a proper conduct towards

* We believe that the words ‘The moderate Bhikkhus’ are in-
tended here and throughout the whole work as an abbreviation of
the fuller phrase, ‘Those Bhikkhus who were moderate, frugal,
modest, conscientious, anxious for training ’ (chap. 25. 3).

* All this is an abbreviation of what has been given at full
length in chap. 25. 4-6.

mahAvagga.

I, 37, 3.

166

his upa//^Aya. He who does not observe it, is
guilty of a dukka/a^ offence.’

2. Notwithstanding this, they did not observe
a proper conduct. They told this thing to the
Blessed One.

‘ I ordain, 0 Bhikkhus, to turn away (a saddhi-
vihArika) who does not observe a proper conduct.
And he ought, O Bhikkhus, to be turned away in
this way : (The upa^^^Aya is to say) : “ I turn you
away,” or, “ Do not come back hither,” or, “ Take
away your alms-bowl and robe,” or, “I am not to
be attended by you any more.” Whether he ex-
press this by gesture, or by word, or by gesture
and word, the saddhivihSrika has then been
turned away. If he does not express this by gesture,
nor by word, nor by gesture and word, the saddhi-
vihArika has not been turned away.’

3. At that time saddhivihArikas who had been
turned away did not beg pardon (of their upa^^^A-
yas). They told this thing to the Blessed One.

‘ I prescribe, O Bhikkhus, that (a saddhivi-
hctrika who has been turned away) should beg
pardon (of his upa^^^iya).’

They did not beg pardon notwithstanding. They
told, &c.

‘I prescribe, O Bhikkhus, that (a saddhiviha-
rika) who has been turned away shall not forbear
to beg pardon (of his upa^^^Aya). If he does not
beg pardon, it is a dukka/a offence.’

f ‘ Those slight offences which were not embodied in the Pdti-
i mokkha are called dukka/a offences. They range, as to their
; gravity, with the pl^ittiya offences of the PStimokkha. For him
who had committed a dukka/a offence, no further penance was
required than a simple confession of his fault. See iPullavagga

I, 37, 7. ADMISSION TO THE ORDER OF BHIKKHUS. 167

4. At that time upa/-^ 44 yas, when the saddhi-
vihdrikas begged their pardon, would not forgive
them. They told, &c.

‘ I prescribe, O Bhikkhus, forgiving.’

Notwithstanding this they did not forgive. The
saddhivihirikas went away, or returned to the
world, or went over to other schools. They told, &c.

‘ Let him who is asked for his pardon, not with-
hold it. He who does not forgive, is guilty of a
dukka/a offence.’

5. At that time upa^^ A&yas turned away (a sad-
dhivihirika) who observed a proper conduct, and
did not turn away one who did not observe it. They
told, &c.

‘ Let no one, O Bhikkhus, who observes a proper
conduct, be turned away. He who turns him away
is guilty of a dukka/a offence. And let no one,
O Bhikkhus, who does not observe a proper conduct,
not be turned away. (An upa^^^iya) who does
not turn him away is guilty of a dukka^a offence.

6. ‘In five cases, O Bhikkhus, a saddhivihirika
ought to be turned away: when he does not feel
gp'eat affection for his upa^^^dya, nor great incli-
nation (towards him), nor much shame, nor great
reverence, nor g^eat devotion (towards the upa^-
ghtyd). In these five cases, O Bhikkhus, a sad-
dhivihdrika ought to be turned away.

‘ In five cases, O Bhikkhus, a saddhivihdrika
ought not to be turned away : when he feels great
affection for his upa^^^iya, great inclination (to-
wards him), &c. In these five cases, O Bhikkhus,
a saddhivihdrika ought not to be turned away.

7. ‘ In five cases, O Bhikkhus, it is right to turn
away a saddhivihdrika : when he does not feel

i68

mahAvagga.

I, 37 , 8 .

great affection, &c. In these five cases, O Bhikkhus,
it is right to turn away a saddhivihArika.

‘ In five cases, O Bhikkhus, it is not right, &c.

8. ‘In five cases, O Bhikkhus, an upa_^^^Aya
who does not turn away a saddhivihirika, tres-
passes (against the law), and an upa^^^Aya who
turns him away, does not trespass : when he does
not feel great affection, &c. In these five cases, &c.

‘ In five cases, O Bhikkhus, an upa^^^Aya who
turns away a saddhivihArika, trespasses (against
the law), and an upa^^^Aya who does not turn him
away, does not trespass, &c.’

28 .

1. At that time a certain BrAhmawa came to the
Bhikkhus and asked them for the pabba^^A ordi-
nation. The Bhikkhus were not willing to ordain
him. As he did not obtain the pabba^^A ordina-
tion from the Bhikkhus, he became emaciated, lean,
discoloured, more and more livid, and the veins be-
came visible all over his body.

And the Blessed One saw this BrAhmawa, who
had become emaciated, &c. When he had seen him,
he said to the Bhikkhus : ‘ How is it, O Bhikkhus,
that this BrAhma«a has become emaciated, &c. ?’

‘ This BrAhma«a, Lord, came to the Bhikkhus and
asked them for the pabba,^^ ordination (&c., as
above, down to :), and the veins became visible all
over his body.’

2 . Then the Blessed One said to the Bhikkhus :

‘ Now, O Bhikkhus, who remembers anything about
this BrAhma»a ?’

I, 28, 4. ADMISSION TO THE ORDER OF BHIKKHUS. 1 69

When he had spoken thus, the venerable Sdriputta
said to the Blessed One : ‘ I remember something,
Lord, about this Brihma^a.’

‘ And what is it you remember, S^riputta, about
this Brihma^a ? ’

‘This Brihma«a, Lord, one day, when I went
through R^^gaha for alms, ordered a spoonful of
food to be given to me ; this is what I remember.
Lord, about this Brihma»a.’

3. ‘ Good, good, Sariputta ; pious men, Siriputta,
are grateful and remember what has been done to
them. Therefore, Sdriputta, confer you the pab-
ba^^i and upasampadd ordinations on that
Brahma«a.’

‘Lord, how shall I confer the pabba^^d and
upasampadd ordinations on this Brdhmawa?’

Then the Blessed One on this occasion, after
having delivered a religious discourse, thus addressed
the Bhikkhus : ‘ I abolish, O Bhikkhus, from this
day the upasampadi ordination by the threefold
declaration of taking refuge*, which I had prescribed.
I prescribe, O Bhikkhus, that you confer the upa-
sampadd ordination by a formal act of the Order
in which the announcement (watti) is followed by
three questions ^

4. ‘And you ought, O Bhikkhus, to confer the

* See chap. 12 and the note on chap. 1. 1.

* The form for bringing a formal motion before the Order is the
following : The mover first announces to the assembled Bhikkhus
what resolution he is going to propose; this announcement is
called natti (see, for instance, § 4). After the jlatti follows the
question put to the Bhikkhus present if they approve the resolution.
This question is put either once or three times ; in the first case we
have a »attidutiya kamma (see, for instance, II, chap. 6); in the
second case, a nattiiatuttha kamma (as in this chapter).

170

mahAvagga.

Ij 28j 5'

upasampadd ordination in this way: Let a learned,
competent Bhikkhu proclaim the following »atti
before the Sawgha:

‘ Let the Sa«?gha, reverend Sirs, hear me. This
person N. N. desires to receive the upasampadi
ordination from the venerable N. N. (i. e. with the
venerable N. N. as his upa^^A^ya). If the Sa»?gha
is ready, let the Saw^gha confer on N. N. the upa-
sampad^ ordination with N. N. as upa^^^dya.
This is the «atti.

5, 6. ‘Let the Sawgha, reverend Sirs, hear me.
This person N. N. desires to receive the upasam-
padA ordination from the venerable N. N. The
Saw^gha confers on N. N, the upasampad^ ordi-
nation with N. N. as upa^^^^ya. Let any one of
the venerable brethren who is in favour of the upa-
sampadd ordination of N. N. with N. N. as upa^-
ghkyz, be silent, and any one who is not in favour
of it, speak.

‘ And for the second time I thus speak to you :
Let the Samgha (&c., as before).

‘ And for the third time I thus speak to you : Let
the Sa»?gha, &c.

‘ N. N. has received the upasampadi ordination
from the Sa»/gha with N. N. as upa^^^Aya. The
Sawgha is in favour of it, therefore it is silent.
Thus I understand^.’

29 .

I. At that time a certain Bhikkhu shortly after
having received the up as am pad A ordination, aban-

* With this and the following chapters should be compared the
corresponding ordinance laid down in chapters 74-76.

I, 29, 3. ADMISSION TO THE ORDER OF BHIKKHUS. I7I

doned himself to bad conduct. The Bhikkhus said
to him: ‘You ought not to do so, friend; it is not
becoming.'

He replied: ‘I never asked you, Sirs, saying,
“Confer on me the upasampadS. ordination.” Why
have you ordained me without your being asked?’

They told this thing to the Blessed One.

‘ Let no one, O Bhikkhus, ordain a person unless
he has been asked to do so. He who does, commits
a dukka/a offence. I prescribe, O Bhikkhus, that
you ordain only after having been asked.

2. ‘And (a Bhikkhu) ought to be asked in this
way: Let him who desires to receive the upasam-
pad^ ordination, go to the Sa»^gha, adjust his upper
robe so as to cover one shoulder, salute the feet of
the Bhikkhus with his head, sit down squatting, raise
his joined hands, and say : “ I ask the Sawgha,
reverend Sirs, for the upasampadi ordination;
might the Sa»/gha, reverend Sirs, draw me out (of
the sinful world) out of compassion towards me.”
And for the second time, &c. ; and for the third time
let him ask, &c.

3. ‘ Then let a learned, competent Bhikkhu pro-
claim the following watti before the Sa^gha : “Let
the Sawgha, reverend Sirs, hear me. This person
N. N. desires to receive the upasampadft ordina-
tion from the venerable N. N. ; N. N. asks the Sa»*-
gha for the upasampadi ordination with N. N.
as upa_^^^iya. If the Sawgha is ready, &c.^”’

* Here follows the complete formula of a ilatti^atuttha
kamma, as in chap. 28. 4-6. The only diiference is, that here
in the ^atti, as well as in the three questions, the words ‘ N. N.
asks the Samgha for the upasampad^ ordination with N. N. as
upa^^AHya’ are inserted after the words ‘ desires to receive the
upasampad^ ordination from the venerable N. N.’

172

mahAvagga.

I> 30 > I-

30 .

1. At that time an arrangement had been made
at R^gaha that the Bhikkhus were to receive
excellent meals successively (in the houses of different

\ rich upAsakas). Now (one day) a certain Brdh-
I ma«a thought ; ‘ Indeed the precepts which these
I Sakyaputtiya Samaras keep and the life they live are
( commodious ; they have good meals and lie down on
' beds protected from the wind*. What if I were to
embrace the religious life among the Sakyaputtiya
Sama»as?’ Then this Brdhma^^a went to the Bhik-
khus and asked them for the pabba^^i ordination ;
the Bhikkhus conferred the pabba^^i and upa-
sampadd ordinations on him.

2. When he had been ordained, the arrangement
pf successive meals (with the rich updsakas) came to
an end. The Bhikkhus said to him : ‘ Come, friend,
let us now go on our rounds for alms.’

He replied : ‘ I have not embraced the religious
life for that purpose — to going about for alms ; if
you give me (food), I will eat ; if you do not, I will
return to the world.’

(The Bhikkhus said): ‘ What, .friend ! have you
indeed embraced the religious life for your belly’s
sake ?’

‘ Y es, friends.’

3. The moderate Bhikkhus were annoyed, mur-
mured, and became angry : ‘ How can a Bhikkhu
embrace the religious life in so well-taught a doctrine
and discipline for his belly’s sake ?’

* On this curious expression, compare ATuUavagga IV, 4, 8. It
is frequently repeated l^low.

I, 30, 4 . ADMISSION TO THE ORDER OF BHIKKHUS. 1 73

These Bhikkhus told this thing to the Blessed One.

(The Buddha said) : ‘ Is it true, O Bhikkhu, that
you have embraced the religious life for your belly's
sake ?’

(He replied): ‘ It is true, Lord.’

Then the blessed Buddha rebuked that Bhikkhu :

‘ How can you, foolish person that you are , embrace
the religious life in so well-taught a doctrine and
discipline for your belly’s sake ? This will not do,
O foolish one, for converting the unconverted and'
for augmenting the number of the converted.’

Having rebuked him: and delivered a religious
discourse, he thus addressed the Bhikkhus :

4. ‘ I prescribe, O Bhikkhus, that he who confers
the upasampadi ordination (on a Bhikkhu), tell
him the four Resources :

‘The religious life has morsels of food given
in alms for its resource. Thus you must endeavour
to live all your life. Meals given to the Sa»/gha, to
certain persons, invitations, food distributed by ticket,
meals given each fortnight, each uposatha day (i. e.
the last day of each fortnight), or the first day of
each fortnight, are extra allowances.

‘The religious life has the robe made of rags
taken from a dust heap for its resource. Thus
you must endeavour to live all your life. Linen,
cotton, silk, woollen garments, coarse cloth, hempen
cloth are extra allowances.

‘The religious life has dwelling at the foot
of a tree for its resource. Thus you must endea-
vour to live all your life. Vihdras, a<f</^ayogas,
storied dwellings, attics, caves ^ are extra allowances.

' These are the five kinds of dwellings (pa^a lenfini) which are
declared to be allowable, iSTullavagga 'VI, i, 2. The single expres-

174

mahAvagga.

I> 31. 1-

‘The religious life has decomposing urine as
medicine^ for its resource. Thus you must endea-
vour to live all your life. Ghee, butter, oil, honey,
and molasses are extra allowances.’

Here ends the fifth BhA»avira, which contains
the duties towards upa^^^Ayas.

31 .

1. At that time a certain youth came to the Bhik-
khus and asked them to be ordained. The Bhikkhus
told him the (four) Resources before his ordination.
Then he said : ‘ If you had told me the Resources,
venerable Sirs, after my ordination, I should have
persisted (in the religious life) ; but now, venerable
Sirs, I will not be ordained; the Resources are
repulsive and loathsome to me.’

The Bhikkhus told this thing to the Blessed One.

‘ You ought not, O Bhikkhus, to tell the Resources
(to the candidates) before their ordination. He who
does, is guilty of a dukka/a offence. I prescribe,
O Bhikkhus, that you tell the Resources (to the
newly-ordained Bhikkhus) immediately after their
upasampadA.’

sions are explained by Buddhaghosa in his note on iTullavagga 1. 1.
as follows : ‘ a<^ayogo 'ti suva»»avahgageham, piis&do 'ti digha-
pAsSdo, hammiyan ti upariUkSsataie patiZ/^itakA/ig^ro pds&do yeva,
guhd ’ti i//iakaguh& silSguhA diruguhd pamsuguhl,’ i.e. ‘Kddhsi-
yoga is a gold-coloured Bengal house. P&s&da is a long storied
mansion (or, the whole of an upper storey). Hammiya is a
PSs&da, which has an upper chamber placed on the topmost
storey. Guhd is a hut made of bricks, or in a rock, or of wood.’ ^
* ^mpare MahAvagga VI, 14, 6.

I, 31, 4. ADMISSION TO THE ORDER OF BHIKKHUS. 1 75

2. At that time some Bhikkhus performed the
upasampadd service with a chapter of two or
three Bhikkhus.

They told this thing to the Blessed One.

‘ Let no one, O Bhikkhus, receive the upasam-
padd ordination before a chapter of less than ten
Bhikkhus. He who performs the upasampadi
service (with a smaller number of Bhikkhus), is
guilty of a dukka^a offence. I prescribe you, O
Bhikkhus, the holding of upasampadd services
with a chapter of ten Bhikkhus or more than ten.'

3. At that time some Bhikkhus conferred the
upasampadfL ordination on their saddhivihd-
rikas one or two years after their own upasam-
pad 4 . ^Thus also the venerable Upasena Vah-
gantaputta conferred the upasampadfi ordination
on a saddhivihirika of his one year after his own
upasampadi. When he had concluded the vassa
residence, after two years from his own upasam-
padi had elapsed, he went with his saddhivihi-
rika, who had completed the first year after his
upasampadi, to the place where the Blessed One
was ; having approached him and respectfully saluted
the Blessed One, he sat down near him.

4 . Now it is the custom of the blessed Buddhas
to exchange greeting with incoming Bhikkhus. And
the Blessed One said to the venerable Upasena
Vangantaputta : ‘ Do things go well with you, Bhik-
khu ? Do you get enough to support your life ?
Have you made your journey with not too great
fatigue ?’

‘Things go pretty well with us, Lord; we get

* This story recurs in the ^itaka Commentary II, 449.

176

mahAvagga.

I, 31 , 6-

enough, Lord, to support our life, and we have made
our journey. Lord, with not too great fatigue.'

The Tath^lgatas sometimes ask about what they
know ; sometimes they do not ask about what they
know. They understand the right time when to
ask, and they understand the right time when not
to ask. The Tathigatas put questions full of sense,
not void of sense ; to what is void of sense the bridge
is pulled down for the TathAgatas. For two pur-
poses the blessed Buddhas put questions to the
Bhikkhus, when they intend to preach the doctrine
or when they intend to institute a rule of conduct to
their disciples.

5. And the Blessed One said to the venerable
Upananda Vahgantaputta: ‘ How many years have
you completed, O Bhikkhu, since your upasam-
padA ?’

‘ Two years, Lord.’

‘And how many years has this Bhikkhu com-
pleted ?’

‘ One year. Lord.’

‘ In what relation does this Bhikkhu stand to you ?’

‘He is my saddhivihArika, Lord.’

Then the blessed Buddha rebuked him : ‘ This
is improper, O foolish one , unbecoming, unsuitable,
unworthy of a Samara, unallowable, and to be
avoided. How can you, O foolish one, who ought
to receive exhortation and instruction from others,
think yourself fit for administering exhortation and
instruction to another Bhikkhu ? Too quickly, O
foolish one, have you abandoned yourself to the
ambition of collecting followers. This will not do
(&c., as in chap. 30. 3). Let no ‘one, O Bhikkhus,
confer the upasampadd ordination who has not

I, 31, 8. ADMISSION TO THE ORDER OF BHIKKHUS. I 77

completed ten years. He who does, is guilty of a
dukka^a offence. I prescribe, O Bhikkhus, that
only he who has completed ten years, or more than
ten years, may confer the upasampad^ ordination.’

6. At that time ignorant, unlearned Bhikkhus
(who said), ‘We have completed ten years (since
our upasampadi), we have completed ten years,’
conferred the upasampadi ordination ; (thus) igno-
rant upa^^^iyas were found and clever saddhi-
vih&rikas; unlearned upa^^^^yas were found
and learned saddhivihdrikas ; upa^^^ayas were
found who had small knowledge, and saddhivi-
h Erikas who had great knowledge; foolish upa^-
^^iyas were found and wise saddhiviharikas.
And a certain Bhikkhu who had formerly belonged to
a Titthiya school, when his upa^^^S.ya remonstrated
with him (on certain offences) according to the
Dhamma, brought his upa^^^^ya (by reasoning) to
silence and went back to that same Titthiya schools

7. The moderate Bhikkhus were annoyed, mur-
mured, and became angry : ‘ How can those ignorant,
unlearned Bhikkhus confer the upasampadi ordi-
nation (saying), “We have completed ten years, we
have completed te.n years ?” (Thus) ignorant upa^-
ghky?iS are found and clever saddhivihdrikas
(&c., down to:), foolish upa^^^dyas are found and
wise saddhivihdrikas.’

These Bhikkhus told, &c.

‘ Is it true, O Bhikkhus, &c. ?’

‘ It is true, Lord.’

8. Then the blessed Buddha rebuked those Bhik-
khus : ‘ How can these foolish persons, O Bhikkhus,

C»3]

' See the conclusion of this in

chapter 38.

N

178

mahAvagga.

I. 3*. I-

confer tlie upasampadA ordination (saying), “We
have, &c ?” (Thus) igfnorant upa^/^Ayas are found,
&c. This will not do, O Bhikkhus, for converting
the unconverted and for augmenting the number
of the converted.’

Having rebuked those Bhikkhus and delivered
a religious discourse, he thus addressed the Bhik-
khus ; ‘ Let no ignorant, unlearned Bhikkhu, O
Bhikkhus, confer the upasampadA ordination. If
he does, he is guilty of a dukka^a offence. I pre-
scribe, O Bhikkhus, that only a learned, competent
Bhikkhu who has completed ten years, or more than
ten years, may confer the upasampadd ordination.’

32 .

I. At that time some Bhikkhus whose upa^-
^^iyas were gone away, or had returned to the
world, or had died, or were gone over to a (schismatic)
faction ^ as they had no d^ariyas and received no
exhortation and instruction, went on their rounds
for alms wearing improper under and upper gar-
ments (&c., as in chap. 25. 1-6, down to :), he thus
addressed the Bhikkhus : ‘ I prescribe, O Bhikkhus,
(that young Bhikkhus choo.se) an d>^ariya®.

’ Buddhaghosa can scarcely be right in explaining pakkha-
sawkanta by titthiyapakkhasawkanta.

® A^ariya as well as upa^^^Sya means ‘teacher,’ or ‘pre-
ceptor.’ It is very difficult or rather impossible to draw a sharp
line of distinction between d^ariya and upa^^/iiya. The duties
of an d^ariya towards his antevdsika, and of an antevdsika
towards his d^ariya, as indicated in chaps. 32, 33 (siTullavagga
^ 3 i ^ 4 )> exactly the same as those of an upa^^^dya

I, 32, 1. ADMISSION TO THE ORDER OF BHIKKHUS. I 79

- ' The &i?ariya, O Bhikkhus, ought to consider the
antev^sika (i.e. disciple) as a son; the antevA-
sika ought to consider the A^ariya as a father.
Thus these two, united by mutual reverence, con-
fidence, and communion of life, will progress, advance,
and reach a high stage in this doctrine and discipline.

‘ I prescribe, O Bhikkhus, that you live (the first)
ten years in dependence (on an ^’ariya) ; he who
has completed his tenth year may give a nissaya^
himself.

towards his saddhiviharika and vice versa (chaps. 25, 26=Arul-
lavagga VIII, ii, 12). The position of an upa^^^dya, however,
was considered as the more important of the two; at the upa-
sampad^ service the upa^^>^aya had a more prominent part
than the S^ariya, as we may infer from chaps. 28, 29, and from
the explanations on the 65th pS^ittiya rule which are given in
the Sutta Vibhahga. There it is said that, if the upasampad^
ordination had been conferred, against the rule, on a person that
has not yet attained his twentieth year, the upa^^^dya has made
himself guilty of a pa>?’ittiya offence, the d^ariya and the other
present Bhikkhus only of a dukka/a offence. V{e may add that
the succession of Vinaya teachers from Updli down to ^lahinda,
which is given in the Dipava/wsa (Bhd^avdras IV and V), is a suc-
cession of upa^^^dyas and saddhivihdrikas (see IV, 36, 42,
43, &c.), not of a^ariyas and antevdsikas; the duty of instruct-
ing the young Bhikkhus in the holy doctrines and ordinances
seems, therefore, to belong to the upa^^^aya rather than to
the d^ariya; compare also Dipavawsa VII, 26. So among the
Brdhmawas, on the contrary, the d^drya is estimated higher than
the upddhydya; see Manu II, 145; Yd^g^Tavalkya I, 35. Com-
pare also chap. 36. i (end of the paragraph), and Buddhaghosa’s
explanation of that passage.

^ Nissaya (i.e. dependence) is the relation between d>tariya and
antevdsika. The antevdsika lives ‘nissdya’ with regard to
the d>l*ariya, i.e. dependent on him; the d^ariya gives his nis-
saya to the antevdsika, i.e. he receives him into his protection
and care. At chap. 36. i,‘ nissaya Ms said also of the relation
between upa^^^dya and saddhivihdrika.

N 2

i8o

mahAvagga.

I, 3a. a-

2. ‘ And let (the antevAsika), O Bhikkhus,
choose his A^ariya in this way: Let him adjust
his upper robe so as to cover one shoulder, salute
the feet (of the A^ariya), sit down squatting, raise
his joined hands, and say: “Venerable Sir, be my
A/^ariya, I will live in dependence on you. Sir.’”
(This formula is repeated thrice.)

‘(If the other answers) : “ Well” (&c., as in chap.

25- ;)•

3. ‘The antevAsika, O Bhikkhus, ought to
observe a strict conduct towards his A>^ariya’ (&c.,
as in chap. 25. 8-24).

End of the duties towards an A/(’ariya.

33 .

‘ The AiSariya, O Bhikkhus, ought to observe a
strict conduct towards his antevAsika’ (&c., as in
chap. 26).

End of the duties towards an antevAsika.
End of the sixth Bhiwavdra.

34 .

At that time the antevdsikas did not observe
a proper conduct towards their d/^ariyas (&c., as
in chap. 27. 1-8).

I, 36, I. ADMISSION TO THE ORDER OF BHIKKHUS. 181

35 .

1,2. At that time igpiorant, unlearned Bhikkhus
(who said), ‘ We have completed ten years (since our
upasampadA), we have completed ten years,’ gave
a nissaya (i. e. they received young Bhikkhus as
their antev^isikas) ; (thus) ignorant &-^ariyas were
found and clever antev&sikas; unlearned i^ariy as
were found and learned antevisikas; i^ariyas
were found who had small knowledge, and ante-
vAsikas who had great knowledge; foolish d^ari-
yas were found and wise antevdsikas. The
moderate Bhikkhus were annoyed (&c., as in chap.
31 - 7 . 8 ).

‘ Let no ignorant, unlearned Bhikkhu, O Bhikkhus,
give a nissaya. If he does, he is gfuilty of a duk-
ka/a offence. I prescribe, O Bhikkhus, that only
a learned, competent Bhikkhu who has completed
ten years, or more than ten years, may give a
nissaya.’

36 .

I. At that time the Bhikkhus whose d/6ariyas
and upa^^/idyas were gone away, or had returned
to the world, or had died, or were gone over to a
(schismatic) faction, were not acquainted with (the
rules about) the cessation of their nissayas*.

They told this thing to the Blessed One.

‘There are five cases of cessation of a nissaya,
O Bhikkhus, between (saddhivihdrika and) upa^-

’ That is, ‘ did not know how to decide whether their nissaya
was destroyed, or not.’

i82

mahAvagga.

1, 36. »•

When the upa^/^Aya is gone away, or he
has returned to the world, or has died, or is gone
over to a (schismatic) faction ; the fifth case is that
of order (given by the upa^Mya to the saddhivi-
hArika^). These, O Bhikkhus, are the five cases of
the cessation of a nissaya between (saddhivihA-
rika and) upa^^^Aya.

‘There are six cases of cessation of a nissaya,
O Bhikkhus, between (antevAsika and) iiSariya:
When the Aiariya is gone away, &c.; the fifth case
is that of order (given by the A^ariya to the ante-
vAsika); or (sixthly) when the Ay^ariya and the
upa_f/^Aya have come together at the same place
These, O Bhikkhus, are the six cases of cessation of
a nissaya between (antevAsika and) Aiariya.

2. ‘ In five cases, O Bhikkhus, a Bhikkhu should
not confer the upasampadA ordination, nor give
a nissaya, nor ordain a novice®: When he does not
possess full perfection in what belongs to moral
practices ; or does not possess full perfection in what
belongs to self-concentration; or does not possess
full perfection in what belongs to wisdom ; or does

‘ This refers, according to Buddhaghosa, to the paBSmanS
(turning away of the saddhiviharika); see chap. 27. 2.

® Buddhaghosa : ‘ Coming together may be understood either by
seeing or by hearing. If a saddhivihdrika who lives in depend-
ence (nissdya) on his a^ariya sees his upa^^Adya paying
homage to a sacred shrine in the same Vihara, or going on his
rounds in the same village, cessation of the nissaya (towards the
aiariya) is the consequence. If he hears the voice of his upa^-
ghiyz, who preaches the Dhamma or gladdens (lay-people by reli-
gious discourse), in the Vihdra or in the interior of a house, and if
he recognises that it is his upa^^Adya’s voice, cessation of the
nissaya (towards the d^ariya) is the consequence.’

“ About the ordination of novices, see chap. 54. 3.

I, 36, 8. ADMISSION TO THE ORDER OF BHIKKHUS. 1 83

not possess full perfection in what belongs to eman-
cipation ; or does not possess full perfection in what
belongs to knowledge and insight into emancipation.
In these five cases, O Bhikkhus, a Bhikkhu should
not confer the upasampadi ordination, nor give
a nissaya, nor ordain a novice.

3. ‘ In five cases, O Bhikkhus, a Bhikkhu may
confer the upasampadi ordination, give a nissaya,
and ordain a novice : When he possesses full per-
fection in what belongs to moral practices, &c. In
these five cases, O Bhikkhus, a Bhikkhu may, &c.

4. ‘And also in other five cases, O Bhikkhus, a
Bhikkhu should not confer, &c. : When he does not
possess for himself full perfection in what belongs to
moral practices, and is not able to help others to full
perfection in what belongs to moral practices; or
does not possess for himself full perfection in what
belongs to self-concentration, and is not able to help
others to full perfection in what belongs to self-con-
centration, &c.

5. ‘In five cases, O Bhikkhus, a Bhikkhu may
confer, &c. ; When he possesses for himself full per-
fection in what belongs to moral practices, and is
able to help others to full perfection, &c.

6. ‘And also in other five cases, O Bhikkhus, a
Bhikkhu should not confer, &c. : When he is unbe-
lieving, shameless, fearless of sinning, indolent, for-
getful. In these five cases, &c.

7. ‘In five cases, O Bhikkhus, a Bhikkhu may
confer, &c. : When he is believing, modest, fearful of
sinning, strenuous, of ready memory. In these five
cases, &c.

8. ‘And also in other five cases, O Bhikkhus, a
Bhikkhu should not confer, &c. : When as regards

mahAvagca.

1 84

moral practices he is guilty of moral transgrpsions ;
or when as regards the rules of conduct* he is guilty
of transgressions in his conduct ; or when as regards
belief he is guilty of heresy ; or when he is unlearned ;
or when he is foolish. In these five cases, &c.

9. ‘ In five cases, 0 Bhikkhus, a Bhikkhu may
confer, &c.: When as regards moral practices he is
not guilty of moral transgressions, &c.; when he
is learned ; and when he is wise. In these five
cases, &c.

10. ‘And also in other five cases, 0 Bhikkhus, a
Bhikkhu should not confer, &c.: When he is not
able to nurse or to get nursed an antevdsika or a
saddhivihdrika when he is sick, to appease him or
to cause him to be appeased when discontent with
religious life has sprung up within him, to dispel or
to cause to be dispelled according to the Dhamma
doubts of conscience which have arisen in his mind ;
when he does not know what is an offence ; or does
not know how to atone for an offence. In these five
cases, &c.

11. ‘In five cases, 0 Bhikkhus, a Bhikkhu may
confer, &c.: When he is able (&c., down to:); when
he knows what is an offence; and knows how to
atone for an offence. In these five cases, &c.

12. ‘And also in other five cases, 0 Bhikkhus, a
Bhikkhu should not confer, &c.r When he is not
able to train an antevfisika or a saddhivihdrika
in the precepts of proper conduct ^ to educate him

' According to Buddhaghosa, moral transgression (adhisila) is
said with regard to offences against the p^rS^ika and sumghi-
disesa rules, while transgressions in conduct (a^gAd^ilra) consist
in offences against the minor rules of the PStimokkha. Buddha-
ghosa’s explanation is confirmed by the MahSvagga IV, 16, 12.

* According to Buddhaghosa, this refers to instruction in the

I, 36, 16. ADMISSION TO THE ORDER OF BHIKKHUS. 1 85

in the elements of morality*, to instruct him in what
pertains to the Dhamma, to instruct him in what
pertains to the Vinaya, to discuss or to make another
discuss according to the Dhamma a false doctrine
that might arise. In these five cases, &c.

13. ‘In five cases, O Bhikkhus, a Bhikkhu may
confer, &c. : When he is able, &c.

14. ‘And also in other five cases, O Bhikkhus, a
Bhikkhu should not confer, &c. : When he does not
know what is an offence ; or does not know what is
no offence ; or does not know what is a light offence ;
or does not know what is a grave offence ; when the
two Pitimokkhas are not perfectly known to him in
their entirety, with all their divisions and their whole
course, and with the entire discussion according to
the single rules and to the single parts of each rule.
In these five cases, &c.

15. ‘In five cases, O Bhikkhus, a Bhikkhu may
confer, &c. : When he knows, &c.

16. ‘And also in other five cases, O Bhikkhus,
a Bhikkhu should not confer, &c.: When he does
not know what is an offence ; or does not know what
is no offence; or does not know what is a light
offence ; or does not know what is a grave offence ;

khandhakavatta (i.e. in the rules contained in the Khandhaka
texts, Mahdvagga andh ATullavagga?). See also Spence Hardy,
Manual, p. 492.

* This means instructing him in the sekhapailnatti (Buddha-
ghosa). We cannot say what is the accurate meaning of the last
term, which apparently, as its verbal meaning seems to imply, refers
to ordinances for those Bhikkhus who have entered the path of
sanctification, but have not yet attained Arahatship. Spence Hardy
(Manual, p. 493) gives the term sekha-sila, which he explains
as the observance of precepts in order to become a sekha. See
also Hardy’s note on fidibrahma^ariya-stla, 1.1. p. 493.

i86

mahAvagga.

1. 36. 17-

or when he has not completed the tenth year (after
his upasampadA). In these five cases, &c,

17. ‘In five cases, O Bhikkhus, a Bhikkhu may
confer, &c,; When he knows (&c., down to:); when
he has completed ten years or more than ten years
(after his upasampadA). In these five cases, &c.’

End of the sixteen times five cases concerning
the admissibility of upasampadA.

37 .

‘In six cases, O Bhikkhus, a Bhikkhu should not
confer, &c.'’

End of the sixteen times* six cases concerning
the admissibility of upasampadA.

38 .

I . At that time that Bhikkhu who, having formerly
belonged to a Titthiya school, had (by reasoning)
put to silence his upa/^^Aya, when he remonstrated
with him according to the Dhamma, and had returned
to that same Titthiya school*, came back again and
asked the Bhikkhus for the upasampadA ordination.
The Bhikkhus told, &c. •

‘ That Bhikkhu, O Bhikkhus, who having formerly

" Chap. 37 is exactly identical with chap. 36. 2-15, but for the
sixth case, which, throughout chap. 37, is added each time at the
end of the five cases given in chap. 36, ‘ When he has not com-
pleted the tenth year (after his upasampadfi) and respectively,
‘ When he has completed ten years or more than ten years (after
his upasampadA).'

* It should be, ‘ Fourteen times.' ’ See chap. 31, § 6.

1, 38,3* ADMISSION TO THE ORDER OF BHIKKHUS. 1 87

belonged to a Titthiya school, has put to silence his
upa^^^iya when he remonstrated with him accord-
ing to the Dhamma, and has returned to that same
Titthiya school, must not receive the upasampad^
ordination, if he comes back. On other persons,
O Bhikkhus, who have formerly belonged to Titthiya
schools and desire to receive the pabba^^S, and
upasampad^ ordinations in this doctrine and disci-
pline, you ought to impose a pariv&sa (a probation-
time) of four months.

2. ‘And you ought, O Bhikkhus, to impose it in
this way : Let him (who desires to receive the ordi-
nation) first cut off his hair and beard ; let him put on
yellow robes, adjust his upper robe so as to cover
one shoulder, salute the feet of the Bhikkhus (with
his head), and sit down squatting ; then let him raise
his joined hands, and tell him to say : “ I take my
refuge in the Buddha, I take my refuge in the
Dhamma, I take my refuge in the Sawgha. And
for the second time, &c. And for the third time
take I my refuge in the Buddha, and for the third
time take I my refuge in the Dhamma, and for the
third time take I my refuge in the Sawgha.”

3. ‘ Let that person, O Bhikkhus, who has formerly
belonged to a Titthiya school, approach the Sawgha,
adjust his upper robe so as to cover one shoulder,
salute the feet of the Bhikkhus (with his head), sit
down squatting, raise his joined hands, and say: “ I,
N. N., reverend Sirs, who have formerly belonged to
a Titthiya school, desire to receive the upasam-
padS. ordination in this doctrine and discipline, and
ask the Sarngha, reverend Sirs, for a parivdsa of
four months.” Let him ask thus a second time. Let
him ask thus a third time.

i88

mahAvagga.

1. 38, 4 *

‘Then let a learned, competent Bhikkhu proclaim
the following »atti before the Sawgha: “ Let the Sa/»-
gha, reverend Sirs, hear me. This person N. N., who
has formerly belonged to a Titthiya school, desires to
receive the upasampadA ordination in this doctrine
and discipline. He asks the Sawgha for a pari visa
of four months. If the Saw^gha is ready, let the
Sa»«gha impose on N. N., who has formerly belonged
to a Titthiya school, a parivAsa of four months.
This is the «atti.

4. ‘ “ Let the Sa»zgha, reverend Sirs, hear me.
This person N. N., who has, &c. He asks the
Sawgha for a parivAsa of four months. The
Sa»2gha imposes on N. N., who has formerly be-
longed to a Titthiya school, a parivAsa of four
months. Let any one of the venerable brethren
who is in favour of imposing a parivAsa of four
months on N. N., who has formerly belonged to a
Titthiya school, be silent, and any one who is not
in favour of it, speak. A parivAsa of four months
has been imposed by the Sawgha on N. N., who
has formerly belonged to a Titthiya school. The
Sawgha is in favour of it, therefore it is silent. Thus
I understand.”

5. ‘And this, O Bhikkhus, is the way in which
a person that has formerly belonged to a Titthiya
school, succeeds or fails in satisfying (the Bhikkhus
and obtaining upasampadA when the probation-
time is over).

‘ What is the way, O Bhikkhus, in which a person
that has formerly belonged to a Titthiya school,
fails in satisfying (the Bhikkhus)?

‘ In case, O Bhikkhus, the person that has formerly
belonged to a Titthiya school, enters the village

1,38,7- ADMISSION TO THE ORDER OF BHIKKH US. 1 89

too early, and comes back (to the Vihdra) too late,
thus, O Bhikkhus, a person that has formerly be-
longed to a Titthiya school, fails in satisfying (the
Bhikkhus).

‘And further, O Bhikkhus, in case the person
that has formerly belonged to a Titthiya school,
frequents the society of harlots, or of widows, or of
adult girls, or of eunuchs, or of Bhikkhunls, thus also,
O Bhikkhus, a person that has formerly belonged to
a Titthiya school, fails in satisfying (the Bhikkhus).

6. ‘And further, O Bhikkhus, in case the person
that has formerly belonged to a Titthiya school, does
not show himself skilled in the various things his
fellow Bhikkhus have to do, not diligent, not able to
consider how those things are to be done, not able
to do things himself, not able to give directions to
others, thus also, O Bhikkhus, &c.

‘ And further, O Bhikkhus, in case the person that
has formerly belonged to a Titthiya school, does not
show keen zeal, when the doctrine is preached to
him or when questions are put, in what belongs to
morality, to contemplation, and to wisdom, thus
also, O Bhikkhus, &c.

7. ‘And further, O Bhikkhus, in case the person
that has formerly belonged to a Titthiya school,
becomes angry, displeased, and dissatisfied, when
people speak against the teacher, the belief, the
opinions, the persuasion, the creed of the school he
formerly belonged to ; and is pleased, glad, and satis-
fied, when people speak against the Buddha, the
Dhamma, and the Sawgha ; or he is pleased, glad,
and satisfied, when people speak in praise of the
teacher, &c. ; and becomes angry, displeased, dissatis-
fied, when people speak in praise of the Buddha, the

190

mahAvagga.

I, 38, 8.

Dhamma, and the Sa;»gha ; this, O Bhikkhus, is a
decisive moment for the failure of a person that has
formerly belonged to a Titthiya school (in obtaining
admission to the Sa^^gha).

‘ Thus, O Bhikkhus, a person that has formerly
belonged to a Titthiya school, fails in satisfying (the
Bhikkhus). When a person comes, O Bhikkhus, that
has formerly belonged to a Titthiya school, and has
thus failed in satisfying (the Bhikkhus), the upasam-
padA ordination should not be conferred on him.

8-10. ‘And what is the way, O Bhikkhus, in which
a person that has formerly belonged to a Titthiya
school, succeeds in satisfying (the Bhikkhus) ?

‘ In case, O Bhikkhus, the person that has formerly
belonged to a Titthiya school, does not enter the
village too early (&c., point by point the contrary of
the preceding).

‘When a person comes, O Bhikkhus, that has
formerly belonged to a Titthiya school, and has thus
succeeded in satisfying (the Bhikkhus), the upasam-
padi ordination ought to be conferred on him.

II. ‘ If a person, O Bhikkhus, that has formerly
belonged to a Titthiya school, comes (to the Bhik-
khus) naked, it is incumbent on his upa^^^Aya to
get a robe for him. If he comes with unshaven hair,
the Sa«?gha’s permission ought to be asked for having
his hair shaved ^

‘ If fire-worshipper s and ( 7 a/ilas come to you, O
Bhikkhus, they are to receive the upasampadfi
ordination (directly), and no parivAsa is to be im-
posed on them. And for what reason These, O
Bhikkhus, hold the doctrine that actions receive their

' Compare chap. 48.

I, 39, a. ADMISSION TO THE ORDER OF BHIKKHUS. I9I

reward, and that our deeds have their result (accord-
ing to their moral merit).

‘ If a Sakya by birth, O Bhikkhus, who has be-
longed to a Titthiya school, comes to you, he is to
receive the upasampad^ ordination (directly), and
no parivisa is to be imposed on him. This ex -
ceptional privileg e, O Bhikkhus, I grant to my
kinsmen. '

«

Here ends the exposition on the ordination of persons
that have formerly belonged to Titthiya schools.

End of the seventh Bhi«avira.

1. At that" time these five diseases prevailed
among the people of Magadha : — leprosy, boils, dry
leprosy, consumption, and fits. The people who
were affected with these five diseases went to dvaka
Komirabha/'yC’ai and said: ‘ Pray, doctor, cure us.’

‘ I have too many duties. Sirs, and am too occu-
pied. I have to treat the Magadha king Seniya
BimbisAra, and the royal seraglio, and the fraternity
of Bhikkhus with the Buddha at their head. I
cannot cure you.’

‘All that we possess shall be yours, doctor, and
we will be your slaves ; pray, doctor, cure us.’

‘ I have too many duties, Sirs,&c. ; I cannot cure you.’

2. Now those people thought : ‘ Indeed the pre-
cepts which these Sakyaputtiya Sama«as keep and

^ Gtvaka was physician to king BimbisSra, and one of the chief
partisans of Buddha at the court of Ri^^gaha. See VIII, i, the
introduction of the S&maniiaphala Sutta, 8cc.

192

mahAvagga.

I. 39. 3-

the life they live are commodious ; they have good
meals and lie down on beds protected from the wind.
What if we were to embrace the religious life among
the Sakyaputtiya Samawas : then the Bhikkhus will
nurse us, and < 7 ivaka KomArabha/f’y^a will cure us.’

Thus these persons went to the Bhikkhus and
asked them for the pabba^^A ordination ; the Bhik-
khus conferred on them the pabba^^i and upa-
sampadA ordinations; and the Bhikkhus nursed
them, and 6^1vaka KomArabha^^a cured them.

3. At that time the Bhikkhus, who had to nurse
many sick Bhikkhus, began to solicit (lay people)
with many demands and many requests : ‘ Give us
food for the sick; give us food for the tenders of
the sick ; give us medicine for the sick.’ And also
6^1vaka Komarabha/i’/(’a, who had to treat many sick
Bhikkhus, neglected some of his duties to the king.

4. Now one day a man who was affected with the
five diseases went to Glvaka Komirabha>6>^a and
said : ‘ Pray, doctor, cure me.’

‘ I have too many duties. Sir, and am too occupied ;

I have to treat the Magadha king Seniya BimbisAra,
and the royal seraglio, and the fraternity of Bhikkhus
with the Buddha at their head ; I cannot cure you.’

‘All that I possess shall be yours, doctor, and
I will be your slave ; pray doctor, cure me.’

‘ I have too many duties. Sir, &c. ; I cannot cure you.’

5. Now that man thought : ‘ Indeed the precepts
which these Sakyaputtiya Samaras keep (&c., down
'to:): then the Bhikkhus will nurse me, and (rlvaka
Komdrabha^^ will cure me. When I have become
free from sickness, then I will return to the world.’

Thus that man went to the Bhikkhus and asked
them for the pabba^^d ordination; the Bhikkhus

I, 39, 7. ADMISSION TO THE ORDER OF BHIKKHUS. 1 93

conferred on him the pabba^^d and upasampad^
ordinations; and the Bhikkhus nursed him, and
Clvaka Komdrabhai:^a cured him. When he had
become free from sickness, he returned to the world.
Now 6^tvaka Komirabhaiy^ saw this person that
had returned to the world ; and when he saw him he
asked that person : ‘Had you not embraced the
religious life. Sir, among the Bhikkhus?'

‘ Yes, doctor.’

‘And why have you adopted such a course. Sir?’

Then that man told Qvaka Komdrabhai^/fci the
whole matter.

6. Then 6^1vaka Komirabhai^a was annoyed,
murmured, and became angry : ‘How can the vener-
able brethren confer the pabba^^d ordination on a
person affected with the five diseases ?’

And 6^1vaka Komdrabha^/^a went to the place
where the Blessed One was; having approached
him and having respectfully saluted the Blessed One,
he sat down near him. Sitting near him, Qvaka
Komdrabha^^a said to the Blessed One ; ‘ Pray,
Lord, let their reverences not confer the pabba^fa
ordination on persons affected with the five diseases.’

7. Then the Blessed One taught, incited, ani-
mated, and gladdened 6^ivaka Komirabha/’/’a by
religious discourse ; and 6^ivaka Komdrabha/fcfei,
having been taught .... and gladdened by the
Blessed One by religious discourse, rose from his
seat, respectfully saluted the Blessed One, and pass-
ing round him with his right side towards him, went
away.

In consequence of that and on this occasion the
Blessed One, after having delivered a religious dis-
course, thus addressed the Bhikkhus : ‘ Let no one,

194

mahAvagga.

I| 40 y !•

O Bhikkhus, who is affected with the five diseases ,
receive the pabba^^A ordination. He who confers
the pabba^^i ordination (on such a person), is
guilty of a dukka/a offence.’

40.

1. At that time the border provinces (of the king-
dom) of the Magadha king Seniya BimbisAra were
agitated. Then the Magadha king Seniya Bimbisara
gave order to the officers who were at the head of
the army: ‘Well now, go and search through the
border provinces^.’ The officers who were at the
head of the army accepted the order of the Maga-
dha king Seniya BimbisAra (by saying), ‘ Yes, Your
Majesty.’

2. Now many distinguished warriors thought :

‘ We who go (to war) and find our delight in fight-
ing, do evil and produce great demerit. Now what
shall we do that we may desist from evil-doing and
may do good ?’

Then these warriors thought : ‘ These Sakyaput-
tiya Sama«as lead indeed a virtuous, tranquil, holy
life ; they speak the truth ; they keep the precepts
of morality, and are endowed with all virtues. If
we could obtain pabba^^A with the Sakyaputtiya
Sama»as, we should desist from evil-doing and do
good.’

Thus these warriors went to the Bhikkhus and

* On u^^inatha, compare the use of Mkkhtkkhirai at Mah4-
parinibbana Sutta I, i (p. i), which Buddhaghosa rightly explains
by u^^^indissami. But we think it better to adhere here to the
reading u^^inatha, in accordance with the MSS.

I, 40, 4. ADMISSION TO THE ORDER OF BHIKKHUS. I95

asked them for the pabba /^4 ordination; the
Bhikkhus conferred on them the pabba^^A and
upasampadd ordinations.

3. The officers at the head of the army asked
the royal soldiers : ‘Why, how is it that the war-
riors N. N. and N. N. are nowhere to be seen ?’

‘ The warriors N. N. and N. N., Lords, have em-
braced religious life among the Bhikkhus.’

Then the officers at the head of the army were
annoyed, murmured, and became angry : ‘ How can
the Sakyaputtiya Sama«as ordain persons in the
royal service ?’

The officers who were at the head of the army
told the thing to the Magadha king Seniya Bim-
bisira. And the Magadha king Seniya Bimbisira
asked the officers of justice ; ‘Tell me, my good
Sirs, what punishment does he deserve who ordains
a person in the royal service ?’

‘The upa^^^iya. Your Majesty, should be be-
headed ; to him who recites (the kammav&^i), the
tongue should be torn out ; to those who form the
chapter, half of their ribs should be broken.’

4. Then the Magadha king Seniya BimbisSra
went to the place where the Blessed One was ;
having approached him and having respectfully
saluted the Blessed One, he sat down near him.
Sitting near him the Magadha king Seniya Bim-
bisira said to the Blessed One : ‘ Lord, there are
unbelieving kings who are disinclined (to the faith) ;
these might harass the Bhikkhus even on trifling
occasions. Pray, Lord, let their reverences not
confer the pabba^^i ordination on persons in
royal service.’

Then the Blessed One taught (&c., see chap. 39. 7,

n ^

196 MAHAvAGGA. 1,41.

down to :), thus addressed the Bhikkhus : ‘ Let no
one, O Bhikkhus, who is in the royal service , re-
ceive the pabba^^i ordination. He who confers
the pabba^^i ordination (on such a person), is
guilty of a dukka/a offence.’

41 .

At that time the robber AhgulimAla^ had em-
braced religious life among the Bhikkhus. When
the people saw that, they became alarmed and terri-
fied; they fled away, went elsewhere, turned away
their heads, and shut their doors. The people were
annoyed, murmured, and became angry: ‘How can
the Sakyaputtiya Samawas ordain a robber who
openly wears the emblems (of his deeds)?'

Some Bhikkhus heard those people that were
annoyed, murmured, and had become angry; these
Bhikkhus told the thing to the Blessed One.

The Blessed One thus addressed the Bhikkhus :
‘ Let no robber, O Bhikkhus, who wears the emblems
(of h is deeds) , receive the p a b b a^^ A ordination. H e
who confers the pabba^^A ordination (on such a
person), is guilty of a dukka/a offence.’

’ The robber Ahgulimala (i. e. he who wears a necklace of
fingers), whose original name was Ahimsaka, had received this
surname from bis habit of cutting off the fingers of his victims
and wearing them as a necklace. See Spence Hardy, Manual,
p. 249 seq.

I, 42,2. ADMISSION TO THE ORDER OF BHIKKHUS. I97

42 .

1. At that time the Magadha king Seniya Bim-
bisira had issued the following decree : ‘ No one is ^
to do any harm to those who are ordained among
the Sakyaputtiya Samaras ; well taught is their doc-
trine ; let them lead a holy life for the sake of the
complete extinction of suffering.’

Now at that time a certain person who had com-
mitted robbery was imprisoned in the jail. He
broke out of the jail, ran away, and received the
pabba^^a ordination with the Bhikkhus.

2. The people who saw him, said: ‘Here is the
robber w'ho has broken out of jail ; come, let us bring
him (before the authorities).’

But some people replied : ‘ Do not say so, Sirs.
A decree has been issued by the Magadha king
Seniya Bimbis^ra : ‘No one is to do any harm to
those who are ordained, &c.’

People were annoyed, murmured, and became
angry, thinking : ‘ Indeed these Sakj-aputtij'a Sama-
ras are secure from anything; it is not allowed
to do any harm to them. How can they ordain
a robber who has broken out of jail

They told this thing to the Blessed One.

‘ Let no robber , O Bhikkhus, who has broken out
of jail, receive the pabba^^a ordination. He who
confers the pabba^^d ordination (on such a person),
is guilty of a dukka/a offence.’

198

mahAvagga.

1 . 43 -

43 .

At that time a certain person who had committed
robbery had run away and had become ordained
with the Bhikkhus. At the royal palace a proclama-
tion was written : ‘ Wherever he is seen, he is to
be killed.’

The people who saw him, said : ‘ Here is the pro-
claimed robber; come, let us kill him’ (&c., as in
chap. 42).

‘ Let no proclaimed robber, O Bhikkhus, receive
the pabba^^i ordination. He who confers the
pabba^^A ordination (on such a robbe r), is guilty
of a dukka/a offence.’

44 .

At that time a certain person who had been
punished by scourging had been ordained with the
Bhikkhus. People were annoyecj, &c.: ‘How can
these Sakyaputtiya Samaras ordain a person that
has been punished by scourging ? ’

They told this thing to the Blessed One.

‘ Let no one, O Bhikkhus, who has been punished
by scourging, rfeceive the pabba^^A ordination. He
who confers the pabbaf^A ordination (on such a
person), is guilty of a dukka/a offence.’

46 .

At that time a certain person who had been
punished by branding (&c, as in chap. 44, down to
the end).

1,47. ADMISSION TO THE ORDER OF BHIKKHUS. 1 99

46 .

At that time a certain person who was in debt,
ran away and was ordained with the Bhikkhus.
When his creditors saw him, they said : ‘ There is
our debtor ; come, let us lead him (to prison).’ But
some people replied : ‘ Do not say so, Sirs. A decree
has been issued by the Magadha king Seniya Bim-
bisira : ‘ No one is to do any harm to those who are
ordained with the Sakyaputtiya Samawas; well taught
is their doctrine ; let them lead a holy life for the
sake of the complete extinction of suffering.’

People were annoyed, murmured, and became
angry : ‘ Indeed these Sakyaputtiya Samawas are
secure from anything; it is not allowed to do any-
thing to them. How can they ordain a debtor V

They told this thing to the Blessed One.

* Let no debtor . O Bhikkhus, receive the pabba/^4
ordination. He who confers the pabba^^i ordina-
tion (on a debtor), is guilty of a dukka/a offence.’

47 .

At that time a slave ran away and v^’as ordained
with the Bhikkhus. When his masters saw him, they
said : ‘ There is our slave ; come, let us lead him
away (back to our house),’ (&c., as in chap. 46).

‘ Let no slave. O Bhikkhus, receive the pabba^^i
ordination. He who confers the pabba^^i ordina-
tion (on a slave), is guilty of a dukka/a offence.’

200

mahAvagga.

48# I*

48 .

1. At that time a certain smith ^ who was bald-
headed, having had a quarrel with his father and
mother, had gone to the ArAma and received pab-
ba^^ci with the Bhikkhus. Now the father and
mother of that bald-headed smith, searching after
that bald-headed smith, came to the ArAma and
asked the Bhikkhus : ‘ Pray, reverend Sirs, have you
seen such and such a boy ?'

The Bhikkhus, who did not know him, said ; ‘We
do not know him having not seen him, they said :
‘ We have not seen him.’

2. Now the father and mother of that bald-headed
smith, searching after that bald-headed smith, found
him ordained with the Bhikkhus ; they were annoyed,
&c. : ‘ These Sakyaputtiya Samawas are shameless,
wicked, and liars. They knew him and said : “ We
do not know him they had seen him and said :
“We have not seen him.” This boy has been or-
dained with the Bhikkhus.’

Now some Bhikkhus heard the father and mother
of that bald-headed smith, who were annoyed, &c.
Those Bhikkhus told the thing to the Blessed One.

I prescribe, O Bhikkhus, that the Saw/gha's per-
mission is asked for having (the new coming Bhik-
khus) shaved.’

Buddhaghosft explains karom^rabhaMe/u by tuldtaramun-
rfako (read tuiadharam.) suva««akarapuito. At Dhatnmapada,
^39» katnindra is said of a silversmith. There was probably
no distinction in these early times between gold, silver, copper,

and iron smiths; the same man being an artificer in all kinds
of metal. ,

1,49. a* admission TO THE ORDER OF BHIKKHUS. 201

49 .

1. At that time there was in Ri^gaha a company
of seventeen boys, friends of each other; young
Upili^ was first among them. Now Upili’s father
and mother thought: ‘How will Up&li after our
death live a life of ease and without pain ?’ Then
Upili’s father and mother said to themselves: ‘If
Updli could learn writing, he would after our death
live a life of ease and without pain.’ But then Upali’s
father and mother thought again: ‘ If Upali learns
writing, his fingers will become sore. But if Upali
could learn arithmetic, he would after our death live
a life of ease and without pain.’

2. But then Upali’s father and mother thought
again: ‘If UpMi learns arithmetic, his breast will
become diseased 2. But if Upali could learn money-
changing he would after our death live a life of
ease and comfort, and without pain.’ But then
Updli’s father and mother said to themselves: ‘ If
Updli learns money-changing, his eyes will suffer.
Now here are the Sakyaputtiya Samaras, who keep
commodious precepts and live a commodious life ; )
they have good meals and lie down on beds protected
from the wind. If Upali could be ordained with the

* This Updli is different from the famous Upali who belonged
to the chief disciples of Buddha ; tlie latter came not from Ra^-
gaha, but from the Sakya countr)'.

‘ Buddhaghosa : ‘ He who learns arithmetic, must think much ; I
therefore his breast will become diseased.’ *

• We prefer this translation of rflpa to translating it by ‘paint-
ing,* on account of Buddhaghosa’s note: ‘He who learns the
rhpa«sutta must turn over and over many kdrshdpanas and
look at them.’

202

mahAvagga.

I, 49. 3-

Sakyaputtiya Samaras, he would after our death live
a life of ease and without pain.’

3. Now young UpAli heard his father and mother
talking thus. Then young UpAli went to the other
boys; having approached them, he said to those
boys : ‘ Come, Sirs, let us get ordained with the
Sakyaputtiya Samaras.’ (They replied) : ‘ If you
will get ordained, Sir, we will be ordained also.’
Then those boys went each to his father and mother
and said to them ; ‘Give me your consent for leaving
the world and going forth into the houseless state.’
Then the parents of those boys, who thought, Tt is a
good thing what all these boys are wishing so unani-
mously for,’ gave their consent They went to the
Bhikkhus and asked them for the pabba^^A ordi-
nation. The Bhikkhus conferred the pabba^^A
and upasampadA ordinations on them.

4. In the night, at dawn, they rose and began to
cry : ‘ Give us rice-milk, give us soft food, give us
hard food!’ The Bhikkhus said : ‘ Wait, friends, till
day-time. If there is rice-milk, you shall drink ; if
there is food, soft or hard, you shall eat; if there
is no rice-milk and no food, soft or hard, you must
go out for alms, and then you will eat.’

But those Bhikkhus, when they were thus spoken
to by the other Bhikkhus, threw their bedding about
and made it wet, calling out : ‘Give us rice-milk, give
us soft food, give us hard food!’

5. Then the Blessed One, having arisen in the
night, at dawn, heard the noise which those boys
made ; hearing it he said to the venerable Ananda :
‘ Now, Ananda, what noise of boys is that ?’

Then the venerable Ananda told the thing to the
Blessed One.

I, 49, 6. ADMISSION TO THE ORDER OF BHIKKHUS. 203

‘ Is it true, O Bhikkhus, that the Bhikkhus know-
ingly confer the upasampadi ordination on persons
under twenty years of age ?’

‘ It is true, Lord.’

Then the Blessed One rebuked those Bhikkhus :

‘ How can those foolish persons, O Bhikkhus, know-
ingly confer the upasampadd ordination on persons
under twenty years of age ?

6. ‘A person under twenty years, O Bhikkhus,
cannot endure coldness and. heat, hunger and thirst,
vexation by gadflies and gnats, by storms and sun-
heat, and by reptiles; (he cannot endure) abusive,
offensive language ; he is not able to bear bodily
pains which are severe, sharp, grievous, disagreeable,
unpleasant, and destructive to life ; whilst a person
that has twenty years of age, O Bhikkhus, can en-
dure coldness, &c. This will not do, O Bhikkhus,/
for converting the unconverted and for augmenting
the number of the converted.’

Having rebuked those Bhikkhus and delivered a
religious discourse, he thus addressed the Bhikkhus :
‘Let no one, O Bhikkhus, knowingly confer thei
upasampadd ordination on a person under twenty
years of age. He who does, is to be treated accord- j
ing to the law^’

* The law alluded to is the 65th pS^ittiya rule. Generally in
the Khandhakas, which presuppose, as we have stated in our pre-
face, the existence of the Patimokkha, direct repetition of the rules
laid down there has been avoided. If, nevertheless, in the Khan-
dhakas a transgression alluded to in the Pdtimokkha had to be men-
tioned again, then in most cases the Khandhakas, instead of directly
indicating the penance incurred thereby, use of the guilty Bhikkhu
the expression, ‘yathidhammo kdretabbo,' i. e. ‘he is to be
treated according to the law.’ See H. O.'s Introduction to his
edition of the Mahdvagga, p. xx note.

204

mahAvagga.

1, 50.

At that time a certain family had died of pesti-
lence^; only a father and his son were left; they
received the pabba/^4 ordination with the Bhikkhus
and went together on their rounds for alms. Now
that boy, when food was given to his father, ran up
to him and said ; ‘ Give some to me too, father ;
give some to me too, father.’

People were annoyed, &c. : ‘ These Sakyaputtiya
Samawas live an impure life; this boy is a Bhik-
khunl’s son.’

Some Bhikkhus heard, &c.

They told this thing to the Blessed One, &c.

I ‘ Let no one, O Bhikkhus, confer the pabba/^&
I ordination on a boy under fifteen years of age. He
' who does, is guilty of a dukka/a offence.’

51 .

At that time a believing, pious family, who de-
voted themselves to the (especial) service of the
venerable Ananda, had died of pestilence. Only
two boys were left ; these, when seeing Bhikkhus,
ran up to them according to their old custom, but
the Bhikkhus turned them away. Wlien they were
turned away by the Bhikkhus, they cried. Now
the venerable Ananda thought : ‘ The Blessed One
has forbidden us to confer the pabba_^^d ordination

‘ Buddhaghosa explains ahivitakaroga by m^ribyidhi, and
says : When this plague befalls a house, men and beasts in that
house die; but he who breaks through wall or roof, or is “rog4
madigato {?),” may be saved/

I, 53, I. ADMISSION TO THE ORDER OF BHIKKHUS. 20 $

on a boy under fifteen years of age, and these boys
are under fifteen years of age. What can be done in
order that these boys may not perish ?’ And the vene-
rable Ananda told this thing to the Blessed One.

‘ Are these boys able, Ananda, to scare crows ?’

‘ They are, Lord.’

In consequence of that and on this occasion the
Blessed One, after having delivered a religious dis-
course, thus addressed the Bhikkhus : ‘ I allow you,
O Bhikkhus, to confer the pabba^^a ordination on
crow-keeper boys even under fifteen years of age.’ ^

52. l/"

At that time the venerable Upananda, of the
Sakya tribe, had two novices, Ka«^/aka and Ma-
haka; these committed sodomy with each other.
The Bhikkhus were annoyed, &c. : ‘How can
novices abandon themselves to such bad conduct ?’

They told this thing to the Blessed One, &c.

‘ Let no one, O Bhikkhus, ordain two novices. He
who does, is guilty of a dukka/a offence

53.

I. At that time the Blessed One dwelt at R^i^gaha
during the rainy season, and remained at the same
place during winter and summer. The people were
annoyed, &c. : ‘The (four) regions are* .... and

^ This seems very unpractical : and the rule is accordingly prac-
tically abrogated again by chapter 55.

‘ We must leave * dhundarikd ’ untranslated ; Buddhaghosa says
nothing about this obscure word.

206

mahAvagga.

I> 53. 2*

covered by darkness to the Sakyaputtiya Samaras ;
they cannot discern the (four) regions/ Some Bhik-
khus heard, &c.

2. Then the Blessed One said to the venerable
Ananda: ‘Go, Ananda, take a key and tell the
Bhikkhus in every cell ; “ Friends, the Blessed One
wishes to go forth to Dakkhi«igiri. Let any one
of the venerable brethren who thinks fit, come to
him.” '

The venerable Ananda accepted this order of the
Blessed One (by saying), ‘Yes, Lord,’ took a key,
and said to the Bhikkhus in every cell : ‘ Friends,
the Blessed One,’ &c.

3. The Bhikkhus replied : ‘ Friend Ananda, the
Blessed One has prescribed^ that Bhikkhus are to
live (the first) ten years in dependence (on their
Ai^ariyas and upa^^^Ayas), and that he who has
completed his tenth year, may give a nissaya him-
self. Now if we go there, we shall be obliged to
take a nissaya there; then we shall stay there for
a short time, then we must go back again and take
a new nissaya. If our A^ariyas and upa^-
^kSLya-s go, we will go also; if our AA’ariyas and
upa^^^dyas do not go, we will not go either.
Otherwise our light-mindedness, friend Ananda, will
become manifest/

4. Thus the Blessed One went forth to Dakkhi-
«dgiri followed only by a few Bhikkhus. And the
Blessed One, after having dwelt at Dakkhiwdgiri as
long as he thought fit, went back to Rd^gaha again.

Then the Blessed One said to the venerable
Ananda : ‘How is it, Ananda, that the perfect

‘ See chap. 32. i.

I, S4» I- ADMISSION TO THE ORDER OF BHIKKHUS. 207

One has gone forth to Dakkhi/^dgiri with so few
Bhikkhus ?’

Then the venerable Ananda told the thing to the
Blessed One.

In consequence of that and on this occasion the\
Blessed One, after having delivered a religious dis- I
course, thus addressed the Bhikkhus : ‘ I prescribe, i
O Bhikkhus, that a learned, competent Bhikkhu lives /
five years in dependence (on his i^ariya and upa^- {
ghkyd), an unlearned one all his life.

5. ‘ In five cases, O Bhikkhus, a Bhikkhu should
not live without a nissaya (i. e. independent of
iiariya and upa^^^iya) : when he does not pos-
sess full perfection in what belongs to moral prac-
tices (&c., as in chap. 36. 2). In these five cases,
O Bhikkhus, a Bhikkhu should not live without a
nissaya.

Tn five cases, O Bhikkhus, a Bhikkhu may live
without a nissaya: when he possesses full perfection
in what belongs to moral practices (&c., as in chap. 36.
3). In these five cases, O Bhikkhus, a Bhikkhu may
live without a nissaya.

6-13. ‘^nd also in other five cases, &c.^'

End of the eighth Bhi;«iv&ra, which is called the
Abhayfivara Bhdwavara®.

64 .

I. Then the Blessed One, after having resided at
R^^gaha as long as he thought fit, went forth to

' Supply these pentads and hexads, respective!)’, from chaps. 36.
6, 7 ; 8, 9 ; 14, 15 ; 16, 17 ; 3?. ! .* 5 . ^ ; 7 . 8 : M-

* AbhayUvara means, ‘ secure from anything. This refers to
the expression used in chap. 42, § 2.

2o8

MAHAVAGGA.

I. 54. 2-

Kapilavatthu. Wandering from place to place he
came to Kapilavatthu. There the Blessed One
dwelt in the Sakka country, near Kapilavatthu, in
the NIgrodhirima (Banyan Grove).

And in the forenoon the Blessed One, having
put on his under-robes, took his alms-bowl and with
his /^Ivara on went to the residence of the Sakka
Suddhodana (his father). Having gone there, he
sat down on a seat laid out for him.

Then the princess, who was the mother of Rihula’,
said to young RAhula: ‘This is your father, Rahula ;
go and ask him for your inheritance.’

2. Then young Rahula went to the place where
the Blessed One was ; having approached him, he
stationed himself before the Blessed One (and said) :
‘ Your shadow, Samara, is a place of bliss.’

Then the Blessed One rose from his seat and
went away, and young Rahula followed the Blessed
One from behind and said : ‘ Give me my inherit-
ance, Sama«a ; give me my inheritance, Samawa.’

Then the Blessed One said to the venerable
Sariputta : ‘ Well, Siriputta, confer the pabba^^i
ordination on young RAhula.’

(Siriputta replied) ; ‘How shall I confer. Lord,
the pabba^^i ordination on young R4hula?’

3. In consequence of that and on this occasion the
Blessed One, after having delivered a religious dis-
course, thus addressed the Bhikkhus : ‘ I prescribe.

* The Buddha’s former wife. This is, as far as we know, the
only p^sage in the PSli Pi/hkas which mentions this lady , and
it deserves notice that her name is not mentioned. Probably this
name was unknown to the Buddhists in early times, and thus we
may best account for the difference of the simply invented names
given to this lady by later writers. Compare Rh. D., Buddhism,
•p. 50 seq.

I> 84 , 8 - ADMISSION TO THE ORDER OF BHIKKHUS. 209

0 Bhikkhus, the pabba^/i ordination of novices
by the threefold declaration of taking refuge.

‘ And you ought, O Bhikkhus, to confer the pab-
ha//i ordination (on a novice) in this way: Let him
first have his hair and beard cut off ; let him put on
yellow robes, adjust his upper robe so as to cover
one shoulder, salute the feet of the Bhikkhus (with his
head), and sit down squatdng ; then let him raise his
joined hands and tell him to say; “ I take my refuge
in the Buddha, I take my refuge in the Dhamma, I
take my refuge in the Sa;;/gha. And for the second
time, &c. And for the third time,

‘ I prescribe, O Bhikkhus, the pabba^^A ordi-
nation of novices by this threefold declaration of
taking refuge.'

Thus the venerable SAriputta conferred the pab-
ba/^A ordination on young RAhula.

4. Then the Sakka Suddhodana went to the place
where the Blessed One was; having approached
him and having respectfully saluted the Blessed
One, he sat down near him. Sitting near him the
Sakka Suddhodana said to the Blessed One : ‘ Lord,

1 ask one boon of the Blessed One.’ (The Buddha
replied); ‘The perfect Ones, Gotama, are above
granting boons (before they know what they are ’).'
(Suddhodana said) : ‘ Lord, it is a proper and unob-
jectionable demand.’ ‘Speak, Gotama.’

5. ‘Lord, when the Blessed One gave up the

* Granting a boon (vara) is a constant phrase used of princes
whm making an open promise to give to any one whatever they
should ask. See, for instance, the (xfitaka Story, No. 9, where the
person to whom the boon was given laid it by for a convenient
season ; and then asked the king to make her son heir-apparent,
in violation of all ancient law and custom.

210

MAHAVAGGA.

6S‘

world, it was a great pain to me ; so it was when
Nanda^ did the same ; my pain was excessive when
R 4 hula too did so. The love for a son, Lord, cuts
into the skin ; having cut into the skin, it cuts into
the hide ; having cut into the hide, it cuts into- the

flesh the ligaments, .... the bones ; having

cut into the bones, it reaches the marrow and dwells
in the marrow. Pray, Lord, let their reverences not
confer the pabba^^i ordination on a son without
his father’s and mother’s permission.’

Then the Blessed One taught the Sakka Suddho-
dana (&c., see chap. 39. 7).

‘ Let no son, O Bhikkhus, receive the pabba^^i
ordination without his father’s and mother’s per-
mission. He who confers -the pabba^^i ordination
(on a son without that permission), is guilty of a
dukka/a offence.’

66 .

Then the Blessed One, after having resided at
Kapilavatthu as long as he thought fit, went forth
to SAvatthi. Wandering from place to place he
came to Savatthi. There the Blessed One dwelt
at Savatthi, in the CPetavana, the Ar4ma of Ani-
thapi«fl?ika.

At that time a family who devoted themselves to
the (especial) service of the venerable Siriputta sent
a boy to the venerable Siriputta (with this message) :

f * Njmda was a son of MahSp^patt, a half-brother of the
, Buddha. See the story of his conversion in Rh. D.’s Buddhist
j Birth Stories, p. 128 (later and fuller accounts can be seen in
I Hardy, Manual, p. 204 seq. ; Beal, Romantic Legend, p. 369 seq.)

I, 56. ADMISSION TO THE ORDER OF BHIKKHUS. 2 1 1

‘ Might the Thera confer the pabba^^i ordination
on this boy.’ Now the veherable Siriputta thought :
‘ The Blessed One has established the rule^ that
no one may ordain two novices, and I have already
one novice, RAhula. Now what am I to do ?’

He told the thing to the Blessed One.

‘ I allow, O Bhikkhus, a learned, competent
Bhikkhu to ordain two novices, or to ordain as
many novices as he is able to administer exhorta-
tion and instruction to.’

56 . 1 /

Now the novices thought : ‘ How many precepts^
are there for us, and in what (precepts) are we to
exercise ourselves ?’

They told this thing to the Blessed One.

‘ I prescribe, O Bhikkhus, ten precepts for the
novices, and the exercise of the novices in these
(ten precepts), viz. abstinence from destroying life ;
abstinence from stealing; abstinence from impu-
rity; abstinence from lying; abstinence from
arrack and strong drink and intoxicating
liquors, which cause indifference (to religion);
abstinence from eating at forbidden times;
abstinence from dancing, singing, music, and
seeing spectacles; abstinence from garlands,
scents, unguents, ornaments, and finery; absti-
nence from (the use of) high or broad beds;
abstinence from accepting gold or silver. I pre-

* See chap. 52.

* SikkhSpaddni, literally, ‘Paths of Training.' Compare chap. 60.

212

mahAvagga.

S7»

scribe, O Bhikkhus, these ten precepts for the
novices, and the exercise of the novices in these
(ten precepts).’

67.

1. At that time novices did not show reverence
and confidence towards the Bhikkhus, and did not
live in harmony with them. The Bhikkhus were
annoyed, murmured, and became angry : ‘ How can
the novices not show reverence and confidence
towards the Bhikkhus, and not live in harmony
with them ? ’

They told this thing to the Blessed One.

‘ I prescribe, O Bhikkhus, that you inflict punish-
ment upon a novice in five cases: When he is
intent on the Bhikkhus’ receiving no alms ; when he
is intent on the Bhikkhus’ meeting with misfortune ;
when he is intent on the Bhikkhus’ finding no resi-
dence ; when he abuses and reviles the Bhikkhus ;
when he causes divisions between Bhikkhus and
Bhikkhus. I prescribe, O Bhikkhus, that in these
five cases you inflict punishment upon a novice.’

2. Now the Bhikkhus thought : ‘ What punish-
ment are we to inflict

They told this thing to the Blessed One.

‘ I prescribe, O Bhikkhus, that you forbid them
(certain places, for instance, their own residences).’

At that time Bhikkhus forbad novices the whole
Sa;^ghdrdma. The novices, who were not admitted
to the Sa;»ghArima, went away, or returned to the
world, or went over to Titthiya schools.

They told this thing to the Blessed One.

I, 58. ADMISSION TO THE ORDER OF BHIKKHUS. 2 1 3

‘ Let them not, O Bhikkhus, forbid (novices) the
whole Samghir&ma. He who does so, commits
a dukka/a offence. I prescribe, O Bhikkhus, that
(the Bhikkhus) forbid (a novice) the place where he
lives or which he uses to frequent.’

3 . At that time Bhikkhus forbad the novices the
use of (certain kinds of) food that is taken with the
mouth. People, when they prepared rice-milk to
drink or meals for the Sa^^gha, said to the novices :
‘ Come, reverend Sirs, drink rice-milk ; come, reve-
rend Sirs, take food.’ The novices replied ; ' It is
impossible, friends ; the Bhikkhus have issued a fore-
warning (against us).’ The people were annoyed,
murmured, and became angry, thinking : ‘ How can
their reverences forbid novices the use of all food
that is taken with the mouth ?’

. They told this thing to the Blessed One.

‘ Let them not, O Bhikkhus, forbid (novices) food
that is taken with the mouth. He who does so,
commits a dukka^a offence.’

End of the section about punishment (of novices).

58.

At that time the A7«abbaggiya' Bhikkhus laid
a ban upon novices without the consent of the
upa^^ftyas (of those novices). The upa^/^4yas

* Here first appear the A'iiabbaggiya Bhikkhus (the company of
the,' six Bhikkhus’, with their attendants), the constant and indefati-
gable evil-doers throughout the whole Yinaya-Pi/aka. Buddhaghosa
(on .STullavagga 1, i) says that Panduka and Lohitaka belonged to
this company, and also Asss^ and Punabbasu are mentioned as
ATiiabbaggiyas (see Childdts s.v, ^^abbaggiyo).

214

MAHAVAGGA.

I. 59*

searched after them, thinking : ‘ How is it that our
novices have disappeared?’ The Bhikkhus said:
‘ The ^>5abbaggiya Bhikkhus, friends, have laid a ban
upon them.’ The upa^Myas were annoyed, &c.:
‘ How can the iifi^abbaggiya Bhikkhus lay a ban
upon our novices without having obtained our
consent ? ’

They told this thing to the Blessed One.

‘ Let no one, O Bhikkhus, lay a ban (upon novices)
without consent of the up^Myas. He who does,
commits a dukka/a offence.’

69 .

At that time the AT^abbaggiya Bhikkhus drew the
novices of senior Bhikkhus over (to themselves).
The Theras, who were obliged to get themselves
teeth-cleansers and water to rinse their mouths with,
became tired.

They told this thing to the Blessed One.

‘ Let no one, O Bhikkhus, draw the followers of
another Bhikkhu over to himself. He who does,
commits a dukka/a offence.’

60 .'

At that time a novice, Kant/aka. by name, who
was a follower of the venerable Upananda Sakya-
putta, had sexual intercourse with a Bhikkhunl,
Ka«a^ki by name. The Bhikkhus were annoyed,
&c. : ‘ How can a novice abandon himself to such
conduct ? ’

I, 6i. ADMISSION TO THE ORDER OF BHIKKHUS. 21 5

They told this thing to the Blessed One.

‘ I prescribe, O Bhikkhus, that you expel a novice
(from the fraternity) in the following ten cases :
When he destroys life ; when he commits theft ;
when he commits impurity; when he is a liar ; when
he drinks strong drinks ; when he speaks against
the Buddha ; when he speaks against the Dhamma ;
when he speaks against the Sa»?gha ; when he holds
false doctrines ; when he has sexual intercourse with
Bhikkhunls’. In these ten cases I prescribe, O
Bhikkhus, that you expel the novice (from the
fraternity).’

61 .

At that time, &c. ®

‘ Let a eunuch, O Bhikkhus, who has not received |
the upasampadi ordination, not receive it ; if he •
has received it, let him be expelled (from the fra- 1
ternity).’

‘ The case of the novice's committing sexual intercourse with
a Bhikkhunt can have found its place here only by a negligence of
the redactor, as it is comprised already in the third of the ten
cases (the novice’s committing impurity). Buddhaghosa (who of
course never admits anything like an inadvertence of the holy
Theras by whom the Vinaya is compiled) says that the third case
and the tenth are distinguished here, because a person that has
simply committed an impurity may receive the ordination, if he is
willing to refrain himself in future; whilst a bhikkhuntdhsaka
cannot be ordained in any case (see chap. 67).

* Tena kho pana samayena afinataro pamikko bhikkhilsu pab-
ba^to hoti, so dahare dahare bhikkhfi upasamkamitvd evam
vadeti: etha mam dyasmanto dfisethi 'ti. Bhikkhil apasddenti:
nassa pai»&ka, vinassa psoufaka, ko tayi attho 'ti. So bhikkhdhi
apasddito mahante mahante moligalle (Buddhaghosa : thfilasartre)
s£ma»ere upasamkamitv^ evam vadeti: etha mam dvuso dUsethS

2I6

mahAvagga.

I, 62, I.

62.

1. At that time there was a certain person of an
old family, whose kinsmen had died away ; he was
delicately nurtured. Now this person of an old

^family, whose kinsmen had died away, thought:

‘ I am delicatel y nu rtured ; I am not able to acquire
new riches or to augment the riches which I possess.

A What shall I do . in order that I may live a life of

I ease and without pain?’

Then this person of an old family, whose kinsmen
had died away, gave himself the following answer :
‘ There are the Sakyaputtiya Samaras, who keep
commodious precepts and live a commodious life ;
they have good meals and lie down on beds pro-
tected from wind. What if I were to procure myself
an alms-bowl and robes on my own account, and
were to have my hair and beard cut off, to put on
yellow robes, to go to the ArAma, and to live there
with the Bhikkhus.’

2. Then that person of an old family, whose
kinsmen had died away, procured himself an alms-
bowl and robes on his own account, had his hair and
beard cut off, put on yellow robes, went to the
Ardma, and respectfully saluted the Bhikkhus. The

Hi. S^ma;»er^ apas&denti: nassa pa^^/aka, vinassa pa»^aka, ko
tay^ attho Hi. So sdma;«erehi apasddito hatthibha»^e assabha;i£/e
upasa/T^kamitvd ev2jn vadeti : etha msim ivuso dfisethft Hi. Hatthi-
bha/f<& assabha;i</d diisesuxn. Te uggMysLnli khiyanti vipd^enti :
l>2Lnd2i\iSi ime sama»& SakyaputtiyS, ye pi imesam na paii</akd te pi
pa»^ake dfisenti, evam ime sabbeva abfahma^&rino Hi. Assosuxv
kho bhikkhii hatthibha^Snam assabhafi(/dna;n u^^^dyant&na^ khi-
yantdna/n vipd/^entdnam. Atha kho te bhikkhd bhagavato etam
attham dro^esu/71.

I, 63, r. ADMISSION TO THE ORDER OF BHIKKHUS. 21 7

Bhikkhus said to him : ‘ How many years, friend,
have elapsed since your upasampadi?’

‘What does that mean, friends, “years elapsed
since the upasampadd?’”

‘ And who is your upa^^^dya, friend ?’

‘ What does that word upa^^^&yamean,friends?’

The Bhikkhus said to the venerable Upili : ‘ Pray,
friend Upili, examine this ascetic.’

3. Then that person of an old family, whose
kinsmen had died away, when being examined by
the venerable Up^lli, told him the whole matter.
The venerable Updli told this thing to the Bhikkhus ;
the Bhikkhus told this thing to the Blessed One.

‘ Let a person, O Bhikkhus, who has furtively
attached himself to the Sa»«gha, if he has not re-
ceived the upasampadi ordination, not receive it ;
if he has received it, let him be expelled (from the
fraternity).

‘ Let a person, O Bhikkhus, who has gone over to
the Titthiyas’ (&c., as in chap. 61).

63 .

1. At that time there was a serpent who was
aggrieved at, ashamed of, and conceived aversion
for his having been bom as a serpent. Now this
serpent thought: ‘What am I to do in order to
become released from being a serpent, and quickly
to obtain human nature ?’ Then this serpent gave
himself the following answer : ‘ These Sakyaputtiya
Samanas lead indeed a virtuous, tranquil, holy life ;
they speak the truth; they keep the precepts of
morality, and are endowed with all virtues. If

2I8

mahAvagga.

I, 63, 2.

I could obtain pabba/^i with the Sakyaputtiya
Samaras, I should be released from being a ser-
pent and quickly obtain human nature.’

2. Then that serpent, in the shape of a youth,
went to the Bhikkhus, and asked them for the
pabba^^A ordination ; the Bhikkhus conferred on
him the pabba^^i and upasampadi ordinations.

At that time that serpent dwelt together with
a certain Bhikkhu in the last Vihira (near the boun-
dary wall of the 6^etavana). Now that Bhikkhu,
having arisen in the night, at dawn, was walking
up and down in the open air. When that Bhikkhu
had left (the VihAra), that serpent, who thought
himself safe (from discovery), fell asleep (in his
natural shape). The whole Vihdra was filled with
the snake’s body; his windings jutted out of the
window.

3. Then that Bhikkhu thought : ‘ I will go back
to the Vihira,’ opened the door, and saw the whole
Vihira filled with the snake’s body, the windings
jutting out of the window. Seeing that he was
terrified and cried out. The Bhikkhus ran up, and
said to that Bhikkhu : ‘ Why did you cry out,
friend ?’ ‘ This whole Vihira, friends, is filled with a
snake’s body ; the windings jut out of the window.’

Then that serpent awoke from that noise and sat
down on his seat. The Bhikkhus said to him :
‘ Who are you, friend ?’ ‘ I am a serpent, reverend

Sirs.’ ‘ And why have you done such a thing,
friend ?’ Then that NAga told the whole matter
to the Bhikkhus; the Bhikkhus told it to the
Blessed One.

4. In consequence of that and on this occasion
the Blessed One, having ordered the fraternity of

I, 64, 1. ADMISSION TO THE ORDER OF BHIKKHUS. 219

Bhikkhus to assemble, said to that serpent: ‘You\
serpents are not capable of (spiritual) growth in
this doctrine and discipline. However, serpent, go
and observe fast on the fourteenth, fifteenth, and
eighth day of each half month; thus will you be
released from being a serpent and quickly obtain ]
human nature.’

Then that serpent, who thought, ‘ I am not
capable of (spiritual) growth in this doctrine and
discipline,’ became sad and sorrowful, shed tears,
made an outcry, and went away.

5. Then the Blessed One said to the Bhikkhus :

‘ There are two occasions, O Bhikkhus, on which
a serpent (who has assumed human shape) manifests
his true nature : when he has sexual intercourse with
a female of his species, and if he thinks himself
safe (from discovery) and falls asleep. These, O
Bhikkhus, are the two occasions on which a serpent
manifests his true nature.

‘ Let an animal, O Bhikkhus, that has not received \
the upasampadi ordination, not receive it; if it j
has received it, let it be expelled (from the fra- j
ternity).’

I. At that time a certain young man deprived his
mother of life. He was grieved, ashamed, and
loathed this sinful deed. Now this young man
thought : ‘ What am I to do to get rid of my sinful
deed ?’ Then this young man gave himself this
answer : ' These Sakyaputtiya Samairas lead indeed
a virtuous, tranquil, holy life, &c. If I could obtain

220

mahavagga.

I, 64, 2.

with the Sakyaputtiya Samaras, I might
get rid of my sinful deed.’

2.. Then that young man went to the Bhikkhus
and asked them for the pabba^^i ordination. The
Bhikkhus said to the venerable Upili : ‘ Formerly,
friend Up&li, a serpent in the shape of a youth
received the pabba^^i ordination with the Bhik-
khus; pray, friend Upili, examine this young man.’
Then that young man, when examined by the
venerable Up 4 li, told him the whole matter. The
venerable Upili told it to the Bhikkhus; the
Bhikkhus told it to the Blessed One.

‘ Let a person, O Bhikkhus, that is guilty of matri-
cide, if he has not received the upasampadA ordi-*
nation, not receive it ; if he has received it, let him
be expelled (from the fraternity).’

65 .

At that time a certain young man deprived his
father of life (&c., as in chap. 64).

‘ Let a person, O Bhikkhus, that is guilty of par-
ricide, &C.’

66 .

I. At that time a number of Bhikkhus were travel-
ling on the road from Sfiketa to Sivatthi. On the
road robbers broke forth, robbed some of the Bhik-
khus, and killed some of them. Then ro)^! soldiers
came from Sdvatthi and caught some of the robbers ;
others of them escaped. Those who had escaped,
received pabba^^-A with the Bhikkhus ; those who
had been caught, were led to death.

1,67. ADMISSION TO THE ORDER OF BHIKKHUS. 221

2 . Then those who had been ordained, saw those
robbers who were being led to death ; seeing them
they said : ‘ It is well that we have escaped ; had we
been caught, we should also be killed thus.’ The
Bhikkhus said to them: ‘Why, what have you
done, friends ?’ Then those (robbers) who had
been ordained, told the whole matter to the Bhik-
khus. The Bhikkhus told this thing to the Blessed
One.

‘Those Bhikkhus, O Bhikkhus, were Arahats.
Let a person, O Bhikkhus, that has murdered an
Arahat, if this person has not received the upa-
sampadi ordination, not receive it; if he has re-
ceived it, let him be expelled (from the fraternity).’

67 .

At that time a number of Bhikkhunis were tra-
velling on the road from S&keta to Savatthi. On
the road robbers broke forth, robbed some of the
Bhikkhunis, and violated some of them. Then royal
soldiers (&c., as in chap. 66).

The Bhikkhus told this thing to the Blessed One.

‘Let a person, O Bhikkhus, that has violated a
Bhikkhuni (or, that has had sexual intercourse with
a Bhikkhuni), (&c., as in chap. 66).

‘Let a person, O Bhikkhus, that has caused a
schism among the Samgha, &c.

JLet a person, O Bhikkhus, that has shed (a
Buddha’s) blood,’ &c.

222

mahAvagga.

I, 68.

68 .

At that time a certain hermaphrodite had received
pabba/^i with the Bhikkhus; so karoti pi kArA-
peti pi.

They told this thing to the Blessed One.

‘ Let a hermaphrodite, O Bhikkhus,’ &c.

69 .

1. At that time the Bhikkhus conferred the
upasampadd ordination on a person that had no
upa/^^cLya.

They told this thing to the Blessed One.

‘ Let no one, O Bhikkhus, who has no upa^f/^dya,
receive the upasampadd ordination. He who con-
fers the upasampadd ordination (on such a person),
commits a dukkaAi offence.’

2. At that time the Bhikkhus conferred the upa-
sampadd ordination with the Sa/«gha as upa/-
ghkyZi.

They told this thing to the Blessed One.

‘ Let no one receive the upasampadd ordination
with the Saw^gha as upa/^Mya. He who confers
the upasampadd ordination (in such a way), com-
mits a dukka/a offence.’

3. At that time the Bhikkhus conferred the upa-
sampadd ordination with a number of Bhikkhus'
as upa/^^dya (&c., as before).

4. At that time the Bhikkhus conferred the upa-

* I.e. not with the whole fraternity residing at that place, but
with a part of it.

I, 70, 3. ADMISSION TO THE ORDER OF BHIKKHUS. 223

sampadd ordination with a eunuch as upa^^^iya,
&c. ; with a person that had furtively attached him-
self (to the Sa««gha) as upa^^^iya; with a person
that was gone over to the Titthiyas as upa/^^iya;
with an animal as upa^^^dya; with a person that
was guilty of matricide as upa^^^clya; with a per-
son that was gfuilty of parricide as upa^^^iya ; with
a person that had murdered an Arahat as upa^-
ghkydi\ with a person that had violated a Bhikkhuni
as n^&ggktyz] with a person that had caused a
schism among the Sawgha as upa^^^&ya; with a
person that had shed (a Buddha’s) blood as upa^-
ghkya.-, with a hermaphrodite as upa^^^iya.

They told this thing to the Blessed One.

‘ Let no one,’ &c. (as in the first clause).

70 .

1. At that time the Bhikkhus conferred the upa-
sampadd ordination on persons that had no alms-
bowl. They received alms with their hands. People
were annoyed, murmured, and became ang^, saying,
‘ Like the Titthiyas.’

They told this thing to the Blessed One.

‘ Let no one, % Bhikkhus, receive the upasam-
padd ordination without having an alms-bowl. He
who confers the upasampadi ordination (on a per-
son that has not), commits a dukka/a offence.’

2. At that time the Bhikkhus conferred the upa-
sampadS ordination on persons that had no robes.
They went out for alms naked. People were an-
noyed (&c., as in J i).

3. At that time the Bhikkhus conferred the upa-

224

mahAvagga.

7 ®> 4 *

sampadA ordination on persons that had neither
alms-bowl nor robes. They went out for alms naked
and (received alms) with their hands. People were
annoyed (&c., as in ^ i).

4. At that time the Bhikkhus conferred the upa-
sampadA ordination on persons that had borrowed
alms-bowls. After the ordination (the owners) took
their alms-bowls back ; (the Bhikkhus) received alms

with their hands. People were annoyed (&c

down to) : ‘ Like the Titthiyas.'

They told this thing to the Blessed One.

‘Let no one, O Bhikkhus, receive the upasam-
padA ordination who has borrowed the alms-bowl.
He who confers,’ &c. (as in the first clause).

5. At that time the Bhikkhus conferred the upa-
s am pad A ordination on persons that had borrowed
robes. After the ordination (the owners) took their
robes back ; (the Bhikkhus) went out for alms naked.
People were annoyed (&c., as in ^ i to the end).

6. At that time the Bhikkhus conferred the upa-
sampadA ordination on persons that had borrowed
alms-bowls and robes, &c.

Here end the twenty cases in which upasampadA
is forbidden.

i.

71 .

I. At that time the Bhikkhus conferred the
pabba^^A ordination on a person whose hands
were cut off, on a person whose feet were cut off,
whose hands and feet were cut off, whose ears
were cut off, whose nose was cut off, whose ears and
nose were cut off, whose fingers were cut off, whose

I, 71. ADMISSION TO THE ORDER OF BHIKKHUS. 225

thumbs were cut off, whose tendons (of the feet)
were cut, who had hands like a snake’s hood^, who
was a hump-back, or a dwarf, or a person that had
a goitre, that had been branded, that had been
scourged, on a proclaimed robber, on a person that
had elephantiasis, that was afflicted with bad illness,
that gave offence (by any deformity) to those who
saw him, on a one-eyed person, on a person with
a crooked limb, on a lame person, on a person that
was paralysed on one side, on a cripple ^ on a person
weak from age, on a blind man, on a dumb man, on
a deaf man, on a blind and dumb man, on a blind
and deaf man, on a deaf and dumb man, on a blind,
deaf and dumb man.

They told this thing to the Blessed One.

‘ Let no person, O Bhikkhus, whose hands are cut
off, receive the pabba^/i ordination. Let no person
whose feet are cut off, receive the pabba^^i ordi-
nation, &c. (each of the above cases being here
repeated). He who confers the pabba^/^ ordina-
tion (on such persons), is guilty of a dukka/a
offence.’

Here end the thirty-two^c ases in which pabba/^4
is forbidden.

End of the ninth Bhi/zav^ra.

* ‘ Whose fingers are grown together, like bats’ wings' (BudJha-
ghosa).

* Buddhaghosa (Berlin MS.) explains ‘^^inniriyfipatha’ by
‘ pidhasappi.’ We ought to read, no doubt, ptMasappi, which
is Sanskrit piMasarpin, a cripple that is moved on in a rolling
chair.

226

mahAvagga.

1, 72, 1.

72.

1. At that time the AT^abbaggiya Bhikkhus gave
a nissaya to shameless Bhikkhus.

They told this thing to the Blessed One.

‘Let no one, O Bhikkhus, give a nissaya to
shameless Bhikkhus. He who does, is guilty of a
dukka/a offence.’

At that time some Bhikkhus lived in dependence
on shameless Bhikkhus (i. e. they received a nis-
saya from them, they chose them for their upa^-
^/ikyas or i/ 6 ariyas); ere long they became also
shameless, bad Bhikkhus.

They told this thing to the Blessed One.

‘ Let no one, O Bhikkhus, live in dependence on
shameless Bhikkhus. He who does, is guilty of
a dukka/a offence.’

2. Now the Bhikkhus thought: ‘The Blessed
One has prescribed that we shall not give a nissaya
to shameless Bhikkhus, nor live in dependence on
shameless Bhikkhus. Now how are we to discern
modest and shameless persons ?’

They told this thing to the Blessed One.

‘ I prescribe, O Bhikkhus, that you wait first four
or five days until you have seen how a Bhikkhu
behaves to the other Bhikkhus.’

73 .

I. At that time a certain Bhikkhu was travelling on
the road in the Kosala country. Now this Bhikkhu
thought : ‘ The Blessed One has prescribed that we
shall not live without a nissaya (of an dA’ariya and

I, 73 , 4 . ADMISSION TO THE ORDER OF BHIKKHUS. 227

an upa^^^dya) ; now I want a nissaya, but I am
travelling. What am I to do ?’

They told this thing to the Blessed One.

‘ I allow, O Bhikkhus, a travelling Bhikkhu who
can get no nissaya, to live without a nissaya.’

2. At that time two Bhikkhus were travelling on
the road in the Kosala country. They came to
a certain residence ; there one of the two Bhikkhus
was taken ill. Now that sick Bhikkhu thought:

‘ The Blessed One has prescribed that we shall not
live without a nissaya ; now I want a nissaya, but
I am sick. What am I to do ?’

They told this thing to the Blessed One.

‘ I allow, O Bhikkhus, a sick Bhikkhu who can
get no nissaya, to live without a nissaya.’

3. Now the other Bhikkhu, who nursed that sick
Bhikkhu, thought ; ‘ The Blessed One has pre-
scribed, &c. ; now I want a nissaya, but this
Bhikkhu is sick. What am I to do ?’

They told this thing to the Blessed One.

‘ I allow, O Bhikkhus, a Bhikkhu who is nursing
a sick Bhikkhu, if he can get no nissaya and the
sick asks him (to remain with him), to live without
a nissaya.’

4. At that time a certain Bhikkhu lived in the
forest ; he had a dwelling-place where he lived
pleasantly. Now this Bhikkhu thought : ‘ The
Blessed One has prescribed, &c. ; now I want
a nissaya, but I live in the forest and have a i
dwelling-place where I live pleasantly. What am (
I to do ?’

They told this thing to the Blessed One.

‘ I allow, O Bhikkhus, a Bhikkhu living in the <
forest who finds a place where he may live pleasantly, j

228

mahAvagga.

I. 74, I.

j and who can get (there) no nissaya, to live without
I a nissaya (saying to himself) : “ If a proper person
j to give me nissaya com^s hither, I will take nis-
( saya of that person.” ’

74 .

I. At that time there was a person that desired
to receive the upasampadA ordination from the
venerable Mahikassapa. Then the venerable Mahi-
kassapa sent a messenger to the venerable Ananda :
‘ Come, Ananda, and recite the upasampadA pro-
clamation for this person.’ The venerable Ananda
said : ‘ I cannot pronounce the Thera’s (i. e. MahA-
kassapa’s) name ; the Thera is too venerable com-
pared with me.’

They told this thing to the Blessed One.

‘ I allow you, O Bhikkhus, to use also the family
name (of the upa,^^^Aya, instead of his proper
name) in the proclamation.’

2. At that time there were two persons that
desired to receive the upasampadA ordination from
the venerable MahAkassapa. They quarrelled with
each other. (One said) : ‘ I will receive the upa-
sampadA ordination first.’ (The other said): ‘ Nay,

I will receive it first.’

They told this thing to the Blessed One.

I allow you, O Bhikkhus, to ordain two persons
by one proclamation.’

3. At that time there were persons who desired
to receive the upasampadA ordination from dif-
ferent Theras. They quarrelled with each other.
(One said): ‘ I will receive the upasampadA ordina-

I, 75. ADMISSION TO THE ORDER OF BHIKKHUS. 229

tion first’ (The other said): ‘Nay, I will receive
it first’ The Theras said : ‘ Well, friends, let us
ordain them altogether by one proclamation.’

They told this thing to the Blessed One.

‘ I allow you, O Bhikkhus, to ordain two or three
persons by one proclamation, provided they have
the same upa^/^flya, but not if they have dif-
ferent upa^^^iyas.’

75 .

At that time the venerable Kumirakassapa had
received the upasampadi ordination when he had
completed the twentieth year from his conception
(but not from his birth). Now the venerable Kumd-
rakassapa thought : ‘ The Blessed One has forbidden
us to confer the upasampadi ordination on persons
under twenty years of age^, and I have completed
my twentieth year (only) from my conception. Have
I, therefore, received the upasampadi ordination,
or have I not received it ?’

They told this thing to the Blessed One.

‘ When, O Bhikkhus, in the womb the first thought
rises up (in the nascent being), the first conscious-
ness manifests itself, according to this the (true)
birth should be reckoned. I allow you, O Bhikkhus,
to confer the upasampadd ordination on persons
that have completed the twentieth year from their |
conception (only).’

* See chap. 49. 6.

230

mahAvagga.

1, 76, 1.

76 .

I. At that time ordained Bhikkhuswere seen who
were afflicted with leprosy, boils, dry leprosy, con-
sumption, and fits.

They told this thing to the Blessed One.

‘ I prescribe, O Bhikkhus, that he who confers
the upasampadi ordination, ask (the person to be
ordained) about the Disqualifications (for receiving
the ordination). And let him ask, O Bhikkhus, in
this way :

‘Are you afflicted with the following diseases,
leprosy, boils, dry leprosy, consumption, and fits

‘ Are you a man ?

‘ Are you a male ?

‘ Are you a freeman ?

‘ Have you no debts ?

‘ Are you not in the royal service ?

‘ Have your father and mother given their consent'?

‘ Are you full twenty years old ?

‘ Are your alms-bowl and your robes in due state ?

‘ What is your name ?

‘ What is your upa^^^Aya’s name ?’

2. At that time the Bhikkhus asked the persons
who desired to receive the upasampadA ordination
about the Disqualifications, without having them in-
structed beforehand (how to answer). The persons
that desired to be ordained, became disconcerted,
perplexed, and could not answer.

They told this thing to the Blessed One.

I prescribe, O Bhikkhus, that you first instruct
(the persons desirous of being ordained), and then
ask them about the Disqualifications.’

I, 76, 5. ADMISSION TO THE ORDER OF BHIKKHUS.. 23 1

3. Then they instructed (the candidates) in the
midst of the assembly; the persons desirous of being
ordained became disconcerted, perplexed, and could
not answer nevertheless.

They told this thing to the Blessed One.

‘ I prescribe, O Bhikkhus, that you instruct them
aside, and ask them about the Disqualifications be-
fore the assembly. And you ought, O Bhikkhus,
to instruct them in this way: You ought first to
cause them to choose an upa^^^iya; when they
have chosen an upa^^^Aya, their alms-bowl and
robes must be shown to them, “ This is your alms-
bowl, this is your surnghk^i, this is your upper
robe, this is your under garment; come and place
yourself here.” ’

4. Ignorant, unlearned Bhikkhus instructed them;
the persons desirous of being ordained, though they
had been instructed, became disconcerted, perplexed,
and could not answer.

They told this thing to the Blessed One.

‘ Let no ignorant, unlearned Bhikkhus, O Bhik-
khus, instruct them. If they do, they commit a
dukka/a offence. I prescribe, O Bhikkhus, that
a learned, competent Bhikkhu instruct them.’

5. At that time persons instructed them who
were not appointed thereto.

They told this thing to the Blessed One.

‘ Let no one, O Bhikkhus, instruct them without
being appointed thereto. He who so instructs, com-
mits a dukka/a offence. I prescribe, O Bhikkhus,
that an appointed Bhikkhu is to instruct them. And
(this Bhikkhu), O Bhikkhus, is to be appointed in this
way : One may either appoint himself, or one may
appoint another person. And how is (a Bhikkhu) to

232

mahAvagga.

I, 7^>

appoint himself ? Let a learned, competent Bhikkhu
proclaim the following «atti before the Sa»«gha:
“ Let the Sawgha, reverend Sirs, hear me. N. N. de-
sires to receive the upasampadd ordination from
the venerable N. N. If the Sazwgha is ready, I will
instruct N. N.” Thus one may appoint himself.

6. ‘ And how is (a Bhikkhu) to appoint another
person? Let a learned, competent Bhikkhu pro-
claim the following »atti before the Sa»«gha : “ Let
the Sawgha, &c. N. N. desires to receive the upa-
sampadd ordination from the venerable N. N. If
the Sa»2gha is ready, let N. N. instruct N. N.” Thus
one may appoint another person.

7. ‘Then let that appointed Bhikkhu go to the
person who desires to be ordained, and thus address
him : “ Do you hear, N. N. ? This is the time for
you to speak the truth, and to say that which is.
When I ask you before the assembly about that
which is, you ought, if it is so, to answer : ‘ It is if it
is not so, you ought to answer : ‘ It is not.’ Be not
disconcerted, be not perplexed. I shall ask you thus :

‘ Are you afflicted with the following diseases, &c ? ””

8. (After the instruction, the instructor and the
candidate) appeared together before the assembly.

‘ Let them not appear together. Let the instructor
come first and proclaim the following ^atti before
the Sawgha : “ Let the Sawgha, reverend Sirs, hear
me. N. N. desires to receive the upasampadd
ordination from the venerable N. N.; he has been
instructed by me. If the Sawgha is ready, let N. N.
come. ’ Then let him be told : “ Come on.” Let
him be told to adjust his upper robe (&c., see chap.
^9' 2), to raise his joined hands, and to ask (the
Sa»*gha) for the upasampadd ordination (by say-

I, 76, 10. ADMISSION TO THE ORDER OF BHIKKHUS. 233

ing), “ I ask the Sawgha, reverend Sirs, for the upa-
sampadi ordination; might the Sawgha, reverend
Sirs, draw me out (of the sinful world) out of compas-
sion towards me. And for the second time, reverend
Sirs, I ask, &c. And for the third time, reverend
Sirs, I ask, &c.”

9. ‘ Then let a learned, competent Bhikkhu proclaim
the following »atti before the Sawgha : “ Let the
Sa»?gha, reverend Sirs, hear me. This person N. N.
desires to receive the upasampadi ordination from
the venerable N. N. If the Sa;«gha is ready, let me
ask N. N. about the Disqualifications.

‘ “ Do you hear, N. N.? This is the time for you
(&c., see § 7, down to :) you ought to answer : ‘ It
is not’ ”

‘ “Are you afflicted with the followingdiseases, S^c.?’’

10. ‘ Then let a learned, competent Bhikkhu pro-
claim the following watti before the Sawgha : “ Let
the Sa»«gha, reverend Sirs, hear me. This person
N. N. desires to receive the upas amp add ordi-
nation from the venerable N.N.; he is free from
the Disqualifications; his alms-bowl and robes are
in due state. N. N. asks the Sawgha for the upa-
sampadd ordination with N. N. as upa^^^dya. If
the Sa/«gha is ready, &c.^’”

End of the regulations for the upasampadd
ordination®.

* Here follows the usual complete formula of a natti^atuttha
kamma; see chaps. 28. 4-6 ; 29. 3, &c.

* With these sections compare the previous chapters 12, 28 and
following, 36 and following. The nattis prescribed in this chapter,
together with the Three Refuges Formula prescribed in chap. la,
§ 4, the whole of chap. 77, and the Four Interdictions form together

234

mahAvagga.

1 . 77 -

77 .

‘ Then let them measure the shadow, tell (the
newly-ordained Bhikkhu) what season and what
date it is, tell him what part of the day it is, tell
him the whole formula^, and tell him the four Re-
sources : “ The religious life has the morsels of food
given in alms for its resource (&c., as in chap. 30. 4).” ’

End of the four Resources.

78 .

1 . At that time the Bhikkhus, after having conferred
the upasampadi ordination on a certain Bhikkhu,
left him alone and went away. Afterwards, as he
went alone (to the Arima), he met on the way his
former wife. She said to him : ‘ Have you now em-
braced the religious life?’ (He replied): ‘Yes, I
have embraced the religious life.’ ‘ It is difficult to
persons who have embraced religious life, to obtain
sexual intercourse ; come, let us have intercourse.’
He practised intercourse with her, and, in conse-
quence, came late (to the Arima). The Bhikkhus
said: ‘ How is it, friend, that you are so late?’

2. Then that Bhikkhu told the whole matter
to the Bhikkhus. The Bhikkhus told it to the
Blessed One.

the current ceremony of ordination (the upasampadd-kamma-
as now still in use in the Order. See the Journal of the
Royal Asiatic Society, New Series, VII, p. i.

‘ I. e., according to Buddhaghosa, repeat to him all the data
specified before together, in order that he might be able to give a
correct answer when asked about his spiritual age.

I, 78, 5. ADMISSION TO THE ORDER OF BHIKKHUS. 235

‘ I prescribe, O Bhikkhus, that you give a com-
panion to a newly-ordained Bhikkhu, and that you
tell him the four Interdictions :

A Bhikkhu who has received the upasampadi
ordination, ought to abstain from all sexual
intercourse even with an animal. A Bhikkhu
who practises sexual intercourse is no Sama«a and
no follower of the Sakyaputta. As a man whose
head is cut off, cannot live any longer with his trunk
alone, thus a Bhikkhu who practises sexual inter-
course is no Samawa and no follower of the Sakya-
putta. Abstain from doing so as long as your life lasts.

3. ‘“A Bhikkhu who has received the upasam-
padd ordination, ought to abstain from taking
what is not given to him, and from theft, even
of a blade of grass. A Bhikkhu who takes what is
not given to him, or steals it, if it is a pdda (i. e. a
quarter of a kdrshdpa»a), or of the value of a
pdda, or worth more than a pdda, is no Samaria and
no follower of the Sakyaputta. As a sear leaf loosed
from its stalk cannot become green again, thus a
Bhikkhu who takes, &c. Abstain from doing so as
long as your life lasts.

4. ‘“A Bhikkhu who has received the upasam-
padd ordination, ought not intentionally to
destroy the life of any being down to a worm
or an ant. A Bhikkhu who intentionally kills a
human being, down to procuring abortion, is no
Samawa and no follower of the Sakyaputta. As a
great stone which is broken in two, cannot be re-
united, thus a Bhikkhu who intentionally, &c. Abstain
from doing so as long as your life lasts.

5. ‘“A Bhikkhu who has received the upa-
sampadd ordination, ought not to attribute to

236

mahAvagga.

1, 19 > I-

himself any superhuman condition, and not to
say even : ‘ I find delight in sojourning in an empty
place.’ A Bhikkhu who with bad intention and out
of covetousness attributes to himself a superhuman
condition, which he has not, and which he is not pos-
sessed of, a state oi ghknz. (mystic meditation), or
one of the vimokkhas*, or one of the samAdhis
(states of self-concentration), or one of the samA-
pattis (the attainment of the four^^Anas and four
of the eight vimokkhas), or one of the Paths
(of sanctification), or one of the Fruits thereof, is no
Sama»a and no follower of the Sakyaputta. As a
palm tree of which the top sprout has been cut off,
cannot grow again, thus a Bhikkhu who with bad
intention, &c. Abstain from doing so as long as
your life lasts.” ’

End of the four Interdicts.

79 .

1. At that time a certain Bhikkhu against whom
expulsion ** had been pronounced for his refusal to
see an offence (committed by himself), returned to

* The vimokkhas (literally, deliverances) are eight stages of
meditation different from the four ^Mnas. The characteristics of
the different vimokkhas are specified by Childers s. v.

* This temporary expulsion (ukkhepaniyakamma), which is
pronounced against Bhikkhus who refuse to see an offence com-
mitted by themselves (dpattiy^ adassane), or to atone for such an
offence (dpattiyS appa/ikamme), or to renounce a false doc-
trine (pipik&ya di/Z^iyi appa/inissagge), must be distin-
guished from the definitive and permanent expulsion (nfisanfl)
which is pronounced against Bhikkhus who have committed a p&rft-

I offence, or in cases like those treated of in chapters 6i seq.

I, 79, 3. ADMISSION TO THE ORDER OF BHIKKHUS. 237

the world. Afterwards he came back to the Bhikkhus
and asked them for the upasampadi ordination.

They told this thing to the Blessed One.

‘ In case, O Bhikkhus, that a Bhikkhu against
whom expulsion has been pronounced for his refusal
to see an offence (committed by himself), returns to
the world, and afterwards comes back to the Bhikkhus
and asks them for the upasampadi ordination,
let them say to him : “ Will you see that offence ?”
If he replies : “ I will see it,” let him be admitted to
the pabba^^i ordination ; if he replies : “ I will
not see it,” let him not be admitted to the pab-
ordination.

2. ‘ When he has received the pabba^^i ordina-
tion let them say to him ; “Will you see that offence?”
If he says ; “ I will see it,” let him be admitted to
the upasampadi ordination; if he says: “I will
not see it,” let him not be admitted to the upasam-
padS ordination.

‘ When he has received the upasampadi ordina-
tion (&c., as before). If he says : “ I will see it,”
let him be restored ^ ; if he says : “ I will not see it,”
let him not be restored.

‘ When he has been restored, let them say to
him : “ Do you see that offence ?” If he sees it,
well and good ; if he does not see it, let them expel
him again, if it is possible to bring about unanimity
(of the fraternity for the sentence of expulsion) ; if
that is impossible, it is no offence to live and to
dwell together (with such a Bhikkhu).

3. ‘ In case, O Bhikkhus, that a Bhikkhu against
whom expulsion has been pronounced for his refusal

' I. e. the sentence of expulsion is abolished; compare the
Samanta PSsMk&, ap. Minayefif, Prdtimoksha, p. 92.

238

MAHAVAGGA.

I, 79. 4 -

to atone for an offence (committed by himself), &c.’
When he has been restored, let them say to him :
“ Atone now for that offence.” If he atones for it,
well and good, &c.

4. ‘In case, O Bhikkhus, that a Bhikkhu against
whom expulsion has been pronounced for his refusal
to renounce a false doctrine, &c.® When he has
been restored, let them say to him ; “ Renounce now
that false doctrine.” If he renounces it, well and
good, &c.’

End of the first Khandhaka, which is called the
Great Khandhaka®.

’ As in §§ I, 2. Instead of ‘Will you see that offence?’ and,
‘ I will see it,’ read here : ‘ Will you atone for that offence ? ’ and,
‘ I will atone for it.’

* As above. Read here : ‘ Will you renounce that false doc-
trine?’ and, ‘I will renounce it.’

’ Here follow some A’lokas, probably written in Ceylon, and an
elaborate Table of Contents, both of which we leave untranslated.
The Slokas are introductory to the Table of Contents (uddana)
and belong to it. A similar Table of Contents is found in the MSS.
nearly after all the other Khandhakas.

II, I, 3 . Ul’OSATHA CEREMONY, AND pAtIMOKKHA. 239

SECOND KHANDHAKA.

(the UPOSATIIA CEREMONY, AND THE pAtIMOKKHA.)

JL

1. At that time the blessed Buddha dwelt near
Ra^gaha, on the Gi^^akd/a mountain (‘ the Vul-
ture’s Peak’). At that time the ParibbA^kas
belonging to Titthiya schools assembled on the
fourteenth, fifteenth, and eighth day of each half
month * and recited Aeir Dhamnia. The people |
went to them in order to hear the Dhamma. They i
were filled with favour towards, and were filled with [
faith in, the Paribbi^akas belonging to Titthiya j
schools; the ParibbA^^kas belonging to T'lttHTya
schools gained adherents.

2. Now when the MAgadha king Seniya Bimbi-
sAra was alone, and had retired into solitude, the
following consideration presented itself to his mind :

‘ The PariobA^kas belonging to Titthija schools
assemble now on the fourteenth, fifteenth, and eighth
day of each half month and recite their Dhamma.
The people go to them in order to hear the Dhamma.
They are filled with favour towards, and are filled with
faith in, the ParibbA^kas who belong to Titthiya

* One should be inclined to understand that the Faribb%akas
assembled twice each half month, on the eighth day of the pakkha
and on the fourteenth or fifteenth day, according to the different
length of the pakkha. However, chap. 4 makes it probable that
not two days in each pakkha are to be understood, but three.
Compare, however, the remark of Buddhaghosa, quoted in the
note on chap. 34. i.

240

mahAvagga.

n. 1, 3*

schools ; the Paribb^akas who belong to Titthiya
schools gain adherents. What if the reverend ones
(the Buddhist Bhikkhus) were to assemble also on
the fourteenth, fifteenth, and eighth day of each half
month.’

3. Then the MAgadha king Seniya BimbisAra went
to the place where the Blessed One was; having
approached him and having respectfully saluted the
Blessed One, he sat down near him. Sitting near
him the MAgadha king Seniya BimbisAra said to the
Blessed One : ‘ Lord, when I was alone and had
retired into solitude, the following consideration pre-
sented itself to my mind : “ The ParibbA^kas, &c. ;
what if the reverend ones were to assemble also on
the fourteenth, fifteenth, and eighth day of each half
month.” Well, Lord, let the reverend ones assemble
also on the fourteenth, fifteenth, and eighth day of
each half month.’

4. Then the Blessed One taught, incited, animated,
and gladdened the MAgadha king Seniya BimbisAra
by religious discourse ; and the MAgadha king Seniya
BimbisAra, having been taught .... and gladdened
by the Blessed One by religious discourse, rose from
his seat, respectfully saluted the Blessed One, passed
round him with his right side towards him, and went
away.

In consequence of that and on this occasion the
Blessed One, after having delivered a religious dis-
course, thus addressed the Bhikkhus : ‘ I prescribe,
O Bhikkhus, that you assemble on the fourteenth,
fifteenth, and eighth day of each month.’

II, 3. 1 . UPOSATHA CEREMONY, AND pAtIMOKKHA. 24I

2 .

At that time the Bhikkhus, considering that the
Blessed One had ordered them to assemble on the
fourteenth &c. day of each half month, assembled
on the fourteenth &c. day of each half month and
sat there silent The people went to them in order
to hear the Dhamma. They were annoyed, mur-
mured, and became angry: ‘How can the Sakya-
puttiya Sama«as, when they have assembled on the
fourteenth &c. day of each half month, sit there
silent, like the dumb, or like hogs ? Ought they
not to recite the Dhamma, when they have assem-
bled?’ Some Bhikkhus heard those people that
were annoyed, murmured, and had become angry ;
these Bhikkhus told this thing to the Blessed One.
In consequence of that and on this occasion the
Blessed One, after having delivered a religious dis-
course, thus addressed the Bhikkhus ; ‘ I prescribe,
O Bhikkhus, that you recite the Dhamma, when
you have assembled on the fourteenth &c. day of
each half month.’

3 .

1. Now when the Blessed One was alone and had
retired into solitude, the following consideration pre-
sented itself to his mind : ‘ What if I were to
prescribe that the Bhikkhus recite as the Pdti-
mokkha* the precepts which I have promulgated to

’ On the origin and the meaning of the title * Pitimokkha,’ see
our Introduction, p. xxvii.

242

MAHAVAGGA.

II. 3 . 3 -

them; this will be their Uposatha service (service
of the fast-day).’

2, And the Blessed One, having left the solitude
in the evening, in consequence of that and on this
occasion, after having delivered a religious discourse,
thus addressed the Bhikkhus : ‘ When I was alone,
O Bhikkhus, and had retired into solitude, the fol-
lowing consideration, &c., this will be their Upo-
satha service. I prescribe you, O Bhikkhus, to
recite the Pitimokkha.

3. ‘And you ought, O Bhikkhus, to recite it in
this way : Let a learned, competent Bhikkhu pro-
claim the following «atti before the Sawgha : “ Let
the Sawgha, reverend Sirs, hear me. To-day it is
Uposatha, the fifteenth (of the half month). If the
Sa/«gha is ready, let the Sawgha hold the Upo-
satha service and recite the Pitimokkha. What
ought to be first done by the Sa;;2gha ? Proclaim
the pirisuddhiS Sirs. I will recite the Piti-
mokkha.”

“‘We hear it well and fix well the mind on it all
of us*.”

‘ “ He who has committed an offence, may con-
fess it ; if there is no offence, you should remain
silent; from your being silent I shall understand
that the reverend brethen are pure (from offences).
As a single person that has been asked a question,
answers it, the same is the matter if before an

‘ See chap. 22. If a Bhikkhu is prevented by disease from
assisting to the Pdtimokkha ceremony, he is to charge another
Bhikkhu with his pirisuddhi, i.e. with the solemn declaration
that he is pure from the offences specified in the Pfitimokkha.

* These words are evidently the answer of the Bhikkhus then
present to the proclamation of the pfitimokkhuddesaka.

II, 3. 4 - UPOSATHA CEREMONY, AND pAtIMOKKHA. 243

assembly like this a question has been solemnly
proclaimed three times : if a Bhikkhu, after a three-
fold proclamation, does not confess an existing
offence which he remembers, he commits an inten-
tional falsehood. Now, reverend brethren, an
intentional falsehood has been declared an impedi-
ment^ by the Blessed One. Therefore, by a
Bhikkhu who has committed (an offence), and
remembers it, and desires to become pure, an
existing offence should be confessed ; for if it has
been confessed, it is treated duly.” ’

4.® ‘ Pitimokkhaw it is the beginning, it is
the face (mukhaw), it is the principal (pamu-
k.ha.m) of good qualities; therefore it is called
‘ pAtimokkha^*®.’

‘Ayasmanto this word ‘Ayasmanto’ is an
expression of friendliness, an expression of re-
spect, an appellation that infers respectfulness and
reverence.

‘ UddisissAmi I will pronounce, I will show,
I will proclaim, I will establish, I will unveil, I will
distinguish, I will make evident, I will declare.

‘Taw’ (it) : this refers to the Pitimokkha.

‘ Sabbe va santi’ (all of us): as many as are pre-
sent in that assembly, aged, young, and middle-aged
(Bhikkhus), are denoted by ‘sabbe va santS*.’

‘ Sddhukaw su«oma’ (we hear it well) : admit-

* See § 7.

* §§ 4“8 contain an explanation, word by word, of the formula
given in § 3. This explanation is a portion of the ancient com-
mentary on the Pitimokkha which at the time of the redaction of
the Vinaya Pi/aka has been admitted into it in its full extent (see
the Introduction, p. xv seq.).

* See p. 241, note i.

* See p. 1, note 5.

R 2

244

mahAvagga.

n, 3, s-

ting its authority, fixing our minds on it, we repeat
the whole of it in our thoughts.

‘ Manasikaroma’ (we fix our minds on it) : we
listen to it with concentrated, not perplexed, not
confused thoughts.

5. ‘Yassa siyi Apatti’ (he who has committed
an offence) : he who, whether an aged or young or
middle-aged Bhikkhu, has committed some offence
belonging to the five classes of offences or to the
seven classes of offences

‘So Avikareyya:’ he may show it, unveil it,
make it evident, declare it before the Sa»2gha (the
full chapter of Bhikkhus), or before a small number,
or before one person.

‘Asanti Apatti’ (a non-existing offence); an
offence which has not been committed, or which has
been committed and atoned for.

‘Tu«h! bhavitabba/^’ (he ought to remain
silent) : he ought to accept (the recitation of the
PAtimokkha without any answer), he ought not to
utter anything.

‘ ParisuddhA ’ti vedissAmi’ (I shall understand
that they are pure) : I shall infer, I shall know.

6. ‘ YathA kho pana pa^'^ekapuZ/^assa vey-
yAkara«a»« hoti’ (as a single person that has been
asked a question answers it) : as a single person
that has been asked a question by another one,
would answer it, thus (those who are present) in
that assembly ought to understand : ‘ He asks me.’

I * The five classes of offences are, the pfiri^ika, sawghddi-
sesa, pd^ittiya, pd/idesaniya, dukka/a offences; the seven
classes, the pdrd^ika, sawghddisesa, thulla^Aaya, pd^ittiya,
pd/idesaniya, dukka/a,dubbhdsita offences. See, for instance,
^ullavagga IX, 3, 3.

II, 3 , 7 " UPOSATHA CEREMONY, AND pAtIMOKKHA. 245

‘ EvarApA parish’ (an assembly like this): this
refers to the assembly of Bhikkhus.

‘ YAvatatiyaw anussAvita;;; hoti’ (it has been
solemnly proclaimed three times): it has been
solemnly proclaimed once, and the second time,
and the third time.

‘ SaramAno ’ (remembering it): knowing it, being
conscious of it.

‘ Santi Apatti’ (an existing offence) : an offence
which has been committed, or which has been com-
mitted and not been atoned for.

‘ NAvikareyya :’ he does not show it, he does
not unveil it, he does not make it evident, he does
not declare it before the Sawgha, or before a small
chapter, or before one person.

7. ‘ Sampa^AnamusAvAd’ assa hoti’ (he com-
mits an intentional falsehood) : what is intentional
falsehood ? It is a sin

‘AntarAyiko dhammo vutto bhagavatA’ (it
has been declared an impediment by the Blessed
One) : an impediment to what ? An impediment to
the attainment of the first GMm, an impediment to
the attainment of the second . . . third . . . fourth
G/tkna, an impediment to the attainment of the
6^>^Anas, Vimokkhas *, SamAdhis (states of self-con-
centration), SamApattis (the eight attainments of
the four G/iknas and four of the eight Vimokkhas),

* The PSli text has ‘dukka/a.' We cannot interpret here
dukka/a in the technical sense of a dukka/a offence (see the
Introduction, p. xxiv), for intentional falsehood belongs to the
class of the pi/^ittiya offences, among which it occupies the first
place.

* See the note on I, 78, 5.

246

mahAvagga.

11,3,8-

the states of renunciation, of escape (from the world),
of seclusion, of (all) good qualities,

‘ T asmA for that reason.

‘SaramAnena’ (by him who remembers it): by
him who knows it and is conscious of it.

‘ Visuddhipekkhena’ (by him who desires to
become pure) : by him who wishes to atone for it
and to make himself pure of it.

8. ‘ Sant! Apatti’ . . . (see § 6).

‘ AvikitabbA ’ (it is to be confessed ) : it is to
be confessed before the Sa»^gha, or before a small
chapter, or before one person.’

‘ AvikatA hi ’ssa phAsu hoti’ (for if it has been
confessed, it is treated duly): duly for what pur-
pose? In the due way for the attainment of the
first GAkna. (and so on, as in § 7, down to :) of (all)
good qualities.

4 .

1. At that time the Bhikkhus, considering that
the PAtimokkha recitation had been instituted by the
Blessed One, recited the PAtimokkha every day.

j They told this thing to the Blessed One.

/ ‘ The PAtimokkha, O Bhikkhus, is not to be recited
every day. He who recites it (every day), commits
a dukka/a offence. I ordain, O Bhikkhus, to recite
the PAtimokkha on the Uposatha day.’

2. At that time the Bhikkhus, considering that
it had been prescribed by the Blessed One to recite
the PAtimokkha on the U posatha day, recited the PAti-
mokkha three times each half month, on the four-
teenth, fifteenth, and eighth day of each half month.

They told this thing to the Blessed One.

n, S> 3 - UPOSATHA CEREMONY, AND pAtIMOKKHA. 247

‘ The PAtimokkha, 0 Bhikkhus, is not to be recited
three times each half month. He who recites it (three
times), commits a dukka/a offence. I prescribe, 0
Bhikkhus, that you recite the PAtimokkha once each
half month, on the fourteenth or on the fifteenth day.’

5.

1. At that time the ATi^abbaggiya Bhikkhus
recited the Pitimokkha according as they lived
together, every one before his own companions.

They told this thing to the Blessed One.

‘ The Pitimokkha, O Bhikkhus, is not to be recited (
according as (the Bhikkhus) live together, by every
one before his own companions. He who recites it ;
(in that way), commits a dukka^a offence. I pre-
scribe, O Bhikkhus, that the Uposatha service is to^
be held by the complete fraternity.’

2. Now the Bhikkhus thought: ‘The Blessed
One has prescribed that the Uposatha service is to
be held by the complete fraternity. How far does
completeness extend, as far as one residence (or one
district), or all over the earth ?’

They told this thing to the Blessed One.

‘ I prescribe, 0 Bhikkhus, that completeness is to
extend as far as one residence.’

3. At that time the reverend Mahi Kappina
dwelt near Ri^gaha, in the deer park of Madda-
VwkkKx. Now (one day) when the reverend Mah4
Kappina was alone and had retired into solitude,
the following consideration presented itself to his
mind : ‘ Shall I go to the Uposatha service or shall
I not go ? Shall I go to the functions of the Order

248

mahAvagga.

5 > 4 *

or shall I not go? Indeed I have become pure by
the highest purity (i. e. I have reached Arahatship
or NirvA«a),’

4. Then the Blessed One, understanding by the
power of his mind the reflection which had arisen in
MahA Kappina’s mind, disappeared from the Gi^^a-
kA/a mountain and appeared in the deer park of
Maddaku^/^^i, before the reverend MahA Kappina
(as quickly) as a strong man might stretch his bent
arm out, or draw his outstretched arm back. The
Blessed One sat down on a seat laid out for him,
and the reverend MahA Kappina, after having re-
spectfully saluted the Blessed One, sat down also
neeU* him.

5. When the reverend MahA Kappina was seated
near him, the Blessed One said to him : ‘When you
were alone, Kappina, and had retired into solitude,
has not the following consideration presented itself
to your mind: “Shall I go (&c., as in $ 3 down to:)
by the highest purity?”’

‘ Even so. Lord.’

‘ If you BrAhma^as do not honour, do not regard,
do not revere, do not pay reverence to the Upo-
satha, who will then honour, regard, revere, pay
reverence to the Uposatha? Go to the Uposatha,
O BrAhmawa, do not neglect to go; go to the func-
tions of the Order, do not neglect to go.’ The
reverend MahA Kappina promised the Blessed One
to do so (by saying), ‘ Even so. Lord.’

6. Then, having taught, incited, animated, and
gladdened the reverend MahA Kappina by a reli-
gious discourse, the Blessed One disappeared from
the deer park of Maddaku^^^i, from the presence of
the reverend MahA Kappina, and appeared on the

II, 7 . 1. UPOSATHA CEREMONY, AND pAtIMOKKHA. 249

mountain (as quickly) as a strong man
might stretch his bent arm out, or draw his out-
stretched arm back.

6 .

Now the Bhikkhus thought : ‘ The Blessed One
has prescribed that completeness (of the assembled
fraternity) is to extend as far as one residence ^ Now
how far does one residence extend?’

They told this thing to the Blessed One.

‘ I prescribe, O Bhikkhus, that you determine a
boundary. And it ought to be determined, O Bhik-
khus, in this way : First the landmarks are to be
proclaimed; a landmark consisting in a mountain,
in a rock, in a wood, in a tree, in a path, in an ant-
hill, in a river, in a piece of water. The landmarks
having been proclaimed, let a learned, competent
Bhikkhu proclaim the following watti before the
Sawgha : “ Let the Sa»*gha, reverend Sirs, hear me.
If the Sawgha is ready, let the Saw/gha, as the
landmarks have been proclaimed all around, by
these landmarks determine the boundary for com-
mon residence and communion of Uposatha. This
is the watti. Let the Sawgha, reverend Sirs, hear
me. The Sa»«gha determines the boundary (&c., as
above). Thus I understand.” ’

7 .

I. At that time the A'-^bbaggiya Bhikkhus,
considering that fixing of boundaries had been

’ See chap. 5. a.

250

mahAvagga.

II, 7 , 3 .

prescribed by the Blessed One, fixed boundaries of
excessive extension, of four yo/anas, five yo^nas,
six yOjfanas. The Bhikkhus who came to the
Uposatha, arrived when the Pitimokkha was being
recited, or when it had just been recited, or they
were obliged to stay the night on the way.

They told this thing to the Blessed One.

‘ Let no one, 0 Bhikkhus, determine a boundary
of excessive extension, of four, five, or six yo^nas.
He who determines (such a boundary), commits a
dukka/a offence. I prescribe, O Bhikkhus, that
you determine boundaries of three yo^nas’ extent
at most.’

2 . At that time the ATl^abbaggiya Bhikkhus deter-
mined a boundary which extended to the opposite
side of a river. The Bhikkhus who came to the
Uposatha, were carried down (by the river), and
their alms-bowls and robes were carried away.

They told this thing to the Blessed One.

‘ Let no one, O Bhikkhus, determine a boundary
which extends to the opposite side of a river. He
who determines (such a boundary), commits a duk-
ka/a offence. I allow you, O Bhikkhus, if there is a
regular communication by a ferry boat or a dike, at
such places to determine a boundary which extends
also to the opposite side of the river.’

8 .

I. At that time the Bhikkhus recited the P&ti-
mokkha in their successive cells without appointing
(a certain place for doing so). The Bhikkhus who

II, 8, 4 - UPOSATHA CEREMONY, AND pAtIMOKKHA. 25!

arrived (from distant places), did not know where
the Uposatha was to be held that day.

They told this thing to the Blessed One.

‘ Let no one, O Bhikkhus, recite the PAtimokkha
in the successive cells without appointing a certain
place for it. He who recites it (in this way), com-
mits a dukka/a offence. I prescribe, O Bhikkhus,
the holding of Uposatha after having fixed upon an
Uposatha hall, wherever the Sa»«gha likes, a VihAra,
or an AddAsyoga., or a storied building, or a house,
or a cave^. And you ought to appoint it in this way:

2. ‘ Let a learned, competent Bhikkhu proclaim
the following «atti before the Sa«^gha: “Let the
Sawgha, reverend Sirs, hear me. If the Samgha
is ready, let the Sawgha appoint the Vihira called
N. N. to be our Uposatha hall. This is the «atti.
Let the Sarngha., reverend Sirs, hear me. The
Sawgha appoints, &c. Thus I understand.” ’

3. At that time there were in a certain residence
(or district) two Uposatha halls fixed upon. The
Bhikkhus assembled in both places, because (some
of them) thought, ‘The Uposatha will be held here;’
(and some), ‘ It will be held there.’

They told this thing to the Blessed One.

‘ Let no one, O Bhikkhus, fix upon two Uposatha
halls in one district. He who does so, commits a
dukka/a offence. I ordain, O Bhikkhus, the abolish-
ing of one of them®, and the holding of Uposatha
(only) in one place.

4. ‘ And you ought to abolish it, O Bhikkhus, in
this way: Let a learned, competent Bhikkhu pro-

‘ See the note on I, 30, 4.

* I. e. to abolish the character of uposathig&ra, conferred on
the Vihira &c. by the act of sammutL

252 mahAvagga. II, 9, I.

claim the following watti before the Sa»?gha : “ Let
the Sazwgha, reverend Sirs, hear nie. If the Sa»«gha
is ready, the Saw^gha may abolish the Uposatha
hall called N.N. This is the «atti. Let the Sa»«-
gha, &c. Thus I understand,”'

9 .

1. At that time in a certain district too small an
Uposatha hall had been appointed. On the day
of Uposatha a great assembly of Bhikkhus met
together. The Bhikkhus heard the Pitimokkha
sitting outside the site fixed upon. Now those
Bhikkhus thought : ‘ The Blessed One has promul-
gated the precept that Uposatha is to be held after
an Uposatha hall has been fixed upon, and we have
heard the PAtimokkha sitting outside the site fixed
upon. Have we therefore (duly) held Uposatha or
have we not held it ?’

They told this thing to the Blessed One.

‘ Whether (a Bhikkhu) be seated inside or outside
the site fixed upon, provided he hears the Piti-
mokkha, Uposatha has been duly held by him.

2, ‘ Therefore, O Bhikkhus, let the Sawgha deter-
mine as large an uposatha-pamukha^ as it desires.
And it ought to be determined, O Bhikkhus, in this
way : First the landmarks are to be proclaimed.
The landmarks having been proclaimed, let a learned,
competent Bhikkhu proclaim the following na.tti

* Uposatha-pamukha (literally, that which has the Uposatha
at its head, or, that which is situated in front of the Uposatha)
evidently means the place around the uposath&g&r a, in which
the F&timokkha recitation may be heard as well as in the uposa-
th&g&ra itself.

II, II. UPOSATHA CEREMONY, AND pAtIMOKKHA. 253

before the Sa/»gha : “ Let the Sa»igha, reverend
Sirs, hear me. If the Sawgha is ready, let the
Sawgha, as the landmarks have been proclaimed all
around, determine an uposathapamukha by these
landmarks. This is the »atti. Let the Sa»zgha,
&c. Thus I understand.”’

10 ,

At that time in a certain district on the day of
Uposatha the young Bhikkhus, who had assembled
first, thought : ‘ The Theras do not come yet,' and
went away. The Uposatha service was held after
the right time.

They told this thing to the Blessed One.

‘ I prescribe, O Bhikkhus, that on the Uposatha
day the Theras ought to assemble first.’

11 .

At that time there were at Rd^gaha several
residences (of Bhikkhus) within the same boundary.
Now the Bhikkhus quarrelled : (some of them said),
‘The Uposatha shall be held in our residence;’
(others said), ‘ It shall be held in our residence.’

They told this thing to the Blessed One.

‘ There are, O Bhikkhus, several (Bhikkhu) resi-
dences within the same boundary; now the Bhik-
khus quarrel : (some of them say), “ The Uposatha
shall be held in our residence;” (others say), ‘‘It
shall be held in our residence.” Let those Bhikkhus,
O Bhikkhus, assemble in one place all of them and
hold Uposatha there, or let them assemble where

254

MAHAVAGGA,

II, 13, I.

the senior Bhikkhu dwells and hold Uposatha there.
But in no case is Uposatha to be held by an incom-
plete congregation. He who holds it (in that way),
commits a dukka/a offence.’

12 .

I. At that time the reverend Mah4 Kassapa,
when going to the Uposatha from Andhakavinda to
R^^agaha, and crossing a river on his way, was
nearly^ being carried away (by the river)*; and his
robes got wet. The Bhikkhus said to the reverend
Mahd Kassapa : ‘ How have your robes got wet,
friend ?’ (He replied) : ‘ As I was going, friends, to
the Uposatha from Andhakavinda to R^fagaha, and
crossing a river on my way, I was nearly being
carried away (by the river) ; thus my robes have
become wet.’

- They told this thing to the Blessed One.

‘ Let the Sa»^gha, O Bhikkhus, confer on the
boundary which it has determined for common

^ *Man2Lm vuMo ahosi/ Buddhaghosa : ‘isaka;;; appatta-
vuMabhdvo ahosi/ Mana^ is evidently the equivalent of
Sanskrit manak.

^ Buddhaghosa’s note on this passage contains some details
regarding the way which Mah& Kassapa went. Andhakavinda is
three g^&vuta distant from R^agaha. There were eighteen (?the
MS. reaJs: a//ASra mahSvih&rS) great VMras around R^-
gaha included by the same boundary which Buddha himself had
consecrated. The Uposatha service for this whole district was
performed in the Ve/uvana monastery. The river which Mahd
Kassapa crossed on his way to the Ve/uvana was the Sappinl,
which rises in the Gi^^iakfl/a mountain.

II, 13,3. UPOSATHA CEREMONY, AND pAtIMOKKHA. 255

residence and for communion of Uposatha, the
character of tiiivarena avippavAsa\

2. ‘ And you ought, O Bhikkhus, to confer on it
this character in this way: Let a learned, compe-
tent Bhikkhu proclaim the following »atti before
the Sa»«gha : “ Let the Sawgha, reverend Sirs, hear
me. If the Sa»^gha is ready, let the Sawgha confer
on the boundary which the Sawgha has determined
for common residence and for communion of Upo-
satha, the character of ti/§lvarena avippavAsa.
This is the «atti. Let the Sawgha (&c., as above).
Thus I understand.”’

3. At that time the Bhikkhus, considering that
the Blessed One had ordained the conferring of the
character of ti^lvarena avippavAsa (on the boun-
daries), deposited their robes in a house. Those
robes were lost, burnt, or eaten by rats ; the
Bhikkhus were badly dressed and had coarse robes.
(Other) Bhikkhus said : ‘ How comes it that you
are badly dressed, friends, and that you have coarse
robes?’ (They replied) : ‘Considering, friends, that
the Blessed One had ordained the conferring (on
the boundaries) of the character of ti^^lvarena
avippavAsa, we deposited our robes in a house;
the robes have been lost, burnt, or eaten by rats ;

’ Ti^tvarena avippavdsa means not parting with the three
robes which belong to the usual ‘ parikkhdrd* (requisites) of a
Bhikkhu. Bhikkhus were not allowed to part with their ^ivaras,
excepting under special circumstances and for a limited time (see
the Pdtimokkha, 29th nissaggiya dhamma). Conferring the
character of ti>(ivarena avippavdsa on a boundary means, we
believe, to determine that it should be free to Bhikkhus residing
within this boundary, to keep a set of robes wherever they liked
within the same boundary (excepting in a village, § 3), and that
such an act should not be considered as parting with the robes.

256

mahAvagga.

II, 12, 4.

therefore we are badly dressed and have coarse
robes.’

They told this thing to the Blessed One.

‘ Let ^ the Sa/wgha, O Bhikkhus, confer on the
boundary which it has determined for common resi-
dence and for communion of Uposatha, the character
of tii&lvarena avippavAsa, excepting villages and
the neighbourhood of villages \

4. ‘ And you ought, O Bhikkhus, to confer on it
this character in this way, &c. ®

5. ‘ Let him who determines a boundary, O
Bhikkhus, first determine the boundary for common
residence and for communion of Uposatha, and
afterwards decree about the ti^lvarena avippa-
visa. Let him who abolishes a boundary, O
Bhikkhus, first abolish the decree about the tiJti-
varena avippavAsa, and afterwards abolish the
boundary for common residence and for communion
of Uposatha,

‘ And you ought, O Bhikkhus, to abolish the

^ Buddhaghosa observes that this rule applies to Bhikkhus only,
and not to Bhikkhunts. For Bhikkhunis reside only in villages ;
there would be no ^ivaraparihara at all for Bhikkhunis, if they
were to use the kammavd/^a given in § 4. Buddhaghosa also
observes at this occasion that the boundaries of the Bhikkhusa»zgha
and of the Bhikkhunisa»/gha are quite independent from each
other, and that the rules given in chap. 13 do not refer to boun-
daries the one of which belongs to the Bhikkhusa;;/gha, the other
to the Bhikkhunisa; 72 gha.

® As to the extent attributed to the ‘gamflpa>^ira’ (neighbour-
hood of the village), see the Vibhahga, quoted by Minayeff, Prdtim.

p. 66, 1. 1.

* This formula is identical with that given in § 2. The only dif-
ference is that after the words ‘the character of tiiHvarena avip-
pavdsa,' the words ‘excepting villages and the neighbourhood of
villages ' are inserted.

II, 12, 7 - UPOSATHA CEREMONY, AND pAtiMOKKHA. 257

ti/^ivarena avippavAsa in thisway: Let a learned,
competent Bhikkhu proclaim the following »atti
before the Sawgha : “ Let the Sawgha, reverend
Sirs, hear me. If the Sa»/gha is ready, let the
Sa«2gha abolish theti-^lvarena avippavAsa, which
the Sawgha has decreed. This is the «atti. Let
the Sa^wgha, &c.”

6. ‘ And you ought, O Bhikkhus, to abolish the
boundary in this way: Let a learned, competent
Bhikkhu proclaim the following watti before the
Sawgha : “ Let the Sawgha, reverend Sirs, hear
me. If the Sa/»gha is ready, let the Sawgha
abolish the boundary for common residence and for
communion of Uposatha which it has determined.
This is the »atti. Let the Saw/gha, &c.”

7. ‘ If there is no boundary determined nor fixed,
O Bhikkhus, the village boundary of that village, or
the nigama boundary of that nigama (market town)
near which village or nigama (a Bhikkhu) dwells,
is to be considered as boundary for common resi-
dence and for the communion of U posatha. If (he
lives), O Bhikkhus, in a forest where no villages
are, community of residence and Uposatha extends
to a distance of seven abbhantaras^ all around.
A river, O Bhikkhus, cannot be a boundary, a sea
cannot be a boundary, a natural lake cannot be a
boundary. In a river, O Bhikkhus, or in a sea, or
in a natural lake, community of residence and U po-
satha extends as far as an average man can spirt
water all around.’

’ t abbhantara= 28 hattha (Buddhaghosa and AbhidhSnappadt-
pikd, V. 197). See Rh. D., ‘Coins and Measures,’ &c., p. 15.

258

mahAvagga.

n, 13, 1.

13 .

1. At that time the A'/^bbaggiya Bhikkhus made
one boundary overlap another one (which had been
determined before by other Bhikkhus).

They told this thing to the Blessed One.

‘The act of those who have determined their
boundary first is lawful, unobjectionable, and valid.
The act of those who have determined their boun-
dary afterwards is unlawful, objectionable, and invalid.
Let no one, O Bhikkhus, make one boundary overlap
another one. He who does, commits a dukka/a
offence.’

2. At that time the AT/^abbaggiya Bhikkhus made
one boundary encompass another one (which had
been determined before by other Bhikkhus).

They told this thing to the Blessed One.

‘The act of those, &c. (see § i). Let no one,

0 Bhikkhus, make one boundary encompass another
one. He who does, commits a dukka/a offence.

1 prescribe, O Bhikkhus, that he who determines
a boundary, is to determine it so as to leave an
interstice * between the boundaries.’

U.

I. Now the Bhikkhus thought : ‘How many Upo-
satha (days) are there?’

They told this thing to the Blessed One.

* Buddhaghosa prescribes to leave an interstice of one hattha,
and he adds that the ancient Sinhalese commentaries differ as to
the measure required for this interstice : the Kurundi requires one
vidatthi, the Mahlpa^^ari four ahgula.

11,14,3- UPOSATHA CEREMONY, AND pAtIMOKKHA. 259

‘There are the following two Uposatha (days),
O Bhikkhus, the fourteenth and the fifteenth (of the
half month); these are the two Uposatha (days),
O Bhikkhus.’

2. Now the Bhikkhus thought ; ‘ How many
Uposatha services are there?'

They told this thing to the Blessed One.

‘ There are the following four Uposatha services,
O Bhikkhus: the Uposatha service which is held
unlawfully (by an) incomplete (congregation) \ the
Uposatha service which is held unlawfully (by a)
complete (congregation), the Uposatha service which
is held lawfully (by an) incomplete (congregation),
the Uposatha service which is held lawfully (by a)
complete (congregation).

3. ‘ Now, O Bhikkhus, the Uposatha service
which is held unlawfully (by an) incomplete (con-
gregation), such an Uposatha service, O Bhikkhus,
ought not to be held, nor is such an Uposatha service
allowed by me. Now, O Bhikkhus, the Uposatha
service which is held unlawfully (by a) complete
(congregation), such an Uposatha service, O Bhik-
khus, ought not to be held, nor is such an Uposatha
service allowed by me. Now, O Bhikkhus, the
Uposatha service which is held lawfully (by an)
incomplete (congregation), such an Uposatha service,
O Bhikkhus, ought not to be held, nor is such an
Uposatha service allowed by me. Now, O Bhikkhus,
the Uposatha service which is held lawfully (by a)
complete (congregation), such an Uposatha service,
O Bhikkhus, ought to be held, and such an Upo-

* For a definition of lawfulness and unlawfulness of the official
functions of the Order as well as of completeness and incompleteness
of the congregation by which such acts are performed, see IX, 3.

26o

mahAvagga.

*s>

satha service is allowed by me. Therefore, O
Bhikkhus, you ought to train yourselves thus : “ The
Uposatha service which is held lawfully (by a) com-
plete (congregation), such an Uposatha service will
we hold.’”

15 .

I. Now the Bhikkhus thought : ‘ How many ways
are there of reciting the Pitimokkha ? ’

They told this thing to the Blessed One.

‘ There are the following five ways of reciting the
PAtimokkha : The introduction ^ having been recited,
as to the rest, it may be proclaimed: “Such and
such rules are known (to the fraternity^).” This is
the first way of reciting the PAtimokkha. The
introduction having been recited, the four pAr5-
^iki dhammi having been recited, as to the rest,
it may be proclaimed : “ Such and such rules are
known (to the fraternity).” This is the second way
of reciting the PAtimokkha. The introduction having
been recited, the four pirAfikA dhammA having
been recited,'the thirteen sawghAdisesA dhammA
having been recited, . . . the introduction having
been recited, the four pArA^ikA dhammA having
been recited, the thirteen sazwghAdisesA dhammA
having been recited, the two aniyatA dhammA
having been recited, as to the rest, it may be pro-

* The introduction (nidina) of the Pdtimokkha is the formula
given above, chap. 3. 3.

* ‘Avasesam sutena sivetabbanz,’ i. e. it is to be pro-
claimed: ‘The four piriL^ikS dhammS, &c., are known to the
reverend brethren (literaily, have been heard by the reverend
brethren).'

II, IS, 4* UPOSATHA CEREMONY, AND pAtIMOKKHA. 26 1

claimed : “ Such and such rules are known (to the
fraternity).” This is the fourth way of reciting the
Pitimokkha. The fifth way is (to recite it) in its
full extent. These, O Bhikkhus, are the five ways
of reciting the Pfitimokkha.’

2. At that time the Bhikkhus, considering that
the Blessed One had allowed to recite the Piti-
mokkha abridged, always recited the Pdtimokkha
abridged.

They told this thing to the Blessed One.

‘You ought not, O Bhikkhus, to recite the Piti-
mokkha abridged. He who does, commits a duk-
ka/a offence.’

3. At that time a certain residence (of Bhikkhus)
in the Kosala country was menaced on the day of
Uposatha by savage people. The Bhikkhus were
not able to recite the Piltimokkha in its full extent.

They told this thing to the Blessed One.

‘ I allow you, O Bhikkhus, in the case of danger
to recite the Pdtimokkha abridged.’

4. At that time the AT/iabbaggiya Bhikkhus recited
the Patimokkha abridged also when there was no
danger.

They told this thing to the Blessed One.

‘ You ought not to recite the Pdtimokkha abridged,
O Bhikkhus, if there is no danger. He who does,
commits a dukka/a offence. I allow you, O
Bhikkhus, in the case of danger only to recite the
Pitimokkha abridged. The cases of danger are the
following : danger from kings, from robbers, from fire,
from water, from human beings, from non-human
beings, from beasts of prey, from creeping things,
danger of life, danger against chastity. I ordain,
O Bhikkhus, the recitation in such cases of danger

262

mahAvagga.

^ 5 * 5 *

of the PAtimokkha abridged ; if there is no danger,
in its full extent/

5. At that time the A'i^abbaggiya Bhikkhus
preached the Dhamma before the Sawgha without
being called upon (by the Thera).

They told this thing to the Blessed One.

‘ Let no one, O Bhikkhus, preach the Dhamma
before the Sa«^gha without being called upon. He
who does, commits a dukka/a offence. I prescribe,

0 Bhikkhus, that the Thera is either to preach the
Dhamma himself or to call upon another (Bhikkhu
to do so).’

6. At that time the A'i^abbaggiya Bhikkhus put
questions about the Vinaya before the Sa»^gha
without being appointed thereto.

They told this thing to the Blessed One.

‘ Let no one, O Bhikkhus, put questions about
the Vinaya before the Sa»?gha without being ap-
pointed thereto. He who so questions, commits
a dukka^a offence. I prescribe, O Bhikkhus, that
an appointed (Bhikkhu) is to put questions about
the Vinaya before the Sa»?gha. And (this Bhikkhu)
is to be appointed, O Bhikkhus, in this way : One
may either appoint himself, or one may appoint
another person.

7. ‘And how is (a Bhikkhu) to appoint himself?
Let a learned, competent Bhikkhu proclaim the fol-
lowing »atti before the Sawgha : “ Let the Sa»^gha,
reverend Sirs, hear me. If the Sawgha is ready,

1 will question N. N. about the Vinaya.” Thus one
may appoint himself. And how is (a Bhikkhu) to
appoint another person ? Let a learned, competent
Bhikkhu proclaim the following »atti before the
Sawgha ; “ Let the Sa/^^gha, &c. If the Sa;»gha is

II, 15, II. UPOSATHA CEREMONY, AND pAtIMOKKHA. 263

ready, let N. N. question N. N. about the Vinaya.”
Thus one may appoint another person.’

8. At that time appointed, clever Bhikkhus put
questions about the Vinaya before the Sa»«gha. The
A^abbaggiya Bhikkhus conceived anger (towards
those Bhikkhus), conceived discontent, and threat-
ened them with blows.

They told this thing to the Blessed One.

‘ I prescribe you, O Bhikkhus, that even he who
has been appointed shall (not) put questions about
the Vinaya before the Sa»«gha (without) having
looked at the assembly and weighed (with the mind
each) person (present).’

9, 10. At that time the A’Aabbaggiya Bhikkhus
answered questions about the Vinaya before the
Sa»?gha without being appointed thereto.

They told this thing to the Blessed One.

‘ Let no one, O Bhikkhus, answer questions about
the Vinaya before the Sawgha without being ap-
pointed thereto. He who does, commits a dukka/a
offence. I prescribe, O Bhikkhus, that questions
about the Vinaya are to be answered before the
Sawgha (only) by an appointed (Bhikkhu). And
(this Bhikkhu) is to be appointed \ &c.’

II. At that time appointed, clever Bhikkhus
answered questions about the Vinaya before the
Sawgha. The A’^abbaggiya Bhikkhus ^ &c.

^ See §§ 6, 7. Read: * ... I will answer the questions of N. N.
about the Vinaya.’ And, ‘ ... let N. N. answer the questions of
N. N. about the Vinaya.’

* See § 8. Read : ‘ . . .

Vinaya . .

shall (not) answer questions about the

264

mahAvagga.

II, 16 , 1.

16 ,

1. At that time the Afi^abbaggiya Bhikkhus
reproved for an offence a Bhikkhu who had not
given them leave.

They told this thing to the Blessed One.

‘ No Bhikkhu, O Bhikkhus, who has not given
leave, may be reproved for an offence. He who
reproves (such a Bhikkhu), commits a dukka/a
offence. I prescribe, O Bhikkhus, that you reprove
(Bhikkhus) for an offence (only) after having asked
for leave (by saying), “ Give me leave, reverend
brother, I wish to speak to you.” ’

2. At that time clever Bhikkhus reproved the
ATi^abbaggiya Bhikkhus for an offence after having
asked for leave. The ATAabbaggiya Bhikkhus con-
ceived anger (towards those Bhikkhus), conceived
discontent, and threatened them with blows.

They told this thing to the Blessed One.

‘ I prescribe, O Bhikkhus, that you are (not) to
reprove (a Bhikkhu) for an offence, even if he has
given leave, (without) having weighed (with your
mind) the person (concerned).’

3. At that time the Af/^abbaggiya Bhikkhus, who
thought : ‘ Otherwise clever Bhikkhus might ask us
for leave (and reprove us for an offence),’ themselves
asked beforehand pure Bhikkhus who had com-
mitted no offence, for leave without object and
reason.

They told this thing to the Blessed One.

‘ Let no pure Bhikkhus, O Bhikkhus, who have
committed no offence, be asked for leave without
object and reason. He who does, commits a duk-
ka^a offence. I prescribe, O Bhikkhus, that you

II, i6, 6 . UPOSATHA CEREMONY, AND pAtIMOKKHA. 265

are (not) to ask for leave (without) having weighed
(with your mind) the person (concerned)/

4. At that time the ATl^abbaggiya Bhikkhus per-
formed an unlawful official act before the Sa;; 7 gha.

They told this thing to the Blessed One.

‘ Let no one, O Bhikkhus, perform unlawful acts
before the Sa;;2gha. He who does, commits a duk-
ka/a offence.’

They performed an unlawful act nevertheless.

They told this thing to the Blessed One.

‘ I prescribe, O Bhikkhus, that you should protest,
if an unlawful act is being performed.’

5. At that time clever Bhikkhus protested at an
unlawful act being performed by the A'/^abbaggiya
Bhikkhus. The A/^abbaggiya Bhikkhus conceived
anger, conceived discontent, and threatened (those
Bhikkhus) with blows.

They told this thing to the Blessed One.

‘ I allow you, O Bhikkhus, to express your opinion
only (instead of protesting formally).’

They expressed their opinion in the presence of
the said (Bhikkhus). The AT/wibbaggiya Bhikkhus
conceived anger, conceived discontent, and threat-
ened (them) with blows.

They told this thing to the Blessed One.

‘ I prescribe, O Bhikkhus, that four or five persons
may protest, that two or three may express their
opinion, and that one person may determine (in his
mind) : “ I do not think this right.” ’

6. At that time the A 7 «abbaggiya Bhikkhus, when
reciting the Pitimokkha before the Sa»/gha, inten-
tionally recited it so that it could not be heard.

They told this thing to the Blessed One.

‘ Let not him who is to recite the Pcltimokkha,

266

mahAvagga.

11, i6. 7.

O Bhikkhus, intentionally recite it so that it cannot
be heard. He who does, commits a dukka/a
offence.’

7. At that time the reverend Udiyi, who had
a crow’s voice, had the duty to recite the PAti-
mokkha before the Sawgha. Now the reverend
UdAyi thought : ‘ It has been prescribed by the
Blessed One that he who is to recite the PAti-
mokkha, ought to recite it so that it may be heard ;
but I have a crow’s voice. Well, how am I to act ?’

They told this thing to the Blessed One.

‘ I prescribe, O Bhikkhus, that he who is to recite
the PAtimokkha may endeavour to make it audible.
If he endeavours (to do so), he is free from offence.’

8. At that time Devadatta recited the PAtimokkha
before an assembly in which laymen were present.

They told this thing to the Blessed One.

‘ Let no one, O Bhikkhus, recite the Pitimokkha
before an assembly in which laymen are present. He
j who does, commits a dukka/a offence.’

9. At that time the AT/^abbaggiya Bhikkhus re-
cited the PAtimokkha before the Sawgha without
being called upon (by the Thera).

They told this thing to the Blessed One.

‘ Let no one, O Bhikkhus, recite the PAtimokkha
before the Sawgha without being called upon. He
who does, commits adukka/a offence. I prescribe,
O Bhikkhus, that the Thera is master of the PAti-
mokkha^’

End of the BhA^avAra of the A«»atitthiyas®.

’ I.e. of reciting the Pitimokkha himself or causing another
Bhikkhu to do so.

‘ 1. e. Samanas belonging to other schools. See chap. i.

n,i 7 . 3 - UPOSATHA CEREMONY, AND pAtIMOKKHA. 267

17 .

#

1. Then the Blessed One, after having dwelt near
Rl^gaha as long as he thought fit, went forth
on his pilgrimage to AjodancLvatthu. Going from
place to place on his pilgrimage, he came to Koda.-
nivatthu. At that time there dwelt in a certain
residence many Bhikkhus, the eldest of whom was
an ignorant, unlearned person : he neither knew ^
Uposatha, nor the Uposatha service, nor the PAti-
mokkha, nor the recital of the Pitimokkha.

2. Now those Bhikkhus thought : ‘ It has been
prescribed by the Blessed One that the eldest Bhik-
khu is master of the PAtimokkha, and here the eldest
of us is an ignorant, unlearned person : he neither
knows Uposatha . . . nor the recital of the PAti-
mokkha. Well, how are we to act ?’

They told this thing to the Blessed One.

‘ I prescribe, O Bhikkhus, that (in such a case)
that Bhikkhu who is (most) learned and competent,
is to be made master of the Patimokkha.’

3. At that time there dwelt in a certain residence
on the day of Uposatha many ignorant, unlearned
Bhikkhus: they neither knew Uposatha . . . nor the
recital of the Pdtimokkha. They called upon the
Thera : ‘ May it please the Thera, reverend Sir, to
recite the Pitimokkha.’ He replied : ‘ I am not
competent to do so.’ They called upon the next
eldest, &c. He also replied, &c. They called upon
the third eldest, &c. In this manner they called
upon (all Bhikkhus) down to the youngest one:
‘May it please the reverend brother to recite the
Patimokkha.’ He also replied: ‘I am not compe-
tent, venerable Sirs, to do so.’

268

mahAvagga.

II, 17, 4.

They told this thing to the Blessed One.

4. 5- ‘ WJien, O Bhikkhus, in a certain residence,
&c.^; in that case, O Bhikkhus, these Bhikkhus are
instantly to send one Bhikkhu to the neighbouring
residence (of Bhikkhus) : “Go, friend, and come back
when you have learnt the Pdtimokkha abridged or in
its full extent.” ’

6. Now the Bhikkhus thought: ‘ By whom is (this
Bhikkhu) to be sent?’

They told this thing to the Blessed One.

‘ I prescribe, O Bhikkhus, that the Thera is to
give order to a young Bhikkhu.’

The young Bhikkhus, having received that order
from the Thera, did not go.

They told this thing to the Blessed One.

‘ Let no one who has been ordered by the Thera
forbear to go, unless he be sick. He who does not
go, commits a dukka/a offence.’

18 .

I. Then the Blessed One, after having dwelt at
.^odanAvatthu as long as he thought fit, went back
again to R^agaha. At that time the people asked
the Bhikkhus who went about for alms : ‘ What day
of the half month is this, reverend Sirs?’ The Bhik-
khus replied : ‘ We do not know, friends.’ The people
were annoyed, murmured, and became angry : ‘Those
Sakyaputtiya Samawas do not even know how to
count (the days of) the half month ; what good things
else will they know?’

‘ Here follows an exact repetition of the story told in § 3, which
is given here, of course, in the present tense.

II, ip. UPOSATHA CEREMONY, AND pAtIMOKKHA. 269

They told this thing to the Blessed One.

‘ I prescribe, O Bhikkhus, that you learn how to 1
count (the days of) the half month.’

2. Now the Bhikkhus thought: ‘Who ought to
learn to count (the days of) the half month ?’

They told this thing to the Blessed One.

‘ I prescribe, O Bhikkhus, that you learn all of you
to count (the days of) the half month.’

3. At that time the people asked the Bhikkhus
who went about for alms : ‘ How many Bhikkhus
are there, reverend Sirs ?’ The Bhikkhus replied :

‘ We do not know, friends.’ The people were annoyed,
murmured, and became angry : ‘ Those Sakyaputtiya |
Samaras do not even know each other ; what good i
things else will they know ?’

They told this thing to the Blessed One.

‘ I prescribe, O Bhikkhus, that you count the
Bhikkhus.’

4. Now the Bhikkhus thought: ‘At what time
ought we to count the Bhikkhus?’

They told this thing to the Blessed One.

‘ I prescribe, O Bhikkhus, that you count (the
Bhikkhus) on the day of Uposatha, either by way
of (counting the single) troops (of which the as-
sembly is composed)*, or that you take (each of
you) a ticket (and count those tickets).’

19.

At that time Bhikkhus who did not know that it
was Uposatha day, went for alms to a distant village.

* This appears to be the meaning of ganamaggena ganetum ;
Buddhaghosa has no note on this passage.

mahAvagga.

II, 30, I.

270

They came back when the PAtimokkha was being
recited, or when it just had been recited.

They told this thing to the Blessed One.

‘ I prescribe, O Bhikkhus, that you proclaim: “To-
day is Uposatha.” ’

Now the Bhikkhus thought: ‘Who is to pro-
claim so?’

They told this thing to the Blessed One.

‘ I prescribe, O Bhikkhus, that the Thera is to
proclaim (the day of Uposatha) in due time.’

At that time a certain Thera did not think of it
in due time.

They told this thing to the Blessed One.

‘ I allow you, O Bhikkhus, to proclaim it also at
meal time.’

(The Thera) did not think of it at meal time either.

They told this thing to the Blessed One.

‘ I allow, O Bhikkhus, to proclaim it whenever
(the Thera) thinks of it’

20 .

1. At that time the Uposatha hall in a certain
residence was full of sweepings. The Bhikkhus
who arrived there were annoyed, murmured, and
became angry: ‘How can the Bhikkhus neglect to
sweep the Uposatha hall?’

They told this thing to the Blessed One.

‘ I prescribe, O Bhikkhus, that you sweep the
Uposatha hall.’

2. Now the Bhikkhus thought: ‘Well, who is to
sweep the Uposatha hall?’

They told this thing to the Blessed One.

11,20,5. UPOSATHA CEREMONY, AND pAtIMOKKH A. 27 I

‘ I prescribe, O Bhikkhus, that the Thera is to order
a young Bhikkhu (to sweep the Uposatha hall).’

The young Bhikkhus, having received that order
from the Thera, did not sweep it.

They told this thing to the Blessed One.

‘ He who has been ordered by the Thera, ought
not to forbear to sweep it, unless he be sick. He who
does not sweep it, commits a dukka/a offence.’

3. At that time there were no seats prepared in \
the Uposatha hall. The Bhikkhus sat down on the j
ground. Their bodies and their robes became full ^
of dust.

They told this thing to the Blessed One.

‘ I prescribe, O Bhikkhus, that you prepare seats
in the Uposatha hall.’

Now the Bhikkhus thought, &c. (see § 2).

‘He who does not prepare (seats), commits a duk-
ka/a offence.’

4. At that time there was no lamp in the Upo-
satha hall. The Bhikkhus in the darkness trod upon
(each other’s) bodies and robes.

They told this thing to the Blessed One.

‘ I prescribe, O Bhikkhus, that you light a lamp
in the Uposatha hall.’

Now the Bhikkhus thought, &c, (see § 2).

‘ He who does not light (the lamp), commits a
dukka/a offence.’

5. At that time the resident Bhikkhus in a certain
residence did not provide drink (i.e. water), nor did
they provide food. The incoming Bhikkhus were
annoyed, murmured, and became angry: ‘How can
the resident Bhikkhus neglect to provide for drink
and to provide for food ?’

They told this thing to the Blessed One.

272

mahAvagga.

II, 21, I.

‘ I prescribe, O Bhikkhus, that you provide drink
and food.’

Now the Bhikkhus thought, &c. (see § 2).

‘ He who does not provide for it, commits a duk-
ka/a offence.’

21 .

1. At that time many ignorant, unlearned Bhik-
khus who travelled to the (four) quarters (of the
world) did not ask leave of their d>^ariyas and
upa^^^Ayas (when going away).

They told this thing to the Blessed One.

‘ In case, O Bhikkhus, there are many ignorant,
unlearned Bhikkhus who travel to the (four) quarters
without asking leave of their d>^ariyas and upa_^-
^^iyas ; such Bhikkhus ought to be asked by
their fi>^ariyas and upa_^^^Ayas: “Where will
you go ? with whom will you go?” If those ignorant,
unlearned Bhikkhus name other ignorant, unlearned
Bhikkhus, their fi^ariyas and upa^^^iyas ought
not to allow them (to go) ; if they allow them, they
commit a ‘dukka/a offence. If those ignorant, un-
learned Bhikkhus go without the permission of their
iiariyas and upa^^^Ayas, they commit a duk-
ka/a offence.

2. ‘In case, O Bhikkhus, there dwell in a certain
residence many ignorant, unlearned Bhikkhus who
neither know Uposatha, nor the Uposatha service,
nor the PAtimokkha, nor the recital of the PAti-
mokkha : now there arrives (at that place) another
Bhikkhu who is erudite, who has studied the
ij;amas (i. e. the collections of Suttas), who knows

11,21,3- UPOSATHA CEREMONY, AND pAtIMOKKHA. 273

the Dhamma, the Vinaya, the mAtikA*, who is
wise, learned, intelligent, modest, conscientious*,
anxious for training ; let those Bhikkhus, O Bhik-
khus, kindly receive that Bhikkhu, let them show
attention to him, exchange (friendly) words with him,
provide him with powder, clay®, a tooth-cleanser,
and water to rinse his mouth with. If they do not
receive him kindly, or show no attention to him, or
do not exchange (friendly) words with him, or do
not provide him with powder, clay, a tooth-cleanser,
and water to rinse his mouth with, they commit
a dukka/a offence.

3. ‘In case, O Bhikkhus, there dwell in a certain
residence on the day of Uposatha many ignorant,
unlearned Bhikkhus who neitlier know Uposatha
. . . nor the recital of the PAtimokkha ; let those
Bhikkhus, O Bhikkhus, instantly send one Bhikkhu
to the neighbouring residence (of Bhikkhus, saying),
“ Go, friend, and come back when you have learnt
the PAtimokkha abridged or in its full extent.” If
they succeed in this way, well and good. If they
do not succeed, those Bhikkhus, O Bhikkhus, ought
all to go to a residence where they (the Bhikkhus
there) know Uposatha or the Uposatha service or
the PAtimokkha or the recital of the PAtimokkha.

^ Enumerations of terms indicating the different cases that come
under a Vinaya rule or a dogmatical proposition are called mdtikd ;
for instance, in discussing the first pdra^ika rule the Vibhahga
gives the following mdlikdpaddni : tisso itthiyo manussitthi ama-
nussitthi tira^^^dnagatitthi, tayo ubhatovya^anakd manussubha-
tovyaw^anako amanussubh. tira^^Adnagatubh., &c. Most of the
works belonging to the Abhidhamma Pi/aka are based on and
opened by such mdtikd lists.

* Or * scrupulous/ in good sense.

® See I, 25, 12, with our note,
fictl T

274

mahAvagga.

II, 31,4.

If they do not go, they commit a dukka/a
offence.

4. ‘ In case, O Bhikkhus, many igjnorant, un-
learned Bhikkhus keep vassa^ in a certain resi-
dence who neither know, &c,‘* If they succeed in
this way, well and good. If they do not succeed,
they ought to send away one Bhikkhu for seven
days’ time (saying), “ Go, friend, and come back
when you have learnt the Pitimokkha abridged or
in its full extent.” If they succeed in this way, well
and good. If they do not succeed, those Bhikkhus,
O Bhikkhus, ought not to keep vassa in that resi-
dence. If they do, they commit a dukka/a offence.’

22 .

I. Then the Blessed One thus addressed the
Bhikkhus: ‘Assemble, O Bhikkhus, the Sa»?gha
will hold Uposatha.’ When he had spoken thus,
a certain Bhikkhu said to the Blessed One : ‘ There
is a sick Bhikkhu, Lord, who is not present.’

‘ I prescribe, O Bhikkhus, that a sick Bhikkhu is
to declare (lit. to give) his pArisuddhi ®. And let it
be declared, O Bhikkhus, in this way : Let that sick
Bhikkhu go to one Bhikkhu, adjust his upper robe
so as to cover one shoulder, sit down squatting,
raise his joined hands, and say : “ I declare my
pArisuddhi, take my pArisuddhi, proclaim my
pArisuddhi (before the fraternity).” Whether he

* See III, I seq. * See § 3.

* PArisuddhi, literally, means purity. He declares that he is
pure from the offences specified in the PAtimokkha, and charges
another Bhikkhu with proclaiming his declaration before the
assembled chapter.

II, 22, 3- UPOSATHA CEREMONY, AND pAtIMOKKHA. 275

express this by gesture (lit. by his body), or by
word, or by gesture and word, the pArisuddhi has
been declared. If he does not express this by ges-
ture, &c., the pArisuddhi has not been declared.

2. ‘ If (the sick Bhikkhu) succeeds in doing so,
well and good. If he does not succeed, let them
take that sick Bhikkhu, O Bhikkhus, on his bed or
his chair to the assembly, and (then) let them hold
Uposatha. If, O Bhikkhus, the Bhikkhus who are
nursing the sick, think : “ If we move this sick
person from his place, the sickness will increase, or
he will die,” let them not move the sick, O Bhik-
khus, from his place ; let the Sa»?gha go there and
hold there Uposatha. But in no case are they to
hold Uposatha with an incomplete congregation.
If (a Bhikkhu) does so, he commits a dukka/a
offence.

3. ‘ If he who has been charged with the piri-
suddhi, O Bhikkhus, leaves the place at onceS
after the pArisuddhi has been entrusted (to him),
the pArisuddhi ought to be declared to another.
If he who has been charged with the pArisuddhi,
O Bhikkhus, after the pArisuddhi has been en-
trusted to him, returns to the world ® at once ^ ; or
dies; or admits that he is a sAma»era; or that he
has abandoned the precepts ® ; or that he has become

* Literally, on the spot, i. e. without setting out on his way to
the assembly.

* We have no doubt that this is the correct translation of vib-
bhamati (see I, 39, 5). The difference between vibbhamati (he
returns to the world) and sikkha>n pa^^akkhffti (he abandons
the precepts) seems to be that the former is an informal, and the
latter a formal, renunciation of the Order.

* The precepts are abandoned (sikkhd pa^^akkh&tff hoti)
by declaring that one abandons the Buddha, or the Dhamma, or the

276

mahAvagga.

II, 22 , 4 .

guilty of an extreme offence*; or that he is mad;
or that his mind is unhinged ; or that he suffers
(bodily) pain ; or that expulsion has been pro-
nounced against him for his refusal to see an offence
(committed by himself) ; or to atone for such an
offence ; or to renounce a false doctrine ; or that he
is a eunuch ; or that he has furtively attached him-
self (to the Sawgha) ; or that he is gone over to
the Titthiyas; or that he is an animal*; or that
he is guilty of matricide; or that he is guilty of
parricide ; or that he has murdered an Arahat ; or
that he has violated a BhikkhunI ; or that he has
caused a schism among the Sawgha ; or that he has
shed (a Buddha’s) blood ; or that he is a hermaphro-
dite : (in these cases) the pArisuddhi ought to be
entrusted to another one.

4. ‘ If he who has been charged with the pAri-
suddhi, O Bhikkhus, after the pArisuddhi has
been entrusted to him, and whilst he is on his way
(to the assembly), leaves the place, or returns to the
world, or dies, or admits that he is a sAma»era, &c.,
or admits that he is a hermaphrodite, the pdri-
suddhi has not been conveyed (to the Sa»/gha).
If he who has been charged with the pArisuddhi,
O Bhikkhus, after the pirisuddhi has been en-
trusted to him, having arrived with the fraternity,
leaves the place, or dies, &c., the pArisuddhi has

Samgha, or the Vinaya, &c. By such a declaration a Bhikkhu who
wishes to return to a layman’s life, or to go over to a Titthiya sect,
gives up his character as a member of the Buddhist fraternity. The
rules about the sikkhdpa^^akkh^na are given in the Vibhahga,
in the explanation of the first pfirfi^ika rule (chap. 8, § a).

‘ Most probably antimavattbu refers to the pfirfi^ika offences
which require excommunication.

* See the stoiy given in I, 63.

II, as- UPOSATHA CEREMONY, AND pAtiMOKKHA. 277

been conveyed. If he who has been charged with
the pArisuddhi, O Bhikkhus, after the pirisuddhi
has been entrusted to him, though he reaches the
assembly, does not proclaim (the pArisuddhi he is
charged with) because he falls asleep, or by careless-
ness, or because he attains (meditation), the pAri-
suddhi has been conveyed, and there is no offence
on the part of him who has been charged with the
pirisuddhi. If he who has been charged, &c.,
intentionally omits to proclaim (the pArisuddhi),
the pirisuddhi has been conveyed, but he who
has been charged with the pAri suddhi is guilty of
a dukka/a offence.’

23 .

Then the Blessed One thus addressed the Bhik-
khus ; ‘ Assemble, O Bhikkhus, the Sawgha will per-
form an (official) act’ When he had spoken thus, a
certain Bhikkhu said to the Blessed One: ‘There is
a sick Bhikkhu, Lord, who is not present.’

‘ I prescribe, O Bhikkhus, that a sick Bhikkhu is
to declare (lit. to give) his consent (to the act to
be performed), &c.^ I prescribe, O Bhikkhus, that
on the day of Uposatha he who declares his pAri-
suddhi is to declare his consent (to official acts to
be performed eventually) also, for (both declarations)
are required for the Sawgha (and for the validity of
its acts).

* The rules given here regarding the ^^an da (declaration of con-
sent of an absentee) that is required for the performance of official
acts are word for word the same as those set out in chap. 22. 1-4,
regarding the pfirisuddhi required at the Uposatha service.

278

mahAvagga.

Ill 24i

24 .

1. At that time relations of a certain Bhikkhu
seized him on the day of Uposatha.

They told this thing to the Blessed One,

‘ In case, O Bhikkhus, a certain Bhikkhu is seized
on the day of Uposatha by relations of his, let the
Bhikkhus say to those relations : “ Pray, friends, let
this Bhikkhu free for a moment until this Bhikkhu
has held Uposatha.”

2. ‘ If they succeed in this way, well and good.
If they do not succeed, let the Bhikkhus say to
those relations : “ Pray, friends, stand apart for a
moment, until this Bhikkhu has declared his pdri-
suddhi.” If they succeed, well and good. If they
do not succeed, let the Bhikkhus say to those rela-
tions : “ Pray, friends, take this Bhikkhu for a mo-
ment outside the boundary, until the Sa»?gha has

J held Uposatha.” If they succeed, well and good,
j If they do not succeed, in no case is Uposatha to be
I held by an assembly that is incomplete. Should it
\ be so held, (each Bhikkhu in the assembly) is guilty
' of a dukka/a offence.

3. ‘In case, O Bhikkhus, a certain Bhikkhu is
seized on the day of Uposatha by kings, by robbers,
by rascals, by hostile Bhikkhus, &c.

26 .

I. Then the Blessed One thus addressed the
Bhikkhus: ‘Assemble, O Bhikkhus, the Saw^gha

‘ See §§ I, a.

II, 25, 4* UPOSATHA CEREMONY, AND pAtIMOKKHA. 279

has duties (official acts) to perform.’ When he had
spoken thus, a certain Bhikkhu said to the Blessed
One: ‘There is a mad Bhikkhu, Lord, called Gagga,
who is not present’ ‘ There are, O Bhikkhus, two
sorts of madmen : There is one mad Bhikkhu who
now remembers the Uposatha, now does not re-
member it, who now remembers official acts (of the
Order), now does not remember them, (and) there
is (another mad Bhikkhu) who does not remember
them; one who now goes to Uposatha, now does
not go, who now goes to official acts, now does not
go, (and another) who does not go.

2. ‘ Now, O Bhikkhus, that madman that now
remembers, &c., that now goes to, &c., to such a
madman I prescribe that you grant um mattaka-
sammuti (i. e. the madman’s leave).

3. ‘And you ought, O Bhikkhus, to grant it in
this way: Let a learned, competent Bhikkhu pro-
claim the following »atti before the Sa»zgha : “ Let
the Sa»?gha, reverend Sirs, hear me. Gagga, a mad
Bhikkhu, now remembers the Uposatha, now does
not remember, &c., now goes to, &c. ; if the Sawgha
is ready, let the Sawgha grant ummattakasam-
muti to the mad Bhikkhu Gagga : let the Bhikkhu
Gagga remember or not remember Uposatha, re-
member or not remember official acts (of the Order),
let him go to Uposatha or not go, let him go to
official acts or not go : (in every case) it may be free
to the Sawgha to hold Uposatha and to perform
official acts with Gagga as well as without Gagga.
This is the »atti.

4. ‘ “ Let the Sawgha, &c. Gagga, a mad Bhikkhu,
&c. ; the Sawgha grants, &c. Thus I understand.” ’

28o

mahAvagga.

II, 26, I.

26 .

1. At that time four Bhikkhus dwelt in a certain
residence (of Bhikkhus) on the day of Uposatha.
Now these Bhikkhus thought: ‘The Blessed One
has prescribed the holding of Uposatha, and we are
(only) four persons ^ Well, how are we to hold
Uposatha?’

They told this thing to the Blessed One.

‘ I prescribe, O Bhikkhus, that four (Bhikkhus)
may recite the PAtimokkha.’

2. At that time three Bhikkhus dwelt in a certain
residence (of Bhikkhus) at the day of Uposatha.
Now these Bhikkhus thought : ‘ The Blessed One
has prescribed to four (Bhikkhus) the reciting of the
Pitimokkha, and we are (only) three persons,’ &c.

‘ I prescribe, O Bhikkhus, that three Bhikkhus
may hold pArisuddhi-uposatha^

3. ‘ And it ought to be held in this way : Let a
learned, competent Bhikkhu proclaim the following
watti before those Bhikkhus: “Let the reverend
brethren hear me. To-day is Uposatha, the fifteenth
(day of the half month). If the reverend brethren are
ready, let us hold pirisuddhi-uposatha with each
other.” Let the senior Bhikkhu adjust his upper
robe so as to cover one shoulder, sit down squatting,
raise his joined hands, and say to those Bhikkhus :
“I am pure, friends, understand that I am pure, &c.®”

4. ‘ Let (each) younger Bhikkhu (in his turn) adjust

’ The quorum for several official acts of the Order was five or
more Bhikkhus; see IX, 4.

* Uposatha by mutual declaration of purity from the offences
specified in the Pfitimokkha ; see § 3 seq.

• The same phrase is repeated twice more.

11,26,10, UPOSATHA CEREMONY, AND pAtIMOKKHA. 28 1

his upper robe so as to cover one shoulder, sit down
squatting, raise his joined hands, and say to those
Bhikkhus : “ I am pure, reverend Sirs, &c.’' ’

5. At that time two Bhikkhus dwelt in a certain
residence on the day of Uposatha. Now these Bhik-
khus though't : ‘ The Blessed One has prescribed to
four (Bhikkhus) the reciting of the Pitimokkha, to
three (Bhikkhus) the holding of pArisuddhi-upo-
satha, and we are (only) two persons,’ &c.

‘ I prescribe, O Bhikkhus, that two persons may
hold pirisuddhi-uposatha.^

6, 7. ‘ And it ought to be held in this way : Let
the senior Bhikkhu, &c.’’

8. At that time there dwelt a single Bhikkhu in a
certain residence on the day of Uposatha. Now this
Bhikkhu thought, &c.

9. ‘ In case there dwell, O Bhikkhus, in a certain
residence on the day of Uposatha a single Bhikkhu ;
let that Bhikkhu, O Bhikkhus, sweep the place which
the Bhikkhus used to frequent, the refectory, or hall,
or place at the foot of a tree ; let him (then) provide
water and food, prepare seats, put a lamp there, and
sit down. If other Bhikkhus come, let him hold^
Uposatha with them ; if they do not come, let him
fix his mind upon the thought: “To-day is my Upo-I
satha.” If he does not fix his mind upon this thought,
he commits a dukka/a offence.

10. ‘Now, O Bhikkhus, where four Bhikkhus
dwell (together), they must not convey the pAri-
suddhi® of one (to their assembly), and recite the

' See §§ 3, 4. The Matti prescribed in the preceding case does
not apply to this case.

* See chap. 2a.

282

mahAvagga.

Ilj 27, li

Pitimokkha by three. If they do, they commit
a dukka/a offence.

‘Now, O Bhikkhus, where three Bhikkhus dwell
(together), they must not convey the pArisuddhi
of one (to their assembly), and hold pArisuddhi-
uposatha by two. If they do, they commit a
dukka/a offence.

‘ Now, O Bhikkhus, where two Bhikkhus dwell,
one of them must not convey the pArisuddhi of the
other one, and fix (only) his thoughts (upon the Upo-
satha). If he does, he commits a dukka/a offence.’

27 .

1. At that time a certain Bhikkhu was guilty of
an offence on the day of Uposatha. Now this Bhik-
khu thought : ‘ The Blessed One has prescribed :
“ Uposatha is not to be held by a Bhikkhu who is
guilty of an offence^.” Now I am guilty of an offence.
What am I to do ?’

They told this thing to the Blessed One.

‘ In case, O Bhikkhus, a certain Bhikkhu be guilty
of an offence on the day of Uposatha ; let that Bhik-
khu, O Bhikkhus, go to one Bhikkhu, adjust his
upper robe so as to cover one shoulder, sit down
squatting, raise his joined hands, and say : “ I have
committed, friend, such and such an offence ; I con-
fess that offence.” Let the other say; " Do you see
it?” “Yes, I see it.” “ Refrain from it in future.”

2. ‘ In case, O Bhikkhus, there be a Bhikkhu on
the day of Uposatha who feels doubt with regard

* See iSTullavagga IX, 2 .

II, 27, 4- UPOSATHA CEREMONY, AND pAtIMOKKHA. 283

to an offence ; let this Bhikkhu, O Bhikkhus, go to
one Bhikkhu, &c. (§ i), and say: “ I feel doubt, friend,
with regard to such and such an offence. • When I
shall feel no doubt, then I will atone for that offence.”
Having spoken thus, let him hold Uposatha and hear
the PAtimoktha. But in no case must there be any
hindrance to holding Uposatha from such a cause.’

3. At that time the A'^abbaggiya Bhikkhus con-
fessed in common an offence (shared by them all).

They told this thing to the Blessed One.

‘ You ought not, O Bhikkhus, to confess an offence
in common. He who does so, commits a dukka/a
offence.’

At that time the A'i^abbaggiya Bhikkhus accepted
the common confession of an offence (shared by
several Bhikkhus).

They told this thing to the Blessed One.

‘You ought not, O Bhikkhus, to accept the com-
mon confession of an offence. He who does so,
commits a dukka/a offence.’

4. At that time a certain Bhikkhu remembered
an offence, while Pitimokkha was being recited.
Now this Bhikkhu thought: ‘The Blessed One
has prescribed : “ Uposatha is not to be held by (a
Bhikkhu) who is guilty of an offence.” Now I am
guilty of an offence. What am I to do?’

They told this thing to the Blessed One.

‘ In case, O Bhikkhus, there be a Bhikkhu who
remembers an offence, while PAtimokkha is being
recited; let this Bhikkhu, O Bhikkhus, say to his
neighbour Bhikkhu : “ I have committed such and
such an offence, friend; when I have arisen from
this (assembly), I will atone for that offence.” Having
spoken thus, &c. (§ 2 ).

284

mahAvagga.

® 7 > 6 '

5. ‘ In case, O Bhikkhus, there be a Bhikkhu
who feels doubt with regard to an offence, while
PAtimokkha is being recited, &c. (§§ 2, 4).’

6. At that time the whole Sa««gha in a certain
residence was guilty of a common offence on the
day of Uposatha. Now these BhikkKus thought :
‘ The Blessed One has prescribed that offences
(shared by many Bhikkhus) are not to be confessed
in common, and that the common confession of such
offences is not to be accepted. Now this whole
Sawgha is guilty of a common offence. What are
we to do ?’

They told this thing to the Blessed One.

‘ In case, O Bhikkhus, the whole Sa^«gha in a
certain residence is guilty of a common offence on
the day of Uposatha ; let those Bhikkhus, O Bhik-
khus, send instantly one Bhikkhu to the neigh-
bouring residence of Bhikkhus (saying), “ Go, friend,
and come back when you have atoned for that
offence (for yourself) ; we will (then) atone for the
offence before you.”

7. ‘ If they succeed in this way, well and good.
If they do not succeed, let a learned, competent
Bhikkhu proclaim the following watti before the
Sa»?gha : “ Let the Saw^gha, reverend Sirs, hear
me. This whole Sa»?gha is guilty of a common
offence. When it shall see another pure, guiltless
Bhikkhu, it will atone for the offence before him.”
(One of the Bhikkhus) having spoken thus, let them
hold Uposatha and recite the Pitimokkha. But in
no case must there be any hindrance to holding
Uposatha from such a cause.

8. ‘ In case, O Bhikkhus, the whole Sa»*gha in
a certain residence feels doubt with regard to a

II, a7,ia. UPOSATHA CEREMONY, AND pAtIMOKKHA. 28 $

common o£fence on the day of Uposatha; (in this
case) let a learned, competent Bhikkhu proclaim the
following «atti before the Sa»^gha: “Let the
Sawgha, reverend Sirs, hear me. This whole
Sa/^gha feels doubt with regard to a common
offence. WKen it will feel no doubt, it will atone
for that offence.” (One of the Bhikkhus) having
spoken thus, &c.

9. ‘ In case, O Bhikkhus, in a certain residence
the Saw^gha that has entered (there) upon vassa is
guilty of a common offence. Those Bhikkhus, O
Bhikkhus, are instantly, &c. {§§ 6, 7). If they do
not succeed, let them send away one Bhikkhu for
seven days’ time : “ Go, friend, and come back when
you have atoned for that offence (for yourself) ; we
will (then) atone for the offence before you.” ’

10. At that time the whole Sawgha in a certain
residence was guilty of a common offence, and did
not know the name nor the class to which that
offence belonged. Now there arrived (at that place)
another Bhikkhu, &c. (see chap. 21. 2), anxious for
training. To that Bhikkhu one of the Bhikkhus
went, and having gone to him, he said to him : ‘ He
who does such and such a thing, friend, what sort
of offence does he commit ?’

11. He replied: ‘He who does such and such
a thing, friend, commits such and such an offence.
If you have committed such an offence, friend, atone
for that offence.’ The other replied : ‘ Not I myself
alone, friend, am gfuilty of that offence ; this whole
Sa»?gha is guilty of that offence.’ He said : ‘ What
is it to you, friend, whether another is guilty or guilt-
less? Come, friend, atone for your own offence.’

12. Now this Bhikkhu, after having atoned for

286

mahAvagga.

n, 27, 13.

that offence by the advice of that Bhikkhu, went to
those Bhikkhus (to his brethren who shared in the
same offence) ; having gone to them, he said to those
Bhikkhus : ‘ He who does such and such a thing,
friends, commits such and such an offence. As you
have committed such an offence, friends, atone for
that offence.’ Now those Bhikkhus refused to atone
for that offence by that Bhikkhu’s advice.

They told this thing to the Blessed One.

13, 14. ‘ In case, O Bhikkhus, the whole Sawgha
in a certain residence is guilty of a common offence,
&c. {§§ 10, ii) —

15. ‘If this Bhikkhu, O Bhikkhus, after having
atoned for that offence by the advice of that
Bhikkhu, goes to those Bhikkhus, and having gone
to them, says to those Bhikkhus : “ He who does,
&c.,” and if those Bhikkhus, O Bhikkhus, atone for
that offence by that Bhikkhu’s advice, well and
good ; if they do not atone for it, that Bhikkhu, O
Bhikkhus, need not say anything (further) to those
Bhikkhus, if he does not like.’

End of the Bhd«avAra on ATodanAvatthu.

28 .

I. At that time there assembled in a certain
residence (of Bhikkhus) at the day of Uposatha a
number of resident Bhikkhus, four or more. They
did not know that there were other resident Bhik-
khus absent. Intending to act according to Dhamma
and Vinaya, thinking themselves to be complete
while (really) incomplete, they held Uposatha and

11,28,4. UPOSATHA CEREMONY, AND pAtIMOKKHA. 287

recited the Pdtimokkha. While they were reciting
the Patimokkha, other resident Bhikkhus, a greater
number (than the first ones), arrived.

They told this thing to the Blessed One.

2. ‘ In case, O Bhikkhus, there assemble in a
certain resicfence at the day of Uposatha, &c. ($ i);
while they are reciting the Pdtimokkha, other resi-
dent Bhikkhus, a greater number, arrive ; let those
Bhikkhus, O Bhikkhus, recite the Pitimokkha again ;
they who have recited it, are free from guilt.

3. ‘ In case, O Bhikkhus, there assemble, &c. ;
while they are reciting the PAtimokkha, other resi-
dent Bhikkhus, exactly the same number (as the
first ones), arrive ; in that case (the part of the
Pitimokkha) that has been recited, has been cor-
rectly recited; let those (who have arrived late),
hear the rest ; they who have recited it, are free
from guilt.

‘ In case, O Bhikkhus, there assemble, &c. ; while
they are reciting the PAtimokkha, other resident
Bhikkhus, a smaller number, arrive, &c.^

4. ‘In case, O Bhikkhus, there assemble, &c. ;
when they have just finished the recital of the PAti-
mokkha, other resident Bhikkhus, &c.*

’ The decision given for the case of a smaller number of Bhik-
khus arriving late, is here, and invariably throughout the following
exposition, identical with the decision of the case of the number of
Bhikkhus being equal on the two sides.

* The same three cases are distinguished here as in §§ 2, 3, accord-
ing as the number of Bhikkhus who are late, is the same,

or smaller than that of the other Bhikkhus. The first case is decided
by Buddha as above ; in the decision of the second and third cases,
instead of * let those (who have arrived late) hear the rest,’ read :
‘let those (who have arrived late) proclaim their pfirisuddhi in
the presence (of the other brethren).’

288

mahAvagga.

II, 28, 5-

5 . ‘In case, O Bhikkhus, there assemble, &c. ;
when they have just finished the recital of the Pdti-
mokkha, and the assembly has not yet risen, other
resident Bhikkhus, &c.^

6 . ‘In case, O Bhikkhus, there assemble, &c. ;
when they have just finished the recital of the P4ti-
mokkha, and a part of the assembly has risen, &c.^

7 . ‘ In case, O Bhikkhus, there assemble, &c. ;
when they have just finished the recital of the Pelti-
mokkha, and the whole assembly has risen, &c^’

End of the fifteen cases in which there is no offence.

29.

‘In case, O Bhikkhus, there assemble in a certain
residence on the day of Uposatha a number of resi-
dent Bhikkhus, four or more ; they know that there
are other resident Bhikkhus absent; intending to
act according to Dhamma and Vinaya, incomplete,
conscious of their incompleteness, they hold Upo-
satha and recite the PAtimokkha, See.**’

End of the fifteen cases of the incompletely
assembled Bhikkhus who are conscious
of their incompleteness.

* The three triads of §§ 5, 6, 7 agree exactly with the triad
of § 4.

‘ Here follow fifteen cases which are arranged exactly as in
chap. 28. Instead of *they who have recited it, are free from
guilt,’ read: ‘they who have recited it, have committed a dukka/a
offence.’

11, 33* UPOSATHA CEREMONY, AND pAtIMOKKHA. 289

30 .

‘ In case, O Bhikkhus, there assemble, &c. ; they
know that there are other resident Bhikkhus absent.
Feeling doubt as to whether they are competent to
hold Uposatha or not competent, they hold Upo-
satha and recite the PAtimokkha, &c.^’

End of the fifteen cases of the Bhikkhus who
feel doubt.

31 .

‘In case, O Bhikkhus, there assemble, &c. ; they
know that there are other resident Bhikkhus absent.
(Thinking) : “We are competent to hold Uposatha,
we are not incompetent,” they abandon themselves
to misbehaviour, hold Uposatha, and recite the Pdti-
mokkha, &c.^’

End of the fifteen cases of the Bhikkhus abandoning
themselves to misbehaviour.

32 .

‘ In case, O Bhikkhus, there assemble, &c. ; they
know that there are other resident Bhikkhus absent.
They perish and become ruined®, saying, “What
are those people to us.?” and risking a schism

* The decision of these fifteen cases is the same as in chap. 29.

* I. e. they destroy their own welfare by their wickedness.

[13] U

290

mahAvagga.

n.33-

(among the fraternity), they hold Uposatha and
recite the Pitimokkha, &c.* ’

End of the fifteen cases of the Bhikkhus risking
a schism.

End of the seventy-five * cases.

33.

‘ In case, O Bhikkhus, there assemble in a certain
residence on the day of Uposatha a number of resi-
dent Bhikkhus, four or more ; they know that other
resident Bhikkhus are about to enter the boundary.
They know that other resident Bhikkhus have
entered within the boundary. They see other resi-
dent Bhikkhus who are about to enter, &c., who have
entered within the boundary. They hear that other
resident Bhikkhus are about to enter, &c., have
entered within the boundary.’

Thus® a hundred and seventy-five systems of triads
are produced which refer to resident and resident

* The decisions as in chap. 29; only read instead of ‘dukka/a
offence,’ ‘thulla^^aya offence’ (grave sin).

® Five times fifteen cases, in chaps. 28-32.

I * Remarks like this, which indicate the rules for suppl3dng abbre-
viated passages, do not belong, strictly speaking, to the text of the
I Vinaya itself, but form a posterior addition, as is shown also by
j grammatical peculiarities. In chaps. 28-32 we have seventy-five
I cases, or twenty-five triads ; all of these triads contain the words :

I ‘ They know that there are other resident Bhikkhus absent.’ By
successively varying these words six times, as is indicated in chap.

; 33> we obtain a hundred and seventy-five triads.

II, 34>9> UPOSATHA CEREMONY, AND pAtIMOKKHA. 29 1
s

Bhikkhus^. (Then follow the same cases with re-
gard to) resident and incoming Bhikkhus, incoming
and resident Bhikkhus, incoming and incoming Bhik-
khus. By putting these words (successively) into
the peyyAla^ seven hundred triads are produced.

34 .

1. ‘In case, O Bhikkhus, the resident Bhikkhus
count the day as the fourteenth (of the pakkha),
the incoming Bhikkhus as the fifteenth®; if the
number of the resident Bhikkhus is greater, the
incoming Bhikkhus ought to accommodate them-
selves to the resident Bhikkhus. If their number
is equal, the incoming Bhikkhus ought to accommo-
date themselves to the resident Bhikkhus. If the
number of the incoming Bhikkhus is greater, the
resident Bhikkhus ought to accommodate themselves
to the incoming Bhikkhus.

2. ‘In case, O Bhikkhus, the resident Bhikkhus
count the day as the fifteenth, the incoming Bhik-
khus as the fourteenth ; if, &c. (§ i).

* I. e. the assembled Bhikkhus as well as the incoming reside in
the same dvdsa.

* ‘PeyySla' is identical in meaning and, we believe, etymolo-
gically with ‘pariyilya.’ See Childers s.v. ; H. O.'s remarks in
Kuhn’s Zeitschrift fiir vergleichende Sprachforschung, vol. xxv, 324;
Trenckner, Pali Miscellany, p. 66.

* Buddhaghosa: ‘They who count the day as the fifteenth,
anive from a distant kingdom, or they have held the preceding
Uposatha on the fourteenth.' It seems to follow from this remark
of Buddhaghosa that after an Uposatha on the fourteenth invariably
an Uposatha on the fifteenth must follow, i. e. the Uposatha may
not be held on the fourteenth ad libitum, but only in the second
pakkha of the short months. Compare chap. 4 and the note on
chap. I. I.

292

mahAvagga.

34 > 3 *

3. ‘In case, O Bhikkhus, the resident Bhikkhus
count the day as the first (of the pakkha), the in-
coming Bhikkhus as the fifteenth (of the preceding
pakkha) ; if the number of the resident Bhikkhus
is greater, the resident Bhikkhus need not, if they
do not like, admit the incoming ones tb their com-
munion ; let the incoming Bhikkhus go outside the
boundary and hold (there) Uposatha. If their num-
ber is equal, &c. (as in the preceding case). If the
number of the incoming Bhikkhus is greater, let the
resident Bhikkhus either admit the incoming ones
to their communion or go outside the boundary.

4. ‘In case, O Bhikkhus, the resident Bhikkhus
count the day as the fifteenth, the incoming Bhik-
khus as the first (of the following pakkha) ; if the
number of the resident Bhikkhus is greater, let the
incoming Bhikkhus either admit the resident Bhik-
khus to their communion or go outside the boundary.
If their number is equal, &c. (as in the preceding
case). If the number of the incoming Bhikkhus is
greater, the incoming Bhikkhus need not, if they do
not like, admit the resident Bhikkhus to their com-
munion; let the resident Bhikkhus go outside the
boundary and hold Uposatha (there).

5. ‘ In case, O Bhikkhus, the incoming Bhikkhus
see the signs, the tokens, the marks, the character-
istics of (the presence of) resident Bhikkhus, well
prepared beds and chairs and mats and pillows, food
and water well provided for, well swept cells ; seeing
this, they begin to doubt: “Are there here any
resident Bhikkhus or are there not?” —

6. ‘ Being doubtful they do not search, having not
searched they hold Uposatha: this is a dukka/a
offence. Being doubtful they search, searching they

II, 34 . UPOSATHA CEREMONY, AND pAtIMOKKHA. 293

• ------

do not see them, not seeing them they hold Uposatha :
(in this case) they are free from offence. Being doubt-
ful they search, searching they see them, seeing them
they hold Uposatha together : (in this case) they are
free from offence. Being doubtful they search, search-
ing they see them, seeing them they hold Uposatha
apart: this is a dukka^a offence. Being doubtful
they search, searching they see them, seeing them
they perish and become ruined^, saying, “ What are
those people to us ?” and risking a schism, they hold
Uposatha : this is a thulla>&/^aya (grave) offence.

7. ‘In case, O Bhikkhus, the incoming Bhikkhus
hear the signs &c. of (the presence of) resident
Bhikkhus, the sound of their footsteps when they
are walking, the sound of their rehearsal (of the
Dhamma), of their clearing the throat and sneezing ;
hearing this they begin to doubt, &c. (§J 5, 6).

8. ‘In case, O Bhikkhus, the resident Bhikkhus
see the signs &c. of (the presence of) incoming
Bhikkhus, unknown bowls, unknown robes, unknown
seats, (the traces of) foot-washing, water sprinkled
about ; seeing this they begin to doubt, &c.

9. ‘In case, O Bhikkhus, the resident Bhikkhus
hear the signs &c. of (the presence of) incoming
Bhikkhus, the sound of their footsteps when they
are arriving, the sound of their shaking out their
shoes, clearing the throat, and sneezing; hearing
this, &c.

10. ‘In case, O Bhikkhus, the incoming Bhikkhus
see resident Bhikkhus. belonging to a different dis-
trict; they take them as belonging to the same dis-
trict ; taking them as belonging to the same district

* See chap. 32.

294

mahAvagga.

II, 34, ir.

they do not ask; having not asked, they hold Upo-
satha together: (in this case) they are free from
offence. They ask ; having asked, they do not go
through the matter; having not gone through the
matter, they hold Uposatlia together: this is a duk-
ka/a offence. They ask, &c. (as in the last case),
they hold Uposatha apart: (in this case) they are
free from offence.

11. ‘In case, O Bhikkhus, the incoming Bhikkhus
see resident Bhikkhus belonging to the same district.
They take them as belonging to a different district ;
taking them, &c. they do not ask ; having not asked,
they hold Uposatha together: this is a dukka/a
offence. They ask ; having asked, they go through
the matter; having gone through the matter, they hold
Uposatha apart : this is a dukka/a offence. They
ask, &c. (as in the last case), they hold Uposatha
together : (in this case) they are free from offence.

12. ‘In case, O Bhikkhus, the resident Bhikkhus
see incoming Bhikkhus belonging to a different dis-
trict, &c. (see § lo).

13. ‘In case, O Bhikkhus, the resident Bhikkhus
see incoming Bhikkhus belonging to the same dis-
trict, &c. (see § 1 1).’

36 .

I. ‘You ought not, O Bhikkhus, to go on the day
of Uposatha from a residence in which Bhikkhus are,
to a residence in which no Bhikkhus are, except with
a Sa;;;gha^ or in a case of danger*. You ought not.

* T.e. with a number of Bhikkhus sufiScient for holding Uposatha.

* See chap. 15. 4.

II, 3<S. I. UPOSATHA CEREMONY, AND pAtiMOKKHA. 295
■

O Bhikkhus, to go on the day of Uposatha from a
residence in which Bhikkhus are, to a non-residence
in which no Bhikkhus are, except, &c. You ought
not, O Bhikkhus, to go on the day of Uposatha from
a residence in which Bhikkhus are, to a residence or
non-residence^ in which no Bhikkhus are, except, &c.

2. ‘You ought not, O Bhikkhus, to go on the day
of Uposatha from a non-residence in which Bhikkhus
are, to a residence, &c., to a non-residence, &c., to a
residence or non-residence in which no Bhikkhus are,
except, &c.

- 3. ‘You ought not, O Bhikkhus, to go on the day
of Uposatha from a residence or non-residence in
which Bhikkhus are, to a residence, &c., to a non-
residence, &c., to a residence or non-residence in
which no Bhikkhus are, except, &c.

4. ‘You ought not, O Bhikkhus, to go on the day
of Uposatha from a residence in which Bhikkhus are,
to a residence in which Bhikkhus are, if these Bhik-
khus belong to a different district, except, &c. *

5. ‘You may go, O Bhikkhus, on the day of
Uposatha from a residence in which Bhikkhus are,
to a residence in which Bhikkhus are, if these Bhik-
khus belong to the same district, and if you know :
“ I can attain that place to-day.” You may, &c.®’

36 .

I. ‘ Let no one, O Bhikkhus, recite the PAti- j
mokkha in a seated assembly (of Bhikkhus) before S
a Bhikkhunt. He who does, commits a dukka/a 1

* Probably this means a place the quality of which, whether
residence or non-residence, is doubtful.

* Nine cases are distinguished here quite as in §§ 1-3.

296 mahAvagga. II, 36, 2.

- — c.

offence. Let no one, O Bhikkhus, recite the P 4 ti-
mokkha in a seated assembly (of Bhikkhus) before
a sikkhamAni^ a sima;;era, a sima^ert, one
who has abandoned the precepts®, one who is guilty
of an extreme offence®. He who does, commits a
dukka/a offence. '

2. ‘ Let no one, O Bhikkhus, recite the PAti-
mokkha in a seated assembly (of Bhikkhus) before
a (Bhikkhu) against whom expulsion has been
pronounced for his refusal to see an offence (coni-
mitted by himself), before a (Bhikkhu) against whom
expulsion has been pronounced for his refusal to
atone for such an offence, or for his refusal to
renounce a false doctrine. He who does, is to be
treated according to the law®.

3. ‘ Let no one, O Bhikkhus, recite the Piti-
mokkha in a seated assembly (of Bhikkhus) before
a eunuch, before one who has furtively attached
himself (to the Sawgha), &c. (see chap. 22. 3), before
a hermaphrodite. He who does, commits a duk-
ka^a offence.

* In the Bhikkhunikhandhaka (ATuIlav. X, i, 4) we are told that
Buddha, when admitting women to the Order of mendicants, pre-
scribed for them a probationary course of instruction, which should
last two years, after which time they were to ask for the upasam-
pada ordination. During these two years the candidates were
called sikkhamd»ds. Childers (Diet. s.v. sikkhati) has misunder-
stood the MahSvaxnsa (p. 37), when he states that in the case of
Asoka’s daughter Sarnghamittil the training prescribed for the sik-
kham&n&s was absolved in a single day.

* See the note on chap. 2 a. 3.

* The law alluded to most probably is the 69th F&^ittiya rule,
which expressly treats only of the conduct towards Bhikkhus re-
fusing to renounce false doctrines, but it may be extended by
analogy also to the two other categories of Bhikkhus mentioned
in our passage.

II, 3 ^, 4 * UPOSATHA CEREMONY, AND pAtIMOKKHA. 297

A

4. ‘ Let no one, O Bhikkhus, hold Uposatha by
(accepting) the pdrisuddhi declaration^ of a pAri-
vAsika®, except if the assembly has not yet risen
(at the time when the pirisuddhi is declared).
And let no one, O Bhikkhus, hold Uposatha on
another day* than the Uposatha day, except for the
sake of (declaring the re-establishment of) concord
among the Sawgha

End of the third Bhiwavfira in the Uposatha-
khandhaka.

* See chap. 22.

‘ Le. a Bhikkhu subject to the penal discipline of parivisa,
the rules of which are discussed at length in the second and third
books of the iTullavagga.

’ If a schism among the fraternity has been composed, the
reconciled parties hold Uposatha together (X, 5, 14).

298

mahAvagga.

HI, I, I.

THIRD KHANDHAKA.

(residence during the rainy season, vassa.)

1 .

1. At that time the Blessed One dwelt at R^^-
gaha, in the Ve/uvana, in the KalandakanivApa
At that time the retreat during the rainy season
had not yet been instituted by the Blessed One for
the Bhikkhus. Thus the Bhikkhus went on their
travels alike during winter, summer, and the rainy
season.

2. People were annoyed, murmured, and became
angry, saying, ‘ How can the Sakyaputtiya Samaras
go on their travels alike during winter, summer, and
the rainy season ? They crush the green herbs, they
hurt vegetable life they destroy the life of many
small living things. Shall the ascetics who belong
to Titthiya schools, whose doctrine is ill preached,
retire during the rainy season and arrange places
for themselves to live in® ? shall the birds make their
nests on the summits of the trees, and retire during

‘ See the note on I, 22, 17. About the name of Kalandaka-
nivipa (seeds of Kalandaka? feeding ground for squirrels?), see
the story related in Beal, Romantic Legend, &c., p. 315, where this
place is said to be the gift of a merchant named Kalandaka. A dif-
ferent account is given by Spence Hardy, Manual, p. 194.

* Literally, living creatures which have but one organ of sense ;
that is, which have only the org;an of feeling, viz. the outward
form (k&ya).

• SamkSpayissanti = samkappayissanti ? Buddhaghosa :
appossukka-nibaddha-vSsain vasissanti.

Ill, 3 , 3 . RESIDENCE DURING THE RAINY SEASON. 299

the rainy season, and arrange themselves places to
live in; and yet the Sakyaputtiya Sama«as go on
their travels alike during winter, summer, and the
rainy season, crushing the green herbs, hurting
vegetable life, and destroying the life of many small
things ?’ •

3. Now some Bhikkhus heard those people that
were annoyed, murmured, and had become angry.

These Bhikkhus told this thing to the Blessed One.

In consequence of that and on this occasion the
Blessed One, after having delivered a religious dis-
course, thus addressed the Bhikkhus :

‘ I prescribe, O Bhikkhus, that you enter upon
VassaV

2 .

1. Now the Bhikkhus thought: ‘When are we
to enter upon Vassa ?’

They told this thing to the Blessed One.

‘ I prescribe, O Bhikkhus, that you enter upon
Vassa in the rainy season.’

2. Then the Bhikkhus thought : ‘ How many
periods are there for entering upon Vassa ?’

They told this thing to the Blessed One.

* There are two periods, O Bhikkhus, for entering
upon Vassa, the earlier and the later. The earlier
time for entering (upon Vassa) is the day after the

' I. e. enter upon the retreat prescribed for the rainy season.
Buddhaghosa : ‘ They are to look after their Vihdra (if it is in a
proper state), to provide food and water for themselves, to fulfil all
due ceremonies, such as paying reverence to sacred shrines, &c.,
and to say loudly once, or twice, or thrice : * I enter upon Vassa in
this Vihfira for these three months." Thus they are to enter upon
Vassa.'

300

mahAvagga.

Ill, 3, I-

I full moon of AsA/4a (June-July) ; the later, a month
1 after the full moon of AsA//4a ^ These, O Bhikkhus,
j are the two periods for entering upon Vassa.’

3 .

1 . At that time the AT^abbaggiya Bhikkhus, having
entered upon Vassa, went on their travels during
the period of Vassa. People were annoyed, mur-
mured, and became angry (saying), ‘ How can the
Sakyaputtiya Samaras go on their travels alike

during winter, summer, and the rainy season

(&c., as in chap. i. 2, down to:) and destroy the life
of many small living things?’

2 . Now some Bhikkhus heard those people that
were annoyed, murmured, and had become angry.
The moderate Bhikkhus were annoyed, murmured,
and became angry (saying), ‘ How can the A'^b-
baggiya Bhikkhus, having entered upon Vassa, go
on their travels during the period of Vassa ?’

These Bhikkhus told this thing to the Blessed One.

/ ‘ Very probably this double period stands in connection withf

the double period prescribed in the Br&hma»as and Shtras for
most of the Vedic festivals. Thus the sacrifice of the varu«apra-
ghfisfis, with which the Brahmans began the rainy season, was to
be held either on the full moon day of AshitfAa or on the full
moon day of the following month, . 9 rfiva»a, quite in accordance
with the Buddhistical rules about the vassupanfiyiki. The
Brdhma»a texts begin the year with the full moon day of the
(uttarfi) Fhfilgunf; the Sfitras mention, besides the FhfilgunI,
another new-year’s day, the ATaitri paurnamfist, which falls one
month later. It was in connection with this dislocation of the be-
ginning of the year that the annual festivfds could be postponed
accordingly. See Weber, Die vedischen Nachrichten von den
Naxatra, II, p. 329 seq.

Ill, 4 , 3. RESIDENCE DURING THE RAINY SEASON. 3OI
»— — —

In consequence of that and on this occasion the
Blessed One, after having delivered a religious dis-
course, thus addressed the Bhikkhus :

‘ Let no one, O Bhikkhus, who has entered upon
Vassa, go on his travels before he has kept Vassa
during the darlier or during the later three months.
He who does so, commits a dukka/a offence.’

4 .

1. At that time the A'i^abbaggiya Bhikkhus were
not willing to enter upon Vassa.

They told this thing to the Blessed One.

‘ Let no one, O Bhikkhus, forbear to enter upon
Vassa. He who does not enter upon Vassa, com-
mits a dukka/a offence.’

2. At that time the AT/^abbaggiya Bhikkhus, who
were not willing to enter upon Vassa on the pre-
scribed day, purposely left the district (where they
were living).

They told this thing to the Blessed One.

‘ Let no one, O Bhikkhus, purposely leave the dis-
trict (where he is living), because he is not willing
to enter upon Vassa on the prescribed day. He
who does, commits a dukka/a offence.’

3. At that time the Magadha king Seniya Bimbi-
s 4 ra, who wished that the Vassa period might be
postponed, sent a messenger to the Bhikkhus: ‘What
if their reverences were to enter upon Vassa on thej
next full moon day ? ’

They told this thing to the Blessed One.

‘ I prescribe, O Bhi kkhus, that you obe y kings.’

302

mahAvagga.

5 >

6 .

1. And the Blessed One, after having resided at
R^^gaha as long as he thought fit, went forth to
SAvatthi. Wandering from place to place he came
to SAvatthi. There, at SAvatthi, the Blessed One
dwelt in the 6^etavana, the garden of AnAthapi«flfika.

At that time an upAsaka (lay devotee) named
Udena, in the Kosala country, had a VihAra built
for the Sawgha. He sent a messenger to the
Bhikkhus (saying), ‘ Might their reverences come
hither ; I desire to bestow gifts (on the Sazwgha) and
to hear the Dhamma and to see the Bhikkhus.’

2. The Bhikkhus replied: ‘The Blessed One has
prescribed, friend, that no one who has entered upon
Vassa, may go on a journey before he has kept
Vassa during the earlier or during the later three
months. Let the upAsaka Udena wait so long as
the Bhikkhus keep their Vassa residence; when
they have finished Vassa, they will go. But if
there is any urgent necessity, let him dedicate the
VihAra in presence of the Bhikkhus who reside
there.’

3. The upAsaka Udena was annoyed, murmured,
and became angry (saying), ‘ How can their reve-
rences, when I send for them, refuse to come ? I am
a giver and a doer (of good works), and do service
to the fraternity.’ Some Bhikkhus heard the upA-
saka Udena, who was annoyed, &c.

These Bhikkhus told the thing to the Blessed One.

4. In consequence of that the Blessed One, after
having delivered a religious discourse, thus addressed
the Bhikkhus :

‘ I allow you, O Bhikkhus, to go (even during

Ill, s, 6 . RESIDENCE DURING THE RAINY SEASON. 303

the rainy season), if the affair for which you go can
be accomplished in seven days, and if you are sent
for, but not if you are not sent for, by a person of
one of the following seven classes : Bhikkhus, Bhik- 1
khunts, sikkham&nisS sima^eras, sclma»eris,
lay devotees, female lay devotees. I allow you, O
Bhikkhus, to go, if the thing (you go for) can be
accomplished in seven days, and if you are sent for,
but not if you are not sent for, by a person of one
of these seven classes. Within seven days you
ought to return.

5. ‘ In case, O Bhikkhus, an updsaka has built
a VihAra for the Sa»«gha. If he sends a mes-
senger to the Bhikkhus (saying), “ Might their
reverences come hither; I desire to bestow gifts
(on them) and to hear the Dhamma and to see
the Bhikkhus,” you ought to go, O Bhikkhus, if the
affair for which you go can be accomplished in
seven days, and if he sends for you, but not if he
does not send for you. Within seven days you
ought to return.

6. ‘In case, O Bhikkhus, an upAsaka has built!
for the Sawgha an zddhdLyogdi\ has built a storied ;
house, has built an attic, has constructed a cave, '
a cell, a store-room, a refectory, a fire-room, a ware- 1
house ®, a privy, a place to walk in, a house to walk ^
in, a well, a well house, a ^antAghara*, a ^antA-^
ghara room®, a lotus-pond, a pavilion, a park, orj

' See the note on II, 36, i.

* See the note on I, 30, 4.

* This translation of kappiyaku/f is merely conjectural;
comp. kappiyabhfkmlVI, 33.

* See the note on I, 25, 12.

* See ATullavagga V, 16 , 1.

304

mahAvagga.

has prepared the site for a park. If he sends a

messenger to the Bhikkhus (&c., as in § 5,

down to the end of the section).

7. ‘ In case, O Bhikkhus, an upAsaka has built
for a number of Bhikkhus an duidhayoga. .... (&c.,
as in } 6 to the end of the section), .... for
one Bhikkhu a Vihira, an suidh^yoga,, a storied
house .... (&c., as in f 6 to the end).

8. ‘In case, O Bhikkhus, an upAsaka has built
for the sisterhood of Bhikkhunls, &c., for a number
of Bhikkhunls, for one Bhikkhunl, for a number of
sikkhaminAs, for one sikkhamini, for a number
of sima»eras, for one sAmawera, for a number of
sima^^eris, for one sAma^^erl a VihAra, &c.^ If
he sends a messenger to the Bhikkhus, &c.

j 9. ‘ In case, O Bhikkhus, an upisaka has built
{ for his own use a residence, a sleeping room, a
i stable*, a tower, a one-peaked building®, a shop,
I a boutique, a storied house, an attic, a cave, a cell,

I a store-room, a refectory, a fire-room, a kitchen, a
I privy, a place to walk in, a house to walk in, a
I well, a well house, a ^antdghara, a ^antighara
I room, a lotus-pond, a pavilion, a park, or has pre-
{ pared the site for a park; or that his son is to
I choose a consort ; or that his daughter is to choose
I a consort ; or that he is sick ; or that he knows how

' The enumeration of edifices is identical with that given in § 6,
but in the cases beginning with that of the sisterhood of Bhikkhunts
(according to Buddhaghosa; we believe that the two cases referring
to sfima«eras ought to be excepted) three of the edifices are left
out, viz. the privy, the ^antighara, and the ^antfighara room,
the use of which is forbidden to nuns; see ATullavagga X, 27, 3, 4.

* See' Abhidhinapp. v. 213, and compare a8sabha«(&, hatthi-
bha>»fa (Mahfivagga I, 61, i).

* See Abhidbfinapp. v. 209.

Ill, 6, I. RESIDENCE DURING THE RAINY SEASON. 305

to recite a celebrated suttanta. If he sends a
messenger to the Bhikkhus (saying), “ Might their
reverences come and learn this suttanta; other-
wise this suttanta will fall into oblivion;” — or if
he has any other business or any work to be done ; |
and if he 'sends a messenger to the Bhikkhus '
(saying), “ Might their reverences come hither ”

(&c.) .... then you ought to go (&c., as in § 5,
down to :) . . . . you ought to return.

10-12. ‘In case, O Bhikkhus, an upisikA has
built a Vih4ra for the Sawgha (&c., as in §§ 5-9’).

13. ‘In case, O Bhikkhus, a Bhikkhu has built,
&c., a Bhikkhunt, a sikkhamini, a sdma^^era, a
sdma«eri has built for the Sawgha, for a number
of Bhikkhus, for one Bhikkhu, for the sisterhood of

Bhikkhunls for one simawerl, for his own

use, a Vih^ra (&c., as in § 8).’

6 .

I. At that time a certain Bhikkhu was sick.
He sent a messenger to the Bhikkhus (saying),
‘ I am sick ; might the Bhikkhus come to me ;
I long for the Bhikkhus’ coming.’

They told this thing to the Blessed One.

‘ I allow you, O Bhikkhus, to go (even during the
rainy season), if the affair for which you go can
be accomplished in seven days, even if you are not
sent for, and much more if you are sent for, by a

* Only it is said here of the Bhikkhus, ayyS, ‘ the noble ones,’
instead of bhaddantS, ‘ their reverences.’

[X3i X

3o6

mahAvagga.

Ill, 6 , 2 .

I person of one of the following five classes : Bhik-
[ khus, Bhikkhunls, sikkhamAnAs, sAma^eras, and
'* sAma«eris. I allow you, O Bhikkhus, to go, if
the affair for which you go can be accomplished in
seven days, even if you are not sent for, and much
more if you are sent for, by a persotf of one of
these five classes. Within seven days you ought
to return.

2. ‘ In case, O Bhikkhus, a Bhikkhu is sick. If
he sends a messenger to the Bhikkhus (saying),
“ I am sick ; might the Bhikkhus come to me ;
I long for the Bhikkhus’ coming,” you ought to go,
O Bhikkhus, if the thing can be accomplished in
seven days, even if he had not sent for you, much
more when he has sent (saying to yourselves) ;
” I will try to get food for the sick, or food for the
tender of the sick, or medicine for the sick, or I will
ask him (questions referring to the Dhamma), or
nurse him.” Within seven days you ought to
return.

3. ‘ In case, O Bhikkhus, inward struggles have
befallen a Bhikkhu. If he sends a messenger to
the Bhikkhus : “ ^ wa rd struggles have befallen me ;
might the Bhikkhus come to me ; 1 long for the
Bhikkhus’ coming,’’ you ought to go ... . (&c., as
in J 2, down to) : (saying to yourselves) : “ I will
try to appease those struggles, or cause them
to be appeased (by another), or compose him by
religious conversation.” Within seven days you
ought to return.

4. ‘In case, O Bhikkhus, a Bhikkhu in whose
mind doubts of conscience have arisen sends
.... (&c., as in § 3, down to) : (saying to your-
selves) : “ I will try to dispel those doubts, or cause

Ill, 6, 10. RESIDEKCE DURING THE RAINY SEASON. 307

them to be dispelled, or compose him by religious con-
versation.” Within seven days you ought to return.

5. ‘ In case, O Bhikkhus, a Bhikkhu takes to a
false doctrine. If he sends .... (&c., down to):
(saying to yourselves) : “ I will discuss that false
doctrine, or cause another to discuss it, or compose
(that Bhikkhu) by religious conversation.” Within
seven days you ought to return.

6. ‘In case, O Bhikkhus, a Bhikkhu is guilty of
a grave offence and ought to be sentenced to par i-
visa discipline. If he sends .... (&c., down to):
(saying to yourselves) : “ I will take care that he
may be sentenced to parivdsa discipline, or I will
propose the resolution (to the assembly), or I will
help to complete the quorum (required for passing
the sentence of parivisa).” Within seven days
you ought to return.

7. ‘ In case, O Bhikkhus, a Bhikkhu ought to be
sentenced to recommence penal discipline. If he
sends .... (&c., as in § 6, down to the end of the
section).

8. ‘ In case, OJ Bhikkhus, a Bhikkhu ought to
have the mdnatta discipline imposed upon him.
If he sends .... (&c., as in § 6, down to the end
of the section).

9. * In case, O Bhikkhus, a Bhikkhu (having duly
undergone penal discipline) ought to be rehabilitated.
If he sends .... (&c., as in § 6).

10. ‘In case, O Bhikkhus, the Sawgha is going
to proceed against a Bhikkhu by the ta^^aniya-
kamma, or the nissaya, or the pabbA^aniya-
kamma, or the pa/is 4 ra»iyakamma, or the
ukkhepaniyakamma. If that Bhikkhu sends a
messenger to the Bhikkhus (saying), “ The Sa/^gha

X 2

3o8

mahAvagga.

Ill, 6 , II.

is going to proceed against me ; might the Bhikkhus
come to me ; I long for the Bhikkhus’ coming,” you
ought to go ... . (&c., as in § 2, down to) : (saying
to yourselves): “What can be done in order that
the Sa/»gha may not proceed (against that Bhikkhu)
or may mitigate the proceeding?” Within seven
days you ought to return.

II. ‘Or the Sawgha has instituted a proceeding
against him, the ta^_^aniyakamma .... (&c., down
to) : .... or the ukkhepaniyakamma ; if he sends
a messenger to the Bhikkhus : “ The Sarngha has
instituted a proceeding against me ; might the Bhik-
khus come to me ; I long for the Bhikkhus’ coming,”
you ought to go ... . (&c., as in § 3, down to):
(saying to yourselves) : “ What can be done in order
that this Bhikkhu may behave himself properly, live
modestly, and aspire to get clear of his penance, and
that the Sawgha may revoke its sentence ?” Within
seven days you ought to return.

12-15. case, O Bhikkhus, a Bhikkhunt is
sick, &c.^

16. ‘In case, O Bhikkhus, a Bhikkhuni is guilty
of a grave offence and ought to be sentenced to
man atta discipline I If she sends. . . . (as in ^ 3,
down to) : .... (saying to yourselves) : “ I will take
care that she may be sentenced to mAnatta disci-
pline®.” Within seven days you ought to return.

^ See §§ 2-5. Read here and in all cases where the messenger
is sent by a woman: ‘Might the noble ones (ayyS) come to me;

I long for the noble ones' coming/

® There is no pariv^sa discipline for the Bhikkhunls. When
a Bhikkhuni has committed a Sa/T/gh&disesa offencci no matter
whether she has concealed it or not, she is sentenced to mdnatta
discipline for a fortnight. See jiTullavagga X, i, 4; 25, 3.

* The phrases, ‘ Or I will propose the resolution to the assembly,

Ill, 6 , 35. RESIDENCE DURING THE RAINY SEASON. 309

JL.

17. ‘In case, O Bhikkhus, a Bhikkhuni ought to
be sentenced to recommence penal discipline ....
(&c., as in § 7).

18. ‘In case, O Bhikkhus, a Bhikkhuni who is to
be rehabilitated .... (&c., as in § 9).

19. ‘In case, O Bhikkhus, the Sawgha is going
to proceed against a Bhikkhuni by the ta^^ani-
yakamma .... (&c., as in § 10).

20. ‘ Or the Sa»/gha has instituted a proceeding
against her .... (&c., as in § ii).

21. 22. ‘ In case, O Bhikkhus, a sikkhamini is
sick (&c., see §§ 2-5).

‘ In case, O Bhikkhus, a sikkhamani has vio-
lated* the precepts (in which she is trained). If
she sends .... (&c., as in § 3, down to); (saying
to yourselves) ; “ I will take care that she may take
upon herself the precepts (again).” Within seven
days you ought to return.

23. ‘ In case, O Bhikkhus, a sikkham&na desires
to receive the upasampadd ordination. If she
sends, &c., .... you ought to go (saying to your-
selves) : “I will take care that she may receive
the upasampada ordination, or I will proclaim
the formula (of ordination before the assembly),
or I will help to complete the quorum.” Within
seven days you ought to return.

24, 25. ‘ In case, O Bhikkhus, a sdmawera is
sick (&c., as in §§ 2-5) . . . . , a s^mawera desires

or I will help to complete the quorum’ (see § 6 seq.), of course are
omitted here, because, if the proceeding is directed against a Bhik-
khuni, this is to be done by a Bhikkhuni and not by a Bhikkhu.
See ATullavagga X, 6, 3.

* This translation of sikkh^i kupitd hoti is merely conjectural;
Buddhaghosa has no note here. Comp, kuppa and akuppa.

310

mahAvagga.

Ill, 6. 36.

to ask concerning Vassal If he sends .... (say-
ing to yourselves) : “ I will ask him or I will tell
it to him.” Within seven days you ought to return.

26. ‘ In case, O Bhikkhus, a sima»era who de-
sires to receive the upasampadi ordination (&c.,
see } 23).

27, 28. ‘In case, O Bhikkhus, a sAma»eri is sick
(&c., see l§ 24-25).

29. ‘ In case, O Bhikkhus, a sAma«erl desires to
take upon herself the precepts. If she sends . . . .
&c., you should go (saying to yourselves) ; “ I will
take care that she may take upon herself the pre-
cepts.” Within seven days you ought to return.’

7 .

I. At that time the mother of a Bhikkhu was
sick. She sent a messenger to her son (saying),

‘ I am sick ; might my son come to me ; I long for
my son’s coming.’ Now that Bhikkhu thought :
‘ The Blessed One has allowed (a Bhikkhu) to go, if
the affair for which he goes can be accomplished
within seven days, and if he is sent for, but not if
he is not sent for, by a person of any one of the
seven classes ; (and he has also allowed to go), if the
thing he goes for can be accomplished within seven
days, even if he is not sent for, and much more if he
is sent for, by a person of any one of the five classes.
Now my mother is sick ; she is not a lay-devotee
(upasikA). What am I, therefore, to do ? ’

* The technical meaning of vassam pu>i^4itu«i (to ask after
Vassa ?) is unknown to us.

111,7.8. RESIDENCE DURING THE RAINY SEASON. 3 II

.» — — . , - , „

They told this thing to the Blessed One.

2. ‘ I allow you, O Bhikkhus, to go (even during [
the rainy season), if the thing you go for can be j
accomplished within seven days, even if you are not 1
sent for, and much more if you are sent for, by a
person of any one of the following seven classes : t
Bhikkhus, Bhikkhunts, sikkham^nds, s£lma»eras, /
sima»erls, the mother, and the father. I allow
you, O Bhikkhus, to go, if the thing you go for can
be accomplished within seven days, even if you are
not sent for, and much more if you are sent for, by
a person of any one of these seven classes. Within
seven days you ought to return.

3. Tn case, O Bhikkhus, a Bhikkhu’s mother is
sick. If she sends a messenger to her son (saying),

“ I am sick ; might my son come to me ; I long for
my son’s coming (&c., see chap. 6. 2).”

4. ‘In case, O Bhikkhus, a Bhikkhu’s father is
sick .... (&c., as in § 3).

5. ‘In case, O Bhikkhus, a Bhikkhu’s brother is
sick. If he sends a messenger to his brothe r (saying),

“ I am sick ; might my brother come to me ; I long
for my brother’s coming,” he ought to go, O Bhik-
khus, if the affair can be accomplished within seven
days, and if he sends for him, but not if he does
not send for him. Within seven days he ought to
return.

6. ‘ In case, O Bhikkhus, a Bhikkhu’s sister is
sick .... (&c., see § 5).

7. ‘ In case, O Bhikkhus, a relation of a Bhikkhu
is sick. If he sends a messenger to that Bhikkhu
(saying), “ I am sick ; might his reverence come to
me ”... . (&c., as in § 5).

8. ‘ In case, O Bhikkhus, a person that used to

mahAvagga.

Ill, 8.

live with the Bhikkhus ^ is sick. If he sends a mes-
senger to the Bhikkhus (saying), “ I am sick ;
might the Bhikkhus come to me . (&c., as in

hy

8 .

At that time a VihAra belonging to the Sa»?gha
went to ruin, A certain upAsaka had a quantity of
wood cut in the forest. He sent a messenger to
the Bhikkhus (saying), ‘ If their reverences will
fetch that wood, I will give it to them.’

They told this thing to the Blessed One.
f ‘ I allow you, O Bhikkhus, to go out on the Sam-
: gha’s business. Within seven days you ought to
return.’

End of the first BhAwavAra about the Vassa
residence. .

9 .

I. At that time the Bhikkhus of a certain dis-
trict in the Kosala country who had entered upon
Vassa, were troubled^ by beasts of prey ; the beasts
carried them off and killed them.

They told this thing to the Blessed One.

‘ In case, O Bhikkhus, the Bhikkhus who have
entered upon Vassa, are troubled by beasts of prey,
and the beasts carry them off and kill them : this is

' Buddhaghosa : bhikkhugatika is a person that dwells in the
same Vihilra with the Bhikkhus.

* Compare GItaka I, 300.

Ill, 9, 4. RESIDENCE DURING THE RAINY SEASON. 3 1 3
«

to be considered as a case of danger, and they ought
to leave that residence. They are not guilty of
interruption of Vassa.

‘ In case, O Bhikkhus, the Bhikkhus who have
entered upon Vassa, are infested by snakes; they
bite them and kill them. This is to be considered
as a case of danger, .... (&c., as in $ i down to) ... .
Vassa.

2. ‘ In case, O Bhikkhus, the Bhikkhus who have
entered upon Vassa, are troubled by robbers; the
robbers plunder them and beat them. This is to be
considered .... (&c., as in ^ i) . . . . Vassa.

‘ In case, O Bhikkhus, the Bhikkhus who have
entered upon Vassa, are troubled by demons; the
demons enter into them and take their power from
them. This is to be considered .... (&c., as in ^ i)
, . . . Vassa.

3. ‘In case, O Bhikkhus, the village near which
the Bhikkhus have entered upon Vassa, is destroyed
by fire ; the Bhikkhus suffer from want of food. This
is to be considered .... (&c,,as in § 1) ... . Vassa.

‘ In case, O Bhikkhus, the places of rest of the
Bhikkhus who have entered upon Vassa, are de-
stroyed by fire; the Bhikkhus suffer from having
no place of rest This is to be considered .... (&c.,
as in J i) . . . . Vassa.

4. ‘In case, O Bhikkhus, the village near which
the Bhikkhus have entered upon Vassa, is destroyed
by water; the Bhikkhus suffer from want of food,
. . . . (&c., as in J 1) ... . Vassa.

‘ In case, O Bhikkhus, the places of rest of the
Bhikkhus who have entered upon Vassa, are de-
stroyed by water ; the Bhikkhus suffer from having
no place of rest, .... (&c., as in J i) . . . . Vassa.*

314 mahAvagga. Ill, 10.

-t

10 .

I At that time the village near which the Bhikkhus
of a certain district had entered upon Vassa, was
transferred to another place through (fear of) robbers.

They told this thing to the Blessed One.

‘ I prescribe, O Bhikkhus, that you go where the
village is.’

The village (people) divided themselves in two parts.

They told this thing to the Blessed One.

‘ I prescribe, O Bhikkhus, that you go where the
greater part is.’

The greater part were unbelieving, unconverted
people.

They told this thing to the Blessed One.

‘ I prescribe, O Bhikkhus, that you go where the
believing, converted people are.’

11 .

1. At that time the Bhikkhus of a certain district
in the Kosala country who had entered upon Vassa,
could get (there) neither coarse nor fine food suffi-
ciently as required.

They told this thing to the Blessed One.

‘ In case, O Bhikkhus, the Bhikkhus who have
entered upon Vassa, can get neither coarse nor fine
food sufficiently as required. This is to be con-
sidered as a case of danger, and they ought to leave
that residence. They are not guilty of interruption
of Vassa.

I ‘In case, O Bhikkhus, the Bhikkhus who have
^entered upon Vassa, get food coarse or fine suffi-

Ill, II, 4. RESIDENCE DURING THE RAINY SEASON. 315

ciently as required, but they cannot get sustaining
food. This is to be considered .... (&c., as in § i)
. . . . Vassa.

2. ‘ In case, O Bhikkhus, the Bhikkhus who have
entered upon Vassa, get food coarse or fine suffi-
ciently as 'required, they get sustaining food, but
they cannot get proper medicine. This is to be
considered .... (&c., as in $ i) ... . Vassa.

‘ In case, O Bhikkhus, the Bhikkhus .... (&c., as
§ I, down to) ... . sustaining food, and they can get
profitable medicine, but they cannot find suitable lay-
men to do service to them. This is to be considered
. . . . (&c., as in $ i) ... . Vassa.

3. ‘ In case, O Bhikkhus, to a Bhikkhu who has
entered upon Vassa, a woman makes an offer (in
these words) : “ Come, venerable Sir, I give you
gold, or I give you bullion*, or I give you a field,
or I give you a site (for a house or a garden), or I
give you an ox, or I give you a cow, or I give you
a slave, or I give you a female slave, or I give you
my daughter as your wife, or I will be your wife, or
I get another wife for you,” In that case, if the
Bhikkhu thinks: “The Blessed One has said that
the mind of men is easily changeable ; danger might
arise to the purity of my Jife,” he ought to go away
from that place. He is not guilty of interruption
of Vassa.

4. ‘In case, O Bhikkhus, to a Bhikkhu who has
entered upon Vassa, a harlot makes an offer, &c., an
adult girl makes an offer, &c., a eunuch makes an
offer, &c., relations make an offer, &c., kings make

* See Rh. D.’s * Ancient Coins and Measures of Ceylon,’ p. 5
(‘ Numismata Orientalia,’ vol. i).

mahAvagga.

Ill, II, g.

316 '

an offer, &c., robbers make an offer, &c., rascals
make an offer (in these words) : “ Come, venerable
Sir, we give you gold, .... (&c., down to) .... or
we give you our daughter as your wife, or we get
another wife for you.” In that case, .... (&c., as in
§ 3 ) ... . Vassa.

‘ In case, O Bhikkhus, a Bhikkhu who has en-
tered upon Vassa, finds an ownerless treasure. In
that case (&c., as in § 3, down to) Vassa.

5. ‘In case, O Bhikkhus, a Bhikkhu who has
entered upon Vassa, sees a number of Bhikkhus
who strive to cause divisions in the Sawgha. In
that case, if that Bhikkhu thinks : “ The Blessed
One has said that it is a grievous sin to cause divi-
sions in the Sa;«gha ; may no division arise in the
Saw^gha in my presence,” let him go away. He is
not guilty of interruption of Vassa.

‘ In case, O Bhikkhus, a Bhikkhu who has en-
tered upon Vassa, hears: “A number of Bhikkhus
are striving to cause divisions in the Sawgha.” In
that case, .... (&c., as in § 5, down to) ... . Vassa.

6. ‘In case, O Bhikkhus, a Bhikkhu who has
entered upon Vassa, hears : “ In such and such a
district a number of Bhikkhus are striving to cause
divisions in the Sa«?gha.” If that Bhikkhu thinks ;
“ Those Bhikkhus are' friends of mine ; I will say
to them : ‘ The Blessed One, my friends, has said
that it is a grievous sin to cause divisions in the
Sa»?gha ; let not divisions in the Sa»«gha please you.
Sirs then they will do what I say, they will obey
me and give ear,” in that case let him go (to that
place). He is not guilty of interruption of Vassa.

7. ‘In case, O Bhikkhus, a Bhikkhu who has
entered upon Vassa, hears : “ In such and such a

Ill, 13, 1. RESIDENCE DURING THE RAINY SEASON. 317

district a number of Bhikkhus are striving to cause
divisions in the Sawgha.” If that Bhikkhu thinks :
“ Those Bhikkhus are not friends of mine, but their
friends are friends of mine ; to these I will say, and
they will say to their friends : ‘ The Blessed One,
. . . . (&c.,’ is in § 6, down to) Vassa.

8. ‘ In case, O Bhikkhus, a Bhikkhu who has
entered upon Vassa, hears: “ In such and such a
district divisions in the Sai^gha have been caused
by a number of Bhikkhus.” If that Bhikkhu ....
(&c., as in § 6, down to) ... . Vassa.

9. ‘In case, O Bhikkhus, a Bhikkhu who has
entered upon Vassa, hears: “In such and such a
district divisions in the Sa»?gha have been caused
by a number of Bhikkhus.” If that Bhikkhu ....
(&c., as in § 7) ... . Vassa.

10-13. ‘ In case, O Bhikkhus, a Bhikkhu who has
entered upon Vassa, hears : “In such and such a
district a number of Bhikkhunls strive to cause divi-
sions in the Sa;«gha .... (&c.*)” ’

12 .

I. At that time a Bhikkhu desired to enter upon
Vassa in a cattle-pen.

They told this thing to the Blessed One.

‘ I allow you, O Bhikkhus, to enter upon Vassa
in a cattle-pen.’

The cattle-pen was moved from its place.

‘ See §§ 6-9. Instead, of ‘ A number of Bhikkhus ’ in these
paragraphs, the subject is ‘ A number of Bhikkhunis.’ Instead of
‘Friends' or ‘Sirs,’ the address is ‘Sisters.’ In §§ ii, 13 read:
‘Those Bhikkhunis are not friends of mine, but their (female)
friends are friends of mine, &c.’

3i8 '

mahAvagga.

Ill, la, a.

They told this thing to the Blessed One.

‘ I allow you, O Bhikkhus, to go with the cattle-pen.’

2. At that time a Bhikkhu, when the time for
entering upon Vassa approached, desired to go on
a journey with a caravan.

They told this thing to the Blessed Ohe.

‘ I allow you, O Bhikkhus, to enter upon Vassa
in a caravan.’

At that time a Bhikkhu, when the time for enter-
ing upon Vassa approached, desired to go on a
journey in a ship.

They told this thing to the Blessed One.

‘ I allow you, O Bhikkhus, to enter upon Vassa
in a ship.’

3. At that time some Bhikkhus entered upon
Vassa in a hollow tree. People were annoyed,
murmured, and became angry : ‘^These Bhikkhus
behave) like goblins^.’ •

They told this thing to the Blessed One.

‘ Let no one, O Bhikkhus, enter upon Vassa in a
hollow tree. He who does, commits a dukka^a
offence.’

4. At that time some Bhikkhus entered upon
Vassa on a branch of a tree. People were annoyed,
&c. : ‘ (These Bhikkhus behave) like huntsmen.’

They told this thing to the Blessed One.

‘ Let no one, O Bhikkhus, enter upon Vassa on a
branch of a tree. He who does, commits a dukka/a
offence.'

5. At that time some Bhikkhus entered upon
Vassa in the open air. When it began to rain,

^ This must be about the sense of pis&^illika (comp. ATuIla-
vagga V, 10, 2; 27, 5), although we are not sure how -illika
ought to be explained.

Ill, 13 , 9. RESIDENCE DURING THE RAINY SEASON*.’ 319

they ran up to the foot of a tree, or to the hollow
of a Nimba tree.

They told this thing to the Blessed One.

‘ Let no one, O Bhikkhus, enter upon Vassa in the i
open air. He who does, commits a dukka/a offence.’ ■

6. At that time some Bhikkhus entered upon
Vassa without having a place of rest. They
suffered from coldness and heat.

They told this thing to the Blessed One.

‘ Let no one, O Bhikkhus, enter upon Vassa /
without having a place of rest. He who does,/
commits a dukka^ offence.’

7. At that time some Bhikkhus entered upon
Vassa in a house for keeping dead bodies in.
People were annoyed, &c. : ‘ (These Bhikkhus are)
like those who burn corpses.’

They told this thing to the Blessed One.

‘Let no one, O Bhikkhus, enter upon Vassa in
a house for keeping dead bodies. He who does,
commits a dukka/a offence.’

8. At that time some Bhikkhus entered upon
Vassa under a sun-shade. People were annoyed,
&c. ; ‘ Like cowherds.’

They told this thing to the Blessed One.

‘Let no one, O Bhikkhus, enter upon Vassa
under a sun-shade. He who does, commits a duk-
ka/a offence.’

9. At that time some Bhikkhus entered upon
Vassa under an earthenware vessel. People were
annoyed, &c. : ‘ Like Titthiyas.’

They told this thing to the Blessed One.

‘Let no one, O Bhikkhus, enter upon Vassa
under an earthenware vessel. He who does, com-
mits a dukka/a offence.’

320 »

mahAvagga.

Ill, 13, r.

13 .

I. At that time the Sawgha at SAvatthi had made
an agreement that nobody should receive the pab-
ba^^A ordination during the rainy season. A grand-
son of Visikhi MigAramAtA^ went to the Bhikkhus
and asked them for the pabba//A ordination. The
Bhikkhus said to him : ‘ The Saw^gha, friend, has
made an agreement that nobody shall receive the
pabba^^i ordination during the rainy season.
Wait, friend, as long as the Bhikkhus keep Vassa;
when they have concluded the Vassa residence,
they will confer on you the pabba^f^A ordination.’

When those Bhikkhus had concluded the Vassa
residence, they said to the grandson of VisAkhA Mi-
gAramAtA ; ‘ Come now, friend, you may receive the
pabba^^A ordination.’ He replied: ‘ If I had re-
ceived the pabba^^A ordination before, reverend
Sirs, I should remain (in the religious life), but now,
reverend Sirs, I will not receive the pabba/^A
ordination.’

2. VisAkhA MigAramAtA was annoyed, murmured,
and became angry (saying), ‘How can the noble
ones make such an agreement that nobody shall re-
ceive the pabba^^A ordination during the rainy
season? At what time ought the duties of the
Dhamma not to be performed?*

Some Bhikkhus heard VisAkhA MigAramAtA, who
was annoyed, murmured, and had become angry.

I * Visikha was the most distinguished among the updsikSs, and
1 occupied a place among them similar to that which Anithapwdika,

I with whom she is frequently mentioned together, did among the
|upS,sakas. See Dhammapada A//Aak p. 78, &c.

Ill, 14, 3. RESIDENCE DURING THE RAINY SEASOlf. 32 1

Those Bhikkhus told the thing to the Blessed One.

‘Such an agreement, O Bhikkhus, ought not to
be made— that nobody shall receive the pabba^^^t
ordination during the rainy season. He who makes (an
agreement like this), commits a dukka/a offence.’

14 .

1. At that time the venerable Upananda Sakya-
putta had promised to king Pasenadi of Kosala to
take up his Vassa residence (with him) at the earlier
period^. When he was going to the district (where
he had consented to go to), he saw on his way two
districts in which there were plenty of robes, and he
thought: ‘What if I were to keep Vassa in these
two districts ; thus shall I obtain many robes.’ And
he kept Vassa in those two districts.

King Pasenadi of Kosala was annoyed, murmured,
and became angpy (saying), ‘ How can the noble
Upananda Sakyaputta, after he has promised us to
take up hisVassa residence (with us), break his word?
Has not falsehood been reproved, and abstinence
from falsehood been praised by the Blessed One in
many ways ?’

2. Some Bhikkhus heard king Pasenadi of Kosala,
who was annoyed, &c. The moderate Bhikkhus were
annoyed, murmured, and became angry (saying),
‘ How can the venerable Upananda Sakyaputta, after
he has promised to king Pasenadi of Kosala, &c. ?
Has not falsehood .... (&c., as in § i)?’

3. Those Bhikkhus told the thing to the Blessed
One.

* See chap. 2, § 2.
rill Y

322

mahAvagga.

Ill, 14, 4.

In consequence of that, the Blessed One, after
having ordered the fraternity of Bhikkhus to assem-
ble, asked the venerable Upananda Sakyaputta;
;‘Is it true, Upananda, that you have broken your
Iword, having promised to king Pasenadi of Kosala
(to take up your Vassa residence (with him)?’

‘ It is true, Lord\’

Then the blessed Buddha rebuked him : ‘How
can you, O foolish one , break your word, having
promised, &c. ? Has not falsehood, O foolish one,
^ been reproved, and abstinence from falsehood been
praised by me in many ways ? This will not do, O
foolish one, for converting the unconverted, and for
augmenting the number of the converted, but it will
result, O foolish one, in the unconverted being r^
pulsed (from the faith) and many.of the converted
being estranged.’

Having reproved him and delivered a religious
discourse, he thus addressed the Bhikkhus :

4. ‘ In case, O Bhikkhus, a Bhikkhu has promised
(to a lay-devotee) to take up his Vassa residence
(with him) at the earlier period, and when he goes
to that district, he sees on his way two districts in
which there are plenty of robes, and he thinks:
“ What if I were to keep Vassa in these two dis-
tricts ; thus shall I obtain many robes and he keeps
Vassa in those two districts. This Bhikkhu’s (enter-
ing upon Vassa), O Bhikkhus, (at the) earlier period
is not valid, and as to his promise he has committed
a dukka/a offence.

5. ‘ In case, O Bhikkhus, a Bhikkhu has promised
(to a lay-devotee) to take up his Vassa residence
(with him) at the earlier period, and when going to
diat district, he holds Uposatha outside (on the last

Ill, 14, 7. RESIDENCE DURING THE RAINY SEASOl^. 323

day of the half month), and on the first day (of the
next half month) he goes to the Vihdra, prepares
himself a place of rest, gets (water to) drink and food,
sweeps the cell, and goes away that same day with-
out having any business. This Bhikkhu s (entering
upon VasSa) .... (&c., as in § 4, down to) . . . .
offence.

‘ In case, O Bhikkhus, a Bhikkhu has promised
(&c., as in the preceding case, down to :) and goes
away that same day having business. This Bhik-
khu’s (entering upon Vassa) .... (&c., as in § 4,
down to) ... . offence.

6. ‘ In case, O Bhikkhus, a Bhikkhu has promised,
&c., and having resided there two or three days, he
goes away without having any business, &c. ; he goes
away having business. This Bhikkhu’s (entering
upon Vassa) .... (&c., as in § 4, down to) ... . offence.

‘ In case, O Bhikkhus, a Bhikkhu has promised,
&c., and having resided there two or three days, he
goes away having a business which can be accom-
plished within seven days^; he is absent above those
seven days. This Bhikkhu’s (entering uponVassa).. . .
(&c., as in § 4, down to) ... . offence.

‘ In case, O Bhikkhus, &c., he returns within those
seven days. This Bhikkhu’s (entering upon Vassa),
O Bhikkhus, (at the) earlier period is valid, and as
to his promise he has committed no offence.

7. ‘In case, O Bhikkhus, a Bhikkhu has promised,
&c., and goes away seven days before the Pavi-
ra«&^ having business. No matter, O Bhikkhus,
whether that Bhikkhu comes back to that district or

^ See chap, g seq.

• I. e. before the concluding ceremony of Vassa ; see IV, i, 13.

mahAvagga.

Ill, 14, 8.

does not come back, this Bhikkhu’s entering, &c., is
valid, and as to his promise he has committed no
offence.

8-10. ‘In case, 0 Bhikkhus, a Bhikkhu has
promised, &c., and having gone to that district, he
holds Uposatha there (on the last day'of the half
month), and on the first day (of the next half month)
he goes to the VihAra, &c.^

II. ‘In case , 0 Bhikkhus, a Bhikkhu has promised
(to a lay-devotee) to take up his Vassa residence
(with him) at the later period, and when going to
that district, he holds Uposatha outside, &c.^’

End of the third Khandhaka, which treats of
entering upon Vassa.

^ Here follows an exact repetition of all the cases given in
§§ 5-7 ; the only difference is, that in the former cases it was said:
‘When going to that district, he holds Uposatha outside,’ instead
of which it is said now : ‘ Having gone to that district, he holds
Uposatha there.’

® The cases given in §§ 5-10 are repeated here; instead of
‘Earlier period,’ it is said here ‘Later period;' instead of ‘Before
the Pavdra«^’ (§ 7), ‘Before the komudt ^dtumdsint.’ The
komudi ^^tumSsinf is the full moon day in the month Kat-
tika, which is frequently called Kaumuda in the Epic literature;
the epithet ^dtum^sini refers to the Vedic iT^turm^sya festival,
which falls upon that day (KStylyana, Aantasiltra V, 6, i). For
those who entered upon Vassa at the later period (in the 5 rSva«a
month), the end of Vassa fell on the Komudi day.

IV, I, 3 -

THE PAVARAJvA ceremony.

325

FOURTH KHANDHAKA.

(the pavAranA ceremony at the end of the

RAINY SEASON, VASSa).

1 .

1. At that time the blessed Buddha dwelt at
Sivatthi, in the ( 7 etavana, the garden of Anitha-
pi«fl!Ika. At that time a number of Bhikkhus, com-
panions and friends of each other, entered upon
Vassa in a certain district of the Kosala country.
Now those Bhikkhus thought : ‘ What shall we do
in order that we may keep Vassa well, in unity, and
in concord, and without quarrel, and that we may
not suffer from want of food ?'

2. Then those Bhikkhus thought : ‘ If we do not
speak to or converse with each other, if he who
comes back first from the village, from his alms-
pilgrimage, prepares seats, gets water for washing
the feet, a foot-stool, and a towel S cleans the slop-
basin and gets it ready, and puts there (water to)
drink and food, —

3. ‘ And if he who comes back last from the village,
from his alms-pilgrimage, eats, if there is any food
left (from the dinner of the other Bhikkhus) and if
he desires to do so ; and if he does not desire (to
eat), throws it away at a place free from grass, or
pours it away into water in which no living things
are ; puts away the water for washing the feet, the
foot-stool, and the towel * ; cleans the slop-basin and

* See the note on I, 6, ii.

326

mahAvagga.

IV. I, 4.

puts it away, puts the water and the food away, and
sweeps the dining-room, —

4. ‘ And if he who sees a water-pot, or a bowl for
food, or a vessel for evacuations, empty and void,
puts it (into its proper place), and if he is not able
to do so single-handed, calls some one else and puts
it away with their united effort ^ without uttering a
word on that account, — thus shall we keep Vassa
well, in unity, and in concord, and without quarrel,
and not suffer from want of food

5-7. And those Bhikkhus did not speak to or
converse with each other. He who came back from
the village from his alms-pilgrimage first, prepared
seats (&c., as above, § 4, down to) ... . without utter-
ing a word on that account.

8. Now it is the custom of the Bhikkhus who
have finished their Vassa residence, to go to see
the Blessed One. Thus those Bhikkhus, when they
had finished their Vassa residence, and when the
three months (of Vassa) had elapsed, set their
places of rest in order, took their alms-bowls and
robes, and went on their way to SAvatthi. Wandering
from place to place, they came to SAvatthi, to the
(Petavana, the garden ofAnAthapi«flfika,to the Blessed
One ; having approached the Blessed One and re-
spectfully saluted him, they sat down near him.

9. Now it is the custom of the blessed Buddhas

* We are not quite sure of the meaning of the compounds
hattha-vik&rena and hattha-vilahghakena. Buddhaghosa
says merely hatthavilahghakenS 'ti hatthukkhepakena.

* For this whole passage, compare iTullavagga VIII, 5, 3. The
single actions which these Bhikkhus do, are quite correct, except
that they keep silence during the whole time of Vassa, and espe-
cially at the end of it, for which time Buddha, on this occasion,
prescribes the PavUranli ceremony.

IV, I, II.

THE PAvArAJvA ceremony.

327

to exchange greeting with incoming Bhikkhus. And
the Blessed One said to those Bhikkhus : ‘ Do things
go well with you, O Bhikkhus ? Do you get enough
to support yourselves with ? Have you kept Vassa
well, in unity, and in concord, and without quarrel ?
and have )i\)u not suffered from want of food ?’

‘ Things go tolerably well with us. Lord ; we get
enough. Lord, wherewith to support ourselves ; we
have kept Vassa well, in unity, in concord, and
without quarrel; and have not suffered from want
of food.’

10. The TathAgatas sometimes ask about what
they know ; sometimes they do not ask about what
they know. They understand the right time when
to ask, and they understand the right time when
not to ask. The TathAgatas put questions full
of sense, not void of sense ; to what is void of sense
the bridge is pulled down for the T athigatas. For \
two purposes the blessed Buddhas put questions to
the Bhikkhus, when they intend to preach the doctrine,
or when they intend to institute a rule of conduct to /
their disciples.

1 1. And the Blessed One said to those Bhikkhus :

‘ In what way, O Bhikkhus, have you kept Vassa
well, in unity, and in concord, and without quarrel,
and not suffered from want of food

‘We have entered upon Vassa, Lord, a number
of Bhikkhus, companions and friends of each other,
in a certain district of the Kosala country. Now,
Lord, we thought : “ What shall we do (&c., as in
§ i)}’’ Then we thought. Lord: “If we do not
speak (&c., as in §§ 2-4)." Thus, Lord, we did not
speak to or converse with each other (&c., down to :)
without uttering a word on that account. In that

328 ' mahAvagga. IV, i, 12.

c

way, Lord, we have kept Vassa well, in unity, and
in concord, and without quarrel; and have not suffered
from want of food.’

12. Then the Blessed One thus addressed the
Bhikkhus : ‘ Indeed, O Bhikkhus, these foolish men
who profess to have kept Vassa well, have kept it
badly ; indeed, O Bhikkhus, these foolish men who
profess to have kept Vassa well, have kept it
like a herd of cattle ; indeed .... have kept it like
a herd of rams ; indeed .... have kept it like a
company of indolent people. How can these foolish
persons, O Bhikkhus, take upon themselves the vow
of silence , as the Titthiyas do ?

13. ‘ This will not do, O Bhikkhus, for converting
the unconverted (&c., as in Book III, chapter 14, § 3).’

And when he had rebuked them and delivered a
religious discourse, he thus addressed the Bhikkhus :

I ‘ Let no one, O Bhikkhus, take upon himself the
j vow of silence, as the T itthiyas do. He who does,

I commits a dukka/a offence.

‘ I prescribe, O Bhikkhus, that the Bhikkhus, when
they have finished their Vassa residence, hold
Pavclrawd with each other ^ in these three ways:
by what has been seen, or by what has been heard,
or by what is suspected. Hence it will result that
you live in accord with each other, that you atone
for the offences (you have committed), and that you
keep the rules of discipline before your eyes.

14. ‘ And you ought, O Bhikkhus, to hold PavA-
ranSL in this way :

* Literally, invite each other; i.e. every Bhikkhu present invites
his companions to tell him if they believe him guilty of an offence,

, having seen that offence, or having heard of it, or suspecting it.

IV, 2, I.

THE PAVArAJvA ceremony.

• 329

‘ Let a learned, competent Bhikkhu proclaim the
following «atti before the Sawgha : “ Let the Sam-
gha, reverend Sirs, hear me. To-day is the PavA-
ran& day. If the Sawgha is ready, let the Saiwgha
hold PavAra»A.”

‘ Then Ifet the senior Bhikkhu adjust his upper
robe so as to cover one shoulder, sit down squatting,
raise his joined hands, and say : “ I pronounce my
PavArawA, friends, before the Sa»/gha, by what has
been seen, or by what has been heard, or by what
is suspected^; may you speak to me, Sirs, out
of compassion towards me ; if I see (an offence), I
will atone for it. And for the second time, &c.
And for the third time I pronounce my PavArawA ....
(&c., down to) .... if I see (an offence), I will atone
for it.”

‘ Then let (each) younger Bhikkhu adjust his
upper robe .... (&c.)^’

2 .

I. At that time the A'-^abbaggiya Bhikkhus, while
the senior Bhikkhus were crouching down and were
performing their PavArawA, remained on their seats.
The moderate Bhikkhus were annoyed, murmured,
and became angry : ‘How can the Alfcibbaggiya
Bhikkhus remain on their seats, while the senior

* I. e. I invite the Sa»igha to charge me with any offence they
think me guilty of, which they have seen, or heard of, or which
they suspect

* As in the preceding sentence, except that the younger 4
Bhikkhus do not address the Samgha, ‘ Friends,’ but, ‘ Reverend {
Sirs.’

330 '

mahAvagga.

IV, 2, 2.

Bhikkhus crouch down, and perform their PavA-
ra?^A ?’

Those Bhikkhus told the thing to the Blessed
One.

‘Is it true, O Bhikkhus, that the ^-^abbaggiya
Bhikkhus, &c.?’

‘ It is true, O Lord.’

Then the blessed Buddha rebuked them : ‘ How can
these foolish men, O Bhikkhus, remain on their seats
(&c., as above)? This will not do, O Bhikkhus, for
converting the unconverted (&c., as in chap. 1,^13).’

Having rebuked them and delivered a religious
discourse, he thus addressed the Bhikkhus : ‘ Let
no one, O Bhikkhus, remain on his seat, while the
senior Bhikkhus crouch down, and perform their
PavirawA. He who does, commits a dukka/a
1 offence. I prescribe, O Bhikkhus, that all of you
' crouch down while PavAra»A is being performed.’

) 2. At that time a certain- Bhikkhu weak from

!age, who waited crouching till all had finished their
' PavArawA, fell down fainting.

They told this thing to the Blessed One.

‘ I prescribe, O Bhikkhus, that (every Bhikkhu)
crouches down the whole while till he has performed
his PavAra«A, and sits down on his seat when he
has performed it’

3 .

I. Now the Bhikkhus thought: ‘How many
PavArawi (days) are there ?’

They told this thing to the Blessed One.

‘ There are the two following PavAra^A (days).

IV, 3. 5* the pavAra^vA ceremony. * 331

O Bhikkhus: the fourteenth and the fifteenth (of
the half month) ^ ; these are the two PavdrawA
(days), O Bhikkhus.’

2. Now the Bhikkhus thought: ‘How many
Pavira«A services are there ?’

They tofd this thing to the Blessed One.

‘ There are the four following PavArawA services,
O Bhikkhus, &c.* ’

3. Then the Blessed One thus addressed the
Bhikkhus : ‘ Assemble, O Bhikkhus, the Sa/wgha
will hold PavAra«A.’ When he had spoken thus,
a certain Bhikkhu said to the Blessed One : ‘ There
is a sick Bhikkhu, Lord, who is not present.’

‘ I prescribe, O Bhikkhus, that a sick Bhikkhu
shall declare (lit. give) his PavArawA. And let
him declare it, O Bhikkhus, in this way : Let that
sick Bhikkhu go to some Bhikkhu, adjust his upper
robe so as to cover one shoulder, sit down squatting,
raise his joined hands, and say : “ I declare my
PavAra«A, take my PavArawA, perform the PavA-
ra»A for me.” If he expresses this by gesture, or
by word, or by gesture and word, the PavArawA
has been declared. If he does not express this by
gesture, &c., the Pa v A raw A has not been declared.

4-5. ‘ If (the sick Bhikkhu) succeeds in doing so,
well and good. If he does not succeed, let them
take that sick Bhikkhu, O Bhikkhus, on his bed or
his chair to the assembly, &c.®

* Cotnp. II, 14, 1, and the note on 11 , 34, i.

‘ This passage is exactly identical with II, 14, 2. 3, replacing
‘ Uposatha service’ by ‘Pavlra«& service.'

* This passage is a repetition of II, 22, 2-4, the words, ‘ Hold
Uposatha,' ‘Declare the FIrisuddhi,' &c., being replaced respec-
tively by ‘Hold Pay&ra»S,' ‘Declare the Pav&ranS,’ &c.

332 '

mahAvagga.

IV, 4.

‘ I prescribe, O Bhikkhus, that ori the day of
Pavira»d he who declares his Pavira«A, is to
declare also his consent^ (to acts to be performed
eventually by the Order), for (both declarations)
are required for the Sajwgha (and for the validity
of its acts)

4 .

At that time relations of a certain Bhikkhu kept
him back on the day of PavAra»A, &c.®

5 .

1. At that time five Bhikkhus dwelt in a certain
district (or, in a certain residence of Bhikkhus) on
the day of Pavira«A.

Now these Bhikkhus thought : ‘ The Blessed One
has prescribed the holding of PavAra»A by the
Sa««gha, and we are (only) five persons ^ Well, how
are we to hold PavAra^A ?’

They told this thing to the Blessed One.

‘ I prescribe, O Bhikkhus, that five Bhikkhus should
hold PavAra»A in a (regular) chapter®.'

2 . At that time four Bhikkhus dwelt in a certain

* See II, 23.

® Comp, the finishing clause of II, 23.

* This is a repetition of II, 24, but instead of ‘Uposatha’ and
‘Pfirisuddhi’ read ‘PavSrawfi.’

* As a general rule five Bhikkhus were sufficient to form the
quorum; but for the performance of several among the official
acts of the Order the presence of more than five members was
required ; see IX, 4, 1 seq.

® See IX, 4, 1.

IV. 6,5-

THE PAVArA^A ceremony.

• 333

district on the day of PavAra»A. Now these Bhik-
khus thought : ‘ The Blessed One has prescribed that
five Bhikkhus shall hold Pavira«A in a (regular)
chapter, and we are (only) four persons. Well, how
are we to hold PavAra«A ?’

They toM this thing to the Blessed One.

‘ I prescribe, O Bhikkhus, that four Bhikkhus
should hold Pavira«A with each other.

3. ‘And let them hold PavAra»i, O Bhikkhus,
in this way : Let a learned, competent Bhikkhu pro-
claim the following ^atti before those Bhikkhus:
“ Hear me. Sirs. To-day is PavArawA day. If you
are ready. Sirs, let us hold PavArawA with each
other.”

‘ Then let the senior Bhikkhu adjust his upper
robe, &c., and say to those Bhikkhus : “ I pronounce
my PavAra»A, friends, before you, by what has
been seen, or by what has been heard, or by what
is suspected ; may you speak to me. Sirs, out of com-
passion towards me ; if I see (an offence), I will atone
for it. And for the second time, &c. ; and for the
third time, &c.”

‘ Then let each younger Bhikkhu, &c.’

4. At that time three Bhikkhus dwelt in a certain
district on tlie day of PavArawA. Now these Bhik-
khus thought : ‘ The Blessed One has prescribed that
five Bhikkhus shall hold PavArawA in a (regular)
chapter, that four Bhikkhus shall hold PavAra^^A
with each other, and we are (only) three persons.
Well, how are we to hold PavAra«A ?’

‘ I prescribe, O Bhikkhus, that three Bhikkhus
should hold PavAra«A with each other. And let
them hold PavArawA (&c., see § 3).’

5. At that time two Bhikkhus dwelt in a certain

334

mahAvagga.

IV, 5,6.

district on the day of PavArawA. Now these Bhik-
khus thought ; ‘ The Blessed One has prescribed that
five Bhikkhus, &c., that four Bhikkhus, &c., that three
Bhikkhus, &c., and we are (only) two persons. Well,
how are we to hold PavArawA ?’

‘ I prescribe, O Bhikkhus, that two Bhikkhus should
hold PavAra«el with each other.

6. ‘ And let them hold PavAra«i, O Bhikkhus,
in this way : Let the senior Bhikkhu adjust his upper
robe, &c., and say to the junior Bhikkhu : “ I pro-
nounce my PavAra»A, friend, &c.”

‘ Then let the junior Bhikkhu, &c.’

7. At that time there dwelt a single Bhikkhu in
a certain district on the day of PavArawA. Now
this Bhikkhu thought : ‘ The Blessed One has pre-
scribed that five Bhikkhus, &c., &c., and I am only
one person. Well, how am I to hold PavAra«A ?’

8. ‘ In case there dwell, O Bhikkhus, in a certain
district on the day of PavArawA, a single Bhikkhu :
Let that Bhikkhu, O Bhikkhus, .sweep the place
which the Bhikkhus use to frequent, — the refectory,
or hall, or place at the foot of a tree ; let him (then)
provide water and food, prepare seats, put a lamp
there, and sit down. If other Bhikkhus come, let
him hold PavAra«A with them; if they do not
come, let him fix his mind upon the thought:

“ To-day is my PavAra«A.” If he does not fix his
mind upon this thought, he commits a dukka/a
offence.

9. ‘ Now, O Bhikkhus, where five Bhikkhus dwell
(together), they must not convey the PavAra«A^
of one (to their assembly) and hold PavAra«A by

^ See chap. 3, § 3. Compare II, chap. 22 , and chap. 26, § 10.

IV, 6, 3- the pavArajvA ceremony. • 335

»

four (as) in a (regular) chapter.' If they do, they
commit a dukka^a offence.

‘ Now, O Bhikkhus, where four Bhikkhus dwell
(together), they must not convey the Pavira«A of
one (to their assembly) and hold PavArawA with
each other* by three. If they do, they commit a
dukka/a offence.

‘ Now, O Bhikkhus, where three Bhikkhus (&c., as
in the last clause).

‘ Now, O Bhikkhus, where two Bhikkhus dwell,
one of them must not convey the PavAra«A of the
other one, and fix (only) his thoughts (upon the
Pavdra«A). If he does, he commits a dukka/a
offence.’

6 .

I. At that time a certain Bhikkhu was guilty of
an offence on the day of PavArawA. Now this
Bhikkhu thought : ‘ The Blessed One has prescribed :
“PavirawA is not to be held by a Bhikkhu who
is guilty of an offence^.” Now I am guilty of an
offence. What am I to do ?’

They told this thing to.the Blessed One.

‘ In case, O Bhikkhus, a certain Bhikkhu be guilty
of an offence on the day of PavAra«A (&c., as in
II, 27. I, 2, down to:) “When I shall feel no doubt,
then I will atone for that offence.” Having spoken
thus, let him hold PavAra«A. But in no case must
there any hindrance arise to holding Pa vdra^i from
such a cause.’

2-3. At that time a certain Bhikkhu remembered

' See chap. 16, § i.

336 '

MAHAVAGGA.

IV, 7. I.

an offence, while Pavira»4 was being held (&c.,
see II, 27. 4-8).

End of the first Bhiwavira.

7 - 13 .

7 . I. At that time there assembled in a certain
residence (or district) on the day of Pavdra«i a
number of resident Bhikkhus, five or more. They
did not know that there were other resident Bhikkhus
absent. Intending to act according to Dhamma and
Vinaya, thinking themselves to be complete while
(really) incomplete, they held Pavira«i. While they
were holding Pavdrawi, other resident Bhikkhus, a
greater number (than the first ones), arrived.

They told this thing to the Blessed One.

2. ‘In case there assemble, O Bhikkhus, in a
certain residence on the day of Pavira«i (&c., as
in § I, down to) ... . they hold Pavira«i. While
they are holding Pa virawei, other resident Bhikkhus,
a greater number, arrive. Let (all) those Bhikkhus,
O Bhikkhus, hold Pavira^cl again ; they who have
held Pavdra»i, are free from guilt.

3, ‘In case there assemble, &c While they

are holding Pavira« 4 , other resident Bhikkhus,
exactly the same number (as the first ones), arrive.
Those who have held Pav4ra«d, have held it cor-
rectly; let the other ones hold Pav 4 ra»i; they
who have held Pav 4 ra«i, are free from guilt.’

1

' The following paragraphs and chapters exacdy follow the
course indicated by II, 28-35. The alterations to be made are

IV, IS, I.

THE PAVARAiVA CEREMONY.

’ 337

14 .

1-3. ‘Let no one, .0 Bhikkhus, hold Pavdra;^4
in a seated assembly (of Bhikkhus) before a Bhik-
khunl, . . .*. (&c.^)

4. ‘ Let no one, O Bhikkhus, hold Pav&rawi by
(accepting) the Pavei.ra«i declaration of a pirivi-
sika*, except if the assembly has not yet risen (at
the time when the Pavdra«4 is declared). And I
let no one, O Bhikkhus, hold Pavdra^^d on another 1
day than the Pavira«^l day, except for the sake of ‘
(preserving) concord among the Sa»igha

16 .

I. At that time a certain residence (of Bhikkhus)
in the Kosala country was menaced on the day of
Paveira«4 by savage people. The Bhikkhus were
not able to perform Pavd.rand. with the threefold
formula.

They told this thing to the Blessed One.

obvious and sufficiently indicated by §§ 1-3; instead of, ‘Let them
proclaim their Fdrisuddhi ' (II, 28, 4, &c.), read here, ‘Let them
pronounce their Fav&ranS.'

See H, 3^,

* Comp. II, 36, 4, with the note.

' See, for instance, the cases in chap. 17. Buddhaghosa’s
explanation is different ; he says : ‘ Concord among the Samgha is
to be understood of such cases as that of Kosambi.’ It is said
in the account of the schism of Kosambi that, if concord has been
re-established, the reconciled parties hold Uposatha together
(X, 5, 14; comp. II, 36, 4); Buddhaghosa apparently extends this
to holding Faviran^ also.

[13] Z

338 ' mahAvagga. IV, ig. a.

‘ I allow you, O Bhikkhus, to perform PavArawA
with the twofold formula*/

The danger from savage people became still more
urgent. The Bhikkhus were not able to perform
PavArawA with the twofold formula.

They told this thing to the Blessed One.

‘ I allow you, O Bhikkhus, to perform PavAra»A
with the onefold formula *.’

The danger from savage people became still more
urgent. The Bhikkhus were not able to perform
PavAra«A with the onefold formula.

They told this thing to the Blessed One.

‘ I allow, O Bhikkhus, that all the Bhikkhus who
have kept Vassa together, perform PavAra^^A (by
one common declaration).’

2. At that time in a certain district on the day
of PavAra«A the greater part of the night had
passed away while (lay-)people were offering gifts
(to the Bhikkhus). Now the Bhikkhus thought:

‘ The greater part of the night has passed away
while the people were offering gifts. If the Sa»«gha
performs PavAra«A with the threefold formula, it
will not have finished the PavAra»A when day
breaks. Well, what are we to do ?’

They told this thing to the Blessed One.

3. ‘ In case, O Bhikkhus, in a certain district on
the day of PavAra«A the greater part of the night
has passed away while people were offering gifts
(to the Bhikkhus). Now if those Bhikkhus think :

“ The greater part (&c., down to :) when day breaks,”

* This means apparently that the Bhikkhus were not obliged to
pronounce the formula of Favdra»£ (chap, i, 14) thrice, but twice
or once respectively.

iV, IS, s-

THE PAVARAA^A CEREMONY.

339

let a learned, competent Bhikkhu proclaim the
following »atti before the Sawgha : “ Let the Sam-
gha, reverend Sirs, hear me. While people were
offering gifts, the greater part of the night has passed
away. If the Sa»?gha performs Pavira^d with
the three^ld formula, it will not have finished the
Pavirawi when day breaks. If the Sawgha is
ready, let the Sa«/gha hold Pavclra«el with the
twofold formula, or with the onefold formula, or by
common declaration of all the Bhikkhus who have
kept Vassa together.”

4. ‘ In case, O Bhikkhus, in a certain district on the {
day of Pavirawi the greater part of the night has '
passed away while the Bhikkhus were in confusion ; '
the Bhikkhus were reciting the Dhamma, those
versed in the Suttantas were propounding the Sut-
tantas, those versed in the Vinaya were discussing
the Vinaya, the Dhamma preachers were talking
about the Dhamma. Now if those Bhikkhus think :

“ The greater part of the night has passed away
while the Bhikkhus were in confusion. If the Saw-
gha performs Pavira«4 with the threefold formula,
it will not have finished the Pavira «4 when day
breaks,” let a learned, competent Bhikkhu proclaim
the following naltx before the Sa«/gha : “ Let the
Samgha, &c. The greater part of the night has
passed away while the Bhikkhus were in confusion.
If the Sawgha performs PavdrawS, (&c. as in § 3).’”

5. At that time in a certain district in the Kosala
country a g^eat assembly of Bhikkhus had come
together on the day of Pav 4 ra«i, and there was
but a small place protected from rain, and a great
cloud was in the sky. Now the Bhikkhus thought :

‘ A great assembly of Bhikkhus has come together

7. 2

340

mahAvagga.

IV. 16, 6 .

here, and there is but a small place protected from
rain, and a great cloud is in the sky. If the Sa»/gha
performs PavArawA with the threefold formula, it
will not have finished the PavAra»A when this cloud
will begin to rain. Well, what are we to do ?’

They told this thing to the Blessed On'e.

6. ‘In case, O Bhikkhus, in a certain district a
great assembly of Bhikkhus has come together on
the day of Pavira»A, and there is but a small place
protected from rain, and a great cloud is in the sky.
Now if those Bhikkhus think .... (&c., as in ^ 3
to the end).

7. ‘In case, O Bhikkhus, in a certain district on
the day of PavAra «4 danger arises from kings,
danger from robbers, danger from fire, danger from
water, danger from human beings, danger from non-
human beings, danger from beasts of prey, danger
from creeping things, danger of life, danger against
chastity. Now if those Bhikkhus think : “ Here is
danger for our chastity. If the Saw^gha performs
Pavira»A with the threefold formula, it will not
have finished the PavAra»A when this danger for
chastity will arise,” let a learned, competent Bhik-
khu . . . .’ (&c., as in ^ 3 to the end).

16 . .

I. At that time the AT^bbaggiya Bhikkhus held
Pavdra^A being guilty of an offence.

They told this thing to the Blessed One.

* Let no one, O Bhikkhus, hold PavAra»A who
is guilty of an offence. He who does, commits a

IV, i6,3. the pavArajva ceremony. » 341

1 — - —

dukka/a offence. I prescribe, O Bhikkhus, that
you ask a Bhikkhu who holds Pavira«& being
guilty of an offence, for his leave ^ and reprove him
for that offence.’

2. At that time the jOabbaggiya Bhikkhus, when
asked for ’leave, were not willing to give leave (to
Bhikkhus who were going to reprove them for an
offence).

They told this thing to the Blessed One.

‘ I prescribe, O Bhikkhus, that you inhibit the
Pavdra»d of a Bhikkhu who does not give leave.
And you ought to inhibit it, O Bhikkhus, in this
way: Let (a Bhikkhu) say on the day of Pavi-
ra»i, on the fourteenth or on the fifteenth day (of
the half month), in presence of that person, before
the assembled Sa»«gha : “ Let the Sawgha, reverend
Sirs, hear me. Such and such a person is guilty of
an offence; I inhibit his Pavira^d; Pavira«i
must not be held in his presence,” Thus his Pavi-
ra«d is inhibited.’

3. At that time the A'.^bbaggiya Bhikkhus, who '
thought : ‘ Otherwise good Bhikkhus might inhibit i
our Pavdrawi,’ themselves inhibited beforehand, ^
without object and reason, the Pavdra«d of pure )
Bhikkhus who had committed no offence, and they
also inhibited the Pavdra«d of Bhikkhus who had
already performed their Pavdra»d.

They told this thing to the Blessed One.

‘ Let no one, O Bhikkhus, inhibit, without object
and reason, the Pavdra»d of pure Bhikkhus who
have committed no offence. He who does, commits a
dukka/a offence. And further, O Bhikkhus, let no

* Comp. II, 16, 1.

342 •

mahAvagga.

IV, i6, 4.

one inhibit the PavAra^A of Bhikkhus who have
already performed their PavAra»A He who does,
commits a dukka/a offence.

4. ‘And thus, O Bhikkhus, (you may discern
* whether) the PavAra»A is (duly) inhibited or not

inhibited. *

‘ In what cases is the PavAra»i, O Bhikkhus,
not inhibited? When Pavira«A, O Bhikkhus,
is pronounced, declared, and finished with the
threefold formula, and if (a Bhikkhu then) in-
hibits the Pavdra«A (of another Bhikkhu), the
Pavdra«A is not inhibited. When Pavira«A, O
Bhikkhus, is pronounced, declared, and finished
with the twofold formula, with the onefold formula,
by common declaration of all Bhikkhus who have
kept Vassa together, and if (a Bhikkhu then) in-
hibits, .... (&c., as before). In these cases, O
Bhikkhus, the PavAra^i is not inhibited.

5. ‘ And in what cases, O Bhikkhus, is the Pavi-
ra«A inhibited? When PavirawA, O Bhikkhus,
is pronounced, declared, but not finished^ with the
threefold formula, and if (a Bhikkhu then) inhibits
the PavirawA (of another Bhikkhu), the PavA-

ra«A is inhibited (&C.2). In these cases, O

Bhikkhus, the PavAra«A is inhibited.

6. ‘In case, O Bhikkhus, one Bhikkhu, on the day
of PavArawA, inhibits the PavArawA of another
Bhikkhu : then if the other Bhikkhus know with
regard to that (inhibiting) Bhikkhu : “ This vene-

' Correct in the Pdli text pariyositSya into apariyositAya.

“ The paragraph is repeated with the phrases, ‘ With the two-
fold formula,’ ‘with the onefold formula,’ and ‘by common
declaration of all the Bhikkhus who have kept Vassa together,’
respectively, instead of ‘ with the threefold formula.’

IV, i6. II.

THE PAVArAJvA ceremony.

. 343

rable brother is not of a pure conduct in his deeds,
nor in his words, nor as regards his means of live-
lihood, he is ignorant, unlearned, unable to give
explanation when he is questioned,” (let them say
to him) : “ Nay, friend, let not quarrel arise, nor strife,
nor discord, nor dispute,” and having thus put him
to silence, let the Sa«*gha hold Pavdra^i.

7-9. ‘ In case, O Bhikkhus, &c.^

10. ‘In case, O Bhikkhus, one Bhikkhu on the
day of PavArawi inhibits the PavAra»i of another
Bhikkhu : then if the other Bhikkhus know with re-
gard to that (inhibiting) Bhikkhu : “ This venerable
brother is of a pure conduct in his deeds and in his
words and with regard to his means of livelihood, he
is clever, learned, and able to give explanation when
he is questioned,” let them say to him : “ If you in-
hibit, friend, the Pavdrawd of this Bhikkhu, on what
account do you inhibit it, on account of a moral trans-
gression, or on account of a transgression against the
rules of conduct, or on account of heresy ?”

11. ‘ If he replies : “ I inhibit it on account of a
moral transgression, I inhibit it on account of a
transgression against the rules of conduct, I inhibit
it on account' of heresy,” let them say to him :
“Well, do you know. Sir, what a moral transgres-
sion is, what a transgression against the rules of
conduct is, what heresy is ?” If he replies, “ I

' As in § 6. But instead of ‘Not of a pure conduct in his deeds,
nor in his words, nor as regards his means of livelihood,’ read
respectively, ‘Of a pure conduct in his deeds, but not in his
words, nor as regards his means of livelihood’ (§7); ‘Of a pure
conduct in his deeds and in his words, but not with regard to
his means of livelihood’ (§8); ‘Of a pure conduct in his deeds
and in his words and with regard to his means of livelihood’ (§ 9).

344 '

mahavagga.

IV, i6, 12.

know, friends, what a moral transgression is, &c.,”
let them say to him : “ And what is, friend, a moral
transgression, &c. ?”

j 12. ‘ If he replies : “ The four pdrA/ika offences
/and the thirteen sa«»gh 4 disesa offences are the
i moral transgressions; thullai^aya offences, pi-
l^ittiya offences, pi/idesanlya offences, dukka/a
i offences, and wicked language are the transgres-
isions against the rules of conduct; false doctrine
[land .... doctrine^ are heresy,” let them say to
him: “If you inhibit, friend, the Pavdra^d of
this Bhikkhu, do you inhibit it on account of what
you have seen, or of what you have heard, or of
what you suspect?”

13. ‘If he replies; “I inhibit it on account of
what I have seen, or on account of what I have
heard, or on account of what I suspect,” let them
say to him : “ If you inhibit, friend, the Pavira«i
of this Bhikkhu on account of what you have seen,
what have you seen? What is it that you have
seen ? When have you seen it ? Where have you
seen it ? Have you seen him committing a piri-
^ika offence? Have you seen him committing a
sa^^ghfldisesa offence? Have you seen him
committing a thullai^ilaya offence, a pi-^ittiya
offence, a pd/idesanlya offence, a dukka/a offence,
or making himself guilty of wicked language ? And
where were you? And where was this Bhikkhu?
And what did you do? And what did this Bhik-
khu do?”

* The meaning of antagg&hikd di/Mi (Sanskrit Sntargra-
hikS drtsh/i? dntagrahikS drfsh/i?) is unknown to us; Bud-
dhaghosa gives no explanation. Perhaps it may mean doctrine
partly false and partly correct (eclectic).

IV, i6, i6.

THE PAVARAivA CEREMONY.

• 345

14. ‘If he then replies : “ I do not inhibit, friends,
the Pavira«i of this Bhikkhu on account of what I
have seen, but I inhibit it on account of what I have
heard,” let them say to him; “ If you inhibit, friend, ^
the PavAra«^l of this Bhikkhu on account of what
you have 'heard, what have you heard ? What is it
that you have heard? When have you heard it?
Where have you heard it? Have you heard that he
has committed a p&ri/ika offence, .... (&c., down
to) .... or that he has made himself guilty of wicked
language? Have you heard it from a Bhikkhu?
Have you heard it from a Bhikkhuni? Have you
heard it from a sikkhamAnd, from a sAma«era,
from a sAma«erl, from an upisaka, from an upA-
siki, from kings, from royal officers, from Titthiyas,
from Titthiya disciples ?”

15. ‘If he then replies : “ I do not inhibit, friends,
the Pavdra»i of this Bhikkhu on account of what
I have heard, but I inhibit it on account of what I
suspect,” let them say to him : “ If you inhibit, friend,
the Pavdraftd of this Bhikkhu on account of what
you suspect, what do you suspect? What is it that you
suspect? When do you suspect it? Where do you
suspect it ? Do you suspect that he has committed
a pArA^ika offence, .... (&c., down to) ... . wicked
language ? Does your suspicion come from what
you have heard from a Bhikkhu, .... (&c., down
to) ... . from Titthiya disciples ?”

16. ‘If he then replies: “ I do not inhibit, friends,
the Pavdra^d of this Bhikkhu on account of what
I suspect ; I do not know the reason why I inhibit
the Pav 4 ra«i of this Bhikkhu,” and if that Bhikkhu,

O Bhikkhus, who reproves (the other one), being
questioned by intelligent fellow Bhikkhus, is not able

346 '

mahAvagga.

IV, i6, 17.

to convince their minds, you are right in saying that
in such case the Bhikkhu who has been reproved is
blameless. But if that Bhikkhu, O Bhikkhus, who
reproves (the other one), being questioned by intel-
ligent fellow Bhikkhus, is able to convince their
minds, you are right in saying that in Such case
the Bhikkhu who has been reproved is blamable.

17. ‘If that Bhikkhu, O Bhikkhus, who reproves
(another one), admits that he has charged him un-
foundedly with a pird^ika offence, let the Sawgha
enter upon the sawghidisesa proceedings' (against
the accuser) and then hold Pavira«i.

‘ If that Bhikkhu, O Bhikkhus, who reproves (an-
other one), admits that he has charged him un-
foundedly with a sawghidisesa offence, let the
Saz«gha treat (the accuser) according to the law®
and then hold Pavira«d.

‘ If that Bhikkhu, O Bhikkhus, who reproves (an-
other one), admits that he has charged him un-
foundedly with a thulla^^aya offence, or with a
pd^ittiya offence, or with a pd/idesan!ya offence,
or with a dukka/a offence, or with having used
wicked language, let the Sa»?gha treat (the accuser)
according to the law® and then hold Pavira«i.

18. ‘If that Bhikkhu, O Bhikkhus, who has been
reproved, admits that he has committed a piri^ika
offence, let the Sa«/gha expel him and then hold
Pav 4 ra«i.

‘ If that Bhikkhu, &c., admits that he has com-

' See the 8th Samgh&disesa rule.

* See the 76th P&^ittiya rule.

* According to Buddhaghosa, the Bhikkhu who brings such an
unfounded chaig;e against a fellow Bhikkhu, is guilty of a dukka/a
offence.

IV, i6, 32. THE pavArajvA ceremony. » 347

ir

mitted a sa^/ghAdisesa offence, let the Sa»«gha
enter upon the sawghAdisesa proceedings (agjainst
him) and then hold PavAra«A.

‘ If that Bhikkhu, &c., admits that he has com-
mitted a thulla^i^aya offence, or a pAitittiya
offence, . . (&c., down to) ... . wicked language,

let the Sa»?gha treat him according to the law
and then hold PavArawA.

19. ‘In case, O Bhikkhus, a Bhikkhu on the day
of PavAra«A is guilty of a thulla>S/ 5 aya offence.
Some Bhikkhus believe that it is a thulla/^^aya
offence, other Bhikkhus believe that it is a sa»2-
ghAdisesa offence. In that case, O Bhikkhus, let
those Bhikkhus who take it for a thulla^A’aya
offence, take that Bhikkhu, O Bhikkhus, aside, treat
him according to the law, go back to the Sawgha,
and say : “ The offence, friends, which this Bhikkhu
has committed, he has atoned for according to the
law. If the Sa»«gha is ready, let the Sa;«gha hold

20. ‘ In case, O Bhikkhus, a Bhikkhu on the day
of PavAra^^A is guilty of a thulla^^aya offence.
Some Bhikkhus believe that it is a thullaA’^^aya
offence, other Bhikkhus believe that it is a pA^it-
tiya offence. Some Bhikkhus believe that it is a
thulla^y^aya offence, other Bhikkhus believe that it
is a pA/idesanlya offence ; a thulla^/^aya offence;
a dukka/a offence; a thulla^>&aya offence, an
offence by wicked language. In that case (&c., as
in $ 19, down to the end).

21. 22. ‘ In case, O Bhikkhus, a Bhikkhu on the
day of PavAra«A is guilty ofa pA-^ittiya offence, of
a pA^idesanfya offence, ofa dukka/a offence, of an
offence by wicked language. Some Bhikkhus believe

348 '

mahAvagga.

IV,1«,23.

that it is an offence by wicked language, other Bhik-
khus believe that it is a sa^^ghAdisesa offence, &c.
Some Bhikkhus believe that it is an offence by
wicked language, other Bhikkhus believe that it is
a dukka/a offence. In that case, O Bhikkhus, let
those Bhikkhus who take it for an offence‘by wicked
language, take that Bhikkhu, O Bhikkhus, aside
(&c., see § ig).

23. ‘ If, O Bhikkhus, a Bhikkhu speaks thus before
the assembly on the day of PavArawA : “ Let the
Sa»2gha, reverend Sirs, hear me. Here this deed
is known (to me), but not the (guilty) person. If
the Sawgha is ready, let the Sa»/gha hold Pavi-
ra«i excluding this deed,” (the Bhikkhus) ought to
reply : “ The Blessed One, friend, has prescribed
that they who hold Pavira»A, ought to be pure.
If a deed is known, but not the (guilty) person,
report it (to us) now.”

24. ‘ If, O Bhikkhus, a Bhikkhu speaks thus before
the assembly on the day of PavAra^A : “ Let the
Sa»«gha, reverend Sirs, hear me. Here a person
is known (to me as guilty), but not his deed. If
the Saw^gha is ready, let the Sawgha hold PavA-
ra»A excluding this person,” (the Bhikkhus) ought
to reply : “ The Blessed One, friend, has prescribed
that they who hold PavAra^A, ought to be com-
plete. If a person is known to you (as guilty), but
not his deed, report it (to us) now.”

25. ‘ If, O Bhikkhus, a Bhikkhu speaks thus before
the assembly on the day of PavAra»A; “Let the
Sawgha, reverend Sirs, hear me. Here a deed is
known (to me) as well as the (guilty) person. If
the Sa;;2gha is ready, let the Sa;;2gha hold PavA-
ra«A excluding this deed and this person,” (the

IV, VJ, I.

THE PAVArAJvA ceremony.

' 349

Bhikkhus) ought to reply: “The Blessed One,
friend, has prescribed that they who hold PavA-
ra«A, ought to be pure as well as complete. If
the deed and the (guilty) person are known to you,
report it (to us) now.”

26. ‘ If,* O Bhikkhus, a deed becomes known be-
fore the PavAra»A, and the (guilty) person after-
wards (i. e. after the PavAra«d), it is right to bring
it forward (then)

‘If, O Bhikkhus, the (guilty) person becomes
known before the PavAra»A, and his deed after-
wards, it is right to bring it forward (then),

‘ If, O Bhikkhus, the deed as well as the (guilty)
person becomes known. before the PavAra»A, and if
(a Bhikkhu) raises up that matter again after the Pavi-
ra«i, he makes himself guilty of a pA/^ittiya offence
for raising up (a matter that has been settled) K'

17 .

I. At that time a number of Bhikkhus, companions
and friends of each other, entered upon Vassa in a
certain district of the Kosala country. In their I
neighbourhood other Bhikkhus, litigious, conten- \
tious, quarrelsome, disputatious persons, who used
to raise questions before the Sawgha, entered upon |
Vassa with the intention of inhibiting, on the PavA-i
ra»A day, the PavAra«A of those Bhikkhus when

1 • Because it had not been possible to decide the matter at the
Favirand’ (Buddhaghosa).

* See the 63rd PS^ittiya rule.

350 '

MAHAVAGGA.

IV, 17, 2.

they should have finished their Vassa residence.
Now those Bhikkhus heard: ‘In our neighbour-^
hood other Bhikkhus, &c. Well, what are we
to do?'

They told this thing to the Blessed One.

2. ‘In case, O Bhikkhus, a number of'Bhikkhus,

companions and friends of each other, enter upon
Vassa in a certain district. In their neighbourhood
other Bhikkhus (&c., § 1 ). I prescribe, O Bhik-

khus, that those Bhikkhus hold Uposatha twice or
thrice on the fourteenth day (of the half-month) ^ in
order that they may be able to hold Pavira^d before
those (other) Bhikkhus. If those litigious, conten-
tious (&c., § 1 ) Bhikkhus approach that district,

let the resident Bhikkhus, O Bhikkhus, quickly as-
semble and hold Pavira« 4 ; having held Pavd-
ra?ji, let them say to them : “ We have held
our Pavirawi, friends; do you do. Sirs, as you
think fit.”

3. ‘ If those litigious (&c., § i) Bhikkhus

come to that residence unexpectedly, let the resi-
dent Bhikkhus, O Bhikkhus, prepare seats (for

I them), get water for the washing of their feet,
foot-stools, and towels ^ then let them go to meet
them, take their bowls and their robes, and offer
them (water) to drink; having thus looked after
those Bhikkhus, let them go outside the boundary
and hold Pavira^fi; having held PavdrawA, let

, * In this way, when the inimical Bhikkhus are arriving about

the time of Pav^rani, the resident Bhikkhus count the day which is
the thirteenth or fourteenth to the other Bhikkhus, as the fifteenth,
and thus they are enabled to finish their Pavfira«fi before they can
be prevented.

* See I, 6, II.

IV, 17. 7-

THE PAVArAJvA ceremony.

’ 351

them say : “ We have held our PavArawi, friends,
^ do you do, Sirs, as you think fit.”

4. ‘If they succeed in this way, well and good ;
if they do not succeed, let a learned, competent,
resident Bhikkhu proclaim the following »atti be-
fore the • resident Bhikkhus : “ Let the resident
Bhikkhus hear me. Sirs. If you are ready. Sirs,
let , us now hold Uposatha and recite the Piti-
mokkha, and let us hold PavAra«A on the next
new-moon day.” If, O Bhikkhus, the litigious, ....
(&c., ^ i) Bhikkhus say to those Bhikkhus: “Well,
friends, hold PavAra^iA with us now,” let them
reply: “You are not masters, friends, of our PavA-
ra«A; we will not hold PavArawA now.”

5. ‘ If, O Bhikkhus, those litigious, .... (&c., § i)
Bhikkhus stay there till that new-moon day, let a
learned, competent, resident Bhikkhu, .... *

6. ‘ If, O Bhikkhus, those litigious, .... (&c., J i)
Bhikkhus stay there still till that full-moon day,
those Bhikkhus, O Bhikkhus, ought to hold PavA-
ra»A all of them, no matter whether they like it or
not, on the next full-moon day, on the day of the
komudi A’AtumAsini^.

7. ‘ If those Bhikkhus, O Bhikkhus, hold PavA-
ranA, and a sick Bhikkhu inhibits the PavArawA of
a healthy Bhikkhu, let them say (to the inhibiting
Bhikkhu) : “You are sick. Sir, and the Blessed One
has said that a sick person cannot endure being,
questioned. Wait, friend, until you have recovered ;

‘ As in § 4, down to the end of the paragraph ; instead of, ‘ On
the next new-moon day,’ it is to be read here, ‘On the next
full-moon day.’ .

* See the note on III, 14, 1 1. J

352 '

mahAvagga.

IV, 17, 8.

having recovered, you may reprove him, if you like."
If they speak to him thus, and he reproves (that
Bhikkhu) notwithstanding, he makes himself guilty
of the pi/littiya offence of disregard^.

8. ‘ If those Bhikkhus, O Bhikkhus, hold PavA-
ra^A, and a healthy Bhikkhu inhibits the PavA-
ra»A of a sick Bhikkhu, let them say (to the
inhibiting Bhikkhu) : “ This Bhikkhu is sick, friend,
and the Blessed One has said that a sick person
cannot endure being questioned. Wait, friend, until
this Bhikkhu has recovered ; when he has recovered
you may reprove him, if you like.” If they speak
to him thus, .... (&c., as in § 7).

9. ‘ If those Bhikkhus, O Bhikkhus, hold PavA-
ra»A, and a sick Bhikkhu inhibits the PavAra»A
of another sick Bhikkhu, let them say (to the in-
hibiting Bhikkhu): “You are sick. Sirs, and the
Blessed One has said that a sick person cannot
endure being questioned. Wait, friend, until you
have recovered; when he has recovered^ you may
reprove him, if you like.” If they speak to him
thus, .... (&c., as in § 7).

10. ‘If those Bhikkhus, O Bhikkhus, hold PavA-
ra»A, and a healthy Bhikkhu inhibits the PavAra^A
of another healthy Bhikkhu, let the Sawgha question
and examine them both and treat them according to
the law, and then hold PavAra«A.’

* See the 54th P&^ittiya rule.

‘ Probably we should read in the Pdli text, ‘Irogo drogam
ikahkham^o ^odessasiti.’ Then the translation would be : ‘ When
you have recovered and he has recovered, &c.’

IV, i8. 3.

THE PAVARAivA CEREMONY.

9

353

18.

1. At that time a number of Bhikkhus, companions
and friends of each other, entered upon Vassa in a
certain district of the Kosala country. These Bhik-
khus, living in unity, and concord, and without quarrel,
had found a comfortable place to dwell in. Now those
Bhikkhus thought : ‘ Living in unity, &c., we have
found a comfortable place to dwell in. If we hold
PavAra«A now, (other Bhikkhus) might come on a
journey, having held their PavAra»A, (and might
occupy this place); thus we should lose this place
which is comfortable to dwell in. Well, what are
we to do?’

They told this thing to the Blessed One.

2. ‘ In case, O Bhikkhus, a number of Bhikkhus,
companions and friends of each other, have entered
upon Vassa in a certain district. These Bhikkhus,
(&c,, §1).

‘ If these Bhikkhus think : “ Living in unity

(&c., § I, down to :) thus we should lose this place
which is comfortable to dwell in,” I allow, O Bhik-
khus, these Bhikkhus to agree upon pavArawA-
sa.mgzha.\

3. ‘ And you ought, O Bhikkhus, to agree upon
it in this way: Let them all assemble together. When

* Literally this word means, we believe, ‘ Keeping back one’s
own PavAra«S.’ Buddhaghosa says: ‘When the decree of pavS-
ran^samgaha has been issued, the Bhikkhus (who have issued
it) ought to live as in the rainy season. Incoming Bhikkhus are
not allowed to take possession of their places of rest. On the
other side, they ought not to interrupt their Vassa residence.’

ri.3l A a

354 '

mahAvagga.

IV, i8, 4-

they have assembled, let a learned, competent Bhik-
khu proclaim the following »atti before the Sa.m-^
gha: “Let the Sawgha, reverend Sirs, hear me.
Living in unity, .... (&c., § i, down to :) thus we
should lose this place which is comfortable to dwell
in. If the Sa;«gha is ready, let the Sa»%ha agree
upon pavAra«isa»*gaha; let it now hold Upo-
satha and recite the PAtimokkha, and let the
Sawgha hold PavAra«A on the next komudi
^Atumisinl day. This is the »atti.”

4. ‘ “Let the Samghd., &c.^ ”

5. ‘If, O Bhikkhus, after those Bhikkhus have
agreed upon pavclra«cLsa»«gaha, a Bhikkhu should
say : “ I wish, friends, to go on my travels through
the country ; I have a business in the country,” let
them reply to him : “ Good, friend, hold PavAra»A
and go.” If that Bhikkhu, O Bhikkhus, when hold-
ing Pavdra»A inhibits the Pavira»A of another
Bhikkhu, let (that other Bhikkhu) say to him : “You
are not master of my PavArawA, friend; I will not
hold Pavira»A now.”

‘ If, O Bhikkhus, when that Bhikkhu holds PavA-
ra«i, another Bhikkhu inhibits his PavArawi, let
the Sa»«gha question and examine them both and
treat them according to the law.

6. ‘ If that Bhikkhu, O Bhikkhus, has finished
that business in the country and comes back to that
district before the day of komudt /§i turn As ini,
and if a Bhikkhu, O Bhikkhus, when the Bhikkhus
hold PavAra«A, inhibits the PavAra»i of that
Bhikkhu (who has been absent), let him say (to the

* Here follows the usual formula of a iiattidutiya kamma as
in Book II, chap. 6. Comp, the note on Book I, chap. 28, § 3.

IV, i8,6. THE PAvARAivA CEREMONY. ' 355

inhibiting Bhikkhu): “You are not master of myf
PavAra«i, friend; I have held my Pav4ra«A.” I
‘ If, O Bhikkhus, when the Bhikkhus hold Pavd-
ra«d, this Bhikkhu inhibits the Pavdrawd of an-
other Bhikkhu, let the Samgha question and examine
them both ’and treat them according to the law, and
then hold Pavdrawd.'

End of the Pavira;;d-Khandhaka.

A a 2

II Class.

TRANSLITERATION OF ORIENTAL ALPHABETS.'' 357

358 CRANSLITERATION OF ORIENTAL ALPHABETS

Dentines modificatae
(linguales, &c.)

38 Tenuis

FOR THE SACRED BOOKS OF THE EAST.

359

56 Spiritus asper

57 „ lenis .

58 Anusv&ra. • ,

59 Visarga • • • «

1 Neutralis • • • •

2 Latyngo-palatalis

3 labialis

360 '1 TKANSLITERATION OF ORIENTAL ALPHABETS.

Sacred Books of the East

TRANSLATED BY VARIOUS ORIENTAL SCHOLARS
AND EDITED BY

THE RIGHT HON. F. MAX MOLLER.

,1,*^, This Series is published with the sanction and co operation of the Secretdry of
State for India in Council,

BSPOBT presented to tBe AOADEMIE BES ZESCBIPTZOES, May 11,
1883, by M. EBEE8T BEEAH.

*M. Renan prisente trois nouveanx
volumes de la grande collection des
“Livres sacres de rOrient” (Sacred
Books of the East), qiie dirige a Oxford,
avec nne si vaste erudition et nne critique
si silre, le savant associe de I’Academie
des Inscriptions, M. Max MUller. ... La
premiere serie de ce beau recueil, com-
posee de 24 volumes, esl presqiie achevde.
M. Max Muller se propose d’en publier

une seconde, dont Tinter^t historique et
religieux iie sera pas moindre. M. Max
Muller a su se procurer la collaboration
des savans les plus eminens d’Europe et
d’Asie. L’Universit^ d’Oxford, que cette
grande publication honore au plus hant
degr^, doit tenir i continuer dans les plus
larges proportions une oeuvre aussi philo-
sophiquement con9ne que s.avamment
executee/

EZTBACT firoxn tbe OtTABTEBBY BEVZEW..

* We rejoice to notice that a second
series of tliese translations has been an>
nounced and has actually begun to appear.
The stones, at least, out of which a stately
edifice may hereafter arise, are here being
brought together. Prof. Max Muller has
deserved well of scientific history. Not
a few minds owe to his enticing words
their first attraction to this branch of
study. But no work of his, not even the

great edition of the Rig-Veda, can com-
pare in importance or in usefulness with
this English translation of the Sacred
Books of the East, which has been devised
by his foresight, successfully brought so
far by his persuasive and organising
power, and will, we trust, by the assist-
ance of the distinguished scholars he has
gathered round him, be carried in due
time to a happy completion.'

Professor E. BABBY, Znaugurol Lecture la the University of Freiburg, 188Y.

‘Die allgemeine vergleichende Reli- internationalen Orientalistencongress in
gionswissenschaft datirt von jenem gross- London der Grundstein gelegt worden
artigen, in seiner Art einzig dastchenden war, die Dbersetzimg derheiligen Biicher
Unternehmen, zu welchem auf Anregung des Ostens* {the Sacred Books of the
Max Mullers im Jahre 1874 auf dem East).

The Hon. ALEEBT S. O. CAKHZEO, ‘Words on Existing BeUglons.’

‘ The recent publication of the “ Sacred a great event in the annals of theological

Books of the East” in English is surely literature.*

OXFORD

AT THE CLARENDON PRESS
LONDON: HENRY FROWDE

OXFORD UNIVERSITY PRESS WAREHOUSE, AMEN CORNER, K.C.

2

SACRED BOOKS OF THE EAST:

FIRST SERIES.

VoL. I. The Upanishads.

Translated by F. Max Muller. Part 1. The JCXdndogya-
^ upanishad, The Talavak&ra-upanishad, The Aitareya-Srawyaka,
The Kaushitaki-brShmawa-upanishad, and The VS^saneyi-
saxnhitS-upanishad. Second Edition. 8vo, cloth, lor. 6^.

The Upanishads contain the philosophy of the Veda. They have
become the foundation of the later Veddnta doctrines^ and indirectly
of Buddhism. Schopenhauer^ speaking of the Upanishads^ says :

‘ In the whole world there is no study so beneficial and so elevating
as that of the Upanishads. It has been the solace of my life^ it will
be the solace of my death!

[See also VoL XV.]

VoL. II. The Sacred Laws of the Aryas, •

As taught in the Schools of Apastamba, Gautama, Visish//ia,
and BaudhSyana. Translated by Georg BOhler. Part I.
Apastamba and Gautama. Second Edition. 8vo, cloth, i or. 6e/.

The Sacred Laws of the Aryas contain the original treatises on
which the Laws of Manu and other lawgivers were founded.

[See also Vol. XIV.]

VoL. III. The Sacred Books of China.

The Texts of Confucianism. Translated by James Legge.
Part 1. The Shfl King, The Religious Portions of the Shih
King, and The HsiSo King. Second Edition. 8vo, cloth, iar. 6rf.

Confucius was a collector of ancient traditions^ not the founder of
a new religion. As he lived in the sixth and fifth centuries B. C.
his works are of unique interest for the study of Ethology.

[See also Vols. XVI, XXVII, XXVIII, XXXIX, and XL.]

VoL. IV. The Zend-Avesta.

Translated by James Darmesteter. Part 1. The VendtdSd.
Second Edition. 8vo, cloth, ns.

The Zend-Avesta contains the relics of what was the religion of
Cyrus, Darius, and Xerxes, and, but for the battle of Marathon,

. EDITED BY F. MAX MOLLER.

3

might have become the religion of Europe. It forms to the present
• day the sacred book of the Parsis, the so-called fire-worshippers.

[See also Vok XXIII and XXXL]

VoL. V. Pahlavi Texts.

Transl|ted by E. W. West. . Part I. The Bundahir, Bahman
Yart, and Shdyast Id-shdyast. 8vo, cloth, lar. id.

The Pahlavi Texts comprise the theological literature of the revmal
of Zoroaster’s rel^ion, beginning with the Sassanian dynasty. ZXey
are important for a study of Gnosticism.

[See also Vols. XVIII, XXIV, XXXVII, and XLVIL]

voLs. VI AOTJ IX. The Qur’Sn.

Parts I and II. Translated by E. H. Pai.mer. Second Edition.
8 VO, doth, 2 If.

This translation^ carried out according to his own peculiar views
of the origin of the Qur'dn^ was the Iasi great work of E, H. Palmer^
before he was murdered in Egypt.

'♦

Voii. VII. The Institutes of Vish«u.

Translated by Julius Jolly. 8vo, doth, lof. bd.

A collection of legal aphorisms^ closely connected with one of the
oldest Vedic schoolsy the KaMas, but considerably added to in later
time. Of importance for a critical study of the Laws of Manu.

VoL. VIII. The Bhagavadgltd,with The Sanatsugitiya,
and The Anugltd.

Translated by KXshinath Trihbak Telakg. Second Edition.
8vo, doth, lOf. td.

The earliest philosophical and religious poem of India. It has been
paraphrased in Arnold’s 'So^g Celestidl.’

voii. X. The Dhammapada,

Translated from PdU by F. Max Muller; and

The Sutta-Nipita,

Translated from Pdli by V. FausbSll; being Canonical Books
of the Buddhists. Second Edition. 8vo, cloth, lOf. fsd.

The Dhammapada contains the quintessence of Buddhist morahiy.
The SsMa-Nipdta gives the authentic teaching of Buddha on seme
of the fitndamenial principles of religion.

SACRED BOOKS OF THE EASr:c

’ XI. Buddhist Suttas.

Translated from Plli by T. W. Rhys Davids, i. The MahS*
xparinibbdna Suttanta; 2. The Dhamma-^akka-ppavattana
^ 4 Sutta. 3. The Tevijf^a Suttanta; 4. The Akahkheyya Sutta ;
5. The A'etokhila Sutta; 6. The Mahd-sudassana Suttanta;
7. The Sabbisava Sutta. .8vo, cloth, lor. 6if.

colleciion oflhe most important religious, moral, and philosophical
'^discourses tciken from the sacred canon of the Buddhists.

VoL. XII. The iSatapatha-Brihmawa, according to the
Text of the Midhyandina School.

Translated by Julius Eggeling. Part I. Books I and II.
8vo, cloth, 1 2J. (>d.

A minute account of the sacrificial ceremonies of the Vedic age.
It contains the earliest account of the Deluge in India,

[See also Vols. XXVI, XLI, XLIII, and XLIV.]

VoL. XIII. Vinaya Texts.

Translated from the Pdli by T. W. Rhys Davids and Hermann
Oldenberg. Parti. The Pdtimokkha. The Mahdvagga, I-IV.
8 VO, cloth, I Of. 6(/. t

The Vinaya Texts give for the first time a translation of the moral
code of the Buddhist religion as settled in the third century B. C.
[See also Vols. XVII and XX.]

Voii. XIV. The Sacred Laws of the Aryas,

As taught in the Schools of Apastamba, Gautama, Vdsish/, 4 a,
and Baudhayana. Translated by Georg Buhler. Part II.
'Vdsish/Aa and Baudhdyana. 8vo, cloth, lof. (>d.

VoL. XV. The Upanishads.

Translated by F. Max Moller. Part II. The Ka/^a-upanishad,
The Mu«(/aka-upanishad, The Taittiriyaka-upanishad, The
Bribaddra«yaka-upanishad, The iVetSfvatara-upanishad, The
Prajdfa-upanishad, and The Maitrdya«a-brfihma«a-upanishad.
Second Edition. 8vo, cloth, lOf. M,

VoL. XVI. The Sacred Books of China.

The Texts of Confucianism. Translated by James Legge.
Part II. The Yt King. 8vo, cloth, lOf. 6</.

[See also Vols. XXVII, XXVIII.]

Voi.. XVII. Vinaya Texts.

Translated from the Pili by T. W. Rhys Davids and Hermann
Oldenberg. Part II, The Mahdvagga, V— X. The ATullavagga,
I-III. 8vo, cloth, rof. 6rf.

EDITED BY F. MAX MULLER.

5

VOL. XVIII. Pahlavi Texts.

^ Translated by E. W. West. Part II. The

and The Epistles of MSnfij^thar. 8vo, cloth, i is. ^

VoL. XIX. The Fo-sho-hing-tsan-king.

A Life of Buddha by Ajvaghosha Bodhisattva, trar
Sanskrit into Chinese by Dharmaraksha, a.d. 420^!;

Chinese into English by Samuel Beal. 8vo, cloth/far46rf.

This life of Buddha was translated from Sanskrit intb Vhfnest^
A.D. 420. It contains many legends^ some of which show a certain
similarity to the Evangelium infantiae,

VoL. XX. Vinaya Texts.

Translated from the Pdli by T. W. Rhys Davids and Hermann
Oldenberg. Part III. The ATullavagga, IV-XII. 8vo, cloth,
los. 6 d.

VoL, XXI. The Saddharma-pu«t/arlka ; or, The Lotus
^ of the True Law.

Translated by H. Kern. 8vo, cloth, 12s. 6 d.

‘ The Lotus of the True Lawl a canonical book of the Northern
Buddhists^ translated from Sanskrit. There is a Chinese transla-
tion of this book which was finished as early as the year 286 A.D.

VoL, XXII. 6^aina-S<itras.

Translated from Prdkrit by Hermann Jacobi. Part I. The
A^Mhga-Sfitra and The Kalpa-Sfitra. 8vo, cloth, loj. 6 d.

The religion of the Gainas was founded iy a contemporary of Buddha.
It still counts numerous adherents in India^ while there are no
Buddhists left in India proper.

[See Vol, XLV.]

VOL. XXIII. The Zend-Avesta.

Translated by JauesDarmesteter. Fart II. The Strdzahs,
Yarts, and NySyir. 8vo, cloth, ioj. 6rf.

Vol. XXIV. Pahlavi Texts.

Translated by E. W. West. Part III. Din&-i Matndg-
Khira</, .Slkand-gfimdntk Vi^r, and Sad Dar. 8vo, cloth,
lor. 6<f.

SACRED BOOKS OF THE EAST: •

SECOND SERIES.

VOL. XXV. Manu.

Translated by Georg Buhler. 8vo, cloth, air.

This iramlation is foundtd on that of Sir William Jones, which
has been carefully revised and corrected with the help j seven native
Commentaries. An Appendix contains all the quotations from Manu
ttjhich are found in the Hindu Law-books, translated for the use of
the Law Courts in India. Another Appendix gives a synopsis of
parallel passages from the six Dharma-sdtras, the other Smidis,
the Upanishads, the Mahdbhdrata, jr.

VoL. XXVI. The .Satapatha-Brfihma«a.

Translated by Julius Eggeling. Part II. Books III and IV.
8vo, cloth, laf. 6d.

VoLS. XXVII AND XXVIII. The Sacred Books of China.
The Texts of Confucianism. Translated by James Legge. Parts
III and IV. The Li K\, or Collection of Treatises on the Rules
of Propriety, or Ceremonial Usages. 8vo, cloth, asr. ^

VoL. xxTx. The GnTiya-Shtras, Rules of Vedi(\^
Domestic Ceremonies.

Part I. ^Snkhtyana, ArvalSyana, Pdraskara, KhSdira. Trans-
lated by Hermann Oldenberg. 8vo, cloth, lar. 6d.

VOL. TtTCTc. The Gnhya-Shtras, Rules of Vedic

Domestic Ceremonies. -

Part II. Gobhila, Hira^akem, Apastamba. Translated by
Hermann Oldenberg. Apastamba, Ya^a-paribhdsh&>s<itras.
Translated by F. Max MUller. 8vo, cloth, lar. 6d.

These rules of Domestic Ceremonies describe the home life of the
ancient Aryas with a completeness and accuracy unmatched in any
other literature. Some of these rules have been incorporated in the
ancient Law-books.

VOL. XXXI. The Zend-Avesta.

Part III. The Yasna, Visparad, AfrinagHn, Gdhs, and
Miscellaneous Fragments. Translated by L. H. Mills. 8vo,
cloth, isr. 6d.

VoL. XXXII. Vedic Hymns.

Translated by F. Max Muller. Part I. 8vo, cloth, i8r. 6d,
[See also Vol. XLVL]

VOL. XXXIII. The Minor Law-books.

Translated by Julius Jolly. Part I. NS'rada, Brihaspati.

8 VO, cloth, I or. hd.

EDITED BY F. MAX MOLLER.

Voii. XZXIV. The Vedllnta-Sfttras, with the Com-
mentary by 5ankarAi&rya. Part I.

Translated by G. Thibaut. 8vo, cloth, 12 s. 6d.

[See also VoL XXXVIII.]

VoiiS. xxzv AKD XXXVI. The Questions
Milindi.

Translated from the Pdli by T. W. Rmi ^

Part I. 8vo, cloth, lor. 6d. Part 11. 8vo, cloth, 11

Voii. XXXVII. Pahlavi Texts. ■

Translated by E. W. West. Part IV. The Contents of the
Nasks, as stated in the Eighth and Ninth Books of the
Dtnkard. igj.

Voii. XXXVTII. The Ved4nta-S6tras. Part II. 8vo,
cloth, with full Index to both Parts, i 2 f. 6d.

j .. ^1*

XXXIX AND XL. The Sacred Books of China.
The Texts of Taoism. Translated by James Legge. 8vo,
cloth, 21 ^.

OL; XLI. The ^atapatha - Brihmawa. Part III.
^^Translated by Julius Eggeling. 8vo, cloth, i 2 j. 6d.

XLII. Hymns of the Atharva-veda.
i, Translated by M. Bloomfield. 8vo, cloth, zis.

xLiii. The 5atapatha-Brdhma?/a.

Translated by Julius Eggeling. Part IV. Books VIII,
IX, and X. 12 ^. 6(/.

VoL. XLlV. The .Satapatha-Brdhmawa.

Translated by Julius Eggeling. Part V. Books XI, XII,
XIII, and XIV. i8f. 6rf.

Voii. XLV. The Caina-SAtras.

Translated from Prakrit, by Herhann Jacobi. Part II. The
Uttarddhyayana Sdtra, The Sdtrakritdhga Sfitra. 8vo, cloth,

123, 6d.

VoL. XLVI. Vedic Hymns. Part II. 8vo, cloth, 14^.

Voii. XL VII. Pahlavi Texts.

Translated by E. W. West. Part V. Marvels of Zoroas-
trianism. 8r. 6<f.

VoL. XLViil. The Veddnta-Sfttras, with R&mdni^’s
.Sribhdshya.

Translated by G. Thibaut. [In the Prm.J

Vozi. XLIX. Buddhist MahdySna Texts. Buddha-
^arita, translated by E. B. Cowell. Sukhdvatt-vyilha,V!t^Ta^^^
dM, &c., translated by F. Max MUller. Amitiiyur-Dby&na-
Sftira, translated by J. Takaxvsu. 8vo, cloth, lar. 6<f.

c

8

RECENT ORIENTAL WORKS.

ARYAN SERIES.

uddkist Texts from Japan, I. ; The

'^Diamond-Cutter.

Edited by F. Max MiJtLKR, M.A. Small 4to,

One of the most famous metaphysical treatises of the Mah^ydna Buddhists.

Bu^hist Texts from Japan. II. Sukhivati-Vyflha :
Description of Sukkdvatt, the Land of Bliss.

Edited by F. Max Muller, M.A., and Bunyiu Nanjio. With
two Appendices : (i) Text and Translation of Sahghavarman’s
Chinese Version of the Poetical Portions of the Sukhfivalt-
Vyiiha ; (2) Sanskrit Text of the Smaller Sukhavati-Vyfiha.
Small 4to, 7^.

The editio princeps of the Sacred Book of one of the largest and most
influential sects of Buddhism, numbering more than ten millions of followers
in Japan alone.

Buddhist Texts from Japan. III. The A ncimt Palm-
Leaves containing the Pr^^wi-Pdramitd- Ir/daya-,;
SAtra and the Ush»lsha-Vi^ya-DhAra?il.

Edited by F. Max Muller, M.A., and Bunyiu Nanjio, M.A;
With an Appendix by G. Buhler, C.I.E. With many Plates.
Small 4to, loj.

Contains facsimiles of the oldest Sanskrit MS. at present known.

Dharma-Sawgraha, an A ncient Collection of Buddhist
Technical Terms.

Prepared for publication by Kenjiu Kasawara, a Buddhist
Priest from Japan, and, after his death, edited by F. Max
Muller and H, Wenzel. Small 4to, 7r. 6</.

KAty&y ana’s Sarv^lnukrama/ei of the i?/gveda.

With Extracts from Sha^/gurujishya's Commentary entitled
VeddrthadlpikS. Edited by A. A, Macdonell, M.A., Ph.D. i6j.
The Buddha-A^arita of A.yvaghosha.

Edited, from three MSS., by E. B. Cowell, M.A. I2J. 6^/.
The Mantrapatha, or the Prayer Book of the Apa-
stambins.

Edited, together with the Commentary of Haradatta, and
translated by M. Winternitz, Ph.D. First Part. Introduc-
tion, Sanskrit Text, Varietas Lectionis, and Appendices.
Small quarto, io.r. 6^.

OXFORD

AT THE CLARENDON PRESS
LONDON : HENRY FROWDE

OXFORD UNIVERSITY PRESS WAREHOUSE, AMEN CORNER, E.C.