The Sacred Books of the East, Vol. 3: The Shû King (The Sacred Books of China, Part 1) (James Legge (trans.), 1879)
==========================================================
One of two missing SBE volumes (of 50) — brings the library's Sacred Books of the East to 49/50. Public domain. Source: Internet Archive.

M     g  PROPERTY      Or 


%  >^^     ^ 


ARTES      SCIENTIA      VERITAS 


T5V-. 

V/3 


THE 


SACRED   BOOKS   OF  THE   EAST 


Honfcon 

HENRY     FROWDE 


OXFORD     UNIVERSITY     PRESS     WAREHOUSE 
7    PATERNOSTER   ROW 


/???  z. 


THE 


SACRED  BOOKS  OF  THE  EAST 


TRANSLATED 


BY  VARIOUS  ORIENTAL  SCHOLARS 


AND    EDITED    BY 


F.   MAX    MULLER 


VOL.  Ill 


AT     THE     CLARENDON      PRESS 
1879 

I  All  rights  reserved '] 


f^W 


THE 


SACRED   BOOKS    OF   CHINA 


THE    TEXTS    OF    CONFUCIANISM 


TRANSLATED  BY 


JAMES     LEGGE 


"W 


PART     I  '   *?*^*c 

''-  Si* 

THE    SHU    KING 

THE    RELIGIOUS    PORTIONS    OF   THE    SHIH    KING 

THE    HSIAO    KING 


AT     THE     CLARENDON     PRESS 
1879 

[All  rights  reserved"] 


CONTENTS. 


ff^  PAGE 

1^  Preface xiii 

lo  THE     SH(J. 

1 

m  Introduction. 

ftf  CHAP. 

^  I.  The  Nature  and  History  of  the  Sh£t  i 

Meaning  of  the  name  Shu  King.  The  Shu  existed  as  a 
collection  of  documents  before  Confucius.  Number  of 
documents  in  it  in  his  time.  The  Preface  ascribed  to  him. 
The  sources  of  the  Shu.  Destruction  of  the  classical  litera- 
ture by  the  emperor  of  A^in.     Recovery  of  the  Shu. 

II.  The  Credibility  of  the  Records  in  the  ShCt  .        .      12 
Are  the  records  reliable  or  not  ?    The  Books  of  ATau  ;   of 

Shang  ;  of  Hsii.  The  Books  of  Thang  and  Yii  are  professedly 
later  compilations  ;  legendary  ;  based  on  ancient  documents. 
The  Tribute  of  Yii.  Y&o,  Shun,  and  Yii  are  all  historical 
personages. 

III.  On  the  Chronology  of  China,  and  the  Principal 
Eras  in  the  Shi) 20 

No  detailed  chronological  system  can  be  made  out  from 
the  Shu.  Attempts  at  systematic  chronology  began  in  the 
Han  period.  Ancient  method  of  determining  the  length  of 
Chinese  history.  The  period  of  the  A'au  dynasty  ;  of  the 
Shang  ;  of  the  Hsia  ;  of  Yao  and  Shun. 

A  Chart  by  the  Rev.  Professor  Pritchard,  representing 
the  principal  zodiacal  stars  above  the  horizon  of  any  place  in 
central  China,  about  the  year  B.  c.  2300  ;  with  note,  and  table 
of  the  apparent  positions  of  the  principal  stars  in  B.  C  2300, 
B.C.  1500,  a.d.  1,  A. D.  1000,  and  A.  D.  1878    .        .        .         27-30 

Part  I.    The  Book  of  Thang. 
The  Canon  of  Yao 31 


1\(\  <r 


Vlll  CONTENTS. 


Part  II.    The  Books  of  Yu. 

BOOK  PAGE 

i.    The  Canon  of  Shun 37 

2.  The  Counsels  of  the  Great  Yii 46 

3.  The  Counsels  of  Kao-yao 53 

4.  The  Yi  and  K\ 56 


Part  III.    The  Books  of  HsiA. 

1.  The  Tribute  of  Yii.     Section  i 64 

»               „               „      11     ......  72 

2.  The  Speech  at  Kan 76 

3.  The  Songs  of  the  Five  Sons 78 

4.  The  Punitive  Expedition  of  Yin 81 

Part  IV.    The  Books  of  Shang. 

1.  The  Speech  of  Thang 84 

2.  The  Announcement  of  Aung-hui 86 

3.  The  Announcement  of  Thang      ......       89 

4.  The  Instructions  of  1  *        .        .        .        .        .        .        .92 

5.  The  Thai  iTia.     Section  i  .        .        ....       95 

„  „       ii  ......       97 

»  »     i»  99 

6.  The  Common  Possession  of  Pure  Virtue    .        .        .        .100 

7.  The  Pan-kang.     Section  i  104 

»  »     "  108 

»  n     "i  HI 

8.  The  Charge  to  Yueh.     Section  i 113 

»  »  »       h* 115 

„  „  „      in  .         .         .         .        .116 

9.  The  Day  of  the  Supplementary  Sacrifice  to  Kao  Sung    .     118 

10.  The  Chief  of  the  West's  Conquest  of  Li    .        .        .        .120 

11.  The  Count  of  Wei ,        .121 


Part  V.    The  Books  of  A*au. 

1.    The  Great  Declaration.     Section  i 125 

»               »                    99      n 

127 

»                »                    »     m 

129 

2.    The  Speech  at  Mu       .        . 

131 

3.    The  Successful  Completion  of  the  War 

*33 

4.    The  Great  Plan    ..... 

1.37 

5.    The  Hounds  of  Lii 

149 

6.    The  Metal-bound  Coffer       . 

>        * 

.     151 

CONTENTS.  IX 


BOOK  PAGE 

7.  The  Great  Announcement   .        .        »        .        .        .        .156 

8.  The  Charge  to  the  Count  of  Wei 161 

9.  The  Announcement  to  the  Prince  of  Khang      .        .        .164 

10.  The  Announcement  about  Drunkenness     .        .        .        .     171 

11.  The  Timber  of  the  Rottlera 179, 

12.  The  Announcement  of  the  Duke  of  Shao  .         .         .181 

13.  The  Announcement  concerning  Lo 188 

14.  The  Numerous  Officers 196 

15.  Against  Luxurious  Ease 200 

16.  The  Prince  Shih 205 

17.  The  Charge  to  Knng  of  3hai 211 

18.  The  Numerous  Regions 213 

19.  The  Establishment  of  Government 219 

20.  The  Officers  of  K&u 226 

21.  The  Kwa-khaxi. 231 

22.  The  Testamentary  Charge  .  234 

23.  The  Announcement  of  King  Khang 243 

24.  The  Charge  to  the  Duke  of  Pi 245 

25.  The  A"un-ya .  250 

26.  The  Charge  to  -Oiung .         .252 

27.  The  Marquis  of  Lii  on  Punishments 254 

28.  The  Charge  to  the  Marquis  Wan 265 

29.  The  Speech  at  Pi 267 

30.  The  Speech  of  the  Marquis  of  .Oin         .        .        .        .    270 


THE    SHIH. 

Introduction. 


CHAP. 


I.  The  Name  and  Contents  of  the  Shih       .        .        .275 

The  meaning  of  the  character  Shih.  The  contents.  Only 
the  pieces  of  the  fourth  Part  have  professedly  a  religious 
character.  Classification  of  the  pieces  from  their  form  and 
style. 

II.  The  Shih  before  Confucius,  and  what,  if  any,  were 

his  Labours  upon  it 280 

Statement  of  Sze-ma  Kh\tn  ;  in  the  Records  of  the  Sui 
Dynasty ;  of  Kix  Hsi.  View  of  the  author.  Groundlessness 
of  Alien's  statement.    What  Confucius  did  for  the  Shih. 


CONTENTS. 


III.  The  Shih  from  the  Time  of  Confucius  till  the 
General  Acknowledgment  of  the  Present  Text 

From  Confucius  to  the  rise  of  the  Khm  dynasty.  The  Shih 
was  all  recovered  after  the  fires  of  Khm.  Three  different 
texts  : — of  Lu  ;   of  KM ;   of  Han  Ying.     The  text  of  Mao. 


285 


IV.  The  Formation  of  the  Collection  of  the  Shih; 
how  it  came  to  be  so  Small  and  Incomplete;  the 
Interpretation  and  Authors  of  the  Pieces  ;  one 
Point  of  Time  certainly  indicated  in  it  ;  and 
the  Confucian  Preface 290 

The  theory  of  the  Chinese  scholars  about  a  collection  of 
poems  for  governmental  purposes.  The  music-master  of  the 
king  got  the  odes  of  each  state  from  its  music-master ;  and 
the  collected  poems  were  disseminated  throughout  the  states. 
How  the  Shih  is  so  small  and  incomplete.  The  authors  of  the 
pieces.  The  year  B.  c.  776  clearly  indicated.  The  Preface 
to  the  Shih. 


Odes  of  the  Temple  and  the  Altar. 

1.  The  Sacrificial  Odes  of  Shang 

2.  The  Sacrificial  Odes  of  ATau.     Decade  i 

j>  j)  »  »       n 

»  »  »  »      ni 

3.  The  Praise  Odes  of  Lu  ... 


303 
313 
320 
328 
336 


The  Minor  Odes  of  the  Kingdom. 

Decade  i.  Odes  5,  6,  9 347 

iv.  Odes  5,  6,  7,  8,  9,  10   .        .        .        .        .        .        .  349 

v.  Odes  1,  2,  3,  4,  6,  9 358 

vi.  Odes  3,  5, 6,  7,  8         .        .        .        .        .        .        .  364 

vii.  Odes  1,6 .  373 

viii.  Ode  5 376 


The  Major  Odes  of  the  Kingdom. 

Decade  i.    Odes  1,  2,  3,  4,  5,  6,  7,  9,  10        .        .        .         .        .  377 

„      ii.     Odes  1,  2,  3,  4,  5,  8,  9,  10 396 

„     iii.     Odes  1,  2,  3,  4,  5,  6,  7,  8,  10,  11 410 


Lessons  from  the  States. 

Book  2.     Odes  2",  4 430 

„     3.     Odes  4,  15 433 

„     4.     Odes  1,  3,  6 434 


CONTENTS.  XI 


PAGE 

Book  5.  Ode  4 437 

„     6.  Odes  1,  9 438 

„    10.  Odes  8,  11 440 

„    11.  Ode  6 442 

„   15.  Ode  1 444 


THE     HSIAO. 

Introduction. 

CHAP. 

I.  The  Name  of  the  Classic  ;  its  Existence  before  the 

Han  Dynasty  ;  its  Contents,  and  by  whom  it  was 
written 449 

Meaning  of  the  character  Hsi&o.  Was  the  treatise  called 
the  Hsi&o  King  by  Confucius?  It  existed  before  the  Han 
dynasty  during  the  time  of  the  A"au.  It  came,  probably,  from 
the  school  of  Sang-gze. 

II.  The   Recovery    of    the    Hsiao    under    the    Han 

Dynasty,  and  its  Preservation  down  to  the 
Publication  of  the  Commentary  of  the  Thang 
Emperor  Hsuan  Sung 452 

Recovery  of  the  Hsiao.  The  shorter  or  modern  text.  The 
old  or  longer  text.  Was  another  copy  in  the  old  text  dis- 
covered ?  Can  we  fully  rely  on  the  copies  catalogued  by  Liu 
Hin?  From  Khung  An-kwo  to  the  emperor  Hsiian  Sung. 
The  emperor's  work.     Hsing  Ping's  work. 

III.  Criticism  of  the  Hsiao  since  the  Thang  Dynasty     458 

Works  on  the  old  text  by  Sze-mi  Kwang  and  Fan  Su-yii. 
Sceptical  criticism  ; — views  of  Kvl  Hsi  and  Wu  Khaxig.  Con- 
clusion regarding  the  genuineness  and  integrity  of  the  Hsiao. 
Note  on  the  translation. 

1.  The  Scope  and  Meaning  of  the  Treatise    ....  465 

2.  Filial  Piety  in  the  Son  of  Heaven 467 

3.  Filial  Piety  in  the  Princes  of  States 468 

4.  Filial  Piety  in  High  Ministers  and  Great  Officers     .        .  469 

5.  Filial  Piety  in  Inferior  Officers 470 

6.  Filial  Piety  in  the  Common  People 471 

7.  Filial  Piety  in  Relation  to  the  Three  Powers    .        .        .  472 


Xll  CONTENTS. 


CHAP.  PAGE 

8.  Filial  Piety  in  Government 474 

9.  The  Government  of  the  Sages 476 

10.  An  Orderly  Description  of  the  Acts  of  Filial  Piety  .         .  480 

11.  Filial  Piety  in  Relation  to  the  Five  Punishments      ♦        .481 

12.  Amplification  of  'the  All-embracing  Rule  of  Conduct'  in 

Chapter  I 481 

13.  Amplification  of  l the  Perfect  Virtue'  in  Chapter  I     .        .  482 

14.  Amplification  of '  Making  our  Name  Famous'  in  Chapter  I  483 

15.  Filial  Piety  in  Relation  to  Reproof  and  Remonstrance     .  483 

16.  The  Influence  of  Filial  Piety  and  the  Response  to  it       .  484 

17.  The  Service  of  the  Ruler 486 

18.  Filial  Piety  in  Mourning  for  Parents 487 


Transliteration  of  Oriental  Alphabets   adopted  for  the  Trans- 
lations of  the  Sacred  Books  of  the  East      ....     489 


PREFACE. 


WHILE  submitting  here  some  prefatory  observations  on 
the  version  of  the  Shu  King  presented  in  this  volume, 
I  think  it  well  to  prefix  also  a  brief  account  of  what  are 
regarded  as  the  Sacred  Books  of  the  Religions  of  China. 
Those  religions  are  three: — Confucianism,  Taoism,  and 
Buddhism. 

I.  I  begin  with  a  few  words  about  the  last.  To  translate 
any  of  its  books  does  not  belong  to  my  province,  and  more 
than  a  few  words  from  me  are  unnecessary.  It  has  been 
said  that  Buddhism  was  introduced  into  China  in  the  third 
century  B.  C. ;  but  it  certainly  did  not  obtain  an  authorita- 
tive recognition  in  the  empire  till  the  third  quarter  of  our 
first  century  \  Its  Texts  were  translated  into  Chinese,  one 
portion  after  another,  as  they  were  gradually  obtained  from 
India;  but  it  was  not  till  very  long  afterwards  that  the 
Chinese  possessed,  in  their  own  language,  a  complete  copy 
of  the  Buddhist  canon2.  Translations  from  the  Sanskrit 
constitute  the  principal  part  of  the  Buddhistic  literature 
of  China,  though  there  are  also  many  original  works  in 
Chinese  belonging  to  it. 

x  I  put  the  introduction  of  Buddhism  into  China  before  our  Christian  era  thus 
uncertainly,  because  of  what  is  said  in  the  article  on  the  history  of  Buddhism  in 
China,  in  the  Records  of  the  Sui  Dynasty  (a.d.  589-618),  the  compilers  of  which 
say  that  before  the  Han  dynasty  (began  b.  c.  202)  Buddhism  was  not  heard  of 
in  China.  They  refer  to  contrary  statements  as  what  'some  say/  and  proceed 
to  relate  circumstances  inconsistent  with  them.  It  is  acknowledged  on  all  sides 
that  Buddhist  books  were  first  brought  to  China  between  a.  d.  60  and  70. 

2  Mr.  Beal  (Catena  of  Buddhist  Scriptures  from  the  Chinese,  pp.  1,  2)  says 
that  '  the  first  complete  edition  of  the  Buddhist  Canon  in  China  dates  from  the 
seventh  century ;  that  a  second  and  much  enlarged  edition  of  it,  called  the 
Southern  Collection,  was  prepared  in  a.  d.  1410 ;  that  a  third  edition,  called  the 
Northern  Collection,  appeared  about  a.d.  1590;  which  again  was  renewed  and 
enlarged  in  the  year  1723/ 


XIV  PREFACE. 


II.  Confucianism  is  the  religion  of  China  par  excel- 
lence, and  is  named  from  the  great  sage  who  lived  in  the 
fifth  and  sixth  centuries  B.  C.  Confucius  indeed  did  not 
originate  the  system,  nor  was  he  the  first  to  inculcate  its 
principles  or  enjoin  its  forms  of  worship.  He  said  of  him- 
self (Analects,  VII,  i)  that  he  was  a  transmitter  and  not 
a  maker,  one  who  believed  in  and  loved  the  ancients ;  and 
hence  it  is  said  in  the  thirtieth  chapter  of  the  Doctrine  of 
the  Mean,  ascribed  to  his  grandson,  that  '  he  handed  down 
the  doctrines  of  Yao  and  Shun,  as  if  they  had  been. his 
ancestors,  and  elegantly  displayed  the  regulations  of  Wan 
and  Wu,  taking  them  as  his  models.' 

In  fulfilling  what  he  considered  to  be  his  mission,  Con- 
fucius did  little  towards  committing  to  writing  the  views  of 
antiquity  according  to  his  own  conception  of  them.  He 
discoursed  about  them  freely  with  the  disciples  of  his 
school,  from  whom  we  have  received  a  good  deal  of  what 
he  said ;  and  it  is  possible  that  his  accounts  of  the  ancient 
views  and  practices  took,  unconsciously  to  himself,  some 
colour  from  the  peculiar  character  of  his  mind.  But  his 
favourite  method  was  to  direct  the  attention  of  his  disciples 
to  the  ancient  literature  of  the  nation.  He  would  neither 
affirm  nor  relate  anything  for  which  he  could  not  adduce 
some  document  of  acknowledged  authority.  He  said  on 
one  occasion  (Analects,  III,  ix)  that  he  could  describe  the 
ceremonies  of  the  dynasties  of  Hsia  (B.C.  2205-1767)  and 
Yin  (B.C.  1766-1123),  but  did  not  do  so,  because  the 
records  and  scholars  in  the  two  states  of  iTau,  that  had 
been  assigned  to  the  descendants  of  their  sovereigns,  could 
not  sufficiently  attest  his  words.  It  is  an  error  even  to 
suppose  that  he  compiled  the  historical  documents,  poems, 
and  other  ancient  books  from  various  works  existing  in  his 
time.  Portions  of  the  oldest  works  had  already  perished. 
His  study  of  those  that  remained,  and  his  exhortations  to 
his  disciples  also  to  study  them,  contributed  to  their  preser- 
vation. What  he  wrote  or  said  about  their  meaning  should 
be  received  by  us  with  reverence ;  but  if  all  the  works 
which  he  handled  had  come  down  to  us  entire,  we  should 
have  been,  so  far  as  it  is  possible  for  foreigners  to  be,  in 


PREFACE.  XV 

the  same  position  as  he  was  for  learning  the  ancient  reli- 
gion of  his  country.  Our  text-books  would  be  the  same 
as  his.  Unfortunately  most  of  the  ancient  books  suffered 
loss  and  injury  after  Confucius  had  passed  from  the  stage 
of  life.  We  have  reason,  however,  to  be  thankful  that  we 
possess  so  many  and  so  much  of  them.  No  other  litera- 
ture, comparable  to  them  for  antiquity,  has  come  down  to 
us  in  such  a  state  of  preservation. 

But  the  reader  must  bear  in  mind  that  the  ancient  books 
of  China  do  not  profess  to  have  been  inspired,  or  to  con- 
tain what  we  should  call  a  Revelation.  Historians,  poets, 
and  others  wrote  them  as  they  were  moved  in  their  own 
minds.  An  old  poem  may  occasionally  contain  what  it 
says  was  spoken  by  God,  but  we  can  only  understand  that 
language  as  calling  attention  emphatically  to  the  state- 
ments to  which  it  is  prefixed.  We  also  read  of  Heaven's 
raising  up  the  great  ancient  sovereigns  and  teachers,  and 
variously  assisting  them  to  accomplish  their  undertakings ; 
but  all  this  need  not  be  more  than  what  a  religious  man  of 
any  country  might  affirm  at  the  present  day  of  direction, 
help,  and  guidance  given  to  himself  and  others  from  above. 
But  while  the  old  Chinese  books  do  not  profess  to  contain 
any  divine  revelation,  the  references  in  them  to  religious 
views  and  practices  are  numerous ;  and  it  is  from  these 
that  the  student  has  to  fashion  for  himself  an  outline  of 
the  early  religion  of  the  people.  I  will  now  state  what  the 
books  are. 

First,  and  of  greatest  importance,  there  is  the  Book  of 
Historical  Documents,  called  the  Shu  and,  since  the 
period  of  the  Han  dynasty  (began  B.C.  202),  the  Shu 
King.  Its  documents  commence  with  the  reign  of  Yao  in 
the  twenty-fourth  century  B.C.,  and  come  down  to  that  of 
king  Hsiang  of  the  Afau  dynasty,  B.C.  651-619.  The  earliest 
chapters  were  not  contemporaneous  with  the  events  which 
they  describe,  but  the  others  begin  to  be  so  in  the  twenty- 
second  century  B.  C.  The  reader  will  find  a  translation  of 
the  whole  of  this  work  without  abridgment. 

Second,  and  nearly  as  important  as  the  Shu,  there  is 
the  Shih,  or  the  Book  of  Poetry.     It  contains  in  all  305 


XVI  PREFACE. 


pieces,  five  of  which  are  of  the  time  of  the  Shang  dynasty 
(called  also  the  Yin),  B.C.  1 766-1 123.  The  others  belong 
to  the  dynasty  of  iTau,  from  the  time  of  its  founder,  king 
Wan,  born  B.C.  1231,  to  the  reign  of  king  Ting,  B.C.  606- 
586.  The  whole  is  divided  into  four  Parts,  the  last  of 
which  is  occupied  with  'Odes  of  the  Temple  and  the 
Altar.'  Many  pieces  in  the  other  Parts  also  partake  of 
a  religious  character,  but  the  greater  number  are  simply 
descriptive  of  the  manners,  customs,  and  events  of  the 
times  to  which  they  belong,  and  have  no  claim  to  be  in- 
cluded in  the  roll  of  Sacred  Texts.  In  this  volume  will  be 
found  all  the  pieces  that  illustrate  the  religious  views  of 
their  authors,  and  the  religious  practices  of  their  times. 

The  third  work  is  the  Yi,  commonly  called  the  Book  of 
Changes.  Confucius  himself  set  a  high  value  on  it,  as 
being  fitted  to  correct  and  perfect  the  character  of  the 
learner  (Analects,  VII,  xvi) ;  *  and  it  is  often  spoken  of  by 
foreigners  as  the  most  ancient  of  all  the  Chinese  classics. 
But  it  is  not  so.  As  it  existed  in  the  time  of  the  sage,  and 
as  it  exists  now,  no  portion  of  the  text  is  older  than  the 
time  of  king  Wan,  mentioned  above.  There  were  and  are, 
indeed,  in  it  eight  trigrams  ascribed  to  Fu-hsi,  who  is  gene- 
rally considered  as  the  founder  of  the  Chinese  nation,  and 
whose  place  in  chronology  should,  probably,  be  assigned  in 
the  thirty-fourth  century  B.C.  The  eight  trigrams  are  again 
increased  to  sixty-four  hexagrams.     To  form  these  figures, 

two  lines,  one  of  them  whole  ( )  and  the  other  divided 

( ),  are  assumed  as  bases.   Those  lines  are  then  placed, 

each  over  itself,  and  each  over  the  ther ;  and  four  bino- 
grams  are  formed.  From  these,  by  the  same  process  with 
the  base  lines,  are  obtained  eight  figures, — the  famous  tri- 
grams. Three  other  repetitions  of  the  same  process  give 
us  successively  sixteen,  thirty-two,  and  sixty-four  figures. 
The  lines  in  the  figures  thus  increase  in  an  arithmetical 
progression,  whose  common  difference  is  one,  and  the  num- 
ber of  the  figures  increases  in  a  geometrical  progression, 
whose  common  ratio  is  twro.  But  what  ideas  Fu-hsi  at- 
tached to  his  primary  lines, — the  whole  and  the  divided ; 
what  significance  he  gave  to  his  trigrams  5   what  to  the 


PREFACE.  XVU 

sixty-four  hexagrams, — if  indeed  he  himself  formed  so 
many  figures ;  and  why  the  multiplication  of  the  figures 
was  stayed  at  sixty-four : — of  none  of  these  points  have  we 
any  knowledge  from  him.  There  is  some  reason  to  believe 
that  there  were  texts  to  the  hexagrams  under  the  dynasties 
of  Hsia  and  Shang,  but  none  of  them  have  been  preserved. 
It  may  be  that  king  Wan  and  his  equally  famous  son,  the 
duke  of  ATaUj  adopted  much  of  what  they  found  already 
existing,  and  incorporated  it  with  their  own  interpretations 
of  the  figures ;  but  they,  and  they  alone,  are  accepted  as 
the  authors  of  the  text  of  the  Yt.  King  Wan,  we  are  told, 
at  a  time  when  he  was  imprisoned  by  the  tyrannical  sove- 
reign with  whom  the  dynasty  of  Shang  or  Yin  ended,  took 
in  hand  the  ever-changing  hexagrams,  and  appended  to 
each  a  brief  explanation  of  the  meaning  which  the  trigrams 
composing  it  suggested  by  their  union  to  his  mind  ;  and  in 
some  cases  the  practical  course  in  affairs  to  which  that 
meaning  should  direct.  His  son  did  for  the  separate  lines 
of  each  hexagram  what  Wan  had  done  for  the  whole  figure. 
Confucius  is  said  to  have  entered  into  their  labours  about 
600  years  afterwards.  Several  appendixes  are  ascribed  to 
him,  in  which  there  is  an  attempt  to  explain  the  origin 
of  the  Fu-hsi  figures,  and  many  of  the  interpretations  of 
Wan  and  his  son.  The  early  linear  figures;  the  notes 
of  Wan  and  the  duke  of  Kku ;  and  the  Confucian  appen- 
dixes : — these  constitute  the  Yi. 

The  work  was  from  the  first  intimately  connected  with 
the  practice  of  divination,  which,  we  know  from  the  Shu, 
entered  largely  into  the  religion  of  the  ancient  Chinese. 
This  goes  far  to  account  for  its  obscure  and  enigmatical 
character ;  but  at  the  same  time  there  occur  in  it,  though 
in  a  fragmentary  manner,  so  many  metaphysical,  physical, 
moral,  and  religious  utterances,  that  the  student  of  it  is 
gradually  brought  under  a  powerful  fascination.  In  conse- 
quence, moreover,  of  its  use  in  divination,  it  was  exempted 
by  the  superstitious  tyrant  of  KMn  from  the  flames  to 
which  he  condemned  all  the  other  Confucian  literature  in 
B.C.  213.  It  has  thus  come  down  to  us  entire,  and  a  trans- 
lation of  the  whole  of  it  will  be  given, 
[1]  b 


XV111  PREFACE. 


An  additional  interest  belongs  to  the  Yi  as  the  fountain- 
head  from  which  the  comparatively  modern  philosophers 
of  the  Sung  dynasty  (began  A.  D.  960)  professed  to  draw 
what  has  been  called  their  '  atheo-political '  system.  As 
an  appendix  to  the  translation  of  the  Yt,  there  will  be  given 
an  outline  of  that  system,  and  an  attempt  will  be  made  to 
test  the  correctness  of  the  interpretation  of  this  classic  by 
its  authors. 

The  fourth  of  the  great  classics  is  the  Li  Ki,  or  the 
Record  of  Rites  ;  but  it  is  only  one  of  a  class  that  we  may 
denominate  the  Constitutional  and  Ritual  Books  of  ancient 
China,  especially  under  the  iTau  dynasty.  They  are  often 
mentioned  together  as  'the  Three  Rituals.'  The  first  of 
them  is  called  ATau  Li,  the  Rites  of  iTau,  and  also  jfiTau 
Kwan,  the  Officers  of  ATau,  which  latter  is  the  better  name 
for  it.  It  is  the  official  book  of  the  iTau  dynasty.  The 
prevailing  opinion  is  that  it  was  the  production  of  the  duke 
of  K&u;  and  if  it  were  not  composed  in  its  present  form  by 
him,  it  contains,  no  doubt,  the  substance  of  the  regulations 
which  he  made  for  the  administration  of  the  government, 
after  the  dynasty  of  Shang  had  passed,  through  the  achieve- 
ments of  his  father  and  brother,  into  that  of  Kau.  Under 
the  various  departments  in  which  that  administration  was 
arranged,  it  enumerates  the  principal  and  subordinate 
officers  belonging  to  each,  and  describes  their  duties.  After 
the  fires  of  .Oin,  the  work  was  recovered  nearly  complete 
in  the  first  century  B.  C.  A  good  translation  of  the  whole 
work  was  published  in  1851,  at  Paris,  by  M.  Edouard  Biot. 

The  second  Ritual  Collection  bears  the  name  of  1  Li, 
which  has  been  translated  '  the  Decorum  Ritual,'  and  '  the 
Rules  of  Demeanour.'  It  was  recovered  earlier  than  the 
former,  and  is  as  voluminous.  It  consists  of  the  rules  by 
which  a  scholar  or  officer  should  regulate  his  behaviour  on 
social  and  state  occasions.  It  has  not  yet,  so  far  as  I 
know,  been  translated  into  any  European  language. 

The  third  Collection,  more  voluminous  than  either  of 
the  others,  was  made  also  under  the  Han  dynasty.  In  the 
first  century  B.  C,  it  was  an  immense  compilation  of  314 
books  arranged  in  five  divisions.     The  214  were  reduced 


PREFACE.  XIX 

to  eighty-five  by  T&i  Teh,  a  scholar  of  the  time,  and  his 
eighty-five  again  to  forty-six  by  a  cousin,  called  Tai  .Oang. 
Three  other  books  were  added  to  these  towards  the  end  of 
the  Han  period,  forming  forty-nine  in  all,  which  have  come 
down  to  us  under  the  title  of  Li  K%  or  'the  Record  of 
Rites,5  and  have  long  constituted  by  imperial  authority  one 
of  the  five  King.  An  abridgment  of  this  work  was  trans- 
lated by  M.  J.  M.  Callery,  at  Turin,  in  1853,  with  the 
title, — {Li  K%  ou  Memorial  des  Rites,  traduit  pour  la 
premiere  fois  du  Chinois,  et  accompagnd  de  notes,  de 
commentaires,  et  du  texte  original.5  Callery5s  work,  how- 
ever, contains  only  thirty-six  of  the  forty-nine  books  of 
the  Li  K%  and  most  of  those  thirty-six  in  a  condensed 
form.  Whether  it  will  be  possible  to  give  in  these  Sacred 
Books  of  the  East  translations  of  the  whole  of  these  Rituals  ; 
and  if  that  be  not  possible,  by  what  principles  to  be  guided 
in  the  selection  of  portions  of  them : — these  are  questions 
to  be  determined  after  further  deliberation.  Many  passages 
contain  more  of  the  mind  of  Confucius  himself  on  the 
sacrificial  worship  of  his  country,  and  the  ideas  underlying 
it,  than  we  find  elsewhere. 

But  it  must  not  be  forgotten  that  these  ritual  books  do 
not  throw  so  valuable  a  light  on  the  ancient  religion  of 
China  as  the  older  Shu  and  Shih.  They  belong  to  the 
period  of  the  iTau  dynasty,  and  do  not  go  back  as  contem- 
poraneous records  to  the  dynasties  beyond  it  and  the  still 
remoter  age  of  Yao  and  Shun.  The  views  of  Confucius, 
moreover,  as  given  in  them,  do  not  come  to  us  at  first  hand. 
They  were  gathered  up  by  the  Han  scholars  five  and  six 
centuries  after  his  death,  nor  can  we  be  sure  that  these 
did  not  sometimes  put  ideas  of  their  own  into  the  mouth  of 
the  sage,  and  make  additions  to  the  writings  which  were 
supposed,  correctly  or  incorrectly,  to  have  come  from  his 
immediate  disciples. 

We  owe  the  fifth  and  last  of  the  Kings  of  China  to 
Confucius  himself.  It  is  what  he  called  Khun  Kh\^  or 
'  the  Spring  and  Autumn,"  a  very  brief  chronicle  compiled 
by  him  of  the  annals  of  his  native  state  of  Lu  for  243 
years,  from  B.  c.  733  to  481.     But  there  is  not  much  to  be 

b  2 


XX  PREFACE. 


gleaned  from  it  for  the  Sacred  Texts ;  and  if  we  were  to 
launch  out  into  the  three  supplements  to  it  of  3o  A"^iu- 
ming,  Kung-yang,  and  Ku-liang,  the  result  would  not  repay 
the  labour.  A  translation  of  the  whole  of  3°'s  supplement, 
much  the  most  important,  is  given  in  my  work  on  the 
Khun  Kk\\xy  published  at  Hong  Kong  in  1872. 

There  is  another  short  treatise  attributed  to  Confucius, — 
the  Hsiao  King,  or  'Classic  of  Filial  Piety.'  Though  not 
like  one  of  the  five  great  works  that  have  been  described, 
it  was  the  first  to  receive  the  denomination  of  a  King, — 
and  that  from  the  lips  of  the  sage  himself, — if  the  account 
which  we  have  received  of  the  matter  is  to  be  relied  on. 
This  little  work  does  not  come  to  us,  like  the  Kkun  KMu, 
as  directly  from  the  pencil  of  Confucius,  but  in  the  shape  of 
conversations  between  him  and  his  disciple  3ang-jze,  put 
on  record  in  the  first  place,  probably,  by  some  members  of 
3ang's  school.  No  portion  of  the  ancient  literature  has 
more  exercised  the  minds  and  engaged  the  attention  of 
many  of  the  emperors  of  successive  dynasties.  The  Hsiao 
seems  to  me  an  attempt  to  construct  a  religion  on  the 
basis  of  the  cardinal  virtue  of  Filial  Piety,  and  is  open 
to  criticism  in  many  respects.  A  translation  of  it  is  given 
in  the  present  volume. 

The  classical  books  are  often  spoken  of  as  being  'the 
five  King'  and  'the  four  Shu.'  The  King  have  all  been 
separately  referred  to  above;  the  four  Shu  is  an  abbrevia- 
tion for  the  Shu  or  Books  of  the  four  Philosophers.  The 
first  is  the  Lun  Yu,  or  'Discourses  and  Conversations/ 
occupied  chiefly  with  sayings  of  Confucius  and  conversations 
between  him  and  many  of  his  disciples.  The  second  is  the 
Works  of  Mencius,  perhaps  the  greatest  thinker  and  writer 
of  the  Confucian  school  after  the  Master.  I  hope  to  be 
able  to  give  both  these  works.  The  third  of  the  Shu  is 
the  Ta  Hsio,  or 'Great  Learning,'  ascribed,  like  the  Hsiao, 
to  3ang-§ze.  The  fourth  is  the  Kung  Yung,  or  '  Doctrine 
of  the  Mean,''  the  production  of  3ze-sze,  the  sage's  grandson. 
Both  of  these  treatises,  however,  are  taken  from  the  Li  ATI. 
The  whole  of  the  Four  Books  were  translated  and  published 
by  me  in  1861. 


PREFACE.  XXI 


III.  The  third  Religion  in  China  is  what  is  called  Taoism. 
It  was,  like  Confucianism,  of  native  origin,  and  its  acknow- 
ledged founder  was  Lt  i?,  called  also  Li  Po-yang,  and,  after 
his  death,  Li  Tan.  More  commonly  he  is  designated  L&o- 
$ze,  translated  by  some  'the  Old  Philosopher,'  and  by 
others  '  the  Old  Boy'  from  a  fabulous  story  that  his  mother 
carried  him  in  her  womb  for  seventy-two  years,  so  that 
when  he  was  at  length  cut  out  of  it,  his  hair  was  already 
white.  His  birth  is  referred  to  the  year  604  B.  C,  so  that 
he  was  between  fifty  and  sixty  years  older  than  Confu- 
cius. There  are  accounts,  hardly  reliable,  of  interviews  and 
discussions  between  the  two  men. 

Lao-jze's  system  often  goes  with  English  writers  by  the 
name  of  Rationalism;  but  if  that  name  be  retained,  the 
term  must  be  taken  in  quite  a  peculiar  sense.  His  doc- 
trine was  that  of  the  Tio,  but  it  is  not  easy  to  determine 
what  English  term  will  best  express  the  meaning  of  the 
Chinese  character.  The  only  record  which  we  have  of 
Lao-jze's  views  is  the  Tao-teh  King,  or  '  Classic  of  Tao 
and  Virtue,'  a  treatise  of  no  great  length.  It  was  published 
at  Paris  in  184a,  with  a  translation  in  French,  by  the  late 
Stanislas  Julien,  under  the  title  of  '  Le  Livre  de  la  Voie 
et  de  la  Vertu.'  Appealing  to  the  views  of  ^Twang-jze  and 
other  writers  of  the  Taoist  school,  M.  Julien  says  that  '  Le 
Tao  est  depourvu  d'action,  de  pensee,  de  jugement,  d'intel- 
ligence/  and  adds  that  '  it  appears  impossible  therefore  to 
take  it  for  the  primordial  reason,  the  Sublime  Intel- 
ligence, which  created  and  rules  the  world.' 

A  translation  in  English  was  published,  in  1868,  by 
the  Rev.  Dr.  Chalmers  of  Canton,  under  the  title  of '  the 
Speculations  in  Metaphysics,  Polity,  and  Morality,  of  "  the 
Old  Philosopher." '  Dr.  Chalmers  retains  the  term  Tao 
in  his  English  Text,  and  says,  '  I  have  thought  it  better 
to  leave  the  word  Tao  untranslated,  both  because  it  has 
given  the  name  to  the  sect, — the  Taoists, — and  because  no 
English  word  is  its  exact  equivalent.  Three  terms  suggest 
themselves, — the  Way,  Reason,  and  the  Word  ;  but  they 
are  all  liable  to  objection.  Were  we  guided  by  etymology, 
"  the  Way"  would  come  nearest  to  the  original,  and  in  one 


xxu  Preface. 


or  two  passages  the  idea  of  a  Way  seems  to  be  in  the 
term  ;  but  this  is  too  materialistic  to  serve  the  purpose  of 
a  translation.  Reason  again  seems  to  be  more  like  a 
quality  or  attribute  of  some  conscious  Being  than  Tao  is. 
I  would  translate  it  by  the  Word  in  the  sense  of  the 
Logos,  but  this  would  be  like  settling  the  question  which 
I  wish  to  leave  open,  viz.  what  amount  of  resemblance  there 
is  between  the  Logos  of  the  New  Testament  and  this  Tao, 
which  is  its  nearest  representative  in  Chinese.5 

Two  other  translations  of  the  Tao-teh  King  have  ap- 
peared, both  in  German: — 'Lao-tsze's  TaoTe  King,  aus 
dem  Chinesischen  ins  Deutsche  ubersetzt,  eingeleitet,  und 
commentirt,  von  Victor  von  Strauss  (Leipzig,  iSjo),' 
and  'Lao-tse,  Tao-te-king,  "Der  Weg  zur  Tugend," 
aus  dem  Chinesischen  ubersetzt  und  erklart  von  Reinhold 
von  Planckner,'  also  published  at  Leipzig.  Strauss  closely 
follows  Julien,  while  Planckner  allows  himself  great  free- 
dom in  dealing  with  his  original.  Notwithstanding  these 
four  attempts  to  give  the  meaning  of  '  the  Old  Philosopher ' 
in  three  European  languages,  there  is  room  for  a  new  ver- 
sion, which  will  be  submitted  to  the  reader  in  due  course. 
It  is  only  by  an  intense  and  long-continued  study  of  the 
original  that  we  can  come  to  an  agreement  as  to  the  mean- 
ing of  the  Tao.  I  propose  not  only  to  give  a  translation  of 
the  Tao-teh  King,  but  also  of  the  works  of  A"wang-jze,  the 
most  remarkable  of  the  early  writers  of  the  Taoist  school. 

Whatever  Lao-jze  intended  by  the  Tao,  Taoism  has,  in 
the  course  of  time,  borrowed  largely,  both  from  Confu- 
cianism and  Buddhism.  It  inculcates  a  morality  of  a  high 
order  in  some  respects,  and  has  developed  a  system  of 
grotesque  beliefs  and  practices,  ministering  to  superstition, 
and  intended  to  refine  and  preserve  the  breath  of  life.  Its 
practical  teachings  will  be  exhibited  in  the  most  popular  of 
all  the  Taoist  writings, — the  treatise  on  '  Actions  and  their 
Recompenses,5  and  perhaps  in  one  or  more,  besides,  of  the 
characteristic  productions  of  the  system. 


The  version  of  the  Shu  that  appears  in  this  volume  is 
substantially  the  same  as  that  in  the  third  volume  of  my 


PREFACE.  XX111 


large  edition  of  the  Chinese  Classics,  and  which  was  pub- 
lished in  1865.  I  wrote  out  the  whole  afresh,  however, 
having  before  me  not  only  my  own  version,  but  the  earlier 
translations  of  P.  Gaubil  in  French  and  Dr.  Medhurst  in 
English.  Frequent  reference  was  made  likewise  to  a  larger 
apparatus  of  native  commentaries  than  I  had  formerly  used. 
Going  to  the  text  anew,  after  more  than  twelve  years 
devoted  mainly  to  the  continuous  study  of  the  Chinese 
classics,  I  yet  hardly  discovered  any  errors  which  it  was 
necessary  to  correct.  A  few  verbal  alterations  were  made 
to  make  the  meaning  clearer.  Only  in  one  case  will  a 
reader,  familiar  with  the  former  version,  be  struck  with  any 
alteration  in  this.  The  Chinese  character  fjqf  (Ti),  applied 
repeatedly  to  the  ancient  Yao  and  Shun  in  the  commencing 
books  of  the  classic,  and  once  in  the  27th  Book  of  the  fifth 
Part,  was  there  translated  by  '  emperor,'  while  it  is  left 
untranslated  in  the  present  volume,  and  its  name  trans- 
ferred to  the  English  text. 

Before  adopting  this  change,  I  had  considered  whether 
I  ought  to  translate  Ti  in  all  other  instances  of  its  occur- 
rence in  the  Shu  (and  invariably  in  the  Shih),  and  its  in- 
tensified form  Shang  Ti  (  j^  fj7),  by  our  term  *  God.' 
Gaubil  rendered  Ti  for  the  most  part  by  cle  Seigneur,5  and 
Shang  Ti  by  'le  Souverain  Maitre,5  adding  sometimes  to 
these  names  Ti  and  Shang  Ti  in  brackets.  Medhurst  trans- 
lated Ti  by  c  the  Supreme,5  and  '  the  Supreme  Ruler/  and 
Shang  Ti  by  'the  Supreme  Ruler.5  More  than  twenty- 
five  years  ago  I  came  to  the  conclusion  that  Ti  was  the 
term  corresponding  in  Chinese  to  our  '  God,5  and  that 
Shang  Ti  was  the  same,  with  the  addition  of  Shang,  equal 
to  '  Supreme.5  In  this  view  I  have  never  wavered,  and  I 
have  rendered  both  the  names  by  i  God5  in  all  the  volumes 
of  the  Chinese  Classics  thus  far  translated  and  published. 

What  made  me  pause  before  doing  so  in  the  present 
volume,  was  the  consideration  that  the  object  of  'the 
Sacred  Texts  of  the  Religions  of  the  East,5  as  I  under- 
stand it,  is  to  give  translations  of  those  texts  without  any 
colouring  in  the  first  place  from  the  views  of  the  trans- 


XXIV  PREFACE. 


lators.  Could  it  be  that  my  own  view  of  Ti,  as  meaning 
God,  had  grown  up  in  the  heat  of  our  controversies  in 
China  as  to  the  proper  characters  to  be  used  for  the  words 
God  and  Spirit,  in  translating  the  Sacred  Scriptures? 
A  reader,  confronted  everywhere  by  the  word  God,  might 
be  led  to  think  more  highly  of  the  primitive  religion  of 
China  than  he  ought  to  think.  Should  I  leave  the  names 
Ti  and  Shang  Ti  untranslated  ?  Or  should  I  give  for 
them,  instead  of  God,  the  terms  Ruler  and  Supreme 
Ruler?  I  could  not  see  my  way  to  adopt  either  of  these 
courses. 

The  term  Heaven  (/^,  pronounced  Thien)  is  used 
everywhere  in  the  Chinese  Classics  for  the  Supreme  Power, 
ruling  and  governing  all  the  affairs  of  men  with  an  omni- 
potent and  omniscient  righteousness  and  goodness ;  and 
this  vague  term  is  constantly  interchanged  in  the  same 
paragraph,  not  to  say  the  same  sentence,  with  the  personal 
names  Ti  and  Shang  Ti.  Thien  and  Ti  in  their  written 
forms  are  perfectly  distinct.  Both  of  them  were  among 
the  earliest  characters,  and  enter,  though  not  largely,  as 
the  phonetical  element  into  other  characters  of  later  for- 
mation. According  to  the  oldest  Chinese  dictionary,  the 
Shwo  Wan  (a.  d.  ioo),  Thien  is  formed,  '  by  association  of 

ideas/  from  yi  ( — •),  'one,5  and  ta  (y^)>  'great,'  meaning — 
what  is  one  and  undivided,  and  great.  Tai  Thung,  of  our 
thirteenth  century,  in  his  remarkable  dictionary,  the  Liu 
Shu  Ku,  explains  the  top  line  of  it  as  indicating  'what 
is  above/  so  that  the  significance  of  the  character  is  '  what 

is  above  and  great.'  In  both  these  dictionaries  Ti  (fpf )  is 
derived  from  J-  or  -^—  (shang),  'above,'  or  'what  is 
above : '  and  they  say  that  -the  whole  character  is  of  pho- 
netical formation,  in  which  I  am  not  able  to  follow  them1; 

1  It  is  said  in  the  Shwo  Wan  that  the  phonetical  element  in  Ti  is  J/jv^ ;  but 
this  is  pronounped  j$hze.  Neither  in  form  nor  sound  is  there  any  similitude 
between  it  and  Ti.  An  error,  probably,  has  crept  into  the  text.  Dr.  Chalmers, 
in  his  treatise  on  '  the  Origin  of  the  Chinese/  attempts  (p.  1 2)  to  analyse  the 
character  into  its  constituent  parts  in  the  following  way : — '  The  peculiar  nature 
of  the  Chinese  written  language  has  done  good  service  in  stereotyping  the  primi- 


PREFACE.  XXV 


but  Tai  Thung  gives  the  following  account  of  its  mean- 
ing : — 'Ti  is  the  honourable  designation  of  lordship  and 
rule,'  adding,  'Therefore  Heaven  is  called  Shang  Ti;  the 
five  Elementary  Powers  are  called  the  five  Ti ;  and  the 
Son  of  Heaven  1 — that  is,  the  Sovereign — is  called  Ti.' 
Here  then  is  the  name  Heaven,  by  which  the  idea  of 
Supreme  Power  in  the  absolute  is  vaguely  expressed ;  and 
when  the  Chinese  would  speak  of  it  by  a  personal  name, 
they  use  the  terms  Ti  and  Shang  Ti; — saying,  I  believe, 
what  our  early  fathers  did,  when  they  began  to  use  the 
word  God.  Ti  is  the  name  which  has  been  employed  in 
China  for  this  concept  for  fully  5000  years.  Our  word 
God  fits  naturally  into  every  passage  where  the  character 
occurs  in  the  old  Chinese  Classics,  save  those  to  which  I 
referred  above  on  p.  xxiii.  It  never  became  with  the  people 
a  proper  name  like  the  Zeus  of  the  Greeks.  I  can  no 
more  translate  Ti  or  Shang  Ti  by  any  other  word  but  God 

than  I  can  translate  ^an  (/^)  by  anything  else  but  man. 

The  preceding  is  a  brief  abstract  of  the  reasoning  by 
which  I  was  determined  to  retain  the  term  God  for  Ti  and 
Shang  Ti  in  this  volume,  excepting  in  the  cases  that  have 
called  for  these  observations.  But  in  the  account  of  Ti 
which  I  have  adduced  from  Tai  Thung,  it  is  said  that '  the 
sovereign  is  also  called  Ti ;'  and  most  of  my  readers  know 
that  Hwang  Ti  (|||  fj^)  is  the  title  of  the  emperor  of 
China.  How  did  this  application  of  the  name  arise  ?  Was 
it  in  the  first  place  a  designation  of  the  ruler  or  emperor ; 
and  was  it  then  given  to  the  Supreme  Power,  when  the 
vague  Heaven  failed  to  satisfy  the  thinker  and  worshipper, 

tive  belief  in  one  Supreme  Ti  (flt),  wno  is  yC  "great,"  over,  and  [  » 
"  ruling,"  heaven  (  -  ^  =  i — »  )  and  earth  ( |~~  {  ). '  This  is  ingenious,  but  not 
entirely  satisfactory.  The  three  last  steps  are  so ;  but  the  finding  y^ 
(great)  in  the  top  part  of  5fr  does  not  in  the  same  way  carry  conviction  to 
the  mind. 

1  Thien  3ze,  '  the  Son  of  Heaven,'  is  a  common  designation  of  the  sovereign 
of  China.  Originally  3  ze  performed  in  the  expression  the  part  of  a  verb,  and 
Thien  $ze  was  equivalent  to  'he  whom  Heaven  sons,'  that  is,  considers  and 
treats  as  its  son.     See  the  second  line  of  the  ode,  p.  318. 


XXVI  PREFACE. 


and  he  wished  to  express  his  recognition  of  a  personal 
Being  who  was  to  himself  his  almighty  ruler?  If  these 
questions  be  answered  in  the  affirmative,  Ti  would  be  a 
name  applied  to  the  Supreme  Being,  just  as  we  rise  from 
the  paternal  relation  among  ourselves  and  call  him  Father. 
Or,  on  the  other  hand,  was  Tt  the  designation  of  the 
Supreme  Lord  and  Ruler,  corresponding  to  our  God,  and 
was  it  subsequently  applied  to  the  earthly  ruler,  thereby 
deifying  him,  just  as  the  title  Divus  was  given  to  a  Roman 
emperor  ?  I  believe  that  it  was  in  this  latter  way  that  Tt 
came  to  be  used  of  the  sovereigns  of  China  ;  and  therefore 
in  again  publishing  a  translation  of  the  Shu,  I  resolved, 
that  where  the  appellation  is  given  in  it  to  Yao  and  Shun, 
and  it  is  only  to  them  that  it  is  given,  I  would  retain 
the  Chinese  term  instead  of  rendering  it,  as  formerly,  by 
*  emperor/ 

The  following  are  the  reasons  which  weighed  with  me  in 
coming  to  this  resolution  : 

First,  the  first  really  historical  sovereign  of  China  who 
used  the  title  of  Hwang  Tt  was  the  founder  of  the  K/i'm 
dynasty;  and  he  assumed  it  in  B.C.  221,  when  he  had  sub- 
jugated all  the  sovereignties  into  which  the  feudal  kingdom 
of  Kau  had  become  divided,  and  was  instituting  the 
despotic  empire  that  has  since  subsisted. 

The  ^au  dynasty  had  continued  for  867  years,  from 
B.C.  1 122  to  256,  and  its  rulers  had  been  styled  Wang  or 
kings. 

Kk\x  superseded  the  dynasty  of  Shang  or  Yin,  that  had 
endured  for  644  years,  from  B.C.  1766  to  n 23;  and  its 
rulers  had  similarly  been  styled  Wang  or  kings. 

Shang  superseded  the  dynasty  of  Hsia,  which  had  lasted 
for  439  years,  from  B.C.  2205  to  1767,  and  its  rulers  had 
been  styled  Wang,  or  kings,  and  Hau,  or  sovereigns. 

Thus,  from  the  great  Yu,  B.C.  2205  to  B.C.  221,  that  is, 
for  nearly  2000  years,  there  was  no  Tt  or  emperor  in 
China.  During  all  that  time  the  people  had  on  the  whole 
been  increasing  in  numbers,  and  the  nation  growing  in 
territory ; — how  did  it  come  to  pass,  that  the  higher  title,  if 
it  had  previously  existed,  gave  place  to  an  inferior  one  ? 


PREFACE.  XXV11 


Prior  to  the  dynasty  of  Hsia,  with  the  exception  of  the 
period  of  Yao  and  Shun,  the  accounts  which  we  have  of  the 
history  of  China  have  been,  and  ought  to  be,  pronounced 
*  fabulous '  and  *  legendary.'  The  oldest  documents  that 
purport  to  be  historical  are  the  books  in  the  Shu  about 
Yao  and  Shun,  and  even  they  do  not  profess  to  be  con- 
temporaneous with  those  personages.  The  earlier  accounts 
open  with  a  Phan-ku,  in  whose  time  'heaven  and  earth 
were  first  separated.'  To  him  succeeded  the  period  of  the 
San  Hwang,  or  Three  August  Lines,  consisting  of  twelve 
Celestial,  eleven  Terrestrial,  and  nine  Human  Sovereigns, 
who  ruled  together  about  50,000  years.  After  them  come  a 
host  of  different  Lines,  till  we  arrive  at  the  Wu  Ti,  or  Five 
Emperors.  The  first  of  these  is  commonly  said  to  be  Fu- 
hsi,  while  he  and  two  others  are  sometimes  put  down  as 
the  San  Hwang,  in  order  to  bring  in  YcLo  and  Shun  as  the 
last  two  of  the  Tis. 

I  have  entered  into  these  details  because  of  the  account 
which  we  have  of  the  king  of  jOin's  assuming  the  title  of 
Hwang  Ti.  We  are  told: — 'As  soon  as  the  king  had 
brought  the  whole  country  into  subjection,  thinking  that  he 
united  in  himself  the  virtues  of  the  three  Hwangs,  and  that 
his  merits  exceeded  those  of  the  five  Tls,  he  changed  his 
title  into  Hwang  Ti'  The  three  Hwangs  are  entirely  fabu- 
lous, and  the  five  Tis  are,  to  say  the  least,  legendary. 
That  there  were  either  Hwangs  or  Tis  ruling  in  China 
before  the  age  of  the  Hsia  dynasty  cannot  be  admitted. 

Second,  it  has  been  stated  above,  and  is  shown  in  the 
Introduction  to  the  Shu,  pp.  13-19,  that  the  books  in  the 
Shu,  previous  to  the  Hsia  dynasty,  are  not  historical  in 
the  sense  of  their  being  contemporaneous  documents  of  the 
times  about  which  they  speak.  They  profess  to  be  compi- 
lations merely  from  older  documents  ;  and  when  they 
speak  of  Yclo  and  Shun  as  Tis,  the  title  Ti  precedes  the 
name  or  designation,  instead  of  following  it,  as  it  ought  to 
do,  according  to  Chinese  usage,  if  Ti  is  to  be  taken  in  the 
sense  of  emperor.  Yao  Ti  would  be  'the  emperor  Yao,' 
but  we  have  Ti  Y&o,  where  Ti  performs  the  part  of  an 
adjective.     King  Wan,  the  founder  of  the  Kau  dynasty,  is 


XXV111  PREFACE. 

invariably  mentioned  as  Wan  Wang,  '  Wan  the  king.'  To 
say  Wang  Wan  would  be  felt  at  once  by  every  Chinese 
scholar  to  be  inadmissible;  and  not  less  so  is  Tt  Yao  for 
'  the  emperor  Yao.'  It  was  the  perception  of  this  violation 
of  usage  in  Chinese  composition,  five  years  ago,  that  first 
showed  me  the  error  of  translating  Ti  Yao  and  Ti  Shun 
by  'the  emperor  Yao'  and  'the  emperor  Shun/  It  is  true 
that  in  the  early  books  of  the  Shu,  we  have  Ti  used  alone, 
without  the  adjunct  of  Yao  or  Shun,  and  referring  to  those 
personages.  In  those  cases  it  does  perform  the  part  of  a 
substantive,  but  its  meaning  depends  on  that  which  be- 
longed to  it  as  an  adjective  in  the  phrases  Ti  Yao  and  Tt 
Shun.  If  it  be  ascertained  that  in  these  it  means  'the 
Deified,'  then  when  used  singly  as  a  noun,  it  will  mean 
Divus,  or  the  Divine  One. 

Third,  the  sovereigns  of  the  Hsia,  the  Shang,  and  the 
Kau  dynasties,  it  has  been  seen,  were  styled  Wang  and 
not  Ti.  Confucius  speaks  repeatedly  in  the  Analects  of 
Yao  and  Shun,  but  he  never  calls  either  of  them  by  the 
title  of  Ti.  Mencius,  however,  uses  it  both  of  the  one  and 
the  other,  when  he  is  quoting  in  substance  from  the 
accounts  of  them  in  the  Shu.  This  confirms  the  view  that 
the  early  books  of  the  Shu  were  current  after  the  middle  of 
the  Kau  dynasty,  very  much  in  the  form  in  which  we  now 
have  them  ;  and  the  question  arises  whether  we  can  show 
how  the  application  of  the  title  T  i  as  given  in  them  to  Yao 
and  Shun  arose.     We  can. 

The  fourth  Book  of  the  Li  K\  is  called  Yueh  Ling, 
'  the  Monthly  Record  of  the  Proceedings  of  Government.' 
In  it  certain  sacrificial  observances  paid  to  the  five  Tis  are 
distributed  through  the  four  seasons.  The  Tis  are  Fu-hsi, 
Shan-nang,  Yu-hsiung  or  Hsien-yiian,  jSTin-thien,  and  Kao- 
yang,  who  are  styled  Thai  Hao  (the  Greatly  Resplendent), 
Yen  Ti  (the  Blazing  Ti),  Hwang  Ti  (the  Yellow  Ti),  Shao 
Hao  (the  Less  Resplendent),  and  Kwan  "Hsu  (the  Solely 
Correct)  ;  with  each  Ti  there  is  associated  in  the  ceremony 

a  personage  of  inferior  rank,  who  is  styled  Shan  (j|jEp=a 
Spirit).  The  language  descriptive  of  the  ceremony  is  the 
same  in  all  the  cases,  with  the  exception  of  the  names  and 


PREFACE.  XXIX 


months.  Thus  the  first  entry  is : — '  In  the  first  month  of 
spring,  on  such  and  such  days,  the  T!  is  Thai  Hao,  and  the 
Shan  is  Kau-mang.5  Now  this  Kau-mang  was  a  son  of 
Shao  Hao,  several  hundreds  of  years  later  than  Thai  Hao, 
so  that  the  associating  them  together  in  this  ceremony 
could  only  have  arisen  in  later  times. 

However  we  explain  the  ceremony  thus  curtly  described ; 
whether  we  see  in  it  the  growing  prevalence  of  nature- 
worship,  or  an  illustration  of  the  practice  of  worshipping 
ancient  heroes  and  worthies : — Ti  appears  in  the  account  of 
it  plainly  used  in  the  sense  of  God.  In  each  of  the  five 
instances,  we  have  a  Ti  and  a  Shan,  not  an  emperor  and  a 
spirit,  but  a  God  and  a  Spirit, — a  Spirit  standing  in  the 

same  relation  to  the  God,  that  .Oan  (j=]5  =a  subject  or 
minister)  stands  in  to  a  ruler.  Thus  it  was  that,  by  a  process 
of  deification,  the  title  of  Ti  came  to  be  given,  in  the  time 
of  the  Kau  dynasty,  to  the  great  names,  fabulous  and 
legendary,  of  antiquity;  and  thus  it  was  that  it  was  applied 
to  the  heroes  Yao  and  Shun.  It  may  well  be  that  the  title 
Hwang  Ti,  used  by  a  Chinese  of  the  present  emperor  or  of 
any  emperor  of  the  past,  does  not  call  up  to  his  mind  any 
other  idea  than  that  of  a  human  sovereign  ;  but  being 
satisfied  as  to  the  proper  signification  of  Ti  as  God,  and  as 
to  the  process  by  which  the  title  came  to  be  applied  to  the 
ancient  Yao  and  Shun,  I  could  no  longer  render  it,  when 
used  of  them  in  the  Shu,  by  emperor,  and  elected  to  leave 
it  untranslated  in  the  present  volume. 


To  any  unimportant  changes  of  translation  it  is  unneces- 
sary to  refer.  The  dates  B.  C.  in  the  introductions  and  notes 
are  all  one  year  more  than  in  the  translations  formerly 
published.  They  are  thus  brought  into  accordance  with 
those  of  P.  Gaubil  and  the  useful  Chinese  Chronological 
Tables  of  the  late  Mr.  Mayers. 


The  changes  in  the  transliteration  of  Chinese  names  are 
very  considerable.  As  foreigners  are  now  resident  in  Pe- 
king, it  seemed  proper  to  adopt  the  pronunciation  of  the 


XXX  PREFACE. 


capital  as  given  by  Sir  T.  F.  Wade  in  his  Hsin  Ching  Lu 
and  Tzu  Erh  Chi  At  the  same  time,  in  order  to  secure 
as  near  an  approach  as  possible  to  uniformity  in  all  the 
volumes  of  the  Sacred  Books  of  the  East,  the  letters  em- 
ployed were  made  to  conform  to  those  in  Professor  Max 
Miiller's  Scheme  for  the  Transliteration  of  Oriental  Alpha- 
bets. It  was  not  easy  at  first  to  do  this,  for  Chinese,  having 
no  alphabet,  reluctated  against  being  made  to  appear  as 
if  it  had;  but  use  has  more  than  reconciled  me  to  the 
method  now  employed.  It  was  not  possible  to  introduce 
into  the  table  all  the  diphthongs  in  which  Chinese  speech  is 
rich.  The  reader  has  to  be  informed  that  i  before  another 
vowel  or  a  diphthong  approximates  to  the  sound  of  y, 
so  that  the  whole  utterance  is  still  monosyllabic.  The 
powers  of  r  and  ze  must  be  heard  before  they  can  be 
appreciated. 

To  call  the  attention  of  the  reader  to  passages  in  the 
Shu,  embodying,  more  or  less  distinctly,  religious  ideas,  an 
asterisk  (*)  will  be  found  appended  to  them. 

J.L. 
Oxford, 
i  8th  April,  1879. 


THE    SHtT    KING 


OR 


BOOK    OF    HISTORICAL    DOCUMENTS. 


THE   SHU   KING 

OR 

BOOK   OF    HISTORICAL  DOCUMENTS. 


INTRODUCTION. 

Chapter  I. 
The  Nature  and  History  of  the  Shi). 

i.  The  Shu  is  the  most  ancient  of  the  Chinese  classical 
books,  and  contains  historical  documents  of  various  kinds, 
relating  to  the  period  from  about  B.C.  2357-627.      The 

.T     .       .     character  Shu  shows  us  by  its   composition 

Meaning  of  J  x 

the  name  that  it  denotes  'the  pencil  speaking,  and 
SM  Kmg.  hence  ft  [s  0ften  used  as  a  designation  of  the 
written  characters  of  the  language.  This,  indeed,  was  the 
earliest  meaning  of  it,  but  from  this  the  transition  was  easy 
to  its  employment  in  the  sense  of  writings  or  books,  applica- 
ble to  any  consecutive  compositions  ;  and  we  find  it  further 
specially  employed  by  Confucius  and  others  to  designate 
the  historical  remains  of  antiquity,  in  distinction  from  the 
poems,  the  accounts  of  rites,  and  other  monuments  of 
former  times.  Not  that  those  other  monuments  might  not 
also  be  called  by  the  general  name  of  Shu.  The  peculiar 
significancy  of  the  term,  however,  was  well  established,  and 
is  retained  to  the  present  day. 

The  book  has  come  down  to  us  in  a  mutilated  condition ; 
but  even  as  it  is  said  to  have  existed  in  the  time  of  Confu- 
cius, it  did  not  profess  to  contain  a  history  of  China,  and 
much  less,  to  give  the  annals  of  that  history.  It  was  simply 
a  collection  of  historical  memorials,  extending  over  a  space 
of  about  1700  years,  but  on  no  connected  method,  and  with 
frequent  and  great  gaps  between  them. 
[1]  B 


THE   Sllft    KING. 


The  name  King  (now  in  Pekinese  King)  was  not  added 
to  Shu  till  the  time  of  the  Han  dynasty  (began  B.  C.  202). 
If  Confucius  applied  it  to  any  of  the  classical  works,  it  was 
to  the  classic  of  Filial  Piety,  as  will  be  seen  in  the  Intro- 
duction to  the  translation  of  that  work.  The  Han  scholars, 
however,  when  engaged  in  collecting  and  digesting  the 
ancient  literary  monuments  of  their  country,  found  it  con- 
venient to  distinguish  the  most  valuable  of  them,  that  had 
been  acknowledged  by  Confucius,  as  King,  meaning  what 
was  canonical  and  of  unchallengeable  authority. 

2.  In  the  Confucian  Analects,  the  sage  and  one  of  his 
disciples   quote   from   the  Shu   by  the   simple  formula — 

^,    01 A  '  The  Shu  says.'     In  the  Great  Learning,  four 

The  Shu  was  *  s '       . 

an  existing     different    books    or  chapters   of  the  classic, 

Cdocumentsf  a^  *n  **  as  we  ^ave  ^  now>  are  mentioned, 
before  each  by  its  proper  name.  Mencius  sometimes 
uses  the  same  formula  as  Confucius,  and  at 
other  times  designates  particular  books.  It  is  most  natural 
for  us  to  suppose  that  Confucius,  when  he  spoke  of  the 
Shu,  had  in  his  mind's  eye  a  collection  of  documents  bearing 
that  title. 

One  passage  in  Mencius  seems  to  put  it  beyond  a  doubt 
that  the  Shu  existed  as  such  a  collection  in  his  time. 
Having  said  that  '  it  would  be  better  to  be  without  the 
Shu  than  to  give  entire  credit  to  it,'  he  makes  immediate 
reference  to  one  of  the  books  of  our  classic  by  name, 
and  adds,  *  In  the  Completion  of  the  War  I  select  two  or 
three  passages  only,  and  believe  them1.5  In  Mo-jze,  Hsiin- 
jze,  and  other  writers  of  the  last  two  centuries  of  the  Ka.\i 
dynasty,  the  Shu  is  quoted  in  the  same  way,  and  also  fre- 
quently with  the  specification  of  its  parts  or  larger  divisions, — 
<  The  Books  of  Yu,' '  of  Hsia,'  '  of  Shang/  '  of  Kku.'  And, 
in  fine,  in  many  of  the  narratives  of  3o  iT^iu-ming's  com- 
mentary on  the  Spring  and  Autumn,  the  Shu  is  quoted  in 
the  same  way,  even  when  the  narratives  are  about  men 
and  events  long  anterior  to  the  sage2.     All  these  consi- 

1  Mencius,  VII,  ii,  ch.  3. 

2  The  first  quotation  of  the  Shu  in  go  is  under  the  sixth  year  of  duke  Yin, 
b.c.  717. 


INTRODUCTION. 


derations  establish  the  thesis  of  this  paragraph,  that  the 
Shu  was  an  existing  collection  of  historical  documents 
before  Confucius. 

3.  From  the  above  paragraph  it  follows  that  Confucius 
did  not  compile  the  collection  of  documents  that  form  the 

^    <•   •     ,.:,    Shu.    The  earliest  assertion  that  he  did  so  we 

Confucius  did  . 

not  compile     have  from  Khung  An-kwo,  his  descendant  in 
dumber  of16  ^e  eleventh  generation,  in  the  second  century, 
documents  in    b.  C.     Recounting  the  labours  of  his  ancestor, 
The  Preface     An-kwo  says,  in  the  Preface  to  his  edition  of 
ascribed  to     the  Shu,  that  '  he  examined  and  arranged  the 
old  literary  monuments  and  records,  deciding 
to  commence  with  Yao  and  Shun,  and  to  come  down  to 
the  times  of  Ka.u.     Of  those  deserving  to  be  handed  down 
to  other  ages  and  to  supply  permanent  lessons,  he  made 
in  all  one  hundred  books,  consisting  of  canons,  counsels, 
instructions,  announcements,  speeches,  and  charges.'     The 
same  thing  is   stated   by   Sze-ma   KAien    in   his   Histo- 
rical   Records,    completed    about    B.C.  100,   but   .Oien's 
information  was  derived  from  An-kwo.     Such  a  compila- 
tion would  have  been  in  harmony  with  the  character  which 
Confucius  gave   of  himself,  as  '  a  transmitter  and  not  a 
maker,  believing  and  loving  the  ancients1,5  and  with  what 
his  grandson  says  of  him  in  the  Doctrine  of  the  Mean, 
that  '  he  handed  down  (the  lessons  of)  Yao  and  Shun,  as  if 
they  had  been  his  ancestors,  and  elegantly  displayed  those 
of  Wan  and  Wu,  whom  he  took  for  his  model  V 

We  have  seen,  however,  that  the  collection  existed  in 
his  time  and  before  it.  Did  it  then,  as  An-kwo  says, 
consist  of  a  hundred  books  ?  His  authority  for  saying  so 
was  a  Preface,  which  was  found  along  with  the  old  tablets 
of  the  Shu  that  were  discovered  in  his  time  and  deciphered 
by  him,  as  will  be  related  farther  on.  He  does  not  say,  how- 
ever, that  it  was  the  work  of  Confucius,  though  Kkien  does. 
It  still  exists, — a  list  of  eighty-one  documents  in  a  hun- 
dred books.  The  prevailing  opinion  of  scholars  in  China 
is  now,  that  it  was  not  written  by  the  sage.     I  entirely 

1  Analects,  VII,  i.  2  The  Doctrine  of  the  Mean,  XXX,  1. 

B  2 


THE    SH6    KING. 


agree  myself  with  the  judgment  of  ^Mi  KMn,  the  disciple 
of  ATu  Hsi,  whose  Collected  Comments,  first  published 
A.  D.  1210,  are  now  the  standard  of  orthodoxy  in  the  in- 
terpretation of  the  Shu.  He  says  of  the  document :  *  It 
sheds  light  on  nothing,  and  there  are  things  in  it  at  vari- 
ance with  the  text  of  the  classic.  On  the  books  that  are 
lost  it  is  specially  servile  and  brief,  affording  us  not  the 
slightest  help.  That  it  is  not  the  work  of  Confucius  is 
exceedingly  plain.' 

The  eighty-one  documents  mentioned  in  it,  and  more, 
may  have  been  in  the  Shu  of  the  time  of  Confucius. 
I  think,  however,  that  several  of  them  must  have  been 
lost  subsequently,  before  the  rise  of  the  tyrant  of  .Oin, 
who  doomed  the  whole  collection  to  the  flames.  Mencius 
complains  that  in  his  days  the  feudal  princes  destroyed 
many  of  the  records  of  antiquity  that  they  might  the  better 
perpetrate  their  own  usurpations  and  innovations1.  Other 
considerations,  on  the  exhibition  of  which  I  need  not  enter, 
confirm  me  in  this  conclusion. 

4.  It  will  be  well  here  to   devote  a  paragraph  to  the 

The  sources     sources  of  the  Shu.    Have  we  sufficient  proofs 

of  the  Shu.     Qf  tjie  composition  in  ancient  times  of  such 

documents  as  it  contains,  and  of  their  preservation,  so  that 

they  could  be  collected  in  a  sort  of  historical  canon  ? 

We  have.  Under  the  dynasty  of  K&u  (B.C.  1132-356), 
at  the  royal  court,  and  at  the  courts  of  the  feudal  princes  - 
on  a  smaller  scale,  there  were  officers  styled  Sze,  which  has 
been  translated  '  Recorders,'  'Annalists,'  '  Historiographers,' 
and  simply  '  Clerks.'  There  were  the  Grand  Recorder,  the 
Assistant  Recorder,  the  Recorder  of  the  Interior,  the  Re- 
corder of  the  Exterior,  and  the  Recorder  in  Attendance  on 
the  Sovereign.  Among  the  duties  of  the  Recorder  of  the 
Interior  were  the  following  : — c  In  case  of  any  charge  given 
by  the  king  to  the  prince  of  a  state,  or  to  any  other  digni- 
tary, he  writes  it  on  tablets  ; '  '  In  case  of  any  memorials 
on  business  coming  in  from  the  different  quarters  of  the 
kingdom,  he  reads  them  (to  the  king);5  'It  is  his  business 


1  Mencius,  V,  ii,  ch.  2. 


INTRODUCTION. 


to  write  all  charges  of  the  king,  and  to  do  so  in  duplicate.' 
Of  the  duties  of  the  Recorder  of  the  Exterior  it  is  said  : — 
'  He  has  charge  of  the  histories  of  the  states  in  all  parts  of 
the  kingdom  ; '  '  He  has  charge  of  the  most  ancient  books  ; ' 
1  It  is  his  business  to  publish  in  all  parts  of  the  kingdom 
the  books  and  the  characters  in  them1.' 

These  entries  show  that  under  the  Kan  dynasty  there 
was  provision  made  for  the  recording  and  preservation  of 
royal  charges  and  ordinances,  of  the  operations  of  the 
general  government,  and  of  the  histories  of  the  different 
states  ;  and,  moreover,  for  the  preservation  and  interpre- 
tation of  documents  come  down  from  more  ancient  times. 
Confucius  himself  tells  us  that  in  his  early  days  a  recorder 
would  leave  a  blank  in  his  text,  rather  than  enter  anything 
of  which  he  had  not  sufficient  evidence2.  Mencius  also 
mentions  three  works,  the  Shang  of  Kin,  the  Thao-wu  of 
Kku,  and  the  .Oun  KMu  of  Lu,  which  must  have  come 
from  the  recorders  of  those  states. 

Of  the  existence  of  a  similar  class  of  officers  under  the 
previous  dynasties  of  Shang  or  Yin  (B.C.  1766-1123)  and 
Hsia  (B.C.  2205-1765),  we  have  not  such  abundant  evi- 
dence. Chapter  2  in  the  10th  Book  of  the  5th  Part  of  our 
classic,  however,  seems  to  speak  of  them  in  the  time  of  the 
former.  Wu-ting  (B.C.  1324-1264),  the  twentieth  sovereign  of 
it,  is  described  as  communicating,  in  writing,  a  dream  which 
he  had  had,  to  his  ministers3;  and  fully  four  hundred  years 
earlier,  1  Yin,  the  chief  minister,  remonstrates,  in  writing, 
with  his  young  and  careless  sovereign  Thai  Ala4.  Going 
back  to  the  dynasty  of  Hsia,  we  find  the  prince  of  Yin, 
during  the  reign  of  Kung  Khang  (B.C.  2159-2145),  in  ad- 
dressing his  troops,  quotes  the  Statutes  of  Government  in 
a  manner  which  makes  us  conceive  of  him  as  referring  to 
a  well-known  written  compilation  5.  The  grandsons  of  the 
great  Yu,  its  founder  (b.  C.  2205-2196).  likewise,  make 
mention,  in  the  Songs  of  the  Five  Sons,  of  his  Lessons,  in 
a  style  that  suggests  to  us  the  formula  that  Mencius  was 

1  See  for  all  these  statements  the  Ritual  or  Official  Book  of  Kku,  XXXI,  35-42. 

2  Analects,  XV,  xxv.  s  Part  IV,  viii,  section  I. 
*  Part  IV,  v,  section  1.  5  Part  III,  iv. 


THE   SKti  KING. 


wont  to  employ  when  referring  to  the  documents  acknow- 
ledged to  be  of  authority  in  his  day  \ 

Mi  Twan-lin,  the  encyclopedist,  in  his  General  Examina- 
tion of  Records  and  Scholars,  first  published  A.  D.  1321, 
says  that '  the  pencil  of  the  recorders  was  busy  from  the 
time  of  Hwang  Tt  (b.  c.  2697).'  The  compilers  of  the 
records  of  the  Sui  dynasty  (A.  D.  589-617)  say  that 
'historical  documents  began  immediately  with  the  inven- 
tion of  written  characters.'  That  invention  I  must  place 
myself  at  an  earlier  date  than  the  time  assigned  to  Hwang 
Ti.  When  once  the  characters  were  invented,  they  would 
come  in  time  to  be  employed  in  the  writing  of  history. 
The  early  dates  alleged  for  many  of  the  documents  in  the 
Shu  are  no  valid  reason  for  rejecting  them  without  further 
examination.  We  may  rather  be  surprised  that,  when  the 
compilation  was  made,  it  did  not  contain  many  more  than 
a  hundred  documents. 

5.  The  dynasty  of  Kslu  came  to  an  end  in  B.  c.  256,  and 

after  an  anarchic  interval  of  thirty-five  years,  the  king  of 

Khm  succeeded  in  uniting  all  the  feudal  states  under  his 

Destruction  of  own  sway>  and  proclaimed  himself  emperor. 

the  classical     Up  to  this  time  the  Shu  had  sustained  no 

literature  by  , 

the  emperor  other  damage  than  all  human  works  are 
of  Khm.  liable  to  in  the  course  of  time  ;  but  now  it 
narrowly  escaped  an  entire  destruction.  An  edict  went  forth 
from  the  tyrant  in  B.C.  213,  commanding  that  all  the  old 
classical  books  should  be  consigned  to  the  flames,  excepting 
those  belonging  to  the  great  scholars  in  the  service  of  the 
court,  and  the  Yi.  His  rage  was  hottest  against  the  Shu 
and  the  Shih  (the  Book  of  Poetry).  Death  was  the  doom 
of  scholars  who  should  be  known  to  meet  together  and 
speak  of  these  works,  and  all  who  should  be  discovered 
having  copies  of  them  in  their  possession,  when  thirty  days 
had  elapsed  after  the  publication  of  the  edict,  were  to  be 
branded,  and  sent  to  labour  for  four  years  on  the  Great 
Wall,  which  was  then  building. 

This  is  not  the  place  to  explain  the  reasons  that  led  to 

1  Part  III,  iii. 


INTRODUCTION. 


this  insane  attempt  to  extinguish,  with  the  exception  of  one 
work,  the  ancient  literary  monuments  of  China.  The  edict 
was  ruthlessly  enforced,  and  hundreds  of  scholars  who  re- 
fused obedience  to  the  imperial  command  were  buried  alive. 
The  Shu  had  nearly  perished  from  off  the  earth. 

6.  The  tyrant,  however,  died  in  B.  C.  210,  within  four  years 
from  the  issuing  of  his  edict.  The  dynasty  which  he  had 
sought  to  establish  passed  away  in  B.  C.  206.  That  of  Han 
dates  from  the  year  B.C.  202,  and  in  191  the  edict  against 
the  ancient  books  was  formally  repealed.     They  had  been 

Recovery  of  under  the  ban  for  less  than  a  quarter  of  a 
the  Shu.  century.  There  would  probably  have  been 
no  difficulty  in  recovering  copies  of  them,  but  for  the  sack 
of  the  capital  in  B.C.  206  by  the  most  formidable  opponent 
of  the  founder  of  the  House  of  Han.  Then  the  fires  blazed, 
we  are  told,  for  three  months  among  the  palaces  and  public 
buildings,  and  proved  as  destructive  to  the  copies  that  might 
have  been  preserved  about  the  court  as  the  edict  of  K/i'm 
had  been  to  those  among  the  people. 

Among  the  scholars  of  .Oin,  however,  there  had  been 
one,  of  the  surname  Fu,  who,  when  the  edict  was  issued, 
hid  his  tablets  of  the  Shu  in  a  wall.  Returning  for  them, 
after  the  rule  of  Han  was  established,  he  found  that  many 
were  perished  or  gone.  He  recovered  only  twenty-nine 
of  the  documents,  containing,  according  to  the  division  of 
them  that  has  long  been  followed,  thirty-five  books  in  all. 
About  one  of  them  there  is  some  difficulty,  on  the  discussion 
of  which  I  need  not  enter.  Fu  commenced  teaching  them, 
and  from  all  parts  scholars  resorted  to  him,  and  sat  at  his 
feet.  The  emperor  Wan  (b.  c.  179-155)  heard  of  him,  and 
sent  one  of  the  recorders  of  the  court  to  visit  him,  and 
bring  the  recovered  tablets  themselves,  or  a  copy  of  them, 
to  the  capital.  They  were  in  the  form  of  the  character 
that  was  prevalent  at  that  time,  different  from  that  which 
had  been  used  in  previous  centuries,  and  are  known  as 
*  the  Shu  of  the  modern  text.5  The  Catalogue  of  the 
Imperial  Library,  prepared  by  Liu  Hin  for  the  emperor 
Ai  (B.C.  6-1),  contains  an  entry  of  'the  text  of  the  Shu 
in  twenty-nine  portions,' — the  same,  no  doubt,  which  was 


8  THE    SHft    KING. 


received  from  Fu.  Fu  himself  commented  on  his  Shu. 
The  text  was  engraved  on  the  stone  tablets  of  the  emperor 
Ling  (a.  D.  168-189).  Very  many  scholars  of  the  Han 
times  laboured  on  this  text,  taught  it  to  their  disciples,  and 
published  their  views  on  it.  Not  one  of  their  writings, 
however,  survived,  in  a  complete  form,  the  troubles  which 
desolated  the  empire  during  the  reign  of  the  emperor  Hwai 
(a.  D.  307-312)  of  the  western  dynasty  of  Kin. 

In  the  reign  of  the  Han  emperor  Wu  (b.  c.  140-85)  a 
discovery  was  made  in  the  wall  of  the  house  of  the  Khung 
or  Confucian  family  of  the  tablets  of  the  Shu,  the  Spring 
and  Autumn,  the  classic  of  Filial  Piety,  and  the  Lun-yii  or 
Confucian  Analects.  How  long  they  had  lain  there  we  do 
not  know.  It  is  commonly  said  that  they  had  been  hidden 
by  some  one  of  the  Khung  family  to  save  them  from  the 
fires  of  .A^in.  But  they  were  in  a  form  of  the  character  that 
had  long  gone  into  disuse,  and  which  hardly  any  one  could 
decipher,  and  must  have  been  deposited  towards  the  be- 
ginning of  the  fifth  century  B.  C.  They  were  committed  to 
the  care  of  Khung  An-kwo,  who  was  then  one  of  the i  great 
scholars '  of  the  empire,  and  the  chief  of  the  Khung  family. 
By  means  of  the  current  text  of  Fu  and  other  resources  he 
made  out  all  the  tablets  of  the  Shu  that  were  in  good  pre- 
servation, and  in  addition  to  Fu's  twenty-nine  documents 
several  others.  He  found  also  that  Fu  had  in  three  cases 
incorporated  two  different  documents  under  one  name,  and 
taken  no  note  of  the  division  of  one  other  into  three  books  or 
sections.  Altogether  there  were  now  forty-six  documents  or 
different  portions  of  the  old  Shu  brought  anew  to  light. 
They  appear  in  Liu  Hin's  Catalogue  as  'the  text  of  the 
Shu  in  old  characters  in  forty-six  portions.' 

When  An-kwo  had  made  out  the  tablets,  he  presented 
them  to  the  emperor  in  B.  c.  97,  with  a  transcript  of  them 
in  the  current  characters  of  the  time,  keeping  a  second 
transcript  of  them  for  himself;  and  he  received  an  order 
to  make  a  commentary  on  the  whole.  He  did  so,  but 
when  he  was  about  to  lay  the  result  of  his  labours  before 
the  court,  troubles  had  arisen  which  prevented  for  several 
years   the  paying  attention   to  literary  matters.     It  was 


INTRODUCTION. 


owing  to  these  that  his  commentary  was  neglected  for  a 
time,  and  the  enlarged  text  which  he  had  deciphered  was 
not  officially  put  in  charge  of  the  Board  of  '  Great  Scholars,' 
to  which  the  care  of  the  five  King,  so  far  as  they  had  been 
recovered,  had  been  committed  in  B.  C.  1 36. 

An-kwo's  commentary,  however,  was  not  lost;  but 
before  speaking  of  it,  I  must  refer  to  a  third  recovery  of 
a  large  portion  of  the  Shu  early  in  our  first  century. 
A  scholar  and  officer,  named  Tu  Lin,  had  been  a  fugitive, 
having  many  wonderful  escapes,  during  the  usurpation  of 
Mang  (a.  D.  9-22).  During  his  wanderings  he  discovered 
a  portion  of  the  Shu  on  '  lacquered'  tablets,  or  perhaps  on 
lacquered  cloth,  which  he  thenceforth  guarded  as  his  richest 
treasure,  and  kept  near  his  person.  When  the  empire  was 
again  settled  by  the  first  emperor  of  the  eastern  Han,  he 
communicated  his  text  to  other  scholars.  Wei  Hung  pub- 
lished a  commentary  on  it,  and  subsequently  iTia  Khwei,  Mi 
Yung,  and  Kang  Khang-Mang  (all,  great  names  in  Chinese 
literature)  did  the  same.  Tu  Lin's  '  lacquered  '  books  were 
the  same  in  number  as  An-kwo's,  but  they  contained  five 
documents  in  thirteen  books,  which  were  not  in  the  text 
of  the  other,  and  wanted  nine  documents,  also  in  thirteen 
books,  which  An-kwo's  text  had.  The  commentary  of 
Kang  Khang-Mang  continued  till  the  Sui  dynasty,  after 
which  we  lose  sight  of  it. 

I  return  to  the  commentary  of  An-kwo,  which,  of  course, 
contained  his  text.  Its  transmission  from  hand  to  hand 
down  to  the  close  of  the  western  Han  dynasty  is  clearly 
traced.  Less  distinctly,  but  surely,  we  can  discover  evi- 
dence of  its  preservation,  till  we  come  to  the  commencement 
of  the  eastern  dynasty  of  ATin,  when  Mei  3en5  a  recorder 
of  the  Interior,  having  come  into  possession  of  a  copy,  pre- 
sented it  to  the  emperor  Yuan  (A.  D.  317-332).  The 
Canon  of  Shun  was  wanting  in  it,  and  was  supplied  from 
the  commentary  of  Ma  Yung,  based  on  the  text  of  Tu  Lin. 
From  this  time  the  text  and  commentary  of  An-kwo  had 
their  place  assigned  them  in  the  Imperial  College.  They 
are  mentioned  in  the  Catalogue  of  the  Imperial  Library  of 
Sui.    The  second  emperor  of  the  Thang  dynasty  gave  orders 


IO  THE    SH<J    KING. 


for  a  grand  edition  of  the  Shu,  under  the  superintendence 
of  Khung  Ying-ta,  assisted  by  others.  They  adopted  the 
commentary  of  An-kwo,  and  enriched  it  with  profuse  anno- 
tations. In  A.  D.  654  their  work  was  ordered  to  be  printed, 
and  happily  remains  to  the  present  day.  The  text  of  the 
Shu,  that  is,  of  all  of  it  that  had  been  recovered  by  An- 
kwo,  was  still  further  secured,  being  engraved  with  that  of 
all  the  other  classics  on  the  Thang  tablets  of  stone  which 
were  completed  in  the  year  837,  and  are  still  preserved  at 
.Oang-an,  in  Shen-hsi. 

It  is  not  necessary  to  trace  the  history  of  the  Shu  further 
on.  The  titles  of  more  than  500  works,  on  the  whole  of  it 
or  on  portions,  from  the  dynasty  of  Thang  to  the  present  day, 
could  easily  be  adduced.  Under  the  Sung  dynasty,  indeed, 
there  began  the  sceptical  criticism,  which,  setting  compara- 
tively little  store  on  external  evidence,  decides  on  the 
genuineness  of  documents  principally  from  their  style. 
The  results  of  such  criticism  always  vary  according  to  the 
knowledge  and  the  subjective  character  of  the  mind  of  its 
author.  Many  maintain  that  the  commentary  said  to  be 
that  of  An-kwo  was  not  really  from  him,  but  was  made  by 
Mei  3eh,  and  palmed  on  the  world  under  the  name  of  the 
great  Han  scholar.  Even  if  it  were  so,  the  work  would 
remain,  produced  nearly  1600  years  ago.  And  to  the  anno- 
tations of  the  Thang  scholars  upon  it  we  are  indebted  for 
most  of  what  we  know  of  the  earlier  views  of  Ma  Yung, 
Kang  Khang-Mang,  and  other  writers  of  the  Han  period. 
Whether  its  author  were  the  true  Khung  or  a  false  Khung,  its 
value  cannot  be  over-estimated.  But  I  do  not  believe  that  it 
was  a  forgery.  That  An-kwo  did  write  a  commentary  on  his 
'  Shu  in  the  ancient  characters '  is  admitted  by  all.  When 
did  it  perish?  There  is  no  evidence  that  it  ever  did  so. 
On  the  contrary,  its  existence  rises  as  a  fact,  here  and  there, 
at  no  great  intervals  of  time,  on  the  surface  of  the  literary 
history  of  the  empire,  till  we  arrive  at  Mei  3eh>  who 
received  it,  as  Khung  Ying-ta  proves,  from  a  scholar  named 
3ang  3hao. 

Then  as  to  the  text  of  the  Shu,  there  is  no  controversy 
about  the  documents  wrhich  were  recovered  in  the  first 


INTRODUCTION.  1 1 


place  by  Fu  ;  but  the  additional  ones  found  by  Khung  An- 
kwo  are  so  much  more  easily  understood,  that  I  do  not 
wonder  that  the  charge  of  not  being  genuine  has  been 
raised  against  them.  But  even  they  are  not  easy.  They 
only  appear  to  be  so,  when  we  come  to  one  of  them,  after 
toiling  through  some  of  the  more  contorted  portions  com- 
mon to  both  texts.  And,  moreover,  the  style  of  the  dif- 
ferent books  differs  according  to  their  subjects.  The 
'  Announcements '  are  the  hardest  to  understand  of  all. 
The  '  Charges,5  '  Speeches/  and  '  Instructions '  are  much 
simpler  in  their  construction  ;  and  the  portions  which  we 
owe  to  An-kwo  consist  principally  of  these.  In  making 
out  his  obsolete  characters  he  had,  in  the  first  place,  to 
make  use  of  the  Books  of  Fu.  That  he  did  not  servilely 
follow  his  text  we  conclude  from  the  readings  of  Fu's 
followers,  different  from  his  in  many  passages  which  the 
industry  of  critics  has  gathered  up.  When  he  came,  how- 
ever, to  new  books,  which  were  not  in  Fu's  copy,  he  had  to 
make  out  his  tablets  as  he  best  could.  His  most  valuable 
aid  had  ceased.  We  can  conceive  that,  when  he  had 
managed  to  read  the  greater  portion  of  a  paragraph,  and 
yet  there  were  some  stubborn  characters  that  defied  him, 
he  completed  it  according  to  his  understanding  of  the 
sense  with  characters  of  his  own.  That  he  was  faithful 
and  successful  in  the  main  we  find  by  the  many  passages 
of  his  peculiar  books  that  are  found  quoted  in  writings  of 
the  Ka.u  dynasty.  This  is  a  fact  worthy  of  the  most 
attentive  consideration.  I  do  not  think  there  is  an  im- 
portant statement  in  his  chapters  that  is  not  thus  vouched 
for.  The  characteristics  of  his  books  which  have  exposed 
them  to  suspicion  are  not  sufficient  to  overthrow  their  claims 
to  be  regarded  as  genuine  transcripts  of  the  tablets  dis- 
covered in  the  wall  of  the  house  of  the  Khung  family. 

The  conclusion  to  which  I  come,  at  the  close  of  this 
chapter,  is,  that  there  is  nothing  seriously  to  shake  our 
confidence  in  the  portions  of  the  Shu  that  we  now  possess, 
as  being  substantially  the  same  as  those  which  were  in 
the  collection  of  the  Kku  dynasty  both  before  and  after 
Confucius. 


12  THE    SU.fi    KING. 


Chapter  II. 
The  Credibility  of  the  Records  in  the  Shlt. 

i.  Accepting  the  conclusion  which  I  have  stated  imme- 
diately above,  I  now  go  on  to  enquire  whether  the  docu- 
Whether  the    ments  in  the  Shu  can  be  relied  on  as  genuine 
records  in      narratives  of  the  transactions  which  they  pro- 

the  Shu         c  ,  .       ;    .  ,  J   r 

are  reliable  less  to  relate.  And  it  may  be  said  at  once, 
or  not.  jn  reference  to  the  greater  number  of  them, 
that  there  is  no  reasonable  ground  to  call  their  credibility  in 
question.  Allowance  must  be  made,  indeed,  for  the  colour- 
ing with  which  the  founders  of  one  dynasty  set  forth  the 
misdeeds  of  the  closing  reigns  of  that  which  they  were 
superseding,  and  for  the  way  in  which  the  failures  of  a 
favourite  hero  may  be  glossed  over.  But  the  documents 
of  the  Shu  are  quite  as  much  entitled  to  credit  as  the 
memorials  and  edicts  which  are  published  at  the  present 
day  in  the  Peking  Gazette. 

The  more  recent  the  documents  are,  the  more,  of  course, 
are  they  to  be  relied  on.  And  provision  was  made,  we  have 
seen,  by  the  statutes  of  Afau,  for  the  preservation  of  the 
records  of  previous  dynasties.  But  it  was  not  to  be  ex- 
pected that  many  of  those  should  not  perish  in  the  lapse 
of  time,  and  others  suffer  mutilations  and  corruptions. 
And  this,  we  find,  was  the  case.  Of  the  eighty-one  docu- 
ments that  the  Shu  at  one  time  contained,  only  one  be- 
longed to  the  period  of  Yao  ;  seven  to  the  period  of  Shun  ; 
four  to  the  dynasty  of  Hsia,  much  the  larger  one  of  which 
narrates  what  was  done  in  the  time  of  Yao ;  thirty-one  to 
the  dynasty  of  Shang;  and  thirty-eight  to  the  first  500 
years  of  that  of  iTau.  All  this  seems  to  bear  on  the 
surface  of  it  the  stamp  of  verisimilitude. 

2.   The  Books  of  Ka.u  were  contemporaneous  with  the 
The  Books     events  which  they  describe,  and  became  public 
of  JsTau.       property   not   long    after   their   composition. 
They  are  to  be  received  without  hesitation. 


INTRODUCTION.  1 3 


Nor  are  those  of  the  previous  dynasty  of  Shang  open 
The  Books     to  suspicion.     We  ascend  by  means  of  them 
of  Shang.      to  Thang  the  Successful,  its  founder,  with  a 
confident  step.    The  beginning  of  his  rule  is  placed  chrono- 
logically in  B.C.  1766. 

Of  the  still  earlier  dynasty  of  Hsia,  there  are  only  four 
The  Books  documents,  and  we  have  no  evidence  that 
of  Hsia.  there  were  any  more  when  the  collection  of 
the  Shu  was  made  in  the  times  of  Kku.  The  first  and 
longest  of  the  four,  though  occupied  with  the  great  achieve- 
ment of  Yii,  the  founder  of  Hsia,  whose  chronological 
place  is  B.C.  3305-2196,  really  belongs  to  the  reign  of 
Yao,  and  is  out  of  place  among  the  records  of  Hsia.  The 
other  three  documents  bring  us  down  only  to  the  reign  of 
Kung  Khang  (B.C.  2159-2145),  and  I  see  no  grounds  for 
doubting  their  genuineness.  In  the  last  of  them  a  celestial 
phenomenon  is  mentioned,  which  has  always  been  under- 
stood to  have  been  an  eclipse  of  the  sun  in  Fang,  a  space  of 
about  5^°  from  it  to  0-  of  Scorpio,  on  the  first  day  of  the 
last  month  of  autumn.  P.  Gaubil  thought  he  had  deter- 
mined by  calculation  that  such  an  eclipse  really  took 
place  in  the  fifth  year  of  Kung  Khang,  B.  C  2155.  Doubts, 
however,  have  been  cast,  as  will  be  seen  in  the  next  chapter, 
on  the  accuracy  of  his  calculation,  and  therefore  I  do  not 
avail  myself  of  it  here  as  a  confirmation  of  the  truth  of 
the  document. 

3.  We  come  to  the  earlier  records, — those  of  the  reigns 
-,    -d    ,       of  Yao  and  Shun,  with  which  must  be  classed 

The  Books  ' 

of  Thang      the  Tribute  of  Yii,  the  first  of  the  documents 
and  Ytt.       of  Hsi a  .  and  .t  must  be  admitted  that  there 

is  not  the  same  evidence  that  they  existed  originally  in 
their  present  form. 

i.  The  Canon  of  Yao  and  three  of  the  four  still  exist- 
ing books   of  the  time  of  Yii,  all  commence 
pTofeLedly     with  the  words,  'Examining  into  antiquity, 
later  compi-    we  fin£j    They  are  therefore,  on  their  own 
showing,  the  compilations  of  a  later  age.   The 
writer  separates  himself  from  the  date  of  the  events  which 
he  narrates,  and  while  professing  to  draw  from  the  records 


14  THE    SHt)    KING. 


of  '  antiquity,'  yet  writes  himself  from  a  modern  standpoint. 
The  Yt  and  Kt,  the  last  of  the  documents  of  the  Shun 
period,  formed  one  book  with  the  preceding  in  the  Shu  of 
Fu,  and  came  under  the  opening  words  of  that,  as  being 
a  result  of '  the  examination  of  antiquity.'  I  will  draw  sepa- 
rate attention  farther  on  to  the  Tribute  of  Yii. 

ii.  Much  of  what  is  related  in  the  Canons  of  Yao  and 
Shun,  as  well  as  in  the  other  documents,  has  more  the  air 
They  are  of  legend  than  of  history.  When  Yao  has 
legendary,  been  on  the  throne  for  seventy  years,  he  pro- 
poses to  resign  in  favour  of  his  principal  minister,  who  is 
styled  the  Four  Mountains.  That  worthy  declares  him- 
self unequal  to  the  office.  Yao  then  asks  him  whom  he 
can  recommend  for  it ;  be  the  worthiest  individual  a  noble 
or  a  poor  man,  he  will  appoint  him  to  the  dignity.  This 
brings  Shun  upon  the  stage.  All  the  officers  about  the 
court  can  recommend  him, — Shun  of  Yii1,  an  unmarried 
man  among  the  lower  people.  His  father,  a  blind  man, 
was  obstinately  unprincipled ;  his  mother,  or  stepmother, 
was  insincere ;  his  brother  was  arrogant ;  and  yet  Shun 
had  been  able  by  his  filial  piety  to  live  harmoniously  with 
them,  and  to  bring  them  to  a  considerable  measure  of  self- 
government  and  good  conduct.  Yao  is  delighted.  He  had 
himself  heard  something  of  Shun.  He  resolved  to  give  him 
a  preliminary  trial.  And  a  strange  trial  it  was.  He  gave 
him  his  own  two  daughters  in  marriage,  and  declared  that 
he  would  test  his  fitness  for  the  throne  by  seeing  his  beha- 
viour with  his  two  wives. 

Shun  must  have  stood  the  test.  Yao  continued  to  em- 
ploy him  as  General  Regulator  for  three  years,  and  then 
called  him  to  ascend  the  throne.  Shun  refused  to  do  so, 
but  discharged  the  royal  duties  till  the  death  of  Yao  in 
3257,  becoming  himself  sole  ruler  in   B.  C.  2255.      These 


'Ahr,, — Yii  is  the  dynastic  designation  of  Shun.  It  is  to  be  distin- 
guished from  Yii  (FPA  tne  name  of  Shun's  successor,  the  founder  of  the 
dynasty  of  Hsia\  Bunsen  confounded  the  two  appellations  (Egypt's  Place  in 
Universal  History,  III,  p.  399). 


INTRODUCTION.  1 5 


and  other  marvellous  notices  of  Yao  and  Shun  are 
largely  added  to  by  Mencius  and  Sze-ma  .Oien,  but 
their  accounts  are  of  the  same  extraordinary  character. 
I  must  believe  that  the  oldest  portions  of  the  Shu  do  not 
give  us  the  history  of  Yao  and  Shun,  but  legendary  tales 
about  them. 

At  the  same  time  it  must  be  allowed  that  the  compiler 
m  of  these  books  in  their  present  form  had  in 

Their  compiler  .  111 

had  ancient    his  possession  some  documents  as  old  as  the 

^whTcTto011  time  of  Yio-  To  m?  mind  three  things  ren" 

base  his       der  this  admission  necessary.     First,  the  titles 

representations.   of  ^  high  officers   of  y^  and  Shun  ^  dif_ 

ferent  from  those  of  the  corresponding  dignitaries  at  a  later 
age.  The  principal  personage  was  called  the  Four  Moun- 
tains; next  to  him  was  the  General  Regulator;  and  the 
Minister  of  Religion  was  the  Arranger  of  the  Ancestral 
Temple.  It  is  more  probable  that  the  compiler  received 
these  and  other  peculiar  designations  from  old  documents 
than  that  he  invented  them  himself.  Second,  the  style  of 
these  early  books  is  distinguished  in  several  particulars  from 
the  style  of  those  of  Hsia,  Shang,  and  ATau.  I  need  only 
specify  the  exclamations, ' Alas !' '  Ah!'  and  '  Oh !'  which  are 
expressed  by  characters  that  we  do  not  elsewhere  find  used 
in  the  same  way.  Third,  the  directions  of  Yao  to  his  astro- 
nomers, telling  them  how  to  determine  the  equinoxes  and 
solstices,  by  means  of  the  stars  culminating  at  dusk  in  those 
seasons,  could  not  be  the  inventions  of  a  later  age.  The 
reader  will  find  this  subject  discussed  in  the  next  chapter, 
where  it  is  shown  how  those  culminating  stars  may  be 
employed  to  ascertain  the  era  of  Yao.  No  compiler, 
ignorant  of  the  precession  of  the  equinoxes,  which  was 
not  known  in  China  till  about  the  middle  of  our  fourth 
century,  could  have  framed  Yao's  directions  with  such  an 
adjustment  to  the  time  assigned  to  him  in  chronology. 

When  the  Books  of  Thang  and  Yii  received  their  present 
form,  we  cannot  tell.  Probably  it  was  in  the  early  period  of 
the  Kau  dynasty,  though  I  am  not  without  a  suspicion 
that  some  verbal  changes  were  made  in  them  under  the 
short-lived   dynasty  of  Kk'm,  which  intervened    between 


1 6  THE    SKti    KING. 


the  dynasties  of  Kau  and  Han,  and  possibly  some  also 
when  they  were  recovered  under  the  latter. 

4.  It  remains  for  us  to  consider  the  case  of  the  Tribute 
The  Tribute  °f  Yii,  the  first,  as  the  books  are  now  arranged, 
of  Yii.  0f  those  of  Hsia,  but  belonging,  as  has  been 
already  said,  to  the  period  of  Yao,  or  at  least  to  the  period 
when  Yao  and  Shun  were  together  on  the  throne.  It  thus 
appears  out  of  its  chronological  order,  and  must  share  in  the 
general  uncertainty  which  attaches  to  the  documents  of 
the  first  two  parts  of  our  classic. 

Yao,  in  what  year  of  his  reign  we  are  not  told,  appears 
suddenly  startled  by  the  ravages  of  a  terrible  inundation. 
The  waters  were  overtopping  the  hills,  and  threatening  the 
heavens  in  their  surging  fury.  The  people  everywhere  were 
groaning  and  murmuring  Was  there  a  capable  man  to 
whom  he  could  assign  the  correction  of  the  calamity  ?  All 
the  nobles  recommend  one  Khwan,  to  whom  Yao,  against 
his  own  better  judgment,  delegates  the  difficult  task,  on 
which  Khwan  labours  without  success  for  nine  years.  His 
son  Yu  then  entered  on  the  work.  From  beyond  the 
western  bounds  of  the  present  China  proper  he  is  repre- 
sented as  tracking  the  great  rivers,  here  burning  the  woods, 
hewing  the  rocks,  and  cutting  through  the  mountains  that 
obstructed  their  progress,  and  there  deepening  their  chan- 
nels until  their  waters  flow  peacefully  into  the  eastern  sea. 
He  forms  lakes,  and  raises  mighty  embankments,  till  at 
length  £  the  grounds  along  the  rivers  were  everywhere  made 
habitable ;  the  hills  cleared  of  their  superfluous  wood  ;  and 
access  to  the  capital  was  secured  for  all  within  the  four 
seas.  A  great  order  was  effected  in  the  six  magazines  (of 
material  wealth) ;  the  different  parts  of  the  country  were 
subjected  to  an  exact  comparison,  so  that  contribution  of 
revenue  could  be  carefully  adjusted  according  to  their 
resources.  The  fields  were  all  classified  according  to  the 
three  characters  of  the  soil,  and  the  revenues  of  the  Middle 
Kingdom  were  established.'  Of  the  devotion  with  which 
Yii  pursued  his  work,  he  says  himself  in  the  Yi  and 
K\ : — 'I  mounted  my  four  conveyances,' — carriages  on 
the  land,  boats  on  the  water,  sledges  in  icy  places,  and 


INTRODUCTION.  1 7 


shoes  with  spikes  in  them  in  ascending  the  hills, — ( and  all 
along  the  hills  hewed  down  the  woods,  at  the  same  time, 
along  with  Yi,  showing  the  people  how  to  get  flesh  to 
eat,' — that  is,  by  capturing  fish  and  birds  and  beasts.  '  I 
opened  passages  for  the  streams  throughout  the  nine  pro- 
vinces, and  conducted  them  to  the  sea.  I  deepened  the 
channels  and  canals,  and  conducted  them  to  the  streams, 
at  the  same  time,  along  with  K%  sowing  grain,  and  showing 
the  people  how  to  procure  the  food  of  toil  in  addition  to 
flesh  meat.  I  urged  them  to  exchange  what  they  had  for 
what  they  had  not,  and  to  dispose  of  their  accumulated 
stores.  In  this  way  all  the  people  got  grain  to  eat,  and 
the  myriad  regions  began  to  come  under  good  rule.'  And 
again :— '  When  I  married  in  Tu-shan,  I  remained  with  my 
wife  only  four  days/  Mencius  says  that  while  engaged  on 
his  task,  he  thrice  passed  the  door  of  his  house,  but  did  not 
enter  it.  His  own  words  are  : — *  When  Kh\  (my  son)  was 
wailing  and  weeping,  I  did  not  regard  him,  but  kept  plan- 
ning with  all  my  might  my  labour  on  the  land.' 

Along  with  his  operations  to  assuage  the  wide-spread 
inundation,  Yii  thus  carried  on  other  most  important  labours 
proper  to  an  incipient  civilization.  We  gather  from  the  Shii 
that  it  did  not  take  him  many  years  to  accomplish  his 
mighty  undertaking.  It  was  successfully  finished  before 
the  death  of  Yao.  All  this  is  incredible.  The  younger 
Biot,  in  an  article  on  the  Tribute  of  Yii,  published  in  the 
Journal  Asiatique,  in  1842,  says:  —  *  If  we  are  to  believe 
the  commentators,  Yii  will  become  a  supernatural  being, 
who  could  lead  the  immense  rivers  of  China  as  if  he  had 
been  engaged  in  regulating  the  course  of  feeble  stream- 
lets/ There  is  no  occasion  to  say,  '  If  we  are  to  believe 
the  commentators ; ' — if  we  are  to  believe  the  Shu,  this  is 
the  judgment  that  we  must  form  about  Yii. 

The  general  conclusion  to  which  Biot  came  about  the 
document  under  our  notice  was  that  we  are  to  find  in  it 
only  the  progress  of  a  great  colony.  Yii  was  the  first 
explorer  of  the  Chinese  world.  He  established  posts  of 
colonists  or  planters  in  different  parts  of  the  territory. 
He  caused  the  wood  around  those  posts  to  be  cut  down, 
[1]  C 


1 8  THE   SHU   KING. 


and  commenced  the  cultivation  of  the  soil.  After  Yii,  the 
labours  of  draining  the  country  and  clearing  the  forests 
continued  during  some  ages,  and  the  result  of  all  was 
attributed  by  Chinese  tradition  to  the  first  chief.  I  have 
no  doubt  there  is  an  inkling  of  the  truth  in  this  view  of 
the  French  sinologue,  but  the  idea  of  Yii's  being  the  leader 
of  a  Chinese  colony  had  better  be  abandoned.  We  recog- 
nise the  primitive  seat  of  the  Chinese  people,  in  the 
southern  parts  of  the  present  Shan-hsi,  with  the  Ho  on 
the  west  and  south  of  it.  His  son  fought  a  battle  with 
the  Chief  of  Hu  at  a  place  in  the  present  department  of 
Hsi-an,  in  Shen-hsi,  across  the  Ho,  and  his  grandson  was 
kept  a  sort  of  prisoner  at  large  in  the  present  province  of 
Ho-nan,  south  of  the  river.  The  people  or  tribe  extended 
itself  westward,  eastward,  and  southward,  and  still  later 
northward,  as  it  increased  in  numbers,  and  was  able  to 
subdue  the  earth. 

The  flood  of  Yao  was  probably  an  inundation  of  the 
Ho,  similar  to  many  in  subsequent  times  which  have  pro- 
cured for  that  river  the  name  of  'China's  Sorrow,5  and 
Yu  distinguished  himself  in  the  assuaging  of  it,  and  the 
regulation  of  its  course  to  the  sea.  The  extent  of  the 
country  came  to  be  ascertained  under  the  dynasties  of 
Hsia  and  Shang,  and  its  different  parts  were  gradually 
occupied  by  the  increasing  numbers  of  the  people,  and 
contributed  their  various  proportions  of  revenue  to  the 
central  government.  There  were  memorials  of  the  toils 
which  Yli  had  undergone,  and  of  allotments  of  territory 
which  he  had  made  to  the  most  distinguished  among  his 
followers.  It  occurred  to  some  historiographer  to  form  a 
theory  as  to  the  way  in  which  the  whole  country  might 
have  been  brought  to  order  by  the  founder  of  the  Hsi& 
dynasty,  and  he  proceeded  to  glorify  Yu  by  ascribing  so 
grand  an  achievement  to  him.  About  the  same  time, 
probably,  the  popular  stories  of  Yii's  self-denial  had  found 
their  expression  in  the  Yt  and  K\,  prompting  at  once 
the  conception  of  the  Tribute  of  Yli,  and  obtaining  for 
it  a  favourable  reception.  Yu  entered  well  into  associa- 
tion with  Yao  and  Shun,  and  formed  a  triad  with  them 


INTRODUCTION.  1 9 


at  the  beginning  of  the  Chinese  monarchy.  Their  wisdom 
and  benevolence  appeared  in  him,  combined  with  a  prac- 
tical devotion  to  the  duties  of  his  position,  in  which  all 
sovereigns  would  have  a  model,  to  win  them  from  indolence 
and  self-indulgence,  and  stimulate  them  to  a  painstaking 
discharge  of  their  responsibilities. 

In  the  nineteenth  of  the  Books  of  Part  V,  the  duke  of 
Ka.u  counsels  his  young  sovereign,  king  K/tang  (b.  c. 1115- 
1077)5  to  have  his  armies  in  a  good  state  of  preparation, 
so  that  he  might  go  forth  '  beyond  the  footsteps  of  Yii,'  and 
travel  over  all  beneath  the  sky,  everywhere  meeting  with 
submission.  The  duke's  reference  to  'the  footsteps  of  Yii' 
does  not  prove  that  Yu  really  travelled  and  toiled  as  the 
Tribute  of  Yii  reports,  but  only  that  such  was  the  current 
belief  at  the  commencement  of  the  K&u  dynasty,  while  it 
affords  at  the  same  time  a  presumption  that  our  document 
was  then  among  the  archives  of  the  kingdom.  It  may  have 
been  compiled  before  the  end  of  the  Hsia  dynasty,  or  under 
that  of  Shang.  From  Shang  it  passed  to  isfau,  and  came 
under  the  care  of  the  recorders  of  the  Exterior.  Then 
subsequently  it  was  very  properly  incorporated  in  the 
collection  of  the  Shu. 

5.  While  we  are  thus  unable  to  receive  the  six  earliest 
documents  in  our  classic  as  contemporaneous  in  their  pre- 
sent form  with  the  events  which  they  relate,  it  is  not  meant 
to  throw  doubt  on  the  existence  of  Yao, 
and  Yu  are     Shun,  and  Yii  as  historical  personages.    More 

all  historical    especially  does  Yu  stand  forth  as   the  first 

personages.  .  ,.     ,         ,  r    TT  - 

sovereign  of  the  dynasty  of  Hsia,  the  man 
who  laid  the  foundation  of  the  hereditary  monarchy  in 
China,  its  feudal  sovereign  who  'conferred  surnames  and 
lands.'  The  documents  which  follow  the  Tribute  of  Yii, 
commencing  with  the  Speech  at  Kan,  delivered  in  B.C.  2197 
by  Yii's  son  and  successor,  may  all  be  received  as  veritable 
monuments  of  antiquity. 


C  2 


20  THE    SH.ti    KING. 


Chapter  III. 

On  the  Chronology  of  China,  and  the  Principal 
Eras  in  the  ShO. 

i.  I  do  not  enter  here  on  the  subject  of  the  chronology 
of  China  further  than  is  necessary  to  show  that  there  is  no 
chronological  difficulty  in  the  way  of  our  accepting  the 
documents  of  the  Shu,  which  I  have  just  specified,  as  being 
possessed  of  the  antiquity  ascribed  to  them. 

The  Shu  itself  does  not  supply  the  means  of  laying  down 
No  detailed  anv  scheme  of  chronology  for  the  long  period 
chronological   Gf  time  which  it  covers.   We  learn  from  it  that 

system  can  T;r.  ,  %     .        c 

be  made  out  the  dynasty  of  A  au  succeeded  to  that  ot 
from  the  Shu.  gfrang  (another  name  for  which  was  Yin),  and 
the  dynasty  of  Shang  to  that  of  Hsia,  and  that  prior  to  Yii, 
the  founder  of  the  Hsia,  there  were  the  reigns  of  Shun 
and  Yao.  As  P.  Gaubil  has  observed,  *  If  we  had  only 
the  Shu  King,  we  should  have  but  confused  ideas  of  the 
time  comprised  in  the  different  parts  of  the  book.'  There 
is  nothing  in  this  to  awaken  our  surprise.  The  chronology 
of  a  nation  comes  to  be  cultivated  as  a  science  only  when 
a  necessity  is  felt  to  arrange  the  events  of  its  history  in 
regular  series  on  the  course  of  time. 

2.  It  was   under   the   Han    dynasty   that    it  was   first 

Attem  tsat    attemP^ed     to     construct     a     chronological 

systematic     scheme   of  the  history  of  the   nation.     For 

^eganni7     ^is  PurPose  &$  scholars  employed  the  well- 

the  Han       known  cycle  of  sixty  years,  in  the  fifteenth 

Peno  •        year  Qf  the  seventy-sixth  revolution  of  which 

I  am  now  writing.     It  was  assumed  that  this  cycle  was  first 

devised  by  Ta-nao,  an  officer  of  Hwang  Ti,  in  B.  C.  2637, 

which  is  the  first  year  of  the  first  cycle.     But  all  scholars 

in  China,  whether  they  call  in  question  this  origin  of  the 

cycle  or  not,  now  agree  in  saying  that  the  use  of  the  cyclic 

characters  to  chronicle  years  was  not  the  ancient  method, 

and  did  not  begin  earlier  than   the  time  of  the  usurper 

Mang  (a.  d.  9-32). 

In  the  Shu  itself  the  current  cycle  is  used  to  chronicle 


INTRODUCTION.  2 1 


days,  and  days  only.    Years  are  specified  according  to  their 
order  in  the  ~eign  of  the  sovereign  to  whom  they  are  re- 
ferred.    Such  specification  of  years  in  it,  however,  is  rare. 
Before  the  Han  dynasty  a  list  of  sovereigns,  and  of  the 
Ancient       length  of  their  several  reigns,  was  the  only 
method  of     method  which  the  Chinese  had  of  determining 
th^iengSf     the  duration  of  their  national  history.     And 
of  Chinese     jt  would  still  be  a  satisfactory  method,  if  we 
had  a  list  of  sovereigns,  and  of  the  years  that 
each  reigned,  that  was  complete  and  reliable.     But  we  do 
not  have  this.     Even  in  the  early  part  of  the  Han  dynasty, 
Sze-ma  .Alien's   father    and   himself,  in  their   Historical 
Records,  completed  about  B.  C.  ioo,  were  obliged  to  content 
themselves  with  giving  simply  the  names  and  order  of  most 
of  the  rulers  of  Shang  and  Hsia.     It  is  right  to  state  also 
that  in  A.  D.  379,  when  the  grave  of  king  Hsiang  of  Wei 
(died  in  B.  c.  295)  was  opened,  there  were  found  a  number 
of  bamboo  tablets  in  it,  written  in  the  ancient  seal  characters, 
among  which  the  most  valuable  portion   was  a  book  of 
annals,  beginning  with  the  reign  of  Hwang  Ti,  and  coming 
down  to  the  sixteenth  year  of  the  last  king  of  K&u,  B.C.  299. 
This  work  is  still  current  under  the  name  of  the  Annals  of  the 
Bamboo  Books.   The  chronology  derived  from  it  is  shorter 
than  the  received  system  by  rather  more  than  200  years. 

If  in  any  of  the  classical  books  of  the  TTau  dynasty  we 
had  a  statement  of  the  length  of  the  national  history  from 
any  given  era  to  the  time  of  the  writer,  the  notice  would 
be  exceedingly  valuable ;  or,  if  the  length  of  the  reigns  of 
the  sovereigns  of  Shang  and  Hsia,  cursorily  mentioned  in  it, 
were  correctly  given,  we  should  be  in  a  position  to  make 
an  approximate  computation  for  ourselves.  But  there  are 
only  two  passages  in  all  those  books  which  are  helpful  to 
us  in  this  point.  The  former  of  them  is  in  a  narrative  in 
3o  jOiu-ming's  supplement  to  the  Spring  and  Autumn, 
under  the  third  year  of  duke  Hsiian,  where  it  is  said  that 
the  dynasty  of  Shang  possessed  the  throne  for  600  years. 
The  other  passage  is  the  last  chapter  of  the  works  of  Men- 
cius,  where  that  philosopher  says  that '  from  Yao  and  Shun 
to  Thang' — a  period  including  all  the  dynasty  of  Hsia  — 


22  THE   SH<J   KING, 


*  there  were  500  years  and  more ;  from  Thang  to  king 
Wan ' — the  period  of  the  Shang  dynasty — '  500  years  and 
more  ;  and  from  king  Wan  to  Confucius,  500  years  and 
more.'  We  know  that  Confucius  was  born  in  B.  C.  55  t. 
Adding  551  to  the  1500  years  'and  more,5  given  by  Mencius, 
we  have  the  era  of  Yao  and  Shun  at  3100  years  'and 
more '  before  our  Christian  era.  And  the  received  chro- 
nology places  Ytfs  accession  to  the  throne,  as  the  successor 
of  Shun,  in  B.  C.  2205.  Vague  as  the  language  of  Mencius 
is,  I  do  not  think  that  with  the  most  painstaking  research, 
apart  from  conclusions  based  on  astronomical  considera- 
tions, we  can  determine  anything  more  precise  and  definite 
concerning  the  length  of  Chinese  history  than  it  conveys. 

3.  The  Charge  to  the  Marquis  Wan,  which  now  forms 

The    eriod      the   ^8th   Bo°k   °f   the   5th   Palt    °f  the    Sh^' 

oftheXau  is  understood  to  have  been  delivered  by 
ynas  y.  )zmg  Phing,  the  thirteenth  of  his  line.  His 
place  in  historical  time  is  well  ascertained.  Confucius' 
chronicle  of  the  Spring  and  Autumn  commences  in 
B.  C.  722.  The  first  of  the  thirty-six  solar  eclipses  men- 
tioned in  it  took  place  three  years  after,  on  the  14th 
February  (n.  S.)  719,  and  it  is  recorded  that  in  the  month 
after  king  Phing  died.  Here  therefore  is  a  point  of  time 
about  which  there  can  be  no  dispute.  An  earlier  date  in 
the  K&u  dynasty  is  known  with  the  same  certainty.  The 
Book  of  Poetry  mentions  an  eclipse  of  the  sun  which  took 
place  on  the  29th  August,  B.C.  776,  in  the  sixth  year  of 
king  Yu,  who  preceded  Phing.  Yu  reigned  eleven  years, 
and  his  predecessor,  Hsiian,  forty-six,  whose  reign  conse- 
quently commenced  B.  c.  837.  Up  to  this  date  Chinese 
chronologers  agree.  To  the  ten  reigns  before  king  Hsiian, 
the  received  chronology  assigns  295  years,  making  the 
dynasty  begin  in  B.C.  1122,  which  cannot  be  far  from  the 
truth. 

4.  In  the  period  of  the  Shang  dynasty  we  cannot  fix  a 
The   eriod     smgle  reign  by  means  of  astronomical  facts. 

of  the  Shang    The  received  chronology  assigns  to  it  twenty- 

ynasy*       eight   reigns,   extending   over  644  years,   so 

that  its  commencement  was  in  B.C.  1766.     The  scheme 


INTRODUCTION.  23 


derived  from  the  bamboo  books  makes  the  sovereigns  to 
be  thirty,  but  the  aggregate  of  their  reigns  is  only  508. 
Mencius  says  that  between  Thang,  the  founder  of  the 
dynasty,  and  Wu-ting,  the  twentieth  sovereign  (in  the 
common  scheme),  *  there  had  been  six  or  seven  worthy  and 
sage  rulers1,' — leading  to  the  conclusion  that  the  number 
of  twenty-eight  sovereigns  in  all  is  not  beyond  the  truth. 
In  the  fifteenth  of  the  Books  of  Kku  the  names  of  three 
of  the  Shang  rulers  are  given,  and  the  duration  of  their 
reigns, — to  show  how  Heaven  is  likely  to  crown  a  good 
king  with  length  of  sway.  They  are  Thai  Mau,  who  reigned 
seventy-five  years;  Wu-ting,  who  reigned  fifty-nine;  and 
3u-£ia,  who  reigned  thirty  -  three.  The  two  schemes 
agree  in  the  length  of  those  reigns  and  of  five  others. 
From  the  statement  in  the  3o-^wan>  to  which  I  have 
referred  above,  that  the  Shang  dynasty  possessed  the  throne 
for  600  years,  and  Mencius'  language  that  it  lasted  'for  500 
years  and  more,'  we  may  believe  that  the  644  years  of  the 
common  scheme  are  more  likely  to  be  correct  than  the  508 
of  the  shorter. 

5.  The  dynasty  of  Hsia  lasted,  according  to  the  received 
chronology,  439  years,  and  according  to  the  bamboo  books, 

The  period  43 *  ;  so  that  the  difference  here  between  the 
of  Hsia.  two  schemes  is  small.  The  former  estimate 
carries  us  up  to  B.C.  3205,  as  the  first  year  of  Yii's  reign. 

I  referred  on  page  13  to  an  eclipse  of  the  sun,  mentioned 
in  the  fourth  of  the  Books  of  Hsia,  as  having  occurred  in 
the  reign  of  Kung  Khang,  a  grandson  of  Yu,  and  stated 
that  P.  Gaubil  had  found  by  calculation  that  on  the  day 
and  month  stated  in  the  document,  and  in  the  quarter  of 
the  heavens  given,  an  eclipse  did  occur  in  the  fifth  year 
of  Kung  Khang,  that  is,  in  B.C.  2156,  and  was  visible  at 
his  capital  at  6h  49',  A.M.  In  1840,  J.  B.  Biot  submitted  a 
copy  of  Gaubil's  calculations  to  the  younger  Largeteau,  a 
member,  like  himself,  of  the  Institute  of  France,  who  went 
over  them  with  the  lunar  tables  of  Damoiseau  and  the 
solar  tables  of  Delambre,  and  brought  out  the  result  that 

1  Mencius,  II,  i,  ch.  1. 


24  THE   SH<J   KING. 


there  was  indeed  an  eclipse  on  the  day  stated,  but  before 
the  rising  of  the  sun  at  the  then  capital  of  China1.  My 
friend,  the  Rev.  Dr.  Chalmers  of  Canton,  not  knowing  any- 
thing of  the  examination  made  by  Largeteau,  undertook 
to  verify  the  eclipse  in  i86i,and  found  that  while  the  year, 
the  month,  and  the  day,  as  given  by  Gaubil,  were  correct, 
the  eclipse  had  taken  place  during  the  night,  and  could  not 
have  been  seen  by  the  Chinese  astronomers.  The  eclipse 
mentioned  in  the  document  of  the  Shu  cannot  therefore 
be  used  at  present  to  confirm  the  received  chronology  of 
China  ;  but  I  am  unwilling  to  give  it  up  entirely.  M.  Biot 
says  that,  ;  Notwithstanding  the  failure  of  the  attempt  of 
Largeteau  to  verify  the  eclipse,  the  hope  of  yet  finding  it 
in  some  one  of  the  years  of  the  twenty-second  century 
before  our  era  is  not  entirely  lost.  We  ought  to  wait  till 
the  further  perfecting  of  the  lunar  tables  brings  us  new 
lights,  by  means  of  which  we  can  form  a  surer  judgment.' 

6.  We  come  to  the  earliest  period  of  Chinese  history  of 
which  the  Shu  makes  more  than  a  cursory  mention, — that 

The  eriod  °^  ^°  anc*  Shun.  It  says  that  Shun  was 
of  Y&o  thirty  years  on  the  throne  with  Yao,  and  that, 
fifty  years  after,  he  died  and  went  on  high. 
We  learn  from  it  also  that  it  was  in  the  seventieth  year  of 
his  reign  that  Yao  sought  for  another  to  relieve  him  of  the 
toils  of  government.  The  period  covered  by  the  two  there- 
fore is  150  years,  which  both  the  schemes  of  chronology 
accept.  Adding  two  years  of  mourning  between  Shun's 
death  and  Yii's  accession  to  the  throne,  we  have  B.  c.  2357 
as  the  first  year  of  Yao. 

In  the  Canon  of  Y&o,  when  that  personage  is  giving 
directions  to  his  astronomers  how  to  determine  the  equi- 
noxes and  solstices,  he  tells  them  that  at  the  vernal  equinox 
they  would  find  the  star  in  Niao,  and  at  the  autumnal  in 
Hsu ;  at  the  summer  solstice,  the  star  in  Hwo,  and  at  the 
winter  in  Mao.  It  has  always  been  assumed  by  Chinese 
scholars  that  when  Yao  said,  '  The  star  of  mid-spring  is  in 


1  Etudes  sur  l'Astronomie  Indienne  et  sur  l'Astronomie  Chinoise,  pp.  376— 

382. 


INTRODUCTION.  25 


Ni&o,'  he  meant  the  star  culminating  at  dusk  at  that  season, 
at  the  point  of  observation.  And  so  of  the  other  stars  and 
seasons.  A  Chinese  astronomer  at  the  present  day  would 
similarly  express  himself. 

Further,  the  most  common,  and  what  was  the  earliest 
division  of  the  ecliptic  in  China,  is  that  of  the  twenty-eight 
lunar  mansions,  forming  what  we  may  call  the  Chinese 
zodiac.  These  mansions  are  grouped  together  in  four 
classes  of  seven  each,  assigned  to  the  four  quarters  of  the 
heavens1.  Of  the  celestial  spaces  which  Yao  specified,  Niao 
is  the  general  name  for  the  seven  mansions  or  constellations 
belonging  to  the  southern  quarter ;  Hwo  is  an  old  name  of 
what  is  now  called  Fang,  the  central  constellation  of  the 
eastern  quarter ;  Hsu  and  Mao  are  the  central  constella- 
tions of  the  northern  and  southern  quarters  respectively. 
What  Yao  meant  therefore  was,  that  his  astronomers  could 
determine  the  solstices  and  the  autumnal  equinox  by  the 
culmination  of  the  stars  in  the  mansions  which  he  specified 
for  those  seasons.  And  we  may  assume  that  he  directed 
them,  for  the  star  of  the  vernal  equinox,  to  Hsing,  the 
central  mansion  in  the  southern  space  Niao.  Now,  Hsing 
corresponds  to  a  (Alphard)  Hydrae,  and  small  stars  near 
it,  in  our  stellar  nomenclature ;  Hwo,  to  /3,  b  in  Scorpio ; 
Hsu,  to  /3  Aquarii ;  and  Mao,  to  Pleiades.  When  we  wish 
to  make  the  directions  of  Yao  available  for  the  purpose 
of  chronological  enquiry,  the  question  that  arises  is  this  : — 
When  did  the  above-named  stars  culminate  at  dusk  in  China 
at  the  equinoctial  and  solstitial  seasons  ? 

Bunsen  tells  us  that  Ideler,  computing  the  places  of  the 
constellations  backwards,  fixed  the  accession  of  Yio  at 
B.  C.  2163,  and  that  Freret  was  of  opinion  that  the  observa- 
tions left  an  uncertainty  of  30,  leaving  a  margin  of  210 


1  In  the  Official  Book  of  £au,  a  work  of  the  twelfth  century  before  our 
era,  Book  XXVI,  par.  25,  in  the  enumeration  of  the  duties  of  the  astronomer 
royal  of  that  day,  there  is  mentioned  the  determination  of  *  the  places  of  the 
twenty-eight  stars,'  meaning  '  the  principal  stars  in  the  twenty-eight  lunar  man- 
sions.' The  names  of  the  stars  and  their  mansions  are  not  mentioned  ; — surely 
a  sufficient  indication  that  they  were  even  then  well  known.  See  Biot's  Etudes 
sur  l'Astronomie  Indienne,  &c,  pp.  112,  113. 


26  THE   SH<J   KING. 


years1.  On  the  other  hand,  J.  B.  Biot  found  in  the  direc- 
tions a  sufficient  confirmation  of  the  received  date  for 
Yao's  accession, — B.C.  ^357  2.  Appended  to  this  Introduc- 
tion is  a  chart  of  the  stars  as  they  were  visible  in  China  in 
B.  C.  2300,  which  the  Rev.  C.  Pritchard,  Savilian  Professor  of 
Astronomy  in  the  University  of  Oxford,  kindly  prepared 
for  me.  An  inspection  of  it,  in  the  manner  directed  by 
him,  will  show  that  the  phenomena  indicated  by  Yao  to 
his  astronomers  were  all  apparent  at  that  date.  This 
fact  must  be  accepted  as  a  strong  proof  of  the  approxi- 
mate correctness  of  the  chronology,  which  places  Ycio  in 
the  twenty-fourth  century  B.  c.  The  precession  of  the  equi- 
noxes, it  has  already  been  observed,  was  not  known  in 
China  till  more  than  2500  years  after  the  time  assigned  to 
Yao,  so  that  the  culminating  stars  at  the  equinoxes  and 
solstices  of  his  remote  period  could  not  have  been  com- 
puted back  scientifically  in  the  time  of  the  Kku  dynasty, 
during  which  the  collection  of  the  Shu  existed.  The  form 
in  which  the  directions  are  given,  and  other  things  in  the 
Canon,  savour,  indeed,  of  legend,  and  I  have  not  claimed 
for  it  that  in  its  present  form  it  be  received  as  a  document 
contemporaneous  with  the  reign  of  Yao.  I  have  argued, 
however,  that  the  compiler  of  it  had  before  him  ancient 
documents,  and  one  of  them  must  have  contained  the  facts 
about  the  culminating  of  the  stars,  which  I  have  now  en- 
deavoured to  set  in  a  clear  light. 

The  mention  of  these  culminating  stars  does  seem  to  fix 
Yao's  place  in  chronology  in  the  twenty-fourth  century  B.  C, 
and  to  show  that  at  that  remote  era  it  was  the  custom  to 
make  and  to  record  astronomical  observations  of  the  heavenly 
bodies.  Having  respect  to  these  things,  my  claim  to  have 
the  documents  of  the  Shu  from  the  Speech  at  Kan, 
nearly  two  centuries  later  than  Yao,  downwards,  regarded 
as  contemporaneous  with  the  events  which  they  describe, 
cannot  be  considered  extravagant. 

7.  In  the  27th  Book  of  the  5th  Part,  the  Marquis  of 


1  Egypt's  Place  in  Universal  History,  III,  pp.  400,  401. 

2  Etudes  sur  l'Astronomie  Indienne,  &c,  pp.  361-366, 


INTRODUCTION.  2? 


Lii  on  Punishments,  there  is  a  historical  reference  which 
would  carry  us  back  four  centuries  beyond  the  time  of 
Yao.  It  is  said  that,  '  According  to  the  teachings  of  anti- 
quity, Kk\h.  Yu  was  the  first  to  create  disorder.5  There 
is  no  intimation,  however,  of  the  time  when  this  rebel 
disturbed  the  happy  order  and  innocence  which  had  pre- 
viously prevailed  ;  and  the  very  same  sentence  brings  the 
review  of  antiquity  down  to  the  time  of  Shun.  But  the 
chronologers  place  him  in  the  reign  of  Hwang  Ti,  towards 
the  end  of  the  twenty-seventh  century  B.C.  Other  writers 
describe  the  struggle  between  him  and  Hwang  Ti,  in  which 
dragons,  mists,  and  the  invention  of  the  compass  play  con- 
spicuous parts.  It  is  to  the  credit  of  the  Shu,  and  an 
evidence  of  its  being  a  genuine  collection  of  historical  me- 
morials, that  this  cursory  reference  to  Khih.  Yu  is  the  only 
mention  in  it  of  any  name  older  than  that  of  Ycto. 


The  Use  of  the  Chart. 

This  chart  is  intended  to  represent  approximately  the  aspect  of 
the  principal  zodiacal  stars  as  seen  above  the  horizon  of  any 
place  in  central  China,  at  any  hour  of  any  day,  about  the  year 
B.c.  2300. 

In  order  to  apply  the  chart  to  a  practical  purpose,  the  reader  is 
advised  to  cut  out  a  sheet  of  paper  (cardboard  is  preferable)  with 
its  upper  edge  exactly  fitting  the  curved  line  ABOCD,  and  to 
draw,  near  to  the  bottom  of  the  paper,  a  line  coinciding  with  '  the 
hour-line '  on  the  chart. 

This  being  done,  if  it  be  asked  what  will  be  the  aspect  of  the 
heavens  when  the  Sun  sets  at  the  Vernal  Equinox,  the  reader  is  to 
move  the  line  at  the  bottom  of  the  cardboard  along  the  horizontal 
1  hour-line '  of  the  chart  until  the  place  of  the  Sun  in  the  Ecliptic  at 
the  Vernal  Equinox  O  just  touches  the  curved  top  of  the  paper ; 
then  all  the  stars  not  covered  over  are  above  the  horizon  at  the  time 
of  that  sunset,  viz.  in  this  case  Aldebaran,  Sirius,  Spica,  &c. ;  the 
Pleiades  are  just  setting,  Regulus  and  a  Hydrae  are  very  near  the 
meridian,  /3  Centauri  is  on  the  point  of  rising,  and  a  Serpentis  is 
well  up  above  the  horizon.  This  exactly  corresponds  with  that 
state  of  the  heavens  which  Yao,  (alleged  in  the  Chinese  records  to 
have  flourished  about  b.c  2300,)  indicated  to  his  astronomers  (Hsi 
and  Ho)  would  be  the  case,  viz.  that  he  would  find  the  star  (or  the 


28  THE    SH6    KING. 


stellar  division)  Shun  Hwo  (corresponding,  it  is  said,  to  a  Hydrse) 
culminating  at  the  time  of  sunset  at  the  Vernal  Equinox  \ 

Again,  if  it  be  required  to  find  what  constellation  is  culminating 
at  the  time  of  sunset  at  the  Summer  Solstice,  the  cardboard  must 
be  moved,  as  before,  towards  the  right  hand  until  the  position  of 
the  Sun  at  the  Summer  Solstice,  viz.  G,  just  touches  the  horizon 
curve,  when  it  will  be  seen  that  a  Serpentis  and  Antares  are  then 
culminating,  Regulus  and  /3  Centauri  are  just  setting,  while  the 
constellations  of  Aquila  and  Aquarius  are  rising ;  Vega  is  a  con- 
spicuous object  above  the  eastern  horizon.  This  again  corresponds 
to  the  indications  given  by  Yao  to  his  astronomers,  viz.  that  they 
would  find  the  constellation  Scorpio  culminating  at  the  time. 

Thirdly,  to  find  what  constellation  is  culminating  at  sunset  at  the 
Winter  Solstice,  the  cardboard  horizon  is  to  be  moved,  as  before, 
until  the  Sun  at  F  falls  upon  it,  when  the  constellations  Aries  and 
Taurus  with  the  Pleiades  will  be  seen  near  to  their  culmination. 
This  is  a  third  correspondence  with  the  indications  of  the  astro- 
nomical sovereign. 

Lastly,  at  sunset  of  the  Autumnal  Equinox  the  movable  horizon 
is  to  be  shifted  to  the  left  until  the  point  A  falls  upon  it,  where  it 
will  be  seen  in  this  position  that  the  stars  in  Aquarius  are  cul- 
minating at  the  time.  It  is  scarcely  possible  that  all  these  indica- 
tions of  the  positions  of  the  stars  at  these  several  times  of  the  year 
could  be  simultaneously  correct  at  any  other  epoch  than  some- 
where about  b.c.  2300  or  a  very  small  number  of  centuries  before 
or  after. 

The  reader  may  easily  make  for  himself  many  other  interesting 
applications  of  the  chart.  A  general  notion  of  the  effects  of 
precession  on  the  positions  of  the  stars  may  be  seen  at  once  by 
observing  the  three  positions  of  the  Pleiades,  at  the  three  epochs 
b.c  2300,  a.d.  1,  and  a.d.  1878,  marked  in  the  chart  by  the  letters 
K,  L,  M ;  and  as  the  approximate  effect  of  precession  is  to  cause 
all  stars  to  move  parallel  to  the  Ecliptic  and  through  the  same  arc, 
if  the  reader  will  imagine  every  star  to  be  shifted  parallel  to  the 
Ecliptic  through  spaces  equal  respectively  to  K  L,  L  M,  he  will  get 
the  aspect  of  the  heavens  at  the  epochs  a.d.  i  and  a.d.  1878. 

The  following  table  has  been  calculated  for  the  apparent  posi- 
tions of  the  principal  stars  in  the  years  b.c.  2300,  b.c  1500,  a.d.  i, 
and  a.d.  1000 ;  except  in  one  instance  it  will  be  found  to  confirm 
a  similar  calculation  made  by  Biot  for  the  earliest  of  these  dates. 

1  See  an  excellent  memoir  by  Mr.  Williams,  the  late  Assistant  Secretary  of 
the  Royal  Astronomical  Society,  on  Chinese  Comets,  procurable  at  the  apart- 
ments of  the  Royal  Astronomical  Society,  Burlington  House,  London. 


INTRODUCTION. 


29 


ft  >sjft  ft  ft  >»  >"Go  c/2"Co  £)»  h^o^ft  !tjO  >-=*  ft  ta-*  0 

Cu 

8 

P 

3 

(T) 

O 
-+* 
Ol 
p 

MMMMMMMMM                                                                                                       to     tO     tO     tO     tO     £yi 

M     M     M     m             M     HW     HCWW^l^-Utn    H           4^^^^     H^     M  W     B 

4k  onvo  -<r  004k   0  on  on-<i  voy>ui-K-K  ONOn  *<r  00  O  vo  oo  O  cow  p 

OO     M              tO            On     M            4k     M     M  OO     tO     M     tO            OO              M                       ^  CJl     H     „ 

h  o  ao^o  O  oooo  covo   kj  o  to  «<r  oo«<r «^j  m  «^r  O  O  cooo  O  oo  • 

> 

M     ^ 
TO     O 

O     ** 
&% 

O  V! 
O  n> 
•     P 

vow    O    004»-  vo    ON4k    NVWi   ONCOOO  O\h\0    m    0\VO    00  00  to  vo    00  0 
tj^w  to  oo  oooo  *<r  *<r  ooon  on  ootn   to  to  oo  m  o   O  OVO  vo  on  to 

OO  On             M             H4kUl     M     HC^^W                            W4»-     HUl             N'Jl 

4*.  4*.   oo  to  oo   On-*j  GOtn  ui^   O   to4^4>-vp*<rojoo4^   P0*^  V*   i"1   ^    "* 
4*.  b  on  to  ONOn  Ij  w  h  b\N  *ON-<r  bovb  b  -^  bo  m  onoo  iw  hv 

b 

O  sO    00  ON  ONOo    to    m    O    O    00  ON  ON4*  Oo4KtotoMMO^MMM. 
OnOi  On  «^T  ON  ON  M    K>    ON^T   m  On    00  004*    ^    ONONto    to    m\0    K>    toOop 

OO  4k     tO              tt^Ol     M^     M     N     H              tO     M            On     M     M     tO     M  On              ^     ^   V) 

OiW    ONONOOO    00  to    to  VO  On  On   OnO    O    m    ON  ti  4k  On  on  VO  On   O    GO  • 

> 

TO     O 

o  ^ 

M     ^ 

O^! 

O    <T> 
•       P 

•-< 

VO  Oo    O    004k    O    ONOn  Oo    OOOi    ON  00  00  On    OVO    O  »    00  00  00  to  V©  Mr    o 
OOotoooVOtoOOtOMtoOOO\OOOoVOQOO-<rO^ONMOnONtoVO 

WOi    MJiWiW    H    HC«                       ^y«    hot         Un  tr>  OO  4k    m  4k  On 
6n    00 Oo    O    tli    O    w  *^r  boon   boon    b    004*    OOOo  4»-    "to    m    ON  m  sb  Oo 

b 

tOtOtOMMMMM     —     MM                                                                                                      tOtOtOj^- 

m   O    O    00-<r  4*  4».    to    to    m    o    00"^r  On  On  On  4k  oo    to    to    m    O    to    to   to    . 

w  tn   m   m   to  oo        oo        4>-         m  4*  Ot   to   m        woi^Ot   hoiW   n   B 
4k    OOVO    to    OO  O    ONVO    h    O    h    ONOiO    n^    0\  OOtn  Oo    to    OOVO    O  "<T   f 

M   On  4k     M     tO     M            4k     M  OO              M  4k   OO   OO     tO    4k              MtOtOtOtOtOOOyj 

4».  «<r  m  4>.  4w   m  ON^r  Oson  vo  m  m  onoo  nt  OMy»  O  O  O  ~<r  Onoo  • 

.* 
> 

o 

>  ^ 

•    n> 

P 
•1 

CO  to  vo   ooon  o  «*■»  Onoo  vo  on  Onvo  goo*  o  oo0  4-mst  --J  m  OO-vj  o 

4*.  VO    004k    m  VO  On    OVO    O  4k  VO    w    *>    ON  ONOn    to  VO  VO  Oo    ONVO  On    M 

4».H(4k.toOotn4»>4k.4>.H4».Ootoi-itofcO          to        oo  On  on        4-^    ^ 
SsjOih    OOOo    ON  O    OOtn  oo    ONOn    00«<r  4^VOwOo-<rto-<rtoCJiVO 

4k.  4k.  *►-  *m  b  vb  6i  oo  m  on  bo  "onv©  oo  b  oo  *m  Vo  b  b  4*  k>  bovb  4* 

5z! 
b 

b 

tOtOtOMMMMMMMM                                                                                                      tOtOtOHy- 

to    to    m  VO    OOOn  4^00    to    to    OVO    OOOnON  ONOt  4k  4k  Oo    to    m  oo  Oo  Oo    . 

m          w                to<LntoOnOoOiwoo4^.to                "k,^^    ^M^3 
•n  m  4k    to  Oo  VO  On   COVO  oo    On4k    OOOt  VO    O   w   On4k  VO  VO    to  oo    to    CO  p 

M                  mm         ooOntOMOn           Htn^W    H+.           H    h    M           (0           k 
SOOn    to  VO    OOCOO    to  oo  Oo  4k    to  4*    w   Onm   O    hVO  •^M^^IOj^    • 

> 

O    <T> 
•      P 

00  ti  VO    GOO*    m  »<r  Ov4>-  VO    ON"<r  vo    OOOn    O    OOO  4*  «<r   ON*^r   m    op  ON  0 
O  4k  4k  oo    m  O0VOOnOiO^VO4K4K    to    O^  ONOO  VO  On    ONVO    m  Oo    O    ON  ° 

4kOt    m4kO0O^4k    m4kcji    toooonoo          totnOn         Oo  Oo  oo    to    to 
to   onoo   tooo   Ov  00  00  h  ui +.  tn  vp  \o  U»   ON  to   to^^r  »-•   Onoo  ^-   00 
ONVO  VO  -<r   m    ON  00-<r  bo  to  On   C04k    m  VO  On   *m    to    O  On    ONOO  4k    004*- 

b 

b 

to   S   m  SO    00  ONOn  i'w  W   m    OVO-<r«<r  ONOn  OiOi^W    M   O   O   O  r 

OnOiOn4KtWt0O0MOnM4K          woo    to  Oo  -£-                to  4k         Oo                g 
00OVO4Kfc0M00OOn00t0MMt0    OWO    00  00"<r   00  O    O  ^J   ON  to    p 

4KOnOJ*-"4KtnM          h^OiOiW'J'^^W^^O'Hh    to  On          w 
m4k    m    O    00OnONOn4k    OnO    to  On  On  VO    ON4k    O    m  On  4k    00  00  ^J  On   . 

> 

>  o 

p  ^ 

'-<  ? 

00^ 

•     P 

,_,(_,                      M     M                                                 M                                                          M 

k<T   to  VO    OOOn    m    00^t4k    0-<r--TVO    OOOn    O    00^ -£  ^   2^^0,7^   °^  <> 
On    O    O    m    m    ONOo    O  VO    O  4»-  *<r  004^  •<!   ON  ti    004^  oo    OY<r  00-n   m 

tOMOntOM         mm4kOo4kM         toonooooto        4km        oo    to  oo 
«<r  o»4k  «<rvovo  m  o*<r  m4»>  On*^  "^  Owm  p^-f-   On  OnsC'  vo  on   ^ 
O  m  -<r  to  «<r  on4k  vb  O  -K  bo  to  bo  bo^r  b  h  ^■^wivb«^Ki  O 

b 

b 

To  f€U>eT«9*A 


For  VieDefegaZas  trfihe  CZarendorLPress,  Oxford.. 


SacredBoeks  oftte£asl:  The  Shic£fng 


THE    SHU    KING. 


PART    I.      THE    BOOK    OF    THANG, 

The  Canon  of  Yao. 

Sh#  King,  the  name  of  the  whole  work,  has  been  sufficiently 
explained  in  the  Introduction.  The  name  of  this  Part,  the 
first  of  the  five  into  which  the  whole  is  divided,  is  the 
Book  of  Thang,  Thang  being  taken  as  the  dynastic  designa- 
tion of  Yao,  who  before  his  elevation  to  the  throne  had  been 
marquis  of  the  small  state  of  Thang,  the  name  of  which  is 
supposed  to  be  still  retained  in  Thang,  one  of  the  districts  of 
the  department  P&o-ting,  in  iTih-li.  It  is  said  that  after  his 
elevation  he  established  his  capital  in  Phing-yang,  lat.  360  06', 
long.  in°  33',  in  Shan-hsi.  But  all  this  is  very  uncertain.  See 
on  Part  III,  Book  iii,  ch.  2.  The  one  Book,  forming  this  Part, 
is  called  the  Canon  of  Y&o.  The  character  which  we  trans- 
late l  Canon '  means  a  document  of  the  most  exalted  nature, 
the  contents  of  which  are  entitled  to  the  greatest  regard.  The 
name  is  given  expressly  only  to  one  other  Book  in  the 
Shu.  The  Canons  are  the  first  of  the  six  classes  of  documents 
which  the  Sh&  contains. 

Y&o  is  the  subject  of  the  Book: — In  ch.  1,  in  his  personal  character 
and  the  general  results  of  his  government;  in  ch.  2,  in  his 
special  care  for  the  regulation  of  the  calendar  and  the  labours 
of  agriculture ;  in  ch.  3,  in  his  anxiety  to  find  one  who  could 
cope  with  the  ravages  of  a  terrible  inundation,  and  take  his 
place  on  the  throne.  The  third  chapter  introduces  to  our 
notice  Shun,  the  successor  of  Y&o. 


32  THE    Suti   KING. 


PART   I. 


i.  Examining  into  antiquity,  (we  find  that)  the  Tt 
Yao1  was  styled  Fang-hsun2.  He  was  reverential, 
intelligent,  accomplished,  and  thoughtful, — naturally 
and  without  effort.  He  was  sincerely  courteous,  and 
capable  of  (all)  complaisance.  The  bright  (influence 
of  these  qualities)  was  felt  through  the  four  quarters 
(of  the  land),  and  reached  to  (heaven)  above  and 
(earth)  beneath. 

He  made  the  able  and  virtuous  distinguished,  and 
thence  proceeded  to  the  love  of  (all  in)  the  nine 
classes  of  his  kindred,  who  (thus)  became  harmo- 
nious. He  (also)  regulated  and  polished  the  people 
(of  his  domain),  who  all  became  brightly  intelligent. 
(Finally),  he  united  and  harmonized  the  myriad 
states ;  and  so  the  black-haired  people  were  trans- 
formed.    The  result  was  (universal)  concord. 

2.  He  commanded  the  Hsis  and  Hos3,  in  reve- 
rent accordance  with  (their  observation  of)  the  wide 
heavens,  to  calculate  and  delineate  (the  movements 
and  appearances  of)  the  sun,  the  moon,  the  stars, 
and  the  zodiacal  spaces,  and  so  to  deliver  respect- 
fully the  seasons  to  be  observed  by  the  people. 


1  Yao  is  to  us  now  the  name  of  the  ancient  ruler  so  de- 
nominated. The  character  means  'high/  'lofty  and  grand/  It 
may  originally  have  been  an  epithet,  'the  Exalted  One.'  On 
the  meaning  of  Ti  in  Ti  Yao,  see  what  has  been  said  in  the 
Preface. 

2  The  Han  scholars  held  that  Fang-hsun  was  the  name  of  Yao. 
Those  of  Sung,  taking  the  characters  as  an  epithet,  make  them 
signify  '  the  Highly  Meritorious/ 

3  The  Hsis  and  Hos  seem  to  have  been  brothers  of  two 
families,  on  whom  devolved  the  care  of  the  calendar,  principally 
with  a  view  to  regulate  the  seasons  of  agriculture.  See  Parts  III, 
iv,  and  V,  xxvii.  On  Yao"s  directions  to  them,  see  the  Introduc- 
tion, pp.  24-28. 


CHAP.  2.  THE    CANON    OF   YAO.  33 

He  separately  commanded  the  second  brother 
Hst  to  reside  at  Yti-t1,  in  what  was  called  the 
Bright  Valley,  and  (there)  respectfully  to  receive 
as  a  guest  the  rising  sun,  and  to  adjust  and  arrange 
the  labours  of  the  spring.  '  The  day/  (said  he),  '  is 
of  the  medium  length,  and  the  star  is  in  Niao  ; — you 
may  thus  exactly  determine  mid-spring.  The  people 
are  dispersed  (in  the  fields),  and  birds  and  beasts 
breed  and  copulate/ 

He  further  commanded  the  third  brother  Hsl  to 
reside  at  Nan-/£iao2,  (in  what  was  called  the  Bril- 
liant Capital),  to  adjust  and  arrange  the  transforma- 
tions of  the  summer,  and  respectfully  to  observe  the 
exact  limit  (of  the  shadow).  '  The  day/  (said  he), 
'  is  at  its  longest,  and  the  star  is  in  Hwo ; — you  may 
thus  exactly  determine  mid-summer.  The  people 
are  more  dispersed ;  and  birds  and  beasts  have  their 
feathers  and  hair  thin,  and  change  their  coats/ 

He  separately  commanded  the  second  brother 
Ho  to  reside  at  the  west,  in  what  was  called  the 
Dark  Valley,  and  (there)  respectfully  to  convoy  the 
setting  sun,  and  to  adjust  and  arrange  the  completing 
labours  of  the  autumn.  '  The  night/  (said  he),  '  is 
of  the  medium  length,  and  the  star  is  in  Hsli ; — you 
may  thus  exactly  determine  mid-autumn.  The  people 
feel  at  ease,  and  birds  and  beasts  have  their  coats  in 
good  condition/ 

He  further  commanded  the  third  brother  Ho  to 


1  Yu-i  is  by  some  identified  with  Tang-^au,  in  Shan-tung, 
lat.  37°  48',  long.  1210  4';  by  others,  it  is  sought  in  Corea. 

2  Nan-y£iao  was  south,  it  is  said,  on  the  border  of  An -nan 
or  Cochin-China.  The  characters  for  'in  what  was  called  the 
Brilliant  Capital '  are  supposed  to  have  dropt  out  of  the  text. 

D 


34  THE   SH#   KING.  PART  I. 

reside  in  the  northern  region,  in  what  was  called 
the  Sombre  Capital,  and  (there)  to  adjust  and  ex- 
amine the  changes  of  the  winter.  '  The  day/  (said 
he),  '  is  at  its  shortest,  and  the  star  is  in  Mdo ; — you 
may  thus  exactly  determine  mid- winter.  The  people 
keep  in  their  houses,  and  the  coats  of  birds  and 
beasts  are  downy  and  thick/ 

The  Ti  said,  'Ah  !  you,  Hsis  and  Hos,  a  round 
year  consists  of  three  hundred,  sixty,  and  six  days. 
Do  you,  by  means  of  the  intercalary  month,  fix  the 
four  seasons,  and  complete  (the  period  of)  the  year. 
(Thereafter),  the  various  officers  being  regulated 
in  accordance  with  this,  all  the  works  (of  the  year) 
will  be  fully  performed/ 

3.  The  Tl  said,  'Who  will  search  out  (for  me)  a 
man  according  to  the  times,  whom  I  can  raise  and 
employ?'  Fang-^t  said,  '(Your)  heir-son  Kil1  is 
highly  intelligent/  The  Tl  said,  'Alas!  he  is  in- 
sincere and  quarrelsome  : — can  he  do  ?' 

The  Ti  said,  '  Who  will  search  out  (for  me)  a  man 
equal  to  the  exigency  of  my  affairs  ?'  Hwan-tau2 
said,  '  Oh !  the  merits  of  the  Minister  of  Works 
have  just  been  displayed  on  a  wide  scale/  The  Tl 
said,  '  Alas !  when  all  is  quiet,  he  talks  ;  but  when 
employed,  his  actions  turn  out  differently.  He  is 
respectful  (only)  in  appearance.  See !  the  floods 
assail  the  heavens  ! ' 

The   Tl    said,    '  Ho !    (President   of)   the    Four 


1  In  Part  II,  iv,  2,  Yii  speaks  of  this  son  of  Yao  as  '  the  haughty 
Ku  of  Tan/  Tan  probably  being  the  name  of  a  state,  over  which, 
according  to  tradition,  he  had  been  appointed. 

2  Hwan-tau  and  the  Minister  of  Works,  whom  he  recommends, 
appear  in  the  next  Book  as  great  criminals. 


CHAP.  3.  THE   CANON    OF   YAO.  35 

Mountains1,  destructive  in  their  overflow  are  the 
waters  of  the  inundation.  In  their  vast  extent  they 
embrace  the  hills  and  overtop  the  great  heights, 
threatening  the  heavens  with  their  floods,  so  that  the 
lower  people  groan  and  murmur  !  Is  there  a  capable 
man  to  whom  I  can  assign  the  correction  (of  this 
calamity) ?'  All  (in  the  court)  said,  'Ah!  is  there 
not  Khwan2  ?'  The  Tf  said,  'Alas  !  how  perverse  is 
he !  He  is  disobedient  to  orders,  and  tries  to  injure 
his  peers/  (The  President  of)  the  Mountains  said, 
'  Well  but  — .  Try  if  he  can  (accomplish  the  work)/ 
(Khwan)  was  employed  accordingly.  The  Tt  said  (to 
him),  'Go;  and  be  reverent !'  For  nine  years  he 
laboured,  but  the  work  was  unaccomplished. 

The  Tt  said,  '  Ho!  (President  of)  the  Four  Moun- 
tains, I  have  been  on  the  throne  seventy  years.  You 
can  carry  out  my  commands  ; — I  will  resign  my  place 
to  you/  The  Chief  said,  '  I  have  not  the  virtue  ; — 
I  should  disgrace  your  place/  (The  Tf)  said,  '  Show 
me  some  one  among  the  illustrious,  or  set  forth 
one  from  among  the  poor  and  mean/  All  (then) 
said  to  the  T 1,  '  There  is  an  unmarried  man  among 
the  lower  people,  called  Shun   of  Yli3/     The  Ti 


1  (President  of)  the  Four  Mountains,  or  simply  Four  Moun- 
tains, appears  to  have  been  the  title  of  the  chief  minister  of  Yao. 
The  four  mountains  were — mount  Thai  in  the  east ;  Hwa  in  the 
west,  in  Shan-hsi ;  Hang  in  the  south,  in  Hu-nan ;  and  Hang  in 
the  north,  in  iTih-li.  These,  probably,  were  the  limits  of  the 
country,  so  far  as  known,  and  all  within  these  points  were  the  care 
of  the  chief  minister. 

2  Khwan  is  believed  to  have  been  the  father  of  Yii,  who  after- 
wards coped  successfully  with  the  inundation.  We  are  told  that 
he  was  earl  of  Khxmg,  corresponding  to  the  present  district  of  Hu, 
in  Shen-hsi. 

8  See  on  the  title  of  next  Book. 

D  2 


36  THE   SH<J   KING.  part  i. 

said,  '  Yes,  I  have  heard  of  him.  What  have  you 
to  say  about  him  ?'  The  Chief  said,  '  He  is  the  son 
of  a  blind  man.  His  father  was  obstinately  unprin- 
cipled; his  (step-)mother  was  insincere;  his  (half-) 
brother  Hsiang  was  arrogant.  He  has  been  able, 
(however),  by  his  filial  piety  to  live  in  harmony  with 
them,  and  to  lead  them  gradually  to  self-government, 
so  that  they  (no  longer)  proceed  to  great  wicked- 
ness/ The  Tl  said,  'I  will  try  him;  I  will  wive 
him,  and  thereby  see  his  behaviour  with  my  two 
daughters/  (Accordingly)  he  arranged  and  sent 
down  his  two  daughters  to  the  north  of  the  Kwei  1y 
to  be  wives  in  (the  family  of)  Yti.  The  Ti  said  to 
them,  *  Be  reverent ! ' 


1  The  Kwei  is  a  small  stream  in  Shan-hsi,  which  flows  into 
the  Ho. 


PART    II.      THE    BOOKS    OF    YO. 


Book  I.     The  Canon  of  Shun. 

The  Books  of  Yii  is  the  name  of  this  Part  of  the  Shu,  Yii 
being  the  dynastic  designation  of  Shun,  as  Thang  was  that 
of  Y&o.  It  does  not  appear  so  clearly,  however,  how  it  came 
to  be  so.  Yii  must  be  the  name  of  a  state,  and  is  commonly 
identified  with  the  present  district  of  An-yi,  in  ITieh  K&u, 
Shan-hsi.  Some  think  that  Y&o,  after  marrying  his  two  daughters 
to  Shun,  appointed  him  lord  of  this  state;  but  in  the  first 
mention  of  him  to  Yao  in  the  last  Book,  he  is  called  Shun  of 
Yii.  It  is  generally  said  that  Shun's  ancestors  had  been  lords 
of  the  principality  of  Yii  up  to  the  time  of  his  father,  who  lost 
his  patrimony  and  was  reduced  to  the  rank  of  a  private  man. 
But  after  what  has  been  said,  in  the  Introduction,  on  the  Books 
in  the  first  two  Parts  of  the  Shu,  it  will  not  be  thought  surprising 
that  much  in  the  accounts  about  Yao  and  Shun  should  be  open 
to  suspicion.  According  to  Mencius,  IV,  Part  ii,  ch.  i,  Shun  was 
from  the  country  of  the  wild  tribes  on  the  east.  Sze-ma  Khitn 
makes  him  to  have  been  descended  from  Hwang-Ti,  in  which 
case  he  and  his  wives,  the  daughters  of  Y&o,  would  have  had 
the  same  ancestor.  Nothing  more  injurious  to  the  fame  of 
Ydo  and  Shun,  according  to  Chinese  notions  of  propriety,  could 
be  alleged  against  them. 

Shun  is  the  subject  of  this  Canon,  as  Yao  was  of  the  former. 
As  it  now  stands,  we  may  divide  it  into  six  chapters : — the  first, 
describing  Shun's  virtues  and  gradual  advancement ;  the  second, 
Yao's  satisfaction  with  his  administration  of  affairs,  and  asso- 
ciating of  Shun  with  himself  on  the  throne ;  the  third,  the  acts 
of  Shun  in  that  position ;  the  fourth,  the  demise  of  Ydo,  and 
Shun's  accession  as  sole  monarch;  the  fifth,  his  choice  of 
ministers  and  complete  organization  of  his  government;  and 
the  sixth,  his  death. 


38  THE    SHft    KING.  PART  II. 

i.  Examining  into  antiquity,  (we  find  that)  the 
Tl  Shun1  was  styled  .Oung-hwa2.  His  character 
was  entirely  conformed  to  (that  of)  the  (former)  Tt ; 
he  was  profound,  wise,  accomplished,  and  intelligent. 
He  was  mild  and  courteous,  and  truly  sincere.  The 
report  of  his  mysterious  virtue  was  heard  on  high, 
and  he  was  appointed  to  office. 

2.  (Shun)  carefully  set  forth  the  beauty  of  the 
five  cardinal  duties,  and  they  came  to  be  (univer- 
sally) observed.  Being  appointed  to  be  General 
Regulator,  the  affairs  of  every  (official)  department 
were  arranged  in  their  proper  seasons.  (Being 
charged)  to  receive  (the  princes)  from  the  four 
quarters  of  the  land,  they  were  all  docilely  sub- 
missive. Being  sent  to  the  great  plains  at  the  foot 
of  the  mountains,  notwithstanding  the  tempests  of 
wind,  thunder,  and  rain,  he  did  not  go  astray. 

The  Ti  said,  '  Come,  you  Shun.  I  have  consulted 
you  on  (all)  affairs,  and  examined  your  words,  and 
found  that  they  can  be  carried  into  practice  ; — (now) 
for  three  years.  Do  you  ascend  the  seat  of  the  Tt.' 
Shun  wished  to  decline  in  favour  of  some  one  more 
virtuous,  and  not  to  consent  to  be  (Y&o's)  successor. 
On  the  first  day  of  the  first  month,  (however),  he 
received  (Yio's)  retirement  (from  his  duties)  in  the 
temple  of  the  Accomplished  Ancestor3.* 

3.  He  examined  the  pearl-adorned  turning  sphere, 

1  If  Shun  be  taken  as  an  epithet,  it  will  mean  'the  Benevo- 
lent and  Sage/ 

2  .Oung-hwd,  the  name  of  Shun  according  to  the  Han  scholars, 
may  mean  '  the  Glorious  (Ydo)  repeated/ 

3  The  Accomplished  Ancestor  would  be,  probably,  the  indi- 
vidual in  some  distant  time  to  whom  Yao  traced  his  possession  of 
the  throne. 


BOOK  I.  THE   CANON    OF    SHUN.  39 

with  its  transverse  tube  of  jade,  and  reduced  to  a 
harmonious  system  (the  movements  of)  the  Seven 
Directors 1. 

Thereafter,  he  sacrificed  specially,  but  with  the 
ordinary  forms,  to  God ;  sacrificed  with  reverent 
purity  to  the  Six  Honoured  Ones ;  offered  their 
appropriate  sacrifices  to  the  hills  and  rivers ;  and 
extended  his  worship  to  the  host  of  spirits 2.* 

He  called  in  (all)  the  five  jade-symbols  of  rank  ; 
and  when  the  month  was  over,  he  gave  daily  audi- 
ence to  (the  President  of)  the  Four  Mountains,  and 
all  the  Pastors 3,  (finally)  returning  their  symbols  to 
the  various  princes. 

In  the  second  month  of  the  year  he  made  a  tour 
of  inspection  eastwards,  as  far  as  Thai-jung  4,  where 
he  presented  a  burnt-offering  to  Heaven,  and  sacri- 
ficed in  order  to  the  hills  and  rivers.*  Thereafter 
he  gave  audience  to  the  princes  of  the  east.  He  set 
in  accord  their  seasons  and  months,  and  regulated 
the  days  ;  he  made  uniform  the  standard-tubes,  with 
the  measures  of  length  and  of  capacity,  and  the  steel- 
yards ;  he  regulated  the  five  (classes  of)  ceremonies, 
with  (the  various)  articles  of  introduction, — the  five 

1  Probably  the  seven  stars  of  the  Great  Bear. 

2  Who  the  Six  Honoured  Ones  were  cannot  be  determined 
with  certainty.  An-kwo  thought  they  were,  '  the  seasons,  cold  and 
heat,  the  sun,  the  moon,  the  stars,  and  drought/  that  is,  certain 
spirits,  supposed  to  rule  over  these  phenomena  and  things,  and 
residing  probably  in  different  stars.  The  whole  paragraph  describes 
Shun's  exercise  of  the  prerogative  of  the  sovereign,  so  far  as  reli- 
gious worship  was  concerned. 

8  The  princes  of  the  various  states,  whose  official  chief  was  the 
President  of  the  Four  Mountains,  all '  shepherds  of  men/ 

4  Thai-^ung  is  mount  Thai,  in  Shan-tung.  See  note  on  the 
President  of  the  Four  Mountains,  p.  35. 


40  THE   SH#   KING.  PART  II. 

symbols  of  jade,  the  three  kinds  of  silk,  the  two 
living  (animals)  and  the  one  dead  one.  As  to  the 
five  instruments  of  rank,  when  all  was  over,  he  re- 
turned them.  In  the  fifth  month  he  made  a  similar 
tour  southwards,  as  far  as  the  mountain  of  the  south1, 
where  he  observed  the  same  ceremonies  as  at  Thai. 
In  the  eighth  month  he  made  a  tour  westwards,  as 
far  as  the  mountain  of  the  west 1,  where  he  did  as 
before.  In  the  eleventh  month  he  made  a  tour 
northwards,  as  far  as  the  mountain  of  the  north1, 
where  he  observed  the  same  ceremonies  as  in  the 
west.  He  (then)  returned  (to  the  capital),  went  to 
(the  temple  of)  the  Cultivated  Ancestor 2,  and  sacri- 
ficed a  single  bull.* 

In  five  years  there  was  one  tour  of  inspection,  and 
there  were  four  appearances  of  the  princes  at  court. 
They  gave  a  report  (of  their  government)  in  words, 
which  was  clearly  tested  by  their  works.  They  re- 
ceived chariots  and  robes  according  to  their  merits. 

He  instituted  the  division  (of  the  land)  into  twelve 
provinces3,  raising  altars  upon  twelve  hills  in  them.* 
He  (also)  deepened  the  rivers. 

He  exhibited  (to  the  people)  the  statutory  punish- 
ments, enacting  banishment  as  a  mitigation  of  the 
five  (great)  inflictions 4 ;  with  the  whip  to  be  em- 
ployed in  the  magistrates'  courts,  the  stick  to  be 


1  See  note  on  the  President  of  the  Four  Mountains,  p.  35. 

2  Probably  the  same  as  the  Accomplished  Ancestor  on  p.  38. 

3  As  Yu,  according  to  Part  III,  i,  divided  the  land  into  nine  pro- 
vinces,, this  division  of  it  into  twelve  must  have  been  subsequent  to 
the  completion  of  Yu's  work.     See  on  the  Tribute  of  Yu. 

4  Those  five  great  inflictions  were — branding  on  the  forehead  ; 
cutting  off  the  nose ;  cutting  off  the  feet ;  castration ;  and  death, 
inflicted  in  various  ways. 


BOOK  I.  THE    CANON    OF    SHUN.  4 1 

employed  in  schools1,  and  money  to  be  received 
for  redeemable  offences.  Inadvertent  offences  and 
those  which  could  be  ascribed  to  misfortune  were 
to  be  pardoned,  but  those  who  transgressed  pre- 
sumptuously and  repeatedly  were  to  be  punished 
with  death.  *  Let  me  be  reverent !  Let  me  be 
reverent!'  (he  said  to  himself.)  '  Let  compassion 
rule  in  punishment ! ' 

He  banished  the  Minister  of  Works  to  Yu  island  ; 
confined  Hwan-tau  on  mount  Kk\mg ;  drove  (the 
chief  of)  San-miao  (and  his  people)  into  San-wei, 
and  kept  them  there  ;  and  held  Khwan  a  prisoner 
till  death  on  mount  Yii.  These  four  criminals  being 
thus  dealt  with,  all  under  heaven  acknowledged  the 
justice  (of  Shuns  administration) 2. 

4.  After  twenty-eight  years  the  Ti  deceased, 
when  the  people  mourned  for  him  as  for  a  parent 
for  three  years.  Within  the  four  seas  all  the  eight 
kinds  of  instruments  of  music  were  stopped  and 
hushed.  On  the  first  day  of  the  first  month  (of  the) 
next  year,  Shun  went  to  (the  temple  of)  the  Accom- 
plished Ancestor.* 


1  This  punishment  was  for  officers  in  training ;  not  for  boys  at 
school. 

2  The  Minister  of  Works,  Hwan-tau,  and  Khwan  are  mentioned 
in  the  former  Canon.  Yu  island,  or  Yu  K&u,  was  in  the  extreme 
north  of  the  present  district  of  Mi-yun,  department  Shun-thien, 
JTih-lr. 

Mount  Zkng  was  in  the  district  of  Yung-ting,  Li  ^!au,  Hu-nan. 
San-mi&o  was  the  name  of  a  territory,  embracing  the  present 
departments  of  Wu-Mang  in  Hu-pei,  Yo-Mu  in  Hu-nan,  and 
^iu-^iang  in  i£iang-hsr.  San-wei  was  a  tract  of  country  round 
a  mountain  of  the  same  name  in  the  present  department  of  An- 
hsi,  Kan-su.  Mount  Yii  was  in  the  present  district  of  Than-^ang, 
Shan-tung. 


42  THE   Silt    KING.  PART  II. 

5.  He  deliberated  with  (the  President  of)  the 
Four  Mountains  how  to  throw  open  the  doors  (of 
communication  between  himself  and  the)  four 
(quarters  of  the  land),  and  how  he  could  see  with 
the  eyes,  and  hear  with  the  ears  of  all. 

He  consulted  with  the  twelve  Pastors1,  and  said 
to  them,  '  The  food  ! — it  depends  on  observing  the 
seasons.  Be  kind  to  the  distant,  and  cultivate  the 
ability  of  the  near.  Give  honour  to  the  virtuous, 
and  your  confidence  to  the  good,  while  you  discoun- 
tenance the  artful ; — so  shall  the  barbarous  tribes 
lead  on  one  another  to  make  their  submission/ 

Shun  said,  '  Ho  !  (President  of)  the  Four  Moun- 
tains, is  there  any  one  who  can  with  vigorous  ser- 
vice attend  to  all  the  affairs  of  the  Tl,  whom  I  may 
appoint  to  be  General  Regulator,  to  assist  me  in 
(all)  affairs,  managing  each  department  according  to 
its  nature  ? '  All  (in  the  court)  replied,  '  There  is 
Po-yu2,  the  Minister  of  Works/  The  Ti  said,  <  Yes. 
Ho !  Yti,  you  have  regulated  the  water  and  the 
land.  In  this  (new  office)  exert  yourself/  Yti  did 
obeisance  with  his  head  to  the  ground,  and  wished 
to  decline  in  favour  of  the  Minister  of  Agriculture, 
or  Hsieh,  or  K&o-y&o.  The  Tl  said,  'Yes,  but  do 
you  go  (and  undertake  the  duties)/ 

The  Ti  said,  'Khiz,  the  black-haired  people  are 
(still)  suffering  from  famine.     Do  you,  O  prince,  as 

1  These  were  the  twelve  princes  holding  the  chief  sway  and 
superintendence  in  his  twelve  provinces. 

2  Po-yu  is  the  great  Yu,  the  founder  of  the  Hsia  dynasty.  Po 
denotes,  probably,  his  order  as  the  eldest  among  his  brothers. 

3  Kh\  was  the  name  of  the  Minister  of  Agriculture,  better  known 
in  the  Shih  and  other  books  as  Hau-^i,  the  progenitor  of  the  kings 
of  jfjlu.    See  the  legend  about  him  in  the  Shih,  Part  III,  ii,  Ode  1. 


BOOK  I.  THE    CANON    OF    SHUN.  43 

Minister  of  Agriculture,  (continue  to)  sow  (for  them) 
the  various  kinds  of  grain/ 

The  Tl  said,  'Hsieh1,  the  people  are  (still) 
wanting  in  affection  for  one  another,  and  do  not 
docilely  observe  the  five  orders  of  relationship.  It 
is  yours,  as  the  Minister  of  Instruction,  reverently 
to  set  forth  the  lessons  of  duty  belonging  to  those 
five  orders.     Do  so  with  gentleness/ 

The  Ti  said,  *  Kao-yao2,  the  barbarous  tribes 
trouble  our  great  land.  There  are  (also)  robbers, 
murderers,  insurgents,  and  traitors.  It  is  yours,  as 
the  Minister  of  Crime,  to  use  the  five  punishments 
to  deal  with  their  offences.  For  the  infliction  of 
these  there  are  the  three  appointed  places.  There 
are  the  five  cases  in  which  banishment  in  the  appro- 
priate places  is  to  be  resorted  to,  to  which  places, 
though  five,  three  localities  are  assigned.  Perform 
your  duties  with  intelligence,  and  you  will  secure  a 
sincere  (submission)/ 

The  T  t  said,  *  Who  can  superintend  my  works,  as 
they  severally  require  ?'  All  (in  the  court)  replied, 
'Is  there  not  Zui3?'  The  Ti  said,  'Yes.  Ho! 
Zui,  you  must  be  Minister  of  Works/  Zui  did 
obeisance  with  his  head  to  the  ground,  and  wished 
to  decline  in  favour  of  Shu,  jOiang,  or  Po-yu.     The 

1  Hsieh  was  honoured  by  the  kings  of  the  Shang  dynasty  as  their 
progenitor.     See  the  Shih,  Part  IV,  iii,  Odes  3  and  4. 

2  See  the  preliminary  note  to  Book  iii. 

3  Zui  was  not  claimed  by  any  great  family  as  its  progenitor, 
but  he  was  handed  down  by  tradition  as  a  great  artificer.  See 
a  reference  to  him  in  Part  V,  xxii,  2.  Shu  and  .Oiang  must 
have  been  named  from  their  skill  in  making  halberds  and  axes. 
The  Yu  (quite  different  from  the  name  of  the  great  Yti)  in  Po-yti 
gives  us  no  indication  of  the  skill  of  that  individual. 


44  the  sh{j  KING.  PART  ii. 

Ti  said,  '  Yes,  but  do  you  go  (and  undertake  the 
duties).     Effect  a  harmony  (in  all  the  departments)/ 

The  Tt  said,  *  Who  can  superintend,  as  the  nature 
of  the  charge  requires,  the  grass  and  trees,  with  the 
birds  and  beasts  on  my  hills  and  in  my  marshes  ?' 
All  (in  the  court)  replied,  '  Is  there  not  Yi1?'  The 
Tt  said,  'Yes.  Ho!  Yl,  do  you  be  my  Forester/ 
Yt  did  obeisance  with  his  head  to  the  ground,  and 
wished  to  decline  in  favour  of  Au,  Hii,  Hsiung, 
or  PI1.  The  Tt  said,  'Yes,  but  do  you  go  (and 
undertake  the  duties).  You  must  manage  them 
harmoniously/ 

The  Tt  said, '  Ho  !  (President  of  the)  Four  Moun- 
tains, is  there  any  one  able  to  direct  my  three 
(religious)  ceremonies2?'  All  (in  the  court)  an- 
swered, Ms  there  not  Po-i 3  ?'  The  Tt  said,  'Yes. 
Ho  !  Po,  you  must  be  the  Arranger  in  the  Ancestral 
Temple.  Morning  and  night  be  reverent.  Be  upright, 
be  pure/  Po  did  obeisance  with  his  head  to  the 
ground,  and  wished  to  decline  in  favour  of  Khwei 
or  Lung.  The  Tt  said,  '  Yes,  but  do  you  go  (and 
undertake  the  duties).     Be  reverential ! '  * 

The  Tt  said,  'Khwei4,  I  appoint  you  to  be  Di- 
rector of  Music,  and  to  teach  our  sons,  so  that  the 
straightforward  shall  yet  be  mild  ;  the  gentle,  dig- 
nified ;  the  strong*,  not  tyrannical ;  and  the  impetuous, 

1  For  Yi,  see  the  preliminary  note  to  Book  iv.  He  wishes  here 
to  decline  his  appointment  in  favour  of  Kvl  ('  The  Cedar '),  Hu 
(<  The  Tiger '),  Hsiung  (<  The  Bear'),  or  Pi  ('  The  Grisly  Bear'). 

2  The  three  ceremonies  were  the  observances  in  the  worship  of 
the  Spirits  of  Heaven,  the  Spirits  of  Earth,  and  the  Spirits  of  Men. 

3  Po-i  was  the  progenitor  of  the  great  family  of  Alang,  members 
of  which  ruled  in  Kh\  and  other  states. 

4  Of  Khwei  we  know  nothing  more  than  what  is  here  told  us. 
The  character  denotes  a  monstrous  animal, '  a  dragon  with  one  leg/ 


BOOK  I.  THE   CANON    OF    SHUN.  45 

not  arrogant.  Poetry  is  the  expression  of  earnest 
thought ;  singing  is  the  prolonged  utterance  of  that 
expression  ;  the  notes  accompany  that  utterance,  and 
they  are  harmonized  themselves  by  the  standard- 
tubes.  (In  this  way)  the  eight  different  kinds  of 
musical  instruments  can  be  adjusted  so  that  one 
shall  not  take  from  or  interfere  with  another ;  and 
spirits  and  men  are  brought  into  harmony/  Khwei 
said/ 1  smite  the  (sounding-)  stone,  I  gently  strike  it,  and 
the  various  animals  lead  on  one  another  to  dance/ 

The  Tf  said,  'Lung1,  I  abominate  slanderous 
speakers  and  destroyers  of  the  (right)  ways,  who 
agitate  and  alarm  my  people.  I  appoint  you  to 
be  the  Minister  of  Communication.  Early  and  late 
give  forth  my  orders  and  report  to  me,  seeing  that 
everything  is  true/ 

The  Tl  said,  'Ho!  you,  twenty  and  two  men,  be 
reverent ;  so  shall  you  be  helpful  to  the  business 
(entrusted  to  me  by)  Heaven/  * 

Every  three  years  there  was  an  examination  of 
merits,  and  after  three  examinations  the  undeserving 
were  degraded,  and  the  deserving  advanced.  (By 
this  arrangement)  the  duties  of  all  the  departments 
were  fully  discharged;  the  (people  of)  San-miao 
(also)  were  discriminated  and  separated. 

6.  In  the  thirtieth  year  of  his  age,  Shun  was 
called  to  employment.  Thirty  years  he  was  on  the 
throne  (with  Yao).  Fifty  years  afterwards  he  went 
on  high  and  died 2.* 

1  We  are  in  ignorance  of  Lung,  as  we  are  of  Khwei.  The 
character  denotes  'the  dragon/ 

2  The  Chinese  text  is  here  difficult  to  construe.  KiX  Hsi  says 
that  the  term  '  went  on  high'  is  appropriate  to  the  death  of  the  Son 
of  Heaven ;  and  that  the  meaning  is  that  Shun  went  to  heaven. 


46  THE   SHti   KING. 


PART  II. 


Book  II.     The  Counsels  of  the  Great  Yu. 

Of  the  six  classes  of  documents  in  the  Shu,  '  Counsels '  are  the 
second,  containing  the  wise  remarks  and  suggestions  of  high 
officers  on  the  subject  of  government. 

This  Book  may  be  divided  into  three  chapters : — the  first,  con- 
taining counsels  of  Yii  and  Yi  on  principles  and  methods  of 
government;  the  second,  occupied  with  Shun's  resignation  of 
the  administration  to  Yu,  and  containing  also  many  sage 
observations  and  maxims;  and  the  third,  describing  Yii's 
operations  against  the  people  of  Mi&o,  and  counsels  addressed 
to  him  by  Yi.  The  style  differs  from  that  of  the  Canons ;  being 
more  sententious,  and  falling  occasionally  into  rhyme. 

i.  Examining  into  antiquity,  (we  find  that)  the 
Great  Yu1  was  styled  Wan-ming2.  Having  ar- 
ranged and  divided  (the  land),  all  to  the  four  seas, 
in  reverent  response  to  the  Tl,  he  said,  '  If  the 
sovereign  can  realize  the  difficulty  of  his  sovereign- 
ship,  and  the  minister  the  difficulty  of  his  ministry, 
the  government  will  be  well  ordered,  and  the  black- 
haired  people  will  sedulously  seek  to  be  virtuous/ 

The  Ti  said,  '  Yes ;  let  this  really  be  the  case, 
and  good  words  will  nowhere  lie  hidden ;  no  men  of 
virtue  and  talents  will  be  left  neglected,  away  from 
court,  and  the  myriad  states  will  all  enjoy  repose. 
(But)  to  obtain  the  views  of  all ;  to  give  up  one's 
opinion  and  follow  that  of  others ;  to  keep  from 
oppressing   the   helpless,   and    not   to   neglect   the 

1  The  name  Yii,  taken  as  an  epithet,  would  mean  'the  Un- 
constrained/ As  an  epithet  after  death,  it  has  the  meaning  of 
'  Receiving  the  Resignation  and  Perfecting  the  Merit ; '  but  this  is 
evidently  based  on  the  commonly  received  history  of  Yii. 

2  Wan-ming  may  be  translated, '  the  Accomplished  and  the  Issuer 
of  Commands/ 


BOOK  II.        THE   COUNSELS    OF    THE   GREAT  YU.  47 

straitened  and  poor; — it  was  only  the  (former)  Ti 
who  could  attain  to  this/ 

Yl  said,  '  Oh !  your  virtue,  O  T  i,  is  vast  and  in- 
cessant. It  is  sagely,  spirit-like,  awe-inspiring,  and 
adorned  with  all  accomplishments.  Great  Heaven 
regarded  you  with  its  favour,  and  bestowed  on  you  its 
appointment.  Suddenly  you  possessed  all  within  the 
four  seas,  and  became  ruler  of  all  under  heaven.'* 

Yii  said,  *  Accordance  with  the  right  leads  to  good 
fortune ;  following  what  is  opposed  to  it,  to  bad  ; — 
the  shadow  and  the  echo/  Yi  said,  '  Alas !  be 
cautious  !  Admonish  yourself  to  caution,  when  there 
seems  to  be  no  occasion  for  anxietyL  Do  not  fail  to 
observe  the  laws  and  ordinances.  Do  not  find  your 
enjoyment  in  idleness.  Do  not  go  to  excess  in 
pleasure.  In  your  employment  of  me"  nf  yynrth  W 
none  come  between  you  and  them.  Put  away  evil 
without  hesitation.  Do  not  carry  onf.  plans,  of  (the 
wisdom  of)  which~YOu  have  doubts.  Study  that  all 
your  purposes  may  be  with  the  light  of  reason.  Do 
not  go  against  what  is  right,  to  get  the  praise  of  the 
.people.  Do  notoppose  the  people's  (wishes)Tto  follow 
your  own  desires.  (Attend  to  these  things)  without 
idleness  or  omission,  and  the  barbarous  tribes  all 
around  will  come  and  acknowledge  your  sovereignty/ 

Yii  said,  'Oh!  think  (of  these  things),  O  Ti.  The 
virtue  (of  the  ruler)  is  seen  in  (his)  good  govern- 
ment, and  that  government  in  the  nourishing  of 
the  people.  There  are  water,  fire,  metal,  wood, 
the  earth,  and  grain, — these  must  be  duly  regu- 
lated; there  are  the  rectification  of  (the  people's) 
virtue,  (the  tools  and  other  things)  that  supply  the 
conveniences  of  life,  and  the  securing  abundant 
means  of  sustentation, — these  must  be  harmoniously 


48  THE    SH<J    KING. 


PART   II. 


attended  to.  When  the  nine  services  (thus  indicated) 
have  been  orderly  accomplished,  that  accomplish- 
ment will  be  hailed  by  (the  people's)  songs.  Caution 
them  with  gentle  (words),  correct  them  with  the 
majesty  (of  law),  stimulate  them  with  the  songs  on 
those  nine  subjects, — in  order  that  (your  success)  may 
not  suffer  diminution/  The  Ti  said, '  The  earth  has 
been  reduced  to  order,  and  the  (influences  of)  heaven 
produce  their  complete  effect ;  those  six  magazines 
and  three  departments  of  (governmental)  action  are 
all  truly  regulated,  and  may  be  depended  on  for  a 
myriad  generations  : — this  is  your  merit.' 

2.  The  Ti  said,  '  Come,  you  Yti.  I  have  occu- 
pied my  place  for  thirty  and  three  years.  I  am 
between  ninety  and  a  hundred  years  old,  and  the 
laborious  duties  weary  me.  Do  you,  eschewing  all 
indolence,  take  the  leading  of  my  people/  Yii  re- 
plied, '  My  virtue  is  not  equal  (to  the  position),  and 
the  people  will  not  repose  in  me.  (But  there  is) 
Kao-yao  with  vigorous  activity  sowing  abroad  his 
virtue,  which  has  descended  on  the  black-haired 
people,  till  they  cherish  him  in  their  hearts.  O  Ti, 
think  of  him !  When  I  think  of  him,  (my  mind)  rests 
on  him  (as  the  man  fit  for  this  place) ;  when  I 
would  put  him  out  of  my  thoughts,  (my  mind  still) 
rests  on  him ;  when  I  name  and  speak  of  him,  (my 
mind)  rests  on  him  (for  this) ;  the  sincere  outgoing 
of  my  thoughts  about  him  is  that  he  is  the  man.  O 
Ti,  think  of  his  merits/ 

The  Ti  said,  '  K&o-yao,  that  of  these  my  minis- 
ters and  all  (my  people)  hardly  one  is  found  to 
offend  against  the  regulations  of  the  government  is 
owing  to  your  being  Minister  of  Crime,  and  intelli- 
gent in  the  use  of  the  five  punishments,  thereby 


BOOK  II,        THE   COUNSELS    OF    THE   GREAT   YU.  49 

assisting  (the  inculcation  of)  the  five  cardinal  duties, 
with  a  view  to  the  perfection  of  my  government, 
and  that  through  punishment  there  may  come  to 
be  no  punishments,  but  the  people  accord  with  (the 
path  of)  the  Mean.  (Continue  to)  be  strenuous/ 
K&o-yao  replied,  '  Your  virtue,  O  Ti,  is  faultless. 
You  condescend  to  your  ministers  with  a  kindly 
ease  ;  you  preside  over  the  multitudes  with  a  gene- 
rous forbearance.  Punishments  do  not  extend  to 
(the  criminal's)  heirs,  while  rewards  reach  to  (suc- 
ceeding) generations.  You  pardon  inadvertent 
faults,  however  great,  and  punish  purposed  crimes, 
however  small.  In  cases  of  doubtful  crimes,  you 
deal  with  them  lightly ;  in  cases  of  doubtful  merit, 
you  prefer  the  high  estimation.  Rather  than  put  an 
innocent  person  to  death,  you  will  run  the  risk  of 
irregularity  and  error.  This  life-loving  virtue  has 
penetrated  the  minds  of  the  people,  and  this  is  why 
they  do  not  render  themselves  liable  to  be  punished 
by  your  officers/  The  T  t  said,  '  That  I  am  able 
to  follow  and  obtain  what  I  desire  in  my  govern- 
ment, the  people  responding  everywhere  as  if  moved 
by  the  wind, — this  is  your  excellence/ 

The  Ti  said,  'Come  Yu.  The  inundating  waters 
filled  me  with  dread,  when  you  accomplished  truly 
(all  that  you  had  represented),  and  completed  your 
service  ; — thus  showing  your  superiority  to  other 
men.  Full  of  toilsome  earnestness  in  the  service  of 
the  country,  and  sparing  in  your  expenditure  on 
your  family,  and  this  without  being  full  of  yourself 
and  elated, — you  (again)  show  your  superiority  to 
other  men.  You  are  without  any  prideful  assump- 
tion, but  no  one  under  heaven  can  contest  with  you 
the  palm  of  ability ;  you  make  no  boasting,  but  no 

[i]  E 


50  the  sh6  king. 


PART   II. 


one  under  heaven  can  contest  with  you  the  palm  of 
merit.  I  see  how  great  is  your  virtue,  how  admir- 
able your  vast  achievements.  The  determinate 
appointment  of  Heaven  rests  on  your  person;  you 
must  eventually  ascend  (the  throne)  of  the  great 
sovereign.*  The  mind  of  man  is  restless,  prone  (to 
err) ;  its  affinity  to  what  is  right  is  small.  Be  dis- 
criminating, be  uniform  (in  the  pursuit  of  what  is 
right),  that  you  may  sincerely  hold  fast  the  Mean. 
Do  not  listen  to  unsubstantiated  words ;  do  not 
follow  plans  about  which  you  have  not  sought 
counsel.  Of  all  who  are  to  be  loved,  is  not  the 
ruler  the__chief  ?  Qf_all  who  are  to  be  feared,  are 
not  the  people  the  chief  ?  I f_the  multitude  were 
without  their  sovereign  HeadT  whom  should  they 
sustain  aloft  ?  If  the  sovereign  had  not  the  multi- 
tude, there  would  be  none  to  guard  the  country  for 
him.  Be  reverential !  Carefully  maintain  the  throne 
which  you  are  to  occupy,  cultivating  (the  virtues) 
that  are  to  be  desired  in  you.  If  within  the  four 
seas  there  be  distress  and  poverty,  your  Heaven- 
conferred  revenues  will  come  to  a  perpetual  end. 
It  is  the  mouth  which  sends  forth  what  is  good,  and 
raises  up  war.     I  will  not  alter  my  words/ 

Yti  said,  '  Submit  the  meritorious  ministers  one 
by  one  to  the  trial  of  divination1,  and  let  the  favour- 
ing indication  be  followed.'  The  Tf  replied,  '(Ac- 
cording to  the  rules  for)  the  regulation  of  divination, 
one  should  first  make  up  his  mind,  and  afterwards 
refer  (his  judgment)  to  the  great  tortoise-shell.  My 
mind  (in  this  matter)  was  determined  in  the  first 
place;    I   consulted   and   deliberated   with   all   (my 


1  On  Divination,  see  Part  V,  iv. 


BOOK  II.       THE   COUNSELS    OF    THE   GREAT   YU.  5 1 

ministers  and  people),  and  they  were  of  one  accord 
with  me.  The  spirits  signified  their  assent,  and  the 
tortoise-shell  and  divining  stalks  concurred.  Divi- 
nation, when  fortunate,  should  not  be  repeated/* 
Yii  did  obeisance  with  his  head  to  the  ground,  and 
firmly  declined  (the  place).  The  T  f  said, '  You  must 
not  do  so.  It  is  you  who  can  suitably  (occupy  my 
place)/  On  the  first  morning  of  the  first  month,  (Yii) 
received  the  appointment  in  the  temple  (dedicated  by 
Shun)  to  the  spirits  of  his  ancestors  \  and  took  the 
leading  of  all  the  officers,  as  had  been  done  by  the  Ti 
at  the  commencement  (of  his  government).  * 

3.  The  Tt  said,  'Alas!  O  Yii,  there  is  only  the 
lord  of  Miio2  who  refuses  obedience;  do  you  go 
and  correct  him/  Yii  on  this  assembled  all  the 
princes,  and  made  a  speech  to  the  host,  saying, '  Ye 
multitudes  here  arrayed,  listen  all  of  you  to  my 
orders.  Stupid  is  this  lord  of  Miao,  ignorant,  erring, 
and  disrespectful.  Despiteful  and  insolent  to  others, 
he  thinks  that  all  ability  and  virtue  are  with  himself. 
A  rebel  to  the  right,  he  destroys  (all  the  obliga- 
tions of)  virtue.  Superior  men  are  kept  by  him  in 
obscurity,  and  mean  men  fill  (all)  the  offices.  The 
people  reject  him  and  will  not  protect  him.     Heaven 

1  Many  contend  that  this  was  the  ancestral  temple  of  Yao. 
But  we  learn  from  Confucius,  in  the  seventeenth  chapter  of  the 
Doctrine  of  the  Mean,  that  Shun  had  established  such  a  temple 
for  his  own  ancestors,  which  must  be  that  intended  here. 

2  The  lord  of  Miao  against  whom  Yii  proceeded  would  not 
be  the  one  whom  Shun  banished  to  San-wei,  as  related  in  the 
former  Book,  but  some  chieftain  of  the  whole  or  a  portion  of  the 
people,  who  had  been  left  in  their  native  seat.  That  Yao,  Shun, 
and  Yii  were  all  obliged  to  take  active  measures  against  the 
people  of  Mido,  shows  the  difficulty  with  which  the  Chinese  sway 
was  established  over  the  country. 

E  2 


52  THE    SHft  KING. 


PART   II. 


is  sending  down  calamities  upon  him.*  I  therefore, 
along  with  you,  my  multitude  of  gallant  men,  bear 
the  instructions  (of  the  Tf)  to  punish  his  crimes. 
Do  you  proceed  with  united  heart  and  strength,  so 
shall  our  enterprize  be  crowned  with  success/ 

At  the  end  of  three  decades,  the  people  of  Miao 
continued  rebellious  against  the  commands  (issued 
to  them),  when  Yl  came  to  the  help  of  Yti,  saying, 
'  It  is  virtue  that  moves  Heaven ;  there  is  no  dis- 
tance to  which  it  does  not  reach.  Pride  brings  loss, 
and  humility  receives  increase ; — this  is  the  way  of 
Heaven.*  In  the  early  time  of  the  Tl,  when  he  was 
living  by  mount  Li1,  he  went  into  the  fields,  and 
daily  cried  with  tears  to  compassionate  Heaven, 
and  to  his  parents,  taking  to  himself  all  guilt,  and 
charging  himself  with  (their)  wickedness.*  (At  the 
same  time)  with  respectful  service  he  appeared  be- 
fore Kii-sau,  looking  grave  and  awe-struck,  till  Kit 
also  became  transformed  by  his  example.  Entire 
sincerity  moves  spiritual  beings, — how  much  more 
will  it  move  this  lord  of  Miao  !'*  Yti  did  homage  to 
the  excellent  words,  and  said,  '  Yes/  (Thereupon) 
he  led  back  his  army,  having  drawn  off  the  troops. 
The  Tl  set  about  diffusing  on  a  grand  scale  the 
virtuous  influences  of  peace ;  —  with  shields  and 
feathers  they  danced  between  the  two  staircases  (in 
his  courtyard).  In  seventy  days,  the  lord  of  Miao 
came  (and  made  his  submission). 


1  Mount  Li  is  found  in  a  hill  near  Phu  I£&ii,  department  of 
Phing-yang,  Shan-hsi.  It  is  difficult  to  reconcile  what  Yi  says 
here  of  Shun  'in  his  early  life'  and  his  father  Ku-sau  with  the 
account  of  it  as  happening  when  Shun  was  fifty  years  old;  see 
Mencius  V,  Part  i,  ch.  5.  The  whole  is  legendary,  and  there  were, 
no  doubt,  more  forms  of  the  legend  than  one. 


BOOK  III.  THE    COUNSELS    OF   kAo-YAO.  53 


Book  III.     The  Counsels  of  Kao-yao. 

Kao-yao  was  Minister  of  Crime  to  Shun,  and  is  still  celebrated 
in  China  as  the  model  for  all  administrators  of  justice.  There 
are  few  or  no  reliable  details  of  his  history.  Sze-ma  Khien 
says  that  Yii,  on  his  accession  to  the  throne,  made  Kao-yao 
his  chief  minister,  with  the  view  of  his  ultimately  succeeding 
him,  but  that  the  design  was  frustrated  by  Kao-yao's  death. 
But  if  there  had  been  such  a  tradition  in  the  time  of  Mencius, 
he  would  probably  have  mentioned  it,  when  defending  Yii  from 
the  charge  of  being  inferior  to  Yao  and  Shun,  who  resigned  the 
throne  to  the  worthiest,  whereas  he  transmitted  it  to  his  son. 
K&o-yao's  surname  was  Yen,  but  an  end  was  made  of  his 
representatives,  when  the  principality  belonging  to  them  was 
extinguished  in  the  dynasty  of  K&xi  by  the  ambitious  state  of 
Khk.  There  is  still  a  family  in  China  with  the  surname  Kao, 
claiming  to  be  descended  from  this  ancient  worthy ;  but  K&o 
and  Yao  are  to  be  taken  together  in  the  Shu  as  his  name. 

The  ( Counsels '  in  the  Book  do  not  appear  as  addressed  directly 
to  Shun,  but  are  found  in  a  conversation  between  Yii  and 
Kao-yao,  the  latter  being  the  chief  speaker.  The  whole  may 
be  divided  into  four  chapters:  —  the  first,  enunciating  the 
principle  that  in  government  the  great  thing  is  for  the  ruler 
to  pursue  the  course  of  his  virtue,  which  will  be  seen  in  his 
knowledge  and  choice  of  men  for  office,  thereby  securing  the 
repose  of  the  people;  the  second,  illustrating  how  men  may  be 
known ;  the  third,  treating  of  the  repose  of  the  people ;  in  the 
fourth,  the  speaker  asserts  the  reasonableness  of  his  sentiments, 
and  humbly  expresses  his  own  desire  to  be  helpful  to  the 
sovereign. 

i.  Examining  into  antiquity,  (we  find  that)  Kcio- 
yclo  said,  *  If  (the  sovereign)  sincerely  pursues  the 
course  of  his  virtue,  the  counsels  (offered  to  him) 
will  be  intelligent,  and  the  aids  (of  admonition  that 
he  receives)  will  be  harmonious/  Yii  said,  '  Yes, 
but  explain  yourself/  Kdo-yio  said,  '  Oh  !  let  him 
be  careful  about  his  personal  cultivation,  with 
thoughts    that   are   far-reaching,    and   thus  he  will 


54  THE   SH<J   KING.  PART  II. 

produce  a  generous  kindness  and  nice  observance 
of  distinctions  among  the  nine  branches  of  his 
kindred.  All  the  intelligent  (also)  will  exert  them- 
selves in  his  service ;  and  in  this  way  from  what 
is  near  he  will  reach  to  what  is  distant/  Yti  did 
homage  to  the  excellent  words,  and  said,  '  Yes/ 
Kao-yao  continued,  '  Oh  !  it  lies  in  knowing  men, 
and  giving  repose  to  the  people/  Yti  said,  '  Alas  ! 
to  attain  to  both  these  things  might  well  be  a  diffi- 
culty even  to  the  Tl.  When  (the  sovereign)  knows 
men,  he  is  wise,  and  can  put  every  one  into  the 
office  for  which  he  is  fit.  When  he  gives  repose 
to  the  people,  his  kindness  is  felt,  and  the  black- 
haired  race  cherish  him  in  their  hearts.  When  he 
can  be  (thus)  wise  and  kind,  what  occasion  will  he 
have  for  anxiety  about  a  Hwan-tau  ?  what  to  be 
removing  a  lord  of  Miio  ?  what  to  fear  any  one 
of  fair  words,  insinuating  appearance,  and  great 
artfulness  ? ' 

2.  Kao-yao  said,  '  Oh !  there  are  in  all  nine 
virtues  to  be  discovered  in  conduct,  and  when  we 
say  that  a  man  possesses  (any)  virtue,  that  is  as 
much  as  to  say  he  does  such  and  such  things/ 
Yti  asked,  '  What  (are  the  nine  virtues)  ? 9  Kao- 
yao  replied,  '  Affability  combined  with  dignity ; 
mildness  combined  with  firmness  ;  bluntness  com- 
bined with  respectfulness ;  aptness  for  government 
combined  with  reverent  caution ;  docility  combined 
with  boldness  ;  straightforwardness  combined  with 
gentleness ;  an  easy  negligence  combined  with  dis- 
crimination  ;  boldness  combined  with  sincerity ;  and 
valour  combined  with  righteousness.  (When  these 
qualities  are)  displayed,  and  that  continuously,  have 
we  not  the  good  (officer)  ?     When  there  is  a  daily 


BOOK  in.  THE    COUNSELS    OF   KAO-YAO.  55 

display  of  three  (of  these)  virtues,  their  possessor 
could  early  and  late  regulate  and  brighten  the  clan 
(of  which  he  was  made  chief).  When  there  is  a 
daily  severe  and  reverent  cultivation  of  six  of  them, 
their  possessor  could  brilliantly  conduct  the  affairs 
of  the  state  (with  which  he  was  invested).  When 
(such  men)  are  all  received  and  advanced,  the  pos- 
sessors of  those  nine  virtues  will  be  employed  in 
(the  public)  service.  The  men  of  a  thousand  and 
men  of  a  hundred  will  be  in  their  offices ;  the 
various  ministers  will  emulate  one  another ;  all  the 
officers  will  accomplish  their  duties  at  the  proper 
times,  observant  of  the  five  seasons  (a;s  the  several 
elements  predominate  in  them), — and  thus  their 
various  duties  will  be  fully  accomplished.  Let  not 
(the  Son  of  Heaven)  set  to  the  holders  of  states 
the  example  of  indolence  or  dissoluteness.  Let  him 
be  wary  and  fearful,  (remembering  that)  in  one  day 
or  two  days  there  may  occur  ten  thousand  springs 
of  things.  Let  him  not  have  his  various  officers 
cumberers  of  their  places.  The  work  is  Heaven's  ; 
men  must  act  for  it ! '  * 

3.  '  From  Heaven  are  the  (social)  relationships 
with  their  several  duties ;  we  are  charged  with  (the 
enforcement  of)  those  five  duties  ; — and  lo  !  we  have 
the  five  courses  of  honourable  conduct1.  From 
Heaven  are  the  (social)  distinctions  with  their 
several  ceremonies  ;  from  us  come  the  observances 
of  those  five  ceremonies  ; — and  lo  !  they  appear  in 


1  The  five  duties  are  those  belonging  to  the  five  relationships, 
which  are  the  constituents  of  society; — those  between  husband 
and  wife,  father  and  son,  ruler  and  subject,  elder  brother  and 
younger,  friend  and  friend. 


56  THE    SHU    KING.  PART  II. 

regular  practice1.  When  (sovereign  and  ministers 
show)  a  common  reverence  and  united  respect  for 
these,  lo !  the  moral  nature  (of  the  people)  is  made 
harmonious.  Heaven  graciously  distinguishes  the 
virtuous  ; — are  there  not  the  five  habiliments,  five 
decorations  of  them 2  ?  Heaven  punishes  the 
guilty  ; — are  there  not  the  five  punishments,  to  be 
severally  used  for  that  purpose  ?  The  business  of 
government ! — ought  we  not  to  be  earnest  in  it  ? 
ought  we  not  to  be  earnest  in  it  ?  * 

*  Heaven  hears  and  sees  as  our  people  hear  and 
see;  Heaven  brightly  approves  and  displays  its 
terrors  as  our  people  brightly  approve  and  would 
awe  ; — such  connexion  is  there  between  the  upper 
and  lower  (worlds).  How  reverent  ought  the  masters 
of  territories  to  be ! '  * 

4.  Kao-yao  said, '  My  words  are  in  accordance  with 
reason,  and  may  be  put  in  practice/  Yu  said,  '  Yes, 
your  words  may  be  put  in  practice,  and  crowned 
with  success/  Kao-yao  added,  '  (As  to  that)  I  do 
not  know,  but  I  wish  daily  to  be  helpful.  May  (the 
government)  be  perfected  V 


Book  IV.     The  Yi  and  K\. 

Yi  and  K\9  the  names  of  Shim's  Forester  and  Minister  of 
Agriculture,  both  of  whom  receive  their  appointments  in  Book  i, 
occur  near  the  commencement  of  this  Book,  and  occasion  is 
thence  taken  to  give  its  title  to  the  whole.  But  without  good 
reason ;  for  these  worthies  do  not  appear  at  all  as  interlocutors 


1  The  five  ceremonies  are  here  those  belonging  to  the  distinctions 
of  rank  in  connexion  with  the  five  constituent  relations  of  society. 

2  See  in  next  Book,  ch.  1. 


BOOK  IV.  THE   YI    AND    Kl.  57 

in  it.  Yu  is  the  principal  speaker;  the  Book  belongs  to  the 
class  of  '  Counsels.' 

To  Yr  there  is,  of  course,  assigned  an  ancient  and  illustrious 
descent ;  what  is  of  more  importance,  is  that  the  lords  of  -Oin, 
who  finally  superseded  the  kings  of  -ZTau,  traced  their  lineage  to 
him.  Kh\  was  the  name  of  K%  the  character  for  the  latter  term 
meaning  'Millet/  and  Kh\  was  so  styled  from  his  labours  in 
teaching  the  people  to  sow  and  reap,  so  that  Ki  became  equi- 
valent to  '  Minister  of  Agriculture/ 

The  contents  of  the  Book  have  been  divided  into  three  chapters. 
The  first  gives  a  conversation  between  Shun  and  Yii.  Yii 
relates  his  own  diligence  and  achievements  as  a  model  to  Shun, 
and  gives  him  various  admonitions,  while  Shun  insists  on  what 
his  ministers  should  be,  and  wherein  he  wished  them  to  help 
him.  In  the  second  chapter,  Khwei,  the  Minister  of  Music, 
makes  his  appearance;  it  has  no  apparent  connexion  with  the 
former.  In  the  third,  Shun  and  Kao-yao  sing  to  each  other 
on  the  mutual  relation  of  the  sovereign  and  his  ministers. 

i.  The  Ti  said,  'Come  Yii,  you  also  must  have 
excellent  words  (to  bring  before  me)/  Yti  did 
obeisance,  and  said,  'Oh!  what  can  I  say,  O  Ti, 
(after  Kao-yao)  ?  I  can  (only)  think  of  maintaining 
a  daily  assiduity/  K&o-y&o  said,  '  Alas  !  will  you 
describe  it  ? '  Yti  replied,  *  The  inundating  waters 
seemed  to  assail  the  heavens,  and  in  their  vast 
extent  embraced  the  hills  and  overtopped  the  great 
mounds,  so  that  the  people  were  bewildered  and 
overwhelmed.  I  mounted  my  four  conveyances1, 
and  all  along  the  hills  hewed  down  the  trees,  at  the 
same  time,  along  with  Yi,  showing  the  multitudes 
how  to  get  flesh  to  eat.  I  (also)  opened  passages  for 
the  streams  (throughout  the)  nine  (provinces),  and 
conducted  them  to  the  four  seas.  I  deepened  (more- 
over) the  channels  and  canals,  and  conducted  them 
to  the  streams,  sowing  (grain),  at   the   same  time, 

1  See  the  Introduction,  pp.  16,  17. 


58  THE    SH.ti    KING.  PART  II. 

along  with  Ki,  and  showing  the  multitudes  how  to 
procure  the  food  of  toil,  (in  addition  to)  the  flesh  meat. 
I  urged  them  (further)  to  exchange  what  they  had  for 
what  they  had  not,  and  to  dispose  of  their  accumu- 
lated stores.  (In  this  way)  all  the  people  got  grain 
to  eat,  and  the  myriad  regions  began  to  come  under 
good  rule/  Kao-yao  said,  *  Yes,  we  ought  to  model 
ourselves  after  your  excellent  words/ 

Yti  said, '  Oh  !  carefully  maintain,  O  T !,  the  throne 
which  you  occupy/  The  Ti  replied,  'Yes/  and 
Yti  went  on,  '  Find  your  repose  in  your  (proper) 
resting-point.  Attend  to  the  springs  of  things  ;  study 
stability ;  and  let  your  assistants  be  the  upright : — 
then  shall  your  movements  be  grandly  responded  to, 
(as  if  the  people  only)  waited  for  your  will.  Thus 
you  will  brightly  receive  (the  favour  of)  God; — 
will  not  Heaven  renew  its  appointment  of  you,  and 
give  you  blessing  ?'  * 

The  Tt  said,  'Alas!  what  are  ministers? — are 
they  not  (my)  associates  ?  What  are  associates  ? — 
are  they  not  (my)  ministers  ? '  Yti  replied,  c  Yes  ; ' 
and  the  Tt  went  on,  '  My  ministers  constitute  my 
legs  and  arms,  my  ears  and  eyes.  I  wish  to  help 
and  support  my  people  ; — you  give  effect  to  my 
wishes.  I  wish  to  spread  the  influence  (of  my 
government)  through  the  four  quarters  ; — you  act 
as  my  agents.  I  wish  to  see  the  emblematic  figures 
of  the  ancients, — the  sun,  the  moon,  the  stars,  the 
mountain,  the  dragons,  and  the  flowery  fowl  ( =  the 
pheasant),  which  are  depicted  (on  the  upper  gar- 
ment) ;  the  temple  cups,  the  pondweed,  the  flames, 
the  grains  of  rice,  the  hatchet,  and  the  symbol  of 
distinction,  which  are  embroidered  (on  the  lower 
garment), — (I  wish  to  see  all  these)  fully  displayed 


BOOK  IV.  THE   YI    AND   jrf.  59 

in  the  five  colours,  so  as  to  form  the  (ceremonial) 
robes  ; — it  is  yours  to  see  them  clearly  (for  me). 
I  wish  to  hear  the  six  pitch-tubes,  the  five  notes 
(determined  by  them),  and  the  eight  kinds  of  musical 
instruments  (regulated  again  by  these),  examining 
thereby  the  virtues  and  defects  of  government, 
according  as  (the  odes  that)  go  forth  (from  the 
court,  set  to  music),  and  come  in  (from  the  people), 
are  ordered  by  those  five  notes  ; — it  is  yours  to  hear 
them  (for  me).  When  I  am  doing-  wrong,  it  is  yours 
tO  Correct  me  ; Hn   t^t   fnllnw  mf>   to  my  farer  and, 

when  you  have  rptirHi  ^aw  nth^r  rprnf^ks  to  make. 
Be  reverent,  ye  associates,  who  are  before  and  behind 
and  on  each  side  of  me !  As  to  all  the  obstinately 
stupid  and  calumniating  talkers,  who  are  found  not 
to  be  doing  what  is  right,  are  there  not — the  target 
to  exhibit  (their  true  character) x ,  the  scourge  to 
make  them  recollect,  and  the  book  of  remem- 
brance 2  ?  Do  we  not  wish  them  to  live  along  with 
us  ?  There  are  also  the  masters  (of  music)  to  re- 
ceive their  compositions,  (set  them  to  music),  and 
continually  publish  them  (as  corrected  by  them- 
selves). If  they  become  reformed  they  are  to  be 
received  and  employed;  if  they  do  not,  let  the 
terrors  (of  punishment)  overtake  them/ 


1  Archery  was  anciently  made  much  of  in  China,  and  supposed 
to  be  a  test  of  character.  Unworthy  men  would  not  be  found 
hitting  frequently,  and  observing  the  various  rules  of  the  exercise. 
Confucius  more  than  once  spoke  of  archery  as  a  discipline  of 
virtue ;    see  Analects,  III,  xvi. 

2  In  the  Official  Book  of  Zau,  the  heads  of  districts  are 
required  to  keep  a  register  of  the  characters  of  the  people. 
Shun's  Book  of  Remembrance  would  be  a  record  on  wood 
or  cloth.     The  reference  implies  the  use  of  writing. 


60  THE    SHft    KING.  PART  If. 

Yii  said,  '  So  far  good !  But  let  your  light  shine, 
O  T  i,  all  under  heaven,  even  to  every  grassy  corner 
of  tne  sea-shore,  and  throughout  the  myriad  regions 
the  most  worthy  of  the  people  will  all  (wish)  to  be 
your  ministers.  Then,  O  Tf,  you  may  advance 
them  to  office.  They  will  set  forth,  and  you  will 
receive,  their  reports  ;  you  will  make  proof  of  them 
according  to  their  merits ;  you  will  confer  chariots 
and  robes  according  to  their  services.  Who  will 
then  dare  not  to  cultivate  a  humble  virtue  ?  who 
will  dare  not  to  respond  to  you  with  reverence  ?  If 
you,  O  T 1,  do  not  act  thus,  all  (your  ministers)  toge- 
ther will  daily  proceed  to  a  meritless  character/ 

'  Be  not  haughty  like  K\x  of  Tan *,  who  found 
his  pleasure  only  in  indolence  and  dissipation,  and 
pursued  a  proud  oppressive  course.  Day  and  night 
without  ceasing  he  was  thus.  He  would  make  boats 
go  where  there  was  no  water.  He  introduced  licen- 
tious associates  into  his  family.  The  consequence 
was  that  he  brought  the  prosperity  of  his  house  to 
an  end.  I  took  warning  from  his  course.  When  I 
married  in  Thu-shan 2,  (I  remained  with  my  wife  only 
the  days)  hsin,  ^an,  kwei,  and  >£ia.  When  (my  son) 
Kh\  was  wailing  and  weeping,  I  did  not  regard  him, 
but  kept  planning  with  all  my  might  my  labour  on 
the  land.  (Then)  I  assisted  in  completing  the  five 
Tenures3,  extending  over  5000  11 4;  (in  appointing) 
in  the  provinces  twelve  Tutors,  and  in  establishing 

1  This  was  the  son  of  Y&o.     He  must  have  been  made  lord  of 
some  principality,  called  Tan. 

2  Yu  married  the  daughter  of  the  lord  of  Thu-shan,  a  principality 
in  the  present  department  of  Fang-yung,  An-hui. 

8  See  in  the  Tribute  of  Yu,  Part  II. 

*  The  li  is  what  is  called  the  Chinese  mile,  generally  r-eckoned 
to  be  360  paces. 


BOOK   IV. 


THE   Yl    AND   k1.  6 1 


in  the  regions  beyond,  reaching  to  the  four  seas, 
five  Presidents.  These  all  pursue  the  right  path, 
and  are  meritorious  ;  but  there  are  still  (the  people 
of)  Miao,  who  obstinately  refuse  to  render  their 
service.  Think  of  this,  O  Ti/  The  Ti  said, 
*  That  my  virtue  is  followed  is  the  result  of  your 
meritorious  services  so  orderly  displayed.  And  now 
Kao-yao,  entering  respectfully  into  your  arrange- 
ments, is  on  every  hand  displaying  the  (various)  pun- 
ishments, as  represented,  with  entire  intelligence.' 

2.  Khwei  said,  'When  the  sounding-stone  is  tapped 
or  struck  with  force,  and  the  lutes  are  strongly  swept 
or  gently  touched,  to  accompany  the  singing,  the 
progenitors  (of  the  Tf)  come  (to  the  service),*  the 
guest  of  Yii1  is  in  his  place,  and  all  the  princes 
show  their  virtue  in  giving  place  to  one  another. 
(In  the  court)  below  (the  hall)  there  are  the  flutes 
and  hand-drums,  which  join  in  at  the  sound  of  the 
rattle,  and  cease  at  that  of  the  stopper,  when  the 
organ  and  bells  take  their  place.  (This  makes) 
birds  and  beasts  fall  moving.  When  the  nine  parts 
of  the  service,  as  arranged  by  the  Ti,  have  all  been 
performed,  the  male  and  female  phoenix  come  with 
their  measured  gambolings  (into  the  court).' 

Khwei  said,  *  Oh  !  when  I  smite  the  (sounding-) 
stone,  or  gently  strike  it,  the  various  animals  lead 
on  one  another  to  dance 2,  and  all  the  chiefs  of  the 
official  departments  become  truly  harmonious/ 

1  Kb  of  Tan. 

2  These  last  words  of  Khwei  have  already  appeared  in  Book  i, 
ch.  5.  They  are  more  in  place  here,  though  this  second  chapter 
has  no  apparent  connexion  with  what  precedes.  '  The  stone ' 
is  the  sonorous  stone  formed,  often  in  the  shape  of  a  carpenter's 
square,  into  a  musical  instrument,  still  seen  everywhere  in  China. 


62  THE   SH#   KING. 


PART   II. 


3.  The  Tl  on  this  made  a  song,  saying,  *  We 
must  deal  cautiously  with  the  favouring  appoint- 
ment of  Heaven,  at  every  moment  and  in  the  smallest 
particular/  *     He  then  sang, 

*  When  the  members  (work)  joyfully, 
The  head  rises  (grandly) ; 

And  the  duties  of  all  the   offices  are  fully  dis- 
charged ! ' 

Kclo-ydo  did  obeisance  with  his  head  to  his  hands 
and  then  to  the  ground,  and  with  a  loud  and  rapid 
voice  said, '  Think  (O  Tl).  It  is  yours  to  lead  on  and 
originate  things.  Pay  careful  attention  to  your  laws 
(in  doing  so).  Be  reverential !  and  often  examine 
what  has  been  accomplished  (by  your  officers).  Be 
reverential  V    With  this  he  continued  the  song, 

'  When  the  head  is  intelligent, 
The  members  are  good ; 
And  all  affairs  will  be  happily  performed ! ' 

Again  he  continued  the  song, 

'  When  the  head  is  vexatious, 
The  members  are  idle ; 
And  all  affairs  will  go  to  ruin ! ' 

The  T 1  said,  *  Yes,  go  and  be  reverently  (attentive 
to  your  duties)/ 


PART  III.     THE  BOOKS  OF  HSlA. 


Book  I.     The  Tribute  of  Yu. 

Hsia  is  the  dynastic  designation  under  which  Yu  and  his  descend- 
ants held  the  throne  for  439  years  (b. c.  2205-1767).  On  the 
conclusion  of  his  labours,  according  to  what  was  the  universally 
accepted  tradition  in  the  Aau  period,  Yii  was  appointed  by 
Yao  to  be  earl  of  Hsia\  a  small  principality  in  Ho-nan,  identified 
with  the  present  Yu-Hu,  department  Khai-fang,  which  thus  still 
retains  the  name  of  Yii. 

It  has  been  repeatedly  said  in  the  Introduction  that  the  Tribute 
of  Yu  describes  what  was  done  before  the  death  of  Y&o.  The 
reason  why  it  got  its  place  as  the  first  of  the  Books  of  Hsia  was, 
no  doubt,  because  the  merit  set  forth  in  it  was  the  ground  of 
Yii's  advancement  to  the  throne. 

Altogether  the  Books  of  Hsia  are  properly  no  more  than  three ; — 
a  fact  which  shows  that  in  so  early  a  period  the  duty  of  the 
recorder  was  little  exercised,  or  that  the  destruction  of  its 
monuments  in  the  course  of  time  was  nearly  complete.  We 
may  assume  that  it  was  in  consequence  of  both  of  these  things 
that,  when  the  collection  of  the  Shu  was  made,  only  three 
documents  of  Hsia  were  found,  to  go  into  it. 

The  word  '  Tribute '  in  the  name  of  this  first  Book  is  not  to  be 
understood  only  in  the  sense  of  a  contribution  paid  by  one 
nation  to  another  in  acknowledgment  of  subjection,  but  also 
as  the  contribution  of  revenue  paid  by  subjects  to  their  proper 
ruler.  The  term,  moreover,  gives  a  very  inadequate  idea  of 
the  contents,  which  describe  generally  the  labours  of  Yii  in 
remedying  the  disasters  occasioned  by  the  inundation  with 
which  he  had  to  cope,  and  how  he  then  defined  the  boundaries 
of  the  different  provinces,  made  other  important  territorial 
divisions,  and  determined  the  quality  of  the  soil  in  each  pro- 
vince, and  the  proportion  of  revenue  it  should  pay,  with  other 
particulars.  The  Book,  if  we  could  fully  credit  it,  would  be 
a  sort  of  domesday  book  of  China  in  the  twenty-third  century 


64  THE    SH<J   KING.  PART  III. 

b.c,  in  the  compass  of  a  few  pages.  In  the  classification  of 
the  Books  of  the  Shu,  according  to  their  subject-matter,  this  is 
rightly  considered  as  a  Canon.  The  first  section  of  it  is  divided 
into  one  short  introductory  chapter,  and  nine  others,  each  con- 
taining the  account  of  one  province. 

Section  1. 

i.  Yd  divided  the  land.  Following  the  course  of 
the  hills,  he  cut  down  the  trees.  He  determined 
the  highest  hills  and  largest  rivers  (in  the  several 
regions). 

2.  With  respect  to  Ki  K&u1,  he  did  his  work 
at  Hu-khau,  and  took  effective  measures  at  (the 
mountains)  Liang  and  Kki.  Having  repaired  the 
works  on  Thai-yuan,  he  proceeded  on  to  the  south 
of  (mount)  Yo.  He  was  successful  with  his  labours 
on  Tan-hwai,  and  went  on  to  the  cross-flowing  stream 
of  ^Tang. 

The  soil  of  this  province  was  whitish  and  mellow. 
Its  contribution  of  revenue  was  the  highest  of  the 
highest  class,  with  some  proportion  of  the  second. 
Its  fields  were  the  average  of  the  middle  class. 

1  K\  Khi  embraced  the  present  provinces  of  Shan-hsi,  ^ih-W, 
the  three  most  northern  departments  of  Ho-nan,  and  the  western 
portion  of  Liao-tung.  It  had  the  Ho — what  we  call  the  Yellow 
river — on  three  sides  of  it.  On  the  west  was  all  that  part  of  the 
Ho  which  forms  the  dividing  line  between  Shen-hsi  and  Shan-hsi. 
At  the  south-western  corner  of  Shan-hsi,  the  Ho  turns  to  the 
east:  and  in  Yu's  time  it  flowed  eastwards  to  about  the  place 
where  Kih-\%  Shan-tung,  and  Ho-nan  all  touch,  forming  the 
southern  boundary  of  K\  jffau.  Thence  it  ran  north  and  east, 
till  its  waters  entered  the  present  gulph  of  iTih-li,  forming,  so 
far,  the  eastern  boundary  of  the  province.  The  northern  boundary 
must  be  left  undefined. 

It  would  be  foreign  to  the  object  of  the  present  publication  of 
the  Shu,  and  take  too  much  space,  to  give  notes  on  the  details 
of  Yu's  operations  in  K\  Kiw  and  the  other  provinces. 


BOOK  I.  THE   TRIBUTE    OF   YU.  65 

The  (waters  of  the)  Hang  and  Wei  were  brought 
to  their  proper  channels,  and  Ta-lii  was  made  capable 
of  cultivation. 

The  wild  people  of  the  islands  (brought)  dresses 
of  skins  (i.  e.  fur  dresses) ;  keeping  close  on  the  right 
to  the  rocks  of  A^ieh,  they  entered  the  Ho. 

3.  Between  the  Ki  and  the  Ho  was  Yen  Afau1. 
The  nine  branches  of  the  Ho  were  made  to  keep 

their  proper  channels.  Lei-hsia  was  made  a  marsh, 
in  which  (the  waters  of)  the  Yung  and  the  3ti  were 
united.  The  mulberry  grounds  were  made  fit  for 
silkworms,  and  then  (the  people)  came  down  from 
the  heights,  and  occupied  the  grounds  (below). 

The  soil  of  this  province  was  blackish  and  rich  ; 
the  grass  in  it  was  luxuriant,  and  the  trees  grew 
high.  Its  fields  were  the  lowest  of  the  middle  class. 
Its  contribution  of  revenue  was  fixed  at  what  would 
just  be  deemed  the  correct  amount ;  but  it  was  not 
required  from  it,  as  from  the  other  provinces,  till 
after  it  had  been  cultivated  for  thirteen  years.  Its 
articles  of  tribute  were  varnish  and  silk,  and,  in 
baskets,  woven  ornamental  fabrics. 

They  floated  along  the  Ki  and  Tha,  and  so 
reached  the  Ho. 

4.  The  sea  and  (mount)  Tai  were  the  boundaries 
of  KkmgK&u\ 

1  Yen  iTau  was  a  small  province,  having  the  Ho  on  the  north, 
the  K\  on  the  south,  the  gulph  of  Xih-li  on  the  east,  and  Yii 
K§u,  Yus  seventh  province,  on  the  west.  It  embraced  the 
department  of  Td-ming,  with  portions  of  those  of  Ho-^ien  and 
Thien-^ing,  in  iTih-li,  and  the  department  of  Tung-Mang,  with 
portions  of  those  of  JSTi-nan  and  Yen-^au,  in  Shan-tung. 

2  Khiiig  K&n,  having  mount  Tai  and  Hsu  iTau  (the  next 
province)  on  the  west  and  south,  Yen  Zau  and  the  sea  on  the 
north-west  and  the  north,  and  the   sea  on  the  east  and  south, 

[1]  F 


66  THE   SHti    KING. 


PART   III. 


(The  territory  of)  Yli-f  was  defined  ;  and  the  Wei- 
and  3ze  were  made  to  keep  their  (old)  channels. 

Its  soil  was  whitish  and  rich.  Along  the  shore 
of  the  sea  were  wide  tracts  of  salt  land.  Its  fields 
were  the  lowest  of  the  first  class,  and  its  contri- 
bution of  revenue  the  highest  of  the  second.  Its 
articles  of  tribute  were  salt,  fine  cloth  of  dolichos 
fibre,  productions  of  the  sea  of  various  kinds  ;  with 
silk,  hemp,  lead,  pine  trees,  and  strange  stones,  from 
the  valleys  of  Tai.  The  wild  people  of  L&i  were 
taught  tillage  and  pasturage,  and  brought  in  their 
baskets  the  silk  from  the  mountain  mulberry  tree. 

They  floated  along  the  Wan,  and  so  reached 
the  AI 

5.  The  sea,  mount  Tai,  and  the  Hwai  were  (the 
boundaries  of)  Hsu  K&u1. 

The  Hw&i  and  the  t  (rivers)  were  regulated.  The 
(hills)  Mang  and  Yii  were  made  fit  for  cultivation. 
(The  waters  of)  Ta-yeh  were  confined  (so  as  to  form 

would  be  still  smaller  than  Yen  Xau,  and  contain  the  three 
departments  of  Khmg-kiu,  Lai-^au,  and  Teng-^au,  with  the 
western  portion  of  that  of  iTi-nan,  in  Shan-tung.  From  the  text 
we  should  never  suppose  that  it  passed  across  the  sea  which 
washes  the  north  and  east  of  Shan-tung,  and  extended  indefinitely 
into  Li&o-tung  and  Corla.  This,  however,  is  the  view  of  many 
Chinese  geographers. 

1  The  western  boundary  of  Hsu  ^"au,  which  is  not  given  in 
the  text,  was  Yii  K&m,  and  part  of  Khmg  ^au.  It  embraced 
the  present  department  of  Hsii-Mu,  the  six  districts — Th&o-yuan, 
jOing-ho,  An-tung,  Hsii-^ien,  Sui-ning,  and  Kan-yfi,  department 
of  Hwai-an,  with  Phei  i£au  and  Hal  ^au, — all  in  iTiang-su ;  the 
whole  of  Yen-/£3,u  department,  Tung-phing  lau  and  the  south 
of  Phing-yin  district  in  the  department  of  Thai-an,  the  department 
of  t-^au,  and  portions  of  those  of  jO-nan  and  Khing-k&u, — all 
in  Shan-tung;  with  the  four  districts  Hw&i-yuan,  Wu-ho,  Hung, 
and  Ling-pi,  department  of  Fang-yang,  with  Sze  i£au  and  Hsu 
jSau, — all  in  An-hui. 


BOOK  I.  THE    TRIBUTE    OF   YU.  67 

a  marsh) ;  and  (the  tract  of)  Tung-yuan  was  success- 
fully brought  under  management. 

The  soil  of  this  province  was  red,  clayey,  and  rich. 
Its  grass  and  trees  grew  more  and  more  bushy.  Its 
fields  were  the  second  of  the  highest  class  ;  its  con- 
tribution of  revenue  was  the  average  of  the  second. 
Its  articles  of  tribute  were — earth  of  five  different 
colours,  variegated  pheasants  from  the  valleys  of 
mount  Yu,  the  solitary  dryandra  from  the  south  of 
mount  Yi,  and  the  sounding-stones  that  (seemed  to) 
float  on  the  (banks  of  the)  Sze.  The  wild  tribes 
about  the  Hwai  brought  oyster-pearls  and  fish,  and 
their  baskets  full  of  deep  azure  and  other  silken 
fabrics,  chequered  and  pure  white. 

They  floated  along  the  Hwai  and  the  Sze,  and  so 
reached  the  Ho. 

6.  The  Hwai  and  the  sea  formed  (the  boundaries 
of)  Yang  Aau \ 

The  (lake  of)  Phang-l!  was  confined  to  its  proper 
limits,  and  the  sun-birds  ( =  the  wild  geese)  had  places 

1  The  Hwai  was  the  boundary  of  Yang  Xau  on  the  north, 
and  we  naturally  suppose  that  the  other  boundary  mentioned, 
the  sea,  should  be  referred  to  the  south  of  the  province.  If  it 
were  really  so,  Yang  Zau  must  have  extended  along  the  coast 
as  far  as  Cochin-China,  and  not  a  few  Chinese  scholars  argue  that 
it  did  so.  But  that  no  southern  boundary  of  the  province  is 
mentioned  may  rather  be  taken  as  proving  that  when  this  Book 
was  compiled,  the  country  south  of  the  iTiang — the  present 
Yang-jze — was  unknown. 

Along  the  greater  part  of  its  course,  the  province  was  con- 
terminous on  the  west  with  King  K&ii,  and  in  the  north-west 
with  Yu  i£au.  We  may  safely  assign  to  it  the  greater  portion  of 
An-hui,  and  a  part  of  the  department  of  Hwang-^au,  in  Hu-pei. 
All  this  would  be  the  northern  portion  of  the  province.  How  far 
it  extended  southwards  into  ^e-^iang  and  ifiang-hsi,  it  is  impos- 
sible to  say. 

F  2 


68  THE  Sttti   KING.  PART  in. 

to  settle  on.  The  three  Kiang  were  led  to  enter 
the  sea,  and  it  became  possible  to  still  the  marsh  of 
Aan.  The  bamboos,  small  and  large,  then  spread 
about ;  the  grass  grew  thin  and  long,  and  the  trees 
rose  high  ;  the  soil  was  miry. 

The  fields  of  this  province  were  the  lowest  of  the 
lowest  class  ;  its  contribution  of  revenue  was  the 
highest  of  the  lowest  class,  with  a  proportion  of  the 
class  above.  Its  articles  of  tribute  were  gold,  silver, 
and  copper ;  yao  and  khwan  stones  ;  bamboos,  small 
and  large ;  (elephants')  teeth,  hides,  feathers,  hair, 
and  timber.  The  wild  people  of  the  islands  brought 
garments  of  grass,  with  silks  woven  in  shell-patterns 
in  their  baskets.  Their  bundles  contained  small 
oranges  and  pummeloes, — rendered  when  specially 
required. 

They  followed  the  course  of  the  Ki&ng  and  the 
sea,  and  so  reached  the  Hwai  and  the  Sze. 

7.  (Mount)  King  and  the  south  of  (mount)  Hang 
formed  (the  boundaries  of)  King  K&w  1. 

The  Kiang  and  the  Han  pursued  their  (common) 
course  to  the  sea,  as  if  they  were  hastening  to  court. 
The  nine  Kiang  were  brought  into  complete  order. 
The  Tho  and  .Oien  (streams)  were  conducted  by 

1  Mount  King,  which  bounded  King  Zau  on  the  north,  is 
in  the  department  of  Hsiang-yang,  Hu-pei,  and  is  called  the 
southern  King,  to  distinguish  it  from  another  mountain  of  the 
same  name  farther  north  in  Yung  Zau.  Mount  Hang,  its  southern 
boundary,  is  'the  southern  mountain '  of  the  Canon  of  Shun 
in  Hang-Mu  department,  Hu-nan.  Yang  Kau  was  on  the  east, 
and  the  country  on  the  west  was  almost  unknown.  King  Zau 
contained  the  greater  portion  of  the  present  provinces  of  Hu-pei 
and  Hu-nan,  and  parts  also  of  Kwei-Mu  and  Sze-£Man.  Some 
geographers  also  extend  it  on  the  south  into  Kwang-tung  and 
Kwang-hsi,  which  is  very  unlikely. 


BOOK  I.  THE    TRIBUTE   OF   YU.  69 

their  proper  channels.  The  land  in  (the  marsh  of) 
Ylin  (became  visible),  and  (the  marsh  of)  Mang  was 
made  capable  of  cultivation. 

The  soil  of  this  province  was  miry.  Its  fields 
were  the  average  of  the  middle  class ;  and  its  con- 
tribution of  revenue  was  the  lowest  of  the  highest 
class.  Its  articles  of  tribute  were  feathers,  hair, 
(elephants')  teeth,  and  hides ;  gold,  silver,  and 
copper ;  kh\m  trees,  wood  for  bows,  cedars,  and 
cypresses ;  grindstones,  whetstones,  flint  stones  to 
make  arrow-heads,  and  cinnabar ;  and  the  kkun 
and  lti  bamboos,  with  the  hu  tree,  (all  good  for 
making  arrows) — of  which  the  Three  Regions  were 
able  to  contribute  the  best  specimens.  The  three- 
ribbed  rush  was  sent  in  bundles,  put  into  cases. 
The  baskets  were  filled  with  silken  fabrics,  azure 
and  deep  purple,  and  with  strings  of  pearls  that 
were  not  quite  round.  From  the  (country  of  the) 
nine  isfiang,  the  great  tortoise  was  presented  when 
specially  required  (and  found). 

They  floated  down  the  A"iang,  the  Tho,  the  A^ien, 
and  the  Han,  and  crossed  (the  country)  to  the  Lo, 
whence  they  reached  the  most  southern  part  of 
the  Ho. 

8.  The  King  (mountain)  and  the  Ho  were  (the 
boundaries  of)  Yti  iTau  1. 

The  1,  the  Lo,  the  A^an,  and  the  Tsfien  were 
conducted  to  the  Ho.    The  (marsh  of)  Yung-po  was 

1  Yu  ^au  was  the  central  one  of  Yti's  nine  divisions  of  the 
country,  and  was  conterminous,  for  a  greater  or  less  distance,  with 
all  of  them,  excepting  .Oing  j£au,  which  lay  off  in  the  east  by 
itself.  It  embraced  most  of  the  present  Ho-nan,  stretching  also 
into  the  east  and  south,  so  as  to  comprehend  parts  of  Shan-tung 
and  Hu-pei. 


70  THE    Sut   KING. 


PART  III. 


confined  within  its  proper  limits.  The  (waters  of 
that  of)  Ko  were  led  to  (the  marsh  of)  Mang-/£u. 

The  soil  of  this  province  was  mellow  ;  in  the  lower 
parts  it  was  (in  some  places)  rich,  and  (in  others) 
dark  and  thin.  Its  fields  were  the  highest  of  the 
middle  class;  and  its  contribution  of  revenue  was  the 
average  of  the  highest  class,  with  a  proportion  of 
the  very  highest.  Its  articles  of  tribute  were  varnish, 
hemp,  fine  cloth  of  dolichos  fibre,  and  the  boehmerea. 
The  baskets  were  full  of  chequered  silks,  and  of  fine 
floss  silk.  Stones  for  polishing  sounding-stones  were 
rendered  when  required. 

They  floated  along  the  Lo,  and  so  reached 
the  Ho. 

9.  The  south  of  (mount)  Hwa  and  the  Black- 
water  were  (the  boundaries  of)  Liang  Afau  \ 

The  (hills)  Min  and  Po  were  made  capable  of 
cultivation.  The  Tho  and  AT^ien  streams  were 
conducted  by  their  proper  channels.  Sacrifices  were 
offered  to  (the  hills)  3hai  and  Mang  on  the  regula- 
tion (of  the  country  about  them).*  (The  country 
of)  the  wild  tribes  about  the  Ho  was  successfully 
operated  on. 


1  Liang  K&u  was  an  extensive  province,  and  it  is  a  remarkable  fact 
that  neither  the  dominions  of  the  Shang  nor  the  ^au  dynasty,  which 
followed  Hsia,  included  it.  Portions  of  it  were  embraced  in  the  Yii 
and  Yung  provinces  of  ^au,  but  the  greater  part  was  considered  as 
wild,  savage  territory,  beyond  the  limits  of  the  Middle  Kingdom.  It 
is  difficult  to  believe  that  the  great  Yii  operated  upon  it,  as  this 
chapter  would  seem  to  indicate.  The  Hwa  at  its  north-eastern 
corner  is  the  western  mountain  of  Shun.  The  Black-water,  or 
'the  Kiting  of  the  Golden  Sands/  is  identified  with  the  present 
Lu.  The  province  extended  over  most  of  the  present  Sze-^tian, 
with  parts  of  Shen-hsi  and  Kan-su.  I  can  hardly  believe,  as  many 
do,  that  it  extended  far  into  Ytin-nan  and  Kwei-Mu* 


BOOK  I.  THE   TRIBUTE    OF  YU.  J I 

The  soil  of  this  province  was  greenish  and  light. 
Its  fields  were  the  highest  of  the  lowest  class  ;  and 
its  contribution  of  revenue  was  the  average  of  the 
lowest  class,  with  proportions  of  the  rates  immedi- 
ately above  and  below.  Its  articles  of  tribute  were 
— the  best  gold,  iron,  silver,  steel,  flint  stones  to 
make  arrow-heads,  and  sounding-stones ;  with  the 
skins  of  bears,  foxes,  and  jackals,  and  (nets)  woven 
of  their  hair. 

From  (the  hill  of)  Hsi-^ing  they  came  by  the 
course  of  the  Hwan ;  floated  along  the  Khien,  and 
then  crossed  (the  country)  to  the  Mien;  passed  to 
the  Wei,  and  (finally)  ferried  across  the  Ho. 

10.  The  Black-water  and  western  Ho  were  (the 
boundaries  of)  Yung  Aau 1. 

The  Weak-water  was  conducted  westwards.  The 
King  was  led  to  mingle  its  waters  with  those  of  the 
Wei.  The  Khi  and  the  KM  were  next  led  in  a 
similar  way  (to  the  Wei),  and  the  waters  of  the  Feng 
found  the  same  receptacle. 

(The  mountains)  King  and  Khi  were  sacrificed  to.* 
(Those  of)  Aung-nan  and  /Sun-wu  (were  also  regu- 
lated), and  (all  the  way)  on  to  Niao-shu.  Successful 
measures  could  now  be  taken  with  the  plains  and 
swamps,  even  to  (the  marsh  of)  A"u-yeh.  (The 
country  of)  San-wei  was  made  habitable,  and  the 
(affairs  of  the)  people  of  San-miao  were  greatly 
arranged. 

1  The  Black-water,  which  was  the  western  boundary  of  Yung  K&u, 
was  a  different  river  from  that  which,  with  the  same  name,  ran  along 
the  south  of  Liang  K§m.  Yung  Kau  was  probably  the  largest  of 
Yii's  provinces,  embracing  nearly  all  the  present  provinces  of 
Shen-hsi:  and  Kan-su,  and  extending  indefinitely  northwards  to  the 
Desert. 


72  THE    SHU   KING. 


PART  III. 


The  soil  of  the  province  was  yellow  and  mellow. 
Its  fields  were  the  highest  of  the  highest  class,  and 
its  contribution  of  revenue  the  lowest  of  the  second. 
Its  articles  of  tribute  were  the  khiix  jade  and  the 
lin,  and  (the  stones  called)  lang-kan. 

Past  iTi-shih  they  floated  on  to  Lung-man  on  the 
western  Ho.  They  then  met  on  the  north  of  the 
Wei  (with  the  tribute-bearers  from  other  quarters). 

Hair-cloth  and  skins  (were  brought  from)  Khwan- 
lun,  Hsf-^ih,  and  jOu-s&u  ; — the  wild  tribes  of  the 
west  (all)  coming  to  (submit  to  Yu's)  arrangements. 


Section  2. 

The  division  of  the  Book  into  two  sections  is  a  convenient  arrange- 
ment, but  modern,  and  not  always  followed.  The  former  section 
gives  a  view  of  Yu's  labours  in  each  particular  province.  This 
gives  a  general  view  of  the  mountain  ranges  of  the  country,  and 
of  the  principal  streams;  going  on  to  other  labours,  subse- 
quently, as  was  seen  in  the  Introduction,  ascribed  to  Yii, — his 
conferring  lands  and  surnames,  and  dividing  the  whole  territory 
into  five  domains.  The  contents  are  divided  into  five  chapters  : 
— the  first,  describing  the  mountains;  the  second,  describing 
the  rivers ;  the  third,  containing  a  summary  of  all  the  labours  of 
Yii  thus  far  mentioned ;  the  fourth,  relating  his  other  labours ; 
and  the  fifth,  celebrating  Yu's  fame,  and  the  completion  of  his 
work. 

i.  (Yii)  surveyed  and  described  (the  hills),  begin- 
ning with  jOien  and  Khi  and  proceeding  to  mount 
King;  then,  crossing  the  Ho,  Hu-khau,  and  Lei- 
shau,  going  on  to  Thai-yo.  (After  these  came) 
Ti-M  and  Hs!-^Mng,  from  which  he  went  on  to 
Wang-wti ;  (then  there  were)  Thai-hang  and  mount 
Hang,  from  which  he  proceeded  to  the  rocks  of 
isfieh,  where  he  reached  the  sea. 

(South  of  the  Ho,  he  surveyed)  Hsi-Mmg,  A^u-yli, 


BOOK  I.  THE    TRIBUTE   OF   YU.  73 

and  Niao-shu,  going  on  to  Thai-hwa;  (then)  Hsiung-r, 
Wai-fang,  and  Thung-p&i,  from  which  he  proceeded  to 
Pei-wei. 

He  surveyed  and  described  Po-/Mung,  going  on  to 
(the  other)  mount  A"ing ;  and  Nei-fang,  from  which 
he  went  on  to  Td-pieh. 

(He  did  the  same  with)  the  south  of  mount  Min, 
and  went  on  to  mount  Hang.  Then  crossing  the  nine 
./Hang,  he  proceeded  to  the  plain  of  Fu-ivHen. 

2.  He  traced  the  Weak-water  as  far  as  the  Ho-lt 
(mountains),  from  which  its  superfluous  waters  went 
away  among  the  moving  sands. 

He  traced  the  Black-water  as  far  as  San-wei,  from 
which  it  (went  away  to)  enter  the  southern  sea. 

He  traced  the  Ho  from  Ki-sh'ih  as  far  as  Lung- 
man  ;  and  thence,  southwards,  to  the  north  of  (mount) 
Hwa ;  eastward  then  to  Tl-M\i  ;  eastward  (again) 
to  the  ford  of  Mang ;  eastward  (still)  to  the  junction 
of  the  Lo ;  and  then  on  to  Ta-pei.  (From  this  the 
course  was)  northwards,  past  the  ./Hang-water,  on  to 
Td-lu ;  north  from  which  the  river  was  divided,  and 
became  the  nine  Ho,  which  united  again,  and  formed 
the  Meeting  Ho,  when  they  entered  the  sea. 

From  Po-Mung  he  traced  the  Yang,  which,  flowing 
eastwards,  became  the  Han.  Farther  east  it  became 
the  water  of  3hang-lang ;  and  after  passing  the  three 
Dykes,  it  went  on  to  Ti-pieh,  southwards  from  which 
it  entered  the  A"iang.  Eastward  still,  and  whirling 
on,  it  formed  the  marsh  of  Phang-li ;  and  from  that 
its  eastern  flow  was  the  northern  isfiang,  as  which  it 
entered  the  sea. 

From  mount  Min  he  traced  the  isfiang,  which, 
branching  off  to  the  east,  formed  the  Tho  ;  eastward 
again,  it  reached  the  Li,  passed  the  nine  i$fiang,  and 


74  THE    SHft    KING. 


PART  III. 


went  onto  Tung-ling;  then  flowing  east,  and  winding 
to  the  north,  it  joined  (the  Han)  with  its  eddying 
movements.  From  that  its  eastern  flow  was  the 
middle  Alang,  as  which  it  entered  the  sea. 

He  traced  the  Yen  water,  which,  flowing  eastward, 
became  the  Ki,  and  entered  the  Ho.  (Thereafter) 
it  flowed  out,  and  became  the  Yung  (marsh).  East- 
ward, it  issued  forth  on  the  north  of  Thao-^iu,  and 
flowed  farther  east  to  (the  marsh  of)  Ko ;  then  it 
went  north-east,  and  united  with  the  Wan ;  thence  it 
went  north,  and  (finally)  entered  the  sea  on  the 
east. 

He  traced  the  Hwai  from  the  hill  of  Thung-pai. 
Flowing  east,  it  united  with  the  Sze  and  the  I,  and 
(still)  with  an  eastward  course  entered  the  sea. 

He  traced  the  Wei  from  (the  hill)  Niao-shti-thung- 
hstieh.  Flowing  eastward,  it  united  with  the  Feng, 
and  eastwards  again  with  the  King.  Farther  east 
still,  it  passed  the  Khi  and  the  Kh%  and  entered 
the  Ho. 

He  traced  the  Lo  from  (the  hill)  Hsiung-r. 
Flowing  to  the  north-east,  it  united  with  the  -ATien 
and  the  A^an,  and  eastwards  still  with  the  I.  Then 
on  the  north-east  it  entered  the  Ho. 

3.  (Thus),  throughout  the  nine  provinces  a 
similar  order  was  effected : — the  grounds  along  the 
waters  were  everywhere  made  habitable ;  the  hills 
were  cleared  of  their  superfluous  wood  and  sacri- 
ficed to ;  *  the  sources  of  the  rivers  were  cleared  ;  the 
marshes  were  well  banked  ;  and  access  to  the  capital 
was  secured  for  all  within  the  four  seas. 

The  six  magazines  (of  material  wealth)  were  fully 
attended  to  ;  the  different  parts  of  the  country  were 
subjected    to   an   exact   comparison,    so   that   con- 


BOOK  I.  THE    TRIBUTE    OF    YU.  75 

tribution  of  revenue  could  be  carefully  adjusted 
according  to  their  resources.  (The  fields)  were  all 
classified  with  reference  to  the  three  characters  of 
the  soil;  and  the  revenues  for  the  Middle  Region 
were  established. 

4.  He  conferred  lands  and  surnames.  (He 
said),  *  Let  me  set  the  example  of  a  reverent  atten- 
tion to  my  virtue,  and  none  will  act  contrary  to  my 
conduct/ 

Five  hundred  li  formed  the  Domain  of  the 
Sovereign.  From  the  first  hundred  they  brought 
as  revenue  the  whole  plant  of  the  grain ;  from  the 
second,  the  ears,  with  a  portion  of  the  stalk  ;  from 
the  third,  the  straw,  but  the  people  had  to  perform 
various  services  ;  from  the  fourth,  the  grain  in  the 
husk ;  and  from  the  fifth,  the  grain  cleaned. 

Five  hundred  11  (beyond)  constituted  the  Domain 
of  the  Nobles.  The  first  hundred  li  was  occupied 
by  the  cities  and  lands  of  the  (sovereign's)  high 
ministers  and  great  officers;  the  second,  by  the 
principalities  of  the  barons ;  and  the  (other)  three 
hundred,  by  the  various  other  princes. 

Five  hundred  li  (still  beyond)  formed  the  Peace- 
securing  Domain.  In  the  first  three  hundred,  they 
cultivated  the  lessons  of  learning  and  moral  duties  ; 
in  the  other  two,  they  showed  the  energies  of  war 
and  defence. 

Five  hundred  li  (remoter  still)  formed  the  Do- 
main of  Restraint.  The  (first)  three  hundred  were 
occupied  by  the  tribes  of  the  1  ;  the  (other)  two 
hundred,  by  criminals  undergoing  the  lesser  banish- 
ment. 

Five  hundred  li  (the  most  remote)  constituted 
the  Wild  Domain.     The  (first)  three  hundred  were 


J6  THE    SHt   KING.  PART  ill. 

occupied  by  the  tribes  of  the  Man  ;  the  (other) 
two  hundred,  by  criminals  undergoing  the  greater 
banishment. 

5.  On  the  east,  reaching  to  the  sea ;  on  the  west, 
extending  to  the  moving  sands ;  to  the  utmost 
limits  of  the  north  and  south  : — his  fame  and  in- 
fluence filled  up  (all  within)  the  four  seas.  Yli 
presented  the  dark-coloured  symbol  of  his  rank, 
and  announced  the  completion  of  his  work. 


Book  II.     The  Speech  at  Kan. 

With  this  Book  there  commence  the  documents  of  the  Shu  that 
may  be  regarded,  as  I  have  said  in  the  Introduction,  as  con- 
temporaneous with  the  events  which  they  describe.  It  is  the 
first  of  the  '  Speeches/  which  form  one  class  of  the  documents 
of  the  classic. 

The  text  does  not  say  who  the  king  mentioned  in  it  was,  but 
the  prevalent  tradition  has  always  been  that  he  was  Kh%  the  son 
and  successor  of  Yii.  Its  place  between  the  Tribute  of  Yu 
and  the  next  Book  belonging  to  the  reign  of  Thai  Khang,  ffl's 
son,  corroborates  this  view. 

Kan  is  taken  as  the  name  of  a  place  in  the  southern  border  of  the 
principality  of  Hu,  with  the  lord  of  which  Kh\  fought.  The  name 
of  Hu  itself  still  remains  in  the  district  so  called  of  the  depart- 
ment Hsi-an,  in  Shen-hsi. 

The  king,  about  to  engage  in  battle  with  a  rebellious  vassal, 
assembles  his  generals  and  troops,  and  addresses  them.  He 
declares  obscurely  the  grounds  of  the  expedition  which  he  had 
undertaken,  and  concludes  by  stimulating  the  soldiers  to  the 
display  of  courage  and  observance  of  order  by  promises  of 
reward  and  threats  of  punishment. 

There  was  a  great  battle  at  Kan.  (Previous  to 
it),  the  king  called  together  the  six  nobles,  (the 
leaders  of  his  six  hosts),  and  said,  'Ah  !  all  ye  who 


BOOK  II.  THE    SPEECH  AT  KAN.  7 7 

are  engaged  in  my  six  hosts,  I  have  a  solemn 
announcement  to  make  to  you. 

'  The  lord  of  Hti  wildly  wastes  and  despises  the 
five  elements  (that  regulate  the  seasons),  and  has 
idly  abandoned  the  three  acknowledged  commence- 
ments of  the  year1.  On  this  account  Heaven  is 
about  to  destroy  him,  and  bring  to  an  end  his 
appointment  (to  Hft) ;  and  I  am  now  reverently 
executing  the  punishment  appointed  by  Heaven.* 

'  If  you,  (the  archers)  on  the  left2,  do  not  do  your 
work  on  the  left,  it  will  be  a  disregard  of  my  orders. 
If  you,  (the  spearmen)  on  the  right2,  do  not  do  your 
work  on  the  right,  it  will  be  a  disregard  of  my 
orders.  If  you,  charioteers2,  do  not  observe  the 
rules  for  the  management  of  your  horses,  it  will  be 
a  disregard  of  my  orders.  You  who  obey  my  orders, 
shall  be  rewarded  before  (the  spirits  of)  my  ances- 
tors ;  and  you  who  disobey  my  orders,  shall  be  put 
to  death  before  the  altar  of  the  spirits  of  the  land, 
and  I  will  also  put  to  death  your  children/* 

1  The  crimes  of  the  lord  of  Hu  are  here  very  obscurely  stated. 
With  regard  to  the  second  of  them,  we  know  that  Hsia  commenced 
its  year  with  the  first  month  of  spring,  Shang  a  month  earlier, 
and  iTau  about  mid-winter.  It  was  understood  that  every  dynasty 
should  fix  a  new  month  for  the  beginning  of  the  year,  and  the 
dynasty  of  Khm.  actually  carried  its  first  month  back  into  our 
November.  If  the  lord  of  Hu  claimed  to  begin  the  year  with 
another  month  than  that  which  Yu  had  fixed,  he  was  refusing 
submission  to  the  new  dynasty.  No  doubt,  the  object  of  the 
expedition  was  to  put  down  a  dangerous  rival. 

2  The  chariots  were  the  principal  part  of  an  ancient  Chinese 
army ;  it  is  long  before  we  read  of  cavalry.  A  war-chariot  gene- 
rally carried  three.  The  driver  was  in  the  centre ;  on  his  left  was 
an  archer,  and  a  spearman  occupied  the  place  on  his  right,  They 
all  wore  mail. 


78  THE  SH0  king. 


Book  III.     The  Songs  of  the  Five  Sons. 

This  Book  ranks  in  that  class  of  the  documents  of  the  Shu  which 
goes  by  the  name  of  '  Instructions/  Though  the  form  of  it  be 
poetical,  the  subject-matter  is  derived  from  the  Lessons  left  by 
Yu  for  the  guidance  of  his  posterity. 

Th&i  Khang  succeeded  to  his  father  in  b.c.  2188,  and  his  reign  con- 
tinues in  chronology  to  2160.  His  character  is  given  here  in  the 
introductory  chapter.  .Oiung,  the  principality  of  I  who  took  the 
field  against  him,  is  identified  with  the  sub-department  of  Te- 
KdM,  department  ^"i-nan,  Shan-tung.  There  is  a  tradition  that 
1 ,  at  an  early  period  of  his  life,  was  lord  of  a  state  in  the  present 
Ho-nan.  This  would  make  his  movement  against  Thai  Khang, 
'  south  of  the  Ho/  more  easy  for  him.  The  name  of  Thai  Khang 
remains  in  the  district  so  called  of  the  department  A^an-^au, 
Ho-nan.  There,  it  is  said,  he  died,  having  never  been  able  to 
recross  the  Ho. 

In  his  song  the  king's  first  brother  deplores  how  he  had  lost 
the  affections  of  the  people ;  the  second  speaks  of  his  dissolute 
extravagance ;  the  third  mourns  his  loss  of  the  throne ;  the 
fourth  deplores  his  departure  from  the  principles  of  Yu,  and  its 
disastrous  consequences ;  and  the  fifth  is  a  wail  over  the  misera- 
ble condition  of  them  all. 

i.  Thai  Khang  occupied  the  throne  like  a  per- 
sonator  of  the  dead  \  By  idleness  and  dissipation  he 
extinguished  his  virtue,  till  the  black-haired  people 
all  wavered  in  their  allegiance.  He,  however, 
pursued  his  pleasure   and  wanderings  without   any 

1  The  character  that  here  as  a  verb  governs  the  character  signi- 
fying 'throne'  means  properly  <a  corpse/  and  is  often  used  for  the 
personator  of  the  dead,  in  the  sacrificial  services  to  the  dead  which 
formed  a  large  part  of  the  religious  ceremonies  of  the  ancient 
Chinese.  A  common  definition  of  it  is  '  the  semblance  of  the 
spirit,' = the  image  into  which  the  spirit  entered.  TMi  Khang 
was  but  a  personator  on  the  throne,  no  better  than  a  sham 
sovereign. 


BOOK  in.  THE   SONGS    OF  THE  FIVE   SONS.  79 

self-restraint.  He  went  out  to  hunt  beyond  the  Lo, 
and  a  hundred  days  elapsed  without  his  returning. 
(On  this)  I,  the  prince  of  .A^iung,  taking  advantage 
of  the  discontent  of  the  people,  resisted  (his  return) 
on  (the  south  of)  the  Ho.  The  (king's)  five  brothers 
had  attended  their  mother  in  following  him,  and  were 
waiting  for  him  on  the  north  of  the  Lo ;  and  (when 
they  heard  of  is  movement),  all  full  of  dissatisfac- 
tion, they  related  the  Cautions  of  the  great  Yli  in 
the  form  of  songs. 

2.  The  first  said, 
'  It  was  the  lesson  of  our  great  ancestor : — 

The  people  should  be  cherished, 

And  not  looked  down  upon. 

The  people  are  the  root  of  a  country ; 

The  root  firm,  the  country  is  tranquil. 

When  I  look  at  all  under  heaven, 

Of  the  simple  men  and  simple  women, 

Any  one  may  surpass  me. 

If  the  One  man  err  repeatedly1, 

Should  dissatisfaction  be  waited  for  till  it  appears  ? 

Before  it  is  seen,  it  should  be  guarded  against. 

In  my  dealing  with  the  millions  of  the  people, 

I  should  feel  as  much  anxiety  as  if  I  were  driving 
six  horses  with  rotten  reins, 

The  ruler  of  men — 

How  should  he  be  but  reverent  (of  his  duties)  ? ' 
The  second  said, 
'  It  is  in  the  Lessons  :— 

When  the  palace  is  a  wild  of  lust, 

And  the  country  is  a  wild  for  hunting ; 

1  Any  king,  in  the  person  of  Yii,  may  be  understood  to  be  the 
speaker. 


80  THE    SH6    KING. 


PART  III. 


When  spirits  are  liked,  and  music  is  the  delight ; 
When  there  are  lofty  roofs  and  carved  walls ; — 
The  existence  of  any  one  of  these  things 
Has  never  been  but  the  prelude  to  ruin/ 

The  third  said, 
'  There  was  the  lord  of  Thao  and  Thang  \ 
Who  possessed  this  region  of  Ki. 
Now  we  have  fallen  from  his  ways, 
And  thrown  into  confusion  his  rules  and  laws  ; — 
The  consequence  is  extinction  and  ruin/ 

The  fourth  said, 
Brightly  intelligent  was  our  ancestor, 
Sovereign  of  the  myriad  regions. 
He  had  canons,  he  had  patterns, 
Which  he  transmitted  to  his  posterity. 
The  standard  stone  and  the  equalizing  quarter 
Were  in  the  royal  treasury. 
Wildly  have  we  dropt  the  clue  he  gave  us, 
Overturning  our  temple,  and  extinguishing  our 
sacrifices/  * 

The  fifth  said, 
'  Oh  !  whither  shall  we  turn  ? 
The  thoughts  in  my  breast  make  me  sad. 
All  the  people  are  hostile  to  us ; 
On  whom  can  we  rely  ? 
Anxieties  crowd  together  in  our  hearts ; 
Thick  as  are  our  faces,  they  are  covered  with  blushes. 
We  have  not  been  careful  of  our  virtue  ; 
And  though  we  repent,  we  cannot  overtake  the 
past/ 

1  The  lord  of  Thao  and  Thang  is  Yao,  who  was  lord  of  the  prin- 
cipalities of  Thao  and  Thang,  but  of  which  first  and  which  last  is 
uncertain,  before  his  accession  to  the  throne.  K\  is  the  K\  K§m 
of  the  Tribute  of  YiL 


BOOK  IV.       THE   PUNITIVE   EXPEDITION    OF   YIN.  8 1 


Book  IV.     The  Punitive  Expedition  of  Yin. 

This  Book  is  another  of  the  '  Speeches '  of  the  Shu,  belonging  to 
the  reign  of  iTung  Khang,  a  brother  of  Thai  Khang,  the  fourth 
of  the  kings  of  Shang  (b.  c.  2 159-2 14*7). 

Hsi  and  Ho,  the  principal  ministers  of  the  Board  of  Astronomy, 
descended  from  those  of  the  same  name  in  the  time  of  Yao,  had 
given  themselves  over  to  licentious  indulgence  in  their  private 
cities,  and  grossly  neglected  their  duties.  Especially  had  they 
been  unobservant  of  an  eclipse  of  the  sun  in  autumn.  The 
king  considered  them  worthy  of  death,  and  commissioned  the 
marquis  of  Yin  to  execute  on  them  the  sentence  of  his  justice. 
Where  Yin  was  is  not  now  known. 

The  principal  part  of  the  Book  consists  of  the  speech  made  by  the 
marquis  to  his  troops. 

i.  When  Kung  Khang  commenced  his  reign 
over  all  within  the  four  seas,  the  marquis  of  Yin 
was  commissioned  to  take  charge  of  the  (king  s) 
six  hosts.  (At  this  time)  the  Hsi  and  Ho  had 
neglected  the  duties  of  their  office,  and  were  aban- 
doned to  drink  in  their  (private)  cities;  and  the 
marquis  of  Yin  received  the  kings  charge  to  go  and 
punish  them. 

2.  He  made  an  announcement  to  his  hosts,  saying, 
'  Ah  !  ye,  all  my  men,  there  are  the  well-counselled 
instructions  of  the  sage  (founder  of  our  dynasty), 
clearly  verified  in  their  power  to  give  stability  and 
security  : — "  The  former  kings  were  carefully  atten- 
tive to  the  warnings  of  Heaven1,*  and  their  minis- 
ters observed  the  regular  laws  (of  their  offices).  All 
the  officers  (moreover)  watchfully  did  their  duty  to 

1  That  is,  here,  such  warnings  as  were  supposed  to  be  conveyed 
by  eclipses  and  other  unusual  celestial  phenomena. 


82  THE    SHti    KING.  PART  III. 

assist  (the  government),  and  their  sovereign  became 
entirely  intelligent."  Every  year,  in  the  first  month 
of  spring,  the  herald,  with  his  wooden-tongued  bell, 
goes  along  the  roads1,  (proclaiming),  "  Ye  officers 
able  to  instruct,  be  prepared  with  your  admonitions. 
Ye  workmen  engaged  in  mechanical  affairs,  remon- 
strate on  the  subjects  of  your  employments.  If  any 
of  you  do  not  attend  with  respect  (to  this  require- 
ment), the  country  has  regular  punishments  for 
you. 

'  Now  here  are  the  Hsi  and  Ho.  They  have 
allowed  their  virtue  to  be  subverted,  and  are  be- 
sotted by  drink.  They  have  violated  the  duties  of 
their  office,  and  left  their  posts.  They  have  been  the 
first  to  let  the  regulating  of  the  heavenly  (bodies)  get 
into  disorder,  putting  far  from  them  their  proper  busi- 
ness. On  the  first  day  of  the  last  month  of  autumn, 
the  sun  and  moon  did  not  meet  harmoniously  in 
Fang2.  The  blind  musicians  beat  their  drums ;  the 
inferior  officers  galloped,  and  the  common  people 
(employed  about  the  public  offices)  ran  about3.  The 
Hsi  and  the  Ho,  however,  as  if  they  were  (mere) 
personators  of  the  dead  in  their  offices,  heard  nothing 
and  knew  nothing; — so  stupidly  went  they  astray 
(from  their  duties)  in  the  matter  of  the  heavenly 
appearances,  and  rendered  themselves  liable  to  the 
death  appointed  by  the  former  kings.  The  statutes 
of  government  say,  "  When  they  anticipate  the  time, 
let  them  be  put  to  death  without  mercy ;  when  (their 

1  A  similar  practice  existed  in  the  K§m  dynasty. 

2  See  the  Introduction,  p.  13. 

8  Similar  observances  are  still  practised  on  occasion  of  an 
eclipse  of  the  sun.  See  Biot's  Etudes  sur  TAstronomie  Indienne 
et  Chinoise,  pp.  357-360. 


BOOK  IV.       THE    PUNITIVE    EXPEDITION    OF   YIN.  83 

reckoning)  is  behind  the  time,  let  them  be  put  to 
death  without  mercy." 

*  Now  I,  with  you  all,  am  entrusted  with  the  exe- 
cution of  the  punishment  appointed  by  Heaven.* 
Unite  your  strength,  all  of  you  warriors,  for  the 
royal  House.  Give  me  your  help,  I  pray  you,  reve- 
rently to  carry  out  the  dread  charge  of  the  Son  of 
Heaven. 

'  When  the  fire  blazes  over  the  ridge  of  Khwan1, 
gems  and  stones  are  burned  together ;  but  if  a 
minister  of  Heaven  exceed  in  doing  his  duty,  the 
consequences  will  be  fiercer  than  blazing  fire.  While 
I  destroy,  (therefore),  the  chief  criminals,  I  will  not 
punish  those  who  have  been  forced  to  follow  them ; 
and  those  who  have  long  been  stained  by  their 
filthy  manners  will  be  allowed  to  renovate  them- 
selves. 

4  Oh !  when  sternness  overcomes  compassion, 
things  are  surely  conducted  to  a  successful  issue. 
When  compassion  overcomes  sternness,  no  merit 
can  be  achieved.  All  ye,  my  warriors,  exert  your- 
selves, and  take  warning,  (and  obey  my  orders) !' 

1  Khwan  is  perhaps  a  part  of  the  Khwan-lun  mountain  in  the 
west  of  the  Ko-ko-nor,  where  the  Ho  has  its  sources.  The 
speaker  evidently  thought  of  it  as  volcanic. 


G  2 


PART  IV.     THE  BOOKS  OF  SHANG. 


Book  I.     The  Speech  of  Thang. 

Shang  was  the  name  under  which  the  dynasty  that  superseded 
Hsi&  (b.  c.  1766)  held  the  kingdom  for  fully  300  years.  Yin 
then  began  to  be  used  as  well  as  Shang,  and  the  dynasty  was 
called  indifferently  Shang  or  Yin,  and  sometimes  Yin-Shang  by 
a  combination  of  the  two  names.  The  ruling  House  traced  its 
origin  into  the  remote  times  of  antiquity,  through  Hsieh,  whose 
appointment  by  Shun  to  be  Minister  of  Instruction  is  related  in 
the  Canon  of  Shun.  For  his  services  Hsieh  was  invested  with 
the  principality  of  Shang,  corresponding  to  the  present  small 
department  of  the  same  name  in  Shen-hsr.  From  Hsieh  to 
Thang,  the  founder  of  the  dynasty,  there  are  reckoned  fourteen 
generations,  and  we  find  Thang,  when  he  first  becomes  prominent 
in  history,  a  long  way  from  the  ancestral  fief,  in  '  the  southern 
Po/  corresponding  to  the  present  district  of  Shang-Mu,  depart- 
ment Kwei-teh,  Ho-nan.  The  title  of  the  dynasty,  however,  was 
derived  from  the  original  Shang. 

There  were  in  the  Shu,  when  the  collection  was  formed,  thirty-one 
documents  of  Shang  in  forty  Books,  of  which  only  eleven  remain 
in  seventeen  Books,  two  of  them  containing  each  three  parts  or 
sections.  The  Speech  of  Thang,  that  is  now  the  first  Book  in 
the  Part,  was  originally  only  the  sixth.  Thang  was  the  designa- 
tion of  the  hero,  whose  surname,  dating  from  Hsieh,  was  3ze> 
and  name  Li.  Thang  may  be  translated,  'the  Glorious  One.7 
His  common  style  in  history  is  as  Kftkng  Thang,  '  Thang  the 
Completer/  or  '  Thang  the  Successful/ 

He  had  summoned  his  people  to  take  the  field  with  him  against 
jffieh,  the  cruel  and  doomed  sovereign  of  Hsia,  and  finding 
them  backward  to  the  enterprise,  he  sets  forth  in  this  Book  his 
reasons  for  attacking  the  tyrant,  argues  against  their  reluctance, 
using  in  the  end  both  promises  and  threats  to  induce  them  to 
obey  his  orders. 


BOOK  I.  THE   SPEECH    OF    THANG.  85 

The  king  said,  '  Come,  ye  multitudes  of  the 
people,  listen  all. to  my  words.  It  is  not  I,  the 
little  child1,  who  dare  to  undertake  a  rebellious 
enterprise;  but  for  the  many  crimes  of  the  sovereign 
of  Hsia,  Heaven  has  given  the  charge  to  destroy 
him.* 

'  Now,  ye  multitudes,  you  are  saying,  "Our  prince 
does  not  compassionate  us,  but  (is  calling  us)  away 
from  our  husbandry  to  attack  and  punish  Hsid." 
I  have  indeed  heard  (these)  words  of  you  all ;  (but) 
the  sovereign  of  Hsia  is  guilty,  and,  as  I  fear  God, 
I  dare  not  but  punish  him.* 

1  Now  you  are  saying,  "  What  are  the  crimes  of 
Hsia  to  us?"  The  king  of  Hsi&  in  every  way 
exhausts  the  strength  of  his  people,  and  exercises 
oppression  in  the  cities  of  Hsia.  His  multitudes 
are  become  entirely  indifferent  (to  his  service),  and 
feel  no  bond  of  union  (to  him).  They  are  saying, 
"  When  wilt  thou,  O  sun,  expire  ?  We  will  all 
perish  with  thee2."  Such  is  the  course  of  (the 
sovereign)  of  Hsia,  and  now  I  must  go  (and  punish 
him). 

'  Assist,  I  pray  you,  me,  the  One  man,  to  carry 
out  the  punishment  appointed  by  Heaven.  I  will 
greatly  reward  you.  On  no  account  disbelieve  me  ; — 
I  will  not  eat  my  words.  If  you  do  not  obey  the 
words  which  I  have  thus  spoken  to  you,  I  will  put 

1  '  The  little  child'  is  a  designation  used  humbly  of  themselves 
by  the  kings  of  Shang  and  K&w.  It  is  given  also  to  them  and 
others  by  such  great  ministers  as  t  Yin  and  the  duke  of  K&xx. 

2  ICieh,  it  is  said,  had  on  one  occasion,  when  told  of  the  danger 
he  was  incurring  by  his  cruelties,  pointed  to  the  sun,  and  said  that 
as  surely  as  the  sun  was  in  the  heavens,  so  firm  was  he  on  the 
throne. 


86  the  sh6  king. 


PART   IV. 


your  children  to  death  with  you ; — you  shall  find  no 
forgiveness/ 


Book  II.     The  Announcement  of  A!ung-hui. 

This  Book  is  the  first  of  the  '  Announcements/  which  form  a  large 
class  of  the  documents  in  the  Shft.  They  are  distinguished 
from  the  Speeches,  as  being  made  in  a  general  assembly,  or 
published,  for  the  information  of  all,  whereas  the  Speeches  were, 
made  to  an  army. 

.ffung-hui,  of  an  old  family,  whose  surname  was  2an,  with  its  seat  in 
the  territory  of  Hsieh,  corresponding  to  the  present  district  of 
Thang,  department  Yen-^au,  Shan-tung,  was  a  minister  of  Thang. 
Thang  has  been  successful  against  JTieh,  and  dethroned  him,  but 
is  haunted  by  some  feeling  of  remorse,  and  afraid  that  what  he 
has  done  may  be  appealed  to  in  future  ages  as  an  apology  for 
rebellion.  This  gives  occasion  to  the  Announcement,  in  which 
^ung-hui  vindicates  the  proceeding  of  the  king,  showing,  first, 
that  he  had  only  obeyed  the  guidance  of  Heaven,  and,  then,  that 
men  consented  with  Heaven  in  the  matter.  He  concludes  with 
various  counsels  addressed  to  the  king. 

i.  When  Thang  the  Successful  was  keeping  A^ieh 
in  banishment  in  Nan-^Mo1,  he  had  a  feeling  of 
shame  on  account  of  his  conduct,  and  said,  '  I  am 
afraid  that  in  future  ages  men  will  fill  their  mouths 
with  me,  (as  an  apology  for  their  rebellious  pro- 
ceedings.) ' 

2.  On  this  Aung-hui  made  the  following  announce- 
ment :  '  Oh  !  Heaven  gives  birth  to  the  people  with 
(such)  desires,  that  without  a  ruler  they  must  fall 
into  all  disorders;   and  Heaven  again  gives  birth 

1  Nan-£Mois  identified  with  the  present  district  of.Oao,  depart- 
ment Lu-/£au,  An-hui. 


BOOK  II.        THE   ANNOUNCEMENT    OF   JsTUNG-HUI.  87 

to  the  man  of  intelligence  to  regulate  them.*  The 
sovereign  of  Hsia  had  his  virtue  all-obscured,  and 
the  people  were  (as  if  they  had  fallen)  amid  mire 
and  (burning)  charcoal.  Heaven  hereupon  gifted 
(our)  king  with  valour  and  prudence,  to  serve  as 
a  sign  and  director  to  the  myriad  regions,  and 
to  continue  the  old  ways  of  Yu.  You  are  now 
(only)  following  the  proper  course,  honouring  and 
obeying  the  appointment  of  Heaven.  The  king 
of  Hsi&  was  an  offender,  falsely  and  calumniously 
alleging  the  sanction  of  supreme  Heaven,  to  spread 
abroad  his  commands  among  the  people.  On  this 
account  God  viewed  him  with  disapprobation, 
caused  our  Shang  to  receive  his  appointment,  and 
employed  (you)  to  enlighten  the  multitudes  (of  the 
people)/  * 

3.  '  Contemners  of  the  worthy  and  parasites  of 
the  powerful, — many  such  followers  he  had  indeed ; 
(but)  from  the  first  our  country  was  to  the  sovereign 
of  Hsicl  like  weeds  among  the  springing  corn,  and 
blasted  grains  among  the  good.  (Our  people),  great 
and  small,  were  in  constant  apprehension,  fearful 
though  they  were  guilty  of  no  crime.  How  much 
more  was  this  the  case,  when  our  (prince's)  virtues 
became  a  theme  (eagerly)  listened  to !  Our  king 
did  not  approach  to  (dissolute)  music  and  women  ; 
he  did  not  seek  to  accumulate  property  and  wealth. 
To  great  virtue  he  gave  great  offices,  and  to  great 
merit  great  rewards.  He  employed  others  as  if 
(their  excellences)  were  his  own ;  he  was  not  slow 
to  change  his  errors.  Rightly  indulgent  and  rightly 
benevolent,  from  the  display  (of  such  virtue),  con- 
fidence was  reposed  in  him  by  the  millions  of  the 
people. 


88  THE    SH#    KING. 


PART   IV. 


'  When  the  earl  of  Ko  1  showed  his  enmity  to  the 
provision-carriers,  the  work  of  punishment  began 
with  Ko.  When  it  went  on  in  the  east,  the  wild 
tribes  of  the  west  murmured ;  when  it  went  on  in 
the  south,  those  of  the  north  murmured  : — they  said, 
"  Why  does  he  make  us  alone  the  last  ?  "  To  what- 
ever people  he  went,  they  congratulated  one  another  in 
their  families,  saying,"  We  have  waited  for  our  prince; 
our  prince  is  come,  and  we  revive."  The  people's 
honouring  our  Shang  is  a  thing  of  long  existence/ 

4.  *  Show  favour  to  the  able  and  right-principled 
(among  the  princes),  and  aid  the  virtuous ;  distinguish 
the  loyal,  and  let  the  good  have  free  course.  Absorb 
the  weak,  and  punish  the  wilfully  blind ;  take  their 
states  from  the  disorderly,  and  deal  summarily  with 
those  going  to  ruin.  When  you  (thus)  accelerate 
the  end  of  what  is  (of  itself)  ready  to  perish,  and 
strengthen  what  is  itself  strong  to  live,  how  will 
the  states  all  flourish !  When  (a  sovereign's)  virtue 
is  daily  being  renewed,  he  is  cherished  throughout 
the  myriad  regions ;  when  his  mind  is  full  (only)  of 
himself,  he  is  abandoned  by  the  nine  branches  of 
his  kindred.  Exert  yourself,  O  king,  to  make  your 
virtue  (still  more)  illustrious,  and  set  up  (the  standard 
of)  the  Mean  before  the  people.    Order  your  affairs 

1  Ko  was  a  principality  corresponding  to  the  present  district  of 
Ning-ling,  department  of  Kwei-teh,  Ho-nan.  It  was  thus  near  the 
southern  Po,  which  belonged  to  Thang.  Mencius  tells  us  (III,  ii, 
ch.  3)  that  Thang  sent  a  multitude  of  his  people  to  assist  the  farmers 
of  Ko,  about  the  poor  produce  of  which  their  chief  had  lamented 
to  him.  That  chief,  however,  instead  of  showing  any  gratitude, 
surprised  and  robbed  those  who  were  carrying  provisions  from  Po 
to  the  labourers  in  the  field,  and  committed  various  atrocities  upon 
them.  This  aroused  Thang' s  indignation,  and  he  made  him  the 
first  object  of  his  punitive  justice. 


BOOK  III.         THE   ANNOUNCEMENT    OF    THANG.  89 

by  righteousness  ;  order  your  heart  by  propriety ; — 
so  shall  you  transmit  a  grand  example  to  posterity. 
I  have  heard  the  saying,  "  He  who  finds  instructors 
for  himself,  comes  to  the  supreme  dominion ;  he 
who  says  that  others  are  not  equal  to  himself, 
comes  to  ruin.  He  who  likes  to  put  questions, 
becomes  enlarged ;  he  who  uses  only  his  own 
views,  becomes  smaller  (than  he  was)."  Oh !  he 
who  would  take  care  for  the  end  must  be  attentive 
to  the  beginning.  There  is  establishment  for  the 
observers  of  propriety,  and  overthrow  for  the  blinded 
and  wantonly  indifferent.  To  revere  and  honour 
the  path  prescribed  by  Heaven  is  the  way  ever  to 
preserve  the  favouring  appointment  of  Heaven/  * 


Book  III.     The  Announcement  of  Thang. 

Thang  had  made  an  end  of  the  dynasty  of  Hsia,  and  returned  to 
Po,  when  he  issued  this  Announcement,  which  may  be  con- 
sidered as  a  solemn  inauguration  of  the  new  dynasty.  He 
shows  how  he  had  taken  possession  of  the  throne  in  reverent 
submission  to  the  will  of  Heaven,  what  appreciation  he  had  of 
the  duties  devolving  on  him,  and  the  spirit  in  which  he  would 
discharge  them.  In  the  end  he  calls  on  the  princes  and  the 
people  to  sympathize  and  co-operate  with  him. 

i.  When  the  king  returned  from  vanquishing 
Hsia  and  came  to  Po,  he  made  a  grand  announce- 
ment to  the  myriad  regions. 

2.  The  king  said,  'Ah!  ye  multitudes  of  the 
myriad  regions,  listen  clearly  to  the  announcement 
of  me,  the  One  man 1.   The  great  God  has  conferred 

1  '  The  One  man '  has  occurred  before,  in  the  Songs  of  the 
Five  Sons,  as  a  designation  of  the  sovereign.  It  continues  to  be 
so  to  the  present  day. 


90  THE   SHfi    KING.  part  IV. 

(even)  on  the  inferior  people  a  moral  sense,  com- 
pliance with  which  would  show  their  nature  invaria- 
bly right*  To  make  them  tranquilly  pursue  the 
course  which  it  would  indicate  is  the  work  of  the 
sovereign. 

'  The  king  of  Hsia  extinguished  his  virtue,  and 
played  the  tyrant,  extending  his  oppression  over  you, 
the  people  of  the  myriad  regions.  Suffering  from 
his  cruel  injuries,  and  unable  to  endure  the  worm- 
wood and  poison,  you  protested  with  one  accord 
your  innocence  to  the  spirits  of  heaven  and  earth.* 
The  way  of  Heaven  is  to  bless  the  good,  and  make 
the  bad  miserable.  It  sent  down  calamities  on  (the 
House  of)  Hsia,  to  make  manifest  its  guilt.  Therefore 
I,  the  little  child,  charged  with  the  decree  of  Heaven 
and  its  bright  terrors,  did  not  dare  to  forgive  (the 
criminal).  I  presumed  to  use  a  dark-coloured  victim- 
bull,  and,  making  clear  announcement  to  the  Spiritual 
Sovereign  in  the  high  heavens  \  requested  leave  to 
deal  with  the  ruler  of  Hsia  as  a  criminal.  *  Then 
I  sought  for  the  great  Sage  2,  with  whom  I  might 
unite  my  strength,  to  request  the  favour  (of  Heaven) 
for  you,  my  multitudes.  High  Heaven  truly  showed 
its  favour  to  the  inferior  people,  and  the  criminal 
has  been  degraded  and  subjected.  What  Heaven 
appoints  is  without  error  ; — brilliantly  (now),  like 
the  blossoming  of  plants  and  trees,  the  millions  of 
the  people  show  a  true  reviving/  * 

3.  Tt  is  given  to  me,  the  One  man,  to  secure  the 

1  For  '  the  Spiritual  Sovereign  in  the  high  heavens/  we  have  in 
the  Confucian  Analects,  XX,  1,  professing  to  quote  this  passage, 
*  the  most  great  and  Sovereign  God/ 

2  'The  great  Sage'  must  be  t  Yin,  Thang's  chief  adviser  and 
minister,  who  appears  prominently  in  the  next  Book. 


BOOK  III.         THE  ANNOUNCEMENT   OF    THANG.  9 1 

harmony  and  tranquillity  of  your  states  and  clans  ; 
and  now  I  know  not  whether  I  may  not  offend 
against  (the  Powers)  above  and  below.*  I  am  fearful 
and  trembling,  as  if  I  were  in  danger  of  falling  into 
a  deep  abyss.  Throughout  all  the  regions  that 
enter  on  a  new  life  under  me,  do  not,  (ye  princes), 
follow  lawless  ways  ;  make  no  approach  to  insolence 
and  dissoluteness ;  let  every  one  be  careful  to  keep 
his  statutes; — that  so  we  may  receive  the  favour 
of  Heaven.*  The  good  in  you  I  will  not  dare 
to  keep  concealed ;  and  for  the  evil  in  me  I  will 
not  dare  to  forgive  myself.  I  will  examine  these 
things  in  harmony  with  the  mind  of  God.*  When 
guilt  is  found  anywhere  in  you  who  occupy  the 
myriad  regions,  let  it  rest  on  me,  the  One  man  \ 
When  guilt  is  found  in  me,  the  One  man,  it  shall 
not  attach  to  you  who  occupy  the  myriad  regions. 

'  Oh  !  let  us  attain  to  be  sincere  in  these  things, 
and  so  we  shall  likewise  have  a  (happy)  consum- 
mation/ 

1  There  was  a  tradition  in  the  ^au  dynasty,  given  with  varia- 
tions by  Hsiin-jze,  Sze-ma  .Oien,  and  others,  which  may  be  quoted 
to  illustrate  these  noble  sentiments  of  Thang.  For  seven  years 
after  his  accession  to  the  throne,  b.  c.  1 766-1 760,  there  was  a  great 
drought  and  famine.  It  was  suggested  at  last  that  some  human 
being  should  be  offered  in  sacrifice  to  Heaven,  and  prayer  made  for 
rain.  Thang  said, '  If  a  man  must  be  the  victim,  I  will  be  he/  He 
fasted,  cut  off  his  hair  and  nails,  and  in  a  plain  carriage,  drawn  by 
white  horses,  clad  in  rushes,  in  the  guise  of  a  sacrificial  victim,  he 
proceeded  to  a  forest  of  mulberry  trees,  and  there  prayed,  asking 
to  what  error  or  crime  of  his  the  calamity  was  owing.  He  had  not 
done  speaking  when  a  copious  rain  fell. 


92  THE    SHU    KING.  PART  IV. 


Book  IV.     The  Instructions  of  t. 

Thang  died  in  b.c  1754  or  1753,  and  was  succeeded,  so  far  as  the 
evidence  of  the  Shu  goes,  by  his  grandson,  known  as  Thai  K\L 
The  chief  minister  of  Thang  had  been  i  Yin,  who  delivers  these 
Instructions  to  his  young  sovereign  soon  after  his  accession. 
I  was  a  great  and  wise  man,  c  a  great  sage/  as  Thang  calls  him 
in  the  last  Book,  and  is  classed  by  Mencius  among  other 
celebrated  ministers  as  'the  one  most  inclined  to  take  office.' 
He  reasons  thus  : — '  Heaven's  plan  with  mankind  is  that  they 
who  are  first  informed  should  instruct  those  who  are  later  in 
being  informed,  and  they  who  first  apprehend  principles  should 
instruct  those  who  are  later  in  doing  so.'  He  thought  he  was 
one  of  the  former  class,  and  a  fire  burned  within  him,  impelling 
him  to  seek  for  office  with  a  view  to  benefit  the  ignorant  and 
erring.  There  were  many  legends  about  him  in  the  times  of 
K&u.  He  was  surnamed  t,  from  having  been  born  near  the 
river  of  that  name,  an  affluent  of  the  Ho.  His  name  is  said  to 
have  been  ^ih,  and  also  A-hang  (see  the  beginning  of  next 
Book).  Yin  was  his  designation.  Thang  had,  probably,  entrusted 
to  him  the  guardianship  of  his  grandson,  and  so  he  now  went 
over  the  history  of  the  kingdom  from  Yu,  till  it  was  transferred 
from  the  line  of  Hsia  to  that  of  Shang,  celebrated  the  virtues  of 
Thang  and  his  government,  and  warned  the  young  king  of  the 
fate  that  he  must  incur,  if  he  neglected  the  instructions  given  to 
him. 

i.  In  the  twelfth  month  of  the  first  year,  on  (the 
day)  Yt-Mau,  1  Yin  sacrificed  to  the  former  king, 
and  presented  the  heir-king  reverently  before  (the 
shrine  of)  his  grandfather.*  All  the  princes  from 
the  domain  of  the  nobles  and  the  royal  domain  were 
present;  all  the  officers  (also),  each  continuing  to 
discharge  his  particular  duties,  were  there  to  receive 
the  orders  of  the  chief  minister.  I  Yin  then  clearly 
described  the  complete  virtue  of  the  Meritorious 
Ancestor  for  the  instruction  of  the  (young)  king. 


BOOK  IV.  THE    INSTRUCTIONS    OF   1  93 

2.  He  said,  'Oh !  of  old  the  former  kings  of  Hsisl 
cultivated  earnestly  their  virtue,  and  then  there 
were  no  calamities  from  Heaven.  The  spirits  of 
the  hills  and  rivers  likewise  were  all  in  tranquillity; 
and  the  birds  and  beasts,  the  fishes  and  tortoises,  all 
enjoyed  their  existence  according  to  their  nature.* 
But  their  descendant  did  not  follow  (their  example), 
and  great  Heaven  sent  down  calamities,  employing 
the  agency  of  our  (ruler)  who  was  in  possession  of 
its  favouring  appointment.*  The  attack  (on  Hsia) 
may  be  traced  to  (the  orgies  in)  Ming-thiao1,  but  our 
(rise)  began  in  Po.  Our  king  of  Shang  brilliantly 
displayed  his  sagely  prowess  ;  for  oppression  he  sub- 
stituted his  generous  gentleness ;  and  the  millions 
of  the  people  gave  him  their  hearts.  Now  your 
Majesty  is  entering  on  the  inheritance  of  his 
virtue  ; — all  depends  on  (how)  you  commence  your 
reign.  To  set  up  love,  it  is  for  you  to  love  (your 
relations') ;  to  set  up  respect,  it  is  for  you  to  respect 
(yr^f  elders)  The  commencement  is  in  the  family 
and  the  state  ;  the  consummation  is  in  (all  within) 
the  four  seas/ 

3.  '  Oh !  the  former  king  began  with  careful 
attention  to  the  bonds  that  hold  men  together. 
He  listened  to  expostulation,  and  did  not  seek  to 
resist  it;  he  conformed  to  (the  wisdom  of)  the 
ancients ;  occupying  the  highest  position,  he  dis- 
played intelligence  ;  occupying  an  inferior  position, 
he  displayed  his  loyalty ;  he  allowed  (the  good 
qualities  of)  the  men  (whom  he  employed),  and  did 

1  Ming-thiao  was  a  place  not  far  from  the  capital  of  ^ieh  (in  the 
present  district  of  An-yi,  Hai  iTau,  Shan-hsi).  He  had  a  palace 
there,  where  the  vilest  orgies  were  celebrated  that  alienated  the 
minds  of  the  people  from  him. 


94  THE    SHU    KING.  PART  IV. 

not  seek  that  they  should  have  every  talent ;  in  the 
government  of  himself,  he  seemed  to  think  that  he 
could  never  (sufficiently)  attain.  It  was  thus  he 
arrived  at  the  possession  of  the  myriad  regions. — 
How  painstaking  was  he  in  these  things  ! 

'  He  extensively  sought  out  wise  men,  who  should 
be  helpful  to  you,  his  descendant  and  heir.  He 
laid  down  the  punishments  for  officers,  and  warned 
those  who  were  in  authority,  saying,  "If  you  dare 
to  have  constant  dancing  in  your  palaces,  and 
drunken  singing  in  your  chambers, — that  is  called 
the  fashion  of  sorcerers ;  if  you  dare  to  set  your 
hearts  on  wealth  and  women,  and  abandon  your- 
selves to  wandering  about  or  to  the  chase, — that 
is  called  the  fashion  of  extravagance ;  if  you  dare 
to  despise  sage  words,  to  resist  the  loyal  and  up- 
right, to  put  far  from  you  the  aged  and  virtuous, 
and  to  seek  the  company  of  procacious  youths, — 
that  is  called  the  fashion  of  disorder.  Now  if  a 
high  noble  or  officer  be  addicted  to  one  of  these 
three  fashions  with  their  ten  evil  ways1,  his  family 
will  surely  come  to  ruin ;  if  the  prince  of  a  country 
be  so  addicted,  his  state  will  surely  come  to  ruin. 
The  minister  who  does  not  (try  to)  correct  (such 
vices  in  the  sovereign)  shall  be  punished  with 
branding."  These  rules  were  minutely  inculcated 
(also)  on  the  sons  of  officers  and  nobles  in  their 
lessons/ 

4.  *  Oh !  do  you,  who  now  succeed  to  the  throne, 
revere  (these  warnings)  in  your  person.     Think  of 


1  The  'ten  evil  ways'  are  those  mentioned  in  connexion  with 
the  three  evil  fashions ; — two  under  the  sorcerers'  fashion,  and  four 
under  each  of  the  other  two  fashions. 


BOOK  V.  THE    THAI   KIA.  95 

them  ! — sacred  counsels  of  vast  importance,  admira- 
ble words  forcibly  set  forth !  (The  ways)  of  God 
are  not  invariable: — on  the  good-doer  he  sends 
down  all  blessings,  and  on  the  evil-doer  he  sends 
down  all  miseries.*  Do  you  but  be  virtuous,  be  it 
in  small  things  (or  in  large),  and  the  myriad  regions 
will  have  cause  for  rejoicing,  Tf  ynn  b^  nr>t  ^1  fa- 
tuous, be  it  in  large  things  (or  in  smpll),  it  will  hripa 
the  ruin  of  your  ancestral  temple/ 


Book  V.     The  ThIi  KiL 

This  Book  also  belongs  to  the  class  of '  Lessons  or  Instructions/  and 
is  called  '  the  Thai  Km]  because  the  Instructions  were  addressed 
to  the  young  monarch  so  named.  It  is  divided  into  three  sec- 
tions or  parts.  I  Yin  finds  the  young  sovereign  disobedient  to  his 
counsels,  and  proceeds  to  a  high-handed  measure.  He  removes 
him  from  his  palace  and  companions,  and  keeps  him  in  a  sort  of 
easy  confinement,  near  the  grave  of  his  grandfather,  all  the  period 
of  mourning  ;  and  Thai  Kit  becomes  sincerely  penitent  and  vir- 
tuous. This  is  related  in  the  first  section.  In  the  second,  t  Yin 
brings  the  king  back  with  honour  to  Po,  to  undertake  the  duties 
of  the  government,  and  congratulates  him  on  his  reformation. 
The  king  responds  suitably,  and  asks  the  minister  to  continue  to 
afford  him  his  counsels,  which  the  other  at  once  proceeds  to  do. 
The  third  section  is  all  occupied  with  further  and  important 
counsels. 

Section  1. 

i.  The  king,  on  succeeding  to  the  throne,  did  not 
follow  (the  advice  of)  A-hang1.     (A-hang  or)  t  Yin 

1  A-hang,  it  is  said  by  Sze-md  .A^ien,  was  the  name  of  t.  Others 
make  it  the  title  of  the  chief  minister  under  the  dynasty  of  Shang,  = 
'  the  Support  and  Steelyard/  '  the  Buttress  and  Director/ 


96  THE  snti  king. 


PART   IV. 


then  made  the  following  'writing1  : — '  The  former 
king  kept  his  eye  continually  on  the  bright  require- 
ments of  Heaven,  and  so  he  maintained  the  worship 
of  the  spirits  of  heaven  and  earth,  of  those  presiding 
over  the  land  and  the  grain,  and  of  those  of  the 
ancestral  temple; — all  with  a  sincere  reverence.* 
Heaven  took  notice  of  his  virtue,  and  caused  its 
great  appointment  to  light  on  him,  that  he  should 
soothe  and  tranquillize  the  myriad  regions.*  I,  Yin, 
then  gave  my  assistance  to  my  sovereign  in  the 
settlement  of  the  people  ;  and  thus  it  is  that  you, 

0  heir-king,  have  received  the   great  inheritance. 

1  have  seen  it  myself  in  Hsia  with  its  western 
capital2,  that  when  its  rulers  went  through  a  pros- 
perous course  to  the  end,  their  ministers  also  did 
the  same,  and  afterwards,  when  their  successors 
could  not  attain  to  such  a  consummation,  neither 
did  their  ministers.  Take  warning,  O  heir-king. 
Reverently  use  your  sovereignty.  If  you  do  not 
play  the  sovereign,  as  the  name  requires,  you  will 
disgrace  your  grandfather.' 

2.  The  king  would  not  think  (of  these  words), 
nor  listen  to  them.  On  this  f  Yin  said,  *  The 
former  king,  before  it  was  light,  sought  to  have 
large  and  clear  views,  and  then  sat  waiting  for 
the  dawn  (to  carry  them  into  practice).  He  (also) 
sought  on  every  side  for  men  of  ability  and  virtue, 
to  instruct  and  guide  his  posterity.  Do  not  frus- 
trate his  charge  (to  me),  and  bring  on  yourself  your 
own  overthrow.    Be  careful  to  strive  after  the  virtue 

1  This  is  the  first  direct  statement  in  the  Shu  of  a  communica- 
tion made  in  writing. 

2  An-yi,  the  capital  of  Hsia,  might  be  described  as  *  western/ 
from  the  standpoint  of  Po. 


BOOK  v.  THE   THAI  KIA.  97 

of_self-restraint,  and  cherish  far-reaching  plans.     Bel 
like  the  forester,  who,  when  he  has  adjusted  thej 
spring,   goes   to   examine    the   end    of  the   arrow, 
whether  it  be  placed  according  to  rule,  and  then! 
lets  go  ;  reverently  determine  your  aim,  and  follow 

I  the  ways  of  your  grandfather.  Thus  I  shall  be 
delighted,  and  be  able  to  show  to  all  ages  that  I 
have  discharged  my  trust/ 

3.  The  king  was  not  yet  able  to  change  (his 
course).  1  Yin  said  (to  himself),  '  This  is  (real) 
unrighteousness,  and  is  becoming  by  practice  (a 
second)  nature.  I  cannot  bear  to  be  near  (so) 
disobedient  (a  person).  I  will  build  (a  place)  in 
the  palace  at  Thung1,  where  he  can  be  in  silence 
near  (the  grave  of)  the  former  king.  This  will  be 
a  lesson  which  will  keep  him  from  going  astray  all 
his  life/  The  king  went  (accordingly)  to  the  palace 
at  Thung,  and  dwelt  during  the  period  of  mourning. 
In  the  end  he  became  sincerely  virtuous. 

Section  2. 

i.  On  the  first  day  of  the  twelfth  month  of  his 
third  year,  1  Yin  escorted  the  young  king  in  the 
royal  cap  and  robes  back  to  Po.  (At  the  same  time) 
he  made  the  following  writing : — 

*  Without  the  sovereign,  the  people  cannot  have 
that  guidance  which  is  necessary  to  (the  comfort  of) 
their  lives  ;  without  the  people,  the  sovereign  would 
have  no  sway  over  the  four  quarters  (of  the  kingdom). 

1  Thung  was  the  place  where  Thang's  tomb  was ;  probably  in  the 
present  district  of  Yung-ho,  department  of  Phu-£au,  Shan-hsi.  The 
site  or  supposed  site  of  the  grave  there  was  washed  away  in  an 
overflow  of  the  Fan  river  under  the  Yuan  dynasty,  and  a  stone 
coffin  was  removed  to  another  position,  near  which  a  royal  tomb 
has  been  built. 

[i]  H 


98  THE    SHtj    KING.  PART  IV. 

Great  Heaven  has  graciously  favoured  the  House  of 
Shang,  and  granted  to  you,  O  young  king,  at  last  to 
become  virtuous.  *  This  is  indeed  a  blessing  that  will 
extend  without  limit  to  ten  thousand  generations/ 

2,  The  king  did  obeisance  with  his  face  to  his 
hands  and  his  head  to  the  ground,  saying,  '  I,  the 
little  child,  was  without  understanding  of  what  was 
virtuous,  and  was  making  myself  one  of  the  un- 
worthy. By  my  desires  I  was  setting  at  nought  all 
rules  of  conduct,  and  violating  by  my  self-indulgence 
all  rules  of  propriety,  and  the  result  must  have 
been  speedy  ruin  to  my  person.  Calamities  sent  by 
Heaven  maybe  avoided,  but  from  calamities  brought 
on  by  one's  self  there  is  no  escape.*  Heretofore  I 
turned  my  back  on  the  instructions  of  you,  my  tutor 
and  guardian  ; — my  beginning  has  been  marked  by 
incompetency.  Let  me  still  rely  on  your  correcting 
and  preserving  virtue,  keeping  this  in  view  that  my 
end  may  be  good  !' 

3.  1  Yin  did  obeisance  with  his  face  to  his 
hands  and  his  head  on  the  ground,  and  said,  i  To 
cultivate  his  person,  and  by  being  sincerely  virtuous, 
bring  (all)  below  to  harmonious  concord  with  him  ; — 
this  is  the  work  of  the  intelligent  sovereign.  The 
former  king  was  kind  to  the  distressed  and  suffering, 
as  if  they  were  his  children,  and  the  people  sub- 
mitted to  his  commands, — all  with  sincere  delight. 
Even  in  the  states  of  the  neighbouring  princes,  (the 
people)  said,  "  We  are  waiting  for  our  sovereign  ; 
when  our  sovereign  comes,  we  shall  not  suffer  the 
punishments  (that  we  now  do)." 

'  O  king,  zealously  cultivate  your  virtue.  Regard 
(the  example  of)  your  meritorious  grandfather.  At 
no  time  allow  yourself  in  pleasure  and  idleness.     In 


BOOK  V.  THE    THAI    KIA. 


worshipping  your  ancestors,  think  how  you  can  prove 
your  filial  piety  ;  *  _  in  receiving  your  ministers,  think 
how  you  can  show  yourself  respectful ;  in  looking"  to 
what  is  distant,  try  to  get  clear  views :  have  your 
ears  ever  open  to  lessons  of  virtue ; — then  shall  I 
acknowledge  (and  respond  to)  the  excellence  of  your 
majesty  with  an  untiring  (devotion  to  your  service). 

Section  3. 

i.  f  Yin  again  made  an  announcement  to  the 
king,  saying,  ■'  Oh!  Heaven  has  no  (partial)  affec- 
tion ; — only  to  those  who  are  reverent  does  it  show 
affection.*  The^people  are  not  ™™gtant  fn  .ttuasg 
wV^jn  th^y  nh^\ch  ; — f.Hey  cherish  (only)  him -who 
is  benevolent  The  spirits  do  not  always  accept  the 
sacrifices  that  are  offered  to  them ; — they  accept  only 
the  sacrifices  of  the  sincere.*  A  place  of  difficulty 
is  the  Heaven-(conferred)  seat.  When  there  are 
(those)  virtues,  good  government  is  realized;  when 
they  are  not,  disorder  comes.  To  maintain  the  same 
principles  as  those  who  secured  good  government 
will  surely  lead  to  prosperity  ;  to  pursue  the  courses 
of  disorder  will  surely  lead  to  ruin.  He  who  at 
last,  as  at  first,  is  careful  as  to  whom  and  what  hg 
follows  is  a  truly  intelligent  sovereign..  The  former 
king  was  always  zealous  in  the  reverent  cultivation 
of  his  virtue,  so  that  he  was  the  fellow  of  God  \  * 
Now,  O  king,  you  have  entered  on  the  inheritance 
of  his  excellent  line ; — fix  your  inspection  on  him/ 

2.  *  (Your  course  must  be)  as  when  in  ascending 

1  This  phrase  is  used,  as  here,  with  reference  to  the  virtue  of  a 
sovereign,  making  him  as  it  were  the  mate  of  God,  ruling  on  earth 
as  He  rules  above ;  and  with  reference  to  the  honours  paid  to  a 
departed  sovereign,  when  he  is  associated  with  God  in  the  great 
Sacrificial  services. 

H  2 


I0O  THE    SHti    KING. 


PART   IV. 


high  you  begin  from  where  it  is  low,  and  when  in 
travelling  far  you  begin  from  where  it  is  near.  Do 
not  slight  the  occupations  of  the  people  ; — think  of 
their  difficulties.  Do  not  yield  to  a  feeling  of  repose 
on  your  throne  ; — think  of  its  perils.  Be  careful  for 
the  end  at  the  beginning.  When  you  hear  words 
that  are~distasteful  to  your  mind,  you  must  enquire 
whether  they  be  not  right ;  when  you  hear  words 
that  accord  with  your  own  views,  you  must  enquire 
whether  they  be  not  contrary  to  what  is  right.  Oh  ! 
what  attainment  can  be  made  without  anxious 
thought  ?  what  achievement  can  be  made  without 
earnest  effort  ?  Let  the  One  man  be  greatly  good, 
and  the  myriad  regions  will  be  rectified  by  him/ 

3.  i  When  the  sovereign  does  not  with  disputatious 
words  throw  the  old  rules  of  government  into  con- 
fusion, and  the  minister  does  not,  for  favour  and  gain, 
continue  in  an  office  whose  work  is  done, — then  the 
country  will  lastingly  and  surely  enjoy  happiness/ 


Book  VI. 
The  Common  Possession  of  Pure  Virtue. 

This  is  the  last  of  the '  Instructions'  of  1  Yin; — addressed,  like  those 
of  the  last  two  Books,  to  TMi  ^ia,  but  at  a  later  period  when 
the  great  minister  wished  to  retire  from  the  toils  of  administra- 
tion. He  now  disappears  from  the  stage  of  history,  though 
according  to  Sze-md  .Oien,  and  a  notice  in  the  Preface  to  the 
Shu,  he  lived  on  to  b.c.  17 13,  the  eighth  year  of  Thai^ia's  son 
and  successor. 

In  this  Book,  his  subject  is  '  Pure  or  Single-eyed  Virtue/  and  the 
importance  of  it  to  the  ruler  of  the  kingdom.  He  dwells  on 
the  fall  of  iTieh  through  his  want  of  this  virtue,  and  the  eleva- 
tion of  Thang  through  his  possession  of  it ;  treats  generally  on  its 
nature  and  results ;  and  urges  the  cultivation  of  it  on  Thai  K\&. 

I.  I  Yin,  having  returned  the  government  into 


BOOK  VI.         THE    POSSESSION   OF    PURE    VIRTUE.  IOI 

the  hands  of  his  sovereign,  and  being  about  to 
announce  his  retirement,  set  forth  admonitions  on 
the  subject  of  virtue. 

2.  He  said, '  Oh!  it  is  difficult  to  rely  on  Heaven ; — 
its  appointments  are  not  constant.*  (But  if  the 
sovereign  see  to  it  that)  his  virtue  be  constant,  he 
will  preserve  his  throne ;  if  his  virtue  be  not  con- 
stant, the  nine  provinces  will  be  lost  by  him.  The 
king  of  Hsia  could  not  maintain  the  virtue  (of  his 
ancestors)  unchanged,  but  contemned  the  spirits 
and  oppressed  the  people.  Great  Heaven  no  (longer) 
extended  its  protection  to  him.  It  looked  out  among 
the  myriad  regions  to  give  its  guidance  to  one  who 
should  receive  its  favouring  appointment,  fondly 
seeking  (a  possessor  of)  pure  virtue,  whom  it  might 
make  lord  of  all  the  spirits.*  Then  there  were  I, 
Yin,  and  Thang,  both  possessed  of  pure  virtue,  and 
able  to  satisfy  the  mind  of  Heaven.  He  received 
(in  consequence)  the  bright  favour  of  Heaven,  so  as 
to  become  possessor  of  the  multitudes  of  the  nine 
provinces,  and  proceeded  to  change  Hsias  com- 
mencement of  the  year.  It  was  not  that  Heaven 
had  any  private  partiality  for  the  lord  of  Shang ; — it 
simply  gave  its  favour  to  pure  virtue.*  It  was  not 
that  Shang  sought  (the  allegiance  of)  the  lower 
people ; — the  people  simply  turned  to  pure  virtue. 
Where  (the  sovereign's)  virtue  is  pure,  his  enter- 
prizes  are  all  fortunate  ;  where  his  virtue  is  wavering 
and  uncertain,  his  enterprizes  are  all  unfortunate. 
Good  and  evil  do  not  wrongly  befal  men?  but 
Heaven  sends  down  misery  or  happiness  according 
to  their  conduct/  * 

3.  '  Now,  O  young  king,  you  are  newly  entering  on 
your  (great)  appointment, — you  should  be  seeking  to 


102  THE    SH6    KING. 


PART   IV. 


\ 


make  new  your  virtue.  At  last,  as  at  first,  have  this 
as  your  one  object,  so  shall  you  make  a  daily  reno- 
vation. Let  the  officers  whom  you  employ  be  men 
of  virtue  and  ability,  and  let  the  ministers  about  you 
be  the  right  men.  The  minister,  in  relation  to  (his 
sovereign)  above  him,  has  to  promote  his  virtue, 
and,  in  relation  to  the  (people)  beneath  him,  has 
to  seek  their  good.  How  hard  must  it  be  (to  find 
the  proper  man) !  what  careful  attention  must  be 
required !  (Thereafter)  there  must  be  harmony 
(cultivated  with  him),  and  a  oneness  (of  confidence 
placed  in  him). 

( There  is  no  invariable  model  of  virtue  ; — a  su- 
preme regard  to  what  is  good  gives  the  model  of  it. 
There  is  no  invariable  characteristic  of  what  is  good 
that  is  to  be  supremely  regarded  ; — it  is  found  where 
there  is  a  conformity  to  the  uniform  consciousness 
(in  regard  to  what  is  good).  (Such  virtue)  will 
make  the  people  with  their  myriad  surnames  all  say, 
"  How  great  are  the  words  of  the  king!"  and  also, 
"  How  single  and  pure  is  the  kings  heart !"  It  will 
avail  to  maintain  in  tranquillity  the  rich  possession 
of  the  former  king,  and  to  secure  for  ever  the 
(happy)  life  of  the  multitudes  of  the  people/ 

4.  '  Oh  !  (to  retain  a  place)  in  the  seven-shrined 
temple *  of  ancestors  is  a  sufficient  witness  of  virtue.* 
To  be  acknowledged  as  chief  by  the  myriad  heads  of 
families  is  a  sufficient  evidence  of  one's  government. 

1  It  is  beyond  a  doubt  that  the  ancestral  temple  of  the  kings  of 
K&\i  contained  seven  shrines  or  seven  small  temples,  for  the  occu- 
pancy of  which,  by  the  spirit-tablets  of  such  and  such  kings,  there 
were  definite  rules,  as  the  line  of  sovereigns  increased.  It  would 
appear  from  the  text  that  a  similar  practice  prevailed  in  the  time  of 
the  Shang  dynasty. 


BOOK  VII.  THE   PAN-KANG.  IO3 

The  sovereign  without  the  people  has  none  whom 
he  can  employ ;  and  the  people  without  the  sovereign 
have  none  whom  they  can  serve.  Do  not  think  your- 
self so  large  as  to  deem  others  small  If  ordinary 
men  and  women  do  not  find  the  opportunity  to  give 
full  development  to  their  ability,  the  peoples  lord 
will  be  without  the  proper  aids  to  complete  his 
merit.' 


Book  VII.     The  Pan-kang. 

Pan-kang  was  the  seventeenth  sovereign  in  the  line  of  Thang.  From 
Thai  KA  to  him,  therefore,  there  was  a  space  of  32 1  years,  which 
are  a  gap  in  the  history  of  the  Shang  dynasty,  so  far  as  the  existing 
documents  of  the  Shu  are  concerned.  When  the  collection  was 
complete,  there  were  seven  other  documents  between  'the  Com- 
mon Possession  of  Pure  Virtue '  and '  the  Pan-kang/  but  the  latest 
of  them  belonged  to  the  reign  of  3u-yi,  b.c.  1525-1507. 

The  reign  of  Pan-kang  extended  from  b.c.  1401  to  1374,  and  is 
remarkable  as  that  in  which  the  dynasty  began  to  be  called  Yin, 
instead  of  Shang.  The  Book -belongs  to  the  class  of  'Announce- 
ments/ and  is  divided  into  three  sections. 

The  contents  centre  round  the  removal  of  the  capital  from  the 
north  of  the  Ho  to  Yin  on  the  south  of  it.  The  king  saw  that 
the  removal  was  necessary,  but  had  to  contend  with  the  unwill- 
ingness of  the  people  to  adopt  such  a  step,  and  the  opposition  of 
the  great  families.  The  first  section  relates  how  he  endeavoured 
to  vindicate  the  measure,  and  contains  two  addresses,  to  the 
people  and  to  those  in  high  places,  respectively,  designed  to 
secure  their  cordial  co-operation.  The  second  section  brings  before 
us  the  removal  in  progress,  but  there  continue  to  be  dissatisfac- 
tions, which  the  king  endeavours  to  remove  by  a  long  and 
earnest  defence  of  his  course.  The  third  section  opens  with  the 
removal  accomplished.  The  new  city  has  been  founded,  and 
the  plan  of  it  laid  out.  The  king  makes  a  fresh  appeal  to  the 
people  and  chiefs,  to  forget  all  their  heart-burnings,  and  join 
with  him  in  building  up  in  the  new  capital  a  great  destiny  for 
the  dynasty. 


104  THE   SHti   KING.  part  iv. 

Section  1. 

i.  Pan-kang  wished  to  remove  (the  capital)  to  Yin1, 
but  the  people  would  not  go  to  dwell  there.  He 
therefore  appealed  to  all  the  discontented,  and  made 
the  following  protestations.  '  Our  king,  (3ti-yi), 
came,  and  fixed  on  this  (Kang  for  his  capital).  He 
did  so  from  a  deep  concern  for  our  people,  and  not 
because  he  would  have  them  all  die,  where  they 
cannot  (now)  help  one  another  to  preserve  their 
lives.  I  have  consulted  the  tortoise-shell,  and  ob- 
tained the  reply — "  This  is  no  place  for  us."  When 
the  former  kings  had  any  (important)  business,  they 
gave  reverent  heed  to  the  commands  of  Heaven.*  In 
a  case  like  this  especially  they  did  not  indulge  (the 
wish  for)  constant  repose, — they  did  not  abide  ever 
in  the  same  city.  Up  to  this  time  (the  capital  has 
been)  in  five  regions2.  If  we  do  not  follow  (the 
example)  of  these  old  times,  we  shall  be  refusing  to 
acknowledge  that  Heaven  is  making  an  end  of  our 
dynasty  (here) ; — how  little  can  it  be  said  of  us  that 
we  are  following  the  meritorious  course  of  the  former 
kings  !  As  from  the  stump  of  a  felled  tree  there  are 
sprouts  and  shoots,  Heaven  will  perpetuate  its  de- 
cree in  our  favour  in  this  new  city; — the  great 
inheritance  of  the  former  kings  will  be  continued 
and  renewed,  and  tranquillity  will  be  secured  to  the 
four  quarters  (of  the  kingdom)/  * 

1  The  removal  was  probably  necessitated  by  an  inundation  of  the 
Ho.  Kang  had  been  fixed  on  by  3u-yi  for  his  capital.  The  Yin 
to  which  Pan-kang  removed  was  in  the  present  district  of  Yen-sze, 
department  Ho-nan,  Ho-nan. 

2  This  fact— the  frequent  change  of  capital — does  not  give  us  a 
great  idea  of  the  stability  and  resources  of  the  Shang  dynasty. 


BOOK  VII.  THE   PAN-KANG.  IO5 

2.  Pan-kang,  in  making  the  people  aware  of  his 
views,  began  with  those  who  were  in  (high)  places, 
and  took  the  constantly-recurring  circumstances  of 
former  times  to  lay  down  the  right  law  and  measure 
(for  the  present  emergency),  saying,  i  Let  none  of 
you  dare  to  suppress  the  remonstrances  of  the  poor 
people/  The  king  commanded  all  to  come  to  him 
in  the  courtyard  (of  his  palace). 

The  king  spoke  to  this  effect : — '  Come,  all  of 
you  ;  I  will  announce  to  you  my  instructions.  Take 
counsel  how  to  put  away  your  (selfish)  thoughts. 
Do  not  with  haughty  (disregard  of  me)  follow  after 
your  own  ease.  Of  old,  our  former  kings  planned 
like  me  how  to  employ  the  men  of  old  families  to 
share  in  (the  labours  of)  government.  When  they 
wished  to  proclaim  and  announce  what  was  to  be 
attended  to,  these  did  not  conceal  the  royal  views ; 
and  on  this  account  the  kings  greatly  respected  them. 
They  did  not  exceed  the  truth  (in  their  communica- 
tions with  the  people),  and  on  this  account  the  people 
became  greatly  changed  (in  their  views).  Now, (how- 
ever), you  keep  clamouring,  and  get  the  confidence 
(of  the  people)  by  alarming  and  shallow  speeches  ; — 
I  do  not  know  what  you  are  wrangling  about.  (In 
this  movement)  I  am  not  myself  abandoning  my 
proper  virtue,  but  you  conceal  the  goodness  of  my 
intentions,  and  do  not  stand  in  awe  of  me,  the  One 
man.  I  see  you  as  clearly  as  one  sees  a  fire  ;  but  I, 
likewise,  by  my  undecided  plans,  have  produced  your 
error. 

'  When  the  net  has  its  line,  there  is  order  and  not 
confusion  ;  and  when  the  husbandman  labours  upon 
his  fields,  and  reaps  with  all  his  might,  there  is  the 
(abundant)    harvest.      If  you    can   put   away   your 


106  THE    SHtj    KING.  PART  IV, 

(selfish)  thoughts,  and  bestow  real  good  upon  the 
people,  reaching  (also)  to  your  own  relatives  and 
friends,  you  may  boldly  venture  to  make  your  words 
great,  and  say  that  you  have  accumulated  merit. 
But  you  do  not  fear  the  great  evils  which  (through 
our  not  removing)  are  extending  far  and  near  ;  (you 
are  like)  idle  husbandmen,  who  yield  themselves  to 
ease,  and  are  not  strong  to  toil  and  labour  on  their 
acres,  so  that  they  cannot  get  their  crop  of  millets. 
You  do  not  speak  in  a  spirit  of  harmony  and  good- 
ness to  the  people,  and  are  only  giving  birth  to  bitter 
evils  for  yourselves.  You  play  the  part  of  destroyers 
and  authors  of  calamity,  of  villains  and  traitors,  to 
bring  down  misery  on  your  own  persons.  You  set 
the  example  of  evil,  and  must  feel  its  smart ; — what 
will  it  avail  you  (then)  to  repent  ?  Look  at  the 
poor  people ; — they  are  still  able  to  look  to  one 
another  and  give  expression  to  their  remonstrances, 
but  when  they  begin  to  speak,  you  are  ready  with 
your  extravagant  talk  ; — how  much  more  ought  you 
to  have  me  before  your  eyes,  with  whom  it  is  to 
make  your  lives  long  or  short !  Why  do  you  not  re- 
port (their  words)  to  me,  but  go  about  to  excite  one 
another  by  empty  speeches,  frightening  and  involving 
the  multitudes  in  misery  ?  When  a  fire  is  blazing 
in  the  flames  so  that  it  cannot  be  approached,  can  it 
still  be  beaten  out  ?  So,  it  will  not  be  I  who  will  be 
to  blame,  that  you  all  cause  dispeace  in  this  way, 
(and  must  suffer  the  consequences.) 

'  Kkih.  Zan1  has  said,  "In  men  we  seek  those  of 
old  families ;  in  vessels,  we  do  not  seek  old  ones, 

1  Who  .Oih  Zan  was  is  not  known.  The  general  opinion  is, 
that  he  was  an  ancient  historiographer.  A  iTau  Zan  is  introduced 
in  a  similar  way  in  the  Confucian  Analects,  XVI,  i. 


BOOK  VII.  THE    PAN-KANG.  IO7 

but  new."  Of  old,  the  kings,  my  predecessors,  and 
your  forefathers  and  fathers  shared  together  the 
ease  and  labours  (of  the  government) ; — how  should 
I  dare  to  lay  undeserved  afflictions  on  you  ?  For 
generations  the  toils  of  your  (fathers)  have  been 
approved,  and  I  will  not  conceal  your  goodness. 
Now  when  I  offer  the  great  sacrifices  to  my  pre- 
decessors, your  forefathers  are  present  to  share  in 
them.*  (They  all  observe)  the  happiness  I  confer 
and  the  sufferings  I  inflict,  and  I  cannot  dare  to 
reward  virtue  that  does  not  exist. 

i  I  have  announced  to  you  the  difficulties  (of  the 
intended  movement),  being  bent  on  it,  like  an  archer 
(whose  only  thought  is  to  hit).  Do  not  you  despise 
the  old  and  experienced,  and  do  not  make  little  of 
the  helpless  and  young.  Seek  every  one  long  con- 
tinuance in  this  (new  city),  which  is  to  be  your  abode  ; 
exert  yourselves  and  put  out  your  strength  (in  fur- 
thering the  removal),  and  listen  to  the  plans  of  me, 
the  One  man.  I  will  make  no  distinction  between 
men  as  being  more  distantly  or  more  nearly  related 
to  me  ; — the  criminal  (in  this  matter)  shall  die  the 
death,  and  the  good-doer  shall  have  his  virtue  dis- 
tinguished. The  prosperity  of  the  country  (ought 
to)  come  from  you  all.  If  it  fail  of  prosperity,  that 
must  arise  from  me,  the  One  man,  erring  in  the 
application  of  punishment.  Be  sure,  all  of  you,  to 
make  known  this  announcement.  From  this  time 
forward,  attend  respectfully  to  your  business ;  have 
(the  duties  of)  your  offices  regularly  adjusted ;  bring 
your  tongues  under  the  rule  of  law  : — lest  punish- 
ment come  upon  you,  when  repentance  will  be  of  no 
avail/ 


I08  THE    SH<J    KING.  PART  IV. 


Section  2. 

i.  Pan-kang  arose,  and  (was  about  to)  cross  the 
Ho  with  the  people,  moving  (to  the  new  capital). 
Accordingly,  he  addressed  himself  to  those  of  them 
who  were  (still)  dissatisfied,  and  made  a  full  announce- 
ment to  their  multitudes,  to  induce  a  sincere  acqui- 
escence (in  the  measure).  They  all  attended,  and 
(being  charged)  to  take  no  liberties  in  the  royal 
courtyard,  he  called  them  near,  and  said,  *  Listen 
clearly  to  my  words,  and  do  not  disregard  my 
commands. 

*  Oh !  of  old  time  my  royal  predecessors  cherished, 
every  one  and  above  every  other  thing,  a  respectful 
care  of  the  people,  who  (again)  upheld  their  sovereign 
with  a  mutual  sympathy.  Seldom  was  it  that  they 
were  not  superior  to  any  (calamitous)  time  sent  by 
Heaven.  When  great  calamities  came  down  on 
Yin,  the  former  kings  did  not  fondly  remain  in  their 
place.  What  they  did  was  with  a  view  to  the 
people's  advantage,  and  therefore  they  moved  (their 
capitals).  Why  do  you  not  reflect  that  I,  according 
to  what  I  have  heard  of  the  ancient  sovereigns,  in 
my  care  of  you  and  actings  towards  you,  am  only 
wishing  to  rejoice  with  you  in  a  common  repose  ? 
It  is  not  that  any  guilt  attaches  to  you,  so  that  (this 
movement)  should  be  like  a  punishment.  If  I  call 
upon  you  to  cherish  this  new  city,  it  is  simply  on 
your  account,  and  as  an  act  of  great  accordance  with 
your  wishes.  My  present  undertaking  to  remove 
with  you,  is  to  give  repose  and  stability  to  the 
country.  You,  (however),  have  no  sympathy  with 
the  anxieties  of  my  mind ;  but  you  all  keep  a  great 


BOOK  VII.  THE    PAN-KANG.  IO9 

reserve  in  declaring  your  minds,  (when  you  might) 
respectfully  think  by  your  sincerity  to  move  me,  the 
One  man.  You  only  exhaust  and  distress  yourselves. 
The  case  is  like  that  of  sailing  in  a  boat ; — if  you  do 
not  cross  the  stream  (at  the  proper  time),  you  will 
destroy  all  the  cargo.  Your  sincerity  does  not  re- 
spond to  mine,  and  we  are  in  danger  of  going  together 
to  destruction.  You,  notwithstanding,  will  not  exa- 
mine the  matter ; — though  you  anger  yourselves, 
what  cure  will  that  bring  ? 

*  You  do  not  consult  for  a  distant  day,  nor  think 
of  the  calamity  that  must  befal]  you  (from  not  re- 
moving). You  greatly  encourage  one  another  in 
what  must  prove  to  your  sorrow.  Now  you  have 
the  present,  but  you  will  not  have  the  future  ; — what 
prolongation  of  life  can  you  look  for  from  above  ? 
My  measures  are  forecast  to  prolong  your  (lease  of) 
life  from  Heaven ;— do  I  force  you  by  the  terrors  of 
my  power  ?  My  object  is  to  support  and  nourish 
you  all.  I  think  of  my  ancestors,  (who  are  now) 
the  spiritual  sovereigns  ;*  when  they  made  your  fore- 
fathers toil  (on  similar  occasions  it  was  only  for 
their  good),  and  I  would  be  enabled  in  the  same 
way  greatly  to  nourish  you  and  cherish  you/ 

2.  '  Were  I  to  err  in  my  government,  and  remain 
long  here,  my  high  sovereign,  (the  founder  of  our 
dynasty),  would  send  down  on  me  great  punishment 
for  my  crime,  and  say,  "  Why  do  you  oppress  my 
people  ?"*  If  you,  the  myriads  of  the  people,  do  not 
attend  to  the  perpetuation  of  your  lives,  and  cherish 
one  mind  with  me,  the  One  man,  in  my  plans,  the 
former  kings  will  send  down  on  you  great  punish- 
ment for  your  crime,  and  say,  "  Why  do  you  not 
agree  with  our  young  grandson,  but  go  on  to  forfeit 


IIO  THE    SH<J    KING.  PART  IV. 

your  virtue  ? "  When  they  punish  you  from  above, 
you  will  have  no  way  of  escape.*  Of  old,  my  royal 
predecessors  made  your  ancestors  and  fathers  toil 
(only  for  their  good).  You  are  equally  the  people 
whom  I  (wish  to)  cherish.  But  your  conduct  is  inju- 
rious ; — it  is  cherished  in  your  hearts.  Whereas  my 
royal  predecessors  made  your  ancestors  and  fathers 
happy,  they,  your  ancestors  and  fathers,  will  (now) 
cut  you  off  and  abandon  you,  and  not  save  you  from 
death.*  Here  are  those  ministers  of  my  govern- 
ment, who  share  with  me  in  the  offices  (of  the  king- 
dom) ; — and  yet  they  (only  think  of  hoarding  up) 
cowries  and  gems.  Their  ancestors  and  fathers 
earnestly  represent  (their  course)  to  my  high 
sovereign,  saying,  "  Execute  great  punishments  on 
our  descendants/'  So  do  they  advise  my  high 
sovereign  to  send  down  great  calamities  (on  those 
men).'  * 

3.  '  Oh !  I  have  now  told  you  my  unchangeable 
purpose ; — do  you  perpetually  respect  (my)  great 
anxiety;  let  us  not  get  alienated  and  removed 
from  one  another ;  share  in  my  plans  and  thoughts, 
and  think  (only)  of  following  me ;  let  every  one  of 
you  set  up  the  true  rule  of  conduct  in  his  heart. 
If  there  be  bad  and  unprincipled  men,  precipitously 
or  carelessly  disrespectful  (to  my  orders),  and  taking 
advantage  of  this  brief  season  to  play  the  part  of 
villains  or  traitors,  I  will  cut  off  their  noses,  or 
utterly  exterminate  them.  I  will  leave  none  of 
their  children.  I  will  not  let  them  perpetuate 
their  seed  in  this  new  city. 

'  Go !  preserve  and  continue  your  lives.  I  will 
now  transfer  you  (to  the  new  capital),  and  (there) 
establish  your  families  for  ever/ 


POOK  VII.  THE    PAN-KANG.  I  I  I 


Section  3. 

i.  Pan-kang  having  completed  the  removal,  and 
settled  the  places  of  residence,  proceeded  to  adjust 
the  several  positions  (of  all  classes  at  an  assembly)  ; 
and  then  he  soothed  and  comforted  the  multitudes, 
saying  to  them,  '  Do  not  play  nor  be  idle,  but  exert 
yourselves  to  build  (here)  a  great  destiny  (for  us). 

'  Now  I  have  disclosed  my  heart  and  belly,  my 
reins  and  bowels,  and  fully  declared  to  you,  my 
people,  all  my  mind.  I  will  not  treat  any  of  you 
as  offenders ;  and  do  not  you  (any  more)  help  one 
another  to  be  angry,  and  form  parties  to  defame 
me,  the  One  man. 

'  Of  old,  my  royal  predecessor,  (Thang),  that  his 
merit  might  exceed  that  of  those  who  were  before 
him,  proceeded  to  the  hill-site  \  Thereby  he  re- 
moved our  evils,  and  accomplished  admirable  good 
for  our  country.  Now  you,  my  people,  were  by 
(your  position)  dissipated  and  separated,  so  that 
you  had  no  abiding  place.  (And  yet)  you  asked 
why  I  was  troubling  your  myriads  and  requiring 
you  to  remove.  But  God,  being  about  to  renew 
the  virtuous  service  of  my  high  ancestor,  and  secure 
the  good  order  of  our  kingdom,  I,  with  the  sincere 
and  respectful  (of  my  ministers),  felt  a  reverent  care 
for  the  lives  of  the  people,  and  have  made  a  lasting 
settlement  in  (this)  new  city.* 

'  I,  a  youth,  did  not  neglect  your  counsels ; — 
I  (only)  used  the  best  of  them.     Nor  did  any  of 


1  It  is  supposed  that  this l  hill-site '  of  Thang  was  the  same  as  that 
which  Pan-kang  had  fixed  on,  but  this  does  not  clearly  appear  in 
the  text. 


112  THE    SH6   KING. 


PART  IV. 


you  presumptuously  oppose  the  decision  of  the 
tortoise-shell ;  — so  we  are  here  to  enlarge  our 
great  inheritance/* 

2.  '  Oh  !  ye  chiefs  of  regions,  ye  heads  of  depart- 
ments, all  ye,  the  hundreds  of  officers,  would  that 
ye  had  a  sympathy  (with  my  people) !  I  will  exert 
myself  in  the  choice  and  guiding  of  you ; — do  ye 
think  reverently  of  my  multitudes.  I  will  not  em- 
ploy those  who  are  fond  of  enriching  themselves ; 
but  will  use  and  revere  those  who  are  vigorously, 
yet  reverently,  labouring  for  the  lives  and  increase 
of  the  people,  nourishing  them  and  planning  for 
their  enduring  settlement. 

'  I  have  now  brought  forward  and  announced  to 
you  my  mind,  whom  I  approve  and  whom  I  dis- 
allow;— let  none  of  you  but  reverence  (my  will). 
Do  not  seek  to  accumulate  wealth  and  precious 
things,  but  in  fostering  the  life  of  the  people,  seek 
to  find  your  merit.  Reverently  display  your  virtue 
in  behalf  of  the  people.  For  ever  maintain  this 
one  purpose  in  your  hearts/ 


Book  VIII.     The  Charge  to  Yueh. 

After  Pan-kang  came  the  reigns  of  Hsiao-hsin  and  Hsiao-yi,  of 
which  we  have  no  accounts  in  the  Shu.  Hsiao-yi  was  followed  by 
Wu-ting  (b.  c.  i  324-1 264),  to  the  commencement  of  whose  reign 
this  Book,  in  three  sections,  belongs.  His  name  is  not  in  it, 
but  that  he  is  the  king  intended  appears  from  the  prefatory 
notice,  and  the  Confucian  Analects,  XIV,  xliii.  The  Book  is  the 
first  of  the  '  Charges '  of  the  Shu.  They  relate  the  designation 
by  the  king  of  some  officer  to  a  particular  charge  or  to  some  fief, 
with  the  address  delivered  by  him  on  the  occasion.  Here  the 
charge  is  to  Yueh?  in  the  first  section,  on  his  appointment  to  be 


BOOK  VIII.  THE    CHARGE    TO   YUEH.  1 1 3 

chief  minister.  In  the  other  two  sections  Yueh  is  the  principal 
speaker,  and  not  the  king.  They  partake  more  of  the  nature  of 
the  '  Counsels.'  Yueh  had  been  a  recluse,  living  in  obscurity. 
The  king's  attention  was  drawn  to  him  in  the  manner  related 
in  the  Book,  and  he  was  discovered  in  Fu-yen,  or  amidst  *  the 
Crags  of  Fu,'  from  which  he  was  afterwards  called  Fu  Yueh,  as 
if  Fu  had  been  his  surname. 
The  first  section  tells  us  how  the  king  met  with  Yueh,  and  appointed 
him  to  be  his  chief  minister,  and  how  Yueh  responded  to  the 
charge  that  he  received.  In  the  second  section,  Yueh  counsels  the 
king  on  a  variety  of  points,  and  the  king  responds  admiringly. 
In  the  third,  the  king  introduces  himself  as  a  pupil  at  the  feet  of 
Yueh,  and  is  lectured  on  the  subject  of  enlarging  his  knowledge. 
In  the  end  the  king  says  that  he  looks  to  Yueh  as  another  I  Yin, 
to  make  him  another  Thang, 

Section  1. 

i.  The  king  passed  the  season  of  sorrow  in 
the  mourning  shed  for  three  years  *,  and  when  the 
period  of  mourning  was  over,  he  (still)  did  not 
speak  (to  give  any  commands).  All  the  ministers 
remonstrated  with  him,  saying,  *  Oh !  him  who  is 
(the  first)  to  apprehend  we  pronounce  intelligent, 
and  the  intelligent  man  is  the  model  for  others. 
The  Son  of  Heaven  rules  over  the  myriad  regions, 
and  all  the  officers  look  up  to  and  reverence  him. 
They  are  the  kings  words  which  form  the  com- 
mands (for  them).  If  he  do  not  speak,  the  minis- 
ters have  no  way  to  receive  their  orders/  On  this 
the  king  made  a  writing,  for  their  information,  to 
the  following  effect :— '  As  it  is  mine  to  serve  as  the 

1  A  young  king,  mourning  for  his  father,  had  to  '  afflict '  himself 
in  various  ways  for  twenty-five  months,  nominally  for  three  years* 
Among  other  privations,  he  had  to  exchange  the  comforts  of  a 
palace  for  a  rough  shed  in  one  of  the  courtyards.  During  the  time 
of  mourning,  the  direction  of  affairs  was  left  to  the  chief  minister* 


114  the  sh6  king. 


PART  IV. 


director  for  the  four  quarters  (of  the  kingdom), 
I  have  been  afraid  that  my  virtue  is  not  equal  to 
(that  of  my  predecessors),  and  therefore  have  not 
spoken.  (But)  while  I  was  reverently  and  silently 
thinking  of  the  (right)  way,  I  dreamt  that  God  gave 
me  a  good  assistant  who  should  speak  for  me/  *  He 
then  minutely  recalled  the  appearance  (of  the  person 
whom  he  had  seen),  and  caused  search  to  be  made 
for  him  everywhere  by  means  of  a  picture.  Ylieh, 
a  builder  in  the  wild  country  of  Fft-yen,  was  found 
like  to  it. 

2.  On  this  the  king  raised  and  made  (Ylieh)  his 
prime  minister,  keeping  him  (also)  at  his  side. 

He  charged  him,  saying,  '  Morning  and  evening 
present  your  instructions  to  aid  my  virtue.  Sup- 
pose me  a  weapon  of  steel ; — I  will  use  you  for  a 
whetstone.  Suppose  me  crossing  a  great  stream  ; — 
I  will  use  you  for  a  boat  with  its  oars.  Suppose  me 
in  a  year  of  great  drought; — I  will  use  you  as  a 
copious  rain.  Open  your  mind,  and  enrich  my  mind. 
(Be  you)  like  medicine,  which  must  distress  the  pa- 
tient, in  order  to  cure  his  sickness.  (Think  of  me) 
as  one  walking  barefoot,  whose  feet  are  sure  to  be 
wounded,  if  he  do  not  see  the  ground. 

'  Do  you  and  your  companions  all  cherish  the 
same  mind  to  assist  your  sovereign,  that  I  may 
follow  my  royal  predecessors,  and  tread  in  the  steps 
of  my  high  ancestor,  to  give  repose  to  the  millions 
of  the  people.  Oh !  respect  this  charge  of  mine  ;  — 
so  shall  you  bring  your  work  to  a  (good)  end/ 

3.  Ylieh  replied  to  the  king,  saying,  'Wood  by 
the  use  of  the  line  is  made  straight,  and  the  sove- 
reign who  follows  reproof  is  made  sage.  When  the 
sovereign  can  (thus)  make  himself  sage,  his  ministers, 


BOOK  VIII.  THE    CHARGE    TO    YtJEH.  1 1 5 

without  being  specially  commanded,  anticipate  his 
orders ; — who  would  dare  not  to  act  in  respectful 
compliance  with  this  excellent  charge  of  your 
Majesty?' 

Section  2. 

i.  Ylieh  having  received  his  charge,  and  taken 
the  presidency  of  all  the  officers,  he  presented  him- 
self before  the  king,  and  said,  *  Oh !  intelligent  kings 
act  in  reverent  accordance  with  the  ways  of  Heaven. 
The  founding  of  states  and  the  setting  up  of  capitals, 
the  appointing  of  sovereign  kings,  of  dukes  and  other 
nobles,  with  their  great  officers  and  heads  of  depart- 
ments, were  not  designed  to  minister  to  the  idleness 
and  pleasures  (of  one),  but  for  the  good  government 
of  the  people.  It  is  Heaven  which  is  all-intelligent 
and  observing ; — let  the  sage  (king)  take  it  as  his 
pattern.*  Then  his  ministers  will  reverently  accord 
with  him,  and  the  people  consequently  will  be  well 
governed. 

'  It  is  the  mouth  that  gives  occasion  for  shame : 
they  are  the  coat  of  mail  and  helmet  that  give  occa- 
sion to  war.  The  upper  robes  and  lower  garments 
(for  reward  should  not  be  lightly  taken  from)  their 
chests;  before  spear  and  shield  are  used,  one  should 
examine  himself.  If  your  Majesty  will  be  cautious 
in  regard  to  these  things,  and,  believing  this  about 
them,  attain  to  the  intelligent  use  of  them,  (your 
government)  will  in  everything  be  excellent.  Good 
government  and  bad  depend  on  the  various  officers. 
Offices  should  not  be  given  to  men  because  they  are 
favourites,  but  only  to  men  of  ability.  Dignities 
should  not  be  conferred  on  men  of  evil  practices,  but 
only  on  men  of  worth. 

I  2 


Il6  THE   SH#   KING. 


PART  IV. 


'  Anxious  thought  about  what  will  be  best  should 
precede  your  movements,  which  also  should  be  taken 
at  the  time  proper  for  them.  Indulging  the  con- 
sciousness  of  being  good  is  the  way  to  lose  that 
goodness ;  being  vain  of  one's  ability  is  the  way  to 
lose  the  merit  it  might  produce.  ^ 

'  For  all  affairs  let  there  be  adequate  preparation ; — 
with  preparation  there  will  be  no  calamitous  issue. 
Do  not  open  the  door  for  favourites,  from  whom  you 
will  receive  contempt.  Do  not  be  ashamed  of  mis- 
takes, and  (go  on  to)  make  them  crimes.  Let  your 
mind  rest  in  its  proper  objects,  and  the  affairs  of 
your  government  will  be  pure.  Officiousness  in  sacri- 
ficing is  called  irreverencej  *  and  multiplying  cere- 
monies leads  to  disorder.  To  serve  the  spirits 
acceptably  (in  this  way)  is  difficult/  * 

2.  The  king  said,  'Excellent!  your  words,  O 
Ylieh,  should  indeed  be  put  in  practice  (by  me). 
If  you  were  not  so  good  in  counsel,  I  should  not 
have  heard  these  rules  for  my  conduct/  Ylieh  did 
obeisance  with  his  head  to  the  ground,  and  said,  '  It 
is  not  the  knowing  that  is  difficult,  but  the  doing. 
(But)  since  your  Majesty  truly  knows  this,  there 
will  not  be  the  difficulty,  and  you  will  become  really 
equal  in  complete  virtue  to  our  first  king.  Wherein 
I,  Ylieh,  refrain  from  speaking  (what  I  ought  to 
speak),  the  blame  will  rest  with  me/ 

Section  3. 

i.  The  king  said,  'Come,  O  Ylieh.  I,  the  little 
one,  first  learned  with  Kan  Pan l.    Afterwards  I  lived 

1  From  Part  V,  xvi,  2,  we  learn  that  Kan  Pan  was  a  great  minister 
of  Wu-ting.  It  is  supposed  that  he  had  been  minister  to  Wu-ting's 
father,  and  died  during  the  king's  period  of  mourning. 


BOOK  VIII.  THE    CHARGE    TO   YUEH.  117 

concealed  among  the  rude  countrymen,  and  then  I 
went  to  (the  country)  inside  the  Ho,  and  lived  there 1. 
From  the  Ho  I  went  to  Po ; — and  the  result  has 
been  that  I  am  unenlightened.  Do  you  teach  me 
what  should  be  my  aims.  Be  to  me  as  the  yeast 
and  the  malt  in  making  sweet  spirits,  as  the  salt  and 
the  prunes  in  making  agreeable  soup.  Use  various 
methods  to  cultivate  me  ;  do  not  cast  me  away ; — so 
shall  I  attain  to  practise  your  instructions/ 

Ylieh  said,  '  O  king,  a  ruler  should  seek  to  learn 
much  (from  his  ministers),  with  a  view  to  establish 
his  affairs ;  but  to  learn  the  lessons  of  the  ancients 
is  the  way  to  attain  this.  That  the  affairs  of  one, 
not  making  the  ancients  his  masters,  can  be  perpetu- 
ated for  generations,  is  what  I  have  not  heard. 

<_InJearning  there  should  be  a  humble  mind  and 
the  maintenance  of  a  constant  earnestness  ; — in  such 
a  case  (the  learner  s)  improvement  will  surely  come* 
He  who  sincerely  cherishes  these  things  will  find  all 
truth  accumulating  in  his  person.  Teaching  is  the 
half  of  learning;  when  a  man's  thoughts  from  first 
to  last  are  constantly  fixed  on  learning,  his  virtuous 


cultivation  comes  unperceived. 

'  Survey  the  perfect  pattern  of  our  first  king ; — so 
shall  you  for  ever  be  preserved  from  error.  Then 
shall  I  be  able  reverently  to  meet  your  views,  and 
on  every  side  to  look  out  for  men  of  eminence  to 
place  in  the  various  offices/ 

2.  The  king  said, '  Oh!  Yiieh,  that  all  within  the  four 


1  We  do  not  know  the  events  of  Wu-ting's  early  life  sufficiently  to 
explain  his  language  here.  His  living  concealed  among  the  rude 
people  of  the  country,  and  then  crossing  to  the  north  of  the  Ho, 
was  owing  probably  to  troubles  in  the  kingdom. 


1 1 8  THE    SHft    KING. 


PART  IT. 


seas  look  up  to  my  virtue  is  owing  to  you.  As  his 
legs  and  arms  form  the  man,  so  does  a  good  minister 
form  the  sage  (king).  Formerly,  there  was  the  first 
premier  of  our  dynasty,  Pao-hang1,  who  raised  up 
and  formed  its  royal  founder.  He  said,  "  If  I  cannot 
make  my  sovereign  like  Y&o  or  Shun,  I  shall  feel 
ashamed  in  my  heart,  as  if  I  were  beaten  in  the 
market-place/ '  If  any  common  man  did  not  get 
(all  he  should  desire),  he  said,  "It  is  my  fault/' 
(Thus)  he  assisted  my  meritorious  ancestor,  so  that 
he  became  equal  to  great  Heaven.*  Do  you  give 
your  intelligent  and  preserving  aid  to  me,  and  let 
not  A-hang  engross  all  the  good  service  to  the 
House  of  Shang. 

*  The  sovereign  should  share  his  government  with 
none  but  worthy  officers.  The  worthy  officer  should 
accept  his  support  from  none  but  the  proper  sove- 
reign. May  you  now  succeed  in  making  your  sove- 
reign a  (true)  successor  of  the  founder  of  his  line,  and 
in  securing  the  lasting  happiness  of  the  people ! ' 

Yiieh  did  obeisance  with  his  head  to  the  ground, 
and  said,  '  I  will  venture  to  respond  to,  and  display 
abroad,  your  Majesty's  excellent  charge.' 


Book  IX.     The  Day  of  the  Supplementary 
Sacrifice  to  Kao  3ung. 

Kao  3ung  was  the  title  given  to  Wu-ting,  after  his  death,  in  the 
ancestral  temple.  A  supplementary  sacrifice  was  offered  on  the 
day  following  the  regular  and  more  solemn  service.  What 
special  idea  was  connected  with  it,  it  would  be  difficult  to  say ; 

1  Styled  A-hang  in  the  beginning  of « the  Th&i-M.'  P&>hang= 
'  the  Protector  and  Steelyard/ 


BOOK  IX.  SACRIFICE   TO   KAO    3UNG.  II9 

but  at  the  close  of  it,  the  representatives  or  personators  of  the 
dead  in  the  sacrifice  of  the  preceding  day  were  all  feasted. 
The  title  of  this  short  Book  leaves  it  uncertain  whether  the  sacrifice 
was  offered  to  Wu-ting  or  by  him.  The  prefatory  notice  proceeds 
on  the  former  view.  Many  critics  of  great  intelligence  decide 
for  the  latter,  which  a  renewed  consideration  of  the  text  has 
induced  me  to  adopt.  The  king  then  is  3u-kang,  Wu- ting's  son. 
Something  irregular  or  excessive  in  his  sacrificing  to  his  father 
was  the  thing  which  his  monitor  3U  K\  wished  to  censure, 
taking  occasion  to  do  so  from  the  incident  mentioned  in  the  first 
sentence. 

On  the  day  of  the  supplementary  sacrifice  of 
YAo  3ung,  there  appeared  a  crowing  pheasant *. 
3&  Ki  said,  '  To  rectify  this  affair,  the  king  must 
first  be  corrected/  He  delivered  accordingly  a 
lesson  to  the  king,  saying, '  In  its  inspection  of  men 
below.  Heaven's  first  consideration  is  of  their  right- 
eousness, and  it  bestows  on  them  (accordingly)  length 
of  years  or  the  contrary.*  It  is  not  Heaven  that 
cuts  short  men's  lives ;  they  bring  them  to  an  end 
themselves.  Some  men  who  have  not  complied  with 
virtue  will  yet  not  acknowledge  their  offences,  and 
when  Heaven  has  by  evident  tokens  charged  them 
to  correct  their  conduct,  they  still  say,  "  What  are 
these  things  to  us  ?" 

*  Oh !  your  Majesty's  business  is  to  care  reve- 
rently for  the  people.  And  all  (your  ancestors)  were 
the  heirs  of  (the  kingdom  by  the  gift  of)  Heaven ; — 
in  attending  to  the  sacrifices  (to  them),  be  not  so 
excessive  in  those  to  your  father/  * 

1  Sze-md  iOien,  after  the  prefatory  notice,  says  that  the  pheasant 
sat  on  the  ear — one  of  the  handles — of  a  tripod. 


I20  THE    Slltf   KING* 


PART  IV, 


Book   X. 
The  Chief  of  the  West's  Conquest  of  Lf. 

The  reigns  of  seven  more  kings  of  Yin  or  Shang  have  passed,  and 
this  Book  brings  us  to  the  time  of  ^au-hsin  or  Shau,  its  last  sove- 
reign, b.c.  1 154-1 123.  The  House  of  iTau  begins  to  come  to  the 
front,  for  '  the  Chief  of  the  West '  was  one  of  the  acknowledged 
founders  of  the  ^au  dynasty ; — whether  .A^ang,  known  as  king 
Wan,  or  his  son  Fa\  known  as  king  Wu,  is  uncertain,  bang's 
father>  the  duke  of  jffau  in  the  present  department  of  Fang-hsiang, 
Shen-hsi,  had  been  appointed  Chief  of  the  West,  that  is,  of  all  the 
western  portion  of  the  kingdom,  embracing  Yu's  provinces  of 
Yung,  Liang,  and  King.  The  same  jurisdiction  descended  to  his 
son  and  grandson.  The  state  of  Li,  the  conquest  of  which  is 
mentioned,  was  in  the  present  department  of  Lu-an,  Shan-hsf, 
within  the  royal  domain,  so  that  the  Chief  of  the  West  was  no 
longer  confining  himself  to  the  west,  but  threatening  the  king 
himself. 

3u  t,  a  loyal  officer,  hears  of  the  conquest  of  Lf,  and  hurries  away 
to  inform  the  king  and  warn  him  of  the  danger  threatening  the 
dynasty  through  his  evil  conduct.  The  king  gives  no  heed  to 
his  remonstrances,  and  3u  I  retires,  sighing  over  the  ruin,  which 
he  sees  is  not  to  be  averted. 

The  Book  is  classed,  it  would  be  hard  to  tell  why,  among  the 
'  Announcements/ 

The  Chief  of  the  West  having  subdued  Lf,  3u  t 
was  afraid,  and  hastened  to  report  it  to  the  king. 

He  said,  'Son  of  Heaven,  Heaven  is  bringing  to 
an  end  the  dynasty  of  Yin ;  *  the  wisest  men  and  the 
shell  of  the  great  tortoise  do  not  presume  to  know 
anything  fortunate  for  it*  It  is  not  that  the  former 
kings  do  not  aid  us,  the  men  of  this  later  time  ;  * 
but  by  your  dissoluteness  and  sport  you  are  bring- 
ing on  the  end  yourself.  On  this  account  Heaven 
has  cast  us  off,  and  there  are  no  good  harvests  to 
supply  us  with  food.*     Men  have  no  regard  to  their 


BOOK  XI.  THE   COUNT   OF   WEI.  121 

heavenly  nature,  and  pay  no  obedience  to  the  sta- 
tutes (of  the  kingdom).  (Yea),  our  people  now  all 
wish  (the  dynasty)  to  perish,  saying,  "  Why  does  not 
Heaven  send  down  its  indignation  ?  Why  does  not 
(some  one  with)  its  great  appointment  make  his 
appearance  ?  What  has  the  present  king  to  do 
with  us  ?  "  ' 

The  king  said,  '  Oh !  was  not  my  birth  in 
accordance  with  the  appointment  of  Heaven  (in 
favour  of  my  House)?'  (On  this)  3u  1  returned 
(to  his  own  city),  and  said,  '  Your  crimes,  which  are 
many,  are  registered  above,  and  can  you  still  appeal 
to  the  appointment  of  Heaven  in  your  favour?* 
Yin  will  perish  very  shortly.  As  to  all  your  deeds, 
can  they  but  bring  ruin  on  your  country?' 


Book  XI.     The  Count  of  Wei. 

The  conversation  recorded  here — called,  like  the  last  Book,  and 
with  as  little  reason,  an  *  Announcement ' — is  referred  to  B.C. 
1 1 23,  the  year  in  which  the  dynasty  of  Shang  perished. 

Wei  was  a  principality  in  the  royal  domain,  corresponding  to  the 
present  district  of  Lu-^ang,  department  Lu-an,  Shan-hsi,the  lords 
of  which  were  counts.  The  count  who  appears  here  was,  most 
probably,  an  elder  brother  of  the  king,  and  by  the  same  mother, 
who  was,  however,  only  a  concubine  when  the  count  was  born, 
but  raised  to  be  queen  before  the  birth  of  jffau-hsin.  Saddened 
with  the  thought  of  the  impending  ruin  of  the  dynasty,  the  count 
seeks  the  counsel  of  two  other  high  nobles,  and  asks  them  to 
tell  him  what  was  to  be  done.  One  of  them  replies  to  him  in 
still  stronger  language  about  the  condition  and  prospects  of  the 
kingdom,  and  concludes  by  advising  the  count  to  make  his 
escape,  and  declaring  that  he  himself  would  remain  at  his  post, 
and  share  in  the  unavoidable  ruin. 


12  2  THE    SHIJ   KING.  PART  IV. 

i.  The  Count  of  Wei  spoke  to  the  following 
effect: — '  Grand  -Master  and  Junior -Master1,  (the 
House  of)  Yin,  we  may  conclude,  can  no  longer 
exercise  rule  over  the  four  quarters  (of  the  king- 
dom). The  great  deeds  of  our  founder  were  dis- 
played in  former  ages,  but  by  our  maddened  indulg- 
ence in  spirits,  we  have  destroyed  (the  effects  of) 
his  virtue  in  these  after-times.  (The  people  of) 
Yin,  small  and  great,  are  given  to  highway  rob- 
beries, villainies,  and  treachery.  The  nobles  and 
officers  imitate  one  another  in  violating  the  laws, 
and  there  is  no  certainty  that  criminals  will  be 
apprehended.  The  smaller  people  (consequently) 
rise  up,  and  commit  violent  outrages  on  one  another. 
Yin  is  now  sinking  in  ruin  ; — its  condition  is  like 
that  of  one  crossing  a  stream,  who  can  find  neither 
ford  nor  bank.  That  Yin  should  be  hurrying  to 
ruin  at  the  present  pace!' 

He  added,  '  Grand-Master  and  Junior-Master,  we 
are  manifesting  insanity.  The  most  venerable 
members  of  our  families  are  withdrawn  to  the 
wilds ;  and  you  indicate  no  course  (to  be  taken), 
but  (only)  tell  me  of  the  impending  ruin ; — what  is 
to  be  done  ?' 

2.  The  Grand-Master  made  about  the  following 
reply : — *  O  son  of  our  (former)  king,  Heaven  in 
anger  is  sending  down  calamities,  and  wasting  the 
country  of  Yin.*  Hence  has  arisen  that  mad  in- 
dulgence in  spirits.     (The  king)  has  no  reverence 


1  For  high  ministers  with  these  titles  under  the  .Afau  dynasty, 
see  next  Part,  Book  xx.  The  individuals  whom  the  count  of  Wei 
consulted  were  probably  the  count  of  Ki  and  Pi-kan,  who  are 
classed  with  him  in  the  Confucian  Analects,  XVIII,  i. 


BOOK  XI.  THE    COUNT    OF   WEI.  123 

for  things  which  he  ought  to  reverence,  but  does 
despite  to  the  venerable  aged,  the  men  who  have 
long  been  in  office.  The  people  of  Yin  will  now 
steal  even  the  pure  and  perfect  victims  devoted  to 
the  spirits  of  heaven  and  earth  ;  *  and  their  conduct 
is  connived  at,  and  though  they  proceed  to  eat  the 
victims,  they  suffer  no  punishment.  (On  the  other 
hand),  when  I  look  down  and  survey  the  people  of 
Yin,  the  methods  by  which  they  are  governed  are 
hateful  exactions,  which  call  forth  outrages  and 
hatred ; — and  this  without  ceasing.  Such  crimes 
equally  belong  to  all  in  authority,  and  multitudes 
are  starving  with  none  to  whom  to  appeal.  Now 
is  the  time  of  Shang's  calamity ;— I  will  arise  and 
share  in  its  ruin.  When  ruin  overtakes  Shang, 
I  will  not  be  the  servant  (of  another  House). 
(But)  I  tell  you,  O  king's  son,  to  go  away,  as  being 
the  course  (for  you).  Formerly  I  injured  you  by 
what  I  said ;  if  you  do  not  (now)  go  away,  our 
(sacrifices)  will  entirely  perish.  Let  us  rest  quietly 
(in  our  several  parts),  and  each  present  himself  to 
the  former  kings1  (as  having  done  so).*  I  do  not 
think  of  making  my  escape/ 

1  It  is  understood  that  the  former  king,  the  father  of  both  KhX 
and  ^ui-hsin,  had  wished  to  leave  the  throne  to  Kh\,  and  that  the 
Grand-Master  had  advocated  such  a  measure; — thereby  injuring 
Kh\  when  it  did  not  take  effect,  through  making  iTau-hsin  jealous 
of  him. 


PART  V.     THE    BOOKS   OF  KK\J. 


Book  I.     The  Great  Declaration. 

Kiv  is  the  dynastic  designation  under  which  king  Wu  and  his 
descendants  possessed  the  throne  from  b.  c.  i  122  to  256,  a  period 
of  867  years.  They  traced  their  lineage  up  to  Kh\,  who  was 
Minister  of  Agriculture  under  Shun.  He  was  invested  with  the 
principality  of  Thai,  the  present  district  of  Fu-fang,  department 
of  Fang-hsiang,  Shen-hsi.  Long  afterwards  Than-fu,  claiming 
to  be  one  of  his  descendants,  appears  in  b*c.  1326,  founding 
the  state  of  iTau,  near  mount  Kh%  in  the  same  department  of 
Fang-hsiang.  This  Than-fu  was  the  great-grandfather  of  king 
Wu.     The  family  surname  was  K\. 

When  the  collection  of  the  Shu  was  complete,  it  contained 
thirty-eight  different  documents  of  the  i£au  dynasty,  of  which 
twenty-eight  remain,  twenty  of  them  being  of  undisputed 
genuineness. 

This  first  Book,  '  the  Great  Declaration/  is  one  of  the  contested 
portions ;  and  there  is  another  form  of  it,  that  takes  the  place 
of  this  in  some  editions.  It  has  appeared  in  the  Introduction 
that  the  received  text  of  the  Shu  was  formed  with  care,  and  that 
everything  of  importance  in  the  challenged  Books  is  to  be  found 
in  quotations  from  them,  while  the  collection  was  complete,  that 
have  been  gathered  up  by  the  industry  of  scholars. 

King  Wu,  having  at  last  taken  the  field  against  ^Tau-hsin,  the 
tyrant  of  Shang,  made  three  speeches  to  his  officers  and  men, 
setting  forth  the  reasons  for  his  enterprise,  and  urging  them 
to  exert  themselves  with  him  in  the  cause  of  humanity  and 
Heaven.  They  are  brought  together,  and  constitute  '  the  Great 
Declaration/ 

*  In  the  first  Part/  says  a  Chinese  critic,  '  king  Wu  addresses  him- 
self to  the  princes  and  nobles  of  inferior  rank;  in  the  second, 
to  their  hosts ;  and  in  the  third,  to  his  officers.  The  ruling  idea 
in  the  first  is  the  duty  of  the  sovereign, — what  he  ought  to  be 


BOOK  I.  THE   GREAT   DECLARATION.  1 25 

and  to  do ;  with  this  it  begins  and  ends.  There  is  not  the  same 
continuity  of  thought  in  the  second,  but  the  will  and  purpose  of 
Heaven  is  the  principal  thing  insisted  on.  The  last  Part  shows 
the  difference  between  the  good  sovereign  and  the  bad,  and 
touches  on  the  consent  that  there  is  between  Heaven  and  men. 
There  is  throughout  an  unsparing  exhibition  of  the  wickedness 
of  -ATau-hsin. 

Section  1. 

In  the  spring  of  the  thirteenth  year1  there  was 
a  great  assembly  at  M&ng-^ing2.  The  king  said, 
*  Ah !  ye  hereditary  rulers  of  my  friendly  states,  and 
all  ye  my  officers,  managers  of  my  affairs,  hearken 
clearly  to  my  declaration. 

'  Heaven  and  earth  is  the  parent  of  all  creatures  ; 
and  of  all  creatures  man  is  the  most  highly  endowed/''7 
The  sincerely  intelligent  (among  men)  becomes  the 
great  sovereign ;  and  the  great  sovereign  is  the 
parent  of  the  people.  But  now,  Shau,  the  king  of 
Shang,  does  not  reverence  Heaven  above,  and  inflicts 
calamities  on  the  people  below.  *  Abandoned  to 
drunkenness  and  reckless  in  lust,  he  has  dared  to 
exercise  cruel  oppression.  He  has  extended  the 
punishment  of  offenders  to  all  their  relatives.  He 
has  put  men  into  offices  on  the  hereditary  principle. 
He  has  made  it  his  pursuit  to  have  palaces,  towers, 
pavilions,  embankments,  ponds,  and  all  other  extra- 
vagances, to  the  most  painful  injury  of  you,  the 
myriads  of  the  people.  He  has  burned  and  roasted 
the  loyal  and  good.     He  has  ripped  up  pregnant 


1  The  thirteenth  year  is  reckoned  from  king  Wus  succeeding 
to  his  father  as  *  the  Chief  of  the  West/ 

2  Mang-^ing,  or  '  the  Ford  of  Mang/  is  still  the  name  of  a 
district  in  the  department  of  Ho-nan,  Ho-nan, 


126  THE    SHti    KING. 


PART  V. 


women.  Great  Heaven  was  moved  with  indigna- 
tion, and  charged  my  deceased  father  Wan  to  dis- 
play its  terrors  ;  but  (he  died)  before  the  work  was 
completed.  * 

'  On  this  account,  I,  F£,  the  little  child,  have  by 
means  of  you,  the  hereditary  rulers  of  my  friendly 
states,  contemplated  the  government  of  Shang ;  but 
Sh&u  has  no  repentant  heart.  He  sits  squatting 
on  his  heels,  not  serving  God  nor  the  spirits  of 
heaven  and  earth,  neglecting  also  the  temple  of  his 
ancestors,  and  not  sacrificing  in  it.  *  The  victims 
and  the  vessels  of  millet  all  become  the  prey  of 
wicked  robbers,  and  still  he  says,  "  The  people  are 
mine ;  the  (heavenly)  appointment  is  mine,"  never 
trying  to  correct  his  contemptuous  mind.* 

*  Heaven,  for  the  help  of  the  inferior  people,  made 
for  them  rulers,  and  made  for  them  instructors,  that 
they  might  be  able  to  be  aiding  to  God,  and  secure 
the  tranquillity  of  the  four  quarters  (of  the  kingdom). 
In  regard  to  who  are  criminals  and  who  are  not,  how 

,  dare  I  give  any  allowance  to  my  own  wishes  ?  * 

*  "  Where  the  strength  is  the  same,  measure  the 
virtue  of  the  parties ;  where  the  virtue  is  the  same, 
measure  their  righteousness."  Shiu  has  hundreds 
of  thousands  and  myriads  of  officers,  but  they  have 
hundreds  of  thousands  and  myriads  of  minds ;  I  have 
(but)  three  thousand  officers,  but  they  have  one  mind. 
The  iniquity  of  Shang  is  full.  Heaven  gives  command 
to  destroy  it.  If  I  did  not  obey  Heaven,  my  iniquity 
would  be  as  great* 

*  I,  the  little  child,  early  and  late  am  filled  with 
apprehensions.  I  have  received  the  command  of 
my  deceased  father  Wan ;  I  have  offered  special 
sacrifice  to  God;  I  have  performed  the  due   ser- 


BOOK  I.  THE   GREAT    DECLARATION.  12  J 

vices  to  the  great  earth ;  and  I  lead  the  multitude 
of  you  to  execute  the  punishment  appointed  by 
Heaven.  *  Heaven  compassionates  the  people. 
What  the  people  desire,  Heaven  will  be  found  to 
give  effect  to.*  Do  you  aid  me,  the  One  man,  to 
cleanse  for  ever  (all  within)  the  four  seas.  Now 
is  the  time! — It  should  not  be  lost/ 

Section  2. 

On  (the  day)  Wtl-wft1,  the  king  halted  on  the 
north  of  the  Ho.  When  all  the  princes  with  their 
hosts  were  assembled,  the  king  reviewed  the  hosts, 
and  made  the  following  declaration  : — '  Oh  !  ye  mul- 
titudes of  the  west,  hearken  all  to  my  words. 

'  I  have  heard  that  the  good  man,  doing  good, 
finds  the  day  insufficient;  and  that  the  evil  man, 
doing  evil,  also  finds  the  day  insufficient.  Now 
Shclu,  the  king  of  Shang,  with  strength  pursues 
his  lawless  way.  He  has  driven  away  the  time- 
worn  sires,  and  cultivates  intimacies  with  wicked 
men.  Dissolute,  intemperate,  reckless,  oppressive, 
his  ministers  have  become  assimilated  to  him ;  and 
they  form  combinations  and  contract  animosities, 
and  depend  on  their  power  to  exterminate  one 
another.  The  innocent  cry  to  Heaven.  The  odour 
of  such  a  state  is  felt  on  high.  * 

*  Heaven  loves  the  people,  and  the  sovereign 
should  reverently  carry  out  (this  mind  of)  Heaven. 
K\ehy  the  sovereign  of  Hsia,  would  not  follow  the 


1  In  Book  iii  we  are  told  that  Wu  commenced  his  march  to 
attack  iTau-hsin,  on  Kwei-ii,  the  2nd  day  of  the  moon.  Calcu- 
lating on  to  the  day  Wu-wu,  we  find  that  it  was  the  28th  day  of 
the  same  moon. 


128  THE   Snti   KING. 


PART  V. 


example  of  Heaven,  but  sent  forth  his  poisonous 
injuries  through  the  states  of  the  kingdom: — Heaven 
therefore  gave  its  aid  to  Thang  the  Successful,  and 
charged  him  to  make  an  end  of  the  appointment 
of  Hsia.*  But  the  crimes  of  Sh&u  exceed  those  of 
Tsfieh.  He  has  degraded  from  office  the  greatly 
good  man1 ;  he  has  behaved  with  cruel  tyranny  to 
his  reprover  and  helper2.  He  says  that  with  him 
is  the  appointment  of  Heaven ;  he  says  that  a  reve- 
rent care  of  his  ccnduct  is  not  worth  observing  ;  he 
says  that  sacrifice  is  of  no  use  ;  he  says  that  tyranny 
is  no  harm.*  The  beacon  for  him  to  look  to  was  not 
far  off; — it  was  that  king  of  Hsia.  It  would  seem 
that  Heaven  is  going  by  means  of  me  to  rule  the 
people.  My  dreams  coincide  with  my  divinations  ; 
the  auspicious  omen  is  double.*  My  attack  on 
Shang  must  succeed. 

'  Sh&u  has  hundreds  of  thousands  and  millions  of 
ordinary  men,  divided  in  heart  and  divided  in  prac- 
tice ; — I  have  of  ministers,  able  to  govern,  ten  men  3, 
one  in  heart  and  one  in  practice.  Though  he  has 
his  nearest  relatives  with  him,  they  are  not  like  my 
virtuous  men.  Heaven  sees  as  my  people  see : 
Heaven  hears  as  my  people  hear.*  The  people  are 
blaming  me,  the  One  man,  for  my  delay ; — I  must 
now  go  forward.  My  military  prowess  is  displayed, 
and  I  enter  his  territories  to  take  the  wicked  tyrant. 
My  punishment  (of  evil)  will  be  great,  and  more 
glorious  than  that  executed  by  Thang.     Rouse  ye, 


1  The  count  of  Wei.  2  Pi-kan. 

5  Confucius  tells  us,  in  the  Analects,  VIII,  xx,  that  one  of 
these  ten  was  a  woman ;  but  whether  the  lady  was  Wu's  wife  or 
mother  is  disputed. 


BOOK  I.  THE    GREAT   DECLARATION.  129 

my  heroes !  Do  not  think  that  he  is  not  to  be 
feared ;— better  think  that  he  cannot  be  withstood. 
(His)  people  stand  in  trembling  awe  of  him,  as  if 
the  horns  were  falling  from  their  heads.  Oh ! 
unite  your  energies,  unite  your  hearts; — so  shall 
you  forthwith  surely  accomplish  the  work,  to  last 
for  all  ages!' 

Section  3. 

The  time  was  on  the  morrow,  when  the  king  went 
round  his  six  hosts  in  state,  and  made  a  clear  decla- 
ration to  all  his  officers.  He  said,  '  Oh !  my  valiant 
men  of  the  west,  from  Heaven  are  the  illustrious 
courses  of  duty,  of  which  the  (several)  requirements 
are  quite  plain.  And  now  Sh&u,  the  king  of  Shang, 
treats  with  contemptuous  slight  the  five  regular 
(virtues),  and  abandons  himself  to  wild  idleness  and 
irreverence.  He  has  cut  himself  off  from  Heaven, 
and  brought  enmity  between  himself  and  the 
people.  * 

'  He  cut  through  the  leg-bones  of  those  who  were 
wading  in  the  morning1;  he  cut  out  the  heart  of  the 
worthy  man2.  By  the  use  of  his  power,  killing  and 
murdering,  he  has  poisoned  and  sickened  all  within 
the  four  seas.  His  honours  and  confidence  are 
given  to  the  villainous  and  bad.  He  has  driven 
from  him  his  instructors  and  guardians.  He  has 
thrown  to  the  winds  the  statutes  and  penal  laws. 
He  has  imprisoned  and  enslaved  the  upright  officer3. 
He  neglects  the  sacrifices  to  heaven  and  earth.     He 

1  This  was  in  winter.  Observing  some  people  then  wading 
through  a  stream,  iTau-hsin  caused  their  legs  to  be  cut  through 
at  the  shank-bone,  that  he  might  see  their  marrow. 

2  Pi-kan. 

8  The  count  of  Kh\\  see  Book  iv. 
[i]  K 


1 30  THE    SH<J    KING.  PART  V. 

has  discontinued  the  offerings  in  the  ancestral  temple. 
He  makes  contrivances  of  wonderful  device  and  ex- 
traordinary cunning  to  please  his  wife1. — God  will 
no  longer  indulge  him,  but  with  a  curse  is  sending 
down  on  him  this  ruin.*  Do  ye  with  untiring  zeal 
support  me,  the  One  man,  reverently  to  execute  the 
punishment  appointed  by  Heaven.  The  ancients 
have  said,  "He  who  soothes  us  is  our  sovereign ; 
he  who  oppresses  us  is  our  enemy/'  This  solitary 
fellow  Shau,  having  exercised  great  tyranny,  is  your 
perpetual  enemy.  (It  is  said  again),  "In  planting 
(a  man's)  virtue,  strive  to  make  it  great ;  in  putting 
away  (a  man's)  wickedness,  strive  to  do  it  from  the 
roots."  Here  I,  the  little  child,  by  the  powerful 
help  of  you,  all  my  officers,  will  utterly  exterminate 
your  enemy.  Do  you,  all  my  officers,  march  forward 
with  determined  boldness  to  sustain  your  prince. 
Where  there  is  much  merit,  there  shall  be  large 
reward ;  where  you  do  not  so  advance,  there  shall  be 
conspicuous  disgrace. 

*  Oh !  (the  virtue  of)  my  deceased  father  Wan 
was  like  the  shining  of  the  sun  and  moon.  His 
brightness  extended  over  the  four  quarters  of  the 
land,  and  shone  signally  in  the  western  region. 
Hence  it  is  that  our  K&n  has  received  (the  alle- 
giance of)  many  states.  If  I  subdue  Shdu,  it  will 
not  be  from  my  prowess,  but  from  the  faultless 
(virtue  of)  my  deceased  father  Wan.  If  Shau  sub- 
due me,  it  will  not  be  from  any  fault  of  my  deceased 
father  Wan,  but  because  I,  the  little  child,  am  not 
good.' 

1  The  notorious  Ta-^i,  the  accounts  of  whose  shameless  wicked- 
ness and  atrocious  cruelties  almost  exceed  belief. 


BOOK  II,  THE    SPEECH    AT    M#.  I3I 


Book  II.     The  Speech  at  Mi>. 

It  is  the  morning  of  the  day  of  battle,  for  which  the  king  has 
prepared  his  host  by  the  three  speeches  of  the  last  Book. 
Once  more  he  addresses  his  confederate  princes,  his  officers, 
and  his  men.  He  sets  forth  more  briefly  the  intolerable  wicked- 
ness of  Shau,  and  instructs  and  warns  his  troops  how  they  are 
to  behave  in  the  fight. 

Mu  was  in  the  south  of  the  present  district  of  Kh\,  department 
Wei-bui,  Ho-nan,  a  tract  of  open  country  stretching  into  the 
district  of  K%  and  at  no  great  distance  from  the  capital  of 
Sh^u. 

i.  The  time  was  the  grey  dawn  of  the  day  K'A-^ze. 
On  that  morning  the  king  came  to  the  open  country 
of  Mu,  in  the  borders  of  Shang,  and  addressed  his 
army.  In  his  left  hand  he  carried  a  battle-axe, 
yellow  with  gold,  and  in  his  right  he  held  a  white 
ensign,  which  he  waved,  saying,  '  Far  are  ye  come, 
ye  men  of  the  western  regions!'  He  added,  'Ah! 
ye  hereditary  rulers  of  my  friendly  states ;  ye  ma- 
nagers of  affairs, — the  Ministers  of  Instruction,  of 
War,  and  of  Works ;  the  great  officers  subordinate 
to  these,  and  the  many  other  officers ;  the  master 
of  my  body-guards ;  the  captains  of  thousands  and 
captains  of  hundreds  ;  and  ye,  O  men  of  Yung,  Shii, 
isfiang,  Mdo,  Wei,  Lti,  Phang,  and  Pho1,  lift  up 
your  lances,  join  your  shields,  raise  your  spears  : — 
I  have  a  speech  to  make/ 

1  These  are  the  names  of  eight  different  tribes  or  confederations 
of  tribes  of  the  south  and  west.  We  are  to  look  for  their  sites  in 
Sze-^uan,  Yun-nan,  and  Hu-pei.  They,  were,  no  doubt,  an 
important  portion  of  Wu's  army,  but  only  as  auxiliaries.  It  is  too 
much  to  ascribe,  as  some  have  done,  the  overthrow  of  Shang  to 
an  irruption  of  barbarous  people  from  the  west. 

K  2 


132  THE   SHO   KING.  part  v. 

2.  The  king  (then)  said,  '  The  ancients  have  said, 
"  The  hen  does  not  announce  the  morning.  The 
crowing  of  a  hen  in  the  morning  (indicates)  the  sub- 
version  of  the  family/'  Now  Shau,  the  king  ~of 
Shang,  follows  only  the  words  of  his  wife.  In  his 
blindness  he  has  neglected  the  sacrifices  which  he 
ought  to  offer,  and  makes  no  response  (for  the 
favours  that  he  has  received) ;  *  he  has  also  cast  off 
his  paternal  and  maternal  relations,  not  treating  them 
properly.  They  are  only  the  vagabonds  from  all 
quarters,  loaded  with  crimes,  whom  he  honours  and 
exalts,  whom  he  employs  and  trusts,  making  them 
great  officers  and  high  nobles,  so  that  they  can 
tyrannize  over  the  people,  and  exercise  their  vil- 
lainies in  the  cities  of  Shang. 

'Now,  I,  Fa,  am  simply  executing  respectfully 
the  punishment  appointed  by  Heaven.*  In  to-day's 
business  do  not  advance  more  than  six  or  seven 
steps,  and  then  stop  and  adjust  your  ranks  ; — my 
brave  men,  be  energetic !  Do  not  exceed  four 
blows,  five  blows,  six  blows,  or  seven  blows,  and 
then  stop  and  adjust  your  ranks ; — my  brave  men, 
be  energetic !  Display  a  martial  bearing;  Be  like 
tigers  and  panthers,  like  bears  and  grisly  bears, — 
(here)  in  the  borders  of  Shang.  Do  not  rush  on 
these  who  fly  (to  us  in  submission),  but  receive 
them  to  serve  our  western  land  ; — my  brave  men, 
be  energetic !  If  you  be  not  energetic  (in  all 
these  matters),  you  will  bring  destruction  on  your- 
selves/ 


BOOK  ill.       SUCCESSFUL  COMPLETION  OF  THE  WAR.  I  33 

Book  III. 
The  Successful  Completion  of  the  War. 

I  have  divided  this  Book  into  three  chapters : — one,  consisting  of 
brief  historical  notes  of  the  commencement  and  close  of  Wu's 
expedition ;  a  second,  giving  the  address  (or  a  part  of  it)  deli- 
vered by  Wu  to  his  nobles  and  officers  on  occasion,  we  may- 
suppose,  of  their  recognition  of  him  as  king,  and  his  confirming 
some  of  them  in  their  old  states  or  appointments,  and  giving 
new  ones  to  others ;  the  third  again  historical,  and  relating 
several  incidents  of  the  battle  between  Wu  and  Shau,  and  going 
on  to  subsequent  events  and  important  governmental  measures 
of  the  new  dynasty. 

Most  Chinese  critics  hold  that  portions  of  the  Book  are  lost,  and 
that  the  paragraphs  of  it  are,  besides,  erroneously  arranged. 
In  what  division  of  the  documents  of  the  Shu  it  should  be 
classified,  it  is  not  easy  to  say.  It  is  more  like  a  '  Canon '  than 
anything  else. 

i.  In  the  first  month,  the  day  Zan-Man  im- 
mediately followed  the  end  of  the  moons  waning. 
The  next  day  was  Kwei-^t,  when  the  king,  in  the 
morning,  marched  from  K&u1  to  attack  and  punish 
Shang.  In  the  fourth  month,  at  the  first  appear- 
ance of  the  moon,  the  king  came  from  Shang  to 
Fang  2,  when  he  hushed  all  the  movements  of  war, 
and  proceeded  to  cultivate  the  arts  of  peace.  He 
sent  back  his  horses  to  the  south  of  mount  HwA, 

1  KdM  is,  probably,  Wu's  capital,  called  Hao,  about  ten  miles 
south  of  the  present  district  city  of  .Oang-an,  and  not  quite  so  far 
from  his  father's  capital  of  Fang.  The  river  Fang  ran  between 
them. 

2  In  Fang  there  was  the  ancestral  temple  of  the  lords  of  ^au, 
and  thither  from  the  capital  of  Shang,  Wu  now  repaired  for  the 
purpose  of  sacrificing. 


134  THE   SHti   KING. 


PART  V. 


and  let  loose  his  oxen  in  the  open  country  of  Thao- 
lin  \  showing  to  all  under  heaven  that  he  would  not 
use  them  (again). 

On  the  day  Ting-wei,  he  sacrificed  in  the  ancestral 
temple  of  Aau,when  (the  princes)  of  the  royal  domain, 
and  of  the  Tien,  Hiu,  and  Wei  domains,  all  hurried 
about,  carrying  the  dishes.*  The  third  day  after  was 
Kang-hsu,  when  he  presented  a  burnt-offering  to 
Heaven,  and  worshipped  towards  the  hills  and 
rivers,  solemnly  announcing  the  successful  com- 
pletion of  the  war.* 

After  the  moon  began  to  wane,  the  hereditary 
princes  of  the  various  states,  and  all  the  officers, 
received  their  appointments  from  A^au 2. 

2.  The  king  spoke  to  the  following  effect : — 'Oh  ! 
ye  host  of  princes,  the  first  of  our  kings 3  founded 
his  state,  and  commenced  (the  enlargement  of)  its 
territory.  Kung  Liu4  was  able  to  consolidate  the 
services  of  his  predecessor.  But  it  was  the  king 
Thai  who  laid  the  foundations  of  the  royal  inherit- 
ance. The  king  Ki  was  diligent  for  the  royal 
House ;  and  my  deceased  father,  king  Wan,  com- 
pleted his  merit,  and  grandly  received  the  appoint- 


1  The  country  about  the  hill  of  Mu-niu  or  Khwd-fu,  in  the  south- 
east of  the  present  department  of  Thung-^au.  Thao-lin  may  be 
translated  '  Peach-forest/ 

2  The  new  dynasty  of  Khx  was  now  fully  inaugurated. 

8  By  '  the  first  of  our  kings/  we  must  understand  Kh\,  Shun's 
Minister  of  Agriculture ;  and  his  state  was  that  of  Thai. 

4  Kung  Liu,  perhaps  'duke  Liu/  appears  in  Pin,  the  present 
Pin  ^au  of  Shen-hsr,  about  the  beginning  of  the  eighteenth 
century  b.  c,  reviving  the  fallen  fortunes  of  the  House  of  KhX. 
History  is  then  silent  about  the  family  for  more  than  four  centuries, 
when  we  find  Than-fu,  called  here  'king  Thai/  founding  the  state 
of  Aau. 


BOOK  III.        SUCCESSFUL  COMPLETION  OF  THE  WAR.         I  35 

ment  of  Heaven,  to  soothe  the  regions  of  our  great 
land.*     The  great  states  feared  his  strength  ;   the  J 
small  states  thougETlondly^ofTiTs  virtue.     In  nine  1 
years,  however,  the  whole  kingdom  was  not  united 
under  his  rule,  and  it  fell  to  me,  the  little  child,  to 
carry  out  his  will. 

'  Detesting  the  crimes  of  Shang,  I  announced  to 
great  Heaven  and  the  sovereign  Earth,  to  the  famous 
hill *  and  the  great  river 1  by  which  I  passed,  saying, 
"  I,  Fa,  the  principled,  king  of  Aau  by  a  long 
descent,  am  about  to  administer  a  great  correction 
to  Shang.  Sh&u,  the  present  king  of  Shang,  is 
without  principle,  cruel  and  destructive  to  the  crea- 
tures of  Heaven,  injurious  and  tyrannical  to  the 
multitudes  of  the  people,  lord  of  all  the  vagabonds 
under  heaven,  who  collect  about  him  as  fish  in  the 
deep,  and  beasts  in  the  prairie.  I,  the  little  child, 
having  obtained  (the  help  of)  virtuous  men,  presume 
reverently  to  comply  with  (the  will  of)  God,  and  make 
an  end  of  his  disorderly  ways.*  Our  flowery  and  great 
land,  and  the  tribes  of  the  south  and  north,  equally 
follow  and  consent  with  me.  Reverently  obeying 
the  determinate  counsel  of  Heaven,  I  pursue  my 
punitive  work  to  the  east,  to  give  tranquillity  to  its 
men  and  women.  They  meet  me  with  their  baskets 
full  of  dark-coloured  and  yellow  silks,  thereby  show- 
ing (the  virtues)  of  us,  the  kings  of  A"au.  Heaven's 
favours  stir  them  up,  so  that  they  come  with  their 
allegiance  to  our  great  state  of  K&u.  And  now, 
ye  spirits,  grant  me  your  aid,  that  I  may  relieve 
the  millions  of  the  people,  and  nothing  turn  out  to 
your  shame." '  * 

1  Probably  mount  Hwa  and  the  Ho. 


1 36  THE   SH<J   KING.  1>art  v. 

3.  On  the  day  Wft-wii,  the  army  crossed  the  ford 
of  Mang,  and  on  Kwei-hai  it  was  drawn  up  in  array 
in  the  borders  of  Shang,  waiting  for  the  gracious 
decision  of  Heaven.  On  Afia-jze,  at  early  dawn, 
Shau  led  forward  his  troops,  (looking)  like  a  forest, 
and  assembled  them  in  the  wild  of  Mta.  But  they 
offered  no  opposition  to  our  army.  Those  in  the 
front  inverted  their  spears,  and  attacked  those  be- 
hind them,  till  they  fled;  and  the  blood  flowed  till  it 
floated  the  pestles  of  the  mortars.  Thus  did  (king 
Wu)  once  don  his  armour,  and  the  kingdom  was 
grandly  settled.  He  overturned  the  (existing)  rule 
of  Shang,  and  made  government  resume  its  old 
course.  He  delivered  the  count  of  Khi  from 
prison,  and  raised  a  mound  over  the  grave  of 
Pl-kan.  He  bowed  forward  to  the  cross-bar  of 
his  carriage  at  the  gate  of  Shang  Yungs  village  *. 
He  dispersed  the  treasures  of  the  Stag  Tower 2, 
and  distributed  the  grain  of  ^ti-^iao3,  thus  con- 
ferring great  gifts  on  all  within  the  four  seas,  so 
that  the  people  joyfully  submitted  to  him. 

He  arranged  the  nobles  in  five  orders4,  assign- 
ing the  territories  to  them  according  to  a  threefold 


1  Shang  Yung  must  have  been  some  worthy  in  disgrace  with 
Shau,  and  living  in  the  retirement  of  his  village. 

2  The  Stag  Tower  was  the  name  of  a  place  in  the  present 
department  of  Wei-hui,  Ho-nan,  where  Shau  had  accumulated  great 
treasures.  He  fled  to  it  after  his  defeat,  and  burned  himself  to 
death ;  but  it  would  appear  he  had  not  succeeded  in  consuming 
at  the  same  time  all  his  wealth. 

3  K^rkKAo  was  in  the  present  district  of  Khyi-k&u,  department 
Kwang-phing,  .ATih-li,  where  Shau  had  collected  great  stores  of 
grain. 

4  Dukes,  marquises,  earls,  counts,  and  barons. 


BOOK  IV.  THE    GREAT    PLAN.  1^7 

scale1.  He  gave  offices  only  to  the  worthy,  and 
employments  only  to  the  able.  He  attached  great 
importance  to  the  people's  being  taught  the  duties 
of  the  five  relations  of  society,  and  to  measures 
for  ensuring  a  sufficient  supply  of  food,  attention 
to  the  rites  of  mourning,  and  to  sacrifices.*  He 
showed  the  reality  of  his  truthfulness,  and  proved 
clearly  his  righteousness.  He  honoured  virtue, 
and  rewarded  merit.  Then  he  had  only  to  let 
his  robes  fall  down,  and  fold  his  hands,  and  the 
kingdom  was  orderly  ruled. 


Book  IV.     The  Great  Plan. 

The  Great  Plan,  ordinarily  classed  among  the  l  Counsels '  or 
among  the  '  Instructions '  of  the  Shu,  might  as  well  have  a 
place  among  the  '  Canons/  It  is  a  remarkable  production,  and 
though  it  appears  among  the  documents  of  the  K&u  dynasty, 
there  is  claimed  for  the  substance  of  it  a  much  greater  antiquity. 
According  to  the  introductory  sentences,  king  Wu,  the  founder 
of  Alu,  obtained  it  from  the  count  of  Kh\  in  the  same  year,  the 
thirteenth  of  his  dignity  as  Chief  of  the  West,  that  he  took  the 
field  against  the  tyrant  of  Shang.  The  count  of  Kh%  it  is 
understood,  was  the  Grand- Master  at  the  court  of  Shang,  who 
appears  in  the  concluding  Book  of  the  last  Part.  He  says  there, 
that,  when  ruin  overtook  the  House  of  Shang,  he  would  not  be 
the  servant  of  another  dynasty.  Accordingly,  he  refused  to 
acknowledge  the  sovereignty  of  king  Wu,  who  had  delivered 
him  from  the  prison  in  which  he  had  been  confined  by  iTau- 
hsin,  and  fled — or  purposed  perhaps  to  flee — to  Corea.  WU 
respected  and  admired  his  fidelity  to  the  fallen  dynasty,  and 
invested  him  with  that  territory.  He  then,  it  is  said,  felt  con- 
strained to  appear  at  the  court  of  ^Tau,  when  the  king  consulted 

1  Dukes  and  marquises  had  the  same  amount  of  territory  assigned 
to  them,  and  counts  and  barons  also. 


138  THE    SHU    KING.  PART  V. 

him  on  the  principles  of  government ;  and  the  result  was  that 
he  communicated  to  him  this  Great  Plan,  with  its  nine  divisions. 
When  we  read  the  Book,  we  see  that  it  belonged  originally  to 
the  time  of  Hsi&,  and  that  the  larger  portion  of  it  should  be 
ascribed  to  the  Great  Yu,  and  was  as  old,  indeed,  as  the  reign 
of  Yao.  How  it  had  come  into  the  possession  of  the  count  of 
Kh\  we  cannot  tell.  Nor  does  it  appear  how  far  the  language 
of  it  should  be  ascribed  to  him.  That  the  larger  portion  of 
it  had  come  down  from  the  times  of  Hsii  is  not  improbable. 
The  use  of  the  number  nine  and  other  numbers,  and  the 
naming  of  the  various  divisions  of  the  Plan,  are  in  harmony 
with  Yii's  style  and  practice  in  his  Counsels  in  the  second 
Part  of  our  Classic,  and  in  the  second  Part  also  of  the  Tribute 
of  Yu.  We  are  told  in  the  introductory  sentences,  that  Heaven 
or  God  gave  the  Plan  with  its  divisions  to  Yu.  To  explain 
the  way  in  which  the  gift  was  made,  there  is  a  tradition  about 
a  mysterious  tortoise  that  appeared  in  the  waters  of  the  Lo, 
bearing  well-defined  marks  on  its  back  from  one  to  nine,  and 
that  thereupon  Yu  determined  the  meaning  of  those  marks  and 
of  their  numbers,  and  completed  the  nine  divisions  of  the  Plan. 
Of  this  legend,  however,  it  is  not  necessary  to  speak  in  con- 
nexion with  the  Shu,  which  does  not  mention  it ;  it  will  come  up 
in  connexion  with  the  translation  of  the  Yi  King. 

The  Great  Plan  means  the  great  model  for  the  government  of  the 
nation, — the  method  by  which  the  people  may  be  rendered 
happy  and  tranquil,  in  harmony  with  their  condition,  through 
the  perfect  character  of  the  king,  and  his  perfect  administration 
of  government. 

P.  Gaubil  says  that  the  Book^is  a  treatise  at  once  of  physics, 
astrology,  divination,  morals,  politics,  and  religion,  and  that 
it  has  a  sufficiently  close  resemblance  to  the  work  of  Ocellus 
the  Lucanian.  There  is  a  shadowy  resemblance  between  the 
Great  Plan  and  the  curious  specimen  of  Pythagorean  doctrine 
which  we  have  in  the  treatise  on  the  Universe ;  but  the  dissimi- 
larities are  still  greater  and  more  numerous.  More  especially 
are  the  differences  between  the  Greek  mind,  speculative, 
and  the  Chinese  mind,  practical,  apparent  in  the  two  works. 
Where  the  Chinese  writer  loses  himself  in  the  sheerest  follies  of 
his  imagining,  he  yet  gropes  about  for  a  rule  to  be  of  use  in  the 
conduct  of  human  affairs. 

The  whole  of  the  treatise  is  divided  into  three  chapters.  The 
first  is  introductory,  and  relates  how  the  Great  Plan  with  its 


BOOK  IV.  THE   GREAT    PLAN.  1 39 

nine  divisions  was  at  first  made  known  to  Yii,  and  came  at  this 
time  to  be  communicated  to  king  Wu ;  the  second  contains 
the  names  of  the  nine  divisions  of  the  Plan ;  and  in  the  third 
we  have  a  description  of  the  several  divisions.  *  The  whole/ 
says  a  Chinese  writer,  *  exhibits  the  great  model  for  the  govern- 
ment of  the  nation/  The  fifth  or  middle  division  on  royal 
perfection  is  the  central  one  of  the  whole,  about  which  the 
Book  revolves.  The  four  divisions  that  precede  it  show  how 
this  royal  perfection  is  to  be  accomplished,  and  the  four  that 
follow  show  how  it  is  to  be  maintained. 

i.  In  the  thirteenth  year1,  the  king  went  to 
enquire  of  the  count  of  KM,  and  said  to  him, 
'Oh!  count  of  Khi,  Heaven,  (working)  unseen,  se- 
cures the  tranquillity  of  the  lower  people,  aiding 
them  to  be  in  harmony  with  their  condition  2.  I 
do  not  know  how  the  unvarying  principles  (of  its 
method  in  doing  so)  should  be  set  forth  in  due 
order/ 

The  count  of  Khi  thereupon  replied,  'I  have 
heard  that  in  old  time  Khwan  dammed  up  the 
inundating  waters,  and  thereby  threw  into  disorder 
the  arrangement  of  the  five  elements.  God  was 
consequently  roused  to  anger,  and  did  not  give 
him  the  Great  Plan  with  its  nine  divisions,  and 
thus  the  unvarying  principles  (of  Heaven's  method) 
were  allowed  to  go  to  ruin.*     Khwan  was  therefore 

1  See  the  commencement  of  Book  i. 

2  Khung  Ying-ta"  of  the  Thang  dynasty  says  on  this : — '  The 
people  have  been  produced  by  supreme  Heaven,  and  both  body  and 
soul  are  Heaven's  gift.  Men  have  thus  the  material  body  and  the 
knowing  mind,  and  Heaven  further  assists  them,  helping  them  to 
harmonize  their  lives.  The  right  and  the  wrong  of  their  language, 
the  correctness  and  errors  of  their  conduct,  their  enjoyment  of 
clothing  and  food,  the  Tightness  of  their  various  movements  ; — all 
these  things  are  to  be  harmonized  by  what  they  are  endowed  with 
by  Heaven/ 


140  THE    Silt  KING.  PART  V. 

kept  a  prisoner  till  his  death,  and  his  son  Yli  rose  up 
(and  entered  on  the  same  undertaking).  To  him 
Heaven  gave  the  Great  Plan  with  its  nine  divi- 
sions, and  the  unvarying  principles  (of  its  method) 
were  set  forth  in  their  due  order/  * 

2.  '  (Of  those  divisions)  the  first  is  called  "  the 
five  elements  ;  "  the  second,  "  reverent  attention  to 
the  five  (personal)  matters ; "  the  third,  "  earnest 
devotion  to  the  eight  (objects  of)  government ; : 
the  fourth,  "  the  harmonious  use  of  the  five  dividers 
of  time ; "  the  fifth,  "  the  establishment  and  use  of 
royal  perfection ; "  the  sixth,  "  the  discriminating 
use  of  the  three  virtues  ;  "  the  seventh,  "  the  intel- 
ligent use  of  (the  means  for)  the  examination  of 
doubts ;  "  the  eighth,  "  the  thoughtful  use  of  the 
various  verifications  ;"  the  ninth,  "the  hortatory  use 
of  the  five   (sources  of)  happiness,  and  the  awing 

_use  of  the  six  (occasions  of)  suffering." ' 

3.  i.   'First,  of  the  five  elements1. — The  first  is 

1  Gaubil  gives  here  'les  cinq  hing/  without  translating  the 
Chinese  term.  English  sinologists  have  got  into  the  habit  of 
rendering  it  by  '  elements/  but  it  hardly  seems  possible  to  deter- 
mine what  the  Chinese  mean  by  it.  We  intend  by  '  elements 7 
'  the  first  principles  or  ingredients  of  which  all  things  are  com- 
posed/ The  Pythagoreans,  by  their  four  elements  of  earth,  water, 
air,  and  fire,  did  not  intend  so  much  the  nature  or  essence 
of  material  substances,  as  the  forms  under  which  matter  is  actually 
presented  to  us.  The  character  hsing,  meaning  'to  move,'  'to 
be  in  action,'  shows  that  the  original  conception  of  the  Chinese 
is  of  a  different  nature ;  and  it  is  said  in  the  Khang-hsi  Dictionary, 
'The  five  hsing  move  and  revolve  between  heaven  and  earth, 
without  ever  ceasing,  and  hence  they  are  named.'  The  editors  of 
the  latest  imperial  edition  of  the  Shu  say,  '  Distributed  through  the 
four  seasons,  they  make  "  the  five  dividers  of  time ; "  exhibited  in 
prognostications,  they  give  rise  to  divination  by  the  tortoise-shell 
and  the  reeds;  having  lodgment  in  the  human  body,  they  produce 
"  the  five  personal  matters; "  moved  by  good  fortune  and  bad,  they 


BOOK  IV.  THE   GREAT   PLAN.  1 4 1 

water ;  the  second  is  fire ;  the  third,  wood ;  the 
fourth,  metal ;  and  the  fifth,  earth.  (The  nature  of) 
water  is  to  soak  and  descend  ;  of  fire,  to  blaze  and 
ascend ;  of  wood,  to  be  crooked  and  straight ;  of 
metal,  to  yield  and  change ;  while  (that  of)  earth  is 
seen  in  seed-sowing  and  in-gathering.  That  which 
soaks  and  descends  becomes  salt ;  that  which  blazes 
and  ascends  becomes  bitter ;  that  which  is  crooked 
and  straight  becomes  sour ;  that  which  yields  and 
changes  becomes  acrid  ;  and  from  seed-sowing  and, 
in-gathering  comes  sweetness/ 

ii.  *  Second,  of  the  five  (personal)  matters  *. — The 
first  is  the  bodily  demeanour ;  the  second,  speech  ; 
the  third,  seeing;  the  fourth,  hearing j  the  fifth/ 
thinking*  (The  virtue  of)  the  bodily  appearance  is 
respectfulness  ;  of  speech,  accordance  (with  reason) ; 
of  seeing,  clearness ;  of  hearing,  distinctness ;  of 
thinking,  perspicaciousness.  The  respectfulness  be- 
comes manifest  in  gravity ;  accordance  (with  reason), 
in  orderliness ;  the  clearness,  in  wisdom. ;  the  dis^ 
tinctness,  in  deliberation  ;  and  the  perspicaciousness, 
in  sageness/  j 

iii.  '  Third,  of  the  eight  (objects  of)  government2. —  i 

produce  "the  various  verifications;"  communicated  to  organisms, 
they  produce  the  different  natures,  hard  and  soft,  good  and  evil  ; 
working  out  their  results  in  the  changes  of  those  organisms,  they 
necessitate — here  benevolence  and  there  meanness,  here  longevity 
and  there  early  death : — all  these  things  are  from  the  operation  of 
the  five  hsing.  But  if  we  speak  of  them  in  their  simplest  and  most 
important  character,  they  are  what  man's  life  depends  on,  what 
the  people  cannot  do  without/  After  all  this,  I  should  still  be 
sorry  to  be  required  to  say  what  the  five  hsing  are. 

1  These  five  '  matters '  are  represented  as  being  in  the  human 
person  what  the  five  hsing  are  in  nature.  Demeanour  is  the 
human  correspondency  of  water,  speech  that  of  fire,  &c. 

2  Medhurst  calls  the  eight  (objects  of)  government i the  eight 


142  THE   Snti   KING.  PART  V. 

The  first  is  food  ;  the  second,  wealth  and  articles 
of  convenience  ;  the  third,  sacrifices  ;  the  fourth,  (the 
J  business  of)  the  Minister  of  Works  ;  the  fifth,  (that 
of)  the  Minister  of  Instruction  ;  the  sixth,  (that  of) 
the  Minister  of  Crime ;  the  seventh,  the  observances 
to  be  paid  to  guests ;  the  eighth,  the  army/ 

iv.  '  Fourth,  of  the  five  dividers  of  time  \ — The 
first  is  the  year  (or  the  planet  Jupiter)  ;  the  second, 

\the  moon ;  the  third,  the  sun ;  the  fourth,  the  stars 
and  planets,  and  the  zodiacal  spaces ;  and  the  fifth, 
the  calendaric  calculations/ 

v.  '  Fifth,  of  royal  perfection  2. — The  sovereign, 
having  established  (in  himself)  the  highest  degree 
and  pattern  of  excellence,  concentrates  in  his  own 
person  the  five  (sources  of)  happiness,  and  proceeds 
to  diffuse  them,  and  give  them  to  the  multitudes 
of  the  people.  Then  they,  on  their  part,  embody- 
ing your  perfection,  will  give  it  (back)  to  you,  and 
lsecure  the  preservation  of  it.  Among  all  the  mul- 
titudes of  the  people  there  will  be  no  unlawful  con- 
federacies, and  among  men  (in  office)  there  will  be 
no  bad  and  selfish  combinations  ; — let  the  sovereign 


regulators/  and  Gaubil  calls  them  'les  huit  regies  du  gouverne- 
ment/  The  phrase  means  the  eight  things  to  be  attended  to  in 
government, — its  objects  and  departments. 

1  'The  five  dividers  of  time'  are  with  Medhurst  'the  five 
arrangers/  and  with  Gaubil  '  les  cinq  peViodes.'  This  division  of 
the  Great  Plan  is  substantially  the  same  as  Yao's  instructions  to  his 
astronomers. 

2  By  'royal  perfection'  we  are  to  understand  the  sovereign 
when  he  is,  or  has  made  himself,  all  that  he  ought  to  be.  '  Perfec- 
tion '  is  '  the  utmost  point/  the  extreme  of  excellence,  realized  in 
the  person  of  the  sovereign,  guiding  his  administrative  measures, 
and  serving  as  an  example  and  attractive  influence  to  all  below, 
both  ministers  and  people. 


BOOK  IV.  THE   GREAT    PLAN.  143 

establish  in  (himself)  the  highest  degree  and  pattern 
of  excellence. 

'Among  all  the  multitudes  of  the  people  there 
will  be  those  who  have  ability  to  plan  and  to  act, 
and  who  keep  themselves  (from  evil) : — do  you 
keep  such  in  mind;  and  there  will  be  those  who, 
not  coming  up  to  the  highest  point  of  excellence, 
yet  do  not  involve  themselves  in  evil : — let  the 
sovereign  receive  such.  And  when  a  placid  satis- 
faction appears  in  their  countenances,  and  they  say, 
"  Our  love  is  fixed  on  virtue,"  do  you  then  confer 
favours  on  them  ; — those  men  will  in  this  way  ad- 
vance to  the  perfection  of  the  sovereign.  Do  not 
let  him  oppress  the  friendless  and  childless,  nor  let 
him  fear  the  high  and  distinguished.  When  men 
(in  office)  have  ability  and  administrative  power, 
let  them  be  made  still  more  to  cultivate  their  con- 
duct ;  and  the  prosperity  of  the  country  will  be  pro- 
moted. All  (such)  right  men,  having  a  competency, 
will  go  on  in  goodness.  If  you  cannot  cause  them 
to  have  what  they  love  in  their  families,  they  will 
forthwith  proceed  to  be  guilty  of  crime.  As  to 
those  who  have  not  the  love  of  virtue,  although 
you  confer  favours  (and  emoluments)  on  them,  they 
will  (only)  involve  you  in  the  guilt  of  employing  the 
evil. 

'  Without  deflection,  without  unevenness, 

Pursue  the  royal  righteousness. 

Without  selfish  likings. 

Pursue  the  royal  way. 

Without  selfish  dislikings, 

Pursue  the  royal  path. 

Avoid  deflection,  avoid  partiality;— 

Broad  and  long  is  the  royal  way. 


144  THE    SH^    KING.  FART  V, 

Avoid  partiality,  avoid  deflection  ; —  j 

Level  and  easy  is  the  royal  way.  I 

Avoid  perversity,  avoid  one-sidedness  ; — 
Correct  and  straight  is  the  royal  way. 
(Ever)  seek  for  this  perfect  excellence, 
(Ever)  turn  to  this  perfect  excellence/ 
He  went   on   to   say,   '  This    amplification    of   the 
royal    perfection    contains    the    unchanging    (rule), 
and  is  the  (great)  lesson ; — yea,  it  is  the  lesson  of 
God.*     All  the  multitudes  of  the  people,  instructed 
in  this  amplification  of  the  perfect  excellence,  and 
carrying  it  into  practice,  will  thereby  approximate 
to  the  glory  of  the  Son  of  Heaven,  and  say,  "The 
Son  of  Heaven  is  the  parent  of  the  people,  and  so 
becomes  the  sovereign  of  all  under  the  sky." ' 

vi.  '  Sixth,  of  the  three  virtues  1. — The  first  is 
correctness  and  straightforwardness ;  the  second, 
strong  rule;  and  the  third,  mild  rule.  In  peace 
and  tranquillity,  correctness  and  straightforwardness 
(must  sway) ;  in  violence  and  disorder,  strong  rule ; 
in  harmony  and  order,  mild  rule.  For  the  reserved 
and  retiring  there  should  be  (the  stimulus  of)  the 
strong  rule;  for  the  high(-minded)  and  distinguished, 
(the  restraint  of)  the  mild  rule. 

*  It  belongs  only  to  the  sovereign  to  confer 
dignities  and  rewards,  to  display  the  terrors  of 
majesty,  and  to  receive  the  revenues  (of  the  king- 
dom). There  should  be  no  such  thing  as  a  minis- 
ters  conferring  dignities  or  rewards,  displaying  the 
terrors  of  majesty,  or  receiving  the  revenues.     Such 


1  '  The  three  virtues '  are  not  personal  attributes  of  the  sove- 
reign, but  characteristics  of  his  rule,  the  varied  manifestations  of 
the  perfection  described  in  the  preceding  division* 


BOOK  IV.  THE    GREAT   PLAN.  145 

a  thing  is  injurious  to  the  clans,  and  fatal  to  the 
states  (of  the  kingdom) ;  smaller  affairs  are  thereby 
managed  in  a  one-sided  and  perverse  manner,  and 
the  people  fall  into  assumptions  and  excesses/  \ 

vii.  'Seventh,  of  the  (means  for  the)  examination 
of  doubts  1. — Officers  having  been  chosen  and  ap- 
pointed for  divining  by  the  tortoise-shell  and   the 


1  The  practice  of  divination  for  the  satisfaction  of  doubts  was 
thus  used  in  China  from  the  earliest  times.  In  the  Counsels  of 
Yii,  p.  50,  that  sage  proposes  to  Shun  to  submit  the  question  of 
who  should  be  his  successor  on  the  throne  to  divination,  and  Shun 
replies  that  he  had  already  done  so.  Gaubil  says  that  according  to 
the  Great  Plan  divination  was  only  used  in  doubtful  cases ;  but  if 
such  was  the  practice  of  the  sages,  diviners  and  soothsayers  must 
have  formed,  as  they  do  now,  a  considerable  and  influential  class  in 
society.  The  old  methods  of  divination  have  fallen  into  disuse, 
and  we  do  not  know  how  far  other  methods  are  employed  and 
sanctioned  by  the  government.  Those  old  methods  were  by 
means  of  the  tortoise-shell,  and  the  stalks  of  the  Kh\  plant.  '  The 
tortoise/  says  iTu  Hsf,  '  after  great  length  of  years  becomes  intelli- 
gent ;  and  the  Kh\  plant  will  yield,  when  a  hundred  years  old,  a 
hundred  stalks  from  one  root,  and  is  also  a  spiritual  and  intelli- 
gent thing.  The  two  divinations  were  in  reality  a  questioning  of 
spiritual  beings,  the  plant  and  the  shell  being  employed,  because 
of  their  mysterious  intelligence,  to  indicate  their  intimations.  The 
way  of  divination  by  the  shell  was  by  the  application  of  fire  to 
scorch  it  till  the  indications  appeared  on  it ;  and  that  by  the  stalks 
of  the  plant  was  to  manipulate  in  a  prescribed  way  forty- nine  of 
them,  eighteen  different  times,  till  the  diagrams  were  formed/ 

The  outer  shell  of  the  tortoise  was  removed,  leaving  the  inner 
portion  on  which  were  the  marks  of  the  lines  of  the  muscles  of  the 
creature.  This  was  smeared  with  a  black  pigment,  and,  fire  being 
applied  beneath,  the  pigment  was  examined,  and  according  as  it 
had  been  variously  dried  by  the  heat,  presented  the  indications 
mentioned  in  the  text.  The  Kh\  plant  was  probably  the  Achillea 
millefolium.  It  is  cultivated  largely  on  the  mound  over  the  grave 
of  Confucius.  I  brought  from  that  two  bundles  of  the  dried  stalks 
in  1873/ 

[1]  L 


I46  THE   SHt    KING.  PARTV. 

/Stalks  of  the  Achillea,  they  are  to  be  charged  (on 
occasion)  to  execute  their  duties.  (In  doing  this), 
they  will  find  (the  appearances  of)  rain,  of  clearing 
up,  of  cloudiness,  of  want  of  connexion,  and  of 
crossing;  and  the  inner  and  outer  diagrams.  In 
all  (the  indications)  are  seven  ; — five  given  by  the 
shell,  and  two  by  the  stalks  ;  and  (by  means)  of  these 
any  errors  (in  the  mind)  may  be  traced  out.  These 
officers  having  been  appointed,  when  the  divination 
is  proceeded  with,  three  men  are  to  interpret  the 
indications,  and  the  (consenting)  words  of  two  of 
them  are  to  be  followed.* 

'  When  you  have  doubts  about  any  great  matter, 
consult  with  your  own  mind ;  consult  with  your  high 
ministers  and  officers ;  consult  with  the  common 
people ;  consult  the  tortoise-shell  and  divining 
stalks.  If  you,  the  shell,  the  stalks,  the  ministers 
and  officers,  and  the  common  people,  all  agree  about 
a  course,  this  is  what  is  called  a  great  concord,  and 
the  result  will  be  the  welfare  of  your  person  and 
good  fortune  to  your  descendants.  If  you,  the  shell, 
and  the  stalks  agree,  while  the  ministers,  and  officers, 
and  the  common  people  oppose,  the  result  will  be 
fortunate.     If  the  ministers  and  officers,  with  the 


I  shell  and  stalks,  agree,  while  you  and  the  common 
I  people  oppose,  the  result  will  be  fortunate.     If  the 
common   people,    the   shell,  and   the  stalks  agree, 
ivhile  you,  with  the  ministers  and  officers,  oppose, 
the  result  will  be  fortunate.     If  you  and  the  shell 
/agree,   while   the   stalks,   with    the    ministers    and 
/officers,  and  the  common  people,  oppose,  internal 
I  operations   will   be  fortunate,  and   external  under- 
takings unlucky.     When   the  shell  and  stalks  are  . 
'both  opposed  to  the  views  of  men,  there  will  be  \ 


BOOK  IV.  THE    GREAT   PLAN.  1 47 

good  fortune  in  being  still,  and  active  operations 
will  be  unlucky/  * 

viii.  *  Eighth,  of  the  various  verifications \ — 
They  are  rain,  sunshine,  heat,  cold,  wind,  and 
seasonableness.  When  the  five  come,  all  complete, 
and  each  in  its  proper  order,  (even)  the  various 
plants  will  be  richly  luxuriant.  Should  any  one  of 
them  be  either  excessively  abundant  or  excessively 
deficient,  there  will  be  evil.* 

'  There  are  the  favourable  verifications2 : — namely,  j 


1  P.  Gaubil  renders  by  l  les  apparences  *  the  characters  which  I 
have  translated  *  the  various  verifications/  observing  that  he  could 
not  find  any  word  which  would  cover  the  whole  extent  of  the 
meaning.  He  says,  '  In  the  present  case,  the  character  signifies 
meteors,  phenomena,  appearances,  but  in  such  sort  that  these  have 
relation  to  some  other  things  with  which  they  are  connected ; — 
the  meteor  or  phenomenon  indicates  some  good  or  some  evil.  It 
is  a  kind  of  correspondency  which  is  supposed,  it  appears,  to  exist 
between  the  ordinary  events  of  the  life  of  men  and  the  constitution 
of  the  air,  according  to  the  different  seasons ; — what  is  here  said 
supposes — I  know  not  what  physical  speculation  of  those  times.  It 
is  needless  to  bring  to  bear  on  the  text  the  interpretation  of  the 
later  Chinese,  for  they  are  full  of  false  ideas  on  the  subject  of 
physics.  It  may  be  also  that  the  count  of  Kh\  wanted  to  play  the 
physicist  on  points  which  he  did  not  know/  There  seems  to 
underlie  the  words  of  the  count  that  feeling  of  the  harmony 
between  the  natural  and  spiritual  worlds,  which  occurs  at  times  to 
most  men,  and  strongly  affects  minds  under  deep  religious  thought 
or  on  the  wings  of  poetic  rapture,  but  the  way  in  which  he  en- 
deavours to  give  the  subject  a  practical  application  can  only  be 
characterised  as  grotesque. 

2  Compare  with  this  what  is  said  above  on  the  second  division  of 
the  Plan, '  the  five  (personal)  matters/  It  is  observed  here  by  3hal 
KJ&tl,  the  disciple  of  Kb.  Hsi,  and  whose  commentary  on  the  Shu 
has,  of  all  others,  the  greatest  authority : — '  To  say  that  on  occasion 
of  such  and  such  a  personal  matter  being  realized,  there  will  be 
the  favourable  verification  corresponding  to  it,  or  that,  on  occasion 
of  the  failure  of  such  realization,  there  will  be  the  corresponding 

L  2 


148  THE    SH<J    KING.  PART  r. 

of  gravity,  which  is  emblemed  by  seasonable  rain ; 
of  orderliness,  emblemed  by  seasonable  sunshine  ;  of 
wisdom,  emblemed  by  seasonable  heat ;  of  delibera- 
tion, emblemed  by  seasonable  cold  ;  and  of  sageness, 
emblemed  by  seasonable  wind.  There  are  (also) 
the  unfavourable  verifications  : — namely,  of  reckless- 
ness, emblemed  by  constant  rain  ;  of  assumption, 
emblemed  by  constant  sunshine ;  of  indolence,  em- 
blemed by  constant  heat ;  of  hastiness,  emblemed 
by  constant  cold  ;  and  of  stupidity,  emblemed  by 
constant  wind/  * 

He  went  on  to  say,  '  The  king  should  examine 
the  (character  of  the  whole)  year  ;  the  high  ministers 
and  officers  (that  of)  the  month  ;  and  the  inferior 
officers  (that  of)  the  day.  If,  throughout  the  year, 
the  month,  the  day,  there  be  an  unchanging  season- 
ableness,  all  the  grains  will  be  matured ;  the  measures 
of  government  will  be  wise ;  heroic  men  will  stand 
forth  distinguished ;  and  in  the  families  (of  the 
people)  there  will  be  peace  and  prosperity.  If, 
throughout  the  year,  the  month,  the  day,  the  season- 
ableness  be  interrupted,  the  various  kinds  of  grain 
will  not  be  matured ;  the  measures  of  government 
\  will  be  dark  and  unwise ;  heroic  men  will  be  kept  in 

unfavourable  verification,  would  betray  a  pertinacious  obtuseness, 
and  show  that  the  speaker  was  not  a  man  to  be  talked  with  on  the 
mysterious  operations  of  nature.  It  is  not  easy  to  describe  the 
reciprocal  meeting  of  Heaven  and  men.  The  hidden  springs 
touched  by  failure  and  success,  and  the  minute  influences  that 
respond  to  them: — who  can  know  these  but  the  man  that  has 
apprehended  all  truth  ? '  This  is  in  effect  admitting  that  the  state- 
ments in  the  text  can  be  of  no  practical  use.  And  the  same 
thing  is  admitted  by  the  latest  imperial  editors  of  the  Shu  on  the 
use  which  the  text  goes  on  to  make  of  the  thoughtful  use  of  the 
.verifications  by  the  king  and  others, 


BOOK  V.  THE    HOUNDS    OF    LU.  I49 

I  obscurity  ;  and  in  the  families  (of  the  people)  there 
will  be  an  absence  of  repose. 

'  By  the  common  people  the  stars  should  be 
examined.  Some  stars  love  wind,  and  some  love 
rain.  The  courses  of  the  sun  and  moon  give  winter 
and  summer.  The  way  in  which  the  moon  follows 
the  stars  gives  wind  and  rain/ 

ix.  '  Ninth,  of  the  five  (sources  of)  happiness1. — 
The  first  is  long  life ;  the  second,  riches ;  the  third, 
soundness  of  body  and  serenity  of  mind  ;  the  fourth, 
the  love  of  virtue ;  and  the  fifth,  fulfilling  to  the 
end  the  will  (of  Heaven).*  Of  the  six  extreme 
evils,  the  first  is  misfortune  shortening  the  life ;  the 
second,  sickness ;  the  third,  distress  of  mind ;  the 
fourth,  poverty ;  the  fifth,  wickedness ;  the  sixth, 
weakness2/ 


Book  V.     The  Hounds  of  Lu. 

Lii  was  the  name  of  one  of  the  rude  tribes  of  the  west,  lying 
beyond  the  provinces  of  K&m.  Its  situation  cannot  be  more 
exactly  defined.  Its  people,  in  compliment  to  king  Wu,  and 
impressed  by  a  sense  of  his  growing  power,  sent  to  him  some 
of  their  hounds,  and  he  having  received  them,  or  intimated  that 
he  would  do  so,  the  Grand- Guardian  remonstrated  with  him, 
showing  that  to  receive  such  animals  would  be  contrary  to  pre- 
cedent, dangerous  to  the  virtue  of  the  sovereign,  and  was  not 
the  way  to  deal  with  outlying  tribes  and  nations.  The  Grand- 
Guardian,  it  is  supposed,  was  the  duke  of  Shao,  author  of  the 
Announcement  which  forms  the  twelfth  Book  of  this  Part.  The 
Book  is  one  of  the  '  Instructions '  of  the  Shu. 

1  It  is  hardly  possible  to  see  how  this  division  enters  into  the 
scheme  of  the  Great  Plan. 

2  '  Wickedness '  is,  probably,  boldness  in  what  is  evil,  and  *  weak- 
ness/ feebleness  of  will  in  what  is  good. 


I50  THE    Silt    KING. 


PART  V. 


I 


i.  After  the  conquest  of  Shang,  the  way  being 
open  to  the  nine  tribes  of  the  I1  and  the  eight  of 
the  Man1,  the  western  tribe  of  Lti  sent  as  tribute 
some  of  its  hounds,  on  which  the  Grand-Guardian 
made  'the  Hounds  of  Lti,'  by  way  of  instruction 
to  the  king. 

2.  He  said,  'Oh  !  the  intelligent  kings  paid  careful 
attention  to  their  virtue,  and  the  wild  tribes  on  every 
side  acknowledged  subjection  to  them.  The  nearer 
and  the  more  remote  all  presented  the  productions 
of  their  countries, — in  robes,  food,  and  vessels  for 
use.  The  kings  then  displayed  the  things  thus 
drawn  forth  by  their  virtue,  (distributing  them)  to 
the  (princes  of  the)  states  of  different  surnames  from 
their  own,  (to  encourage  them)  not  to  neglect  their 
duties.  The  (more)  precious  things  and  pieces  of 
jade  they  distributed  among  their  uncles  in  charge 
of  states,  thereby  increasing  their  attachment  (to  the 
throne).  The  recipients  did  not  despise  the  things, 
but  saw  in  them  the  power  of  virtue. 

^Complete  virtue  allows  no  contemptuous  fami- 
liarity. When  (a  ruler)  treats  superior  men  with  such 
familiarity,  he  cannot  get  them  to  give  him  all  their 
hearts ;  when  he  so  treats  inferior  men,  he  cannot 
get  them  to  put  forth  for  him  all  their  strength. 
Let  him  keep  from  being  in  bondage  to  his  ears 
and  eyes,  and  strive  to  be  correct  in  all  his  measures. 
By  trifling  intercourse  with  men,  he  ruins  his  virtue ; 
by  finding  his  amusHneilt  in  things  (of  mere  pleasure), 

1  By  '  the  nine  I  and  eight  Man '  we  are  to  understand  generally 
the  barbarous  tribes  lying  round  the  China  of  K&u.  Those  tribes 
are  variously  enumerated  in  the  ancient  books.  Generally  the  I 
are  assigned  to  the  east,  the  Zung  to  the  west,  the  Ti  to  the 
north,  and  the  Man  to  the  south. 


BOOK  VI.  THE    METAL-BOUND    COFFER.  1 5 1 

he  ruins  his  aims.  His  aims  should  repose  in  what 
is  right ;  he  should  listen  to  words  (also)  in  their 
relation  to  what  is  right. 

'  When  he  does  not  do  what  is  unprofitable  to  the 
injury  of  what  is  profitable,  his  merit  can  be  com- 
pleted. When  he  does  not  value  strange  things  to 
the  contemning  things  that  are  useful,  his  people 
will  be  able  to  supply  (all  that  he  needs).  (Even) 
dogs  and  horses  that  are  not  native  to  his  country 
he  will  not  keep.  Fine  birds  and  strange  animals 
he  will  not  nourish  in  his  state.  When  he  does 
not  look  on  foreign  things  as  precious,  foreigners 
will  come  to  him ;  when  it  is  real  worth  that  is 
precious  to  him,  (his  own)  people  near  at  hand  will 
be  in  a  state  of  repose. 

*  Oh  1  early  and  late  never  be  but  earnest.  If  you 
do  not  attend  jealously  to  your  small  actions,  the 
result  will  be  to  affect  your  virtue  in  great  matters ; 
— in  raising  a  mound  of  nine  fathoms,  the  work  may 
be  unfinished  for  want  of  one  basket  (of  earth).  If 
you  really  pursue  this  course  (which  I  indicate),  the 
people  will  preserve  their  possessions,  and  the  throne 
will  descend  from  generation  to  generation/ 


Book  VI.     The  Metal-bound  Coffer. 

A  certain  chest  or  coffer,  that  was  fastened  with  bands  of  metal, 
and  in  which  important  state  documents  were  deposited,  plays 
an  important  part  among  the  incidents  of  the  Book,  which  is 
therefore  called  'the  Metal-bound  Coffer/  To  what  class 
among  the  documents  of  the  Shu  it  should  be  assigned  is 
doubtful. 

King  Wu  is  very  ill,  and  his  death  seems  imminent.  His  brother, 
the  duke  of  K&xx,  apprehensive  of  the  disasters  which  such  an 


I"52'  THE    SH6    KING.  PART  V. 

event  would  occasion  to  their  infant  dynasty,  conceives  the  idea 
of  dying  in  his  stead,  and  prays  to  '  the  three  kings/  their  imme- 
diate progenitors,  that  he  might  be  taken  and  king  Wu  left. 
Having  done  so,  and  divined  that  he  was  heard,  he  deposits 
the  prayer  in  the  metal-bound  coffer.  The  king  gets  well, 
and  the  duke  is  also  spared ;  but  five  years  later,  Wu  does  die, 
and  is  succeeded  by  his  son,  a  boy  only  thirteen  years  old. 
Rumours  are  spread  abroad  that  the  duke  has  designs  on  the 
throne,  and  he  withdraws  for  a  time  from  the  court.  At  length, 
in  the  third  year  of  the  young  king,  Heaven  interposes.  He  has 
occasion  to  open  the  coffer,  and  the  prayer  of  the  duke  is  found. 
His  devotion  to  his  brother  and  to  the  interests  of  their  family 
is  brought  to  light.  The  boy-monarch  weeps  because  of  the 
unjust  suspicions  he  had  harboured,  and  welcomes  the  duke 
back  to  court,  amid  unmistakeable  demonstrations  of  the 
approval  of  Heaven. 

The  whole  narrative  is  a  very  pleasing  episode  in  the  history  of 
the  times.  It  divides  itself  naturally  into  two  chapters : — the 
first,  ending  with  the  placing  the  prayer  in  the  coffer ;  and  the 
second,  detailing  how  it  was  brought  to  light,  and  the  conse- 
quences of  the  discovery. 

It  is  in  this  Book  that  we  first  meet  in  the  Shu  with  the  duke  of 
,£au,  a  name  in  Chinese  history  only  second  to  that  of  Con- 
fucius. He  was  the  legislator  and  consolidator  of  the  dynasty  of 
iTau,  equally  mighty  in  words  and  in  deeds, — a  man  of  counsel 
and  of  action.  Confucius  regarded  his  memory  with  reverence, 
and  spoke  of  it  as  a  sign  of  his  own  failing  powers,  that  the 
duke  of  JTau  no  longer  appeared  to  him  in  his  dreams.  He 
was  the  fourth  son  of  king  Wan;  his  name  was  Tan,  and 
he  had  for  his  appanage  the  territory  of  j5Tdu,  where  Than-fu, 
canonized  by  him  as  king  Thai,  first  placed  the  seat  of  his 
family  in  b.c.  1327,  and  hence  he  is  commonly  called  'the  duke 
of  ^au/ 

i.  Two  years  after  the  conquest  of  Shang1,  the 
king  fell  ill,  and  was  quite  disconsolate.  The  two 
(other  great)  dukes2  said,  '  Let  us  reverently  consult 

1  B.C.    II2I. 

2  These  were  the  duke  of  Shao,  to  whom  the  preceding  Book 
is  ascribed,  and  Thai-kung,  who  became  the  first  of  the  lords 
ofJSTA!.- 


BOOK  VI.  THE    METAL-BOUND    COFFER.  1 5  ^ 

the  tortoise-shell  about  the  king ; '  but  the  duke  of 
A^au  said,  '  You  must  not  so  distress  our  former 
kings1/  He  then  took  the  business  on  himself,  and 
reared  three  altars  of  earth  on  the  same  cleared 
space ;  and  having  made  another  altar  on  the  south 
of  these,  and  facing  the  north,  he  took  there  his  own 
position.  Having  put  a  round  symbol  of  jade  (on 
each  of  the  three  altars),  and  holding  in  his  hands  the 
lengthened  symbol  (of  his  own  rank),  he  addressed 
the  kings  Thai,  K\,  and  Wan.4'5" 

The  (grand)  historiographer  had  written  on  tablets 
his  prayer,  which  was  to  this  effect : — '  A.  B.,  your 
great  descendant,  is  suffering  from  a  severe  and 
violent  disease ; — if  you  three  kings  have  in  heaven 
the  charge  of  (watching  over)  him,  (Heaven's)  great 
son,  let  me  Tan  be  a  substitute  for  his  person 2. 
I  was  lovingly  obedient  to  my  father ;  I  am  possessed 
of  many  abilities  and  arts,  which  fit  me  to  serve 
spiritual  beings.  Your  great  descendant,  on  the 
Other  hand,  has  not  so  many  abilities  and  arts  as 
I,  and  is  not  so  capable  of  serving  spiritual  beings. 
And  moreover  he  was  appointed  in  the  hall  of  God 
to  extend  his  aid  all  over  the  kingdom,  so  that  he 
might  establish  your  descendants  in  this  lower  earth. 
The  people  of  the  four  quarters  all  stand  in  reverent 

1  He  negatives  their  proposal,  having  determined  to  take  the 
whole  thing  on  himself. 

2  Two  things  are  here  plain  : — first,  that  the  duke  of  ^au  offered 
himself  to  die  in  the  room  of  his  brother ;  and  second,  that  he 
thought  that  his  offer  might  somehow  be  accepted  through  the 
intervention  of  the  great  kings,  their  progenitors.  He  proceeds  to 
give  his  reasons  for  making  such  an  offer,  which  are  sufficiently 
interesting.  It  was  hardly  necessary  for  Chinese  scholars  to  take 
the  pains  they  have  done  to  free  the  duke  from  the  charge  of 
boasting  in  them. 


154  THE  sh£  king.  part  v, 

awe  of  him.  Oh  !  do  not  let  that  precious  Heaven- 
conferred  appointment  fall  to  the  ground,  and  (all 
the  long  line  of)  our  former  kings  will  also  have  one 
in  whom  they  can  ever  rest  at  our  sacrifices.  *  I  will 
now  seek  for  your  determination  (in  this  matter) 
from  the  great  tortoise-shell.  If  you  grant  me  (my 
request),  I  will  take  these  symbols  and  this  mace, 
and  return  and  wait  for  your  orders.  If  you  do  not 
grant  it,  I  will  put  them  by  V  * 

The  duke  then  divined  with  the  three  tortoise- 
shells,  and  all  were  favourable.  He  opened  with  a 
key  the  place  where  the  (oracular)  responses  were 
kept,  and  looked  at  them,  and  they  also  were 
favourable.  He  said,  '  According  to  the  form  (of 
the  prognostic)  the  king  will  take  no  injury.  I,  the 
little  child,  have  got  the  renewal  of  his  appointment 
from  the  three  kings,  by  whom  a  long  futurity  has 
been  consulted  for.  I  have  now  to  wait  for  the 
issue.     They  can  provide  for  our  One  man/  * 

When  the  duke  returned,  he  placed  the  tablets 
(of  the  prayer)  in  a  metal-bound  coffer2,  and  next 
day  the  king  got  better. 

2.  (Afterwards),  upon  the  death  of  king  Wu,  (the 
duke's)  elder  brother,  he  of  Kwan,  and  his  younger 
brothers,  spread  a  baseless  report  through  the  king- 

1  I  suppose  that  the  divination  took  place  before  the  altars,  and 
that  a  different  shell  was  used  to  ascertain  the  mind  of  each  king. 
The  oracular  responses  would  be  a  few  lines,  kept  apart  by  them- 
selves, and  consulted,  on  occasion,  according  to  certain  rules  which 
have  not  come  down  to  the  present  day. 

2  Many  scholars  think  that  it  was  this  coffer  which  contained 
the  oracles  of  divination  mentioned  above.  It  may  have  been  so ; 
but  I  rather  suppose  it  to  have  been  different,  and  a  special  chest 
in  which  important  archives  of  the  dynasty,  to  be  referred  to  on 
great  emergencies,  were  kept. 


BOOK  VI.  THE    METAL-BOUND    COFFER.  1 55 

dom,  to  the  effect  that  the  duke  would  do  no  good 
to  the  (king's)  young  son.  On  this  the  duke  said  to 
the  two  (other  great)  dukes,  *  If  I  do  not  take  the 
law  (to  these  men),  I  shall  not  be  able  to  make  my 
report  to  the  former  kings1/  * 

He  resided  (accordingly)  in  the  east  for  two  years2, 
when  the  criminals  were  taken  (and  brought  to  jus- 
tice). Afterwards  he  made  a  poem  to  present  to 
the  king,  and  called  it  'the  Owl3/  The  king  on 
his  part  did  not  dare  to  blame  the  duke. 

In  the  autumn,  when  the  grain  was  abundant  and 
ripe,  but  before  it  was  reaped,  Heaven  sent  a  great 
storm  of  thunder  and  lightning,  along  with  wind,  by 
which  the  grain  was  all  broken  down,  and  great  trees 
torn  up.  The  people  were  greatly  terrified  ;  and 
the  king  and  great  officers,  all  in  their  caps  of  state, 
proceeded  to  open  the  metal-bound  coffer  and  exa- 
mine the  writings  in  it,  where  they  found  the  words 
of  the  duke  when  he  took  on  himself  the  business 
of  being  a  substitute  for  king  Wft.  The  two  (great) 
dukes  and  the  king  asked  the  historiographer  and 
all  the  other  officers  (acquainted  with  the  transac- 
tion) about  the  thing,  and  they  replied,  '  It  was 
really  thus ;  but  ah !  the  duke  charged  us  that  we 

1  Wu  died  in  b.  c.  1 1 1 6,  and  was  succeeded  by  his  son  Sung, 
who  is  known  in  history  as  king  Kfr&xig,  or  '  the  Completer/ 
He  was  at  the  time  only  thirteen  years  old,  and  his  uncle,  the 
duke  of  K&w,  acted  as  regent.  The  jealousy  of  his  elder  brother 
Hsien, '  lord  of  Kwan,'  and  two  younger  brothers,  was  excited,  and 
they  spread  the  rumour  which  is  referred  to,  and  entered  into  a 
conspiracy  with  the  son  of  the  tyrant  of  Shang,  to  overthrow  the 
new  dynasty. 

2  These  two  years  were  spent  in  military  operations  against  the 
revolters. 

3  See  the  Book  of  Poetry,  Part  I,  xv,  Ode  2. 


156  The  shIj  king. 


part  v. 


should  not  presume  to  speak  about  it/  The  king 
held  the  writing  in  his  hand,  and  wept,  saying,  '  We 
need  not  (now)  go  on  reverently  to  divine.  For- 
merly the  duke  was  thus  earnest  for  the  royal  House, 
but  I,  being  a  child,  did  not  know  it.  Now  Heaven 
has  moved  its  terrors  to  display  his  virtue.  That  I, 
the  little  child,  (now)  go  with  my  new  views  and 
feelings  to  meet  him,  is  what  the  rules  of  propriety 
of  our  kingdom  require/  * 

The  king  then  went  out  to  the  borders  (to  meet 
the  duke),  when  Heaven  sent  down  rain,  and,  by 
virtue  of  a  contrary  wind,  the  grain  all  rose  up. 
The  two  (great)  dukes  gave  orders  to  the  people 
to  take  up  the  trees  that  had  fallen  and  replace 
them.     The  year  then  turned  out  very  fruitful.* 


Book  VII.     The  Great  Announcement. 

This  'Great  Announcement '  was  called  forth  by  the  emergency 
referred  to  in  the  second  chapter  of  the  last  Book.  The 
prefatory  notice  says,  '  When  king  Wu  had  deceased,  the  three 
overseers  and  the  wild  tribes  of  the  Hwai  rebelled.  The  duke 
of  K&w  acted  as  minister  for  king  Kh&ng,  and  having  purposed 
to  make  an  end  of  the  House  of  Yin  (or  Shang),  he  made  '  the 
Great  Announcement/  Such  was  the  occasion  on  which  the 
Book  was  composed.  The  young  king  speaks  in  it  the  words 
and  sentiments  of  the  duke  of  iTau ;  and  hence  the  style  in 
which  it  commences,  'The  king  speaks  to  the  following  effect/ 

The  young  sovereign  speaks  of  the  responsibility  lying  on  him  to 
maintain  the  kingdom  gained  by  the  virtues  and  prowess  of  his 
father,  and  of  the  senseless  movements  of  the  House  of  Shang 
to  regain  its  supremacy.  He  complains  of  the  reluctance  of 
many  of  the  princes  and  high  officers  to  second  him  in  putting 
down  revolt,  and  proclaims  with  painful  reiteration  the  support 
and  assurances  of  success  which  he  has  received  from  the 
divining  shell.  His  traitorous  uncles,  who  were  confederate 
with  the  son  of  the  tyrant  of  Shang,  are  only  alluded  to. 


BOOK  vil.  THE   GREAT    ANNOUNCEMENT.  1 5  7 

i.  The  king  speaks  to  the  following  effect : — *  Ho  ! 
I  make  a  great  announcement  to  you,  (the  princes 
of)  the  many  states,  and  to  you,  the  managers  of  my 
affairs. — We  are  unpitied,  and  Heaven  sends  down 
calamities  on  our  House,  without  the  least  inter- 
mission1.* It  greatly  occupies  my  thoughts  that  I, 
so  very  young,  have  inherited  this  illimitable  patri- 
mony with  its  destinies  and  domains.  I  cannot 
display  wisdom  and  lead  the  people  to  prosperity ; 
and  how  much  less  should  I  be  able  to  reach  the 
knowledge  of  the  decree  of  Heaven!"*  Yes,  I  who 
am  but  a  little  child  am  in  the  position  of  one  who 
has  to  go  through  a  deep  water  ; — I  must  go  and  seek 
where  I  can  cross  over.  I  must  diffuse  the  elegant 
institutions  of  my  predecessor  and  display  the 
appointment  which  he  received  (from  Heaven) ; — 
so  shall  I  not  be  forgetful  of  his  great  work.  Nor 
shall  I  dare  to  restrain  the  majesty  of  Heaven  in 
sending  down  its  inflictions  (on  the  criminals)2/  * 

2.  '  The  Tranquillizing  king3  left  to  me  the  great 
precious  tortoise-shell,  to  bring  into  connexion  with 
me  the  intelligence  of  Heaven.  I  divined  by  it,  and 
it  told  me  that  there  would  be  great  trouble  in  the 
region  of  the  west4,  and  that  the  western  people 
would  not  be  still4.*  Accordingly  we  have  these 
senseless  movements.     Small   and  reduced  as  Yin 

1  With  reference,  probably,  to  the  early  death  of  his  father,  and 
the  revolt  that  followed  quickly  upon  it. 

2  The  duke  had  made  up  his  mind  that  he  would  deal  stern 
justice  even  on  his  own  brothers. 

3  King  Wu. 

4  The  troubles  arose  in  the  east>  and  not  in  the  west.  We 
do  not  know  the  facts  in  the  state  of  the  kingdom  sufficiently  to 
explain  every  difficulty  in  these  Books.  Perhaps  the  oracular 
response  had  been  purposely  ambiguous. 


I58  THE   SHt)   KING.  part  V. 

now  is,  (its  prince)  greatly  dares  to  take  in  hand  its 
(broken)  line.  Though  Heaven  sent  down  its  terrors 
(on  his  House),  yet  knowing  of  the  evils  in  our 
kingdom,  and  that  the  people  are  not  tranquil,  he 
says,  "  I  will  recover  (my  patrimony);"  and  so  (he 
wishes  to)  make  our  Kku  a  border  territory  again. 

'  One  day  there  was  a  senseless  movement,  and 
the  day  after,  ten  men  of  worth  appeared  among  the 
people,  to  help  me  to  go  forward  to  restore  tran- 
quillity and  perpetuate  the  plans  (of  my  father)1. 
The  great  business  I  am  engaging  in  will  (thus) 
have  a  successful  issue.  I  have  divined  (also)  by  the 
tortoise-shell,  and  always  got  a  favourable  response/* 
Therefore  I  tell  you,  the  princes  of  my  friendly  states, 
and  you,  the  directors  of  departments,  my  officers, 
and  the  managers  of  my  affairs, — I  have  obtained 
a  favourable  reply  to  my  divinations.  1  will  go  for- 
ward with  you  from  all  the  states,  and  punish  those 
vagabond  and  transported  ministers  of  Yin/ 

3.  *  (But)  you  the  princes  of  the  various  states, 
and  you  the  various  officers  and  managers  of  my 
affairs,  all  retort  on  me,  saying,  "  The  hardships  will 
be  great,  and  that  the  people  are  not  quiet  has  its 
source  really  in  the  king's  palace  and  in  the  mansions 
of  the  princes  in  that  (rebellious)  state2.  We  little 
ones,  and  the  old  and  reverend  men  as  well,  think 
the  expedition  ill-advised  ; — why  does  your  Majesty 
not  go  contrary  to  the  divinations  ?"  I,  in  my  youth, 
(also)  think  continually  of  these  hardships,  and  say, 

1  Who  these  '  ten  men  of  worth '  were,  we  do  not  know,  nor 
the  circumstances  in  which  they  came  forward  to  help  the 
government. 

2  Here  is  an  allusion,  as  plain  as  the  duke  could  permit  himself 
to  make,  to  the  complicity  of  his  brothers  in  the  existing  troubles. 


BOOK  VII.  THE   GREAT   ANNOUNCEMENT.  1 59 

Alas !  these  senseless  movements  will  deplorably 
afflict  the  wifeless  men  and  widows !  But  I  am  the 
servant  of  Heaven,  which  has  assigned  me  this 
great  task,  and  laid  the  hard  duty  on  my  person.* 
I  therefore,  the  young  one,  do  not  pity  myself ;  and 
it  would  be  right  in  you,  the  many  officers,  the 
directors  of  departments,  and  the  managers  of  my 
affairs,  to  comfort  me,  saying,  "  Do  not  be  distressed 
with  sorrow.  We  shall  surely  complete  the  plans  of 
your  Tranquillizing  father." 

'  Yes,  I,  the  little  child,  dare  not  disregard  the 
charge  of  God1.*  Heaven,  favourable  to  the  Tran- 
quillizing king,  gave  such  prosperity  to  our  small 
country  of  i£au.  The  Tranquillizing  king  divined 
and  acted  accordingly,  and  so  he  calmly  received 
his  (great)  appointment.  Now  when  Heaven  is 
(evidently)  aiding  the  people,  how  much  more  should 
we  follow  the  indications  of  the  shell !  Oh  !  the 
clearly  intimated  will  of  Heaven  is  to  be  feared  : — 
it  is  to  help  my  great  inheritance  ! '  * 

4.  The  king  says, '  You,  who  are  the  old  ministers, 
are  fully  able  to  remember  the  past ;  you  know  how 
great  was  the  toil  of  the  Tranquillizing  king.  Where 
Heaven  (now)  shuts  up  (our  path)  and  distresses  us, 
is  the  place  where  I  must  accomplish  my  work ; — 
I  dare  not  but  do  my  utmost  to  complete  the  plans 
of  the  Tranquillizing  king.  It  is  on  this  account  that 
I  use  such  efforts  to  remove  the  doubts  and  carry 
forward  the  inclinations  of  the  princes  of  my  friendly 
states.  And  Heaven  assists  me  with  sincere  expres- 
sions (of  sympathy),  which  I  have  ascertained  among 

1  Probably  the  charge  understood  to  be  conveyed  by  the  result 
of  the  divinations  spoken  of  above. 


l6o  THE    SHO   KING.  part  v. 

the  people  ; — how  dare  I  but  aim  at  the  completion 
of  the  work  formerly  begun  by  the  Tranquillizer  ? 
Heaven,  moreover,  is  thus  toiling  and  distressing  the 
people  ; — it  is  as  if  they  were  suffering  from  disease  ; 
how  dare  I  allow  (the  appointment)  which  my  pre- 
decessor, the  Tranquillizer,  received,  to  be  without  its 
happy  fulfilment  ? '  * 

The  king  says,  '  Formerly,  at  the  initiation  of  this 
expedition,  I  spoke  of  its  difficulties,  and  thought  of 
them  daily.  But  when  a  deceased  father,  (wishing) 
to  build  a  house,  had  laid  out  the  plan,  if  his  son  be 
unwilling  to  raise  up  the  hall,  how  much  less  will  he 
be  willing  to  complete  the  roof!  Or  if  the  father 
had  broken  up  the  ground,  and  his  son  be  unwilling 
to  sow  the  seed,  how  much  less  will  he  be  willing  to 
reap  the  crop  !  In  such  a  case  could  the  father,  (who 
had  himself)  been  so  reverently  attentive  (to  his 
objects),  have  been  willing  to  say,  "  I  have  a  son 
who  will  not  abandon  his  patrimony  ?" — How  dare 
I  therefore  but  use  all  my  powers  to  give  a  happy 
settlement  to  the  great  charge  entrusted  to  the 
Tranquillizing  king  ?  If  among  the  friends  of  an  elder 
brother  or  a  deceased  father  there  be  those  who 
attack  his  son,  will  the  elders  of  the  people  encou- 
rage (the  attack),  and  not  (come  to  the)  rescue  ?' 

5.  The  king  says,  *  Oh !  take  heart,  ye  princes  of 
the  various  states,  and  ye  managers  of  my  affairs. 
The  enlightening  of  the  country  was  from  the  wise, 
even  from  the  ten  men x  who  obeyed  and  knew  the 

1  '  The  ten  men '  here  can  hardly  be  the  '  ten  men  of  worth ' 
above  in  the  second  chapter.  We  must  find  them  rather  in  the 
'ten  virtuous  men,  one  in  heart  and  one  in  practice,  capable 
of  good,'  mentioned  by  king  Wu,  in  the  second  Part  of  the 
Great  Declaration. 


BOOK  VIII.        CHARGE    TO    THE    COUNT    OF    WEI.  1 6 1 

charge  of  God,*  and  the  real  assistance  given  by 
Heaven.  At  that  time  none  of  you  presumed  to 
change  the  rules  (prescribed  by  the  Tranquillizing 
king).  And  now  when  Heaven  is  sending  down 
calamity  on  the  country  of  K&u,  and  the  authors  of 
these  great  distresses  (make  it  appear  on  a  grand 
scale  as  if)  the  inmates  of  a  house  were  mutually 
to  attack  one  another,  you  are  without  any  know- 
ledge that  the  decree  of  Heaven  is  not  to  be 
changed  !  * 

'  I  ever  think  and  say,  Heaven  in  destroying  Yin  was 
doing  husbandman's  work1; — how  dare  I  but  complete 
the  work  on  my  fields  ?  Heaven  will  thereby  show 
its  favour  to  my  predecessor,  the  Tranquillizer.  How 
should  I  be  all  for  the  oracle  of  divination,  and  pre- 
sume not  to  follow  (your  advice)  ?  *  I  am  following 
the  Tranquillizer,  whose  purpose  embraced  all  within 
the  limits  of  the  land.  How  much  more  must  I 
proceed,  when  the  divinations  are  all  favourable  !  It 
is  on  these  accounts  that  I  make  this  expedition  in 
force  to  the  east.  There  is  no  mistake  about  the 
decree  of  Heaven.  The  indications  given  by  the 
tortoise-shell  are  all  to  the  same  effect/* 


Book  VIII.    The  Charge  to  the  Count  of  Wel 

The  count  of  Wei  was  the  principal  character  in  the  eleventh 
Book  of  the  last  Part,  from  which  it  appeared  that  he  was 
a  brother  of  the  tyrant  ZEu-hsin.  We  saw  how  his  friends 
advised  him  to  withdraw  from  the  court  of  Shang,  and  save 


1  That  is,  thorough  work, — clearing  the  ground  of  weeds,  and 
not  letting  their  roots  remain. 

[i]  H 


1 62  THE    SH<J    KING. 


PART  V. 


himself  from  the  destruction  that  was  impending  over  their 
House.  He  had  done  so,  and  king  Wu  had  probably  continued 
him  in  the  possession  of  his  appanage  of  Wei,  while  Wu-kang, 
the  son  of  the  tyrant,  had  been  spared,  and  entrusted  with  the 
duty  of  continuing  the  sacrifices  to  the  great  Thang  and  the 
other  sovereigns  of  the  House  of  Shang.  Now  that  Wu-kang 
has  been  punished  with  death  for  his  rebellion,  the  duke  of  ^au 
summons  the  count  of  Wei  to  court,  and  in  the  name  of  king 
-Oang  invests  him  with  the  dukedom  of  Sung,  corresponding 
to  the  present  department  of  Kwei-teh,  Ho-nan,  there  to  be  the 
representative  of  the  line  of  the  departed  kings  of  Shang. 

The  king  speaks  to  the  following  effect : — '  Ho  ! 
eldest  son  of  the  king  of  Yin,  examining  into  anti- 
quity, (I  find)  that  the  honouring  of  the  virtuous 
(belongs  to  their  descendants)  who  resemble  them 
in  worth,  and  (I  appoint)  you  to  continue  the  line 
of  the  kings  your  ancestors,  observing  their  ceremo- 
nies and  taking  care  of  their  various  relics.  Come 
(also)  as  a  guest  to  our  royal  House1,  and  enjoy  the 
prosperity  of  our  kingdom,  for  ever  and  ever  without 
end. 

'  Oh !  your  ancestor,  Thang  the  Successful,  was 
reverent  and  sage,  (with  a  virtue)  vast  and  deep. 
The  favour  and  help  of  great  Heaven  lighted  upon 
him,  and  he  grandly  received  its  appointment,  to 
soothe  the  people  by  his  gentleness,  and  remove  the 
wicked  oppressions  from  which  they  were  suffering.* 
His  achievements  affected  his  age,  and  his  virtue 
was  transmitted  to  his  posterity.  And  you  are  the 
one  who  pursue  and  cultivate  his  plans ; — this  praise 


1  Under  the  dynasty  of  <£au,  the  representatives  of  the  two 
previous  dynasties  of  Shang  and  Hsia  were  distinguished  above 
the  other  princes  of  the  kingdom,  and  denominated  '  guests '  of 
the  sovereign,  coming  to  his  court  and  assisting  in  the  services 
in  his  ancestral  temple,  nearly  on  a  footing  of  equality  with  him. 


BOOK  VIII.        CHARGE   TO    THE   COUNT   OF    WEI.  1 63 

has  belonged  to  you  for  long.  Reverently  and  care- 
fully have  you  discharged  your  filial  duties  ;  gravely 
and  respectfully  you  behave  to  spirits  and  to  men.* 
I  admire  your  virtue,  and  pronounce  it  great  and  not 
to  be  forgotten.  God  will  always  enjoy  your  offer- 
ings ;  the  people  will  be  reverently  harmonious 
(under  your  sway).*  I  raise  you  therefore  to  the 
rank  of  high  duke,  to  rule  this  eastern  part  of  our 
great  land1. 

'  Be  reverent.  Go  and  diffuse  abroad  your  instruc- 
tions. Be  carefully  observant  of  your  robes  and 
(other  accompaniments  of)  your  appointment2;  follow 
and  observe  the  proper  statutes ; — so  as  to  prove 
a  bulwark  to  the  royal  House*  Enlarge  (the  fame 
of)  your  meritorious  ancestor ;  be  a  law  to  your 
people ; — so  as  for  ever  to  preserve  your  dignity. 
(So  also)  shall  you  be  a  help  to  me,  the  One  man  ; 
future  ages  will  enjoy  (the  benefit  of)  your  virtue  ; 
all  the  states  will  take  you  for  a  pattern ; — and  thus 
you  will  make  our  dynasty  of  Aau  never  weary 
of  you. 

*  Oh !  go,  and  be  prosperous.  Do  not  disregard 
my  charge/ 


1  Sung  lay  east  from  Fang  and  Hao,  the  capitals  of  Wan  and 
Wu,  which  were  in  the  present  department  of  Hsi-an,  Shen-hst. 

2  Meaning  probably  that  he  was  to  bear  in  mind  that,  however 
illustrious  his  descent,  he  was  still  a  subject  of  the  king  of  isTau,. 


M  2 


J  64  THE    SH#   KING.  PART  v. 

Book  IX. 
The  Announcement  to  the  Prince  of  Khang. 

Of  the  ten  sons  of  king  Wan,  the  ninth  was  called  Fang,  and 
is  generally  spoken  of  as  Khang  Shu,  or  '  the  uncle,  (the  prince 
of)  Khang.'  We  must  conclude  that  Khang  was  the  name 
of  Fang's  appanage,  somewhere  in  the  royal  domain.  This 
Book  contains  the  charge  given  to  him  on  his  appointment 
to  be  marquis  of  Wei  (the  Chinese  name  is  quite  different  from 
that  of  the  appanage  of  the  count  of  Wei),  the  chief  city  of 
which  was  ifao-ko,  that  had  been  the  capital  of  iTau-hsin.  It 
extended  westward  from  the  present  Khai  Zau,  department 
Td-ming,  ^ih-li,  to  the  borders  of  the  departments  of  Wei-hui 
and  Hwai-^ing,  Ho-nan. 

The  Book  is  called  an  l  Announcement/  whereas  it  properly 
belongs  to  the  class  of  'Charges/  Whether  the  king  who 
speaks  in  it,  and  gives  the  charge  be  Wu,  or  his  son  king  .A'Mng, 
is  a  point  on  which  there  is  much  difference  of  opinion  among 
Chinese  critics.  The  older  view  that  the  appointment  of  Fang 
to  be  marquis  of  Wei,  and  ruler  of  that  part  of  the  people 
who  might  be  expected  to  cling  most  tenaciously  to  the  memory 
of  the  Shang  dynasty,  took  place  after  the  death  of  Wu-kang, 
the  son  of  the  tyrant,  and  was  made  by  the  duke  of  Zau,  in 
the  name  of  king  .Oang,  is  on  the  whole  attended  with  the 
fewer  difficulties. 

The  first  paragraph,  which  appears  within  brackets,  does  not 
really  belong  to  this  Book,  but  to  the  thirteenth,  where  it 
will  be  found  again.  How  it  got  removed  from  its  proper 
place,  and  prefixed  to  the  charge  to  the  prince  of  Khang,  is 
a  question  on  which  it  is  not  necessary  to  enter.  The  key-note 
of  the  whole  charge  is  in  what  is  said,  at  the  commencement 
of  the  first  of  the  five  chapters  into  which  I  have  divided  it, 
about  king  Wan,  that  '  he  was  able  to  illustrate  his  virtue  and 
be  careful  in  the  use  of  punishments/  The  first  chapter  cele- 
brates the  exhibition  of  these  two  things  given  by  Wan,  whereby 
he  laid  the  foundations  of  the  great  destiny  of  his  House,  and 
set  an  example  to  his  descendants.  The  second  inculcates  on 
Fang  how  he  should  illustrate  his  virtue,  as  the  basis  of  his 
good  government  of  the  people  entrusted  to  him.  The  third 
inculcates   on  him  how  he   should  be   careful  in  the  use  of 


BOOK  IX.    ANNOUNCEMENT  TO  THE  PRINCE  OF  KHANG.     1 65 

punishments,  and  sets  forth  the  happy  effects  of  his  being  so. 
The  fourth  insists  on  the  influence  of  virtue,  as  being  superior 
in  government  to  that  of  punishment,  and  how  punishments 
should  all  be  regulated  by  the  ruler's  virtue.  The  last  chapter 
winds  the  subject  up  with  a  reference  to  the  uncertainty  of  the 
appointments  of  Heaven,  and  their  dependance  for  permanence 
on  the  discharge  of  the  duties  connected  with  them  by  those 
on  whom  they  have  lighted. 

[On  the  third  month,  when  the  moon  began  to 
wane,  the  duke  of  A^au  commenced  the  foundations, 
and  proceeded  to  build  the  new  great  city  of  Lo,  of 
the  eastern  states.  The  people  from  every  quarter 
assembled  in  great  harmony.  From  the  Hau,  Tien, 
Nan,  3hii,  and  Wei  domains,  the  various  officers 
stimulated  this  harmony  of  the  people,  and  intro- 
duced them  to  the  business  there  was  to  be  done 
for  A^au.  The  duke  encouraged  all  to  diligence,  and 
made  a  great  announcement  about  the  performance 
(of  the  works).] 

1.  The  king  speaks  to  this  effect : — '  Head  of  the 
princes1,  and  my  younger  brother2,  little  one2,  Fang, 
it  was  your  greatly  distinguished  father,  the  king 
Wan,  who  was  able  to  illustrate  his  virtue  and  be  care- 
ful in  the  use  of  punishments.  He  did  not  dare  to 
treat  with  contempt  (even)  wifeless  men  and  widows. 
He  employed  the  employable,  and  revered  the  reve- 
rend ;  he  was  terrible  to  those  who  needed  to  be 
awed : — so  getting  distinction  among  the  people. 
It  was  thus  he  laid  the  foundations  of  (the  sway 
of)  our  small  portion  of  the  kingdom 3,  and  the  one 

1  Fang  had,  no  doubt,  been  made  chief  or  leader  of  all  the 
feudal  lords  in  one  of  the  -£au  or  provinces  of  the  kingdom. 

2  The  duke  of  i£au,  though  speaking  in  the  name  of  king 
Kh&ng,  yet  addresses  Fang  from  the  standpoint  of  his  own 
relation  to  him. 

3  Referring  to  the  original  principality  of  Zau. 


1 66  the  snij  KING.  PART  V. 

or  two  (neighbouring)  regions  were  brought  under 
his  improving  influence,  until  throughout  our  western 
land  all  placed  in  him  their  reliance.  The  fame 
of  him  ascended  up  to  the  high  God,  and  God 
approved.  Heaven  accordingly  gave  a  grand  charge 
to  king  Wan,  to  exterminate  the  great  (dynasty  of) 
Yin,  and  grandly  receive  its  appointment,  so  that 
the  various  countries  belonging  to  it  and  their 
peoples  were  brought  to  an  orderly  condition.* 
Then  your  unworthy  elder  brother1  exerted  him- 
self; and  thus  it  is  that  you  Fang,  the  little  one, 
are  here  in  this  eastern  region/ 

2.  The  king  says,  '  Oh  !  Fang,  bear  these  things 
in  mind.  Now  (your  success  in  the  management  of) 
the  people  will  depend  on  your  reverently  following 
your  father  Wan  ; — do  you  carry  out  his  virtuous 
words  which  you  have  heard,  and  clothe  yourself 
with  them.  (Moreover),  where  you  go,  seek  out 
among  (the  traces  of)  the  former  wise  kings  of  Yin 
what  you  may  use  in  protecting  and  regulating  their 
people.  (Again),  you  must  in  the  remote  distance 
study  the  (ways  of)  the  old  accomplished  men  of 
Shang,  that  you  may  establish  your  heart,  and  know 
how  to  instruct  (the  people),  (Further  still),  you 
must  search  out  besides  what  is  to  be  learned  of  the 
wise  kings  of  antiquity,  and  employ  it  in  tranquil- 
lizing and  protecting  the  people.  (Finally),  enlarge 
(your  thoughts)  to  (the  comprehension  of  all) 
heavenly  (principles),  and  virtue  will  be  richly  dis- 
played in  your  person,  so  that  you  will  not  render 
nugatory  the  kings  charge/ 


1  Is  it  strange  that  the  duke  should  thus  speak  of  king  Wu  ? 
Should  we  not  think  the  better  of  him  for  it  ? 


BOOK  IX.    ANNOUNCEMENT  TO  THE  PRINCE  OF  KHANG.     1 67 

The  king   says,  '  Oh !    Fang,  the  little   one,    be 
respectfully  careful,  as  if  you  were  suffering  from 
a  disease.     Awful  though  Heaven  be,  it  yet  helps 
the  sincere.*     The  feelings  of  the  people  can  for 
the  most  part  be  discerned;  but   it  is  difficult  to\ 
preserve   (the    attachment   of)    the    lower    classes.  \ 
Where   you  go,   employ   all    your   heart.     Do    not 
seek   repose,    nor   be   fond   of  ease   and   pleasure. 
I  have  read  the  saying, — "  Dissatisfaction  is  caused  \ 
not  so  much  by  great  things,  or  by  small  things,  as  I 
by  (a  rulers)  observance  of  principle  or  the  reverse,  i 
and  by  his  energy  of  conduct  or  the  reverse."    Yes,  it 
is  yours,  O  little  one, — it  is  your  business  to  enlarge 
the  royal  (influence),  and  to  protect  the  people  of 
Yin  in  harmony  with  their  feelings.    Thus  also  shall 
you  assist  the  king,  consolidating  the  appointment  of 
Heaven,  and  renovating  the  people/* 

3.  The  king  says,  '  Oh !  Fang,  deal  reverently 
and  intelligently  in  your  infliction  of  punishments. 
When  men  commit  small  crimes,  which  are  not  mis- 
chances, but  purposed,  they  of  themselves  doing 
what  is  contrary  to  the  laws  intentionally,  though 
their  crimes  be  but  small,  you  may  not  but  put 
them  to  death.  But  in  the  case  of  great  crimes, 
which  were  not  purposed,  but  from  mischance  and 
misfortune,  accidental,  if  the  transgressors  confess 
their  guilt  without  reserve,  you  must  not  put  them 
to  death/ 

The  king  says,  '  Oh !  Fang,  there  must  be  the 
orderly  regulation  (of  this  matter).  When  you  show 
a  great  discrimination,  subduing  (mens  hearts),  the 
people  will  admonish  one  another,  and  strive  to  be 
obedient.  (Deal  firmly  yet  tenderly  with  evil),  as  if 
it  were  a  disease  in  your  own  person,  and  the  people 


1 68  THE    SH#    KING.  PART  v. 

will  entirely  put  away  their  faults.  (Deal  with  them) 
as  if  you  Were  protecting  your  own  infants,  and  the 
people  will  be  tranquil  and  orderly.  It  is  not  you, 
O  Fang,  who  (can  presume  to)  inflict  a  (severe) 
punishment  or  death  upon  a  man  ; — do  not,  to  please 
yourself,  so  punish  a  man  or  put  him  to  death/ 
Moreover,  he  says,  'It  is  not  you,  O  Fang,  who 
(can  presume  to  inflict  a  lighter  punishment),  cutting 
off  a  man's  nose  or  ears  ; — do  not,  to  please  yourself, 
cause  a  man's  nose  or  ears  to  be  cut  off/ 

The  king  says,  '  In  things  beyond  (your  immediate 
supervision),  have  laws  set  forth  which  the  officers 
may  observe,  and  these  should  be  the  penal  laws  of 
Yin  which  were  rightly  ordered/  He  also  says, 
'  In  examining  the  evidence  in  (criminal)  cases, 
reflect  upon  it  for  five  or  six  days,  yea,  for  ten  days 
or  three  months.  You  may  then  boldly  come  to  a 
decision  in  such  cases1/ 

The  king  says,  'In  setting  forth  the  business  of 
the  laws,  the  punishments  will  be  determined  by  (what 
were)  the  regular  laws  of  Yin.  But  you  must  see 
that  those  punishments,  and  (especially)  the  penalty 
of  death,  be  righteous.  And  you  must  not  let  them 
be  warped  to  agree  with  your  own  inclinations, 
O  Fang.  Then  shall  they  be  entirely  accordant 
with  right,  and  you  may  say,  "  They  are  properly 
ordered  ;"  yet  you  must  say  (at  the  same  time), 
"  Perhaps  they  are  not  yet  entirely  accordant  with 
right."  Yes,  though  you  are  the  little  one,  who  has 
a  heart  like  you,  O  Fang  ?  My  heart  and  my  virtue 
are  also  known  to  you. 

1  This  is  supposed  to  refer  to  a  case  where  guilt  would  involve 
death,  so  that  there  could  be  no  remedying  a  wrong  decision. 


BOOK  IX.    ANNOUNCEMENT  TO  THE  PRINCE  OF  KHANG.     1 69 

1  All  who  of  themselves  commit  crimes,  robbing, 
stealing,  practising  villainy  and  treachery,  and  who 
kill  men  or  violently  assault  them  to  take  their 
property,  being  reckless  and  fearless  of  death ; — 
these  are  abhorred  by  all/ 

The  king  says,  '  O  Fang,  such  great  criminals  are 
greatly  abhorred,  and  how  much  more  (detestable) 
are  the  unfilial  and  unbrotherly !— as  the  son  who 
does  not  reverently  discharge  his  duty  to  his  father, 
but  greatly  wounds  his  father's  heart,  and  the  father 
who  can  (no  longer)  love  his  son,  but  hates  him ;  as 
the  younger  brother  who  does  not  think  of  the  mani- 
fest will  of  Heaven,  and  refuses  to  respect  his  elder 
brother,  and  the  elder  brother  who  does  not  think 
of  the  toil  of  their  parents  in  bringing  up  their  chil- 
dren, and  is  very  unfriendly  to  his  junior.  If  we 
who  are  charged  with  government  do  not  treat 
parties  who  proceed  to  such  wickedness  as  offenders, 
the  laws  (of  our  nature)  given  by  Heaven  to  our 
people  will  be  thrown  into  great  disorder  and 
destroyed.  You  must  resolve  to  deal  speedily  with 
such  according  to  the  penal  laws  of  king  Wan, 
punishing  them  severely  and  not  pardoning. 

'  Those  who  are  disobedient  (to  natural  principles) 
are  to  be  thus  subjected  to  the  laws ; — how  much 
more  the  officers  employed  in  your  state  as  the 
instructors  of  the  youth,  the  heads  of  the  official 
departments,  and  the  smaller  officers  charged  with 
their  several  commissions,  when  they  propagate 
other  lessons,  seeking  the  praise  of  the  people,  not 
thinking  (of  their  duty),-  nor  using  (the  rules  for 
their  offices),  but  distressing  their  ruler !  These  lead 
on  (the  people)  to  wickedness,  and  are  an  abomina- 
tion  to   me.     Shall  they  be   let   alone  ?     Do   you 


I70  THE    Sni]   KING. 


PART  V. 


speedily,  according  to  what  is  right,  put  them  to 
death. 

'  And  you  will  be  yourself  ruler  and  president ; — 
if  you  cannot  manage  your  own  household,  with 
your  smaller  officers,  and  the  heads  of  departments 
in  the  state,  but  use  only  terror  and  violence,  you 
will  greatly  set  aside  the  royal  charge,  and  be  trying 
to  regulate  your  state  contrary  to  virtue.  You  must 
in  everything  reverence  the  statutes,  and  proceed  by 
them  to  the  happy  rule  of  the  people.  There  were 
the  reverence  of  king  Wan  and  his  caution  ; — in 
proceeding  by  them  to  the  happy  rule  of  the  people, 
say,  "  If  I  could  only  attain  to  them — ."  So  will 
you  make  me,  the  One  man,  to  rejoice/ 

4.  The  king  says,  '  O  Fang,  when  I  think  clearly 
of  the  people,  I  see  that  they  should  be  led  (by 
example)  to  happiness  and  tranquillity.  I  think  of 
the  virtue  of  the  former  wise  kings  of  Yin,  whereby 
they  tranquillized  and  regulated  the  people,  and 
rouse  myself  to  make  it  my  own.  Moreover,  the 
people  now  are  sure  to  follow  a  leader.  If  one  do 
not  lead  them,  he  cannot  be  said  to  exercise  a 
government  in  their  state/ 

The  king  says,  '  O  Fang,  I  cannot  dispense  with 
the  inspection  (of  the  ancients),  and  I  make  this 
declaration  to  you  about  virtue  in  the  use  of  punish- 
ments. Now  the  people  are  not  quiet;  they  have 
not  yet  stilled  their  minds ;  notwithstanding  my 
leading  of  them,  they  have  not  come  to  accord  (with 
my  government).  I  clearly  consider  that  severe  as 
are  the  inflictions  of  Heaven  on  me,  I  dare  not 
murmur.  The  crimes  (of  the  people),  though  they 
were  not  great  or  many,  (would  all  be  chargeable 
on  me),  and  how   much   more   shall   this   be   said 


BOOK  X.    ANNOUNCEMENT  ABOUT  DRUNKENNESS.    I7I 

when  the  report  of  them  goes  up  so  manifestly  to 
heaven!' 

The  king  says,  '  Oh !  Fang,  be  reverent !  Do  not 
what  will  cause  murmurings ;  and  do  not  use  bad 
counsels  and  uncommon  ways.  With  the  determina- 
tion of  sincerity,  give  yourself  to  imitate  the  active 
virtue  (of  the  ancients).  Hereby  give  repose  to 
your  mind,  examine  your  virtue,  send  far  forward 
your  plans ;  and  thus  by  your  generous  forbearance 
you  will  make  the  people  repose  in  what  is  good, 
and  I  shall  not  have  to  blame  you  or  cast  you  off.- 

5.  The  king  says,  '  Oh !  you,  Fang,  the  little  one, 
(Heaven  s)  appointments  are  not  unchanging.*  Think 
of  this,  and  do  not  make  me  deprive  you  of  your 
dignity.  Make  illustrious  the  charge  which  you 
have  received ;  exalt  (the  instructions)  which  you 
have  heard,  and  tranquillize  and  regulate  the  people 
accordingly/ 

The  king  speaks  to  this  effect :  '  Go,  Fang.  Do 
not  disregard  the  statutes  you  should  reverence ; 
hearken  to  what  I  have  told  you ; — so  shall  you 
among  the  people  of  Yin  enjoy  (your  dignity),  and 
hand  it  down  to  your  posterity/ 


Book   X. 
The  Announcement  about  Drunkenness. 

This  Announcement  was,  like  the  last,  made  to  Fang,  the 
prince  of  Khang,  about  the  time  when  he  was  invested  with 
the  principality  of  Wei.  Mention  has  often  been  made  in 
previous  documents  of  the  Shu  of  the  drunken  debauchery  of 
JTieh  as  the  chief  cause  of  the  downfal  of  the  dynasty  of  Hsid, 
and  of  the  same  vice  in  .Sau-hsin,  the  last  of  the  kings  of 


172  THE    SH#    KING. 


PART  v. 


Shang.  The  people  of  Shang  had  followed  the  example  of 
their  sovereign,  and  drunkenness,  with  its  attendant  immoralities, 
characterised  both  the  highest  and  lowest  classes  of  society. 
One  of  Fang's  most  difficult  tasks  in  his  administration  would 
be,  to  correct  this  evil  habit,  and  he  is  called  in  this  Book  to 
the  undertaking.  He  is  instructed  in  the  proper  use  and  the 
allowable  uses  of  spirits;  the  disastrous  consequences  of  drunken- 
ness are  set  forth  ;  and  he  is  summoned  to  roll  back  the  flood 
of  its  desolation  from  his  officers  and  people. 

I  have  divided  the  Book  into  two  chapters : — the  one  preliminary, 
showing  the  original  use  and  the  permissible  uses  of  ardent 
spirits;  the  other,  showing  how  drunkenness  had  proved  the 
ruin  of  the  Shang  dynasty,  and  how  they  of  Aau,  and  par- 
ticularly Fang  in  Wei,  should  turn  the  lesson  to  account. 

The  title  might  be  translated — '  The  Announcement  about  Spirits/ 
but  the  cursory  reader  would  most  readily  suppose  that  the 
discourse  was  about  Spiritual  Beings.  The  Chinese  term  Km, 
that  is  here  employed,  is  often  translated  by  wine,  but  it  denotes, 
it  seems  to  me,  ardent  spirits.  As  Gaubil  says,  'We  have 
here  to  do  with  le  vin  du  riz,  the  art  of  which  was  dis- 
covered, according  to  most  writers,  in  the  time  of  Yu,  the 
founder  of  the  first  dynasty.  The  grape  was  not  introduced  to 
China  till  that  of  the  first  Han/ 

[Since  the  above  sentences  were  in  manuscript,  the  Rev.  Dr. 
Edkins  of  Pekin  has  stated  at  a  meeting  of  the  North-China 
branch  of  the  Royal  Asiatic  Society,  and  in  a  letter  to  myself 
(April  24th),  that  he  has  lately  investigated  the  question  whether 
the  Km  of  the  ancient  Chinese  was  spirits  or  not,  and  found 
that  distillation  was  first  known  in  China  in  the  Mongol  or 
Yuan  dynasty  (a.  d.  1 280-1367),  so  that  the  Arabs  must  have 
the  credit  of  the  invention ;  that  the  process  in  making  Km  was 
brewing,  or  nearly  so,  but,  as  the  term  beer  is  inadmissible  in 
a  translation  of  the  classics,  he  would  prefer  to  use  the  term 
wine;  and  that  Km  with  S  h  &  o  ('  fired/  '  ardent ')  before  it, 
means  spirits,  but  without  Shao,  it  means  wine. 
If  the  whole  process  of  Dr.  Edkins'  investigation  were  before  me, 
I  should  be  glad  to  consider  it,  and  not  hesitate  to  alter  my 
own  view,  if  I  saw  reason  to  do  so.  Meanwhile,  what  he  says 
makes  me  glad  that  I  adopted  '  the  Announcement  about 
Drunkenness'  as  the  title  of  this  chapter.  It  is  drunkenness, 
by  whatever  liquor  occasioned,  that  the  king  of  K&u  condemns 
and  denounces. 


BOOK  X.       ANNOUNCEMENT   ABOUT    DRUNKENNESS.  1 73 

What  we  commonly  understand  by  wine  is  never  intended  by 
Km  in  the  Chinese  classics,  and  therefore  I  cannot  use  that 
term.  After  searching  as  extensively  as  I  could  do  in  this 
country,  since  I  received  Dr.  Edkins'  letter,  I  have  found  nothing 
to  make  me  think  that  the  Chinese  term  is  not  properly  trans- 
lated by  c  spirits.' 

Dr.  Williams,  in  his  Syllabic  Dictionary  of  the  Chinese  Language 
(Shanghai,  1874),  gives  this  account  oiKm\ — *  Liquor ;  it  in- 
cludes spirits,  wine,  beer,  and  other  drinks.  The  Chinese  make 
no  wine,  and  chiefly  distil  their  liquors,  and  say  that  Tu  Khang, 
a  woman  of  the  Ti  tribes,  first  made  it/  This  account  is  to  a 
considerable  extent  correct.  The  Chinese  distil  their  liquors. 
I  never  saw  beer  or  porter  of  native  production  among  them, 
though  according  to  Dr.  Edkins  they  had  been  brewing  '  or 
nearly  so '  for  more  than  3000  years.  Among  his  examples  of 
the  use  of  Km,  Williams  gives  the  combinations  of '  red  Kifi. ' 
for  claret,  *  white  Km '  for  sherry,  and  '  pi  (simply  phonetical) 
Km '  for  beer,  adding  that  they  '  are  all  terms  of  foreign  origin/ 
What  he  says  about  the  traditional  account  of  the  first  maker  of 
Kit  is  not  correct.  It  is  said  certainly  that  this  was  Tu  Khang, 
but  who  he  was,  or  when  he  lived,  I  have  never  been  able  to 
discover.  Some  identify  him  with  I-ti,  said  by  Williams  to  have 
been  '  a  woman  of  the  Ti  tribes.'  The  attributing  of  the  invention 
to  I-ti  is  probably  an  independent  tradition.  We  find  it  in  the 
'Plans  of  the  Warring  States'  (ch.  xiv,  art.  10),  a  work  covering 
about  four  centuries  from  the  death  of  Confucius : — '  Anciently, 
the  daughter  of  the  Ti  ordered  I-ti  to  make  Kiii.  She  admired  it, 
and  presented  some  to  Yu,  who  drank  it,  and  found  it  pleasant. 
He  then  discarded  t-ti,  and  denounced  the  use  of  such  generous 
iTiu,  saying,  "  In  future  ages  there  are  sure  to  be  those  who  by 
Km  will  lose  their  states/' '  According  to  this  tradition  intoxi- 
cating KHi  was  known  in  the  time  of  Yii — in  the  twenty -third 
century  b.  c.  The  daughter  of  the  T  i  would  be  Yti's  wife,  and 
I-ti  would  probably  be  their  cook.  It  does  not  appear  as  the 
name  of  a  woman,  or  one  from  the  wild  Ti  tribes. 

With  regard  to  the  phrase  S  h  a  o  K\  u,  said  to  be  the  proper  term 
for  ardent  spirits,  and  unknown  in  China  till  the  Yuan  dynasty, 
a  reference  to  the  Khang-hsi  Tonic  Thesaurus  of  the  language 
will  show  instances  of  its  use  as  early  at  least  as  the  Thang 
dynasty  (a.d.  618-906).] 

i .  The  king  speaks  to  the  following  effect : — '  Do 


1 74  THE    SHft    KING.  PART  V. 

you  clearly  make  known  my  great  commands  in  the 
country  of  Mei1. 

'  When  your  reverent  father,  the  king  Wan,  laid 
the  foundations  of  our  kingdom  in  the  western 
region,  he  delivered  announcements  and  cautions 
to  (the  princes  of)  the  various  regions,  and  to  all 
his  (high)  officers,  with  their  assistants,  and  the 
managers  of  affairs,  saying,  morning  and  evening, 
"  At  sacrifices  spirits  should  be  employed."*  When 
Heaven  was  sending  down  its  favouring  decree,  and 
laying  the  foundations  of  (the  eminence  of)  our 
people,  (spirits)  were  used  only  at  the  great  sacri- 
fices. When  Heaven  sends  down  its  terrors,  and 
our  people  are  thereby  greatly  disorganized  and  lose 
their  virtue,  this  may  be  traced  invariably  to  their 
indulgence  in  spirits ;  yea,  the  ruin  of  states,  small 
and  great,  (by  these  terrors),  has  been  caused  inva- 
riably by  their  guilt  in  the  use  of  spirits 2, 

1  There  is  a  place  called  *  the  village  of  Mei/  in  the  north  of 
the  present  district  of  Kh%  department  Wei-hui,  Ho-nan ; — a  relic 
of  the  ancient  name  of  the  whole  territory.  The  royal  domain 
of  Shang,  north  from  the  capital,  was  all  called  Mei.  Fang's 
principality  of  Wei  must  have  embraced  most  of  it. 

2  Ku  Hsi  says  upon  the  meaning  of  the  expressions  '  Heaven 
was  sending  down  its  favouring  decree '  (its  order  to  make  i£iu,  as 
he  understood  the  language),  and  '  when  Heaven  sends  down  its 
terrors/  in  this  paragraph  : — 'jSTang  Nan-hsien  has  brought  out  the 
meaning  of  these  two  statements  much  better  than  any  of  the 
critics  who  went  before  him,  to  the  following  effect: — Aiu  is  a 
thing  intended  to  be  used  in  offering  sacrifices  and  in  entertaining 
guests; — such  employment  of  it  is  what  Heaven  has  prescribed. 
But  men  by  their  abuse  of  i£iu  come  to  lose  their  virtue,  and 
destroy  their  persons ; — such  employment  of  it  is  what  Heaven  has 
annexed  its  terrors  to.  The  Buddhists,  hating  the  use  of  things 
where  Heaven  sends  down  its  terrors,  put  away  as  well  the  use  of 
them  which  Heaven  has  prescribed.  It  is  not  so  with  us  of  the 
learned  (i.e.  the  Confucian  or  orthodox)  school; — we  only  put 


BOOK  X.    ANNOUNCEMENT  ABOUT  DRUNKENNESS.    I  75 

*  King  Wan  admonished  and  instructed  the  young 
nobles,  who  were  charged  with  office  or  in  any  em- 
ployment, that  they  should  not  ordinarily  use  spirits ; 
and  throughout  all  the  states,  he  required  that  such 
should  drink  spirits  only  on  occasion  of  sacrifices, 
and  that  then  virtue  should  preside  so  that  there 
might  be  no  drunkenness1.' 

He  said,  '  Let  my  people  teach  their  young  men 
that  they  are  to  love  only  the  productions  of  the 
soil,  for  so  will  their  hearts  be  good.  Let  the  young 
also  hearken  wisely  to  the  constant  instructions  of 
their  fathers ;  and  let  them  look  at  all  virtuous 
actions,  whether  great  or  small,  in  the  same  light 
(with  watchful  heed). 

'  (Ye  people  of)  the  land  of  Mei,  if  you  can  employ 
your  limbs,  largely  cultivating  your  millets,  and 
hastening  about  in  the  service  of  your  fathers  and 
elders ;  and  if,  with  your  carts  and  oxen,  you  traffic 
diligently  to  a  distance,  that  you  may  thereby  filially 
minister  to  your  parents ;  then,  when  your  parents 
are  happy,  you  may  set  forth  your  spirits  clear  and 
strong,  and  use  them2. 

'  Hearken  constantly  to  my  instructions,  all  ye  my 
(high)  officers  and  ye  heads  of  departments,  all  ye, 
my  noble  chiefs ; — when  ye  have  largely  done  your 

away  the  use  of  things  to  which  Heaven  has  annexed  its  terrors, 
and  the  use  of  them,  of  which  it  approves,  remains  as  a  matter 
of  course.' 

1  In  sacrificing,  the  fragrant  odour  of  spirits  was  supposed  to  be 
acceptable  to  the  Beings  worshipped.  Here  the  use  of  spirits 
seems  to  be  permitted  in  moderation  to  the  worshippers  after  the 
sacrifices.  Observe  how  king  Wan  wished  to  guard  the  young 
from  acquiring  the  habit  of  drinking  spirits. 

2  Here  is  another  permissible  use  of  spirits ; — at  family  feasts, 
with  a  view  especially  to  the  comfort  of  the  aged. 


I  76  THE    SH#    KING.  part  V. 

duty  in  ministering  to  your  aged,  and  serving  your 
ruler,  ye  may  eat  and  drink  freely  and  to  satiety. 
And  to  speak  of  greater  things  : — when  you  can 
maintain  a  constant,  watchful  examination  of  your- 
selves, and  your  conduct  is  in  accordance  with  correct 
virtue,  then  may  you  present  the  offerings  of  sacri- 
fice,"* and  at  the  same  time  indulge  yourselves  in 
festivity.  In  such  case  you  will  indeed  be  ministers 
doing  right  service  to  your  king,  and  Heaven  like- 
wise will  approve  your  great  virtue,  so  that  you 
shall  never  be  forgotten  in  the  royal  House/* 

2.  The  king  says,  '  O  Fang,  in  our  western  region, 
the  princes  of  states,  and  the  young  (nobles),  sons 
of  the  managers  of  affairs,  who  in  former  days 
assisted  king  Wan,  were  all  able  to  obey  his  lessons, 
and  abstain  from  excess  in  the  use  of  spirits ;  and 
so  it  is  that  I  have  now  received  the  appointment 
which  belonged  to  Yin/ 

The  king  says,  '  O  Fang,  I  have  heard  it  said, 
that  formerly  the  first  wise  king  of  Yin  manifested 
a  reverential  awe  of  the  bright  principles  of  Heaven 
and  of  the  lower  people,  acting  accordingly,  stead- 
fast in  his  virtue,  and  holding  fast  his  wisdom.* 
From  him,  Thang  the  Successful,  down  to  Tf-yi1, 
all  completed  their  royal  virtue  and  revered  their 
chief  ministers,  so  that  their  managers  of  affairs 
respectfully  discharged  their  helping  duties,  and 
dared  not  to  allow  themselves  in  idleness  and 
pleasure; — how  much  less  would  they  dare  to 
indulge  themselves  in  drinking!  Moreover,  in  the 
exterior  domains,  (the  princes  of)  the   H&u,  Tien, 

1  Tf-yi  was  the  father  of  jffau-hsin,  the  twenty-seventh  Shang 
sovereign.  The  sovereigns  between  Thang  and  him  had  not  all 
been  good,  but  the  duke  of  K&a  chooses  here  to  say  so. 


BOOK  X.    ANNOUNCEMENT  ABOUT  DRUNKENNESS.    I  77 

Nan,  and  Wei  (states)1,  with  their  presiding  chiefs  ; 
and  in  the  interior  domain,  all  the  various  officers, 
the  directors  of  the  several  departments,  the  inferior 
officers  and  employes,  the  heads  of  great  houses,  and 
the  men  of  distinguished  name  living  in  retirement,  all 
eschewed  indulgence  in  spirits.  Not  only  did  they 
not  dare  to  indulge  in  them,  but  they  had  not  leisure 
to  do  so,  being  occupied  with  helping  to  complete 
the  sovereign  s  virtue  and  make  it  more  illustrious, 
and  helping  the  directors  of  affairs  reverently  to 
attend  to  his  service. 

'  I  have  heard  it  said  likewise,  that  the  last 
successor  of  those  kings  was  addicted  to  drink,  so 
that  no  charges  came  from  him  brightly  before  the 
people,  and  he  was  (as  if)  reverently  and  unchangingly 
bent  on  doing  and  cherishing  what  provoked  resent- 
ment. Greatly  abandoned  to  extraordinary  lewdness 
and  dissipation,  for  pleasure  s  sake  he  sacrificed  all 
his  majesty.  The  people  were  all  sorely  grieved 
and  wounded  in  heart ;  but  he  gave  himself  wildly 
up  to  drink,  not  thinking  of  restraining  himself,  but 
continuing  his  excess,  till  his  mind  was  frenzied,  and 
he  had  no  fear  of  death.  His  crimes  (accumulated) 
in  the  capital  of  Shang ;  and  though  the  extinction 
of  the  dynasty  (was  imminent),  this  gave  him  no 
concern,  and  he  wrought  not  that  any  sacrifices  of 
fragrant  virtue  might  ascend  to  Heaven.  *  The 
rank  odour  of  the  people's  resentments,  and  the 
drunkenness  of  his  herd  of  creatures,  went  loudly 
up  on  high,  so  that  Heaven  sent  down  ruin  on  Yin, 

1  These  were  the  first,  second,  third,  and  fifth  domains  or  terri- 
torial divisions  of  the  land  under  K&a,  counting  back  from  the 
royal  domain.  It  appears  here  that  an  arrangement  akin  to  that  of 
jSTau  had  been  made  in  the  time  of  Shang. 

[1]  N 


I  78  THE    SH#    KING.  part  V. 

and  showed  no  love  for  it, — because  of  such  excesses. 
There  is  not  any  cruel  oppression  of  Heaven ;  people 
themselves  accelerate  their  guilt,  (and  its  punish- 
ment.)'* 

The  king  says,  i  O  Fang,  I  make  you  this  long 
announcement,  not  (for  the  pleasure  of  doing  so) ; 
but  the  ancients  have  said,  "  Let  not  men  look  into 
water ;  let  them  look  into  the  glass  of  other  people." 
Now  that  Yin  has  lost  its  appointment,  ought  we 
not  to  look  much  to  it  as  our  glass,  (and  learn)  how 
to  secure  the  repose  of  our  time  ?  I  say  to  you, — 
Strenuously  warn  the  worthy  ministers  of  Yin,  and 
(the  princes)  in  the  Hau,  the  Tien,  the  Nan,  and 
the  Wei  domains  ;  and  still  more  your  friends,  the 
great  Recorder  and  the  Recorder  of  the  Interior, 
and  all  your  worthy  ministers,  the  heads  of  great 
Houses ;  and  still  more  those  whom  you  serve,  with 
whom  you  calmly  discuss  matters,  and  who  carry 
out  your  measures ;  and  still  more  those  who  are, 
as  it  were,  your  mates, — your  Minister  of  War  who 
deals  with  the  rebellious,  your  Minister  of  Instruc- 
tion who  is  like  a  protector  to  the  people,  and  your 
Minister  of  Works  who  settles  the  boundaries ;  and 
above  all,  do  you  strictly  keep  yourself  from  drink. 

i  If  you  are  informed  that  there  are  companies 
that  drink  together,  do  not  fail  to  apprehend  them 
all,  and  send  them  here  to  Aau,  where  I  may  put 
them  to  death.  As  to  the  ministers  and  officers  of 
Yin  who  were  led  to  it  and  became  addicted  to 
drink,  it  is  not  necessary  to  put  them  to  death  (at 
once); — let  them  be  taught  for  a  time.  If  they 
follow  these  (lessons  of  mine),  I  will  give  them 
bright  distinction.  If  they  disregard  my  lessons, 
then  I,  the  One  man,  will  show  them  no  pity.     As 


BOOK  XI.  THE    TIMBER    OF    THE    ROTTLERA.  1 79 

they  cannot  change  their  way,  they  shall  be  classed 
with  those  who  are  to  be  put  to  death/ 

The  king  says,  '  O  Fang,  give  constant  heed  to 
my  admonitions.  If  you  do  not  rightly  manage  the 
officers,  the  people  will  continue  lost  in  drunkenness.' 


Book  XI.     The  Timber  of  the  Rottlera. 

'  The  wood  of  the  3ze  tree  '—the  Rottlera  Japonica,  according  to 
Dr.  Williams — is  mentioned  in  the  Book,  and  was  adopted  as 
the  name  for  it.  The  3ze  was  esteemed  a  very  valuable  tree  for 
making  articles  of  furniture  and  for  the  carver's  art.  The  title 
perhaps  intimates  that  the  administrator  of  government  ought  to 
go  about  his  duties  carefully  and  skilfully,  as  the  cabinet-maker 
and  carver  deal  with  their  materials. 

The  Book  is  wanting  in  unity.  Divided  into  two  chapters,  the 
first  may  be  taken  as  a  charge  to  '  the  prince  of  Khang/  He 
is  admonished  of  his  duty  to  promote  a  good  understanding 
between  the  different  classes  in  his  state,  and  between  them  all 
and  the  sovereign ;  and  that,  in  order  to  this,  his  rule  must  be 
gentle,  eschewing  the  use  of  punishments.  The  second  chapter 
is  of  a  different  character,  containing  not  the  charges  of  a 
sovereign,  but  the  admonitions  or  counsels  of  a  minister,  loyally 
cautioning  him,  and  praying  for  the  prosperity  of  his  reign. 
We  might  suppose  them  the  response  of  Fang  to  the  previous 
charge,  but  the  text  does  not  indicate  the  introduction  of  a  new 
speaker. 

i.  The  king  says,  '  O  Fang,  to  secure  a  good 
understanding  between  the  multitudes  of  his  people 
and  his  ministers  (on  the  one  hand),  and  the  great 
families  (on  the  other) ;  and  (again)  to  secure  the 
same  between  all  the  subjects  under  his  charge,  and 
the  sovereign  : — is  the  part  of  the  ruler  of  a  state. 

'  If  you  regularly,  in  giving  out  your  orders,  say, 
"  My  instructors  whom  I  am  to  follow,  my  Minister 
of  Instruction,  my  Minister  of  War,  and  my  Minister 

N  2 


l8o  THE    SH.fi   KING. 


PART  V. 


of  Works ;  my  heads  of  departments,  and  all  ye, 
my  officers,  I  will  on  no  account  put  any  to  death 
oppressively1" — .  Let  the  ruler  also  set  the  example 
of  respecting  and  encouraging  (the  people),  and 
these  will  (also)  proceed  to  respect  and  encourage 
them.  Then  let  him  go  on,  in  dealing  with  villainy 
and  treachery,  with  murderers  and  harbourers  of 
criminals,  to  exercise  clemency  (where  it  can  be 
done),  and  these  will  likewise  do  the  same  with 
those  who  have  assaulted  others  and  injured  their 
property.  When  sovereigns  appointed  overseers  (of 
states),  they  did  so  in  order  to  the  government  of 
the  people,  and  said  to  them,  "  Do  not  give  way  to 
violence  or  oppression,  but  go  on  to  show  reverent 
regard  for  the  friendless,  and  find  helping  connexions 
for  (destitute)  women2."  Deal  with  all  according  to 
this  method,  and  cherish  them.  And  when  sovereigns 
gave  their  injunctions  to  the  rulers  of  states,  and 
their  managers  of  affairs,  what  was  their  charge  ?  It 
was  that  they  should  lead  (the  people)  to  the  enjoy- 
ment of  plenty  and  peace.  Such  was  the  way  of 
the  kings  from  of  old.  An  overseer  is  to  eschew 
the  use  of  punishments/ 

(The  king)  says,  '  As  in  the  management  of  a 
field,  when  the  soil  has  been  all  laboriously  turned 
up,  they  have  to  proceed  by  orderly  arrangements 
to  make  its  boundaries  and  water-courses;  as  in 
building  a  house,  after  all  the  toil  on  its  walls,  they 
have  to  plaster  and  thatch  it ;  as  in  working  with 
the  wood  of  the  rottlera,  when  the  toil  of  the  coarser 
and  finer  operations  has  been  completed,  they  have 

1  The  sentence  here  is  incomplete.  Many  of  the  critics  confess 
that  the  text  is  unintelligible  to  them. 

2  It  is  difficult  to  say  what  the  exact  meaning  here  is. 


BOOK  XII.      ANNOUNCEMENT  OF  THE  DUKE  OF  SHAO.       l8l 

to  apply  the  paint  of  red  and  other  colours ; — (so  do 
you  finish  for  me  the  work  which  I  have  begun  in 
the  state  of  Wei.)' 

2.  Now  let  your  majesty  say,  '  The  former  kings 
diligently  employed  their  illustrious  virtue,  and  pro- 
duced such  attachment  by  their  cherishing  (of  the 
princes),  that  from  all  the  states  they  brought  offer- 
ings, and  came  with  brotherly  affection  from  all 
quarters,  and  likewise  showed  their  virtue  illustrious. 
Do  you,  O  sovereign,  use  their  methods  to  attach 
(the  princes),  and  all  the  states  will  largely  come 
with  offerings.  Great  Heaven  having  given  this 
Middle  Kingdom  with  its  people  and  territories  to 
the  former  kings,  do  you,  our  present  sovereign, 
display  your  virtue,  effecting  a  gentle  harmony 
among  the  deluded  people,  leading  and  urging 
them  on ; — so  (also)  will  you  comfort  the  former 
kings,  who  received  the  appointment  (from 
Heaven).* 

'Yes,  make  these  things  your  study.  I  say  so 
simply  from  my  wish  that  (your  dynasty)  may  con- 
tinue for  myriads  of  years,  and  your  descendants 
always  be  the  protectors  of  the  people/ 


Book  XII. 
The  Announcement  of  the  Duke  of  Shao. 

Shao  was  the  name  of  a  territory  within  the  royal  domain,  cor- 
responding to  the  present  district  of  Hwan-^ii,  Kizxig  Aau, 
Shan-hsi.  It  was  the  appanage  of  Shih,  one  of  the  ablest  of  the 
men  who  lent  their  aid  to  the  establishment  of  the  dynasty  of 
JTau.  He  appears  in  this  Book  as  the  Grand-Guardian  at  the 
court  of  king  Khzxig,  and  we  have  met  with  him  before  in 


1 82  THE  SHU    KING.  PART  V. 

the  Hounds  of  Lu  and  the  Metal-bound  Coffer.  He  is  intro- 
duced here  in  connexion  with  one  of  the  most  important  enter- 
prises of  the  duke  of  ^au,  the  building  of  the  city  of  Lo,  not 
very  far  from  the  present  city  of  Lo-yang,  in  Ho-nan,  as  a  new 
and  central  capital  of  the  kingdom.  King  Wu  had  conceived 
the  idea  of  such  a  city ;  but  it  was  not  carried  into  effect  till  the 
reign  of  his  son,  and  is  commonly  assigned  to  Zhang's  seventh 
year,  in  b.c.  1109. 

Shih  belonged  to  the  royal  House,  and  of  course  had  the  sur- 
name K\.  He  is  styled  the  duke  of  Sh&o,  as  being  one  of  the 
'  three  dukes/  or  three  highest  officers  of  the  court,  and  also  the 
chief  of  Shao,  all  the  country  west  of  Shen  being  under  him, 
as  all  the  east  of  it  was  under  the  duke  of  K&m.  He  was 
invested  by  Wu  with  the  principality  of  'the  Northern  Yen,' 
corresponding  to  the  present  department  of  Shun-thien,  ^ih-li, 
which  was  held  by  his  descendants  fully  nine  hundred  years.  It 
was  in  Lo — while  the  building  of  it  was  proceeding — that  he 
composed  this  Book,  and  sent  it  by  the  hands  of  the  duke  of 
Aau  to  their  young  sovereign. 

The  whole  may  be  divided  into  three  chapters.  The  first  contains 
various  information  about  the  arrangements  for  the  building  of 
Lo,  first  by  the  duke  of  Shao,  and  then  by  the  duke  of  A*au  ; 
and  about  the  particular  occasion  when  the  former  recited  the 
counsels  which  he  had  composed,  that  they  might  be  made 
known  to  the  king.  These  form  the  second  chapter.  First,  it 
sets  forth  the  uncertainty  of  the  favour  of  Heaven,  and  urges  the 
king  to  cultivate  the  '  virtue  of  reverence/  in  order  to  secure  its 
permanence,  and  that  he  should  not  neglect  his  aged  and  ex- 
perienced ministers.  It  speaks  next  of  the  importance  and 
difficulty  of  the  royal  duties,  and  enforces  the  same  virtue  of 
reverence  by  reference  to  the  rise  and  fall  of  the  previous  dynas- 
ties. Lastly,  it  sets  forth  the  importance,  at  this  early  period 
of  his  reign,  of  the  king's  at  once  setting  about  the  reverence 
which  was  thus  described.  There  is  a  concluding  chapter, 
where  the  duke  gives  expression  to  his  loyal  and  personal 
feelings  for  the  king,  and  the  purpose  to  be  served  by  the 
offerings,  which  he  was  then  sending  to  the  court. 

The  burden  of  the  Announcement  is  '  the  virtue  of  reverence.' 
Let  the  king  only  feel  how  much  depended  on  his  attending 
reverently  to  his  duties,  and  all  would  be  well*  The  people 
would  love  and  support  the  dynasty  of  -ffau,  and  Heaven  would 
smile  upon  and  sustain  it. 


BOOK  XII.  ANNOUNCEMENT  OF  THE  DUKE  OF  SHAO.   1 83 

1.  In  the  second  month,  on  the  day  Yi-wei,  six 
days  after  full  moon,  the  king  proceeded  in  the 
morning  from  Aau  to  Fang1.  (Thence)  the  Grand- 
Guardian  went  before  the  duke  of  K&u  to  survey 
the  locality  (of  the  new  capital) ;  and  in  the  third 
month,  on  the  day  Wu-shan,  the  third  day  after  the 
first  appearance  of  the  moon  on  Ping-wu,  he  came 
in  the  morning  to  Lo.  He  divined  by  the  tortoise- 
shell  about  the  (several)  localities,  and  having  obtained 
favourable  indications,  he  set  about  laying  out  the 
plan  (of  the  city).*  On  Kang-hsli,  the  third  day 
after,  he  led  the  people  of  Yin  to  prepare  the  various 
sites  on  the  north  of  the  Lo ;  and  this  work  was 
completed  on  Afia-yin,  the  fifth  day  after. 

On  Yi-mao,  the  day  following,  the  duke  of  A'au 
came  in  the  morning  to  Lo,  and  thoroughly  inspected 
the  plan  of  the  new  city.  On  Ting-sze,  the  third  day 
after,  he  offered  two  bulls  as  victims  in  the  (northern 
and  southern)  suburbs2 ;  and  on  the  morrow,  Wti-wti, 
at  the  altar  to  the  spirit  of  the  land  in  the  new  city, 
he  sacrificed  a  bull,  a  ram,  and  a  boar.*  After  seven 
days,  on  JTia-jze,  in  the  morning,  from  his  written 
(specifications)  he  gave  their  several  orders  to  the 
people  of  Yin,  and  to  the  presiding  chiefs  of  the 
princes  from  the  Hau,  Tien,  and  Nan  domains. 
When  the  people  of  Yin  had  thus  received  their 
orders,  they  arose  and  entered  with  vigour  on 
their  work. 

(When  the  work  was  drawing  to  a  completion), 

1  That  is,  from  Wu's  capital  of  H&o  to  king  Wan's  at  Fang. 

2  By  the  addition  to  the  text  here  of  '  northern  and  southern/ 
I  intimate  my  opinion  that  the  duke  of  K&w  offered  two  sacrifices, 
one  to  Heaven  at  the  altar  in  the  southern  suburb,  and  one  to 
Earth  in  the  northern  suburb. 


184  THE    SHft   KING. 


the  Grand-Guardian  went  out  with  the  hereditary 
princes  of  the  various  states  to  bring  their  offerings 
(for  the  king) 1 ;  and  when  he  entered  again,  he  gave 
them  to  the  duke  of  K&u,  saying,  '  With  my  hands 
to  my  head  and  my  head  to  the  ground,  I  present 
these  to  his  Majesty  and  your  Grace 2.  Announce- 
ments for  the  information  of  the  multitudes  of  Yin 
must  come  from  you,  with  whom  is  the  management 
of  affairs/ 

2.  '  Oh  !  God  (dwelling  in)  the  great  heavens  has 
changed  his  decree  respecting  his  great  son  and  the 
great  dynasty  of  Yin.  Our  king  has  received  that 
decree.  Unbounded  is  the  happiness  connected  with 
it,  and  unbounded  is  the  anxiety  : — Oh  !  how  can  he 
be  other  than  reverent  ?  * 

'  When  Heaven  rejected  and  made  an  end  of  the 
decree  in  favour  of  the  great  dynasty  of  Yin,  there 
were  many  of  its  former  wise  kings  in  heaven.* 
The  king,  however,  who  had  succeeded  to  them, 
the  last  of  his  race,  from  the  time  of  his  entering 
into  their  appointment,  proceeded  in  such  a  way  as 
at  last  to  keep  the  wise  in  obscurity  and  the  vicious 
in  office.  The  poor  people  in  such  a  case,  carrying 
their  children  and  leading  their  wives,  made  their 
moan  to  Heaven.  They  even  fled  away,  but  were 
apprehended  again.  Oh !  Heaven  had  compassion 
on  the  people  of  the  four  quarters ;  its  favouring 

1  These  '  offerings  '  were  the  '  presents  of  introduction/  which 
the  feudal  princes  brought  with  them  to  court,  when  they  were  to 
have  audience  of  the  king.  This  has  led  many  critics  to  think 
that  the  king  was  now  in  Lo,  which  was  not  the  case. 

2  The  original  text  here  is  difficult  and  remarkable ; — intended 
probably  to  indicate  that  the  king's  majesty  was  revered  in  the 
person  of  the  duke  of  iTau,  who  was  regent. 


BOOK  XII.      ANNOUNCEMENT  OF  THE  DUKE  OF  SHAO.      1 85 

decree  lighted  on  our  earnest  (founders).     Let  the 
king  sedulously  cultivate  the  virtue  of  reverence.  * 

*  Examining  the  men  of  antiquity,  there  was  the 
(founder  of  the)  Hsii  dynasty.  Heaven  guided  (his 
mind),  allowed  his  descendants  (to  succeed  him), 
and  protected  them.*  He  acquainted  himself  with 
Heaven,  and  was  obedient  to  it.  But  in  process  of 
time  the  decree  in  his  favour  fell  to  the  ground.* 
So  also  is  it  now  when  we  examine  the  case  of  Yin. 
There  was  the  same  guiding  (of  its  founder),  who 
corrected  (the  errors  of  Hsia),  and  (whose  descend- 
ants) enjoyed  the  protection  (of  Heaven).  He 
(also)  acquainted  himself  with  Heaven,  and  was 
obedient  to  it.  *  But  now  the  decree  in  favour  of 
him  has  fallen  to  the  ground.  Our  king  has  now 
come  to  the  throne  in  his  youth ; — let  him  not  slight 
the  aged  and  experienced,  for  it  may  be  said  of 
them  that  they  have  studied  the  virtuous  conduct 
of  the  ancients,  and  have  matured  their  counsels  in 
the  sight  of  Heaven. 

*  Oh !  although  the  king  is  young,  yet  he  is  the 
great  son  (of  God).*  Let  him  effect  a  great  harmony 
with  the  lower  people,  and  that  will  be  the  blessing 
of  the  present  time.  Let  not  the  king  presume  to 
be  remiss  in  this,  but  continually  regard  and  stand 
in  awe  of  the  perilous  (uncertainty)  of  the  people's 
(attachment). 

*  Let  the  king  come  here  as  the  vice-gerent  of 
God,  and  undertake  (the  duties  of  government)  in 
this  centre  of  the  land.*  Tan  1  said,  "  Now  that  this 
great  city  has  been  built,  from  henceforth  he  may 

1  Tan  was  the  name  of  the  duke  of  i£au,  and  his  brother  duke 
here  refers  to  him  by  it,  in  accordance  with  the  rule  that '  ministers 


1 86  THE   SHft   KING.  PART  V. 

be  the  mate  of  great  Heaven,  and  reverently  sacri- 
fice to  (the  spirits)  above  and  beneath ;  from  hence- 
forth he  may  from  this  central  spot  administer 
successful  government/'  Thus  shall  the  king  enjoy 
the  favouring  regard  (of  Heaven)  all-complete, and  the 
government  of  the  people  will  now  be  prosperous.* 

'  Let  the  king  first  subdue  to  himself  those  who 
were  the  managers  of  affairs  under  Yin,  associating 
them  with  the  managers  of  affairs  for  our  A"au. 
This  will  regulate  their  (perverse)  natures,  and  they 
will  make  daily  advancement.  Let  the  king  make 
reverence  the  resting-place  (of  his  mind) ; — he  must 
maintain  the  virtue  of  reverence. 

'  We  should  by  all  means  survey  the  dynasties  of 
Hsia  and  Yin.  I  do  not  presume  to  know  and  say, 
"  The  dynasty  of  Hsia  was  to  enjoy  the  favouring 
decree  of  Heaven  just  for  (so  many)  years,"  nor  do 
I  presume  to  know  and  say,  "  It  could  not  continue 
longer."  *  The  fact  simply  was,  that,  for  want  of 
the  virtue  of  reverence,  the  decree  in  its  favour 
prematurely  fell  to  the  ground.  (Similarly),  I  do 
not  presume  to  know  and  say,  "  The  dynasty  of  Yin 
was  to  enjoy  the  favouring  decree  of  Heaven  just 
for  (so  many)  years,"  nor  do  I  presume  to  know 
and  say,  "  It  could  not  continue  longer."  *  The  fact 
simply  was,  that,  for  want  of  the  virtue  of  reverence, 
the  decree  in  its  favour  fell  prematurely  to  the 
ground.  The  king  has  now  inherited  the  decree, — 
the  same  decree,  I  consider,  which  belonged  to  those 
two  dynasties.     Let  him  seek  to  inherit  (the  virtues 


should  be  called  by  their  names  in  the  presence  of  the  sovereign.' 
King  -Oang,  indeed,  was  not  now  really  present  in  Lo,  but  he 
was  represented  by  his  uncle,  the  regent. 


BOOK  XII.      ANNOUNCEMENT  OF  THE  DUKE  OF  SHAO.      1 87 

of)  their  meritorious  (sovereigns) ; — (let  him  do  this 
especially)  at  this  commencement  of  his  duties. 

'  Oh !  it  is  as  on  the  birth  of  a  son,  when  all 
depends  on  (the  training  of)  his  early  life,  through 
which  he  may  secure  his  wisdom  in  the  future,  as  if 
it  were  decreed  to  him.  Now  Heaven  may  have 
decreed  wisdom  (to  the  king) ;  it  may  have  decreed 
good  fortune  or  bad ;  it  may  have  decreed  a  (long) 
course  of  years ; — we  only  know  that  now  is  with 
him  the  commencement  of  his  duties.  Dwelling  in 
this  new  city,  let  the  king  now  sedulously  cultivate 
the  virtue  of  reverence.  When  he  is  all-devoted  to 
this  virtue,  he  may  pray  to  Heaven  for  a  long-abiding 
decree  in  his  favour.  * 

'  In  the  position  of  king,  let  him  not,  because  of 
the  excesses  of  the  people  in  violation  of  the  laws, 
presume  also  to  rule  by  the  violent  infliction  of 
death ; — when  the  people  are  regulated  gently,  the 
merit  (of  government)  is  seen.  It  is  for  him  who  is 
in  the  position  of  king  to  overtop  all  with  his  virtue. 
In  this  case  the  people  will  imitate  him  through- 
out the  kingdom,  and  he  will  become  still  more 
illustrious. 

'  Let  the  king  and  his  ministers  labour  with  a 
mutual  sympathy,  saying,  "  We  have  received  the 
decree  of  Heaven,  and  it  shall  be  great  as  the  long- 
continued  years  of  Hsia; — yea,  it  shall  not  fail  of 
the  long-continued  years  of  Yin."  I  wish  the  king, 
through  (the  attachment  of)  the  lower  people,  to 
receive  the  long-abiding  decree  of  Heaven/* 

3.  (The  duke  of  Shao)  then  did  obeisance  with 
his  hands  to  his  head  and  his  head  to  the  ground, 
and  said, ' I,  a  small  minister,  presume,  with  the  kings 
(heretofore)   hostile    people   and   all    their   officers, 


i88  THE   SHft    KING. 


and  with  his  (loyal)  friendly  people,  to  maintain  and 
receive  his  majesty's  dread  command  and  brilliant 
virtue.  That  the  king  should  finally  obtain  the 
decree  all-complete,  and  that  he  should  become 
illustrious, — this  *  I  do  not  presume  to  labour  for. 
I  only  bring  respectfully  these  offerings  to  present 
to  his  majesty,  to  be  used  in  his  prayers  to  Heaven 
for  its  long-abiding  decree/  * 


Book  XIII.     The  Announcement  concerning  Lo. 

The  matters  recorded  in  this  Book  are  all  connected,  more  or  less 
nearly,  with  Lo,  the  new  capital,  the  arrangements  for  the 
building  of  which  are  related  at  the  commencement  of  the  last 
Book.  According  to  the  summary  of  the  contents  given  by  the 
commentator  3n&  -Oan,.  i  The  arrangements  for  the  building 
having  been  made,  the  duke  of  Zau  sent  a  messenger  to  inform 
the  king  of  the  result  of  his  divinations.  The  historiographer 
recorded  this  as  the  Announcement  about  Lo,  and  at  the  same 
time  related  a  dialogue  between  the  king  and  his  minister,  and 
how  the  king  charged  the  duke  to  remain  at  Lo,  and  conduct 
the  government  of  it/  Passing  over  the  commencing  paragraph, 
which  I  have  repeated  here  from  the  ninth  Book,  3hai  divides 
all  the  rest  into  seven  chapters.  Ch.  i  contains  the  duke's 
message  concerning  his  divinations;  and  the  next  gives  the 
king's  reply.  Ch.  3  is  occupied  with  instructions  to  the  king 
about  the  measures  which  he  should  pursue  on  taking  up  his 
residence  at  Lo.  In  ch.  4,  the  king  charges  the  duke  to  remain 
at  Lo,  and  undertake  its  government.  In  ch.  5,  the  duke  re- 
sponds, and  accepts  the  charge,  dwelling  on  the  duties  which 
the  king  and  himself  would  have  to  perform.  Ch.  6  relates 
the  action  of  the  duke  in  reference  to  a  message  and  gift 
from  the  king  intended  for  his  special  honour.  In  ch.  7,  the 
historiographer  writes  of  sacrifices  offered  by  the  king  in  Lo, 
and  a  proclamation  that  he  issued,  and  tells  how  long  the  duke 
continued  in  his  government ; — showing  how  the  duke  began  the 
city  and  completed  it,  and  how  king  .Oang,  after  offering  the 
sacrifices  and  inaugurating  the  government,  returned  to  Hao, 
and  did  not,  after  all,  make  his  capital  at  Lo. 


BOOK  XIII.      THE   ANNOUNCEMENT    CONCERNING   LO.       l8g 

Many  critics  make  much  to  do  about  the  want  of  historical  order 
in  the  Book,  and  suppose  that  portions  have  been  lost,  and  other 
portions  transposed;  but  the  Book  may  be  explained  without 
resorting  to  so  violent  a  supposition. 

[In  the  third  month,  when  the  moon  began  to 
wane,  the  duke  of  Aau  commenced  the  foundations 
and  proceeded  to  build  the  new  great  city  of  Lo  of 
the  eastern  states.  The  people  from  every  quarter 
assembled  in  great  harmony.  From  the  Hau,  Tien, 
Nan,  3h&i,  and  Wei  domains,  the  various  officers 
stimulated  this  harmony  of  the  people,  and  intro- 
duced them  to  the  business  that  was  to  be  done 
for  ATau.  The  duke  encouraged  all  to  diligence,  and 
made  a  great  announcement  about  the  performance 
(of  the  works)1.] 

i.  The  duke  of  Aau  did  obeisance  with  his  hands 
to  his  head  and  his  head  to  the  ground2,  saying, 
'  Herewith  I  report  (the  execution  of  my  commission) 
to  my  son,  my  intelligent  sovereign.  The  king 
appeared  as  if  he  would  not  presume  to  be  present 
at  Heaven's  founding  here  the  appointment  (of  our 
dynasty),  and  fixing  it,  whereupon  I  followed  the 
(Grand-)Guardian,  and  made  a  great  survey  of  this 
eastern  region,  hoping  to  found  the  place  where  he 
should  become  the  intelligent  sovereign  of  the  people. 
On  the  day  Yi-mao,  I  came  in  the  morning  to  this 
capital  of  Lo.  I  (first)  divined  by  the  shell  concern- 
ing (the  ground  about)  the  Ll-water  on  the  north 
of  the  Ho.  I  then  divined  concerning  the  east  of 
the  i^ien-water,  and  the  west  of  the  A^an,  when 
the  (ground  near  the)  Lo  was  indicated.     Again  I 

1  See  the  introductory  note  to  Book  ix. 

2  In  sending  his  message  to  the  king,  the  duke  does  obeisance 
as  if  he  were  in  the  presence  of  his  majesty.  The  king  responds 
with  a  similar  ceremony. 


1 90  THE   SHti   KING. 


PART  V, 


divined  concerning  the  east  of  the  -A^an-water, 
when  the  (ground  near  the)  Lo  was  also  indicated. 
I  (now)  send  a  messenger  with  a  map,  and  to  present 
the  (result  of  the)  divinations/* 

2.  The  king  did  obeisance  with  his  hands  to  his 
head  and  his  head  to  the  ground,  saying,  '  The 
duke  did  not  presume  not  to  acknowledge  reverently 
the  favour  of  Heaven,  and  has  surveyed  the  locality 
where  our  Aau  may  respond  to  that  favour.  Having 
settled  the  locality,  he  has  sent  his  messenger  to 
show  me  the  divinations,  favourable  and  always 
auspicious.  We  two  must  together  sustain  the 
responsibility.  He  has  made  provision  for  me 
(and  my  successors),  for  myriads  and  tens  of 
myriads  of  years,  there  reverently  to  acknowledge 
the  favour  of  Heaven.*  With  my  hands  to  my 
head  and  my  head  to  the  ground,  (I  receive)  his 
instructive  words.' 

3.  The  duke  of  Aau  said  1y  '  Let  the  king  at  first 
employ  the  ceremonies  of  Yin,  and  sacrifice  in  the 
new  city,*  doing  everything  in  an  orderly  way,  but 
without  display.  I  will  marshal  all  the  officers  to 
attend  you  from  A"au,  merely  saying  that  probably 
there  will  be  business  to  be  done  (in  sacrificing). 
Let  the  king  instantly  issue  an  order  to  the  effect 
that  the  most  meritorious  (ministers)  shall  have  the 
first  place  in  the  sacrifices ;  and  let  him  also  say  in 
an  order,  "  You,  in  whose  behalf  the  above  order  is 
issued,  must  give  me  your  assistance  with  sincere 
earnestness."    Truly  display  the  record  of  merits,  for 

1  We  must  suppose  that  the  duke  of  ^au,  after  receiving  the 
reply  to  his  message,  had  himself  returned  to  H&o,  to  urge  upon 
the  king  the  importance  of  his  repairing  in  person  to  Lo,  and 
solemnly  inaugurating  the  new  city  as  the  capital  of  the  kingdom. 


BOOK  XIII.     THE   ANNOUNCEMENT   CONCERNING   LO.       191 

it  is  you  who  must  in  everything  teach  the  officers. 
My  young  son,  can  you  indulge  partiality  ?  Eschew 
it,  my  young  son.  (If  you  do  not),  the  consequence 
hereafter  will  be  like  a  fire,  which,  a  spark  at  first, 
blazes  up,  and  by  and  by  cannot  be  extinguished. 
Let  your  observance  of  the  constant  rules  of  right, 
and  your  soothing  measures  be  like  mine.  Take 
only  the  officers  that  are  in  Kau  with  you  to  the 
new  city,  and  make  them  there  join  their  (old) 
associates,  with  intelligent  vigour  establishing 
their  merit,  and  with  a  generous  largeness  (of 
soul)  completing  (the  public  manners) ;  —  so  shall 
you  obtain  an  endless  fame/ 

The  duke  said,  *  Yes,  young  as  you  are,  be  it 
yours  to  complete  (the  work  of  your  predecessors). 
Cultivate  (the  spirit  of)  reverence,  and  you  will  know 
who  among  the  princes  (sincerely)  present  their 
offerings  to  you,  and  who  do  not.  In  connexion 
with  those  offerings  there  are  many  observances.  If 
the  observances  are  not  equal  to  the  articles,  it  must 
be  held  that  there  is  no  offering.  When  there  is  no 
service  of  the  will  in  the  offerings  (of  the  princes), 
all  the  people  will  then  say,  "  We  need  not  (be 
troubled  about)  our  offerings,,,  and  affairs  will  be 
disturbed  by  errors  and  usurpations, 

'  Do  you,  my  young  son,  manifest  everywhere  my 
unwearied  diligence,  and  listen  to  my  instructions  to 
you  how  to  help  the  people  to  observe  the  constant 
rules  of  right.  If  you  do  not  bestir  yourself  in  these 
things,  you  will  not  be  of  long  continuance.  If  you 
sincerely  and  fully  carry  out  the  course  of  your 
Directing  father,  and  follow  exactly  my  example, 
there  will  be  no  venturing  to  disregard  your  orders. 
Go,   and  be   reverent.       Henceforth    I    will   study 


192  THE    SHtj    KING.  part  v. 

husbandry1.  There  do  you  generously  rule  our 
people,  and  there  is  no  distance  from  which  they 
will  not  come  to  you/ 

4.  The  king  spoke  to  this  effect2,  *  O  duke,  you 
are  the  enlightener  and  sustainer  of  my  youth.  You 
have  set  forth  the  great  and  illustrious  virtues,  that 
I,  notwithstanding  my  youth,  may  display  a  brilliant 
merit  like  that  of  Wan  and  Wti,  reverently  responding 
to  the  favouring  decree  of  Heaven;  and  harmonize 
and  long  preserve  the  people  of  all  the  regions, 
settling  the  multitudes  (in  Lo) ;  and  that  I  may  give 
due  honour  to  the  great  ceremony  (of  recording)  the 
most  distinguished  (for  their  merits),  regulating  the 
order  for  the  first  places  at  the  sacrifices,  and  doing 
everything  in  an  orderly  manner  without  display. 

'  But  your  virtue,  O  duke,  shines  brightly  above 
and  beneath,  and  is  displayed  actively  throughout 
the  four  quarters.  On  every  hand  appears  the 
deep  reverence  (of  your  virtue)  in  securing  the 
establishment  of  order,  so  that  you  fail  in  nothing 
of  the  earnest  lessons  of  Wan  and  Wu.  It  is  for 
me,  the  youth,  (only)  to  attend  reverently,  early  and 
late,  to  the  sacrifices/  * 

The  king  said,  '  Great,  O  duke,  has  been  your 
merit  in  helping  and  guiding  me ; — let  it  ever  con- 
tinue so/ 

1  By  this  expression  the  duke  indicates  his  wish  and  intention 
now  to  retire  from  public  life,  and  leave  the  government  and 
especially  the  affairs  of  Lo  in  the  king's  hands. 

2  From  the  words  of  the  king  in  this  chapter,  we  receive  the 
impression  that  they  were  spoken  in  Lo.  He  must  have  gone 
there  with  the  duke  from  Hao.  He  deprecates  the  duke's  intention 
to  retire  into  private  life ;  intimates  his  own  resolution  to  return  to 
Hao ;  and  wishes  the  duke  to  remain  in  Lo,  accomplishing  all  that 
was  still  necessary  to  the  establishment  of  their  dynasty. 


BOOK  XIII.     THE   ANNOUNCEMENT   CONCERNING    LO.       1 93 

The  king  said,  '  O  duke,  let  me,  the  little  child, 
return  to  my  sovereignty  in  Aau,  and  I  charge  you, 
O  duke,  to  remain  behind  (here).  Order  has  been 
initiated  throughout  the  four  quarters  of  the  kingdom, 
but  the  ceremonies  to  be  honoured  (by  general  observ- 
ance) have  not  yet  been  settled,  and  I  cannot  look 
on  your  service  as  completed.  Commence  on  a 
great  scale  what  is  to  be  done  by  your  remaining 
here,  setting  an  example  to  my  officers  and  greatly 
preserving  the  people  whom  Wan  and  Wti  received ; 
— by  your  good  government  you  will  be  a  help  to 
the  whole  kingdom/ 

The  king  said, '  Remain,  O  duke.  I  will  certainly 
go.  Your  services  are  devoutly  acknowledged  and 
reverently  rejoiced  in.  Do  not,  O  duke,  occasion 
me  this  difficulty.  I  on  my  part  will  not  be  weary 
in  seeking  the  tranquillity  (of  the  people) ; — do  not 
let  the  example  which  you  have  afforded  me  be 
intermitted.  So  shall  the  kingdom  enjoy  for  gene- 
rations (the  benefit  of  your  virtue)/ 

5.  The  duke  of  Aau  did  obeisance  with  his  hands 
to  his  head  and  his  head  to  the  ground,  saying, '  You 
have  charged  me,  O  king,  to  come  here.  I  under- 
take (the  charge),  and  will  protect  the  people  whom 
your  accomplished  grandfather,  and  your  glorious 
and  meritorious  father,  king  Wu,  received  by  the 
decree  (of  Heaven).  I  will  enlarge  the  reverence 
which  I  cherish  for  you.  (But),  my  son,  come  (fre- 
quently), and  inspect  this  settlement.  Pay  great 
honour  to  (old)  statutes,  and  to  the  good  and  wise 
men  of  Yin.  Good  government  (here)  will  make 
you  (indeed)  the  new  sovereign  of  the  kingdom,  and 
an  example  of  (royal)  respectfulness  to  all  your 
successors  of  Aau/ 

[1]  o 


194  THE    SH^    KING.  PART    V. 

(The  duke)  proceeded  to  say,  '  From  this  time,  by 
the  government  administered  in  this  central  spot, 
all  the  states  will  be  conducted  to  repose ;  and  this 
will  be  the  completion  of  your  merit,  O  king. 

' 1,  Tan,  with  the  numerous  officers  and  managers 
of  affairs,  will  consolidate  the  achievements  of  our 
predecessors,  in  response  to  (the  hopes  of)  the  people. 
I  will  afford  an  example  of  sincerity  to  (future  minis- 
ters of)  A"au,  seeking  to  render  complete  the  pattern 
intended  for  the  enlightenment  of  you,  my  son,  and 
thus  to  carry  fully  out  the  virtue  of  your  accom- 
plished grandfather/ 

6.  (Afterwards,  on  the  arrival  of  a  message  and 
gifts  from  the  king,  the  duke  said  *),  '  (The  king) 
has  sent  messengers  to  admonish  (the  people  of) 
Yin,  and  with  a  soothing  charge  to  me,  along  with 
two  flagons  of  the  black-millet  herb-flavoured  spirits, 
saying,  "  Here  is  a  pure  sacrificial  gift,  which  with 
my  hands  to  my  head  and  my  head  to  the  ground 
I  offer  for  you  to  enjoy  its  excellence  !  "  *  I  dare  not 
keep  this  by  me,  but  offer  it  in  sacrifice  to  king 
Wan  and  king  Wu.'  (In  doing  so,  he  prayed), 
*  May  he  be  obedient  to,  and  observant  of  your 
course !  Let  him  not  bring  on  himself  any  evil  or 
illness  !  Let  him  satisfy  his  descendants  for  myriads 
of  years  with  your  virtue  !  Let  (the  people  of)  Yin 
enjoy  prolonged  (prosperity)  ! '  *  (He  also  said  to 
the  messengers),  '  The  king  has  sent  you  to  Yin, 

1  We  must  suppose  that  the  king  had  returned  to  Hao,  and  now 
sends  a  message  to  the  duke  with  an  extraordinary  gift,  doing 
honour  to  him  as  if  he  were  a  departed  spirit,  continuing  in  heaven 
the  guardianship  of  the  dynasty  which  he  had  so  long  efficiently 
discharged  on  earth.  This  gives  occasion  for  the  duke  to  exhibit 
anew  his  humility,  piety,  and  loyalty. 


BOOK  XIII.        THE  ANNOUNCEMENT  CONCERNING  LO.       1 95 

and  we  have  received  his  well-ordered  charges, 
(sufficient  to  direct  us)  for  myriads  of  years,  but  let 
(the  people)  ever  (be  able  to)  observe  the  virtue 
cherished  by  my  son/ 

7.  On  the  day  Wu-Man,  the  king,  being  in  the 
new  city1,  performed  the  annual  winter  sacrifice, 
offering  (moreover)  one  red  bull  to  king  Wan  and 
another  to  king  Wti.*  He  then  ordered  a  declara- 
tion to  be  prepared,  which  was  done  by  Yf 2  in  the 
form  of  a  prayer,  and  it  simply  announced  the  re- 
maining behind  of  the  duke  of  Aau.  The  king's 
guests3,  on  occasion  of  the  killing  of  the  victims 
and  offering  the  sacrifice,  were  all  present.  The 
king  entered  the  grand  apartment,  and  poured  out 
the  libation.*  He  gave  a  charge  to  the  duke  of 
Aau  to  remain,  and  Yi,  the  preparer  of  the  docu- 
ment, made  the  announcement ;  —  in  the  twelfth 
month.  (Thus)  the  duke  of  Aau  grandly  sustained 
the  decree  which  Wan  and  Wu  had  received  through 
the  space  of  seven  years  4. 

1  The  duke  had  asked  the  king  to  come  frequently  to  the  new 
city ;  he  is  there  now  accordingly. 

2  Yi  was  the  name  of  the  Recorder  who  officiated  on  the 
occasion. 

3  All  the  princes  present  and  assisting  at  the  sacrifices,  and 
especially  the  representatives  of  the  previous  dynasties. 

4  These  seven  years  are  to  be  calculated  from  the  seventh  year 
of  king  Z^ang,  after  the  duke  had  served  as  administrator  of 
the  government  seven  years  from  the  death  of  king  Wii.  Many 
think,  however,  that  the  '  seven  years'  are  only  those  of  the  duke's 
regency. 


O  2 


I96  THE    SH<J    KING.  PART  v. 


Book  XIV.     The  Numerous  Officers. 

We  have  in  this  Book  another  '  Announcement/  addressed  to  the 
people  of  Yin  or  Shang,  and  especially  to  the  higher  classes 
among  them, — '  the  numerous  officers/ — to  reconcile  them  to 
their  lot  as  subjects  of  the  new  dynasty.  From  the  preceding 
two  Books  it  appears  that  many  of  the  people  of  Yin  had  been 
removed  to  the  country  about  the  Lo,  before  the  dukes  of  Shao 
and  ^Tau  commenced  the  building  of  the  new  city.  Now  that 
the  city  was  completed,  another  and  larger  migration  of  them,  we 
may  suppose,  was  ordered,  and  the  duke  of  K&xx  took  occasion 
to  issue  the  announcement  that  is  here  preserved. 

I  have  divided  it  into  four  chapters.  The  first  vindicates  the  kings 
of  JTau  for  superseding  the  line  of  Shang,  not  from  ambition, 
but  in  obedience  to  the  will  of  God.  The  second  unfolds  the 
causes  why  the  dynasty  of  Yin  or  Shang  had  been  set  aside. 
The  third  shows  how  it  had  been  necessary  to  remove  them  to 
Lo,  and  with  what  good  intention  the  new  capital  had  been 
built.  The  fourth  tells  how  comfort  and  prosperity  were  open 
to  their  attainment  at  Lo,  while  by  perseverance  in  disaffection 
they  would  only  bring  misery  and  ruin  upon  themselves. 

1.  In  the  third  month,  at  the  commencement  (of 
the  government)  of  the  duke  of  Aau  in  the  new  city 
of  Lo,  he  announced  (the  royal  will)  to  the  officers 
of  the  Shang  dynasty,  saying,  '  The  king  speaks  to 
this  effect : — "  Ye  numerous  officers  who  remain 
from  the  dynasty  of  Yin,  great  ruin  came  down  on 
Yin  from  the  cessation  of  forbearance  in  compas- 
sionate Heaven,  and  we,  the  lords  of  A"au,  received 
its  favouring  decree.*  We  felt  charged  with  its 
bright  terrors,  carried  out  the  punishments  which 
kings  inflict,  rightly  disposed  of  the  appointment  of 
Yin,  and  finished  (the  work  of)  God.*  Now,  ye  nume- 
rous officers,  it  was  not  our  small  state  that  dared 
to  aim  at  the  appointment  belonging  to  Yin.  But 
Heaven  was  not  with  (Yin),  for  indeed  it  would  not 


BOOK  XIV.  THE   NUMEROUS    OFFICERS.  1 97 

strengthen  its  misrule.  It  (therefore)  helped  us ; — 
did  we  dare  to  seek  the  throne  of  ourselves  ?  God 
was  not  for  (Yin),  as  appeared  from  the  mind  and 
conduct  of  our  inferior  people,  in  which  there  is  the 
brilliant  dreadfulness  of  Heaven."  '  * 

2.  '  I  have  heard  the  saying,  "  God  leads  men  to 
tranquil  security,"  *  but  the  sovereign  of  Hsii  would 
not  move  to  such  security,  whereupon  God  sent 
down  corrections,  indicating  his  mind  to  him.  (A^eli), 
however,  would  not  be  warned  by  God,  but  pro- 
ceeded to  greater  dissoluteness  and  sloth  and  excuses 
for  himself.  Then  Heaven  no  longer  regarded  nor 
heard  him,  but  disallowed  his  great  appointment,  and 
inflicted  extreme  punishment.  Then  it  charged  your 
founder,  Thang  the  Successful,  to  set  Hsia  aside, 
and  by  means  of  able  men  to  rule  the  kingdom. 
From  Thang  the  Successful  down  to  Ti-yi,  every 
sovereign  sought  to  make  his  virtue  illustrious,  and 
duly  attended  to  the  sacrifices.  *  And  thus  it  was 
that,  while  Heaven  exerted  a  great  establishing 
influence,  preserving  and  regulating  the  House  of 
Yin,  its  sovereigns  on  their  part  were  humbly 
careful  not  to  lose  (the  favour  of)  God,  and  strove 
to  manifest  a  good-doing  corresponding  to  that  of 
Heaven.*  But  in  these  times,  their  successor 
showed  himself  greatly  ignorant  of  (the  ways  of) 
Heaven,  and  much  less  could  it  be  expected  of  him 
that  he  would  be  regardful  of  the  earnest  labours  of 
his  fathers  for  the  country.  Greatly  abandoned  to 
dissolute  idleness,  he  gave  no  thought  to  the  bright 
principles  of  Heaven,  and  the  awfulness  of  the 
people.*  On  this  account  God  no  longer  protected 
him,  but  sent  down  the  great  ruin  which  we  have 
witnessed.     Heaven  was  not  with  him,  because  he 


198  THE    SHft    KING. 


did  not  make  his  virtue  illustrious.*  (Indeed),  with 
regard  to  the  overthrow  of  all  states,  great  and 
small,  throughout  the  four  quarters  of  the  king- 
dom, in  every  case  reasons  can  be  given  for  their 
punishment/ 

'  The  king  speaks  to  this  effect : — "  Ye  numerous 
officers  of  Yin,  the  case  now  is  this,  that  the  kings 
of  our  .A^au,  from  their  great  goodness,  were  charged 
with  the  work  of  God.  There  was  the  charge  to 
them,  '  Cut  off  Yin/  (They  proceeded  to  perform 
it),  and  announced  the  execution  of  their  service  to 
God.  In  our  affairs  we  have  followed  no  double 
aims ; — ye  of  the  royal  House  (of  Yin)  must  (now 
simply)  follow  us."  '  * 

3.  *  "  May  I  not  say  that  you  have  been  very  law- 
less ?  I  did  not  (want  to)  remove  you.  The  thing 
came  from  your  own  city1.  When  I  consider  also 
how  Heaven  has  drawn  near  to  Yin  with  so  great 
tribulations,  it  must  be  that  there  was  (there)  what 
was  not  right/, 

'  The  king  says,  "Ho!  I  declare  to  you,  ye  nume- 
rous officers,  it  is  simply  on  account  of  these  things 
that  I  have  removed  you  and  settled  you  here  in  the 
west2; — it  was  not  that  I,  the  One  man,  considered 
it  a  part  of  my  virtue  to  interfere  with  your  tran- 
quillity. The  thing  was  from  Heaven  ;  do  not  offer 
resistance ;  I  shall  not  presume  to  have  any  subse- 
quent (charge  concerning  you) ;  do  not  murmur 
against  me.  Ye  know  that  your  fathers  of  the  Yin 
dynasty  had  their  archives  and   statutes,  (showing 

1  That  is,  your  conduct  in  your  own  city. 

2  Lo  is  often  called  'the  eastern  capital/  as  being  east  from 
Hao,  the  capital  of  king  Wu ;  but  it  was  west  from  jSlo-ko,  the 
capital  of  Yin. 


BOOK  xiv.  THE    NUMEROUS    OFFICERS.  I99 

how)  Yin  superseded  the  appointment  of  Hsia. 
Now,  indeed,  ye  say  further,  '  (The  officers  of)  Hsia 
were  chosen  and  employed  in  the  royal  court  (of 
Shang),  and  had  their  duties  among  the  mass  of 
its  officers/  (But)  I,  the  One  man,  listen  only  to 
the  virtuous,  and  employ  them;  and  it  was  with 
this  view  that  I  ventured  to  seek  you  in  your 
capital  of  Shang  (once  sanctioned  by)  Heaven,  (and 
removed  you  here  to  Lo.)  I  thereby  follow  (the 
ancient  example),  and  have  pity  on  you.  (Your 
present  non-employment)  is  no  fault  of  mine ; — it  is 
by  the  decree  of  Heaven/'* 

'  The  king  says,  "  Ye  numerous  officers,  formerly, 
when  I  came  from  Yen1,  I  greatly  mitigated  the 
penalty  and  spared  the  lives  of  the  people  of  your 
four  states2.  At  the  same  time  I  made  evident 
the  punishment  appointed  by  Heaven,  and  removed 
you  to  this  distant  abode,  that  you  might  be  near 
the  ministers  who  had  served  in  our  honoured 
(capital)3,  and  (learn)  their  much  obedience." 

'  The  king  says,  "  I  declare  to  you,  ye  numerous 
officers  of  Yin,  now  I  have  not  put  you  to  death, 
and  therefore  I  reiterate  the  declaration  of  my 
charge4.     I  have  now  built  this  great  city  here  in 

1  Yen  was  the  name  of  a  territory,  corresponding  to  the  present 
district  of  iTM-fau,  in  Shan-tung.  The  wild  tribe  inhabiting  it, 
had  joined  with  Wu-kang  and  the  king's  uncles  a  few  years  before ; 
and  the  crushing  of  the  Yen  had  been  the  last  act  in  the  sup- 
pression of  their  rebellion. 

2  The  royal  domain  of  Yin,  which  had  been  allotted  to  Wu-kang 
and  the  king's  three  uncles. 

3  Hao.  There  were,  no  doubt,  at  this  time  many  ministers  and 
officers  from  Hao  in  Lo;  but  the  duke  had  intended  that  they 
should  in  the  mass  remove  from  the  old  to  the  new  capital. 

4  The  charge  which  had  been  delivered  on  the  first  removal  of 
many  of  them  to  the  neighbourhood  of  Lo. 


200  THE    SHU    KING.  part  v. 

Lo,  considering  that  there  was  no  (central)  place  in 
which  to  receive  my  guests  from  the  four  quarters, 
and  also  that  you,  ye  numerous  officers,  might  here 
with  zealous  activity  perform  the  part  of  ministers 
to  us,  with  the  entire  obedience  (ye  would  learn). 
Ye  have  still  here,  I  may  say,  your  grounds,  and 
may  still  rest  in  your  duties  and  dwellings.  If  you 
can  reverently  obey,  Heaven  will  favour  and  com- 
passionate you.  If  you  do  not  reverently  obey,  you 
shall  not  only  not  have  your  lands,  but  I  will  also 
carry  to  the  utmost  Heavens  inflictions  on  your 
persons.  Now  you  may  here  dwell  in  your  villages, 
and  perpetuate  your  families  ;  you  may  pursue  your 
occupations  and  enjoy  your  years  in  this  Lo ;  your 
children  also  will  prosper ; — (all)  from  your  being 
removed  here." 

'  The  king  says—1 ;  and  again  he  says,  "  Whatever 
I  may  now  have  spoken  is  on  account  of  (my  anxiety 
about)  your  residence  here."  ' 


Book  XV.     Against  Luxurious  Ease. 

The  name  of  this  Book  is  taken  from  two  characters  in  the  first 
sentence  of  it,  which  are  the  key-note  of  the  whole.  It  is  classi- 
fied among  the  '  Instructions '  of  the  Shu,  and  was  addressed  to 
king  ,Oang  by  the  duke  of  ^au  soon  after  he  had  resigned  the 
administration  of  the  government  into  his  hands. 

There  are  six  pauses  in  the  course  of  the  address,  which  is  resumed 
always  with  '  The  duke  of  ^au  said,  "  Oh." T  This  suggests  a 
division  into  seven  chapters. 

In  the  first,  the  duke  suggests  to  the  king  to  find  a  rule  for  himself 
in  the  laborious  toils  that  devolve  on  the  husbandman.  In  the 
second,  he  refers  to  the  long  reigns  of  three  of  the  Yin  sovereigns, 

1  There  are  probably  some  sentences  lost  here. 


BOOK  xv.  AGAINST   LUXURIOUS    EASE.  201 

and  the  short  reigns  of  others,  as  illustrating  how  the  blessing  of 
Heaven  rests  on  the  diligent  monarch.  In  the  third,  the  example 
of  their  own  kings,  Thai,  K\,  and  Wan,  is  adduced  with  the 
same  object.  In  the  fourth,  the  duke  addresses  the  king  directly, 
and  exhorts  him  to  follow  the  pattern  of  king  Wan,  and  flee  from 
that  of  ^au-hsin.  In  the  fifth,  he  stimulates  him,  by  reference  to 
ancient  precedents,  to  adopt  his  counsels,  and  shows  the  evil 
effects  that  will  follow  if  he  refuse  to  do  so.  In  the  sixth,  he 
shows  him,  by  the  cases  of  the  good  kings  of  Yin  and  of  king 
Wan,  how  he  should  have  regard  to  the  opinions  of  the  common 
people,  and  gird  himself  to  diligence.  The  seventh  chapter  is  a 
single  admonition  that  the  king  should  lay  what  had  been  said 
to  heart. 

i .  The  duke  of  i£au  said,  '  Oh  !  the  superior  man 
rests  in  this, — that  he  will  indulge  in  no  luxurious 
ease.  He  first  understands  how  the  painful  toil 
of  sowing  and  reaping  conducts  to  ease,  and  thus 
he  understands  how  the  lower  people  depend  on 
this  toil  (for  their  support).  I  have  observed  among 
the  lower  people,  that  where  the  parents  have 
diligently  laboured  in  sowing  and  reaping,  their  sons 
(often)  do  not  understand  this  painful  toil,  but 
abandon  themselves  to  ease,  and  to  village  slang, 
and  become  quite  disorderly.  Or  where  they  do 
not  do  so,  they  (still)  throw  contempt  on  their 
parents,  saying,  "  Those  old  people  have  heard 
nothing  and  know  nothing." ' 

2.  The  duke  of  isfau  said,  *  Oh !  I  have  heard 
that  aforetime  Aung  Bung,  one  of  the  kings  of  Yin *, 
was  grave,  humble,  reverential,  and  timorously 
cautious.  He  measured  himself  with  reference  to 
the  decree  of  Heaven,  and  cherished  a  reverent 
apprehension  in  governing  the  people,  not  daring 


1  Kung  3u»g  was  the  sacrificial  title  of  Thai-wu,  the  seventh  of 
the  kings  of  Shang  or  Yin,  who  reigned  b.  c.  1637-1563. 


202  THE    SH6  KING. 


PART  V. 


to  indulge  in  useless  ease.*  It  was  thus  that  he  en- 
joyed the  throne  seventy  and  five  years.  If  we  come 
to  the  time  of  Kao  Sung1,  he  toiled  at  first  away 
from  the  court,  and  was  among  the  lower  people  2. 
When  he  came  to  the  throne,  and  occupied  the 
mourning  shed,  it  may  be  said  that  he  did  not  speak 
for  three  years.  (Afterwards)  he  was  (still  inclined) 
not  to  speak ;  but  when  he  did  speak,  his  words 
were  full  of  harmonious  (wisdom).  He  did  not  dare 
to  indulge  in  useless  ease,  but  admirably  and  tran- 
quilly presided  over  the  regions  of  Yin,  till  through- 
out them  all,  small  and  great,  there  was  not  a  single 
murmur.  It  was  thus  that  he  enjoyed  the  throne 
fifty  and  nine  years.  In  the  case  of  3u-/£ia3,  he 
refused  to  be  king  unrighteously,  and  was  at  first 
one  of  the  lower  people.  When  he  came  to  the 
throne,  he  knew  on  what  they  must  depend  (for 
their  support),  and  was  able  to  exercise  a  protecting 
kindness  towards  their  masses,  and  did  not  dare  to 
treat  with  contempt  the  wifeless  men  and  widows. 
Thus  it  was  that  he  enjoyed  the  throne  thirty  and 
three  years.  The  kings  that  arose  after  these, 
from  their  birth  enjoyed  ease.  Enjoying  ease  from 
their  birth,  they  did  not  know  the  painful  toil  of 
sowing  and  reaping,  and  had  not  heard  of  the  hard 
labours  of  the  lower  people.  They  sought  for 
nothing  but  excessive  pleasure;  and  so  not  one 
of  them  had  long  life.    They  (reigned)  for  ten  years, 

1  Kao  3ung  was  the  sacrificial  title  of  Wu-ting,  the  nineteenth 
sovereign  of  the  Yin  line,  who  reigned  b.c.  1324-1266.  He  has 
already  appeared  in  the  8th  and  9th  Books  of  Part  IV. 

2  Compare  Part  IV,  viii,  sect.  3,  ch.  1. 

3  3fi-&a  was  the  twenty-first  of  the  Yin  sovereigns,  and  reigned 
b.c.  1258-1226. 


book  XV,  AGAINST    LUXURIOUS    EASE.  203 

for  seven  or  eight,  for  five  or  six,  or  perhaps  (only) 
for  three  or  four/ 

3.  The  duke  of  K&u  said,  '  Oh !  there  likewise 
were  king  Thai  and  king  Ki  of  our  own  i£au,  who 
were  humble  and  reverentially  cautious.  King  Wan 
dressed  meanly,  and  gave  himself  to  the  work  of 
tranquillization  and  to  that  of  husbandry.  Admira- 
bly mild  and  beautifully  humble,  he  cherished  and 
protected  the  inferior  people,  and  showed  a  fostering 
kindness  to  the  wifeless  men  and  widows.  From 
morning  to  mid-day,  and  from  mid-day  to  sun- 
down, he  did  not  allow  himself  leisure  to  eat ; — thus 
seeking  to  secure  the  happy  harmony  of  the  myriads 
of  the  people.  King  Wan  did  not  dare  to  go  to 
excess  in  his  excursions  or  his  hunting,  and  from 
the  various  states  he  would  receive  only  the  cor- 
rect amount  of  contribution.  The  appointment  (of 
Heaven)  came  to  him  in  the  middle  of  his  life  \ 
and  he  enjoyed  the  throne  for  fifty  years.'* 

4.  The  duke  of  Aau  said,  '  Oh !  from  this  time 
forward,  do  you  who  have  succeeded  to  the  throne 
imitate  Wans  avoiding  of  excess  in  his  sight-seeing, 
his  indulgence  in  ease,  his  excursions,  his  hunting ; 
and  from  the  myriads  of  the  people  receive  only  the 
correct  amount  of  contribution.  Do  not  allow  your- 
self the  leisure  to  say,  "  To-day  I  will  indulge  in 
pleasure."  This  would  not  be  holding  out  a  lesson 
to  the  people,  nor  the  way  to  secure  the  favour 
of  Heaven.  Men  will  on  the  contrary  be  prompt 
to  imitate  you  and  practise  evil.     Become  not  like 

1  This  can  only  be  understood  of  Wan's  succeeding  to  his  father 
as  duke  of  Kzm  and  chief  of  the  West  in  b.c.  1185.  He  died 
in  1 135,  leaving  it  to  his  son  Wu  to  overthrow  the  dynasty  of 
Shang. 


204  THE    SHti    KING.  part  v. 

Shau  the  king  of  Yin,  who  went  quite  astray,  and 
became  abandoned  to  drunkenness/ 

5.  The  duke  of  .ATau  said,  *  Oh !  I  have  heard 
it  said  that,  in  the  case  of  the  ancients,  (their 
ministers)  warned  and  admonished  them,  protected 
and  loved  them,  taught  and  instructed  them ;  and 
among  the  people  there  was  hardly  one  who  would 
impose  on  them  by  extravagant  language  or  de- 
ceiving tricks.  If  you  will  not  listen  to  this  (and 
profit  by  it),  your  ministers  will  imitate  you,  and 
so  the  correct  laws  of  the  former  kings,  both  small 
and  great,  will  be  changed  and  disordered.  The 
people,  blaming  you,  will  disobey  and  rebel  in 
their  hearts ;  —  yea,  they  will  curse  you  with  their 
mouths/ 

6.  The  duke  of  K&u  said,  '  Oh !  those  kings  of 
Yin, — Aung  3ung,  Kao  3ung,  and  3u-/£ia,  with  king 
Wan  of  our  ATau, — these  four  men  carried  their 
knowledge  into  practice.  If  it  was  told  them,  "  The 
lower  people  murmur  against  you  and  revile  you," 
then  they  paid  great  and  reverent  attention  to  their 
conduct ;  and  with  reference  to  the  faults  imputed 
to  them  they  said,  "  Our  faults  are  really  so,"  thus 
not  simply  shrinking  from  the  cherishing  of  anger. 
If  you  will  not  listen  to  this  (and  profit  by  it),  when 
men  with  extravagant  language  and  deceptive  tricks 
say  to  you,  "  The  lower  people  are  murmuring 
against  you  and  reviling  you/'  you  will  believe  them. 
Doing  this,  you  will  not  be  always  thinking  of  your 
princely  duties,  and  will  not  cultivate  a  large  and 
generous  heart.  You  will  confusedly  punish  the 
guiltless,  and  put  the  innocent  to  death.  There 
will  be  a  general  murmuring,  which  will  be  con- 
centrated upon  your  person/ 


BOOK  XVI.  THE    PRINCE    SHIH.  205 

7.  The  duke  of  iTau  said,  '  Oh  !  let  the  king,  who 
has  succeeded  to  the  throne,  make  a  study  of  these 
things/ 


Book  XVI.     The  Prince  Shih. 

The  words  '  Prince  Shih '  occur  at  the  commencement  of  the 
Book,  and  are  taken  as  its  title.  Shih  was  the  name  of  the 
duke  of  Shao,  the  author  of  Book  xii.  To  him  the  address 
or  announcement  here  preserved  was  delivered,  and  his  name  is 
not  an  inappropriate  tide  for  it. 

The  common  view  of  Chinese  critics  is  that  the  duke  of  Shao  had 
announced  his  purpose  to  withdraw  from  office  on  account  of 
his  age,  when  the  duke  of  iTau  persuaded  him  to  remain  at  his 
post,  and  that  the  reasons  which  he  set  before  him  were  recorded 
in  this  Book.  It  may  have  been  so,  but  the  language  is  far 
from  clearly  indicating  it.  A  few  expressions,  indeed,  may  be 
taken  as  intimating  a  wish  that  Shih  should  continue  at  court, 
but  some  violence  has  to  be  put  upon  them. 

1  have  divided  the  whole  into  four  chapters,  but  the  two  principal 
ideas  in  the  address  are  these : — that  the  favour  of  Heaven  can 
be  permanently  secured  for  a  dynasty  only  by  the  virtue  of  its 
sovereigns;  and  that  that  virtue  is  secured  mainly  by  the  counsels 
and  help  of  virtuous  ministers.  The  ablest  sovereigns  of  Shang 
are  mentioned,  and  the  ministers  by  whose  aid  it  was,  in  a  great 
measure,  that  they  became  what  they  were.  The  cases  of  Wan 
and  Wu  of  their  own  dynasty,  similarly  aided  by  able  men,  are 
adduced  in  the  same  way;  and  the  speaker  adverts  to  the  ser- 
vices which  they — the  two  dukes — had  already  rendered  to  their 
sovereign,  and  insists  that  they  must  go  on  to  the  end,  and 
accomplish  still  greater  things. 

i.  The  duke  of  Tsfau  spoke  to  the  following 
effect : — '  Prince  Shih,  Heaven,  unpitying,  sent 
down  ruin  on  Yin.  Yin  has  lost  its  appointment 
(to  the  throne),  which  our  House  of  K§&  has  re- 
ceived.    I  do  not  dare,  however,  to  say,  as  if  I  knew 


206  THE    SH#    KING.  PART  v. 

it,  "  The  foundation  will  ever  truly  abide  in  pros- 
perity. If  Heaven  aid  sincerity," — *.*  Nor  do 
I  dare  to  say,  as  if  I  knew  it,  "  The  end  will  issue  in 
our  misfortunes."  Oh  !  you  have  said,  O  prince,  "  It 
depends  on  ourselves/'  I  also  do  not  dare  to  rest 
in  the  favour  of  God,  not  forecasting  at  a  distance 
the  terrors  of  Heaven  in  the  present  time,  when 
there  is  no  murmuring  or  disobedience  among  the 
people ;  *  —  (the  issue)  is  with  men.  Should  our 
present  successor  to  his  fathers  prove  greatly  unable 
to  reverence  (Heaven)  above  and  (the  people)  below, 
and  so  bring  to  an  end  the  glory  of  his  predecessors, 
could  we  in  (the  retirement  of)  our  families  be 
ignorant  of  it  ?  The  favour  of  Heaven  is  not  easily 
preserved ;  Heaven  is  difficult  to  be  depended  on. 
Men  lose  its  favouring  appointment,  because  they 
cannot  pursue  and  carry  out  the  reverence  and 
brilliant  virtue  of  their  forefathers.*  Now  I,  Tan, 
the  little  child,  am  not  able  to  make  (the  king) 
correct.  I  would  simply  conduct  him  to  the  glory  of 
his  fathers,  and  make  him,  who  is  my  young  charge, 
partaker  of  that.'  He  also  said,  '  Heaven  is  not  to 
be  trusted.  Our  course  is  only  to  seek  the  pro- 
longation of  the  virtue  of  the  Tranquillizing  king, 
that  Heaven  may  not  find  occasion  to  remove  its 
favouring  decree  which  king  Wan  received/* 

2.  The  duke  said,  *  Prince  Shih,  I  have  heard 
that  aforetime,  when  Thang  the  Successful  had 
received  the  appointment  (to  the  throne),  he  had 
with  him  1  Yin,  making  (his  virtue)  like  that  of 
great    Heaven;*    that    Th&i   Kia.   had    (the  same 

1  The  text  is  here  defective ;  or  perhaps  the  speaker  purposely 
left  his  meaning  only  half  expressed. 


BOOK  XVI.  THE    PRINCE    SHIH.  207 

1  Yin),  the  P4o-hang 1 ;  that  Thai-wfi 2  had  t 
A"ih2  and  jOan  Hu2,  through  whom  (his  virtue) 
was  made  to  affect  God,*  and  Wu  Hsien 3  who 
regulated  the  royal  House;  that  3u-yi3  had  Wu 
Hsien's  son;  and  that  Wu-ting  had  Kan  Phan4. 
(These  ministers)  carried  out  (their  principles),  and 
displayed  (their  merit),  preserving  and  regulating 
the  dynasty  of  Yin,  so  that,  while  its  ceremonies 
lasted,  (those  sovereigns),  when  deceased,  were  as- 
sessors to  Heaven  5,*  and  its  duration  extended  over 
many  years.  Heaven  thus  determinately  maintained 
its  favouring  appointment,  and  Shang  was  replen- 
ished with  men.  The  various  heads  of  great  sur- 
names and  members  of  the  royal  House,  holding 
employments,  all  held  fast  their  virtue,  and  showed 
an  anxious  solicitude  (for  the  kingdom).  The  smaller 
ministers,  and  the  guardian  princes  in  the  Hau  and 
Tien  domains,  hurried  about  on  their  services.  Thus 
did  they  all  exert  their  virtue  and  aid  their  sove- 
reign, so  that  whatever  affairs  he,  the  One  man, 
had  in  hand,  throughout  the  land,  an  entire  faith 
was  reposed  in  their  justice  as  in  the  indications  of 
the  shell  or  the  divining  stalks/  * 

The  duke  said, '  Prince  Shih,  Heaven  gives  length 
of  days  to  the  just  and  the  intelligent;  (it  was  thus 

1  See  Part  IV,  v,  sect,  i,  ch.  i,  where  I  Yin  is  called  A-hang, 
nearly = Pao-hang. 

2  Thai-wu  is  the  ^ung  3ung  °f  ^ast  Book.  I  J^ih  would  be  a 
son  or  grandson  of  1  Yin.  Of  .Oan  Hu  we  know  only  what  is 
stated  here. 

3  3u-yi  was  the  eleventh  Yin  sovereign,  reigning  b.  c.  i 525-1 507. 
We  know  of  Wu  Hsien  only  that  he  was  3u-y^s  minister. 

4  See  Part  IV,  viii,  sect.  3,  ch.  1. 

5  That  is,  they  were  associated  with  Heaven  in  the  sacrifices 
to  it. 


208  THE   SH6    KING. 


PART  V. 


that  those  ministers)  maintained  and  regulated  the 
dynasty  of  Yin.*  He  who  came  last  to  the  throne 
granted  by  Heaven  was  extinguished  by  its  terrors. 
Do  you  think  of  the  distant  future,  and  we  shall 
have  the  decree  (in  favour  of  Aau)  made  sure,  and 
its  good  government  will  be  brilliantly  exhibited  in 
our  newly -founded  state/ 

3.  The  duke  said,  '  Prince  Shih,  aforetime  when 
God  was  inflicting  calamity  (on  Yin),  he  encouraged 
anew  the  virtue  of  the  Tranquillizing  king,  till  at 
last  the  great  favouring  decree  was  concentrated  in 
his  person.  (But)  that  king  Wan  was  able  to  con- 
ciliate and  unite  the  portion  of  the  great  kingdom 
which  we  came  to  possess,  was  owing  to  his  having 
(such  ministers)  as  his  brother  of  Kwo,  Hung  Yio, 
San  1-shang,  Thai  Tien,  and  Nan-kung  Kwo/ 

He  said  further,  '  But  for  the  ability  of  those  men 
to  go  and  come  in  his  affairs,  developing  his  constant 
lessons,  there  would  have  been  no  benefits  descend- 
ing from  king  Wan  on  the  people.  And  it  also 
was  from  the  determinate  favour  of  Heaven  that 
there  were  these  men  of  firm  virtue,  and  acting  ac- 
cording to  their  knowledge  of  the  dread  majesty  of 
Heaven,  to  give  themselves  to  enlighten  king  Wan, 
and  lead  him  forward  to  his  high  distinction  and  uni- 
versal rule,  till  his  fame  reached  the  ears  of  God,  and 
he  received  the  appointment  that  had  been  Yin's.* 
There  were  still  four  of  those  men  who  led  on  king 
Wu  to  the  possession  of  the  revenues  of  the  king- 
dom, and  afterwards,  along  with  him,  in  great  reve- 
rence of  the  majesty  of  Heaven,  slew  all  his  enemies.* 
These  four  men,  moreover,  made  king  Wti  so  illus- 
trious that  his  glory  overspread  the  kingdom,  and 
(the  people)  universally  and  greatly  proclaimed  his 


BOOK  XVI.  THE    PRINCE    SHIH.  209 

virtue.  Now  with  me  Tan,  the  little  child,  it  is  as 
if  I  were  floating  on  a  great  stream; — with  you, 
O  Shih,  let  me  from  this  time  endeavour  to  cross 
it.  Our  young  sovereign  is  (powerless),  as  if  he 
had  not  yet  ascended  the  throne.  You  must  by 
no  means  lay  the  whole  burden  on  me  ;  and  if  you 
draw  yourself  up  without  an  effort  to  supply  my 
deficiencies,  no  good  will  flow  to  the  people  from 
our  age  and  experience.  We  shall  not  hear  the 
voices  of  the  phoenixes  \  and  how  much  less  can  it 
be  thought  that  we  shall  be  able  to  make  (the  kings 
virtue)  equal  (to  Heaven)  ! '  * 

The  duke  said,  '  Oh !  consider  well  these  things, 
O  prince.  We  have  received  the  appointment  to 
which  belongs  an  unlimited  amount  of  blessing,  but 
having  great  difficulties  attached  to  it.  What  I 
announce  to  you  are  counsels  of  a  generous  large- 
ness.— I  cannot  allow  the  successor  of  our  kings 
to  go  astray/ 

4.  The  duke  said,  '  The  former  king  laid  bare  his 
heart,  and  gave  full  charge  to  you,  constituting  you 
one  of  the  guides  and  patterns  for  the  people,  saying, 
"  Do  you  with  intelligence  and  energy  second  and 
help  the  king;  do  you  with  sincerity  support  and 
convey  forward  the  great  decree.  Think  of  the 
virtue  of  king  Wan,  and  enter  greatly  into  his 
boundless  anxieties." ' 

The  duke  said,  '  What  I  tell  you,  O  prince,  are 
my  sincere  thoughts.  O  Shih,  the  Grand- Protector, 
if  you  can  but  reverently  survey  with  me  the  decay 
and  great  disorders  of  Yin,  and  thence  consider  the 


1  As  a  token  of  the  goodness  of  the  government  and  the  general 
prosperity.     See  Part  II,  iv,  ch.  3. 


2IO  THE    SHU    KING.  PART  v. 

dread  majesty  of  Heaven  (which  warns)  us ! — Am 
I  not  to  be  believed  that  I  must  reiterate  my  words  ? 
I  simply  say,  "  The  establishment  (of  our  dynasty) 
rests  with  us  two."  Do  you  agree  with  me  ?  Then 
you  (also)  will  say,  "It  rests  with  us  two/'  And 
the  favour  of  Heaven  has  come  to  us  so  largely  : — 
it  should  be  ours  to  feel  as  if  we  could  not  suf- 
ficiently respond  to  it.  If  you  can  but  reverently 
cultivate  your  virtue  (now),  and  bring  to  light  our 
men  of  eminent  ability,  then  when  you  resign  (your 
position)  to  some  successor  in  a  time  of  established 
security,  (I  will  interpose  no  objection.) 

'  Oh  !  it  is  by  the  earnest  service  of  us  two  that 
we  have  come  to  the  prosperity  of  the  present  day. 
We  must  both  go  on,  abjuring  all  idleness,  to  com- 
plete the  work  of  king  Wan,  till  it  has  grandly 
overspread  the  kingdom,  and  from  the  corners  of  the 
sea,  and  the  sunrising,  there  shall  not  be  one  who  is 
disobedient  to  the  rule  (of  Aau)/ 

The  duke  said,  '  O  prince,  have  I  not  spoken  in 
accordance  with  reason  in  these  many  declarations  ? 
I  am  only  influenced  by  anxiety  about  (the  appoint- 
ment of)  Heaven,  and  about  the  people/ 

The  duke  said,  '  Oh !  you  know,  O  prince,  the 
ways  of  the  people,  how  at  the  beginning  they  can 
be  (all  we  could  desire) ;  but  it  is  the  end  (that  is 
to  be  thought  of).  Act  in  careful  accordance  with 
this  fact.  Go  and  reverently  exercise  the  duties  of 
your  office/ 


BOOK  XVII.       THE    CHARGE    TO   J5TUNG    OF    ShAi.  211 


Book  XVII.     The  Charge  to  Zung  of  3hai. 

3hai  was  the  name  of  the  small  state  or  territory,  which  had  been 
conferred  on  Tu,  the  next  younger  brother  of  the  duke  of  Khi. 
The  name  still  remains  in  the  district  of  Shang-^hai,  depart- 
ment Zu-ning,  Ho-nan.  Tu  was  deprived  of  his  state  because 
of  his  complicity  in  the  rebellion  of  Wu-^ang;  but  it  was 
subsequently  restored  to  his  son  Hu  by  this  charge.  Hu  is 
here  called  .ATung,  that  term  simply  denoting  his  place  in  the 
roll  of  his  brothers  or  cousins.  King  .Oang  and  Hu  were 
cousins, — '  brothers '  according  to  Chinese  usage  of  terms,  and 
Hu  being  the  younger  of  the  two,  was  called  3Mi  J£ung,  '  the 
second  or  younger  brother, — of  3hai.' 

The  Book  consists  of  two  chapters.  The  former  is  of  the  nature 
of  a  preface,  giving  the  details  necessary  to  explain  the  ap- 
pointment of  Hu.  The  second  contains  the  king's  charge, 
delivered  in  his  name  by  the  duke  of  i£au,  directing  Hu  how 
to  conduct  himself,  so  that  he  might  blot  out  the  memory  of  his 
father's  misdeeds,  and  win  the  praise  of  the  king. 

i.  When  the  duke  of  K&u  was  in  the  place  of 
prime  minister  and  directed  all  the  officers,  the 
(kings)  uncles  spread  abroad  an  (evil)  report,  in 
consequence  of  which  (the  duke)  put  to  death  the 
prince  of  Kwan  in  Shang l ;  confined  the  prince  of 
3hai  in  Kwo-lin 2,  with  an  attendance  of  seven 
chariots;  and  reduced  the  prince  of  H wo3  to  be  a 
private  man,  causing  his  name  to  be  erased  from 
the  registers  for  three  years.     The  son  of  the  prince 

1  The  prince  of  Kwan — corresponding  to  the  present  Kh2ca% 
^Tau,  department  Khai-fang,  Ho-nan — was  the  third  of  the  sons 
of  king  Wan,  and  older  than  the  duke  of  ^au.  The  Shang  where 
he  was  put  to  death  was  probably  what  had  been  the  capital  of 
the  Shang  kings. 

2  We  do  not  know  where  Kwo-lin  was. 

3  The  name  of  Hwo  remains  in  Hwo  ^Tau,  department  Phing- 
yang,  Shan-hsf.  The  prince  of  Hwo  was  the  eighth  of  Wan's 
sons. 

P  2 


212  THE    Snfi    KING. 


PART    V. 


of  3hai  having  displayed  a  reverent  virtue,  the  duke 
of  i£au  made  him  a  high  minister,  and  when  his 
father  died,  requested  a  decree  from  the  king,  in- 
vesting him  with  the  country  of  3hai. 

2.  '  The  king  speaks  to  this  effect : — "  My  little 
child,  Hu,  you  follow  the  virtue  (of  our  ancestors), 
and  have  changed  from  the  conduct  (of  your  father) ; 
you  are  able  to  take  heed  to  your  ways ; — I  there- 
fore appoint  you  to  be  a  marquis  in  the  east.  Go 
to  your  fief,  and  be  reverent ! 

"  In  order  that  you  may  cover  the  faults  of  your 
father,  be  loyal,  be  filial l.  Urge  on  your  steps  in 
your  own  way,  diligent  and  never  idle,  and  so  shall 
you  hand  down  an  example  to  your  descendants. 
Follow  the  constant  lessons  of  your  grandfather 
king  Wan,  and  be  not,  like  your  father,  disobedient 
to  the  royal  orders. 

"  Great  Heaven  has  no  partial  affections; — it  helps 
only  the  virtuous.*  The  people's  hearts  have  no 
unchanging  attachment; — they  cherish  only  the  kind. 
Acts  of  goodness  are  different,  but  they  contribute 
in  common  to  good  order.  Acts  of  evil  are  different, 
but  they  contribute  in  common  to  disorder.  Be 
cautious ! 

"  In  giving  heed  to  the  beginning  think  of  the 
end; — the  end  will  then  be  without  distress.  If  you 
do  not  think  of  the  end,  it  will  be  full  of  distress, 
even  of  the  greatest. 

"  Exert  yourself  to  achieve  your  proper  merit. 
Seek  to  be   in  harmony  with  all  your  neighbours. 

1  Hu  s  father  had  not  been  filial.  When  he  is  told  to  be  filial, 
there  underlies  the  words  the  idea  of  the  solidarity  of  the  family. 
His  copying  the  example  of  his  grandfather  would  be  the  best 
service  he  could  render  to  his  father. 


BOOK  xviii.  THE    NUMEROUS    REGIONS.  21 3 

Be  a  fence  to  the  royal  House.  Live  in  amity 
with  your  brethren.  Tranquillize  and  help  the 
lower  people. 

"  Follow  the  course  of  the  Mean,  and  do  not  by 
aiming  to  be  intelligent  throw  old  statutes  into 
confusion.  Watch  over  what  you  see  and  hear,  and 
do  not  for  one-sided  words  deviate  from  the  right 
rule.    Then  I,  the  One  man,  will  praise  you." 

'  The  king  says,  "  Oh !  my  little  child,  Hfi,  go, 
and  do  not  idly  throw  away  my  charge." ' 


Book  XVIII.     The  Numerous  Regions. 

The  king  has  returned  to  his  capital  in  triumph,  having  put  down 
rebellion  in  the  east,  and  specially  extinguished  the  state  or 
tribe  of  Yen.  The  third  chapter  of  Book  xiv  contained  a 
reference  to  an  expedition  against  Yen.  Critics  are  divided 
on  the  point  of  whether  the  expedition  mentioned  in  this  Book 
was  the  same  as  that,  or  another;  and  our  sources  of  information 
are  not  sufficient  to  enable  us  to  pronounce  positively  in  the 
case.  If  we  may  credit  what  Mencius  says,  the  Records  of 
the  Shu  do  not  tell  us  a  tithe  of  the  wars  carried  on  by  the 
duke  of  iTau  to  establish  the  new  dynasty  : — '  He  smote  Yen, 
and  after  three  years  put  its  ruler  to  death.  He  drove  Fei-lien 
to  a  corner  by  the  sea,  and  slew  him.  The  states  which  he 
extinguished  amounted  to  fifty '  (Mencius,  III,  ii,  ch.  9). 

However  this  point  be  settled,  on  the  occasion  when  the  announce- 
ment in  this  Book  was  delivered,  a  great  assembly  of  princes 
and  nobles — the  old  officers  of  Yin  or  Shang,  and  chiefs 
from  many  regions — was  met  together.  They  are  all  supposed 
to  have  been  secretly,  if  not  openly,  in  sympathy  with  the 
rebellion  which  has  been  trampled  out,  and  to  grudge  to  yield 
submission  to  the  rule  of  If&u.  The  king,  by  the  duke  of  iTau, 
reasons  and  expostulates  with  them.  He  insists  on  the  leniency 
with  which  they  had  been  treated  in  the  past;  and  whereas 
they  might  be  saying  that  iTau's  overthrow  of  the  Yin  dynasty 
was  a  usurpation,  he  shows  that  it  was  from  the  will  of  Heaven. 


214  THE   SHtj   KING. 


PART  V. 


The  history  of  the  nation  is  then  reviewed,  and  it  is  made  to 
appear  that  king  Wu  had  displaced  the  kings  of  Yin  or  Shang, 
just  as  Thang,  the  founder  of  the  Shang  dynasty,  had  displaced 
those  of  Hsia.  It  was  their  duty  therefore  to  submit  to  isfau. 
If  they  did  not  avail  themselves  of  its  leniency,  they  should  be 
dealt  with  in  another  way. 
Having  thus  spoken,  the  duke  turns,  in  the  fourth  of  the  five 
chapters  into  which  I  have  divided  the  Book,  and  addresses 
the  many  officers  of  the  states,  and  especially  those  of  Yin,  who 
had  been  removed  to  Lo,  speaking  to  them,  as  '  the  Numerous 
Officers/  after  the  style  of  Book  xiv.  Finally,  he  admonishes 
them  all  that  it  is  time  to  begin  a  new  course.  If  they  do  well, 
it  will  be  well  with  them ;  if  they  continue  perverse,  they  will 
have  to  blame  themselves  for  the  consequences. 

I.  In  the  fifth  month,  on  the  clay  Ting-hai,  the 
king  arrived  from  Yen,  and  came  to  (Hao),  the 
honoured  (capital  of)  A^au.  The  duke  of.Aau  said, 
'  The  king  speaks  to  the  following  effect:  "  Ho!  I 
make  an  announcement  to  you  of  the  four  states, 
and  the  numerous  (other)  regions.  Ye  who  were  the 
officers  and  people  of  the  prince  of  Yin,  I  have  dealt 
very  leniently  as  regards  your  lives,  as  ye  all  know. 
You  kept  reckoning  greatly  on  (some)  decree  of 
Heaven,  and  did  not  keep  with  perpetual  awe 
before  your  thoughts  (the  preservation  of)  your 
sacrifices1.* 

'  "  God  sent  down  correction  on  Hsia,  but  the 
sovereign  (only)  increased  his  luxury  and  sloth,  and 
would  not  speak  kindly  to  the  people.  He  showed 
himself  dissolute  and  dark,  and  would  not  yield 
for  a  single  day  to  the  leadings  of  God : — this  is 
what  you  have  heard/*     He  kept  reckoning  on  the 

1  The  extinction  of  the  sacrifices  of  a  state  was  its  utter  over- 
throw. None  were  left — or  if  some  might  be  left,  none  of  them 
were  permitted — to  continue  the  sacrifices  to  its  founder  and  his 
descendants. 


book  xviii.  THE   NUMEROUS    REGIONS.  215 

decree  of  God  (in  his  favour),  and  did  not  cultivate 
the  means  for  the  people's  support*  By  great 
inflictions  of  punishment  also  he  increased  the  dis- 
order of  the  states  of  Hsia.  The  first  cause  (of  his 
evil  course)  was  the  internal  misrule  \  which  made 
him  unfit  to  deal  well  with  the  multitudes.  Nor  did 
he  endeavour  to  find  and  employ  men  whom  he  could 
respect,  and  who  might  display  a  generous  kindness 
to  the  people  ;  but  where  any  of  the  people  of  Hsia 
were  covetous  and  fierce,  he  daily  honoured  them, 
and  they  practised  cruel  tortures  in  the  cities, 
Heaven  on  this  sought  a  (true)  lord  for  the  people, 
and  made  its  distinguished  and  favouring  decree 
light  on  Thang  the  Successful,  who  punished  and 
destroyed  the  sovereign  of  Hsia.*  Heavens  refusal 
of  its  favour  (to  Hsia)  was  decided.  The  righteous 
men  of  your  numerous  regions  were  not  permitted 
to  continue  long  in  their  posts  of  enjoyment,  and 
the  many  officers  whom  Hsias  (last  sovereign) 
honoured  were  unable  intelligently  to  maintain  the 
people  in  the  enjoyment  (of  their  lives),  but,  on  the 
contrary,  aided  one  another  in  oppressing  them,  till 
of  the  hundred  ways  of  securing  (prosperity)  they 
could  not  promote  (one). 

'"  In  the  case  indeed  of  Thang  the  Successful,  it 
was  because  he  was  the  choice  of  your  numerous 
regions  that  he  superseded  Hsia,  and  became  the 
lord  of  the  people.  He  paid  careful  attention  to  the 
essential  virtue  (of  a  sovereign) 2,  in  order  to  stimu- 
late the  people,  and  they  on  their  part  imitated  him 


1  The  vile  debaucheries  of  which  iTieh  was  guilty  through  his 
connexion  with  the  notorious  Mei-hsi. 

2  That  is,  to  benevolence  or  the  love  of  the  people. 


2l6  THE   SHIJ   KING. 


PART  V. 


and  were  stimulated.  From  him  down  to  Tl-yi, 
the  sovereigns  all  made  their  virtue  illustrious,  and 
were  cautious  in  the  use  of  punishments  ; — thus  also 
exercising  a  stimulating  influence  (over  the  people). 
When  they,  having  examined  the  evidence  in 
criminal  cases,  put  to  death  those  chargeable  with 
many  crimes,  they  exercised  the  same  influence ; 
and  they  did  so  also  when  they  liberated  those  who 
were  not  purposely  guilty.  But  when  the  throne 
came  to  your  (last)  sovereign,  he  could  not  with  (the 
good  will  of)  your  numerous  regions  continue  in  the 
enjoyment  of  the  favouring  decree  of  Heaven."  '  * 

2.  '  Oh  !  the  king  speaks  to  the  following  effect : — 
"  I  announce  and  declare  to  you  of  the  numerous 
regions,  that  Heaven  had  no  set  purpose  to  do  away 
with  the  sovereign  of  Hsia  or  with  the  sovereign  of 
Yin.  But  it  was  the  case  that  your  (last)  ruler, 
being  in  possession  of  your  "numerous  regions, 
abandoned  himself  to  great  excess,  and  reckoned 
on  the  favouring  decree  of  Heaven,  making  trifling 
excuses  for  his  conduct.  And  so  in  the  case  of  the 
(last)  sovereign  of  Hsia  ;  his  plans  of  government 
were  not  of  a  tendency  to  secure  his  enjoyment  (of 
the  kingdom),  and  Heaven  sent  down  ruin  on  him, 
and  the  chief  of  the  territory  (of  Shang)  put  an 
end  (to  the  line  of  Hsia).  In  truth,  the  last  sove- 
reign of  your  Shang  was  luxurious  to  the  extreme 
of  luxury,  while  his  plans  of  government  showed 
neither  purity  nor  progress,  and  thus  Heaven  sent 
down  such  ruin  on  him  \* 

1  There  must  have  been  something  remarkable  in  the  closing 
period  of  .^au-hsin's  history,  to  which  the  duke  alludes  in  the 
subsequent  specification  of  five  years.  We  do  not  know  the 
events  of  the  times  sufficiently  to  say  what  it  was. 


BOOK  xviii.  THE   NUMEROUS    REGIONS.  21 7 

1 "  The  wise,  through  not  thinking,  become  foolish, 
and  the  foolish,  by  thinking,  become  wise.  Heaven 
for  five  years  waited  kindly,  and  forbore  with  the 
descendant  (of  Thang),  to  see  if  he  would  indeed 
prove  himself  the  ruler  of  the  people  ;  but  there  was 
nothing  in  him  deserving  to  be  regarded.  Heaven 
then  sought  among  your  numerous  regions,  making 
a  great  impression  by  its  terrors  to  stir  up  some  one 
who  would  look  (reverently)  to  it,  but  in  all  your 
regions  there  was  not  one  deserving  of  its  favouring 
regard.  But  there  were  the  kings  of  our  i£au,  who 
treated  well  the  multitudes  of  the  people,  and  were 
able  to  sustain  the  burden  of  virtuous  (government). 
They  could  preside  over  (all  services  to)  spirits  and 
to  Heaven.*  Heaven  thereupon  instructed  us,  and 
increased  our  excellence,  made  choice  of  us,  and  gave 
us  the  decree  of  Yin,  to  rule  over  your  numerous 
regions." '  * 

3.  '  "Why  do  I  now  presume  to  make  (these)  many 
declarations  ?  I  have  dealt  very  leniently  as  regards 
the  lives  of  you,  the  people  of  these  four  states. 
Why  do  you  not  show  a  sincere  and  generous  obedi- 
ence in  your  numerous  regions  ?  Why  do  you  not 
aid  and  co-operate  with  the  kings  of  our  A"au,  to 
secure  the  enjoyment  of  Heavens  favouring  decree? 
You  now  still  dwell  in  your  dwellings,  and  cultivate 
your  fields ; — why  do  you  not  obey  our  kings,  and 
consolidate  the  decree  of  Heaven  ?  The  paths 
which  you  tread  are  continually  those  of  disquietude  ; 
— have  you  in  your  hearts  no  love  for  yourselves  ? 
do  you  refuse  so  greatly  to  acquiesce  in  the  ordi- 
nance of  Heaven  ?  do  you  triflingly  reject  that 
decree  ?  do  you  of  yourselves  pursue  unlawful 
courses,  scheming  (by  your  alleged  reasons)  for  the 


2l8  THE    Sllti    KING.  PART  V. 

approval  of  upright  men  ?  I  simply  instructed  you, 
and  published  my  announcement *  ;  with  trembling 
awe  I  secured  and  confined  (the  chief  criminals)  : — 
I  have  done  so  twice  and  for  three  times.  But  if 
you  do  not  take  advantage  of  the  leniency  with 
which  I  have  spared  your  lives,  I  will  proceed  to 
severe  punishments,  and  put  you  to  death.  It  is 
not  that  we,  the  sovereigns  of  iTau,  hold  it  virtuous 
to  make  you  untranquil,  but  it  is  you  yourselves 
who  accelerate  your  crimes  (and  sufferings). "  ' 

4.  'The  king  says,  "  Oh !  ho  !  I  tell  you,  ye  many 
officers  of  the  various  regions,  and  you,  ye  many 
officers  of  Yin,  now  have  ye  been  hurrying  about, 
doing  service  to  my  overseers  for  five  years.  There 
are  among  you  the  inferior  assistants,  the  chiefs,  and 
the  numerous  directors,  small  and  great ; — see  that  ye 
all  attain  to  the  discharge  of  your  duties.  Want  of 
harmony  (in  the  life)  rises  from  (the  want  of  it  in) 
one's  (inner)  self ; — strive  to  be  harmonious.  Want 
of  concord  in  your  families  (arises  from  the  want 
of  it  in  your  conduct) ; — strive  to  be  harmonious. 
When  intelligence  rules  in  your  cities,  then  will  you 
be  proved  to  be  attentive  to  your  duties.  Do  not 
be  afraid,  I  pray  you,  of  the  evil  ways  (of  the 
people) ;  and  moreover,  by  occupying  your  offices 
with  a  reverent  harmony,  you  will  find  it  possible  to 
select  from  your  cities  individuals  on  whose  assist- 
ance you  can  calculate.  You  may  thus  long  con- 
tinue in  this  city  of  Lo2,  cultivating  your  fields. 
Heaven  will  favour  and  compassionate  you,  and  we, 

1  Referring  probably  to  'the  Great  Announcement '  in  Bookvii. 

2  It  would  almost  seem  from  this  that  the  announcement  was 
made  in  Lo ;  and  some  critics  have  argued  that  Lo  was  '  the 
honoured  capital '  in  the  first  sentence. 


BOOK  XIX.       THE  ESTABLISHMENT  OF  GOVERNMENT.        2ig 

the  sovereigns  of  Aau,  will  greatly  help  you,  and 
confer  rewards,  selecting  you  to  stand  in  our  royal 
court.  Only  be  attentive  to  your  duties,  and  you 
may  rank  among  our  great  officers.', 

'  The  king  says,  "  Oh  !  ye  numerous  officers,  if 
you  cannot  exhort  one  another  to  pay  a  sincere 
regard  to  my  charges,  it  will  further  show  that  you 
are  unable  to  honour  your  sovereign  ;  and  all  the 
people  will  (also)  say,  '  We  will  not  honour  him/ 
Thus  will  ye  be  proved  slothful  and  perverse, 
greatly  disobedient  to  the  royal  charges.  Through- 
out your  numerous  regions  you  will  bring  on  your- 
selves the  terrors  of  Heaven,  and  I  will  then  inflict 
on  you  its  punishments,  removing  you  far  from  your 
country."  ' 

5.  '  The  king  says,  "  I  do  not  (wish  to)  make 
these  many  declarations,  but  it  is  in  a  spirit  of  awe 
that  I  lay  my  commands  before  you."  He  further 
says,  "  You  may  now  make  a  (new)  beginning.  If 
you  cannot  reverently  realize  the  harmony  (which  I 
enjoin),  do  not  (hereafter)  murmur  against  me." ' 


Book  XIX.     The  Establishment  of  Government. 

The  phrase,  'the  Establishment  of  Government/  occurs  several 
times  in  the  course  of  the  Book,  and  is  thence  taken  to  de- 
nominate it, — appropriately  enough.  The  subject  treated  of 
throughout,  is  how  good  government  may  be  established. 

Some  Chinese  critics  maintain  that  the  text  as  it  stands  is  very 
confused,  'head  and  tail  in  disorder,  and  without  connexion/ 
and  various  re-arrangements  of  it  have  been  proposed,  for 
which,  however,  there  is  no  manuscript  authority.  Keeping 
to  the  received  text,  and  dividing  it  into  six  chapters,  we  may 
adopt  a  summary  of  its  contents  approved  by  the  editors  of 
the  Shu,  which  was  published  in  the  Yung-^ang  reign  of  the 


2  20  THE    SHU    KING.  PART  V. 

present  dynasty. — In  government  there  is  nothing  more  im- 
portant than  the  employment  of  proper  men;  and  when  such 
men  are  being  sought,  the  first  care  should  be  for  those  to 
occupy  the  three  highest  positions.  When  these  are  properly 
filled,  all  the  other  offices  will  get  their  right  men,  and  royal 
government  will  be  established.  The  appointment  of  the  officers 
of  business,  of  pastoral  oversight,  and  of  the  law,  is  the  great 
theme  of  the  whole  Book,  and  the  concluding  words  of  chapter  i 
are  its  pulse, — may  be  felt  throbbing  everywhere  in  all  the  senti- 
ments. Chapters  2  and  3  illustrate  the  subject  from  the  history 
of  the  dynasties  of  Hsia  and  Shang;  and  in  chapter  4  it  is 
shown  how  kings  Wan  and  Wu  selected  their  officers,  and 
initiated  the  happy  state  which  was  still  continuing.  In  chapter  5 
there  is  set  forth  the  duty  of  the  king  to  put  away  from  him 
men  of  artful  tongues;  to  employ  the  good,  distinguished  by 
their  habits  of  virtue ;  to  be  always  well  prepared  for  war ;  and 
to  be  very  careful  of  his  conduct  in  the  matter  of  litigations. 
Chapter  6  seems  to  have  hardly  any  connexion  with  the  rest 
of  the  Book,  and  is  probably  a  fragment  of  one  of  the  lost 
Books  of  the  Shu,  that  has  got  tacked  on  to  this. 
The  Book  belongs  to  the  class  of '  Instructions/  and  was  made, 
I  suppose,  after  the  duke  of  K2&  had  retired  from  his  regency. 

I.  The  duke  of  Aau  spoke  to  the  following 
effect : — '  With  our  hands  to  our  heads  and  our 
heads  to  the  ground,  we  make  our  declarations  to 
the  Son  of  Heaven,  the  king  who  has  inherited  the 
throne/  In  such  manner  accordingly  all  (the  other 
ministers)  cautioned  the  king,  saying,  '  In  close 
attendance  on  your  majesty  there  are  the  regular 
presidents1,  the  regular  ministers2,  and  the  officers 
of  justice  ; — the  keepers  of  the  robes  (also),  and  the 
guards/  The  duke  of  Aau  said,  '  Oh !  admirable 
are  these  (officers).  Few,  however,  know  to  be 
sufficiently  anxious  about  them/ 

1  We  must  understand  by  these  the  chiefs  or  presidents  who 
had  a  certain  jurisdiction  over  several  states  and  their  princes. 

2  The  high  ministers  of  Instruction,  War,  Works,  &c. 


BOOK  xix.       THE  ESTABLISHMENT  OF  GOVERNMENT.       221 

2.  '  Among  the  ancients  who  exemplified  (this 
anxiety)  there  was  the  founder  of  the  Hsia  dynasty. 
When  his  House  was  in  its  greatest  strength,  he 
sought  for  able  men  who  should  honour  God  (in  the 
discharge  of  their  duties).*  (His  advisers),  when 
they  knew  of  men  thoroughly  proved  and  trust- 
worthy in  the  practice  of  the  nine  virtues  \  would 
then  presume  to  inform  and  instruct  their  sovereign, 
saying,  "  With  our  hands  to  our  heads  and  our 
heads  to  the  ground,  O  sovereign,  we  would  say, 
Let  (such  an  one)  occupy  one  of  your  high  offices : 
Let  (such  an  one)  be  one  of  your  pastors  :  Let 
(such  an  one)  be  one  of  your  officers  of  justice. 
By  such  appointments  you  will  fulfil  your  duty  as 
sovereign.  If  you  judge  by  the  face  only,  and 
therefrom  deem  men  well  schooled  in  virtue,  and 
appoint  them,  then  those  three  positions  will  all 
be  occupied  by  unrighteous  individuals."  The  way 
of  iTieh,  however,  was  not  to  observe  this  precedent. 
Those  whom  he  employed  were  cruel  men  ;• — and  he 
left  no  successor/ 

3.  'After  this  there  was  Thang  the  Successful, 
who,  rising  to  the  throne,  grandly  administered  the 
bright  ordinances  of  God.*  He  employed,  to  fill 
the  three  (high)  positions,  those  who  were  equal  to 
them ;  and  those  who  were  called  possessors  of  the 
three  kinds  of  ability2   would  display  that  ability. 

1  See  chapter  2  of  '  the  Counsels  of  Kao-yao '  in  Part  II. 

2  Some  suppose  that  men  are  intended  here  who  possessed 
'  the  three  virtues '  of  '  the  Great  Plan/  I  think  rather  that  men 
are  intended  who  had  talents  and  virtue  which  would  make  them 
eligible  to  the  three  highest  positions.  Thang  had  his  notice  fixed 
on  such  men,  and  was  prepared  to  call  them  to  office  at  the 
proper  time. 


22  2  THE    SH#    KING. 


PART   V. 


He  then  studied  them  severely,  and  greatly  imitated 
them,  making  the  utmost  of  them  in  their  three 
positions  and  with  their  three  kinds  of  ability.  The 
people  in  the  cities  of  Shang1  were  thereby  all 
brought  to  harmony,  and  those  in  the  four  quarters 
of  the  kingdom  were  brought  greatly  under  the 
influence  of  the  virtue  thus  displayed.  Oh !  when 
the  throne  came  to  Shau,  his  character  was  all 
violence.  He  preferred  men  of  severity,  and  who 
deemed  cruelty  a  virtue,  to  share  with  him  in  the 
government  of  his  states ;  and  at  the  same  time,  the 
host  of  his  associates,  men  who  counted  idleness  a 
virtue,  shared  the  offices  of  his  court.  God  then 
sovereignly  punished  him,  and  caused  us  to  possess 
the  great  land,  enjoy  the  favouring  decree  which 
Sh&u  had  (afore)  received,  and  govern  all  the  people 
in  their  myriad  realms/  * 

4.  '  Then  subsequently  there  were  king  Wan  and 
king  Wii,  who  knew  well  the  minds  of  those  whom 
they  put  in  the  three  positions,  and  saw  clearly  the 
minds  of  those  who  had  the  three  grades  of  ability. 
Thus  they  could  employ  them  to  serve  God  with 
reverence,  and  appointed  them  as  presidents  and 
chiefs  of  the  people.  In  establishing  their  govern- 
ment, the  three  things  which  principally  concerned 
them  were  to  find  the  men  for  (high)  offices,  the 
officers  of  justice,  and  the  pastors.  (They  had  also) 
the  guards  ;  the  keepers  of  the  robes  ;  their  equerries  ; 
their  heads  of  small  departments ;  their  personal 
attendants ;  their  various  overseers ;  and  their  trea- 
surers. They  had  their  governors  of  the  larger  and 
smaller  cities  assigned  in  the  royal  domain  to  the 


1  That  is,  within  the  royal  domain. 


BOOK  XIX.       THE  ESTABLISHMENT  OF  GOVERNMENT.       2  23 

nobles ;  their  men  of  arts x ;  their  overseers  whose 
offices  were  beyond  the  court ;  their  grand  historio- 
graphers ;  and  their  heads  of  departments  ; — all  good 
men  of  constant  virtue. 

'  (In  the  external  states)  there  were  the  Minister 
of  Instruction,  the  Minister  of  War,  and  the  Minister 
of  Works,  with  the  many  officers  subordinate  to  them. 
Among  the  wild  tribes,  such  as  the  Wei,  the  Lli, 
and  the  ATzang2,  in  the  three  Po,  and  at  the  danger- 
ous passes,  they  had  wardens. 

'  King  Wan  was  able  to  make  the  minds  of  those 
in  the  (three  high)  positions  his  own,  and  so  it  was 
that  he  established  those  regular  officers  and  super- 
intending pastors,  so  that  they  were  men  of  ability 
and  virtue.  He  would  not  appear  himself  in  the 
various  notifications,  in  litigations,  and  in  precau- 
tionary measures.  There  were  the  officers  and 
pastors  (to  attend  to  them),  whom  he  (simply) 
taught  to  be  obedient  (to  his  wishes),  and  not  to 
be  disobedient.  (Yea),  as  to  litigations  and  pre- 
cautionary measures,  he  (would  seem  as  if  he)  did 
not  presume  to  know  about  them.  He  was  followed 
by  king  Wu,  who  carried  out  his  work  of  settle- 
ment, and  did  not  presume  to  supersede  his  right- 
eous and  virtuous  men,  but  entered  into  his  plans, 
and  employed,  as  before,  those  men.  Thus  it  was 
that  they  unitedly  received  this  vast  inheritance/ 

1  All  who  employed  their  arts  in  the  service  of  the  government; — 
officers  of  prayer,  clerks,  archers,  charioteers,  doctors,  diviners,  and 
the  practisers  of  the  various  mechanical  arts,  &e. 

2  Compare  what  is  said  in  'the  Speech  at  Mu/  ch.  i.  The 
Kh%xig  are  not  mentioned  there.  It  would  seem  to  be  the 
name  of  a  wild  tribe.  The  three  Po  had  all  been  capitals  of  the 
Shang  kings,  and  their  people  required  the  special  attention  of 
the  sovereigns  of  JSTau. 


2  24  THE    SHft   KING.  PART  v. 

5.  '  Oh !  young  son,  the  king,  from  this  time  forth 
be  it  ours  to  establish  the  government,  appointing 
the  (high)  officers,  the  officers  of  the  laws,  and  the 
pastors ; — be  it  ours  clearly  to  know  what  courses 
are  natural  to  these  men,  and  then  fully  to  employ 
them  in  the  government,  that  they  may  aid  us 
in  the  management  of  the  people  whom  we  have 
received,  and  harmoniously  conduct  all  litigations 
and  precautionary  measures.  And  let  us  never 
allow  others  to  come  between  us  and  them.  (Yea), 
in  our  every  word  and  speech,  let  us  be  thinking 
of  (these)  officers  of  complete  virtue,  to  regulate 
the  people  that  we  have  received. 

'  Oh  !  I,  Tan,  have  received  these  excellent  words 
of  others1,  and  tell  them  all  to  you,  young  son,  the 
king.  From  this  time  forth,  O  accomplished  son 
(of  Wu),  accomplished  grandson  (of  Wan),  do  not 
err  in  regard  to  the  litigations  and  precautionary 
measures ;— let  the  proper  officers  manage  them. 
From  of  old  to  the  founder  of  Shang,  and  down- 
wards to  king  Wan  of  our  iTau,  in  establishing 
government,  when  they  appointed  (high)  officers, 
pastors,  and  officers  of  the  laws,  they  settled  them 
in  their  positions,  and  allowed  them  to  unfold  their 
talents ; — thus  giving  the  regulation  of  affairs  into 
their  hands.  In  the  kingdom,  never  has  there  been 
the  establishment  of  government  by  the  employment 
of  artful-tongued  men  ;  (with  such  men),  unlessoned 
in  virtue,  never  can  a  government  be  distinguished 
in  the  world.  From  this  time  forth,  in  establishing 
government,   make  no  use  of  artful-tongued    men, 

1  Probably  all  the  other  officers  or  ministers  referred  to  in  ch.  1. 
They  are  there  prepared  to  speak  their  views,  when  the  duke  of 
■ATau  takes  all  the  discoursing  on  himself. 


BOOK  XIX.      THE    ESTABLISHMENT    OF    GOVERNMENT.      225 

but  (seek  for)  good  officers,  and  get  them  to  use 
all  their  powers  in  aiding  the  government  of  our 
country.  Now,  O  accomplished  son  (of  Wu), 
accomplished  grandson  (of  Wan),  young  son,  the 
king,  do  not  err  in  the  matter  of  litigations ; — there 
are  the  officers  and  pastors  (to  attend  to  them). 

'  Have  well  arranged  (also)  your  military  accoutre- 
ments and  weapons,  so  that  you  may  go  forth  beyond 
the  steps  of  Yli,  and  traverse  all  under  the  sky,  even 
to  beyond  the  seas,  everywhere  meeting  with  sub- 
mission : — so  shall  you  display  the  bright  glory  of 
king  Wan,  and  render  more  illustrious  the  great 
achievements  of  king  Wu  \ 

'  Oh  !  from  this  time  forth,  may  (our)  future  kings, 
in  establishing  the  government,  be  able  to  employ 
men  of  constant  virtue  ! ' 

6.  The  duke  of  isfau  spoke  to  the  following 
effect : — '  O  grand  historiographer,  the  duke  of  Su, 
the  Minister  of  Crime,  dealt  reverently  with  all  the 
criminal  matters  that  came  before  him,  and  thereby 
perpetuated  the  fortunes  of  our  kingdom.  Here 
was  an  example  of  anxious  solicitude  (for  future 
ministers),  whereby  they  may  rank  with  him  in  the 
ordering  of  the  appropriate  punishments  V 

1  At  the  close  of  his  address  to  prince  Shih,  Book  xvi,  the 
duke  of  .A'au  breaks  all  at  once  into  a  warlike  mood,  as  he  does 
here. 

2  I  have  said  in  the  introductory  note  that  this  chapter  does 
not  seem  to  have  any  connexion  with  the  rest  of  the  Book.  From 
a  passage  in  the  3o  ^Twan,  under  the  eleventh  year  of  duke  ^"Mng, 
we  learn  that  a  Su  Fan-shang,  or  Fan-shang  of  Su,  was  Minister 
of  Crime  to  king  Wu.  It  is  probably  to  him  that  the  duke  here 
alludes. 


[1] 


226  THE   SH#   KING.  PART  V. 


Book  XX.     The  Officers  of  Kav. 

'  The  Officers  of  Kan. '  contains  a  general  outline  of  the  official 
system  of  the  Khi  dynasty,  detailing  the  names  and  functions 
of  the  principal  ministers  about  the  court  and  others,  to  whom, 
moreover,  various  counsels  are  addressed  by  the  king  who  speaks 
in  it, — no  doubt,  king  .Oang.  Chinese  critics  class  it  with  the 
'Instructions'  of  the  Shu,  but  it  belongs  rather  to  the  'An- 
nouncements.' 

There  is  no  mention  in  it  of  the  duke  of  K&u ;  and  its  date  must 
therefore  be  in  some  year  after  he  had  retired  from  the  regency, 
and  resigned  the  government  into  the  king's  own  hands. 

The  Book  has  a  beginning,  middle,  and  end,  more  distinctly 
marked  than  they  are  in  many  of  the  documents  in  the  Shu. 
The  whole  is  divided  into  five  chapters.  The  first  is  intro- 
ductory, and  describes  the  condition  of  the  kingdom,  when  the 
arrangements  of  the  official  system  were  announced.  In  the 
second,  the  king  refers  to  the  arrangements  of  former  dynasties. 
In  the  third,  he  sets  forth  the  principal  offices  of  state,  the 
ministers  of  which  had  their  residence  at  court,  and  goes  on 
to  the  arrangements  for  the  administration  of  the  provinces. 
The  two  other  chapters  contain  many  excellent  advices  to  the 
ministers  and  officers  to  discharge  their  duties  so  that  the 
fortunes  of  the  dynasty  might  be  consolidated,  and  no  dis- 
satisfaction arise  among  the  myriad  states. 

i.  The  king  of  Ksm  brought  the  myriad  regions 
(of  the  kingdom)  to  tranquillity ;  he  made  a  tour  of 
inspection  through  the  Hciu  and  Tien  tenures;  he 
punished  on  all  sides  the  chiefs  who  had  refused  to 
appear  at  court;  thus  securing  the  repose  of  the 
millions  of  the  people,  and  all  the  (princes  in  the) 
six  tenures  acknowledging  his  virtue.  He  then  re- 
turned to  the  honoured  capital  of  A"4u,  and  strictly 
regulated  the  officers  of  the  administration. 

2.  The  king  said,  '  It  was  the  grand  method  of 
former  times  to  regulate  the  government  while  there 


BOOK  XX.  THE   OFFICERS    OF   KAV.  227 

was  no  confusion,  and  to  secure  the  country  while 
there  was  no  danger/  He  said,  '  Yao  and  Shun, 
having  studied  antiquity1,  established  .a  hundred 
officers.  At  court,  there  were  the  General  Regu- 
lator and  (the  President  of)  the  Four  Mountains ; 
abroad,  there  were  the  pastors  of  the  provinces  and 
the  princes  of  states.  Thus  the  various  departments 
of  government  went  on  harmoniously,  and  the  myriad 
states  all  enjoyed  repose.  Under  the  dynasties  of 
Hsia  and  Shang,  the  number  of  officers  was  doubled, 
and  they  were  able  still  to  secure  good  government. 
(Those  early)  intelligent  kings,  in  establishing  their 
government,  cared  not  so  much  about  the  number 
of  the  offices  as  about  the  men  (to  occupy  them). 
Now  I,  the  little  child,  cultivate  with  reverence  my 
virtue,  concerned  day  and  night  about  my  defi- 
ciencies ;  I  look  up  to  (those)  former  dynasties, 
and  seek  to  conform  to  them,  while  I  instruct  and 
direct  you,  my  officers/ 

3.  '  I  appoint  the  Grand  -  Master,  the  Grand  - 
Assistant,  and  the  Grand-Guardian.  These  are  the 
three  Kung2.    They  discourse  about  the  principles 


1  It  is  the  same  phrase  here,  which  occurs  at  the  beginning 
of  the  Canons  of  Yao  and  Shun,  and  of  some  other  Books.  It 
may  be  inferred,  as  P.  Gaubil  says,  that  Yao  and  Shun  had  certain 
sources  of  knowledge,  that  is  to  say,  some  history  of  the  times 
anterior  to  their  own. 

2  That  is,  'the  three  dukes;'  but  the  term  is  here  a  name  of 
office,  more  than  of  nobility,  as  is  evident  from  the  name  of  the 
three  Ku,  who  were  next  to  them.  Ku  was  not  used  as  a  term 
expressing  any  order  of  nobility.  It  would  seem  to  indicate  that, 
while  the  men  holding  the  office  were  assistant  to  the  Kung,  they 
yet  had  a  distinct  standing  of  their  own.  The  offices  of  Grand- 
Master  &c.  had  existed  under  the  Shang  dynasty ;  see  Book  xi, 
Part  IV. 

Q  2 


2  28  THE    SHU   KING. 


PART   V. 


of  reason *  and  adjust  the  states,  harmonizing  (also) 
and  regulating  the  operations  (in  nature)  of  heaven 
and  earth2.  These  offices  need  not  (always)  be 
filled ;  there  must  (first)  be  the  men  for  them. 

'(I  appoint)  the  Junior  Master,  the  Junior  Assist- 
ant, and  the  Junior  Guardian.  These  are  called 
the  three  Kti3.  They  assist  the  Kung  to  diffuse 
widely  the  transforming  influences,  and  display 
brightly  with  reverence  (the  powers  of)  heaven 
and  earth, — assisting  me,  the  One  man. 

'  (I  appoint)  the  Prime  Minister,  who  presides  over 
the  ruling  of  the  (various)  regions,  has  the  general 
management  of  all  the  other  officers,  and  secures 
uniformity  within  the  four  seas;  the  Minister  of 
Instruction,  who  presides  over  the  education  in  the 
states,  diffuses  a  knowledge  of  the  duties  belonging 
to  the  five  relations  of  society,  and  trains  the  mil- 
lions of  the  people  to  obedience  ;  the  Minister  of 
Religion,  who  presides  over  the  (sacred)  ceremonies 
of  the  country,  regulates  the  services  rendered  to 
the  spirits  and  manes,  and  makes  a  harmony 
between  high  and  low4  ;*  the  Minister  of  War,  who 
presides  over  the   (military)  administration  of  the 


1  Meaning,  I  suppose,  the  courses  or  ways,  which  it  was  right 
for  the  king,  according  to  reason,  to  pursue. 

2  That  is,  probably,  securing  the  material  prosperity  of  the 
kingdom,  in  good  seasons,  &c. 

3  See  note  2  on  the  preceding  page. 

4  The  name  here  for  '  the  Minister  of  Religion'  is  the  same  as 
that  in  the  Canon  of  Shun.  'The  spirits  and  manes'  are  'the 
spirits  of  heaven,  earth,  and  deceased  men.'  All  festive,  funeral, 
and  other  ceremonies,  as  well  as  those  of  sacrifices,  came  under 
the  department  of  the  Minister  of  Religion,  who  had  therefore 
to  define  the  order  of  rank  and  precedence.  This  seems  to  be 
what  is  meant  by  his  '  making  a  harmony  between  high  and  low.' 


BOOK  XX.  THE    OFFICERS    OF   KAXJ.  229 

country,  commands  the  six  hosts,  and  secures  the 
tranquillity  of  all  the  regions  ;  the  Minister  of  Crime, 
who  presides  over  the  prohibitions  of  the  country, 
searches  out  the  villainous  and  secretly  wicked,  and 
punishes  oppressors  and  disturbers  of  the  peace ; 
and  the  Minister  of  Works,  who  presides  over  the 
land  of  the  country,  settles  the  four  classes  of  the 
people,  and  secures  at  the  proper  seasons  the  pro- 
duce of  the  ground1. 

'  These  six  ministers  with  their  different  duties 
lead  on  their  several  subordinates,  and  set  an 
example  to  the  nine  pastors  of  the  provinces,  en- 
riching and  perfecting  the  condition  of  the  millions 
of  the  people.  In  six  years  (the  lords  of)  the  five 
tenures  appear  once  at  the  royal  court ;  and  after 
a  second  six  years,  the  king  makes  a  tour  of  inspec- 
tion in  the  four  seasons,  and  examines  the  (various) 
regulations  and  measures  at  the  four  mountains. 
The  princes  appear  before  him  each  at  the  moun- 
tain of  his  quarter ;  and  promotions  and  degrada- 
tions are  awarded  with  great  intelligence/ 

4.  The  king  said,  '  Oh !  all  ye  men  of  virtue,  my 
occupiers  of  office,  pay  reverent  attention  to  your 
charges.  Be  careful  in  the  commands  you  issue ; 
for,  once  issued,  they  must  be  carried  into  effect, 
and  cannot  be  retracted.  Extinguish  all  selfish 
aims  by  your  public  feeling,  and  the  people  will 
have  confidence  in  you,  and  be  gladly  obedient. 
Study  antiquity  as  a  preparation  for  entering   on 

1  Out  of  these  six  ministers  and  their  departments  have  grown 
the  Six  Boards  of  the  Chinese  Government  of  the  present  day  : — 
the  Board  of  Civil  Office ;  the  Board  of  Revenue ;  the  Board  of 
Rites ;  the  Board  of  War ;  the  Board  of  Punishment ;  and  the 
Board  of  Works. 


23O  THE    SH<J    KING.  PART  v. 

your  offices.  In  deliberating  on  affairs,  form  your 
determinations  by  help  (of  such  study),  and  your 
measures  will  be  free  from  error.  Make  the  regular 
statutes  of  (our  own)  dynasty  your  rule,  and  do 
not  with  artful  speeches  introduce  disorder  into 
your  offices.  To  accumulate  doubts  is  the  way  to 
ruin  your  plans;  to  be  idle  and  indifferent  is  the 
way  to  ruin  your  government.  Without  study,  you 
stand  facing  a  wall,  and  your  management  of  affairs 
will  be  full  of  trouble. 

'  I  warn  you,  my  high  ministers  and  officers,  that 
exalted  merit  depends  on  the  high  aim,  and  a  patri- 
mony is  enlarged  only  by  diligence ;  it  is  by  means 
of  bold  decision  that  future  difficulties  are  avoided. 
Pride  comes,  along  with  rank,  unperceived,  and  ex- 
travagance in  the  same  way  with  emolument.  Let 
reverence  and  economy  be  (real)  virtues  with  you, 
unaccompanied  with  hypocritical  display.  Practise 
them  as  virtues,  and  your  minds  will  be  at  ease, 
and  you  will  daily  become  more  admirable.  Prac- 
tise them  in  hypocrisy,  and  your  minds  will  be 
toiled,  and  you  will  daily  become  more  stupid.  In 
the  enjoyment  of  favour  think  of  peril,  and  never  be 
without  a  cautious  apprehension ; — he  who  is  with- 
out such  apprehension  finds  himself  amidst  what 
is  really  to  be  feared.  Push  forward  the  worthy, 
and  show  deference  to  the  able ;  and  harmony  will 
prevail  among  all  your  officers.  When  they  are 
not  harmonious,  the  government  becomes  a  mass 
of  confusion.  If  those  whom  you  advance  be 
able  for  their  offices,  the  ability  is  yours ;  if  you 
advance  improper  men,  you  are  not  equal  to  your 
position/ 

5.  The  king  said,   '  Oh !    ye  (charged)  with  the 


BOOK  XXI.  THE   JTUN-tftfAN.  23I 

threefold  business  (of  government)1,  and  ye  great 
officers,  reverently  attend  to  your  departments,  and 
conduct  well  the  affairs  under  your  government,  so 
as  to  assist  your  sovereign,  and  secure  the  lasting 
happiness  of  the  millions  of  the  people ; — so  shall 
there  be  no  dissatisfaction  throughout  the  myriad 
states/ 


Book  XXI.     The  ICun-khan. 

Kvx-kh&$  was  the  successor  in  '  the  eastern  capital '  of  the  duke 
of  ^Tau,  who  has  now  passed  off  the  stage  of  the  Shu,  which 
he  occupied  so  long.  Between  '  the  Officers  of  JTau '  and  this 
Book,  there  were,  when  the  Shu  was  complete,  two  others, 
which  are  both  lost.  We  must  greatly  deplore  the  loss  of  the 
second  of  them,  for  it  contained  an  account  of  the  death  of 
the  duke  of  ^au,  and  an  announcement  made  by  king  Kh-kng 
by  his  bier. 

Who  iTun-^an,  the  charge  to  whom  on  entering  on  his  important 
government  is  here  preserved,  really  was,  we  are  not  informed. 
Some  have  supposed  that  he  was  a  son  of  the  duke  of  .A"au ; 
but  we  may  be  sure,  from  the  analogy  of  other  charges,  that 
if  he  had  been  so,  the  fact  would  have  been  alluded  to  in  the 
text.  Kiln-khaxi  might  be  translated  '  the  prince  Ktiknl  like 
Ziin  Shih  in  the  title  of  Book  xvi,  but  we  know  nothing  of  any 
territory  with  which  he  was  invested. 

The  following  summary  of  the  contents  is  given  by  a  Chinese 
critic: — '  The  whole  Book  maybe  divided  into  three  chapters. 
The  first  relates  isTun-^an's  appointment  to  the  government 
of  the  eastern  capital.     The  concluding  words,  "  Be  reverent/' 

1  '  The  threefold  business  of  government '  is  the  appointment 
of  the  men  of  office,  the  officers  of  law,  and  the  pastors,  '  the  three 
concerns  of  those  in  the  three  highest  positions,'  as  described  in 
the  last  Book,  ch.  4.  The  king,  probably,  intends  the  Kung,  the 
Ku,  and  the  six  ministers,  whose  duties  he  has  spoken  of.  The 
<  great  officers '  will  be  all  the  officers  inferior  to  these  in  their 
several  departments. 


232  THE   SH<J   KING.  part  v. 

are  emphatic,  and  give  the  key-note  to  all  that  follows.  The 
second  chapter  enjoins  on  him  to  exert  himself  to  illustrate 
the  lessons  of  the  duke  of  ^au,  and  thereby  transform  the 
people  of  Yin.  The  third  requires  him  to  give  full  develop- 
ment to  those  lessons,  and  instances  various  particulars  in 
which  his  doing  so  would  appear ; — all  illustrative  of  the  com- 
mand at  the  commencement,  that  he  should  be  reverent/ 

i.  The  king  spake  to  the  following  effect:  — 
'  i^tm-Man,  it  is  you  who  are  possessed  of  excel- 
lent virtue,  filial  and  respectful.  Being  filial,  and 
friendly  with  your  brethren,  you  can  display  these 
qualities  in  the  exercise  of  goverment.  I  appoint 
you  to  rule  this  eastern  border.     Be  reverent/ 

2.  '  Formerly,  the  duke  of  Kau  acted  as  teacher 
and  guardian  of  the  myriads  of  the  people,  who 
cherish  (the  remembrance  of)  his  virtue.  Go  and 
with  sedulous  care  enter  upon  his  charge;  act  in 
accordance  with  his  regular  ways,  and  exert  your- 
self to  illustrate  his  lessons ; — so  shall  the  people 
be  regulated.  I  have  heard  that  he  said,  "  Perfect 
government  has  a  piercing  fragrance,  and  influ- 
ences the  spiritual  intelligences.*  It  is  not  the 
i  millet  which  has  the  piercing  fragrance ;  it  is  bright 
virtue."  Do  you  make  this  lesson  of  the  duke 
of  i£au  your  rule,  being  diligent  from  day  to  day, 
and  not  presuming  to  indulge  in  luxurious  ease. 
Ordinary  men,  while  they  have  not  yet  seen  a 
sage,  (are  full  of  desire)  as  if  they  should  never 
get  a  sight  of  him  ;  and  after  they  have  seen  him, 
they  are  still  unable  to  follow  him.  Be  cautioned 
by  this !  You  are  the  wind ;  the  inferior  people 
are  the  grass.  In  revolving  the  plans  of  your 
government,  never  hesitate  to  acknowledge  the 
difficulty  of  the  subject.  Some  things  have  to  be 
abolished,  and  some  new  things  to  be  enacted  ; — 


BOOK  XXI.  THE   KUN-KHAH.  233 

going  out  and  coming  in,  seek  the  judgment  of  your 
people  about  them,  and,  when  there  is  a  general 
agreement,  exert  your  own  powers  of  reflection. 
When  you  have  any  good  plans  or  counsels,  enter 
and  lay  them  before  your  sovereign  in  the  palace. 
Thereafter,  when  you  are  acting  abroad  in  accord- 
ance with  them,  say,  "  This  plan  or  this  view  is  all 
due  to  our  sovereign/'  Oh !  if  all  ministers  were 
to  act  thus,  how  excellent  would  they  be,  and  how 
distinguished ! ' 

3.  The  king  said,  '  Aun-/£Mn,  do  you  give  their 
full  development  to  the  great  lessons  of  the  duke 
of  .Aau.  Do  not  make  use  of  your  power  to  exer- 
cise oppression  ;  do  not  make  use  of  the  laws  to 
practise  extortion.  Be  gentle,  but  with  strictness 
of  rule.  Promote  harmony  by  the  display  of  an 
easy  forbearance. 

'  When  any  of  the  people  of  Yin  are  amenable  to 
punishment,  if  I  say  "  Punish,"  do  not  you  therefore 
punish  ;  and  if  I  say  "  Spare,"  do  not  you  therefore 
spare.  Seek  the  due  middle  course.  Those  who 
are  disobedient  to  your  government,  and  uninflu- 
enced by  your  instructions,  you  will  punish,  remem- 
bering that  the  end  of  punishment  is  to  make  an 
end  of  punishing.  Those  who  are  inured  to  villainy 
and  treachery,  those  who  violate  the  regular  duties 
of  society,  and  those  who  introduce  disorder  into 
the  public  manners  : — those  three  classes  you  will 
not  spare,  though  their  particular  offences  be  but 
small. 

'  Do  not  cherish  anger  against  the  obstinate,  and 
dislike  them.  Seek  not  every  quality  in  one  indi- 
vidual. You  must  have  patience,  and  you  will  be 
successful;   have  forbearance,  and  your  virtue  will 


234  THE   SHft   KING.  PART  v. 

be  great.  Mark  those  who  discharge  their  duties 
well,  and  also  mark  those  who  do  not  do  so,  (and 
distinguish  them  from  one  another.)  Advance  the 
good,  to  induce  those  who  may  not  be  so  to  follow 
(their  example). 

'  The  people  are  born  good,  and  are  changed  by 
(external)  things,*  so  that  they  resist  what  their 
superiors  command,  and  follow  what  they  (them- 
selves) love.  Do  you  but  reverently  observe  the 
statutes,  and  they  will  be  found  in  (the  way  of) 
virtue;  they  will  thus  all  be  changed,  and  truly 
advance  to  a  great  degree  of  excellence.  Then 
shall  I,  the  One  man,  receive  much  happiness,  and 
your  excellent  services  will  be  famous  through  long 
ages ! ' 


Book  XXII.     The  Testamentary  Charge. 

This  Book  brings  us  to  the  closing  act  of  the  life  of  king  Kh&ng, 
whose  reign,  according  to  the  current  chronology,  lasted  thirty- 
seven  years,  ending  in  b.c.  1079.  From  the  appointment  of  iTun- 
khixi  to  his  death,  the  king's  history  is  almost  a  blank.  The 
only  events  chronicled  by  Sze-ma  Khien  are  a  coinage  of  round 
money  with  a  square  hole  in  the  centre, — the  prototype  of  the 
present  cash ;  and  an  enactment  about  the  width  and  length 
in  which  pieces  of  silk  and  cloth  were  to  be  manufactured. 

King  Khzng,  feeling  that  his  end  is  near,  calls  his  principal 
ministers  and  other  officers  around  his  bed,  and  commits  his 
son  K&o  to  their  care  and  guidance.  The  record  of  all  these 
things  and  the  dying  charge  form  a  chapter  that  ends  with  the 
statement  of  the  kings  death.  The  rest  of  the  Book  forms  a 
second  chapter,  in  which  Ave  have  a  detailed  account  of  the 
ceremonies  connected  with  the  publication  of  the  charge,  and 
the  accession  of  iTao  to  the  throne.  It  is  an  interesting  account 
of  the  ways  of  that  distant  time  on  such  occasions. 

i.   In  the  fourth  month,  when  the  moon  began  to 
wane,  the  king  was  indisposed.     On  the  day  Ala- 


BOOK  xxil.  THE    TESTAMENTARY    CHARGE.  235 

jze,  he  washed  his  hands  and  face;  his  attendants 
put  on  him  his  cap  and  robes 1 ;  (and  he  sat  up), 
leaning  on  a  gem-adorned  bench2.  He  then  called 
together  the  Grand-Guardian  Shih,  the  earls  of  Zui 
and  Thung,  the  duke  of  Pi,  the  marquis  of  Wei,  the 
duke  of  Mao,  the  master  of  the  warders,  the  master 
of  the  guards,  the  heads  of  the  various  departments, 
and  the  superintendents  of  affairs 3. 

The  king  said,  '  Oh  !  my  illness  has  greatly  in- 
creased, and  it  will  soon  be  over  with  me.  The 
malady  comes  on  daily  with  more  violence,  and 
maintains  its  hold.  I  am  afraid  I  may  not  find 
(another  opportunity)  to  declare  my  wishes  about 
my  successor,  and  therefore  I  (now)  lay  my  charge 
upon  you  with  special  instructions.  The  former 
rulers,  our  kings  Wan  and  W&,  displayed  in  suc- 
cession their  equal  glory,  making  sure  provision  for 
the  support  of  the  people,  and  setting  forth  their 

1  The  king's  caps  or  crowns  and  robes  were  many,  and  for 
each  there  was  the  appropriate  occasion.  His  attendants,  no 
doubt,  now  dressed  king  Khkug  as  the  rules  of  court  fashions 
required. 

2  In  those  days  they  sat  on  the  ground  upon  mats;  and  for 
the  old  or  infirm  benches  or  stools  were  placed,  in  front  of  them, 
to  lean  forward  on.  The  king  had  five  kinds  of  stools  variously 
adorned.    That  with  gems  was  the  most  honourable. 

3  The  Grand-Guardian  Shih,  or  the  duke  of  Shao,  and  the  other 
five  dignitaries  were,  no  doubt,  the  six  ministers  of  the  20th  Book. 
Zui  is  referred  to  the  present  district  of  JTao-yi,  department  Hsi-an; 
and  Thung  to  Hwa  ^ffau,  department  Thung-£au; — both  in  Shen- 
hsi.  The  earl  of  Zui,  it  is  supposed,  was  Minister  of  Instruction, 
and  he  of  Thung  Minister  of  Religion.  Pt  corresponded  to  the 
present  district  of  Z^ang-an,  department  Hsi-an.  The  duke  of 
Pt  was  Minister  of  War.  called  Duke  or  Kung,  as  Grand-Master. 
It  is  not  known  where  Mao  was.  The  lord  of  it  was  Minister 
of  Works,  and  Grand-Assistant.  The  marquis  of  Wei, — see  on 
Book  ix.    He  was  now,  it  is  supposed,  Minister  of  Crime. 


236  THE   Silt   KING.  PART  v. 

instructions.  (The  people)  accorded  a  practical 
submission,  without  any  opposition,  and  the  influ- 
ence (of  their  example  and  instructions)  extended 
to  Yin,  and  the  great  appointment  (of  Heaven)  was 
secured*.  After  them,  I,  the  stupid  one,  received 
with  reverence  the  dread  (decree)  of  Heaven,  and 
continued  to  keep  the  great  instructions  of  Wan  and 
Wu,  not  daring  blindly  to  transgress  them."* 

'  Now  Heaven  has  laid  affliction  on  me,  and  it 
seems  as  if  I  should  not  again  rise  or  be  myself. 
Do  you  take  clear  note  of  these  my  words,  and  in 
accordance  with  them  watch  reverently  over  my 
eldest  son  Aao,  and  greatly  assist  him  in  the 
difficulties  of  his  position.  Be  kind  to  those  who 
are  far  off,  and  help  those  who  are  near.  Promote 
the  tranquillity  of  the  states,  small  and  great,  and 
encourage  them  (to  well-doing).  I  think  how  a  man 
has  to  govern  himself  in  dignity  and  with  decorum ; 
— do  not  you  allow  .ATao  to  proceed  heedlessly  on 
the  impulse  of  improper  motives/  Immediately  on 
receiving  this  charge,  (the  ministers  and  others) 
withdrew.     The    tent1   was    then    carried  out  into 

1  The  tent  had  been  prepared  when  the  king  sent  for  his 
ministers  and  officers  to  give  them  his  last  charge,  and  set  up 
outside  his  chamber  in  the  hall  where  he  was  accustomed  to  hold 
'  the  audience  of  government/  He  had  walked  or  been  carried 
to  it,  and  then  returned  to  his  apartment  when  he  had  expressed 
his  last  wishes,  while  the  tent — the  curtains  and  canopy — was 
carried  out  into  the  courtyard. 

The  palace  was  much  more  long  or  deep  than  wide,  con- 
sisting of  five  series  of  buildings  continued  one  after  another, 
so  that,  if  all  the  gates  were  thrown  open,  one  could  walk  in  a 
direct  line  from  the  first  gate  to  the  last.  The  different  parts 
of  it  were  separated  by  courts  that  embraced  a  large  space  of 
ground,  and  were  partly  open  overhead.  The  gates  leading  to 
the  different  parts  had  their  particular  names,  and  were  all  fronting 


BOOK  XXII.  THE    TESTAMENTARY   CHARGE.  237 

the  court ;  and  on  the  next  day,  (being)  Yi-^Mu, 
the  king  died. 

2.  The  Grand  -  Guardian  then  ordered  .ffung 
Hwan1  and  Nan-Kung  M&o1  to  instruct  Lli  Kiy 
the  marquis  of  Khi 2,  with  two  shield-and-spearmen, 
and  a  hundred  guards,  to  meet  the  prince  iTao  out- 
side the  south  gate3,  and  conduct  him  to  (one  of) 
the  side-apartments  (near  to  that  where  the  king 
lay),  there  to  be  as  chief  mourner 4. 

On  the  day  Ting-mao,  (two  days  after  the  kings 
death),  he  ordered  (the  charge)  to  be  recorded  on 

the  south.  Outside  the  second  was  held  'the  outer  levee,'  where 
the  king  received  the  princes  and  officers  generally.  Outside  the 
fifth  was  held  '  the  audience  of  government/  when  he  met  his 
ministers  to  consult  with  them  on  the  business  of  the  state.  Inside 
this  gate  were  the  buildings  which  formed  the  private  apartments, 
in  the  hall  leading  to  which  was  held  '  the  inner  audience/  and 
where  the  sovereign  feasted  those  whom  he  designed  specially 
to  honour.  Such  is  the  general  idea  of  the  ancient  palace  given 
by  KH  Hsi.  The  gateways  included  a  large  space,  covered  by  a 
roof,  supported  on  pillars. 

1  We  know  nothing  more  of  these  officers  but  what  is  here 
related. 

2  The  marquis  of  Kh\  was  the  son  of  Thai-kung,  a  friend  and 
minister  of  king  Wan,  who  had  been  enfeoffed  by  king  Wu  with 
the  state  of  Kh\,  embracing  the  present  department  of  jOing-$Ui, 
in  Shan-tung,  and  other  territory.  His  place  at  court  was  that  of 
master  of  the  guards. 

3  All  the  gates  might  be  called  '  south  gates/  It  is  not  certain 
whether  that  intended  here  was  the  outer  gate  of  all,  or  the  last, 
immediately  in  front  of  the  hall,  where  the  king  had  given  his 
charge.  Whichever  it  was,  the  meeting  ^Tao  in  the  way  described 
was  a  public  declaration  that  he  had  been  appointed  successor 
to  the  throne. 

4  '  The  mourning  shed/  spoken  of  in  Part  IV,  viii,  ch.  1,  had 
not  yet  been  set  up,  and  the  apartment  here  indicated — on  the 
east  of  the  hall  of  audience— was  the  proper  one  for  the  prince 
to  occupy  in  the  mean  time. 


238  THE    SH<)    KING.  PART  V. 

tablets,  and  the  forms  (to  be  observed  in  publishing 
it).  Seven  days  after,  on  Kwei-yti,  as  chief  (of  the 
west)  and  premier,  he  ordered  the  (proper)  officers 
to  prepare  the  wood  (for  all  the  requirements  of 
the  funeral)  \ 

The  salvage  men 2  set  out  the  screens 3,  orna- 
mented with  figures  of  axes,  and  the  tents.  Between 
the  window  (and  the  door),  facing  the  south,  they 
placed  the  (three)fold  mat  of  fine  bamboo  splints, 
with  its  striped  border  of  white  and  black  silk, 
and  the  usual  bench  adorned  with  different-coloured 
gems.  In  the  side-space  on  the  west,  which  faced 
the  east,  they  placed  the  threefold  rush  mat,  with 
its  variegated  border,  and  the  usual  bench  adorned 
with  beautiful  shells.  In  the  side-space  on  the  east, 
which  faced  the  west,  they  placed  the  threefold  mat 
of  fine  grass,  with  its  border  of  painted  silk,  and 
the  usual  bench  carved,  and  adorned  with  gems. 
Before  the  western  side-chamber,  and  facing  the 
south,  they  placed  the  threefold  mat  of  fine  bamboo, 
with  its  dark  mixed  border,  and  the  usual  lacquered 
bench 4. 

1  On  the  seventh  day  after  his  death  the  king  had  been  shrouded 
and  put  into  his  coffin.  But  there  were  still  the  shell  or  outer 
coffin,  &c,  to  be  provided. 

2  These  'salvage  men'  were,  I  suppose,  natives  of  the  wild 
Ti  tribes,  employed  to  perform  the  more  servile  offices  about  the 
court.    Some  of  them,  we  know,  were  enrolled  among  the  guards. 

8  The  screens  were  ornamented  with  figures  of  axe-heads,  and 
placed  behind  the  king,  under  the  canopy  that  overshadowed 
him. 

4  All  these  arrangements  seem  to  have  been  made  in  the  hall 
where  king  Khang  had  delivered  his  charge.  He  had  been 
accustomed  to  receive  his  guests  at  all  the  places  where  the  tents, 
screens,  and  mats  were  now  set.  It  was  presumed  he  would  be 
present  in  spirit  at  the  ceremony  of  proclaiming  his   son,  and 


BOOK  XXII.  THE    TESTAMENTARY    CHARGE.  239 

(They  set  forth)  also  the  five  pairs  of  gems  (or 
jade),  and  the  precious  things  of  display.  There 
were  the  red  knife,  the  great  lessons,  the  large 
round-and-convex  symbol  of  jade,  and  the  rounded 
and  pointed  maces, — all  in  the  side-space  on  the 
west;  the  large  piece  of  jade,  the  pieces  contributed 
by  the  wild  tribes  of  the  east,  the  heavenly  sounding- 
stone,  and  the  river-Plan, — all  in  the  side -space 
on  the  east ;  the  dancing  habits  of  Yin,  the  large 
tortoise-shell,  and  the  large  drum, — all  in  the  western 
apartment;  the  spear  of  Tui,  the  bow  of  Ho,  and 
the  bamboo  arrows  of  Kkux,  —  all  in  the  eastern 
apartment 1. 

The  grand  carriage  was  by  the  guests'  steps, 
facing  (the  south) ;  the  next  was  by  the  eastern 
(or  host's)  steps,  facing  (the  south).  The  front 
carriage  was  placed  before  the  left  lobby,  and  the 
one  that  followed  it  before  the  right  lobby2. 

making  known  to  him  his  dying  charge ;  and  as  they  could  not 
tell  at  what  particular  spot  the  spirit  would  be,  they  made  all  the 
places  ready  for  it. 

1  The  western  and  eastern  apartments  were  two  rooms,  east 
and  west  of  the  hall,  forming  part  of  the  private  apartments, 
behind  the  side  rooms,  and  of  large  dimensions.  The  various 
articles  enumerated  were  precious  relics,  and  had  been  favourites 
with  king  Khaxig.  They  were  now  displayed  to  keep  up  the 
illusion  of  the  king's  still  being  present  in  spirit.  '  They  were  set 
forth/  it  is  said,  '  at  the  ancestral  sacrifices  to  show  that  the  king 
could  preserve  them,  and  at  the  ceremony  of  announcing  a  testa- 
mentary charge  to  show  that  he  could  transmit  them/  About 
the  articles  themselves  it  is  not  necessary  to  append  particular 
notes.  They  perished  thousands  of  years  ago,  and  the  accounts 
of  them  by  the  best  scholars  are  little  more  than  conjectural. 

2  The  royal  carriages  were  of  five  kinds,  and  four  of  them  at 
least  were  now  set  forth  inside  the  last  gate,  that  everything  might 
again  be  done,  as  when  the  king  was  alive.  On  the  west  side 
of  the  hall  were  the  guests'  steps  (or  staircase),  by  which  visitors 


24O  THE   SH#    KING.  part  V. 

Two  men  in  brownish  leather  caps,  and  holding 
three-cornered  halberts,  stood  inside  the  gate  leading 
to  the  private  apartments.  Four  men  in  caps  of 
spotted  deer-skin,  holding  spears  with  blades  up- 
turned from  the  base  of  the  point,  stood,  one  on 
each  side  of  the  steps  east  and  west,  and  near  to 
the  platform  of  the  hall.  One  man  in  a  great 
officer's  cap,  and  holding  an  axe,  stood  in  the  hall, 
(near  the  steps)  at  the  east  (end).  One  man  in  a 
great  officer's  cap,  and  holding  an  axe  of  a  different 
pattern,  stood  in  the  hall,  (near  the  steps)  at  the 
west  end.  One  man  in  a  great  officer's  cap,  and 
holding  a  lance,  stood  at  the  front  and  east  of 
the  hall,  close  by  the  steps.  One  man  in  a  great 
officer's  cap,  and  holding  a  lance  of  a  different 
pattern,  stood  in  the  corresponding  place  on  the 
west.  One  man  in  a  great  officer's  cap,  and  holding 
a  pointed  weapon,  stood  by  the  steps  on  the  north 
side  of  the  hall. 

The  king,  in  a  linen  cap  and  the  variously  figured 
skirt,  ascended  by  the  guests'  steps,  followed  by 
the  high  ministers,  (great)  officers,  and  princes  of 
states,  in  linen  caps  and  dark-coloured  skirts1. 
Arrived  in  the  hall,  they  all  took  their  (proper) 
places.  The  Grand-Guardian,  the  Grand- Historio- 
grapher, and  the  Minister  of  Religion  were  all  in 

ascended,  and  on  the  east  were  those  used  by  the  host  himself. 
If  one  of  the  royal  carriages  was  absent  on  this  occasion,  it  must 
have  been  that  used  in  war,  as  not  being  appropriate  at  such 
a  time. 

1  All  was  now  ready  for  the  grand  ceremony,  and  the  performers, 
in  their  appropriate  mourning  and  sacrificial  array,  take  their 
places  in  the  hall.  K&o  is  here  for  the  first  time  styled  '  king ; ' 
but  still  he  goes  up  by  the  guests'  steps,  not  presuming  to  ascend 
by  the  others,  while  his  father's  corpse  was  in  the  hall. 


BOOK  xxii.  THE    TESTAMENTARY    CHARGE.  24 1 

linen  caps  and  red  skirts.  The  Grand-Guardian 
bore  the  great  mace.  The  Minister  of  Religion 
bore  the  cup  and  the  mace -cover.  These  two 
ascended  by  the  steps  on  the  east1.  The  Grand- 
Historiographer  bore  the  testamentary  charge.  He 
ascended  by  the  guests*  steps  (on  the  west),  and 
advanced  to  the  king  with  the  tablets  containing 
the  charge,  and  said,  '  Our  royal  sovereign,  leaning 
on  the  gem-adorned  bench,  declared  his  last  charge, 
and  commanded  you  to  continue  (the  observance  of) 
the  lessons,  and  to  take  the  rule  of  the  kingdom  of 
Aau,  complying  with  the  great  laws,  and  securing  the 
harmony  of  all  under'the  sky,  so  as  to  respond  to  and 
display  the  bright  instructions  of  Wan  and  Wii.' 

The  king  twice  bowed  (low),  and  then  arose,  and 
replied,  '  I  am  utterly  insignificant  and  but  a  child, 
how  should  I  be  able  to  govern  the  four  quarters 
(of  the  kingdom)  with  a  corresponding  reverent 
awe  of  the  dread  majesty  of  Heaven  V*  He  then 
received  the  cup  and  the  mace-cover.  Thrice  he 
slowly  and  reverently  advanced  with  a  cup  of  spirits 
(to  the  east  of  the  coffin) ;  thrice  he  sacrificed  (to  the 
spirit  of  his  father);*  and  thrice  he  put  the  cup  down. 
The  Minister  of  Religion  said,  '  It  is  accepted2/* 

1  The  Grand-Guardian  and  the  Minister  of  Religion  ascended 
by  the  eastern  steps,  because  the  authority  of  king  IC/img  was 
in  their  persons,  to  be  conveyed  by  the  present  ceremony  to  his 
son.  'The  great  mace'  was  one  of  the  emblems  of  the  royal 
sovereignty,  and  €  the  cup '  also  must  have  been  one  that  only  the 
king  could  use.  'The  mace-cover'  was  an  instrument  by  which 
the  genuineness  of  the  symbols  of  their  rank  conferred  on  the 
different  princes  was  tested. 

2  According  to  Khung  Ying-td,  when  the  king  received  the  record 
of  the  charge,  he  was  standing  at  the  top  of  the  eastern  steps,  a 
little  eastwards,  with  his  face  to  the  north.  The  Historiographer 
stood  by  king  bang's  coffin,  on  the  south-west  of  it,  with  his  face 

[1]  R 


242  THE   SHft   KING.  part  v. 

The  Grand-Guardian  received  the  cup,  descended 
the  steps,  and  washed  his  hands1.  He  then  took 
another  cup,  (placed  it  on)  a  half-mace  which  he 
carried,  and  repeated  the  sacrifice2.*  He  then  gave 
the  cup  to  one  of  the  attendants  of  the  Minister 
of  Religion,  and  did  obeisance.  The  king  returned 
the  obeisance.  The  Grand-Guardian  took  a  cup 
again,  and  poured  out  the  spirits  in  sacrifice.*  He 
then  just  tasted  the  spirits,  returned  to  his  place, 
gave  the  cup  to  the  attendant,,  and  did  obeisance. 
The  king  returned  the  obeisance.  The  Grand* 
Guardian  descended  from  the  hall,  after  which  the 
various  (sacrificial)  articles  wefe  removed,  and  the 
princes  all  went  out  at  the  temple  gate 3  and  waited. 

to  the  east.  There  he  read  the  charge,  after  which  the  king 
bowed  twice,  and  the  Minister  of  Religion,  on  the  south-west 
of  the  king,  presented  the  cup  and  mace-cover.  The  king  took 
them,  and,  having  given  the  cover  in  charge  to  an  attendant, 
advanced  with  the  cup  to  the  place  between  the  pillars  where  the 
sacrificial  spirits  were  placed.  Having  filled  a  cup,  he  advanced 
to  the  east  of  the  coffin,  and  stood  with  his  face  to  the  west; 
then  going  to  the  spot  where  his  father's  spirit  was  supposed  to 
be,  he  sacrificed,  pouring  out  the  spirits  on  the  ground,  and  then 
he  put  the  cup  on  the  bench  appropriated  for  it.  This  he  repeated 
three  times.  At  the  conclusion  the  Minister  of  Religion  conveyed 
to  him  a  message  from  the  spirit  of  his  father,  that  his  offering 
was  accepted. 

1  Preparatory,  that  is,  to  his  offering  a  sacrifice. 

2  That  is,  probably,  repeated  the  sacrifice  to  the  spirit  of  king 
Khzng,  as  if  to  inform  him  that  his  charge  had  been  communicated 
to  his  son.  The  half-mace  was  used  as  a  handle  for  the  sacrificial 
cup.  This  ceremony  appears  to  have  been  gone  through  twice. 
The  Grand  Guardian's  bowing  was  to  the  spirit  of  king  .A^ang, 
and  the  new  king  returned  the  obeisance  for  his  father. 

3  Meaning  the  fifth  or  last  gate  of  the  palace.  The  private 
apartments  had  for  the  time,  through  the  presence  of  the  coffin 
and  by  the  sacrifices,  been  converted  into  a  sort  of  ancestral 
temple. 


BOOK  xxiii.      ANNOUNCEMENT   OF   KING   KHANG.  243 

Book  XXIII. 
The  Announcement  of  King  Khang. 

Khang  was  the  honorary  sacrificial  title  conferred  on  -A!ao,  the 
son  and  successor  of  king  Kh&ng.  His  reign  lasted  from 
B.C.  1078  to  1053.  Khang,  as  an  honorary  title,  has  various 
meanings.  In  the  text  it  probably  denotes — '  Who  caused  the 
people  to  be  tranquil  and  happy/ 

Immediately  on  his  accession  to  the  throne,  as  described  in  the 
last  Book,  king  Khang  made  the  Announcement  which  is  here 
recorded.  Indeed  the  two  Books  would  almost  seem  to  form 
only  one,  and  as  such  they  appeared  in  the  Shu  of  Fu,  as 
related  in  the  Introduction. 

The  princes,  with  whose  departure  from  the  inner  hall  of  the 
palace  the  last  Book  concludes,  are  introduced  again  to  the 
king  in  the  court  between  the  fourth  and  fifth  gates,  and  do 
homage  to  him  after  their  fashion,  cautioning  also  and  advising 
him  about  the  discharge  of  his  high  duties.  He  responds  with 
the  declaration  which  has  given  name  to  the  Book,  referring 
to  his  predecessors,  and  asking  the  assistance  of  all  his  hearers, 
that  his  reign  may  be  a  not  unworthy  sequel  of  theirs.  With 
this  the  proceedings  terminate,  and  the  king  resumes  his 
mourning  dress  which  he  had  put  off  for  the  occasion.  The 
whole  thus  falls  into  three  chapters. 

i.  The  king  came  forth  arid  stood  (in  the  space) 
within  the  fourth  gate  of  the  palace,  when  the 
Grand-Guardian  led  in  the  princes  of  the  western 
regions  by  the  left  (half)  of  the  gate,  and  the  duke 
of  PI  those  of  the  eastern  regions  by  the  right  (half)  \ 
They  then  all  caused  their  teams  of  light  bay  horses, 
with  their  manes  and  tails  dyed  red,  to  be  exhibited ; 
— and,  (as  the  kings)  guests,  lifted  up  their  rank- 
symbols,  and  (the  other)  presents  (they  had  brought)2, 

1  See  note  on  these  ministers,  p.  235. 

2  These  presents  were  in  addition  to  the  teams  of  horses  ex- 
hibited in  the  courtyard ; — silks  and  lighter  productions  of  their 
various  territories. 

R  2 


244  THE   SHtf    KING.  PART  V. 

saying,  '  We  your  servants,  defenders  (of  the  throne), 
venture  to  bring  the  productions  of  our  territories, 
and  lay  them  here/  (With  these  words)  they  all 
did  obeisance  twice,  laying  their  heads  on  the  ground. 
The  king,  as  the  righteous  successor  to  the  virtue 
of  those  who  had  gone  before  him,  returned  their 
obeisance. 

The  Grand-Guardian  and  the  earl  of  Zui,  with 
all  the  rest,  then  advanced  and  bowed  to  each  other, 
after  which  they  did  obeisance  twice,  with  their 
heads  to  the  ground,  and  said,  '  O  Son  of  Heaven, 
we  venture  respectfully  to  declare  our  sentiments. 
Great  Heaven  altered  its  decree  which  the  great 
House  of  Yin  had  received,  and  Wan  and  Wu  of 
our  Aau  grandly  received  the  same,  and  carried 
it  out,  manifesting  their  kindly  government  in  the 
western  regions.  His  recently  ascended  majesty* 
rewarding  and  punishing  exactly  in  accordance  with 
what  was  right,  fully  established  their  achievements, 
and  transmitted  this  happy  state  to  his  successors. 
Do  you,  O  king,  now  be  reverent.  Maintain  your 
armies  in  great  order,  and  do  not  allow  the  rarely 
equalled  appointment  of  our  high  ancestors  to  come 
to  harm/  * 

2.  The  king  spoke  to  the  following  effect : — '  Ye 
princes  of  the  various  states,  chiefs  of  the  Hau,  Tien, 
Nan,  and  Wei  domains,  I,  Aao,  the  One  man,  make 
an  announcement  in  return  (for  your  advice).  The 
former  rulers,  Wan  and  Wfi,  were  greatly  just  and 
enriched  (the  people).  They  did  not  occupy  them- 
selves to  find  out  people's  crimes.  Pushing  to  the 
utmost  and  maintaining  an  entire  impartiality  and 
sincerity,  they  became  gloriously  illustrious  all  under 
heaven.     Then  they  had  officers  brave  as  bears  and 


BOOK  XXIV.  CHARGE    TO    THE    DUKE    OF    Pt.  245 

grisly  bears,  and  ministers  of  no  double  heart,  who 
(helped  them)  to  maintain  and  regulate  the  royal 
House.  Thus  (did  they  receive)  the  true  favour- 
ing decree  from  God,  and  thus  did  great  Heaven 
approve  of  their  ways,  and  give  them  the  four 
quarters  (of  the  land).*  Then  they  appointed  and 
set  up  principalities,  and  established  bulwarks  (to 
the  throne),  for  the  sake  of  us,  their  successors. 
Now  do  ye,  my  uncles x,  I  pray  you,  consider  with 
one  another,  and  carry  out  the  service  which  the 
dukes,  your  predecessors,  rendered  to  my  prede- 
cessors. Though  your  persons  be  distant,  let  your 
hearts  be  in  the  royal  House.  Enter  thus  into  my 
anxieties,  and  act  in  accordance  with  them,  so  that 
I,  the  little  child,  may  not  be  put  to  shame.' 

3.  The  dukes  and  all  the  others,  having  heard 
this  charge,  bowed  to  one  another,  and  hastily  with- 
drew. The  king  put  off  his  cap,  and  assumed  again 
his  mourning  dress. 


Book  XXIV.    The  Charge  to  the  Duke  of  Pi. 

The  king  who  delivers  the  charge  in  this  Book  was  Khang,  and 
the  only  events  of  his  reign  of  twenty-six  years  of  which  we 
have  any  account  in  the  Shu  and  in  Sze-ma  KK\v&  are  it  and 
the  preceding  announcement. 

Book  xxi  relates  the  appointment  of  Ziin-^an,  by  king  .Oang, 
to  the  charge  which  was  now,  on  his  death,  entrusted  to  the 
duke  of  Pi,  who  is  mentioned  at  the  commencement  of  '  the 
Testamentary  Charge/  By  the  labours  of  the  duke  of  iTau 
and  Kiln-Man  a  considerable  change  had  been  effected  in  the 
character  of  the  people  of  Yin,  who  had  been  transferred  to 
the  new  capital  and  its  neighbourhood;    and  king  Khang  now 

1  Meaning  the  various  princes,  and  especially  those  bearing  the 
same  surname  as  himself 


246  THE   SH#   KING.  part  V. 

appoints  the  duke  of  Pi  to  enter  into  and  complete  their 
work. 
After  an  introductory  paragraph,  the  charge,  in  three  chapters, 
occupies  all  the  rest  of  the  Book.  The  first  of  them  speaks 
of  what  had  been  accomplished,  and  the  admirable  qualities  of 
the  duke  which  fitted  him  to  accomplish  what  remained  to  be 
done.  The  second  speaks  of  the  special  measures  which  were 
called  for  by  the  original  character  and  the  altered  character  of 
the  people.  The  third  dwells  on  the  importance  of  the  charge, 
and  stimulates  the  duke,  by  various  considerations,  to  address 
himself  to  fulfil  it  effectually. 

i.  In  the  sixth  month  of  his  twelfth  year,  the  day 
of  the  new  moon's  appearance  was  Kang-wu,  and  on 
Zan-shan,  the  third  day  after,  the  king  walked  in  the 
morning  from  the  honoured  capital  of  Aau  to  Fang1, 
and  there,  with  reference  to  the  multitudes  of  KJvkxvg- 
Mu 2,  gave  charge  to  the  duke  of  Pi 3  to  protect  and 
regulate  the  eastern  border. 

2.  The  king  spoke  to  the  following  effect : — 
1  Oh !  Grand-Master,  it  was  when  Wan  and  Wu 
had  diffused  their  great  virtue  all  under  heaven, 
that  they  therefore  received  the  appointment  which 
Yin  had  enjoyed.*  The  duke  of  Aau  acted  as 
assistant  to  my  royal  predecessors,  and  tranquillized 
and  established  their  kingdom.  Cautiously  did  he 
deal  with  the  refractory  people  of  Yin,  and  removed 
them  to  the  city  of  Lo,  that  they  might  be  quietly 
near  the  royal  House,  and  be  transformed  by  its 

1  That  is,  he  went  from  H&o,  founded  by  king  Wu,  to  Fang 
the  capital  of  Wan.  The  king  wished  to  give  his  charge  in  the 
temple  of  king  Wan,  because  the  duke  of  Pi  had  been  one  of 
his  ministers. 

2  Khang-k&u  was  a  name  of  the  new  or  Mower'  capital  of 
Lo,  perhaps  as  giving  '  completion/  or  full  establishment  to  the 
dynasty. 

3  The  duke  of  Pi  had  succeeded  the  duke  of  Aau,  in  the  office 
of  Grand-Master,  under  king  -ATMng. 


BOOK  XXIV.  CHARGE    TO    THE    DUKE    OF    pf.  247 

lessons.  Six  and  thirty  years  have  elapsed1;  the 
generation  has  been  changed;  and  manners  have 
altered.  Through  the  four  quarters  of  the  land 
there  is  no  occasion  for  anxiety,  and  I,  the  One 
man,  enjoy  repose. 

*  The  prevailing  ways  now  tend  to  advancement 
and  now  to  degeneracy,  and  measures  of  govern- 
ment must  be  varied  according  to  the  manners 
(of  the  time).  If  you  (now)  do  not  manifest  your 
approval  of  what  is  good,  the  people  will  not  be  led 
to  stimulate  themselves  in  it.  But  your  virtue, 
O  duke,  is  strenuous,  and  you  are  cautiously  atten- 
tive to  the  smallest  things.  You  have  been  helpful 
to  and  brightened  four  reigns 2 ;  with  deportment  all 
correct  leading  on  the  inferior  officers,  so  that  there 
is  not  one  who  does  not  reverently  take  your  words 
as  a  law.  Your  admirable  merits  were  many  (and 
great)  in  the  times  of  my  predecessors;  I,  the  little 
child,  have  but  to  let  my  robes  hang  down,  and  fold 
my  hands,  while  I  look  up  for  the  complete  effect 
(of  your  measures)/ 

3.  The  king  said,  '  Oh  !  Grand-Master,  I  now 
reverently  charge  you  with  the  duties  of  the  duke  of 
K&u.  Go!  Signalize  the  good,  separating  the  bad 
from  them  ;  give  tokens  of  your  approbation  in  their 
neighbourhoods3,  making  it  ill  for  the  evil  by  such 
distinction  of  the  good,  and  thus  establishing  the 
influence  and  reputation  (of  their  virtue).  When 
the  people  will  not  obey  your  lessons  and  statutes, 

1  Probably,  from  the  death  of  the  duke  of  jff'du. 

2  Those  of  Wan,  Wu,  ZHng,  and  the  existing  reign  of  Khang. 
8  Setting  up,  that  is,  some   conspicuous   monument,  with  an 

inscription  testifying  his  approbation.  All  over  China,  at  the 
present  day,  such  testimonials  are  met  with. 


248  THE   SHfi  KING.  PART  v. 

mark  off  the  boundaries  of  their  hamlets,  making 
them  fear  (to  do  evil),  and  desire  (to  do  good). 
Define  anew  the  borders  and  frontiers,  and  be 
careful  to  strengthen  the  guard-posts  through  the 
territory,  in  order  to  secure  tranquillity  (within)  the 
four  seas.  In  measures  of  government  to  be  con- 
sistent and  constant,  and  in  proclamations  a  combi- 
nation of  completeness  and  brevity,  are  valuable. 
There  should  not  be  the  love  of  what  is  extraordi- 
nary. Among  the  customs  of  Shang  was  the  flat- 
tery of  superiors  ;  sharp-tonguedness  was  the  sign  of 
worth.  The  remains  of  these  manners  are  not  yet 
obliterated.  Do  you,  O  duke,  bear  this  in  mind. 
I  have  heard  the  saying,  "  Families  which  have  for 
generations  enjoyed  places  of  emolument  seldom 
observe  the  rules  of  propriety.  They  become  disso- 
lute, and  do  violence  to  virtue,  setting  themselves  in 
positive  opposition  to  the  way  of  Heaven.  They 
ruin  the  formative  principles  of  good;  encourage 
extravagance  and  display;  and  tend  to  carry  all 
(future  ages)  on  the  same  stream  with  them."  Now 
the  officers  of  Yin  had  long  relied  on  the  favour 
which  they  enjoyed.  In  the  confidence  of  their 
prideful  extravagance  they  extinguished  their  (sense 
of)  righteousness.  They  displayed  before  men  the 
beauty  of  their  robes,  proud,  licentious,  arrogant, 
and  boastful ;  —  the  natural  issue  was  that  they 
should  end  in  being  thoroughly  bad.  Although 
their  lost  minds  have  (in  a  measure)  been  recovered, 
it  is  difficult  to  keep  them  under  proper  restraint. 
If  with  their  property  and  wealth  they  can  be 
brought  under  the  influence  of  instruction,  they  may 
enjoy  lengthened  years,  virtue,  and  righteousness  ! — 
these  are  the  great  lessons.     If  you  do  not  follow 


BOOK  XXIV.  CHARGE   TO    THE   DUKE    OF   Pf.  249 

in  dealing  with  them  these  lessons  of  antiquity, 
wherein  will  you  instruct  them  ? ' 

4.  The  king  said,  '  Oh !  Grand-Master,  the  secu- 
rity or  the  danger  of  the  kingdom  depends  on  those 
officers  of  Yin.  If  you  are  not  (too)  stern  with  them 
nor  (too)  mild,  their  virtue  will  be  truly  cultivated. 
The  duke  of  K&u  exercised  the  necessary  caution  at 
the  beginning  (of  the  undertaking) ;  A^n-^an  dis- 
played the  harmony  proper  to  the  middle  of  it ;  and 
you,  O  duke,  can  bring  it  at  last  to  a  successful  issue. 
You  three  princes  will  have  been  one  in  aim,  and 
will  have  equally  pursued  the  proper  way.  The 
penetrating  power  of  your  principles,  and  the  good 
character  of  your  measures  of  government,  will  exert 
an  enriching  influence  on  the  character  of  the  people, 
so  that  the  wild  tribes,  with  their  coats  buttoning  on 
the  left1,  will  all  find  their  proper  support  in  them, 
and  I,  the  little  child,  will  long  enjoy  much  happi- 
ness. Thus,  O  duke,  there  in  KMng-Mu  will  you 
establish  for  ever  the  power  (of  .Afau),  and  you  will 
have  an  inexhaustible  fame.  Your  descendants  will 
follow  your  perfect  pattern,  governing  accordingly. 

'Oh!  do  not  say,  "I  am  unequal  to  this;"  but 
exert  your  mind  to  the  utmost.  Do  not  say,  "  The 
people  are  few ; "  but  attend  carefully  to  your  busi- 
ness. Reverently  follow  the  accomplished  achieve- 
ments of  the  former  kings,  and  complete  the  excel- 
lence of  the  government  of  your  predecessors/ 

1  Confucius  once  praised  Kwan  iSTung,  a  great  minister  of  Kh\, 
in  the  seventh  century  B.C.,  for  his  services  against  the  wild  tribes 
of  his  time,  saying,  that  but  for  him  they  in  China  would  be  wear- 
ing their  hair  dishevelled,  and  buttoning  the  lappets  of  their  coats 
on  the  left  side.  See  Analects,  XIV,  xviii.  The  long  robes  and 
jackets  of  the  Chinese  generally  stretch  over  on  the  right  side  of 
the  chest,  and  are  there  buttoned. 


25O  THE    SHtf    KING.  PART  V. 


Book  XXV.    The  Aun-ya. 

According  to  the  note  in  the  Preface  to  the  Shu,  the  charge 
delivered  in  this  Book  to  JTiin-ya,  or  possibly  '  the  prince  Y&Y 
was  by  king  Mu ;  and  its  dictum  is  not  challenged  by  any 
Chinese  critic.  The  reign  of  king  -Oao,  who  succeeded  to 
Khang,  is  thus  passed  over  in  the  documents  of  the  Shu.  Mu 
was  the  son  and  successor  of  .Oao,  and  reigned  from  b.c  iooi 
to  947. 

jffiin-ya's  surname  is  not  known.  He  is  here  appointed  to  be 
Minister  of  Instruction,  and  as  it  is  intimated  that  his  father 
and  grandfather  had  been  in  the  same  office,  it  is  conjectured 
that  he  was  the  grandson  of  the  earl  of  Zui,  who  was  Minister 
of  Instruction  at  the  beginning  of  the  reign  of  king  Khang. 

The  Book  is  short,  speaking  of  the  duties  of  the  office,  and 
stimulating  Ya  to  the  discharge  of  them  by  considerations  drawn 
from  the  merits  of  his  forefathers,  and  the  services  which  he 
would  render  to  the  dynasty  and  his  sovereign. 

i.  The  king  spoke  to  the  following  effect : — 
'  Oh !  Aun-yi,  your  grandfather  and  your  father, 
one  after  the  other,  with  a  true  loyalty  and  honesty, 
laboured  in  the  service  of  the  royal  House,  accom- 
plishing a  merit  that  was  recorded  on  the  grand 
banner1.  I,  the  little  child,  have  become  charged 
by  inheritance  with  the  line  of  government  trans- 
mitted from  Wan  and  Wu,  from  Kka.ng  and  Khang ; 
I  also  keep  thinking  of  their  ministers  who  aided 
them  in  the  good  government  of  the  kingdom ;  the 
trembling  anxiety  of  my  mind  makes  me  feel  as  if 
I  were  treading  on  a  tiger  s  tail,  or  walking  upon 
spring  ice.      I  now  give  you  charge  to  assist  me ; 

1  The  grand  banner  was  borne  aloft. when  the  king  went  to 
sacrifice.  There  were  figures  of  the  sun  and  moon  on  it,  and 
dragons  lying  along  its  breadth,  one  over  the  other,  head  above 
tail.  The  names  of  meritorious  ministers  were  inscribed  on  it 
during  their  lifetime,  preparatory  to  their  sharing  in  the  sacrifices 
of  the  ancestral  temple  after  their  death. 


BOOK  XXV.  THE   #UN-YA.  251 

be  as  my  limbs  to  me,  as  my  heart  and  backbone. 
Continue  their  old  service,  and  do  not  disgrace  your 
grandfather  and  father. 

*  Diffuse  widely  (the  knowledge  of)  the  five  in- 
variable relations  (of  society),  and  reverently  seek 
to  produce  a  harmonious  observance  of  the  duties 
belonging  to  them  among  the  people.  If  you  are 
correct  in  your  own  person,  none  will  dare  to  be 
but  correct.  The  minds  of  the  people  cannot 
attain  to  the  right  mean  (of  duty) ; — they  must  be 
guided  by  your  attaining  to  it.  In  the  heat  and 
rains  of  summer,  the  inferior  people  may  be  de- 
scribed as  murmuring  and  sighing.  And  so  it  is 
with  them  in  the  great  cold  of  winter.  How  great 
are  their  hardships!  Think  of  their  hardships  in 
order  to  seek  to  promote  their  ease ;  and  the  people 
will  be  tranquil.  Oh  !  how  great  and  splendid  were 
the  plans  of  king  Wan!  How  greatly  were  they 
carried  out  by  the  energy  of  king  Wu !  All  in 
principle  correct,  and  deficient  in  nothing,  they  are 
for  the  help  and  guidance  of  us  their  descendants. 
Do  you  with  reverence  and  wisdom  carry  out  your 
instructions,  enabling  me  to  honour  and  follow  the 
example  of  my  (immediate)  predecessors,  and  to 
respond  to  and  display  the  bright  decree  conferred 
on  Wan  and  WA ; — -so.  shall  you  be  the  mate  of  your 
by-gone  fathers/ 

2.  The  king  spoke  to  the  following  effect : — 
'Aun-ya,  do  you  take  for  your  rule  the  lessons 
afforded  by  the  courses  of  your  excellent  fathers. 
The  good  or  the  bad  order  of  the  people  depends 
on  this.  You  will  thus  follow  the  practice  of  your 
grandfather  and  father,  and  make  the  good  govern- 
ment of  your  sovereign  illustrious/ 


252  THE    SHO    KING.  PARTY. 


Book  XXVI.    The  Charge  to  Khivng. 

The  charge  recorded  here,  like  that  in  the  last  Book,  is  assigned 
to  king  Mu.  It  was  delivered  on  the  appointment  of  a  -Oiung 
or  Po-^//iung  (that  is,  the  eldest  inning,  the  eldest  brother 
in  his  family)  to  be  High  Chamberlain.  Of  this  jOiung  we 
know  nothing  more  than  we  learn  from  the  Shu.  He  was  no 
high  dignitary  of  state.  That  the  charge  to  him  found  a  place 
in  the  Shu,  we  are  told,  shows  how  important  it  was  thought 
that  men  in  the  lowest  positions,  yet  coming  into  contact  with 
the  sovereign,  should  possess  correct  principles  and  an  earnest 
desire  for  his  progress  in  intelligence  and  virtue. 

King  Mii  represents  himself  as  conscious  of  his  own  incompetencies, 
and  impressed  with  a  sense  of  the  high  duties  devolving  on 
him.  His  predecessors,  much  superior  to  himself,  were  yet 
greatly  indebted .  to  the  aid  of  the  officers  about  them  ; — how 
much  more  must  this  be  the  case  with  him ! 

He  proceeds  to  appoint  .Oiung  to  be  the  High  Chamberlain, 
telling  him  how  he  should  guide  correctly  all  the  other  servants 
about  the  royal  person,  so  that  none  but  good  influences  should 
be  near  to  act  upon  the  king; — telling  him  also  the  manner 
of  men  whom  he  should  employ,  and  the  care  he  should  exercise 
in  the  selection  of  them. 

The  king  spoke  to  the  following  effect : — '  Po- 
Miung,  I  come  short  in  virtue,  and  have  succeeded 
to  the  former  kings,  to  occupy  the  great  throne. 
I  am  fearful,  and  conscious  of  the  peril  (of  my  posi- 
tion). I  rise  at  midnight,  and  think  how  I  can  avoid 
falling  into  errors.  Formerly  Wan  and  W6  were 
endowed  with  all  intelligence,  august  and  sage, 
while  their  ministers,  small  and  great,  all  cherished 
loyalty  and  goodness.  Their  servants,  charioteers, 
chamberlains,  and  followers  were  all  men  of  correct- 
ness; morning  and  evening  waiting  on  their  sove- 
reigns wishes,  or  supplying  his  deficiencies.  (Those 
kings),  going  out  and  coming  in,  rising  up  and  sitting 


BOOK  xxvi.  THE   CHARGE   TO   KHIXJTXG.  253 

down,  were  thus  made  reverent.  Their  every  warn- 
ing or  command  was  good.  The  people  yielded  a 
reverent  obedience,  and  the  myriad  regions  were  all 
happy.  But  I,  the  One  man,  am  destitute  of  good- 
ness, and  really  depend  on  the  officers  who  have 
places  about  me  to  help  my  deficiencies,  applying 
the  line  to  my  faults,  and  exhibiting  my  errors,  thus 
correcting  my  bad  heart,  and  enabling  me  to  be  the 
successor  of  my  meritorious  predecessors. 

1  Now  I  appoint  you  to  be  High  Chamberlain, 
to  see  that  all  the  officers  in  your  department  and 
my  personal  attendants  are  upright  and  correct,  that 
they  strive  to  promote  the  virtue  of  their  sovereign, 
and  together  supply  my  deficiencies.  Be  careful  in 
selecting  your  officers.  Do  not  employ  men  of 
artful  speech  and  insinuating  looks,  men  whose 
likes  and  dislikes  are  ruled  by  mine,  one-sided  men 
and  flatterers ;  but  employ  good  men.  When  these 
household  officers  are  correct,  the  sovereign  will  be 
correct ;  when  they  are  flatterers,  the  sovereign  will 
consider  himself  a  sage.  His  virtue  or  his  want  of 
it  equally  depends  on  them.  Cultivate  no  intimacy 
with  flatterers,  nor  get  them  to  do  duty  for  me  as 
my  ears  and  eyes  ; — they  will  lead  their  sovereign 
to  disregard  the  statutes  of  the  former  kings.  If 
you  choose  the  men  not  for  their  personal  goodness, 
but  for  the  sake  of  their  bribes,  their  offices  will  be 
made  of  no  effect,  your  great  want  of  reverence  for 
your  sovereign  will  be  apparent,  and  I  will  hold  you 
guilty/ 

The  king  said,  '  Oh !  be  reverent !  Ever  help 
your  sovereign  to  follow  the  regular  laws  of  duty 
(which  he  should  exemplify)/ 


254  THE    SHfi   KING.  PART  V. 

Book  XXVII. 
The  Marquis  of  Lti  on  Punishments. 

The  charge  or  charges  recorded  in  this  Book  were  given  in  the 
hundredth  year  of  the  king's  age.  The  king,  it  is  again  under- 
stood, was  Mu ;  and  the  hundredth  year  of  his  age  would  be 
B.C.  952.  The  title  of  the  Book  in  Chinese  is  simply  'Lti's 
Punishments/  and  I  conclude  that  Lti,  or  the  marquis  of  Lti, 
was  a  high  minister  who  prepared,  by  the  king's  orders,  a  code 
of  punishments  for  the  regulation  of  the  kingdom,  in  connexion 
with  the  undertaking,  or  the  completion,  of  which  the  king 
delivered  to  his  princes  and  judges  the  sentiments  that  are  here 
preserved. 

The  common  view  is  that  Lti  is  the  name  of  a  principality,  the 
marquis  of  which  was  Mu's  Minister  of  Crime.  Where  it  was 
is  not  well  known,  and  as  the  Book  is  quoted  in  the  Li  K\ 
several  times  under  the  title  of '  Fu  on  Punishments/  it  is  sup- 
posed that  Lti  and  Fu  (a  small  marquisate  in  the  present  Ho-nan) 
were  the  same. 

The  whole  Book  is  divided  into  seven  chapters.  The  first  is 
merely  a  brief  introduction,  the  historiographer's  account  of  the 
circumstances  in  which  king  Mu  delivered  his  lessons.  Each 
of  the  other  chapters  begins  with  the  words,  '  The  king  said/ 
The  first  two  of  them  are  an  historical  resume*  of  the  lessons 
of  antiquity  on  the  subject  of  punishments,  and  an  inculcation 
on  the  princes  and  officers  of  justice  to  give  heed  to  them,  and 
learn  from  them.  The  next  two  tell  the  princes  of  the  diligence 
and  carefulness  to  be  employed  in  the  use  of  punishments,  and 
how  they  can  make  punishments  a  blessing.  The  fourth  chap- 
ter treats  principally  of  the  commutation  or  redemption  of 
punishments,  and  has  been  very  strongly  condemned  by  critics 
and  moralists.  They  express  their  surprise  that  such  a  docu- 
ment should  be  in  the  Shu,  and,  holding  that  the  collection  was 
made  by  Confucius,  venture  to  ask  what  the  sage  meant  by 
admitting  it.  There  is,  in  fact,  no  evidence  that  the  redemption 
of  punishments  on  the  scale  here  laid  down,  existed  in  China 
before  Mu's  time.  It  has  entered,  however,  into  the  penal  code 
of  every  subsequent  dynasty.  Great  official  corruption  and  de- 
pravation of  the  general  morality  would  seem  to  be  inseparable 
from  such  a  system.     The  fifth  chapter  returns  again  to  the 


•BOOK  XXVII.        MARQUIS  OF  LU  ON  PUNISHMENTS.  255 

reverence  with  which  punishments  should  be  employed;  and  the 
sixth  and  last  is  addressed  to  future  generations,  and  directs 
them  to  the  ancient  models,  in  order  that  punishments  may 
never  be  but  a  blessing  to  the  kingdom. 
A  Chinese  critic  says  that  throughout  the  Book  ' virtue'  and  'exact 
adaptation '  are  the  terms  that  carry  the  weight  of  the  meaning. 
^Virtue  must  underlie  the  use  of  punishments,  of  which  their 
exact  adaptation  will  be  the  manifestation. 

i.  In  reference  to  the  charge  to  (the  marquis  of) 
Lii : — When  the  king  had  occupied  the  throne  till  he 
reached  the  age  of  a  hundred  years,  he  gave  great 
consideration  to  the  appointment  of  punishments, 
in  order  to  deal  with  (the  people  of)  the  four 
quarters. 

2.  The  king  said, i  According  to  the  teachings  of 
ancient  times,  Kkih  Yix  was  the  first  to  produce  dis- 
order, which  spread  among  the  quiet,  orderly  people, 
till  all  became  robbers  and  murderers,  owl-like  and 
yet  self-complacent  in  their  conduct,  traitors  and 
villains,  snatching  and  filching,  dissemblers  and 
oppressors  \ 

'Among  the  people  of  Mi&o,  they  did  not  use 
the  power  of  goodness,  but  the  restraint  of  punish- 
ments. They  made  the  five  punishments  engines 
of    oppression2,    calling    them    the    laws.      They 

1  .A^ih  Yu,  as  has  been  observed  in  the  Introduction,  p.  27,  is 
the  most  ancient  name  mentioned  in  the  Shu,  and  carries  us  back, 
according  to  the  Chinese  chronologists,  nearly  to  the  beginning  of 
the  twenty-seventh  century  b.  c.  P.  Gaubil  translates  the  characters 
which  appear  in  the  English  text  here  as  'According  to  the 
teachings  of  ancient  times '  by  '  Selon  les  anciens  documents/ 
which  is  more  than  the  Chinese  text  says. — It  is  remarkable  that 
at  the  commencement  of  Chinese  history,  Chinese  tradition  placed 
a  period  of  innocence,  a  season  when  order  and  virtue  ruled  in 
men's  affairs. 

2  I  do  not  think  it  is  intended  to  say  here  that '  the  five  punish- 
ments *  were  invented  by  the  chiefs  of  the  Miao ;  but  only  that 


256  THE   SHft   KING.  PART  v.- 

slaughtered  the  innocent,  and  were  the  first  also  to 
go  to  excess  in  cutting  off  the  nose,  cutting  off  the 
ears,  castration,  and  branding.  All  who  became 
liable  to  those  punishments  were  dealt  with  without 
distinction,  no  difference  being  made  in  favour  of 
those  who  could  offer  some  excuse.  The  people 
were  gradually  affected  by  this  state  of  things,  and 
became  dark  and  disorderly.  Their  hearts  were  no 
more  set  on  good  faith,  but  they  violated  their  oaths 
and  covenants.  The  multitudes  who  suffered  from 
the  oppressive  terrors,  and  were  (in  danger  of)  being 
murdered,  declared  their  innocence  to  Heaven.  God 
surveyed  the  people,  and  there  was  no  fragrance  of 
virtue  arising  from  them,  but  the  rank  odour  of  their 
(cruel)  punishments.* 

'The  great  Ti1  compassionated  the  innocent 
multitudes  that  were  (in  danger  of)  being  murdered, 
and  made  the  oppressors  feel  the  terrors  of  his 
majesty.  He  restrained  and  (finally)  extinguished 
the  people  of  Mi&o,   so  that  they  should  not  con- 


these  used  them  excessively  and  barbarously.  From  two  passages 
in  the  Canon  of  Shun,  we  conclude  that  that  monarch  was 
acquainted  with  *  the  five  great  inflictions  or  punishments/  and 
gave  instructions  to  his  minister  Kao-y&o  as  to  their  use. 

1  Here  is  the  name — Hwang  Ti — by  which  the  sovereigns  of 
China  have  been  styled  from  b.c  221,  since  the  emperor  of  KKm, 
on  his  extinction  of  the  feudal  states,  enacted  that  it  should  be 
borne  by  himself  and  his  descendants.  I  have  spoken  of  the 
meaning  of  Ti  and  of  the  title  Hwang  Ti  in  the  note  on  the 
translation  of  the  Shu  appended  to  the  Preface.  There  can 
be  no  doubt  that  it  was  Shun  whom  king  Mu  intended  by  the 
name.  A  few  sentences  further  on,  the  mention  of  Po-i  and 
Yti  leads  us  to  the  time  subsequent  to  Yao,  and  there  does  not 
appear  to  be  any  change  of  subject  in  the  paragraph.  We  get 
from  this  Book  a  higher  idea  of  the  power  of  the  Miao  than 
from  the  Books  of  Part  II. 


BOOK  xxvii.        MARQUIS  OF  LU  ON  PUNISHMENTS.  257 

tinue  to  future  generations.  Then  he  commissioned 
KAung  and  Li *  to  make  an  end  of  the  communica- 
tions between  earth  and  heaven  ;  and  the  descents 
(of  spirits)  ceased1.      From  the  princes  down  to  the 

1  Khung  and  Li  are  nowhere  met  with  in  the  previous  parts  of 
the  Shu,  nor  in  any  other  reliable  documents  of  history,  as  officers 
of  Shun.  3hal  Kfrkn  and  others  would  identify  them  with  the 
Hsi  and  Ho  of  the  Canon  of  Yao,  and  hold  those  to  have  been 
descended  from  a  Kh\mg  and  a  Li,  supposed  to  belong  to  the 
time  of  Shao  Hao  in  the  twenty-sixth  century  b.  c. 

Whoever  they  were,  the  duty  with  which  they  were  charged 
was  remarkable.  In  the  Narratives  of  the  States  (a  book  of 
the  Kan  dynasty),  we  find  a  conversation  on  it,  during  the  life- 
time of  Confucius,  between  king  Kh%,o  of  KJA  (b.  c.  5I5~4^9) 
and  one  of  his  ministers,  called  Kwan  Yi-fu.  '  What  is  meant/ 
asked  the  king,  '  by  wrhat  is  said  in  one  of  the  Books  of  iTau 
about  K/iung  and  Li,  that  they  really  brought  it  about  that  there 
was  no  intercourse  between  heaven  and  earth  ?  If  they  had  not 
done  so,  would  people  have  been  able  to  ascend  to  heaven?' 
The  minister  replied  that  that  was  not  the  meaning  at  all,  and 
gave  his  own  view  of  it  at  great  length,  to  the  following  effect. — 
Anciently,  the  people  attended  to  the  discharge  of  their  duties 
to  one  another,  and  left  the  worship  of  spiritual  beings  — the 
seeking  intercourse  with  them,  and  invoking  and  effecting  their 
descent  on  earth — to  the  officers  who  were  appointed  for  that 
purpose.  In  this  way  things  proceeded  with  great  regularity. 
The  people  minded  their  own  affairs,  and  the  spirits  minded 
theirs.  Tranquillity  and  prosperity  were  the  consequence.  But 
in  the  time  of  Shao  Hao,  through  the  lawlessness  of  JTiu-li,  a 
change  took  place.  The  people  intruded  into  the  functions  of 
the  regulators  of  the  spirits  and  their  worship.  They  abandoned 
their  duties  to  their  fellow  men,  and  tried  to  bring  down  spirits 
from  above.  The  spirits  themselves,  no  longer  kept  in  check 
and  subjected  to  rule,  made  their  appearance  irregularly  and 
disastrously.  All  was  confusion  and  calamity,  when  JTwan  Hsu 
(b.c.  2510-2433)  took  the  case  in  hand.  He  appointed  iOung, 
the  Minister  of  the  South,  to  the  superintendency  of  heavenly 
things,  to  prescribe  the  laws  for  the  spirits,  and  Li,  the  Minister 
of  Fire,  to  the  superintendency  of  earthly  things,  to  prescribe  the 
rules  for  the  people.  In  this  way  both  spirits  and  people  were 
[1]  S 


258  THE   SKfi   KING,  PART  V. 

inferior  officers,  all  helped  with  clear  intelligence 
(the  spread  of)  the  regular  principles  of  duty,  and 
the  solitary  and  widows  were  no  longer  overlooked. 
The  great  Ti  with  an  unprejudiced  mind  carried  his 
enquiries  low  down  among  the  people,  and  the  soli- 
tary and  widows  laid  before  him  their  complaints 
against  the  Mi&o.  He  awed  the  people  by  the 
majesty  of  his  virtue,  and  enlightened  them  by 
its  brightness.  He  thereupon  charged  the  three 
princely  (ministers)1  to  labour  with  compassionate 
anxiety  in  the  people's  behalf.  Po-t  delivered  his 
statutes  to  prevent  the  people  from  rendering  them- 
selves obnoxious  to  punishment;  Yti  reduced  to 
order  the  water  and  the  land,  and  presided  over  the 
naming  of  the  hills  and  rivers ;  Ki  spread  abroad 
a  knowledge  of  agriculture,  and  (the  people)  exten- 
sively cultivated  the  admirable  grains.  When  the 
three  princes  had  accomplished  their  work,  it  was 
abundantly  well  with  the  people.  The  Minister  of 
Crime2   exercised    among    them    the    restraint    of 

brought  back  to  their  former  regular  courses,  and  there  was  no 
unhallowed  interference  of  the  one  with  the  other.  This  was  the 
work  described  in  the  text.  But  subsequently  the  chief  of  San- 
mi&o  showed  himself  a  ^iu-lr  redivivus,  till  Yao  called  forth 
the  descendants  of  jOung  and  Li,  who  had  not  forgotten  the 
virtue  and  functions  of  their  fathers,  and  made  them  take  the  case 
in  hand  again. 

According  to  Yi-fiYs  statements  bung's  functions  were  those 
of  the  Minister  of  Religion,  and  Li's  those  of  the  Minister  of 
Instruction ;  but  Hsi  and  Ho  were  simply  Ministers  of  Astronomy 
and  the  Calendar,  and  their  descendants  continue  to  appear  as 
such  in  the  Shu  to  the  reign  of  JTung  Khang,  long  after  we  know 
that  men  of  other  families  were  appointed  to  the  important  minis- 
tries of  Khung  and  Li. 

1  Those  immediately  mentioned, — Po-i,  Yu,  and  KL  See  the 
Canon  of  Shun  and  other  Books  of  Part  II. 

*  K&o-y&o. 


BOOK  xxvii.         MARQUIS  OF  LU  ON  PUNISHMENTS.  259 

pjonishment^n  exagL  adaptation  jo  each  jjffence, 
and  taught  them  to  reverence  virtue.  The  greatest 
gravity  and  harmony  in  the  sovereign,  and  the 
greatest  intelligence  in  those  below  him,  thus 
shining  forth  to  all  quarters  (of  the  land),  all  were 
rendered  diligent  in  cultivating  their  virtue.  Hence, 
(if  anything  more  were  wanted),  the  clear  adjudica- 
tion of  punishments  effected  the  regulation  of  the 
people,  and  helped  them  to  observe  the  regular 
duties  of  life.  The  officers  who  presided  over 
criminal  cases  executed  the  law  (fearlessly)  against 
the  powerful,  and  (faithfully)  against  the  wealthy. 
They  were  reverent  and  cautious.  They  had  no 
occasion  to  make  choice  of  words  to  vindicate  their 
conduct.  The  virtue  of  Heaven  was  attained  to  by 
them  ;  from  them  was  the  determination  of  so  great 
a  matter  as  the  lives  (of  men).  In  their  low  sphere 
they  yet  corresponded  (to  Heaven)  and  enjoyed  (its 
favour)/  * 

3.  The  king  said,  '  Ah !  you  who  direct  the 
government  and  preside  over  criminal  cases  through 
all  the  land,  are  you  not  constituted  the  shepherds 
of  Heaven  ?*  To  whom  ought  you  now  to  look 
as  your  pattern  ?  Is  it  not  to  Po-i,  spreading 
among  the  people  his  lessons  to  avert  punishments  ? 
And  from  whom  ought  you  now  to  take  warning  ? 
Is  it  not  from  the  people  of  Mi&o,  who  would  not 
examine  into  the  circumstances  of  criminal  cases, 
and  did  not  make  choice  of  good  officers  that  should 
see  to  the  right  apportioning  of  the  five  punish- 
ments, but  chose  the  violent  and  bribe-snatchers, 
who  determined  and  administered  them,  so  as  to 
oppress  the  innocent,  until  God  would  no  longer 
hold   them   guiltless,   and   sent   down   calamity  on 

s  2 


26o  THE    Silt   KING.  PART  V. 

Mi&o,  when  the  people  had  no  plea  to  allege  in 
mitigation  of  their  punishment,  and  their  name  was 
cut  off  from  the  world  ? '  * 

4.  The  king  said,  '  Oh !  lay  it  to  heart.  My 
uncles,  and  all  ye,  my  brethren  and  cousins,  my  song 
and  my  grandsons1,  listen  all  of  you  to  my  words,  in 
which,  it  may  be,  you  will  receive  a  most  important 
charge.  You  will  only  tread  the  path  of  satisfaction 
by  being  daily  diligent; — do  not  have  occasion  to 
beware  of  the  want  of  diligence.  Heaven,  in  its 
wish  to  regulate  the  people,  allows  us  for  a  day  to 
make  use  of  punishments.*  Whether  crimes  have 
been  premeditated,  or  are  unpremeditated,  depends 
on  the  parties  concerned ; — do  you  (deal  with  them 
so  as  to)  accord  with  the  mind  of  Heaven,  and  thus 
serve  me,  the  One  man.  Though  I  would  put  them 
to  death,  do  not  you  therefore  put  them  to  death ; 
though  I  would  spare  them,  do  not  you  therefore 
spare  them.  Reverently  apportion  the  five  punish- 
ments, so  as  fully  to  exhibit  the  three  virtues 2. 
Then  shall  I,  the  One  man,  enjoy  felicity;  the 
people  will  look  to  you  as  their  sure  dependance ; 
the  repose  of  such  a  state  will  be  perpetual/ 

5.  The  king  said,  'Ho!  come,  ye  rulers  of  states 
and  territories3,  I  will  tell  you  how  to  make  punish- 
ments a  blessing.  It  is  yours  now  to  give  repose  to 
the  people ; — what  should  you  be  most  concerned 

1  Meaning  all  the  princes  of  the  same  surname  as  himself.  As 
he  was  a  hundred  years  old,  there  might  well  be  among  them 
those  who  were  really  his  sons  and  grandsons. 

2  'The  three  virtues'  are  those  of  the  Great  Plan;  those  of 
'  correctness  and  straightforwardness/  of  '  strong  government/  and 
of '  mild  government/ 

8  Meaning  all  the  princes ;— of  the  king's  own  and  other  sur- 
names. 


BOOK  XXVII.      MARQUIS  OF  Ltf  ON  PUNISHMENTS.  26 1 

about  the  choosing  of  ?  Should  it  not  be  the  proper 
men  ?  What  should  you  deal  with  the  most  reve- 
rently ?  Should  it  not  be  punishments  ?  What 
should  you  calculate  the  most  carefully  ?  Should 
it  not  be  to  whom  these  will  reach  ? 

'  When  both  parties  are  present,  (with  their  docu- 
ments and  witnesses)  all  complete,  let  the  judges 
listen  to  the  fivefold  statements  that  may  be  made1. 
When  they  have  examined  and  fully  made  up  their 
minds  on  those,  let  them  adjust  the  case  to  one  of 
the  five  punishments.  If  the  five  punishments  do 
not  meet  it,  let  them  adjust  it  to  one  of  the  five 
redemption-fines ;  and  if  these,  again,  are  not  suffi- 
cient for  it,  let  them  reckon  it  among  the  five  cases 
of  error 2. 

'  In  (settling)  the  five  cases  of  error  there  are 
evils  (to  be  guarded  against) ; — being  warped  by 
the  influence  of  power,  or  by  private  grudge,  or  by 
female  solicitation,  or  by  bribes,  or  by  applications. 
Any  one  of  these  things  should  be  held  equal  to 
the  crime  (before  the  judges).  Do  you  carefully 
examine,  and  prove  yourselves  equal  to  (every 
difficulty). 

'When  there  are  doubts  as  to  the  infliction  of 
any  of  the  five  punishments,  that  infliction  should 
be  forborne.     When   there   are   doubts    as   to   the 

1  That  is,  the  statements,  with  the  evidence  on  both  sides, 
whether  incriminating  or  exculpating.  They  are  called  fivefold,  as 
the  case  might  have  to  be  dealt  with  by  one  or  other  of  *  the  five 
punishments/ 

2  That  is,  the  offences  of  inadvertence.  What  should  ensue 
on  the  adjudication  of  any  case  to  be  so  ranked  does  not  appear. 
It  would  be  very  leniently  dealt  with,  and  perhaps  pardoned.  In 
<  the  Counsels  of  Yu/  K&o-yao  says  to  Shun,  '  You  pardon  inad- 
vertent offences  however  great/ 


262  THE    SHU   KING.  part  V. 

infliction  of  any  of  the  five  fines,  it  should  be  for- 
borne. Do  you  carefully  examine,  and  prove  your- 
selves equal  to  overcome  (every  difficulty).  When 
you  have  examined  and  many  things  are  clear,  yet 
form  a  judgment  from  studying  the  appearance  of 
the  parties.  If  you  find  nothing  out  on  examina- 
tion, do  not  listen  (to  the  case  any  more).  In 
everything  stand  in  awe  of  the  dread  majesty  of 
Heaven.* 

'When,  in  a  doubtful  case,  the  punishment  of 
branding  is  forborne,  the  fine  to  be  laid  on  instead 
is  600  ounces  (of  copper) ;  but  you  must  first  have 
satisfied  yourselves  as  to  the  crime.  When  the  case 
would  require  the  cutting  off  the  nose,  the  fine  must 
be  double  this ; — with  the  same  careful  determina- 
tion of  the  crime.  When  the  punishment  would 
be  the  cutting  off  the  feet,  the  fine  must  be  3000 
ounces; — with  the  same  careful  determination  of 
the  crime.  When  the  punishment  would  be  castra- 
tion \  the  fine  must  be  3600  ounces ; — with  the  same 
determination.  When  the  punishment  would  be 
death,  the  fine  must  be  6000  ounces ; — with  the 
same  determination.  Of  crimes  that  may  be  re- 
deemed by  the  fine  in  lieu  of  branding  there  are 
1000 ;  and  the  same  number  of  those  that  would 
otherwise  incur  cutting  off  the  nose.  The  fine  in 
lieu  of  cutting  off  the  feet  extends  to  500  cases ; 
that  in  lieu  of  castration,  to  300;  and  that  in  lieu 
of  death,  to  200.  Altogether,  set  against  the  five 
punishments,  there  are  3000  crimes.  (In  the  case 
of  others  not  exactly  defined),  you  must  class  them 
with  the  (next)  higher  or  (next)  lower  offences,  not 

1  Or  solitary  confinement  in  the  case  of  a  female. 


BOOK  XXVII.        MARQUIS  OF  LU  ON  PUNISHMENTS.  263 

admitting  assumptive  and  disorderly  pleadings  and 
not  using  obsolete  laws.  Examine  and  act  lawfully, 
judging  carefully,  and  proving  yourselves  equal  (to 
every  difficulty). 

'  Where  the  crime  should  incur  one  of  the  higher 
punishments,  but  there  are  mitigating  circumstances, 
apply  to  it  the  next  lower.  Where  it  should  incur  one 
of  the  lower  punishments,  but  there  are  aggravating 
circumstances,  apply  to  it  the  next  higher.  The  light 
and  heavy  fines  are  to  be  apportioned  (in  the  same 
way)  by  the  balance  of  circumstances.  Punishments 
and  fines  should  (also)  be  light  in  one  age,  and 
heavy  in  another.  To  secure  uniformity  in  this 
(seeming)  irregularity,  there  are  certain  relations  of 
things  (to  be  considered),  and  the  essential  principle 
(to  be  observed). 

'  The  chastisement  of  fines  is  short  of  death,  yet 
it  will  produce  extreme  distress.  They  are  not 
(therefore)  persons  of  artful  tongues  who  should 
determine  criminal  cases,  but  really  good  persons, 
whose  awards  will  hit  the  right  mean.  Examine 
carefully  where  there  are  any  discrepancies  in  the 
statements  ;  the  view  which  you  were  resolved  not 
to  follow,  you  may  see  occasion  to  follow ;  with 
compassion  and  reverence  settle  the  cases;  exa- 
mine carefully  the  penal  code,  and  deliberate  with 
all  about  it,  that  your  decisions  may  be  likely  to 
hit  the  proper  mean  and  be  correct ; — whether  it  be 
the  infliction  of  a  punishment  or  a  fine,  examining 
carefully  and  mastering  every  difficulty.  When  the 
case  is  thus  concluded,  all  parties  will  acknowledge 
the  justice  of  the  sentence ;  and  when  it  is  reported, 
the  sovereign  will  do  the  same.  In  sending  up 
reports  of  cases,  they  must  be  full  and  complete. 


264  THE   SHU    KING.  PART  v. 

If  a  man  have  been  tried  on  two  counts,  his  two 
punishments  (must  be  recorded)/ 

6.  The  king  said,  '  Oh !  let  there  be  a  feeling  of 
reverence.  Ye  judges  and  princes,  of  the  same  sur- 
name with  me,  and  of  other  surnames,  (know  all)  that 
I  speak  in  much  fear.  I  think  with  reverence  of  the 
subject  of  punishment,  for  the  end  of  it  is  to  promote 
virtue.  Now  Heaven,  wishing  to  help  the  people, 
has  made  us  its  representatives  here  below/5"  Be 
intelligent  and  pure  in  hearing  (each)  side  of  a  case. 
The  right  ordering  of  the  people  depends  on  the 
impartial  hearing  of  the  pleas  on  both  sides  ; — do 
not  seek  for  private  advantage  to  yourselves  by 
means  of  those  pleas.  Gain  (so)  got  by  the  decision 
of  cases  is  no  precious  acquisition ;  it  is  an  accumu- 
lation of  guilt,  and  will  be  recompensed  with  many 
judgments : — you  should  ever  stand  in  awe  of  the 
punishment  of  Heaven.*  It  is  not  Heaven  that 
does  not  deal  impartially  with  men,  but  men  ruin 
themselves.  If  the  punishment  of  Heaven  were 
not  so  extreme,  nowhere  under  the  sky  would  the 
people  have  good  government/ 

7.  The  king  said,  '  Oh !  ye  who  shall  hereafter 
inherit  (the  dignities  and  offices  of)  the  present  time, 
to  whom  are  yb  to  look  for  your  models  ?  Must  it 
not  be  to  those  who  promoted  the  virtue  belonging 
to  the  unbiassed  nature  of  the  people  ?  I  pray  you 
give  attention  to  my  words.  The  wise  men  (of 
antiquity)  by  their  use  of  punishments  obtained 
boundless  fame.  Everything  relating  to  the  five 
punishments  exactly  hit  with  them  the  due  mean, 
and  hence  came  their  excellence.  Receiving  from 
your  sovereigns  the  good  multitudes,  behold  in  the 
case  of  those  men  punishments  made  felicitous ! ' 


BOOK  XXVIII.       CHARGE    TO    THE    MARQUIS    WAN.  265 

Book  XXVIII. 
The  Charge  to  the  Marquis  Wan. 

The  king  to  whom  this  charge  is  ascribed  was  Phing  (b.  c.  770-719). 
Between  him  and  Mu  there  was  thus  a  period  of  fully  two  cen- 
turies, of  which  no  documents  are,  or  ever  were,  in  the  collec- 
tion of  the  Shu.  The  time  was  occupied  by  seven  reigns,  the 
last  of  which  was  that  of  Nieh,  known  as  king  Yu,  a  worthless 
ruler,  and  besotted  in  his  attachment  to  a  female  favourite, 
called  Pao-sze.  For  her  sake  he  degraded  his  queen,  and  sent 
their  son,  I-^iu,  to  the  court  of  the  lord  of  Shan,  her  father, 
'  to  learn  good  manners.'  The  lord  of  Shan  called  in  the 
assistance  of  some  barbarian  tribes,  by  which  the  capital  was 
sacked,  and  the  king  slain ;  and  with  him  ended  the  sway  of 
'  the  Western  K&xi.'  Several  of  the  feudal  princes  went  to  the 
assistance  of  the  royal  House,  drove  away  the  barbarians, 
brought  back  I-^iu  from  Shan,  and  hailed  him  as  king.  He 
is  known  as  king  Phing,  'the  Tranquillizer/  His  first  measure 
was  to  transfer  the  capital  from  the  ruins  of  Hao  to  Lo,  thus 
fulfilling  at  length,  but  under  disastrous  circumstances,  the 
wishes  of  the  duke  of  ^Tau;  and  from  this  time  (b.  c.  770)  dates 
the  history  of  '  the  Eastern  K&u? 

Among  king  Phing' s  early  measures  was  the  rewarding  the  feudal 
lords  to  whom  he  owed  his  throne.  The  marquis  of  Km  was 
one  of  them.  His  name  was  -Oiu,  and  that  of  I-ho,  by  which 
he  is  called  in  the  text,  is  taken  as  his  '  style/  or  designation 
assumed  by  him  on  his  marriage.  Wan,  '  the  Accomplished/ 
was  his  sacrificial  title.  The  lords  of  Km  were  descended  from 
king  Wu's  son,  Yu,  who  was  appointed  marquis  of  Thang,  cor- 
responding to  the  present  department  of  Thai-yuan,  in  Shan-hsi. 
The  name  of  Thang  was  afterwards  changed  into  Km,  The 
state  became  in  course  of  time  one  of  the  largest  and  most 
powerful  in  the  kingdom. 

The  charge  in  this  Book  is  understood  to  be  in  connexion  with 
Wan's  appointment  to  be  president  or  chief  of  several  of  the 
other  princes.  The  king  begins  by  celebrating  the  virtues  and 
happy  times  of  kings  Wan  and  Wu,  and  the  services  rendered 
by  the  worthy  ministers  of  subsequent  reigns.  He  contrasts 
with  this  the  misery  and  distraction  of  his  own  times,  deploring 
his  want  of  wise   counsellors  and  helpers,  and  praising  the 


266  THE    SH<J    KING.  PART  V. 

marquis  for  the  services  which  he  had  rendered.  He  then 
concludes  with  the  special  charge  by  which  he  would  reward 
the  prince's  merit  in  the  past,  and  stimulate  him  to  greater 
exertions  in  the  future. 

i.  The  king  spoke  to  the  following  effect: — • 
'  Uncle  f-ho,  how  illustrious  were  Wan  and  Wti ! 
Carefully  did  they  make  their  virtue  brilliant,  till 
it  rose  brightly  on  high,  and  the  fame  of  it  was 
widely  diffused  here  below.  Therefore  God  caused 
his  favouring  decree  to  light  upon  king  Wan.* 
There  were  ministers  also  (thereafter),  who  aided 
and  illustriously  served  their  sovereigns,  following 
and  carrying  out  their  plans,  great  and  small,  so  that 
my  fathers  sat  tranquilly  on  the  throne. 

'  Oh !  an  object  of  pity  am  I,  who  am  (but  as)  a 
little  child.  Just  as  I  have  succeeded  to  the  throne, 
Heaven  has  severely  chastised  me.*  Through  the 
interruption  of  the  (royal)  bounties  that  ceased  to 
descend  to  the  inferior  people,  the  invading  bar- 
barous tribes  of  the  west  have  greatly  (injured)  our 
kingdom.  Moreover,  among  the  managers  of  my 
affairs  there  are  none  of  age  and  experience  and 
distinguished  ability  in  their  offices.  I  am  (thus) 
unequal  (to  the  difficulties  of  my  position),  and  say 
to  myself,  "  My  grand-uncles  and  uncles,  you  ought 
to  compassionate  my  case."  Oh !  if  there  were 
those  who  could  establish  their  merit  in  behalf  of 
me,  the  One  man,  I  might  long  enjoy  repose  upon 
the  throne. 

'  Uncle  t-ho,  you  render  still  more  glorious  your 
illustrious  ancestor.  You  were  the  first  to  imitate 
the  example  of  Wan  and  WA,  collecting  (the  scat- 
tered powers),  and  continuing  (the  all  but  broken 
line  of)  your  sovereign.    Your  filial  piety  goes  back 


BOOK  XXIX.  THE    SPEECH    AT   !>!.  l6>] 

to  your  accomplished  ancestor,  (and  is  equal  to  his.) 
You  have  done  much  to  repair  my  (losses),  and 
defend  me  in  my  difficulties,  and  of  you,  being  such, 
I  am  full  of  admiration/ 

2.  The  king  said,  '  Uncle  t-ho,  return  home, 
survey  your  multitudes,  and  tranquillize  your  state. 
I  reward  you  with  a  jar  of  spirits,  distilled  from  the 
black  millet,  and  flavoured  with  odoriferous  herbs  \ 
with  a  red  bow,  and  a  hundred  red  arrows 2 ;  with 
a  black  bow,  and  a  hundred  black  arrows ;  and  with 
four  horses.  Go,  my  uncle.  Show  kindness  to 
those  that  are  far  off,  and  help  those  who  are 
near  at  hand ;  cherish  and  secure  the  repose  of 
the  inferior  people  ;  do  not  idly  seek  your  ease  ; 
exercise  an  inspection  and  (benign)  compassion  in 
your  capital  (and  all  your  borders); — thus  com- 
pleting your  illustrious  virtue/ 


Book  XXIX.     The  Speech  at  Pi. 

The  Speech  at  Pi  carries  us  back  from  the  time  of  Phing  to 
that  of  king  ZMng.  In  the  Preface  to  the  Shu  it  is  attributed 
to  Po-Min,  the  son  of  the  duke  of  .ffau ;  and  there  is  a  general 
acquiescence  of  tradition  and  critics  in  this  view.  We  may- 
account  for  its  position  out  of  the  chronological  order  from 

1  Compare  king  bang's  gift  to  the  duke  of  iTau,  in  the 
Announcement  concerning  Lo,  ch.  6. 

2  The  conferring  on  a  prince  of  a  bow  and  arrows,  invested 
him  with  the  power  of  punishing  throughout  the  states  within  his 
jurisdiction  all  who  were  disobedient  to  the  royal  commands,  but 
not  of  taking  life  without  first  reporting  to  the  court.  The  gift 
was  also  a  tribute  to  the  merit  of  the  receiver.  See  the  Book  of 
Poetry,  II,  iii,  ode  I. 


268  THE    SH$    KING.  PART  V. 

the  Book's  being  the  record  not  of  any  royal  doings,  but  of 
the  words  of  the  ruler  of  a  state. 

The  speech  has  reference  to  some  military  operations  against  the 
wild  tribes  on  the  Hw&i  river  and  in  other  parts  of  the  pro- 
vince of  Hsu ;  and  we  have  seen  that  they  were  in  insurrection 
many  times  during  the  reign  of  J^hang.  We  thus  cannot  tell 
exactly  the  year  in  which  the  speech  was  delivered.  To-Min 
presided  over  his  state  of  Lu  for  the  long  period  of  fifty-three 
years,  and  died  b.  c.  1063. 

The  name  of  Pi  is  retained  in  the  district  still  so  called  of  the 
department  of  I-Hu.  At  first  it  was  an  independent  territory, 
but  attached  to  Lu,  and  under  the  jurisdiction  of  its  marquises, 
by  one  of  whom  it  had  been  incorporated  with  Lu  before  the 
time  of  Confucius. 

Po-^in  appears  at  the  head  of  his  host,  approaching  the  scene 
of  active  operations.  Having  commanded  silence,  he  issues  his 
orders,  first,  that  the  soldiers  shall  have  their  weapons  in  good 
order ;  next,  that  the  people  of  the  country  shall  take  care  of 
the  oxen  and  horses  of  the  army;  further,  that  the  troops  on  no 
account  leave  their  ranks  or  go  astray;  and  finally,  he  names 
the  day  when  he  will  commence  operations  against  the  enemy, 
and  commands  all  the  requisite  preparations  to  be  made. 

The  duke  said,  '  Ah  !  ye  men,  make  no  noise,  but 
listen  to  my  commands.  We  are  going  (to  punish) 
those  wild  tribes  of  the  Hwai  and  of  Hsli,  which 
have  risen  up  together. 

'  Have  in  good  repair  your  buff  coats  and  helmets ; 
have  the  laces  of  your  shields  well  secured  ;- — pre- 
sume not  to  have  any  of  them  but  in  perfect  order. 
Prepare  your  bows  and  arrows  ;  temper  your  lances 
and  spears ;  sharpen  your  pointed  and  edged  wea- 
pons ; — presume  not  to  have  any  of  them  but  in 
good  condition. 

'  We  must  now  largely  let  the  oxen  and  horses 
loose,  and  not  keep  them  in  enclosures;  —  (ye 
people),  do  you  close  your  traps  and  fill  up  your 
pitfalls,  and  do  not  presume  to  injure  any  of  the 
animals  (so  let  loose).     If  any  of  them  be  injured, 


BOOK  XXIX.  THE    SPEECH    AT   pf.  269 

you    shall  be  dealt  with  according  to  the  regular 
punishments. 

'  When  the  horses  or  cattle  are  seeking  one 
another,  or  when  your  followers,  male  or  female, 
abscond,  presume  not  to  leave  the  ranks  to  pursue 
them.  But  let  them  be  carefully  returned.  I  will 
reward  you  (among  the  people)  who  return  them 
according  to  their  value.  But  if  you  leave  your 
places  to  pursue  them,  or  if  you  who  find  them  do 
not  restore  them,  you  shall  be  dealt  with  according 
to  the  regular  punishments. 

*  And  let  none  of  you  presume  to  commit  any 
robbery  or  detain  any  creature  that  comes  in  your 
way,  to  jump  over  enclosures  and  walls  to  steal 
(people's)  horses  or  oxen,  or  to  decoy  away  their 
servants  or  female  attendants.  If  you  do  so,  you 
shall  be  dealt  with  according  to  the  regular  punish- 
ments. 

*  On  the  day  A^ia-hsii  I  will  take  action  against 
the  hordes  of  Hsu  ; — prepare  the  roasted  grain  and 
other  provisions,  and  presume  not  to  have  any  defi- 
ciency. If  you  have,  you  shall  suffer  the  severest 
punishment.  Ye  men  of  LA,  from  the  three  en- 
vironing territories  and  the  three  tracts  beyond1, 


1  Outside  the  capital  city  was  an  environing  territory  called  the 
-ffiao,  and  beyond  the  ^i&o  was  the  Sui.  The  iTiao  of  the  royal 
domain  was  divided  again  into  six  Hsiang,  which  furnished  the  six 
royal  hosts,  while  the  Sui  beyond  furnished  subsidiary  hosts.  The 
K\&o  and  Sui  of  a  large  state  furnished  three  hosts,  and  if  need 
were,  subsidiary  battalions.  The  language  of  the  text  is  equivalent, 
I  conceive,  simply  to  '  ye  men  of  the  army  of  Lu ; '  but,  as  P.  Gaubil 
observes,  it  is  difficult  at  the  present  day  to  get  correct  ideas  of 
what  is  meant  by  the  designations,  and  to  account  for  the  mention 
of  three  K\ko  and  three  Sui. 


2  70  THE    SHO   KING.  PART  V. 

be  ready  with  your  posts  and  planks.  On  A'ia-hsu 
I  will  commence  my  intrenchments  ;— - -dare  not  but 
be  provided  with  a  supply  of  these.  (If  you  be  not 
so  provided),  you  shall  be  subjected  to  various 
punishments,  short  only  of  death.  Ye  men  of  Lti, 
from  the  three  environing  territories  and  the  three 
tracts  beyond,  be  ready  with  the  forage,  and  do  not 
dare  to  let  it  be  other  than  abundant.  (If  you  do), 
you  shall  suffer  the  severest  punishment/ 


Book  XXX. 
The  Speech  of  (the  Marquis  of)  A^in. 

The  state  of  Khm,  at  the  time  to  which  this  speech  belongs,  was 
one  of  the  most  powerful  in  the  kingdom,  and  already  giving 
promise  of  what  it  would  grow  to.  Ultimately,  one  of  its  princes 
overthrew  the  dynasty  of  K&u,  and  brought  feudal  China  to  an 
end.  Its  earliest  capital  was  in  the  present  district  of  Kh&xig- 
shui,  ^in  Z^u,  Kan-su. 

Khm  and  Km  were  engaged  together  in  b.  c.  631  in  besieging  the 
capital  of  ^ang,  and  threatened  to  extinguish  that  state.  The 
marquis  of  Khm>  however,  was  suddenly  induced  to  withdraw 
his  troops,  leaving  three  of  his  officers  in  friendly  relations  with 
the  court  of  i£ang,  and  under  engagement  to  defend  the  state 
from  aggression.  These  men  played  the  part  of  spies  in  the 
interest  of  .Oin,  and  in  b.  c.  629,  one  of  them,  called  KhU-yiQ, 
sent  word  that  he  was  in  charge  of  one  of  the  gates,  and  if 
an  army  were  sent  to  surprise  the  capital,  ^ang  might  be 
added  to  the  territories  of  Khixi.  The  marquis — known  in 
history  as  duke  Mu — laid  the  matter  before  his  counsellors. 
The  most  experienced  of  them — Pai-li  Hsi  and  -Oien-shu — 
were  against  taking  advantage  of  the  proposed  treachery ;  but 
the  marquis  listened  rather  to  the  promptings  of  ambition ;  and 
the  next  year  he  sent  a  large  force,  under  his  three  ablest  com- 
manders, hoping  to  find  -Sang  unprepared  for  any  resistance. 
The  attempt,  however,  failed ;  and  the  army,  on  its  way  back  to 


BOOK  XXX.  THE    SPEECH    OF   KHIN.  2JI 

Khm,  was  attacked  by  the  forces  of  Kin,  and  sustained  a  terrible 
defeat.  It  was  nearly  annihilated,  and  the  three  commanders 
were  taken  prisoners. 
The  marquis  of  Km  was  intending  to  put  these  captives  to  death, 
but  finally  sent  them  to  Khm,  that  duke  Mu  might  himself  sacri- 
fice them  to  his  anger  for  their  want  of  success.  Mu,  however, 
did  no  such  thing.  He  went  from  his  capital  to  meet  the  dis- 
graced generals,  and  comforted  them,  saying  that  the  blame  of 
their  defeat  was  due  to  himself,  who  had  refused  to  listen  to  the 
advice  of  his  wise  counsellors.  Then  also,  it  is  said,  he  made 
the  speech  here  preserved  for  the  benefit  of  all  his  ministers, 
describing  the  good  and  bad  minister,  and  the  different  issues  of 
listening  to  them,  and  deploring  how  he  had  himself  foolishly 
rejected  the  advice  of  his  aged  counsellors,  and  followed  that 
of  new  men ; — a  thing  which  he  would  never  do  again. 

The  duke 1  said,  '  Ah !  my  officers,  listen  to  me 
without  noise.  I  solemnly  announce  to  you  the 
most  important  of  all  sayings.  (It  is  this  which) 
the  ancients  have  said,  "  Thus  it  is  with  all  people, 
— they  mostly  love  their  ease.  In  reproving  others 
there  is  no  difficulty,  but  to  receive  reproof,  and 
allow  it  to  have  free  course, — this  is  difficult/'  The 
sorrow  of  my  heart  is,  that  the  days  and  months 
have  passed  away,  and  it  is  not  likely  they  will 
come  again,  (so  that  I  might  pursue  a  different 
course.) 

'  There  were  my  old  counsellors2. — I  said,  "  They 
will  not  accommodate  themselves  to  me,"  and  I 
hated  them.  There  were  my  new  counsellors,  and 
I  would  for  the  time  give  my  confidence  to  them3. 
So    indeed   it  was  with   me ;    but   hereafter  I  will 

1  The  prince  of  KMn  was  only  a  marquis ;  but  the  historio^ 
graphers  or  recorders  of  a  state  always  gave  their  ruler  the  higher 
title.  This  shows  that  this  speech  is  taken  from  the  chronicles  of 
JKin. 

2  Pai-H  Hsi  and  ^ien-shu. 

3  jOi-jze  and  others. 


2  72  THE   SH{j   KING. 


PART  V. 


take  advice  from  the  men  of  yellow  hair,  and  then 
I  shall  be  free  from  error.  That  good  old  officer ! 
—  his  strength  is  exhausted,  but  I  would  rather 
have  him  (as  my  counsellor).  That  dashing  brave 
officer ! — his  shooting  and  charioteering  are  fault- 
less, but  I  would  rather  not  wish  to  have  him.  As 
to  men  of  quibbles,  skilful  at  cunning  words,  and 
able  to  make  the  good  man  change  his  purposes, 
what  have  I  to  do  to  make  much  use  of  them  ? 

'  I  have  deeply  thought  and  concluded. — Let  me 
have  but  one  resolute  minister,  plain  and  sincere, 
without  other  ability,  but  having  a  straightforward 
mind,  and  possessed  of  generosity,  regarding  the 
talents  of  others  as  if  he  himself  possessed  them ; 
and  when  he  finds  accomplished  and  sage  men, 
loving  them  in  his  heart  more  than  his  mouth  ex- 
presses, really  showing  himself  able  to  bear  them  : 
— such  a  minister  would  be  able  to  preserve  my 
descendants  and  people,  and  would  indeed  be  a 
giver  of  benefits. 

'  But  if  (the  minister),  when  he  finds  men  of 
ability,  be  jealous  and  hates  them ;  if,  when  he  finds 
accomplished  and  sage  men,  he  oppose  them  and 
does  not  allow  their  advancement,  showing  himself 
really  not  able  to  bear  them : — such  a  man  will  not 
be  able  to  protect  my  descendants  and  people ;  and 
will  he  not  be  a  dangerous  man  ? 

'  The  decline  and  fall  of  a  state  may  arise  from 
one  man.  The  glory  and  tranquillity  of  a  state  may 
also  arise  from  the  goodness  of  one  man/ 


THE    SHIH    KING 

OR 

BOOK   OF    POETRY: 

ALL  THE  PIECES  AND  STANZAS  IN   IT  ILLUSTRATING 

THE  RELIGIOUS  VIEWS  AND   PRACTICES  OF 

THE  WRITERS  AND  THEIR  TIMES. 


[i] 


THE    SHIH    KING 

OR 

BOOK   OF   POETRY. 


INTRODUCTION. 

Chapter  I. 

The  Name  and  Contents  of  the  Classic. 

i.  Among  the  Chinese  classical  books  next  after  the  Shu 
in  point  of  antiquity  comes  the  Shih  or  Book  of  Poetry. 
The  character  Shu1,  as  formed  by  the  combination  of 
The  meaning    two  others,  one  of  which  signified  *  a  pencil/ 

character  anc*  the  °ther  '  to  speak,'  supplied,  we  saw, 
Shih.  in  its  structure,  an  indication  of  its  primary 
significance,  and  furnished  a  clue  to  its  different  applications. 
The  character  Shih2  was  made  on  a  different  principle, — 
that  of  phonetical  formation,  in  the  peculiar  sense  of  these 
words  when  applied  to  a  large  class  of  Chinese  terms.  The 
significative  portion  of  it  is  the  character  for  '  speech/  but 
the  other  half  is  merely  phonetical,  enabling  us  to  approxi- 
mate to  its  pronunciation  or  name.  The  meaning  of  the 
compound  has  to  be  learned  from  its  usage.  Its  most 
common  significations  are  *  poetry,'  '  a  poem,  or  poems,'  and 
'  a  collection  of  poems.'  This  last  is  its  meaning  when  we 
speak  of  the  Shih  or  the  Shih  King. 

The  earliest  Chinese  utterance  that  we  have  on  the 
subject  of  poetry  is  that  in  the  Shu  by  the  ancient  Shun, 
when  he  said  to  his  Minister  of  Music,  '  Poetry  is  the  ex- 
pression of  earnest  thought,  and  singing  is  the  prolonged 


T  2 


2J6  THE    SHIH    KING. 


utterance  of  that  expression.'  To  the  same  effect  is  the 
language  of  a  Preface  to  the  Shih,  sometimes  ascribed  to 
Confucius,  and  certainly  older  than  our  Christian  era  : — 
'  Poetry  is  the  product  of  earnest  thought.  Thought  che- 
rished in  the  mind  becomes  earnest ;  then  expressed  in  words, 
it  becomes  poetry.  The  feelings  move  inwardly,  and  are 
embodied  in  words.  When  words  are  insufficient  for  them, 
recourse  is  had  to  sighs  and  exclamations.  When  sighs  and 
exclamations  are  insufficient  for  them,  recourse  is  had  to 
the  prolonged  utterance  of  song.  When  this  again  is  in- 
sufficient, unconsciously  the  hands  begin  to  move  and  the 

feet  to  dance To  set  forth  correctly  the  successes 

and  failures  (of  government),  to  affect  Heaven  and  Earth, 
and  to  move  spiritual  beings,  there  is  no  readier  instrument 
than  poetry.' 

Rhyme,  it  may  be  added  here,  is  a  necessary  accompani- 
ment of  poetry  in  the  estimation  of  the  Chinese.  Only 
in  a  very  few  pieces  of  the  Shih  is  it  neglected. 

2.  The  Shih  King  contains  305  pieces  and  the  titles  of 
The  contents    six  others.     The  most  recent  of  them   are 

of  the  Shih.  assigned  to  the  reign  of  king  Ting  of  the 
Ka.u  dynasty,  B.C.  606  to  586,  and  the  oldest,  forming  a 
group  of  only  five,  to  the  period  of  the  Shang  dynasty 
which  preceded  that  of  iTau,  B.C.  1766  to  11 23.  Of  those 
five,  the  latest  piece  should  be  referred  to  the  twelfth  century 
B.  C,  and  the  most  ancient  may  have  been  composed  five 
centuries  earlier.  All  the  other  pieces  in  the  Shih  have 
to  be  distributed  over  the  time  between  Ting  and  king 
Wan,  the  founder  of  the  line  of  Kau.  The  distribution, 
however,  is  not  equal  nor  continuous.  There  were  some 
reigns  of  which  we  do  not  have  a  single  poetical  fragment. 

The  whole  collection  is  divided  into  four  parts,  called  the 
Kwo  Fang,  the  Hsiao  Yi,  the  Ta  Ya,  and  the  Sung. 

The  Kwo  Fang,  in  fifteen  Books,  contains  160  pieces, 
nearly  all  of  them  short,  and  descriptive  of  manners  and 
events,  in  several  of  the  feudal  states  of  Kau.  The  title 
has  been  translated  by  The  Manners  of  the  Different 
States,  '  Les  Mceurs  des  Royaumes,'  and,  which  I  prefer, 
by  Lessons  from  the  States. 


INTRODUCTION.  277 


The  Hsiao  Ya,  or  Lesser  Ya,  in  eight  Books,  contains 
seventy-four  pieces  and  the  titles  of  six  others,  sung  at 
gatherings  of  the  feudal  princes,  and  their  appearances  at 
the  royal  court.  They  were  produced  in  the  royal  territory, 
and  are  descriptive  of  the  manners  and  ways  of  the  govern- 
ment in  successive  reigns.  It  is  difficult  to  find  an  English 
word  that  shall  fitly  represent  the  Chinese  Ya  as  here  used. 
In  his  Latin  translation  of  the  Shih,  P.  Lacharme  trans- 
lated Hsiao  Ya  by  '  Quod  rectum  est,  sed  inferiore  ordine,' 
adding  in  a  note  : — '  Siao  Ya,  latine  Parvum  Rectum,  quia 
in  hac  Parte  mores  describuntur,  recti  illi  quidem,  qui  tamen 
nonnihil  a  recto  deflectunt.'  But  the  manners  described  are 
not  less  correct  or  incorrect,  as  the  case  may  be,  than  those 
of  the  states  in  the  former  Part  or  of  the  kingdom  in  the 
next.  I  prefer  to  call  this  Part  '  Minor  Odes  of  the  King- 
dom,' without  attempting  to  translate  the  term  Ya. 

The  Ta  Ya  or  Greater  Ya,  in  three  Books,  contains 
thirty-one  pieces,  sung  on  great  occasions  at  the  royal 
court  and  in  the  presence  of  the  king.  P.  Lacharme  called 
it  '  Magnum  Rectum  (Quod  rectum  est  superiore  ordine).' 
But  there  is  the  same  objection  here  to  the  use  of  the 
word  '  correct '  as  in  the  case  of  the  pieces  of  the  previous 
Part.  I  use  the  name  '  Major  Odes  of  the  Kingdom/ 
The  greater  length  and  dignity  of  most  of  the  pieces  justify 
the  distinction  of  the  two  Parts  into  Minor  and  Major. 

The  Sung,  also  in  three  Books,  contains  forty  pieces, 
thirty-one  of  which  belong  to  the  sacrificial  services  at  the 
royal  court  of  iTau  ;  four,  to  those  of  the  marquises  of  Lu  ; 
and  five  to  the  corresponding  sacrifices  of  the  kings  of 
Shang.  P.  Lacharme  denominated  them  correctly  '  Paren- 
tales  Cantus.'  In  the  Preface  to  the  Shih,  to  which  I  have 
made  reference  above,  it  is  said,  '  The  Sung  are  pieces  in 
admiration  of  the  embodied  manifestation  of  complete 
virtue,  announcing  to  the  spiritual  Intelligences  their 
achievement  thereof.'  Kil  Hsfs  account  of  the  Sung  was — 
'  Songs  for  the  Music  of  the  Ancestral  Temple  ;'  and  that  of 
K'mng  Yung  of  the  present  dynasty — '  Songs  for  the  Music 
at  Sacrifices.'  I  have  united  these  two  definitions,  and  call 
the  Part — 'Odes  of  the  Temple  and  the  Altar.'    There  is 


278  THE   SHIH    KING. 


a  difference  between  the  pieces  of  Lu  and  the  other  two 
collections  in  this  Part,  to  which  I  will  call  attention  in 
giving  the  translation  of  them. 

From  the  above  account  of  the  contents  of  the  Shih, 
r,  ,    .,      .         it  will  be  seen  that   only  the  pieces  in  the 

Unly  the  pieces  J  * 

of  the  fourth     last  of  its  four    Parts   are  professedly  of  a 

professed^  a    religious  character.     Many  of  those,  however, 

religious       jn  the  other  Parts,  especially  the  second  and 

chsrsctcr 

third,   describe    religious    services,   and    give 
expression  to  religious  ideas  in  the  minds  of  their  authors. 

3.  Some  of  the  pieces  in  the  Shih  are  ballads,  some  are 

songs,  some  are  hymns,  and  of  others  the  nature  can  hardly 

be  indicated  by  any  English  denomination. 

of  the  pieces1    They  have    often    been   spoken    of   by   the 

from  their  form  £eneral  name  of  odes,  understanding  by  that 

and  style.        ° 

term  lyric  poems  that  were  set  to  music. 
My  reason  for  touching  here  on  this  point  is  the  earliest 
account  of  the  Shih,  as  a  collection  either  already  formed 
or  in  the  process  of  formation,  that  we  find  in  Chinese 
literature.  In  the  Official  Book  of  iTau,  generally  supposed 
to  be  a  work  of  the  twelfth  or  eleventh  century  B.  C,  among 
the  duties  of  the  Grand  Music-Master  there  is  '  the  teach- 
ing^ (that  is,  to  the  musical  performers,)  'the  six  classes 
of  poems:— the  Fang;  the  Fu ;  the  Pi;  the  Hsing;  the 
Ya;  and  the  Sung.'  That  the  collection  of  the  Shih,  as 
it  now  is,  existed  so  early  as  the  date  assigned  to  the 
Official  Book  could  not  be ;  but  we  find  the  same  account 
of  it  given  in  the  so-called  Confucian  Preface.  The  Fang, 
the  Ya,  and  the  Sung  are  the  four  Parts  of  the  classic 
described  in  the  preceding  paragraph,  the  Ya  embracing 
both  the  Minor  and  Major  Odes  of  the  Kingdom.  But 
what  were  the  Fu,  the  Pi,  and  the  Hsing?  We  might 
suppose  that  they  were  the  names  of  three  other  distinct 
Parts  or  Books.  But  they  were  not  so.  Pieces  so  discri- 
minated are  found  in  all  the  four  Parts,  though  there  are 
more  of  them  in  the  first  two  than  in  the  others. 

The  Fu  may  be  described  as  Narrative  pieces,  in  which 
the  writers  tell  what  they  have  to  say  in  a  simple,  straight- 
forward manner,  without  any  hidden  meaning  reserved  in 


INTRODUCTION.  279 


the  mind.  The  metaphor  and  other  figures  of  speech  enter 
into  their  composition  as  freely  as  in  descriptive  poems 
in  any  other  language. 

The  Pi  are  Metaphorical  pieces,  in  which  the  poet  has 
under  his  language  a  different  meaning  from  what  it  ex- 
presses,— a  meaning  which  there  should  be  nothing  in  that 
language  to  indicate.  Such  a  piece  may  be  compared 
to  the  ^Esopic  fable ;  but,  while  it  is  the  object  of  the 
fable  to  inculcate  the  virtues  of  morality  and  prudence, 
an  historical  interpretation  has  to  be  sought  for  the  meta- 
phorical pieces  of  the  Shih.  Generally,  moreover,  the 
moral  of  the  fable  is  subjoined  to  it,  which  is  never  done 
in  the  case  of  these  pieces. 

The  Hsing  have  been  called  Allusive  pieces.  They  are 
very  remarkable,  and  more  numerous  than  the  metaphorical. 
They  often  commence  with  a  couple  of  lines  which  are  re- 
peated without  change,  or  with  slight  rhythmical  changes,  in 
all  the  stanzas.  In  other  pieces  different  stanzas  have  allusive 
lines  peculiar  to  themselves.  Those  lines  are  descriptive, 
for  the  most  part,  of  some  object  or  circumstance  in  the 
animal  or  vegetable  world,  and  after  them  the  poet  pro- 
ceeds to  his  proper  subject.  Generally,  the  allusive  lines 
convey  a  meaning  harmonizing  with  those  which  follow, 
where  an  English  poet  would  begin  the  verses  with  Like  or 
As.  They  are  really  metaphorical,  but  the  difference  be- 
tween an  allusive  and  a  metaphorical  piece  is  this,— that 
in  the  former  the  writer  proceeds  to  state  the  theme  which 
his  mind  is  occupied  with,  while  no  such  intimation  is  given 
in  the  latter.  Occasionally,  it  is  difficult,  not  to  say  im- 
possible, to  discover  the  metaphorical  idea  in  the  allusive 
lines,  and  then  we  can  only  deal  with  them  as  a  sort  of 
refrain. 

In  leaving  this  subject,  it  is  only  necessary  to  say  further 
that  the  allusive,  the  metaphorical,  and  the  narrative  ele- 
ments sometimes  all  occur  in  the  same  piece. 


280  THE    SHIH    KING. 


Chapter  II. 

The  Shih  before  Confucius,  and  what,  if  any, 
were  his  Labours  upon  it. 

i.  Sze-ma  Kkltn,  in  his  memoir  of  Confucius,  says: — 
'  The  old  poems  amounted  to  more  than  3000.  Confucius 
removed  those  which  were  only  repetitions  of  others,  and 
selected  those  which  would  be  serviceable  for  the  inculca- 

Statement  of  ti°n  of  propriety  and  righteousness.  Ascend- 
Sze-ma  tfAien.  ing  as  hjgn  as  Hsieh  and  Hau-£i,  and 
descending  through  the  prosperous  eras  of  Yin  and  K&u  to 
the  times  of  decadence  under  kings  Yu  and  Li,  he  selected 
in  all  305  pieces,  which  he  sang  over  to  his  lute,  to  bring 
them  into  accordance  with  the  musical  style  of  the  Shao, 
the  Wu,  the  Ya,  and  the  Fang.' 

In  the  History  of  the  Classical  Books  in  the  Records  of 
the  Sui  Dynasty  (a.  d.  589  to  618),  it  is  said  : — '  When  royal 
The  writer  of  benign  rule  ceased,  and  poems  were  no  more 
the  Records  of  collected,  Kih,  the  Grand  Music-Master  of 
t  e  ui  ynasty.  j-^  arranged  in  order  those  that  were  exist- 
ing, and  made  a  copy  of  them.  Then  Confucius  expur- 
gated them ;  and  going  up  to  the  Shang  dynasty,  and 
coming  down  to  the  state  of  Lu,  he  compiled  altogether 
300  pieces.' 

Ku  Hsi,  whose  own  standard  work  on  the  Shih  appeared 
in  A.  D.  1 1 78,  declined  to  express  himself  positively  on  the 
expurgation  of  the  odes,  but  summed  up  his  view  of 
what  Confucius  did  for  them  in  the  following  words : — 

Opinion  of  '  Royal  methods  had  ceased,  and  poems  were 
Ku  Hsi.  no  more  collected.  Those  which  were  extant 
were  full  of  errors,  and  wanting  in  arrangement.  When 
Confucius  returned  from  Wei  to  Lu,  he  brought  with  him 
the  odes  that  he  had  gotten  in  other  states,  and  digested 
them,  along  with  those  that  were  to  be  found  in  Lu,  into 
a  collection  of  300  pieces.' 

I  have  not  been  able  to  find  evidence  sustaining  these 


INTRODUCTION.  28 1 


representations,  and  must  adopt  the  view  that,  before  the 
View  of  the  birth  of  Confucius,  the  Book  of  Poetry  existed, 
author.  substantially  the  same  as  it  was  at  his  death, 
and  that  while  he  may  have  somewhat  altered  the  arrange- 
ment of  its  Books  and  pieces,  the  service  which  he  rendered 
to  it  was  not  that  of  compilation,  but  the  impulse  to  study  it 
which  he  communicated  to  his  disciples. 

3.   If  we  place  Kkien's  composition  of  the  memoir  of 

Confucius  in  B.  C.  100,  nearly  four  hundred  years  will  have 

Groundlessness    elaPsed  between  the  death  of  the  sage  and 

of  lien's       any  statement  to  the  effect  that  he  expurgated 

statement.  ,  .  ,.  .,     ,    ,, 

previously  existing  poems,  or  compiled  the 
collection  that  we  now  have ;  and  no  writer  in  the  interval 
affirmed  or  implied  any  such  things.  The  further  state- 
ment in  the  Sui  Records  about  the  Music-Master  of  Lu 
is  also  without  any  earlier  confirmation.  But  independently 
of  these  considerations,  there  is  ample  evidence  to  prove, 
first,  that  the  poems  current  before  Confucius  were  not 
by  any  means  so  numerous  as  AT^ien  says,  and,  secondly, 
that  the  collection  of  300  pieces  or  thereabouts,  digested 
under  the  same  divisions  as  in  the  present  classic,  existed 
before  the  sage's  time. 

3.  i.  It  would  not  be  surprising,  if,  floating  about  and 
current  among  the  people  of  China  in  the  sixth  century 
before  our  era,  there  had  been  more  than  3000  pieces  of 
poetry.  The  marvel  is  that  such  was  not  the  case.  But  in 
the  Narratives  of  the  States,  a  work  of  the  iTau  dynasty, 
and  ascribed  by  many  to  3°  .Oiu-ming,  there  occur 
quotations  from  thirty-one  poems,  made  by  statesmen  and 
others,  all  anterior  to  Confucius ;  and  of  those  poems  there 
are  not  more  than  two  which  are  not  in  the  present  classic. 
Even  of  those  two,  one  is  an  ode  of  it  quoted  under  another 
name.  .  Further,  in  the  3°  ^wan,  certainly  the  work  of 
Kkiii-ming,  we  have  quotations  from  not  fewer  than  219 
poems,  of  which  only  thirteen  are  not  found  in  the  classic. 
Thus  of  250  poems  current  in  China  before  the  supposed 
compilation  of  the  Shih,  236  are  found  in  it,  and  only 
fourteen  are  absent.  To  use  the  words  of  Kao  Yi,  a 
scholar  of  the  present  dynasty,  '  If  the  poems  existing  in 


282  THE   SHIH   KING. 


Confucius'  time  had  been  more  than  3000,  the  quotations 
of  poems  now  lost  in  these  two  works  should  have  been 
ten  times  as  numerous  as  the  quotations  from  the  305 
pieces  said  to  have  been  preserved  by  him,  whereas  they 
are  only  between  a  twenty-first  and  twenty-second  part 
of  the  existing  pieces.  This  is  sufficient  to  show  that 
K/nen's  statement  is  not  worthy  of  credit.' 

ii.  Of  the  existence  of  the  Book  of  Poetry  before  Con- 
fucius, digested  in  four  Parts,  and  much  in  the  same 
order  as  at  present,  there  may  be  advanced  the  following 
proofs : — 

First.  There  is  the  passage  in  the  Official  Book  of  Kauf 
quoted  and  discussed  in  the  last  paragraph  of  the  preceding 
chapter.  We  have  in  it  a  distinct  reference  to  poems, 
many  centuries  before  the  sage,  arranged  and  classified  in 
the  same  way  as  those  of  the  existing  Shih.  Our  Shih, 
no  doubt,  was  then  in  the  process  of  formation. 

Second.  In  the  ninth  piece  of  the  sixth  decade  of  the 
Shih,  Part  II,  an  ode  assigned  to  the  time  of  king  Yti, 
B.C.  781  to  771,  we  have  the  words, 

'They  sing  the  Ya  and  the  Nan, 
Dancing  to  their  flutes  without  error.' 

So  early,  therefore,  as  the  eighth  century  B.  C.  there  was 
a  collection  of  poems,  of  which  some  bore  the  name  of 
the  Nan,  which  there  is  much  reason  to  suppose  were  the 
A"au  Nan  and  the  Shao  Nan,  forming  the  first  two  Books  of 
the  first  Part  of  the  present  Shih ;  and  of  which  others  bore 
the  name  of  the  Ya,  being,  probably,  the  earlier  pieces  that 
now  compose  a  large  portion  of  the  second  and  third  Parts. 
Third.  In  the  narratives  of  3°  .Oiu-ming,  under  the 
twenty-ninth  year  of  duke  Hsiang,  B.C.  544,  when  Con- 
fucius was  only  seven  or  eight  years  old,  we  have  an 
account  of  a  visit  to  the  court  of  Lu  by  an  envoy  from 
Wu,  an  eminent  statesman  of  the  time,  and  a  man  of  great 
learning.  We  are  told  that  as  he  wished  to  hear  the  music 
of  ATau,  which  he  could  do  better  in  Lu  than  in  any  other 
state,  they  sang  to  him  the  odes  of  the  Kixu  Nan  and  the 
Shao  Nan  ;  those  of  Phei,  Yung,  and  Wei ;  of  the  Royal 
Domain  ;  of  Kang ;  of  KM  ;  of  Pin  ;  of  Khln  ;  of  Wei ;  of 


INTRODUCTION.  283 


Thang ;  of  Kh&w  ;  of  Kwei ;  and  of  $Mo.  They  sang  to 
him  also  the  odes  of  the  Minor  Ya  and  the  Greater  Ya  ; 
and  they  sang  finally  the  pieces  of  the  Sung.  We  have 
thus,  existing  in  the  boyhood  of  Confucius,  what  we  may 
call  the  present  Book  of  Poetry,  with  its  Fang,  its  Ya,  and 
its  Sung.  The  only  difference  discernible  is  slight,— in  the 
order  in  which  the  Books  of  the  Fang  followed  one  another. 

Fourth.  We  may  appeal  in  this  matter  to  the  words  of 
Confucius  himself.  Twice  in  the  Analects  he  speaks  of  the 
Shih  as  a  collection  consisting  of  300  pieces1.  That  work 
not  being  made  on  any  principle  of  chronological  order, 
we  cannot  positively  assign  those  sayings  to  any  particular 
years  of  Confucius'  life  ;  but  it  is,  I  may  say,  the  unanimous 
opinion  of  Chinese  critics  that  they  were  spoken  before  the 
time  to  which  KMen  and  Ku  Hsi  refer  his  special  labour 
on  the  Book  of  Poetry. 

To  my  own  mind  the  evidence  that  has  been  adduced 
is  decisive  on  the  points  which  I  specified.  The  Shih, 
arranged  very  much  as  we  now  have  it,  was  current  in 
China  before  the  time  of  Confucius,  and  its  pieces  were 
in  the  mouths  of  statesmen  and  scholars,  constantly  quoted 
by  them  on  festive  and  other  occasions.  Poems  not  included 
in  it  there  doubtless  were,  but  they  were  comparatively  few. 
Confucius  may  have  made  a  copy  for  the  use  of  himself 
and  his  disciples ;  but  it  does  not  appear  that  he  rejected 
any  pieces  which  had  been  previously  received  into  the 
collection,  or  admitted  any  which  had  not  previously  found 
a  place  in  it. 

4.  The  question  now  arises  of  what  Confucius  did  for  the 
Shih,  if,  indeed,  he  did  anything  at  all.  The  only  thing 
What  Confu  *      fr°m  which  we  can  hazard  an  opinion  on  the 

did  for  the      point  we  have  from  himself.    In  the  Analects, 

Shih'  IX,  xiv,  he  tells  us  :— '  I  returned  from  Wei 

to  Lu,  and  then  the  music  was  reformed,  and  the  pieces  in 

1  In  stating  that  the  odes  were  300,  Confucius  probably  preferred  to  use  the 
round  number.  There  are,  as  I  said  in  the  former  chapter,  altogether  305 
pieces,  which  is  the  number  given  by  Sze-ma  Khien.  There  are  also  the  titles 
of  six  others.  It  is  contended  by  Ku  Hsi  and  many  other  scholars  that  these 
titles  were  only  the  names  of  tunes.  More  likely  is  the  view  that  the  text  of  the 
pieces  so  styled  was  lost  after  Confucius'  death. 


284  THE    SHIH    KING. 


the  Ya  and  the  Sung  received  their  proper  places.5  The 
return  from  Wei  to  Lu  took  place  only  five  years  before  the 
sage's  death.  He  ceased  from  that  time  to  take  an  active 
part  in  political  affairs,  and  solaced  himself  with  music,  the 
study  of  the  ancient  literature  of  his  nation,  the  writing 
of '  the  Spring  and  Autumn,'  and  familiar  intercourse  with 
those  of  his  disciples  who  still  kept  around  him.  He 
reformed  the  music, — that  to  which  the  pieces  of  the  Shih 
were  sung ;  but  wherein  the  reformation  consisted  we 
cannot  tell.  And  he  gave  to  the  pieces  of  the  Ya  and 
the  Sung  their  proper  places.  The  present  order  of  the 
Books  in  the  Fang,  slightly  differing  from  what  was 
common  in  his  boyhood,  may  have  now  been  determined 
by  him.     More  than  this  we  cannot  say. 

While  we  cannot  discover,  therefore,  any  peculiar  and 
important  labours  of  Confucius  on  the  Shih,  and  we  have 
it  now,  as  will  be  shown  in  the  next  chapter,  substantially 
as  he  found  it  already  compiled  to  his  hand,  the  subse- 
quent preservation  of  it  may  reasonably  be  attributed  to 
the  admiration  which  he  expressed  for  it,  and  the  enthu- 
siasm for  it  with  which  he  sought  to  inspire  his  disciples. 
It  was  one  of  the  themes  on  which  he  delighted  to  con- 
verse with  them1.  He  taught  that  it  is  from  the  poems 
that  the  mind  receives  its  best  stimulus 2.  A  man  ignorant 
of  them  was,  in  his  opinion,  like  one  who  stands  with  his 
face  towards  a  wall,  limited  in  his  view,  and  unable  to 
advance3.  Of  the  two  things  that  his  son  could  specify  as 
enjoined  on  him  by  the  sage,  the  first  was  that  he  should 
learn  the  odes4.  In  this  way  Confucius,  probably,  contri- 
buted largely  to  the  subsequent  preservation  of  the  Shih, — 
the  preservation  of  the  tablets  on  which  the  odes  were 
inscribed,  and  the  preservation  of  it  in  the  memory  of  all 
who  venerated  his  authority,  and  looked  up  to  him  as  their 
master. 

1  Analects,  VII,  xvii.  2  Analects,  VIII,  viii,  XVII,  ix. 

3  Analects,  XVII,  x.  4  Analects,  XVI,  xiii. 


INTRODUCTION.  285 


Chapter  III. 

The  Shih  from  the  Time  of  Confucius  till 

the  General  Acknowledgment  of  the 

Present  Text. 

1.  Of  the  attention  paid  to  the  study  of  the  Shih  from 
the  death  of  Confucius  to  the  rise  of  the  Kkm  dynasty,  we 

have  abundant  evidence  in  the  writings  of  his 

From  Con-  & 

fucius  to  the     grandson  3ze~szeJ  °f  Mencius,  and  of  Hsiin 

Khfa&yi^xy.     Kking.    One  of  the  acknowledged  distinctions 

of  Mencius  is  his  acquaintance  with  the  odes, 

his  quotations  from  which  are  very  numerous;  and  Hsiin 

.Oing  survived  the  extinction  of  the  Ka.\i  dynasty,  and 

lived  on  into  the  times  of  Khm. 

2.  The  Shih  shared  in  the  calamity  which  all  the  other 
classical  works,  excepting  the  Yi,  suffered,  when  the  tyrant 
of  .Oin  issued  his  edict  for  their  destruction.  But  I  have 
shown,  in  the  Introduction  to  the  Shu,  p.  7,  that  that  edict 
was  in  force  for  less  than  a  quarter  of  a  century.     The 

odes  were  all,  or  very  nearly  all1,  recovered ; 
all^ecoveral  and  the  reason  assigned  for  this  is,  that  their 
after  the  fires    preservation   depended   on    the    memory   of 

ofKhin.  r  ..     ,  \  -     .  .      . 

scholars   more  than   on   their  inscription  on 
tablets  of  bamboo  and  on  silk. 

3.  Three  different  texts  of  the  Shih  made  their  appear- 
ance early  in  the  Han  dynasty,  known  as  the  Shih  of  Lu, 

Three  different  of  Kk%  and  of  Han;  that  is,  the  Book  of 
texts.  Poetry  was  recovered  from  three  different 
quarters.  Liu  Hin's  Catalogue  of  the  Books  in  the 
Imperial  Library  of  Han  (B.C.  6  to  1)  commences,  on  the 
Shih  King,  with  a  collection  of  the  three  texts,  in  twenty- 
eight  chapters. 

1  All,  in  fact,  unless  we  except  the  six  pieces  of  Part  II,  of  which  we  have 
only  the  titles.  It  is  contended  by  A'u  Hsi  and  others  that  the  text  of  these 
had  been  lost  before  the  time  of  Confucius.  It  may  have  been  lost,  however, 
after  the  sage's  death ;  see  note  on  p.  283. 


286  THE    SHIH    KING. 


i.  Immediately  after  the  mention  of  the  general  collection 
in  the  Catalogue  come  the  titles  of  two  works  of  com- 
mentary on  the  text  of  Lu.  The  former  of 
them  was  by  a  Shan  Phei  of  whom  we  have 
some  account  in  the  Literary  Biographies  of  Han.  He  was 
a  native  of  Lu,  and  had  received  his  own  knowledge  of  the 
odes  from  a  scholar  of  KM,  called  Fau  A7ziu-po.  He  was 
resorted  to  by  many  disciples,  whom  he  taught  to  repeat 
the  odes.  When  the  first  emperor  of  the  Han  dynasty  was 
passing  through  Lu,  Shan  followed  him  to  the  capital  of 
that  state,  and  had  an  interview  with  him.  Subsequently 
the  emperor  Wu  (B.C.  140  to  87),  in  the  beginning  of  his 
reign,  sent  for  him  to  court  when  he  was  more  than  eighty 
years  old  ;  and  he  appears  to  have  survived  a  considerable 
number  of  years  beyond  that  advanced  age.  The  names 
of  ten  of  his  disciples  are  given,  all  of  them  men  of 
eminence,  and  among  them  Khung  An-kwo.  Rather  later, 
the  most  noted  adherent  of  the  school  of  Lu  was  Wei 
Hsien,  who  arrived  at  the  dignity  of  prime  minister  (from 
B.  C.  71  to  67),  and  published  the  Shih  of  Lu  in  Stanzas  and 
Lines.  Up  and  down  in  the  Books  of  Han  and  Wei  are 
to  be  found  quotations  of  the  odes,  that  must  have  been 
taken  from  the  professors  of  the  Lu  recension ;  but  neither 
the  text  nor  the  writings  on  it  long  survived.  They  are 
said  to  have  perished  during  the  Kin  dynasty  (a.  D.  %6$  to 
419).  When  the  Catalogue  of  the  Sui  Library  was  made, 
none  of  them  were  existing. 

ii.  The  Han  Catalogue  mentions  five  different  works  on 
the  Shih  of  KM.  This  text  was  from  a  Yuan  Ku,  a  native 
of  KM,  about  whom  we  learn,  from  the  same 
1#  collection  of  Literary  Biographies,  that  he  was 
one  of  the  great  scholars  of  the  court  in  the  time  of  the 
emperor  King  (b.  C.  156  to  141), — a  favourite  with  him,  and 
specially  distinguished  for  his  knowledge  of  the  odes  and 
his  advocacy  of  orthodox  Confucian  doctrine.  He  died  in 
the  succeeding  reign  of  Wu,  more  than  ninety  years  old  ; 
and  we  are  told  that  all  the  scholars  of  KM  who  got  a 
name  in  those  days  for  their  acquaintance  with  the  Shih 
sprang  from  his  school.     Among  his  disciples  was  the  well- 


INTRODUCTION.  287 


known  name  of  Hsia-hau  Shih-^ang,  who  communicated 
his  acquisitions  to  Hau  3^ang,  a  native  of  the  present 
Shan-tung  province,  and  author  of  two  of  the  works  in  the 
Han  Catalogue*  Hau  had  three  disciples  of  note,  and  by 
them  the  Shih  of  KM  was  transmitted  to  others,  whose 
names,  with  quotations  from  their  writings,  are  scattered 
through  the  Books  of  Han.  Neither  text  nor  commentaries, 
however,  had  a  better  fate  than  the  Shih  of  Lu.  There 
is  no  mention  of  them  in  the  Catalogue  of  Sui.  They  are 
said  to  have  perished  even  before  the  rise  of  the  Kin 
dynasty. 

iii.  The  text  of  Han  was  somewhat  more  fortunate. 
Hin's  Catalogue  contains  the  names  of  four  works,  all  by 
The  text  of  ^an  Ying,  whose  surname  is  thus  perpetuated 
Han  Ying.  in  the  text  of  the  Shih  that  emanated  from 
him.  He  was  a  native,  we  are  told,  of  Yen,  and  a  great 
scholar  in  the  time  of  the  emperor  Wan  (B.C.  179  to  155), 
and  on  into  the  reigns  of  King  and  Wu.  ' He  laboured/ 
it  is  said,  '  to  unfold  the  meaning  of  the  odes,  and  published 
an  Explanation  of  the  Text,  and  Illustrations  of  the  Poems, 
containing  several  myriads  of  characters.  His  text  was 
somewhat  different  from  the  texts  of  Lu  and  KM,  but 
substantially  of  the  same  meaning/  Of  course,  Han  founded 
a  school ;  but  while  almost  all  the  writings  of  his  followers 
soon  perished,  both  the  works  just  mentioned  continued  on 
through  the  various  dynasties  to  the  time  of  Sung.  The  Sui 
Catalogue  contains  the  titles  of  his  Text  and  two  works  on 
it ;  the  Thang,  those  of  his  Text  and  his  Illustrations  ;  but 
when  we  come  to  the  Catalogue  of  Sung,  published  under 
the  Yuan  dynasty,  we  find  only  the  Illustrations,  in  ten 
books  or  chapters;  and  Au-yang  Hsiu  (a. D.  1017  to 
1072)  tells  us  that  in  his  time  this  was  all  of  Han  that 
remained.  It  continues  entire,  or  nearly  so,  to  the  present 
day. 

4.  But  while  those  three  different  recensions  of  the  Shih 
all  disappeared,  with  the  exception  of  a  single  treatise  of 
Han  Ying,  their  unhappy  fate  was  owing  not  more  to  the 
convulsions  by  which  the  empire  was  often  rent,  and  the 
consequent  destruction  of  literary  monuments  such  as  we 


288  THE    SHIH    KING. 


have  witnessed  in  China  in  our  own  day,  than  to  the 
A  fourth  text;   appearance  of  a  fourth  text,  which  displaced 

that  of  Mao.  them  by  its  superior  correctness,  and  the 
ability  with  which  it  was  advocated  and  commented  on. 
This  was  what  is  called  the  Text  of  Mao.  It  came  into  the 
field  rather  later  than  the  others ;  but  the  Han  Catalogue 
contains  the  Shih  of  Mao,  in  twenty-nine  chapters,  and 
a  Commentary  on  it  in  thirty-nine.  According  to  Kang 
Hsiian,  the  author  of  this  was  a  native  of  Lu,  known  as 
Mao  Hang  or  '  the  Greater  Mao,'  who  had  been  a  disciple, 
we  are  told  by  Lli  Teh-ming,  of  Hsiin  Kkmg.  The  work 
is  lost.  He  had  communicated  his  knowledge  of  the  Shih, 
however,  to  another  Mao, — Mao  Kang,  'the  Lesser  Mao,' 
who  was  a  great  scholar,  at  the  court  of  king  Hsien  of 
Ho-£ien,  a  son  of  the  emperor  King.  King  Hsien  was  one 
of  the  most  diligent  labourers  in  the  recovery  of  the  ancient 
books,  and  presented  the  text  and  work  of  Hang  at  the 
court  of  his  father, — probably  in  B.C.  129.  Mao  ATang  pub- 
lished Explanations  of  the  Shih,  in  twenty-nine  chapters, 
— a  work  which  we  still  possess ;  but  it  was  not  till  the 
reign  of  Phing  (a.  D.  i  to  5)  that  Mao's  recension  was  re- 
ceived into  the  Imperial  College,  and  took  its  place  along 
with  those  of  Lu,  KM,  and  Han  Ying. 

The  Chinese  critics  have  carefully  traced  the  line  of 
scholars  who  had  charge  of  M&o's  Text  and  Explanations 
down  to  the  reign  of  Phing.  The  names  of  the  men  and 
their  works  are  all  given.  By  the  end  of  the  first  quarter 
of  our  first  century  we  find  the  most  famous  scholars 
addicting  themselves  to  Mao's  text.  The  well-known  Kik 
Khwei  (a.  D.  30  to  101)  published  a  work  on  the  Meaning 
and  Difficulties  of  Mao's  Shih,  having  previously  compiled 
a  digest  of  the  differences  between  its  text  and  those  of 
the  other  three  recensions,  at  the  command  of  the  emperor 
Ming  (a.  D.  58  to  75).  The  equally  celebrated  Ma  Yung 
(A. D.  79  to  166)  followed  with  another  commentary; — and 
we  arrive  at  iTang  Hsiian  or  iTang  Khang-^ang  (a.  d. 
137  to  200),  who  wrote  a  Supplementary  Commentary 
to  the  Shih  of  M&o,  and  a  Chronological  Introduction  to 
the  Shih.     The  former  of  these  two  works  complete,  and 


INTRODUCTION.  289 


portions  of  the  latter,  are  still  extant.  After  the  time  of 
Afang  the  other  three  texts  were  little  heard  of,  while  the 
name  of  the  commentators  on  Mao's  text  speedily  becomes 
legion.  It  was  inscribed,  moreover,  on  the  stone  tablets  of 
the  emperor  Ling  (a.  d.  168  to  189).  The  grave  of  Mao 
Kang  is  still  shown  near  the  village  of  3un-fu>  in  the 
departmental  district  of  Ho-£ien,  iTih-li. 

5.  Returning  now  to  what  I  said  in  the  second  paragraph, 
it  will  be  granted  that  the  appearance  of  three  different  and 
independent  texts,  soon  after  the  rise  of  the 
texts6  duarantee  ^an  dynasty,  affords   the   most  satisfactory 
the  genuineness  evidence   of   the    recovery   of  the   Book    of 
Shih°Vere    Poetry  as  it  had  continued    from  the  time 
of  Confucius.     Unfortunately,  only  fragments 
of  those  texts  remain  now;  but  they  were,  while  they  were 
current,  diligently  compared  with  one  another,  and  with 
the  fourth  text  of  Mao,  which  subsequently  got  the  field  to 
itself.    When  a  collection  is  made  of  their  peculiar  readings, 
so  far  as  it  can  now  be  done,  it  is  clear  that  their  varia- 
tions from  one  another  and  from  Mao's  text  arose  from 
the  alleged  fact  that  the   preservation    of  the   odes  was 
owing  to  their  being  transmitted  by  recitation.    The  rhyme 
helped    the    memory   to   retain    them,   and   while   wood, 
bamboo,  and  silk   had  all  been  consumed  by  the  flames 
of  .Oin,  when  the  time  of  repression  ceased,  scholars  would 
be  eager  to  rehearse  their  stores.     It  was  inevitable,  and 
more  so  in  China  than  in  a  country  possessing  an  alphabet, 
that  the  same  sounds  when  taken  down  by  different  writers 
should  be  represented  by  different  characters. 

On  the  whole,  the  evidence  given  above  is  as  full  as  could 
be  desired  in  such  a  case,  and  leaves  no  reason  for  us  to 
hesitate  in  accepting  the  present  received  text  of  the  Shih 
as  a  very  close  approximation  to  that  which  was  current  in 
the  time  of  Confucius. 


[1]  U 


29O  THE    SHIH    KING. 


Chapter  IV. 

The  Formation  of  the  Collection  of  the  Shih 
how  it  came  to  be  so  small  and  incomplete 
the  Interpretation  and  Authors  of  the  Pieces 
one  Point  of  Time  certainly  indicated  in  it 
and  the  Confucian  Preface. 

1.  It  has  been  shown  above,  in  the  second  chapter,  that 
the  Shih  existed  as  a  collection  of  poetical  pieces  before 
the  time  of  Confucius1.  In  order  to  complete  this  Intro- 
duction to  it,  it  is  desirable  to  give  some  account  of  the 
various  subjects  indicated  in  the  heading  of  the  present 
chapter. 

How  were  the  odes  collected  in  the  first  place  ?  In  his 
Account  of  a  Conversation  concerning  '  a  Right  Regulation 
of  Governments  for  the  Common  Good  of  Mankind'  (Edin- 
burgh, 1704),  p.  10,  Sir  Andrew  Fletcher,  of  Saltoun,  tells  us 
the  opinion  of  '  a  very  wise  man,'  that  '  if  a  man  were  per- 
mitted  to  make  all  the  ballads  of  a  nation,  he  need  not  care 
who  should  make  its  laws/  A  writer  in  the  Spectator,  no.  502, 
refers  to  a  similar  opinion  as  having  been  entertained  in 
England  earlier  than  the  time  of  Fletcher.  '  I  have  heard,' 
he  says,  '  that  a  minister  of  state  in  the  reign  of  Elizabeth 
had  all  manner  of  books  and  ballads  brought  to  him,  of 
what  kind  soever,  and  took  great  notice  how  they  took  with 
the  people ;  upon  which  he  would,  and  certainly  might, 
very  well  judge  of  their  present  dispositions,  and  of  the 
most  proper  way  of  applying  them  according  to  his  own 
purposes  V 

1  As  in  the  case  of  the  SM,  Confucius  generally  speaks  of  *  the  Shih/  never 
using  the  name  of  '  the  Shih  King.'  In  the  Analects,  IX,  xiv,  however,  he  men- 
tions also  the  Ya  and  the  Sung ;  and  in  XVII,  x,  he  specifies  the  Kan  Nan  and 
the  Shao  Nan,  the  first  two  books  of  the  Kwo  Fang.  Mencius  similarly  speaks 
of  '  the  Shih ; '  and  in  III,  i,  ch.  4,  he  specifies  '  the  Sung  of  Lu,'  Book  ii  of 
Part  IV.  In  VI,  ii,  ch.  3,  he  gives  his  views  of  the  Hsiao  Phan,  the  third  ode 
of  decade  5,  Part  II,  and  of  the  Khai  Fung,  the  seventh  ode  of  Book  iii  of 
Part  I. 

2  This  passage  from  the  Spectator  is  adduced  by  Sir  John  Davis  in  his  treatise 
on  the  Poetry  of  the  Chinese,  p.  35. 


INTRODUCTION.  29 1 


In  harmony  with  the  views  thus  expressed  is  the  theory 
-«    x,  r   of  the  Chinese  scholars,  that  it  was  the  duty 

The  theory  of       r      ,  .  ' 

the  Chinese     of   the    ancient   kings   to    make    themselves 
a^oli^tion°of  accluainte(:i  witn  all  the  poems  current  in  the 

poems  for      different  states,  and  to  judge  from  them  of 

g0p™enstal    the  rule  exercised  by  the  several  princes,  so 
that   they   might   minister   praise  or  blame, 
reward  or  punishment  accordingly. 

The  rudiments  of  this  theory  may  be  found  in  the  Shu, 
in  the  Canon  of  Shun ;  but  the  one  classical  passage  which 
is  appealed  to  in  support  of  it  is  in  the  Record  of  Rites, 
III,  ii,  parr.  13,  14  : — '  Every  fifth  year,  the  Son  of  Heaven 
made  a  progress  through  the  kingdom,  when  the  Grand 
Music-Master  was  commanded  to  lay  before  him  the  poems 
of  the  different  states,  as  an  exhibition  of  the  manners  and 
government  of  the  people.'  Unfortunately,  this  Book  of 
the  Li  Ki,  the  Royal  Ordinances,  was  compiled  only  in  the 
reign  of  the  emperor  Wan  of  the  Han  dynasty  (b.  C.  179  to 
155).  The  scholars  entrusted  with  the  work  did  their  best, 
we  may  suppose,  with  the  materials  at  their  command. 
They  made  much  use,  it  is  evident,  of  Mencius,  and  of  the 
i  Li.  The  Ka.u  Li,  or  the  Official  Book  of  iTau,  had  not 
then  been  recovered.  But  neither  in  Mencius  nor  in  the 
f  Li  do  we  meet  with  any  authority  for  the  statement 
before  us.  The  Shu  mentions  that  Shun  every  fifth  year 
made  a  tour  of  inspection ;  but  there  were  then  no  odes  for 
him  to  examine,  for  to  him  and  his  minister  Kao-yao  is 
attributed  the  first  rudimentary  attempt  at  the  poetic  art. 
Of  the  progresses  of  the  Hsia  and  Yin  sovereigns  we  have 
no  information  ;  and  those  of  the  kings  of  Kau  were  made, 
we  know,  only  once  in  twelve  years.  The  statement  in  the 
Royal  Ordinances,  therefore,  was  probably  based  only  on 
tradition. 

Notwithstanding  the  difficulties  that  beset  this  passage 
of  the  Li  Ki,  I  am  not  disposed  to  reject  it  altogether.  It 
derives  a  certain  amount  of  confirmation  from  the  passage 
quoted  from  the  Official  Book  of  iTau  on  p.  278,  showing 
that  in  the  Kan  dynasty  there  was  a  collection  of  poems, 
under  the  divisions  of  the  Fang,  the  Ya,  and  the  Sung, 

U  2 


292  THE   SHIH   KING. 


which  it  was  the  business  of  the  Grand  Music-Master  to 
teach  the  musicians  of  the  court.  It  may  be  accepted  then, 
that  the  duke  of  ATau,  in  legislating  for  his  dynasty,  enacted 
that  the  poems  produced  in  the  different  feudal  states 
should  be  collected  on  occasion  of  the  royal  progresses, 
and  lodged  thereafter  among  the  archives  of  the  bureau 
of  music  at  the  royal  court.  The  same  thing,  we  may 
presume  a  fortiori,  would  be  done,  at  certain  other  stated 
times,  with  those  produced  within  the  royal  domain  itself. 

But  the  feudal  states  were  modelled  after  the  pattern  of 
the  royal  state.     They  also  had  their  music-masters,  their 

_,,         .        musicians,  and  their  historiographers.      The 

The  music-  .   . 

master  of  the    kings  in  their  progresses  did  not  visit  each 
&Toftgch  particular   state,  so    that  the    Grand  Music- 
state  from  its     Master  could  have  the  opportunity  to  collect 
music-mas  er.    ^e  ^^  .^  .^  ^  himself.     They  met,  at  well- 
known   points,  the    marquises,    earls,   barons,   &c,  of  the 
different  quarters  of  the  kingdom  ;  there  gave  audience  to 
them  ;  adjudicated  on  their  merits,  and  issued  to  them  their 
orders.     We  are  obliged  to  suppose  that  the  princes  were 
attended   to   the   places   of  rendezvous    by   their    music- 
masters,    carrying   with   them    the   poetical    compositions 
gathered  in  their  several  regions,  to  present  them  to  their 
superior  of  the  royal  court.     We  can  understand  how,  by 
means  of  the  above  arrangement,  the  poems  of  the  whole 
kingdom    were    accumulated    and    arranged    among    the 
archives  of  the  capital.     Was  there  any  provision  for  dis- 
Howthecol-    seminating   thence  the  poems   of  one   state 
lected poems    amoncr   all   the   others?     There  is   sufficient 

were  dissemi- 

nated  through-  evidence  that  such  dissemination  was  effected 
out  the  states.  jn  some  way#  Throughout  the  Narratives  of 
the  States,  and  the  details  of  3o  A^iu-ming  on  the  history 
of  the  Spring  and  Autumn,  the  officers  of  the  states 
generally  are  presented  to  us  as  familiar  not  only  with  the 
odes  of  their  particular  states,  but  with  those  of  other  states 
as  well.  They  appear  equally  well  acquainted  with  all  the 
Parts  and  Books  of  our  present  Shih ;  and  we  saw  how  the 
whole  of  it  was  sung  over  to  K\  Kk  of  Wu,  when  he  visited 
the  court  of  Lu  in  the  boyhood  of  Confucius.     There  was, 


INTRODUCTION.  $()'• 


probably,  a  regular  communication  from  the  royal  court  to 
the  courts  of  the  various  states  of  the  poetical  pieces  that 
for  one  reason  or  another  were  thought  worthy  of  preserva- 
tion. This  is  nowhere  expressly  stated,  but  it  may  be 
contended  for  by  analogy  from  the  accounts  which  I  have 
given,  in  the  Introduction  to  the  Shu,  pp.  4,  5,  of  the  duties 
of  the  royal  historiographers  or  recorders. 

2.  But  if  the  poems  produced  in  the  different  states  were 
thus  collected  in  the  capital,  and  thence  again  disseminated 
throughout  the  kingdom,  we  might  conclude  that  the  collec- 
tion would  have  been  far  more  extensive  and  complete  than 
How  the  Shih    we  nave  ^  now.     The  smallness  of  it  is  to  be 
is  so  small  and   accounted  for  by  the  disorder  into  which  the 

mcomp  e  e.  kingdom  fejj  after  ^e  iapSe  Qf  a  few  reigns 
from  king  Wu.  Royal  progresses  ceased  when  royal  govern- 
ment fell  into  decay,  and  then  the  odes  were  no  more  col- 
lected \  We  have  no  account  of  any  progress  of  the  kings 
during  the  Khun  K/iiu  period.  But  before  that  period 
there  is  a  long  gap  of  nearly  150  years  between  kings 
.Oang  and  1,  covering  the  reigns  of  Khang,  Kao,  Mu, 
and  Kung,  if  we  except  two  doubtful  pieces  among  the 
Sacrificial  Odes  of  ATau.  The  reign  of  Hsiao,  who  succeeded 
to  f ,  is  similarly  uncommemorated  ;  and  the  latest  odes  are 
of  the  time  of  Ting,  when  100  years  of  the  .Oun  .Oiu 
period  had  still  to  run  their  course.  Many  odes  must  have 
been  made  and  collected  during  the  140  and  more  years 
after  king  Kkang.  The  probability  is  that  they  perished 
during  the  feeble  reigns  of  1  and  the  three  monarchs  who 
followed  him.  Then  came  the  long  and  vigorous  reign  of 
Hsiian  (B.C.  827  to  782),  when  we  may  suppose  that  the 
ancient  custom  of  collecting  the  poems  was  revived.  After 
him  all  was  in  the  main  decadence  and  confusion.  It  was 
probably  in  the  latter  part  of  his  reign  that  ATang-khao, 
an  ancestor  of  Confucius,  obtained  from  the  Grand  Music- 
Master  at  the  court  of  Kau  twelve  of  the  sacrificial  odes 
of  the  previous  dynasty,  as  will  be  related  under  the  Sacri- 
ficial Odes  of  Shang,  with  which   he   returned   to   Sung, 

1  See  Mencius,  IV,  ii,  ch.  21. 


294  the  sum  king. 


which  was  held  by  representatives  of  the  line  of  Shang. 
They  were  used  there  in  sacrificing  to  the  old  Shang 
kings ;  yet  seven  of  the  twelve  were  lost  before  the  time 
of  the  sage. 

The  general  conclusion  to  which  we  come  is,  that  the 
existing  Shih  is  the  fragment  of  various  collections  made 
during  the  early  reigns  of  the  kings  of  iTau,  and  added  to 
at  intervals,,  especially  on  the  occurrence  of  a  prosperous 
rule,  in  accordance  with  the  regulation  that  has  been  pre- 
served in  the  Li  K\.  How  it  is  that  we  have  in  Part  I 
odes  of  comparatively  few  of  the  states  into  which  the 
kingdom  was  divided,  and  that  the  odes  of  those  states 
extend  only  over  a  short  period  of  their  history  : — for  these 
things  we  cannot  account  further  than  by  saying  that  such 
were  the  ravages  of  time  and  the  results  of  disorder.  We 
can  only  accept  the  collection  as  it  is,  and  be  thankful 
for  it.  How  long  before  Confucius  the  collection  was 
closed  we  cannot  tell. 

3.  The  conclusions  which  I  have  thus  sought  to  esta- 
blish concerning  the  formation  of  the  Shih  as  a  collection 
have  an  important  bearing  on  the  interpretation  of  many 
of  the  pieces.  The  remark  of  Sze-ma  .Oien  that '  Confucius 
Bearing  of  these  selected  those  pieces  which  would  be  service- 
views  on  the     able    for    the    inculcation    of    propriety  and 

interpretation  of      .    ,  t  ,    .  , ,  , , 

particular  righteousness  is  as  erroneous  as  the  other, 
pieces.  tnat  ^e  selected  305  pieces  out  of  more  than 
3000.  The  sage  merely  studied  and  taught  the  pieces  which 
he  found  existing,  and  the  collection  necessarily  contained 
odes  illustrative  of  bad  government  as  well  as  of  good, 
of  licentiousness  as  well  as  of  a  pure  morality.  Nothing 
has  been  such  a  stumbling-block  in  the  way  of  the  recep- 
tion of  K\x  Hsi's  interpretation  of  the  pieces  as  the  readiness 
with  which  he  attributes  a  licentious  meaning  to  many  of 
those  in  the  seventh  Book  of  Part  I.  But  the  reason  why 
the  kings  had  the  odes  of  the  different  states  collected  and 
presented  to  them  was,  'that  they  might  judge  from  them 
of  the  manners  of  the  people/  and  so  come  to  a  decision 
regarding  the  government  and  morals  of  their  rulers.  A 
student  and  translator  of  the  odes  has  simply  to  allow  them 


INTRODUCTION.  295 


to  speak  for  themselves,  and  has  no  more  reason  to  be 
surprised  by  references  to  vice  in  some  of  them  than 
by  the  language  of  virtue  in  many  others.  Confucius 
said,  indeed,  in  his  own  enigmatical  way,  that  the  single 
sentence,  '  Thought  without  depravity,'  covered  the  whole 
300  pieces1;  and  it  may  very  well  be  allowed  that  they 
were  collected  and  preserved  for  the  promotion  of  good 
government  and  virtuous  manners.  The  merit  attaching 
to  them  is  that  they  give  us  faithful  pictures  of  what 
was  good  and  what  was  bad  in  the  political  state  of  the 
country,  and  in  the  social,  moral,  and  religious  habits  of 
the  people. 

The   pieces  were  of  course   made  by  individuals  who 

possessed  the  gift,  or  thought  that  they  possessed  the  gift, 

The  writers  of    of  poetical  composition.     Who  they  were  we 

the  odes.  could  tell  only  on  the  authority  of  the  pieces 
themselves,  or  of  credible  historical  accounts,  contempo- 
raneous with  them  or  nearly  so.  It  is  not  worth  our  while 
to  question  the  opinion  of  the  Chinese  critics  who  attribute 
very  many  of  them  to  the  duke  of  Kslu,  to  whom  we  owe 
so  much  of  the  fifth  Part  of  the  Shu.  There  is,  however, 
independent  testimony  only  to  his  composition  of  a  single 
ode, — the  second  of  the  fifteenth  Book  in  Part  1 2.  Some  of 
the  other  pieces  in  that  Part,  of  which  the  historical  inter- 
pretation may  be  considered  as  sufficiently  fixed,  are  written 
in  the  first  person ;  but  the  author  may  be  personating  his 
subject. 

In  Part  II,  the  seventh  ode  of  decade  %  was  made  by  a 
TTia-fu,  a  noble  of  the  royal  court,  but  we  know  nothing 
more  about  him  ;  the  sixth  of  decade  6,  by  a  eunuch 
styled  Mang-jze ;  and  the  sixth  of  decade  7,  from  a  con- 
currence of  external  testimonies,  should  be  ascribed  to  duke 
Wu  of  Wei,  B.  c.  813  to  758. 

In  the  third  decade  of  Part  III,  the  second  piece  was 
composed  by  the  same  duke  Wu  ;  the  third  by  an  earl  of 
Zui  in  the  royal  domain  ;  the  fourth  must  have  been  made 
by  one  of  king  Hsiian's  ministers,  to  express  the  king's 

1  Analects,  II,  ii,  2  See  the  Shu,  V,  vi,  par.  2. 


296  THE    SHIH    KING. 


feelings  under  the  drought  that  was  exhausting  the  king- 
dom ;  and  the  fifth  and  sixth  claim  to  be  the  work  of  Yin 
isfi-fu,  one  of  Hsuan's  principal  officers. 

4.  The  ninth  ode  of  the  fourth  Book,  Part  II,  gives  us 
a  note  of  time  that  enables  us  to  fix  the  year  of  its  com- 
position in  a  manner  entirely  satisfactory,  and  proves  also 
the  correctness,  back  to  that  date,  of  the  ordinary  Chinese 
chronology.  The  piece  is  one  of  a  group  which  their 
contents  lead  us  to  refer  to  the  reign  of  king  Yu,  the 
son  of  Hsiian,  B.C.  781  to  771.  When  we  examine  the 
chronology  of  his  period,  it  is  said  that  in  his  sixth  year, 
B.C.  776,  there  was  an  eclipse  of  the  sun.  Now  the  ode 
commences : — 

'  At  the  conjunction  (of  the  sun  and  moon)  in  the  tenth 
month,  on  the  first  day  of  the  moon,  which  was  Hsin-mao, 
the  sun  was  eclipsed.5 

This  eclipse  is  verified  by  calculation  as  having  taken 
place  in  B.C.  776,  on  August  29th,  the  very  day  and 
month  assigned  to  it  in  the  poem. 

5.  In  the  Preface  which  appeared  along  with  Mao's  text 
of  the  Shih,  the  occasion  and  authorship  of  many  of  the 
odes  are  given ;    but  I  do  not  allow  much  weight  to  its 

The  Preface  to  testimony.  It  is  now  divided  into  the  Great 
the  Shih.  Preface  and  the  Little  Preface;  but  Mao 
himself  made  no  such  distinction  between  its  parts.  It 
will  be  sufficient  for  me  to  give  a  condensed  account  of 
the  views  of  Kix  Hsi  on  the  subject : — 

(  Opinions  of  scholars  are  much  divided  as  to  the  author- 
ship of  the  Preface.  Some  ascribe  it  to  Confucius ;  some 
to  (his  •  disciple)  3ze"hsi&  ;  and  some  to  the  historiogra- 
phers of  the  states.  In  the  absence  of  clear  testimony  it 
is  impossible  to  decide  the  point,  but  the  notice  about 
Wei  Hung  (first  century)  in  the  Literary  Biographies  of 
Han1  would  seem  to  make  it  clear  that  the  Preface  was 


1  The  account  is  this  :  '  Hung  became  the  disciple  of  Hsieh  Man-Ming,  who 
was  famous  for  his  knowledge  of  Mao's  Shih ;  and  he  afterwards  made  the 
Preface  to  it,  remarkable  for  the  accuracy  with  which  it  gives  the  meaning  of 
the  pieces  in  the  Fang  and  the  Ya,  and  which  is  now  current  in  the  world/ 


INTRODUCTION.  297 


his  work.  We  must  take  into  account,  however,  on  the 
other  hand,  the  statement  of  K ang  Khang  -  £/£ang,  that 
the  Preface  existed  as  a  separate  document  when  Mao 
appeared  with  his  text,  and  that  he  broke  it  up,  prefixing 
to  each  ode  the  portion  belonging  to  it.  The  natural  con- 
clusion is,  that  the  Preface  had  come  down  from  a  remote 
period,  and  that  Hung  merely  added  to  it,  and  rounded  it 
off.  In  accordance  with  this,  scholars  generally  hold  that 
the  first  sentences  in  the  introductory  notices  formed 
the  original  Preface,  which  Mao  distributed,  and  that  the 
following  portions  were  subsequently  added. 

'  This  view  may  appear  reasonable ;  but  when  we  examine 
those  first  sentences  themselves,  we  find  that  some  of  them 
do  not  agree  with  the  obvious  meaning  of  the  odes  to 
which  they  are  prefixed,  and  give  only  rash  and  baseless 
expositions.  Evidently,  from  the  first,  the  Preface  was 
made  up  of  private  speculations  and  conjectures  on  the 
subject-matter  of  the  odes,  and  constituted  a  document 
by  itself,  separately  appended  to  the  text.  Then  on  its 
first  appearance  there  were  current  the  explanations  of  the 
odes  that  were  given  in  connexion  with  the  texts  of  Lu, 
KM,  and  Han  Ying,  so  that  readers  could  know  that  it  was 
the  work  of  later  hands,  and  not  give  entire  credit  to  it. 
But  when  Mao  no  longer  published  the  Preface  as  a  sepa- 
rate document,  but  each  ode  appeared  with  the  introductory 
notice  as  a  portion  of  the  text,  this  seemed  to  give  it  the 
authority  of  the  text  itself.  Then  after  the  other  texts 
disappeared  and  Mao's  had  the  field  to  itself,  this  means 
of  testing  the  accuracy  of  its  prefatory  notices  no  longer 
existed.  They  appeared  as  if  they  were  the  production 
of  the  poets  themselves,  and  the  odes  seemed  to  be  made 
from  them  as  so  many  themes.  Scholars  handed  down  a 
faith  in  them  from  one  to  another,  and  no  one  ventured  to 
express  a  doubt  of  their  authority.  The  text  was  twisted 
and  chiseled  to  bring  it  into  accordance  with  them,  and  no 
one  would  undertake  to  say  plainly  that  they  were  the 
work  of  the  scholars  of  the  Han  dynasty.' 

There  is  no  western  sinologist,  I  apprehend,  who  will 


298  THE    SHIH    KING. 


not  cordially  concur  with  me  in  the  principle  of  Ku  Hsi 
that  we  must  find  the  meaning  of  the  poems  in  the  poems 
themselves,  instead  of  accepting  the  interpretation  of  them 
given  by  we  know  not  whom,  and  to  follow  which  would 
reduce  many  of  them  to  absurd  enigmas. 


THE    SHIH    KING. 


ODES  OF  THE  TEMPLE  AND  THE 
ALTAR. 

It  was  stated  in  the  Introduction,  p.  278,  that  the  poems  in  the 
fourth  Part  of  the  Shih  are  the  only  ones  that  are  professedly 
religious;  and  there  are  some  even  of  them,  it  will  be  seen, 
which  have  little  claim  on  internal  grounds  to  be  so  considered. 
I  commence  with  them  my  selections  from  the  Shih  for  the 
Sacred  Books  of  the  Religions  of  the  East.  I  will  give  them 
all,  excepting  the  first  two  of  the  Praise  Odes  of  Lu,  the  reason 
for  omitting  which  will  be  found,  when  I  come  to  that  division 
of  the  Part. 

The  Odes  of  the  Temple  and  the  Altar  are,  most  of  them,  con- 
nected with  the  ancestral  worship  of  the  sovereigns  of  the  Shang 
and  K&u  dynasties,  and  of  the  marquises  of  Lu.  Of  the  ancestral 
worship  of  the  common  people  we  have  almost  no 
worship  of  information  in  the  Shih.  It  was  binding,  however, 
the  common  on  aU}  and  two  utterances  of  Confucius  may  be 
PeoP e-  given  in  illustration  of  this.  In  the  eighteenth 
chapter  of  the  Doctrine  of  the  Mean,  telling  how  the  duke  of 
^au,  the  legislator  of  the  dynasty  so  called,  had  '  completed  the 
virtuous  course  of  Wan  and  Wu,  carrying  up  the  title  of  king 
to  Wan's  father  and  grandfather,  and  sacrificing  to  the  dukes 
before  them  with  the  royal  ceremonies,'  he  adds,  '  And  this 
rule  he  extended  to  the  feudal  princes,  the  great  officers,  the 
other  officers,  and  the  common  people.  In  the  mourning  and 
other  duties  rendered  to  a  deceased  father  or  mother,  he  allowed 
no  difference  between  the  noble  and  the  mean.'  Again,  his 
summary  in  the  tenth  chapter  of  the  Hsi&o  King,  of  the  duties 


300  THE    SHIH    KING. 


of  filial  piety,  is  the  following : — *  A  filial  son,  in  serving  his 
parents,  in  his  ordinary  intercourse  with  them,  should  show  the 
utmost  respect;  in  supplying  them  with  food,  the  greatest  de- 
light ;  when  they  are  ill,  the  utmost  solicitude  ;  when  mourning 
for  their  death,  the  deepest  grief;  and  when  sacrificing  to  them, 
the  profoundest  solemnity.  When  these  things  are  all  complete, 
he  is  able  to  serve  his  parents/ 

Of  the  ceremonies  in  the  royal  worship  of  ancestors,  and  perhaps 
on  some  other  occasions,  we  have  much  information  in  the 
pieces  of  this  Part,  and  in  many  others  in  the  second  and  third 
Parts.  They  were  preceded  by  fasting  and  various  purifications 
The  royal  on  tne  Part  °f  tne  king  and  the  parties  who 
worship  of  were  to  assist  in  the  performance  of  them.  There 
ancestors.  wag  a  great  concourSe  of  the  feudal  princes,  and 
much  importance  was  attached  to  the  presence  among  them  of 
the  representatives  of  former  dynasties ;  but  the  duties  of  the 
occasion  devolved  mainly  on  the  princes  of  the  same  surname 
as  the  royal  House.  Libations  of  fragrant  spirits  were  made, 
especially  in  the  ^Sfau  period,  to  attract  the  Spirits,  and  their 
presence  was  invoked  by  a  functionary  who  took  his  place 
inside  the  principal  gate.  The  principal  victim,  a  red  bull  in 
the  temple  of  ^au,  was  killed  by  the  king  himself,  using  for  the 
purpose  a  knife  to  the  handle  of  which  small  bells  were  attached. 
With  this  he  laid  bare  the  hair,  to  show  that  the  animal  was  of 
the  required  colour,  inflicted  the  wound  of  death,  and  cut  away 
the  fat,  which  was  burned  along  with  southernwood  to  increase 
the  incense  and  fragrance.  Other  victims  were  numerous,  and 
the  fifth  ode  of  the  second  decade,  Part  II,  describes  all 
engaged  in  the  service  as  greatly  exhausted  with  what  they  had 
to  do,  flaying  the  carcases,  boiling  the  flesh,  roasting  it,  broiling 
it,  arranging  it  on  trays  and  stands,  and  setting  it  forth.  Ladies 
from  the  palace  are  present  to  give  their  assistance;  music  peals; 
the  cup  goes  round.  The  description  is  that  of  a  feast  as  much 
as  of  a  sacrifice  ;  and  in  fact,  those  great  seasonal  occasions  were 
what  we  might  call  grand  family  reunions,  where  the  dead  and 
the  living  met,  eating  and  drinking  together,  where  the  living 
worshipped  the  dead,  and  the  dead  blessed  the  living. 

This  characteristic  of  these  ceremonies  appeared  most  strikingly 
in  the  custom  which  required  that  the  departed  ancestors  should 
be  represented  by  living  relatives  of  the  same  surname,  chosen 
according  to  certain  rules  that  are  not  mentioned  in  the  Shih. 
These  took  for  the  time  the  place  of  the  dead,  received  the 


ODES  OF  THE  TEMPLE  AND  THE  ALTAR.    30I 

honours  which  were  due  to  them,  and  were  supposed  to  be 
possessed  by  their  spirits.  They  ate  and  drank  as  those  whom 
they  personated  would  have  done;  accepted  for  them  the  homage 
rendered  by  their  descendants ;  communicated  their  will  to  the 
principal  in  the  service,  and  pronounced  on  him  and  on  his 
line  their  benediction,  being  assisted  in  this  point  by  a  mediating 
priest,  as  we  may  call  him  for  want  of  a  more  exact  term.  On 
the  next  day,  after  a  summary  repetition  of  the  ceremonies  of 
the  sacrifice,  those  personators  of  the  dead  were  specially  feasted, 
and,  as  it  is  expressed  in  the  second  decade  of  Part  III,  ode  4, 
'  their  happiness  and  dignity  were  made  complete/  We  have 
an  allusion  to  this  strange  custom  in  Mencius  (VI,  i,  ch.  5), 
showing  how  a  junior  member  of  a  family,  when  chosen  to 
represent  one  of  his  ancestors,  was  for  the  time  exalted  above 
his  elders,  and  received  the  demonstrations  of  reverence  due  to 
the  ancestor. 

When  the  sacrifice  to  ancestors  was  finished,  the  king  feasted  his 
uncles  and  younger  brothers  or  cousins,  that  is,  all  the  princes 
and  nobles  of  the  same  surname  with  himself,  in  another  apart- 
ment. The  musicians  who  had  discoursed  with  instrument  and 
voice  during  the  worship  and  entertainment  of  the  ancestors, 
followed  the  convivial  party  '  to  give  their  soothing  aid  at  the 
second  blessing/  The  viands  that  had  been  provided,  we  have 
seen,  in  great  abundance,  were  brought  in  from  the  temple, 
and  set  forth  anew.  The  guests  ate  to  the  full  and  drank  to 
the  full,  and  at  the  conclusion  they  all  did  obeisance,  while  one 
of  them  declared  the  satisfaction  of  the  Spirits,  and  assured  the 
king  of  their  favour  to  him  and  his  posterity,  so  long  as  they 
did  not  neglect  those  observances.  During  the  feast  the  king 
showed  particular  respect  to  those  among  his  relatives  who 
were  aged,  filled  their  cups  again  and  again,  and  desired  '  that 
their  old  age  might  be  blessed,  and  their  bright  happiness  ever 
increased/ 

The  above  sketch  of  the  seasonal  sacrifices  to  ancestors  shows 
that  they  were  intimately  related  to  the  duty  of  filial  piety,  and 
were  designed  mainly  to  maintain  the  unity  of  the  family  con- 
nexion. There  was  implied  in  them  a  belief  in  the  continued 
existence  of  the  spirits  of  the  departed ;  and  by  means  of  them 
the  ancestors  of  the  kings  were  raised  to  the  position  of  the 
Tutelary  spirits  of  the  dynasty;  and  the  ancestors  of  each  family 
became  its  Tutelary  spirits.  Several  of  the  pieces  in  Part  IV 
are  appropriate,  it  will  be  observed,  to  sacrifices  offered  to  some 


}02  THE    SHIH    KING. 


one  monarch.     They  would  be  used  on  particular  occasions 
connected  with  his  achievements  in  the  past,  or  when  it  was 
supposed  that    his   help   would   be   valuable   in   contemplated 
enterprises.    With  regard  to  all  the  ceremonies  of  the  ancestral 
temple,  Confucius  gives  the  following  account  of  the  purposes 
which  they  were  intended  to  serve,  hardly  adverting  to  their 
religious  significance,  in  the  nineteenth  chapter  of  the  Doctrine 
of  the  Mean  : — '  By  means  of  them  they  distinguished  the  royal 
kindred  according  to   their   order  of  descent.     By  arranging 
those  present  according  to  their  rank,  they  distinguished  the 
more  noble  and  the  less.    By  the  apportioning  of  duties  at  them, 
they  made  a  distinction  of  talents  and  worth.     In  the  ceremony 
of  general  pledging,  the  inferiors  presented  the  cup  to  their 
superiors,  and  thus  something  was  given  to  the  lowest  to  do. 
At  the  (concluding)  feast  places  were  given  according  to  the 
hair,  and  thus  was  marked  the  distinction  of  years/ 
The  Shih  does  not  speak  of  the  worship  which  was  paid  to  God, 
unless  it  be  incidentally.    There  were  two  grand 
paidT^God     occasions  on  which  it  was  rendered  by  the  sove- 
reign,— the  summer  and  winter  solstices.   These 
two  sacrifices  were  offered  on  different  altars,  that  in  winter 
being  often  described  as  offered  to  Heaven,  and  that  in  summer  to 
Earth;  but  we  have  the  testimony  of  Confucius,  in  the  nineteenth 
chapter  of  the  Doctrine  of  the  Mean,  that  the  object  of  them 
both  was  to  serve  Shang-Ti.    Of  the  ceremonies  on  these  two 
occasions,  however,  I  do  not  speak  here,  as  there  is  nothing 
said  about  them  in  the  Shih.     But  there  were  other  sacrifices  to 
God,  at  stated  periods  in  the  course  of  the  year,  of  at  least  two 
of  which  we  have  some  intimation  in  the  pieces  of  this  fourth 
Part.   The  last  in  the  first  decade  of  the  Sacrificial  Odes  of  Kan 
is  addressed  to  Hau  K\  as  having  proved  himself  the  correlate 
of  Heaven,  in  teaching  men  to  cultivate  the  grain  which  God 
had  appointed  for  the  nourishment  of  all.    This  was  appropriate 
to  a  sacrifice  in  spring,  offered  to  God  to  seek  His  blessing  on 
the  agricultural  labours  of  the  year,  Hau  K%  as  the  ancestor  of 
the  House  of  iTau,  being  associated  with  Him  in  it.  The  seventh 
piece  of  the  same  decade  again  was  appropriate  to  a  sacrifice 
to  God  in  autumn,  in  the  Hall  of  Light,  at  a  great  audience  to 
the  feudal  princes,  when  king  Wan  was  associated  with  Him  as 
being  the  founder  of  the  dynasty  of  .A'au. 
With  these  preliminary  observations  to  assist  the  reader  in  under- 
standing the  pieces  in  this  Part,  I  proceed  to  give — 


THE    SACRIFICIAL   ODES    OF    SHANG.  303 


I.    The  Sacrificial  Odes  of  Shang. 

These  odes  of  Shang  constitute  the  last  Book  in  the  ordinary 
editions  of  the  Shih.  I  put  them  here  in  the  first  place,  because 
they  are  the  oldest  pieces  in  the  collection.  There  are  only  five 
of  them. 

The  sovereigns  of  the  dynasty  of  Shang  occupied  the  throne  from 
b.c.  1766  to  1 123.  They  traced  their  lineage  to  Hsieh,  who 
appears  in  the  Shu  as  Minister  of  Instruction  to  Shun.  By  Ydo 
or  by  Shun,  Hsieh  was  invested  with  the  principality  of  Shang, 
corresponding  to  the  small  department  which  is  so  named  in 
Shen-hsi.  Fourteenth  in  descent  from  him  came  Thien-yi, 
better  known  as  Kh&ng  Thang,  or  Thang  the  Successful,  who 
dethroned  the  last  descendant  of  the  line  of  Hsid,  and  became 
the  founder  of  a  new  dynasty.  We  meet  with  him  first  at  a 
considerable  distance  from  the  ancestral  fief  (which,  however, 
gave  name  to  the  dynasty),  having  as  his  capital  the  southern  Po, 
which  seems  correctly  referred  to  the  present  district  of  Shang- 
kh\%  in  the  department  of  Kwei-teh,  Ho-nan.  Among  the 
twenty-seven  sovereigns  who  followed  Thang,  there  were  three 
especially  distinguished  : — Thai  R\&,  his  grandson  and  successor 
(b.c  1753  to  1721),  who  received  the  title  of  Thai  3ung;  Thai 
Mau  (b.c.  1637  to  1563),  canonized  as  ^Tung  3ung  ',  and  Wu- 
ting  (b.c.  1324  to  1266),  known  as  Kao  3ung.  The  shrines 
of  these  three  sovereigns  and  that  of  Thang  retained  their  places 
in  the  ancestral  temple  ever  after  they  were  first  set  up,  and  if 
all  the  sacrificial  odes  of  the  dynasty  had  been  preserved,  most 
of  them  would  have  been  in  praise  of  one  or  other  of  the  four. 
But  it  so  happened  that  at  least  all  the  odes  of  which  Thai  3ung 
was  the  subject  were  lost ;  and  of  the  others  we  have  only  the 
small  portion  that  has  been  mentioned  above. 

Of  how  it  is  that  we  have  even  these,  we  have  the  following  account 
in  the  Narratives  of  the  States,  compiled,  probably,  by  a  con- 
temporary of  Confucius.  The  count  of  Wei  was  made  duke 
of  Sung  by  king  Wu  of  Aau,  as  related  in  the  Shu,  V,  viii,  there 
to  continue  the  sacrifices  of  the  House  of  Shang;  but  the  govern- 
ment of  Sung  fell  subsequently  into  disorder,  and  the  memorials  of 
the  dynasty  were  lost.  In  the  time  of  duke  Tai  (b.c  799  to  766), 
one  of  his  ministers,  iTang-khao,  an  ancestor  of  Confucius,  re- 
ceived from  the  Grand  Music-Master  at  the  court  of  K&w  twelve 


304  THE    SHIH    KING.  ODE  I. 

of  the  sacrificial  odes  of  Shang  with  which  he  returned  to  Sung, 
where  they  were  used  in  sacrificing  to  the  old  Shang  kings.  It  is 
supposed  that  seven  of  these  were  lost  subsequently,  before  the 
collection  of  the  Shih  was  formed. 


Ode  1.     The  Na1. 

APPROPRIATE  TO  A  SACRIFICE  TO  THANG,  THE  FOUNDER  OF  THE 
SHANG  DYNASTY,  DWELLING  ESPECIALLY  ON  THE  MUSIC  AND  THE 
REVERENCE    WITH    WHICH    THE    SACRIFICE   WAS    PERFORMED. 

We  cannot  tell  by  which  of  the  kings  of  Shang  the  sacrifice  here 
referred  to  was  first  performed.  He  is  simply  spoken  of  as  '  a 
descendant  of  Thang.'  The  ode  seems  to  have  been  composed 
by  some  one,  probably  a  member  of  the  royal  House,  who  had 
taken  part  in  the  service. 

How  admirable !  how  complete !  Here  are  set 
our  hand-drums  and  drums.  The  drums  resound 
harmonious  and  loud,  To  delight  our  meritorious 
ancestor 2. 

The  descendant  of  Thang  invites  him  with  this 
music,  That  he  may  soothe  us  with  the  realization 
of  our  thoughts3.     Deep  is  the  sound  of  our  hand- 

1  The  piece  is  called  the  Na,  because  a  character  so  named  is 
an  important  part  of  the  first  line.  So  generally  the  pieces  in  the 
Shih  receive  their  names  from  a  character  or  phrase  occurring  in 
them.     This  point  will  not  be  again  touched  on. 

2  The  '  meritorious  ancestor '  is  Thang.  The  sacrifices  of  the 
Shang  dynasty  commenced  with  music ;  those  of  the  K2H1  with 
libations  of  fragrant  spirits ; — in  both  cases  with  the  same  object, 
to  attract  the  spirit,  or  spirits,  sacrificed  to,  and  secure  their  presence 
at  the  service.  .Oan  Hao  (Ming  dynasty)  says,  'The  departed 
spirits  hover  between  heaven  and  earth,  and  sound  goes  forth, 
filling  the  region  of  the  air.  Hence  in  sacrificing,  the  people  of 
Yin  began  with  a  performance  of  music.' 

3  The  Li  K\,  XXIV,  i,  parr.  2,  3,  tells  us,  that  the  sacrificer,  as 
preliminary  to  the  service,  had  to  fast  for  some  days,  and  to  think 
of  the  person  of  his  ancestor, — where  he  had  stood  and  sat,  how 
he  had  smiled   and  spoken,  what  had  been  his  cherished  aims, 


ODE  2.  THE    SACRIFICIAL    ODES    OF    SHANG.  305 

drums  and  drums ;  Shrilly  sound  the  flutes ;  All 
harmonious  and  blending  together,  According  to 
the  notes  of  the  sonorous  gem.  Oh  !  majestic  is  the 
descendant  of  Thang ;   Very  admirable  is  his  music. 

The  large  bells  and  drums  fill  the  ear;  The 
various  dances  are  grandly  performed1.  We  have 
the  admirable  visitors2,  Who  are  pleased  and 
delighted. 

From  of  old,  before  our  time,  The  former  men 
set  us  the  example ; — How  to  be  mild  and  humble 
from  morning  to  night,  And  to  be  reverent  in 
discharging  the  service. 

May  he  regard  our  sacrifices  of  winter  and 
autumn3,  (Thus)  offered  by  the  descendant  of 
Thang ! 

Ode  2.     The  Lieh  3ft. 

PROBABLY  LIKE  THE  LAST  ODE,  APPROPRIATE  TO  A  SACRIFICE  TO 
THANG,  DWELLING  ON  THE  SPIRITS,  THE  SOUP,  AND  THE  GRAVITY 
OF   THE   SERVICE,    AND    ON   THE    ASSISTING   PRINCES. 

Neither  can  we  tell  by  which  of  the  kings  of  Shang  this  ode  was 
first  used.  Kb  Hsi  says  that  the  object  of  the  sacrifice  was 
Thang.  The  Preface  assigns  it  to  Thai  Mau,  the  iTung  3ung, 
or  second  of  the  three  '  honoured  ones/     But  there  is  not  a 

pleasures,  and  delights;  and  on  the  third  day  he  would  have  a 
complete  image  of  him  in  his  mind's  eye.  Then  on  the  day  of 
sacrifice,  when  he  entered  the  temple,  he  would  seem  to  see  him 
in  his  shrine,  and  to  hear  him,  as  he  went  about  in  the  discharge 
of  the  service.   This  line  seems  to  indicate  the  realization  of  all  this. 

1  Dancing  thus  entered  into  the  service  as  an  accompaniment 
of  the  music.  Two  terms  are  employed ;  one  denoting  the  move- 
ments appropriate  to  a  dance  of  war,  the  other  those  appropriate 
to  a  dance  of  peace. 

2  The  visitors  would  be  the  representatives  of  the  lines  of  Hsia, 
Shun,  and  Yao. 

5  Two  of  the  seasonal  sacrifices  are  thus  specified,  by  synec- 
doche, for  all  the  four. 


306  THE    SHIH    KING.  ODE  2. 

word  in  praise  of  K\mg  3ung,  and  the  'meritorious  ancestor* 
of  the  first  line  is  not  to  be  got  over.  Still  more  clearly  than 
in  the  case  of  the  former  ode  does  this  appear  to  have  been 
made  by  some  one  who  had  taken  part  in  the  service,  for  in 
line  4  he  addresses  the  sacrificing  king  as  'you.* 

Ah  !  ah !  our  meritorious  ancestor !  Permanent 
are  the  blessings  coming  from  him,  Repeatedly 
conferred  without  end  ; — They  have  come  to  you 
in  this  place. 

The  clear  spirits  are  in  our  vessels,  And  there 
is  granted  to  us  the  realization  of  our  thoughts. 
There  are  also  the  well-tempered  soups,  Prepared 
beforehand,  with  the  ingredients  rightly  propor- 
tioned. By  these  offerings  we  invite  his  presence, 
without  a  word,  Without  (unseemly)  contention 
(among  the  worshippers).  He  will  bless  us  with 
the  eyebrows  of  longevity,  With  the  grey  hair 
and  wrinkled  face  in  unlimited  degree. 

With  the  naves  of  their  wheels  bound  with 
leather,  and  their  ornamented  yokes,  With  the 
eight  bells  at  their  horses'  bits  all  tinkling,  (The 
princes)  come  to  assist  at  the  offerings1.  We  have 
received  the  appointment  in  all  its  greatness,  And 
from  Heaven  is  our  prosperity  sent  down,  Fruitful 
years  of  great  abundance.  (Our  ancestor)  will  come 
and  enjoy  (our  offerings),  And  confer  on  us  happi- 
ness without  limit 

May  he  regard  our  sacrifices  of  winter  and 
autumn,  (Thus)  offered  by  the  descendant  of 
Thang ! 

1  These  lines  are  descriptive  of  the  feudal  princes,  who  were  pre- 
sent and  assisted  at  the  sacrificial  service.  The  chariot  of  each  was 
drawn  by  four  horses  yoked  abreast,  two  insides  and  two  outsides, 
on  each  side  of  the  bits  of  which  small  bells  were  attached. 


ODE  3.  THE   SACRIFICIAL    ODES    OF    SHANG.  307 


Ode  3.     The  Hsuan  Niao. 

APPROPRIATE  TO  A  SACRIFICE   IN  THE  ANCESTRAL  TEMPLE  OF  SHANG  ; 

INTENDED  SPECIALLY  TO  DO  HONOUR  TO   THE  KING  WU-TING. 

If  this  ode  were  not  intended  to  do  honour  to  Wu-ting,  the  K&o 
3ung  of  Shang,  we  cannot  account  for  the  repeated  mention  of 
him  in  it.  Kb.  Hsf,  however,  in  his  note  on  it,  says  nothing 
about  Wu-ting,  but  simply  that  the  piece  belonged  to  the 
sacrifices  in  the  ancestral  temple,  tracing  back  the  line  of  the 
kings  of  Shang  to  its  origin,  and  to  its  attaining  the  sovereignty  of 
the  kingdom.  Not  at  all  unlikely  is  the  view  of  Aang  Hsiian, 
that  the  sacrifice  was  in  the  third  year  after  the  death  of  Wu-ting, 
and  offered  to  him  in  the  temple  of  Hsieh,  the  ancestor  of  the 
Shang  dynasty. 

Heaven  commissioned  the  swallow,  To  descend 
and  give  birth  to  (the  father  of  our)  Shang1.  (His 
descendants)  dwelt  in  the  land  of  Yin,  and  became 
great.  (Then)  long  ago  God  appointed  the  martial 
Thang,  To  regulate  the  boundaries  throughout  the 
four  quarters  (of  the  kingdom). 

(In  those)  quarters  he  appointed  the  princes, 
And  grandly   possessed   the    nine    regions2.     The 

1  The  father  of  Shang  is  Hsieh,  who  has  already  been  men- 
tioned. The  mother  of  Hsieh  was  a  daughter  of  the  House  of  the 
ancient  state  of  Sung,  and  a  concubine  of  the  ancient  ruler  KM 
(b.  c.  2435).  According  to  Mao,  she  accompanied  Khu,  at  the 
time  of  the  vernal  equinox,  when  the  swallow  made  its  appear- 
ance, to  sacrifice  and  pray  to  the  first  match-maker,  and  the 
result  was  the  birth  of  Hsieh.  Sze-m&  Khizvi  and  i£ang  make 
Hsieh's  birth  more  marvellous: — The  lady  was  bathing  in  some 
open  place,  when  a  swallow  made  its  appearance,  and  dropt  an 
egg,  which  she  took  and  swallowed;  and  from  this  came  Hsieh. 
The  editors  of  the  imperial  edition  of  the  Shih,  of  the  present 
dynasty,  say  we  need  not  believe  the  legends; — the  important 
point  is  to  believe  that  the  birth  of  Hsieh  was  specially  ordered  by 
Heaven. 

'  'The  nine  regions'  are  the  nine  provinces  into  which  Yu 
divided  the  kingdom. 

X  2 


308  THE   SHIH    KING.  ODE  4. 

first  sovereign  of  Shang1  Received  the  appoint- 
ment without  any  element  of  instability  in  it, 
And  it  is  (now)  held  by  the  descendant  of  Wil- 
ting2. 

The  descendant  of  Wft-ting  Is  a  martial  sove- 
reign, equal  to  every  emergency.  Ten  princes, 
(who  came)  with  their  dragon-emblazoned  banners, 
Bear  the  large  dishes  of  millet. 

The  royal  domain  of  a  thousand  11  Is  where 
the  people  rest;  But  the  boundaries  that  reach 
to  the  four  seas  commence  there. 

From  the  four  seas3  they  come  (to  our  sacri- 
fices); They  come  in  multitudes.  King  has  the 
Ho  for  its  outer  border4.  That  Yin5  should  have 
received  the  appointment  (of  Heaven)  was  entirely 
right; — (Its  sovereign)  sustains  all  its  dignities. 

Ode  4.     The  Kh&sg  FA. 

CELEBRATING  HSIEH,  THE  ANCESTOR  OF  THE  HOUSE  OF  SHANG  J 
HSIANG-THU,  HIS  GRANDSON;  THANG,  THE  FOUNDER  OF  THE  DYNASTY; 
AND   t-YIN,    THANG'S  CHIEF   MINISTER   AND    ADVISER. 

It  does  not  appear  on  occasion  of  what  sacrifice  this  piece  was 
made.    The  most  probable  view  is  that  of  M&o,  that  it  was  the 

1  That  is,  Thang. 

2  If  this  ode  were  used,  as  .ffang  supposes,  in  the  third  year 
after  Wu-ting's  death,  this  *  descendant '  would  be  his  son  3u- 
kang,  b.  c.  1265  to  1259. 

3  This  expression,  which  occurs  also  in  the  Shu,  indicates  that 
the  early  Chinese  believed  that  their  country  extended  to  the  sea, 
east,  west,  north,  and  south. 

4  Kb.  Hsr  says  he  did  not  understand  this  line;  but  there  is 
ground  in  the  3o  ^wan  for  our  believing  that  King  was  the 
name  of  a  hill  in  the  region  where  the  capital  of  Shang  was. 

6  We  saw  in  the  Shu  that  the  name  Shang  gave  place  to  Yin 
after  the  time  of  Pan-kang,  b.c  1401  to  1374.  Wu-ting's  reign 
was  subsequent  to  that  of  Pan-kang. 


ODE  4.  THE  SACRIFICIAL   ODES   OF   SHANG.  309 

'  great  Ti  sacrifice/  when  the  principal  object  of  honour  would 
be  the  ancient  KM,  the  father  of  Hsieh,  with  Hsieh  as  his 
correlate,  and  all  the  kings  of  the  dynasty,  with  the  earlier  lords 
of  Shang,  and  their  famous  ministers  and  advisers,  would  have 
their  places  at  the  service.  I  think  this  is  the  oldest  of  the  odes 
of  Shang. 

Profoundly  wise  were  (the  lords  of)  Shang,  And 
long  had  there  appeared  the  omens  (of  their  dignity). 

When  the  waters  of  the  deluge  spread  vast 
abroad,  Yli  arranged  and  divided  the  regions  of 
the  land,  And  assigned  to  the  exterior  great  states 
their  boundaries,  With  their  borders  extending  all 
over  (the  kingdom).  (Even)  then  the  chief  of  Sung 
was  beginning  to  be  great,  And  God  raised  up  the 
son  (of  his  daughter),  and  founded  (the  line  of) 
Shang 1. 

The  dark  king  exercised  an  effective  sway2. 
Charged  with  a  small  state,  he  commanded  success ; 
Charged  with  a  large  state,  he  commanded  success 3. 
He  followed  his  rules  of  conduct  without  error ; 
Wherever  he  inspected  (the  people),  they  responded 
(to  his  instructions) 4.  (Then  came)  Hsiang-thft  all 
ardent 5,  And  all  within  the  four  seas,  beyond  (the 
middle  regions),  acknowledged  his  restraints. 

1  This  line  refers  to  the  birth  of  Hsieh,  as  described  in  the 
previous  ode,  and  his  being  made  lord  of  Shang. 

2  It  would  be  hard  to  say  why  Hsieh  is  here  called  *  the  dark 
king/  There  may  be  an  allusion  to  the  legend  about  the  con- 
nexion of  the  swallow, — '  the  dark  bird/ — with  his  birth.  He  never 
was  'a  king;'  but  his  descendants  here  represented  him  as  such. 

8  All  that  is  meant  here  is,  that  the  territory  of  Shang  was 
enlarged  under  Hsieh. 

4  There  is  a  reference  here  to  Hsieh's  appointment  by  Shun  to 
be  Minister  of  Instruction. 

6  Hsiang-thu  appears  in  the  genealogical  lists  as  grandson  of 
Hsieh.    We  know  nothing  of  him  but  what  is  related  here. 


3IO  THE    SHIH    KING.  ODE  4. 

The  favour  of  God  did  not  leave  (Shang),  And 
in  Thang  was  found  the  fit  object  for  its  display. 
Thang  was  not  born  too  late,  And  his  wisdom 
and  reverence  daily  advanced : — Brilliant  was  the 
influence  of  his  character  (on  Heaven)  for  long. 
God  he  revered,  And  God  appointed  him  to  be  the 
model  for  the  nine  regions. 

He  received  the  rank-tokens  of  the  states,  small 
and  large,  Which  depended  on  him  like  the  pen- 
dants of  a  banner : — So  did  he  receive  the  blessing 
of  Heaven.  He  was  neither  violent  nor  remiss, 
Neither  hard  nor  soft.  Gently  he  spread  his 
instructions  abroad,  And  all  dignities  and  riches 
were  concentrated  in  him. 

He  received  the  tribute  of  the  states,  small  and 
large,  And  he  supported  them  as  a  strong  steed 
(does  its  burden) : — So  did  he  receive  the  favour  of 
Heaven.  He  displayed  everywhere  his  valour, 
Unshaken,  unmoved,  Unterrified,  unscared  :  —  All 
dignities  were  united  in  him. 

The  martial  king  displayed  his  banner,  And 
with  reverence  grasped  his  axe.  It  was  like  (the 
case  of)  a  blazing  fire  which  no  one  can  repress. 
The  root,  with  its  three  shoots,  Could  make  no 
progress,  no  growth1.  The  nine  regions  were 
effectually  secured  by  Thang.  Having  smitten  (the 
princes  of)  Wei  and  Kti,  He  dealt  with  (him  of) 
Aun-wli  and  with  Aleh  of  Hsid. 

Formerly,    in   the   middle  of  the  period  (before 

1  By  '  the  root '  we  are  to  understand  Thang's  chief  opponent, 
ifteh,  the  last  king  of  Hsia\  iTieh's  three  great  helpers  were  '  the 
three  shoots/ — the  princes  of  Wei,  Ku,  andZiin-wu;  but  the  exact 
sites  of  their  principalities  cannot  be  made  out. 


ODE  5.  THE   SACRIFICIAL    ODES    OF    SHANG.  3II 

Thang),  There  was  a  time  of  shaking  and  peril1. 
But  truly  did  Heaven  (then)  deal  with  him  as  a  son, 
And  sent  him  down  a  high  minister,  Namely, 
A-hang2,  Who  gave  his  assistance  to  the  king  of 
Shang. 

Ode  5.     The  Yin  Wft. 

CELEBRATING  THE  WAR  OF  WU-TING  AGAINST  KISG-KHt,  ITS  SUCCESS, 
AND  THE  GENERAL  HAPPINESS  AND  VIRTUE  OF  HIS  REIGN  ; — MADE, 
PROBABLY,  WHEN  A  SPECIAL  AND  PERMANENT  TEMPLE  WAS  BUILT 
FOR   HIM   AS   THE    '  HIGH   AND   HONOURED '  KING   OF   SHANG. 

The  concluding  lines  indicate  that  the  temple  was  made  on  the 
occasion  which  I  thus  assign  to  it.  After  Wu-ting's  death,  his 
spirit-tablet  would  be  shrined  in  the  ancestral  temple,  and  he 
would  have  his  share  in  the  seasonal  sacrifices;  but  several 
reigns  would  elapse  before  there  was  any  necessity  to  make  any 
other  arrangement,  so  that  his  tablet  should  not  be  removed, 
and  his  share  in  the  sacrifices  not  be  discontinued.  Hence  the 
composition  of  the  piece  has  been  referred  to  the  time  of  Ti-yi, 
the  last  but  one  of  the  kings  of  Shang. 

Rapid  was  the  warlike  energy  of  (our  king  of) 
Yin,       And  vigorously  did  he  attack  King-KAu  3. 

1  We  do  not  know  anything  of  this  time  of  decadence  in  the 
fortunes  of  Shang  between  Hsieh  and  Thang. 

2  A-hang  is  t  Yin,  who  plays  so  remarkable  a  part  in  the 
Shu,  IV,  Books  iv,  v,  and  vi. 

3  iTing,  or  Kh&,  or  ATing-A'M,  as  the  two  names  are  combined 
here,  was  a  large  and  powerful  half-savage  state,  having  its  capital 
in  the  present  Wu-pei.  So  far  as  evidence  goes,  we  should  say, 
but  for  this  ode,  that  the  name  of  ATM  was  not  in  use  till  long 
after  the  Shang  dynasty.  The  name  ATing  appears  several  times 
in  '  the  Spring  and  Autumn'  in  the  annals  of  duke  Afwang  (b.c  693 
to  662),  and  then  it  gives  place  to  the  name  ATM  in  the  first  year 
of  duke  Hsi  (b.c  659),  and  subsequently  disappears  itself  alto- 
gether. In  consequence  of  this  some  critics  make  this  piece  out 
to  have  been  composed  under  the  Aau  dynasty.  The  point  cannot 
be  fully  cleared  up ;  but  on  the  whole  I  accept  the  words  of  the 
ode  as  sufficient  proof  against  the  silence  of  other  documents. 


312  THE    SHIH    KING.  ODE  5. 

Boldly  he  entered  its  dangerous  passes,  And 
brought  the  multitudes  of  Kmg  together,  Till  the 
country  was  reduced  under  complete  restraint : — 
Such  was  the  fitting  achievement  of  the  descendant 
of  Thang ! 

'  Ye  people/  (he  said),  *  of  Kmg-Kk\xy  Dwell  in 
the  southern  part  of  my  kingdom.  Formerly,  in 
the  time  of  Thang  the  Successful,  Even  from  the 
Alang  of  Ti  \  They  dared  not  but  come  with  their 
offerings;  (Their  chiefs)  dared  not  but  come  to 
seek  acknowledgment 2 : — Such  is  the  regular  rule 
of  Shang.' 

Heaven  had  given  their  appointments  (to  the 
princes),  But  where  their  capitals  had  been  as- 
signed within  the  sphere  of  the  labours  of  Yli, 
For  the  business  of  every  year  they  appeared 
before  our  king 3,  (Saying),  '  Do  not  punish  nor 
reprove  us ;  We  have  not  been  remiss  in  our 
husbandry/ 

When  Heaven  by  its  will  is  inspecting  (the  king- 
dom), The  lower  people  are  to  be  feared.  (Our 
king)  showed  no  partiality  (in  rewarding),  no  excess 
(in  punishing) ;  He  dared  not  to  allow  himself  in 
indolence  : — So  was  his  appointment  (established) 

1  The  Ti  .A'iang,  or  ^Tiang  of  Ti,  still  existed  in  the  time  of  the 
Han  dynasty,  occupying  portions  of  the  present  Kan-su. 

2  The  chiefs  of  the  wild  tribes,  lying  beyond  the  nine  provinces 
of  the  kingdom,  were  required  to  present  themselves  once  in  their 
lifetime  at  the  royal  court.  The  rule,  in  normal  periods,  was  for 
each  chief  to  appear  immediately  after  he  had  succeeded  to  the 
headship  of  his  tribe. 

3  The  feudal  lords  had  to  appear  at  court  every  year.  They 
did  so,  we  may  suppose,  at  the  court  of  Wu-ting,  the  more  so 
because  of  his  subjugation  of  JTing-A'M. 


ODE  i.  THE  SACRIFICIAL    ODES    OF   KAV.  313 

over   the    states,      And    he    made    his    happiness 
grandly  secure. 

The  capital  of  Shang  was  full  of  order,  The 
model  for  all  parts  of  the  kingdom.  Glorious  was 
(the  kings)  fame  ;  Brilliant  his  energy.  Long  lived 
he  and  enjoyed  tranquillity,  And  so  he  preserves 
us,  his  descendants. 

We  ascended  the  hill  of  A"ing  \  Where  the  pines 
and  cypresses  grew  symmetrical.  We  cut  them 
down  and  conveyed  them  here ;  We  reverently 
hewed  them  square.  Long  are  the  projecting  beams 
of  pine  ;  Large  are  the  many  pillars.  The  temple 
was  completed, — the  tranquil  abode  (of  the  mar- 
tial king  of  Yin). 


II.     The  Sacrificial  Odes  of  A"au. 

In  this  division  we  have  thirty-one  sacrificial  odes  of  iTau, 
arranged  in  three  decades,  the  third  of  which,  however,  contains 
eleven  pieces.  They  belong  mostly  to  the  time  of  king  Wan, 
the  founder  of  the  ^au  dynasty,  and  to  the  reigns  of  his  son 
and  grandson,  kings  Wu  and  Klvkng.  The  decades  are  named 
from  the  name  of  the  first  piece  in  each. 

The  First  Decade,  or  that  of  Khmg  Mido. 
Ode  1.     The  Ajjing  Miao. 

CELEBRATING    THE    REVERENTIAL    MANNER    IN   WHICH    A   SACRIFICE    TO 
KING  WAN   WAS   PERFORMED,  AND   FURTHER   PRAISING    HIM. 

Chinese  critics  agree  in  assigning  this  piece  to  the  sacrifice  men- 
tioned in  the  Shu,  in  the  end  of  the  thirteenth  Book  of  Part  V, 
when,  the  building  of  Lo  being  finished,  king  Khzxig  came  to 


1  See  on  the  last  line  but  two  of  ode  3. 


314  THE   SHIH   KING.  DECADE  1. 

the  new  city,  and  offered  a  red  bull  to  Wan,  and  the  same  to 
Wu.  It  seems  to  me  to  have  been  sung  in  honour  of  Wan, 
after  the  service  was  completed.  This  determination  of  the 
occasion  of  the  piece  being  accepted,  we  should  refer  it  to 
b.c.  1108. 

Oh!  solemn  is  the  ancestral  temple  in  its  pure 
stillness.  Reverent  and  harmonious  were  the  dis- 
tinguished assistants 1 ;  Great  was  the  number  of 
the  officers 2 : — (All)  assiduous  followers  of  the  virtue 
of  (king  Wan).  In  response  to  him  in  heaven, 
Grandly  they  hurried  about  in  the  temple.  Distin- 
guished is  he  and  honoured,  And  will  never  be 
wearied  of  among  men. 

Ode  2.     The  Wei  Thien  Km  Ming. 

CELEBRATING  THE  VIRTUE  OF  KING  WAN  AS  COMPARABLE  TO  THAT 
OF  HEAVEN,  AND  LOOKING  TO  HIM  FOR  BLESSING  IN  THE  FUTURE. 

According  to  the  Preface,  there  is  an  announcement  here  of  the 
realization  of  complete  peace  throughout  the  kingdom,  and  some 
of  the  old  critics  refer  the  ode  to  a  sacrifice  to  king  Wan  by  the 
duke  of  iTau,  when  he  had  completed  the  statutes  for  the  new 
dynasty.  But  there  is  nothing  to  authorize  a  more  definite 
argument  of  the  contents  than  I  have  given. 

The  ordinances  of  Heaven, — How  deep  are  they 
and  unintermitting !  And  oh !  how  illustrious  Was 
the  singleness  of  the  virtue  of  king  Wan 3 ! 

How  does  he  (now)  show  his  kindness  ?  We  will 
receive  it,    Striving  to  be  in  accord  with  him,  our 

1  These  would   be  the   princes   who   were  assembled  on  the 
occasion,  and  assisted  the  king  in  the  service. 

2  That  is,  the  officers  who  took  part  in  the  libations,  prayers, 
and  other  parts  of  the  sacrifice. 

8  See  what  3ze-sze  says  on  these  four  lines  in  the  Doctrine  of 
the  Mean,  XXVI,  par.  10. 


ODE  4.  THE   SACRIFICIAL    ODES   OF   KAV.  3  I  5 

king  Wan ;     And  may  his  remotest  descendant  be 
abundantly  the  same! 


Ode  3.     The  Wei  Khing. 

APPROPRIATE  AT  SOME  SACRIFICE  TO   KING  WAN,  AND  CELEBRATING  HIS 

STATUTES. 

Nothing  more  can,  with  any  likelihood  of  truth,  be  said  of  this 
short  piece,  which  moreover  has  the  appearance  of  being  a 
fragment. 

Clear  and  to  be  preserved  bright,  Are  the  sta- 
tutes of  king  Wan.  From  the  first  sacrifice  (to 
him),  Till  now  when  they  have  issued  in  our  com- 
plete state,  They  have  been  the  happy  omen  of 
(the  fortunes  of)  Aau. 


Ode  4.     The  Lieh  Wan. 

A  SONG  IN  PRAISE  OF  THE  PRINCES  WHO  HAVE  ASSISTED  AT  A  SACRIFICE, 
AND  ADMONISHING   THEM. 

The  Preface  says  that  this  piece  was  made  on  the  occasion  of 
king  bang's  accession  to  the  government,  when  he  thus  ad- 
dressed the  princes  who  had  assisted  him  in  the  ancestral 
temple.  Kb  Hsi  considers  that  it  was  a  piece  for  general  use 
in  the  ancestral  temple,  to  be  sung  when  the  king  presented 
a  cup  to  his  assisting  guests,  after  they  had  thrice  presented  the 
cup  to  the  representatives  of  the  dead.  There  is  really  nothing 
in  it  to  enable  us  to  decide  in  favour  of  either  view. 

Ye,  brilliant  and  accomplished  princes,  Have 
conferred  on  me  this  happiness.  Your  favours  to 
me  are  without  limit,  And  my  descendants  will 
preserve  (the  fruits  of)  them. 

Be  not  mercenary  nor  extravagant  in  your  states, 
And  the  king  will  honour  you.     Thinking  of  this 


316  THE    SHIH    KING.  DECADE  I. 

great  service,    He  will  enlarge  the  dignity  of  your 
successors. 

What  is  most  powerful  is  the  being  the  man : — 
Its  influence  will  be  felt  throughout  your  states. 
What  is  most  distinguished  is  the  being  virtuous  : — 
It  will  secure  the  imitation  of  all  the  princes.  Ah  ! 
the  former  kings  cannot  be  forgotten ! 

Ode  5.     The  Thien  3o. 

APPROPRIATE    TO    A    SACRIFICE    TO    KING    THAI. 

We  cannot  tell  what  the  sacrifice  was ;  and  the  Preface,  indeed, 
says  that  the  piece  was  used  in  the  seasonal  sacrifices  to  all  the 
former  kings  and  dukes  of  the  House  of  -£au.  King  TMi 
was  the  grandfather  of  king  Wan,  and,  before  he  received  that 
title,  was  known  as  'the  ancient  duke  Thancfu/  In  b. c,  1327, 
he  moved  with  his  followers  from  Pin,  an  earlier  seat  of  his 
House,  and  settled  in  the  plain  of  Kh%  about  fifty  li  to  the 
north-east  of  the  present  district  city  of  .A^-shan,  in  Shen-hsi. 

Heaven  made  the  lofty  hill1,  And  king  Thai 
brought  (the  country  about)  it  under  cultivation. 
He  made  the  commencement  with  it,  And  king 
Wan  tranquilly  (carried  on  the  work),  (Till)  that 
rugged  (mount)  Khi  Had  level  roads  leading  to  it. 
May  their  descendants  ever  preserve  it ! 

Ode  6.     The  Hao  Thien  xt  Khang  Ming. 

APPROPRIATE    TO    A    SACRIFICE    TO    KING    KlfAKG. 

Kh&xig  was  the  honorary  title  of  Sung,  the  son  and  successor  of 
king  Wu,  b.c.  1 1 15  to  1079. 

Heaven  made  its  determinate  appointment,  Which 
our  two  sovereigns  received2.  King  A^ang  did  not 
dare  to  rest  idly  in  it,     But  night  and  day  enlarged 

1  Meaning  mount  Kh\.  2  Wan  and  Wu. 


ODE  8.  THE  SACRIFICIAL    ODES    OF   KAV.  3  I  7 

its  foundations  by  his  deep  and  silent  virtue.  How 
did  he  continue  and  glorify  (his  heritage),  Exerting 
all  his  heart,    And  so  securing  its  tranquillity ! 

Ode  7.     The  Wo  A"iang. 

APPROPRIATE  TO  A  SACRIFICE  TO  KING  WAN,  ASSOCIATED  WITH  HEAVEN, 
IN    THE    HALL    OF    AUDIENCE. 

There  is,  happily,  an  agreement  among  the  critics  as  to  the 
occasion  to  which  this  piece  is  referred.  It  took  place  in  the 
last  month  of  autumn,  in  the  Hall  of  Audience,  called  also  ( the 
Brilliant  Hall/  and  '  the  Hall  of  Light/  We  must  suppose  that 
the  princes  are  all  assembled  at  court,  and  that  the  king  receives 
them  in  this  hall.  A  sacrifice  is  then  presented  to  God,  and 
with  him  is  associated  king  Wan,  the  two  being  the  fountain 
from  which,  and  the  channel  through  which,  the  sovereignty  had 
come  to  .ATau. 

I  have  brought  my  offerings,  A  ram  and  a  bull. 
May  Heaven  accept  them * ! 

I  imitate  and  follow  and  observe  the  statutes  of 
king  Wan,  Seeking  daily  to  secure  the  tranquillity 
of  the  kingdom.  King  Wan,  the  Blesser,  has  de- 
scended on  the  right,  and  accepted  (the  offerings). 

Do  I  not,  night  and  day,  Revere  the  majesty  of 
Heaven,     Thus  to  preserve  (its  favour)  ? 

Ode  8.     The  Shih  Mai. 

APPROPRIATE  TO  KING  Wu's  SACRIFICING  TO  HEAVEN,  AND  TO  THE 
SPIRITS  OF  THE  HILLS  AND  RIVERS,  ON  A  PROGRESS  THROUGH  THE 
KINGDOM,  AFTER    THE    OVERTHROW    OF    THE   SHANG    DYNASTY. 

Here  again  there  is  an  agreement  among  the  critics.  We  find 
from  the  3°  -Swan  and  '  the  Narratives  of  the  States/  that  the 

1  This  is  a  prayer.  The  worshipper,  it  is  said,  in  view  of  the 
majesty  of  Heaven,  shrank  from  assuming  that  God  would  cer- 
tainly accept  his  sacrifice.  He  assumes,  below,  that  king  Wan 
does  so. 


3l8  THE    SHIH    KING.  DECADE  I. 

piece  was,  when  those  compilations  were  made,  considered  to 
be  the  work  of  the  duke  of  K&xi ;  and,  no  doubt,  it  was  made 
by  him  soon  after  the  accession  of  Wu  to  the  kingdom,  and 
when  he  was  making  a  royal  progress  in  assertion  of  his 
being  appointed  by  Heaven  to  succeed  to  the  rulers  of  Shang. 
The  '  I '  in  the  fourteenth  line  is,  most  probably,  to  be  taken 
of  the  duke  of  i£au,  who  may  have  recited  the  piece  on 
occasion  of  the  sacrifices,  in  the  hearing  of  the  assembled 
princes  and  lords. 

Now  is  he  making  a  progress  through  his  states  ; 
May  Heaven  deal  with  him  as  its  son  ! 

Truly  are  the  honour  and  succession  come  from 
it  to  the  House  of  K&u.  To  his  movements  All 
respond  with  tremulous  awe.  He  has  attracted 
and  given  rest  to  all  spiritual  beings  1,  Even  to 
(the  spirits  of)  the  Ho  and  the  highest  hills. 
Truly  is  the  king  our  sovereign  lord. 

Brilliant  and  illustrious  is  the  House  of  K&w. 
He  has  regulated  the  positions  of  the  princes ; 
He  has  called  in  shields  and  spears ;  He  has  re- 
turned to  their  cases  bows  and  arrows2.  I  will 
cultivate  admirable  virtue,  And  display  it  through- 
out these  great  regions.  Truly  will  the  king  pre- 
serve the  appointment. 


1  '  All  spiritual  beings '  is,  literally,  '  the  hundred  spirits,'  mean- 
ing the  spirits  presiding,  under  Heaven,  over  all  nature,  and 
especially  the  spirits  of  the  rivers  and  hills  throughout  the  kingdom. 
Those  of  the  Ho  and  the  lofty  mountains  are  mentioned,  because 
if  their  spirits  were  satisfied  with  Wu,  those  of  all  other  mountains 
and  hills,  no  doubt,  were  so. 

2  Compare  with  these  lines  the  last  chapter  of '  the  Completion 
of  the  War '  in  the  Shu. 


ODE  io,  THE  SACRIFICIAL   ODES    OF   KAU.  319 


Ode  9.     The  K\yl  ATlng. 

AN  ODE  APPROPRIATE   IN   SACRIFICING  TO   THE   KINGS  Wl>,  KHAKG,  AND 

KHANG. 

The  Chinese  critics  differ  in  the  interpretation  of  this  ode,  the 
Preface  and  older  scholars  restricting  it  to  a  sacrifice  to  king 
Wu,  while  Kb  Hsi  and  others  find  reference  in  it,  as  to  me 
also  seems  most  natural,  to  Kbing  and  Khang,  who  succeeded 
him. 

The  arm  of  king  Wft  was  full  of  strength  ;  Irre- 
sistible was  his  ardour.  Greatly  illustrious  were 
A^ang  and  Khang  \     Kinged  by  God. 

When  we  consider  how  Kkkng  and  Khang 
Grandly  held  all  within  the  four  quarters  (of  the 
kingdom),  How  penetrating  was  their  intelli- 
gence ! 

The  bells  and  drums  sound  in  harmony;  The 
sounding -stones  and  flutes  blend  their  notes  ; 
Abundant  blessing  is  sent  down. 

Blessing  is  sent  down  in  large  measure.  Careful 
and  exact  is  all  our  deportment ;  We  have  drunk, 
and  we  have  eaten,  to  the  full ;  Our  happiness  and 
dignity  will  be  prolonged. 

Ode  10.     The  Sze  Wan. 

APPROPRIATE  TO  ONE  OF  THE  BORDER  SACRIFICES,  WHEN  HAU-/TI 
WAS  WORSHIPPED  AS  THE  CORRELATE  OF  GOD,  AND  CELEBRATING 
HIM. 

Hdu-£i  was  the  same  as  KJA,  who  appears  in  Part  II  of  the  Shu,  as 
Minister  of  Agriculture  to  Y&o  and  Shun,  and  co-operating  with 

1  If  the  whole  piece  be  understood  only  of  a  sacrifice  to  Wu, 
this  line  will  have  to  be  translated — '  How  illustrious  was  he,  who 
completed  (his  great  work),  and  secured  its  tranquillity.'  We  must 
deal  similarly  with  the  next  line.  This  construction  is  very  forced; 
nor  is  the  text  clear  on  the  view  of  Kb  Hsi. 


320  THE    SHIH    KING.  DECADE  II. 

Yii  in  his  labours  on  the  flooded  land.  The  name  Hau  belongs  to 
him  as  lord  of  Thai ;  that  of  K%  as  Minister  of  Agriculture.  How- 
ever the  combination  arose,  Hau-£i  became  historically  the  name 
of  Kh\  of  the  time  of  Yao  and  Shun,  the  ancestor  to  whom  the 
kings  of  Aau  traced  their  lineage.  He  was  to  the  people  the 
Father  of  Husbandry,  who  first  taught  men  to  plough  and  sow 
and  reap.  Hence,  when  the  kings  offered  sacrifice  and  prayer 
to  God  at  the  commencement  of  spring  for  his  blessing  on 
the  labours  of  the  year,  they  associated  Hau-^t  with  him  at  the 
service. 

O  accomplished  Hau-/£i,  Thou  didst  prove  thy- 
self the  correlate  of  Heaven.  Thou  didst  give 
grain-food  to  our  multitudes  : — The  immense  gift  of 
thy  goodness.  Thou  didst  confer  on  us  the  wheat 
and  the  barley,  Which  God  appointed  for  the 
nourishment  of  all.  And  without  distinction  of 
territory  or  boundary,  The  rules  of  social  duty 
were  diffused  throughout  these  great  regions. 


The  Second  Decade,  or  that  of  Kkkn  Kung. 
Ode  1.     The  Khan  Kung. 

INSTRUCTIONS   GIVEN   TO   THE   OFFICERS   OF   HUSBANDRY. 

The  place  of  this  piece  among  the  sacrificial  odes  makes  us  assign 
it  to  the  conclusion  of  some  sacrifice ;  but  what  the  sacrifice 
was  we  cannot  tell.  The  Preface  says  that  it  was  addressed, 
at  the  conclusion  of  the  spring  sacrifice  to  ancestors,  to  the 
princes  who  had  been  present  and  taken  part  in  the  service. 
K&  Hsi  says  nothing  but  what  I  have  stated  in  the  above 
argument  of  the  piece. 

Ah !  ah  !  ministers  and  officers,  Reverently  attend 
to  your  public  duties.  The  king  has  given  you 
perfect  rules ; — Consult  about  them,  and  consider 
them. 

Ah!    ah!   ye  assistants,     It  is  now  the  end  of 


ODE  2.  THE    SACRIFICIAL    ODES    OF  KAU.  32 1 

spring 1 ;  And  what  have  ye  to  seek  for  ?  (Only) 
how  to  manage  the  new  fields  and  those  of  the  third 
year.  How  beautiful  are  the  wheat  and  the  barley ! 
The  bright  and  glorious  God  Will  in  them  give  us 
a  good  year.  Order  all  our  men  To  be  provided 
with  their  spuds  and  hoes  : — Anon  we  shall  see  the 
sickles  at  work. 

Ode  2.     The  t   Hsl. 

FURTHER   INSTRUCTIONS   TO    THE    OFFICERS    OF    HUSBANDRY. 

Again  there  is  a  difficulty  in  determining  to  what  sacrifice  this 
piece  should  be  referred.  The  Preface  says  it  was  sung  on  the 
occasions  of  sacrifice  by  the  king  to  God,  in  spring  and  summer, 
for  a  good  year.  But  the  note  on  the  first  two  lines  will  show 
that  this  view  cannot  be  accepted  without  modification. 

Oh !  yes,  king  Kkang 2  Brightly  brought  him- 
self near 2.  Lead  your  husbandmen  To  sow  their 
various  kinds  of  grain,    Going  vigorously  to  work 

1  It  is  this  line  which  makes  it  difficult  to  determine  after 
what  sacrifice  we  are  to  suppose  these  instructions  to  have  been 
delivered.  The  year,  during  the  Hsia  dynasty,  began  with  the 
first  month  of  spring,  as  it  now  does  in  China,  in  consequence  of 
Confucius  having  said  that  that  was  the  proper  time.  Under  the 
Shang  dynasty,  it  commenced  a  month  earlier ;  and  during  the 
K&u.  period,  it  ought  always  to  have  begun  with  the  new  moon 
preceding  the  winter  solstice, — between  our  November  22  and 
December  22.  But  in  the  writings  of  the  K&u  period  we  find 
statements  of  time  continually  referred  to  the  calendar  of  Hsia, — 
as  here. 

2  These  first  two  lines  are  all  but  unmanageable.  The  old 
critics  held  that  there  was  no  mention  of  king  -Oang  in  them ; 
but  the  text  is  definite  on  this  point.  We  must  suppose  that  a 
special  service  had  been  performed  at  his  shrine,  asking  him  to 
intimate  the  day  when  the  sacrifice  after  which  the  instructions 
were  given  should  be  performed ;  and  that  a  directing  oracle  had 
been  received. 

[1]  Y 


322  THE    SHIH    KING.  DECADE  II. 

on  your  private  fields1,  All  over  the  thirty  li2. 
Attend  to  your  ploughing,  With  your  ten  thousand 
men  all  in  pairs. 


Ode  3.     The  Kav  Ltj. 

CELEBRATING  THE  REPRESENTATIVES  OF  FORMER  DYNASTIES,  WHO 
HAD  COME  TO  COURT  TO  ASSIST  AT  A  SACRIFICE  IN  THE  ANCESTRAL 
TEMPLE. 

This  piece  may  have  been  used  when  the  king  was  dismissing  his 
distinguished  guests  in  the  ancestral  temple.  See  the  intro- 
ductory note  to  this  Part,  pp.  300,  301. 

A  flock  of  egrets  is  flying,  About  the  marsh 
there  in  the  west 3.  My  visitors  came,  With  an 
(elegant)  carriage  like  those  birds. 

There,  (in  their  states),  not  disliked,  Here,  (in 
isfau),  never  tired  of;  —  They  are  sure,  day  and 
night,     To  perpetuate  their  fame. 

1  The  mention  of '  the  private  fields '  implies  that  there  were 
also  '  the  public  fields/  cultivated  by  the  husbandmen  in  common, 
in  behalf  of  the  government.  As  the  people  are  elsewhere  intro- 
duced, wishing  that  the  rain  might  first  fall  on  '  the  public  fields/ 
to  show  their  loyalty,  so  the  king  here  mentions  only  '  the  private 
fields/  to  show  his  sympathy  and  consideration  for  the  people. 

2  For  the  cultivation  of  the  ground,  the  allotments  of  single 
families  were  separated  by  a  small  ditch;  ten  allotments,  by  a 
larger ;  a  hundred,  by  what  we  may  call  a  brook ;  a  thousand,  by 
a  small  stream;  and  ten  thousand,  by  a  river.  The  space  occupied 
by  10,000  families  formed  a  square  of  a  little  more  than  thirty-two 
It.  We  may  suppose  that  this  space  was  intended  by  the  round 
number  of  thirty  It  in  the  text.  So  at  least  iTang  Khang-^ang 
explained  it. 

3  These  two  lines  make  the  piece  allusive.  See  the  Intro- 
duction, p.  279. 


ode  5.  the  sacrificial  odes  of  .rtau.  323 

Ode  4.     The  Fang  Nien. 

AN    ODE    OF    THANKSGIVING    FOR    A    PLENTIFUL    YEAR. 

The  Preface  says  the  piece  was  used  at  sacrifices  in  autumn  and 
winter.  Kn  Hsi  calls  it  an  ode  of  thanksgiving  for  a  good 
year, — without  any  specification  of  time.  He  supposes,  however, 
that  the  thanks  were  given  to  the  ancient  Shan-nang,  '  the 
father  of  Agriculture/  Hau-£r,  '  the  first  Husbandman/  and  the 
spirits  presiding  over  the  four  quarters  of  the  heavens.  To  this 
the  imperial  editors  rightly  demur,  saying  that  the  blessings 
which  the  piece  speaks  of  could  come  only  from  God. 

Abundant  is  the  year  with  much  millet  and  much 
rice;  And  we  have  our  high  granaries,  With 
myriads,  and  hundreds  of  thousands,  and  millions 
(of  measures  in  them) ;  For  spirits  and  sweet  spirits, 
To  present  to  our  forefathers,  male  and  female,  And 
to  supply  all  our  ceremonies.  The  blessings  sent 
down  on  us  are  of  every  kind. 

Ode  5.     The  YO   Kti. 

THE   BLIND    MUSICIANS    OF    THE    COURT    OF    KAV  ;      THE    INSTRUMENTS 
OF    MUSIC  ;     AND    THEIR    HARMONY. 

The  critics  agree  in  holding  that  this  piece  was  made  on  occasion 
of  the  duke  of  iTau's  completing  his  instruments  of  music  for 
the  ancestral  temple,  and  announcing  the  fact  at  a  grand  per- 
formance in  the  temple  of  king  Wan.  It  can  hardly  be  regarded 
as  a  sacrificial  ode. 

There  are  the  blind  musicians ;  there  are  the 
blind  musicians;     In  the  court  of  (the  temple  of) 

1  The  blind  musicians  at  the  court  of  A'au  were  numerous. 
The  blindness  of  the  eyes  was  supposed  to  make  the  ears  more 
acute  in  hearing,  and  to  be  favourable  to  the  powers  of  the  voice. 
In  the  Official  Book  of  jTau,  III,  i,  par.  22,  the  enumeration  of 

Y  2 


324  THE    SHIH    KING.  DECADE  II. 

There  are  (the  music-frames  with  their)  face- 
boards  and  posts,  The  high  toothed-edge  (of  the 
former),  and  the  feathers  stuck  (in  the  latter) ;  With 
the  drums,  large  and  small,  suspended  from  them  ; 
And  the  hand-drums  and  sounding-stones,  the  in- 
strument to  give  the  signal  for  commencing,  and  the 
stopper.  These  being  all  complete,  the  music  is 
struck  up.  The  pan-pipe  and  the  double  flute  begin 
at  the  same  time  \ 

Harmoniously  blend  their  sounds ;  In  solemn 
unison  they  give  forth  their  notes.  Our  ancestors 
will  give  ear.  Our  visitors  will  be  there  ; — Long  to 
witness  the  complete  performance. 

Ode  6.     The  A"#ien. 

SUNG   IN    THE    LAST    MONTH    OF    WINTER,    AND    IN    SPRING,   WHEN   THE 
KING   PRESENTED    A   FISH    IN    THE    ANCESTRAL   TEMPLE. 

Such  is  the  argument  of  this  piece  given  in  the  Preface,  and  in 
which  the  critics  generally  concur.  In  the  Li  K%  IV,  vi,  49,  it 
is  recorded  that  the  king,  in  the  third  month  of  winter,  gave 
orders  to  his  chief  fisher  to  commence  his  duties,  and  went 
himself  to  see  his  operations.  He  partook  of  the  fish  first 
captured,  but  previously  presented  some  as  an  offering  in  the 
back  apartment  of  the  ancestral  temple.  In  the  third  month  of 
spring,  again,  when  the  sturgeons  began  to  make  their  appearance 
(Li  ifi,  IV,  i,  25),  the  king  presented  one  in  the  same  place.   On 

these  blind  musicians  gives  2  directors  of  the  first  rank,  and  4 
of  the  second;  40  performers  of  the  first  grade,  100  of  the 
second,  and  160  of  the  third;  with  300  assistants  who  were 
possessed  of  vision.  But  it  is  difficult  not  to  be  somewhat  in- 
credulous as  to  this  great  collection  of  blind  musicians  about  the 
court  of  K&u. 

1  All  the  instruments  here  enumerated  were  performed  on  in 
the  open  court  below  the  hall.  Nothing  is  said  of  the  stringed 
instruments  which  were  used  in  the  hall  itself;  nor  is  the  enumera- 
tion of  the  instruments  in  the  courtyard  complete. 


ODE  7.  THE    SACRIFICIAL    ODES    OF   KAXJ.  325 

these  passages,  the  prefatory  notice  was,  no  doubt,  constructed. 
Choice  specimens  of  the  earliest-caught  fish  were  presented  by 
the  sovereign  to  his  ancestors,  as  an  act  of  duty,  and  an  acknow- 
ledgment that  it  was  to  their  favour  that  he  and  the  people  were 
indebted  for  the  supplies  of  food,  which  they  received  from  the 
waters. 

Oh!  in  the  Khi  and  the  Kk\i,  There  are  many 
fish  in  the  warrens  ; — Sturgeons,  large  and  snouted, 
Thryssas,  yellow-jaws,  mud-fish,  and  carp;  —  For 
offerings,  for  sacrifice,  That  our  bright  happiness 
may  be  increased. 

Ode  7.     The  Yung. 

APPROPRIATE,  PROBABLY,  AT  A  SACRIFICE   BY  KING  WU   TO   HIS  FATHER 

WAN. 

From  a  reference  in  the  Analects,  III,  ii,  to  an  abuse  of  this  ode 
in  the  time  of  Confucius,  we  learn  that  it  was  sung  when  the 
sacrificial  vessels  and  their  contents  were  being  removed. 

They  come  full  of  harmony  ;  They  are  here  in 
all  gravity ; — The  princes  assisting,  While  the  Son 
of  Heaven  looks  profound. 

(He  says),  'While  I  present  (this)  noble  bull, 
And  they  assist  me  in  setting  forth  the  sacrifice, 
O  great  and  august  Father,  Comfort  me,  your 
filial  son. 

'With  penetrating  wisdom  thou  didst  play  the  man, 
A  sovereign  with  the  gifts  both  of  peace  and  war, 
Giving  rest  even  to  great  Heaven1,  And  ensuring 
prosperity  to  thy  descendants. 

1  To  explain  this  line  one  commentator  refers  to  the  seventh 
stanza  of  the  first  piece  in  the  Major  Odes  of  the  Kingdom,  where 
it  is  said,  'God  surveyed  the  four  quarters  of  the  kingdom,  seeking 
for  some  one  to  give  settlement  and  rest  to  the  people ; '  and  adds, 
*  Thus  what  Heaven  has  at  heart  is  the  settlement  of  the  people. 
When  they  have  rest  given  to  them,  then  Heaven  is  at  rest.' 


326  THE    SHIH    KING.  DECADE  II. 

'  Thou  comfortest  me  with  the  eyebrows  of  lon- 
gevity ;  Thou  makest  me  great  with  manifold 
blessings,  I  offer  this  sacrifice  to  my  meritorious 
father,     And  to  my  accomplished  mother  V 

Ode  8.     The  3ai  Hsien. 

APPROPRIATE    TO    AN    OCCASION   WHEN  THE   FEUDAL    PRINCES  HAD  BEEN 
ASSISTING    KING   A77ANG    AT    A    SACRIFICE    TO    HIS    FATHER. 

They  appeared  before  their  sovereign  king,  To 
seek  from  him  the  rules  (they  were  to  observe). 
With  their  dragon  -  emblazoned  banners,  flying 
bright,  The  bells  on  them  and  their  front-boards 
tinkling,  And  with  the  rings  on  the  ends  of  the 
reins  glittering,  Admirable  was  their  majesty  and 
splendour. 

He  led  them  to  appear  before  his  father  shrined 
on  the  left2,  Where  he  discharged  his  filial  duty, 
and  presented  his  offerings ; — That  he  might  have 
granted  to  him  long  life,  And  ever  preserve  (his 
dignity).  Great  and  many  are  his  blessings.  They 
are  the  brilliant  and  accomplished  princes,  Who 
cheer   him    with    his    many   sources    of   happiness, 


1  At  sacrifices  to  ancestors,  the  spirit  tablets  of  wives  were 
placed  along  with  those  of  their  husbands  in  their  shrines,  so 
that  both  shared  in  the  honours  of  the  service.  So  it  is  now 
in  the  imperial  ancestral  temple  in  Peking.  The  '  accomplished 
mother '  here  would  be  Thai  Sze,  celebrated  often  in  the  pieces  of 
the  first  Book  of  Part  I,  and  elsewhere. 

2  Among  the  uses  of  the  services  of  the  ancestral  temple, 
specified  by  Confucius  and  quoted  on  p.  302,  was  the  distinguishing 
the  order  of  descent  in  the  royal  House.  According  to  the  rules 
for  that  purpose,  the  characters  here  used  enable  us  to  determine 
the  subject  of  this  line  as  king  Wu,  in  opposition  tp  his  father 
Wan. 


ODE  9.  THE    SACRIFICIAL    ODES    OF   KAU.  327 

Enabling  him  to  perpetuate   them  in  their  bright- 
ness as  pure  blessing. 

Ode  9.     The  Yu  Kho. 

CELEBRATING  THE  DUKE  OF  SUNG  ON  ONE  OF  HIS  APPEARANCES 
AT  THE  CAPITAL  TO  ASSIST  AT  THE  SACRIFICE  IN  THE  ANCESTRAL 
TEMPLE  OF  KAV  ) — SHOWING  HOW  HE  WAS  ESTEEMED  AND  CHERISHED 
BY    THE    KING. 

The  mention  of  the  white  horses  here  in  the  chariot  of  the 
visitor  sufficiently  substantiates  the  account  in  the  Preface  that 
he  was  the  famous  count  of  Wei,  mentioned  in  the  Shu,  IV,  xi^ 
and  whose  subsequent  investiture  with  the  duchy  of  Sung,  as 
the  representative  of  the  line  of  the  Shang  kings,  is  also  related 
in  the  Shu,  V,  viii.  With  the  dynasty  of  Shang  white  had  been 
the  esteemed  and  sacred  colour,  as  red  was  with  JTau,  and 
hence  the  duke  had  his  carriage  drawn  by  white  horses.  '  The 
language,'  says  one  critic,  '  is  all  in  praise  of  the  visitor,  but  it 
was  sung  in  the  temple,  and  is  rightly  placed  therefore  among 
the  Sung/  There  is,  in  the  last  line,  an  indication  of  the 
temple  in  it. 

The  noble  visitor !  The  noble  visitor !  Drawn, 
like  his  ancestors,  by  white  horses !  The  reverent 
and  dignified,     Polished  members  of  his  suite! 

The  noble  guest  will  stay  (but)  a  night  or  two ! 
The  noble  guest  will  stay  (but)  two  nights  or  four ! 
Give  him  ropes,    To  bind  his  horses1. 

I  will  convoy  him  (with  a  parting  feast) ;  I  will 
comfort  him  in  every  possible  way.  Adorned  with 
such  great  dignity,  It  is  very  natural  that  he  should 
be  blessed. 

1  These  four  lines  simply  express  the  wish  of  the  king  to  detain 
his  visitor,  from  the  delight  that  his  presence  gave  him.  Compare 
the  similar  language  in  the  second  ode  of  the  fourth  decade  of 
Part  II. 


328  THE    SHIH    KING.  DECADE  III. 


Ode  10.     The  Wtf. 

SUNG    IN   THE    ANCESTRAL    TEMPLE    TO    THE    MUSIC    REGULATING    THE 
DANCE    IN   HONOUR    OF   THE    ACHIEVEMENTS    OF    KING   WU. 

This  account  of  the  piece,  given  in  the  Preface,  is  variously  cor- 
roborated, and  has  not  been  called  in  question  by  any  critic. 
Perhaps  this  brief  ode  was  sung  as  a  prelude  to  the  dance,  or 
it  may  be  that  the  seven  lines  are  only  a  fragment.  This,  indeed, 
is  most  likely,  as  we  have  several  odes  in  the  next  decade,  all 
said  to  have  been  used  at  the  same  occasion. 

Gh !  great  wast  thou,  O  king  WA,  Displaying 
the  utmost  strength  in  thy  work.  Truly  accom- 
plished was  king  Wan,  Opening  the  path  for  his 
successors.  Thou  didst  receive  the  inheritance  from 
him.  Thou  didst  vanquish  Yin,  and  put  a  stop  to 
its  cruelties  ; — Effecting  the  firm  establishment  of 
thy  merit. 

The  Third  Decade,  or  that  of  Min  Yii  Hsiao  3ze. 

Ode  1.    The  Min  Yu. 

APPROPRIATE  TO    THE  YOUNG  KING  KHAXG,  DECLARING  HIS  SENTIMENTS 
IN    THE    TEMPLE    OF    HIS   FATHER. 

The  speaker  in  this  piece  is,  by  common  consent,  king  ./TMng. 
The  only  question  is  as  to  the  date  of  its  composition,  whether 
it  was  made  for  him,  in  his  minority,  on  his  repairing  to  the 
temple  when  the  mourning  for  his  father  was  completed,  or 
after  the  expiration  of  the  regency  of  the  duke  of  JTau.  The 
words  '  little  child/  according  to  their  usage,  are  expressive  of 
humility  and  not  of  age.  They  do  not  enable  us  to  determine 
the  above  point. 

Alas  for  me,  who  am  a  little  child,  On  whom  has 
devolved  the  unsettled  state  !  Solitary  am  I  and  full 
of  distress.  Oh !  my  great  Father,  All  thy  life  long, 
thou  wast  filial. 

Thou  didst  think  of  my  great  grandfather,  (Seeing 


ODE  3.  THE    SACRIFICIAL   ODES    OF   KAU.  329 

him,  as  it  were)  ascending  and  descending  in  the 
court,  I,  the  little  child,  Day  and  night  will  be 
as  reverent. 

Oh !  ye  great  kings,      As  your  successor,  I  will 
strive  not  to  forget  you. 

Ode  2.     The  Fang  Lo. 

THE  YOUNG  KING  TELLS  OF  HIS  DIFFICULTIES  AND  INCOMPETENCIES; 
ASKS  FOR  COUNSEL  TO  KEEP  HIM  TO  COPY  THE  EXAMPLE  OF  HIS 
FATHER  ;  STATES  HOW  HE  MEANT  TO  DO  SO  J  AND  CONCLUDES  WITH 
AN   APPEAL  OR    PRAYER    TO    HIS   FATHER. 

This  seems  to  be  a  sequel  to  the  former  ode.  We  can  hardly  say 
anything  about  it  so  definite  as  the  statement  in  the  Preface, 
that  it  relates  to  a  council  held  by  Kh&xig  and  his  ministers  in 
the  ancestral  temple. 

I  take  counsel  at  the  beginning  of  my  (rule), 
How  I  can  follow  (the  example  of)  my  shrined 
father.  Ah !  far-reaching  (were  his  plans),  And 
I  am  not  yet  able  to  carry  them  out.  However 
I  endeavour  to  reach  to  them,  My  continuation 
of  them  will  still  be  all-deflected.  I  am  a  little 
child,  Unequal  to  the  many  difficulties  of  the 
state.  Having  taken  his  place,  (I  will  look  for  him) 
to  go  up  and  come  down  in  the  court,  To  ascend 
and  descend  in  the  house.  Admirable  art  thou, 
O  great  Father,  (Condescend)  to  preserve  and 
enlighten  me. 

Ode  3.     The  A"ing  Km. 

KING  KHAKG  SHOWS  HIS  SENSE  OF  WHAT  WAS  REQUIRED  OF  HIM  TO 
PRESERVE  THE  FAVOUR  OF  HEAVEN,  A  CONSTANT  JUDGE  J  INTIMATES 
his  good  purposes;  AND  ASKS  THE  HELP  OF  HIS  MINISTERS  TO 
BE    ENABLED    TO    PERFORM    THEM. 

Let  me  be  reverent !  Let  me  be  reverent !  (The 
way  of)  Heaven  is  evident,      And  its  appointment 


330  THE    SHIH    KING.  DECADE  III. 

is  not  easily  preserved1.  Let  me  not  say  that  it 
is  high  aloft  above  me.  It  ascends  and  descends 
about  our  doings;  It  daily  inspects  us  wherever 
we  are. 

I  am  a  little  child,  Without  intelligence  to  be 
reverently  (attentive  to  my  duties) ;  But  by  daily 
progress  and  monthly  advance,  I  will  learn  to  hold 
fast  the  gleams  (of  knowledge),  till  I  arrive  at  bright 
intelligence.  Assist  me  to  bear  the  burden  (of  my 
position),  And  show  me  how  to  display  a  virtuous 
conduct. 

Ode  4.     The  Hsiao  PI. 

KING  A7/ANG  ACKNOWLEDGES  THAT  HE  HAD  ERRED,  AND  STATES  HIS 
PURPOSE  TO  BE  CAREFUL  IN  THE  FUTURE  ;  HE  WILL  GUARD  AGAINST 
THE  SLIGHT  BEGINNINGS  OF  EVIL  J  AND  IS  PENETRATED  WITH  A 
SENSE    OF    HIS    OWN    INCOMPETENCIES. 

This  piece  has  been  considered  by  some  critics  as  the  conclusion 
of  the  council  in  the  ancestral  temple,  with  which  the  previous 
two  also  are  thought  to  be  connected.  The  Preface  says  that 
the  king  asks  in  it  for  the  assistance  of  his  ministers,  but  no  such 
request  is  expressed.  I  seem  myself  to  see  in  it,  with  Su  Kheh. 
and  others,  a  reference  to  the  suspicions  which  jOang  at  one 
time,  we  know,  entertained  of  the  fidelity  of  the  duke  of  ^au, 
when  he  was  inclined  to  believe  the  rumours  spread  against 
him  by  his  other  uncles,  who  joined  in  rebellion  with  the  son 
of  the  last  king  of  Shang. 

I  condemn  myself  (for  the  past),  And  will  be  on 
my  guard  against  future  calamity.  I  will  have 
nothing  to  do  with  a  wasp,  To  seek  for  myself 
its  painful  sting.     At  first  indeed  it  seemed  to  be 


1  The  meaning  is  this :  '  The  way  of  Heaven  is  very  clear,  to 
bless  the  good,  namely,  and  punish  the  bad.  But  its  favour  is 
thus  dependent  on  men  themselves,  and  hard  to  preserve/ 


ODE  5-  THE    SACRIFICIAL    ODES    OF   KAV.  33 1 

(but)  a  wren1,  But  it  took  wing,  and  became  a 
large  bird.  I  am  unequal  to  the  many  difficulties 
of  the  kingdom,  And  am  placed  in  the  midst  of 
bitter  experiences. 

Ode  5.     The  3ai  Shu. 

THE  CULTIVATION  OF    THE   GROUND    FROM  THE    FIRST   BREAKING    OF    IT 

UP,    TILL    IT    YIELDS    ABUNDANT    HARVESTS  ; AVAILABLE    SPECIALLY 

FOR  SACRIFICES  AND  FESTIVE  OCCASIONS.  WHETHER  INTENDED  TO 
BE  USED  ON  OCCASIONS  OF  THANKSGIVING,  OR  IN  SPRING  WHEN 
PRAYING   FOR    A   GOOD    YEAR,  CANNOT    BE    DETERMINED. 

The  Preface  says  that  this  ode  was  used  in  spring,  when  the  king 
in  person  turned  up  some  furrows  in  the  field  set  apart  for  that 
purpose,  and  prayed  at  the  altars  of  the  spirits  of  the  land  and 
the  grain,  for  an  abundant  year.  Ka  Hsi  says  he  does  not  know 
on  what  occasion  it  was  intended  to  be  used;  but  comparing 
it  with  the  fourth  ode  of  the  second  decade,  he  is  inclined  to 
rank  it  with  that  as  an  ode  of  thanksgiving.  There  is  nothing 
in  the  piece  itself  to  determine  us  in  favour  of  either  view.  It 
brings  before  us  a  series  of  pleasing  pictures  of  the  husbandry 
of  those  early  times.  The  editors  of  the  imperial  edition  say 
that  its  place  in  the  Sung  makes  it  clear  that  it  was  an  accom- 
paniment of  some  royal  sacrifice,  We  need  not  controvert  this  ; 
but  the  poet  evidently  singled  out  some  large  estate,  and  describes 
the  labour  on  it,  from  the  first  bringing  it  under  cultivation  to 
the  state  in  which  it  was  before  his  eyes,  and  concludes  by  saying 
that  the  picture  which  he  gives  of  it  had  long  been  applicable 
to  the  whole  country. 

They  clear  away  the  grass  and  the  bushes ;    And 
the  ground  is  laid  open  by  their  ploughs. 

In    thousands   of  pairs    they   remove  the  roots, 
Some  in  the  low  wet  land,  some  along  the  dykes. 

1  The  Chinese  characters  here  mean,  literally, l  peach-tree  insect/ 
or,  as  Dr.  Williams  has  it,  '  peach-bug.'  Another  name  for  the 
bird  is  c  the  clever  wife/  from  the  artistic  character  of  its  nest, 
which  would  point  it  out  as  the  small  '  tailor  bird.'  But  the  name 
is  applied  to  various  small  birds. 


33 2  THE    SHIH    KING.  DECADE  III. 

There  are  the  master  and  his  eldest  son ;  His 
younger  sons,  and  all  their  children ;  Their  strong 
helpers,  and  their  hired  servants.  How  the  noise  of 
their  eating  the  viands  brought  to  them  resounds ! 
(The  husbands)  think  lovingly  of  their  wives; 
(The  wives)  keep  close  to  their  husbands.  (Then) 
with  their  sharp  ploughshares  They  set  to  work 
on  the  south-lying  acres. 

They  sow  their  various  kinds  of  grain,  Each 
seed  containing  in  it  a  germ  of  life. 

In  unbroken  lines  rises  the  blade,  And,  well 
nourished,  the  stalks  grow  long. 

Luxuriant  looks  the  young  grain,  And  the  weed- 
ers  go  among  it  in  multitudes. 

Then  come  the  reapers  in  crowds,  And  the  grain 
is  piled  up  in  the  fields,  Myriads,  and  hundreds  of 
thousands,  and  millions  (of  stacks) ;  For  spirits  and 
for  sweet  spirits,  To  offer  to  our  ancestors,  male 
and  female,     And  to  provide  for  all  ceremonies. 

Fragrant  is  their  aroma,  Enhancing  the  glory  of 
the  state.  Like  pepper  is  their  smell,  To  give 
comfort  to  the  aged. 

It  is  not  here  only  that  there  is  this  (abundance); 
It  is  not  now  only  that  there  is  such  a  time  : — 
From  of  old  it  has  been  thus. 

Ode  6.     The  Liang  Sze. 

PRESUMABLY,    AN    ODE    OF    THANKSGIVING     IN     THE     AUTUMN     TO     THE 
SPIRITS    OF    THE    LAND    AND    GRAIN. 

Very  sharp  are  the  excellent  shares,  With  which 
they  set  to  work  on  the  south-lying  acres. 

They  sow  their  various  kinds  of  grain,  Each 
seed  containing  in  it  a  germ  of  life. 


ODE  7.  THE    SACRIFICIAL    ODES    OF   KAXJ.  333 

There  are  those  who  come  to  see  them,  With 
their  baskets  round  and  square,  Containing  the 
provisions  of  millet. 

With  their  light  splint  hats  on  their  heads,  They 
ply  their  hoes  on  the  ground,  Clearing  away  the 
smartweed  on  the  dry  land  and  wet. 

The  weeds  being  decayed,  The  millets  grow 
luxuriantly. 

They  fall  rustling  before  the  reapers.  The 
gathered  crop  is  piled  up  solidly,  High  as  a  wall, 
United  together  like  the  teeth  of  a  comb ;  And 
the  hundred  houses  are  opened  (to  receive  the 
grain) x. 

Those  hundred  houses  being  full,  The  wives  and 
children  have  a  feeling  of  repose. 

(Now)  we  kill  this  black-muzzled  tawny  bull2, 
with  his  crooked  horns,  To  imitate  and  hand  down, 
To  hand  down  (the  observances  of)  our  ancestors. 

Ode  7.     The  Sze  !. 

AN  ODE  APPROPRIATE  TO  THE  PREPARATIONS  AND  PROGRESS  OF  A 
FEAST  AFTER  A  SACRIFICE. 

The  Preface  and  the  editors  of  the  Yung-Mang  Shih  say  that  the 
piece  has  reference  to  the  entertainment  given,  the  day  after  a 

1  '  The  hundred  houses,'  or  chambers  in  a  hundred  family 
residences,  are  those  of  the  hundred  families,  cultivating  the  space 
which  was  bounded  by  a  brook  ; — see  note  on  the  second  ode  of 
the  preceding  decade.  They  formed  a  society,  whose  members 
helped  one  another  in  their  field  work,  so  that  their  harvest  might 
be  said  to  be  carried  home  at  the  same  time.  Then  would  come 
the  threshing  or  treading,  and  winnowing,  after  which  the  grain 
would  be  brought  into  the  houses. 

2  It  has  been  observed  that  under  the  iT&u  dynasty,  red  was  the 


334  THE    SHIH    KING.  DECADE  III. 

sacrifice,  in  the  ancestral  temple,  to  the  personators  of  the  dead, 
described  on  p.  301.  Kvl  Hsi  denies  this,  and  holds  simply  that 
it  belongs  to  the  feast  after  a  sacrifice,  without  further  specifying 
what  sacrifice.    The  old  view  is  probably  the  more  correct. 

In  his  silken  robes,  clean  and  bright,  With  his 
cap  on  his  head,  looking  so  respectful,  From  the 
hall  he  goes  to  the  foot  of  the  stairs,  And  (then) 
from  the  sheep  to  the  oxen  \  (He  inspects)  the 
tripods,  large  and  small,  And  the  curved  goblet 
of  rhinoceros  horn2.  The  good  spirits  are  mild, 
(But)  there  is  no  noise,  no  insolence: — An  auspice 
(this)  of  great  longevity. 

Ode  8.     The  Ko. 

AN    ODE     IN    PRAISE    OF     KING    WU,    AND    RECOGNISING    THE    DUTY    TO 
FOLLOW    HIS   COURSE. 

This  was  sung,  according  to  the  Preface,  at  the  conclusion  of  the 
dance  in  honour  of  king  Wii; — see  on  the  last  piece  of  the 
second  decade. 

Oh !     powerful    was    the    king's    army,      But   he 
nursed  it,  in  obedience  to  circumstances,  while  the 

colour  of  the  sacrificial  victims.  So  it  was  for  the  ancestral  temple ; 
but  in  sacrificing  to  the  spirits  of  the  land  and  grain,  the  victim 
was  a  '  yellow '  bull  with  black  lips. 

1  The  subject  of  these  lines  must  be  an  ordinary  officer,  for  to 
such  the  silk  robes  and  a  purple  cap  were  proper,  when  he  was 
assisting  at  the  sacrifices  of  the  king  or  of  a  feudal  prince.  There 
were  two  buildings  outside  the  principal  gate  leading  to  the  ancestral 
temple,  and  two  corresponding  inside,  in  which  the  personators 
of  the  departed  ancestors  were  feasted.  We  must  suppose  the 
officer  in  question  descending  from  the  upper  hall  to  the  vestibule 
of  the  gate,  to  inspect  the  dishes,  arranged  for  the  feast,  and  then 
proceeding  to  see  the  animals,  and  the  tripods  for  boiling  the 
flesh,  &c. 

2  The  goblet  of  rhinoceros  horn  was  to  be  drained,  as  a  penalty, 
by  any  one  offending  at  the  feast  against  the  rules  of  propriety ; 
but  here  there  was  no  occasion  for  it. 


ODE  io.  THE    SACRIFICIAL    ODES    OF   KAV.  S35 

time  was  yet  dark.  When  the  time  was  clearly 
bright,  He  thereupon  donned  his  grand  armour. 
We  have  been  favoured  to  receive  What  the  martial 
king  accomplished.  To  deal  aright  with  what  we 
have  inherited,  We  have  to  be  sincere  imitators 
of  thy  course,  (O  king). 

Ode  9.     The  Hwan. 

CELEBRATING    THE    MERIT    AND    SUCCESS    OF    KING    WU. 

According  to  a  statement  in  the  3°  -ffwan,  this  piece  also  was 
sung  in  connexion  with  the  dance  of  Wu.  The  Preface  says 
it  was  used  in  declarations  of  war,  and  in  sacrificing  to  God 
and  the  Father  of  War.  Perhaps  it  came  to  be  used  on  such 
occasions ;  but  we  must  refer  it  in  the  first  place  to  the  reign 
of  king  KMcag. 

There  is  peace  throughout  our  myriad  regions. 
There  has  been  a  succession  of  plentiful  years  : — 
Heaven  does  not  weary  in  its  favour.  The  martial 
king  Wu  Maintained  (the  confidence  of)  his  officers, 
And  employed  them  all  over  the  kingdom,  So 
securing  the  establishment  of  his  family.  Oh ! 
glorious  was  he  in  the  sight  of  Heaven,  Which 
kinged  him  in  the  room  (of  Shang). 

Ode  10.     The  Lai. 

CELEBRATING    THE    PRAISE    OF    KING    WAN. 

This  is  the  only  account  of  the  piece  that  can  be  given  from  itself. 
The  3°  ^wan,  however,  refers  it  to  the  dance  of  king  Wu ; 
and  the  Preface  says  it  contains  the  words  with  which  Wu 
accompanied  his  grant  of  fiefs  and  appanages  in  the  ancestral 
temple  to  his  principal  followers. 

King  Wan  laboured  earnestly: — Right  is  it  we 
should  have  received  (the  kingdom).  We  will  dif- 
fuse (his  virtue),   ever   cherishing   the  thought    of 


33^  THE    SHIH    KING.  DECADE  III.  n. 

him;  Henceforth  we  will  seek  only  the  settlement 
(of  the  kingdom).  It  was  he  through  whom  came 
the  appointment  of  .Afau.  Oh !  let  us  ever  cherish 
the  thought  of  him. 

Ode  11.     The  Pan. 

CELEBRATING  THE  GREATNESS  OF  KAV,  AND  ITS  FIRM  POSSESSION  OF 
THE  KINGDOM,  AS  SEEN  IN  THE  PROGRESSES  OF  ITS  REIGNING  SOVE- 
REIGN. 

In  the  eighth  piece  of  the  first  decade  we  have  an  ode  akin  to 
this,  relating  a  tentative  progress  of  king  Wu,  to  test  the  accept- 
ance of  his  sovereignty.  This  is  of  a  later  date,  and  should  be 
referred,  probably,  to  the  reign  of  king  .Oang,  when  the  dynasty 
was  fully  acknowledged.  Some  critics,  however,  make  it,  like 
the  three  preceding,  a  portion  of  what  was  sung  at  the  Wu 
dance. 

Oh !  great  now  is  Aau.  We  ascend  the  high 
hills,  Both  those  that  are  long  and  narrow,  and 
the  lofty  mountains.  Yes,  and  (we  travel)  along 
the  regulated  Ho,  All  under  the  sky,  Assembling 
those  who  now  respond  to  me.  Thus  it  is  that  the 
appointment  belongs  to  Aau. 


III.     The   Praise  Odes  of  Lti. 

It  is  not  according  to  the  truth  of  things  to  class  the  Sung  of  Lu 
among  the  sacrificial  odes,  and  I  do  not  call  them  such.  Kil 
Hsi  says : — '  King  iT^ang,  because  of  the  great  services  rendered 
by  the  duke  of  ^au,  granted  to  Po-^in,  (the  duke's  eldest  son, 
and  first  marquis  of  Lu),  the  privilege  of  using  the  royal  cere- 
monies and  music,  in  consequence  of  which  Lu  had  its  Sung, 
which  were  sung  to  the  music  in  its  ancestral  temple.  After- 
wards, they  made  in  Lu  other  odes  in  praise  of  their  rulers, 


ODE  3.  THE    PRAISE    ODES   OF   LlJ.  337 

which  they  also  called  Sung/  In  this  way  it  is  endeavoured 
to  account  for  there  being  such  pieces  in  this  part  of  the  Shih 
as  the  four  in  this  division  of  it.  Confucius,  it  is  thought,  found 
them  in  Lu,  bearing  the  name  of  Sung,  and  so  he  classed  them 
with  the  true  sacrificial  odes,  bearing  that  designation.  If  we 
were  to  admit,  contrary  to  the  evidence  in  the  case,  that  the 
Shih  was  compiled  by  Confucius,  this  explanation  of  the  place 
of  the  Sung  of  Lu  in  this  Part  would  not  be  complimentary  to 
his  discrimination. 

Whether  such  a  privilege  as  Kb.  states  was  really  granted  to  the 
first  marquis  of  Lu,  is  a  point  very  much  controverted.  Many 
contend  that  the  royal  ceremonies  were  usurped  in  the  state,  in 
the  time  of  duke  Hsi  (b.c.  659  to  627).  But  if  this  should  be 
conceded,  it  would  not  affect  the  application  to  the  odes  in  this 
division  of  the  name  of  Sung.  They  are  totally  unlike  the  Sung 
of  Shang  and  of  Kzm.  It  has  often  been  asked  why  there  are 
no  Fang  of  Lu  in  the  first  Part  of  the  Shih.  The  pieces  here 
are  really  the  Fang  of  Lu,  and  may  be  compared  especially  with 
the  Fang  of  Pin. 

Lu  was  one  of  the  states  in  the  east,  having  its  capital  in  Khft.- 
f&u,  which  is  still  the  name  of  a  district  in  the  department  of 
Yen-£au,  Shan-tung.  According  to  Kix,  king  ZAang  invested 
the  duke  of  ifTau's  eldest  son  with  the  territory.  According  to 
Sze-md  iufcien,  the  duke  of  .ATau  was  himself  appointed  marquis 
of  Lu ;  but  being  unable  to  go  there  in  consequence  of  his 
duties  at  the  royal  court,  he  sent  his  son  instead.  After  the 
expiration  of  his  regency,  the  territory  was  largely  augmented, 
but  he  still  remained  in  ICau. 

I  pass  over  the  first  two  odes,  which  have  no  claim  to  a  place 
among  '  sacred  texts/  And  only  in  one  stanza  of  the  third  is 
there  the  expression  of  a  religious  sentiment.  I  give  it  entire, 
however. 

Ode  3.     The  Phan  Shui. 

IN  PRAISE  OF  SOME  MARQUIS  OF  LU,  CELEBRATING  HIS  INTEREST  IN 
THE  STATE  COLLEGE,  WHICH  HE  HAD,  PROBABLY,  REPAIRED,  TESTI- 
FYING HIS  VIRTUES,  AND  AUSPICING  FOR  HIM  A  COMPLETE  TRIUMPH 
OVER  THE  TRIBES  OF  THE  HWAI,  WHICH  WOULD  BE  CELEBRATED 
IN    THE    COLLEGE. 

The  marquis  here  celebrated  was,  probably,  Shan,  or  '  duke  Hsi/ 
mentioned  above.     The  immediate  occasion  of  its  composition 

CO  z 


33^  THE   SHIH    KING.  ODE  3. 

must  have  been  some  opening  or  inauguration  service  in  con- 
nexion with  the  repair  of  the  college. 

i.  Pleasant  is  the  semicircular  water1,  And  we 
gather  the  cress  about  it.  The  marquis  of  Lti  is 
coming  to  it,  And  we  see  his  dragon-figured 
banner.  His  banner  waves  in  the  wind,  And  the 
bells  of  his  horses  tinkle  harmoniously.  Small 
and  great,  All  follow  the  prince  in  his  progress 
to  it. 

2.  Pleasant  is  the  semicircular  water,  And  we 
gather  the  pondweed  in  it.  The  marquis  of  Lu  has 
come  to  it,  With  his  horses  so  stately.  His  horses 
are  grand;  His  fame  is  brilliant.  Blandly  he  looks 
and  smiles ;  Without  any  impatience  he  delivers  his 
instructions. 

3.  Pleasant  is  the  semicircular  water,  And  we 
gather  the  mallows  about  it.  The  marquis  of  Lft 
has  come  to  it,  And  in  the  college  he  is  drinking. 
He  is    drinking  the    good  spirits.      May  there  be 

1  It  is  said  in  the  tenth  ode  of  the  first  decade  of  the  Major  Odes 
of  the  Kingdom,  that  king  Wu  in  his  capital  of  Hao  built  '  his  hall 
with  its  circlet  of  water/  That  was  the  royal  college  built  in  the 
middle  of  a  circle  of  water ;  each  state  had  its  grand  college  with  a 
semicircular  pool  in  front  of  it,  such  as  may  now  be  seen  in  front  of 
the  temples  of  Confucius  in  the  metropolitan  cities  of  the  provinces. 
It  is  not  easy  to  describe  all  the  purposes  which  the  building  served. 
In  this  piece  the  marquis  of  Lu  appears  feasting  in  it,  delivering 
instructions,  taking  counsel  with  his  ministers,  and  receiving  the 
spoils  and  prisoners  of  war.  The  Li  K\,  VIII,  ii,  7,  refers  to 
sacrifices  to  Hau-/£i  in  connexion  with  the  college  of  Lu.  There 
the  officers  of  the  state  in  autumn  learned  ceremonies ;  in  winter, 
literary  studies ;  in  spring  and  summer,  the  use  of  arms ;  and  in 
autumn  and  winter,  dancing.  There  were  celebrated  trials  of 
archery;  there  the  aged  were  feasted;  there  the  princes  held 
council  with  their  ministers.  The  college  was  in  the  western 
suburb  of  each  capital. 


ODE  3.  THE   PRAISE   ODES    OF   udt.  339 

given  to  him  such  old  age  as  is  seldom  enjoyed! 
May  he  accord  with  the  grand  ways,  So  subduing 
to  himself  all  the  people  ! 

4.  Very  admirable  is  the  marquis  of  Lti,  Reve- 
rently displaying  his  virtue,  And  reverently  watching 
over  his  deportment,  The  pattern  of  the  people. 
With  great  qualities,  both  civil  and  martial,  Bril- 
liantly he  affects  his  meritorious  ancestors1.  In 
everything  entirely  filial,  He  seeks  the  blessing 
that  is  sure  to  follow. 

5.  Very  intelligent  is  the  marquis  of  Lti,  Making 
his  virtue  illustrious.  He  has  made  this  college 
with  its  semicircle  of  water,  And  the  tribes  of  the 
Hw&i  will  submit  to  him2.  His  martial-looking 
tiger-leaders  Will  here  present  the  left  ears  (of 
their  foes)3.  His  examiners,  wise  as  Kao-yao4, 
Will  here  present  the  prisoners. 

6.  His  numerous  officers,  Men  who  have  en- 
larged their  virtuous  minds,  With  martial  energy 
conducting  their  expedition,  Will  drive  far  away 
those  tribes  of  the  east  and  south.     Vigorous  and 


1  The  meaning  is  that  the  fine  qualities  of  the  marquis  '  reached 
to '  and  affected  his  ancestors  in  their  spirit-state,  and  would  draw 
down  their  protecting  favour.  Their  blessing,  seen  in  his  pros- 
perity, was  the  natural  result  of  his  filial  piety. 

2  The  Hwai  rises  in  the  department  of  Nan-yang,  Ho-nan,  and 
flows  eastward  to  the  sea.  South  of  it,  down  to  the  time  of  this 
ode,  were  many  rude  and  wild  tribes  that  gave  frequent  occupa- 
tion to  the  kings  of  K&u. 

8  When  prisoners  refused  to  submit,  their  left  ears  were  cut  off, 
and  shown  as  trophies. 

4  The  ancient  Shun's  Minister  of  Crime.  The  '  examiners ' 
were  officers  who  questioned  the  prisoners,  especially  the  more 
important  of  them,  to  elicit  information,  and  decide  as  to  the 
amount  of  their  guilt  and  punishment. 

Z  2 


34°  THE   SHIH   KING.  ODE  3. 

grand,  Without  noise  or  display,  Without  appeal 
to  the  judges  \  They  will  here  present  (the  proofs 
of)  their  merit. 

7.  How  they  draw  their  bows  adorned  with  bone  ! 
How  their  arrows  whiz  forth !  Their  war  chariots 
are  very  large!  Their  footmen  and  charioteers 
never  weary !  They  have  subdued  the  tribes  of 
Hwai,  And  brought  them  to  an  unrebellious  sub- 
mission. Only  lay  your  plans  securely,  And  all 
the  tribes  of  the  Hwai  will  be  won 2. 

8.  They  come  flying  on  the  wing,  those  owls, 
And  settle  on  the  trees  about  the  college ;  They 
eat  the  fruit  of  our  mulberry  trees,  And  salute  us 
with  fine  notes  3.  So  awakened  shall  be  those  tribes 
of  the  Hwai.  They  will  come  presenting  their 
precious  things,  Their  large  tortoises,  and  their 
elephants'  teeth,  And  great  contributions  of  the 
southern  metals4. 


1  The  ' judges'  decided  all  questions  of  dispute  in  the  army, 
and  on  the  merits  of  different  men  who  had  distinguished  them- 
selves. 

2  In  this  stanza  the  poet  describes  a  battle  with  the  wild 
tribes,  as  if  it  were  going  on  before  his  eyes. 

8  An  owl  is  a  bird  with  a  disagreeable  scream,  instead  of  a 
beautiful  note;  but  the  mulberries  grown  about  the  college  would 
make  them  sing  delightfully.  And  so  would  the  influence  of  Lu, 
going  forth  from  the  college,  transform  the  nature  of  the  tribes 
about  the  Hwai. 

4  That  is,  according  to  '  the  Tribute  of  Yii/  in  the  Shu,  from 
ITmg-%&u  and  Yang-Mu. 


ODE  4.  THE   PRAISE   ODES   OF   L.t.  34I 


Ode  4.    The  Pi  Rung. 

IN  PRAISE  OF  DUKE  HSI,  AND  AUSPICING  FOR  HIM  A  MAGNIFICENT 
CAREER  OF  SUCCESS,  WHICH  WOULD  MAKE  LU  ALL  THAT  IT  HAD 
EVER  BEEN  : — WRITTEN,  PROBABLY,  ON  AN  OCCASION  WHEN  HSl  HAD 
REPAIRED  THE  TEMPLES  OF  THE  STATE,  OF  WHICH  PIOUS  ACT  HIS 
SUCCESS   WOULD   BE   THE    REWARD. 

There  is  no  doubt  that  duke  Hsi  is  the  hero  of  this  piece.  He  is 
mentioned  in  the  third  stanza  as  '  the  son  of  duke  -ATwang/  and 
the  Hsi-sze  referred  to  in  the  last  stanza  as  the  architect  under 
whose  superintendence  the  temples  had  been  repaired  was  his 
brother,  whom  we  meet  with  elsewhere  as  '  duke's  son,  Yu7  The 
descriptions  of  various  sacrifices  prove  that  the  lords  of  Lu, 
whether  permitted  to  use  royal  ceremonies  or  not,  did  really 
do  so.  The  writer  was  evidently  in  a  poetic  rapture  as  to 
what  his  ruler  was,  and  would  do.  The  piece  is  a  genuine 
bardic  effusion. 

The  poet  traces  the  lords  of  Lu  to  iTiang  Yuan  and  her  son 
Hau-/£i.  He  then  comes  to  the  establishment  of  the  iTau 
dynasty,  and  under  it  of  the  marquisate  of  Lu ;  and  finally  to 
duke  Hsi,  dilating  on  his  sacrificial  services,  the  military  power 
of  Lu,  and  the  achievements  which  he  might  be  expected  to 
accomplish  in  subjugating  all  the  territory  lying  to  the  east,  and 
a  long  way  south,  of  Lu. 

i.  How  pure  and  still  are  the  solemn  temples, 
In  their  strong  solidity  and  minute  completeness! 
Highly  distinguished  was  .A'iang  Yuan1,  Of  virtue 
undeflected.  God  regarded  her  with  favour,  And 
without  Injury  or  hurt,  Immediately,  when  her 
months  were  completed,  She  gave  birth  to  Hau-/£1 ! 
On  him  were  conferred  all  blessings, — (To  know) 
how  the  (ordinary)  millet  ripened  early,  and  the 
sacrificial    millet    late;      How   first    to    sow   pulse 

1  About  Kizxig  Yuan  and  her  conception  and  birth  of  Hau-^i, 
see  the  first  piece  in  the  third  decade  of  the  Major  Odes  of  the 
Kingdom.  There  also  Hau-^i's  teaching  of  husbandry  is  more 
fully  described. 


3  \2  THE   SHIH    KING.  ODE  4. 

and  then  wheat.  Anon  he  was  invested  with  an 
inferior  state,  And  taught  the  people  how  to  sow 
and  to  reap,  The  (ordinary)  millet  and  the  sacri- 
ficial, Rice  and  the  black  millet;  Ere  long  over 
the  whole  country  :  —  (Thus)  continuing  the  work 
of  Yti. 

2.  Among  the  descendants  of  Hau-^1,  There 
was  king  Thii 1,  Dwelling  on  the  south  of  (mount) 
Kkiy  Where  the  clipping  of  Shang  began.  In 
process  of  time  Wan  and  W&  Continued  the  work 
of  king  Thai,  And  (the  purpose  of)  Heaven  was 
carried  out  in  its  time,  In  the  plain  of  Mil 2.  '  Have 
no  doubts,  no  anxieties/  (it  was  said),  '  God  is  with 
you3.'  Wu  disposed  of  the  troops  of  Shang;  He 
and  his  men  equally  shared  in  the  achievement. 
(Then)  king  (ATMng)  said,  f  My  uncle 4,  I  will  set 
up  your  eldest  son,  And  make  him  marquis  of  LA. 
I  will  greatly  enlarge  your  territory  there,  To  be 
a  help  and  support  to  the  House  of  Aau.' 

3.  Accordingly  he  appointed  (our  first)  duke  of 
Lu,  And  made  him  marquis  in  the  east,  Giving 
him  the  hills  and  rivers,  The  lands  and  fields,  and 
the  attached  states5.  The  (present)  descendant  of 
the  duke  of  Aau,  The  son  of  duke  iTwang,  With 
dragon-emblazoned  banner,  attends  the  sacrifices, 
(Grasping)  his  six  reins  soft  and  pliant.     In  spring 

1  See  on  the  Sacrificial  Odes  of  ^au,  decade  i,  ode  5. 

2  See  the  Shu,  V,  iii. 

3  Shang-fu,  one  of  Wu's  principal  leaders,  encouraged  him  at 
the  battle  of  Mu  with  these  words. 

4  That  is,  the  duke  of  Aau. 

5  That  is,  small  territories,  held  by  chiefs  of  other  surnames,  but 
acknowledging  the  jurisdiction  of  the  lords  of  Lu,  and  dependent 
on  them  for  introduction  to  the  royal  court. 


ODE  4*  THE   PRAISE   ODES    OF    Llj.  343 

and  autumn  he  is  not  remiss;  His  offerings  are 
all  without  error1.  To  the  great  and  sovereign 
God,  And  to  his  great  ancestor  Hau-/£i,  He 
offers  the  victims,  red  and  pure 2.  They  enjoy,  they 
approve,  And  bestow  blessings  in  large  number. 
The  duke  of  Aiau,  and  (your  other)  great  ancestors, 
Also  bless  you. 

4.  In  autumn  comes  the  sacrifice  of  the  season3, 
But  the  bulls  for  it  have  had  their  horns  capped 
in  summer 4 ;  They  are  the  white  bull  and  the  red 
one5.  (There  are)  the  bull-figured  goblet  in  its 
dignity 6 ;  Roast  pig,  minced  meat,  and  soups ;  The 
dishes  of  bamboo  and  wood,  and  the  large  stands  7, 
And  the  dancers  all  complete.    The  filial  descendant 

1  These  lines  refer  to  the  seasonal  sacrifices  in  the  temple  of 
ancestors,  two  seasons  being  mentioned  for  all  the  four,  as  in 
some  of  the  odes  of  Shang. 

2  From  the  seasonal  sacrifices  the  poet  passes  to  the  sacrifice  to 
God  at  the  border  altar  in  the  spring, — no  doubt  the  same  which  is 
referred  to  in  the  last  ode  of  the  first  decade  of  the  Sacrificial 
Odes  of  K&u. 

3  The  subject  of  the  seasonal  sacrifices  is  resumed. 

4  A  piece  of  wood  was  fixed  across  the  horns  of  the  victim- 
bulls,  to  prevent  their  injuring  them  by  pushing  or  rubbing 
against  any  hard  substance.  An  animal  injured  in  any  way  was 
not  fit  to  be  used  in  sacrifice. 

5  In  sacrificing  to  the  duke  of  K&u,  a  white  bull  was  used  by 
way  of  distinction.  His  great  services  to  the  dynasty  had  ob- 
tained for  him  the  privilege  of  being  sacrificed  to  with  royal 
ceremonies.  A  white  bull,  such  as  had  been  offered  to  the  kings 
of  Shang,  was  therefore  devoted  to  him ;  while  for  Po-Min,  and 
the  other  marquises  (or  dukes  as  spoken  of  by  their  own  sub- 
jects), a  victim  of  the  orthodox  iTau  colour  was  employed. 

6  This  goblet,  fashioned  in  the  shape  of  a  bull,  or  with  a  bull 
pictured  on  it,  must  have  been  well  known  in  connexion  with 
these  services. 

7  '  The  large  stand '  was  of  a  size  to  support  half  the  roasted 
body  of  a  victim. 


344  THE   SHIH   KING.  ODE  4. 

will  be  blessed.  (Your  ancestors)  will  make  you 
gloriously  prosperous,  They  will  make  you  long- 
lived  and  good,  To  preserve  this  eastern  region, 
Long  possessing  the  state  of  Lfi,  Unwaning,  un- 
fallen,  Unshaken,  undisturbed !  They  will  make 
your  friendship  with  your  three  aged  (ministers) 1 
Like  the  hills,  like  the  mountains. 

5.  Our  prince's  chariots  are  a  thousand,  And  (in 
each)  are  (the  two  spears  with  their)  vermilion 
tassels,  and  (the  two  bows  with  their)  green  bands. 
His  footmen  are  thirty  thousand,  With  shells  on 
vermilion  strings  adorning  their  helmets 2.  So 
numerous  are  his  ardent  followers,  To  deal  with 
the  tribes  of  the  west  and  north,  And  to  punish 
those  of  King  and  ShCl 3,  So  that  none  of  them 
will  dare  to  withstand  us.  (The  spirits  of  your 
ancestors)  shall  make  you  grandly  prosperous;    They 


1  Referring,  probably,  to  the  three  principal  ministers  of  the 
state. 

2  These  lines  describe  Hsfs  resources  for  war.  A  thousand 
chariots  was  the  regular  force  which  a  great  state  could  at  the 
utmost  bring  into  the  field.  Each  chariot  contained  three 
mailed  men; — the  charioteer  in  the  middle,  a  spearman  on  the 
right,  and  an  archer  on  the  left.  Two  spears  rose  aloft  with 
vermilion  tassels,  and  there  were  two  bows,  bound  with  green 
bands  to  frames  in  their  cases.  Attached  to  every  chariot  were 
seventy-two  foot- soldiers  and  twenty-five  followers,  making  with 
the  three  men  in  it,  100  in  all;  so  that  the  whole  force  would 
amount  to  100,000  men.  But  in  actual  service  the  force  of  a 
great  state  was  restricted  to  three  'armies'  or  375  chariots,  attended 
by  37,500  men,  of  whom  27,500  were  foot-soldiers,  put  down 
here  in  round  numbers  as  30,000. 

3  King  is  the  King-khu  of  the  last  of  the  Sacrificial  Odes  of 
Shang,  and  the  name  Shu  was  applied  to  several  half- civilized  states 
to  the  east  of  it,  which  it  brought,  during  the  Khun  Khiu  period, 
one  after  another  under  its  jurisdiction. 


ODE  4.  THE   PRAISE    ODES   OF   iA  345 

shall  make  you  long-lived  and  wealthy.  The  hoary 
hair  and  wrinkled  back,  Marking  the  aged  men, 
shall  always  be  in  your  service.  They  shall  grant 
you  old  age,  ever  vigorous,  For  myriads  and  thou- 
sands of  years,  With  the  eyebrows  of  longevity, 
and  ever  unharmed. 

6.  The  mountain  of  Th&i  is  lofty,  Looked  up  to 
by  the  state  of  Lu l.  We  grandly  possess  also  Kwei 
and  Mang 2 ;  And  we  shall  extend  to  the  limits 
of  the  east,  Even  the  states  along  the  sea.  The 
tribes  of  the  Hw&i  will  seek  our  alliance ;  All 
will  proffer  their  allegiance: — Such  shall  be  the 
achievements  of  the  marquis  of  Lti. 

7.  He  shall  maintain  the  possession  of  Hu  and 
Yi 3,  And  extend  his  sway  to  the  regions  of 
Hsu4,  Even  to  the  states  along  the  sea.  The 
tribes  of  the  Hwai,  the  Man,  and  the  Mo  5,  And 
those  tribes  (still  more)  to  the  south,  All  will 
proffer  their  allegiance ; — Not  one  will  dare  not  to 
answer  to  his  call,  Thus  showing  their  obedience 
to  the  marquis  of  Lu. 

8.  Heaven  will  give  great  blessing  to  our  prince, 
So  that   with   the  eyebrows  of  longevity  he  shall 

1  Mount  Thai  is  well  known,  the  eastern  of  the  four  great 
mountains  of  China  in  the  time  of  Shun.  It  is  in  the  depart- 
ment of  Thai-an,  Shan-tung. 

2  These  were  two  smaller  hills  in  Lu. 

3  These  were  two  hills  of  Lu,  in  the  present  district  of  3au. 

4  Hsu  was  the  name  of  one  of  Yti's  nine  provinces,  embracing 
portions  of  the  present  Shan-tung,  .ATiang-su,  and  An-hui. 

5  Mo  was  properly  the  name  of  certain  wild  tribes  in  the 
north,  as  Man  was  that  of  the  tribes  of  the  south.  But  we 
cannot  suppose  any  tribes  to  be  meant  here  but  such  as  lay 
south  of  Lu. 


346  THE    SHIH    KING.  ODE  4. 

maintain  Lti.  He  shall  possess  A^ang  and  Hsu  x, 
And  recover  all  the  territory  of  the  duke  of  Kau. 
Then  shall  the  marquis  of  Lu  feast  and  be  glad, 
With  his  admirable  wife  and  aged  mother ;  With 
his  excellent  ministers  and  all  his  (other)  officers2. 
Our  region  and  state  shall  he  hold,  Thus  receiving 
many  blessings,  To  hoary  hair,  and  with  teeth  ever 
renewed  like  a  child's. 

9.  The  pines  of  3u-lai3,  And  the  cypresses  of 
Hsin-ffi 3,  Were  cut  down  and  measured,  With 
the  cubit  line  and  the  eight  cubits'  line.  The  pro- 
jecting beams  of  pine  were  made  very  large ;  The 
grand  inner  apartments  rose  vast.  Splendid  look 
the  new  temples,  The  work  of  Hsl-sze,  Very 
wide  and  large,  Answering  to  the  expectations  of 
all  the  people. 


1  iTang  was  a  city  with  some  adjacent  territory,  in  the  present 
district  of  Thang,  that  had  been  taken  from  Lu  by  KhX.  Hsu, 
called  in  the  Spring  and  Autumn  'the  fields  of  Hsu/  was  west 
from  Lu,  and  had  been  granted  to  it  as  a  convenient  place  for  its 
princes  to  stop  at  on  their  way  to  the  royal  court ;  but  it  had  been 
sold  or  parted  with  to  ^ang  in  the  first  year  of  duke  Hwan 
(b.c.  711).  The  poet  desires  that  H  si  should  recover  these  and 
all  other  territory  which  had  at  any  time  belonged  to  Lu. 

2  He  would  feast  with  the  ladies  in  the  inner  apartment  of 
the  palace,  suitable  for  such  a  purpose ;  with  his  ministers  in  the 
outer  banqueting-room, 

3  These  were  two  hills,  in  the  present  department  of  Th&i-an. 


THE  MINOR  ODES  OF  THE  KINGDOM. 

Pieces  and  Stanzas  illustrating  the  Religious 
Views  and  Practices  of  the  Writers  and 
their  Times. 

The  First  Decade,  or  that .  of  LA-ming. 
Ode  5,  Stanza  1.     The  Fa  m6. 

THE  FA  MU  IS  A  FESTAL  ODE,  WHICH  WAS  SUNG  AT  THE  ENTERTAIN- 
MENT OF  FRIENDS  J — INTENDED  TO  CELEBRATE  THE  DUTY  AND  VALUE 
OF    FRIENDSHIP,    EVEN   TO   THE   HIGHEST. 

On  the  trees  go  the  blows  ^ang-/§ang;  And 
the  birds  cry  out  ying-ying.  One  issues  from  the 
dark  valley,  And  removes  to  the  lofty  tree.  Ying 
goes  its  cry,  Seeking  with  its  voice  its  companion. 
Look  at  the  bird,  Bird  as  it  is,  seeking  with  its 
voice  its  companion ;  And  shall  a  man  Not  seek 
to  have  his  friends  ?  Spiritual  beings  will  then 
hearken  to  him * ;  He  shall  have  harmony  and 
peace. 

Ode  6.     The  Thien  Pao. 

A  FESTAL  ODE,  RESPONSIVE  TO  ANY  OF  THE  FIVE  THAT  PRECEDE  IT. 
THE  KING'S  OFFICERS  AND  GUESTS,  HAVING  BEEN  FEASTED  BY  HIM, 
CELEBRATE  HIS  PRAISES,  AND  DESIRE  FOR  HIM  THE  BLESSING  OF 
HEAVEN   AND   HIS   ANCESTORS. 

Ascribed,  like  the  former,  to  the  duke  of  iTau. 
Heaven  protects  and  establishes  thee,    With  the 
greatest   security;     Makes   thee   entirely  virtuous. 

1  This  line  and  the  following  show  the  power  and  value  of  the 
cultivation  of  friendship  in  affecting  spiritual  beings.  That  desig- 
nation is  understood  in  the  widest  sense. 


34^  THE   SHIH    KING.  DECADE  I. 

That  thou  mayest  enjoy  every  happiness ;  Grants 
thee  much  increase,  So  that  thou  hast  all  in 
abundance. 

Heaven  protects  and  establishes  thee.  It  grants 
thee  all  excellence,  So  that  thine  every  matter  is 
right,  And  thou  receivest  every  Heavenly  favour. 
It  sends  down  to  thee  long-during  happiness,  Which 
the  days  are  not  sufficient  to  enjoy. 

Heaven  protects  and  establishes  thee,  So  that  in 
everything  thou  dost  prosper.  Like  the  high  hills 
and  the  mountain  masses,  Like  the  topmost  ridges 
and  the  greatest  bulks,  Like  the  stream  ever 
coming  on,     Such  is  thine  increase. 

With  happy  auspices  and  purifications  thou  bring- 
est  the  offerings,  And  dost  filially  present  them, 
In  spring,  summer,  autumn,  and  winter,  To  the 
dukes  and  former  kings l ;  And  they  say, '  We  give 
to  thee  myriads  of  years,  duration  unlimited  V 

The  spirits  come3,  And  confer  on  thee  many 
blessings.  The  people  are  simple  and  honest,  Daily 
enjoying  their  meat  and  drink.  All  the  black-haired 
race,  in  all  their  surnames,  Universally  practise  thy 
virtue. 

Like  the  moon  advancing  to  the  full,  Like  the 
sun  ascending  the  heavens,  Like  the  everlasting 
southern  hills,    Never  waning,  never  falling,    Like 

1  These  dukes  and  former  kings  are  all  the  ancestors  of  the 
royal  House  of  jffau,  sacrificed  to  at  the  four  seasons  of  the  year. 

2  Here  we  have  the  response  of  the  dukes  and  kings  communi- 
cated to  the  sacrificing  king  by  the  individuals  chosen  to  represent 
them  at  the  service. 

8  The  spirits  here  are,  of  course,  those  of  the  former  dukes  and 
kings. 


ODE  9.  THE    MINOR   ODES    OF   THE   KINGDOM.  349 

the  luxuriance  of  the  fir  and  the  cypress  ;  —  May- 
such  be  thy  succeeding  line  ! 

Ode  9,  Stanza  4.     The  Tt  T#. 

THE  Tf  Tf)  IS  AN  ODE  OF  CONGRATULATION,  INTENDED  FOR  THE  MEN 
WHO  HAVE  RETURNED  FROM  MILITARY  DUTY  AND  SERVICE  ON  THE 
FRONTIERS. 

The  congratulation  is  given  in  a  description  of  the  anxiety  and 
longing  of  the  soldiers'  wives  for  their  return.  We  must  suppose 
one  of  the  wives  to  be  the  speaker  throughout.  The  fourth 
stanza  shows  how  she  had  resorted  to  divination  to  allay  her 
fears  about  her  husband. 

They  have  not  packed  up,  they  do  not  come. 
My  sorrowing  heart  is  greatly  distressed.  The 
time  is  past,  and  he  is  not  here,  To  the  multipli- 
cation of  my  sorrows.  Both  by  the  tortoise-shell 
and  the  reeds  have  I  divined,  And  they  unite  in 
saying  he  is  near.     My  warrior  is  at  hand. 


The  Fourth  Decade,  or  that  of  Khi  fti. 
Ode  5,  Stanzas  5  to  9.     The   Sze   Kan. 

THE  SZE  KAN  WAS  PROBABLY  MADE  FOR  A  FESTIVAL  ON  THE  COM- 
PLETION OF  A  PALACE;  CONTAINING  A  DESCRIPTION  OF  IT,  AND 
PROCEEDING  TO  GOOD  WISHES  FOR  THE  BUILDER  AND  HIS  POSTE- 
RITY. THE  STANZAS  HERE  GIVEN  SHOW  HOW  DIVINATION  WAS  RE- 
SORTED  TO    FOR   THE   INTERPRETATION   OF   DREAMS. 

The  piece  is  referred  to  the  time  of  king  Hsiian  (b.c  827  to  782). 

Level  and  smooth  is  the  courtyard,  And  lofty 
are  the  pillars  around  it.  Pleasant  is  the  exposure 
of  the  chamber  to  the  light,  And  deep  and  wide 
are  its  recesses.    Here  will  our  noble  lord  repose. 

On  the  rush-mat  below  and  that  of  fine  bamboos 
above  it,    May  he  repose  in  slumber  !    May  he  sleep 


350  THE    SHIH   KING.  DECADE  IV. 

and  awake,  (Saying),  *  Divine  for  me  my  dreams 1. 
What  dreams  are  lucky  ?  They  have  been  of  bears 
and  grisly  bears  ;  They  have  been  of  cobras  and 
(other)  snakes/ 

The  chief  diviner  will  divine  them.  '  The  bears 
and  grisly  bears  Are  the  auspicious  intimations  of 
sons ;  The  cobras  and  (other)  snakes  Are  the 
auspicious  intimations  of  daughters2/ 

Sons  shall  be  born  to  him  : — They  will  be  put  to 
sleep  on  couches;  They  will  be  clothed  in  robes  ; 
They  will  have  sceptres  to  play  with ;  Their  cry 
will  be  loud.  They  will  be  (hereafter)  resplendent 
with  red  knee-covers,  The  (future)  king,  the  princes 
of  the  land. 

Daughters  shall  be  born  to  him : — They  will  be 
put  to  sleep  on  the  ground ;  They  will  be  clothed 
with  wrappers  ;  They  will  have  tiles  to  play  with  3. 
It  will  be  theirs  neither  to  do  wrong  nor  to  do 
good 4.     Only  about  the  spirits  and  the  food  will 

1  In  the  Official  Book  of  ^"au,  ch.  24,  mention  is  made  of  the 
Diviner  of  Dreams  and  his  duties  : — He  had  to  consider  the  season 
of  the  year  when  a  dream  occurred,  the  day  of  the  cycle,  and  the 
then  predominant  influence  of  the  two  powers  of  nature.  By 
the  positions  of  the  sun,  moon,  and  planets  in  the  zodiacal  spaces 
he  could  determine  whether  any  one  of  the  six  classes  of  dreams 
was  lucky  or  unlucky.  Those  six  classes  were  ordinary  and  regular 
dreams,  terrible  dreams,  dreams  of  thought,  dreams  in  waking, 
dreams  of  joy,  and  dreams  of  fear. 

2  The  boy  would  have  a  sceptre,  a  symbol  of  dignity,  to  play  with ; 
the  girl,  a  tile,  the  symbol  of  woman's  work,  as,  sitting  with  a  tile 
on  her  knee,  she  twists  the  threads  of  hemp. 

8  That  is,  the  red  apron  of  a  king  and  of  the  prince  of  a  state. 

4  The  woman  has  only  to  be  obedient.  That  is  her  whole  duty. 
The  line  does  not  mean,  as  it  has  been  said,  that  '  she  is  incapable 
of  good  or  evil ; '  but  it  is  not  her  part  to  take  the  initiative  even 
in  what  is  good. 


ODE  7.  THE    MINOR    ODES    OF    THE    KINGDOM.  35 1 

they  have  to  think,    And  to  cause  no  sorrow  to 
their  parents. 

Ode  6,  Stanza  4.     The  Wft  Yang. 

THE  WU  YANG  IS  SUPPOSED  TO  CELEBRATE  THE  LARGENESS  AND 
EXCELLENT  CONDITION  OF  KING  HSUAN's  FLOCKS  AND  HERDS.  THE 
CONCLUDING  STANZA  HAS  REFERENCE  TO  THE  DIVINATION  OF  THE 
DREAMS    OF  HIS   HERDSMEN. 

Your  herdsmen  shall  dream,  Of  multitudes  and 
then  of  fishes,  Of  the  tortoise -and-serpent,  and 
then  of  the  falcon,  banners1.  The  chief  diviner 
will  divine  the  dreams  ; — How  the  multitudes,  dis- 
solving into  fishes,  Betoken  plentiful  years ;  How 
the  tortoise-and-serpent,  dissolving  into  the  falcon, 
banners,  Betoken  the  increasing  population  of  the 
kingdom. 

Ode  7.     The  A"ieh  Nan  Shan. 

A  LAMENTATION  OVER  THE  UNSETTLED  STATE  OF  THE  KINGDOM  ; 
DENOUNCING  THE  INJUSTICE  AND  NEGLECT  OF  THE  CHIEF  MINISTER, 
BLAMING  ALSO  THE  CONDUCT  OF  THE  KING,  WITH  APPEALS  TO 
HEAVEN,  AND  SEEMINGLY  CHARGING  IT  WITH  CRUELTY  AND  INJUS- 
TICE. 

This  piece  is  referred  to  the  time  of  king  Yu  (b.  c.  781  to  771), 
the  unworthy  son  of  king  Hsuan.  The  *  Grand-Master '  Yin 
must  have  been  one  of  the  'three  Kung,'  the  highest  ministers 
at  the  court  of  iT&u,  and  was,  probably,  the  chief  of  the  three, 
and  administrator  of  the  government  under  Yu. 

Lofty  is  that  southern  hill 2,  With  its  masses  of 
rocks !     Awe-inspiring   are  you,  O  (Grand-)Master 

1  The  tortoise-and-serpent  banner  marked  the  presence  in  a 
host  of  its  leader  on  a  military  expedition.  On  its  field  were  the 
figures  of  tortoises,  with  snakes  coiled  round  them.  The  falcon 
banners  belonged  to  the  commanders  of  the  divisions  of  the  host. 
They  bore  the  figures  of  falcons  on  them. 

2  '  The  southern  hill '  was  also  called  the  ^Tung-nan,  and  rose 
right  to  the  south  of  the  western  capital  of  ^Tau. 


352  THE    SHIH    KING.  DECADE  IV. 

Yin,  And  the  people  all  look  to  you  !  A  fire  burns 
in  their  grieving  hearts  ;  They  do  not  dare  to  speak 
of  you  even  in  jest.  The  kingdom  is  verging  to 
extinction ; — How  is  it  that  you  do  not  consider  the 
state  of  things  ? 

Lofty  is  that  southern  hill,  And  vigorously 
grows  the  vegetation  on  it !  Awe-inspiring  are 
you,  O  (Grand-)Master  Yin,  But  how  is  it  that  you 
are  so  unjust  ?  Heaven  is  continually  redoubling 
its  inflictions ;  Deaths  and  disorder  increase  and 
multiply;  No  words  of  satisfaction  come  from 
the  people  ;  And  yet  you  do  not  correct  nor  be- 
moan yourself. 

The  Grand-Master  Yin  Is  the  foundation  of  our 
Aiau,  And  the  balance  of  the  kingdom  is  in  his 
hands.  He  should  be  keeping  its  four  quarters 
together;  He  should  be  aiding  the  Son  of  Heaven, 
So  as  to  preserve  the  people  from  going  astray. 
O  unpitying  great  Heaven,  It  is  not  right  he 
should  reduce  us  all  to  such  misery! 

He  does  nothing  himself  personally,  And  the 
people  have  no  confidence  in  him.  Making  no  en- 
quiry about  them,  and  no  trial  of  their  services, 
He  should  not  deal  deceitfully  with  superior  men. 
If  he  dismissed  them  on  the  requirement  of  justice, 
Mean  men  would  not  be  endangering  (the  common- 
weal) ;  And  his  mean  relatives  Would  not  be  in 
offices  of  importance. 

Great  Heaven,  unjust,  Is  sending  down  these 
exhausting  disorders.  Great  Heaven,  unkind,  Is 
sending  down  these  great  miseries.  Let  superior 
men  come  (into  office),  And  that  would  bring  rest 
to  the  people's  hearts.     Let  superior  men  execute 


ODE  7.  THE    MINOR    ODES    OF    THE    KINGDOM.  353 

their  justice,    And  the  animosities  and  angers  would 
disappear  \ 

0  unpi tying  great  Heaven,  There  is  no  end  to 
the  disorder !  With  every  month  it  continues  to 
grow,  So  that  the  people  have  no  repose.  I  am 
as  if  intoxicated  with  the  grief  of  my  heart.  Who 
holds  the  ordering  of  the  kingdom  ?  He  attends 
not  himself  to  the  government,  And  the  result  is 
toil  and  pain  to  the  people. 

1  yoke  my  four  steeds,  My  four  steeds,  long- 
necked.  I  look  to  the  four  quarters  (of  the  king- 
dom) ;  Distress  is  everywhere  ;  there  is  no  place 
I  can  drive  to. 

Now  your  evil  is  rampant 2,  And  I  can  see  your 
spears.  Anon  you  are  pacified  and  friendly  as  if 
you  were  pledging  one  another. 

From  great  Heaven  is  the  injustice,  And  our 
king  has  no  repose.  (Yet)  he  will  not  correct  his 
heart,  And  goes  on  to  resent  endeavours  to  rectify 
him. 

I,  .ATid-fti,  have  made  this  poem,  To  lay  bare 
the  kings  disorders.  If  you  would  but  change 
your  heart,  Then  would  the  myriad  regions  be 
nourished. 


1  In  this  stanza,  as  in  the  next  and  the  last  but  one,  the  writer 
complains  of  Heaven,  and  charges  it  foolishly.  He  does  so  by  way 
of  appeal,  however,  and  indicates  the  true  causes  of  the  misery  of 
the  kingdom, — the  reckless  conduct,  namely,  of  the  king  and  his 
minister. 

2  The  parties  spoken  of  here  are  the  followers  of  the  minister, 
'mean  men/  however  high  in  place  and  great  in  power,  now 
friendly,  now  hostile  to  one  another. 

[1]  a  a 


354  the  shih  king.  decade  iv. 

Ode  8,  Stanzas  4,  5,  and  7.     The  Aang  yueh. 

THE  7TANG  YUEH  IS,  LIKE  THE  PRECEDING  ODE,  A  LAMENTATION  OVER 
THE  MISERIES  OF  THE  KINGDOM,  AND  THE  RUIN  COMING  ON  IT; 
WITH  A  SIMILAR,  BUT  MORE  HOPEFULLY  EXPRESSED,  APPEAL  TO 
HEAVEN,    'THE    GREAT    GOD.' 

Look  into  the  middle  of  the  forest ;  There  are 
(only)  large  faggots  and  small  branches  in  it  \  The 
people  now  amidst  their  perils  Look  to  Heaven, 
all  dark ;  But  let  its  determination  be  fixed,  And 
there  is  no  one  whom  it  will  not  overcome.  There 
is  the  great  God, — Does  he  hate  any  one  ? 

If  one  say  of  a  hill  that  it  is  low,  There  are  its 
ridges  and  its  large  masses.  The  false  calumnies 
of  the  people, — How  is  it  that  you  do  not  repress 
them  2  ?  You  call  those  experienced  ancients,  You 
consult  the  diviner  of  dreams.  They  all  say,  '  We 
are  very  wise,  But  who  can  distinguish  the  male 
and  female  crow 3  ? ' 

Look  at  the  rugged  and  stony  field ; — Luxuriantly 
rises  in  it  the  springing  grain.  (But)  Heaven  moves 
and  shakes  me,     As  if  it  could  not  overcome  me  4. 

1  By  introducing  the  word  '  only/  I  have  followed  the  view  of 
the  older  interpreters,  who  consider  the  forest,  with  merely  some 
faggots  and  twigs  left  in  it,  to  be  emblematic  of  the  ravages  of 
oppressive  government  in  the  court  and  kingdom.  Kii  Hst  takes 
a  different  view  of  them : — '  In  a  forest  you  can  easily  distinguish 
the  large  faggots  from  the  small  branches,  while  Heaven  appears 
unable  to  distinguish  between  the  good  and  bad/ 

2  The  calumnies  that  were  abroad  were  as  absurd  as  the  asser- 
tion in  line  i,  and  yet  the  king  could  not,  or  would  not,  see  through 
them  and  repress  them. 

3  This  reference  to  the  diviners  of  dreams  is  in  derision  of  their 
pretensions. 

4  That  is,  the  productive  energy  of  nature  manifests  itself  in  the 
most  unlikely  places ;  how  was  it  that  *  the  great  God,  who  hates 
no  one/  was  contending  so  with  the  writer  ? 


ODE  9.  THE    MINOR    ODES    OF    THE    KINGDOM.  355 

They  sought  me  (at  first)  to  be  a  pattern  (to  them), 
(Eagerly)  as  if  they  could  not  get  me  ;  (Now)  they 
regard  me  with  great  animosity,  And  will  not  use 
my  strength. 

Ode  9.     The  Shih  YtiEH  kik  Kiko. 

THE  LAMENTATION  OF  AN  OFFICER  OVER  THE  PRODIGIES  CELESTIAL 
AND  TERRESTRIAL,  ESPECIALLY  AN  ECLIPSE  OF  THE  SUN,  THAT 
WERE  BETOKENING  THE  RUIN  OF  KAV.  HE  SETS  FORTH  WHAT  HE 
CONSIDERED  TO  BE  THE  TRUE  CAUSES  OF  THE  PREVAILING  MISERY, 
WHICH    WAS   BY    NO    MEANS    TO    BE    CHARGED    ON    HEAVEN. 

Attention  is  called  in  the  Introduction,  p.  296,  to  the  date  of  the 
solar  eclipse  mentioned  in  this  piece. 

At  the  conjunction  (of  the  sun  and  moon)  in  the 
tenth  month,  On  the  first  day  of  the  moon,  which 
was  hsin-mao,  The  sun  was  eclipsed,  A  thing 
of  very  evil  omen.  Before,  the  moon  became  small, 
And  now  the  sun  became  small.  Henceforth  the 
lower  people    Will  be  in  a  very  deplorable  case. 

The  sun  and  moon  announce  evil,  Not  keeping 
to  their  proper  paths.  Throughout  the  kingdom 
there  is  no  (proper)  government,  Because  the  good 
are  not  employed.  For  the  moon  to  be  eclipsed 
Is  but  an  ordinary  matter.  Now  that  the  sun  has 
been  eclipsed, — How  bad  it  is  ! 

Grandly  flashes  the  lightning  of  the  thunder. 
There  is  a  want  of  rest,  a  want  of  good.  The 
streams  all  bubble  up  and  overflow.  The  crags  on 
the  hill-tops  fall  down.  High  banks  become  valleys; 
Deep  valleys  become  hills.  Alas  for  the  men  of 
this  time!  How  does  (the  king)  not  stop  these 
things  ? 

Hwang-fta  is  the  President ;    Fan  is  the  Minister 
a  a  2 


356  THE   SHIH    KING.  DECADE  IV. 

of  Instruction;  .Afia-po  is  the  (chief)  Administrator; 
Aung-yiin  is  the  chief  Cook ;  3&u  is  the  Recorder 
of  the  Interior;  Khwei  is  Master  of  the  Horse; 
Yli  is  Captain  of  the  Guards ;  And  the  beautiful 
wife  blazes,  now  in  possession  of  her  place  1. 

This  Hwang-fft  Will  not  acknowledge  that  he 
is  acting  out  of  season.  But  why  does  he  call  us 
to  move,  Without  coming  and  consulting  with  us  ? 
He  has  removed  our  walls  and  roofs  ;  And  our 
fields  are  all  either  a  marsh  or  a  moor.  He  says, 
*  I  am  not  injuring  you ;  The  laws  require  that 
thus  it  should  be/ 

Hwang-fft  is  very  wise;  He  has  built  a  great 
city  for  himself  in  Hsiang.  He  chose  three  men 
as  his  ministers,  All  of  them  possessed  of  great 
wealth.  He  could  not  bring  himself  to  leave  a 
single  minister,  Who  might  guard  our  king.  He 
(also)  selected  those  who  had  chariots  and  horses, 
To  go  and  reside  in  Hsiang2. 

1  We  do  not  know  anything  from  history  of  the  ministers  of  Yu 
mentioned  in  this  stanza.  Hwang-fu  appears  to  have  been  the  leading 
minister  of  the  government  at  the  time  when  the  ode  was  written, 
and,  as  appears  from  the  next  two  stanzas,  was  very  crafty,  oppres- 
sive, and  selfishly  ambitious.  The  mention  of  '  the  chief  Cook  ' 
among  the  high  ministers  appears  strange ;  but  we  shall  find  that 
functionary  mentioned  in  another  ode  ;  and  from  history  it  appears 
that  '  the  Cook,'  at  the  royal  and  feudal  courts,  sometimes  played 
an  important  part  during  the  times  of  K&u.  l  The  beautiful 
wife/  no  doubt,  was  the  well-known  Sze  of  Pao,  raised  by  king  Yu 
from  her  position  as  one  of  his  concubines  to  be  his  queen,  and 
whose  insane  folly  and  ambition  led  to  her  husband's  death,  and 
great  and  disastrous  changes  in  the  kingdom. 

2  Hsiang  was  a  district  of  the  royal  domain,  in  the  present  dis- 
trict of  Mang,  department  of  Hw&i-^ing,  Ho-nan.  It  had  been 
assigned  to  Hwang-fu,  and  he  was  establishing  himself  there,  with- 
out any  loyal  regard  to  the  king.     As  a  noble  in  the  royal  domain, 


ODE  io.         THE    MINOR    ODES    OF   THE    KINGDOM.  357 

I  have  exerted  myself  to  discharge  my  service, 
And  do  not  dare  to  make  a  report  of  my  toils. 
Without  crime  or  offence  of  any  kind,  Slanderous 
mouths  are  loud  against  me.  (But)  the  calamities 
of  the  lower  people  Do  not  come  down  from 
Heaven.  A  multitude  of  (fair)  words,  and  hatred 
behind  the  back ; — The  earnest,  strong  pursuit  of 
this  is  from  men. 

Distant  far  is  my  village,  And  my  dissatisfaction 
is  great.  In  other  quarters  there  is  ease,  And 
I  dwell  here,  alone  and  sorrowful.  Everybody  is 
going  into  retirement,  And  I  alone  dare  not  seek 
rest.  The  ordinances  of  Heaven  are  inexplicable, 
But  I  will  not  dare  to  follow  my  friends,  and  leave 
my  post 

Ode  10,  Stanzas  1  and  3.     The  Yu  wu  ATang. 

THE  WRITER  OF  THIS  PIECE  MOURNS  OVER  THE  MISERABLE  STATE 
OF  THE  KINGDOM,  THE  INCORRIGIBLE  COURSE  OF  THE  KING,  AND 
OTHER  EVILS,  APPEALING  ALSO  TO  HEAVEN,  AND  SURPRISED  THAT 
IT    ALLOWED    SUCH    THINGS    TO    BE. 

Great  and  wide  Heaven,  How  is  it  you  have 
contracted  your  kindness,  Sending  down  death 
and  famine,  Destroying  all  through  the  kingdom? 
Compassionate  Heaven,  arrayed  in  terrors,  How 
is  it  you  exercise  no  forethought,  no  care  ?  Let 
alone  the  criminals  :  —  They  have  suffered  for  their 
guilt.  But  those  who  have  no  crime  Are  indis- 
criminately involved  in  ruin. 

he  was  entitled  only  to  two  ministers,  but  he  had  appointed  three 
as  in  one  of  the  feudal  states,  encouraging,  moreover,  the  resort  to 
himself  of  the  wealthy  and  powerful,  while  the  court  was  left  weak 
and  unprotected. 


358  THE    SHIH    KING.  DECADE  V, 

How  is  it,  O  great  Heaven,  That  the  king  will 
not  hearken  to  the  justest  words  ?  He  is  like  a 
man  going  (astray),  Who  knows  not  where  he 
will  proceed  to.  All  ye  officers,  Let  each  of 
you  attend  to  his  duties.  How  do  ye  not  stand 
in  awe  of  one  another  ?  Ye  do  not  stand  in 
awe  of  Heaven. 


The  Fifth  Decade,  or  that  of  Hsido  Min. 
Ode  1,  Stanzas  1,  2,  and  3.     The  Hsiao  Min. 

A  LAMENTATION  OVER  THE  RECKLESSNESS  AND  INCAPACITY  OF  THE 
KING  AND  HIS  COUNSELLORS.  DIVINATION  HAS  BECOME  OF  NO 
AVAIL,    AND   HEAVEN    IS   DESPAIRINGLY    APPEALED   TO. 

This  is  referred,  like  several  of  the  pieces  in  the  fourth  decade,  to 
the  time  of  king  Yu. 

The  angry  terrors  of  compassionate  Heaven 
Extend  through  this  lower  world.  (The  kings) 
counsels  and  plans  are  crooked  and  bad ;  When 
will  he  stop  (in  his  course)  ?  Counsels  that  are 
good  he  will  not  follow,  And  those  that  are  not 
good  he  employs.  When  I  look  at  his  counsels 
and  plans,     I  am  greatly  pained. 

Now  they  agree,  and  now  they  defame  one  an- 
other;— The  case  is  greatly  to  be  deplored.  If  a 
counsel  be  good,  They  are  all  found  opposing  it. 
If  a  counsel  be  bad,  They  are  all  found  according 
with  it.  When  I  look  at  such  counsels  and  plans, 
What  will  they  come  to  ? 

Our  tortoise-shells  are  wearied  out,  And  will 
not  tell  us  anything  about  the  plans.  The  coun- 
sellors are  very  many,  But  on  that  account  nothing 
is  accomplished.     The  speakers  fill  the  court,     But 


ODE  2.  THE   MINOR    ODES    OF    THE    KINGDOM.  359 

who  dares  to  take  any  responsibility  on  himself? 
We  are  as  if  we  consulted  (about  a  journey)  without 
taking  a  step  in  advance,  And  therefore  did  not 
get  on  on  the  road. 

Ode  2,  Stanzas  1  and  2.     The  Hsiao  Yuan. 

SOME  OFFICER  IN  A  TIME  OF  DISORDER  AND  MISGOVERNMENT  URGES 
ON  HIS  BROTHERS  THE  DUTY  OF  MAINTAINING  THEIR  OWN  VIRTUE, 
AND   OF  OBSERVING  THE   GREATEST    CAUTION. 

Small  is  the  cooing  dove,  But  it  flies  aloft  to 
heaven.  My  heart  is  wounded  with  sorrow,  And 
I  think  of  our  forefathers.  When  the  dawn  is 
breaking,  and  I  cannot  sleep,  The  thoughts  in  my 
breast  are  of  our  parents. 

Men  who  are  grave  and  wise,  Though  they 
drink,  are  mild  and  masters  of  themselves  ;  But 
those  who  are  benighted  and  ignorant  Become 
devoted  to  drink,  and  more  so  daily.  Be  careful, 
each  of  you,  of  your  deportment ;  What  Heaven 
confers,  (when  once  lost),  is  not  regained  \ 

The  greenbeaks  come  and  go,  Picking  up  grain 
about  the  stackyard.  Alas  for  the  distressed  and 
the  solitary,  Deemed  fit  inmates  for  the  prisons  ! 
With  a  handful  of  grain  I  go  out  and  divine  2,  How 
I  may  be  able  to  become  good. 

1  '  What  Heaven  confers'  is,  probably,  the  good  human  nature, 
which  by  vice,  and  especially  by  drunkenness,  may  be  irretrievably 
ruined. 

2  A  religious  act  is  here  referred  to,  on  which  we  have  not  suffi- 
cient information  to  be  able  to  throw  much  light.  It  was  the 
practice  to  spread  some  finely  ground  rice  on  the  ground,  in  con- 
nexion with  divination,  as  an  offering  to  the  spirits.  The  poet 
represents  himself  here  as  using  a  handful  of  grain  for  the  pur- 
pose,— probably  on  account  of  his  poverty. 


360  THE    SHIH    KING.  DECADE  V. 


Ode  3,  Stanzas  I  and  3.     The  Hsiao  Pan. 

THE  ELDEST  SON  AND  HEIR-APPARENT  OF  KING  YU  BEWAILS  HIS  DEGRA- 
DATION, APPEALING  TO  HEAVEN  AS  TO  HIS  INNOCENCE,  AND  COM- 
PLAINING  OF   ITS  CASTING   HIS   LOT  IN   SUCH   A  TIME. 

It  is  allowed  that  this  piece  is  clearly  the  composition  of  a  banished 
son,  and  there  is  no  necessity  to  call  in  question  the  tradition 
preserved  in  the  Preface  which  prefers  it  to  I-Miu,  the  eldest 
son  of  king  Yu.  His  mother  was  a  princess  of  the  House  of 
Shan ;  but  when  Yu  became  enamoured  of  Sze  of  Pao,  the  queen 
was  degraded,  and  the  son  banished  to  Shan. 

With  flapping  wings  the  crows  Come  back,  flying 
all  in  a  flock 1.  Other  people  are  happy,  And  I 
only  am  full  of  misery.  What  is  my  offence  against 
Heaven  ?  What  is  my  crime  ?  My  heart  is  sad  ; — 
What  is  to  be  done  ? 

Even  the  mulberry  trees  and  the  rottleras  Must 
be  regarded  with  reverence 2 ;  But  no  one  is  to  be 
looked  up  to  like  a  father,  No  one  is  to  be  de- 
pended on  as  a  mother.  Have  I  not  a  connexion 
with  the  hairs  (of  my  father)  ?  Did  I  not  dwell 
in  the  womb  (of  my  mother)  ?  O  Heaven,  who 
gave  me  birth!  How  was  it  at  so  inauspicious 
a  time  ? 


1  The  sight  of  the  crows,  all  together,  suggests  to  the  prince  his 
own  condition,  solitary  and  driven  from  court. 

2  The  mulberry  tree  and  the  rottlera  were  both  planted  about 
the  farmsteadings,  and  are  therefore  mentioned  here.  They  carried 
the  thoughts  back  to  the  father  or  grandfather,  or  the  more  remote 
ancestor,  who  first  planted  them,  and  so  a  feeling  of  reverence 
attached  to  themselves. 


ODE  6.  THE    MINOR    ODES    OF    THE    KINGDOM.  361 


Ode  4,  Stanza  1.     The  Khiko  Yen. 

SOME  ONE,  SUFFERING  FROM  THE  KING  THROUGH  SLANDER,  APPEALS 
TO  HEAVEN,  AND  GOES  ON  TO  DWELL  ON  THE  NATURE  AND  EVIL 
OF  SLANDER. 

This  piece  has  been  referred  to  the  time  of  king  Li,  B.C.  878 
to  828. 

O  vast  and  distant  Heaven,  Who  art  called  our 
parent,  That,  without  crime  or  offence,  I  should 
suffer  from  disorders  thus  great!  The  terrors  of 
great  Heaven  are  excessive,  But  indeed  I  have 
committed  no  crime.  (The  terrors  of)  great 
Heaven  are  very  excessive,  But  indeed  I  have 
committed  no  offence. 

Ode  6,  Stanzas  5  and  6.     The  Hsiang  Po. 

A  EUNUCH,  HIMSELF  THE  VICTIM  OF  SLANDER,  COMPLAINS  OF  HIS  FATE, 
AND  WARNS  AND  DENOUNCES  HIS  ENEMIES  ;  APPEALING  AGAINST 
THEM,  AS    HIS   LAST  RESORT,  TO    HEAVEN. 

The  proud  are  delighted,  And  the  troubled  are 
in  sorrow.  O  azure  Heaven  !  O  azure  Heaven  ! 
Look  on  those  proud  men,  Pity  those  who  are 
troubled. 

Those  slanderers !  Who  devised  their  schemes 
for  them  ?  I  would  take  those  slanderers,  And 
throw  them  to  wolves  and  tigers.  If  these  refused 
to  devour  them,  I  would  cast  them  into  the  north1. 
If  the  north  refused  to  receive  them,  I  would 
throw  them  into  the  hands  of  great  (Heaven)  2. 

1  '  The  north/  i.e.  the  region  where  there  are  the  rigours  of  winter 
and  the  barrenness  of  the  desert. 

2  'Great  Heaven;'  'Heaven'  has  to  be  supplied  here,  but  there 


362  THE    SHIH    KING.  DECADE  V. 


Ode  9.     The  Ta  Tung. 

AN  OFFICER  OF  ONE  OF  THE  STATES  OF  THE  EAST  DEPLORES  THE 
EXACTIONS  MADE  FROM  THEM  BY  THE  GOVERNMENT,  COMPLAINS 
OF  THE  FAVOUR  SHOWN  TO  THE  WEST,  CONTRASTS  THE  MISERY  OF 
THE  PRESENT  WITH  THE  HAPPINESS  OF  THE  PAST,  AND  APPEALS  TO 
THE   STARS   OF   HEAVEN   IDLY  BEHOLDING  THEIR    CONDITION. 

I  give  the  whole  of  this  piece,  because  it  is  an  interesting  instance 
of  Sabian  views.  The  writer,  despairing  of  help  from  men, 
appeals  to  Heaven  ;  but  he  distributes  the  Power  that  could  help 
him  among  many  heavenly  bodies,  supposing  that  there  are 
spiritual  beings  in  them,  taking  account  of  human  affairs. 

Well  loaded  with  millet  were  the  dishes,  And 
long  and  curved  were  the  spoons  of  thorn-wood. 
The  way  to  Aau  was  like  a  whetstone,  And 
straight  as  an  arrow.  (So)  the  officers  trod  it, 
And  the  common  people  looked  on  it  When  I 
look  back  and  think  of  it,  My  tears  run  down  in 
streams. 

In  the  states  of  the  east,  large  and  small,  The 
looms  are  empty.  Then  shoes  of  dolichos  fibre 
Are  made  to  serve  to  walk  on  the  hoar-frost. 
Slight  and  elegant  gentlemen1  Walk  along  that 
road  to  K&u.  Their  going  and  coming  makes  my 
heart  sad. 

Ye  cold  waters,  issuing  variously  from  the  spring, 
Do  not  soak  the  firewood  I  have  cut.  Sorrowful 
I  awake  and  sigh; — Alas  for  us  toiled  people! 
The  firewood  has  been  cut ; — Would  that  it  were 

is  no  doubt  as  to  the  propriety  of  doing  so ;  and,  moreover,  the 
peculiar  phraseology  of  the  line  shows  that  the  poet  did  not  rest 
in  the  thought  of  the  material  heavens. 

1  That  is,    'slight-looking/   unfit  for  toil;    and  yet   they  are 
obliged  to  make  their  journey  on  foot. 


ODE  9.  THE    MINOR    ODES    OF    THE    KINGDOM.  363 

conveyed  home!     Alas  for  us    the  toiled   people! 
Would  that  we  could  have  rest1! 

The  sons  of  the  east  Are  summoned  only  (to 
service),  without  encouragement ;  While  the  sons 
of  the  west  Shine  in  splendid  dresses.  The  sons  of 
boatmen  Have  furs  of  the  bear  and  grisly  bear. 
The  sons  of  the  poorest  families  Form  the  officers 
in  public  employment. 

If  we  present  them  with  spirits,  They  regard 
them  as  not  fit  to  be  called  liquor.  If  we  give 
them  long  girdle  pendants  with  their  stones,  They 
do  not  think  them  long  enough. 

There  is  the  Milky  Way  in  heaven  2,  Which  looks 
down  on  us  in  light;  And  the  three  stars  together 
are  the  Weaving  Sisters 3,  Passing  in  a  day  through 
seven  stages  (of  the  sky). 

Although  they  go  through  their  seven  stages, 
They  complete  no  bright  work  for  us.  Brilliant 
shine  the  Draught  Oxen  4,  But  they  do  not  serve 
to  draw  our  carts.  In  the  east  there  is  Lucifer5; 
In  the  west  there  is  Hesperus5;    Long  and  curved 

1  This  stanza  describes,  directly  or  by  symbol,  the  exactions 
from  which  the  people  of  the  east  were  suffering. 

2  'The  Milky  Way'  is  here  called  simply  the  Han, = in  the  sky 
what  the  Han  river  is  in  China. 

3  'The  Weaving  Sisters,  or  Ladies/  are  three  stars  in  Lyra,  that 
form  a  triangle.  To  explain  what  is  said  of  their  passing  through 
seven  spaces,  it  is  said :  '  The  stars  seem  to  go  round  the  circum- 
ference of  the  heavens,  divided  into  twelve  spaces,  in  a  day  and 
night.  They  would  accomplish  six  of  them  in  a  day  ;  but  as  their 
motion  is  rather  in  advance  of  that  of  the  sun,  they  have  entered 
into  the  seventh  space  by  the  time  it  is  up  with  them  again/ 

4  '  The  Draught  Oxen'  is  the  name  of  some  stars  in  the  neck  of 
Aquila. 

6  Liu  I  (Sung  dynasty)  says :  '  The  metal  star  (Venus)  is  in  the 


364  THE    SHIH    KING.  DECADE  vi. 

is    the   Rabbit   Net    of  the   sky x ; — But   they  only 
occupy  their  places. 

In  the  south  is  the  Sieve  2,  But  it  is  of  no  use 
to  sift.  In  the  north  is  the  Ladle3,  But  it  lades 
out  no  liquor.  In  the  south  is  the  Sieve,  Idly 
showing  its  mouth.  In  the  north  is  the  Ladle, 
Raising  its  handle  in  the  west. 


The  Sixth   Decade,  or  that  of  Pei  Shan. 
Ode  3,  Stanzas  1,  4,  and  5.     The  Hsiao  Ming. 

AN  OFFICER,  KEPT  LONG  ABROAD  ON  DISTANT  SERVICE,  APPEALS  TO 
HEAVEN,  DEPLORING  THE  HARDSHIPS  OF  HIS  LOT,  AND  TENDERS 
GOOD   ADVICE   TO  HIS  MORE  FORTUNATE   FRIENDS   AT   COURT. 

0  bright  and  high  Heaven,  Who  enlightenest 
and  rulest  this  lower  world !  I  marched  on  this 
expedition  to  the  west,  As  far  as  this  wilderness 
of  jOiu.  From  the  first  day  of  the  second  month, 
I  have  passed  through  the  cold  and  the  heat.  My 
heart  is  sad ;  The  poison  (of  my  lot)  is  too  bitter. 
I  think  of  those  (at  court)  in  their  offices,  And  my 
tears  flow  down  like  rain.  Do  I  not  wish  to  return  ? 
But  I  fear  the  net  for  crime. 

Ah  !  ye  gentlemen,     Do  not  reckon  on  your  rest 

east  in  the  morning,  thus  "opening  the  brightness  of  the  day;" 
and  it  is  in  the  west  in  the  evening,  thus  "  prolonging  the  day/' ' 
The  author  of  the  piece,  however,  evidently  took  Lucifer  and  Hes- 
perus to  be  two  stars. 

1  '  The  Rabbit  Net '  is  the  Hyades. 

2  'The  Sieve'  is  the  name  of  one  of  the  twenty- eight  constel- 
lations of  the  zodiac, — part  of  Sagittarius. 

3  'The  Ladle'  is  the  constellation  next  to  'the  Sieve,' — also  part 
of  Sagittarius. 


ODE  5.     THE  MINOR  ODES  OF  THE  KINGDOM.     365 

being  permanent.  Quietly  fulfil  the  duties  of  your 
offices,  Associating  with  the  correct  and  upright ; 
So  shall  the  spirits  hearken  to  you,  And  give  you 
good. 

Ah !  ye  gentlemen,  Do  not  reckon  on  your 
repose  being  permanent.  Quietly  fulfil  the  duties 
of  your  offices,  Loving  the  correct  and  upright; 
So  shall  the  spirits  hearken  to  you,  And  give  you 
large  measures  of  bright  happiness. 

Ode  5.     The  Kh\j  3#ze. 

SACRIFICIAL   AND   FESTAL    SERVICES   IN   THE    ANCESTRAL    TEMPLE;     AND 
THEIR   CONNEXION  WITH   ATTENTION  TO   HUSBANDRY. 

See   the    remarks    on   the    Services    of  the  Ancestral   Temple, 
PP-  3°°>  301- 

Thick  grew  the  tribulus  (on  the  ground),  But 
they  cleared  away  its  thorny  bushes.  Why  did  they 
this  of  old  ?  That  we  might  plant  our  millet  and 
sacrificial  millet ;  That  our  millet  might  be  abun- 
dant, And  our  sacrificial  millet  luxuriant.  When 
our  barns  are  full,  And  our  stacks  can  be  counted 
by  tens  of  myriads,  We  proceed  to  make  spirits 
and  prepared  grain,  For  offerings  and  sacrifice. 
We  seat  the  representatives  of  the  dead,  and  urge 
them  to  eat x: — Thus  seeking  to  increase  our  bright 
happiness. 

1  The  poet  hurries  on  to  describe  the  sacrifices  in  progress. 
The  persons  selected  to  personate  the  departed  were  necessarily 
inferior  in  rank  to  the  principal  sacrificer,  yet  for  the  time  they 
were  superior  to  him.  This  circumstance,  it  was  supposed,  would 
make  them  feel  uncomfortable;  and  therefore,  as  soon  as  they 
appeared  in  the  temple,  the  director  of  the  ceremonies  instructed 
the  sacrificer  to  ask  them  to  be  seated,  and  to  place  them  at  ease ; 
after  which  they  were  urged  to  take  some  refreshment. 


366  THE    SHIH    KING.  DECADE  VI. 

With  correct  and  reverent  deportment,  The  bulls 
and  rams  all  pure,  We  proceed  to  the  winter  and 
autumnal  sacrifices.  Some  flay  (the  victims);  some 
cook  (their  flesh)  ;  Some  arrange  (the  meat) ;  some 
adjust  (the  pieces  of  it).  The  officer  of  prayer 
sacrifices  inside  the  temple  gate  \  And  all  the 
sacrificial  service  is  complete  and  brilliant.  Grandly 
come  our  progenitors ;  Their  spirits  happily  enjoy 
the  offerings ;  Their  filial  descendant  receives  bless- 
ing : — They  will  reward  him  with  great  happiness, 
With  myriads  of  years,  life  without  end. 

They  attend  to  the  furnaces  with  reverence ; 
They  prepare  the  trays,  which  are  very  large; — 
Some  for  the  roast  meat,  some  for  the  broiled.  Wives 
presiding  are  still  and  reverent 2,  Preparing  the 
numerous  (smaller)  dishes.  The  guests  and  visitors 3 
Present  the  cup  all  round  4.  Every  form  is  accord- 
ing to  rule  ;  Every  smile  and  word  are  as  they 
should  be.     The  spirits  quietly  come,    And  respond 


1  The  Kb,  who  is  mentioned  here,  was  evidently  an  officer,  '  one 
who  makes  or  recites  prayers/  The  sacrifice  he  is  said  to  offer 
was,  probably,  a  libation,  the  pouring  out  fragrant  spirits,  as  a  part 
of  the  general  service,  and  likely  to  attract  the  hovering  spirits  of 
the  departed,  on  their  approach  to  the  temple.  Hence  his  act 
was  performed  just  inside  the  gate. 

2  '  Wives  presiding/  i.  e.  the  wife  of  the  sacrificer,  the  principal 
in  the  service,  and  other  ladies  of  the  harem.  The  dishes  under 
their  care,  the  smaller  dishes,  would  be  those  containing  sauces, 
cakes,  condiments,  &c. 

3  '  The  guests  and  visitors '  would  be  nobles  and  officers  of  dif- 
ferent surnames  from  the  sacrificer,  chosen  by  divination  to  take 
part  in  the  sacrificial  service. 

4  '  Present  the  cup  all  round '  describes  the  ceremonies  of  drink- 
ing, which  took  place  between  the  guests  and  visitors,  the  repre- 
sentatives of  the  dead,  and  the  sacrificer. 


ODE  5-  THE    MINOR    ODES    OF    THE    KINGDOM.  367 

with   great    blessings, — Myriads    of   years    as    the 
(fitting)  reward. 

We  are  very  much  exhausted,  And  have  per- 
formed every  ceremony  without  error.  The  able 
officer  of  prayer  announces  (the  will  of  the  spirits)  *, 
And  goes  to  the  filial  descendant  to  convey  it 1 : — 
*  Fragrant  has  been  your  filial  sacrifice,  And  the 
spirits  have  enjoyed  your  spirits  and  viands.  They 
confer  on  you  a  hundred  blessings  ;  Each  as  it  is 
desired,  Each  as  sure  as  law.  You  have  been  exact 
and  expeditious  ;  You  have  been  correct  and  care- 
ful ;  They  will  ever  confer  on  you  the  choicest 
favours,    In  myriads  and  tens  of  myriads/ 

The  ceremonies  having  thus  been  completed, 
And  the  bells  and  drums  having  given  their  warn- 
ing 2,  The  filial  descendant  goes  to  his  place 3, 
And  the  able  officer  of  prayer  makes  his  announce- 
ment, 'The  spirits  have  drunk  to  the  full/  The 
great  representatives  of  the  dead  then  rise,  And 
the  bells  and  drums  escort  their  withdrawal,  (On 
which)  the  spirits  tranquilly  return  (to  whence  they 
came) 4.  All  the  servants,  and  the  presiding  wives, 
Remove  (the  trays  and  dishes)  without  delay.     The 

1  The  officer  of  prayer  had  in  the  first  place  obtained,  or  pro- 
fessed to  have  obtained,  this  answer  of  the  progenitors  from  their 
personators. 

2  The  music  now  announced  that  the  sacrificial  service  in  the 
temple  was  ended. 

8  The  sacrificer,  or  principal  in  the  service,  now  left  the  place 
which  he  had  occupied,  descended  from  the  hall,  and  took  his 
position  at  the  foot  of  the  steps  on  the  east, — the  place  appropriate 
to  him  in  dismissing  his  guests. 

4  Where  did  they  return  to  ?  According  to  King  Hsiian,  '  To 
heaven/ 


368  THE    SHIH    KING. 


DECADE  VI. 


(sacrificers)  uncles  and  cousins     All  repair  to  the 
private  feast 1. 

The  musicians  all  go  in  to  perform,  And  give 
their  soothing  aid  at  the  second  blessing 2.  Your 3 
viands  are  set  forth  ;  There  is  no  dissatisfaction, 
but  all  feel  happy.  They  drink  to  the  full,  and  eat 
to  the  full ;  Great  and  small,  they  bow  their  heads, 
(saying),  'The  spirits  enjoyed  your  spirits  and 
viands,  And  will  cause  you  to  live  long.  Your 
sacrifices,  all  in  their  seasons,  Are  completely  dis- 
charged by  you.  May  your  sons  and  your  grand- 
sons    Never  fail  to  perpetuate  these  services ! ' 

Ode  6.     The  Hsin  Nan  Shan. 

HUSBANDRY  TRACED  TO    ITS   FIRST  AUTHOR  J    DETAILS  ABOUT    IT,  GOING 
ON  TO  THE  SUBJECT  OF  SACRIFICES  TO  ANCESTORS. 

The  Preface  refers  this  piece  to  the  reign  of  king  Yu ;  but  there 
is  nothing  in  it  to  suggest  the  idea  of  its  having  been  made  in 
a  time  of  disorder  and  misgovernment.  '  The  distant  descendant ' 
in  the  first  stanza  is  evidently  the  principal  in  the  sacrifice  of  the 
last  two  stanzas  : — according  to  Kii,  a  noble  or  great  landholder 
in  the  royal  domain ;  according  to  others,  some  one  of  the  kings 
of  Alu.     I  incline  myself  to  this  latter  view.     The  three  pieces, 

1  These  uncles  and  cousins  were  all  present  at  the  sacrifice,  and 
of  the  same  surname  as  the  principal.  The  feast  to  them  was  to 
show  his  peculiar  affection  for  his  relatives. 

2  The  feast  was  given  in  the  apartment  of  the  temple  behind  the 
hall  where  the  sacrifice  had  been  performed,  so  that  the  musicians 
are  represented  as  going  in  to  continue  at  the  feast  the  music  they 
had  discoursed  at  the  sacrifice. 

3  The  transition  to  the  second  person  here  is  a  difficulty.  We 
can  hardly  make  the  speech,  made  by  some  one  of  the  guests  on 
behalf  of  all  the  others,  commence  here.  We  must  come  to  the 
conclusion  that  the  ode  was  written,  in  compliment  to  the  sacrificer, 
by  one  of  the  relatives  who  shared  in  the  feast ;  and  so  here  he 
addresses  him  directly. 


ODE  6.         THE    MINOR   ODES    OF    THE   KINGDOM.  369 

of  which  this  is  the  middle  one,  seem  all  to  be  royal  odes.     The 
mention  of  '  the  southern  hill '  strongly  confirms  this  view. 

Yes,  (all  about)  that  southern  hill  Was  made 
manageable  by  Yti1.  Its  plains  and  marshes  being 
opened  up,  It  was  made  into  fields  by  the  distant 
descendant.  We  define  their  boundaries,  We 
form  their  smaller  divisions,  And  make  the  acres 
lie,  here  to  the  south,  there  to  the  east. 

The  heavens  overhead  are  one  arch  of  clouds, 
Snowing  in  multitudinous  flakes;  There  is  super- 
added the  drizzling  rain.  When  (the  land)  has 
received  the  moistening,  Soaking  influence  abun- 
dantly,   It  produces  all  our  kinds  of  grain. 

The  boundaries  and  smaller  divisions  are  nicely 
adjusted,  And  the  millets  yield  abundant  crops, 
The  harvest  of  the  distant  descendant.  We  pro- 
ceed to  make  therewith  spirits  and  food,  To 
supply  our  representatives  of  the  departed,  and 
our  guests; — To  obtain  long  life,  extending  over 
myriads  of  years. 

In  the  midst  of  the  fields  are  the  huts  2,     And 

1  There  is  here  a  recognition  of  the  work  of  the  great  Yu,  as 
the  real  founder  of  the  kingdom  of  China,  extending  the  territory 
of  former  elective  chiefs,  and  opening  up  the  country.  'The 
southern  hiir  bounded  the  prospect  to  the  south  from  the  capital 
of  K&m,  and  hence  the  writer  makes  mention  of  it.  He  does  not 
mean  to  confine  the  work  of  Yu  to  that  part  of  the  country  ;  but, 
on  the  other  hand,  there  is  nothing  in  his  language  to  afford  a  con- 
firmation to  the  account  given  in  the  third  Part  of  the  Shu  of  that 
hero's  achievements. 

2  In  every  -King,  or  space  of  900  Chinese  acres  or  mau,  assigned 
to  eight  families,  there  were  in  the  centre  100  mau  of  '  public 
fields/  belonging  to  the  government,  and  cultivated  by  the  hus- 
bandmen in  common.  In  this  space  of  100  mau,  two  mau  and 
a  half  were  again  assigned  to  each  family,  and  on  them  were 

[1]  Bb 


37°  THE    SHIH    KING.  DECADE  VI. 

along  the  bounding  divisions  are  gourds.  The  fruit 
is  sliced  and  pickled,  To  be  presented  to  our  great 
ancestors,  That  their  distant  descendant  may  have 
long  life,     And  receive  the  blessing  of  Heaven  1. 

We  sacrifice  (first)  with  clear  spirits,  And  then 
follow  with  a  red  bull ;  Offering  them  to  our  an- 
cestors, (Our  lord)  holds  the  knife  with  tinkling 
bells,  To  lay  open  the  hair  of  the  victim,  And 
takes  the  blood  and  fat 2. 

Then  we  present,  then  we  offer ;  All  round  the 
fragrance  is  diffused.  Complete  and  brilliant  is  the 
sacrificial  service ;  Grandly  come  our  ancestors. 
They  will  reward  (their  descendant)  with  great 
blessing,     Long  life,  years  without  end. 

Ode  7.     The  Ph£  Thien. 

PICTURES  OF  HUSBANDRY,  AND  SACRIFICES  CONNECTED  WITH  IT.       HAPPY 
UNDERSTANDING    BETWEEN    THE    PEOPLE    AND    THEIR   SUPERIORS. 

It  is  difficult  to  say  who  the  '  I '  in  the  piece  is,  but  evidently  he 
and  the  '  distant  descendant'  are  different  persons.  I  suppose 
he  may  have  been  an  officer,  who  had  charge  of  the  farms,  as  we 
may  call  them,  in  the  royal  domain. 

Bright  are  those  extensive  fields,  A  tenth  of 
whose  produce  is  annually  levied 3.     I  take  the  old 

erected  the  huts  in  which  they  lived,  while  they  were  actively 
engaged  in  their  agricultural  labours. 

1  Here,  as  in  so  many  other  places,  the  sovereign  Power,  ruling 
in  the  lots  of  men,  is  referred  to  as  Heaven. 

2  The  fat  was  taken  from  the  victim,  and  then  burnt  along 
with  fragrant  herbs,  so  as  to  form  a  cloud  of  incense.  On  the 
taking  of  the  '  blood/  it  is  only  said,  that  it  was  done  to  enable 
the  sacrificer  to  announce  that  a  proper  victim  had  been  slain. 

9  This  line,  literally,  is,  'Yearly  are  taken  ten  (and  a)  thousand  ;' 
meaning  the  produce  of  ten  acres  in  every  hundred,  and  of  a 
thousand  in  every  ten  thousand. 


ODE  7.         THE    MINOR    ODES    OF    THE    KINGDOM.  371 

stores,  And  with  them  feed  the  husbandmen.  From 
of  old  we  have  had  good  years  ;  And  now  I  go  to 
the  south-lying  acres,  Where  some  are  weeding, 
and  some  gather  the  earth  about  the  roots.  The 
millets  look  luxuriant ;  And  in  a  spacious  resting- 
place,  I  collect  and  encourage  the  men  of  greater 
promise  \ 

With  my  vessels  full  of  bright  millet,  And  my 
pure  victim-rams,  We  sacrificed  at  the  altar  of  the 
spirits  of  the  land,  and  at  (the  altars  of  those  of  the 
four)  quarters  2.  That  my  fields  are  in  such  good 
condition  Is  matter  of  joy  to  the  husbandmen. 
With  lutes,  and  with  drums  beating,  We  will  invoke 
the  Father  of  Husbandry3,  And  pray  for  sweet 
rain,  To  increase  the  produce  of  our  millets,  And 
to  bless  my  men  and  their  wives. 

The  distant  descendant  comes,  When  their  wives 
and  children  Are  bringing  food  to  those  (at  work) 
in  the  south-lying  acres.  The  surveyor  of  the 
fields  (also)  comes  and  is  glad.  He  takes  (of  the 
food)  on  the  left  and  the  right,    And  tastes  whether 


1  The  general  rule  was  that  the  sons  of  husbandmen  should 
continue  husbandmen ;  but  their  superior  might  select  those  among 
them  in  whom  he  saw  promising  abilities,  and  facilitate  their 
advancement  to  the  higher  grade  of  officers. 

2  The  sacrifices  here  mentioned  were  of  thanksgiving  at  the 
end  of  the  harvest  of  the  preceding  year.  The  one  was  to 
'  sovereign  Earth/  supposed  to  be  the  supreme  Power  in  correla- 
tion with  Heaven,  or,  possibly,  to  the  spirits  supposed  to  preside 
over  the  productive  energies  of  the  land ;  the  other  to  the  spirits 
presiding  over  the  four  quarters  of  the  sky,  and  ruling  all  atmo- 
spherical influences. 

3  This  was  the  sacrifice  that  had  been,  or  was  about  to  be, 
offered  in  spring  to  '  the  Father  of  Husbandry,' — probably  the 
ancient  mythical  Ti,  Shan  Nang. 

B  b   2 


372  THE   SHIII    KING.  decade  vi. 

it  be  good  or  not.  The  grain  is  well  cultivated,  all 
the  acres  over ;  Good  will  it  be  and  abundant.  The 
distant  descendant  has  no  displacency ;  The  hus- 
bandmen are  encouraged  to  diligence. 

The  crops  of  the  distant  descendant  Look  (thick) 
as  thatch,  and  (swelling)  like  a  carriage-cover.  His 
stacks  will  stand  like  islands  and  mounds.  He  will 
seek  for  thousands  of  granaries  ;  He  will  seek  for 
tens  of  thousands  of  carts.  The  millets,  the  paddy, 
and  the  maize  Will  awake  the  joy  of  the  husband- 
men ;  (And  they  will  say), '  May  he  be  rewarded 
with  great  happiness,  With  myriads  of  years,  life 
without  end ! ' 

Ode  8.     The  Ta  Thien. 

FURTHER  PICTURES  OF  HUSBANDRY,  AND  SACRIFICES  CONNECTED  WITH  IT. 

Large  are  the  fields,  and  various  is  the  work  to  be 
done.  Having  selected  the  seed,  and  looked  after 
the  implements,  So  that  all  preparations  have  been 
made  for  our  labour,  We  take  our  sharp  plough- 
shares, And  commence  on  the  south-lying  acres. 
We  sow  all  the  kinds  of  grain,  Which  grow  up 
straight  and  large,  So  that  the  wish  of  the  distant 
descendant  is  satisfied. 

It  ears  and  the  fruit  lies  soft  in  its  sheath ;  It 
hardens  and  is  of  good  quality ;  There  is  no  wolf  s- 
tail  grass  nor  darnel.  We  remove  the  insects  that 
eat  the  heart  and  the  leaf,  And  those  that  eat  the 
roots  and  the  joints,  So  that  they  shall  not  hurt 
the  young  plants  of  our  fields.  May  the  spirit,  the 
Father  of  Husbandry  l,  Lay  hold  of  them,  and  put 
them  in  the  blazing  fire! 

1  The  ancient  Shan  Nang,  as  in  the  preceding  ode. 


ODE  8.  THE    MINOR    ODES    OF  THE   KINGDOM.  373 

The  clouds  form  in  dense  masses,  And  the  rain 
comes  down  slowly.  May  it  first  rain  on  our  public 
fields  *,  And  then  come  to  our  private  * !  Yonder 
shall  be  young  grain  unreaped,  And  here  some 
bundles  ungathered  ;  Yonder  shall  be  handfuls  left 
on  the  ground,  And  here  ears  untouched : — For 
the  benefit  of  the  widow 2. 

The  distant  descendant  will  come,  When  their 
wives  and  children  Are  bringing  food  to  those 
(at  work)  on  the  south-lying  acres.  The  surveyor 
of  the  fields  (also)  will  come  and  be  glad.  They 
will  come  and  offer  pure  sacrifices  to  (the  spirits 
of  the  four)  quarters,  With  their  victims  red  and 
black  3,  With  their  preparations  of  millet : — Thus 
offering,  thus  sacrificing,  Thus  increasing  our  bright 
happiness. 

The  Seventh  Decade,  or  that  of  Sang  Hu. 
Ode  1,  Stanza  1.     The  Sang  Ht). 

THE    KING,    ENTERTAINING    THE    CHIEF    AMONG    THE    FEUDAL    PRINCES, 
EXPRESSES  HIS  ADMIRATION  OF  THEM,  AND  GOOD  WISHES  FOR  THEM. 

They  flit  about,   the   greenbeaks 4,     With    their 

1  These  are  two  famous  lines,  continually  quoted  as  showing  the 
loyal  attachment  of  the  people  to  their  superiors  in  those  ancient 
times. 

2  Compare  the  legislation  of  Moses,  in  connexion  with  the  har- 
vest, for  the  benefit  of  the  poor,  in  Deuteronomy  xxiv.  19-22. 

3  They  would  not  sacrifice  to  these  spirits  all  at  once,  or  all 
in  one  place,  but  in  the  several  quarters  as  they  went  along  on 
their  progress  through  the  domain.  For  each  quarter  the  colour 
of  the  victim  was  different.  A  red  victim  was  offered  to  the  spirit 
of  the  south,  and  a  black  to  that  of  the  north. 

4  The  greenbeaks  appeared  in  the  second  ode  of  the  fifth 
decade.     The  bird  had  many  names,  and  a  beautiful  plumage, 


374  THE    SHIH    KING-  DECADE  VII. 

variegated   wings.      To    be    rejoiced    in   are   these 
princes !    May  they  receive  the  blessing  of  Heaven a ! 


Ode  6,  Stanzas  1  and  2.     The  Pin  kiu  khv  yen. 

AGAINST  DRUNKENNESS.  DRINKING  ACCORDING  TO  RULE  AT  ARCHERY 
CONTESTS  AND  THE  SEASONAL  SACRIFICES,  AND  DRINKING  TO 
EXCESS. 

There  are  good  grounds  for  referring  the  authorship  of  this  piece 
to  duke  Wu  of  Wei  (b.  c.  812  to  758),  who  played  an  important 
part  in  the  kingdom,  during  the  affairs  which  terminated  in 
the  death  of  king  Yu,  and  the  removal  of  the  capital  from 
Hao  to  Lo.  The  piece,  we  may  suppose,  is  descriptive  of 
things  as  they  were  at  the  court  of  king  Yu. 

When  the  guests  first  approach  the  mats  2,  They 
take  their  places  on  the  left  and  the  right  in  an 
orderly  manner.  The  dishes  of  bamboo  and  wood 
are  arranged  in  rows,  With  the  sauces  and  kernels 
displayed  in  them.  The  spirits  are  mild  and  good, 
And  they  drink,  all  equally  reverent.  The  bells  and 
drums  are  properly  arranged3,  And  they  raise  their 
pledge-cups  with  order  and  ease 4.    (Then)  the  great 

made  use  of  here  to  compliment  the  princes  on  the  elegance  of 
their  manners,  and  perhaps  also  the  splendour  of  their  equipages. 
The  bird  is  here  called  the  'mulberry  Hu/  because  it  appeared 
when  the  mulberry  tree  was  coming  into  leaf. 

1  This  line  is  to  be  understood,  with  Kix  Hsf,  as  a  prayer  of 
the  king  to  Heaven  for  his  lords. 

2  The  mats  were  spread  on  the  floor,  and  also  the  viands  of  the 
feast.     Chairs  and  tables  were  not  used  in  that  early  time. 

3  The  archery  took  place  in  the  open  court,  beneath  the  hall  or 
raised  apartment,  where  the  entertainment  was  given.  Near  the 
steps  leading  up  to  the  hall  was  the  regular  place  for  the  bells  and 
drums,  but  it  was  necessary  now  to  remove  them  more  on  one  side, 
to  leave  the  ground  clear  for  the  archers. 

4  The  host  first  presented  a  cup  to  the  guest,  which  the  latter 
drank,  and  then  he  returned  a  cup  to  the  host.     After  this  pre* 


ODE  6.         THE    MINOR    ODES    OF    THE    KINGDOM.  375 

target  is  set  up ;  The  bows  and  arrows  are  made 
ready  for  the  shooting.  The  archers  are  arranged 
in  classes ;  '  Show  your  skill  in  shooting/  (it  is  said 
by  one).  '  I  shall  hit  that  mark '  (is  the  response), 
'  And  pray  you  to  drink  the  cup  V 

The  dancers  move  with  their  flutes  to  the  notes 
of  the  organ  and  drum,  While  all  the  instruments 
perform  in  harmony.  All  this  is  done  to  please 
the  meritorious  ancestors,  Along  with  the  observ- 
ance of  all  ceremonies.  When  all  the  ceremonies 
have  been  fully  performed,  Grandly  and  fully, 
(The  personators  of  the  dead  say),  'We  confer  on 
you  great  blessings,  And  may  your  descendants 
also  be  happy ! '  These  are  happy  and  delighted, 
And  each  of  them  exerts  his  ability.  A  guest2 
draws  the  spirits  ;  An  attendant  enters  again  with 
a  cup,  And  fills  it, — the  cup  of  rest2.  Thus  are 
performed  your  seasonal  ceremonies  3. 

liminary  ceremony,  the  company  all  drank  to  one  another, — *  took 
up  their  cups/  as  it  is  here  expressed. 

1  Each  defeated  archer  was  obliged  to  drink  a  large  cup  of 
spirits  as  a  penalty. 

2  This  guest  was,  it  is  supposed,  the  eldest  of  all  the  scions  of 
the  royal  House  present  on  the  occasion.  At  this  point,  he  pre- 
sented a  cup  to  the  chief  among  the  personators  of  the  ancestors, 
and  received  one  in  return.  He  then  proceeded  to  draw  more 
spirits  from  one  of  the  vases  of  supply,  and  an  attendant  came  in 
and  filled  other  cups, — we  may  suppose  for  all  the  other  person- 
ators. This  was  called  'the  cup  of  repose  or  comfort;'  and  the 
sacrifice  was  thus  concluded, — in  all  sobriety  and  decency. 

3  The  three  stanzas  that  follow  this,  graphically  descriptive  of  the 
drunken  revel,  are  said  to  belong  to  the  feast  of  the  royal  relatives 
that  followed  the  conclusion  of  the  sacrificial  service,  and  is  called 
'  the  second  blessing '  in  the  sixth  ode  of  the  preceding  decade. 
This  opinion  probably  is  correct ;  but  as  the  piece  does  not  itself 
say  so,  and  because  of  the  absence  from  the  text  of  religious  senti- 
ments, I  have  not  given  the  stanzas  here. 


37^  THE    SHIH   KING.  DECADE  viu. 

The    Eighth    Decade,   or  that    of    Po   Hw&. 
Ode  5,  Stanzas  1  and  2.     The  Po  Hwa. 

THE    QUEEN    OF    KING    YU    COMPLAINS    OF    BEING    DEGRADED    AND 
FORSAKEN. 

The  fibres  from  the  white-flowered  rush  Are 
bound  with  the  white  grass \  This  mans  sending 
me  away  makes  me  dwell  solitary. 

The  light  and  brilliant  clouds  Bedew  the  rush 
and  the  grass  2.  The  way  of  Heaven  is  hard  and 
difficult3; — This  man  does  not  conform  (to  good 
principle). 

1  The  stalks  of  the  rush  were  tied  with  the  grass  in  bundles,  in 
order  to  be  steeped ; — an  operation  which  ladies  in  those  days  might 
be  supposed  to  be  familiar  with.  The  two  lines  suggest  the  idea 
of  the  close  connexion  between  the  two  plants,  and  the  necessa- 
riness  of  the  one  to  the  other; — as  it  should  be  between  husband 
and  wife. 

2  The  clouds  bestowed  their  dewy  influence  on  the  plants,  while 
her  husband  neglected  the  speaker. 

3  'The  way  of  Heaven'  is  equivalent  to  our  'The  course  of 
Providence/  The  lady's  words  are,  literally, '  The  steps  of  Heaven/ 
She  makes  but  a  feeble  wail ;  but  in  Chinese  opinion  discharges 
thereby,  all  the  better,  the  duty  of  a  wife. 


THE  MAJOR  ODES  OF  THE  KINGDOM. 

Pieces  and  Stanzas  illustrating  the  Religious 
Views  and  Practices  of  the  Writers  and 
their  Times. 

The  First  Decade,  or  that  of  Wan  Wang. 
Ode  1.     The  Wan  Wang. 

CELEBRATING  KING  WAN,  DEAD  AND  ALIVE,  AS  THE  FOUNDER  OF  THE 
DYNASTY  OF  A^U,  SHOWING  HOW  HIS  VIRTUES  DREW  TO  HIM  THE 
FAVOURING  REGARD  OF  HEAVEN  OR  GOD,  AND  MADE  HIM  A  BRIGHT 
PATTERN    TO    HIS    DESCENDANTS   AND    THEIR    MINISTERS. 

The  composition  of  this  and  the  other  pieces  of  this  decade  is 
attributed  to  the  duke  of  ^au,  king  Wans  son,  and  was  intended 
by  him  for  the  benefit  of  his  nephew,  the  young  king  Khaxig. 
Wan,  it  must  be  borne  in  mind,  was  never  actually  king  of 
China.  He  laid  the  foundations  of  the  kingly  power,  which  was 
established  by  his  son  king  Wu,  and  consolidated  by  the  duke 
of  K&u.  The  title  of  king  was  given  to  him  and  to  others  by 
the  duke,  according  to  the  view  of  filial  piety,  that  has  been 
referred  to  on  p.  299. 

King  Wan  is  on  high.  Oh  !  bright  is  he  in 
heaven.  Although  A"au  was  an  old  country,  The 
(favouring)  appointment  lighted  on  it  recently  \ 
Illustrious    was    the    House    of    A"&u,      And    the 

1  The  family  of  ^au,  according  to  its  traditions,  was  very  ancient, 
but  it  did  not  occupy  the  territory  of  Aau,  from  which  it  subse- 
quently took  its  name,  till  b.  c.  1326;  and  it  was  not  till  the  time 
of  Wan  (b.c  1231  to  1135)  that  the  divine  purpose  concerning 
its  supremacy  in  the  kingdom  was  fully  manifested. 


378  THE    SHIH    KING.  DECADE  I. 

appointment  of  God  came  at  the  proper  season. 
King  Wan  ascends  and  descends  On  the  left  and 
the  right  of  God  \ 

Full  of  earnest  activity  was  king  Wan,  And  his 
fame  is  without  end.  The  gifts  (of  God)  to  A^au 
Extend  to  the  descendants  of  king  Wan,  In  the 
direct  line  and  the  collateral  branches  for  a  hundred 
generations2.  All  the  officers  ofiTau  Shall  (also) 
be  illustrious  from  age  to  age. 

They  shall  be  illustrious  from  age  to  age,  Zeal- 
ously and  reverently  pursuing  their  plans.  Admir- 
able are  the  many  officers,  Born  in  this  royal 
kingdom.  The  royal  kingdom  is  able  to  produce 
them,  The  supporters  of  (the  House  of)  Afau. 
Numerous  is  the  array  of  officers,  And  by  them 
king  Wan  enjoys  his  repose. 

Profound  was  king  Wan  ;  Oh  !  continuous  and 
bright  was  his  feeling  of  reverence.  Great  is  the 
appointment  of  Heaven  !  There  were  the  descend- 
ants of  (the  sovereigns  of)  Shang3 — The  descendants 
of  the  sovereigns  of  Shang    Were  in  number  more 


1  According  to  Kt  Hsi,  the  first  and  last  two  lines  of  this 
stanza  are  to  be  taken  of  the  spirit  of  Wan  in  heaven.  Attempts 
have  been  made  to  explain  them  otherwise,  or  rather  to  explain 
them  away.  But  language  could  not  more  expressly  intimate  the 
existence  of  a  supreme  personal  God,  and  the  continued  existence 
of  the  human  spirit. 

2  The  text,  literally,  is,  'The  root  and  the  branches:'  the  root 
(and  stem)  denoting  the  eldest  sons,  by  the  recognised  queen,  suc- 
ceeding to  the  throne ;  and  the  branches,  the  other  sons  by  the 
queen  and  concubines.  The  former  would  grow  up  directly  from 
the  root ;  and  the  latter,  the  chief  nobles  of  the  kingdom,  would 
constitute  the  branches  of  the  great  Kin  tree. 

8  The  Shang  or  Yin  dynasty  of  kings  superseded  by  AT&u. 


ODE  i.         THE   MAJOR   ODES    OF    THE   KINGDOM.  379 

than  hundreds  of  thousands.     But  when  God  gave 
the  command,    They  became  subject  to  Aa,u. 

They  became  subject  to  isfau,  (For)  the  appoint- 
ment of  Heaven  is  not  unchangeable.  The  officers 
of  Yin,  admirable  and  alert,  Assist  at  the  liba- 
tions in  our  capital  \  They  assist  at  those 
libations,  Always  wearing  the  hatchet-figures  on 
their  lower  garments  and  their  peculiar  cap 2. 
O  ye  loyal  ministers  of  the  king,  Ever  think 
of  your  ancestor! 

Ever  think  of  your  ancestor,  Cultivating  your 
virtue,  Always  seeking  to  accord  with  the  will 
(of  Heaven): — So  shall  you  be  seeking  for  much 
happiness,  Before  Yin  lost  the  multitudes,  (Its 
kings)  were  the  correlates  of  God  3.  Look  to  Yin 
as  a  beacon ;  The  great  appointment  is  not  easily 
preserved. 

The  appointment  is  not  easily  (preserved)  : — Do 
not  cause  your  own  extinction.  Display  and  make 
bright  your  righteousness  and  fame,  And  look 
at  (the  fate  of)  Yin  in  the  light  of  Heaven.  The 
doings  of  high  Heaven     Have  neither  sound  nor 


1  These  officers  of  Yin  would  be  the  descendants  of  the  Yin 
kings  and  of  their  principal  nobles,  scions  likewise  of  the  Yin  stock. 
They  would  assist,  at  the  court  of  Zau,  at  the  services  in  the  an- 
cestral temple,  which  began  with  a  libation  of  fragrant  spirits  to 
bring  down  the  spirits  of  the  departed. 

2  These,  differing  from  the  dress  worn  by  the  representatives 
of  the  ruling  House,  were  still  worn  by  the  officers  of  Yin  or  Shang, 
by  way  of  honour,  and  also  by  way  of  warning. 

3  There  was  God  in  heaven  hating  none,  desiring  the  good  of 
all  the  people ;  there  were  the  sovereigns  on  earth,  God's  vicegerents, 
maintained  by  him  so  long  as  they  carried  out  in  their  government 
his  purpose  of  good. 


380  THE    SHIH    KING.  DECADE  r. 

smell 1.     Take  your  pattern  from  king  Wan,    And 
the  myriad  regions  will  repose  confidence  in  you. 

Ode  2.     The  Ta  Ming. 

HOW  THE  APPOINTMENT  OF  HEAVEN  OR  GOD  CAME  FROM  HIS  FATHER 
TO  KING  WAN,  AND  DESCENDED  TO  HIS  SON,  KING  WI>,  WHO  OVER- 
THREW THE  DYNASTY  OF  SHANG  BY  HIS  VICTORY  AT  MU  ;  CELE- 
BRATING  ALSO    THE    MOTHER   AND    WIFE    OF    KING    WAN. 

The  illustration  of  illustrious  (virtue)  is  required 
below,  And  the  dread  majesty  is  on  high2.  Heaven 
is  not  readily  to  be  relied  on ;  It  is  not  easy  to  be 
king.  Yin's  rightful  heir  to  the  heavenly  seat  Was 
not  permitted  to  possess  the  kingdom. 

Zan,  the  second  of  the  princesses  ofiTih3,  From 
(the  domain  of)  Yin-shang,  Came  to  be  married 
to  (the  prince  of)  K&w,    And  became  his  wife  in  his 

1  These  two  lines  are  quoted  in  the  last  paragraph  of  the 
Doctrine  of  the  Mean,  as  representing  the  ideal  of  perfect  virtue. 
They  are  indicative  of  Power,  operating  silently,  and  not  to  be 
perceived  by  the  senses,  but  resistless  in  its  operations. 

2  l  The  first  two  lines/  says  the  commentator  Yen  3^an,  <  con- 
tain a  general  sentiment,  expressing  the  principle  that  governs  the 
relation  between  Heaven  and  men.  According  to  line  1,  the  good 
or  evil  of  a  ruler  cannot  be  concealed ;  according  to  2,  Heaven,  in 
giving  its  favour  or  taking  it  away,  acts  with  strict  decision.  When 
below  there  is  the  illustrious  illustration  (of  virtue),  that  reaches 
up  on  high.  When  above  there  is  the  awful  majesty,  that  exer- 
cises a  survey  below.  The  relation  between  Heaven  and  men 
ought  to  excite  our  awe/ 

3  The  state  of  ^ih  must  have  been  somewhere  in  the  royal  domain 
of  Yin.  Its  lords  had  the  surname  of  Zan,  and  the  second  daughter 
of  the  House  became  the  wife  of  Ki  of  Zau.  She  is  called  in  the 
eighth  line  Thai-zan,  by  which  name  she  is  still  famous  in  China. 
1  She  commenced/  it  is  said,  '  the  instruction  of  her  child  when  he 
was  still  in  her  womb,  looking  on  no  improper  sight,  listening  to 
no  licentious  sound,  uttering  no  word  of  pride.' 


ODE  2.  THE    MAJOR   ODES    OF    THE    KINGDOM.  38 1 

capital.  Both  she  and  king  Ki  Were  entirely 
virtuous.  (Then)  Thai-^an  became  pregnant,  And 
gave  birth  to  our  king  Wan. 

This  king  Wan,  Watchfully  and  reverently,  With 
entire  intelligence  served  God,  And  so  secured  the 
great  blessing.  His  virtue  was  without  deflection  ; 
And  in  consequence  he  received  (the  allegiance  of) 
the  states  from  all  quarters. 

Heaven  surveyed  this  lower  world;  And  its 
appointment  lighted  (on  king  Wan).  In  his  early 
years,  It  made  for  him  a  mate1; — On  the  north 
of  the  Hsii,  On  the  banks  of  the  Wei.  When 
king  Wan  would  marry,  There  was  the  lady  in 
a  large  state  2. 

In  a  large  state  was  the  lady,  Like  a  fair 
denizen  of  heaven.  The  ceremonies  determined 
the  auspiciousness  (of  the  union)  3,  And  in  person 
he  met  her  on  the  Wei.  Over  it  he  made  a 
bridge  of  boats  ;  The  glory  (of  the  occasion)  was 
illustrious. 

The  favouring  appointment  was  from  Heaven, 
Giving  the  throne  to  our  king  Wan,  In  the  capital 
of  Aau.  The  lady-successor  was  from  Hsin,  Its 
eldest  daughter,  who  came  to  marry  him.  She  was 
blessed  to  give  birth  to  king  Wti,  Who  was  pre- 
served, and  helped,  and  received  (also)  the  appoint- 


1  Heaven  is  here  represented  as  arranging  far  the  fulfilment  of 
its  purposes  beforehand. 

2  The  name  of  the  state  was  Hsin,  and  it  must  have  been  near 
the  Hsia  and  the  Wei,  somewhere  in  the  south-east  of  the  present 
Shen-hsi. 

3  '  The  ceremonies  '  would  be  various  ;  first  of  all,  divination  by 
means  of  the  tortoise-shell. 


382  THE   SHIH    KING. 


DECADE  I. 


ment,  And  in  accordance  with  it  smote  the  great 
Shang. 

The  troops  of  Yin-shang  Were  collected  like  a 
forest,  And  marshalled  in  the  wilderness  of  Mu. 
We  rose  (to  the  crisis) ;  '  God  is  with  you/  (said 
Shang-fu  to  the  king),  '  Have  no  doubts  in  your 
heart  V 

The  wilderness  of  Mu  spread  out  extensive ; 
Bright  shone  the  chariots  of  sandal ;  The  teams 
of  bays,  black-maned  and  white-bellied,  galloped 
along;  The  Grand-Master  Shang-fu  Was  like  an 
eagle  on  the  wing,  Assisting  king  Wu,  Who  at 
one  onset  smote  the  great  Shang.  That  mornings 
encounter  was  followed  by  a  clear,  bright  (day). 

Ode  3,     The  Mien. 

SMALL  BEGINNINGS  AND  SUBSEQUENT  GROWTH  OF  THE  HOUSE  OF  KAV 
IN  Kkv.  ITS  REMOVAL  FROM  PIN  UNDER  THAN-FU,  WITH  ITS  FIRST 
SETTLEMENT  IN  iTAU,  WITH  THE  PLACE  THEN  GIVEN  TO  THE  BUILDING 
OF  THE  ANCESTRAL  TEMPLE,  AND  THE  ALTAR  TO  THE  SPIRITS  OF  THE 
LAND.       CONSOLIDATION  OF  ITS  FORTUNES  BY  KING  WAN. 

'  The  ancient  duke  Than-fu '  was  the  grandfather  of  king  Wan, 
and  was  canonized  by  the  duke  of  JSKlu  as  'king  Thai.'  As 
mentioned  in  a  note  on  p.  316,  he  was  the  first  of  his  family  to 
settle  in  JST&u,  removing  there  from  Pin,  the  site  of  their  earlier 
settlement,  '  the  country  about  the  KhU  and  the  KhV 

In  long  trains  ever  increasing  grow  the  gourds  2. 
When  (our)  people  first  sprang,  From  the  country 
about  the  Kku  and  the  Khi 3,     The  ancient  duke 

1  See  the  account  of  the  battle  of  Mu  in  the  third  Book  of  the 
fifth  Part  of  the  Shu.  Shang-fu  was  one  of  Wu's  principal  leaders 
and  counsellors,  his  '  Grand-Master  Shang-fu '  in  the  next  stanza. 

2  As  a  gourd  grows  and  extends,  with  a  vast  development  of  its 
tendrils  and  leaves,  so  had  the  House  of  K&xx.  increased. 

8  These  were  two  rivers  in  the  territory  of  Pin,  which  name  still 


ODE  3.  THE    MAJOR    ODES    OF    THE    KINGDOM.  383 

Than-fu     Made  for  them  kiln-like  huts  and  caves, 
Ere  they  had  yet  any  houses  \ 

The  ancient  duke  Than-fft  Came  in  the  morning, 
galloping  his  horses,  Along  the  banks  of  the  western 
rivers,  To  the  foot  of  mount  Khi 2 ;  And  there  he 
and  the  lady  Kiang 3  Came  and  together  looked 
out  for  a  site. 

The  plain  of  Ka.u  looked  beautiful  and  rich, 
With  its  violets,  and  sowthistles  (sweet)  as  dump- 
lings. There  he  began  by  consulting  (with  his 
followers) ;  There  he  singed  the  tortoise-shell,  (and 
divined).  The  responses  were  there  to  stay  and 
then  ;     And  they  proceeded  there  to  build  4. 

He  encouraged  the  people,  and  settled  them ; 
Here  on  the  left,  there  on  the  right.  He  divided 
the  ground,  and  subdivided  it;  He  dug  the  ditches; 
he  defined  the  acres.  From  the  east  to  the  west, 
There  was  nothing  which  he  did  not  take  in  hand 5. 

remains  in  the  small  department  of  Pin  jSau,  in  Shen-hsi.     The 
Khii  flows  into  the  Lo,  and  the  Kh\  into  the  Wei. 

1  According  to  this  ode  then,  up  to  the  time  of  Than-fu,  the 
R§m  people  had  only  had  the  dwellings  here  described ;  but  this 
is  not  easily  reconciled  with  other  accounts,  or  even  with  other 
stanzas  of  this  piece. 

2  See  a  graphic  account  of  the  circumstances  in  which  this 
migration  took  place,  in  the  fifteenth  chapter  of  the  second  Part 
of  the  first  Book  of  Mencius,  very  much  to  the  honour  of  the 
ancient  duke. 

3  This  lady  is  known  as  Thai-/£iang,  the  worthy  predecessor  of 
Thai-zan. 

4  This  stanza  has  reference  to  the  choice — by  council  and 
divination — of  a  site  for  what  should  be  the  chief  town  of  the 
new  settlement. 

6  This  stanza  describes  the  general  arrangements  for  the 
occupancy  and  cultivation  of  the  plain  of  iTau,  and  the  distribution 
of  the  people  over  it. 


384  THE    SHIH    KING.  DECADE  I. 

He  called  his  Superintendent  of  Works ;  He 
called  his  Minister  of  Instruction ;  And  charged 
them  with  the  rearing  of  the  houses.  With  the 
line  they  made  everything  straight;  They  bound 
the  frame-boards  tight,  so  that  they  should  rise 
regularly :  Uprose  the  ancestral  temple  in  its 
solemn  grandeur1. 

Crowds  brought  the  earth  in  baskets ;  They 
threw  it  with  shouts  into  the  frames ;  They  beat 
it  with  responsive  blows.  They  pared  the  walls 
repeatedly,  till  they  sounded  strong.  Five  thou- 
sand cubits  of  them  arose  together,  So  that  the 
roll  of  the  great  drums  did  not  overpower  (the 
noise  of  the  builders)2. 

They  reared  the  outer  gate  (of  the  palace),  Which 
rose  in  lofty  state.  They  set  up  the  gate  of  au- 
dience, Which  rose  severe  and  exact.  They  reared 
the  great  altar  to  the  spirits  of  the  land,  From 
which  all  great  movements  should  proceed 3. 

1  This  stanza  describes  the  preparations  and  processes  for 
erecting  the  buildings  of  the  new  city.  The  whole  took  place 
under  the  direction  of  two  officers,  in  whom  we  have  the  germ 
probably  of  the  Six  Heads  of  the  Boards  or  Departments,  whose 
functions  are  described  in  the  Shu  and  the  Official  Book  of  ^au. 
The  materials  of  the  buildings  were  earth  and  lime  pounded 
together  in  frames,  as  is  still  to  be  seen  in  many  parts  of  the 
country.  The  first  great  building  taken  in  hand  was  the  ancestral 
temple.  Than-fu  would  make  a  home  for  the  spirits  of  his  fathers, 
before  he  made  one  for  himself.  However  imperfectly  directed, 
the  religious  feeling  asserted  the  supremacy  which  it  ought  to 
possess. 

2  The  bustle  and  order  of  the  building  all  over  the  city  is  here 
graphically  set  forth. 

3  Than-fu  was  now  at  leisure  to  build  the  palace  for  himself, 
which  appears  to  have  been  not  a  very  large  building,  though  the 
Chinese  names  of  its  gates  are  those  belonging  to  the  two  which 


ODE  3.  THE    MAJOR    ODES    OF    THE   KINGDOM.  385 

Thus  though  he  could  not  prevent  the  rage 
of  his  foes  \  He  did  not  let  fall  his  own  fame. 
The  oaks  and  the  buckthorns  were  (gradually) 
thinned,  And  roads  for  travellers  were  opened. 
The  hordes  of  the  Khwan  disappeared,  Startled 
and  panting. 

(The  chiefs  of)  Yu  and  Zui 2  were  brought  to  an 
agreement  By  king  Wan's  stimulating  their  natural 
virtue.  Then,  I  may  say,  some  came  to  him,  pre- 
viously not  knowing  him ;  Some,  drawn  the  last 
by  the  first ;  Some,  drawn  by  his  rapid  suc- 
cesses ;  And  some  by  his  defence  (of  the  weak) 
from  insult. 


were  peculiar  to  the  palaces  of  the  kings  of  -ATau  in  the  subsequent 
times  of  the  dynasty.  Outside  the  palace  were  the  altars  appro- 
priate to  the  spirits  of  the  four  quarters  of  the  land,  the  '  great ' 
or  royal  altar  being  peculiar  to  the  kings,  though  the  one  built  by 
Than-fu  is  here  so  named.  All  great  undertakings,  and  such  as 
required  the  co-operation  of  all  the  people,  were  preceded  by  a 
solemn  sacrifice  at  this  altar. 

1  Referring  to  Than-fu's  relations  with  the  wild  hordes,  described 
by  Mencius,  and  which  obliged  him  to  leave  Pin.  As  the  new 
settlement  in  ^au  grew,  they  did  not  dare  to  trouble  it. 

2  The  poet  passes  on  here  to  the  time  of  king  Wan.  The  story  of 
the  chiefs  of  Yti  and  Zui  (two  states  on  the  east  of  the  Ho)  is  this: — 
They  had  a  quarrel  about  a  strip  of  territory,  to  which  each  of  them 
laid  claim.  Going  to  lay  their  dispute  before  the  lord  of  .ffau,  as  soon 
as  they  entered  his  territory,  they  saw  the  ploughers  readily  yielding 
the  furrow,  and  travellers  yielding  the  path,  while  men  and  women 
avoided  one  another  on  the  road,  and  old  people  had  no  burdens 
to  carry.  At  his  court,  they  beheld  the  officers  of  each  inferior 
grade  giving  place  to  those  above  them.  They  became  ashamed 
of  their  own  quarrel,  agreed  to  let  the  disputed  ground  be  an  open 
territory,  and  withdrew  without  presuming  to  appear  before  Wan. 
When  this  affair  was  noised  abroad,  more  than  forty  states,  it 
is  said,  tendered  their  submission  to  K&u. 

[1]  c  c 


386  THE    SHIH    KING.  DECADE  I. 


Ode  4,  Stanzas  1  and  2.     The  Yi  Pho. 

IN  PRAISE  OF  KING  WXn,  CELEBRATING  HIS  INFLUENCE,  DIGNITY   IN   THE 
TEMPLE  SERVICES,  ACTIVITY,  AND  CAPACITY  TO  RULE. 

Abundant  is  the  growth  of  the  buckthorn  and 
shrubby  trees,  Supplying  firewood ;  yea,  stores  of 
it  \  Elegant  and  dignified  was  our  prince  and  king  ; 
On  the  left  and  the  right  they  hastened  to  him. 

Elegant  and  dignified  was  onr  prince  and  king ; 
On  his  left  and  his  right  they  bore  their  half- 
mace  (libation-cups)2: — They  bore  them  with  solemn 
gravity,     As  beseemed  such  eminent  officers. 

Ode  5.     The  Han  Lfj. 

IN  PRAISE  OF  THE  VIRTUE  OF  KING  WXN,  BLESSED  BY  HIS  ANCESTORS, 
AND  RAISED  TO  THE  HIGHEST  DIGNITY  WITHOUT  SEEKING  OF  HIS 
OWN. 

Look  at  the  foot  of  the  Han3,  How  abundantly 
grow  the  hazel  and  arrow-thorn 4.  Easy  and  self- 
possessed  was  our  prince,  In  his  pursuit  of  dignity 
(still)  easy  and  self-possessed. 

Massive  is  that  libation-cup  of  jade,     With  the 

1  It  is  difficult  to  trace  the  connexion  between  these  allusive 
lines  and  the  rest  of  the  piece. 

2  Here  we  have  the  lord  of  A!au  in  his  ancestral  temple,  assisted 
by  his  ministers  or  great  officers  in  pouring  out  the  libations  to  the 
spirits  of  the  departed.  The  libation-cup  was  fitted  with  a  handle 
of  jade,  that  used  by  the  king  having  a  complete  kwei,  the  obelisk- 
like symbol  of  rank,  while  the  cups  used  by  a  minister  had  for  a 
handle  only  half  a  kwei. 

3  Where  mount  Han  was  cannot  now  be  determined. 

4  As  the  foot  of  the  hill  was  favourable  to  vegetable  growth, 
so  were  king  Wan's  natural  qualities  to  his  distinction  and 
advancement. 


ODE  6.  THE   MAJOR    ODES   OF    THE   KINGDOM.  387 

yellow  liquid  sparkling  in  it1.  Easy  and  self-pos- 
sessed was  our  prince,  The  fit  recipient  of  blessing 
and  dignity. 

The  hawk  flies  up  to  heaven,  The  fishes  leap 
in  the  deep 2.  Easy  and  self-possessed  was  our 
prince  : — Did  he  not  exert  an  influence  on  men  ? 

His  clear  spirits  were  in  the  vessels  ;  His  red 
bull  was  ready8; — To  offer,  to  sacrifice,  To  increase 
his  bright  happiness. 

Thick  grow  the  oaks  and  the  buckthorn,  Which 
the  people  use  for  fuel  4.  Easy  and  self-possessed 
was  our  prince,  Cheered  and  encouraged  by  the 
spirits  4. 

Luxuriant  are  the  dolichos  and  other  creepers, 
Clinging  to  the  branches  and  stems.  Easy  and  self- 
possessed  was  our  prince,  Seeking  for  happiness 
by  no  crooked  ways. 

Ode  6.    The  Sze  Aai. 

THE  VIRTUE  OF  WAN,  WITH  HIS  FILIAL  PIETY  AND  CONSTANT  REVERENCE, 
AND  THEIR  WONDERFUL  EFFECTS.  THE  EXCELLENT  CHARACTER  OF 
HIS  MOTHER  AND  WIFE. 

Pure  and  reverent  was  Thai  iTan 5,  The  mother 
of  king  Wan.     Loving  was  she  to  Aau  Kiang  6 ; — 

1  As  a  cup  of  such  quality  was  the  proper  receptacle  for  the 
yellow,  herb-flavoured  spirits,  so  was  the  character  of  Wan  such 
that  all  blessing  must  accrue  to  him. 

2  It  is  the  nature  of  the  hawk  to  fly  and  of  fishes  to  swim,  and  so 
there  went  out  an  influence  from  Wan  unconsciously  to  himself. 

3  Red,  we  have  seen,  was  the  proper  colour  for  victims  in  the 
ancestral  temple  of  iTau. 

*  As  it  was  natural  for  the  people  to  take  the  wood  and  use  it, 
so  it  was  natural  for  the  spirits  of  his  ancestors,  and  spiritual 
beings  generally,  to  bless  king  Wan. 

5  Thai  Zan  is  celebrated,  above,  in  the  second  ode. 

6  jffau  ^iang  is  '  the  lady  -ff'iang '  of  ode  3,  the  wife  of  Than-Hi  or 

C  C  2 


388  THE   SHIH    KING.  DECADE  I. 

A  wife  becoming  the  House  of  K&u.  Thai  Sze1 
inherited  her  excellent  fame,  And  from  her  came 
a  hundred  sons 2. 

He  conformed  to  the  example  of  his  ancestors, 
And  their  spirits  had  no  occasion  for  complaint. 
Their  spirits  had  no  occasion  for  dissatisfaction; 
And  his  example  acted  on  his  wife,  Extended  to 
his  brethren,  And  was  felt  by  all  the  clans  and 
states. 

Full  of  harmony  was  he  in  his  palace ;  Full  of 
reverence  in  the  ancestral  temple.  Unseen  (by 
men),  he  still  felt  that  he  was  under  inspection3: 
Unweariedly  he  maintained  his  virtue. 

Though  he  could  not  prevent  (some)  great  calami- 
ties, His  brightness  and  magnanimity  were  without 
stain.  Without  previous  instruction  he  did  what 
was  right ;  Without  admonition  he  went  on  (in  the 
path  of  goodness). 

So,  grown  up  men  became  virtuous  (through  him), 
And  young  men  made  (constant)  attainments.  (Our) 
ancient  prince  never  felt  weariness,  And  from  him 
were  the  fame  and  eminence  of  his  officers. 


king  Thai,  who  came  with  him  from  Pin.    She  is  here  called  ^au, 
as  having  married  the  lord  of  -£au. 

1  Thai  Sze,  the  wife  of  Wan,  we  are  told  in  ode  2,  was  from  the 
state  of  Hsin.  The  surname  Sze  shows  that  its  lords  must  have 
been  descended  from  the  Great  Yu. 

2  We  are  not  to  suppose  that  Thai  Sze  had  herself  a  hundred 
sons.  She  had  ten,  and  her  freedom  from  jealousy  so  encouraged 
the  fruitfulness  of  the  harem,  that  all  the  sons  born  in  it  are 
ascribed  to  her. 

3  Where  there  was  no  human  eye  to  observe  him,  Wan  still 
felt  that  he  was  open  to  the  observation  of  spiritual  beings. 


ODE  7.  THE    MAJOR    ODES    OF    THE    KINGDOM.  389 


Ode  7.     The  Hwang  t. 

SHOWING  THE  RISE  OF  THE  HOUSE  OF  ^TAU  TO  THE  SOVEREIGNTY  OF  THE 
KINGDOM  THROUGH  THE  FAVOUR  OF  GOD.  THE  ACHIEVEMENTS  OF 
KINGS   THAI    AND   K%    A.JD   ESPECIALLY    OF    KING   wXN. 

Great  is  God,  Beholding  this  lower  world  in 
majesty.  He  surveyed  the  four  quarters  (of  the 
kingdom),  Seeking  for  some  one  to  give  establish- 
ment to  the  people.  Those  two  earlier  dynasties  * 
Had  failed  to  satisfy  him  with  their  government; 
So,  throughout  the  various  states,  He  sought  and 
considered  For  one  on  whom  he  might  confer  the 
rule.  Hating  all  the  great  states,  He  turned  his 
kind  regards  on  the  west,  And  there  gave  a  settle- 
ment (to  king  Thdi). 

(King  Th&i)  raised  up  and  removed  The  dead 
trunks  and  the  fallen  trees.  He  dressed  and  regu- 
lated The  bushy  clumps  and  the  (tangled)  rows. 
He  opened  up  and  cleared  The  tamarisk  trees  and 
the  stave  trees.  He  hewed  and  thinned  The  moun- 
tain mulberry  trees.  God  having  brought  about 
the  removal  thither  of  this  intelligent  ruler,  The 
Kwan  hordes  fled  away2.  Heaven  had  raised  up 
a  helpmeet  for  him,  And  the  appointment  he  had 
received  was  made  sure. 

God  surveyed  the  hills,  Where  the  oaks  and  the 
buckthorn  were  thinned,  And  paths  made  through 
the  firs  and  cypresses.     God,  who  had  raised  the 

1  Those  of  Hsisi  and  Shang. 

2  The  same  as  '  the  hordes  of  the  Khwan '  in  ode  3.  Mr.  T.  W. 
Kingsmill  says  that  'Kwan'  here  should  be  'Chun/  and  charges 
the  transliteration  Kwan  with  error  (Journal  of  the  Royal  Asiatic 
Society  for  April,  1878).  He  had  not  consulted  his  dictionary  for 
the  proper  pronunciation  of  the  Chinese  character. 


39°  THE    SHIH    KING.  DECADE  I. 

state,  raised  up  a  proper  ruler1  for  it, — From  the 
time  of  Thcii-po  and  king  Ki  (this  was  done)  \ 
Now  this  king  Afi  In  his  heart  was  full  of  brotherly 
duty.  Full  of  duty  to  his  elder  brother,  He  gave 
himself  the  more  to  promote  the  prosperity  (of  the 
country),  And  secured  to  him  the  glory  (of  his  act)2. 
He  accepted  his  dignity  and  did  not  lose  it,  And 
(ere  long  his  family)  possessed  the  whole  kingdom. 

This  king  Ki  Was  gifted  by  God  with  the  power 
of  judgment,  So  that  the  fame  of  his  virtue  silently 
grew.  His  virtue  was  highly  intelligent, — Highly 
intelligent,  and  of  rare  discrimination ;  Able  to  lead, 
able  to  rule,  To  rule  over  this  great  country ; 
Rendering  a  cordial  submission,  effecting  a  cordial 
union  3.     When  (the  sway)  came  to  king  Wan,    His 

1  King  Wan  is  '  the  proper  ruler '  intended  here,  and  the  next 
line  intimates  that  this  was  determined  before  there  was  any 
likelihood  of  his  becoming  the  ruler  even  of  the  territory  of  iifau ; — 
another  instance  of  the  foreseeing  providence  ascribed  to  God. 
Thai-po  was  the  eldest  son  of  king  Thai,  and  king  K\  was, 
perhaps,  only  the  third.  The  succession  ought  to  have  come  to 
Thai-po;  but  he,  seeing  the  sage  virtues  of  ^T^ang  (afterwards 
king  Wan),  the  son  of  K\y  and  seeing  also  that  king  Thai  was 
anxious  that  this  boy  should  ultimately  become  ruler  of  iT&u, 
voluntarily  withdrew  from  ^Tau  altogether,  and  left  the  state  to 
K\  and  his  son.  See  the  remark  of  Confucius  on  Thai-po's 
conduct,  in  the  Analects,  VIII,  i. 

2  The  lines  from  six  to  ten  speak  of  king  K\  in  his  relation  to 
his  elder  brother.  He  accepted  Thai-po's  act  without  any  failure 
of  his  own  duty  to  him,  and  by  his  own  improvement  of  it,  made 
his  brother  more  glorious  through  it.  His  feeling  of  brotherly 
duty  was  simply  the  natural  instinct  of  his  heart.  Having  accepted 
the  act,  it  only  made  him  the  more  anxious  to  promote  the  good 
of  the  state,  and  thus  he  made  his  brother  more  glorious  by  show- 
ing what  advantages  accrued  from  his  resignation  and  withdrawal 
from  ,£au. 

3  This  line  refers  to  -5Ts  maintenance  of  his  own  loyal  duty 


ODE  7.  THE    MAJOR    ODES    OF    THE    KINGDOM.  39 1 

virtue  left  nothing  to  be  dissatisfied  with,  He  re- 
ceived the  blessing  of  God,  And  it  was  extended 
to  his  descendants. 

God  said  to  king  Wan x,  '  Be  not  like  those  who 
reject  this  and  cling  to  that ;  Be  not  like  those  who 
are  ruled  by  their  likings  and  desires;'  So  he  grandly 
ascended  before  others  to  the  height  (of  virtue).  The 
people  of  Mi 2  were  disobedient,  Daring  to  oppose 
our  great  country,  And  invaded  Yuan,  marching  to 
Kung3*  The  king  rose,  majestic  in  his  wrath  ;  He 
marshalled  his  troops,  To  stop  the  invading  foes  ; 
To  consolidate  the  prosperity  of  isfau  ;  To  meet 
the  expectations  of  all  under  heaven. 

He  remained  quietly  in  the  capital,  But  (his 
troops)  went  on  from  the  borders  of  Yuan.  They 
ascended  our  lofty  ridges,  And  (the  enemy)  arrayed 
no  forces  on  our  hills,  On  our  hills,  small  or  large, 
Nor  drank  at  our  springs,  Our  springs  or  our 
pools.  He  then  determined  the  finest  of  the  plains, 
And  settled  on  the  south  of  Kh¥,    On  the  banks  of 


to  the  dynasty  of  Shang,  and  his  making  all  the  states  under  his 
presidency  loyal  also. 

1  The  statement  that  '  God  spake  to  king  Wan/  repeated  in 
stanza  7,  vexes  the  Chinese  critics,  and  they  find  in  it  simply 
an  intimation  that  Wans  conduct  was  'in  accordance  with  the 
will  of  Heaven.'  I  am  not  prepared  to  object  to  that  view  of 
the  meaning ;  but  it  is  plain  that  the  writer,  in  giving  such  a  form 
to  his  meaning,  must  have  conceived  of  God  as  a  personal  Being, 
knowing  men's  hearts,  and  able  to  influence  them. 

2  Mi  or  Mi-hsu  was  a  state  in  the  present  ifing-ning  ^au,  of 
Phing-liang  department,  Kan-su. 

3  Yuan  was  a  state  adjacent  to  Mi,— the  present  King  Kiu, 
and  Kung  must  have  been  a  place  or  district  in  it. 

4  Wan,  it  appears,  made  now  a  small  change  in  the  site  of  his 
capital,  but  did  not  move  to  Fang,  where  he  finally  settled. 


392  THE    SHIH    KING.  DECADE  I. 

the  Wei,    The  centre  of  all  the  states,    The  resort 
of  the  lower  people. 

God  said  to  king  Wan,  '  I  am  pleased  with  your 
intelligent  virtue,  Not  loudly  proclaimed  nor  pour- 
trayed,  Without  extravagance  or  changeableness, 
Without  consciousness  of  effort  on  your  part,  In 
accordance  with  the  pattern  of  God/  God  said  to 
king  Wan,  '  Take  measures  against  the  country  of 
your  foes.  Along  with  your  brethren,  Get  ready 
your  scaling  ladders,  And  your  engines  of  onfall 
and  assault,    To  attack  the  walls  of  Kkxmg1' 

The  engines  of  onfall  and  assault  were  (at  first) 
gently  plied,  Against  the  walls  of  Kkung  high  and 
and  great ;  Captives  for  the  question  were  brought 
in,  one  after  another ;  The  left  ears  (of  the  slain) 
were  taken  leisurely  2.  He  had  sacrificed  to  God 
and  to  the  Father  of  War 3,   Thus  seeking  to  induce 

1  Khxxng  was  a  state,  in  the  present  district  of  Hu,  department 
Hsi-an,  Shen-hsi.  His  conquest  of  Khxrng  was  an  important 
event  in  the  history  of  king  Wan.  He  moved  his  capital  to  it, 
advancing  so  much  farther  towards  the  east,  nearer  to  the  domain 
of  Shang.  According  to  Sze-ma  .Oien  the  marquis  of  .Oung 
had  slandered  the  lord  of  K&u,  who  was  president  of  the  states 
of  the  west,  to  if&u-hsin,  the  king  of  Shang,  and  our  hero  was 
put  in  prison.  His  friends  succeeded  in  effecting  his  deliverance 
by  means  of  various  gifts  to  the  tyrant,  and  he  was  reinstated 
in  the  west  with  more  than  his  former  power.  Three  years  after- 
wards he  attacked  the  marquis  of  jOung. 

2  So  far  the  siege  was  prosecuted  slowly  and,  so  to  say,  tenderly, 
Wan  hoping  that  the  enemy  would  be  induced  to  surrender  with- 
out great  sacrifice  of  life. 

8  The  sacrifice  to  God  had  been  offered  in  Kin,  at  the  com- 
mencement of  the  expedition ;  that  to  the  Father  of  War,  on  the 
army's  arriving  at  the  borders  of  J£/mng.  We  can  hardly  tell  who 
is  intended  by  the  Father  of  War.  Kii  Hsi  and  others  would 
require  the  plural  '  Fathers,'  saying*  the  sacrifice  was  to  Hwang  Ti 
and  Kh\h  Yu,  who  are  found  engaged  in  hostilities  far  back  in  the 


ODE  9.  THE    MAJOR    ODES    OF    THE    KINGDOM.  393 

submission,  And  throughout  the  region  none  had 
dared  to  insult  him.  The  engines  of  onfall  and 
assault  were  (then)  vigorously  plied,  Against  the 
walls  of  A^ung  very  strong.  He  attacked  it,  and 
let  loose  all  his  forces;  He  extinguished  (its  sacri- 
fices) 1,  and  made  an  end  of  its  existence ;  And 
throughout  the  kingdom  none  dared  to  oppose  him. 

Ode  9.     The  Hsia  WO. 

IN  PRAISE  OF  KING  WU,  WALKING  IN  THE  WAYS  OF  HIS  FOREFATHERS, 
AND  BY  HIS  FILIAL  PIETY  SECURING  THE  THRONE  TO  HIMSELF  AND 
HIS  POSTERITY. 

Successors  tread  in  the  steps  (of  their  predecessors) 
in  our  K&u.  For  generations  there  had  been  wise 
kings  ;  The  three  sovereigns  were  in  heaven  2 ; 
And  king  (Wti)  was  their  worthy  successor  in  his 
capital 3. 

King  (Wu)  was  their  worthy  successor  in  his 
capital,  Rousing  himself  to  seek  for  the  hereditary 
virtue,    Always  striving  to  be  in  accordance  with  the 

mythical  period  of  Chinese  history.  But  Khih  Yu  appears  as  a 
rebel,  or  opposed  to  the  One  man  in  all  the  country  who  was  then 
fit  to  rule.  It  is  difficult  to  imagine  how  they  could  be  associated, 
and  sacrificed  to  together. 

1  The  extinction  of  its  sacrifices  was  the  final  act  in  the  extinc- 
tion of  a  state.  Any  members  of  its  ruling  House  who  might 
survive  could  no  longer  sacrifice  to  their  ancestors  as  having  been 
men  of  princely  dignity.  The  family  was  reduced  to  the  ranks 
of  the  people. 

2  '  The  three  sovereigns,'  or  '  wise  kings/  are  to  be  understood 
of  the  three  celebrated  in  ode  7, — Thai,  K\t  and  Wan.  We  are 
thus  obliged,  with  all  Chinese  scholars,  to  understand  this  ode 
of  king  Wu.  The  statement  that  '  the  three  kings  were  in  heaven' 
is  very  express. 

3  The  capital  here  is  Hao,  to  which  Wu  removed  in  b.  c.  n  34, 
the  year  after  his  father's  death.  It  was  on  the  east  of  the  river 
Fang,  and  only  about  eight  miles  from  Wan's  capital  of  Fang. 


394  THE    SHIH    KING.  DECADE  I. 

will  (of  Heaven) ;     And  thus  he  secured  the  con- 
fidence due  to  a  king. 

He  secured  the  confidence  due  to  a  king,  And 
became  the  pattern  of  all  below  him.  Ever  thinking 
how  to  be  filial,  His  filial  mind  was  the  model 
(which  he  supplied). 

Men  loved  him,  the  One  man,  And  responded 
(to  his  example)  with  a  docile  virtue.  Ever  thinking 
how  to  be  filial,  He  brilliantly  continued  the  doings 
(of  his  fathers). 

Brilliantly !  and  his  posterity,  Continuing  to  walk 
in  the  steps  of  their  forefathers,  For  myriads  of 
years,    Will  receive  the  blessing  of  Heaven. 

They  will  receive  the  blessing  of  Heaven,  And 
from  the  four  quarters  (of  the  kingdom)  will 
felicitations  come  to  them.  For  myriads  of  years 
Will  there  not  be  their  helpers  ? 

Ode  10.     The  Wan  Wang  yl>  Shang. 

THE  PRAISE  OF  KINGS  WAN  AND  w6  ! HOW  THE  FORMER  DISPLAYED  HIS 

MILITARY  PROWESS  ONLY  TO  SECURE  THE  TRANQUILLITY  OF  THE 
PEOPLE  ;  AND  HOW  THE  LATTER,  IN  ACCORDANCE  WITH  THE  RESULTS 
OF  DIVINATION,  ENTERED  IN  HIS  NEW  CAPITAL  OF  HAO,  INTO  THE 
SOVEREIGNTY  OF  THE  KINGDOM  WITH  THE  SINCERE  GOOD  WILL  OF 
ALL  THE  PEOPLE. 

King  Wan  is  famous ;  Yea,  he  is  very  famous. 
What  he  sought  was  the  repose  (of  the  people) ; 
What  he  saw  was  the  completion  (of  his  work).  A 
sovereign  true  was  king  Wan! 

King  Wan  received  the  appointment  (from  Hea- 
ven), And  achieved  his  martial  success.  Having 
overthrown  Kkung1  He  fixed  his  (capital)  city  in 
Fang 2.     A  sovereign  true  was  king  Wan ! 

1  As  related  in  ode  7. 

2  Fang  had,  probably,  been  the  capital  of  Khung,  and  Wan 


ODE  io.        THE    MAJOR    ODES    OF   THE    KINGDOM.  395 

He  repaired  the  walls  along  the  (old)  moat.  His 
establishing  himself  in  Fang  was  according  to  (the 
pattern  of  his  forefathers),  It  was  not  that  he  was 
in  haste  to  gratify  his  wishes  ; — It  was  to  show  the 
filial  duty  that  had  come  down  to  him.  A  sovereign 
true  was  the  royal  prince ! 

His  royal  merit  was  brightly  displayed  By  those 
walls  of  Fang.  There  were  collected  (the  sympathies 
of  the  people  of)  the  four  quarters,  Who  regarded 
the  royal  prince  as  their  protector.  A  sovereign 
true  was  the  royal  prince ! 

The  Fang-water  flowed  on  to  the  east  (of  the 
city),  Through  the  meritorious  labour  of  Yu.  There 
were  collected  (the  sympathies  of  the  people  of)  the 
four  quarters,  Who  would  have  the  great  king  as 
their  ruler.    A  sovereign  true  was  the  great  king 1 ! 

In  the  capital  of  Hao  he  built  his  hall  with  its 
circlet  of  water  2.  From  the  west  to  the  east,  From 
the  south  to  the  north,  There  was  not  a  thought 
but  did  him  homage.  A  sovereign  true  was  the 
great  king! 

He  examined  and  divined,  did  the  king,  About 
settling  in  the  capital  of  Hao.  The  tortoise-shell 
decided  the  site 3,  And  king  Wii  completed  the 
city.     A  sovereign  true  was  king  Wii  ! 

removed  to  it,  simply  making  the  necessary  repairs  and  alterations. 
This  explains  how  we  find  nothing  about  the  divinations  which 
should  have  preceded  so  important  a  step  as  the  founding  of 
a  new  capital. 

1  The  writer  has  passed  on  to  Wu,  who  did  actually  become 
king. 

2  See  on  the  third  of  the  Praise  Odes  of  Lu  in  Part  IV. 

3  Hao  was  built  by  Wu,  and  hence  we  have  the  account  of  his 
divining  about  the  site  and  the  undertaking. 


39^  THE    SHIH    KING.  DECADE  II. 

By  the  Fang-water  grows  the  white  millet * ; — 
Did  not  king  Wti  show  wisdom  in  his  employ- 
ment of  officers  ?  He  would  leave  his  plans  to  his 
descendants,  And  secure  comfort  and  support  to 
his  son.    A  sovereign  true  was  king  Wft ! 

The  Second  Decade,  or  that  of  Shang  Min. 
Ode  1.     The  Shang  Min. 

THE  LEGEND  OF  KAU-Kl  I — HIS  CONCEPTION  J  HIS  BIRTH ;  THE  PERILS 
OF  HIS  INFANCY ;  HIS  BOYISH  HABITS  OF  AGRICULTURE ;  HIS  SUBSE- 
QUENT METHODS  AND  TEACHING  OF  AGRICULTURE;  HIS  FOUNDING 
OF  CERTAIN  SACRIFICES  J  AND  THE  HONOURS  OF  SACRIFICE  PAID  TO 
HIM   BY   THE   HOUSE    OF   K&V. 

Of  Hau-^t  there  is  some  notice  on  the  tenth  ode  of  the  first 
decade  of  the  Sacrificial  Odes  of  Kin.  To  him  the  kings  of 
K&u  traced  their  lineage.  Of  Kizxig  Yuan,  his  mother,  our 
knowledge  is  very  scanty.  It  is  said  that  she  was  a  daughter 
of  the  House  of  Thai,  which  traced  its  lineage  up  to  Shan-nung 
in  prehistoric  times.  From  the  first  stanza  of  this  piece  it 
appears  that  she  was  married,  and  had  been  so  for  some  time 
without  having  any  child.  But  who  her  husband  was  it  is 
impossible  to  say  with  certainty.  As  the  K&u  surname  was  K\, 
he  must  have  been  one  of  the  descendants  of  Hwang  Tf. 

The  first  birth  of  (our)  people2  Was  from  A"iang 
Yuan.  How  did  she  give  birth  to  (our)  people  ? 
She  had  presented  a  pure  offering  and  sacrificed  3, 

1  '  The  white  millet/  a  valuable  species,  grown  near  the  Fang, 
suggests  to  the  writer  the  idea  of  all  the  men  of  ability  whom  Wu 
collected  around  him. 

2  Our  ' people'  is  of  course  the  people  of  -ffau.  The  whole 
piece  is  about  the  individual  from  whom  the  House  of  Kzxx  sprang, 
of  which  were  the  kings  of  the  dynasty  so  called. 

3  To  whom  iTiang  Yuan  sacrificed  and  prayed  we  are  not  told, 
but  I  receive  the  impression  that  it  was  to  God, — see  the  next 
stanza, — and  that  she  did  so  all  alone  with  the  special  object  which 
is  mentioned. 


ODE  i.  THE    MAJOR   ODES   OF    THE  KINGDOM.  397 

That  her  childlessness  might  be  taken  away.  She 
then  trod  on  a  toe-print  made  by  God,  and  was 
moved1,  In  the  large  place  where  she  rested.  She 
became  pregnant ;  she  dwelt  retired ;  She  gave 
birth  to,  and  nourished  (a  son),    Who  was  H4u-/£i. 

When  she  had  fulfilled  her  months,  Her  first- 
born son  (came  forth)  like  a  lamb.  There  was  no 
bursting,  nor  rending,  No  injury,  no  hurt ;  Show- 
ing how  wonderful  he  would  be.  Did  not  God  give 
her  the  comfort  ?  Had  he  not  accepted  her  pure 
offering  and  sacrifice,  So  that  thus  easily  she 
brought  forth  her  son  ? 

He  was  placed  in  a  narrow  lane,  But  the  sheep 
and  oxen  protected  him  with  loving  care  2.  He  was 
placed  in  a  wide  forest,  Where  he  was  met  with  by 
the  wood-cutters.  He  was  placed  on  the  cold  ice, 
And  a  bird  screened  and  supported  him  with  its 
wings.  When  the  bird  went  away,  Hau-/£i  began 
to  wail.  His  cry  was  long  and  loud,  So  that  his 
voice  filled  the  whole  way  2. 


1  The  'toe-print  made  by  God '  has  occasioned  much  speculation 
of  the  critics.  We  may  simply  draw  the  conclusion  that  the  poet 
meant  to  have  his  readers  believe  with  him  that  the  conception  of 
his  hero  was  supernatural.  We  saw  in  the  third  of  the  Sacrificial 
Odes  of  Shang  that  there  was  also  a  legend  assigning  a  preter- 
natural birth  to  the  father  of  the  House  of  Shang. 

2  It  does  not  appear  from  the  ode  who  exposed  the  infant  to 
these  various  perils;  nor  did  Chinese  tradition  ever  fashion  any 
story  on  the  subject.  M&o  makes  the  exposure  to  have  been  made 
by  ^iang  Yiian's  husband,  dissatisfied  with  what  had  taken  place  ; 
JTang,  by  the  mother  herself,  to  show  the  more  the  wonderful 
character  of  her  child.  Readers  will  compare  the  accounts  with 
the  Roman  legends  about  Romulus  and  Remus,  their  mother  and 
her  father ;  but  the  two  legends  differ  according  to  the  different 
characters  of  the  Chinese  and  Roman  peoples. 


398  THE    SHIH    KING.  DECADE  II. 

When  he  was  able  to  crawl,  He  looked  majestic 
and  intelligent.  When  he  was  able  to  feed  himself, 
He  fell  to  planting  beans.  The  beans  grew  luxu- 
riantly;  His  rows  of  paddy  shot  up  beautifully; 
His  hemp  and  wheat  grew  strong  and  close;  His 
gourds  yielded  abundantly. 

The  husbandry  of  H^u-^1  Proceeded  on  the  plan 
of  helping  (the  growth).  Having  cleared  away  the 
thick  grass,  He  sowed  the  ground  with  the  yellow 
cereals.  He  managed  the  living  grain,  till  it  was 
ready  to  burst ;  Then  he  used  it  as  seed,  and  it 
sprang  up  ;  It  grew  and  came  into  ear ;  It  became 
strong  and  good  ;  It  hung  down,  every  grain  com- 
plete ;    And  thus  he  was  appointed  lord  of  Thai  \ 

He  gave  (his  people)  the  beautiful  grains  ; — The 
black  millet  and  the  double-kernelled,  The  tall  red 
and  the  white.  They  planted  extensively  the  black 
and  the  double-kernelled,  Which  were  reaped  and 
stacked  on  the  ground.  They  planted  extensively 
the  tall  red  and  the  white,  Which  were  carried  on 
their  shoulders  and  backs,  Home  for  the  sacrifices 
which  he  founded 2. 

And  how  as  to  our  sacrifices  (continued  from  him)  ? 


1  Hau-^fs  mother,  we  have  seen,  was  a  princess  of  Thai,  in  the 
present  district  of  Wu-kung,  .Oien  ^au,  Shen-hsi.  This  may  have 
led  to  his  appointment  to  that  principality,  and  the  transference  of 
the  lordship  from  Zlangs  to  J£is.  Evidently  he  was  appointed  to 
that  dignity  for  his  services  in  the  promotion  of  agriculture.  Still 
he  has  not  displaced  the  older  Shan-nung,  with  whom  on  his  father's 
side  he  had  a  connexion,  as  '  the  Father  of  Husbandry/ 

2  This  is  not  to  be  understood  of  sacrifice  in  general,  as  if  there 
had  been  no  such  thing  before  H&u-/£i ;  but  of  the  sacrifices  of  the 
House  of  -£au, — those  in  the  ancestral  temple  and  others, — which 
began  with  him  as  its  great  ancestor. 


ODE  2.  THE    MAJOR    ODES    OF    THE   KINGDOM.  399 

Some  hull  (the  grain) ;  some  take  it  from  the 
mortar ;  Some  sift  it ;  some  tread  it.  It  is  rattling 
in  the  dishes ;  It  is  distilled,  and  the  steam  floats 
about.  We  consult 1 ;  we  observe  the  rites  of  puri- 
fication; We  take  southernwood  and  offer  it  with 
the  fat;  We  saciifice  a  ram  to  the  spirit  of  the 
path  2 ;  We  offer  roast  flesh  and  broiled  : — And 
thus  introduce  the  coming  year3. 

We  load  the  stands  with  the  offerings,  The  stands 
both  of  wood  and  of  earthenware.  As  soon  as  the 
fragrance  ascends,  God,  well  pleased,  smells  the 
sweet  savour.  Fragrant  it  is,  and  in  its  due  season4. 
Hau-/£1  founded  our  sacrifices,  And  no  one,  we 
presume,  has  given  occasion  for  blame  or  regret  in 
regard  to  them,     Down  to  the  present  day. 

Ode  2.     The  Hsin  Wei. 

A  FESTAL  ODE,  CELEBRATING  SOME  ENTERTAINMENT  GIVEN  BY  THE 
KING  TO  HIS  RELATIVES,  WITH  THE  TRIAL  OF  ARCHERY  AFTER  THE 
FEAST;  CELEBRATING  ESPECIALLY  THE  HONOUR  DONE  ON  SUCH 
OCCASIONS   TO    THE   AGED. 

This  ode  is  given  here,  because  it  is  commonly  taken  as  a  prelude 
to  the  next.     Kvl  Hsi  interprets  it  of  the  feast,  given  by  the 

1  That  is,  we  divine  about  the  day,  and  choose  the  officers  to 
take  part  in  the  service. 

2  A  sacrifice  was  offered  to  the  spirit  of  the  road  on  commencing 
a  journey,  and  we  see  here  that  it  was  offered  also  in  connexion 
with  the  king's  going  to  the  ancestral  temple  or  the  border  altar. 

3  It  does  not  appear  clearly  what  sacrifices  the  poet  had  in  view 
here.  I  think  they  must  be  all  those  in  which  the  kings  of  K&u 
appeared  as  the  principals  or  sacrificers.  The  concluding  line  is 
understood  to  intimate  that  the  kings  were  not  to  forget  that  a  pros- 
perous agriculture  was  the  foundation  of  their  prosperity. 

4  In  this  stanza  we  have  the  peculiar  honour  paid  to  H&u-£i  by 
his  descendants  at  one  of  the  great  border  sacrifices  to  God, — the 
same  to  which  the  last  ode  in  the  first  decade  of  the  Sacrificial 
Odes  of  Kin  belongs. 


400  THE   SHIH    KING.  DECADE  n. 

king,  at  the  close  of  the  sacrifice  in  the  ancestral  temple,  to  the 
princes  of  his  own  surname.  There  are  difficulties  in  the  inter- 
pretation of  the  piece  on  this  view,  which,  however,  is  to  be 
preferred  to  any  other. 

In  thick  patches  are  those  rushes,  Springing  by 
the  way-side : — Let  not  the  cattle  and  sheep  trample 
them.  Anon  they  will  grow  up  ;  anon  they  will  be 
completely  formed,  With  their  leaves  soft  and 
glossy  \  Closely  related  are  brethren  ;  Let  none 
be  absent,  let  all  be  near.  For  some  there  are 
mats  spread ;     For  some  there  are  given  stools 2. 

The  mats  are  spread,  and  a  second  one  above ; 
The  stools  are  given,  and  there  are  plenty  of  ser- 
vants. (The  guests)  are  pledged,  and  they  pledge 
(the  host)  in  return  ;  He  rinses  the  cups  (and  refills 
them,  but  the  guests)  put  them  down,  Sauces  and 
pickles  are  brought  in,  With  roasted  meat  and 
broiled.  Excellent  provisions  there  are  of  tripe  and 
palates ;     With  singing  to  lutes,  and  with  drums. 

The  ornamented  bows  are  strong,  And  the  four 
arrows  are  all  balanced.  They  discharge  the  arrows, 
and  all  hit,  And  the  guests  are  arranged  accord- 
ing to  their  skill.  The  ornamented  bows  are  drawn 
to  the  full,  And  the  arrows  are  grasped  in  the 
hand.     They  .go  straight  to  the  mark  as  if  planted 

1  In  the  rushes  growing  up  densely  from  a  common  root  we 
have  an  emblem  of  brothers  all  sprung  from  the  same  ancestor  ; 
and  in  the  plants  developing  so  finely,  when  preserved  from  in- 
jury, an  emblem  of  the  happy  fellowships  of  consanguinity,  when 
nothing  is  allowed  to  interfere  with  mutual  confidence  and  good 
feeling. 

2  In  a  previous  note  I  have  said  that  chairs  and  tables  had  not 
come  into  use  in  those  early  times.  Guests  sat  and  feasts  were 
spread  on  mats  on  the  floor ;  for  the  aged,  however,  stools  were 
placed  on  which  they  could  lean  forward. 


ODE  3.  THE    MAJOR    ODES    OF    THE    KINGDOM.  4OI 

in  it,     And  the  guests  are  arranged  according  to 
the  humble  propriety  of  their  behaviour. 

The  distant  descendant  presides  over  the  feast ; 
His  sweet  spirits  are  strong.  He  fills  their  cups 
from  a  large  vase,  And  prays  for  the  hoary  old 
(among  his  guests)  :  —  That  with  hoary  age  and 
wrinkled  back,  They  may  lead  on  one  another  (to 
virtue),  and  support  one  another  (in  it) ;  That  so 
their  old  age  may  be  blessed,  And  their  bright 
happiness  ever  increased. 

Ode  3.     The  K\  Sui. 

RESPONSIVE  TO  THE  LAST  I THE   UNCLES  AND  BRETHREN  OF  THE  KING 

EXPRESS  THEIR  SENSE  OF  HIS  KINDNESS,  AND  THEIR  WISHES  FOR  HIS 
HAPPINESS,  MOSTLY  IN  THE  WORDS  IN  WHICH  THE  PERSON ATORS  OF 
THE  DEPARTED  ANCESTORS  HAD  CONVEYED  THEIR  SATISFACTION 
WITH  THE  SACRIFICE  OFFERED  TO  THEM,  AND  PROMISED  TO  HIM 
THEIR   BLESSING. 

You  have  made  us  drink  to  the  full  of  your  spirits; 
You  have  satiated  us  with  your  kindness.  May  you 
enjoy,  O  our  lord,  myriads  of  years!  May  your 
bright  happiness  (ever)  be  increased ! 

You  have  made  us  drink  to  the  full  of  your  spirits; 
Your  viands  were  set  out  before  us.  May  you  enjoy, 
O  our  lord,  myriads  of  years  !  May  your  bright 
intelligence  ever  be  increased! 

May  your  bright  intelligence  become  perfect, 
High  and  brilliant,  leading  to  a  good  end!  That 
good  end  has  (now)  its  beginning  : — The  personators 
of  your  ancestors  announced  it  in  their  blessing. 

What  was  their  announcement  ?  '  (The  offerings) 
in  your  dishes  of  bamboo  and  wood  are  clean  and 
[1]  Dd 


402  THE    SHIH    KING.  DECADE  II. 

fine.    Your  friends1,  assisting  in  the  service,     Have 
done  their  part  with  reverent  demeanour. 

'Your  reverent  demeanour  was  altogether  what 
the  occasion  required ;  And  also  that  of  your  filial 
son2.  For  such  filial  piety,  continued  without  ceasing, 
There  will  ever  be  conferred  blessings  upon  you/ 

What  will  the  blessings  be  ?  '  That  along  the 
passages  of  your  palace,  You  shall  move  for  ten 
thousand  years,  And  there  will  be  granted  to  you 
for  ever  dignity  and  posterity/ 

How  as  to  your  posterity  ?  ( Heaven  invests  you 
with  your  dignity;  Yea,  for  ten  thousand  years, 
The  bright  appointment  is  attached  (to  your  line)/ 

How  is  it  attached  ?  '  There  is  given  you  a 
heroic  wife.  There  is  given  you  a  heroic  wife,  And 
from  her  shall  come  the  (line  of)  descendants/ 

Ode  4.     The  Hu  f. 

AN  ODE  APPROPRIATE  TO  THE  FEAST  GIVEN  TO  THE  PERSONATORS  OF 
THE  DEPARTED,  ON  THE  DAY  AFTER  THE  SACRIFICE  IN  THE  ANCES- 
TRAL   TEMPLE. 

This  supplementary  sacrifice  on  the  day  after  the  principal  service 
in  the  temple  appeared  in  the  ninth  Book  of  the  fourth  Part  of 
the  Shu ;  and  of  the  feast  after  it  to  the  personators  of  the  dead 
I  have  spoken  on  p.  301. 

The  wild-ducks  and  widgeons  are  on  the  King 3 ; 

1  That  is,  the  guests,  visitors,  and  officers  of  the  court. 

2  Towards  the  end  of  the  sacrificial  service,  the  eldest  son  of 
the  king  joined  in  pledging  the  representatives  of  their  ancestors. 

3  The  Kmg  is  an  affluent  of  the  Wei,  not  far  from  Wu's  capital 
of  Hdo.  The  birds,  feeling  at  home  in  its  waters,  on  its  sands,  &c, 
serve  to  introduce  the  parties  feasted,  in  a  situation  where  they 
might  relax  from  the  gravity  of  the  preceding  day,  and  be  happy. 


ODE  4.  THE   MAJOR    ODES    OF    THE   KINGDOM.  4O3 

The  personators  of  your  ancestors  feast  and  are 
happy.  Your  spirits  are  clear ;  Your  viands  are 
fragrant  The  personators  of  your  ancestors  feast 
and  drink  ; — Their  happiness  and  dignity  are  made 
complete. 

The  wild-ducks  and  widgeons  are  on  the  sand  ; 
The  personators  of  the  dead  enjoy  the  feast,  their 
appropriate  tribute.  Your  spirits  are  abundant ; 
Your  viands  are  good.  The  personators  of  your 
ancestors  feast  and  drink; — Happiness  and  dignity 
lend  them  their  aids. 

The  wild-ducks  and  widgeons  are  on  the  islets ; 
The  personators  of  your  ancestors  feast  and  enjoy 
themselves.  Your  spirits  are  strained ;  Your  viands 
are  in  slices.  The  personators  of  your  ancestors 
feast  and  drink; — Happiness  and  dignity  descend 
on  them. 

The  wild-ducks  and  widgeons  are  where  the 
waters  meet ;  The  persoiiators  of  your  ancestors 
feast  and  are  honoured.  The  feast  is  spread  in  the 
ancestral  temple,  The  place  where  happiness  and 
dignity  descend.  The  personators  of  your  ancestors 
feast  and  drink  ; — Their  happiness  and  dignity  are 
at  the  highest  point. 

The  wild-ducks  and  widgeons  are  in  the  gorge ; 
The  personators  of  your  ancestors  rest,  full  of 
complacency.  The  fine  spirits  are  delicious ;  Your 
meat,  roast  and  broiled,  is  fragrant.  The  personators 
of  your  ancestors  feast  and  drink ; — No  troubles  will 
be  theirs  after  this. 


D  d  2 


404  THE   SHIH    KING.  DECADE  II. 


Ode  5,  Stanza  1.     The  K\k  Lo. 

IN    PRAISE    OF    SOME    KING,    WHOSE    VIRTUE    SECURED    TO    HIM    THE 
FAVOUR    OF    HEAVEN. 

Perhaps  the  response  of  the  feasted  personators  of  the  ancestors. 

Of  our  admirable,  amiable  sovereign  Most  illus- 
trious is  the  excellent  virtue.  He  orders  rightly 
the  people,  orders  rightly  the  officers,  And  receives 
his  dignity  from  Heaven,  Which  protects  and  helps 
him,  and  (confirms)  his  appointment,  By  repeated 
acts  of  renewal  from  heaven. 

Ode  8.     The  A#uan  A. 

ADDRESSED,  PROBABLY,  BY  THE  DUKE  OF  SHAO  TO  KING  ^T^ANG,  DESIRING 
FOR  HIM  LONG  PROSPERITY,  AND  CONGRATULATING  HIM,  IN  ORDER 
TO  ADMONISH  HIM,  ON  THE  HAPPINESS  OF  HIS  PEOPLE,  THE  NUMBER 
OF  HIS  ADMIRABLE  OFFICERS,  AND  THE  AUSPICIOUS  OMEN  ARISING 
FROM   THE   APPEARANCE    OF    THE   PH03NIX. 

The  duke  of  Shao  was  the  famous  Shih,  who  appears  in  the  fifth 
and  other  Books  of  the  fifth  Part  of  the  Shu,  the  colleague  of  the 
duke  of  Zau  in  the  early  days  of  the  ^au  dynasty.  This  piece 
may  have  been  composed  by  him,  but  there  is  no  evidence  in  it 
that  it  was  so.  The  assigning  it  to  him  rests  entirely  on  the 
authority  of  the  preface.  The  language,  however,  is  that  in 
which  an  old  statesman  of  that  time  might  express  his  com- 
placency in  his  young  sovereign. 

Into  the  recesses  of  the  large  mound  Came  the 
wind,  whirling  from  the  south.  There  was  (our) 
happy,  courteous  sovereign,  Rambling  and  singing; 
And  I  took  occasion  to  give  forth  my  notes. 

(  Full  of  spirits  you  ramble  ;  Full  of  satisfaction 
you  rest.  O  happy  and  courteous  sovereign,  May 
you  fulfil  your  years,  And  end  them  like  your 
ancestors ! 

'  Your  territory  is  great  and  glorious,     And  per- 


ODE  8.  THE    MAJOR    ODES    OF    THE    KINGDOM.  405 

fectly  secure.  O  happy  and  courteous  sovereign, 
May  you  fulfil  your  years,  As  the  host  of  all  the 
spirits  1 ! 

'  You  have  received  the  appointment  long  acknow- 
ledged, With  peace  around  your  happiness  and 
dignity.  O  happy  and  courteous  sovereign,  May 
you  fulfil  your  years,  With  pure  happiness  your 
constant  possession! 

*  You  have  helpers  and  supporters,  Men  of  filial 
piety  and  of  virtue,  To  lead  you  on,  and  act  as 
wings  to  you,  (So  that),  O  happy  and  courteous 
sovereign,  You  are  a  pattern  to  the  four  quarters 
(of  the  kingdom). 

'  Full  of  dignity  and  majesty  (are  they),     Like  a 

1  'Host  of  the  hundred — i.e.,  of  all — the  spirits'  is  one  of  the 
titles  of  the  sovereign  of  China.  It  was  and  is  his  prerogative  to 
offer  the  great  '  border  sacrifices '  to  Heaven  and  Earth,  or,  as  Con- 
fucius explains  them,  to  God,  and  to  the  spirits  of  his  ancestors  in 
his  ancestral  temple ;  and  in  his  progresses  (now  neglected),  among 
the  states,  to  the  spirits  of  the  hills  and  rivers  throughout  the  king- 
dom. Every  feudal  prince  could  only  sacrifice  to  the  hills  and 
streams  within  his  own  territory.  Under  the  changed  conditions  of 
the  government  of  China,  the  sacrificial  ritual  of  the  emperor  still 
retains  the  substance  of  whatever  belonged  to  the  sovereigns  in 
this  respect  from  the  earliest  dynasties.  On  the  text  here,  Khung 
Ying-ta  of  the  Thang  dynasty  said, '  He  who  possesses  all  under  the 
sky,  sacrifices  to  all  the  spirits,  and  thus  he  is  the  host  of  them  all/ 
Kvl  Hsi  said  on  it,  '  And  always  be  the  host  of  (the  spirits  of) 
Heaven  and  Earth,  of  the  hills  and  rivers,  and  of  the  departed/ 
The  term  'host'  does  not  imply  any  superiority  of  rank  on  the 
part  of  the  entertainer.  In  the  greatest  sacrifices  the  emperor 
acknowledges  himself  as  '  the  servant  or  subject  of  Heaven.'  See 
the  prayer  of  the  first  of  the  present  Manchau  line  of  emperors,  in 
announcing  that  he  had  ascended  the  throne,  at  the  altar  of  Heaven 
and  Earth,  in  1644,  as  translated  by  the  Rev.  Dr.  Edkins  in  the 
chapter  on  Imperial  Worship,  in  the  recent  edition  of  his  '  Religion 
in  China/ 


406  THE   SHIH    KING.  DECADE  II. 

jade-mace(in  its  purity),  The  subject  of  praise,  the 
contemplation  of  hope.  O  happy  and  courteous 
sovereign,  (Through  them)  the  four  quarters  (of 
the  kingdom)  are  guided  by  you. 

'  The  male  and  female  phoenix  fly  about  *,  Their 
wings  rustling,  While  they  settle  in  their  proper 
resting-place.  Many  are  your  admirable  officers, 
O  king,  Ready  to  be  employed  by  you,  Loving 
you,  the  Son  of  Heaven. 

'  The  male  and  female  phoenix  fly  about,  Their 
wings  rustling,  As  they  soar  up  to  heaven.  Many 
are  your  admirable  officers,  O  king,  Waiting  for 
your  commands,  And  loving  the  multitudes  of  the 
people. 

'The  male  and  female  phoenix  give  out  their 
notes,  On  that  lofty  ridge.  The  dryandras  grow, 
On  those  eastern  slopes.  They  grow  luxuriantly  ; 
And  harmoniously  the  notes  resound. 

1  The  phoenix  (so  the  creature  has  been  named)  is  a  fabulous 
bird,  *  the  chief  of  the  360  classes  of  the  winged  tribes/  It  is 
mentioned  in  the  fourth  Book  of  the  second  Part  of  the  Shu,  as 
appearing  in  the  courtyard  of  Shun;  and  the  appearance  of  a 
pair  of  them  has  always  been  understood  to  denote  a  sage  on  the 
throne  and  prosperity  in  the  country.  Even  Confucius  (Analects, 
IX,  viii)  could  not  express  his  hopelessness  about  his  own  times 
more  strongly  than  by  saying  that  '  the  phcenix  did  not  make  its 
appearance/  He  was  himself  also  called  '  a  phcenix,'  in  derision,  by 
one  of  the  recluses  of  his  time  (Analects,  XVIII,  v).  The  type  of 
the  bird  was,  perhaps,  the  Argus  pheasant,  but  the  descriptions 
of  it  are  of  a  monstrous  creature,  having  *  a  fowl's  head,  a  swallow's 
chin,  a  serpent's  neck,  a  fish's  tail,'  &c.  It  only  lights  on  the 
dryandra  cordifolia,  of  which  tree  also  many  marvellous 
stories  are  related.  The  poet  is  not  to  be  understood  as  saying 
that  the  phoenix  actually  appeared ;  but  that  the  king  was  sage 
and  his  government  prosperous,  as  if  it  had  appeared. 


ODE  9.  THE    MAJOR    ODES    OF    THE    KINGDOM.  407 

'  Your  chariots,  O  sovereign,  Are  numerous, 
many.  Your  horses,  O  sovereign,  Are  well  trained 
and  fleet.  I  have  made  my  few  verses,  In  pro- 
longation of  your  song/ 

Ode  9,  Stanza  1.     The  Min  Lao. 

IN  A  TIME  OF  DISORDER  AND  SUFFERING,  SOME  OFFICER  OF  DISTINC- 
TION CALLS  ON  HIS  FELLOWS  TO  JOIN  WITH  HIM  TO  EFFECT  A 
REFORMATION  IN  THE  CAPITAL,  AND  PUT  AWAY  THE  PARTIES  WHO 
WERE   THE   CAUSE    OF    THE   PREVAILING   MISERY. 

With  the  -Ouan  A,  what  are  called  the  '  correct'  odes  of  Part  III, 
or  those  belonging  to  a  period  of  good  government,  and  the 
composition  of  which  is  ascribed  mainly  to  the  duke  of -Sau,  come 
to  an  end ;  and  those  that  follow  are  the  '  changed '  Major  Odes 
of  the  Kingdom,  or  those  belonging  to  a  degenerate  period,  com- 
mencing with  this.  Some  among  them,  however,  are  equal  to 
any  of  the  former  class.  The  Min  Lao  has  been  assigned  to 
duke  Mu  of  Shdo,  a  descendant  of  duke  Khang,  the  Shih  of  the 
Shu,  the  reputed  author  of  the  .Oiian  A,  and  was  directed 
against  king  Li,  b.  c.  878  to  828. 

The  people  indeed  are  heavily  burdened,  But 
perhaps  a  little  relief  may  be  got  for  them.  Let 
us  cherish  this  centre  of  the  kingdom,  To  secure 
the  repose  of  the  four  quarters  of  it.  Let  us  give 
no  indulgence  to  the  wily  and  obsequious,  In  order 
to  make  the  unconscientious  careful,  And  to  repress 
robbers  and  oppressors,  Who  have  no  fear  of  the 
clear  will  (of  Heaven)  K  Then  let  us  show  kindness 
to  those  who  are  distant,  And  help  those  who  are 
near, — Thus  establishing  (the  throne  of)  our  king. 

1  l  The  clear  will,'  according  to  Kii  Hsi,  is  'the  clear  appointment 
of  Heaven;'  according  to  Kt  Kung-Mien,  ' correct  principle/ 
They  both  mean  the  law  of  human  duty,  as  gathered  from  the 
nature  of  man's  moral  constitution  conferred  by  Heaven. 


408  the  shih  king.  decade  ii. 

Ode  10.     The  Pan. 

AN  OFFICER  OF  EXPERIENCE  MOURNS  OVER  THE  PREVAILING  MISERY ; 
COMPLAINS  OF  THE  WANT  OF  SYMPATHY  WITH  HIM  SHOWN  BY  OTHER 
OFFICERS  ;  ADMONISHES  THEM,  AND  SETS  FORTH  THE  DUTY  RE- 
QUIRED OF  THEM,  ESPECIALLY  IN  THE  ANGRY  MOOD  IN  WHICH  IT 
MIGHT   SEEM    THAT    HEAVEN   WAS. 

This  piece,  like  the  last,  is  assigned  to  the  time  of  king  Li. 

God  has  reversed  (his  usual  course  of  procedure)1, 
And  the  lower  people  are  full  of  distress.  The 
words  which  you  utter  are  not  right;  The  plans 
which  you  form  are  not  far-reaching.  As  there  are 
not  sages,  you  think  you  have  no  guidance ;  — You 
have  no  real  sincerity.  (Thus)  your  plans  do  not 
reach  far,    And  I  therefore  strongly  admonish  you. 

Heaven  is  now  sending  down  calamities; — Do  not 
be  so  complacent.  Heaven  is  now  producing  such 
movements ; — Do  not  be  so  indifferent.  If  your 
words  were  harmonious,  The  people  would  become 
united.  If  your  words  were  gentle  and  kind,  The 
people  would  be  settled. 

Though  my  duties  are  different  from  yours,  I  am 
your  fellow-servant.  I  come  to  advise  with  you, 
And  you  hear  me  with  contemptuous  indifference. 
My  words  are  about  the  (present  urgent)  affairs ; — 
Do  not  think  them  matter  for  laughter.  The  ancients 
had  a  saying:  —  'Consult  the  gatherers  of  grass 
and  firewood2/ 

1  The  proof  of  God's  having  reversed  his  usual  course  of  pro- 
cedure was  to  be  found  in  the  universal  misery  of  the  people, 
whose  good  He  was  understood  to  desire,  and  for  the  securing  of 
which  government  by  righteous  kings  was  maintained  by  him. 

2  If  ancient  worthies  thought  that  persons  in  such  mean  employ- 
ments were  to  be  consulted,  surely  the  advice  of  the  writer  deserved 
to  be  taken  into  account  by  his  comrades. 


ODE  10.       THE    MAJOR    ODES    OF    THE    KINGDOM.  409 

Heaven  is  now  exercising  oppression  ; — Do  not  in 
such  a  way  make  a  mock  of  things.  An  old  man, 
(I  speak)  with  entire  sincerity;  But  you,  my  juniors, 
are  full  of  pride.  It  is  not  that  my  words  are  those 
of  age,  But  you  make  a  joke  of  what  is  sad.  But 
the  troubles  will  multiply  like  flames,  Till  they 
are  beyond  help  or  remedy. 

Heaven  is  now  displaying  its  anger; — Do  not  be 
either  boastful  or  flattering,  Utterly  departing  from 
all  propriety  of  demeanour,  Till  good  men  are 
reduced  to  personators  of  the  dead  \  The  people 
now  sigh  and  groan,  And  we  dare  not  examine 
(into  the  causes  of  their  trouble).  The  ruin  and 
disorder  are  exhausting  all  their  means  of  living, 
And  we  show  no  kindness  to  our  multitudes. 

Heaven  enlightens  the  people  2,  As  the  bamboo 
flute  responds  to  the  earthen  whistle ;  As  two  half- 
maces  form  a  whole  one ;  As  you  take  a  thing, 
and  bring  it  away  in  your  hand,  Bringing  it  away, 
without  any  more  ado.  The  enlightenment  of  the 
people  is  very  easy.  They  have  (now)  many  per- 
versities;—  Do  not  you  set  up  your  perversity 
before  them. 

Good  men  are  a  fence  ;  The  multitudes  of  the 
people  are  a  wall ;  Great  states  are  screens  ;  Great 
families  are  buttresses  ;     The  cherishing  of  virtue 

1  During  all  the  time  of  the  sacrifice,  the  personators  of  the  dead 
said  not  a  word,  but  only  ate  and  drank.  To  the  semblance  of 
them  good  men  were  now  reduced. 

2  The  meaning  is,  that  Heaven  has  so  attuned  the  mind  to  virtue, 
that,  if  good  example  were  set  before  the  people,  they  would  cer- 
tainly and  readily  follow  it.  This  is  illustrated  by  various  instances 
of  things,  in  which  the  one  succeeded  the  other  freely  and  as  if 
necessarily ;  so  that  government  by  virtue  was  really  very  easy. 


4-IO  THE    SHIH    KING.  DECADE  ill. 

secures  repose  ;  The  circle  of  (the  kings)  relatives 
is  a  fortified  wall.  We  must  not  let  the  fortified 
wall  get  destroyed  ;  We  must  not  let  (the  king) 
be  solitary  and  consumed  with  terrors. 

Revere  the  anger  of  Heaven,  And  presume  not 
to  make  sport  or  be  idle.  Revere  the  changing 
moods  of  Heaven,  And  presume  not  to  drive  about 
(at  your  pleasure).  Great  Heaven  is  intelligent, 
And  is  with  you  in  all  your  goings.  Great  Heaven 
is  clear-seeing,  And  is  with  you  in  your  wanderings 
and  indulgences. 


The  Third  Decade,  or  that  of  Tang. 
Ode  1.     The  Tang. 

WARNINGS,  SUPPOSED  TO  BE  ADDRESSED  TO  KING  LI,  ON  THE  ISSUES 
OF  THE  COURSE  WHICH  HE  WAS  PURSUING,  SHOWING  THAT  THE 
MISERIES  OF  THE  TIME  AND  THE  IMMINENT  DANGER  OF  RUIN  WERE 
TO  BE  ATTRIBUTED,  NOT  TO  HEAVEN,  BUT  TO  HIMSELF  AND  HIS 
MINISTERS. 

This  ode,  like  the  ninth  of  the  second  decade,  is  attributed  to  duke 
Mii  of  Shao.  The  structure  of  the  piece  is  peculiar,  for,  after 
the  first  stanza,  we  have  king  Wan  introduced  delivering  a  series 
of  warnings  to  -Af&u-hsin,  the  last  king  of  the  Shang  dynasty. 
They  are  put  into  Wan's  mouth,  in  the  hope  that  Li,  if,  indeed, 
he  was  the  monarch  whom  the  writer  had  in  view,  would 
transfer  the  figure  of  ^au-hsin  to  himself,  and  alter  his  course 
so  as  to  avoid  a  similar  ruin. 

How  vast  is  God,  The  ruler  of  men  below !  How 
arrayed  in  terrors  is  God,  With  many  things  irre- 
gular in  his  ordinations.  Heaven  gave  birth  to 
the  multitudes  of  the  people,  But  the  nature  it 
confers  is  not  to  be  depended  on.     All  are  (good) 


ODE  i.  THE    MAJOR   ODES    OF    THE  KINGDOM.  4 1. 1 

at   first,     But  few  prove   themselves  to  be  so  at 
the  last1. 

King  Wan  said,  '  Alas !  Alas  !  you  sovereign 
of  Shang,  That  you  should  have  such  violently 
oppressive  ministers,  That  you  should  have  such 
extortionate  exactors,  That  you  should  have  them 
in  offices,  That  you  should  have  them  in  the  conduct 
of  affairs!  " Heaven  made  them  with  their  insolent 
dispositions ;"  But  it  is  you  who  employ  them,  and 
give  them  strength/ 

King  Wan  said,  '  Alas  !  Alas !  you  (sovereign 
of)  Yin-shang,  You  ought  to  employ  such  as  are 
good,  But  (you  employ  instead)  violent  oppressors, 
who  cause  many  dissatisfactions.  They  respond 
to  you  with  baseless  stories,  And  (thus)  robbers 
and  thieves  are  in  your  court.  Hence  come  oaths 
and  curses,    Without  limit,  without  end/ 

King  Wan  said, '  Alas  !  Alas  !  you  (sovereign  of) 
Yin-shang,  You  show  a  strong  fierce  will  in  the 
centre  of  the  kingdom,  And  consider  the  con- 
tracting of  enmities  a  proof  of  virtue.  All-unintelli- 
gent are  you  of  your  (proper)  virtue,  And  so  you 
have  no  (good)  men  behind  you,  nor  by  your  side. 
Without  any  intelligence  of  your  (proper)  virtue, 
You  have  no  (good)  intimate  adviser  or  minister/ 

King  Wan  said,  'Alas!  Alas  !  you  (sovereign  of) 
Yin-shang,  It  is  not  Heaven  that  flushes  your  face 
with  spirits,  So  that  you  follow  what  is  evil  and 
imitate  it.  You  go  wrong  in  all  your  conduct ;  You 
make   no    distinction   between    the   light   and    the 

1  The  meaning  seems  to  be  that,  whatever  miseries  might  pre- 
vail, and  be  ignorantly  ascribed  to  God,  they  were  in  reality  owing 
to  men's  neglect  of  the  law  of  Heaven  inscribed  on  their  hearts. 


412  THE    SHIH    KING.  DECADE  III. 

darkness  ;     But  amid  clamour  and  shouting,    You 
turn  the  day  into  night  V 

King  Wan  said,  ' Alas  !  Alas  !  you  (sovereign  of) 
Yin-shang,  (All  round  you)  is  like  the  noise  of 
cicadas,  Or  like  the  bubbling  of  boiling  soup. 
Affairs,  great  and  small,  are  approaching  to  ruin, 
And  still  you  (and  your  creatures)  go  on  in  this 
course.  Indignation  is  rife  against  you  here  in  the 
Middle  Kingdom,  And  extends  to  the  demon 
regions  V 

King  Wan  said,  'Alas!  Alas!  you  (sovereign  of) 
Yin-shang,  It  is  not  God  that  has  caused  this  evil 
time,  But  it  arises  from  Yin's  not  using  the  old 
(ways).  Although  you  have  not  old  experienced 
men,  There  are  still  the  ancient  statutes  and  laws. 
But  you  will  not  listen  to  them,  And  so  your  great 
appointment  is  being  overthrown/ 

King  Wan  said,  'Alas !  Alas !  you  (sovereign  of) 
Shang,  People  have  a  saying,  "When  a  tree  falls 
utterly,  While  its  branches  and  leaves  are  yet  un- 
injured, It  must  first  have  been  uprooted/'  The 
beacon  of  Yin  is  not  far  distant; — It  is  in  the  age 
of  the  (last)  sovereign  of  Hsid/ 

1  We  speak  of  '  turning  night  into  day.'  The  tyrant  of  Shang 
turned  day  into  night.  Excesses,  generally  committed  in  darkness, 
were  by  him  done  openly. 

2  These  'demon  regions'  are  understood  to  mean  the  seat  of 
the  Turkic  tribes  to  the  north  of  China,  known  from  the  earliest 
times  by  various  names — '  The  hill  Zung,'  <  the  northern  Li/  '  the 
Hsien-yun,'  &c.  Towards  the  beginning  of  our  era,  they  were 
called  Hsiung-nu,  from  which,  perhaps,  came  the  name  Huns; 
and  some  centuries  later,  Thu-^tieh  (Thuh-Meh),  from  which 
came  Turk.  We  are  told  in  the  Yi,  under  the  diagram  K\-k\, 
that  Kao  Qung  (b.c.  i 324-1 266)  conducted  an  expedition  against 
the  demon  regions,  and  in  three  years  subdued  them, 


ODE  2.  THE    MAJOR    ODES    OF    THE    KINGDOM.  413 


Ode  2.     The  Yi. 

CONTAINING  VARIOUS  COUNSELS  WHICH  DUKE  WU  OF  WEI  MADE  TO 
ADMONISH  HIMSELF,  WHEN  HE  WAS  OVER  HIS  NINETIETH  YEAR  J 
ESPECIALLY  ON  THE  DUTY  OF  A  RULER  TO  BE  CAREFUL  OF  HIS 
OUTWARD  DEMEANOUR,  FEELING  THAT  HE  IS  EVER  UNDER  THE  IN- 
SPECTION OF  SPIRITUAL  BEINGS,  AND  TO  RECEIVE  WITH  DOCILITY 
INSTRUCTIONS   DELIVERED    TO    HIM. 

The  sixth  ode  in  the  seventh  decade  of  the  Minor  Odes  of  the 
Kingdom  is  attributed  to  the  same  duke  of  Wei  as  this;  and  the 
two  bear  traces  of  having  proceeded  from  the  same  writer.  The 
external  authorities  for  assigning  this  piece  to  duke  Wu  are  the 
statement  of  the  preface  and  an  article  in  the  'Narratives  of  the 
States/  a  work  already  referred  to  as  belonging  to  the  period  of 
the  -#au  dynasty.  That  article  relates  how  Wu,  at  the  age  of 
ninety-five,  insisted  on  all  his  ministers  and  officers  being  instant, 
in  season  and  out  of  season,  to  admonish  him  on  his  conduct, 
and  that  '  he  made  the  warnings  in  the  I  to  admonish  himself.' 
The  I  is  understood  to  be  only  another  name  for  this  Yi.  Thus 
the  speaker  throughout  the  piece  is  Wu,  and  '  the  young  son/ 
whom  he  sometimes  addresses,  is  himself  also.  The  conception 
of  the  writer  in  taking  such  a  method  to  admonish  himself,  and 
give  forth  the  lessons  of  his  long  life,  is  very  remarkable ;  and 
the  execution  of  it  is  successful. 

Outward  demeanour,  cautious  and  grave,  Is  an 
indication  of  the  (inward)  virtue.  People  have  the 
saying,  *  There  is  no  wise  man  who  is  not  (also) 
stupid/  The  stupidity  of  the  ordinary  man  Is 
determined  by  his  (natural)  defects.  The  stupidity 
of  the  wise  man  Is  from  his  doing  violence  (to 
his  proper  character). 

What  is  most  powerful  is  the  being  the  man 1 ; — 

1  Wu  writes  as  the  marquis  of  Wei,  the  ruler  of  a  state;  but 
what  he  says  is  susceptible  of  universal  application.  In  every 
smaller  sphere,  and  in  the  largest,  '  being  the  man/  displaying, 
that  is,  the  proper  qualities  of  humanity,  will  be  appreciated  and 
felt. 


4 14  THE    SHIH    KING.  DECADE  III. 

In  all  quarters  (of  the  state)  men  are  influenced  by- 
it.  To  an  upright  virtuous  conduct  All  in  the  four 
quarters  of  the  state  render  obedient  homage.  With 
great  counsels  and  determinate  orders,  With  far- 
reaching  plans  and  timely  announcements,  And  with 
reverent  care  of  his  outward  demeanour,  One  will 
become  the  pattern  of  the  people. 

As  for  the  circumstances  of  the  present  time. 
You  are  bent  on  error  and  confusion  in  your  govern- 
ment. Your  virtue  is  subverted ;  You  are  besotted 
by  drink 1.  Although  you  thus  pursue  nothing  but 
pleasure,  How  is  it  you  do  not  think  of  your  rela- 
tion to  the  past,  And  do  not  widely  study  the 
former  kings,  That  you  might  hold  fast  their  wise 
laws  ? 

Shall  not  those  whom  great  Heaven  does  not 
approve  of,  Surely  as  the  waters  flow  from  a  spring, 
Sink  down  together  in  ruin  ?  Rise  early  and  go 
to  bed  late,  Sprinkle  and  sweep  your  courtyard  ; — 
So  as  to  be  a  pattern  to  the  people2.  Have  in  good 
order  your  chariots  and  horses,  Your  bows  and 
arrows,  and  (other)  weapons  of  war; — To  be  pre- 
pared for  warlike  action,  To  keep  at  a  distance 
(the  hordes  of)  the  south. 

Perfect  what  concerns  your  officers  and  people ; 

1  Han  Ying  (who  has  been  mentioned  in  the  Introduction)  says 
that  Wu  made  the  sixth  ode  of  the  seventh  decade  of  the  former 
Part  against  drunkenness,  when  he  was  repenting  of  his  own  giving 
way  to  that  vice.  His  mention  of  the  habit  here,  at  the  age  of 
ninety-five,  must  be  understood  as  a  warning  to  other  rulers. 

2  Line  3  describes  things  important  to  the  cultivation  of  one's 
self ;  and  line  4,  things  important  to  the  regulation  of  one's  family. 
They  may  seem  unimportant,  it  is  said,  as  compared  with  the 
defence  of  the  state,  spoken  of  in  the  last  four  lines  of  the  stanza; 
but  the  ruler  ought  not  to  neglect  them. 


ODE  2.  THE    MAJOR   ODES    OF    THE   KINGDOM.  415 

Be  careful  of  your  duties  as  a  prince  (of  the  king- 
dom). To  be  prepared  for  unforeseen  dangers,  Be 
cautious  of  what  you  say ;  Be  reverentially  careful 
of  your  outward  behaviour;  In  all  things  be  mild 
and  correct.  A  flaw  in  a  mace  of  white  jade  May 
be  ground  away ;  But  for  a  flaw  in  speech  Nothing 
can  be  done. 

Do  not  speak  lightly ;  your  words  are  your  own  \ 
Do  not  say,  '  This  is  of  little  importance ;  No  one 
can  hold  my  tongue  for  me/  Words  are  not  to  be 
cast  away.  Every  word  finds  its  answer ;  Every 
good  deed  has  its  recompense.  If  you  are  gracious 
among  your  friends,  And  to  the  people,  as  if  they 
were  your  children,  Your  descendants  will  continue 
in  unbroken  line,  And  all  the  people  will  surely 
be  obedient  to  you. 

Looked  at  in  friendly  intercourse  with  superior 
men,  You  make  your  countenance  harmonious  and 
mild ;  Anxious  not  to  do  anything  wrong.  Looked 
at  in  your  chamber,  You  ought  to  be  equally  free 
from  shame  before  the  light  which  shines  in.  Do 
not  say,  'This  place  is  not  public ;  No  one  can  see 
me  here/  The  approaches  of  spiritual  beings 
Cannot  be  calculated  beforehand ;  But  the  more 
should  they  not  be  slighted 2. 

1  And  therefore  every  one  is  himself  responsible  for  his  words. 

2  Kh  Hsi  says  that  from  the  fourth  line  this  stanza  only  speaks  of 
the  constant  care  there  should  be  in  watching  over  one's  thoughts ; 
but  in  saying  so,  he  overlooks  the  consideration  by  which  such 
watchful  care  is  enforced.  Compare  what  is  said  of  king  Wan  in 
the  third  stanza  of  the  sixth  ode  of  the  first  decade.  King  Wan 
and  duke  Wu  were  both  influenced  by  the  consideration  that  their 
inmost  thoughts,  even  when  '  unseen  by  men/  were  open  to  the 
inspection  of  spiritual  beings. 


41 6  THE   SHIH    KING.  decade  ill. 

O  prince,  let  your  practice  of  virtue  Be  en- 
tirely good  and  admirable.  Watch  well  over  your 
behaviour,  And  allow  nothing  wrong  in  your 
demeanour.  Committing  no  excess,  doing  nothing 
injurious,  There  are  few  who  will  not  in  such  a 
case  take  you  for  their  pattern.  When  one  throws 
to  me  a  peach,  I  return  to  him  a  plum  *.  To  look 
for  horns  on  a  young  ram  Will  only  weary  you, 
my  son  2. 

The  tough  and  elastic  wood  Can  be  fitted  with 
the  silken  string3.  The  mild  and  respectful  man 
Possesses  the  foundation  of  virtue.  There  is  a 
wise  man ; — I  tell  him  good  words,  And  he  yields 
to  them  the  practice  of  docile  virtue.  There  is  a 
stupid  man; — He  says  on  the  contrary  that  my 
words  are  not  true  : — So  different  are  people's 
minds. 

Oh  !  my  son,  When  you  did  not  know  what  was 
good,  and  what  was  not  good,  Not  only  did  I  lead 
you  by  the  hand,  But  I  showed  the  difference 
between  them  by  appealing  to  instances.  Not  (only) 
did  I  charge  you  face  to  face,  But  I  held  you  by 
the  ear 4.  And  still  perhaps  you  do  not  know, 
Although  you  have  held  a  son  in  your  arms.  If 
people  be  not  self-sufficient,  Who  comes  to  a  late 
maturity  after  early  instruction  ? 

Great  Heaven  is  very  intelligent,     And  I   pass 

1  That  is,  every  deed,  in  fact,  meets  with  its  recompense. 

2  See  the  conclusion  of  duke  Wu's  ode  against  drunkenness. 
Horns  grow  as  the  young  ram  grows.  Effects  must  not  be 
expected  where  there  have  not  been  the  conditions  from  which 
they  naturally  spring. 

3  Such  wood  is  the  proper  material  for  a  bow. 

4  That  is,  to  secure  your  attention. 


ODE  3.  THE    MAJOR    ODES    OF    THE    KINGDOM.  417 

my  life  without  pleasure.  When  I  see  you  so  dark 
and  stupid,  My  heart  is  full  of  pain.  I  taught  you 
with  assiduous  repetition,  And  you  listened  to 
me  with  contempt.  You  would  not  consider  me 
as  your  teacher,  But  regarded  me  as  trouble- 
some. Still  perhaps  you  do  not  know; — But  you 
are  very  old. 

Oh!  my  son,  I  have  told  you  the  old  ways.  Hear 
and  follow  my  counsels : — Then  shall  you  have  no 
cause  for  great  regret.  Heaven  is  now  inflicting 
calamities,  And  is  destroying  the  state.  My  illus- 
trations are  not  taken  from  things  remote  : — Great 
Heaven  makes  no  mistakes.  If  you  go  on  to  dete- 
riorate in  your  virtue,  You  will  bring  the  people  to 
great  distress. 

Ode  3,  Stanzas  1,  2,  3,  4,  and  7.    The  Sang  Zau. 

THE  WRITER  MOURNS  OVER  THE  MISERY  AND  DISORDER  OF  THE  TIMES, 
WITH  A  VIEW  TO  REPREHEND  THE  MISGOVERNMENT  OF  KING  LI, 
APPEALING   ALSO    TO    HEAVEN   TO    HAVE   COMPASSION. 

King  Li  is  not  mentioned  by  name  in  the  piece,  but  the  second 
line  of  stanza  7  can  only  be  explained  of  him.  He  was  driven 
from  the  throne,  in  consequence  of  his  misgovernment,  in  b.  c.  842, 
and  only  saved  his  life  by  flying  to  Xih,  a  place  in  the  present 
Ho  Aau,  department  Phing-yang,  Shan-hsi,  where  he  remained 
till  his  death  in  b.c.  828.  The  government  in  the  meantime  was 
carried  on  by  the  dukes  of  Shao  and  ^Tau,  whose  administration, 
called  the  period  of  'Mutual  Harmony/  forms  an  important 
chronological  era  in  Chinese  history.  On  the  authority  of 
a  reference  in  the  3°  Kwan,  the  piece  is  ascribed  to  an  earl 
of  Zui. 

Luxuriant  is  that  young  mulberry  tree,  And 
beneath  it  wide  is  the  shade ;  But  they  will  pluck 
its  leaves  till  it  is  quite  destroyed1.     The  distress 

1  These  three  lines  are  metaphorical  of  the  once  flourishing 
kingdom,  which  was  now  brought  to  the  verge  of  ruin. 
[1]  Ee 


41 8  THE    SHIH   KING.  DECADE  III. 

inflicted  on  these  (multitudes  of  the)  people,  Is  an 
unceasing  sorrow  to  my  heart ;  My  commiseration 
fills  (my  breast).  O  thou  bright  and  great  Heaven, 
Shouldest  thou  not  have  compassion  on  us  ? 

The  four  steeds  (gallop  about),  eager  and  strong1; 
The  tortoise-and-serpent  and  the  falcon  banners  fly 
about.  Disorder  grows,  and  no  peace  can  be  secured. 
Every  state  is  being  ruined ;  There  are  no  black 
heads  among  the  people  2.  Everything  is  reduced 
to  ashes  by  calamity.  Oh !  alas  !  The  doom  of  the 
kingdom  hurries  on. 

There  is  nothing  to  arrest  the  doom  of  the  king- 
dom; Heaven  does  not  nourish  us.  There  is  no 
place  in  which  to  stop  securely ;  There  is  no  place 
to  which  to  go.  Superior  men  are  the  bonds  (of  the 
social  state) 3,  Allowing  no  love  of  strife  in  their 
hearts.  Who  reared  the  steps  of  the  dissatisfaction4, 
Which  has  reached  the  present  distress  ? 

The  grief  of  my  heart  is  extreme,  And  I  dwell 
on  (the  condition  of)  our  land.  I  was  born  at  an 
unhappy  time,  To  meet  with  the  severe  anger  of 
Heaven.  From  the  west  to  the  east,  There  is  no 
quiet  place  of  abiding.  Many  are  the  distresses  I 
meet  with ;  Very  urgent  is  the  trouble  on  our 
borders. 

Heaven  is  sending  down  death  and  disorder,   And 

1  That  is,  the  war- chariots,  each  drawn  by  its  team  of  four 
horses. 

2  The  young  and  able-bodied  of  the  people  were  slain  or  absent 
on  distant  expeditions,  and  only  old  and  gray-headed  men  were  to 
be  seen. 

3  Intimating  that  no  such  men  were  now  to  be  found  in  office. 

4  Meaning  the  king  by  his  misgovernment  and  employment  of 
bad  men. 


ODE  4.  THE   MAJOR    ODES    OF    THE   KINGDOM.  419 

has  put  an  end  to  our  king.  It  is  (now)  sending 
down  those  devourers  of  the  grain,  So  that  the 
husbandry  is  all  in  evil  case.  Alas  for  our  middle 
states  * !  All  is  in  peril  and  going  to  ruin.  I  have 
no  strength  (to  do  anything),  And  think  of  (the 
Power  in)  the  azure  vault. 

Ode  4.     The  Yun  Han. 

KING  HSU  AN,  ON  OCCASION  OF  A  GREAT  DROUGHT,  EXPOSTULATES  WITH 
GOD  AND  ALL  THE  SPIRITS,  WHO  MIGHT  BE  EXPECTED  TO  HELP  HIM 
AND  HIS  PEOPLE ;  ASKS  THEM  WHEREFORE  THEY  WERE  CONTENDING 
WITH  HIM  J  AND  DETAILS  THE  MEASURES  HE  HAD  TAKEN,  AND  WAS 
STILL   TAKING,    FOR   THE   REMOVAL    OF   THE   CALAMITY. 

King  Hsuan  does  not  occur  by  name  in  the  ode,  though  the  remark- 
able prayer  which  it  relates  is  ascribed  to  a  king  in  stanza  1.  All 
critics  have  admitted  the  statement  of  the  Preface  that  the  piece 
was  made,  in  admiration  of  king  Hsuan,  by  Zang  Shu,  a  great 
officer,  we  may  presume,  of  the  court.  The  standard  chronology 
places  the  commencement  of  the  drought  in  b.c  822,  the  sixth 
year  of  Hsiian's  reign.     How  long  it  continued  we  cannot  tell. 

Bright  was  the  milky  way,  Shining  and  revolving 
in  the  sky.  The  king  said,  '  Oh !  What  crime  is 
chargeable  on  us  now,  That  Heaven  (thus)  sends 
down  death  and  disorder  ?  Famine  comes  again 
and  again.  There  is  no  spirit  I  have  not  sacrificed 
to2;     There  is   no  victim  I   have  grudged;     Our 

1  We  must  translate  here  in  the  plural,  'the  middle  states'  mean- 
ing all  the  states  subject  to  the  sovereign  of  ifau. 

2  In  the  Official  Book  of  jST&u,  among  the  duties  of  the  Minister 
of  Instruction,  or,  as  Biot  translates  the  title,  '  the  Director  of  the 
Multitudes/  it  is  stated  that  one  of  the  things  he  has  to  do,  on 
occurrences  of  famine,  is  '  to  seek  out  the  spirits/  that  is,  as  ex- 
plained by  the  commentators,  to  see  that  sacrifices  are  offered  to 
all  the  spirits,  even  such  as  may  have  been  discontinued.  This 
rule  had,  no  doubt,  been  acted  on  during  the  drought  which  this 
ode  describes. 

e  e  2 


420  THE   SHIH   KING.  DECADE  III. 

jade  symbols,  oblong  and  round,  are  exhausted1 ;  — 
How  is  it  that  I  am  not  heard  ? 

'  The  drought  is  excessive  ;  Its  fervours  become 
more  and  more  tormenting.  I  have  not  ceased 
offering  pure  sacrifices ;  From  the  border  altars 
I  have  gone  to  the  ancestral  temple2.  To  the 
(Powers)  above  and  below  I  have  presented  my 
offerings  and  then  buried  them3; — There  is  no 
spirit  whom  I  have  not  honoured.  Hiu-^1  is  not 
equal  to  the  occasion ;  God  does  not  come  to  us. 
This  wasting  and  ruin  of  our  country, — Would  that 
it  fell  (only)  on  me ! 

'  The  drought  is  excessive,  And  I  may  not  try 
to  excuse  myself.  I  am  full  of  terror,  and  feel  the 
peril,  Like  the  clap  of  thunder  or  the  roll.  Of  the 
remnant  of  -AT&u,  among  the  black-haired  people, 
There  will  not  be  half  a  man  left ;  Nor  will  God 
from  his  great  heaven  exempt  (even)  me.      Shall 


1  We  have,  in  the  sixth  Book  of  the  fifth  Part  of  the  Shu,  an 
instance  of  the  use  of  the  symbols  here  mentioned  in  sacrificing  to 
the  spirits  of  departed  kings.  The  Official  Book,  among  the 
duties  of  the  Minister  of  Religion,  mentions  the  use  of  these  and 
other  symbols — in  all  six,  of  different  shapes  and  colours — at  the 
different  sacrifices. 

2  By  'the  border  altars'  we  are  to  understand  the  altars  in  the 
suburbs  of  the  capital,  where  Heaven  and  Earth  were  sacrificed 
to; — the  great  services  at  the  solstices,  and  any  other  seasons. 
The  mention  of  Hau-£i  in  the  seventh  line  makes  us  think  espe- 
cially of  the  service  in  the  spring,  to  pray  for  a  good  year,  when 
Hdu-if  was  associated  with  God. 

3  '  The  (Powers)  above  and  below '  are  Heaven  and  Earth.  The 
offerings,  during  the  progress  of  the  service,  were  placed  on  the 
ground,  or  on  the  altars,  and  buried  in  the  earth  at  the  close  of  it. 
This  explains  what  the  king  says  in  the  first  stanza  about  the 
offerings  of  jade  being  exhausted. 


ODE  4.  THE   MAJOR    ODES    OF    THE   KINGDOM.  42 1 

we  not  mingle  our  fears  together  ?    (The  sacrifices 
to)  my  ancestors  will  be  extinguished  \ 

'  The  drought  is  excessive,  And  it  cannot  be 
stopped.  More  fierce  and  fiery,  It  is  leaving  me 
no  place.  My  end  is  near; — I  have  none  to  look 
up,  none  to  look  round,  to.  The  many  dukes  and 
their  ministers  of  the  past 2  Give  me  no  help. 
O  ye  parents  and  (nearer)  ancestors 3,  How  can 
ye  bear  to  see  me  thus  ? 

*  The  drought  is  excessive; — Parched  are  the 
hills,  and  the  streams  are  dried.  The  demon  of 
drought  exercises  his  oppression,  As  if  scattering 
flames  and  fire4  My  heart  is  terrified  with  the 
heat ; — My  sorrowing  heart  is  as  if  on  fire.     The 

1  Equivalent  to  the  extinction  of  the  dynasty. 

2  The  king  had  sacrificed  to  all  the  early  lords  of  ^au.  '  The 
many  dukes'  may  comprehend  kings  Thai  and  K\.  He  had  also 
sacrificed  to  their  ministers.  Compare  what  Pan-kang  says  in  the 
Shu,  p.  109,  about  his  predecessors  and  their  ministers.  Some 
take  '  the  many  dukes,  and  the  ministers/  of  all  princes  of  states 
who  had  signalised  themselves  by  services  to  the  people  and 
kingdom. 

8  The  king  could  hardly  hope  that  his  father,  the  oppressive  Li, 
would  in  his  spirit-state  give  him  any  aid ;  but  we  need  only  find  in 
his  words  the  expression  of  natural  feeling.  Probably  it  was  the 
consideration  of  the  character  of  Li  which  has  made  some  critics 
understand  by  ' parents'  and  'ancestors'  the  same  individuals, 
namely,  kings  Wan  and  Wu,  '  the  ancestors '  of  Hsiian,  and  who 
had  truly  been  'the  parents'  of  the  people. 

4  Khung  Ying-td,  from  '  the  Book  of  Spirits  and  Marvels,'  gives 
the  following  account  of '  the  demon  of  drought :' — '  In  the  southern 
regions  there  is  a  man,  two  or  three  cubits  in  height,  with  the 
upper  part  of  his  body  bare,  and  his  eyes  in  the  top  of  his  head. 
He  runs  with  the  speed  of  the  wind,  and  is  named  Po,  In  what- 
ever state  he  appears,  there  ensues  a  great  drought.'  The  Book 
of  Spirits  and  Marvels,  however,  as  it  now  exists,  cannot  be  older 
than  our  fourth  or  fifth  century. 


422  THE   SHIH    KING.  DECADE  III. 

many  dukes  and  their  ministers  of  the  past  Do  not 
hear  me.  O  God,  from  thy  great  heaven,  Grant 
me  the  liberty  to  withdraw  (into  retirement1). 

'  The  drought  is  excessive  ; — I  struggle  and  fear 
to  go  away.  How  is  it  that  I  am  afflicted  with  this 
drought  ?  I  cannot  ascertain  the  cause  of  it.  In 
praying  for  a  good  year  I  was  abundantly  early  2. 
I  was  not  late  (in  sacrificing)  to  (the  spirits  of) 
the  four  quarters  and  of  the  land  3.  God  in  great 
heaven  Does  not  consider  me.  Reverent  to  the 
intelligent  spirits,  I  ought  not  to  be  thus  the 
object  of  their  anger. 

1  The  drought  is  excessive ; — All  is  dispersion, 
and  the  bonds  of  government  are  relaxed.  Reduced 
to  extremities  are  the  heads  of  departments ;  Full 
of  distress  are  my  chief  ministers,  The  Master  of 
the  Horse,  the  Commander  of  the  Guards,  The 
chief  Cook4,  and  my  attendants.  There  is  no  one 
who  has  not  (tried  to)  help  (the  people) ;  They 
have  not  refrained  on  the  ground  of  being  unable. 
I  look  up  to  the  great  heaven  ; — Why  am  I  plunged 
in  this  sorrow  ? 

'  I  look  up  to  the  great  heaven,  But  its  stars 
sparkle  bright.  My  great  officers  and  excellent  men, 
Ye  have  reverently  drawn  near  (to  Heaven)  with  all 

1  That  is,  to  withdraw  and  give  place  to  a  more  worthy 
sovereign. 

2  This  was  the  border  sacrifice  to  God,  when  Hau-£f  was 
associated  with  him.  Some  critics  add  a  sacrifice  in  the  first 
month  of  winter,  for  a  blessing  on  the  ensuing  year,  offered  to 
'the  honoured  ones  of  heaven/ — the  sun,  moon,  and  zodiacal 
constellations. 

3  See  note  2  on  p.  371. 

4  See  note  1  on  p.  356. 


ODE  5-  THE    MAJOR    ODES    OF    THE    KINGDOM.  423 

your  powers.  Death  is  approaching,  But  do  not 
cast  away  what  you  have  done.  You  are  seeking 
not  for  me  only,  But  to  give  rest  to  all  our  depart- 
ments. I  look  up  to  the  great  heaven; — When 
shall  I  be  favoured  with  repose  ? ' 

Ode  5,  Stanzas  1,  2,  and  4.     The  Sung  Kao. 

CELEBRATING  THE  APPOINTMENT  BY  KING  HStJAN  OF  A  RELATIVE  TO 
BE  THE  MARQUIS  OF  SHAN,  AND  DEFENDER  OF  THE  SOUTHERN 
BORDER  OF  THE  KINGDOM,  WITH  THE  ARRANGEMENTS  MADE  FOR 
HIS   ENTERING    ON   HIS    CHARGE. 

That  the  king  who  appears  in  this  piece  was  king  Hsuan  is  suffi- 
ciently established.  He  appears  in  it  commissioning  '  his  great 
uncle/  an  elder  brother,  that  is,  of  his  mother,  to  go  and  rule,  as 
marquis  of  Shan,  and  chief  or  president  of  the  states  in  the 
south  of  the  kingdom,  to  defend  the  borders  against  the  en- 
croaching hordes  of  the  south,  headed  by  the  princes  of  Khu, 
whose  lords  had  been  rebellious  against  the  middle  states  even 
in  the  time  of  the  Shang  dynasty ; — see  the  last  of  the  Sacrificial 
Odes  of  Shang. 

Grandly  lofty  are  the  mountains,  With  their 
large  masses  reaching  to  the  heavens.  From  those 
mountains  was  sent  down  a  spirit,  Who  produced 
the  birth  of  (the  princes  of)  Fu  and  Shan  \    Fu  and 

1  Shan  was  a  small  marquisate,  a  part  of  what  is  the  present 
department  of  Nan-yang,  Ho-nan.  Fu,  which  was  also  called 
Lii,  was  another  small  territory,  not  far  from  Shan.  The  princes 
of  both  were  Clangs,  descended  from  the  chief  minister  of  Yao, 
called  in  the  first  Book  of  the  Shu,  '  the  Four  Mountains/  Other 
states  were  ruled  by  his  descendants,  particularly  the  great  state  of 
Kht  When  it  is  said  here  that  a  spirit  was  sent  down  from  the 
great  mountains,  and  produced  the  birth  of  (the  princes  of)Fu  and 
Shan,  we  have,  probably,  a  legendary  tradition  concerning  the 
birth  of  Yao's  minister,  which  was  current  among  all  his  descend- 
ants ;  and  with  which  we  may  compare  the  legends  that  have  come 
under  our  notice  about  the  supernatural  births  of  the  ancestors  of 
the  founders  of  the  Houses  of  Shang  and  Zau.     The  character  for 


424  THE    SHIH    KING.  DECADE  III. 

Shan  Are  the  support  of  iTdu,  Screens  to  all 
the  states,  Diffusing  (their  influence)  over  the  four 
quarters  of  the  kingdom. 

Full  of  activity  is  the  chief  of  Shan,  And  the 
king  would  employ  him  to  continue  the  services  (of 
his  fathers),  With  his  capital  in  Hsieh  \  Where  he 
should  be  a  pattern  to  the  states  of  the  south.  The 
king  gave  charge  to  the  earl  of  Shao,  To  arrange 
all  about  the  residence  of  the  chief  of  Shan,  Where 
he  should  do  what  was  necessary  for  the  regions  of 
the  south,  And  where  his  posterity  might  maintain 
his  merit. 

Of  the  services  of  the  chief  of  Shan  The  founda- 
tion was  laid  by  the  earl  of  Shao,  Who  first  built 
the  walls  (of  his  city),  And  then  completed  his 
ancestral  temple2.  When  the  temple  was  completed, 
wide  and  grand,  The  king  conferred  on  the  chief  of 
Shao  Four  noble  steeds,  With  the  hooks  for  the 
trappings  of  the  breast-bands,  glittering  bright 3. 

*  mountains'  in  lines  1  and  3  is  the  same  that  occurs  in  the  title  of 
Yao's  minister.  On  the  statement  about  the  mountains  sending 
down  a  spirit,  Hwang  Hsun,  a  critic  of  the  Sung  dynasty,  says  that 
4  it  is  merely  a  personification  of  the  poet,  to  show  how  high 
Heaven  had  a  mind  to  revive  the  fortunes  of  K§m,  and  that  we 
need  not  trouble  ourselves  about  whether  there  was  such  a  spirit 
or  not.7 

1  Hsieh  was  in  the  present  Fang  Khx  of  the  department  of 
Nan-yang. 

2  Compare  with  this  the  account  given,  in  ode  3  of  the  first 
decade,  of  the  settling  of 'the  ancient  duke  Than-fu'  in  the  plain 
of  Xau.  Here,  as  there,  the  great  religious  edifice,  the  ancestral 
temple,  takes  precedence  of  all  other  buildings  in  the  new  city. 

3  The  steeds  with  their  equipments  were  tokens  of  the  royal 
favour,  usually  granted  on  occasions  of  investiture.  The  con- 
ferring of  them  was  followed  immediately  by  the  departure  of  the 
newly-invested  prince  to  his  charge. 


ODE  6.         THE    MAJOR    ODES    OF   THE    KINGDOM.  425 


Ode  6,  Stanzas  1  and  7.     The  ^sTang  Min. 

CELEBRATING  THE  VIRTUES  OF  /TUNG  SHAN-FU,  WHO  APPEARS  TO  HAVE 
BEEN  ONE  OF  THE  PRINCIPAL  MINISTERS  OF  KING  HStJAN,  AND  HIS 
DESPATCH  TO  THE  EAST,  TO  FORTIFY  THE  CAPITAL  OF  THE  STATE 
OF   KHt 

Heaven,  in  giving  birth  to  the  multitudes  of  the 
people,  To  every  faculty  and  relationship  annexed 
its  law.  The  people  possess  this  normal  nature, 
And  they  (consequently)  love  its  normal  virtue1. 
Heaven  beheld  the  ruler  of  A"au,  Brilliantly  affect- 
ing it  by  his  conduct  below,  And  to  maintain  him, 
its  Son,    Gave  birth  to  Aung  Shan-fti 2. 

Kxmg  Shan-fu  went  forth,  having  sacrificed  to  the 
spirit  of  the  road3.     His  four  steeds  were  strong; 

1  We  get  an  idea  of  the  meaning  which  has  been  attached  to 
these  four  lines  from  a  very  early  time  by  Mencms'  quotation 
of  them  (VI,  i,  ch.  6)  in  support  of  his  doctrine  of  the  goodness  of 
human  nature,  and  the  remark  on  the  piece  which  he  attributes 
to  Confucius,  that  *  the  maker  of  it  knew  indeed  the  constitution 
(of  our  nature)/  Every  faculty,  bodily  or  mental,  has  its  function 
to  fulfil,  and  every  relationship  its  duty  to  be  discharged.  The  func- 
tion and  the  duty  are  the  things  which  the  human  being  has  to 
observe  : — the  seeing  clearly,  for  instance,  with  the  eyes,  and  hearing 
distinctly  with  the  ears ;  the  maintenance  of  righteousness  between 
ruler  and  minister,  and  of  affection  between  parent  and  child. 
This  is  the  'normal  nature,'  and  the  'normal  virtue'  is  the  nature 
fulfilling  the  various  laws  of  its  constitution. 

2  The  connexion  between  these  four  lines  and  those  that  pre- 
cede is  this : — that  while  Heaven  produces  all  men  with  the  good 
nature  there  described,  on  occasions  it  produces  others  with  virtue 
and  powers  in  a  super-eminent  degree.  Such  an  occasion  was 
presented  by  the  case  of  king  Hsuan,  and  therefore,  to  mark  its 
appreciation  of  him,  and  for  his  help,  it  now  produced  Kxmg 
Shan-fu. 

3  This  was  a  special  sacrifice  at  the  commencement  of  a  journey, 
or  of  an  expedition.     See  note  2  on  p.  399. 


426  THE    SHIH    KING.  DECADE  III. 

His  men  were  alert,  He  was  always  anxious  lest 
he  should  not  be  equal  to  his  commission ;  His 
steeds  went  on  without  stopping,  To  the  tinkling 
of  their  eight  bells.  The  king  had  given  charge 
to  Aung  Shan-fti,  To  fortify  the  city  there  in 
the  east. 


Ode  7,  Stanzas  1  and  part  of  3.     The  Han  Yl. 

CELEBRATING  THE  MARQUIS  OF  HAN : HIS  INVESTITURE,  AND  THE  KING'S 

CHARGE  TO  HIM  j  THE  GIFTS  HE  RECEIVED,  AND  THE  PARTING  FEAST 
AT  THE  COURT ;  HIS  MARRIAGE  ;  THE  EXCELLENCE  OF  HIS  TERRI- 
TORY ;    AND  HIS  SWAY  OVER  THE  REGIONS  OF  THE  NORTH. 

Only  one  line — the  first  of  stanza  3- — in  this  interesting  piece 
serves  to  illustrate  the  religious  practices  of  the  time,  and  needs 
no  further  note  than  what  has  been  given  on  the  first  line  of 
stanza  7  in  the  preceding  ode.  The  name  of  the  marquisate 
of  Han  remains  in  the  district  of  Han-^ang,  department  of 
Hsi-an,  Shen-hsr,  in  which  also  is  mount  Liang. 

Very  grand  is  the  mountain  of  Liang,  Which  was 
made  cultivable  by  Yu.  Bright  is  the  way  from  it, 
(Along  which  came)  the  marquis  of  Han  to  receive 
investiture.  The  king  in  person  gave  the  charge  : — 
*  Continue  the  services  of  your  ancestors  ;  Let  not 
my  charge  to  you  come  to  nought.  Be  diligent  early 
and  late,  And  reverently  discharge  your  duties  : — 
So  shall  my  appointment  of  you  not  change.  Be  a 
support  against  those  princes  who  do  not  come  to 
court,    Thus  assisting  your  sovereign/ 

When  the  marquis  of  Han  left  the  court,  he 
sacrificed  to  the  spirit  of  the  road.  He  went  forth, 
and  lodged  for  the  night  in  Tti. 


ODE  8.         THE    MAJOR    ODES    OF    THE    KINGDOM.  427 


Ode  8,  Stanzas  4  and  5.     The  A"iang  Han. 

CELEBRATING  AN  EXPEDITION  AGAINST  THE  SOUTHERN  TRIBES  OF  THE 
HWAI,  AND  THE  WORK  DONE  FOR  THE  KING  IN  THEIR  COUNTRY,  BY 
HU,  THE  EARL  OF  ShAo,  WITH  THE  MANNER  IN  WHICH  THE  KING 
REWARDED  HIM,  AND  HE  RESPONDED  TO  THE  ROYAL  FAVOUR. 

Hu  was  probably  the  same  earl  of  SMo,  who  is  mentioned  in 
ode  5,  as  building  his  capital  of  Hsieh  for  the  new  marquis  of 
Shan.  The  lords  of  Shao  had  been  distinguished  in  the  service 
of  ^au  ever  since  the  rise  of  the  dynasty. 

The  king  gave  charge  to  H\x  of  Shao : — '  You 
have  everywhere  made  known  (and  carried  out  my 
orders).  When  (the  kings)  Wan  and  Wti  received 
their  appointment,  The  duke  of  Shao  was  their 
strong  support.  You  not  (only)  have  a  regard  to 
me  the  little  child,  But  you  try  to  resemble  that 
duke  of  Shao.  You  have  commenced  and  earnestly 
displayed  your  merit ;    And  I  will  make  you  happy. 

*  I  give  you  a  large  libation-cup  of  jade  x,  And  a 
jar  of  herb-flavoured  spirits  from  the  black  millet 2. 
I  have  made  announcement  to  the  Accomplished 
one  3,  And  confer  on  you  hills,  lands,  and  fields. 
In  (A^i-)^au  shall  you  receive  investiture,  Accord- 
ing as  your  ancestor  received  his/     Hu  bowed  with 

1  See  note  2  on  p.  386. 

2  The  cup  and  the  spirits  would  be  used  by  the  earl  when 
sacrificing  in  his  ancestral  temple.  Compare  the  similar  gift  from 
king  -Oang  to  the  duke  of  i£au,  in  the  Shu,  p.  194.  More  sub- 
stantial gifts  are  immediately  specified. 

8  'The  Accomplished  one'  is  understood  to  be  king  Wan  (  =  '  the 
Accomplished  king ').  He  was  the  founder  of  the  K&m  dynasty. 
To  him  the  kingdom  had  first  come  by  the  appointment  and  gift 
of  Heaven.  It  was  the  duty  therefore  of  his  successors,  in  making 
grants  of  territory  to  meritorious  officers,  to  announce  them  to  him 
in  Khl-k&a,  the  old  territory  of  the  family,  and  o"btain,  as  it  were, 
his  leave  for  what  they  were  doing. 


428  THE    SHIH    KING.  DECADE  III. 

his  head  to  the  ground  (and  said),     '  May  the  Son 
of  Heaven  live  for  ever!' 


Ode  10,  Stanzas  1,  5,  6,  and  7.    The  Ka^  Zang. 

THE  WRITER  DEPLORES,  WITH  AN  APPEALING  WAIL  TO  HEAVEN,  THE 
MISERY  AND  OPPRESSION  THAT  PREVAILED,  AND  INTIMATES  THAT 
THEY  WERE  CAUSED  BY  THE  INTERFERENCE  OF  WOMEN  AND  EUNUCHS 
IN  THE  GOVERNMENT. 

The  king  addressed  in  this  piece  was  most  probably  Yu.  It  suits 
his  character  and  reign. 

I  look  up  to  great  Heaven,  But  it  shows  us  no 
kindness.  Very  long  have  we  been  disquieted,  And 
these  great  calamities  are  sent  down  (upon  us). 
There  is  nothing  settled  in  the  country;  Officers 
and  people  are  in  distress.  Through  the  insects 
from  without  and  from  within,  There  is  no  peace 
or  limit  (to  our  misery).  The  net  of  crime  is  not 
taken  up  19  And  there  is  no  peace  nor  cure  (for 
our  state). 

Why  is  it  that  Heaven  is  (thus)  reproving  (you)  ? 
Why  is  it  that  Heaven  is  not  blessing  (you)  ?  You 
neglect  your  great  barbarian  (foes),  And  regard 
me  with  hatred.  You  are  regardless  of  the  evil 
omens  (that  abound  2),  And  your  demeanour  is  all 
unseemly.  (Good)  men  are  going  away,  And  the 
country  is  sure  to  go  to  ruin. 

Heaven  is  letting  down  its  net,  And  many  (are 
the  calamities  in  it).  (Good)  men  are  going  away, 
And  my  heart  is  sorrowful.    Heaven  is  letting  down 

1  By  'the  net  of  crime'  we  are  to  understand  the  multitude  of 
penal  laws,  to  whose  doom  people  were  exposed.  In  stanza  6, 
Heaven  is  represented  as  letting  it  down. 

2  Compare  ode  9. of  the  fourth  decade  in  the  former  Part. 


ODE  ii  THE    MAJOR    ODES    OF    THE    KINGDOM.  429 

its  net,    And  soon  (all  will  be  caught  in  it).    (Good) 
men  are  going  away,    And  my  heart  is  sad. 

Right  from  the  spring  comes  the  water  bubbling, 
Revealing  its  depth.  The  sorrow  of  my  heart,— Is 
it  (only)  of  to-day  ?  Why  were  these  things  not 
before  me  ?  Or  why  were  they  not  after  me  ?  But 
mysteriously  great  Heaven  Is  able  to  strengthen 
anything.  Do  not  disgrace  your  great  ancestors  : — 
This  will  save  your  posterity 1. 

Ode  11,  Stanzas  1  and  2.     The  Shao  Min. 

THE  WRITER  APPEALS  TO  HEAVEN,  BEMOANING  THE  MISERY  AND  RUIN 
WHICH  WERE  GOING  ON,  AND  SHOWING  HOW  THEY  WERE  DUE  TO  THE 
KING'S  EMPLOYMENT  OF  MEAN  AND  WORTHLESS  CREATURES. 

Compassionate  Heaven  is  arrayed  in  angry  terrors. 
Heaven  is  indeed  sending  down  ruin,  Afflicting  us 
with  famine,  So  that  the  people  are  all  wandering 
fugitives.  In  the  settled  regions,  and  on  the  borders, 
all  is  desolation. 

Heaven  sends  down  its  net  of  crime; — Devour- 
ing insects,  who  weary  and  confuse  men's  minds, 
Ignorant,  oppressive,  negligent,  Breeders  of  con- 
fusion, utterly  perverse  :  —  These  are  the  men 
employed. 

1  The  writer  in  these  concluding  lines  ventures  to  summon  the 
king  to  repentance,  and  to  hold  out  a  hope  that  there  might  come 
a  change  in  their  state.  He  does  this,  believing  that  all  things  are 
possible  with  Heaven. 


LESSONS   FROM   THE   STATES. 

Odes  and  Stanzas  illustrating  the  Religious 
Views  and  Practices  of  the  Writers  and 
their  Times. 

It  has  been  stated  in  the  Introduction,  p.  276,  that  the  first  Part 
of  the  Shih,  called  the  Kwo  Fang,  or  'Lessons  from  the 
States/  consists  of  160  pieces,  descriptive  of  manners  and 
events  in  several  of  the  feudal  states  into  which  the  kingdom 
of  K&w  was  divided.  Nearly  all  of  them  are  short ;  and  the 
passages  illustrating  the  religious  views  and  practices  of  their 
times  are  comparatively  few.  What  passages  there  are,  however, 
of  this  nature  will  all  be  found  below.  The  pieces  are  not 
arranged  in  decades,  as  in  the  Odes  of  the  Kingdom,  but  in 
Books,  under  the  names  of  the  states  in  which  they  were 
produced. 

Although  the  Kwo  Fang  form,  as  usually  published,  the  first  Part 
of  the  Shih,  nearly  all  of  them  are  more  recent  in  their  origin 
than  the  pieces  of  the  other  Parts.  They  bring  us  face  to  face 
with  the  states  of  the  kingdom,  and  the  ways  of  their  officers  and 
people  for  several  centuries  of  the  dynasty  of  K&u. 


Book  II.     The  Odes  of  Shao  and  the  South. 

The  Shu  and  previous  portions  of  the  Shih  have  made  us  familiar 
with  Shao,  the  name  of  the  appanage  of  Shih,  one  of  the  prin- 
cipal ministers  at  the  court  of  K&u  in  the  first  two  reigns  of  the 
dynasty.  The  site  of  the  city  of  Shao  was  in  the  present  depart- 
ment of  Fang-Miang,  Shen-hsi.  The  first  possessor  of  it, 
along  with  the  still  more  famous  duke  of  iTau,  remained  at 
court,  to  watch  over  the  fortunes  of  the  new  dynasty.  They  were 
known  as  '  the  highest  dukes '  and  '  the  two  great  chiefs/  the 
duke  of  -ATau  having  charge  of  the  eastern  portions  of  the  king- 
dom, and  the  other  of  the  western.  The  pieces  in  this  Book  are 
supposed  to  have  been  produced  in  SMo,  and  the  principalities 
south  of  it  within  his  jurisdiction,  by  the  duke. 


BOOK  II.  2.  LESSONS   FROM    THE    STATES.  43 1 


Ode  2.     The  Zhai  Fan. 

CELEBRATING    THE   INDUSTRY   AND   REVERENCE    OF    A   PRINCE'S   WIFE, 
ASSISTING   HIM   IN   SACRIFICING. 

We  must  suppose  the  ladies  of  a  harem,  in  one  of  the  states  of  the 
south,  admiring  and  praising  in  these  simple  stanzas  the  way  in 
which  their  mistress  discharged  her  duties.  A  view  of  the  ode 
maintained  by  many  is  that  the  lady  gathered  the  southernwood, 
not  to  use  it  in  sacrificing,  but  in  the  nurture  of  the  silkworms 
under  her  care ;  but  the  evidence  of  the  characters  in  the  text  is, 
on  the  whole,  in  favour  of  the  more  common  view.  Constant 
reference  is  made  to  the  piece  by  Chinese  moralists,  to  show  that 
the  most  trivial  things  are  accepted  in  sacrifice,  when  there  are 
reverence  and  sincerity  in  the  presenting  of  them. 

One  critic  asked  Kb.  Hsi  whether  it  was  conceivable  that  the  wife 
of  a  prince  did  herself  what  is  here  related,  and  he  replied  that 
the  poet  said  so.  Another  has  observed  that  if  the  lady  ordered 
and  employed  others,  it  was  still  her  own  doing.  But  that  the 
lady  did  it  herself  is  not  incredible,  when  we  consider  the  sim- 
plicity of  those  early  times,  in  the  twelfth  century  b.  c. 

She  gathers  the  white  southernwood,  By  the 
ponds,  on  the  islets.  She  employs  it,  In  the 
business  of  our  prince. 

She  gathers  the  white  southernwood,  Along 
the  streams  in  the  valleys.  She  employs  it,  In 
the  temple 1  of  our  prince. 

1  If  the  character  here  translated  '  temple'  had  no  other  signifi- 
cation but  that,  there  would  be  an  end  of  the  dispute  about  the 
meaning  of  the  piece.  But  while  we  find  it  often  used  of  the 
ancestral  temple,  it  may  also  mean  any  building,  especially  one  of 
a  large  and  public  character,  such  as  a  palace  or  mansion ;  and 
hence  some  contend  that  it  should  be  interpreted  here  of '  the  silk- 
worm house/  We  are  to  conceive  of  the  lady,  after  having 
gathered  the  materials  for  sacrificial  use,  then  preparing  them 
according  to  rule,  and  while  it  is  yet  dark  on  the  morning  of  the 
sacrificial  day,  going  with  them  into  the  temple,  and  setting  them 
forth  in  their  proper  vessels  and  places. 


432  THE   SHIH    KING.  BOOK  n.  4. 

With  head-dress  reverently  rising  aloft,  Early, 
while  yet  it  is  night,  she  is  in  the  prince's  (temple). 
In  her  head-dress,  slowly  retiring,  She  returns  (to 
her  own  apartments). 

Ode  4.     The  Zhai  Pin. 

CELEBRATING  THE  DILIGENCE  AND  REVERENCE  OF  THE  YOUNG  WIFE   OF 
AN  OFFICER,  DOING  HER  PART  IN  SACRIFICIAL  OFFERINGS. 

She  gathers  the  large  duckweed,  By  the  banks 
of  the  stream  in  the  southern  valley.  She  gathers 
the  pondweed,     In  those  pools  left  by  the  floods. 

She  deposits  what  she  gathers,  In  her  square 
baskets  and  round  ones.  She  boils  it,  In  her  tripods 
and  pans. 

She  sets  forth  her  preparations,  Under  the  window 
in  the  ancestral  chamber1.  Who  superintends  the 
business  ?     It  is  (this)  reverent  young  lady. 

1  '  The  ancestral  chamber'  was  a  room  behind  the  temple  of  the 
family,  dedicated  specially  to  the  ancestor  of  the  officer  whose  wife 
is  the  subject  of  the  piece.  The  princes  of  states  were  succeeded, 
as  a  rule,  by  the  eldest  son  of  the  wife  proper.  Their  sons  by 
other  wives  were  called  '  other  sons.'  The  eldest  son  by  the  wife 
proper  of  one  of  them  became  the  'great  ancestor'  of  the  clan 
descended  from  him,  and  'the  ancestral  chamber'  was  an  apart- 
ment dedicated  to  him.  Mao  and  other  interpreters,  going  on  cer- 
tain statements  as  to  the  training  of  daughters  in  the  business  of 
sacrificing  in  this  apartment  for  three  months  previous  to  their 
marriage,  contend  that  the  lady  spoken  of  here  was  not  yet 
married,  but  was  only  undergoing  this  preparatory  education. 
It  is  not  necessary,  however,  to  adopt  this  interpretation.  The 
lady  appears  doing  the  same  duties  as  the  wife  in  the  former 
piece. 


BOOK  III.  4.  LESSONS    FROM    THE    STATES.  43; 


Book  III.     The  Odes  of  Phei. 

When  king  Wu  overthrew  the  dynasty  of  Shang,  the  domain  of  its 
kings  was  divided  into  three  portions,  the  northern  portion  being 
called  Phei,  the  southern  Yung,  and  the  eastern  Wei,  the  rulers 
of  which  last  in  course  of  time  absorbed  the  other  two.  It 
is  impossible  to  say  why  the  old  names  were  retained  in  the 
arrangement  of  the  odes  in  this  Part  of  the  Shih,  for  it  is  acknow- 
ledged on  all  hands  that  the  pieces  in  Books  iii  and  iv,  as  well 
as  those  of  Book  v,  are  all  odes  of  Wei. 

Ode  4.     The  Zah  Yueh. 

SUPPOSED  TO  BE  THE  COMPLAINT  AND  APPEAL  OF  isTWANG  TsflANG,  A 
MARCHIONESS  OF  WEI,  AGAINST  THE  BAD  TREATMENT  SHE  RECEIVED 
FROM  HER   HUSBAND. 

All  the  Chinese  critics  give  this  interpretation  of  the  piece.  iTwang 
^iang  was  a  daughter  of  the  house  of  Kh%  about  the  middle  of 
the  eighth  century  b.  c,  and  was  married  to  the  marquis  Yang, 
known  in  history  as  '  duke  iTwang/  of  Wei.  She  was  a  lady  of 
admirable  character,  and  beautiful;  but  her  husband  proved 
faithless  and  unkind.  In  this  ode  she  makes  her  subdued  moan, 
appealing  to  the  sun  and  moon,  as  if  they  could  take  cognizance 
of  the  way  in  which  she  was  treated.  Possibly,  however,  the 
addressing  those  bodies  may  simply  be  an  instance  of  proso- 
popoeia. 

O  sun,  O  moon,  Which  enlighten  this  lower 
earth !  Here  is  this  man,  Who  treats  me  not  ac- 
cording to  the  ancient  rule.  How  can  he  get  his 
mind  settled  ?    Would  he  then  not  regard  me  ? 

O  sun,  O  moon,  Which  overshadow  this  lower 
earth  !  Here  is  this  man,  Who  will  not  be  friendly 
with  me.  How  can  he  get  his  mind  settled?  Would 
he  then  not  respond  to  me  ? 

O  sun,  O  moon,  Which  come  forth  from  the 
east !  Here  is  this  man,  With  virtuous  words,  but 
really  not  good.  How  can  he  get  his  mind  settled  ? 
Would  he  then  allow  me  to  be  forgotten  ? 

M  Ff 


434  THE    SHIH    KING.  BOOK  IV. 

0  sun,  O  moon,  From  the  east  that  come  forth  ! 
O  father,  O  mother,  There  is  no  sequel  to  your 
nourishing  of  me.  How  can  he  get  his  mind  settled? 
Would  he  then  respond  to  me  contrary  to  all  reason  ? 

Ode  15,  Stanza  1.     The  Pei  Man. 

AN  OFFICER  OF  WEI  SETS  FORTH  HIS  HARD  LOT,  THROUGH  DISTRESSES 
AND  THE  BURDENS  LAID  UPON  HIM,  AND  HIS  SILENCE  UNDER  IT  IN 
SUBMISSION    TO   HEAVEN. 

1  go  out  at  the  north  gate,  With  my  heart  full 
of  sorrow.  Straitened  am  I  and  poor,  And  no  one 
takes  knowledge  of  my  distress.  So  it  is  !  Heaven 
has  done  it 1 ; — What  then  shall  I  say  ? 


Book    IV.       The    Odes   of    Yung. 

See  the  preliminary  note  on  p.  433. 
Ode  1.     The  Pai  Aau. 

PROTEST  OF  A  WIDOW  AGAINST  BEING  URGED  TO  MARRY  AGAIN,  AND 
HER  APPEAL  TO  HER  MOTHER  AND  TO  HEAVEN. 

This  pieee,  it  is  said,  was  made  by  Kung  ^iang,  the  widow  of 
Kung-po,  son  of  the  marquis  Hsi  of  Wei  (b.c.  855-814).  Kung- 
po  having  died  an  early  death,  her  parents  (who  must  have  been 
the  marquis  oiKffi.  and  his  wife  or  one  of  the  ladies  of  his  harem) 
wanted  to  force  her  to  a  second  marriage,  against  which  she 
protests.     The  ode  was  preserved,  no  doubt,  as  an  example  of 

1  The  c  Complete  Digest  of  Comments  on  the  Shih '  warns  its 
readers  not  to  take  'Heaven'  here  as  synonymous  with  Ming, 
'  what  is  decreed  or  commanded/  The  writer  does  not  go  on 
to  define  the  precise  idea  which  he  understood  the  character  to 
convey.  This  appears  to  be  what  we  often  mean  by  '  Providence/ 
when  we  speak  of  anything  permitted,  rather  than  appointed,  by 
the  supreme  ruling  Power. 


ODE  3.  LESSONS    FROM    THE    STATES.  435 

what  the  Chinese  have  always  considered  a  great  virtue, — the 
refusal  of  a  widow  to  marry  again. 

It  floats  about,  that  boat  of  cypress  wood,  There 
in  the  middle  of  the  Ho1.  With  his  two  tufts  of 
hair  falling  over  his  forehead2,  He  was  my  mate; 
And  I  swear  that  till  death  I  will  have  no  other. 
O  mother,  O  Heaven3,  Why  will  you  not  under- 
stand me  ? 

It  floats  about,  that  boat  of  cypress  wood,  There 
by  the  side  of  the  Ho.  With  his  two  tufts  of  hair 
falling  over  his  forehead,  He  was  my  only  one ; 
And  I  swear  that  till  death  I  will  not  do  the  evil 
thing.  O  mother,  O  Heaven,  Why  will  you  not 
understand  me  ? 

Ode  3,  Stanza  2.     The  JTun-Bze  Kieh  Lao. 

CONTRAST   BETWEEN  THE   BEAUTY   AND   SPLENDOUR    OF  HSU  AN  TsTIANG 
AND   HER   VICIOUSNESS. 

Hsiian  ^iang  was  a  princess  of  Kh\,  who,  towards  the  close  of  the 
seventh  century  B.C.,  became  wife  to  the  marquis  of  Wei,  known 
as  duke  Hsiian.  She  was  beautiful  and  unfortunate,  but  various 
things  are  related  of  her  indicative  of  the  grossest  immoralities 
prevailing  in  the  court  of  Wei. 

How  rich  and  splendid     Is  her  pheasant-figured 

1  These  allusive  lines,  probably,  indicate  the  speaker's  widow- 
hood, which  left  her  like  *  a  boat  floating  about  on  the  water/ 

2  Such  was  the  mode  in  which  the  hair  was  kept,  while  a  boy  or 
young  man's  parents  were  alive,  parted  into  two  tufts  from  the  pia 
mater,  and  brought  down  as  low  as  the  eyebrows  on  either  side 
of  the  forehead. 

3  Mao  thought  that  the  lady  intended  her  father  by  '  Heaven ;' 
while  Zu  held  that  her  father  may  have  been  dead,  and  that  the 
mother  is  called  Heaven,  with  reference  to  the  kindness  and  pro- 
tection that  she  ought  to  show.  There  seems  rather  to  be  in  the 
term  a  wild,  and  not  very  intelligent,  appeal  to  the  supreme  Power 
in  heaven. 

F  f  2 


436  THE    SHIH    KING.  BOOK  IV.  6. 

robe1!  Her  black  hair  in  masses  like  clouds,  No 
false  locks  does  she  descend  to.  There  are  her  ear- 
plugs of  jade,  Her  comb-pin  of  ivory,  And  her 
high  forehead,  so  white.  She  appears  like  a  visitant 
from  heaven  !     She  appears  like  a  goddess 2. 

Ode  6,  Stanzas  1  and  2.    The  Ting  kih  fang  ICxjng. 

CELEBRATING  THE  PRAISE    OF  DUKE  WAN  ; HIS  DILIGENCE,  FORESIGHT, 

USE   OF    DIVINATION,   AND    OTHER   QUALITIES. 

The  state  of  Wei  was  reduced  to  extremity  by  an  irruption  of  some 
northern  hordes  in  b.  c.  660,  and  had  nearly  disappeared  from 
among  the  states  of  -ATau.  Under  the  marquis  Wei,  known  in 
history  as  duke  Wan,  its  fortunes  revived,  and  he  became  a  sort 
of  second  founder  of  the  state. 

When  Ting  culminated  (at  night-fall) 3,  He 
began  to  build  the  palace  at  .ATM4,     Determining 

1  The  lady  is  introduced  arrayed  in  the  gorgeous  robes  worn  by 
the  princess  of  a  state  in  the  ancestral  temple. 

2  P.  Lacharme  translated  these  two  concluding  lines  by  '  Tu 
primo  aspectu  coelos  (pulchritudine),  et  imperatorem  (majestate) 
adaequas,'  without  any  sanction  of  the  Chinese  critics  ;  and  more- 
over there  was  no  Ti  (fR*)  in  the  sense  of  imperator  then  in 
China.  The  sovereigns  of  -ATau  were  wang  or  kings.  KiX  Hsi 
expands  the  lines  thus  : — 'Such  is  the  beauty  of  her  robes  and 
appearance,  that  beholders  are  struck  with  awe,  as  if  she  were 
a  spiritual  being.'  Hsii  .Oien  (Yuan  dynasty)  deals  with  them 
thus: — '  With  such  splendour  of  beauty  and  dress,  how  is  it  that  she 
is  here?  She  has  come  down  from  heaven  1  She  is  a  spiritual 
being  !' 

3  Ting  is  the  name  of  a  small  space  in  the  heavens,  embracing 
a  Markab  and  another  star  of  Pegasus.  Its  culminating  at  night-fall 
was  the  signal  that  the  labours  of  husbandry  were  over  for  the 
year,  and  that  building  operations  should  be  taken  in  hand.  Great 
as  was  the  urgency  for  the  building  of  his  new  capital,  duke  Wan 
would  not  take  it  in  hand  till  the  proper  time  for  such  a  labour 
was  arrived. 

4  IM,  or  Khh-khm,  was  the  new  capital  of  Wei,  in  the  pre- 
sent district  of -Oang-wu,  department  ftkao-kau,  Shan-tung. 


BOOK  v.  4.  LESSONS   FROM    THE    STATES.  437 

its  aspects  by  means  of  the  sun.  He  built  the 
palace  at  Khix.  He  planted  about  it  hazel  and 
chesnut  trees,  The  1,  the  Thung,  the  3ze,  and  the 
varnish  tree.  Which,  when  cut  down,  might  afford 
materials  for  lutes. 

He  ascended  those  old  walls,  And  thence  sur- 
veyed (the  site  of)  Khix.  He  surveyed  Khix  and 
Thang  1}  With  the  lofty  hills  and  high  elevations 
about.  He  descended  and  examined  the  mulberry 
trees.  He  then  divined  by  the  tortoise-shell,  and 
got  a  favourable  response 2 ;  And  thus  the  issue 
has  been  truly  good. 


Book  V.     The  Odes  of  Wei. 

It  has  been  said  on  the  title  of  Book  iii,  that  Wei  at  first  was  the 
eastern  portion  of  the  old  domain  of  the  kings  of  Shang.  With 
this  a  brother  of  king  Wu,  called  Khang-shu,  was  invested.  The 
principality  was  afterwards  increased  by  the  absorption  of  Phei 
and  Yung.  It  came  to  embrace  portions  of  the  present  pro- 
vinces of  ^ih-lr,  Shan-tung,  and  Ho-nan.  It  outlasted  the 
dynasty  of  jOu  itself,  the  last  prince  of  Wei  being  reduced  to 
the  ranks  of  the  people  only  during  the  dynasty  of  Jfh'm. 

Ode  4,  Stanzas  1  and  2.     The  Mang. 

AN  UNFORTUNATE  WOMAN,  WHO  HAD  BEEN  SEDUCED  INTO  AN  IMPROPER 
CONNEXION,  NOW  CAST  OFF,  RELATES  AND  BEMOANS  HER  SAD  CASE. 

An  extract  is  given  from  the  pathetic  history  here  related,  because 
it  shows  how  divination  was  used  among  the  common  people, 
and  entered  generally  into  the  ordinary  affairs  of  life. 

A  simple-looking  lad  you  were,     Carrying  cloth 

1  Thang  was  the  name  of  a  town,  evidently  not  far  from  Khvi. 

2  We  have  seen  before  how  divination  was  resorted  to  on  occa- 
sion of  new  undertakings,  especially  in  proceeding  to  rear  a  city. 


43§  THE    SHIH    KING. 


BOOK  VI. 


to  exchange  it  for  silk.  (But)  you  came  not  so 
to  purchase  silk ; — You  came  to  make  proposals  to 
me.  I  convoyed  you  through  the  Kkl1,  As  far 
as  Tnn-khiix2,  '  It  is  not  1/(1  said),  '  who  would 
protract  the  time ;  But  you  have  had  no  good  go- 
between.  I  pray  you  be  not  angry,  And  let  autumn 
be  the  time/ 

I  ascended  that  ruinous  wall,  To  look  towards 
Fti-kwan 3 ;  And  when  I  saw  (you)  not  (coming 
from)  it,  My  tears  flowed  in  streams.  When  I  did 
see  (you  coming  from)  Fti-kwan,  I  laughed  and 
I  spoke.  You  had  consulted,  (you  said),  the  tortoise- 
shell  and  the  divining  stalks,  And  there  was  nothing 
unfavourable  in  their  response4.  'Then  come/  (I 
said),  '  with  your  carriage,  And  I  will  remove  with 
my  goods/ 


Book  VI.     The  Odes  of  the  Royal  Domain. 

King  Wan,  it  has  been  seen,  had  for  his  capital  the  city  of  Fang, 
from  which  his  son,  king  Wu,  moved  the  seat  of  government 
to  Hao.   In  the  time  of  king  Kh&xig,  a  city  was  built  by  the  duke 

1  The  Kh\  was  a  famous  river  of  Wei. 

2  Tun-^iu  was  a  well-known  place  — l  the  mound  or  height  of 
Tun ' — south  of  the  Wei. 

3  Fii-kwan  must  have  been  the  place  where  the  man  lived, 
according  to  Kb.  Rather,  it  must  have  been  a  pass  (Fu-kwan 
may  mean  '  the  gate  or  pass  of  Fu'),  through  which  he  would  come, 
and  was  visible  from  near  the  residence  of  the  woman. 

4  Ying-td  observes  that  the  man  had  never  divined  about  the 
matter,  and  said  that  he  had  done  so  only  to  complete  the  process 
of  seduction.  The  critics  dwell  on  the  inconsistency  of  divination 
being  resorted  to  in  such  a  case: — ' Divination  is  proper  only  if 
used  in  reference  to  what  is  right  and  moral.' 


ODE  I.  LESSONS    FROM    THE    STATES.  439 

of  .£au,  near  the  present  Lo-yang,  and  called  '  the  eastern 
capital.'  Meetings  of  the  princes  of  the  states  assembled  there  ; 
but  the  court  continued  to  be  held  at  Hao  till  the  accession  of 
king  Phing  in  b.  c.  770.  From  that  time,  the  kings  of  K&u  sank 
nearly  to  the  level  of  the  princes  of  the  states,  and  the  poems 
collected  in  their  domain  were  classed  among  the  '  Lessons  of 
Manners  from  the  States/  though  still  distinguished  by  the 
epithet  '  royal '  prefixed  to  them. 

Ode  1,  Stanza  1.     The  Sh<j  Li. 

AN  OFFICER  DESCRIBES  HIS  MELANCHOLY  AND  REFLECTIONS  ON  SEEING 
THE  DESOLATION  OF  THE  OLD  CAPITAL  OF  JCAU,  MAKING  HIS  MOAN 
TO    HEAVEN    BECAUSE    OF    IT. 

There  is  no  specific  mention  of  the  old  capital  ofiTau  in  the  piece, 
but  the  schools  of  Mao  and  jSTu  are  agreed  in  this  interpreta- 
tion, which  is  much  more  likely  than  any  of  the  others  that  have 
been  proposed. 

There  was  the  millet  with  its  drooping  heads  ; 
There  was  the  sacrificial  millet  coming  into  blade  \ 
Slowly  I  moved  about,  In  my  heart  all-agitated. 
Those  who  knew  me  Said  I  was  sad  at  heart. 
Those  who  did  not  know  me,  Said  I  was  seeking 
for  something.  O  thou  distant  and  azure  Heaven2! 
By  what  man  was  this  (brought  about) 3  ? 

1  That  is,  there  where  the  ancestral  temple  and  other  grand 
buildings  of  Hao  had  once  stood. 

2  '  He  cried  out  to  Heaven/  says  Yen  $Mn,  '  and  told  (his  dis- 
tress), but  he  calls  it  distant  in  its  azure  brightness,  lamenting  that 
his  complaint  was  not  heard/  This  is,  probably,  the  correct  expla- 
nation of  the  language.  The  speaker  would  by  it  express  his  grief 
that  the  dynasty  of  K&u  and  its  people  were  abandoned  and  un- 
cared  for  by  Heaven. 

3  Referring  to  king  Yu,  whose  reckless  course  had  led  to  the 
destruction  of  Hao  by  the  Zung,  and  in  a  minor  degree  to  his 
son,  king  Phing,  who  had  subsequently  removed  to  the  eastern 
capital. 


44-0  THE    SHIH    KING.  BOOK  x. 

Ode  9,  Stanzas  1  and  3.     The  Ta  Kxj. 

A  LADY  EXCUSES  HERSELF  FOR  NOT  FLYING  TO  HER  LOVER  BY  HER 
FEAR  OF  A  SEVERE  AND  VIRTUOUS  MAGISTRATE,  AND  SWEARS  TO  HIM 
THAT  SHE  IS  SINCERE  IN  HER  ATTACHMENT  TO  HIM. 

His  great  carriage  rolls  along,  And  his  robes  of 
rank  glitter  like  the  young  sedge.  Do  I  not  think 
of  you  ?  But  I  am  afraid  of  this  officer,  and  dare 
not  (fly  to  you). 

While  living  we  may  have  to  occupy  different 
apartments ;  But,  when  dead,  we  shall  share  the 
same  grave.  If  you  say  that  I  am  not  sincere,  By 
the  bright  sun  I  swear  that  I  am 1. 


Book  X.     The  Odes  of  Thang. 

The  odes  of  Thang  were  really  the  odes  of  3in,  the  greatest  of  the 
fiefs  of  Kau  until  the  rise  of  .Oin.  King  KhdJig,  in  b.  c.  1107, 
invested  his  younger  brother,  called  Shu-yu,  with  the  territory 
where  Yao  was  supposed  to  have  ruled  anciently  as  the  marquis 
of  Thang,  in  the  present  department  of  Thai-yuan,  Shan-hsi, 
the  fief  retaining  that  ancient  name.  Subsequently  the  name  of 
the  state  was  changed  to  jjin,  from  the  river  gin  in  the  southern 
part  of  it. 

Ode  8,  Stanza  1.     The  Pao  Yu. 

THE  MEN  OF  3lN,  CALLED  OUT  TO  WARFARE  BY  THE  KING'S  ORDER, 
MOURN  OVER  THE  CONSEQUENT  SUFFERING  OF  THEIR  PARENTS,  AND 
LONG  FOR  THEIR  RETURN  TO  THEIR  ORDINARY  AGRICULTURAL  PUR- 
SUITS, MAKING  THEIR  APPEAL  TO  HEAVEN. 

Sii-sti  go  the  feathers  of  the  wild  geese,     As 

1  In  the  ' Complete  Digest'  this  oath  is  expanded  in  the  fol- 
lowing way  : — '  These  words  are  from  my  heart.  If  you  think  that 
they  are  not  sincere,  there  is  (a  Power)  above,  like  the  bright  sun, 
observing  me; — how  should  my  words  not  be  sincere?' 


ODE  ii.  LESSONS    FROM    THE    STATES.  44I 

they  settle  on  the  bushy  oaks  1.  The  king's  affairs 
must  not  be  slackly  discharged,  And  (so)  we  cannot 
plant  our  millets ; — What  will  our  parents  have  to 
rely  on  ?  O  thou  distant  and  azure  Heaven 2 ! 
When  shall  we  be  in  our  places  again  ? 

Ode  11.     The  Ko  Shang. 

A  WIFE  MOURNS  THE  DEATH  OF  HER  HUSBAND,  REFUSING  TO  BE  COM- 
FORTED, AND  DECLARES  THAT  SHE  WILL  CHERISH  HIS  MEMORY  TILL 
HER  OWN  DEATH. 

It  is  supposed  that  the  husband  whose  death  is  bewailed  in  this 
piece  had  died  in  one  of  the  military  expeditions  of  which  duke 
Hsien  (b.c.  676-651)  was  fond.  It  may  have  been  so,  but  there 
is  nothing  in  the  piece  to  make  us  think  of  duke  Hsien.  I  give 
it  a  place  in  the  volume,  not  because  of  the  religious  sentiment 
in  it,  but  because  of  the  absence  of  that  sentiment,  where  we 
might  expect  it.  The  lady  shows  the  grand  virtue  of  a  Chinese 
widow,  in  that  she  will  never  marry  again.  And  her  grief  would 
not  be  assuaged.  The  days  would  all  seem  long  summer  days, 
and  the  nights  all  long  winter  nights ;  so  that  a  hundred  long 
years  would  seem  to  drag  their  slow  course.  But  there  is  not 
any  hope  expressed  of  a  re-union  with  her  husband  in  another 
state.  The  '  abode'  and  the  'chamber*  of  which  she  speaks  are 
to  be  understood  of  his  grave ;  and  her  thoughts  do  not  appear 
to  go  beyond  it. 

The  dolichos  grows,  covering  the  thorn  trees ; 
The  convolvulus  spreads  all  over  the  waste  3.    The 

1  Trees  are  not  the  proper  place  for  geese  to  rest  on ;  and  the 
attempt  to  do  so  is  productive  of  much  noise  and  trouble  to  the  birds. 
The  lines  would  seem  to  allude  to  the  hardships  of  the  soldiers'  lot, 
called  from  their  homes  to  go  on  a  distant  expedition. 

2  See  note  2  on  ode  1  of  Book  vi,  where  Heaven  is  appealed  to 
in  the  same  language. 

3  These  two  lines  are  taken  as  allusive,  the  speaker  being  led 
by  the  sight  of  the  weak  plants  supported  by  the  trees,  shrubs,  and 
tombs,  to  think  of  her  own  desolate,  unsupported  condition.  But 
they  may  also  be  taken  as  narrative,  and  descriptive  of  the  battle- 
ground, where  her  husband  had  met  his  death. 


442  THE    SHIH    KING.  BOOK  XI. 

man   of  my  admiration    is  no    more  here; — With 
whom  can  I  dwell  ?    I  abide  alone. 

The  dolichos  grows,  covering  the  jujube  trees  ; 
The  convolvulus  spreads  all  over  the  tombs.  The 
man  of  my  admiration  is  no  more  here  ; — With 
whom  can  I  dwell  ?    I  rest  alone. 

How  beautiful  was  the  pillow  of  horn  !  How 
splendid  was  the  embroidered  coverlet1!  The  man 
of  my  admiration  is  no  more  here ; — With  whom  can 
I  dwell  ?     Alone  (I  wait  for)  the  morning. 

Through  the  (long)  days  of  summer,  Through 
the  (long)  nights  of  winter  (shall  I  be  alone),  Till 
the  lapse  of  a  hundred  years,  When  I  shall  go 
home  to  his  abode. 

Through  the  (long)  nights  of  winter,  Through 
the  (long)  days  of  summer  (shall  I  be  alone),  Till 
the  lapse  of  a  hundred  years,  When  I  shall  go 
home  to  his  chamber. 


Book  XL     The  Odes  of  Ajiin. 

The  state  of  Khin  took  its  name  from  its  earliest  principal  city,  in  the 
present  district  of  .A^ing-shui,  in  KK\w  Zau,  Kan-su.  Its  chiefs 
claimed  to  be  descended  from  Yr,  who  appears  in  the  Shu  as 
the  forester  of  Shun,  and  the  assistant  of  the  great  Yu  in  his 
labours  on  the  flood  of  Yao.  The  history  of  his  descendants 
is  very  imperfectly  related  till  we  come  to  a  Fei-^ze,  who  had 
charge  of  the  herds  of  horses  belonging  to  king  Hsiao  (b.c.  909- 
895),  and  in  consequence  of  his  good  services  was  invested  with 

1  These  things  had  been  ornaments  of  the  bridal  chamber ;  and 
as  the  widow  thinks  of  them,  her  grief  becomes  more  intense. 


ODE  6.  LESSONS    FROM    THE    STATES.  443 

the  small  territory  of  .Oin,  as  an  attached  state.  A  descendant 
of  his,  known  as  duke  Hsiang,  in  consequence  of  his  loyal  ser- 
vices, when  the  capital  was  moved  to  the  east  in  b.c.  770,  was 
raised  to  the  dignity  of  an  earl,  and  took  his  place  among  the 
great  feudal  princes  of  the  kingdom,  receiving  also  a  large 
portion  of  territory,  which  included  the  ancient  capital  of  the 
House  of  Kau.  In  course  of  time  Khin,  as  is  well  known,  super- 
seded the  dynasty  of  iTau,  having  gradually  moved  its  capital 
more  and  more  to  the  east.  The  people  of  Khm  were,  no  doubt, 
mainly  composed  of  the  wild  tribes  of  the  west. 


Ode  6,  Stanza  1.     The  Hwang  Niao. 

LAMENT    FOR    THREE  WORTHIES    OF  JCH1S,   WHO    WERE    BURIED    IN    THE 
SAME    GRAVE    WITH    DUKE    M#. 

There  is  no  difficulty  or  difference  in  the  interpretation  of  this 
piece  ;  and  it  brings  us  down  to  b.  c.  621.  Then  died  duke  Mu, 
after  playing  an  important  part  in  the  north-west  of  China  for 
thirty-nine  years.  The  3o  ^wan,  under  the  sixth  year  of  duke 
Wan,  makes  mention  of  Mil's  requiring  that  the  three  brothers 
here  celebrated  should  be  buried  with  him,  and  of  the  compo- 
sition of  this  piece  in  consequence.  Sze-m&  Jf/iien  says  that 
this  barbarous  practice  began  with  Mil's  predecessor,  with  whom 
sixty-six  persons  were  buried  alive,  and  that  one  hundred  and 
seventy-seven  in  all  were  buried  with  Mii.  The  death  of  the  last 
distinguished  man  of  the  House  of.Oin,  the  emperor  I,  was  sub- 
sequently celebrated  by  the  entombment  with  him  of  all  the 
inmates  of  his  harem. 

They  flit  about,  the  yellow  birds,  And  rest  upon 
the  jujube  trees1.  Who  followed  duke  Mil  in  the 
grave  ?  3ze-^u  Yen-hsl.  And  this  Yen-hsi  Was 
a  man  above  a  hundred.     When  he  came  to  the 

1  It  is  difficult  to  see  the  relation  between  these  two  allusive 
lines  and  the  rest  of  the  stanza.  Some  say  that  it  is  this, — that  the 
people  loved  the  three  victims  as  they  liked  the  birds  ;  others  that 
the  birds  among  the  trees  were  in  their  proper  place, — very  different 
from  the  brothers  in  the  grave  of  duke  Mu. 


444  THE    SHIH    KING.  BOOK  XV. 

grave,  He  looked  terrified  and  trembled.  Thou 
azure  Heaven  there!  Could  he  have  been  redeemed, 
We  would  have  given  a  hundred  (ordinary)  men 
for  him  \ 


Book  XV.     The  Odes  of  Pin. 

Duke  Liu,  an  ancestor  of  the  K§m  family,  made  a  settlement,  ac- 
cording to  its  traditions,  in  B.C.  1797,  in  Pin,  the  site  of  which 
is  pointed  out,  90  It  to  the  west  of  the  present  district  city  of 
San-shui,  in  Pin  ifau,  Shen-hsi,  where  the  tribe  remained  till  the 
movement  eastwards  of  Than-fu,  celebrated  in  the  first  decade 
of  the  Major  Odes  of  the  Kingdom,  ode  3.  The  duke  of  ^au, 
during  the  minority  of  king  Kh&ng,  made,  it  is  supposed,  the 
first  of  the  pieces  in  this  Book,  describing  for  the  instruction  of 
the  young  monarch,  the  ancient  ways  of  their  fathers  in  Pin  ; 
and  subsequently  some  one  compiled  other  odes  made  by  the 
duke,  and  others  also  about  him,  and  brought  them  together 
under  the  common  name  of  '  the  Odes  of  Pin/ 


Ode  1,  Stanza  8.     The  Khi  Yueh. 

DESCRIBING  LIFE  IN  PIN  IN  THE  OLDEN  TIME  J  THE  PROVIDENT  ARRANGE- 
MENTS THERE  TO  SECURE  THE  CONSTANT  SUPPLY  OF  FOOD  AND 
RAIMENT, WHATEVER  WAS  NECESSARY  FOR  THE  SUPPORT  AND  COM- 
FORT   OF    THE    PEOPLE. 

If  the  piece  was  made,  as  the  Chinese  critics  all  suppose,  by  the 
duke  of  ifau,  we  must  still  suppose  that  he  writes  in  the  person 
of  an  old  farmer  or  yeoman  of  Pin.  The  picture  which  it  gives 
of  the  manners  of  the  Chinese  people,  their  thrifty,  provident 
ways,  their  agriculture  and  weaving,  nearly  3,700  years  ago,  is 

1  This  appeal  to  Heaven  is  like  what  we  met  with  in  the  first 
of  the  Odes  of  the  Royal  Domain,  and  the  eighth  of  those  of 
Thang. 


ODE  I.  LESSONS   FROM    THE    STATES.  445 

full  of  interest ;  but  it  is  not  till  we  come  to  the  concluding  stanza 
that  we  find  anything  bearing  on  their  religious  practices. 

In  the  days  of  (our)  second  month,  they  hew  out 
the  ice  with  harmonious  blows  * ;  And  in  those  of 
(our)  third  month,  they  convey  it  to  the  ice-houses, 
(Which  they  open)  in  those  of  (our)  fourth,  early  in 
the  morning  A  lamb  having  been  offered  in  sacri- 
fice with  scallions2.  In  the  ninth  month,  it  is  cold, 
with  frost.  In  the  tenth  month,  they  sweep  clean 
their  stack-sites.  (Taking)  the  two  bottles  of  spirits 
to  be  offered  to  their  ruler,  And  having  killed  their 
lambs  and  sheep,    They  go  to  his  hall,    And  raising 

1  They  went  for  the  ice  to  the  deep  recesses  of  the  hills,  and 
wherever  it  was  to  be  found  in  the  best  condition. 

2  It  is  said  in  the  last  chapter  of  '  the  Great  Learning/  that  '  the 
family  which  keeps  its  stores  of  ice  does  not  rear  cattle  or  sheep/ 
meaning  that  the  possessor  of  an  ice-house  must  be  supposed  to 
be  very  wealthy,  and  above  the  necessity  of  increasing  his  means 
in  the  way  described.  Probably,  the  having  ice-houses  by  high 
ministers  and  heads  of  clans  was  an  innovation  on  the  earlier  cus- 
tom, according  to  which  such  a  distinction  was  proper  only  to  the 
king,  or  the  princes  of  states,  on  whom  it  devolved  as  '  the  fathers 
of  the  people/  to  impart  frpm  their  stores  in  the  hot  season  as 
might  be  necessary.  The  third  and  fourth  lines  of  this  stanza  are 
to  be  understood  of  what  was  done  by  the  orders  of  the  ruler  of 
the  tribe  of  Zau  in  Pin.  In  the  Official  Book  of  -ATau,  Part  I, 
ch.  5,  we  have  a  description  of  the  duties  of  '  the  Providers  of  Ice/ 
and  the  same  subject  is  treated  in  the  sixth  Book  of  *  the  Record 
of  Rites/  sections  2  and  6.  The  ice  having  been  collected  and 
stored  in  winter,  the  ice-houses  were  solemnly  opened  in  the  spring. 
A  sacrifice  was  offered  to  '  the  Ruler  of  Cold,  the  Spirit  of  the 
Ice/  and  of  the  first  ice  brought  forth  an  offering  was  set  out  in 
the  apartment  behind  the  principal  hall  of  the  ancestral  temple. 
A  sacrifice  to  the  same  Ruler  of  Cold,  it  is  said,  had  also  been 
offered  when  the  ice  began  to  be  collected.  The  ceremony  may  be 
taken  as  an  illustration  of  the  manner  in  which  religious  services 
entered  into  the  life  of  the  ancient  Chinese. 


446  THE    SHIH    KING.  BOOK  XV. 

the  cup  of  rhinoceros  horn,     Wish  him  long  life, — 
that  he  may  live  for  ever  \ 

1  The  custom  described  in  the  five  concluding  lines  is  mentioned 
to  show  the  good  and  loyal  feeling  of  the  people  of  Pin  towards 
their  chief.  Having  finished  all  the  agricultural  labours  of  the 
year,  and  being  now  prepared  to  enjoy  the  results  of  their  industry, 
the  first  thing  they  do  is  to  hasten  to  the  hall  of  their  ruler,  and 
ask  him  to  share  in  their  joy,  and  express  their  loyal  wishes  for  his 
happiness. 


THE    HSIAO    KING 


OR 


CLASSIC     OF     FILIAL    PIETY. 


THE    HSIAO    KING 

OR 

CLASSIC    OF    FILIAL    PIETY. 


INTRODUCTION. 

Chapter  I. 

The  Name  of  the  Classic  ;  its  Existence  before 
the  Han  Dynasty  ;  its  Contents,  and  by  whom 
it  was  written. 

i.  The  Chinese  character  pronounced  Hsiao,  which  we 
translate  by  '  Filial  Piety,'  and  which  may  also  perform  the 
part  of  an  adjective,  'filial/  of  a  verb,  'to  be  filial,'  or  of 
Meaning  of  the    an  adverb>  'filially/  is  one  of  the  composite 

character  characters  whose  meaning  is  suggested  by  the 
meanings  of  their  constituent  parts  combined 
together.  It  is  made  up  of  two  others, — one  signifying 
'  an  old  man '  or  '  old  age/  and  beneath  it  the  character 
signifying  'a  son.'  It  thus,  according  to  the  Shwo  Wan, 
the  oldest  Chinese  dictionary  (a.  D.  ioo),  presents  to  the 
eye  'a  son  bearing  up  an  old  man,'  that  is,  a  child  sup- 
porting his  parent.  Hsiclo  also  enters  as  their  phonetical 
element  into  at  least  twenty  other  characters,  so  that  it 
must  be  put  down  as  of  very  early  formation.  The  cha- 
racter King  has  been  explained  in  the  Introduction  to 
the  Shu  King,  p.  i ;  and  the  title,  Hsiao  King,  means  '  the 
Classic  of  Filial  Piety.' 

2.  Many  Chinese  critics  contend  that  this  brief  treatise 
was  thus  designated  by  Confucius   himself,   and   thatj  it 
received  the  distinction  of  being  styled  a   King   before 
[i]  G  g 


450  THE    HSIAO    KING. 


any  of  the  older  and  more  important   classics.     For  the 
preservation  of  the  text  as  we  now  have  it,  we 

yy^c  fnf*  1*1*^*1  tmf* 

called  the  Hsiao  are  indebted  to  Hsiian  3ung  (a.d.  713-755), 
Kmg  by  Con-    one  0f  fae  emperors  of  the  Thang  dynasty. 
In  the  preface  to  his  commentary  on  it  there 
occurs  this  sentence  : — '  The  Master  said,  Ci  My  aim  is  seen 
in  the  Kkun  Khiu ;  my  (rule  of)  conduct  is  in  the  Hsiao 
King."'     The  imperial  author  quotes  the  saying,  as  if  it 
were   universally  acknowledged  to   have   come   from   the 
sage.     It  is  found  at  a  much  earlier  date  in  the  preface 
of  Ho  Hsiu   (a.d.   129-182)  to  his   commentary  on  the 
Khun  Khiu  as  transmitted  and  annotated  by  Kung-yang. 
The  industry  of  scholars  has  traced  it  still  farther  back, 
and  in  a  more  extended  form,  to  a  work  called  Hsiao  King 
i£u-ming  Kuth, — a  production,  probably,  of  the  first  cen- 
tury of  our  era,  or  of  the  century  before  it.     It  was  one  of 
a  class  of  writings  on  the  classical  books,  full  of  mysterious 
and  useless  speculations,  that  never  took  rank  among  the 
acknowledged  expositions.   Most  of  them  soon  disappeared, 
but  this  subsisted  down  to  the  Sui  dynasty  (a.d.  581-618), 
for  there  was  a  copy  of  it  then  in  the  Imperial  Library.     It 
is  now  lost,  but  a  few  passages  of  it  have  been  collected 
from  quotations  in  the  Han  writers.    Among  them  is  this  : — 
*  Confucius  said,  "  If  you  wish  to  see  my  aim  in  dispensing 
praise  or  blame  to  the  feudal  lords,  it  is  to  be  found  in  the 
Khun  Khiu  ;  the  courses  by  which  I  would  exalt  the  social 
relations  are  in  the  Hsiao  King." '   The  words  thus  ascribed 
to  Confucius  were  condensed,  it  is  supposed,  into  the  form 
in  which  we  have  them, — first  from  Ho  Hsiu,  and  afterwards 
from  the  emperor  Hsiian  3ung-     Whether  they  were  really 
used  by  the  sage  or  not,  they  were  attributed  to  him  as 
early  as  the  beginning  of  our  Christian  era,  and  it  was  then 
believed  that  he  had  given  to  our  classic  the  honourable 
name  of  a  King. 

3.  But  the  existence  of  the  Hsiao  King  can  be  traced 

several  hundred  years  farther  back ;— to  within  less  than  a 

The  Hsiao  King    century  after  the  death  of  Confucius.    Sze-m4 

existed  before     Khien,  in  his  history  of  the  House  of  Wei, 

the  Han  dynasty.  r     -       ,,  .  .  ,  .  ,      , 

one  of  the  three  marquisates  into  which  the 


INTRODUCTION.  45 1 


great  state  of  iTin  was  broken  up  in  the  fifth  century  B.  C., 
tells  us  that  the  marquis  Wan  received,  in  B.C.  407,  the 
classical  books  from  Pu  3ze-hsia,  and  mentions  the  names 
of  two  other  disciples  of  Confucius,  with  whom  he  was  on 
intimate  terms  of  friendship.  There  remains  the  title  of 
a  commentary  on  the  Hsiao  King  by  this  marquis  Wan ; 
and  the  book  was  existing  in  the  time  of  3hai  Yung  (a.  d. 
133-193),  who  gives  a  short  extract  from  it  in  one  of  his 
treatises. 

4.  The  recovery  of  our  classic  after  the  fires  of  Kh'm  will 

be  related  in  the  next  chapter.     Assuming  here  that  it  was 

recovered,  we  look  into  it,  and  find  a  con- 

The  contents  of  1  1  r  1 

the  classic,  and    versation,  or  memoranda,  perhaps,  of  several 
by  whom  it      conversations,  between  Confucius  and  his  dis- 

was  written.  _,       ,  t  .     ,.     , 

ciple  Sang-^ze.  The  latter,  however,  is  little 
more  than  a  listener,  to  whom  the  sage  delivers  his  views 
on  Filial  Piety  in  its  various  relations.  There  are  two 
recensions  of  the  text ; — one  in  eighteen  chapters,  and  the 
other  in  twenty-two.  As  edited  in  eighteen  chapters,  each 
of  them  has  a  very  brief  descriptive  heading.  I  have  given 
this  in  the  subjoined  translation,  but  the  headings  cannot 
be  traced  back  beyond  the  commentary  of  the  emperor 
Hsiian. 

The  saying  attributed  by  Ho  Hsiu  and  others  to  Con- 
fucius would  seem  to  indicate  that  he  had  himself  composed 
the  work,  but  the  reader  of  it  sees  at  once  that  it  could  not 
have  proceeded  from  him.  Nor  do  the  style  and  method 
of  the  treatise  suggest  a  view  which  has  had  many  advo- 
cates,— that  it  was  written  by  3ang-jze,  under  the  direction 
of  the  master.  There  is  no  reason,  however,  why  we  should 
not  accept  the  still  more  common  account, — that  the  Hsiao 
came  from  the  school  of  3ang-gze.  To  use  the  words  of 
Hu  Yin,  an  author  of  the  first  half  of  our  twelfth  cen- 
tury : — '  The  Classic  of  Filial  Piety  was  not  made  by 
3ang-gze  himself.  When  he  retired  from  his  conversation 
(or  conversations)  with  Kung-nl  on  the  subject  of  Filial 
Piety,  he  repeated  to  the  disciples  of  his  own  school  what 
(the  master)  had  said,  and  they  classified  the  sayings,  and 
formed  the  treatise.' 

Gg  2 


452  THE    HSIAO    KING. 


Chapter  II. 

The  Recovery  of  the  Hsiao  King  under  the  Han 
Dynasty,  and  its  Preservation  down  to  the 
Publication  of  the  Commentary  of  the  Thang 
Emperor  Hsuan  £ung. 

i.  The  Hsiao  King  suffered,  like  all  the  other  Confucian 
books  except  the  Yi,  from  the  fires  of  Kkm.  Its  subse- 
quent recovery  was  very  like  that  of  the  Shu,  described  on 
pp.  7,  8.  We  have  in  each  case  a  shorter  and  a  longer 
copy,  a  modern  text  and  an  ancient  text. 

In  the  Catalogue  of  the  Imperial  Library,  prepared  by 

Liu   Hin  immediately  before  the  commencement  of  our 

Recovery  of  the    Christian   era,   there   are   two   copies  of  the 
Hsiao  King.      HsiAQ  ._<  the  old  text  of  the  Khung  family,' 

which  was  in  twenty-two  chapters,  according  to  a  note  by 
Pan  Ku  (died  A.  D.  9a),  the  compiler  of  the  documents  in 
the  records  of  the  western  Han ;  and  another  copy,  which 
was,  according  to  the  same  authority,  in  eighteen  chapters, 
and  was  subsequently  styled  '  the  modern  text.'  Immedi- 
ately following  the  entry  of  these  two  copies,  we  find 
'  Expositions  of  the  Hsiao  by  four  scholars/ — whose  sur- 
names were  iTang-sun,  Klang,  Yi,  and  Hau.  *  They  all,' 
says  Pan  Ku,  '  had  laboured  on  the  shorter  text.' 

The  copy  in  eighteen  chapters  therefore,  we  must  pre- 
The  shorter  or    sume,  had  been  the  first  recovered ;   but  of 

modem  text,  j^y  this  came  about  we  have  no  account 
till  we  come  to  the  records  of  the  Sui  dynasty.  There 
it  is  said  that,  when  the  KMn  edict  for  the  destruction  of 
the  books  was  issued,  his  copy  of  the  Hsiao  was  hidden 
by  a  scholar  called  Yen  iTih,  a  member,  doubtless,  of  the 
Yen  family  to  which  Confucius'  favourite  disciple  Yen  Hui 
had  belonged.  When  the  edict  was  abrogated  in  a  few 
years,  A"  an,  a  son  of  ICih,  brought  the  copy  from  its  hiding- 
place.  This  must  have  been  in  the  second  century  B.  C, 
and  the  copy,  transcribed,  probably  by  TTan,  in  the  form 
of  the  characters  then  used,  would  pass  into  the  charge  of 
the  board  of  ' great  scholars'  appointed  to  preserve  the 


INTRODUCTION.  453 


ancient  books,  in  the  reigns  of  the  emperors  Wan  and  King, 
B.C.  1 79-141. 

The  copy  in  the  ancient  text  was  derived  from  the 
tablets  found  in  the  wall  of  the  Confucian  house  in  the 

The  old  or       time  of  the  emperor  Wu   (b.  C.  140-87),  and 

longer  text.  [s  commonly  said  to  have  been  deciphered, 
as  in  the  case  of  the  tablets  of  the  Shu,  by  Khung  An-kwo. 
An-kwo  wrote  a  commentary  himself  on  the  Hsiao,  which 
does  not  appear  in  Hin's  Catalogue,  just  as  no  mention  is 
made  there  of  his  commentary  on  the  Shu.  We  find  it 
entered,  however,  among  the  books  in  the  Sui  Library  with 
the  following  note : — '  The  work  of  An-kwo  disappeared 
during  the  troubles  of  the  Liang  dynasty  (a.  D.  502-556), 
and  continued  unknown  till  the  time  of  Sui,  when  a  copy 
was  found  in  the  capital,  and  came  into  the  possession  of 
a  scholar  called  Liu  Hsiian.'  Hsiian  made  his  treasure 
public,  and  ere  long  it  was  acknowledged  by  the  court, 
while  many  scholars  contended  that  it  was  a  forgery  of 
his  own,  and  ascribed  by  him  to  An-kwo.  Whatever 
opinion  we  may  form  on  this  matter,  the  discovery  of  the 
old  text,  and  the  production  of  a  commentary  on  it  by 
Khung  An-kwo,  can  hardly  be  called  in  question. 

It  might  be  argued,  indeed,  that  another  copy  in  the 
old  text  was  found  in  the  first  century  B.  C.  In  a  memorial 
addressed  about  the  Shwo  Wan  dictionary  to  the  emperor 
An,  in  A.  D.  131,  by  Hsu  i£ung,  a  son  of  the  author,  he  says 

w  s  another     ^at  the  Hsiao  King  which  his  father  used  was 

copy  in  the  old    a  copy  of  that  presented,  by  '  a  very  old  man 

text  discovered?    Qf  ^   ^  ^    emperor   K&0    ^  a    86-74)1. 

Many   Chinese    critics,     and    especially    Wang    Ying-lin 

1  The  language  of  the  memorial  is :  —  *  The  Hsiao  King '  (used  by  my 
father  in  the  composition  of  his  dictionary)  'was  what  San  lao  of  Lu  pre- 
sented in  the  time  of  the  emperor  -STao.'  The  San  lao  most  readily  suggests  to 
the  reader  the  idea  of  'three  old  men  ;'  but  the  characters  may  also  mean,  in 
harmony  with  Chinese  idiom,  *  the  three  classes  of  old  men,'  or  « an  individual 
from  those  three  classes.'  The  classical  passage  to  explain  the  phrase  is  par.  1 8 
in  the  first  section  of  the  sixth  Book  in  the  Li  K%  where  it  is  said  that  king 
Wan  feasted  the  San  lao  and  Wu  kang,  'the  three  classes  of  old  men  and 
five  classes  of  men  of  experience,'  in  his  royal  college.  The  three  classes  of  old 
men  were  such  as  were  over  80,  90,  and  100  years  respectively.  It  was  from 
a  man  of  one  of  these  classes  that  the  emperor  received  the  Hsiao  in  the  old 


454  THE    HSIAO   KING. 


(better  known  as  Wang  Po-h&u,  A.  D.  1 223-1296),  say  that 
this  is  a  different  account  of  the  recovery  of  the  old  text 
from  that  with  which  the  name  of  Khung  An-kwo  is  con- 
nected. It  is  difficult  to  reconcile  the  two  statements,  as 
will  be  seen  on  a  reference  to  the  note  below1 ;  and  yet  it 


text.  According  to  the  account  given  in  the  next  note  this  man  was  Khung 
3ze-hui ;  and  in  the  Books  of  Sui  that  is  given  as  the  name  of  the  individual  of 
the  Khung  family,  who  had  hidden  the  tablets  on  the  appearance  of  the  .Oin 
edict  for  the  destruction  of  all  the  old  books. 

1  The  Catalogue  Raisonne  of  the  Imperial  Libraries  commences  its  account 
of  the  copies  of  the  Hsiao  with  a  description  of '  the  Old  Text  of  the  Hsiao 
with  the  Commentary  of  Khung  An-kwo,'  obtained  from  Japan  ;  but  the  editors 
give  good  reasons  for  doubting  its  genuineness.  There  is  a  copy  of  this  work  in 
the  Chinese  portion  of  the  British  Museum,  an  edition  printed  in  Japan  in  1732, 
which  I  have  carefully  examined,  with  the  help  of  Professor  R.  K.  Douglas  and 
Mr.  A.  Wylie.  It  contains  not  only  the  commentary  of  Khung  An-kwo,  but 
what  purports  to  be  the  original  preface  of  that  scholar.  There  it  is  said  that 
the  bamboo  tablets  of  the  copy  in  '  tadpole  characters,'  found  in  the  wall  of 
Confucius'  old  « lecture  hall,  in  a  stone  case/  were  presented  to  the  emperor  by 
Khung  3ze-hui, *  a  very  old  man  of  Lu.'  The  emperor,  it  is  added,  caused  two 
copies  to  be  made  in  the  current  characters  of  the  time  by '  the  great  scholars,' 
one  of  which  was  given  to  3ze-hui,  and  the  other  to  General  Ho  Kwang,  a 
minister  of  war  and  favourite,  who  greatly  valued  it,  and  placed  it  among  the 
archives  of  the  empire,  where  it  was  jealously  guarded. 

This  account  makes  the  meaning  of  the  phrase  'the  San  lao  of  Lu'  quite 
clear ;  but  there  are  difficulties  in  the  way  of  our  believing  that  it  proceeded 
from  Khung  An-kwo.  No  mention  is  made  of  him  in  it,  whereas,  according  to 
the  current  narrations,  the  tablets  with  the  tadpole  characters  were  first  de- 
ciphered by  him ;  nor  is  the  name  of  the  emperor  to  whom  Khung  3ze-hui 
presented  the  tablets  given.  No  doubt,  however,  this  emperor  was  Ka.o,  with 
whom  Ho  Kwang  was  a  favourite.  If  the  preface  were  genuine,  of  course  An- 
kwo  was  alive  after  3ze-hui  went  to  court  with  the  tablets.  Now,  the  tablets 
were  discovered  in  the  period  Thien-han,  b.  c.  100-97,  and  jKao  reigned  from 
b.  c.  86  to  74.  An-kwo  died  at  the  age  of  sixty,  but  in  what  year  we  are  not 
told.  He  had  studied  the  Shih  under  Shan  Kung,  whose  death  can  hardly  be 
placed  later  than  in  b.  c.  135.  If  An-kwo  were  born  in  b.  c.  150,  he  would 
have  been  more  than  sixty  years  old — the  age  assigned  to  him  at  his  death — 
at  the  accession  of  Zao.  I  cannot  believe,  therefore,  that  the  preface  in  the 
Japanese  Hsiao  was  written  by  him ;  and  if  we  reject  the  preface,  we  must  also 
reject  the  commentary  before  which  it  stands. 

The  text  of  the  Hsiao  in  the  work  is  nearly  identical  with  that  of  Sze-mi 
Kwang,  mentioned  below  on  p.  458;  but  to  the  chapters  there  are  prefixed  the 
headings  (which  Kwang  did  not  adopt),  that  cannot  be  traced  farther  back  than 
the  Thang  dynasty.  This  might  be  got  over,  but  the  commentary  throws  no 
new  light  on  the  text.  '  It  is  shallow  and  poor,'  say  the  editors  of  the  Cata- 
logue Raisonne,  '  and  not  in  the  style  of  the  Han  scholars.'  I  must  think  with 
them  that  Khung  An-Kwo's  commentary,  purporting  to  have  been  preserved  in 
Japan  is  a  forgery. 


INTRODUCTION.  455 


is  possible  that  the  difficulty  would  disappear,  if  the  details 
of  the  discovery  and  the  subsequent  dealing  with  the  tablets 
had  come  down  to  us  complete. 

Certainly,  in  the  first  century  B.  C.  there  were  two  copies 
of  the  Hsiao  King  in  the  Imperial  Library  of  Han.  If  those 
copies,  catalogued  by  Liu  Hin,  were  the  actual  text,  pre- 
sented by  Yen  iTan,  and  a  faithful  transcript  in  the  current 
Han  characters  of  the  ancient  text  discovered  in  the  wall  of 
Confucius'  old  lecture  hall,  we  should  be  able  to  say  that 
Can  we  rely  tne  evidence  for  the  recovery  of  the  Hsiao,  as 
fully  on  the      ft  had  existed  during  the  Ka\i  dynasty,  was 

copies  cata-  °        ,,,.,, 

logued  by  Liu    as  satisfactory  as  we  could  desire  ;  but  there 
Hm?  are  some  considerations  that  are  in  the  way 

of  our  doing  so. 

According  to  the  records  of  Sui,  after  the  old  text  came 
into  the  possession  of  the  court,  and  the  differences  between 
it  and  the  text  earlier  recovered  were  observed,  Liu  Hsiang 
(b.  C.  80-9),  the  father  of  Hin,  was  charged  by  the  emperor 
(-Oang,  B.C.  33-7)  to  compare  the  two.  The  result  of  his 
examination  of  them  was  that '  he  removed  from  the  modern 
text  what  was  excessive  and  erroneous,  and  fixed  the  number 
of  the  chapters  at  eighteen.'  It  does  not  appear  that  pre- 
viously there  was  any  division  of  K&ns  copy  into  chapters. 
What  Hsiang  did  in  the  case  of  the  old  text  we  are  not  told. 
A  note  by  Yen  Sze-ku  of  the  Thang  dynasty,  appended 
to  Hin's  Catalogue,  quotes  from  him  that  '  one  chapter  of 
the  modern  text  was  divided  into  two  in  the  old,  another 
into  three,  and  that  the  old  had  one  chapter  which  did  not 
appear  in  the  other.'  This  missing  chapter,  it  is  understood, 
was  the  one  beginning,  'Inside  the  smaller  doors  leading  to 
the  inner  apartments,'  which  I  have  appended,  from  the  cur- 
rent old  text,  to  my  translation  of  the  classic  as  published 
by  Hsiian  Qung  ;  and  yet  the  Sui  account  says  that  that 
chapter  was  in  the  Hsiao  of  Kang-sun,  one  of  the  four 
early  commentators  on  the  modern  text. 

The  copies  catalogued  by  Hin  were  made  after  the  exa- 
mination and  revision  of  the  two  texts  by  his  father.  There 
are  suspicious  resemblances  between  the  style  and  method 
of  the  present  classic  and  those  of  the  original  works  of 


456  THE    HSIAO   KING. 


Hsiang  that  have  come  down  to  us.  It  is  impossible  to 
say,  from  the  want  of  information,  what  liberties  he  took 
with  the  documents  put  into  his  charge.  The  differences 
between  the  two  texts  as  we  now  have  them  are  trivial. 
I  believe  that  the  changes  made  in  them  by  Hsiang 
were  not  important ;  but  having  them  as  they  came  from 
his  revision,  we  have  them  at  second  hand,  and  this  has 
afforded  ground  for  the  dealing  with  them  by  ATu  Hsi 
and  others  in  the  manner  which  will  be  described  in  the 
next  chapter. 

2.  I  have  said  above  (p.  450)  that  for  the  text  of  the 

classic, — the  modern  text,  that  is, — as  we  now  have  it,  we 

are  indebted  to  the  labours  of  the  emperor  Hsiian  3ung  of 

the  Thang  dynasty.     Kix  1-tsun,  of  the  .Oien-lung  period 

(1 736-1 795),  in  his  work  on  the  classics  and  the  writings 

on  them,  has  adduced  the  titles  of  eighty-six 

An4cwo  tog    different  works  on  our  classic,  that  appeared 

the  emperor    between  Khung  An-kwo   and   Hsuan  Rung. 

Hsuan  Bung-     .»T  r 

Not  a  single  one  of  all  these  now  survives  ;  but 
the  enumeration  of  them  shows  that  the  most  distinguished 
scholars  during  the  intervening  centuries  exercised  their 
powers  on  the  treatise,  and  would  keep  a  watch  on  one 
another  in  the  preservation  of  the  text.  Moreover,  several 
of  the  works  continued  through  the  Thang  dynasty,  and  on 
into  that  of  Sung.  The  Catalogue  of  the  Sui  Library  con- 
tains the  titles  of  nineteen  in  its  list. 

The  emperor  Hsiian  says,  in  his  preface,  that  in  the 
Hsuan  3ung  s  making  of  his  commentary  he  had  freely  used 
work.  j^e  commentaries  of  six  earlier  writers,  whom 
he  names.  They  were,  Wei  Kko,  Wang  Su,  Yu  Fan,  and 
Liu  Shao,  all  of  our  second  and  third  centuries;  Liu  Hsiian, 
of  our  sixth  century,  who  laboured  on  the  commentary  of 
Khung  An-kwo,  which,  as  I  have  already  stated,  is  said 
to  have  been  discovered  in  his  time  and  presented  to  him  ; 
and  Lu  .Oang,  rather  earlier  than  Liu,  who  dealt  critically 
with  the  commentary  attributed  to  iTang  Khang-Mang. 
«  But/  says  the  imperial  author,  '  if  a  comment  be  right  in 
reason,  why  need  we  enquire  from  whom  it  came?  We 
have  therefore  taken  those  six  writers,  considered  wherein 


INTRODUCTION.  457 


they  agreed  and  differed,  and  decided  between  their  inter- 
pretations by  reference  to  the  general  scope  of  the  five 
(great)  King.  In  compendious  style,  but  with  extensive 
examination  of  the  subject,  we  have  made  the  meaning  of 
the  classic  clear.' 

The  emperor  says  nothing  himself  about  the  differences 
between  the  ancient  and  modern  texts,  though  we  know 
that  that  subject  was  vehemently  agitated  among  the 
scholars  of  his  court.  The  text  as  commented  on  by  him 
is  in  eighteen  chapters,  which  do  not  include  the  chapter 
to  which  I  have  referred  on  p.  455  as  having  been  in  the 
copy  of  iTang-sun  in  the  first  century  B.C.  It  is  said, 
and  on  sufficient  authority,  that  this  chapter  was  excluded 
through  the  influence  of  the  scholar  and  minister  Sze-mi 
isf  an.  To  each  of  his  chapters  the  emperor  prefixed  a  brief 
heading  or  argument,  which  I  have  retained  in  the  transla- 
tion. These  headings,  probably,  were  selected  by  him  from 
a  variety  proposed  by  the  scholars  about  the  court. 

The  text  employed  in  this  imperial  commentary  might 
now  be  considered  as  sufficiently  secured.  It  was  engraved, 
in  less  than  a  century  after,  on  the  stone  tablets  of  Thang, 
which  were  completed  in  the  year  837,  and  set  up  in  Hsi-an, 
the  Thang  capital,  where  they  remain,  very  little  damaged, 
to  this  day1.  And  not  only  so.  The  emperor  was  so 
pleased  with  the  commentary  which  he  had  made,  that 
he  caused  the  whole  of  it  to  be  engraved  on  four  large 
tablets  or  pillars  of  stone  in  745.  They  are  still  to  be 
seen  at  Hsi-an,  in  front  of  the  Confucian  College. 


1  These  tablets  are  commonly  said  to  contain  the  thirteen  classics  (Shih-san 
King).  They  contained,  however,  only  twelve  different  works, — the  Yi,  the 
Shu,  the  Shih,  the  isTau  Li,  the  1  Li,  the  Li  Ki,  and  the  amplifications  of  the 
Khun  Khm, — by  3°  .Oiu-ming,  by  Kung-yang,  and  by  Kd-liang.  These  form 
•  the  nine  King.'  In  addition  to  these  there  were  the  Lun  Yii,  the  Hsiao  King, 
and  the  R  Ya.  According  to  Ku  Yen-wu  (1613-1682),  the  characters  on  the 
tablets  were  in  all  650,252.  Mr.  T.  W.  Rhys  Davids  (Buddhism,  p.  19)  esti- 
mates that  our  English  Bible  contains  between  900,000  and  950,000  words. 
The  first  Psalm,  in  what  is  called  the  Delegates'  version,  very  good  and  con- 
cise, contains  100  Chinese  characters,  and  in  our  English  version  130  words. 
The  classics  of  the  Thang  tablets,  if  the  translator  were  a  master  of  both  lan- 
guages, might  be  rendered  in  English  so  as  to  form  a  volume  not  quite  so  large 
as  our  Bible. 


458  THE    HSIAO    KING. 


It  is  hardly  necessary  to  say  more  on  the  preservation 
The  work  of    °f  tne  Hsiao  King.     In  A.  D.  996  the  second 

HsingPing.  emperor  of  the  Sung  dynasty  gave  orders 
for  an  annotated  edition  of  it  to  be  prepared.  This  was 
finally  completed  in  100 1,  under  the  superintendence  of 
Hsing  Ping  (932-1010),  with  a  large  critical  apparatus,  and 
a  lengthened  exposition,  both  of  the  text  and  of  Hsiian 
Bung's  explanation.  This  work  has  ever  since  been  current 
in  China. 


Chapter  III. 

Criticism  of  the  HsiAo  since  the  Thang  Dynasty. 

1.  Notwithstanding    the    difficulty   about    one    chapter 

which  has  been  pointed  out  on  p.  455,  Hsiian  Bung's  text 

was  generally  accepted   as  the   representative  of  that  in 

modern   characters,  recovered  in  the  second  century  B.  c. 

There  were  still  those,  however,  who  continued  to  advo- 

Worksonthe  cate  tne  claims    of  'the  old    text.'     Sze-ma 

old  text  by     Kwang,  a  distinguished  minister  and  scholar 

Z6and  Faiiailg  of  the  Sung  dynasty  (1009-1086),  presented 

3u-yu.       to  tjje  court;  ;n  io^4  his  '  Explanations  of  the 

Hsiao  King  according  to  the  Old  Text,5  arguing,  in  his 

preface  and  in  various  memorials,  for  the  correctness  of  that 

text,  as   recovered  by  Liu  Hsiian  in  the  sixth   century. 

Fan  3u*yu  (1041-1098),  a  scholar  of  the  same  century, 

and  in  other  things  a  collaborates  of  Kwang,  produced, 

towards  the  end  of  his  life,  an  '  Exposition  of  the  Hsiao 

King  according  to  the  Old  Text.'    He  says  in  his  preface  : — 

'  Though  the  agreement  between  the  ancient  and  modern 

texts  is  great,  and   the  difference  small,  yet  the  ancient 

deserves  to  be  preferred,  and  my  labour  upon  it  may  not 

be  without  some  little  value  V 


1  In  the  Hsiao  King,  as  now  frequently  published  in  China,  either  separately 
by  itself,  or  bound  up  with  Kxi  Hsi's  Hsiao  Hsio,  'the  Teaching  for  the 
Young,'  we  find  the  old  text,  without  distinction  of  chapters.  The  commen- 
taries of  Hsiian  3ung  and  Sze-ma  Kwang,  and  the  exposition  of  Fan  3u~yii» 
however,  follow  one  another  at  the  end  of  the  several  clauses  and  paragraphs. 


INTRODUCTION.  459 


2.  But  our  classic  had  still  to  pass  the  ordeal  of  the  scep- 

Sce  tical  criti-   **Ca'    cr^^c^sm    t^iat    set    *n    during    ^e    Sung 

cism.  Views  dynasty.  The  most  notable  result  of  this 
oftfAHsl.  wag  <the  Hsi.Q  King  Expurgated,'  pub- 
lished by  Kb  Hsi  in  1186.  He  tells  us  that  when  he  first 
saw  a  statement  by  Hu  Hung  (a  minister  in  the  reign  of 
Kao  %ung,  11 27-1 162),  that  the  quotations  from  the  Book 
of  Poetry  in  the  Hsiao  were  probably  of  later  introduction 
into  the  text,  he  was  terror-struck.  Prolonged  examina- 
tion, however,  satisfied  him  that  there  were  good  grounds 
for  Hu's  statement,  and  that  other  portions  of  the  text 
were  also  open  to  suspicion.  He  found,  moreover,  that 
another  earlier  writer,  Wang  Ying-Man,  in  the  reign  of 
Hsiao  3ung  (1163-1189),  had  come  to  the  conclusion  that 
much  of  the  Hsiao  had  been  fabricated  or  interpolated  in 
the  Han  dynasty.  The  way  was  open  for  him  to  give 
expression  to  his  convictions,  without  incurring  the  charge 
of  being  the  first  to  impugn  the  accepted  text. 

The  fact  was,  as  pointed  out  by  the  editors  of  the  Cata- 
logue Raisonne  ofthe  Imperial  Library  of  the  present  dynasty, 
that  KiX  had  long  entertained  the  views  which  he  indicated 
in  his  expurgated  edition  of  the  Hsiao,  and  his  references 
to  Hu  and  Wang  were  simply  to  shield  his  own  boldness. 
He  divided  the  treatise  into  one  chapter  of  classical  text, 
and  fourteen  chapters  of  illustration  and  commentary. 
But  both  parts  were  freely  expurgated.  His  classical  text 
embraces  the  first  six  chapters  in  my  translation,  and  is 
supposed  by  him  to  form  one  continuous  discourse  by  Con- 
fucius. The  rest  of  the  treatise  should  not  be  attributed 
to  the  sage  at  all.  The  bulk  of  it  may  have  come  from 
3ang-$ze,  or  from  members  of  his  school,  but  large  inter- 
polations were  made  by  the  Han  scholars.  Adopting  the 
old  text,  K\\  discarded  from  it  altogether  223  characters. 
Attention  will  be  called,  under  the  several  chapters,  to 

Some  portions  also  are  in  a  different  order  from  the  arrangement  of  Hsiian 
Bung  and  Hsing  Ping,  which  I  have  followed  in  my  translation.  As  has  been 
already  said,  the  difference  between  its  text  and  that  of  the  Thang  emperor  is 
slight, — hardly  greater  than  the  variations  in  the  different  recensions  of  our 
Gospels  and  the  other  books  of  the  New  Testament. 


460  THE    HSIAO    KING. 


some  of  the  passages  which  he  suppressed,  and  to  the 
reasons,  generally  satisfactory,  which  he  advanced  for  his 
procedure.  Evidently  he  was  influenced  considerably  by 
the  way  in  which  iTMng  1  (1033-1 107),  whom  he  called 
'  his  master,5  had  dealt  with  the  old  text  of  '  the  Great 
Learning;'  but  he  made  his  innovations  with  a  bolder 
pencil  and  on  a  more  extensive  plan,  not  merely  altering 
the  arrangement  of  paragraphs,  and  supplementing  what 
was  plainly  defective,  but  challenging  the  genuineness  of 
large  portions  of  the  treatise,  and  removing  them  without 
scruple. 

Under  the  Yuan  dynasty,  Wu  jOang  (1249-1333),  the 
Views  of       greatest  of  its  scholars,  followed  in  the  wake 

Wu  Khang.  0f  k u  Hsi,  yet  with  the  independence  charac- 
teristic of  himself.  As  K\x  had  preferred  the  old  text,  Wu 
decided — and,  I  believe,  more  correctly — in  favour  of  the 
modern,  arguing  that  the  copy  of  Khung  An-kwo's  text 
and  commentary,  said  to  have  been  recovered  and  pub- 
lished in  the  sixth  century  by  Liu  Hsiian,  was  a  fabrication. 
He  adopted,  therefore,  Hsiian  Bung's  text  as  the  basis  of 
his  revision,  which  appeared  with  the  title  of  '  the  Hsiao 
King,  in  paragraphs  and  sentences1.'  He  adopted  Ku's 
division  of  the  treatise  into  classical  text  and  commentary. 
The  chapter  of  classical  text  is  the  same  as  Ku's  ;  the 
chapters  of  commentary  are  only  twelve.  He  discarded, 
of  course,  the  chapter  peculiar  to  the  old  text,  which  has 
been  referred  to  more  than  once,  united  Hsiian  3ung's 
eleventh  chapter  with  another,  and  arranged  the  other 
chapters  differently  from  Kix.  His  revision  altogether  had 
246  characters  fewer  than  the  old  text. 

3.  Ku  i-tsun  gives  the  titles  of  nearly  130  works  on  our 
classic    that   appeared    after    the   volume   of  Wu  KMng, 

Later  works     bringing  its  literary  history  down  to  the  end 

on  the  Hsiao.    0f  the  Ming  dynasty.     The  scholars  of  the 

present   dynasty   have   not   been    less   abundant   in   their 

labours   on  it  than  their   predecessors.     Among   the  col- 


1  The  title  of  this  work  in  the  Catalogue  of  the  Imperial  Libraries  is  '  Settle- 
ment of  the  Text  of  the  Hsi&o  King.' 


INTRODUCTION.  46 1 


lected  works  of  Mao  Khl-Xmg  (1623-1 713)  is  one  called 
*  Questions  about  the  Hsiao  King,5  in  which,  with  his  usual 
ability,  and,  it  must  be  added,  his  usual  acrimony,  he 
defends  the  received  text.  He  asserts — and  in  this  he  is 
correct — that  there  is  no  difference  of  any  importance 
between  the  ancient  and  modern  texts  ;  when  he  asserts 
further  that  there  never  was  any  such  difference,  what  he 
affirms  is  incapable  of  proof.  He  pours  scorn  on  Kix  Hsf 
and  Wu  KMng ;  but  he  is  not  so  successful  in  defending 
the  integrity  of  the  Hsiao  as  I  have  allowed  him  to  be  in 
vindicating  the  portions  of  the  Shu  that  we  owe  to  Khung 
An-kwo. 

The  Hsiao  King  has  always  been  a  favourite  with  the 
emperors  of  China.  Before  Hsiian  3ung  took  it  in  hand, 
the  first  and  eighth  emperors  of  the  eastern  Kin  dynasty 
(317-419),  the  first  and  third  of  the  Liang  (502-556),  and  the 
ninth  of  the  northern  Wei  (^86-^4)  had  published  their 
labours  upon  it.  The  Manchau  rulers  of  the  present  dynasty 
have  signalised  themselves  in  this  department.  In  1656  the 
first  emperor  produced  in  one  chapter  his  '  Imperial  Com- 
mentary on  the  Hsiao  King,'  and  in  1728  the  third  pub- 
lished a  '  Collection  of  Comments'  on  it.  Between  them  was 
the  long  reign  known  to  us  as  the  Khang-hsi  period  (1662- 
1722),  during  which  there  appeared  under  the  direction  of 
the  second  emperor,  the  most  distinguished  of  his  line, 
his  '  Extensive  Explanation  of  the  Hsiao  King,5  in  100 
chapters.  The  only  portion  of  the  text  which  it  gives  in 
full  is  K\X  Hsf  s  chapter  of  Confucian  text ;  but  most  of 
the  topics  touched  on  in  iTu's  supplementary  chapters, 
added,  as  he  supposed,  by  some  later  hand,  are  dealt  with 
in  the  course  of  the  work,  the  whole  of  which  will  amply 
repay  a  careful  study. 

4.  It  will  have  been  seen  that  the  two  great  scholars,  Kb. 

Conclusion  Hsi  and  Wu  .Oang,  who  have  taken  the 
regarding  the    greatest  liberties  with  the  text  of  our  classic, 

genuineness 

and  integrity    allow  that  there  is  a  Confucian  element  in  it, 

of  the  Hsiao.     and   that   mQre  than  a  fifth  part  of  the  ^ole, 

containing,  even  as  expurgated  by  Ku,  about  400  characters, 
may  be  correctly  ascribed  to  the  sage.     I  agree  with  them 


462  THE   HSlAo   KING. 

in  this.  All  the  rest  of  the  treatise,  to  whomsoever  it  may 
be  ascribed,  from  Sang-^ze,  the  immediate  disciple  of  Confu- 
cius, down  to  Liu  Hsiang  (b.  C.  80-9),  took  its  present  form 
in  the  first  century  before  our  Christian  era.  The  reader 
will  fail  to  see  in  it  a  close  connexion  between  the  dif- 
ferent chapters,  and  think  that  the  author  or  authors  try 
to  make  more  of  Filial  Piety  than  can  be  made  of  it.  The 
whole,  however,  is  a  valuable  monument  of  antiquity,  and 
an  exhibition  of  the  virtue  which  Chinese  moralists  and 
rulers,  from  the  most  ancient  times,  have  delighted  to  cele- 
brate as  the  fundamental  principle  of  human  virtue,  the 
great  source  of  social  happiness,  and  the  bond  of  national 
strength  and  stability. 


Note  on  the  Translation. 

In  preparing  the  translation  of  the  Hsiao  King  for  the 
present  work,  I  have  made  frequent  reference  to  four 
earlier  translations. 

Two  of  them  were  made  by  myself; — the  one  about 
thirty  years  ago,  simply  as  an  exercise  for  my  own  im- 
provement in  Chinese ;  the  other  four  years  ago,  when 
I  was  anxious  to  understand  fully  the  Confucian  teaching 
on  the  subject  of  Filial  Piety,  but  without  reference  to  my 
earlier  version. 

The  third  is  a  translation  in  the  fourth  volume  of  the 
Chinese  Repository,  pp.  345-353  (1835),  for  the  accuracy 
of  which  much  cannot  be  said.  Very  few  notes  are  ap- 
pended to  it.  The  fourth  is  in  the  '  Memoires  concernant 
les  Chinois'  (Paris,  1779),  being  part  of  a  long  treatise  on 
the  '  Ancient  and  Modern  Doctrine  of  the  Chinese  about 
Filial  Piety/  by  P.  Cibot.  In  a  preliminary  notice  to  his 
version  of  our  classic,  he  says : — '  P.  Noel  formerly  trans- 
lated the  Hsiao  King  into  Latin.  Our  translation  will 
necessarily  be  different  from  his.  He  laboured  on  the 
old  text,  and  we  on  the  new,  which  the  scholars  of  the 
Imperial    College    have    adopted.     Besides  this,  he   has 


INTRODUCTION.  463 


launched  out  into  paraphrase,  and  we  have  made  it  our 
business  to  present  the  text  in  French  such  as  it  is  in 
Chinese.'  I  have  not  been  able  to  refer  to  P.  Noel's  trans- 
lation in  preparing  that  now  given  to  the  public ;  but  I  had 
his  work  before  me  when  writing  out  my  earliest  version. 
The  difference  between  the  old  and  modern  texts  is  too 
slight  to  affect  the  character  of  translations  of  them,  but 
P.  Noel's  version  is  decidedly  periphrastic.  The  title  of 
his  work  is :  — '  Sinensis  Imperii  Libri  Classici  Sex, 
nimirum  Adultorum  Schola,  Immutabile  Medium,  Liber 
sententiarum,  Mencius,  Filialis  Observantia,  Parvulorum 
Schola,  e  Sinico  idiomate  in  Latinum  traducti  a  P.  Fr. 
Noel,  S.  J.  (Prague,  1711).'  The  present  version,  I  believe, 
gives  the  text  in  English,  such  as  it  is  in  Chinese,  more 
accurately  and  closely  than  P.  Cibot's  does  in  French. 


THE    HSIAO    KING. 


Chapter  I. 

The  Scope  and  Meaning  of  the  Treatise. 

(Once),  when  Aung-nf1  was  unoccupied,  and  his 
disciple  3ang 2  was  sitting  by  in  attendance  on  him, 
the  Master  said,  '  Shan,  the  ancient  kings  had  a  per- 
fect virtue  and  all-embracing  rule  of  conduct,  through 
which  they  were  in  accord  with  all  under  heaven. 
By  the  practice  of  it  the  people  were  brought  to  live 
in  peace  and  harmony,  and  there  was  no  ill-will  be- 
tween superiors  and  inferiors.  Do  you  know  what 
it  was3?'    3ang  rose  from  his  mat,  and  said,  '  How 

1  JTung-ni  was  the  designation  or  marriage-name  of  Confucius. 
We  find  it  twice  in  the  Doctrine  of  the  Mean  (chh.  2  and  30), 
applied  to  the  sage  by  3ze_sze>  m"s  grandson,  the  reputed  author 
of  that  treatise.  By  his  designation,  it  is  said,  a  grandson  might 
speak  of  his  grandfather,  and  therefore  some  scholars  contend 
that  the  Classic  of  Filial  Piety  should  also  be  ascribed  to  3ze*sze  > 
but  such  a  canon  cannot  be  considered  as  sufficiently  established. 
On  the  authorship  of  the  Classic,  see  the  Introduction,  p.  451. 

2  3ang-jze,  named  Shan,  and  styled  3z^-yu,  was  one  of  the  most 
distinguished  of  the  disciples  of  Confucius.  He  was  a  favourite 
with  the  sage,  and  himself  a  voluminous  writer.  Many  incidents 
and  sayings  are  related,  illustrative  of  his  filial  piety,  so  that  it  was 
natural  for  the  master  to  enter  with  him  on  the  discussion  of  that 
virtue.  He  shares  in  the  honour  and  worship  still  paid  to  Confu- 
cius, and  is  one  of  his  'Tour  Assessors'  in  his  temples. 

3  Both  the  translator  in  the  Chinese  Repository  and  P.  Cibot 
have  rendered  this  opening  address  of  Confucius  very  imperfectly. 

[1]  Hh 


466  THE    HSIAO    KING.  CH.  I. 

should  I,  Shan,  who  am  so  devoid  of  intelligence, 
be  able  to  know  this  ? '  The  Master  said,  '  (It  was 
filial  piety).  Now  filial  piety  is  the  root  of  (all) 
virtue1,  and  (the  stem)  out  of  which  grows  (all  moral) 
teaching.  Sit  down  again,  and  I  will  explain  the 
subject  to  you.  Our  bodies — to  every  hair  and  bit 
of  skin — are  received  by  us  from  our  parents,  and  we 
must  not  presume  to  injure  or  wound  them  : — this 
is  the  beginning  of  filial  piety.  When  we  have  esta- 
blished our  character  by  the  practice  of  the  (filial) 
course,  so  as  to  make  our  name  famous  in  future 
ages,  and  thereby  glorify  our  parents  : — this  is  the 
end  of  filial  piety.     It  commences  with  the  service 


The  former  has : — '  Do  you  understand  how  the  ancient  kings, 
who  possessed  the  greatest  virtue  and  the  best  moral  principles, 
rendered  the  whole  empire  so  obedient  that  the  people  lived  in 
peace  and  harmony,  and  no  ill-will  existed  between  superiors  and 
inferiors  ? '  The  other : — '  Do  you  know  what  was  the  pre-emi- 
nent virtue  and  the  essential  doctrine  which  our  ancient  monarchs 
taught  to  all  the  empire,  to  maintain  concord  among  their  subjects, 
and  banish  all  dissatisfaction  between  superiors  and  inferiors?' 
P.  Cibot  comes  the  nearer  to  the  meaning  of  the  text,  but  he  has 
neglected  the  characters  corresponding  to  '  through  which  they 
were  in  accord  with  all  under  heaven,'  that  are  expounded  clearly 
enough  by  Hsiian  3ung-  The  sentiment  of  the  sage  is,  as  he  has 
tersely  expressed  it  in  the  Doctrine  of  the  Mean  (ch.  13),  that  the 
ancient  kings  '  governed  men,  according  to  their  nature,  with  what 
is  proper  to  them/ 

1  '  All  virtue'  means  the  Rve  virtuous  principles,  the  constituents 
of  humanity,  'benevolence,  righteousness,  propriety,  knowledge, 
and  fidelity/  Of  these,  benevolence  is  the  chief  and  fundamental, 
so  that  Mencius  says  (VII,  ii,  ch.  16),  'Benevolence  is  man/  In 
man's  nature,  therefore,  benevolence  is  the  root  of  filial  piety ; 
while  in  practice  filial  piety  is  the  root  of  benevolence.  Such 
is  the  way  in  which  Kii  Hsi  and  other  critical  scholars  recon- 
cile the  statements  of  the  text  here  and  elsewhere  with  their  theory 
as  to  the  constituents  of  humanity. 


CH.  II.  FILIAL    PIETY    IN    THE    SOVEREIGN.  467 

of  parents ;  it  proceeds  to  the  service  of  the 
ruler;  it  is  completed  by  the  establishment  of 
the   character. 

'  It  is  said  in  the  Major  Odes  of  the  Kingdom, 
"  Ever  think  of  your  ancestor, 
Cultivating  your  virtue  V ' 


Chapter  II. 

Filial  Piety  in  the  Son  of  Heaven. 

He  who  loves  his  parents  will  not  dare  (to  incur 
the  risk  of)  being  hated  by  any  man,  and  he  who 
reveres  his  parents  will  not  dare  (to  incur  the  risk  of) 
being  contemned  by  any  man2.  When  the  love  and 
reverence  (of  the  Son  of  Heaven)  are  thus  carried  to 
the  utmost  in  the  service  of  his  parents,  the  lessons 
of  his  virtue  affect  all  the  people,  and  he  becomes 

1  See  the  Shih  King,  III,  i,  ode  2,  stanza  4.  Kt  Hsi  commences 
his  expurgation  of  our  classic  with  casting  out  this  concluding  para- 
graph ;  and  rightly  so.  Such  quotations  of  the  odes  and  other  pas- 
sages in  the  ancient  classics  are  not  after  the  manner  of  Confucius. 
The  application  made  of  them,  moreover,  is  often  far-fetched,  and 
away  from  their  proper  meaning. 

2  The  thing  thus  generally  stated  must  be  understood  specially 
of  the  sovereign,  and  only  he  who  stands  related  to  all  other  men 
can  give  its  full  manifestation.  Previous  translators  have  missed 
the  peculiarity  of  the  construction  in  each  of  the  clauses.  Thus 
P.  Cibot  gives  : — '  He  who  loves  his  parents  will  not  dare  to  hate 
any  one,'  &c.  But  in  the  second  member  we  have  a  well-known 
form  in  Chinese  to  give  the  force  of  the  passive  voice.  Attention 
is  called  to  this  in  the  Extensive  Explanation  of  the 
Hsiao  (see  p.  461): — 'Wu  yii  zan  does  not  mean  merely  to 
hate  men ;  it  indicates  an  anxious  apprehension  lest  the  hatred 
of  men  should  light  on  me,  and  my  parents  thereby  be  involved 
in  it.7 

H  h  2 


468  THE    HSIAO    KING.  CH.  III. 

a  pattern  to  (all  within)  the  four  seas x : — this  is  the 
filial  piety  of  the  Son  of  Heaven 2. 

It  is  said  in  (the  Marquis  of)  Fu  on  Punishments3, 
'  The  One  man  will  have  felicity,  and  the  millions 
of  the  people  will  depend  on  (what  ensures  his  hap- 
piness)/ 

Chapter  III. 
Filial  Piety  in  the  Princes  of  States. 

Above  others,  and  yet  free  from  pride,  they  dwell 
on  high,  without  peril ;  adhering  to  economy,  and 
carefully  observant  of  the  rules  and  laws,  they  are 
full,  without  overflowing.  To  dwell  on  high  without 
peril  is  the  way  long  to  preserve  nobility ;  to  be  full 
without  overflowing  is  the  way  long  to  preserve 
riches.  When  their  riches  and  nobility  do  not  leave 
their  persons,  then  they  are  able  to  preserve  the 
altars  of  their  land  and  grain,  and  to  secure  the 
harmony  of  their  people  and  men  in  office  4  : — this 
is  the  filial  piety  of  the  princes  of  states. 

1  Chinese  scholars  make  'the  people'  to  be  the  subjects  of  the 
king,  and  'all  within  the  four  seas'  to  be  the  barbarous  tribes  out- 
side the  four  borders  of  the  kingdom,  between  them  and  the  seas 
or  oceans  within  which  the  habitable  earth  was  contained — accord- 
ing to  the  earliest  geographical  conceptions.  All  we  have  to  find 
in  the  language  is  the  unbounded,  the  universal,  influence  of  '  the 
Son  of  Heaven.' 

2  The  appellation  '  Son  of  Heaven '  for  the  sovereign  was  un- 
known in  the  earliest  times  of  the  Chinese  nation.  It  cannot  be 
traced  beyond  the  Shang  dynasty. 

3  See  the  Shu,  V,  xxvii,  4,  and  the  note  on  the  name  of  that 
Book,  p.  254. 

4  In  the  Chinese  Repository  we  have  for  this : — '  They  will  be 
able  to  protect  their  ancestral  possessions  with  the  produce  of 
their  lands;'    'They  will  make  sure  the  supreme  rank  to  their 


CH.  IV.  FILIAL    PIETY    IN    HIGH   OFFICERS.  469 

It  is  said  in  the  Book  of  Poetry1, 
'  Be  apprehensive,  be  cautious, 
As  if  on  the  brink  of  a  deep  abyss, 
As  if  treading  on  thin  ice/ 

Chapter  IV.     Filial  Piety  in  High  Ministers 
and  Great  Officers. 

They  do  not  presume  to  wear  robes  other  than 
those  appointed  by  the  laws  of  the  ancient  kings  2 ; 
nor  to  speak  words  other  than  those  sanctioned  by 
their  speech  ;  nor  to  exhibit  conduct  other  than  that 
exemplified  by  their  virtuous  ways.  Thus  none  of 
their  words  being  contrary  to  those  sanctions,  and 
none  of  their  actions  contrary  to  the   (right)  way, 

families.'  But  it  is  better  to  retain  the  style  of  the  original.  The 
king  had  a  great  altar  to  the  spirit  (or  spirits)  presiding  over  the 
land.  The  colour  of  the  earth  in  the  centre  of  it  was  yellow ; 
that  on  each  of  its  four  sides  differed  according  to  the  colours 
assigned  to  the  four  quarters  of  the  sky.  A  portion  of  this  earth 
was  cut  away,  and  formed  the  nucleus  of  a  corresponding  altar 
in  each  feudal  state,  according  to  their  position  relative  to  the 
capital.  The  prince  of  the  state  had  the  prerogative  of  sacrificing 
there.  A  similar  rule  prevailed  for  the  altars  to  the  spirits  pre- 
siding over  the  grain.  So  long  as  a  family  ruled  in  a  state,  so 
long  its  chief  offered  those  sacrifices;  and  the  extinction  of  the 
sacrifices  was  an  emphatic  way  of  describing  the  ruin  and  extinc- 
tion of  the  ruling  House. 

1  See  the  Shih,  II,  v,  ode  1,  stanza  6. 

2  The  articles  of  dress,  to  be  worn  by  individuals  according  to 
their  rank,  from  the  sovereign  downwards,  in  their  ordinary  attire, 
and  on  special  occasions,  were  the  subject  of  attention  and  enact- 
ment in  China  from  the  earliest  times.  We  find  references  to  them 
in  the  earliest  books  of  the  Shu  (Part  II,  Books  iii,  iv).  The  words 
to  be  spoken,  and  conduct  to  be  exhibited,  on  every  varying 
occasion,  could  not  be  so  particularly  described ;  but  the  example 
of  the  ancient  kings  would  suffice  for  these,  as  their  enactments 
for  the  dress. 


470  THE    HSIAO    KING.  CH.  V. 

from  their  mouths  there  comes  no  exceptionable 
speech,  and  in  their  conduct  there  are  found  no 
exceptionable  actions.  Their  words  may  fill  all 
under  heaven,  and  no  error  of  speech  will  be  found 
in  them.  Their  actions  may  fill  all  under  heaven, 
and  no  dissatisfaction  or  dislike  will  be  awakened  by 
them.  When  these  three  things — (their  robes,  their 
words,  and  their  conduct) — are  all  complete  as  they 
should  be,  they  can  then  preserve  their  ancestral 
temples1:* — this  is  the  filial  piety  of  high  ministers 
and  great  officers. 

It  is  said  in  the  Book  of  Poetry 2, 

4  He  is  never  idle,  day  or  night, 
In  the  service  of  the  One  man/ 


Chapter  V.     Filial  Piety  in  Inferior  Officers. 

As  they  serve  their  fathers,  so  they  serve  their 
mothers,  and  they  love  them  equally.  As  they 
serve  their  fathers,  so  they  serve  their  rulers,  and 
they  reverence  them  equally.  Hence  love  is  what 
is  chiefly  rendered  to  the  mother,  and  reverence  is 
what  is  chiefly  rendered  to  the  ruler,  while  both  of ' 
these  things  are  given  to  the  father.  Therefore 
when  they  serve  their  ruler  with  filial  piety  they  are 
loyal ;  when  they  serve  their  superiors  with  rever- 
ence they  are  obedient.     Not  failing  in  this  loyalty 

1  Their  ancestral  temples  were  to  the  ministers  and  grand 
officers  what  the  altars  of  their  land  and  grain  were  to  the  feudal 
lords.  Every  great  officer  had  three  temples  or  shrines,  in  which 
he  sacrificed  to  the  first  chief  of  his  family  or  clan ;  to  his  grand- 
father, and  to  his  father.  While  these  remained,  the  family  re- 
mained, and  its  honours  were  perpetuated. 

2  See  the  Shih,  III,  iii,  ode  6,  stanza  4. 


CH.  vi.       FILIAL    PIETY    IN    THE  COMMON    PEOPLE.  47 1 

and  obedience   in  serving  those  above  them,  they 
are   then  able   to  preserve  their   emoluments  and 
positions,  and  to  maintain  their  sacrifices  l : — this  is 
the  filial  piety  of  inferior  officers 2. 
It  is  said  in  the  Book  of  Poetry3, 

'  Rising  early  and  going  to  sleep  late, 
Do  not  disgrace  those  who  gave  you  birth.' 

Chapter  VI. 

Filial  Piety  in  the  Common  People. 

They  follow  the  course  of  heaven   (in   the   re- 
volving seasons) ;  they   distinguish  the  advantages 

1  These  officers  had  their  '  positions '  or  places,  and  their  pay. 
They  had  also  their  sacrifices,  but  such  as  were  private  or  per- 
sonal to  themselves,  so  that  we  have  not  much  information  about 
them. 

2  The  Chinese  Repository  has  here,  '  Such  is  the  influence  of 
filial  duty  when  performed  by  scholars;'  and  P.  Cibot,  'Voila 
sommairement  ce  qui  caracterise  la  Vi6t6  Filiale  du  LettreV  But 
to  use  the  term  ' scholar'  here  is  to  translate  from  the  standpoint 
of  modern  China,  and  not  from  that  of  the  time  of  Confucius.  The 
Shih  of  feudal  China  were  the  younger  sons  of  the  higher  classes, 
and  men  that  by  their  ability  were  rising  out  of  the  lower,  and  who 
were  all  in  inferior  situations,  and  looking  forward  to  offices  of 
trust  in  the  service  of  the  royal  court,  or  of  their  several  states. 
Below  the  'great  officers'  of  ch.  4,  three  classes  of  Shih — the 
highest,  middle,  lowest  — were  recognised,  all  intended  in  this 
chapter.     When  the  feudal  system  had  passed  away,  the  class  of 

'scholars'  gradually  took  their  place.  Shih  (~p)  is  one  of  the 
oldest  characters  in  Chinese,  but  the  idea  expressed  in  its  formation 
is  not  known.  Confucius  is  quoted  in  the  Shwo  Wan  as  making 
it  to  be  from  the  characters  for  one  ( — *)  and  ten  (-f^).  A  very 
old  definition  of  it  is — 'The  denomination  of  one  entrusted  with 
affairs.' 

3  See  the  Shih,  II,  iii,  ode  2,  stanza  6. 


472  THE    HSIAO    KING.  CH.  VII. 

afforded  by  (different)  soils 1 ;  they  are  careful  of 
their  conduct  and  economical  in  their  expendi- 
ture ; — in  order  to  nourish  their  parents  : — this  is 
the  filial  piety  of  the  common  people. 

Therefore  from  the  Son  of  Heaven  down  to  the 
common  people,  there  never  has  been  one  whose 
filial  piety  was  without  its  beginning  and  end  on 
whom  calamity  did  not  come. 


Chapter  VII. 

Filial  Piety  in  Relation  to  the  Three  Powers  2. 

The  disciple  3ang  said,  '  Immense  indeed  is  the 
greatness   of  filial   piety!'      The  Master  replied3, 

1  These  two  sentences  describe  the  attention  of  the  people  to 
the  various  processes  of  agriculture,  as  conditioned  by  the  seasons 
and  the  qualities  of  different  soils. 

With  this  chapter  there  ends  what  Kh.  Hsi  regarded  as  the  only 
portion  of  the  Hsiao  in  which  we  can  rest  as  having  come  from  Con- 
fucius. So  far,  it  is  with  him  a  continuous  discourse  that  proceeded 
from  the  sage.  And  there  is,  in  this  portion,  especially  when  we 
admit  ^u's  expurgations,  a  certain  sequence  and  progress,  without 
logical  connexion,  in  the  exhibition  of  the  subject  which  we  fail  to 
find  in  the  chapters  that  follow. 

2  '  The  Three  Powers  is  a  phrase  which  is  first  found  in  two 
of  the  Appendixes  to  the  Yi  King,  denoting  Heaven,  Earth,  and 
Man,  as  the  three  great  agents  or  agencies  in  nature,  or  the  circle 
of  being. 

3  The  whole  of  the  reply  of  Confucius  here,  down  to  '  the  advan- 
tages afforded  by  earth,'  is  found  in  a  narrative  in  the  3°  A'wan, 
under  the  twenty-fifth  year  of  duke  ^ao  (b.  c.  517),  with  the  im- 
portant difference  that  the  discourse  is  there  about  '  ceremonies/ 
and  not  about  filial  piety.  Plainly,  it  is  an  interpolation  in  the 
Hsi&o,  and  is  rightly  thrown  out  by  KiX  and  Wu  Kh&ng.  To  my 
own  mind  it  was  a  relief  to  find  that  the  passage  was  not  genuine, 
and  had  not  come  from  Confucius.  The  discourse  in  the  Qo 
Awan,  which  is  quite  lengthy,  these  sentences  being  only  the  com- 


CH.  VII.        FILIAL  PIETY  AND  THE  THREE  POWERS.  473 

*  Yes,  filial  piety  is  the  constant  (method)  of  Heaven, 
the  righteousness  of  Earth,  and  the  practical  duty  of 
Man1.  Heaven  and  earth  invariably  pursue  the 
course  (that  may  be  thus  described),  and  the  people 
take  it  as  their  pattern.  (The  ancient  kings)  imi- 
tated the  brilliant  luminaries  of  heaven,  and  acted 
in  accordance  with  the  (varying)  advantages  afforded 
by  earth,  so  that  they  were  in  accord  with  all  under 
heaven ;  and  in  consequence  their  teachings,  without 
being  severe,  were  successful,  and  their  government, 
without  being  rigorous,  secured  perfect  order. 

mencement  of  it,  is  more  than  sufficiently  fanciful ;  but  it  is  con- 
ceivable that  what  is  here  predicated  of  filial  piety  might  be  spoken 
of  ceremonies,  while  I  never  could  see  what  it  could  have  to  do 
with  filial  piety,  or  filial  piety  with  it.  After  the  long  discourse  in 
the  3°  -^wan  one  of  the  interlocutors  in  it  exclaims,  '  Immense, 
indeed,  is  the  greatness  of  ceremonies  ! ' — the  same  terms  with 
which  3&ng-$ze  is  made  to  commence  this  chapter,  saving  that  we 
have  '  ceremonies '  instead  of  '  filial  piety/  There  can  be  no  doubt 
that  the  passage  is  interpolated ;  and  yet  the  first  part  of  it  is 
quoted  by  Pan  Ku  (in  our  first  century),  in  a  note  to  Liu  Hins 
Catalogue,  and  also  in  the  Amplification  of  the  First  Precept  of  the 
Khang-hsi  Sacred  Edict  (in  our  eighteenth  century).  Pan  Ku  may 
not  have  been  sufficiently  acquainted  with  the  3°  ^wan  to  detect  the 
forgery ;  that  Chinese  scholars  should  still  quote  the  description  as 
applicable  to  filial  piety  shows  how  liable  they  are  to  be  carried 
away  by  fine-sounding  terms  and  mysterious  utterances. 

P.  Cibot  gives  a  correct  translation  of  the  first  part  in  a  note,  but 
adds  that  it  carries  the  sense  of  the  text  much  too  high,  and  would 
bring  it  into  collision  with  the  prejudices  of  the  west,  and  he  has 
preferred  to  hold  to  the  more  common  explanation : — '  Ce  qu'est 
la  re'gularite  des  monuments  des  astres  pour  le  firmament,  la  fer- 
tilite'  des  campagnes  pour  la  terre,  la  Pidte'  Filiale  Test  constam- 
ment  pour  les  peuples!' 

1  An  amusing  translation  of  this  sentence  is  found  in  Samuel 
Johnson's  '  Oriental  Religions,  China/  p.  208,  beginning,  '  Filial 
Piety  is  the  Book  of  Heaven !'  Mr.  Johnson  does  not  say  where 
he  got  this  version. 


474  THE    HSIAO    KING.  CH.  VIII. 


'  The  ancient  kings,  seeing  how  their  teachings l 
could  transform  the  people,  set  before  them  there- 
fore an  example  of  the  most  extended  love,  and 
none  of  the  people  neglected  their  parents  ;  they  set 
forth  to  them  (the  nature  of)  virtue  and  righteous- 
ness, and  the  people  roused  themselves  to  the  prac- 
tice of  them  ;  they  went  before  them  with  reverence 
and  yielding  courtesy,  and  the  people  had  no  con- 
tentions ;  they  led  them  on  by  the  rules  of  propriety 
and  by  music,  and  the  people  were  harmonious  and 
benignant ;  they  showed  them  what  they  loved  and 
what  they  disliked,  and  the  people  understood  their 
prohibitions. 

'  It  is  said  in  the  Book  of  Poetry2, 
"  Awe-inspiring  are  you,  O  Grand-Master  Yin, 
And  the  people  all  look  up  to  you/' ' 

Chapter  VIII.     Filial  Piety  in  Government. 

The  Master  said,  '  Anciently,  when  the  intelligent 
kings  by  means  of  filial  piety  ruled  all  under  heaven, 
they  did  not  dare  to  receive  with  disrespect  the  min- 
isters of  small  states ; — how  much  less  would  they 
do  so  to  the  dukes,  marquises,  counts,  and  barons ! ' 
Thus  it  was  that  they  got  (the  princes  of)  the  myriad 
states  with  joyful  hearts  (to  assist  them)  in  the  (sacri- 
ficial) services  to  their  royal  predecessors 3. 

1  Sze-ma  Kwang  changes  the  character  for  '  teachings'  here  into 
that  for  '  filial  piety/  There  is  no  external  evidence  for  such  a 
reading ;  and  the  texture  of  the  whole  treatise  is  so  loose  that  we 
cannot  insist  on  internal  evidence. 

2  See  the  Shih,  II,  iv,  ode  7,  stanza  1. 

3  Under  the  ^Tau  dynasty  there  were  five  orders  of  nobility,  and 
the  states  belonging  to  their  rulers  varied  proportionally  in  size. 


CH.  VIII.  FILIAL    PIETY    IN    GOVERNMENT.  475 

'  The  rulers  of  states  did  not  dare  to  slight  wife- 
less men  and  widows; — how  much  less  would  they 
slight  their  officers  and  the  people !  Thus  it  was 
that  they  got  all  their  people  with  joyful  hearts 
(to  assist  them)  in  serving  the  rulers,  their  prede- 
cessors \ 

'  The  heads  of  clans  did  not  dare  to  slight  their 
servants  and  concubines  ; — how  much  less  would 
they  slight  their  wives  and  sons  !  Thus  it  was  that 
they  got  their  men  with  joyful  hearts  (to  assist  them) 
in  the  service  of  their  parents. 

'  In  such  a  state  of  things,  while  alive,  parents 
reposed  in  (the  glory  of)  their  sons ;  and,  when  sacri- 
ficed to,  their  disembodied  spirits  enjoyed  their 
offerings2.  Therefore  all  under  heaven  peace  and 
harmony  prevailed  ;  disasters  and  calamities  did  not 
occur ;  misfortunes  and  rebellions  did  not  arise. 

'  It  is  said  in  the  Book  of  Poetry3, 
"  To  an  upright,  virtuous  conduct 
All  in  the  four  quarters  of  the  state  render  obedient 
homage."  ' 


There  were  besides  many  smaller  states  attached  to  these.  The 
feudal  lords  at  stated  times  appeared  at  the  royal  court,  and  one 
important  duty  which  then  devolved  on  them  was  to  take  part  in 
the  sacrificial  services  of  the  sovereign  in  the  ancestral  temple. 

1  These  services  were  also  the  sacrifices  in  the  ancestral  temples 
of  the  rulers  of  the  states  and  of  the  chiefs  of  clans, — the  feudal 
princes  and  the  ministers  and  great  officers  of  chapters  3  and  4. 

2  In  the  Chinese  Repository  we  read  here : — '  Parents  enjoyed 
tranquillity  while  they  lived,  and  after  their  decease  sacrifices  were 
offered  to  their  disembodied  spirits/  To  the  same  effect  P.  Cibot : — 
'  Les  peres  et  meres  e'toient  heureux  pendant  la  vie,  et  apres  leur 
mort  leurs  dmes  e'toient  consoles  par  des  Tsi  (sacrifices)/  I  be- 
lieve that  I  have  caught  the  meaning  more  exactly. 

3  See  the  Shih,  III,  iii,  ode  2,  stanza  2. 


476  THE   HSIAO    KING.  CH.  IX. 


Chapter  IX.     The  Government  of  the  Sages1. 

The  disciple  Bang  said,  *  I  venture  to  ask  whether 
in  the  virtue  of  the  sages  there  was  not  something 
greater  than  filial  piety/  The  Master  replied,  '  Of 
all  (creatures  with  their  different)  natures  produced 
by  Heaven  and  Earth,  man  is  the  noblest.  Of  all 
the  actions  of  man  there  is  none  greater  than  filial 
piety.  In  filial  piety  there  is  nothing  greater  than 
the  reverential  awe  of  one's  father.  In  the  rever- 
ential awe  shown  to  one's  father  there  is  nothing 
greater  than  the  making  him  the  correlate  of 
Heaven2.  The  duke  of  A"au  was  the  man  who 
(first)  did  this  3. 

1  '  The  sages'  here  must  mean  the  sage  sovereigns  of  antiquity, 
who  had  at  once  the  highest  wisdom  and  the  highest  place. 

2  See  a  note  on  p.  99  on  the  meaning  of  the  phrase  '  the  fel- 
low of  God,'  which  is  the  same  as  that  in  this  chapter,  translated 
'  the  correlate  of  God/  P.  Cibot  goes  at  length  into  a  discussion 
of  the  idea  conveyed  by  the  Chinese  character  P'ei,  but  without 
coming  to  any  definite  conclusion ;  and  indeed  Tai  Thung,  author 
of  the  dictionary  Liu  Shu  Ku,  says  that  'its  original  signifkancy 
has  baffled  investigation,  while  its  classical  usage  is  in  the  sense  of 
"  mate,"  "  fellow." '  The  meaning  here  is  the  second  assigned  to 
it  on  p.  99.  In  the  Chinese  Repository  we  find  : — '  As  a  mark  of 
reverence  there  is  nothing  more  important  than  to  place  the  father 
on  an  equality  with  heaven ;'  which  is  by  no  means  the  idea,  while 
the  author  further  distorts  the  meaning  by  the  following  note  : — 
'T'ien,  "Heaven,"  and  ShangTf,  the  "Supreme  Ruler,"  seem  to 
be  perfectly  synonymous ;  and  whatever  ideas  the  Chinese  attach 
to  them,  it  is  evident  that  the  noble  lord  of  iifau  regarded  his  an- 
cestors, immediate  and  remote,  as  their  equals,  and  paid  to  the  one 
the  same  homage  as  the  other.  In  thus  elevating  mortals  to  an 
equality  with  the  Supreme  Ruler,  he  is  upheld  and  approved  by 
Confucius,  and  has  been  imitated  by  myriads  of  every  generation 
of  his  countrymen  down  to  the  present  day/ 

3  It  is  difficult  to  say  in  what  the  innovation  of  the  duke  of  Ki\i 


CH.  IX.     THE  GOVERNMENT  OF  THE  SAGES.      477 

*  Formerly  the  duke  of  K§m  at  the  border  altar 
sacrificed  to  Hau-/£1  as  the  correlate  of  Heaven, 
and  in  the  Brilliant  Hall  he  honoured  king  Wan, 
and  sacrificed  to  him  as  the  correlate  of  God 1.     The 


consisted.  The  editors  of  the  Extensive  Explanation  of  the 
Hsi&o  say: — '  According  to  commentators  on  our  classic,  Shun 
thinking  only  of  the  virtue  of  his  ancestor  did  not  sacrifice  to  him  at 
the  border  altar.  The  sovereigns  of  Hsia  and  Yin  were  the  first  to 
sacrifice  there  to  their  ancestors ;  but  they  had  not  the  ceremony  of 
sacrificing  to  their  fathers  as  the  correlates  of  Heaven.  This  began 
with  the  duke  of  iTau/  To  this  explanation  of  the  text  the  editors 
demur,  and  consider  that  the  noun  '  father ;  in  the  previous  sen- 
tence should  be  taken,  in  the  case  of  the  duke  of  K&n,  both  of 
Hau-/£i  and  king  Wan. 

1  The  reader  of  the  translations  from  the  Shih  must  be  familiar 
with  Hau-/£i,  as  the  ancestor  to  whom  the  kings  of  K§u  traced 
their  lineage,  and  with  king  Wan,  as  the  acknowledged  founder  of 
their  dynasty  in  connexion  with  his  son,  king  Wu.  Was  any  greater 
honour  done  to  Hau-^f  in  making  him  the  correlate  of  Heaven 
than  to  king  Wan  in  making  him  the  correlate  of  God  ?  We  must 
say,  No.  As  is  said  in  the  Extensive  Explanation,  '  The  words 
Heaven  and  God  are  different,  but  their  meaning  is  one  and  the 
same/  The  question  is  susceptible  of  easy  determination.  Let 
me  refer  the  reader  to  the  translations  from  the  Shih  on  pp.  317 
and  329.  The  tenth  piece  on  the  latter  was  sung,  at  the  border 
sacrifice  to  Heaven,  in  honour  of  Hau-/£r ;  and  the  first  four  lines 
of  it  are  to  the  effect — 

'  O  thou,  accomplished,  great  Hau-/£i ! 
To  thee  alone  'twas  given 
To  be,  by  what  we  trace  to  thee, 
The  correlate  of  Heaven;' 
while  the  fifth  and  sixth  lines  are — 

'  God  had  the  wheat  and  barley  meant 
To  nourish  all  mankind. 
None  would  have  fathomed  His  intent, 
But  for  thy  guiding  mind.' 
The  seventh  piece  on  the  former  page  was  used  at  the  sacrifice,  in 
the  Brilliant  Hall,  to  king  Wan,  as  '  the  correlate  of  God/     The 
first  three  lines  have  been  versified  by — 


47§  THE    HSIAO   KING.  CH.  IX. 

consequence  was  that  from  (all  the  states)  within 
the  four  seas,  every  (prince)  came  in  the  discharge 
of  his  duty  to  (assist  in  those)  sacrifices.  In  the 
virtue  of  the  sages  what  besides  was  there  greater 
than  filial  piety  ? 

'  Now  the  feeling  of  affection  grows  up  at  the 
parents'  knees,  and  as  (the  duty  of)  nourishing  those 
parents  is  exercised,  the  affection  daily  merges  in 
awe.  The  sages  proceeded  from  the  (feeling  of) 
awe  to  teach  (the  duties  of)  reverence,  and  from 
(that  of)  affection  to  teach  (those  of)  love.  The 
teachings  of  the  sages,  without  being  severe,  were 
successful,  and  their  government,  without  being  rigo- 

'My  offerings  here  are  given, 

A  ram,  a  bull. 
Accept  them,  mighty  Heaven, 

All-bountiful ;/ 
and  the  sixth  and  seventh  lines  by — 

'  From  Wan  comes  blessing  rich ; 

Now  on  the  right 
He  owns  those  gifts  to  which 

Him  I  invite/ 
Since  'Heaven*  and  'God'  have  the  same  reference,  why  are  they 
used  here  as  if  there  were  some  opposition  between  them  ?  The 
nearest  approach  to  an  answer  to  this  is  found  also  in  the  Exten- 
sive Explanation,  derived  mainly  from  Khixi  Hsiang-tao,  of  the 
Sung  dynasty,  and  to  the  following  effect  : — '  Heaven  (Tien)  just  is 
God  (Ti).  Heaven  is  a  term  specially  expressive  of  honour, 
and  Hau-/£i  was  made  the  correlate  of  Heaven,  because  he  was 
remote,  far  distant  from  the  worshipper.  God  is  a  term  expressive 
of  affection,  and  king  Wan  was  made  the  correlate  of  God,  be- 
cause he  was  nearer  to,  the  father  of,  the  duke  of  ^au.'  Hsiang-tao 
concludes  by  saying  that  the  sacrifice  at  the  border  altar  was  an 
old  institution,  while  that  in  the  Brilliant  Hall  was  first  appointed 
by  the  duke  of  j&Tau.  According  to  this  view,  Heaven  would 
approximate  to  the  name  for  Deity  in  the  absolute, — Jehovah,  as 
explained  in  Exodus  xv.  14;  while  Ti  is  God,  'our  Father  in 
heaven/ 


CH.  IX.     THE  GOVERNMENT  OF  THE  SAGES.       479 

rous,  was  effective.    What  they  proceeded  from  was 
the  root  (of  filial  piety  implanted  by  Heaven). 

'  The  relation  and  duties  between  father  and  son, 
(thus  belonging  to)  the  Heaven-conferred  nature, 
(contain  in  them  the  principle  of)  righteousness 
between  ruler  and  subject1.  The  son  derives  his 
life  from  his  parents,  and  no  greater  gift  could 
possibly  be  transmitted  ;  his  ruler  and  parent  (in 
one),  his  father  deals  with  him  accordingly,  and  no 
generosity  could  be  greater  than  this.  Hence,  he 
who  does  not  love  his  parents,  but  loves  other  men, 
is  called  a  rebel  against  virtue  ;  and  he  who  does 
not  revere  his  parents,  but  reveres  other  men,  is 
called  a  rebel  against  propriety.  When  (the  ruler) 
himself  thus  acts  contrary  to  (the  principles)  which 
should  place  him  in  accord  (with  all  men),  he  pre- 
sents nothing  for  the  people  to  imitate.  He  has 
nothing  to  do  with  what  is  good,  but  entirely  and 
only  with  what  is  injurious  to  virtue.  Though  he 
may  get  (his  will,  and  be  above  others),  the  superior 
man  does  not  give  him  his  approval. 

1  We  find  for  this  in  the  Chinese  Repository  : — '  The  feelings 
which  ought  to  characterise  the  intercourse  between  father  and  son 
are  of  a  heavenly  nature,  resembling  the  bonds  which  exist  between 
a  prince  and  his  ministers/  P.  Cibot  gives  : — '  Les  rapports  im- 
muable  de  pere  et  de  fils  d^coulent  de  1'essence  m6me  du  Tien, 
et  offrent  la  premiere  id£e  de  prince  et  de  sujet;'  adding  on  the 
former  clause  this  note : — '  Les  commentateurs  ne  disent  que  des 
mots  sur  ces  paroles;  mais  comment  pourroient  ils  les  bien  expliquer, 
puisqu'ils  ne  sauroient  en  entrevoir  le  sens  supreme  et  ineffable  ? 
Quelques-uns  ont  pris  le  parti  de  cites  le  texte  deTao-teh  King 
(ch.  42),  "Le  Tao  est  vie  et  unite ;  le  premier  a  engendre*  le  second  ; 
les  deux  ont  produit  le  troisieme;  le  trois  ont  fait  toutes  choses;" 
c'est-a-dire,  qu'ils  ont  tache  d'expliquer  un  texte  qui  les  passe,  par 
un  autre  ou  ils  ne  comprennent  rien/  But  there  is  neither  difficulty 
in  the  construction  of  the  text  here,  nor  mystery  in  its  meaning. 


480  THE    HSIAO    KING.  CH.  X. 

'  It  is  not  so  with  the  superior  man.  He  speaks, 
having  thought  whether  the  words  should  be  spoken  ; 
he  acts,  having  thought  whether  his  actions  are  sure 
to  give  pleasure.  His  virtue  and  righteousness  are 
such  as  will  be  honoured  ;  what  he  initiates  and  does 
is  fit  to  be  imitated ;  his  deportment  is  worthy  of 
contemplation ;  his  movements  in  advancing  or  re- 
tiring are  all  according  to  the  proper  rule.  In  this 
way  does  he  present  himself  to  the  people,  who  both 
revere  and  love  him,  imitate  and  become  like  him. 
Thus  he  is  able  to  make  his  teaching  of  virtue  suc- 
cessful, and  his  government  and  orders  to  be  carried 
into  effect 1. 

'  It  is  said  in  the  Book  of  Poetry 2, 
"  The  virtuous  man,  the  princely  one, 
Has  nothing  wrong  in  his  deportment.,, ' 

Chapter  X.     An  Orderly  Description  of  the 
Acts  of  Filial  Piety. 

The  Master  said,  '  The  service  which  a  filial  son 
does  to  his  parents  is  as  follows  : — In  his  general 
conduct  to  them,  he  manifests  the  utmost  reverence  ; 
in  his  nourishing  of  them,  his  endeavour  is  to  give 
them  the  utmost  pleasure  ;  when  they  are  ill,  he 
feels  the  greatest  anxiety ;  in  mourning  for  them 
(dead),  he  exhibits  every  demonstration  of  grief; 
in  sacrificing  to  them,  he  displays  the  utmost  so- 
lemnity. When  a  son  is  complete  in  these  five 
things  (he  may  be  pronounced)  able  to  serve  his 
parents. 

1  This  paragraph  may  be  called  a  mosaic,  formed  by  piecing 
together  passages  from  the  $o  ^wan. 

2  See  the  Shih,  I,  xiv,  ode  3,  stanza  3. 


CH.  XII.  THE   ALL-EMBRACING    RULE.  48  [ 

*  He  who  (thus)  serves  his  parents,  in  a  high 
situation,  will  be  free  from  pride ;  in  a  low  situation, 
will  be  free  from  insubordination ;  and  among  his 
equals,  will  not  be  quarrelsome.  In  a  high  situation 
pride  leads  to  ruin ;  in  a  low  situation  insubordina- 
tion leads  to  punishment ;  among  equals  quarrel- 
someness leads  to  the  wielding  of  weapons. 

'  If  those  three  things  be  not  put  away,  though 
a  son  every  day  contribute  beef,  mutton,  and  pork1 
to  nourish  his  parents,  he  is  not  filial/ 

Chapter  XI.     Filial  Piety  in  Relation  to 
the  Five  Punishments. 

The  Master  said,  *  There  are  three  thousand 
offences  against  which  the  five  punishments  are 
directed2,  and  there  is  not  one  of  them  greater 
than  being  unfilial. 

'  When  constraint  is  put  upon  a  ruler,  that  is  the 
disowning  of  his  superiority  ;  when  the  authority  of 
the  sages  is  disallowed,  that  is  the  disowning  of 
(all)  law  ;  when  filial  piety  is  put  aside,  that  is  the 
disowning  of  the  principle  of  affection.  These  (three 
things)  pave  the  way  to  anarchy/ 

Chapter    XII.       Amplification     of    'the    All- 
embracing  Rule  of  Conduct  '  in  Chapter  I. 

The  Master  said,  '  For  teaching  the  people  to  be 
affectionate  and  loving  there  is  nothing  better  than 
Filial  Piety  ;  for  teaching  them  (the  observance  of) 
propriety  and  submissiveness  there  is  nothing  better 
than   Fraternal  Duty;  for  changing  their  manners 

1  Compare  with  this  the  Confucian  Analects,  II,  vii. 

2  See  the  Shu,  p.  43,  and  especially  pp.  255,  256. 


482  THE    HSIAO    KING.  CH.  XIII. 

and  altering  their  customs  there  is  nothing  better 
than  Music  ;  for  securing  the  repose  of  superiors  and 
the  good  order  of  the  people  there  is  nothing  better 
than  the  Rules  of  Propriety. 

'  The  Rules  of  Propriety  are  simply  (the  develop- 
ment of)  the  principle  of  Reverence.  Therefore  the 
reverence  paid  to  a  father  makes  (all)  sons  pleased  ; 
the  reverence  paid  to  an  elder  brother  makes  (all) 
younger  brothers  pleased  ;  the  reverence  paid  to 
a  ruler  makes  (all)  subjects  pleased  x.  The  rever- 
ence paid  to  one  man  makes  thousands  and  myriads 
of  men  pleased.  The  reverence  is  paid  to  a  few, 
and  the  pleasure  extends  to  many  ; — this  is  what  is 
meant  by  an  "  All-embracing  Rule  of  Conduct."  ' 

Chapter  XIII.     Amplification  of  'the  Perfect 
Virtue'  in  Chapter  I. 

The  Master  said,  (  The  teaching  of  filial  piety  by 
the  superior  man 2  does  not  require  that  he  should 
go  to  family  after  family,  and  daily  see  the  members 
of  each.  His  teaching  of  filial  piety  is  a  tribute  of 
reverence  to  all  the  fathers  under  heaven ;  his 
teaching  of  fraternal  submission  is  a  tribute  of 
reverence  to  all  the  elder  brothers  under  heaven  ; 
his  teaching  of  the  duty  of  a  subject  is  a  tribute  of 
reverence  to  all  the  rulers  under  heaven. 

1  We  must  understand  that  the  '  reverence'  here  is  to  be  under- 
stood as  paid  by  the  sovereign.  In  reverencing  his  father  (or  an 
uncle  may  also  in  Chinese  usage  be  so  styled),  he  reverences  the 
idea  of  fatherhood,  and  being  '  in  accord  with  the  minds  of  all 
under  heaven/  his  example  is  universally  powerful.  And  we  may 
reason  similarly  of  the  other  two  cases  of  reverence  specified. 

2  The  I£un-$ze,  or  '  superior  man/  here  must  be  taken  of  the 
sovereign.     P.  Cibot  translates  it  by  '  un  prince/ 


CH.  XV.      FILIAL  PIETY  IN  RELATION  TO  REPROOF.         483 

'  It  is  said  in  the  Book  of  Poetry1, 

"  The  happy  and  courteous  sovereign 
Is  the  parent  of  the  people." 
*  If  it  were  not  a  perfect  virtue,  how  could  it  be 
recognised  as  in  accordance  with  their  nature  by  the 
people  so  extensively  as  this  ?  ■ 

Chapter  XIV.     Amplification  of  '  Making  our 
Name  Famous'  in  Chapter  I. 

The  Master  said,  '  The  filial  piety  with  which  the 
superior  man  serves  his  parents  may  be  transferred 
as  loyalty  to  the  ruler  ;  the  fraternal  duty  with  which 
he  serves  his  elder  brother  may  be  transferred  as 
submissive  deference  to  elders ;  his  regulation  of 
his  family  may  be  transferred  as  good  government 
in  any  official  position.  Therefore,  when  his  conduct 
is  thus  successful  in  his  inner  (private)  circle,  his 
name  will  be  established  (and  transmitted)  to  future 
generations/ 

Chapter  XV.     Filial  Piety  in  Relation  to 
Reproof  and  Remonstrance. 

The  disciple  3ang  said,  '■  I  have  heard  your  in- 
structions on  the  affection  of  love,  on  respect  and 
reverence,  on  giving  repose  to  (the  minds  of)  our 
parents,  and  on  making  our  name  famous ;— I  would 
venture  to  ask  if  (simple)  obedience  to  the  orders  of 
one's  father  can  be  pronounced  filial  piety/  The 
Master  replied,  'What  words  are  these!  what  words 
are  these  !  Anciently,  if  the  Son  of  Heaven  had 
seven  ministers  who  would  remonstrate  with  him, 

1  See  the  Shih,  III,  ii,  ode  7,  stanza  1.  The  two  lines  of  the 
Shih  here  are,  possibly,  not  an  interpolation. 

I  i  2 


484  THE    HSIAO    KING*  CH.  XVI. 

although  he  had  not  right  methods  of  government, 
he  would  not  lose  his  possession  of  the  kingdom  ; 
if  the  prince  of  a  state  had  five  such  ministers, 
though  his  measures  might  be  equally  wrong,  he 
would  not  lose  his  state  ;  if  a  great  officer  had  three, 
he  would  not,  in  a  similar  case,  lose  (the  headship 
of)  his  clan ;  if  an  inferior  officer  had  a  friend  who 
would  remonstrate  with  him,  a  good  name  would 
not  cease  to  be  connected  with  his  character ;  and 
the  father  who  had  a  son  that  would  remonstrate 
with  him  would  not  sink  into  the  gulf  of  unrighteous 
deeds 1.  Therefore  when  a  case  of  unrighteous  con- 
duct is  concerned,  a  son  must  by  no  means  keep 
from  remonstrating  with  his  father,  nor  a  minister 
from  remonstrating  with  his  ruler.  Hence,  since 
remonstrance  is  required  in  the  case  of  unrighteous 
conduct,  how  can  (simple)  obedience  to  the  orders  of 
a  father  be  accounted  filial  piety 2  ?  ' 

Chapter  XVI.     The  Influence  of  Filial  Piety 
and  the  Response  to  it. 

The  Master  said,  '  Anciently,  the  intelligent  kings 
served  their  fathers  with  filial  piety,  and  therefore 
they  served  Heaven  with  intelligence  ;  they  served 
their  mothers  with  filial  piety,  and  therefore  they 
served   Earth  with  discrimination3.     They  pursued 

1  The  numbers  7,  5,  3,  1  cannot  be  illustrated  by  examples,  nor 
should  they  be  insisted  on.  The  higher  the  dignity,  the  greater 
would  be  the  risk,  and  the  stronger  must  be  the  support  that  was 
needed. 

2  Compare  the  Analects,  IV,  xviii,  and  the  Li  K%  X,  i,  15. 

s  This  chapter  is  as  difficult  to  grasp  as  the  seventh,  which  treated 
of  Filial  Piety  in  Relation  to  '  the  Three  Powers/  It  is  indeed  a 
sequel  to  that.     Heaven  and  Earth  appear  as  two  Powers,  or  as 


CH.  XVI.  INFLUENCE    OF    FILIAL    PIETY.  485 

the  right  course  with  reference  to  their  (own)  seniors 
and  juniors,  and  therefore  they  secured  the  regula- 
tion of  the  relations  between  superiors  and  infe- 
riors (throughout  the  kingdom). 

'When  Heaven  and  Earth  were  served  with  intelli- 
gence and  discrimination,  the  spiritual  intelligences 
displayed  (their  retributive  power x). 

'Therefore  even  the  Son  of  Heaven  must  have 
some  whom  he  honours  ;  that  is,  he  has  his  uncles 
of  his  surname.  He  must  have  some  to  whom  he 
concedes  the  precedence  ;  that  is,  he  has  his  cousins, 
who  bear  the  same  surname,  and  are  older  than 
himself.  In  the  ancestral  temple  he  manifests  the 
utmost  reverence,  showing  that  he  does  not  forget 
his  parents ;  he  cultivates  his  person  and  is  careful 
of  his  conduct,  fearing  lest  he  should  disgrace  his 
predecessors. 

*  When  in  the  ancestral  temple  he  exhibits  the 

a  dual  Power,  taking  the  place  of  Heaven  or  God.  We  can  in  a 
degree  follow  the  treatise  in  transferring  the  reverence  paid  by 
a  son  to  his  father  to  loyalty  shown  by  him  to  his  ruler ;  but  it  is 
more  difficult  to  understand  the  development  of  filial  piety  into 
religion  that  is  here  assumed  and  described.  Was  it  not  the 
pressing  of  this  virtue  too  far,  the  making  more  of  it  than  can  be 
made,  that  tended  to  deprave  religion  during  the  ^au  dynasty,  and 
to  mingle  with  the  earlier  monotheism  a  form  of  nature- worship  ? 

Hsing  Ping,  in  his  'Correct  Meaning,'  makes  the  '  discrimination' 
here  to  be  '  an  ability  to  distinguish  the  advantages  of  the  earth ;' — 
showing  how  he  had  the  sixth  and  seventh  chapters  in  his  mind. 

1  /  The  Spiritual  Intelligences '  here  are  Heaven  and  Earth  con- 
ceived of  as  Spiritual  Beings.  They  responded  to  the  sincere 
service  of  the  intelligent  kings,  as  Hsing  Ping  says,  with  '  the 
harmony  of  the  active  and  passive  principles  of  nature,  seasonable 
winds  and  rain,  the  absence  of  epidemic  sickness  and  plague,  and 
the  repose  of  all  under  heaven.'  Compare  with  this  what  is  said 
in  'the  Great  Plan'  of  the  Shu,  pp.  147,  148. 


486  THE    HSIAO    KING.  CH.  XVII. 

utmost  reverence,  the  spirits  of  the  departed  mani- 
fest themselves1.  Perfect  filial  piety  and  fraternal 
duty  reach  to  (and  move)  the  spiritual  intelligences, 
and  diffuse  their  light  on  all  within  the  four  seas ; — 
they  penetrate  everywhere. 

'  It  is  said  in  the  Book  of  Poetry2, 
"  From  the  west  to  the  east, 

From  the  south  to  the  north, 

There  was  not  a  thought  but  did  him  homage/' ' 

Chapter  XVII.     The  Service  of  the  Ruler. 

The  Master  said,  i  The  superior  man 3  serves  his 
ruler  in  such  a  way,  that  when  at  court  in  his  pre- 
sence his  thought  is  how  to  discharge  his  loyal  duty 
to  the  utmost ;  and  when  he  retires  from  it,  his 
thought  is  how  to  amend  his  errors.  He  carries 
out  with  deference  the  measures  springing  from  his 
excellent  qualities,  and  rectifies  him  (only)  to  save 
him  from  what  are  evil.  Hence,  as  the  superior 
and  inferior,  they  are  able  to  have  an  affection  for 
each  other. 

(  It  is  said  in  the  Book  of  Poetry4, 
"  In  my  heart  I  love  him ; 
And  why  should  I  not  say  so  ? 
In  the  core  of  my  heart  I  keep  him, 
And  never  will  forget  him."  ' 

1  The  reader  will  have  noticed  many  instances  of  this,  or  what 
were  intended  to  be  instances  of  it,  in  the  translations  from  the 
Shih,  pp.  365-368,  &c. 

2  See  the  Shih,  III,  i,  ode  10,  stanza  6. 

3  '  The  superior  man'  here  can  only  be  the  good  and  intelligent 
officer  in  the  royal  domain  or  at  a  feudal  court. 

4  See  the  Shih,  II,  viii,  ode  4,  stanza  4. 


CH.  xviii.  FILIAL    PIETY    IN    MOURNING.  487 

Chapter  XVIII. 
Filial  Piety  in  Mourning  for  Parents. 

The  Master  said,  *  When  a  filial  son  is  mourning 
for  a  parent,  he  wails,  but  not  with  a  prolonged 
sobbing ;  in  the  movements  of  ceremony  he  pays  no 
attention  to  his  appearance  ;  his  words  are  without 
elegance  of  phrase ;  he  cannot  bear  to  wear  fine 
clothes;  when  he  hears  music,  he  feels  no  delight; 
when  he  eats  a  delicacy,  he  is  not  conscious  of  its 
flavour  : — such  is  the  nature  of  grief  and  sorrow. 

*  After  three  days  he  may  partake  of  food ;  for 
thus  the  people  are  taught  that  the  living  should 
not  be  injured  on  account  of  the  dead,  and  that 
emaciation  must  not  be  carried  to  the  extinction  of 
life  : — such  is  the  rule  of  the  sages.  The  period  of 
mourning  does  not  go  beyond  three  years,  to  show 
the  people  that  it  must  have  an  end. 

'  An  inner  and  outer  coffin  are  made ;  the  grave- 
clothes  also  are  put  on,  and  the  shroud  ;  and  (the 
body)  is  lifted  (into  the  coffin).  The  sacrificial 
vessels,  round  and  square,  are  (regularly)  set  forth, 
and  (the  sight  of  them)  fills  (the  mourners)  with 
(fresh)  distress1.  The  women  beat  their  breasts, 
and  the  men  stamp  with  their  feet,  wailing  and 
weeping,  while  they  sorrowfully  escort  the  coffin 
to  the  grave.  They  consult  the  tortoise-shell  to 
determine  the  grave  and  the  ground  about  it,  and 

1  These  vessels  were  arranged  every  day  by  the  coffin,  while  it 
continued  in  the  house,  after  the  corpse  was  put  into  it.  The 
practice  was  a  serving  of  the  dead  as  the  living  had  been  served. 
It  is  not  thought  necessary  to  give  any  details  as  to  the  other 
different  rites  of  mourning  which  are  mentioned.  They  will  be 
found,  with  others,  in  the  translations  from  the  Li  Kt 


488  THE    HSIAO   KING.  CH.  XVIII. 

there  they  lay  the  body  in  peace.  They  prepare 
the  ancestral  temple  (to  receive  the  tablet  of  the 
departed),  and  there  present  offerings  to  the  disem- 
bodied spirit.  In  spring  and  autumn  they  offer 
sacrifices,  thinking  of  the  deceased  as  the  seasons 
come  round. 

'  The  services  of  love  and  reverence  to  parents 
when  alive,  and  those  of  grief  and  sorrow  to  them 
when  dead  : — these  completely  discharge  the  funda- 
mental duty  of  living  men.  The  righteous  claims 
of  life  and  death  are  all  satisfied,  and  the  filial  son's 
service  of  his  parents  is  completed/ 


The  above  is  the  Classic  of  Filial  Piety,  as  published  by  the 
emperor  Hsiian  in  a.d.  722,  with  the  headings  then  prefixed  to  the 
eighteen  chapters.  Subsequently,  in  the  eleventh  century,  Sze-ma 
Kwang  (a.d.  1009-1086),  a  famous  statesman  and  historian,  pub- 
lished what  he  thought  was  the  more  ancient  text  of  the  Classic  in 
twenty -two  chapters,  with  'Explanations'  by  himself,  without  indi- 
cating, however,  the  different  chapters,  and  of  course  without 
headings  to  them.  This  work  is  commonly  published  along  with 
an  '  Exposition'  of  his  views,  by  Fan  3u^yu,  one  of  his  contempo- 
raries and  friends.  The  differences  between  his  text  and  that  of 
the  Thang  emperor  are  insignificant.  He  gives,  however,  one 
additional  chapter,  which  would  be  the  nineteenth  of  his  arrange- 
ment. It  is  as  follows  : — '  Inside  the  smaller  doors  leading  to  the 
inner  apartments  are  to  be  found  all  the  rules  (of  government). 
There  is  awe  for  the  father,  and  also  for  the  elder  brother.  Wife 
and  children,  servants  and  concubines  are  like  the  common  people, 
serfs,  and  underlings/ 


TRANSLITERATION   OF   ORIENTAL   ALPHABETS. 


489 


A 
A 


n\  n  **  *s  n~ 


n  %  c  ^  c 


D 


:0 


~   -    iJoJ-O 


id-ou 


D 


:S 


-   —    UoJ-U 


id 


UtU 


^\  3  «W 


3 


^^3  8^oJ 


<2s 


If  »  *  pr 


|fe      lie/ 


I?  i@r  it  1^  ir 


*  3   *>t> 


H 

<5 
O 


*  5 


'^ 

3      *•&     *        ^ 


^    -       ^    ^ 


1 


•a. 


■a  .s 

8   8 

5 


g  73 

i  = 
&-3 


*     IS 

•B    .8 

f  J 


N    M    ^    «) 


S3    - 

•1    I 

CD         N    00    OJ    O    h    N 

1— I      i-H      i-H 


c3 


O      ^ 

B  8 

1    i  "^ 

I     S     a 

CO   th    »o 


1 


[1] 


Kk 


490         TRANSLITERATION   OF   ORIENTAL   ALPHABETS 


«s  •+=>     5       *      *       •       •     S    ~* 


(\  c;    .  r  r    .  ^j^ 


.D  o  —  m 


* 


*?> 


On       •  •*>     3-o 


•^ 


si 

W    8 


3. 


4b^ 


<3    o       •  .1      3-D 


0 


V!> 


?<i>     ^ 


init. 

T3 


?-S      e-\? 


* 


|c  tr 


\<is 


hr  5* 


*o 


^(8 


*$ss*5j»     «0      *» 


s 

02 


,£j       •»      5      S 

Oh 

a* 

05    O    i-h    (M 
r-H     <M     W     <M 


O 

<D 
A 


*    £ 


O*     oq 


£     ^ 


EH  § 


W        ^        05       § 


s 


a*  £<  s 


2 

•1 

CO 


MrJ<JO{ON00050HNW^»0 


OQ        W 

I    § 
11 

Pw    Or 


CO    t^ 
CO    CO 


FOR   THE   SACRED   BOOKS   OF   THE   EAST. 


491 


•  •••••&»• 

•  •••••               • 

Ph    ^       .         .         • 

S    *     | 

«m 

a    .*    #.    I    !  r    -    • 

m  ci  n  n    • 

13     i     1 

•  #— 

-*  *  :  *^  :  ^  :  : 

;    ;  y    ;    ; 

t^    » 

•3  ♦> 

•&.£•••*>•• 

>  :  >  :  . 

«_    .     . 

)  - 

•  •     •  •  <<  * 

?  ! 

•  n; 

s^        . 

5)  * 

»  •     •        • 

•     •           •                • 

ia- 

:     ^  p  : 

:«>* 

?o3 

b9    tO    |»     fO    &    *       • 

•  *r 

tr  F  fr  * 

i  tr    ! 

'■  '•*•&$ 

0 

•       •••••• 

»      •     •      •      • 

*•*  S5  ^  *§    s     •    *• 

.     .     .     .    § 

^    •    • 

'     •     "    g    ^ 

c3 

.£3 


p, 

03 

03 


«8    ;£ 

I  S 


.9    2 

1    S       OS 


A3 

1 


S    &  J  «* 


*P*    c8 
§    .1 


Ph 


00     ffi'O 
CO     CO     T* 


CO     ^H 


Ph 
CD 


a 


o3 

1    1    I 

S  jS  « 


S«  a 


p< 

32 


OOOJOHWW^WJtON 


<y 

03 

> 

b() 

i 

§3 

QQ 

<H 

> 

00 

O 

«5 

0 

492 


TRANSLITERATION   OF   ORIENTAL   ALPHABETS. 


.a 

u 

>e8 

•      o8    <c6    «^    <^       •       •       •       •     pS    <3      oj    <a>    <Sj       „      •      O       •    ^ 

.                             •      •      •      •                                 "S      •            •            • 

:3      * 

I..  : 

:  |..  m-,|-  :  :  :  '•  i--M:  \  \'\  \*z-  \  [ 

. 

< 

:  «l  ii  l»  ij, :  :  :  :.|^  :  :si5  :  :  :  :.^  : 

• 

d 
.2 

I 

Oh 

:  : x|  ^  li  § :  :  :  H*^  :  :^  :  :  :  :A  : 

: 

> 
1 

■        •     ;£3                *                •••••                .                ....                .        . 

■  <§  .'S  *    •    o —    •  o    •    •    •    •  —    • 

•  —   3         

. 

c 

V 

...            S  f>/   ...            ^ 

:  :  *  3  i***  :  :  :  :  ***%  -  :  :  :^^-2- 

•    •                    •    •    •    •          co  **■   •    •    '           3L*  ' 

• 

s 
1 

10 

•'     •  P  £  *"<**  P  P1  HP*  IP*  lv  P     •  IV  /fe/     '.     '.     1^  ^ 

. 

5 

a, 

i 

>■ 

< 

§ 
B 

■  g 

U 

...••••«••..••••••*• 

• 

c/5 

0 

•  s  •  s ^  •  s  ^  •  *  •  w  § 

• 

«5 

©    w    JO      o3    <c«    -h    <h    ^    J2    "^      {3    <3      ©    sS  ;S    w   5©      o    ^  <g    S,S    :cS    :-    :2    to 

•S   -s         <o          g   § 

DO 

03                      ..^3 

~        *        * 

i  i 

3      0 
3     C" 

•      08 

.   -8 

eS 

;  .* 

3     8 

3  1 
•  1 

•§                    3 

!           'a            .    .  i§ 

............     '^       S%       i                            BCeai 

;.:::::;■::::  s  ??  a  8'^  62 

QQ 

'ii 
1. 

1-4     C 

:  :  i  :  .  :  i  :  :  .  : s  ^  b        2  §  j 

CO 

J 

w 

O     ■ 

> 

1  "il   6   g>-  -g  &  .a  *  "£  &  .a  «  3       2?          '-a       *°          1  * 

Mi*  J*  Hi1  ill  .1     1  „|     IJ 

&         'S          -S3          -2          ^           w           o      *  _§                 o      *    g                'g   .2 

&       s      'a       £      .s      ■§       s     ■  -jf          g      -Jr          =*  ^ 

WW'rt*-<i-4rHfH»HFHf-l*Hi-ieilCMCSieJCSlt> 

September,  1880. 

BOOKS 

PUBLISHED   FOR  THE  UNIVERSITY  BY 

HENRY    FROWDE, 

AT     THE     OXFORD     UNIVERSITY    PRESS    WAREHOUSE, 
7    PATERNOSTER    ROW,    LONDON. 

ALSO  TO  BE  HAD  AT  THE 

CLARENDON    PRESS    DEPOSITORY,    OXFORD. 


LEXICONS,  GRAMMARS,  &c. 

(See  also  Clarendon  Press  Series  pp.  24,  26.) 

A  Greek-English  Lexicon,  by  Henry  George  Liddell,  D.D., 
and  Robert  Scott,  D.D.  Sixth  Edition,  Revised  and  Augmented. 
1870.  4to.  cloth,  il.  1 6s. 

A  copious  Greek-English  Vocabulary,  compiled  from  the 
best  authorities.     1850.  241110.  bound,  3s. 

A  Practical  Introduction  to  Greek  Accentuation,  by  H.  W. 

Chandler,  M.A.     1862.  8vo.  cloth,  10s.  6d. 

Etymologicon  Magnum.  Ad  Codd.  MSS.  recensuit  et  notis 
variorum  instruxit  Thomas  Gaisford,  S.T.P.     1 848.  fol.  cloth,  ll.  12s. 

Suidae  Lexicon.  Ad  Codd.  MSS.  recensuit  Thomas  Gaisford, 
S.T.P.     Tomi  III.     1834.  fol.  cloth,  2/.  2s. 

Scheller's  Lexicon  of  the  Latin  Tongue,  with  the  German  ex- 
planations translated  into  English  by  J.  E.  Riddle,  M.A.  1835.  fol. 
cloth,  iZ.  is. 

A  Latin  Dictionary,  founded  on  Andrews'  edition  of  Freund's 
Latin  Dictionary,  revised,  enlarged,  and  in  great  part  rewritten  by 
Charlton  T.  Lewis,  Ph.D.,  and  Charles  Short,  LL.D.,  Professor  of 
Latin  in  Columbia  College,  New  York.     1 879.  410.  cloth,  il.  us.  6d. 

Scriptores  Rei  Metricae.  Edidit  Thomas  Gaisford,  S.T.P. 
Tomi  III.     8vo.  cloth,  15s. 

Sold  separately: 
Hephaestion,  Terentianus  Maurus,  Proclus,  cum  annotationibus,  etc. 
Tomi  II.  10s.         Scriptores  Latini.  5s. 
[2]  B 


Clarendon  Press,  Oxford. 


The  Book  of  Hebrew  Roots,  by  Abu  'L-Walid  Marwan  ibn 
Janah.  otherwise  called  Rabbi  Y6nah.  Now  first  edited,  with  an 
Appendix,  by  Ad.  Neubauer.     1875.  4to.  cloth,  2/.  7s.  6d. 

A  Treatise  on  the  use  of  the  Tenses  in  Hebrew.    By  S.  R. 

Driver,  M.A.     Extra  fcap.  8vo.  cloth,  6s.  6d. 

Thesaurus  Syriacus  :  collegerunt  Quatremere,  Bernstein,  Lors- 
bach,  Arnoldi,  Field :  edidit  R.  Payne  Smith,  S.T.P.R. 

Fasc.  I-V.  1868-79.   sm«  f°l*  eacn>  il-  ls> 

Vol.  I,  containing  Fasc.  I-V.  sm.  fol.  cloth,  5/.  5s.  Just  Published. 

A  Practical  Grammar  of  the  Sanskrit  Language,  arranged 

with  reference  to  the  Classical  Languages  of  Europe,  for  the  use  of 
English  Students,  by  Monier  Williams,  M.A.,  Boden  Professor  of  San- 
skrit.    Fourth  Edition,  1877.     8vo.  cloth,  15s. 

A  Sanskrit-English  Dictionary,  Etymologically  and  Philo- 
logically  arranged,  with  special  reference  to  Greek,  Latin,  German, 
Anglo-Saxon,  English,  and  other  cognate  Indo-European  Languages. 
By  Monier  Williams,  M.A.,  Boden  Professor  of  Sanskrit.  1872.  4to. 
cloth,  4/.  14s.  6d. 

Nalop&khyanam.  Story  of  Nala,  an  Episode  of  the  Maha- 
Bharata :  the  Sanskrit  text,  with  a  copious  Vocabulary,  and  an  im- 
proved version  of  Dean  Milman's  Translation,  by  Monier  Williams,  M.A. 
Second  Edition,  Revised  and  Improved.     1879.  ^vo.  c^oin>  15s' 

Sakuntala.  A  Sanskrit  Drama,  in  seven  Acts.  Edited  by 
Monier  Williams,  M.A.     Second  Edition,  1876.   8 vo.  cloth,  21s. 

An  Anglo-Saxon  Dictionary,  by  the  late  Joseph  Bos  worth, 
D.D.,  Professor  of  Anglo-Saxon,  Oxford.    New  edition.    In  the  Press. 

An  Icelandic-English  Dictionary,  based  on  the  MS.  col- 
lections of  the  late  Richard  Cleasby.  Enlarged  and  completed  by 
G.  Vigfiisson.  With  an  Introduction,  and  Life  of  Richard  Cleasby, 
by  G.  Webbe  Dasent,  D.C.L.     1874.  4to.  cloth,  3/.  7s. 

A  List  of  English  Words  the  Etymology  of  which  is 
illustrated  by  comparison  with  Icelandic.  Prepared  in  the  form 
of  an  Appendix  to  the  above.     By  W.  W.  Skeat,  M.A.,  stitched,  2s. 

A  Handbook  of  the  Chinese  Language.  Parts  I  and  II, 
Grammar  and  Chrestomathy.  By  James  Summers.  1863.  8vo.  half 
hound,  ll.  8s. 

Cornish  Drama  (The  Ancient).  Edited  and  translated  by  E. 
Norris,  Esq.,  with  a  Sketch  of  Cornish  Grammar,  an  Ancient  Cornish 
Vocabulary,  etc.     2  vols.  1859.  8vo.  cloth,  ll.  is. 

The  Sketch  of  Cornish  Grammar  separately,  stitched,  2s.  6d. 

An  Etymological  Dictionary  of  the  English  Language, 
arranged  on  an  Historical  Basis.      By  W.  W.  Skeat,  M.A.,  Elrington 
and  Bosworth  Professor  of  Anglo-Saxon  in  the  University  of  Cambridge. 
To  be  completed  in  Four  Parts.     Parts  I— III,  4to.  10s.  6d.  each. 
Part  IV.     In  the  Press. 


Clarendon  Press,  Oxford. 


GREEK  CLASSICS,  &c. 

Aeschyli  quae  supersunt  in  Codice  Laurentiano  quoad  effici 
potuit  et  ad  cognitionem  necesse  est  visum  typis  descripta  edidit 
R.  Merkel.     1861.     Small  folio,  cloth,  ll.  is. 

Aeschylus:  Tragoediae  et  Fragmenta,  ex  recensione  Guil. 
Dindorfii.    Second  Edition,  1851.  8vo.  cloth,  $s.6d. 

Aeschylus:  Annotationes  Guil.  Dindorfii.  Partes  II.  1841. 
8vo.  cloth,  1  os. 

Aeschylus :  Scholia  Graeca,  ex  Codicibus  aucta  et  emendata  a 
Guil.  Dindorfio.     1 85 1.  8vo.  cloth,  5s. 

Sophocles :  Tragoediae  et  Fragmenta,  ex  recensione  et  cum 
commentariis  Guil.  Dindorfii.  Third  Edition,  2  vols.  i860,  fcap.  8vo. 
cloth,  1 1,  is. 

Each  Play  separately,  limp,  2s.  6d. 

The  Text  alone,  printed    on    writing   paper,  with    large 
margin,  royal  l6mo.  cloth,  8s. 

The  Text  alone,  square  i6mo.  cloth,  $s.6d. 

Each  Play  separately,  limp,  6d.     (See  also  p.  26.) 

Sophocles :  Tragoediae  et  Fragmenta  cum  Annotatt.  Guil. 
Dindorfii.     Tomi  II.     1849.  ^vo.  cl°tb>  IQ5« 

The  Text,  Vol.  I.  5s.  6d.     The  Notes,  Vol.11.  4$.  6d. 

Sophocles:  Scholia  Graeca: 

Vol.  I.  ed.  P.  Elmsley,  A.M.     1825.  8vo.  cloth,  4s.  6d. 
Vol.  II.  ed.  Guil.  Dindorfius.     1852.  8vof  cloth,  4s.  6d. 

Euripides :  Tragoediae  et  Fragmenta,  ex  recensione  Guil.  Din- 
dorfii.    Tomi  II.     1834.  8vo.  cloth,  10s. 

Euripides:  Annotationes  Guil.  Dindorfii.  Partes  II.  1840. 
8vo.  cloth,  1  os. 

Euripides:  Scholia  Graeca,  ex  Codicibus  aucta  et  emendata  a 
Guil.  Dindorfio.     Tomi  IV.     1863.  8vo.  cloth,  ll.  16s. 

Euripides  :  Alcestis, ex  recensione  Guil.  Dindorfii.  1834.  8vo. 
sewed,  2s.6d. 

Aristophanes :  Comoediae  et  Fragmenta,  ex  recensione  Guil. 

Dindorfii.     Tomi  II.     1835.  8vo.  cloth,  lis. 

Aristophanes:  Annotationes  Guil.  Dindorfii.  Partes  II.  1837. 
8vo.  cloth,  lis. 

Aristophanes :  Scholia  Graeca,  ex  Codicibus  aucta  et  emendata 
a  Guil.  Dindorfio.     Partes  III.     1839.  8vo.  clotb,  ll. 
B   2 


Clarendon  Press,  Oxford. 


Aristophanem,  Index  in:  J.Caravellae.    1822.  8vo.  cloth,  is. 

Metra  Aeschyli  Sophoclis  Euripidis  et  Aristophanis.    De- 

scripta  a  Guil.  Dindorfio.  Accedit  Chronologia  Scenica.  1842.  8vo. 
cloth,  Ks. 

Anecdota  Graeca  Oxoniensia.  Edidit  J.  A.  Cramer,  S.T.P. 
Tomi  IV.     1835.  8vo.  cloth,  iZ.  2s. 

Anecdota  Graeca  e  Codd.  MSS.  Bibliothecae  Regiae  Parisien- 
sis.     Edidit  J.  A.  Cramer,  S.T.P.    Tomi  IV.    1839.  8vo.  cloth,  1/.  2s. 

Apsinis  et  Longini  Rhetorica.  E  Codicibus  MSS.  recensuit 
Joh.  Bakius.     1849.  8vo.  cloth,  3s. 

Aristoteles ;  ex  recensione  Immanuelis  Bekkeri.    Accedunt  In- 
dices Sylburgiani.     Tomi  XI.     1837.  8vo.  cloth,  2/.  10s. 
The  volumes  (except  vol.  IX.)  may  be  had  separately,  price  5s.  6d.  each. 

Aristotelis  Ethica  Nicomachea,  ex  recensione  Immanuelis 
Bekkeri.     Crown  8vo.  cloth,  5s. 

Choerobosci  Dictata  in  Theodosii  Canones,  necnon  Epimerismi 
in  Psalmos.  E  Codicibus  MSS.  edidit  Thomas  Gaisford,  S.T.P.     Tomi 

III.  1842.  8vo.  cloth,  15s. 

Demosthenes  :  ex  recensione  Guil.  Dindorfii.    Tomi  I.  II.  III. 

IV.  1846.  8vo.  cloth,  iZ.  is. 

Demosthenes:  Tomi  V.  VI.  VII.  Annotationes  Interpretum. 
1849.  ^vo.  cloth,  15s. 

Demosthenes:  Tomi  VIII.  IX.  Scholia.    1851.  8vo.  cloth,  10s. 

Harpoerationis  Lexicon,  ex  recensione  G.  Dindorfii.  Tomi 
II.     1854.  8vo.  cloth,  10s.  6d. 

Heracliti  Ephesii  Reliquiae.     Recensuit   I.  By  water,  M.A. 

Appendicis  loco  additae  sunt  Diogenis  Laertii  Vita  Heracliti,  Particulae 
Hippocratei  De  Diaeta  Libri  Primi,  Epistolae  Heracliteae.  1877.  8vo. 
cloth,  price  6s. 

Herculanensium  Voluminum  Partes  II.  1824.  8  vo.  cloth,  1  o s. 

Homerus:  Ilias,  cum  brevi  Annotatione  C.  G.  Heynii.  Acce- 
dunt Scholia  minora.     Tomi  II.     1834.  8vo.  cloth,  155. 

Homerus:  Ilias,  ex  rec.  Guil. Dindorfii.  1856.  8vo.  cloth,  5s.  6d. 

Homerus :  Scholia  Graeca  in  Iliadem.  Edited  by  Prof.  W.  Din- 
dorf,  after  a  new  collation  of  the  Venetian  MSS.  by  D.  B.  Monro, 
M.A.,  Fellow  of  Oriel  College. 

Vols.  I.  II.  1875.  8vo.  cloth,  24s.  Vols.  III.  IV.  1877.  8vo.  cloth,  26s. 

Homerus:  Odyssea,  ex  rec.  Guil.  Dindorfii.  1855.  8vo.  cloth, 
5s.  6d. 

Homerus :  Scholia  Graeca  in  Odysseam.  Edidit  Guil.  Dindorfius. 
Tomi  II.     1855.  8vo.  cloth,  15s.  6d, 


Clarendon  Press }  Oxford. 


Homerum,  Index  in :  Seberi.      1780.   8vo.  cloth>  6s.  6d, 

Homer :  A  Complete  Concordance  to  the  Odyssey  and  Hymns 
of  Homer ;  to  which  is  added  a  Concordance  to  the  Parallel  Passages 
in  the  Iliad,  Odyssey,  and  Hymns.  By  Henry  Dunbar,  M.D.,  Member  of 
the  General  Council,  University  of  Edinburgh.    1880.    410.  cloth,  ll.  is. 

Oratores  Attici  ex  recensione  Bekkeri : 

I.  Antiphon,  Andocides,  et  Lysias.     1822.  8vo.  cloth,  ?s. 

II.  Isocrates.     1822.  8vo.  cloth,  7s. 

III.  Isaeus,  Aeschines,  Lycurgus,Dinarchus,etc.  1823.  8vo.  cloth,  75. 

Scholia  Graeca  in  Aeschinem  et  Isocratem.  Edidit  G.  Dindor- 
fius.     1852.  8vo.  cloth,  4s. 

Paroemiographi  Graeei,  quorum  pars  nunc  primum  ex  Codd. 
MSS.  vulgatur.     Edidit  T.  Gaisford,  S.T.P.     1836.   8vo.   cloth,  5s.  6d. 

Plato :  The  Apology,  with  a  revised  Text  and  English  Notes, 
and  a  Digest  of  Platonic  Idioms,  by  James  Riddell,  M.A.  1878.  8vo, 
cloth,  Ss.  6d. 

Plato :  Philebus,  with  a  revised  Text  and  English  Notes,  by 
Edward  Poste,  M.A.     i860.  8vo.  cloth,  Js.  6d. 

Plato :  Sophistes  and  Politicus,  with  a  revised  Text  and  Eng- 
lish Notes,  by  L.  Campbell,  M.A.     1866.  8vo.  cloth,  18s. 

Plato  :  Theaetetus,  with  a  revised  Text  and  English  Notes,  by 
L.Campbell,  M.A.     1861.  8vo.  cloth,  gs. 

Plato :  The  Dialogues,  translated  into  English,  with  Analyses 
and  Introductions,  by  B.  Jowett,  M.A.,  Regius  Professor  of  Greek. 
A  new  Edition  in  5  volumes,  medium  8vo.  1875*  cloth,  3/.  10s. 

Plato :  Index  to.    Compiled  for  the  Second  Edition  of  Professor 

Jowett's  Translation  of  the  Dialogues.     By  Evelyn  Abbott,  M.A.  1875. 
8vo.  paper  covers,  2s.  6d. 

Plato :  The  Republic,  with  a  revised  Text  and  English  Notes, 
by  B.  Jowett,  M.A.,  Regius  Professor  of  Greek.    Demy  8vo.   Preparing. 

Plotinus.    Edidit  F.  Creuzer.    Tomi  III.     1835.  4to.  1/.  8j. 

Stobaei  Plorilegium.  Ad  MSS.  fidem  emendavit  et  supple vit 
T.  Gaisford,  S.T.P.     Tomi  IV.     1822.  8vo.  cloth,  ll. 

Stobaei  Eclogarum  Physicarum  et  Ethicarum  libri  duo.    Ac- 

cedit  Hieroclis  Commentarius  in  aurea  carmina  Pythagoreorum.     Ad 
MSS. Codd. recensuitT. Gaisford, S.T.P.  Tomi II.  1850.  8vo.cloth,iis. 

Thucydides:  History  of  the  Peloponnesian  War,  translated 
into  English  by  B.  Jowett,  M.A.,  Regius  Professor  of  Greek. 
In  the  Press. 

Xenophon :  Historia  Graeca,  ex  recensione  et  cum  annotatio- 
nibus  L.  Dindorfii.     Second  Edition,  1852.  8vo.  cloth,  ios.6d. 


Clarendon  Press,  Oxford. 


Xenophon :  Expeditio  Cyri,  ex  rec.  et  cum  annotatt.  L.  Din- 
dorfii.     Second  Edition,  1855.  8vo.  cloth,  ios.6d. 

Xenophon :  Institutio  Cyri,  ex  rec.  et  cum  annotatt.  L.  Din- 
dorfii.     1857.  8vo.  cloth,  ios.6d. 

Xenophon :  Memorabilia  Socratis,  ex  rec.  et  cum  annotatt.  L. 
Dindorfii.     1862.  8vo.  cloth,  fs.6d. 

Xenophon :  Opuscula  Politica  Equestria  et  Venatica  cum  Arri- 
ani  Libello  de  Venatione,  ex  rec.  et  cum  annotatt.  L.  Dindorfii.  1866. 
8vo.  cloth,  10s.  6d. 

THE  HOLY  SCRIPTURES,  &c. 

The  Holy  Bible  in  the  earliest  English  Versions,  made  from  the 
Latin  Vulgate  by  John  Wycliffe  and  his  followers :  edited  by  the  Rev. 
J.  Forshall  and  Sir  F.  Madden.  4  vols.  1850.  royal  4to.  cloth,  3/.  3s. 

Also  reprinted  from  the  above: 

The  New  Testament  in  English,  according  to  the  Version 
by  John  Wycliffe,  about  a.d.  i  380,  and  Revised  by  John  Purvey, 
about  a.d.  1388.  With  Introduction  and  Glossary  by  W.  W. 
Skeat,  M.A.     1879.  Extra  fcap.  8vo.  cloth,  6s. 

The  Book  of  Job,  Psalms,  Proverbs,  Eeelesiastes,  and 
Solomon's  Song :  according  to  the  Version  by  John  Wycliffe, 
Revised  by  John  Purvey.     In  the  Press. 

The  Holy  Bible:  an  exact  reprint,  page  for  page,  of  the  Author- 
ized Version  published  in  the  year  161 1.   Demy  410.  half  bound,  il.  is. 

Vetus  Testamentum  Graeee  cum  Variis  Lectionibus.  Edi- 
tionem  a  R.  Holmes,  S.T.P.  inchoatam  continuavit  J.  Parsons,  S.T.B. 
Tomi  V.  1 798-1 8 2  7.  folio,  7/. 

Vetus  Testamentum  ex  Versione  Septuaginta  Interpretum 
secundum  exemplar  Vaticanum  Romae  editum.  Accedit  potior  varietas 
Codicis  Alexandrini.    Tomi  III.    Editio  Altera.     i8mo.   cloth,   185. 

Origenis  Hexaplorum  quae  supersunt;  sive,  Veterum  Inter- 
pretum Graecorum  in  totum  Vetus  Testamentum  Fragmenta.  Edidit 
Fridericus  Field,  A.M.     2  vols.  1 867-1 874.  4to.  cloth,  5/.  5s. 

Libri  Psalmorum  Versio  antiqua  Latina,  cum  Paraphrasi 
Anglo-Saxonica.     Edidit  B.  Thorpe,  F.A.S.     1835.  8vo.  cloth,  10s.  6d. 

Libri  Psalmorum  Versio  antiqua  Gallica  e  God.  MS.  in  Bibl 
Bodleiana  adservato,  una  cum  Versione  Metrica  aliisque  Monumentis 
pervetustis.  Nunc  primum  descripsit  et  edidit  Franciscus  Michel,  Phil. 
Doct.     i860.  8vo.  cloth,  10s.  6d. 

The  Psalms  in  Hebrew  without  points.  1879.  Crown  8vo. 
cloth,  3s.  6d. 

Libri  Prophetarum  Majorum,  cum  Lamentationibus  Jere- 
miae,  in  Dialecto  Linguae  Aegyptiacae  Memphitica  seu  Coptica.  Edidit 
cum  Versione  Latina  H.  Tattam, S.T.P.  Tomi  II.    1 85 2.  8vo.  cloth,  1 7s. 


Clarendon  Press,  Oxford. 


Libri  duodecim  Prophetarum  Minorum  in  Ling.  Aegypt. 
vulgo  Coptica.     Edidit  H.  Tattam,  A.M.     1836.  8vo.  cloth,  8s.  6d. 

Novum.  Testamentum  Graece.  Antiquissimorum  Codicum 
Textus  in  ordine  parallelo  dispositi.  Accedit  collatio  Codicis  Sinaitici. 
Edidit  E.  H.  Hansell,  S.T.B.  Tomi  III.  1864.  8vo.  half  morocco, 
2I.  12s.  6d. 

Novum  Testamentum  Graece.  Accedunt  parallela  S.  Scrip- 
turae  loca,  necnon  vetus  capitulorum  notatio  et  canones  Eusebii.  Edidit 
Carolus  Lloyd,  S.T.P.R.,  necnon  Episcopus  Oxoniensis.  i8mo.  cloth,  3s. 

The  same  on  writing  paper,  with  large  margin,  cloth,  ios.  6d. 

Novum  Testamentum  Graece  juxta  Exemplar  Millianum. 
i8mo.  cloth,  2s.  td. 

The  same  on  writing  paper,  with  large  margin,  cloth,  9s . 

Evangelia  Sacra  Graece.    fcap.  8vo.  limp,  is.  6d. 

The  New  Testament  in  Greek  and  IJnglish.  Edited  by 
E.  Cardwell,  D.D.     2  vols.  1837.  crown  8vo.  cloth,  6s. 

Novum  Testamentum  Coptice,  cura  D.  Wilkins.    17 16.  4 to, 

cloth,  12s.  6d. 
Evangeliorum  Versio  Gothica,  cum  Interpr.  et  Annott.  E« 

Benzelii.     Edidit,  et  Gram.  Goth,  praemisit,  E.  Lye,  A.M.  1759.  4to. 

cloth,  12s.  6d. 
Diatessaron ;  sive  Historia  Jesu  Christi  ex  ipsis  Evangelistarum 

verbis  apte  dispositis  confecta.   Ed.  J.White.  1856.  i2mo.  cloth,  3s.  6d. 

Canon  Muratorianus :  the  earliest  Catalogue  of  the  Books  of 

the  New  Testament.     Edited  with  Notes  and  a  Facsimile  of  the  MS.  in 
the  Ambrosian  Library  at  Milan,  by  S.P.  Tregelles,  LL.D.     1868.  4to. 
cloth,  1  os.  6d. 
The  Five  Books  of  Maccabees,  in  English,  with  Notes  and 
Illustrations  by  Henry  Cotton,  D.C.L.      1 833.  8vo.  cloth,  ios.  6d. 

Horae  Hebraicae  et  Talmudieae,  a  J.  Lightfoot.  A  new 
Edition,  by  R.  Gandell,  M.A.     4  vols.  1859.  8vo.  cloth   1/.  is. 

FATHERS  OF  THE  CHURCH,  &c. 

Liturgies,  Eastern  and  Western.  Edited,  with  Introduction, 
Notes,  and  a  Liturgical  Glossary,  by  C.  E.  Hammond,  M.A.  1878. 
Crown  8vo.  cloth,  ios.  6d. 

An  Appendix  to  the  above.    1879.   Crown  8vo.  paper  covers,  is.  6d. 

St.  Athanasius :  Orations  against  the  Arians.  With  an  Account 
of  his  Life  by  William  Bright,  D.D.,  Regius  Professor  of  Ecclesiastical 
History,  Oxford.     1873.    Crown  8vo.  cloth,  9s. 

St.  Athanasius:  Historical  Tracts.     With  an  Introduction  by 

William  Bright,  D.D.,  Regius  Professor  of  Ecclesiastical  History,  Oxford. 
In  the  Press. 


Clarendon  Press,  Oxford. 


St.  Augustine:  Select  Anti-Pelagian  Treatises,  and  the  Acts 
of  the  Second  Council  of  Orange.  With  an  Introduction  by  William 
Bright,  D.D.     Crown  8vo.  cloth,  gs.     Just  Published. 

The  Canons  of  the  First  Four  General  Councils  of  Nicaea, 
Constantinople,  Ephesus,  and  Chalcedon.  1877.  Crown  8vo.  cloth,  2s.  6d. 

Catenae  Graecorum  Patrum  in  Novum  Testamentum.  Edidit 
J.  A.  Cramer,  S.T.P.     Tomi  VIII.     1838-1844.  8vo.  cloth,  2/.  4s. 

dementis  Alexandrini  Opera,  ex  recensione  Guil.  Dindorfii. 
Tomi  IV.     1869.  8vo.  cloth,  3/. 

Cyrilli  Archiepiscopi  Alexandrini  in  XII  Prophetas.  Edidit 
P.  E.  Pusey,  A.M.    Tomi  II.     1868.  8vo.  cloth,  2/.  2s. 

Cyrilli  Archiepiscopi  Alexandrini  in  D.  Joannis  Evangelium. 
Accedunt  Fragmenta  Varia  necnon  Tractatus  ad  Tiberium  Diaconum  Duo. 
Edidit  post  Aubertum  P.  E.  Pusey,  A.M.    Tomi  III.    1872.  8vo.  2/.  5s. 

Cyrilli  Archiepiscopi  Alexandrini  Commentarii  in  Lucae  Evan- 
gelium quae  supersunt  Syriace.  E  MSS.  apud  Mus.  Britan.  edidit  R. 
Payne  Smith,  A.M.     1858.     4to.  cloth,  il.  2s. 

The  same,  translated  by  R.  Payne  Smith,  M.A.  2  vols.  1859. 
8vo.  cloth,  14s. 

Ephraemi  Syri,  Rabulae  Episcopi  Edesseni,  Balaei,  aliorumque 
Opera  Selecta.  E  Codd.  Syriacis  MSS.  in  Museo  Britannico  et  Biblio- 
theca  Bodleiana  asservatis  primus  edidit  J.  J.  Overbeck.  1865.  8vo. 
cloth,  il.  is. 

Eusebii  Pamphili  Evangelicae  Praeparationis  Libri  XV.  Ad 
Codd.  MSS.  recensuit  T.  Gaisford,  S.T.P.  Tomi  IV.  1843.  8vo. 
cloth,  il.  10s. 

Eusebii  Pamphili  Evangelicae  Demonstrationis  Libri  X.  Re- 
censuit T.  Gaisford,  S.T.P.    Tomi  II.     1852.  8vo.  cloth,  15s. 

Eusebii  Pamphili  contra  Hieroclem  et  Marcellum  Libri.  Re- 
censuit T.  Gaisford,  S.T.P.     1852.  8vo.  cloth,  7s. 

Eusebius'  Eeclesiastieal  History,  according  to  the  text  of 
Burton,  with  an  Introduction  by  William  Bright,  D.D.  1872.  Crown 
8vo.  cloth,  8s.  6d. 

Eusebii  Pamphili   Hist.   Eccl. :    Annotationes  Variorum. 

Tomi  II.     1842.  8vo.  cloth,  ip. 

Evagrii  Historia  Ecclesiastica,  ex  recensione  H,  Valesii.  1844. 
8vo.  cloth,  4s. 

Irenaeus:  The  Third  Book  of  St.  Irenaeus,  Bishop  of  Lyons, 
against  Heresies.  With  short  Notes  and  a  Glossary  by  H.  Deane,  B.D., 
Fellow  of  St.  John's  College,  Oxford.   1874.  Crown  8vo.  cloth,  5s.  6d. 


Clarendon  Press,  Oxford, 


Origenis  Philosophumena ;  sive  omnium  Haeresium  Refutatio. 

E  Codice  Parisino  nunc  primum  edidit  Emmanuel  Miller.     1 851.  8vo. 

cloth,  I  os. 
Patrum  Apostolicorum,  S.  Clementis  Romani,  S.  Ignatii,  S. 

Polycarpi,  quae  supersunt.     Edidit  Guil.  Jacobson,  S.T.P.R.     Tomi  II. 

Fourth  Edition,  1863.  8vo.  cloth,  l7.  is. 
Reliquiae  Sacrae  secundi  tertiique  saeculi.     Recensuit  M.J. 

Routh,  S.T.P.    Tomi  V.   Second  Edition,  1 846-1 848.  8vo.  cloth,  il.  5s. 

Scrip torum  Ecclesiasticorum  Opuscula.  Recensuit  M.  J. 
Routh,  S.T.P.     Tomi  II.     Third  Edition,  1858.  8vo.  cloth,  10s. 

Socratis  Scholastici  Historia  Ecclesiastica.  Gr.  et  Lat.  Edidit 
R.  Hussey,  S.T.B.    Tomi  III.     1853,  8vo.  cloth,  15s. 

Socrates'  Ecclesiastical  History,  according  to  the  Text  of 

Hussey,  with  an  Introduction  by  William  Bright,  D.D.     1878.     Crown 
8vo.  cloth,  7s.  6d. 

Sozomeni  Historia  Ecclesiastica.  Edidit  R.  Hussey,  S.T.B. 
Tomi  III.     1859.  8vo.  cloth,  15s. 

Theodoreti   Ecclesiasticae    Historiae  Libri  V.    Recensuit  T. 

Gaisford,  S.T.P.     1854.  8vo.  cloth,  7s.  6d. 

Theodoreti  Graecarum  Affectionum  Curatio.  Ad  Codices  MSS. 
recensuit  T.  Gaisford,  S.T.P.     1 839.  8vo.  cloth,  Js.  6d. 

Dowling  (J.  G.)  Notitia  Scriptorum  SS.  Patrum  aliorumque  vet. 
Eccles.  Mon.  quae  in  Collectionibus  Anecdotorum  post  annum  Christi 
mdcc.  in  lucem  editis  continentur.     1839.  8vo.  cloth,  4s.  6d. 

ECCLESIASTICAL   HISTORY,  BIOGRAPHY,  &c. 

Baedae  Historia  Ecclesiastica.  Edited,  with  English  Notes 
by  G.  H.  Moberly,  M.A.  1869.  crown  8vo.  cloth,  10s.  6d. 

Bingham's  Antiquities  of  the  Christian  Church,  and  other 
Works.    10  vols.    1855.   8vo.   cloth,  3/.  3s. 

Bright  (W.,  D.D.).  Chapters  of  Early  English  Church  History. 
1878.  8vo.  cloth,  12s. 

Burnet's  History  of  the  Reformation  of  the  Church  of  Eng- 
land. A  new  Edition.  Carefully  revised,  and  the  Records  collated 
with  the  originals,  by  N.Pocock,  M.A.     7  vols.  1865.  8vo.  4/.  4s. 

Burnet's  Life  of  Sir  M.  Hale,  and  Fell's  Life  of  Dr.  Hammond. 

1856.  small  8vo.  cloth,  2s.  6d. 

Cardwell's  Two  Books  of  Common  Prayer,  set  forth  by 

authority  in  the  Reign  of  King  Edward  VI,  compared  with  each  other. 
Third  Edition,  1852.  8vo.  cloth,  7s. 

Cardwell's  Documentary  Annals  of  the  Reformed  Church  of 
England ;  being  a  Collection  of  Injunctions,  Declarations,  Orders,  Arti- 
cles of  Inquiry,  &c.  from  1546  to  1 716.  2  vols.  1843.  8vo.  cloth,  1 8s. 


io  Clarendon  Press,  Oxford. 


Cardwell's  History  of  Conferences  on  the  Book  of  Common 
Prayer  from  1551  to  1690.     Third  Edition,  1849.  8vo.  cloth,  7s.  6c?. 

Councils  and  Ecclesiastical  Documents  relating  to  Great 
Britain  and  Ireland.  Edited,  after  Spelman  and  Wilkins,  by  A.  W. 
Haddan,  B.D.,  and  W.  Stubbs,  M.A.,  Regius  Professor  of  Modern 
History,  Oxford.  Vols.  I.  and  III.  1869-71.  Medium  8vo.  cloth, 
each  \l.  is. 

Vol.  II.  Part  I.  1873.  Medium  8vo.  cloth,  10s.  6d. 
Vol.  II.  Part  II.   1878.  Church  of  Ireland ;  Memorials  of  St.  Patrick. 
stiff  covers,  3s.  6d. 

Formularies  of  Faith  set  forth  by  the  King's  Authority  during 
the  Reign  of  Henry  VIII.     1856.  8vo.  cloth,  p. 

Fuller's  Church  History  of  Britain.    Edited  by  J.  S.  Brewer, 

M.A.     6  vols.  1845.  8vo.  cloth,  il.  19s. 

Gibson's  Synodus  Anglicana.  Edited  by  E.  Cardwell,  D.D. 
1854.  8vo.  cloth,  6s. 

Hussey's  Rise  of  the  Papal  Power  traced  in  three  Lectures. 
Second  Edition,  1863.  fcap.  8vo.  cloth,  4s.  6d. 

Inett's  Origines  Anglicanae  (in  continuation  of  Stillingfleet). 
Edited  by  J.  Griffiths,  M.A.     3  vols.  1855.  8vo.  cloth,  15s. 

John,  Bishop  of  Ephesus.  The  Third  Part  of  his  Ecclesias- 
tical History.  [In  Syriac]  Now  first  edited  by  William  Cureton, 
M.A.     1853.  4to.  cloth,  il.  12s, 

The  same,  translated  by  R.  Payne  Smith,  M.A.  i860.  8vo. 
cloth,  1  os. 

Knight's  Life  of  Dean  Colet.     1823.  8vo.  cloth,  7s.  6d. 

Le  Neve's  Fasti  Ecclesiae  Anglicanae.  Corrected  and  continued 
from  1715  to  1853  by  T.  Duffus  Hardy.  3  vols.  1854.  8vo.  cloth,  1/.  is. 

The  Liturgy  and  Ritual  of  the  Celtic  Church.  By  F.  E. 
Warren,  B.D.,  Fellow  of  St.  John's  College,  Oxford.     In  the  Press. 

Missale  Vetus  Anglo- Saxonicum :  the  Liturgy  of  the  Anglo- 
Saxon  Church.     By  the  same  Editor.     In  Preparation. 

Noelli  (A.)  Catechismus  sive  prima  institutio  disciplinaque 
Pietatis  Christianae  Latine  explicata.  Editio  nova  cura  Guil.  Jacobson, 
A.M.     1844.  8vo.  cloth,  5s.  6 d. 

Prideaux's  Connection  of  Sacred  and  Profane  History.  2  vols. 
1 85 1.  8vo.  cloth,  ios. 

Primers  put  forth  in  the  Reign  of  Henry  VIII.     1848.    8vo. 

cloth,  5s. 

Records  of  the  Reformation.  The  Divorce,  1527 — 1533. 
Mostly  now  for  the  first  time  printed  from  MSS.  in  the  British  Museum 
and  other  Libraries.  Collected  and  arranged  by  N.  Pocock,  M.A. 
1870,    z  vols.  §vo.  cloth,  1/.  16*. 


Clarendon  Press,  Oxford,  n 


Reformatio  Legum  Ecclesiasticarum.  The  Reformation  of 
Ecclesiastical  Laws,  as  attempted  in  the  reigns  of  Henry  VIII,  Edward 
VI,  and  Elizabeth.  Edited  by  E.  Cardwell,  D.D.  1850.  8vo.  cloth, 
6s.  6d. 

Shirley's  (W.  W.)  Some  Account  of  the  Church  in  the  Apostolic 
Age.     Second  Edition,  1874.  fcap.  8vo.  cloth,  3s.  6d. 

Shuckford's  Sacred  and  Profane  History  connected  (in  con- 
tinuation of  Prideaux).     2  vols.  1848.  8vo.  cloth,  10s. 

Stillingfleet's  Origines  Britannicae,  with  Lloyd's  Historical 
Account  of  Church  Government.  Edited  by  T.  P.  Pantin,  M.A.  2  vols. 
1842.  8vo.  cloth,  10s. 

Stubbs  (W.).  Registrum  Sacrum  Anglicanum.  An  attempt 
to  exhibit  the  course  of  Episcopal  Succession  in  England.  1858.  small 
4to.  cloth,  8s.  6d. 

Strype's  Works  Complete,  with  a  General  Index.     27  vols. 
1821-1843.  8vo.  cloth,  *jl.  13s.  6d.     Sold  separately  as  follows: — 
Memorials  of  Granmer.     2  vols.  1840.  8vo.  cloth,  us. 
Life  of  Parker.     3  vols.  1828.  8vo.  cloth,  16s.  6d. 
Life  of  Grindal.     182 1.  8vo.  cloth,  5J.  6d. 
.   Life  of  Whitgift.     3  vols.  1822.  8vo.  cloth,  16 s.  6d. 
Life  of  Aylmer.     1820.  8vo.  cloth,  5s.  6d. 
Life  of  Cheke.     182 1.  8vo.  cloth,  $s.  6d. 
Life  of  Smith.     1820.  8vo.  cloth,  $s.  6d. 
Ecclesiastical  Memorials.    6  vols.  1822.  8vo.  cloth,  1/.  13J. 
Annals  of  the  Reformation.  7  vols.   8vo.  cloth,  2/.  3/.  6d. 
General  Index.     2  vols.  1828.  8vo.  cloth,  us. 

Sylloge  Confessionnm  sub  tempus  Reformandae  Ecclesiae  edi- 

tarum.     Subjiciuntur  Catechismus  Heidelbergensis  et  Canones  Synodi 
Dordrechtanae.    1827.  8vo.  cloth,  8s. 

ENGLISH  THEOLOGY. 

Beveridge's  Discourse  upon  the  XXXIX  Articles.  The  third 
complete  Edition,  1847.  8vo.  cloth,  8s. 

Bilson  on  the  Perpetual  Government  of  Christ's  Church,  with  a 
Biographical  Notice  by  R.Eden,  M.A.     1842.  8vo.  cloth,  4s. 

Biscoe's  Boyle  Lectures  on  the  Acts  of  the  Apostles.  1840.  8vo. 
cloth,  gs.  6d. 

Bull's  Works,  with  Nelson's  Life.  Edited  by  E.  Burton,  D.D. 
A  new  Edition,  1846.     8  vols.  8vo.  cloth,  2I.  gs. 

Burnet's  Exposition  of  the  XXXIX  Articles.  1845.  Swo.  cloth,  7s 

Burton's  (Edward)  Testimonies  of  the  Ante-Nicene  Fathers  to 
the  Divinity  of  Christ.    Second  Edition,  1829.  8vo.  cloth,  7s. 
B3 


12  Clarendon  Press,  Oxford. 


Burton's  (Edward)  Testimonies  of  the  Ante-Nicene  Fathers  to 
the  Doctrine  of  the  Trinity  and  of  the  Divinity  of  the  Holy  Ghost. 
1831.  8vo.  cloth,  3s.  6d. 

Butler's  "Works,  with  an  Index  to  the  Analogy.  2  vols.  1874. 
8vo.  cloth,  11s. 

Butler's  Sermons.     8vo.  cloth,  $s.  6d. 

Butler's  Analogy  of  Beligion.     8vo.  cloth,  5s.  6d. 

Chandler's  Critical  History  of  the  Life  of  David.  1853.  8vo. 
cloth,  8s.  6d. 

Chillingworth's  Works.     3  vols.  1838.  8vo.  cloth,  1/.  is.  6d. 

Clergyman's  Instructor.    Sixth  Edition,  1855.  8vo.  cloth,  6s.  6d. 

Comber's  Companion  to  the  Temple ;  or  a  Help  to  Devotion  in 
the  use  of  the  Common  Prayer.     7  vols.  1841.  8vo.  cloth,  iZ.  lis.  6d. 

Cranmer's  "Works.  Collected  and  arranged  by  H.  Jenkyns, 
M.A.,  Fellow  of  Oriel  College.   4  vols.   1834.  8vo.  cloth,  il.  los. 

Enchiridion  Theologicum  Anti-Romanum. 

Vol.  I.     Jeremy  Taylor's  Dissuasive  from  Popery,  and  Treatise  on 

the  Real  Presence.     1852.  8vo.  cloth,  8s. 
Vol.  II.    Barrow  on  the  Supremacy  of  the  Pope,  with  his  Discourse 

on  the  Unity  of  the  Church.     1852.  8vo.  cloth,  Js.  6d. 
Vol.  III.  Tracts  selected  from  Wake,  Patrick,  Stillingfleet,  Clagett, 

and  others.     1837.  8vo.  cloth,  lis. 

[Fell's]  Paraphrase  and  Annotations  on  the  Epistles  of  St.  Paul. 
1852.  8vo.  cloth,  7s. 

Greswell's  Harmonia  Evangelica.  Fifth  Edition,  1856,  8vo. 
cloth,  9s.  6d. 

Greswell's  Prolegomena  ad  Harmoniam  Evangelicam.  1840. 
8vo.  cloth,  gs.  6d. 

Greswell's  Dissertations  on  the  Principles  and  Arrangement 
of  a  Harmony  of  the  Gospels.     5  vols.  1837.  8vo.  cloth,  3/.  3s. 

Hall's  (Bp.)  Works.  A  new  Edition,  by  Philip  Wynter,  D.D. 
10  vols.  1863.  8vo.  cloth,  3/.  3s. 

Hammond's  Paraphrase  and  Annotations  on  the  New  Testa- 
ment.    4  vols.  1845.  8vo.  cloth,  il. 

Hammond's  Paraphrase  on  the  Book  of  Psalms.  2  vols.  1850. 
8vo.  cloth,  1  os. 

Heurtley's  Collection  of  Greeds.     1858.  8vo.  cloth,  6s.  6d. 

Homilies  appointed  to  be  read  in  Churches.  Edited  by  J. 
Griffiths,  M.A.    1859.  8v0-  ciotb>  7s-  ^d' 


Clarendon  Press,  Oxford.  13 


Hooker's  Works,  with  his  Life  by  Walton,  arranged  by  John 
Keble,  M.A.  Sixth  Edition,  1874.  3  vols.  8vo.  cloth,  1l.11s.6d. 

Hooker's  Works;  the  text  as  arranged  by  John  Keble,  M.A. 
2  vols.  1875.  8vo.  cloth,  lis. 

Hooper's  (Bp.  George)  Works.     2  vols.  1855.  8vo.  cloth,  8j. 

Jackson's  (Dr.  Thomas)  Works.  12  vols.  1844.  8vo.  cloth, 
3I.  6s. 

Jewel's  Works.  Edited  by  R.  W.  Jelf,  D.D.  8  vols.  1847. 
8vo.  cloth,  ll.  10s. 

Patrick's  Theological  Works.    9  vols.  1859.  8yo-  cloth,  il.  u. 

Pearson's  Exposition  of  the  Creed.  Revised  and  corrected  by 
E.  Burton,  D.D.     Sixth  Edition,  1877.  8vo.  cloth,  10s.  6d. 

Pearson's  Minor  Theological  Works.  Now  first  collected,  with 
a  Memoir  of  the  Author,  Notes,  and  Index,  by  Edward  Churton,  M.A. 
2  vols.  1844.  8vo.  cloth,  10s. 

Sanderson's  Works.  Edited  by  W.  Jacobson,  D.D.  6  vols. 
1854.  8vo.  cloth,  il.  ios. 

Stanhope's  Paraphrase  and  Comment  upon  the  Epistles  and 
Gospels.     A  new  Edition.     2  vols.  1851.  8vo.  cloth,  ios. 

Stillingfleet's  Origines  Sacrae.     2  vols.  1837.  8vo.  cloth,  gs. 

Stillingneet's  Rational  Account  of  the  Grounds  of  Protestant 
Religion;  being  a  vindication  of  Abp.  Laud's  Relation  of  a  Conference, 
&c.     2  vols.  1844.  8vo.  cloth,  ios. 

Wall's  History  of  Infant  Baptism,  with  Gale's  Reflections,  and 
Wall's  Defence.  A  new  Edition,  by  Henry  Cotton,  D.C.L.  2  vols. 
1862.  8vo.  cloth,  1/.  is. 

Waterland's  Works,  with  Life,  by  Bp.  Van  Mildert.  A  new 
Edition,  with  copious  Indexes.    6  vols.    1857.  8vo.  cloth,  il.  lis. 

Waterland's  Review  of  the  Doctrine  of  the  Eucharist,  with  a 
Preface  by  the  present  Bishop  of  London.  1868.  crown  8vo.  cloth, 
6s.  6d. 

Wheatly's  Illustration  of  the  Book  of  Common  Prayer.  A 
new  Edition,  1S46.  8vo.  cloth,  5s. 

Wyclif.  A  Catalogue  of  the  Original  Works  of  John  Wyclif,  by 
W.  W.  Shirley,  D.D.     1865.  8vo.  cloth  3s.  6d. 

Wyclif.  Select  English  Works.  By  T  Arnold,  M.A  3  vols. 
1 871.  8vo.  cloth,  2/.  2s. 

Wyclif.  Trialogus.  With  the  Supplement  now  first  edited*  By 
Gotthard  Lechler.     1869.  8vo.  cloth,  14s. 


14  Clarendon  Press,  Oxford. 


ENGLISH  HISTORICAL  AND  DOCUMENTARY 
WORKS. 

British  Barrows,  a  Record  of  the  Examination  of  Sepulchral 
Mounds  in  various  parts  of  England.  By  William  Greenwell,  M.A., 
F.S.A.  Together  with  Description  of  Figures  of  Skulls,  General 
Remarks  on  Prehistoric  Crania,  and  an  Appendix  by  George  Rolleston, 
M.D.,  F.R.S.     1877.    Medium  8vo.  cloth,  25s. 

Two  of  the  Saxon  Chronicles  parallel,  with  Supplementary 
Extracts  from  the  Others.  Edited,  with  Introduction,  Notes,  and  a 
Glossarial  Index,  by  J.  Earle,  M.A.     1865.  8vo.  cloth,  16s. 

Magna  Carta,  a  careful  Reprint.  Edited  by  W.Stubbs,  M.A., 
Regius  Professor  of  Modern  History.     1879.  4to*  stitched,  is. 

Britton,  a  Treatise  upon  the  Common  Law  of  England,  com- 
posed by  order  of  King  Edward  I.  The  French  Text  carefully  revised, 
with  an  English  Translation,  Introduction,  and  Notes,  by  F.  M.  Nichols, 
M.A.     2  vols.  1865.  royal  8vo.  cloth,  1/.  1 6s. 

Burnet's  History  of  His  Own  Time,  with  the  suppressed  Pas- 
sages and  Notes.     6  vols.  1833.  8vo.  cloth,  2/.  10s. 

Burnet's  History  of  James  II,  with  additional  Notes.  1852. 
8vo.  cloth,  9s.  6d. 

Carte's  Life  of  James  Duke  of  Ormond.  A  new  Edition,  care- 
fully compared  with  the  original  MSS.   6  vols.  1851.  8vo.  cloth,  il.  5s. 

Clarendon's  (Edw.  Earl  of)  History  of  the  Rebellion  and  Civil 
Wars  in  England.  To  which  are  subjoined  the  Notes  of  Bishop  War- 
burton.     7  vols.  1849.  medium  8vo.  cloth,  2I.  10s. 

Clarendon's  (Edw.  Earl  of)  History  of  the  Rebellion  and  Civil 
Wars  in  England.    7  vols.  1839.  l8mo.  cloth,  1/.  is. 

Clarendon's  (Edw.  Earl  of)  History  of  the  Rebellion  and  Civil 
Wars  in  England.  Also  His  Life,  written  by  Himself,  in  which  is  in- 
cluded a  Continuation  of  his  History  of  the  Grand  Rebellion.  With 
copious  Indexes.    In  one  volume,  royal  8vo.  1842.  cloth,  il.  2s. 

Clarendon's  (Edw.  Earl  of)  Life,  including  a  Continuation  of 
his  History.     2  vols.   1857.  medium  8vo.  cloth,  il.  2s. 

Clarendon's  (Edw.  Earl  of)  Life,  and  Continuation  of  his  His- 
tory.    3  vols.  1827.  8vo.  cloth,  1 6s.  6d. 

Calendar  of  the  Clarendon  State  Papers,  preserved  in  the 

Bodleian  Library.     In  three  volumes.     1869-76. 

Vol.  I.  From  1523  to  January  1649.   ^vo.  c^°th,  1 8s. 
Vol.  II.  From  1649  to  1654.     8vo.  cloth,  16s. 
Vol.  III.    From  1655  to  1657.     8vo.  cloth,  14s. 


Clarendon  Press \  Oxford.  15 


Calendar  of  Charters  and  Rolls  preserved  in  the  Bodleian 

Library.     1878.     8vo.  cloth,  ll.  lis.  6d. 

Freeman's  (E.  A.)  History  of  the  Norman  Conquest  of  England; 
its  Causes  and  Results.     In  Six  Volumes.     8vo.  cloth,  5/.  9s.  6d. 

Vols.  I— II  together,  3rd  edition,  1877.  1/.  1 6s. 

Vol.  Ill,  2nd  edition,  1874.   1/.  is. 

Vol.  IV,  2nd  edition,  1875.   il.  is. 

Vol.  V,  1876.  1/.  is. 

Vol.  VI.     Index.     1879.    8vo.  cloth,  10s.  6d. 

Lloyd's  Prices  of  Corn  in  Oxford,  1583-18 30.  8vo.  sewed,  is. 

Luttrell's  (Narcissus)  Diary.  A  Brief  Historical  Relation  of 
State  Affairs,  1678-1714.     6  vols.   1857.  8vo.  cloth,  il.  4s. 

May's  History  of  the  Long  Parliament.  1854.  8vo.  cloth,  6s.  6d, 

Rogers's  History  of  Agriculture  and  Prices  in  England,  a.d. 
1 259-1 793.  Vols.  I  and  II  (1 259-1400).  8vo.  cloth,  il.  2s. 
Vols.  Ill  and  IV  in  the  Press. 

Sprigg's  England's  Recovery ;  being  the  History  of  the  Army 

under  Sir  Thomas  Fairfax.     1854.    8vo.  cloth,  6s. 

Whitelock's  Memorials  of  English  Affairs  from  1625  to  1660. 
4  vols.  1853.  8vo.  cloth,  il.  10s. 

Protests  of  the  Lords,  including  those  which  have  been 
expunged,  from  1624  to  1874;  with  Historical  Introductions.  Edited 
by  James  E.  Thorold  Rogers,  M.A.      1875.    3  vols.  8vo.  cloth,  il.  is. 

Enactments  in  Parliament,  specially  concerning  the  Universi- 
ties of  Oxford  and  Cambridge.  Collected  and  arranged  by  J.  Griffiths, 
M.A.     1869.  8vo.  cloth,  12s. 

Ordinances  and  Statutes  [for  Colleges  and  Halls]  framed  or 
approved  by  the  Oxford  University  Commissioners.  1863.  8vo.  cloth, 
12s. — Sold  separately  (except  for  Exeter,  All  Souls,  Brasenose,  and 
Corpus),  at  is.  each. 

Statuta  Universitatis  Oxoniensis.    1879.  8vo.  cloth,  5s. 

The  Student's  Handbook  to  the  University  and  Colleges 

of  Oxford.     Fifth  Edition.     1879.     Extra  fcap.   8vo.  cloth,  2s.  6d. 

Index  to  "Wills  proved  in  the  Court  of  the  Chancellor  of  the 
University  of  Oxford,  &c.  Compiled  by  J.  Griffiths,  M.A.  1862. 
royal  8vo.  cloth,  3s.  6d. 

Catalogue  of  Oxford  Graduates  from  1659  to  1850.     1851. 

8vo.  cloth,  7s.  6d. 


1 6  Clarendon  Press,  Oxford. 


CHRONOLOGY,  GEOGRAPHY,  &e. 

Clinton's  Fasti  Hellenici.  The  Civil  and  Literary  Chronology 
of  Greece,  from  the  LVIth  to  the  CXXIIIrd  Olympiad.  Third  edition, 
1 841.  4to.  cloth,  1/.  14s.  6d. 

Clinton's  Fasti  Hellenici.  The  Civil  and  Literary  Chronology 
of  Greece,  from  the  CXXIVth  Olympiad  to  the  Death  of  Augustus. 
Second  edition,  1 85 1.  4to.  cloth,  1/.  12s. 

Clinton's  Epitome  of  the  Fasti  Hellenici.  1851.  8vo.  cloth, 
6s.  6d. 

Clinton's  Fasti  Romani.  The  Civil  and  Literary  Chronology 
of  Rome  and  Constantinople,  from  the  Death  of  Augustus  to  the  Death 
of  Heraclius.     2  vols.  1845,  1850.  4to.  cloth,  3/.  9s. 

Clinton's  Epitome  of  the  Fasti  Romani.    1854.  8vo.  cloth,  7s. 

Cramer's  Geographical  and  Historical  Description  of  Asia 
Minor.     2  vols.  1832.  8vo.  cloth,  us. 

Cramer's  Map  of  Asia  Minor,  15J. 

Cramer's  Map  of  Ancient  and  Modern  Italy,  on  two  sheets,  15J. 

Cramer's  Description  of  Ancient  Greece.  3  vols.  1828.  8vo. 
cloth,  1 6s.  6d. 

Cramer's  Map  of  Ancient  and  Modern  Greece,  on  two  sheets,  1 5/. 

Greswell's  Fasti  Temporis  Catholici.    1852.  4  vols.  8vo.  cloth, 

2/.  IOS. 

Greswell's  Tables  to  Fasti,  4to.,  and  Introduction  to  Tables, 

8vo.    1852.  cloth,  15s. 

Greswell's  Origines  Kalendariae  Italicae.  1854.  4  vols.  8vo.  cloth 

2l.  2S. 

Greswell's  Origines  Kalendariae  Hellenicae.  6  vols.  1862. 
8vo.  cloth,  4/.  4s. 


MATHEMATICS,  PHYSICAL  SCIENCE,  &c. 

Arehimedis  quae  supersunt  omnia  cum  Eutocii  comment ari is 
ex  recensione  Josephi  Torelli,  cum  nova  versione  Latina.  1792.  fol. 
cloth,  il.  5s. 

Bradley's  Miscellaneous  Works  and  Correspondence.    With  an 
Account  of  Harriot's  Astronomical  Papers.     1832.  4to.  cloth,  ip. 
Reduction  of  Bradley's  Observations  by  Dr.  Busch.  1 838. 4to.  cloth,  3s. 


Clarendon  Press,  Oxford.  17 


Astronomical  Observations  made  at  the  University  Obser- 
vatory, Oxford,  under  the  direction  of  C.  Pritchard,  M.A.,  Savilian  Pro- 
fessor of  Astronomy.     No.  I.    1878.  Royal  8vo.  paper  covers,  3s.  6d. 

Treatise  on  Infinitesimal  Calculus.  By  Bartholomew  Price, 
M.A.,  F.R.S.,  Professor  of  Natural  Philosophy,  Oxford. 

Vol.  I.  Differential  Calculus.     Second  Edition,  8vo.  cloth,  14s.  6d. 

Vol.  II.  Integral  Calculus,  Calculus  of  Variations,  and  Differential 
Equations.     Second  Edition,  1865.  ^vo«  doth,  18s. 

Vol.  III.  Statics,  including  Attractions;  Dynamics  of  a  Material 
Particle.    Second  Edition,  1868.  8vo.  cloth,  16s. 

Vol.  IV.  Dynamics  of  Material  Systems;  together  with  a  Chapter  on 
Theoretical  Dynamics,  by  W.  F.  Donkin,  M.A.,  F.R.S.  1862. 
8vo.  cloth,  16s, 

Bigaud's  Correspondence  of  Scientific  Men  of  the  17th  Century, 
with  Table  of  Contents  by  A.  de  Morgan,  and  Index  by  the  Rev.  J. 
Rigaud,  M.A.,  Fellow  of  Magdalen  College. Oxford.  2  vols*  1841-1862. 
8vo.  cloth,  i#s.  6d. 

Daubeny's  Introduction  to  the  Atomic  Theory.  1850.  16 mo. 
cloth,  6s. 

Vesuvius.  By  John  Phillips,  M.A.,  F.R.S.,  Professor  of 
Geology,  Oxford.     1869.  Crown  8vo.  cloth,  10s.  6d. 

Geology  of  Oxford  and  the  Valley  of  the  Thames.  By  the  same 

Author.     1 8  7 1 .   8 vo.  cloth,  21s. 

Synopsis  of  the  Pathological  Series  in  the  Oxford  Museum. 
By  H.  W.  Acland,  M.D.,  F.R.S.,  1867.  8vo.  cloth,  2s.  6d. 

Thesaurus  Entomologicus  Hopeianus,  or  a  Description  of 
the  rarest  Insects  in  the  Collection  given  to  the  University  by  the 
Rev.  William  Hope.  By  J.  O.  Westwood,  M.A.,  F.L.S.  With  40 
Plates.     1874.    Small  folio,  half  morocco,  *jl.  10s. 

Text-Book  of  Botany,  Morphological  and  Physiological.    By 

Dr.  Julius  Sachs,  Professor  of  Botany  in  the  University  of  Wiirzburg. 
Translated  by  A.  W.  Bennett,  M.A.  and  S.  H.  Vines,  M.A.,  and  edited 
by  W.  T.  Thiselton  Dyer,  M.A.  Royal  8vo.  Second  Edition,  in  the 
Press. 

Johannes  Muller  on  Certain  Variations  in  the  Vocal  Organs 

of  the  Passeres  that  have  hitherto  escaped  notice.  Translated  by 
F.  J.  Bell,  B.A.,  and  edited  with  an  Appendix,  by  A.  H.  Garrod,  M.A., 
F.R.S.     With  Plates.     1878.     4to.  paper  covers,  'js.  6d. 


1 8  Clarendon  Press,  Oxford. 


BIBLIOGRAPHY. 

Ebert's  Bibliographical  Dictionary,  translated  from  the  German. 
4  vols.  1837.  8vo.  cloth,  il.  10s. 

Cotton's  List  of  Editions  of  the  Bible  in  English.  Second  Edition, 
corrected  and  enlarged.     1852.  8vo.  cloth,  8s.  6d. 

Cotton's  Typographical  Gazetteer.     183 1.  8vo.  cloth,  12s.  6d. 

Cotton's  Typographical  Gazetteer,  Second  Series.  1866.  8vo. 
cloth,  1 2s.  6d. 

Cotton's  Rhemes  and  Doway.  An  attempt  to  shew  what  has 
been  done  by  Roman  Catholics  for  the  diffusion  of  the  Holy  Scriptures 
in  English.     1855.  8vo.  cloth,  gs. 


MISCELLANEOUS. 

Bacon's  Novum  Organum.  Edited,  with  English  notes,  by 
G.  W.  Kitchin,  M.A.     1855.  8vo.  cloth,  gs.  6d. 

Bacon's  Novum  Organum.  Translated  by  G.  W.  Kitchin, 
M.A.  1855.  8vo.  cloth,  gs.  6d.     (See  also  p.  35.) 

The  "Works  of  George  Berkeley,  D.D.,  formerly  Bishop  of 

Cloyne;  including  many  of  his  writings  hitherto  unpublished.     With 

Prefaces,  Annotations,  and  an  Account  of  his  Life  and  Philosophy,  by 

Alexander  Campbell  Fraser,  M.A.     4  vols.  1871.    8vo.  cloth,  2/.  18s. 

The  Life,  Letters,  &c.     1  vol.  cloth,  16s.     See  also  p.  35. 

The  Logic  of  Hegel;  translated  from  the  Encyclopaedia  of 

the  Philosophical  Sciences.     With  Prolegomena  by  William  Wallace, 
M.A.     1874.  8vo.  cloth,  14s. 

Smith's  Wealth  of  Nations.  A  new  Edition,  with  Notes, 
by  J.  E.  Thorold  Rogers,  M.A.     2  vols.  1870.  cloth,  21s. 

A  Course  of  Lectures  on  Art,  delivered  before  the  University 
of  Oxford  in  Hilary  Term,  1870,  by  John  Ruskin,  M.A.,  Slade 
Professor  of  Fine  Art.     8vo.  cloth,  6s. 

A  Critical  Account  of  the  Drawings  by  Michel  Angelo 

and  Raffaello  in  the  University  Galleries,  Oxford.     By  J.  C.  Robinson, 
F.S.A.     1870.  Crown  8vo.  cloth,  4s. 

Sturlunga  Saga,  including  the  Islendinga  Saga  of  Lawman 
Sturla  Thordsson  and  other  works.  Edited  with  Prolegomena,  Ap- 
pendices, Tables,  Indices,  and  Maps,  by  Dr.  Gudbrand  Vigfusson.  In 
a  vols.     1878.  8vq.  cloth,  il.  as, 


Clarendon  Press,  Oxford.  19 


Casauboni  Ephemerides,  cum  praefatione  et  notis  J.  Russell, 
S.T.P.     Tomi  II.     1850.  8vo.  cloth,  15s. 

The  Ornmlum;  with  the  Notes  and  Glossary  of  Dr.  R.  M. 

White.  Edited  by  Rev.  R.  Holt,  M.A.  1 8 78.  2  vols.  Extra  fcap. 
8vo.  cloth,  2 is. 

The  Saered  Books  of  the  East.      Translated  by  various, 

Oriental  Scholars,  and  edited  by  F.  Max  Miiller. 

Vol.  I.  The  Upanishads.    Part  I.  The  £#andogya-upanishad, 

The  Talavakara-upanishad,  The  Aitareya-arawyaka,  The  Kaushitaki- 
brahmawa-upanisbad,  and  The  Vag-asaneyi-samhita-upanishad.  Trans- 
lated by  F.  Max  Miiller.     8vo.  cloth,  10s.  6d. 

Vol.  II.  The  Sacred  Laws  of  the  Aryas,  as  taugh  in  the 
Schools  of  Apastamba  and  Gautama.  Translated  by  Georg  Biihler. 
8vo.  cloth,  10s.  6d. 

Vol.  III.  The  Saered  Books  of  China.  The  Texts  of  Con- 
fucianism. Part  I.  The  Shu  King,  The  Shih  King,  and  The  Hsiao 
King.     Translated  by  James  Legge.     8vo.  cloth,  1 2s.  6d. 

Vol.  IV.  The  Zend-Avesta.  Part  I.  The  Vendidad.  Trans- 
lated by  James  Darmesteter.     8vo.  cloth,  10s.  6d. 

Vol.  V.  Pahlavi  Texts.  Part  I.  The  Bundahis,  Bahman 
Yast,  and  Shayast-la-Shayast.  Translated  by  E.  W.  West.  8vo.  cloth, 
1 2s.  6d. 

Vol.  VII.  The  Institutes  of  Vishwu.  Translated  by  Julius 
Jolly.     8vo.  cloth,  10s.  6d, 


The  following  Volumes  are  also  in  the  Press  : — 

Vol.  VI.  The   Qur'an.     Part   I.      Translated    by   Professor 
E.  H.  Palmer. 

Vol.  VIII.  The  Bhagavadgita  with  other  extracts  from  the 
Mahabharata.     Translated  by  Kashinath  Trimbak  Telang. 

Vol.  IX.  The  Qur'an.     Part  II.     Translated  by  Professor 
E.  H.  Palmer. 

Vol.  X.  The   Suttanipata,   etc.      Translated    by  Professor 

Fausboll. 

Vol.  XI.  The    Mahaparinibbana     Sutta,     The    Tevigga 

Sutta,    The   Mahasudassana    Sutta,    The    Dhamma-JSTakkappavattana 
Sutta.     Translate4  by  T.  W.  Rhys  Davids. 


20  Clarendon  Press,  Oxford. 


tflaratam  Itoa  StetiM. 


The  Delegates  of  the  Clarendon  Press  having  undertaken 
the  publication  of  a  series  of  works,  chiefly  educational,  and 
entitled  the  Clamttom  |3r.egg  §>m*8»  have  published,  or  have 
in  preparation,  the  following. 

Those  to  which,  prices  are  attached  are  already  published;  the  others  are  in 
preparation. 

I.    ENGLISH. 

A  First  Reading  Book.  By  Marie  Eichens  of  Berlin;  and 
edited  by  Anne  J.  Clough.     Extra  fcap.  8vo.  stiff  covers,  4c?. 

Oxford  Beading  Book,  Part  I.  For  Little  Children.  Extra 
fcap.  8vo.  stiff  covers,  6d. 

Oxford  Beading  Book,  Part  II.  For  Junior  Glasses.  Extra 
fcap.  8vo.  stiff" covers,  6d, 

An  Elementary  English   Grammar   and  Exercise  Book. 

By  O.  W.  Tancock,  M.A.,  Head  Master  of  Norwich  School.  Extra  fcap. 
8vo.  cloth,  is.  6d. 

An  English  Grammar  and  Beading  Book,  for  Lower  Forms 
in  Classical  Schools.  By  O.  W.  Tancock,  M.A.,  Head  Master  of 
Norwich  School.     Third  Edition.     Extra  fcap.  8vo.  cloth,  3s.  6d. 

Typical  Selections  from  the  best  English  Writers,  with  Intro- 
ductory Notices.  Second  Edition.  In  Two  Volumes.  Extra  fcap.  8vo. 
cloth,  3s.  6d.  each. 

Vol.  I.  Latimer  to  Berkeley.  Vol.  II.  Pope  to  Macaulay. 

The  Philology  of  the  English  Tongue.  By  J.  Earle,  M.A., 
formerly  Fellow  of  Oriel  College,  and  Professor  of  Anglo-Saxon,  Oxford. 
Third  Edition.     Extra  fcap.  8vo.  cloth,  7s.  6d. 

A  Book  for  the  Beginner  in  Anglo-Saxon.  By  John  Earle, 
M.A.,  Professor  of  Anglo-Saxon,  Oxford.  Second  Edition.  Extra  fcap, 
8vo.  cloth,  2s.  6d. 


Clarendon  Press,  Oxford.  21 


An  Anglo-Saxon    Reader.      In    Prose    and   Verse.      With 

Grammatical   Introduction,  Notes,  and   Glossary.     By  Henry  Sweet, 
M.A.     Second  Edition.     Extra  fcap.  8vo.  cloth,  8s.  6d. 

Specimens  of  Early  English.  A  New  and  Revised  Edition. 
With  Introduction,  Notes,  and  Glossarial  Index.  By  R.  Morris,  LL.D., 
and  W.  W.  Skeat,  M.A. 

Part  I.     In  the  Press. 

Part  II.  From  Robert  of  Gloucester  to  Gower  (a.d.  1298  to  a.d.  1393). 
Second  Edition.     Extra  fcap.  8vo.  cloth,  7s.  6d. 

Specimens  of  English  Literature,  from  the  '  Ploughmans 
Crede'  to  the  'Shepheardes  Calender'  (a.d.  1394  to  a.d.  1579).  With 
Introduction,  Notes,  and  Glossarial  Index.  By  W.  W.  Skeat,  M.A. 
Extra  fcap.  8vo.  cloth.  Js.  6d. 

The  Vision  of  William  concerning  Piers  the  Plowman, 

by  William  Langland.    Edited,  with  Notes,  by  W.  W.  Skeat,  M.A. 
Extra  fcap.  8vo.  clotht  4s.  6d. 

Chaucer.    The  Prioresses  Tale;    Sir  Thopas;   The   Monkes 

Tale;    The   Clerkes    Tale;     The   Squieres    Tale,    &c.       Edited    by 
W.  W.  Skeat,  M.A.     Second  Edition.    Extra  fcap.  8vo.  cloth,  4s.  6d. 

Chaucer.  The  Tale  of  the  Man  of  Lawe;  The  Pardoneres 
Tale ;  The  Second  Nonnes  Tale ;  The  Chanouns  Yemannes  Tale. 
By  the  same  Editor.     Extra  fcap.  8vo.  cloth,  4s.  6 d.     (See  also  p.  22.) 

Old  English  Drama.  Marlowe's  Tragical  History  of  Dr. 
Faustus,  and  Greene's  Honourable  History  of  Friar  Bacon  and  Friar 
Bungay.  Edited  by  A.  W.  Ward,  M.A.,  Professor  of  History  and 
English  Literature  in  Owens  College,  Manchester.  1878.  Extra  fcap. 
8vo.  cloth,  5s.  6d. 

Marlowe.  Edward  II.  With  Introduction,  Notes,  &c.  By 
O.  W.  Tancock,  M.A.,  Head  Master  of  Norwich  School.  Extra  fcap. 
8vo.  cloth,  3s. 

Shakespeare.  Hamlet.  Edited  by  W.  G.  Clark,  M.A.,  and 
W.  Aldis  Wright,  M.A.    Extra  fcap.  8vo.  stiff  covers,  2s. 

Shakespeare.    Select  Plays.    Edited  by  W.  Aldis  Wright,  M.A. 

Extra  fcap.  8vo.  stiff  covers. 

The  Tempest,  is.  6d.  King  Lear,  is.  6d. 

As  You  Like  It,  is.  6d.  A  Midsummer  Night's  Dream,  is.  6d. 

Julius  Csesar,  2s.  Coriolanus.    2s.  6c?. 

Richard  the  Third,  2s.  6d.     Just  Published. 
(For  other  Plays,  see  p.  23.) 


22  Clarendon  Press,  Oxford. 


Milton.  Areopagitica.  With  Introduction  and  Notes.  By 
J.  W.  Hales,  M.A.,  late  Fellow  of  Christ's  College,  Cambridge.  Second 
Edition.     Extra  fcap.  8vo.  cloth,  3s. 

Bunyan.  Holy  War,  Life  and  Death  of  Mr.  Badman,  &c. 
Edited  by  E.  Venables,  M.A.    In  Preparation.     (See  also  p.  23.) 

Addison.     Selections   from    Papers  in  the   Spectator.    With 

Notes.      By  T.  Arnold,  M.A.,  University  College.      Second  Edition. 
Extra  fcap.  8vo.  cloth,  4s.  6d. 

Burke.  Four  Letters  on  the  Proposals  for  Peace  with  the  Regi- 
cide Directory  of  France.  Edited,  with  Introduction  and  Notes,  by 
E.  J.  Payne,  M.A.     Extra  fcap.  8vo.  cloth,  5s.     (See  also  p.  23.) 

Also  the  following  in  paper  covers  : — 

Goldsmith.    The  Deserted  Village.     2d. 

Gray.     Elegy,  and  Ode  on  Eton  College.     2d. 

Johnson.  Vanity  of  Human  Wishes.  With  Notes  by  E.  J. 
Payne,  M.A.     4^. 

Keats.  Hyperion,  Book  I.  With  Notes  byW.T.  Arnold,  B.A.  $d. 

Milton.    With  Notes  by  R.  G.  Browne,  M.A. 

Lycidas,  3c?.         L' Allegro,  $d.         II  Penseroso,  4^.         Comus,  6d. 
Samson  Agonistes,  6d. 
Parnell.     The  Hermit.   2d. 


A  SERIES  OF  ENGLISH  CLASSICS, 

Designed  to  meet  the  wants  of  Students  in  English  Literature, 
by  the  late  Rev.  J.  S.  BREWER,  M.A.,  of  Queen's  College,  Oxford, 
and  Professor  of  English  Literature  at  King's  College,  London. 

1.  Chaucer.  The  Prologue  to  the  Canterbury  Tales;    The 

Knightes  Tale ;  The  Nonne  Prestes  Tale.  Edited  by  R.  Morris, 
Editor  of  Specimens  of  Early  English,  &c,  &c.  Sixth  Edition.  Extra 
fcap.  8vo.  cloth,  2s.  6d.     (See  also  p.  21.) 

2 .  Spenser's  Faery  Queene.  Books  I  and  1 1.   Designed  chiefly 

for  the  use  of  Schools.  With  Introduction,  Notes,  and  Glossary.  By 
G.  W.  Kitchin,  M.A. 

Book  I.    Eighth  Edition.     Extra  fcap.  8vo.  cloth,  2s.6d. 

Book  II.     Third  Edition.     Extra  fcap.  8vo.  cloth,  2s.  6d. 

3.  Hooker.    Ecclesiastical  Polity,  Book  I.    Edited  by  R.  W. 

Church,  M.A.,  Dean  of  St.  Paul's  ;  formerly  Fellow  of  Oriel  College, 
Oxford.    Second  Edition.     Extra  fcap.  8vo.  cloth,  2s. 


Clarendon  Press,  Oxford.  23 


4.  Shakespeare.    Select  Plays.    Edited  by  W.  G.  Clark,  M.A., 

Fellow  of  Trinity  College,  Cambridge ;    and  W.  Aldis  Wright,  M.A., 
Trinity  College,  Cambridge.     Extra  f cap.  8  vo.  stiff  covers. 
I.  The  Merchant  of  Venice,     is. 
II.  Richard  the  Second,     is.  6d. 
III.  Macbeth,     is.  6d.     (For  other  Plays,  see  p.  21.) 

5.  Bacon. 

I.  Advancement  of  Learning.     Edited  by  W.  Aldis  Wright,  M.A. 

Second  Edition.     Extra  fcap.  8vo,  cloth,  4s.  6d. 
II.  The  Essays.    With  Introduction  and  Notes.     By  J.  R.  Thursfield, 
M.A.,  Fellow  and  formerly  Tutor  of  Jesus  College,  Oxford. 

6.  Milton.    Poems.     Edited  by  R.  C.  Browne,  M.A.     2  vols. 

Fourth  Edition.     Extra  fcap.  8vo.  cloth,  6s.  6d. 

Sold  separately,  Vol.  I.  4s.;  Vol.  II.  3s.     (See  also  p.  22.) 

7.  Dryden.      Select  Poems.     Stanzas  on  the  Death  of  Oliver 

Cromwell ;  Astraea  Redux ;  Annus  Mirabilis  ;  Absalom  and  Achitophel ; 
Religio  Laid;  The  Hind  and  the  Panther.  Edited  by  W.  D.  Christie, 
M.A.     Second  Edition.     Ext.  fcap.  8vo.  cloth,  3s.  6d. 

8.  Bunyan.  The  Pilgrim's  Progress,  Grace  Abounding,  Relation 

of  the  Imprisonment  of  Mr.  John  Bunyan.  Edited,  with  Biographical 
Introduction  and  Notes,  by  E.  Venables,  M.A.  1879.  Extra  fcap. 
8vo.  cloth,  5s. 

9.  Pope.    With  Introduction  and  Notes.     By  Mark  Pattison, 

B.D.,  Rector  of  Lincoln  College,  Oxford. 

I.  Essay  on  Man.     Sixth  Edition.     Extra  fcap.  8vo.     is.  6d. 

II.  Satires  and  Epistles.     Third  Edition.     Extra  fcap.  8vo.     2s. 

10.  Johnson.  Rasselas  ;    Lives  of  Pope  and  Dryden.     Edited 

by  Alfred  Milnes;  B.A.  (London),  late  Scholar  of  Lincoln  College, 
Oxford.     Extra  fcap.  8vo.  cloth,  4s.  6d. 

1 1 .  Burke.  Select  Works.  Edited,  with  Introduction  and  Notes, 
by  E.  J.  Payne,  M.A.,  of  Lincoln's  Inn,  Barrister-at-Law,  and  Fellow  of 
University  College,  Oxford. 

I.  Thoughts   on   the  Present  Discontents ;    the  two  Speeches  on 

America.    Second  Edition.    Extra  fcap.  8vo.  cloth,  4s.  6d. 
II.  Reflections  on  the  French  Revolution.    Second  Edition.    Extra 
fcap.  8vo.  cloth,  5s.     (See  also  p.  22.) 

12.  Cowper.  Edited,  with  Life,  Introductions,  and  Notes,  by 
H.  T.  Griffith,  B.A.,  formerly  Scholar  of  Pembroke  College,  Oxford. 

I.  The  Didactic  Poems  of  1782,  with  Selections  from  the  Minor 

Pieces,  a.d.  i  779—1 783.    Extra  fcap.  8vo.  cloth,  3s. 
II.  The  Task,  with  Tirocinium,  and  Selections  from  the  Minor  Poems, 
a.d.  1 784-1 799.     Extra  fcap.  8vo.  cloth,  3s. 


24  Clarendon  Press,  Oxford. 


II.  LATIN. 

An  Elementary  Latin  Grammar.  By  John  B.  Allen,  M.A., 
Head  Master  of  Perse  Grammar  School,  Cambridge.  Third  Edition, 
Revised  and  Corrected.     Extra  fcap.  8vo.  cloth,  2s.  6d. 

A  First  Latin  Exercise  Book.  By  the  same  Author. 
Second  Edition.     Extra  fcap.  8vo.  cloth,  2s.  6d. 

Anglice  Reddenda,  or  Easy  Extracts,  Latin  and  Greek,  for 
Unseen  Translation.     By  C.  S.  Jerram,  M.A.     Extra  fcap.  8vo.  cloth,  2s. 

Passages  for  Translation  into  Latin.  For  the  use  of  Pass- 
men and  others.  Selected  by  J.  Y.  Sargent,  M.A.,  Fellow  and  Tutor  of 
Magdalen  College,  Oxford.  Fifth  Edition.  Ext.  fcap.  8vo.  cloth,  2s.  6d. 

First  Latin  Reader.  By  T.  J.  Nunns,  M.A.  Third  Edition. 
Extra  fcap.  8vo.  cloth,  2s. 

Second  Latin  Reader.    In  Preparation, 

Caesar.  The  Commentaries  (for  Schools).  With  Notes  and 
Maps.    By  Charles  E.  Moberly,  M.A. 

Parti.  The  Gallic  War.  Third  Edition.  Extra  fcap.  8  vo.  cloth,  4s.  6c?. 
Part  II.     The  Civil  War.     Extra  fcap.  8vo.  cloth,  3s.  6d. 
The  Civil  War.     Book  I.     Extra  fcap.  8vo.  cloth,  2  s. 

Cicero.  Selection  of  interesting  and  descriptive  passages.  With 
Notes.  By  Henry  Walford,  M.A.  In  three  Parts.  Second  Edition. 
Extra  fcap.  8vo.  cloth,  4s.  6d.     Each  Part  separately,  limp,  is.6d. 

Part  I.       Anecdotes  from  Grecian   and  Roman  History. 

Part  II.     Omens  and  Dreams :  Beauties  of  Nature. 

Part  III.    Rome's  Rule  of  her  Provinces. 

Cicero.  Selected  Letters  (for  Schools).  With  Notes.  By  the 
late  C.  E.  Prichard,  M.A.,  and  E.  R.  Bernard,  M.A.  Second  Edition. 
Extra  fcap.  8vo.  cloth,  3s. 

Cicero.  Select  Orations  (for  Schools).  With  Notes.  By  J.  R. 
King,  M.A.     Extra  fcap.  8vo.  cloth,  2s.  6d. 

Cornelius  Wepos.  With  Notes.  By  Oscar  Browning,  M.A. 
Second  Edition.     Extra  fcap.  8vo.  cloth,  2s.  6d. 

Livy.  Selections  (for  Schools).  With  Notes  and  Maps.  By 
H.  Lee-Warner,  M.A.     Extra  fcap.  8vo.     In  Parts,  limp,  each  is.  6d. 

Part  I.     The  Caudine  Disaster. 

Part  II.   Hannibal's  Campaign  in  Italy. 

Part  III.  The  Macedonian  War. 


Clarendon  Press,  Oxford.  25 


Ovid.  Selections  for  the  use  of  Schools.  With  Introductions 
and  Notes,  and  an  Appendix  on  the  Roman  Calendar.  By  "W.  Ramsay, 
M.A.  Edited  by  G.  G.  Ramsay,  M.A.,  Professor  of  Humanity,  Glas- 
gow.    Second  Edition.     Ext.  fcap.  8vo.  cloth,  5s.  6d. 

Pliny.  Selected  Letters  (for  Schools).  With  Notes.  By 
the  late  C.  E.  Prichard,  M.A.,  and  E.  R.  Bernard,  M.A.  Second  Edition. 
Extra  fcap.  8vo.  cloth,  3s. 

Virgil.  Edited  with  Notes,  etc.,  by  T.  L.  Papillon,  M.A.,  Fellow 
of  New  College,  Oxford.     In  Preparation. 


Catulli  Veronensis  Liber.  Iterum  recognovit,  apparatum 
criticum  prolegomena  appendices  addidit,  Robinson  Ellis,  A.M.  1878. 
Demy  8vo.  cloth,  16s. 

A  Commentary  on  Catullus.  By  Robinson  Ellis,  M.A.  1876. 
Demy  8vo.  cloth,  16s. 

Catulli  Veronensis  Carmina  Selecta,  secundum  recogni- 
tionem  Robinson  Ellis,  A.M.     Extra  fcap.  8vo.  cloth,  3s.  6d. 

Cicero  de  Oratore.  With  Introduction  and  Notes,  by  A.  S. 
Wilkins,  M.A.,  Professor  of  Latin,  Owens  College,  Manchester.  Book  I. 
1879.  8vo.  cloth,  6s.     Book  II.    In  the  Press. 

Cicero's  Philippic  Orations.  With  Notes.  By  J.  R.  King,  M.A. 
Second  Edition.    1879.    8vo.  cloth,  10s.  6d. 

Cicero.  Select  Letters.  With  English  Introductions,  Notes, 
and  Appendices.  By  Albert  Watson,  M.A.  Second  Edition.  1874. 
Demy  8vo.  cloth,  1 8s. 

Cicero.    Select  Letters.    Text.    By  the  same  Editor.     Extra 

fcap.  8vo.  cloth,  4s. 

Cicero  pro  Cluentio.  With  Introduction  and  Notes.  By  W. 
Ramsay,  M.A.  Edited  by  G.  G.  Ramsay,  M.A.  Extra  fcap.  8vo.  cloth, 
3s.  6d. 

Horace.  With  a  Commentary.    Volume  I.     The  Odes,  Carmen 
Seculare,  and  Epodes.     By  Edward  C.  Wickham,  M.A.,  Head  Master 
of  Wellington  College.     Second  Edition.     1877.     8vo.  cloth,  12s. 
Also  a  small  edition  for  Schools. 

Livy,  Books  I-X.  By  J.  R.  Seeley,  M.A.,  Regius  Professor  of 
Modern  History,  Cambridge.  Book  I.  Second  Edition.  1874.  8vo. 
cloth,  6s. 

Also  a  small  edition  for  Schools. 

Persius.  The  Satires.  With  a  Translation  and  Commentary. 
By  John  Conington,  M.A.  Edited  by  Henry  Nettleship,  M.A.  Second 
Edition.     1874.    Svo.  cloth,  'js.  6d. 


26  Clarendon  Press,  Oxford. 


Selections  from  the  less  known  Latin  Poets.  By  North 
Pinder,  M.A.     1869.    Demy  8vo.  cloth,  15s. 

Fragments  and  Specimens  of  Early  Latin.  With  Introduc- 
tions and  Notes.  1874.    By  John  Wordsworth,  M.A.     8vo.  cloth,  18s. 

Tacitus.  The  Annals.  Books  I-VI.  With  Essays  and  Notes. 
By  T.  F.  Dallin,  M.A.,  Tutor  of  Queen's  College,  Oxford.    Preparing. 

Vergil :  Suggestions  Introductory  to  a  Study  of  the  Aeneid. 
By  H.  Nettleship,  M.A.    8vo.  sewed,  is.  6d. 

Ancient  Lives  of  Vergil ;  with  an  Essay  on  the  Poems  of  Vergil, 
in  connection  with  his  Life  and  Times.  By  H.  Nettleship,  M.A.  8vo. 
sewed,  2s. 

The  Roman  Satura :  its  original  form  in  connection  with  its 
literary  development.     By  H.  Nettleship,  M.A.  8vo.  sewed,  is. 

A  Manual  of  Comparative  Philology.  By  T.  L.  Papillon, 
M.A.,  Fellow  and  Lecturer  of  New  College.  Second  Edition.  Crown 
8vo.  cloth,  6s. 

The  Roman  Poets  of  the  Augustan  Age.  By  William 
Young  Sellar,  M.A.,  Professor  of  Humanity  in  the  University  of 
Edinburgh.     Virgil.     1877.    8vo.  cloth,  14s. 

The  Roman  Poets  of  the  Republic.  By  the  same  Author. 
In  the  Press. 


III.   GREEK. 

A  Greek  Primer,  for  the  use  of  beginners  in  that  Language. 
By  the  Right  Rev.  Charles  Wordsworth,  D.C.L.,  Bishop  of  St.  Andrews. 
Sixth  Edition,  Revised  and  Enlarged.     Extra  fcap.  8vo.  cloth,  is.  6d. 

Graecae  Grammaticae  Rudimenta  in  usum  Scholarum.  Auctore 
Carolo  Wordsworth,  D.C.L.   Nineteenth  Edition,  187 7.  1 2mo.  bound, 4s. 

A  Greek-English  Lexicon,  abridged  from  Liddell  and  Scott's 
4T0.  edition,  chiefly  for  the  use  of  Schools.  Eighteenth  Edition.  Care- 
fully Revised  throughout.     1879.    Square  12  mo.  cloth,  7s.  6d. 

Greek  Verbs,  Irregular  and  Defective;  their  forms,  mean- 
ing, and  quantity ;  embracing  all  the  Tenses  used  by  Greek  writers, 
with  references  to  the  passages  in  which  they  are  found.  By  W.  Veitch. 
Fourth  Edition.     Crown  8vo.  cloth,  10s.  6d. 

The  Elements  of  Greek  Accentuation  (for  Schools):  abridged 
from  his  larger  work  by  H.  W.  Chandler,  M.A.,  Waynflete  Professor  of 
Moral  and  Metaphysical  Philosophy,  Oxford.  Ext.  fcap.  8 vo.  cloth,  2s.  6d. 


Clarendon  Press,  Oxford.  27 


A  Series  of  Graduated  Greek  Readers  j — 

First  Greek  Reader.  By  W.  G.  Rushbrooke,  MX.,  for- 
merly Fellow  of  St,  John's  College,  Cambridge,  Second  Classical 
Master  at  the  City  of  London  School.    Extra  fcap.  8vo.  cloth,  2s.  6d. 

Second  Greek  Reader.  By  A.  M.  Bell,  M.A.  Extra  fcap. 
8vo.  cloth,  3s.  6d. 

Third  Greek  Reader.     In  Preparation. 

Fourth  Greek  Reader  ;  being  Specimens  of  Greek. 
Dialects.  With  Introductions  and  Notes.  ByW.W.  Merry,  M.A., 
Fellow  and  Lecturer  of  Lincoln  College.  Extra  fcap.  8vo.  cloth,  4s.  6  d. 

Fifth  Greek  Reader.  Part  I.  Selections  from  Greek  Epic 
and  Dramatic  Poetry,  with  Introductions  and  Notes.  By  Evelyn 
Abbott,  M.A.,  Fellow  of  Balliol College.  Ext.fcap.  8vo. cloth,  4s. 6d. 

Part  II.     By  the  same  Editor.  In  Preparation. 

The  Golden  Treasury  of  Ancient  Greek  Poetry ;  being  a  Col- 
lection of  the  finest  passages  in  the  Greek  Classic  Poets,  with  Introduc- 
tory Notices  and  Notes.  By  R.  S.  Wright,  M.A.,  Fellow  of  Oriel 
College,  Oxford.     Ext.  fcap.  8vo.  cloth,  Ss.  6d. 

A  Golden  Treasury  of  Greek  Prose,  being  a  collection  of  the 
finest  passages  in  the  principal  Greek  Prose  Writers,  with  Introductory 
Notices  and  Notes.  By  R.  S.  Wright,  M.A.,  and  J.  E.  L.  Shadwell,  M.A. 
Ext.  fcap.  8vo.  cloth,  4s.  6d. 

Aeschylus.  Prometheus  Bound  (for  Schools).  With  Intro- 
duction and  Notes,  by  A.  O.  Prickard,  M.A.,  Fellow  of  New  College. 
Extra  fcap.  8vo.  cloth,  2s. 

Aeschylus.     Agamemnon  (for  Schools),  with  Introduction  and 

Notes  by  Arthur  Sidgwick,  M.A.,  Lecturer  at  Corpus  Christi  College, 
Oxford ;  late  Assistant  Master  at  Rugby  School,  and  Fellow  of  Trinity 
College,  Cambridge. 

Aristophanes.      In  Single   Plays,  edited,  with  English  Notes, 
Introductions,  etc.,  by  W.  W.  Merry,  M.A.     Extra  fcap.  8vo. 
The  Clouds,  2s.  The  Acharnians,  2s.     Just  Published. 

Other  Plays  will  follow. 

Arrian.  Selections  (for  Schools).  With  Notes.  By  J.  S.  Phill- 
potts,  B.C.L.,  Head  Master  of  Bedford  School. 

Cebes.  Tabula.  With  Introduction  and  Notes  by  C.  S. 
Jerram,  M.A.    Extra  fcap.  8vo.  cloth,  2s.  6d. 

Euripides.  Alcestis  (for  Schools).  By  C.  S.  Jerram,  M.A. 
Extra  fcap.  8vo.  cloth,  2s.  6d. 

Euripides.  Helena  (for  Schools).  By  the  same  Editor.  In 
the  Press. 


28  Clarendon  Press,  Oxford. 


Herodotus.  Selections  from.  Edited,  with  Introduction,  Notes, 
and  a  Map,  by  W.  W.  Merry,  M.A.,  Fellow  and  Lecturer  of  Lincoln 
College.     Extra  fcap.  8vo.  cloth,  2s.  6d. 

Homer.     Odyssey,  Books  I— XII  (for  Schools).     By  W.  W. 
Merry,  M.A.    Nineteenth  Thousand.     Extra  fcap.  8vo.  cloth,  4s.  6d. 
Book  II,  separately,  is.  6d. 

Homer.    Odyssey,  Books  XIII-XXIV  (for  Schools).     By  the 

same  Editor.     Extra  fcap.  8vo.  cloth,  5s. 

Homer.    Iliad,  Book  I  (for  Schools).     By  D.  B.  Monro,  M.A. 

Extra  fcap.  8vo.  cloth,  2s. 

Homer.     Iliad,  Book  XXI.     Edited  with  Notes,  etc.,  for  the 

use  of  Schools,  by  Herbert  Hailstone,  M.A.,  late  Scholar  of  St.  Peter's 
College,  Cambridge.     Just  ready. 

Lueian.  Vera  Historia  (for  Schools).  By  C.  S.  Jerram,  M.A. 
Extra  fcap.  8vo.  cloth,  is.  6d. 

Plato.  Selections  (for  Schools).  With  Notes.  By  B.  Jowett, 
M.A.,  Regius  Professor  of  Greek  ;  and  J.  Purves,  M.A.,  Fellow  and 
late  Lecturer  of  Balliol  College,  Oxford.     In  the  Press. 

Sophocles.     In  Single  Plays,  with  English  Notes,  &c.    By  Lewis 
Campbell,  M.A.,  and  Evelyn  Abbott,  M.A.     Extra  fcap.  8vo.  limp. 
Oedipus  Rex,         Oedipus  Coloneus,         Antigone,  is.  yd.  each. 
Ajax,  Electra,  Trachiniae,         Philoctetes,  2s.  each. 

Sophocles.  Oedipus  Rex  :  Dindorfs  Text,  with  Notes  by  the 
present  Bishop  of  St.  David's.     Ext.  fcap.  8vo.  limp,  is.  6d. 

Theocritus  (for  Schools).   With  Notes.   By  H.  Kynaston,  M.A. 

(late  Snow),  Head  Master  of  Cheltenham  College.    Second  Edition. 
Extra  fcap.  8vo.  cloth,  4s.  6d. 

Xenophon.  Easy  Selections  (for  Junior  Glasses).  With  a 
Vocabulary,  Notes,  and  Map.  By  J.  S.  Phillpotts,  B.C.L.,  and  C.  S. 
Jerram,  M.A.     Extra  fcap.  8vo.   cloth,  3s.  6d. 

Xenophon.  Selections  (for  Schools).  With  Notes  and  Maps. 
By  J.  S.  Phillpotts,  B.C.L.,  Head  Master  of  Bedford  School.  Fourth 
Edition.     Ext.  fcap.  8vo.  cloth,  3s.  6d. 

Xenophon.  Anabasis,  Book  II.  With  Notes  and  Map.  ByC.  S. 
Jerram,  M.A.     Extra  fcap.  8vo.  cloth,  2s. 


Aristotle's  Politics.     By  W.  L.  Newman,  M.A.,  Fellow  of 

Balliol  College,  Oxford. 

Aristotelian  Studies.  I.  On  the  Structure  of  the  Seventh 
Book  of  the  Nicomachean  Ethics.  By  J.  C.  Wilson,  M.A.,  Fellow  of 
Oriel  College,  Oxford.     1879.     Medium  8vo.  stiff,  5s. 


Clarendon  Press,  Oxford.  29 


Demosthenes  and  Aeschines.    The  Orations  of  Demosthenes 

and  iEschines  on  the  Crown.     With  Introductory  Essays  and  Notes. 

ByG.  A.  Simcox,  M.A.,and  W.H.Simcox,M.A.    1872.  8vo.  cloth,  1  25. 
Homer.  Odyssey,  Books  I-XII.     Edited  with  English  Notes, 

Appendices,  etc.    By  W.  W.  Merry,  M.A.}  and  the  late  James  Riddell, 

M.A.     1876.     Demy  8vo.  cloth,  16s. 
Homer.   Odyssey,   Books  XIII-XXIV.      With   Introduction 

and  Notes.     By  S.  H.  Butcher,  M.A.,  Fellow  of  University  College. 

Homer.  Iliad.  With  Introduction  and  Notes.  By  D.  B. 
Monro,  M.A.,  Vice-Provost  of  Oriel  College,  Oxford.     Preparing. 

A  Homeric  Grammar.     By  D.  B.  Monro,  M.A.     In  the  Press. 

Sophocles.  The  Plays  and  Fragments.  With  English  Notes 
and  Introductions,  by  Lewis  Campbell,  M.A.,  Professor  of  Greek,  St. 
Andrews,  formerly  Fellow  of  Queen's  College,  Oxford.     2  vols. 

Vol.  I.   Oedipus  Tyrannus.    Oedipus  Coloneus.     Antigone.    Second 
Edition.  1879.  8vo.  cloth,  16s.    Vol.11.    In  the  Press. 

Sophocles.  The  Text  of  the  Seven  Plays.  By  the  same  Editor. 
Ext.  fcap.  8vo.  cloth,  4s.  6d. 

A  Handbook  of  Greek  Inscriptions,  illustrative  of  Greek 
History.  By  E.  L.  Hicks,  M.A.,  formerly  Fellow  of  Corpus  Christi 
College,  Oxford.     In  Preparation. 

IV.  FEENCH. 
An  Etymological  Dictionary  of  the  French  Language,  with 
a  Preface  on  the  Principles  of  French  Etymology.      By  A.   Brachet. 
Translated  into  English    by  G.  W.  Kitchin,   M.A.    Second  Edition. 
Crown  8vo.  cloth,  p.  6d. 

Brachet's  Historical  Grammar  of  the  French  Language. 
Translated  into  English  by  G.  W.  Kitchin,  M.A.  Fourth  Edition. 
Extra  fcap.  8vo.  cloth,  3s.  6d. 

Historical    Outlines    of  French    Literature.     By    George 

Saintsbury,  M.  A.     In  Preparation. 

A  Primer  of  French  Literature.  By  the  same  Author.  Extra 
fcap.  8vo.  cloth,  2s.     Just  Published. 

French  Classics,  Edited  by  GUSTAVE  MaSSON,  B.A. 
Corneille's  Ginna,  and  Moliere's  Les  Femmes  Savantes.  With 
Introduction  and  Notes.     Extra  fcap.  8vo.  cloth,  2s.  6d. 

Racine's  Andromaque,  and  Corneille's  Le  Menteur.  With 
Louis  Racine's  Life  of  his  Father.     Extra  fcap.  8vo.  cloth,  2s.  6d. 

Moliere's  Les  Fourberies  de  Scapin,  and  Racine's  Athalie. 

With  Voltaire's  Life  of  Moliere.    Extra  fcap.  8vo.  cloth,  2s.  6d. 
Selections  from  the  Correspondence  of  Madame  de  Sevign6 

and  her   chief  Contemporaries.      Intended  more  especially  for  Girls' 
Schools.    Extra  fcap.  8vo.  cloth,  3s. 


30  Clarendon  Press,  Oxford. 


Voyage  autour  de  ma  Chambre,  by  Xavier  de  Maistre ;  Ourika, 
by  Madame  de  Duras  ;  La  Dot  de  Suzette,  by  Fievee  ;  Les  Jumeaux 
de  l'Hotel  Comeille,  by  Edmond  About ;  Mesaventures  d'un  Ecolier, 
by  Bodolphe  Topffer.    Extra  fcap.  8vo.  cloth,  2s.  6d. 

Regnard's    Le    Joueur,    and   Brueys    and    Falaprat's    Le 

Grondeur.    Extra  fcap.  8vo.  cloth,  2s.  6d. 

Louis  XIV and  his  Contemporaries;  as  described  in  Extracts 

from   the  best  Memoirs  of  the  Seventeenth  Century.     With   English 
Notes,  Genealogical  Tables,  &c.     Extra  fcap.  8vo.  cloth,  2s.  6d. 

V.  GERMAN. 

Lange'S  German  Course,    By  HERMANN  LANGE,  Teacher  of 
Modern  Languages,  Manchester : 

The  Germans  at  Home;  a  Practical  Introduction  to  German 
Conversation,  with  an  Appendix  containing  the  Essentials  of  German 
Grammar.     Second  Edition.     8vo.  cloth,  2s.  6d. 

The  German  Manual;  a  German  Grammar,  a  Reading  Book, 
and  a  Handbook  of  German  Conversation.     8vo.  cloth,  Js.  6d. 

A  Grammar  of  the  German  Language.     8vo.  cloth,  3J.  6d. 

This  Grammar'  is  a  reprint  of  the  Grammar  contained  in  '  The  German 
Manual,'  and, in  this  separate  form,  is  intended  for  the  use  of  students 
who  wish  to  make  themselves  acquainted  with  German  Grammar 
chiefly  for  the  purpose  of  being  able  to  read  German  books. 

German  Composition;  Extracts  from  English  and  American 
writers  for  Translation  into  German,  with  Hints  for  Translation  in  foot- 
notes.    In  the  Press. 


Lessing's  Laokoon.  With  Introduction,  English  Notes,  etc. 
By  A.  Hamann,  Phil.  Doc,  M.A.,  Taylorian  Teacher  of  German  in  the 
University  of  Oxford.   Extra  fcap.  8vo.  cloth,  4s.  6d. 

Wilhelm  Tell.  A  Drama.  By  Schiller.  Translated  into 
English  Verse  by  E.  Massie,  M.A.     Extra  fcap.  8vo.  cloth,  5s. 

Also,  Edited  by  G.  A.  BUCHHEIM,  Phil.  Doc,  Professor  in 
King's  College,  London : 

Goethe's  Egmont.  With  a  Life  of  Goethe,  &c.  Second  Edition. 
Extra  fcap.  8vo.  cloth,  3s. 

Schiller's  Wilhelm  Tell.  With  a  Life  of  Schiller  ;  an  historical 
and  critical  Introduction,  Arguments,  and  a  complete  Commentary. 
Third  Edition.     Extra  fcap.  8vo.  cloth,  3s.  6d. 

Lessing's  Minna  von  Barnhelm.  A  Comedy.  With  a  Life  of 
Lessing,  Critical  Analysis,  Complete  Commentary,  &c.  Third  Edition. 
Extra  fcap.  8vo.  clotbt  3s.  6d. 


Clarendon  Press,  Oxford.  31 


Schiller's  Historische  Skizzen ;  Egmonts  Leben  und  Tod,  and 

Belagerung  von  Antwerpen.     Extra  fcap.  8vo.  cloth,  2S.  6d. 

Goethe's  Iphigenie  auf  Tauris.  A  Drama.  With  a  Critical 
Introduction  and  Notes.     Extra  fcap.  8vo.  cloth,  js. 

In  Preparation. 
Schiller's  Maria  Stuart.     With  Notes,  Introduction,  &c. 
Schiller's  Jungfrau  von  Orleans.    With  Notes,  Introduction,  &c. 
Selections  from  the  Poems  of  Schiller  and  Goethe. 
Becker's  (K.  F.)  Friedrich  der  Grosse. 
A  German  Header,  in  Three  Parts.     Part  I.     In  the  Press, 

VI.  MATHEMATICS,  &c. 

Figures  Made  Easy:  a  first  Arithmetic  Book.  (Introductory 
to  *The  Scholar's  Arithmetic.')  By  Lewis  Hensley,  M.A.,  formerly 
Fellow  and  Assistant  Tutor  of  Trinity  College,  Cambridge.  Crown  8vo. 
cloth,  6d. 

Answers  to  the  Examples  in  Figures  made  Easy,  together 

with  two  thousand  additional  Examples  formed  from  the  Tables  in  the 
same,  with  Answers.     By  the  same  Author.     Crown  8vo,  cloth,  is. 
The  Scholar's  Arithmetic;   with  Answers  to  the  Examples. 
By  the  same  Author.     Crown  8vo.  cloth,  4s.  6d. 

The  Scholar's  Algebra.  An  Introductory  work  on  Algebra. 
By  the  same  Author.     Crown  8vo.  cloth,  4s.  6d. 

Book-keeping.  By  R.  G.  G.  Hamilton,  Financial  Assistant 
Secretary  to  the  Board  of  Trade,  and  John  Ball  (of  the  Firm  of 
Quilter,  Ball,  &  Co.),  Co-Examiners  in  Book-keeping  for  the  Society 
of  Arts.     New  and  enlarged  Edition.     Extra  fcap.  8vo.  limp  cloth,  2s. 

A  Course  of  Lectures  on  Pure  Geometry.  By  Henry  J. 
Stephen  Smith,  M.A.,  F.R.S.,  Fellow  of  Corpus  Christi  College,  and 
Savilian  Professor  of  Geometry  in  the  University  of  Oxford. 

Acoustics.  By  W.  F.  Donkin,  M.A.,  F.R.S.,  Savilian  Professor 
of  Astronomy,  Oxford.     1870.     Crown  8 vo.  cloth,  7s.  6d. 

A  Treatise  on  Electricity  and  Magnetism.  By  J.  Clerk 
Maxwell,  M.A.,  F.R.S.,  Professor  of  Experimental  Physics  in  the  Uni- 
versity of  Cambridge.  A  New  Edition  in  the  Press,  edited  by  W.  D. 
Niven,  M.A.,  Fellow  of  Trinity  College,  Cambridge. 

An  Elementary  Treatise  on  the  same  subject.    Edited,  from 

the  materials  left  by  Professor  Clerk  Maxwell,  by  W.  Gamett,  M.A., 
Fellow  of  St.  John's  College,  Cambridge.     Preparing. 

A  Treatise  on  Statics.     By  G.  M.  Minchin,  M.A.,  Professor  of 

Applied  Mathematics  in  the  Indian  Engineering  College,  Cooper's  Hill. 
Second  Edition,  Revised  and  Enlarged.     1 8 79.     8vo.  cloth,  14s. 


32  Clarendon  Press  y  Oxford. 


A  Treatise  on  the  Kinetic  Theory  of  Gases.  By  Henry 
William  Watson,  M.A.,  formerly  Fellow  of  Trinity  College,  Cambridge. 
1876    8vo.  cloth,  zs.6d. 

A  Treatise  on  the  Application  of  Generalised  Coordinates 

to  the  Kinetics  of  a  Material  System.  By  H.  W.  Watson,  M.A.,  and 
S.  H.  Burbury,  M.A.,  formerly  Fellow  of  St.  John's  College,  Cambridge. 
1879.     Svo.  cloth,  6s. 

Geodesy.  By  Colonel  Alexander  Ross  Clarke,  C.B.,  R.E.  1880. 
8vo.  cloth,  12s.  6d. 


VII.  PHYSICAL  SCIENCE. 

A    Handbook    of    Descriptive    Astronomy.       By    G.    F. 

Chambers,  F.R.A.S.     Third  Edition.     1877.     Demy  8vo.  cloth,  28s. 

A  Cycle  of  Celestial  Objects.  An  enlarged  and  revised  edition 
of  vol.  II.  of  Admiral  Smyth's  work.  By  G.  F.  Chambers,  F.R.A.S. 
In  the  Press. 

Chemistry  for  Students.  By  A.  W.  Williamson,  Phil.  Doc, 
F.R.S.,  Professor  of  Chemistry,  University  College,  London.  A  new 
Edition,  with  Solutions,     1 8 73.     Extra  fcap.  8vo.  cloth,  8s.  6d. 

A  Treatise  on  Heat,  with  numerous  Woodcuts  and  Diagrams. 
By  Balfour  Stewart,  LL.D.,  F.R.S.,  Professor  of  Natural  Philosophy  in 
Owens  College,  Manchester.  Third  Edition.  1876.  Extra  fcap.  8vo. 
cloth,  7s.  6d. 

Lessons  on  Thermodynamics.  By  R.  E.  Baynes,  M.A.,  Senior 
Student  of  Christ  Church,  Oxford,  and  Lee's  Reader  in  Physics.  1878. 
Crown  8vo.  cloth,  Js.  6d. 

Forms  of  Animal  Life.      By  G.   Rolleston,  M.D.,  F.R.S., 

Linacre  Professor  of  Physiology,  Oxford.  Illustrated  by  Descriptions 
and  Drawings  of  Dissections.     Demy  8vo.  cloth,  16s. 

Exercises  in  Practical  Chemistry  (Laboratory  Practice). 

By  A.  G.  Vernon  Harcourt,  M.A.,  F.R.S.,  Senior  Student  of  Christ 
Church,  and  Lee's  Reader  in  Chemistry;  and  H.  G.  Madan,  M.A.,  Fellow 
of  Queen's  College,  Oxford.  Second  Edition.  Crown  8vo.  cloth,  7s.  6d. 

Crystallography.  By  M.  H.  N.  Story-Maskelyne,  M.A.,  Pro- 
fessor of  Mineralogy,  Oxford  ;  and  Deputy  Keeper  in  the  Department  of 
Minerals,  British  Museum.     In  the  Press. 

VIII.  HISTORY. 

The  Constitutional  History  of  England,  in  its  Origin  and 
Development.    By  William  Stubbs,  D.D.,  Regius  Professor  of  Modern 
History.     Library  Edition,    Three  vols,  demy  8vo.  cloth,  il.  85. 
Also  in  3  vols,  crown  8vo.  price  12s.  each. 


Clarendon  Press,  Oxford.  33 


Select  Charters  and  other  Illustrations  of  English  Con- 
stitutional History,  from  the  Earliest  Times  to  the  Reign  of  Edward  I. 
Arranged  and  Edited  by  W.  Stubbs,  M.A.  Third  Edition,  1876. 
Crown  8vo.  cloth,  8s.  6d. 

A  History  of  England,  principally  in  the  Seventeenth  Century. 
By  Leopold  Von  Ranke.  Translated  by  Resident  Members  of  the 
University  of  Oxford,  under  the  superintendence  of  G.  W.  Kitchin, 
M.A.,  and  C.  W.  Boase,  M.A.     1875.  6  vols.  8vo.  cloth,  3/.  3s. 

A  Short  History  of  the  Norman  Conquest  of  England.    By 

E.  A.  Freeman,  M.A.    Extra  fcap.  8vo.  cloth,  2s.  6d.     Just  Published. 

Genealogical  Tables  illustrative  of  Modern  History.     By 

H.  B.  George,  M.A.     Second  Edition.     Small  4to.  cloth,  12s. 

A  History  of  France.  With  numerous  Maps,  Plans,  and 
Tables.  By  G.  W.  Kitchin,  M.A.  In  Three  Volumes.  1873-77. 
Crown  8vo.  cloth,  each  10s.  6d. 

Vol.  1.     Down  to  the  Year  1453.        Vol.  2.     From  1453-1624. 
Vol.  3.     From  1624-1793. 

A  History  of  Germany  and  of  the  Empire/down  to  the  close 
of  the  Middle  Ages.  By  J.  Bryce,  D.C.L.,  Regius  Professor  of  Civil 
Law  in  the  University  of  Oxford. 

A  History  of  British  India.  By  S.  J.  Owen,  M.A.,  Reader  in 
Indian  History  in  the  University  of  Oxford. 

A  Selection  from  the  Despatches,  Treaties,  and  other  Papers 
of  the  Marquess  Wellesley,  K.G.,  during  his  Government  of  India. 
Edited  by  S.  J.  Owen,  M.A.,  formerly  Professor  of  History  in  the  Elphin- 
stone  College,  Bombay.     1877.  8vo.  cloth,  il.  4s. 

A  Selection  from  the  Wellington  Despatches.    By  the  same 

Editor.     Just  ready. 

A  History  of  the  United  States  of  America.  By  E.  J.  Payne, 
M.A.,  Barrister-at-Law,  and  Fellow  of  University  College,  Oxford.  In 
the  Press. 

A  History  of  Greece  from  its  Conquest  by  the  Romans  to 
the  present  time,  B.C.  146  to  a.d.  1864.  By  George  Finlay,  LL.D. 
A  new  Edition,  revised  throughout,  and  in  part  re-written,  with  con- 
siderable additions,  by  the  Author,  and  Edited  by  H.  F.  Tozer,  M.A., 
Tutor  and  late  Fellow  of  Exeter  College,  Oxford.  1877.  7  vols. 
8vo.  cloth,  3/.  10s. 

A  Manual  of  Ancient  History.  By  George  Rawlinson,  M.A., 
Camden  Professor  of  Ancient  History,  formerly  Fellow  of  Exeter 
College,  Oxford.     Demy  8vo.  cloth,  14s. 

A  History  of  Greece.  By  E.  A.  Freeman,  M.A.,  formerly 
Fellow  of  Trinity  College,  Oxford. 


34  Clarendon  Press,  Oxford, 


Italy  and  her  Invaders,     ad.    376-476.     By  T.   Hodgkin, 

Fellow  of  University  College,  London.  Illustrated  with  Plates  and 
Maps.     2  vols.  8vo.  cloth,  \l.  12s. 

IX.  LAW. 

The  Elements  of  Jurisprudence.  By  Thomas  Erskine 
Holland,  D.C.L.,  Chichele  Professor  of  International  Law  and  Diplo- 
macy, and  Fellow  of  All  Souls  College,  Oxford.  1880.  Demy  8vo. 
cloth,  I  os.  6d. 

The  Institutes  of  Justinian,  edited  as  a  recension  of  the  Insti- 
tutes of  Gaius.  By  the  same  Editor.  1873.  Extra  fcap.  8vo.  cloth,  55. 

Gaii  Institutionum  Juris  Civilis  Commentarii  Quatuor ; 

or,  Elements  of  Roman  Law  by  Gaius.  With  a  Translation  and  Com- 
mentary by  Edward  Poste,  M.A.,  Barrister-at-Law,  and  Fellow  of  Oriel 
College,  Oxford.     Second  Edition.    1875.    8vo.  cloth,  iSs. 

Select  Titles  from  the  Digest  of  Justinian.  By  T.  E. 
Holland,  D.C.L.,  Chichele  Professor  of  International  Law  and  Diplo- 
macy, and  Fellow  of  All  Souls'  College,  Oxford,  and  C.  L.  Shadwell, 
B.C.L.,  Fellow  of  Oriel  College,  Oxford.     In  Parts. 

Part  I.      Introductory  Titles.     8vo.  sewed,  2s.  6d. 

Part  II.     Family  Law.     8vo.  sewed,  is. 

Part  III.  Property  Law.     %vo.  sewed,  2s.  6d. 

Part  IV.  (No.  1.)  Law  of  Obligations.    8vo.  sewed,  ?>s.  6d. 

An  Introduction  to  the  Principles  of  Morals  and  Legisla- 
tion.  By  Jeremy  Bentham.   Crown  8vo.  cloth,  6s.  6d. 

Elements  of  Law  considered  with  reference  to  Principles  of 
General  Jurisprudence.  By  William  Markby,  M.A.,  Judge  of  the  High 
Court  of  Judicature,  Calcutta.  Second  Edition,  with  Supplement. 
1874.  Crown  Svo.  cloth,  7s.  6d.     Supplement  separately,  2s. 

Alberici  Gentilis,  LCD.,  I.  G.  Professoris  Regii,  De  lure  Belli 
Libri  Tres.  Edidit  Thomas  Erskine  Holland  LCD.,  Iuris  Gentium 
Professor  Chicheleianus,  Coll.  Omn.  Anim.  Socius,  necnon  in  Univ. 
Perusin.  Iuris  Professor  Honorarius.   1877.  Small  4to.  half  morocco,  21s. 

International    Law.       By    William     Edward     Hall,     M.A., 

Barrister-at-Law.     Demy  8vo.  cloth,  21s. 

An   Introduction  to   the   History  of  the  Law  of  Real 

Property,  with  original  Authorities.  By  Kenelm  E.  Digby,  M.A.,  of 
Lincoln's  Inn,  Barrister-at-Law.  Second  Edition.  1876.  Crown  8vo. 
cloth,  75*  6d- 

Principles  of  the  English  Law  of  Contract.  By  Sir  William 
R.  Anson,  Bart.,  B.C.L.,  Vinerian  Reader  of  English  Law,  and  Fellow 
of  All  Souls  College,  Oxford.     1879.    Crown  8vo.  cloth,  gs. 


Clarendon  Press,  Oxford.  35 


X.    MENTAL   AND    MORAL    PHILOSOPHY. 

Bacon.  Novum  Organum.  Edited,  with  Introduction,  Notes, 
&c,  by  T.  Fowler,  M.A.,  Professor  of  Logic  in  the  University  of 
Oxford.     1878.  8vo.  cloth,  14s. 

Locke  on  the  Conduct  of  the  Understanding.  Edited  by 
T.  Fowler,  M.A.,  Professor  of  Logic  in  the  University  of  Oxford.  In 
Preparation. 

Selections  from  Berkeley,  with  an  Introduction  and  Notes. 
For  the  use  of  Students  in  the  Universities.  By  Alexander  Campbell 
Fraser,  LL.D.  Second  Edition.  Crown  8vo.  cloth,  Js.  6d.  {See  also 
p.  18.) 

The  Elements  of  Deductive  Logic,  designed  mainly  for  the 
use  of  Junior  Students  in  the  Universities.  By  T.  Fowler,  M.A., 
Professor  of  Logic  in  the  University  of  Oxford.  Seventh  Edition,  with 
a  Collection  of  Examples.     Extra  fcap.  8vo.  cloth,  3s.  6d. 

The  Elements  of  Inductive  Logic,  designed  mainly  for  the 
use  of  Students  in  the  Universities.  By  the  same  Author.  Third 
Edition.     Extra  fcap.  8vo.  cloth,  6s. 

A  Manual  of  Political  Economy,  for  the  use  of  Schools.  By 
J.  E.  Thorold  Rogers,  M.A.,  formerly  Professor  of  Political  Economy, 
Oxford.     Third  Edition.    Extra  fcap.  8vo.  cloth,  4s.  6d. 


XI.  ART,  &e. 

A  Handbook  of  Pictorial  Art.  By  R.  St.  J.  Tyrwhitt,  M.A., 
formerly  Student  and  Tutor  of  Christ  Church,  Oxford.  With  coloured 
Illustrations,  Photographs,  and  a  chapter  on  Perspective  by  A.  Mac- 
donald.     Second  Edition.     1 8  75.  8vo.  half  morocco,  18s. 

A  Music  Primer  for  Schools.  By  J.  Troutbeck,  M.A.,  Music 
Master  in  "Westminster  School,  and  R.  F.  Dale,  M.A.,  B.  Mus.,  Assistant 
Master  in  Westminster  School.     Crown  8vo.  cloth,  is.  6d. 

A  Treatise  on  Harmony.  By  Sir  F.  A.  Gore  Ouseley,  Bart., 
Professor  of  Music  in  the  University  of  Oxford.  Second  Edition.  4to. 
cloth,  1  os. 

A  Treatise  on  Counterpoint,  Canon,  and  Fugue,  based  upon 
that  of  Cherubini.  By  the  same  Author.  Second  Edition.  4X0.  cloth,  16s. 

A  Treatise  on  Musical  Form  and  General  Composition. 

By  the  same  Author.   4to.  cloth,  10s. 

The  Cultivation  of  the  Speaking  Voice.  By  John  Hullah. 
Second  Edition.     Extra  fcap.  8vo.  cloth,  2s.  6d. 


36  Clarendon  Press,  Oxford. 


XII.  MISCELLAETEOUS. 

The  Construction  of  Healthy  Dwellings;  namely  Houses, 
Hospitals,  Barracks,  Asylums,  etc.  By  Douglas  Galton,  late  Royal 
Engineers,  C.B.,  F.R.S.,  etc.   Demy  8vo.  cloth,  ios.  6d. 

River  and  Canal  Engineering.  By  Leveson  Francis  Vernon 
Harcourt,  M.A.,  C.E.     Preparing. 

A  System  of  Physical  Education :  Theoretical  and  Practical. 

By  Archibald  Maclaren.    Extra  fcap.  8vo.  cloth,  Js.  6d, 

Specimens  of  Lowland  Scotch  and  Northern  English.  By 
Dr.  J.  A.  H.  Murray.     Preparing. 

English  Plant  Names  from  the  Tenth  to  the  Fifteenth  Century. 
By  J.  Earle,  M.A.,  Professor  of  Anglo-Saxon  in  the  University  of  Oxford. 
Small  fcap.  8vo.  cloth,  5$. 

An  Icelandic  Prose  Reader,  with  Notes,  Grammar,  and  Glos- 
sary by  Dr.  Gudbrand  Vigfusson  and  F.  York  Powell,  M.A.  1879. 
Extra  fcap.  8vo.  cloth,  ios.  6d. 

Dante.  Selections  from  the  Inferno.  With  Introduction  and 
Notes.     By  H.  B.  Cotterill,  B.  A.    Extra  fcap.  8vo.  cloth,  4s.  6d. 

Tasso.  La  Gerusalemme  Liberata.  Cantos  i,  ii.  With 
Introduction  and  Notes.  By  the  same  Editor.  Extra  fcap.  8vo. 
cloth,  is.  6d. 

The  Modern  Greek  Language  in  its  relation  to  Ancient  Greek. 
By  E.  M.  Geldart,  B.A.    Extra  fcap.  8vo.  cloth,  4s.  6d. 

The  Book  of  Tobit.  A  Ghaldee  Text,  from  a  unique  MS.  in 
the  Bodleian  Library;  with  other  Rabbinical  Texts,  English  Trans- 
lations, and  the  Itala.  Edited  by  Ad.  Neubauer,  M.A.  1878.  Crown 
8vo.  cloth,  6s. 

Outlines  of  Textual  Criticism  applied  to  the  New  Testament. 
By  C.  E.  Hammond,  M.A.,  Fellow  and  Tutor  of  Exeter  College,  Oxford. 
Third  Edition.  Extra  fcap.  8vo.  cloth,  3*.  6d. 

A  Handbook  of  Phonetics,  including  a  Popular  Exposition  of 
the  Principles  of  Spelling  Reform.  By  Henry  Sweet,  President  of  the 
Philological  Society,  Author  of  a  *  History  of  English  Sounds,'  &c.  Extra 
fcap.  8vo.  cloth,  4s.  6d. 

LONDON:    HENRY   FROWDE, 
Oxford    University   Press   Warehouse,    7  Paternoster   Row, 
OXFORD:    CLARENDON  PRESS  DEPOSITORY, 
116   High   Street. 

The  Delegates  of  the  Press  invite  suggestions  and  advice  from 
all  persons  interested  in  education;  and  will  be  thankful  for  hints,  &>c. 
addressed  to  the  Secretary  to  the  Delegates,  Claretidon  Press, 
Oxford.  n 


THE  UNIVERSITY  OF  MICHIGAN 
GRADUATE  LIBRARY 


DATE  DUE 


A-K^ 


rtl9N^4**i5i,aLS] 


MA^p^j 


Form  9584 


UMIVEffftTY  OF  MICHIGAN 


3   9015 


02354  6735 


■"•-'V-or 


l'e«A&c"' 


GRAD 

BL 

1010 

.M946 

v.3
