Chemical Observations and Experiments on Air and Fire (Carl Wilhelm Scheele, 1780)
==================================================================================
Carl Wilhelm Scheele — English translation (J. R. Forster, 1780) of Chemische Abhandlung von der Luft und dem Feuer (1777). Public domain. Scan via Internet Archive.

5 3 "il 


5 3 "il 


. / = * 
2 * — 


, nant 


CHEMICAL OBSERVATIONS. 


| A ND 
EXPERIMEN TS 
ON 
AIR AND FIRE. 
BY 


CHARLES-WILLIAM SCHEELE, 


Mzuzzs of the Royar Acabzur at STOCKHOLM z 


WITH A PREFATORY INTRODUCTION, 
By TORBERN BERGM AN; 


TRANSLATED FROM THE GERMAN BY 


J. R. FORSTER, L.LD. F.R.S. and S. A. 
Mzu zzz of ſeveral Learned Societies and Academies in Euxorx. 
TO WHICH ARE ADDED 


N + ge © E S, 
By RICHARD KIRW AN, Esd. F.R.S+ 


WITH A LETTER TO HIM FROM 
JOSEPH PRIESTLEY, L.L.D. F. R. S. 


7... % —!B ———— — —⁰ 


LONDON: 


PRINTED FOR J. JOHNSON, wo. 72, ST, PAUL'S 
CHURCH = YARD, M DCCLXXX. 


34 
— 4 


9% V wires £ 


— ws ERS — + + » „ * ” 3 OCB 
— . * — 2 
- = 
o | . 1 
* & © . Aa % * 4 


MANCHESTER 
UNIVERSITY 
LIBKAARY 


* - 
- re 
1 a 
—_— 4 * _ 
#F 
* — 4 
9 L „ Aa 
F 
8 = . - — F® * 
1 10 \s — 
T 
" / 
« . * e # 
47 = — - 4 4 
1 "- 
: * 
1 Ch 4" 
UL 
P * 9 
1 4 1 
1 4 # "XY 
* 
95 FN. 4 , 
„„ 
— 
- 
_ 
* 9 * 7 
, 
* — - 


90 111 
Rev. Dr. fo/eph Prieſtley, F. R. s. 


Dear Sin, 


O ſooner was the preſent Treatiſe of 
Mr. Scheele, about two years ago, 
tranſmitted to England from Germany, 
than you began to encourage me to tranſ- 
late it into Engliſh, and from time to time 
you repeated your applications. Many avo- 
cations of another nature hindered me from 
anſwering your friendly expectation. Laſt 
winter you not only renewed your ſolicita- 
tions, but by the aſſiſtance of your friends 
enabled me to complete the work, which I 
had already begun. It is with heartfelt 
pleaſure, and real gratitude and reſpect for 
your friendly encouragement, that I now 
take the liberty to preſent you with 
the tranſlation of a work on Air and 
Fire, which has in many reſpects fo great 
a reference to your immortal diſcoveries on 
Air. The northern philoſopher has treated 
| 4 2 the 


iv DEDICATION. 

the ſubje& as a Chemiſt, you as a Philoſo- 
pher; he came in many reſpects to the 
fame concluſions, grounded however on 
different premiſes; you knew nothing of 
his Experiments, and he was ignorant of 
your great and numerous diſcoveries, when 
he made his Experiments: and you both, 
independent of one another, contributed 
by very different ways and methods to en- 
large the field of ſcience. The differences 
in our Author's performance, ariſe chiefly 
from his not attending always to ſome 
principles of natural Philoſophy, or elſe 
from adhering too ſcrupulouſly to che- 
miſtry, and not ſo much founding certain 
inferences on Experiment as on rea- 


ſoning. 


Though invited both by you and others 
to add ſome notes to Mr. Scheele's perfor- 
formance, I made uſe of this privilege of 
Tranſlator and Editor very ſparingly ; and 
only in thoſe caſes, where I thought the 
ſenſe wanted illuſtration, or where I was 
afraid the Author might be unintelligible 
or obſcure, without a ſhort remark, ex- 
plaining perhaps ſome chemical com- 

pound 


DEDICATION - 


pound, or a cuſtom uſual in Sweden and 
the North only and therefore little known 


here. 


Give me leave to add a few words rela- 
tive to my tranſlation. I have endeavoured 
to make it as literal as was conſiſtent with 
the genius of both languages. The ſtyle 
of my Author is not always ſo ſmooth and 
clear, as might be wiſhed in a ſcientiic 
performance : wherever the German could 
be plainly underſtood, but might in W 
Engliſh cauſe obſcurity or ambiguity, I 
did not heſitate to inſert an explicative 
word or ſentence, in order to make the 
ſenſe run ſmoother and clearer. Where 
the original carried with it obſcurity or 
ambiguity, I endeavoured to be as literal as 
_ poſſible, and neither to add nor to take 
away any part of the ſentence. A book 
of ſo great importance in ſcience,” ſhould 
not be tranſlated in a careleſs manner. 
This very importance gives me the beſt 
grounded hopes, that the remarks and 
ſtrictures which you or your friends in- 
tend to annex to it, will ſerve to eluci- 
date many a point, which our Author 1 
A 3 could 


vi DEDICATION. 
could not know, or perhaps conſidered i in 
a different light. | 


May Providence ſpare your life, and 
bleſs it with health, contentment of mind, 
and all thoſe comforts and enjoyments 
which may more and more enable you to 
purſue that noble career of Natural Philo- 
ſophy, which you have already ſo much 
enriched by your numerous diſcoveries, 
and which you would moſt certainly ſtill 
more aſcertain and enlarge by new and in- 
* Experiments. 


"oY ION the honour to be, with the ſin- 
cereſt ſentiments of attachment, gratitude, 
and regard, 
Dear SIR, 
Your moſt obedient, 
Obliged humble Servant, 


Paldington -Green, 
Feb. 28, 1780. 


John-Reinold Forſter. 


THE 
AU T HO R'; 
Er 


"THE reſearches on Air are at preſent 

an important object of Chemiſtry, 
'This elaſtic fluid is poſſeſſed of ſo many 
properties, that it may furniſh ſufficient 
materials for new diſcoveries to every one 
who chuſes to ſet about making Experi- 
ments. This branch of Chemiſtry, ſhews 
us, that Fire, that is ſo wonderful, cannot 
be generated without Air; I hope not to 
be looked upon as erroneous, when I pre- 
ſume in this Treatiſe, (which ought to be 
conſidered only as an Eſſay towards the Che- 
mical Doctrine of Fire) to alledge proofs, 
that a kind of Air ſubſiſting in our at- 
moſphere is a true conſtituent part of Fire, 
A 4 and 


viii Tur AuTHroR's PREFACE. 


and materially contributes to the exiſtence 
and ſupport of flame; for which reaſon 1 
call this Air empyreal Air (Fire Ait). 
Certainly I will not be ſo impertinent as 
to force my opinion upon my Readers: 
No; there are evident Experiments that 
ſpeak for me; Experiments which I have 
many times repeated, and in which I flat- 
ter myſelf to have attained my view of 
coming as much as poſſible at the know- 
ledge of Fire: and this is all the reward 
I have obtained for my labours, together 
with the real pleaſure I then enjoyed, 
which I was unable to keep to myſelf, 
This therefore is the view in which I have 
communicated my labours to my Readers. 
I had already elaborated the chief part of 
my Eſſay, when I firſt got a ſight of the 
excellent Experiments of Mr. PRIESTLEx. 
Though the theory of Meyer has met very 
little approbation, his Experiments how- 
ever will always have merit; and I am 
ſure this laborious Chemiſt would have 
changed his opinion, could he have had 
the leaſt notion of fixed Air, or the theory 
of Dr. Black: But * in the time when 
he 


Tur AuTHOR's PREFACE, ir 


he publiſhed his Book *, this doctrine was 
not yet fo well 10 it is no wonder 
that he ſtill adhered to the old opinion 
that all pure alkalies and abſorbent earths 
muſt efferveſce with acids. That I have 
myſelf gone too far in this Treatiſe with my 
chemical Experiments, will perhaps be 
made matter of objection: but I am of 
opinion, that only in the caſe, when no 
more material ſubjects are left for objects 
of enquiry, ſhould this ſcience be de- 
fined by limits. But who will pretend to 
prove that light and heat do not be- 
long to the corporeal ſyſtem? for though 
they be very ſubtle and fine, it will be 
eaſy to prove fo far from my Experi- 
ments, that they are compounds of two 
different ſubſtances, (conſequently can no 
more than Air, be conſidered as primi- 
tive Elements) and that by thoſe incom- 
prehenſible operations of nature, the at- 
tractions, they are very often decompound- 
ed into their gan parts: for did this 


0 vob. Fred. Meyer ; Chemiſche Verſuche zur nahern 
Erkentniſs des ungeloſchten kalchs. Hanov. & Leipz. 
1764. The ſame has been lately tranſlated into 


French, 
not 


x TRE AvuTHoOR's Prarken. 


not take place, it would be right to piit 
the queſtion, Whence all the great quan- 
tity of Empyreal Air is generated; ſince 
every moment ſuch quantities of empyreal 
Air are deſtroyed by animals, or changed 
into aërial acid, and employed for the 


compoſition of Fire? 


Whether I am wrong or right in my opi- 
nion on the conſtituent parts gf earthy ſub- 


fances, time muſt decide: ſo much how-- 


ever I believe, might be ſaid with juſtice, 
that my opinion is ſomewhat more than a 


mere hypotheſis, fince it is founded on 


Experiments,—I take it as a certainty 
for granted,” that pure water in itſelf, can 


neither by art nor nature be changed into 


4 dry ſubſtance, which ſhall have all the 
properties of a true earth, I am not igno- 
rant of the circumſtance that both by re- 
peated diſtillations, and hkewiſe by tritura- 
tion of pure water, an earth has been pro- 
diced. It was notſufficient for me merely 
to read this very ſtrange metamorphoſis, I 


wanted likewiſe to behold it with my eyes: 


1 took a quarter of an ounce of diſtilled 
ſaow-water, put it into a ſmall glaſs ma- 
tras of the ſhape and ſize of a hen's egg, 

with 


Tur AuTHoR's PRETAc -. xi 


with a ſlender neck of two feet length; I 
cauſed the water to be boiled in it, and then 
ſhat the orifice to it up with a well- fitting 
cork: I then ſuſpended this matras over 
a burning lamp, and kept the water conti- 
nually. boiling for twelve days and nights 
together : after it had boiled two days, it 
had ſome whitiſh appearance; after fix 
days time, it was white like milk; and at 
the end of the twelfth day, it ſeemed to 
be quite thick. After it was grown cold, 
T let the matras ſtand peaceably, that the 
white powder might ſubſide, which hap- 
pened only in two days time; then I de- 
canted the water quite clear, which I found 
to have the following properties : Mixed 
with falt ammoniac, it ſets the volatile al- 
kali free: It coagulated by pouring on it 
acid of vitriol ; it precipitated metallic ſo- 
lutions; it ſtruck the ſyrup of violets with 
a green colour; and in the open Air it 
turned into a jelly, The very ſubtle and 
white earth had the properties of filiceous 
earth mixed with a little of calcareous 
ſubſtance. I broke the matras, and found 
the inſide of it dim, and without the 


ſmoothnefs common to glaſs, as far as the 
boiling 


* - 


xii Tur AurRHOR's PREFACE. 


boiling water had reached; though this 
only became viſible when the glaſs was, 
dry. Could I doubt any longer, that the 
water, by continued boiling, is capable of 
decompounding the glaſs? Had I not ob- 
tained a true /guor filicum? The earth 
which I procured was therefore by no 
means generated from water.---No better 
ſucceſs I met with, when I triturated 
diſtilled water during two hours in a po- 
liſhed glaſs mortar: The water became 
milky ; after the white ſubſtance was ſet- 
tled, I decanted the water ; which had all 
the properties of pure water, without any 
addition of alkali ; and the white earth was 
nothing elſe than the moſt ſubtle powder 
of glaſs. | 

I have nothing to add, except that ſeve- 
ral typographical Errata have crept into 
this Treatiſe, which are the more excuſable 
fince I live very far off from the place of 
impreſſion ; but they are all of ſuch a nature, 
that neither the main ſubject nor the ſenſe 


is affected by it. 


* 


Nor E 


6 
NorTz of the TRANSLATOR 


Joan Mavow, in his Opera Omnia Medico- 
phyſica, Hagz, 1681, 8vo. has already given ſome 
obſcure hints about that part of -our common 
atmoſpherical Air, which properly ſpeaking is 
the moſt proper for reſpiration, or in which the 
flame of a candle will burn longer than in the ſame 
bulk of our mixed common Air. This conſti- 
tuent part of our common Air Dr. Px1esTLEY has 
called dephlogiſticated Air, and Mr. SCHEELE em- 
pyreal Air; it is eaſily produced by heating red 
lead, moiſtened with ſpirit of nitre ; and Dr. 
Prieſtley obſerves, that dephlogiſticated Air is a 
compound of ſpirit of nitre and earth. (See Ex- 
periments and Obſervations on Air, vol. ii. p. 54, 
55, 62, 63. vol. iii. p. 41.) This above-mentioned 
Fohn Mayo pretends, that ſome falt-petre, or 
even aerial ſpirit of nitre flies about in the Air; 
which when breathed enters the lungs and yields 
in the human body the animal ſpirits and hear 
which it communicates to the mals of the blood. 
By reſpiration the Air loſes that elaſticity which 
it had obtained from that kind of nitre which he 
ſuppoſes in common Air.,— This dephlogiſti- 
cated Air, however, though very obſcurely, ſeems 
to be hinted at in Mayow's Diſſertalionede Salnitro 
& Spiritu Nitri Aereo; item in the Diff. de Reſpira- 
tione, contained in the above Opera. The honour 


of 


( 

of the diſcovery of this kind of Air is ſo much 
the property of Dr. Prieſtley and Mr. Scheele, 
though neither knew of the other's Experiments, 
that there is not the leaſt doubt about it: But 
is it leſs certain, that Mayow proved his theory 
in a manner ſo little convincing by Experi- 
ments, that he cannot havẽ the leaſt claim to any 
diſcovery ? It is only curious, that a looſe hint, 
thrown out at random in that age, ſhould at 
i ſuch a diſtance of time in a new, more circum- 
ql ſtantial and ample manner be confirmed in a 
1 ſeries of Experiments by two Philoſophers who 
certainly knew nothing of Mayow. | 


PREFATORY 


p REF AT ORY 


INTRODUCTION; 


Written by Sir TORBERN BERGMAN, 
{ Knight of the Order of Waſa, Profeſſor 
of Chemiſtry in the Untiverfity of Upſal, 
F. R. S. and Member of the Academies of 


Sciences at Upſal, Stockholm, Goertin- 
gen, Berlin, Gottenburg, and Lund, in 


Scania. 


NH E Science of Nature ſeems to have 

three degrees. The firſt fixes our 
attention to the ouz/ides, and teaches us to 
collect external characters, in order to en- 
able us to diſtinguiſh various natural 
bodies; and this is the proper object of 
NATURAL HISTORY. If we penetrate 
ſtill deeper by our contemplation, and ex- 
amine the general qualities of matter (its 
extenſion, 


| | 
h 
| 


1 
= 
\ | 
_ | 
bu 
441} 
4 
V 
5 
16 


— 

th — — 
* * 
1 


xvi T. BeRGMAN's INTRODUCTION, 


extenſion, impenetrability and vis inertie} 
in regardto its peculiar relations; it is that 


which is commonly called NATURAL 


PuitosoPHYyY /Phy/ca). But Cn Ex- 
MISTRY is the innermoſt part, ſince 


it examines the material elements, their 


mixtures, and proportions to one another. 
The firſt teaches us the elementary rudi- 
ments, the alphabet of the great book of 
nature; the ſecond inſtructs in ſpelling; 
and the third, to read diſtinctly. The two 


firſt therefore are no more than ſubſidiary 


ſciences, which conduct us to the laſt, as 
the proper great object. 

Since all ſingle qualities of bodies de- 
pend upon their ſtructure and compoſition; 
it follows neceſſarily, that all our occupa- 
tions with material and corporeal ſubſtances, 
never can obtain any degree of perfection, 
without the aſſiſtance of Natural Philoſo- 
phy. And ſince commonly the proper in- 
tention of our occupations is directed ei- 
ther to our health, the neceſſaries of life, 
or our comfort, three different claſſes of 


practical ſciences are from thence derived, 
Medicine, Huſbandry, and the Arts. We 


ſhall in the moſt conciſe manner confider 


the 


PRETATORYW INTRODUCTION, xXvii 


the connection of chemiſtry with each of 
them. E 
In the times when chemiſtry was 
chiefly founded on various nonſenſical hy- 
potheſes, and was nevertheleſs applied 
with a blind zeal and the moſt perfect 
confidence not only to the cure of all 
infirmities and diſeaſes, but even to the 
obtaining of immortality itſelf ; then it 
could be productive of nothing but de- 
triment and miſchief in the ſcience of 
phyſic. 

We have no knowledge of bodies à pri- 
ori: Every intelligence about them, muſt 
be acquired by proper obſervations and 
Experiments. | But to diſcover and purſue 
ſuch Experiments as really illuſtrate the 
point we are in ſearch of, requires not only 
ſkill, and a peculiar application, but alſo the 
moſt impartial love of truth; in order not 
to be enſnared by the pleaſing deſire of 
drawing general concluſions from a few 
data of precarious certainty. It leflens no 
doubt our trouble, and flatters our vanity, 
to be able to diſcloſe in a moment the 
whole courſe of nature. Man is beſides na- 


turally indolent, and much inclined to be 
captivated. 


 Iviy 'T. BERGMAN's 


captivated by imagination more than by re- 
ality. The confeſſion therefore, that we real- 
ly know no more than what we know, is 
even in our days, when the experimental 
method is conſidered as the only right and 
true method, very difficult and humiliating: 
But ſince all ſciences have their roads of 
error, their abuſes and follies (which un- 
fortunately always ſeduce the greater part 
of mankind) it is chiefly owing to this pre- 
cipitation and fancy, that ſuch monſters 
are produced. 

Every thing going forward in our body, 
is done either in a mechanical or in a chemi- 
cal way; ſince the operations of the imma- 
terial ſoul have nothing to do with it, Our 
food is diſſolved and changed on its road in 
paſſing from the mouth, through the ſto- 
mach, entrails and other inteſtines, by 
means of the ſaliva, the liquor gaſtricus, the 
gall, the chyle, &c. ſo that in (ſeveral places 
various matters are prepared, all of which 
are neceſſary for the increaſe and ſupport of 
the machine! the lungs moreover add by 
their conſtant motion, various ſubtle parti» 
cles by means of the abſorbing veſſels, and 
again by the exhaling veſſels, carry off 

others 


PREFATORY INTRODUCTION. xix 


ben, The leaſt irregularity in all 
theſe natural functions, lays of courſe the 
foundation for many infirmities and diſ- 
eaſes. Theſe ought to be prevented or 
cured by ſuch medicines as have nothing 
noxious in other reſpects capable of ob- 
ſtructing the main tendency, and which 
contain nothing ſuperfluous ; for if they 
were even in themſelves harmleſs, they 
might however become hurtful by their 
quantity. It is therefore no doubt a great 
advantage, to be able to concentrate 
the powers of ſeveral ounces into a few 
grains. 

Did we exactly know after chemical 
principles, the natural functions going for- 
ward in the body, the cauſes of diſeaſes, 
and the effects of medicines; chemiſtry 
would moſt certainly operate miracles. 

But I foreſee already what may be ob- 
jected to this aſſertion with ſome reaſon, viz. 
* Though ſuch knowledge would be a 
* moſt excellent thing, it would how- 
* ever be rather the object of wiſhes than 
„ ſuch as might be ſuppoſed or hoped 
« for: In the human body every ope- 


ration goes forward very ſecretly; _ 
b 2 «© nor 


xx T. BERGMAN's 


4 nor is there any glaſs window to admit 
1 the reſearches of the inquiſitive: It is 


— 


«© by no means right to play with the lives 


of men, and it would be highly unjuſti- 


© fiable to endanger them by uncertain 


44 Experiments, &c.“ I reply, this is per- 
fectly right; at the ſame time it by no 


: 


means juſtifies us in neglecting the right 
means of obtaining information; and ſtill 
leſs in treating them with contempt. 
Whatſoever is difficult, is not therefore 
impoſſible always. The more inveſtigation 
and trouble an invention coſts, the more 
.honour may be obtained by it; eſpecially 
if. it has for its object, Health, the moſt 
precious enjoyment a man can be bleſſed 
with. If a man be only poſſeſſed of a truly 


fundamental knowledge, many things may 


be diſcovered without the leaſt danger. 


Higher chemiſtry has diſcovered many 
and various new manipulations, land by 


recalling to our minds one or the ather 
3 we ſhall be enabled to judge what 

more may with reaſon be expected. 
Several kinds of diſeaſes ſpread devaſta- 
tion over extenſive countries, over people of 
all ranks and denominations; without being 
however 


PREFATORY INTRODUCTION. XXL 


however infectious in themſelves, Theſe 
cannot, properly ſpeaking, be deriyed from 
the mode of living; which in thoſe who 
are attacked with the evil, is widely dif- 
ferent; there muſt therefore exiſt a ge- 
neral cauſe, which affe&ts equally the 
richer -and the poorer. The atmoſphere 
is the ſame for all ; during ſeveral years its 
weight and temperature have been obſerv- 
ed; and this has furniſhed ſeveral explica- 
tions, which however are not ſatisfactory 
for the explanation of all its phænomena. 
Its conſtituent parts therefore ought to be 
better known. The vapours and hetero- 
geneous' particles, are different in regard to 
quantity, as well as to quality. Beſides 
Chemiſtry teaches us, that this elaſtic fluid 
ſurrounding our globe, is at all times and 
every where, a compound of three, very 
different ſubſtances, vg. of good Air, foul 
Air, and aëcial acid. The jr/t is called by 
Dr. PRIESTLEY, if not wrongly, however 
ſomewhat improperly, phlogiſticated Air. * 

02 8s ro, en 
Though it is expreſſed here plainly in the Ger- 
man, phlogi/trcated Air; I am however pretty well 


convinced, that either Chevalier Bergman perfectly 
b 3 miſtook 


xxii T. BexoMan's. 


Mr. Scheele calls it with more reaſon empy4 
real Air, (Fire Air) ſince this alone gives 
life to Fire, when the other two kinds of 
Air extinguiſh the flame of a candle or 
Fire. The laſt kind is commonly called- 
fixed Air: but I flatter myſelf to have ſa- 
tisfactorily proved by Experiments, that it 
ts a peculiar acid. The nature of the 
firff kind, has as yet been very little 
inveſtigated ; however by analogy it ſeems 
to be hardly any thing but good Air, which 
is corrupted either by a ſuperfluity of in- 
flammable ſubſtance, or perhaps by a want 


miſtook Dr. Prieſtley, who calls that dephlogifticated 
Air (and not phlagiſticated) which is ſo good that Fire 
will burn in it longer than in any other kind of Air; 
or there muſt be an error in the preſs, and we ought to 
read dephlogi/ticated inſtead of phlogiſticated Air; and in- 
deed that great Philoſopher and Chemiſt Chev. Berg- 
man could hardly be ſuppoſed to be ſo ignorant, as 
not to know the difference between dephlogifticated and 


pblogiſticated Air. 


In the German it ſtands as here, fr/? kind ; but 
from the connection, it ſeems, Mr. Bergman meant 
the ſecond kind of the three different ſubſtances which 
he obſerved to be the integrant parts of common at- 
moſpheric Air, or (as he calls it) foul Air, 


of 


PRETATORVY INTRODUCTION. xXXiit © 


of it. It will however be ſtill difficult 
to decide which of the two above propo- 
fitions is the true one.—Of theſe three divi- 
fions, the atrial acid always bears the leaſt 
proportion, and ſcarcely makes the fifteenth 
part of the bulk of the atmoſphere, at leaſt 
on the ſurface of our globe : the foul Air 
is always in the greateſt proportion; and 
by far more, than the pure or good Air. 
The various effects of each of theſe three 
ſubſtances upon animal bodies, are ſtill in- 
volved in impenetrable darkneſs. — The 
good Air fit for reſpiration, ought however 
to be excellent in its operations, ſince with- 
out it, it is impoſſible to live. It has been 
believed, that it contained an indiſpenſibly 
neceſſary vivifying food; which never has 
been proved, at leaſt it ſeems not to be of 
an electric nature. It might perhaps ſoon 
be poſſible to decide by Experiments, 
whether this good Air carries off noxious, 
eſpecially phlogiſtic particles; ſince the 
Air which has been expired from the 
lungs, is unfit for reſpiration, and 1s fimilar 
to that which has been phlogiſticated. 


e ſhall then likewiſe be informed, whe- 
b 4 ther- 


xxly I. BERGMAN's 


ther that which makes the greater part 4 
the atmoſphere, if it be in ſpired by itſelf, | 
becomes fatal, for the reaſon that it has 
been previouſly ſaturated with heteroge- 
neous bodies, and is thence incapacitated 
for carrying off any. particles from the lungs. 
— Perhaps the aerial acid becomes an unfit 
vehicle for theſe articles, and is itſelf ori- 
ginally formed without them ; however it 
is not yet aſcertained in what manner this 
Air acts; but thus much is certain, that it 
deftroys all irritability. I have, from ani- 
mals killed by it, before they were grown 
cold extracted the heatt, in which it was 
impoſlible to raiſe the. leaſt irritability, 
either with the moſt powerful men/irua, or 
the fire, or 9 If muſcular fibres 
were: the chief cauſe of the motion of the 
lungs, it would not be difhcult to find out 
the ultimate cauſe of death; but ſince its 
ſtructure is formed of quite different ſub- 
ſtances, the greateſt difficulties preſent 
themſelves. By Experiments however it 
might be eaſy to aſcertain, whether the 
atrial acid and foul Air act in the fame 
manner. It would therefore be neceſſary 
to inveſtigate, whether irritability (by all 
appearance 


1 —— — 
OA — — o CE — — — — 
— —— — ——. — 


* | the = 
. —— m2 —— 


2 


PRETATORY INTRODUCTION. xx 


appearance ſo very neceſſary for the whole 
Economy of animal bodies) is not likewiſe 
deſtroyed in ſuch animals as have been, 
ſuffocated and killed inſtantaneouſly by that. 
Air, which had been corrupted by reſpira- 
tion, fire, or other means. - Since the Air 
returning from the lungs, by expiration, is 
always blended with aerial acid; it would 
be neceſſary, in order to avoid all ambiguity, 
entirely to free the foul Air of the aerial 
acid by means of lime-water, before any. 
Experiments were made with it. I hope 
ſoon to have an opportunity of making 
them. If then, contrary to expectation, 
the reſult ſhews, that they both act in the 
ſame manner it would ſeemingly follow 
from thence, that theſe two fluids, ſo very 
diſtin& in their nature, act however by 
the ſame common unfitneſs, either for 
carrying off from the lungs. the noxious 
particles, or introducing into them a vi- 
vifying pabulum. — But however noxious 
aerial acid is for ſound lungs, it is never- 
theleſs of great utility in the prime vie. 
Purulent lungs not only bear atrial acid, 
but they are. even cured by it: And no 

| ſooner 


xxvil T. BERGMAN's 


ſooner is the cure performed, than its in- 
halation becomes again dangerous. — But 
though there be ever ſo much left for in- 
veſtigation, we may apply that for uſe 
which has already been diſcovered. It 
is for inſtance well known, that the Air 
of the atmoſphere may be examined in re- 
gard to its fitneſs for reſpiration; a diſ- 
covery which bids fair to yield, in a very 
ſhort time, the moſt important illuſtra- 
tions. If ſuch obſervations were made at 
the ſame time in dwelling-rooms, infirma- 
ries, and the open Air, and were continued 
with ſome degree of accuracy, we ſhould 
certainly diſcover the cauſes of many phæ- 
nomena, which hitherto have remained 
inexplicable. Thus much we know al- 
ready; that wounds and ulcers are with dif- 
ficulty kept from going into mortification in 
corrupted, foul Air; whereas on the other 
fide, the immenſely acute pains accom- 
panying the cancer (that dreadful ailment) 
are in a few days not only mitigated and 
aſſwaged by the external uſe of atrial acid, 
but the loathſome aperture is alſo conſider- 
ably diminiſhed—. The compaſs of a Pre- 
face not only prevents me from entering 

into 


PRETATORVY INTRODUCTION xxvrt 


into a fuller diſcuſſion of this important 
ſubject, but alſo from producing more in- 
ſtances of its utility ; I cannot help how- 
ever. mentioning in a few words only, that 
the obſervations on aerial acid have already 
ſpread a new light on the method of eſſay- 
ing and imitating, by art, medicated wa- 
ters; and on their application and uſe in the 
cure of the ſcurvy, and other internal pu- 

trid diſeaſes. The true analyſis of the 
calculi from the kidneys and bladder, 
has enabled us to judge with preciſion 
of the beſt lremedies againſt the gravel. 

The diſcovery of the inner conſtitution of 
arſenic, made us better acquainted with the 
manner by which its dreadful effects are 
produced; and thereby the beſt means were 
pointed out, both to extinguiſh its poiſon- 
ous quality, and likewiſe to mitigate 
and direct its effect for better purpoſes, 
How ſimplified are at preſent many com- 
pounded remedies ; and how ſafe and little 
perilous, are many preparations of the 
moſt acrid and corroſive ſubſtances ? How 
many abſurd mixtures, decompounding and 
counteracting themſelves, have not of late 


been rejected ? How many falſe theories of 
diſeaſes 


XXVIII T. BEROMAN's 


diſeaſes, and their cauſes, are there not daily 
expoſed, and ſhewn to be without any foun- 
dation, by means of Chemiſtry? Sugar was 
ſaid to contain lime, in order to account 
for certain effects aſcribed to ſugar; though 
it contains not an atom of it. The cal- 
culi of the kidneys and the bladder were 
ſaid to be calcareous; though they con- 
tain at the moſt only one half of cal- 
careous ſubſtance. And ſo in many more 
inſtances, which it would be too tedious to 
enumerate. Laſtly, how would it be poſſible 
to diſcover and to ſubjet to controul the 
various noſtrums, quack-medicines, cheats, 
neglects, and other monſters of the me- 
dical ſcience without the application of a 
chemical analyſis? The Muſes were not 
without reaſon thought to be fiſters ; and 
they are a moſt excellent emblem of that 
harmonic union, by which all the ſciences 
mutually aſſiſt one another; and without 
which they never can attain any degree of 
perfection. 7 

Next to health, there is nothing more 
preſſing and neceſſary than common food. 
In order to convince us of the utility pro- 
duced by Chemiſtry in regard to the ne- 


ceſlaries 


PREFATORY INTRODUCTION. XXIX 


ceflaries of life, we ſhall only take a view 
of Agriculture, that moſt antient and noble 
occupation. If we conſult Columella, and 
many of the moſt antient writers on Huſ- 
bandry, we find to our humiliation and 
ſhame, that they were as well inſtructed as 
us, if not better; though in later times fo 
much pains have been taken, ſo many en- 
couragements have been given, and ſo 
many rewards have been diſtributed. — This 
ought to be confidered in the following 
manner. The great Lord of Nature has fo 
bountifully taken care of us, that corn 
grows without any great care and know- 
ledge. The improvements which this art 
in general is capable of from experience 
and collected Experiments, are likewiſe 
ſoon enough acquired; and in this ſtate it 
remains till the ſcience of nature throws a 
new light upon it. They are two vety 
diſtin things, to raiſe corn on a certain 
piece of ground, and to raiſe as much corn 
as will poſſibly grow there :—The laſt de- 
fideratum is not always obtained by plough- 
ing, ditching and manuring ; for beſides theſe 
mechanical operations, there are two things 
More required : ſuch a mixture as will af- 
ford to the vegetables not only proper 

nouriſh- 


xxx T. BERGMaAN's 


nouriſhment ; but alſo ſuch a one as keeps 
humidity as long as the uſual drought 
makes it requiſite ; for nothing grows, even 
in the moſt exquiſite ſoil, without water, 
The beſt compound therefore, ought to be 
adapted to the nature of the ſoil, the ex- 
poſure, the climate, and the common tem- 
perature of the weather; as I have proved 
more at large in another place. —In the 
mean time it will be eaſily found, that 
Chemiſtry is of the ſame importance to 
agriculture and all the more particular 
branches of rural œconomy, that aſtro- 
nomy is to navigation. 
The arts and mechanical trades, are 
occupied with the melioration of raw ma- 
terials, One part of them, from beginning 
to end, is a ſeries of chemical operations; 
others are more mechanical; however there 
is hardly one of them which contains not 
one or more problems whoſe more perfect 
ſolution depends upon Chemiſtry only. 
What a number of years muſt have elapſed 
before they arrived by chance only, or by 
unpremeditated Experiments, to their pre- 
ſent perfection; or before they learned 
to avoid all occurring inconveniences, 
A perfect knowledge of the raw materials, 
often 


PREFATORY INTRODUCTION. XXXI 


often furniſhes the beſt inſtructions, in a 
direct way. And it has been hitherto a 
great misfortune, that the practical part of 
the Arts has been kept very ſecret: But 
ſince the French Academy of Sciences has 
begun to remove this obſtacle, we have 
the moſt certain expectations of their 
quick and amazing progreſs, by the aſſiſt- 
ance of the ſcience of Nature. Without 
the knowledge of the true cauſes and their 
connections, it is impoſſible either to ob- 
viate or to remove all the obſtacles ariſing 

from chance or accidental circumſtances. 
From what has been faid in a few 
words, it muſt evidently appear, that Che- 
miſtry in a peculiar manner, throws a great 
light on all mechanical trades, concerned 
with corporeal ſubſtances. However the 
property of the ſubject itſelf ſeems to pre- 
ſcribe limits to this ſcience. The quality 
of our ſenſes, even when aſſiſted and im- 
proved by art, will not Jet us penetrate 
farther than to a certain point, The ſub- 
tleneſs of our inſtruments is inſuffi- 
_ cient, and the beſt become at laſt uſeleſs. 
All theſe difficulties are ſtill more in- 
creaſed, from the moſt ſubtle parti- 
cles which cannot well fall under the 
exa- 


xxxii T. BERGMAN's 


examination of our bare ſenſes, having not 
only the greateſt adheſion and conſe- 
quently exerciſing the greateſt reſiſtance to 
the attempts of dividing them, but alſo 
affording the moſt effectual and active 
means for this end. How imperfect there- 
fore, muſt be our moſt perfect knowledge 
of the myſteries of nature? | 

This is all perfectly right; and the pre- 
tenſion is ſupremely filly, to be able at a fu- 
ture period to inveſtigate the firſt powers, 
which the Creator has eſtabliſhed at the 
creation and for the preſervation of the 
material world. Such a ſcience is too 
abſtruſe, and reaches beyond our attain» 
ment; it 1s reſerved for the power of the 
Creator, and not for that of a creature, 
— But it by no means follows, that Che- 
miſtry ſhould not be able to diſcloſe to our 
eyes many a ſcene of wonders. Could 
we only diſcover with certainty, the ele- 
mentary principles of bodies (principia 
proxima) together with their connections 

and proportions, Chemiſtry would be able 
to do great things, 

From the moſt early periods, certain 
ſubſtances were thought to be ſo ſimple, 
that art Lam up all hopes of analyſing 

them 


PRETPATORY INTRODUCTION. xxxlii 


them any further, and theſe were there- 
fore conſidered as the /amina prima. Such 
are more eſpecially the four Ariſtotelic ele- 
ments, Earth, Water, Air, and Fire: To 
diſcover the compoſition of which is the 
buſineſs of higher and more refined Che- 
miſtry. Let us therefore examine, whe- 
ther all hopes are entirely loſt of diſcover- 
ing any thing here. EARTH is the fixed 
principle, which remains after the Fire 
has exerted its deſtroying power againſt a 
body, and which is not ſoluble in water 
in the common way. This is the coarſeſt 
of all the four common elements, and 
makes but a ſmall part of the bodies. 
Whatever analyſis has hitherto been able 
to eſtabliſh with certainty, may be reduced 
to this; that earth (which after all proves 
to be of different ſubſtances) is by no 
means the ſame matter, nor homogeneous, 
but a compound of ſeveral; and is found 
to be more or leſs of a ſaline nature, at 
leaſt it is ſo on the ſurface of our globe, 
in it its moſt pure ſtate. There have been 
found ſix different ſpecies; having all quite 
different properties, and which hitherto 
have neither been decompounded into 
more imple, nor been changed into ano- 


ther: viz. 1. The Earth of the ponderous 
C Spar; 


Xxxiv T. Bzxoman's 


Spar; 2. calcareous Earth; 3. Mama 
4. Clay; 5. filiceous Earth ; and 6. Earth of 
Gems. I have in another place mentioned 
the characteriſtics of them. — Whether 
theſe, which till a further inveſtigation. 
may be called primitive Earths, are really 
different, or only varieties of the ſame, I can- 
not tell; the laſt opinion ſeems to be the 
moſt ſimple. I have however before obſerv- 
ed the dangerous error of limiting the order 
of nature to our confined ideas. The 
| concluſion ought not to be formed before 
the premiſes are aſcertained by Experi- 
ments. Patience and aſſiduous applica- 
tion may perhaps in future times make 
diſcoveries; ſince we have at leaſt ſome 
conſiderable number of notions about their 

properties, by which a great deal is already 
gained. But ſince the acid of fluor and 
water, meeting one another in the form of 
vapours, coagulate into filiceous earth; 
and acid of arſenic with phlogiſton coagu- 
late into ſolid white arſenic; there is ſome 
indication that terreous ſubſtances, as 
well as metallic calxes, may be conſidered 
in their firſt principles as. acids; which in 
the firſt caſe are become fixed by water, 
and in the laſt by phlogiſton. Thus much 
at leaſt. i is certain, that nature has indicated 
itſelf 


PREFATORY INTRODUCTION. XXxXY 


itſelf to be poſſeſſed of an abundance and 
variety of acids; and that it particularly 
employs them in its various operations. 
Water is ſtill more ſubtle, and with more 
difficulty decompounded.— Upon more 
accurate examination we find, that the Ex- 
periments according to which it was ima- 
gined, that water could be changed into 
earth, do by no means prove that which in 
the beginning had been ſuſpected of them. 
It is generally known, that heat cauſes 
peculiar changes in water. The particles 
of water ſtrongly attract the particles of 
heat; and after they have been charged 
with, or envelloped by a certain quantity 
of them, this compounded matter becomes 
ſo eaſily moveable, that its ſurface en- 
deavours conſtantly to form a horizontal 
line; it has a great ſimilarity with a ſubtle 
earth melted by fire. If you diminith the 
heat, by which operation the ſurface of 
the particles either come in contact and 
by their friftion hinder this reciprocal 
motion, or the elaſticity and power of 
repulſion is ſufficiently diminiſhed by the 
ſeparation of one of theſe elementary prin- 
ciples, then the maſs becomes indurated 
and ice is formed. It is not yet deter- 
mined, which of theſe cauſes is here 
2 2 prevalent, 


xXxxvi T. BeRGMAN's 


prevalent. If ice is to be melted, a quantity 
of the employed heat is loſt, amounting 
to very near 720 of our thermometers, * 
and forms a kind of ſaturation ; ſo that 
its effect is concealed by its union with 
the ice, almoſt in the ſame manner as if 
an acid were hindered from exerciſing its 
characteriſtic properties by a ſaturation 
with alkalies. The ſame takes place with 
quicklime : It contains heat, which is in- 
active till a ſtronger elective attraction 
ſets free and expels it. By the abſorption of 
729 of heat, ice is made fluid; that which 
it receives beyond it is ſuperfluous ; which 
may be eaſily obſerved, in the ſame manner 
as in adding an acid to a neutral ſalt: 
The water expands, grows warmer, more 
ſubtle, more penetrating, moveable, and 
light. If the quantity of heat is accumulated 
till it becomes equal to 100. it is diſſolved 
into elaſtic vapours; ſome of which are 
already generated before the degree of heat 
is 


The Swediſh thermometers are ſilled with quick- 
ſilver, and the point of congelation of water, is diſtant 
from that of boiling water exactly 100 parts or de- 
grees. The point of freezing is o and that of boiling, 
is one hundred upwards. From o downwards, another 
ſeries of degrees is marked for the oblervation of 
cold, | 


PREFPATORY INTRODUCTION. xxxvii 


is equal to 1009; but ſo much the leſs, 
the leſs the quantity of heat exceeds the 
abovementioned degree of ſaturation, _— 
In the very moment they are ſeparated 
from the maſs it cools ; for all eva- 
poration generates cold. Does this cold 
ariſe becauſe the increaſed volume re- 
quires more to its ſaturation, and can in 
conſequence of its effect, fix more heat 
than before? Or is the heat, (which was 
united to the water and was increaſed to 
a certain degree) now enabled to conſoli- 
date itſelf cloſer and in greater abundance, 
and to carry off in conſequence that part 
of the water which is neareſt at hand ? 
—— This is what Experiments have 
taught us of the compoſition of water ; 
plainly demonſtrating that it by no means 
ought to be conſidered as a ſimple ſub- 
ſtance. | 
I have before mentioned ſomething 
about A1R, and proved, that the ſubſtance 
commonly called by that name, is by no 
means a ſimple and homogeneous body. 
I need not likewiſe be prolix on this, and 
the thus called fourth element or FIRE; 
fince theſe two are the objects of the fol- 
lowing performance ;—whoſe author, Mr. 
SCHEELE, has great merit in Chemiſtry by 
ſeveral 


xxxviii T. BrxoMAN's 
feveral important diſcoveries : * all his 
inquiries ſhewing not only his reflection and 
reaſoning, but alſo a peculiar ſkill and 
perſeverance in inveſtigating truth, both 
by analyſis and by ſyntheſis. Newton's 
diſcovery to divide light (the infinitely ſub- 
tle light) into colours, has opened the way 
to many very curious myſteries of nature, 
though it was no more than a mechanical 
diviſion. Mr. Scheele diſcloſes a more 
ſubtle, becauſe a chemical analyſis ; which 
inſtructs us not only about light, but alſo 
about fire, .whoſe explication has hitherto 
been the crux pbilgſopbi. I have, with 
ſeveral alterations, repeated his principal 
Experiments on which he grounds his 
doctrine on this ſubject, and found them 
perfectly accurate. Though in ſome leſs 
material circumſtances a nearer confirma- 
tion might become neceſſary; it does how- 
ever no injury to the main ſubject; which 
is grounded on ſeveral correſponding Ex- 
periments.— Heat, Fire, and Light are in 
regard to the elementary principle, the 
ſame with good Air and phlogiſton; but 
| their 


Mr. Scheele firſt diſcovered the acid of Fluor; 

and he gave a very intereſting Memoir on Manganeſe 
(Molgbdenum Magneſium, Linn.) in 1774, among the 
Memoirs of the Academy of Sciences at Stockholm. 


PrREFATORY INTRODUCTION. --XXXIX 


their proportion and perhaps the manner 
of their compoſition, cauſe the great differ- 
ence. Phlogiſton ſeems to be a real ele- 
mentary principle, which enters the chief 
part of ſubſtances, and adheres to them 
moſt obſtinately. There are ſeveral means 
to ſeparate it more or leſs perfectly: Of 
thoſe known ſubſtances, good Air is moſt 
active; for which reaſon, I put its ſign at 
the very top of the column of phlogiſton in 
my new table of attractions; what it cannot 
do ſuddenly, is however done gradually by 
the intervention of favourable circum- 
ſtances. +. 

How intereſting the more refined Che- 
miſtry is, will not be neceſſary to prove 
more circumſtantially on the preſent occa- 
ſion. It requires a great deal of prejudice 
or the greateſt ignorance, to treat it with 
contempt under the ſpecious pretence 
of unneceſſary refinement and ſubtleties, 
Earth, Water, Air, Heat, Light, and many 
more ſuch ſubtle ſubſtances are every 
where to be met with; and as long as 
their properties remain unknown, the ef- 
fects both of nature and art, muſt remain 
involved in the moſt perfect obſcurity. In 
Chemiſtry, there are none of the veritates 


atieſe ; the leaſt phznomenon, when ex- 
amined 


xl PrREFATORY INTRODUCTION. 


amined in all its cauſes, is always connected 
with others of the greateſt importance; in 
ſuch a manner, that every thing is ſhewn 
connected in the great economy of nature. 
Finally, it is neceſſary to obſerve, that 
the following intereſting performance, has 
been ready for the preſs very near two years 
ago; though it is publiſhed only at preſent, 
for ſeveral reaſons, which it would be ſu- 
perfluous to alledge here. By this delay 
it happened, that Dr. Prieſtley not know- 
ing any thing of Mr. Scheele's work, has 
previous to its publication, deſcribed ſe- 
veral new properties of Air. But they 
are here exhibited in a different manner, 
as well as in a quite different connection. 
To conclude, I wiſh the Author an unin- 
terrupted and laſting enjoyment of health; 
as he without doubt, will not be deficient 
in zeal, reflection, diligence, and opportu- 
nities to continue his reſearches; in which 
caſe the ſcience of nature, muſt expect 
from him many more inveſtigations. 


TORBERN BERGMAN, 
Upſal, July 13. 1777- 


Naturalem cauſam quærimus & aſſiduam, 
non raram & fortuitam, SENECA, 


OBSERVATIONS 
AND 
EXPERIMENTS 


ON 


AIR AND FIRE. 


I 


HE object and chief bufineſs of Che- 

miſtry conſiſts in a ſkilful decompo- 

ſition of bodies into their integrant parts, and 
in combining them again in various manners. 
Only thoſe can be ignorant how difficult 

it is to execute this buſineſs with the greateſt 
accuracy, who either never undertook it, or 
B never 


2 Experiments on 


never beſtowed upon it the * degree 


of attention. 


2. 


Hitherto chemiſts are not agreed upon 
the number of ſimple principles or elements, 
of which all corporeal ſubſtances are com- 
poſed. This indeed is one of the moſt dif- 
ficult problems; and ſome are of opinion, 
that there are no hopes of ever inveſtigating 
the elements of bodies; which circumſtance 
is but a poor comfort for thoſe, who delight 
in the inveſtigation of nature: but far be it, 
that the noble ſcience of Chemiſtry ſhould 
be circumſcribed in ſo narrow limits. Others 
believe that earth and phlogi/ion are thoſe 
principles, which are the conſtituent parts of 
all corporeal ſubſtances. The greateſt num- 
ber ſeem to admit only the peripatetic ele- 
ments, 


2, 
I confeſs to have beſtowed a great deal of 
trouble upon the ſubject, in order to acquire 
diſtin& ideas, It is aſtoniſhing how nume- 
rous and varied the notions and conjectures of 
authors 


Air and Firr. US. 


authors are in giving a definition of the fiery 
phenomena, which were the chief object 
of my inveſtigations. I found the great ne- 
ceſſity to know the Fire, ſince it is impoſſible 
to make experiments without heat and fire, 
or to produce any effects with any ſalvent; 1 
began to ſet aſide all the definitions of Fire; I 
made numerous experiments, in order to 
inveſtigate, if poſſible, this glorious ſub- 
jet. I ſoon found, that without know- 
ing the Air, it is impoſlible to form a true 
judgment on the phenomena of Fire. After 
a ſeries of experiments I obſerved, that Air 
really makes part of the compound of Fire, 
and is a conſlituent part of the flame. and of 
ſparks. I concluded, therefore, that a Trea- 
tiſe on Fire, could not be drawn up with any 
degree of accuracy, without an enquiry - 
into Air. 


4: 

Air is that inviſible fluid, which is con- 
ſtantly breathed by us, which every where 
ſurrounds the globe, and which is poſſeſſed 
of elaſticity and weight. It is conſtantly 
filled with a great quantity of various ef- 
fluvia, which are divided ſo minutely through- 

B 2 _— 


4 Experiments on 


out its whole maſs, that they ſcarcely become 
viſible in the very rays of the ſun. Among 
- theſe heterogeneous particles, watery vapours 
are always moſt prevalent. But it is mixed 
with another elaſtic fluid ſimilar to air, and 
which is in many reſpects differing from it, 

called very properly by Profeſſor Bergman, 
 Aerious Acid. It owes its exiſtence to the 
deſtruction of organic bodies by putrefaction 
or combuſtion, 


LO 

Nothing has of late ſo much engaged the 
attention of natural philoſophers, as this 
ſabtle acid, or fixed air. It is no wonder, 
. ſince inferences drawn from the properties of 
this elaſtic aicd, are by no means favourable 
to all thoſe who are poſſeſſed by prejudice. 
The partiſans of the Paracelſian doctrine are 
of opinion, that air 1s properly not ſubject 
to alteration or change : others think with 
Hales, that it may be mixed with other 
bodies; but that it then loſes its elaſticity ; 
which it again recovers, as ſoon as it is diſ- 
engaged either by fire or fermentation. But 
_ obſerving, that this diſengaged air is poſſeſſed 
of properties widely different of thoſe in 
28 common 


Air and Fire. 5 


common air; they conclude, (without being 
founded on experience) that this Air is 
charged with heterogeneous particles; and 
that the Air ought to be cleared of the he- 
terogeneous matter by ſhaking and filtrating 
it with various fluids. I believe this opinion 
might be adopted without the leaſt heſitation, 
if it only could be clearly proved by expe- 
riment, that a certain quantity of common 
Air may be changed, by the mixture of 
adventitious ſubſtances, into fixed or other 
Air : but as this has not as yet been put into 
execution, I ſuppoſe myſelf right, by adopt- 
ing as many kinds of Air, as are extricated 
by experience, For having collected an 
elaſtic fluid, and obſerving that its elaſticity 
is increaſed by heat and diminiſhed by cold; 
when at the ſame time it retains conſtantly 
its elaſtic fluidity, and has properties and re- 
lations quite different of thote, which are 
found in common Air, I think myſelf en- 
titled to conclude, that this is a peculiar kind 
of Air. I aſſert that ſuch collected Air 
ought to preſerve its elaſticity even in the _ 
moſt intenſe cold; ſince otherwiſe innumer- 
able kinds of Air muſt be allowed; as it is 
highly probable that all ſubſtances may be 
B 3 changed 


6 Experiments on 


changed into a vapour ſimilar to Air by an 
intenſe heat. 


6. 


Subſtances undergoing either putre faction 
ot decompoſition by Fire, diminiſh or as it 
were abſorb part of the Air, Sometimes it 
happens that they conſiderably increaſe the 
bulk of the Air, and in other inſtances, theſe 
ſubſtances will neither increaſe nor diminiſh 
a certain given quantity of Air; all which are 
very remarkable phenomena. Surmiſes can» 
not determine any thing with certainty, and 
they will ſtill leſs ſatisfy a chemical natural 
philoſopher, who always wants demonſtrative 
proofs, This clearly ſhews the neceſſity of 
making experiments, in order to elucidate 
this myſtery of nature, 


_—_— — —— — 
— — 


CY — were 


. — = l - 
2 — — — 
+ Lo — — —— > a —— 7 a —_— 
cd - — «©. — — 6 


7. 
General Properties of common Air. 


1. FIRE burns for a certain time in a 
given quantity of Air. 2. If the 
Fire does not yield during combuſtion a 


fl uid 


Air and Fire. 7 


fluid ſimilar to air, after the ſpontaneous 


extinction of the Fire, air is diminiſhed 


between a third and a fourth of its bulk. 
3. It is not miſcible with common water. 
4. All kind of animals live but a certain 
time in a given quantity of confined air. 
5. Seeds, as for inſtance peas, will ſtrike 
roots, and grow to a certain height in a 
given quantity of equally confined air, by the 
addition of ſome water and moderate heat. 

Hence if a fluid be exhibited ſimilar in 
all external appearances to Air, but which 
upon examination wants the enumerated 
qualities, (ſhould even only one be wanting,) 
I ſhould think myſelf convinced, that it is 
not common air, 


8. 


Air is a Compound of two Kinds of elaſtic 
Fluids. 


Expert ment J. 


I diſſolved one ounce alcaline liver of 
ſulphur in eight ounces of water ; of this 
ſolution I ponred four ounces into an 
empty bottle, whoſe capacity was twenty- 

B 4 four 


8 Experiments on 


four ounces, and corked it well; then I turned 
the bottle, immerſed its neck into a ſmall 
veſſel with water, and kept it in this poſition 
a fortnight, The ſolution had partly loft 
its red colour, and ſome ſulphur had been 
precipitated from it, during this time: after 
this I put the bottle in the ſame poſition in 
a larger veſſel with water, keeping the mouth 
and neck under water, and the bottom of 
the bottle above the water, and thus I drew 
the cork under water, which immediately 
ruſhed with violence into the bottle ; I corked 
the bottle, pulled it out from under the 
water, and weighed the liquor contained, 
which I found to be ten ounces: if you 
ſubſtra& out of it the four ounces ſolution 
of liver of ſulphur, there remain fix ounces ; 
conſequently, the experiment proves that, 
in a fortnight, out of twenty parts of Air, 
fix parts were loſt, ah 


9, 
Experiment II. 


a, J repeated the above experiment with 
the ſame quantity of liver of ſulphur, only 
with this difference, that 1 kept the bottle 
| e well 


Air and Fire. 9 


well corked during one week. I found here. 
upon, that out of twenty parts of air, no 
more than four were loſt. 

6. Another time I kept the bottle ſtand- 
ing four months; the ſolution was of a 
dark yellow colour ; but there had been loſt 
no more Air than in Experiment I. viz. fix 
Parts. 


10. 
Experiment III. 


mixed two ounces of cauſtic lixivium, 
made of alkali of tartar and quicklime, (ſuch 
as did not precipitate limewater), with half 
an ounce of the above ſolution of liver of 
ſulphur, which likewiſe did not precipitate 
any thing out of limewater. This mixture 
was of a yellow colour, I poured it in the 
ſame bottle as before (Experiment I.) ; and 
after it had been kept for a fortnight, well 
corked, I found it colourleſs, and without 
any precipitate. That the air had been 
likewiſe diminiſhed in the bottle, I collected 
from the ruſhing of the air into the bottle, 
by a ſmall hole in the cork. 


E xpe- 


10 Experiments on 


11. 


Experiment IV. 


a. I took four ounces of a ſolution of 
ſulphur in limewater, poured it into a bottle, 
and corked it well. After a fortnight the 
yellow colour was gone, and out of twenty 
parts of air, four were loſt, The ſolution con- 
tained not any ſulphur, but a powder had 
been precipitated, which was chiefly plaiſter 
of Paris —b. Volatile liver of ſulphur dimi- 
' niſhes likewiſe the bulk of the air.—c. But 


ſulphur and volatile ſpirit of ſulphur are not 
ſubje& to any change in it. 


12. 
Experiment V. 


I ſuſpended linen rags, dipped in a ſolu- 
tion of alkali of tartar, over burning ſul phur, 
The alkali having been ſaturated by the vo- 
latile acid, I put the rags into a retort, and 
tied the opening carefully with a wet blad- 
der. After three weeks I found the bladder 
very flaccid, I turned the retort and kept 

its 


Air and Fire. 11 


its mouth under water, having made a hole 
into the bladder; the water ruſhed with 
violence into the retort, and filled a fourth 
part of it. | 


13. 
Experiment VI. 


collected in a bladder nitrous air 
which had been formed by a ſolution of 
metals in nitrous acid, and having well 
tied the bladder, I put it into a retort, and 
tied its mouth carefully with a wet bladder, 
The nitrous air gradually loſt its elaſticity, 
the bladder became flaccid and-yellow, as 
if corroded by aquafortis. A fortnight after, 
] turned the mouth of the retort, kept 
it under water, and made a hole in the 
bladder; the water ruſhed into it, and no 
more than twoethirds of it remained empty. 


14. 
Experiment VII. 


4. I immerſed the mouth of a retort in a 
veſſel with oil of turpentine, which was riſing 
every day into the retort a few lines, After 
a fort- 


8 Expertments on 


a fortnight the fourth part of the retort was 
filled with it; I let it ſtand for three weeks 
more, but the oil would riſe no more. All 
ſuch oils as will dry in the air and may be 
changed into a reſinous ſubſtance, have this 
quality; but oil of turpentine, and linſeed 
oil will riſe eaſier, having previouſly rinced 
the retort with a concentrated ſharp lie,—6. I 
poured two ounces of perfectly limpid and 
colourleſs animal oil of dippel into a bottle, 
and cloſed it very carefully: in two months 
time it was thick and black. I then turned 
the bottle under water and drew the cork, 
when a fourth part of the bottle was filled 


with water. 


15. 
Experiment VIII. 


a. I diſſolved two ounces of martial vitriol 
in thirty-two ounces of water, and precipi- 
tated the ſolution with a cauſtic lie. The 
precipitate being quite ſettled, I decanted the 
clear liquor, and I put the deep-green pre- 
cipitate of iron, together with the remaining 
liquor into the bottle mentioned before, 
(No. 8.) and corked it well. Aﬀter a fort- 
night, 


Air and Fire. 13 
night (during all which time I ſhook fre- 
quently the bottle) the green calx of iron 
had acquired the colour of crocus martis, 
and out of forty parts of Air twelve were 
loſt.—5. By moiſtening iron filings with 
ſome water, and keeping it cloſely ſhut in 
a bottle, likewiſe ſome part of the Air is 
diminiſhed, —c. The ſolution of iron in vine- 
gar has the ſame effect upon Air, The 
vinegar precipitates the diſſolved iron in the 
form of a yellow crocus, and is entirely freed 
from the metal.—d. The ſolution of cop- 
per made by the marine acid in a cloſe 
veſſel, diminiſhes likewiſe the Air, In all 
the abovementioned kinds of Air neither a 
candle will burn, nor the leaſt ſpark be 
viſible, 


15. 

It appears from all theſe Experiments, 
that in each of them phlogiſton, the ſimple 
inflammable principle, is preſent. It is well 
known, that Air attracts the inflammable 
part of hodies, and deprives them of it: not 
only this may be ſeen from the above Ex- 
periments; but it alſo appears that in the 
tranſition of what is inflammable principle 
into 


14 Experiments on 


into the Ait, a conſiderable part of the Ait 

is loſt; but that what is inflammable prin- 

ciple is the ſole cauſe of this effect, is evi- 

dent from No. 10, where not a veſtige of 
ſulphur remained, ſince the colourleſs /ix- 

tum, according to my Experiments, con- 
tained only ſome vitriolated tartar ; and 

No. 11. proves this likewiſe, | 

But fince ſulphur by itſelf, and likewiſe the 
volatile ſulphureous acid have no effect upon 
air, according to No. 2, it is evident, that 
the decompoſition of liver of ſulphur is done 
by the laws of a double affinity, viz. the 
alkalis and lime attract the vitriolic acid, 
and Air attracts their phlogiſton. 

From the above Experiments it like wiſe 
appears, that a given quantity of Air can 
be united to, or ſaturated as it were only by 
a certain quantity of phlogiſton, which is 
evident from No. . letter c. But whether 
the phlogiſton which is loſt from the ſub- 
ſtance, ſtill remained in the reſiduum of 
Air in the bottle; or whether the loſt Air 
was united, and became fixed with the 
ſubſtances of liver of ſulphur, oils, &c. are 
queſtions of great importance. 

It would follow from the fr/? queſtion, 


that phlogiſton has the quality of depriving 
Air 


Air and Fire. 15 


Air of part of its elaſticity, and that for 
this reaſon it is more compreſſed by the 
external air. In order to extricate myſelf 
from theſe doubts, I firſt ſuppoſed that 
ſuch air ought to be ſpecifically heavier 
than common Air, both on account of the 
phlogiſton it contained, and of its greater 
denſity. But how much was I aſtoniſhed, 
upon finding, that a very thin retort, filled 
with this kind of Air, and weighed ia 
the niceſt manner, was not only not heavier 
than an, equal meaſure of common Air, 
but even ſomewhat lighter, —I then imagined, 
that the /zft queſtion might be applicable; 
and then it would follow, that the loſt 
Air might again be ſeparated from the ma- 
terials employed in the Experiment. None 
of the Experiments ſeemed to intimate this 
more clearly, than that in No. 10; be- 
cauſe this reſiduum, as mentioned before, 
conſiſted of vitriolated tartar and alkali, 
In order therefore to try whether the loſt 
Air might not be changed into fixed Air; 
I examined” whether this would not appear, 
when ſome part of this cauſtic lie was 
poured into limewater, but all was in vain, 


and no precipitate could be procured. I 
tried 


16 Experiments on 


tried by ſeveral other methods to extricate 
the loſt Air from this alkaline mixture, 
but ſince the ſucceſs was the ſame with the 
preceding one, I forbear mentioning the Ex- 
periment, to avoid prolixity.—Thus much 
I fee from the abovementioned Experiments ; 
that Air is compoſed of two different fluids, 
the one of which attracts not the phlogiſton, 
and the other has the quality of attracting 
it, and this latter fluid makes between a third 
and a fourth of the whole bulk of the 
air. What becomes of this laſt kind of 
air, after it unites with the phlogiſton, is 
a queſtion which ought not to be decided 
by ſurmiſes, but by new experiments. 


Let us now examine how air is affected 
by inflammable ſubſtances, when expoſed 
to fiery motion. Firſt let us conſider that 
kind of fire, which, during combuſtion, 
yields no fluid fimilar to air. 


17. 
Experiment I. 
a 
I put into a thin tetort, whoſe capacity 
was of thirty ounces water, nine QUnces 
of urinous phoſphorus, and ſhut its mouth 
up 


Ai, and Fire. 17 
up carefully. Then I heated, by a burning 
candle, the place of the retort, where the 
phoſporous lay, which latter ſoon began to 
melt, and immediately after to burn; the 
retort filling with white fumes, which ſtuck 
to the ſides of the veſſel like white flowers; 
This is the acid of phoſporus in its dry ſtate; 
After the retort had grown cold, I held 
it inverted, under water, and drew the ecork 
there ; ſcarcely was this done, when the 
external air preſſed the water into the re- 
tort; this water weighed nine ounces. 


18. 
Experiment II. 


Having put into the ſame retort ſome 
pieces of phoſphorus, 1 put it by, well 
ſhut up during fix weeks, or ſo long till 
it would no more caſt a light; when I 
obſerved that one-third of the bulk of air 


had been loſt, 


; 19. 
Experiment III. 


I put three tea · ſpoonfuls of ſteel filings 


into a phial, of the capacity of two ounces 
C of 


18 Experiments on 

of water; I poured on it one ounce of 
water, and gradually added half an ounce 
of oil of vitriol. A violent efferveſcence and 
fermentation enſued ; after the ſcum had ſub- 
ſided, I ſhut the orifice as cloſely as poſſible 
with a cork, through which a glaſs tube 
had been previouſly put. A (Fig. 1.) 
This phial I placed in a veſſel with hot water, 
BB, (for cold water would much hinder 
the ſolution) then I approached a burning 
candle to the orifice of the glaſs tube, 
when immediately the inflammable air took 
fire, and burnt with a yellowiſh green flame. 
Immediately after this, I took a ſmall re- 
tort, of the capacity of twenty ounces water, 
C, and kept it ſo deep under water, that 
by this means the ſmall flame came juſt 
into the middle of the retort : a moment 
after the water began to mount in the 
retort, till it reached to D, when the flame 
was extinguiſhed ; the inſtant after, the 
water began to. lower, and was entirely 
expelled out of the retort. The ſpace till 
D contained tour ounces, conſequently the air 
was diminiſhed about one-fifth,—I poured 
a few ounces of limewater into the retort, 
in order to fee whether, during the burn- 


ing, 


Air and Fire. 19 


ing, ſome aerial acid /i. e.) fixed air) had 
not been extricated: but I found none. I 
repeated the experiment with filings of 
Zinc, and the reſult was in every reſpe& the 
ſame. The conſtituent parts of this in- 
flammable air I ſhall hereafter demonſtrate; 
for though it might appear from theſe ex- 
periments, that it was chiefly phlogiſton, 
there are, however, other experiments 
againſt it. 

Nov let us examine the relation of air 
to that kind of fire, which, during.combuſ- 
tion, yields a fluid ſimilar to air. 


20. 
Experiment IV. 


It is known that the flame of a can- 
dle abſorbs air ; but fince it is very dif- 
ficult, or next to impoſſible, to light a 
candle in a cloſe retort, previouſly an ex- 
periment was made as follows: I put a 
burning candle into a diſh filled with water, 
and then covered the candle with an invert- 
ed retort ; immediately after this, great air 
bubbles roſe out of the water, which were. 
cauſed by the expanded air from the heat 


C 2 in 


* 
— — — . —̃ —— 


20 Experiments on 


in the retort ; when the flame decreaſed 


in ſize the water began ta mount into the 
retort ; after the flame was extinguiſhed, 


and the retort grown cold, I found its 


fourth part filled with water. This experi- 
ment was not decifive to me, ſince I was 
not ſure, whether this fourth part of gir 
was not expelled by the heat of the flame; 


in which caſe the external air preſſing ne- 


ceſſarily on the water, after the cooling of 
the retort, endeavours to. reſtore the equi- 
librium, and farces a quantity of water iuto 
the retort equal in bulk to the air which 
had been expelled by heat. I therefore 
made the following experiment. 


21. 


Experiment V. 


a. I faſtened to the bottom of a thaw 
dith A (fig. 2.) a tough maſs, compoſed 
of melting wax, rofin, and turpentine, 
of the thickneſs of about two fingers: in 
its middle I fixed a ſtrong iron wire, reach- 
ing up to the middle of the retort B. On 


the point of the wire C a ſmall wax candle 
Was 


Air and Fire. 21 


was fixed, whoſe wick I had myſelf made 
by twiſting three ſmall threads together; 
this candle was lighted, and the inverted 
retort B was immediately put on it, and 
preſſed deep into the maſs below; and then 
the diſh was filled with water. After the 
flame was extinguiſhed, and every thing 
perfectly grown cold, I opened the mouth 
of the retort under water, when two ounces 
of water ruſhed in, The retort was ca- 
ble of holding one hundred and fixty ounces 
of water, The air diminiſhed therefote 
muſt have been two ounces. Had this 
air been abſorbed by the inflammable mat. 
ter; or had the heat of this little flame ex- 
pelled juſt ſo much air, before I could ſtop 
the mouth of this retort by preſſing it into 
the tough ſubſtance below? The latter 
ſeems to be the cafe, as I collect from 
the following circumſtance: I took a ſmall 
matraſs, or retort, of about twenty ounces 
meaſute; in this I left a candle burning in 
the manner mentioned before: After every 
thing was grown cold, about two ounces of 
water ruſhed in, Had the firſt two ounces 
meaſure of air been abſorbed, there muſt 
have been in this experiment abſorbed only 
two drachms meaſure of air, 


51 


22 Experiments on 


5. J repeated the above experiment with 
the large matraſs, only with this difference, 
that I uſed ſpirit of wine inſtead of a candle. 
For I fixed three iron wires, of equal 
length, into the abovementioned tough mals 
at the bottom of the diſh, reaching to the 
middle of the matraſs; on theſe wires a 
ſquare piece of tin was laid, and then a 
ſmall ſaucer with ſpirit of wine was put on 
the tin; the ſpirit was ſet fire to, and the 
matraſs was ſet over the whole apparatus. 
After the whole was grown cold, I found 
that three ounces meaſure of air had been 
expelled by the heat of the flame. 

c. On the ſame apparatus I put ſome ſmall 
live coal, and left them to extinguiſh under 
the retort. After ' growing cold, I found 
that the heat of the coals had expelled three 
and a half ounces meaſure 'of air. 

Theſe experiments ſeem to prove, that 
the tranſition of phlogiſton into the air 
diminiſhes not always its bulk; which how 
ever other experiments clearly indicate, which 
ate mentioned No. 8— 6: but what we 
now are going to mention, demonſtrates 
that the part of air, which unites with the 

| 11990 . 


Air and Fire. == 


 inflammable, and is in a manner abſorbed, 
is again reſtored by the re-extcicated aerial 
acid (fixed air.) | 


22. 


Experiment VI. 


I poured in each matraſs, after the fire 
was extinguiſhed, in the abovementioned ex- 
periments (No. 21. 4, 6. c.) and quite grown 
cold, fix ounces of (lac calcis) milk of 
lime, (ie. lime- water, which contained more 
quicklime than the water could diſſolve), I 
then carefully ſhut with the hand the mouth 
of the matraſs, and ſhook repeatedly the 
liquor in it; after which the inverted matraſs 
was immerſed in water, and the hand a 

little taken away, ſo as to make a ſmall open- 

ing, when immediately the water ruſhed 
into the matraſs; hereupon I ſhut again 
the mouth of the matraſs with my hand, 
and ſhook it ſeveral times, immerſed it in 
water, and made an opening; this ma- 
nœuvte I repeated twice over, until the 
water would no more ruſh into the ma- 
traſs, or until no more aerial acid (fixed 
24 air) 


24 Experiments on 


air) was in the matraſs. T obſerved that in 
each experiment, about ſeven or eight 
ounces of water mounted into the retort, 
and conſequently a nineteenth part of air 
was loſt, This is no doubt ſomething ; 
but fince in the combuſtion of phoſphorus 
(No, 17.) very nigh the third part of air 
was loſt; there muſt be till another 
cauſe exiſting, why the ſame quantity in 
proportion here was not abſorbed, It is 
known, that one part of aerial acid (fixed 
air) mixed with ten parts of common air, 
extinguiſhes the fire ; and here, in this in- 
ſtance, are moreover the watery vapours, 
which ariſe from the deſtruction of the 
oily ſubſtance, and are expanded by the 
heat of the flame; theſe two elaſtic fluids 
ſeparating from the flame, no doubt hinder 
the fire very much from burning longer, 
(though it would do it otherwiſe) ſince 
there is no current of air exiſting, which 
might carry them off from the flame, 
After the aerial acid has been ſeparated 
from this air, by the /ac calcis, a candle 
can again burn in it; though it is only for 
a very ſhort ſpace of time, 
| | 23+ Ex- 


Air and Fire. 25 


23. 
Experiment VII, 


I put a crucible on the ſtand (No. 21. 5) 
filled with ſulphur, ſet it on fire, and co- 
vered the matraſs over it. After the ſulphur 
could burn no longer, and every thing had 
grown cold; I found that two parts out of one 
hundred and fixty, were expelled from the 


matraſs by the heat of the flame. Then I 
poured fix ounces of clear limewater into 


the matraſs, and began to ſhake it, as 
mentioned above; and obſerved that the 
ſixth part of all the air was loſt by burning. 
The limewater cauſed no precipitate; which 
ſhews that tulphur, during its conflagra- 
tion, yields no aerial acid, but a ſubſtance 
ſomewhat analogous to air, or the volatile 
ſulphureous acid, which occupies the va- 
cuum cauſed by the union of the phlogiſton 
with air, Certainly it is a remarkable cir- 
cumſtance to obſerve, that the- phlogiſton 
ſeparated from bodies, either without or with 
a fiery motion, and united with air, always 


conſiderably diminiſhes the bulk of air. 
24. Ex- 


26 Exßeriments on 


24. 


Experiments, proving that common air, 
. conhiſting of two kinds of elaſtic fluids, 
after having been ſeparated by means of 
Pblogiſlon, may again be compounded. 


I have already mentioned (No. 16.) that 
I could not find again the loſt air. It 
might be objeCted, that the loſt air is till 
contained in the reſiduum of air, which 
could not farther be united with the phlo- 
giſton; for finding that kind of air lighter 
than common air, it might be ſuppoſed 
that the phlogiſton when united with this air 
made it leſs pondercus, which circumſtance 
is already known from other experiments. 
However, ſince phlogiſton is a ſubſtance, 
(which always ſuppoſes ſome weight,) I very 
much doubt whether this hypotheſis be 
founded on truth, But without entering 
into any detail, I will prove, that by the union 
of air with the inflammable principle, a 
compound is formed, fo ſubtle as to paſs 
through the fine pores of the glaſs, and 
diſperſe all uver the air, 


25. Che- 


Air and Fire. 27 


25. 


Chemiſts have frequently diſtilled the 
fuming ſpirit of nitre, from oil of vitriol 
ſpread on ſalt- petre; and they could not help 
obſerving, that this acid is in the beginning 
of the operation red; in the ſequel white and 
colourleſs; and at laſt again fo intenſely red, 
that it is impoſſible to look . acroſs the re- 
ceiver. Here it ought to be remarked, that 
in caſe the heat is much increaſed towards 
the end of the diſtillation, the whole mix- 
ture is put into ſuch an-efferveſcence, that 
every thing paſles over into the receiver; and 
during this efferveſcence a kind of air is 
diſengaged, which deſerves every attention. 
If for this operation a very Sac oil of vi- 
triol is employed, the acid going over in 
the beginning is not only by far more red, 
than if a white oil of vitriol had been uſed ; 
but alſo by putting a burning candle into 
the receiver, after the paſſing over of about 
one ounce of acid, you fee it inſtantly ex- 
tioguiſhed ; whereas a burning candle in- 
troduced towards the end of the operation 
when the mixture is in efferveſcence, into 

the 


28 Experiments on 


the receiver filled with intenſely red va- 
pours, not only continues burning, but its 
flame becomes infinitely more vivid, than in 
common air. The ſame phenomenon ap- 
pears, if towards the end of the operation 
a receiver filled with air, wherein a candle 
will not burn, is luted to the apparatus; 
for after it has been fixed about half an 
hour, a candle will again burn in the air it 
then contains. 

The previous queſtion therefore ought 
to be put: whether the vapours of acid of 
nitre are naturally red? I beg leave to in- 
troduce here this queſtion; fince I have 
reaſon to believe that there are people, who 
make the red colour a characteriſtic of this 
acid, The colours of the acid of nitre are 
accidental : for if ſeveral ounces of fuming 
ſpirit of nitre be diſtilled by a very moderate 
heat, the yellow colour ſeparates from it, 
and paſſes over into the receiver, and the 
refiduum in the retort is as white and co- 
Jourleſs as water, This acid has all the 
chief qualities of acid of nitre, and the 
yellow colour alone is wanting: This 1 
would call the pure acid of nitre. No 
ſooner comes it in contact with an inflan- 

mable 


Ai and Fire. 29 


mable principle, than it grows more or leſs red. 
The red acid 1s more volatile than the pure, 
becauſe moderate heat alone will ſeparate 
it; and for this very reaſon in the diſtilla- 
tion of Glauber's ſpirit of nite, the volatile 
tpirit goes over firſt, and after it has paſſed the 
uncoloured follows. However, why does 
the acid again paſs over intenſely red at the 
end of the diſtillation ? why was the red co- 
lour not gone off in the beginning of the 
operation? whence obtains it phlogiſton at 
that period? Here lies the difficulty. 

I mentioned in the preceding number, 
that a burning candle is extinguiſhed in the 
receiver at the beginning of the diſtillation. 
The cauſe of it is alledged in the experiment 
already deſcribed, No. 13. The acid of 
nitre paſſing over in the form of vapours, 
attracts the phſogiſton, which diſcovers itſelf 
in the black colour of the oil of vitriol, im- 
mediately after it meets theair; which again, 
by elective attraction, deprives the phlogiſti- 
cated acid of its inflammable principle; by 
which means part of the air contained in 
the receiver is loſt, whence flame immerſed 
into it is extinguiſhed. (No. 15.) 


27. 


Experiments on 


27. 
Acid of nitre can take up phlogiſton in 
various proportions, and obtains at each pro- 
portion different qualities. 3. If it be, as it 
were, ſaturated with it, real fire riſes, and it 
is entirely deſtroyed. 5. If the inflammable 
principle be leſs copious, the acid is con- 
verted into a kind of air, which will neither 
unite with alkalies, nor with abſorbent 
earths, and with water only in {mall pro- 
portions : if this acid of nitre analogous to air, 
meets the air, the latter attracts the phlogiſton, 
and loſes its elaſticity, (No. 13.) The va- 
pours become red, the air undergoes likewiſe 
this remarkable and natural change, of be- 
ing not only diminiſhed, but alſo of growing 
warm. c. If the acid of nitre receives a ſtill 
leſs proportion of phlogiſton, it is likewiſe 
changed into a kind of air; which, like 
common air is inviſible &, but capable of 


* The author means to ſay, that as common air has not 
particles, which cloſe to them, or in ſmall proportions 
become diſceroible to the naked eye; in the ſame man- 
ner, the air formed by the addition of a ſmall proportion 
of phlogiſton to acid of nitre, becomes not diſcernible 
to the naked eye; though its effects and qualities may 
ſofliciently characteriſe it, ſo as to diſtinguiſh it from 
other kinds of air. (F.) 


| | uniting 


Air and Fire. 31 


uniting with alkalies and terreous ſubſtances, 
and of yielding by their mixture true neutral 
ſalts; however, this phlogiſticated acid fo 
cloſely adheres to theſe abforbent ſubſtances, 
that even the addition of vegetable acids can 
not expel it. In this manner it is to be met 
with it, in ſaltpetre, made red hot; and 
likewiſe in the nitrum antimoniatum. If this 
acid of nitre meets the common air, the 
latter loſes its elaſticity, and is diſſolved in 
red vapours; if mixed in certain propor- 
tions with water it becomes tinged, blue 
green or yellow. d. If the pure acid of nitre 
receives but a very ſmall proportion of inflam- 
mable principle,' the vapours become only 
tinged red, they are deprived of elaſticity ; 
but this acid of nitre is however become 
more volatile than a pure acid: And this 
ſmall quantity of plogiſton ſo firmly adheres 
to the acid, that even air, which has the 
ſtrongeſt affinity to phlogiſton, is incapable 
of extcicating the ſame, 


28. 


Suppoſing then all this; let us try, whe- 
ther the peculiar phenomenon, mentioned, 
No. 25, (viz. that fire burns ſo very clear 

in 


32 Experiments oft 


in the receiver at the end of the diſtillation) 
may not be accounted for, Is not that pe- 
culiar kind of air, eſpecially that peculiar 
part of it by the medium of which fire 
burns, which (according to the preceding ex- 
periments) conſtitutes only the third part of 
common air; is not this kind of air introduced 
into the receiver by diſtillation? Muſt not 
this kind of air, after its union with phlo- 
giſton and its thereby becoming inviſible to the 
eye, re- appear; whenever it comes in con- 
tact with a ſubſtance, which has a fronger 
affinity to inflammables, than this kind of 
air? Is there any rational perſon that will 
doubt, that this exactly happens in the 
diſtillation of fuming ſpirit of nitre? Did 
J not obſerve in the preceding No. 27. d, 
and does not daily experience corroborate it, 
that the more or leſs intenſe. redneſs can- 
not be eaſily ſeparated from the acid of nitre 
to which it is united, though air attracts ever 
- fo much the ſuperabundant phlogiſton of this 
acid; and in this attraction a ſenſible degree of 
heat is produced (No. 27. 6) whence I am 
induced to ſuſpect, that during each union 


of the phlogiſton with air, heat is gene- 
rated 


Air and Fire. 33 
rated; and conſequently that Heat is a com- 
pound of that air which makes the third 
part of common air, (No. 16.) and of an in- 
flammable ſubſtance. This heat it is, which 
during the diſtillation of concentrated acid of 
nitre is decompoſed, and reſolved into its in- 
tegrant parts. This owes its exiſtence to the 
fire employed in the diſtillation; at firſt it is 
compoſed of air, (without which no fire can 
be imagined,) and of the phlogiſton of the 
coals; it penetrates the cuppel, the ſand and 
retort, where it meets with a ſubſtance at- 
tracting more powerfully the phlogiſton, than 
the air does which is united with it, conſe- 
quently heat is decompounded ; by which 
means the acid of nitre is tinged of a deep 
red colour; the air which had been divided 
into incomprehenfibly minute parts, re- 
aſſumes its former quality; it is puſhed into 
the receiver by the concomitant acid, becomes 
more elaſtic by heat, where it has opportunity 
again to attract phlogiſton; and fince in 
the receiver a greater proportion of this kind 
of air is preſent, than in common air, it is no 
wonder, that the flame there is ſtronger and 
brighter. This opinion ought to appear to 
my readers as ſtrange, as it did in the begin- 

D ning 


34 Experiments on 


ning to me. However, being ſince con- 

vinced, that it is not a mere hypotheſis, but 
one of the cleareſt truths, I ſhall endeavour 
to corroborate it by further emperiments. 


29. 


I took a glaſs retort, capable of containing 
eight ounces of water, and diſtilled fuming 
ſpirit of nitre according to the uſual method. 
In the beginning the acid paſſed over red, 
then it became colourleſs, and laſtly again 
all red: no ſooner did this happen, than I 
took away the receiver ; and tied to the mouth 
of the retort a bladder emptied of air, which 
J had moiſtened in its inſide with milk of 
lime lac calcis, (i. e. lime-water, containing 
more quicklime than water can diſſolve) 
(No. 22.) to prevent its being corroded by 
the acid. Then I continued the diſtillation, 
and the bladder gradually expanded. Here- 
upon I left every thing to cool, tied up the 
bladder, and took it off from the mouth of 
the retort, —I filled a ten-ounce glaſs with 
this air (No. 30. c.) and put a ſmall burn- 
ing candle into it; when immediately the 
candle burnt with a large flame, of ſo vivid 
a light 


Air and Fire. 35 


a light that it dazzled the eyes. I mixed 
one part of this air with three parts of 
air, wherein fire would not burn; and 
this mixture afforded air, in every reſpect 
ſimilar to the common fort, Since this 
air is abſolutely neceſſary for the genera- 
tion of fire, and makes about one-third of 
our common air, I ſhall henceforth, for 
ſhortneſs ſake call it empyrea/ air, [literally 
fire-air :] the air which is unſerviceable for 
the fiery phenomenon, and which makes about 
two-thirds of common air, I ſhall for the fu- 
ture call foul air literally corrupted air]. 


30. 


It may happen, that I ſhall be aſked, 
in what manner I pour air from one veſſel 
into another ? I find it therefore neceſſary to 
_ deſcribe this previous to any other thing, My 
apparatus and veſſels are the moſt ſimple 
that can poſſibly be found. Matraſſes, 
retorts, bottles, phials, and ox-bladders 
are the things which I employ. The 
bladders are, when freſh rubbed and well 
blown up, bound up tight, and hung for 
drying. If I want a bladder, and find it 

D 2 ſill 


36 Exper iments on 
ſtill as well expanded as originally, Tony 
be aſſured that it is tight, 

a. If I want to collect a certain hind of 
air, for inſtance, phlogiſticated acid of nitre; 
(No. 13.) I take a ſoft bladder, rubbed on 
its inſide with a few drops of oil, I put into 
it the filings of ſome metal, iron, zinc or tin; 
I then carefully expel, by compreſſion, all 
the aic contained in it, and tye the bladder to 
the mouth of a ſmall phial, into which I had 
poured ſome aquefortis ; I unfold the bladder 
a little, that ſome of the ſteel filings may fall 
into the aquafortis ; and in proportion as they 
are diſſolved the bladder is expanded, When 
J have a ſufficiency of ſuch air, I tye the ori- 
fice of the bladder pretty cloſe with a ſtring, 
and take it off from the phial. 

5. If the phlogiſticated acid of nitre be 
mixed with aerial acid, which happens if the 
acid of nitre is diſtilled from ſugar, I then 
tye a bladder ſoftened in water round the ex- 
tremity of the neck of the retort (A, fig. 4.) ; 
but the better to preclude the eſcaping of air, 
it is neceſſary to ſcratch in that place the neck 
of the retort with a flint, (Retorts which I 
employ for this operation, I always order to 
be made of the ſize of half an ounce, and 

others 


Air and Pre. 37 


vthers increaſing to the ſize of three ounces, 
with a neck of the length of about a foot 
that the bladder, tied to its neck, may not 
ſuffer from the heat of the oven, nor from 
the hot vapours during the operation), In 
this bladder I pour ſome (lac calcts) milk of 
lime (No. 22.) and expel air as carefully 
as is poſſible. This lime abſorbs, du- 
ring diſtillation, the aerial acid (fixed air) 
and leaves the phlogiſticated acid of nitre. 

c. In the ſame manner as deſcribed (a.) 
I collect the aerial acid, and the inflammable 
air from ſulphur (of which J ſhall ſpeak in 
the ſequel), If the bladders be moiſt, or 
even only the ambient air ſo, theſe two kinds 
of air penetrate through the bladder ; but if 
on the contrary; the air be dry as well as the 
bladder, this does not happen. Inflamma- 
ble air from metals, (viz: iron, zinc, &c. &c.) 
F obtain' in the ſame manner, except that 
the plaſs is put into warm ſand. This air 
is ſtill more ſubtle than the preceding, and 
in a few days it paſſes through the ſmall 
pores of the bladder, though the air and 
bladder be ever ſo dry. I often experienced 
this to my diſappointment. — 4. I often 
collect air in bladders, without any phial. 
I put 


38 Experiments on 


I put into a ſoft bladder (A A. fig. 4.) that 
ſubſtance, from which I intend to-extricate 
the air, as for inſtance, chalk; above this chalk 
I gather the b'adder, and faſten it by 
means of a ſtring B B; I then pour on it 
the acid diluted with water, and expreſs the 
air as carefully as poſſible out of the bladder; 
laſtly, I tye up the mouth of the bladder. 
Then I untye the ſtring B, and admit the 
acid upon the chalk, which extricates the 
aereal acid, and expands the bladder.—e. It 
1 deſire to introduce a certain kind of air out 
of the bladder into a retort or bottle, the 
veſſel ought to be filled with water, and 
cloſely ſhut up with a tight cork; I 
then tye the orifice of the bladder (C to D. 
fig. 4.) including the air cloſely to the mouth 
of the bottle; this done, I turn the bottle, 
ſo that the bladder is below and the bottle 
uppermoſt ; I hold the bottle with the left 
hand, and draw the cork with the right, 
keeping the cork in the bladder between two 
fingers, until the water is gone out of the 
bottle into the bladder, and the air, out of 
the bladder into the blottle; after which I 
ſhut up the mouth of the bottle with: the 
cork, and untye the bladder from the bottle. 
= | It 


Air and Fire. 39 


If I intend to keep this air for ſome time, 1 
immerſe the inverted bottle to its neck in a 
veſſel with water. 

J. If the bladder contains aerial acid, or 
another kind of air, which may be abſorbed 
by water, and J intend to unite it with water 
in a dextrous manner; I fill a bottle with cold 
water, and having tyed the bladder to the 
mouth of the bottle, I then pour out of the 
bottle about the fourth part of the water into 
the bladder, and ſhut again the mouth of the 
bottle with the cork I had held all that time 
between my fingers in the bladder. I then 
gently ſhake the bottle, by which means the 
water imbibes the air: Hereupon I open 
the cork ſomething and the air ruſhes into 
the bottle, in order to fill the ſpace- become 
empty in the bottle, without ſpilling any 
water in the bladder; I ſhut again with the 
cork the bottle, and ſhake the water; and re- 
peat the proceſs two or three times more, by 
which operation the water becomes ſaturated 
with that kind of air. pay: 

g. If I intend to mix two kinds of air in a 
matraſs or retort,” I let run out of the retort 
into the bladder tyed to it, that proportion of 
water which I with to have of that kind of 
air, 


40 Experiments on 


air, I then tye the bladder, including the ſe- 


cond kind of air to the bottle, and let the re- 
maining water run into this bladder; this 
being done, I ſhut the bottle with the cork. 
5. If I intend to transfer air collected in a 
bottle, into a bladder, I reverſe the operation : 
i. e. I fill the bladder with that proportion of 
water which I wiſh to introduce of air into the 
bladder; this I tye up in one part of the blad- 
der ; then I fix the bladder to the mouth of 
the bottle, I untye the ſtring above the water, 
draw out the cork and let the water run into 
the bottle; tye again the bladder, ſeparate it 


from the bottle, and I have transferred the 


air from the bottle into the bladder, 

1. If I have in a bottle two kinds of air 
mixed together, the one of which may be 
abſorbed either by water or lime, and I in- 
tend to aſcertain what proportion of each is 
contained in the mixture; I tye a bladder, 
filled with as'much milk of lime as will fill 
the bottle, to the veſſel; draw the cork, and 
let the water or milk of lime run into.the 
bottle ; I then turn the bottle, and pour the 
milk of lime into the bladder, and repeat the 

operation ſeveral times: The quantity of 
the milk of lime remaining in the bottle aſ- 
certains 


Air and Fire. 41 


certains the quantity of the air which has 
deen abſorbed. 

Theſe are the methods employed by me in 
my enquiries on air. I confeſs that they will 
not pleaſe every body, fince they decide not to 
a nicety : but 1n my enquiries they have all 
proved ſatisfactory: and often people pre- 
tend to ſplit even a hair, where there is no 
neceſſity to attend to minutiz. 


31. 


Continuation of the Experiment mentioned 
(No. 28.) ; with a demonſtration that heat 
or warmth is compoſed cf phlogiſton and 
empyreal air, (29 ) 


It may be objected; that the air ob- 
tained according to (No. 28.) is perhaps 
only a dry acid of nitre changed into 
elaſtic vapours. However, if this opinion 
were founded in truth, this air would be not 
only corroſive, but alſo yield again ſaltpetre 
with alkali: And nevertheleſs this never hap- 
pens. I] he above objection would have ſome 
weight, if I could not demonſtrate, that there 
are more ſubſtances yielding during diſtillation 
the ſame kind of air, which is generated 
from 


42 Experiments on 


from diſtilled acid of nitre. This demon- 

ſtration is not wanting. | 
I have proved in a paper on \ Manganeſe 
(molybdenum magneſia Linn.) (Manganeſe 
Cronſted's Mineralogy, ſect cxiii.) inſerted in 
the memoirs of the Swediſh academy of the 
year 1774, that this mineral ſubſtance is not 
ſoluble in any one of the acids; unleſs there 
be added an inflammable ſubſtance, which 
might communicate its phlogiſton to the 
manganeſe, and thus procure admittance to 
the acids, I there likewiſe obſerved, that 
acid of vitrio] unites with pounded manganeſe, 
during a very violent diſtillation, and makes 
it ſoluble in water; and if this manganeſe 
be again ſeparated from the acid of vitriol by 
precipitation, the moſt evident proofs of the 
preſence of an inflammable ſubſtance are ob- 
ſerved. From this phænomenon, I then 
collected, that there is a phlogifton in Beat; 
and this ſuſpicion has been confirmed, If I 
aſſert, that the acid of nitre decompounds 
heat, becauſe the acid has a greater affinity 
to inflammables, than empyreal air; and 
if J have collected from various qualities 
of the manganeſe, that it attracts the phlogiſ- 
ton ſtronger than even acid of nitre ; I cannot 
heſitate 


Air and Fire. 43 


heſitate a moment believing that the man- 
ganeſe decompounds the heat, for the very 
reaſon for which acid of nitre does it, I 
could by no means doubt of this; ſince I had 
already ſeveral years ago obſerved, that if 
during the calcination of manganeſe with oil 
of vitriol in an open crucible, ſome duft of 
coals is carried accidentally on the ſurface of 
this mixture; theſe ſubtle coals are inſtanta- 
neouſly ſet a fire, with a very vivid ſplendor. 
Il in conſequence made the following expe- 
riments, 


Experiment ]. 


32. 


I mixed ſo much of concentrated oil of vi- 
triol with manganeſe reduced to an impalpable 
powder, that it became a thick, ſtiff magma 
(or dregs.) This mixture I diftilled in a tmall 
retort by open fire. In lieu'of a receiver I 
employed a bladder emptied of air; and, that 
the riſing vapours might not attack the blad- 
der, I had poured into it ſome milk of lime. 
(No. 30 5.) As ſoon as the bottom of the 
retort became red hot, a kind of air paſſed 
over, which gradually expanded the bladder. 
8 This 


44 Experiments 61 


This air has all the qualities of a pure cm- 
pyreal air. 


Experiment II. 


33 


By diſtilling two parts of an impalpable 
powder of manganeſe, with one part of acid 
of phoſphorus, in the ſame manner as men- 
tioned in the preceding (No. 32.) I obtained 
likewiſe empyreal air. 


Experiment III. 


34+ 


a. I diſſolved the common magnejia alba 
in aquafortis ; this ſolution I evaporated till it 
became dry. This falt I put into a ſmall 
retort for diſtillation, as mentioned (No. 32:). 
Before even the retort was red hot, acid of 
nitre was ſeparated from the magnefia alba 
in vapours as red as blood, and immediately 
the bladder became expanded : The air thus 
obtained was my empyreal air. 

It is conſtantly obſerved that all metals 
diſſolved in acid. of nitre, when again de- 

| prived 


Air and Fire. 45 


prived by heat of this menſtruum, part with 
it in vapours as red as blood. 

b. I diſtilled in the fame manner mercy 
rial nitre till the acid of nitre was ſeparated 
from the red precipitate: And I obtained 
likewiſe my empyreal air.—Saltpetre alone 
will decompound heat. Whence ariſes the 
boiling of the fuſed and red hot ſaltpetre in 
the crucible ? neither ſmoke nor vapour are 
ſeen rifing, and coal duſt which is carried 
acroſs the open crucible is burning with a 
radiant light, Whence becomes the ſalt- 
petre moiſt and deliqueſcent, which has been 
kept for about half an hour in red hot 
fuſion, after it is grown cold, without giving 
any ſigns of an alkah ? (No. 27. c.) What 
can be the cauſe, that this fufed faltpetre, 
when ground with vegetable acids, will im- 
mediately part with its volatile acid? After 
becoming acquainted with the component 
parts of heat, it is not difficult to anſwer to 
theſe queries —Had the Chemiſts of laſt 
century vouchſafed to examine more mi- 
nutely the elaſtic fluids ſimilar to air, which 
appear in ſo many operations, we ſhould at 
preſent be farther advanced, They wanted 
to lee eyery thing in corporeal form, and col- 

lect 


46 Experiments on 


lect them as drops in the receiver, It has 
been better enquired into in our days; and 
air has been examined; and who is not ſen- 
ſible of the utility of the reſults of ſuch ex- 
periments ? 

J have declared that ſaltpetre alone will 
decompound the ſubſtance of heat —The 
tollowing experiment proves it. 


1 


Experiment IV. 


* 


I put one ounce of ſaltpetre purified for 
diſtilling, into a glaſs retort, and employed a 
moiſtened bladder, emptied of air, in lieu of 
a receiver (fig. 3.) As ſoon as the ſaltpetre 
became red hot, it began boiling ; and at 
that period of time the bladder was ex- 
panded from the air that paſſed over. I con- 
tinued the diſtillation, till the boiling in the 
retort ceaſed; and the ſaltpetre was on the 
point of penetrating through the ſoftened 
glaſs retort, In the bladder I found the 
pure empyreal air, taking up the ſpace of 
fifty ounces meaſure, —This is the beſt and 
cheapeſt method of obtaining empyreal air. 


36. The 


Air and Fire. 47 


36. 


The preceding experiment might eaſily 
prevail upon a man to doubt, if the acid 
of nitre attracts the phlogiſton more power- 
fully, than empyreal air; what may be 
the cauſe, that the ſaltpetre leaves not off 
boiling, imbibing ſo much phlogiſton as is 
ſufficient to alkaliſe the ſaltpetre? The an- 
ſwer is already given, (No. 27. d.) 

What paſſes through the retort beſides 
heat? If ſome one were inclined to believe 
that perhaps light might interfere, the 
contrary may be ſeen from the diſtillation of 
fuming ſpirit of nitre, and likewiſe from the 
experiment (No. 34. a.) For in theſe in- 
ſtances, neither the ſubſtances contained, nor 
the retort, were red hot, and nevertheleſs the 
empyreal air was obtained. Now let us exa- 
mine, whether there are not more ſubſtances 
exiſting, which are capable of decompound- 
ing heat; and this inquiry will lead us to 
thoſe phenomena, which are obſerved in 
the calcination of noble metals by fire. 


37. That 


48 Experiments on 


37. 


That the acid of nitre as well as the de- 
phlogiſticated marine acid, deprive the noble 
metals of the inflammable principle, which 
gives them their ſplendor; is a fact ſo well 
aſcertained, that I think it ſuperfluous to 
give any further proofs of it. The quan- 
tity of air bubbles appearing on the ſurfaces 
of gold, filver, and quickfilver in the acid of 
nitre, and which when burſting, as foon as 
they come in contact with air, ſhew a yellow 
tinge, (No. 27.) are evident proofs of this 
aſſertion, —Nevertheleſs, fince it has been ob- 
ſerved, that the calxes of metals feparated 
from their ſolvents, are reduced to metalleity 
without the addition of a phlogiſton, by 
mere heat; it has been inferred, . that the 
corroding ſolvents were not capable of de- 
priving the noble metals of their phlogiſton.— 
Others, who are convinced of the calcination 
of metals by acids, ſuppoſe that the ſmall de- 
ficiency of phlogiſton ſeparated from the 
coals, paſſes through the crucible, and is in- 
corporated with the metallic calxes. This 
opinion approaches nearer to truth; how- 
ever 


Air and Fire. 49 
ever it ought to be known that the phlo- 
giſton does not ſeparate from any ſubſtance, 
unleſs the ſubſtance attracting the phlo- 
giſton be brought into immediate contact 
with it. Hence it likewiſe appears, that 
ſince the phlogiſton of the coals has no 
action upon the crucible, and, of conſe- 
quence, comes not in contact with the me- 
tallic calx, and yet the reduction of it 
takes place; there ought to be ſome 
other ſubſtance which is to yield the phlo- 
giſton wanting for the metallic calxes. 
Heat, conſidered as a ſimple, uncompounded 
ſubſtance, cannot bring about this reduction; 
ſince in that caſe the calxes of the ignoble 
or baſe metals, muſt be likewiſe reduced by 
it. But heat, conſidered as a compound, 
will not leave a doubt that it procures the 
reduction of the calxes of noble metals by 
means of its phlogiſton : and if this hap- 
pens, empyreal Air muſt be extricated during 
the reduction, for the ſame reaſons which 
are alledged in the preceding numeros.—But 
to prove this evidently, I made the follow- 
ing Experiments: 


E Expe- 


FR Experiments on 
38. 
Experiment V. 


I took a ſolution of ſilver made by acid 
of nitre, I precipitated jc with ſalt of tartar, 
the precipitate I waſhed and dried ; here- 
upon I put. the calx of filver in a ſmall 
glaſs retort, for its reduction in open fire, 
and tied an empty bladder at the orifice of 
the neck of the retort. The bladder was 
immediately expanded from the Air paſſing 
over. After the end of the diſtillation, 
I, found the calx of filver in the retort 
half melted, with its metallic ſplendor ; 
however, the precipitation being made 
with falt of tartar, which always is united 
with a great quantity of atrial acid, and 
this acid uniting during the operation 
with the calx of filver; this acid was ſe- 
parated by the milk of lime No. 30, letter :. 
the remaining half was of pure empyreal 
Air. ; | 

39+ 
Experiment VI. | 
I precipitated a ſolution of gold made in 


aqua regis, with ſalt of tartar ; the edulco- 
rated 


Air and Fire. 31 


rated and dried calx of gold, I reduced after 
the preceding manner; I obtained here the 
ſame empyreal Air, except that no atrial 
acid came over; which is no wonder, ſince 
the ſaturated ſolution of gold cauſed an ef- 
ferveſcence with the alkaline ſalt, which does 
not happen with the ſolution of filyer, 


40. 
Experiment VII, 


It is well known that the red precipitate 
of quickſilver receives again the form of 
Mercurius currens without the addition of 
an inflammable. However, fince mercury 
moſt certainly is deprived of its phlogiſton 
by vitriolic and nitrous acid, it muſt ne- 
ceſſarily reſume the phlogiſton, whenever it 
receives its metalliety. 

4. Into a ſolution of corroſive 1 
a ſolution of ſalt of tartar was gradually 
poured by drops; I waſhed and dried the 
browniſh red precipitate thus obtained. 
Then I put it in open fice, in a ſmall retort, 
with an empty bladder at its neck, for re- 
duction; When the calx became red-hot, 

E 2 the 


52 Experiments on 

the bladder was expanded, and the quick» 
filver mounted by the neck of the retort. 
The empyreal Air thus obtained, contained 
ſomewhat of atrial acid. 

6. Mercury reduced into calx by acid of 
nitre, or the red precipitate, and treated in 
the ſame manner as in the former proceſs, 
gave the ſame reſult ; only with this dif- 
ference, the empyreal Air thus obtained was 
pure, without the addition of atrial acid. 


41: 
Experiment VIII. 


I have demonſtrated in a memoir on 
arſenic, communicated by me to the Royal 
Academy of Sciences, at Stockholm, that 
this poiſonous ſubſtance conſiſts of an acid 
ſui generis and a phlogiſton. I remarked in 
that memoir, that this acid could be ſubli- 

mated into arſenic, by mere continued heat; 
though I then already underſtood the cauſe 
of it, I did, however, avoid mentioning 
it, for ſhortneſs ſake. I put ſome of the 
fixed arſenical acid in a ſmall retort for diſ- 
tillation, with a bladder tied to its neck. 
When 


Air and Fire. 53 


When this acid was melted and red-hot, it 
began to boil; during which operation the 
arſenic was ſublimated into the neck, and 
the bladder was expanded. I continued the 
operation as long as the retort would hold 
it out. The air collected was likewiſe of 
the empyreal kind.—I mentioned in the ſame 
memoir a peculiar exploſion, which hap- 
pened during the diſtillation of zinc with 
arſenical acid. How natural, how evident 
is the explication of this phænomenon, af- 
ter being convinced that here in the retort 
the empyreal Air is in its utmoſt purity, and 
that zinc is in a red-hot fuſion ; and what 
ſhould be more required for its ignition ? 

have often viewed with pleaſure the 
bright and radiant ſparks, which are pro- 
duced by heat only in a retort, during the 
reduction of metallic calxes, when only a 
little duſt of coals is added to it. 

Let us now examine whether this empy- 
real Air 1s not that kind of Air which had 
been loſt without Fire, (No. 8,—15.) and 
even with Fire, (No, 17,—23.) 


E 3 Expe- 


54 Experiments on 


42. 
Experiment J. 


T filled a phial of twenty ounce meaſure 
with empyreal Air, by the method deſcribed 
No. 30, letter e. This phial I put inverted 
in a wide glaſs filled with a ſolution of 
hepar ſulpburis. The ſolution roſe every 
hour higher into the phial, and in the ſpace 
of two days the phial was filled with it. 


13. 
Experiment II. 


I mixed in a bottle fourteen parts of that 
Air which by the liver of ſulphur, No. 8. 
had loſt its empyreal Air, and which, ac- 
cordingly, (No. 29.) I have called foul Air, 
with four parts of empyreal Air, and put 
this inverted bottle into a veſſel filled with 
a ſolution of liver of ſulphur. After the 
expiration of a fortnight, four parts of 
empyreal Air were loſt, and the ſolution had 
riſen into their place. 


Expe-· 


E: Air and Fire, 45 


44. 
Experiment III. 


Having filled a phial with our Air Cempy- 
real} I poured in ſome colourleſs animal 
oil, and ſtopt it up very carefully ; a few 
hours after it was become brown, and the 
next day black. It is a difficult taſk for 
apothecaries to keep this oil white; they 
are under the neceflity to divide it into 
ſmall phials, and to exclude the acceſs of 
common Air very carefully. If ſuch co- 
lourleſs oil be mixed with an acid, though 
it were diluted with water, theſe acids, to- 
gether with the oil, grow black in an hour's 
time. Vinegar has the ſame effe&t.—There 
is no other reaſon for the aſſumption of 
black colour in the Air by this oil, than 
that the empyreal Air of the common Air 
deprives this oil of its phlogiſton, and by 
this means a ſubtle acid is ſet free, which 
before was united with this phlogiſton, and 
this produces the black colour, 


E 4 Eupe- 


56 Experiments on 


45+ 
Experiment IV. 


a. I put into a phial of ſeven ounce mea- 
ſure, filled with empyreal Air, a piece of 
phoſphorus of urine, and ſhut it up with a 
a cork; then I heated the place where the 
phoſphorus lay, by a burning candle; the 
phoſphorus began to burn with a very vivid 
flame; as ſoon as the flame was extin- 
guiſhed, the phial burſt in pieces. 

b. Since the phial employed in the pre- 
ceding Experiment, was very thin, I re- 
peated the Experiment with a phial of a 
thicker ſubſtance, and after it had been left 
to cool, I wanted to draw the cork under 
water, but it was not in my power ; for the 
external Air preſſed the cork too hard to- 
wards the inſide of the phial. I then puſhed 
the cork into the phial, immediately after 
the water ruſhed into the phial, and filled 
it very nearly full. The firſt phial being 
very thin, it ſeems the external Air broke 
the glaſs. | | 

e. Having mixed the foul Air, with one 
third part of the empyreal kind, and burnt 

a piece 


Air and Fire. 57 


a piece of phoſphorus in it, only one third 
of the Air was abſorbed. 


46. 
Experiment V. 


I likewiſe repeated the Experiment de- 
ſcribed No. 19, only with this difference, 
that the tube of it was longer, and that 
empyreal Air was admitted into the matraſs. 
It was a pretty fight to obſerve the water 
mounting gradually into the matraſs, and 
juſt when 7-8ths of it were filled with water, 
the flame was extinguiſhed. 


47+ 
Experiment VI. 


On the ſtand No. 21, letter c. I put a few 
live coals, and put a matraſs filled with 
empyreal Air over it. The coals had no 
ſooner reached the Air in the matraſs, 
than they began to burn with a very vivid 
fire. 

After it had been left for cooling, I 
made a ſmall aperture under the matraſs, 
which was filled one-fourth part with 

water; 


58 Experiments on 


water; and having ſeparated from it the 
atrial acid, by means of the milk of lime, 
No. 22, only one-fourth remained in the 
matraſs; and in this reſiduum a candle 
would burn. 


48. 
Experiment VII. 


I tried likewiſe how empyreal Air was 
affected by ſulphur No, 23. As ſoon as the 
burning ſulphur came in contact with the 
empyreal Air in the matraſs, the flame be- 
came larger and more vivid. When the 
fire was extinguiſhed, the water in the veſ- 
fel had found its way into the matraſs, and 
filled 3-4ths of it.——Since I had employed 
for theſe three laſt Experiments a matraſs 
containing no more than thirty ounce mea- 
ſure of Air, I was obliged to accommodate 
the ſand No. 21, to it. 


49+ 


I have mentioned before (No. 16,) that 
IT found the, foul! Air lighter than common 
Air; ſhould it not follow from thence that 


empyreal Air is heavier than common Air? 
In 


4 * Ge ET O'S Oh, e "OO OT ASCE Op; 


— 


Air and Fire. 59 


In reality, I found, by weighing, moſt ex- 
actly, as much empyreal Air as occupied the 
meaſure of twenty ounces of water, that it 
nearly exceeded the ſame meaſure of com- 
mon Air by two grains. | 

50. 

Therefore theſe Experiments prove, that 
empyreal Air is that kind of Air by means 
of which fire burns in common Air; and 
it is in common Air mixed with a kind of 
Air, which has not the leaſt attraction of 
the inflammable; and it is owing to this, 
that ſome hindrance is m rapid and 
violent conflagration ; and moſt certainly, 
if all the Air conſiſted of empyreal Air, 
the water would be of little ſervice for ex- 
tinguiſhing of fires. The atrial acid, mixed 
with this empyreal Air, has the ſame ef- 
fect as foul Air. I mixed one part of 
empyreal Air with four parts of aerial acid, 
in this mixture a candle burnt tolerably, 
The heat contained in the interſtices of in- 
flammable ſubſtances, cannot poſſibly effect 
ſo much as the heat in the fire; and I be- 
lieve myſelf not miſtaken, when I conclude 

from 


60 Experiments on 


from my own Experiments, that heat is 
produced and generated during the com- 
buſtion of empyreal Air, and the phlogiſton 
of inflammable ſubſtances ; and if this very 
ſubtle and elaſtic ſubſtance comes in con- 
tact with another body attracting the phlo- 
giſton more powerfully, the heat muſt of 
courſe be again decompounded. The Ex- 
periments No. 45, letter 5. and No. 46. 
prove this both to the eyes and the feel- 
ings, every thing ſeeming entirely to dif- 
appear in the matraſs. 

We ſhall now examine, whether the 
empyreal Air, loſt in the Experiments 
No. 8—15, without Fire, is really con- 
verted into heat. The heat is undoubtedly 
not felt in thoſe caſes, but No. 10. evi- 
dently demonſtrates that there is an union 
of phlogiſton and empyreal Air. It is by no 
means right to truſt to the ſenſe of feeling, 
in forming an accurate judgment of the 
heat; the thermometer is the only ſure 
guide. If ſulphur burns in a certain quan- 
tity of Air about three minutes, and the 
ſame quantity of Air can withſtand the 
ſolution of liver of ſulphur ſeveral weeks 
before all the empyreal Air be ſeparated 

| from 


ol 
W mY a wy 1 1 Fr 


Hir and Fire. 61 


from it it follows, that the heat thus ge- 
nerated, and which however is not one mo- 
ment without a new addition of it, muſt be 
very flight. And, in a word, we have 
Experiments wherein Air is abſorbed in 
half that time, and in that caſe heat muſt 
be in the double ratio of the former. There 
are other Experiments where you may feel 
the heat with your hands; and in thoſe 
caſes the empyreal Air diſappears already 
within an hour. —I will here communicate 
the Experiments I made on this ſubject. 


81. 


Experiment I. 


I mixed a ſtrong ſolution of liver of ſul- 
phur, with ſo much of pounded chalk, that 
it became almoſt a dry powder. Then I 
put this powder in an open glaſs before the 
window, and cloſe to it a thermometer : 
two hours afterwards, both the thermo- 
meter and the powder hadacquired the ſame 
degree of heat, when I put the thermome- 
ter into the powder contained in the glaſs. 


Some minutes after this, the ſpirit was riſen: 
I took 


62 Experiments on 

I took the thermometer out, and placed it 
elaſe by, the ipirit immediately fell: I again 
immerſed it into the glaſs, and it roſe again. 
The next day, I wanted to have the ſame 
phænomena, but the thermometer having 
ſtood ſeveral: minutes in the powder, the 
ſpirit did not riſe.— The powder which the 
preceding day had been yellow, was at pre- 
ſent white, and by the addition of an acid, 
no ſmell. of liver of ſulphur was produced; 
conſequently the ſulphur was decom- 
pounded ; anditherefore no wonder that ng 
heat could be produced. 


52. 
Experiment II. 


2. Steel-filings macerated with a few 
drops of water, cauſe the ſpirit in the ther- 
mometer to riſe; which I tried ſeveral times 
on- three conſecutive days, with the ſame 
ſucceſs, and the ſame filings. | 

b. Since oil of turpentine abſorbs air, it 
is probable that here likewiſe heat ſhould 
be generated; I therefore mixed ſomewhat 
of this oil with pounded chalk, ſo that it 
made a looſe powder; and after this mix- 


ture 


Air and Fire. 63 


tute and the thermometer were come to a 
par, I put the thermometer into it, but the 
ſpirits would neither riſe nor fall. Since 
oil of turpentine evaporates very ſtrongly, 
and all evaporations abforb the heat of the 
Air, is it not probable that the ſame happens 
in this caſe, and that the generated cold be 
compenſated by the heat which is cauſed ? 
If this does not de the ſpirit ſhould 
fall. 


The reaſon for which I mixed the ſolu- 
tion of liver of ſulphur with oil of turpen- 


tine and chalk, is chiefly this; that the Air 
might come in many more points in con- 
tact with the phlogiſton, and cauſe a more 
ſenſible heat. 


53. 
Experiment III. 


Since only empyreal Air cauſes heat with 
the inflammable principle in our common 
Air, I was defirous to know whether the 
heat generated would not become more 
ſenſible by employing in theſe Experiments 
pure empyreal Air only. I was convinced 
of _ truth ; for having filled a phial of 


twelye 


64 
twelve ounce meaſure with empyreal Air, 
and ſhut its mouth carefully up, I let the 
phial, with a thermometer, a mixture of 
unded chalk, and a ſolution of liver of 
fulphur, ſtand together, in the ſame place, 
during the ſpace of four hours; then I put 
the powder into the phial, the thermo- 
meter into the powder, and carefully ſtopped 
the mouth of the phial round the tube of 
the thermometer with wax ; immediately 
after the ſpirit roſe to the double of the 
height which it had riſen to when the 
thermometer was put into the mixture in 
the common Air. | 


Experiments on 


54. 
Experiment IV. 


The heat cauſed by a mixture of iron- 
filings, ſulphur, and water, muſt be ſolely 
aſcribed to the union of the phlogiſton in 
the iron with the empyreal Air. I mixed 

three parts of iron-filings, and one part of 
ſulphur, with as much water as was required 
to make of it a moiſt powder ; this mixture 


I divided into two parts; one of them I 
filled 


hs, ty — my 0 as {nn HI” 6 


— 
r 


OI 
ar 


Air and Fire. 65 


filled into a phial, and ſhut it up with a 
well- fitting cork; the other I expoſed to 
the common Air in an open glaſs; after 
the ſpace of two hours the laſt mixture was 
grown {ſo intenſely hot that I could not 
hold the glaſs long in my hand ; the firſt 
was not even grown warm, though both 
had taken a black colour. Some weeks 
after I threw part of the ſtill moiſt and 
ſhut-up powder on a piece of paper ; three 
minutes after, the powder became intenſely 
heated, and ſmoaked. The reſt of this 
powder I put in an open glaſs on the 
ſtand, (No. 21, letter 6.) and put a ma- 
traſs over it. The water roſe gradually in 
the matraſs, and after three hours about 
one third of the matraſs was filled with it, 
and there it remained ; then I removed the 
matraſs, and filled it with freſh Air, and 
covered with it again the mixture of iron- 
filings; when the water again roſe. 

The water being ſo quick abſorbed, it is no 
wonder that a ſenſible heat was cauſed ; and 
I flatter myſelf with having proved, that heat 
or warmth is compoſed of two ſubſtances, 
viz. the univerſal inflammable principle, 
and the empyreal Air contained in common 

Air. 


66 Experiments on 


Air. A man of ſenſe, however, will not 
immediately infer, wherever heat is gene- 
rated, theſe two integrant parts of heat 
muſt at that period form an union by no 
means ; ſince heat is likewiſe found in the 
pores of ſubſtances ; whereof we ſhall ſpeak 
hereafter, 8 


3. 
Properties of Heat. 


It is well known, that a metal concave 
mirror will reflect the heat of burning 
coals put into its focus, in ſuch a manner 
that when colleted by means of another 
metal concave mirror into a focus, inflam- 
mable ſubſtances will be ignited by it. Inow 
aſk, whether the heat of theſe ignited coals, 
or light alone, or both together, produce 
this effect? I am well acquainted with 
the vague phraſes, according to which 


every thing is called Fire that bears a 


diſtant fimilarity to it. In one caſe, light 
is called Fire; in another, warmth and heat 
are reputed to be Fire; and ſtill in another 


the 


Air and Fire. 67 
the phlogiſton contained in all bodies is 
miſtaken for Fire. Therefore there will be 
perſons that will not heſitate to give an 
anſwer to my query; and ſay: It is Fire 
which is reflected by theſe mirrors, col- 
lected and concentrated; and conſequently 
the ſame effe& is produced as by the light 
of the ſun. But Iam of opinion, it is beſt 
not to begin to read before one knows 
the elements of the alphabet; and to with- 
hold an anſwer, till one has reflected on the 
following Experiments. 


56. 


a. Sitting in winter in a room oppoſite 
the ſtove * when the fuel in it is in full 
blaze, 


The author, a German Apothecary, being ſettled at 
Gefla, in Gæſtricke, in Sweden, under about 60. 400. 
north lat. ſpeaks of ſtoves which are uſual in that cold 
country. They are conſtructed of glazed earthen- ware 
filled in the inſide with clay and bricks ; the fuel is laid 
on a hearth or grate, and the heated vapours and ſmoke, 
are obliged to circulate through many ducts managed in 
the inſide of the ſtove, before they enter the chimney ; 
by which means the heat is communicated to the ſides 
of the ſtove, and enters the room. The place where 


the fuel burns may be occaſionally ſhut with an iron 
2 da, 


68 Experiments on 


blaze, you may ſenſibly feel the heat com- 
ing out of the ſtove, when the door is left 
open at about ſix feet diſtance; however, 
the breath of the mouth is ſtill viſible, 
though in ſummer, in a leſs warm atmoſ- 
phere, you cannot perceive it. 

5. If you put a burning candle, or cauſe 
a ſmoke, within the ſphere of the heat iſſu- 
ing from the ſtove in ſtrait lines, the candle 


continues to burn without the leaſt inter- | 


ruption, and the ſmoke riſes perpendicu- 
larly. 

c. Since there is a conſtant current of 
Air going from the room into the ſtove, in 
order to replace the Air rarified by heat 
and gone off by the chimney, very natu- 
rally it will be aſked : Why is the heat, 
coming from the ſtove into the room, not 

likewiſe 


doot, having a ſmall vent-hole beneath it. The door 
is commonly open whilſt the wood burns, and all ſmoke 
and vapours are ſtill going away from the coals to which 


the wood is reduced. After the coals are quite freed 


from any noxious yapours, there is a valve at the place 
wherethe duct enters the chimney, which, when ſhut, 
prevents the heat from going off by the chimney, 
The door to the fire-place is likewiſe ſhut, and theſe 
precautions preſerve a temperate warmth throughout 
the whole room. 


Air and Fire. 69 


likewiſe carried off by the current of Air 
through the pipe or duct of the ſtove ? 

d. If by any means whatſoever a ſtrong 
wind is cauſed before and in a direction 
tranſverſe to the opening of the ſtove, this 
wind can no more divert the direction of 
the heat, than that of the beams of the 
ſun ; the face therefore held on the left ſide 
of the ſtove will be ſenſible of the wind 
paſſing tranſverſly through the heat, but 
without any ſenſation of warmth. 

e. It is well known, that the ſhade from 
the light of the ſun with a heated or red-hot 
body, on an opoſite wall, is ſurrounded by 
vapours, which ſeem to be tremulous ; 
which are to be accounted for by the greater 
or leſſer rarefaction of the Air, cauſed by 
the heat, and the refraction of the beams 
of light in it: What is then the reaſon, 
that ſitting oppoſite the ſtove, and having the 
window on your right hand, and the white 
wall on your left, nevertheleſs the beams 
of the ſun coming in by the window, and 
croſſing the heat before the ſtove in a 
tranſverſe direction, and falling on the op- 
polite white wall, will not repreſent ſuch a 


tremulous ſhade? But on ſuſpending in 
3 this 


70 Experiments on 


this heat a hot iron or ſtone, heated by this 
very ſame heat, you can immediately ob- 
ſerve in the open air, and on the wall the 
uſual tremulous motion. 

V. If you hold a large pane of glaſs be- 
tween your face and the ſtove, you will ſee 
the Fire, but you have no ſenſation of the 
heat, and the glaſs receives all the heat. 

g. In the ſame manner you may reflect 
the light of the Fire, with a flat glaſs mir- 
ror, and however not feel the leaſt heat in 
the reflected light whereas the looking- 
glaſs will receive and * all the heat fall - 
ing on it. ä 

hb, But a poliſhed metal plate will reflect 
both the light and the heat according to 
the laws of the light of the ſun; and ſince 
the heat is reflected, it is no wonder that 
the metal plate is by no means warm. 

i. For the ſame reaſon, you may with a 
ſmall metal concave mirror before this 
ſtove at the diſtance of four feet, form a 
focus, wherein you may alight ſulphur. 
In this ſituation you may keep the mirror 
very long, and it will not grow warm ; but 
if covered with black over a burning candle, 

you 


Air and Fire. 71 


you cannot keep it four minutes in the 
ſame ſituation without burning your fingers. 

&, If you reflect the heat paſſing out of 
the ſtove with a poliſhed metal plate to ano- 
ther ſpot, you may, at the diſtance only of 
four or fix feet, form a focus with it which 
has ſenſible heat ; but if you collect, with 
a concave mirror, the light reflected by 
a glaſs mirror, the ſocus will be very 
bright, but deſtitute of all heat. 

J. If you hold a giafs pane between your- 
{elf and the ſtove, you may form a bright 
focus with the concave mirror, which how- 
ever has no heat. For the ſame reaſon you 
may with a convex glaſs lens, form a 
bright focus before this fire, which, how» - 
ever, is void of all heat. 

m. The metal concave mirror, and the 
metal plate grow ſoon hot, if they come in 
contact with a heated body; though the 
heat paſſing out of the ſtove will not impart 
heat to them, If the tube or duct carry- 
ing the ſmoke from the ſtove into the chim- 
ney be ſhut, the heated Air immediately 
paſſes through the door of the ſtove in a 
perpendicular direction upwards. If you 
preſent a metal concave mirror, or metal 

F 4 plate 


72 Experiments on 


plate to this heat riſing perpendicularly, 
you may not only reflect the heat, but the 
metals themſelves will be heated. 


57 


From theſe Experiments it appears, that 
the heat mounting with the Air in the ſtove, 
and paſſing through the chimney, is mate- 
rially different from the heat paſſing 
through the door of the ſtove into the room: 


That the heat departs from the centre, 


where it is generated in ſtrait lines, and is 
reflected from poliſhed metals under an 
angle which is equal to that of incidence 
(No. 56. letters 5. 1.): That it unites not 
with Air, nor can be diverted by a current 
of Air, into a direction different from that 
which it originally had received (letters c. d.) 
For that very reaſon the vapours of the 
breath are viſible in this great heat (letter 
a.); for ſince Air and Heat are really 
united during ſummer, and warm Air can 
diſſolve more water than cold Air, it like- 
wiſe hence appears, that this kind of heat 
is not united with Air; nor has this kind 
of heat probably rarefied the Air; and of 

con- 


— Aa — lat! al _ — ran — dts. __ 


bay YH my 


— 
— 


Air and Fire. — 


conſequence it becomes evident, why it 
cauſes no tremulous motion in ſunſhine 
(letter e). Theſe are properties of light; 
I will not, however, believe, that on ac- 
count of it theſe phænomena will be aſcribed 
to the light emanating from the flame; for, 
in the firſt place, this light is, in regard to 
that of tne ſun, very weak; and ſecondly, the 
above-mentioned effect of conflagration is 
(letter 1.) infinitely more ſtrong when the 
wood is conſumed and changed into bright, 
glowing coals, at which time the light is 
much decreated ; and you may, by means 
of a glaſs mirror, (letter g.) ſeparate the 
light from this heat, when the heat re- 
mains in the glaſs, and the radiant light 
yields no heat, which appears by letters g. J. 
Hence it follows, that the heat paſſing 
through the door of the ſtove coincides, in 
ſome points, with the light, but is not yet 
quite become light, ſince it is not reflected in 
the ſame manner from a glaſs ſurface as from 
a metallic one remarkable circumſtance ! 
It becomes likewiſe active only at a ſmaller 
diſtance from the point where it is gene- 
rated, at leaſt ſenſibly ſo; but it is ſoon 
changed into the uſual heat, whenever it 


unites 


74 Experiments on 


unĩtes with a body; which may be obſerved 
in the glaſs /g. / and in the metallic con- 
cave mirror blackened hy ſoot /i. and in 
more inſtances ; whence heat may be tranſ- 
ferred from one body into another, and, 
in conſequence, unite with air, and produce 
the tremulous motion e. This is ap- 
plicable not only to the heat paſſing 
from the ſtove into the room, but alſo to 
any fire whatſoever, Repreſent to yourſelf 
a little hillock of burning coals; in this 
caſe the heat darting from this hillock all 
around, is that which may be reflected by a 
metallic poliſhed plate; that on the con- 
trary which riſes upwards, and may be 
driven by winds to and fro, unites with 
Air. I will call the firſt kind, for diſtinc- 
tion ſake, radiant beat. 


58. 


Since theſe are two diſtint kinds of 
heat, which are poſſeſſed of ſo conſiderable 
a difterence, it occaſions the following 
queries: Wherein conſiſts this difference? 
Did it, in the moment of its generation, 

not 


Air and Fire. 75 


not meet with a ſufficient maſs of Air, 
with which it might enter into an union of 
coheſion? or ſhould it, at its firſt exiſtence, 
have received ſo great an elaſticity, that in 
its ſwift motion it can neither by Air nor 
by poliſhed metals be detained ? The firſt 
opinion has probably no great weight; for it 
will ſoon be objected, why does it not unite 
afterwards with Air, but paſſes like beams 
of light through it? The laſt ſeems to 
me, for certain reaſons, to be very probable, 
However, which is it that communicates to 
heat ſo great a degree of elaſticity ? I ima- 
gine empyreal Air is capable of being united 
with either more or leſs phlogiſton: Then, 
undoubtedly, empyreal Air ought to preſent 
us with phznomena proportionate to the 
quantity of phlogiſton united with it. Do 
we not obſerve, that many bodies admitting 
of an union with phlogiſton, are capable of 
receiving either a larger or ſmaller propor- 
tion of it? and do they not, by this means, 
obtain either a greater or leſſer degree of 
volatility and elaſticity, as mentioned be- 
fore, (No. 27.) and is demonſtrable from 
the ſpirit of nitre? Empyreal Air ought 
to be n athl of the ſame property, ſince, 

together 


f 
2 
3 
7 J 
F o 
. 
1 
7 
+ I 
44 
bu 
N 1 
9 
1 4 
4 4 
_ 
- 
, 


— — - 


76 Experiments on 


together with phlogiſton, they are conſti- 
tuent parts of heat; and I ſhall, in the 
ſequel, prove that heat is capable of unit- 
ing with more phlogiſton. The encreaſed 
elaſticity of heat communicated to it by 
phlogiſton, is diminiſhed by the attraction 
of bodies, fo that both poliſhed metals and 
Air may attract it.—Now it will be eaſy to 
anſwer to the query propoſed, No. 55. 


For it is radiant heat, which is inviſible 


and diſtin from fire, that dane the igni- 
tion there mentioned. 1 


59. 
About Light. 


Hitherto I have, as much as was re- 
quired for my intended definition of Fire, 
ſhewn, from the moſt incontrovertible Ex- 
periments, what are the conſtituent parts of 
heat, and likewiſe thoſe of Air. But ſince 
there is no Fire without light, this wonder- 
ful phænomenon remains to be explained 
before fundamental inſtruction can be given 
about Fire and its conſtituent parts. 


There 


Air and Fire. 77 


There i is no doubt about the light of the 
can, and that of a burning candle being the 
ſame thing ; for this affects the eye in the 
fame manner as the ſun, and repreſents the 
ſame colours through the priſm ; but being 
weaker, it is no wonder, that its beams, 
collected by a burning glaſs, will not burn. 

Nor is there any more doubt about 
light being a body, in the ſame manner as 
heat: but I cannot perſuade myſelf that 
light and heat are the ſame thing, ſince 
Experiments prove juſt the contrary ; what 
is now to be ſaid ſhall explain the ſubject 
more diſtinctly. 


50. 


Proofs of the Exiſtence of an Inflammatle 
Principle in Light. 


It is well known, that the. ſolution of 
ſilver in acid of nitre poured on a piece of 
chalk, and expoſed to the beams of the ſun, 
grows black. The light of the ſun re- 
flected from a white wall has the ſame 
effect, though more ſlowly. Heat without 
light has no effect on this mixture. Should 


the black colour not be real ſilyer? We 
| ſhall 


78 Experiments on 

ſhall not decide this queſtion until I have 
given the proof of the phlogiſton being 
found in light. 


61. 


Experiment I. 


1 put ſome filver-carth on a piece of 
porcelane, and expoſed it to the focus of a 
| burning-glaſs ; immediately the ſurface of 
this earth was reduced to filver. By ſilver- 
earth, I underſtand filver diflolved in pure 
acid of nitre, and precipitated by ſalt of 
tartar. The acid of nitre moſt certainly 
deprives the noble and baſe metals of their 
phlogiſton (No. 27. letter 5.) which is evi- 
dently proved from the efferveſcence cauſed 
during the ſolution, and likewiſe from the 
red colour of the vapours. Metallic preci- 
pitates are diflolved in acid of nitre, but 
communicate to it not the leaſt red colour, 
the ſame takes place in regard to the earth 
of filver. The filver reduced in the focus, 
communicates to acid of nitre, during its 
ſolution a redneſs; and whence could this 

phlogiſton 


Afr and Fire. 79 


phlogiſton pofñbly come, but from the light 
of the ſun ? 


62. 


a. I put on a ducat ſome calx of mer- 
cury, prepaired by acid of nitre, or what is 
commonly called red precipitate, and ex- 
poſed it to the focus of a burning-glaſs. 
The powder began to emit fumes, and the 
gold became white. 

6. I diſſolved gold in aqua regis, made of 
aquafort and common falt, and precipitated 
the ſame with falt of tartar. This gold- 
earth, edulcorated and dried, was expoſed 
to the focus on a piece of porcelane ; it be- 
came brown, and had the properties of real 


gold. 
c. This reduction might be aſcribed to 


the heat which is actually exifting in the 
focus. Suppoſing, therefore, the heat to be 
the cauſe of this phænomenon, then even 
the inflammable principle is demonſtratedto 
exiſt in light; fince no heat can exiſt with- 


out 


80 Experiments on 


out phlogiſton; but there are many moto 
arguments contrary to this opinion. 

d. I poured a ſmall quantity of the pureſt 

fuming ſpirit of nitre (No. 25) in a white 
| Phial made of cryſtal glaſs provided with a 
glaſs ſtopper, and expoſed it to the light of 
the ſun. Three hours after I found the 
phial filled with red vapours ; the ſame hap- 
pens when the phial-is ſet on a German 
earthen-ware ſtove; but it requires four 
weeks before the red colour becomes diſ- 
cernible. 


63 . 
Experiment III. 


4. I precipitated a ſolution of filver by 
ſal ammoniac ; then I edulcorated and dried 
the precipitate, and expoſed it on a piece of 
paper to the beams of the ſun for the ſpace 
of two weeks, when the ſurface of the white 
powder grew black; after which I ſtirred 
the powder, and repeated the ſame ſeveral 
times. Hereupon I poured ſome cauſtic 
ſpirit of ſal ammoniac on this, in all ap- 
pearance, black powder, and ſet it by for 

digeſtion. 


FT _A___”___ TT _T7r,//]/ PERL” rT 7 


wv» ©, 


* ad. a Yes 2. 


Air and Fire. 87 
digeſtion. This menſtruum diſſolved a quan- 
tity of luna cornua (horn- ſilver) though 
ſome black powder remained undiſſolved. 
The powder having been waſhed, was, for 
the greater part, diſſolved by a pure acid of 
nitre,, which, by the operation, acquired 
volatility. This ſolution I precipitated 
again by means of ſal ammoniac into horn- 
ſilver.— Hence it follows, that the blackneſs 
which the luna cornua acquires from the 
fan's light, andlikewiſe the ſolution of ſilver 
poured on chalk (No. 60) is filver by reduc- 
tion. I kept the white horn-falver wrapped 
up in paper during the ſpace of two months, 
on a warm earthen-ware ftove, which did 
not in the leaſt alter its colour. But fince 
filver never can unite with marine acid 
under its metallic form, it follows, that as 
many particles of luna cornua are reduced 
on its ſurface into filver, as many likewiſe 
ought to part with their marine acid, with 
which they were united. 

5. To verify this, I mixed ſo much of 
diſtilled water with well edulcorated horn- 
ſilver as would juſt cover this powder. 
The half of this mixture I poured into a 
white cryſtal phial, expoſed it to the beams 


G of 


182 Experimente on 

of the ſun, and ſhook it ſeveral times each- 
day; the other half I ſet by in a dark place. 

After having expoſed the one mixture, 
during the ſpace of two weeks, I filtrated 
the water, ſtanding over the luna cornua, 
grown already black, Het ſome of this water 
fall by drops in a ſolution of ſilvery which 
was immediately precipitated into horn 
ſilver. The water which had been ſtand- 
ing over the other half of the luna cornua, 
in a-dark place, did not change the ſolution 

of ſilver; and the horn=filver, over which 

the water had been ſtanding, had not in 
the leaſt changed its white colour. 
K. I. poured aquafortis upon horn- ſilver, 
and; expoſed: it in ai cryſtal phial to the 
beams of the ſun; but it did not grow 
black; the cauſe of SUR appears from 
No. 082 letter G 


64: 
Experiment oe 


I evaporated a ſolution of gold all it 
was dry; then I diſſolved the refiduum 
ea water, poured it into a white 
| cryſtal 


Air and Fire, 83 
cryſtal phial, ſhut up with a glaſs ſtopper, 
and expoſed it to the beams of the ſun. 
A fortnight after, I obſerved (eſpecially ' 
when Fexamined the ſolution in ſunſhine): 
that a quantity of minute ſpangles of god 
appeared in the ſolution, and the ſurface 
was likewiſe covered with a very ſubtle 
"lice of gold. The evaporation of the 
ſolution of gold, was done with a view to 
free it from the ſuperſſuous acid, which in 
a certain meaſure would have hindered the 
reduction. Now I am willing to mention 
another Experiment, which muſt convince 
us ſtill more of the preſence of a phlogiſton 
in light. A pure aquafortis diſſolves not 
manganeſe (Molybdenum, Magneſia, Linn. 
Manganeſe, Cronſtedt's Mineralogy, ſect. 
cxlii.) unleſs ſome inflammable ſub- 
ſtance; vis. ſugar, be added; when the ſolu- 
tion becomes clear like water, and without 
any colour. If ſuch à ſolution be pre- 
cipitated by ſalt of tartar, a white preci- 
pitate is yielded; which after being edulco- 
rated and dried, is nothing elſe but man- 
ganeſe united with the phlogiſton of ſugar. 
If you ſeparate the phlogiſton in any 
manner whatſoever, you have again the 

G 2 manganeſq 


84 Experiments on 


manganeſe in its natural black colour. (See 
the Memoirs of the Swediſh Academy for 
the year 1774). To effectuate this, there 
is no ſhorter method than that of ſpreading 
the phlogiſticated manganeſe on a thin 
metal plate, and expoſing it to the heat of 
burning coals, when it ſoon acquires again 
its black colour. This manganeſe, be it ever 
ſo finely pounded, never diſſolves in acid 
of nitre without an addition of phlogiſton z 
and of this I am going to ſpeak in the ſequel. 


_— 
| Eeperiment | V. 


I poured about half an ounce of pure 
and Fain ſpirit ' of nitre, in a cryſtal 
phial, of which 7-8ths remained empty; 
into this I put ſome of the before-mentioned 
manganeſe, ſhut the phial with a glaſs 
ſtopper, and expoſed the phial during two 
tours to ſun-ſhine, During this time the 
mixture had loſt its black colour, and was 
become clear. Then I added ſomewhat 
of the fine pounded manganeſe; and having 
Topped up the phial, expres? it again to the 

beams 


Air and Fire. 85 


beams of the ſun; ſome hours after this 
the manganeſe was likewiſe diſſolved. 
I repeated this operation till the acid 
would no more diſſolve the manganeſe. 
Then I added to it fix times its bulk - of 
diſtilled water, and filtrated the ſolution, + 
which I afterwards precipitated by falt of 
tartar : The white precipitate I waſhed 
carefully, and dried it in a moderate degree 
of warmth. This now is the manganeſe 
united with phlogiſton, with an addition 
of atrial acid from the alkali.—If you want 
to be convinced of it, diſſolve it in vitriolic 
acid, and diſtill it by a ſtrong fire in a ſmall 
glaſs retort. The manganeſe remaining 
in the retort has then recovered its natural 
colour; and the acid gone over, has acquired 
all the qualities of a volatile ſpirit of ſul- 
phur.—Or take one part of pounded falt- 
petre, and mix it with four parts of this 
white manganeſe ; put the mixture into a 
ſmall retort and diſtill it: the mixture 
ſoon acquires a black colour, and the falt- 
petre is found to be alkalized.— Or, till 
better :. Fill a ſmall phial with this phlo- 
giſticated manganeſe, fit a ſtopper of chalk 
into its mouth, ſurround the phial with 

G 3 ſand 


8b Euperiments an 


and in a crucible, and then keep the phial 
for about a quarter of an hour red-hot ; 
whilſt at is ſtill tolerably hot, take it out of 
the ſand and throw the ſtill white manganeſe 
on a paper, and it will ſoon after deflagrate, 
and the manganeſe turn into a black 
powder: Or let it grow quite cold, throw 
it then on a hot (though not red-hot) metal 
Plate, when the manganeſe will become 
xed-hot, and be reſtored to its original 
nature. If you aſk, why the manganeſe 
.ought to be made red-hot in a cloſe veſlel, 
in order to bring about this deflagration, I 
anſwer, if ſuch white manganeſe, before it 
be long uſtulated in a cloſe veſſel, be put on 
a hot iron plate, it is likewiſe calcined, but 
the deflagration is ſcarcelyvifible,on account 
of the atrial acid with which it is united, 
for this is carried off into the Air in pro- 
portion as the phlogiſton flies off, Now 
one part of atrial acid mixed with eight or 
ten parts of common Air (No. 22) ex- 
tinguiſhes Fire; it is therefore neceſſary 
to expel firſt the atrial acid in cloſe veſſels, 
and after this operation the phlogiſton 
_ ſeparated from the beams of the ſun really 
deflagrates, 


Light 


66. 


Light is not a Primitive or Elementary 
| | SubRlance, 


If light were a-primitive ſubſtance nobody 
would heſitate to conclude, from the juſt 
mentioned Experiments, and others known 
before, that it cannot be any thing but the 
inflammable principle or phlogiſton. But 
having myſelf proved, that this elementary 
ſubſtance, in conjunction with empyreal 
Air, compounds the heat or warmth, and 
that our atmoſphere is filled with a great 
quantity of empyreal Air, it would then fol- 
low, that the phlogiſton conſtantly flowing 
out from the ſun, unites with our empyreal 
Air, -and cauſes nothing but heat ; and that 
we in conſequence mult dwell in utter dark- 
neſs. We find, however, that light, though 
ever ſo-much concentrated, cannot produce 
any heat in the Air; conſequently I can- 
not perſuade myſelf that light is pure 
phlogiſton.—Secondly, I cannot collect from 
my own Experiments, that light ſhould be 
G 4 nothing 


88 Experiments on 

nothing but phlogiſton ; for in that caſe 
it would alkalize ſaltpetre in the focus of 
a burning-glaſs, and bring about the re- 
duction of the calxes of the baſe metals, 
which never happens. It may be objected 
to me, that as much as there is reduced of 


theſe calxes, as much is calcined by the 


Air, through the heat in the focus. It is 
therefore chiefly neceſſary to make this 
Experiment in an Air incapable of receiv- 
ing any more phlogiſton, i. e. in foul Air. 
Mr. Lavorfer, and others, have already ob- 
viated this objection. He calcined metals 
under a glaſs receiver by means of a burn- 
ing-glaſs, and they were deprive of their 
phlogiſton only in a certain quantity of 


Air; 1. e. in proportion to the empyreal Air 
contained under the receiver ſo much and 


no more phlogiſton could be ſeparated from 
the metals; the Air remaining under the 


receiver, being foul Air. Why could Mr. 


Lavoiſier not reduce again this calx in 
this ſame Air, after having continued 
the calcination, if the objection had 
any weight, ſince this Air cannot receive 
any more of phlogiſton ? Again, it might 
be objected ; if light were not a ſubtle, a 

pure 


as +; tv, <a, tr, Fa twis os ,, ah 295 -«@ — e — — AF —< ww = —— tm ww RN - *. 


Air and Fire. 89 
pure phlogiſton, it would reduce tho 
calxes of baſe metals as well as thoſe of 
the noble ones, ſince the baſe metals have 
in their mixture only a coarſe phlogiſton. 
I anſwer, the phlogiſton is in all ſubſtances 
the ſame, and not in the leaſt different, 
that exiſting in gold and in ſilver is fimilar 
to that found in iron and oil. The baſer 
metals reduce the noble ones, for inſtance, 
copper reſtores the metallic earth, or calx of 
filver, or quickſilver, diſſolved in ſpirit of 
nitre, again to its metallic form. It may 
again be ſaid, that the phlogiſton of 
copper is decompounded, and only its 
more ſubtle particles (ſuch as are ſimilar to 
thoſe which penetrate through the retort, 
and reduce the calxes of the nobler metals) 
are communicated to the ſilver earth.— 
Then I aſk, What is the remaining part of 
the coarſe phlogiſton, which is ſtill left 
in the ſolution of copper ? If any ſolid 
| ſubſtance ſhould be ſeparated from the 
ſubtle phlogiſton which was united to the 
filver earth, (Mr. Beaume thinks it is a 
filiceous earth) it would follow, that the 
copper ſolution in this ſtate (after having 
been evaporated till it be dry, and then 


ſtrongly 
MANCHESTER 
UNIVERSITY 
LipRARY 


„ 

ſttongly diſtilled in à retort, by which 
means the acid of nitre will be again fepa. 
rated) ſhould have its calx of copper left in 
the reſuuum again reduced into copper by 
a mere red- hot heat; 'fince the ſubtle earth 
where with the pure phlogiſton is imagined 
to have before been united, is ſtill preſent, 
ſo that the pure phlogiſton penetrating 
through the crucible could again be 
reſtored to it: But experience has proved 
to me that this cannot be done.—lt 
appears evidently, that all ſuch opinions 
have their origin in the ignorance we 
hitherto have been in with regard to the 
eſſential property of heat, 2oh:ch bas been 
looked upon as a ſubtle phlogiſton. 

The beautiful colours, wherewith light 
always ſhines, are, thirdly, likewiſe proofs 
that the light is not ſolely a phlogiſton. 
The attraction with which they both act 
ſo differently upon the different bodies, 
ſufficiently proves that they cannot be 
analogous ; and the following Experiment 
gives to this opinion ſtill more weight: 
Fix a glaſs priſm at the window, and let 
the refracted ſun-beams fall on the floor; 


with 


in this coloured light put a paper ſtrewed 


ns ya | noe „ ͤ ͥ U La. 


— 


— "WI | 


Air and Fire. 91 


with luna cornua, and you will obſerve 
that this horn- ſilver grows ſooner black 
in the violet ray than in any of the other 
rays: i. e. that the calx of ſilver ſeparates th 
ogiſton ſooner from the violet ray of 
light than from any other colour.— Having 
demonſtrated the exiſtence of an inflam- 
mable principle in the light, and having 
beſides proved that light conſiſts not ſolely 
of phlogiſton, it may be inferred, that 
light can by no means be conſidered as a 
primitive ſubſtance, | 


67. 


Light, if its motion be not interrupted, cauſes 
neither Heat nor Cold, 


If you take two thermometers which are 
exactly equal, and one of which is filled 
with deep red ſpirits, and the other with an 
uncoloured ſpirit, and expoſe them both to 
the beams of the ſun, you will obſerve that 
the coloured ſpirits riſe ſooner than the un- 
coloured ones ; but immerſing both in the 
ſame hot water, they riſe both with equal ce- 
lerity, The more a body approaches in co- 
lour to black, the ſooner will it be heated by 

the 


92 Experiments on 

the beams of the ſun; the whiter it is, 
the later it will be heated: However, if 
both be immerſed in a warm fluid, they 
both acquire the ſame degree of heat. The 
cauſe of the difference of theſe phænomena 
is to be found in the greater or leſſer attrac- 
tion the bodies have to light. For this 
very reaſon, the bodies that reflect the inci- 
dent light in all poſſible directions, and are 
called white, grow little and ſlowly warm: 
the ſame may bo ſaid of bodies which let 
the ſun-· beams paſs without hindrance, and 
are commonly called tranſparent bodies, 
Heat cauſed by the rays of the ſun, is owing 
to their velocity being impeded by certain 
bodies, Here ariſes the queſtion: Whether 
this heat is a&ually a property of the rays of 
the ſun, or whether it originates from the 


boates ? 


68, 


I have, in ſome of the preceding ſections, 
mentioned Experiments by which it ap- 
pears,. that the radiant heat (No. 57.) is 
attracted neither by Air nor poliſhed me- 
tals; and that by the means of a metallic 
concave mirror, it produces a burning focus; 

and 


Air and Fire. 93 


and like wiſe, that after having been brought 
into union with other bodies, it eaſily unites 
with the Air and metals : Theſe are pro- 
perties which are alſo belonging to light. 
I then likewiſe proved, that the igniting 
power of radiant heat is not to be aſcribed 
to the light mixed with it, (No. 27.) but 
that it then only produces ſuch effects, when 
this heat has been attracted by bodies: 
And are theſe not likewiſe properties of the 
beams of the fun ?—I will ſuppole, the heat 
which to the greater part of bodies is com- 
municated by the light of the ſun, is the 
ſame which is contained in the pores of 
bodies; but, fince it is thought that all heat 
ariſes from friction, that it is ſet in motion by 
the friction cauſed by the light of the ſun. 
Air, which in its pure ſtate is not ſenſibly 
heated by the rays of the ſun, is however 
heated when it ſurrounds a body, upon 
which the light of the ſun has operated for 
a ſhort while: This is the chief cauſe of 
the heat we obſerve in the air during ſum- 
mer. This ſuppoſed, it would follow, that 
the body muſt part with ſome of its natural 
quantity of heat; if this happens, it muſt 
make a conſiderable quantity, when the ſun 

has 


has been ſhining on the body almoſt every 
day during a whole ſummer. Nevertbe- 
les I obſerved that, for inſtance, à piece 
of iron becomes, in autumn, from the light 
of the fun; to my feeling as hot as tn ſpring, 
or when itis bent backwards and forwards; 
A very weighty objection may be made 
here ; vis. that the heat which the body 
illuminated by the fun-beams loſes during 
day, may again be attracted after the ferting 
of the ſun; and during night, from the Air 
and thoſe bodies which ſurround it; and 
that this perhaps is one of the cauſes why 
it grows · ſo cool in the evenings and during 
night. In order therefore to obviate this 
difficulty, I made the following Experi- 
ment, June the 22d; I hung a piece of ſheet 
lead. coloured: blaek, in the open Air, ſo 
that it might be expoſed to the ſun during 
the whole day: the lead was conſtantly fo 
intenſely hot that a tender hand eonld not 
hold it for a long time. Two hours before 
ſun- ſetting, I rolled the lead up and im- 


merſed it in a beer-glaſs filled with water; 
cloſe to it I had put another beer-glaſs like- 
wiſe filled with water, into both I had im- 
merſed thermometers. Immediately after, 


the 


F S SSF FSF TFT 


8 
1 


S 


ESFE_ 


the ſpitits of the thermometer in the glaſs 
where lead had been immerſed began ſome 
thing to riſe, an account af the ſnieet- lead. 
After the ſpace of two hours, the heat asg 
equal in both glaſſes. I continued to ob- 
ſerve the heighit of the thermometers dur ing 
all the night, but as much as the one fell, 
the other fell likewiſe: Should the water: 
wherein the lead had been immer ſed not 
have loſt a greater quantity of heat, if the 
above objection were founded? am theore- 
fore apt to believe, that the light of the ſun 
imparts, no heat whenever it continues its 
ſtraight motion uninterrupted; but when it 
is retarded. by the attracting powers of 
bodies, its heat becomes immediately ſen- 
fible;—So. likewiſe it happens. with the 74+ 
diant, heat, (No. 57.) 


69. 
Conſtituent Parts of Light. 


dince the beams of light falling on 2 
body which has an attraction to them 
are changed into heat, it might at firſt 
ontſet ſeem, that light is nothing elſe but 
heat moved with an incredible velocity: 

— for 


9 Experiments on. 


for it extends bodies to which it is united 
in the ſame manner as heat does. Our 
| nerves receive from this heat the ſame motion 
which is communicated to them from the 
heat of Fire; and it is likewiſe inviſible, 
juſt as heat is. But it ought not then to 
cauſe the reduction of the precipitate gold; 
it would not make luna cornua black ; the 
fuming ſpirit of nitre would not be tinged 
red; not would manganeſe be diſſolved in 
it; which is juſt the contrary of what I have 
proved, (No. 62, 63-65.) This may be 
obſerved by covering the phial containing 
any one of the above mixtures with a thick 
coating of black paint, and then expoſing 
it for ſeveral days together to the operation 
of the ſun-beams ; the phial grows very 
hot, but the ſubſtances contained do not 
undergo the leaſt change. Light, therefore, 
intercepted by certain bodies, produces the 
phenomena of heat. It is therefore more 
than probable, that light is compoſed 
of the ſame principles as heat, However, 
ſince light, when it moves on in a free and 
| undiſturbed direction, is poſſeſſed of till 
more properties than thoſe- belonging to 
heat or radiant beat, (No. 57.7 it may be 
| | hence 


,,, xo = oat 


NO mo & =» 


Air and Fire. 97 


hence inferred, that it is not to be con- 
fidered as heat only; at leaſt it entitles one 
to the belief, that its integrant parts are 
made up in a proportion entirely different 
from that of heat. To thoſe who occupy 
themſelves with chemiſtry in a rational 
manner, it cannot be unknown, that there 
are a great many ſubſtances which unite 
with the inflammable principle, either in a 
greater or leſſer proportion, and in each 
of theſe unions acquire different properties. 
I have ſpoken already of it (No. 27,) and 
the acid of vitrol proves the ſame thing : 
Why then ſhould this not take place in re- 
gard to heat, ſince I have proved, that it is 
compoſed of phlogiſton and empyreal Air ? 
Tf this empyreal Air is compoſed with more 
phlogiſton than is neceflary for producing 
heat, radiant heat is produced; if ſome very 
little phlogiſton be added, the property 
diſcovered in radiant heat is then increaſed 
and /ighf is produced. Nay, the leaſt atom 
more or leſs of phlogiſton, produces the 
moſt glorious phænomenon of the various 
colours, that is to ſay, the various kinds of 
light: Among theſe the violet and purple 
coloured light is charged with the leaſt 
H quantity 


98 Experiments on 


quantity of phlogiſton, ſince it is more 
attracted by the priſm than all the other 
ſpecies of lighs; eſpecially obſerving, that 
radiant heat (No. 57,) which undoubtedly 
is charged with ſomewhat leſs phlogiſton 
than light, is likewiſe and ſtill more ſo at- 
tracted by the priſm. Whence it appears, 
why the eye can bear a longer time to dwell 
upon the violet rays than the red ones, viz. 
becauſe each particle of light in the red ray 
is charged with ſomewhat more phlogiſton ; 
for which reaſon this light, be it ever fo 
ſubtle, muſt conſiſt of greater particles than 
the violet colour, and therefore produce a 
greater effect on the nerves of viſion. The 
violet beams produce the reduction of horn- 
filver ſooner than the reſt (No.66). It ſeems 
that ſince theſe beams are more ſtrongly 
attracted by the priſm than all the reſt, 
they move afterwards with a velocity ſome- 
What diminiſhed ; whence the calx of filver 
can keep up its attraction the longer, and 
conſequently decompound the violet light. 
I therefore am of opinion that each par- 
ticle of Light is nothing more than a /ub7/e 
particle of N Air, which is more 

| charged 


Air and Fire. 99 


charged with phlogiſton than an equally 
ſubtle particle of heat. 


70. 


The experiments mentioned in the be- 
ginning of the preceding ſection, give an 
opportunity of putting the queſtion, Why 
light produces quite different properties 
after it has been attracted by bodies, and 
thence acquired the chief properties of heat? 
It would be eaſy to anſwer, if I could 
prove that all bodies retained the ſuper- 
fluous phlogiſton of light ; but this is done 
by few only ; and if this were the caſe, all 
bodies ſtruck during ſome time by ſun 
beams muſt have undergone ſenſible altera- 
tions, which however has not been obſerved. 
—[t is equally difficult to account for the 
change of radiant heat (No. 57.) into 
heat, by the attracting bodies. — The 
chemical affinities producing the ſtrangeſt 
changes in bodies, become only then active 
when the bodies come in every poflible 
point of contact with one another. Heat, 
as a matter, cannot penetrate a body, and 
it occupies only its pores; in which caſe 


H 2 only 


100 Expermments on 


only a few points of its matter come in 
contact with it: if more heat be added, it 
comes in contact with ſtill more points; if 
ſtill more heat be as it were forced into 
it, and the body is of ſuch a nature that it 
attracts the inflammable principle ſtronger 
than the empyreal Air does, heat is 
deſtroyed. This is the caſe with the re- 
duction of the nobler metallic calxes by 
heat only, which never happens before 
theſe calxes either acquire a red heat, or at 
leaſt nearly approach to that heat.—If I 
apply this theory to light, this ſubtle and 
with incredible velocity moving ſubſtance, 
muſt exactly touch the bodies; and by thoſe 
poſſeſſed of attraction to the phlogiſton, 
be in the ſame moment decompounded : 
But after that its violent motion has been 
ſtopped by the attrafting powers of other 
bodies, and it ſhews its activity only as mere 
heat, occupies the pores of theſe bodies, 
paſſes from them into others containing leſs 
of it, without touching much or at all the 
matter of theſe bodies ; and in conſequence 
the luna cor nua, &c. &c. cannot be reduced. 


On 


Air and Fire. 101 


71. F 
On Fire. 


At laſt I come to my chief ſubject, 
which properly has been the object of 
all the preceding Experiments.—I know 
how very uſeful the thorough knowledge 
of Fire muſt be to him who is deſirous of 
obtaining a perfect knowledge of the pro- 
perties and conſtituent parts of all bodies. 
Inquiries comprehending the principles 
and explications of ſo many other phæno- 
mena, muſt be made with great care and 
accuracy, in order to avoid all falſe ſyſtems, 
which lead us from one uncertainty into 
another: Inquiries which thoſe chiefly 
ought to take upon themſelves, and be- 
come anſwerable for, who make ſo many 
if not the greateſt part of their Experiments 
in fire: Chemiſts are thoſe whom I 
mean. But how is it poſſible to obtain a 
clear inſight into this matter, when people 
are diſcouraged both by written and verbal 
accounts of the great difficulties obvious in 
the inveſtigation of fire, which amount to 


II 3 this 3 


102 Experiments an 


this; that there are many centuries elapſed, 
and nevertheleſs ſo very little certainty has 
been brought to light relative to its pro- 
perties? But far be it, that he who is de- 
firous of acquiring the knowledge of natural 
phenomena, ſhould take this for a rule of 
his conduct, and give up the hopes of 
obtaining more certainty and inſight in this 
affair.— Others, on the contrary, explain 
Fire ſo eaſily, that by their account it 
ſhould ſeem to become palpable. They 
do not confider the many objections to 
which their doctrine is liable : According to 
the one, heat is fire; and to another, light is 
Fire: Here it is aſſerted that heat is the 
elementary Fire; and there again, it is 
the effet of Fire. By the principles of 
one, light is the pureſt Fire, and an 
element ; and by thoſe of another, light is 
difleminated through the whole ſpace of 
our world, and by the impulſe of the 
elementary Fire, it is put into a rectilinear 
motion. Here you are given to under- 
ſtand that light is an element, which is 
confined by means of the acidum pingue,* 

and 


* By Mr. Meyer; who uſed that expreſſion in a 
treatiſe on lime, full of very curious Experiments. 


Air and Fire. 103 


and by the expanſion of this imaginary 
acid it is again ſet at liberty, &c. What is 
therefore more neceſſary than to make 
new Experiments, in order to get out of 
this labyrinth ?—But before I enter upon 
the ſubject I am obliged to explain what 
I underſtand by the word phlogi/ton. 


7 2 * 
Phlogiſton. 


1. Plogiſion is a true element and a 


ſimple principle.“ 2. It can, by the reten- 
tive 


® There are a great many who believe that phlogiſ- 
ton is a compound of elementary fire (by which they 
mean heat) and of a ſubtle earth. This earth is, 
according to the opinion of Mr. Beaume, the ſiliceous, 
which he thinks to be the primitive earth. When 
this earth conflagrates, heat is ſeparated from it, and 
goes into the earth. Is this elementary fire united 
with Air, or is it only diſſipated in it? Why is it not 
poſſible to compound phlogiſton of heat and ſiliceous 
earth? Mr. Beaume ſays, the coal-like reſiduum 
of diſtilled oils is almoſt pure phlogiſton. If ſuch a 
ſubtle coal is burnt, but very little earth remains. 
It is incomprehenſible how ſo ſmall a quantity of 
earth, could abſorb ſo great a quantity of heat or ele- 


H 4 mentary 


104 Experiments on 


tive power of certain matters, be transferred 
from one body into the other; theſe bodies 
then undergoing material changes, ſo that 
not ſeldom they are enabled, by the effect of 
the particles inſinuating themſelves in the 
interſtices of bodies, to go over into fuſion, 
or even into elaſtic vapours; and in this 
ſtate it is the chief cauſe of ſmelling. 
3. Very often it brings the particles of bodies 
into ſuch a ſituation that they attract either 
all the beams of light, or only ſome one, 
or even none. 4. In the tranſition from 
one body into another neither light nor 
heat is communicated to it. 5. This 
element enters into ſo cloſe and ſubtle an 
union with empyreal Air that it even pene- 
trates through the moſt ſubtle pores of all 
bodies. From this union ariſes both the 
matter of light, and likewiſe the matter of 
heat. In all theſe compoſitions phlogiſton 
undergoes not the leaſt change; and from 
the laſt compoſition it can be ſeparated 
again, Phlogiſton can by no means be 

obtained 


mentary fire ; for what, after conflagration is wanting, 
is the weight of heat. But the atrial acid which is 
ſeparated from this coal in ſuch great quantities dur- 


ing conflagration weighs it nothing ? The Author, 


„„ a tw. A%* was *»n% tc Pw tw 21 vt XDXX1202 wig cowd JLJH&S Aa. a 


Air and Fire. 105 


obtained by itſelf; for it never ſeparates 
from one body, though united with it ever 
ſo cloſely, unleſs there be preſent another 
coming in immediate contact with it. 


73. 
Combuſtible Bodies. 


Thoſe bodies commonly called com- 
buſtible, are either hard, or ſoft, or fluid, 
Sulphur, pit-coals, zinc, yellow amber, 
wax, camphire, oil, ſpirit of wine, &c. 
belong to them. Phlogiſton exiſts in them 
in great quantity, but not ſtrongly united 
with them.—A number of Experiments 
ſeem to prove, that the acid principle is 
properly the ſubſtance with which phlo- 
giſton is capable of forming a more or leſs 
firm union.—The objection made to this 
aſſertion relative to metallic earths ſeems to 
me to be of no conſequence. I ſee that the 
acid of arſenic, with a ſmall portion of in- 
flammable, acquires the appearance of an 
earth; and with ſtill more of it the form of a 
regulus (No. 41). How hard were it to 


ſuppoſe, that all metallic earths, nay, all 
kinds 


1066 Experiments on 


kinds of earth, are different kinds of acid ?-. 
Water is the chief earth made fluid by heat. 
This ſubſtance communicates fixity to acids, 
though both be volatile. Phoſphoric acid 
is volatile: this may be ſeen when phoſ- 
phorus is burnt in a cloſe phial, the acid 
attaches itſelf every where to the phial, 
and may be ſublimed by a burning candle 
from one ſide of the phial to the other; but 
by adding water, this acid will bear red heat 
without evaporating. Fuming acid of vi- 
triol, fuming acid of nitre, and fuming ma- 
rine acid, nay, even concentrated vinegar, 
may every one be ſomewhat fixed by water, 
Of thoſe acids which properly are thus 
fixed by watery vapours, ſo that they can 
be called earths, we hitherto know but one; 
which is the acid of ſparry fluor, yielding 
with watery vapours the ſiliceous earth ; 
an earth whoſe conſtituent parts chemiſtry 
has not yet been able again to decompound. 
— The properties of metallic earths in at- 
tracting the phlogiſton, muſt depend upon 
the nature of their acids : the vitriolic, 
nitrous, and phoſphoric acids attract it very 
ſtrongly, the marine and ſparry fluor acid 
attract it but weakly; for which reaſon the 
filiceous 


ri 


Ve! 


Air and Fire. 107 


filiceous earth is found to have no affinity 
with it. The union of moſt earths with 
acids, depends merely on a ſmall portion of 
phlogiſton wherewith the acids or earths 
are intimately united. It is manganeſe 
which gives me an opportunity of ſupecting 
this : manganeſe has a great ſimilarity with 
the ſiliceous earth, it is likewiſe indifloluble 
in the acids; but if a phlogiſton be added 
to its mixture, it acquires all the properties 
of an abſorbent earth (No. 64). If it were 
poſſible to ſeparate, in a rational manner, the 
phlogiſton ſo firmly united with metallic 
and other abſorbent earths, they would pro- 
bably diſcover their acid nature more pal- 
pably.---Who ſees not, that here is opened 
a wide field for new and beautiful Expe- 
riments ? But I find that I am deviating too 
far from my intent. 


74. 


We are pretty well acquainted with of 
mixtures : we know the conſtituent parts 
of ſulphur and phoſphorus. Although the 
imitation of animal and vegetable oils is 
very difficult, we know, however, their 
conſtituent 


108 Experiments an 


conſtituent parts; and after a mature con- 
ſideration it will become obvious, that it is 
a difficult taſk to compofe them by chemi- 
cal operations. We find, in a moſt ſcrupu- 
lous and total analyſis of fuch oils, nothing 
but phlogiſton, aerial acid, and water. It 
is believed, that they beſides" contain an 
acid ſomewhat fimilar to vinegar, which 
may be actually ſeparated from them in a 
ſmall proportion by diſtillation : However, 
| ſince this acid is again to be analyzed, and 
then contains water, atrial acid, and phlo- 
giſton; and it is probable that the above 
acid is generated from the above conſtituent 
parts during diſtillation ; and beſides, none 
has been able to compoſe of vegetable acids 
and phlogiſton an oil; J am apt to believe, 
that ſuch decompounded acid may be con- 
ſidered as a conſtituent part of oils : But 
why are we not able to compound ſuch 
oils, as well as we can compound ſulphur ? 
When the phlogiſton is to be united with 
aerial acid, ſuch a body is to be employed as 
contains phlogiſton : If you ſhould employ 
for that purpoſe ſuch a body as has a ſtronger 
affinity to phlogiſton than the atrial acid, 
you would act very improperly. The 
| phoſphorus 


Air and Fire. 109 
phoſphorus, vitriolic, nitrous acids, metallic 
earths, and empyreal Air, are ſuch as de- 
compound coals and oil; and in theſe laſt, 
the phlogiſton is united with aerial acid. 
The greater or leſſer quantity of earth con- 
tained in theſe oily ſubſtances is only to be 
conſidered as accidental; for as little as 
earth is requiſite for making ſulphur and 
phoſphorus, as little is earth neceſſary in this 
caſe, How difficult muſt this compoſition 
be l Thus much is true, their conſtituent 
parts are phlogiſton, atrial acid, and water. 


/ 


75 


Fire. 


Fire is that more or leſs heating, and 
more or leſs luminous fate of certain bodies, 
into which they come by means of the Air 
having previouſly been heated to a certain 
degree; in which ſtate they are reſolved 
into their conſtituent parts, and entirely de- 
ſtroyed, whereby conſtantly a certain part 
of the Air is loſt. | 
\. Remark 1. Hence it likewiſe appears, 
that the heating of ſtones, earths, ſalts, &c. 


with 


110 Experiments on 


with a red heat cannot be called a Fire; 
ſince the air undergoes by it no change, its 
expanſion excepted, and ſince the operation 
can be done even without Air. 

Remark 2. Heat and warmth likewiſe 
cannot be called Fire, fince it can be pro- 
duced in various manners without heat: 
under the ſame predicament are liver of 
ſulphur, ſome oils, varniſh of linſeed oil, 
iron-filings, &c. For theſe cauſe a heat, no 
doubt by means of the Air, by which ſome 
part of the Air is loſt (No. 51.) ; but the 
abſence of light prevents their being called 
Fire. 

Remark 3. The luminous appearance of 
ſome kinds of ſtone, after they have been 
heated, the Bononian and Baldwin's phoſ- 
phorus, the electrical luminous appearance, 
and the light of the ſun, are likewiſe not 
to be conſidered as Fire; fince the air is 
not changed by theſe phznomena, and they 
may equally well be ſeen in the vacuum of 
an exhauſted receiver. But the phoſphorus 
of urine is an actual Fire; for it is luminous, 
it heats, it is deſtroyed, and abſorbs Air. 
None of theſe phenomena appear in foul 
Ac, or without Air in the exhauſted 

vacuum 


2. = .<C 


Air and Fire. 111 
vacuum.— It is an improper expreſſion to 
fay, water conſiſts of particles of ice and 


Fire; the Fire latent in ſome ſubſtances, 
the Fire of the ſun, &c. 


76. 
At preſent I intend to deſcribe my theory 
on the generation of Fire, and the phæno- 
mena it cauſes, founded on the preceding 


Experiments, and leave the deciſionther eon 
to the judgment of my readers. 


I. To every combuſtible bodya certain quan- 


tity of heat muſt be communicated, in order to 
ſet it in the fiery commotion. (a.) 


Ca. ] Since heat is a very ſubtle, elaſtic, 
and fluid ſubſtance, it penetrates the pores 
of combuſtible bodies, and deſtroys their co- 
heſion; the oils are changed into ſmoke, 
and the Air then finds an opportunity of 
coming in contact with them in more 
points, and conſequently a beginning is made 
of its deſtruction. —The weaker the cohe- 
ſion is.of the integrant parts of combuſtible 
bodies, the leſs heat is required in procuring 

ignition: phoſphorus requires only little 
heat. 


112 Experiments on 
heat. I cut about a drachm of phoſphorus 


in ſmall pieces, in order to examine whether 
the luminous appearance of this ſubſtance 
really produces a greater degree of heat 
than that of the common atmoſphere. I 
then put the ball of the thermometer in 
the middle between the ſmall pieces of 
phoſphorus. The ſpirit in the thermo- 
meter began to riſe, and after the ſpace of 
a quarter of an hour the phoſphorus con- 
flagrated. One piece of phoſphorus does not 

take fire from itſelf; the increaſed number 
of ſurfaces communicating to the empyreal 
Air a greater bulk of phlogiſton, muſt na- 
turally cauſe a greater heat; which explains 
the ignition, —Volatile vitriolic ether takes 
fire by holding a red-hot iron above it : In 
the ſame predicament is likewiſe the in- 
flammable Air cauſed by iron or zinc and 
the vitriolic acid. Sulphur requires leſs 
heat than the fat oils. The water con- 
tained in common atmoſpheric Air is the 
chief cauſe of the ignition of pyrophorus, 
whereof I ſhall ſpeak afterwards. 


2. Then 


"GS _ _ 


2. Then it is enabled to part with its 
phlogifton, provided there be a ſubſtance pre- 
fent which has a ſtranger attraction to the 
inflammable than that with which it was 
before in union. (b.) 

{6.) If the phlogiſton be united with 
atrial acid, in that caſe the phoſphoric, 
nitrous, and arſenical acids, metallic earths, 
&c. are ſubſtances which deprive the atrial 
acid of its phlogiſton; however in this caſe, 
neither heat nor light is generated. 

3. If the heating is done in open air, 
the empyreal Air has the flronger at- 
tration, (c). 

{c.) That empyreal Air has a very great 
affinity with the univerſal phlogiſton, has 


been demonſtrated in many paſſages of 
this memoir. 


4. Immediately after, the inflammable prin- 
ciple muſt come out and unite with the em- 


pyreal Air, and thus be ſet at liberty. (d.) 


Fd. In caſe the ſubſtance be coals or 
oil, it is the aerial acid; if ſulphur, vitriolic 
acid ; if phoſphorus, phoſphoric acid ; if 

I metals, 


114 Experiments on 


metals, metallic earths; which all part with 
phlogiſton, though not ſo as to agquire the 
higheſt ſtate of dephlogiſtication. Thus 
the vitriolic acid retains ſo much of phlo- 
giſton as is neceſfary to generate ſpirit of 
ſulphur: Arſenical acid retains after the 
burning of the regulus, as much phlogiſton 
as makes common arſenic ; (which makes it 
no wonder, that arſenical acid decompounds 
heat, and becomes arſenic.) There is no 
doubt of it that vitriolic acid is reduced by 
heat into volatile ſpirit of ſulphur : and the 


metallic calxes no doubt retain ſomewhat of 


phlogiſton. 
5. Prom this union heat is compounded, 


which adheres to foul Air, expands it, and 
riſes according to bydroſtatical principles. (e.) 


fe. Heat js united to foul Air (No. 56. 
letter mm.) For all the empyreal Air which 
had been mixed with it is united with the 
phlogiſton< if you collect Air paſſing thro' 
burning coals, a burning candle. will im- 
mediately extinguiſh in it. Heat is not 
always generated by the compoſition of 
theſe two conſtituent parts, but it is found 


previouſly exiſting in moſt if not all bodies: 
But 


Air and Fire. 115 


But who will believe, that in oily mixtures 
ſhould be contained all the heat that is 
felt, after they are brought into the fiery 
commotion? Only that kind of heat then 
is previouſly exiſting in the bodies, which 
without the addition of Air, in any way, 
may be extricated from them. It exiſts 
two ways in bodies; in the one, it 
fills the minute pores of bodies in which 
it enters juſt as a liquor reſides in capillary 
tubes. Secondly, it is united with certain 
ſubſtances, and makes one of their integrant 
parts; whereof I ſhall ſpeak afterwards.— 
The heat which is contained in the pores 
of bodies is there entirely inactive, ſince 
the attractive power of matter hinders its 
elaſticity; and all Experiments ſeem to in- 
dicate, that all the effects of heat on bodies 
muſt be aſcribed to their expanſion. This 
ſhut- up heat may be extricated in two dif- 
ferent ways; either the minute pores muſt 
be ſtill more compreſſed, which is done by 
reciprocal friction of two bodies and the 
bending and hammering of metals; (for 
muſt not heat then come out, when the 
pores are opened on one fide and compreſſed 
on the other, by the bending backwards 

N and 


116 Experiments on 


and forwards of metals ?) or the integrant 
parts of bodies muſt be disjoined, which 
is done partly by fermentation; putrefaction, 
and chemical ſolutions, 


6. Scarcely is this heat generated when 
the combuſtible body is flill niore expanded by 
it than in the beginning, and its phlogiſton is 
more laid open. (f.) 

. The more the heat is increaſed, the 
more minute are the particles into which 
the body is diflolved; the empyrealAir meets 
with more ſurfaces, and conſequently comes 
in contact with more phlogiſton. 


(7.) Empyreal Air comes in contact with 
more phlogiſton, and, according to its nature, 
forms an union with a greater quantity of it, 
which cauſes radiant heat. (g.) 

Jg. Do we not obſerve, that vitriolic 
acid united with a ſmall portion of phlo- 
giſton forms ſpitit of ſulphur ; and, with a 
{till greater quantity, ſulphur. Arſenical 
acid has the ſame property; nitrous acid 
and metallic earth ſhew the ſame; and man- 
ganeſe, with a ſmall quantity of phlogiſton, 
becomes an abſorbent earth ; with a greater 
portion, it forms a regulus. Empyreal Air 
is ſubject to the ſame laws. 

| 8. And 


Air and Fire. 117 


8. And at that very moment the integrant 
parts of the combuſtible body are ſo much dij- 
united by the fill increafing beat, that the 
empyreal Air continuing to pour upon it in 
freams, attratts the phlogiſton in flill greater 
quantities ; and hence {that wonderful pbæ- 
nomenon } the moſt elaſtic ſubſtance, Light, is 
compoſed ; which, according to the quantity of 
combuſtible matter, has various colours. (h.) 


b.] Laſtly, when the great quantity of 
generated heat has ſo far diſunited the 
ſmalleſt particles of oily bodies that they 
can take up no more heat, it may be eaſily 
imagined, that even the integrant parts are 
disjoined ; which may be done fo much 
the more eaſy, the nearer a ſubſtance is found 
which is capable of attracting the phlogiſton 
in quantities; v/2. the empyreal Air, which 
pouring in upon the combuſtible body in 
ſtreams, takes conſtantly up ſo much of 
the phlogiſton as is neceſſary to generate 
light. But fince the phlogiſton cannot in 
all points thoroughly come in contact with 
the empyreal Air, on account of the acid 
quited by the phlogiſton, the empyreal 
Air muſt naturally take up different pro- 
portions of phlogiſton; and ſhould the 

| 13 dif- 


118 Experiments on 


difference conſiſt even in a few atoms more 
or leſs, the properties ariſing from theſe 
different mixtures muſt be different, and 
ſhew us different colours, eſpecially when 
they are divided by the priſm. All theſe 
phenomena, vig. heat, radiant heat, and 
light, are produced in ſo quick a ſucceſſion 
that hardly a moment is paſſed after they 
are generated when in another inſtant they 


again as it were diſappear, and new ſuc- 


ceſſions of heat and light are generated. 
The more Air is compreſied the denſer is 
empyreal Air; the more it comes in con- 
tact with the combuſtible body, the more 
heat and light is generated, and con- 
ſequently the quicker -is the combuſtible 
body reduced to aſhes; a ſtrong current and 
a pair of bellows ſhew this evidently.—Is 
there not a great quantity of phlogiſton in 
an oily mixture, ſo that empyreal Air may 
be, as it were, ſaturated with it? the light 
commonly then being tinged blue; as may 
be ſeen in the flame of charcoal, inflammable 
Air, ſulphur, and ſpirit of wine.—Certain 
ſtrange vapours in the flame ſeem to at- 
tract certain kinds of light: Should the 
vapour of copper not attract all the other 

beams 


i... —_y 


ns £A; ' tan. ite kocÞc 


n 
0 


Air and Fire. mg 


beams of light, except the green ones; and 
the mineral fixed alkali all others, except 
the yellow; &c.? 10 
Mr. Meyer, and ſeveral more, are of 
opinion, that light is already pre-exiſting in 
the combuſtible bodies, and only comes 
forth at their deſtruction. But the Experi- 
ments I have made upon light militate 
againſt this docttrine; and the following are 
likewiſe to the ſame purpoſe: When I, for 
inſtance, obſerve that hepar ſulpburis is de- 
ſtroyed in open Air, without the addition 
of heat, and I fee no light preſent, (though 
light, -even in its moſt ſubtle expanſion, 
may be well ſeen in the dark) I take an 
opportunity of inferring, that light, in 
the burning of ſulphur is only accidental. 
'T ain ftill more confirmed in this opi- 
nion, when I find that ſulphur is entirely 
diſſolved with efferveſcence, by fuming ſpirit 
of nitre poured on it, and kept in digeſtion; 
and yet no light appears. —If the ſo- 
lution be evaporated, nothing remains but 
a concentrated oil of vitriol.—Nay, even 
phoſphorus, treated in the ſame manner, 
with fuming ſpirit of nitre, is eaſily diſ- 
ſolved, even without the addition of heat ; 
I 4 and 


{ 


120 Experiments on 


and no light appears in the operation. After 
evaporation there remains likewiſe only 
the pure acid of phoſphorus. 


77 


In regard to the ſhining quality of ſome 
kinds of ſtone after they have been rubbed 
or heated, it ſeems to me probable, that their 
light is firſt compounded. There is not 


dme leaſt doubt that the calcareous ſparry 
fluor, and many other kinds, contain ſome 


phlogiſton ;_.when theſe ſtones are heated, 
either by rubbing or heat, the phlogiſton 
unites with the heat, and by it the em- 
pyreal Air acquires more phlogiſton ; and 
hence the light is generated: For it is 
indifferent whether empyreal Air attracts 
at once ſo much phlogiſton as is neceſſary 
for generating light, or whether heat at- 
tracts ſome additional phlogiſton, in order 
to compound this ſubtle elaſtic ſubſtance, 
Hence it likewiſe becomes evident, why 
this light may be generated in the vacuum, 
where Air has been extracted by the Air- 
pump ; and why the ſparry fluor even ſhines 
in hot water, Were this light previouſly 

contained 


Air and Fire. 121 


contained in theſe ſtones it muſt become 
viſible at their diſſolution. After the phlo- 
giſton is extracted by heat, the ſhining is 
at an end; for which reaſon it is impoſſible 
ever to procure again light by the appli- 
cation of heat, after the ſparry fluor has 
once been heated red-hot and again grown 
cold. 

Since the diamond entirely flies off in 
cloſe veſſels under a continued heat, ſhould 
not heat likewiſe unite with the great 
quantity of phlogiſton which the diamond 
muſt be poſſeſſed of, and carry it off under 
the form of light ? The bright light which 
is obſerved during the calcination of dia- 
monds, ſeems to give weight to this opi- 
nion. 

In regard to the Phoſphorus Balduint, 
and the Bononian Phoſphorus, it 1s moſt 
probable, that theſe two ſubſtances attract 
the light from the ſun or fire. I cannot 
find the cauſe in anything elſe than in a cer- 
tain magnitude of the moſt ſubtle pores, into 
which the particles of light penetrate, with- 
out being very ſtrongly attracted by the mat- 
ter of theſe bodies; to which the acid of 
nitre or ſulphur exiſting in theſe bodies 
may 


122 Experiments on 


may contribute ſomething. Heat, which 
neceſſarily ought to be ſomewhat coarſer than 
light, when made very elaſtic by the addition 
of more phlogiſton, penetrates likewiſe into 
them; becauſe it is attracted more power- 
fully on account of its greater denſity, and 
therefore expels again the light: The more 
heat penetrates at once into the ſubtle 
pores, the quicker is the light expelled; 
and the brighter ſhines the phoſphorus.— 
Hence I collect the cauſe, why theſe p 
pbori, after they are ſomewhat heated, do 
not attract the light, as long as they ſtill re- 
main hot; becauſe then the particular pores 
are filled up by heat. Humidity has the 
ſame effect. | 


78. 


A ſtone when put into fire firſt grows 
hot, and then red-hot ; it therefore attracts 
from the fire not only heat but likewiſe 
light: the light, which at firſt penetrated 
into the ſtone or iron, together with the 
heat, is, by the attraction of the matter of 
iron, changed into heat, till all the pores 
are filled with heat; then the pores are 
expanded 


Air and Fire. 123 
expanded, ſubtle openings are made into 
which the light enters, and which is as it 
were preſſed into it by a new ſucceſſion be- 
hind; and this cannot any more be changed 
into heat, ſince the matterof the ſtone has no 
more attraction to ſpare: light therefore ſits 
very looſely; and may, whenever the ſtone is 
taken out of the fire, very eaſily ſtream out 
again; and this really happens; however, 
if in any manner after the ſtone is taken 
out of the fire, you ſuddenly take away its 
heat, the light ſooner diſappears: Plunge 
a red-hot iron, for inſtance, into water, 
the latter attracts the heat very quickly. I 
ſuppoſe this piece of iron would have been 
red-hot a quarter of an hour in the open 
Air; in water it will not be a minute red- 
hot, though the light is by no means at- 
tracted more powerfully by the water than 
by the Air. The cauſe of it is; as ſoon 
as the water has attracted the heat from 
the external ſurface of the red-hot iron, 
this ſurface attracts the light, and changes 
it into heat ; ſo it happened when the ſtone 


or iron was firſt put into the fire. 


Though 


124 Experiments on 


79. 


Though nothing is more univerſally 
known, than that ſteel, ſtruck by a flint, 
yields ſparks, nevertheleſs, the true cauſe 
of this ignition is unknown, I ſhall, in the 
ſequel, prove by Experiments, that Fire 
contains a great quantity of heat, which has 
penetrated its pores, If then, by means of 
a ſharp and hard ſtone, a minute particle is 
rapidly ſeparated, the heat confined by this 
particle is ſet free, and adheres partly to it ; 
the phlogiſton (which is known to be co- 
pious in iron) is by it enabled to unite 
with a ſubſtance which attraQs it ſtronger 
than the earth of iron does, namely, the em- 
pyreal Air which is ready at hand; and by 
it the heat is fo much increaſed, that ſtill 
more phlogiſton is ſet free, and light is then 
generated; in a word, the particle of ſteel 
conflagrates. All theſe phenomena follow 
one another in an inſtant.— If ſuch a ſpark 
falls on a looſe, ſpungy, and combuſtible 
body, it heats the place on which it alights, 
whereby its phlogiſton is let looſe, is at- 
tracted by the empyreal Air, and ignited. 

It 


Air and Fire. 125 
If the red-hot particle of Neel be ſomewhat 
larger, the included heat of its middle is 
then expanded by the external heat, and 
fince the reſiſtance of a ſmall particle of 
ſteel cannot be otherwiſe than ſmall, it is 
disjointed by it, and divided into ſtill ſmaller 
ſparks: Theſe are thoſe ſparks which are 
ſo often ſeen to fly off laterally, —I faid, the 
particle of ſteel ought to be ſtruck off ra- 
pialy; for it may be eaſily imagined, that 
in caſe this happens to be done more flow- 
ly, the heat getting out of the pores is 
immediately again attracted by the ſtone, 
and by the whole piece of ſteel, as bodies 
infinitely more denſe than Air; and, conſe- 
quently, the phlogiſton cannot ſufficiently 
be ſet at liberty in order to unite with the 
empyreal Air. 


80. 


| I had long deſired to be poſſeſſed of a 
portion of Mercurius præcipitatus per ſe, 
in order to try whether it would likewiſe 
yield empyreal Air during its reduction, 
At laſt I was favoured with ſome by my 


dear friend Henry Gabn, doctor of phyſic. 
- This 


126 Experiments bn 

This ſo-called precipitate, had the appear- 
ance of ſmall dark red cryſtals, ſimilar to 
thoſe of cinnabar or vermillion. As I know 
very well, that mercury cannot be diſſolv- 
ed in the marine acid, unleſs it be deprived 
of its phlogiſton, which may be done by its 
ſolution in nitrous or vitriolic acid; and 
is the cauſe why, in a mixture of calcined 
vitriol, common ſalt and quickfilver nitre 


' ought to exiſt. I therefore poured marine 


acid on a portion of this red precipitate ; 


the ſolution was ſoon done, and grew ſome- 


what hot: I then evaporated it, and in- 
creaſed the heat; the whole was ſublimated, 
and formed a very corroſive ſublimate; 
conſequently this precipitate, prepared by 


mere heat only, is a calcined mercury. 


Another part of this precipitate I put into 
a ſmall glaſs retort, and having fixed to its 
mouth an empty bladder, I brought it into 
the fire; as ſoon as the retort became red- 
hot, the bladder was expanded, and the re- 
duced mercury mounted into the neck. No 
red ſublimate was here mounting, as is the 
caſe with that calx which is prepared with 
acid of nitre. The Air obtained was 
pure empyrea! Air.—This is a remarkable 
| | circum- 


Air and Fire. 127 


circumſtance, that empyreal Air, which 
before, in a flow calcination, had deprived 
mercury of its phlogiſton, likewiſe reſtores 
the ſame phlogiſton as ſoon as the calx 
hecomes red-hot. But we know of more 
ſuch phænomena, where heat as it were 
changes the attracting powers of bodies. 


81. 
1 On Pyrophorus. 


The accounting for the conflagration of 
this ſtrange chemical product, has by many 
been attempted in vain : They all agree in 
this, that therein exiſts a ſubſtance grow- 
ing ſo hot in the open Air, that the coals 
contained in the pyrophorus are ignited. 
It has been thought, that a concentrated 
vitriolic acid is the cauſe of this heat; fince 
moiſture accelerates the conflagration, and 
without this acid no pyrophorus can be 
m zde.But can it be demonſtrated, that 
a pure vitriolic acid, without any phlo- 
giſton, is contained in the pyrophornus ? 
and what is the reaſon, that oil of vitriol 


and water uniting, cauſe a heat? and why 
enſues 


129 Experiments on 


enſues no heat, when the pyrophorus is 
put into a foul and moiſt Air; though vi- 
triolic acid is heated in the ſame Air by 
the addition of water ?We ſhall now exa- 
mine, whether my Experiments with it 
are capable of explaining this curious and 
remarkable phenomenon.—I had treated 
clay with oil of vitriol, in order to make 
alum, and I really produced alum without 
the addition of alkali; there remained 
however, a thick magma (maſs) which 
would not cryſtallize. Part of this refduum 
Iemployed in making a pyrophorus : Hav- 
ing calcined this in the uſual manner, I 
found to my aſtoniſhment, that it would 
neither kindle in the open Air, nor even 
cauſe the leaſt heat. Hereupon I took 
the other part, put ſome alkali of tartar to 
it, and calcined it in the uſual method, 
and I obtained a fine pyrophorus. I learned 
by it firſt and foremoſt, that a fixed alkali 
is neceſſary to its generation, which unites 
with the ſulphur generated in the ope- 
ration ; and, conſequently, the liver of ſul- 
phur is the chief ſubſtance in this pro- 
duct. Iknew very well that hepar ſulphuris 
grows not hot in the common Air; but 

I ima- 


Air and Fire. 129 


I imagined, however, that being mixed 
with the porous earth of alum in the pyro- 
phorus, it might grow ſenſibly hot. In 
conſequence, I mixed a ſtrong ſolution of 
liver of ſulphur with burnt alum, and cal- 
cined-it violently in a cloſe glaſs; but af- 
ter it had been cooled, I found that it 
would not heat in the open Air.—I repeated 
the Experiment ; only with this difference, 
that I added ſome charcoal-duſt to the 
mixture, and behold, after having gone 
through the calcination, I had a good py- 
rophorus. I collected from thence, that a 
liver of ſulphur was not the only thing ne- 
ceſſary, but that coals alſo were to be in 
the mixture. I next mixed a ſpoonful 
of vitriolated tartar reduced to powder, 
with three ſpoonfuls of charcoal, reduced to 
a powder, and calcined the mixture ia the 
uſual manner with a ſtrong fire: After it 
was grown cold, I found a fine pyrophorus. 
Hence it follows, that fince without a fixed 
alkali no pyrophorus can be generated; and 
fince alum joined with the volatile alka- 
li, cryſtallizes, this muſt be certainly the 
cauſe why every alum yields not a pyro- 
phorus.— It was ſtill neceſſary to aſcertain 

K whether 


130 Experiments on 


whether moiſture was abſolutely neceſſary, 
in the kindling of the pyrophorus. I made 
a very dry Air, by putting ſome very ſmall 
pieces of quick- lime into a ſmall matras; 
then I put the neck of another matras into 
that of the firſt, ſo that the Airof both might 
communicate, and I luted the crevices with 
wax. Two days after, I ſeparated the 
empty matras, and -poured half an ounce 
of pyrophorus from my phial into it, and 
immediately carefully ſhut the aperture 
up; but I did not obſerve that it grew 
in the leaſt warm. An hour after this, I 
put a ſponge moiſtened in water into the 
matras, and ſhut it. again up: A few mi- 
nutes after the pyrophorus began ſtrongly 
to be heated, and ſome pieces kindled ſpon- 
taneouſly. — Then I filled a matras with 
foul Air, and put ſome pyrophorus into it, 
and put likewiſe a moiſtened ſponge into 
it, but the heat did not appear: When I 
poured it afterwards out, it kindled imme- 
diately. 

How 1s it then with this kindling? Py- 
rophorus is generated from hepar ſulphuris 
and charcoal: The liver of ſulphur at- 
tracts the phlogiſton ſet looſe from the 


| coals 


Air and Fire. 131 


coals by making it red-hot. (I ſhall prove 
in the ſequel, that ſulphur is capable of 
taking up till more phlogiſton). This ſub- 
ſtance compounded of alkali, phlogiſton, 
and ſulphur, will not kindle without moiſ- 
ture and empyreal Air: alkali which at- 
tracts moiſture ſtrongly, is diſabled by it 
from keeping any longer the phlogiſton ; 
eſpecially if there be preſent a ſubſtance at- 
tracting it more powerfully, viz. empyreal 
Air, which preſents itſelf and unites with 
the looſely adhering phlogiſton ; this forms 
heat; which, by the help of new ſupplies 
of empyreal Air, is quite ſufficient for 
kindling both the ſulphur and the coals ; 
and fince after the burning of the py- 
rophorus no liver of ſulphur is to be 
found, it muſt have been calcined during 
the heat. If the pyrophorus be thrown 
into water, before its kindling, an hepatic 
ſolution is formed, precipitating the Ace- 
tum litbargyrii black; whereas a ſolution 
of common liver of ſulphur yields brown 
precipitate. I obſerved likewiſe, that the 
firſt ſolution abſorbed Air quicker than the 
laſt; it muſt therefore contain a great 
quantity of phlogiſton. 

K 2 The 


132 Experiments on 


The conflagration produced by a mix- 
ture of pounded ſulphur and iron-filings 
moiſtened together, muſt, as I ſuppoſe, be 
explained in the ſame manner. Experi- 
ments taught me, that iron and ſulphur 
will not intimately unite, unleſs ſome part 
of the phlogiſton be ſeparated from the 
metal. Hence it is evident, that the ef- 
fort of the earth of iron to unite with ſul- 
phur muſt be ſtronger than that to unite 
with the phlogiſton; if then a ſubſtance 


be preſent which can unite with the ſepa- 


rated phlogiſton, there muſt ariſe effects 
proportionate to the union of the two ſub- 
ſtances. 

Take three parts of freſh iron-filings, 
one part of the fineſt powder of ſalphur, 
and ſo much water as is neceſſary to make 
a ſtrong dough of this mixture. The wa- 
ter begins to act firſt upon the iron, where- 
by its phlogiſton is freed of its fetters; the 
| fulphur increaſes this action, and unites 
with the half-dephlogiſticated iron, (which 
gives to the whole mixture a black colour;) 
the diſpoſſeſſed phlogiſton fits on the ſur- 
face ſo looſely adhering, that it may be ſoon 
expelled, (No. 54). If the Air is preſent, 

the 


Air and Fire. 133 
the empyreal Air contained in it attracts it; 
and heat is then compounded, which is 
proportionate to the extent of ſurface and 
the little coheſion of the mixture; which 
from the conſtant ſupply of empyrecal Air, 
muſt fo much increaſe, that the quantity of 
ſulphur kindles, and the whole maſs be- 
comes calcined. —But what becomes of the 
phblogiſton of the iron, in caſe it unites while 
on fire, with ſulphur in cloſe veſſels? for if this 
melted maſs be reduced into a minute pow- 
der, and be moiſtened with ſome water, 
nevertheleſs it will not become heated in the 
Air? If the phænomena are attended to, 
produced by this mixture during its union 
on the fire, it will be eaſy to anſwer this 
query. It has been obſerved, that almoſt every 
metal capable of undergoing with ſulphur 
an union on the fire, kindles in the very 
moment when this happens: and tho' the 
preſent operation be done in cloſe veſſels, ſome 
phænomenon ſimilar to this happens. I 
mixed three ounces of clean iron-filings 
with one ounce and a half of ſulphur in 
powder, and put it into a glaſs retort, three 
fourths of which were filled by it; and 
fixed to its neck a bladder emptied of Air 


K 3 and 


= 


1 34 Experiments on 


and moiſtened, (No. 30. letter þ.) and then 
I gradually put the retort on burning coals, 
When the retort began to be red-hot below, 
the mats itſelf began to be red-hot about 
the margin ; this fine purple red light ex- 
tended more and mote, till even the very 
middle of it was red-hot; then the margin 
became again dark, and at laſt the purple 
light diſappeared even in the middle. All 
this happened, though the retort continued 
to remain in the ſame fire. During this 
phznomenon, as much Air went over and 
expanded the bladder as would fill eight 
ounces meaſure. It was an inflammable 
Air, and had no ſmell. 


I have already demonſtrated, that light 
is diſtinguiſhed from heat by a greater 


quantity of phlogiſton only. Here in the 


retort is nothing wherewith the phlogiſton 
of the iron, expelled by the ſulphur, could 
be united; by the increaſing heat of the 
Fire it is entirely deprived of that ſmall 
degree of cohefion, whereby it might even 
adhere to the outer ſurface of the mixture; 
and fince it cannot be ſeparated from one 
ſubſtance unleſs there be another with 
which it can immediately unite (No. 27— 
5.) the heat penetrating through the retort 
attracts 


Air and Fire. 135 


attracts the phlogiſton, and what could be 
produced but light? As much light is ge- 
nerated, as the phlogiſton expelled from the 
iron will permit; and when this is con- 
ſumed, the luminous appearance muſt be 
at an end. But whence comes the inflam- 
mable Air in the bladder? I have already 
mentioned before, and ſhall demonſtrate it 
hereafter, that this inflammable Air is 
compoſed of heat and a greater portion of 
phlogiſton than is neceſſary to generate light. 
This ſuppoſed, it therefore follows, that in 
the union of iron and ſulphur, light is ge- 
nerated; but ſince there is more phlogiſton 
extricated than is neceſſary for that purpoſe, 
the ſuperfluous part of it, united with a 
ſmall portion of heat, generates inflammable 
Air.—I ſhall introduce ſome Experiments 
which may convince thoſe who have 
doubts againſt this theory, I mixed crocus 
martis with half of its weight of ſulphur 
and diſtilled as before; in this operation I 
obſerved no ignition, and no Air was in the 
bladder ; but I found a volatile ſpirit of 
ſulphur. The crocus was become black and 
was attracted by the magnet; and it con- 
tained very little of ſulphur, fince this was 

K 4 altogether 


136 Experiments on 


altogether gone up into the neck. Hence 
it becomes evident, that the earth of iron 
entirely deprived of its phlogiſton, attracts 
it only to a certain point ſtronger than the 
vitriolic acid ; which produces the volatile 
ſpirit of ſulphur, It may, however, be ſeen 
from this Experiment, that the ſmall quan- 
tity of phlogiſton is not ſufficient for uniting 
the earth of iron with ſulphur ; it ſhould 
contain ſomewhat more of it ; whereas 
the metallic iron poſſeſſed too much of 
it. I mixed likewiſe this earth of iron 
with ſulphur and water, ſo as to form a 
dough of it. But this mixture became 
neither black nor warm in the open air. — 
I diſtilled a mixture of lead-filings and 
ſulphur. Here likewiſe ſuch a dark red 
light appeared; however, ſince the lead 
contains leſs phlogiſton than the iron, 
it is no wonder that I could collect no Air 
in the bladder. Here it likewiſe appears, 
that part of the phlogiſton is expelled from 
the lead by the ſulphur; which produces, 
with heat, light. I ſay on purpoſe, part of it; 
for if a calx of lead be diſtilled with ſulphur, 
a volatile ſpirit of ſulphur is formed, and 
. ; (Plumbum galena. Linn. ] con- 

ſequentl 


Air and Fire. 1 37 


ſequently the calx of lead muſt previouſſy 
be united with ſome phlogiſton befote it 
can undergo ſuch an union with ſulphur. 


82. 
On Fulminating Gold. 


At preſent I come to another ſtill more 
remarkable phenomenon, which the ful- 
minating gold preſents us with. Am I 
ſo happy as to have found the true cauſe 
of this phænomenon? No; I will not flat- 
ter myſelf with this hope, but rather take 
notice of what my readers may ſay of 
the concluſions deduced from my Ex- 
periments. That gold is a compound of an 
earth ſui generis and of phlogiſton, pro- 
bably nobody will call in queſtion; and 
that gold is not ſoluble in acids, unleſs it 
has parted with its phlogiſton, is likewiſe 


known and confirmed by the moſt deciſive 


Experiments. The marine acid has, of all 
acids, the greateſt affinity to the earth of 
gold: however, it cannot unite with the 
earth of gold, unleſs there be preſent 
another ſubſtance capable of depriving gold 


of its phlogiſton : This is effected by the 
ſpirit 


— 


; 3 CI — 
\ * * 
— — — — . — w1L—U— 
In * 9 
: 4 


3 . 2 p 4 
. E — 4 — * . > 4 


138 Experiments on 


ſpirit of nitre; whoſe acquired volatility by 
this means viſibly demonſtrates it. The 
gold is then attacked by two powers at 
once, and its ſolution is brought about.— 
But gold may likewiſe be diſſolved in dephlo- 
giſticated marine acid, which has as power- 
ful an attraction to the phlogiſton as the acid 
of nitre : In what manner ſuch acid may 
be obtained I have ſhewn in my memoir on 
- manganeſe (No. 64). Such a ſolution of 
gold contains pure marine acid; becauſe it 
has recovered from the gold the phlogiſton 
which it had before depoſited upon the 
manganeſe ; nevertheleſs, if the gold ſolu- 
tion be ſtrongly diſtilled in a retort, the 
gold is reduced, and the marine acid goes 
over in its original ſtate, (viz. dephlo- 
giſticated) into the receiver: the cauſe is, 
that the earth of gold, by means of 
the heat, acquires a ſtronger attraction to 
the phlogiſton, and deprives the marine 
acid again of it.— In the ſame memoir I 
have likewiſe demonſtrated, that from this 
ſolution, by the volatile alkali fulminating 
gold is generated. This phænomenon re- 
moves already a great difficulty; ſince by 
this it appears that acid of nitre is by no 

means 


= dw Ra bande A U eee Lad 


— 


Air and Fire. 139 
means neceſſary in the generation of ful - 
minating gold. When I find that the earth 
of gold is ſeparated from its ſolution in its 
metallic ſplendor, I am ſure that it has ac- 
quired phlogiſton ; metals precipitate gold 
in its ſplendent form, but not their calxes: 
Fixed alkalies decompound the ſolution of 
gold, but it ſucceeds very ſlowly, and the 
precipitate rhus obtained, I call the earth 
of gold : the volatile alkali precipitates the 
ſolution of gold quicker, and this precipitate 
is the object of this ſection. | 


Earth of gold can unite with a part of 
volatile alkali, and then forms a gs of 


analogous ſalt. 


I digeſted thirty grains of earth of gold, 
with ſome ſpirit of ſal ammoniac prepared 
with lime ; I then edulcorated this earth, 
and dried it gently; it weighed thirty- 
ſeven grains, and was changed into ful- 
minating gold. From. a theſis defended 
at. Up/al, under the prefidium of Profeſſor 
Bergmann, I find that the ammoniacal falts 
likewiſe communicate to the earth of gold 
the property of fulminating; I have been 
guided by this excellent %%; and my 

enquiries 


1 Experiments on 


enquiries have in many points been facili- 
tated by it.—I put a ſolution of Glauber's 
fal ammoniac * with the earth of gold into 
digeſtion ; then I obſerved that this ſolution 
was become acidulous ; which proved that 
the volatile alkali had been united with the 
earth of gold. After elutriation J found 
this earth to be a real fulminating gold: 
hence it is evident, that the volatile alkali 
has a nearer affinity to the earth of gold 
than to the acids. 

1 diſſolved a well waſhed fulminating 
gold in marine acid; into this ſolution I 
put ſeveral pieces of copper: the gold fell in 
the form of a minute powder to the bottom 
of the phial. I then filtered the ſolution ; 
evaporated it to dryneſs ; then mixed with 
it ſome ſalt of tartar ; and after diſtillation I 
found a real volatile alkali in the receiver.— 
That the earth of gold unites with alkaline 
ſalts is nothing extraordinary, ſince many 
more metallic earths are poſſeſſed of the ſame 
property; and this confirms, in ſome 
meaſure, the opinion mentioned before, 
(No. 73) that all earths are ſpecies of acids. 


2 Glauber's ſal ammoniac is formed from acid of vi- 
triol and volatile alkali. 
A 


Air and Fire. 141 


A kind. of Air is generated in the conflagra- 
tion of fulminating Gold. 


I took a glaſs tube of the thickneſs of a 
finger and the length of a foot, and ſome- 
what tapering at one end. I put the taper- 
ing part ſo far into water, that about one 
third of it remained empty; I then ſtopped 
up the part under water, took it out of the 
water and marked the height of the water 
in the tube: then I kept the tube in an 
oblique direction, inclined towards the hori- 
zon, and put in at the upper end about one 
grain of fulminating gold; taking care how- 
ever to preſerve this empty part dry from 
the water ; and laſtly ſtopped this end like- 
wiſe up with a well-fitting cork ; after this I 
held the tube in the ſame direction over a 
burning candle, and heated the place where 
the fulminating gold was laying. After the 
ignition of it, and ſome hours after the 
tube being quite cold, I opened the tapering 
end, when ſome water ran out. I repeated 
the Experiment ſeveral times with the ſame 
ſucceſs. —The Air generated took up as 
much room as one drachm and a half 

| | meaſure 


142 Experiments on 


meaſure of water; then I was deſirous of 


learning what Lind of Air the newly pro- 


duced one might be. I mixed carefully 
half a drachm of fulminating gold with 
three drachms of vitriolated tartar z this 
powder I put into a ſmall glaſs retort, and 
fixed to its neck a bladder emptied of Air: 
then the retort was put on burning coals. 
After the mixture had been heated, it be- 
came dark brown ; ſome moiſture got up 
into the neck, and ſome httle of a white 
ſublimate, and the bladder was expanded. 
When the retort was grown cold, I tied up 
the orifice of tae bladder, and removed it 
from the retort: the raiſed ſublimate 
weighed about two grains, and was a com- 


mon ſal ammoniac; the Air in the retort was 


impregnated with a ſmell of volatile alkali. 
On the reſiduum I poured hot water, which 
diſſolved the vitriolated tartar; and there 
remained a brown powder, which was a 
ſubtle gold, which had undergone reduction 
in the form of a powder ; the air in the 
bladder ſmelt ſtrongly of volatile alkali, 
took up the room of fix ounce meaſure, 
and had the following properties: 1. It 
was . not miſcible with water; 2. It did 

not 


Air and Fire. 143 


not precipitate lime-water; 3. It extin- 
guiſhed immediately the flame of a burning 
candle; and was conſequently Air, in every 
reſpect, ſimilar to that generated by the 
deſtruction of volatile alkali. I have re- 
cited remarkable demonſtrations of ſuch 
kinds of deſtructions of the volatile alkali 
in my memoir on manganeſe : The principal 
points of it ſhew, that whenever a body 
attracts the phlogiſton which is an integrant 
part of the volatile alkali, ſuch Air is always 
produced. I afterwards have procured 
ſuch Air by various methods, viz. from a 
mixture of crocus martis and fal ammoniac, 
which were diſtilled in a retort with a 
bladder fixed to it ; and from the white pre- 
cipitate of ſublimate mercury, made with 
volatile alkali ; this precipitate conſiſting of 
the earth of mercury, ſal ammoniac, and 
ſome water. The Air procured by the 
detonation of nitrum flammans is for 
the greater part the ſame. 

In order to aſcertain whether. our Air 
contributed any thing to the accenſion of 
fulminating gold, I filled a glaſs with atrial 
acid, and put a little of fulminating gold 
into it, ſtopped it up, and put it in the dark on 

hot 


144 Experiments on 


hot ſand; but it kindled it the ordinary 
Way. } 

From theſe Experiments I form this 
concluſion; ſince fulminating gold is a 
compound of volatile alkali and gold earth, 
and to the accenſion of fulminating gold 
heat is always required, and heat is a com- 
pound of phlogiſton and empyreal Air, and 
gold earth attracts ſtronger the phlogiſton 
than empyreal Air, (No. 39) heat muſt be- 
comethecauſeof the reduction of fulminating 
gold : however, fince in that caſe the em- 
pyreal Air is ſet free, it immediately unites 
with the combuſtible of the dry volatile al- 
kali, becauſe this ſalt has no affinity with 
gold* ; and fince there is more phlogiſton 
preſent than 1s neceſſary for producing heat, 
the always-ſhining light is generated : the 


Air now ſet free from its union with the 


phlogiſton in the alkali. volatile, acquires 
again its elaſticity ; which is ſtill more in- 
creaſed from the extracted moiſture, ſal- am- 
moniac and ſome volatile alkali, which are 


* Volatile alkali has one of the leaſt affinities with 
gold in its metallic form, except water. See Che- 
valier Torbern Berymann's Table of Affinities, in the 
21ſt column. In the ſecond Volume of the Nova 


Acta Upſalienſia. 
expanded 


Air and Fire. 145 
panded into elaſtic vapours by the ſuddenly 


procreated heat; it therefore gives an im- 
pulſe to the Air all around, which by it is 
put into ſuch an undulated motion as is 
required to produce ſound. 

In regard to the ſal-· ammoniac produced 
during diſtillation, I am of opinion that it 
does not belong to the fulminating gold; 
for undoubtedly there muſt have been ſome 
{mall portion of marine acid, with the ful- 
minating gold ; which, by the addition of 
the ſeparating volatile alkali, formed a ſal- 
ammoniac.—l likewiſe am of opinion, that 
with the fulminating.gold a greater por- 
tion of volatile alkali exiſts than can de- 
ſtroyed by the empyreal Air. That volatile 
alkali can be deſtroyed by empyreal Air, 
may be collected from hence, that when- 
ever a piece of it is thrown into a red-hot 
crucible, it is immediately kindled and 
flames. — I am alſo of opinion, that were 
it only poſſible to unite the earth of gold 
intimately with charcoal, it would form a 
fulminating gold. I put a portion of earth 
of gold mixed with ſome duſt of charcoal 
into a ſmall glaſs, and ſet it on hot ſand; 
inſtantly the gold earth was reduced, and 

the 


146 
the coals were kindled: That the heat of the 
ſand could not be the cauſe of the accenſion 
of the coals I found out by ſtrewing 
part of this duſt of charcoal on the 
hot ſand, which was not kindled ; but it 
would, however, moſt certainly have 
kindled, if the empyreal Air had becn 
preſent in great quantity. 


Experiments on 


83. 
Alir is a Dulcified Elaſtic Acid. 


In the preceding Experiments I have 
recited two of the conſtituent parts of com- 
mon Air, becauſe it was not neceſſary for a 
diſtinct idea of fire to know more of it: 
Now I intend to advance one ſtep further, 
and examine whether a more detailed 


analy/is of Air is not to be obtained. 
Experiment I. 


I put a rat into a matras of four quarts 
meaſure; I gave it ſome bread ſoaked in 
milk, and ſhut up the matras with a moiſt 
bladder: one and thirty hours after it died; 

then 


= TY x WW WW poo 


Air and Fire. 147 


Then I turned the matras, put the orifice 
under water and cut a hole into the bladder; 
when two ounces of water mounted into 
the matras. The ſmall diminution of 
Air is probably owing to the heat which 
was in the rat, and had previouſly expelled 
the Air. 


34. 


Experiment II. 

I took a large ſoft bladder and fixed 
a tube to its mouth; then I filled it with 
the Air contained in my lungs, and ſhut up 
the tube and bladder with my right hand, 
and with the left I ſhut up both my 
noſtrils ; I reſpired the Air in the bladder 
as long as ever I could, and could make 
twenty-four inhalations, (here it ought to 
be obſerved, that at laſt I was obliged to 
inhale at once all the Air of the bladder, 
whereas at the beginning I wanted no 
more than one half of it for one inhalation): 
I then ſtopped up the tube with my finger, 
and tied up the bladder. The Air had the 


ſame qualities as that wherein the rat had 
L 2 died, 


148 Experiments on 


died, viz. it contained about one-thir- 
tieth part of atrial acid, which was ſepa- 
rated by the milk of lime; and a burn- 
ing candle was immediately extinguiſhed 
in it, 


85. 
Experiment III. 


I ſhut up ſome flies in a phial, into 
which I had laid a paper whereon.I put 
ſome honey: ſome days after they al! 
were dead; but they had not abſorbed 
any Air : The milk of lime diminiſhed its 
bulk of about one-fourth part, and the 
reſt extinguiſhed a candle, 

Then I took a bottle of twenty ounces 
meaſure, and near its bottom I bored a 
hole into it with the corner of a broken 
file (fig. 5, A.); into this bottle I put a ſmall 
piece of quick lime, and ſhut its mouth 
with a cork, through which I had paſſed a 
tube, B; round the cork I laid a ring of 


pitch, and having put a bee with ſome | 


honey on a paper into a common open 
glals, 


” fi & © oo ww @ ww © a> vx. ian 


py > mk a 


2 2 


yy 


Air and Fire. 149 


glaſs, C. I et it inverted on the pitch, (into 
which I gently preſſed the glaſs, in order 
to exclude all communication of external 
Air ;) then the bottle was placed in a diſh, 
D; this I filled fo far with water as to 
cover half of the bottle; finding the water 
lifted the bottle off from the bottom of 
the diſh, I laid a ſmall weight on the top 
of the inverted glaſs. The water mounted 
every day into the bottle by the hole, A. 
I took care now and then to ſhake the 
bottle, in order to burſt the ſkin formed on 
the ſurface of the water. At the end of 
ſeven days the water was riſen to E. and 
the bee was dead : Sometimes I put two 
bees at a time into the glaſs, C. when the 
ſame quantity of Air has been changed 
into atrial acid in half the time. Cater- 
pillars and butterflies cauſe the {ame effect. 


86. 
Experiment IV. 
In a ſmall matras of twenty-four ounces 


meaſure I put ſome peaſe, and poured fo 


much water on as to cover them half; 
3 then 


— — 2 — — 
7 * * — - == 
+ = _ 
— — — — — IIS EWIY — — ww. — 
2 - 


G N 
x 6--==ad = J 


150 Experiments on 


then I ſhut the mouth of the matras. The 
peaſe began to ſtrike out roots and to grow: 
When I ſaw after a fortnight that they 
would increaſe no more, I inverted the 
matras, and opened its mouth under water ; 
and found the Air neither increaſed nor 
diminiſhed. With the milk of lime one 
fourth of the Air was abſorbed, and the 
reſt of it extinguiſhed a burning candle. 
I have preſerved freſh roots, fruit, herbs, 
flowers, and leaves, each ſeparately in a 
matras; and found after ſome days one- 
fourth of the Air changed into atrial acid; 
flies put into ſuch Air died immediately. 


87. 


Theſe are remarkable circumſtances; that 
Air is not conſiderably abſorbed by animals 
endowed with lungs, contains very little 
atrial acid, and however extinguiſhes the 
flame of fire; whereas inſects and vegetables 
ſo greatly change the Air, that one-fourth 
of it becomes atrial acid, I was there- 
fore deſirous of knowing whether empyreal 
Air is not that which is here changed into 


aorial | 


= TR ” e , EIS 


Air and Fire. 151 


atrial acid, becauſe juſt the ſame bulk of 
Air had been converted into atrial acid 
which empyreal Air occupied in it, 


88. 
Experiment V, 


In a bottle of twenty ounces meaſure I 
maxed one part of empyreal Air, with three 
parts of Air wherein peaſe had ceaſed 
to grow, and from which the aerial 
acid had been ſeparated, I filled the bottle 
with water, and put four peaſe into it; 
then I poured into the bladder containing 
the empyreal Air, the fourth part of the 
water ; and into another bladder including 
the foul Air, I put the reſt of it, (No. 3o, 
letter g.); I took care at the ſame time that 
the peaſe ſhould not tall into the bladder, 
and I likewiſe left ſo much water as would 
cover half the peaſe, I obſerved the peaſe 
growing ; and when they would grow no 
more, I found the Air likewiſe not abſorbed ; 
but nearly the fourth part of it was ab- 
ſorbed by the milk of lime. It is there- 
fore the empyreal Air, which is changed 

L 4 into 


152 Experiments on 


into atrial acid. In three parts atrial acid 
and one part empyreal, the peaſe will not 
grow. have mixed foul] Air (No. 29) 
with empyreal Air, and found the ſame 
event ; viz. the empyreal Air was changed 
into atrial acid. 


39. 
Experiment VT. 


I mixed in the ſame proportion Air cor- 
rupted by peaſe, with empyreal Air; and 
filled a bladder with it. Having exhaled 

the Air contained in my lungs, I breathed 
this newly compounded Air as many times 
as was poſſible : I found that it contained 
very little aErial acid, and (like that) ex- 
tinguiſhed the flame of fire. I am of opi- 
nion that the effect which animals endowed 
with lungs upon Air, ought to have be aſcribed 

to the 4/594 contained in the pulmonary 
veins. The following Experiment occa- 
ſioned this opinion: 

It is known that blood newly taken, and 
expoſed to common Air, acquires on its 
ſurface a fine florid red; and that the parts 

| below, 


— 


9952 2 MH 


& = «©. = 


Air and Fire. 153 


below, after coming in contact with Air 
grow likewiſe red: Does the Air perhaps 
here undergo an alteration ?—TI filled one 
third of a matras with blood recently taken 
from a bullock ; and tied it carefully up 
with a bladder, and ſhook it frequently : 
Eight hours after this, I found in this Air 
neither atrial acid, nor any diminution 


of it in bulk; but the flame of a candle 


was immediately extinguiſhed in it. This 
Experiment was made during winter ; 
Whence it is clear, that the above effects 
cannot be aſcribed to putrefaction; ſince the 
ſame blood ſix days after was ſtill found to 
be freſh, and all putrefactions produce atrial 
acid. —I was now deſirous of knowing 
how empyreal Air by itſelf, would a& 
upon animals and vegetables, 


90. 
Experiment VII. 


a. I put two ounces of ſaltpetre in a 
ſmall glaſs retort on burning coals, and 
fixed to the orifice a large ſoftened bladder; 
(No. 35.) then I left the faltpetre ſo long 

boiling, 


. 


9 
: 
U 
1 
1. 


4 by 
* 1 
1 
44 
(7 '% 
1 
e 
159 
l 
þ 1 


154 Experiments on 


boiling, that I had obtained in the bladder 
three-fourths of a quart of empyreal Air : 
I tied up the bladder, removed it from the 
retort, and fixed a tube to its orifice ; and 
having quite emptied my lungs from Air, I 
began to breath the Air out of the bladder, 
(No. 84). This ſucceeded fo well, that I 
was able to take forty inhalalations before 
it became troubleſume to me ; and laſtly, 
exhaled all the Air from my lungs into 
the bladder. The Air ſeemed not much 
to be diminiſhed, and having filled a glaſs 
with it, a burning candle introduced into it 
continued to burn, 

6. I was aſtoniſhed that I 8 not at 
the very ficſt trial deprive the Air of its 
property of bearing a burning candle in it: 
I imagined that perhaps the quantity of 
humidity might hinder me from inhaling 
this Air ſo often as was poſſible ; I there- 
fore repeated the Experiment, with this 
difference only, that I put about a handful 
of pot-aſhes into the bladder before I 
forced the empyreal Air into it; then I 
began to inhale this Air into my lungs, 
and counted fxty-fve inhalations before I 
was obliged to leave off; but immerſing a 

burning 


Air and Fire. ISS 


burning candle into this Air, it would burn, 
though only a few ſeconds. 


| 91. 
Experiment VIII. 


I ſhut up the ſmall hole A. (fig. 5), with 
a cork, and likewiſe the tube B. and filled the 
glaſs with empyreal Air, (No. 30. letter c.) 
Then I was ready with the glaſs; into 
which I put two large bees and ſome 
honey for their ſuſtenance. I opened the 
tube hitherto ſhut, and as ſoon as poſſible 
I covered it with the glaſs, and preſſed it 
into the ring of pitch. Hereupon I ſet 
the caſe in the diſh D. which 1 had filled 
with milk of lime, I then drew out the 
cork at A. I obſerved the milk of lime 
mounting ſomething every day into the 
Apparatus; and when eight days were 
elapſed, the glaſs was very nearly filled 
with it; and the bees were dead. 


92. 


Experiment IX. 


Vegetables will not thrive well in em- 
pyreal Air, I filled with this Air, a phial 
of 


1 56 Experiments on 


of ſixteen ounces meaſure, containing four 
peaſe ; (88.) they got roots, but would not 
grow up. With milk of lime the twelfth 
part was abſorbed.—This Air I removed into 
another phial, containing likewiſe four peaſe. 
A fortnight after they had ſtruck out roots, 
but were not grown, and with the milk of 
lime, only one-twelfth part was abſorbed, 
J repeated the ſame Experiment ſtill three 
times more, with the ſame Air; and J ob- 
ſerved that the fourth and fifth time the 
peaſe had begun to grow upwards : The 
half of the whole Air remained, and the 
flame of fire would ſtill burn in it. There 
1s not the leaſt doubt, had I continued the 
operation, that at laſt the whole quantity 
of empyreal Air would have been converted 
into aërial acid. It ought likewiſe to be 
noticed, that when the peaſe began to 
ſtrike roots, they acted more powerfully 
upon the empyreal Air than afterwards, 


v3 


It is therefore empyreal Air, by the 
means of which the circulation of the blood, 
and of juices in animals and plants, is fo 
| much 


Air and Fire. 157 
much ſuported : But it is a peculiar cir- 
cumſtance, that the blood and the lungs 
have not ſuch effects on empyreal Air as 
inſects and vegetables; ſince the laſt 
change it into aerial acid, and the former 
into foul Air. (No. 29, 89, go.)—It is not 
eaſy to account for this, though I will 
attempt to do it. It is notorious that all 
acids loſe the properties by which they 
prove themſelves to be acids, on the addition 
of an inflammable, (as may be evidently 
ſeen by ſulphur, elaſtic acid of nitre, regu- 
lus of arſenic, ſugar, &c.); now I am apt to 
ſuppoſe that empyreal Air is compounded of 
a ſubtle acid united with phlogiſton, and that 
it is probable that all acids owe their origin 
to empyreal Air. If this Air penetrates 
vegetables, they mult attract the phlogiſton; 
and conſequently the acid which manifeſts 
itſelf as atrial acid, muſt make its ap- 
pearance again and part from it. The 
objection, however, that at the deſtruction 
of vegetables a great quantity of aerial 
acid is obtained, in conſequence of which 
they ought to attract the atrial acid, has 
no weight; for in that caſe the Air in the 
veſſels which contained the peaſe, muſt have 
been 


158 Experiments on 


been Joſt for the greateſt part; which how- 
ever did not happen. It ought to be re- 
membered what I have proved about the 
conſtituent parts of heat and light; and 
fince without heat no vegetable can well 
thrive, it is eaſy to be conceived that heat 
and light is decompounded in vegetables ; 
fince there is nothing elſe required than 


that the inflammable principle may be 


ſeparated from theſe ſubtle ſubſtances by 
the fineſt capillary veſſels, and by the 
preſervation of a very little of acid, and the 
addition of a few atoms of water changed 
into oil. The generation of a green roſin 
in plants, after having been brought out 
of a cellar where they are almoſt white, 
and ſtanding a couple of days only expoſed 
to ſunſhine ; the production of inflam- 
mable Air, which is nothing elſe but a 
very ſubtle oil, make this probable to me. 
If the plants attract the phlogiſton from 
the Air, the aërial acid muſt be lighter ; 
but experience ſhews the contrary; I found 
ijt after a moſt ſcrupulous weighing ſome- 
what heavier: But this by no means 
militates againſt my opinion, ſince it is well 
known that as all the acids ſtrongly keep the 

water, 


mn — — — > 20 — - yy, a, wma — 


oo” Ov e ty 


wel FD = IH 


Air and Fire. 159 


water, the atrial acid muſt likewiſe be 
pofleſſed of the fame property; and 
this might be the cauſe of the heavi- 
neſs. —If all this be conformable to truth, 
there arifes a new query: Why the 
blood and the lungs do not change the 
empyreal Air into aerial acid! ; Here I like- 
wiſe take the liberty of communicating my 
opinion about it: (For what utility could 
the Experiments have which I made with 
fo much trouble, did they not give the 
moſt grounded hopes of obtaining at laſt my 
intention, viz. to come nearer to truth ?) 
Phlogiſton, which communicates for the 
greater part to thoſe ſubſtances with which 
it is united, fluidity, mobility, and elaſticity ; 
muſt have the ſame effect on blood. The 
globules of the blood muſt attract it from 
the Air, through the ſmall pores of the 
pulmonary veſicles ; by this union they are 
ſeparated, and conſequently made more 
fluid, and appear then very red (No. 89.) 
They ought however to depoſit this at- 
tracted phlogiſton during circulation ; and 
conſequently be enabled to imbibe again 
from the Air, the phlogiſton in the place 
where 


160 Experiments on 


where they come the neareſt in contact 
with it, 1. e. in the lungs. What may 
have become of this phlogiſton I leave to 
others to determine. The attraction the 
blood has to the phlogiſton is not fo 
powerful as that of plants and inſects at- 
tracting it from the Air, and therefore the 
blood cannot change ſuch Air in atrial 
acid; it is however changed into an Air 
which is a mean between empyreal Air 
and atrial acid, viz. foul Air; for it unites 
neither with lime nor water, as empyreal 
Air does, and extinguiſhes fire in the ſame 
manner as aerial acid. However to prove 
that blood does attract phlogiſton, I have 
another Experiment in ſtore, when I de- 
prived inflammable Air (by means of my 
lungs) of its phlogiſton, and changed it into 
foul Air. | 

I filled a bladder with Air produced 
from iron filings, and acid of vitriol, 
(No. zo, letter c.) and inhaled it in the 
manner deſcribed before (No. 48.) I could 
inhale it no more than twenty times ; and 
having again recovered in ſome meaſure, 
I again expelled the Air from the lungs as 
much as poſſible, and then drew in again 
| this 


Air and Fire. 16 
this inflammable Air. After ten inhalations 
I found myſelf obliged to leave off, and 
found that it 'was no more inflammable, 
nor would it unite with lime-water ; in a 
word, it was foul Air. 

I kept a piece of ſulphur in a retort of 
twelve ounces meaſure for half an hour, 
conſtantly boiling over the fire ; and in lieu 
of a receiver I fixed an empty bladder ; 
and beſides this I ſo placed the retort 
that the ſulphur mounting in the neck 
might run back. After every thing was 
grown cold again, I found the Air neither 
increaſed nor decreaſed ; it ſmelt ſomewhat 
ſimilar to liver of ſulphur, and extinguiſhed. 
the flame of a candle. That phlogiſton 
can unite with a greater quantity of ſulphur 
I ſhall prove hereafter ; and it ſeems to be 
concluſive from this Experiment; that ſome 
phlogiſton of the Air had been depoſited 
on the ſulphur, and had acquired the pro- 
perty of foul Air.— It is however likewiſe 
remarkable, that other ſubſtances more 
powerfully attracting the phlogiſton, as (for 
inſtance; fuming ſpirit of nitre) do not de- 
prive the Air of it.—It is equally wonder- 
ful, that I could inhale inflammable Air 


M only 


162 Experiments on 


only twenty times into the lungs ; and 1 
obſerve here, as ſomething peculiar, that 
if I am not miſtaken, I found myſelf about 
a quarter of an hour afterwards confiderably 
warmer.—It muſt likewiſe be remarked, 
that empyreal Air made foul by the lungs 
extinguiſhes fire. — Why does atrial acid 
not attract the phlogifion again? Why 
likewiſe not foul Air ? Mr. Prieſtley ſuc- 
ceeded in this; but I could not bring it 
about, though I ſhould have liked it very 


much: He has changed aerial acid, with a 


mixture of iron filings, ſulphur, and ſome 
water, into falubrious Air; whenever | 
wanted to imitate this Experiment, I 
conſtantly found' the. atrial acid abſorbed in 
the iron filings. I have hkewiſe taken iron 
filings melted together with a ſuperfluity 
of ſulphur reduced to a powder, and 
moiſtened with water ; and kept it cloſely 
ſhut up in a bottle filled with atrial acid, 
- but with the ſame ſucceſs: The atrial acid 
was in two days almoſt entirely abſorbed. — 
This learned man likewiſe fays, that he 
made foul Air again good by ſhaking it 
with water: but I muſt confeſs that I con- 
ſtantly failed in this. I filled the fourth 

part 


Air and Fire. 163 


of a matras with foul Air, and the reſt 
with freſh water, I carefully ſhut the ma- 
tras and ſhook it up and down for almoſt 
ah hour; and when I collected this Air into 
a bladder, and from thence into a glaſs, I 
found that a candle would no more burn 
in it than before. He mixed the inflamma- 
ble Air from metals, by ſhaking, in water ; 
nor has this ſucceeded with me; though I 
uſed only a very little of Air, and a great 
quantity of water. — He ſays likewiſe vege- 
tables make foul Air again falubrious : 
From my Experiments the reſults were 
that they corrupt Air. I have kept vegeta- 
bles in a matras filled with foul Air and 
ſhut it well (where the well-ſhutting-up 
muſt be well obſerved,) both in the dark, 
and likewiſe expoſed to the light of the 
ſun; I tried ſome ſmall part of this Air 
every two days, and always found it foul. 


94- 


Water has the peculiar quality of diſunit- 
ing the next conſtituent parts of Air in 
order to unite with empyreal Air, and never 
to enter into union with foul Air. 


M 2 1 


164 Experiments on 


1. I filled a large bottle with boiled 


water, which a little while ago had grown 
cold, and let one tenth part of it run out; 
then I ſet this bottle inverted and open in 
a veſſel with water: 1 found the bulk of 
water diminiſhing ſomething every day ; 
and when it had done diminiſhing, I col- 
lected the remaining Air firſt in a bladder, 
(No. 30, letter h.) and from the bladder 
into a glaſs (No. 3o, letter e.) and then in- 
troduced a burning candle into the glaſs, 
which was extinguiſhed the moment it 
reached the aperture. 

2. Then again I took water . Air 


had been expelled by boiling ; filled with 


it a bottle, and det one tenth part of ir run 


into a bladder filled with foul Air; then! 


ſet the bottle inverted into a veſſel with 
water, and obſerved the ſpace the water 
occupied in the bottle ; a fortnight after 
I found that the water had not abſorbed 
any of it. 

I put a large bottle of which the 
bottom was broke off into a deep kettle, 
with water which covered the mouth of 
the bottle; then I tied a bladder emptied 
of Air to the mouth of the bottle, and 

made 


Air. and Fire. 165 


made the water boil. The Air contained 
in that part of the water, which was con- 
tained under the. bottle, roſe into the blad- 
der; and having tied up the orifice of the 
bladder, and detached it from the mouth 
of the bladder, I filled a glaſs with it, and 
introduced a ſmall burning candle into it ; 
which burned brighter than in common 
Air, 

This empyreal Air diſſolved in water, 
mult be equally indiſpenſible to aquatic 
animals as to thoſe who live on the earth: 
they muſt inhale it into their bodies, and 
change it either into aerial acid or foul 
Air. Of whatever kind it be, it muſt al- 
ways again ſeparate from the water ; for, as 
aerial acid, it does not remain with water in 
the open Air, and foul Air cannot at all be 
united with it (No, 2), The water is capa- 
hle of diflolving empyreal Air in the firſt in- 
ſtance and of communicating it to animals. 

The Experiments I made in this reſpect 
correſpond with it.--I let ſome leeches ſtand 
ina bottle, half filled with waterandcloſe ſhut 
up, till. they died in it; then I examined 
the Air ſtanding above the water; it had 
no more a peculiar ſinell than the water; 


M 3 it 


166 Experiments on 


it was ſome what increaſed to all appearance, 
and it extinguiſhed the flame of a candle. 
It ſeems theſe animals live chiefly on the 
phlogiſton in the empyreal Air, and perhaps 
too on the heat. I kept them alive during 
two years in water; and what is more, in 
the ſame water, with a crape covering the 
mouth of the bottle.—I have a ready me- 
thod of finding out whether the water 
contains empyreal Air or not: I take for 


inſtance, one ounce of the water, and let 


fall into it about four drops of a ſolution 
of vitriol of iron, and add two drops of a 
ſolution of ſalt of tartar ſomewhat diluted 
with water. It yields immediately a dark 
green precipitate ; which in a couple of mi- 
minutes changes into yellow, if the water 
contain empyreal Air; But if the water be 
previouſly boiled and grown cold without 
the acceſs of free Air, or if the water be 
diſtilled lately, the precipitate retains its 
green colour and does not turn yellow, un- 
leſs about an hour after; and never changes 
into yellow, if it be kept in full glaſſes 
ſo that the free Air can have no acceſs 
to it. That the green precipitate of iron 
has its colour from the phlogiſton Rill 

adhering 


„% te Jy ww: wa K & ww + A ww» ww wo «© we =»  - + _ ww. wand * Yud te: WA. +, as 


Air and Fire. 167 


adhering to the earth, I before proved; 
(No. 15.) and hence it follows, that em- 
pyreal Air, though not in the elaſtic ſtate, 
is capable of attracting phlogiſton.--Another 
Experiment alſo proved, that aquatic ani- 
mals attract empyreal Air from the water. 
I put a leech in a glaſs entirely filled with 
water, and precluded all acceſs of Air: 
In two days it was. nearly dead; I then 
examined the water in the manner deſcribed 
hefore, and found that the iron earth rex 
tained its green colour. The ſwelling of 
peaſe in cold water, is chiefly to be aſcribed 
to the empyreal Air contained in water. 


Filling a glaſs with water and putting ſome 


peaſe into it, four-and-twenty hours after 
this the water contains atrial acid, but no 
empyreal Air. In Soiled water grown cold, 
the peaſe ſwell but very little. I diſcover 


here the cauſe why waters diſtilled from 


vegetables not only loſe their ſmell, but 
depoſit at the bottom a mucilaginous ſub- 
ſtance, whenever the bottle containing them 
is often unſtopped; whereas in quite full and 
well-ſtopped glaſſes, theſe diſtilled waters 
preſerve conſtantly their ſmell and their lim- 
pid purity, All vegetables communicate 


M 4 to 


__— 


L. 
. 
q 
19 
4 


9 _— — — — - = — 
* WF; —B— — — 
— — = > * * 


3 


w 


168 Experiments on 


to water ſomething mucilaginous, which 
goes over in diſtillation, The empyreal 
Air is the chief cauſe of this corruption ; 
if this empyreal Air again enters the water, 
it attracts the inflammable from the ſub- 
' tle, oily, and mucilaginous ſubſtance, and 
changes the whole water. 


4 


Heat is an integrant Part of ſeveral Bodies. 


From what I have ſaid, (No. 93.) and 
the Experiments preceding it, I imagine 
that it is coming very near to truth to 
ſuppoſe that empyreal Air is a dulcified 
elaſtic fluid; a ſubtle acid united with 
ſome phlogiſton, and which by aſſuming 
more. qr leſs inflammable parts, acquires 
new properties. 

Heat therefore 1s a peculiar acid, which 
has admitted a certain quantity of phlogiſ- 
ton in its mixture; it conſequently muſk 
naturally unite with ſubſtances having an 
attraction either of acids or phlogiſton.— 
Such new-compounded bodies mult preſent 
phenomena, which may be illuſtrated from 

2 0 the 


\ 


Air. and Fire. 169 


the heat which is in union with them. 
Alkalies, abſorbent earths, and metallic 
earths, are thoſe bodies which really form 
an union with heat; and of conſequence 
form peculiar kinds of neutral ſalts. Theſe 
bodies muſt immediately part with heat 
(that ſubtle ſulphureous ſubſtance) whenever 
they unite with another ſubſtance, having 
a ſtronger attraction to them. All kinds 
of acids, even atrial acid, and ſometimes 
water alone, can cauſe this decompoſition z - 
according as heat is more or leſs ſtrongly 
united with them, 

Take neutral ſalts of that kind, which 
will part with their acid by heat only; (for 
inſtance, fixed alkalies, calcareous ſpar, 
magneſia alba, metallic earths, lime, and 
magneſia diſſolved in acid of nitre, mag- 
neſia diflolved in marine acid, &c.) Calcine 
them either in open or cloſe veſſels half 
an hour or one hour with a radiant red heat: 
After they are grown cold, thut them im- 
mediately up in ſmall well-cloſed veſſels. 
All theſe are the fame terreous ſubſtances 
which they originally were, excepting that 
inſtead of nitrous, marine, and atrial acid, 
they have adopted heat, with which they 
are 


170 Experiments on 


are united. Some can abſorb more heat, 
ſome. leſs ; and they acquire different pro- 


perties in proportion to heat abſorbed; in 


the very ſame manner that happens to 
ſeveral kinds of earthy ſubſtances, capable 
of attracting more or leſs of aerial or other 
acids.—Thofe which have attracted the 
moſt heat, acquire not only the quality 
of diſſolving in water, but alſo of parting 
with the ſuperfluous heat, by means of 
water only, (This phenomenon, as a 
+ ſubtle acid, heat has in common with many 
other acids, viz. the phoſphoric, arſenical, 
ſpatoſe or fluor, and atrial acids; which 
when perfectly ſaturated with earths, pro- 
duce ſalts which are not ſoluble in water; 
but become ſoluble by the addition of more 
acid.) Such are likewiſe the fixed alkalics, 
quick-lime, and the earth of heavy ſpar * ; 
theſe 


»The heavy or ponderous ſpar has a peculiar ſpe- 
cific gravity, which is to that of water as 4,500 to 
1000: for which reaſon it was ſuſpected to contain 
fomething metallic ; but hitherto none have been able 
to extract any metal from it. However it obtained 
hence the name of Marmor metallicum. See Cronſledt's 
Mineralogy Sect. xviii. and Muria phoſphorea.' Linn. 
yl. Nat. iii. p. 99. (for the Bononian Stone, which has 

the 


Air and Fire. 171 


theſe become ſoluble in water by means of 
the heat united to them, and the redundant 
heat is expelled by the water; and they 
therefore grow hot with water, though 
this heat has not been ſenſibly obſerved 
exiſting in the ponderous earth. Lime may 
be precipitated in the form of lime from 
the water; if alcohol or ſpirit of wine be 
poured in lime-water, the lime falls and 


| may 


the quality of ſhining in the dark, after being heated 


is a ſpecies of this Marmor metallicum :)—but Meſſ. 


J. G. Gahn and C. W. Scheele, found at laſt, by a num- 
ber of Experiments, that though the great and ex- 
cellent Chemiſt Mr. Marggraf had ſaid, that the 
earth of this ſtone was calcareous, it was nevertheleſs 
moſt certainly an earth ſui generis; though having, no 
doubt, many properties in common with calcareous 
ſubſtances, e. g. they both efferveſce in acids, fire ex- 
pels from both aerial acid, and then makes them ſolu- 
ble in water; they both depoſit a pellicle in the water, 
communicate cauſticity to alkalies, and diſſolve ſul- 


phur, &c. 


But this ponderous earth is at the ſamg 


time vaſtly different from all calcareous earths and 
gypſcous ſubſtances, for gyſpum is ſoluble in water; 


but this ponderous earth with acid of vitriol forms the 


heavy or ponderous ſpar, which is not ſoluble in wa- 
ter : So that if our ponderous earth be calcined, it 
diſſolves in water like lime; but on adding a ſolution 
of gypſum to it, the laſt ſolution is decompounded, 


and 888 vitriolic acid of the gypſum unites with the 


ponderous 


— 


172 Experiments on 


may be again diſſolved in water without a 
fecond calcination ; whence it appears, that 
it is Qill united with heat as its men- 
ſtruum or ſolvent. It is therefore a alt 
which is inſoluble in ſpirit of wine, and 
conſequently quick-lime is never heated in 
ſpirit of wine.—lIf an acid be added to the 
aboyementioned calcined earthy ſubſtances, 
they are diſſolved and violently heated, fince 


ponderous earth, and forms again a heavy or ponde- 
rous ſpar, not ſoluble in water. This earth forms 
with the nitrous and marine acids, neutral ſalts ſhoot- 

ing into cryſtals, which are not eafily ſoluble; lime 
in the nitrous and marine acids yields a deliqueſcent 
falt. Lime and vinegar yield a cryſtalline ſalt; but 
ponderous carth and vinegar a deliqueſcent neutraliſed 
mixture.--In order to obtain this ponderous earth pure 
from the ponderous ſpar containing it, the ſpar muſt 
be treated with oils and coal-duſt in fire, in order to 
volatiliſe the vitriolic acid, which with phlogiſton 
forms a ſulphureous phlogiſticated vitriolic ſpirit and 
ſulphur, and at laſt leaves the ponderous earth by itſelf 
behind ; but this is always a very tedious proceſs. To 
purify this ponderous earth it muſt be diſſolved in ni- 
trous acid, and ſome fixed alkali neutraliſed with 
atrial acid or fixed Air be added to the ſolution, when 
by a double attraction the atrial acid attracts the 
ponderous earth, and precipitates, and the fixed al- 
kali remains diſſolved in the nitrous acid. The pre- 
cipitate waſhed and dried is ponderous earth, with atrial 


gcid or fixed Air, which may be expelled by fire. 
theſe 


5 Hir and Fire. 173 


theſe acids decompound the former neutral 
ſalt, and expel the heat. If a thermometer 
be put into lime-water, and you add ſome 
water ſaturated with aerial acid, the ſpirit 
in the thermometer is obſerved to riſe a 
little. If the acids poured on the calcined 
earths or alkalies be previouſly united with 
abſorbent earths, there enſues no heat, 
though the heat is actually expelled, but a 
double decomponition takes place. It is 
well known, that from a mixture of a ſo- 
lution of fixed ſal ammoniac, and of a very 
cauſtic alkali, a true lime is regenerated, 
In this caſe the heat unites with the calca- 
reous earth, and the. marine acid with the 
alkali: if you pour an acid to this calca- 
reous earth, the heat becomes immediately 
ſenſible. If calcareous earth contains more 
heat than other earths, which tho' ſtrongly 
calcined, will not diſſolve in water, the 
conſequence muſt be, that in caſe for in- 
ſtance, Epſom falt is decompounded with 
lime mill, the vitriolic acid moſt certainly 
unites with the calcareous earth, and the 
heat with magneſia; but ſince lime can 
attract more heat than magneſia, the re- 
dundant part of it muſt remain in the wa» 

ter, 


174 Experiments on 


ter. I put a thermometer into milk of 
lime, and left it ſtanding in the liquor for 
the ſpace of one hour; then I mixed with 
it ſome part of a ſolution of Epſom ſalt; 
immediately the ſpirit began to riſe.— Me- 
tallic earths, though not ſoluble in water, 
- muſt have attracted a conſiderable quantity 
of heat. This becomes evident, from 
the great increaſe in weight acquired 
during calcination. They have either at- 
tracted empyreal Air during their calcina- 
tion by means of their phlogiſton, and 
thus formed heat ; or they have communi- 
cated their phlogiſton to the Air, and at- 
trated heat from the fire; but either way 
there is empyreal Air in theſe calxes, which 
makes the overplus of their weight. —!] ſaid 
theſe metallic earths muſt attract a conſider- 
able quantity of heat, for lime may be made 
ſoluble in water by their ſurplus. I ground 
freſh caltined litharge very fine, and poured 
on it a ſolution of fixed ſal ammoniac diluted 
with water; I kept the whole mixture in a 
well-ſtopped phial, and ſhook it frequently; 
after ſome hours the ſolution had depofited 
calcareous earth, which made good lime- 
water, and was decompounding itſelf in 


the 


SK Sg. DSS segn 2. 


Air and Fire. 175 


the open Air, and fit for precipitating cor- 
roſive ſublimate with a yellow colour. If 
the ſolution of common ſalt be digeſted 
with litharge, a cauſtic mineral alkali is 
produced.— Subſtances which are united 
with a redundant heat, as alkalies,) quick- 
lime, and litharge, attra& the inflammable 
which is found in oily mixtures: They 
diſſolve the fat oils and ſulphur, and yield 


with it ſoaps. If you pour an acid to a2 


faponaceous ſolution, the acid unites with 
the alkali, and ſets the heat free; and fince 
it becomes not ſenſible, it muſt undergo 
ſome new union; and meeting for that pur- 
poſe with the oil, it unites with it; And the 
oil acquires by it the peculiar quality of be- 
coming ſoluble in conſiderable quantity in 
ſpirit of wine, and to form with volatile 
ſpirits of ſal ammoniac prepared with 
quick-lime a peculiar kind of ſoap: Qua- 
lities which the fat oils likewiſe acquire 
after being diſtilled ſeveral times, when 
they like wiſe muſt have attracted heat f 


the fire. It likewiſe inſinuates itſelf into 


the pores of ſome ſalts, (vi. vitriol calcined 
to whiteneſs, fixed falt ammoniac, terra 
foliata 


k 

3 
1 
1 
1 
Mo! 


48 
0 ' 
„ il 
"7 


9 

| 

1 

| 

| 

bl 

4 
1 
4d 

G 


176 Experiments bn 


foliata' tartari, &c.) But water again ex⸗ 
pels this heat. 

Concentrated vitriolic acid, and acid of 
phoſphorus attract likewiſe a conſiderable 
quantity of heat, on account of their fixity ; 
and though the other mineral acids, for 
want of fixity are incapable of attracting 
heat from the fire, they are nevertheleſs ca- 
pable of abſorbing heat in great quantities, 
In this reſpect they are ſimilar to volatile 
alkali; for when ſal ammoniac is diſtilled 
with a cauſtic fixed alkali or quicklime, 
the heat of their cauſtic. ſalt unites with the 
volatile alkali, and the acid of ſal ammoniac 
with the lime. If to this volatile alkali an 
acid be added, the heat is ſenſibly expelled. 
 — The*weak mineral acids have the ſame 
qualities. Pour oil of vitriol on common 
falt in a ſmall retort, lute the neck of it to 
a receiver containing ſome water, this 
water will be heated without fire : for the 
vitriolic acid unites with the alkali of com- 
mon falt, by which its heat is ſet free, and 
is immediately united with the marine acid; 
and 1s again expelled, when the water in 
the receiver is united with this acid. 
Hence the . reputed to be very 
extraor- 


Air and Fire. 1 77 


extraordinary may be illuſtrated, viz. that 
vil of vitriol poured on common ſalt has the 
appearance of boiling, and is however cold; 
whereas the vapours grow hot in the Air. 
am perſuaded this heat is no new pro- 
duction, but ariſes from the moiſture which 
is found in the Air: the boiling is nothing 
peculiar, for marine acid is always elaſtic in 
its dry ſtate: fuming ſpirit of nitre likewiſe 
is heated in the Air, and with water. It is 
remarkable that heat-expels ſome acids, and 
again that theſe acids in their turn expel 
heat: There are more ſuch affinities known 
in chemiſtry, where heat even inverts them 
and pethaps the following Experiment 
will illuſtrate this matter. I filled a phial 
with atrial acid, and put ſome ground freſh 
calcined lime into it; then I ſtopt it up, 
turned it well, and put it inverted in à veſſel 
with oil: after eight days I opened the 
phial thus inverted under water, when I 
found to my aſtoniſhment, that no water 
mounted into the glaſs ; but when a little 
water came to it, the Air was immediately 
abſorbed. Do not perhaps ſuch ſalts firſt 
part with their water by means of the 
heat, and then the dry acid have a weaker 

N attraction 


. 2 
- y 4 = : - - _ * 2 —_— _ 
, —— — — T — _ * = 
l - 8 - 2 
: 1 joe — M . ju * 0 y - x 
——— —— — — —_ _ K 4 
< , ® - — _—. 
— - + - - — A - © —— = = > 5 © = =. - — 


178 Experiments on 


attraction to abſorbent ſubſtances than to 
heat? From all theſe arguments it appears 
how difficult it is to obtain a pure acid and 
a pure earth; and I ſay not too much by 
aſſerting, that nobody ever ſaw a pure carth 
or a pure alkali. 


96 - 
Inflammable Air. 


If heat be a ſubtle acid, it ſhould be able 
to be united with more of leſs phlogiſton ; 
and though all acids have not that property to 
attract phlogiſton in quantity, the greater 
part of them are however capable of attract- 
ing it in the greateſt abundance. To this 
laſt claſs belongs heat; for with a ſmall ad- 
dition of phlogiſton it produces light ; and 
with ſtill more, the well known inflammable 
Air.—I will begin with the metals: Tron 
conſiſts of an earth . generis, united with 
a ceriain quantity of phlogiſton, and a cer- 
' tain quantity of heat; all metals agree in 
that point; the difference is in their earths, 
which according to their nature have ab- 
ſorbed either more or lefs phlogiſton. 
Whether heat be really an integrant part of 


metals, or whether the metallic pores are 
| only | 


Air and Fit. 159 


only filled with it, is of no conſequence, let 
it ſuffice that it is found in metals: the 
more phlogiſton a metal contains, the more 
heat is likewiſe found with it: no metal is 
diſſolved in acids, but it is done according 
to the laws of a double attraction. The 
acids unite with their earths, and the diſ- 
charged phlogiſton with the ſame acids: 
if the latter have no attraction to the phlo- 
giſton it is attracted by the Air; if this 
is wanting, it unites with heat, which in 
the ſame moment is diſcharged from the 
metals by the acids; then appear phæ- 
nomena, which are peculiar to theſe unions. 
When the vitrialic acid diluted with water, 
comes in contact with the iron, it firſt unites 
with its earth; and ſince this weak acid 
has no conſiderable attraction to phlogiſton, 
and Air cannot come in contact with the 
iron where the acid is, the phlogiſton has 
no other way open but that of uniting 
with the heat of the iron; and thus the 
inflammable Air is compounded. The 
heat which ariſes from that ſolution, is 
only that which the phlogiſton cannot 
come into perfect contact with; but if the 
phlogiſton can form an union with another 

N 2 ſubſtance 


— „ 2 . 


z PR — — 
= 2 — 5 = 5 — pn 


4.4 = 
— <xa—== - 
k _— - 


= g —_=_—_ 
— == " 


5 — * — 2 
* 4 
8 . 4 
* my * < 
2 „ 
CS 


— — ww» 
INDEED —- 


180 Experiments on 


ſubſtance, the heat muſt increaſe in that 
caſe, ſince it is ſet at liberty: This happens 
when nitrous acid is poured on iron filings. 
Since marine acid does not much attract 
the phlogiſton, this acid acts in the ſame 
manner as the vitriolic.— Tin and zinc pro- 
duce the ſame phænomena with theſe acids. 

Inflammable Air cannot be deſtroyed by 
nitrous acid. I filled a phial with this Air, 
and poured on it ſome fuming nitrous 
acid ; the acid did not grow red, nor was 
the Air abforbed, but after ſome days was 
{till inflammable as before. 

J give this Experiment here with a view 
to convince my readers that inflammable 
Air is not contained quite ready-made in the 
metals; for then it would follow, that even 
nitrous acid might ſeparate inflammable 


Air from metals, juſt as aerial acid is ſepa- | 


rated from chalk : but ſince inflamm able 
Air is compoſed of heat and plilogiſton, it 
is. no wonder that this Air whei its phlo- 
giſton unites with the empyreal Air, ſeems 
entirely to diſappear with the empyreal Air, 


without leaving the leaſt indication of atrial * 


acid or any thing elſe (No. 19, 46.). Pure 


water only can produce inflammable Air 


from iron: it is ſcum. which conſtantly 


appears 


a 
1 
1 
4 
L 
£ 
J 
ff 
tl 
-a 
fl 
w 


Air and Fire. 181 


appears on the ſurface of the water, after it 
Has ſtood over iron filings. during ſome 
weeks, and has been ſomewhat ſtirred. If 
iron filings be diſtilled with ſalt ammoniac, 
and a bladder is tied to the mouth of the 
retort, inflammable Air is thus procured ; 
for what ſhould become of the phlogiſton 
contained in the iron, after the marine acid 
has been united with the earth of iron, 
the volatile alkali having no connection or 
union with it?---Should any one ſuppoſe 
that the acids contribute ſomething to the 
generation of inflammable Air, I can readi- 
ly clear his doubts: Mix zinc with cauſtic 
fixed alkali, and diſtill it in a glaſs retort ; 
then the alkali attacks the earth of zinc, 
and in the bladder tied to the mouth in- 
flammable Air is produced. Zinc digeſted 
with ſpirit of ſalt ammoniac, generates like- 
wiſe inflammable Air. 

If the cauſtic fixed alkali be compounded 
of heat and pure alkali, it is eaſy to con- 
ceive that if an inflammable ſubſtance be 
added, and the alkali attracts the acid united 
with the phlogiſton in the combuſtible bo- 
dy ſtronger than the acid does the phlogiſ- 
ton, a double decompoſition muſt neceſſa- 

N 3 rily 


182 Experiments on 


rily enſue; and the heat of the alkali muſt 
unite with the phlogiſton in an inflammable 
Air. With ſulphur this decompoſition 
cannot be produced; ſince its acid attracts 
the phlogiſton ſtronger than to allow the 
alkali to diſpoſſeſs the vitriolic acid of its 
phlogiſton.— The charcoal is moſt proper 
for the purpoſe, ſince it is a ſulphur com- 
pounded of phlogiſton and aerial acid. If 
coals be ground together with alkali, made 
cauſtic by quick · lime or fire and then di- 
ſtilled in a glaſs retort in an open fire, a 
great quantity of inflammable Air is thus 


obtained, containing no atrial acid: if a 


bladder be tied to the mouth, the alkali 
on the other hand loſes its cauſticity and 
efferveſces with acids. —In this Expe- 
riment the cauſe is found, why burning 
red-hot charcoal in a ſtove appears with 
a blue flame. Who would believe it that 
this flame is owing -to the oil remaining in 
the coals? who would beheve it, that this 


oil ſhould not be long ago expelled by {| 
heat? I filled a ſmall retort half full with 


very dry pounded charcoal, and tied to it a 
bladder emptied of Air. As ſoon as the 
retort became red-hot, the bladder was 

expanded; 


ß ON ON 


Air and Fire. 183 


expanded; and when it was red-hot at the 
bottom, the bladder would no longer ex- 
pand. I left the retort to cool, and the 
Air returned from the bladder into the 
coals. I again heated the retort, and the 
Air was again expelled; and when it was 
cooled, the Air was again abſorbed by the 
coals. This Air filled eight times the 
ſpace occupied by the coals. I heated the 
retort once more, the Air was expelled; 
and when left to cool, the coals re-abſorbed 
it. I repeated this Experiment very often, 
with the ſame ſucceſs. This Air puts out 
the flame of a candle, and contains a ſmall 
part of atrial acid —I tied to the mouth a 
bladder full of freſh Air, and after the foul 
Air was expelled by heat, and when the re- 
tort was ſtill red-hot at the bottom, this freſh 
Air was abſorbed by the coals; and being 
expelled again by heat, it was changed into 
foul Air. I found that charcoal attracted 
a {till greater bulk of atrial acid. Wheat 
burnt to coals, and hartſhorn reduced to 
coals, do not yield ſuch Air.—But if char- 
coal, after it ceaſes yielding any more Air 
into the bladder, be heated by a ſtill more 
violent fire, till they be thoroughly red- hot, 

N 4 then 


184 Experiments on 


then another kind of Air is produced: ] 
continued the fire till the bladder would 
expand no more, and then I let it cool: 
Part of the Air returned into the retort ; a 
good part however ſtill remained in the 
bladder. This Air expelled hy a violent 
red heat is inflammable Air. I again in- 


creaſed the fire on the ſame charcoals, but 


did not get any more Air, than what du- 
ring their cooling might haye been re-ab- 
ſorbed by them ; which amounted to eight 
times their bulk. I ſhook them out of the 
retort, and let them burn on in the open Air; 
then let them cool again and diſtilled them 
as before. I obtained at firſt outſet, before 
the retort was red-hot, an Air ſimilar to the 
foul; after the coals became red-hot, I ob- 
tained a preat portion of inflammable Air. 
I left it again to cool, and repeated the fire 
with ſo violent a heat, that the retort began 
to melt at the bottom; but it yielded very 
little Air. Charcoals therefore muſt pre- 
viouſly be kindled to a red heat in the open 
Air, before they will yield inflammable Air 
in the retort.---Charcoals contain both al- 
kali and lime. Conſequently there are two 
attractions which deſtroy them. The re- 

leaſed 


£2 
VE 


Air and Fire. 185 
leaſed alkali or the lime, uniting with the 
arial acid and the heat penetrating through 
the retort with the phlogiſton. After the 
alkali has been ſaturated with aerial acid, 
it is ĩimpoſſible that more inflammable Air 
| ſhould be generated; but if the coal be 
burnt in the open Air, {ome alkali may re- 
appear; and then a new portion of inflam- 

mable Air may ve compounded in the re- 
tort.---If charred hartſhorn be diſtilled in 
a violent fire, a great quantity of inflam- 
mable Air is generated for the ſame reaſon. 

The flame of coals is produced, when 
the heat which is between the red-hot 
coals unites with the phlogiſton, and ſome 
part of the atrial acid with the aſhes: it 
cannot kindle immediately, ſince the empy- 
real Air which is between the coals, is al- 
ready ſaturated with phlogiſton from 
the charcoals; it therefore riſes, and this 
Air meets the common Air : Theſe red- 
hot coals, therefore, if they have large in- 
tervals between them, mult look as if they 
were burning. 

It is remarkable that phlogiſton, which 
expands the empyreal Air to a certain bulk 


very thinly, (as may be obſerved in heat — 
light, 


186 Experiments on 
light,) becomes by the addition of more 


phlogiſton ſo coarſe, that it may be 


kept in phials. Though in the inflamma. 


ble Air produced from coal, no atrial acid, . 


or at leaſt very little may be diſcovered ; 
yet if this be ſeparated by means of the 
milk of lime, there however may be ob- 
ſerved a good portion of ſuch atrial acid, 
after it be burnt. Hence it appears, that 
this inflammable Air has volatiliſed ſome 
part of the coal : In the ſame manner as 
arſenical acid during a digeſtion with zinc, 
generates inflammable Air, which contains 
ſome of the reguline arſenic. Does this 
volatilifed ſubtle coal mix with the maſs of 
blood, and become the cauſe of the vapour 
of coals being noxious ? - | 


8 
Stinking ſulpbureous Air. 


1. I mixed the moſt ſubtle powder of 
quick-lime with an equal quantity of ſul- 
phur, and made the mixture red-hot in a 
ſmall glaſs retort, to which I had tied a 
bladder emptied of Air. Some ſulphur 

ET role 


Air and Fire. 187 


roſe into the neck of the retort, but no 
Air appeared. I poured marine acid on 
this liver of ſulphur; it cauſed a violent 
efferveſcence, and yielded a-ſtrong hepatic 
ſmell. The mixture grew only a 
warm. 

I mixed well ground a 
(Molybdenum Magnefia. Linn. Manganeſe 
Cronſtedt's Mineralogy, Sect. cxiii.) with 
an equal quantity of ſulphur, and made it 
red-hot in a retort, with a bladder tied to 
it. The exceſs of ſulphur was ſublimed, 
and in the bladder I found a volatile ſpirit 
of ſulphur. The refduum had a greeniſh 
colour, it cauſed a ſcum with acids, and 
had an hepatic ſmell. * 

3. I prepared a cauſtic alkali from tartar 
and lime, which grew very hot with acids, 
but did not efferveſce ; and I melted it in a 
crucible provided with a cover, into a liver 
of ſulphur, which ſtrongly efferveſced with 
acids, but was very little heated. 

4. I collected the Air of theſe fuſions 
each ſeparately in a bladder : it had the 
following properties : (@) It did not precipi- 
tate lime-water ; (5) it was in conſiderable 
quantities abſorbed by water, which thence 

acquired 


188 Experiments on | 


acquired a ſtrong hepatic ſmell and a ſweetiſh 
taſte; /c} and a burning candle introduced 
into a glaſs of it, was immediately extin- 


guiſhed. If a third part of a glaſs veſſel 


be filled with this Air, and the reſt be 
common Air, this ſtinking Air kindles 
when a burning candle is put into it, and 
the glaſs is filled with a white thick va- 
pour; this Air then ſmells like volatile 
ſpirit of ſulphur, and a white powder is 
depoſited which conſiſts of ſulphur. 

5. I mixed charcoal-duſt with ſulphur, 
and diſtilled it in a'retort with an emptied 
bladder tied to it, Firſt, I procured foul 
Air from it; then I increaſed the Fire and 
tied a new bladder to it; when I obtained 
a ſtinking ſulphureous Air, in all reſpects 
like the preceding.---In order to determine 
whether heat alone would produce Air from 
ſulphur like that which heat with phlogiſton 


generates with inflammable Air, 1 put a | 


piece of ſulphur in a retort, with a bladder 
tied to it, and kept the ſulphur ſtrongly 
boiling during the ſpace of half an hour, 
The air in the retort was neither increaſed 
nor diminiſhed, and was changed into foul 
Air, but not into ftinking ſulphureous Air, 


The 


Air and Fire. 
The phlogiſton of coals muſt therefore 
contribute ſomething to this phænome- 
non. | 
6. I filled a retort with inflammahle 
Air from iron, I put ſome ſulphur into it, 
and kept it boiling as before. In this and 
the preceeding Experiment I placed the 
retort in ſuch a manner, that the ſublimed 
ſulphur from the neck fell back and was 
again melted by the heat. The Atr in this 
retort was, when it was grown cold, ſtink- 
ing, but did not diffolve in water. It ſeems 
that this inflammable Air was overcharged 
with phlogiſton, which hinders the ſolu- 
tion. 
7. This inflammable ſulphureous Air 
ſeems to be a compound of heat, phlogiſ- 


ton and fulphur. 
I filled a phial with this Air, poured 


ſome fuming ſpirit of nitre into it, and ſhut 


it carefully with a cork. The glaſs was 
inſtantly filled with red thick vapours ; 
half an hour after this I inverted the phial, 
and opened the cork under water ; the wa- 


ter inſtantly roſe into the glaſs, and filled 
it about three-fourths of the whole, and: 


the water was ſomewhat mixed with 


ſulphur. 


* 
— 


9 — rr — ——— A * 

- = 2 — - | 8 — — — — 2 — =_ = 

* . — = — >. 2 5 Oy — — — 
f 4 —— — — 7 1 _ 

4 — 0 þ ' * _— - . 

- 7 0 

nd "x % 1 2 — * = — — — . : 3 - 

- — 

& — 


——ů wn.  m— <— 
2 2 3 —— - 


== 
— 


— - 


E — 
. 


— —2 eee 4 £m 


"Zz 3 x _ W_ = 1 


Er EVEN DINER 
— * 


— 
— — ——— —— d— = 
N 


—— 
— — 


190 Experiments on 

8. I repeated the ſame Experiment: (i. e. 
I filled a phial with the fame Air) and let 
fome drops of fuming nitrous acid fall into it, 
that I might put the ball of a thetmometer 
into it. Inſtantly the ſpirit roſe in the ther- 
mometer ; and a yellow powder was preci- 
pitated, which I found to be ſulphur. 

9. From (No. 4.) it appears, that after 
the Air was burnt, a ſulphur was precipi- 
tated ; which muſt be cauſed by that vola- 
tile ſpirit of ſulphur, which was ſeparated 


from that part of the ſulphur, which had 


been kindled. . 

I filled a phial with this ſtinking ſul- 
phureous Air, and poured into it ſome vola- 
tile ſpirit of ſulphur, and ſhut it carefully. 
In half an hour's time the phial was covered 
with a yellow coating of ſulphur, and the 
Air was for the greateſt part abſorbed. I 
repeated the ſame Experiment, and intro- 
duced a thermometer into it, when I ob- 
ſerved the ſpirit in the thermometer riſing 
conſiderably. 

I poured ſome acid of arſenic into this 


ſulphureous Air. The acid became tinged 


yellow, and a true orpiment was precipi- 
tated, 


Air and Fire. 192 


tated.Dephlogiſticated Spiritus Salis ab- 
ſorbs likewiſe this Air, and the ſulphur is 


precipitated : But marine acid itſelf does 


not change it. 
I am therefore of opinion, that if from 


this Air the phlogiſton be ſeparated, (which 


is the medium uniting ſulphur and heat,) this 


kind of Air is entirely decompounded : the 
heat is ſeparated, and the ſulphur is preci- 
pitated. Hence it likewiſe appears, that 
the volatile ſpirit of ſulphur has an attrac- 
tion to phlogiſton. 


Since neither the alkalies nor 13 diſſolve 


ſulphur, unleſs they be made cauſtic, it fol- 


lows, that the heat which is contained in 
theſe ſalts, muſt be the chief cauſe of their 
coheſion with ſulphur. If therefore an acid, 
for inſtance, the marine acid be added, it 


unites with the calcareous earth or the al- 
kali, and the heat is then ſet free; and fince 
it is not ſenſibly felt, it muſt enter into a 
new union; but not being able to unite with 
the ſulphur likewiſe ſet at liberty, unleſs 
there be added a greater quantity of phlo- 


giſton, (No. 5.) this heat attracts the phlo- 


giſton from a part of the ſulphur, and unites 
then with ſo much ſulphur as is required 
for 


- 
— — OED =: — — 


8 


— — — — — 


2 


N — — — 
— — — 
r 7 


= . = * 
D ——- 
— * 


192 Experimenti on 


fot the formation of ſtinking ſulphureous 
Air. ond 

This opinion becomes more confirmed 
by the plaiſter of Paris, or vitriolated tartar, 
and volatile ſpirit of vitriol, which is con- 
ſtantly-found to be contained in the lixivium 
after the ſulphur is precipitated ; which is 
a neceflary confequenee; after part of the 
ſulphur had been decompounded. If you 
pour to a ſolution of ſulphur in alkali, a 
great deal of acid at once; leſs ſtinking Ait 
is generated, and you may obſerve in this 
mixture a kind of thin oil: however the oil 
remains. not fluid always, but grows thick 
and hard in the open Air. It ſeems that 
the exceſs of acid immediately ſeizes upon 
the alkali; and ſince in that caſe no decom- 
poſition, or at leaſt a very partial one, of 
the ſulphur is. poſſible; the heat obtains too 
ſmall a quantity of phlogiſton to expand 
the heavy ſulphur into an airy vapour; a 
beginning only being made' by forming an 
oil. 

The generation of ſuch a ſulphureous Air, 
from fatneſs and ſulphur muſt have the 
ſame cauſe. I diſtilled in a retort a mix- 
ture of oil of olives and ſulphur, and tied 
a bladder to it: As ſoon as it began to 

a boil, 


Air and Fire. 193 


boil, the bladder was expanded, and a 
+ ſinking ſulphureous Air was obtained: Here 
being ſulphur; phlogiſton, and heat toge- 
ther, it is no wonder that this kind of 
Airſhould be compoſed, If any body wants 
to make Experiments with this kind of Air, 
he may uſe the following as the beſt me- 
thod : Melt three ounces of ſmall iron file- 
ings with two ounces of ſulphur in a re- 
tort, the heat muſt be kept, till the ſulphur 
no more riſes into the neck of the re- 
tort ; after all has been cooled, the retort 
may be broken; you will find the iron in- 
creaſed one ounce in weight, This ſul- 
phurated iron diſſolves with ſtrong effer- 
veſcence in acids; and nothing but ſtinking 
ſulphureous Air is obtained, without any 
reſiduum of ſulphur being left. During the 
melting the exceſs of phlogiſton is ſeparated 
from the iron, and united with the heat of 
the fire; this is the cauſe of the appearance 
of light. (No. 81.) The remaining phlogiſ- 
ton is that proportion of it which unites 
with the heat of iron and with the ſulphur 
diſengaged by means of the vitriolic acid, 
and this generates ſtinking ſulphureous 
Air. (No. 6.) 


THE END. 


r N 
ON THE 
PRECEDING WORK. 
„ 
RICHARD kI RW AN, Eſa. F.R.S. 


r A 


r 
To HIM FROM 


JOSEPH PRIESTLEY, L.L.D. F. R. S. 


TT may be ſaid, with equal truth, of the 
_ progreſs through ſcience, as of that 
through ſpace, that it is impoſſible to arrive 
at any diſtant point without paſſing through 
the intermediate, however great we may 
ſuppoſe the energy of motion in the one 
* O 2 caſe, 


c d 1 K . 
caſe, or that of genius in the other. The 
great Newton could never have arrived at 
the diſcovery of the Mundane ſyſtem, if he 
had not availed himſelf of the previous diſ- 
coyeries of Galilee and Kepler. Many in- 
ſtances of this ſort occur in the Hiſtory of 
the Sciences, nor is there any thing that 
ought to encourage us more in our pur- 
ſuits of natural knowledge, than the chance 
that perhaps one ſtep further may be a ca- 
pital diſcovery, and the certainty, that if 
it be not, it at leaſt neceſſarily leads to- 
wards one. There never was perhaps a 
more fignal proof of the incaparity of the 
human underſtanding to make any impor- 
tant diſcoyery, without paſſing through the 
intermediate ſteps, than the attempt of 
our Author to penetrate into the very eſ- 
ſence of fire, without availing himſelf, or 
perhaps being acquainted with the interme- 
diate diſcoveries of Fahrenheit, Black, and 
Crawford. Thoſe of the laſt he was cer- 
tainly unacquainted with, Dr. Crawford's 


Treatiſe being much poſterior to his; thoſe 


of the former, he ſeems not to have attended 


to; yet, without a previous knowledge of 
theſe, his genius, great as it confeſſedly is, 


and 


A 


ra. 197 
and his chemical abilities, equal, if not 
ſuperior, to thoſe of any of his coteinpora+ 
ries, could not ſupply the deficiency. With 
regard to Air, (the knowledge of which 
indeed was not his principal object) he has 
done little elſe than repeat, with ſome varia» 
tion in the manner, the Experiments pub- 
liſhed ſome years before his Treatiſe, by 
Dr. Prieſtley, to whom, indeed, the Doc- 
trine of Air owes more, notwithſtanding 
he cultivated moſt branches of it with 
out a guide, and paſſed through all the 
Intermediate ſteps by himſelf, than to 
any one wha has yet appeared, though it 
has been more aſſiduouſly cultivated theſe 
eight years paſt by the moſt eminent Phi- 
loſophers, both at home, and on the Con- 
tinent, than any other in the whole circle 
of experimental knowledge. 


2 
9 via 


Page 7. SI 8. 


THIS Experiment was alſo made by 
Dr. Prieſtley, but he did not find the dimi- 
nution of the common Air quite ſo great, 


being only one-fifth ; whereas Mr. Scheele 
O 3 found 


— — — — 


— — 


198 . 


found it to be nearly one-third ; probably | 
Dr. . Prieſtley did not expoſe theſe ſub- | 
ſtances as long to each other as Mr. 


Scheele has done, but he applied the teſt 
of nitrous Air, which Mr. Scheele ne- 
glected to do in this and every other caſe ; 
however, he has aſcertained that the greateſt 
diminution does not reach quite to one- 
third. Mr. Scheele thinks that fix ounce 
meaſures of Air were loſt in this Experi- 
ment; but as he remarked, that part of 
the ſulphur was precipitated, (an effect 
which is always produced by the addition 
of an acid) he ſhould rather have judged 
that either part of the Air was converted 
into an acid, or that an acid was precipi- 
tated from the Air by the very act of phlo- 
giſtication, as Dr, Prieſtley has done. In 
this caſe 10, 89 cubic inches (which ac- 
cording to Mr. Fontana, are equal to 5, 86 
grains) of fixed Air were precipitated. 


Page 9. § 10. 


In this caſe, the ſulphur was not preci- 
pitated, becauſe its quantity was very ſmall 
relatively 


N O T E 8. 199 


relatively to the quantity of cauſtic alkali 
to which it was united, and which was 


much greater than was neceſſary to keep 
it in ſolution ; hence the fixed Air uniting 
to this * proportion of fixed al- 
kali, no precipitation enſued, it even ap- 
pears by the liquor's becoming colourleſs, 
that the ſulphur was decompoſed ; there 
were only thirty grains of fulphur in this 
ſolution, whereas in the firſt Experiment 
there were four hundred and eighty. 


Page 10. § 11. 


Four ounces of a ſolution of ſulphur in 
lime-water, can contain but very little ſul- 
phur, for boiling water diſſolves only about 
one three-hundredth part of its weight of 
lime, as Mr. Bergman affirms, and conſe- 
quently, four ounces in the temperature of 
fifty- nine degrees of Fahrenheit, cannot con- 
tain above ſix grains of it; now ſix grains 
of quick lime cannot take up above three 
grains of ſulphur, ſo that here there could 
not be more than three grains; hence this 


ſmall quantity was eaſily decompoſed, the 
O 4 phlogiſton 


200 N O T. E 8. 


phlogiſton of the ſulphur uniting to the 
Air, from whence fixed air was prec ipi- 
tated, and the vitriolic acid to the calca- 
reous earth,---Our author did not find that 
the volatile acid of vitriol was altered in 
his Experiment, but Dr. Prieſtley diſco- 
yered that not only common Air is phlogi- 
ſticated by this acid, but that the acid itſelf 
is altered, and real ſulphur formed of it in 
tubes hermetically ſealed, 4 Prieſtley 124. 


Page 11. S 13, 14. and 15. 


I The effects of nitrous Air on bladders, 

are handled at large by Dr. Prieſtley, 
1 Pr. 214.—3. Pr. 153.—4 Pr. 60....... 
the diminution of common Air by eſſential 
oils was alſo firſt noticed by him, 3 Pr. 92. 
4 Pr. 363. that the green and blue calces 
of iron diminiſhes common Air, has alſo 


been fince found by Dr. Prieſtley, Vol. IV. 
p. 289. | 


Page 13; 


an Py aa ww vv ac Joc cc 


„ 


NO T S. 


Page 13. 8 16. 


In this ſection, Mr. Scheele endeavours to 
prove, that the diminution of common Air 
in the phlogiſtic proceſſes above deſcribed, 
ariſes from a total loſs or eſcape of that 


quantity by which it was diminiſhed ; for, 


ſays he, it is not to be found in the ſhape 
of Air, the remajning Air weighing rather 
leſs than before, nor is it to be found in 
the remaining liquor, & 10. For, ſays he, 


this alkaline lye being mixed with lime-water 


produced no precipitate. It is ſurpriſing this 
accurate chemiſt did not obſerve the impoſ- 
ſibility of the precipitation of lime-water 


in this inſtance; for the quantity of fixed 
Air precipitated muſt _ haye been very 


| ſmall; (but how ſmall cannot be deter- 
mined, as he has not mentioned how much 
the common Air was diminiſhed) : now it 
js well known that a large quantity of any 
ſubſtance being united to a very ſmall 
quantity of another ſubſtance, to which it 
bears any affinity, retains this latter moſt 
obſtinately, how then could the ſmall por- 
tion of lime contained in lime-water ſepa- 
Tate 


N 4 — 1 
— 1 0 — 
— — —— — - 
= 2 W 
* — 
— — — 


— 


- "© * I. Ys > 4 — ” 2 2 4 — E 
a * 7 * 5 — — 
2 - 28 = 1 8 * 4 = — - 
— — 4 = - 2 * _ — — * — hy — 
4 - 22 > -— 6 — A - N 1 — = 
_———— —_ : - — * / =_ == - 
2 A : 1 __ : 
< — - = BD - — — 144 <7 
- — 1 — — —— by — . 2 * — 
- . OP : 11 : = 5 ny — — — 
— — => - 2 — X. - — — — 
4 — — —— — - — 
— — — — S 


= — 
— _— 
— 
— = 
- = = 
— — 
2 0 — 
— — 
= = Dau — > 
- x * — — — 
- l 


202 NO Tr E 8 
rate a few grains of fixed Air, from about 
two ounces and a half of a cauſtic alkaline lye 
by bare affuſion, and without the aſſiſtance 
of heat, when Dr. Black, to ſtrip fixed 
alkalies of all their fixed Air, was obliged to 
mix them with one-third of their weight 
of quick lime in boiling water ? It is no 
leſs extraordinary that he did not remark 
the precipitation of lime-water by phlo- 
giſtic proceſles ſo frequently mentioned by 
Dr. Prieſtley, the firſt volume of whoſe 
Experiments he muſt have ſeen, 


Page 16. $ 17. 


Nine ounces of phoſphorus, occupied at 
molt the ſpace of four ounces and a half of 
water; and ſubſtracting this ſpace from the ca- 
pacity of the retort, we ſhall find it con- 
tained only twenty-five ounces and a half 
meaſures of Air, and by this Experiment, 
it would appear that theſe twenty-five 
ounces anda half meaſures were diminiſhed 
by the combuſtion of phoſphorus nine 
ounces, that is more than one third ; a de- 
gree of diminution greater than has ever 


yet 


— 


29-75 * 203 


yet been produced in common Air, by 
any Experiment. Mr. Lavoiſier, who ex- 
amined the phænomena attending the com- 
buſtion of phoſphorus very carefully, ne- 
ver found common Air to be diminiſhed 
by it more than between one-fifth and one- 
fixth, and even this diminution is much 
greater than that which is - cauſed by the 
combuſtion of any other ſubſtance. But 
Mr. Lavoiſier has carried this matter much 
further ; for, by a nice and careful Expe- 
riment, he found, that the phoſphoric 
acid thus formed, had acquired the very 
weight which the Air had loſt. Vol. I. 
p. 335 and, conſequently, that no part of 
the Air had been loſt, or had made its 
eſcape, but had ſimply been abſorbed by 
the phoſphoric acid ; an Experiment which 
if Mr. Scheele had made, it would pro- 
bably have ſpared him the pains of writing 
this treatiſe. | | 
However, the greater diminution of Ait 
by the combuſtion of phoſphorus, than by 
that of any other ſubſtance, is very re- 
markable; and certainly ariſes from its 
producing greater heat, during its com- 
buſtion, than any other combuſtible; for 
| Dr, 


204 N OTE s. 


Dr. Hales has long ago remarked, that 
Air, in which a ſmall, or ill-lighted can- 
dle has ceaſed to burn, will yet admit a 
larger and better lighted candle to burn, 
but for a ſhorter time. Now the diſco- 
veries of Dr. Crawford prove, that the 
more phlogiſton is thrown into Air, in a 
given time, the more of its ſire it parts 
with; which, if not taken up by the 
burning ſubſtance, becomes redundant, and 
cauſes ſenſible heat. On the other hand, 
it is well known, that phoſphorus im- 
parts its phlogiſton to Ait more readily 
than any other combuſtible ; and I myſelf 
have found, that moſt acids are incapable 
of taking it up in any conſiderable degree; 
and hence it becomes redundant, and a 
great heat is produced, which promotes a 
ſtill further ſeparation of phlogiſton; a cir- 
cumſtance which is always attended with 
a proportionable diminution of the Air 
that receives it, 


Page 17. 8518. 


The diminution of common Air, by 
phoſphorus, without combuſtion, has 


not 


NO TH CL 205 


not been experienced by any one that I 
know of, except the very ingenious and 
induſtrious Mr. Fontana; and, if I miſtake 
not, he has found it much leſs conſider- 
able than our author, who it were to be 
wiſhed had informed us in what ſtate the 
phoſphorus exiſted after this diminution, 
and whether it had increaſed in weight. 


Page 17. 5 19. 


In this Experiment, the atrial acid was 
depoſited in the water, or metallic ſolution, 
therefore it was a vain attempt to ſeek for 
it in the remaining Air. 


Page 20. '{ 21. 

Dr. Hales lighted a candle in a cloſe re- 
ceiver by means of a burning glaſs, he alio 
found that in proportioa to the ſize of the 
veſſel, the Air was more diminiſhed in 
ſmall than in large veſſels, when candles 
of the fame ſize were uſed; but in general 
theſe Experiments are liable to a good deal 
of 


206 rA & 


of uncertainty, not only from the different 
degrees of inflammability of the tallow or 
other combuſtibles uſed, according to their 
greater or leſſer purity, and from the quan- 
tity of inflammable Air unburned, which 
mixes with the reſiduum of common Air, 
but from another circumſtance firſt diſco- 
vered by Mr. Fontana, viz. that the coaly 
ſubſtance of the combuſtible abſorbs very 
plentifully all forts of. Air, ſo that it is 
hard to ſay how much Air is diminiſhed by 
the mere act of combuſtion. 


Page 23. 8 22. 


This Experiment clearly proves that a 
mixture of fixed Air, renders common Air 
leſs fit to ſupport flame, as Mr. Caven- 
diſh had diſcovered eight years before ; 
Dr. Hales had alſo found that the preſence 
of ſalt of tartar enables a candle to burn 
longer than it would otherwiſe by abſorb- 
ing ſome vapour, or rather the atrial acid; 
ſo that here the alkali acted the ſame part 
as the quick lime in Mr. Scheele's ben 
ment. 1 Hales, 271. 

= Page 25. 


& y gf - jw fy td pa we 


N OT E 8. 207 


Page 25. § 23. , 
Dr. Prieſtley, who firſt made this Expe- 


riment, explains it ſo clearly that it' is 
needleſs to fay any thing further concern- 
ing it. ; 


- 


Page 27. § 25. 


The obſervations that occur in this 
ſection, ſeem - peculiarly to belong to 
Mr. Scheele : Dr. Prieſtley has fince en- 
larged, and conſiderably improved them. 
See Vol. III. p. 243, and Vol. IV. p. 1. 
But to underſtand this matter perfectyl, 
it will be neceſſary to remark, iſt. That 
dephlogiſticated Air is one of the compo- 
nent parts of nitrous acid, let the other 
be what it may; (if indeed there be any 
other beſides dephlogiſticated Air in a con- 
crete ſtate, and deprived of the quantity 
of elementary fire neceſlary to keep it in 
an aerial ſtate). This ſeems to me the ma- 
nifeſt reſult of the numerous Experiments 
of Dr. Prieſtley, ſome of which have been 


repeated by Mr. Fontana and Lavoiſier. 
; For 


208 N OT E S. 


For, by combining this acid with fixed 
alkalies, earths of any ſort, or various 
metallic ſubſtances, deplogiſticated Air 
has been obtained in great plenty. Now 
it ſeems to me much more reaſonable to 
attribute the origin of this Air to one 
and the ſame ſubſtance, which has been 
combined with all of them, than to ſo 
many ſubſtances eſſentially different from 
each other ; moſt part of which are incapa- 
ble of affording the leaſt particle of it, either 
alone or in combination. with any other 
ſubſtance. 2d, That nitrous Air is pro- 
duced hy the ſolution of any ſubſtance in 
nitrous acid, as ſome phlogiſton is always 
diſengaged, and of this nitrous air a, con- 
ſiderable quantity is reſorbed by the ſolu- 
tion, as Mr. Fontana has particularly 
remarked. | 3. That the colour af the 
Ditrous acid and its vapour depends on the 
intimacy. of the union of the phlogiſton 
they contain with the ſaline part; and, 
conſrquently, in ſome meaſure, of the 
proportion of the aqueous part, and the 
degree of heat by which they are united; 
the union of the acid and phlogiſton being 


ſo much the more intimate, as the degree of 
0% N heat 


N G T8. 209 


heat in which they are united is greater, 
and as the proportion of water is leſſer; 
and hence red ſpirit of nitre, by the ad- 
dition of more water, becomes yellow 7 
and by the addition of ' ſtill more water, 
green; as the preſence of water, in propor- 
tion to its quantity, diminiſhes the force 
with which the acid and the phlogiſton 
attract each other; ſee Dr. Prieſtley's Ob- 
fervations, Vol. III. p. 198 and 243. And 
on the other hand, blue ſpirit of nitre is 
dy heat converted into green, and the green 
into yellow, and this into red; but if the 
proportion of water be conſiderable, the 
former colours return on the ceſſation of 
heat, Vol. IV. p. 4. 

Towards the end of the operation of di- 
ſtilling ſpirit of nitre, and indeed, during 
moſt part of the proceſs, dephlogiſticated 
Air is produced, as Dr. Prieſtley has ſhewn 
at large; and hence a candle will burn in 
the receiver with a vivid flame. The red 
vapour proceeds from the decompo- 
ſition of nitrous Air, by the dephlogiſti- 
cated Air: it is this Air that pervades the 
receiver filled with phlogiſticated Air, and 


* it to Permit a candle to burn in it. 
FP He 


No N OT EES. 


He aſlis from whence the phlogiſton pro- 
ceeds.at the end of the operation? I an- 
ſwer, from the fixed alkali of the nitre, 
which-phlogiſticates the vitriolic acid after 
the nitrous is for the moſt part expelled, 
and hence the vitriolic acid is in part phlo- 
giſticated in tartar vitriolate, as Mr. Baume 
has ſhewn at large in the ſixth volume of 
the Mem. Btrang. & Chymie Experim. 
Voh II. p. 199. but this vitriolic acid is 
again dephlogitticated by the nitrous, which 
then is expelled, and forms the red vapours 
1 the 0 of the een. 
10 1013-192; 9112 
Page 30. C ER 400 


4-1 , 
70 IS, 


1 Our attic bo no whos a that 
the ſaturation vf nitrous acid with phlogiſ- 
on, produces real Fire, as is here aſſerted. 


55. Common Air does not loſt its elaſticity 


by an uiion with nitrous A ir, or the phlogiſ- 
ton of this latter, as Dr. Hales originally 


eonjectured, concurrently with all philoſo- 
phers, both at home and abroad, until Dr. 
Prieſtley clearly ſhewed that common Air bỹ7 
. e e was not only diminiſhed in 


bulk 


an 211 


zul but in.'me/7 alſo, and that the te- 
maining Air was juſt as; elaſtic as ever; 
which has lately been confirmed by 
Mr. Herbert, of Vienna. The red vapour 
' which are ſeen on uniting nitrous Ait with 
common Ait ariſe from a change in the 
proportion of the nitrous acid and phlogiſ- 
ton, relatively to each other, which pro- 
duces a conſequent change in the degree of 
force with which they are united; for the 
colour of all bodies ſeems to depend on the 
degree of attraction with which their con- 
ſtituent parts are united: to each other; as 1 
have found i in numerous inſtances, As ſoon 
as nitrous Air is decompoſed by common 
or dephlogiſticated Air, nitrous vapour is 
produced, which conſiſts entirely of nitrous 
acid and phlogiſton; but theſmaller the pro- 
portion this latter is, the more forcibly it is 
attracted by the acid; and hence the purer 
the common or dephlogiſticated Air is, 
and conſequently the more phlogiſton it 
takes up, the leſs of this phlogiſton re- 
mains with the nitrous acid, and then the 
vapours are exceeding red, as Dr. Prieſtley 
obſerved, Vol. II. p. 41. When the pro- 
n of phlogiſton remaining with the 


| P 2 nitrous 


212 N T 2 8. 


nitrous acid is ſome what greater then 
the force of their attractions is leſſer, 
and the vapours are of an orange colour, 
and when the proportion phlogiſton is {till 
greater, then the united ſubſtances are 


colou#leſs, as is the caſe ot that which is 


ſttictly called Nitrous Air; the conſtituent 
principles of which attract each other ſo 
weakly, that they are eaſily decompoſed 
by all ſubſtances that attract only one of 
them as elementary Air, which attracts 
the phlogiſton only, and water, which at- 
tracts the acid only, as Mr. Fontana has 
ſnewn; ſee his Trat on Nitrous Air, 
Pp. 13. +» The heat produced by the 
union of nitrous and common, or de- 
phlogiſticated Air, ariſes from the ſepara- 
tion of elementary Fire from the latter 
Airs, at the time they take up the phlo- 
giſton of the former, as Mr. Magellan aſ- 
ſerts in conformity to Dr. Crawford's 
theory; the diminution ariſes from the 
ipitation of fixed Air from the com- 

mon or dephlogiſticated Air. 
1 * What Mr. Scheele here calls a AP of 
nitrous Air, is the ſame as what Dr. Prieſt- 
ley calls nitrous vapour; of whoſe phæno- 
mena 


— my — op — 1 Par OB” £2006 


97289838 


N HS ay 


mena he treats at large in his zd and 4th vo- 
lame of Obſervations, and the fame as 
what Mr. Bergman very juſtly calls Phy- 
giſticated Nitrous Acid. Mr. Scheele firſt 
obſerved, that the nitrous acid in nitre ĩs 
phlogiſticated by barely keeping nitre red- 
hot for ſome time, which ſhould ſhew him 
that fixed alkalies might furniſh phlogiſton 
in certain circumſtances, 


. 


T ſhall here endeavour to anſwer the que- 
ries of Mr. Scheele. Is not the peeuliar kind 
of Air by the mediation of which Fire 
burns, and which conſtitutes the third part 
of common Air, introduced into the receiver 
by diſtillation ? That is to fay, is not the 
dephlogiſticated Air in the proceſs men- 
tioned in the laſt ſection, produced by di- 
ſtillation It certainly is ; yet not in the- 
manner in which Mr. Scheele would have 
it, viz. by the penetration of a compound 
of Air and phlogiſton (which according to 
him conſtitutes heat) through the retort or 
crucible, and'a ſubſequent decompoſition of 

oh theſe 


214 Ne Or Fr E 877 

theſe two principles, for in no inſtance does 
it appear that phlogiſton penetrates through 
glats, much leſs a compound of Air and 
phlogiſton; and if Mr. Scheele's notion 
were true, then metallic calces, or at leaſt 
black manganeſe, would be reduced by bare 
heat; for this laſt calx dephlogiſticates ni- 
trous acid, and therefore has a ſtronger 
affinity with phlogiſton than this acid as 
Mr. Bergman aftirms, and therefore heat 
ought as well to be decompoſed by it as by 
nitrous acid, which Mr, Scheele will not 
certainly pretend. 

But the truth is that the nitrous apid is 
itſelf partly decompoſed during the diſtilla- 
tion of Glauber's -ſpirit of nitre, an event 
analogous to ſeveral others ; thus if nitre be 
diſtilled per /e in glaſs veſſels, the greater 
part of the produce is dephlogiſticated Air, 
as Dr, Prieſtley firſt found, 2 Prieſtley, 89. 
and afterwards Mr, Fontana, who found the 
nitre totally alkaline after this operation, 
and fcarce any trace of the nitrous acid in 
the receiver, ſee Rozier's Journal for No- 
vember, 17783 an evident demonſtration 
that the dephlogiſticated Air proceeded 


from that acid, and not from the decompo- 
ſition 


o 
TRY _— 4 


| would have 


Kart 5 4 


ſition of the matter of heat, as Mr. Sheele 
it. 1 paſs over ſeveral other 
inſtances of the decompoſition of the gitrous 
acid in the diſtillation of red precipitate, 
and even of nitrous acid and glaſs, and in 
various other Experiments to be met-with 
in Dr. Prieſtley's Obſervations ; as after 
what has been ſaid, all Further peyote 
would be ſuperfluous. 


Page 34. 


$ 29. 


215 


The Experiment mentioned here has 
been repeated by that very accurate philo- 
ſopher, Mr, Fontana, but without ſuc- 
ceſs; ſuppoling it to be true, it would 
only prove a partial decom polition of the 


nitrous acid, 


Page 35. 


§ 30. 


The apparatus here mentioned by Mr. 
Scheele, is ingenious; but as he obſerves, 
very inadequate to the purpoſe of nice 


diſcrimination ; 


4 


nay, may often lead into 


con- 


216 NOTE 9. 
conſiderable miſtakes, as muſt be very ap- 
parent to any ane converſant in Dr. Prieſt- 
ley's works. * 


Pages 41, 43» 44. 637, 32, 33. 


Dr. Prieſtley has ſhewn in the 4th vo- 
lume of his Obſervations on Air, p. 203, 
that manganeſe diſtilled per /e yields de- 
phlogiſticated Air; it is no wonder then 
it ſhould alſo yield it when diſtilled with 
acids; but the Doctor obſerves, it ſtill con- 
tinues black and unchanged ; whereas, ac- 
eording to our author, it ſhould have AC 
- oy phlogiſton. 


Pages 44» 46, 47- 5 34. 35» 36. 


The Experiments here mentioned, prove 
nothing more than the decompoſition of 
the nitrous acid, and have all been firſt 
made by Dr. Prieſtley, 


Page 


T1 = Sh.” on... foo the r . . SR III . 


N OT E S. 2175 


whoſe general theory is ſo very different 
from that of Mr. Fontana, ſhould ne- 
vertheleſs in this ſection hit upon ex- 
actly the ſame explanation of the reduc- 
tion of the calces of what are called the 
noble metals, and which indeed appears 
to me very ſatisfactory, if we take in 
a circumſtance deducible from the diſ- 
coveries of Dr. Crawford. It was obſerved 
by Mr. Fontana, in his excellent Treatiſe 
on dephlogiſticated Air, that metallic ſalts 
formed by the ſolution of mercury or ſilver, 
in the nitrous acid, contain ſome phlogiſti- 
cated nitrous acid, and a quantity of nitrous 
Air, which increaſes their abſolute weight ; 
on the other hand, Dr. Crawford diſco- 


vered that metallic calces (to which ſtate 


metals are reduced by ſolution) contain 
more elementary Fire than the metals from 
which they proceed. When therefore 
theſe metallic falts are heated to a certain 
degree, the nitrous acid is decompoſed as 
uſual, the metallic calces attract the phlo- 
giſton contained in the nitrous acid, or 

NItFOUS 


— 5 - » 
wo —— — — — — * * . - 
- — — — — = 
ond * 3 — — — - — * 
> of 3 — 
- 2 9 — 83 


. 


* = — -—---- 
= I F-5 = 
CY — = — - — 


218 N O T. E S. 


nitrous Air, and are revivified ; and the Air 
thus dephlogiſticated, attracts the elemen- 
tary Fire in the calces, which is as neceſſary 
to the exiſtence of dephlogiſticated Air, as 
the phlogiſton is to the revivification of the 
calces; thus both phznomena are clearly ex- 
plained. Mr. Scheele in the ſame manner at- 
tributed the revivification of theſe calces to a 
decompoſition of a compound of Air and 
phlogiſton, not pre-exiſting in the metallic 
ſalts, (which yet their increaſe of weight 
and abſorption of Air evidently demon- 
ſtrates) but introduced in the ſhape of heat 
through the pores of the retort ; a ſuppoſi- 
tion totally needleſs. 

In all metallic ſolutions, the incumbent 
Air is in ſome meaſure phlogiſticated, and 
conſequently ſome fixed Air precipitated, 
which is abſorbed by the ſolution ; leſs in- 
deed when the nitrous acid is uſed, than 
when the vitriolic or marine are employed, 
becauſe the nitrous is fo greedy of phlo- 
giſton, that it takes it almoſt all up. The 
fixed Air thus formed, and alſo the phio- 
giſticated Air are in a great meaſure ab- 
ſorbed by the ſolution. Thus Dr. Hales 
has obſerved, that the ſolutions of iron and 


i a 


rr I Bm wwmsntmwsr o 


8 219 
copper in lemon juice, abſorb more Air 
than they produce. 1 


Page 52. § 41. 


The reſtoration of the acid of arſenic to 
the ſtate of white arſenic by mere heat, is 
a very curious diſcovery, entirely due to 
Mr. Scheele, to whom indeed we owe the 
complete knowledge of this mineral. He 
has clearly demonſtrated that it can exiſt 
in three ſtates; that of regulus, when it 
is completely phlogiſticated ; that of a 
white calx, commonly called white arſe- 
nic, when it is in ſome meaſure dephlogiſti- 
cated ; and that of an acid, when it is en- 
tirely ' dephlogiſticated ; and thus removed 
all the obſcurities which the greateſt che- 
miſts had found in treating this ſemi-metal. 
But the Experiment here mentioned, 
proves no more than that during its de- 
phlogiſtication, it had abſorbed ſome phlo- 
giſticated Air, which is decompoſed during 
ſtrong heat, as above ſhewn. If the par- 
tial reſtoration, mentioned by Mr. Scheele, 
had been brought about in the manner he 
pretends, 


220 8 ELK 

pretends, then might the calx itſelf be 
compleatly metallized in the ſame manner, 
which does not happen. 


Page 54. 9 42. 


This Experiment of Mr. Scheeſe's is 
analogous to ſome of Dr. Prieſtley's and 
Mr. Fontana's, which prove the entire 
deſtructibility of dephlogiſticated Air, 
(which is here called empyreal Air) by 
phlogiſtic- proceſſes, or rather its entire 
convertibility into aërial acid, that is, 
fixed Air. The reaſon why common Air 
cannot be ſo far diminiſhed is, ' becauſe 
it does not contain the ſame quantity of 
elementary Fire, as Dr. Crawford has 
ſhewn ; for the hepar parts with its phlo- 
giſton only in proportion as it receives 
elementary Fire from the Air to which it 
communicates phlogiſton; for here a double 
decompoſition takes place. 


Page 


o = wy © mM 6&5 — . nitro wind wat 


%*. ) oY © Doe re 


0 S. 221 


Page 54. 43. 


"What Mr. Scheele here terms foul Air, 
is that which by Dr. Prieſtley has very 
juſtly called phlogiſticated Air; in which 
he has been followed by all other philoſo- 
phers; even Mr. Bergman, though he 
ſeems to have embraced: the ſyſtem of 
Mr. Scheele, in a late tract adopts the ſame 
appellation, by which it would appear as 
if at preſent he had relinquiſhed that hypo- 
theſis; and this Experiment, among others 
I could mention, ſeems to me a full proof 
that fixed Air conſiſts of elementary Air 
and phlogiſton, that phlogiſticated Air is 
for the moſt part an atrial ſulphur, conſiſt- 
ing of fixed Air, ſuperſatutated with phlo- 
giſton; and that in phlogiſtic proceſſes, 
fixed Air is generally generated, and not 
phlogiſticated Air ; ſo that the phlogiſti- 
cated Air that remains after ſuch proceſſes 
pre- exiſted, and was not formed by thoſe 
proceſſes, but that the production of 1 
Air is their . effect. 


Page | 


222 N O r £ 8. 


Page 57. 5 47. 


This Experiment alſo proves what was 
advanced in the foregoing remark, viz. that 
phlogiſticated Air is not produced by what 
are generally called phlagiſtic proceſſes, viz. 
the union of nitrous and elementary Air, the 
calcination and ſolution of metals, reſpita- 
tion, combuſtion, expoſition to ſulphureous 
and phlogiſtic fumes, & c, for a candle would 
burn in this teſiduum, which yet a very 
flight phlogiſtication would prevent it from 
doing. Dephlogiſticated Air and its pro- 
perties were firſt diſcovered by Dr. Prieſtley, 
and its power of promoting combuſtion. a+ 
certained ; he alſo diſcovered in what com- 
buſtion conſiſted, and how far elementary 
Air was neceffary to it; and why Air that 
bad once ſerved for combuſtion, could 
never ſerve again until it was purified ; and | 
the means of its purification; and what 
becomes of the phlogiſton after combuſ- 
tion. He ſhews that combuſtion conſiſts 
in the rapid ſeparation of phlogiſton from 
combuſtibles by Air; that the phlogiſton 


ſo ſeparated, unites to the Air; that atrial | 


N OT E 8. 223 


acid; or fixed Air is then depoſited ; that 
Air after this is leſs ſuſceptible of: g 
up pblogiſton than before, and con: 
quently cannot again ſerve for combuſtion 
until it is purified, and that it is purified 
by agitation in water, or by the proceſs of 
vegetation; all which, to ſay nothing of 
his other theoretic diſcoveries, clearly ſhew 
how little he deſetves the appellation of a 
mere Exper imenter, which he himſelf 
ſometimes modeſtly afſumes, and which. 
ſome others would fondly attribute to him. 
This indeed, I may confidently affirm, that 
without poſſeſſing the common routine of 
chemiſtry, which he every where owns, 
his writings have contributed more to its 
advancement and perfection, than all thoſe 
which have appeared ſince the days of 
Stahl; there remained but one circum- 
ſtance more, the knowledge of which was 
neceſſary to complete the theory of com- 
buſtion; namely, that of the appearance of 
light, and the ſource of the Fire that ap- 
pears in that ſhape; and this knowledge 
bas lately been happily ſupplied by Dr. 
Crawford, who clearly demonſtrates from 
Experiments, as ingenious as irrefragable, 
| that 


224 N OT S8. 
that the Fire then produced to view, proceeds 
from tlie Air, and not from the combuſtible 
ſubſtance ; which, on the contrary, receives 
a great part of it, at the ſame time that it 
communicates phlogiſton; and that de- 
phlogiſticated Air contains more than four 
times the quantity of Fire that common 
Air does; and hence, as well as from its 
ſuperior attraction to phlogiſton, promotes 
combuſtion more powerfully. 


Page 5 69. . | 


1 to che erin und peri- 
ments of Mr. Fontana, the thermometer of 
Fahrenheit at 35, and the barometer at 
29 onerhalf, the weight of this bulk of 
dephlogiſticated Air ſhould be 15, 15 
n and of common Air 1 3, 98 e 


14 8 & ® * 
* 


ollen 51 „ 
Page 61. 6 51. 


Liver of ſulphur is undoubtedly decom- 
poſed by Air, and the decompoſition was 


_ haſtened by increafing its ſurface, and 
conſe- 


Led — — . — 


conſequently heat was produced by the 
phlogiſtication of the Air, as OW ex- 
FG, 7 


Page 652. 8 52. 


Dr. Hales has long ago ſhewn that a 
mixture of filings of iron and water di- 
miniſhes Air; and as iron is evidently de- 
phlogiſticated and ruſted, this exactly co- 
incides with the theory above-mentioned z 
the phlogiſton uniting with the Air. 


Pages 67, 72, 74+ $ 56, 57, 38. 


The queries in this fifty-ſixth ſection 
ſeem to me very little to the purpoſe, and 
the concluſions deduced from them altoge- 
ther groundleſs. 

a. Why is the breath inviſible at the 
diſtance of ſix feet from a Swediſh ſtove 
well heated, though viſible in a cooler at- 
moſphere in ſummer? But has he told us 
the heat that prevails at the diſtance of ſix 
feet from that ſtove? All I know is, that 


2 the 


2 N OT E s. 


the breath is inviſible in the temperature of 
63 degrees, and perhaps at a lower tempe- 
rature. 

6, Why does a candle burn without in- 
terruption, and its ſmoke aſcend perpendi- 
cularly at ſome diſtance from the heated 
ſtove? Becauſe the rarified Air that is not 
oppoſite the entrance of the ſtove, riſes to 
the cieling by the difference of its ſpecific 
gravity, and carries the ſmoke with it. 
c. Heat is not a particular ſubſtance, 
diſtinct from things heated, except by heat, 
the cauſe of heat be meant, that is ele- 
mentary Fire, lodged in bodies, and this 
cannot be carried up through the ſtove, un- 
leſs the hot, bodies can paſs through it; 
and here it is evident, that no hot Air 
can be carried up but that which. is oppo- 
fite the entrance, 

e. This tremulous motion ariſes from 
the effluvia of the heated body, and pre- 
ſents no ſort of difficulty. A Frenchman 
has lately. imagined he ſaw the element of 
Fire aſcend in this manner, but his ima- 
ginations have convinced nobody, at leaſt 
in this country. 


Page 


NO TE S% 229 


Page 5g. 9.60. 


The nature of light is as yet very far 
from being accurately aſcertained ; but to 
me it ſeems very improbable, notwith- 
ſtanding the Experiment here alledged, 
that it is compounded of phlogiſton and 
Fire. Firſt, becauſe of the repulſive na- 
ture of Fire and phlogiſton, diſcovered by 
Dr. Crawford. | 

2dly, Becauſe I cannot find in any other 
inſtance that phlogiſton has the power of 
penetrating ſolid bodies.——3dly, Becauſe 
it would follow by theſe Experiments, that 
the calxes of the perfect metals, and alſo 
dephlogiſticated ſpirit of nitre poſſeſs a 
greater attraction to phlogiſton than the 
other conſtituent part of light does; and if 
ſo, I do not fee why this ſpirit of nitre may 
not be totally phlogiſticated, and theſe me- 
tallic calxes intirely reduced by light. Now 
dephlogiſticated nitrous acid may be turned 
- green, but never red or brown by expoſi- 
tion to light, as I have experienced ; nor is 
the marine dephlogiſticated acid in the leaſt 
altered by it, nor the calx of manganeſe, 


Q, 2 com- 


commonly called black manganeſe, in the 

leaſt diſcoloured, though it attracts phlogiſ- 

ton more ſtrongly than fe nitrous acid, and 

on account of its colour, can imbibe light 
very copioufly. 

If conjecture be allowed, I ſhould rather 
think that /;ght conſiſted in a rapid impulſe 
of elementary Fire, as heat does in the ex- 
ceſs of Fire, contained in the hot body over 
the quantity neceſſary to keep it in an equi- 
librium with thoſe bodies with whoſe 


temperature it is compared. This impulſe 


may poſſibly tend (by reaſon of the repul- 
ſion betwixt Fire and phlogiſton) to ſeparate 
and expel phlogiſton from the bodies that 
are expoſed to it, eſpecially when this ex- 
pulſion is promoted by the attraction of a 
body to which phlogiſton hath a ſtrong 
affinity, as the calxes of the perfect metals 
and dephlogiſticated nitrous acid; and this 
effect, it may petform more readily than 
mere heat can, becauſe heat operates more 
ſlowly, and expands bodies in proportion 
to its quantity, which Ag does not, for 
moon: light collected in a focus, though 
excellively bright, does not affect a ther- 


mometer, as Muſchenbroek affirms; and 


this 


Ba 


r 229 


this expanſion allows the elementary Fire 
ſufficient room without expelling the 
phlogiſton; beſides, let it be conſidered 
that the whole quantity of light that falls 
on any body, is never reflected; part of it 


is therefore imbibed, and the capacity of 


the body for containing it is increaſed, and 
conſequently the phlogiſton is in part ex- 
pelled, by reaſon af their repulſive action 
on each other, 


Page 78. 8 61. 
This calx of filver fill retained fixed Air, 


and alſo nitrous Air ; the light, that is, 
elementary Fire uniting to theſe Airs, ex- 


pelled the phlogiſton, which the calx then 


took up. 


Page 79. 5 62. 


a. The red precipitate always contains 
a certain quantity of the nitrous acid, as 
Bayen has ſhewn; and hence the reduction 


may happen, as above explained. 
Q 3 b. The 


230 NAT N 

5. The calx of gold contains nitrous or 
marine Air, and hence it is reduced as the 
above. TY 

d. By pure nitrous acid, the author 
means the dephlogiſticated colourleſs nitrous 
acid. T'have expoſed this in a phial half 
full, and cloſed with a glaſs ſtopper, to the 
folar light, and in a quarter of an hour 
found it phlogiſticated; but when the phial 
was quite full, this did not happen, though 
I expoſed it two hours to the ſame light. 
It appeared to'me in the firſt caſe, that the 
vapour only was acted upon, being changed 
from white to red ; this vapour was ab- 
ſorbed by the liquor which then became 
greeniſh, In this caſe, the vapour may 
have taken phlogiſton from the Air, whoſe 
capacity for containing Fire was increaſed; 
this I am the more inclined to ſuſpect, be- 
cauſe the more of the bottle was left 
empty, the deeper green the liquor ap- 
peared to me to aſſume, = 


NOTES ay 


Pages $6, $2, 84. F 63, 64, 65. 


All the reductions mentioned in theſe 
ſections are explicable on the principle 
above-mentioned, without having recourſe 
to any phlogiſton contained in light. Our 
Author's Experiments on Manganeſe are 
truly admirable, In his Memoirs, and thoſe 
of Mr. Gahn, to be found amongſt thoſe 
of the Academy of Stockholm, the nature 
of this ſemi-metal, which had baffled the 
efforts of the molt ſkilful chemiſts before 
his time, is clearly ſet forth. 


Y | Page 37. 8 66. 


Mr. Schecle, at the end of this ſection, 
relates a very, curious Experiment, namely, 
that /una cornue is eaſier reduced by the 
violet ray than by any other: this ſeems to 
favour the conjecture |, had advanced in 
my remark on the Goth ſection, for the vio- 
let ray is the moſt refrangible of any there- 
fore the more of it remains, and incorpo- 


Q 4 rates 


232 N O r E s. 


rates with bodies, that is, in this caſe, 
with the marine acid, which therefore 
ſooner parts with its phlogiſton to the calx 
of ſilver. | 


Page 91 $ 67. | 


The earlieſt and moſt curious Experi- 
ments that have been made on this head, 
are thoſe of the celebrated Dr. Franklin, 
and the ſubject has been fince ably proſe- 
cuted by Mr. Cavallo. 


i 


Page 103. 5 72. 


The principal characters of phlogiſton 
ſeem to me to be 1ſt, its ſtrong attraction 
to elementary Air, mineral acids, and me- 
tallic earths, together with the properties 
that reſult to theſe ſubſtances from their 
union with it, ' 

- 2dly, Its repulſion with regard to ele- 
mentary Fire, and Water. 

zdly, The heat which always ariſes from 
its u union with Air, or with any other ſub- 
Fd | ſtance 


NOTES. 233 
ſtance whoſe capacity to contain Fire is 
greater than that of the body from which 
the phlogiſton was transferred. 

Athly, Its properties in its pureſt ſtate ; 
which I take to be that of inflammable 
Air from metals, well waſhed, though it 
cannot be ſaid to be quite pure, as it, even 
after waſhing, contains ſome metallic earth 
in ſolution, by reaſon of the great affinity 
or attraftion they have to each other. 


Page 105, 5 73. 

That metals may conſiſt of an acid and 
phlogiſton is not improbable, beſides the 
arſenical acid here mentioned; we may add, 
that the calxes of antimony, when well de- 
phlogiſticated, are in ſome meaſure ſoluble 
in water; that even quickfilyer imparts 
ſomething to it, that iron and copper ſeem 
to contain an acid, to ſay nothing of ſome 
other of the imperfect metallic ſub- 
ſtances ; but earths, as far as is yet known, 
ſeem rather to be of an abſorbent nature. 

Though the ſparry acid be little known, 
yet it may certainly be ſaid to contain phlo- 
giſton ; ; 


234 N O T 8. 


giſton z for powdered flints make nitre de- 
flagrate. Home, on Agriculture, p. 30. 


Page 105. 6 74. 


It is probable, that beſides the atrial 
acid, different oils eſſentially require diffe- 
rent acids ; the acid of ſugar is the baſis of 
ſome ; and in animal oils, Mr. Crell has 
lately diſcovered a peculiar acid. Many 
of the vegetable acids are alſo known to 
poſſeſs properties eſſentially diſtint from 
each other, 


Page 109. 973. 


By Fire the generality of mankind un- 
derſtand the cauſe of heat, and by hear, 
they underſtand the ſenſation, ſo called, 
or that diſpoſition of bodies that tends. to 
excite that ſenſation in a greater or leſſer 
degree, whether attended with the ſenſa- 
tion of light or not. But philoſophers 
finding that the bounds of ſenſation were 
very: narrow, and its degrees very hard to 

; | be 


ſ 


NOTES. 235 


be meaſured, beſtowed the ſame name on 
the cauſe of a much more unlimited effect, 

namely, that of rarefa@ion ; finding that 
the ſame diſpoſition, which tended in ſame 
degrees of its intenſity to excite Seat, 
tended in all, to excite rare faction. Touch- 
ing the nature of this cauſe they have been 
very much divided ; ſome, as the Engliſh 
philoſophers in general, making it conſiſt in 
a tumultuous or vibratory motion of the 
proper and peculiar parts of the heated 
body; to which opinion, I find the cele- 
brated Mr. Macquer has lately acceded ; 
and it has been ingenioufly ſupported by 
Mr. Lomonſow, in the Memoirs of Peterſ- 
burgh ; others, among whom the great 
Boerhaave is the moſt eminent, have ſup- 
poſed it to be a pecuhar element, diſtinct 
from all other ſubſtances except light, 
which is only a modification. of it. The 
many curious and important difcoveries of 
Dr. Black, and the ſtill later of Dr. Craw- 
ford, reflect the higheſt probability on this 
opinion. An excellent ſummary of theſe 
diſcoveries, with feveral ingenious applica- 
tions of his own, has lately been publiſhed 
in French by Mr, Magellan, who is highly 
deſerving 


236 N O TES. 


deſerving of the oublic gratitude for his 
extraordinary attention to the diffuſion of 
uſeful knowledge. | 
Mr. Wilſon has proved, in an elaborate 
tract, that all phoſphori ſhine by reaſon of 
a ſlow combuſtion ; and Mr. Fontana has 
found that the Bononian phoſphorus i in par- 
ticular, diminiſhes Air. | 


Page 111. $ 76. 


Having refuted the principles of our 
author f in the preceding ſections, 1 ſhall not 
pretend, to rectify his miſtakes in the expla- 
nation of the phænomena, which would 
require a complete treatiſe on the ſubject, 
and more knowledge than I poſſeſs. In 
general, it may be remarked, that a very 
flight alteration will make many of his ex- 
planations conſiſtent; with truth; for he 
aſſerts, that phlogiſton and pure Air com- 
poſe heat; and in truth heat reſults from 
their union; becauſe, as Dr. Crawford has 
proved, elementary Air contains more Fire 
than any known ſubſtance, but by uniting 
with phlogiſton, its capacity for contain- 

ws 


N OT E S. 237 


ing it is diminiſhed, and conſequently 
this Fire is let out, becomes redundant, 
and cauſes ſenſible heat. 


Page 127. 981. 


The inflammation of pyrophori has been 
differently accounted for. Homberg, the 
original inventor, aſcribed the heat to the 
attraction of water by the earth of alum, 
which he had employed in making his 
pyrophorus; but this hypotheſis Mr. 
Suvigny has endeavoured to refute, by 
denying that aluminous earth heats with 


water; and he would have this heat pro- 


ceed from the attraction of the vitriolic 
acid to water. On the other hand, Mr. 
Prouſt has demonſtrated the impoſſibility 
of this effect; as the vitriolic acid cannot 
be tuppoſed in a diſengaged ſtate, while 
the earth of allum is preſent to which it 
has a ſtrong attraction; and Mr, Bewly till 
better, by ſhewing that a pyrophorus may 
be made without any vitriolic acid; and, 
upon the whole, his hypotheſis feems to 
me moſt probable, namely, that charcoal, 
and 


-_ - a 
* — — — T4 1 TEN 
— ———— — EIS — — — _ 3 
— — — - 2 * =! — , 

— — 
- — — 
> -- Y — 2 
- — 
— a — 2 — - 
yr - — — — — - . - * — — * 
— = Ii 
— — — - 


— — — | - 


— —— 


— 
> ——— 
—̃ä— — — — 


— IM === 


- 6.3. 374 3 * 
— — — —— — — 


——— — — — — 
— - — 
— 


— — — _— 
* r 7 


* — — —— 
_ — JI 
2 — — 


2 N O T E 8. 


and a fixed alkali, or chareoal and an ar- 
gillaceous baſis are alone neceſſary for the 

production of a pyrophorus. © Charcoal 
is always neceſſary ; the alkali is only fo 
where the earth is not employed. The al- 
kali, or earth, attracts an exceſs of phlo- 
giſton; this exceſs is taken up by the at- 
moſpheric Air as ſoon as it is expoſed to 
It; the rapid ſolution of it in the Air pro- 
duces the inflammation ; this ſolution is 
accelerated by whatever haſtens the ſepara- 
tion of the phlogiſton from the coal or 
earth; and hence it is promoted by moiſ- 
ture or heat. 

The heat excited by the mixture of oil 
of vitriol and water, proceeds from the 
different quantities of Fire naturally con- 
tained in theſe ſubſtances before mixture, 
though of the ſame temperature ; the 
quantity in oil of vitriol when concentrated 
to a certain degree and dephlogiſticated, I 
have found to be to that of water nearly as 
ſeven to ten; when therefore it combines 
with a certain proportion of water it expels 
from' this latter a certain quantity of Fire, 
which then becomes redundant, and cauſes 
ſenſible heat. DONE 

| The 


* A FE Ss 239 


The Experiments relating to the deſicca- 
tion of Air by quick-lime, and the inflam- 
mation of pyrophorus in cloſe veſſels are 
new and curious. 

Mr. Fontana has given ſome proof that 
neither fixed alkalies nor oil of vitriol ab- 
forb moiſture from the Air in cloſe veſſels. 
See Roxzier's Journal for Jan. 1779. 


Page 137. $ 82. 


This ſection contains, befides a more 
exact account of the nature of fulminating 
gold, and a theory which (with very little 
alteration) may be rendered accurate, a new 
and important diſcovery, namely, the de- 
compoſition of the cauſtic volatile alkali. 
The reigning opinion concerning fulmi- 
nating gold hath hitherto been, that it 
contained a nitro-ammoniacal fait, which is 
known to inflame and explode in a ſmall 
degree of heat; but this opinion has been 
clearly refuted by Mr. Bergman, for he 
proved, 1ſt, that a ſolution of gold in the 
marine or vitriolic acid, if precipitated by: 
a volatile alkali, would produce fulminat- 

ing 


240 NOT D % 


ing gold. 2dly, That fulminating gold 
boiled in diſtilled water does not loſe ity 
fulminating power. gdly, That fulmi- 
nating gold explodes more powerfully after 
it is freed from its adhering ſalts by waſh- 
ing, than before. The Experiments of 
Mr. Scheele go to prove that the calx of 
gold has a greater affinity with volatile al- 
kalies than acids have with either ; this 
calx therefore retains a volatile alkali un- 
til the moment of its reduction ; but then, 
through its ſtronger affinity to phlogiſton, 
it decompoſes the volatil alkali, by ſtrip- 
ping it of its phlogiſton; a ſpecies of Air 
is then ſuddenly produced, which as to the 
properties diſcovered in it by Mr. Scheele, 
xeſembles phlogiſticated Air; the rapidity 
of its production caules the exploſion. at as in 
gunpowder. 


Pages 146, 147. 883, 84. 


I cannot determine the quantity of Air 
abſorbed in this Experiment, as it is un- 
certain whether by guart ſhould be un- 
derſtood that meaſure which the Swedes - 


call 


NOTE 8. 241 


call alſo a quart, and which is equal to half 
of one of dur wine pints, or that which they 
call kanne; which is the word uſed in the 
German copy, from which this tranſlation 
was made, and which exceeds our wine 
gallon, However, it is certain the dimi- 
nution was very inconſiderable; yet Dr. 
Prieſtley hath found it one- ſixth or one- 
fifth. It is very probable that in this caſe 
Air penetrated through the bladder, or 
that ſome was produced by the bread and 
milk. The next Experiment alſo is ex- 
ceeding inaccurate, as it is hardly poſſible 
that ſome Air ſhould not be introduced; 
however, it is remarkable that our author 
found ſome fixed Air, though but one- 
thirtieth, by means of lime-water, which 
he would in vain ſeek for, if it had not 
been generated by breathing. 


Page 148. 0 85. 


In theſe Experiments, Mr. Scheele finds 
that flies and bees die after ſome days in 
confined Air. Dr. Prieſtley has found, on 
the other hand, that inſets can live in 

8 R putrid 


%% N 5 TE 


putrid Air; perhaps in Mr. Scheele's Ex- 
periment they died for want of nouriſh- 
ment, which confined animals often refuſe. 
However, the quantity of Air diminiſhed, 
is very temarkable, it probably proceeds 
from the metion of theſe inſects, which 
enable them to phlogiſticate it thtoughout; 
for Mr. Keir has found that only the Air 
contiguous to an animal is infected, and that 
a candle will burn in a more diſtant part 
of the ſame Air, and above the animal; 
which ſhews that fixed Air only is formed 
by reſpiration, and not phlogiſticated Air; 
for this latter, being ſpecifically lighter 
than common Air, ſhould be found over it. 


Page 149. 586. g 


That vegetation hath a power of me- 
liorating common Air is very evident 
from the Experiments of Dr. Prieſtley, 
fee Vol. IV. p. 300; but that there are 
circumſtances which impede its ſalutary 
action is no leſs certain, though they be 
not all as yet well known ; according to 


Dr. In- 


NOTES 243 


Dr. Ingenhouz, light and darkneſs have 
yppoſite effects in this caſe, the ſormer 
promoting, the latter impeding. this ame- 
lioration; however, the great quantity of 
atrial acid produced in Mr. Sheele's Ex- 
periment, ſeems to me to proceed uy 
from the fermentation of the peas, whic 

always precedes their ſprouting, and partly 
from the phlogiſton emitted during the fer- 
mentation, The remainder quenched a 
2 becauſe it was phlogiſticated Air. 


Page 152. $ 89. 8 


T be teciptocal effects of Air and blood 
dn each other, have been happily aſcer- 
tained by Dr. Prieſtley, i in the third volume 
of his Obſervations ; he has there ſhewn 
that red blood is freer from phlogiſton 
than black blood. That the former dephlo- 
giſticates i in ſome meaſure nitrous; inflam= 
mable, phlogiſticated, and fixed Air, and 
then becomes black: that the latter phlo- 
giſticates common and dephlogiſticated 
Air, and then becomes red, particularly 


when the latter of theſe Airs is uſed; 
8 and 


244 r 

and hence inferred the true uſe of reſpita- 
tion to conſiſtin the dephlogiſtication of 
blood, which he proved that Air could ef- 
fect, even through the membranes of the 
lungs, and through ſerum. A diſcovery of 
the greateſt importance to medicine as well 
as to the general ſcience of nature, 


Page 155. $ 92. 


That vegetables will not thrive in de- 
phlogiſticated Air has alſo been obſerved 
by Dr. Prieſtley ; who even diſcovered that 
many of them emit dephlogiſticated Air in 
certain circumſtances, as an excrementi- 
tious ſubſtance, which diſcovery has been 
confirmed by Dr. Ingenhouz. Yet it is 
not improbable that in other circumſtances 
dephlogiſticated Air may be converted by 
them into fixed Air, as Mr. Scheele aſſerts. 


Page 156. $94 
The conſequences here drawn by Mr. 


Scheele are much too general, Vegetables 
evidently 


N: Or Y RN. 245 
evidently thrive better in phlogiſticated, 


than in pure Air. Dephlogiſticated Air 


cannot be looked upon as an acid united to 
phlogiſton, ſince it affords no marks of 
either, particularly the latter; it is much 
more probable that vegetables derive their 


phlogiſton from phlogiſticated Air, than 


from light or heat, as neither of theſe can 
be ſaid to contain it, as already ſhewn. 
Light certainly promotes the dephlogiſtica- 
tion of Air, but it is probably by means of 
a double decompoſition ; light uniting to 
the Air and increaſing its quantity of Fire, 
while the phlogiſton unites to vegetables, 
as explained in my remark on the 6oth 
ſection. 


That the lungs do change ampyweel — 


dephlogiſticated Air into atrial acid, is 
very evident by breathing it into lime 
water, which is ſoon made turbid. 

It is hard to fay how. inflammable Air 
could have been reſpired fo often by Mr. 
Scheele without inconvenience, and how 
it has happened in this Experiment, that 
it loſt its inflammability; for not only 
Dr. Prieſtley, but all others who have ex- 
perienged its effects on animals, have found 


R 3 u 


— T =>” 2 2 5 . P 
We fo "EE 
bh — —— 


— 2 
— 


ou _ 
. — 
— — — = 
— * 


— — 


« — — — — — — — — 
— * — ; — 7 — © 
m ao a. . — 
— — — — 
= - r a: yp — - 
— = _ —— 


— A 12 


— —H— — no 


——— 


— 


—— — — 


246 N O T E 8. 


it deleterious; and alſo, that after animals 
had died in it; it ſtill remained inflam- 
mable. Mr, Fontana has indeed ſhewn, 
that when the lungs are not entirely emp- 
tied of the Air they naturally contain, in- 
flammable Air may be breathed for ſome 
time with impunity, hut that it cannot, 
when the lungs are entirely emptied; yet 
Mr. Scheele ſays, that even in this an» 
ner he has reſpired it ten times. 

The Experiments of Dr. Prieſtley; rela- 
tire to filings of iron, water and ſulphur, 
expoſed to fixed Ait, prove only that fixed 
Ait was rendered immiſcible with water, 
but not that it was turned into common 
Air; it appears rather to have been in part 
converted into phlogiſticated Air, by the 
ſuperſaturation of the atrial acid with phlo- 
giſton. See his Ohſervatians. Vol. J. 
p- 42, &&. 

Mr. Scheele ſays, lie failed in oe. 
ing inflammable and phlogiſticated Air, 
(which he calls foul Air) by agiration in 
water, but his failure evidently aroſe from 
his-agitating theſe Airs in water, which 
won na Eammunication with the at- 
of mwmaoſphere; 


NOTE S. 247 


| oſphere ; whereas Dr. Prieſtley. always 
8 cceeded by attending to this circum- 


ſtance. 


Page 163. 8 94 


The reſult of the fict Experiment here 
mentioned agrees with that which Dr. 
Prieſtley alſo found, Vol. I. p. 158. by 
which it clearly, appears that water at- 
tracis che dephlogiſticated part of common 
Air preferably to the phlogiſticated part. 
The ſecand Experiment is rather contrary 
to his trials, for he found, that even in- 
flammahle Air is in ſome meaſure abſorbed 
by water, out of which its own Air was 
boiled, Vol. III. p. 267. The third Ex- 
perimens is confirmed by Mr. Fontana, 
Dr. Prieſtley obferycd, that pump-water 
yielded dephlogiſticated Air, by mere ex- 
poſure to ſun-ſhine. 

The manner in which Mr. Scheele diſ- 
covers dephlogiſticated Air in water, is 
truly ingenious. The remainder of this ſec- 
tion contains new and important truths, 
and happily explains why water diſtilled 


| eyen io laß veſſels F the Al 


248 NOTES. 
which it is expoſed, as Dr. Prieſtley has 
remarked, 


Page 168. I 25. 


After what has been already faid of the 
nature of heat, it is unneceſſary to follow 
| Mr. Scheele in the detail of the Experi- 
ments here mentioned; it is ſufficient to 
obſerve, that the pureſt water contains 
more of what he calls heat, than any of 
the ſubſtances he mentioned, as Dr. Craw- 
ford has proved at large; and ſurely with- 
out oyerturning all our ideas, it cannot be 
faid to contain more acid; but by a flight 
alteration in the expreſſion, all the phæno- 
mena here mentioned, may be eaſily ex- 
plained conſiſtently with the ſyſtem of 
Pr. Black and Dr. Crawford, 


Page 178. $ 96. 


The vety reverſe of the maxim here laid 
down by Mr. Scheele, namely, that metals 
Lontaig ſo much more heat, as they e con- 


tain 


monſtrably proved by Dr. Crawford. 
Dr. Prieſtley has extracted inflammable 
Air from metals in cloſe veſſels full of 


part of Mr. Scheele's ſyſtem, 


Page 186, 8 97+ 


The Air treated of i in this ſection was 
firſt diſcovered by Mr. Scheele, nor does 
it appear to have been as yet inveſtigated 
by any other philoſopher it ſeems to be a 
ſolution of ſulphur in. none or marine 
xcid Air. 14 


tain more phlogiſton, has ſince been de- 


quickfilver, which directly overturns this 


—. 
— 


_ 7 A 
41% 


. 
4 4 , # ? 
* , 4 . % þ 112144 *E * 
* 0 
”® Þ 6 * , 
wif 1404 87 * r 5 ' 0 +. — 
5 E | 5 5 | 'T 3 E R "Wis &; 
- — pe s * 
19 917 2 * p \ ## » * 2 PIR Pry 
= + Da &ft + £* ff - * 7 . N I - * 
. « * 
. 9 4 * * . . * 
„ " «© 5 Wo, * SS ”'% * , a £4.24 ; * . . 


- 
* 
32 


To RICHARD KIRWAN, Eg. 


Dear Sis, | 
F mycte en aue i you 
1 for the Notes Wick! at my requeſt, 
you have been ſo obliging as to write on 
this work of Mr. Scheele, I was very 
defirons tHat a (treatiſe of one of the firſt 
. chemiſts in Europe, on a ſubject in which 
he has been a fellow-labourer with myſelf, 
ſhould be eaſily underſtood in this coun- 
try; and as 1 was ſenſible that many 
things in it would want illuſtration, and 
probably ſome correction, a mere tranſla- 
tion, however well executed, would not 
be ſufficient. I am far from pretending ta 
a complete knowledge of chemiſtry, but 
Dr. Forſter's tranſlation, and your Notes 
together, ſeem to have anſwered all my 
wiſhes; and all that I have to add, are a 


few obſervations on ſome points of differ- 
ence 


(. 251 I» | 


ende between Mr, Scheele and myſelf, 


with illuſtrations from ſome of my late un- 
publiſhed Experiments, 
Mr. Scheele always found that when he 
expoſed fixed Air to iron filings and brim- 
ſtone, it was almoſt wholly abſorbed by 
by that mixture; whereas, I had found, 
(Vol, I. p. 41.) that after this proceſs, a 
conſiderable proportion af the fixed Air 
was immiſcible with water, though not 
rendered fit for reſpiration, as he, by a 
miſtake of my meaning, ſays. | 
On this I would obſerve, that the act 
was exactly as I repreſented it; but I now 
think that I was miſtaken with reſpect to 
the cauſe. In the trials which I then 
made with this mixture, whether in water, 
or in vacuo, no Air of any kind was pro- 
duced; but I have ſince found, that by 
allowing it more time, inflammable Air is 
yielded by it; though when a conſiderable 
quantity of common Air is expoſed to it, 
it is Gmply phlogiſticated by the proceſs, 
and nothing inflammable is found in it. | 
In other proceſſes, alſo, in which reſpir- 
able Air is ſimply phlogiſticated, I have 
found that when it is made in quickſilver, 
| or 


* * 


6252) 
or water, without any Air, a ſmall quan- 
tity of inflammable Air has been produced; 
ſo that when inflammable Air is generated 
very flowly, and has immediate acceſs to a 
ſufficient quantity of reſpirable Air, it is de- 
compoſed as it is formed, the phlogiſton 
incorporating with reſpirable Air; whereas, 
if a large quantity of inflammable - Air be 
mixed with common Air, they will con- 
tinue together a very long time, without | 
much affecting each other. 

I was led to theſe obſervations, by in- 
quiring into the cauſe of the ſeeming con- 
verſion of nitrous Air into inflammable 
Air, mentioned in the laſt volume of my 
Experiments. For uſing leſs and leſs 
nitrous Air, and at laſt none at all, I fo 
that inflammable Air was continually, 
though ſlowly, produced from the iron 
filings and brimſtone; and this Air being 
in time mote in quantity than the nitrous 
Air, (which itſelf becomes mere phlo- 
giſticated Air by long ſtanding in water) 
the reſult of the whole proceſs was a A 
ſtrong inflammable Air. 

You have yourſelf very well obſerves: the 
difference between the methods in which 
Mr. Scheele 


( 253 ) 
Mr. Scheele and myſelf agitated both phlo- 
piſticated and inflammable Air in water, 
in conſequence of which we had different 
reſults. 

The fact of the purification of reſpirable 
Air by vegetation, which Mr. Scheele de- 
nies, has been ſo fully proved, that I ſhall 
only inform you and our readers of what I 
had obſerved before the publication of 
Dr. Ingenhouz's book on that ſubject. At 
the time of the publication of my laſt vo- 
Iume, I had obſerved that a green matter, 
which I then ſuppoſed to have been de- 
poſited by the water, yielded a great quan- 
tity of very pure Air when expoſed to /ig hf, 
but that mere warmtb had no ſuch effect 
upon it. TI at firſt ſuſpected this green 
matter to be a plant, but not being able to 
diſcover any thing like the form of a plant 
by a microſcope, I continued to call it ſim- 
ply green matter, Several of my friends, 
however, who were better ſkilled in botany, 
never entertained any doubt of its being 
a plant ; and preſently after the publication 
of that volume, I had 'myſelf the cleareſt 
proof, that though I could not diſcover 
the lineaments of a plant, it muff neceſſa- 

rily 


{ 234 ) 


rily. be a vegetable ſubſtance. Imme⸗ 
diately u upon this, I tried other plants that- 
row wholly in water, and found that all 
of them, without exception, produced the 
Haine effect, yielding, when placed in the 
light, and eſpecially in that of the ſun, a 
certain quantity of the pureſt Air. This 
proceſs, however, as in that of the green 
matter, always had its ſimits, never ex- 
ceeding one tenth, or at the moſt one 
eighth of the capacity of the veſſel in 
which it was made. 
a The quantity of Air thus produced, 
bearing a certain proportion to the quan- 
tity of water, I was ſatisfied it muſt be the 
water, or ſomething contained in the wa- 
ter, that furniſhed the materials for this 
pure Air; and this I aſcertained by 
changing the water after the production of 
Air had ceaſed. For the moment that the 
ſame plants, which now yielded no Air at 
all, even in the ſun, were put into a quan- 
tity of freſh water of the ſame kind, they 
immediately yielded Air as briſkly and in 
as great a quantity as before; but after 
this, the production of Air ſtopped ill the 


water was changed again. 


That 


6253) 


That it was the Air contained in the 
Water, and not the water ice, that fur - 
withed the matetials for this pure Air, I 
found by examining the Air contained in 
the water before and after this proceſs. 
For expelling Air by heat from the DO 
water which had not been uſed in this | 


manner, I found it to be either of the 
ſtandard of common Air, or ſomething be- ö 
low it ; but when this water had been 
iuſed in this manner, that is, when it had 
been expoſed to the action of the plants 
and of the ſun, it yielded the pureſt Air; 

| 


this being ſtill retained in the water after 

a confiderable quantity more than could 

be contained in it - had been diſengaged 
from it, and lodged on its ſurface. This | 
pure Air alſo contained in the water was ö 
in much greater quantity than the impure 
Air contained in it before. For as pure g 
Air is diminiſhed whenever it is phlogiſti- 
cated, ſo, on the contrary, the quantity is 
encreaſed when it is dephlogiſticated. 

The action of theſe plants therefore be- 
ing to dephlogiſticate the Air contained in ö 
water in which they grow, I imme- | 
diately concluded, that 4% plants, growing 

in | 


( 236 ) 
in water, or out of water, müſt putify 
the Air to which they have acceſs, when« 
ever they are placed in a ſufficiently ſtrong 
light, and therefore that there could be no 
room to entertain any doubt with reſpect 
to my firſt obſervations on this ſubject, 
though at that time I was ignorant how 
much. /ight had to do in the buſineſs. 

- T alſo found that ſome plants growing in 
Air, produced this effect in a ſmall degree 
when they. were put into water, though 
this - not being- their natural element, they 
could not bear it long; but I did not ſuſ- 
pe that leaves alone would retain fo much 
life as to produce this effect, when ſepa- 
rated from the plants, until I ſaw Dr. In- 

genhouz's book, which abundantly proves it, 

and which I had a great pleaſure in peruſing, 
notwithſtanding ſome miſtakes he has been 
led into, and which I know I ſhall give 
him pleaſure in rectifying in my next pub- 
lication on this ſubject. Some of them J 

mentioned to him in perſon afterwards. 
You have, I perceive, adopted the opi- 
nion, that phlogiſton converts atmoſpheri- 
cal Air into fixed Air, in which I cannot 
ſay that I am at preſent diſpoſed to agree 
| with 


2 


* 
* 


( 257 ) 

with you. I have, indeed, been inclined 
to think that fixed Air may be a factitious 
ſubſtance, and have deſcribed ſome pro- 
ceſſes in which I thought I procured it in 
confiderable quantities from materials which 
had not been ſuppoſed to contain it; and 
thence I was led to ſuſpect that the appear- 
ance of it, even in the phlogiſtication of 
common Air might be occafioned by a real 
production of it, though 1 had no conjec- 
ture concerning the immediate cauſe of 
that production. But, upon the whole, I | 
am inclined to think that all the fixed Air | 
that is diſcovered in this caſe, is nothing | 
more than that which is naturally contained | 
in, and incorporated with, the atmoſpheri- 
cal Air; and therefore that it is merely | 
precipitated by the phlogiſtication of that 
Air. 

I think that if phlogiſton be capable of 
converting any part of a maſs of Air into 
fixed Air, it might make the fame change 
in the whole of it, which is never the cafe ; 
and no more fixed Air is produced in phlo- 
giſtic procefles than the common Air may 
be ſuppoſed to contain. That it does con- 
tain ſome ſeems to be evident from the pre- 

8 cipitation 


( 258 |) 

cipitation of lime in lime-water, fimply ex- 
poſed to the common Air. I was engaged 
in a courſe of Experiments, which I think 
calculated to decide this queſtion, when 
my late tedious illneſs, and the change of 
my fituation, with the conſequent inter- 
ruption of all my Experiments for almoſt 
the whole of this ſummer, prevented the 

completion of them. 
Mr. Scheele explains the phænomenon 
of fulminating gold, by ſuppoſing a gene- 
ration of Air, to which he gives the pro- 
perties of phlogiſticated Air. Now, when- 
ever I have thought upon the ſubject, ſince 
the diſcovery of alkaline Air, I have had no 
doubt but that the exploſion of that ſub- 
ſtance muſt be occaſioned by the ſuddenly 
ſetting looſe a quantity of that kind of Air ; 
and becauſe a much greater quantity of 
this Air may be contained in many ſub- 
ſtances than of fixed Air; and alſo becauſe 
the whole of it may perhaps be reſtored to 
its elaſtic ſtate more nearly at the ſame time, 
this exploſion is greater than that which is 
made by the puluis fulminans, or any other 
compoſition into which merely fixed Air 
enters. The ſame ſolution has likewiſe oc- 
We curred 


( 259 ) 


curred to other perſons ſince the diſcovery 
of alkaline Air; and I even fully intended 
to have mentioned this ſolution in two of 
my laſt publications on the ſubject of Air, 
but it eſcaped my memory at the time. 

Your partiality to me is too apparent in 
the courſe of your Notes; however, I am 
truly ſenſible of the value of that friendſhip 
from which the partiality proceeds ; and 
am, with much reſpec, 


Dear Sir, 
Your obliged humble ſervant, 


J. PRIESTLEY. 


London, Aug, 1780. 


* 
. . ͤö Ä —— 


Yut Publiſhed, 


Printed for J . J OHN $0N, No. 72, St. Paul's 
Church - Yard: 


1. Experiments and Obſervations on different 
Kinds of Air, in 4 Volumes, Octavo, 
Frice 11. 48. in Boards, or 11. 8s. Bound. 


a, A 2 Introduction to the Study of 
9 - 24 Edit. 8 vo. Price 2s. 6d. 


f 3. The H N an] Preſent State of Elec- 
tricity, wü «a I KB, Experiments, 3d, 
Edition, in O e 11. 1. or in 

2 Vols. Octavo. Bound. 


4 The Hiſtoty of Diſcorsfteb- 


ies elating to 
Viſion, Light, and Colours, with Cop- 
per-plates, 2 Vols. 4to. Price 11. 16s, 
Bound. | 


5. A Familiar Imroduction to Perſpective, 
Bvo, Price 5s. in Boards. 


The above by Joſeph Prieſtley, L. L. D. F. R. S. 


6. Eſſays Phyſical and Chemical; containing 
a Hiſtory of the Diſcoveries relating to 
Fixed Air, from Paracelſus to the 
Preſent Time. To which are added, 

Original Experiments. Tranſlated from 
the French of M. Lavoiſiere. By 


Thomas Henry, F.R.S. 


7. Eſfays on - Phyſiological Subjects. By 
| J. Elliot. Price 1s. 6d. 
CAN JHESTER 


UNIVERSITY. 
LIBRARY
