Riddles of the Sphinx: A Study in the Philosophy of Evolution
F. C. S. Schiller (1891)
========================================================================

PROVENANCE NOTE (Tower of Babel staging): F. C. S. Schiller's Riddles of the Sphinx (1891) — the founding manifesto of humanist pragmatism, first issued as by 'A. Troglodyte'.

========================================================================

RIDDLES  OF  THE  SPHINX


%  Stubg  in  i^t  ^l^ilosDp^g  oi  (Sfaolution


A TROGLODYTE,  ps-ec^^  • /-.
[  F.  C.  S. Sc-kiLle  r]


KOI  TOP  fTTiXfi'PovvTa  Xvciv  Te  Kai  avdyeiv,  et  ttus  ew  rais
Xfp<Ti  SvpaivTO  XajSeii',  (cai  drroKreiveiav  av.

Plato,  Republic,  517  a


SWAN SONNENSCHEIN & CO
PATERNOSTER SQUARE , , .,
1891


trr-^.


CORNELL >^
UNJVLRS!TY^


/v.  4  5^y^


Butler  &  Tanner,

The  Selwood  Printing  Womcs,

Frome,  and  London,


F.  S.  N.,

HIS FELLOW  -  PRISONER IN THE CAVE,

THE AUTHOR INSCRIBES THIS BOOK,

IN THE  HOPE  THAT FROM HIS MIND  ALSO IT MAY EXPEL

SOME  OF  THE SHADOWS  AND  PHANTOMS

THAT BESET  THE LIFE  OF ONE

NOT YET PERMITTED TO BEHOLD

THE LIGHT OF  TRUTH.


ERRATUM.
Page  52,  note. For  "Mahaffy's  trans,  p.  47,"  read  "§  46,  p.  124."


PREFACE.


It  is  the  privilege  of  a  preface  that  it  enables  the
author  to  deprecate  some  misconception  of  the
scope  and  tendencies  of  his  work  by  a  preliminary
explanation.  And  this  privilege  is  doubly  valu-
able when  the  author  has  to  excuse  himself  for
writing  a  book  upon  subjects  of  the  highest  human
interest.  For  he  feels  that  it  is  no  adequate  excuse
to  plead  that  the  condition  of  philosophy  is  such
that  his  efforts  cannot  make  it  worse,  and  still  less
that  the  conclusions  to  which  he  has  been  led  by
many  years  of  reflection  may  present  some  degree
of  novelty.  He  knows  that  real  or  apparent  novelty
is  the  greatest  obstacle  to  success,  even  in  this  most
progressive  century,  and  that  the  mental  attitude
which  was  ever  eager  "  to  hear  some  new  thing "
is  as  extinct  as  the  "  Attic  salt "  which  seasoned  the
disputations  of  the  ancient  philosophers.  And  the
more  fundamental  the  ideas  are,  upon  which  change
is  alleged  to  be  necessary,  the  more  violent  is  the
resistance  with  which  novel  doctrines  are  resented.
There  is  no  subject,  therefore,  on  which  mankind  is
more  conservative,  and  more  uiiintelligently  con-
servative, than  metaphysics,  and  a  novelty  in  meta-
physics is  met  as  coldly  as  a  novelty  in  fashions  is
welcomed  warmly.  So  far,  then,  from  priding  him-
self upon  his  novelty,  the  author  would  rather  hope


VI  PREFACE.


that  he  has  not  carried  innovation  to  a  pitch  too
audacious,  and  has  made  it  sufficiently  clear  that  his
principles  are  either  ancient  principles  which  he  has
revived,  or  commonly  current  principles  which  he
has  worked  out  to  their  logical  conclusions,  and
cleared  of  the  inconsistencies  which  ordinarily  deface
them.

It  is  not  upon  the  ground  of  novelty  that  the
author  would  base  his  appeal  for  indulgence,  but
rather  upon  two  wholly  different  facts.

To  the  more  or  less  technical  public  of  those
who  love  philosophy  for  its  own  sake  and  study  it
irrespective  of  its  results,  as  one  of  the  finest  and
most  salutary  disciplines  of  the  mind,  he  would
appeal  because  he  believes  that  the  experience  of
the  last  sixty  years  must  have  generated  in  their
minds  an  unavowed  but  deep-seated  and  wide-
spread distrust  of  and  disgust  with  the  methods
which  have  starved  philosophy  in  the  midst  of
plenty,  and  condemned  it  to  sterility  and  decay  in
the  very  midst  of  the  unparalleled  progress  of  all
the  other  branches  of  knowledge.  Can  they  really
believe  that  a  science  is  on  the  right  path,  which
in  the  opinion  of  its  most  authoritative  exponents
"  has  made  no  substantial  advance  since  Hegel,"
and  which  meets  the  advances  of  the  other  sciences
by  an  attitude  of  querulous  negation  ?  Our  philo-
sophers have  given  more  or  less  intelligible  reasons,
mostly  in  the  form  of  voluminous  commentaries  on
their  predecessors,  for  their  inability  to  accept  a
scientific  interpretation  of  things  which  was  so  un-
duly neglectful  of  this  or  that  technical  distinction,
laid  down  by  Hegel,  or  Kant,  or  Thomas  Aquinas,
or  Aristotle.  But  though  they  have  abounded  in
endless  criticisms  of  one  another  and  of '  the  scien-


PREFACE.  VU

tists,  they  have  not  found  it  possible  to  inform
us  what  interpretation  they  themselves  would  put
upon  the  world  in  the  light  of  modern  discoveries.
Where  is  the  cultivated  reader  to  go  for  a  positive
statement  of  the  philosophic  view  of  the  world,  for
an  exposition  of  modern  metaphysics,  and  for  an
explanation  of  their  bearing  on  the  problem  of  life
in  its  modern  shape  ?

It  was  the  sense  of  this  want,  of  the  absence  of
any  interpretation  of  modern  results  in  the  light  of
ancient  principles,  which  prompted  the  author  to
give  what  is  substantially  2l  philosophy  of  Evolution^
the  first  perhaps  which  accepts  without  reserve  the
data  of  modern  science,  and  derives  from  them  a
philosophical  cosmology,  which  can  emulate  the
completeness  of  our  scientific  cosmogonies.  He
believes  that  quite  apart  from  professed  philoso-
phers, there  exists  a  large  and  growing  body  of
men,  who  are  interested  to  know  "what  it  all
comes  to,"  who  are  impressed  by  the  mystery  of  the
claim  made  on  behalf  of  philosophy,  and  yet  re-
pelled by  the  fragmentariness,  the  unattractive  form
and  the  inconclusiveness  of  modern  philosophy.
Thus  there  exists  a  great  deal  of  philosophic  inter-
est which  is  baffled  by  the  difficulties  of  the  subject,
a  great  deal  of  philosophic  reflection  which  comes
to  nothing,  or  still  worse,  leads  only  to  confusion,

^  Of  course,  in  speaking  of  the  attitude  of  the  philosophers
proper  towards  scientific  data,  writers  like  Mr.  Herbert  Spencer
are  excluded.  For  he  is  just  a  typical  representative  of  modern
ideas  which  have  failed  to  obtain  due  notice  at  the  hands  of  the
metaphysicians.  In  von  Hartmann's  case  there  is  indeed  no
disputing  the  reality  of  the  old  metaphysics,  but  their  juncture
with  the  new  ideas  of  Evolution  is  too  superficial,  and  the  latter
have  not  been  able  substantially  to  affect  the  character  of  the
former  (cp.  ch.  x.  §  1 1,  note).


via  PREFACE.

for  lack  of  the  most  ordinary  facilities  for  studying
the  subject.  It  is  with  a  view  to  affording  these,
and  in  the  hope  that  his  book  may  be  found  not
only  a  contribution  to  modern  philosophy,  but  use-
ful also  as  an  introduction  to  its  study,  that  the
author  has  avoided  needless  technicalities,  and  as
far  as  possible  explained  their  use  on  their  first
appearance.  And  to  some  extent  the  same  motive
has  led  him  to  treat  his  subject  in  the  order  which
it  assumes  to  the  individual  mind  as  it  sets  out  on
its  explorations.  By  setting  out  from  the  anti-meta-
physical agnosticism  of  ordinary  men,  it  starts  with
a  stock  of  ideas  which  are  more  familiar  to  men
than  the  fundamental  conceptions  of  metaphysics,
which  come  last  in  the  order  of  discovery.  And  at
the  same  time  this  arrangement  brings  out  more
clearly  the  natural  dialectic  of  the  soul,  and  the
necessity  of  the  process  which  impels  it,  step  by
step,  from  the  coarsest  prejudice  and  crassest  "  fact,"
towards  the  loftiest  ideals  of  metaphysics.  But  an
adequate  defence  of  the  plan  of  the  book  maybe
made  also  on  its  intrinsic  merits.  It  is  written  not
only  in  the  order  which  is  likely  to  be  most  palat-
able to  the  ordinary  reader,  but  also  in  the  order
which  is  natural  both  to  human  thought  and  to  the
course  of  the  world,  -which  is  required  by  its  induc-
tive method  of  philosophizing  (ch,  vi.  §  2),  the  order
in  which  it  took  shape  in  the  author's  brain,  and  the
order  which  is  most  worthy  of  the  dignity  of  the
subject.  For  by  representing  the  course  of  the
argument  as  a  sort  of  philosophical  Pilgrim's  Pro-
gress, it  most  emphatically  asserts  the  vital  import-
ance of  the  points  at  issue.

And  yet,  of  course,  the  author  is  well  aware  that
his  order  is  not  devoid  of  countervailing  disadvan-


PREFACE.  IX

tages.  It  makes  him  liable,  e.g.,  to  verbal  contradic-
tions between  the  earlier  and  more  imperfect  adum-
brations of  a  conception,  and  the  clearer  and  more
perfect  grasp  which  is  possible  only  later  on,  i.e.,  it
rpnders  it  necessary  to  read  the  earlier  to  some
extent  in  the  light  of  the  later  assertions.  This
danger  it  has  been  attempted  to  minimize  by  a
frequent  use  of  cross-references.  And,  secondly,
it  was  unfortunately  impossible  to  avoid  a  good  deal
of  technical  discussion  in  chapters  ii.  and  iii.,  in  the
refutation  of  Agnosticism  and  the  establishment
of  Scepticism  :  all  that  could  be  done  was  to  warn
the  non-technical  reader  of  what  to  omit  by  means
of  the  analysis  of  the  argument.

As  to  the  remaining  points  which  might  seem
to  require  explanation,  the  author  must  refuse  to
apologize  for  what  may  seem  the  romantic,  character
of  some  of  his  conclusions.  For  romance  is  a  rela-
tive term,  and  for  his  part  he  would  often  be  inclined
to  agree  with  the  uninitiated  public  in  looking  upon
some  of  the  most  ordinary  assertions  of  the  dullest
every-day  philosophy  as  the  wildest  and  most  per-
nicious romance.  And  in  any  case,  no  apology
should  be  needed  for  the  romance  of  philosophy  in
an  age  which  has  rightly  learned  to  appreciate  "  the
fairy  tales  of  science."  If  truth  seems  stranger  than
fiction,  it  is  because  we  have  previously  abased  our
minds  to  the  level  of  superstitions  none  the  less
fictitious  for  being  unpoetical.

The  attitude  of  "  Riddles  of  the  Sphinx"  to  the
established  religion  is  a  subject  more  important  and
more  difficult,  and  it  would  be  presumptuous  to
attempt  any  forecast  of  its  reception.  But  its  author
may  sincerely  claim  that  its  relation  to  Christianity  is
one  of  complete  independence,  aiid  even  that  it  was


X  PREFACE.


intended  rather  for  the  deniers  and  doubters  of
religious  truth.  And  this  was  all  the  more  possible
that  on  the  whole  the  discussion  dealt  with  subjects
upon  which  religious  tradition  was  silent,  or  dis-
cussed them  on  planes  so  different  that  their  re-
spective assertions  could  hardly  come  into  contact.
Nevertheless,  whenever  the  conclusions  a:rrived  at
coincided  with  those  of  religion,  this  has  been
frankly  admitted.  But  in  no  case  has  this  coinci-
dence been  quoted  as  an  authority,  or  taken  the
place  of  independent  argument.  Neither,  on  the
other  hand,  has  the  author  concealed  his  disagreer
ment  with  certain  widely  prevalent  religious  views,
such  as,  e.g.,  that  as  to  the  infinity  of  the  Deity.
But  he  has  been  at  pains  to  point  out  that  the  views
he  combats  have  not  been  unambiguously  asserted  by
the  Christian  Church,  and  that  they  are  incompat-
ible with  the  spirit  of  all  religion.  He  trusts,  there-
fore, that  rather  than  impugn  the  orthodoxy  of  a
philosophy  whiph  contains  no  doctrine  inconsistent
with  the  principles  of  religion,  theologians  will
find  it  possible  to  put  such  an  interpretation  upon
the  dogmas  in  question  as  will  at  length  reconcile
faith  with  reason.

Instead  of  hastily  condemning  verbal  divergencies
from  the  wording  of  the  Athanasian  Creed,  let  them
reflect  rather  whether  it  is  not  wiser  to  meet  in  a
conciliatory  spirit  the  well-meant  efforts  of  a  philo-
sophical theory  which  may  sincerely  claim  that  its
metaphysics  enable  it  to  grant  to  religion  the
substance,  though  not  the  shadow  of  its  demands^
and  which  challenges  careful  consideration  of  the
question  whether  all  the  alternative  systems  do  not
do  just  the  reverse,  and  sacrifice  the  substance  to
the  shadow. Certainly  religion  can  still  less  afford


PREFACE.  XI

to  quarrel  needlessly  with  philosophy  than  science  ;
but  even  the  votaries  of  the  physical  sciences  may
find  it  growing  more  and  more  impossible  to  dis-
avow their  metaphysical  basis,  and  more  and  more
needful  to  recognize  that  the  problems  of  philosophy
concern  the  first  principles  of  all  knowing  and  all
living.  Hence  it  was  with  the  idea  of  diminishing
this  estrangement  between  philosophy  and  "science,"
that  the  author  has  attempted,  to  bring  out  the
metaphysical  conclusions  implied  in  the  frank  and
full  acceptance  of  the  methods  of  modern  science,
and  in  the  hope  that  both  parties  might  discover
in  them  some  possibility  of  composing  their  differ-
ences in  a  manner  equally  advantageous  and  honour-
able to  both.

But  though  the  shock  of  diametrically  opposed
views  is  generating  in  many  thoughtful  minds,  the
conviction  that  their  common  ground  and  reconcili-
ation must  be  sought  deeper  down  than  has  been  the
fashion,  the  anti-metaphysical  surface  current  is  still
sufficiently  violent,  both  in  religion  and  in  science,  to
render  discretion  the  duty  of  all  who  do  not  covet
the  barren  honours  of  a  useless  martyrdom.  Hence
it  would  be  needless  to  assign  any  further  reason  for
the  last  point  it  is  necessary  to  allude  to,  viz.,  the
anonymity  of  the  Riddles  of  the  Sphinx,  even  if  the
professional  position  of  its  author  were  such  that  he
could  afford  to  disregard  men's  intolerance  of  real
or  seeming  innovation.  For  the  splendid  satire  of
Plato  is  unfortunately  still  too  true  to  the  spirit  of
men's  treatment  of  those  whose  souls  have  risen  by
rough  paths  of  speculation  to  the  supernal  spheres
of  metaphysics,  and  who  return  to  tell  them  that  the
shadows  on  the  walls  of  their  Cave  are  not  the
whole  truth,  nor .  precisely  what  their  nurses  have


XII  PREFACE.

taught  them,  and  such  as  they  have  learnt  from
their  grandmothers.  In  their  wrath  "they  would,  if
perchance  they  could  lay  their  hands  upon  them,
verily  put  them  to  death  ;  "  for  their  first  impulse  is
still  to  stone  the  prophets,  whose  spirit  their  boot-
less reverence  will  afterwards  oppress  beneath  the
burden  of  memorial  sepulchres..  Who  then  will
take  it  upon  him  to  blame  a  philosopher  if  he  wraps
his  mantle  closely  around  his  face  ?


ANALYSIS OF CONTENTS.


BOOK  I.

PAGB

Chapter  I. Introductory 3

§  I.  The  prevalent  despair  of  solving  the  highest
problems  of  knowledge  not  justified  in  an  age  of  pro-
gress. §  2.  Causes  of  this  despair  in  the  faulty  attitude.
of  religion,  philosophy,  and  science.  §  3.  Its  results — a
positivist  temper — ■"  we  can  do  without  philosophy ."  §  4.
But  we  can  not.  Philosophy  as  the  theory  of  Life,  and
so  practical.  §§  5-8.  The  problem  of  philosophy  really
that  of  all  knowledge  ;  shown  both  in  the  common  origin
of  religion  (§  6),  philosophy  (§  7),  and  science  (§  8),
viz.,  Animism,  and  in  their  common  end,  viz.,  practice,
g  9.  Hence  Positivism  must  admit  that  philosophy  is
desirable  and  important.  It  can  only  assert  that  it  is
impossible,  and  §  10  thereby  become  Agnosticism.

Chapter  II. Agnosticism 16

§  I.  Its  two  varieties,  scientific  and  epistemological,
Spencer  and  Kant.

§§  2-6.  Objections  to  both.  §  2.  Suspense  of  judg-
ment on  the  problems  of  life  impossible  in  practice.
§  3.  The  argument  from  the  known  to  the  unknowable
always  involves  a  contradiction.  §  4.  The  impossibility
of  a  transition  from  the  known  to  the  unknowable..  §  5.
No  infinity  in  things  to  suggest  an  unknowable.  §  6.
Agnosticism  must  be  rendered  consistent  by  a  denial  of
the  causality  of  the  Unknowable,  which  is  thereby  re-
duced to  nought.

§§  7-10. Spencerian  Agnosticism. %  7.  (a)  Direct
arguments  to  show  the  existence  of  the  Unknowable
R.ofS.  ='"'  b


XIV  ANALYSIS OF CONTENTS.

refuted  :  (i)  growth  of  knowledge  is  not  a  growth  of
ignorance ;  (2)  explanations  are  not  required  ad  infini-
tum ;  (3)  a  limit  does  not  imply  something  beyond  it ;
this  is  true  of  (conceptual)  space,  but  not  of  know-
ledge. §§  8-10.  Spencer's  indirect  arguments  from  the
difficulties  of  metaphysics  should  not  daunt  an  evolu-
tionist. §  9.  The  self-existence  of  God,  how  tenable.
§  10.  The  infinite  regress  of  causation  and  the  question
as  to  the  cause  of  the  first  cause.  But  this  difficulty  is
one  of  all  causation,  extending  also  to  science,  and
therefore  sceptical.  Insuperable,  if  an  absolute  first
cause  is  meant,  but  not  if  only  a  cause  of  our  world.

§§  11-21.  Kantian  Agnosticism.  The  defects  of  our
minds  preclude  us  froili  the  knowledge  of  things  as  they
really  are.  §§12-17.  His  positive  arguments  examined.
§  12.  Kant's  refutation  of  his  own  distinction  of  things
in  themselves  and  appearances.  §  13.  His  claim  to
have  made  an  exhaustive  analysis  of  the  mind.  §  14.
His  distinction  of  Form  and  Matter  in  knowledge.  But
we  cannot  know  until  we  try.  §  15.  The  epistemologi-
cal  standpoint  incompatible  with  the  evolution  of  the
mind  and  the  development  of  its  categories.  §  16.
Epistemology  is  futile  as  well  as  false,  (§  17)  if  the
"  immanent  criticism  of  experie?ice "  does  not  transcend
its  limits.  The  ambiguity  of  "  a  priori"  :  it  should  be
taken  logically  only,  and  not  of  priority  in  time.
§§  18-21.  Indirect  arguments  from  the  metaphysical
difficulties  of  (§  19)  theology,  of  (§  20)  the  antinomies,
of  (§  21)  psychology.  §  19.  Kant's  claim  that  of  three
possible  proofs  of  the  existence  of  God,  two  are  false
and  the  third  is  inadequate.  But  if  the  third  can  prove
a  limited  God,  is  not  this  all  that  is  needed  ?  §  20.  The
antinomies,  the  infinity  of  Space  and  Time.  The  thesis
inadequately  stated,  being  supported  by  science  as  well
as  by  metaphysics ;  the  proof  of  the  antithesis  holds
good  only  of  our  ideas  of  Space  and  Time,  and  identifies
Space  with  what  fills  it.  A  third  alternative  in  the  case
of  Time,  ignored  by  Kant.  §  21.  Kant's  attack  on  the
reality  of  the  soul ;  its  assumptions  and  contradictions.
§  22.  The  origin  of  agnosticism,  a  phenomenon  of
the  growth  of  knowledge.  §  23.  The  transition  into
Scepticism  owing  (i)  to  the  impossibility  of  refuting
metaphysics  without  upsetting  science,  and  §  24  (2)  to
the  self-criticism  of  Agnosticism.


ANALYSIS OF CONTENTS.  XV

PAGE

Chapter  III. Scepticism 57

§  I.  The  meaning  of  Scepticism,  and  §  2  its  invalid
forms.  §  3.  It  must  be  immanent  and  base  itself  on
the  irreconcilable  conflict  of  the  data  of  consciousness,
e.g.,  between  thought  and  reality.

§§  4-14.  The  origin  and  flaws  0/ the  conceptions  form-
ing the  first  principles  of  science.  §  4.  They  are  mutilated
anthropomorphisms, and  (§  5)  cannot  grasp  the  Becoming
of  things.  §  6.  This  shown  in  the  case  of  Time.  The
fiction  of  its  discreteness.  Time  measured  by  motions
and  motions  by  Time,  a  vicious  circle.  Its  infinity  and
self-contradiction.  §  7.  Space.  Its  infinity.  Atomism  v.
its  infinite  divisibility.  Matter  and  Space  and  the  Void.
Real  and  conceptual  Space  and  the  truth  of  geometry.
§  8.  Motion  measured  by  Rest,  but  Rest  illusory.  If  all
motive  is  relative,  what  of  the  conservation  of  energy  ?
How  can  there  be  potential  energy  or  position  in  in-
finite Space?  §  9.  Matter,  an  abstraction.  The  solidity
of  atoms  does  not  account  for  the  hardness  of  bodies.
The  wonders  of  the  Ether.  Action  at  a  distance  and
inertia.  Matter  a  hypothesis  which  is  not  even  self-
consistent.  §  10.  Force,  only  depersonalized  will.  The
interaction  of  bodies  a  theory.  §  11.  Causation,  its
.  animistic  origin.  It  will  not  work  unless  arbitrary  isola-
tions and  connections  are  made  in  the  complex  of  phe-
nomena. Even  so  it  involves  the  difficulties  of  an
infinite  regress  or  of  a  First  Cause,  and  finally,  it  con-
flicts with  free  will.  §  12.  Substance,  the  permanent  in
change;  no  proof  of  this.,  §  13.  Becoming  not  a  cate-
gory, but  a  contradiction  to  thought,  which  science  can
deal  with  only  as  Being  and  Not  Being.  But  Being  a
fiction,  for  all  things  become.  So  (§  14)  none  of  our
principles  can  deal  with  Becoming,  because  of  the  radi-
cal difference  of  thought  and  feeling  (reality).  The-. --•
meaning  of  the  a  priority  of  thought.

§  15.  The  characteristics  of  the  Real ;  individual,
substantival,  presented,  becomes  in  Time  and  Space,  has
infinite  content.  And  of  Thought,  does  not  become  in
Time  or  Space,  but  is  valid  eternally ;  abstract,  univer-
sal, discursive,  discrete,  adjectival,  necessary.  Hence,
§  16,  a  harmony  of  truth  and  fact,  viz.,  knowledge,  is
impossible.  §§  17-18.  This  conclusion  is  confirmed  by
logic,  both  as  to  judgment,  which  states  ideas  as  facts,
and  (§  18)  as  to  inference,  which  does  not  even  pretend


XVI  ANALYSIS OF CONTENTS.

to  correspond  with  facts.  The  course  of  explanation
leads  away  from  reality.  §  19.  Hence  the  case  for
knowledge  is  hopeless.  §  20.  But  yet  our  assumptions
work.  This  plea  only  shifts  the  ground  of  the  argu-
ment, and  by  denying  (§21)  that  knowledge  ultimately
works  in  practice,  Scepticism  passes  into  Pessimism.


Chapter  IV. Pessimism 95

§§  1-2.  Pessimism  essentially  the  theory  of  the  inherent
perversity  of  things,  rendering  all  the  aims  of  life  illusory.
§  3.  Not  based  on  hedonism ;  the  belief  that  life  is
misery  the  consequence,  not  the  cause  of  Pessimism.

§§4-19.  The  Ideal  of  Happiness.  §4.  As  happiness
is  complete  adaptation  to  environment,  it  is  impossible
in  "a  world  of  change.  §  5.  So  there  is  no  adaptation  to
the  physical  environment — all  must  die.  Nor  (§  6)  to
the  social— births,  marriages  and  deaths.  Nor  (§  7)  is
harmony  attainable  in  the  soul — inherited  discords  and
incompatible  claims.  Life  for  the  individual  a  fruitless
struggle,  with  a  certain  prospect  of  defeat.  §§  8-10.  The
prospects  of  the  race  no  better,  either  physically,  §  8  ;
socially,  §  9 ;  or  psychologically,  §  10.  Owing  to  the
rapidity  of  the  changes  in  the  conditions  of  life,  our
feelings  are  survivals  from  obsolete  modes  of  life,  and
conflict  with  our  reason.  Our  bodies  still  less  har-
monized with  our  duties.  g§  11-17.  The  evidence  for
Pejorism,  the  growth  of  misery.  §  12.  Evidence  that
the  physical  organism  does  not  adapt  itself  quickly
enough  to  changed  conditions.  Increased  sensitiveness
to  pain,  and  diminished  power  of  recuperation.  Death
itself  evolved.  §13.  Material  progress  renders  spiritual
misery  possible,  and  (§  14)  provokes  social  discontent.
^15.  The  social  environment  has  grown  too  fast,  and
so  (§  16)  has  the  discord  in  the  soul,  most  obviously
(§  17)  in  the  case  of  the  sexual  feelings,  which  have  re-
tained an  excessive  strength  from  animal  times,  although
the  smaller  waste  of  life  renders  it  needless.  They  are
fostered  by  society,  but  their  wholesome  gratification
ijecomes  more  and  more  difficult.  Consequent  growth
of  immorality  and  misery.  §  18.  The  evolutionist  argu-
ment for  Meliorism :  adaptation  must  prevail,  for  the
unadapted  die, — §  19,  unless  the  nature  of  things  is


ANALYSIS OF CONTENTS.  XVI 1

PAGE

SO  perverse  that  the  environment  changes  more  rapidly
than  adaptation  takes  place.

§  20.  The  Ideal  of  Goodness.  The  moral  value  of  life
would  only  aggravate  its  misery.  But  goodness  is  as
impossible  as  happiness :  depends  on  the  proportion
between  the  moral  ideal  and  actual  conduct.  If  then
the  moral  ideal  i^  capable  of  infinite  growth,  it  is  un-
attainable, and  we  fall  further  and  further  short  of  it.

§  21.  The  Ideal  of  BeatUy.  The  sense  of  beauty  the
least  developed  ;  its  conflict  with  the  other  ideals ;
makes  us  sensitive  to  the  ugliness  of  ordinary  life.

§  22.  The  Ideal  of  Knowledge.  It,  like  the  rest,  re-
quires a,  fixed  environment,  and  so  baffled  by  the  Be-
coming of  the  world.  §  23.  But  the  success  of  Pessimism
may  be  due  to  the  rejection  of  metaphysics.


BOOR  II
Chapter  V. Reconstruction 133

§  I.  Result  so  far  to  prove  that  metaphysics  alone  can
answer  Pessimism,  though,  §  2,  even  that  will  only  be
an  alternative.  No  direct  answer  to  Scepticism  or
Pessimism  possible.  But  if  philosophy  can  solve  all  the
problems  of  life,  it  may  be  esteemed  successful.  The
three  great  characteristics  of  life  to  be  accounted  for.
§  3.  The  one  indisputable  fact  and  basis  of  philosophy,
viz.,  the  reality  of  the  Self.  Attacked  in  vain  by  Hume,
and  by  Kant  (§  4).  §  5.  The  Self  as  the  concrete  union
of  thought  and  feeling  rises  superior  to  the  sceptical  attack
on  knowledge,  and  suggests  that  the  ideals  of  thought
are  nearer  to  truth  than  sensible  reality,  and  that  the
change  of  the  real  may  be  due  to  its  striving  after  the
ideal.  §  6.  The  necessary  anthropomorphism  of  all
thought ;  choice  only  between  good  and  bad.  §  7.  The
bad  either  false  or  confused.  §  8.  The  confused
anthropomorphism  of  science,  and,  §  9,  the  ideal  of
true  anthropomorphism  :  to  show  how  all  things  are  of
like  nature  with  the  mind.

Chapter  VI. The  Method  of  Philosophy . . .148

§  I.  Epistemological  and  psychological  methods  must
be  rejected,  as  they  do  not  take  the  mind  in  its  historical
context. Hence,  §  2,  the  method  must  be  either  meta-


XVm  ANALYSIS OF CONTENTS.

PACE

physical  or  pseudo-metaphysical.  §  3.  The  latter  mis-
applies the  methods  of  science  to  ultimate  questions.
But  (i)  the  principles  of  the  sciences  involve  contradic-
tions which  philosophy  has  to  solve.  And  (2)  this
method- explains  the  higher  by  the  lower,  which  is  im-
possible, and  then  denies  the  higlier.  (3)  Its  strength
lies  in  its  appreciation  of  the  continuity  of  things  and
its  accumulation  of  data.  §  4.  The  metaphysical  method
rightly  protests  against  the  explanation  of  the  higher
by  the  lower,  but  merely  asserts  their  difference,  \i\\AQ
their  connection  is  wanted.  §  5.  By  denying  the  con-
tinuity of  higher  and  lower  it  either  regards  them  as
antagonistic,  and  ends  in  dualism  and  pessimism,  e.g.,
Platonism,  or,  §  6,  it  ignores  the  lower  altogether,  like
the  Eleatics  and  Hegel.  §  7.  The  fact  is  that  the
method  is  abstract,  and  that  first  principles  which  are
abstractions  are  all  false,  all  the  more  (§  8)  when  they
are  picked  up  at  random.  §  9.  The  true  method  is
metaphysical,  \)\iX.cdncrete.  It  explains  the  lower  by  the
higher,  but  admits  their  connection.  Metaphysics  to
be  derived  from  the  sciences.  §10.  Its  difficulties  j^C^)
scarcity  of  precedents,  §  11  (2)  Our  imperfect  know-
ledge of  the  lower,  and  §  1 2  (3)  Our  imperfect  attain-
ment of  the  higher,  which  remains  unimaginable  to  the
lower.  §  13.  These  defects  limit  its  achievements,  yet,
§  14,  much  light  may  be  derived  from  the  new  data  of
science.

^  ■  Chapter  VII. The  Met.4physics  of  Evolution . .170

§  I.  The  theory  of  evolution,  like  all  others,  must  be
based  on  ultimate  principles,  i.e.,  metaphysics.  §  2.  It
is  a  special  case  of  the  historical  method,  which  assumes
-  the  reality  of  history,  and  so  of  time.  Also  (§  3)  that
the  past  has  caused  the  present,  and  that  things  have
had  an  origin.  But  how  if  causal  connexion  is  an  illu-
sion, and  the  infinity  of  time  renders  a  beginning
incredible?  Hence  the  historical  method  assumes  a
real  beginning  of  things,  or  at  least  of  their  history.
§  4.  Evolutionism  shares  these  assumptions,  and  adds
the  assertion  that  history  proceeds  from  the  simple  to
the  complex.  §  5.  By  erecting  this  fact  into  a  universal
principle  evolutionism  becomes  metaphysical  and  philoso-
phic, as  in  Spencer. §  6.  Evolution  as  a  history  of  all


ANALYSIS OF CONTENTS.  XIX


things,  and  so  involving  a  sort  of  teleology.  §  7-  But
in  what  sense  is  a  history  an  explanation  ?  The  three
results  of  historical  explanations,  an  inexplicable  datum,
a  passing  into  something  else,  or  an  origination  out  of
nothing,  and,  §  8,  ultimately  they  all  resolve  into  the
last.  §  9.  The  logical  necessity  of  this  process  illus-
trated by  evolutionist  theories,  and  §§  10-12  most  com-
pletely by  Mr.  Crookes'  theory  of  prothyle,  and  of  the
genesis  of  the  elements.  §  13.  Does  it  refer  to  a
historical  event  or  assert  an  eterual  process  ?  If  the
latter,  the  mechanical  cosmogony  of  evolutionism  would
be  complete.  §  14.  But  prothyle  is  indistinguishable
from  nothing.  The  genesis  and  dissolution  of  atoms  a
couple  of  miracles.  §15.  Hence  historical  evolutionism
must  be  supplemented  by  metaphysics,  and  it  must
be  admitted,  §  16,  that  it  is  really  successful  only  when
it  derives  the  actual  from  its  germ  or  potentiality,  as
explained  by  Aristotle.  §  17.  Though  in  Time  the
potential  comes  first,  metaphysically  the  actual  is  prior.
§  18.  So  prothyle,  as  the  pure  potentiality  of  the  whole
phenomenal  world,  implies  a  prior  actuality,  i.e.,  a  non-
phenomenal  cause  of  its  evolution,  and  so  a  transcendent
Deity  becomes  necessary,  of  whose  purpose  the  world-
process  is  the  working  out.  And  as  its  earlier  stages  are
more  remote  from  that  purpose,  the  true  significance  of
things  lies  in  their  end,  and  all  explanation  is  ultimately
teleological.  §  19.  The  necessity  of  teleology  is  also
derivable  from  the  analysis  of  the  conception  of  a  pro-
cess, for,  §  20,  a  process  is  necessarily ^/f^//^,  and  so  the
world,  if  it  is  in  process,  must  have  a  beginning  and  an
end  in  Time,  with  reference  to  which  fixed  points  all
events  must  be  arranged  teleologically.  §21.  But  this
teleology  does  not  lend  itself  to  abuse  by  humaii  con-
ceit, nor  is  it  incompatible  with  scientific  mechanism,
which  it  supplements  but  does  not  supersede,  being
itself  based  on  scientific  data.  §  22.  Yet  it  can  only
gradually  woi-k  down  to  the  lower  facts.  §  23.  The
process  can  not  be  everlasting,  nor,  §  24,  alternate  in
cycles.  This  idea  due  (1)  to  the  difficulty eof  grasping
the  reality  of  progress,  and  to  the  confusion  of  our
world  with  the  totality  of  existence,  and  (2)  to  ignorance
of  the  nature  of  eternity. §  25.  Summary.


PAGE


XX'  ANALYSIS OF CONTENTS.

PACE

Chapter  VIII. Formulas  of  the  Law  of  Evolution.  212

§  I.  Evolutionism  asserts  that  the  course  of  the
world  conforms  to  the  conception  of  a  process.  But  a
process  of  \yhat  ?  §  2.  Mr.  Spencer's  formula — true  as
far  as  it  goes,  but  inadequate.  §  3.  Von  Hartmann's
formula :  not  applicable  to  the  inorganic.  §  4.  The
perfection  of  the  societies  of  the  ants  and  bees.  But,
§  5,  it  is  attained  by  the  sacrifice  of  the  individual  and  of
the  possibility  of  progress.  §  6.  This  suggests  that  real
progress  concurrently  develops  the  individual  and  the
social  medium.  §  7.  Shown  in  actual  society,  in  the
division  of  labour,  §  8,  in  the  growth  of  knowledge  and
science,  §  9,  in  military  strength,  g  10,  in  social  inter-
course, and  §  II,  may  be  traced  also  in  the  earlier
stages  of  human  evolution.  §12.  Apparent  exceptions.
Caste  States  have  higher  social  structure,  but  repress
individuality.  Greece  sacrificed  the  family  to  the  State,  '
but  could  not  control  the  individual.  Rome  secured
the  self-subordination  of  the  individuals,  but  made  them
too  mediocre  to  find  any  one  who  could  adapt  the
Roman  training  to  a  universal  empire.  §  13.  Among
animals  both  individuality  and  sociality  are  at  a  lower
stage.  §  14.  In  plants  and  the  lowest  animals  individu-
ality becomes  too  faint  to  be  any  longer  distinguished
from  the  social  medium.  Perhaps  dependence  on,  it
has  here  become  a  physical  bond,  as,  §  15,  is  certainly
the  case  in  inorganic  nature,  where  physical  combination
is  the  analogue  of  society  and  individuality  is  evanes-
cent. §  i6.  In  the  evolution  of  chemical  substances,
the  most  complex  came  last,  though  before  life.  But
even  in  the  elements  there  are  signs  of  individual  differ-
ences. §17.  The  ^recosmi'c  condition  of  atoms  before
combination  began.  §  18.  But  can  this  formula  of  Evo-
lution also  supply  an  ideal?  Yes,  for  as  yet  neither
society  nor  individuals  are  perfect.  Evidence  that  we
are  imperfectly  individualized.  Hence,  §  19,  the  ideal  of
perfect  individuals  in  a  perfect  society  is  the  ideal  of
Heaven. §  20.  The  advantages  of  this  formula.


ANALYSIS OF CONTENTS.  XXI


BOOK  III.


Chapter  IX. Man  and  the  World ....  245

§  I.  Its  subject,  the  "material"  environment.
§§  2-1 1.  Space  and  Time  and  their  infinity.  §  z.  The
senses  of  infinity,  the  popular,  §  3,  the  proper,  and  §  4,
the  mathematical  sense ;  but  infinity  is  inapplicable  to
quantity.  §  5.  There  is  no  need  to  regard  the  infinity
of  Time  and  Space  as  anything  but  ideal ;  and  §  6,  it  is
impossible  to  infer  from  this  ideal  infinity  that  of  the  real
world,  which  would  render  knowledge  impossible.  §  7.
The  metaphysical  difficulties  of  infinity.  Space  and  Time
abstractions.  §  8.  Infinite  Time  self-contradictory.  An
infinite  whole,  an  infinite  process,  and  an  infinite  regress
of  causes  impossible.  §  9.  These  difficulties  reappear
in  science.  The  dissipation  of  energy  in  infinite  Space.
The  atom  and  infinite  divisibility.  The  equilibration
of  energy.  If  the  world  is  infinite.  Evolution  is  a  mis-
take. §  10.  In  favour  of  infinity  there  is  only  a  disa-
bility of  our  thought.  In  the  case  of  Space  this  may
prove  purely  subjective  and  temporary.  §  11.  But  in
the  case  of  Time  the  reality  of  the  world-process  is
bound  up  with  it.  But  the  consciousness  of  Time  de-
pends on  that  of  change.  If,  then,  change  can  be  tran-
scended, so  can  Time.  Time,  Becoming  and  Evil,  as
corruptions  of  Eternity,  Being,  and  Perfection,  and  so
Time  passes  into  Eternity  at  the  completion  of  the
world-process.

§§  12-15.  IJealism  and  Science.  §  12.  The  denial
of  an  "  external  world,"  a  coroUaiy  from  the  primary
fact  of  idealism,  which  idealists  are  anxious  to  avoids
§  13.  That  fact  being  inconclusive  in  itself  must  be
interpreted  either  by  a  universal  mind  (in  which  case
the  world  remains  an  illusion)  or,  §  14,  by  transcendent
realities,  existing  in  consciousness,  but  not  only  in  con-
sciousness, i.e.,  the  .Self  and  the  world  are  correlative
facts,  and  if  ultimate  existence  is  ascribed  to  the  one,
it  must  be  also  to  the  other.  But  they  need  not  turn
.out  to  be  such  as  they  appear.  §  15.  Thus  idealism,
refutes  materialism,  and  brings  out  the  distinction  be-
tween phenomenal  and  ultimate  existence;  §  16,  but
this  must  be  shown  in  detail.


Xxii  ANALYSIS OF CONTENTS.

PAGE

§§17-25.  The  explanation  of  Matter.  §  17.  Matter
an  abstraction.  The  unknowable  substratum  of  Force.
All  its  effects  due  to  forces.  But  the  substratum  of  the
forces  need  not  be  material.  §  18.  Intelligence  as  the
substratum  of  Force.  Monads  as  the  metaphysical
account  of  the  material.  §  19.  These  result  also  from
the  analysis  of  "  Force."  §  20.  Reconciliation  of  ideal-
ism and  science,  matter  not  being  an  ultimate  fact.
§  21.  It  is  the  result  in  consciousness  of  an  interaction
between  the  Deity  and  ultimate  spirits,  or  Egos.  §  22.
The  relation  of  these  Egos  to  the  Deity  and  to  our
phenomenal  "selves."  §  23.  This  account  borne  out
by  scientific  evidence.  Hypnotism  and  the  conception
of  an  objective  hallucination.  Secondary  selves.  §  24.
Thus  the  progressive  phases  of  the  interaction  of  the
Egos  with  the  Deity,  form  the  history  of  the  world.
,§  25.  How  the  world's  existence  in  consciousness  is
compatible  with  its  reality  and  with  the  plurality  of
spirits.  Parallels  in  dreams  and  the  collective  halluci-
nations of  hypnotism.

§§  26-28.  The  significance  of  Matter.  §  26.  The
fallacy  of  separating  body  and  soul  as  aspects  of  the
same  interaction.  §  27.  This  rejection  of  dualism  does
not  lead  to  materialism  if  the  relation  of  body  and  soul
be  inverted,  and  the  body  regarded  not  as  what  causes
but  as  what  represses  consciousness.  The  growth  ot
organization  a  growth  qf  labour-saving  mechanism  which
liberates  consciousness.  §  28.  Hence  matter  is  a  divine
mechanism  for  controlling  resisting  spirits,  an  explan-
ation which  fits  the  facts  as  well  or  better  than  material-
ism.

§§  29-31.  The  spiritual  evolution  of  Matter.  §  29.
The  properties  of  matter  are  seen  to  be  less  opposed  to
those  of  spirit.  Modern  materialism  less  uncompromis-
ing than  ancient.  §  30.  Matter  less  of  an  obstacle  to
spiritual  evolution.  Material  and  spiritual  progress
interdependent  in  society,  and  also  in  the  individual.
True  development  is  harmonious,  and  does  not  involve
antagonism  with  lower  phases  of  life.  §31.  Yet  there
is  truth  also  in  the  ascetic  view  of  matter,  as  it  char-
acterizes an  essentially  imperf(Sct  world.  §  32.  How  the
existence  of  the  world,  before  that  of  conscious  beings,
maybe  reconciled  with  the  idealist  assertion  that  matter
exists  only  in  consciousness.


ANALYSIS OF CONTENTS.  XXllI

PAGE

Chapter,  X. Man  and  God 309

§  I.  Man  and  his  cause^ — God.  His  nature  as
implied  in  the  earlier  results,  (a)  As  the  first  cause,
but  only  of  the  phenomenal  world,  (d)  As  a  factor  in  the
interaction  which  produces  the  world,  (c)  As  personal,
(d)  as  finite,  because  only  a  finite  God  can  be  inferred,
and  all  force  implies  resistance.  So  God  is  in  all,  but
not  all.  §  2.  The  finiteness  of  God  conflicts  with  reli-
gious and  philosophic  tradition,  but  may  be  proved.

§§  3-23.  TAe  doctrine  of  the  Infinite.  ^§  3-7.  The
religious  conception  of  God — a  mass  of  contradictions.
His  infinity  incompatible  with  all  His  other  attributes,
e.g.,  (i)  personality,  (2)  consciousness,  (3)  power,  (4)
wisdom,  §  4.  (5)  Goodness ;  either  God  is  evil  or
everything  is  good.  The  failure  of  the  attempts  at  re-
conciliation. §  5.  For  the  Infinite  there  can  be  no
reality  in  good  and  evil,  nor  meaning  in  the  phenomenal
world  and  its  process.  §  6.  Nor  dqes  it  admit  of
Revelation.  §  7.  The  origin  and  history  of  the  attribute
of  infinity.  Monotheism  a  compromise  between  .poly-
theism and  pantheism.  But  it  may  be  purged  of  its
■ contradiction  by  omitting  the  infinity.

§§  8-23.  The  Infinite  in  philosophy  - —  Pantheism.
§  8.  In  pantheism  "God"=the  universe  as  a  whole.
§  9.  The  exceptions  to  this  view,  e.g.,  J.  S.  Mill.  §  10.
Pantheism  a  mistake  (i)  emotionally,  because  it  renders
good  and  evil  illusory.  §§^11,  12.  (2)  Scientifically,  be-
cause it  destroys  the  reality  of  the  world-process  and
the  meaning  of  the  world,  and  ultimately  (§  12)  must
declare  all  change  illusory.  Hence,  either  we  and  our
world,  or  the  Absolute,  an  illusion.  §  13.  The  objec-
tion that  finite  minds  cannot  grasp  the-  Infinite,  un-
tenable, for  if  true,  they  would  never  have  formed  the
conception  of  an  Infinite.  §  14.  The  attempt  to  make
the  Infinite  a  postulate  of  feeling.  But  how  can  feeling
decide  delicate  questions  of  metaphysics  ?

§§  15-20.  (3)  The  logical  basis  of  Pantheism.  §15.
The  main  basis  of  Pantheism  logical — but  fallacious.
§  16.  The  words  "all"  and  "whole"  ambiguous.  A
finite  totality  v.  an  infinite  maximum.  §17.  The  "  In-
finite "  a  misnomer  because  a  real  whole  must  be  finite.  ^
§  18.  But  anyhow  the  world  is  not  a  real  whole.  The
two  ways  of  conceiving  the  relation  of  a  whole  to  its


XXIV  ANALYSIS OF CONTENTS.

PA  OS

parts,  of  which  the  one  would  not  apply  to  the  absolute
"All,"  and  the  pther  would  make  it  an  ideal  whole.
§  19.  A  third  way  conceivable,  if  the  reality  of  the
whole  could  be  directly  inferred  from  the  reality  of  the
parts.  But  it  is  not  yet  realized,  and  (§  20)  if  it  were,
it  would  make  the  parts  as  necessary  to  the  existence  of
the  whole,  as  the  whole  to  the  parts.  Though  the  ideal
of  social  hkrmony,  this  does  not  justify  Pantheism.

§§  21-23.  (4)  27/«  metaphysical  basis  of  Pantheism.
§  21.  The  ultimate  question  of  ontology.  Is  existence
one,  dual,  or  many?  Monism,  Dualism,  Pluralism.
Why  Dualism  must  be  rejected.  The  difficulties  of
Monism — it  cannot  explain  phenomenal  plurality.  §  22.
Pluralism  does  not  need  to  do  so.  The  relation  of  the
Many  to  the  One.  The  One  as  the  possibility  of  the
interaction  of  the  Many.  §  23.  Pluralism  can  also
regard  the  One  as  the  ideal  of  a  real  union. Perfection.

S§  24-30.  77/1?  nature  of  God.  §  24.  The  finiteness
of  God  follows  from  the  adoption  of  Pluralism  in  meta-
physics. God  not  =  " Nature,"  and  hence  "Nature"
can  contain  an  element  which  resists  God,  i.e..  Evil,  due
to  the  imperfect  harmony  of  ultimate  spirits.  The
world-process  designed  to  harmonize  them.  §  25.  This
view  verified  in  the  actual  character  of  evil.  Evil  that
which  obstructs  the  course  of  Evolution.  §  26.  Change
and  death  as  consequences  of  inharmonious  interaction.
§  27.  God  immanent  as  well  as  transcendent.  Can  be
in  all  because  not = all.  §  28.  Our  conception  of  the
Divine  Power  really  heightened  by  this  view :  its  practi-
cal value.  §  29.  Why  pluralism  must  be  theistic — a
Deity  required  to  guide  the  world-process.  §  30.
Pluralism  not  Polytheism.


Chapter  XI. Immortality

§  I.  The  unreasonable  attitude  of  men  towards  the
subject.  Do  they  really  desire  to  believe  in  a  future
life  ?  §  2.  Is  such  belief  really  desirable  ?  Its  dangers
and  advantages,  §  3.  Can  the  question  be  settled  by
an  appeal  to  facts  in  the  shape  of  ghost  stories,  etc.  ?
Facts  which  are  not  reasonable  carry  no  conviction.

§§  4-13.  But  the  reasons  on  both  sides  are  inadequate,
(a)  In  favour  of  immortality.  §  4.  (i)  ITie  religious
argument. §  5.  (2)  The  argument  from  moral  necessity


375


ANALYSIS OF CONTENTS.  XXV

PAGE

and  the  postulates  of  feeling. §  6.  (3)  From  dualism  ^
and  the  different  natures  of  body  and  soul. This  ends
in  materialism,  or  in  the  immortality  of  a  universal  Soul,
which  is  not  personal.

§§  7-13.  {b)  The  arguments  against  immortality.
§7.  (i)  Materialism.  §  8.  (2)  The  self-evidence  of
death.  But  we  know  what  death  is  only  from  the  point
of  view  of  the  survivors,  and,  taking  an  idealist  view  of
the  material  world,  this  is  insufficient.  §  9.  (3)  The
gradual  evolution  of  consciousness  :  either  all  beings  are
immortal  or  none.  §  10.  This  objection  to  be  answered
only  by  a  doctrine  of  gradgLtions  in  immortality,  corre-
sponding to  those  of  consciousness.  §  11.  Practically
a  future  life  dependent  on  self-identity  and  memory.
§  12.  But  memory  «>  a  inatter  of  degree.  Immortality
proportioned  to  spiritual  development.  §  13.  Objec-
tions.

§§  14-16.  77/1?  metaphysical  basis  for  the  belief  in
immortality.  §  14.  Its  only  secure  basis  in  the  plurality
of  ultimate  existences,  whose  spiritual  evolution  inspires
the  material  evolution.  §  15.  Their  relation  to  our
phenomenal  selves.  The  latter  phases  in  the  develop-
nierit  of  the  former,  which  persist  as  factors  in  that
development.  The  immortality  of  the  good  and  transi-
toriness  of  evil,  g  16.  This  theory  meets  the  chief
difficulties.

§§  17-25.  Elucidation  of  difficulties.  §  17.  Pre-
existence,  confirmed  by  Darwinist  account  of  the
"descent  of  man."  §§  18-22.  Pre-existence  and  Here-
dity. §  18.  Not  incompatible,  owing  (§  19)  to  the
possibility  of  double  causation.  §  20.  Examples  of
this.  §  21.  Hence  the  scientific  and  the  metaphysical
views  both  true.  §  22.  The  significance  of  heredity.
g  23.  Do  several  phenomenal  beings  correspond  to  a
single  ultimate  spirit  ?  Evidence  in  favour  of  this  view.
§  24.  Especially  in  the  existence  of  Sex.  A  metaphysic
of  Love.  §  25.  Yet  this  does  not  affect  the  ultimate
ideal.

Chapter  XII. Conclusion 431

§'  I.  The  relation  of  the  world's  evolution  to  ultimate
reality.  §  2.  The  ultimate  aim  of  the  process — the
perfectioning  of  a  society  of  harmonious  individuals.


XXVI  ANALYSIS  OF  CONTENTS.

§  3.  If  SO,  its  starting-point  must  have  been  a  minimum
of  harmony.  This  implies  a  precosmic  state,  when  no
interaction,  and  hence  no  world,  existed.  It  preceded
Time  and  Change,  and  does  not  admit  of  further  in-
quiries. §  4.  The  end  of  the  world-process — in  the
attainment  of  perfect  harmony  or  adaptation — the  per-
fection and  aim  of  all  the  activities  of  life.  Distin-
guished by  its  metaphysical  character  from  the  Becoming
of  the  time-process,  a  changeless  and  eternal  state  of
perfect  Being.  This  includes  a  solution  of  all  difficul-
ties, evil,  Time,  divergence  of  thought  and  feeling,  etc.

§§  5-1 1.  The  nature  of  Perfection.-  §  5.  It  is  con-
scious, but  not  self-conscious.  §  6.  It  is  perfect  Activity
rather  than  Rest,  Being  rather  than  Not-Being,  Heaven
rather  than  Nirvana.  The  conception  of  the  Ideal  as
the  perfection  of  activity,  held  by  Aristotle.  §  7.  The
analogy  of  perfect  motion.  §  8.  The  content  of  the
perfect  activity  of  Being  cannot  be  imagined,  but  only
conceived,  as  it  is  an  ideal  of  thought  which  lacks  all
analogy  in  sensuous  experience.  But  if  reality  realizes
the  ideals  of  thought,  i.e.,  if  the  world  is  rational  and
knowledge  possible,  the  ideal  of  Being  must  be  realized.
For  it  is  implied  in  the  assumption  of  all  thought  that
what  becomes  is.  But  it  must  be  experienced  and  can-
not be  anticipated.  §  9.  Hence  it  can  be  described
only  as  the  perfection  of  the  activities  of  life,  and  yet
transcends  them.  It  is  perfect  goodness,  knowledge,
beauty,  and  happiness,  and  yet  something  more.  §  10.
It  is  all-embracing,  else  its  harmony  might  be  destroyed.
Hence  the  existing  imperfection  of  the  world  reflected
in  the  divine  consciousness.  The  expression  of  this
principle  in  philosophy  and  religion — the  sympathetic
suffering  of  Christ  The  world-process  a  redemption  of
all  beings.  §11.  It  is  attainable,  as  a  real  process  does
not  admit  of  infinite  approximations.

§  12.  The  ultimate  answer  to  the  problem — the  world-
process  leads  from  timeless  Not-Being  through  temporal
Becoming  to  eternal  Being.  §13.  Yet  this  answer  is
hypothetical,  and  only  gives  an  alternative  to  Pessimism,
for  the  final  rejection  of  which  (§  14)  Faith  in  the  ration-
ality of  things  is  required  ;  demonstration  must  issue  in
belief.


ANALYSIS OF CONTENTS.  XXVII

PAGE

Appendix. Freedom  and  Necessity . . . -459

§  I.  The  difficulty  as  usually  stated  insoluble,  as  (§  2)
both  terms  have  several  senses.  §  3.  The  difficulty
really  one  about  the  nature,  not  of  the  will,  but  of  caus-
ation. §  4.  This  shown  by  fact  that  both  determinists
and  libertarians  ultimately  arrive  at  indeterminism.  §  5.
But  the  question  has  been  wrongly  put,  for  to  explain
the  will  by  causation  is  to  explain  the  prototype  by  the
derivative.  The  assumptions  made.  §  6.  Causation
and  necessity  strictly  applicable  only  to  the  will.  Neces-
sity should  mean  the  feeling  of  cortipulsion,  §  7,  when,
like  Freedom,  it  would  be  a  psychological  fact.  Free-
dom and  Necessity  as  correlative,  and  both  abnormal.
§  8.  For  the  maximum  consciousness  of  either  involves
an  unhealthy  mental  condition,  while  thorough  degrad-
ation is  unconscious  of  either  necessity  or  freedom.
§  9.  This  is  the  condition  of  inanimate  nature,  the  Be-
coming of  which  is  neither  necessary  nor  free.  But  we.
read  causal  necessity  into  what  simply  happens.  §  10.
But  as  there  is  a  state  beneath  morality  and  freedom,
so  there  is  one  which  transcends  the  consciousness  of  a
freedom  and  necessity,  viz.,  perfect  wisdom  and  perfect
virtue.  So  both  necessity  and  freedom  are  defects  of  a
nature  only  partly  rational,  and  would  vanish  together
in  perfection,  i.e.,  at  the  end  of  the  world-process.


BOOK  I.


K.  ofS.


CHAPTER I.

INTRODUCTORY.

§  I.  The  attempt  nowadays  to  solve  afresh  the
world-old  problems  of  philosophy  will  doubtless  be
thought  to  require  some  apology  :  for  though  there
has  never  been  an  age  in  which  the  desire  for  such
solution  has  been  more  ardent,  or  the  need  greater,
there  is  none  also  in  which  the  faith  in  its  possibility
has  been  fainter.  It  is  an  age  which  professes  to
have  despaired  of  the  ultimate  problems  of  life  with
its  lips,  whatever  the  secret  hopes  it  may  cherish  in
its  heart ;  it  is  an  age  in  which  a  theory  of  what  we
can  not  know  has  usurped  the  name  of  philosophy,
in  which  science  is  defined  as  the  knowledge  of  the
manifestations  of  the  Unknowable,  in  which,  even  in
religion,  God  has  become  an  unknowable  Infinite,
and  Faith  has  been  degraded  into  an  unthinking
assent  to  unmeaning  verbiage  about  confessedly
insoluble  difficulties,  instead  of  being  the  prescience
that  forecasts  the  future  beyond  what  is  rigorously
justified  by  the  data  as  yet  given,  the  pillar  of  flame
that  points  out  the  path  of  the  soul  beyond  the
limits  of  unaided  sight.  And  so  we  are  brought
face  to  face  with  the  curious  and  unnatural  phen-
omenon that  an  age  which  has  witnessed  greater
triumphs  of  the  human  mind  than  any  that  preceded
it,  should  have  despaired  niore  completely  of  an
answer  to  its  highest  questions.


4  INTRODUCTORY.

In  view  of  this  anarchy  of  the  intellectual  com-
monwealth, the  aim  of  this  essay  will  be  threefold.
Its  first  design  will  be  to  record  a  protest  against
the  current  despair  of  a  theoretic  understanding  of
the  meaning  of  life,  a  protest  for  which  it  should,
even  if  unsuccessful,  deserve  at  least  the  thanks
which  the  unyielding  constancy  of  the  Roman
Senate  bestowed  upon  the  general  who  had  brought
about  the  catastrophe  of  Cannae,  for  not  having
despaired  of  the  republic.  Secondly,  it  aims  at
tracing  the  far-reaching  consequences  of  this  super-
ficial and  apparently  unimportant  despair  of  philo-
sophy, and  tracking  it  to  its  ultimate  foundation  in
utter  pessimism  and  complete  negation.  Thirdly,
its  main  object  will  be  to  put  forward  a  sketch  of
a  possible  solution  of  the  great  problems  of  philo-
sophy, which  may,  it  is  hoped,  claim  to  proceed
from  a  new  combination  of  the  old  materials,  to
reconcile  the  present  antagonism  of  several  import*
ant  ways  of  thinking,  and  to  afford  to  its  conclusions
a  more  or  less  considerable  degree  of  probability.
And  this  probability  will  assuredly  be  materially
enhanced  if  it  can  be  shown  that  these  conclusions,
possible  in  themselves,  are  consistent  with  one
another,  and  capable  of  combining  in  a  systematic
and  organic  view  of  the  whole  world,  of  giving  a
complete  answer  to  the  problems  of  life,  an  answer
which,  it  is  hoped,  may  be  found  to  satisfy  not  only
the  desiderata  of  knowledge,  but  also,  substantially,
the  aspirations  of  the  human  soul.  To  absolute
certainty  its  conclusions  do  not  pretend ;  for  cer-
tainty does  not  exist  outside  of  the  abstractions  of
mathematics  and  of  the  barren  sphere  of  formal
logic.  In  science  and  in  practical  life  probability
,  is  all-important,  and  hence  any  answer  to  the  ques-


THE DESPAIR OF PHILOSOPHY.  5

tion  of  life  cannot  be  more  than  probable.  And  in
action  especially  we  are  often  forced  to  act  upon
slight  possibilities.  Hence-,  if  it  can  be  shown  that
our  solution  is  a  possible  answer,  and  the  only  pos-
sible alternative  to  pessimism,  to  a  complete  despair
of  life,  it  would  deserve  acceptance,  even  though  it
were  but  a  bare  possibility.  But,  though  human
minds  vary  greatly  in  their  estimates  of  indefinite
probabilities,  it  may  perhaps  appear  to  some  to  be
far  more  than  a  possibility,  and  to  be  based  on  prin-
ciples which  will  be  confirmed  by  subsequent  ac-
cumulations of  material,  even  when,  as  must  be
expected,  its  minor  details  are  proved  erroneous
by  the  growth  of  knowledge.

The  contention,  then,  of  this  essay  is,  that  the
prevalent  despair  of  philosophy  can  not  be  justified.
But  though  it  cannot  be  justifi.ed,  it  may  be  ex-
plained, and  its  explanation  is  the  first  step  towards
its  refutation.

§  2.  Religion,  philosophy,  and  science  have  all
contributed  to  discredit  the  possibility  of  a  theory
of  life.  With  regard  to  the  first,  it  must  be  admitted
that  its  present  position  is  a  not  undeserved  Nemesis
on  its  past  policy.  The  alienation  from  religion  of
so  much  of  the  best  thought  of  our  times,  and  the
consequent  discord  in  the  ranks  of  the  all  too  scanty
army  of  the  fighters  for  righteousness,  is  deplorable
but  not  astonishing ;  for  the  short-sighted  leaders
of  the  religious  masses  have  too  often  abused  their
position  in  favour  of  obscurantism,  have  too  often
burked  inconvenient  questions  by  sophistical  evas-
ions. Professing  themselves  the  depositaries  of
divine  knowledge,  they  have  too  often  cast  a  doubt
upon  its  value  by  confessing  to  ignorance  concern-
ing the  vital  issues of  human life. They have


INTRODUCTORY.


seemed  to  possess  too  little  real  faith  in  the  eternal
truth  of  the  principles  of  religion,  to  admit  that
their  creeds  were  but  human  formularies,  which,
just  because  they  contained  divine  trlith,  could  only
be  transitory  and  impermanent  receptacles  of  the
changeless,  i.e.,  could  be  true  only  in  idea  and  not
in  formula.  And  so,  instead  of  perceiving  that  in-
spiration is  as  necessary  to  the  successive  interpre-
tations of  divine  truth  as  to  its  original  statement,
and  that  hence  it  required  to  be  constantly  re-
modelled and  re-stated,  in  order  to  take  in  the  new
aspects  of  truth  which  the  progress  of  the  world  re-
vealed, they  have  clung  to  the  lifeless  letter  of  their
worn-out  creeds,  until  they  have  driven  to  despair
all  who  believed  that  truth  was  one  and  indivisible,
and  that  if  there  was,  as  alleged,  an  irreconcilable
conflict  between  faith  and  reason,  this  must  be  due
to  the  errors  of  a  reason  which  so  unreasonably  in-
terpreted the, demands  of  faith.

Philosophers,  again,  have  been  too  prone  to  de-
clare insoluble  problems  which  they  had  not  yet  the
data  to  solve,  too  much  enslaved  to  a  false  method
to  utilize  the  fresh  data  offered  them  by  the  dis-
coveries of  science,  too  ready  to  profess  that  they
possessed  answers  where  they  had  none,  and  could
only  conceal  an  arid  vacuity  of  hopeless  negation
in  endless  swathings  of  ambitious  and  ambiguous
phrases.  The  disgust  at  such  deceptions  could  not
but  generate  estrangement  from  philosophy  in  men's
minds,  and  deliver  them  over  to  unauthorized  guides,
who  boldly  proclaimed  that  physical  science  alone
could  answer  the  questions  philosophy  had  aban-
doned. But  if  philosophy  was  futile,  reflection  too
soon  showed  that  science  was  helpless  and  hopeless.
It  depended  too  obviously  upon  unproved  assumpt-


POSITIVISM.  7

ions,  which  ought  to  have  been  established  by
philosophy,  but  which  were  left  at  the  mercy  of
every  chance  objection.  Hence  science,  starting,
without  criticism  from  the  metaphysical  assumptions
of  ordinary  life,  has  never  been  able  to  give  an
answer  to  ultimate  questions  that  could  appear  ad-
equate to  those  that  had  the  least  perception  of  the
real  point  of  the  difficulty ;  and  many  of  the  scientists
themselves  have  been  wise  enough  to  admit  this
limitation  of  their  subject.  And  so,  being  conscious
of  their  limits,  they  deprecated  any  inquiry  which
transcended  them.

§  3.  As  the  net  result  of  these  influences,  thfere
has  arisen  a  "  positive "  frame  of  mind,  which  con-
fines itself  within  the  limited  horizon  and  grey  tones
of  the  known,  and  renounces  ajl  ulterior  and  ultimate
inquiries.  And  so  long  as  this  positivism  aims  at
nothing  beyond  the  production  of  a  state  of  feeling,
we  cannot  but  applaud  its  tendency  to  a  wise  limitat-
ion of  our  aims,  and  admire  the  enviable  happiness
of  lives  that  present  no  problems  which  the  known
data  cannot  solve,  no  desires  which  the  known  facts
cannot  satisfy,  no  restlessness  of  discontent  which
drives  them  beyond  the  phenomenal.  But  when  it
attempts  to  raise  a  most  serviceable  but  rare  temper
of  mind  into  a  dogmatic  injunction,  and  to  assert  as
a  universal  fact  that  philosophy  is  irrelevant  to
practice,  that  things  as  they  are  can  and  ought  to
content  us  all,  that  the  practical  life  can  be  lived
without  referenceto  ulterior  theories,  it  is  necessary
to  join  issue.

§  4.  Can  the  practical  life  really  be  lived  without
answering  the  theoretical  questions  of  philosophy  ?
Are  the  riddles  of  the  Sphinx  the  idle  pastime  of
deluded  fancy  ? Does  the  wise  man  turn  his  back


INTRODUCTORY.


Upon  them  and  go  his  way,  his  ears  sealed  against
them  as  against  the  allurements  of  the  Siren  ?  This
is,  alas,  impossible.  The  Sphinx  is  seated  in  the
soul  of  each  man,  and  though  we  endeavour  to  be
deaf,  their  penetrating  sounds,  more  subtle  than  the
Siren's  song,  will  search  us  out  and  ask— What  then
art  thou  ?  And  to  her  riddles  we  may  not  gainsay
an  answer :  it  was  no  false  myth  that  symbolized  the
mystery  of  life  in  the  figure  of  the  "  Strangler,"
whose  cold  embrace  constricts^  the  warm  glow  of
life,  and  stifles  by  degrees  the  voice  of  hope.  Thus
life  depends  upon  the  answer,  and  death,  spiritual
and  physical,  is  the  penalty  for  him  that  answers
wrongly.  We  are  the  subjects  of  the  Sphinx,  and
often  too  her  victims ;  and  it  is  neither  right  nor
possible  for  us  to  evade  her  questions.  For  it  may
boldly  be  affirmed  that  the  speculative  impulse,  both
in  its'  origin  and  in  its  inmost  essence,  is  practical.
It  sprang  from  practical  necessities,  and  it  is  still
concerned  with  them.  The  ultimate  questions  of
philosophy  are  what  we  come  to  when  we  follow
out  their  conclusions,  the  practical  problems  of  life  :
they  concern  the  theory  upon  which  all  practice  is
based.  And  the  neglect  of  the  theoretic  foundation
of  life  ultimately  ruins  its  whole  fabric,  and  leads
from  agnosticism  to  the  despair  of  scepticism  and
pessimism.  The  question — What  is  life  ? — is  not
propounded  by  the  idleness  of  a  leisure  hour,  but  by
the  most  pressing  realities  of  life,  and  must  be  de-
cided in  one  way  or  another  in  every  action.  And
in  order  to  know  what  life  is,  we  must  inquire  into
its  whence  and  whither ;  we  are  exercised  about  the
past  and  the  future,  in  order  to  know  what  use  to
make  of  the  present.  And  the  threefold  riddle  of
the  Sphinx  is  merely  the  articulation  of  the  question,


THE PROBLEM OF LIFE.  9

What  is  man  or  what  is  Hfe  ? — and  concerned  merely
with  the  relation  of  man  to  his  Cause,  to  his  Environ-
ment, and.  to  his  Future.  The  questions  of  man's
relation  to  God,  to  the  world,  and  to  immortality,
are  the  three  great  problems  of  philosophy,  to  which
all  other  speculative  inquiries  are  subsidiary;  and
in  a  sense  the  three  are  one.

§  5.  And  this  ultimate  unity  of  life,  which  it  is
the  business  of  philosophy  consciously  to  restore,
was  unconsciously  foreshadowed  by  the  origin  of  its
problems.  The  material  Sphinx  is  the  oldest  of  the
extant  monuments  of  human  labour,  and  was  a
mystery  even  to  the  old-time  builders  of  the  pyra-
mids. But  the  spiritual  Sphinx,  its  archetype,  is
older  still ;  it  is  as  old  as  reflection,  as  old  as  know-
ledge, and,  we  may  be  assured,  will  last  as  long.
And  knowledge  is  one  and  indivisible,  and  an  inte-
gral portion  of  life.  For  in  order  to  live  we  must
know,  and  knowledge  sets  us  the  problems  of  which
philosophy  essays  the  solution.  ,  Our  solutions,  it  is
true,  must  be  imperfect  until  the  end  is  reached ;  but
is  it  not  sufificient  that  our  errors  should  progress-
ively approximate  to  truth  ?  If  we  can  bring  our-
selves to  believe  that  an  impulse  so  deeply  rooted
in  our  nature,  so  intimately  bound  up  with  all  our
knowledge,  as  that  of  speculation,  can  be  an  illusion,
intended  to  misguide  us,  and  destined  never  to  be
satisfied,  what  must  we  think  of  a  world  so  ordered
to  delude  us?  What  but  that  it  may  contain  such
ineradicable  illusions  elsewhere  also  }  For  philo-
sophy does  not  arise  self- sought  from  idle  wonder
and  vain  speculation.  The  wonder,  to  which  Greek
thinkers  were  fond  of  attributing  the  origin  of  philo-
sophy, is  an  essential  characteristic  of  the  mind,  or
rather,  it  is  the  inevitable  reflexion  of  the  action  of


lO  JNTRODUCTORY.

external  nature.  And  if,  in  an  age  in  which  science
loves  to  pry  into  the  origins  of  all  things,  it  were
once  to  turn  its  attention  to  its  own  origin,  it  would
quickly  appear  that  the  origin  of  science,  philosophy
and  religion  was  to  be  found  in  one  and  the  same
fact,  the  fact  that  the  world  is  so  constituted  that
we  can  not  in  thoughtless  content  acquiesce  in  what
is  given.  The  perplexity,  with  which"  thought  starts
on  its  road  to  knowledge,  is  forced  upon  it  from
without.  So  far  from  its  being  true,  as  Aristotle
said,  that  man  naturally  desires  knowledge,  it  is
rather  the  case  that  man  is  originally  as  lazy  and
uninquiring  as  the  beasts,  and  that  the  necessity  of
knowledge  is  hardly  borne  in  upon  him  by  the  stern
struggle  for  existence.  Primitive  man  could  not
acquiesce  in  the  chaos  of  phenomena,  because  its
improvident  and  thoughtless  acceptance  meant
death.  Then,  as  always,  knowledge  was  power,
and  to  survive,  man  had  to  understand  the  world
he  lived  in.  And  so  the  first  steps  in  knowledge
were  directly  necessitated  by  external  pressure,  and
the  primitive  theory  of  life  was  the  first  reaction
of  thought  upon  its  environment.  And  as  such  it
contained,  in  an  undifferentiated  whole,  the  germs
of  activities  that  have  since  drifted  far  apart.
Animism  is  the  first  theory  of  the  world,  and  out  of
it  have  differentiated  science,  philosophy,  and  reli-
gion. The  single  basis  of  all  three  was  the  "anthro-
pomorphic "  assumption  that  all  things  were  to  be
interpreted  on  the  analogy  of  what  man  conceived
to  be  his  own  nature,  and  hence  supposed  that  volit-
ion was  the  cause  of  motion,  and  that  all  events
were  to  be  ascribed  to  the  action  of  personal  spirits,
with  wills  as  capricious  as  man's  own.

§  6. This  theory  was  the  basis  of  religion, in


PRIMITIVE ANIMISM.  I  I

that  men  feared  and  attempted  to  propitiate  the
spirits  that  conducted  the  operations  of  nature,  al-
though Animism  can  hardly  yet  be  called  a  religion.
It  is  not  until  some  subordination  is  introduced  into
the  spiritual  chaos,  which  corresponded  to  the  mater-
ial chaos  in  the  thought  of  early  man,  that  real
religion  is  evolved.  But  as  the  underlying  simil-
arity in  the  operations  of  nature  came  to  be  per-
ceived, the  numberless  spirits  aggregated  into  gods,
and  a  god  of  fire  presiding  over  the  whole  depart-
ment, took  the  place  of  individual  fire-spirits  acting
every  time  a  fire  burned.  Thus  Animism  passes
into  Polytheism,  and,  as  the  consciousness  of  the
uniformity  of  nature  grows,  into  Monotheism,  unless
the  derivative  law  of  causation  so  obscures  the
personal  volition  from  which  it  sprang  as  to  make
personal  agency  seem  impossible,  when  there  takes
place  a  direct  transition  into  Pantheism.

§  7.  Animism- is  also  the  origin  of  philosophy,
for  the  volitional  theory  of  causation  is  also  a  theory
of  the  ultimate  truth  about  the  world.

§  8.  It  is  also  the  origin  of  science,  for  the  spirits
are  also  the  efficient  causes  of  phenomena,  and  the
physical  changes  of  the  world  are  explained  by  their
volitions.  Thus  while  religion  was  rapidly  differ-
entiated from  philosophy  and  science  by  the  growth
of  an  emotional  factor,  passing  through  fear  and
propitiation  into  worship,  philosophy  and  science
remained  united  much  longer.  The  theories  of  the
physical  and  of  the  metaphysical,  the  working
theories  of  the  actual  appearances  of  the  environ-
ment, and  of  its  ultimate  nature,  remained  identical
or  closely  connected.  It  is  only  in  comparatively
recent  times  that  the  independent  growth  of  the
physical sciences, the accumulation of facts, the


1 2  INTRODUCTORY.

validity  of  which  could  not  be  affected  by  any  meta-
physical interpretation  that  might  be  applied  to
them,  together  with  the  mutual  contradictions  of
philosophic  theories,  has  produced  the  semblance
of  their  complete  separation,  and  suggested  the
idea  that  science  and  metaphysics  are  two  inde-
pendent and  mutually  irrelevant  branches  of  know-
ledge. But  should  we  not  rather  cherish  the  hope
of  a  final  reconciliation  of  these  three  speculative
activities,  of  such  a  harmony  of  all  the  elements  of
thought  as  is  worthy  of  their  common  parentage,
and  as  will  enable  all  in  the  end  to  subserve  in
unison  to  the  attainment  of  the  perfect  life  .-'  May
not  the  appearances  of  the  world  be  connected
with  its  ultimate  nature,  i.e.,  science  with  meta-
physics, and  may  not  the  true  religion  be  but  the
emotional  aspect  of  the  true  philosophy  .''

To  such  a  consummation  these  discussions  may
perhaps  in  some  measure  pave  the  way  ;  they  may
contribute  some  material  to  bridge  the  Sea  of
Doubt,  to  mark  a  track  across  the  Slough  of  De-
spond, and  thus  to  smooth  the  rough  paths  of
virtue  ;  nor  need  we  be  dissatisfied  if  our  successors
trample  under  foot  the  stepping-stones  we  have
collected,  and  thus  at  length  attain  the  promised
goal.

§  9.  We  have  seen  hitherto  that  no  serious  de-
fence of  the  positivist  attitude  could  be  made  on  the
ground  of  its  desirability.  It  could  not  seriously
be  maintained  that  it  was  better  in  itself  for  us  not
to  know  anything  beyond  our  present  environment.
It  turns  out  to  be  impossible  to  separate  the  "posit-
ive knowledge"  of  science  from  its  metaphysical
presuppositions;  it  was  an  undertaking  justified
neither  by  their  Common  origin  nor  by  the  essential


POSITIVISM IMPRACTICABLE.  1 3

solidarity  of  knowledge.  For  in  the  subsequent
course  of  its  development  knowledge  did  not  belie
its  origin.  There  has  been  no  age  when  the  Sphinx
could  be  evaded,  when  the  answers  to  her  riddles
were  not  of  transcendent  importance  to  life.  To
escape  these  questions  proves  neither  possible,  nor
perhaps,  right.  For  if  there  is  any  meaning  at  all
in  life,  the  philosophic  impulse  also  cannot  be  devoid
of  its  significance,  nay,  of  a  significance  proportionate
to  its  antiquity,  its  persistence,  and  its  vital  import-
ance.

To  the  question,  therefore,  of  Positivism — Why
should  you  seek  to  know  ? — we  may  give  the  answer
—Because  we  must  and  ought.  It  is  futile  to  bid
.  us  confine  ourselves  to  this  present  world  of  phen-
omena, and  to  assure  us  that  the  question  as  to  the
nature  of  God  and  of  our  future  need  not  be  raised.
The  world  of  phenomena,  the  sphere  of  positive
science,  is  noi  self-supporting,  self-sufficing,  and  self-
explaining,  it  points  beyond  itself  to  a  reality  which
underlies  it,  back  to  a  past  from  which  it  is  de-
scended, and  forward  to  a  future  it  foreshadows.
Man  can  not  understand  his  own  nature, and  that  of
his  existing  environment,  the'  twofold  aspect  of  a
single  fact,  except  by  a  reference  to  their  previous
and  prospective  conditions.  Life  cannot  be  lived
now  except  in  connexion  with  its  past  and  future.
And  this,  we  shall  see,  is  literally  true,  since  the
consistent  attempt  to  take  the  world  as  it  is,  to  con-
fine ourselves  to  the  given,  to  exclude  all  ulterior
inquiries,  inevitably  leads  to  pessimism,  i.e.,  to  the
utter  negation  of  life.

Positivism,  therefore,  i.e.,  the  assertion  that  philo-
sophy is  unnecessary  and  useless,  cannot  maintain
its  position :  it  must  either  vanish  or  transform  itself.


r4  INTRODUCTORY.

It  is  merely  the  first  stage  in  negation,  and  negation
finds  no  rest  until  it  has  sunk  to  the  lowest  depth.
And  Positivism,  especially,  finds  it  very  easy  to  pass
into  Agnosticism,  with  which  it  is  indeed  frequently
combined.

I  lo.  Granted,  it  may  be  said,  that  a  knowledge
of  God  and  of  a  future  life  would  be  of  all  things
the  most  desirable,  of  all  knowledge  the  most  pre-
cious, and  that  the  search  for  it  is  irresistibly  sug-
gested by  the  constitution  of  things,  it  does  not
follow  that  it  is  also  possible.  It  was,  perhaps,  a
well-meant  deception  to  maintain  that  philosophy
was  not  needed,  intended  to  console  men  for  the
fact  that  it  is  impossible.  The  rejection  of  meta-
physics was  put  on  the  wrong  ground :  the  assertion
that  they  did  not  exist  should  have  been  supple-
mented by  the  proof  that  they  could  not  exist.  The
consoling  so{)hism  that  philosophy  is  a  matter  of
indifference  having  been  falsified  by  the  concern
men  display  about  it,  and  the  simple  assertion  that
we  do  not  know  having  proved  insufficient  to  repress
the  pertinacious  questionings  of  the  philosopher,  it
is  now  time  to  assert  that  we  can  not  know^,,  and  to
exhibit  the  illusoriness  of  metaphysics  and  the  im-
possibility of  answering  the  ultimate  questions  of
philosophy.  This  is  the  task  which  Agnosticism
sets  itself  to  prove,  and  we  shall  consider  its  achieve-
ments in  the  next  chapter.  It  will  then  appear  that
it  succeeds  only  by  suggesting  a  doubt  of  the  com-
petence of  human  knowledge,  which  cannot  be  con-
fined to  the  sphere  in  which  it  started.  It  calls  up
Scepticism  from  the  abyss  of  negation,  and  is  ab-
sorbed by  a  greater  and  more  powerful  spirit  of  evil.
Scepticism,  in  its  turn,  can  establish  its  case  only  by
allying  itself  with  Pessimism,  and  in  Pessimism  the


POSITIVISM.  PASSES INTO AGNOSTICISM.  I  5

last  disguise  is  thrown  off,  and  Chaos  once  more
swallows  up  the  Cosmos.

The  second  Book  will  be  concerned  with  the
rebirth  and  regeneration  of  the  world  by  means  of
metaphysics,  and  the  elaboration  of  the  method  of
philosophy ;  the  third  will  apply  the  principles  laid
down  to  the  solution  of  the  problerns  of  philosophy.


CHAPTER II.

AGNOSTJCISAt.

§  I,  Under  the  head  of  Agnosticism  may  be  included
all  doctrines  concerning  the  inherent  insolubleness
of  certain  questions,  or  inherent  limitations  or  de-
fects of  the  human  mind,  which,  precluding  from
the  knowledge  of  certain  departments  of  existence,
leave  something  unknowable  beyond  the  barriers  of
possible  knowledge.

And  where  agnostic  assertions  are  not  made  in
the  light-hearted  contempt  of  ignorance,  where  an
ignoramus  is  not  the  real  basis  of  the  cry  of  ignor-
dbimus,  we  may  distinguish  two  species  of  rational
Agnosticism.  And  looking  at  the  character  of  the
philosophies  which  have  upheld  them,  we  may  call
these  two  forms  of  Agnosticism  the  scientific  and
the  epistemological.  For  though  their  general  tend-
ency is  the  same,  there  is  a  slight  difference  in  the
method  of  their  argumentation.  Scientific  Agnost-
icism infers  a  region  of  the  unknowable  from  the
indefinite  and  seemingly  infinite  expansion  of  know-
ledge :  epistemological  Agnosticism  is  based  rather
on  a  consideration  of  the  relativity  of  knowledge  to
the  knowing  faculty,  and  suggests  that  the  limits
of  objects  do  not  correspond  to  the  limits  of  our
knowledge  of  them.  As  types  of  these  two  agnost-
icisms we  may  take  Mr.  Herbert  Spencer  and
Kant ;  Mr.  Spencer  as  the  representative  of  scient-


ITS TWO KINDS.  1 7

ific  and  Kant  of  epistemological  Agnosticism.
And  since  somewhat  different  objections  apply  to
each,  it  will  be  well  to  consider  first  the  arguments
against  Agnosticism  generally,  before  dealing  with
the  special  pleas  of  its  chief  exponents.  And  thus
the  exposure  of  the  flaws  involved  in  all  forms  of
Agnosticism  will  finally  drive  it  to  seek  refuge  with
Scepticism.

§  2.  The  first  objection  which  may  be  made  to
every  form  of  Agnosticism  is,  that  it  is  impossible
on  practical  grounds.  It  supposes  that  we  can  take
up  a  position  of  suspense  of  judgment,  based  on
a  theoretical  recognition  of  their  unknowableness,
with  regard  to  the  great  principles  which  underlie
the  practical  life,  and  need  neither  affirm  nor  deny
them  in  action.  This  is  really  a  re-assertion  of  the
positivist  plea  that  they  were  immaterial  to  practice,
without  the  excuse  positivism  had  in  its  ignorance
of  their  importance.  But  such  suspense  of  judg-
ment is  quite  impossible.  If  we  were  purely  think-
ing beings,  it  would  obviously  be  the  right  attitude
towards  matters  not  known.  But  as  we  have  also
to  act,  and  as  action  requires  practical  certainty,  we
must  make  up  our  minds  in  one  way  or  the  other,
and  our  acts  must  belie  the  professions  of  our
theory.  No  agnostic  can  live  for  five  minutes
without  indulging  in  acts  involving  a  belief  or  dis-
belief in  some  of  the  unknowables  he  had  solemnly
forsworn.  Questions  sucli  as  the.  existence  of  God
and  the  future  of  the  soul  cannot  be  treated  as
practically  indifferent ;  and  the  life,  if  not  the  theory,
of  the  agnostic  must  practically  answer  them  in
some  way  or  other.  Just  as  men  arrange  their
lives  differently  according  as  they  believe  them-
selves to  have  one  year  more  to  live  or  fifty,  ac-

R  ofS.  c


1 8  AGNOSTICISM.

cording  as  they  possess  a  powerful  patron  or  are
thrown on their  own resources,  so  life must  be
ordered  either  on  the  assumption  or  on  the  neglect
.  of  its  indefinite  prolongation  and  divine  care.

And  the  agnostic  writers  themselves  afford  this
practical  contradiction  to  their  theories,  though  their
idiosyncrasies  lead  them  to  adopt  different  sides
of  the  alternative.  Thus  Mr.  Spencer's  Agnosticism
practically  denies  the  existence  of  God  and  the
immortality  of  the  soul,  in  spite  of  all  his  theoretical
protests  that  he  has  merely  referred  them  to  the
Unknowable.  Kant,  on  the  other  hand,  in  a  manner
which  would  be  comical,  if  it  were  not  concerned
with  such  serious  issues,  and  which  has  brought  upon
him  much  ridicule,  deliberately  refutes  his  theor-
etical agnosticism.  He  avowedly  rehabilitates,  by
means  of  the  Practical  Reason,  the  dogmas  he  had
invalidated  by  the  Theoretic  Reason.  Hence  he
avows  his  personal  belief  in  a  God  whose  existence
he  had  shown  to  be  indemonstrable,  in  a  future
life  for  which  he  had  asserted  there  could  be  no
evidence,  and  in  a  freedom  which  he  had  admitted
to  contradict  all  causation  in  Time.  The  one
thought  which  seems  never  to  have  suggested  itself
to  him  is,  that  the  Power  which  was  capable  of
playing  such  pranks,  upon  its  creatures,  capable  of
devising  a  Theoretic  Reason,  destined  by  the  es-
sential constitution  of  its  nature  to  irreconcilable
conflict  with  the  practical  necessities  of  life,  was
hardly  a  fit  object  of  our  reverence  or  trust.

The  fact  is,  that  this  demand  for  an  impossible
suspense  of  judgment  is  based  upon  a  confusion  of
scientific and philosophic certainty. In science
certainty  =  great  probability, and impossibility  =  an
off  chance ;  and  hence  in  pure  (as  opposed  to  ab-


CERTAINTY REQUIRED FOR ACTION.  1 9

stract^  or  applied)  science  certainty  is  neither  fre-
quent nor  necessary.  But  in  philosophy,  which  is
the  science  of  life,  we  requite  from  our  theory
practical  certainty  in  addition  to  its  theoretic  probab-.
ility,  and  as  we  must  act,  we  must  act  often  on
very  slight  probabilities.  While  science,  therefore,
must  remain  conscious  of  all  sorts  of  improbable
and  barely  possible  theories,  seeing  that  they  may
suggest  fruitful  experiments  and  so  enlarge  the
bounds  of  knowledge,  philosophy,  when  it  has  once
decided  on  the  right  solution,  must  sternly  and
rigorously  put  aside  all  its  rivals,  even  though  its
choice  was  originally  arrived  at  by  a  very  slender
preponderance.  It  must  act  and  act  without  waver-
ing and  without  hesitation,  as  soon  as  its  initial
inquiry  has  been  concluded,  nor  allow  itself  to  be
easily  dismayed  by  difficulties  or  deterred  from
following  its  principles  to  their  consistent  conclus^
ions.  Philosophy,  at  all  events,  cannot  serve  both
God  and  Mammon.  Any  inconsistency  and  any
hesitation  is  bound  to  be  false,  whatever  theory  of
life  is  true.  Such  a  thing,  therefore,  as  a  provisional
theory  of  life  would  be  absurd.  How  different  is
the  course  of  merely  theoretic  science :  upon ,  all
disputable  points,  it  may,  nay  must,  keep  any  number
of  provisional  hypotheses  before  its  eyes,  and  mast
be  slow  to  decide  in  favour  of  one  or  the  other ;  it
must  be  for  ever  doubting  and  testing,  and,  if  con-
venient, may  even  adopt  conflicting  explanations  in
different  branches  of  its  inquiries,  and  trust  to  fresh

1  Such  as  e.g.  geometry.  As  its  subject-matter  is  ideal  Space
and  not  the  Real  at  all,  all  its  assertions  must  be  certain  and
necessary.  But  the  necessity  of  mathematics  is  simply  an  ex-
ample of  the  necessity  possessed  by  all  thought  as  thought  [cf.
ch.  iii.  §  15].


20  AGNOSTICISM.

discovery  to  resolve  the  contradictions  of  its  work-
ing hypotheses.  The  patient  temper  which  does
not  reject  the  remotest  possibiHty  that  may  throw
light  upon  a  subject,  which,  as  in  Darwin's  case,  is
not  ashamed  to  try  absurd  experiments  which  it  is
ashamed  to  record,  is  that  which  has  led  to  great
discovery.  The  mental  attitude  in  short  required
in  scientific  research,  is  the  very  opposite  to  that
required  in  a  theory  of  life  ;  and  in  philosophy  there
is  no  room  for  the  scientific  suspense  of  judgment.

From  this  point  of  view,  then,  Agnosticism  is
simply  a  miscoaception  of  the  limits  of  science  and
philosophy,  and  its  practical  impossibility  is  fatal  to
its  claims  to  be  a  theory  of  Life.^

§  3.  But  it  is  also  open  to  grave  theoretic  ob-
jection.

It  involves  in  every  case  an  argument  from  the
known  to  the  unknowable.

For  unless  the  assumption  of  the  unknowable  is
purely  gratuitous,  and  so  refutes  itself,  there  must  be
something  in  the  constitution  of  the  known  to  lead
us  to  infer  an  unknowable.  But  such  an  inference
from  the  known  to  the  unknowable  is  a  contradict-
ion. For  that  very  inference  creates  a  bond  be-
tween the  known  and  the  unknowable,  and  to  this
extent  renders  the  unknowable  knowable.  If  we
can  know  nothing  else  about  the  unknowable,  we
can  at  least  know  that  it  is  the  cause  of  the  known.
At  the  very  least,  the  known  is  its  manifestation,
the  "  phenomenon "  is  the  appearance  of  the
"  Noiimenon."

Thus  the  connection  between  the  known  and  the
unknowable  is  in  the  same  breath  both  asserted  and
denied.  The  primary  statement  of  Agnosticism
explicitly  asserts,  but  implicitly  denies,  the  imposs-


/

ITS SELF-CONTRADICTION.  21

ibility  of  a  transition  from  the  known  to  the  unknow-
able. It  is  the  vagary  of  an  insane  logic  which
from  its  very  nature  refutes  itself  It  is  as  imposs-
ible to  credit  its  initial  assertion  as  it  was  to  believe
the  Hibernian  who  asserted  that  he  was  dead.  If,
therefore,  the  assertion  alone  of  the  unknowable
implies  that  it  is  not  wholly  unknowable,  what  busi-
ness have  we  to  call  it  the  unknowable  ?

But  this  is  not  all.  All  reasorring  that  does  npt
confine  itself  to  an  analysis  of  the  logical  necessities
of  our  thought,  must  be  based  upon  some  real  evid-
ence, must  have  some  ground  from  which  it  draws
its  conclusions.  But  if  so,  that  evidence  must  have
a  determinate  character,  which  must  affect  its  con-
clusions, and  which  may,  if  we  choose,  appear  in
them.  The  inference  as  to  the  existence  of  a  thing
may  often  be  so  much  the  most  important  as  to  be
the  only  one  we  care  to  derive  from  our  evidence,
but  in  itself  it  says  least.  An  existential  judgnient
cannot  be  made  unless  we  have  grounds  for  assert-
ing very  much  more  than  bare  existence.  Either
we  have  no  grounds  for  asserting  the  existence  of  a
thing  at  all,  or  we  have  grounds  for  asserting  a
certain  kind  of  existence,  an  existence  of  a  deter-
minate character.  It  follows  from  these  general
principles  of  reasoning,  that,  in  this  case  also,  the
evidence  on  the  strength  of  which  we  inferred  the
existence  of  an  unknowable  beyond  the  known,  can
never  justify  an  inference  merely  to  the  bare  exist-
ence of  the  unknowable.  That  inference  must  to
some  extent  reveal  the  nature  of  the  unknowable ;
it  must  present  us  with  some  hints  of  its  attributes
or  qualities  ;  the  character  of  the  unknowable  must
to  some  extent  appear  in  its  action.  And  so  the
paradoxical  result  ensues,  that  we  really  find  our-


22  AGNOSTICISM.

selves  in  possession  of  a  good  deal  of  knowledge
about  the  unknowable.  Indeed  it  has  been  plaus-
ibly remarked,  that,  in  the  course  of  Mr.  Spencer's
philosophy,  we  are  afforded  far  more  informa6<m
about  the  Unknowable  than  the  combined  efforts  of
revelation  and  theology  have  yet  given  us  concern-
ing God.^

§  4.  And  there  is  no  way  by  which  Agnosticism
can  escape  its  fundamental  contradiction.  Either
the  nature  of  the  known  does  not  justify  the  infer-
ence to  an  unknowable  beyond,  or,  if  it  does,  the
unknowable  ipso  facto  becomes  knowable.  '  All  that
any  reasoning  can  ever  prove  is  the  unknown  ;  but
no  valid  process  of  thought  will  carry  us  from  the
unknown  to  the  unknowable.  Agnosticism  has
here  mistaken  the  unknown  for  the  unknowable,
and  imagined  that  because  the  known  could  suggest
the  unknown,  it  could  also  suggest  an  unknowable
beyond  itself.

But  this  is  a  paralogism.  The  known  can  sug-
gest the  unknown,  and  there  is  nothing  extraord-
inary in  the  existence  of  the  latter,  because  know-
ledge is  fragmentary,  and  reality  points  to  realities
beyond  it :  we  have  problems  that  are  not  solved,
and  facts  that  are  not  independent.  But  unsolved
problems  are  not  on  that  account  insoluble,  nor  are
unknown  facts  unknowable.  Science  may  become
conscious  of  something  beyond  the  known,  because


1  The  Unknowable  has  a  high  character  in  Mr.  Spencer's
philosophy.  It  is  orderly  and  considerate  in  its  habits,  and
always  "  conserves  "  the  same  amount  of  its  various  "  manifesta-
tions" in  the  world.  This  is  all  the  more  estimable,  as  if  it  did
not  do  this,  if  ^'.^..it  suddenly  took  to  manifesting  itself  as  mind
instead  of  as  matter,  or  vice  versA,  it  might  very  easily  make
knowledge  impossible.


NO EVIDENCE FOR THE UNKNOWABLE.  23

the  facts  suggest  it,  but  they  can  never  suggest  that
it  should  be  unknowable.

For  the  fact  that  the  unknown  persists  in  spite  of
the  advance  of  knowledge  is  insufficient  to  prove
it  unknowable ;  it  is  a  phenomenon  which  must
persist  until  knowledge  is  completed  and  the  un-
known is  exhausted.  Nor  can  we  lay  serious  stress
upon  Mr.  Spencer's  argument  that  the  circle  of
"  surrounding  nescience  "  grows  with  every  advance
of  science.  Not  only  is  the  truth  of  this  statement
doubtful,  but  its  importance  is  slight.  For  a  finite
unknown  can  never  grow  into  an  infinite  unknow-
able, and  even  its  growth  is  due  only  to  the  mis-
taken practice  of  explaining  the  more  known  by
means  of  the  less  known.  If  we  work  down  the
pyramid,  of  knowledge,  and  regard  the  lower  know-
ledge as  the  deeper,  we  shall  necessarily  find  that
the  lower  layers  are  more  extensive.

§  5.  But  there  is  no  real  warrant  for  the  assert-
ion that  either  our  thought  or  its  objects  display
an  inherent  necessity  to  plunge  into  an  infinite
process,  the  only  plea  which  could  to  some  extent
excuse  Agnosticism.

There  is  no  infinite  process  implied  in  the  exist-
ence of  things,  for  existence  is  the  highest  category
of  the  Real,  and  a  thing  cannot  be  more  than  a  fact.
Prima  facie,  therefore,  there  is  no  need  to  go
beyond  the  fact ;  a  harmonious  fact  is  as  final  to
knowledge  as  it  is  to  action.  Its  existence  needs
no  explanation.  If,  therefore,  a  fact  is  asserted  to
be  inharmonious  or  incongruous,  the  burden  of,
proof  lies  with  those  who  are  not  satisfied  with
hings  as  they  find  them,  and  the  unknown  and  un-
satisfactory element  has  to  be  demonstrated  in  each
case. And  in  an  imperfectly-evolved  world  such


24  Agnosticism.

thought-provoking  facts  must  be  common,  but  they
will  not  justify  the  assumption  of  an  essentially  un-
knowable element — not  unless  the  ideal  of  complete
adaptation,  of  a  completely  congruous  system  of
facts  be  renounced  as  an  illusion.

Neither  is  an  unknowable  infinity  latent  in
thought.  Our  search  for  explanation  does  not  go
on  to  infinity — on  the  contrary,  an  infinite  regress  of
reasons  is  no  reason  at  all — but  only  until  we  reach
some  really  or  apparently  self-evident  principle.  If
therefore  our  principles  were  always  self-evident,
and  our  facts  always  harmonious,  there  would  be
nothing  to  suggest  a  mystery  beyond  the  actual,
either  of  knowledge  or  of  life,  no  hint  of  an  un-
known, and  still  less  of  an  unknowable,  working
behind  the  veil.  If  a  self-evident  certainty  of
knowledge  and  a  self-sufficing  harmony  of  life  be
.the  ideal  of  our  theoretic  and  practical  activities,  it
is  clear  that  they  have  no  sympathy  with  a  restless
and  endless  striving  after  the  infinite.

The  infinite  region  of  the  unknowable,  which  is
supposed  to  border  knowledge,  is  nothing,  and  can
gain  no  support  from  the  fact  that  our  knowledge  is,
like  all  things,  limited.  For  as  we  shall  see  [§  7],
a  limit  does  not  imply  anything  beyond  it,  and  the
infinite  is  only  a  negation,  the  ideal  limit  of  the
finite  [cf.  ch.  ix.  §  3].  Hence  we  may,  console  our-
selves with  the  reflection  that  even  if  a  real  limit
to  knowledge  existed,  pur  thought  could  never  dis-
cover its  reality.  It  would  always  regard  it  as  an
ideal  limit,  not  as  something  beyond  the  known,
but  as  the  illusion  of  the  self-transcendence  of
knowledge.

§  6. It  has  been  shown  then  that  the  assertion
of  any  unknowable  is  self-contradictory,  and that


COLLAPSE OF THE UNKNOWABLE.  25

knowledge,  no  matter  what  its  difificulties  may  be,
can  never  afford  any  positive  ground  for  the  as-
sumption of  an  unknowable.  But  if  agnostics  per-
sist in  their  assertions  as  a  matter  of  faith,  without
having  any  positive  basis  of  evidence,  we  may
request  them  at  least  to  make  their  theory  consist-
ent. If  they  gratuitously  assume  an  unknowable,
they  must  at  least  purify  their  assumption  from  an
illusory  reference  to  reality.  If  any  connection  with
the  known  degrades  the  unknowable  into  the  known,
that  link  must  be  broken.  The  agnostics  must  pass
over  for  good  into  the  region  of  the  unknowable
and  unthinkable,  and  burn  their  boats.  They  must
make  the  separation  between  the  unknowable  and
our  real  world  complete,  and  carry  it  out  consist-
'  ently.  They  must  no  longer  be  allowed  to  base
anything  upon  the  unknowable,  to  make  it  the
ground  of  anything  actual,  the  cause  of  anything
real,  the  reason  of  anything,  rational.  They  must
no  longer  be  allowed  to  decorate  their  first  principle
with  an  initial  capital,  for  to  spell  it  with  U,  is  to
liken  it  to  reality  in  the  known  world,  to  attribute
existence  to  it,  to  make  an  adjectival  negation  of
knowledge  into  a  substantive  fact ;  in  a  word,  to
hypostasize  it.  They  must  be  prevented  from  say-
ing even  that  the  unknowable  exists,  for  existence
also  is  a  predicate  of  the  known  world.  Rigorously,
the  only  statement  they  can  be  permitted  to  make
is,  that  it  is  unknowable,  and  has  no  connection  with
the  known.

But  this  proposition  would  suggest  nothing  to  our
minds,  just  as  nothing  can  validly  suggest  it  to  them;
if  we  could  hold  the  self-contradictory  hypothesis
that  the  unknowable  existed,  we  should  yet  have  to
admit  that  its  existence  could  never  be  discovered;


26  AGNOSTICISM.

And  if  such  consequences  of  his  doctrine  do  not
convince  the  agnostic  that  an  unknowable,  which  is
truly  unknowable,  truly  out  of  relation  to  the  known,
is  nothing,  nothing  ever  will.

§  7.  The  inherent  contradictions  of  the  agnostic
position  generally  having  been  exposed,  it  becomes
necessary  to  point  out  the  flaws  in  the  special  argu-
ments of  Mr.  Spencer  and  of  Kant,  and  to  detect
the  weak  points  in  the  "  antinomies  "  in  which  they
have  sought  to  enmesh  the  human  reason.

Spencer's  positive  arguments  in  favour  of  the
assumption  of  an  unknowable,, if  indeed  they  should
be  called  arguments  rather  than  metaphors  drawn
from  a  mistaken  comparison  of  knowledge  and
Space,  have  been  already,  to  a  considerable  extent,
dealt  with.

It  is  not  true  that  science  is  "a  gradually
increasing  sphere  in  which  every  addition  to  its
surface  brings'  us  into  wider  contact  with  surround-
ing nescience."  Neither  is  it  true  that  "  at  the
uttermost  reach  of  discovery  there  arises,  and  must
continue  to  arise,  the  question — What  lies  beyond  ?  "
or  that  "we  cannot  conceive  any  exiplanation  pro-
found enough  to  exclude  the  question — What  is  the
explanation  of  that  explanation  ?  "

It  is  indeed  true  that  "  positive  knowledge  does
not,  and  cannot,  fill  the  whole  region  of  possible
knowledge,"  if  under  "  possible  knowledge "  we  in-
clude, as  Mr.  Spencer  apparently  wishes  us  to
include,  every  casual  question  of  fools  and  madmen.
But  no  sane  thought  will  argue  on  possibilities  that
everything  might  have  been  different  from  what  it
is,  or  trouble  itself  to  consider  the  consequences  of
such  absurd  assumptions,  nor  will  it  seek  an  explan-
ation of  the  self-evident,  nor,  when  it  has  reached


THE FINITUDE OF KNOWLEDGE.  27

the  ultimate  fact,  will  it  stray  beyond  it  into  the
shadowy  region  of  fiction.

But  if  the  argument  concerning  the  infinite  pro-
cess of  thought  cannot  be  regarded  as  more  than  a
inistaken  metaphor  from  Space,  the  argument  which
follows  rises  to  a  positive  fallacy  from  ,the  same
source.

Mr.  Spencer  says :  ^  "  To  -think  of  the  First
Cause  zs,  finite  (  =  limited  in  power)  is  to  think  of
it  as  limited.  To  think  of  it  as  limited,  necessarily
implies  a  conception  of  something  beyond  its  limits ;
it  is  absolutely  impossible  to  conceive  a  thing  as
bounded  (  =  limited  in  space),  without  conceiving  a
region  surrounding  its  boundaries."

We  have  ventured  to  emphasize  by  the  use  of
italics  the  curious  transition  from  finite  to  bounded
by  means  of  the  ambiguous  middle  term,  limited,
for  it  is  on  this  that  the  argument  depends.
Boundaries  are,  of  course,  frankly  spatial,  and  Space
is,  of  course,  in  some  sense  infinite  (ch,  ix.,  §  2  ff.).
But  the  limited  is  used'  not  merely  in  a  spatial  sense,
but  also,  moire  widely,  in  a  sense  to  which  spatial
analogies  no  longer  apply.  Every  boundary  is  a
limit,  but  not  every  limit  is  a  boundary.  Limits
exist  in  thoughts  and  feelings  as  well  as  in  Space.
When  the  stupidity  of  a  sensational  novel  reaches
the  limits  of  his  endurance,  Mr.  Spencer  does  not
perceive  a  black  line  on  the  paper.  Or  again,  a
process  of  inference  is  limited  by  its  premisses  and  its
conclusion,  but  these  are  neither  straight  lines  nor
crooked.  Again,  it  is  not  one  of  the  difficulties  of  a
limited  liability  company  that  it  is  necessarily  sur-
rounded by  an  infinite  ocean  of  liabilities.  It  is  not
true,  then,  that  in  thought  a  limit,  necessarily  and
^  "  First  Principles,"  p.  37.


28  AGNOSTICISM.

as  such,  implies  anything  beyond  it :  the  not-known
remains  a  merely  logical  possibility,  an  empty  figure
of  speech,  devoid  of  real  content :  it  can  lend  no
help  to  infer  the  real  contrary  of  knowledge,  the
unknown,  and  still  less  does  it  involve  the  un-
knowable. ^

§  8.  But  Mr.  Spencer,  after  the  fashion  of  agnost-
ics, lays  far  more  stress  on  the  indirect  than  on  the

'^  Mr.  Spencer,  when  hard  pressed  for  reasons  in  favour  of  a
positive  unknowable,  does  indeed  make  use  of  another  argument
("  First  Princ,"  p.  88),  which  respect  for  his  other  achievements
must  make  his  critics  reluctant  to  dwell  on.  He  suggests  that
"  besides  the  definite  consciousness  of  which  logic  formulates  the
laws,  there  is  also  an  indefinite  consciousness  which  cannot  be
formulated  .  .  .  and  which  is  yet  real  as  being  a  normal
affection  of  the  intellect."

Is  not  this  a  clear  confession  of  the  extra-logical  character  of
the  agnostic's  faith  in  the  Unknowable  ?  And  there  has  been
nothing  like  this  "  indefinite  consciousnesSi"  invented  to  know  the
Unknowable,  since  the  days  when  Plato  declared  that  Not-Being
was  voBw  \nyicrfiiS  dirrov,  to  be  grasped  only  by  spurious  reasoning!
And  the  spuriousness  of  its  nature  seems  to  affect  also  the
arguments  in  its  favour,,  for  a  little  further  down  we  find  Mr.
Spencer  contending  that  "an  argument  .  .  .  which  assigns
to  a  term  a  certain  meaning,  but  ends  in  showing  that  this  term
has  no  such  meaning,  is  simply  elaborate  suicide.  Clearly  then
the  very  demonstration  that  a  definite  consciousness  of  the
Absolute  is  impossible  unavoidably  presupposes  an  indefinite
consciousness  of  it."  Has  Mr.  Spencer  never  heard  of  the  method
of  redudio  ad  absurdum,  and  does  he  regard  the  fourth  propos-
ition of  the  first  book  of  Euclid  as  a  suicidal  argument  ?  And
does  he  seriously  think  that  "the  very  proof  that  a  definite
consciousness  of  Unicorns  or  Chimeras  is  impossible,  must
necessarily  involve  an  indefinite  consciousness  of  them  "  ?  And
would  the  proof  of  the  fictitious  character  of  unicorns  really
destroy  in  his  mind  the  reality  of  their  "  correlative,"  all  two-
horned  animals  ?  It  would  have  been  better  if  in  matters  of
logic,  one  of  the  few  subjects  to  which  he  could  not  claim  to  have
made  any  important  addition,  he  had  followed,  as  in  the  rest  of
his  arguments  for  Agnosticism,  the  guidance  of  Mansel  and  of
Hamilton.


IS INCOMPATIBLE WITH EVOLUTION.  29

direct  argument  for  the  unknowable.  And  it  is,  of
course,  always  possible  to  produce  considerable
effect  by  parading  the  real  difficulties  of  metaphysics.
But  here  again  there  are  plenty  of  unknowns  but
no  unknowable,  plenty  of  unsolved  problems  and
some  which  are  doubtless  insoluble  if  perversely
stated,  but  none  which  can  be  declared  insoluble  in
themselves.

And  least  of  all  can  Mr.  Spencer  assert  that  these
problems  are  insoluble  without  being  false  to  his
own  principles.  An  evolutionist  must  surely  be
the  last  to  believe  that  any  problems  need  remain
insoluble  because  they  have  not  hitherto  been
solved,  the  last  to  restrict  by  a  dogmatic  prohibition,
even  in  thought,  the  boundless  possibilities  of  future
development.  Indeed  the  raison  d'etre  of  this
essay  is  to  show  how  evolution  may  lead  to  the
solution  of  many  of  these  apparently  insoluble
questions.  A  great  part  of  Mr.  Spencer's  content-
ion may  indeed  be  accepted  without  qualification.
The  contradictions  in  the  conceptions  of  Matter,
Motion, ,  Rest,  and  Force  are  insoluble,  and  fraught
with  dire  consequences  to  all  knowledge  when
manipulated  by  the  sceptic  (ch.  iii.  §  5-8).'  They
can  be  justified  only  as  relative  conceptions  which
must  be  transcended  by  metaphysical  inquiry  in  the
seartfh  for  ultimate  truth.  Space  and  Time,  again,
present  real  difficulties  and  will  cause  us  much
trouble.  The  impossibility,,  on  the  other  hand,  of
treating  the  Self  as  an  object  of  knowledge  and  of
finding  the  ends  of  the  thread  of  consciousness  ^  will
turn  out  a  fortunate  and  serviceable  fact.

§  9. Mr.  Spencer's  account  of  the  problems  of

^  "  First  Principles,"  p.  66.


30  AGNOSTICISM.

self- existence and causation, on the other hand,
deserves  closer  attention.

He  rightly  says  that  we  must  assume  self-existence
somewhere,  and  infers  that  we  may  as  well  assume
it  of  the  worjd  as  of  a  transcendent  deity  and  cause
of  the  world.  Nothing  is  gained  by  accounting  for
the  world  by  a  self-existing  God ;  we  have  merely
'  needlessly  multiplied  entities.  And  either  theory  is
equally  unable  to  satisfy  our  demand  for  a  why :  ■
we  can  as  little  tell  why  God  should  exist  as  why
the  world  should  :  we  must  seek  a  cause  of  the
existence  of  God  just  as  of  the  world.

It  will  be  seen  from  this  that  Mr.  Spencer  admits
that  we  are  prima  facie  entitled  to  ask  the  why
of  the  world  and  the  cause  of  its  existence,  but
considers  our  demand '  futile,  because  the  same  de-
mand may  be  renewed  upon  any  answer  we  may
get.  It  will  be  necessary,  therefore,  for  any  one
asserting  the  self-existence  of  God,  while  denying
that  of  the  world,  to  make  a  distinction  between
their  cases,  which  will  justify  their  different  treat-
ment.

And  it  is  not  perhaps  so  difficult  to  make  such
a  distinction  as  it  might  at  first  appear.  It  was
shown  above  (§  5)  that  our  thought  does  not  possess
a  futile  craving  after  infinite  explanations,  but  that
its  inquiries  must  in  every  case  be  suggested*  and
provoked  by  something  outside  it.  The  impetus  to
thought  is  given  by  the  discordant  aspects  of  facts.
We  do  not  ask  the  why  of  a  fact,  unless  the  fact  is
so  constituted  as  to  provoke  us  to  this  question.
If,  therefore,  we  raise  the  question  of  the  why  of
the  world,  this  is  not  due  to  some  gratuitous  vagary
of  our  thought,  but  to  the  fact  that  the  world  is  so
constituted as irresistibly  to raise this question.


THE PROBLEM OF SELF-EXISTENCE.  3 1

Hence  it  does  so,  not  in  virtue  of  being  a  world  as
such,  but  in  consequence  of  being  a  world  of  a
certain  kind,  with  a  certain  character  which  prompts
us  to  ask  certain  questions.  It  is  because  the  world
does  not  appear  to  be  self -caused,  that  we  ask  for  its
cause.  And  conceivably  the  answer  we  gave  to
this  question  might  be  the  vision  of  a  fact  that)
would  not,  when  reached,  arouse  in  us  the  same
desire  to  ask  the  reason  why.  If,  therefore,  our
conception  of  the  Deity  as  the  cause  of  the  world,
substituted  a  harmonious  fact  for  a  discordant  one,
a  truly  concordant  cosmos  for  the  conflict  of  unin-
telligible chaos,  we  should  have  succeeded,  not
merely  in  postponing,  but  in  actually  solving  the
problem.  But  is  the  theory  of  the'  causation  ot
our  world  by  a  self-existent  Deity  such  a  solution  ?
This  is  at  least  possible  ;  for  while  the  self-existence
of  the  world  is  inferred  from  its  character  to  be  im-
possible, and  its  existence  is  felt  to  require  an
explanation,  that  of  God  may  eventually  be  seen
not  to  require  explanation.  At  all  events  the  ex-
planation is  not  an  immediate  necessity,  and  in  the
course  of  evolution  many  things  no  less  wonderful
may  happen.  Thus  the  question  of  self-existence
and  the  conception  of  causation  may  be  relative  to
an  imperfect  world  still  in  the  process  of  its  develop-
ment; and  together  with  the  imperfection  which
drove  us  to  seek  a  cause  of  the  existent,  the
category  by  which  we  sought  to  explain  it  may
itself  disappear.  The  conception  of  causation  may
become  simply  inapplicable  and  unmeaning  in  a
state  of  perfect  adaptation  (ch,  xii.).  For  it  is  bound
up  with  physical  Becoming  or  change;  and  as  in  the
case  of  perfect  adaptation,  the  organism  and  the
environment  would  be  in  sqch  complete  correspond-


32  AGNOSTICISM.

ence  that  each  would  instantaneously  respond  to
every  change  in  either ;  and  as  there  would  hence
be  no  interval  of  imperfect  adaptation,  no  change
could  be  perceived  and  no  consciousness  of  change
'could  arise.  And  without  consciousness  of  change
there  would  be  no  occasion  for  the  use  of  the
conception  of  causation.

It  is  impossible,  therefore,  for  an  evolutionist,
consistently  with  his  principles,  to  maintain  that  any
conception  must  remain  what  it  now ;  is  and  Mr.
Spencer,  while  half  admitting  this,  is  really  trying
to  combine  two  irreconcilable  views  when  he  says  :  ^
"  The  ideas  of  cause  and  origin,  which  have  been
slowly  changing,  will  change  still  further.  But  no
changes  in  them,  even  when  pushed  to  the  extreme,  •
will  expel  them  from  consciousness.  .  .  .  No  more
in  this  than  in  other  things  will  Evolution  alter  its
general  direction."  But  how,  we  may  reasonably
ask,  can  Mr.  Spencer  tell  from  the  general  direction
of  ,  evolution  in  the  past,  that  the  relation  of  our
conception  of  causation  to  self-existence  will  not
undergo  important  and  radical  changes  ?  And
may  not  a  continuous  change  in  degree  finally
amount  to  a  change  in  kind  .-'  Not  only  will  these
conceptions  change,  but  they  may  be  wholly  trans-
formed or  become\^'holly  otiose,  because  nothing
would  any  longer  correspond  to  them.  Thus,  in
a  state  of  complete  adaptation  or  "  Being,"  there
would  be  no  Becoming,  z>.,  no  change  for  which  it
was  needful  to  discovef  a.  cSUse. (Ch.  iv.  §  4,  xii.  §  4.)

And  this  is  the  real  reason  why  our  present
changing  world  is^  felt  to  be  explained,  when  it  is
referred  to  a  self-existent  Deity  as  its  cause. For

1  In  the  volume  on  Sociology  in  the  International  Scientific
Series,  p.  309.


IS A FIRST CAUSE CONCEIVABLE  ?  33.

J

God  is  conceived  as  in  a -state  of  "  Being,"  and  even
when  not  regarded  as  perfectly  unchanging,  He  has
attributed  to  Him  at  least  that  amount  of  permanence
or  Being  which  is  implied  in  self-identity.  We  find,
therefore,  that  when  we  inquire,  not  into  existence
in  general,  but  only  into  that  special  portion  of  it  '.
which  constitutes  our  world,  a  self- existent  God
may  explain  it  in  a  way  in  which  it  could  never
explain  itself.

§  10. And  a  similar  solution may  be  given  to
the  parallel  difficulty  conceraing  the  cause  of  the
First  Cause. Mr.  Spencer  urges  that  the  assumpt-
ion of  a  first  cause  is  firtile,  because  we  must  con-
tinue to  ask  for  further  causes  of  the  first  cause  aal
infinitum,  and  somewhat  unJHstly  regards  the  diffic-  ,
ulty  as  one  in  the  '  metaphysical '  conception  of  a
first  cause  instead  off  in  the  '  scientific '  conception  of
causation  generally. And  yet  the  conception  of  a
first  cause  represents  only  an  attempt  to  escape  from
the  difficulty  of  the  infinite  regress  which  is  inherent
in  every  form  of  causation. Whatever,  therefore,  it
proves,  is  proved  against  the  use  of  the  conception
of  causation  generally,  i.e.,  the  drift  of  the  argument
is  sceptical  and  not  agnostic. And,  as  a  matter  of
fact,  a  First  Cause,  if  the  meaning  of  the  term  is
properly  limited,  is  open  to  raj;her less  objection
than  an  ordinary  cause. If  it  is  taken  as  an  absolute
First  Cause  of  all  things,  it  is  indeed  unthinkable,
whereas a  relative  first  cause  of  our  phenomenal
world  may  turn out  a  conception  both  valid  and
useful.

An  absolute  First  Cause  of  the  universe  as  such
(oTrXwy),  is  absurd,  because  it  is  a  supposition  which
would  explain  nothing,  and  would  only  contradict ,
itself. It  could  not  explain  the  Becoming  or  cause

R.  ofS.  .  D


34  AGNOSTICISM.

of  the  changes  in  our  world.  For  there  could  be
nothing  either  within  or  without  it  to  cause  it  to  be
the  cause  of  the  world  at  one  time  rather  than  at
another.  For  if  there  were  anything  that  could
thus  compel  it  to  become  a  cause,  that  something
would  itself  be  the  first  cause.  Whatever,  there-
fore, the  condition  of  the  First  Cause  happened  to
be,  ft  would  remain  for  ever,  without  change,  alike
whether  no  world  existed  at  all  or  whether
myriad  worlds  were  mirrored  in  its  dream.
Since,  then,  the.  world  exists,  it  must  always  have
existed.  But  if  it  has  always  existed,  it  has  not
come  into  being,  and  hence  it  has  had  no  cause.
And  not  only  does  this  result  contradict  our  premiss,
that  a  first  cause  of  the  world  existed,  but  it  does
not  even  appear  how  an  absolute  first  cause  could  be
a  cause  at  all.  For,  as  the  cause  of  the  All  would
be  all,  the  sum  of  its  existence  could  neither  be
increased  nor  diminished  :  it  would  be  equally  all-
embracing,  whether  the  world  existed  or  not.  It
could  gain  nothing  then  by  the  creation,  and  lose
nothing  by  the  destruction  of  the  world :  it  would
contain  nothing  ^hat  could  determine  it  at  one  time
to  create,  at  another  to  remain  in  motionless  absorpt-
ion in  itself.  The  changes,  therefore,  of  our  world
are  not  in  the  least  explained  by  such  a  cause.  {Cf.
ch.  x,  §  II.)

If,  therefore,  we  put  the  First  Cause  of  our  world
=  a  First  Cause  of  all  things,  the  result  is  confusion,
and  the  collapse  of  our  conception.  But  no  such
consequence  need  follow  if  we  regard  the  First
Cause  as  the  cause  merely  of  our  universe,  not  of
the  totality  of  existence.  The  question  as  to  the
cause  of  the  First  Cause  may  then  be  met  by  the
suggestion  that  to  a  non-phenomenal First  Cause


KANTS THEORY OF KNOWLEDGE.  35

tlie  category  of  causation,  to  which  the  difficultyfs
due,  is  not  applicable  in  the  same  way-  as-  ti3  the
phenomenal  causes  of  physical  sci'ence.

§  II.  The  Kantian  Agnosticism,  to  whiclf  we
must  next  direct  our  attention;  has  proved  as  stimul-
ating to  philosophers  as  the  Spencerian  has  been
comforting  to  scientists,  when  afflicted  with  doubts
as  to  whether  a  rational'  interpretation  of  their  first
principles  was  possible.  And  just  as  the  discovery
of  the  Unknowable  appeared  to  the  one  the  crown-
ing achievement  of  human  knowledge,  so  it  has
seemed  to  the  others  a  discovery  most  important  to
knowledge  that  we  could  not  know  certain  subjects.
Indeed,  the  whole  of  post- Kantian  philosophy  seems
to  be'  occupied  in  persistent  but  futile  attempts  to
wriggle  out  of  Kant's  conclusions  while  accepting
their  basis,  or  in  expounding  the  meaning  of 'an
argument  so  subtle  that  only  a  born  metaphys-^
ician  could  make  his  way  unaided  through  its  ob-
scurities. And  as  complete  success,  either,  in
establishing  the  Kantian  case,  or  in  making  it  wholly
intelligible  to  the  world,  would  destroy  the  whole
occupation  of  philosophers,  it  is  perhaps  fortunate
that  they  have  not  committed  the  happy  despatch
by  doing  the  only  thing  they  supposed  themselves
entitled  to  attempt.

The  difference  between  Spencerian  and  Kantian
Agnosticism  may  be  roughly  forihulated  as  being,
that  while  the  former  declares  knowledge  impossible
because  of  its  knowledge  of  the  Unknowable,  the
latter  does  so  because  of  its  knowledge  of  the  im-
potencies  of  our  knowledge.  By  Kant,  the  possib-
ility of  metaphysics  is  denied,  not  because  of  the
infinite  complexity  of  things,  begetting  an  infinite
process of  knowledge,  but because  of  the faulty


'2)6  .-agnosticism;.

constitution  of  our  niinds,  and  the  limitations  of  our-
faculties,  'It  is  not  that  things  actively  elude  our
minds,  but  that  our  knowledge  cannot  reach  them.
Its  activity  cannot  penetrate  to  the  real  nature  of
things,  or  disturb'the  serene  calm  of  their  essences,
the  "otium  cum  digiiitate  of  the  thing-in-itself."
We  can  know  only  appearances,  not  fee  ultimate
(which  is  also  the  real)  nature  ef  things.  In
Kantian  language,  our  knowledge  is  oilly  of  pheno-
mena not  of  Noumena.

§  12. Now, as we have already pointed out'
,(§  3~6),  the  absurdity  of  making* unknowable  realities,
the  causes  of  phenomena,  it  is  "here  merely  necess-
ary to point  out how  this assumption,  in Kant's
special  form,  is  refuted  dy  himself,  and  contradicts-
his  own  clearly  enunciated  principles.

Kant  himself  lays  great  stress  on  the  fact  that  all
the  categories  or  fundamental  conceptions  of  our
knowledge  have  a  value  and  a  meaning  only  relat-'
ively  to  the  world  of  our  experience,  in  his  own/'
phrase,  are  "  of  immanent  application."  Now  chief
among  these  categories  are  the  conceptions  of  Sub-
stance and  Cause.  Hence,  on  Kant's  own  showing,
the  unknowable  Noumena  can  be  neither  substances
nor  causes.  And  yet,  unless  they  are  both,  we  can
neither  say  that  they  are,  nor  that  they  are  the
causes  of  phenomena.  They  are  not  substances,  i.e.,
they  do  not  exist,  they  are  not  causes,  i.e.,  if  they
did,  they  would  explain  nothing.  It  remains  that
they  are  nothing,  and  that  Kant's  doctrine  of  the
unknowable  Noumena  is  a  mistake.

That  this  is  so,  has  been  generally  admitted  by
all  competent  critics  of  Kant ;  but  it  is  astonishing
that  this  result  should  have  led  so  few  of  them  to
question  the  soundness  of  the  basis  from  which
Kant  was  able  to  reach  such  absurd  conclusions.


FORM"  AND  matter;  37'

'§1 3.  Kant's  great  discovery,  in  his  own  estimat-
ion was,  that  the  inquiry  into  the  nature  of  our
knowing  faculty  must  precede  actual  investigation.
We:  must  discover  how  we  can  know,  before  we
examine  what  we  do  know.  This  is  the  gist  of  the
famous  Criticism,  and  the  basis  of  a  theory  of  know-
ledge which  substituted  "  epistemology. "  for  meta*
physics.  But  though  this  undertaking  is  apparently,'-
simple,  it  involves  several  assumptions  which  are  rio
longer  admissible  in  the  present  state  of  our  know-
ledge.

§  14,  It  involves,  jn  the  first  place,  the  assumpt-
ion that  the  Form.and  Matter  of  knowledge  can  be
separated  :.  that  the  growth  of  the  Matter  does  not
affect  its  Form,  and  that  hence  it.  is  possible  to
examine  the  knowing  faculty.,  independently,  and
that  any  conclusion-,  arrived  at  concerning  it  will
hold  good  of  all. our  knowledge  for  all  time.  For,
unless  all  possibilities  of  valid  inference  can  be
determined  with-  absolute  certainty,  in  consequence
of  an  exhaustive  analysis  of  their  forms,  it  is  evident
that  the  future  course  of  knowledge  cannot  be  pre-
dicted. And  yet,  even  as  a  matter  of  pure  logic,  it
seems  that  no  such  separation  of  Form  and  Matter
is  .possible.  The  "pure  forms"  collapse  as  empty
abstractions,  when.,  it  is  attempted  to  treat  them  as
independent  realities.  The  "laws  of  thought"  by
themselves  do  not  work  nor  lead  to  real  knowledge.
Even  in  logic,  thought  turns  out  to  be  an  organism
in  which  form,  and  matter  imply  each  other,  so  that
each  grows-with  the  growth  of  the  other.

And  when,  we  go  on  to  the  principles  of  actual
investigation,  it  appears  still  more  clearly  that  we
can  never  know  until  we  try.  The  process,  which
is  fruitful  of  results,  cannot  be  predicted  beforehand,
but  only  analysed  after  the  event And  every  such


o


8  AGNOSTICISM.


result  in  some  way  modifies  the  principles  from
which  we  started,  and  the  method  by  which  we
reached  it.  Thus,  the  application  of  the  Historical
Method  to  iDiological  science  has  not  only  been  most
fruitful  of  results,  but  it  has  reacted  profoundly
upon  the  method  itself,  and  changed  the  whole
course  of  sociological  inquiry.

We  cannot  know,  then,  .how  we  know,  except  in
dependence  upon  what  we  know.  The  theory  of
knowledge  appears  only  -from  its  practice,  and  it  is
a  prejudice  to  think  that  it  can  be  prejudged.

§  15.  And  the  Kantian  separation  of  the  form
and  matter  of  knowledge  is  not  only  vicious  on
general  grounds,  but  the  whole  epistemological
standpoint  is  utterly  irreconcilable  with  the  modern
conception  of  the  world  as  an  evolution.  The
ft  Kantian  theory  of  knowledge  is  able  to  assert  that
the  mind  can  never  do  certain  things,  because  it
claims  to  have  given  an  exhaustive  account  and  a
complete  classification  of  the  powers  and  impot-
encies  of  the  human  mind.

But  how  if  the  mind  which  it  analyses  have  not
the  dead  fixity  of  an  artificial  machine,  but  be  a
living  organism  with  boundless  capacities  for  de-
velopment ?  How  then,  can  any  classification  of
its  faculties  be  complete  or  -conclusive  ?  How  can
one  analyse  the  latent  germs  which  have  not  yet
reached  the  surface  ?  how  foretell  the  future  growth,
'  even,'  of  what  yet  lacks  its  full  development  ?
Why,  even  the  impotencies  of  our  minds  may  be
potentialities  prescient  of  future  powers!  And
these  suggestions  are  so  far  from  being  unverified
analogies  from  other  spheres  of  knowledge,  that  we
can  already  actually  trace  some  startling  changes
in  the  development  of  our  categories.  (Ch.  iii,  §  10.)


EVOLUTION V. EPISTEMOLOGY.  39

It  would  be  more  to  the  purpose  if,  instead  of
attacking  others,  epistemology  looked  to  itself,— if,
instead  of  interfering  with  metaphysics  and  psy-
chology, it  raised  its  own  stock  question  about  it-
self and  cojnsidered  'Jiow,'  if  at  all,  'epistemology
was  possible.'

§  16.  The  epistemologieal  standpoint,  then,  is
false,  because  it  makes  no  allowance  for  the  growth  .
of  the  faculties  of  the  mind  which  it  attempts  to
analyse,  and  so  it  can  not  establish  unknowable
limits  to  thought,  or  prove  anything  against  the
possibility  of  metaphysics.  But  it  is  also  so  im-
potent in  itself,  and  so  inherently  futile  that  it  can-
not, legitimately  and  in  accordance  with  its  own
principles,  even  attempt  any  attack  upon  meta-
physics. It  is  not  only  false,  but  barren.  To
establish  a  proposition  which  may  appear  somewhat
startling,  let  us  recollect  why  the  Kantian  doctrine
of  Noiimena  broke  down.  ,  It  broke  down  in
attempting  to  pass  from  phenomena  to  things-in-
themselves.  And  it  broke  down.3ecause  it  attempted
to  transcend  itself  and  to  ignore  the  limits  of  its
method.  It  may  be  asserted  further  that  epistem-
ology must  break  down  whenever  it  tries  to  trans-
cend its  limits,  and  that  it  is  yet  under  constant,
temptation  to  attempt  this,  because  if  it  does  not  and
keeps  within  its  proper  limits,  it  is  utterly  useless.

§  17.  For  it  professes  to  be  nothing  but  an
"  immanent  criticism  of  experience,"  an  account  of
what  is  "  implied  in  knowledge."  What  is  implied
in  this  attitude,  however,  is,  that  it  can  neither
generate  nor  criticize  actual  knowledge.  Given
actual  knowledge,  "  Criticism "  can  analyse  it,  can
tell  us  what  is  implied  in  it.  It  can  show  us  what
categories  we  have  used,  and  how  the  "forms  of


4Q  AGNOSTICISM.

thought"  are  combined  with  the  matter.  It  can
re- arrange  the  factors  in  knowledge  and  show  us
the  logical  connexions  of  its  elements.  But  it  can
do  no  more.  It  can  bring  to  the  surface  what  is
concealed  in  the  depth,  it  can  render  explicit  what
was  implicit,  but  it  can  create  nothing  new.  It  can
neither  account  for  the  origin,  nor  jjudge  of  the
ultimate  validity  of  any  actual  bit  of  knowledge.
For  to  do  so,  it  would  have  to  cease  to.  be  "  im-
manent," to  cease  to  deal  with  the  logical  elements
"implied  in.  knowledge,.!'  and  to  reach  real  facts.
But  if  it  dealt  with  real  facts,.,  actual  instances  of
knowledge,  it  would,  become  a  science  like  all  others,
psychology  or  something,  of  the  sort,  and  would
cease  to  be  the  theory  and  criticism.of  all  knowledge.
If,  on  the  other  hand,  our  theory  of  knowledge
claimed  to  deal  with  ultimate:  existences,,  it  would,
like  the  Platonic  theory  of  Ideas,  become  a  meta-
physic.^  But  of  course  it  would  be  absurd  to  assert
that  the  series  of  logical  elements,  the  "  a  priori
forms  of  intuition  and  thought,"  such  as  Space  and
Time,  Cause,  Substance,  Interaction,  etc.,  were  actual
existences,  and  not  abstractions  "  implied  in  reality."

1  T.  H.Green  in  his  "  Prolegomena  to  Ethics  "  makes  what  looks
like  an  attempt  to  do  this,  and  comes. very  near  asserting  it.  He
talks  about  a  "  metaphysic  of  knowledge,"  but  does  not  venture,
like  Hegel,  to  put  it  forward  definitely  as  absolute  metaphysic.
His  "spiritual  principle  implied  in  nature"  is  rather  our  means
for  inferring  the  Absolute  than  the  Absolute  itself ;  it  does  not
attain  to  the  dignity  of  a  hypostasized,  abstraction,  although  it
strongly  suggests  one,  and  remains  an  epistemological  ambiguity.
Still  .it  is  often  difficult  to  remember  that  all  Gxeen's.statements
must  be  taken  in  an  epistemological  sense,  especially  when  he
"  theologizes,"  and  declares  that  individuals  are  only  parts  of  the
"  eternal  self-consciousness,"  a  statemenf  that  ought  not  to  mean
anything  more  than  that  they  exemplify  the  use  of  the  category
of  self-consciousness.  "


THE AMBIGUITY OF A  PRIORI.  4 1

And  SO  epistemology  remains  in-  the  air,  a  great
mist,  as  it  were,  suspended  between  science  and
metaphysicsy  and  makes. ineffectual  attempts  to  come
into  contact  with  both.  But  this  is  intrinsically
,  impossibki  and  all  it  does  is  to  obscure  the  issues
between  science  and  metaphysics,  and  by  the  fog  it
raises,  to  prevent  the  combatants  from  meeting,  and
either  fighting  out,  or,  as  is  more  probable,  com-
posing their  differences.  Its  contributions  to  the
question  of  the  relation  of  science  and  metaphysics
are  always  irrelevant  and  often  misleading.  For
whether  it  be  its  misfortune  or  its  fault,  epistemology
is  in  the  habit  of  using  terms  in  a  peculiar  sense  of
its  own..

When  we  aret  tdd,  e.g.,  that.  "  the  conception  ot
cause  is  a-  priori  and  dannot  be  derived  from  ex-
perience, because  it  is  the  presupposition  of  all
experience,"  or  informed  that,  "  an  eternal  self  is
the  presupposition  of  all  knowledge,.!'  we  are,  accord-
ing to  the  bent  of  our  sympathies,  either  consoled
or  confounded:  But  the  exultation  of  the  one  party
and  the  depression  of  the  other  is  alike  premature.
Upon' further  inquiry  it  appears,  that  the  priority  of
the  epistemologists  is  not  in  titne  at  all.  and  does
not  refer  to  historical  eyents.  They  are  not  making
statements  about  the  actual  origin  or  ultimate  nature
of  knowledge,  but.  only  about  the  relation  of  certain
factors  in  existing  knowledge.  They  do  not:  mean
that  the  conception  of  cause  is  a  priori  imthe  sense
that  many  ages  ago.  it  existed  without  experience,
and  that,  when  experience  came,  it  was  subsumed
under  th.\s  pre-existing  category,  nor  are  they  speak-
ing of  any ,  experieace  any  one  ever  had.  Cause
is  a  priori,  because,  if  we  eliminate  ftiis  factor  out
of  actual  experience,  we  are  left  with  a  fictitious


42  AGNOSTICISM.

abstraction  of  "  mere  experience "  and  the  whole
conception  collapses.  But  it  would  be  equally
erroneous  to  suppose  that  the  a  priori  forms  of
thought  could  exist  without  the  matter  given  by
experience.  Perception  without  conception,  as  Kant
himself  says,  is  blind;  conception  without  perception
is  empty-:  the  reality  lies  in  their  combination  alone.
Similarly  the  assertion  that  the  eternal  self  is  pre-
supposed in  all  knowledge,  conceals  merely  the
commonplace  fact  that  all  knowledge  must  be  some-
\  body's  knowledge,  must  be  referred  to  some  "  I."
The  self  is  eternal  or  timeless,  because  it  is  a  logical
abstraction  (cf  p.  81)  and  because  abstractions  do
not  exist  either  in  Space  or  in  Time.  It  is  eternal
in  precisely  the  same  way  and  for  precisely  the
same  reasons  as  the  isosceles  triangle.  There  is  in
fact  no  reason  why  epistemology  should  designate
one  of  the  mutually-implied  elements  in  knowledge
as  a  priori,  and  the  other  as  a  posteriori  rather  than
vice  versa,  and  the  use  of  such  a.  word  as  "prior"
merely  has  the  misleading  effect  of  producing  an
irresistible  reference -to  Time.  It  would  be  a  great
boon  if  epistemologists  gave  up  the  use  of  both
words,  even  .though  their  whole  science  would  prob-
ably disappear  with  it.  Nor  would  this  be  a
result  one  could  affect  to  deplore ;  a  science  which
is  so  sterile  of  truth  in  itself,  and  yet  so  fruitful  in
engendering  error  in  others,  had  better  be  destroyed.
It  can  utter  only  trivial  truisms  within  the  limits  of
its  "  immanent  criticism " ;  beyond  them  it  gets'
ultra  vires,  and  can  only  suggest  dangerous  con-
fusions. It  can  prove  nothing,  still  less  prove  fatal
to  metaphysics.  It  is  a  Criticism  which  can  validly
criticize  nothing  but  itself,  and  to  itself  its  criticism
is  deadly.


KANT V. METAPHYSICS.  43

§  1 8.  It  remains,  as  before,  not  ■  only  to  exhibit
the  unsoundness  of  the  basis  of  epistenaological
Agnosticism,  but  also  to  point  out  the  flaws  in
Kant's  reduciio  ad  absurdum  of  metaphysics.

For  it  is  an  -.the  negative  polemic  against  meta-
physic  that  the  chief  strength  of  Agnosticism  lies,
and  it  is  by  the  skilfulness  of  its  attack  that  it  can
most  easily  cover  the  weakness  of  its  own  positive
position.  Kant's  description  of  the  antinomies  ot
metaphysics,  of  the  contradictory  necessities  and
perplexing  inadequacies  which  distract  the  human
mind  in  dealing  with  certain  ultimate  questions,  is
deservedly  famous.  Their  fame  must  be  our
apology  for  stating  them  so  briefly  and  for  merely
indicating  here  the  side  in  the  conflict  which  'we
intend  subsequently  to  espouse.

The  difficulties  of  metaphysics,  according  to  Kant,
fall  under  tiie  three  pseudo-sciences  of  Oatology,
Cosmology,  and  Rational  Psychology,  and  are
concerned  with  the  conceptions  or  "  Ideas  of  the
Pure  Reason,"  i.e.,  of  God,  the  world,  and  the
Self.

§  1 9.  With  respect  to  the  first,  Kant  asserts
that  no  -theoretical  proof  of  the  existence  of  God  can
be  given,  though  three  may  be  attempted.  These
he  calls  the  ontological,  the  cosmological  and  the
physico-  theological.

The  ontological  proof  infers  the  existence  of  God
from  the  necessity  of  the  Jconception  of  a  -being
possessing  all  /-reality.  We  have  this  conception ;
and  since  real  existence  is  included  in  the  conception
of  "all  reality,"  the  being  we  conceive  must  be  con-
ceived also  to  have  real  existence.

The  cosmological  proof  is  a  form  of  the  argument
from  causation,  and  runs  as  follows  : If  anything


;44  AGNOSTiaSM.

exists,  an  absolutely  necessary  being  exists.  Now
I  exist  :  therefore  an.  absolutely  necessary  (uncon-
ditioned) being  {i.e.,.  God  as  the  First  Cause)
exists.

The  physico-theological  proof  is  the  argument
from  design,,  and  argues^  from  the  wisdom  and  in-
telligence in  the  creation  to  the  existence  of  a  wise
and  intelligent  Creator.

Now,  says  Kant,,  both  the  cosmological  and  the
physico-theological  proofs-  depend  ultimately  on  the
ontological,  and  the  ontological  simply  begs  the
.question..  It  professes  to  establish,  the  existence  of
God.,  i.e.,  to  show  that  a  reality  corresponds  to  our
conception.  But  in  order  to  do  so,  if  assumes  the
conception  of  a  totality  of  all '  reality,  in  which  it  has
covertly  included  actual  existence;  Mere  thought,
therefore,  cannot  prove  that  a  reality,  corresponds  to
its  ideas  ;  it  would  be  as  reasonable  to  suppose  that
we;  might  increase  our  property  by  thinking  of  vast
sums.  Reality  can  be  derived,  only  from  experience  '
of  reality,  not  from,  any  manipulation  of  abstract
idfeas.

To  this,  argument,,  which  has  never  been-  met,
nothing  need  be  added ;  it  is  a  conclusive  refuta-
tion of  a  conception  of  God  which  has-  almost
rhonopolized  the  attention  of  philosophers.

With  regard  to  the  cosmological,  it.  must  be
pointed  out  that,  until  it  has  been  connected  with
the  ontological  pnoof,  it  does  not  specify  what  the
"absolutely  necessary  being"  is,  or  exclude  the
possibility  of  its  being  the  world  as  a  whole,  or  a
Spencerian  "  Unknowable"  instead  of  a  God.  So  it  is
connected  with  the  ontological  proof,  on  the  ground
that  the  conception  of  a  being  possessing  all  reality
is  the  only  one  which  can  completely  determine  that


THE PROOFS OF GOD's EXISTENCE.  45,

of  a  necessary' being. "^ Thus  the  cosmological  proof
stands  and  falls  with  the  ontological.

The  physico-theological  proof  in  its  turn  depends
on  the  cosmological,  and  must  argue  from,  the  con-
tingent existence  of  the  wbdd  to  an  absolute  First
Cause,  if  it  is  to  be  adequate.  For  in  itself  it  is
concerned  wholly  with  the  finite  and  cannot  properly
infer  anything  but  an  adequate ^niile  cause  of  pheno-
niena.  The  argument  from  design  cannot  validly
pass  from  the  conception  of  a  great  Architect  of  the
world,  designing  and  disposing  his  materials  like  a
human  craftsman,  to  an  absolute  and  infinite  Creator.
,  Thus  the  only  argument  in  favour  of  the  existence
of  God  which  has  any  cogency,  the  only  one  which
could  give  us  any  insight  into  His  nature,  is  in-
adequate. It  cannot  prove  an  infinite  God.

This  admission  of  Kant's  we  -shall  do  well  to
store  up  for  subsequent  use,  when  it  will  be  necess-
ary to  inquire  whether  infinity  is  a  possible  or
desirable  attribute  of, the  Deity.  For  should  it
appear  {v.  ch.  x.)  that  an  infinite  God  would  be
an  embarrassment  rather  than  an  advantage,  the
inability  of  the  argument  kom  design  to  justify  a
false  conception  of  the  Deity  will  have  been  a
fortunate  deficiency.

§  20.  The  four  antinomies  involved  in  the  at-
tempt to  think  the  ultimate  .nature  of  the  world  are
concerned  with  its  infinity,  the  infinite  divisibility  of
substances,  the  conflict  of  causation  and  freewill,  and

1  All  other  conceptions  would  be  inadequate  predicates,  which
could  not  determine  their  subject  silngfy,  and  hence  could  not
establish  its  existence.  For  all  real  existences  are  subjects  con-
■  taining  an  infinity  of  predicates,  and  the  only  predicate  which
contains  an  infinity  of  attributes  and  can  thus  put  its  subject  on
a  par  with  a  real  existence  and  thereby  confer  reality  upon  it,  is
the  conception  of  an  ens  realissimum.


46  AGNOSTICISM.

its  first  cause.  On-  each  of  these  subjects  contra-
dictory propositions  may  be  maintained,  either  that
the  world  is  infinite  in  Space  and  Time,  or  that  it
i&  not,  etc.

The  fast  of  these  antinomies  has  been  already
discussed  in  connection  with  Mr.  Spencer's  views.
(§  id),  and  it  is  here  only  necessary  to  remark,  in
completion  of  what  was  previously  asserted,  that
Kant  proves  conclusively  that  the  First  Cause
cannot  be  one  in-  tMe  serves  of  caused  phenomena.
Hence,  if  in  seeking  a  cause  of  our  world,  we  are
inquiring  into  the  cause  of  existence  in  general,  we
are  doomed  to  disappointment.  If  all  things  are
caused,  then  a  First  Cause  is  impossible.  If  God,
therefore  is  the  cause  of  all  things,  the  All  is  God,
and  God  (in  the  traditionaP  sense)  is  nothing.

The  antinomy  of  causation  and  freedom  can  be
profitably  discussed  only  when  we  have  realized  the
origin  and  nature  of  our  conception  of  causation
(^.  ch.  iii,  §  II,  and  App.  I.):

The-  second  antinomy  is  concerned  with  the  relat-
ions of  part  to  whole  :  the  thesis  maintains  that
unless  absolutely  simple  substances  exist,  composite
substances  are  impossible,  and  hence  nothing  exists;
the  antithesis  infers  the  infinite  divisibility  of  sub-
stances from  the  infinite  divisibility  of  the  Space  in
which  they  exist,  and  asserts  that  simple  substances
could  never  be  objects  of  perception  or  of  any  ex-
perience.

Kant's  proof  in  the  antithesis  is  based  on  several
assumptions.  In  the  first  place  he  assumes  that
the  infinite  divisibility  of  our  conception  of  Space
must  be  applied  to  the  spatially- extended  objects,
that  the  ideal  Space  which  we  conceive,  and  the
real  Space which we  perceive, are  one  and  the


THE INFINITY OF THE WORLD.  47-

same  ;  in  short,  that  our  conception  of  Space  is  not  .
an  abstraction  from  an  attribute  of  the  Real,  a  uni-
versal mode  of  the  interaction  of  the  Existent,  but
simply  an  ideal  a  priori  form  of  intuition,  under
which  things  must  appear  to  us;  Even  though,
therefore,  metaphysically  speaking,  ultimate  entities
may  be  "monads,"  yet;  phenomenally,  their  appear-
ances must  be  subject  to  the  laws  of  spatial  intuition
and  composite.  Secondly,  Kant  argues  that  the
Self  or  Soul  is-  not  an  ihstance  of  a  simple  sub-
stance, because  its  apparent  sunplicity  is  merely
due  to  the  fact  that  in  declaring  its  own  substant-
iality, it  is  contemplating  itself;  that  if  it  could  be
externally  perceived,  it  would  probably  display  its
compositeness.

Now  every  one  of  these- assertions  may  be  tra-
versed. We  need  not  suppose,  and  indeed  scientific
atomism  has  always  refused"  to  suppose,  that  the
mathematical  infinite  divisibility  of  Space  holds  good
of  real  objects  ;  nor  that  ideal  Space,  which  is  con-
ceived, but  never  seen,  is  like  real  Space ;  nor  again
that  Space  is  an  a  priori  form  which  exists  independ-
ently of  the  interactions  of  the  bodies  that  occupy
it.  Further,  it  may  be  remarked  that  Kant  here
illustrates  both  of  the  two  great  fallacies  of  his
doctrine  :  (i)  he  forgets  the  impotence  of  epistemo-
logy  and  allows  himself  to- treat  his  a  priori  Space
as  a  condition  and  not  as  a  mode  of  existence,  and
so  regards  it  as  something  which  can  prescribe  to
reality  its  mode  of  behaviour.  (2)  He  makes  the
impossible  distinction  between  phenomena  and
noumena.  Lastly,  we  may  point  out  that  Kant's
argument  against  the  existence  of  absolute  sub-
stances is  bound  up  with  his  doctrine  of  the  Self,
presently  to  be  considered,  and  need  only  wonder


4-8  AGNOSTICISM.

in  passing  how  Kant  could  arrive  at  his  extra-
ordinary confidence  that  if  he  could  only  get  outside
himself  and  see  his  Self,  iit  would  appear  to  be  a
composite  patchwork  of  various  substances !  Does
he  imagine  that  if  he  could  see  his  soul  it  would
be  his  soul?  And  even  if  he  could  see  \t,  and  see
that  it  was  composite,  it  wouid  yet,  on  his  own
principles,  be  a  fallacy  to  infer  the  multiplicity  of
the  (noumenal)  subject  from  that  of  its  (phenq-,
menal)  appearance.  Jt  may  be  that  our  idea  of
the  unity  of  'the  soul  requires  modification  ult-
imately, but  it  «can  hardly  be  denied  that  our  con-
sciousness of  the  oneness  of  our  Self  is  \h& prima,-
fflcie  basis  of  our  assertion  of  the  unity  of  substance.

Lastly,  his  first  antinomy  deals  with  the  limits  of,
the  world  in  Space  and  Time.  The  thesis  main-
tains that  the  world  must  have  limits  in  Space  and
in  Time ;  it  must  have  bad  a  beginning  in  Time
and  must  come  to  an  end  in  Sjpace,  because  of  the
conflict  between  the  conpeptions-  of  infinity  and  of
a  whele.  An  infinite  whole  is  an  impossibility,
because  its  infinity  consists  just  in  the  fact  that  it
cannot  be  completed.  Time,  therefore,  without
beginning,  is  a  contradiction  in  terms,  for  past  Time
is  infinite,  and  yet  limited  by  the  present.  An
infinite  world  in  Space,  on  the  other  hand,  is  no
world  at  all,  d.e.,  it  can  never  be  completed  and
teeated  as  a  whole.

The  antithesis  argues  that  limits  to  the  world  in
Space  and  Time  are  unthinkable.  For  did  they
exist,  they  would  imply  in  the  world  "a  relation  to
ernpty  Space  and  empty  Time,  i.e.,  relations  to
nonentities,  ^nd  ifeeoce  contradictions.  We  can
never  conceive  limits  to  Space,  but  our  thought
•must ever stray  beyond  any  imagined  limit,  and


THE INFINITY OF TIME.  49

inquire  into  its  beyond.  So  with  Time  ;  even  if
we  imagined  an  absolute  beginning  of  the  world,
the  empty  Time  which  preceded  the  existence  of  the
world,  could  neither  itself  have  caused  the  world
nor  have  contained  anything  that  could  cause  it.

Now,  as  we  intend  to  return  to  the  subject  of  the
infinity  of  Space  and  Time  (ch.  vi.  |  2  £f.),  it  will
here  suffice  to  remark  that Kant  understates  the
force  of  the  argument  in  favour  of  the  limitation
of  the  world  in  Space  and  Time,  by  stating  it  in
metaphysical  terms merely. The infinity  of  the
world  is  indeed  in  metaphysical  convict  with  our
conception  of  a  whole,  and,  we  may  add,  of  a  process
and  of  causation,  but  it  is  also  incompatible  with  all
scientific  doctrines  which  involve  these  conceptions.
And,  as  we  shall  see,  these  form  no  inconsiderable
portion  of  all  the  sciences,  but  one  so  great  that
their abandonment would ruin many important
sciences like physics, mechanics, chemistry, and
biology,  and  bring  universal  scepticism  in  its  train.
The difficulties of  the thesis, therefore, are not
merely  difficulties  of  metaphysics,  as  the  agnostic
would make out, but also real  difficulties of  all
science. Those  of  the  antithesis,  on  the  other  hand,
2X0. purely  metaphysical. They  do  not  conflict  with
the  facts,  but  with  our  ideas. The  infinity  of  Space
and  Time  is  not,  and  never  can  be,  a  fact. An
infinite  reality  can  never  be  perceived,  infinity  must
always  be  merely  a  matter  of  idea,  merely  a  necess-
ity  of thought. It is  not the  actual perception
of  Space  and  Time  that  leads  us  to  the  conviction
that  they  are  infinite,  but  the  conceptions  we  form
about  them. If  therefore  the  identity  and  parallel- '
ism  of  our  ideal conceptions  of  Space  and  Time
which  involve  infinity,  and  our  real  perceptions  of

R.  ofS.  E


50  - AGNOSTICISM,

objects  in  Space  and  Time,  which  cannot  Involve
infinity,  be  denied,  the  whole  antithesis  vanishes.
For  infinity  in  thought  is  quite  compatible  with
actual  finitude.

With  regard  to  the  origin  of  the  world  in  Time,
Kant's  difiSculty,  like  Spencer's  about  the  First
Cause  (§  lo),  applies  only  to  an  absolute  beginning
of  all  things.  If  nothing  originally  existed,  nothing
can  have  come  into  being.  But  if  something  existed
eternally,  that  something  may  at  some  point  have
caused  the  existence  of  our  world.  There  is  in
fact  a  third  alternative  to  the  infinite  existence  of
the  world  and  its  beginning  in  empty  Time.  For
though  the  world  cannot  have  come  into  existence
in  Time,  it  may  perfectly  well  have  done  so  with
Time.  Time  and  our  phenomenal  world  may  be
correlated  conditions  of  our  present  dispensation.
This  is  a  possibility  which  Kant  should  have
noticed  and  considered,  all  the  more  that  it  is  as
old  as  Plato,  who  in  the  Timaeus  (38  B)  calls  Time
the  moving  image  of  Eternity,  and  that  it  has  been
adopted  by  the  majority  of  thinkers  who  have  con-
sidered the  question  of  creation  seriously,  e.g.,  by
St.  Augustine,  who  says,  Non  est  /actus  mundus  in
tempore,  sed  cum.  tempore}

§  21.  Lastly,  we  must  consider  Kant's  attack
upon  the  old  rational  psychology,  which  professed
to  derive  from  the  substantiality  of  the  Self  or  Soul
its  immateriality,  incorruptibility,  personality,  im-
mortality, etc.  And  with  regard  to  the  a  priori
proofs  of  rational  psychology,  Kant  may  be  admitted
to  have  made  out  his  case.^ The  simplicity  of  the

1  "The  world  was  not  made  in  Time,  but  together  with  Time."

2  Thus  he  shows  that  the  immortality  cannot  be  inferred  from
the  simplicity  of  the  soul :  for  though  the  simple  cannot  be  dh-
.solved  into  its  component  parts,  it  may  yet  be  annihilated  by
evanescence.


THE REALITY OF THE SELF.  5 1

soul  cannot  be  made  a  proof  of  its  immortality;
suQh  juggling  with  ideas  cannot  afford  any  real
certainty  of  a  future  life.

But  Kant's  own  doctrine  is  of  a  more  dubious
character.  The  question  is,  whether  our  conscious-
ness of  our  own  existence  can  be  made,  the  basis
of  theoretical  inferences.^  Kant  puts  it  as  the
Cogito  ergo  sum  of  Descartes,  and  denies  that  it  is
the  basis  of  any  knowledge.  For,  he  says,  self-
consciousness  is  a  mere  form,  indifferent  to  its
matter,  the  actual  contents  which  fill  it  (cf.  §  14),
and  utterly  empty  in  itself.  The  Self  is  a  mere
"  synthetic  unity  of  apperception,"  which  unites  and
binds  together  "  the  manifold  of  perception  "  into  a
whole,  and  thus  makes  experience  and  knowledge
possible.  But  it  does  no  more ;  it  is  a  paralogism
to  regard  our  own  existence  as  the  one  certain  fact
and  the  basis  of  all  knowledge.

This  argument  depends  on  the  substitution  of  the
Cogito  ergo  stint,  i.e.  the  explicit  assertion  of  exist-
ence, for  the  implicit  conviction  which  we  feel.  It
assumes  that  thought  can  be  put  =  consciousness,
and  that  that  which  cannot  be  stated  in  terms  of
thought,  e.g.  feeling,  is  nothing.

But  as  a  matter  of  fact,  the  Cogito  ergo  sum  can-
not be  regarded  as  the  ratio  essendi,  but  orily  as  the
ratio  cognoscendi  of  our  existence.  It  is  not  that
we  are  because  we  think,  but  we  are  able  to  think
because  we  are. And  we  not  only  think,  but  will

^  On  theoretical  grounds  his  verdict  about  the  existence  of  the
soul  is  non  liquet.  But  this,  of  course,  does  not  hinder  him,  here
as  elsewhere,  from  reversing  the  agnosticism  of  the  Theoretic
Reason  by  means  of  the  Practical  Reason.  So  he  asserts  that
the  moral  consciousness  does  establish'  the  reality  of  the  Self.
"  I  am,  because  I  ought,"  as  it  were.  Only,  he  says,  this  does
not  suffice  for  any  theoretic  inference.


'S'Z  AGNOSTICISM.

and  fed.  And  Will  and  Feeling  are  other  than
Thought,  and  Thought  does  not  fully  represent
them.  It  is  true  that  if  we  desire  to  assert  our
existence,  we  must  assert  it  in  terms  of  thought,
ie.,  as  Cogito  ergo  sum,  but  then  we  assert  it  only
against  a  doubt,  and  a  doubt  so  futile  does  not
require  to  be  refuted.  As  long,  therefore,  as  we
content  ourselves  with  our  inner  consciousness,  i.e.,
the  feeling  of  our  existence,  we  have  committed
nothing  which  thought  can  lay  hold  of.  And  when
it  does  lay  hold  of  our  expressed  conviction  of  our
existence,  and  attempts  to  show  it  is  invalid,  it  only
does  so  to  cover  itself  with  confusion.

Kant's  attack  on  the  reality  of  the  Self  may  be
refuted  out  of  his  own  mouth.

He  admits^  (i)  that  our  thought  can  think  the
Self  only  in  the  position  of  a  subject,  i.e.,  that  the
"  I  "  can  never  be  the  predicate  of  any  statement ;
(2)  that  our  thought  is  discursive,  i.e.,  all  its  state-
ments are  predicate;s.  Hence  (3)  the  Self,  cannot
be  a  (mere)  conception.  Thereupon  he  argues,  that
because  the  conception  of  the  Self  is  empty,  the  Self
is  no  reality.  This  argument  not  merely  involves
the  direct  contradiction  of  denying  and  asserting,
almost  in  the  same  breath,  that  the  Self  was  a  con-
ception, but  actually  argues  from  the  defect  of  a
defective  conception  to  a  defect  in  its  subject.
First  he  shows  conclusively  that  if  the  Self  is  real,
our  thought  can  never  do  justice  to  it,  then  he
argues,  that  because  our  thought  cannot  do  justice
to  it,  the  Self  is  not  real.  If  it  could  be  validly
asserted  that  the  Self  was  a  conception  at  all,  it
must  surely  be  admitted  that,  so  far  from  being
empty,  it is the  fullest  of  all  conceptions,  with  a

1  Prolegomena,  p.  116  (Reclana),  Mahaffy's  trans,  p.  47.


THE ORrGIN OF AGNOSTrCISM'.  53",

content  co-extensive  with  the  whole  world.  For
every  thought  that  was  ever  thought,  every  feeling
that  was  ever  felt,  every  act  that  was.  ever  willed,,
was  contained  in  the  consciousness  of  some  self,  was
thought,  felt,  or  willed  within  the;  soul  of  somebody;
The  proper  inference  then  surely  was,  that  the
emptiness  of  our  conception^  of  our  thought-symbol
of  the  Self,  proved  nothing  against  its  reality,  but
much  against  thought,  the  abstractions  of  which
here  prove  utterly  inadequate  to  grasp  the  reality.

Thus  the  breakdown  of  Kant's  argument  leads
us  on  to  the  important  distinction  of  Thought  and
Reality,  which  in  the  next  chapter  will  be  emphas-
ized by  scepticism  to  the  utmost ;  it  illustrates
unexpectedly  our  contention  that  Agnosticism  paves
the  way  for  Scepticism.

§  2  2.  Our  elaborate  examination  of  Agnosticism
has  been  rendered  necessary,  not  only  by  the  repute
of  the  authors  criticized,  but  still  more  by  the  fact
that  the  agnostic  attitude  towards  ultimate  philo-
sophic problems  is  the  most  prevalent  one  among
philosophers  and  cultivated  men  generally.  But
the  length  of  the  argument  will  have  been  more
than  justified,  if  it  can  induce  us  to  realize  the
arrogance  of  the  pretensions  to  omniscience  lurking
beneath  the  mock  modesty  of  the  agnostic's  assert-
ion of  the  unknowable,  and  if  it  enables  us  to  see
how  inconclusive  are  the  attacks  on  metaphysics  by
which  he  seeks  to  veil  the  weakness  of  his  own
position.

And  yet  the  doubt  may  recur — How  can  we
know  things  as  they  really  are  .-'  and  will  not  be  set
at  rest  until  we  have  exposed  its  origin  as  well  as
its  futility.  We  might  indeed  answer  it  by  shifting
the  onus  probandi, and asking.  Why should not


54  AGNOSTICISM.

things  appear  as  they  are  ?  Why  should  not
appearances  be  true,  or  a  sure  basis  whence  to  infer
the  truth  ?  Why  should  not  "  things  as  they  are  "
be  either  nothing  at  all,  or  at  least  irrelevant
machinery  intended  to  produce  in  us  the  spectacle
of  the  world  ?  The  suggestion  that  appearances
are  divided  by  an  impassable  gulf  from  the  reality
of  things  is  a  mere  prejudice,  which  may  be  left  to
flounder  in  its  own  impotence.

But,  it  is  urged,  is  it  not  a  fact  that  appearances
are  deceptive  ?  It  is  this  that  makes  Agnosticism
plausible.

But  for  this,  but  for  the  fact  that  appearances:  are
but  the  raw  material  of  knowledge,  there  would  be
nothing  to  suggest  anything  beyond  what  is  given.

Only  the  fact  will  not  bear  the  inference  the
agnostic  seeks  to  put  upon  it.  It  does  not  justify
the  assumption  of  a  world  of  things  "as  they  really
are,"  opposed  to  a  world  of  appearances.  AH  it  in-
volves is  that  the  real  and  ultimate  nature  of  things
must  be  inferred,  that  things  do  not  yet  appear
as  they  are.  The  known  suggests  an  unknown,
but  not  an  unknowable.  And  what  is  this  but  the
phenomenon  of  the  growth  of  knowledge,  what
but  the  fact  that  in  a  world  not  yet  fully  known,
the  imperfection  of  our  knowledge  must  suggest  its
own  defect,  and  cause  things  to  appear  at  first
other  than  what  they  subsequently  turn  out  to  be  ?

The  feeling,  therefore,  from  which  Agnosticism
draws  its  force,  is  an  illusion  incident  to  the  growth
of  knowledge.  In  a  perfectly  known  world  things
would  appear  as  they  were,  and  would  be  what  they
appeared ;  there  would  be  no  occasion  to  correct
the  judgments  of  sense  or  to  go  beyond  the  given;

Thus  the  same  growth  of  knowledge  which  made


TRANSITION TO SCEPTICISM.  55

it impossible to  admit that agnosticism  could  be
true,  explains  also  how  it  comes  to  seem  true.

§  23.  The  course  of  the  argument  has  so  far
been  directed  to  establish  that  Agnosticism  is  an
illusion  and  cannot  be  true.  It  must  now  establish
that  if  it  is  true,  it  must  cease  to  be  itself,  and  pass
into  something  profounder  and  more  consistent
Its  only  hope  lies  in  its  turning  into  Scepticism,  and
internal  and  external  necessities  combine  to  turn  it
into  this.

Scepticism  is  the  only  refuge  for  Agnosticism
from  the  external  pressure  of  reason  :  it  alone  can
suspend  and  reverse  the  condemnation  pronounced
on  its  absurdities.  The  sceptic  may  admit  that
Agnosticism  has  failed,  that  its  arguments  are  fall-
acious and  absurd.  But,  he  asks,  what  does  this
prove  1  What  but  the  absurdity  of  all  arguments  ?
Arguments  may  be  made  to  prove  anything,  but
in  the  end.  they  prove  nothing.  Not  only  is  there
an  Unknowable  beyond  knowledge,  but  all  around
it  and  before  its  eyes.  The  mistake  of  Agnosticism
was  not  in  thinking  that  some  things  were  unknow-
able, but  in  implying-  that  there  is  anything  not
unknowable,,  not  in  clinging  to  demonstrable  ab-
surdities, but  in  supposing  that  anything  but
absurdities  were  demonstrable.  Agnosticism  erred
in  attempting  to  draw  a  distinction  between  meta-
physics and  the  rest  of  knowledge,  and  so  was  sur-
prised by  their  solidarity  and  overwhelmed  by  their
union.  This  was  a  mistake  in  principle ;  for  meta-
physic  is  not  only  every  whit  as  good  as  any  other
knowledge,  but  indeed  superior.  For  metaphysic
is  the  science  of  the  ultimate  chaos  in  which  all
knowledge  ends  ;  so  far  from  being  false,  it  is  pre-
eminently true,  for  it  alone  of  all  the  sciences  is


56  AGNOSTICISM.

aware  of  its  condition.  All  knowledge  terminates
in  nonsense,  but  metaphysic  alone  confesses  this,
fact.

§  24.  Thus  Scepticism  rises  superior  to  the
question  in  dispute,  not  only  by  rescuing  Agnostic-
ism from  metaphysical  objections,  but  also  by  its
kindly  rehabilitation  of  metaphysics.  But  it  is  not
merely  the  outcome  of  the  dispute  between  Agnostic-
ism and  metaphysics,  but  also  of  the  logical  self-
development  of  Agnosticism.

Agnosticism  had  asserted  that  there  exists  in
the  world  something  unknowable  and  that  certain
questions  cannot  be  solved.  But  admitting  this,
how'can  we  limit  the  havoc  this  admission  works
in  the  whole  structure  of  knowledge?  If  anyone
thing  is  unknowable,  may  there  not  be  many  others
like  it  ?  If  some  questions  are  insoluble,  how  do
we  know  that  insoluble  questions  are  confined  to
a  single  department  of  thought?  Nay,,  if  the
Unknowable  is  at  the  basis  of  all  knowledge,  if  all
things  are  "manifestations  of  the  Unknowable,"  how
can  it  manifest  anything  but  its  unknowableness  ?
If  all  our  explanations  terminate  in  the  inconceiv-
able, are  they  not  all  illusions  ?  If  an  unknowable
force  underlies  all  things,  if  the  ultimate  constitution
of  things  cannot  be  grasped  by  our  minds,  what  can
our  knowledge  do  but  laboriously  lead  us  to  the
conclusion  that  all  our  science  is  a  fraud,  hopelessly
vitiated  by  the  unknowable  character  of  its  basis  ?
Does  not  this  fundamental  flaw  falsify  all  the  futile
efforts  of  beings  constitutionally  incapable  of  under-
standing the  real  nature  of  things  ?

Agnosticism,  at  all  events,  has  no  strength  to
resist  such  suggestions,  and  falls  into  the  deeper
but  seemingly  securer  abyss  of  Scepticism.


CHAPTER III.

SCEPTICISM.

§  I. Scepticism is, as was shown in the last
chapter, the development of Agnosticism, which
passes  into  it  as  necessarily .  as Positivism  passed
into ,  Agnosticism. It  is  related  to  Agnosticism  as
the  whole  to  the  part ;  it  both  refutes  and  completes
it ;  for  it  is  Agnosticism  perfected  and  purified  from
prejudice. By  Scepticism  we  mean  the  denial  of  the
possibility  of  knowledge,  based  on  rational  grounds.
For  the  psychological  scepticism,  so  frequent  now-
a-days,  which  is  distracted  by  doubt,  not  because
nothing  is  worthy  of  belief,  but  because  the  mind  has
lost  the  faculty  of  belief,  is  indeed  one  of  the  most
serious  and  distressing  symptoms  of  our  times,  but
belongs  rather  to  the  pathology  of  the  human  mind.
True Scepticism does not arise from a morbid
flabbinesss  of  the  intellectual  fibre,  but  is  vigorously
aggressive  and  dogmatic. For  though  it  sometimes
affects  to  doubt  rather  than  to  deny  the  possibility
of  knowledge,  the  real  intention  of  the  doubt  is  yet
to  de,ny  and to  destroy  the practical certainty  of '
knowledge. If Scepticism did not succeed in
producing  any  practical  effect,  if  its  doubt  of  the
possibility of knowledge were theoretically ad-
mitted but  practically  ignored,  it  would  feel  that  it
had  failed.

§  2. In  pursuance  of  its  object  of  proving  the

57 ,


58  SCEPTICISM.

impossibility  of  knowledge,  Scepticism  may  adopt
several  modes  of  procedure,  of  which  only  those  can
be  at  once  disposed  of  which  involve  a  denial  of  the
laws  of  thought.  The  most  common  form,  perhaps,
is  the  ancient  scepticism  based  on  the  "  relativity  of
knowledge,"  i.e.,  on  the  distinction  of  phenomena
and  the  real  nature  of  things,  which  denies  that  we
can  know  aught,  because  we  cannot  know  things  "as
they  really  are."  This  scepticism  is  merely  a  re-
appearance of  Agnosticism,  extended  and  enlarged,
if  not  improved,  and  directed  not  merely  against
metaphysics,  but  against  the  whole  of  knowledge.
And  as  such  it  has  been  already  refuted  in  the  last
chapter  (§  22).  Here  it  need  merely  be  character-
ized as  a  gratuitous  prejudice,  since  it  has  no  positive
ground  for  assuming  these  unknowable  things-in-
themselves.  If  no  argument  can  directly  refute  it,
neither  can  any  argument  establish  it.  But  the  onus
probandi  surely  lies  on  those  who  attack,  and  not  on
those  who  assert  the  existence  of  knowledge.  And,
as  has  been  shown,  if  such  a  world  of  things-in-
themselves  existed,  we  could  never  know  of  its
existence  (chap,  ii.  §  6).  It  is  a  gross  abuse,  there-
fore, to  invent  a  transcendent  world  of  unknowable
things-in-themselves,  merely  in  order  to  cast  a  slur
on  knowledge,  to  convict  it  of  incapacity,  merely
because  it  cannot  transcend  itself.

§  3.  Scepticism  is  on  firmer  ground  when  it
becomes  immanent  instead  of  transcendent,  and
asserts  not  that  there  may  be  something  behind
appearances,  but  that  appearances  are  inherently
conflicting,  and  that  knowledge  is  impossible,  be-
cause this  conflict  within  consciousness  and  between
its  data  can  never  be  resolved.  If  the  constituent
elements  of  consciousness  are  essentially  disparate


THE CONFLICT OF THE FACTORS OF KNOWLEDGE, ^g

and  incongruous,  Scepticism  has  merely  to  compare
the  characteristics  of  the  given  factors,  and  to  pro-
nounce their  disagreement  to  be  irreconcilable,  in
order  to  prove  that  knowledge',  i.e.,  systematic
harmony  of  the  given,  is  impossible,  and  need  not
perform  the  impossible  feat  of  getting  help  from  the
unknowable  outside  consciousness.  Its  aim  must
therefore  be  throughout  to  elicit  the  conflict  and
incompatibility  of  the  constituents  of  knowledge.

It  will  begin  by  showing  that  appearances  are
deceptive,  and  in  so  doing  it  will  be  proving  a
truism.  For  the  whole  of  science  is  concerned  with
enabling  us  to  see  through  the  deceptive  appearances
of  things,  and  to  perceive  their  real  nature.  But
Scepticism  will  contend  that  science  fails  ;  that  this
deceptiveness  is  ultimate  and  never  can  be  seen
through ;  that  in  fancying  that  our  science  can
correct  it,  we  are  once  more  deceived.  For  all
science  is  an  interpretation  of  phenomena  by  means
of  thought,  in  which  we  substitute  thought-symbols
for  the  real  things  of  which  we  are  treating,  and
suppose  that  the  manipulations  of  our  symbols  will
hold  good  of  the  realities  we  perceived,  and  will  thus
enable  us  to  manage  and  calculate  their  course.

But  it  turns  out  (i)  that  not  one  of  the  categories
of  our  knowledge,  not  one  of  the  fundamental
conceptions  which  underlie  all  science,  is  adequate
to  describe  the  nature  of  the  Real,  and  that  science
is  everywhere  based  upon  fictitious  assumptions
known  to  be  false  :  (2)  the  reason  of  this  is  dis-
covered to  lie  in  the  radically  different  natures  of
thought  and '  feeling,  which  give  us  two  utterly
discordant  aspects  of  existence,  and  render  it  im-
possible that  the  real  thing  perceived  by  feeling
should  ever  be  symbolized  by  thought;  and  (3),  as


60  SCEPTICISM.

it  appears  that  every  utterance  involves  a  reference
to  reality,  it  is  both  false  and  impossible,  false,
because  the  thought-symbols  expressed  by  speech
cannot  be  true  of  reality,  and  because  the  course
of  inference  does  not  correspond  to  the  course  of
nature,  and  impossible  because  we  cannot  see  how
the  transition  from  fact  to  symbol  should  ever  have
been  made.  Thus  Scepticism  succeeds  not  only  in
exhibiting  the;  justice  of  its  denial  of  knowledge,  but
literally  reduces  its  opponents  to  silence.

It  is  the  course  of  this  process  which  we  must  now
follow.

§  4.  It  has  been  said  with  some  point,  that  the
best  cure  for  the  admiration  of  old  institutions  lies
in  the  study  of  their  history ;  ,  and  certainly  our
traditional  faith  in  reason  must  be  very  strong  or
very  blind,  if  it  can  resist  the  doubts,  of  the  com-
petency of  our  categories  suggested  "by  the  least
study  of  their  origin  and  history.

We  are  all,  thanks  to  the  perhaps  not  wholly
disinterested  efforts  of  modern  science,  familiar  with
the  discredit  which  their  anthropomorphic  character
has  brought  on  the  central  conceptions  of  religion,
and  have  seen  the  grossness  of  savage  superstitions
traced  throughout  their  survivals  in  modern  theo-
logy.

But  though  the  Sceptic  will  be  at  one  with  the
scientist  in  reprobating  the  anthropomorphism  of  the
savage,  he  will  hardly  have  the  politeness  to  confine
the  inferences  from  his  historfcal  studies  to  the
single  sphere  of  religion,  or  to  show  any  greater
respect  for  the  sacro-sanctity  of  science.  For  he
finds  that  all  our  knowledge  is  vitiated  by  this,
fundamental  flaw  of  its  anthropomorphic  origin,  that
the  conceptions  of  bur  science  are  all  direct  descend-


FIRST PRINCIPLES ALL ANTHROPOMORPHIC. 6 1

ants  of  the  grossest  anthropomorphisms  of  primi-
tive savages,  who  naively  and  uncritically  ascribed
whatsoever  they  felt,  and  whatsoever  seemed  natural
to  them  to  the  world  outside  them.  And  grotesque
as  was  the  savage's  method  of  explanation,  grossly
erroneous  as  was  the  ascription  to  nature  of  these
primitive  fancies,  it  was  at  all  events  better  than
their  subsequent  treatment  at  the  hands  of  science.
They  were  not  rejected  outright,  but  reduced  into
unmeaning  skeletons  of  explanations  by  the  cutting
away  of  such  portions  as  seemed  too  obviously
false  to  be  any  longer  retained ;  they  were  not
buried  in  merciful  oblivion,  but  permitted  to  linger
on  in  a  maimed  and  impotent  condition,  starved,  and
stripped  of  the  sensuous  analogies  that  suggested
their  self-evidence.  And  by  this  brutal  process  of
mutilation,  all  the  advantages  of  the  primitive  view
have  been  lost,  without  countervailing  gain,  and
without  extirpating  the  original  taint  of  our  know-
ledge :  it  is  as  though  we  should  attempt  to  change
an  Ethiopian's  skin  by  flaying  him,* and  then  dis-
cover that  even  his  bones  were  not  as  the  bones  of
a  white  man.  Our  categories  have  too  often  be-
come mere  symbols,  words  to  which  no  definite  fact
can  be  found  to  correspond.

Thus  the  animistic  conception  of  a  cause  as  a
personal  will  (chap.  i.  §  5,  6),  was  intelligible  though
false ;  but  what  possible  meaning  can  be  attached  to
the  conception  of  Cause  as  Identity  ?

So  long,  again,  as  a  frankly  material  view  was
taken  of  Substance,  and  nothing  was  accounted
substance  that  could  not  be  touched,  seen,  tasted,
•and  smelt,  we  were  at  least  secured  against  the
hypostasizing  of  "  second  substances,"  safe  from  the
confusions  of  ideas  with  real  existences  with  which


62  SCEPTICISM.

the  history  of  philosophy  teems,  exempt  from  the
metaphysical  fictions  of  modern  science,  from  intan-
gible solids  like  the  ether,  from 'vortex  rings'  in
'  frictionless  fluids.'  So  too  the  geometrical  ignor-
ance of  the  savage  left  him  blissfully  untroubled  by
the  possibilities  of  pseudo-spherical,  or  four-dimens-
ional Space  ;  his  simple  theory  of  causation  had  not
yet  evolved  an  insoluble  contradiction  between  free
will  and  necessity.  Happy  too  were  the  ages  of
scientific  faith  in  anthropomorphic  metaphor,  when
a  mystic  marriage  of  male  and  female  elements  could
be  witnessed  in :  every  chemical  combination,  and
when  terms  like  arsenic  ^  and  chemical  affinity^  as
yet  conveyed  a  meaning  that  explained  their  nature.

But  we  are  burdened  by  the  heritage  of  ancient
thought  and  ancient  fancy,  while  we  have  to  our
loss  exchanged  their  vividness  for  modern  excre-
scences, quite  as  false  and  far  more  obscure.  And
our  categories  are  not  able  to  fit  the  facts,  even  when
they  have  been  whittled  away  into  nonsense ;  not
even  then  do  they  succeed  in  being  true.

§  5.  For  not  one  of  the  principal  conceptions  of
our  science  is  true,  not  one  is  able  to  grasp  the
"  Becoming  "  of  things  as  it  really  is.  All  are  what
we  call  "approximations,"  which  leave  an  unex-
plained surd  in  everything  they  are  supposed  to
explain  ;  and  not  only  are  they  false,  but  we  know
that  they  are  false,  however  we  may  choose  to
ignore  it.  We  believe  in  our  first  principles,  though  .
we  know  that  they  involve  fictions ;  we  believe  in
them  because  these  fictions  are  so  transparent  as  no
longer  to  excite  surprise.  Is  it  then  too  much  to
say  that  the  Credo  quia  absurdum is  the  basis  of

^  Arsenic = the  male  element.

^  Affinity = relationship  by  marriage.


CONTRADICTIONS OF TIME.  63

science  as  well  as  of  theology,  and  that  knowledge  as
well  as  faith  is -reared  upon  the  milk  of  mythology  ?
§  6.  U  e.g-.  we  consider  the  conception  of  Time,
we  find  that  Time  is  for  scientific  purposes  taken  as
discrete,  and  divided  into  years,  days,  hours,  minutes,
and  seconds ;  and  indeed  its  accuracy  in  measuring
Time  is  one  of  the  chief  boasts  of  modern  science.
And  yet  is  not  this  very  measurement  of  Time  based
on  all  sorts  of  fictitious  assumptions  ?  When  we
ask  how  Time  is  measured,  we  perceive  that  our
measurements  in  the  last  resort  are  all  based  on  the
supposed  regularity  of  certain  motions.  And  the
measurement  of  these  motions  again  depends  on  the
supposed  accuracy  of  our  time-pieces.  And  further,
as  far  as  our  observation  can  check  their  vagaries,
we  have  every  reason  to  believe  that  not  one
of  these  motions  is  really  regular.  And  so  our
mieasurements  of  time  move  in  a  vicious  circle  :
Time  depends  on  motion  and  motion  on  Time.
Some  interesting  corollaries  would  follow  from  this,
such  as  that  if  the  motions  on  which  our  measure-
ment of  Time  depends  were  uniformly  accelerated,
the  flow  of  Time  also  would  be  accelerated  in  like
proportion,  and  the  events  of  a  lifetime  might  be
crowded  into  what  would  previously  have  been  re-
garded as  a  few  minutes.  And  if  this  acceleration
were  conceived  to  go  on  indefinitely,  any  finite
series  of  events  could  be  compressed  into  an  in-
finitely short  time.  Or  conversely,  supposing  that
the  flow  of  Time  could  somehow  be  indefinitely
accelerated  without  corresponding  acceleration  in
the  flow  of  events,  a  finite  series  of  events  would
last  for  an  infinite  Time.  In  either  case  the  infinite
divisibility  of  Time  would  be  equivalent  to  infinite
duration, and the essential subjectivity of  Time


64  SCEPTICISM.

would  peep  through  our  apparently  objective
measurements.

And  is  not  a  further  fiction  involved  in  the
measurement  of  Time  at  all  ?  For  our  measure-
ment is,  and  must  be,  in  terms  of  the  discrete,
whereas  that  which  we  attempt  to  measure  is
continuous,  one,  and  indivisible  by  our  arbitrary
partitions.

Again,  Time  is  infinite,  and  yet  science  treats  it
as  though  it  were  finite  :  we  fancy  that  the  past
explains  the  present ;  Time  has  no  beginning,  and
yet  we  search  the  past  for  the  origins  of  things :
the  world  of  which  science  is  the  knowledge  cannot
have  existed  from  all  time,  and  yet  a  beginning  of
the  world  in  Tiriie  is  impossible.

Our  real  consciousness  of  Time  conflicts  at  every
point  with  the  treatment  of  Time  required  in  science,
and  this  conflict  culminates  as  a  contradiction  in
terms  in  the  insoluble  antinomy  of  the  completed
infinity  of  past  Time.  For  the  original  and  only
valid  meaning  of  infinity  is  that  which  can  never
be  completed  by  the  addition  of  units,  and  yet  we
undoubtedly  regard  the  past  infinity  as  completed
by  the  present.

§  7.  Nor  do  we  fare  any  better  when  we  com-
pare our  conception  of  Space  with  the  reality  :  its
infinite  extent  and  divisibility  cannot  be  forced  into
the  scheme  of  science.  An  infinite  and  infinitely
divisible  world  is  not  an  object  of  knowledge ;  so
science  postulates  the  atom  at  the  one,  and  the
"confines  of  the  universe"  at  the  other  extreme,
as  the  limits  of  Space,  in  order  to  obtain  definite
quantities  which  can  be  calculated.  And  yet  we
can  conceive  neither  how  the  atom  should  be  in-
capable of  further  division,  nor  how  the  extent  of


OF SPACE.  65

the  world  can  be  limited.  For  it  is  equally  difficult
to  treat  of  "  Space  "  apart  from  that  which  fills  it,  i.e.
Matter,  and  to  neglect  this  distinction.  If  Space  =
the  spatially-extended,  then  the  infinite  extent  and
divisibility  of  Space  must  apply  to  Matter,  i.e.  atoms
and  limits  of  the  material  universe  are  impossible.
If,  on  the  other  hand.  Space  is  distinguished  from
that  which  fills  it,  we  not  only  seem  to  be  making  a
false  abstraction,  inasmuch  as  Space  is  never  pre-
sented to  us  except  as  filled  by  Matter,  but  to  com-
mit ourselves  to  the  existence  of  the  Void  or  empty
space,  existing  certainly  between  the  interstices  of
the  atoms,  and  probably  beyond  the  limits  of  the
universe. ,  But  empty  Space,  possessing  no  qualities
by  which  it  could  possibly  be  cognizable,  is  a  thing
in  no  way  distinguishable  from  nothing,  i.e.  a  non-
entity. And  further,  if  Space  be  not  Identified
with  the  spatially  extended,  how  do  we  know  that
the  properties  of  Space  hold  good  of  the  spatially-
extended,  i.e.  that  bodies  obey  the  laws  prescribed
for  them  by  mathematics  ?

And  even  when  Space  has  been  distinguished
from  that  which  fills  it,  it  seems  necessary  to  dis-
tinguish afresh  between  real  Space  which  we  per-
ceive and  ideal  or  conceptual  Space,  about  which
we  reason  in  mathematics.  For  they  differ  on  the
important  point  of  infinity  :  real  Space  is  not  in-
finite, for  nothing  infinite  can  be  perceived.  In-
finity, on  the  other  hand,  is  the  most  prominent
attribute  of  ideal  Space.  And  so  their  other  pro-
perties also  might  be  different,  e.g.  all  the  lines  drawn
in  real  Space  might  really  be  closed  curves,  owing
to  an  inherent  curvature  of  Space,  etc.  If,  then,
ideal  Space  and  real  Space  are  different,  a  serious
difficulty  arises  for  mathematics,  for  they  deal  with

R.  ofS.  -c.


66  .SCEPTICISM.

ideally  straight  lines,  perfect  circles,  etc.,  such  as  do
not  exist  in  real  Space,  and  which,  for  all  we  know,
may  be  incapable  of  so  existing,  because  real  Space
is  "  pseudo  -  spherical  "  or  "  four-dimensional."  If,
therefore,  mathematical  demonstrations  are  supposed
to  apply  to  figures  in  real  Space,  they  are  not  true,
and  if  not,  to  what  do  they  apply  ?  It  seems  easy
to  reply,  to  the  ideal  space  in  our  minds ;  but  what  if
there  be  no  relation  between  real  and  ideal  Space  ?
And  if  mathematical  truths  exist  only  in  our  heads,"
what  and  where  are  they  before  they  are  discovered  ?
Surely  the  truth  that  the  angles  of  a  triangle  are
equal  to  two  right  angles  did  not  come  into  being
when  it  was  first  discovered  ?

Such  considerations  may  justify  the  Sceptic  in  his
doubt  whether  the  ideal  certainty  of  mathematics  is
after  all  relevant  to  reality,  and  in  his  denial  of  the
self-evidence  of  the  assumptions  which  underlie  the
scientific  treatment  of  Space.

§  8.  Motion  also  is  feigned  for  scientific  purposes
to  be  something  different  from  what  it  is  :  it  can  be
calculated  only  on  the  assumption  that  it  is  discrete
and  proceeds  from  point  to  point,  and  yet  the  ancient
Zeno's  famous  fallacy  of  the  Arrow  warns  us  that
the  Real  moves  contintiously}

Our  conception,  too,  of  Rest  is  illusory  ;  for  all
things  seem  to  be  in  more  or  less  rapid  motion.
And  yet  motion  is  calculated  only  by  the  assumption
of  fixed  points,  i.e.  of  Rest. But  these  fixed,  points

1  If  the  arrow  really  moved  from  point  to  point,  it  would
be  at  rest  at  each  point,  i.e.  would  never  move  at  all.  But  of
course  it  never  is  at  the  points  at  all,  but  moves  through  them.
Only  unfortunately  our  thought  and  our  speech  refuses  to  express
a  fact  which  our  eyes  behold,  and  we  must  continue  to  say  one
thing,  while  meaning  another.


OF MOTION AND REST.  6/

are  fictitious,  and  so  our  calculations  are  wholly-
arbitrary,  for  in  limitless  Space  all  motion  must  be
relative  :  the  bodies  which  from  certain  points  of
view  seem  to  be  at  rest,  from  others  seem  to  be  in
motion,  and  so  on  alternately  at  rest  and  in  motion
ad  infinitum.  Nor  is  there  any  theoretic  reason  to
be  assigned  for  giving  one  point  of  view  the  pre-
ference over  another.  If,  then,  Motion  is  relative  to
any  and  every  point,  it  is  relative  to  nothing,  and
does  not  admit  of  being  objectively  determined.
And  even  if  we  were  content  that  motion  should  be
relative,  yet  energy  must  be  real,  and  indeed  its
conservation  is  one  of  the  chief  doctrines  of  modern
physics.  But  energy  is  ever  generated  out  of  and
passing  into  motion,  and  the  amount  of  actual  and
potential  energy  possessed  by  any  system  of  bodies
would  be  relative  to  the  points  which  for  the  purpose
of  our  calculations  Were  feigned  to  be  at  rest.  Thus
from  one  point  of  view  a  system  might  possess  three
times  the  motive  energy  it  has  from  another,  and
the  question  arises  which  of  these  seeming  energies
is  the  subject  of  the  doctrine  of  the  conservation  of
energy.  And  in  whatever  way  we  answer,  that
doctrine  is  false.  For  the  points  relatively  to  which
energy  is  conserved  do  not  preserve  their  relative
positions  for  two  moments  together,  and  hence  the
case  to  which  the  doctrine  refers  never  arises.  The
doctrine  of  the  conservation  of  energy  is  a  purely
metaphysical  assertion  concerning  a  state  of  things
that  cannot  possibly  arise  in  our  experience.  And
the  same  conviction  of  the  entirely  metempirical  and
hypothetical  character  of  the  doctrine  of  the  con-
servation of  energy  is  forced  upon  us  when  we  ex-
amine the  statements'  which  our  physicists  make
concerning  it. For they  admit  that  -it  does  not


55^  fiCEPTiCISM.

hold  good  of  any  actual  system ;  rin  any  system  of
bodies  we  may  choose  to  take,  the  sum  of  energy
does  not  remain  ihe  same  from  moment  to  moment.
What  else  is  it  then  but  to  trifle  with  the  ignorance
of  their  hearers  ito  .talk  about  demonstrating  the
doctrine  by  actual  experiment?  They  might  as
well  prove  that  two  .parallel  straight  lines  never
met  by  an  assiduous  use  of  the  measuring  tape.
And  the  case  is  no  better,  but  rather  worse,  when  it
is  explained  that  strictly  -speaking  the  conservation
of  energy  holds  only  of  an  .infinite  system.  For  an
infinite  system  is  in  the  very  nature  of  things  im-
possible. It  would  be  a  whole  which  was  not  a
whole,  a  system  which  was  not  a  system  (Cf.  ch.  9
§  8  and  ch.  2  §  20).  However  it  is  put,  .the  doctrine
can  be  asserted  only  of  a  fictitious  case,  well  known
to  be  impossible.

And  of  the  assumptions  subsidiary  ;to  ^that  of  the
conservation  of  energy,  the  conception  of  potential
energy  deserves  special  criticism.  For  it  illustrates
the  haphazard  TA?ay  in  which  our  science  accepts
incompatible  first  principles.  Potential  energy  is
defined  as  energy  of  position.  But  how  can  there
be  position  in  infinite  Space  ?  Position  is  deter-
mined  with  reference  lo  at  least  three  points,  and
each  of  these  with  reference  to  three  others,  and  so
on  until  we  either  get  to  fixed  ipoints  with  an  ab-
solute position,  or  go  on  to  infinity  and  are  never
able  to  determine  position  at  all.

Thus  the  reality  of  Motion,  Rest,  Energy,  and
Position  in  every  case  involves  metaphysical  postul-
ates which  experience  does  not  satisfy,  and  we  have
agreed  that  for  the  present  a  reduction  to  meta-
physics shall  be  esteemed  a  reduction  to  absurdity.

§  9. The  conception  of  Matter,  which  may  next


OF MATTER,  69?

ba  considterecT,  through  ft  at  present  seems  indis-
pensable to  science,  is  reaily  a  frttitful  source  of
perplexities.  For  it  appears  that  ail  we  know  of
Matter  is.  the  forces  it  exercises.  Mutter,  therefore,-
is  said  to  be  unknowable  in"  itself,  andi  this;  unknow-
ableness'  of  matter-in-itself  is  quoted  in  support  of
the  belief  in'  the  unknowablfe'  generally.  And  yet"
it  is  perhaps  hardly  astonishing  that  a  baseless
abstraction,  should  be  unknowable  in  itself  And
Matter  certainly  is  such  an  abstraction.  For  all
that  appears  to  us  is  bodies,  which  we  call  material
They  possess  certain  more  or  less  obvious  points
of  resemblance,  and  the  abstraction,  "Matter,"  is
promptly  invented  to  account  for  them.  But  this
is  not  only  a  gross  instance  of  abstract  metaphysics,
but  also  a  fiction  which  in  the  end  profits  us  little.
Certain  superficial  aspects  of  bodies  are  taken  and
exaggerated  into  primary  qualities  of  Matter.  The
hardness  of  bodies  is  explained  by  the  hardness  of
the  ultimate  particles  of  which  they  are  composed,
their  divisibility  and  compressibility  by  the  empty
interstices  between  these;  ultimate  atoms.  So  as  the
final  result  bodies  are  to  be  explained  by  their  com-
position out  of  atoms,  possessiag  the  attributes  of
gravity,  impenetrability,  and  inertia.

These  attributes,  however,  suffer  severally  from
the  defects  of  being  false,  imsufficient,  and  unin-
telligible. No  visible  material  body,  e.g.,,  is  im-
penetrable or  absolutely  solid  :.  all  are  more  or  less
compressible.  So  the  atoms  of  absolute  solidity
have  been  falsely  invented,,  in  order  to  explain  a
property  of  bodies,  which,  after  all,  they  were  un-
able to  explain  ;  viz.,  their  relative  solidity.  For
the  supposed  solidity  of  the  atoms,  is,  according  to
modern scientific views, utterly  irrelevant to-  the


*JO  SCEPTICISM.


actual  solidity  of  bodies.  The  latter  is  due  to  re-
pellent forces  acting  at  mqlecular  distances,  and  not
due  to  contact  with  the  atoms.  Nor  is  it  even  true
that  the  complex  of  interacting  atoms  composing  a
body  is  solid  in  the  way  the  body  seems  to  be  solid,
seeing  that  the  atoms  are  separated  by  distances
vast  when  compared  with  their  own  size.*  And  as
nothing  else  can  come  within  striking  distance  of
them  and  put  their  internal ,  economy  to  the  test,  it
is  difficult  to  see  what  it  matters  whether  the  atoms
are  solid  or  liquid,  empty  or  full  inside.

It  follows  from  the  atomic  theory  in  its  present
shape  that  the  solidity  which  we  feel  is  not  real,
that  the  solidity  which  exists  is  not  relevant,  and
that  bodies  are  not  really  solid.  And  the  atomic
theory  is  not  only  false,  but  feeble.  It  cannot,  after
all,  explain  the  behaviour  of  bodies,  but  must  call  to
aid  the  hypothesis  of  a  luminiferous  ether,  inter-
penetrating all  bodies,  the  vibrations  of  which  are
supposed  to  explain  the  phenomena  of  light.  The
qualities  of  this  ether  are  so  extraordinary  that  not
even  the  boldest  scientists  venture  to  determine
them  all,  such  as  whether  it  is  continuous  or  atomic.
Nor  is  this  reluctance  without  good  reason.  For  if
the  ether  is  continuous,  it  cannot  vibrate ;  while  if  it
is  atomic,  there  must  exist  voids  between  its  inter-
stices, and  all  physical  action  must  in  the  last  resort
be  action  at  a  distance.  The  first  alternative,  of  a
vibrating  ether  which  cannot  vibrate,  is  too  obviously
absurd  to  be  explicitly  stated,  while  the  second  would
outrage  one  of  the  most  cherished  of  the  anthropo-
morphic prejudices  of  science. Still,  the avowed

1  As  the  size  of  the  interstices  in  the  most  soUd  bodies  is  to
that  of  the  atoms  asfive  to  one,  it  is  clear  that  the  solidity  we
feel  has  not  much  to  do  with  the  hardness  of  the  atoms.


ETHER.  AND GRAVITY.  'Jrl

properties  of  the  ether  are  sufficiently  extraordinary.
It  is  an  adamantine  solid  several  hundred  times
more  rigid  than  the  most  solid  bodies,  and  vibrates
at  the  rate  of  from  470  to  760  billion  times  per
second.  And  this  intangible  solid  has  no  gravity,
and  thereby  lacks  the  great  characteristic  of  matter.'^

For  gravity  has  been  since  Newton's  time  re-
garded as  the  primary  attribute  of  matter,  although
its  nature  and  operation  is,  by  Newton's  own  ad-
mission, unthinkable.  For  it  differs  radically  from
all  the  other  forces  in  the  physical  universe  in  that
it  does  not  require  time  for  its  transmission.  Sound
travels  at  the  rate  of  1,100  feet  per  second,  and  light
at  the  rate  of  186,000  miles;  but  the  changes  in
gravitative  attraction  seem  to  be  instantaneous.  So
either-  Time  or  Space  *  do  not  seem  to  exist  for  it,
and  it  also  may  be  said  to  involve  Action  at  a  dis-
tance.

Such  action  our  scientists  persist  in  regarding  as
impossible,,  although  their  own  physics  evidently
require  it,  and  although  there  is  no  real  reason  why
it  should  be  more  unthinkable  than  anything  else.
The  objection  to  it  seems  nothing  but  the  survival
of  the  primitive  prejudice  that  all  action  must  be
like  a  band  of  savages  in  a  tug-of-war.  If  meta-
physics had  been  consulted,  it  would  have  been
obvious  that  no  special  medium  was  required to

1  If  the  ether  gravitated,  it  would  be  attracted  towards  the
larger  aggregates  of  matter,  and  hence  be  denser  in  the  neigh-
bourhood of  the  stars  than  in  interstellar  space;  but  if  its  density  ■
varied,  it  would  not  propagate  light  in  straight  lines.

2  If  it  can  traverse  any  distance  instantaneously ;  for  the  fact
that  it  varies  inversely  as  the  square  of  the  distance  does  not
prove  that  gravity,  recognises  the .  prior  existence  of  space.  The
distances  between  bodies  may  be  only  the  phenomenal  expres-
sion of  their  metaphysical  attractions  and  repulsions.


72  SCEPTICISM.

make  interaction  possible  between  bodies  that  co-
exist, seeing  that  their  co-existence  is  an  ample
guarantee  of  their  connection'  and  of  the  possibility
of  their  interaction.

Lastly,  the  Inertia  of  matter  is  a  prejudice  in-
herited from  a  time  when  the  test  of  life  was  self-
motion.  ;  and  its  retention  now  makes  the  origination
of  motion  by  matter  impossible,,  and  thus  forms  an
insuperable  obstacle  ta  any  successful  materialistic
(or  rather  hylozoist)  explanation  of  the  world.

The  sum  total  therefore  of  the  explanation  of
bodies  by  scientific  doctrines  of  Matter  is  : —

(i)  That  all  things- are  Matter.

(2)  That  gravitation  is  the  characteristic  quality
of  Matter.

{3)  That  gravitation  is  entirely  unthinkable.

(4)  That  ether  is  Matter,  but  does  not  gravitate.

(5)  That  Matter  is  solid,  but  that  solidity  is  not
due  to  the  solidity  of  Matter.

(6)  That  Matter  does  not  explain,  all  things  be-
cause it  is  inert.

It  will  be  seen  from  this,  that  until  the  theory  of
Matter  acquires  something  like  self-consistency  it  is
needless  for  the  sceptic  to  inquire  whether  it  ex-
plains the  action  of  bodies..

§  I  p.  Force  is  the  conception  which  does  most
work  in  science  ;  but  it  is  only  a  clumsy  depersonal-
ization of  our  human  volition,  from  the  sense  of
which  it  sprang,,  and  the  sense  of  effort  still  seems
indissolubly  associated  with  it.  This  fact  is,  of
course,  irresistibly  suggestive  of  false  ideas  as  to
the  "  cause  of  motion^"  it  is  subsequently  defined
to  be.

The  correlative  conceptions  again  of  Activity  and
Passivity,  which  so  long  dominated  humafi  thought,


FORCE AND INTERACTION.  73

are  now  discarded  by  science.  We  now  say  that
a  force  is- one  half  a  stress,  and  substitute  interact-
ion for  the  distinction  of  active  and  passive;  and
indeed  the  fact  that  action  and  reaction  are  equal
and  opposite  has  become  as  obvious  a  necessity  of
thought  as  it  ever  was  ta  the  Greeks,  that  one
thing  must  be  acted  upon  and  the  other  act  upon  it.

And  yet  what  business  have  we, to  speak  even  of
interaction  ?  All  we  see  is  how  two  bodies  seem  to
change  each' other's  motions,  without  being  able  to
grasp  horn  they  do  so  in  their  action  at  a  distance.
Even  so  we  have  assumed  too  much ;  for  what  right
have  we  to  assume  that  one  influences  the  other,
what  justification  for  defining  force  as  the  cause  of
motion,  for  applying  our  conception  of  causation  to
the  things  around  us  }

§  II.  Since  the  time  of  Hume  the  vital  import-
ance to  science  of  the  conception  of  causation  has
been  fully  recognised,  and  it  would  now  be  generally
admitted  that  a  successful  assault  upon  it  is  in  itself
sufficient  to  establish  the  case  of  Scepticism.  And
fully  proportionate  to  its  importance  are  the  diffic-
ulties of  justifying  this  principle.  Its  historical,
antecedents  are  in  themselves  almost  sufficient  to
condemn  it ;  and  the  existing  divergences  as  to  its
nature  make  a  consistent  defence  almost  impossible.

Originally,  as  has  been  remarked,  the  conception
of  cause  was  a  transference  of  the  internal  sense  of
volition  and  effort  to  things  outside  the  organism.
The  changes  in  the  world  were  supposed  to  be  due
to  the  action  of  immanent  spirits.  In  course  of
time  these  divine  spirits  were  no  longer  regarded
as  directly  causing  events,  but  as  being  the  first
causes  which  set  secondary  causes  in  motion.  It
was  then  supposed  that  cause  and  effect  were  con-


74  SCEPTICISM.

nected  by  chains  of  necessity,  which  ultimately  de-
pended from  the  First  Cause  of  the  All.  Then
Hume  remarked  that  necessity  was  subjective,  and
falsely  anthropopathic,  and  that  the  necessary  con-
nexion between  cause  and  effect  could  never  be
traced.  So  it  was  suggested  that  if  cause  and  effect
were  merely  antecedent  and  consequent,  science
would  suffer  no  hurt,  and  that  it  worked  equally
well  with  an  (ambiguously)  "  invariable  "  antecedent.
But  the  arbitrary  distinction  between  the  anteced-
ent conditions  which  were  causes  of  the  effect,  and
those  which  were  not,  proved  untenable ;  the  cry
was  raised  that  all  the  conditions  must  be  included.
This  was  done,  and  it  then  appeared,  as  the
triumphant  result  of  a  scientific  purification  of  the
category  of  causation,  that  the  cause  was  identical
with  the  effect !  And  this  reductio  ad  absurdum  of
the  whole  conception  was  actually  hailed  as  the
highest  achievement  of  philosophic  criticism,  about
which  it  was  alone  remarkable  that  the  element  of
temporal  succession  from  cause  to  effect  should
somehow  have  dropped  out  of  sight !  It  was
simply  curious  that  the  category  which  was  to  have
explained  the  Becoming  of  nature  should  finally
involve  no  transition  whatever,  and  thus  be  unable
to  discern  the  various  elements,  to  distinguish  the
different  phases,  in  the  flow  of  things.  The  true
use  of  the  conception  was  to  teach  us  that  every-
thing was  the  cause  or  the  effect  of  everything  else,
to  suggest  that  our  failure  to  see  this  arose  from
an  illusion  of  Time,  unworthy  of  the  timelessness  of
our  true  Self

Of  course,  however,  it  is  not  intended  to  suggest
that  an  extreme  of  epistemological  fatuity  like  this
view  of  causation  could  ever  work  in  practice  ;  it  is


CAUSATION,  75

merely  the  legitimate  outcome  of  the  attempt  to
apply  the  category  consistently  to  the  explanation-
of  things.  And  not  only  is  Cause  useless  when
purged  of  its  incongruities,  but  it  is  false,  if  taken
at  an  earlier  stage  in  the  process.  The  necessary
connexion  of  cause  and  effect  is  not,  as  Hume
rightly  remarked,  anything  visible  in  rerum  natura,
but  a  fiction  of  the  mind.  All  we  see  in  nature  is
how  a  thing  is  or  becomes,  how  one  thing  or  phase
follows  upon  another.  Either,  therefore,  the  necess-
ary connexion  is  pure  assumption,  or  all  Becoming
must  be  called  necessary ;  in  the  latter  case  we
simply  produce  useless  ambiguity  in  a  useful  term  .
without  curing  the  defects  of  causation.  If,  again,
mere  sequence  is  causation,  night,  as  has  been  long
ago  pointed  out,  would  be  the  cause  of  day.

The  fact  is,  that  in  applying  the  conception  of
causation  to  the  world  we  have  made  a  gigantic
assumption ;  and  that  all  these  difficulties  arise
from  the  fact  that  our  assumption  breaks  down
everywhere  as  soon  as  it  is  tested.  Secondary
causes  involve  just  as  great  difficulties  as  first
causes,  the  perplexities  of  which  we  have  already
considered  (ch.  ii.,  §  lo).

It  is  assumed  (i)  that  events  depend  on  one
another,  and  not  on  some  remote  agency  behind  the
veil  of  illusion.  But  what  if  the  successive  aspects
of  the  world  be  comparable  to  the  continuous  shuf-
fling of  a  gigantic  kaleidoscope,  in  the  tube  of  which
we  were  imprisoned  as  impotent  spectators  of  a
world  that  had  no  meaning  or  intelligible  connec-
tion ?  Would  not  the  attempt  to  know  phenomena,
to  derive  one  set  from  another  by  our  category
of  causation,  be  inherently  futile?  And  (2)  it  is
assumed  that  we  are  both  entitled  and  able  to  dis-


75  ■  ,  SCEPTICISM.

member  the  continuous  flow  of  events,  to  dissever
it  into  discrete  stages,  to  distinguish  certain  elements
in  the  infinitely  complex  whole  of  phenomena,  and
to  connect  them  with  others-as  their  causes  or  effects.
But  what  if  the  Becoming  of  things  be  an  integral
whole,  which  could  be  understood  only  from  the
point  of  view  of  the  whole?  Would  not  the  idea
of  causation  be  inherently  invalidr  just  because  it
isolates  certain  factors-  ?  And  in  any  case  it  is
inherently  false.  For  whether  our  dissection  of  the
continuous  flux  of  phenomena  be  justifiable  or  not,
the  separation  by  which' we  isolate  certain  fragments
must  be  false.  We  hear  a  noise  and  see  a.  bird  fall ;
we  jump  to  the  conclusion  that  it '  has  been  shot.
But  what  right  have  we  thus  to  connect  the  firing
of  the  gun  and  the  death  of  the  bird  as  cause  and
effect,  and  to  separate  them  from  the  infinite  mult-
itude of  conconritant  circumstances  ?  Why  do  we
neglect  all  the  rest  as  iramaterial  ?  We  cannot
say,  "  because  all  the  other  circumstances  remain  the
same,"  for  the  world  never  remains  the  same  for
two  consecutive  moments.  How  then  can  we  say
beforehand  that  the  remotest  and  occultest  circum-
stances have  not  been  essential  to-  the  result  ?  It
was  at  least  a  merit  of  astrology  that  it  faced  the
difficulty,  and  did  not  disdain  to  suppose  that  even
the  stars  had  an  influence  over  human  events.  The
supposition  of  ancient  divination,  that  the  fate  of
a  fight  might  be  calculated  from  the  entrails  of
chickens,  the  flight  of  rooks;  or  the  conjunction  of
planets,  may  appear  a  sober  and  sensible  doctrine
of  causation,  far  less  absurd  than  the  arbitrary  and
indefensible  procedure  of  modern  science.

But  even  supposing  that  we  had  made  good  a
claim  to  apply  our  subjective  category  of  causation


.  SUBSTANCE.  ']']

to  the  Becoming  of  things,  we  should  only  have
plunged  into  greater  difficulties.  For  we  are  im-
pelled by  the  very  law  of  causation  itself,  which
forbids  us  to  say  that  things  have  been  caused  by
nothing,  to  ask  for  cause  after  cause  in  an  infinite
regress,  and  can  never  find  rest  in  a  first  cause  in
the  endless  series  of  phenomena.  And  even  if  a
first  cause  could  be  reached,  it  would  be  subject  to
all  the  difficulties  discussed  in  the  last  chapter  (§  lo).

What  then  shall  we  say  .of  a  principle  of  explana-
tion which  cannot  explain,  .but  deludes  us  with  its
endless  regress  as  we  pursue  it  ?  What  but  that  it
is  false  and  as  deceitful  as  it  is  incapable  ?

Lastly,  there  must  be  recorded  against  the  .category
of  causation  the  crowaing  absurdity,  that,  like  Time,
it  contradicts  itself.  For  in  its  later  stages  as  a
"scientific  conception"  it  becomes  forgetful  of  its
original  form,  and  engages  in  an  insoluble  conflict
with  the  freedom  of  the  will,  which  it  condemns  as
an  intolerable  exception  to  its  supremacy.  It  rises
in  rebellion  against  the  will  which  begot  it,  and  this
final  impiety  adds  dishonour  to  the  damage  of  its
fall  (Cp.  App.  I.  §  5).

§  1 2.  The  category  of  Substance  presents  diffic-
ulties hardly  less  serious  than  those  of  causation.
For  if  substance  be  the  permanent  in  change,  where
shall  it  be  found  in  a  world  where  nought  is  per-
manent but  change  ?  And  in  any  case  it  must  be
admitted  that  the  relation  we  suppose  to  exist
between  substance  and  attributes,  the  way  in  which
we  imagine  substances  to  hold  plurality  in  unity,  is
certainly  false.  For  while  we  regard  a  substance
as  the  unity  of  many  attributes,  and  compose  a
thing  out  of  its  qualities,  the  real  things  are  concrete
unities. Their  attributes  or  qualities  are  nothing


78  SCEPTICISM.

but  the  modes  of  their  interaction,  or  to  state  thb
matter  with  still  fewer  assumptions,  phases  we  ascribe
to  the  same  substance.  But  this  permanent  identity
of  things  from  moment  to  moment,  this  hypothesis
of  a  substantial  substratum  persisting  through  change,
is  a  grave  assumption.  How  do  we  know  that
successive  appearances  are  changes  of  the  same
substance  ?  It  is,  after  all,  an  inference  that  the  dog
who  comes  into  my  room  is  the  same  dog  who  left
me  five  minutes  ago,  and  not,  as  mediaeval  scholars
would  have  considered  probable,  a  demon  with
intent  to  tempt  me.

And  if,  with  Kant,  we  urge  against  this  denial  of
Substance,  that  change  implies  permanence,  it  is
equally  easy  to  answer,  with  Mr,  Balfour,  that  Kant
himself  admitted  the  possibility  oi  alternation,  i.e.  of
a  kaleidoscopic  wavering  of  appearances,  in  which
the  sole  connection  between  the  successive  phases
was  a  fiction  of  our  minds.

§  13.  Our  highest  and  most  abstract  categories
also,  those,  of  Being  and  Becoming,  fare  no  better  at
the  sceptic's  hands.  For  while  it  soon  appears  that
in  nature  nothing  is,  but  everything  becomes.  Becom-
ing turns  out  to  be  a  contradiction  in  terms,  merely
a  word  to-  designate  a  forcibly  effected  union  of
Being  and  Not- Being.  For  when  we  say  that  a
thing  becomes,  we  can  describe  it  only  by  the  two
ends  of  the  process,  positively  by  what  it  is  and
negatively  by  what  it  is  not.  Thus  the  hatching  of  a
chicken  is  defined  by  the  t.%^  which  it  is,  but  will
not  be,  and  the  chicken,  which  it  is  not,  but  will  be.
Becoming,  therefore,  is  not  properly  a  category  of
our  thought,  but  a  fact  which  we  symbolize  by  the
word  ;  and  that  which  we  try  to  express  by  it  appears
as  the  unknowable,  the  incomprehensible  by  thought.


THE BECOMING OF THINGS UNKNOWABLE.  79

which  no  category  of  ours  can  grasp.  For  aill
reality  is  immersed  in  the  flux  of  Becoming,  which
glides  before  our  eyes  in  a  Protean  stream  of  change,
interminable,  indeterminate,  indefinite,  indescribable,
impenetrable,  a  boundless  and  groundless  abyss  into
which  we  cast  the  frail  network  of  our  categories  fruit-
lessly and  in  vain.

And  this  revelation  of  the  flux  of  things  sums  up
the  doom  of  science;  surely,  we  must  say,  the  god-
dess of  wisdom  could  not  be  born  of  the  froth  and
spume  of  such  fluctuating  waves ;  our  search  for
truth  beneath  the  idle  show  of  such  appearances  is
surely  vain  ;  the  sensuous  veil  that  hides  the  truth
is  all  the  picture,

§  14.  Thus  the  principles  of  our  science  all  break
down,  because  not  one  is  capa,ble  of  expressing  the
Becoming  of  things.  Our  science  has  turned  out  a
patchwork  raft,  compiled  out  of  the  battered  frag-
ments of  ancient  superstitions,  that  floats  idly  on  a
sea  of  doubt,  unable  to  attain  to  the  terra  firma  of
certainty,  and  still  more  incapable  of  wafting  the
ark  of  life  to  the  distant  islands  of  the  Blest.

But  this  fiasco  of  human  science  does  not  satisfy
the  sceptic  :  he  is  prepared  to  explain  how  it  comes
about.  That  the  categories  of  our  thought  should
prove  inadequate  to  the  explanation  of  reality  will ,
cease  to  surprise  us,  when  we  have  considered  the
complete  difference  of  character  which  exists  between
our  thoughts  on  the  one  hand  and  the  reality  which
is  given  to  feeling  in  perception  on  the  other.

For  it  is  not  true  that  perception  and  conception
are  distinguished  merely  by  the  greater  vividness  of
the  consciousness  which  accompanies  the  former :
their  difference  is  an  essential  difference  of  character,
and  as  soon  as  it  is  realized  puts  an  end  to  the


8o  SCEPTICISM.

ridiculous  attempts  to  derive  the  peculiarities  of  our
thought  from  "experience."  Our  conceptions  can-
not be  derived  from  experience,  for  the  simple
reason  that  no  amount  of  experience  can  make  them
square  with  "experience"  {v.  above  §§  6-13).  The
character  of  our  thought  {i.e.  of  the  "  intuitive "
principles  of  the  intuitionists)  and  that  of  our  feeling
{i.e.  of  the  experience  of  the  empiricists)  differ  so
radically  that  no  length  of  common  employment  in
the  use  of  man  has  made  their  deliverances  agree.
And  it  is  this  difference  which  was  described  by  the
misleading  term  of  the  ""  a  priori  element  in  know-
ledge "  (z/.  ch.  2  I  1 7).  This  does  not  mean,  or  at
least  should  not  be  taken  to  mean,  that  our  thought
is  prior  to  sense- experience  in  Time,  that  we  first
have  thought-categories  arni  then  classify  our  experi-
ences by  their  aid  ;  it  is  intended  to  describe  the
morphology  of  thought,  the  law  of  its  development,
the  intrinsic  character  and  structure  which  it  displays
in  all  its  manifestations.

The  intuitionists  then  were  right  in  contending
that  there  was  in  thought  an  element  that  could  not
be  derived  from  "  experience,"  an  element  different
from  and  alien  to  "sensation,"  a  stream  of  con-
sciousness which  sprang  from  the  obscurity  of  the
same  origin,  and  has  run  parallel  with  feeling  through-
out the  whole  history  of  the  human  mind.  But  it
was  the  assertion  of  a  more  dubious  doctrine  to
claim  for  thought  greater  dignity  and  greater  cer-
tainty, nay  to  represent  it  as  the  sole  ground  of
certainty  on  the  ground  of  this  very  difference.  Is
it  not  rather  a  ground  for  the  sceptical  inference
that  since,  thought  and  feeling  are  fundamentally
different,  knowledge,  which  depends  on  a  harmonious
combination  of  the  two,  is  impossible  ?


CHARACTERISTICS OF REALITY.  8 1

It  is  into  the  evidence  for  this  suggestion  that  we
must  now  enter.

§  15.  The  Real  in  perception,  so  far  as  the
inadequacy  of  our  language  allows  us  to  describe  it,
is  always  unique  and  individual.  It  is  substantial
and  substantival,  i.e.  it  is  not  dependent  on  other
things  for  its  existence,  not  itself  an  attribute,  but  a
subject,  to  which  qualities  are  attributed.  It  exists
in  Time  and  Space,  in  which  it  continuously  becomes.
It  is  presented  with  an  infinite  wealth  of  sensuous
detail,  and  interacts  with  the  other  real  things  in
continual  change.

Our  thought,  on  the  other  hand,  does  not  exist
either  in  Space  or  in  Time.  We  should  not  come
across  the  happy  hunting  grounds  of  the  equilateral
triangle,  even  on  a  voyage  to  the  moon  or  one  of
the  minor  planets,  neither  did  truth  come  into  exist-
ence at  the  time  when  we  made  its  discovery.  The
truth  that  2x2  =  4  cannot  be  said  to  date  from  the
time  when  men  first  became  conscious  of  it,  or  to  be
localized  in  the  heads  of  those  who  are  aware  of  it.
We  feel  that  the  word  'exist '  is  quite  inadequate  to
describe  the  peculiarities  of  its  nature,  for,  like  all
'  the  truths  of  our  thought,  it  is  not,  and  cannot  be,  a
fact  which  can  fall  under  the  observation  of  our
senses.  We  may  try  to  express^  it  by  saying  that
thought  holds  good  eternally  or  timelessly  in  the
intelligible  sphere  {iv  tovw  voijrSi'j,  but  even  so  it  will
be  doubtful  whether  we  shall  avoid  misconception.
For  the  temptation  to  confuse  the  real  existence  of
thought  as  a  psychological  fact  inside  human  heads,
with  its  logical  validity,  which  is  eternal,  and  "  un-
become,"  unchanging  and  unlocalized,  is  too  great
for  most  philosophy.  And  further,  all  thought  is
abstract,  i.e. it expresses  only  a  selected  extract,

R.  of  S.  Q


82  SCEPTICISM.

distilled  fr6m  the  infinite  wealth  of  perception,  and
rejects  the  greater  part  of  the  sensuous  context  as
irrelevant. It is  universal,  i.e. common  to  indi-
viduals, 'and  hence  incapable  of  representing  their
uniqueness. It  is  discursive,  i.e.  it  proceeds  step  by
step,  from  one  definite  conception  to  another,  and
hence  can  only  state  a  thing  successively  as  a  series,
and  not  simultaneously  as  a  whole. So  it  is  incap-
able of  representing  the  continuous  ejicept  by  the
fiction of  an infinity of  discrete steps, and this
incapacity is the secret ground of the constant
attempts  to  regard  Space  and  Time  as  composed  of
discrete  atoms  and;  moments  (§§  6,  7),  and  to  draw
h9.rd  and  fast  lines  of  demarcation,  where reality;
exhibits  one  thing  passing  into  another  by  insensible
gradations  in  an  uninterrupted  flow. And,  above
all,  thought  is  adjectival. It  cannot  stand  by  itself,
but  must  always  be  attributed  to  some  substantive
realitj'. In  other  words,  thought  must  always  be
somebody's thought, and any statement of our
thought  must  refer  to  something  : the  abstractions
of  thought  must  be  attached  to  some  real  subject
which  they  qualify. No  statement  we  can  possibly
make,  can  possibly  be  a  fact,  at  the  most  it  may  be
true  of  the  fact,  and  to  forget  this  is  to  commit  the
most  serious of philosophic crimes,  viz.,  that  of
hypostasizing  abstractions.

The  objects  of  our  thought,  in  short,  are  not  real
existences  interacting  in  the  sensible  world,  but
ideal  relations  connected  by  the  logical  laws  of  an
"  eternal "  validity!

Hence  the  logical  treatment,  also,  our  thought
requires,  differs  :  its  highest  category  is  not  actual
existence,  but  logical  necessity.  And  while  in  the
real  world  a  fact  cannot  be  more  than  a  fact,  and  is


AND.  OF thought;  83

either  a  fact  or  notiiing  afr  all,,  a  trutR'  for  though't
may  vary  througb  all!  the  gradations  of  logical
necessity,  from-,  possibility  up  to  "  necessary  truth."
Whenever,  therefore,  we  set  out  to  prove  a  fact,  we
are  trying  to  decive  it  from  a  totally  different  order
of  existence,  to  deduce  the  real  from  the  logical,  and
hence  to  reduce  reality  to  thought.  Thus  all  proof
is  perversion  :  it  involves  an  unwarranted  manipul-
ation of  the  evidence  on  which  it  is  based.  As
soon  as  we  are  not  content  to  take  things  simply
as  they  are,  and  for  what  they  are,  as  soon,  as  we
inquire  into  the  reason  of  what  is,  we  inevitably  pass
into  the  totally  different  sphere  of  what  maist  be  (or
may  be,  for  possibility  indicates  only  the-  degree  of
confidence  with  which  we  attribute  the  logical  con-
nexion, necessary  in  itself,  to  reality)^,  in  which
things  do  not  become  but  are  related.  For  it  is
only  as  a  psychological  event  in.  the  life  history  of
an  individual  whose  knowledge  grows,,  that  truth
becomes  or  changes  ;  in  itself  it  possesses  an  ideal
validity  which  is  eternal,  and  to  which  the  analogies
of  Time  and  Space  are  inapplicable..  Hence  there
is  no  change  or  motion  about  the  world  of  Ideas  :
change  and  motion  belong  only  to  the  world  of
existence  and  exist  either  in  the  real  mind  which
apprehends,  or  in  the  Becoming  of  things  which  it
seeks  to  comprehend.  Instead  of  changes  whereby
one  thing  takes  the  place  of  another,  the  ideal  world
exhibits  only  logically  necessary  connexions  between
its  co-existent  and  mutually  implicated  members.
To  speak  therefore  of  a  logical  process  or  a  process
of  thought,  is  a  misnomer,  if  by  process  we  mean
any  change  in  the  relations  of  the  ideas.  The  ideas
must  co-exist,  or  else  there  is  no  relation  between
them;  but  if  they  co-exist,  i.e.  are  both  there  already i


84  SCEPTICISM.

there  is  no  change  and  no  process.  The  process
therefore  mnst  be  a  pyschological  process  in  the
mind,  which  travels  over  .the  pre-existing  system  of
mutually^dependent  relations,  and  can  only  render
explicit  the  relations  which  were  before  implicitly
involved.  That  is  to  say,  if  our  reasoning  is  cogent,
our  conclusaan  ought  at  the  end  of  the  process  to
appear  a  p&titio  principii  which  is  involved  in  the
premisses,  and  our  conclusion  ought  to  appear
nothing  new,,  ex  past  facto.  And  the  reason  is  that
the  supra-sensible  world  of  Ideas  is  unaffected  by  the
manipulations  by  wjaich  we  catch  glimpses  of  its
correlations,  and  that  its  co- existent  members  have
nothing  to  do  with  the  coming  into  and  passing  out
of  being  of  the  sensible  world.''

^  Students  of  anciemt  philosophy  will  have  perceived  that  this
account  of  the  contrast  between  reality  and  thought  agrees  entirely
with  Plato's  much-maligned  description  of  the  world  of  Ideas.
Every  one  of  his  assertions  is  literally  true.  It  is  true  that  the
Ideas  form  a  connected  hieraiichy  which  abides  unchangeably  and
eternally  "  beyond  the  heavens."  It  is  true  that  the  Idea  is  the
universal,  the  one  opposed  to  the  many  which  are  pervaded  by  it,
and  which  cannot  absorb  it.  It  ie  true,  likewise,  that  the  sensible
is  knowable  only  by  partaking  in  the  Ideas,  thai  "  matter  "  is  the
nonexistent,  and  that  the  Sensible  with  its  Becoming  contains  an
element  of  non-existence  baffling  thought.  {  =  The  Real  is  know-
able  only  in  terms  of  thought,  and  in  so  far  as  it  is  not  so  express-
ible, it  is  nothing  for  thought.]  And  Plato  is  no  less  eloquently
true  in  his  silence  than  in  his  explanations.  He  does  not  explain
how  sensible  things  "  partake  in  "  the  Ideas.  And  the  reason  is
that  this  partaking  is  inexplicable,  that  the  connection  of  thought
with  reaUty  is  just  the  difficulty,  which  Plato  saw,  but  which  his
successors  mostly  failed  to  see.  If  the  Sensible  and  the  Idea
are  fundamentally  different,  such  partaking  is  an  assumption
which  our  knowledge  must  assume,  but  which  it  cannot  justify
against  scepticism.  And  so  Platonism,  as  its  later  history
showed,  is  capable  of  developing  in  two  directions :  it  may
either  confess  that  the  connection  cannot  be  made,  and  so  pass
into  the  scepticism  of  the  new  Academy,  or  it  must  seek  extra-


THEIR  DIVERGENCE  MAKES  KNOWl-EDGE  IMPOSSIBLE. S'-,


§  i6.  It  follows  from  this  divergence  between
thought  and  reality,  that  our  thought  can  only
symbolize  things,  and  from'  the  extent  of  that  diverg-
ence, that  it  can  only  symbolize  them  imperfectly;
and  in  such  a  way  that  upon  all  the  critical  ques-
tions the  disagreement  between  thought  and  reality
is  hopeless.  Thought  can  nefther  grasp  the  indi-
viduality of  the  Rear,  which  it  fails:  tcr  define  as
particularity,  nor  its  Becoming,  which  it  fails  to
describe  by  the  categories  of  Being  and  Not-Being
(v.  §  13),  nor  the  exuberant  abundance  of  sense
perception,  which  it  fails  to  express  in  terms  of
thought-relationsi  and  cuts  away  as  irrelevant  to
the  abstractions  with  which  albne  it  can  work.
Thought  and  feeling  thus  speak  in  different  tongues,
as  it  were,  and  where  is  the  interpreter  that  can
render  them  intelligible  to  each  other  ?

And  yet  knowledge  consists  only  in  their  har-
mony, in  the  conformity  of  truth  and  fact,  in  the
correspondence  of  our  thought-symbols,  with  which
we  reason;  with  the  reality  which  we  feel.  If  then
such  harmony  cannot  be  attained,  our  reasonings
may  be  perfectly  valid  within  their  own  sphere,  and
our  feelings-  perfectly  unquestionable  within  theirs,
and  yet  knowledge  will  be  impossible.  For  we
cannot  bestow  the  title  of  knowledge  on  an  inequit-
able adherence  to  one  side  r  neither  reasoning
which  can  attribute  no  meaning  to  facts,  nor  un-
reasoning acceptance  of  facts  which  have  no  mean-
ing, deserves  the  name  of  knowledge:  And  yet  it
would  seem  that  to  one  or  other  of  these  alternatives

logical  certainty  in  the  ecstasy  of  Neoplatonisnoi  In  the  one
case  it  sacrifices  the  theory  of  Ideas,,  in  the  other  the  sensible
world,  but  in  no  case  does  it  so  solve  the.  problem  a»  to.  make
knowledge  possible.


86  .-SCEPTICISM,

we  were  confined,  for  the  symbols  oF  our  thought
cannot  interpret  reality.  This  is  not  only,  as  has
been  shown,  an  inevitable  result  of  the  different
natures  of  thought  and  feeling,  but  it  is  confirmed
by  the  character  of  all  our  knowledge.  For  all  our
knowledge,  every  statement  about  the  woiJld  which
can  possibly  be  made,  deals  with  realities  in  terms
of  thought,  states  facts  in  terms  of  thought-relations.
But  these  thought-relations  are  not  facts,  and  dis-
aster swiftly  overtakes  the  attempt  t®  treat  them
as  such.  For  in  the  first  place  things  cannot  be
analysed  into  thought-relations.;  one  may  make  any
number  of  statements  about  a  thing  and  yet  never
be  assured  that  all  has  been  stated  that  could  be
said  about  the  thing.  In  other  words,  any  real
thing  possesses  an  infinity  of  content,  which  no
amount  of  thought-fdations  can  exhaust.

But  what  is  this  but  an  indirect  admission  that
the  analysis  of  things  in  terms  of  thought  has  failed;
just  as  the  infinite  regress  of  causes  was  an,  indic-
ation that  the  category  of  causation  had  broken
down  (§  1 1)  ?

And,  secondly,  even  if  we  supposed  that  the
whole  meaning  vof  a  thing  could  be  stated  by  our
thought,  even  so,  things  would  not  be  complexes;
of  thought-relations.  For  our  statements  would
remain  a  series  of  propositions  about  the  thing,
which  would  for  ever  fail  to  make  or  be  the  thing.
They  would  remain  a  series  to  be  discursively
apprehended,  unable  again  to  coa!lesce  into  a  real
whole.  And  thus  every  attempt  to  symbdlize  feeling
in  terms  of  thought  is  not  merely  misrepresentation,
but  futile  misrepresentation,  which  does  not  in  the
end  succeed  in  its  endeavour.

§  17. But  this  divorce  of  Truth  and  Fact,  this


IS ALL JUDGMENT INVALID  ?  87

disparateness  of  Thought  and  Feeling,  involves  still
further  consequences.  Not  only  does  it  render
knowledge  impossible,  but  it  renders  all  reasaming
invalid,  formally  vicious  as  well  as  materially  false,
and  in  the  end  leaves  it  a  practice  theoretically
inexplicable,  and  practically  indefensible.  For  ac-
cording to  the  most  recent  researches  of  logicians,^
all  significant  jadgment  involves  a  reference  of  the
ideal  content  recognised  as  such — and  it  is  this
which  we  express  in  judging — to  an  unexpressed
reality  beyond  the  judgment.  The  real  subject  of
judgment  is  the  real  world  ;  it  states  facts  as  ideas,
in  terms  of  thought.  We  talk  ideas,  but  talk
about  a  reality  behind  them.  But  if  the  ideas  and
the  reality  are  disparate,  is  not  every  judgment
invalid  ?  For  is  not  every  judgment  a  deliberate
confusion  of  things  essentially  different  ?  If  every
judgment  that  is  not  meaningless  involves  an  ex-
plicit reference  of  thought  to  reality,  in  which  an
ideal  content  is  substituted  for  a  wholly  different
fact,  how  is  it  not  .fata:lly  unsound  ?

And  not  only  does  this  reference  of  thought  to
reality  vitiate  all  judgment,  and  so  all  inference  and
all  knowledge;  but  it  is  not  even  possible  to  explain
how  this  reference  was  made.

If  thought  and  feeling  are  so  different  in  character,
what  suggested  the  attempt  to  interpret  the  one  by
the  other  ?  Why  did  we  not  acquiesce  in  the  con-
viction that  thought  -was  unreal,  and  that  feeling  was
as  indescribable  as  it  is  incommunicable  ?  Why
must  we  needs  essay  to  solder  together  such  dis-
cordant elements  into  a  single  form  ?  And  indeed
was  this  not  as  gratuitous  as  it  is  unavailing  ? If

1  Reference  may  be  made  especially  to  Mr.  F.  H.  Bradley's
profound  work,  "  The  Principles  of  Logic,"  ch.  i  and  2.


88  SCEPTICISM.

in  judgment  we  start  with  an  explicit  recognition  of
the  essential  difference  of  the  ideal  content  from
reality,  what  enables  us  to  assert  their  implicit  con-
nection ?  If  we  start  with  the  assertion  that  thought
and  fact  are  not  the  same,  how  do  we  proceed  con-
fidently to  assert  that  they  are  the  same,  to  the
extent  of  substituting  the  one  for  the  other  ?  What
frenzy  gives  us  the  force  to  leap  this  gulf,  and  to
pass  from  avowed  difference  to  unsuggested  identity?
And  this  transition  is  prior,  both  in  idea  and  in
time,  to  all  knowledge ;  for  it  had  to  be  made  before
knowledge  could  come  into  existence :  thought  and
feeling  must  cohere,  must  have  become  commen-
surable, before  man  could  become  a  rational  animal.
Assuredly  the  unknown  man  or  monkey  who  first
discovered  that  his  semi-articulate  utterances  could
mean  something,  i.e.,  could  be  made  to  stand  for
something  else  than  what  they  were,  must  be  con-,
sidered  to  have  made  the  greatest  of  all  discoveries.
Only  unfortunately  this  hypothetical  origin  of  know-
ledge in  an  obscure  accident  will  hardly  reassure
the  sceptic  as  to  its  validity ;  he  will  not  readily
accept  its  de  facto  achievement  on  the  authority  of
an  ancestral  ape.

§  1 8.  And  if  judgment  is  thus  invalid,  what  shall
be  said  of  the  concatenation  of  judgments  in  in-
ference ?  If  judgment  cannot  attain  to  truth,  how
far  may  not  our  inferences  stray  from  it  ?

And  certainly  there  is  this  much  to  be  said  in
their  favour,  that  they  hardly  pretend  to  corre-
spond with  fact.  They  assert  the  truth  of  their
conclusions,  but  not  that  there  is  anything  in  nature
to  correspond  to  their  methods  and  processes.  And
indeed  it  would  be  difficult  to  persuade  the  most
credulous  that  hypothetical  and  disjunctive  premisses


CAN REASONING REACH TRUTH  ?  89

could  be  facts.  There  are  no  "z/j"  about  facts,  nor
can  a  real  man  be  "  either  dead  or  alive."  And  yet
it  is  upon  devices  of  this  sort  that  all  our  reasonings,
rest.  For  all  inference  depends  on  universal  pro-
positions, and  universal  propositions  are  all  hypo-
thetical. They  do  not  assert  the  reality  of  any
particular  case,  when  they  assert  that  something
holds  good  of  all  cases.  The  proposition  "all
infinites  are  unknowable"  does  not  assert  that  any-
thing infinite  exists :  it  equals,  "  if  anything  is
infinite,  it  is  unknowable."

And  this  illustration  of  the  superior  scientific
importance  of  universal  propositions  leads  us  on  to
another  peculiarity  of  our  science,  v\z.,  that  it
ascribes  greater  truth  to  more  general  propositions.
It  is  ever  aiming  at  generalizing  phenomena,  i.e.
at  gathering  together  isolated  phenomena  under
general  formulas  common  to  them  all,  of  which  it
regards  the  individual  phenomena  as  instances  or
cases.  And  the  more  successful  it  is  in  bringing
out  the  universal  relations  of  things,  the  more  truly
scientific  do  we  esteem'  it.  And  the  higher  the
generalization,  the  more  completely  is  it  deemed  to
explain  the  lower  and  less  general.  Nevertheless
it  was  admitted  that  the  individual  was  the  Real,  and
it  must  be  admitted  also  that  the  less  general  pro-
positions come  nearer  to  a  description  of  the  Real,
and  to  an  expression  of  its  individuality,  than  the
more  general,  which  have  obliterated  all  similitude
with  the  Real  by  their  vague  generalities.  To  say
that  an  individual  is  John  Smith, ,  is  to  designate
him  more  closely  than  to  call  him  an  Englishman,
or  an  animal,  or  a  material  substance.  Thus  the
course  of  truth  leads  directly  away  from  reality.
From  the  standpoint  of  thought,  the  more  universal


90  SCEPTICISM.

is  the  more  real ;  from  that  of  sense,  the  less  uni-
versal. If,  therefore,  we  could  attain  the  ideal ,  of
science,  and  derive  all  ithings  in  the  world  from  the
action  of  a  single  law,  that  law  would  ipso  facto
be  most  unreal,  .i.e.,  furthest  removed  from  ireality.
How  can  we  expect,  then,  that  our  iresults  should
come  out  right,  if  in  our  inquiry  we  deliberately
walk  away  from  reality  ?  And  aiter  this  can  we  be
any  longer  astonished  to  find  that  all  proof  should
be  perversion  (§  0:5),  and  that  all  science  shoiald  end
in  mythology  (§  5)  ?

§  19.  And  so  the  Sceptic  will  conclude  that
knowledge  originated  i>n  a  process  which  seems  to
have  arisen  amid  the  animal  beginnings  of  man,
— ^.perchance  from  one  of  those  fortuitous  variations
to  which  modern  science  professes  itself  indebted
'  for  so  many  interesting  and  important  j)henomena
— but  which  is  historically  inexplicable  and  logically
indefensible ;  that  it  proga"esses  by  shamelessly
ignoring  patent  differences.;  and  that  it  results  in
principles  which  after  all  prove  false  and  incom-
petent to  grasp  the  reality  of  things.  He  will  agree
with  Heraclitus  of  old  in  thinking  that  not  even
a  grunt  can  be  truthfully  uttered  concerning  the
Becoming  of  things,  and  will  claim  to  seal  the  mouth
of  the  defenders  of  knowledge,  until  they  can  show
how  thought  can  harmonike  with  feeling,  or  our
conceptions  icorrespond  with  facts.  And  this  he
knows  can  never  be,  for  since  the  equivalence  of
thought  and  feeling  has  been  denied,  no  reasoning
which  assumes  it  can  avail  against  Scepticism ;  the
proof  of  their  correspondence  would  hav£  to  be
derived  from  thought  alone  or  feeling  alone.  And
yet  feeling  alone  h.  inarticulate,  while  thought  alone
is  vain,  and  has  no  contact  with  reality;  they  cannot


DOES KNOWLEDGE  'WORK  ?  91

coalesce,  and  eadh  must  separately  succumb  to  the
attack  of  Scepticism.

§  20.  But  allthesedemonstpations  leavq  uscold.
It  seems  idle  to  ;urge  that  judgment  is  impossible,
that  inference  is  'invalid,  that  the  categories  of  our
thought  cannot  interpret  the  cipher  of  reality,  in
face  of  the  fact  that,  rightly  or  wrongly,  the  assump-
tions of  our  knowledge  ^work.  The  theoretic  falsity
of  science  shrinks  back  into  the  obscurest  shade  of
self-tormenting  sopihistry  before  the  brilliantevidence
daily  aifforded  us  of  its  practical  certainty.  Our
mathematics,  may  be  grounded  on  falsity,  and  pro-
ceed by  'fiction,  but  yet  they  somehow  manage  to
predict  the  time  of  an  eclipse  "within  the  tenth  part
of  a  second.

Such  reflections  have  often  rendered  ^theoretic
■scepticism  practically  harmless,  and  even  some-
times enabled  it  to  strike  up  a  curious  alliance  with
theological  orthodoxy.  But  they  show,  not  that
Scepticism  is  harmless,  but  that  in  merely  theoretical
scepticism  it  has  not  attained  its  fullest  development.
It  is  baffled,  not  because  "it  has  been  convicted  of
error,  but  because  the  venue  has  been  changed.
The  knowledge  which  it  attacks,  shifts  its  ground
and  takes  refuge  in  the  strong  citadel  of  practice,
and  mere  scepticism  has  not  the  siege  artillery  to
assault  it.  And  this  new  position  knowledge  can
,  maintain  only  until  Scepticism  decides  to  press  its
attack  home.  Knowledge  is  safe  only  while  it  is
not  pursued,  safe  until  the  sceptic  -disputes  his
adversary's  appeal  to  the  higher  court  of  practice.
When  he  does,  it  soon  appears  that  the  "  practical
working"  of  our  knowledge  is  far  from  conclusive
of  the  question  at  issue;  If  knowledge  appeals  to
practice,  the  sceptic  may  say,  to  practice  it  shall  go.


92  SCEPTICISM.-

What  is  meant  by  saying  that  knowledge  works  in
practice  ?  Is  it  enough  that  we  should  be  able  to
work  out  from  our  theoretic  assumptions  isolated
results  which  hold  good  in  practice  ?  Are  the
fundamental  principles  of  life  and  knowledge  justi-
fied by  their  application  to  isolated  cases  ?  Shall
we  stay  to  praise  the  correctness  of  the  minor  details
of  a  picture,  if  its  whole  plan  is  preposterous,  and
its  whole  conception  is  perverse  ?  Surely  that  is
not  enough :  if  knowledge  is  to  be  justified  by  its
practical  success,  it  must  be  because  its  success  is
complete,  because  it  succeeds  in  producing  a  complete  i
harmony  in  the  practical  sphere.  .For  else  it  may
be  merely  an  elaborate  fraud,  designed  to  lead  us  by
an  arduous  and  round-about  way  to  the  inevitable
conclusion,  that  the  nature  of  things  is  ultimately
inexplicable.  'Our  knowledge  works' — what  won-
der if  it  works  ?  For  where  would  be  the  mischief  if
it  did  not  work  ?  If  it  did  not  work,  we  should  not
worry.  If,  arguing  falsely  from  false  premisses  to
vicious  conclusions,  these  did  not,  by  some  malicious
mockery  of  a  primordial  perversity  of  things,  partly
correspond  to  the  processes  of  nature,  how  should
we  be  deceived?  What  if  the  light  of  science  be
but  a  baleful  will- of- the- wisp  which  involves  us  ever
deeper  in  the  marshes  of  nescience  ?  How  should
we  be  lured  into  the  fruitless  toil  of  science,  if  it  did
not  hold  out  to  us  a  delusive  hope  of  reducing  into
a  cosmos  of  knowledge  the  chaos  of  our  present-
ations, if  we  saw  at  the  outset  what  with  much  labour"
we  perceive  at  the  end,  that  our  knowledge  always
leaves  us  with  an  irrational  remainder  of  final  in-
explicability  ?

In  order  to  rebut  the  suggestion  that  the  apparent,
practical  success  of  knowledge  is  one  more  illusion^^^


TRANSITION TO PESSIMISM.  90  •

a  false  clue  that  involves  us  only  the  more  inextric-
ably in  the  maze  of  perplexity,  its  vindicators  must
be  prepared  to  show  that  knowledge  solves,  or  can
reasonably  be  considered  capable  of  solving,  the
problems  of  practical  life,  capable,  of  constituting  it
into  a  concordant  whole.  In  this  way,  and  in  this
way  alone,  knowledge  would  acquire  a  problematic
certainty,  conditional  upon  its  capacity  to  give,  on
the  basis  of  its  assumptions,  a  complete  solution  of
the  problem  of  life.

But  is  it  likely  that  knowledge,  after  failing  to
justify  itself,  will  be  able  to  solve  the  whole  problem
when  complicated  by  the  addition  of  the  practical
aspect  ?  This  the  sceptic  will  surely  deny,  and  in
so  doing  he  becomes  a  pessimist.

§21. Scepticism  passes  into Pessimism  in  two
ways. In  the  first  place  it  is  the  practical  answer
of  Scepticism  to  the  defence  of  knowledge  on  pract-
ical grounds. The pessimist  admits that know-
ledge appears  to  work ;  but  it  appears  to  work  only-
hi  order  to  lead  us  the  more  surely  astray,  to  com-
plicate the  miseries  of  life  by  one  more  illusory  aim ;
it  works  only  to  work  us  woe. For  how  can  our
science claim indulgence on the ground of its
practical  success,  when  all  it  does  is  to  relieve  the
lesser  miseries  of  life,  in  order  that  we  may  have
the  leisure  and  the sensitiveness  the  more  hope-
lessly to  feel its  primary  antinomies  ? How  can
the certainty of  mathematics console us for the
uncertainty  of  life  ? Or  how  does  the  piling  up  of
pyramids  and  Forth  Bridges  alleviate  the  agony  of
death  ? As  it  was  in  the  beginning,  the  pessimist
will  maintain,  it  is  now,  and  ever  will  be,  that  Death
and Sin  are  the  fruit  of  the  fruit  of  the  tree  of
knowledge. It  is  true, too  true,  that increase  of


94  SCEPTICISM.

science  is  increase  of  sorrow,  and  that  he  that
multiplies  knowledge,  multijplies  misery.  In  the
end  it  also  is  vanity  and  vexation  of  spirit

Thus,  just  as  Agnosticism  could  explain  and
justify  itself;  only  by  passing  into  Scepticism,  so
Scepticism,  is  compelled  to  deny  that  knowledge
works  oni  pessimistic  grounds.

And  secondly,  as  Agnosticism  passed  iato  Scep-
ticism, SO'  Scepticism  develops  into  Pfessimism  by
internal  fonces.  Pessmiism  is  the- proper  emotional
reflex  of  intellectual  scepticism.  We  may  indeed
think  the  worlds  evil  without  thinking  it  unknowable,
but  we  can  hardly  think  it  good,  if  it  be  unknow-
able. Not  only  can  we  not  approve  of  a  nature  of
things  which  renders  the  satisfaction  of  our  knowing
faculty  impossible;  but  we  must  feel  that  a  scheme
of  things  which  contains  such  elaborate  provision
for  deceiving  us,  is  likely  to  display  similar  per--
versity  throughout.  And  the  sense  of  an  all-pervad-
ing perversity  of  things  is  the  root  of  Pessimism.

Thus,  in  passing  into  Pessimism  the  negation  of
philosophy  reaches  its  ultimate  resting-place  in  the
unfathomed!  chaos,  where  the  powers  of  darkness
and  disorder  engulf  the  Cosmos.


CHAPTER IV.

PESSIMISM.

IlavTa  yEXcds  Kai  iravratKovts  koi  TrdvTOiTo  firjSeVj.
mdvTa  yap  i^  &X.6yaiv  eori  ra  ytyvd/xcKO.^'

§  I.  Pessimism,  has.  bothi  an  emotional  and'  an
intellectual  aspect,  and  these  may  be  to  a  large
extent  separated  in  practice.  Emotional  pessimism
consists  in  the  feeling  that  life  is.  not  worth  living,
or  that  the  world  is  evil.  As  this  conclusion  may
be  derived  from  a  variety  of  premisses,  the  intellect-
ual grounds  of  pessimism  are  exceedingly  various.
Almost  every  philosophic  doctrine  has  been  made
the  intellectual  basis  of  pessimism,  but  with  nlost  of
them  pessimism  has  no  direct  connection.  There
exists,  nevertheless,  an  intellectual  ground  from
which  emotional  pessimism  most  easily  and  natur-
ajly  results,  and  as  many  or  all  of  the  other  grounds
may  be  reduced  to  it,  it  may  fairly  be  called  the
essence  of  Pessimism.

This  essential  basis  of  Pessimism  is  what  we
have  reached  in  the  course  of  the  argument,  and
shall  henceforth  consider.  It  may  be  most  briefly
described  as  the  supposition  of  the  fundamental
perversity  or  irrationality  of  all  things.  It  asserts
that  the  problem  of  life  is  inherently  insoluble,  that
the  attempt  to  obtain  a  harmonious  and  significant

1  All  is  a  mockery,  and  all  is  dust,  and  all  is  naught,
For  the  irrational  engenders  all  that  becomes.

(Glycon. Anthol.  Pal.  x.  124.)

95


96  TESSIMTSM.

solution  is  comparable  to  circle-squaring,  and  that
hence,  from  whatever  side  we  attack  the  difficulty,
we  are  baffled  by  invincible  discords.

This  position  is  the  negation  of  all  the  activities
that  make  up  life :  for  they  all  in  different  ways
assume  that  life  has  a  meaning,  that  its  ends  and  its
means  are  not  incommensurable,  that  it  is  not  a
hopeless  and  senseless  striving  that  ends  in  nothing.
It  is  the  negation  of  happiness  and  goodness,  be-
cause it  asserts  that  these  ideals  are  meaningless
phantoms  impossible  of  attainment ;  of  science,
because  knowledge  is  a  snare  and  a  delusion,  and  in
the  end  a  fruitless  waste  of  labour ;  of  philosophy,
because  it  assumes  that  the  world  has  a  meaningf
which  may  be  discovered,  whereas  in  truth  the
secret  of  the  universe  cannot  be  unravelled,  because
the  world  contains  nothing  which  admits  of  rational
interpretation.

Thus  Pessimism  not  only  includes  all  the  views
we  have  been  considering.  Agnosticism  which  denied
the  possibility  of  all  philosophy,  and  Scepticism
which  denied  that  of  all  knowledge,  but  adds  on  its
own  account  a  denial  of  the  possibility  of  all  rational
conduct.  And  so,  since  it  cuts  at  the  roots  of  them
all,  the  possibility  of  this  Pessimism  must  be  the
primary  consideration,  not  only  of  philosophy,  but
of  science,  of  ethics,  and  of  eudaemonism.

§  2.  And  not  only  is  it  possible  that  the  con-
stitution of  things  is  intrinsically  perverse,  but  it  is .
possible  for  Pessimism  plausibly  to  urge  that  this
is  extremely  probable.  The  one  thing  certain,  it
may  be  said,  about  the  world,  is  the  fundamental
discord  which  runs  through  all  creation,  is  the  ingen-
ious perversity  which  baffles  all  effort,  is  the  futil-
ity to  which  all  the  activities  of  life  are  condemned.


THE INTRINSIC PERVERSITY OF THINGS.  97

This  Pessimism  which  denies  that  anything  can
in  any  way  be  made  of  life,  because  life  is  hope-
lessly irrational,  because  its  conflicting  aspects  are
insuperable,  is  the  primary  question  for  philosophy.
If  it  can  be  answered,  difficulties  may  remain  in
plenty,  but  there  is  no  impossibility,  and  indeed  we
are  pledged  to  the  faith  that  an  answer  may  ult-
imately be  found  to  every  valid  difficulty  the  human
mind  can  validly  feel.  If  it  cannot  be  answered,
the  whole  edifice  of  life  collapses  at  a  blow,  and  for
its  practice  we  are  left  to  the  chance  guidance  of
our  inclinations,  and  deprived  even  of  the  hope  that
they  will  not  lead  us  into  destruction.

And  yet  such  pessimism  is  particularly  formidable
because  of  its  very  simplicity.  It  does  not  require
the  aid  of  any  abstruse  metaphysics ;  it  has  not  to
rely  on  subtle  inferences  that  take  it  beyond  the
obvious  and  visible  ;  it  merely  takes  the  facts  of  the
world,  such  as  they  are,  and  requests  us  to  put  two
and  two  together.  It  takes  the  main  activities  of
life,  the  main  aims  of  life  which  are  capable  of  being
desired  for  their  own  sake,  and  shows  how  in  each
case,  (i)  their  attainment  is  impossible  ;  (2)  their
imperfection  is  inherent  and  ineradicable ;  and  (3)
the  aggravation  of  these  defects  is  to  be  looked  for
in  the  course  of  time  rather  than  their  amelioration.
In  this  way  it  does  not,  it  is  true,  justify  the  ill-
coined  title  of  "pessimism,"  nor  claim  to  prove  a
superlative  which  is  ambiguous  in  the  case  of
optimism  and  absurd  in  that  of  pessimism,^  nor  does

1  Optimism  may  mean,  and  originally  meant,  the  doctrine  that
ours  is  tl^e  best  of  all  possible  worlds.  But  it  is  often  taken  as
equivalent  to  the  assertion  that  good  predominates.  So  pessimism
should  mean  that  ours  was  the  worst  of  all  possible  worlds,  but
how  are  we  to  know  this  ?

R.  ofS.  H


98  PESSIMISM

it  at  once  declare  life  evil.  For  though  the  pessimist
asserts  this  ultimately,  just  as  the  optimist  asserts
that  life  is  good,  he  cannot  do  it  directly.,  What-
ever testimony  he  may  bring  to  the  actual  evils  of
life,  the  optimist  may  refuse  to  conclude  that  the
evil  predominates.  Hence  it  is  only  by  the  tend-
encies of  things  that  the  question  can  be  scientific-
ally argued,  and  that  probable  but  unprovable
assertions  on  either  side  can  be  established  or
refuted.  The  question  as  to  the  value  of  life  is
mainly  a  question  of  Meliorism  or  Pejorism  :  for  to
whatever  side  we  suppose  the  balance  to  incline  at
the  outset,  it  is  bound  to  be  more  than  counter-
balanced in  the  end  by  a  constant  tendency  in  the
opposite  direction.

§  3.  Hence  we  must  consider  the  nature  and
prospects  of  the  four  main  pursuits  or  aims  of  life,
hsLppiness,  goodness,  beauty,  and  knowledge,  and
see  what  fate  awaits  the  sensuous,  moral,  eesthetic,
and  intellectual  enthusiasms.'

We  shall  consider  first  what  is  the  value  of  life
from  the  point  of  view  of  happiness,  not  only
because  happiness  is  in  a  way  the  supreme  end
including  all  the  rest,  because  if  it  could  be  truly
attained  the  means  would  be  of  comparatively  slight
importance,  or  because  the  full  and  unmarred  attain-
ment of  any  of  the  others  would  bring  happiness  in
its  train,  but  also  because  it  has  been  popularly
supposed  to  be  the  sole  interest  of  Pessimism.  It
has  been  supposed  that  the  whole  question  of
pessimism  and  optimism  was  as  to  whether  there
was  a  surplus  of  pleasure  or  pain  in  the  world,  and
implied  agreement  to  a  common  hedonistic  basis.^

But this is really an  accident of the historic,
1  E.g.  by  H.  Spencer:  "Data  of  Ethics,"  p.  27.


NOT PRIMARILY HEDONISTIC.  99

development  of  the  controversy,  which  does  not
affect  its  essential  nature,  nor  justify  the  derivation
of  Pessimism  from  the  consciousness  of  a  baffled
love  of  pleasure.  The  Pessimist  need  not  assert
that  life  normally  brings  with  it  a  surplus  of  pain,
though  he  will  doubtless  be  prone  to  think  so,  i.e.,
he  need  not  base  his  pessimism  on  hedonism  :  his
denial  of  the  pleasure-value  of  life  may  be  the  con-
sequence and  not  the  caiise  of  his  pessimism.  No
doubt  most  pessimists  have  also  been  hedonists,  and
several  excellent  reasons  may  be  given  for  the  fact ;
but  this  is  no  reason  why  Pessimism  should  be
based  on  hedonism.  It  would  be  possible  to  base
Pessimism  on  several  non-hedonistic  principles  ;  on
a  despair  of  the  possibility  of  goodness,  of  know
ledge;  of  beauty,  or  on  an  aristocratic  contempt  for
human  happiness.  For  it  would  be  possible  to  argue
that  the  happiness  of  creatures  so  petty  and  con-
temptible as  men  was  insufficient  to  redeem  the
character  of  the  universe  :  whether  or  not  man
enjoyed  a  short-lived  surplus  of  ephemeral  and
intrinsically  worthless  pleasure,  there  was  in  this
nothing  great,  nothing  noble,  nothing  worthy  of
being  the  aim  of  effort,  nothing  capable  of  satisfying
the  aspirations  of  the  soul.

The  deepest  pessimism  is  not  hedonistic ;  for
hedonism  implies  a  presumption,  a  confidence  in  the
claims  of  man,  which  it  cannot  countenance ;  it
asserts,  not  that  life  is  valueless  because  it  is  un-
happy, but  that  it  is  unhappy  because  it  is  valueless.

And  that  so  many  pessimists  have  been  hedonists
is  easily  explained  by  the  facts  that  so  few  of  them
had  probed  the  real  depths  of  the  abyss  of  Pessim-
ism, that  they,  like  the  majority  of  men,  were
naturally  hedonists,  and  above  all,  that  the  accept-


lOO  PESSIMISM.

ance  of  the  hedonistic  basis  was  the  surest  way  of
carrying  the  war  into  the  enemy's  country.

For  hedonism  is  the  chief  stronghold  of  optimism :
the  most  obvious  defence  of  life  is  on  the  ground
of  its  happiness.  Indeed,  if  we  neglect  for  the
moment  metaphysical  possibilities,  life  can  hardly
be  pronounced  a  success  from  any  other  point  of
view.  Can  it  seriously  be  asserted  that  the  presenfi
race  of  men  deserve  to  live  because  of  their  good^
ness,  or  of  their  wisdom,  or  of  their  beauty  ?  Would
not  any  impartial  man  with  a  .decently  high  stand-
ard in  these  respects,  if  he  were  armed  with
omnipotence  for  an  hour,  destroy  the  whole  race
with  a  destruction  more  utter  than  that  which  over-
took the  Cities  of  the  Plain,  lest  he  should  leave
daughters  of  Lot  among  the  favoured  few  ?  Or
shall  it  be  said  that  any  present  or  probable  satis-
faction of  the  moral,  intellectual  and  aesthetic
activities  of  average  man  makes  his  life  worth
living  ?  Surely  if  our  life  is  not  on  the  average
good  because  it  is  happy  and  pleasant,  it  cannot  be
seen  to  be  very  good  because  it  is  virtuous,  beauti-
ful or  wise.

Optimists  then  are  well-advised  to  defend  the
value  of  life  on  the  ground  of  its  pleasure-value,
for  if  the  defence  breaks  down  here,  the  resistance
will  be  a  mere  pretence  elsewhere.  The  optimist
and  not  the  pessimist  is  the  real  hedonist,  for  the
latter's  condemnation  of  life  rests  on  the  conscious-
ness of  too  many  evils  for  him  to  base  it  on  a  single
class  :  he  is  too  deeply  absorbed  in  the  endless
spectacle  of  Evil  to  have  the  leisure  specially  to
bewail  the  hedonistic  imperfections  of  life,  the
brevity  and  illusoriness  of  pleasure.

§  4. We  must  consider  then  the  claims  of  life  to


THE IDEAL OF HAPPINESS.  lOI

be  happy,  and  ask  what  happiness  is  and  on  what  it
depends.

Happiness  may  be  defined  from  within  as  the
fruition  of  fulfilled  desire,  from  without  as  complete
adaptation  to  environment.  A  complete  corre-
spondence between  the  soul  and  its  environment  is
required  for  perfect  happiness  ;  it  can  be  attained
only  if  our  desires  are  at  once  realized  in  our  con-
ditions of  life,  or  if  they  are  at  once  accommodated
to  them.  We  need  either  a  wondrous  control  of
our  environment  or  a  wondrous  plasticity  of  our
nature.  But  both  of  these  are  rendered  imposs-
"  ible  by  what  seems  to  be  the  intrinsic  constitution
of  our  environment.  If  that  environment  were
something  fixed  and  unchanging,  it  is  conceivable
that  we  might,  in  the  course  of  time,  come  to  under-
stand it  and  our  nature  so  perfectly  as  to  bring
complete  correspondence  within  our  reach.  But
our  environment  is  not  fixed  :  it  is  constantly  shift-
ing and  changing,  and,  humanly  speaking,  it  seems
impossible  that  it  should  be  fixed.  For  it  appears
to  be  an  essential  feature  of  our  world  to  be  a  world
of  Becoming,  and  to  such  an  ever-changing  environ-
ment there  can  be  no  adaptation.  Whenever  we
fancy  that  we  have  adapted  ourselves  to  our  con-
ditions, the  circumstances  change  :  a  turn  of  the
kaleidoscope  and  the  labour  of  a  life-time  is  ren-
dered unavailing.  Hence  it  is  that  not  one  of
the  activities  or  functions  of  life  is  ever  quite  com-
mensurate with  its  end,  that  our  efforts  are  for  ever
disproportionate  to  our  objects,  and  for  ever  fail  of
attaining  an  end  which  is  too  lofty  for  our  means.
The  Ideal  seems  sometimes  to  be  within  our  sight,
but  it  is  never  within  our  reach,  and  we  can  never
cross  the  great  gulf  that  pa,rts  it  from  the  Actual.


I02  PESSIMISM.

And  so  the  ideal  of  perfect  adaptation,  harmony
or  happiness  is  not  one  which  has  any  application  to
the  world  in  which  we  live  ;  the  dream  of  its  realiz-
ation is  forbidden  by  the  constitution  of  things.  It
was  not  then  a  false  instinct  that  prompted  men  to
postpone  the  attainment  of  happiness  to  a  heaven
beyond  their  ken  in  another  world  ;  for  assuredly  it
is  an  illusion  in  this  world  of  ours.

And  what  may  be  inferred  from  this  ?  What  but
this,  that  the  attempt  to  judge  life  by  the  standard
of  happiness  is  to  judge  it  by  a  conception  which  is
inapplicable  and  unmeaning,  by  a  standard  which  is
false  and  futile  ?  What  but  this,  that  in  aiming  at
happiness  we  are  deliberately  striving  after  the
impossible,  and  that  it  would  be  strange  indeed  if
the  vanity  of  our  aim  did  not  reveal  itself  in  the
failure  of  our  efforts  ?

§  5.  But  it  will  not  perhaps  suffice  to  assert
generally  the  impossibility  of  adaptation  to  environ-
ment under  the  given  conditions  of  sensible  existence,
and  the  fact  will  at  all  events  become  more  obvious,
if  we  consider  the  question  more  in  detail.  We
shall  find  that  adaptation  to  environment  is  intrin-
sically impossible  from  whatever  side  we  approach
the  question,  no  matter  whether  we  consider  the
physical,  social,  or  psychological  environment,  the
case  of  the  individual  or  of  the  race.

The  individual  cannot  ad^ipt  himself  to  his  physical
environment,  because  in  the  end  the  strength  of  life
must  be  exhausted  in  the  effort  to  keep  up  with  the
changes  the  revolving  seasons  bring,  because  in  the
end  waste  must  exceed  repair,  and  the  vain  struggle
of  life  be  solved  in  death,  that  the  unstable  com-
pounds of  his  bodily  frame  may  be  dissociated  into
stabler  forms  of  lifeless  matter. If  the  performance


. IMPOSSIBILITY OF ADAPTATION.  IO3

of  the  functions  of  life  is  the  aim  of  life,  life  is  a  fail-
ure, for  all  its  forms  must  die  and  pass  away.

§  6.  Nor  is  there  adaptation  to  the  social  en- ■
vironment :  births,  marriages,  and  deaths  ring  the
changes  of  our  social  happiness.  How  can  there  be
stability  in  relations  where  all  the  acting  forces  come
and  go,  are  attracted  and  divorced  by  influences
they  can  neither  calculate  nor  govern?  To  set
one's  heart  upon  the  fortunes  of  another  does  but
multiply  the  sources  of  its  deadly  hurt,  and  the  more
expose  our  vitals  to  the  shafts  of  fortune.  For  in
the  end  all  love  is  loss,  and  all  affection  breeds
affliction.  What  does  it  then  avail  to  vow  in  vain
a  faith  that  fate  frustrates?  why  should  our  will
weave  ties  that  death  and  chance  must  shatter  ?

Does  not  true  wisdom,  then,  lie  in  a  self-centred
absorption  in  one's  own  interests  ?  Is  not  a  cool
and  calm  selfishness,  which  does  not  place  its  happi-
ness in  aught  beyond  its  self,  which  engages  in  social
relations  but  does  not  engage  itself  in  them,  the
primary  condition  of  prosperity  ?  Does  not  the
sage's  soul  retire  into  its  own  sphere  and  contemplate
its  own  intrinsic  radiance,  unbroken,  untouched  and
unobscured  by  sympathetic  shadows  from  the  lives
of  others  ?  Is  not  feeling  with  others  in  very  truth
sympathy,  suffering  with  them  ?

§  7.  The  dream  of  such  a  self-sufficing  severance
from  all  physical  and  social  ties  may  be  an  ideal  for
fakirs,  but  it  is  impossible  for  men.  And  even  were
it  possible,  happiness  would  be  as  little  found  in  the
individual  soul  as  in  the  social  life.

For  here  too,  harmony  is  unattainable  :  the  dis-
cords of  the  essential  elements  of  our  nature  can
never  be  composed  by  beings  subjected  to  the
material  world  of  Time  and  Space. It  is  impossible


I04  PESSIMISM.

to  compromise  the  claims  of  the  future  with  the
desires  of  the  present,  impossible  also  to  cast  off
the  fetters  of  the  past.

The  life  which  is  warped  and  narrowed  down  to
limited  possibilities  by  the  past,  must  sacrifice  either
its  present  or  its  future,  and  most  often  sacrifices
both,  in  vain.  For  how  can  we,  starting  from  the
perverse  and  incongruous  materials  we  did  not
make,  so  mould  our  lives  that  we  can  be  happy
both  in  youth  and  in  old  age,  enjoy  our  lives  and
yet  be  glad  at  death  ?  How  shall  we  not  regret  in
age  the  pleasures  and  the  freshness  of  youth,  or  in
youth  struggle  vainly  to  attain  the  wisdom  and  the
calm  of  age  ?  And  this  incongruence  of  the  inner
constitution  of  man's  soul  is  invincible  and  universal :
his  nature  is  a  disordered  jumble  of  misinherited
tendencies.  The  image  of  a  multitude  of  warring
and  destructive  beasts  which  Plato  regarded  as  the
inner  state  of  a  tyrant's  soul,  fails  to  describe  the
full  horror  of  the  facts:  for  each  man's  soul  contains
the  representatives  of  ancestral  savages  and  beasts,
and  has  out  of  such  discordant  elements  to  form  a
government  to  guide  his  course.  Thus,  in  addition
to  the  external  difficulties  of  life,  there  is  constant
danger  of  rebellion  and  anarchy  within.  The, reason
has  to  provide  not  ortly  against  attacks  from  with-
out, but  to  curb  the  conflict  of  the  elements  within  ;
for  if  it  reach  a  certain  point,  the  mind  is  shattered
and  a  raging  maniac  leaps  foirth  into  the  light.

And  so  the  lusts  of  the  flesh,  the  incubus  of  an-
cestral sins,  are  ever  at  war  with  the  aspirations  of
the  spirit ;  our  feelings,  the  deep-rooted  reaction  of
our  emotional  nature  upon  ancient  and  obsolete
conditions  of  life,  persist  into  a  present  where  they
are  out  of  harmony  with  the  more  flexible  conclu-


NO HOPE FOR HUMANITY.  I  OS

sions  of  our  reason,  and  cannot  be  conformed  to
them  within  the  brief  space  of  a  life-time.

Thus,  from  whatever  side  we  regard  the  life  of  the
individual,  adaptation,  is  impossible  :  whether  we
consider  its  physical,  social,  >  or  psychological  con-
ditions, there  is  war  and  constant  struggle,  over-
shadowed by  the  certainty  of  ultimate  defeat.  It
is  ill  dicing  with  the  gods,  who  load  the  dice  with
death :  the  pursuit  of  happiness  is  an  unequal  fight
with  fate,  for  us,  "the  helpless  pieces  of  a  cruel
gaitne,"  whose  life  seems  little  but  a  series  of  forced
moves  resulting  in  an  inevitable  checkmate.

§  8.  And  if  we  consider  the  prospects  of  the  race,
they  appear  equally  hopeless.

Physically  complete  adaptation  is  impossible.  We
know  that  our  solar  system  cannot  go  on  for  ever,
and  that  the  ultimate  fate  of  humanity,  imprisoned
in  a  decaying  planet,  must  be  to  shiver  and  to  starve
to  death  in  ever- deepening  gloom.

§  9.  Again,  the  possibility  of  social  harmony
depends  on  the  possibility  of  so  reconciling  the
claims  of  the  individual  with  the  requirements  of
society,  that  men  would  be  perfectly  free  to  do
what  they  pleased,  and  be  pleased  to  do  what  they
ought.  But  how  shall  we  cherish  such  an  illusion  in
face  of  the  evidence  of  the  infinity  of  the  individual,
of  the  boundless  growth  of  selfish  demands,  of  the
insatiable  cravings  of  ambition,  avarice,  and  vanity  ?
Until  it  has  been  shown  how  human  society  could
rid  itself  of  poverty,  discontent  and  crime,  could  regu-
late the  number  and  the  reproduction  of  the  race,
could  eradicate  love  and  hunger,  and  the  competit-
ion between  individuals  for  the  prizes  of  those
passions,  and  so  the  envy,  hatred  and  malice  which
that  competition  must  engender,  such  hopes  of  social


I06  PESSIMISM.

harmony  can  bear  no  relation  to  the  actualities  of
life.

§  lo.  Or  lastly,  if  we  consider  the  psychological
conditions  of  internal  harmony,  we  shall  have  again
to  admit  its  impossibility  under  the  present  constit-
ution of  things.

The  primary  reflex  in  the  rational  soul  of  the
action  of  the  environment,  is  the  growth  of  certain
convictions  as  to  the  practical  necessities  of  life.
These  convictions,  when  they  have  sunk  into  the
soul,  generate  corresponding  emotions,  and  ultim-
ately become  incarnate,  as  it  were,  in  the  physical
structure  of  the  body  (whether  by  direct  adaptation,
or  by.  natural  selection).  But  this  process  requires
much  time.  And  what  is  the  result  in  a  world  of
constant  change.'*  The  conditions  of  life  change;
the  conduct  required  by  the  new  conditions  is  first
(though  often  all  too  late)  perceived  by  the  reason,
and  after  a  time  the  suitable  emotions  are  grown,
prompting  to  the  performance  of  that  conduct ;  and
last  of  all,  perhaps  only  by  the  action  of  heredity
through  numberless  generations,  the  body  is  moulded
into  fitness  to  perform  its  new  functions.  But  how
if  these  changes  follow  more  rapidly  than  the  capa-
city of  the  organism  to  adapt  jthemselves  to  them  ?
It  would  tend  to  fall  behind  the  times ;  and  thus
if  A,  B,  C,  be  successive  stages  in  the  conditions
of  life,  requiring  the  adaptation  of  the  organism  to
them,  it  might  be  that  our  reason  had  adapted  itself
to  stage  C,  our  feelings  to  B,  while  our  body  was
still  only  fitted  to  perform  the  duties  of  stage  A,
and  there  would  arise  a  conflict  in  the  soul,  i.e.  the
elements  of  our  being  would  be  always  more  or  less
unadapted  to  their  work.  And  there  can  be  no
doubt  that  such  is  everywhere and  normally  the


THE CONFLICT IN THE SOUL.  TOy

case.  We  can  as  yet  hardly  boast  to  have  dis-
covered the  solutions  to  the  complex  problems  of
modern  life  with  our  reason ;  our  feelings  are  con-
tinually harking  back  irrationally  to  the  conditions
of  a  remote  antiquity,  while  our  bodies  are  still  more
unsuited  to  the  sedentary  and  intellectual  life  of
civilization.  And  so  we  are  impelled  in  contrary
directions  by  the  conflicting  constituents  of.  our
nature,  and  life  becomes  a  burden  to  men  whose
faculties  are  not  competent  to  perform  the  functions
it  requires,  /it  would  be  but  a  slight  exaggeration
of  our  inability  to  keep  pace  with  the  changes  of
things  to  say  that  our  bodies  are  those  of  animals,
our  feelings  those  of  savages,  our  reason  that  of  men,
while  our  destiny  and  duties  seem  those  of  angels,  j
Thus  this  internal  discord,  this  conflict  between  the
convictions  of  the  head  and  the  promptings  of  the
heart,  between  the  aspirations  of  the  will  and  the .
shackles  imposed  on  them  by  "  the  body  of  this
death  "  is  not,  as  we  would  fain  believe,  a  transitory
symptom  of  the  present  age,  due  to  the  ascetic
superstitions  of  an  effete  religion,  or,  as  Mr.  Spencer
would  persuade  us,  to  the  survival  of  military  habits
in  an  industrial  age,  but  a  necessary  and  permanent
feature,  which  marks  and  stains  the  whole  of  Evol-
ution. Internal  non-adaptation  is  the  inevitable
concomitant. of  life  in  a  changing  world,  and  must
exist  until  Time  pass  into  Eternity.

§  1 1.  But  not  only  does  the  intrinsic  constitut-
ion of  things  render  the  pursuit  of  happiness  that  of
an  unattainable  ideal,  but  even  the  approximations
to  it,  as  we  fondly  call  them^  are  put  beyond  our
reach  by  the  course  of  events.  Happiness  can  never
be  attained,  and,  for  all  our  efforts,  the  delusive
phantom  recedes  further  and  further  from  our  eyes.


Io8  PESSIMISM.

The  evidence  of  Pejorism,  i.e.,  of  the  fact  that  the
world  has  been  growing  more  unhappy,  must  of
necessity  be  historical,  and  as  our  knowledge  of
history  is  imperfect,  it  cannot  in  itself  be  conclusive.
But  in  connection  with  the  facts  which  have  been
mentioned,  it  becomes  highly  significant  testimony
to  Pessimism.

This  testimoriy  may  be  considered  with  a  view  to
its  bearing  upon  the  physical,  material,  social  and
psychological  effects  of  "  progress  "  upon  the  happi-
ness of  mankind.

§  12.  In  estimating  the  effect  of  physical  changes
in  the  organism  upon  happiness,  it  is  essential  to
bear  in  mind  the  fact  that  the  physical  functions  of
life  are  largely,  and  probably  increasingly,  performed
unconsciously,  and  only  enter  into  consciousness  as
pain,  when  out  of  order.  Hence  all  the  improve-
ments in  the  conditions  of  life  which  merely  secure
the  carrying  on  of  the  physical  functions  are  useless
for  the  production  of  ;Jc>«V?Ve  happiness.  Our  ordin-
ary life  is  none  the  happier  because  it  is  securer
against  violent  interruption  of  its  functions,  because
we  are  less  liable  to  be  butchered  or  burnt.  The  '
proper  functioning  of  our  organism  is  doubtless  a
primary  condition  of  positive  happiness,  but  does
not  in  itself  constitute  any  considerable  factor  in  it.
Hence  by  far  the  larger  part  of  the  increased
security  and  protection  of  life  is  of  no  avail  for  the
produqtion  of  pleasurable  feeling,  and  its  effect  would,
on  the  whole,  probably  be  more  than  counterbalanced
by  the  diminution  of  happiness  arising  out  of  the
non  -  elimination  of  diseased  and  unfit  organisms
which  in  former  times  could  not  have  survived  to
suffer  much.

Secondly,  the  pleasures  arising  from  the  bodily


EVOLUTION  FOR  THE  WORSE. IO9

organism  are,  owing  to  the  lack  of  adaptation  be-
tween man  and  his  environment,  particularly  liable
to  be  interfered  with  by  the  development  of  the
higher  feelings  of  the  mind,  and  hence  to  be  im-
paired by  the  progress  of  civilization  (§  9).

For  it  is.  necessary  to  remember  that  different
pleasures  are  either  mutually  exclusive,  or  can  only
be  enjoyed  together  to  a  very  limited  extent,  while
different  pains  admit  of  indefinite  intensification  by
combination — up  to  the  point  at  which  death  or  un-
consciousness ensues.  Thus  the  greater  sensitive-
ness of  a  more  refined  nervous  system  is  rendered
unavailing  as  a  source  of  pleasure,  while  it  is  terribly
efficacious  as  a  source  of  pain.

And  our  non-adaptation  to  our  environment  is
also  a  fruitful  source  of  new  pains.  There  can  be
little  doubt  that  our  organism  is  not  adapted  to  the
conditions  of  modern  life ;  our  brains  are  not  equal
to  the  intellectual  strain  imposed  on  them ;  our
nerves  are  disordered  by  the  hurry  and  worry  of
stimuli  to  which  they  cannot  respond  with  sufficient
rapidity  and  delicacy ;  our  eyes  cannot  be  persist-
ently used  for  reading  without  painful  malformations,
and^even  our  stomachs  are  becoming  increasingly
incompetent  to  digest  the  complexities  of  modern
cookery.]  In  short,  the  physical  machine  was  not
meant  to  work  at  such  pressure,  nor  can  it  sustain
the  strains  where  we  require  it.

And  in  addition  to  sources  of  misery  which  seem
to  be,  in  part  at  least,  due  to  human  action,  there
are  others  more  purely  physical,  which  form  the
penalties  nature  has  affixed  to  Evolution.  Among
them  may  be  instanced  a  fruitful  source  of  acute
pain  in  the  progressive  decay  of  the  teeth  of  civil-
ized man. It  has  been  asserted  that  no  philosophy


I  I O  PESSIMISM.

was  proof  against  toothache,  but  Pessimism  at  any
rate  can  convert  toothache  into  a  proof  of  its  philoso-
phy. And,  more  generally,  civilized  man  becomes
far  more  subject  to  minor  ailments,  which,  together
with  his  nervous  sensitiveness,  probably  make  "  a
bad  cold  "  as  painful  as  a  deadly  disease  was  to  a
savage.  In  fact,  the  higher  races  of  man  seem,  like
the  higher  breeds  of  domestic  animals,  to  develop
an  astonishing  aptitude  for  illness,  a  delicateness
and  want  of  stamina  which  makes  them  suffer
acutely  when  they  have  to  bear  privations,  even
when  their  superior  morale  enables  them  to  bea,r  up
against  them,  and  their  superior  knowledge  enables
them  to  delay  death;

Again,  there  is  a  progressive  loss  in  the  power
of  recuperation  under  injury  as  we  advance  to  the
higher  forms  of  life.  Just  as  a  crab,  on  losing  a  limb,
will  grow  another,  or  as  a  snail  can  repair  the  loss
even  of  its  head,  so  savage  races  will  recover  from
hurts  which  would  prove  fatal  to  Europeans,  And
if  this  process  goes  on,  we  may  justly  dread  the
time  when  the  merest  scratch  will  prove  an  incurable
wound.

Or  again,  we  find  several  facts  about  the  repro-
duction of  the  race,  which  may  well  occasion  des-
pondency. Births  are  easier  and  safer  among
savages  than  among  civilized  men,  and  most  difficult
among  the  most  civilized  of  these.  And  other  facts
connected  with  this  subject  seem  to  set  a  limit  to  the
intellectual  development  of  man.  There  seems  to
be  a  decided  tendency  for  highly  educated  women
to  be  sterile,  probably  because  their  organism  does
not  possess  the  superfluous  energy  which  renders
reproduction  possible.  And,  to  a  large  extent,  the
explanation  both  of  this  and  the  previous  phenome-


PHYSICAL LIMITS TO PROGRESS.'  Ill

non  lies  in  the  fact  that  there  is  a  physical  limit  to
.  the  size  of  the  head  of  an  infant  which  can  be  born.
It  would  follow  from  this  that  since  there  is  an  un-
doubted relation  between  intellect  and  the  size  of
the  brain,  the  bulk  of  our  geniuses  even  now  perish
in  their  birth.

Lastly,  if  we  go  back  to  prehuman  stages  in  the
history  of  Evolution,  we  find  that  some  of  the  most
fundamental  features  of  animal  life  are  not  original.
Sexual  reproduction,  e.g.,  has  been  evolved,  and
there  was  originally  no  difference  between  nutrition
and  reproduction.  One  cannot  help  thinking,  how-
ever, that  much  evil  and  much  suffering  might  have
been  prevented  if  this  connection  had  been  main-
tained, if  life  had  never  been  complicated  by  the
distinction  of  the  sexes,  if  reproduction  had  never
occurred,  except  as  an  incident  of  superabundant
nutrition,  and  if  children  had  never  made  their
appearance,  except  where  there  was  an  abundance
of  food !

And  recently  it  has  been  suggested  also  that  death
itself  is  derivative,  and  was  evolved  by  the  amoeba
from  a  mistaken  desire  to  promote  the  survival  of
the  fittest.^  Into  the  somewhat  inadequate  evidence
for  this  speculation  there  is  no  need  to  enter,  nor  to
deny  that  the  biological  and  physiological  reasons
for  this  unparalleled  feat  of  Evolution  are  doubtless
of  a  highly  satisfactory  character.  But  from  a  purely
human  point  of  view  it  seems  the  final  condemnation
of  the  process.  From  an  evolution  which  could
invent  and  cause  death,  man  has  evidently  ho  happi-
ness to  hope ;  rather  he  must  in  fear  and  trembling
expect  it  to  bring  forth  some  new  and  unconjectured
horror.

1  By  Professor  Weismann.


I  I  2  PESSIMISM.

§  13.  Taking  next  the  material  conditions  of
life,  it  is  undeniable  that  many  ameliorations  of  the
lot  of  man  have  taken  place  within  our  knowledge.
But  material  progress  is  not  in  itself  a  cure  of  the
miseries  of  the  soul ;  on  the  contrary,  it  alone
renders  possible  that  growth  of  sensitiveness  and
reflection  which  makes  men  conscious  pessimists.
So  it  is  not  surprising  that  the  chief  prophets  of  Pes-
simism should  have  arisen  amongst  those  who  from
a  coarsely  material  point  of  view  had  less  to  com-
plain of  than  their  fellows.  Nor  is  it  surprising  that
an  age  pre-eminent  for  its  material  progress  should
be  also  an  age  pre-eminent  for  its  spiritual  misery.
For  how  can  railways,  telegraphs  and  telephones
make  men  happy  ?  To  be  deprived  of  their  con-
veniences would  doubtless  be  pain  acutely  felt  and
indignantly  resented  ;  but  when  the  first  joy  of  novel
discovery  is  past,  their  possession  is  no  source  of
positive  pleasure.

§  14.  But  even  if  it  be  admitted  that  material
progress,  unlike  the  evolution  of  the  bodily  organ-
ism, has  in  itself  brought  a  surplus  of  pleasure,  it
cannot  be  considered  in  abstraction,  apart  from  its
indirect  effect  upon  social  conditions.  And  if  these
are  taken  into  consideration,  it  appears  that  every
new  luxury  generates  a  thousand  new  wants  in
those  who  possess  it,  a  thousand  ignoble  ambitions
in  those  who  may  hope  to  do  so,  a  thousand  hateful
jealousies  in  those  who  behold  it  beyond  their  reach.
The  happiness  of  the  unsophisticated  savage  was
not  wholly  created  by  the  vivid  imaginations  of
eighteenth  century  theorists  :  it  is  a  theory,  to  some
extent  at  least,  borne  out  by  the  customary  pro-
cedure of  introducing  civilization  among  savages.
Savages  have  comparatively  few  wants  they  cannot


MATERIAL PROGRESS.  I  I  3

satisfy,  and  so  will  not  slave  to  produce  things  in
order  to  satisfy  the  wants  of  civilized  man.  The
trader  therefore  must  excite  passions  powerful
enough  to  overcome  the  natural  indolence  of  the
savage ;  and  so  with  rum  and  rifles  he  gratifies  his
desire  of  drink  and  of  revenge.  Thus  the  savage
enters  on  the  path  of  money-getting,  propter  vitcm.
Vivendi perdere  causas,  an  endless  path  whence  there
is  no  return,  and  where  to  falter  is  to  fall.  He  is
demoralized  and  often  too  destroyed,  but  civilization
triumphs  and  the  world  "progresses,"  and  though
each  generation  be  more  unhappy  than  its  prede-
cessor, each  hopes  that  its  successor  will  be  more
fortunate.

And  in  another  way  at  any  rate,  material  progress
has  been  the  source  of  much  misery,  and  a  chief
factor  in  the  increase  of  social  discord,  by  widening
the  material  gulf  between  the  rich  and  the  poor,
and  the  intellectual  gulf  between  the  educated  and
uneducated, and by  stimulating the envy  of  the
poor,  nay,  by  making  possible  the  education  which
made  them  conscious  of  their  misery. It  is  the
fierce  lust  for  the  material  good  things  of  life  which
has  brought  upon modern society  the  great  and
growing danger of revolutionary Socialism, and
which  baffles  the  well-meant  efforts  of  those  who
would  content  it  with  less  than  the  utter  destruction
of  civilization. And  not  the  least  pathetic  feature
of  a  desperate  situation  is  that,  while  the  unreason-
ing insistance  of  those  who  claim  the  good  things
of  life  is  becoming  fiercer,  the  happiness  they  covet
is  imaginary,  and  those  who  are  supposed  to  possess
the  means  to  happiness  are  either  too  blas^  to  enjoy
them,  or  have  made  them  the  means  to  new  pains.
And  though these progressively  increasing  pains

R.  ofS.  I


114  PESSIMISM.

and  claims  of  an  ever-deepening  sensitiveness  will
doubtless  appear  morbid  and  ridiculous  from  the
fact  that  they  differ  in  almost  every  case,  they  are
none  the  less  real,  none  the  less  the  bane  of  many
lives  comparatively  free  from  other  sources  of  misery,
none  the  less  a  cause  of  social  non-adaptation.
And  while  there  is  so  much  dirty  work  to  be  done
in  the  world,  tendencies  which  engender  in  men
a  distaste  for  dirty  work  are  not  conducive  to  hap-
piness. While,  e.g.,  battles  have  to  be  fought,  it  is
a  distinct  source  of  misery  that  so  few  of  the  men
who  fight  them  should  now  delight  in  carnage  for
its  own  sake.

§  15.  But  perhaps  the  most  serious  and  disheart-
ening source  of.  non-adaptation  to  the  social  environ-
ment, and  one  indeed  which  largely  underlies  the
ymptoms  to  which  allusion  has  been  made,  is  the
over-rapid  growth  of  the  social  environment  itself.
It  is  impossible  for  society  to  harmonize  the  con-
flicting claims  of  its  members  because  of  the  con-
stant addition  of  new  claimants :  adaptation  to  the
social  environment  is  nullified  by  the  ever-increasing
complexity  of  the  social  environment  itself.

It  was  comparatively  feasible  for  political  philo-
sophers in  ancient  times  to  theorize  about  ideal
republics  in  which  social  harmony  was  attained :
the  citizens  for  whom  they  legislated  formed  but  a
small  proportion  even  of  the  human  inhabitants
of  the. State;  their  material  wants  were  to  be  sup-
plied by  the  forced  labour  of  slaves  and  inferior  ,
classes,  whose  happiness  was  excluded  from  con-
sideration. So,  too,  the  difficulties  of  the  population
question  were  evaded  by  summary  methods  of
infanticide,  i.e.,  the  rights  of  children  were  not
recognised,  and even  in  the  case  of  women  that


GROWTH OF THE SOCIAL ENVIRONMENT. II 5

recognition  was  little  more  than  nominal.  With  so
restricted  a  body  of  fully-qualified  citizens,  i.e.,  with
so  circumscribed,  an  area  of  the  social  environment,
it  is  not  astonishing  that  the  structural  perfection
of  ancient  states  should  have  been  far  gre^ater  thani
ours  and  th-e  ideal  far  nearer :  the  ancient  State:
could  reppesent  a  higher  type  of  soeial  organismi
because  it  made  no  attempt  to-  solve  the  problems-
whicb  peuplex  us.  But  ze;^  have  successively  admitted
the  claims,  of  children,  slaves,  and  women,  and  withs
the  growing  complexity  of  our  social  problems  we-
have  sunk  out  of  sight  even  of  an  approximate
solutioni  in  a^  quagmire  of  perplexities,  in  which  we
are  more  hopelessly  involved  with  every  step  in  our
"progress."  Nor  need  the  process  stop  with  man  :;
in  the- laws  for- the  prevention  of  cruelty  to  animals
there  is  marked  a  more  than  incipient  reccvg»nitioni
of  the  rights  of  animals,  and*  already  there  are
thousands  who  resent  the  si^fferings  of  viv^ectedj
dogs  as  keenly  as  the  most  ardent  abolitionist  did
those  of  negro  slkves;  and  there;  are  more  convinced
of  the-  iwiquity  of  vivisection  now  than  there  were
convinced  of  the  iniquity  of  slavery  one  hundred
years  ago.

§  16.  But  not  only  is  the  prodigious  growth  of
the  social  environment  removing  a  harmony  of  the-
social  forces  further  and  further  fromi  our  sight,,  but-
a  parallel  process  is  rendering  harmony  more  and
more  unattainable  for  the  individiaal  soul..  .

In  the  earliest  beginnings  of  life,  adaptation,  in
so  far  as  it  exists,  is  physical  or  nothing  at  all.  The
organism  adapts  itself  directly  to  its  environment  or
it  perishes.  At  a  subsequent  stage  it  is  primarily
emotional  and  secondarily  physical ;  i.e..  the-  pressure
of circumstances generates feelings which subse-


1 1  6  J'ESSTMISM.

quently  direct  tlte  tactions  lof  t3ie  body.  In  the
amoeba  there  is  scarcely  any  search  for  or  effort
after  food:  it  assimailat-es  the  cigestiMe  substances
it  comes  across.  And  bence  there  is  no  need  of
feeling.  But  higher  animals  are  capatSe  of  pursuing
their  prey,  and  hence  are  stimulated  by  tfee  pangs  of
hunger.  In  man,  again,  the  conditions  of  life  have
become  so  complex  that  the  simple  feelings-  no
longer  suffice.  Man  cannot,  as  a  rule,  when  hungry,
simply  put  forth  his  hand  and  eat.  The  means  to
gratify  his  feelings  and  his  physical  needs  require
a  long  and  far-sighted  process  of  calculatioin,  and
thus  reason  becomes  the  main  factor  in  vital  adapt-
ation. As  Mr.  Spencer  phrases  it,  the  more  complex
and  re-representative  feelings  gain  greater  authority
and  become  more  important  than  the  simple  and
presentative  feelings,  and  the  latter  must  be  re-
pressed as  leading  to  fatal  imprudences.  To  the
consequences  of  this  process  allusion  has  already
been  made  (§  lo) ;  it  produces  an  ever-growing  dis-
cord within  the  individual  soul.  More  specifically,
however,  a  single  case  may  be  mentioned  of  the
growing  non-adaptatioa  of  the  feelings  to  the  con-
ditions  of  modern  life,  because  it  is  fraught  with
such  fatal  consequences  to  human  welfare  and  be-
cause no  reformer  dares  even  to  attack  a  well-spring
of  evil  in  the  soul  of  man  which  poisons  the  whole
of  modern  life.

§  17.  In  animals  the  reproductive  instinct  does
not  do  more — ^^such  is  the  waste  of  life — than  main-
tain the  numbers  of  the  race.  But  in  man  that
waste  is  so  diminished  that  population  normally  in-
creases, and  increases  rapidly.  And  every  advance
in  civilization,  in  medicine,  in  material  comfort,  in
peaceableness  and  respect  for  human  life,  increases


THE POPULATION QUESTION.  1 1  7

the  length  and  the-  security  of  life  and  diminishes
the  death-rate.  In  other  words,  it  diminishes  the
number  of  new  births,  required  to  maintain  the  race
and  the  fertility  which,  is  politically  necessary.

But  no  corresponding  change  takes  place  in  the
natural  fertility  of  the  race.  What  is  the  result  1
If  we  suppose:  that  a  healthy  woman,  marrying  at
the  right  age,  could  without  detriment  to  her  health
produce  six  children,^  and  if  we.  take  into  consider-
ation also  the  fact  that  the  lengtl\i  of  life  will  soon  on
an  average  extend  over  two  generations,  i.e.  that
men  may  reasonably  expect  to  see  their  grand-
children grown  up,  it  is  evident  that  population  will
be  fully  maintained  if  one-fifth  to  one-sixth  of  the
women  Ln  a  society  provide;  for  its  continuknce ;
i.e.  the  services  of  four  out  of  every  five,  at  least,
might  be  dispensed  with  from,  this  point  of  view.
If,  therefore,  only  the  one  who  was  really  wanted,.
wanted  to  marry,  while  the  other  four  were:  content
to  leave  no  descendants,  all  would  be  .well,  and
human  desires,  would  be  adapted  to  the  require-
ments of  the  situation.  But  in  that  case:  the.  fepro^
ductive  instinct  would  have  to  be  reduced,  itwouHdl
be  hard  to  say  to  what  fraction,  of  its  present
strength.  This  is  so  far  from  being  the  case  that
even  if  it  is  not  true;  that  its  strength  has  not  been
reduced  at  all,  it  is  yet  obvious  that  its  reduction
has.  not  taken  place  in  anything  like,  a  degree  pror
portionate  to  the  reduction,  of  the  need  of  its.
exercise.

^  As  a  fact  the  average  fertility  of  marriage  is  £bur-ania-half.
But  for  many  reasons  the  actual  number  of  children  falls  far  short
of  the  possible  maximum.  For  under  the  present  conditions
healthy  and  strong  women  are  by  no  means  exclusively  selectedi
for  marriage,  and  other  artificial  conditions  limit  the  number  o£
children,  produced,  in  most  cases  far  below  what  it  might  be..


Il8  PESSIMISM.

And  this  is  not  astonishing  for  many  reasons.
For  (i)  feelings  are  slow  to  be  eradicated,  and  their
persistence  is  the  greater  the  more  deep-seated
and  important  they  were.  Hence  any  considerable
change  in  human  nature  seems  in  this  case  to  border
upon  the  impossible,  although  it  must  be  admitted
that  no  instinct  which  was  acquired  in  the  course
of  Evolution  can  be  exempted  from  the  possibility
of  being  again  removed  by  an  adaptation  to  cir-
cumstances similar  to  that  which  generated  it  (2)
Civilization,^lthough  it  gives  the  over-«ensual  mani-
fold opportunities  of  killing  themselves,  does  not
directly  favour  the  less  sensual  as  against  the  more
serasual,  as  it  favours  the  gentler  as  against  the  more
violent,  the  more  industrious  as  against  the  lazier;
^©n  the  contrary,  it  perhaps  makes  the  sensual  the
■more  likely  to  leave  offspring.  (3)  Human  instit-
utions and  social  forces  have,  in  almost  all  cases,
done  their  utmost  lo  keep  the  amative  instinct  at
lits  pristine  strength.  Christianity  alone  has  even
attempted  to  contend  with  human  .nature  in  this
respect,  and  even  it,  in  Protestant  countnies  at  least,
may  now  be  said  to  have  retired  baffled  from  the
contest.  Its  defeat  indeed  will  surprise  no  one  who
considers  the  means  it  adopted  in  order  to  repress
seasuality,  and  reflects  upon  the  fatuity,  e.^'.,  of  con-
demning to  celibacy  those  who  were  presumably
the  most  spiritually-minded  and  least  sensual  in
each  generation.

And  what  are  the  present  arrangements  of
society  ?  Are  they  not  all  calculated  to  foster  these
feelings  in  the  young  ?  What  else  but  "  love  "  is
the  tale  which  is  dinned  into  their  all- too-willing
ears  from  every  side?  'Not  to  speak  of  too  un-
savoury imatters,  what  lis  to  be  thought  of  the  effect


THE SEXUAL INSTINCT,  II9

of  poetry  and  literature  ?  What  is  the  inex-
haustible subject  of  lyric  poetry  ?  What  of  the
novels  that  form  nine-tenths  of  the  reading  of
mankind  ?  Are  they  not  all  of  them  tales  of  love,
-and  do  not  nine-tenths  of  them  inculcate  as  their  sole
fragment  of  philosophy  that  love  is  the  one  redeem-
ing feature  in  life  ?  Would  it  not  then  be  a
miracle  if  men  did  not  accept  this  doctrine  and
cherish  their  animal  instincts  to  their  own  destruc-
tion and  that  of  others  ?

For  what  does  society  do  for  the  feelings  it  has
thus  trained  up  ?  Does  it  render  satisfaction  poss-
ible ?  Far  from  it ;  it  makes  marriage  difficult
and  sordid,  and  all  other  means  odious  and
dangerous  both  to  body  and  soul.  Even  one
hundred  years  ago  Kant  could  say  that  men
were  physically  adult  fifteen  years  before  they
were  economically  adult,  i.e.,  capable  of  support-
ing a  household,  and  since  then  the  age  of  mar-
riage has  gone  on  becoming  later  and  later.
And  women  in  many  cases  never  get  a  chance
of  marrying  at  all !  On  the  effect  such  a  condition
of  things  must  have  upon  morality  it  is  unnecess-
ary to  say  anything,  except  that  it  renders  all
preaching  a  ghastly  and  unavailing  mockery;  but
from  the  point  of  view  of  human  misery  the  con-
sequences of  immorality  form  too  great  and  too
growing  a  contribution  to  its  sum  total  to  be  ignored
by  Pessimism.  And  let  us  consider  whether  there
can  be  happiness  in  the  soul  whose  strongest  feeling
can  find  no  vent  in  the  only  way  which  can  give  it
permanent  satisfaction,  and  reflect  upon  the  myriads
who  are,  and  will  be,  in  this  condition,  and  then,  if
we  dare,  let  us  assert  that  the  world  is  growing
Jiappier ! Is  it  not  certain,  rather,  that  it  must  be


1 20  PESSIMISM.


growing  both  more  unhappy  and  more  immoral  ?
For  the  strength  of  the  instinct  being  constant,  and
its  field  of  action  being  continuously  circumscribed,
must  not  the  internal  pressure  of  necessity  become
more  painful  ?  must  not  the  outbursts  of  passion
more  and  more  frequently  and  violently  burst
through  the  limits  of  the  law  ?

§  18.  We  have  seen  so  far  how  impossible  is
adaptation,  how  ineradicable  is  misery,  and  how
inevitable  is  the  growth  of  unhappiness ;  but  it  is
perhaps  necessary  also  to  display  the  fallaciousness
of  the  appeal  which  optimism  makes  to  the,  law  of
adaptation,  which  may  be  called  the  evolutionist
argument  against  Pessimism.

It  may  be  stated  as  follows  : —

Other  things  being  equal,  those  men  will  survive
whose  speculative  doctrines  tend  to  make  them
more  successful  in  life.  This  will  generate  in  time
a  strong  bias  in  favour  of  those  doctrines,  which
may  go  the  length  of  making  their  opposites  not
only  practically  impossible,  but  even  theoretically
unintelligible.  Hence,  quite  apart  from  questions
of  their  truth  or  falsehood,  we  may  rest  assured  that
doctrines  tending  to  handicap  those  that  hold  them
in  the  struggle  for  existence,  must  in  the  long  run
vanish  away.  Now  Pessimism  is  certainly  such  a
doctrine.  It  diminishes  the  amount  of  pleasure  of.
its  votaries,  and  thus  deprives  them  of  its  vitalizing
effects ;  it  depresses  their  energies,  efforts  and  en-
terprise, by  its  constant  suggestion  of  the  general
futility  of  all  things,  even  when  it  does  not  settle
the  question  of  survival  by  the  short  remedy  of
suicide.  Hence,  the  optimist  will  survive  better
than  the  pessimist,  and  pessimism  will  receive  its
final  answer from  the  brutal  logic  of  facts. The


THE EVOLUTIONIST ANSWER INCONCLUSIVE. 121

king  of  gods  and  men  will  stop  the  railing .  mouth
of  Thersites  by  the  cold  clod  of  earth,  by  the  un-
answerable summons  of  his  dread  herald  Death.
Thus  Pessimism  is  hopeless,  and  doomed  to  pass
away,  and  can  cherish  no  hope,  even  if  true,  of  per-
suading men  of  its  truth.

§  19.  Pessimists  will  doubtless  use  this  argu-
ment to  explain  the  undeniably  optimistic  bias  of
the  generality  of  men,  but  will  deny  several  of  its
assumptions.  For  instance,  it  assumed  that,  other
things  being  equal,  the  optimist  would  survive.

But  how  if  Pessimism  be  causally  connected  with
other  qualifications  for  survival,  e.g.  with  growth  of
knowledge  ?  How,  if  increase  of  wisdom  be  truly
increase  of  sorrow  ?  Might  not  the  wiser  pessimist
survive  better  than  the  ignorant  optimist  ?  History,
indeed,  seems  to  teach  that  this  has  frequently  hap-
pened, and  that  gay  savages  and  the  lightly-living
races  of  the  South  have  not  been  more  successful
than  those  who  have  soberly  and  sadly  borne  the
burden  of  civilization  and  of  science.

Thus,  there  is  nothing  absurd  in  the  supposition
that  with  the  attainment  of  a  certain  degree  of
mental  development,  the  conviction  of  the  futility  of
life  should  be  irresistibly  borne  in  upon  all  men,
and  that  the  forces  of  evolution  should  for  ever
urge  mankind  towards  Pessimism,  even  though  it
meant  death.  Pessimism  may  invert  the  evolut-
ionist argument,  and  urge  not  that  the  susceptib-
ility to  pessimistic  modes  of  thinking  will  be  des-
troyed by  the  progress  of  the  world,  but  that  the
progress  of  the  world  will  be  artificially  suppressed,
because  of  the  destruction  which  pessimistic  modes
of  thinking  involve  as  soon  as  a  certain  point  is
reached. Civilization,  then,  would be an ocean


122  PESSIMISM.

which  for  ever  urged  its  foremost  waves  against
the  adamantine  rocks  of  Pessimism  that  broke  and
shattered  them,  and  for  ever  pushed  forward  fresh
breakers  to  carry  on  a  futile  contest.

And,  moreover,  the  evolutionist  argument  assumes
that  the  environment  is  constant,  and  that  hence
the  law  of  adaptation  must  produce  happiness  in  the
end.  But  what  if  the  environment  is  not  constant,
but  itself  evolving,  and  evolving  more  rapidly  than
our  powers  of  adaptation  ?  And  since  the  Pessimist
may  claim  to  have  shown  that  this  is  actually  the
case  (§§  12-17),  must  not  the  world  be  growing
unhappier  in  spite  of  all  the  law  of  adaptation  can
do  ?  Will  not  the  constant  introduction  of  new
conditions  of  life,  to  which  mankind  has  not  yet
grown  adapted  by  the  elimination  of  protesters,  pro-
vide a  constant  source  of  Pessimism  ?  May  not  the
intrinsic  perversity  of  things  fender  adaptation
eternally  impossible  ?

And  lastly,  supposing  the  argument  to  be  valid,
would  it  not  confirm  the  Pessimist  in  his  pessimism  ?
Would  it  not  seem  to  him  one  more  instance  of  the
utter  malignity  of  the  constitution  of  things,  that  his
protest  should  be  overborne  by  the  brutal  tyranny
of  facts,  that  truth  should  be  unable  to  prevail,  that
the  triumphant  lust  of  life  should  lead  reason
captive  ?

It  must  be  confessed,  therefore,  that  the  evolu-
tionist answer  is  not  only  theoretically  insufficient,
but  also  inadequately  supported  by  the  facts.  The
facts  of  life  admit  of  the  pessimistic  interpretation,
and  the  difficulty  is  rather  to  see  what  other  in-
terpretation they  will  admit  of.

§  20.  When  once  the  possibility  of  happiness
has  been  disproved,  no  possible  moral. value  of  life


THE IDEAL OF GOODNESS.  1 23

can  save  it  from  condemnation.  On  the  contrary,
it  would  be  an  arrangement  worthy  of  the  most
fiendish  ingenuity  to  combine  progressive  growth
in  goodness  with  progressive  growth  in  misery.
But  there  is  no  necessity  to  anticipate  this,  seeing
that  the  ideal  of  goodness  is  as  unmeaning  and
impossible  as  that  of  happiness.  And  for  the  same
reasons.

Just  as  happiness  depended  on  the  proportion
between  desires  and  their  fulfilment,  so  goodness
depends  on  the  proportion  between  the  moral
standard  and  moral  conduct  If  our  standard  be
high,  and  our  conduct  fall  far  short  of  it,  we  shall
feel  more  wiclced  than  if  our  standard  and  our
conduct  be  alike  low,  and  the  latter  approximate
more  closely  to  the  former.  Virtue  depends  on
adaptation  to  the  moral  environment,  on  relation  to
the  moral  ideal.  And  as  before,  both  the  environ-
ment and  the  ideal  are  capable  of  growing,  and  of
growing  more  rapidly  than  the  individual's  adapt-
ation to  them.  Thus  it  may  be  that  the  more  we
dp,  the  more  is  given  us  to  do  ;  the  more  duties  we
fulfil,  the  more  fresh  duties  are  laid  upon  us  ;  the
further  we  advance,  the  further  we  are  from  our
end.

The  result,  then,  of  the  moral  judgment  will
depend  on  the  proportion  between  aim  and  achieve-
ment. If  moral  theory  develops  more  rapidly  than
moral  practice,  if  the  refinement  of  our  sense  of  sin
outstrips  the  refinement  of  our  morals,  there  is
nothing  improbable  or  impossible  in  the  prospect
that  the  heirs  of  a  long  course  of  moral  improve-
ment may  be  the  most  wicked  of  men,  utter  scoun-
drels as  judged  by  their  own  moral  standard.

And there is some reason  to think that  this


124  PESSIMISM.

process  has  actually  been  going  on,  to  judge  by  the
lower  type  of  the  moral  ideal  in  modern  times  as
compared  with  ancient.  The  Greeks  regarded  the
moral  man  as  one  rejoicing  in  the  exercise  of  virtue,
and  finding  his  highest  pleasure  in  virtuous  activities
which  were  the  natural  expression  of  his  nature.
The  conduct  of  a  man  who,  in  spite  of  sore  tempt-
ation, acted  rightly  and  controlled  his  evil  impulses,
they  regarded  as  an  altogether  inferior  type,
scarcely  worthy  of  the  name  of  virtue.

But  with  us  the  case  is -different ;  the  unswerving
performance  of  duty  is  the  highest  ideal  to  which
man  is  considered  capable  of  aspiring ;  to  expect
him  not  to  fed  temptation,  to  find  pleasure  in  doing,
his  duty,  is  to  expect  superhuman  perfection.  But
duty  is  in  itself  a  mark  of  imperfection,  for  if  there
were  more  perfect  correspondence  between  the'
internal  nature  and  the  external  environment,  be-
tween the  feelings  and  the  conduct  required,  the
moral  act  would  be  accompanied  by  pleasure,  and
prompted  by  the  impulse  of  feeling,  instead  of  by
the  coercive  sense  of  duty.  Our  ideal  of  morality
then  represents  a  lower  stage  of  moral  progress
than  that  of  the  Greeks.  Are  we  then  so  far
inferior  to  them  in  moral  development  ?  Assuredly
not;  there  can  be  no  doubt  that  thbugh  we  are
further  from  the  attainment  of  our  moral  ideal  than
the  Greeks  were  from  theirs,  we  have  advanced
immensely  beyond  the  Greeks  in  this  very  matter
of  morality,  and  that  measured  on  an  absolute  scale
our  conduct  and  our  ideal  must  rank  far  higher
than  theirs.  Thus,  if  there  is  an  absolute  scale,  we
are  objectively  better,  though  subjectively  worse.

But  is  there  such  an  absolute  scale  ? To  assert
this  would  be  to  assert  that  there  is  a  definite  limit


IS VIRTUE A PHANTOM  ?  12^

to  the  growth  of  the  moral  environment,  to  the
expansion  of  the  moral  ideal.  It  would  be  to
assert  the  existence  of  a  permanent  and  unchanging
environment  somewhere,  even  though  it  were  in  the
heaven  of  heavens,  the  existence  of  an  eternal
Ideal,  of  an  unalterable  standard  of  Right.  And
what  is  there  in  the  character  of  our  sensible
world  of  change  to  justify  such  an  assumption  ?

Thus  goodness  is  as  unattainable  as  happiness,
and  like  it  an  ideal  for  which  the  Real  has  no  room.
It  is  indeed  in  one  way  even  more  unmeaning,  for
the  perfection  of  goodness  would  destroy  its  own
moral  character.  If  all  our  duties  became  pleasures,
they  would  ipso  facto  cease  to  be  duties,  and  the
virtue  which  is  no  longer  tempted  to  do  wrong
ceases  to  be  virtue.

And  so  must  not  the  pessimist's  judgment  be
that  in  aiming  at  goodness  we  are  but  pursuing
the  fleeting  image  of  a  mirage  that  with  its  delus-
ive promise  of  the  waters  of  eternal  life,  and  the
greqn  palms  of  victorious  virtue,  lures  us  ever
deeper  into  the  wilderness  of  Sin  ;  that  mankind  will
do  well  to  abandon  the  wild-goose  chase  of  such  a
winged  phantom  as  insane  folly ;  and  that  goodness,
so  far  from  being  an  alternative  to  happiness,,  is  not
even  an  end  which  can  be  rationally  aimed  at  ?

§  21.  By  way  of  contrast  to  the  otherwise  un-
redeemed gloom  of  their  pictures  of  life,  pessimist
writers  have  been  wont  to  assert  that  whatever
gratiftcation  could  be  got  out  of  life  must  be  derived
from  the  aesthetic  emotions  and  activities ;  hence
it  is  incumbent  upon  us  to  examine  whether  their
assertions  are  well  founded.

In  the  first  place,  there  is  clearly  a  subtle  irony
in  fixing  upon  the  rarest  and  most  capricious  of  our


126  PESSIMISM.

sensibilities  as  the  redeeming  feature  in  life.  Fof
as  disputes  about  taste  show,  our  sense  of  beauty
hardly  yet  gives  rise  to  objectively  valid  judgments.
It  is  still  in  so  rudimentary  a  state  of  development
that  we  are  in  most  cases  quite  unable  to  justify  its
judgments,  and  to  say  how  and  why  anything  is
beautiful.  We  may  indeed  conjecture  that  in  the
end  aesthetic  emotion  would  be  found  to  be  the
crowning  approval  of  a  perfect  harmony,  of  a  com-
plete adaptation  of  means  to  ends,  of  an  exact  fitness
of  things.  But  if  so,  a  developed  sense  of  the
beautiful  would  find  little  to  admire  in  a  world  like
ours,  in  which  all  things  are  more  or  less  discordant
and  unadapted.  What  wonder,  then,  that  of  true
beauty  we  should  have  no  perception  and  no  under-
standing ?

But  even  the  imperfect  sense  of  beauty  we  have
developed  is  a  bane  rather  than  a  blessing.  For
even  by  its  standard  the  vast  majority  of  things  in
the  world  are  ugly,  and  the  longing  for  the  beautiful
can  be  gratified  only  at  the  cost  of  much  subserv-
ience to  the  hideous  and  the  loathsome.

And  then  the  pursuit  of  the  beautiful  brings  us
into  frequent  conflict  with  the  good  ;  for  though  we
may  come  to  perceive  in  some  cases  that  the  good
is  beautiful,  it  is  yet  far  from  being  the  case  that
the  beautiful  is  always  good.  The  antagonism,  too,
between  the  useful  and  the  ornamental  is  too  well
known  to  require  comment.

But  the  most  fatal  effect  of  the  development  of
the  aesthetic  sense  is  its  influence  upon  our  feelings..
It  renders  us  sensitive  to  evils  which  we  had  not
had  the  refinement  to  perceive  before,  and  it  causes
us  to  shrink  in  disgust  from  evils  we  had  thought
it  our duty  to face, and to grapple with. The


THE IDEAL OF BEAUTY.  I27

aesthetic  temperament  is  naturally  impelled  to  avoid
what  is  coarse  and  ugly,  low  and  common-place,  and
so  loses  sympathy  with  nine-tenths  of  human  life.
It  is  not  merely  that  duties  and .  functions  like
those  of  hospital  nurses  or  butchers,  however  necess-
ary and  morally  admirable  they  may  be,  must
continue  to  be  sesthetically  repulsive,  but  that  the
meanness  and  ugliness  of  the  greater  part  of  life
seems  too  irremediable  to  admit  of  the  hope  of
improvement.  It  is  not  from  the  resignation  and
retirement  of  the  aesthetically-minded  that  the  great
"  reforms  "  of  history  have  received  their  impulse,
but  from  the  moral  enthusiasm  or  party  spirit  of
men  whose  every  step  was  marked  by  brutal  utilit-
arianism or  unbeautiful  fanaticism.^  It  is  well,  then,
that  the  world  is  still  so  Philistine ;  for  if  once  the
hideous  and  unalterable  sordidness  of  life  were  fully
realized,  it  might  come  to  pass  that  few  would  care
to  survive  to  feel  it  long.

Thus  the  enthusiasm  for  beauty  does  but  com-
plicate our  already  all  too  complex  lives,  does  but
add  one  more  warring  aim  which  we  can  never
realize.

^  The  history  of  the  Renaissance  may  seem  to  refute  the  view
that  culture  and  artistic  sense  have  not  been  the  moving  forces
of  the  world.  But  the  Renaissance  was  a  revival  of  learning
quite  as  much  as  of  art,  prompted  as  much  by  the  desire  for
knowledge  as  for  beauty.  And,  after  all,  in  the  end  it  effected
little.  It  was  soon  absorbed,  or  swept  away  by  the  Reformation,
and  it  is  well  known  that,  after  a  little  hesitation,  most  of  the
chiefs  of  the  Renaissance  condoned  the  abuses  of  the  old  order
of  things  and  remained  Catholics.  The  intellectual  liberty  (such
as  it  is)  we  have  since  attained,  we  owe,  not  to  the  Renaissance,
but  rather  to  the  conflict  of  equally  intolerant  and  equally  power-
ful orthodoxies,  and  the  progress  of  science  has  been  stimulated
far  more  by  the  hope  of  its  material  advantages  than  by  the
desire  of  pure  knowledge.


128  PESSIMISM.

§  2  2.  Lastly,  the  claim  of  the  intellectual  activit-
ies to  provide  an  aim  to  life  has  really  been  already
disposed,  of  by  Scepticism,  If  knowledge  cannot
lull  asleep  the  discordant  strife  of  the  elements  of
our  being,  if  it  cannot  discover  the  road  to  harmony
and  to  bliss,  then  knowledge  fails  in  practice,  and
then  its  theoretical  defects  stamp  it  as  an  illusion
(cf.  ch.  iii.,  §  20,  21).  And  it  is  an  illusion  for  the
same  reason  as  the  other  activities  of  life,  because
in  order  to  be  true  it  requires  an  ideal,  fixed,  per-
manent and  definite,  as  the  standard  whereby  to
measure  the  passing  and  indeterminate  flux  of
things.  And  such  an  ideal  it  can  nowhere  find  in  a
world  of  Becoming.

The  Becoming  of  the  world  is  the  rock  upon
which  the  ark  of  life  is  shattered  :  to  know,  to  be
good,  to  be  happy,  we  require  a  fixed  standard  of
Being,  but  the  ideal  which  our  reason  and  our  heart
demand  our  eyes  can  nowhere  see.

Thus,  all  reason  can  do  is  to  render  us  sensible  of
the  hopelessness  of  our  position ;  it  is  the  fire,
kindled  by  the  collision  of  discordant  elements,
which  consumes  the  soul  of  man,  and  by  the  lurid
light  it  throws  upon  our  gloomy  lot  we  can  just
see  that  our  doom  is  irrevocable,  that  we  are  the
helpless  victims  of  a  gigantic  auto  da  fS,  of  which
Evolution  is  the  celebration.  For  since  every
advance  does  but  widen  the  chasm  between  the
ideal  and  the  actual,  our  only  hope  would  be  to
retrace  the  course  of  Evolution,  and  to  simplify  life
by  a  return  to  the  primitive  contentment  of  the
amoeba.  But  though  the  amoeba  is  far  more  per-
fectly adapted  to  its  environment  than  any  of- its
descendants,  it  may  well  be  doubted  whether  even
the  amoeba  is  happy  :  in  any  case,  it  suffices  that


THE RUIN OF HOPE.  1  29

such  an  escape  from  misery  by  a  return  to  uncon-
sciousness is  impossible.

Thus  we  must  resign  ourselves  to  our  fate,  and,
to  adapt  a  famous  image  of  Plato's,  allow  the
immortal  steeds  of  Progress  and  of  Reason  to  drag
the  chariot  of  the  Soul  with  reckless  speed  adown
the  race-course'  of  life,  while  the  reluctant  mortal
charioteer  makes  vain  essays  to  break  the  rush,
and  succeeds  only  in  racking  and  rending  his  car
asunder.  And  so  the  mad  course  will  go  on,  until
"  terreitum  equitem  gravatusl'^  the  Pegasus  of  Pro-
gress kicks  over  the  traces,  wrecks  the  chariot,  and
leaves  the  blanched  bones  of  the  charioteer  to  mark
the  melancholy  track  for  successors  neither  wiser  nor
more  fortunate.

§  23.  Thus  ruin,  final  and  irretrievable,  has
overtaken  thfe  attempt  to  deal  with  life,  such  as  it
is,  or  rather,  to  regard  the  present  appearances  of
things  as  self-sufficing  and  ultimate  :  there  remains
only  the  poor  consolation  of  knowing  that  we  have
brought  this  ruin  upon  ourselves.

For  perhaps  the  reflection  may  obtrude  that  we
are  ourselves  responsible  for  the  disaster,  in  that  we
insisted  on  ignoring  the  heavenly  nature  of  our
ideals.  If  we  must  needs  drag  the  chariot  of  the
soul  through  the  mire  of  earth,  and  feed  our
Pegasus  on  the  sordid  fare  most  alien  from  the
ambrosia  that  formed  his  proper  nourishment ;  if  we
deny  him  the  use  of  his  wings,  and  keep  him  down
to  the  dusty  track  that  dimmed  his  sight,  and  if
thus  we  fail,  is  it  so  sure  that  we  may  rightly  blame
the  divine  steeds  of  Reason  and  of  Evolution  ?

To  this  question  the  following  section  of  this
essay  will  attempt  to  give  an  answer.

1  "  Spurning  his  earth-born  rider."

R.  ofS.  K


BOOK  II.


CHAPTER  V.

RECONSTRUCTION.

§  I.  The  avowed  object  of  the  preceding  chap-
ters has  been  to  trace  out  the  consequences  of  the
denial  of  metaphysics,  i.e.  of  a  systematic  examin-
ation of  ultimate  questions,  and  of  its  bearing  upon
the  theory  and  practice  of  life.  But  incidentally  far
more  serious  results  followed.  Not  merely  did
Positivism  lead  on  to  Agnosticism,  Agnosticism  to
Scepticism,  and  Scepticism  to  Pessimism,  but  the
two  latter  strengthened  themselves  with  arguments
which  it  seems  well-nigh  impossible  to  refute.  And
so  what  advance  has  been  made  towards  a  solution
of  the  problem  of  life  ?  What  has  it  availed  to
show  the  dire  consequences  of  the  unphilosophical
view,  if  in  so  doing  we  have  destroyed  also  the
basis  of  all  others  ?  Have  we  not  enmeshed  our-
selves also  in  a  deadly  snare  and  been  beguiled
into  a~  position  from  which  there  is  no  escape  ?
Have  we  not  ourselves  destroyed  all  the  hopes  or
illusions  that  make  life  valuable  ?

Yet  it  may  be  that  this  apparent  loss  will  prove
real  gain  ;  even  now  it  is  possible  to  see  counter-
vailing advantages.

In  the  first  place,  we  have  faced  the  worst  that
can  be  said  against  the  scheme  of  things,  and  may
at  least  hope  to  be  acquitted  of  the  suspicion  that
weakness  or  disingenuousness  has  prompted  us  to


1 34  RECONSTRUCTION.

understate  or  overlook  tlie  difficulties  that  beset  the
attempt  to  discover  any  meaning  in  life.  And  from
this  thoroughness  in  stating  the  negative  position
we  may  also  draw  the  assurance  that  whatever
germs  of  higher  hopes  have  survived  such  ruthless
destruction,  must  surely  be  immortal,  and  fraught
with  no  humble  destiny.

Secondly,  the  wholesale  havoc  Pessimism  has
wrought  has  effectually  cleared  the  grouad  :  Pessim-
ism' has  played  the  part  of  a  Samson,  and  in  its
fall  has  crushed  alike  philosopher  and  Philistine.
Not  only  has  it  enabled  us  to  see  the  real  drift  and
final  outcome  of  popular  theories  which  would
otherwise  be  continually  delaying  our  progress,  but
it  has  also  swept  away  the  mass  of  philosophic  con-
structions, of  which  none  have  answered,  and  very
few  can  even  be  said  to  have  considered,  the
questions  which  have  been  brought  forward.  So,
whenever  we  encounter  doctrines  based  upon  the
veiled  assumptions  of  agnosticism,  scepticism,  and
pessimism,  or  such  as  have  no  answer  to  the  poss-
ibilities on  which  they  are  grounded,  we  shall  be
able  to  reduce  them  to  their  lowest  terms,  as  it
were,  to  refer  them  to  their  tyf)es,  and  thus  to
remove  their  obstructions.  We  shall  give  such
opponents  the  choice  between  yielding  or  confessing
to  the  latent  pessimism  of  their  views,  and  thus  use
pessimism  as  a  sort  of  provisional  reductio  ad  absurd-
lun,  justifying  us  in  rejecting  ■  them  in  their  im-
perfect form.

And,  thirdly,  we  have  raised,  in  an  acute  form,
the  question  of  the  method  of  philosophy,  by  showing
that  the  attempt  to  exclude  all  philosophic  methods
on  the  ground  of  metaphysics,  and  to  speculate
about the problems of  life by means of  merely


A BARGAIN WITH SCEPTICISM.  1 35

common-sense  reflection  leads  to  irremediable  dis-
aster. And  the  toil  and  trouble  of  probing  to  its
utmost  depths  the  abyss  of  Pessimism  will  not  have
been  in  vain,  if  it  can  bring  home  to  us  this  con-
viction, that  either  a  metaphysical  method  can
rescue  philosophy  or  all  is  lost,  that  salvation  is  to
be  found  in  metaphysics  or  not  at  all.

§  2.  But  in  addition  to  these,  other  advantages
may  indirectly  result  from  an  attentive  criticism  of
what  has  been  proved  by  Scepticism  and  Pessimism,
and  of  how  it  has  been  proved.

The  demonstration  of  Scepticism  depended  on
the  discrepancy  between  thought  and  reality,  be-
tween things  as  we  think  them,  and  as  they  appear
to  us,  on  the  difference  of  thought  and  feeling,  on
the  impossibility  of  representing  the  whole  by  the
part.  And  as  it  denied  the  correspondence  of  the
elements  which  constitute  knowledge,  it  cannot  be
directly  refuted.  For  any  argument  which  assumes
such  correspondence  begs  the  question,  while  any
argument  which  proceeds  by  only  one  of  the  factors.
is  ex  hypothesi  incapable  of  proving  the  existence  of
truth,  i.e.  of  the  harmony  of  both.

Any  refutation,  therefore,  of  Scepticism  must  be
indirect ;  and  of  such  refutations,  that  which  is
based  on  its  practical  absurdity  has  been  already
considered.  It  is  transcended  by  Pessimism,  which
admits  that  the  assumptions  of  our  knowledge  work,
in  a  certain  sense,  but  only  up  to  a  certain  point,
and  work  only  in  order  to  plunge  us  into  a  more
irredeemable  chaos.  For  in  the  end  they  fail,  and
fail  us  just  at  the  critical  point :  they  imply  intel-
lectual ideals  to  which  the  Becoming  of  sensible
things  will  not  conform.

Nothing  remains,  therefore,  but  to  make  a  kind  of


1 2)6  RECONSTRUCTION.

bargain  with  Scepticism,  and  to  assume  provision-
ally the  unproved  hypothesis  of  the  r^a:/ validity  of
the  principles  of  our  thought,  of  the  substantial
parallelism  of  our  thought  and  reality,  on  condition
of  thereby  solving  all  the  problems  of  life.  For  it
would  be  absurd  to  deny  that  we  can  know,  if  our
knowledge  can  solve,  or  show  the  way  to  the  solu-
tion of  all  the  problems  of  the  world.  And  this
concession  must  and  should  satisfy  us.  It  is  indeed
no  more  than  what  we  should  really  have  been
justified  in  demanding  before  we  were  urged  to  it
by  Scepticism,  that  the  authenticity  of  human
knowledge  should  be  guaranteed  by  its  capacity  to
deal  with  all  human  problems.  We  may  claim  that,
if  the  scheme  of  things  is  rational  at  all,  it  should
not  mock  our  reason  with  puzzles  that  are  insoluble.
We  must  assert  that  either  the  human  reason  is
competent  to  solve  all  the  difficulties  that  human
minds  can  properly  feel,  or  that  in  all  things  it  is
the  plaything  of  an  unknowable,  unmanageable  and
inexorable  perversity  of  things.  But  whether  we
might  have  urged  this  claim  of  our  own  accord  or
not.  Scepticism  renders  all  debate  superfluous  :  we
must  accept  its  terms  or  give  up  the  hope  of  re-
storing the  validity  of  knowledge.  And  the  aspect
of  the  world  which  Pessimism  presents  to  us  is  a  no
less  stimulus  in  the  search  for  a  truly  satisfactory
philosophy.  It  is  based  on  a  possibility  which  may
repel  us,  but  which  is  so  deeply  rooted  in  the  nature
of  our  world  that  we  can  never  wholly  reject  it.  It
thus  forms  an  eternal  contrast  to  the  true  philo-
sophy, the  gloomy  realm  of  shades  which  receives
the  recreant  outcasts  from  the  light.

Its  conclusion  that  life  is  miserably,  and  not  worth
living,  was  the  outcome  of  a  speculative  suggestion.


WHAT PHILOSOrHY MUST ACHIEVE,  I37

4

That  suggestion  was  that  of  the  ultimate  perversity
of  the  constitution  of  things,  as  a  consequence  of
which  all  problems  are  intrinsically  insoluble,  all
questions  inherently  meaningless,  and  all  methods
incurably  impracticable.  It  is  no  use  asking  quest-
ions, because  no  answer  can  be  given  ;  it  is  futile
to  make  any  sort  of  effort,  for  we  are  ever  baffled  in
the  end,  and  the  greater  the  effort  the  more  bitter
the  disappointment  :  the  cup  of  life  must  be  drained
to  the  dregs,  and  however  we  struggle,  the  dregs
are  bitter  with  death.  Theoretically  life  is  a  puzzle
which  has  no  solution  ;  practically  it  is  a  Barmecide
feast  at  which  the  wretched  dupes,  the  victims  of  an
inscrutable  fate,  make  believe  to  enjoy  delights  as
unreal  and  fleetingr  as  the  shadow  of  a  dream.  In
•short,  it  is  all  a  ghastly,  senseless  striving  after  the
impossible.

And  not  the  least  terrible  point  about  this  view  is
its  probability.  It  can  claim  greater  simplicitj',
gr&2Xtr  prima  facie  probability,  than  any  other.  It
may  not  be  the  only  possible  explanation  of  the
facts  considered  in  the  last  two  chapters,  but  it  is
'Considerably  the  most  obvious  explanation.  Every
alternative  to  it  will  have  to  explain  away  many
things  which  it  is  exceedingly  difficult  to  explain
■away.  It  will  have  to  account  for  evil  and  imper-
fection ;  and  even  when  it  has  shown  the  possibility
■of  a  final  reconciliation,  it  will  have  to  show  why
this  could  not  have  been  attained  without  the  long
time-process  of  the  world's  development.

So  in  theoretical  matters  it  will  have  to  show  not
merely  that  the  Becoming  of  things  is  ultimately
knowable,  but  also  to  explain  how  it  was  conducive
to  the  end  to  be  attained.

In  short,  in  order  to  have  an  alternative  to  Pess-


1 38  RECONSTRUCTION.

imism,  we  must  be  prepared  to  account  for  Imper-
fection, Becoming  and  Time — the  three  chief  and
most  obvious  •  characteristics  of  our  world.  In  this;
stupendous  task  the  only  favourable  omen  at  the
start  is  that  no  sane  human  being  will  resign  him-
self to  Pessimism  if  he  can  possibly  help  it,' that  the
merest  possibility  of  an  alternative  must  be  hailed
with  delight  by  every  one  who  has  become  con-
scious of  the  difficulty.

The  search,  then,  for  an  alternative  to  Pessimism
is  a  desperate  undertaking,  which  can  be  justified
only  by  success  ;  for  success  alone  can  save  us  from
despair.  And  it  must  be  admitted  that  appearances,
are  against  us,  and  that  our  only  hope  is  to  pene-
trate beyond  them  :  the  very  principles  of  our
reasoning  are  hypothetical,  conceded  ad  hoc  by
Scepticism  :  the  end  at  which  we  aim,  if  attained,,
would  revolutionize  the  character  of  the  world,  and
nothing  short  of  complete  success  will  deliver  us.
from  the  monstrous  spectre  of  Pessimism.

We  set  out,  then,  under  sentence  of  death,  like
Sir  Walter  Raleigh,  to  discover  Eldorado,  and  the
penalty  of  failure  will  be  inexorably  exacted  if  we
fail.

§  3.  Under  such  circumstances  we  shall  do  well
to  begin  by  taking  stock  of  our  resources,  by  seeing,
what  salvage  may  be  fished  up  out  of  the  shipwreck
of  our  hopes.

In  addition  to  the  laws  of  our  thought,  there  is.
one  principle  which  Scepticism  did  not  deny,  and
indeed  could  not  deny,  without  manifestly  cutting
away  the  basis  of  its  own  argument,  viz.  the  reality
of  the  Self  or  Soul.

Our  scepticism  did  not  deny  it,  because  it  was-
immanent  and  did  not  stray  beyond  the  limits  of


THE REALITY OF THE SELF.  139

consciousness  (cf.  iii.  §  3)  :  it  was  concerned  only  to
establish  the  existence  of  an  irreconcilable  discord
within  the  soul.

Nor  does  Pessimism  care  to  deny  the  reality  of
the  soul,  for  suffering  could  hardly  be  the  supreme
reality,  if  the  soul  which  suffered  were  not  real.
The  only  thing  that  Scepticism  and  Pessimism
would  protest  against  would  be  the  attempt  to
derive  from  the  admission  of  the  reality  of  the  Self
an  admission  of  its  existence  as  a  simple  and  im-
mortal substance,  after  the  fashion  of  the  "  rational
psychology"  of  old;  but  this  we  have  no  intention  of
doing.  The  existence  of  the  Self  is  at  present
asserted  only  as  the  basis  of  all  knowledge,  and  in
this  sense  it  cannot  be  validly  doubted.  Accord-
ingly it  has  been  denied  by  Agnosticism  rather  than
by  Scepticism,  i.e.  by  a  doctrine  which  turned  out
inadequate  on  its  own  presuppositions.

Among  these  denials  of  the  existence  of  the  Self
or  soul,  Hume's  argument  has  the  first  claim  on  our
attention.

He  contends  that  the  soul  does  not  exist  because
he  never  finds  it  existing  without  some  particular
content,  never  catches  himself  without  some  "  im-
pression or  idea."  This  argument  may  be  regarded
as  an  ingenious  redudio  ad  absurdum  of  Berkeley's,
nominalism,  which  denied  the  existence  of  universal
conceptions  on  the  ground  that  the  psychical  imagea
in  the  mind  always  contained  some  irrelevant  ac-
cessories. But  it  has  no  efficacy  against  all  who
avoid  confounding  the  idea  (or  conception)  as  a
universal  predicate  with  the  (image  or)  idea  as  a
psychological  fact  (cp.  iii.  §  15).  And  the  conditions-
upon  which  Hume  would  admit  the  existence  of  the
soul  would  seem  to  be  of  a  ridiculous  severity. So


140  -  RECONSTRUCTION.

long  as  consciousness  Is  consciousness  of  something,
of  something  more  than  mere  existence,  we  cannot,
says  Hume,  infer  from  it  our  own  existence.
ReaHty -could  not,  apparently,  be  attributed  to  any
soul  that  was  not  capable  of  being  reduced  to  an
absolute  blank.  But  this  implies,,  in  the  first  place,
the  fallacy  that  mere  existence  is  possible,  undis-
tinguished by  any  particular  content,  that  a  mere
fact  can  be  found,  which  is  not  determined  by  a
certain  character  (cp.  ch.  ii.  §  3).,  And  secondly,  one
must  wonder  who  could  be  supposed  to  be  in  the
least  concerned  to  assert  the  existence  of  such  a
perfectly  void  soul,  and  who  need  be  dismayed  at
the  discovery  that  his  soul  could  never  be  caijght
in  such  a  condition  of  fatuous  nudity.  The  exist-
ence of  the  soul  does  not  depend  on  its  capacity  to
dispense  with  all  content,  nor  is  any  slur  cast  upon
it  by  the  fact  that  the  contents  of  consciousness  vary.
The  ideal  to  which  the  variations  of  consciousness
point  is  not  a  soul  which  has  been  annihilated  by
~the  loss  of  all  its  contents,  but  one  of  which  the
contents  have  attained  to  stability  and  perfection.

§  4.  Kant's  objection  to  the  reality  of  the  soul  is
similar  to  Hume's-  But,  like  many  of  his  doctrines,
it  is  a  compromise,  not  altogether  successful,  between-
Hume  and  the  old  metaphysics,  and  so  rejects  a
good  deal  of  Hume's  argument.  Kant  recognises
the  necessity  of  admitting  at  least  an  epistemological
reality  of  the  soul,  as  the  principle  on  which  the
possibility  of  consciousness  and  the  unity  of  know-
ledge depends.  As  such,  it  is  the  soul  which  forms
the  fleeting  series  of  impressions,  thoughts,  etc.,  into
a  continuous  system,  and  thus  makes  a  connected
consciousness  possible.

Yet  Kant  strenuously  maintains  that  the  soul  is


THE SELF AS THE PRIMARY CERTAINTY. 141

only  an  eplstemological  and  not  a  metaphysical  (or
ultimate)  principle,  and  that  it  must  not  be  treated
as  existing  outside  of  the  context  of  knowledge,  nor
supposed  to  exist  as  a  "  thing-in-itself."  And  he
does  this  on  the  same  grounds  as  Hume,  viz.,  be-
cause the  "  I  think  "  impartially  accompanies  all  the
contents  of  consciousr^ess  and  never  exists  apart
from  them  :  so  it  must  be  a  mere  form  of  know-
ledge and  not  a  substantive  reality.  But  as  we  have
already  rejected  Kant's  separation  of  form  and
matter,  appearance  and  thing-in-itself  (ch.  ii.  §  14,  §
12),  the  real  existence  of  the  self  is  admitted  when  it
is  confessed  necessary  to  the  existence  of  knowledge,
and  the  reality  of  consciousness.  And  besides,  its
existence  as  the  basis  of  knowledge  presupposes  its
existence  as  a  reality.  For  while  the  laws  of  our
thought  persist,  they  compel  us  to  admit  that
operari  seqtiihir  esse,  and  that  which  is  implied  in  the
activity  of  knowledge  must  be  before  it  can  be
active.

It  is  not  necessary,  therefore,  to  linger  any  longer
over  Kant's  objections  to  the  reality  of  the  Self :  we
may  refer  for  a  further  exposure  of  their  fallacious-
ness to  the  criticism  of  Kant's  agnosticism  (ch.  ii.  §
2 1 ),  and  accept  the  reality  of  the  Self  as  the  funda-
mental basis  of  all  life,  knowledge  and  proof.  As
the  most  certain  of  all  things,  it  is  the  Alpha,  the
starting-point,  and  it  would  not  be  surprising  if  it
turned  out  also  the  Omega,  the  goal  of  philosophy.

§  5.  And  it  is  not  only  the  primary  certainty  in
itself,  but  also  affords  us  the  first  firm  basis  of  a
criticism  of  Scepticism.

Scepticism  was  based  on  the  disparateness  and
conflict  of  the  elements  of  knowledge,  on  the  imposs-
ibility of  finding  a  connection  between  the  incom-


142  RECONSTRUCTION.

mensurable  aspects  of  things.  But  all  these
discordant  aspects  are  activities  of  the  same  self  ;
the  thought  and  feeling  which  conflict  are  both
"  mine  "  ;  my  "  self"  unites  "  my  "  thoughts  and
"my  "feeling  into  a  single  consciousness.  It  gives
us  the  unity  as  an  accomplished  fact,  and  leaves  us
the  task  of  discovering  how  the  miracle  was
effected.

Hence  we  are  justified  in  provisionally  accepting
the  parallelism  of  thought  and  feeling  as  a  fact,  and
assuming  that  the  conclusions  we  prove  concerning
the  thought  symbols  representing  reality  will  hold
good  of  the  facts.  At  any  rate  we  cannot  go  wrong
in  sticking  to  realities  which  unite  thought  and
feeling,  like  the  conscious  self.  It  may  be  false  to
be  guided  by  the  felt  objects  of  perception,  or  by  the
abstractions  of  our  thought,  but  the  procedure  by
means  of  selves  which  both  think  and  feel  must
■surely  be  true.  Thus  the  reality  of  the  Self  restores
to  us,  even  though  only  provisionally,  the  use  of  the
categories  and  first  principles  of  our  thought  with  a
view  to  the  interpretation  of  things.

And  it  justifies  further  a  bold  solution  of  the  diffi-
culty into  which  the  hopeless  conflict  of  thought  and
perception  had  involved  us.  We  had  ventured  to
express  a  suspicion  (ch.  iv.  §  23),  that  possibly  the
excessive  deference  shown  to  phenomenal  facts  and
the  perceptions  of  our  senses  was  responsible  for
the  dire  straits  to  which  Pessimism  reduced  us.
Pessimism  was  the  natural  inference  to  draw  from
the  apparent  supremacy  of  Becoming  in  the  pheno-
menal world,  and  Becoming  was  unknowable  and
irreconcilably  at  variance  with  the  principles  of  our
thought.  But  was  it  not,  after  all,  a  prejudice  to
suppose  the  appearance  of  Becoming  higher  than  the


AND UNION OF THOUGHT AND FEELING. 1 43

ideals  of  our  thought  ?  Why  should  not  our  thought
represent  a  higher  plane  of  truth  than  the  intrinsi-
cally unknowable  Becoming  of  nature  ?  why  should
•not  the  definiteness  and  permanence  of  our  ideas
approximate  more  closely  to  the  ultimate  constitu-
tion of  things  than  the  interminable  changes  of
phenomena  ?  Why  should  not  the  changes  of  the
Real,  instead  of  being  a  proof  of  the  impossibility  of
the  Ideal,  mark  rather  its  efforts  to  approximate  to
the  Ideal  ?

And  if  so,  the  persistent  fiction  by  which  we
interpreted  Becoming  by  the  categories  of  our
thought,  will  have  been  prompted  by  a  sounder  in-
stinct than  we  suspected,  and  will  be  justified  by  the
issue  :  it  is  not  that  our  thought  fails  to  penetrate
into  the  nature  of  things,  but  that  the  na.ture  of
things  is  as  yet  too  imperfect  to  come  up  to  the
ideals  of  our  thought ;  it  is  the  Real  that  is  tainted
with  unreality,  because  it  cannot  express  the  per-
fection of  the  ideal.

And  from  this  point  of  view  a  meaning  may  be
suggested  even  for  the  discrepancy  which  Scepti-
cism made  so  much  of,  between  our  thought  and  the
appearance  of  the  reality.  Might  not  the  very
extravagance  of  the  contradiction  between  what  is
seen  and  what  is  conceived,  taken  in  connection
with  the  inseparable  conjunction  of  thought  and
feeling,  be  intended  to  lead  us  by  a  certain  path  to
what  is  inferred,  to  raise  us  from  phenomenal
appearances  and  the  strife  of  inadequate  categories,
to  a  still  higher  plane  of  transcendent  reality,  capable
of  resolving  all  our  doubts  and  of  reconciling  fact
and  knowledge  ?

This  suggestion  is  one  which  may  hereafter  be
verified ; at  present it must appear  an  arbitrary


144 ,  RECONSTRUCTION.

cutting  of  the  Gordian  knot.  But  it  is  the  fact
alone  that  thought  and  feeling  are  alike  activities  of
the  Self,  the  fact  that  all  things  are  phenomena  for  a
conscious  soul,  which  renders  it  even  possible  to
assign  a  higher  authority  to  the  Ideal,  and  to  assert
that  it  will  in  the  end  be  found  to  possess  greater
reality.  And  this  fact  also  legalizes  what  would
appear  an  arbitrary  act  of  power,  for  in  appealing
to  the  Self  to  compose  the  conflict  between  thought
and  feeling,  we  are  appealing  to  the  legitimate
sovereign  of  both,  to  whom  they  both  belong,  and
who  has  a  right  to  arrange  the  order  of  their  merit.

Thus  the  assertion  of  the  reality  of  the  Self  affords
us  the  inestimable  gain  of  enabling  us  to  burst
through  the  fetters  of  Scepticism  and  to  clear  the
road  for  further  progress.

§  6.  And  from  the  same  principle  follows  a  cor-
ollary hardly  less  important.  We  are  now  in  a
position  to  protest  against  the  ridiculous  charge  of
anthropomorphism  which  is  so  frequently  brought
against  our  thought.  The  sceptic  might  indeed
have  dispensed  with  a  device  Avhich  more  properly
belongs  to  the  agnostic,  but  it  was  too  handy  not  to
be  utilized  when  thrown  in  his  way.  He  used  it
fairly  and  impartially  against  all  knowledge,  and  not
like  the  agnostic,  against  a  selected  portion  (ch.  iii.
§  4),  but  he  could  nqt  raise  it  to  the  dignity  of  a  vital
argument.  But  even  though  it  benefited  the  sceptic
little,  its  refutation  will  benefit  us  much.  We  shall
rightly  seize  the  opportunity  of  exposing  a  wide-
spread superstition,  which  should  really  by  this  time
have  ceased  to  figure  in  any  serious  philosophic
argument.  For  what  conceivable  meaning  can  be
attached  to  the  reproach  that  a  conception  is  anthro-
pomorphic ? Anthropomorphic  means  partaking  of


ANTHROPOMORPHISM INEVITABLE.,  1 45

the  nature  of  man,  and  what  human  reasoning  can
fail  to  render  the  peculiarities  of  the  human  reason  ?
Thus  the  prohibition  of  anthropomorphic  reasoning
is  the  prohibition  of  all  reasoning  in  the  supposed
interests  of  a  fiction  of  un-anthropomorphic  thought
(probably  of  the  Unknowable  ?)  which  can  never  be
known  to  exist,  and  which,  if  it  existed,  would  be
utterly  inconceivable  to  us.  Surely  it  is  too  plain
for  words  that  all  our  thought  and  all  our  feeling
must  be  antkropomorpkic.  The  proposal  to  avoid
anthropomorphism  is  as  absurd  as  the  suggestion
that  we  should  take  an  unbiassed  outside  view  of
ourselves  by  jumping  out  of  our  skin.

§  7.  If,  then,  everything  we  think  is  of  necessity
anthropomorphic,  the  only  possible  distinction  which
can  be  made  is  not  between  thought  which  is
anthropomorphic  and  thought  which  is  not,  but
between  good  and  bad  anthropomorphism.  Bad
anthropomorphism  is  of  several  sorts,  and  we  may
distinguish  between  t\i&  false  and  the  confused.  By
false  anthropomorphism  is  meant  the  ascription  to
beings  other  than  ourselves  of  qualities  or  attributes
which  we  know  they  cannot  possess  because  of  their
difference  from  ourselves.  This  is  exemplified  by
the  attribution  of  specifically  human  qualities  to  the
animals  below,  and  to  God  above  us.  When,  e.g.,  I
assert  that  my  dog  worships  me  as  a  god,  my  an-
thropomorphism is  false,  because  I  have  no  reason
to  ascribe  religious  emotions  to  dogs.  Similarly,
when  I  expect  God  to  eat  the  flesh  of  sacrificial
victims,  my  anthropomorphism  is  fake,  for  I  know-
that  God  is  a  spirit  and  not  a  fact  in  the  phenomenal
world.

§  8, By  confused  anthropomorphism  is  meant  that
which  arises  when,  starting  from  some  obvious  human

R.  ofS.  L


146  RECONSTRUCTION.

analogy,  our  principle  of  explanation  is  chopped  and
chipped,  in  deference  to  the  apparent  exigencies  of
the  facts,  until  its  elements  may  at  last  become
mutually  contradictory,  and  the  original  points  of
analogy  may  entirely  disappear.  We  have  already
had  occasion  to  criticize  such  confused  anthropo-
morphisms from  a  sceptical  point  of  view  (ch.  iii.  §  4),
and  shall  have  further  occasion  to  do  so  from  that
of  a  consistent  and  conscious  anthropomorphism.
And  yet  it  is  in  the  interests  of  these*  weatherbeaten
old  anthropomorphisms,  whose  original  shape  is  often
scarce  recognizable,  that  protests  are  generally  raised
against  anthropomorphism  which  keeps  closer  to  the
primary  principles  of  explanation.  This  confused
anthropomorphism,  though  not  often  wholly  wrong,
is  generally  ridiculous,  and  its  claims  to  superiority
over  the  rest  are  simply  monstrous.  For  even'
where  the  mutilations  it  has  suffered  in  the  course
of  its  chequered  career  have  not  rendered  it  unfit
for  service,  even  where  its  modifications  have
brought  it  nearer  to  the  facts,  it  is  a  lamentable
truth  that  just  in  proportion  as  it  departs  from  the
analogy  of  human  action  its  value  as  an  explanation
diminishes,  and  the  process  it  attempts  to  describe
becomes  as  unintelligible  as  it  was  before  explan-
ation was  essayed  at  all.  The  absolute  Infinite,  e.g.
may  be  the  full  and  final  explanation  of  all  things,
only  unfortunately  it  is  a  conception  which  has
exalted  itself  so  far  beyond  our  grasp  that  it  appears
to  the  human  reason  a  mere  bundle  of  contradict-
ions. Again,  when  a  soporific  virtue  is  assigned
as  the  reason  why  poppies  put  us  to  sleep,  and  a
universal  force  of  gravitation  as  the  reason  why
bodies  attract  one  another,  we  feel  that  the  value  of
the  explanation  has  been  reduced  to  a  minimum.


TRUE ANTHROPOMORPHISM.  I47

§  9.  The  ideal  of  true  anthropomorphism,  and
the  ideal  also  of  true  science,  would  be  realized,
when  all  our  explanations  made  use  of  no  principles ,
which  were  not  self-evident  to  human  minds,  self-
explanatory  to.  human  feelings.  Such  ideals  are,  it
-is  true,  remote  from  the  present  state  of  our  know-
ledge, but  we  may  lay  it  down  as  a  canon  of  inquiry-
that  a  principle  is  the  betteE,  other  things  being
equal,  the  more  closely  it  clings  to  the  analogy  of
human  agency,  the  more  completely  parallel  its
course  runs  to  the-  course  of  the  human  mind.

When  by  the  master-key  of  the  Self  anil  problems
have  been  undone,  when  all  things  have  been  shown
to  be  of  like  nature  with  the  mind  that  knows  them,
then  at  length  will  knowledge  be  perfect  and  per-
fectly anthropomorphic.

Our  care,  then,  must  be,  not  to  avoid  anthropo-
morphism, but.  to  avoid  bad  anthropomorphism^  not
to  allow  the  inevitable  anthropomorphism,  of  our
explanations  to  become  confused  or  inconsistent,  or
to  lag  behind  the  conceptions  of  our  highest  aspir-
ations.

We  start,  then?,  with  the-  certainty  of  our  own
existence,  on  the  basis  and  analogy  of  ■which'='the
world  must  be  interpreted..  '"'


CHAPTER  VI.

THE  METHOD  OF  PHILOSOPHY.

§  I.  We  are  now  in  a  position  to  embark  upon
the  important  subject  of  the  method  of  philosophy,
on  which  it  may  reasonably  be  suspected  that  the
failure  or  success  of  a  philosophy  will  depend.

Among  the  possible  claimants  to  the  honours  of
the  true  method  we  may  dismiss  two,  viz.,  the
epistemological  and  the  psychological.

The  epistemological  method  must  be  rejected  for
the  reasons  already  stated  (ch.  ii.  §§  13-17).  It  suc-
cumbed both  to  scepticism  and  to  science  :  to  science
because  science  could  not  admit  that  any  theory  of
knowledge  had  a  right  to  treat  the  mind  as  a  fixed
product  that  could  be  exhaustively  analysed,  instead
of  being  an  organically  living  and  developing
growth ;  to  scepticism,  because  its  denial  of  the
ultimate  reality  of  the  Self  (ch.  v.  §  4)  incapacitated
it  from  transcending  the  antithesis  of  thought  and
reality,  and  because  it  could  never  show  that  its
assertions  held  good  of  the  real  world.

The  psychological  method '  is  subject  to  the  same
defects  as  the  epistemological  in  a  higher  degree,
and  possesses  also  some  peculiar  to  itself.  It  also
is  invalidated  by  the  growth  of  the  mind,  which  it
attempts  to  make  the  sole  standard  of  knowledge.
The  human  mind,  as  it  now  is,  appears  to  science

to  be  a  transitory phase of  a  development  from

148


NOT THE METHOD OF PSYCHOLOGY.  1 49

protoplasm  into  beings  who  may  be  reasonably  sup-
posed to  be  incalculably  superior  to  existing  man,
and  science  cannot  possibly  make  any  single  term
of  this  development  the  measure  of  all  things.  To
understand  that  development  it  must  be  of  supreme
importance  to  discover  the  origins  of  what  is  in
what  was,  and  its  destiny  and  final  condition  in
what  will  be,  but  it  is  of  subordinate  interest  to
know  what  it  happens  to  be  at  any  fleeting  moment
of  its  evolution.  The  actual  condition,  therefore,  of
the  human  mind  cannot  by  itself  afford  a  universal
criterion  of  the  world  ;  for  it  is  necessarily  imperfect
and  points  back  to  a  past  out  of  which  it  has  deve-
loped, and  forwards  to  a  future  which  it  fore-
shadows. The  fact  that  the  mind  has  a  history  is
fatal  to  the  claims  of  the  psychological  method,  for
it  destroys  the  final  authority  of  its  actual  deliver-
ances. And  of  that  history  the  psychological
method  cannot  take  account  without  ceasing  to  be
psychological,  and  submitting  to  the  restrictions  of
historical  and  metaphysical  methods.

And  besides  this  fatal  disability,  the  psychological
method  involves  other  inherent  defects.

It  is  particularly  liable  to  the  vice  of  false  abstract-
ion. Not  only  is  it  constantly  tempted  to  draw
hard  and  fast  lines  between  the  various  "  faculties  '"
of  the  soul  and  to  -forget  its  fundamental  unity,  but
it  is  bound  to  repeat  the  same  error  in  its  treatment
of  the  relation  of  the  mind  to  "  external "  things,
and  to  consider  it  in  isolation  from  the  world  in
which  it  lives.  It  cannot  treat  the  mind  and  the
world  as  different  aspects  of  the  same  fact,  as  dif-
ferent sides  of  the  same  stress,  as  the  mutually  im-
plicated action  and  reaction  of  interacting  factors.
And  yet  it  may  be  boldly  laid  down  that  no  ex-


150  THE METHOD OF PHILOSOPHY.

planation  of  the  world  can  be  successful  which  for-
gets that  the  world  is  essentially  one  and  indivisible,
and  that  its  parts  cannot  be  explained  in  isolation,
but  only  in  conjunction.  Man  is  the  microcosm,
and  cannot  be  understood  except  in  the  context  of
the  macrocosm  which  environs  him  and  with  which
he  interacts.  Hence  it  is  a  fruitless  waste  of  labour
to  give  isolated  explanations  of  this  faculty  or  that,
to  trace  the  genesis  of  this  sense  or  that,  for  they
all  can  be  assigned  -their  proper  place  only  by  a
reference  to  the  whole.

§  2.  The  method  of  philosophy,  therefore,  must
be  either  physical  -or  metaphysical.

'I.  Of  these,  the  physical  may  more  properly  be
^called  the  pseudo-metaphysical,  because  it  attempts
to  extend  the  method  of  the  physical  sciences  to  the
solution  of  ultimate  questions,  z,^.,  to  metaphysics.

■II.  The  second  method  may  be  called  the  ab-
stract metaphysical,  because  it  attempts  to  state  the
whole  truth  of  all  reality  in  terms  of  thought  ab-
stractions.

III.  Thirdly,  the4;rue  method  may  be  called  the
concrete  metaphysical,  as  combining  the  advantages
-and  avoiding  the  defects  of  the  other  two.

Thus,  e.g.,  the  first  explains  the  higher  by  the
lower,  since  the  objects  of  the  physical  sciences  rank
lower  in  .the  hierarchy  of  existence  than  the  mind ;
while  the  other  two  agree  in  explaining  the  lower
by  the  higher.  But  in  very  different  ways.  For
while  the  higher  of  abstract  metaphysics  is  a  mere
abstraction,  selected  at  random  out  of  the  plenitude
of  existence  with  which  it  has  no  intrinsic  connect-
ion, the  higher  of  the  concrete  metaphysical  method
is  organically  connected  with  the  lower.  Thus  it
lescapes  the  constant  temptation  of  the  first  to  deny


THE PSEUDO-METAPHYSICAL METHOD.  15I

the  higher,  and  of  the  second  to  ignore  the  lower.
Again,  the  pseudo-metaphysical  and .  the  concrete
metaphysical  agree  in  rejecting  the  doctrine  of  the
abstract  metaphysical  as  to  the  difference  in  kind
between  the  higher  and  the  lower,  but  with  very
different  motives.  The  one  asserts  the  connection
of  higher  and  lower  in  order  to  degrade  the  higher,
the  other  in  order  to  redeem  the  lower.

But  it  is  necessary  to  consider  the  strength  and
the  weakness  of  each  method  in  detail.

§  3.  I.  The  pseudo-metaphysical  method  puts
forward  the  method  of  science  as  the  method  of
philosophy.  But  it  is  doomed  to  perpetual  failure.
It  is  not  merely  that,  as  we  saw  (ch.  ii.  §  2),  the
mental  attitude  required  in  science  and  in  philo-
sophy is- different,  but  that  the  scientific  ^material  it
uses  is  both  inadequate  and  intractable.

It  is  inadequate  because  the  physical  sciences  are
all  based  on  all  sorts  of  assumed  first  principles,
often  of  the  confused,  anthropomorphic  order  (ch.  v.
§  8),  which  are  only  valid  within  the  limits  of  each
science,  and  are  often  mutually  conflicting,  like,  the
assumption ,  of  the  theory  of  gravitation  that  all
matter  gravitates,  and  that  of  the  undulatory  theory
that  luminiferous  ether  does .  not  (ch.  iii.  §  9),  or  as
completely  devoid  of  ultimate  validity  as  the  mathe-
matical use  of  impossible  quantities.^ And  from  a

'  1  The  use  of  graphic  formulae  in  chemistry  may  be  instanced.
To  represent  simple  and  indivisible  atoms  as  equipped  with  all
sorts  of  hooks  and  bonds  for  grappling  with  their  neighbours  (or
themselves)  is  impossible  mythology,  especially  when  we  reflect
that  multiplicity  of  parts  seems  excluded  by  the  conception  of
an  atom.  Or  again,  what  are  we  to  say  of  "  negative  elements  "
diminishing  the  atomic  weight  of  the  bodies  with  which  they  com-
bine ?  Such  a  dematerializing  agency  is  surely  a  mere  symbol,
and  cannot  possibly  correspond  to  any  actual  fact.


152  ■ THE METHOD OF PHILOSOPHY.

scientific  point  of  view  no  objection  can  be  taken  to
the  use  of  serviceable  fictions,  however  discordant
and  contradictory  they  may  be,  so  long  as  they  are
really  useful  to  the  particular  sciences.  On  the
other  hand,  it  is  just  the  business  of  philosophy  to
reinterpret  the.se  fundamental  assumptions  of  the
sciences,  and  to  reconcile  their  conflicts,  by  showing
that  they  are  not  ultimate  truths  but  convenient
formulae  for  special  purposes.  But  for  this  very
reason  they  cannot  form  the  basis  of  philosophy.
It  is  philosophy  alone  which  renders  them  capable
of  forming  parts  of  a  single  and  consistent  system
of  knowledge.

And  the  data  supplied  by  the  physical  sciences
are  intractable,  because  they  are  data  of  a  lower
order  than  the  facts  they  are  to  explain.

The  objects  of  the  physical  sciences  form  the
lower  orders  in  the  hierarchy  of  existence,  more
extensive  but  less  significant.  Thus  the  atoms  of
the  physicists  may  indeed  be  found  in  the  organizat-
ion of  conscious  beings,  but  they  are  subordinate  :
a  living  organism  exhibits  actions  which  cannot  be
formulated  by  tjie  laws  of  physics  alone ;  man  is
material,  but  he  is  also  a  great  deal  more.  Again,
all  bodies  gravitate,  but  the  activities  >  of  living,  to
say  nothing  of  rational,  bodies  cannot  be  explained
by  the  action  of  gravitation  alone.  So  chemical
affinities  are  presupposed  in  biological  actions,  but
yet  life  is  something  more  than  and  beyond  chemical
affinity.  And  it  is  the  same  inherent  flaw  of  the
method  which  is  displayed,  not  only  in  the  palpable
absurdity  of  explaining  biological  facts  by  chemical
or  mechanical  facts,  but  also  in  that  .of  explaining
the  rational  or  moral  by  mere  biology.

The pseudo- metaphysical method of physical


VIRTUES  AND  VICES  OF  THE  METHOD  OF  SCIENCE. 1 53

science,  which  of  necessity  must  try  to  explain  the
higher  by  the  lower,  constantly  fails  to  include  the
whole  of  the  higher,  and  is  therefore  constantly
driven  to  deny  what  it  cannot  explain,  and  to  reduce
the  higher  to  the  lower.  But  though  at  first  it
seems  plausible  to  explain  the  higher  and  fuller  by
something  which  seems  simpler  because  less  signific-
ant, by  dint  of  leaving  out  its  surplus  meaning,
this  process  becomes  more  and  more  difficult  the
further  it  is  carried,  and  if  it  were  carried  to  its  con-
sistent conclusion,  it  would  be  seen  to  refute  itself.
It  would  end  by  explaining  all  things  by  that  which
is  nothing  in  itself,  and  has  meaning  only  in  relat-
ion to  thq  things  it  is  supposed  to  explain.  The
further  we  carry  our  researches  into  the  lower,  the
more  it  appears  that  it  is  not  really  simple,  but  only
vaguer  and  more  indefinite,  and  that  the  lack  of
differentiation  indicates  not  that  we  have  got  down
to  the  fundamental  principles  of  the  complex,  but
that  it  arises  from  a  confounding  of  all  the  distinct-
ions which  enable  us  to  comprehend  the  thing.

To  take  only  the  one  example  of  protoplasm,
which  is  the  starting-point  of  biology  (itself  one  of
the  higher  sciences).  Por  bjiology  protoplasm  is  ultim-
ate :  it  can  no  longer  be  derived  from  any  lower
and  "  simpler  "  form  of  life.  It  can  be  defined  only
in  terms  of  what  it  becomes  or  develops  into.  And
yet  this  "  simple  "  protoplasm  performs  all  the  funct-
ions which  in  its  differentiated  developments  fall  to
the  share  of  the  most  various  structures  and  the
most  various  faculties.  It  sees  and  hears  and  smells
and  tastes  and  feels,  thinks  and  wills  and  moves,  it
absorbs  and  excretes,  it  grows  and  reproduces  itself,
and  all  without  any  discoverable  difference  of  struc-
ture. What then have we gained by deriving


154  THE METHOD OF PHILOSOPHY.

differences  we  cari  see  and  partly  understand  from
hypothetical  differences  which  are  invisible  and  in-
comprehensible ?  Is  the  mystery  lessened  by  being
relegated  to  the  mythiccLl  region  of  the  unknowable
and  imperceptible,  and  is  it  not  in  very  deed  an
explanation  ignoti  per  ignotius  ? ,

But  we  shall  have  abundant  illustration  of  this
defect  of  the  method  hereafter  (ch..  vii.*  §§  4-14).
At  present  it  is  mor^  pleasant  to  turn  from  the
intrinsic  weakness  of  the  method  to  its  intrinsic
strength.

Its  great  merit  is  the  emphasis  it  lays  on  the  law
of  continuity.  It  refuses  to  draw  hard  and  fast
divisions  anywhere.  It  does  not  sever  the  con-
nections at  the  articulations  of  the  cosmos.  It  does
not  regard  the  higher  as  ioid  coelo  different  from  the
lower ;  it  never  loses  its  grasp  qf  the  essential
unity  of  things,  even  though  it  may  sometimes  drag
what  is  lofty  in  the  mire.  But  even  in  its  errors  it
is  not  unprofitable.  The  connections  it  establishes
between  the  higher  and  the  lower  serve  to  bridge
the  moats  which  dissever  the  continuity  of  the
universe,  and  will  stand  firm,  even  though  their
architects  were  mistaken  in  their  ulterior  aims.  The
scientific  truths  it  discovers  are  so  much  gain  to
those  who  utilize  the  material  more  wisely,  and,  up
to  a  certain  point,  it  gives  us  pure  truth.  We  need
therefore  merely  pull  down  certain  excrescences  and
extravagances,  and  we  shall  have  firm  foundations
of  science  and  material  of  inestimable  value.  We
may  say  then,  that  the  pseudo-metaphysical  method
is  not  so  much  false  as  insufficient.

§  4.  II.  The  abstract  metaphysical  method,
which  has  been  the  method  hitherto  most  frequent
in  philosophy,  differs  widely  from  the  pseudo-meta-


THE METHOD OF ABSTRACT METAPHYSIC. 1 55

physical  in  its  character.  It  promises  much  more,
but  accomplishes  much  less.  Indeed,  we  are  con-
stantly tempted  to  assert  that  it  has  accomplished
nothing,  and  to  say  that  science  has  never  been
assisted,  but  often  been  perverted  by  metaphysics.
But  such  ebullitions  of  pardonable  impatience  would
ignore  the  immense  impulse,  the  far-reaching  sug-
gestions which  the  whole  intellectual  and  emotional
life  of  men  has  often  received  from  metaphysical
doctrines.  But  if  the  metaphysical  method  is  more
suggestive,  it  is  also  less  sound.  It  produces  artificial
constructions  which  charm  us  by  the  harmonious
interdependence  of  their  parts,  but  which  are  fatally
unstable.  The  demolition  of  a  single  part  drags
the  whole  edifice  to  the  ground,  and  in  the  common
ruin  all  its  outworks  perish.  And  so  metaphysical
systems  have  seemed  like  a  succession  of.  beauteous
bubbles  blown  from  the  reflective  pipe  of  genius,
which  delighted  us  for  a  season  and  then  were  dis-
sipated into  thin  air.  Where  are  the  metaphysical
systems  of  the  earlier  Greeks  or  later  Germans  ?
Their  multitudinous  shades  are  buried  in  the  bulky
tomes  of  our  histories  of  philosophy,  and  but  rarely
stalk  about  the  earth  in  the  eccentricities  of  living
representatives.  The  fatal  flaw  in  "almost  all  the
metaphysics  of  the  past  was  their  abstractness,  and
this  is  a  flaw  which  far  exceeds  their  merits.  For
what  does  it  avail  that  the  metaphysical  method
rightly  protests  against  the  explanation  of  the
higher  by  the  lower,  if  it  confines  itself  to  a  mere
protest,  to  a  rnere  assertion  of  their  difference  ?

To  tell  us  that  the  spiritual  is  not  natural,  that
soul  is  not  body,  that  God  is  not  man,  that  appear-
ance is  not  reality,  is  to  tell  us  nothing.  All  this
does  is  to  constitute  a  difference  in  kind  between


156  THE METHOD OF PHILOSOPHY.

the  higher  and  the  lower,  to  break  in  two  the  unity
of  the  universe,  to  open  an  impassable  abyss  between
here  and  hereafter,  so  that  they  that  would  pass
from  earth  to  heaven  cannot  pass  from  facts  to
metaphysics,  while  those  who  breathe  the  unsubstant-
ial air  of  metaphysical  meditation  can  never  reach
the  gross  but  solid  facts.  To  assert  the  difference
between  the  higher  and  the  lower  is  not  enough  ;
we  require  a  method  which  will  also  bring  out  their
connection.

§  5.  After  this  breach  in  the  law  of  continuity,
and  the  assertion  of  the  utter  difference  of  higher
and  lower,  the  method  of  abstract  metaphysics
develops  in  two  ways.'

\{  it  retains  any  consciousness  of  the  lower  earthly
plane  at  all,  the  difference  between  the  higher  and
the  lower  becomes  accentuated  into  antagonism.
The  spiritual  becomes  the  supernatural,  the  pheno-
menal becomes  the  unreal,  the  body  is  opposed  to
the  soul  in  everlasting  conflict,  man  to  God  and
earth  to  heaven.  There  results,  first,  an  irreconcil-
able dualism  of  the  higher  and  lower,  and  in  the
end  the  lower  or  physical  plane  is  regarded  as  the
sphere  of  the  principle  of  evil.  It  is  well  known
how  near  many  Manichsean  heresies,  as  well  as
certain  forms  of  orthodoxy,  come  to  making  the
Devil  the  ruler  of  the  world,  from  whose  dominion
the  individual  can  only  escape  by  special  miraculous
grace,  and  the  whole  ascetic  view  of  life,  once  so
widely  prevalent,  really  results  from  the  same  tend-
ency. And  that  these  consequences  are  not  due
to  the  bias  of  individuals,  but  inherent  in  the  method,
is  shown  also  in  the  history  of  pre-Christian  philo-
sophy. In  their  asceticism  and  contempt  for  the
material  the  Neo-Platonists  yielded  not  a  whit  to


THE ANTAGONISM OF HIGHER AND LOWER. 1 57

the  most  enthusiastic  monk.  And  yet  they  might
Justly  trace  their  intellectual  descent  from  the  most
Hellenic  of  Hellenic  philosophers,  and  yet  they  are
connected  by  an  unbroken  chain  of  logical  necessity
with  the  doctrine  of  Plato.  And  indeed  we  can
find  in  Plato  both  the  source  and  the  reason  of
Neo-Platonic  asceticism.  For  the  Platonic  system
is  perhaps  the  most  purely  meta:physical  the  world
has  ever  seen.  To  Plato  metaphysical  "  Ideas "
abstracted  from  phenomena  were  the  only  true
reality,  while  the  phenomena  of  sense  were  real
.only  as  partaking  in  them.  The  result  is  that  the
connection  of  the  Ideas  with  the  Sensible  becomes
entirely  unintelligible  (cf.  iii.  §  15,  note) :  the  contrast
has  become  so  sharp  that  union  becomes  inconceiv-
able, and  Plato  himself  admits  that  he  cannot  explain
how  sensible  things  partake  of  the  Ideas.  And,  as
might  have  been  expected,  his  metaphysical  dualism
spreads  from  the  theoretic  to  the  practical  sphere,
and  in  his  latest  and  maturest  work  we  find  him
seriously  propounding  the  theory  of  an  evil  World-
Soul,  the  action  of  which  is  to  differentiate  the
character  of  the  imperfect  world  of  Becoming  from
the  perfection  of  the  world  of  Ideas.^ But  from

1  Laws  X.  896D,  898c.  It  seems  hopeless  to  deny  this  anti-
thesis of  the  phenomenal  and  the  real  on  the  a /wn  ground  that
Plato  was  too  great  a  philosopher  to  be  a  dualist,  and  for  this
reason  to  assume  that  a  reconciliation  of  the  Ideas  and  the  Sensible
must  be  found  somewhere  in  his  system.  For  it  is  no  derogation
to  Plato's  genius  to  say  that  he  failed  to  achieve  what  no  philo-
sopher has  succeeded  in  achieving,  viz.,  the  impossible  task  of
reconciling  the  higher  and  the  lower  by  abstract  metaphysics.
And  at  all  events  Plato  showed  more  discernment  than  his  critics
in  seeing  where  the  real  crux  lay,  and  in  perceiving  that  its  solution
was,  on  his  principles  and  by  his  method,  impossible.  And  if  a
way  out  of  the  difficulty  was  discovered  by  Plato,  is  it  not  astonish-
ing that  all  his  successors  should  not  only  have  failed  to  discover


158  THE METHOD OF PHILOSOPHY.

the  admission  of  an  evil  and  irrational  principle  in
the  physical  world,  at  war  with  the  principle  of
Good  and  Reason,  to  that  of  its  supremacy  in  the
visible  world,  is  only  a  small  step,  easily  forced  upon
the  mind  by  the  evils  of  life,  and  hence  we  find  it
constantly  and  consistently  taken  in  the  Gnostic
and  Neo- Platonic  speculations.  Thus  we  find  the
abstract  metaphysical  rriethod,  in  one  of  its  develop-
ments, passing  from  the  dualism  of  the  Ideal  and
the  Real  to  their  inherent  conflict  and  to  final
Pessimism.  The  separation  of  the  physical  and  the
metaphysical,  the  x'^P''°'M'°'^  which  the  acute  criti-
cism of  Plato's  great  disciple,  Aristotle,  detected
as  the  central  flaw  of  the  Platonic  system,  has
avenged  itself  by  a  fearful  penalty.

§  6.  But  the  metaphysical  method  may  essay  to
rid  itself  of  the  contrast  of  higher  and  lower  by  a
still  more  heroic  remedy.  Just  as  the  pseudo-
metaphysical  method  yielded  to  the  temptation  of
denying  the  higher,  so  conversely  the  metaphysical
method  may  yield  to  the  temptation  of  ignoring  the
lower.  The  metaphysician  wings  his  flight  to  the
invisible,  and  loses, sight  of  earth  altogether.  He,
closes  his  eyes  and  hardens  his  heart  to  the  facts  of
life.  He  declares  unreal  whatever  does  not  fit  into
the  narrow  limits  of  his  theories,  on  the  ground  that
whatever  is  real  is  rational,  and  leaving  to  his  dis-
ciples a  glittering  legacy  of  magniloquent  but  un-
meaning phrases,  he  vanishes  into  the  air  before  he
can  be  caught  and  questioned  about  the  meaning
of  his  enchantments.  But  even  he  cannot  outsoar
the  atmosphere  which  supports  him :  in  the  end
the  irresistible  attraction  of  earth  brings  him  down

it  in  Plato,  but  have  themselves  one  and  all  come  to  grief  over
this  same  difficulty  ?


IIEGELS "metaphysics  159

with  a  fall  more  dire  than  that  of  Icarus  :  stripped
of  the  false  plumes  in  which  he  had  counterfeited
the  divine  bird  of  Zeus,  and  pursued  by  the  imprec-
ations of  those  who  discovered  too  late  the  cheat
which  had  deceived  him,  and  at  length  perceive  that
a  haughty  scorn  of  the  phenomenal  does  not  satisfy
the  demands  of  reality,  and  that  empty  abstractions
are  not  the  staff  of  life,  he  perishes  miserably,  and
leaves  lasting  discredit  on  a  subject  which  seems
composed  of  a:  series  of  splendid  failures.

Of  this  type  of  metaphysics  we  may  talce  as
examples  Eleaticism  in  ancient,  and  Hegelianism  in
modern  times.  The  Eleatic  philosophy  seems  to
have  simply  ignored  the  phenomenal,  and  to  have
consisted  in  an  emphatic  assertion  of  the  abstract
unity  of  the  universe.  Its  ingenious  polemic  against
the  possibility  of  Becoming  has  been  preserved  in
Zeno's  famous  fallacie's  about  motion,  and  "Achilles
and  the  Tortoise "  and  "  The  Arrow "  will  ever
retain  their  charm — even  though  the  world  has  long
ago  replied  to  the  system  which  they  illustrated  and
defended  by  a  solvitur  ambulando.

The  same  praise  of  ingenuity  may  be  bestowed
also  upon  the  Hegelian  system,  which  is  doubtless
the  most  ingenious  system  of  false  pretences  that
adorns  the  history  of  philosophy.  For  even  its
metaphysical  character  is  largely  a  pretence.  It
pretends  to  give  us  metaphysics  where  it  really  has
no  business  to  be  more  than  epistemological.  We
fancy  it  is  speaking  of  metaphysical  realities  when
it  is  really  dealing  with  logical  categories.  It  pre-
tends to  give  us  a  thought- process  incarnate  in
reality,  but  the  thought  remains  motionless,  and  its
transitions  are  really  affected  by  the  surreptitious
introduction  of  phenomenal  Becoming. It  pretends


l6o  THE METHOD OF PHILOSOPHY.

to  deal  with  the  realities  of  life,  but  it  talks  of  abstract-
ions throughout.  It  pretends  to  explain  all  things,
and  then  ascribes  inconvenient  facts  to  the  "  con-
tingency of  matter,"  i.e.  it  pretends  to  be  a  rational
explanation  of  the  world,  and  then  admits  an  element
of  irrationality.  It  pretends  to  solve  all  practical
problems,  but  finally  turns  out  to  be.  necessarily
incapable  of  solving  a  single  one.  It  professes  to
give  categorical  answers  to  disputed  questions,  but
its  most  definite  assertions  are  rendered  worthless
by  the  taint  of  a  subtle  ambiguity.  It  seems  a  hard
saying,  but  it  is  no  more  than  what  is  strictly  demon-
strable, that  Hegelianism  never  anywhere  gets
within  sight  of  a  fact,  or  within  touch  of  reality.
And  the  reason  is  simple :  you  cannot,  without
paying  the  p'enalty,  substitute  abstractions  for  real-
ities ;  the  thought-symbol  cannot  do  duty  for  the
thing  symbolized ;  the  development  of  a  logical
category  is  not  the  same  as  the  evolution  of  a  real
individual.  The  "  dialectical  process,"  if  we  admit
the  phrase,  is  logical  and  not  in  Time,  and  has
nothing  to  do  with  the  worjd  process  in  Time.
Hegelianisiji  is  the  greatest  system  of  abstract  meta-
physics, because  it  starts  from  the  highest  abstract-
,ion  and  makes  the  most  persistent  effort  to  work
down  to  reality  from  it,  because  its  abstractions  are
carried  out  most  ruthlessly,  because  its  confusions
are  concealed  most  artfully,  and  because  it  hence
seems  to  come  closer  to  reality  than  systems  which
stopped  short  of  such  perfect  illusion.

But  for  these  very  reasons  it  is  also  the  falsest  of
abstract  metaphysical  systems,  if  degrees  be  admitted,
where  all  are  fundamentally  false.

§  7.  For  the  truth  is  that  any  theory  which  puts
forward  an  abstraction  as  the  ultimate  explanation


ABSTRACT FIRST PRINCIPLES ALL BAD.  l6l

of  all  things  is  false.  It  is  no  matter  what  we  call
it,  whether  it  is  dubbed  the  Absolute,  or  the  Un-
knowable, or  the  Idea,  or  the  Will,  or  the  Uncon-
scious, or  Matter,  or  Reason,  the  Good  or  the  In-
finite. Nor  is  it  a  relevant  difference  whether  the
fundamental  principle  be  picked  up  out  of  the  sphere
of  material  or  of  immaterial  things,  and  whether  we
pronounce  that  the  All  is  the  One,  or  Number,  or
a  material  "  element,"  like  Fire,  Water,  or  Air.  For
all  these  first  principles  are  abstractions  ;  they  will
give  partial  interpretations  of  aspects  of  things,
more  or  less  successful  according  to  the  importance
of  the  element  denoted  by  the  abstraction,  and  ac-
cording to  the  care  with  which  it  has  been  selected.
But  not  one  of  them  can  ever  be  wholly  successful,
for  each  of  them  is  a  part  which  cannot  include  the
whole.  The  efforts,  therefore,  of  such  theories  may
present  to  the  astounded  spectator  the  most  surpris-
ing feats  of  mental  acrobatism,  but  they  must  be  as
fruitless  as  a  man's  attempt  to  put  himself  into  his
own  pocket.

§  8.  In  addition  to  the  evils  of  the  -j^wpiarixoi  involved
in  the  abstractions  of  mere  metaphysics,  further
difficulties  arise  out  of  the  random  and  haphazard
way  in  which  they  arrive  at  their  first  principles^
Philosophies  are,  for  the  most  part,  generated  by
reflection  upon  the  difficulties  of  the  theories  of  the
past,  and  so  work  on  from  age  to  age  in  the  same
old  narrow  and  vicious  groove.  Hence  the  history
of  philosophy  presents  a  series  of  unprofitable  con-
troversies, like  that  as  to  the  nature  of  universals,
as  to  the  origin  of  knowledge,  as  to  the  existence  of
an  "  external "  world,  etc.,  which  would  either  never
have  been  raised  or  rapidly  adjusted  if  philosophy
had  kept  in  closer  contact  with  the  real  problems  of

R.  of  s.  M


1 62  THE METHOD OF PHILOSOPHY.

life,  and  shown  itself  more  sensitive  to  outside  in-
fluences.

And  it  is  manifest  that  this  secta;rian  adherence  to
the  traditional  formulation  of  philosophic  questions
affords  but  the  slenderest  guarantee  that  the  first
principles  of  philosophy  will  be  such  as  to  be
applicable  to  any  other  subject.  Such  principles
have  no  organic  connexion  with  the  positive
sciences,  and  very  often  must  be  incapable  of
utilizing  scientific  facts.  Hence  the  general  attitude
of  abstract  metaphysics  is  anti-scientific,  and  hence
the  antagonism  of  physical  science  and  philosophy,
which  in  the  present  day  is  so  detrimental  to  the
best  interests  of  both.

Thus  each  of  the  two  methods  on  which  the
human  mind  has  hitherto  placed  its  chief  reliance
in  order  to  achieve  the  Herculean  task  of  silencing
the  Sphinx,  is  vitiated  by  its  peculiar  disabilities.
The  pseudo-metaphysical  method  may  be  compared
to  an  earth-born  Antaeus,  whose  strength  fails  as
.  soon  as  he  is  raised  above  the  ground  ;  the  abstract
metaphysical  to  a  flighty  Icarus,  who  reaches  the
ground  only  in  his  death.  The  one  is  of  use  only
on  the  earth,  and  the  other  only  in  the  air,  whereas
the  winged  Sphinx  is  equally  at  home  in  either
element.

§  9.  We  require,  then,  a  method  which  combines
the  excellencies  of  both  the  pseudo-metaphysical
and  the  abstract  metaphysical,  if  philosophy  is  to  be
possible  at  all.  It  must  be  metaphysical,  and  yet
not  abstract ;  it  must  agree  with  the  metaphysical  in
explaining  the  lower  by  the  higher,  and  with  the
pseudo-metaphysical  in  admitting  their  intrinsic  like-
ness and  the  continuity  of  all  existence.  And  so
it  must  avoid  the  weaknesses  of  the  others. Un-


TRUE METAPHYSIC BASED ON SCIENCE.  1 63

like  the  first,  it  must  explain  the  less  known  and
less  intelligible  lower,  i.e.,  the  more  remote  from
human  nature  by  the  more  known  and  more  in-
telligible, i.e.  that  which  is  nearer  to  human  nature.
Unlike  the  second,  it  must  avoid  the  -j^wpia-ixo?  of
phenomenal  and  real,  the  abstract  opposition  of
ideal  and  actual.  Unlike  the  second,  too,  its
principles  must  be  organically  connected  with  the
sciences,  aided  by  them,  and  reciprocating  their
assistance.

How  can  this  be  ?  Simply  by  basing  our  meta^
physics  on  our  science.  Our  metaphysics  must  be
concrete,  and  not  abstract ;  they  must  be  the  inquiry
into  the  ultimate  nature  of  concrete  realities,  and
not  of  thought  abstractions.  In  other  words,  they
must  proceed  from  the  phenomenally  real  to  the
ultimately  real,  from  science  to  metaphysics.  And
so  the  method  of  philosophy  must  utilize  the  results
of  science  ;  metaphysical- theories  must  be  suggested
by  scientific  researches,  and  must  approve  themselves
by .  in  their  turn  suggesting  scientific  advances.
Their  principles  of  explanation  must  be  systematic-
ally based  on  the  sciences,  and  not  picked  up  at
random,  and  their  function  must  be  to  systematize
the  fundamental  principles  of  the  various  sciences;.
Metaphysic,  in  short,  must  again  become  what  it
once  was  in  the  time  of  Aristotle — the  science  of
ultimate  existence,  the  science  of  the  first  principles
of  the  physical  sciences.

§  10.  But  is  such  a  method  more  than  the  vision
of  an  imagination  which  has  soared  too  far  above
the  region  of  the  actual  ?  Is  such  a  reconciliation
of  science  and  metaphysics  possible  at  all  ?

It  is  certainly  extremely  difficult.

In the first  place, because of the scarcity of


164  THE METHOD OF PHILOSOPHY.

philosophical  piredecessors.  With  the  mention  of
Berkeley's  "  spirits  "  and  Leibnitz's  "  monads  "  we
have  almost  exhausted  the  list  of  philosophical
principles  which  are  not  liable  to  the  charge  of  being
abstractions,  or  of  explaining  the  higher  by  the
lower.  Aristotle  also  regarded  the  concrete  indi-
vidual as  the  primary  reality  {Trpwrn  ova-la),  and  in
his  practice  gives  us  an  unequalled  example  of  the
way  in  which  science  and  metaphysics  should  work
together.  Much  help  may  be  derived  from  all
these,  and  in  questions  of  method,  especially  from
Aristotle.

§  II.  But  even  with  the  utmost  help  and  in-
genuity, our  task  is  still  tremendous.  Its  difficulty
arises  from  two  main  causes.

(i)  Our  imperfect  knowledge  of  the  lower.

(2)  Our  imperfect  attainment  of  the  higher.

These  two  causes  conspire  to  make  most  of  the
facts  in  the  world  unintelligible.  We  have  to  ac-
cept them  as  facts  for  which  we  can  give  no  reason.
Why  does  gravity  vary  inversely  as  the  square  of
the  distance  ?  A  simple  fact  like  this  will  defy  ex-
planation for  many  an  age,  for  it  is  the  lowest  and
most  general  of  physical  facts,  and  therefore  the  last
to  be  rendered  intelligible  from  the  point  of  view  of
the  higher.  For  just  as  in  ascending  a  mountain  the
higher  peaks  are  the  first  to  be  perceived,  the  first
whose  groupings  can  be  understood,  just  as  it  is  not
until  we  reach  the  summit  that  we  rise  to  a  free
purview  of  the  whole,  and  that  the  inter-connection
of  the  lowlands  and  the  direction  of  the  valleys  can
be  made  out ;  so  in  philosophy  we  can  only  catch
partial  and  misleading  views  of  what  is  below,  while
we  toil  through  the  dense  forest  of  prejudice,  and
can  only  gain  mysterious  hints  of  what  lies  beyond,


THE  HIGHER  LIFE  RICHER  THOUGH  UNIMAGINABLE. 165

while  what  is  above  is  shrouded  in  the  mists  of  early
morning.

§  12.  And  not  only  are  we  hampered  by  pur
avowed  ignorance  of  the  lower,  but  in  view  of  the
slight  deference  which  the  scheme  of  things  pays  to
man  and  his  desires,  we  must  admit  also  that  little
progress  has  been  made  in  the  attainment  of  the
higher.  We  are  after  all  far  nearer  to  the  beast
than  to  the  angel,  far  closer  to  hell  than  to  heaven.
We  can  feel  the  throb  of  brutal  instincts,  we  can
conceive  the  anguish  of  undying  torment ;  but  the
calm  of  superhuman  virtue  leaves  us  cold,  and
visions  of  eternal  bliss  seem  empty  and  unmeaning.

Yet  this  is  in  the  nature  of  things  inevitable.
The  higher  can  in  a  way  understand  the  lower,  by
tracing  in  it  the  germs  the  higher  has  developed.
But  the  lower  cannot  in  the  same  way  anticipate  the
higher.  In  the  case  of  existences  higher  than  our-
selves, we  can  ascribe  to  them  the  possession  of
certain  qualities  sensu  eminentiori,  or  the  perfection
of  our  highest  activities^  But  how,  if  our  activities
seem  essentially  imperfect,  bound  up  with  imperfect
'conditions,  relative  to  imperfect  stages  of  develop-
ment ?  In  such  cases  perfection  means  destruction.
One  human  activity  after  another  must  be  excluded
from  the  ideal  life,  and  we  can  imagine  nothing
which  can  take  their  place  ;  and  owing  to  this  pro-
gressive elimination  of  the  lower  activities,  it  is  a
great  achievement  if  we  can  retain  any  aspect  of
human  life  as  a  permanent  ideal,  and  in  any  case  the
ideals  of  perfection  become  mere  forms,  the  whole
content  of  which  has  been  qviscferated.  And  so
the  higher  life  seems  dull  and  empty.  We  are  able
to  describe  it  only  by  negatives,  by  the  negation  of
the,  lower  attributes  unworthy  of  it. This  is  the


l66  THE METHOD OF PHILOSOPHY.

real  explanation  of  the  eternal  emptiness  of  happi-
ness, of  the  ennui  of  bliss  which  is  so  marked  in  the
popular  representations  of  heaven.  It  is  the  ex-
planation also  of  the  irrepressible  tendency  to  de-
scribe God  by  negations,  as  the  ineffable,  infinite,
immutable,  incomprehensible  and  unknowable,  which
is  continually  making  religion  the  half-way  house
to  agnosticism.

But  in  reality  this  is  a  mere  prejudice,  though  a
very  pardonable  one.  To  overcome  it,  we  should
consider  the  parallel  of  the  relation  of  the  infra-
human  to  the  human  from  the  point  of  view  of  the
former.  How  unable  would  the  amoeba  be  to
realize  the  higher  activities  of  man,  how  inevitably
would  the  dim  forecasts  of  its  knowledge  deny  to
man  the  activities,  whatever  they  are,  that  make  up
the  life  of  the  amceba  !  To  a  less  degree,  the  same
incapacity  is  displayed  also  among  men.  The  un-
thinking masses  also  condemn  the  life  of  the  thinker
as  dull,  empty,  and  uneventful,  simply  because  they
cannot  imagine  how  much  fuller  his  heightened
consciousness  makes  it,  how  much  more  intense  are
the  pleasures  and  pains  of  the  sage  than  those  of
coarser  minds  that  cannot  react  upon  the  subtler
stimuli  From  such  examples  we  begin  to  perceive
that  the  higher  is  not  a  negation,  because  the  lower,
cannot  determine  its  positive  attributes.  Every  step
in  advance  does  indeed  mean  a  dropping  away  of
some  lower  activities,  until  they  have  all  dis-
appeared. But  each  step  in  advance  also,  opens  up
new  activities,  and'fuller  realizations  of  old  activities,
which  progressively  increase  the  total  content  of
life,  and  make  the  higher  life  richer  and  fuller  than
the  lower.  But  these,  of  course,  are  not  visible  from
the  standpoint  of  the  lower. The  lament,  therefore,


THE LIMITATIONS OF THE METHOD.  1 67

over  the  emptiness  of  the  higher  life,  is  as  though
one  were  to  lament  in  the  ascent  of  a  mountain  that
the  advance  was  pure  loss,  because  the.  scenery  at
the  foot  must  be  more  and  more  obscured,  oblivious
of  the  fact  that  the  ascent  would  bring  new  features
into  view  of  which  we  could  not  have  dreamt  be-
low. Or  to  illustrate  by  a  mathematical  parallel :
the  higher  can  understand  the  lower  just  as  we  can
abstract  one  and  two  dimensions  from  three  dimens-
ional space  ;  the  lower  cannot  understand  the  higher,
just  as  we  cannot  add  a  fourth  dimension  to  Space.
§  1 3.  These  defects  in  the  concrete  metaphysical
method  are  insurmountable ;  and  though  they  do
not  impair  its  correctness,  they  sadly  limit  its
achievements.  They  render  it  impossible  for
philosophy  to  solve  all  questions,  to  be  more  than
fragmentary,  to  be  complete  and  final.  Philosophy
must  be  content  if  it  can  make  out  the  general
drift  of  life,  if  it  can  determine  its  main  features,  if
it  can  approximately  decipher  its  chief  enigmas,  if
not  with  perfect  certainty  and  in  full  detail,  yet  with
reasonable  probability.  Its  function  is  to  form  a
temporary  roofing- in  of  the  pyramid  of  knowledge,
which  anticipates  the  completion  of  the  structure,
and  enables  the  workers  to  work  secured  against  the
inclemency  of  the  skies,  but  which  from  time  to  time
must  be  renewed  and  modified  and  expanded,  so  as
to  satisfy  the  requirements  of  its  growing  bulk.  A
philosophical  system  will  share  the  characteristics  of
the  sciences  on  which  it  is  based.  It  will  consist  of
a  series  of  happy,  but  not  random,  guesses,  more  or
less  probable,  and  deriving  a  certain  amount  of
support  from  their  connexion,  able  to  explain,  the
broad  outlines  of  the  constitution  of  things  to  a
greater  or .  less extent,  but leaving much  as yet


1 68  THE METHOD OF PHILOSOPHY.

inexplicable ;  like  scientific  theories  also  it  will  be
ratified  by  the  way  it  works  and  stands  the  test  of
experience.  Finality,  completeness,  and  perfection
are  as  impossible  at  present  in  a  true  system  of
philosophy  as  in  any  of  the  sciences,  and  if  this  lack
is  censured  by  the  admirers  of  spick  and  span  sys-
tems which  have  a  glib  response  for  every  question,
we  must  admit  that  as  yet  philosophy  can  do  little
more  than  keep  alive  the  sacred  fire  of  hope,  than
throw  a  light,  upon  the  path  of  progress.  But  we
may  be  more  than  consoled  by  the  reflection  that
such  philosophy,  though  it  is  imperfect,  is  at  least
alive,  and  that  its  potentialities  of  progress  render  it
immensely  superior  to  the;  most  artful  and  artificial
system,  the  symmetry  of  which  forbids  the  slightest
change.

§  14.  But  little  as  philosophy  can  as  yet  achieve,
it  could  nevertheless  have  achieved  far  more  than
it  has  done  if  it  had  kept  in  touch  with  science.
Ought  it  not  to  have  profited  immensely  by  the
unparalleled  advance  of  the  sciences  in  the  course
of  the  present  century  ?  Ought  it  not  to  have
gathered  from  this  advance  data  of  primary  interest
and  principles  of  surpassing  importance  ?  But  the
traditional  metaphysics  have  known  so  little  to
profit  by  the  teaching  of  science  that,  even  in
purely  metaphysical  matters,  scientific  theories  are
now  often  far  in  advance  of  philosophical  ones,  and
involve  metaphysical  principles  which  philosophy  '
has  either  not  yet  realized  at  all,  or  only  grudgingly
recognized,  and  failed  to  apply  generally  to  the
solution  of  its  own  problems.^ And  yet  it  is  the

1  Like  the  metaphysical  principles  of  Evolution  (ch.  vii.)  and
the  impossibility  of  infinity  (ch.  vii.  §  20 ;  ch.  ix.  §§  2-1 1),  and  of
Interaction  (ch.  xii,  §  10 ;  ch.  vii.  §1)  respectively.


METAPHYSICAL GAINS FROM MODERN SCIENCE. 1 69

conviction  that  metaphysical  principles  underlie  the
great  scientific  progress  of  our  age,  and  that  they
afford  the  key  to  the  solution  of  the  chief  problems
of  philosophy,  that  can  embolden  philosophy  to
refuse  to  surrender  to  pessimistic  and  sceptical
despair.

But  as  the  actual  discussion  of  the  metaphysical
principles  involved  in  modern  scientific  conceptions
will  demonstrate  far  more  clearly  than  any  general
argument  can  do,  not  only  that  the  method  of  con-
crete metaphysics  is  possible,  but  that  it  is  true,  and
yields  philosophic  results  of  suprfeme  importance,  we
must  delay  no  longer  to  consider  the  Metaphysics
of  Evolution.  We  shall  see  in  the  next  chapter
how  a  scientific  doctrine,  originating  in  the  single
science  of  biology,  from  the  suggestion  of  an  ob-
scure sociological  analogy,  has  pursued  its  triumph-
ant march  through  all  the  sciences,  impelled  by
the  irresistible  impetus  of  its  metaphysical  nature,
and  how  the  metaphysical  conception  .which  had
been  the  latent  cause  of  its  success  at  last  becomes
explicit,  and  enriches  philosophy  with  the  accumu-
lated wealth  of  the  data  it  has  collected.


CHAPTER  VII.

THE  METAPHYSICS  OF  EVOLUTION.

§  I.  The  discussion  of  the  metaphysics  of  Evolut-
ion may  come  with  the  shock  of  seeming  paradox
on  those  who  pride  themselves  on  their  complete
exemption  from  metaphysical  views  and  metaphys-
ical knowledge.  But  in  reality  their  surprise  is
quite  uncalled  for ;  and  if  they  knew  what  meta-
physics were,  they  would  perceive  that  it  was  as
difficult  to  avoid  talking  metaphysics  as  it  is  to
avoid  talking  prose.  It  requires  a  real  poet  to
avoid  prose,  and  it  requires  a  real  metaphysician
to  avoid  metaphysical  assumptions.  For  ordinary
men  the  choice  is  only  between  good  and  bad
metaphysics  as  between  good  and  bad  prose.

For  metaphysics  is  simply  the  science  of  the
fundamental  principles  of  all  knowing  and  being,
and  it  is  impossible  to  act  or  think  without  assum-
ing and  implying  some  such  principles.  It  is  as
impossible  to  carry  on  life  without  metaphysical
principles  as  it  is  to  carry  on  thought  without
logical  principles.  The  only  real  question  is
whether  our  various  metaphysical  principles  are
to  be  consistent  with  one  another  and  capable  of
being  combined  into  a  connected  whole  or  not ;  and
it  is  highly  probable  that,  unless  great  care  is  taken,
they  will  not  be  so  consistent.  Hence  the  object
of  the  systematic  study  of  metaphysics  is  to  render


WHAT METAPHYSICS MEAN.  171

US  conscious  of  the  errors  of  the  bad  metaphysics  of
common  life  and  common  science,  and  to  avoid
such  views  of  fundamental  principles  as  will  make
nonsense  of  all  things.  In  this  respect  metaphysics
resemble  logic,  the  science  of  the  principles  on
which  our  thought  proceeds  ;  for  logical  principles
also  cannot  be  with  impunity  ignored.  If  we  are
ignorant  of  them,  it  is  probable  that  our  thought
will  misapply  them  ;  but  to  dispense  with  them  is
impossible.  But  though  metaphysical  and  logical
principles  cannot  be  dispensed  with,  it  is  not'  neces-
sary to  be  conscious  of  them  ;  on  the  contrary,  just
as  people  reasoned  rightly  and  thought  logically
long  before  Aristotle  explicitly  stated  the  principles
of  logic,  so  it  is  possible  to  discover  and  to  use
metaphysical  principles  in  ordinary  life  and  in
science  long  before  they  are  consciously  appro-
priated by  systematic  philosophy.

And  so  it  is  not  too  much  to  say  that  every  con-
siderable advance  in  science  has  involved  a  parallel
advance  in  our  view  of  metaphysical  first  principles  ;
and  it  would  not  be  difficult  to  illustrate  this  by
the  history  of  metaphysical  principles  of  acknow-
ledged importance,  which  have  owed  their  dis-
covery, or  at  least  their  acceptance,  to  the  progress
of  the  other  sciences.  Thus  it  was  nothing  but
Newton's  discovery  of  gravitation  which  enabled
the  principle  of  Interaction  to  supersede  the  old
conceptions  of  Activity  and  Passivity  {cf.  ch.  iii.
§10);  and  the  full  import  of  the  metaphysical  re-
volution which  was  thus  worked  by  a  physical
discovery  has  hardly  even  now  been  realized  in  all
philosophic  controversies  (ch.  xii.  §  lo).^

^  It  must  not,  however,  be  supposed  that  metaphysical  ad
vances  are  always  conditioned  by  scientific  progress,  and  that  the


172  THE METAPHYSICS OF EVOLUTION.

This  explanation  should  suffice  to  render  the
assertion  of  metaphysical  principles  in  Evolution  a
truism  rather  than  a  paradox,  and-  to  convince  us
that,  if  their  importance  is  in  any  way  proportionate
to  their  scientific  value,  they  will  throw  much  light
upon  the  ultimate  problems  of  life.  And  it  will  be
the  object  of  this  chapter  to  show,  not  only  what
the  metaphysical  principles  underlying  the  progress
of  moderh  science  are,  but  also  that  our  expectat-
ions as  to  their  value  are  likely  to  be  more  than
fulfilled. ,

§  2.  The  great  method  of  science  which  has
proved  so  fruitful  of  progress  in  modern  times  has
been  the  Historical  Method^  which  investigates
things  by  tracing  their  history.  Wherever  it  has
been  possible  to  apply  it,  the  light  thrown  on  the
nature of things by the study of their history

sciences  owe  nothing  to  metaphysics.  On  the  contrary,  the  ob-
ligation is  reciprocal,  afld  metaphysics  react  upon  science  and
accelerate  its  progress.  And  in  early  times  metaphysical  know-
ledge is  often  far  ahead  of  physical  science.  But  in  such  cases
the  metaphysical  conceptions  are  apt  to  prove  barren,  because  no
physical  facts  are  known  which  exemplify  them.  And  being  thus
destitute  of  illustration  by  reason  of  the  backwardness  of  the
physical  sciences,  the  true  metaphysics  are  often  rejected  in
favour  .of  less  advanced  principles,  which  may  be  supported  by
a  plausible  show  of  facts.  It  is  pretty  clear,  for  instance,  that  in
the  time  of  Aristotle  Greek  metaphysics  were  far  ahead,  not  only
of  Greek  science,  but  also, of  all  but  the  most  recent  develop-
ments of  modern  science.  The  lack  of  progressiveness  of  pure
metaphysics  since  is  to  be  attributed,  not  merely  to  the  disastrous
introduction  into  speculative  philosophy  of  the  popular  doctrine
of  God's  "  infinity "  (ch.  x.  §  7),  but  also  to  the  fact  that  meta-
physics had  to  wait  until  the  physical  sciences  had  reached  a
point  which  afforded  the  data  for  further  metaphysical  progress.
Hence,  as  we  shall  see  (§  16),  the  metaphysical  principles  of
Evolution  were  already  contemplated  by  Aristotle,  but  rejected
by  him  for  lack  of  the  scientific  corroboration  which  they  are
now  receiving.


THE POSTULATES OF THE HISTORICAL METHOD. 1 73

has  been  such  that  in  most  branches  of  science  a
rejection  of  the  Historic  Method  would  justly  be
regarded  as  a  conclusive  mark  of  unscientific  per-
versity. And  in  its  origin  evolutionism  is  nothing
but  a  special  application  and  development  of  the
Historical  Method,  the  metaphysical  assumptions
of  which  it  shares.  Those  assumptions  are  so  few
and  so  simple  that  ordinary  thought  would  hardly
think  of  calling  them  metaphysical ;  and  yet  they
really  involve  some  very  grave  metaphysical  diffic-
ulties.

The  fundamental  assumption  on  which  every
form  of  the  Historical  Method  is  based  is  that  the
thing  investigated  has  had  a  hiatory.  And  to  say
that  a  thing  has  had  a  history  is  to  assert,  not  only
that  it  has  had  a  past,  but  that  this  past  has  a
bearing  upon  aftd  a  connexion  with  its  present
condition.

These  postulates  are  so  easily  granted  on  ord-
inary occasions  that  we  are  apt  to  overlook  the
metaphysical  assumptions  to  which  they  commit  us.
The  reality  of  history  implies  the  reality  of  the
past ;  i.e.,  the  reality  of  Time  and  the  causality  of
^he  past  with  respect  to  the  present.  For  the  con-
ditions which  render  the  application  of  the  Historical
Method  valid  are  absent,  if  a  thing  has  not  existed
in  the  past,  or  if  its  past  is  not  causally  connected
with  its  present.  And  these  conditions,  .which  make
it  possible  to  speak  of  a  history  at  all,  will  be  found
^timately  to  involve,  not  only  the  reality,  but  also,
is,  a  further  metaphysical  postulate,  the  limitation
of  Tinie,  or,  at  all  events,  of  the  past  of  the  thing
to  which  a  history  is  ascribed.

But  this  very  important  point  deserves  further
elucidation.


174  THE METAPHYSICS OF EVOLUTION.

§  3.  The  Historical  Method  supposes  that  the
cause  and  explanation  of  the  present  state  of  a  thing
is  to  be  found  in  its  past,  "that  its  nature  will  appear
when  its  origin  has  been  discovered.  But  what  if
this  supposition  be  an  illusion  ?  What  if  there  is
no  real  causal  connexion  between  the  past  and
present  states  of  things,  and  the  succession  of  their
phases  resembles  rather  the  successive  arrange-
ments of  a  kaleidoscope,  or  of  dissolving  views  in
a  magic-lantern,  in  which  picture  follows  upon  pic-
ture without  any  intrinsic  connexion  between  them
{cf.  ch.  iii.  §  11)  ?^

And  again,  what  if  things  have  had  no  origin  ?
Surely  the  search  for  origins,  the  claim  that  the
explanation  of  things  is  to  be  found  in  their  history,
is  fundamentally  false  if  the  infinity  of  Time  renders
the  whole  conception  of  a  beginning  or  origin  a
delusive  prejudice  of  our  "fancy  ?  If  things  have
fluctuated  to  and  fro  from  all  eternity,  in  a  confused
and  unintelligible  series  of  indeterminate  changes,
if  everything  has  passed  into  everything  else  by  in-
sensible and  indefinite  gradations,  not  in  virtue  of
any  determinate  and  discoverable  law,  but  in  con-
sequence of  the  kaleidoscopic  freaks  of  an  irrational,
inscrutable,  and  irresponsible  "  Unknowable,"  will
not  their  nature  bafBe  the  utmost  efforts  of  historical
research?  If  men  have  "developed"  into  proto-
plasm and  .protoplasm  into  man,  in  an  infinite
number  of  infinitely  various  and  capricious  ways,

1  Of  course  it  is  not  intended  to  assert  that  there  is  no  con-
nexion between  the  successive  pictures,  but  only  that  there  is
no  direct  connexion ;  i.e.,  that  the  earlier  image  is  not  the  cause
of  its  successor.  And  just  as  the  structure  of  the  kaleidoscope
underlies  the  appearances  in  the  one  case,  so  the  ultimate  per-
versity of  things  (ch.  v.  §  2,  p.  137)  would  underlie  them  on  the
other  hypothesis.


THE REALITY OF HISTORY.  1 75

what  meaning  can  any  longer  be  attached  to  the
history  of  the  Evolution  of  man  out  of  protoplasm  ?
If  the  Becoming  of  the  world  has  really  been  in-
finite, no  amount  of  history  will  bring  us  any  nearer
to  its  real  origin  ;  it  is  vain  to  sound  the  bottomless
abyss  of  the  past  with  the  puny  plummet  of  science.
The  Historical  Method  is  futile,  all  theories  of
Evolution  are  false,  and  the  nature  of  things  is
really  unknowable.

And  if  we  refuse  to  admit  these  conclusions,  we
must  admit  as the  metaphysical postulate  of  the
Historical  Method  in  all  its  forms,  that  things  have
had  an  origin,  and  their  history  a  beginning. And
so  it  appears  that  the  ancient  historians,  who  began
their  histories  with  the  beginning  of  the  world,  were
prompted  by  a  correct  and  truly  scientific  instinct ;
they  felt  that  unless  they  began  at  the  beginning,
they  would  have  to  leave  much  obscure,  and,  that
if  a  beginning  was  in  the  nature  of  things  unattain-
able,  all would  be left obscure, and all explan-
ations would  ultimately  come  to  nought. Thus  the
vindication  of  a  determinate  beginning  and  a  real
origin  as  the  necessary  pre-supposition  of  any  hist-
orical account,  commits  us  to  the  doctrine  of  a  be-
ginning of  the  world,  or  at  least  of  the  present  order
of  things. But  it  does  not  directly  compel  us  to  as-
sert the  finiteness  of  Time. Until  the  nature  of  the
infinity  of  Time  has  been  investigated  (in  ch.  ix.  §  ^ii),
we  may  here  reserve  judgment,  all  the  more  easily
that  we  do  not  perhaps  really  require  to  limit  Time
for  the  purposes  of  the  Historical  Method. But  we
can  avoid  it  only  by  a  supposition  at  least  as  dif-
ficult. The  origin  which  the  method  requires  need
not  have  an  origin  of  Time ;  it  is  conceivable  that
the  world  existed  for  an  infinity  of  time,  and  then


176  THE METAPHYSICS OF EVOLUTION.

entered  into  the  historical  process  of  development
at  some  fixed  point  in  the  past.  Supposing  e.g.,
that  life  had  existed  from  all  time  in  the  form  of
protoplasm,  it  might  suddenly  have  taken  to  de-
veloping more  complex  forms,  and  this  point  would
form  the  starting-point  of  biology,  and  the  ideal
fixed  point  to  which  the  Historical  Method  would  go
back.  Or  again,  an  "  eternal "  Deity  may  have
existed  always,  and  at  some  point  in  the  past  have
created  the  beginnings  of  the  world.  In  this  second
case  the  ideal  starting-point  of  the  Historical  Method
would  be  also  the  real  beginning  of  the  world  (at
least  as  a  world) ;  in  the  first,  it  would  be  ideal  only,
and  mark  the  limit  merely  for  our  knowledge.  But
in  either  case,  the  Historical  Method  would  be  unable
to  distinguish  the  ideal  from  the  real  limit ;  it  could
not  determine  whether  its  starting-point  was  merely
an  instantaneous  phase  in  the  history,  or  whether  it
had  not  existed  for  an  infinity  before  the  beginning
of  change  and  beyond  the  reach  of  all  history.  It
is  thus  an  intrinsic  limitation  of  the  Historical
Method,  that  even  where  it  does'  penetrate  to  an
apparent  beginning,  it  cannot  tell  us  whether  it  is
the  beginning  of  the  existence  of  the  thing  or  only  of
its  history.

§  4.  Now  it  follows  from  the  fact  that  modern.
Evolutionism  is  a  special  application  of  the  Histori-
cal Method  that  it  shares  all  the  metaphysical  as-
sumption and  limitations  of  that  method.  But  in
the  course  of  its  development  it  has  superadded
several  others.  And  as  its  history  affords  the  most
instructive  examples  of  how  scientific  progress  un-
wittingly develops  metaphysical  conceptions  (ch.  vi.
§§  9,  16),  it  will  be  no  real  digression  to  trace  the
history  of  the  theory  of  Evolution.


EVOLUTIONISM AND THE HISTORICAL METHOD. 1 77

The  evolutionism  which  has  revolutionized  the
thought  of  our  century  is  the  evolutionism  of
Charles  Darwin,  and  confessedly  arose  out  of  an
interpretation  of  the  gradations  and  affinities  of
animal  species  in  the  light  of  the  Malthusian  law  of
population.  That  is  to  say,  it  arose  out  of  a  hint
which  the  single  science  of  zoology  received  from
the  science  of  sociology.^  After  revolutionizing
zoology,  it  found  its  scope  so  much  enlarged  by
that  process,  that  it  could  be  applied  with  success
to  many  other  sciences,  such  as  botany,  biology
and  anthropology,  with  especial  appropriateness  to
sociology  (from  which  it  had  received  its  original
impulse),  and  even  to  psychology  and  ethics.^  And
every  new  application  had  the  effect  of  bringing
out  more  definitely  the  principles  by  which  it  pro-
ceeded. X

Thus  it  appeared  as  the  common  result  of  all
evolutionist  histories,  what  had  not  before  seemed
a  necessary  characteristic  of  historical  explanations,
that  they  traced  the  genesis  of  the  higher  and  more
differentiated  subsequent  forms  out  of  earlier  forms
which  were  lower  and  simpler  and  more  homo-
geneous. And  hence  arose  the  first  specific  ad-
dition Evolutionism  made  to  the  Historical  Method
proper,  which  may  be  described  as  the  assertion
that  historical  research  leads  us  from  the  more  com-
plex to  the  simpler,  and  "  explains  "  complexity  by
deriving  it  from  simplicity.  And  perhaps  it  is  the
aesthetic  obviousness  of  this  process,  rather  than
any  magic  virtue  in  mere  history,  which  has  ren-
dered evolutionist,  explanations  so  plausible  and  so

1  Cf.i  Darwin's  Life,  I.,  p.  83,  and  compare Mr. Spencer's
Study  of  Sociology,  p.  438.
*  For  a  similar  example,  cf.  Study  of  Sociology,  p.  335,  ff.  (13th  ed.).

R.ofS.  jj


178  THE METAPHYSICS OF EVOLUTION.

popular.  But  it  is  this  addition  also  which  commits
the  evolutionist  theory  of  descent  to  a  course  of
metaphysical  assertion  by  which  it  becomes  at  the
outset  a  specimen,  though  a  most  favourable  one,  of
the  pseudo-metaphysical  method  (ch.  vi.  §  3).  And
if  in  this  it  errs,  its  error  is  yet  venial.  It  had
■achieved  so  much  in  the  way  of  extending  the
borders  of  sciepce,  and  thrown  such  a  surprising  light
upon  so  many  obscure  problems,  that  we  might  well
be  pardoned  for  a  greater  blindness  to  the  limita-
tions of  the  theory  than  we  have  actually  displayed.
For  we  were  able  to  carry  the  histories  of  things  so
much  further  back  than  we  had  ever  expected,  and
were  so  wholly  absorbed  in  disputing  the  details
of  those  histories,  that  our  dazzled  and  distracted
reason  could  hardly  muster  the  composure  to  in-
quire whether  the  historical  explanations  of  evol-
utionism were  successful  as  a  whole,  and  whether
their  complete  success  would  not  bring  out  an  in-
herent weakness  of  the  method.  The  consciousness
of  this  difficulty  was  generated  only  by  the  further
advance  of  the  theory  of  Evolution  itself.

§  5.  That  historical  explanations  should  trace
the  development  of  the  complex  out  of  the  simple
was  at  first  merely  an  empirical  fact  of  observation  ;
it  was  an  interesting  scientific  fact,  but  not  a  philo-
sophic principle.  But  when  this  turned  out  to  be
the  invariable  result  of  each  new  extension  of  the
Historical  Method,  the  idea  was  imperatively  sug-
gested that  this  fact  was  no  mere  accident,  but  the
result  of  an  essential  law  in  the  history  of  things.
The  development  of  the  simple  into  the  complex
came  to  be  regarded  as  the  higher  law  which  all  the
applications  of  the  Historical  Method  to  the  various
sciences illustratedj and  the theory  of  Evolution


EVOLUTION OF DARWIN AND OF SPENCER. 1 79

thereby  ceased  to  be  merely  scientific,  and  became
avowedly  metaphysical.

The  merit  of  the  discovery  and  formulation  of
this  great  generalization  belongs  to  Mr.  Herbert
Spencer,  whose  evolutionism  is  related  to  the  bio-
logical evolutionism  of  Darwin  much  as  the  New-
tonian law  of  gravitation  is  related  to  Kepler's
laws  of  the  motions  of  the  heavenly  bodies.  And
the  step  taken  by  Mr.  Spencer  was  not  only  one  of
the  utmost  importance  for  the  development  of  the
philosophic  implications  of  the  theory  of  Evolution,
but  also  thoroughly  justified  by  purely  scientific  con-
siderations. For  it  was  only  by  such  a  generaliza-
tion that  the  applications  of  evolutioiiist  principles
to  the  various  sciences  could  h€  brought  into  a
connection  that  explained  the  similarity  of  their
evolutions.  A  merely  biologidAl  evolutionism,  e.£:,
could  never  have  accounted  for  th^  evolution  of  the
chemical  elements  (§  9) ;  but  ffoift  the  standpoint  of
a  philosophic  evolutionism  the  evolution  in  biology'
and  in  chemistry  are  instances  of  one  and  the  same
law.

§  6.  When  Evolution  has  been  recognised  as  the
universal  law  of  the  Betomirtg  of  thing's,  the  position
of  affairs  is,  that  all  thirigi  are  subject  to  a  law,
which  explains  the  higher  as  the  development  of
the  lower,  and  that  this  law  miy  be  formulated  by
means  of  the  historical  data  of  this  development.
We  have  thus  advanced  beyond  the  conception  of
isolated  things  haviaig  A.  history,  to  the  conception
of  a  history  of  all  things,  a  world-history ;  not  only
must  things  be  takeii  in  their  historical  context,  but
that  context  is  one  and  the  same  for  all.

And  the  world  has  Aot  only  got  a  history,  but
that  history  has  a  meaning,  it  is  the  process  which


l8o  THE METAPHYSICS OF EVOLUTION.

works  out  the  universal  law  of  Evolution.  The
different  sections  of  the  world's  history  must  be
consistently  interpreted  with  a  reference  to  the
universal  law  which  they  illustrate,  i.e.,  interpreted
as  parts  of  the  world-process.

And  here  we  come  upon  the  first  distinct  trace  of
the  teleology  which  is  inseparable  from  all  evol-
utionism.^ For  when  the  phenomena  of  the  world's
evolution  are  subordinated  to  the  general  law  of
Evolution,  their  relation  inevitably  tends  to  become
that  of  means  to  an  end.  All  things  happen  as
illustrations  of,  or  in  order  to  illustrate  the  general
law  of  Evolution.  But  it  is  still  possible  to  disavow
the  teleology  at  this  point  in  the  development  of
evolutionism,  although  it  admits  of  little  doubt  that
the  success  of  evolutionism  in  combating  other  kinds
of  teleologioal  explanation  is  due  to  its  own  tele-
ology.

For  the  attraction  which  teleology  has  for  the
human  mind  is  indestructible;  an  ineradicable  in-
stinct forbids  us  to  renounce  the  hope  of  finding  in
the  rest  of  nature  that  action  for  the  sake  of  rational
ends  which  is  so  prominent  in  that  section  of  nature
represented  by  intelligence.  And,  as  we  saw
(ch.  V.  §  6),  all  knowledge  is  based  on  the  anthropo-
morphic assumption  that  the  course  of  nature  cor-
responds to, the  operation  of  our  minds.  If,  then,  it
must  correspond  to  some  extent  for  knowledge  to  be
possible  at  all,  the  completer  the  correspondence,
the  more  knowable  will  the  world  be,  and  the
teleological  explanation  of  things,  which  asserts  this

^  For  even  biological  evolutionism  is  not  free  from  teleology  of
a  sort.  It  explains  structure  as  arising  by  natural  selection  in
order  to  survival  in  the  struggle  for  existence,  and  thereby  puts
it  in  the  position  of  a  means  to  an  end.


WHEN IS A HISTORY AN EXPLANATION  ? l8l

correspondence  to  the  fullest  extent,  thus  becomes
a  legitimate  ideal  of  knowledge.

But  before  describing  the  fully  developed  tele-
ology of  an  evolutionism  which  is  fully  conscious  of
its  metaphysical  implications,  it  is  necessary  to
return  to  the  question  of  the  value  and  validity  of
the  explanation  of  the  higher  by  its  development
out  of  the  lower,  which  has  been  asserted  to  be  a
prominent  feature,  not  only  in  philosophic  evolution-
ism, but  also  in  its  merely  biological  stage.

§  7.  In  what  sense  and  under  what  conditions  is
a  history  of  the  development  of  the  lower  into  the
higher  a  complete  and  satisfactory  explanation  of
anything  .-'  Is  the  mere  fact  that  such  an  evolution
takes  place  sufficient  to  satisfy  us  ?  If  so,  we  might
without  further  inquiry  credit  a  conjuror,  when  be-
fore our  eyes  he  changes  a  mango-seed  into  a  mango-
tree,  or  an  egg  into  a  handkerchief.  It  is  no^  suffic-
ient that  a  fact  should  happen  for  it  to  be  intelli-
gible ;  on  the  contrary,  many  facts,  like  death,  e.g:,
remain  mysteries  although  'they  continually  come
under  our  observation.  Hence  it  is  not  true  that
a  mere  history,  merely  as  history,  always  explains
the  matter  it  deals  with.  In  so  far,  therefore,  as
historical  explanations  of  things  seem  satisfactory,  it
must  be  because  they  fulfil  other  conditions  also.

What  those  conditions  are  will  perhaps  appear
most  clearly  from  an  examination  of  the  actual
procedure  of  historical  explanations.  It  appears
from  such  examinations  that  one  of  i^ree  things
may  happen  to  a  thing,  the  evolution  of  which  -is
investigated  by  the  Historical  Method.

(i)  It  may  be  traced  up  to  a  point  beyond  which
historical  knowledge  will  not  carry  us ;  we  may
come  to  an  unresolved  and  irresolvable  residuum,


1 82 •  THE METAPHYSICS OF EVOLUTION.

which  is  the  basis  and  datum  of  evolution,  and  which
no  evolution  can  explain.

(2)  The  thing  to  be  explained  may  merge  into
something  else,  and  cease  to  exist,  or  at  least  to  be
distinguishable  as  such.

(3)  It  may  vanish  entirely  :  it  may  be  traced  to
its  first  appearance  on  the  scene.

It  is  possible  to  illustrate  each  of  these  results  of
the  historical  explanation  from  various  evolutionist
theories.  The  first  may  perhaps  be  said  to  be  the
most  common  result  in  the  present  condition  of  Our
data.  If  we  rigorously  refuse  to  follow  the  evolution-
ist method  beyond  the  data  which  are  indisputably
given,  instead  of  prolonging  our  histories  inferen-
tially,  we  almost  everywhere  come  to  a  point  at
which  our  evidence  fails  us.  To  take  the  most
striking  example,  we  can  trace  the  history  of  life
down  to  protoplasm,  but  we  have  no  evidence  that
could  explain  how  life  arose  out  of  lifeless  matter.
Strictly  speaking,"  therefore,  protoplasm  is  the  inex-
plicable datum,  of  biological  evolution.  For,  though
it  so  happens  that  protoplasm,  or  something  very
like  that  hypothetical  basis  of  biology,  is  an  actually
visible  substance,  and  so  capable  of  further  analysis
by  chemical  and  physical  methods,  there  is  nothing
in  its  chemical  and  physical  properties  to  bridge  the
gulf  between  them  and  the  phenomena  of  life,
nothing  that  renders  it  less  of  an  ultimate  fact  for
biology.

As  an  instance  of  the  second  we  may  quote  the
supposed  origin  of  the  intellectual  and  the  moral
consciousness  in  the  evolution  of  life.  As  we  trace
the  history  of  intelligence  downwards,  we  seem  to
pass  from  the  highest  reason  of  man  by  insensible
gradations  to  a  form  of  life  in  which  nothing  that


EVERYTHING DERIVED FROM ITS GERM.  1 83

can  fairly  be  called  reason  can  any  longer  be  dis-
tinguished. In  the  lowest  forms  of  life  there  is
not  only  no  reason,  but  hardly  any  feeling,  to  be
detected.  It  is  only  by  the  analogy  of  the  higher
forms  of  life  that  we  ascribe  to  protoplasm  the
rudiments  of  thought  and  sensation.  And  what
is  true  of  intellectual  and  sensory  consciousness,
is  still  more  conspicuous  in  the  case  of  the  moral
consciousness.  There  is  no  need  here  to  go  down
into  animal  life,  for  we  find  abundant  examples  in
what  must  be  called  human  beings  of  what  seems
a  total  absence  of  all  moral  feeling.  We  can  all  but
fix  the  date  of  the  origin  of  the  moral  consciousness,
all  but  see  how  it  differentiated  itself  out  of  the
other  factors  of  savage  life.  Of  the  third  result'we
should  obtain  an  example  if  by  any  chance  we  could
witness  the  creation  or  coming  into  being  of  any-
thing.

§  8.  But  let  us  consider  what  effect  would  be
produced  upon  the  actual  results  of  evolutionist
explanations,  if  the  law  of  evolution  could  be  really
and  completely  universalized.  The  first  case  will
evidently  not  bear  universalizing.  An  evolution
which  starts  with  an  original  datum  is  not  com-
pletely successful  in  explaining  a  thing.  On  the
contrary,  it  is  probable  that  we  should  attribute  to
the  original  datum  the  germs  at  least  of  all  the
qualities  of  the  final  product,  and  thereby  render
the  whole  explanation  illusory.  For  if  we  have
already  got  in  the  original  germ  all  the  differences
and  difficulties  we  detect  in  the  final  product,  the
.  whole  explanation  becomes  a  petitio  principii,  and
merely  unfolds  what  we  have  taken  care  to  put  into
the  thing  beforehand.

Neither can  the second case be  universalized.


184  THE METAPHYSICS OF EVOLUTION.

For  it  is  clear  that  things  cannot  go  on  indefinitely
being  merged  into  other  things,  for  the  last  thing
would  have  nothing  else  for  it  to  be  merged  into.

There  remains,  then,  the  third  case,  viz.,  that  our
theory  of  Evolution  traces  all  things  back  to  the
point  where  they  arise  out  of  nothing.

But  is  this  an  explanation?  Have  we  gained
anything  by  showing  laboriously  and  with  an  im-
mense mass  of  illustration  how  A  arises  out  of  B,
B  out  of  C,  etc.,  until  we  come  to  Z,  and  say  that
Z  arises  out  of  nothing  ?

And  so  we  are,  finally,  confronted  with  this
unthinkable  miracle  of  the  creation  of  all  things  out
of  nothing,  as  the  final  completion  and  logical  per-
fection of  the  historical  explanation  !  And  yet  it
is  an  axiomatic  principle  of  human  thought  that
things  cannot  arise  out  of  nothing,  i.e.,  causelessly!^

§  9.  And  that  origination  but  of  nothing  is  not
merely  the  logical  conclusion  to  which  a  consistent
use  of  the  historical  explanation  must  lead,  appears
from  the  fact  that  it  has  already  been  not  obscurely
asserted  in  certain  evolutionist  theories.

If  we  follow  the  bolder  theories  of  the  evolution-
ists, as  illustrating  the  logical  development  of  the
method,  without  for  the  moment  considering  whether
they  are  justified  by  the  scientific  data,  we  find  that
they  derive  all  the  phenomena  of  human  life  from
the  properties  of  original  protoplasm.  And  they
do  not  hesitate  to  carry  us  beyond  this  and  to  con-
struct histories  of  "  biogenesis,"  intended  to  account
for  the  origin  of  life  out  of  inorganic  matter.  They
may  attack  the  problem  in  a  purely  mechanical
manner  by  regarding  the  phenomena  of  life  as
differing  only  in  degree  from  processes  of  combina-
'  Ex  nihilo  nihil ;  in  nihilum  nil  posse  reverti.


MR.  CROOKES'  THEORY  OF  PROTHVLE. 185

tion  and  crystallization,  or  they  may  also  grapple
with  the  logical  difficulty  of  conceiving  a  transition
from  the  unconscious  to  the  conscious  by  theories
of  "mind-stuff"  and  the  like.  When  once,  this
mauvais  pas  has  been  surmounted,  evolutionism
finds  more  congenial  material  in  the  region  of
chemical  and  physical  theories.  Indeed,  the  most
recent  advances  of  chemical  theory,  as  represented
by  Mr.  Crookes'  doctrine  of  Protyle  (prothyle  ?),^
enable  it  to  construct  an  extremely  interesting  and
complete  cosmogony.

The  importance  of  Mr.  Grookes'  views  to  the
theory  of  evolutionism  is  so  great,  and  they  have
as  yet  penetrated  so  little  into  the  general  culture
of  the  day,  that  no  aipology  is  needed  for  dwelling
on  them  at  greater  length  than  on  the  well-known
theories  of  Darwin  and  Spencer.^

§  10.  Chemists  have  for  some  time  been  struck
by  the  fact' that  a  certain  order  and  connection  may
be  detected  among  the  "  elements.''  The  working
out  of  the  periodic  law,  i.-e.,  of  the  law  of  the  natural
grouping  of  the  elements,  is  now  one'  of  the  chief
problems  of  theoretic  chemistry.  But  to  assert  that
the  elements  are  not  only  different,  but  differ  in  a
determinate  manner,  is  to  assert  that  there  is  a  con-
nection underlying  their  differences.  The  fact  that
the  elements  are  capable  of  b^ing  arranged  in  a
series,  in  groups  of  which  the  members  resemble
one  another  more  closely  than  they  do  those  of  other

1  Prothyle  is  the  proper  form  of  the  word,  as  it  is  the
"  prote  hyle  "  of  Aristotle,  derived  through  the  medieval  "  yle.''
We  have  ventured,  therefore,  to  substitute  the  correcter  form.

^  For  Mr.  Crookes'  views  v.  his  Presidential  Address  to  the
Chemical  Society  in  May,  1888  {Journal  of  Chem.  Sac,  p.  487).
Also  his  Address  to  the  Chemical  Section  of  the  British  Associa-
tion in  1886.


1 86  THE METAPHYSICS OF EVOLUTION.

groups,  suggests  that  the  seventy  and  odd  substances
which  are  accounted  elements,  because  we  have  not
hitherto  been  able  to  decompose  them,  are  not  final
and  ultimate  facts.  The  law  which  explains  their
grouping  must  be  regarded  as  anterior  to  them,
and  its  operation  may  be  described  as  the  genesis
of  the  elements.  Hence  it  becomes  possible  to
speak  of  the  evolution  of  the  elements.

But  the  analogy  with  biological  evolution  extends
much  further.  It  is  impossible  not  to  be  struck
with  the  great  quantitative  inequality  in  the  occur-
rence of  the  elements.  Some  of  them  are  widely
distributed  and  occur  in  large  masses,  whereas
others  only  occur  rarely  and  in  small  quantities.
If,  therefore,  the  elements  are  to  be  regarded  as
the  products  of  a  process  of  evolution,  it  is  evident
that  the  process  has  been  much  more  favourable
to,  metals  like  iron  than  to  one  like  platinurrt  or
uranium.  "  A  rare  element,  like  a  rare  plant  or
animal,  is  one  which  has  failed  to  develop  in  har-
mony with  its  surroundings,"  i.e.,  failed  in  the
struggle  for  existence.

And  it  is  even  possible  to  guess  at  the  cause.
One  of  the  most  striking  facts  about  the  rare  metals
is  that  they  occur  in  rare  minerals  composed  of
several  of  these  metals,  and  often  occur'  in  these
minerals  alone.  Thus  rare  minerals,  like  samar-
skite  or  gadolinite,  may  be  found  to  contain  three
or  four  of  the  rare  metals,  samarium,  yttrium,
erbium,  etc.,  and  their  close  and  constant  associ-
ation evidently  cannot  be  a  matter  of  chance.  Now
if  a  soluble  salt  of  one  of  these  earths,  e.g.,  yttria,
be  taken,  and  subjected  to'  an  extremely  delicate
and  laborious  process  of  "  fractionation,"  by  which
the  more  soluble  portions  are  separated  out  from


THE EVOLUTION OF THE CHEMICAL  ELEMENTS. 1 87

the  less  soluble,  it  appears  that  the  apparently
elemental  yttrium  may  be  split  up  into  several
closely  related  substances,  which,  though  in  some
cases  their  chemical  properties  may  be  indistinguish-
able, yet  show  marked  differences  in  their  spectra.
And  so,  instead  of  a  single  metal,  yttrium,  with  five
bright  lines  in  its  spectrum,  we  get  five  substances
with  one  line  each  in  their  spectrum.  Similar
results  have  been  obtained  with  didymium  and
other  metals,  and  quite  lately  (1889),  even  such
common  and  apparently  well-known  metals  as
cobalt  and  nickel  have  been  found  to  be  constantly
alloyed  with  a  third  substance,  and  the  multiplica-
tion of  such  results  seems  simply  a  question  of  time.
§  II.  Now,  says  Mr.  Crookes,  what  are  we  to
make  of  these  facts  ?  Are  we  to  give  up  our  tests
as  worthless,  or  are  we  to  dub  all  these  membra
disjecta  of  an  element  elements  ?  To  do  this  we
should  require  some  graduation,  of  the  conception
of  elementicity,  which  would  dispense  us  from
putting  the  constituents  of  yttrium  and  didymium
on  a  par  with  oxygen  and  carbon  with  respect  to
their  elementicity.  But  Mr.  Crookes  propouhds
another  interpretation,  which  may  startle  old-
fashioned  chemists,  but  has  the  merit  of  being  both
sensible  and  philosophic.  It  is  a  mere  prejudice,
he  says,  to  regard  a  thing  as  an  element,  because  it
has  resisted  all  our  reagents  and  all  our  tests  :  for
each  test  can  only  cleave  it'  in  two,  can  only  divide
a  compound  into  two  portions,  which  are  elements
as  far  as  that  test  is  concerned.  But  if  a  new  test  is
applied,  the  supposed  element  splits  up  with  perfect
ease.  All  that  can  be  inferred  from  our  "elements"'
is  that  the  tests  which  would  subdivide  them  further
have  not  yet  been  discovered. And  these  experi-


1 88  THE METAPHYSICS OF EVOLUTION.

merits  suggest  also  that  the  supposed  homogeneity
of  the  particles  of  a  chemical  substance  was  based
upon  our  ignorance.  Atoms  are  not,  as  Sir  J.
Herschel  said,  and  Clerk  Maxwell  endorsed,
"  manufactured  articles,"  exactly  equal  and  similar,
but,  like  all  other  real  things,  they  possess  individual
differences  and  have  an  individual  character.  The
individual  differences  appear  so  small  only  because
of  the  minuteness  of  the  whole  scale,  just  as  from  a
sufficiently  lofty  standpoint  the  individual  differences
between  men  also  might  appear  as  evanescent  as
those  between  the  atoms  do  to  us.  And  in  chemical
_  interactions  these  individual  differences  would  be
manifested  by  differences  of  atomic  weight,  not  only
between  the  different  "  elements,"  but  within  them.
Some  atoms  of  calcium  might  have  the  atomic
■weight  of  39 "9,  and  others  of  40" i,  and  the  "atomic
weight "  of  calcium,  viz.,  40,  would  be  only  the
average  of  the  closely  related  groups.  Hence  if  we
discover  any  method  of  separating  the  atoms  of
the  atomic  weight,  39*9,  from  those  of  the  atomic
weight,  40" I,  we  should  get  two  substances  differing
sligbtly  from  the  ordinary  calcium  of  the  chemists,
and  differing  still  more  from  each  other.  This,  or
something  similar,  is  what  may  be  supposed  to  have
happened  in  the  case  of  didymium  and  yttrium.  It
is  probable,  then,  that  the  splitting  up  of  elements
into  "  meta- elements "  has  been  first  observed
among  these  rare  metals  only  because  they  present
greater  individual  divergences  between  their  atoms
than  the  rest,  and  perhaps  it  may  be  suggested  that
it  was  this  very  individualism,  this  lack  of  coherence
and  similarity  between  their  more  heterogeneous  and
loosely  knitted  constituents,  which  accounts  for  their
comparative  failure  in  the  evolution  of  the  elements.


THE DISSOCIATION OF CHEMICAL ATOMS. 189

§  12.  As  to  the  manner  of  this  evolution,  Mr.
Crookes'  suggestion  rests  on  astronomical  facts.
He  infers  from  the  fact  that  stars  are  not  of  all
sizes,  but  seem  to  vary  within  certain  limits,  that
there  must  be  some  agency  to  prevent  the  accretion
of  the  stars  beyond  a  certain  point.  He  also  infers
from  the  fact  that  compound  bodies  are  dissociated
by  heat,  that  the  "  elements,"  if  compound,  must
also  be  dissociated  at  very  high  temperatures.
Hence  he  supposes  that  in  the  centre  of  the  hottest
stars  all  elements  are  dissociated.  But  dissociated
iato  what  ?  Into  that  out  of  which  they  were  all
evolved,  says  Mr.  Crookes,  i.e.,  into  prothyle,  the
undifferentiated  basis  of  chemical  evolutipn,  the
formless  stuff  which  was  the  origin  of  all  substances.
And  so,  while  from  our  point  of  view  matter  simply
disappears  at  the  centres  of  the  hottest  stars,  when
the  temperature  exceeds  a  certain  point,  it  is  really
reconverted  into  prothyle,  which  does  not  gravitate,
because  it  is  anterior  to  the  differentiation  of  gravi-
tating matter  and  imponderable  ether.  But  though
(sensible)  matter  is  thus  apparently  destroyed  at  the
centres  of  the  universe,  this  loss  is  compensated  by
the  genesis  of  matter  at  its  confines.  The  existence
of  limits  to  space  Mr.  Crookes  supports  by  an  in-
genious calculation,  that  "  if  an  unlimited  world  of
stars  sent  us  radiations,  we  shoijld  receive  200,000
times  as  much  light  and  heat  as  we  do  receive,
unless  radiations  are  absorbed  or  intercepted  to
such  an  extent  that  only  35^55  reaches  us,  This  is
so  improbable  that  the  conclusion  that  the  universe
is  limited  is  with  some  emphasis  declared  by
astronomy."  ^ And  there  is  the  less  reason  to  object

1  V.  Mr.  J.  G.  Stoney's  letter  to  the  Times  (4th  April,  1888),  in
support  of  Mr.  Crookes'  speculations.


1 90  THE METAPHYSICS OF EVOLUTION.

to  this  limitation  of  Space,  as  it  will  subsequently
appear  a  necessary  postulate  also  on  other  scientific
and  philosophic  grounds  (ch.  ix.  §§  2-10).  By  this
limitation  of  Space  Mr.  Crookes  avoids  the  dissipa-
tion of  energy  by  reason  of  its  conversion  into  light
and  heat,  and  its  subsequent  loss  by  radiation  into
the  infinite.  He  supposes  that  at  the  confines  of
the  universe  the  ether  vibrations  constituting  light
are  re-converted,  first  into  prothyle,  and  then  into
atoms  of  ponderable  matter,  which,  as  soon  as  they
are  formed,  commence  to  gravitate  inward,  and  close
their  careers  by  reaching  the  larger  stars,  and  there
being  again  dissolved  into  prothyle.

Thus  the  atoms  of  sensible  matter  also  are  in  a
way  individual  beings.  And  both  their  individual
and  their  chemical  characteristics  (as  it  were,  their
personal  and  racial  character)  will  depend  on  the
general  physical  conditions  at  the  time  and  place  of
their  formation,  in  accordance  with  the  periodic  law.
And  when  formed  a  process  of  segregation  and
aggregation  takes  place  among  the  atoms  in  con-
sequence of  which  "those  which  have  approximately
the  same  rates  of  motion  "  cohere  to  form  sensible  ag-
gregates of  practically  homogeneous  matter,  "heap-
ing themselves  together  by  virtue  of  that  ill-under-
stood tendency  through  which  like  and  like  come
together,  that  principle  by  which  identical  or  ap-
proximately identical  bodies  are  found  collected  in
masses  in  the  earthy  crust,  instead  of  b^ing  uniformly
distributed."  There  result  certain  "  nodal  points  in
space  with  approximately  void  intervals,"  which  ex-
plains a  difficulty  which  the  theory  of  the  evolution
of  the  elements  has  to  meet  in  common  with  that  of
the  evolution  of  species,  viz.,  the  absence  or  scarc-
ity of  intermediate forms. And thus  the larger


THE SELF-REGENERATION OF THE UNIVERSE, igi

aggregates  first  formed  tend  to  absorb  and  force
into  conformity  with  their  motions  the  surrounding
atoms,  and  thus  to  grow  disproportionately  at  the
expense  of  the  others  :  the  common  elements  are
those  which  have  obtained  a  start  in  the  process  of
genesis  and  improved  their  initial  advantage.

Such  is  the  life-history  of  the  chemical  atoms,  for,
like  all  things,  they  have  a  limited  term  of  existence.
They  "  share  with  all  created  (?  generated)  beings
the  attributes  of  decay  and  death  "  ;  they  are  gener-
ated out  of  prothyle,  according  to  the  laws  of  the
generation  of  matter,  and  when  their  due  course  has
been  accomplished,  they  return  into  that  which  gave
them  birth.

§  13.  But  it  is  a  more  difficult  question  to  deter-
mine what  is  the  exact  relation  of  this  genesis  of  the
elements  to  the  life  of  the  universe  at  large,  and  to
decide  whether  it  took  place  at  a  definite  point  in  its
past  history,  or  continually  renews  its  youth.  For
there  is  much  that  tells  in  favour  of  either  view.
Mr.  Crookes  himself  Vequently  speaks  of  an  original
genesis  of  the  elements  out  of  prothyle  as  an  event
in  the  past ;  he  speaks  of  primitive  matter  as  formed
by  "an  act  of  generative  force  throwing  off  at
intervals  atoms  endowed  with  varying  quantities  of
primary  forms  of  energy,"  and  even  suggests,  on
very  adequate  chemical  grounds,  that  "it  is  ex-
tremely probable  that  the  chemism-forming  energy
is  itself  dying  out,  like  the  fires  of  the  cosmic
furnace."  Moreover  we  have  already  seen  that  a
real  evolution  implies  a  beginning  (§  3),  and  shall  see
that  a  valid  evolutionism  implies  also  an  end  (§  20),
so  that  Mr.  Crookes'  own  interpretation  of  his
speculations  may  claim  greater  consonance  with  the
ultimate  requirements  of  evolutionist  metaphysics,


192  THE METAPHYSICS OF EVOLUTION.

On  the  other  hand,  it  would  seem  that  unless  new
atoms  were  continually  generated  to  repair  the  loss
of  those  which  revert  into  prothyle,  and  to  restore  to
the  universe  the  energy  which  is  radiated  out  to  its
confines,  the  theory  will  not  only  fail  to  dissipate
the  fear  of  "a  final  decrepitude  of  the  universe
through  the  dissipation  of  energy,"  but  also  invalid-
ate the  famous  metaphysical  postulate  of  science
as  to  the  conservation  of  the  same  amount  of  matter
in  the  universe,  at  least  as  far  as  sensible  matter  is
concerned.  So  it  is  not  surprising  to  find  passages
in  which  Mr.  Crookes  asserts  that  "  heat  radiations
propagated  outwards  through  the  ether  fronii  the
ponderable  matter  of  the  universe,  by  some  as  yet
unknown  process,  are  transformed  at  the  confines
into  the  primary  essential  motions  of  chemical  atoms,
which,  the  instant  they  are  formed,  gravitate  in-
wards, and  thus  restore  to  the  universe  the  energy
which  would  otherwise  be  lost  to  it."  Hence  it
is  perhaps  preferable  at  the  present  stage  of  the
inquiry  to  regard  the  continual  generation  and  re-
generation of  the  universe  as  the  theory  more  in
accordance  with  the  spirit  of  pseudo-metaphysical
evolutionism.

Thus,  though  stars  and  sidereal  systems  may  have
come  into  being  and  perished,  formed^  matter  must
have  been  as  eternal  as  prothyle,  and  it  must  be
held  that  the  universe  itself  at  no  time  was  not.^
The  universe  is  an  ever  active,  self-sustaining,  and
self-sufficing  organism,  living  on  for  ever,  though
all  its  parts  are  born  and  die,  and  nourished  by  the
constant  and  correlative  transformations  of  atomic
matter  into  prothyle  and  of  prothyle  into  atoms,  and

1  In  this  respect  also  there  is  a  marked  similarity  between  Mr.
Crookes'  cosmology  and  Aristotle's  (cf.  §  16  s.f.)


PROTHYLE THE NE PLUS ULTRA OF SCIENCE. 1 93

having  in  prothyle  a  basis  which  all  things  have
been  and  will  be,  but  which  itself  never  is.  For
though  prothyle  is  the  ground  of  all  reality  and  the
basis  out  of  which  all  things  are  evolved,  it  is  itself'
never  actual  :  when  atoms  are  dissolved  into  pro-
thyle, they  apparently  perish,  when  they  are  gene-
rated, they,  arise  out  of  nothing :  for  prothyle  lacks
all  the  qualities  which  could  make  it  knowable  or
perceptible  (§  14).

Such  is  the  theory  of  the  evolution  of  all  things
out  of  prothyle,  a  theory  deserving  of  the  highest
praise,  not  only  for  its  scientific  ingenuity,  but  also
as  being  the  logical  completion  of  the  evolutionist
method  of  explanation.  Fpr  it  has  derived  all  com-
plexity and  all  differences  from  the  absolutely  simple
and  homogeneous,  viz.,  prothyle.  And  as  it  depicts
the  universe  as  a  perfectly  self-existent  whole,  we
may  predict  for  it  a  very  considerable  popularity
among  the  foes  of  "  supernaturalism,"  as  dispensing
with  the  last  apology  for  the  belief  in  creation.

§  14.  But  the  very  excess  of  the  theory's  suc-
cess paves  the  way  for  its  irretrievable  overthrow  of
the  method  of  which  it  is  the  logical  result.

The  prothyle,  from  which  it  derives  all  things,  is
in  reality  nothing,  for  it  is  devoid  of  all  the  charac-
teristics of  sensible  reality.  It  is  not  tangible,  be-
cause its  particles,  if  it  has  any,  would  exist  in
atomic  isolation ;  nor  audible,  because  sound  de-
pends on  vibrations  in  very  complex  matter ;  nor
visible,  because  it  is  anterior  to  the  differentiation  of
gravitating  matter  arid  ether,  upon  which  the  phen-
omenon of  light  depends.  For  the  same  reason  it
can  have  neither  colour,  nor  weight,  nor  electric
properties.  It  has  no  temperature,  because  heat  is
but  molecular  motion,  and  ex  hyp.  it  precedes  dis-


R.ofS.


o


194  THE METAPHYSICS OF EVOLUTION.

tinctions  of  chemical  properties.  In  short,  it  has  no
qualities  that  could  render  it  in  any  way  percep-
tible ;  in  the  words  of  Empedocles, —

ovTWS  OUT  eTTiSepKTa  TaS'  •avSpdcriv,  ovt  eiraKOvcTTa,
ovTe  voai  irepiXriirTa^

and  if  it  could  actually  exist,  its  existence  could  not
be  known.

And  so  the  transition  of  matter  into,  and  gener-
ation out  of,  prothyle,  would  have  every  appearance
of  a  couple  of  miracles,  of  a  passing  into  nothing,
and  of  a  generation  out  of  nothing.  For  let  us  sup-
pose that  we  were  somehow  able  to  be  present  when
this  unperceivable  prothyle  developed  some  proper-
ties. What  we  should  experience  would  be  that  at
one  moment  nothing  appeared  .to  exist,  and  that  at
the  next  something  came  into  being.  And, similarly
in  the  case  of  the  destruction  of  formed  matter  with
definite  qualities.;  it  would  appear  simply  to  vanish
away.  Even,  therefore,  if  we  could  be  present  at  the
evolution  of  prothyle,  we  should  be  none  the  wiser,
and  any  explanation  would  appear  more  probable
than  the  miraculous  generation  of  something  out  of
nothing.

Thus  it  seems  to  have  been  a  mere  delusion  that
prompted  us  to  trace  the  origin  of  things  out  of
what  has  no  meaning,  no  qualities,  and  no  reality
apart  from  that  which  it  develops  into.  In  tracing
the  universe  back  to  prothyle  the  Historical  Method
has  reduced  it  to  a  fantastic  and  irrational  nonen-
tity, without  form  and  without  qualities,  which  differs
from  all  other  nothings  only  by  its  mysterious  capa-
city to  develop  into  everything.

1  Thus  it  is  neither  to  be  seen  by  men,  nor  to  be  heard,  nor  to
be  grasped  by  thought.


A PURE POTENTIALITY IS NOTHING.  1 95

§  15.  Shall  we  conclude  from  this  result  that  the
evolutionist  method  is  worthless,  after  the  fashion  of
many  who  have  perceived  this  intrinsic  weakness  of
a  professedly  "  unmetaphysical  "  {i.e.,  pseudo-meta-
physical) evolutionism  ?  It  is  true  that  as  an  ulti-
mate explanation  of  things  it  has-  failed.  It  has
reduced  the  "  complex "  to  the  "  simple,"  until  it
arrived  at  things  so  simple  as  to  be  indistinguishable
from  nothing,  at  simple  substances  which  had  a
meaning  only  with  reference  to  the  complex  ones
which  they  were  supposed  to  explain.  Must  we
then  reject  the  whole  method  as  an  error  and  the
whole  process  by  which  it  traced  the  connection
between  the  higher  and  the  lower  as  a  delusion  ?
To  do  this  would  be  to  do  violence  to  our  best
instincts  :  we  cannot  lightly  or  wholly  abandon  a
method  which  has  added  such  great  and  varied
realms  to  science.  But  the  difficulty  is  such  as
might  convince  even  the  most  anti-metaphysical  of
the  necessity  of  a  systematic  criticism  of  ultimate
questions,  and  of  an  investigation  of  the  metaphys-
ical implications  of  the  evolutionist  method,  as  being
alone  capable  of  separating  the  valid  and  valuable
elements  in  it  from  those  which  are  delusive  arid
absurd.

§  16.  Taken  as  the  type  of  the  pseudo-meta-
physical method,  which  explains  the  higher  by  the
lower,  the  theory  of  Evolution  derives  the  actual
reality  from  its  germ,  i.e.,  from  that  which  was,
what  it  became,  potentially.  Wherever  we  cannot
conceive  the  lower  as  containing  the  germ  of  the
higher  potentially,  the  method  fails.  Thus  it  does
not  explain  the  genesis  of  consciousness  out  of
unconscious  matter,  because  we  cannot,  or  do  not,
attribute  potential  consciousness  to  matter.


}^6  THE METAPHYSICS OF EVOLUTION.

Now  the  metaphysical  implications  of  the  potent-
ial and  the  actual,  i.e.,  of  the  theory  of  Evolution  in
its  only  tenable  form,  were  fully  worked  out  by
Aristotle  more  than  2,000  years  ago.  Aristotle's  doc-
lirine  of  potentiality  and  actuality  {Svvafu?  and  evepyeia)
is  the  most  complete  form  of  evolutionism  conceiv-
able. It  admits  of  no  differences  in  kind  anywhere
in  the  universe.  From  the  lowest  form  of  matter
to  the  highest  form  of  mind,  the  lower  is  the  potent-
iality of  which  the  higher  is  the  actuality  or  real-
ization. And  so  we  ascend  by  insensible  gradations
from  the  first  matter  (prothyle),  which  is  merely
potential  and  never  actual  {cf.  §  13),  to  the  divine
being  wljich  has  completely  realized  all  its  potenti-
alities, ^.e.,  is  all  it  can  possibly  be.

It  is  true,  however,  that  Aristotle  does  no^  con-
ceiy,e  this  process  from  the  potential  to  the  actual
to  be  pne  in  Time,  as  the  historical  theories  of
Evolutioij  are  wont  to.  do,  but  supposes  the  different
degrees  of  perfection  to  coexist  in  Space  rather  than
to  succeed  one  (mother  in  Time.  For  he  regards  the
world  33  eternal,  and  rejects  the  supposition  of  a
secular  progress  in  things.

But  it  is  remarkable  that  he  rejects  it  merely  on
the  ground  of  lack  of  evidence.  It  would  be
absurd,  he  says,^  on  account  of  slight  and  brief
changes,  like  the  growth  of  the  Nile  delta,  to  sup-
pose a  general  cosmic  motion  {kiv^Iv  to  xav).

Thus,  for  lack  of  the  requisite  scientific  illustration,
the  true  theory  of  Evolution  had  to  remain  still-born
for  2,000  years,  until  the  progress  of  physical  science
could  ratify  the  results  Aristotle  had  anticipated !
But  as  soon  as  the  scientific  evidence  was  forthcom-
ing,  it  was  found necessary  to revive Aristotle's

1  Meteorol.  I.  14.


EVOLUTION IN THE LIGHT OF ARISTOTLE. 197

speculations  down  to  their  special  details,  down  to
the  very  name  bestowed  upon  the  potentiality  of
Becoming,  down  to  the  assertion  of  the  finiteness  of
the  universe,  and  of  the  generation  of  its  energy  at
its  confines.  And  the  correspondence  between  Mr.
Crookes  and  Aristotle  is  the  more  valuable  because
it  seems  undesigned,  and  because  the  name  of
prothyle  is  (as  its  incorrect  form  shows)  borrowed
through  the  mediation  of  Roger  Bacon.

§  1 7,  But  Aristotle  had  the  advantage  of  being
a  metaphysician  as  well  as  a  scientist,  and  so  was
well  aware  of  the  metaphysical  value  of  the  symbol
he  used  in  his  physics  and  called  prote  hyie.  He
recognized  that  it  was  nothing  in  itself,  and  so  laid
down  the  axiom,  which  is  so  contrary  to  our  ordin-
ary modes  of  thinking,  viz.,  that  though  the  potent-
iality is  prior  to  the  actuality  in  the  order  of  time  (iv
yevea-ei)  and  in  the  order  of  our  .knowledge  [yfw&et),
yet  the  actuality  is  really  prior  to,  and  presupposed
by  the  potential  (it  is  <pv<rei  or  aTrXw?  irpoTepov).  That
is  to  say,  to  take  the  old  puzzle  which  really  involves
the  whole  question  of  philosophic  method,  though
historically  the  egg  comes  before  the  chicken,  it  is
yet  an  egg  only  in  virtue  of  its  potentiality  to  be-
come a  chicken ;  the  egg  exists  in  order  to  the
development  of  the  chicken  out  of  it.  Or,  to  put  it
into  modern  phraseology,  the  lower  is  prior  to  the
higher  historically,  but  the  higher  is  prior  meta-
physically, because  the  lower  can  be  understood
only  by  reference  to  the  higher,  which  gives  it  a
meaning  and  of  which  it  is  the  potentiality.

It  is  clear  that  this  derivation  of  all  things  from,
a  pure  potentiality,  and  the  subsequent  analysis  of
its  meaning,  explains,  justifies,  and  reconciles  the
scientific and the  metaphysical  way  of  regarding


igS  THE METAPHYSICS OF EVOLUTION.

things.  Neither  of  them  is  gratuitous  or  useless,
but  each  is  adapted  to  certain  purposes.  In
ordinary  Hfe  and  science,  where  we  think  back-
wards, and  are  more  concerned  with  the  past  than
with  the  future  of  things,  the  explanation  by  their
causes,  germs  and  potentialities  is  more  in  point.
But  in  ultimate  analysis  none  of  these  explanations
are  metaphysically  adequate  :  things  must  be  ex-
plained by  their  significance  and  purpose  instead
of  by  their  "  causes,"  by  their  ideals  instead  of  by
their  germs,  by  their  actualities  instead  of  by  their
potentialities.  And  these  two  ways  of  looking  upon
things  are  reconciled  by  the  fact  that  they  regard
the  same  connexion  of  things  in  reverse  order ;  the
process  is  one  and  the  same,  but  we  find  it  con-
venient to  look  at  it  now  from  the  one  end  arid
now  from  the  other.

§  1 8.  Applying  these  results  of  the  Aristotelian
analysis  to  the  prothyle  of  evolutionism,  it  appears
that  the  more  certainly  it  can  reduce  the  whole
sensible  and  material  world  to  a  pure  potentiality,
the  more  necessary  does  it  make  the  existence  of
a  prior  actuality,  as  the  cause  of  the  evolution  of
the  sensible.  And  that  actuality  must  be  not  only
prior  (in  Time,  if  the  process  is  conceived  as  one
in  Time,  or  only  in  idea,  or  in  both),  but,  by  the
very  terms  of  the  hypothesis,  external  tb  the  evolv-
ing world,  non-material  and  non-phenomenal.  For
since  the  whole  of  the  material  and  phenomenal
was  supposed  to  have  been  derived  out  of  the
pure  potentiality,  the  reality  pre-supposed  by  that
potentiality  cannot  itself  have  formed  part  of  the
material  and  phenomenal  world.

And  thus,  so  far  from  dispensing  with  the  need
for  a  Divine  First  Cause,  the  theory  of  Evolution,


THE  ACTUAL  PRIOR  TO  THE  POTENTIAL. 1 99

if  only  we  have  the  faith  in  science  to  carry  it  to
its  conclusion,  and  the  courage  to  interpret  it,
proves  irrefragably  that  no  evolution  was  possible
without  a  pre-existent  Deity,  and  a  Deity,  more-
over, transcendent,  non-material  and  non-pheno-
menal.

And  for  the  power  of  such  a  Deity  to  produce
the  world,  the  pure  potentiality  with  which  evolu-
tionism starts  is  merely  the  expression.  And  the
world  as  actual  is  prior  to  the  germ  which  potent-
ially contains  it,  simply  because  the  world-process
is  the  working  out  of  an  anterior  purpose  or, idea
in  the  divine  consciousness.  And  as  all  things  are,
as  far  as  possible,  directed  to  the  realization  of  that
end  or  purpose,  the  real  nature  of  things  is  to  be
found  in  their  final  cause,  and  not  in  their  historical
antecedents,  which,  just  because  they  take  prece-
dence in  Time,  are  means  to  an  end,  and  of  inferior
significance  in  truth.

Thus  it  is  not  true,  in  the  last  analysis,  that  the
lower  explains  the  higher,  or  that  the  antecedent
is  truer  than  the  final' cause.  On  the  contrary,  it
is  only  from  the  standpoint  of  the  higher  that  the
lower  can  be  explained,  and  it  is  only  by  a  recog-
nition of  final  causes  that  the  conception  of  caus-
ation can  be  cleared  of  its  difficulties  {cf.  iii.  §11).
The  evolutionist  method,  which  was  to  have  a-
bolished  teleology,  turns  out  itself  to  require  the
most  boldly  teleological  treatment.

§  19.  And  the  same  conclusion  as  to  the  ne-
cessity of  teleology  may  be  reached,  perhaps  more
clearly,  from  an  investigation  of  the  other  meta-
physical implications  of  evolutionism.

It  has  been  already  stated  (§  4)  that  the  evolu-
tionist method  involved  the  conception  of  a  world-


200  THE METAPHYSICS OF EVOLUTION.

history  and  the  belief  that  that  history  had  a
meaning,  and  was  capable  of  rational  formulation.
But  we  may  now  go  a  step  further  and  assert  that
the  conception  of  the  world  as  an  evolution  is  the
conception  of  the  world  as  a  process.  In  applying
to  the  world  the  conception  of  evolution,  we  apply
to  it  the  metaphysical  conception  of  a  process,  and
hence  we  continually  hear  evolutionists  talking  of
"  processes  of  evolution."  But  they  hardly  perhaps
realize  how  much  metaphysic  is  contained  in  that
single  word.

§  ^o.  In  the  first  place,  a  process  is  necessarily
finite  and  involves  a  beginning  or  starting-point
and  an  end,  as  two  fixed  points,  between  which
the  process  lies.  For  a  process  consists  in  A's  be-
coming B ;  but  if  neither  A  nor  B  is  fixed,  the
becoming  cannot  be  described  as  a  process.  In
order  to  describe  what  happens  we  must  have  a
definite  and  determinate  starting-point  in  A,  and
a  definite  and  determinate  end  in  B.  And  even
if  the  real  does  not,  strictly  speaking,  appear  to
possess  this  definite  character,  we  must  assume  it
in  idea  for  the  purposes  of  knowledge.  For  our
thought,  and  the  language  which  is  the  expression
of  that  thought,  can  only  work  with  definite  and
determinate  conceptions,  and  would  be  rendered
unmeaning  if  the  flux  of  the  Real  extended  to
them,  and  a  term  did  not  mean  one  thing  to  the
exclusion  of  everything  else.  For  this  reason  mere
Becoming,  which  nowhere  presents  any  salient
phases  which  our  thought  can  seize  upon  as  fixed
points  for  a  process,  is  unknowable  (ch.  iv.  §  22,
ch.  iii.  §  13).  Nothing  that  happens,  therefore,  can
ever  be  .  described  except  as  a  process,  for  our
thought  cannot  grasp  nor  our  language  express  a


THE METAPHYSICS OF A PROCESS.  20I

becoming  which  does  not  indicate,  however  vaguely,
something  definite  happening  within  fixed  Hmits,
If,  e.g.,  we  say,  as  vaguely  as  possible,  "  something
became  something  else,"  we  do  at  least  imply  that
the  ill-defined  "  something  "  was  at  least  not  any-
thing and  everything  else ;  for  in  that  case  it
would  have  been  the  "something  else,"  and  nothing
would  have  happened  at  all,  seeing  that  the  "  some-
thing "  was  the  "  something  else "  already,  and  so
did  not  have  to  become  it,  and  thus  there  would
have  been  no  becoming  at  all>  and  the  original
statement  would  have  been  false.  But  if  both  the
"somethings"  mean  something  with  a  definite
though  unspecified  character,  then  the  becoming
is  limited,  in  this  ease  also,  by  the  initial  something
at  the  one  end  and  the  final  something  at  the
other.

All  this  may  be  illustrated  by  the  old  and  famous
example  of  the  &g^  and  the  chicken.  Supposing
we  are  considering  the  pfOcess  of  the  hatching  of
the  chicken^  then  the  t.^<g  will  represent  the  fixed
starting-point  A,  and  the  chicken  the  fixed  end  B,
and  the  process  will  consist  in  A's  becoming  B.
Now  let  us  suppose  per  iinpossibile  that  neither  A
nor  B  is  fixed,  i.e.,  that  no  chicken  ever  results.
In  that  case  we  may  give  any  name  we  please  to
the  manipulations  to  which  we  subject  the  ^gg,  but
the  "  process "  cannot  be  described  as  one  of
"  hatching."  For  the  end  of  the  process  is  never
reached,  and  we  hatch  nothing.  But  now  suppose
that  what  we  had  described  by  the  definite  term
"6gg"  was  not  an  egg  at  all,  but,  say,  a  piece  of
chalk.  In  that  case  surely  our  original  description
of  the  process  of  hatching  a  chicken  out  of  an  &gg
becomes  ludicrously  false  and  inapplicable. If  A


202  THE METAPHYSICS OF EVOLUTION.

is  not  A,  B  is  not  B,  and  A  (which  is  a  delusion)
cannot  reach  B  (which  is  still  more  of  a  delusion)
from  A.  And  if  our  supposed  egg  was. not  even  a
piece  of  chalk,  but  an  illusive  appearance,  an  ever-
changing  Proteus,  we  can  not  only  make  nothing
of  it,  but  can  not  even  describe  what  happens.

In  saying,  therefore,  that  the  world  is  evolving,
we  say  that  it  is  in  process,  i.e.,  it  is  becoming
something  determinate  oiit  of  something  determ-
inate. And  Evolutionism  shares  this  assumption
of  the  knowableness  of  things,  in  spite  of  their
apparent  flux,  with  all  description  and  knowledge
of  the  world,  and  only  goes  a  step  further  than
I  he  simplest  utterance  concerning  the  world,  by
being  more  conscious  of  all  that  is  involved  in  the
least  that  can  be  said.  If,  therefore,  that  initial
assumption  is  justified  (ch.  v.  §  2),  and  if  our
description  of  the  world  as  a  process  is  true,  the
world  must  satisfy  all  the  characteristics  of  that
description.  Hence,  if  the  conception  of  a  process
involves  two  ideal  fixed  points,  then  if  we  assert
the  process  to  be  a  real  one,  its  fixed  points  must
also  be  real  fixed  points  in  the  history  of  the
world.

We  may  infer,  then,  from  the  supposed  truth  of
our  theories  of  Evolution  that  the  world-process  is
a  determinate  Becoming,  proceeding  from  one  fixed
point  or  beginning  to  another  fixed  point  or  end,
and  that  all  the  events  which  take  place  within  it
are  susceptible  of  having  their  places  in  that  pro-
cess assigned  to  them  as  members  of  a  series,  and
with  reference  to  those  fixed  points.  In  other  words,
all  things  are  susceptible  of  explanation  from  the
point  of  view  of  the  end  of  that  process,  as  tending
towards, or aiming at that end. But such  an


THE TELEOLOGY OF EVOLUTION.  203

explanation  is  necessarily  teleological,  an  explanation
by  ends  or  final  causes.  If  everything  that  is  is
grouped  with  reference  to  the  end  of  the  procisss,
and  has  a  meaning  only  in  its  context,  it  is  what
it  is  only  as  a  means  to  the  end  of  the  process.
The  teleological  explanation,  therefore,  is  not  only
a  perfectly  valid  one, ,  but  the  only  possible  one
(./§6).

§  21.  But  it  is  teleology  of  a  totally  different
kind  to  that  which  is  so  vehemently,  and  on  the
whole  so  justly,  dreaded  by  the  modern  exponents
of  natural  science.  It  does  npt  attempt  to  explain
things  anthropocentrically,  or  regard  all  creation  as
existing  for  the  use  and  benefit  of  man ;  it  is  as
far  as  the  scientist  from  supposing  that  cork-trees
grow  in  order  to  supply  us  with  champagne  cOrks,
The  end  to  which  it  supposes  all  things  to  subserve
is  not  the  good  for  man,  an,d  still  less  for  any  in-
dividual man,  but  the  universal  End  of  the  world-
process,  to  which  all  things  tend,  and  which  will
coincide  with  the  idiocentric  end  and  desires  of  the
sections  of  the  whole  just  in  .proportion  to  their
position  in  the  process.

Hence  the  world  will  not  appear  perfect  from
the  point  of  view  of  the  imperfegt,  and  if  it  did,
it  would  be  rriost  truly  imperfect ;  it  can  be  only
from  the  loftier  standpoint  of  the  highest  members
in  the  hierarchy  of  existence  that  £he  world  will
seem  to  be  what  it  ought,  in  their  opinion,  to  be,
and  that  all  things  will  be  really  seen  to  be  "  very
good."  And  to  judge  by  the  treatment  which  is
meted  out  to  man  by  the  present  constitution  of
things,  and  the  still  more  ruthless  disregard  of  the
feelings  of  the  lower  beings,  which  nature  almost
ostentatiously  displays,  there  is  little  in  our  position


204  THE METAPHYSICS OF EVOLUTION.

that  could  minister  to  the  conceit  of  anthropocentric
teleology.  On  the  contrary,  we  shall  be  disposed
to  hold  rather  that  the  spiritual  value  of  human
existence  is  no  greater  in  the  spiritual  cosmos,  than
is  the  physical  importance  of  our  earth  in  the
sidereal  universe.

And  yet  there  is  a  grain  of  truth  even  in  anthro-
pocentric .  teleology.  For  after  all,  man  is  the
highest  of  the  beings  we  know,  and  the  most  highly
evolyed,  and  so  the  nearest  to  the  end  of  things,
and  hence  in  a  way  entitled  to  regard  the  other
beings  he  knows,  representing  lower  phases  in  the
process  of  Evolution,  as  means  to  his  ends.

And  this  teleology  is  not  only  true  and  inevitable,
but  in  no  wise  conflicts  with  the  principle  of  scien-
tific mechanism.  For  it  does  not  supersede,  but
supplement  it;  it  permits,  nay,  requires,  science  to
carry  its  mechanical  explanation  to  the  furthest
possible  point,  because  it  desires  to  know  the  whole
mechanism  of  the  teleology,  and  because  it  is  confi-
dent that  only  so  it  most  easily  and  most  clearly
displays  the  whole  extent  of  the  essential  limitation
and  insufficiency  of  the  mechanical  explanation.  It
is  only  when  the  explanation  of  "  unmetaphysical  "
science  has  reached  the  limit  of  its  tether  and  ended
in  perplexity,  that  the  consciously  metaphysical
explanation  of  teleology  steps  in  and  reinterprets
the  facts  in  their  proper  order.  But  any  attempt
to  introduce  teleological  points  of  view  in  the
purely  scientific  explanation  of  things  must  be
resisted  as  fatal  to  the  true  interests  both  of  science
and  of  philosophy.

And  in  its  reinterpretation  of  the  scientific  facts
teleology  again  comes  into  no  conflict  with  mech-
anism. For it is guided by the data  amassed


RELATION  OF  TELEOLOGY  TO  MECHANISM. 205

by  science,  and  does  not  indulge  in  random  specu-
lation. It  is  only  from  a  knowledge  of  the  tend-
encies of  things  in  the  past  that  we  are  able  to
predict  their  future:  it  is  by  a  study  of  what  has
been  that  we  discover  what  is  to  be^  both  in  the
sense  of  what  is  about  to,  and  of  what  ought  to,
be.  The  process  which  the  theory  of  Evolution
divined  the  history  of  the  world  to  be,  must  have
its  content  and  meaning  determined  from  the  basis
of  the  scientific  data ;  it  is  only  hy  a  careful  study
of  the  history  of  a  thing  that  we  can  determine
the  direction  of  its  development,  and  discover  the
general  principle  which  ,  forniulates,  its  evolution.
And  it  is  only  when  we  have  discovered  a  formula
holding  good  of  all  things  that  we  can  be  said  to
have  made  the  first  approximation  to  the  knowledge
of  the  End  (TeXo?)  of  the  world-procesiS.

Thus  the  new  teleology  would  not  be  capricious
or  random  in  its  application,  bqt  firmly  rooted  in  the
conclusions  of  the  sciences,  on  which  it  would  be
based  and  by  which  it  would  be  regulated.  It  would
stand  in  definite  .and  recognized  relations  to  the
methods  of  the  sciences,  and  would  share  in  and
stimulate  their  growth.

§  22.  The  only  danger  to  be  guarded  against,
when  a  valid  principle  of  teleological  explanation
has  been  obtained,  is  that  arising  from  human  im-
patience. We  must  not  allow  ourselves  to  forget
that  the  teleological  method  just  reverses  the  order
of  historical  explanation.  What  comes  first  in
science,  comes  last  in  metaphysics.  It  is  in  the
higher  and  subsequent  that  the  explanation  of  the
lower  and  anterior  is  to  be  sought.  And  instead  of
being  simpler  and  more  susceptible  of  explanation,
the lower stages of the process are really the


2o6  THE METAPHYSICS OF EVOLUTION.

obscurer  and  more  unintelligible,  because  they  do
not  so  clearly  exhibit  the  drift  of  the  process.
Hence  their  explanation  conies  last,  just  because  in
the  historical  process  they  came  first.  We  must  not
therefore  hastily  conclude  that  because  the  teleo-
logical  method  is  true,  it  will  be  at  once  possible  to
give  a  teleological  explianation  of  the'physical  laws  of
nature.  The  physical  laws  of  nature  are  the  earliest
and  lowest  laws  of  the  world-process,  the  first  at-
tempts at  the  realization  of  its  End,  and  so  are  the
very  last  to  become  intelligible.  If  we  ever  arrive
at  a  teleological  explanation  of  them,  it  will  be  only
after  we  have  worked  down  to  them  from  the  higher
laws  of  the  more  complex  phenomena.  The  basis,
in  other  words,  for  a  teleological  interpretation  of
nature  will  not  be  found  in  sciences  like  physics  and
mechanics,  but  in  sciences  like  sociology  and  ethics.

But  if  this  principle  is  borne  in  mind,  and  no
attempt  is  made  at  premature  interpretation  of  the
lower  orders,  which  is  bound  to  fail,  we  need  not
despair  of  ultimately  being  able  to  give  a  rational
account  of  why  everything  is  what  it  is  and  nothing
else.

§  23.  But  though  enough  has  perhaps  been  said
to  elucidate  the  teleology  of  the  world-process,  its
relation  to  Time  yet  requires  further  discussion.
We  saw  in  §  2  that  every  assertion  of  the  reality  of
history  involved  the  reality  of  the  Past,  i.e.  of  Time,
and  a  beginning  of  that  history  either  in  or  with
Time.  But  we  must  now  consider  whether  the  end,
which  is  involved  in  the  conception  of  a  worl(l-
process,  applies  also  to  Time,  whether  it  is  a  real  or
merely  a  logical  end.

We  saw  (§  13)  that  it  seemed  net  impossible  to
regard  the  world  as  a  process  which  went  on  ever-


THE END OF THE WORLD- PROCESS.  207

lastingly  reproducing  itself,  without  beginning  and
without  end.  It  might  be  that  the  development  of
prothyle  into  matter  and  of  matter  into  prothyle
should  go  on  to  all  time,  without  change  of  charac-
ter.

But  though  this  would  be  a  conception  tenable  in
itself,  it  must  yet  be  rejected  as  inadequate  to  the
explanation  of  terrestrial  history.  The  evolution  of
the  planets  and  of  the  life  they  bear  would  be  an
utterly  irrelevant  concomitant  of  the  evolution  of
prothyle.  Terrestrial  evolution  would  be  an  inex-
plicable and  meaningless  bye-product,  which  has
aimlessly  diverged  ,  on  a  bye-path  very  remote  from
the  world's  real  process,  viz.,  the  formation  of  atoms
at  its  confines  and  their  subsequent  destruction  in
the  centres  of  the  hottest  stars.  For  in  tjie  majority
of  cases  the  life-history  of  the  atoms  would  come
to  an  end,  without  their  reaching  any  further  stages
of  development  into  inorganic  and  organic  com-
pounds, animal  life  and  human  reason  at  all.  If,
therefore,  the  world-process  is  one,  either  our  terres-
trial evolution  has  no  part  in  it,  or  our  view  of  the
development  of  prothyle  was  an  imperfect  one.  For
its  development  cannot  Include  our  terrestrial  evolu-
tion. Biological,  and  evMi  the  lateaforms  of  chemi-
cal, development  cann/Jt  betetataQ  in  terms  of  this
merely  chemical  evpfution,  anH  so  they  must  either  be
illusory,  or  our  formulation  of  the  latter  is  erroneous.

And  thaty-the  latter  is .  the  alternative  to  be
adopted,  appears  not  only  from  the  fact  that  it  can-
npt  interpret  a  large  portion  of  our  data,  and  that
the  ev/lution  of- the  earth  lies  without  its  scope,  but
also  from  this,  that  a  constant  generation  and  de-
struction of  atoms  is  not  properly  a  process  at  all.  It
j6o\M.  hardly  be  called  even  a  history  of  the  world,


208  THE METAPHYSICS OF EVOLUTION.

for  it  would  be  a  history,  in  which  nothing  ever
really  happened  and  no  progress  was  made,  and
this  history  could  certainly  not  lay  claim  to  any
meaning.  For  in  so  far  as  anything  new  happens,  it
happens  on  our  planet  and  falls  without  the  main
process,  while  in  so  far  as  the  main  process  is  real  our
history  is  unreal.

If,  then,  as  has  been  agreed,  we  must  regard  the
pf^cess  of  Evolution  as  the  same  for  the  whole  of
theViniverse,  it  must  be  formulated  so  as  to  include
the  amrse  of  events  on  our  earth,  and  similarly  situ-
ated parts  of  the  world.  It  is  preferable,  therefore,
to  constniie  the  evolution  of  elements  also  in  terms
of  Time,  and  to  regard  it  also  as  exemplifying  that
general  process  towards  heterogeneity  which  has  been
emphasizedby  Mr.  Spencer.  In  this  way  the  world-
process  wiln  be  one  and  will  have  a  real  beginning
in  Time,  and  also  a  real  end — in  the  attainment  of
the  maximufp  or  perfection  of  that  in  which  the
process  consi^s.  For  a  process  cannot  go  on  for
ever,  but  must Ipass  into  a  generically  different  state
of  things  whMi  it  has  reached  its  highest  develop-
ment. To  suppose  anything  to  the  contrary  would
be  as  erroneciis  as  to  suppose  that  motion  could
continue  when^ll  the  ^bodies  in  the  universe  had
attained  to  a  posiftea-of  equin>b-ium.

§  24.  Hence  we  need  not  li^sitate  to  reject  Mr.
Spencer's  theory  of  alternating  periods  of  evolution
and  dissolution.  This .  belief  is  one  of  venerable
antiquity :  it  is  found  in  the  mythologies  of  ancient
religions  and  endorsed  by  the  speculations  of  ancient
philosophers.  Hence  we  may  be  confident'tiHtt  it
is  concerned  with  what  appears  a  real  difficulty  to
the  human  imagination.

That difficulty is  twofold. It relates in thiB.


THE GREAT CYCLE THEORY.  209

first  place  to  the  difficulty  of  really  grasping  the
reality  of  the  process  and  admitting  a  real  increase
and  growth  in  the  content  or  significance  of  the
world.  The  force  of  facts  compels  to  the  admission
that  the  world  really  progresses,  really  contains  more
than  it  did  of  the  quality  in  terms  of  which  the  pro-
cess is  formulated,  that  its  Becoming  involves  a
progressive  increase  in  Being.  But  in  spite  of  the
avowal  of  dynamical  principles,  the  statical  tendency
to  regard  the  amount  of  Reality  as  stationary,  ir-
resistibly re-asserts  itself.  The  actual  fact  of  growth
cannot  be  denied,  but  its  significance  may  be  dis-
puted. And  so  it  is  asserted  to  be  merely  apparent  :
it  is  really  only  the  manifestation  of  the  great  Cycle,
which  reels  off  the  appointed  series  of  events  in
precisely  the  same  order  for  ever.  It  is  therefore  a
mere  illusion  to  fancy  that  the  total  content  of  the
universe  changes  :  it  is  an  equation  which  is  repre-
sented by  A  =  A?=A  .  .  .  to  infinity,  in  spite
of  the  apparent  progress  of  the  phenomenal  series
from  A  to  Z.

And,  as  will  be  shown  (ch.  x.  §  12),  there  is  a
sense  in  which  this  is  true;  but  it  is  not  true  in  any
sense  which  is  relevant  to  the  explanation  of  the
Becoming  of  the  actual  world.  In  as  far  as  we  and
our  world  are  real  at  all,  in  so  far  the  change  and
progress  of  our  world  is  real,  and  the  world- process
is  a  real  growth  in  the  content  of  our  world.

The  second  difficulty  to  which  the  cycle-theory  is
due,  is  that  men  find  it  hard  to  conceive  the  world
as  reaching  the  end  of  any  process  without  the
question  of — What  next  ?  And  as  they  have  not
troubled  to  consider  the  nature  of  the  eternal  state
of  equilibrium,  which  would  supersede  the  Becoming
of  the  world-process  {cf.  ch.  xii.),  they  have  failed  to

R.  of  S.  .  P


2IO  THE METAPHYSICS OF EVOLUTION.

perceive  that  it  would  render  meaningless  the
question  they  ask.  And  so  it  seems  easier  to  say —
"  Oh,  when  heterogeneity  has  reached  its  maximum,
a  return  to  homogeneity  will  set  in,"  or  "  the  systole
will  follow'  on  the  diastole  of  the  world,"  or  "the
night  of  Brahma,  in  which  all  worlds  are  re-absorbed
into  the  Absolute,  recurs  after  each  cycle  of  creation"
(manvantara).

Put  really  this  belief  in  cycles  of  progression  and
regression  is  based  upon  a  mere  prejudice,  inde-
fensible alike  on  philosophic  and  on  scientific
grounds.  Philosophically  it  is  to  be  execrated  ;  for
it  would  be  difficult  to  imagine  any  theory  that
rendered  the  world  more  meaningless  than  this
pointless  and  futile  fluctuation  of  things  :  the  cease-
less play  of  systole  and  diastole  may  be  the  amuse-
ment of  an  insane  Absolute,  but  it  is  not  an  end  the
human  reason  can  ever  hope  to  appreciate.  Scienti-
fically it  is  gratuitous  :  for,  ex  hypothesi,  if  all  things
in  the  universe  are  evolving  heterogeneity,  there
cannot  possibly  be  any  evidence  in  favour  of  a  reverse
process  towards  homogeneity.  The  assertion,
therefore,  that  process  of  dissolution  will  again  re-
duce the  world  to  homogeneity  is  an  entirely  base-
less speculation,  necessarily  unsupported  by  evidence.
It  is  an  arbitrary  assumption,  devised  "for  the
pastime  of  eternity,"  by  systems  which  mistake  its
nature.  Neither  our  science  nor  our  philosophy  has
any  valid  reason  to  stray  beyond  the  limits  of  the
world-process  and  the  states  which  are  directly  in-
ferred from  its  character.

§  25.  We  may  sum  up,  then,  the  results  of  the
investigation  of  the  metaphysics  of  Evolution  as
being  that  if  our  theories  of  Evolution  are  true,  (i)
the  Becoming  of  the  world  is  a  process:  (2)  a  real


SUMMARY OF CHAPTER.  211

process,  and  not  a  process  in  or  of  thought :  (3)  with
a  determinate  beginning  and  end  in  Time :  (4)  tend-
ing towards  its  perfection  without  any  suggestion
of  a  reversal  :  (5)  the  process  proceeds  from  the
potential  to  the  actual,  and  hence  the  world  possesses
more  actuality,  more  real  significance  and  "  Being  "
in  the  later  stages  of  the  process  than  in  the  earlier.
But  as  (6)  in  the  order  of  Time  the  less  perfect  pre-
cedes the  more  perfect,  that  order  reverses  the  true
relations  of  things.  Hence  (7)  the  true  method  of
philosophy  is  necessarily  teleological,  and  explains
the  lower  as  the  imperfect  realization  of  the  higher,
and  with  a  reference  to  the  End  of  the  world-process.
And  lastly  (8),  the  End  and  meaning  of  the  process
must  be  determined  from  the  historical  data,  the
future  must  be  predicted  from  the  past.

And  it  is  to  this  task  of  determining  the  meaning
of  the  world-process,  by  means  of  formulas  which
hold  good  universally  of  the  Evolution  of  things,
that  we  must  next  devote  our  attention.


CHAPTER  VIII.

FORMULAS  OF  TflE  LAW  OF  EVOLUTION.

§  I,  We  have  seeri  in  the  last  ghapter  what  is
implied  in  saying  that  the  -yv^orld  is  an  evolution.
To  speak  of  Evolution,  of  a  world-process,  is  to  put
before  ourselves  a  metaphysical  ideal,  to  which  we
assert  the  course  of  Reality  will  conform.  A;nd  this
faith  might  be  held  even  though  we  were  utterly
unable  to  define  this  world-process,  ta  diyine  the
content  of  our  conception  in  our  particular  case,  or
to  predict  from  what  the  world  develops  into  what.
We  might  say  that  the  world  was  eyolvin,g,  a,nd  as
yet  not  know  what  it  was  evolving.  We  might  feel
sure  tha^t  the  phenomena  of  the  world  are  not  merely
an  aimless  flux  of  qhange,  but  a  development  in  a
defiinite  direction,  even  though  the  state  of  Qi^r  know-
ledge might  not  enable  us  to  determine  and  to  for-
mulate that  direction.

But  such  a  strain  upon  the  faculty  of  faith  is  fortun-
ately uncalled  for.  The  same  scientific  evidence
which  first  suggested  the  application  of  the  meta-
physical conception  of  process  to  the  world,  also
instructs  us  as  to  the  nature  of  that  process.  The
formulas  of  the  law  of  Evolution  are  generalizations
similar  to  the  other  generalizations  about  the  world,
and  to  some  extent  they  have  already  been  dis-
covered.


ACCORDING  TO  SPENCER.  213

§  2.  Mr.  Spencer  defines  the  process  of  Evolution
as  being  "  an  integration  of  matter  and  concomitant
dissipation  of  motion,  during  which  the  matter
passes  from  an  indefinite  incoherent  homogeneity  td
a  definite  coherent  heterogeneity,  alnd  the  retained
motion  undergoes  a  parallel  transformation."^

As  the  first  to  give  in  these  terms  a  general  foK
mula  of  the  law  of  Evolution,  Mr.  Spencer  deserves
the  undying  gratitude  of  all  philosophers.  But  it  wiH
only  enhance  Mr.  Spencer's  glory  if,  contrary  to  the
drift  of  his  own  utterances,  we  maintain  that  being
the  first  he  cannot  for  this  very  reason  be  the  last,
and  express  a  hope  that  he  may  prove  the  foundef
of  a  long  dynasty  of  evolutionist  philosophers.  For
he  has  begun,  but  he  has  not  ended  the  philosophy
of  Evolution.  His  statement  may  be  true,  and
wholly  true,  but  it  is  not  on  that  account  the  whole
truth.  Nay,  if  we  reflect,  this  is  impossible.  It
would  be  improbable,  though  possible,  that  the  first
shot  should  have  hit  the  mark,  but  it  is  not  possible
either  to  state  the  whole  truth  of  the  higher  in  terms
of  the  lower,  or  to  state  the  whole  truth  about  Evol-
ution in  a  single  formula.  Thus,  in  the  first  place,  Mr.
Spencer's  formula  is  inadequate,  because,  though  all
things  are  perhaps  matter  and  motion,  many  things:
are  so  much  more,  and  the  conceptions  of  matter
and  motion  cannot  reach  their  deeper  import.
Hence,  though  it  is  a  great  triumph  to  have  shown
how  a  definite  formulation  can  be  given  even  of  the
material  changes  that  accompany  Evolution,  yet  this
does  not  suffice.  That  violin-playing  "  is  a  scraping
of  the  hair  of  a  horse  on  the  intestines  of  a  cat "  is
doubtless  true,  but  it  conveys  no  adequate  idea  of
the  music.  The  most  accurate  and  scientific  analysis
1  "First  PrinCi,"  p.  396;


214 FORMULAS  OF  THE  LAW  OF  EVOLUTION.

of  the  pigments  of  a  picture  will  not  take  the  place
of  an  explanation  of  its  meaning.  And  so  with  Mr.
Spencer's  formula :  it  is  true,  but  it  is  not  significant,
it  is  a  formula  which  cannot  be  utilized  to  explain
many  things  in  life,  although  as  Mr.  Spencer  has  so
well  shown,  it  will  throw  fresh  light  on  many  more
things  than  might  have  been  expected.

Secondly,  though  true,  it  is  neither  exhaustive  nor
exclusive,  as  indeed  no  formula  of  the  law  can  well
be.  For  all  our  formulas  attempt  to  state  a  real
process  in  ideal  terms,  and  if  the  Evolution  of  the
world  is  real,  its  content  can,  like  all  reality,  never
be  exhausted  by  our  ideal  symbols.  Hence  various
formulations  of  the  law  of  Evolution  may  all  be  true
and  equally  true  :  true  not  merely  in  the  sense  of
approximating  in  different  degrees  to  the  truth,  but
rather  as  each  embracing  a  more  or  less  prominent
aspect  of  the  whole  truth.

Hence  it  is  no  disparagement  of  Mr.  Spencer's
formula  to  say  that  it  is  unsuited  for  many  purposes,
for  which  more  significant  statements  of  the  nature
of  Evolution  are  required.  Thus,,  in  sociology
the  promotion  of  heterogeneity,  is  not  an  aim  for
which  it  is  possible  to  feel  much  enthusiasm,  nor
even  one  which  would  stimulate  to  any  definite
course  of  conduct.  For  so  many  things  might  lead
to  so  many  kinds  of  heterogeneity,  many  of  which
would  appear  far  from  desirable,  that  we  should
probably  neglect  more  pressing  necessities  in  the
perplexities  of  promoting  heterogeneity.

§  3.  If,  on  the  other  hand,  we  take  a  formula  like
Eduard  von  Hartmann's,  according  to  whom  Evolu-
tion consists  in  the  development  of  consciousness,
or  more  precisely,  in  the  development  of  conscious
reason out  of  the Unconscious,  we  find  that  the


ACCORDING TO V. HARTMANN.  215

process  is  at  once  raised  from  the  merely  physical
to  the  intellectual  sphere,  and  that  we  have  a  formula
which  would  afford  considerable  guidance  in  soci-
ology. Indeed,  it  would  be  both  significant  and  true
of  the  whole  oi- organic  evolution  ;  for  whatever
else,  and  whatever  more  it  is,  it  certainly  involves  a
continuous  raising  and  intensifying  of  consciousness.
But  on  the  other  hand,  it  seems  difficult  to  apply
this  to  inorganic  evolution.  How  shall  we  regard
the  evolution  of  the  solar  system  out  of  a  homogen-
eous nebula,  to  say  nothing  of  the  evolution  of  dif-
ferentiated matter  out  of  indeterminate  prothyle,  as
a  growth  of  consciousness  ?  And  even  if  in  our
distress  we  had  recourse  to  the  difficult,  and  perhaps
gratuitous,  hypothesis,  that  inorganic  matter  was
really  conscious,  it  would  be  difficult  to  detect  any
higher  consciousness  in  a  stone  than  in  an  incandes-
cent gas.  Or  shall  we  say  that  the  inorganic  evolu-
tion prepared  the  way  for  the  organic  ?  But  why
then  all  these  aeons  of  inorganic  evolution  ?  Surely
it  is  too  large  a  factor  in  the  world's  history  to  be
denied  all  intrinsic  significance.  If  it  is  a  mere
means  to  the.  production  of  conscious  organisms,
could  the  means  not  be  prepared  without  such  a
portentous  waste  of  time  and  energy  ?  Von  Hart-
mann's  formula,  then,  cannot  be  applied  universally
without  supplementary  hypotheses  which  largely  im-
pair its  va;lue.

Let  us  see,  however,  whether  it  is  not  possible  to
discover  a  formula  as  true  as  Spencer's  and  as
significant  as  von  Hartmann's,  and  to  elicit  from
nature  a  lesson  which  shall  at  the  same  time  illus-
trate more  clearly  than  all  previous  discussions,  how
the  method  of  concrete  metaphysics  draws  its  philo-
sophical results  from  scientific  facts.


2l5 FORMULAS OF THE LAW OF EVOLUTION.

§  4.  In  Studying  the  wonderful  organization  of
the  polities  of  social  insects  like  the  ants  apd  bees,
the  political  philosopher  will  be  tempted  to  compare
their  States  with  those  of  men.  And  at  first  sight
the  comparison  is  greatly  to  man's  disadvantage.
The  social  insects  appear  to  have  solved  many  prob-
lems the  solution  of  which  would  in  human  States
be  justly  esteemed  Utopian.  They  have  solved  the
great  fundamental  questions  of  Feeding  and  Breed-
ing, which  underlie  all  social  life:  the  demons  of
'  Hunger  and  of  Love  have  lost  their  terrors  for  the
citizen  of  the  City  of  the  Bees.  Short  of  natural
calamities  such  as  no  foresight  can  avert,  his  labour
secures  to  each  member  sufficient  food  and  shelter
(for  clothing  he  does  not  need).  Nor  can  starvation
arise  from  over-(or  under-)  population,  for  population
can  be  accurately  regulated,  without  difficulty  and
without  disturbance.  No  amatory  passions  can  dis-  -
turb  the  calm  of  social  amity,  for  all  the  citizens  are
sexless,  or  at  'least  unsexed.  No  wonder,  then,  that
the  cities  of  the  Ants  and  Bees  have  no  need-  of
prisons  or  police,  that  their  discipline  displays  perfect
obedience  and  perfect  harmony,  that  their  members
support  one  another  like  one  united  family,  that,  in
a  word,  their  instincts  prompt  them  to  do  what  they
ought,  and  are  perfectly  harmonious  with  their  social
environment.  We  have  here  perfect  socialism  har-
monized with  all  but  perfect  industry,  organization
and  legality,  and  there  is  no  doubt  that,  as  far  as
form  goes,  the  structural  perfection  of  these  societies
is  far  higher  than  that  of  any  men  have  ever  attained
to.  In  so  far  as  civilization  is  measured  by  the
capacity  for  social  communion  and  co-operation,  the
ants  and  bees  are  immeasurably  our  superiors.

§  5. Why,  then,  are  they  not  the  masters  of  our


, THE CITY OF THE BEES.  217

planet  ?  Their  diminutive  size  is  an  obstacle,  but
size  is  unavailing  against  intelligence.  The  real
reason  is  different.

The  social  insects,  did  not  achieve  these  marvellous
results,  except  at  a  severe  and,  as  it  proved,  a  fatal
cost. They  solved  the  social  question  by  elimin-
ating the  factors  they  ought  to  have  reconciled  with
the  social  welfare. Sexuality  and  the  difficulties  of
population  being  disturbing  elements  in  social  organ-
isms, they  cut  the  Gordian  knot  by  confining  mem-
bership of  the  State  to  the  sexless. The  males  and
females,  both  of  the  beesand  of  the  ants,  contribute
more  or  less  to  its  existence,  for  which  they  supply
the  necessary  basis,  but  they  do  not  form  part  of  the
eommtinityi The males are,  as is well known,
simply. turned  out  to  starve,  while  the  queen-bee  or
ant,  in  spite  of  the  reverence,  shown  her,  is  kept  as  a
sort  of  State-prisoner, upon  whom  the  security  of
the  State  depends. What  is  the  effect  of  this  curi-
ous solution  of  the  social  problem  ? This,  that  the
training  of  the  citizens  in  each  generation  is  wasted,
and  that,  as they  leave  no  descendants,  there  is
no  possibility  of  hereditary  improvement,  either  by
direct  inheritance  of  acquired  intelligence  or  by  the
survival  of  the  descendants  of  the  more  intelligent.
Each  generation  is  descended  from  queens  that  have
no  training, and  no  occasion  to  exert  their  intel-
lectual faculties,  and  hence  each  generation  is  as  wise
as  its  predecessor. In  other  words,  the  State  of  the
social  insects  is  unprogressive)  because  the  develop-
ment of  the  individual  has  been  stopped ;  its  perfect-
ion has  been  bought  by  the  sacrifice  of  progress.
The  individual has been  harmonized with  social
requirements,  but  only  by  hiaving  his  individuality
crushed,  and  with  it  has  vanished  all  the  hope  of  the


2l8 FORMULAS  OF  THE  LAW  OF  EVOLUTION.

race.  The  ants  and  bees,  therefore,  may  be  said  to
present  a  terrible  example  of  the  fallacy  of  Abstract
Socialism.

§  6.  This  example  may  well  suggest  the  reflection,
that  true  progress  avoids  alike  excessive  individ-
ualism and  excessive  socialism,  and  consists  in  a
harmonious  development  of  the  individual  and  his
social  medium.

And  in  fact  we  find  that  whereas  neither  the
individual  by  himself,  nor  the  society  which  has
crushed  the  individual,  can. develop  beyond  a  limited
extent,  all  real  progress  concurrently  develops  both
the  individual  and  the  social  medium.  It  is  a  develop-
ment of  the  individual  in  society,  and  of  society  through
individuals.  A  harmonjous  deyelopmeat  like  this
does  not  develop,,  the  individual  in  a  fakir-like  isol-
ation, by  himself  and  for  himself,  but  as  a  member  of
society  and  together  with  society  :  and  similarly  the
development  of  society  involves,  that  of  the  indivi-
duals who  compose  it,  and  consists  therein.  The  two
progress  pari  passu^  so  that  we  may  perhaps  conjec-
ture that  they  are  not  two  facts,  but  one.

And  by  the  development  of  the  individual  is
meant  that  the  individual  becomes  more  of  an  in-
dividual, a  fuller  and  more  perfect  individual ;  by  the
development  of  society,  that  society  becomes  more
of  a  society,  a  fuller  and  more  perfect  society,  of
which  the  members  are  more  and  more  dependent
on  one  another,  act  and  react  upon  one  another  with
greater  and  greater  intensity.

But  this  formula  must  be  tested  and  verified  by
its  applicability  to  the  different  stages  of  Evolution,
alike  to  the  evolution  of  human  -society,  to  that  of
the  lower  animals,  and  finally  to  that  of  the  inorganic
world.


DEVELOPMENT OF THE INDIVIDUAL IN SOCIETY. 219

§  7.  With  regard  to  actual  human  society  the
illustrations  of  its  truth  meet  us  on  all  sides.

Thus  it  is  to  adopt  what  has  become  almost  a
commonplace  definition  of  civilization  to  say  tha:t  a
civilized  society  is  a  highly  complex,  differentiated
and  specialized  organism,  and  that  in  progressive
societies  its  complexity,  the  specialization  and
differentiation  of  the  functions  of  the  parts,  are  in-
creased every  day.  But  what  does  this  mean  but
that  in  the  progress  of  Evolution  the  social  organism
is  ever  becoming  more  and  more  of  a  society  ?

The  division  of  labour,  which  is  one  of  the  chief
factors  of  increasing  efficiency,  makes  each  special-
ized class  more  dependent  on  the  others,  which
supply  it,  in  exchange  for  the  products  of  its  labour,
with  the  means  of  satisfying  all  the  wants  of  life ;
for  everything  but  the  single  article  which  it  pro-
duces far  in  excess  of  its  own  requirements,  it  is
dependent  upon  society.

The  effect  of  higher  evolution  in  making  the
individuals  of  higher  societies  more  individual,  is
less  obvious  at  first,  because  highly  specialized  work
becomes  monotonous  and  mechanical,  and  so  soul-
destroying.  But  perhaps  much  of  the  mischief  is
due  to  the  fact  that  our  social  sympathies^-  are  not  yet
sufficiently  developed  for  us  to  take  interest  in  each
other's  specialisms.  And  in  any  case,  the  evil  works
its  own  cure,  for  surely  some  of  the  surplus  wealth
produced  by  the  division  of  labour  might  be  devoted
to  the  alleviation  of  its  secondary  mischiefs.  And
if  we  consider  the  total  effects  of  the  division  of
labour  on  society,  we  find  that  it  does  facilitate
higher  developments  of  individuality.  Division  of
labour  and  the  general  complexity  of  social  structure
in  higher  societies  renders  possible  accumulation  of


2  20 FORMULAS OF THE LAW OF EVOLUTION.

wealth  and  the  growth  of  leisured  classes,  possessing
that  leisure  (a-)(o\^)  and  freedom  from  the  soul-de-
stroying drudgery  [^avava-la)  which  the  Greeks  so  well
perceived  to  be  essential  to  the  highest  developments
of  the  human  soul,  i.e.,  in  this  more  perfect  society
more  perfect  developments  of  individuality  become
possible,  and  if  our  leisured  classes  have  not  hither-
to made  a  particularly  good  use  of  their  oppor-
tunities, the  fault  once  more  lies  in  the  society
which  has  educated  them  perversely.  Our  social
reformers  are  too  apt  to  forget  that  their  labours  in
raising  the  lower  classes  are  likely  to  be  to  a  large
extent  wasted,  while  the  social  ideal  the  upper
classes  put  before  the  masses  is  one  of  "  sport "  and
merely  animal  enjoyment.

§  8.  If,  again,  we  consider  the  second  great
factor  in  social  progress,  the  growth  of  knowledge
and  of  the  consequent  command ,  over  the  material
conditions  of  life,  we  find  that  it  is  closely  bound  up
with  a  proper  correspondence  between  the  indi-
vidual and  his  social  medium.

Knowledge  can  only  be  accumulated  in  a  society
sufficiently  wealthy  and  civilized  to  support  a
leisured  class  which  can  cultivate  knowledge.  Only
a  highly  elaborated  social  order  offers  the  induce-
ments necessary  to  the  cultivation  of  the  sciences,
and  secures  the  fruits  of  discovery.  Hence  it  is  only
in  such  a  society  that  knowledge  can  be  permanent.
A  society  which  is  so  little  of  a  society  that  violence
reigns  supreme,  and  the  arbitrary  aggressions  of
individuals  upon  others  remain  unchecked,  can
neither  itself  acquire  knowledge  nor  maintain  the
knowledge  it  possesses.  Hence  the  path  of  pro-
gress is  closed  to  it,  its  members  remain  immersed
in  brutish  ignorance  and  Cyclopian  barbarism. On


THE INTERACTION OF INDIVIDUAL AND SOCIETY. 22  1

the  other  hand,  good  patent  laws  are  the  greatest
encouragement  of  material,  and  good  copyright  laws
of  moral  and  intellectual  progress.  The  social  order
which  makes  the  growth  of  knowledge  possible  is
not  only  a  permanent  source  of  greater  wealth,  but
also  of  higher  culture.  It  generates  a  higher  stamp
both  of  society  and  of  individuals.  And  these
higher  individuals  are  more  dependent  upon  society.
The  great  author  or  the  great  poet  whom  we  may
perhaps  take  as  the  type  of  the  highest  individualiz-
ation, pre-eminently  needs  the  social  medium  of  the
public  which  reads  him ;  and  society  again  is  bene-
fited by  his  work.

And  the  social  medium  not  only  enters  indirectly
into  the  growth  of  knowledge,  by  supplying  the
conditions  of  life  which  make  it  possible,  but  to  a
growing  extent  also  directly.  For  the  growing
complexity  of  modern  sciences  renders  eoToperation
in  work  as  indispensable  to  the  achievements  of
great  results  in  science  as  in  industry,  and  will  con-
tinue to  do  so  increasingly  in  the  future.

Thus,  on  the.  one  hand,  perfect  societies  can  be
composed  only  of  perfect  individuals,  and  on  the
other,  the  perfection  of  individuals  implies  a  corre-
sponding growth  in  the  perfection  of  society.  For
any  considerable  perfection  of  the  individuals  im-
plies more  or  less  complete  exemption  from  the
degrading  influences  of  the  material  conditions  of
life,  i.e.,  a  considerable  command  over  nature.  But
both  the  sources  of  this  command  over  nature,  alike
division  of  labour  and  knowledge  of  the  properties
of  things,  require  a  highly  developed  social  organiz-
ation, and  this  again,  to  be  stable,  must  possess  a
very  considerable  power  over  nature.  Unless  the
amount  of  leisure  in  a  society  is  relatively  consider-


222 FORMULAS OF THE LAW OF EVOLUTION.

able  and  well-employed,  i.e.,  unless  the  wealthy
classes  are  comparatively  numerous  and  benevolent,
the  constitution  of  society  will  hardly  be  permanent.
There  is  much  latent  or  explicit  social  amity  and
good  feeling  involved  in  the  very  existence  of  a
complex  and  highly  organized  society.  Thus  much
social  sympathy  is  necessary  to  the  existence  and
security  of  highly  developed  individuals,  nor  ought
we  perhaps  to  regard  those  individuals  as  highly
developed  in  whom  that  sympathy  is  wanting.

§  9.  This  mutual  implication  of  individual  and
social  development  is  seen  not  only  in  industrial
progress,  but  even  more  obviously  in  the  methods
of  social  competition,  e.g.  warfare.  For  it  is  clear  that
social  combination  and  co-operation  is  of  primary
importance  in  warfare.  No  individual  fighting-  for
his  own  hand,  however  strong  he  may  be,  can
possibly  maintain  himself  against  combinations  of
many  individuals.  Society,  therefore,  is  based  upon
the  simple  physical  fact  that  in  the  long  run  two  are
stronger  than  one,  and  that  hetice  the  limitation  of
the  struggle  of  all  against  all  by  social  restraints  is
a  more  effective  method  of  survival  than  unrestricted
competition.  Thus  socialism  conquers  the  atomism
of  individuals  in  the  interests  of  the  individuals
themselves.  And  so  the  least  military  efficiency
implies  some  limitations  on  the  aggressions  of  in-
dividuals on  one  another ;  for  evidently  no  man  will
fight,  if  he  is  liable  to  be  treacherously  attacked  by
his  comrades.  And  as  it  was,  so  it  still  is  :  discipline,
superior  organization  and  equipment,  all  of  them
implying  a  superior  capacity  to  subordinate  oneself
to  social  aims  and  to  co-operate  with  othefs,  are
ever  growing  more  important  factors  in  military
success,  than  individual  courage  and  mere  numbers.


PHYSICAL SUPERIORITY OF HIGHER SOCIETIES. 223

Yet  even  numbers  are  in  a  way  a  test  of  social
virtue.  For  they  indicate  at  least  a  capacity  to  act
together  on  a  large  scale.  And  while  military
efficiency  thus  implies  a  growth  of  social  co-opera-
tion, social  development  does  not  in  the  long
run  involve  a  deterioration  in  the  military  prowess
of  the  individual.  It  is  true  that  in  ancient  times
civilization  had  an  unfavourable  effect  on  the
military  virtues.  But  this  was  perhaps  due  to  the
want  of  firmness  in  the  moral  texture  of  the  social
tissue,  which  caused  wealth  to  lead  merely  to  luxur-
ious self-indulgence,  rather  than  to  any  intrinsic  effect
of  civilization.  It  is  also  true  that  owing  to  the
different  directions  which  the  development  of  the
individual  has  taken  in  modern  societies,  the
superiority  of  the  civilized  individual  over  the  savage
is  less  marked  in  military  than  in  other  matters.
But  even  on  this  score  it  is  not  true  that  the  average
civilized  European  soldier  is  inferior  in  physique,
courage  and  endurance  to  the  average  savage  war-
rior, while  our  picked  and  trained  men  will  chal-
lenge comparison  with  the  most  warlike  savages.

§  ID.  There  is,  in  fact,  no  aspect  of  life  in  which
the  intensity  of  social  action  does  not  depend  on  the
development  of  its  component  individuals.  Even  in
the  case  of  social  intercourse  it  appears  that  its
pleasantness  is  largely  dependent  on  the  personal
distinction  of  the  individuals  who  take  part  in  it :
social  "  lions  "  are  individuals  distinguished  for  some
quality  in  which  they  differ  from  and  surpass  other
individuals,  and  individuals  are  interesting  in  pro-
portion as  their  individuality  is  more  marked.

Thus  civilization,  even  though  it  destroys  the
spurious  individuality  which  is  bestowed  by  varieties
of  costume,  and  the  vagaries  of  barbarous  customs,


2  24 FORMULAS OF THE LAW OF EVOLUTION.

is  everywhere  aiming  at  developing  the  intrinsic
individuality  of  its  possessors,  and  at  developing  it
in  harmony  with  the  social  environment.

§  II.  But  it  is  not  enough  to  show  that  our
formula  is  an  adequate  description  of  the  actual
condition  of  the  world.  We  must  show  also  both
that  the  same  tendency  may  be  traced  in  the  lower
stages  of  the_  process  beneath  civilization  and  be-
neath man,  and  that  it  may  be  anticipated  for  the
higher  stages,  and  will  afford  an  adequate  end  and
ideal  of  cosmic  evolution.

Now  with  regard  to  the  lower  stages  of  Evolution,
it  will  not  be  difficult  to  show  this  while  the  lower,
stages  are  still  human.  It  is  clear  that  under  bar-
barous and  savage  conditions  of  life  both  the  in-
dividual and  the  society  are  only  imperfectly  de-
veloped; it  is  a  commonplace  that  even  physically
one  savage  looks  almost  exactly  like  another.  The
individual  has  as  yet  hardly  emerged  from  the  type,
and  a  horde  of  savages  are  as  like  as  a  herd  of
sheep,  or,  as  we  say,  by  a  comparison  with  still
lower  grades  of  individuality,  as  one  pea  is  to
another.  And  even  the  apparent  exceptions .  in
history  only  serve  to  confirm  our  theory,  while  at
the  same  time  it  throws  fresh  light  on  the  historical
facts.

§  1 2.  Thus  it  seems  at  first  sight  anomalous  that
in  an  early  civilization  like  the  Greek,  individuality
and  sociality  should  have  been  more  perfectly  de-
veloped than  in  any  modern  society,  and  that  at
the  dawn  of  history  States  with  highly  developed
structure  and  highly  complex  organization,  like  the
caste-states  of  Egypt,  India  and  China  should  lead
the  van  of  civilization,  while  after  a  time  they  were
overwhelmed  and  outstripped by  barbarous  tribes


THE EXPLANATION OF SEEMING EXCEPTIONS. 225

with  comparatively  little  social  coherence.  Why
did  civilization  arise  in  the  despotic  East?  why  did
Greece  remain  free,  to  become  the  mother  and
model  of  science,  art  and  philosophy  ?  why,  again,
did  Greece  succumb  to  R.ome,  and  Rome  to  the
rude  vigour  of  the  Teutons?  At  first  sight  the
course  of  civilization  does  not  seem  to  have  always
run  smooth.

Now  in  order  to  understand  these  facts,  we  must
remember  the  rhythm  of  progress,  which  may  be
likened  to  the  billows  of  an  ever-growing  tide  which
never  recedes.  But  as  it  deepens,  disturbances  of
its  surface  waves  bear  an  ever-diminishing  propor-
tion to  its  total  bulk.  While  civilization  was  young,
its  temporary  vicissitudes  and  its  transient  eclipses,
which  accompanied  the  decay  of  the  nations  that
represented  it,  might  well  seem  alarming,  and  if  we
confine  our  view  to  sufficiently  narrow  limits,  we
may  find  ages  of  almost  unmitigated  retrogression.
But  for  all  that  civilization  advances,  and  the  rate  of
its  advance  is  ever  accelerated  with  the  growing
momentum  of  its  growing  bulk.  Secondly,  we  may
admit  that  in  some  respects  the  early  civilizations
were  more  perfect,  not  only  than  the  societies  which
supplanted  them,  but  even  than  our  own  {cf.  ch.  iv.
§  15).  A  society  which  is  articulated  into  castes
does  possess  a  higher  structure  and  a  higher  formal
perfection  of  organization  than  one  -in  which  func-
tions are  not  yet  differentiated,  and  every  one  is  a
jack-of-all-trades.  So,  too,  the  highest  insects  are
more  highly  organized  than  the  lowest  fishes.  And
a  system  of  castes  is  not  only  a  high  form  of  social
organization,  but  also  one  particularly  valuable  in
the  beginnings  of  civilization;  and  conducive  to  the
progress  of  tribes  which  adopted  it. As  is  so  well

R.  of  S.  Q


226 FORMULAS OF THE LAW OF EVOLUTION.

shown  by  Mr.  Bagehot,^  the  chief  difficulty  of  early
societies  was  that  they  had  to  bring  wild  men  with
rudimentary  social  instincts  to  live  together  in,
States.  The  caste-system  effected  this  admirably,
and,  hence  ,the  early  civilizations  were  all  dis-
tinguished by  the  rigid  and  rigorous  character  of
the  social  organization.  But  subsequently,  as  the
structure  consolidated  and  ossified,  it  became  incom-
patible with  the  mobility  requisite  ;  the  ancient  civil-
izations were,  as  it  were,  stifled  in  the  armour  which
had  protected  them  ;  their  institutions  became  too
rigid  to  be  adapted  to  the  changing  conditions  of
life.  And  above  all,  the  systern  depressed  individ-
uality too  completely.  The  time  came  when  there
was  need  for  it,  when  the  individual's  energy  and
sense  of  responsibility  alone  could  save  the  State,
and  when  they  were  not  forthcoming."  What
wonder  then  that  the  earliest  civilizations  decayed
and  perished,  and  that  their  cumbrous  organizations
collapsed  for  the  same  reasons  as  the  State  of  the
Incas  collapsed  when  Pizarro  had  seized  its  ruler  ?
So,  too,  the  Persians  could  not  conquer  Greece  ;  be-
cause the  blind  onset  of  slaves  was  no  match  for  the
voluntary  combination  of  intelligent  men  who  knew
the  value  of  individual  effort.  Again,  Greek  civiliz-
ation was  in  some  ways  more  perfect  than  ours ;
their  ideas  of  the  formal  perfection  of  science,  of
ethics,  and  of  a  noble  life  generally,  were  higher
than  any  to  which  we  dare  to  aspire.  But  the  basis
of  Greek  civilization  was  extremely  narrow,  and  so
it  was  fatally  unstable.  It  developed  the  individual
to  an  unequalled  perfection,  but  at  a  heavy  cost.
The  economic  basis  of  the  "  noble "  life  of  social
leisure  was  slavery.  The  Greek  ideal  of  life  was
^  "  Physics  and  Politics."


THE  REASON  OF  THE  FALL  OF  GREECE. 227

one  for  a  select  and  privileged  class.  Nor  were
the  relations  of  the  individual  to  the  State  really
Satisfactory.  In  theory,  no  doubt,  the  State  was
supreme  ;  but  in  practice  the  individual  was  con-
stantly recalcitrant,  and  generally  succeeded  in
doing  pretty  much  as  he  pleased — at  least  to  judge
by  the  complaints  of  Greek  thinkers.  There  were
only  very  few  Greek  States  which  were  not  chronic-
ally in  danger  of  subversion  by  the  lawless  ambi-
tion of  their  own  citizens.  And  such  practical  con-
trol over  the  individual  as  the  State  did  attain  was
only  gained  by  the  almost  complete  sacrifice  of  the
institution  which  is  the  primary  source  of  the  indi-
vidual's altruism,  viz.,  the  family.  The  State  crushed
the  family  life  in  Greece,  in  the  supposed  interests
of  the  social  life ;  but  it  could  not  tame  the  exuber-
ance of  the  individual.  The  Greeks  discovered  no
antidote  to  the  excessive  ambition  and  vanity  of  the
individual  Greek.  Not  only  Athens,  but  every
Greek  .city  was  ruined  by  its  Alcibiades.  And
indeed  the  political  failure  of  the  Greeks  as  a  nation
was  also  due  to  an  extension  of  the  characteristic
which  ruined  the  different  Greek  cities.  The  inerad-
icable particularism  and  mutual  jealousies  of  the
Greek  cities,  which  rendered  any  lasting  tombin-
ation  or  joint  action  impossible,  is  only  one  more
instance  of  their  irrepressible  vanity  and  self-
conceit.  The  individual  Greek  and  the  individual
city  alike  preferred  to  let  the  common  cause  perish
rather  than  tolerate  a  policy  in  which  they  should
have  no  opportunity  of  playing  a  leading  part.
And  just  as  the  minor  actors  in  the  melodrama  of
Greek  history  were  incapable  of  self-subordination,
so  the  leading  States  were  equally  incapable  of  self-
control,  and  consequently  sacrificed  a  just  and  gen-


2  28 FORMULAS OF THE LAW OF EVOLUTION.

erous  policy  to  short-sighted  whims  that  prompted
them  to  abuse  their  power.

The  secret  of  Rome's  success,  on  the  other  hand,
lay  in  her  political  virtue. The  Romans  were  justly
proud  of  the  sternness  of  Roman  discipline,  and
rightly  reckoned  among  their  heroes  the  men  who
were  capable  of  sacrificing  jtheir  lives  and  the  lives
of  their  dearest  for  the  letter  of  the  law. The  cruel
rigour  of  Brutus  and  Manlius  was  but  the  extreme
manifestation  of  a  spirit  of  strict  legality,  unques-*
tioning obedience,  and unflinching adherence  to
duty,  v^hich  njade Rome  great. This  self-control
and  respect  for  legality  was  displayed  in  a  marvel-
lous w^y  during  the  struggle  between  the  plebeians
and  patricians  ;  and  it  may  be  safely  asserted  that
in  no  other  state  w;ould  the  Licinian  and  Sextian
laws haye been rejected  for  eight  ypars  without
causing  3,  revplutipn. gut  this  was  a  quality  the
Greeks could never learn  ; general  principles  of
policy  and  respect  for  the  forijas  of  legal  procedure
were  always  powerless  against  the injpul^e  of  the
n^oment ; the Atljenians sacrificed their empire
rather  than  postpone  the  trial  of  Alcibiades  on  a
domestic  charge  until  hi§  return  from  s^ctiye  service.
With  the  Romans,  on  the  other  hand,  the  immunity
of  magistrates  from  accusatiop  during  their  year  of
office  was  a  cardinal  principlje  of  state-craft. They
yielded  implicit  obedience  to  their  magistrate?,  how-
ever  arbitrary  and  incapable  they  might  be,  and
with whatever  severity  they  might call  them to
account  when  they  had  laid  down  their  functions.
And  the  reason  why  the  Roman  was  able  to  practise
a  self-control  as  wise  as  it  was  difficult  was  that  from
his  youth  he  had  been  trained  to  obey  as  well  as  to
command,  and  that  the  discipline  of  the  army  was


ROMAN  TRAINING  UNEQUAL  TO  IMPERIAL  PROBLEMS.  229

but  the  continuation  of  the  discipline  exercised  by
the  father  of  each  family.  For  absolute  as  Was  the
devotion  which  the  State  required  of  its  citizehs  iri
military  matters,  it  yet  did  not  crush  the  individual,
because  the  State  never  thought  of  interfering  with
the  relations  of  a  Roman  to  his  family  and  his
household.  Hence  the  ambassadors  of  Pyrrhus
might  well  report  that  the  Roman  Seriators  were
300  kings  ;  and  we  may  add  a  truth  no  less  iricorri-
prehensible  to  Greek  ears,  that  not  one  of  them
would  have  been  capable  of  playing  the  tyrant.
The  Roman  training  produced  .a  succession!  of
"  golden  mediocrities,"  who  carried  out  their  task
with  unhesitating  devotion  arid  unyielding  per-
tinacity. But  it  was  too  narrow  to  cope  with  the
problems  which  arose  out  of  the  growth  of  the  city
by  the  Tiber  into  a  world-wide  empire,  too  narrow
to  reconcile  the  spirit  of  old  Roman  morality  with
the  claims  of  Hellenic  culture.  It  could  neither  pro-
duce a  man  who  could  solve  the  political  problem
of  combining  empire  with  freedom,  nor  one  to  solve
the  intellectual  problem  of  combining  reason  with
virtue.  And  so  the  Romans  lost  first  their  virtue
and  then  their  freedom,  and  in  the  end  their  empite.
Thus  we  «iay  learn  from  the  history  of  Greece
and  Egypt  how  necessary  it  is  to  keep  the  proper
balance  between  the  development  of  society  and  of
the  individual ;  from  tfet  of  Rome,  how  necessary
it  is  to  advance,  if  orie  desires  to  avoid  failure  due
not  to  any  intrinsic/  deterioration,  but  to  inability  td
cope  with  new  and  liricilculated  conditions.  It  is
from  excess  of /conservatism  and  self-satisfaction,
from  unwillina'ness  to  adopt  neW  mtJthdds  for
dealing  with  ;niftw  difficulties,  and  not  from  atiy
ineluctable  1^  of natural rhortality, that  civiliz-^


230 FORMULAS  OF  THE  LAW  OF  EVOLUTION.

ations  have  decayed,  and  that  backward  races,  who
have  not  been  too  conceited  to  modify  the  tra-
ditional methods  that  did  good  service  in  the  past,
have  outstripped  the  leaders  of  civilization  who  had
handicapped  themselves  by  their  previous  successes.
And  so  we  may  say  that  the  keenness  of  the
struggle  for  existence  between  European  nations  at
present  is  the  best  guarantee  of  progress,  the  best
security  that  no  physical,  intellectual,  or  moral  ele-
ment of  success  will  be  neglected.

§  13.  Wh,en  from  the  earlier  stages  of  human
development  we  pass  to  the  higher  stages  of  animal
development,  we  find  that  among  animals,  if  we
except  the  case  of  the  social  animals  already  con-
sidered, both  individuality  and  sociality  have  been
little  developed.  The  chief  exceptions  to  this  state-
ment are  to  be  found  among  domesticated  animals.
Dogs,  e.g.,  have  very  distinctly  marked  individual
characters,  so  much  so  that  we  may  be  tempted  to
rank  their  individuality  above  that  of  many  savages.
But  what  is  the  reason  of  this  development  of  indi-
vidual character  ?  What  but  the  nature  of  the
social  medium  in  which  their  domestication  places
them  ?  They  are  the  slaves  of  man,  but  their
slavery  to  superior  beings  raises  them  above  the
level  they  could  have  reached  unaided,  and  develops
their  souls  to  a  degree  not  justified  by  their  position
in  the  hierarchy  of  existence.

But  though  in  general  the  development  both  of
individuality  and  of  sociality  is  slight,  neither  of
them  disappears  entirely  among  the  animals  sexu-
ally reproduced.  There  must  always  be  among
them  at  least  that  amount  of  social  connection
which  is  implied  in  the  relation  of  male  and  female
and  of  parents  and  offspring.


THE FORMULA APPLIED TO THE LOWER ANIMALS.  231

§  14.  But  when  we  go  still  lower,  the  lines  of
demarcation  between  one  individual  and  another
seem  to  grow  faint,  and  perplexities  beset  us.  Is
each  segment  of  a  tapeworm  an  individual,  and
which  is  the  original  individual  when  a  jelly-fish  is
cut  up  into  equal  pieces,  each  of  which  develops
into  a  perfect  animal  }  Shall  we  say  that  each  leaf
of  a  tree  is  an  individual,  or  confine  that  term  to
the  whole  tree  ?  And  if  each  leaf  is  a  true  individ-
ual, why  riot  each  .cell  .-'  And  if  it  is  not,  what
shall  we  say  of  cuttings  and  leaves,  each  of  which
is  able  to  develop  into  a  perfect  tree  ?  What,  again,
of  the  colonies  of  zoophytes  ?  Are  they  one  or
many  ?  Is  a  coral  reef  one  animal  or  a  multitude  ?
Shall  we  regard  rather  the  individual  polypes  or
their  common  organization  ?

The  only  answer,  perhaps,  which  it  is  possible  to
give  is  that  we  have  sunk  too  low  to  find  anything
exactly  corresponding  to  our  conception  of  individ-
uality. We  receive  here  the  first  hint  that  individ-
uality is  an  ideal,  to  which  the  reality  only  imper-
fectly attains,  a  category  of  our  thought,  to  which
even  the  highest  developments  of  reality  only  ap-
proximate. But  nevertheless  we  can  trace  the
working  of  the  ideal  even  in  the  lowest  forms  of
the  real ;  with  the  appropriate  modifications  the
unity  of  the  same  design  runs  through  the  whole.

As  we  trace  it  downwards,  the  formula  is  trans-
formed but  not  destroyed  :  it  persists  in  a  lower
form.

The  social  bond  which  connected  physically  dis-
crete individuals  was  spiritual,  and  can  no  longer  be
traced  as  such :  but  it  now  takes  the  lower  and  grosser
form  of  physical  connection.  A-  coral  reef  is  a  society
in  which  the  union  of  the  individual  members  is  no


232 FORMULAS OF THE LAW OF EVOLUTION.

longer  conscious  and  voluntary,  but  compulsory  and
physical ;  their  connection  is  no  longer  trusted  to
their  own  action,  but  forced  upon  them  from  without.
Sociality  is  no  longer  a  moral  but  a  physical  necessity.
Or  if  we  choose  to  regard  the  facts  from  the  opposite
point  of  view,  we  may  say  that  the  coral  reef  is  an
individual  in  whom  the  growing  insubordination  of
the  members  to  the  central  authority  has  almost
dissolved  away  the  individuality.

§  15.  But  it  matters  little  how  we  decide,  and
whether  we  decide,  the  question  of  the  individuality
of  the  lower  organisms :  the  essential  point  is  that
they  are  transitional  between  individuals  and  socie-
ties in  the  higher  sense,  and  the  form  which  they
take  in  inanimate  nature.

Thus,  in  a  crystal  formed  Out  of  crystals,  or  a  drop
of  water  composed  of  drops  of  water,  the  individu-
ality of  the  component  parts  seems  evanescent,  and
their  combination  to  be  purely  physical.  Yet  their
combination  is  as  real  whether  it  is  that  of  a  system
of  physical  particles  or  of  a  society  of  conscious  indi-
viduals. The  difference  is  that  the  forces  which  hold
it  together  are  in  the  one  case  physical,  and  in  the
other  psychical.  "^  But  they  exist  as  much  in  the  one
case  as  in  the  other,  and  inanimate  bodies  also  are
held  together  by  forces  of  cohesion,  surface-tension,
etc.

And  if  we  next  descend  below  the  limits  of  the
visible  to  chemical  theory  and  the  question  of  the
composition  of  substances,  we  find  that  the  same
law  still  holds.  As  the  individual  molecules  are
hypothetical,  we  cannot  indeed  detect  any  gradations

1  This  does  not  imply  that  social  combinations  are  unaffected
by  physical  influences,  but  that  these  only  act  mediately,  by  pro-
ducing certain  states  of  raihd.


THE ASSOCIATIONS OF CHEMICAL ATOMS. 233

in  their  individuality  ;  but  in  the  complexity  of  the
physical  systems  of  associated  particles,  the  fact
which  here  corresponds  to  the  development  of  social
complexity,  we  can  trace  a  gradual  evolution.

§  16.  Of  all  chemical  compounds,  the  so-called
organic  compounds  are  the  most  complex,  i.e.,  they
contain  and  unite  the  largest  number  of  individual
molecules.  They  are  thus  the  most  highly  organized
forms  of  matter.  And  they  are  also  the  most
recently  evolved.  For  a  comparatively  slight  degree
of  heat  will  break  them  up,  or,  as  chemists  say,  with
a  significant  suggestion  of  the  social  character  of
chemical  combination,  will  dissociate  them.  Hence
they  cannot  have  been  formed  until  the  earth  had
cooled  considerably.  And  yet  their  appearance
must  have  preceded  that  of  living  matter,  as  they
supply  the  basis  of  the  higher  evolution  of  the
animate.  Thus  the  organic  compounds  represent
the  highest  form  of  chemical  combination,  not  only
because  they  are  the  basis  of  living  organisms,  but
also  because  they  are  evolved  later.

Taking  next  the  inorganic  compounds  we  find
that  they  are  on  the  whole  less  complex  and  more
stable  than  the  organic.  But  though  they  can
stand  a  higher  degree  of  heat,  they  are  yet  dissoci-
ated at  high  temperatures.  Hence  they  stand  lower
in  the  scale  of  evolution,  and  if  the  nebular  theory
may  be  trusted,  they  are  also,  historically  speaking,
more  ancient.

The  chemical  "  elements  "  again  are  "  simple  "
bodies  which  we  have  not  hitherto  been  able  to  dis-
sociate. And  yet,  under  the  delicate  manipulations
of  modern  chemistry,  and  in  the  terrific  temperatures
of  the  hottest  stars,  they  also  betray  signs  of  dis-
sociation {cf.  ch.  vii.  §§  10,  11). And  as  was  shown  in


2  34 FORMULAS OF THE LAW OF EVOLUTION.

the  last  chapter  (§  1 2),  the  evidence  points  not  only
at  their  dissociation  into  simpler  forms  of  matter,
but  at  something  radically  different  and  very  much
more  interesting.  Mr.  Crookes'  ingenious  infer-
ences from  the  subtle  differences  he  has  discovered
among  the  molecules  of  the  same  "  element "  irre-
sistibly suggest  that  the  atoms  and  molecules  out
of  which  it  is  composed  still  possess  individual
differences  and  individual  characters.  And  so,  at
the  very  lowest  grade  of  cosmic  evolution.,  we
should  still  detect  the  persistence  of  individual
entities  combined  with  others  into  social  systems ;
and  though  our  elements  be  complex,  their  name
would  not  be  wholly  undeserved,  in  that  their
structure  is  simpler  and  their  generation  earlier  than
that  of  any  other  forms  of  sensible  matter.

§  1 7.  But  what  lies  beyond  ?  Can  we  penetrate
beyond  the  evolution  of  the  elements  ?  In  one
sense  we  can  not ;  the  primitive  condition  of  things .
which  precedes  Evolution  forms  the  zero-point  of
Evolution,  the  absolute  negation  of  the  process  in
which  Evolution  consists.

But  if  we  recognize  that  we  are  now  dealing  with
a  state  of  things  generically  different  from  that  of
cosmic  evolution,  we  may  yet  form  certain  theories
about  the  pre-cosmic  conditions  of  the  world-
process.  Indeed,  we  may  be  troubled  by  alternative
theories,  according  as  we  adopt  more  or  less  ad-
vanced views  about  the  evolution  of  the  elements.
If  we  accept  Mr.  Crookes'  theory  of  prothyle,  the
question  vanishes,  for,  being  anterior  to  the  differ-
entiation into  -  atoms,  it  leaves  room  neither  for
individuals  nor  for  their  combination.  But  prothyle
is  nothing  (ch.  vii.  §  14),  or  rather,  a  symbol  standing
for  the  action  of  spiritual  forces  (ch.  vii.  §  18)  ;  if,


THE ZERO-POINT OF EVOLUTION.  235

therefore,  the  question  is  to  be  pursued  further,  the
method  must  be  changed  into  one  of  metaphysical
investigation  {cf.  ch.  xii.  §  3).

But  we  may  check  the  impulse  of  speculation
before  it  oversteps  the  ground  of  chemical  theory,
and  suppose  that  Evolution  stops  short  at  something
which  has  still  got  enough  of  the  characteristics  of
sensible  matter  to  be  atomic.  Evolution,  then,  would
start  from  matter  in  which  the  atoms  existed  in  per-
fect isolation  and  without  the  least  combination.

But  this  would  raise  a  difficulty.  If,  as  has  been
maintained,  the  evolution  of  society  and  of  the, indi-
vidual is  coincident,, and  the  perfection  of  society
produces  also  the  maximum  of  individuality,  indi-
viduality should  vanish  at  the  opposite  extreme
together  with  combination.  Whereas  now  the
individual  at  this  very  point  appears  completely  in-
dividualized, entirely  independent  and  self-sufficing.

This  difficulty  may  be  explained  in  several  ways.

In  the  first  place,  we  may  lay  stress  on  the  fact
that  at  the  outset  of  the  process  the  individual  is  a
mere  abstract  individual,  an  individual  and  nothing
more,  an  atom  of  which  nothing  can  be  said  except
that  it  is  an  atom,  and  that  individuality  here  has  a
minimum  of  meaning,  which  is  surpassed  by  every
individual  who  enters  into  the  combination  of  a
system.

Secondly,  we  may  point  out  that  even  so  it  is
contrary  to  the  accepted  chemical  doctrine  to  sup-
pose that  the  individual  atoms  can  exist  in  isolation,
and  may  remember  that  the  minimum  of  indepen-
dent existence  is  the  molecule  composed  of  at  least
two  atoms.  And  if  it  be  supposed  that  this  rule
does  not  apply  to  the  atom  of  primitive  matter,  the
answer  is  that  no  scientific  rules  or  conceptions  do


236 FORMULAS OF THE LAW OF EVOLUTION.

apply  to  it,  that  in  it  we  have  reached  the  limits  of
scientific  thought,  and  that  the  whole  condition  of
things  in  the  primitive  nebula  is  an  over-ingenious
fiction  of  the  scientific  imagination,  which  could
never  have  existed  in  actual  fact.  For  unless  this
nebula  was  prior  to  the  development  of  gravity,  a
uniform  distribution  of  matter  in  space  is  impossible,
while  as  soon  as  we  have  aggregation,  combination
at  once  follows.

And  lastly,  from  a  metaphysical  point  of  view,  it
is  not  true  that  the  atoms  in  the  primitive  nebula
exist  in  entire  isolation,  so  long  as  they  coexist :  they
must  have  formed  some  sort  of  a  system  in  order
that  their  interaction  or  attraction  could  be  possible
either  then  or  afterwards.

§  18.  We  have  seen  that  the  formula  of  the  de-
velopment of  the  individual  in  social  combination  is
applicable  both  to  the  actual  condition  of  the  world
and  to  its  past  evolution,  although,  in  the  latter  case
it  ends  in  no  more  or  less  perplexity,  like  all  merely
scientific  explanations,  if  it  is  driven  back  too  far.
It  now  behoves  us  to  ask  whether  our  formula  is
equally  satisfactory  when  regarded  as  the  ideal  and
end  of  Evolution,  i.e.,  as  that  to  which  the  history
of  the  past  justifies  us  in  expecting  that  Evolution
will  tend.

Regarding  the  development  of  the  individual  in
society  as  the  end  of  Evolution,  will  compel  us,  in
the  first  place,  to  assert  that  not  even  the  highest
existing  societies  and  individuals  are  perfect,  either
as  societies  or  as  individuals.

And  with  respect  to  existing  societies  this  will
perhaps  be  easily  admitted.

But  it  is  at  first  more  difficult  to  realize  that  we
are  not  yet  perfect  individuals. In  the  sense,  indeed,


HUMAN INDIVIDUALIZATION INCOMPLETE. 237

that  we  are  not  all  we  ajre  capable  of  being,  it  is
perhaps  pretty  obvious  th^at  we  are  not  yet  perfect
individuals,  but  it  is  equ9/lly  true  that  we  are  not  yet
perfectly  individualized^  There  are  many  facts
about  our  constitutioiyWhich  it  is  difficult  to  explain
except  on  tlie-theefy  that  from  a  higher  point  of
view  our/  individuality  would  appear  almost  as
shadowy  and  imperfect  as  that  of  a  zoophyte  does
to  us./'

If /by  a  person  we  mean  a  conscious  and  spiritual
ini^vidual,  possessing  moral  and  legal  responsibility,
who  must  be  treated  as  an  end  and  never  as  a
means,  then  the  higher  phase  of  individuality,
which  we  designate  by  the  term  personality,  is  an
ideal  to  which  we  have  very  imperfectly  attained.
Heredity,  which  seems  to  render  our  moral,  intel-
lectual and  physical  characteristics  more  or  less
dependent  on  the  action  of  our  parents  and  ances-
tors, limits,  if  it  does  not  destroy,  our  freedom  and
our  responsibility.  A  corresponding  limitation  is
■  indicated  by  the  feelings  which  prompt  us  to  the
maintenance  of  our  species  and  thereby  put  us  in
the  position  of  means  to  the  production  of  other
beings  ;  and  perhaps  they  are  indicative  of  imper-
fections of  personality  in  other  ways  also  (ch.  xi.  §  24).
Our  spiritual  liberty,  moreover,  is  constantly  depend-
ent on  the  physical  necessities  of  our  organism,  which
are  very  far  from  being  always  compatible  with  the
requirements  of  our  spiritual  activities.  This,  indeed,
is  only  a  single  instance  of  the  imperfect  correspond-
ence which  prevails  between  the  elements  of  our
being  and  of  the  imperfect  co-ordination  of  the
portions  of  our  organism.  For  it  is  not  merely  in
disease  that  the  subordinate  parts  of  the  organism
disobey  and  ignore  the  behests  of  the  ruling  prin-


238 FORMULAS OF THE ^^^^ ^^ EVOLUTION.  ,

ciple,  and  act  on  their  oL  ^^  account :  the  physic^
processes  of  our  organisL  ^  ^j.^  always  largely  in-
dependent of  our  will. >yj

But  the  clearest  proof  of  \^^ the  imperfect  combina-
tion of  the  elements  of  our  pl^rsonality  is  to  be  found
in  the  curious  phenomena  of  "i^:^|lii|^^ conscious-
ness or  personality. These  repr^||^|HB^t  we  are
ordinarily  wont  to  call  our  self,  i.e.,  our  norrHJfial  con-
sciousness, as  but  one  out  of  many  psychicatk  '  1  pro-
cesses which  go  on  within  our  organism. The^  nor-
mal consciousness  is  the  primary  self,  but  theres.jjire
indefinite  possibilities  of  secondary  selves,  which  may*^
coexist  with  it,  alternate  with  it,  and  even  supplant
it. So  it  has  been  well  said  that  the  normal  self  is
that  which  has  a  good  working  majority  for  carrying
on  the  affairs  of  life,  and that  when  the  majority
becomes disorganized,  there  ensues  chaos in the
soul,  i.e.,  insanity.

But  perhaps  we  need  hardly  go  so  far  afield  for
examples  of  this  imperfect  psychic  synthesis,  for  we
nightly  experience  in  our  dreams  powers  which  our
waking  self  does  not  possess.  It  is  not  merely  that
we  may  remember  in  dreams  what  we  had  forgotten
in  waking  life,  but  that  the  dream-self  possesses  the
power  of  clothing  its  ideas  with  all  the  vividness
and  wealth  of  sensuous  perception ;  its  fancy  is
creative  of  its  objects,  and  while  the  dream  lasts
they  are  real.  And  yet  when  we  awake,  we  cannot
give  sensuous  shape  to  our  thoughts,  and  no  amount
of  thinking  of  a  cat  will  enable  us  to  see  one.  Or
again,  who  has  not  experienced  the  delicious  cer-
tainty of  the  intuitive  knowledge  we  possess  in
dreams,  and  the  ease  of  absolute  conviction  with
which  we  attain  to  the  knowledge  we  require  ?

§  19. These and similar  facts  which  we shall


THE FORMULA AND THE IDEAL OF "HEAVEN." 239

vsubsequently  have  to  regard  from  a  different  point
of  view  (ch.  ix.  §  23),  more  than  justify  the  assertion
that  our  individuality  is  as  yet  very  ill-defined,  and
that  consequently  personality  is  for  us  an  Ideal,
which  we  have  not  yet  fully  realized.

And  if  we  had  realized  it,  what  would  it  be  ?
What  but  the  life  of  perfected  individuals  in  a  per-
fect society  ?

And  what,  again,  is  this  but  the  ideal  of  the  Com-
munion  of  Saints, of  the  Christian  conception  of '
Heaven  ?

If,  then,  the  process  of  Evolution  may  be  defined
as  the  progressive  development  of  the  individual
in  combination  with  other  individuals,  in  which  the
individual  passes  from  the  atom  to  the  moral  person,
does  not  the  completion  of  the  process  promise  us
the  attainment  of  our  boldest  desires  ?

§  20.  This  formula  for  the  world-process  cannot
at  least  be  accused  of  lacking  in  significance  or
fulness  of  import.  And  perhaps  the  reason  is  that
it  deals  throughout,  not  with  abstractions,  but  with
realities ;  it  makes  use  of  abstractions,  but  con-
>  tinually  refers  thehi  to  the  realities  which  they
symbolize.  For  while  all  the  terms  of  the  other
definitions  of  Evolution  (§§  2,  3),  "heterogeneity,"
"motion,"  "matter,"  "consciousness,"  etc.,  are  ab-
stractions which  stand  for  qualities  of  reality,  which
could  never  exist  by  themselves,  terms  like  "  indi-
vidual," "person,"  and  "society,"  designate reaHties.
Atoms  (?)  crystals,  animals,  and  men,  the  successive
embodiments  of  the  process  towards  individuality,
are  all  of  them  real,  and  as  such  possess  an  infinity
of  attributes.  Hence,  while  the  other  formulations
of  the  world-process  can  give  us  only  partial  aspects
of  reality  (§  2),  we  here  seem  to  have  grasped  the


240 FORMULAS OF THE LAW OF EVOLUTION.

ultimate  reality  itself.  It  is  true,  however,  that  not
even  so  do  we  escape  the  taint  of  imperfection :
for  though  we  see  the  ultimate  reality,  we  as  yet
behold  it  only  as  in  a  glass  darkly,  and  can  express
it  only  inadequately  ;  its  true  nature  is  as  yet  scarce
conjectured.

But  even  this  has  the  advantage  that  we  need  not
shift  our  ground  in  order  to  obtain  new  views  of
the  world-process  by  means  of  new  abstractions  ;  for
after  all,  reality  is  the  three-dimensional  which  can
never  be  fully  expressed  by  one-dimensional  thought.
If,  however,  we  have  grasped  the  Real,  even  though
dimly,  we  need  merely  persevere  in  order  to  ar-
rive at  its  deeper  and  deeper  comprehension,  as  it
manifests  itself  in  higher  and  higher  forms,  and  to
enter  more  and  more  fully  into  the  meaning  of  the
individual  and  of  society.  And  as  we  ourselves  are
the  highest  examples  of  individuals  we  know,  it  is
in  exploring  the  depths  of  our  own  nature  that  the
clue  to  the  riddle  of  the  world  is  to  be  sought,  and
we  are  once  more  led  back  to  take  an  ancient  saying
in  a  novel  sense,  to  know  the  universe  in  knowing
ourselves,  to  seek  the  truth  in  aeeking  what  we
are.^

Thus  the  end  to  which  things  seem  to  tend  is  an
end  which  is  also  capable  of  being  regarded  teleo-
logically,  and  an  aim  of  action  we  can  adopt.  Our
only  doubt  can  be  as  to  whether  the  world  will
attain  it.  But  why  should  not  things  attain  the  end
to  which  they  tend  ?  What,  short  of  the  pessimistic
possibility  of  an  incurable  perversity  of  things,  is  to
prevent  the  world  from  reaching  the  goal  of  its
evolution  ?  For  no  failure  of  partial  processes  with-
in the  All  can  justify  this'  fear  :  for  thesfe  fail  through

1  Tvu>6i,  a-eavTov  and  iSi^rjo-a  i/xavrov  {Heraclitus).


FORESHADOWS THE ULTIMATE REALITY. 24 1

the  interference  of  other  things,  and  what  could
interfere  with  the  a//- emdracing- world-process?  But
the  full  vindication  of  our  hopes  will  be  the  arduous
task  of  the  succeeding  Book ;  for  the  present  we
must  content  ourselves  with  the  first  glimpse  of
Heaven  we  have  caught  through  a  rift  in  the  clouds.


R.  of  s.  R


BOOK  III.


CHAPTER. IX.

MAN  AND THE WORL\b.

§  I.  We  are  now  in  a  position  tx)  attack  the
"riddles  of  the  Sphinx"  themselves,  which,  as  we
said  at  the  outset  (ch.  i.  §  3),  concern  the  relation  of
Man  to  the  World  which  environs  him,  to  his  Cause
and  to  his  Future.

Of  these  questions  we  shall  most  fitly  commence
with  the  first,  for,  as  will  be  shown,  it  leads  on  tb
the  others.

By  the  environment  of  man  we  mean  primarily  his
material  environment,  the  world  of  material  things
in  Space  and  Time,  the  existence  of  which  presents
an  abundance  of  perplexities  to  the  philosophic
mind.  In  this  question  of  the  relation  of  man  to
his  environment  are  involved  the  questions  of  the
existence  of  an  external  world,  which  has  beeii
called  the  battle-ground  of  metaphysics. — because
the  inconclusive  skirmishes  of  unprofitable  philo-
sophies have  been  largely  conducted  in  a  field  in
which  neither  side  could  gain  anything  but  con-
fusion— of  the  nature  of  Matter  and  its  relation  to
Spirit,  of  the  infinity  of  Space  and  Time,  and  gener-
ally of  the  characteristics  of  the  Becoming  of  things.

Of  these  it  will  be  convenient  to  consider  first  the
existence  of  the  world  in  Space  and  Time.

For  if  our  environment  is  infinite  in  respect  to
Space and Time, all hope of  a solution of  thd

245


246  MAN AND THE WORLD.

problem  of  life  must  be  at  once  abandoned ;  for  to
an  infinite  environment  there  can  be  no  adaptation
(cp.  ch.  iv.  §  4).  Hence  to  admit  the  infinity  of
Space  and  Time  is  to  give  up  all  hope  of  tran-
scending Pessimism,  and  it  is  necessary  to  subject
this  doctrine  to  careful  criticism.

§  2.  It  is  necessary,  in  the  first  place,  to  determine
the  proper  sense  of  infinity.

First  of  all-  we  must  reject  the  popular  and  poeti-
cal use  in  which  infinity  is  vaguely  used  as  the
equivalent  of  any  extremely  large  quantity,  and
indicates  merely  the  point  at  which  the  intelligent
appreciation  of  magnitude  ceases.  This  limit,  of
course,  varies  immensely  with  times  and  seasons
aftd  stages  of  civilization.  Thus  the  Greeks,  as
their  language  shows,  at  one  time  regarded  10,000
as  an  infinitely  large  number ;  the  Romans  con-
tented themselves  with  600,  while  to  many  savages
everything  above  two  or  three  is  "many,"  and
"  infinity  "  begins  before  five  has  been  reached.  So,
too,  the  sands  of  the  seashore,  the  hairs  of  the  head,
and  even  the  stars  of  heaven  have  all  been  popular
representatives  of  infinity.  Yet  an  exact  computa-
tion shows  that  a  luxuriant  head  of  hair  does  not
contain  much  over  100,000,  and  that  the  stars .
visible  to  the  naked  eye  at  any  one  time  amount
to  less  than  3,000.  And  the  number  of  grains  of
sand  on  a  definite  piece  of  shore,  though  it  may  be
indefinitely  large,  is  not  infinite.

The  popular  usage,  in  short,  means  very  little  :
infinity  is  merely  a  big  word  which  impresses
people  because  they  do  not  understand  it.  And
how  little  they  understand  its  proper  meaning  is
shown  by  the  history  of  allied  words  like  "  endless,"
"  immense," "  incalculable," "  immeasurable," "  in-


THE MEANINGS OF INFINITY.  247

numerable,"  etc.,  all  of  which  originally  implied
infinity.  From  this  point  of  view  infinity  is  the
last  straggler  of  a  whole  host  of  words,  which  under
the  persuasive  influence  of  popular  usage  have  long
come  to  mean  nothing  more  than  great  magnitude,
and  is  distinguished  from  them  merely  by  the
precarious  allegiance  it  still  owns  to  the  -  technical
terminology  of  the  learned.

§  3.  From  this  wholly  improper  and  positive  use
of  infinity  we  may  pass  to  one  wholly  proper,  when
used  in  its  strictness,  but  negative.  This  is  the
rtiathematical  use,  which  asserts  that  there  can  be  no
end  to  the  successive  synthesis  of  unity  in  measuring
a  quantity.  We  can  never  in  our  thought  arrive  at
a  point  when  the  addition  of  unity  to  a  quantity,
however  large,  is  impossible.

Now  as  to  this,  it  is  noticeable  (i)  that  the
definition  is  purely  negative,  and  makes  the  con-
ception of  infinity  the  conception  of  a  limit,  and  (2)
that  it  is  purely  subjective.  The  definition  makes
no  reference  to  reality,  but  merely  asserts  that  "  we
cannot  help  thinking. . . ."

We  seem  thus  to  receive  a  hint  that  the  idea  of
infinity  indicates  a  defect,  imperfection  or  limitation
of  our  thought,  to  which  reality  is  only  subjected
in  so  far  as  we  must  interpret  it  by  our  thought.

§  4.  From  this,  the  true  conception  of  infinity,  is
derived  the  mathematical  doctrine  of  infinity,  that
since  infinity  contains  a  number  of  given  units  greater
than  all  number,  all  finite  quantities  may  be  neglected
in  comparison  with  it.  This  reasoning  involves
a  subtle  transition  from  the  negative  to  a  positive
conception,  which  finally  results  in  infinity  becoming
a  kind  of  mathematical  topsyturvydom,  where  two
parallel  straight  lines  meet  and  enclose  spaces,  and


248  MAN AND THE WORLI).

two  circles  intersect  at  four  points,  etc.  And,  of
course,  so  long  as  these  symbols  are  recognized  as
fictions  convenient,  and  even  necessary,  for  the
technical  purposes  of  mathematicians,  nobody  need
complain  (cp.  ch.  vi.  §  3),  but  unfortunately  mathe-
maticians, like  other  mortals,  are  apt  to  forget  this,
and  frequently  require  a  gentle  reminder  of  their
logical  absurdity.  When,  e.g.,  they  say  that  two
parallel  straight  lines  meet  at  infinity,  they  really
mean  that  they  do  not  meet  at  all,  or  that  we  can
continue  to  conceive  ourselves  as  prolonging  them,
without  their  approaching.  Or,  again,  the  doctrine
that  one  infinity  can  be  greater  than  another,  is,  to
say  the  least,  inaccurate.  For  if  infinity  be  taken
positively,  it  must  mean  something  out  of  relation  to
quantity,  z.-aA  different  in  kind,  to  which,  therefore,
phrases  like  "greater  and  less  than"  are  totally
inapplicable.  If,  e.g.,  one  of  two  straight  lines  may
be  produced  indefinitely  in  one  direction  and  the
other  in  both,  the  mathematical  doctrine  is  that  the
second  infinity  is  greater  than  the  first.  But  the
question  whether  one  will  at  any  time  be  greater  or
less  than  the  other  will  depend  on  the  rate  at  which
they  are  produced  and  the  size  of  the  "successive
syntheses,"  and  not  on  their  being  infinite  in  one  or
two  directions.  But  in  order  to  measure  them  at
all,  and  so  to  be  able  to  speak  of  greater  or  less
with  respect  to  them,  they  must  both  be  limited
first,  which  is  ex  hypothesi  impossible.  Hence  the
category  of  quantity  is  inapplicable  to  the  case,  and
the  positive  conception  of  infinity  is  absurd,  an
infinite  quantity  being  a  contradiction  in  terms.  For
being  infinite,  no  measure  can  exhaust  it,  while  a
quantity  is  that  which  is  composed  of  units  of
measurement.


INFINITY  ALWAYS  IDEAL — A  DEFECT  OF  THOUGHT. 249

§  5.  Now  does  the  infinity  of  Space  resemble
the  valid  negative,  or  the  invalid  positive  conception
of  infinity  ?

There  is  no  need  to  regard  it  as  anything  but  the
former.  We  need  not  mean  by  the  infinity  of  Space
anything  more  than  that  we  cannot  think  a  limit  to
Space,  can  conceive  no  space  which  is  not  bounded
by  spaces,  and  similarly  in  the  case  of  Time ;  we
can  conceive  no  time  which  was  not  preceded  by
an  earlier  time. '

It  is  evident  that  this  infinity  is  purely  conceptual
and  negative.  No  man  has  ever  found  by  ex-
perience that  Space  and  Time  have  no  limits.  The
infinity  of  Space  and  Time  can  never  be  given  as
an  actual  fact.  We  can  never,  except  in  poetry,  get
to  the  limits  of  the  universe,  and  gaze  into  the  Void
beyond,  if  only  because  of  the  prosaic  attraction  of
the  bodies  behind  us.  But,  unfortunately,  we  seem
since  the  days  of  Aristotle  to  have  forgotten  the
obvious  fact  that  infinity  can  never  be  anything  real,
anything  more  than  a  potential  infinity  in  our
thought.

But  can  we  argue  from  this  potential  infinity  of
our  conceptions  to  the  infinity  of  the  spatially
extended  world,  and  of  the  Becoming  in  Time  ?
This  would  seem  to  be  an  argument  based  upon
hazardous  assumptions  and  resulting  in  inextricable
difficulties.

§  6.  It  involves,  in  the  first  place,  a  relapse  into
the  illegitimate  conception  of  infinity  as  something
positive  and  actual,  if  it  is  to  state  facts  about  the
real  world  and  not  to  make  correct  but  useless  state-
ments abdut  our  subjective  frame  of  mind.  For
while  we  adhere  to  the  true  definition  of  infinity,  the
proposition  that  the  world  is  infinite  in  Space  and


250  MAN AND THE WORLD.

Time  must  resolve  itself  into  the  assertion  that  we
cannot  think  Space  and  Time  exhausted  and  limited
by  successive  additions  of  spaces  and  times.  But
this  tells  us  nothing  as  to  whether  the  real  world  i?
infinite,  when  not  in  relation  to  our  present  modes
of  thinking  it.

This  brings  out,  secondly,  the  robust  assumption,
on  which  the  inference  of  the  infinity  of  the  world
from  the  infinity  of  our  conceptions  is  based.  It
assumes  a  complete  agreement  between  reality  and
thought,  in  virtue  of  which  an  infinity,  which  is  true
primarily  of  our  ideas,  may  be  safely  transferred  to
the  real  world.  But  our  experience  in  dealing  with
Scepticism  (ch.  iii.)  ought  to  have  left  us  very
sceptical  as  to  the  ease  with  which  such  a  corre-
spondence can  be  effected.  And  even  if  we  hope
and  believe  that  concord  between  thought  and
reality  will  be  ultimately  attained,  this  faith  will
afford  but  one  more  reason  for  regarding  the  asser-
tion of  their  present  correspondence  with  grave
suspicion.  The  infinity  contained  in  our  conceptions
of  Space  and  Time,  therefore,  so  far  from  leading*,
on  to  the  infinity  of  the  real  world  as  a  matter  of
course,  militates  rather  in  favour  of  the  conclusion
that  the  real  world  is  limited  in  Space  and  had  a
beginning  in  Time.

And  this  presumption  is  confirmed  by  the  strongest
positive  reasons.  The  doctrine  of  the  infinity  of
Space  and  Time  turns  out,  in  the  first  place,  to  be
vicious  in  its  origin  and  based  upon  an  abuse  of  the
faculty  of  abstraction.  And  further,  it  cannot  even
claim  the  undivided  support  of  the  necessities  of
thought.  On  the  contrary,  it  is  in  the  sharpest
conflict  with  some  of  the  strongest  necessities  of
our thought. The infinity of  Space and Time


INFINITY A FALSE ABSTRACTION.  25  I

contradicts  some  of  the  chief  conceptions  of  our
thought,  and  that  of  Time  even  contradicts  itself
(ch.  iii.  §  6).  The  infinity  of  Space  conflicts  with  the
conception  of  the  world  as  a  wholej  the  infinity  of
Time  with  that  of  the  world  as  a  process,  and  as  has
been  already  shown  (ch.  vii.  §§  3,  20),  all  evolutionist
or  historic  methods  imply  that  Time  is  limited  and
that  the  world  had  a  beginning.  Lastly,  the  in-
finity of  the  world  involves  a  reductio  ad  absurdunt
of  the  category  of  causation.

And,  of  course,  these  metaphysical  difificulties
about  the  infinity  of  Space  and  Time  reappear  in
science,  and  generate  conflicts  between  the  principal
and  most  approved  scientific  doctrines  and  this
alleged  infinity.  It  is  not  merely  that  science  knows
nothing  of  anything  infinite,  but  that  it  is  in  various
ways  compelled  to  assert  that  infinity  is  directly
incompatible  with  verified  knowledge.  It  is  neces-
sary, therefore,  to  give  a  sketch  of  these  objections.

§  7.  We  are  too  apt,  in  the  first  place,  to  forget
that  "Space"  and  "Time"  are  mere  abstractions.
We  speak  as  though  things  were  plunged  in  Space
and  Time,  and  as  if  Space  and  Time  could  exist
without  them.  But  as  a  matter  of  fact  Space  and
Time  are  constituted  by  things,  and  are  only  two
prominent  aspect's  of  their  interaction.  It  is  as. the
result  of  the  attractions  and  repulsions  of  things
that  they  constitute  certain  spaces  between  one
another.  Empty  Space  and  empty  Time  are  bogies
which  we  have  no  business  to  conjure  up  out  of  the
limbo  of  vain  imaginings.  Hence  there  is  no  real
difficulty  in  conceiving  (with  Aristotle)  that  Space
should  be  limited  by  the  spatially-extended,  i.e.
bodies,  seeing  that  the  conception  has  no  meaning
except in connection with bodies : where bodies


252  MAN AND THE WORLD.

cease,  there  Space  would  cease  also,  and  the
question  as  to  what  is  beyond  is  unanswerable,
because  unmeaning  and  invalid.  If,  then,  "pure"
Space  is  an  abstraction  from  the  spatially-extended
reality,  and  if  real  Space  is  actually  delimited  by
that  which  fills  it,  viz.  bodies,  the  resulting  position
of  affairs  is,  that  the  infinity  of  conceptual  Space  is
merely  a 'trick  of  abstraction,  which  imposes  upon
us  by  dint  of  its  very  simplicity.  For  it  ceases  to
be  surprising  that  if  we  abstract  from  that  which
really  limits  Space,  the  remaining'  abstraction,  viz.,
conceptual  or  ideal  "  Space,"  should  have  to  be
regarded  as  unlimited — in  idea.  Only  of  course
this  vice  of  our  thought  proves  less  than  nothing
as  to  the  infinity  of  the  physical  world.  A  similar
argument  would  dispose  of  the  question  as  to  the
infinity  of  real  Time  and  as  to  what  existed  before
the  beginning  of  the  world,  and  thus  the  whole
difficulty  would  be  shown  to  rest  upon  a  miscon-
ception.

§  8.  The  metaphysical  difficulties  of  the  infinity
of  Time  amount  to  a  self-contradiction,  i.e.,  to  a
conflict  with  the  supreme  law  of  human  thought.
For  the  infinity  of  the  past  is  regarded  as  limited
by  the  present,  i.e.,  it  is  a  completed  infinity.  But
a  completed  infinity  is  a  contradiction  of  the  very
conception  of  infinity,  which  consisted  in  the  im-
possibility of  completing  the  infinite  by  successive
synthesis.

Again,  the  infinity  of  the  world  in  Space  involves'
a  hopeless  contradiction  of  the  conception  of  a
whole.  For  when  we  speak  of  the  world  or  uni-
verse, we  mean  the  totality  of  existing  things.  But
in  order  to  attain  to  such  a  whole,  it  would  be
necessary  to  grasp  things  together  as  a  totality,  and


THE  METAPHYSICAL  CONTRADICTIONS  OF  INFINITY. 253

to  define  off  the  existent  against  the  non-existent.
But  this  condition  cannot  be  satisfied  in  the  case  of
an  infinite,  which  can  never  be  completed  by  succes-
sive synthesis,  and  never  therefore  be  grasped
together  as  a  whole.  We  may  generalize  the  case
of  the  infinite  quantity  (§  4),^  and  say  that  an  in-
finite whole  is,  like  a  bottomless  pit,  a  contradiction
in  terms,  in  which  the  infinity  negates  the  whole
and  the  whole  excludes  infinity.  We  must  aban-
don, therefore,  either  the  conception  of  a  totality  or
that  of  the  infinity  of  the  world.  If  the  world  is  a
whole,  it  is  not  infinite,  if  it  is  infinite,  it  is  not  a
whole,  i.e.,  not  a  world  at  all.

And  there  is  a  parallel  contradiction  between
the  conception  of  infinity  and  of  a  process.  It  w^as
shown  in  chapter  vii.  §  20  that  a  process  is  necessarily
and  essentially  finite,  and  limited  by  the  two  points
between  which  the  process  lies.  Unless  it  were
finite,  it  would  be  a  mere  wavering  and  fluctuating
Becoming,  void  of  Being,  and  as  such  unknowable.
The  Becoming,  therefore,  of  reality  must  be  en-
closed within  the  limits  of  a  conception,  which
enables  us  to  define  it  as  having  Being  relatively  to
one  point  and  Not- Being  relatively  to  another.  To
apply  to  the  world  the  conception  of  a  process  is  to
imply  that  its  Becoming  is  definite  and  finite.  If,
therefore,  we  wish  to  assert  that  the  world  has  a  real
history,  that  its  Evolution  is  a  fact  and  that  our
formulas  of  Evolution  are  true,  we  must  think  the
world  as  finite  in  Space  and  Time.

Lastly,  the  belief  in  infinity  conflicts  with  the
most  indispensable  organon  of  all  knowledge  and
all  science*  the  conception  of  causation  {pp.  ch.  iii.
§  II  s.f.).  For  a  chain  of  causation  depends  on  the
strength  of  its  initial  member,  and  if  the  series  of


254  MAN AND THE WORLD.

causes  be  infinite,  if  there  be  no  such  thing  as  a
first  cause,  the  whole  series  dangles  uselessly  in  the
air  or  falls  asunder,  inasmuch  as  each  of  the  rela-
tive causes  receives  no  necessity  to  transmit  to  the
next  beneath  it,  and  hence  the  ultimate  effect  also  is
not  necessary.

§  9.  And,  as  might  have  been  expected,  these
metaphysical  contradictions  reappear  in  science  in
the  shape  of  conflicts  between  the  supposed  infinity
of  the  physical  world  and  some  of  the  most  valu-
able scientific  principles.

Thus  the  impossibility  of  thinking  a  world  infinite
in  Space  as  a  whole  nullifies  the  principle  of  the
conservation  of  energy,  makes  it  impossible  to  re-
gard the  universe  as  a  conservative  system,  and
thus  bi-ings  upon  physics  a  terrible  Nemesis  in  the
shape  of  the  dissipation  of  energy.  For  if  we  duly
take  successively  increasing  spheres  in  Space,  it  is
easily  apparent  that  there  is  uncompensated  loss  of
energy  in  each,  and  that  the  greater  part  of  the
energy  radiated  out  by  the  bodies  within  it  is  lost,
not  being  arrested  by  bodies  on  which  it  can  im-
pinge. Hence  the  larger  the  concentric  spheres
become,  the  greater  the  loss  of  energy,  until  finally
the  amount  of  energy  would  become  infinitesimal.;
Now  at  first  it  might  seem  possible  to  reply  to  this
by  the  mathematical  argument  that  the  universe
being  infinite,  the  energy  radiated  out  in  any  direc-
tion is  certain  sooner  or  later  to  hit  upon  some  body
and  thus  to  avoid  being  lost.  But  to  this,  it  might
be  similarly  answered,  that  as  in  an  infinite  number
of  these  cases  the  body  absorbing  the  energy  would
be  at  an  infinite  distance,  the  energy,  protected
would  be  infinitely  small,  i.e.,  nothing.  And  besides
the argument presupposes an impossibility, and


THE SCIENTIFIC CONTRADICTIONS OF INFINITY. 255

tacitly  assumes  that  it  is  possible  to  speak  of  the
universe  as  an  infinite  whole  possessing  infinite
energy.  Hence  our  present  physics  cannot  evade
the  inference  that  the  energy  of  any  finite  part  of
the  world  must  be  undergoing  gradual  dissipation,
and  would  have  been  entirely  dissipated,  if  it  had
existed  infinitely  in  the  past.  And  as  this  has  not
as  a  matter  of  fact  happened,  the  conclusion  is  that
the  world  with  its  store  of  energy,  which  is  now
being  dissipated,  came  into  being  at  some  definite
point  in  the  past.  In  order,  therefore,  to  assert  the
real  infinity  of  Space,  the  facts  of  the  world  and  the
principles  of  science  compel  us  to  deny  its  infinity
in  Time,  and  to  infer  both  a  beginning  of  the
existence  of  energy  and  an  end,  in  its  inevitable
dissipation.  Science,  in  short,  must  be  consistent
and  treat  the  infinite  extension  of  Space  as  it  has
already  treated  its  infinite  divisibility.  In  idea
Space  is  not  only  infinite  but  infinitely  divisible ;  in
reality  science  posits  the  atom  as  the  indivisible
minimum  of  spatially-extended  reality.  If  there-
fore science  is  entitled  to  assume  a  minimum  of
material  reality  and  to  reject  the  reality  of  the  infini-
,  tesimal,  it  is  by  a  parity  of  reasoning  entitled  to
postulate  also  a  maximum  extent  of  the  world  and
to  reject  the  reality  of  the  infinite.

Further,  it  was  shown  in  ch.  iii.  §  8  that  the  in-
finity of  Space  contradicted  the  reality  of  motion
and  hence  of  energy,  and  scefjticism  inferred  from
this  the  illusoriness  of  the  latter.  But  we  may
equally  well  infer  the  illusoriness  of  infinity,  and
when  science  is  reduced  to  a  choice  between  the
reality  of  energy  and  the  reality  of  infinity,  it  cannot
for  a  moment  hesitate  to  reject  the  latter.
But  if  science  must  reject  the  infinity  of  Space  it


256  MAN AND THE WORLD.

cannot  maintain  that  of  Time.  Just  as  the  infinity
of  Space,  combined  with  the  finiteness  of  Time,
resulted  in  the  destruction  of  energy  by  dissipation,
so  conversely,  the  finitude  of  Space,  combined  with
the  infinity  of  Time,  results  in  the  destruction  of
energy  by  equilibration.  For  in  infinite  Time  a
finite  world  must  have  gone  through  all  possible
changes  already,  and  thus  have  arrived  at  a  con-
dition of  equilibrium  and  a  changeless  state  of
Being  sharply  contrasted  with  its  actual  Becoming.

As  to  the  infinity  of  Time,  it  contradicts,  under
any  circumstances,  the  conception  of  the  world  as  a
process,  i.e.,  as  a  whole  in  Time.  This  contra-
diction gives  us  no  choice  between  denying  the
infinity  of  Time  and  admitting  that  the  search  for
a  beginning  is  comparable  to  the  labour  of  the
Danaids,  that  common  sense,  which  inquires  into
the  "  whence  "  of  things  in  order  to  discover  their
nature,  is  but  the  crude  basis  of  subtler  error,  that
the  Historical  Method  is  futile,  that  all  our  theories
of  Evolution  are  false,  and  that  the  nature  of  things
is  really  unknowable.  Yet  science  is  surely  entitled
to  struggle  hard  against  the  relinquishment  of  such
approved  principles,  against  the  demolition  of  the
whole  fabric  of  knowledge,  in  deference  to  what
cannot  but  appear  to  it  a  mere  metaphysical  pre-
judice.

And  not  only  is  the  finiteness  of  Time  essential
to  knowledge,  but  it  also  carries  with  it  that  of
Space.  For  a  world  finite  in  Time  but  infinite  in
Space  cannot  be  included  under  a  finite  process,
and  hence  baffles  all  attempts  at  grasping  it  by  an
intelligible  conception.  A  spatially  infinite  world
cannot  be  said  to  be  evolving  or  engaged  in  a  pro-
cess at  all,  i.e.,  to  be  passing  from  state  A  to  state


INFINITY NEED NOT BE PERMANENT.  257

B. For  it  could  never  mholly  get  to  A,  and  hence
could  n&w&r  wholly  be  becoming  B.

And  the  converse  supposition  of  a  world  finite  in
Space  and  infinite  in  Time,  which  from  the  point
of  view  of  a  whole  has  been  already  shown  to  be
absurd,  is  equally  impossible  from  that  of  the  con-
ception of  a  process.  Its  absurdity  may  be  illus-
trated by  the  fact  that  if  it  were  engaged  in  a
process,  it  would  require  an  infinite  Time  to  reach
any  given  point  in  the  process,  and  an  infinite
number  of  infinities  to  reach  the  present,  i.e.,  would
never  reach  the  present  at  all.

§  10.  And  to  set  against  the  cumulative  force  of
all  these  metaphysical  and  scientific  contradictions,
nothing  can  be  urged  in  favour  of  the  infinity  of
Space  and  Time,  except  a  disability  of  our  imper-
fect thought,  a  disability,  moreover,  which  does  not
even  profess  to  warrant  the  assertion  of  a  positive
infinity  of  real  Space  and  Time.  We  cannot  think
Space  and  Time  as  limited,  we  cannot  conceive
how  the  world  is  limited  in  Space  and  Time.  But
can  we  assert  this  ideal  infinity  of  the  real  world  ?
Assuredly  we  can  not:  nothing  compels  us  to  go
behind  the  contradiction.  At  the  utmost  all  it
proves  is  thit  there  is  a  lack  of  correspondence
between  the  constitution  of  our  minds  and  that  of
the  world,  and  there  is  no  need  to  regard,  this  con-
flict as  likely  to  be  permanent.  If,  therefore,  we  are
not  satisfied  with  saying  that  the  world  must  be
finite,  though  we  cannot,  while  our  intuition  of
Space  remains  what  it  is,  see  how,  a  solution  is  yet
possible  through  a  change  in  that  intuition.^

1  The  word  "  intuition  "  here  is  used  merely  as  a  translation  of
the  preciser  German  term  "  Anschauung,"  and  has  no  reference  to
any  contrast  with  "  experience."

R.  ofS.  s


258  MAN AND THE WORLD.

The  idea  of  infinity  need  not  form  part  of  an
intuition  of  Space  different  from  ours,  and  after  all,
that  intuition  is  only  subjective.  Subjective  not
only  as  existing  in  consciousness  like  the  whole
world  of  phenomena  {cp.  §  13),  but  subjective  also
as  being  a  peculiarity  of  thought  unconfirmed  by
feeling.  There  is  nothing,  therefore,  impossible  in
the  suggestion  that  in  the  progress  of  Evolution  the
infinity  of  Space  should  disappear  either  with  or
before  the  intuition  of  Space  itself  It  would  thus
turn  out  to  be  nothing  more  than  a  transitory  phase
€r  condition  of  our  minds,,  accidental  to  our  present
imperfect  development,  which  would  cease  to  lay
claim' to  ultimate  reality  when  the  upward  struggle-
of  Evolution  had  raised  us  to  a  more  harmonious
state  of  being.  And  indeed  there  would  be  nothing
inadmissible  even  in  the  idea  of  a  non-spatial  and
non-material  existence  as  the  goal  of  the  develop-
ment of  the  spatial  and  material,  if  our  examination
of  the  nature  of  the  material  should  justify  a  doubt
of  the  permanence  of  Matter  as  a  mode  of  our  con-
sciousness {cp.  §§  17-32).

Our  attitude,  therefore,  towards  Space  will  be
twofold :  speaking  as  scientists  and  accepting  the
phenomenal  reality  of  Space  and  of  the  sensible
world  for  what  it  is  worth,  we  shall  distinguish
between  eur  idea  of  Space  and  real  Space,  deny
that  real  Space  is  infinite,  and  contend  that  the
sensible  world  is  finite.  But  this  scientific  postulate
does  not  so  much  solve  as  carve  through  the  meta-
physical perplexity.  To  metaphysicians,  therefore,
the  conflict  between  the  conceptual  and  the  sensible
will  suggest  their  reconciliation  in  a  non-spatial
"  intelligible  world."  And  with  regard  to  this  in-
telligible world,  we  must  protest  against  two  mis-


SPACE A TRANSITORY FORM OF CONSCIOUSNESS. 2^59

constructions  by  which  Kant  sought  to  damage  the
conception.  It  is  not  unknowable,  and  has  nothing
to  do  with  what  Kant  strangely  called  Noiimena
{objects  of  thought),  because  they  were  unthinkable.
And,  secondly,  it  is  not  the  abstract  conception  of
a  world  in  general.  It  is  a  real  existence,  which  is
legitimately,  and  perhaps  necessarily,  inferred  from
the  discords  of  the  phenomenal  world.  And  though
our  data  may  not  at  first  enable  us  to  assert  much
more  than  its  real  existence,  there  is  no  reason  why
similar  inferences  should  not  eventually  give  us
more  definite  information  as  to  the  nature  of  that
existence.

The  .final  solution,  therefore,  may  be  briefly  stated
as  being  that  the  subjectivity  of  Space,  or  at  least
of  the  infinity  involved  in.  its  conception,  is  likely
to  be  brought  out  in  the  future  evolution  of  the
world,  and  this  solution  has  the  advantage  of  har-
monizing with  two  such  important  doctrines  as  those
of  Evolution  and  of  Idealism,:  and  Idealism  would
surely  be  a  still  more  futile  and  useless  doctrine
than  its  worst  enemies  or  wildest  chanlpions  would
assert,  if  it  cannot  be  appealed  to  to  rescue  philo-
sophy from  this  perplexity.

§  II.  The  infinity  of  Time,  however,  can  not
be  disposed  of  so  easily  by  a  decree  of  subjectivity.
For  the  reality  of  Time  is  involved  in  the  reality
of  the  world-process.  Now  a  process  need  not  be
in  Space  (as,  e.g.,  a  process  of  thought),  and  the
world- process  may  therefore  retain  its  meaning,,
even  though  spatial  extension  be  nothing  more  than,
a  passing  phase  of  that  process,  in  our  consciousness  ;.
but  the  subjectivity  of  Time  would  destroy  the
whole  meaning  and  reality  of  the  world-process,
and  negate  the  idea  of  the  world  as  an  evolution.


260  .MAN AND THE WORLD.

Hence  theories  "which  have  regarded  Time  as  an
illusion,  as  the  phenomenal  distortion  of  the  Eternal,
have  ultimately  had  to  confess  their  inability  to
assign  any  meaning  to  the  course  of  events  in  Time,
and  so  arrived  at  despair,  .practical  and  theoretical,
with  regard  to  the  phenomenal  world.  For  it  is
evident  that  ■a  process  is  necessarily  in  Time,''  and
involves  a  temporal  connection  between  its  suc-
cessive phasfes.  Our  dilemma  then  is  this,  that  if
the  reality  of  Time  is  denied,  the  whole  meaning
and  rationality  of  the  world  is  destroyed  at  one
blow ;  if  it  is  admitted,  we  clo  -not  rid  ourselves  of
its  infinity  and  its  contradiction  of  itself  and  of
science.

A  clue  out  of  the  labyrinth  may  be  found  by
observing  with  Aristotle  (Phys.  IV,  223a)  that  our
consciousness  of  Time  depends  on  the  perception
of  motion  [Kivria-is),  i.e.,  on  the  changes,  and  the
regularity  of  the  changes,  in  short,  on  the  Becoming
of  the  world.  Time,  as  the  consciousness  of  suc-
cession, is  not  indeed,  as  we  feel  at  first  sight
tempted  to  assert,  bound  up  with  the  permanence
of  physical  motions,  by  which  we  at  present  mea-
sure it,  and  regulate  the  subjective  times  of  our
several  consciousnesses  (ch.  iii.  §  6) ;  but  it  does
seem  to  depend  upon  our  consciousness  of  Change
or  Becoming  in  the  wider  sense,  of  which  physical
motion  is  but  a  single  example.  If,  therefore,  there
were  no  change.  Time  would  not  exist  for  us,  i.e.,
would  not  exist  at  all.

The  question  therefore  arises  whether  we  can
form  a  conception  of  a  state  in  which  change  is

1  A  "  logical  process  "  is  really  a  psychological  one  :  the  pro-
cess is  only  in  the  mind  which  traces  the  co-existing  links  of
logical  necessity. Cp.  ch.  iii.  §  15  s/.


TIME ANO)/  ETERNITY.  261

transcended,  and  to  this  question  we  must  answer
yes.  The  ideal  of  perfect  adaptation  is.  such  a  con-
ception, and  in  a  state  of  perfect  adaptation  there
would  be  no  consciousness  of  change  {cp.  ch.  ii.  §  9,
p.  32;  ch.  iv.  §  4).  Unless,  therefore,  happiness  and
harmony  are  the  illusions  the  Pessimist  asserts  them
to  be,  we  must  conclude  that  in  such  a  state  of
perfection  Time  would  be  transcended.

But  transcended  by  what .''  It  is  easy  to  answer
that  its  place  will  be  taken  by  Eternity,  but  less
easy  to  explain  the  meaning  of  that  much-abused
word,  and  its  relation,  to  Time.  For  nothing  would
be  gained  if  Eternity  were  regarded  merely  as  the
negation  of  Time :  this,  would  neither  save  the
meaning  of  the'  world-process  nor  correspond'  to
the  positive  character  of  happiness..  Eternity  must
be  regarded  as  positive,  and  its  relation;  to  Time
must  be  conceived  analogous  to  the  relation  of
Being  to  Becoming.  The  parallelism  of  the  two  is
indeed  surprising.  The  idea  of  Time  involves  an
inherent  contradiction,  and  so  also  does  Becorning.
For  though  Becoming  is  a  fact  of  daily  experience,
it  remains  a  contradiction  to  thought,  and  cannot
be  defined  except  as  a  union  of  Being  and  Not-
Being  (ch.  iii.  §  13).  And  in  this  union  Being  is.
the  positive  element,  the  standard  to  which  ali^
Becoming  is  referred.  That  which  becomes,  is  only
in  so  far  as  it  has  Being,  and  in  so  far  as  it  is  not;
it  is  nothing.  Construed  on  this  analogy,  Time
would  be  real  only  as  the  presage  of  Eternity,  and
Eternity  would  be  the  ultimate  standard  by  which
its  contradictions  would  be  measured  and  har-
monized. And  Time  and  Becoming  are  not  only
analogous,  but  inseparably  connected.  For  not  only
does  all Becoming  take  place  in  Time,  but  without


2'62  TMAN AND THE WORLD.

Becoming  there  would  be  no  Time.  And  may  we
not  then  say  that  what  Becoming  is  without  Being,
tha:t  Time  would  be  without  Eternity,  viz.,  self-
contradictory  and  unmeaning  ?

Thus  we  begin  to  perceive  the  nature  of  the
limits  of  Time.  'The  beginning  of  Time  and  thfe
birth  of  our  present  universe  {cp.  ch.  ii.  §  20  s.f)
must  have  been  a  ^coincident  transition  from  equable
and  unchanging  Being,  from  the  harmonious  Now  of
Eternity  into  the  unrest,  struggle  and  discord  of
Becoming,  and  the  self-cOntradictory  flow  of  Time.
Thus  Time  might  be  called  a  Corruption  of  Eter-
nity, just  as  Becoming  is  a  Corruption  of  Being.
For  in  either  case  the  change  must  be  conceived
as  one  of  decadence,  and  Being  and  Eternity  as
the  positive  conceptions  from  which  Becoming  and
Time  represent  a  partial  falling  away.

And  both  Time  and  Becoming  may  be  called
corruptions  -of  Eternal  Being  also  with  reference
to  their  intimate  connection  with  Evil  and  Imper-
fection. For  .in  the  ever-changing  world  of  Time
complete  adaptation  and  adjustment,  a  ^perfect  har-
mony between  a  thing  and  its  environment  does
not  and  can  not  exist,  and  it  is  just  certain  aspects
of  this  inon-adaptation,  non-equilibrium  and  discord,
that  we  denominate  evil  (ch.  iv.  §  4).  Thus  Time,
Becoming,  and  Evil  form  part  of  the  same  problem
{cp.  ch.  V.  §  2  s.f.),  and  to  recognize  that  the  question
as  to  the  origin  of  each  is  a  question  as  to  the  origin
of  all,  is  the  first  great  step  towards  the  solution
«of  this  triune  perplexity  of  philosophy.  And  the
mystery  of  Time  is  in  a  fair  way  of  solution  when
we  can  express  it  in  terms  of  the  others,  and  say
that  Time  is  but  the  measure  of  the  impermanence  of
the  imperfect,  and  that  the  reason  why  we.  fail  to


HOW TIME PASSES INTO ETERNITY.  263

attain  to  the  ideal  of  Eternity  is  that  we  fail  equally
to  attain  to  the  cognate  ideals  of  Being  and  Adapt-
ation. The  question  thereby  resolves  itself  into  the
old  difficulty  (ch.  v.  |  5)  of  why  the  Real  cannot
realize  the  perfection  of  the  Ideals  of  our  reason.
But  if  it  could,  is  it  not  evident  that  there  would
be  an  end  of  Time,  as  of  Change  and  of  Evil,  and
would  not  Time  pass  into  Eternity  ?

Regarding  Eternity,  therefore,  as  the  Ideal,  and
not  as  the  negation  of  Time,  as  that  into  which  Time
tends  to  pass  in  the  process  of  Evolution,  as,  that
into  which  it  will  pass  at  the  end  of  that  process,
it  is  possible  to  resolve  the  difficulty  of  the  depen-
dence of  the  world-process  on  the  reality  of  Time.
If  Time  is  the  corruption  of  Eternity,  if  it  is  but
the  imperfect  shadow  cast  by  Eternity,  on  the  pre-
scient soul  of  man,  then  what  is  true  of  Time  holds
of  Eternity  sensu  eminentiori,  and  in  becoming  a
process  in  Eternity  the  world-process  does  not  have
its  meaning  annihilated.  On  the  contrary,  it  for
the  first  time  attains  to  its  fiill  plenitude  of  import.

We  may  conclude  therefore,  for  the  present,  that
the  solution  of  the  problem  of  Time  lies  in  its
re-attainment  of  Eternity.

§  12.  The  next  subject  which  awaits  discussion
in  our  relations  to  our  environment  is  that  of  man's
relation  to  the  material  world.  But  before  entering
into  a  discussion  of  the  relations  and  functions  of
Matter  and  Spirit,  it  will  be  necessary  to  allude  as
briefly  as  may  be  to  the  question  of  Idealism  and
the  external  world.

Idealism  is  popularly  supposed  to  consist  in  a
denial  of  the  existence  of  an  external  world.  But
this  accusation  is  really  a  corollary  from  the  funda-
mental fact  of  Idealism,  which  idealists  have  been


264  MAN AND THE WORLD.

by  no  means  anxious  to  draw.  On  the  contrary,
they '  have  made  every  effort  to  evade  it,  although
their  opponents  may  uncharitably  think  that  their
efforts  were  either  unsuccessful,  or  succeeded  only
at  a  disproportionate  cost  of  further  absurdities.
But  that  idealists  should  strain  every  nerve  to
escape  from  the  most  obvious  corollary  of  their  ,
doctrine  was  but  natural.  No  serious  philosopher
can  really  hold  a  doctrine  which  would  hardly  be
credible  even  at  an  advanced  stage  of  insanity,  viz.,
that  nothing  exists  beside  himself  Or  rather,  if
he  is  all  that  exists,  he  is  certainly  insane.^  Sub-
jective idealists  therefore  do  not.  exist  outside  lunatic
asylums  and  certain  histories  of  philosophy.

Into  the  various  devices  of  idealists  to  avoid  sub-
jective idealism,  it  is  not  necessary  to  enter,  as  they
mostly  consist  in  appeals  to  a  deus  ex  machina,  a
"  divine  mind  in  which  the  world  exists."  But  even
if  it  should  not  be  considered  derogatory  to  the
divine  majesty  that  a  God  should  be  invented  to
help  philosophers  out  of  a  difficulty  of  their  own
creation,  the  difficulties  that  beset  the  relation  of
the  individual  and  the  "  universal "  mind  are  even
greater  than  those  of  Idealism.

It  will  be  more  profitable,  therefore,  to  analyse
the  basis  of  all  idealism,  and  to  consider  what  it
proves,  and  whether  it  necessitates  the  inferences  of
Idealism.

§  13.  The  primary  fact  of  Idealism  is  that  all
things  exist  in  our  consciousness — ^exist  as  objects
of our thoughts, feelings and perceptions ; that

'  Compare  the  remark  Goethe  attributes  to  the  idealist : —
"  Fiirwahr,  wenn  ich  dies  alles  bin,
So  bin  ich  heute  narrisch."

Faust  I.  :  Walpurgisnachtsfraum.


IDEALISM AND THE "  EXTERNAL WORLD." 265"

that  which  does  not  and  can  not  enter  into  our
consciousness  in  one  of  these  ways  is  unknowable
and  imperceptible,  and  therefore  nothing.  It  is  thus
the  positive  converse  of  the  proposition  that  the
unknowable  is  nothing  (ch.  ii,  §  6).  But  this  fact  is
just  as  unimportant,  controversially,  as  it  is  scientific-
ally irrefragable.  Thinkers  of  all  parties,  who
know  what  they  are  about,  are  agreed  that  it  is
undeniable,  and  that  it  is  impossible  to  acquiesce  in
it  as  final.  Idealists  and  realists  alike  perceive  the
necessity  of  so  interpreting  it  as  to  render  it  com-
patible with  the  objective  existence  of  the  phe-
nomenal world  :  their  only  difference  is  about  the
means.

Idealists  mostly  seek  to  preserve  the  verbal  state-
ment of  the  primary  fact  of  idealism  by  saying  that
all  things  exist  in consciousness,  but  in  a  divine
consciousness, appear  to  a  divine  "  I,"  and  hence
are  subjective  to  the  Absolute,  but  objective  to  us,
and independent of  our thoughts and feelings.
But  in  so  doing  they  forget  that  they  have  trans-
muted a  fact  into  a  theory,  if  not  into  a  fiction. "My"
consciousness  assures  me  that  all  things  appear  to
me,  exist  in  my  consciousness,  but  it  carries  with  it  no
such  reference  to  a  divine  consciousness. There  is
only  a  verbal  and  illusory  identity  between,  my  own,
"  I  "  and  that  of  God. My  consciousness  tells me
nothing directly  about the way in which things
appear  to  God. The  transition,  therefore,  from  my
consciousness  to  God's  is  an  extremely  hazardous
one, and does not  of itself imply  any  similarity
between  the  contents of  my  consciousness  and  of
God's. Indeed,  upon  reflection,  it  will  seem  pro-
bable that  things  would  appear  widely  differeiit  to  a
divine  being,  and  one  would  be  sorry  to  think  that


266  MAN AND THE WORLD.

they  should  appear  no  better.  But  the  "  objective
world  "  is  a  world  which  appears  to  me,  and  no
appearances  to  some  one  else  will  explain  it.  For
the  pantheistic  proposition  that  in  appearing  to  me,
the  world  really  appears  to  God,  and  that  my  own
"  I  ''  is  but  a  section  of  the  divine  "  I,"  is  not  one
capable  of  being  thought  out.  For  the  universal  "I"
either  has  another  consciousness  beside  mine,  or  it
has  not.  If  it  has,  the  objective  reality  of  things  will
be  things  as  they  appear  to  that  consciousness,  and
things  as  they  appear  to  mine  will  be  reduced  to  a
subjective  illusion,  i.e.,  we  fall  back  into  the  subjec-
tive idealism  from  which  we  are  seeking  to  escape.
If  it  has  not,  why  should  the  reality  of  things  be
constituted  by  my  consciousness,  rather  than  by  that
of  any-  other  self-conscious  "  I,"  which  is  also  a
fragment  of  the  divine  self-consciousness  ?  Things
appear  differently  to  me  and  to  others,  but  to  whom,
do  they  appear  as  they  really  are  ?  It  matters  not
what  answer  is  given  to  this  question,  the  result  will
be  the  same ;  the  world,  as  it  appears  to  every  con-
sciousness but  one,  will  be  an  illusion.

§  14. But  if  Idealism  cannot  extricate  itself  from  .
the  toils  of  illusionism,  let  us  see  whether  Realism  is,
more  successful  in  getting  over  the  primary  subjec-
tivity of  the  world.

Realism  will  naturally  seek  to  draw  a  distinction,
between  existing  in  consciousness  and  existing
solely  in  consciousness.  It  does  not  follow  that
because  the  world  exists  in  my  consciousness,  it
exists  only  in  my  consciousness.  We  may  cheerfully
admit  even  that  the  world  cannot  exist  oui  of  my
consciousness.  For  it  may  be  that  ultimately  the  in-
dependence, either  of  the  world  or  of  the  "I,"  will
be  seen  to  involve  the  same  fallacy  of  false  abstrac-


THE world's reality GIVEN WITH THE SELf's. 267

tion  {cp.  ch.  vi.  §  2  s.f.),  and  that  in  the  end  "I"  can
no  more  exist  without  the  world  than  the  world
can  exist  without  me  {cp.  ch.  x.  §  20).  Indeed,  even
now  the  content  of  the  Self  is  given  only  by  inter-
action and  contrast  with  the  world,  or  Not-Self.

But  at  present  this  is  a  mere  suggestion,  and  we
must  content  ourselves  with  showing  that  the  fact
will  bear  the  interpretation  Realism  puts  upon  it.  It
is  a  mistake  to  suppose  that  the  only  inference  from
the  existence  of  the  world  in  consciousness  is  that  it
exists  only  in  consciousness,  and  that  its  existence
is  therefore  dependent  on  the  subject's  conscious-
ness. For,  granting  the  selfrcxistence  of  the  world
independently  of  my  consciousness,  it  would  yet
exist  for  me  only  as  reflected  in  my  consciousness.
In  other  words,  the  fact  of  its  existence  in  my
consciousness  would  be  the  same,  whether  or  not
the  world  were  self-existent.  Both  interpretations
being  thus  possible,  there  can  be  no  doubt  as
to  which  is  preferable.  Sense  and  science  alike
require  us  to  believe  that  the  existence  of  the  world
is  not  dependent  on  its  appearance  in  any  one's
consciousness.  The  phenomenal  world  and  the
phenomenal  self,  to  whom  it  appears,  are  mutually
implicated  facts,  and  we  have  no  business  to  assume
the.  existence  of  either  out  of  their  given  context.
And  this  mutual  implication  of  the  self  and  the
world  is  equally  fatal  to  both  the  extremes,  both  to
subjective  Idealism  and  to  Materialism.  We  have
as  little  ground  for  asserting  that  consciousness  is
merely  a  phenomenon  of  Matter,  as  for  asserting  that
the  material  world  is  merely  a  phenomenon  of  any
one's  consciousness.  But  a  choice  is  still  left  be-
tween transcendental,  or  ultimate,  and  phenomenal,
or  immediate,  realism.


268  MAN AND THE WORLD.

This  choice  is  decided  in  favour  of  the  former,
not  only  by  the  contradictions  which  the  assumption
of  the  ultimate  reality  of  the  phenomenal  world  in-
volves {cp.  ch.  iii.  §§  2-12,  and  §  21),.  but  also  by  the
fact  that  one  of  the  factors  in  the  phenomenal  world
lays  claim  to  ultimate  reality.  For  each  of  us  is
strongly  persuaded  of  the  absolute  existence  of  his
own  self.  And  the  proper  inference  from  this  is,
not  that  the  phenomenal  world  exists  in  an  absol-
ute Self,  but  that  a  transcendent  world  of  ultimate
reality  corresponds  to  the  reality  of  the  Self.

Of  this  existence  of  ultimate  realities  outside  our-
selves we  can  have  no  direct  proof:  there  can  be
no  direct  disproof  of  subjective  idealism,  just  as
there  can  be  no  direct  disproof  of  pessimism.  It  is
sufificient  to  show  that  it  is  practically  impossible
and  absurd,  and  that  its  competitor  can  give  an
alternative  interpretation  of  the  facts,  which  gives  a
rational  and  harmonious  solution.  And  indeed  it
is  a  mistake  to  suppose  that  all  things  require  to  be
proved  (cp.  ch.  ii.  §  5),  for  proof  is  an  activity  of
thought,  and  thought  does  not  constitute  the  whole
of  consciousness.  A  fact  may  be  as  surely  attested./
by  feeling  or  will,  as  by  the  most  rigorous  demon-
stration, and  ultimately  all  demonstration  rests  on
such  self-evident  facts. ^ The  existence  of  a  reality

1  The  only  alternative  to  this  view  of  ultimate  certainty  is  that
which  regards  consistency  as  the  basis  of  prpot  But  consistency
may  mean  two  very  different  things.  If  we  mean  by  it  that  the
premisses  of  arguments  do  not  contradict  one  another,  and  that
on  the  strength  of  this  we  can  go  on  proving  everything  by  every-
thing else  all  round,  we  are  surely  deluded.  For  such  an  argu-
ment in  a  circle  is  fallacious,  as  Aristotle  pointed  out  long  ago,
even  though  the  circle  be  as  large  as  the  universe.  If,  on  the
other  hand,  it  means  that  things  are  so  fitted  together  as  to  excite
no  sense  of  incongruity,  then  consistency  just  describes  one  of


IDEALISM VERSUS MATERIALISM.  269

outside  ourselves  is  such  a  fact,  irresistibly  attested
by  feeling,  and  one  which  does  not  require  further
proof.  In  this  respect  it  is  exactly  on  a  par  with  the
existence  of  one's  self.  No  man  can  prove  his  own
existence ;  and,  we  may  add,  no  sane  man  wants  to.
The  correlative  facts  of  the  existence  of  Self  and
Not- Self  are  certified  by  the  same  evidence,  the
irresistible  affirmation  of  feeling,  and  their  supreme
certainty  cannot  be  touched,  and  much  less  shaken,
by  any  idealist  argument.

§  1 5.  Was  Idealism,  then,  merely  an  unprofitable
sophism — merely  a  troublesome  quibble  which  ob-
structed our  path  ?  By  no  means  :  we  may  learn
much  from  the  difficulty  to  which  it  drew  attention.
In  the  first  place,  it  brought  out  clearly  the  impor-
tant distinction,  which  we  had  already  anticipated
in  our  account  of  Space  and  Time,  of  phenomenal
and  ultimate  reality,  and  our  answer  depended  on
the  distinction  between  them.  What  was  reasserted
against  subjective  idealism  was  the  existence  of
ultimate  reality,  but  we  refrained  from  identifying
this  with  phenomenal  reality.  We  did  pot  commit
ourselves  to  the  assertion  of  the  absolute  reality  of
every  stick  and  every  stone  exactly  as  we  now  be-
hold it.  The  world,  as  it  now  appears  to  us,  may
be  but  the  subjective  reflexion  of  the  ultimate
reality,  and  thus  idealism  would  be  true,  at  least
of  our  phenomenal  world.

And,  secondly,  Idealism  supplies  the  antidote  to
the  materialism  which  regards  consciousness  as  an
accident  without  which  the  world  is  quite  capable  of
existing.

Idealism  and  Materialism,  starting  from  opposite

the  chief  characteristics  of  self-evidence,  and  becomes  simply  a
lax  statement  of  the  rival  theory.


270  MAN AND THE WORLD.

Standpoints,  are  impelled  by  the  force  of  all  but  in-
superable reasonings  towards  contrary  conclusions,
and  as  they  meet  midway,  the  shock  of  their  col-
lision seems  like  to  shatter  the  authority  of  human
reason.  For  just  as  Idealism  concluded  from  the
fact  that  the  world  exists  in  consciousness,  that  it
existed  only  in  the  individual's  consciousness,  so
Materialism  concludes  from  the  fact  that  the  world
dispenses  with  every  individual,  that  all  may  be
dispensed  with.  The  exaggeration  and  the  flaw  is
the  same  in  both.  Materialism  overlooks  that  the
world  it  speaks  of  is  phenomenal,  that  the  indivi-
dual dispensed  with  is  phenomenal  also  ;  and  that
what  appears  need  not  be  all  that  ultimately  is.  Its
arguments,  therefore,  do  not  touch  the  individual's
conviction  of  his  ultimate  reality.  Similarly,  Ideal-
ism cannot  affect  the  individual's  conviction  that  there
must  be  something  beside  himself  to  account  for
the  appearances  to  him.  If,  then,  we  recognize  the
distinction  of  the  phenomenal  and  ultimate  reality,
the  contradiction  between  Materialism  and  Idealism
ceases  to  be  insoluble.

§  16.  And  to  say  nothing  of  other  difficulties
which  it  alone  can  solve,  this  fact  is  in  itself  suffici-
ent reason  for  making  the  distinction  between  phen-
omenal and  transcendent  reality,  which  may  at
first  sight  appear  somewhat  needless.  In  so  doing
we  are  proving  true  to  the  principle  of  our  method,
by  solving  a  conflict  between  thought  and  fact  by  an
appeal  to  metaphysic.  And  it  is  certainly  a  more
satisfactory  method  thus  to  reconcile  the  contending
parties  than  for  each  to  go  on  re -asserting  the  un-
tenableness  of  its  opponent's  position  from  its  own
point  of  view.  Students  of  philosophy  must  be  well-
nigh  sick by this  time of  hearing  the well-worn


WANTED A METAPHYSICAL ACCOUNT OF MATTER. 271

philosophic  argument  against  Materialism,  that  it  is
"a  gigantic  hysteron-proteron "  and  a  logical  contra-
diction. And  the  small  impression  this  mode  of
argument  has  hitherto  produced,  might  well  arouse
the  most  supine  of  philosophers  to  abandon  the
method  of  sterile  and  captious  criticism,  and  to
bethink  himself  of  an  alternative  explanation  of  the
phenomenal  world.  If  Materialism  is  bad  meta-
physics, what  is  the  true  metaphysical  explanation
of  Matter  ?  If  self-consciousness  is  the  primary
fact  of  knowledge,  what  part  does  it  play  in  the
explanation  of  the  phenomenal  world  ?  What  is
the  relation  of  Matter  and  Spirit  ?  what  is  the  mean-
ing of- the  distinction  of  Body  and  Soul  ?  and  what  is
the  function  and  purpose  of  the  arrangement  of  the
material  cosmos  ?

If  we  remember  the  primary  subjectivity  pf  the
phenomenal  world,  and  proceed  by  the  right  method,
we  shall  be  enabled  to  give  substantially  sufficient
answers  to  these  questions.  And  the  right  method
will  here  as  elsewhere  be  one  which  derives  its  meta-
physical conclusions  from  scientific  data  and  justifies
them  by  parallels  from  acknowledged  scientific  facts.

§  17.  In  analysing  the  conception  of  Matter,  the
first  thing  to  remark  is  that  Matter  is  an  abstraction
from  material  bodies  or  things.  Things  are  all  indi-
vidual and  no  one  thing  is  exactly  like  any  other.
Nevertheless  we  detect  in  them  certain  resemblances
i/i  virtue  of  which  we  call  them  material,  and  regard
them  as  composed  of  the  abstraction  "  Matter."
Matter,  therefore,  like  all  abstractions,  is  an  adjective
but  not  a  substantive  fact  {cp.  ch.  iii.  §  15,  p.  82),
and  it  is  this  which  justifies  the  philosophic  protest
against  the  materialist  annihilation  of  the  mind  by
means  of  one  of  its  own  abstractions.


272  MAN AND THE WORLD.

This  abstract  Matter,  moreover,  stands  in  a
curious  relation  to.  the  equally  abstract  conception
of  Force.  According  to  the  ordinary  scientific
doctrine,  which  ignores  the  metaphysical  character
of  Matter,  forgets  that  it  is  an  abstraction,  and  treats
it  as  a  reality.  Matter  is  the  substratum  or  vehicle
of  Force.  All  the  sensible  qualities  of  Matter  are
due  to  forces,  gravitative,  cohesive,  repulsive,  chem-
ical, electrical,  or  to  motions  (like  Heat,  Sound,
Light,  etc.),  or  "  motive  forces."  Matter  itself,
therefore,  is  left  as  the  unknown  and"  unknowable
substratum  of  Force.  There  is  no  reason  why  the
term  Matter  should  appear  from  one  end  of  a  sci-
entific account  of  the  world  to  the  other.  It  is  not
required  to  explain  the  appearance  of  anything  we
can  experience,  and  is  merely  a  metaphysical  fiction
designed  to  provide  forces  with  a  vehicle.

Hence  the  idea  easily  suggested  itself  to  scientists
to  drop  out  the  totally  otiose  conception  of  Matter,
and  to  regard  the  "  atoms "  of  physics  as  Force-
centres.  But  though  physics  could  perfectly  well
employ  such  force- centres,  their  nature  requires
further  elucidation.  It  is  impossible,  in  the  first
place,  to  regard  them,  with  Faraday,  as  material
points,  devoid  of  magnitude.  For  this  would  not
only  stultify  the  whole  aim  of  the  theory  by  reintro-
ducing Matter,  but  involve  the  further  difficulty  that
as  the  material  points  would  be  infinitely  small,  the
velocity  which  any  force,  however  small,  would  im-
part to  them,  would  be  infinite,  and  they  would  rush
about  the  universe  with  infinite  velocities,  and  never
remain  long  enough  anywhere  for  their  existence  to
become  known.  If,  on  the  other  hand,  the  force-
centres  are  really  points,  i.e.,  mathematical  points
"  without  parts  and  without  magnitude,"  it  is  diffi-


MATTER AND FORCE.  273

cult  to  see  how  real  forces  could  be  attached  to  i(kal
points.  And  again,  unless  each  of  these  atomic
forces  were  attached  to  some  real  substratum,  what
would  keep  them  separate,  or  prevent  them  from
combining  intO'  one  gigantic  resultant  Force,  which
would  sweep  the  universe  headlong  into.  Chaos  ?

In  short,  the  whole  conception  of  independent
force-centres  rests  upon  insufficient  metaphysical
analysis.  A  force  which  has  no  substratum,  which
acting  from  nothing,  is  the  force  of  noihing;  but  as
it  were  in  the  air,  is  utterly  unthinkable.

But  is  this  any  reason  for  reverting  to  unknowable
"  Matter  "  as  the  substratum,  in  order  that  our  forces
may  inhere  in  it,  and  not  stray  about  helplessly?
It  would  be  a  great  mistake  to  suppose  this.  Our
"  forces  "  may  require  a  substratum,  but  there  is  no
reason  why  that  substratum  should  be  material.  It
is,  as  Mr.  Mill  says^.  a  coarse  prejudice  of  popular
thought,  to  which  science  has  needlessly  deferred,
to  suppose  that  the  cause  must  be  like  the  effect,
that  a  nightmare,  e.g.,  must  resemble  the  plum-pud-
ding which  caused  it.  So  there  is  no  need  to  sup-
pose that  an  unknowable  "Matter"  is  an  ultimate
reality,  merely  because  phenomenal  things  have  the
attribute  of  materiality.  Matter  is  not  the  only  con-
ceivable substratum  of  Force.

§  1 8.  We  found  just  now  that  Force-centres,  in
order  to  be  a  satisfactory  scientific  explanation  of
things,  required  some  agency  to  prevent  the  indi-
vidual atomic  forces  from  coalescing  into  one.  This
postulate  is  realized  if  the  force-atoms  be  endowed
with  something  like  intelligence,  and  thus  enabled
to  keep  their  positions  with  respect  to  one  another,
ie.,  to  keep  their  positions  in  Space.  We  shall  then
say  that  they  act  at,  or  from  the  points  where  they

R.  ofS.  X


2  74  MAN AND THE WORLD.

appear,  and  shall  have  substituted  a  known  and
Sknowable  substratum,  viz.,  intelligence,  for  unknow-
able "Matter."  Our  "  force-atonls  "  will  have  deve-
loped into  "  monads,"  spiritual  entities  akin  to  our-
selves. Thus  ithe  dualism  of  Matter  and  Spirit
would  have  been  transcended,  and  the  lower,  viz.
Matter,  would  have  been  interpreted  as  a  phenom-
enal appearance  of  the  higher,  viz.  Spirit.

§  19.  And  a  similar  result  follows  from  the  ana-
lysis of  the  conception  of  Force.  Just  as  Matter
was  a  conception  which  could  not  be  applied  to
ultimate  reality  at  all,  s©  Force  is  a  conception  which
inevitably  implies  the  spiritual  character  of  the  ult-
imate reality.  Historically  it  is  undeniable  that
Force  is  depersonalized  Will,  that  the  prototype  of
FoKce  is  Will,  which  even  now  is  the  Force  par  ex-
cellence and  the  only  one  we  know  directly.  The
isense  of  Effort  also,  which  is  a  distinctive  element  in
the  conception  of  Force,  is  irresistibly  suggestive  of
the  action  of  a  spiritual  being.  For  how  can  there
be  effort  without  intelligence  and  will  ?

It  is  this  closer  reference  to  our  own  consciousness
which  makes  Force  a  more  satisfactory  explanation
of  things  than  Matter :  it  is  nearer  to  the  higher,
and  hence  more  capable  of  really  explaining  than
the  lower. And  we  see  this  also  by  the  issue  of  the
attempt  to  interpret  Force  in  terms  of  lower  concep-
tions. Force  is  frequently  defined  as  the  cause  of
motion  {ep.  ch.  iii.  §  10),  and  if  this  definition  were
metaphysically  true,  the  sooner  Force  were  obliter-
ated from  the  vocabulary  of  science  the  better. Its
association  with  the  sense  of  effort  would  lead  to
groundless  suggestions  of  similarity  with  the  action  of
our  wills,  which  could  only  be  misleading. But,  as
we  saw  (ch.  iii.  §  1 1,  8),  the  conceptions  of  cause  and

i


MATTER ULTIMATELY REDUCIBLE' TO SPIRIT. 275;

motion  are  even  more  replete  with, contradiction  andi
perplexity,  and  to  explain  Force  in ,  terms  of  cause
and  motion  is  to  explain  what  is  imperfectly  known  i
in  terms  of  what  is  still  less  known.  When  we
assert  that  the  Becoming  of  things  is  due  to  the
action  of  forces,  we  can  form  some  sort  of  inadequate
idea  of  how  the  process  works,  but  we  have  not  the
least  idea  of  what  causation  consists  in  as  soon  as  we
rigidly  exclude  all  human  analogies.  To  use  caus-
ation without  a  reference  to  our  own  wills  is  to  use
a  category  which  has  been  reduced  to  a  mere  word
without  meaning,  a  category,  moreover,  the  use  of
which  involves  us  in  the.-  inextricable  difficulties
of  an  infinite  regress.

§  20.  If,  on  the  other  hand,. w.e  admit  that  Matter
may  be  resolved  into  forces,  and  that  the  only  pos-
sible substratum  of  Force  is. intelligence,  the  way  is
open  for  a  reconciliation  of  the  metaphysics  of  Ideal-
ism with  the  requirements  of  science.  Idealism
admits  the  phenomenal  reality  of  the  "material"
world,  and  science  recognizes  that  it  has  neither
need  nor  right  to  assert  its  ultimate  reality.  The
unity  of  philosophy  and  of  the  universe  is  vindicated
by  the  discovery  of  the:  fundamental  identity  of
Matter  and  Spirit,  and  the  ultimate  reduction  of  the
former  to  the  latter.

And  not  only  has  science  no  need  to  assert  the
ultimate  reality  of  Matter,  but  it  actually  benefits,
in  a  hardly  less  degree  than  metaphysics,  from  the
interpretation  of  the  phenomena  of  Matter  we  have
propounded.  If  Matter  is  not  and  can  not  be  an
ultimate  mode  of  being,,  it  follows  that  the  pseudo-,
metaphysical  speculations  as  to  its  ultimate  consti-
tution lead  only  to  a  loss  of  time  and  temper.  The
conceptions of  atoms, ether,  space, etic, are not


C2f6  MAN A-ND  (THE W0RLD.

capable  df  being  ieleared  of  their  contradictions,
because  they  have  only  a  relative  validity  in  the
phenomenal  world,  and  the  phenomenatl  world
taken  by  itself  is  full  of  contradictions.  -Science
therefore  need  not  concern  itself  to  pursue  its
assumptions  beyond  the  point  at  which  they  are
most  useful  practically,  nor  attempt  the  hopeless  task
of  solving  the  perplexities  which  arise  when  it  is
essayed  to  give  them  an  ontological  validity.  And
this  is  the  true  answer  to  the  sceptica^ciaricism  of  the
first  principles  of  science  (ch.  iii.  §§  6-11).  Hence
it.  will  be  sufficient  to  assume  as  many  undulating
agencies  as  are  requisite  to  explain  the  phenomena
of  light  and  electricity,  without  troubling  whether
the  assumption  of  the  reality  of  a  luminiferous  ether
would  not  involve  impossibilities.  The  difficulties
inherent  in  the  conceptions  of  Matter,  Motion,  and
Infinity,  puzzles  like  that  of  .the  infinitude  of  the
material  universe,  of  the  infinite  divisibility  of
Matter  and  the  relativity  of  Motion,  lose  their
sting,  when  we  cease  to  imagine  that  the  facts  with
which  they  are  concernedare  ultimate.  It  is  enough
to  know  that  we  shall  never  get  to  the  end  of  the
world,  or  come  to  a  particle  we  cannot  divide.

But  though  Matter  ultimately  be  but  a  form  of
the  Evolution  of  Spirit,  difficulties  remain  in  plenty.
Before  the  reconciliation  can  be  considered  com-
plete, e.g.,  it  is  necessary  to  determine  the  nature
of  the  intelligence  which  Matter  is  divined  to
conceal,  and  to  discover  what  is  the  function  of
this  disguise  of  Spirit.

§  21.  After  the  dispersion  of  the  doubts  which
Scepticism  had  cast  on  the  first  principles  of  science,
we  must  consider  the  nature  of  the  intelligence  of
the  Force-atoms. It  is  possible  either to  regard


THE SPIRITUAL NATURE OF "ATOMS."  277;

each  atom,  with  Leibnitz  and  Lotze,  as  a  meta-
physical entity  or  monad,  and  to-  regard  their  inter-
actions as  constituting  the-  material  universe,  or
to  ascribe  them  to  the  direct  action  of  divine  force.
Nor  is  it  a  question  of  vital  importance  which  we
prefer.  For,  on  the  one  hand,  we  cannot  dispense
with'  the  divine  force  in  trying  to  understand  the
arrangement  of  the  world  and  the  aim  of  its  pro-
cess, and,  on  the  other,  it'  is  not  very  much  more
difficult  to.  conceive  of  an  atom. as  possessing  rudi-
mentary consciousness  and  individuality  than. to  do
this  in  the  case  of  an  amoeba. .  But  perhaps  it  is .
better,  in  the  present  state  of  our  knowledge,  and.
until  Mr..  Crookes'  theories  of  the  individualities  of
atoms  (ch.  vii.  §11)  have  received  fuller  confirmation,,
to  recognize,  the  distinction  between  organic  andi
inorganic  being,  and  to  ascribe  consciousness  only
to  living  beings,,  out  of  which  it  is  historically  pro-
bable that  our  highly  evolved  consciousness  has
directly  developed.

An  atom,  then,  may  be  defined  as  a  constant
manifestation  of  divine  Force  or  Wilt,  exercised  at
a  definite  point.  In  this  definition,  which  moreover
can  be  easily  adapted  to  new  requirements,  should,
the  old  conceptions  of  atoms  cease  to  be  serviceable
expressions  for  the  scientific  facts,  the  constancy  of  the
divine  Will  excludes  the  association  of  caprice,  while
the  localization  prevents  the  fusion  and  confusion.,  of,
the  force-atoms.  It  must  not,  however,  be  supposed,
that  there  is  any  intrinsic  connection  between. the
forces  and  the  mathematical  points  at  which  they
act.  It  is  merely  that  at  these  points  we  come
under  the  influence  of  a  certain  intensity  of  divine
Force.  That  this  intensity  is  a  constant  and,  definite
one,  and  that  we  can  therefore  measure  it  in,  numr^


'278  MAN AND THE WORLD.

'bers  of  force  units,  and  speak  of  the  conservation
•  of  mass  and  energy,  is  a  fact  given  only  by  experi-
'  ence,  and  one  which  need  hold  good  only  in  so  far
as  it  subserves  to  the  idea  of  the  whole.  And  if
it  be  objected  that  a  thing  can  not  act  where  it  is
not,  it  may  be  replied  that  the  divine  Force  is
omnipresent,  or  its  action  in  matter  may  be  com-
pared to  a  piece  of  machinery  which  remained  in
action  in  the  absence  of  its  constructor,  which  affected
us  on  reaching  certain  spots,  and  which  might  fairly
be  said  to  represent  a  constant  will  of  its  constructor.
But  if  we  penetrate  a  little  deeper,  the  difiEculty
will  appear  gratuitous.  For  we  have  seen  (§  10)
that  Space  can  not  be  an  ultimate  reality,  but  must
be  regarded  as  a  creation  of  the  divine  Force  on
precisely  the  same  footing  as  Matter,  and  need  not
appear  real  to  us  except  in  our  present  condition.

Thus  the  "  objective  "  world  in  Space  and  Time
^would  be  the  direct  creation  in  our  consciousness
-of  the  divine  Force,  and  represent  merely  a  state
or  condition  of  our  mind,  which  need  not  be  true
or  exist  at  all,  except  for  a  being  in  that  condition.
And  yet  it  would  bfe  the  only  reality  and  the  primary
object  of  knowledge  for  such  a  consciousness.

§  22.  We  have  spoken  hitherto  of  the  world
as  a  manifestation  of  divine  Force,  and  treated  the
physical  forces  from  the  point  of  view  of  the  sub-
ject of  which  they  were  forces.  But  Force,  to  be;
real,  requires  at  least  two  factors,  and  cannot  act
upon  nothing,  any  more  than  it  can  be  the  force
of  nothing.  We  must  consider,  then,  the  objects
also,  upon  which  the  divine  Force  acts.  It  must
be  a  manifestation  to  (something  or)  somebody,  it
must  act  upon  (something  or)  somebody.  Upon
whom  ? Upon  us,  surely,  for  it  is  to  us  that  the


THE  WORLD  A  STJ!£SS  BETWEEN  GOD  AND SPIRITS, 279

world  appears.  But  that  it  should  appear  to  us
implies  a  certain  independence  and  distinction  from
the  Deity.  For  Force  implies  resistance,  and  there
would  be  nothing  for  the  divine  Force  to  act  upon,
if  we  were  not  distinct  and  resisting  entities.  Or
rather,  we  slaould  remember  that  the  conception  of
Force  is  imperfect,  if  we  regard  only  the  force
which  acts,,  and  nat  that  which  it  acts  upon,  and
which  calls  it  out  by  its  resistance,  that  every  action
implies  reaction,  and  that  tO/  speak  of  forces  is  but  a
convenient  but  inaccurate  way  of  speaking  of  ^Stress
or  Inter-CBctioii  between  two>  factors^  And  of  these
factors  each  must  be  real  in  order  to  make  pos-
sible the  existence  of  the  force  exercised  by  either.
When,  therefore,  we  call  the  universe  a  manifestation
of  divine  Force,  we  are  not  speaking  with  perfect
precision,  but  leaving  out  of  account  the  other  half
of  the  Stress,,  viz.,  the  Reaction  of  the  Ego  upon
that  force..  The  cosmos  of  our  experience  is  a
stress  or  inter-action  between  God  and  ourselves.

And  in  such  interaction  both  sides  are  affected.
If  God  appears  to  us  as  the  world,,  if  the  splendour
of  perfection  can  be  thus  distorted  in  the  dross  of
the  material,  the  Self  also,  which  is  a  factor  in  that
interaction,  cannot  appear  in  its,  fulness.

We  must  distinguish  therefore  between  the  Self
as  it  ultimately  is,  and  as  it  appears  to  itself  in  its
interaction  with  the  Deity.  This  distinction  may
be  marked  by  calling  the  Self  as  it  appears,  the.
phenomenal  self,  and  the  self  as  the  ultimate  reality,
the  Transcendental  Ego.  By  the  latter  name  it  is
intended  to  express  its  transcendence  of  the  limit-
ations of  our  ordinary  consciousness  and  of  our  phen-
omenal world,,  and  yet  to  emphasize  its  fundamental
kinship  with  our  normal  self. And  in  agreement


28o  MAN AND THE WORLD.

with  Kant's  phraseology,  it  is  called  "transcend-
enta/,"  because  its  existence  is  not  directly  pre-
sented, but  inferred,  based  upon  a  metaphysical
inference  from  the  phenomenal  to  the  transcendent}
On  th«  other  hand,  our  ordinary  selves  ^r&  phenome-
nal, just  as  phenomenal  as  the  phenomenal  world.
We  can  discover  our  character  only  from  our
thoughts,  feelings,  and  actions,  and  introspective
psychology  is  a  science  of  observation.  It  is  by
experience  and  experiment  that  we  arrive  at  a
knowledge  of  ourselves,  by  an  examination  of  the
varying  flow  of  consciousness.  But  in  order  to  be
conscious  of  the  connection  of  the  flow  of  phenomena
in  consciousness,  in  order  to  be  convinced  that  my
feelings  to-day  and  yesterday  both  belong  to  me,
it  is  necessary  that  there  should  be  something
permanent  which  connects  them  {cp.  ch.  v,  §  3).  This
permanent  being,  which  holds  together  the"  Becoming
of  the  phenomenal  selves,  is  secured  by  the  Trans-
cendental Ego,  which  is,  as  it  were,  the  form  con-
taining as  its  content  the  whole  of  our  psychic  life.
But  the  form  cannot  be  separated  from  its  content
(ch.  ii.  §  14),  and  hence  the  Ego  cannot  be  reduced
to  an  empty  form,  or  regarded  as  different  from  the
Self  They  must  be  in  some  way  one,  and  their
unity  must  correspond  to  our  conviction  that  we
change  and  yet  are  the  same.  What,  then,  is  the
relation  of  the  Ego  to  the  Self  ? For  it  seems  that

1  There  is,  however,  this  difference  :  in  Kant  "  transcenden-
tal "=  that  which  is  reached  by  an  ep'istemological  argument,
a  truth  implied  in  the  nature  of  our  knowledge.  Having,  how-
ever, rejected  epistemology,  we  must  modify  the  meaning  of  a
"  transcendental  proof  "  into  being  "  a  proof  of  the  transcendent,"
viz.,  that  which  transcends — not  experience  generally,  as  in
Kant — but  our  actual  presentations,  i.e.,,  which  is  based  on  meta-
physical necessities.


THE  SELF  AND  THE  TRANSCENDENTAL  EGO,  28 1

the  Transcendental  Ego  can  neither  be  separate
from  or  equivalent  to  the  phenomenal  self  (  =  the
content  of  consciousness).  If  it  were  separate,  the
"I"  would  be  divided,  would  be  not  one  but  two ;
if  it  were  equivalent,  the  self  which  interacts  with
the  Deity  would  be  equivalent  to  the  self  which  is
the  result  of  that  interaction.

To  understand  this  rdation,  we  must  remember
that  the  ordinary phenomenal "  I  " is  essentially
changing,  and  displays  different  sides  of  its  nature
at  different  times. Hence  its  actual  consciousness
never represents the wkole  capacity of  the self
What  "  I "  think,  feel,  etc.,  is  only  a  sijiall  portion
at  any  time  of  what  I  am  capable  of  thinking  and
feeling,  and  its  amount  is  very  different  when  I  am
intensely  active  and  half  asleep. But  do not  the
latent  capacities of  feeling, etc., truly belong to
myself,  or  does  its  reality  admit  of  degrees  corre-
sponding to  the  intensities  oi  consciousness  ? Am
"  I  "  annihilated  when  I  fell  asleep,  and  resurrected
when  I  awake  ? Assuredly  this  would  be  a  strange
doctrine-,  and  one  from  which  the  acceptance  of  the
Transcendental Ego  delivers  us. The  Transcen-
dental Ego  is  the "  I  " with,  all  its  powers  and
latent  capacities  of  detielopment,  the  ultimate  reality
which  we  have  not  yet  actually  reached. The  phen-
omenal self  is  that  portion  of  the  Transcendental
Ego  which is  at  any  time  actual (exists  ii^epyela),
or  present  in  consciousness,  and  forms  but  a  feeble
and  partial  excerpt  of  the  Ego. But  the  Self  is  as
yet  alone  real,  and  as  in  the  progress  of  its  develop-
ment it  "unfolds  all  its  hidden  powers,  it  approximates
more  and  more  to  th.e  Ego,  until  at  last  the  actual
and  the  potential  would  become  co-extensive,  the
Self  and  the  Ego  would  coincide,  and  in  the  attain-


282  MAN AND THE WORLD.

ment  of  perfection  we  should  be  all  we  are  capable
of  beingl

§  23.  And  this  account  of  the  relation  of  the
Ego  to  the  Self  is  not  only  metaphysically  necessary,
but  supported  also  by  the  direct  scientific  evidence
of  experimental  psychology.  For  it  seems  to  pro-
vide an  explanation  of  the  excee:dingly  perplexing
phenomena  of  double  or  multifold  and  alternating
consciousness,  multiplex  personality  and  "secondary"
selves.  These  curious  phenomena  forcibly  bring
home  to  us  what  a  partial  and  imperfect  thing  our
ordinary  consciousness  is,  how  much  goes  on  within
us  of  which  we  know  nothing,  how  far  the  pheno-
menal falls  short  of  being  co- extensive  with  our
whole  nature.  And  yet  we  must  either  include
these  changes  of  personality  within  the  limits  of  our
own  "self,"  or  ascribe  them  to  possession  by  "spirits."
And  there  can  be  little  doubt  that  the  former  theory
is  in  most  cases  obviously  preferable.  The  secondary
selves  show  such  close  relations  to  the  .primary,
display  sueh  complications  of  inclusive  and  exclusive
memories,  betray  such  constant  tendencies  to  merge
into  or  to  absorb  their  primaries,  that  we  cannot
exclude  them  from  our  "  selves.'*  Indeed.,  it  is  often
difficult  to  decide  which  of  several  personalities  is  to
be  regarded  as  the  primary  self..  What,  e.g.,  is  the
real  self  of  personages  like  Felida  X.  or  Madame  B.  ?^
Is  it  the  L;^ome  of  waking  life,  the  dull  uneducated
peasant  woman,  who  knows  nothing  of  the  higher
faculties  she  is  capable  of .  displaying  when  the
habitual  grouping  of  the  elements  of  her  being  has
been  resifted  by  hypnotization  ? Or  is  it  the  bright

^  Compare  Proceedings  of  the  Society  for  Psychical  Research,  vol.
iv.'  p.  129.  The  case  of  Felida  X.,  given  fully  m  Hypnotism!  et
Double  Conscience,  par  le  Dr.  Azam. Paris^  iS&y.


SECONDARY AND NORMAL "SELVES."  283

and  lively  Ldontine  of  the  hypnotic  condition,  who
knows  all  that  Ldonie  does,  but  speaks  of  her  in  the
third  person  ?  Or  is  it  not  rather  the  Ldonore  of
a  still  deeper  stage,  with  her  higher  intellect  and
perfect  memory  of  all  that  she,  Ldontine  and  L^onie
have  done  ?

By  the  theory  suggested  all  these  difficulties  may  be
solved.  They  merely  illustrate  the  contention  that
our  ordinary  selves  are  neither  our  whole  selves  nor
our  true  selves.  They  are,  as  Mr.  Myers  phrases  it,
merely  that  portion  of  our  self  which  has  happened
to  come  to  the  surface,  or  which  it  has  paid  to
develop  into  actual  consciousness  in  the  course  of
Evolution.  They  are  our  habitual  or  normal  Selves,
more  or  less  on  a  par  with  the  secondary  selves,  and
like  them,  phenomenal.  But  the  Ego  includes  them
all,  and  this  inclusion  justifies  us  in  reckoning  these
,  phenomena  part  of  ourselves.  In  it  the  phenomenal
selves  unite  and  combine,  and  as  a  beginning  of  this
fusion  it  is  interesting  to  find  traces  of  coalescence
in  the  higher  stages  of  personalities  which  at  lower
stages  had  seemed  exclusive  and  antagonistic.^

§  24.  The  way  in  which  the  world  arises  may
now  be  represented  as  follows.  If  there  are  two
beings,  God  and  an  Ego,  capable  of  interacting,  and
if  thereupon  interaction  takes  place,  there  will  be  a
reflexion  of  that  interaction  presented  to  or  con-
ceived by  the  Ego.  And  if,  for  reasons  to  be  sub-
sequently elucidated  (ch.  x.  §§  25,  26),  there  is  an
element  of  non-adaptation  and  imperfection  in  this
interaction,  both  factors  will  appear  to  the,  Ego  in  a
distorted  shape.  Its  image  of  the  interaction  will
not  correspond  to  the  reality.  And  such  a  distorted
image  our  universe  is,  and  hence  the  divine  half  of
'  Compare  Proceedings  of  the  Psychical  Society,  vol.  iv.  p.  529  s.f.


284  MAN AND THE WORLD.

the  stress  [cp.  §  22)  is  represented  by  the  material
world,  and  that  of  the  Ego  by  our  present  pheno-
menal selves.  But  just  as  the  development  of  our-
selves reveals  more  and  more  our  full  nature,  so  it
must  be  supposed  thait  the  developmervt  of  the  world
will  reveal  more  and  more  fully  the  nature  of  God,
so  that  in  the  course  of  Evolution,  our  conception
of  the  interaction  between  us  and  the  Deity  would
come  to  correspond  more  and  more  to-  the  reality,
until  at  the  completion  of  the  process,  the  last  thin
veil  would  be  rent  asunder,  and  the  perfected  spirits
would  behold  the  undimmed  splendour  of  truth  in
the  light  of  the  countenance  of  God.

§  25.  But  many  difficulties  remain.  Granting
that  Matter  is  the  product  of  an  interaction  between
the  Deity  and  the  Ego,  we  have  not  yet  fully
accounted  for  the  objective  worid.  The  objective
world  includes  not  only  things  but  persons,  i.e.,
spiritual  beings.  Are  these  then  also-  subjective
hallucinations  of  each  man's  Ego  ?

It  is  rt6t  as  imperative  to  deny  the  ultimate  reality
of  spiritual  beings  as  it  was  to  deny  that  of  unknow-
able and  lifeless  Matter.  But  it  is  undeniable  that
the  admission  of  their  reality  creates  some  difficulty.
For  how  can  others  share  in  the  subjective  cosmos
arisiftg  out  of  the  interaction  between  the  Deity  and
the  Ego  of  each  of  us  ?  Metaphysic  alone  might
long  have  failed  to  find  an  answer  to  this  question,
and  the  idea  of  a  "pre-established  harmony"  be-
tween the  phenomenal  worlds  of  several  spirits
might  long  have  continued  to  seem  a  strange  flight
of  fancy,  if  the  progress  of  science  had  not  ■enabled
us  to  conceive  the  process  on  scientific  analogies.

The  problem,  in  the  first  place,  has  much  affinity
with  what  we  see  in  dreams. In  a  dream  also  we


THE  ANALOGY  OF  DREAMS. 285

have  a  sensuous  presentation  laying  claim  to  reality,
and  yet  possessing  only  subjective  validity.  A
dream  is  a  hallucination,  and,  yet  not  a  random
hallucination  :  each  feature  in  the  wildest  dream  is
causally  connected  with  a  reality  transcending  the
dream  state  (in  this  case  our  ordinary  "waking"
life),  and  when  we  awake  we  can  generally  account
even  for  its  greatest  absurdities.  And  yet  those
absurdities  do  not,  as  a  rule,  strike  us  while  we  dream.
We  live  for  the  nonce  in  topsyturvydom,  and  are
surprised  at  nothing.  While  it  lasts,  therefore,  a
dream  has  all  the  characteristics  of  reality.  And  so
with  our  present  life  :  it  seems  real  and  rational,
because  we  are  yet  asleep,  because  the  eyes  of  the
soul  are  not  yet  opened  to  pierce  the  veil  of  illusion.
But  if  the  rough  touch  of  death  awoke  us  from  the
lethargy  of  life,  and  withdrew  the  veil  that  shrouded
from  our  sight  the  true  nature  of  the  cosmos,'  would
not  our  earth-life  appear  a  dream,  the  hallucin-
ation of  an  evil  nightmare  ?

Certainly  the  analogy  holds  very  exactly.  The
world  of  dreams  is  moulded,  although  with  strange
distortions,  upon  that  of  our  waking  life ;  so  is  our
present  world  on  that  of  ultimate  reality.  It  is  real
while  it  lasts ;  so  is  our  world  ;  when  we  awake,
both  cease  to  be  true,  but  not  to  be  significant.
And  both,  moreover,  may  be  seen  through  by  reflec-
tion. Just  as  we  are  sometimes  so  struck  by  the
monstrous  incongruity  of  our  dreams  that,  even  as
we  dream,  we  are  conscious  that  we  dream,  so
philosophy  arouses  us  to  a  consciousness  that  the
phenomenal  is  not  the  real.

But  yet  the  parallel  would  not  be  complete  unless
different  people  had  parallel  and  corresponding
dreams  or  hallucinations. Exceptionally  this  ccr-


286  MAN AND THE WORLD.

respondence  has  been  recorded  even  in  the  case  of
dreams,^  but  for  a  frequent  and  normal  occurrence
of  such  parallelism  we  must  go  to  the  nascent  science
of  hypnotism.

Not  only  are  hypnotized  subjects  easily  subjected
to  hallucinations  at  the  will  of  their  operator,  both
while  hypnotized  and  when  they  have  apparently
returned  to  their  normal  condition,  but  it  is  quite
possible  to  make  several  subjects  share  in  the  same
hallucination.

,  Now  as  yet  our  knowledge  of  these  phenomena
is  too  rudirhentary  for  us  to  assign  limits  to  the
extent  and  complexity  of  the  hallucinations  which
may  be  in  this  way  induced,  but  even  now  their
consistency  is  quite  astounding.  The  subject  to
whom  it  has  been  suggested  that  he  will  at  such
and  such  a  time  have  audience  of  the  President  of
the  French  Republic,  is  not  disillusioned  by  any
incongruity  in  the  appearance  and  demeanour  of  his
phantom  president  ;  a  hallucinatory  photograph  on
a  spotless  piece  of  paper  obeys  all  the  laws  of  optics  ;
it  is  reflected  in  a  mirror,  doubled  by  a  prism,
magnified  by  a  lens,  etc.*

And  if  such  effects  are  possible  to  us,  if  we  can
experimentally  create  subjective  worlds  of  objective
reality  {i.e.,  valid  for  several  persons),  even  though
of  comparatively  limited  extent  and  variety,  in  a
human  consciousness,  what  may  not  be  achieved  by
an  operator  of  vastly  greater  knowledge  and  power  ?
Shall  we  assert  that  this  hallucinatory  cosmos  would
fall  short  even  of  the  almost  infinite  complexity  and
variety  of  our  world  ?

1  Vide  Phantasms  of  the  Living,  vol.  ii.  p.  380  ff.,  590  ff.

2  Proceedings  of  the  Psychical  Society,  vol,  iv.  p.  1 1,  vol.  iii.
p.  167.


THE  ANALOGY  OF  HYPNOTIC  HALLUCINATIONS.  287

We  may  put,  then,  the  analogy  in  terms  of  a  con-
tinuous proportion,  and  say  that  the  hypnotic  or
dream-consciousness  is  to  the  normal,  as  the  normal
is  to  the  ultimate.  And  in  each  case  the  lower  is
related  to  the  higher  as  the  actual  to  the  potential  :
while  we  sleep  our  dream-consciousness  is  all  that
is  actual  and  our  waking  self  exists  only  potentially ;
while  we  live  on  earth  our  normal  consciousness
alone  is  actual  and  our  true  selves  are  the  ideals  of
unrealized  aspirations.

And  thus  to  philosophy,  as  to  religion,  its  reproach
has  become  its  glory.  Just  as  the  Cross  has  become
the  symbol  of  religious  hope,  so  philosophy  has
answered  the  taunts  that  truth  is  a  dream  and  God
a  hallucination,  by  gathering  truth  from  dreams,  and
by  tracing  the  method  of  God's  working  through
hallucinations.

§  26.  But  though  the  "  objective  world "  be  a
hallucination,  subjective  in  its  mode  of  genesis,  it  is
not  on  that  account  without  a  meaning,  without  a
purpose.  Not  even  our  own  casual  and  disconnected
hallucinations  are  without  connection  with  the  real
world,  without  the  most  direct  significance  for  our
real  life.  Still  less  can  this  be  the  case  with  the
material  world  :  it  must  be  possible  to  determine
the  teleological  significance  of  Matter,  and  of  the
phenomenal  selves  incarnated  in  it.  For  it  is  neces-
sary, on  metaphysical  grounds,  to  endorse  the
protest  which  is  generally  made  in  the  interests  of
Materialism,  against  the  separation  of  Body  and
Soul,  the  dualism  of  Matter  and  Spirit,  and  to  wel-
come the  accumulating  proofs  of  their  complete
correspondence  and  interdependence.

For  the  universe  is  one  ;  Body  and  Soul,  Matter
and  Spirit  are  but  different  aspects,  the  outside  and


288  MAN AND THE WORLD.

the  inside  of  the  same  fact :  the  material  is  but  the
outward  and  visible  sign  of  the  inward  and  spiritual
state.  No  other  theory  of  their  relations  can  possibly
be  drawn  from  our  premisses  :  for  if  the  phenomenal
world  is  a  stress  between  the  Deity  and  the  Ego,
the  soul  is  but  the  reaction  of  the  Ego' upon  the
divine  action  which  encases  it  as  the  body.  But
this  very  analysis  of  a  stress,  this-  very  distinction
between  force  and  resistance,  action  arid  reaction  is
a  logical  and  not  a  real  one,  and  so  it  is  not  surprising
that  they  should  be  distinguishable  in.  thought  but
inseparable  in  reality.

§  27.  And  this  close  connection  of  the  material'
and  the  spiritual  will  enable  us  to  understand  why
the  single  process  of  Evolution  is  a  correlated
development  of  both,  why  the  development  of  a
spirit  is  naturally  accompanied  by  a  growth  in  the
complexity  of  its  material  reflex.

Of  this  fact  Materialism  gives  an  explanation
which  is  not  only  plausible  in  itself,  but  persuasive
by  its  favourable  contrast  with  all  the  other  meta-
physical explanations  hitherto  offered.  It  is  all
very  well,  a  materialist  may  urge,  to  give  meta-
physical explanations  of  Matter  in  the  lofty  region
of  vague  generalities,  but  when  we  come  down  to
humble  but  solid  facts,  and  require  a  specific  ex-
planation of  this  or  that,  the  courage  and  the  meta-
physics of  the  opponents  of  Materialism  evaporate,
and  shedding  around  them  a  "  divine  mist "  of
mystical  verbiage  they  hasten  to  regain  the  cloudy
peaks  of  metaphysics.  Granted,  therefore,  that  it  is
hard  to  conceive  the  constitution  of  Matter  as  an
ultimate  fact,  that  Matter  may  quite  -well  be  an
immediate  activity  of  the  Divine  Energy,  that  the
conception  of  the  universe  as  a  stress  between  the


MATERIALISM AND BODILY ORGANIZATION, 289

Deity  and  the  Ego  is  a  possible  explanation  of  the
interaction  and  close  connection  of  Matter  and
Spirit, — granted  all  this,  the  question  may  yet  be
asked  why  the  growth  of  the  complexity  of  material
organization  should  be  the  invariable  accompani-
ment of  the  growth  of  consciousness.  Is  it  not  the
easiest  and  most  reasonable  explanation  of  this  fact
to  suppose  that  spirit  is  a  kind  of  harmony,  resulting
from  the  proper  collocation  of  material  particles  ?
And  indeed,  do  not  the  facts  of  the  evolution  of  life
directly  negative  the  supposition  that  Matter  is  an
instrument  of  the  Deity  ?  For  if  the  world-process
were  the  realization  of  a  Divine  purpose,  the  lower
forms  of  material  organisms  would  necessarily  be
less  harmonious  to  that  purpose,  and  hence  should
require  a  more  powerful  and  complicated  machinery
of  Matter  than  the  higher  and  more  harmonized.
Instead  of  which,  material  organization  rises  in  com-
plexity and  ^ovi&r  pari  passu  with  the  development
of  consciousness,  and  the  obvious  inference  is  that
it  is  the  cause  of  the  development  of  consciousness.

That  such  a  materialistic  explanation  of  the  facts
is  the  most  obvious  to  the  vulgar,  it  is  needless  to
dispute,  that  it  is  also  the  soundest,  it  is  imperative
to  deny.  We  may  boldly  accept  the  challenge  of
Materialism,  and  if  we  succeed,  we  may  reasonably
expect  that  a  defeat  of  Materialism  on  the  ground
of  its  own  choice  will  not  mean  merely  a  passing
foray  of  the  metaphysical  mountaineers,  but  a  final
conquest  of  the  rich  lowlands  of  science  from  the
materialists  who  have  terrorized  over  them  so
long.

For  the  greater  complexity  of  material  organiz-
ation in  the  development  of  the  world  several  reasons
may  be  given. In  the  first  place,  we  may  appeal  to

R.  of  S.  U


ago  MAN AND THE WORLD.

the  fact  that  growth  of  complexity  seems  to  be  the
law  of  Evolution  in  all  things,  and  might  parallel
the  greater  complexity  and  delicacy  of  the  individual
organism  by  the  growing  complexity  and  delicacy
of  the  higher  social  organism  {cp.  ch.  viii.  §  7).  For
if  growth  of  complexity  is  a  universal  law  of  Evol-
ution, there  need  be  no  inter-dependence  between
the  manifestations  of  that  law,  i.e.,  no  causal  relation
between  the  greater  complexity  of  material  organ-
ization and  the  development  of  consciousness.

Secondly,  we  may  say  quite  generally,  that  if  the
world-process  represents  a  gradual  harmonizing  of
the  Deity  arid  the  Ego,  it  must  bring  with  it  an
increase  in  the  intercourse  and  interaction  between
them.  Hence  the  reflex  of  that  interaction  in  the
consciousness  of  the  Ego,  viz.,  the  world,  would
show  a  parallel  development.  The  greater  intensity
and  the  greater  number  of  relations  between  the
Ego  and  the  Deity  would  generate  an  intenser
consciousness  on  the  one  side  and  a  more  complex
organization  on  the  other.  Thus  the  materialist
explanation  of  the  fact  would  in  both  these  cases  be
a  fallacy  of  cuin  hoc  ergo  propter  hoc,  and  confuse  a
parallelism  due  to  a  common  origin  with  causal
dependence.

These  considerations,  however,  are  perhaps  insuf-
ficient to  explain  the  whole  function  of  Matter  in
the  Evolution  of  the  world,  and  we  must  examine
rather  the  part  material  organization  plays  in  the
different  organisms.

In  the  lowest  and  simplest  forms  of  life,  e.g.,  proto-
plasm, consciousness  is  reduced  to  a  minimum,  and
it  has  no  organization  to  speak  of.  The  protoplasm
has  to  do  all  its  work  itself ;  the  amoeba  catches  its
food  consciously  and  digests  it  consciously. When


ORGANIZATION AS LABOUR-SAVING;  ME.CHANISM-w 2^1-

it  feels,  its  consciousness  has  to  be  all  there,  and
on  the  spot  where  the  feeling  is..

Now  let  us  suppose  that  it  differentiates  itself  and,
sets  up  a  rudimentary  organization,  say  a  stomach.
It  no  longer  requires  to  supervise  the  digestion  of
its  food  in  its  proper  person  and  with  its  whole  con-
sciousness, but  only  gets  called;  ia  by  the  structure
it  has  set  up  when  something  has.  gone  wrong,  and
it  has  dyspepsia.  It  is  a  familiar  observation  that
we  know  and  feel  nothing  of  our  bodily  organism
until  it  is  out  of  order.  In  health  our  nerves  and  our
digestion  do  not  demand  the  attention  of  our  con-
sciousness. And  the  conjecture  may  be  hazarded
'  that  this  is  precisely  the  reason  why  we  have  grown
nerves  and  a  digestive  apparatus.  For  the  estab-
lishment of  a  nervous  system  makes  it  possible  for
consciousness  to  be  concentrated  at  the  centre  of
affairs  and  quietly  to  receive  reports  and  send
orders  through  the  nerves,  instead  of  rushing  about
all  over  the  body.

There  is  thus  a  considerable  econotny  of  conscious-
ness involved  in  every  piece  of  material  organization.
Its  raison  d'Hre  is  that  it  liberates  a  certain  amount
of  consciousness.  That  is  to  say,  consciousness,
instead  of  being  bound  down  to  the  performance  of
lower  and  mechanical  functions,  is  set  free  to  pursue
higher  aims  or  to  perfect  its  attainment  of  the  lower,
and  thus  the  total  of  intelligence  is  increased.  E.g.,
our  original  protoplasm,  when  it  has  got  a  stomach,
can  devote  the  attention  it  formerly  bestowed  upon
digesting  its  breakfast  to  improved  methods  of
catching  it,  and  so  its  descendants,  as  they  increase
the  complexity  and  efficiency  of  their  organic  ma-
chinery, may  rise  to  the  contemplation  of  the
highest  problems  of  life.


292  MAN AND THE WORLD.

Thus  organization  is  not  a  primary  fact  in  the
history  of  life.  The  unconscious  material  organiz-
ation is  simply  the  ex-conscious.  Our-unconsciousness
of  how  we  (our  wills)  control  our  bedies,  gives  no
support  to^the  view  that  body  and  soul  are  different:
we  have  merdy  forgotten  how  we  grew  our  bodies
in  the  long  process  of  Evolution.  But  as  the  pro-
cess still  g*oes  «on  we  can  retrace  the  steps  of  our
past  development.  Our  acts  still  form  our  bodies
for  good  and  ill  'First,  they  generate  habits,  and
habits  gradually  become  mechanical  and  uncon-
scious. Habits,  again,  gradually  produce  organic
changes,  at  first  slight  changes,  it  may  be,  in  the
development  of  the  muscles  and  'the  expression  of
countenance.  But  in  the  course  of  generations
these  are  summed  up  into  hereditary  organization.
The  only  reason  why  this  production  of  physiqal
changes  as  the  expression  of  psychical  nature  is  not
more  obvious  is,  in  the  first  place,  that  for  reasons
already  stated  (ch.  iv.  |§  10,  16),  our  faculties  have
not  been  harmoniously  developed,  aind  that  the  corre-
spondence between  the  different  elements  of  our
being  is  very  far  from  perfect.  And  moreover,  by
far  the  greater  part  of  our  nature  is  given  us,  and
in  the  course  of  a  single  life-^time  comparatively
little  can  be  done  towards  changing  the  outer  into
conformity  with  the  inner  man.  .Nevertheless,  it
may  perhaps  be  suspected  that  our  direct  control  of
our  bodily  organism,^  though  an  obscured,  is  not  an
extinct  power,  that  under  favourable  circumstances
we  possess  what  appears  to  be  a  supernatural  and
is  certainly  a  supernormal  power  over  our  bodies,
and  that  this  is  the  true  source  of  the  perennial
accounts  of  miracles  of  healing  and  extraordinary
faculties.


MATTER AS  THE RESTRAINT OF SPIRITS. 2.9$

The  essential  meaning,  then,  of  material  organiz-
ation in  the  evolution  of  the  individual  is  Mechanism,
and  Structure  is  essentially  a  labour-saving  apparatus
which  sets  free  consciousness.

And  this,  estimate  of  the  function  of  Matter  and
the  meaning  of  complexity  of  organization  in  the
individual  is-  confirmed  by  its  applicability  to  the
organization  of  society.  For  both  the  complex
structure  of  higher  societies  {cp.  ch.  viii.  §  7)  and
their  elabouate  material  machinery  are  essentially
contrivances  for  liberating  force,  and  enabling:;  them
to  produce  a  higher  intelligence,,  which-  shall  be
competent  to  deal;  with  higher  problems*

§  28.  And  it  is  not  oniy  from  the  point  of  view
of  the  individual  organism  that  Matter  seems  to. be
mechanism,  but  no  less. from  that  of  the  Deity.  It  is
not  merely  that  Atoms  have  the  appearance  of  being
"manufactured  articles,"  from  their  equality,  regu-
larity and  similarity,  for  they  may  not  be  oi  divine
manufacture,  and  we  may  be  compelled  to  deny
their,  uniformity  {cp.  ch.  vii.  §  11).  But  if  we  think
out  the  relation  which  on  our  theory  must  exist  be-
tween the  Deity  and  the  Egos,  we  shall  perceive
that  Matter  is  an  admirably  calculated  machinery  for
regulating,  limiting,  and.  restraining  the  conscious-
ness which  it  encases..  Its  impersonal  character
gives  it  the  superiority  which  Aristotle  ascribed  to
the  law  over  personal  rule.^  It  does  noL  cause
hatred,  and  escapes  "  the  detestation  which  men
feel  for  those  who  thwart  their,  impulses,  even  when
they  do  it  rightly,"  Even,  children;  and- savages
cannot  long  be  angry  with  sticks  and  stones.  The
dull  resistance  with  which  it  meets  and.  checks  the
outbursts  of  unreasoning  passion,  is  more  subduing
1  Eth.  Nic.  X.  9,  12.


294  MAN AND THE WORLD.

than  the  most  active  display  of  power.  The  irre-
sponsive and  impassive  inertia,  against  which  we
dash  ourselves  in  vain,  binds  us  with  more  rigid  and
■yet  securer  bonds  than  any  our  fancy  could  have
imagined.  Matter  constrains  us  by  a  necessity  we
can  iieither  resist  nor  resent,  and  to  dispute  its  sway
would  not  only  be  a  waste  of  time  and  strength,
but  display  a  ludicrous  lack  of  the  sense  of  the
ridiculous.

But  if  Matter  be  a  controlling  mechanism,  we  can
see  also  why  the  lower  beings  possess  a  less  com-
plex organization.  A  simpler  and  coarser  machinery
depresses  their  consciousness  to  a  very  low  point,
and  so  they  have  not  the  intelligence  seriously  to
affect  the  course  of  events.  On  the  other  hand,  in
order  to  permit  of  the  higher  manifestations  of
consciousness,  admitting  of  greater  spontaneity,  of
greater  powers  for  good  and  for  evil,  a  more  com-
plex, elaborate  and  delicate  mechanism  of  Matter
is  required,  to  secure  the  necessary  control  of  the
resultant  action.  Slaves  may  be  driven  by  the  lash,
governed  by  simple  and  violent  means,  but  free  men
'require  to  be  guided  by  subtler  and  more  compli-
cated modes  of  suasion.  Or,  to  vary  the  metaphor,
if  the  material  encasement  be  coarse  and  simple,
as  in  the  lower  organisms,  it  permits  only  a  litde
intellige'nce  to  permeate  through  it ;  if  it  is  delicate
and  complex,  it  leaves  more  pores  and  exits,  as  it
were,  for  the  manifestations  of .  consciousness.  Or,
to  appeal  to  the  analogy  already  found  so  service-
able (§  24),  it  is  far  easier  for  the  operator  to  put
his  hypnotized  subject  asleep  than  to  produce  the
higher  manifestations  in  which  the  consciousness  of
the  subject  is  called  forth,  but  guided  -by  the  will  of
the  operator ;  and  these  require  far  more  elaborate


THE FINAL ANSWER TO MATERIALISM.  295

and  delicate  preparations.  On  this  analogy,  then,
we  may  say  that  the  lower  animals  are  still  en--
tranced  in  the  lower  stage  of  brute  lethargy,  while
we  have  passed,  into  the  higher  phase  of  somnam-
bulism, which  already  permits  us  strange  glimpses
of  a  lucidity  that  divines  th^  realities  of  a  transcen-
dent world.

And  this  gives  the  final  answer  to  Materialism  :  it
consists  in  showing  in  detail  what  was  asserted  at
the  outset  (§  16),  viz.,  that  Materialism  is  a  hysteron
proteron,  a  putting  of  the  cart  before  the  horse,
which  may  be  rectified  by  just  inverting  the  con-
nection between  Matter  and  consciousness.  Matter
is  not  that  which  produces  consciousness,  but  that
which  limits  it  and  confines  its  intensity  withih  cer-
tain limits  :  material  organization  does  not  construct
consciousness  out  of  arrangements  of  atoms,  but
contracts  its  manifestation  within  the  sphere  which
it  permits.

This  explanation  does  not  involve  the  denial
either  of  the  facts  or  of  the  principle  involved  in
Materialism,  viz.,  the  unity  of  all  life  and  the  con-
tinuity of  all  existence.  It  admits  the  connection
of  Matter  and  consciousness,  but  contends  that  the
course  of  interpretation  must  proceed  in  the  con-
trary direction.  Thus  it  will  fit  the  facts  alleged  in
favour  of  Materialism  equally  well,  besides  enabling
us  to  understand  facts  which  Materialism  rejected  as
"supernatural."  It  explains  the  lower  by  the  higher,
Matter  by  Spirit,  instead  of  vice  versa,  and  thereby
attains  to  an  explanation  w;hich  is  ultimately  tenable
instead  of  one  which  is  ultimately  absurd.  And  it  is
an.  explanation  the  possibility  of  which  no  evidence
in  favour  of  Materialism  can  possibly  affect.  For  if,
e.g.,  a  man  loses  consciousness  as  soon  as  his  brain  is


296  MAN AND THE WORLD.

injurfed,  it  is  clearly  as  good  an  explanation  to  say
the  injury  to  the  brain  destroyed  the  mechanism  by
which  the  manifestation  of  consciousness  was  ren-
dered possible,  as  to  say  that  it  destroyed  the  seat
of  consciousness.  On  the  other  hand,  there  are  facts
which  the  former  theory  suits  far  better.  If,  e.g.,  as
sometimes  happens,  the  man  after  a  time  more  or  less
recovers  the  faculties  of  which  the  injury  to  his  brain .
had  deprived  him,  and  that  not  in  consequence  of  a
renewal  of  the  injured  part,  but  in  consequence  of
the  inhibited  functions  being  performed  by  the
vicarious  action  of  other  parts,  the  easiest  explan-
ation certainly  is  that  after  a  time  consciousness  con-
stitutes the  remaining  parts  into  a  mechanism  capable
of  acting  as  a  substitute  for  the  lost  parts.

And  again,  if  the  body  is  a  mechanism  for  inhibit-'
ing  consciousness,  -for  preventing  the  full  powers  of
the  Ego  from  being  prematurely  actualized,  it  will
be  necessary  to  invert  also  our  ordinary  ideas  on  the
subject  of  memory,  and  to  account  for  forgetfulness
instead  of  for  memory. It  will  be  during  life  that
we  drink  the  bitter  cup  of  Lethe,  it  will  be  with  our
brain  that  we  are  enabled  to  forget. And  this  will
serve  to  explain  not  only  the  extraordinary  memories
of  the  drowning  and  the  dying  generally,  but  also;;
the  curious  hints  which experimental psychology!
occasionally  affords  us  that  nothing  is  ever  forgotten  i?
wholly  and  beyond  recall.^

^  And  yet  this  is  a  fact  which  to  materialism  is  utterly  inexplic- q
able.  For  on  a  materialist  hypothesis  the  memory  of  anything
must  consist  of  a  certain  arrangement  of  certain  particles  of  brain  ,
tissue,  and  in  the  case  of  complex  facts,  the  memory  would  evi-
dently require  a  very  complex  system  of  particles.  Now  as  the
contents  of  the  brain  are  limited,  it  is  clear  that  there  can  only  be
a  limited  number  of  such  systems  of  particles,  and  hence  a
limited  number  of  facts  remembered. It  would  be  physically


THE SPIRITUALIZATION OF MATTEK.  297

§  29.  And  that  Matter  is  ultimately  divine  force
and  divine  mechanism,  is  shown  also  by  the  develop-
ment it  undergoes.  For  coincidently  with  the
spiritual  development  of  spiritual  beings,  Matter
also  undergoes  a  process '  of  spiritualization.  And
of  spiritualization  in  two  senses,  (i)  The  gulf  be-
tween its  (apparent)  properties  and  those  of  Spirit
diminishes.  We  discover^tthat  it  possesses  more
and  more  analogies  witji'  Spirit.  And  curiously
enough  this  is  one  of  jthe  chief  reasons  why  the
advance  of  science  has  seemed  favourable  to
Materialism.  For  as  the  spiritual  character  of
Matter  became  better  known,  it  became  less  absurd
to  explain  all  things  by  Matter.  But  such  successes  -
of  Materialism  have  been  gained  only  by  absorbing
alien  elements,  and  have  hopelessly  impaired  its
metaphysical  value.  In  this  sense  Materialism  hasy^
since  the  days  of  Democritus  and  Lucretius,  Js€en
fighting  a  losing  battle.  Its  seeming  victories  have
been  won  by  the  absorption  of  spiritualistic  el&ments
which  have  corrupted  the  simplicity  of  its  ooginal
conception  of  Matter,  and  caused  it  to  diverge
further  and  further  from  the  "  clear  and  defini^ly
intelligible"  motions  of  solid  particles.  The  colu
nection  of  the  scientific  conception  of  Matter  wit|
the  hard  Matter  of  common  experience  has  becomel
fainter  and  fainter,  as  science  is  compelled  to  multiply-
impossible  that  the  brain  could  be  charged  with-  memories  beyond
a  certain  point.  And  if  we  consider  the  number  of  impressions
and  ideas  which  daily  enter  into  our  consciousness,  it  is  clear  that
even  in  youth  the  brain  must  soon  reach  the  saturation  point  of
memory,  and  that  the  struggle  for  existence  in  our  memory  must
be  very  severe.  If  therefore  we  receive  unexpected  proofs  of  the
survival  in- memory  of  the  facts  most  unlikely  to  be  remembered,
we  have  evidently  reached  a  phenomenon  which  it  is  exceedingly
difficult  for  materialism  to  explain.


298  MAN AND THE WORLD.

invisible,  impalpable  and  imponderable  substances
in  the  "  unseen  universe,"  by  which  it  explains  the
visible.  The  ignorance  of  Lucretius  permitted  him
to  give  to  his  Atomism  a  far  greater  formal  perfec-
tion, than  the  fuller  knowledge  of  modern  physicists
admits  of,  and  every  far-sighted  materialist  must
lament  that  science  should  have  been  driven  to  give
inetaphysicians  such  opCfftags  for  crushing  tu  quoques
as  it  has  by  asserting  the  ^istence  of  supra-sensible
substances  like  the  ether  arvd  of  timeless  forces  like
gravitation  (cp.  ch.  iii.  §  9).  For  with  what  face  after
this  can  science  protest  against  the  admission  of
supra-sensible  world  of  eternal  Being,  as  involved  in
4:he  complete  explanation  of  the  physical  universe,
when  precisely  similar  assumptions  have  already
been  use<^  by  science  for  the  purposes  of  a  partial
•explanation  ?  Metaphysicians,  on  the  other  hand,
wTffk^eg^rd  these  facts  as  indications  that  the  de-
velopment of  Matter  and  Spirit  proceeds  along  con-
verging lines,  and  that  by  the  time  the  supra-sensible
is  reached  a  single  reality  will  be  seen  to  embrace  '
theymanifestations  of  bot,h.

30.  And  (2)  the  spiritualization  of  Matter  is
djiplayed  also  in  its  relations  to  spiritual  beings,
^s  in  the  course  of  Evolution  these  become  more
harmonized  with  the  Divine  Will,  Matter,  the
expression  of  that  Will,  becomes  more  and  more
harmonized  with  the  desires  of  spiritual  beings.
The  chains  that  bound  us  are  gradually  relaxed,
the  restrictions  that  fettered  us  are  one  by  one
removed,  as  intelligent  insight  grows  strong  enough
to  take  the  place  of  physical  compulsion.  We  obtain
command  of  Nature  by  knowledge  of  -her  laws,  and
it  is  by  our  obedience  to  the  laws  of  the  material
that  we  win  our  way  to  spiritual  freedom^ Hence


SPIRITUAL AND MATERIAL PROGRESS.  299

there  is  deep  symbolic  truth  in  the  myth  of  Prome-
theus the  Firebearer,  which  connects  the  discovery
of  fire  with  man's  advance  to  a  higher  spiritual  con-
dition. For  it  is  difficult  to  realize,  and  impossible
to  over-estimate,  the  importance  of  this  step  in
the  spiritualization  of  Matter,  whereby  what  had.
seemed  hopelessly  unmanageable  and  immovable
,  vanished  and  volatilized  at  the  magfic  touch  of  flame.
And  in  the  spiritualization  of  man  the  discovery  of
fire  was  no  less  essential,  as  the  foundation  of  all
subsequent  spiritual  progress.

And  it  is  still  true  that  spiritual  progress  in  the
long  run  depends  on  material  progress,  and  this  is
equally  true  of  the  development  of  the  individual
and  of  the  race.  Indeed,  it  is  even  more  obviously
true  in  the  case  of  the  race,  when  the  process  takes
place  on  a  larger  .scale  and  our  survey  extends  over,
a  longer  history.  Historically  it  is  true  that  the
higher  has  developed  out  of  the  lower,  the  moral
and  intellectual  life  out  of  the  material,  and  ulti-
mately it  can  only  rise  pari  passu  with  the  improve-
ment of  the  material.  It  is  a  fact  to  which  our
vulgar  Theodicy  loves  to  blind  itself,  that  a  great,
and  perhaps  the  greater,  part  of  the  evil  in  the
world  is  not  due  to  the  perversity  of  men  and
institutions,  to  the  tyranny  of  priests  and  princes,
but  to  the  material  conditions  of  life,  and  cannot
therefore  be  removed  by  the  mere  progress  of  intel-
ligence or  morality.  These  evils  are  but  the  reaction
of  ordinary  human  nature  upon  the  ineluctable  pres-
sure of  material  conditions,  and  can  be  eradicated
only  by  a  completer  command  of  those  conditions,
by  the  knowledge  which  is  power.  On  the  other
hand,  the  growth  of  knowledge  brings  with  it  a  slow-
but  sure  remedy  for  these  evils  : every  extension


300  MAN AND THE WORLD.

of  our  knowledge  of  the  nature  of  Matter  affords
the  material  basis  for  a  higher  spiritual  condition  ;
ultimately  material  progress  means  s-piritual  pro-
gresSi  And  thus  it  is  true  of  social,  as  of  metaphys-
ical, problems,  that  many  which  at  present  seem
insoluble  are  slowly  ripening  to  their  solution.
Hence  it  is  our  business  to  take  care  that  a  due
balance  of  functions,  a  proper  harmony  is  preserved
of  the  material,  intellectual  and  moral  elements  of
progress.  For  a  one-sided  development  is  in  the  end
fatal  to  all.  Material  progress  alone,  if  it  neglects
the  spiritual  elements  of  life,,  will  in  the  end  bring
about  moral  and  intellectual  decay,  and  a  condition
of  society  not  only  unfavourable  to  further  material
progress,  but  incapable  of  maintaining  the  prosperity
it  has  acquired.  Power  over  Matter  which  does
not  rest  on  an  assured  basis  of  intelligence  and
morality  is  certain  to  be  lost  in  the  ignorance  and
violence  of  a  society  which  does  not  make  a  proper
use  of  the  knowledge  it  possesses.  And  the  limits
of  spiritual  progress  in  the  absence  of  a  material
basis  are  equally  obvious.  When  "  plain  living "
becomes  a  euphemism  for  starvation,  "high  think-
ing "  is  no  longer  possible,  and  fakirism  is  a  carica-
ture of  spirituality.

And  so  in  the  case  of  the  individual.  Psychical
progress  is  evolved  on  a  physical  basis.  The  in-
tellectual and  moral  qualities  are  developed  sub-
sequently to  the  physical,  and  developed  out  of  them.
And  though  this  does  not  of  course  explain  them
away — for  the  lower  cannot  explain  away  the  higher
— it  yet  shows  that  the  distinction  of  body  and  soul
must  not  be  exaggerated  into  an  irreconcilable  dif-
ference. For  just  as  Matter  approximates  to  Spirit
in the  course  of Evolution,  so the  body  approx-


A HARMONIOUS DEVELOPMEI>rr REQUIRED. 3OI

imates  to  the  soul.  In  neither  case,  indeed,  does
the  lower  become  absorbed  into  the  higher,  but  it
becomes  more  distinctly  subordinated  to  it.  As
we  progress,  the  higher  intellectual  and  moral
qualities  play  a  more  and  more  important  part
in  life,  and  tend  to  predominate  in  consciousness
over  the  physical  functions.  For  the  physical
processes  tend  to  become  unconscious.  Conscious-
ness, therefore,  is  less  engrossed  by  the  mechanism
of  life.  Hence  the  body  itself  becomes  more  and
more  fitted  to  be  the  body  of  a  spiritual  being,  better
and  better  adapted  as  the  vehicle  of  a  life  which  is
more  than  physical.  It  develops  higher  physical
powers,  and  becomes  less  of  an  obstacle  to  spiritual
progress.  And  when  the  individual  development
is  allowed  to  proceed  normally  and  harmoniously,
there  does  not  arise  any  conflict  between  the  higher
and  the  lower  stages  :  the  lower  are  the  potential-
ities of  which  the  higher  are  the  realization,  the
promise  of  which  the  higher  are  the  fulfilment,  the
foundation  upon  which  the  higher  rear  the  edifice,
the  stem  of  which  the  higher  are  the  flowers.
Hence  the  higher  does  not  destroy  or  supersede  .the
lower,  but  transforms  it,  and  includes  it  in  what  is
its  realization  also.  The  intellectual  and  the  moral
life  is  higher  than  and  more  than  the  physical,,  and
also  its  perfection.

Wherever,  therefore,  there  appears  an  antagon-
ism between  the  higher  and  the  lower,  we  may
rest  assured  that  there  the  higher  also  has  not  been
fully  attained,  and  that  whether  the  blame  fall  on
the  individual,  or,  as  is  more  frequently  the  case,
on  the  society,  a  higher  life  which  involves  the
mortification  and  neglect  of  the  physical  is  both
wrong  and  foolish,  i.e.,  both  morally  and  intellectu-


302  MAN AND THE WORLD.

ally  defective.  Ethical  systems,  therefore,  which
inculcate  such  a  neglect  of  the  material  are  funda-
mentally false  :  for  just  because  the  physical  duties
are  the  lower,  they  take  precedence  over  the  higher:
the  physical  necessities  of  life  (to  ^^v)  precede,  both
in  Time  and  in  urgency  the  moral  necessities  of
living  we//  {to  eS  ^^v).

On  the  other  hand,  the  true  meaning  and  function
of  the  lower  activities  is  to  be  sought  in  their  rela-
tion to  the  higher,  which  they  prepare  and  promote.
The  natural  shows  its  spiritual  nature  by  supplying
the  machinery  of  spiritual  progress  and  by  promot-
ing it  in  spite  of  the  unavailing  protests  of  spiritual
beings.  For  thought  human  stupidity  has  hitherto
resisted  rather  than  assisted  the  steady  pressure  of
"  natural "  causes,  we  may  trace,  even  within  the
narrow  limits  of  human  history,  an  irresistible  secu-
lar progress,  which  has  strengthened  the  intellectual
and  moral  elements  in  human  nature  at  the  expense
of  the  purely  animal.  And  even  if  we  do  not  always,
approve  of  the  methods  employed,  who  are  we  that
we  should  pit  our  insight  against  that  of  the  power
that  works  in  Evolution  ?

Thus  this  view  enables  us  fully  to  appreciate  the
social  value  of  a  materialism  which  calls  attention
to  the  impiortance  of  our  foundations ;  and  while  it
is  no  less  powerful  in  dispelling  the  Utopias  of  our
fancies,  dissipating  our  castles  in  the  air  and  com-
pelling us  to  uprear  the  structure  of  the  higher  life,
stone  by  stone,  by  unremitting  labour,  it  yet  solaces
us  with  loftier  prospects  based  on  the  surer  found-
ation of  scientific  retrospect.

§  31.  And  yet  there  is  an  element  of  truth  even
in  the  ascetic  view  of  Matter.  We  might  indeed
have gathered this from the frequency  and' per-


MATTER AS THE MARK OF EVIL.  lO


J


sistency  at  all  times  and  under  all  conditions  of  the
theory  which  makes  Matter  the  principle  of  Evil ;
for  it  would  be  contrary  to  all  belief  in  the  ration-
ality of  Evolution  to  suppose  that  even  error,  when
persistent,  is  ever  gratuitous.  Accordingly  we  find
tiiat  though  Matter,  being  nothing  in  itself,  cannot
be  the  principle  of  Evil,  and  is  not  in  itself  evil,  it
is  yet  characteristic  of  an  essentially  imperfect  order
of  things  :  it  is,  as  it  were,  the  outward  indication
and  visible  reflexion  of  Evil.  For  Evil  is,  like  all
things,  ultimately  psychical,  and  'what  is  evil  about
Matter  is  the  condition  of  the  spirits  which  require
the  restraint  of  Matter.  If,  therefore,  as  Plato  says,
the  bpdy  is  the  grave  of  the  soul,  and  Matter  is  the
prison  of  the  Spirit,  it  must  yet  be  admitted  that
it  is  not  the  existence  of  prisons  which  is  to  be
deplored,  but  of  those  whom  it  is  necessary  to
ibfirison.

And  Matter  is  connected  with  Evil  in-  its  double
aspect,  both  as  the  engine  of  progress  and  the
mechanism  of  the  divine  education  of  spirits,  and
also  as  the  check  upon  consciousness.  For  if  evil,
i.e.,  inharmonious  spirits  were  permitted  the  full
realization  of  their  conscious  powers,  they  would
be  able  to  thwart  and  to  delay,  if  not  to  prevent,
the  attainment  of  the  divine  purpose  of  the  world-
process.  But  if  they  are  permitted  intelligence  only
when  they  are  ready  to  recognize  the  cosmic  order
and  in  proportion  as  they  are  ready  to  do  so,  the
aptness  of  the  contrivance  of  Matter  becomes  mani-
fest. The  lower  existences,  i.e.,  the  less  harmonized,
have  their  consciousness  limited  and  repressed  by
material  organization,  in  order  that  their  power  for
evil  may  be  practically  neutralized,  and  that  in  the
impotence  of  their  stupidity  they  may  have  little


304  MAN AND THE WORLD,

influence  on  the  course  of  events.  On  the  other
hand,  the  higher  existences  who  have  learnt  the
necessity  of  social  order  and  harmony,  are  thereby
enabled  to  acquire  that  knowledge  which  gives
them  power  over  Matter^  Thus  there  is  a  corre-
spondence, on  the  whole,  between  the  spiritual  con-
dition of  an  individual  and  a  race  and  their  material
resources.  We  are  too  apt  to  chafe  against  the
material  limits  of  our  being,  too  hasty  in  resenting
the  physical  obstacles  to  our  higher  aspirations  :  it
is  possible  that  the  real  obstacle  lies  in  the  con-
dition of  our  own  souls,  and  that  God  knows  us
better  than  we  know  ourselves.  What  man,  at  all
events,  could  claim  to  be  entrusted  with  higher
knowledge,  and  confidently  assert  that  he  would  use
the  Ring  of  Gyges,  the  Philosopher's  Stone,  or  the
Elixir  of  Life,  so  as  to  further  the  highest  spiritual
interests  of  himself  and  of  the  world  ?  And  so  with
societies.  Let  us  suppose  the  realization  of  what
many  of  our  social  philosophers  regard  as  the  proper
goal  of  human  ambition.  Suppose  a  humorous
fairy  revealed  to  us  a  secret  by  which  we  might
satisfy  all  the  material  wants  of  life  without  labour.
What  would  be  the  result  on  a  society  at  the
present  level  of  intelligence  and  morality  ?  Would
it  not  convert  it  in  very  deed  into  a  "  city  of  the
pigs,"  intent  only  on  making  merry  and  making
love,  and  totally  forgetful  of  any  higher  destiny  of
man  ?  The  truth  and  the  true  justification  of  the
divine  government  of  the  uniyerse  is  that  we  are
not  fit  to  be  better  off  than  we  are,  and  that  the
whole  g'igantic  mechanism  of  the  material  world  is
designed  to  further  the  attainment  of  the  purpose  of
the  world.

But  we  need  not  fear  that  this  mechanism  will  be


IDEALISM AND PREHUMAN EVOLUTION.  305

found  too  rigid  and  mechanical,  that  in  the  ripeness
of  time  it  will  put  an  absolute  limit  upon  spiritual
evolution.  The  time  may  come  when  Matter  will
no  longer  offer  any  obstacles  to  our  wishes,  and
when  in  sober  truth  Man  will,  with  a  word,  precipi-
tate a  mountain  into  the  sea.  Or  can  it  be  that  a
completer  harmony  of  the  human  with  the  Divine
Will  can  anticipate  the  course  of  social  evolution,
and  give  to  saints  and  sages  a  power  over  Matter
which  transcends  that  of  ordinary  men,  and  even
now  enables  their  faith  to  move  mountains  ?  Might
not  their  power  over  Matter  already  rise  to  the
level  to  be  attained  in  far-distant  ages,  just  as  their
iptellectual  and  moral  development  towers  above
that  of  the  societies  in  which  they  dwell  ?  But
whether  a  belief  which  has  found  strong  favour  at
all  times  and  in  all  countries  be  well  founded,  is  not
a  question  for  a  philosopher  to  decide  :  it  is  enough
for  him  to  assert  that  there  is  nothing  inherently
absurd  in  the  supposition,  and  that  a  will  completely
congruous  with  the  Divine  would  needs  have  a
complete  control  of  the  material.  •

§  32.  And  with  this  suggestion  we  must  leave
the  subject  and  close  a  chapter  which  has  already
been  unduly  prolonged,  by  a  brief  explanation  of  a
difficulty  which  has  often  been  felt  an  insuperable
obstacle  in  the  way  of  any  idealist  view  of  the
material  world.

Granted,  it  may  be  said,  that  Matter  is  in  itself
unknowable,  that  a  satisfactory  metaphysical  account
of  the  world  must  always  explain  it  in  terms  of
Spirit ;  yet  how  is  it  that  the  material  world  existed,
apparently,  long  before  spiritual  beings  came  into
existence.''  Is  not  this  conclusive  proof  that  the
world  does  not  exist  in  the  consciousness  of  spirits,

R.  ofS.  X


3o5  MAN AND THE WORLD.

whether  as  an  "  objective  hallucination "  or  other-
wise ?

The  objection  sounds  more  serious  than  it  is,  and
the  evolutionist  idealist  at  least  will  have  no  diffi-
culty in  answering  it.  For  in  the  first  place,  what
does  the  previous  existence  of  the  world  prove  ?
What  but  that  the  world-process  was  proceeding  at
a  time  when,  to  judge  by  the  knowledge  which  we,
immersed  in  a  certain  stage  of  that  process,  at
present  possess,  there  were  no  beings  in  that  phase
of  the  process  represented  by  physical  existence  on
our  earth.  But  this  falls  very  far  short  of  being
a  refutation  of  Idealism,  or  of  proving  that  the
material  world  is  not  a  phenomenon  in  the  con-
sciousness of  spirits.

For  (i),  as  we  saw  in  chapter  viii.,  material
evolution  is  an  integral  part  of  the  world-process,
and  obeys  the  same  law  as  spiritual  evolution,  viz.,
that  of  the  development  of  the  individual  in  associ-
ation. Hence  it  is  not  true  that  the  material  existed
outside  of  and  before  the  spiritual  process.  We
may  not  be  in  the  habit  of  calling  the  development
of  atoms  an  evolution  of  spiritual  beings,  but  the
process  which  developed  the  material  world  and
developed  spiritual  beings  is  one  and  the  same,
and  the  material  is  but  an  earlier  and  less  perfect
phase  of  the  spiritual  development.

(2)  It  is  at  the  utmost  true  only  from  our  present
point  of  view  that  in  its  earlier  stages  the  universe
contained  no  spiritual  beings  for  whom  it  existed,
and  our  ignorance  of  the  possibilities  of  existence
is  no  proof  against  the  idccilist  view  of  Matter.  For
there  might  have  existed,  and  still  exist,  myriads  of
beings  in  the  world  of  a  different  order  from  our-
selves, the  denizens  of  stellar  fires  or  interstellar


THE PROCESS ONE AND SPIRITUAL.  3O7

Space,  whose  constitution  and  mode  of  life  concealed
them  from  our  sight.  There  may  be  phase  upon
phase  of  existence,  forming  worlds  upon  worlds  im-
penetrable to  our  knowledge  in  our  present  phase,
the  existence  of  which  may  be  indicated  by  the  pre-
human evolution  of  our  world.

And,  lastly  (3),  the  objection  shows  how  slowly
scientific  discoveries  find  their  way  into  philosophy.
Philosophers  still  argue  as  if  our  earth  were  the
universe,  as  if  spiritual  existence  must  be  conceived
to  be  confined  to  a  single  planet  of  a  tenth-rate  sun.
Because  10,000,000  years  ago  no.  conscious  beings
inhabited  our  earth,  it  is  forsooth  impossible  that
other  heavenly  bodies  were  more  populous !  But
if  spiritual  beings  in  our  phase  of  physical'  existence
existed  in  other  worlds,  it  is  surely  as.  probable  that
our  solar  system  existed  to  adorn  their  skies,  as
that  we  are  now  the  sole  intelligent  beings  in  the
universe,  and  that  the  uncounted  hosts  of  suns
and  planets  exist  either  for  no  purpose  at  all  or  to
provide  employment  for  our  astronomers.

Thus  it  is  (i)  highly  improbable  that  the  phen-
omenal world  ever  existed  without  spiritual  beings
in  many,  if  not  in  all,  the  heavenly  bodies.  (2)  It
is  highly  probable  that  there  are  many  other  phases
or  stages  of  Evolution,  different  from  that  which
constitutes  our  present  physical  world,  and  of  which
the  existence  of  the  world  before  that  of  spiritual
beings  would  be  a  symbol,  a  piece  of  salutary  scene-
painting,  which  would  produce  an  illusion  in  lieu  of
a  reality  we  were  not  yet  fitted  to  grasp.  Or  (3),
it  may  be  directly  denied^  that  the  material  world
existed  without  spirit,  seeing;  that  it  represented  the
lower  stages  of  the  evolution  of  spirits.  And  which-
ever of  these  explanations  be  adopted,  they  are  one


308  MAN AND THE WORLD.

and  all '  competent  to  account  for  the  existence  of
the  material  world  and  in  harmony  with  the  account
given  of -the  spiritual  nature  of  Matter  in  the  above
chapter.

The  resuk,  then,  of  this  chapter  has  been  to
show  that  the  difficulties  presented  by  the  nature
of  our  environment  admit  of  solution  only  if  we
refer  the  phenomenal  world  to  the  transcendent  or
ultimate  reality.  By  this  reference  we  were  enabled
to  transcend  the  iinfinities  of  Space  and  Time;  the
conflict  of  Idealism  and  the  facts  of  life,  to  give  a
rough  sketch  of  the  nature  and  function  of  Matter
in  the  economy  of  the  universe,  and  so  to  solve  the
old  puzzles  as  to  the  relation  of  Matter  and  Spirit,
of  body  and  soul.  But  in  so  doing,  two  further
subjects  were  also  introduced,  those  of  the  nature
of  God  and  of  Evil.  These  subjects  will  have  to  be
investigated  in  the  following  chapters,  in  which  it
will  be  necessary  to  make  good  the  assumptions
that  God  and  Good  and  Evil  exist  in  any  intelli-
gible sense,  and  so  that  they  can  make  intelligible
anything  else  about  the  world.


CHAPTER X.

MAN  AND  GOD.

§  I.  The  subject  oi  this  chapter  is  that  of  the
relation  of  man.  to  his  cause,  or  his  past,  and  if  we
denominate  the  supposed  First  Cause  of  the  world
God,  it  will  possess  two  main  connections  with  the
preceding  inquiries.  In  the  first  place,  the  concep-
tion of  a  first  cause  of  the  world  requires  to  be
vindicated  against  the  criticism  stated  in  chapter
ii.  (§  lo).  In  the  second  place,  we  were  led  in  the
last  chapter  to  explain  the  material  cosmos  as  an
interaction  between  God'  and  the  Ego,  and  to  sug-
gest positions  which  require  further  elucidation.

It  was  shown  by  an  examination, of  the  contradic-
tion of  causation-  in  chapter  ii.  that  a  first  cause  of
existence  in  general  is  an  irrational  conception,  in
chapter  iii. (§ ii) that  causation is  a  thoroughly
anthropomorphic  conception,  derived  from,  and  ap»
plicable  to,  the  phenomenal  world. On  both  these
grounds,  therefore,  to  say  that  God  is  the  First  Cause
of  the  world  is  to  say  that  God  is  the  First  Cause  of
the  phenomenal  world,  i.e.,  the  cause  of  the  world-
process. For  the  category  oi  causation  does  not  carry
beyond  the  process  of  Evolution  or  the  phenomenal
world  {cp.  ch.  ii.  §  9). But  if  so  interpreted,  there  is
no  absurdity  in  the  conception  of  a  First  Cause. Our-
reason  impels  us  to  ask  for  a  cause  of  the  changes
we  see,  and  at  the  same  time  forbids  us  to  say  that


'^W  MAN AND GOD.

'they  arise  out  of  nothing,  i.e.  causelessly.  But  if  we
applied  these  postulates  of  our  reason  to  a//  things,
to  existence  as  such,  they  would  lead  us  into  the
absurdity  that  all  things  having  been  caused,  they
must  ultimately  have  been  caused  by  nothing.  But
if  this  is  impossible,  if  we  cannot  derive  existence
'Out  of  nothing,  then  there  miist  be  at  least  one
existence  which  has  never  come  into  existence.  Such
an  existence  would  be  an  ultimate  fact,  and  the
question  as  to  its  cause  would  be  unmeaning.  For
being  non-phenomenal,  the  idea  of  coming  into
existence,  or  Becoming,  which  is  a  conception  apply^
ing  only  to  the  facts  of  the  phenomenal  world,
would  not  here  be  applicable.  If,  then,  God  is  such
an  existence,  such  a  conception  of  God  satisfies  both
the  requirements  of  our  demand  for  causation  and
solves  the  difficulty  which  the  conception  of  a  First
Cause  presents,  if  taken  in  an  absolute  sense.

Thus  God  is,  (i)  the  unbecome  and  non-pheno-
menal Cause  of  the  world-process — the  Creator.

(2)  We  saw  in  the  last  chapter  that  God  was
also  the  Sustainer,  as  being  a  factor  in  the  inter-
action of  the  Ego  and  the  Deity.

(3)  It  has  been  implicitly  asserted  in  our  discus-
sions of  method  in  chapters  v.  and  viii.,  that  the
Deity  must  be  conceived  as  an  intelligent  and
personal  Spirit.  For  Cause  is  a  category  which  is
valid  only  if  used  by  persons  and  of  persons  {cp.  ch.
iii.  §  11),  while  personality  is  the  conception  expres-
sive of  the  highest  fact  we  know  (cp.  ch.  viii.  §  18) ;
hence  it  is  only  by  ascribing  personality  to  God  that
He  can  be  regarded  either  as  the  Cause  or  as  the
Perfector  of  the  world-process.^ Lastly,  Evolution

1  Personality  being  avowedly  an  Mai  (ch.  viii.  §  19),  the  attri-


THE FINITENESS OF GOD.  311

is  meaningless  if  it  is  not  teleological  {cp.  ch.  vii.
§§  20,  21),  and  •we  cannot  conceive  a  purpose  except
in  the  intelligence  of  a  personal  being.  And  we
are  prevented  by  the  principle  of  not  multiplying
entities  needlessly  to  invent  gratuitous  fictions  like
an  impersonal  intelligence  or  unconscious  purpose.

It  follows  (4)  that  God  \&  finite,  or  rather  that  to
God,  as  to  all  realities,  infinite  is  an  unmeaning
epithet.  This  conclusion  also  has  already  been
foreshadowed  in  many  ways.  Thus  {a)  it  followed
from  Kant's  criticism  of  the  proofs  of  the  existence
of  God,  that  only  a  finite  God  could  be  inferred
from  the  nature  of  the  world  {cp.  ch.  ii.  \  19  s.f ).
No  evidence  can  prove  an  infinite  cause  of  the
world,  for  no  evidence  can  prove  anything  but
a  cause  adequate  to  the  production  of  the  world,  but
not  infinite.  To  infer  the  infinite  from  the  finite
is  a  fallacy  like  inferring  the  unknowable  from  the
known,  and  all  arguments  in  favour  of  an  infinite
God  must  commit  it.  We  argue  with  finite  minds
from  finite  data,  and  our  conclusions  must  be  of  a
like  nature.  {b)  It  follows  from  the  conception  of
.  God  as  Force  {cp.  ch.  ix.  §  21) ;  for  Force  implies
resistance,  and  if  God  is  to  enforce  His  will  upon  the
worfd.  He  cannot  just  for  that  reason,  be  all — unless
indeed  He  is  by  some  inexplicable  chance  divided
against  Himself.  And  so,  too  {c),  just  because  God
is  a  factor  in  all  things,  He  cannot  be  all  things.

bution  of  personality  asserts  merely  that  God  is  the  perfection  of
the  process  whereby  personal  beings  have  arisen  out  of  the  lowest
individualities  of  atoms.  There  is  no  objection,  however,  to  the
use  of  terms  like  supra-personal  or  ultrarpersonal,  if  we  mean  by
them  something  including  and  transcending,  rather  than  exclud-
ing, personality.  For  doubtless  the  personality  of  God  trainscends
that  of  man  as  far  as  that  of  the  highest  man  transcends  that  of
the  atom.


312  MAN AND GOD.

For  to  interact  implies  a  not-God  to  react  upon
God.  Lastly  (a),  finiteness  follows  from  the  whole
account  given  in  the  last  chapter  of  the  divine
economy  of  the  world.

§  2.  But  these  conclusions  conflict  sharply  with
the  ordinary  doctrines  both  of  theology  and  of  philo-
sophy. In  theology  we  are  wont  to  hear  God
called  the  infinite,  omnipotent,  Creator  of  all  things,
while  in  philosophy  we  hear  of  the  all-embracing
Absolute  and  Infinite,  in  which  all  things  are  and
have  their  being.  And  as  this  conflict  can  be  no
longer  dissembled  or  postponed,  we  must  now
either  make  good  our  defiance  of  the  united  forces
of  theology  and  philosophy,  or  be  crushed  by  the
overwhelming  weight  of  their  authority.  In  so  un-
equal a  contest  our  only  hope  lies  in  the  divisions
and  hesitations  of  our  adversaries.  For  it  may  be
that  their  agreement  is  not  so  perfect  as  we  had
feared,  that  the  bearing  of  some  of  their  chief
objections  is  ambiguous,  and  that  with  a  little  skill
we  can  find  efficient  support  in  the  very  citadels  of
our  opponents.  Hence  we  must  aim  at  reconciling
to  the  novelty  of  our  views  all  but  the  most  hope-
lessly prejudiced,  and  seek  to  address  appeals  to
them  to  which  they  cannot  but  listen.  In  dealing
with  philosophy  we  may  appeal  to  reason,  in  dealing
with  religion  to  feeling,  and  in  dealing  with  theology,
which  has  not  hitherto  always  shown  itself  very  sus-
ceptible either  to  reason  or  to  feeling,  to  its  own
interests.  Thus  we  shall  show  to  the  first  that  the
rational  grounds  for  the  assumption  of  an  infinite
existence  are  mistaken  and  absurd,  to  the  second,
that  its  emotional  consequences  are  atrocious  and
destructive  of  all  religious  feeling,  and  to  the  third,
that  it  is  this  doctrine  which  has  been  the  fatal  canker


THE CONFLICT OF THE FINITE AND INFINITE.  313

that  produced  the  chronic  debility  of  faith,  and  the
real  obstacle  to  the  practical  supremacy  of  religion.

§  3.  In  pursuance  of  our  practice  of  starting
from  the  apparently  simple  and  intelligible,  but
really  so  confused,  conceptions  of  ordinary  thought,
we  shall  examine  first  the  religious  conception  of
God.  In  the  course  of  that  examination  it  will  soon
appear  that  it  is  a  self-contradictory  jumble  of
.  inconsistent  elements,  of  which  those  which  are
practically  the  most  important  imply  the  finiteness
of  the  Deity,  and  tend  in  the  direction  of  the
doctrine  we  have  propounded,  while  the  others,
which  are  theoretically  more  prominent,  but  might
be  with  great  advantage  dispensed  with  in  practical
religion,  would,  if  carried  out  consistently,  result  in
philosophic  atheism.

•  And  not  only  is  the  combination  of  human  and
infinite  elements  in  the  conception  of  God  an  out-
rage upon  the  human  reason,  but  it  leads  to  no  less
outrageous  consequences  from  the  point  of  view  of
human  feeling.  For  by  ascribing  unlimited  power
to  God,  it  makes  God  the  author  of  all  evil,  and
imprisons  us  in  a  Hell  to  escape  from  which  would
be  rebellion  against  omnipotence.  To  be  brief,  the
attribute  of  Infinity  contradicts  and  neutralizes  all
the  other  attributes  of  God,  and  makes  it  impossible
to  ascribe  to  the  Deity  either  personality,  or  con-
sciousness, or  power,  or  intelligence,  or  wisdom,  or
goodness,  or  purpose  or  object  in  creating  the  world  ;
an  infinite  Deity  does  not  effect  a  single  one  of  the
functions  which  the  religious  consciousness  demands
of  its  God,

It  is  easy  to  show  that  every  one  of  the  religious
attributes  must  be  excluded  from  an  infinite  Deity.
Thus  an  infinite  God  can  have  neither  personality


314  MAN AND GOD.

nor  consciousness,  for  they  both  depend  on  limit-
ation. Personality  rests  on  the  distinction  of  one
person  from  another,  consciousness  on  the  distinction
of  Self  and  Not-Self^  An  all-embracing  person,
therefore,  is  an  utterly  unmeaning  phrase,  and  if  it
meant  anything,  it  would  mean  something  utterly
subversive  of  all  religion.  For  the  infinite  person-
ality would  equally  embrace  and  impartially  absorb
the  personalities  of  all  finite  individuals,  and  so
Jesus  and  Barabbas  would  be  revealed  as  co-existent,
and  therefore  as  co-equal  incarnations  of  an  infinite
God.

The  phrase  infinite  power  is,  as  has  been  stated
(§  1),  equally  meaningless.  Not  only  is  power  a
finite  conception,  applicable  only  to  a  finite  world
in  which  force  implies  resistance,  but  when  used  out
of  its  setting  it  becomes  a  contradiction.  Power  is
power  only  if  it  overpowers  what  resists,  and  it  is
not  infinite  if  anything  resists  it.  Infinite  power,
therefore,  is  as  unmeaning. as  a  round  square.

Neither  can  intelligence  or  wisdom  be  ascribed
to  an  infinite  God.  For  such  a  God  could  have
neither  personality  nor  consciousness,  his  intelligence
would  have  to  be  impersonal  and  his  wisdom  un-
conscious, and  to  such  terms  our  minds  can  give  no
.  meaning.  And  moreover,  what  we  understand  by
wisdom  is  an  essentially  finite  quality,  shown  in  the
adaptation  of  means  to  ends.  But  the  Infinite  can
neither  have  ends  nor  require  means  to  attain  them.

§  4.  Goodness,  again,  is  doubly  impossible  as  an
attribute  of  an  infinite  God ;  in  the  first  place,  because

1  Or  perhaps  we  should  rather  say  "  distinctness,"  for  it  is  as  a
ratio  essendi,  and  not  as  a  ratio  cognoscendi,  that  the  distinction  is
important.  It  is  important  that  God  should  be  distinct  from  the
world,  but  not  that  He  should  know  Himself  as  such.


THE MYSTERY OF EVIL.  3IS

to  him  all  things  are  good,  and  in  the  second,  because
the  distinction  of  good  and  evil  must  be  entirely-
unmeaning.  To  put  the  difficulty  in  its  homeliest
form,  God  cannot  be  both  all-good  and  all-powerful,
in  a  world  in  which  evil  is  a  reality.  For  if  God
is  all-powerful  everything  must  be  exactly  what  it
should  be,  from  God's  point  of  view,  else  He  would
instantly  alter  it.  If,  then,  evil  things  exist,  it  must
be  because  God  wills  to  have  it  so,  i.e.,  because  God
is,  from  our  point  of  view,  evil.  Or  conversely,  if
God  is  good.  He  must  put  up  with  the  continuance
of  evil  because  He  cannot  remove  it  This  is  the
'  terrible  mystery  of  evil '  which  for  2,000  years  has
been  a  stumbling-block  to  all  practical  religion,  tried
the  faith  of  all  believers,  and  depressed  and  debased
all  thought  on  the  ultimate  questions  of  life,  and  is
as  '  insoluble  a  mystery '  to  theologians  now  as  it
was  in  the  beginning.  And  it  is  perhaps  likely  to
remain  so,  seeing  that,  as  Goethe  says,  "  a  complete
contradiction  is  alike  mysterious  to  wise  men  and  to
fools,"  and  that  no  labour  can  ever  extract  any  sense
out  of  a  gratuitous  combination  of  incoherent  words.

Hence  it  is  not  surprising  that  no  attempt  at  re-
conciling the  divine  goodness  with  divine  power  has
ever  been  successful ;  indeed,  the  only  way  in  which
they  have  ever  appeared  to  be  successful  was  either
by  covertly  limiting  the  divine  power,  or  by  misusing
the  term  goodness  in  some  non-human  sense,  to
denote  a  quality  shown  in  God's  action  towards
imaginary  beings  other  than  man.

Thus  Leibnitz's  famous  Theodicy,  e.g.,  depends
on  a  limitation  of  God.  For  to  show  that  the
world  is  the  best  of  all  possible  worlds  is  to  imply
that  not  all  worlds  were  possible,  so  that  the  best
possible  did  not  turn  out  a  perfect  one.


3l6  MAN AND GOD.

So,  again,  to  say  that  God  created  the  world
because  it  was  good,  is  to  limit  God  by  the  pre-
existence  of  a  good  and  evil  independent  of  divine
enactment.

Nor,  again,  can  the  responsibiHty  for  evil  be
shifted  to  the  Devil  or  the  perversity  due  to  human
Free-will,  unless  these  powers  really  limit  the  divine
omnipotence.  For  if  we  or  the  Devil  are  per-
mitted to  do  evil  while  God  is  able  to  prevent  or
destroy  us,  the  real  responsibility  rests  with  God.

On  the  other  hand,  the  commonplace  suggestion
that,  if  we  could  see  the  whole  universe,  the  good
would  be  seen  to  predominate  immensely,  depends
on  an  invalid  use  of  goodness  out  of  relation  to
man.  For  "  what  care  I  how  good  he  be,  if  he  be
not  good  to  me  ? "  What  does  goodness  mean
to  us,  if  it  is  not  goodness  to  us  ?  And  besides,
it  does  not  answer  the  difficulty;  for  it  is  still
necessary  to  ask  why  God  could  or  would  not
create  a  world,  which  was  not  only  predominantly,
but  entirely  good.  It  surely  does  not  befit  infinite
power  to  neglect  even  the  most  infinitesimal  sectionj
to  overlook  even  the  remotest  corner,  to  fall  short
of  making  the  whole  universe  perfect.

But  perhaps  the  most  curious  interference  of
human  limitations  with  the  course  of  superhuman
action  is  shown  in  the  argument  which  sets  down
evil  to  the  imperfection  of  Law.  It  is  supposed
that  by  a  series  of  miracles  all  things  might  have
been  made  perfect,  but  that  this  would  have  been
inconsistent  with  the  divine  determination  to  con-
duct the  world  according  to  natural  laws.  Thus
evil  is  the  price  paid  for  '  the  reign  of  Law,'  for
which  we  have  in  modern  times  developed  a  good
deal  of  superstitious  reverence. But  the  plausibility


DUE TO THE DOGMA OF INFINITY.  317

of  the  argument  depends  upon  a  wholly  unwar-
ranted analogy  with  human  law.  It  is  true  that
human  laws  cannot  avoid  the  commission  of  a
certain  amount  of  injustice,  because  law  is  general,
and  cannot  be  made  to  fit  the  requirements  of
particular  cases.  But  how  can  we  argue  from  the
impotence  of  limited  beings  to  the  powers  of
omnipotence.'*  How  can  we  suppose  the  divine'
intelligence  incapable  of  devising,  or  the  divine
omnipotence  incapable  of  executing,  laws,  which
should  not  fail  to  be  just  in  every  case,  to  be  absol-
utely good  always  and  under  all  circumstances?
The  argument  surely  forgets  that  the  laws  of  nature
are  ex  hypothesi  the  outcome  of  absolute  legislative
power  directed  by  absolute  wisdom,  and  might
surely  have  been  so  enacted  as  to  work  with  per-
fect smoothness.  And  even  if  the  universality  of
law  were  incompatible  with  perfection,  why  should
not. perfect  goodness  have  been  secured  by  a  series
of  miraculous  interventions  ?  How  should  we  have
been  the  wiser  or  the  worse  ?  '  Would  not  such  a
series  have  ipso  facto  become  the  legitimate  order
of  things  ?  And  how  could  even  the  most  fastidious
taste  have  objected  to  a  deus  ex  machina,  when  no
othei:  procedure  was  known  ?  What  then  can  have
prompted  the  preference  of  law  with  its  imper-
fection ?  Shall  it  be  said  that  it  was  preferred  as
demanding  less  exertion  of  the  divine  power  ?  But
it  is  both  unprofitable  and  repugnant  to  exhaust
the  resources  of  unworthy  human  analogies  in  order
to  reject  one  after  another  the  foolish  palliatives  of
an  insoluble  contradiction.

§  5.  The  simple  truth  is  that  the  human  dis-
tinctions of  good  and  evil  have  no  application  to
an  infinite  Deity. We  must  admit  that  either  all


3l8  MAN AND GOD.

things  are'  good,  or  that  God  himself  is  evil ;  but
in  either  case  the  value  of  the  human  distinction  is
destroyed.  From  the  standpoint  of  an  infinite
Deity,  on  the  other  hand,  all  things  must  be  good,
for  they  depend  absolutely  on  his  will,  and  it  is
his  will  that  all  things  should  be  what  they  are.
God  alone  is  responsible  for  all  that  happens,  and
every  action  is  wholly  God's  and  wholly  good.
And  yet  a  true  instinct  tells  us  that  the  distinction
of  good  and  evil  is  a  vital  one,  that  things  are  not
perfect,  that  Evil  is  as  real  as  Good,  as  real  as  life,
as  real  as  we  are,  as  real  as  our  whole  world  and
its  process,  and  that  it  can  be  explained  away  only
at  the  cost  of  dissolving  the  world  into  a  baseless
dream.

Yet  this  is  precisely  what  this  unhappy  dogma
of  the  infinity  of  God  leads  to ;  it  denies  the  reality
of  evil,  because  it  denies  the  reality  and  destroys
the  rationality  of  the  whole  world.  So  long  as  we
deal  with  finite  factors,  the  function  of  pain  and  the
nature  of  Evil  can  be  more  or  less  understood,  but
as  soon  as  it  is  supposed  to  display  the  working  of
an  infinite  power,  everything  becomes  wholly  unin-
telligible. We  can  no  longer  console  ourselves
with  the  hope  that  "  good  becomes  the  final  goal  of
ill,"  we  can  no  longer  fancy  that  imperfection  serves
any  secondary  purpose  in  the  economy  of  the  uni-
verse. A  process  by  which  evil  becomes  good  is
unintelligible  as  the  action  of  a  truly  infinite  power
which  can  attain  its  end  without  a  process ;  it  is
absurd  to  ascribe  imperfection  as  a  secondary  result
to  a  power  which  can  attain  all  its  aims  without
evil.  Hence  the  world- process,  and  the  intelligent
purpose  we  fancy  we  detect  in  it,  must  be  illusory,
in precisely  the  same  way and for  precisely  the


NO REVELATION OF THE INFINITE.  319

same  reason,  as  evil.  God  can  have  no  purpose,
and  the  world  cannot  be  in  process.  For  a
purpose  and  process  both  imply  limitation.  To
adapt  means  to  ends  implies  that  the  ends  cannot
be  achieved  without  them;  to  attain  aims  by  a
process  implies  that  they  cannot  be  reached  instan-
taneously. An  infinite  power,  therefore,  can  have
no  need  of  means  to  attain  its  ends,  no  need  of  a
process  whereby  to  evolve  the  world,  no  need  of
evil  as  a  means  to  good.  It  requires  no  means,
and  hence  the  "  means  "  it  uses  .can  have  no  mean-
ing. The  world  becomes  an  unintelligible  freak  of
irresponsible  insanity.  If  the  world  is  the  product
of  an  infinite  power,  it  is  utterly  unknowable,  be-
cause its  process  and  its  nature  would  be  alike
unnecessary  and  unaccountable.

Thus  the  attribute  of  infinity,  so  far  from  exalt-
ing the  Deity,  would  rather  make  him  into  a  devil,
careless  of,  and  even  rejoicing  in,  evil  and  misery,
infinitely  worse  than  the  Devil  of  tradition,  because
armed  with  omnipotence,  and,  in  view  of  the  im-
possibility of  admitting  the  independence  of  the
Finite,  also  infinitely  more  unaccountable,  inasmuch
as  in  inflicting  misery  on  the  world,  he  would  after
all  only  be  lacerating  himself.

§  6.  And  perhaps  it  may  be  added,  for  the
benefit  of  theologians,  and  in  order  to  complete  the
cycle  of  absurdities  in  which  this  supposed  infinity
of  the  Deity  results,  that  it  is  utterly  fatal  to  any
belief  in  revelation.  Reyelation  may  be  conceived
appropriate  on  the  part  of  a  Deity  of  limited
powers,  who  either  cannot  govern  the  world  per-
fectly by  ordinary  law,  or  uses  it  as  an  exceptional
means  which  it  would  be  too  expensive  to  employ
constantly,  or  as  an  occasional  stimulus  to  acceler-


320  MAN AND GOD.

ate  a  process  which  cannot  be  completed  at  once.
But  no  such  suppositions  will  apply  to  an  infinite
Deity,  who  does  not  require  to  economize  his  forces.
For  what,  novel  perfection  could  he  reveal  to  a
world  already  perfect,  or  how  could  one  thing
reveal  his  will  more  than  another,  when  all  have
been  sealed  with  the  approval  of  infinite  might  ?
All  things  would  reveal  his  will  equally,  and  would
be  equally  perfect  and  equally  remote  from  the
necessity  of  revelation,

§  7.  We  have  considered  so  far  the  contradic-
tions in  the  current  theological  conception  of  God,
and  pointed  out  that  they  could  be  easily  removed
by  omitting  the  attribute  of  infinity.  But  it  must
appear  astonishing  that  so  simple  a  solution  was
not  adopted,  especially  when  we  consider  the
history  of  the  conception.  The  monotheistic  con-
ception of  God  has  existed  in  the  world  for  nearly
3,000  years,  and  yet  it  has  never  been  purged  of
so  fatal  a  contradiction.  Shall  we  then  suppose
that  mankind  takes  a  perverse  pleasure  in  contra-
dictions for  their  own  sake,  or  rather  admit  that
there  must  have  been  good  reasons  why  so  contra-
dictory a  conception  was  originally  devised  and  has
survived  so  long  and  on  the  whole  so  successfully  ?

A  brief  historic  retrospect  may  clear  up  matters.
The  God  of  the  theologians  is,  and  has  always
been,  a  mass  of  contradictions,  and  the  reason  is
that  he  is  a  hybrid  between  the  God  of  the  philo-
sophers and  the  God  of  the  people.  Theological
Monotheism  is  a  compromise  between  Pantheism
and  Polytheism  which  has  arisen  but  once  in  the
history  of  the  world,  a  marvellous  accident  in  the
development  of  the  religious  consciousness,  which
may  well  be  esteemed  divine  by  all  who  recognize


THE HISTORY OF MONOTHEISM.  32 1

that  the  contradictions  were  the  husk  which  pre-
served a  kernel  of  substantial  truth.

For  Monotheism  cannot  be  esteemed  a  stable
or  normal  form  of  religion.  It  requires  so  perfect
a  balance  of  conflicting  considerations,  so  accurate
a  retention  of  a  very  restricted  standpoint,  and,  it
may  be  added,  so  pious  a  blindness  to  its  latent
contradictions,  that  it  has  not  hitherto  succeeded
in  permanently  existing,  except  in  Judaism  and  the
two  great  religions  which  are  its  direct  descendants.

The  earliest  religion  of  man  is,  as  has  been
stated  (ch.  i.  §  6),  animistic,  and  gradually  passes  into
polytheism,  as  the  consciousness  of  the  uniformity
of  nature  becomes  more  vivid.  As  the  result  of
this  process,  monotheism  arises  when  the  supreme
god  absorbs  all  the  minor  deities,  and  degrades
them  to  the  position  of  obedient  ministers  or  angels.
But  as  the  minor  deities  are  generally  deeply  rooted
in  the  affections  of  the  people,  matters  hardly  ever
advance  so  far  towards  unification  before  the
thinkers  have  made  religion  the  subject  of  their
speculations.  Philosophy  thus  begins  in  the  poly-
theistic stage,  while  the  majority  of  men  still  be-
lieve in  many  personal  spirits,  and  so,  by  an  easily
intelligible  reaction,  the  ultimate  reality  of  the  uni-
verse is  conceived  to  be  both  one  and  impersonal.

In  other  words,  polytheism  passes  directly  into
pantheism,  without  traversing  any  monotheistic
phase,  and  this  process  may  be  traced  in  the  relig-
ions of  Egypt,  Greece,  India,  China,  etc.  Thus
'the  vulgar  are  permitted  to  retain  their  personal
.  gods,  while  the  educated  regard  them  as  being  all
manifestations  or  epithets  of  the  One  and  All,  of
Brahma,  I  sis,  etc.

Now  the  interesting  point  about  Jewish  mono-

R.  of  s.  y


322  MAN AND GOD.

theism  is  that  it  stopped  in  the  middle  of  this
process.  The  tribal  God  of  the  Hebrews  was
indeed  exalted  into  the  absolute  Creator  of  all
things,  but,  either  from  lack  of  philosophy,  or  from
the  intensity  of  their  conception  of  personality,  they
yet  illogically  retained  the  attributes  of  personality,
goodness,  wisdom,  consciousness,  etc.  Hence  there
was  from  the  first  an  irreconcilable  conflict  between
the  discordant  elements  of  personality  and  of  pan-
theism, which  could  be  palliated  by  various  exped-
ients, but  never  transcended,  and  which  has  been
passed  on  from  Judaism  to  Christianity  and  Mo-
hammedanism.

And  while,  with  the  aid  of  a  personal  Devil  and
a  personal  Redeemer,  the  personal  element  in  our
monotheism  has  received  more  popular  emphasis,
the  more  philosophic  theologians  have  shown  a
constant  tendency  to  lapse  into  pantheism.  And
so  religious  philosophy  has  varied  through  all
shades  of  opinion,  from  Pantheism  and  the  confines
of  Atheism  to  those  of  iDualism  and  Manichaeism,
without  ever  arriving  at  consistency.  Nor  was  it
possible  to  arrive  at  consistency  without  sacrificing
elements  which  seemed  indispensable.  To  have
renounced  the  pantheistic  side  of  monotheism  would
have  been  to  defy,  not  so  much  philosophy — which
at  that  time  at  least  was  largely  dualistic,  and
subsequently  accepted  its  doctrine  of  the  Infinite
largely  from  religion — but  the  popular  prejudice^
which  regarded  infinity  as  the  ideal  of  magnitude
{cp.  ch.  ix.  §  2),  and  could  not  distinguish  between
creation  out  of  Aristotle's  "  formless  matter "  and
creation  out  of  nothing.  To  have  abandoned  the
personal  elements  would  have  been  still  more  fatal.
It  was  by  finiteness  and  limitation  that  God  was


WHY NOT DROP THE INFINITE  J^.'  3,23 ■

brought  near  to  the  religious  consciousness  ;  It  was
the  personality  of  God  which  supplied  the  real
motive  force  of  the  religious  emotions.  For  where-
as many  religions  have  failed  because  they  did  not
render  God  human  enough,  the  success  of  our  own
is  an  eloquent  example  that  no  religion .  can  ever
make  God  too  human.  Accordingly,  it  was  felt  that
if  the  personality  of  God  were  lost,,  all  would  be
lost,  nothing  would  be  left  that  -would  be  ■  able  or
desirable  to  explain  the  world.  Aad  so  it  was
felt  to  be  better  to  assert  the  personality  of'  God
as  an  irrational  and  incomprehensible  dogma  of
faith  than  to  annihilate  religiom  in  the  abyss  of
Pantheism.  And  we  may  trace  in  this ;  the  work-
ing also  of  the  feeling  that  the  personality  of  God
embodied  a  truth  which  could  not  as  yel  be  stated
in  set  terms,  the  working  of  the- faith <  which  pre-
serves the  truth  until  it  grows  great  and'  prevails.
Thus  the  contradictions  of  monotheism  in  the  past
have  preserved  the  doctrine  of  the  divine  person-
ality, which  would  otherwise  have  been  merged  in
pantheism,  have  preserved  a  truth  which  the  earliest
stage  in  the  development  of  religious  consciousness
instinctively  grasped,  but  which  the  spiral  of  the
line  of  progress  subsequently  obscured.

But  the  merits  of  monotheism  in  the  past  are  no
reason  why  we  should  for  ever  acquiesce  in  its
failure  to  find  a  solution :  it  is  neither  prudent  nor
reasonable  to  regard  the  contradiction  as  final.  And
least  of  all  is  it  feasible  in. a  crisis  like  the  present.
'  The  incomprehensible  has .  passed  from  the  lan-
guage of  religion  to  that,  of  irreligion,  and  by  a.
Nemesis  not  wholly  undeserved,,,  theology  is  now
being  devoured  by  a  phantom  of  its  own  creation —
the  Unknowable. The  traditional  monotheism  haa.


324  MAN AND GOD.

lost  most  of  its  hold  over  thinking  minds,  and  has
been  expelled  by  the  very  Agnosticism  it  had
fostered  for  its  own  protection.  The  world  no
longer  seeks  to  escape  !from  the  perpleockies  of  the
human  reason  by  an  appeal  to 'the  Bible  :  tke  appeal
lies  to  "the  exact  methods  of  verified  knowledge,"
which  by  their  very  nature  are  bound  to  treat  the
Book  of  the  Revelation  of  an  (unknowable)  God  as
one  of  the  most  curious  of  the  repositories  of  primi-
tive superstition.  Thus  do  the  eternail  laws  of  retrib-
ution avenge  the  truth  upon  those  who  wittingly
or  unwittingly  use  bad  arguments,  by  the  way  in
which  they  invariably  recoil  upon  'their  authors.
Even,  therefore,  if  acquiescence  in  a  contradiction
ever  really  profited  the  cause  of  religion,  it  can  now
do  so  no  longer.  Religion  is  lost  if  it  sinks  into  the
morass  of  the  unknowable  Infinite,  in  which  it  can
find  no  foothold.

In  pressing  this  advice  upon  the  religious  guides
of  mankind,  it  is  impossible  not  to  feel  painfully
that  the  patient  to  whom  the  advice  is  tendered
has  already  suffered  much  advice  from  every  quarter.
But  though  a  sick  man  receives  much  advice,  it
does  not  follow  that  it  is  all  bad.  And  in  this  case
the  advice  is  at  least  new.  For  it  has  at  last  be-
come possible  for  religion  to  save  itself  by  the  other
alternative.  It  has  "become  possible  to  purify
Theism  of  its  contradiction  without  dissolving  it  in
Pantheism.  The  accumulation  of  the  data  enabling
us  to  estimate  the  drift  of  the  world-process  enable
us  also  for  the  first  time  to  develop  consiiS:ently  the
finite  and  personall  elements  in  Theism ;  and  follow-
ing out  this  train  "xsf  thought  we  shall  come  to  realize
that  religion,  philosophy  and  science  alike  demand
a  belief  in  a  personal  and  limited  God.


PHILOSOPHIC PANTHEISM.  32.5

§  8.  But  before  we  Gan.engage;upon  this  task  it
will  be  necessary  to  wage  a  lengthy  war  with  philo-
sophic Pantheism,  in  order  to  demonstrate  that  the
grounds  on  which  it  claimed  to  be  rationally  un-
assailable-are  without  exception  illusory.

The  philosophic  conception  of  God  is  that  of  the
unity  of  the  uaiverse,  the  all-embracing,  all-sustain-
ing whole  of  which  all  things  are  parts,  the  under-
lying reality  of  which  all  things  are  manifestations.
All  is  Godi  ev.en  where  it  is  attempted  to  deny  that
God  =  the  All,  and  there  is  attributed  to  him  an
existence  for  himself  But  by  God,  through  God,
for  God,  and  in  God  all  thing.s  are.

§  9.  This  conception  of  God,  which,  in  the  more
consciously  anti-theistic  systems  is  also  called  that
of  the  Absolute  or  Infinite,  occurs  more  or  less
explicitly  in  nearly  all  modern  philosophers..  An
honourable  exception  must  be  made  in  favour  of
Mr.  Mill,  who  alone,  in  modern  times  has  pleaded  in
favour  of  a  limited  God.^  Such  limitation,  more-
over, is  really  required  by  consistency  in  all  indi-
vidualistic systems,  notably  in  those  of  Berkeley
and  Leibnitz.  Greek  philosophy,  on  the  other  hand,
is  almost  exclusively  dualistic,  and  hence,  though  the-
Deity  is  rarely  conceived  as  personal,  he  is  never  =-
the  All,  i.e.,  is  never  infinite.  But  down  to  the
latest  times  of  Neoplatonism,,  Matter  is  conceived  as.
a  principle  which  contests  the  supremacy  of  the
Good.  And  though  of  course  this  dualism. of  Matter
and  Reason,  of  the  unknowable  and  knowable,  is
objectionable  on  several  grounds — and  not  least
because  Matter  is  not  able  to  explain  itself,  much
less  the  world  and  the  limitation  of  the  Deity — it
may  be  thought  a  moot  point  whether  a  false  dis-

^  In  his  Essays  on  Religion  (3rd  ed.),  p.  36  fF.,  p.  176  fF,


326  MAN AND GOD.

tinction  was  not  .preferable  to  an  unjustifiable  con-
fusion. It  seems  doubtful  whether  an  assertion  of
the  unity  of  things  which  left  no  room  for  the  recog-
nition flif  their  difference  was  a  change  for  the  better.
Certainly  philosophy  has  since  had  occasion  to
repent  of  its  hasty  identification  of  the  Deity  with
the  unity  of  the  universe,  and  to  lament  the  failure
of  every  system  which  attempted  to  understand  the
world  on  this  assumption.  Bitter  experience  alone
of  the  impotence  of  philosophy,  of  the  stagnation
and  retrogression  of  metaphysics,  which  have  now
dropped  as  far  behind  the  physical  sciences  as  they
were  ahead  of  them  2,000  years  ago,  might  have
raised  doubts  as  to  the  correctness  of  this  funda-
mental assumption  of  philosophy.  And  those
doubts  our  examination  will  fully  confirm.

§  10.  The  conception  of  the  Deity  adopted  by
philosophic  pantheism  is  from  every  point  of  view  a
mistake.  E Optionally  it  is  a  mistake,  because  the
philosophic  Infinite  is  not  God,  and  cannot  satisfy
the  religious  emotions.  Scientifically  it  is  a  mistake,
because  it  is  not  a  principle  which  is  capable  of  ex-
plaining anything  in  or  about  the  world.  Logically
it  is  a  mistake,  because  it  is  grounded'  upon  fallacies
and  paralogisms.

Emotionally  Pantheism  is  disastrous,  because  it
has  destroyed  the  soil  on  which  alone  human  emo-
tions can  develop.  Religious  emotion  is  destroyed
by  the  fact  that  the  god  of  Pantheism  is,  to  ^1
intents  and  purposes,  nothing.  Moral  activity  is
destroyed  by  the  fact  that  the  distinctions  of  Good
and  Evil,  Right  and  Wrong,  what  is  and  what  ought
to  be,  must  to  Pantheism  be  ever  and  entirely  un-
meaning.

Scientific  -activity  is  destroyed  by  the  fact  that


,  WHY PANTHEISM IS ATHEISM.  327

the  world,  in  whatever  way  we  look  at  it,  must  of
necessity  be  meaning-  and  purpose-less.  In  short,
it  is  in  vain  that  Pantheism  tries  to  avoid  the  con-
fession that  our  life  is  a  senseless  illusion  :  it  cannot
vindicate  the  reality  of  our  partial  life  against  the
all-absorbing  claims  of  the  whole.

In  the  first  place  Pantheism  is  Atheism,  and  only
a  lack  of  courage  or  of  logic  can  distinguish  between
them.  For  if  all  is  God  and  all  is  one,  all  distinc-
tions vanish.  All  is  right  and  all  is  well,  for  all
things  exist  but  by  the  favour  and  support  of  the
Infinite :  to  decry  the  perfection  of  any  existing  thing
is  to  blaspheme  against  God,  Hence  all  appeal  to
God  is  futile :  it  is  for  God  to  appeal  to  God  against
God.  So  being  equally  in  all,  God  is  not  a  factor
in  the  course  of  life  :  God  is  a  quantity  ndgligedble,
because  equally  shared  by  all  things.  To  suppose
that  Pantheism  leaves  more  room  for  religion  than
Atheism  is  as  absurd  as  though  we  thought  to
diminish  the  inequalities  of  wealth  by  multiplying
every  man's  property  a  thousandfold.  So  for  prac-
tical purposes  Pantheism  and  Atheism  are  the  same,
except  that  the  latter  has  the  frankness  to  call  things
by  their  true  names.  In  the  mouth  of  a  Pantheist
the  accusation  of  Atheism  is  indeed  ridiculous.
For  just  as  King  Charles  II.  wittily  declared  during
the  Popish  Plot,  that  he  feared  to  be  dethroned  for
his  complicity  in  the  plot  against  his  own  life,  so  the
Atheist  may  plead  against  the  Pantheist  that  in  his'
impiety  he  offends  against  no  one  but  himself,  and
that  no  one  need  interfere  if  it  pleases  God  to
blaspheme  himself.

In  the  second  place,  Pantheism  is  no  less  fatal  .to
the  moral  than  to  the  religious  sentiments.  For  it
must  regard  all  good  and  evil  as  relative  and  there-


328  MAN AND GOD.

fore as illusory. It is  only  from  our  perverted
standpoint  that  the  distinction  of  Good  and  Right
and  Evil  and  Wrong  and  imperfection  exists ;  from
that  of  the  Infinite,  that  which  is,  is  what  it  ought
to  be,  and  everything  occupies  just  the  position  it
should. The  "  God  "  of  Pantheism  is  not  only  im-
potent to  alleviate  our  sufferings — sufferings  which
he  himself  inflicts  upon  himself — but  he  is  actually
indifferent  to  them  ;  the  physical  and  mental  tortures
of  myriad  beings  are actually  seen  to  be  "  very
good"  in  the  eyes. of  "God." And  of  this  diabolical
indifference  he  can  only  be  acquitted  if  we  reflect
that  it  must  evidently  proceed  from  ignorance. For
God  cannot  be  in  any  way  aware  of  our  woes,  not
only  because  an  infinite  God  cannot  be  in  any  way
conscious  (§  3),  but  because,  from  the  standpoint  of
the  Infinite,  our  whole  phenomenal  world,  must  be
nought, unfelt, uncared for, and  unknown. Our
"  real "  world  is  as  relative  as  good  and  evil,  and
like  them  would  vanish  sub  specie  (zternitatis. For
the  all-embracing  Infinite  admits  of  change  as  little
as  it  does  of  imperfection  or  of  Time. It  is  all
things  and  has  all  things,  and  therefore  no  change
could  add  to  or  subtract  from its  substance. If,
therefore,  change  appears  to  exist,  it  must  be  an
illusion  of  our  deluded  sight,  which  does  not  pene-
trate to  the  Infinite. The  world  would  be  an  inex-
plicable illusion,  an  unmeaning,  incoherent  pageant,
dreamt  by  the  grotesque  creatures  of  the  Absolute's
unconscious dream, an unreal chase of  shadows
across the dark background of the Absolute, a
phantasmagoria  existing  only  in  the  fancy  of  the
phantoms that behold it. And so its fleeting
shadows  would  not  affect  the  Absolute,  nor  it  them  :
not  though  we  cry  aloud  shall  we  awake  the  sleep-


WHY PANTHEISM IS UNSCIENTIFIC.  329

ing  "  god  "  of  whom  we  are  the  dream.  Heaven  is
as  dumlj  and  irresponsive  to  the  prophesyings  of  the
philosophers  of  the  Absokite  as  it  ever  was  to  the
priests  of  Baal.

§  II.  And  earth  also:  for  the  Absolute  is  no
less  incompatible  with  the  methods  of  human  science.
An  infinite  God,  is  as  much  out  of  relation  to  human
knowledge  as  to  human  feeling.  Pantheism  ex-
plains nothing,  just  because  it  professes  to  explain
everything.  For  a  principle  which  may  be  regarded
as  the  ultimate  ground  of  all  things  cannot  be  used
as  the  explanation  of  anything  in  particular.  Hence
we  arrive  at  the  paradox  that  the  ultimate  ground
of  all  things,  and  cause  of  their  existence,  is  the
cause  of  nothing,  in  the  nature  of  that  existence.  In
other  words,  for  the  purposes  of  science  as  well  as
for  sentiment,  Pantheism  resolves  itself  into  Atheisrn.
It  follows  that  there  is  an  irreconcilable  conflict
between  Pantheism  and  all  the  finite  methods  by
which  men  have  sought  to  understand  the  world.
The  evolutionist  method  especially,  regarding  the
world  as  a  process,  is  pledged  to  deny  the  Infinite
in  every  form  (cp.  ch.  vii.  §  20).  For  nothing  infinite
can  be  in  process,  or  if  it  is  in  process,  the  process
must  be  unintelligible.

The  vulgar  hear  and  admire  such  explanations  of
things  as  that  "  the  Absolute  can  realize  itself  only
in  the  world,"  that "  it  becomes  self-conscious  only  in
man,"  and  even  that  "  the  history  of  the  world  is  the
process  whereby  the  Absolute  returns  into  itself
enriched."  But  if  such  phrases  can,  upon  reflection,
satisfy  philosophic  minds,  the  whilom  adversaries  of
anthropomorphism  must  have  come  to  content  them-
selves with  the  flimsiest  metaphors  of  a  very  sorry
anthropomorphism.


330  MAN AND GOD.

If,  e.g.,  the  Absolute  is  realized  in  the  world,  then
either  the  existence  of  the  world  is  necessary  to  that
of  the  Absolute,  or  it  is  not.  If  it  is,  the  world  must
either  have  existed  for  ever,  for  the  Absolute  to  be
real,  and  it  is  absurd  to  speak  of  the  Absolute  as
the  First  Cause  (ch.  ii.  §  lo),  or  the  world  and  the
Absolute  have  come  into  existence  together.  But
if  the  Absolute  has  come  into  existence,  it  must
have  become  either  out  of  something  or  else  out  of
nothing,  for  it  cannot  have  originated  out  of  itself
before  it  existed  itself.  If  out  of  nothing,  cadii
quesstio ;  it  is  admitted  that  nothing  is  the  ultimate
ground  of  existence,  and  that  existence  is  ultimately
irrational.  If  out  of  something  el,se,  then  that  some-
thing and  not  the  Absolute  is  the  real  ground  of
existence  ultimately,  and  the  same  question  must
be  raised  about  it,  and  so  on  to  infinity.

If,  on  the  other  hand,  the  world  was  not  necessary
to  the  existence  of  the  Absolute,  then  why  was  it
generated  ?  If  it  was  generated  for  any  reason,  then
why  did  that  reason  impel  the  Absolute  to  generate ,
the  world  at  the  time  it  did,  rather  than  at  any
other  ?  Did  the  Infinite  begin  to  find  infinite  time;
hang  heavily  on  its  hands,  and  if  so,  why  did  it  be^in
to  do  so  ?  Or  if  the  world  was  generated  for  no
reason,  if  we  are  driven  to  admit  that  the  Absolute
cannot  be  moved ,  by  reasons,  is  not  this  the  most
absolute  indeterminism  {cp.  App.  §  4),  the  most
complete  confession  of  the  irrationality  of  the  world?
For  what  explanation  is  it  of  the  world  to  derive  it
from  an  uncaused,  unprovoked,  and  (as  we  shall  see
in  §  12)  impossible  change  in  the  Absolute  ?

And  even  supposing  that  in  some  utterly  inscrut-
able way  the  Absolute  somehow  had  something  to
do  with  the  generation  of  the  world,  what  could  it


WHY THE ABSOLUTE CAN HAVE NO PURPOSE. 33 1

possibly  have  efifected  thereby  ?  ■  What  difference
could  creation  make  to  it  ?  What  could  it  realize
by  creation  that  was  not  already  real  ?  It  must  be
supposed  to  have  created  all  things  out  of  itself,
seeing  that  it  could  create  them  neither  out  of
nothing  nor  out'  of  something  outside  it.  But  it
already  was  all  things,  and  contained  all  things  ;  and
so  could  neither  realize  itself  nor  anything  else  any
more  than  it  was  realized  already.

And  the  idea  that  the  Absolute  attains  to  self-
consciousness  in  man  is  equally  untenable,  when
analysed.  The  Absolute  either  contains  self-con-
sciousness already,  and  then  it  is  nothing  new,  or  it
does  not,  and  then  the  same  question  arises  as  to
how  anything  can  come  into  being  within  the  circle
of  an  all-embracing  being.  For  the  paltry  excuse
that  all  things  exist  potentially  in  the  Absolute  be-
fore the  creation,  but  not  actually  until  the  world  is
created,  will  not  help  us  out  of  the  difficulty.  Poten-
tial existence,  as  we  saw,  is  nothing  (ch.  vii.  §  18),
nothing  but  a  reference  to  a  higher  actuality.  And
in  this  case  there  is  no  higher  actuality  to  refer  to  ;
for  it  would  have  to  be  an  actuality  that  could  dis-
pose the  all-including  Absolute  to  realize  its  poten-
tialities. We  require  something  to  explain  how  in
the  Absolute  potentiality  can  be  something  and
something  different  from  actuality,  to  explain  how  the
difference  between  them  could  arise.  If  the  world
was  ever  potential,  then  why  did  it  become  actual  }

And  besides,  the  idea  that  our  consciousness  is  of
any  value  to  the  Infinite  surely  displays  the  most
extreme  extravagance  of  human  arrogance.  Why
should  the  Absolute  become  self-conscious  in  man  ?
Because  he  happens  to  be  the  highest  being  with-
which  our  limited  knowledge  is  acquainted  } But


332  MAN AND GOD.

why  should  not  the  unnumbered  stars  contain
myriads  of  beings  incomparably  loftier  than  the
obscure  denizens  of  a  paltry  planet  ?  What,  then,
is  the  use  of  man,  and  the  use,  in  any  case,  of  count-
less beings  ?  Why  should  the  Absolute  strive  to
become  imperfectly  self-conscious  in  the  lower  stages
of  spiritual  existence,  when  it  might  do  so  perfectly
in  the  highest  ?  What  sense  is  there  in  attaining  by
a  long,  laborious  process,  what  might  have  been
attained  with  instantaneous  ease  ?  Assuredly,
neither  the  human  nor  any  other  reason  can  ever
discover  the  meaning  of  a  world -process,  which
takes  means  to  an  end  which  might  have  been
attained  without  them.  Ta  our  "  finite "  minds
such  a  process  must  always  appear  an  absurdity ;
it  is  a  process  which  can  reveal  nothing  but  the  ulti-
mate insanity  of  all  things.

And  if  the  means  of  "the  world-process  are  thus
absurd,  and  irrational,  its  end  is  no  less  meaning-
less. For  how  can  it  "enrich  the  Absolute"?
Can  any  process  which  takes  place  within  the
infinite  All  add  one  feather's  weight  to  its  sub-
stance, diminish  or  increase  by  one  jot  or  tittle
the  being  of  that  which  is  all  things  and  has  all
things  ?  Will  it  not  be  what  it  is.  alike  amid  the
crash  of  worlds  and  amid  the  throes  of  their  birth  ?
It  would  be  paying  the  utter  absurdity  of  this  con-
ception of  the  Infinite  concerned  in  a  process,  an  un-
merited compliment  to  liken  it  to  a  spider  spinning
elaborate  cobwebs  out  of  it&  own  substance,  and  then,
finding  that  there  was  nothing  else  to  catch  in  them,
proceeding  to  enmesh  itself  in  its  own  web,  and  after
infinite  labour  succeeding  in  reabsorbing  its  own
production.  And  yet  such  melancholy '  absurdities
are  put  forward  not  by  one  or  two  philosophies,  but


WHY THE ABSOLUTE CANNOT BE IN PROCESS. ^;^;^

by  nearly  all  who  attempt  these  ultimate  questions
at  all,  as  the  deepest  truth  about  the  nature  of
things  '•  It  is  perhaps  fortunate  that  the  obscurity
of  their  language  conceals  this  final  void  from  the
generality  of  men,  but  it  exists  in  all  philosophies
which  make  an  infinite  God  their  first  principle.^

§  12.  Pantheism,  then,  destroys  the  reality  of  the
world-process.  But  we  may  go  further  and  say  that
it  is  for  similar  reasons  equally  incompatible  with  all
Change  or Becoming. This  is  not,  it  is  true,  a

^  It  is  sufficient  to  show  this  in  one  case,  for  exemplo  ab  uno
disce  omnes,  and  we  shall  choose  for  that  purpose  one  who  is  as
certainly  the  frankest  and  clearest  as  he  is  the  ablest  of  modern
metaphysicians. E.  von  Hartmann  is  strongly  and  sincerely  con-
vinced that  the  world  is  a  process,  and  that,  too,  a  process  of
redemption. A  redemption  of  what  ? Of  the  Absolute  ! For
the  Absolute ,  is  now  no  longer  absolute,  but  a mere  ci-devant
Absolute,  and  requires  to  be  redeemed  from  the  deplorable  con-
sequences of  a  youthful  faux  pas. It  created  the  world,  or  en-
tered upon  the  world-process,  in  a  fit  of  temporary  insanity. Or,
as  von  Hartmann  puts  it  more  politely,  when  the  absolute  Uncon-
scious is  quiescent,  its  Reason is non-existent,  and  its  Will  is
potential. Only,  unfortunately,  the  Will  is  not  in  this  condition
guided  by  Reason,  and  so  the  Unconscious  commits  an  irrational
act  of  willing,  and  becomes  actual. But  by  the  nature  of  things
(superior  to  the  Absolute-Unconscious  ?),  to  will  is  to  be  miser-
able, and  the  Unconscious  is  supremely  miserable. So  it  stirs  up
its  Reason,  and  the  Reason  devises  the  world-process  as  a  sort  of
,  .homoeopathic  cure  of  the  misery  of  the  Absolute,  the  end  of  which
is  to  bring  the  Unconscious  back  into  the  quiescence  from  whicfi
it  so  rashly  and  irrationally  departed. It  is  interesting  to  note  in
this,  (i)  the  frank  admission  that  the  ultimate  cause  of  the  world's
existence  is  the  irrational,  in  this  case  an  irrational  act  of  Will ;
(2)  that  even  when  this  has  been  assumed,  it  must  be  supposed
also  that  for  practical  purposes  of  explaining  the  world,  the  Infinite
has  ceased  to  be  infinite. Not  even  when  we  have  been  told  that
the  ultimate  reason  of  things  is  something  for  which  no  reason  can
be  given,  can  anything  be  made  of  the  world  except  on  the  sup-
position that  somehow  this  irrational  Absolute  has  ceased  to  be
infinite.


334  MAN AND GOD.

consequence  Pantheists  have  been  willing  to  admit,
since  the  days  of  the  Eleatics,  but  all  this  proves  is
the  pitiful  inferiority  and  inconsistency  of  subsequent
Pantheists.  For  the  impossibility  of  Becoming  fol-
lows incontestably  from  the  reality  of  the  All.

For  let  us  suppose  that  the  world  has  a  content
or  meaning  A,  i.e.,  K  of  the  quality  or  attribute  in
which  its  meaning  consists.  Now  let  us  suppose
that  a  change  takes  place,  and  its  content  becomes  a. ,
Now  whether  the  change  of  A  into  a  be  an  increase
or  a  diminution,  the  amount  of  its  Being  has  changed.
Its  content  or  meaning  has  increased  or  diminished.
But  tlie  Absolute  can  neither  increase  nor  diminish
the  amount  of  its  Being,  for  it  already  is  and  has  all.
Its  content,  therefore,  must  be  expressed  by  the
equation  A  =  A  — A  to  all  eternity,  i.e.,  it  is  un-
changeable.^

If,  therefore,  changes  take  place  in  the  phenomenal
world,  the  inference  is  either  that  that  world  is  not
the  absolute  All,  or  that  the  absolute  All  is  a
delusion.  If,  however,  we  identify  or  connect  the
changing  world  with  the  Absolute,  we  must  neces-
sarily hold  that  its  changes  are  merely  phenomenal,
illusions  of  our  senses  which  do  not  affect  the
Absolute,  that  properly  speaking,  i.e.,  from  the  true

1  Cp.  ch.  vii.  §  24.  It  may,  perhaps,  be  objected  to  this  illustra-
tion that  to  assume  a  content  A  is  to  assume  the  finiteness  of  that
content.  And  this  is  true,  but  the  assumption  is  really  first  made
when  the  world  is  supposed  to  have  a  meaning,  i.e.,  a  content
expressible  in  terms  of  the  All.  For  (owing  ,to  the  finiteness  of
our  minds  ?)  all  the  conceptions  of  our  thought  imply  finitude,  and
an  infinite  meaning  is  a  meaning  which  means  both  this  and  that,
i.e.,  is  indeterminate,  and  so  means  nothing  at  all.  If,  therefore,
we  are  to  reason  about  the  Infinite  at  all,  we  can  only  do  so  in
terms  constantly  implying  finiteness,  a  fact  which  is  significant
enough  to  those  who  deny  the  reality  of  the  Infinite,  though  it
may  well  drive  its  champions  to  despair.


WHY THE ABSOLUTE CANNOT CHANGE.  335

Standpoint  of  the  Absolute,  change  is  impossible.
And  this  is  precisely  what  the  Eleatics  did  :  they
showed  that  the  conceptions  of  the  changes  and
motions  which  appeared  to  our  senses  involved  con-
tradictions to  our  reason  (cp.  ch.  iii.  §  8),  and  inferred
from  this  that  the  sensible  world  was  an  illusion.
And,  we  may  add,  an  inexplicable  and  inipracticable
illusion.  For  what  theory  or  practice  is  possible  of
life,  if  change,  the  fundamental  characteristic  of  the
world,  is  to  be  treated  as  nought  ?  To  us  change  is
real,  and  change  of  content  is  real ;  to  us  there  is  a
meaning  in  saying  the  world  is  poorer  in  virtue  and
in  wisdom  when  a  good  and  wise  man  dies.  Does
it  not  then  sound  like  a  derision  of  our  whole  life  to
say  the  All  is  as  rich  as  before,  and  all  our  changes
and  our  losses  are  illusions  ?  A  view  of  the  Deity
which  leads  to  such  conclusions  has  nothing  to  do
with  human  life  ;  it  must  be  banished  from  all  minds
>  that  wish  to  retain  their  sanity.

For  the  examination  shows  that  if  the  Absolute
is  real,  the  relative  is  absolutely  unreal,  and  that  the
philosophic  account  of  the  real  world  thus  leads  to
the  curious  conclusion  that  it  is  supposed  to  be  ex-
plained by  a  principle  which  reduces  it  to  absolute
unreality.  The  pantheistic  conception  of  the  Deity
absorbs  the  world  into  God,  and  then  discovers  that
the  latter  cannot  assimilate  it :  so  it  is  compelled  to
reject  it  as  an  illusion,  and  arrives  at  the  self-contra-
dictory reductio  ad  absurdum,  that  from  the  stand-
point of  the  finite,  God  is  nothing,  while  from  the
standpoint  of  the  Infinite,  the  world  is  nothing,
whereas  from  the  standpoint  of  Practice  they  both
agree  in  the  corollary  that  the  world  is  irrational
and  inexplicable.

I  13. But here we may fitly introduce the


336  MAN AND GOD.

hackneyed  objection  which  may  long  have  seemed
the  only  refuge  of  the  belief  in  the  Infinite.  These
difficulties,  it  may  be  said,  only  show  that  our  finite
minds  cannot  grasp  the  Infinite,  and  that  the  Infinite,
therefore,  must  appear  a  mass  of  contradictions  from
the  standpoint  of  the  Finite.  The  abstractions  of
our  finite  reasoning  produce  a  show  of  contradiction
in  what  is  perfectly  consistent  from  the  standpoint
of  the  Infinite.  The  true  attitude  of  the  human
mind  in  such  matters  is  a  reverent  confession  of
weakness,  which  admits  as  a  faith,  and  bases  upon
feeling,  a  mystery  which  is  insoluble  to  our  finite
reason.

Such  has  ever  been  the  language  of  hard-pressed
absurdities,  when  driven  into  a  corner.  They  en-
velop themselves  in  a  cap  of  darkness,  and  seek  to
escape  under  the  protecting  gloom  of  our  ignorance.

But  in  reality  this  pseudo-religious  agnosticism
has  as  little  to  do  with  religion  as  it  has  with  reason.
Agnosticism  is  a  superstition  equally  baleful  and
hateful,  whether  it  masquerades  in  the  vestments  of
religion  or  of  science  (as  in  ch.  ii.),  and  the  worship
of  the  Infinite  is  an  idolatry  precisely  on  a  par  with
the  reverence  for  the  Unknowable.  They  are  both
self-contradictory  phantoms  which  the  human  mind
has  conjured  up  out  of  the  boundless  maze  of  error,
and  hypostasized  and  materialized  by  parallel  C'
paralogisms.  And  if  we  look  at  the  magnitude  of
the  issues  involved,  it  must  surely  be  admitted  that
the  worst  of  all  idolatries  is  that  which  requires  the
human  mind  to  sacrifice  its  faith  in  the  rationality  of
things,  in  its  own  competency  to  solve  the  problems
of  its  life,  in  order  that  it  may  fall  down  and  worship
the  contradictions  it  has  itself  set  up.

The  argument  from  the  "  finiteness  "  of  our  minds


THE INFINITE -AS A FAITH.  337

will  not  bear  the  light  of  day.  Its  very  statement
is  involved  in  all  sorts  of  insuperable  difficulties.
It  declares,  e.g.,  that  our  minds  cannot  grasp  the
Infinite,  and  yet,  in  the  same  breath,  goes  on  to
assert  what  it  had  asserted  to  be  impossible.  Just
as  the  very  assertion  of  the  Unknowable  involved
its  knowableness  (ch.  ii.  §  3),  so  the  very  assertion
of  the  Infinite  involves  either  its  finiteness  or  the
infinity  of  the  mind  which  somehow  claims  to  be
conscious  of  its  existence.  For  if  the  Finite  could
not  really  grasp  the  Infinite,  it  could  not  so  much  as
become  aware  of  its  existence.  We  must  dismiss,
then,  the  absurd  contention  that  our  minds  cannot
grasp  the  Infinite.  If  it  had  been  true,  they  would
assuredly  never  have  formed  so  troublesome  a  con-
ception as  that  of  the  Infinite.  But  the  inquiry, into
how  the  human  mind  arrives  at  the  idea  of  the
Infinite  is  no  less  perplexing.  We  may  suppose  the
mind  itself  to  be  either  finite  or  infinite.  Now  if  the
mind  is  finite,  and  if  the  whole  phenomenal  world  is
finite  also,  there  can  be  no  ground  either  in  thought
or  in  things  for  assuming  an  infinite,  and  the  saying
that  the  Finite  cannot  understand  the  Infinite  is
true  merely  because  there  is  nothing  to  understand,
because  the  Infinite  is  an  utterly  gratuitous  fiction.
In  order,  therefore,  to  infer  the  existence  of  a  real
Infinite,  either  thought  or  things  must  in  a  way  be
infinite.  Now,  as  has  been  shown  (ch.  ix.  §  5),  the
infinity  cannot  lie  in  things,  for  if  Space  and  Time
are  ultimately  infinite,  the  world  is  unknowable.  It
remains  that  the  mind  is  infinite,  that  the  so-called
Finite  is  of  like  nature  with  the  "  Infinite,"  and  that
there  is  no  difference  in  kind  between  them.  But  if
the  mind  forms  the  conception  of  the  Infinite  in
virtue  of  its  infinitude,  that  conception  also must

R.  ofS.  7,


^;^8  Man  and  god.

follow  the  laws  of  the  mind's  thought,  and  can  as
little  contradict  the  laws  of  logic  as  its  thought  upon
the  most  trivial  of  finite  things.  As,  therefore,  no
matter  whether  we  call  the  mind  finite  or  infinite,
there  can  be  no  such  thing  as  a  real  difference  in
kind  between  the  Finite  and  the  Infinite,  but  only  a
difference  in  degree,  the  Infinite  is  not  exempted
from  the  sway  of  the  laws  of  logic  and  of  sane
thought,  and  hence  no  indulgence  can  be  shown  to
the  attempt  to  combine  contradictory  attributes  in
the  same  conception.  The  Infinite  must  be  judged
by  the  logical  rules  applicable  to  all  things,  and  in
dealing  with  the  Infinite,  as  with  everything  else,  a
contradiction  must  be  taken  as  an  indication  of
something  amiss  somewhere.

§  14.  But  perhaps  it  will  be  admitted  that  the
belief  in  the  Infinite  is  not  a  matter  of  reason,  not
susceptible  of  logical  statement.  It  is  a  matter  of
feeling,  and  not  even  of  all  feeling  (for  it  is  not  a
matter  of  perception,  ch.  ix.  §  5),  but  of  subjective
emotion.  Now  this  plea  may  be  admitted  in  so  far
as  it  seems  to  recognize  that  the  belief  in  the  Infinite
is  reached  by  an  unprovoked  and  ungrounded  leap
into  the  Void,  which  can  be  justified  neither  by
reasoning  nor  by  sense-experience.  But  the  feeling
to  which  it  appeals  must  assuredly  be  of  the  most
curious  description.  It  affords  an  intuitive  and
immediate  consciousness  of  the  Infinite,  which  is
superior  to  all  argument.  It  assures  men  not  only  of
the  existence  of  the  Infinite,  but  also  of  its  infinity.
Its  perception  is  so  delicate  that,  even  in  the  most
ignorant  and  unthinking,  it  can  distinguish  with
absolute  certitude  between  real  and  practical  in-
finiteness.  So  when  it  asserts  that  God's  power  is
infinite  rather  than  incalculably  great,  we  are  bound


THE LOGICAL BASIS OF PANTHEISMi  3:39

to  credit  it  against  all  the  opposition  of  our  reason
and  of  our  senses.  Such  an  emotion  would  truly  be
the  most  fearful  and  wonderful  thing,  in.  our-  mental
furniture,  and  we  should  have  to  contemplate  it  with
unceasing  amazement  if  there  were  any  ground  for
supposing  that  it  existed.

As  a  matter  of  fact  it  has.  already  been*  shown  that
our  feelings  not  only  do  not  require  the  assumption
of  an  Infinite,  but  vehemently  repudiate  it  (§  lo);
A  deity  which  is.  unknowable,  inactive  and  in-
different to  all  that  happens  in  the  world,  is  not  one
which  "  finite  minds  "  can  either  grasp  or  cling  to.

§  15.  We  have  beem  considering  hitherto  the
inferences  to  be  drawn'  from  Pantheism  in  its  bear-
ing upon  life  and  science,  and  shown  how  unaccept-
able it  is  from  every  emotional  and  scientific  point
of  view.  But  the  real  root  of  the  doctrine,  the  real
reason  of  its  persistence,  in  spite  of  its  more  or  less
obviously  unsatisfactory  consequences,  is  to  be
found  in  certain  supposed  requirements  of  logic
and  metaphysics.  Hence  it  is  necessary  to  subject
the  logical  validity  of  the  philosophic  conception  of
the  Absolute  or  Infinite  to  a  most  careful  scrutiny.
As  the  result  of  that  scrutin>y,  it  will  appear  that  the
logical  arguments  for  Pantheism,  are  either  fallacious
or  inconclusive.

§  16.  It  must  be  observed,,  in  the  first  place,  that
the  conception  of  a  whole:  or  totality,  which  is  used
in  the  arguments  concerning  the  infinity  of  the
Deity,  is  ambiguous.

When,  e.^.,  we  speak  of  the  attribute  of  omni-
potence, we  may  mean  two*  very  different  things.
To  say  that  the  Deity  possesses  "  all  "  power  may
mean  either  that  he  has  «//  /^^  power  there  is,  and
can  do  all  that  can  be  done,  or  that  he  can  do  any-


340  MAN AND GOD.

thing  and  everything.  We  may  assert  by  "  all "
either  perfection  with  respect  to  the  attributes  in
question  (power,  goodness,  wisdom,  etc.),  or  an
unlimited  maximum.  But  the  first  of  these  con-
ceptions is  really  that  of  a  finite  wh®le.  To  say  that
God  can  do  all  that  can  be  done,  is  to  imply  that
there  are  things  impossible  even  to  God,'  is  to  assert
that  He  is  limited  by  an  ultimate  constitution  of
things.  And,  as  we  shall  see  (§  1 7),  this  is  the  true
conception  of  a  totality  or  whole;  the  true  interpret-
ation of  the  "all"  is  "  almighty,"  the  true  reconcili-
ation of  "  omnipotence,"  with  the  fintteness,  which  is
the  condition  of  reality.  But  on  the  other  hand,  the
generality  of  men  do  not  realize  that  a  whole  or
"  all  "  is  necessarily  finite,  and  that  an  infinite  whole
is  a  contradiction  {pp.  ch.  ii.  \  20;  ch.  ix.  §  8),  and
imagining  that  an  infinite  maximum  can  be  a
whole,  they  attribute  infinity  to  God.  But  in  reality
an  Infinite  whole  is  impossible,  and  the  infinite  is
only  the  negative  limit  of  the  finite,  which  can  exist
only  in  idea,  and  can  never  be  actual.

§  17.  Now  it  is  evident  that  if  we  can  make
good  what  has  been  asserted  above,  viz.,  that  a
whole  is  necessarily  finite,  the  assumption  of  an
infinite  Deity  becomes  logically  ixiadmissible.  It
will  follow  not  only  that  the  All  must  be  finite,  but,
that  the  Infinite  is  an  absurd  and  misleading  appel-
lation of  the  All  of  Pantheism.  But  we  must  go
further  and  assert  that  not  even  as  a  finite  whole
can  the  All  be  real,  and  thereby  destroy  the  whole
logical  basis  of  Pantheism.  For  the  infinite  or
absolute  "  God  "  of  Pantheism  is  nothing  but  the
hypostasization  of  the  conception  of  the  world  as
a  whole,  nothing  but  the  abstract  conception  of  a
totality  of  things,  nothing  but  the  logical  form  of  a


A WHOLE NECESSARILY FINITE.  34 1

universe  as  such.  And  as  every  world,  irrespective
of  its  content  and  character,  may  be  equally  con-
ceived as  a  whole,  it  was  inevitable  that  the  Deity
of  Pantheism  should  be  absolutely  indifferent  to  the
world  (§§  II,  12)  and  to  everything  happening  within
it.  For  the  inference  from  the  worst  world,  and  the
most  discordant  content  to  such  an  Absolute  would
be  just  as  valid  and  just  as  cogent  as  from  the  most
perfect.  God  would  in  any  case  and  under  all  cir-
cumstances be  the  totality  of  existence.

But  this  reasoning  contains  flaws  which  thoroughly
vitiate  it.  In  the  first  place,  a  whole  is  necessarily
finite,  for  two- reasons,  (i)-  Because  all  our  thought
deals  only  with  conceptions,  and  conceptions  are
necessarily  finite  \cp.  §  12  note):  hence  we,  in
applying  to  a  thing  any •  conception  of  our  thought,
in  this  case  the  conception  of  a  whole,  necessarily
imply  that  the  reality  is  as  finite  as  our  eonception.
{2)  Because,  according  to  its  only  true  and  valid
definition,  infinity  consists  just  in  the  impossibility  of
'completing  a  whole  by  successive  synthesis  {cp.  ch.  ix.
§  3).  If,  therefore,. the  world  is  a  real  whole,  it  is  for
that  very  reason  not  infinite.  But  this  proof  of  the
Necessary  finitude  of  wholes  may  be  said  to  •  show
not  so  much  that  Pantheism  is  mistaken  in  deifying
the  universe  as  a  whole,  as  that  the  expression,  of
"the  Infinite"  is  ill-suited  to  describe  the  totality  of
things.  Yet  eveiv  granting  this,  it  would  be  no
slight  help  to  the  cause  of  clear  thought,,  if  the
Infinite  could  be  finally  banished  from  the.  uocab-
blary  of  philosophy.

§  18.  Secondly,  even  permitting  Pantheism,  to
regard  its  deity,  the  absolute  whole,  as.  finite,  it  is
yet  impossible  to  regard  it,  in  the  way  Pantheism
does,  as  a  real  and  all-embracing  existence. For


342  MAN AND GOD.

such  a  view  -would  involve  a  mistaken  conception  of
the  relation  of  a.  whole  to  its  parts.

For  the  conception  of  a  whole  is  finite  also  in  this,
that  it  is  modelled  upon  the  wholes  given  in  our
experience,  and  that  we  have  no  business  to  extend
the  analogy  off-hand  :to  a  whole  in  which  the  rela-
tion to  its  parts  would  be  fundamentally  different
from  anything  with  which  we  are  acquainted.

The  wholes  which  iall  within  the  range  of  our
experience  may  be  conceived  in  two  ways,  and  in
two  ways  alone.  They  must  either  be  regarded
from  without,  and  given  as  wholes  external  to  the
spectator,  or  regarded  from  witbiji,  as  the  sum  of
their  parts.  In  the  first  case  alone,  however,  are
the  parts  at  once  given,  as  parts  by  direct  inspection,
and  .is  the  whole  a  reality  which  includes  the  parts.
In  the  second,  the  whole  has  to  be  constituted  by
the  successive  synthesis  of  the  pa,rts,  and  hence  it
is  always  ideal  and  exists  for  thought  only.

Now  the  universe,  as  the  totality  of  things,  is
necessarily  a  whole  of  the  second  kind,  since  it  is
evident  that  there  cannot  be  any  existence  outside
it,  which  could  regard  it  from  without.  But  if  so,  it
follows  that  the  All  is  not  a  real  whole,  but  literally.
"  the  sum  of  things  "  ;  the  universe,  as  a  whole,  is
simply  a  collective  expression  for  the  sum  of  its
"  parts."  In  othei"  words,  the  whole  is  simply  the
ideal  limit  of  its  parts,  and  not  anything  which  has
Teal  existence  ipart  from  them.  The  individual  ,
existences  in  the  universe  alone  possess  reality,  and
are  the  "  first  substances,"  and  their  inclusion  in  a
supposed  Absolute  is  simply  an  unpardonable  repet-
ition of  the  old  Platonic  fallacy  of  a  transcendent
universal,  apart  from  and  superior  to  the  real
individual. But the All is nothing beside the


THE UNIVERSE NOT A REAL WHOLE.  343

individual  substances  who  compose  and  define  it,
just  as  the  British  nation  is  nothing  real  by  the  side
of  the  individual  Britons.  For  though  it  may  be
claimed  that  such  a  whole  is  in  a  sense  real,  it  is
not  real  in  the  sense  in  which  Pantheism  asserts  the
reality  of  the  Absolute.  The  reality  of  a  nation
depends  on  the  existence  of  its  individual  members,
and  simply  expresses  the  fact  that  they  act  together
in  certain  ways.  Hence  such  a  whole  might  be
destroyed  without  the  destruction  of  a  single  real
individual,  if,  e.g.,  all  the  members  of  a  nation  joined
other  communities.

It  follows,  therefore,  from  the  analysis  of  the  rela-
tion of  a  whole  to  its  parts  that  our  experience  of
the  real  world  affords  us  no  analogy  for  the  existence
of  a  real  whole,  which  should  be  both  all-embracing
and  more  real  than  its  parts  :  the  universe  is  not
anything  to  which  this  our  human  conception  of  a
whole  can  be  applied.  Thus  Pantheism,  in  deifying
the  All,  is  proceeding  upon  a  mistaken  logical
a.nalogy,  and  we  have  here  traced  to  its  logical
source  the  practical  equivalence  of  Pantheism  and
Atheism.  For  if  "  the  sum  of  things"  cannot  be  a
real  being,  it  can  have  no  real  effect  upon  life.

§  19.  Thus  Pantheism  must  resign  itself  to  the
conclusion  that  no  valid  meaning  can  be  given  to
the  assertion  that  God  is  the  All,  unless  we  frankly
depart  from  the  facts  of  the  phenomenal  world.
For  it  is  possible  to  conceive  the  ideal  of  a  third
way  of  relating  a  whole  to  its  parts.  It  is  possible
to  conceive  parts  which  should  be  logically  implied
in  the  whole,  and  incapable  of  existing  except  as
parts  of  the  whole.  In  such  a  case  the  whole  would
be  as  real  as  the  parts,  by  which  it  was  irresistibly
and  certainly  suggested,  so  that  in  stating  the  part


344  MAN AND GOD.

we  should  ipso  facto  state  the  whole,  and  in  asserting
the  existence  of  the  part  we  should  also  assert  the
existence. of  the  whole.  And  in  this  way,  and  in
this  way  alone,  we  could  argue  from  the  given
reality  of  the  parts  to  the  reality  of  the  whole  of
which  they  were  parts.

And  at  first  sight  it  would  seem  as  if  this  concep-
tion of  a  whole  was  not  only  logically  thinkable,  but
also  actually  realizable.  But  this  would  be  an  over-
hasty  inference.  For  owing  to  the  discord  between
thought  and  reality  which  at  present  exists  {cp.  ch.
iii.  §  14;  ch.  V.  §  2),  we  cannot  argue  from  an  ideal
of  our  thought  to  a  corresponding  reality.  The
Real  is  "  contingent,"  things  cannot  be  deduced,
and  facts  cannot  be  demonstrated.  At  the  best,
reality  is  only  realizing  our  ideals,  and  will  not
attain  to  them  until  the  world-process  is  completed.

And  so  it  is  not  surprising  that  the  apparent
examples  of  such  a  relation  of  parts  to  wholes,  with
which  reality  as  yet  presents  us,  turn  out  upon
closer  inspection  to  be  delusive.  All  real  things
are  more  or  less  capable  of  being  parts  of  many
wholes,  of  being  wholes  that  can  vary  their  parts.
There  is  never  any  real  necessity  to  regard  a  thing
as  the  part  of  any  single  whole,  and  hence  we  can
never  conclude  by  a  sure  and  single  inference  from
the  given  existence  of  the  parts  to  that  of  any  parti-
cular whole.  The  inference  from  the  part  to  the
whole  is  always  precarious  and  probable,  and  never
attains  to  strict  and  absolute  certitude.  We  can
find  no  examples  even  in  the  ideal  regions  of  mathe-
matics. There  is  nothing  in  ah  angle  to  compel  us
to  regard  it  as  the  angle  of  a  triangle,  or  in  a  semi-
circle to  prevent  us  from  treating  it  as  a  simple
curve,  without  reference  to  the  circle  of  which  it


THE RELATIONS OF PARTS AND WHOLES. 345

may  form  part.  Nor  do  the  relations  of  a  body  to
its  members  realize  this  ideal.  The  mutual  implic-
ation of  members  of  bodies  is  in  all  cases  more  or
less  transitory  and  impermanent.  The  parts  of  all
bodies  are  more  or  less  capable  of  existing  inde-
pendently of  their  wholes,  while  all  bodies  have
the  power  more  or  less  of  repairing  the  loss  of
their  parts.  In  the  lower  organisms  especially,  the
mutaal  independence  of  whole  and  parts  reaches  an
astonishing  height.  To  say  nothing  of  leaves  and
cuttings  capable  of  developing  into  complete  plants,
of  the  grafting  of  one  plant  upon  another  of  a  totally
different  order,  we  find  that  crabs  will  repair  the
loss  of  their  -legs,  claws  and  eyes,  that  a  lizard  will
part  with  its  tail  with  the  greatest  equanimity,  and
that  the  arms  of  a  male  cuttle  fish  can  sever  them-
selves from  ■  their  body  and  embark  upon  the  ro-
mance of  life  on  their  own  account.^  Even  in  man
"operations  like  the  transfusion  of  the  blood  of  one
organism  into  another,  and  the  transplantation  of.
skin  from  one  body  to  another,  are  perfectly  easy.
Hence  we  cannot  from  the  mere  sight  of  a  member
infer  the  existence  of  the'  body  of  which  it  was  a
member,  although,  as  knowledge  grows,  we  can
define  within  gradually  narrower  limits  the  sort  of
body  it  must  belong  to.  But  the  mere  sight  of  an
arm  will  not  enable  us  to  assert  positively  whose
arm  it  is,  nor  even  establish  its  connection  with  a
body ;  for  it  may  have  been  cut  off  from  its  body,
nor  will  it  tell  us  whether  the  body  is  alive  or  dead.
Everywhere  we  find  wholes  which  can  dispense
with  their  individual  members  with  disgusting  facil-

^  The  hectocotylus.  It  matters  not  that  this  independence  of
the  parts  endures  only  for  a  limited  period,  for  the  wholes  also
which  dispense  with  their  parts  are  equally  impermanent.


346  MAN AND GOD.

ity,  and  parts  capable  of  standing  related  to  many
and  various  wholes.  The  connection  is  never  per-
manent and  unconditionally  valid.

But  perhaps  it  may  be  answered  that  in  the  case
of  an  all-embracing  whole,  like  the  universe,  the
source  of  erroi*  arising  out  of  the  multiplicity  of
wholes  to  which  the  parts  may  be  related  is  elim-
inated by  the  fact  that  there  is  only  one  whole
of  which  the  individual  existences  can  form  part.
There  can  be  no  misinterpretation  of  the  parts  "of
the  universal  whole,  for  everything  that  exists  must
form  part  of  the  Absolute.

This  rejoinder,  however,  would  rest  upon  an  illu-
sion. It  appears  correct  only  while  we  treat  "  the
universe  "  as  an  abstract  conception,  and  only  be-
cause the  real  question  has  already  been  begged  in
the  mode  of  statement.  In  speaking  of  "  the  uni-
verse," i.e.,  of  an  empty  category,  its  unity  has
already  been  covertly  assumed,  i.e.,  it  has  been
assumed  that  no  misinterpretation  of  the  parts  was
possible,  tjtiat  they  could  only  be  related  to  a  single
whole.  But  it  is  a  delusion  to  suppose  that  when
things  have  been  shown  to  form  part  of  a  whole,
they  have  also  been  shown  to  form  part  of  any  part-'
icular  whole.  Accordingly,  as  soon  as  ever  it  is
attempted  qualitatively  to  determine  our  category,
i.e.,  to  infer  that  the  individual  existences  must
form  part,  not  of  a  universe  as  such,  but  of  a  real
universe  of  a .  certain  character,  the  old  difficulty
recurs,  and  it  appears  that  they  might  form  part  of
all  sorts  of  qualitatively  different  cosmical  construc-
tions, and  hence  are  not  logically  implied  in  any  one
of  them.  Taking,  that  is  to  say,  the  individual
existences  as  our  data,  we  can  so  arrange  them  as
to  construct  "  the  universe  "  in  many  different  ways,


THE IDEAL OF A REAL WHOLE.  347

and  our  data  do  not  compel  us  to  assume  any  part-
icular kind  of  universe.  For  instance,  we  are
attempting  to  interpret  the  facts  of  life  upon  the
assumption  of  the  ultimate  rationality  of  existence,
but  we  were  in  Book  I.  forced  to  admit  that  they
might  also  be  interpreted  consistently  with  its  ulti-
mate irrationality.  But  which  of  these  two  theories
about  our  data  is  right,  is  just  what  we  want  to
know,  and  what  Pantheism  does  not  enable  us  to
decide.  To  tell  us  that  things  may  be  regarded  as
a  universe  by  means  of  the  conception  of  a  totality,
is  to  tell  us  nothing  of  the  least  importance,  and  to
offer  us  this  trivial "  truism  in  lieu  of  a  God,  is  to
mock  our  demand  for  a  reality  with  the  unsubstan-
tial shadow  of  a  logical  distinction.  Pantheism,
.therefore,  has  elucidated  and  explained  nothing  by
applying  to  the  world  the  abstract  conception  of  a
whole  ;  its  Deity  is  indifferent  to  the  world,  because
an  abstract  conception  carries  with  it  no  reference
to  any  definite  content ;  its  Deity  is  not  real,  be-
cause it  is  merely  an  irrelevant  play  with  logical
counters  ;  its  Deity  is  not  valid,  because  it  requires
an  unwarranted  manipulation  of  its  data.

§  20.  The  conception,  then,  of  a  whole  necessarily
inferred  from  its  parts  is  an  ideal  and  not  a  reality,
and  as  such  cannot  guarantee  the  reality  of  the
pantheist's  All,  nor  affect  our  belief  in  the  self-suffic-
ing reality  of  the  individual  existences.  And  yet
it  is  interesting  to  observe  that,  even  if  it  could  be
realized,  it  would  after  all  vindicate  the  reality  of
the  whole  only  at  a  cost  of  concession  to  the  parts
which  more  than  compensates  them  for  the  loss  of
their  logical  self- existence.

For  though  it  would  have  to  be  admitted  that  the
whole possessed a  sort  of  honorary  priority,  the


348  MAN AND GOD.

necessary  implication  of  the  whole  and  the  parts
would  yet  have  to  be  really  reciprocal.  For  in
order  to  secure  the  certainty  of  the  inference  from
the  part  to  the  whole,  the  part  must  be  incapable  of
being  anything  but  the  part  of  that  whole,  and  as
essential  to  the  whole  as  the  whole  is  to  it.  The
parts  could  not  escape  from  the  whole,  but  neither
could  the  whole  destroy  the  parts.  If  the  whole  is
necessary,  the  parts  would  also  have  to  be  neces-
sary. There  could  be  no  such,  thing  as  coming  into
or  passing -out  of  existence  in  the  relation  of  the
parts  to  such  a  whole,  no  possibility  of  regarding
their  relation  under  the  category  of  cause  and  effect.
And  even  the  most  self-assertive  individual  might
well  endure  to  be  called  a  section  of  the  Absolute,
if  this  relation  guaranteed  to  him  eternal  and
changeless  existence.

In  this  reciprocity  of  mutual  dependence  doubt-
less lies  the  true  solution  of  the  difficulty,  and  the
true  reconciliation  of  the  conflicting  claims  of  the
individual  and  the  whole  of  which  he  is  a  part,  a  re-
conciliation equally  remote  from  either  extreme,  from
an  intractable  self-assertion  of  the  parts  no  less  than
from  an  all-absorbing  encroachment  of  the  whole.
And  though  it  is  an  ideal  which  as  yet  finds  no
exact  counterpart  amid  the  imperfections  of  the  real
world,  we  have  yet  some  reason  to  believe  that  the
world  is  approximating  towards  it.  The  individual
is  becoming  more  valuable  to  the  whole  as  certainly
as  he  is  becoming  less  able  to  dispense  with  it.  As
the  intrinsic  worth  of  the  individual  rises,  so  does
his  social  value.  The  greater  a  man,  the  greater
the  void  his  loss  leaves,  the  more  keenly  is  it  felt
by  the  society  in  which  he  had  been  a  factor.  And
it  is  one  of  the  cruelest  necessities  of  our  imperfect


THE FINITE LIMITS ITSELF.  349

State  that  we  are  not  able  to  mourn  our  dead  as  we
ought,  that  love  and  grief  are  transient,  and,  like
ourselves,  are  swept  away  in  the  rushing  flood  of
life.  But  even  so,  we  may,  in  this  approximation
to  a  mutual  dependence  of  part  and  whole,  catch
another  view  of  the  ideal  we  first  caught  sight  of  at
the  end  of  chapter  viii.,  that  of  an  eternal  and  har^
monious  interaction  of  individuals,  who  could  not
exist  except  as  members  of  a  perfect  society,  in  a
society  which  could  not  dispense  with  the  services
of  a  single  member.  But  though  such  a  whole
would  be  heavenly,  it  would  not  be  God,  for  it
would  be  a  hypostasization  of  the  interaction  of  the
exis.tent.  And  still  less  would  it  explain  what  after
all  needs  explanation  most,  viz.,  the  why  of  the
world-process,  why  the  world  of  which  we  form
"  parts  "  at  present  falls  so  far  short  of  the  purity  of
our  ideals.  If,  therefore,  we  choose  to  hypostasize'
the  Interaction  of  the  Existent  under  the  name  of
the  Absolute,  we  must  do  so  with  a  full  conscious-
ness that  it  is  out  of  relation  to  the  world  as  it
actually  exists,  iand  can  explain  nothing  in  it.

But  there  is  no  need  to  hypostasize  it ;  no  reason
to  assume  an  "  Infinite"  to  envelop  and  sustain  the
"Finite."  To  make  the  Infinite  the  metaphysical
support  of  reality  only  involves  us  in  superstitions
as  endless  and  as  groundless  as  those  which  sup-
ported the  physical  world  on  an  elephant,  and  the
elephant  on  a  tortoise,  etc.,  etc.  But  just  as  little  as
the  physical  world  requires  an  Atlas  to  bear  it  up,
as  little  does  the  spiritual  world  require  an  infinite
Absolute  to  confer  reality  upon  it.  And  jiist  as  the
celestial  bodies  maintain  their  positions  by  their
mutual  attractions  and  repulsions,  so  the  Finite
suffices  to limit  itself,  and  the  individuals  are  real


350  MAN AND GOT).

and  are  also  limited  in  virtue  of  their  actions  and
reactions  upon  one  another.  All  things  are  finite
and  relative,  and  the  relative  is  relative  to  itself,  and
not  to  an  absolute  and  unlimited  nonentity,  which
must  needs  be  out  of  all  relation  to  the  Real.

§  21.  The  preceding  sections  have  shown  that
the  logical  grounds  on  which  Pantheism  was  based
are  fallacious  and  unnecessary,  and  as  it  had  already
been  shown  to  be  equally  valueless  for  religious,
moral  and  scientific  purposes,  every  possible  basis
and  motive  for  asserting  its  validity  has  really  been
disposed  of  Nevertheless  there  remains  a  strong
metaphysical  prejudice  in  favour  of  Pantheism  which
cannot  be  uprooted  without  an  inquiry  into  the  most
fundamental  question  of  metaphysics,  viz.,  that
whether  existence  is  ultimately  one  or  many.

If  the  ultimate  oneness  of  all  existence  is  main-
tained,' the  doctrine  is  Monism ;  if  existence  is
asserted  to  be  ultimately  of  two  kinds,  e.^:,  Matter
and  Spirit,  it  is  Dv,alism;  if  plurality  is  asserted  to
be  ultimate,  it  is  Pluralism.

Of  these.  Monism  has  maintained  a  sort  of  pre-
ponderance, because  it  appeared  simpler  and  more
satisfactory  to  "  the  philosophic  craving  for  unity."
On  the  other  hand,  it  is  incurably  pantheistic,  and
disposed  to  dissolve  away  all  the  distinctions  between
things.

Dualism,  again,  seemed  able  to  preserve  the  all-
important  distinction  between  good  and  evil,  for
which  Monism  had  left  no  room  ;  but  it  harmonized
neither  with  the  apparent  plurality  of  the  world  nor
with  the  philosophic  demand  for  unity.

Pluralism,  lastly,  had  the  advantage  of  departing
least  from  the  phenomena  of  the  real  world,  but  it
seemed  difficult  to  carry  it  out  consistently.


THEORIES OF ULTIMATE EXISTENCE.  35 1

Of  these  theories  of  ultimate  existence,  the  inter-
mediate theory  of  Dualism,  which  falls  between  two
stools,  may  be  rejected  at  once.  It  was  virtually
disposed  of  with  the  rejection  of  the  ultimate  differ-
ence of  Matter  and  Spirit  (ch.  ix.  §  i6).

The  real  battle  has  to  be  fought  out  between  the
champions  of  the  One  and  of  the  Many,  between
Monism  and  Pluralism.  And  contrary  to  the
opinions  of  most  previous  philosophers,  we  are  in-
clined to  hold  that  the  Many  is  a  far  more  important
principle  than  the  One,  and  that  Pluralism,  consist-
ently interpreted  and  properly  explp.ined,  is  the  only
possible  answer  to  the  ultimate  question  of  ontology.

Monism,  on  the  other  hand,  really  has  nothing
to  recommend  it.  It  might  indeed  be  possible  to
applaud  the  statement  that  philosophy  azW  a/ the
unification  of  the  universe,  if  it  were  not  promptly
made  a  pretext  for  asserting  the  reality  of  this  unity,
in  the  face  of  facts  which  deprive  this  so-called  unity
of  all  practical  value,  and  reduce  it  from,  an  assertion
of  a  real  oneness  to  that  of  a  merely  abstract  unity.
It  would  be  more  to  the  point  if  Monism  could  show
a  little  more  unanimity  in  the  world,  even  at  the
expense  of  a  little  unity.  And  if  more  attention  had
been  paid  to  the  aiming  at  unity,  the  results  would
perhaps  have  been  somewhat  more  satisfactory,  and
Monism  might  have  recognized  that  a  unity  aimed
at,  and  worth  aiming  at,  is  for  that  very  reason  not
yet  attained.  If  they  had  taken  the  trouble  to  inter-
pret their  theory  strictly,  Monists  might  have  realized
that  though  Monism  would  be  an  excellent  theory
when  the  world-process  was  ended,  it  is  for  this  very
reason  quite  inapplicable  and  extremely  mischievous
while  it  is  still  going  on.

Then  again,  the  supposed  simplicity  of  Monism  is


352  MAN AND GOD.

a  great  delusion.  It  does  not  simplify  the  under-
standing of  the  world  to  deny  plurality,  in  order  to
assert  its  abstract  unity.  Or  if  the  One  of  Monism
be  taken  as  the  unit  of  Number,  it  certainly  requires
an  astonishing  amount  of  simplicity  to  see  any  diffi-
culty in  passing  from  one  to  as  many  as  are  wanted.
For  how  is  it  more  difficult  to  assume  many  ulti-
mate existences  than  one  .-•  One  would  have  thought
that  when  one  was  given,  it  was  easy  to  count  a
thousand.  If,  therefore,  the  One  of  Monism  is  the
unit  of  Number,  the  unity  of  ultimate  existence  is
no  simpler  than  its  plurality,  while  if  it  is  an  abstract
One,  Monism  is  unable  to  explain  plurality  at  all.

And  unfortunately.  Monism  has  no  choice  of  evils;
it  is  forced  to  interpret  the  One  as  an  abstractipn
which  excludes  all  plurality.  No  Monism  can  ex-
plain the  existence  of  plurality:  how  the  One  became
the  Many,  or  how,  having  become,  the  Many  can  be
distinguished  from  the  One.  For  the  One,  being
the  sum  total  of  existence,  could  generate  the  Many
only  out  of  itself,  and  however  generated,  their
generation  could  not  serve  any  purpose,  nor  could
the  Many  really  be  independent  of  or  distinct  from
the  One.  In  whatever  way  we  put  it,  the  existence
of  the  Many  must  be  illusory  :  they  are  of  the  sub-
stance of  the  One,  and  can  neither  disown  their
parentage  nor  dissever  themselves  from  the  One
which  was  and  is  and  will  be  all  things.  The  Many
can  have  no  real  existence  from  the  standpoint  of  the
One,  and  no  raison  ditre.  For  supposing  even  that
the  One  found  the  single  blessedness  of  eternity  tire-
some in  the  long  run,  and  created  a  diversion  by
mysteriously  "pouring  itself  out"  into  the  world,
there  was  yet  no  reason  why  plurality  of  types
should not have sufficed, and this in no wise


MONISM CANNOT EXPLAIN PLURALITY.  353

explains  what  is  after  all  the  real  crux  of  plurality,
viz.,  its  indefinite  multiplication  of  imperfect  individ-
uals under  the  same  types,  the  lavish  prodigality
and  meaningless  repetition  of  the  Many.  Why  were
so  many  millions  of  fleas  essential  to  the  happiness
or  comfort  of  the  Absolute  ?  Would  not  a  single
specimen,  nicely  got  up,  have  sufficed  to  show  what
absolute  wisdom  combined,  with  absolute  power  could
effect  in  the  region  of  the  Infinitely  little  and  infin-
itely disagreeable  ?  £i  mutato  nomine  de  te,  oh
monistic  philosopher,  fabula  narratur  !

It  appears  here  again  that  monistic  Pantheism
has  to  deny  the  reality  of  our  world  of  Becoming
and  plurality.  All  systems  which  profess  to  explain
the  world  from  monistic  principles  have  to  make  this
transition  from  the  One  to  the  Many,  and  not  one  of
them  can  make  it  intelligible.

They  labour  in  vain  to  describe  it  by  inexplicable
and  unintelligible  processes,  which  severely  tax  their
resources  in  the  way  of  obscure  metaphor.  But  in
.  reality  the  gulf  between  the  One  and  the  Many  can
be  bridged  by  no  fair  or  valid  means  :  nor  has  the
s^lf-sacrifice  of  monistic  philosophers,  who  have  dis-
carded all  restraints  of  prudence  and  consistency  in
order  to  precipitate  themselves  into  it  with  a  reck-
less devotion  worthy  of  Mettius  Curtius,  availed  to
close  the  gulf.

§  22,  We  may  reasonably  conclude,  then,  that
Monism  is  a  failure,  that  by  assuming  unity  at  the
outset  it  incapacitates  itself  for  the  task  of  explain-
ing phenomenal //i^ra/?'^,  and  a  fortiori  for  the  still
higher  taajk  of  really  uniting  the  Many  in  a  signi-
ficant union.

But  is  Pluralism  any  better  off  ?  Pluralism,  by
assuming  the  ultimateness  of  plurality,  does  indeed

R.ofS.  _^ A


354  MAN AND GOD.

avoid  the  difficulty  which  is  so  fatal  to  Monism.  It
starts  with  an  immense  advantage  over  Monism  :  it
has  no  need  to  explain  away  the  appearance  of  plur-
ality. But  unless  its  position  is  very  carefully  stated,
with  more  precision  and  consistency  than  pluralist
philosophers  have  hitherto  bestowed  upon  it,  it  has
considerable  difficulty  in  explaining  the  possibility,
not  of  the  abstract  unity  it  rejects,  but  of  real  union.

This  difficulty  may  be  elucidated  by  the  example
of  the  greatest  of  pluralist  systems,  that  of  Leibnitz,
and  the  criticism  upon  it.  Leibnitz  asserted  that  the
world  was  ultimately  composed  of  spiritual  beings,  «
"  windowless  monads,"  each  of  whom  ideally  in-
cluded, but  really  excluded  all  others.  And  this
statement  in  its  natural  sense  might  have  been  taken
as  a  forcible  expression  of  the  fact  that  the  mutually
impenetrable  consciousnesses  of  spiritual  beings  yet
communicate  through  the  common  world  of  thought.
But  an  unappreciative  criticism  could  easily  discover
obscurities  and  flaws  in  Leibnitz's  expressions.  It
was  observed  that  if  the  monads  were  absolutely
exclusive,  they  could  not  communicate  at  all,  and
hence  no  world  could  exist,  nor  plurality  in  it,  and
that  Pluralism  thus  supplied  its  own  refutation.  If,
on  the  other  hand,  the  Leibnitzian  conception  of
God  as  the  Central  Monad,  including  all  the  rest,
was  to  be  taken  seriously,  there  was  an  end  to  th^
substantiality  of  the  others,  and  here  again  Plural-
ism was  abandoned.

Such  criticism,  though  it  disregards  the  spirit,  if
not  the  letter,  of  Pluralism,  may  serve  at  least  to
bring  out  the  subtle  way  in  which  Pluralism, includes
and  involves  the  unity  of  things.

It  is  absurd,  in  the  first  place,  to  suppose  that
Pluralism  asserts  the  existence  of  the  Many  in  a


PLURALISM.  355

sense  and  under  conditions  which  would  dfestroy  the
very  fact  it  is  most  anxious  to  explain.  The  exclus-
iveness  and  self-existence  of  the  Many  must  not  be
so  interpreted  as  to  make  nonsense  of  the;  whole
position  and  to  stultify  the  whole  solution  of  the
problem  of  plurality.  For  it  is,  clear  that  if  the
Many  were  absolutely  exclusive  and  incapable  of
having  any  connection  or  communion  with  one
another,  there  would  be  no  Many,  and  no  Plurality
could  exist.  Each  monad  would  form,  a  world  by
itself,  would  be  a  One  as  impervious  tOvCriticism  and
as  unconscious  of  all  outside  influence  as  the  One  of
Monism  itself.  Pluralism  would  be  no.  better  than
Monism.  When,  therefore,  Pluralism  asserts  that
the  Many  as  a  matter  of  fact  exist,  it  must, be  taken
to  have  thereby  implied  that  they  are  also  capable  of
existing  as  many,  i.e.,  the  possibility  of  the  inter-
action of  the  Many  i^s  implied  in,  their  very  existence,
and  does  not  require  any  special  proof

And  Leibnitz  might  well  take  for  granted  that  as
the  Many  do  interact,  they  must  also  be  capable  of
interacting,  and  that  it  was,  unnecessary  to  demon-
strate that  what  actually  existed  was  also  capable  of
existing.  He  himself  was  far  too  well  versed  in
Aristotelian  philosophy  to  suspect  that  his  critics
would  require  him  to  justify  the  possibility  of  the
potentiality,  where  the  actuality  was  obviously
given.  To  such  criticism,  from  the  Leibnitzian  as
from  the  Aristotelian  standpoint,  there  could  be  but
one  answer ;  viz.,  that  the  potentiality  was  nothing
without  the  actuality  (ch.  vii.  §  17),  and  con-
sequently that  the  One,  as  the  possibility  of  their
interiaction,  was  nothing  without  the  Many,  and  that
the  real  reason  of  things  must  be  sought  in  the
Many.


35^  MAN AND GOD.

Yet  as  this  possibility  of  the  interaction  of  the
Many  is  the  One,  Pluralism  is  in  a  way  based  upon
Monism  :  the  Many  presujppose  the  One.  But  not
in  any  sense  which  can  afifect  the  substantiality  of
the  Many.  The  One  which  is  presupposed  by
Pluralism  is  the  most  meaningless  of  all  things ;  it
is  a  mere  possibility  of  the  interaction  or  co-exist-
ence of  the  Many ;  it  is  a  mere  potentiality  w^hich
has  no  actual  existence  except  as  an  ideal  factor  in
a  real  plurality.  It  is  the  actual  interaction  of  the
Many  that  gives  a  meaning  t©  the  One ;  Monism
becomes  possible  only  when  it  has  been  included
and  absorbed  in  Pluralism.  For  if  each  of  the
many  individual  existences  had  never  actually
exerted  its  power  of  interacting  with  the  others,  no
world  would  have  existed.  The  terms  "  one  "  and
"many"  would  have  had  no  meaning,  and  there
would  have  been  no  occasion  for  Monism  to  be  in-
vented in  order  to  explain  how  the  many  could  be
one.

Monism  is  thus  essentially  parasitic  in  its  nature  ;
it  is  a  theory  which  becomes  possible  only  on  the
basis  of  the  real  fact  of  plurality.  And  it  is  equally
dependent  upon  Pluralism  for  its  further  develop-
ment. It  is  a  theory  iparasitic  also  in  thfe,  that  it
construes  the  One  on  the  analogy  of  the  Many  and
after  a  fashion  derived  from  its  knowledge  of  the
phenomenal  world  with  its  many  substances ;  in
other  words,  it  hypostasizes  it.  But  by  this  hypo-
stasization  it  refutes  itself ;  by  treating  as  a  real  and
transcendent  substance  this  co-existence  and,  possibil-
ity of  the  interaction  of  the  Many,  this  immanent  and
impersonal  ultimate  nature  of  existence,  it  reduces,
the  real  world  of  existences,  which  it  set  out  to  ex-
plain, to  absolute  unreality. And  all  this  in  order


HOW PLURALISM IMPLIES UNITY.  357-

to  be  able  to  assert  the  reality  of  a  unity  which,  01*
its  own  showing,  lies  beyond  all  human  thought  and
feeling!  It  would  be  a  sufficient  justification  for
Pluralism  that  it  protects  us  against  such  absurdities.
§  23.  But  Pluralism  can  do  more  than  this  :  it
not  only  vindicates  the  actual  plurality  of;  things,
and  explains  how  the  unity  implied  in  plurality  may
be  treated  without  dissolving  all  reality  in  an  un-
meaning One,  but  it  can  assert  unity  in  a  higher
sense,  which  no  Monisnv-can  reach.

To  assert  the  unity  of  the  universe  at  present  is
to  assert  what  is  either  trivial  or  false.  If  by  unity
is  meant  the  abstract  unity  of  the  category  of  one-
ness, if  unity  means  merely  that  in.  thinking  "  the
universe"  we  must  from  the  nature  of  our  thought
imply  its  oneness,  or,  again,  if  it  means .  the  possi-
bility of  the  interaction. of  the  Many,  the  statement
is  the  most  trivial  and  unimportant  that  caji  possibly
be  made.  If  by  unity  is  meant  something  incom-
patible with  plurality,  it  is  false.  If,  again,  a  real
unity  is  meant,  it  is  false  ;  for  a  real  and  complete
union  of  the  elements  of  the  world  does  not  exist.
The  interactions  of  things. are  not  harmonious,  they
are  not  at  one  but  at  war.

But  Pluralism  can  hold  out  to  us  a. hope  that  such
a  real  union  may  yet  ba^achieved.  The  Many,  who
at  present  interact  discordantly,  may  come  not  only
to  interact,  but  also  to  act  together  ;  and,  their  per-
fect and  harmonious  interaction,  would  realize  the
ideal  of  a  true  union,  of  a  real  unitedness,  as  far
superior  to  the  imperfect  union  of  our  present
cosmos  as  the  latter  is  to  the  abstract  unity  of  the
underlying  One.

Thus,  in  a  way,  the  One  is  Alpha  and  Omega  :  as
the  basis  of  the  Many,  it  is  the  lowest  and  least  of


358  MAN AND GOD.

things ;  as  their  perfection  and  final  harmony,  it  is
the  highest  and  last  of  things ;  but  it  is  Pluralism
alone  that' can  distinguish  between  these  two  senses
of  unity,  "whidh  Monism  inextricably  confounds.

Thus  -satisfaction  is  given  to  the  legitimate  claims
alike  of  the  One  and  of  the  Many,  in  a  higher
synthesis  which  transcends  the  extremes  both  of
Pantheism  and  of  individualism.  Unity  (in  the
sense  of  union)  is  admitted  to  be  a  higher  ideal
than  plurality,  but  for  that  very  reason  it  cannot
be  treated  as  real  in  an  impeffect  world.  For  the
explanation  of  our  existing  world  the  first  sense  of
the  One  is  irrelevant,  as  being  included  in  the  mere
fact  of  the  world's  existence,  whereas  the  second
is  inapplicable,  as  being  not  yet  attained.  In  the
interpretation,  therefore,  of  our  world  Pluralism
is  supreme;  it  is  the  only  possible  and  relevant
answer  to  the  ultimate  question  of  ontology.  It  is
only  by  asserting  existences  to  be  ultimately  many
that  we  can  satisfy  the  demands  either  of  the  Real
or  of 'the  ^Ideal.

And  it'is  a  mere  prejudice  to  suppose  that  there
is  any  irttrinsic  difficulty  in  the  ultimate  existence  of
many  individuals;  for  the  conception  of  ultimate
existence  is  no  more  difficult  in  the  case  of  many
than  of  one.  All  thought  must  admit  the  ultimate-
ness  of  some  existence,  admit  a  limit  to  the  question
of  the  origin  or  cause  of  existence ;  for  otherwise  it
would  have  to  confess  to  the  absurdity  that  the
ultimate  cause  of  everything  is  nothing  or  unknow-
able (§  i).  But  as  we  saw  in  chapter  ii.  (§  5),  our
thinking  faculty,  when  rightly  interrogated,  does
not  require  such  an  infinite  regress  of  reasons,  but
readily  acquiesces  in  the  self-evident,  and  the  ques-
tion as  to  the  cause  of  existence  as  such is  idle


THE FINAL UNION OF THE MANY.  359

and  invalid.  Our  inquiry  must  come  to  a  stop
somewhere,  and  this  limit,  the  ultimate  ground  of
existence,  must  be  either  the  irrational  or  the  self-
evident  and  self-sufficient.  Now  of  these  alterna-
tives, it  has  been  made  abundantly  evident  that
monistic  Pantheism  adopts  the  former,  and  reduces
the  world  to  the  irrational,  to  "  the  delirium  of  an
insane  God,"  whereas  Pluralism,  by  uniting  the
Many  in  an  eternal  harmony,  necessarily  arrives  at
the  latter,  at  a  state  in  which  the  ever-present  reality
of  perfection  permits  no  question  into  what  lies  be-
yond and  before  the  actual. '

But  though  this  reconciliation  of  the  One  and  the
Many  affords  us  once  again  a  view  of  the  Ideal  we
have  already  twice  caught  sight  of,  once  in  dis-
cussing the  relation  of  th6  individual  to  society
(ch.  viii.  §  19),  and  once  in  analysing  that  of  the
part  to  the  whole  (§  19),  we  must  leave  its  elucida-
tion to  a  later  period  (ch,  xii.),  and  content  ourselves
for  the  present  with  settling  the  comparative  merits
of  Monism  and  Pluralism.  Irrespective  of  the  hopes
Pluralism  holds  out  for  the  future,  it  is  enough  that
it  is  superior  in  the  present.  Whatever  the  diffi-
culties that  beset  the  question  of  ultimate  existence,
they  are  the  same  for  both,  the  same  whether  exist-
ence be  ultimately  one  or  many.  And  we  are
clearly  bound  in  our  inquiry  to  draw  the  line  at  a
point  where  the  conception  of  ultimate  existence
will  throw  light  upon  the  phenomenal  existence  of
our  world.  The  world  exists,  and  its  existences
are  many ;  Pluralism  admits  the  facts,  and  thereby
affords  a  valid  theory  of  the  world  ;  Monism  can  not
admit  the  facts,  does  not  explain  the  world,  and
therefore  is  not  a  valid  theory  of  ultimate  existence
or  ontology.


360  MAN AND GOD.

§  24.  An  elaborate  investigation  of  the  doctrine
of  the  infinity  of  the  Deity  has  been  found  necessary,
but  it  was  fully  warranted  by  the  magnitude  of  the
issues  involved,  and  of  the  results  attained.  For
it  ought  to  have  resulted  in  a  firm  conviction  that
neither  religion  nor  science  nor  philosophy  has
anything  to  gain  rather  than  everything  to  lose
by  the  assertion  of  this  doctrine.  It  ought  to  be
at  length  clear  to  all  that  the  Pantheism  which  is
arrived  at  by  deifying  the  abstract  category  of  the
unity  of  the  universe  arises  out  of  paralogisms  and
confusions,  is  unable  to  explain  the  interaction  of
existences  which  do  not  require  it,  and,  were  it
conceivable,  would  plunge  all  speculative  and  practi-
cal philosophy  into  irredeemable  chaos.

The  assertion,  therefore,  of  the  finiteness  of  God
is  primarily  the  assertion  of  the  knowableness  of  the
world,  of  the  commensurateness  of  the  Deity  with
our  intelligence.  By  becoming  finite  God  becomes
once  more  a  real  principle  in  the  understanding  of
the  world,  a  real  motive  in  the  conduct  of  life,  a
real  factor  in  the  existence  of  things,  a  factor  none
the  less  real  for  being  unseen  and  inferred.  For  it
is  much  that  the  Deity  can  once  more  be  made  the
subject  of  inferences,  that  intelligible  reasons  can
once  more  be  given  for  the  existence  of  God,  and
that  the  Kantian  criticism  of  the  "  physico-theo-
logical  proof"  (ch.  ii.  §  19)  falls  to  the  ground.  And
it  is  a  sufficient  concession  to  the  instinctive  humility
of  religious  feeling  to  admit  that  the  Deity  is  un-
known to  us  as  yet,  that  He  is  a  God  who  "wears
a  fold  of  heaven  and  earth  across  His  face"  ;  we
must  not  permit  it  to  ascribe  to  Him  the  suicidal
attribute  of  unknowableness.

And  the  discussion  of  the  relations  of  Monism


WHY THE WORLD IS IN PROCESS.  36 1

and  Pluralism  should  have  largely  brought  out  also
the  nature  of  God's  finiteness. The  finiteness  of
God  depends  on  the  very  attributes  that  make  Him
really  God,  on  His  personality,  on His  being,  like
all  real  beings,  an  individual  existence. God  is  one
among  the  Many,  their  supreme  ruler  and  aim,  and
not the One underlying  the Many. The latter
theory  makes  the  Many  inexplicable  and  the  One
indifferent. God  therefore  must  not  be  identified
with  Nature. For  if  by  Nature  we  mean  the  All
of  things,  then  Nature  is  the  possibility  of  the  in-
teraction of  the  ultimate  existences,  and  of  these
God  is  one. And  the  existence  of  .these  ultimate
existences  explains  also  how  God  can  be  finite  ;  He
is  limited  by  the  co-existence  of  other  individuals.
And  from His  relations  to  these  other  existences,
which  we  have  called  spirits  (ch.  ix.'  §  31),  arise  all
the  features  of  our  world  which  were  so  insoluble  a
puzzle  to  Monism — its Becoming,  its  process,  and
its  Evil — and  in  them  also  must  be  sought  the  ex-
planation of  the  arrangement  of  the  world  down  to
its  minutest  detail. For  as  the  existence  of  these
spirits  is  an  ultimate  fact,  God  has  no  power  to
annihilate  them ;  the  most  that  can  be  done  is  to
bring  them .  into harmony  with the Divine  Will,
And  this  is  just  what  the  world-process  is  designed
to  effect,  this  is  just  the  reason  why  the  world  is  in
process. For  if  the  divine  power  were  infinite,  it
would  be  unnecessary  to  produce  the  harmony  with
the  divine  will  by  a  long  and  arduous  process. As
it  is  not  infinite,  occasion  arises  for  the  display  of
intelligence  and economy, for that adaptation of
means to ends which has always been justly
esteemed  the  surest  ground  of  a  belief  in  God.
And  this  same  limitation  is  also  the  general  ex-


362  MAN AND GOD.

planation  of  Evil ;  the  world  is  evil  because  it  is
imperfectly  harmonized  with  the  divine  will.  And
yet  as  God  is  not  all  things,  He  can  be  an  "eternal
(or  unceasing)  tendency  making  for  righteousness,"
and  need  not  be,  as  on  all  other  theories  He  must
be,  the  responsible  Author  of  Evil.  For  when  once
the  identification  of  God  with  the  whole  of  Nature
is  given  up,  the  evil  in  the  world  may  be  due  to  that
element  in  it  which  is  not  God,  to  the  resistance
of  existences  God  cannot  destroy  and  has  not  yet
reconciled.  And  there  are  many  points  about  the
specific  character  of  evil  which  bear  out  this  inter-
pretation.

§  25.  For  let  us  compare  the  deductions  from
such  a  theory  of  the  nature  of  Evil  with  the  facts
we  find.  We  start  with  a  number  of  spiritual  beings
struggling  against  and  opposing  the  Divine  Power,
which  may  overpower,  but  cannot  destroy  them.
What  is  to  be  done  ?  To  leave  them  in  the  full
possession  of  their  powers  and  intelligence  would  be
to  give  them  the  power  to  do  evil,  to  reduce  the
spiritual  order  to  a  chaotic  play  of  wild  antagonisms.
To  destroy  them  is  impossible.  But  it  is  possible  to
do  the  next  best  thing,  viz.,  to  reduce  their  conscious-
ness to  the  verge  of  non-existence.  In  such  a  state
of  torpor  it  would  be  possible  to  induce  them  to  give
an  all  but  unconscious  assent  to  the  laws  of  the
cosmos,  and  gradually  to  accustom  them  to  the  order
which  the  divine  wisdom  had  seen  ^  be  the  best,
and  the  best  means  to  attain  a  perfectly  harmonious
co-operation  of  all  existences.  And  as  they  grow
more  hajrmonized,  a  higher  development  of  con-
sciousness, and  a  higher  phase  of  life  becomes  per-
missible. Nevertheless  every  advance  in  conscious-
ness renders possible a correspondingly intense


THE NATURE OF EVIL.  363

relapse  into  antagonism  or  Evil,  nor  will  such  relapses
cease  to  be  possible  until  a  complete  harmony  of
all  existences  has  been  attained.

Now  do  not  the  facts  accurately  correspond  to  this
scheme  ?  The  history  of  the  world  begins  with-
beings  to  whom  we  can  hardly  attribute  any  con-
sciousness or  spiritual  character.  This  obliteration
of  consciousness  is  dependent  on  Matter,  which  has
been  recognized  in  the  last  chapter  (ix.  §§  27,  28)  as
a  mechanism  for  depressing  consciousness.  Out  of
these  lowest  and  hardly  conscious  beings  there  are
gradually  evolved,  in  periods  which  to  us  appear
almost  "  infinite,"  higher  beings  with  a  higher  con-
sciousness and  higher  powers.  And  on  the  whole
they  display  progressively  higher  phases  of  associ-
ation and  social  harmony.  The  abuse  of  their  highei:
powers  for  evil  purposes,  on  the  other  hand,  though
possible,  is  confined  to  very  narrow  limits.  For  the
physical  and  social  laws  of  life  form  an  effectual
system  of  checks  upon  the  selfish  lawlessness  of  in-
dividuals, and  prevent  evil-doing  beyond  a  certain
point.  However  evil  the  intentions  of  a  refractory
spirit  may  be,  his  actions  must  involve  some  degree
of  submission  to  the  cosmic  order.  And  not  only  is
he  forced  to  recognize  this  order,  but  Jn  proportion  as
he  fails  to  mould  himself  in  accordance  with  it,  he
tends  to  lose  his  power  of  disturbing  it,  byl  reverting
to  a  lower  and  less  dangerous  type.

To  say  thai' an  evil-doer  makes  a  beast  of  himself
is  true  in  more  senses  than  one ;  for  by  his  indul-
gence in  his  evil  palssions  he  tends  to  lose  the
higher  consciousness  which  raises  men  above  the||
beasts.  His  vices  destroy  his  moral  and  intellectual
perceptions  even  more  surely  thin  they  do  his  body.
For  the  lowest deipth alike  of ignorance  and  of


364  MAN AND GOD.

wickedness  is  unconscious :  the  utterly  degraded
criminal  has  lost  the  moral  and  intellectual  insight,
the  conscience  and  the  intelligence,  which  the  beast
has  not  yet  acquired.  And  even  physically,  could
his  life  be  prolonged,  he  would  revert  into  an  animal
state.  For  as  evil  is  anti-social,  the  extreme  evil-
doer would  be  outcast  from  society,  and  so  become
unable  to  secure  the  manifold  appliances  of  civiliz-
ation. He  would  have  to  depend  for  his  livelihood
on  his  own  unaided  resources,  on  his  strength  of
hand  and  fleetness  of  foot.  His  expression  would
be  coarsened  and  animalized  by  his  life.  The  higher
mental  activities  would  find  no  scope  for  their  exer-
cise, and  the  part  of  the  brain  by  whiqh  they  were
expressed  would  be  atrophied  by  disuse.  For  lack
of  the  means  of  making  clothing,  he  would  have  to
grow  a  thicker  covering  of  hair;  for  the  lack  of  tools,
he  would  have  to  develop  his  nails  into  claws.

Nor  is  it  inconsistent  with  this  view  that  more
intelligent  and  cold-blooded  wickedness  maintains
itself  in  society,  and  often  too  in  honour.  For  it  is
just  by  its  obedience  to  the  laws,  divine  and  human,
by  the  moderation  which,  from  self- regarding  pru-
dence, avoids  offences  which  a  superior  power  would
surely  punish,  that  such  wickedness  is  possible.  The
criminality  is  confined  to  intentions,  and  not  per-
mitted to  issue  in  overt  acts.  A  bad  man  in  a
modern  society  is  probably  worse  than  a  bad  man
10,000  years  ago,  because  his  intelligence  is  higher.
But  his  instincts  will  not  be  as  brutal,  nor  his  action?
as  outrageous  as  those  of  his  predecessor.  He  will
be  more  consciously  selfish  in  the  choice  of  his  ends,
but  he  will  not  be  as  ruthless  and  barbarous  in  the
choice  of  his  means.  He  will,  e.g.,  beware  of  a  free
indulgence  in  manslaughter,  for  the  conditions  of


THE ELIMINATION OF EVIL.  365

civilized  life  render  murder  too  dangerous  a  pastime.
Physically,  also,  his  conduct  will  be  more  prudent,
for  he  will  find  that  the  more  complex  dissipations
of  modern  life  are  more  exhausting  to  his  physical
powers  than  the  simpler  debaucheries  of  the  savage.

Thus  Evil  is  impotent  and  infra-human,  in  our
world  at  least,  rather  than  superhuman.  And  such
a  character  of  Evil  serves  to  further  the  world-
process  indirectly  also.  It  makes  the  attitude  of
resistance  to  the  Divine  Purpose  ridiculous,  con-
temptible, and  disgusting,  as  well  as  futile.  The
adversary  of  God  is  not  a  defiant  fiend,  ■  armed  with
archangelic  powers  and  irreconcilable  in  the  intense
consciousness  of  his  undying  hate,  not  the  Demon
we  had  been  wont  to  fear,  but  the  beast  we  had  been
wont  to  despise,  a  sordid  swine,  whose  narrow  out-
look over  the  nature  of  things  is  limited  by  the
barriers  of  his  garbage,  and  the  boundaries  of  his
sty.  And  so  the  nature  of  our  world  confirms  what
we  ought  to  have  conjectured  beforehand,  viz.,  that
the  divine  wisdom  does  not  permit  the  world  to  be
made  a  playground  for  devils,  but  imposes  upon
Evil  disabilities  which  minimize  its  power  to  thwart
the  purposes  of  God  and  to  affect  the  course  of
history.

§  26.  And  so  we  find  that  Evil  is  that  which  resists
the  Evolution  of  the  world,  and  fights  a  losing  battle
against  the  tendencies  of  things.  It  consists  in  this,
that  the  end  is  not  yet,  that  the  purpose  of  the  world-
process  is  still  being  achieved,  that  the  discordant
elements  are  still  being  harmonized,  and  that  hence
what  is  cannot  yet  realize  what  oug-Ai  to  be.

But  though  on  this  account  Evil  is  an  inseparable
element  in  our  world,  an  ineradicable  element  in  all
existing  things,  yet  from  the  beginning  A<o?  S'ereXetero


366  MAN AND GOD.

;8ovX>J/  and  constrained  chaotic  wills  into  the  scheme
of  cosmic  order.  But  this  cosmic  order  of  perfect
harmony  is  as  yet  unattained,  and  so  the  world  con-
tains a  negative  element  of  the  unknowable,  im-
personal ("  Matter  "),  indeterminate  ("  Becoming  "),
impermanent  ("Time"),  indefinite  ("ignorance"),
and  imperfect  (pain) — in  short,  of  Evil;  it  is  a  world
of  Becoming  and  of  Time,  and  not  a  true  cosmos.
But  yet  it  is  ever  progressing  towards  perfection  ;
Evil  and  Imperfection  is  that  which  is  ever  vanish-
ing away.  It  is  impermanent  itself  and  the  cause  of
jmpermanence  in  the  imperfect,  the  lawless  and  a-
cosmic  factor,  which  must  be  continually  transcended
and  ultimately  eliminated  in  the  process  towards
perfect  Being.  And  of  that  process  all  phenomenal
things  are  transitory  phases,  that  bear  within  them
the  curse  of  change  and  the  seed  of  death,  and  we
ourselves  also  must  pass  away.  We  are  imperfect
phases  in  the  interaction  between  God  and  the  Egos,
the  reflexes  of  relations  that  are  not  satisfactory  or
harmonious,  and  hence  endure  but  for  season.  Hard
then  as  is  our  lot,  and  bitter  as  are  the  pains  the
flow  of  Time  and  the  impermanence  of  life  inflict,
it  is  yet  not  ill  that  the  all-receiving  gate  of  Death
should  open  up  to  us  a  prospect  of  promotion  into
a  more  abiding  state  of  being.

§  27.  Thus  the  complete  account  of  man's  rela-
tion to  God  is  that  our  actual  selves,  and  the  world
in  which  we  live,  are  correlated  results  of  an  inter-
action between  the  Deity  and  ultimate  spiritual
beings  or  Egos,  of  whom  we  form  the  conscious
part  (ch.  ix.  §§  22,  24).  The  imperfection  and  transit-
oriness  of  this  world  of  ours  is  conditioned  by  the

1  "And  the  plan  of  Zeus  was  working  out  its  fulfilment." — Iliad
■■  S-


GOD BOTH IMMANENT AND TRANSCENDENT. 367

unsatisfactory  and  unstable  nature  of  the  relations
between  the  Deity  and  the  Ego,  and  to  this  also
must  be  ascribed  the  all-pervading  element  of  Evil.

But  as  the  Deity  is  one  factor  in  this  interaction,
i.e.,  in  all  things,  there  is  within  and  throughout  the
world  also  an  element  of  good,  that  makes  for  a
more  perfect  harmony  between  God  and  the  Egos,
ourselves  and  the  world.  Thus  God  is  immanent
in  all  things,  a  constant,  all-inspiring,  ever-active
Force.  And  yet  God  is  not  dissolved  in  the  All,
which  was  the  heavy  price  paid  by  Pantheism  for
the  immanence  of  its  "  God,"  but  has  also  a  real
personality,  a  truer  and  transcendent  existence  for
Himself.  In  this  way  we  solve  the  old  controversy
of  the  transcendence  or  immanence  of  the  Deity,  by
showing  how  God  is  in  different  ways  both  imman-
ent and  transcendent,  and  oppose  to  the  Pantheistic
Monism,  which  could  not  explain  the  world,  a  plural-
istic Theism,  which  can.

§  28.  And  if  this  doctrine  seem  at  first  somewhat
to  detract  from  the  effective  supremacy  of  God,  and
to  shock  the  ears  accustomed  to  an  unthinking
Worship  of  the  "  Infinite,"  and  if  the  ascription  of
Evil  to  the  limitation  of  God  seem  even  to  reduce
His  power  to  a  shadow,  let  iis  reflect,  and  realize
that  omnipotence  becomes  impotence  in  the  absence
of  resistance,  that  resistance  also  is  the  measure  of
power.  Hence,  though  it  may  seem  a  task  un-
worthy of  the  divine  power  to  overcome  the  re-
sistance of  fools  and  beasts,  it  does  not  follow  that
the  apparent  is  a  true  measure  of  the  real  resistance.
For  to  impress  on  fools  and  beasts  even  a  dim  sense
of  the  rationality  of  the  scheme  of  things,  is  a  task
more  difficult  by  far  than  to  prevail  over  the  dissent
of  superhuman  intelligences. And  besides,  how  do


368  MAN AND GOD.

we  know  that  this  very  contemptibleness  in  appear-
ance of  the  obstacles  to  the  world's  progress  {pp.  §
25  s.f.)  is  not  In  itself  an  effective  method  of  the
divine  guidance  of  the  process,  that  it  does  not  form
part  of  the  humorous  element  in  things,  of  that
subtle  "  irony  of  fate  "  and  that  gentle  cynicism  of
nature's  ways,  which  we  so  often  fancy  we  can  trace
in  the  course  of  the  world  ?  We  have  hardly  yet
got  the  data  for  estimating  the  strength  of  the
spiritual  resistances  to  the  divine  purpose.  It  is
only  when  we  see  how  slowly  the  vast  and  incalcul-
able power  which  is  displayed  in  the  order  of  the
physical  universe  grinds  small  the  obstacles  to  its
purpose,  how  many  millions  df  years  were  required
to  evolve  man,  how  many  thousands  of  years  to
civilize  him,  and  how  slow  even  now  the  stubborn
obstinacy  of  unreason  makes  the  ever-accelerating,
progress  of  the  world — it  is  only  when  we  observe
and  ponder  on  all  this,  that  we  may  form  some  faint
image  of  the  strength  of  the  spiritual  resistances
to  the  world- process,  and  obtain  an  idea  of  the
grandeur  of  the  Divine  Purpose  immensely  more
vivid  and  impressive:  than  the  yague  hyperboles  of
an  uncritical  adulation  of  the  Infinite.  The  con-
ception of  the  Divine  Power  as  finite  exalts  the
Deity,  actually  and  morally,  as  far  above  an  unin-
telligible Infinite  as  modern  astronomy  has  exalted
our  sense  of  the  grandeur  of  the  universe,  as  com-
pared with  the  ancient  fancies  that  the  stars  were
set  in  the  firmament  to  adorn  our  skie^,  or  that  the
sun  was  "  about  the  size  of  Pelopon)|ese,"  and  was
put  but  every  night  in  the  "  baths  of  Ocean."

And  the  moral  stimulus  and  emotional  relief  also
of  such  a  conception  of  the  world-process  ought  to
be  immense. It represents us no  longer  as  the


WHY PLURAUSM REQUIRES A GOD.  369

helpless  playthings  of  art  infimte  and  infamous
Deity,  the  victims  of  a  senseless  tyranny  of  an
Omnipotence  we  can  neither  resist  nor  assist,  pur-
posely condemned  to  some  idle  task- work  or  equally
unmeaning  idlertess  in  a  purposeless  world,  that
could  achieve  nothing  the  Infinite  might  not  have
achieved  without  our  sufferings  and  without  our
sorrows.  We  are  now  ourselves  the  subjects  of  the
world's  redemption  ;  we  can.  ourselves  assist  in  our
own  salvation ;  we  can  ourselves  co-operate  with
God  in  hastening  the  achievement  of  the  world-
process,  co-operate  in  the  sweet  assurance  that  no
effort  will  be  rejected  as  too  petty  or  too  vain,  that
no  struggle  will  lack  divine  support.  It  is  beyond
the  scope  of  an  essay  like  this  to  draw  out  in  detail
the  practical  consequences  of  theoretic  principles,
and  to  proceed  to  the  exhortations  of  practical  re-
ligion, but  it  is  evident  that  it  would  be  difficult
indeed  to  imagine  a  creed  more  apt  than  this  to
fortify  the  best  elements  in  the  human  soul,  or  to
appeal  more  strongly  to  all  the  higher  instincts  of
our  nature.

§  29.  But  perhaps  it  may  be  asked,  if  God  is  not
identical  with  Nature,  and  if  the  interacting  Many
are  the  ultimate  nature  of  things,  why  need  we  go
beyond  the  phenomenal  Many  at  all,  and  why  com-
plicate our  scheme  of  things  by  a  reference  to  a
transcendent  God  and  ultimate  realities  ?  Granted
that  the  sum  of  things  cannot  fitly  be  called  God,
why  do  we  require  a  God  besides  ?  Why  should
our  Pluralism  be  theistic  ?  Should  we  not  do  just
as  well  by  regarding  the  world  as  it  appears  as  the
world  of  ultimate  reality,  composed  of  interacting
material  beings,  which  can  admit  of  no  God  that  is
not  like  it  phenomenal .''

R.ofS.  B B


370  MAN AND GOD.

The  raising  of  this  question  is  in  reality  merely
one  form  of  asking  why  we  need  to  go  behind  the
phenomenal.  And  the  ultimate  answer  to  it  is  that
all  science  and  all  knowledge,  every  intelligible  view
of  life,  must  go  behind  the  phenomenal.  Even  the
most  materialistic  and  unspeculative  science  must  do
it  to  some  extent,  must  form  theories  of  the  unseen
and  imperceptible,  in  order  to  account  for  appear-
ances {cp.  ch.  iii.  §  3).  And  so  the  philosophic  ground
for  the  existence  of  a  God  is  of  a  precisely  similar
character  to  the  scientific  ground  for  assuming  the
existence  of  atoms  or  undiscovered  planets.  It  is
an  inference  to  account  for  the  actions  of  the  appa-
rent :  we  infer  the  existence  of  the  unseen  reality
God,  just  as  the  astronomer  inferred  the  existence
of  the  unknown  planet  Neptune  from  the  motions
of  the  known  planet  Uranus.  We  infer  it  because
there  is  no  other  reasonable  way  of  accounting  for
the  motions  of  the  world.

That  this  is  the  case  will  easily  appear,  if  we
consider  what  are  the  characteristics  of  the  world
which  directly  necessitate  the  inference  to  the  exist-
ence of  a  God.

It  is  agreed,  in  the  first  place,  that  if  the  pheno-i-!
menal  world  is  ultimate,  the  individual  existences  in
it  are  alone  real,  and  that  it  is  a  superstition  to
hypostasize  their  interaction  as  "  Nature  "  or  "  the
All."  Nature  is  not  a  reality  superior  to  the  indi-
viduals and  capable  of  controlling  their  destinies,
but  simply  the  sum  total  of  their  interactions,  and
all  the  operations  of  nature  must  be  explained  by
the  capacities  of  the  known  individuals.  Hence  all
the  intelligence,  reason,  or  purpose  we  discover  in
the  world  must  be  conscious  intelligence,  in  some
or  other  of  its  real  existences. Even,  therefore,  if


THE WORLD-PROCESS GUIDED.i  BY'IN-TELLIGENCE-.- 371

we  could  think  such  things,  as.  unconscious  purpose
or  impersonal  reason,  even  if  all  canons  of  valid
thinking  did  not  forbid  us  thus  gratuitously  to
multiply  entities,  which  no-  experience  can  suggest,
there  would  be  no  roon:>  for  them  in  our  world.
Whatever  intelligence,  therefore,  is  found  to  be
active  in  the  world  must  be  due  to  the  action  of
some  real  being. .

But  we  do  find  in  the  world  manifold  traces  of  an
intelligent  purpose  which  is  not  that  of  any  known
intelligence. Intelligent  observation  of  the  course
of  events  strongly  suggests  that  there  is  "  a  Provi-
dence that  shapes  our  ends,  rough hew  them  how
we  will." And  even  strict  science  is  forced  to  re-
cognize this  in  the  Evolutioji.of  the  world. Here
we  have  all  things  tending persistently  and  con-  '
stantly  in  a  single  and  definite  .direction. This  ten-
dency of  things  goes  on  while  as  yet  no  one  had
discovered  it,  it  goes  on  although  no  one  consciously
aims  at  it,  nay,  in  spite  of  the  constant  opposition  of
a  large  portion  of  the  conscious  intelligence  of  the^
world. But  the  idea  that  this  constant  tendency  is
due  to  any  of  the  known  intelligences  of  the  world
refutes  itself  as  soon  as  it  is,  stated  ;  to  suppose  that
atoms  and  amoebas  could,  at  the  time  when  they
were  the  highest  individuals  in  the  world,  direct  its
process  towards  the  development  of  individuals  in
association  (ch.  viii.)  is  absurd. We  have,  therefore,
in  the  world-process  the  working  of  an  intelligence
which  not  only  guides  the  actions  of  the  unconscious
material  existences,  but  overrules  those  of  the  con-
scious  intelligences. The only  possible inference
from  the  fact  of  the  constant  and  definite  tendency
of  the  world-process  is  that  it  is  purposed  by  the
intelligence  of  a  real  being,  of  a  God,  who,  though


372  MAN AND GOD.

not  seen,  <is  yet  known  by  His  action  on  the  pheno-
menal woFld.  And  when  it  becomes  possible  to
formulate  the  tendency  of  the  world's  Evolution  in
terms  which  appeal  to  our  own  intelligence,  this
inference  as  to  the  existence  of  Ged  becomes  as
certain  as  any  of  our  inferences  can  be.

And  a  similar  concl.usien  follows  from  the  elimin-
ation of  evil  and  the  contemplation  of  the  moral
aspects  of  the  world-process.  If  we  admit — and
unless  we  are  pessimists  we  must  admit — that  Good
is  gradually  prevailing  over  Evil,  that  the  world-
process  tends  towards  harmony,  we  must  admit  also
that  this  improvement  is  neither  'inherent  in  the  con-
stitution of  things  nor  yet  due  to  the  -efforts  of  the
known  existences.  It  is  not  inherent  in  the  consti-
tution of  things,  for  the  present  condition  of  the
world  sufficiently  shows  that  in  itself  that  constitu-
tion is  perfectly  compatible  with  the  existence  of
disorder,  conflict,  and  Evil,  that  the  existence  of
the  world  is  just  as  possible  with  a  discordant  as
with  a  harmonious  interaction  of  its  parts.  The
constitution  of  things  is  equally  consistent  with  a
good  and  with  a  bad  world,  and  hence  cannot  be
regarded  as  the  cause  of  the  world's  improvements, ;
Nor  can  we  ascribe  it  to  the  efforts  of  the  known
existences,  in  face  of  their  ignarance  of  the  good,
and  their  frequent  and  lamentable  failures  to  dis-
cover the  conduct  which  really  benefits  them.  The
progress,  therefore,  of  the  world  directly  points  to
God  as  its  author.

Thus  a  personal  and  finite,  but  non-phenomenal,
God  is  the  only  possible  cause  that  can  account  for
the  existence  and  character  of  the  world-process,
and  the  belief  in  God's  existence  is  intimately  bound
up  with  the  belief  in  the  reality  of  the  world-process.


GOD REVEALED IN THE WORLD-PROCESS. 373,

Hence  the  method  also  of  our  proof  of  God's.exist-
ence  stands  in  the  sharpest  contrast  with,  that  of
Pantheism. It  is  not  based  on  a  supposed  necessity
of  hypostasizing  the  abstract  formula  of  a  logical
unity  of  the  universe,  a  unity  indifferent  to  every
content  and  intrinsically  empty. It  does  not  yield  a
God  who  is  equally,  implied  in  every  sort  of  world,
without  reference  to  its  nature  and  its  character,  a
God  indifferent  to  the  course  of  things,  and  without
influence  upon  it,  a  God  unknowable  and  unprov-
able. On  the  contrary;  it  proves His  existence  in
the  only  way  in  which  it.  has  been  evident,  since
Kant,  that  it  could  be  proved  (ch.  ii.  §  19),  viz.,  not
a  priori,  from  the  consideration  of  a  world  as  such,
or  of  an  abstract  totality  of  reality,  buLa  posteriori.
from  the  particular  nature  of  this  particular  world  of
ours. And  being  an  inference  from  real  data  it  will
permit  the  proof  of  something  beyond. mere  exist-
ence {cp.  ch.  ii.  §  3). The  character  and  nature  of
God  and  of  His  purpose  may  be  obscured  in  the
gloom  of  our  ignorance  and  degradation,  but  they
are  not  intrinsically  unknowable. And  the  divine
education  of  the  human  race  lies  just  in  this,  that  in
studying  the  nature  and  history  of  our  world,  we  are
.spelling  out  the  elements  of  God's  revelation  to.men.
§  30. It  will  be  necessary  to  touch  upon  one„more
objection  to  the  principles  laid  down  in  the  preced-
ing sections,  not because  it  is  very  important  in
itself,  but  because  it  contains  a  certain  amount  of
truth. The  question  may  be  asked,  how  do'es^  this
view  assure  us  that  God  is  one  and  not  many  ? In
answer  it  would  certainly  have  to  be  admitted  that
the  unity  of  the  divine  person  was  not  a  matter  of
philosophic  principle. If  there  are  other  reasons
for  holding  that  God  is  three,  our  theory  offerano


"374  -MASI AND GOD.

obstacle.  Fof  'We  cannot  infer  from  the  unity  of
the  world's  plan  and  working  anything  more  than
unanimity  or  harmonious  co-operation  in  its  cause.
But  if  the  world-process  displays,  as  it  surely  does,
perfect  unity  alike  in  its  conception  and  its  execu-
tion, there  can  certainly  be  no  philosophic  reason
either  for  assuming  a  plurality  of  guiding  intelli-
gences. Still  less  would  our  experience  of  combined
action  in  ^our  world  warrant  such  a  hasty  belief  in
its  efficiency  as  would  justify  us  in  substituting  a
heavenly  democracy  for  the  monarchical  rule  of  a
single  God.  And  so  it  will  doubtless  appear  prefer-
able to  most  minds  to  retain  the  unity  of  the  God-
head, to  which  their  feelings  have  grown  accustomed,
in  a  case  where  the  assumption  of  plurality  could
not  .possibly  serve  any  practical  purpose.  What  is
alone  important  is  that  the  conception  of  the  Deity-
sketched  in  this  chapter  should  not  be  thought  to
afford  any  support  to  polytheism,  with  its  discordant
interferences  and  jealous  animosities  of  conflict-
ing deities ;  beyond  that  it  is  needless  to  dogmatize
prematurely  upon  a  subject  which  possesses  neither
theoretic  nor  practical  importance.

§  31.  We  have  completed  the  second  great  stage
of  our  journey  by  the  investigation  of  man's  relations
to  his  cause,  and  of  the  whence  of  life.  We  have  also
traced  the  nature  and  origin  of  his  present  environ-
ment, and  discovered  that  we  are  spiritual  beings
living  in  a  spiritual  universe ;  but  the  final  question
of  the  "  whither  ?  "  of  life  yet  remains  to  be  solved  in
accordance  with  the  results  already  attained,  before
we  can  formulate  a  complete  answer  to  the  Riddle
of  the  Sphinx.


CHAPTER XI.

IMMORTALITY.

§  I.  At  length  we  have  come  to  the  last  of  the
great  questions  of  life,  viz.,  that  of  our  Future.  And
in  a  way  this  is  the  most  important  of  all  questions.
For  the  Past  is  irrevocable,  the  Present  more  or  less
calculable  and  provided  for,  but  the  whither  of  man
is  a  mystery  which  each  one  of  us  will  have  to  solve
in  his  own  proper  person.  Death  must  be  experi-
enced by  all,  and  experienced  alone,  and  may  have
to  be  experienced  at  any  moment.  It  requires,
therefore,  unusual  strength  of  soul  or  recklessness
to  ignore  this  ever-present  problem  of  our  future.
Hence  the  question,  of  how  to  live  in  order  to  die
well,  has  always  seemed  a  question  of  primary  im-
portance to  all  who  had  any  care  of  their  future.

And  yet  mankind  has  always  displayed  a  curious
dread  of  really  coming  to  close  quarters  with
this  question.  It  has  always  been  hedged  round
with  unreasoning  awe  and  vague  obscurities  of
mystic  language.  Whether  it  was  believed  that
life  continued  or  passed  away,  both  parties  have
always  shrunk  from  saying  so  in  plain  words,  and
treating  their  beliefs  as  facts.  To  this  day  the
question  of  our  future  life  or  annihilation  has  re-
mained a  subject  for  violent  prejudices  and  fierce
animosities,  for  insensate  hopes  and  fears,  for  de-
clamations and  denunciations,  for  confident  asser-


376  IMMORTALITY^-

tions  on  either  side  of  meaningless  or  ambiguous
sophisms — for  anything,  in  fact,  rather  than  for  calm
consideration  and  dispassionate  inquiry.  Nothing,
indeed,  presents  a  more  curious  study  in  human
psychology  than  the  reckless  violence  with  which
both  the  adherents  and  the  opponents  of  traditional
doctrines  concerning  man's  future  have  resented  any
attempts  to  approach  the  subject  in  the  serious
spirit  of  scientific  philosophy.  In  times  now  happily
past  orthodoxy  has  been  equally  severe  upon  tho^e
who  believed  too  little  and  too  much,  and  burnt  all
misbelievers,  whether  atheists  or  magicians,  at  the
same  stake.  In  the  future  it  seems  possible  that
the  lunatic  asylums  will  be  charged  with  the  function
of  preventing  inquiry  into  this  question.  But  just
at  present  the  conflicting  orthodoxies  of  science  and
religion  are,  by  a  rare  felicity  of  the  times,  so  nearly
balanced  that  a  philosophical  investigation  seems
comparatively  safe.  And  the  first  point  such  an
investigation  would  have  to  consider  is  the  reason
for  such  an  irrational  attitude  of  men.  Half  the
world  profess  to  believe  in  a  highly  sensational  and
stimulating  account  of  their  future  life.  But  its
effect  upon  their  conduct  is  disproportionately  small.
Insanity  due  to  the  fear  of  Hell  contributes  only  a
comparatively  small  quota  to  our  madhouses.  The
hope  of  Heaven  does  not  iaspire  to  superhuman
virtue.  Of  most  cultivated  Christians  it  may  be
safely  said  that  their  belief  in  Hell  is  practically  a
very  faint  and  unimportant  factor  in  their  life,  and
that  in  Heaven  fainter  still.  And  they  shrink  with
genuine  reluctance,  not  fully  accounted  for  by  their
latent  consciousness  of  the  difificulties  of  their  beliefs,
from  all  reasoning  calculated  to  make  them  realize
them.


IS IT DESIRED?  377

The  other  half  »f  the  world  is  convinced  that  a
future  life  is  unprovable,  if  not  impossible,  and  often
prepared  to  argue  this  thesis  at  length.  But  it  is
even  more  reluctant  to  bring  its  a  priori  arguments
to  the  test  of  practical  experiment.  And  why  should
both  parties  agree  in  objecting  to  treat  the  subject
like  any  other,  as  a  question  of  supreme  practical
interest,  to  be  settled  by  reasoning  aad  investig-
ation ?  Such  conduct  naturally  raises  doubts  about
the  sincerity  of  men's  professions  of  interest  in  the
subject.  In  fact,  it  would  not,  in  spite  of  the  appa-
rent paradox,  perhaps  be  too  much  to  say  that  a
final  establishment  of  the  reality  <af  a  future  life
would  prove  highly  inconvenient  to  all  parties,  and
this  inconvenience  is  the  real  reason  of  men's  dislike
to  its  investigation.  The  generality  of  men  do  not
care  enough  about  their  future  to  welcome  a  belief
which  would  make  it  really  necessary  to  look  far
ahead,  and  they  do  not  want  to  care  about  it.^  So
it  is  extremely  convenient  to  leave  the  future  life  in
the  realm  of  vague  speculation,  to  be  believed  when
desired,  and  to  be  disregarded  when  belief  would
suggest  unpleasant  reflections,  in  order  to  avoid
regarding  it  as  a  fact  to  be  steadily  and  consistently
kept  in  sight.  For  a  fact  is  something  which  must
be  faced,  even  though  it  may  be  very  impleasant  to
do  so,  but  an  opinion  may  be  manipulated  so  as  to
suit  the  exigencies  of  the  occasion.

§  2. But  this  disregard  of  the  future  is  often  not
'  only  admitted  but  defended,  on  the  ground  that  over

^  It  is  gratifying  to  find  this  view  as  to  the  comparative  rarity
of  real  interest  in  this  question,  supported  by  the  high  authority
of  Mr.  F.  W.  H.  Myers,  whose  unrivalled  experience  has  caused
him  to  come  to  substantially  the  same  conclusions  about  the  real
feelings  of  men.  (Cp.  Proceedings  of  the  Psychical  Sac,  pt.  xvi.
P-  339-)


S7^  IMMORTALITY —

anxiety  about  the  future  is  by  no  means  to  be  re-
commended, and  that  a  belief  in  another  life  is  apt
to  lead  to  a  neglect  of  this.  Now,  though  it  must
be  admitted  that  such  excess  of  concern  is  possible,
it  is  by  no  means  probable  that  it  will  ever  constitute
a  serious  danger.  The  immediate  pressure  of  the
present  makes  such  overpowering  demands  upon  our
attention  that  there  is  no  real  ground  for  the  fear
that  men  can  ever  to  any  extent  become  oblivious
of  the  importance  of  this  world,  and  least  of  all  will
they  do  so  if  they  have  rationally  investigated  the
question  of  a  future  life.  It  is  the  fancy  eschato-
logies  which  are  uncritically  accepted  that  do  the
mischief,  and  no  rational  doctrine  which  regards  the
future  life  as  a  natural  continuation  of  the  present
is  in  the  least  likely  to  lead  to  an  antagonism  between
the  claims  of  the  present  and  the  future,  different  in
kind  or  much  greater  in  degree  than  that  which
already  exists  between  the  different  sections  of  our
life  on  earth  {cp.  ch.  iv.  §  7).

And  sd,  although  it  is  not  possible  that  the  ques-
tion of  a  future  life  should  ever  be  an  absorbing  and
permanent  occupation  of  the  mind  in  the  heyday  of
youth  and  in  the  vigour  of  life,  while  death  seems  a
distant  cloud  on  the  horizon  of  reality,  it  must  yet
be  regarded  as  a  salutary  and  appropriate  occup-
ation in  the  leisure  of  declining  years.  For  it  is  the
only  interest  which  can  prevent  the  degeneration  of
the  moral  and  intellectual  nature  in  old  age.  With-
out it,  when  the  active  work  of  life  is  done,  men  be-
come slothful.  If  they  have  nothing  further  to  look
forward  to,  there  is  no  reason  for  employing  theh:
activities:  the  game  is  played  out  and  they  lag
superfluous  on  the  stage ;  the  battle  of  life  is  over  as
far  as  they  are  concerned,  and  they  must  leave  its


IS IT DESIRABLE  ?  379

conduct  to  more  vigorous  hands.  They  have  be-
come useless  and  intrinsically  unimportant,  unprofit-
able burdens  of  the  ground  at  the  best,  or  obstacles
that  obstruct  the  path  of  fitter  men.  And  this  feel-
ing is  both  bitter  and  embittering ;  they  relax  too
soon  their  eBTorts  to  preserve  their  powers  of  mind,
and  cling  with  demoralizing  tenacity  to  whatever
fragments  of  their  former  glories  they  can  lay  hold
of.  And  so  they  become  both  intellectually  torpid
and  morally  exacting,  and  frequently  cynical,  with  a
cynicism  which  has  lost  even  the  consciousness  of
the  ideals  it  controverts.

And  all  these  demoralizing  effects  of  a  disbelief  in
their  future  are,  it  should  be  observed,  quite  inde-
pendent of  the  emotional  stimuli  of  hopes  and  fears.
If  men  believed  in  a  future  life  from  which  they
neither  hoped  nor  feared  anything  sensational,  it
would  yet  be  a  most  salutary  belief.  For  it  would
provide,  old  age  with  an  aim,  and  redeem  it  from  the
undignified  futility  it  so  often  displays  at  present.
And  hence  it  would  be  of  the  greatest  service  not
only  to  the  individual  but  also  to  society,  as  tending
to  raise  its  moral  and  intellectual  tone.  Nothing
would  act  as  a  more  powerful  tonic  to  improve  the
whole  moral  and  spiritual  condition  of  mankind
than  a  belief  which  would  induce  men  to  realize
more  vividly  the  solemnity  of  the  issues  involved
in  human  life.

Thus  there  are  two  advantages,  at  the  very  least,
in  the  belief  in  a  future  life,  which  no  other  doctrine
can  offer;  the  motive  it  alone  supplies  for  continuing
the  activity  of  life  to  the  last,  and  the  sense  it  en-
genders that  life  is  not  a  fleeting,  senseless,  play  of
feverish  appetites,  to  be  hastily  glutted  with  whatso-
ever pleasures  each  passing  moment  can  afford,  but


380  IMMORTALITY  —

must  be  consecrated  to  higher  and  more  permanent
aims,  to  activities  which,  it  may  be,  will  enrich  us
with  a  serener  contentment  even  here,  and  certainly
■^Arill  prove  an  inexhaustible  source  of  abiding  bliss
hereafter.  And  these  advantages  are  a  sufificient
reason,  alike  on  personal  and  on  social  grounds,  for
inclining  favourably  towards  this  belief.  But  there
are  other  reasons,  no  less  forcible  and  more  obvious.

One  need  not  necessarily  be  violently  -enamoured
of  one's  own  life,  or  cherish  any  abject  desire  for
personal  continuance,  in  order  to  feel  that  if  the
chapter  of  life  is'  definitely  closed  by  death,  despair
is  the  end  of  all  its  glories.  For  to  assert  that
death  is  the  end  of  all  beings,  is  to  renounce  the
ideal  of  happiness  (ch.  iv.  §§  5-1,7),  to  admit  that
adaptation  is  impossible,  and  that  the  end  of  effort
must  be  failure.  And  it  is  to  poison  the  whole  of
life  with  this  bitter  consciousness.  And  further,  it
is  Anally  to  renounce  the  faith  in  the  rationality  of
things,  which  could  hardly' be  re-asserted  against  so
wanton  a  waste  of  energy  as  would  be  involved  in
the  destruction  of  characters  and  attainments  it  re-
quired so  much  patient  toil  and  effort  to  acquire.  A
good  and  wise  man  dies,  and  his  goodness  and  his
wisdom,  his  incalculable  powers  to  shape  the  course
of  things  for  good,  are  wasted  and  destroyed.  In
the  light  of  such  a  fact,  we  should  have  to  put  the
worst  construction  alike  upon  the  waste  and  the ;
parsimony  of  nature  elsewhere.  They  will  both  ap-
pear inexplicable  freaks  of  a  senseless  constitution
of  things.

Hence  we  must  reject  the  extremes  on  either
side ;  we  must  refuse,  not  only  to  be  terrified  |by
maddening  fears,  to  be  intoxicated  by  unwarranted
hopes, but also to  be  cajoled by  a  disingenuous


IS IT ESTABLISHED BY GHOSTS  ?  381

rhetoric,  which  would  persuade  us  of  the  superior
dignity  of  unqualified  negation.  But  if  we  preserve
an  attitude  of  critical  moderation,  there  is  little  fear
that  reason  will  so  far  play  us  false  as  to  commit  us
to  any  extravagant  or  unacceptable  conclusions.

§  3.  But  before  we  consider  what  reasons  may
be  urged  for  or  against  the  belief  in  immortality,
we  must  examine  with  what  reason  that  belief  is
sometimes  based  upon  facts  which  would  render  all
argument  superfluous  by  directly  establishing  the
existence  of  a  future  life.

It  is  one  of  the  chief  advantages  of  the  assertors
of  a  future  life  that  they  can  bring  forward  direct
evidence  in  its  favour,  whereas  the  doubts  of  their
opponents  must  be  inferential,  and  there  can  be
no  such  thing  as  direct  evidence  against  it.  The
ghost  of  Lord  Lyttelton,  in  the  famous  story,  might
admonish  his  friend  that  his  doubts  were  unfounded,
but  not  even  an  Irishman  could  return  to  us  with
the  assurance  that  there  was  no  future  life.  If,
therefore,  the  allegations  that  the  dead  do  return
are  worthy  of  belief,  if  we  can  regard  the  tales  of
ghosts  and  spirits  as  scientifically  adequate,  they
evidently  settle  the  question.

Nor  is  there  anything  intrinsically  absurd  or  im-
possible about  this  conception,  or  any  reason  to
reject  such  stories  because  of  our  preconceived
notions,  or  on  the  ground  of  a  misuse  of  the  word
supernatural.  It  is  useless  to  assert  that  the  super-
natural is  impossible,  for  if  these  stories,  are  true,
the  facts  to  which  they  testify  ipso  facto  cease  to  be
supernatural.  The  inference  to  be  drawn  from  these
phenomena  would  simply  be  that  we  were  mistaken
in  thinking  that  the  change  of  death  produced  an
absolute  severance  between  us  and  the  dead,  and


382  IMMORTALITY.

that  there  was  no  connection  at  all  between  our
world  and  theirs.  But  if  such  intercourse  is  a  fact,
it  is  also  possible  and  natural,  and  the  laws  and
conditions  thereof  would  be  as  capable  of  being
determined  as  anything  else.  And  it  would  surely
be  the  most  ridiculous  of  prejudices,  or  the  most
indefensible  of  lingering  superstitions,  to  refuse  to
investigate  scientifically  so  interesting  a  subject,  on
the  ground  that  the  evidence  did  not  accord  with
our  preconceptions  as  to  what  was  appropriate  and
permissible  conduct  for  the  departed.  What  shall
be  said  of  the  mental  condition  of  those  who  assure
us  with  one  breath  that  they  do  not  believe  in  the
existence  of  spirits,  but  are  quite  sure  that  spiritism
is  false  because  spirits  would  never  behave  in  the
manner  represented  ?

And  yet  this  evidence,  probably  the  vastest  body
of  unsystematized  testimony  in  the  world,  varying
in  value  from  the  merest  hearsay  to  the  carefully
recorded  experience  of  the  ablest  and  most  compe-
tent men,  is  persistently  put  beyond  the  pale  of
science,  and  the  isolated  attempts  to  investigate  it
systematically  have  met  with  nothing  but  discourage-
ment from  the  general  public.  The  experience,  e.g.,
of  the  Society  for  Psychical  Research  would  afford  a
most  curious  commentary  on  the  sincerity  of  men's
supposed  interest  in  a  future  life.  Surely,  if  men
had  cared  to  have  the  question  settled,  they  would
not  have  allowed  these  phenomena  to  remain  in
doubt  and  perplexity  from  age  to  age,  as  a  standing
challenge  to  science  and  a  standing  reflection  upon
their  desire  for  truth.  We  spend  thousands  of
pounds  on  discovering  the  colour  of  the  mud  at  the
bottom  of  the  sea,  and  do  not  grudge  even  the  lives
of  brave  men  in  exploring  the  North  Pole — although


WHV MERE FACTS ARE INSUFFICIENT.  383

there  is  obviously  not  the  remotest  prospect  of  es-
tablishing a  trade  in  Manchester  calicos  with  the
Eskimos  and  polar  bears — but  we  would  not  pay  a
penny,  nor  sacrifice  the  silliest  scruple  of  a  selfish
reticence,  to  determine  whether  it  is  true  that  our
dead  do  not  pass  wholly  beyond  our  ken.  And  yet,
with  a  tithe  of  the  attention  and  study  that  has
often  been  devoted  to  the  most  trivial  and  unworthy
objects,  the  real  nature  of  these  "  psychical "  phen-
omena might  have  been  explored — had  it  suited
men  to  arrive  at  certainty  on  the  subject.

But  in  any  case  our  course  is  clear  :  as  men  of
science  we  may  deplore  the  apathy  of  mankind,  as
philosophers  we  must  recognize  that  the  present  con-
dition of  the  subject  prevents  us  from  treating  these
phenomena  as  admitted  facts,  on  which  it  is  possible
to  base  inferences.

And  from  a  philosophic  point  of  view  they  possess
in  any  case  two  defects.  The  first  is  that  they  are
presented  to  us  as  mere  facts.  Now  facts,  we  are
apt  to  think,  are  mighty  things,  and  able  to  force
their  way  into  all  minds  by  sheer  weight.  But
nothing  could  be  more  mistaken :  a  mere  fact  is  a
very  feeble  thing,  and  the  minds  of  most  men  are
fortresses  which  cannot  be  captured  by  a  single
assault,  fortresses  impenetrable  to  the  most  obvious
fact,  unless  it  can  open  up.  a  correspondence  with
some  of  the  prejudices  within,  and  enter  by  a  gate
which  their  treasonable  support  betrays  to  the  be-
sieger. Or,  to  drop  metaphor,  the  mind  will  either
not  receive,  or  gradually  eject  and  obliterate  elements
which  it  cannot  assimilate,  which  it  cannot  harmonize
with  the  rest  of  the  mental  furniture,  be  they  facts
ten  times  over,  and  the  occupation  of  the  mind  by
facts  is  extremely  precarious  until  reasons  for  them


3^4  IMMORTALITY.

have  been  given  which  will  reconcile  them  with  the
other  constituents  of  the  mind.  Now  the  facts
alleged  are  of  a  very  startling  character  and  run
sharply  counter  to  many  old-established  prejudices
of  most  men,  who  are  simply  upset  by  them,  shocked
and  perplexed,  but  quite  unable  to  believe  "  facts  "
which  do  not  seem  to  fit  into  any  reasonable  scheme
of  things.  Hence  the  assertion  of  facts  does  not  dis-
pense with  the  necessity  of  giving  reasons.

And  secondly,  the  facts  are  not  in  themselves
adequate  :  they  prove  a:  future  life^  indeed,  but  not
immortality.-

§  4.  It  would  be  impossible,  therefore,  to  avoid
making  the  question  of  immortality  one  of  reasoning,
even  if  the  reasoning  should  be  as  insufficient  as
that  of  the  ordinary  arguments  on  either  side.  And
certainly  we  shall  soon  discover  that  most  of  these
arguments  are  worthy  of  their  origins  in  the  pre-
judices of  men,  i.e.,  inconclusive  and  of  little  value.
We  must  not  expect  then  to  find  that  the  argu-
ments in  favour  of  a  future  life,  whether  based  on
authority  or  on  reason,  are  either  conclusive  or
secure.

To  take,  first,  the  inost  popular  of  these  argu-
ments, that  which  claims  to  base  itself  on  the
Christian  religion. We  shall  find  that  though  the

1  Hence  it  has  been  suggested  by  several  authors  that  ghosts
are  a  sort  of  semi-material  "  shells,"  containing  a  few  relics  of  the
intelligence  of  the  living,  which  gradually  decay  and  fade  away.
And  there  is  something  in  their  recorded  conduct  which  justifies
such  theories.  But  of  course  we  have  no  business  as  yet  to  dog-
matize in  any  way  upon  the  subject,  and  the  futility  of  ghosts,
Which  is  certainly  sometimes  very  marked,  is  explicable  in  many
ways,  e.g.,  if  we  suppose  that  their  appearance  in  our  world  in-
volves what  to  them  also  are  abnormal  conditions,  or  that  they
are  "  dead  men's  dreams,"  i.e.,  effects  on  our  minds  produced  in
states  analogous  to  dreamiiig  in  our  world.


THE CHRISTIAN ESCHATOLOGY.  385

traditions  of  the  Cliristian  Church  apparently  sup-
port the  doctrine  of  a  future  life,  its  assurances  are
anything  but  explicit,  and  we  must  be  easy  to
satisfy  if  we  are  content  to  accept  them  as  conclu-
sive. For  it  would  be  difficult  to  devise  any  eschato-
logy  more  obscure,  fragmentary  and  ambiguous  than
that  of  the  traditional  religion,  or  one  which  so
ingeniously  combines  the  defects  of  raising  insoluble
difficulties,  and  of  yet  leaving  us  without  answer
upon  the  most  critical  points.

The  end  and  the  origin  of  the  soul  are  alike
shrouded  in  perplexities  which  religious  dogma
makes  no  serious  attempt  to  dispel.  For  instance,
what  happens  to  the  soul  after  death  ?  Does  it
sleep  or  is  it  judged  .''  If  it  sleeps, — and  to  judge
from  the  inscriptions  of  our  graveyards  this  may
claim  to  be  the  accepted  view, — is  not  this  an  admis-
sion of  the  possibility  of  its  annihilation  at  least  for  a
season  ?  And  if  for  a  time,  why  not  for  ever  .''  Or
if  it  is  judged,  what  are  the  relations  of  this  prelim-
inary judgment  to  the  Last  Judgment  ?

Or,  again,  whence  does  the  soul  come  ?  Does  it
exist  before  the  body,  is  it  derived  from  the  souls  or
the  bodies  of  its  parents,  or  created  ad  hoc  by  the
Deity }  Is  Pre- existence,  Traducianism,  or  Cre-
ationism  the  orthodox  doctrine  ?  The  first  theory,
although  we  shall  see  that  it  is  the  only  one  on
which  any  rational  eschatology  can  be  or  has  been
based,  is  difficult,  and  has  not  been  very  prominent
in  religious  thought,  but  the  other  two  are  alike  im-
possible and  offensive.  And  it  would  be  difficult  to
decide  which  supposition  was  more  offensive,  whether
that  the  manufacture  of  immortal  spirits  should  be
a  privilege  directly  delegated  to  the  chance  passions
of  a  male  and  a  female,  or  that  they  should  have

R.ofS.  c c


o


86  IMMORTALITY.


the  power  at  pleasure  to  call  forth  the  creative
energy  of  God.  And  however  well  the  former
theory  may  have  agreed  with  the  speculative  views
of  the  early  Church,  it  would  be  well-nigh  impos-
sible now-a-days  to  distinguish  it  from  materialism.
And  if  the  progress  of  science  has  rendered  Tra-
ducianism  untenable,  has  not  the  progress  of  moral
insight  done  the  same  for  Creationism  ?  For  it
surely  cannot  explain  the  different  dispositions  and
faculties  of  different  souls  by  the  varying  excellence
of  the  Creator's  work,  nor  make  the  creation  of
souls  with  unequal  endowments  compatible  with
divine  justice,  even  if  it  be  supposed  that  the  natur-
ally inferior  souls  are  judged  by  a  more  lenient
standard.  For  how  can  a  soul  that  has  led  the
best  life  possible  under  very  unfavourable  conditions,
has  been,  e.g.,  a  good  Fuegian,  be  adjudged  worthy
of  heaven  ?  If  our  life  on  earth  has  any  educational
value  as  a  preparation  for  Heaven,  the  Fuegian  would
be  utterly  unfitted  for  any  heavenly  life,  which  could
only  make  him  supremely  miserable;  if  it  has  not,  he
(and  every  one  else)  would  have  to  be  fitted  for  it
by  a  miraculous  fiat  of  the  Deity.  But  in  this  case,
what  is  the  use  of  earth-life,  and  why  should  not
everybody  be  at  once  transmuted  into  an  angel  or
devil,  according  as  it  pleased  God  to  predestinate
him  ?  Does  it  convey  an  ennobling  view  of  God's
action  to  call  in  the  aid  of  needless  miracle  in  order
to  make  good  the  original  injustice  of  an  unjustifiable
inequality,  and  is  it  well  to  save  the  divine  justice
at  the  expense  of  the  spiritual  value  of  life  ?

From  these  and  similar  difficulties  it  will  be  seen
that  it  is  not  merely  the  mania  for  making  "  conces-
sions to  science  "  that  has  more  than  once  prompted
"  liberal "  divines  tp  undertake  the  proof  that  a  belief


THE ARGUMEtfT FROM MORAL NECESSITV. 387

in  a  future  life  was  not  an  essential  part  of  Cliristian-
ity.  And,  indeed,  they  may  be  admitted  to  have
established  that  there  is  no  logical  necess^y  (or  this
doctrine  within  the  system  of  the  traditional  religion,
nor  even  any  explicit  afifirmation  of  the  continuance
of  all  individuals.  On  the  contrary,  the  Scriptures
contain  many  passages  which  implicitlyand  explicitly
deny  it,  and  compare  man  to  "  the  beasts,  that  perish."
And  the  positive  assertions  of  Scripture  are  all  in-
conclusive. Thus,  e.g.,  no  conclusioni  evidently  can
be  drawn  from  the  resurrection  of  Christ.  For  it
is  impossible  to  argue  from  the  bodily  resurrection
of  a  divine  being  to  the  continuance  of  the  soul  of
ordinary  men.  If  there  Is  one  thing  certain,  it  is  that
our  future  life  can  not  be  similar  to  the  resurrection
and  ascension  into  a  super- terrestrial  sphere  of  the
terrestrial  body  of  Christ.  Whatever  else  we  do
when  we  die,  we  leave  our  bodies  in  our  sepulchres.
Nor  need  the  specific  promises  of  Heaven  or  Hell
made  to  individuals  in  special  cases  be  held  to  estab-
lish a  universal  rule.

Thus  it  appears  that  the  traditional  religion  not
only  does  not  give  us  any  serviceable  information
concerning  any  future  life,  but  does  not  even  secure
us  our  fancied  heritage  of  Heaven  or  of  Hell.  And
once  this  is  realized,  it  surely  becomes  evident  that
it  cannot  be  accepted  in.  any  sense  as  conclusive  of
the  matter  under  discussion.

§  5.  We  may  consider  next  two  closely  allied
grounds  for  the  belief  in  a  future  life,  viz.,  its  asser-
tion on  the  ground  of  its  practical  or  moral  necessity,
or  of  its  being  a  postulate  of  feeling.  These  are
probably  the  favourite  bases  for  the  hope  of  immort-
ality among  those  who  cherish  it,  but  neither  of
them  is  conclusive.


388  IMMORTALTl'y.

It  does  indeed  at  first  sound  a  persuasive  and  at-
tractive line  of  argument  to  say  that  there  can  be  no
retribution  of  good  and  evil  if  there  is  no  future  life,
and  that  the  belief  in  it  is  therefore  a  practical  neces-
sity, if  there  is  to  be  any  reason  or  justice  in  the
order  of  things.

But  what  if  the  constitution  of  things  admit  neither
of  reason  nor  of  justice,  and  hence  be  unable  to  recog-
nize any  such  moral  necessity  ?  What  if  things  be
inherently  irrational  and  perverse  ?  That  all  should
come  right  in  the  end  is  an  assumption  we  can  by  no
means  make  as  a  matter  of  course,  but  only  with  the
utmost  difficulty  (cp.  ch.  v.  §  2),  and  until  it  is  estab-
lished the  argument  from  moral  necessity  is  simply
arguing  in  a  circle.  And  even  when  it  is  admitted,
as  in  a  sense  we  have  admitted  it  (§  2,  s.f.),  it  can
never  be  admitted  as  an  independent  and  substan*
tive  argument.  It  must  always  result  from  a  general
view  of  the  world,  which  has  previously  established
its  rationality.  And  this  is  precisely  what  most  of
those  that  make  use  of  this  plea  neglect  to  do.  They
make  an  appeal  to  moral  necessity,  although  their
systems  have  left  no  room  for  morality,  for  the  dis-
tinction of  Good  and  Evil.  If,  as  is  the  case  in  the
pantheism  of  the  Infinite  (ch.x.  §  10),  or  in  the  atheism
of  Buddhism,  the  distinction  of  Good  and  Evil  is
merely  phenomenal  and  really  unmeaning,  we  have
no  business  to  expect  from  the  All  any  perceptioiif;
of  the  "  moral  necessity  "  of  bestowing  a  future  life
upon  us.

Again,  the  assertion  of  a  future  life  as  a  postulate
of  feeling  seems  to  require  something  like  univer-
sality in  the  feeling.  But  not  only  have  we  been
led  to  observe  phenomena  (§§  2  and  3),  which  throw
considerable  doubt  on  the  genuineness  of  the  alleged


AS A POSTULATE OF FEELING.  389

desire  for  immortality,  but  the  history  of  Hinduism
shows  that  under  certain  circumstances  the  prospect  of
the  continuation  of  life  may  actually  come  to  be  pretty
universally  regarded  with  horror  and  detestation,  and
that  the  loss  of  personal  existence  by  absorption  into
the  Absolute  may  become-  the  highest  object  of  de-
sire. Nor  can  human'  nature  be  utterly  different  in
the  West ;  and  if  among  us  the  desire  for  annihil-
ation is  less  prominent,  it  is  not  because  it  is  there  less
reasonable.  For  surely  it  must  indicate  a  deplorable
lack  either  of  imagination  or  of  real  belief,  if  men
who  admit  that  if  there  is  a  future  life  they  have
merited  the  severest  punishment — and  there  must
be  many  such — can  prefer  the.  torments  of  eternal
damnation  to  the  cessation  of  life.  Not,  only,  there-
fore, does  the  argument  from  feeling-  involve  the
somewhat  dubious  thesis  that  men  desire  continu-
ance at  any  price,  but  it  alSo  has-  first  to  posit  the
rationality  of  things.  The  constitution  of  things
must  not  be  so  wantonly  perverse  as  to  baulk  us  of
the  satisfaction  of  our  desires.

And  even  granting  this,. and  granting,  as  we  may
perhaps  do,  that  the  desire  for  immortality  has  played
an  important  and  beneficial  part  in  furthering  the
progress  of  the  world,  we  are  not  yet  assured  of  a
personal  immortality.  It  ma,y  be  that  our  feelings
are  not  destined  to  utter  disappointment  in  their
ultimate  form,  but  that  we  were  yet  mistaken, as.  to
the  real  drift  of  our  present  desires.  It  may  be  that
what  would  really  satisfy  them  will  be  attained,, and
yet  prove  something  considerably  different  from  what
we  now  desire.

Yet  we  may  concede  to  this  plea  a  certain  amount
of  truth.  It  would  truly  be  an  outrage  upon,  our
conviction  of  the  rationality  of  things  if  a  feeling  so


39©  IMMORTALITY.

deep-seated  should  prove  groundless,  if  a  feeling
which  has  played  so  important  and  increasingly  im-
portant a  part  in  the  Evolution  of  the  world  should
not  stand  in  some  essential  relation  to  the  aim  of
the  world-process.

§  6.  And  lastly,  all  arguments  drawn  from  the
simplicity  and  unity  of  the  soul  are  dangerous  and
fallacious  {ep.  dh.  ii.  §§  20,  21).  They  rest  upon  an
untenable  dualism  which  inevitably  raises  insoluble
questions  as  to  the  relations  of  body  and  soul,  and
•the  nature  of  the  bond  which  connects  them.  For
such  dualism  lends  countenance  to  the  idea  that  the
connection  between  body  and  soul  is  extraneous  and
,  mechanical," tha:t  each  might  exist  without  the  other,
and  yet.be  what  it  is.  It  is  incompatible  with  the
view  which  we  have  seen  to  be  the  only  intelligible
account  of  matter;  and  the  only  adequate  reply  to
materiahsm  (tp.  ch.  ix.  §§  26-28),  viz.,  that  matter
exists  only  for  spirits,  and  ihat  the  soul  is  the  soul  of  a
particular  body,  the  internal  reflex  of  a  spiritual  inter-i  ^
action  of  which  the  body  is  the  external  expressions^
And  as  in  this  dualism  the  body  is  the  obvious  and
visible  partner,  whereas  the  soul  is  neither,  there  is
an  easy  trarrsTtion  to  a  denial  of  the  invisible  soul
and  the  crassest  materialism.

And  tlie  dualism  of  body  and  soul  is  not  only
physically  incompetent  to  account  for  the  facts,  but
also,  to  a  hardly  less  degree,  psychologically.  The
conditioning  of  certain  activities  of  the  soul  by  the
body  is  so  manifest  and  irresistible,  that  a  distinction
between  the  "bodily  feelings,"  engendered  in  the
soul  by  its  connection  with  the  body,  and  its  own
proper  feelings,  must  be  made,  even  though  the
unity  and  simplicity  of  the  soul  is  thereby  sacrificed.
The  bodily  feelings  are  then  regarded  as  transitory.


THE DISTINCTION OK BODY AND SOUL.  39 1

and  .produce  the  distinction  between  the  mortal  and
immortal  "parts  of  the  soul,"  and  this  distinction
destroys  the  huriian  personality.  For,  with  any
strictness  and  consistency,  more  and  more  of  our
psychical  activities  must  be  extruded  from  the  im-
mortal part  of  the  soul,  until  it  is  suddenly  dis-
covered that  all  our  activities  are  indelibly  stamped
with  the  impress  of  mortality,  and  the  "  immortal
part "  is  left  as  an  empty  shell  from  which  all  con-
tent has  been  extracted,  which  has  no  feeling  that
any  one  ever  feels  or  is  capable  of  feeling,  and  is
nothing  the  continuance  of  which  human  feeling
can  possibly  desire.  And  then  the  last  step  is
inevitable :  as  all  the  attributes  which  express  the
individuality  of  the  soul  have  been  abstracted  from,
nothing  remains  to  distinguish  one  person's  soul
from  that  of  another ;  and  so  the  immortal  part  is
declared  to  be  the  Universal  Soul,  in  which  all  the
individual  souls  partake  and  which  is  one  and
the  same  for  all.  And  whereas  the  personal  indi-
vidual souls  are  transitory,  the  impersonal  Uni-
versal Soul  is  eternal  :  as  a  principle  of  metaphysics
the  unity  of  Soul  is  after  a  fashion  maintained,  even
while  personal  immortality  is  declared  a  delusion.
Such  is  the  doctrine  of  immortality  which  is  the
genuine  and  logical  outcome  of  every  dualistic  view
of  the  relations  of  body  and  soul,  and  the  history
of  philosophy  shows  that  it  may  be  read  into,  or
developed out of, every dualistic system.^ But

1  With  and  without  the  leave  of  their  authors.  Thus  Averroes
developed  his  impersonal  immortality  of  the  Active  Reason
(vovs  iroiijTtKos)  out  of  Aristotle's  dualism,  with,  it  must  be  con-
fessed, considerable  support  from  the  vagueness  and  obscurity  of
Aristotle's  language,  who  in  this  matter  was  unsuccessfully  trying
to  reconcile  conflictifig  views.  Similarly  Spinoza's  doctrine  does
but  draw  conclusions  implied  in  the  dualism  of  Descartes. And


392  IMMORTALITV.

whatever  its  philosophic  merits,  and  as  to  these
what  has  been  said  about  Pantheism  will  mutath
mutandis  be  applicable,  it  is  pretty  clear  that  the
eternity  of  Universal  Soul  is  not  what  men  bar-
gained for,  nor  anything  that  men  desire,  or  perhaps
ought  to  desire  ;  it  may  or  may  not  be  an  excellent
doctrine  philosophically,  but  it  will  hardly  do  duty
instead  of  a  personal  immortality.

§  7.  And  the  arguments  against  the  possibility  of
a  future  life  are  equally  inconclusive.

The  most  popular  of  these  is  also  the  most
worthless ;  for  the  different  forms  of  materialism  are
fatal  only  to  the  mistaken  dualism  which  regards
body  and  soul  as  separable  entities.  They  do  not
touch  the  idealist  view  which  refutes  the  materialist
inference  from  the  facts  by  the  reply  that  the  con-
nection of  "body"  and  "soul"  is  at  least, as  well
explained  by  regarding  Matter  as  a  phase  of  the
content  of  Spirit  as  vice  versa  (cp.  ch,  ix.  §  28).

§  8.  And  idealism  also  enables  las  to  see  the
inconclusiveness  of  the  phenomena  of  death,  which
form  a  silent  but  continual  protest  against  the  belief
in  a  future  life,  all  the  more  forcible  because  it  ap-


as  for  Plato,  the  founder  of  the  philosophic  doctrine  of  immortal-
ity, there  has  been  no  lack  of  commentators  ready  to  show  that
if  he  had  understood  his  principles  as  well  as  they  did,  he  could
never  have  asserted  a  doctrine, so  contrary  to  them  as  that  of  a
personal  immortality,  and  that  his  very  explicit  assertions  must
be  interpreted  as  figurative  expressions  designed  to  mislead  the
vulgar.  And  though  we  may  doubt  whether  deliberately  ambi-
guous language  upon  so  vital  an  issue  is  not  rather  a  modern
refinement  of  professional  philosophy,  alien  to  the  frankness  and
freedom  of  the  ancients,  it  must  yet  be  confessed  that,  owing  to
his  dualism,  Plato's  theory  of  the  soul,  with  its  mortal  and  im-
mortal parts,  does  not  admit  of  being  combined  into  a  consistent
and  tenable  whole.


THE SELF- EVIDENCE OF DEATH,  393

peals  to  some  of  our  deepest  feelings  at  times  when
our  powers  to  resist  the  impression  are  weakest.

He  would  indeed  be  a  strangely  constituted  man
who  did  not  in  the  presence  of  his  beloved  dead  feel
the  unanswerable  impressiveness  of  death,  the  utter
and  irretrievable  severance  which  its  agency  effected.
And  no  argument  or  consolation  can  get  over  the
fact  that  whether  or  not  the  dead  continue  to
exist,  they  are  lost  to  the  survivors,  and  that  the
ties  which  bound  them  to  their  earthly  environment
are  broken.  For  whatever  mysteries  the  future
may  hold  in  store,  no  future  meeting,  no  recognition
even,  can  resume  the  thread  or  restore  the  sweet-
,  ness  of  the  human  relations  death  has  severed,  or
assure  us  that  under  conditions  wholly  different
the  charm  of  human  relationships  will  be  renewed.

Though,  therefore,  we  must  thus  renounce  what-
ever hopes  we  may  have  based  on  impure  and  im-
perfect relations  rather  than  upon  the  highest  and
purest  of  spiritual sympathies,  we  must  yet  resist
the  impression  of  this  spurious  self-evidence  of  the
finality  of  death,  and  reassert  against  the  impulses
of  agonized  feeling  that  the  apparent  need  not  be
the  real. And  thus  we  may  come  to  realize  that
our  view  of  death  is  necessarily  imperfect  and  one-
sided. For  we  contemplate  it  only  from  the  point
of  view  of  the  survivors, never  from  that  of  the
dying. ,We  have  not  the  least  idea  of  what  death
means  to  those  that  die. To  tis  it  is  a  catastrophic
change,  whereby  a  complex  of  phenomenal  appear-
ances, which  we  call  the  body  of  the  dead,  ceases  to
suggest  to  us  the  presence  of  the  ulterior  existence
which  we  called  his  spirit. But  this  does  not  prove,
nor  even  tend  to  prove,  that  the  spirit  of  the  dead
has  ceased  to  exist It  merely  shows  that  he  has


394  IMMORTALITY.

ceased  to  form  part  of  our  little  world,  to  interact,
at  least  in  the  way  in  which  we  had  been  accus-
tomed, with  our  spirits.  But  it  is  at  least  as  probable
that  this  result  is  to  be  ascribed  to  his  having  been
promoted  or  removed,  as  to  his  having  been  de-
stroyed.

And  for.  such  suppositions  nature  offers  us  mani-
fold analogies.  It  would  be  a  change  similar  to
that  whereby  a  being  which  had  lived  the  earlier
stages  of  its  life  ia  the  water,  by  a  sudden  change  in
its  organization,  took  to  living  in  the  air,  and  this
we  know  is  the  case  wijth  many  insects.  Hence  it
was  not  by  a  mistaken  fancy  that  the  butterfly  was
at  all  times  regarded  as  the  type  of  immortality.
For  the  analogy  is  realty  fairiy  complete  :  in  both
cases  there  occurs  ani  apparently  catastrophic  change
in  the  mode  of  life,  a  breach  in  the  continuity  of
existence,  a  passing  inito  a  new  environment  with
very  different  functions  and  conditions.  And  in
both  cases  also  there-  is  left  behiaid  an  empty  shell
to  deride  the  fears  of  those  who  cannot  understand
that  identity  can  be  preserved  through  all  the
transformations,  of  metamorphosis.  To  judge  by
the  first  appearance  of  the  cast-off  slough,  we
should  deem  the  change,  of  which  we  see  the
symbol,  to  have  been  that  of  death,  and  yet  we  now
know  that  it  indicates  a  fresh  phase  of  life.  Is  it
then  so  bold  a  conjecture  that  by  the  time  when  we
know  as  much  of  the  spiritual  aspects  of  existence
as  we  now  do  of  the  physical,  the  dead  body  may
seem  a  shell  as  empty  as  the  chrysalis  from  which
the  butterfly  has  flown,  and  as  sure  a  token  of  re-
lease into  a  wider  sphere  of  life  ?

But,  it  may  be  urged,  is  there  not  the  great  dif-
ficulty that  the  chrysalis  is  empty,  while  the  organiz-


IS DEATH BUT CHANGE?  395

ation  of  the  dead  body  remains  intact,  and  that  we
can  trace  the  development  of  the  butterfly  in  the
chrysalis,  while  we  cannot  see  how  the  spirit  is  pre-
pared for  its  new  life,  as  its  old  body  gets  worn  out
with  age  :  the  change  in  the  one  case  only  seems
eastastrophic,  in  the  other  it  really  is.

Such  objections  owe  their  undeniable  plausibility
to  the  deficiencies  of  our  knowledge  and  the  grosi^-
ness  of  our  perceptions.  But  for  these  there  might
be!  some  hope  of  our  understanding  that  from  a
spiritual  point  of  view  the  dead  body  is  really  ji^st
as  empty  as  the  chrysalis,,  a  meaningless  mass  of
machinery,  from  which,  the  motive  force  has  been
withdrawn ;  but  as  its  emptiness  is  spiritual,  and  not
visible  and  palpable,  we  fail  to  see  the  parallelism.

And  so  again  it  might  be,,  if  we  lived  more  wisely,
that  the  body  would  not  be  outworn  before  the
spirit  wearied  of  its  life  on  earth,  or  before  it  had
prepared  for  itself  a  spiritual  tenement,  with  which,
at  the  summons  of  the  angel  of  death,  it  would  soar
aloft  as  gladly  as  the  butterfly.

But  yet  again,  it  may  be  asked,  if  death  is  but
change,  why  should  the  complex  of  phenomena  we
call  the  body  be  left  behind  to  decay  and  to  pollute
a  world  from  which  the  spirit  has  departed  ?  But
what  would  such  critics  have  ?  Would  they  prefer
that  men  at  death  should  silently  vanish  away,  and
be  dissolved  into  air  like  ghosts  ?  Would  this  be  a
more  satisfactory  mode  of  effecting  one's  exit  ?  And
does  not,  after  alD,  the  objection  on  the  ground  of
the  decay  of  the  bbdy  rest  upon  a  misconception  ?
There  is  no  reason  why  the  body  should  not  be
preserved :  death,  as  we  now  know,  has  nothing  to
do  with  the  decay  of  the  body.  For  decay  is  a
phenomenon!  of  life,  not  of  death,  of  the  life  of  the


396  IMMORTALITY.

micro-organisms  that  live  upon  the  bodies  of  the
dead  And  is  there  not  a  certain  symboHc  fitness
in  the  persistence  for  a  season  of  the  body  in  the
phenomenal  world  in  which  the  spirit  worked,  and
which  its  action  will  affect  as  long  as  that  world
remains  ?  It  forms,  as  it  were,  a  symbol  of  a  spiritual
agency  whose  spiritual  development  has  taken  other
forms,  and  left  this  shell  behind  in  its  advance  to
higher  phases  of  existence.

There  is  no  reason,  therefore,  why  we  should  take
the  phenomenon  of  death  as  conclusive  of  the
matter,  or  regard  it  as  inconsistent  with  the  con-
ception of  a  spiritual  process  of  purification  by
means  of  the  gradations  of  existence.  For  if  such
be  the  essential  meaning  of  the  world-process,  it  is
evident  that  no  indefinite  stay  can  be  made  in  any
one  stage,  and  indeed  none  could  permanently  meet
the  spiritual  requirements.  It  is,  moreover,  pretty
obvious  in  our  case  that  long  life  is  by  no  means  an
unmixed  blessing :  for  by  an  intelligent  mind  the
lessons  of  life  are  soon  learnt,  and  while  the  social
environment  remains  what  it  is,  the  experience  of  a
protracted  life  is  apt  only  to  engender  a  conviction
that  all  is  humbug,  a  cynical  disbelief  in  all  ideals
and  the  possibility  of  realizing  them.

§  9.  Such  considerations  may  tend  to  counteract
the  overwhelming  impressiveness  of  the  fact  of
death,  but  they  only  demonstrate  the  possibility  of
a  future  life.  And  moreover,  though  death  makes
the  strongest  appeal  £0  our  feelings,  the  doctrine  of
a  future  life  involves  a  difficulty  far  more  serious
in  the  eyes  of  reason.  This  difficulty  arises  out  of
the  impossibility  of  fixing  the  point  at  which  im-
mortality begins,  either  in  the  beginning  of  the
individual's  life  of  in  that  of  the  race. It  seems  so


WANTED A GRADUATED IMMORTALITY.  397

Utterly  impossible  to  attribute  an  immortal,  or  indeed
any  sort  of  consciousness,  to  the  material  rudiments
of  our  individual  existence ;  and  the  modern  doctrine
of  the  descent  of  man  makes  it  almost  as  impossible
to  do  so  in  the  case  of  the  race. The  union  of  two
minute  particles  of  Matter  is  the  historical  origin,  at
all  events,  of  all  conscious  beings ;  and  at  what  point
in the  historical development can  we  introduce  a
transition  from  the  material  existence  of  the  germs,
which  exists  only  for  consciousness,  to  the  spiritual
existence  of  an  immortal  consciousness?^ Or  again,
if  all  living  beings  have  been  propagated  from  living
protoplasm,  and  if  man  is  but  the  highest  of  the
animals,  but  does  not  differ  from  them  in  kind,  how
can  we,  in  the  infinite  gradations  of  spiritual  evol-
ution, draw  a line anywhere  to  separate  men or
animals  who  possess  immortal  souls  from  those  that
do  not  ? It would seem that they  must all  be
treated  alike  ;  either  all  animals are immortal  or
none. And  yet,  while  some  might  welcome  a  be-
lief in  the  immortality  of  the  higher  animals,  e.g.  of
dogs,  how  could  any  one  admit  the  immortality  of
an  amoeba  ? And  even  if  our  generosity  rose  to
the absurd pitch of  admitting  it, how  could  we
carry  this  belief  into  practice  ?  how  should  we  discern
the' immortality  of  beings  which  possess  so  little  in-
dividuality ? Is  every  leaf  or  cell  of  a  tree,  and
every  segment  of  a  zoophyte— in  short,  every  part  of
an  organism  which  under  favourable  conditions  is
capable  of  independent  existence — an  immortal,  in-
dividual ? If  so,  can  we  multiply  immortal  souls  by
dividing  a  jelly-fish  ? Surely,  when  once  the  question
is  definitely  raised  that  we  must  be  just  as  immortal

1  Cp.  Mr.  F.  H.  Bradley 's,Z^^?V,  p.  466,  for  a  forcible and
frank  discussion  of  this  difficulty.


398  IMMORTALITV.

as  the  germs  and  protoplasms  from  which  we  sprang,
the  answer  our  reason  must  give  is  that  immortality
is  a  foolish  dream.

§  10.  It  is  to  be  feared  that  reflections  like
these  present  almost  insuperable  obstacles  to  the
belief  in  a  future  life  in  modern  minds.  But  if
they  can  be  answered,  their  very  difficulty  would
make  the  answer  the  more  satisfactory.  Yet  no  at-
tempt at  answering  the  difficulty  can  be  successful
which  does  not  realize  where  its  real  point  lies.
Its  essence  lies  in  the  fact  that  whereas  conscious-
ness and  the  conscious  life  of  spiritual  beings  is  a
matter  of  degree,  it  seems  impossible  to  admit
degrees  of  immortality.  It  seems  as  though  a  being
must  either  have  a  future  life  or  not,  must  either  be
immortal  or  perish  utterly.  But  if  the  lowest  passes
into  the  highest  forms  of  consciousness  by  a  continu-
ous development,  it  is  nowhere  possible  to  draw  a.
line  of  demarcation,  and  to  assert  the  immortality
of  man  without  admitting  that  of  the  amoeba.

To  assert  the  continuance  of  spiritual  beings,
therefore,  it  would  be  requisite  to  assert  gradations
of  immortality.  We  must  somehow  distinguish
between  the  case  of  the  embryo  and  the  adult,
between  the  highest  man  and  the  lowest  animal.
We  must,  in  short,  discover  degrees  in  a  spiritual
evolution  corresponding  to  the  degrees  of  the
physical  evolution.

§  II.  Now,  though  these  postulates  hiay  at  first
sight  appear  strange  and  impossible,  yet  if  we  dis-
card ancient  prejudices,  they  will  not  perhaps  prove
incapable  of  fulfilment  We  require,  in  the  first
place,  a  careful  analj'sis  of  the  conditions  on  which
a  future  life  depends.

To  have  a  real  meaning,  immortality  must  be  per-


SELF-IDENTITY DEPENDENT ON MEMORY. 399

sonal  immortality ;  i.e.,  it  must  involve  in  some  sort
the  persistence  of  the  "  I  "  which  in  this  life  thinks,
and  feels,  and  wills.  It  must  preserve  our  personal
identity,  2>.,  ther^  must  be  continuity  of  consciousness
between  the  Self  of  this  life  and  of  the  next.  The
Buddhist  doctrine  of  "Karma"  of  a  person  who  is
the  resultant  of  one's  actions,  but  does  not  share
any  part  of  one's  consciousness,  is  a  miserable  com-
promise between  the  desires  to  deny  the  eternity
of  personal  suffering  (for  to  .Buddhism  to  exist  is  to
suffer),  and  to  retain  the  moral  stimulus  of  a  belief  in
a  future  life.  But  it  falls  between  two  stools,  and
does  not  satisfy  the  conditions  of  a  genuine  future
life.  For  it  is  impossible  to  regard  the  person  who.
inherits  one's  Karma  as  identical  with  oneself,  or
to  feel  a  responsible  interest  in  his  fate.  His  con-
nection with  the  man  whose  Karma  moulds  his
character  and  predestines  his  circumstances  seems
purely  arbitrary,  and  due  to  a  tyrannous  constitution
of  things  whose  procedures  we  are  not  called  upon
to  endorse.

And,  to  a  less  degree,  the  same  defect  of  failing
adequately  to  preserve  the  sense  of  personal  identity
in  its  doctrines  of  the  future  life,  is  observable  also
in  the  current  religious  eschatology,  and  is  probably
one  of  the  chief  reasons  of  its  practical  ineffective-
ness. We  are  led  to  think  of  the  breach  in  con-
tinuity as  too  absolute,  and  feel  little  real  concern
in  the  angel  or  demon  whom  the  catastrophe  of  our
death  produces  in  another  world.

If,  then,  a  future  life  without  self-identity  is  a
meaningless  mockery,  let  us  inquire  on  what  self-
identity  depends.  And  the  answer  seems  plain
that  it  primarily  depends  on  nothing  else  than
memory. It  is  only  by  means  of  memory  that  we,


400  IMMORTALITY

can  identify  ourselves  with  our  past ;  it  is  only  by
memory  that  we  can  hope  to  enjoy  the  fruits  of
present  efforts  in  the  future.  If  every  morning  on
awaking  we  had  forgotten  all  that  we  ever  did,  if
all  the  feelings,  thoughts,  hopes,  fears  and  aspirations
of  yesterday's  self  had  perished  overnight,  we  should
soon  cease  to  regard  to-morrow's  self  as  a  personage
in  whom  it  was  possible  to  take  any  rational  interest,
o^  for  whose  future  it  was  necessary  or  possible  to
provide.  We  take  an  interest  in  our  own  future,
because  we  believe  that  we  can  forecast  the  feelings
of  the  future  self,  because  we  believe  that  the  future
self  which  enjoys  the  fruits  of  our  labours  will  be
conscious  of  its  past,  because,  in  a  word,  its  welfare
is  organically  connected  with  that  of  our.  present
self.  Thus,  to  all  intents  and  purposes,  self-identity,
and  with  it  immortality,  depend  on  memory.

§  12.  But  memory  is  a  matter  of  degree.  Here,
then,  we  have  the  key  to  a  theory  of  immortality
which  will  admit  oi graduation.  If  we  can  conceive
a  future  life,  the  reality  of  which  depends  on  memory,
it  will  admit  of  less  or  more.  And  if,  as  seems
natural,  the  extent  to  which  the  events  of  life  are
remembered  depends  largely  on  the  intensity  of
spiritual  activity  they  implied,  it  follows  that  the
higher  and  intenser  consciousness  was  during  life,
the  greater  the  intensity  of  future  consciousness.
Hence  the  amceba  or  the  embryo,  with  their  in-
finitesimal consciousness,  will  possess  only  an  in-*
finitesimal  memory  of  their  past  after  death.  And
this  for  a  twofold  reason  :  not  only  must  the  im-
press life  produces  upon  so  rudimentary  a  conscious-
ness generate  only  a  very  faint  memory,  but  the
contents  also  of  life  will  present  little  that  is  capable
of  persisting  and  worthy  of  being  retained; Thus


PROPORTIONED TO MERIT.  4OI

the  lowest  phases  of  spiritual  existence  will  have
nothing  to  remember,  and  hardly  any  means  of
remembering  it.  We  cannot,  therefore,  ascribe  to
them  any  vivid  or  enduring  consciousness  of  their
past  lives,  and  yet  need  not  deny  it  altogether.
They  have  a  future  life,  but  it  is  rudimentary.

This  view  will  open  up  to  us  an  alternative  to
utter  extinction  or  fully  conscious  immortality,  and
we  shall  no  longer  be  haunted  with  that  nightmare
of  orthodoxy,  the  vision  of  "  little  children,  a  span
long,  crawling  in  hell."  But  by  a  self-acting  ar^
rangement  the  condition  of  consciousness  hereafter
will  accurately  correspond  to  its  attainments  here.
Just  in  proportion  as  we  have  developed  our  spiritual
powers  here  will  be  our  spiritual  future.  Those
who  have  .lived  the  life  of  beasts  here,  a  dull  and
brutish  life  that  was  redeemed  by  no  effort  to  il-
lumine the  soul  by  spiritual  enlightenmen^:,  will  be
rewarded  as  "  the  beasts  that  perish."  They  will
retain  little  of  what  they  were,  their  future  life  will
be  brief  and  faint.  On  the  other  hand,  we  need
not  hesitate  to  attribute  to  the  faithful  dog,  whom
the  strength  of;  pure  affection  for  his  master  has
lifted  far  above  the  spiritual  level  of  his  race,  at
,  least  as  much  immortality  as  to  the  brutal  savage,
whose  life  has  been  ennobled  by  no  high  thoughts
and  redeemed  by  no  elevating  feeling.^ Those,  again,

1  For,  as  Goethe  well  says  {Faust,  Pt.  2,  Act  3  s.f.)  :—
"  Wer  keinen  Namen  sich  erwarb  noch  Edles  will
Gehort  den  Elementen  an  :  so  fahret  hin —
Mit  meiner  Konigin  zu  sein  verlangt  mich  heiss  ;
Nicht  nur  Verdienst,  auch  Treue  wahrt  uns  die  Person."
[They  that  have  won  no  name,  nor  willed  the  right,
Dissolve  into  the  elements— so  pass  away  !
But  /  to  follow  on  my  queen  do  ardently  desire ;
/Not  merit  only,  but  attachment,  keeps  our  personality.]

R.ofS.  D D


402  IMMORTALITY —

Avhose  activities  have  been  devoted  to  the  com-
mission of  evil  deeds,  that  burn  their  impress  on
the  soul,  will  be  haunted  by  their  torturing  memory.
Those'who  have  trained  and  habituated  themselves
to  high  and  noble  activities,  who  have  disposed  ,
their  thoughts  towards  truths  which  are  permanent
and  their  affections  towards  relations  which  are  ■
enduring,  will  rise  to  life  everlasting,  and  will  have
actions  worthy  of  memory  to  look  back  upon.  The
cup  of  Circe,  the  debasing  draught  df  forgetfulnesS',:;
which  turns  men  into  beasts,  and,  renders  them
oblivious  of  their  divine  destiny,  will  pass  from
them.  And  they  will  be  capable  of  remembering
their  past  life,  glad  to  retrace  the  record  of  great
and  noble  deeds  and  lofty  aspirations,  the  promise
of  a  spiritual  progress  they  have  since  nobly  ful-
filled. Nor  will  the  memory  of  the  past  fade  until
it  pleases  them  to  forget  it  in  the  ecstasy  of  still
sublimer  activities.  Thus  each  of  us  will  be  the
master  and  maker  of  his  own  self  and  of  his  own
immortality,  and  his  future  life  will  be  such  as  he
has  deserved.

§  1 3.  But  it  may  be  objected  that  memory  does
not  last  for  ever,  and  that  hence  a  future  life  de-i
pending  on  it  would  endure  but  for  a  season.  And
the  fact  that  this  and  several  other  objections  might
be  brought  against  the  views  we  have  hinted  at,
should  admonish  us  of  the  necessity  of  dropping
the  negative  method  of  criticizing  inconclusive
arguments,  and  proceeding  at  length  to  a  connected- :
account  of  a  positive  doctrine.  It  may  be  a  salutary
and  necessary  discipline  to  begin  at  the  beginning
as  it  appears  to  us,  to  start  with  the  obvious  dififi-
culties  which  a  subject  presents  to  our  first  attack ;
but  after  such  efforts  have  cleared  the  ground,  we


ITS MJETAPHYSICAL BASES.,  403

must  learn  to  discover  the  real  root  of  the' matter,
and  discuss  it  in  its  logical  and  not  in  its  historical
order.  Hence  it  is  necessary  to  supplement  the
results  of  critical  discussion  of  perplfexities  by  a
systematic  exposition,  beginning  with  a  statement
of  the  ultimate  positive  ground  of  the  doctrine  of
immortality.

§  14.  The  only  absolutely' secure  basis  either  for
the  assertion  or  for  the  denial  of  immortality  must
be  metaphysical.  It  is  only  the  all-devouring  One
of  Monism  which  can  make  the  permanent  existence
of  the  Many  impossible ;  it  is  only  the  plurality  of
ultimate  existences  which  can  ultimately  make  it
possible.  The  ultimate  self-existence  of  spirits,  the
doctrine  that  existences  are- many,  spirits  uncreated,,
uncaused,  that  are  and  ever  have  been  and  can
never  cease  to  be,  is.  the  only  metaphysical  ground
for  asserting  the  immortality  of  the  individual.  And
this  metaphysical"  ground  we  have  secured  by  the
preference  given  to  Pluralism  over  Monism  (ch.  x.
§^  21-23),  3.nd  by  our  account  of  the  Transcendental
Ego  as  the  reconciliation  of  idealism  and  science  and
as  the  explanation  of  the  material  world  (ch.  Ix.
§§  22,  24,  26-31).

Now  what  Is  the  bearing  of  our  metaphysics  on
the  question  before  us  ?.  It  follows  necessarily  and
at  once  from  the  pluralistic  answer  given  to  the  ulti-
mate question  of  ontology  that  the  ultimate  existences
are  eternal  and  immortal,  and  this  assertion  also
applies  to  the  Transcendental  Egos  that  underlie
our  phenomenal  selves.  In  some  sense,  therefore
— to  the  extent  to  which  we  are  to  be  Identified
with  ultimate  existences  and  transcendental  Egos^
It  is  absolutely  certain  that  we  are  immortal.  And
further,  as the whole worJd-process Is a  process


404  IMMORTALITY.

taking  place  in  the  interaction  between  the  Egos
and  the  Deity,  the  different  stages  of  material  evolu-
tion must  correspond  to  different  phases  of  that
spiritual  interaction.  Parallel,  therefore,  to  the
physical  evolution,  there  runs  a  spiritual  evolution,
related  to  it  as  meaning  and  motive  to  outward  and
visible  manifestation.  >  And  there  is  no  reason  why
this  process  should  not  be  the  development,  not  of
Spirit  in  general,  but  of  particular  spirits,  why  a
single  Ego  should  not  pass  through  the  succession  of
organisms  and  developments  of  consciousness,  from
the  amoeba  to  man,  and  from  man  to  perfection.
This  gives,  as  it  were,  the  spirdtual  interpretation  of
the  descent  of  man  from  the  beasts,  and  at  the  same
time  assures  him  of  his  due  and  proportionate  share
in  the  immortality  of  the  ultimate  spirit.

§  15.  But  though  the  plurality  of  ultimate  exist-
ence affords, the  only  safe  and  sure  ground  for  meta-
physical immortality,  it  is  too  remote  from  the
phenomena  of  our  world  to  be  at  once  appealed  to
in  settling  the  nature  of  our  future  life.  It  is  neces-
sary to  make  out  the  connection  of  the  metaphysical
with  the  physical,  and  it  is  just  on  the  subject  of
this  connection  that  considerable  variety  of  doctrine
might  prevail.  We  may  admit  without  derogating
from  the  substantial  truth  of  our  principles,  that  our
data  are  as  yet  too  inadequate  for  us  to  regard
speculations  concerning  the  connection  of  our  pre-
sent selves  with  the  ultimate  spirits  as  more  than
probable  guesses,  to  be  ratified  or.  modified  by  the
course  of  future  discovery.  Hence,  though  it  may
be  laid  down  generally  that  the  ultimate  spirits
manifest  themselves  in  the  phenomenal,  it  is  yet
necessary  to  ask  what  is  the  relation  of  such  an
.eternal spirit  to  its  successive  phases,  whiph  form


THE DEVELOPMENT OF THE SPIRIT.  405

our  phenomenal  existences,  and  in  what  sense  can^
these  be  said  to  have  a  future  life  ?  Upon-  the
answer  to  this  question  it  will  depend  whether  we
can  continue  to  speak  of  our  future  life  int  any
ordinary  sense.

Now,  that  the  insufficiency  of  our  data  renders
the  question  a.  difficult  one,  it  would  be  affectation
to  deny.  And  the  reflection  that  with  a  little  more
knowledge  the  greatest  obscurities  would  seem  plain
and  self-evident  fails  also  to  assist  our  fainting
imagination.  But  we  may  perhaps  convey  some
idea  of  the  facts  by  the  aid  of  a  simile.

If  the  world-process  aims  at  impressing  the  divine
image  upon  the  hard' metal  of  the  Ego,  then  each
phenomenal  life  m;ay  be  supposed  to  stamp  some
faint  impression  on  its  substance.-  And  as  the  im-
pressions are  multiplied,  they  gradually  mould  the
Ego  into  the  required  shape,  and;  each  successive
impress,  working  upon  material  already  more  com-
pletely fitted  into  shape,  produces  a  more  definite
impression  of  itself,  and  also  fashions  more  definitely
that  which  it  impresses.  As.  the  material  comes,
nearer  to  its  final  shape  its  resistance  becomes  less,,
and  each  impress  produces  fewer  features  which  must
be  erased  as  divergent  from  the  ideal.  Or,  in  other
words,  the  spiritual  value  of  the  lower  stages  of
consciousness  is  small ;  they  produce  their  effect.
only  by  their  repetition  and  multiplication.  But  as
the  higher  grades  of  individuality  are  reached,  the
spiritual  significance  of  a  single  phenomenal  life  is
intensified,  and  it  leaves  a  more  enduring  mark,
upon  the  nature  of  the  spirit.  If,  therefore,  we  ask
in  what  sense  the  phenomenal  phases  of  the  spirit's,
development  persist  and  continue,  we  must  answer,
generally,  that  they  persist  as  factors  in  the  develop*


4d'6  .immortality.

ment.  The  future  lives  of  the  spirit  are  the  result-
ant of  its  jpast.  But  the  individual  impress  of  a
single  life  persists  only  in  so  far  as  it  has  coincided
with  the  course  of  spiritual  development.  So,  too,
the  impressions  produced  by  single  blows  upon  a
coin  persist  only  in  so  far  as  their  shape  coincided
with  that  to  be  ultimately  produced  ;  the  individual
divergences  and  eccentricities  of  a  single  impress
are  obliterated  by  their  multiplication.  Thus  in  a
way,  the  good,  i.e.,  the  action  in  the  line  of  upward
development,  would  be  immortal,  however  humble
the  sphere  in  which  It  was  enacted  :  the  good  char-
acter would  persist  even  when  it  was  absorbed  and ,
included  in  a  higher  stage  of  development,  for  such
development  would  oniy  be  the  natural  and  neces-
sary development  of  the  highest  aspirations  of  the
lower  life.

And  this  mode  of  spiritual  progression  is  not  an
arbitrary  conjecture  of  our  fancy  concerning  a  tran-
scendent sphere  of  which  we  know  nothing  ;  it  is  the
law  ©f  all  life  even  now.  It  is  the  law  whereby  all
'Organisms  take  up  and  assimilate  what  they  can
utilize,  i.e.,  what  serves  their  purposes,  and  reject
•what  they  cannot ;  it  is  the  law  whereby  the  world-
(process  preserves  what  promotes  its  purpose,  viz.,
the  good,  and  dissolves  the  rest  away.  And  this
law  may  be  traced  throughout  all  individual  and
social  progress.  To  be  impressed  by  any  experi-
ence requires  the  previous  attainment  of  a  certain,
correspondence  between  the  agent  and  the  patient  ;<
to  be  persistent,  the  impression  must  be  not  only:
congenial  to  the  nature  impressed,  but  consonant
vwith  the  line  of  its  development.  A  lasting  impres-
sion, in  other  words,  is  one  which  is  important  to  us,
fiaot  only  for  a  moment  but  for  the  course  of  our


THE IMMORTALITV OF THE GOOD,  407

history;  if  it  runs  counter  ta  our  nature  and  our
history,  its  influence  is  rapidly  obliterated.  And  so
with  events  that  had  little  intrinsic  importance,  i.e.,
little  spiritual  significance,  they  are  forgotten  and
their  effect  is  evanescent  For  memory  is  not  in-
discriminate :  it  selects  what  is  significant  and  thus
preserves  it :  and  yet  again  all  the  experience  that
moulds  the  character,  though  it  may  be  forgotten,
has  not  wholly  perished,  for  it  persists  in  the  result-
ant habits.  And  what  is  true  of  impressions  is  true
also  of  persons  and  of  actions  ;  in  social  progress
also  it  is  emphatically  not  true  that  "  the  evil  that
men  do  lives  after  them."  Like  a  polluted  stream,
the  course  of  history  runs  itself  clear  of  the  errors
and  crimes  of  the  unconscious  or  unwilling  human
instruments  of  the  divine  purpose  :  the  blindness  and
perversity  of  its  champions  cannot  stop  the  progress
of  a  good  cause.  On  the  other  hand,  it  is  vain  to
struggle  against  the  spirit  of  the  ages  and  the  neces-
sities of  evolution ;  neither  virtue  nor  genius  can
prop  a  falling  cause.  Christianity  triumphed  in  spite
of  the  murder  of  Hypatia;  but  Demosthenes  could
not  save  Athens,  nor  Hannibal  Carthage,  and  Cato
could  not  recall  the  ghost  of  Roman  freedom  by  the
blood  of  his  self-sacrifice.  Force  may  effect  reactions
that  run_  counter  to  the  course  of  things,  byt  they
soon  pass  away,  and  leave  no  trace  behind.  How
much  remained  of  the  constitution  of  Sulla,  or  of
the  restored  rule  of  the  Bourbons,  twenty  years
after  its  institution?

Thus  all  the  elements  of  the  lower  phases  of  life
that  are  capable  of  development  are  transformed
into  the  higher,  and  the  continuous  thread  of  con-
sciousness is  never  broken.  And  this  continuity
of  the  phases  of  consciousness  is really  sufficient


408  IMMORTALITY.

to  secure  also  the  identity  of  the  self,  for  though
self-identity  depend  on  memory,  it  is  not  neces-
sary that  the  memory  should  be  perfect.  It  is
not  necessary  that  we  should  remember  all  we  did
ten  years  ago  in  order  to  feel  ourselves  the  same
persons  now  as  then,  nor  need  we  expect  to  re-
member all  we  feel  now,  in  order  to  identify  our-
selves with  ourselves  ten  years  hence.  The  con-
tinuity of  the  chain  of  consciousness  suffices  to
constitute  the  identity,  even  though  from  any  given
point  the  remoter  links  have  passed  out  of  sight ;
and  hence  a  future  life  may  in  a  sense  be  ascribed
to  all  conscious  beings.

Nevertheless  it  is  not  until  the  higher  stages  of
individuality  and  spiritual  development  are  reached
that  the  phenomenal  self  of  any  single  life,  z'.i?.,,  the
memory  of  its  past,  can  be  supposed  to  form  a  pre-
dominant, or  even  an  important,  factor  in  the  total
or  final  consciousness  of  the  Ego,  or  one  that  can
display  any  great  permanence.  The  lower  phases  of
Evolution  do  not  generate  sufficient  psychical  energy
to  attain  to  any  considerable  degree  of  immortality.
For  as  we  saw  (§  12),  the  continuance  of  life  depends
on  memory,  and  memory  on  the  intensity  of  the  im-
pression thoughts  and  feelings  make  upon  the  soul,^
and  on  the  w^hole  the  capacity  to  receive  impressions
corresponds  to  the  degree  of  spiritual  development.

But  how  does  ■  all  this  apply  to  man?  Shall  we
assert  that  man  has  reached  a  sufficient  height  of
spiritual  evolution  so  that  the  human  soul,  the
phenomenal  self  of  our  earth-life,  persists  as  human  ?
Certainly  man  has  in  many  cases  shown  such
capacity  for  thoughts  more  than  human,  for  a  "  love
that  is  stronger  than  death,"  that  it  would  seem
monstrous  to  deny  him  the  intensity  of  conscious-


THE SURVIVAL OF IMPERFECT PHASES.  40g

ness  which  substantially  preserveshis  personality.
And  yet,  when  we  look  upon  the  sordid  lives  of
others,  whose  outlook  is  limited  to  the  grossest
features  of  this  world,  we  cannot  but  feel  that  the
persistence  of  their  personalities  would  be  only  an
obstacle  to  the  development  of  their  spirit.  And  so
it  will  perhaps  seem  a  probable  compromise  to  make
the  aspirations  of  the  soul,  i.e.,  the  fitness  of  the
phenomenal  self  to  adapt  itself  to  the  conditions  of
a  higher  spiritual  life,  the  test  of  immortality,  and
to  suppose  that  the  desire  of  continuance,  whether
widely  or  exceptionally  felt,  affords  a  fairly  adequate
measure  of  personal  survival.  We  need  not  suppose
that  personal  immortality  will  be  forced  on  those
whose  phenomenal  self  has  not  desired  it  nor  pre-
pared itself  to  survive  death,  and  who  make  no  effort
to  preserve  the  memory  of  their  past,  nor  yet  that
those  should  be  baulked  wiio  have  really  and  in-
tensely desired  it.  And  for  these  latter  the  practical
outcome  of  this  doctrine  cannot  be  formulated  more
truly  and  more  concisely  than  in  the  maxim  of
Aristotle,  ocrw  fidXia-Ta  a6avarl<^ei.v,^  bidding  them  "  as
far  as  possible  to  lead  the  life  of  immortality"  on
earth,  i.e.,  to  live  constantly  in  communion  with  the
ideal,  and  in  co-operation  with  the  aim  of  the  world's
evolution.

^  1 6.  Such  are  the  outlines  of  a  theory  of  im-
mortality which  would  meet  the  main  difficulties  of
the  subject,  and  explain  how  a  future  life  can  admit
of  gradations  proportioned  to  the  grades  and  con-
ditions of  consciousness.  But  our  account  would  be
incomplete  if  it  did  nothing  to  elucidate  several
points  ndt  yet  touched  upon.  The  easiest  miscon-
ception, e.£:,  to  fall  into  would  be  that  of  regarding
1  Ar.  Eth.  Nich.  X.  vii.  8.


4IO  IMMORTALITY.

the  Ego  as  a  reality  different  from  the  self.  It  has
already  been  remarked,  and  must  here  be  em-
phasized again,  that  the  Ego  is  not  a  second  and
alien  consciousness  concurrent  with  and  distinct
from  the  selves  (cp.  ch.  ix.  §  22).  The  self  or  selves,
(ch.  ix.  §  23)  are  simply  the  actually  conscious  part  of
the  Ego,  which  represents  the  potentialities  of  their
development  on  the  one  hand  and  their  primary  and
pre-cosmic  condition  on  the  other.  The  Ego  is
both  the  basis  of  the  development  and  its  end,  but
within  the  process  the  selves  alone  are  real.  For
as  will  be  shown  in  the  next  chapter,  both  the  pre-
cosmic  basis  and  the  post-cosmic  end,  though  neces-
sarily implied  in  and  inferred  from  the  cosmic
process,  belong  to  a  radically  different  order  of
things  from  our  present  world  of  Becoming,  and  the
Ego  does  not  as  such  enter  into  the  cosmos.  Even
if,  therefore,,  we  adopted  a  supposition  which  may  per-
haps commend  itself  from  a  moral  point  of  view,  that
after  death,  in  the  intervals,  as  it  were,  of  its  incarn-
ations, the  Ego  recovered  a  fuller  consciousness  and
the  memory  of  all  its  past  lives,  these  lucid  "intervals,
though  they  might  produce  great  rnpral  effects,  would
not  in  themselves  form  part  of  the  phenomenal  de-
velopment, and  the  latter  would  appear'  to  be  continu-
ous from  phase  to  phase  of  phenomenal  consciousness.
§  1 7.  Secondly,  we  must  consider  some  of  the
objections  likely  to  be  made  to  a  doctrine  involving
\}a.e  pre-existence  of  the  soul,  although  no  apology
should  really  be  needed.  For  no  rational  argument
in  favour  of  immortality  can  be  devised  that  will,  not
tell  as  strongly  in  favour  of  the  pre-existence  as  of
the  post-existence  of  the  soul,  and  this  has  been
fully  recognized  by  all  rational  defenders  of  im-
mortality from  the  timfe  of  Plato  downwards. It


PRE- EXISTENCE AND .TRANSMIGRATION.  4 II

would  in  fact,  as  we  saw  in  §  4,  be  hard  to  defend
the  only  alternative  theories  of  Traducianism  and
Creationism  without  a  high  degree  of  either  moral
obliquity  or  intellectual  obtuseness.

And  in  addition  to  the  somewhat  negative  merit
of  being  the  only  possible  theory,  it  is  one  which
has  been  becoming  progressively  more  credible.  In
early  times,  while  our  earth  was  regarded  as  the
centre  of  the  universe  and  the  only  abode  of  in-
telligent beings,  the  theory  of  pre-existence  and
transmigration  was  liable  to  be  discredited  by  very
homely  objections.  The  limitation  of  the  total
number  of  available  souls  would  either  limit,  or  be
refuted  by,  the  increase  of  population,  while  their
confinement  to  a  single  world  precluded  the  idea  of
anything  like  a  real  progress  of  the  individual  souls.
They  had  to  be  reincarnated  in  our  world,  until,  as
the  history  of  the  Hindus  and  Buddhism  showed,
the  doctrine  of  transmigration,  with  its  endless
round  of  purposeless  re-births,  became  a  terror  such
that  men  eagerly  grasped  at  the  idea  of  annihilation,
as  a  release  from  the  vicissitudes  of  life.  But  now
the  knowledge  of  the  plurality  of  worlds  has  relieved
the  doctrine  of  the  first  difficulty,  while  the  theory  of
the  ascent  which  is  strangely  nick-named  that  of  the
descent  of  man,  and  of  the  transformations  of  animals
into  men,  shows  that  the  process  of  transmigration
is  not  devoid  of  the  elements  of  progress.  Is  it  not
curious,  again,  that  whereas  nothing  has  brought
more  ridicule  upon  the  belief  in  metempsychosis
than  its  inference  that  the  souls  of  men  had  pre-
viously animated  the  bodies  of  animals,  this  very
pedigree  of  the  human  soul  should  have  been
rendered  credible  and  probable  by  the  discoveries
of  modern  science  1 If  the Darwinian  theory  of


412  IMMORTALITY.

descent  compels  us  to  assert  that  the  soul  of  man
has  been  developed  out  of  the  souls  of  animals,
what  difficulty  remains  in  the  supposition  that  each
individual  soul  has  passed  through  the  stages  of
this  same  development  ?

And  again,  the  objection  to  pre-existence,  on  the
ground  of  our  failure  to  remember  anything  about
our  past  lives,  has  distinctly  diminished  in  cogency.
We  have  learnt  too  well  what  a  curiously  uncertain
thing  memory  is  to  attach  much  weight  to  its  dis-
abilities. For,  in  the  first  place,  the  absence  of
memory  may  be  perfectly  accounted  for  teleologically
on  grounds  of  adaptation.  The  memory  of  such  a
past  as  we  should  probably  have  had  would  have
been  a  most  troublesome  equipment,  a  most  disab-
ling burden,  in  the  battle  of  life.  For  the  recollec-
tion of  our  past  faults  and  past  failures  would,  in  the
present  state  of  our  spiritual  development,  be  a  most
fatal  obstacle  to  the  freshness  and  hopefulness  with
which  we  should  encounter  life's  present  problems.
Whatever,  therefore,  may  be  the  case  hereafter,  it
seems  clear  that  the  cultivation  of  a  wise  forgetful-
ness  was  the  condition  of  spiritual  progress  in  the
past ;  a  short  memory  was  necessary,  if  the  burden
of  unbearable  knowledge  was  not  to  crush  our  spirit.

Secondly,  in  the  face  of  the  growing  evidence  of
how  the  right  manipulations  may  revive  the  memory
of  what  seemed  to  have  perished  beyond  recovery
{cp.  ch.  ix.  §  28  s.f.),  it  would  be  rash  indeed  to  assert
that  the  progress  of  experimental  psychology  should
not,  by  some  as  yet  undiscovered  process,  enable
us  actually  to  remember  our  past.

And  lasdy,  it  should  be  observed  that  whatever
the  evidential'  value  of  our  obliviousness  of  our  past
-lives,  it  applies  equally  to  the  earlier  portions  of  our


PRE- EXISTENCE AND HEREDITY.  413

present  ,life.  No  one  has  any  but  second-hand
evidence  of  the  earlier  stages  of  his  existence  on
earth ;  our  belief  in  our  birth  rests  upon  testimony,
and  is  confirmed  by  inference ;  we.  believe  the  tales
of  our  entry  into  the  world,  because  we  perceive
that  we  must  have  come  into  it  somehow.  And  the
inference  as  to  our  pre-existence  is  of  a  precisely
similar  kind,  though,  it  may  be,  of  inferior  certainty
{cp.  ch.  X.  §  29).  So  also  we  believe  the  testimony  of
our  reason  as  to  our  past  existence,  because  there  is
no  other  mode  of  accounting  for  our  present  exist-
ence ;  we.  believe  in  pre-existence,  because  it  is
the  only  reasonable  inference  from  the  observed
facts.

§  18.  But  there  remains  one  very  real  and  seri-
ous objection  to  our  eschatology,  as  to  all  theories
of  pre-existence,  and  indeed  to  all  belief  in  a  future
Jife.  This  is  the  conflict  between  it  and  the  con-
ception of  heredity.  If  our  parents  fashion  our
bodies  for  us,  and  if  our  souls  are  the  souls  of  our
particular  bodies,  how  can  the  immortal  spirit  enter
them  from  without  ?  If  our  character  and  circum-
stances are  the  inherited  results  of  the  past  action  of
our  parents,  how  can  they  be  the  result  of  the  past
action  of  our  Ego,  and  the  reward  of  conduct  in  a
previous  life  ?

The  difficulty  is  a  real  one,  and  must  not  be  trifled
with  or  evaded.  It  will  not  do  to  deny  the  fact  of
heredity,  and  still  less  to  limit  its  scope  by  distin-
guishing that  part  of  the  soul  which  is  inherited
from  that  which  pre-exists.  The  one  device  would
display  only  our  scientific  ignorance,  the  other  our
metaphysical  incompetence  (^/.  §  6),

But  perhaps,  we  may  say,  the  dilemma  in  which
the  objection,  seeks  to  place  us  is  a  false  one,, and


414  IMMORTALITY.

the  alternatives  of  "  either  fashioned  by  our  parents
or  by  our  spirit"  are  not  so  exclusive  as  they  might
at  first  sight  appear.  For  why  should  we  not  be
fashioned  both  by  our  parents  and  by  our  own  past>
in  different  ways  .■*  The  possibility  of  this  solution
appears  at  first  somewhat  of  a  mystery,  but  we
ought  by  this  time  to  have  acquired  a  sufficient  dis-
trust of  pseudo-mysteries  not  to  jump  at  the  con-
clusion that  any  difficulty  we  can  formulate  is  beyond
the  bounds  of  the  human  reason.

For,  admitting  the  general  doctrine  that  the  char-
acter of  the  offspring  is  inherited  from  the  parents,
we  may  raise  the  question  of  what  determines  the
particular  mixture  which  constitutes  a  particular
character.  The  parents  possess  an  indefinite  number
of  potentialities  that  may  possibly  be  inherited,  and
these,  again,  may  be  commingled  in  an  indefinite
number  of  ways.  But  the  character  actually  in-
herited is  a  definite  combination  of  these  potential
qualities,  and  what  determines  the  way  in  which  it
is  actually  combined?  It  is  not  enough  to  know
generally  that  the  parents  supply  the  materials  of
the  new  combination ;  we  must  know  also  what
arranges  the;  materials  in  a  definite  order.

Now  if  we  supposed  that  this  proportion  in  which
the  various  dispositions  of  the  parents  entered  into
the  character  of  the  offspring  was  really  determined
by  the  character  of  the  spiritual  entity  which  the
parents  were  capable  of  providing  with  a  suitable
organism,  we  should  at  all  events  have  devised  a
method  which  rendered  pre-existence  compatible  with
heredity.  For  there  is  no  apparent  break  in  the
chain  of  natural  causes :  the  whole  character  of  the
offspring  is  inherited  from  the  parents.  But  as  the
limits  within  which  heredity  is  possible are  very


PRE-EXISTENCK AND ACCIDENTAL VARIATIONS. 415

wide,  the  spiritual  selection  is  supposed'  to  work
within  them.  .  And  as  no  direct  evidence  can  ever
prove  that  an  indefinite  number  of  other  combin-
ations  would not have equally  well satisfied  the
conditions  of  all  the  physical  factors,  it  is  clear  that
our  theory  can  never  be  disproved  by  the  facts  of
heredity. On  the  contrary,  it  might  perhaps  serve
to explain  some of  its  most perplexing physical
aspects,  such  as the origination of  the so-called
"  accidental variations " which play so important
a  part  in  biological  history. At  present  the  vari-
ations which  produce  a  man  of  genius  or  generate
a  new  species,  are  to  science  utterly  inexplicable ;
for that is the meaning of "  accidental." The
constitution  of  the  parents  no  doubt  renders  them
possible,  for  else  they  would  not  occur,  but  it  in  no
wise explains  them. For they are cases  which
bofder  upon  the  impossible,  and  what  is  wanted  is
some  explanation  of  how  and  why  these  exceptional
possibilities  are  occasionally  realized,  and  how  the
forces  which  resist  any  divergence  from  the  normal
combinations  are  occasionally  overcome. And  we
delude  ourselves  if  we  suppose  that  we  have  cast
any  light  upon  the  subject  by  adducing  the  parallel
of  exceptional  combinations  in  the  realm  of  mathe-
matical probabilities. ' For  in  throwing  dice,  e.g.,  no
one  combination  is  in  itself  any  more  probable  than
any  other,  nor  is  there  any  force  acting  so  as  to
make  the  succession  of  i,  2,  5  any  easier  than  three
sixes. It  is  only  because  there  are  so  many  more
of  the  combinations  we  call  ordinary  possible,  that
they  occur  more  frequently,  and  no  greater  energy
is  required  to  throw  ten  sixes  in  succession  than  to*
throw  any  other  series.

But  a  case  of  heredity  is  totally  different. The


41 6  IMMORTALITY.

forces  tending  to  reproduce  in  the  offspring  some-
thing like  the  average  character  of  the  race  must
preponderate  so  enormously,  that  the  resistance  to
any  marked  divergence  from  it  must  be  incalculably
great,  and  increase  in  geometrical  proportion  the
more  marked  the  divergence  becomes.  That  is  to
say,  it  is  immensely  more  difficult  to  throw  the  rare
combination,  not  merely  because  there  are  so  many
more  of  the  ordinary  ones,  but  because  far  more
force  is  required,  because  the  dice  are  so  Cogged  as
to  make  it  nearly  impossible.  Hence  it  is  useless
to  appeal  to  the  calculus  of  probabilities  as  to  a
deus  ex  machina  to  help  us  out  of  the  difficulty  :
we  must  recognize  that  every  case  of  variatrbn  re-
quires a  definite  and  relatively  very  powerful  force
to  produce  it.  But  where  is  this  force  to  come
from  ?  Surely  not  from  the  physical  conditions  of
generation  ?  For  these  do  not  vary  greatly  in  the
generation  of  a  genius  and  of  a  duffer.  And  besides,
how  should  minute  differences  of  times  and  seasons
and  temperature  and  manner,  etc.,  have  such  dis-
proportionate psychical  effects  ?

But  let  us  indulge  science  in  these  a  priori  pre-
judices, and  admit  that  in  some  way,  not  to  be
further  explained,  the  physical  circumstances  at  the
time  of  generation  determine  with  which  out  of  an
indefinite  number  of  possible  characters  the  off-
spring is  to  be.  provided.  Even  so  the  question
we  have  raised  will  only  recur  in  another  form,  and
we  must  ask  what  determines  generation  to  take
place  at  the  particular  moment  when  it  will  result  in
a  particular  character  of  the  offspring.  For  here
again  the  field  of  selection  is  extremely  wide,  andit
would  surely  be  an  immensely  impressive  fact  that
a  moment's  delay  or  precipitation  may  make  all  the


DOUBLE CAUSATION.  417

difference,  for  good and for  evil,  in the natural
endowment  of  the  offspring.

So  we  must,  from  the  strictly  physical  point  of
view,  answer,  that  the  circumstances  which  deter-
mine at  which  out  of  all  possible  moments  gener-
ation shall  take  place,  depend  on  another  set  of
ulterior  circumstances.  And  if  the  questioner  perti-
naciously inquires  again  on  what  these  circumstances
in  their  turn  depend,  he  must  be  told,  on  another
set  of  circumstances,  and  these  again  on  another,
and  so  on  indefinitely,  until  we  realize  that  we  have
unwittingly  launched  forth  into  an  infinite ,  regress
of  causes,  which  deludes  us  with  a  semblance  of
explanation,  but  baffles  all  attempts  to  arrive  at  a
real  and  final  answer.  And  then,  if  we  have  the
courage  really  to  think  out  the  question,  and  do  not
give  up  the  pursuit  of  truth  faintheartedly  as  soon
as  our  imamnatidn  wearies  and  our  attention  is  re-
laxed,  the  perception  may  begin  to  dawn  upon  us
that  physical  causation  in  the  phenomenal  sphere
is  not,  perhaps,  the  only,  nor  ultimately  the  most
satisfactory,  mode  of  explaining  a  fact.

§  19.  It  is  quite  possible  for  the  same  event  to
be  conditioned  in  two  different  ways,  teleologically
and  historically,  by  a  reason  as  well  as  by  what  we
somewhat  ambiguously  call  a  cause.  And  it  is  only
human  inconsistency  which  sees  any  difficulty  in
this.  For  it  is  nothing  but  inconsistency,  to  limit
teleological  causation  by  reasons  to  conscious  human
action,  and  to  refuse  to  extend  it  to  all  things,  i.e.,
to  deny  the  complete  parallelism  of  the  processes
of  nature  and  of  our  minds,  while  we  yet  assert
their  partial  parallelism  by  asserting  the  existence
of  physical  causation.  For  the  assertion  of  the
reality  of  causation  assumes  this  similarity  of  mind

R.  ofS.  E E


41 8  IMMORTALITY.

I

and  nature  to  some  extent ;  and  if  we  must  assume
it  in  some  form  to  make  science  possible,  why  should
we  not  assume  it  in  its  complete  form,  and  thereby
do  away  with  the  difficulties  in  which  our  inconsis-
tent assumptions  involve  us  ?  If  cause  is  a  category
of  the  human  mind  which  we  attribute  to  nature,
why  should  we  not,  while  we  are  about  it,  attribute
it  in  its  complete  form  as  the  final  cause,  in  which
it  is  no  longer  a  category  which  refutes  itself?
There  may  be  some  ground  for  objecting  to  final
causes  from  a  thoroughly  sceptical  point  of  view,
which  does  not  admit  that  the  world  of  appearances
is  commensurate  with  our  thought  {cp.  ch.  iii.  §  1 1 ) ;
but  from  the  standpoint  of  science,  which  admits  this
assumption,  such  an  objection  surely  strains  at  gnats
while  swallowing  camels  (cp.  ch.  vii.  §  6).

§  20.  And  it  would  be  ridiculous  affectation  to
assert  that  we  are  not  perfectly  familiar  with  several
such  instances  of  double  causation.  Our  daily  life
sujpplies  abundant  examples  of  actions  which  are
physically  caused  by  one  set  of  persons  and  teleo-
logically  by  another.  The  man  who  publishes  a
report  of  the  discovery  of  fabulously  rich  gold  mines,
with  the  purpose  of  attracting  immigrants,  is  at  least
as  truly  the  cause  of  the  resulting  "  rush "  as  the
leg-muscles  of  the  gold  diggers.  And  so  every-
thing in  the  nature  of  a  plan,  plot,  or  device  for
influencing  the  action  of  others  implies  agents  who
consciously  or  unconsciously  give  effect  to  the  pur-
poses of  others.  But  the  phenomenon  can  be
studied  most  clearly  and  unmistakably  in  post-
hypnotic suggestions.  It  is  suggested  to  a  hypno'
tized  subject  that  he  is  to  do  a  certain  action  on
awaking :  when  he  awakes,  he  has  no  memory  of
the  suggestion,  but  executes  the  order,  if  it  be  not


DESCENDED FROM ANGELS ^ -ND' FROW  AVES; 419

one  palpably  absurd  and  repugnant  to  his  habits,
without  the  slightest  suspicion  that  it  has  been  in
any  way  determined  by  any  extraneous  cause  :  on
the  contrary,  if  inquiries  are  made,  he  will  even
proceed  to  give  reasons  fordbing^what  he  did,  which
would  satisfy  every  one  who  was  not  aware  of  the
real  cause  of  the  action  in  ,the  hypnotic  suggestion.^
And  such  examples  should  make  us  realize,  however
much  we  may  struggle  against  the  admission,  that
our  causes  are  always  reasons,^  and  must  be  so
from  the  constitution  of  our  minds,  and  that  with  a
moderate  amount  of  ingenuity  a  great  variety  of
reasons  can  be  given  for  any  action.  It  is  therefore
a  mere  superstition  to  suppose  that  we  ever  arrive
at  the  knowledge  of  a  physical  cause  so  absolute
that  it  does  not  admit  of  an  alternative.  Hence,  as
soon  as  any  considerable  interests. are  involved,,  it
will  always  be  possible  to  support  them  with  a  show
of  reason,  and  the  only  error  of  such  reasonings
often  is  that  they  are  esteemed  mutually  exclusive.

And  it  is  not  merely  in  the  phenomena  of  daily
life  and  of  psychical  science  that  we  are  familiar  with
the  reality  of  double  causation^  but  no  less  in  the
religious  doctrine  of  an  over-ruling  Providence,  t.e.,
of  an  agency  which  shapes  the  course  of  natural
causation  in  accordance  with,  a  preconceived  purpose.

'  The  evidence  for  this  is  not  very'  abundant,  but  sufficient.
But  then  experiments  have  hitherto  aimed  chiefly  at  establishing
the  fact  of  suggestion,  and  hence  the  actions  suggested  have  been ,
intentionally  made  repugnant  to  the  subject,  and  such  as  he  clearly
would  not  perform  of  his  own  accord.  But  even  though  the
experiments  were  specially  calculated  to  arouse  suspicion  as  to
their  source  in  the  subject's  mind,  the  absurdity  of  the  suggested
action  may  reach  an  alarming  height  without  arousing  any  sus-
picion of  an  extraneous  origin;.  Cp.  Froc.  Psychical  Sac,  vol.  III.,
p.  r.

2  Cp.  Mr.  F.  H.  Bradley's  Zagic,  Bk.  III.,  pt.  2,  ch.  2,


420  IMMORTALITY.

But  the  philosophic  truth  which  underlies  all  these
facts  and  all  these  beliefs  is  one  and  the  same — that
of  the  ultimate  supremacy  of  the  final  cause.  It  is
this  superiority  of  the  final  cause  which  preserves  '
the  conception  of  causation  from  self- refutation,
and  which  can  alone  give  a  real  explanation  of  the
world-process.  For  it  is  only  as  the  gradual  reali-
zation of  some  pre-existent  purpose  that  the  process
has  any  real  meaning.

§  21.  These  considerations  open  up  several  ways
in  which  pre-existence  is  compatible  with  heredity.

In  the  first  place,  as  the  ultimate  explanation  of
everything  is  teleological,  i.e.,  relative  to  the  end  of
the  world-process,  the  parents  must  be  in  the  last
resort  ,  held  to  transmit  certain  qualities  to  their
offspring  in  order  to  further  the  development  of  the
pre-existent  spirits.  For  the  parents  are  such  as
they  are,  their  parents  are  such  as  they  are,  and  so
on,  everything  is  such  as  it  is,  until  the  metaphysical
or  first  cause  of  the  world-process  is  reached,  which
is  also  its  final  cause,  and  acts  in  a  certain  way  in
order  to  promote  that  process.

And  secondly,  it  is  possible  to  conceive  that  just
as  the  hypnotic  operator  can  affect  the  will  of  his
subjects  without  their  knowledge,  so  the  spiritual
entity  influences  the  parents  so  to  fashion  the  organ-
ism of  the  offspring  as  is  required  by  its  nature  and
its  needs.

Thus  the  assertions  that  we  are  descended  from
angels  and  ascended  from  beasts,  that  we  are,  (a)
phases  in  the  development  of  ultimate  spiritual
entities,  {b)  the  resultants  of  the  historical  develop-
ment of  our  ancestors,  do  •  not  clash,  for  they  formu-
late the  process  from  different  points  of  view.  And
not  only  do  they  not  clash,  but  they  supplement


HEREDITY AND THE SOLIDARITY OF BEINGS. 42 1

each  other:  they  are  both  of  them,  in  their  own  way,
valid  and  indispensable.  The  second  statement
will  continue  to  be  the  most  serviceable  for  most  of
the  ordinary  purposes  of  life,  and  in  the  view  of  a
physical  science  which  is  not  concerned  to  raise  the
question  of  the  ultimate  nature  of  things,  and  the
final  meaning:  of  its  own  assertions..  But  the  first
will  be  the  truest  and  completest,  because,  meta-
physical statement,  and  that  most  expressive  of  the
highest  aspirations  of  our  moral  nature.  And  it
will  enable  us  aot  merely  to  accept  heredity  as  a
fact,  but  also  to  understand  it,  to  give  a.  rational
interpretation  of  the  part  it  plays  in  the  scheme  of
things.

§  22.  For  wihen  heredity  is.  considered,  not  in
abstract  isolation  as  a  scientific.fact,  but  in  its  con-
nection with  the  totality  of  things,,  it  will  be  found
to  be  only  an  extreme  manifestation  or  illustration
of  the  metaphysical  principle  Of  the  solidarity  of
things.

This  principle,  of  which  the  highest,  generalization
of  physics,  the  all-sustaining  force  of  gravity,  forms
one  of  the  lowest  instances,  may  be  traced  in  its
manifold  applications  throughout  the  sphere  of
sociology.  The  present  throughout  depends  on  the
past,  alike  in  the  case  of  the  social  organism  colr-
lectively  and  of  its  members  individually.  We
inherit  the  institutions,  the  material'  and  intellectual
products  of  the  labours,  of  our  ajicestors  collfectively,
just  as  surely  as  we  inherit  their  bodies  individually,
and  posterity  in  its  turn  will  inherit  the  conditions  of
life  such  as  we  have  made  them.  And  perhaps,- the
spiritual  inheritance  of  the  social  environment  is
hardly  less  important  than  the  physical  heritage
which  is  directly  transmitted. And  thus  the  signifif-


422  HMMORTALITV.

cance  and  raison  M'iire  of  heredity  would  lie  in  its
emphasizing  in  the  most  impressive  way,  in  a  way
that  none  can  fail  to  feel,  this  solidarity  of  all  living
beings,  'this  continuity  of  the  world-process,  and  in
forcing  us  to  realize  what  we  saw  in  chapter  viii.  is
the  great  law  of  that  process,  viz.,  that  the  individual
must  be  'developed  in  and  by  a  social  medium,  and
is  in  every  way  dependent  on  it,  dependent  on  it  for
his  very  existence  in  the  world. But  though  we
regard  the  teleological  significance  of  heredity  to  h6
its assertion  of  the  solidarity  of  the  spiritual  uni-
verse, this  is  no  reason  why  we  should  deny  that
there  may  ailso be  spiritual  aflSnities  of  a  special
and personal  nature,  underlying  and  inspiring  the
physical  fact  of  relationship. For  it  seems  probable
that  the  grouping  of  men  in  their  social  environment
is  as  little  accidental  and  devoid  of  spiritual  signifi-
cance as  the  whoile  process  of  that  environment,  and
if  so,  our  relationship  to  our  family,  nation,  race,  etc.,
points  to  more  "intimate  spiritual  connections  than
those  which exist with beings  who  are excluded
from  these  ties. The  ties  of  kindred  and  our  whole
position  in  the  social  world,  we  may  be  sure,  result
from  the  hidden  action  of  spiritual  affinities,  and  are
as  little  the  work  of  lawless  chance  as  the  grouping
of  the  stellar  spheres  in  obedience  to  the  attractions
of  the  physical  universe.

§  23.  And  this  hint  of  closer  and  more  exclusive
spiritual  connections  may  serve  to  introduce  the
subject  of  the  last  difficulty  in  the  relation  of  the
Ego  to  the  phenomenal  self  which  it  will  be  neces-
sary to  discuss.  We  recognized  in  chapter  viii.
(§  14)  that  the  idea  of  individuality  was  scarce
distinguishable  in  the  lowest  grades  of  being,  and
that  even  in  man  it  was  far  from  being  completely


CAN SEVERAL BEINGS SHARE ONE SPIRIT? 423

realized  (ch.  viii.  §  i8).  We  admitted  further,  in  §  9
of  this  chapter,  that  the  indistinctness  of  individu-
ality, especially  in  the  lower  organisms,  was  a
serious  obstacle  to  the  attribution  of  immortality  to
them.  Hence  the  question  presents  itself  whether  a
single  Ego  corresponds  to  each  ^uast-individual,  or
whether  several  phenomenal  organisms  may  not
be  the  concurrent  manifestations  of  the  same
Ego?

The  answer  given  to  this  question  is  not  of  course
a  matter  affecting  ultimate  metaphysical  principles,
and  it  would  be  quite  admissible  to  answer  it  by  a
non  liquet  from  a  scientific  point  of  view,  but  it  yet
seems  preferable  on  esthetic  grounds  to  deny  that  in
beings  with  a  scarcely  developed  consciousness  an
ultimate  spirit  need  correspond  to  each  phenomenal
^«a«- individual. And  the  analogy  of  the  "secondary
selves"  within  ourselves  {cp.  ch.  viii.  §  18)  will  enable
us  to understand how several  relatively-separate
streams of  consciousness can co-exist within  the
same  entity,  and  how  unsafe  it  is  to  argue  from
temporary exclusiveness to ultimate distinctness.
We  may  hold,  then,  that  the  individual  cells  of  a
tree  or  the  individual  polypes  of  a  zoophyte  are  the
"secondary  selves"  of  the  lower organisms; nor
need  the fact that they  possess  distinct  physical
organizations  and  are  under  the  proper  conditions
capable  of  spatially  separate  existence,  perplex  us
when we reflect that Space was not found on
analysis  to  be  an  ultimate  reality  (ch.  ix.  §  10).

It  is  more  interesting  to  consider  to  what  extent
this  equivalence  of  a  plurality  of  phenomenal  exist-
ence to  a  single  ultimate  existence  may  be  traced
in  human  beings.  That  it  affords  a  plausible  ex-
planation of  the  perplexing  phenomena  of  multiplex


424  IMMORTALITY.

personality  has  been  already  mentioned  (ch.  viii.
§  18,  ix.  §  23).

§  24.  And  perhaps  we  may  discover  indications
tending  towards  the  same  conclusion  in  the  deepest
and  most  momentous  distinction  of  the  social  life,
the  distinction  of  Sex.

Sex  is  in  itself  a  mark  of  imperfect  individuality,
for  neither  men  nor  women  are  sufificient  for  them-
selves or  complete  representatives,  either  physically
or  spiritually,  of  humanity.  A  distinction,  there-
fore, whereby  the  unity  of  the  humangifiikris  rent
in  twain  by  the  antithesis  of  contrary  polarities,
presents  a  problem  well  worthy  of  the  deepest  philo-
sophic thought,  and  one  which  physiological  ex-
planations do  little  to  elucidate.  Historically,  Sex
is  a  differentiation  of  digestion  {cp.  ch.  iv.  §  1 2),  but
even  a  biologist  will  sometimes  find  it  hard  to  regard
it  historically.  Hence  it  has,  at  all  times  and  from
the  most  various  principles,  seemed  to  men,  from
Plato  down  to  the  late  Mr.  Laurence  Oliphant,  that
in  the  fact  of  Sex  they  were  face  to  face  with  the
traces  of  a  disruption  of  the  original  unity  of  the
human  spirit,  or,  as  we  might  perhaps  amend  it,  of
a  unity  not  yet  attained.

But  the  significance  of  Sex  and  the  metaphysics
of  Love  form  a  subject  too  large  and  too  conten-
tious for  an  essay  like  ours,  and  our  discussion  of  it
is  only  intended  to  elucidate  its  relations  to  the
doctrines ,  we  have  propounded,  and  not  to  contain  a
full  and  scientific  account  of  the  matter.  It  may  be
that  the  distinction  of  sex  will  pass  away  in  a  higher
stage  in  the  evolution  of  spirit  than  the  present,
even  as  it  came  into  being  at  a  lower,  and  that  in
the  kingdom  of  heaven  there  will  be  no  marrying  or
giving  in  marriage. It  may  be  that  the  feelings


A METAPHYSIC OF LOVE.  425

themselves  aifford  the  surest  evidence  of  the  lack  of
unity  in  their  longing  for  union,  and  that  the  desire
of  perfect  love  of  transcending  its  self  and  "  at  one
with  that  it  loves  in  one  undivided  Being  blending"^
is  the  metaphysical  ideal  of  which  vulgar  passion  is
but  a  feeble  reflexion  and  caricature. It  may  be
that  this  desire  for  the  merging  of  one  personality
in  another  {Verschmelzungs-sehnsuckt, as  v. Hart-
mann  calls  it)  is  the  specific  differentia  which,  by  the
consentaneous  testimony  of  poets  and  philosophers,
distinguishes  love  from  other  forms  of  affection,  and
that  it  is  the  emotional  impulse  which  foreshadows
the  formation  of  coalesced  existences  of  a  higher
order  than  our  present  pa,rtial  and  imperfect  selves.
It. may  be  that  there  is  truth  in  such  speculations,
and even that they  explain points which  would
otherwise  have  remained  obscure,  such  as,  e.g.,  the
great  development  of  romantic  love  at  the  very  time
when  the  growth  of  .reason  might  have  been  sup-
posed to  render  its  stimulus  even  more  unnecessary
than  it  is  among  animals  and  savages  for  the  main-
tenance of  the  race,  and  to  make  its  essential  illusion,
the  fusion  of  two  spirits  into  one,  seem  more  of  an
impossibility. On all  these points there will  be
great  differences  of  opinion,  arising  largely  from  the
facts that  most  people  feel  even  more  confusedly
than  they  think,  that  they  mean  very  different  things
by  the  term  love,  arid  that  love  is  generally,  and
perhaps  necessarily,  a  very  mixed  feeling  (including
very  often,  e.g.,  an  element  of  that  aesthetic  feeling
which  in  its  piurity  manifests  itself  as  the  worship  of
the  Beautiful)  ;  but  it  will  hardly  be  profitable  here

1  Fitzgerald's  translation  of  Jami's  Salaman  and  Absal.  We
have  quoted  from  an  Oriental,  because  he  is, perhaps  the  least
likely  to  be  suspected  of  taking  too  idealist  a  view.


426  IMMORTALITY.

to  combat  the  objections  which  easily  suggest  thern.-
selves,  and  which  make  up  by  their  obviousness  for
what  they  may  be  lacking  in  profundity.  Thus  to
dismiss  the  philosophy  of  love  by  saying  that  "  they
shall  be  one  flesh"  and  that  this  is  the  whole  mean-
ing of  the  desire  to  be  one  spirit,  is  to  appeal  to  a
coarsely  physical  method  of  explanation,  which  is  as
good  as  explanations  of  the  higher  by  the  lower
usually  are  {cp.  ch.  vi.  §  3)  ;  but  it  should  at  this  point
be  unnecessary  to  show  in  detail  why  it  is  mislead-
ing.

The  essential  points  for  which  we  must  now  con-
tend are  that  such  a  metaphysic  of  love  will  not  in
any  wise  affect  either  the  practical  value,  of  our
doctrine  of  immortality  or  the  metaphysical  prin-
ciples on  which  it  rests.  It  does  not  affect  its  -
emotional  value,  because  ex  hypothesi  the  basis  of
the  evidence  for  the  explanation  suggested  is
emotional,  and  it  is  our  desire  for  the  coalescence  of
imperfect  personalities  which  makes  us  think  it
possible.  Hence  there  is  no  loss,  but  gain  :  what-
ever we  may  lose  of  individual  immortality  is  lost
because  it  is  our  soul's  desire,  is  lost  because  we
gain  in  return  a  higher  good  which  we  desire  more
intensely  than  what  we  sacrifice.  And,  moreover,
it  is  not  even  true  that  the  self  is  lost  by  being
absorbed  and  growing  one  with  what  it  loves  :  it  is
lost  as  little  as  our  earth-life  is  lost  by  passing  into
a  higher  phase  of  being  (§  1 5).

And  similarly  this  theory  contains  nothing  that
need  modify  our  metaphysics  and  our  view  of  the
world-process,  but  rather  confirms  them.  We  can-
not argue  from  a  possible  fusion  of  imperfect  into
perfect  persons  to  an  impossible  confusion  of  all
things  in  the  absolute  One. We  need  not  therefore


LOVE VERSUS FRIENDSHIP.  427

abandon  our  view  of  the  personality  or  individuality
of  ultimate  existence;  indeed,  the  very  fact  that
human  personality  is  still  imperfect  is  the  best
testimonial  to  the  value  of  personality  as  the  ideal
{cp.  ch.  viii.  §  19),  It  is  only  at  first  sight  that  the
metaphysic  of  love  can  be  regarded  as  conflicting
with  the  universal  principle  of  the  development  of
individuality;  for  it  also  aims  at  completing  a
personality.

But  though  such  an  apparent  exception  ultimately
proves  the  rule,  it  must  yet  be  admitted  to  do  so  by
exceptional  means>  forming  a  certain  antithesis  to
the  other  aspects  of  the  evolution  of  perfect  in-
dividuals in  a  perfect  society.  For,  it  is  undeniable
that  love  in  its  higher  developments  is  an  antisocial
force,  and  that  its  exclusive  attraction  contradicts
the  ideal  of  a  universal  harmony  of  all  spirits.
Whatever  services  this  passion  may  have  originally
rendered  in  bringing  men  together,  and  forming  the
basis  of  the  social  life,  it  is  now  antagonistic  to  the
social  ideal.  A  society  of  lovers  would  be  a  ludi-
crous impossibility ;  for  it  is  the  chief  symptom  of
their  condition  that  they  are  entirely  wrapped  up
in  each  other,  and  that  the  rest  of  the  world  does
not  exist  for  them.  From  the  social  point  of  view
there  is  something  awe-inspiring  and  terrible  in  the
madness  of  a  passion  which  teaches  men  to  forget
all  other  ties,  the  claims  of  country,  friendship,  dutyj
reason.

And  this  exclusiveness  of  the  attraction  which
holds  together  the  human  atoms  of  the  sexual  dyad
becomes  particularly  clear  when  we  compare  love
with  friendship ;  i.e.,  with  the  feeling  which  forms
the  bond  of  the  social  union.  The  charm  of  friend-
ship lies  in  the  play  of  difference,  in  the  free  inter-


428  IMMORTALITY.

course  of  spirits  who  preserve  their  own  centres  of
activity,  in  agreement  amid  diversity,  in  the  sym'
pathy  of  kindred  souls  which  is  desired  just  because
it  is  the  sympathy  of  others ;  it  aims  not  at  union  in
the  sense  of  effacement  of  individuals,  but  in  the
sense  of  hai"nibny  ;  it  respects  the  individuality  of
the  friend,  and  values  it  because  of  its  very  dis-
tinctness. In  love,  on  the  other  hand,  if  we  have
interpreted  aright  the  indications  of  feelings  which
dimly  prognosticate  its  inner  essence,  there  is  none
of  this  :  the  union  it  desires  is  absolute,  and  requires
a  complete  sacrifice  of  self.

And  again,  to  consider  them  with  respect  to  their
attitude  towards  extraneous  influences  :  the  harmony
of  friendship  resents  the  intrusion  of  uncongenial
elements,  but  is  not  in  itself  hostile  to  any  widening
of  its  sphere  ;  on  the  contrary,  the  natural  impulse
of  a  sociable  nature  is  "  to  be  friends  with  all  men,"
the  ideal  of  social  harmony  is  all-embracing.  And
it  is  not  as  such  prone  ,to  jealousy  :  we  wish  that
our  friends  should  also  be  friends  of  one  another,
and  labour  to  effect  this.  Love,  on  the  other  hand,
is  distinguished  from  all  the  other  forms  of  affec-
tion by  its  exclusiveness  ;  jealousy  is  part  of  its
essence,  and  is  the  repulsion  whiich  will  not  brook
the  intrusion  of  any  foreign  force  upon  the  intimate
attraction  of  the  human  molecule.  A  pair  of  lovers
are  sufficient  for  each  other ;  they  require  no  one
else,  and  will  not  admit  others  into  the  intensity
of  their  mutual  feelings.  Would  it  not  be  the
height  of  absurdity  to  suggest  to  lovers  what  is  the
desire  of  friends,  viz.,  that  they  should  love  the
largest  possible  number  and  be  loved  by  them  ?
For  does  not  love  desire  wholly  and  solely  to
possess  that  which  it  loves,  and  resent  the  intrusion


LOVE AND THE SOCIAL IDEAL.  429

of  the  most  solemn  social  obligations  as  a  desecra-
tion of  its  sacred  rights  ?

§  25.  The  above  discussion  of  the  metaphysic
of  love  may  be  taken  as  in  some  sort  the  supple-
ment of  the  physical  treatment  which  was  so  con-
ducive to  Pessimism  (ch.  iv.  §17);  but  whether  we
regard  the  subject  in  its  highest  or  in  its  lowest
aspects,  the  result  is  the  same.  From  either  point
of  view  it  is  a  momentous  fact ;  from  neither  point  of
view  is  it  the  road  to  happiness  or  the  ideal  of  life.

It  is  not  fitted  to  be  the  ideal  of  life  because  it
cannot  be  made  to  include  all  existences,  because
a  pair  of  lovers  as  the  culmination  of  the  world-
process  would  be  a  conclusion  equally  bizarre  and
impossible.  We  cannot  abandon  for  such  amorous
fancies  the  ideal  which  has  been  our  lode-star  in  the
pursuit  of  truth,  the  ideal  which  first  revealed  itself
to  us  in  the  search  for  an  adequate  formulation  of
the  world's  process,  the  ideal  of  a  harmonious  inter-
action of  individual  existences ;  for  it  is  an  ideal
which  all  our  subsequent  progress  has  only  con-
firmed and  deepened.  The  conception  of  a  com-
munity of  perfect  persons  was  the  efficient  cause  of
the  wondrous  evolution  of  individual  existence  (ch.
viii.  §§  6-19),  the  final  cause  of  the  material  universe
(ch.  ix.  §§  26-31),  and  the  formal  ground  of  our  plural-
istic answer  to  the  ultimate  questions  of  ontology
''ch,  X.  §  23).  And  now  it  has  successfully  stood  the
severest  of  its  tests  :  in  spite  of  the  most  powerful
objections,  it  has  been  shown  that  there  is  nothing
impossible  in  the  continuance  of  personality ;  in
spite  of  our  strongest  feeling,  it  has  been  shown
that  friendship  is  a  more  universal  principle  than
love,  that  the  concord  of  harmony  is  a  higher  ideal
than  the  ecstasy  of  love.


430  IMMORTALITY,

Thus  we  have  at  length  reached  an  eminence
whence  the  eye  of  faith  can  clearly  discern  the
features  of  the  Promised  Land  which  this,  ideal
holds  out  to  us ;  and  though  we  may  not  enter
until  the  far-distant  end  of  the  world's  process,  we
can  already  grasp  its  nature  and  describe  its  charac-
ter, and  it  is  to  this  completion  of  our  task'  that  the
following  chapter  must  be  devoted.


CHAPTER  XII.

CONCLUSION.

§  I.  We  have  arrived  at  the  end  of  our  inquiry,
and  at  a  point  where  it  seems  merely  necessary  to
gather  together  the  converging  clues  that  resulted
from  our  discussion  of  the  problems  of  man's  past,
present,  and  future  environment,  into  a  single  and
connected  solution  of  the  Riddle  of  the  Sphinx.
And  though  the  principle  which  guided  our  steps
throughout  was  one  and  the  same,  viz.,  faith  in  the,
world-process  and  the  metaphysics  of  Evolution,  we
have  yet  to  answer  explicitly  the  question,  which  so
far  we  have  answered  ,only  by  implication,  as  to
what  is  the  final  meaning  and  end  of  the  world-
process,  the  nature  of  that  "  far-off  divine  event  to
which  the  whole  creation  moves,"  and  in  what  sense
the  world  can  be  said  to  have  a  beginning  and  an
end.  And  this  .  is  in  some  ways  the  most  crucial
and  difficult  of  all  questions  ;  for  our  speculations
will  have  availed  us  nothing  if  we  ultimately  fail  to
prove  how  the  conception  of  a  world-process  can  be
attributed  to  ultimate  reality.  We  must  consider
then,  {a)  what  is  the  ultimate  meaning  of  the  world-
process,  {b)  what  were  its  beginning  and  previous  or
pre-costkic  conditions,  {c)  what  is  its  end  or  post-
cosmic  state,  (d)  whether  such  an  end  is  possible,  i.e.,
capable  of  actual  realization.

§  2. The answer to  the first  question  follows


432  CONCLUSION,

almost  at  once  from  the  formula  of  the  world's  evol-
ution. In  chapter  vili.  Evolution  was  found  to  be
the  development  of  the  individual  in  society,  and  it
is  easy  to  interpret  by  this  formula  of  what  Evolu-
tion actually  is,  what  it  must  be  intended  to  be.  If
Evolution  is  the  process  of  the  gradual  perfection-
ing  of  the  individual  in  society,  its  purpose  and  its
meaning  must  be  the  adaptation  of  the  individual
to  the  social  environment.  And  in  the  light  of
chapters  ix.  and  x.  the  individuals  to  be  adapted
or  perfected  by  social  harmony  are  the  ultimate
spiritual  existences  or  Egos  which  underlie  our  phe-
nomenal selves.  The  ultimate  aim,  therefore,  of  the
world-process  is  a  harmonious  society  of  perfect
individuals,  a  kingdom  of  Heaven  of  perfected
spirits,  in  which  all  friction  will  have  disappeared
from  their  interaction  with  God  and  with  one  an-
other.

§  3.  But  if  this  be  the  ultimate  end  or  aim  of  the
world-process,  light  is  at  once  thrown  on  its  starting-
point.  If  the  individuals  are  as  yet  imperfectly
harmonized,  but  tending  towards  harmony,  the  pro-
cess must  have  begun  with  a  minimum  of  harmony.
That  is  to  say,  at  the  beginning  of  the  world-process
lies  a  state  in  which  the  individual  spirits  formed  no
world  or  society,  and  did  not  interact  with  one  an-
other. Their  interaction  was  as  yet  a  mere  possi-
bility {cp.  ch.  x.  §  23),  and  each  existed  for  and  by
himself  in  a  timeless  solitude.  But  this  spiritual
chaos  forms  a  complete  antithesis  to  the  world  or
cosmos,  and  so  may  be  called  a  pre-cosmic  condi-
tion of  the  world-process.  It  is  precosmic  because
a  world  or  cosmos  could  not  come  into  existence
until  some  sort  of  connection  and  interaction  had
been established among the ultimate existences,


PRECOSMIC CONDITIONS OF THE PROCESS. 433


even  though  of  th6  most  imperfect  and  rudimentary
kind.  Thus  the  pre-cosmic  conditions  of  the  world-
process  lie  beyond  and  outside  the  process,  and  form,
a  limit  to  the  world  and  our  thought  about  Kx.,  a  parte
ante.  For  when  our  thought  travels  back  to  this
point,  the  subject  and  the  means  of  our  inquiries
alike  disappear.  We  cannot  ask  what  the  world
was  before  the  world  was,  what  was  before  Time
was.  For  without  an  interaction  of  the  Many  there
is  no  world  to  explain,  and  as  neither  Time  nor
Causation  apply  to  the  changeless  (cp.  §  4),  there
are  no  means  of  explaining  it.  We  cannot  answer
questions  as  to  what  the  pre-cosmic  is  in  itself,  be-
cause they  cannot  be  validly  asked,  i.e.,  formulated
without  a  reference  to  cosmic  conditions  which  are
ex  Aypot^esz  inappVicahle  to  the  pre-cosmic.  Our
thought  is  silenced  because  all  its  questions  hold
good  only  for  the  world- process,  and  become  un-
meaning in  face  of  the  pre-cosmic.  Yet  the  pre-
cosmic  is  the  presupposition  of  the  world-process
(ch.  xi.  §  16),  hence  we  have  already  had  occasion  to
anticipate  it  in  several  ways.  Thus  it  represents
the  hypothetical  state  of  the  absolute  independence
of  the  individual  atoms,  which  was  implied  as  the
logical  ideal  in  the  theory  of  the  development  of
matter  (ch.  viii.  §  1 7).  And  again  it  forms  the  condi-
tions which  limited  the  Deity  (ch.  x.  §  2),  the  ultimate
nature  of  things  which  was  not  identical  with  God
(ch.  x.  §  24),  the  resisting  Egos  whose  consciousness
could  not  be  destroyed  but  only  depressed  (ch.  ix.
§  27-28),  the  immortal  spirits  of  the  development  of
which  all  living  beings  are  phases  (ch.  xi,  §  14).

But  though  the  conception  of  a  pre-cosmic  state  is
a  logical  inference  from  that  of  a  real  world-process,
it  must  be  admitted  that  our  imagination  has  no

E.ofS.  F F


434  CONCLUSION.

little  difficulty  in  picturing  it,  and  that  it  can  claim
little  support  from  previous  philosophy.  But  then
vfe  recognized  that  for  various  reasons  the  concep-
tion of  a  time-process  and  of  a  real  history  of  things
was  alien  to  philosophy,^  until  the  scientific  doctrine
of  Evolution  boldly  affirmed  the  reiality  of  history
(ch.  vii.  §  2).  On  the  other  hand,  it  is  interesting  ,
to  find  that  our  account  of  the  pre-cosmic  receives
substantial  confirmation  from  religious  tradition,
which  in  preserving  its  memory  has  shown  no  less
superiority  over  profane  thought  than  when  it  was
the  first  to  assert  the  reality  of  the  world's  beginning.
For  only  the  preconceptions  of  a  mistaken  ex-
egesis can  blind  us  to  the  fact  that  though  the  first
chapter  of  the  Book  of  Genesis  professes  to  ^ive  an
account  of  the  creation  of  the  world,  it  does  noi
assert  its  creation  tf?/^  of  nothing.  It  does  not  pro-
fess to  give  the  origin  of  all  existence,  but  only  of
our  material  and  p/ienomenal  world.  It  clearly  re-
cognizes the  pre-existence  of  good  and  evil  and  of
spirittcal  beings,  which  were  presumably  uncreated,
and  certainly  pre-cosmic,  like  our  ultimate  spirits.
The  tree  of  the  knowledge  of  good  and  evil  demon-
strates that  even  before  the  Fall  evil  was  potentially
existent  in  the  world,  and  the  obvious  inference  is
that  the  world  was  created  in  order  to  remedy  this
pre-existent  and  pre-cosmic  defect.  And  the  nature
of  this  defect  is  further  elucidated,  by  the  religious
tradition  of  the  fall  of  Satan  and  his  angels. Their

^  Ancient  philosophy  lacked  the  evidences  of  progress  (ch.  vii.
§  16) ;  modern  philosophy  rested  on  an  epistemolOgical  basis,  and
so  was  congenitally  incapacitated  from  asserting  the  reality  of  the
process  (ch;  ii.  §  17;  iii.  §  15),  although  Hegel  made  a  bold  effort
to  transcend  the  limitations  of  his  standpoint — by  confusing  the
logical  with  the  real  process  and  identifying  the  connexions  of
logica,!  categories  with  the  development  of  real  existences.


THE END OF THE PROCESS.  435

fall,  we  are  told,  was  due  to  pride,  a  term  which
would  describe  not  unaptly  the  defiant  resistance  of
ultimate  spirits  to  the  attempt  to  induce  them  to
submit  their- selfish  and  intractable  wills  to  the  har-
mony of  cosmic  order.  All  this  agrees  excellently
well  with  the  conclusions  we  have  independently
reached ;  we  also  were  led  to  ascribe  Evil  to  the
agency  of  superhuman  forces,  viz.  the  Egos  (dh.  x.
§  25),  and  to  find  the  source  of  its  all-pervading  taint
in  the  region  of  the  pre-cosmic ;  in  short,  to  regard
the  nature  of  the  world  as  conditioned  by  what
existed  before  its  production  and  before  -the  begin-
nihg  of  its  process.  On  the  other, hand,  the  fall  of
the  angels  must  not  be  interpreted  as  a  lapse  from
an  initial  harmony,  in  view  of  the  fact  that  harmony,
once  attained,  would  necessarily  be  eternal  and  un-
changeable (§  10),  and  it  seems  preferable  to  regard
ourselves  as  angels  in  course  of  development  out  of
isolated  and  unsociable  spirits.  ' ■

Thus  the  beginning  of  the  world- process,  i.e.,  of
what  we  call  the  world,  may  be  conceived  as  taking
place  in  consequence  of  the  union  of  the  individual
spirits  into  some  sort  of  whole,  under  the  influence
of  the  Divine  Spirit,  and  the  object  of  the  process
will  be  attained  when  that  spiritual  whole  or  com-
monwealth can  be  rendered  completely  harmonious.

§  4.  But  though  the  pre-cosmic  conditions  of  the
world-process  enable  us  to  understand  much  that
would  otherwise  remain  mysterious,  they  are  not  of
such  direct  interest  as  the  question  of  x!a&  post-cosmic
condition  and  end  of  the  world-process.

If  our  speculations  have  not  entirely  missed  their
mark,  the  world-process  will  come  to  an  end  when
all  the  spirits  whom  it  is  designed  to  harmonize
have  been  united  in  a  perfect  society. ,  Or,  to  put  it


436  CONCLUSION.

in  the  language  of  chapter  viii.,  when  the  individual
has  become  a  perfect  individual,  and  has  been  deve-
loped to  the  utmost  of  his  powers,  and  is  in  perfect
harmony  with  and  completely  adapted  to  the  whole
of  his  environment.

This  attainment  of  the  end  of  the  world-process
may  be  described  by  the  most  various  formulas,  for
it  would  represent  the  perfection  of  all  the  varied
activities  of  the  process.  We  may  call  it  in  the
language  of  physics  a  state  of  perfect  equilibrium,
or  in  that  of  biology,  a  perfect  life  or  adaptation  to
environment,  or  in  that  of  sociology,  the  perfection
of  the  individual  in  the  perfection  of  society ;  or
again,  we  may  describe  it  psychologically  as  perfect
happiness,  goodness,  knowledge  and  beauty.

But  though  it  is  the  perfection  and  aim  of  all
the  activities  of  life,  it  is  yet  contrasted  with  them
by  its  metaphysical  character.  For  it  would  be
opposed  to  the  changing  Becoming  of  our  world  of
Time  as  a  changeless  and  eternal  state  of  Being.  In
it  Becoming  would  be  no  longer  possible,  for  all
would  be  all  they  could  be ;  the  actual  and  the
potential  would  be  co-extensive,  for  all  would  have
realized  their  highest  ideals.  And  as  all  would  be
in  perfect  equilibrium,  perfectly  adapted  to  their
environment,  and  in  perfect  correspondence  with  it,
there  could  be  no  more  change  :  neither  within  nor
without  the  universe  would  there  be  left  a  cause  of
disturbance  or  change.

Nor  would  there  be  any  more  Time,  for  Time,
as  we  saw  (ch.  ix.  §  1 1),  was  but  the  measure  of  the
impermanence  of  the  imperfectly-adjusted,  and  so
it  would  pass  away  together  with  the  changes  by
which  alone  it  could  be  estimated.  For  without
consciousness of  change  there  can  be  no  conscious-


THE NATURE OF PERFECT BEING.  437

ness  of  Time,  and the sceptical objections to a
Time^  independent  of  our  measuremeats  of  Time
(ch.  iii.  §  6)  should  have  cured  us  of  the  fancy  that
absolute  Time  could  exist,  which  was  not  relative
to  change  of  some  sort. And  so  the  case  we  antici-
pated in  an  earlier  chapter  (ix.  §  1 1)  would  have  been
realized,  and  Time  would  have  passed  into  Eternity.,
And  in  that  state  all  difficulties  would  be  solved,
and  all  discords  harmonized. There  would  be  in
it  no  change,  Becoming,  or  death,  but  life  eternal.
The  problems  of  our  imperfect  life  would  have  been
either  answered  or  seen  to  be  unmeaning. Pain
and  Evil  would, have  ceased  to  be  actual,  and  their
past  actuality  would  be  approved  of  as  the  necessary
means  to  perfect  harmony. The  infinity  of  Time
and  the  infinity  of  Becoming  would  have  ceased  to
perplex  beings  who  would  see  how  the  absence  of
the  perfect  equipoise  of  Being  dissevered  the  union
of  Eternity  into the  discordant trinity of  Time.
The  discrepancy  between  thought  and  feeling  (ch.  iii.
§§  1 3-1 7)  would  have  disappeared ;  our  interpretation
of  Becoming  by  means  of  Being  would  have  been
justified  when  all  beings  had  become  perfect. For
all  would  appear  as  they  really  were,  we  should
think  them  such  as  they  were,  think  them  as  we
perceived  them,  and  perceive  them  as  we  thought
them  ;  reality  would  have  realized  the  ideals  of  our
thought,  and  so  our  ideals  would  no  longer  be  un-
real, and  our thought would  no longer need  to
idealize  realities  with  which  it  was  in  perfect  corre-
spondence (ch.  V.  §  2). And  whereas  the  pre-cosmic
put  an  end  to  further  inquiry  by  destroying  thfe  mean-
ing of  the  questions  asked,  the  post-cosmic  would
put  an  end  to  inquiry  by  making  it  impossible  to  ask
them. For  how  could  the  endless  regress  of  caus-


438  CONCLUSION.

ation  perturb  a  spirit  consciaus  of  the  self-evident
and  self-sufficing  order  of  the  All  in  the  fruition  of
a  self-supported  harmony  that  suggested  no  question
and  admitted  of  no  doubt,  of  a  life  of  light  that
could  not  be  borne  until  the  last  dark  shadow  had
vanished  from  the  soul  ?

§  5,  But  from  the  ecstatic  contemplation  of  such
a  state  of  Being  we  should  be  apt  to  be  rudely-
recalled  by  the  objection  that  it  was  inconceivable
and  impossible,  and  incompatible  with  conscious
existence.  There  would  be  quoted  against  us  a
psychological  "  law  ''  of  Hobbes',  that  sentire  semper
idem  et  nil  sentire  ad  idem  recidunt,  that  a  con-
sciousness in  which  there  was  no  change  was  no
consciousness  at  all.  And  doubtless  there  would  be
truth  in  this  objection  if  by  being  "  always  con-
scious "  of  a  feeling  consciousness  in  Time  were
indicated.  Our  present  nature  cannot  react  inde-
finitely upon  the  same  stimuli.  Or  rather,  the  stimuli
being  the  resultant  of  constantly-changing  factors,
cannot  remain  the  same.  The  nature  and  the
stimulus  are  both  changing  from  moment  to  moment,
and  can  generate  only  an  imperfect  and  impermanent
consciousness.  But  it  is  only  on  account  of  the
imperfection  of  our  nature  that  our  activity  cannot
endure.  God,  as  Aristotle  says,^  eternally  rejoices
in  a  single  and  simple  pleasure,  and  our  case  would
be  very  different  if  we  also  had  attained  to  perfect
harmony  and  eternal  Being.  For,  as  all  Time  and
change  would  have  been  transcended,  whatever
ecstasy  of  bliss  accompanied  the  first  consciousness
of  the  attainment  of  perfect  adaptation,  would  per-
sist unimpaired,  timelessly  and  without  change.

1  Eth.  Nich.  vii.  14  (13),  s.f.


PERFECTION NOT SELF-CONSCIOUS.  439

It  is  true,  however,  that  though  perfect  Being
would  be  conscious,  it  would  not  be  self-conscious,  if
by  self-consciousness  is  meant  the  power  of  con-
sciously distinguishing  oneself  from  one's  state,  of
contrasting  what  one  was  with  what  one  is,  of
proving  one's  happiness  to  the  satisfaction  of  others
or  of  oneself,  in  short,  of  arguing  about  it.  For  all
such  operations  and  states  of  consciousness  are  in-
delibly stamped  with  the  mark  of  change  and  im-
perfection.

But  why  should  any  one  wish  to  be  self-conscious
in  this  way  ?  For  though  argument  and  philosophic
self-consciousness  maybe  a  salutary  and  even  a  neces-
sary discipline  for  imperfect '  spirits,  Milton  is  surely
right  in  regarding  them  as  permanent  occupations
appropriate  only  to  devils.^  For  while  they  might
assuage  the  lot  of  lost  spirits,  whose  anguish  they
might  charm  for  a  while  with  a  pleasing  sorcery,
they  would  only  fruitlessly  disturb  the  blessed
denizens  of  Heaven.  Even  now  self-consciousness
is  a  necessary  evil  rather  than  a  positive  good  and
a  fatal  alloy  to  unreflecting  enjoyment.  It  is
possible  to  feel  without  consciousness  of  a  contrast,
and  it  is  only  to  self-conscious  thought  that  every-
thing suggests  its  logical  contrary. ,  But  pure  feeling,
too  entirely  absorbed  in  its  present  reality  to  point
to  anything  beyond  itself,  is  far  from  being  less  real
and  vivid  than  feeling  which  is  accompanied  by  the
uneasy  reflections  of  self-consciousness.  On  the
contrary,  we  can  see  even  now  that  the  happiness
that  reflects  is  lost,  that  comparisons  are  odious,
and  creep  into  the  soul  upon  the  wings  of  the
Harpy  Doubt  when  it  has  sullied  the  unsuspecting
transparency  of  its  virgin  feelings.

1  Paradise  Lost,  II.  566.


440  CONCLUSION.

What  need  then  of  self-consciousness  in  Heaven,
and  what  could  cause  it  in  a  state  of  perfection  ?
What  could  there  be  doubtful  to  dispute  ?  Who
would  raise  a  question  about  the  reality  of  bliss
such  that  it  could  arouse  self-consciousness  to  refute
its  absurdity  ?  Would  happiness  be  any  the  more
real  for  being  re- asserted  against  denial,  or  would
not  such  assertion  ipso  facto  destroy  its  perfection  ?
And  if  all  were  blessed,  there  would  be  no  tempter
to  raise  the  question.

The  idea  that  consciousness  is  impossible  without
self-consciousness  is  merely  a  pernicious  example
of  the  fallacious  tendency  to  suppose  that  all  reality
must  be  capable  of  being  expressed  in  terms  of
discursive  thought,  and  this  idea  It  was  found  neces-
sary to  reject  long  ago  (ch.  ii.  §  21,  and  iii.  §  14-19).

§  6.  There  is,  however,  a  kindred  error  more
-deep-rooteci  even  than  that  of  regarding  conscious-
ness as  dependent  on  change,  and  even  more  fatal
to  a  proper  appreciation  of  the  nature  of  perfection  ;
the  idea,  to  wit,  that  a  state  of  Being  is  a  state  of
Rest.

Our  ideas  of  activity  are  so  moulded  upon  activities
involving  motion  and  change  that  Rest  is  regarded
as  the  natural  antithesis  to  change,  and  so  we  are
wont  to  speak  of  Heaven  as  a  changeless  state  of
Rest.  Or  if  the  ethical  inadequacy  of  this  treat-
ment strikes  us,  we  sometimes  rush  into  the  opposite
extreme,  and  still  more  absurdly  regard  perfection
as  a  state  of  work,  i.e.,  of  imperfect  activity,  which
is  not  its  own  end.  In  either  case  the  effects  upon
the  conception  of  Perfection  are  disastrous,  and  the
failure  to  grasp  the  true  alternative  to  work  has
gone  far  to  banish  it  from  philosophy  and  to  render
it  ridiculous  in  religion. And  yet  nothing  could  be


442  CONCLUSION.

tution  of  an  eternally  active  and  adjusted  whole.
Which  of  these  diametrically  opposed  ideals  is
being  realized  by  our  world  of  Becoming?  is  it
tending  towards  Being  or  Not- Being,  towards  Rest
or  Perfect  Activity  ?  And,  according  as  we  decide
for  the  one  or  the  other  of  these,  we  shall  arrive
at  radically  different  theories  about  the  world-
process,  resulting  in  totally  different  views  of  life.

The  one,  which  is  the  view  which  Pantheism  can
escape  only  by  a  sacrifice  of  consistency,  regards
the  world-process  as  ultimately  and  essentially
illusory':  the  fitful  struggles  of  the  individual  and
of  the  race  alike  are  in  the  end  absorbed  again  into
the  restful  quietude  of  non-existence  :  the  Absolute
that  was  before  the  world  began,  and  will  be  after
it  has  ceased,  is  AH  and  Nought,  unchangeable
and  untouched  by  the  phantom  worlds  which  an
inexplicable  fate  produces,  and  inexorably  sweeps
away.  So  Quietism  becomes  the  ideal  of  life,  and
Nirvana  its  end  :  the  highest  and  the  only  good
is  reabsorption  into  the  Absolute,  in  which  life  and
suffering  cease  together.  Such  is  the  ideal  of  Rest,
the  ideal  which  from  time  immemorial  has  lurked
beneath  the  whole  life  of  the  East,  for  all  its  creeds
and  all  its  mysticism ;  and  a  strange  and  doleful
ideal  it  seems  to  put  before  us  as  the  end  of  all  the
activities  of  life  !

The  other  ideal  is  an  ideal  of  Activity,  enhanced
and  intensified  until  it  becomes  perfect  and  constant
and  eternal,  and  transcends  the  motion  and  change
of  imperfect  effort.  It  asserts  that  life  is  essentially
activity ;  that  perfect  life  and  perfect  bliss  are  but
the  consciousness  of  the  harmonious  exercise  of  an
activity  that  meets  no  check,  and  is  broken  by  no
obstacle. And  so  it  is  an  ideal  not  of  Nirvana  but


1'  f
3


THE IDEAL OF PERI'ECT ACTIVITY.  44

of  Heaven,  not  of  non-existence  but  of  harmonious
existence,  of  individuals  who  are  not  annihilated
but  united.  And  if  the  one  ideal  has  the  support
of  common  prejudice,  of  the  more  or  less  avowed
consequences  of  the  majority  of  philosophic  systems,
and  of  the  dreamy  despair  of  the  East,  the  other
may  appeal  to  the  religious  tradition  of  Heaven,
and  confidently  rely  on  all  the  healthier  instincts,
on  whatever  Jiope  and  strength  remains  in  ma:n.

And  it  is  not  without  support  even  in  past  philo-
sophy ;  indeed,  its  clearest  description  is  found  in
the  writings  of  the  greatest  of  thinkers.  Aristotle,
in  a  passage  all  too  brief  for  the  correct  guidance
of  his  successors,  speaks  of  the  divine  activity  as
being  one  and  changeless  and  invariable,  because
it  IS  an  activity  that  involves  no  motioH.^  And  it
is  as  such  an  evipfjeia.  uKivijarlas  that  we  must  conceive
the  perfect  activity  of  Being,  z.e.,  as  an  activity
which  has  become  so  perfectly  adjusted  that  no  an-
omalies or  variations  exist  in  it  which  could  produce
the  consciousness  of  change,  and  serve  to  measure
Time.  And  if  the  activities  of  life  are  ever  tending
towards  more  perfect  adaptation  and  adjustment,
such  must  be  the  idea.1  to  which  they  point,  and
to  which  they  will  approximate  until  the  goa.1  is
reached,  and  Becoming  is  merged  in  the  equable
and  harmonious  but  changeless  activity  of  Being.

§  7.  And  perhaps  we  may  illustrate  the  case
of  perfect  activity  by  that  of  perfect  motion.  Per-
fect, i.e.,  unimpeded  motion  is,  according  to  Newton's
second  law  of  motion,  unchanging,  undeviatihg,  and
eternal  motion  in  a  straight  line.  But  is  such  motion
ever  realized  ?  And  what  are  the  conditions  of  its
realization  ? It  is  never  realized  because  the  mutual

1  'Eve/jyeta  a.Ki.vr\via%  (Eth.  Nk.  VII.  xiv.  9).


444  CONCLUSION.

attractions  of  bodies  produce  deviations  from  the
rectilinear  motion.  It  could  be  realized,  therefore,
only  by  the  union  of  all  the  bodies  in  the  universe.
Supposing  this  to  have  been  accomplished,  the
motion  would  go  on  with  equable  velocity  to  ajl
eternity.  But  though  the  body  thus  formed  would
be  in  motion  to  the  highest  and  most  perfect  degree,
it  would  yet  be  impossible  for  tis  to  detect  this  fact
unless  we  knew  it  beforehand.  It  would  be  an
impossibility  for  one  not  in  the  secret  to  discover
any  trace  of  this  motion.  For  there  would  be  no
inequality  or  distinction  in  Space,  by  which  it  would
be  possible  to  determine  its  motion,  and  hence  to
an  outsider  it  would  appear  to  be  at  rest.  And  yet
it  would  be  in  motion,  regarded  from  inside.  Now
supposing  4t  were  conscious  ;  it  would  be  conscious
of  being  in  motion,  and  conscious  also  that  its
motion  was  perfectly  equable  and  rectilinear.

And  the  case  of  the  perfect  activity  of  a  state
of  Being  would  be  precisely  analogous.  It  would
be  an  activity  so  perfect  that  the  ordinary  modes
of  measuring  activities  would  be  no  longer  appli-
cable to  it.  And  yet  there  would  be  an  internal
consciousness  and  fruition  of  activity.  But,  again,
as  in  the  case  of  physical  motion,  that  consciousness
could  not  be  transferred  to  an  outsider.  We  saw
above  (§  5)  that  the  consciousness  of  perfection  did
not  involve  self-consciousness,  that  it  was  neither
capable  nor  in  need  of  reasserting  itself  against  out-
side criticism  :  this  would  be  as  impossible  in  the
case  of  perfect  activity  as  it  would  be  to  prove  that
the  body  was  in  motion.

We  may  look  forward,  then,  to  a  future  in  whidi
activity,  i.e.,  life,  becomes  ever  more  intense,  more
sustained,  and more  harmonious, and  finally cul-


PERFECTION  CONCEIVABLE  NOT  IMAGINABLE.  445

minates  in  a  perfect  activity,  which  sums'  up  and
includes  all  the  activities  of  life,  and  realizes  in
actuality  all  the  powers  of  which  we  are  capable.

§  8.  The  claims  of  the  Being,  which  is  the  end
of  the  world-process,  to  be  regarded  as  perfect
activity  having  been  vindicated,  the  question  natur-
ally arises,  of  what  this  activity  consists,  whether,
e.g.,  it  takes  the  form  of  a  perpetual  oratorio,  or
of  eternal  buffalo  hunting  ;  whether  eternity  is  spent
in  the  society  of  Houris,  or  in  the  fighting  and
feasting  of  Walhalla.  The  question  is  a  natural
one,  but  the  mistaken  mode  of  answering  it  has
perhaps  done  more  to  discredit  the  conception  it
was  intended  to  elucidate  than  all  the  attacks  of  its
adversaries.  For  nothing  is  in  the  long  run  more
fatal  to  the  interests  of  an  ideal  than  the  attempt
to  identify  it  with  the  sensuous  imagery  of  an  in-
adequate presentation.  Such  a  procedure  confuses
the  presentation  with  the  conception,^  and  leads  to
the  rejection  of  the  latter  as  soon  as  men  become
conscious  of  the  absurdity  of  the  former.  Now  it
follows  from  the  very  nature  of  the  conception  of
perfect  activity  that  we  can  imagine  no  adequate
content  for  it  in  terms  of  imperfect  activities.  For
that  activity  is  immeasurably  exalted  above  our
present  state  of  existence,  and,  as  we  saw  (ch.  vi.
§  1 2),  the  lower  can  never  anticipate  the  actual  con-
tent of  the  higher  life  ;  it  can  at  the  most  determine
it  as  the  perfection  of  the  forms  in  which  the  lower
is  cast.

1  "Conception"  in  English  is  very  ambiguous,  and  corres-
ponds both  to  "  Vorstellung "  and  "Begriff"  in  German.  The
possession  of  this  distinction  would  have  spared  us  a  vast  amount
of  bad  logic,  bad  psychology,  and  futile  dispute  about  the  "  incon-
ceivable."


446  CONCLUSION.

And,  moreover,  the  demand  that  we  should  de-
termine the  content  of  the  ideal  of  perfect  activity
involves  a  forgetfulness  of  the  method  whereby  we
found  that  ideal.  If  it  is  an  ideal  of  our  thought,
it  cannot  for  that  very  reason  as  yet  be  realized
in  the  sensible  world,  and  the  attempts  to  imagine
lit  in  terms  of  the  sensible  are  not  only  fruitless,  but
wrong,  in  principle.

We  must  avoid,  therefore,  with  equal  care  the
contrary  errors  of  regarding  the  conception  of  perfect
.activity  either  as  unthinkable  or  as  imaginable.  It
is  not  imaginable,  because  the  real  world  presents
us  only  with  activities  which  are  essentially  imper-
fect. It  is  pre-eminently  thinkable,  because  it  is
the  ideal  towards  which  the  Real  tends,  and  the
standard  to  which  it  is  referred,  the  conception  by
which  it  becomes  intelligible.

And  this  conceivability  of  Perfection,  in  spite  of
die  inadequacy  of  the  sensuous  content  our  imagin-
ation essays  to  give  it,  is  a  point  of  such  importance
as  to  warrant  a  brief  digression  in  order  to  realize  ^
precisely  the  cardinal  affirmation  on  which  the  pos-
sibility of  Being  rests.  It  affirms  that  if  we  are
right  in  interpreting  Reality  by  our  thought,  i.e.,  if
knowledge  is  a  reality  and  not  an  elaborate  illusion,
then  reality  must  realize  the  ideals  of  that  thought.
Now  in  all  knowledge  we  use  the  category  of  Being,.,
we  describe  all  things  as  being  or  not  being,  and
.assert  that  everything  must  either  be  or  not  be.
Without  the  standard  of  Being  to  refer  to,  the  Becom-
ing of  the  world  would  be  utterly  indescribable  and
unknowable  (ck  iii.  §  13  ;  iv.  §  22).  But  if  we  mean
*  to  assert  that  our  standard  is  a  true  one,  that  the
real  world  is  really  subject  to  the  laws  of  our  think-
ing faculty,  we  must  assert  also  all  that  is  implied  in


•TI-lE UNION OF ALL IDEALS.  447

the  meaning  of  that  standard.  If  we  know  that  the
real  world  aspires,  and  as  yet  aspires  unsuccessfully,
to  be  in  the  strictest  sense  of  the  word,  if  as  yet
reality  only  becomes  and  contains  an  element  of  Not-
Being,  we  must  assert  that  eventually  it  will  really
be,  and  really  realize  the  ideal  whereby  we  know  it.
We  must  assert,  in  other  words,  the  reality  of  perfect
Being  in  order  to  justify  the  assertion  of  the  reality
of  knowledge.  And  so  the  conditions  and  nature
of  such  Being  which  may  be  determined  by  our.
thought  (for  Being  is  a  category  of  our  thought)
must  be  binding  on  all  reality.

Being,  then,  is  an  ideal  which  the  world-process
must  realize,  and  as  one  of  our  ideals  and  like  all
■our  ideals,  it  must  as  yet  be  a  mere  form,  the  real
content  of  which  can  be  filled  in  only  by  the  con-
summation of  the  process  of  Evolution.  It  mUst  be
experienced  to  be  understood,  and  we  can  determine
•only  the  fprmal  aspects  to  which  it  must  conform.
Perfect  activity  can  be  described  only  as  the  perfec-
tion of  the  activities  of  life,  and  most  of  these  are  so
imperfect  that  their  attainment  of  their  ideal  and
their  realization  of  perfection  would  absorb  them  in
something  more  divine  but  different.

§  9.  Thus,  though  we  may  describe  the  perfect
.activity  of  complete  adjustment  as  the  supreme  End
of  the  process  of  Evolution,  as  the  all-embracing
■culmination  of  all  the  activities  and  ideals  of  Jife,.'we
must  yet  not  overlook  the  fact  that,  strictly  speaking,
it  would  transcend  them.  If  we  regard  Knowledge,
Gpodness,  Beauty  and  Happiness  as  the  supreme
ideals  of  life,  as  the  ideals  respectively  of  the
iintellectual,  the  moral,  the  aesthetic,  and  the  sen-
sitive consciousness,  we  must  say  that  the  perfect
activity  of  Being  includes  all  these,  and  yet  is  some-


448  CONCLUSION.

thing  more.  It  is  perfect  knowledge,  perfect  good-
ness, perfect  beauty  and  perfect  happiness,  because
it  is  that  into  which  they  all  pass  and  are  united.
And  in  it  they  are  so  absorbed  that  they  no  longer
exist  in  isolation  and  in  opposition  to  one  another.
They  are  fused  in  a  whole  which  reconciles,  unites
and  transcends  them.  And  so  it  would  inadequately
represent  the  reality  to  say  that  perfect  activity
was  either  knowledge,  or  goodness,  or  beauty,  or
happiness.

It  could  not,  strictly  speaking,  be  knowledge.  For
perfect  knowledge,  the  knowledge  of  all  that  is  to
be  known,  the  highest  activity  of  reason  in  which
reason  were  fully  master  of  its  subject-matter,  would
be  a  state  radically  different  from  anything  we  now
call  thought.  To  a  perfect  reason,  to  which  all
knowledge  is  an  ever-present  actuality,  the  exercise
of  anything  like  thought  seems  needless  and  degrad-
ing. For  all  our  thinking  involves  change  and
transition  from  thought  to  thought,  and  therefore
Time ;  and  in  this  case,  moreover,  it  could  discover
nothing  that  was  not  already  known.

And  so  with  perfect  goodness.  The  perfection
of  the  moral  consciousness  would  issue  in  the  supra-
moral.  Goodness  which  has  become  so  perfect,  so
ingrained  in  nature,  that  the  suggestion  of  evil  can
no  longer  strike  a  responsive  chord,  that  wrong-
doing can  no  longer  offer  any  temptation,  is  no
longer  goodness  in  any  human  sense.  And  more-
over, not  only  does  wrong  action  become  "  a  moral
impossibility"  in  the  perfectioning  of  the  moral
consciousness,  but  the  occasion  for  moral  action
gradually  vanishes  as  the  moral  environment  ap-
proaches perfection.  As  Mr.  Spencer  so  well  says,
self-sacrifice  becomes  an  impossibility  where  each  is


HAPPINESS A RESULT OF PERFECTION.  449

animated  by  an  equal  and  altruistic  zeal  to  prevent
the  other's  sacrificing  himself  to  him.^

And  so  with  perfect  beauty  :  what  sphere  would
remain  for  the  exercise  of  the  aesthetic  consciousness
in  a  state  in  which  material  form  has  perhaps  long
been  transcended,  and  where  no  ugliness  remained
to  set  off  beauty  by  its  contrast  ?  And  if  we  say,
and  say  rightly,  that  our  sense  of  the  beautiful  may
rise  above  the  appreciation  of  the  physical  points
which  at  present  almost  engross  it,  and  that  beauty
would  remain  as  the  reflexion  in  consciousness  of
the  perfect  order  and  harmony  of  Being,  and  the
perfect  adjustment  and  correspondence  of  its  factors,
this  would  yet  be  a  use  of  the  ideal  of  Beauty  in  a
superhuman  sense.

The  ideal  of  Happiness  is  perhaps  less  inadequate
to  describe  the  activity  of  Perfect  Being  than  any
other,  but  the  reason  lies  in  its  very  vagueness.  It
does  not  directly  suggest  to  us  any  mode  of  being
perfectly  happy,  and  rather  insinuates  that  the  means
of  attaining  happiness  would  be  indifferent  so  long
as  the  aim  was  attained.  And  this  is  profoundly
true,  in  the  sense  that  no  one  can  be  more  than
happy,  and  the  perfect  attainment  of  any  of  the  other
ideals,  e.g.,  either  of  goodness  or  of  knowledge,  would
necessarily  draw  perfect  happiness  in  its  train.

But  even  the  ideal  of  happiness  is  liable  to  objec-
tion as  suggesting  an  exclusion  of  the  other  activities
rather  than  the  culminating  crown  and  final  perfec-
tion of  an  all-inclusive  adjustment  of  all  the  activities

^  It  is  to  such  a  metaphysical  ideal  of  a  supra-moral  state  that
Mr.  Spencer's  "absolute  ethics  "  refer,  and  they  are  justly  obnox-
ious only  to  the  criticism  that  he  does  not  seem  to  realize  what
a  radical  difference  from  the  conditions  of  our  present  woHd
they  would  involve.

R.  ofS.  G G


450 .  CONCLUSION.

of  life.  It  is  only  if  we  remember  to  regard  perfect
happiness  as  the  resultant  harmony  of  perfect  good-
ness and  perfect  wisdom  that  it  will  serve  as  ain  un-
objectionable popular  statement  of  the  formal  nature
of  Perfection.

§  lo.  And  as  the  attainment  of  Perfection  de-
pends on  the  attainment  of  a  complete  harmony  of
the  whole  environment,  it  must  include  all  beings.
The  happiness  of  each  is  bound  up  with  that  of  all.
For  if  there  remained  any  portion  of  the  environ-
ment, however  humble  and  however  remote,  excluded
from  the  harmonious  adjustment  of  perfection,  there
would  be  no  security  that  it  might  not  enter  into
active  interaction  with  the  rest  and  destroy  the
harmony  and  changeless  eternity  of  the  perfected
elements.

And  froqi  this  necessity  not  even  God  is  exempt.
To  deny  this  is  equally  impossible  on  philosophic
and  on  religious  grounds.

Philosophically  its  denial  Involves  a  denial  of  the
category  of  Interaction,  for  if  there  is  any  interaction
between  the  Deity  and  the  world,  the  former  also
must  be  affected.  If  God  acts  upon  the  world,  the
world  must  react  upon  God  :  If  God  is  conscious  of
the  Time-process,  then  God  also  Is  not  eternal  while
the  process  lasts ;  if  God  realizes  His  purpose  in
the  world,  then  its  attainment  involves  a  change  in
God.  And  God  tnust  be  conscious  of  the  existence
of  the  world,  if  the  world  Is  to  be  conscious  of  his
existence,  for  it  is  only  by  his  action  upon  us  that
we  are  led  to  infer  the  existence  of  a  God.  The
Aristotelian  account  of  a  Deity  totally  unconscious
of  the  world's  existence  and  unaffected  by  it,  who
yet  is  its  prime  mover,  by  a  magical  attraction  he
exercises  upon  it, Is  utterly  Impossible, though  it


god's  sympathy  with  the  world. 451

implies  a  perception  of  the  difficulty  which  is  lack-
ing to  those  Avho  glibly  repeat  their  belief  in  the
eternity  and  immutability  of  God.  Aristotle  clearly
saw  that  any  connection  with  the  imperfect  must
involve  a  sympathetic  imperfection  in  the  Deity,  and
to  avoid  what  he  considered  a  degradation  of  the
divine  nature,  he  denied  that  God  could  be  con-
scious of  anything  less  perfect  than  himself.  And
then,  lest  this  denial  of  the  sympathy  of  the  perfect
with  the  imperfect  should  cut  away  the  ratio  cognos-
cendi  of  the  perfect,  he  devised  his  extraordinary
doctrine  of  the  Deity  as  unconsciously  the  object  of
the  world's  desire  ;  i.e.,  as  he  could  not  deny  the
connection  of  the  perfect  with  the  imperfect,  without
denying  the  existence  of  the  former,  he  denied  that
the  connection  was  reciprocal ;  just  as  though  one
could  build  a  bridge  over  which  men  could  not  pass
in  either  direction.  But  the  revival  of  such  a  denial
of  the  necessary  implication  of  action  and  reaction,
by  modern  Pantheism,  is  irnpossible :  an  unrespon-
sive Absolute,  as  we  saw  in  chapter  x.  (§  10),  which
is  unaffected  by  the  world-process,  is  nothing,  and
certainly  not  God.

And  from  the  standpoint  of  religious  emotion,  it
is  equally  certain  that  the  struggle  of  the  imperfect
must  be  reflected  in  the  consciousness  of  God.
God  also  cannot  be  happy  while  there  is  misery
in  the  world,  God  cannot  be  perfect  while  evil  en-
dures, nor  eternal  or  changeless,  while  the  aim  of
the  world-process  is  unrealized.  If  we  suffer.  He
must  suffer ;  if  we  sin,  He  must  expiate  our  sins.

The  conception  of  a  Deity  absorbed  in  perfect,
unchanging  and  eternal  bliss  is  a  blasphemy  upon
the  Divine  energy  which  might  be  permitted  to  the
heathen  ignorance  of  Aristotle,  but  which  should  be


452  CONCLUSION.

abhorred  by  all  who  have  learnt  the  lesson  of  the
Crucifixion.  A  theology  which  denies  that  the
imperfection  of  the  world  must  be  reflected  in  the
sorrows  of  the  Deity,  simply  shows  itself  blind  to
the  deepest  and  truest  meaning  of  the  figure  of  Him
that  was  "  a  man  of  sorrows  and  acquainted  with
grief,"  and  deaf  to  the  gospel  of  Divine  symjpathy
with  the  world.

Thus  the  world-process  is  the  process  of  the
redemption  alike  of  God,  of  the  world,  and  of  our
own  selves.  To  promote  the  attainment  of  Perfec-
tion, therefore,  must  be  the  supreme  motive  and
paramount  obligation  of  conduct,  the  supreme  prin-
ciple of  life,  in  comparison  with  which  all  others
sink  into  insignificance.  And  to  have  risen  to  the
consciousness  of  the  fact  that  they  can,  and  ought,
and  must  co-operate  with  the  Divine  Purpose  in
order  to  accelerate  the  attainment  of  Perfection,
must  surely  be  equivalent  to  doing  so  with  all  the
strength  and  insight  they  possess,  in  all  beings
worthy  of  the  name  of  rational.

§  II.  But  can  the  purpose  of  the  world  be  real-
ized, not  merely  in  theory,  but  in  practice  ?  What
if  the  world-process  prove  a  failure  ?  What  if  the
constitution  of  things  be  such  as  to  make  a  complete
harmony  of  all  existences  impossible  ?

To  such  doubts  the  most  obvious  answer  is  that
it  is  not  likely  that  the  divine  wisdom  should
attempt  the  impossible,  and  that  therefore  the  fact
that  the  world  is  in  process  contains  the  assurance
that  the  end  of  its  process  may  be  achieved.

But  the  objection  may  also  take  the  form  that
though  the  end  of  the  world-process  is  finite,  yet  the
approximations  to  it  are  infinite,  and  hence  it  will
never  be  reached. Progress  may  be  compared  to


CAN THE WORLD-PROCESS FAIL  ?  453

an  asymptote,  always  approaching  the  state  of  Per-
fect Being  and  never  attaining  it.

But  here  again  our  fears  would  be  unfounded.
In  thought,  indeed,  any  process  is  infinitely  divis-
ible into  infinite  gradations,  but  in  reality  this  is  not
the  case.  It  is  a  natural  error  to  suppose  that
because  the  infinitesimal  can  be  thought  it  can  also
be  felt,  but  were  it  true,  all  sorts  of  absurdities  would
follow.

Thus,  e.g.,  Zeno  would  be  right  in  asserting  that
Achilles  would  never  catch  up  the  Tortoise,  if  the
Tortoise  had  a  start.  The  demonstration  of  this
most  ancient  and  ingenious  fallacy  is  quite  irresist-
ible, if  we  admit  that  the  endless  divisibility  of
Space  and  Time  can  be  applied  also  to  the  experi-
ence of  Space  and  Time,  If  Achilles  could  run  first
ten  yards,  then  one,  then  one-tenth,  then  one-
hundredth,  and  so  on  indefinitely,  and  be  conscious
of  each  step  and  each  moment  he  required  to  tra-
verse it,  he  really  would  require  an  infinite  time  to
catch  the  Tortoise.  For  he  would  be  conscious  of
an  infinite  series  of  events  before  he  caught  it,  sud-
jectively  at  least  he  would  never  complete  the
infinity  of  infinitesimal  steps  required  (cp.  ch.  ii.  §  6).
Really,  of  course,  real  Space  and  Time  are  not
infinitely  divisible  (ix.  §9),  Achilles  would  soon  come
to  a  minimum  step  no  longer  capable  of  subdivision,
"and,  he  would  require  a  minimum  time  to  traverse  it.

And  so  in  the  case  proposed  ;  the  approximations
to  perfection  could  not  go  on  indefinitely:  they
would  sooner  or  later  approach  so  nearly  to  per-
fection, that  the  discrepancy  between  the  real  and
the  ideal  would  be  too  minute  to  enter  into  con-
sciousness. A  precisely  similar  instance,  moreover,
of  this impossibility of  endless  approximation in


454  CONCLUSION.

reality,  occurs  daily  in  the  case  of  motion.  In
theory  the  gradations  between  velocity  i  and  ve-
locity o,  i.e.  rest,  are  infinite,  and  so  bodies  ought  to
pass  through  them  all  before  arriving  at  velocity  o.
And  as  they  are  infinite,  a  body  ought  to  require
an  infinite  Time  in  arriving  at  rest.  But  as  a  matter
of  fact,  nothing  of  the  sort  happens.  The  motion
gradually  diminishes,  and  finally  ceases  entirely,  at
least  with  respect  to  the  body  relatively  to  which  it
-exists.^

Hence  we  may  rest  assured  that  just  as  real
bodies  can  return  to  a  state  of  rest  in  a  finite  time,
so  the  real  world-process  can  attain  in  a  finite  time
to  the  perfect  adjustment  of  Being,  the  eternity  of
which  delimits  Time.

§  12.  And  with  this  defence  of  Eternal  Being,
which  the  Becoming  of  the  cosmos  slowly  evolves
out  of  the  timeless  Not- Being  of  acosmic  apathy  and
isolation,  with  this  vision  of  a  Heaven  and  a  Peace
surpassing  all  imagination,  which  for  ever  obliterates
the  last  traces  of  the  pre-cosmic  discord  of  which
the  struggle  of  life  is  but  an  attenuated  survival,  we
must  close.  And  we  may  close  with  the  assurance
that  the  truths  of  which  we  have  caught  a  glimpse
do  represent  a  real  and  complete  answer  to  the
Riddle  of  the  Sphinx,  an  answer  which  is  rational
and  capable  of  realization.  We  have  thus  achieved
the  undertaking  we  proposed  to  ourselves  (ch.  v.  §  2),
and  vindicated  life  and  knowledge  by  showing  that
after  all  it  was  possible  so  to  manipulate  our  data

1  The  argument,  of  course,  is  vitiated  by  its  use  of  infinity  in  a
false,  mathematical  sense  {cp.  ch.  ix.  §  4),  and  supposes  that  rest  is
a  reality  (cp.  ch.  iii.  §  8).  But  it  does  so  only  to  accept  the  basis  of
the  objection  it  controverts ;  for  the  whole  difficulty  arises  out  of
the  mistaken  application  of  the  mathematical  doctrine  of  infinity
to  reality.


THE  SUPREME  ALTERNATIVE, 455

as  to  supply  a  complete  answer  to  all  our  problems.
And  if  this  answer  be  thought  unsatisfactory  because
it  IS  too  dependent  on  ideas,  and  is  true  only  if  our
ideas  are  realized,  we  may  reply  that  according  to
the  terms  of  our  bond,  this  is  all  we  undertook  to
prove.  We  did  not  undertake  absolutely  to  predict
the  facts,  but  only  to  discover  what  would  happen
if  our  ideas  were  valid.  And  yet  it  may  perhaps
afford  some  consolation  to  such  objectors  to  be  as-
sured that  the  realization  of  our  ideas  by  reality  is
by  no  means  a  rare  or  unheard-of  fact,  inasmuch  as
every  advance  of  knowledge  proves  an  idea  to  be  a
fact.^

§  13.  It  is  not,  therefore,  any  failure  to  fulfil  his
promise,  nor  any  defect  human  science  could  avoid,
that  fills  the  philosopher's  heart  with  apprehension,
as  he  goes  forth  to  his  last  dread  encounter  with  the
Sphinx.  It  is  the  consciousness  that  he  can  never
transcend  the  supreme  alternative  of  thought,  that
though  he  have  grasped  the  truth,  truth  always  leaves
him  with  an  if.  What  though  his  reasoning  be
forged,  link  by  link,  an  adamantine  chain  of  logical
necessity,  it  will  yet  be  hypothetical  (ch.  iii.  §§15,
17,  18);  what  though  he  show  what  truth  must  be,
if  truth  there  be,  he  cannot  show  that  truth  there  is.
The  Terror  of  the  Threshold,  the  Pessimist's  fear
of  the  inherent  perversity  of  things  (ch.  iv.  §  i),  the
dread  lest  the  Veil  of  Truth  should  conceal,  not
the  loving  countenance  of  a  pitying  Saviour,  but
the  fiendish  grin  of  a  Mokanna,  deriding  our
miseries  with  malicious  glee,  or  the  fantastic
nightmare  of  an  insane  Absolute,  forms  a  spectre
no  reasoning  can  exorcize.  And  so  a  revulsion  of
feeling  seizes  upon  the  philosopher  in  the  very  hour

1  Le.,  shows  that  a  thought  determination  holds  of  reality.


456  CONCLUSION.

of  his  triumpli:  the  prophet's  mantle  falls;  the
fiery  chariot,  that  uplifted  his  ardent  soul  to  the
Empyrean,  bears  him  back  to  earth;  the  divine
enthusiasm  that  inspired  his  answer  to  the  riddle
of  his  being,  has  left  him,  and,  as  a  child,  he  cries
aloud  to  the  spirit  that  has  forsaken  him, —

"  An  infant  crying  in  the  night,
An  infant  crying  for  the  light,
And  with  no  language  but  a  cry,"

Ahd  when  he  finds  the  Sphinx,  enthroned  amid  the
desert  sands  far  from  the  pleasant  paths  of  life,  he
cannot  read  the  ambiguous  smile  that  plays  around
her  face.  It  may  be  much  that  she  is  not  grimly
unresponsive  to  his  plea,  but  he  cannot  tell  whether
he  have  answered  her  aright,  whether  her  smile
betoken  the  approval  and  encouragement  of  a
goddess  to  be  won  by  toil  and  abstinence,  or  the
mocking  irony  of  a  demon  whom  no  thought  can
fathom  and  no  sacrifice  appease.  And  even  though
he  abide  to  sit  at  the  feet  of  the  Sphinx,  if  so  be
that  his  steadfast  gaze  may  read  the  signs  of  her
countenance  in  the  light  of  long  experience ;  yet
anon  will  the  wild  storms  of  fortune  tear  him  away,
and  the  light  of  life  fade  out,  the  rushing  pinions  of
Time  sweep  him  along  into  darkness,  and  the  bitter
waters  of  Death  engulf  the  questioner.  For  life  is
too  fragmentary  and  experience  too  chequered
wholly  to  dissipate  a  dread  that  springs  from  the
heart  rather  than  from  the  reason,  and  shrinks  too
vehemently  from  the  cruelties  of  the  world's  ways
to  be  consoled  by  the  subtleties  of  a  metaphysical
demonstration.

§  14. Thus  the  end  of  philosophy  is  to  confess
its  impotence  to  make  the supreme decision be-


FAITH AND BELIEF.  457

tween  two  alternative  interpretations,  each  of  which
is  intellectually  warranted  by  the  facts  of  life.  The
faith  in  the  rationality  of  things,  in  the  light  of
which  we  must  read  the  ambiguous  indications  of
reality,  is  to  be  acquired  by  no  reasoning.  Hence
the  final  rejection  of  Pessimism  is  the  highest  and
most  difficult  act  of  Faith,  and  to  effect  it  the  soul
must  draw  the  requisite  strength  from  itself,  it  may
be,  gather  courage  from  the  very  imminence  of
despair.

If,  therefore,  we  have  at  this  point  emphasized  the
possibility  of  Pessimism  once  more,  and  pointed  out
the  necessity  of  Faith,  it  has  been  with  no  intention
of  depreciating  the  value  of  reason  or  of  casting  a
doubt  upon  its  conclusions.  For  in  appealing  to
Faith  we  are  not  appealing  to  anything ,  that  takes
the  place  of  reason,  and  still  less  to  anything  hostile
to  it,  but  to  that  which  perfects  it,  and  perfects  it  by
making  it  practically  efficacious.  It  is  thus  that  we
must  emphasize  again  at  the  close  the  conviction
with  which  we  started  (ch.  i.  §  4) ;  viz.,  that  philosophy
is  practical.  It  is  a  mistake  to  suppose  that  when
all  has  been  said  all  has  been  done ;  on  the  contrary,
the  difficult  task  of  translating  thought  into  feeling,
of  eivinpf  effect  to  the  conclusions  of  reason,  and
of  really  incorporating  them  with  our  being,  still
remains.  And  it  is  this  incompleteness  of  mere
thought  which  philosophy  recognizes  when  it  leaves
us  with  an  alternative.  This  guards  us  against  the
delusion  that  intellectual  assent  is  sufficient  for  life.
Because  philosophy  is  practical,  mere  demonstration
does  not  suffice ;  to  understand  a  proof  is  not  to
believe  it.  And  in  order  to  live  rightly,  we  must
not  only  assent  that  such  and  such  principles  are
conclusively  proved, but  must  also believe  them.


45  8  CONCLUSION.

But  belief  is  not  solely,  nor  perhaps  even  pre-
dominantly, a  matter  of  the  reason.  It  is  a  compli-
cated state  of  mind,  into  which  there  enters  a  large
element  of  will  and  a  considerable  element  of  time
and  training.  We  cannot  believe  unless  we  will,
and  we  cannot  believe  new  truth  until  the  mind  has
long  been  habituated  to  it.  And  it  is  to  effect
this  transformation  into  belief  that  speculative
philosophy  in  the  end  requires  the  stimulus  of  fear
and  the  help  of  faith.  For  it  is  keenly  conscious
that  without  faith  knowledge  edifies  not,  and  that
the  Temple  of  Truth  is  upreared  in  vain  if  wor-
shippers cannot  be  found  to  enter  it.


APPENDIX.

FREE WILL  AND  NECESSITY.

§  I.  The  dispute  about  the  freedom  of  the  will  is  so
famous  and  is  considered  by  many  so  important,  that  it
seems  advisable  to  discuss  the  principles  which  have  been
assumed  concerning  it.  We  have  throughout  used  the
ordinary  language  about  human  action,  and  so  may  seem
to  have  supposed  something  like  free-will.  And  this  is
true  in  the  sense  that  human  conduct  cannot  be  stated
except  in  terms  implying  freedom  in  some  sense.  But  our
ordinary  usage  does  not  really  touch  the  metaphysical
controversy  between  Freedom  and  Necessity,  Indetermin-
ism  and  Determinism.  These  difficulties  only  arise  when
we  are  not  content  with  stating  the  facts  in  a  practically
sufficient  form,  but  begin  to  argue  about  them,  and  desire
to  see  how  we  are  free  or  determined.

And,  as  usually  stated,  the  difficulty  is  an  insoluble  one ;
it  seems  on  the  one  hand  impossible  to  assert  that  we  do
things  without  motives,  i.e.,  irrationally,  and  oh  the  other,
false  to  the  facts  of  our  inner  consciousness  to  say  that
we  can  never  choose  between  two  courses  of  action,  both
of  which  are  equally  possible,  but  are  necessarily  deter-
mined by  "  the  strongest  motive."

§  2.  And  the  reason  why  the  question  is  in  its  ordinary
form  insoluble,  is  that  neither  party  has  sufficiently  analysed
the  terms  it  uses.  Free-will  may  mean  a  great  many
things,  the  power  and  the  feeling  of  choice,  the  capacity
for  determination  by  rational  motives,  etc.,  as^  well  as
indeterminism.

So  also  the  Determinist  confuses,  or  at  least  uses,  in
"  necessity  "  a  word  with  many  different  meanings.  Thus,
physical,  logical  and  moral  necessity  are  very  different
things.  When  a  man  falls  over  a  precipice  and  exclaims,
"  I  must  be  killed,"  the  physical  necessity  which  compels
him  is  quite  different  from  the  logical  necessity  he  recog-


460  FREE WILL AND NECESSITY.

nizes  when  he  says,  "  It  must  be  so,  Plato  thou  reasonest
well,"  and  also  from  the  moral  necessity  he  feels  when  he
says,  "  I  must  speak  the  truth."  Indeed,  if  we  construed
the  last  of  these  assertions  in  terms  of  physical  necessity,
it  would  manifestly  be  nonsense,  for  if  it  were  physically
necessary  to  speak  the  truth,  lying  would  be  impossible.

Perhaps,  however,  we  may  dismiss  logical  and  moral
necessity  from  the  present  discussion,  as  they  do  not  often
enter  into  the  determinist  argument,  like  physical  necessity.
But  the  latfer  is  itself  hopelessly  ambiguous.

It  signifies  not  only  compulsion  but  also  calculability,  and
is  applied  not  only  to  the  ■  overpowering  of  a  conscious
being  by  superior  force,  but  to  the  supposed  causal  con-
nection between  phenoniena.  And  while  it  is  in  the  former
sense  that  it  is  fatal  to  morals  and  productive  of  fatalism,
it  is  in  the  latter  that  it  sustains  a  successful  combat  with
libertarianism.

§  3.  To  say  that  the  will  is  free,  it  is  urged,  is  to  make
it  an  exception  to  the  universal  law  of  causation.  The
argument  is  a  crushing  one — until  it  strikes  us  to  examine
into  the  credentials  of  the  "  universal  law  of  causation,"
and  its  application  to  the  case.  As  soon  as  we  do,  it
appears  that  the  difficulty  lies  not  in  the  nature  of  the  will
at  all,  but  in  the  conception  of  causation,  and  that  liber-
tarians and  determinists,  so  long  as  they  uncritically  accept
it,  are  bound  to  assert  precisely  the  same  thing  at  the  end,
viz.  indeterminism.  And  the  only  difference  between  them
is  that  while  the  indeterminist  frankly  admits  this  at  the
outset,  the  determinist  refuses  to  confess  that  he  succumbs
to  the  same  difficulty  until  he  is  driven  into  a  corner.

§  4.  Thus  the  indeterminist  asserts  that  motives  do  not
determine  the  will,  they  are  not  the  only  factors  which
enter  into  an  act  of  will.  There  is  in  such  an  act  an  elcr
ment  of  freedom,  which  is  not  subject  to  the  principle  of
causation,  and  of  which  no  further  account  can  be  given.
Whereat  the  determinist  grows  indignant  and  talks  of  the
infraction  of  universal  laws,  etc.  But  if  pressed  he  will  be
found  ultimately  to  assert  the  very  same  thing.

Grarited  that  motives  cause  acts  of  the  will  precisely
as  any  other  physical  cause  causes  its  effect,  it  is  yet  no
real  explanation  of  a  thing  to  say  that  it  is  caused  by


A DIFFICULTY OF CAUSATION,  46 1

something  which  in  its  turn  is  caused  by  something  else,
and  so  on  indefinitely.  For  the  necessity  which  each  cause
transmits  to  its  successor  is  a  hypothetical  one,  and  de-
pends on  the  assumption  that  the  initial  cause  had  origin-
ally any  necessity  to  transmit.  But  if  none  of  the  supposed
causes  is  a  cause  in  its  own  right,  if  they  are  all  effects  of
anterior  causes,  then  their  necessity  is  wholly  hypothetical,
dependent  on  a  condition  which  is  never  fulfilled.  Either,
therefore,  determinism  must  admit  that  the  regress  of
causation  is  infinite,  and  that  a  necessity  infinitely  remote
is  no  necessity  at  all,  or  it  must  assume  a  First  Cause.

But  concerning  the  First  Cause  the  same  question  must
be  raised.  Was  the  First  Cause,  which  determined  all  else,
itself  determined  by  motives  or  not?  If  it  was  not,  then
determinism  ends  in  indeterminism  ;  if  it  was,  then  these
motives  are  the  real  cause  of  the  world,  for  they  alone  ex-
plain why  the  First  Cause  generated  the  world  at  one  time
and  not  at  another.

And  these  motives  in  their  turn  must  have  been  pro-
voked by  something  within  the  First  Cause,  or  without  it,
or  by  nothing  at  all.  If  by  nothing  at  all,  the  indetermin-
ism of  motives  uncaused  and  unprovoked  stands  confessed.
If  the  motives  were  provoked  by  something  without  it,
this  constitutes  a  First  Cause  higher  than  the  First  Cause,
which  is  absurd  ;  if  by  something  within  it,  a  change  must
have  taken  place  in  the  First  Cause.

This  change  again  must  have  been  either  caused  by
something  or  by  nothing.  If  the  former,  we  have  a  re-
currence of  the  infinite  regress ;  if  the  latter,  of  indeter-
minism. And  the  result  remains  the  same  whether  we
say  that  the  First  Cause  was  determined  by  nothing  or
by  itself.  If  by  nothing,  the  indeterminism  is  once  more
,  avowed ;  if  by  itself,  we  require  to  know  why  its  nature
determined  it  to  be  the  First  Cause  at  the  time  it  was
and  not  before.

In  short,  whatever  excursions  into  the  realms  of  unmiti-
gated nonsense  determinism  may  undertake  in  its  retreat,
it  can  find  no  resting  place  until  it  reaches  indeterminism.
And  one  may  naturally  inquire  why  it  was  necessary  to
lead  us  so  far-  afield.  Why  is  indeterminism  a  worse
account  of  what  happens  when  it  is  avowed  frankly  at


462  FREE WILL  AND NECESSITY —

once,  than  when  it  is  confessed  to  after  a  tortuous  course
of  prolonged  evasion,  and  what  is  the  advantage  of  a
round-about  path  in  coming  to  a  result  which  indeter-
minists  saw  to  be  inevitable  from  the  first  ?

§  5.  This  result  is  a  serious  one.  It  is  a  serious  shock
to  our  confidence  in  the  power  of  reason  to  discover  that
the  contrary  theories  of  the  Jiature  of  the  will  both  involve
the  same  absurdity.  Shall  we  then  draw  the  agnostic  con-
clusion that  the  question  is  insoluble,  and  indicates  a  per-
manent debility  of  the  human  intellect  ?  Or  rather,  that
the  question  has  been  wrongly  put,  and  that  the  absurdity
of  our  conclusions  indicates  some  flaw  in  our  premisses  i

Nor  is  such  flaw  far  to  seek.

The  whole  method  of  applying  the  conception  of  caus-
ation to  the  will  is  radically  invalid.

For  let  us  remember  the  origin  of  causation.  The  cate-
gory of  causation,  in  its  application  to  the  world,,  is  a  bold
piece  of  "  anthropomorphism  "  originally,  and  springs  from
the  animistic  theory  of  physical  action  (ch.  iii.  §  1 1).  It  is
an  attempt  to  construe  the  Becoming  of  nature  upon  the
analogy  of  the  working  of  our  own  wills,  and  the  will  is
thus  the  original  and  more  definite  archetype,  of  which
causation  is  a  derivative,  vaguer  and  fainter  ectype.  To
explain  the  will,  therefore,  by  causation  is  a  simple  con-
fusion, literally  an  explanation  of  ignotum  per  ignotius,
and  the  only  answer  to  the  assertion  that  conduct  is  neces-
sarily caused  by  motives  is  the  question — what  is  meant
by  causation  and  necessity  ?

§  6.  And  whenever  these  terms  are  examined  it  appears
that  so  far  from  being  an  exception  to  the  universal  law  of
causation,  the  freedom  of  the  will  is  the  only  case  in  which
causation  denotes  a  real  fact  and  is  more  than  a  theory,
an  assumption  we  find  it  necessary  to  make,  if  the  world  is
to  be  regarded  as  intelligible.

And  similarly  with  necessity,  it  turns  out  that  strictly
speaking  necessity  and  freedom  are  correlative,  and  apply
only  to  the  will.

For  necessity,  in  whatever  way  it  is  taken,  is  something
subjective,  an  affection  of  our  minds,  and  to  attribute  it  to
nature  is  a  boldly  optimistic  and  anthropomorphic  assump-
tion, which  ignores  the  possibility  that  the  operations  of


THEIR MEANINGS.  46.3

nature  may  be  such  that  no  efiforts  of  our  thought  can  ever
understand  them.

For  (i)  if  by  necessity  we  mean  logical  necessity,  a
necessity  such  as  that  with  which  the  conclusions  follow
from  their  premisses,  then  we  do  not  find  it  in  nature.
That  necessity  exists  in  thought  alone  and  does  not  ex-
tend to  perception.  We  cannot  demonstrate  that  one  fact
is  logically  involved  in  another,  and  so  generate  an  inde-
finite series  of  facts  from  our  initial  basis.  A  fact  in  the
sensible  world  can  never  be  more  than  a  fact,  and  qua  fact
is  never  necessary,  i.e.,  never  dependent  on  a  previous  fact.
The  categorical  judgment  is  that  which  comes  nearest  to
the  sensible  fact,  and  is  most  successful  in  concealing  the
logical  necessity  which  is  inherent  in  all  thought,  and  yet
the  apodictic  judgment  ranks  higher  in  the  realm  of
thought.  For  whenever  a  mere  statement  of  fact  is
doubted,  we  proceed  to  give  reasons  why  it  must  necessarily
be  so  (cp.  ch;  iii.  §  15).

(2)  If,  again,  we  mean  by  necessity  the  power  of  pre-
dicting or  calculating  events,  we  imply  something  so  dif-
ferent from  the  ordinary  associations  of  necessity  as  to  be
terribly  confusing.  There  is  much  conduct  representing
the  highest  and  freest  action  which  is  eminently  calculable,
much  conduct  which  is  as  remote  as  possible  from  freedom,
which  is  quite  incalculable.  Is  it  not  a  paradoxical  result
of  this  use  of  necessity  to  assert  that  the  deliberate  exe-
cution of  a  well-considered  purpose  is  unfree  and  necessary
action,  while  the  maniac  impulses  of  insanity  are  free.'
And  yet  the  former  is  calculable  and  the  latter  are
incalculable.

(3)  Ifweareto  mean  anything  definite  by  the  use  of
necessity  in  connection  with  causation,  we  must  imply
something  analogous  to  the  feeling  of  compulsion  which
we  experience  when  we  use  the  word  "  must."  If  necessity
does  not  imply  a  reference  to  our  feeling  of  compulsion,
it  either  means  nothing,  or  two  very  different  things,  and
the  question  of  the  relations  of  free-will  and  necessity  can-
not be  profitably  discussed.  If,  on  the  other  hand,  neces-
sity is  taken  in  this  sense,  it  becomes  evident  that  both
freedom  and  necessity  apply  primarily  ta  the  will.

§  7.  Both  freedom  and  necessity  are  psychological  modes.


464  FREE WILL AND NECESSITY —

of  describing  certain  states  of  consciousness.  Freedom  is
the  consciousness  of  choice^  the  feeling  that  we  can  do
either  one  thing  or  another ;  necessity  is  the  consciousness
of  compulsion,  the  feeling  that  we  cannot  help  doing  some-
thing. Thus  they  are  correlative  states  of  our  will,  neither
of  which  can  without  more  ado  be  applied  either  to  all
states  of  will  or  to  the  behaviour  of  things.

For  the  consciousness  of  either  freedom  or  necessity  is
an  extreme  and  comparatively  rare  state  of  our  will,  and
does  not  extend  over  the  whole  of  life.  On  the  contrary,
by  far  the  larger  and  saner  portion  of  our  lives  is  accom-
panied by  no  consciousness  either  of  necessity  or  of  free-
dom.

In  any  properly  constituted  and  situated  human  being
it  is  only  rarely  that  he  feels  he  "  must "  or  "  ought."  Gen-
erally he  simply  acts,  and  no  consciousness  obtrudes  as  to
whether  he  might  have  acted  differently,  or  could  not  have
helped  acting  as  he  did.  We  live  by  far  the  greater
part  of  our  lives  in  accordance  with  our  habits  and  our
principles.  But  as  such  conduct  is  not  accompanied  by
the  consciousness  either  of  freedom  or  of  necessity,  it  can-
not properly  be  called  either  free  or  necessary.  The
category  of  necessity  and  freedom  does  not  apply  to  it,
and  we  must  not  delude  ourselves  into  fancying  that  it
does,  merely  bfecause  ex  post  facto  we  can  bring  our  actions
under  that  category,  should  occasion  arise.  And  when
there  is  any  inducement  to  interpret  the  neutral  action  of
rfTTordinary  life  as  either  necessary  or  free,  it  is  noticeable
v^thatwe  can  generally  interpret  our  past  action  indiffer-
ently as  having  been  either  necessary  or  free.  We  can
colour  our  record  to  suit  either  view,  and  represent  it
either  as  the  free  expansion  of  our  nature,  or  as  the  com-
pulsorily  determined  result  of  previous  habits.  But  both
these  accounts  are  equally  sophistical,  and  false  in  the
same  way.  They  both  invert  the  true  relation  of  the
extremes  to  ordinary  conduct.  They  attempt  to  force  the
original  and  undissevered  whole  of  normal  conduct  into  the
scheme  of  abnormal  divergences,  and  instead  of  regarding
"Tree  "  conduct  and  "  necessary  "  conduct  as  special  cases
of  normal  conduct,  which  is  conscious  neither  of  freedom
nor-  of  necessity,  they  try  to  explain  the  latter  as  either  free


THEIR CORRELATION,  465

or  necessary.  This  is  as  though  we  misunderstood  the
relation  of  the  limbs  to  the  body,  and  fancying  that  the
body  belonged  to  the  limbs,  instead  of  vice  versd,  pro-
ceeded to  dispute  whether  the  body  was  all  leg  or  all
arm.

§  8.  And  if  we  consider  concrete  cases  of  a  maximum
and  minimum  consciousness  of  freedom  and  necessity,  it
becomes  quite  clear  that  they  cannot  be  regarded  as
normal.

The  maximum  consciousness  of  freedom  is  possessed  by
the  man  who  is  most  vividly  conscious  of  his  capacity  of
choosing  to  do  one  thing  or  the  other.  I.e.,  he  hesitates
between  several  possible  courses  ;  intellectually  he  is  irre-
solute, while  morally  he  feels  all  the  temptations  to  do
wrong,  i.e.,  he  lacks  the  principles  which  make  conceivable
crimes  "  morally  impossible."  And  whether  he  finally  acts
well  or  ill,i  his  capacity  to  feel  his  freedom  is  due  to  the
defects  of  his  reason  and  his  will.  If  he  could  see  more
clearly  what  course  was  wise,  if  he  were  impelled  by
stronger  and  more  unhesitating  habits  to  act  rightly,  his
consciousness  of  freedom  of  choice  would  disappear.  It
is  the  mark  of  the  imperfection  of  his  nature,  of  the  lack
of  stability  and  harmony  in  the  interaction  of  its  elements.

Taking  next  the  maximum  consciousness  of  necessity,
we  arrive  at  a  similar  result.  The  man  who  always  feels
that  "  he  can't  help  doing "  a  thing,  that  he  is  compelled
against  his  better  inclinations,  is  also  a  man  in  a  high  state
of  internal  tension.  His  nature  is  so  ill  adapted  to  the
functions  of  life  that  there  is  much  friction  between  the
higher  and  lower  elements,  just  as  in  the  man  who  felt
at  liberty  to  commit  every  imaginable  crime  and  folly.
Only  in  this  case  he  is  aKparrji,  he  succumbs  to  the  temp-
tation and  is  enslaved  by  it,  and  so  feels  unfree.

But  though  he  represents  a  lower  grade  of  moral
development  than  the  man  who  felt  "  free,"  he  is  yet  far
from  having  reached  the  lowest  depth  of  degradation.  If
he  were  thoroughly  degraded  he  would  no  longer  feel  his
slavery.  His  action  would  cease  to  be  "  necessary,"  be-
cause it  would  have  sunk  beneath  the  level  at  which
consciousness  of  necessity  exists.  Thorough  wickedness
'  In  ancient  Greek  phraseology,  is  iyKparr;!  or  wtpams.

R.ofS.  H H


466  FREE WILL AND NECESSITY

(aKo\aaia)  and  thorough  ignorance  have  lost  sight  of  the
ideals  of  goodness  and  wisdom,  and  so  are  no  longer
troubled  by  the  attraction  of  what  is  unseen  as  well  as
unattainable.  There  is  therefore  no  consciousness  of
necessity  or  freedom  in  the  in/ra-moral  stage,  in  which  it
is  impossible  to  say  either  "  I  can,"  "I  ought,"  or  "  I  must."
The  capacity  to  feel  the  last  of  these  at  all  events  does  not
indeed  seem  to  vanish  wholly  until  we  sink  beneath  the
threshold  of  conscious  existence,  but  it  is  the  normal  con-
dition of  inanimate  nature.

§  9.  For  it  is  wholly  erroneous  to  ascribe  necessity  to
the  action  of  the  inanimate  in  the  sense  in  which  we  feel  it.
It  is  erroneous  not  because  of  its  anthropomorphism,  for
all  our  explanations  are  anthropomorphic  (ch.  v.  §  6),  but
because  of  its  bad  anthropomorphism.  The  falling  of  a
stone  over  a  precipice  is  not  necessary,  for  we  cannot,
without  personifying  it,  attribute  to  it  the  feeling  of  "  not
being  able  to  help  falling,"  which  we  should  experience  if
launched  forth  into  the  air.  These  feelings  we  know  to
be  false  in  the  case  of  the  stone :  the  stone  simply  falls,
and  feels  nothing.  We  might  as  truly  (and  as  falsely)
represent  what  happens  as  the  free  expression  of  the
stone's  inner  nature  as  as  a  reluctant  submission  to  the
external  law  of  gravitation.  It  would  be  as  correct  to  say
that  the  stone  fell  because  it  wanted  to,  as  that  it  fell
because  it  had  to.  In  each  case  we  interpret  the  fact  in
terms  of  our  thought ;  it  makes  no  difference  in  principle
whether  we  regard  the  Becoming  of  unconscious  nature'as
analogous  to  human  freedom  or  to  human  necessity.

In  inanimate  nature  events  simply  happen,  A  is  and  then
B  is  ;  but  we,  interpreting  this  anthropopathically,  say  A
is  the  cause  of  B.  But  herein  lies  a  double  error ;  for
when  we  say,  "  When  A  is,  B  must  necessarily  follow,"  we
go  beyond  our  evidence  in  several  ways.  For  we  not  only
assume  a  connection  where  none  need  exist,  except  in  our
fancy,  but  imply  a  feeling  of  compulsion  which  we  cannot
seriously  ascribe  to  B.  And  then  it  turns  out  that  after
all  our  conception  of  causation  cannot  be  applied  to  the
Becoming,  of  nature  in  the  way  we  insist  on  applying  it,
that  it  leads  either  to  an  infinite  regress  of  conditioned
causes  (§  4  and  ch.  iii.  §  11),  or  to  a  first  cause  which  is


AS TRANSITORY IMPERFECTIONS.  467

unmeaning  if  it  is  not  a  final  cause  (ch.  xi.  §  21),  and  which
thus  inverts  the  order  of  succession  in  time  which  we  set
out  to  explain.

Should  we  not  from  these  facts  infer  rather  that  the
becoming  of  inanimate  nature  lies  beneath  the  category  of
freedom  and  necessity,  that  it  is  as  yet  in  itself  merely  an
undifferentiated  happening,  without  necessity,  either  logical,
moral,  or  physical,  and  not  yet  either  necessary  or  free  ?
Should  we  not  infer  that  it  is  only  when  it  has  risen  to
consciousness,  and  only  as  a  psychical  phenomenon,  that
the  sequence  A — B  appears  at  one  time  necessary  and  at
another  contingent  ?  ^

§  10.  We  say  appears :  for  just  as  there  is  a  stage  in
the  evolution  of  the  world  previous  to  the  appearance  of
freedom  and  necessity,  which  are  not  yet  applicable  to  the
Becoming  of  things,  so  there  is  a  subsequent  stage  when
they  ha,ve  disappeared,  to  which  they  cease  to  be  applicable.
And  certainly  our  confidence  that  thjis  evolution  of  the
infra-conscious,  infra-free,  and  infra-moral  into  the  con-
scious, moral  and  free  is  the  correct  account  of  the  matter,
and  contains  the  true  solution  of  the  difficulty,  is  confirmed
by  the  higher  developments  of  consciousness.

For  just  as  it  is  possible  to  sink  below  the  consciousness
of  freedom  and  necessity,  so  it  is  possible  to  rise  above  it.
Compared  with  the  lower  stages  of  mental  and  moral
development,  the  good  and  wise  man  (the  aa>^pcov)  sees
his  course  clearly.  He  does  not  doubt  which  is  the  right
alternative  to  adopt,  he  is  not  tempted,  and  still  less  over-
powered by  circumstances  to  do  evil.  And  so  it  is  only  in
rare  and  distressful  crises  that  disturb  the  harmonious
equipoise  of  his  existence,  that  he  feels  he  might  have  acted
otherwise  than  he  did,  or  that  he  was  compelled  to  act
otherwise  than  he  wished.

Thus  here  again,  it  appears  that  the  intense  consciousness
of  moral  freedom  and  necessity  is  the  characteristic  only
of  the  mixed  characters,  of  the  intermediate  phases  of
imperfect  adaptation,  to  which  the  thoroughly  good,  like
the  thoroughly  bad,  are  not  susceptible.  Only,  of  course,
they  are  less  conscious  of  it  for  a  wholly  different  reason,

'  The  c6ntingent=that  which  may  either  be  or  not  be.


468  FREE WILL AND NECESSITY,

not  because  they  sink  below  it,  but  because  they  transcend
it.

In  a  perfectly  good  and  perfectly  wise  being,  therefore,
both  freedom  and  necessity  would  be  impossible,  and  would
be  seen  to  be  ultimately  unmeaning,  illusions  incidental  to
iljnperfect  development.  For  how  could  there  be  any
alternative  of  action  for  an  intellect  which  infallibly  per-
ceived the  wisest,  and  for  a  will  which  unswervingly
pursued  the  best  course  ?  For  the  best  course  is  one  and
single,  and  admits  no  competition  from  a  pis  aller.  Or
would  it  not  be  ludicrous  to  represent  a  being  whose  whole
nature  was  attracted  towards  the  best,  as  obeying  a  law  of
necessity  ?

There  can  be  no  change  then  or  wavering  in  the  action
or  the  purpose  of  the  Deity,  in  the  conduct  which,  is  as
completely  determined  by  Reason  from  within,  as  that  of
the  unconscious  is  determined  by  external  law  from
without.  But  change  and  doubt,  hesitation  and  incon-
sistency, struggle,  victory  and  defeat  befit  the  intermediate
phases  of  existence :  the  consciousness  of  freedom  and
necessity  marks  the  lives  of  beings  capable  of  rational
action,  and  yet  not  wholly  rational.  We  can  perceivCj
more  or  less  clearly,  what  conduct  is  required  by  the  pro-
gress of  the  world,  and  yet  we  have  continually  to  struggle
against  the  survivals  of  lower  habits  («>.,  adaptations  to
earlier  stages  in  the  process,  cp.  ch.  iv.  §  lo)  within  us  and
around  us.  And  it  is  this  consciousness  of  ill-adjusted
elements  which  generates  the  consciousness  alike  of  freedom
and  of  necessity.  But  as  the  consciousness  of  freedom
accompanies  the  victory  over  the  obstacles  to  progress,
over  the  foully-decaying  corpses  of  the  dead  selves  of  the
individual  and  of  the  race,  freedom  is  a  higher  ethical
principle  than  necessity,  and  is  rightly  brought  into  in-
timate connection  with  morality.  The  phrase  "  I  can
because  I  ought "  may  not  express  the  connection  of  both
freedom  and  morality  with  the  essential  character  of  the
world-process  in  the  clearest  way,  but  it  at  least  bears
witness  to  their  kinship.
