Studies in Humanism
F. C. S. Schiller (1907)
========================================================================

PROVENANCE NOTE (Tower of Babel staging): F. C. S. Schiller's Studies in Humanism (1907) — second series of humanist essays.

========================================================================

ty  of  California
era  Regional
iry  Facility


STUDIES IN HUMANISM


BY  THE  SAME  AUTHOR


RIDDLES OF THE SPHINX

A  STUDY  IN  THE  PHILOSOPHY  OF  EVOLUTION
LONDON  :  SWAN  SONNENSCHEIN  AND  CO. 1894


"AXIOMS AS POSTULATES"

IN

PERSONAL IDEALISM

EDITED  BY  HENRY  STURT
LONDON  :  MACMILLAN  AND  CO.,  LTD. 1902


HUMANISM

PHILOSOPHICAL  ESSAYS
LONDON  :  MACMILLAN  AND  CO.,  LTD. 1903


STUDIES


IN


HUMANISM


BY

F.  C.  S.  SCHILLER, M.A.,  D.Sc.

FELLOW AND SENIOR TUTOR OF CORPUS CHRISTI COLLEGE, OXFORD


Pontoon
MACMILLAN AND CO., LIMITED

NEW  YORK :  THE  MACMILLAN  COMPANY

I
1907

All  rights  reset  z-ed


TJNIV^?TTY  OF  CALIFORNIA
SANTA  5 ARA  COLLEGE  LIBRART

7711°


PREFACE

OF  the  essays  which  compose  this  volume  about  half
have  appeared  in  various  periodicals — Mind,  the  Hibbert
Journal,  the  Quarterly  Review,  the  Fortnightly  Review,
and  the  Journal  of  Philosophy — during  the  past  three
years,  and  I  am  indebted  to  their  editors  for  the
leave  to  republish.  Additions  have,  however,  grown
so  extensive  that  of  the  matter  of  the  book  not  more
than  one  -  third,  and  that  the  less  constructive  part,
can  be  said  to  have  been  in  print  before.  That  the
form  should  still  be  discontinuous  is  due  to  the  fact
that  the  conditions  under  which  I  have  had  to  work
greatly  hamper  and  delay  the  composition  of  a  con-
tinuous treatise,  and  that  it  seemed  imperative  to  deal
more  expeditiously  with  the  chief  strategic  points  of  the
philosophic  situation.  I  hope,  however,  that  the  dis-
continuity of  the  form  will  not  be  found  incompatible
with  an  essential  continuity  of  aim,  argument,  and
interest.  In  all  these  respects  the  present  Studies  may-
most  naturally  be  regarded  as  a  continuation  of  Humanism
and  of  my  share  in  Personal  Idealism,  without,  however,
ceasing  to  be  independently  intelligible.  They  have  had
to  reflect  the  developments  of  philosophy  and  the
progress  of  discussion,  and  this  has  rendered  them,  I
fear,  slightly  more  technical  on  the  whole  than  Humanism.
Nor  can  their  main  topic,  the  meaning  of  Truth,  be  made

vii  a  2


viii  STUDIES  IN HUMANISM

an  altogether  popular  subject.  On  the  other  hand,  they
touch  more  fully  than  Humanism  on  subjects  which
are  less  exclusively  technical,  such  as  the  nature  of  our
freedom  and  the  religious  aspects  of  philosophy.

That  in  the  contents  construction  should  be  somewhat
largely  mixed  with  controversy  is  in  some  respects  re-
grettable. But  whether  one  can  avoid  controversy
depends  largely  on  whether  one's  doctrines  are  allowed
an  opportunity  of  peaceful  development.  Also  on
what  one  has  undertaken  to  do.  And  in  this  case
the  most  harmless  experiments  in  fog  -  dispelling  have
been  treated  as  profanations  of  the  most  sacred  mysteries.
It  is,  however,  quite  true  that  the  undertaking  of  the  new
philosophy  may  be  regarded  as  in  some  ways  the  most
stupendous  in  the  history  of  thought.  Heine,  in  a
well  -  known  passage,  once  declared  the  feats  of  the
German  Transcendentalists  to  have  been  more  terrific  than
those  of  the  French  Revolutionaries,  in  that  they  de-
capitated a  Deity  and  not  a  mere  mortal  king.  But
what  was  the  Transcendental  boldness  of  Kant,  as  described
by  Heine,  when  armed  only  with  the  '  Pure  Reason,'
and  attended  only  by  his  '  faithful  Lampe '  and  an
umbrella,  he  '  stormed  Heaven  and  put  the  whole  garrison
to  the  sword,'  to  the  Transatlantic  audacity  of  a  philosophy
which  is  seriously  suspected  of  penetrating  into  the
'  supercelestial '  heavens  of  the  Pure  Reason,  and  of  there
upsetting  the  centre  of  gravity  of  the  Intelligible  Universe,
of  dethroning  the  '  Higher  Synthesis  of  the  Devil  and
the  Deity,'  the  Absolute,  and  of  instituting  a  general
'  Gbtzendammerung '  of  the  Eternal  Ideas?  Even  its
avowed  aim  of  humanising  Truth,  and  bringing  it  back  to
earth  from  such  altitudes,  seems  at  least  as  sacrilegious
and  Promethean  as  the  theft  of  fire.  What  wonder,
then,  that  such  transcelestial  conflagrations  should  kindle


PREFACE  ix

burning  questions  on  the  earth,  and  be  reflected  in  the
heating  of  terrestrial  tempers  ?

But  after  all,  the  chief  warrant  for  a  polemical  handling
of  these  matters  is  its  strict  relevance.  The  new  truths
are  most  easily  understood  by  contrast  with  the  old
perplexities,  and  the  necessity  of  advancing  in  their
direction  is  rendered  most  evident  by  the  impossibility  of
advancing  in  any  other.1

That  the  development  of  the  new  views,  then,  should
have  been  so  largely  controversial,  was  probably  in-
evitable. It  has  been  all  the  more  rapid  for  that.  For
the  intensity  of  intellectualistic  prejudice  and  the  intoler-
ance of  Absolutism  have  compelled  us  to  attack  in  self-
defence,  to  press  on  our  counter-statements  in  order  to
engage  the  enemy  along  his  whole  front,  and  to  hurry
every  new  argument  into  the  line  of  battle  as  soon  as  it
became  available. 2

The  result  has  been  an  unprecedented  development  of
converging  novelties.  Within  the  past  three  or  four
years  (i.e.  since  the  preface  to  Humanism  was  written)
there  have  .'appeared  in  the  first  place  the  important
Studies  in  Logical  Theory  by  Prof.  Dewey  and  his
coadjutors.  These,  it  is  becoming  more  and  more
evident,  have  dealt  a  death-blow,  not  only  to  the  '  corre-
spondence-with-reality '  view  of  Truth,  but  also  to  all  the
realisms  and  idealisms  which  involve  it.  And  so  far  no
absolutism  has  succeeded  in  dispensing  with  it.  Prof.
Dewey  and  his  pupils  have  also  contributed  a  number  of
weighty  and  valuable  papers  and  discussions  to  the  philo-
sophic periodicals  (Mind,  the  Journal  of  Philosophy,  and
the  Philosophical  Review}.  Mr.  C.  S.  Peirce's  articles  in  the

1  Cp.  pp.  73-4.

2  Readers,  however,  who  wish  to  avoid  this  controversial  side  as  much  as
possible,  may  be  counselled  to  read  Essays  i.,  v.,  ii.,  iii.,  vii.,  xvi.-xx.  in  the
order  indicated.


x  STUDIES IN HUMANISM

Monist  (1905)  have  shown  that  he  has  not  disavowed  the
great  Pragmatic  principle  which  he  launched  into  the
*  world  so  unobtrusively  nearly  thirty  years  ago,  and
seemed  to  leave  so  long  without  a  father's  care.  William
James's  final  metaphysic,  on  the  other  hand,  is  still  in
the  making.  But  he  has  expounded  and  defended  the
new  views  in  a  series  of  brilliant  articles  in  the  Journal  of
Philosophy  and  in  Mind}  In  England  the  literature  of
the  question  has  been  critical  rather  than  constructive.
In  the  forefront  may  be  mentioned  Mr.  Henry  Sturt's
Idola  Theatri,  a  singularly  lucid  and  readable  study  of
the  genesis,  development,  and  ailments  of  English  Ab-
solutism. But  the  masterly  (and  unanswered)  criticisms  by
Capt.  H.  V.  Knox  and  Mr.  Alfred  Sidgwick  of  the  most
essential  foundations  of  absolutist  metaphysics  should  not
be  forgotten.2  And  lastly,  Prof.  Santayana's  exquisite
Life  of  Reason  should  be  cited  as  a  triumph,  not  only  of
literary  form,  but  also  of  the  Pragmatic  Method  in  a
mind  which  has  espoused  a  metaphysic  very  different
from  that  which  in  general  Pragmatism  favours.  For
Prof.  Santayana,  though  a  pragmatist  in  epistemology,
is  a  materialist  in  metaphysics.3

The  new  movement  is  also  in  evidence  beyond  the
borders  of  the  English  -  speaking  world,  either  in  its
properly  pragmatic  forms  or  in  their  equivalents  and
analogues.  It  is  most  marked  perhaps  in  France,  where
it  has  the  weighty  support  in  philosophy  of  Prof.  Bergson
of  the  College  de  France,  who  has  followed  up  the  anti-
intellectualism  of  his  Donn/es  immediates  de  la  Conscience

1  Journal  of  Philosophy,  I.  Nos.  18,  20,  21,  25;  II.  Nos.  2,  5,  7,  9,  n  ;
III.  No.  13.  Mind,  N.S.  Nos.  52  and  54.  In  general  it  must  be  added  that  for
the  most  up-to-date  contributions  to  the  subject  the  Journal  of  Philosophy  must
be  consulted,  though  its  matter  often  suffers  from  a  crudeness  of  literary  form.

-  Mind,  N.S.  Nos.  54  and  53.

3  I  have  discussed  the  relations  of  his  work  to  the  Pragmatic  movement  in
reviewing  it  for  the  Hibbert  Journal  (January  and  July  1906).


PREFACE  xi

by  his  Matiere  et  Memoire,  and  in  science  of  Prof.  Henri
Poincare"  of  the  Institute,  whose  La  Science  et  UHypothese
and  La  Valeur  de  la  Science  expound  the  pragmatic
nature  of  the  scientific  procedures  and  assumptions  with
unsurpassable  lucidity  and  grace.  He  seems,  indeed,  as
yet  unwilling  to  go  as  far  as  some  of  the  ultra-pragmatic
followers  of  Prof.  Bergson,  e.g.  MM.  Leroy  and  Wilbois,
and  imposes  some  slight  limitations  on  the  pragmatic
treatment  of  knowledge,  on  the  ground  that  knowledge
may  be  conceived  as  an  end  to  which  action  is  a  means.
But  this  perhaps  only  indicates  that  this  pre-eminent  man
of  science  has  not  yet  taken  note  of  the  work  which  has
been  done  by  philosophers  in  the  English-writing  world
on  the  nature  of  the  conception  of  Truth  and  the  relation
of  the  scientific  endeavour  to  our  total  activity.  At  any
rate  he  goes  quite  far  enough  to  make  it  clear  that
whoever  henceforth  wishes  to  uphold  the  traditional  views
of  the  nature  of  science,  and  particularly  of  mathematics,
will  have  in  the  first  place  to  confute  Prof.  Poincare.

In  Italy  Florence  boasts  of  a  youthful,  but  extremely
active  and  brilliant,  band  of  avowed  Pragmatists,  whose
militant  organ,  the  Leonardo,  edited  by  Signor  Giovanni
Papini,  is  distinguished  by  a  freedom  and  vigour  of
language  which  must  frequently  horrify  the  susceptibilities
of  academic  coteries.  In  Denmark  Prof.  Hoffding  is
more  than  sympathetic,  and  the  Royal  Academy  of
Science  has  recently  made  the  relations  of  Pragmatism
and  Criticism  the  subject  for  the  international  prize  essay
for  which  Schopenhauer  once  wrote  his  Grundlage  der
Moral.

In  Germany  alone  the  movement  seems  slow  to  take
root  eo  nomine.  Nevertheless,  there  are  a  goodly  number
of  analogous  tendencies.  Professors  Ostwald  and  Mach
and  their  schools  are  the  champions  of  a  pragmatic  view


xii  STUDIES IN HUMANISM

of  science.  Various  forms  of  '  Psychologism,'  proceeding
from  the  same  considerations  as  those  which  have  inspired
the  Anglo-American  pragmatisms,  disturb  the  older  con-
ceptions of  Logic.  Among  them  Prof.  Jerusalem's  Der
Kritische  Idealismus  und  die  reine  Logik  is  particularly
noteworthy.  The  '  school  of  Fries,'  in  which  Dr.  Julius
Schultz,  the  author  of  the  brilliant  Psychologic  der  Axiome,
is  conspicuous,  excellently  emphasises  the  postulation  of
axioms,  though  as  their  polemic  against  empiricism  still
presupposes  the  Humian  conception  of  a  passive  ex-
perience, they  prefer  to  call  them  a  priori}  The  human-
istic aspects  of  the  movement  find  a  close  parallel  in  the
writings  of  Prof.  Eucken.  But  on  the  whole  Germany
lags  behind,  largely  because  these  various  tendencies  have
not  yet  been  connected  or  brought  to  a  common  focus.
I  have,  however,  reason  to  believe  that  this  deficiency
may  soon  be  remedied.

What,  meanwhile,  is  the  situation  in  the  camp  of
Intellectualism,  which  is  still  thronged  with  most  of  the
philosophic  notables  ?  Although  the  technical  journals
have  been  full  of  controversial  articles,  and  the  interest
excited  has  actually  sent  up  the  circulation  of  Mind,
singularly  little  has  been  produced  that  rises  above  the
merest  misconception  or  misrepresentation  ;  and  nothing
to  invalidate  the  new  ideas.  Mr.  F.  H.  Bradley  has
exercised  his  great  talents  of  philosophic  caricature,2  but
a  positive  alternative  to  Pragmatism,  in  the  shape  of  an
intelligible,  coherent  doctrine  of  the  nature  of  Truth,  is
still  the  great  desideratum  of  Intellectualism.

The  most  noteworthy  attempt,  beyond  doubt,  to  work
out  an  intellectualistic  ideal  of  Truth,  which  has  proceeded
from  the  Anglo-Hegelian  school,  is  Mr.  H.  H.  Joachim's
recent  Nature  of  Truth.  But  it  may  be  doubted  whether

1  Cp.  Mind,  xv.  p.  115.  2  Cp.  Essay  iv.


PREFACE


Xlll


its  merits  will  commend  it  to  the  school.  For  it  ends  in
flat  failure,  and  avowed  scepticism,  which  is  scientifically
redeemed  only  by  the  fact  that  its  outspokenness  greatly
facilitates  the  critic's  task  in  laying  his  finger  on  the
fundamental  flaw  of  all  Intellectualism.  With  the  ex-
ception of  Plato's  Theaetetus,  no  book  has,  consequently,
been  of  greater  service  to  me  in  showing  how  fatal  the
depersonalising  of  thought  and  the  dehumanising  of  Truth
are  to  the  possibility  and  intelligibility  of  knowledge,
and  how  arbitrary  and  indefensible  these  abstractions
really  are.

It  would  seem,  therefore,  that  the  situation  is  rapidly
clearing  itself.  On  the  one  hand  we  have  a  new  Method
with  inexhaustible  possibilities  of  application  to  life  and
science,  which,  though  it  is  not  primarily  metaphysical,
contains  also  the  promise  of  an  infinity  of  valuable,  and
more  or  less  valid,  metaphysics  :  on  the  other,  opposed  to
it  on  every  point,  an  old  metaphysic  of  tried  and  tested
sterility,  which  is  condemned  to  eternal  failure  by  the
fundamental  perversity  of  its  logical  method.  And  now
at  last  is  light  beginning  to  penetrate  into  its  obscurities.
It  is  becoming  clear  that  Rationalism  is  not  rational,  and
that  '  reason  '  does  not  sanction  its  pretensions.  Absolut-
ism is  ending  as  those  who  saw  its  essentially  inhuman
character  foresaw  that  it  must  In  its  '  Hegelian '  as  in
its  Bradleian  form,  it  has  yielded  itself  wholly  up  to
Scepticism,  and  Mr.  Bradley  was  evidently  not  a  day
too  soon  in  comparing  it  to  Jericho.1  For  its  defences
have  crumbled  into  dust,  without  a  regular  siege,
merely  under  the  strain  of  attempts  to  man  them.  Its
opponents  really  are  not  needed  for  their  demolition  ;
they  need  merely  record  and  applaud  the  work  of  self-
destruction.

1  Cp.  p.  119.


xiv  STUDIES IN HUMANISM

But  that  this  process  should  provoke  dissatisfaction
and  disintegration  in  the  ranks  of  the  absolutists  is  no
wonder,  nor  that  the  signs  of  their  confusion  should  be
multiplying.  No  one  seems  to  know,  e.g.,  what  is  to  be
done  about  the  central  point,  the  conception  of  Truth  ;
whether  the  '  correspondence-view '  is  to  be  reaffirmed  or
abandoned,  and  in  the  former  case,  how  it  can  be  defended,
or  in  the  latter,  how  it  can  be  discarded.1  Nay,  the  voice
of  mutiny  is  beginning  to  be  heard.  The  advice  is
openly  given  to  the  '  idealist '  host  to  shut  up  their
Bradley  and  their  Berkeley,  and  to  open  their  Plato  and
their  Hegel.2  As  regards  Hegel  this  recommendation  is
not  likely  to  be  fruitful,  because  nothing  will  be  found  in
him  that  bears  on  the  situation :  Plato,  on  the  other
hand,  is  likely  to  provide  most  salutary,  but  almost
wholly  penitential,  reading.  For  I  believe,  these  Studies
will  be  found  to  fulfil  a  pledge  given  in  Humanism?  and
to  show  that  Intellectualism  may  be  confuted  out  of  the
mouth  of  its  own  founder  and  greatest  exponent  For
Plato  had  in  fact  perceived  the  final  consequence  of
Intellectualism,  viz.  that  to  complete  itself  it  must  de-
humanise the  Ideal  and  derealise  the  Real,  with  superior
clearness.  His  unwillingness  either  to  avoid  or  to  conceal
this  consequence  is  what  has  engendered  the  hopeless
crux  of  the  '  Platonic  problem '  from  his  day  to  this,  and
from  this  difficulty  no  intellectualism  can  ever  extricate
itself.  It  may  rail  at  humanity  and  try  to  dissolve
human  knowledge ;  but  the  only  real  remedy  lies  in
renouncing  the  abstractions  on  which  it  rests.  Our  only
hope  of  understanding  knowledge,  our  only  chance  of
keeping  philosophy  alive  by  nourishing  it  with  the
realities  of  life,  lies  in  going  back  from  Plato  to  Prota-

1  Cp.  Essays  iv.  §  7  ;  vii.  §  i  ;  xx.  §  2.
2  Mind,  N.S.  No.  59,  xv.  p.  327.  s  P.  xvii.


PREFACE  xv

goras,  and ceasing to misunderstand the  great teacher
who  discovered  the  Measure  of  man's  Universe.

I  cannot  conclude  this  Preface  without  recording  my
indebtedness  to  my  friend  Capt  H.  V.  Knox,  who  has
read  a  large  part  of  these  Studies  in  proof  and  in  manu-
script, and  with  whom  I  have  had  the  pleasure  of  dis-
cussing some  of  the  knottiest  points  in  the  theory  of
knowledge.  I  have  profited  thereby  to  such  an  extent
that  I  should  find  it  hard  to  say  how  far  some  of  the
doctrines  here  enunciated  were  his  or  mine.


SILS  MARIA,  September  1906.


CONTENTS

ESSAY  PAGE

I.  THE  DEFINITION  OF  PRAGMATISM  AND  HUMANISM  i

II.  FROM  PLATO  TO  PROTAGORAS .  .  .22

III.  THE  RELATIONS  OF  LOGIC  AND  PSYCHOLOGY . 71

IV.  TRUTH  AND  MR.  BRADLEY .  .  .114
V.  THE  AMBIGUITY  OF  TRUTH . .  .141

VI.  THE  NATURE  OF  TRUTH.  .  .  .163

VII.  THE  MAKING  OF  TRUTH.  .  .  . 179

VIII.  ABSOLUTE  TRUTH  AND  ABSOLUTE  REALITY  . 204

IX.  EMPIRICISM  AND  THE  ABSOLUTE  .  .  .224

X.  Is  ABSOLUTE  IDEALISM  SOLIPSISTIC? .  . 258

XI.  ABSOLUTISM AND THE DISSOCIATION OF PER-
SONALITY ..... 266

XII.  ABSOLUTISM  AND  RELIGION .  .  .274

XIII.  THE  PAPYRI  OF  PHILONOUS,  I.-II.  .  . 298

XIV.  I.  PROTAGORAS  THE  HUMANIST .  .  . 302
XV.  II.  A  DIALOGUE  CONCERNING  GODS  AND  PRIESTS 326

XVI.  FAITH,  REASON,  AND  RELIGION . .  . 349

XVII.  THE  PROGRESS  OF  PSYCHICAL  RESEARCH  . 370

' XVIII.  FREEDOM  ....  391

XIX.  THE  MAKING  OF  REALITY . .  .421

XX.  DREAMS  AND  IDEALISM . . .  .452

INDEX .  487


I


THE  DEFINITION  OF  PRAGMATISM  AND
HUMANISM1

ARGUMENT

The  need  of  definitions.  I.  Importance  of  the  problem  of  Error.  Truth
as  the  evaluation  of  claims.  The  question  begged  and  burked  by
Intellectualism.  The  value  of  the  consequences  as  the  Humanist  test.
Why  'true'  consequences  are  'practical'  and  'good.'  Impossibility  of
a  '  purely  intellectual '  satisfaction.  First  definition  of  Pragmatism  :
truths  are  logical  values.  II.  Necessity  of  '  verification  '  of  truth  by  use
and  application  ;  the  second  definition,  the  truth  of  an  assertion  depends
on  its  application  ;  and  the  third,  the  meaning  of  a  rule  lies  in  its
application  ;  the  fourth,  all  meaning  depends  on  purpose.  Its  value  as  a
protest  against  the  divorce  of  logic  from  psychology.  Fifth  definition,  all
mental  life  is  purposive,  a  protest  against  Naturalism,  as  is  the  sixth,  a
systematic  protest  against  ignoring  the  purposiveness  of  actual  knowing.
No  alien  reality.  Finally  this  leads  to  the  seventh  definition  as  a  conscious
application  to  logic  of  a  ideological  psychology,  implying  a  voluntaristic
metaphysic.  III.  Humanism  as  the  spirit  of  Pragmatism,  and  like
it  a  natural  method,  which  will  not  mutilate  experience.  Its  antagonism
to  pedantry.  It  includes  Pragmatism,  but  is  not  necessitated  by  the
latter,  nor  confined  to  epistemology.  IV.  Neither  are  as  such  meta-
physics, both  are  methods,  metaphysical  syntheses  being  merely
personal.  But  both  may  be  conceived  metaphysically  and  have
metaphysical  affinities.  Need  of  applying  the  pragmatic  test  to
metaphysics.

REAL  definitions  are  a  standing  difficulty  for  all  who
have  to  deal  with  them,  whether  as  logicians  or  as
scientists,  and  it  is  no  wonder  that  dialectical  philosophers
fight  very  shy  of  them,  prefer  to  manipulate  their  verbal
imitations,  and  count  themselves  happy  if  they  can  get
an  analysis  of  the  acquired  meaning  of  a  word  to  pass

1  Based  in  part  on  two  short  papers,  in  Mind,  xiv.  N.S.  No.  54,  and  Leonardo
for  April  1905.

B


2  STUDIES IN HUMANISM  i

muster  instead  of  a  troublesome  investigation  of  the
behaviour  of  a  thing.  For  a  real  definition,  to  be  adequate,
really  involves  a  complete  knowledge  of  the  nature  of  the
thing  defined.  And  of  what  subject  of  scientific  interest
can  we  flatter  ourselves  to  have  complete  knowledge  ?

The  difficulty,  moreover,  of  defining  adequately  is  in-
definitely increased  when  we  have  to  deal  with  subjects
of  which  our  knowledge,  or  their  nature,  is  rapidly  develop-
ing, so  that  our  definitions  grow  obsolete  almost  as  fast
as  they  are  made.  Nevertheless  definitions  of  some  sort
are  psychologically  needed  :  we  must  know  what  things
are,  enough  at  least  to  know  what  we  are  discussing.  It
is  just  in  the  most  progressive  subjects  that  definitions
are  most  needed  to  consolidate  our  acquisitions.  In  their
absence  the  confusion  of  thought  and  the  irrelevance  of
discussion  may  reach  the  most  amazing  proportions.
And  so  it  is  the  duty  of  those  who  labour  at  such  subjects
to  avail  themselves  of  every  opportunity  of  explaining
what  they  mean,  to  begin  with,  and  never  to  weary  of
redefining  their  conceptions  when  the  growth  of  know-
ledge has  enlarged  them,  even  though  they  may  be  aware
that  however  assiduously  they  perform  this  duty,  they
will  not  escape  misconception,  nor,  probably,  misrepre-
sentation. The  best  definitions  to  use  in  such  circum-
stances, however,  will  be  genetic  ones,  explaining  how  the
matters  defined  have  come  into  the  ken  of  science,  and
there  assumed  the  shape  they  have.

All  these  generalities  apply  with  peculiar  force  to  the
fundamental  conceptions  of  the  new  philosophy.  The
new  ideas  have  simultaneously  broken  through  the  hard
crust  of  academic  convention  in  so  many  quarters,  they
can  be  approached  in  such  a  multitude  of  ways,  they
radiate  into  so  many  possibilities  of  application,  that
their  promoters  run  some  risk  of  failing  to  combine  their
labours,  while  their  opponents  may  be  pardoned  for
losing  their  tempers  as  well  as  their  heads  amid  the
profusion  of  unco-ordinated  movements  which  the  lack  of
formal  definition  is  calculated  to  encourage.

Even provisional definitions of Pragmatism and


i  PRAGMATISM AND HUMANISM  3

Humanism, therefore, will possess some value, if  they
succeed  in  pointing  out  their  central  conceptions.


The  serious  student,  I  dare  not  say  of  formal  logic,
but  of  the  cognitive  procedures  of  the  human  intelligence,
whenever  he  approaches  the  theory  of  actual  knowing,
at  once  finds  himself  confronted  with  the  problem  of
error.1  All  '  logical  propositions,'  as  he  calls  them,  make
the  same  audacious  claim  upon  him.  They  all  claim  to
be  '  true '  without  reservations  or  regard  for  the  claims  of
others.  And  yet,  of  course,  unless  he  shuts  his  eyes  to
all  but  the  most  '  formal '  view  of  '  truth,'  he  knows  that
the  vast  majority  of  these  propositions  are  nothing  but
specious  impostors.  They  are  not  really  '  true,'  and
actual  science  has  to  disallow  their  claim.  The  logician,
therefore,  must  take  account  of  this  rejection  of  claims,  of
this  selection  of  the  really  '  true '  from  among  apparent
'  truths.'  In  constituting  his  science,  therefore,  he  has  to
condemn  as  '  false '  as  well  as  to  recognise  as  '  true,'  i.e,
to  evaluate  claims  to  truth.

The  question  therefore  is — How  does  he  effect  this  ?
How  does  he  discriminate  between  propositions  which
claim  to  be  true,  but  are  not,  and  claims  to  truth  which
are  good,  and  may  be  shown  to  be  valid  ?  How,  that  is,
are  valid  truths  distinguished  from  mere  claims  which
may  turn  out  to  be  false  ?  These  questions  are  in-
evitable, and  no  theory  of  knowledge  which  fails  to
answer  them  has  any  claim  on  our  respect.  It  avows
an  incompleteness  which  is  as  disgraceful  as  it  is  in-
convenient.

1  Contrast  with  this  the  putting  of  the  question  in  an  absolutist  logic,  e.g.  Mr.
Joachim's  instructive  Nature  of  Truth,  which  I  had  not  seen  when  this  was  written.
Mr.  Joachim  begins  at  the  opposite  end  with  '  the  Ideal, '  and  avoids  the  con-
sideration of  Error  as  long  as  he  can.  But  when  he  does  come  to  it,  he  is
completely  worsted,  and  his  system  is  wrecked.  Thus  the  difference  between  the
Absolutist  and  the  Humanist  theory  lies  chiefly  in  the  standpoint  ;  the  facts  are
the  same  on  either  view.  The  question,  in  fact,  resolves  itself  into  this,
whether  or  not  '  Logic '  is  concerned  with  human  thought.  This  the  humanist
affirms,  while  the  absolutist  is  under  the  disadvantage  of  not  daring  to  deny  it
•wholly.  Hence  the  incoherence  and  inevitable  collapse  of  his  theory.  Cp.
Essay  ii.  §§  16-17.


4  STUDIES IN HUMANISM  r

Now  from  the  standpoint  of  rationalistic  intellectual-
ism  there  is  no  real  answer  to  these  questions,  because
a  priori  inspection  cannot  determine  the  value  of  a  claim,
and  experience  is  needed  to  decide  whether  it  is  good  or
not.1  Hence  the  obscurity,  ambiguity,  and  shiftiness,  the
general  impotence  and  unreality,  of  the  traditional  logic
is  largely  a  consequence  of  its  incapacity  to  deal  with  this
difficulty.  For  how  can  you  devise  any  practicable
method  of  evaluating  'truths,'  if  you  decline  (i)  to  allow
practical  applications  and  the  consequences  of  the  work-
ing out  of  claims  to  affect  their  validity,  if  you  decline
(2)  to  recognise  any  intermediate  stage  in  the  making  of
truth  between  the  mere  claim  and  a  completed  ideal  of
absolute  truth,  and  if,  moreover,  (3)  you  seek  to  burke
the  whole  question  of  the  formation  of  ideals  by  assuming
that  prior  to  all  experience  and  experiment  there  exists  one
immutable  ideal  towards  which  all  claims  must  converge  ?

Pragmatism,  on  the  other  hand,  essays  to  trace  out
the  actual  '  making  of  truth,' 2  the  actual  ways  in  which
discriminations  between  the  true  and  the  false  are  effected,
and  derives  from  these  its  generalisations  about  the

1  The  complete  failure  of  intellectualism  to  apprehend  even  the  most  obvious
aims  of  Pragmatism  is  amusingly  illustrated  by  Mr.  Bradley's  fulminations
against  us  on  the  ground  that  we  cannot  possibly  distinguish  between  a
random  claim  and  an  established  truth.  He  pontifically  declares  (Mind,  xiii.
p.  322)  that  "the  Personal  Idealist  ...  if  he  understood  his  own  doctrine
must  hold  any  end,  however  perverted,  to  be  rational,  if  I  insist  on  it  person-
ally, and  any  idea,  however  mad,  to  be  the  truth,  if  only  some  one  will  have  it
so."  Again,  on  p.  329,  he  ludicrously  represents  us  as  holding  that  "I  can
make  and  I  can  unmake  fact  and  truth  at  my  caprice,  and  every  vagary  of  mine
becomes  the  nature  of  things.  This  insane  doctrine  is  what  consistency  demands,"
but  Mr.  Bradley  graciously  concedes  that  "  I  cannot  attribute  it  even  to  the
protagonist  of  Personal  Idealism."  Of  course  if  there  is  one  subject  which
pragmatist  logicians  may  be  said  to  have  made  their  own  from  the  days  of
Protagoras  downwards,  it  is  that  of  the  evaluation  of  individual  claims  and  their
gradual  transformation  into  'objective'  truths  (cp.  Essay ii.  §  5).  Intellectualists,
on  the  other  hand,  have  ever  steadfastly  refused  to  consider  the  discrepancies
arising  from  the  existence  of  psychological  variations  in  human  valuations  (cp.  p.
132),  or  lazily  preferred  to  attribute  to  'the  human,'  or  even  to  'the  absolute,
mind  whatever  idiosyncrasies  they  discovered  in  themselves.  Thus  inquiry  into
the  actual  making  of  truth  has  been  tabooed,  the  most  important  questions  have
been  begged,  and  both  the  extent  and  the  limitations  of  the  '  common'  world  of
intersubjective  social  agreement  have  been  left  an  unaccountable  mystery,  some-
times further  aggravated  by  the  metaphysical  postulation  of  a  superhuman  mind
conceived  as  '  common  '  to  all  human  minds,  but  really  incompetent  to  enter  into
relation  with  any  of  them,  and  a  fortiori  incapable  of  accounting  for  their
individual  differences.
2  Cp.  Essay  vii.


i  PRAGMATISM AND HUMANISM  5

method  of  determining  the  nature  of  truth.  It  is  from
such  empirical  observations  that  it  derives  its  doctrine
that  when  an  assertion  claims  truth,  its  consequences  are
always  used  to  test  its  claim.  In  other  words,  what  \
follows  from  its  truth  for  any  human  interest,  and  more
particularly  and  in  the  first  place,  for  the  interest  with
which  it  is  directly  concerned,  is  what  established  its  real
truth  and  validity.  This  is  the  famous  '  Principle  of  '
Peirce,'  which  ought  to  be  regarded  as  the  greatest  truism,
if  it  had  not  pleased  Intellectualism  to  take  it  as  the
greatest  paradox.  But  that  only  showed,  perhaps,  how
completely  intellectualist  traditions  could  blind  philo-
sophers to  the  simplest  facts  of  cognition.  For  there
was  no  intrinsic  reason  why  even  the  extremest  in-
tellectualism  should  have  denied  that  the  difference
between  the  truth  and  the  falsehood  of  an  assertion  must
show  itself  in  some  visible,  observable  way,  or  that  two
theories  which  led  to  precisely  the  same  practical  con-
sequences could  be  different  only  in  words.

Human  interest,  then,  is  vital  to  the  existence  of  truth  :
to  say  that  a  truth  has  consequences  and  that  what  has
none  is  meaningless,  means  that  it  has  a  bearing  upon
some  human  interest.  Its  c  consequences '  must  be  con-
sequences to  some  one  for  some  purpose.  If  it  is  clearly
grasped  that  the  '  truth  '  with  which  we  are  concerned  is
truth  for  man  and  that  the  '  consequences  '  are  human  too,
it  is,  however,  really  superfluous  to  add  either  (i)  that  the
consequences  must  be  practical,  or  (2)  that  they  must  be
good^  in  order  to  distinguish  this  view  sharply  from
that  of  rationalism.

1  I  must  here  rectify  a  misapprehension  under  which  I  laboured  in  discussing
the  subject  in  Mind,  xiv.  N.  S.  No.  54,  p.  236.  I  there  tried  to  draw  a  distinction
between  a  narrower  and  a  wider  '  pragmatism,'  of  which  I  attributed  only  the
former  to  Mr.  Peirce.  In  this  I  was  following  James's  distinction  between  the
positions  that  '  truths  should  have  practical  consequences,'  and  that  they  '  consist
in  their  consequences,'  and  that  these  must  be  '  good.'  Of  these  he  seemed  to
attribute  only  the  former  to  Mr.  Peirce,  and  denominated  the  latter  Humanism.
But  Humanism  seems  to  me  to  go  further  still,  and  not  to  be  restricted  to  the  one
question  of  '  truth, '  while  Mr.  Peirce  has  privately  assured  me  that  from  the  first
he  had  perceived  the  full  consequences  of  his  dictum.  Hence  the  formulation  of
the  whole  pragmatic  principle  must  be  ascribed  to  him.  He  now,  however,  calls
his  own  specific  developments  of  Pragmatism,  '  pragmaticism. '  See  Monist,

XV. 2.


6  STUDIES  IN  HUMANISM  i

For  (i)  all  consequences  are  'practical,'  sooner  or
later,  in  the  sense  of  affecting  our  action.  Even  where
they  do  not  immediately  alter  the  course  of  events,  they
alter  our  own  nature,  and  cause  its  actions  to  be  different,
and  thus  lead  to  different  operations  on  the  world.

Similarly  (2)  if  an  assertion  is  to  be  valuable,  and
therefore  '  true,'  its  consequences  must  be  '  good.'  They
can  only  test  the  truth  it  claims  by  forwarding  or  baffling,
the  interest,  by  satisfying  or  thwarting  the  purpose,  which
led  to  the  making  of  the  assertion.  If  they  do  the  one,
the  assertion  is  '  good,'  and  pro  tanto  '  true ' ;  if  they  do
the  other,  it  is  '  bad '  and  '  false.'  For  whatever  arouses
an  interest  or  forwards  an  end  is  judged  to  be  (so  far)
'  good,'  whatever  baffles  or  thwarts  is  judged  to  be  '  bad.'
If,  therefore,  the  consequences  of  an  assertion  turn  out  to
be  in  this  way  '  good,'  it  is  valuable  for  our  purposes,  and,
provisionally  at  least,  establishes  itself  as  '  true ' ;  if  they
are  bad,  we  reject  it  as  useless  and  account  it  '  false,'  and
search  for  something  that  satisfies  our  purpose  better,  or
in  extreme  cases  accept  it  as  a  provisional  truth  concern-
ing a  reality  we  are  determined  to  unmake.  Thus  the
predicates  '  true '  and  '  false '  are  nothing  in  the  end  but
indications  of  logical  value,  and  as  values  akin  to  and
comparable  with  the  values  predicated  in  ethical  and
aesthetical  judgments,  which  present  similar  problems  of
the  validation  of  claims.1

The  reason,  therefore,  why  truth  is  said  to  depend  on
its  consequences  is  simply  this,  that  if  we  do  not  imagine
truths  to  exist  immutably  and  a  priori  in  a  supercelestial
world,  and  to  descend  magically  into  a  passively  recipient
soul,  as  rationalists  since  Plato  have  continually  tried
to  hold,2  they  must  come  into  being  by  winning  our
acceptance.  And  what  rational  mode  of  verification  can
any  one  suggest  other  than  this  testing  by  their  con-
sequences ?

Of  course  the  special  nature  of  the  testing  depends  on
the  subject-matter,  and  the  nature  of  the  '  experiments '
which  are  in  this  way  made  in  mathematics,  in  ethics,

1  Essay  v.  §  3.  2  Cp.  Essay  ii.  §§15,  16.


i  PRAGMATISM AND  HUMANISM  7

in  physics,  in  religion,  may  seem  very  diverse  super-
ficially.

But  there  is  no  reason  to  set  up  a  peculiar  process  of
verification  for  the  satisfying  of  a  '  purely  intellectual '
interest,  different  in  kind  from  the  rest,  superior  in  dignity,
and  autocratic  in  authority.  For  (i)  there  is  no  pure
intellect.  If  '  pure  intellect '  does  not  imply  a  gross
blunder  in  psychology,  and  this  is  probably  what  it  too
often  meant  until  the  conception  was  challenged,  it  means
an  abstraction,  an  intellect  conceived  as  void  of  function,
as  not  applied  to  any  actual  problem,  as  satisfying  no
purpose.  And  such  an  intellect  of  course  would  be
absurd.  Or  is  it  possibly  conceived  as  having  the  end
of  amusing  its  possessor  ?  As  achieving  this  end  it  may
claim  somewhat  more  regard,  but  apart  from  its  value  as
exercise,  the  mere  play  of  the  intellect,  which  is  meant
for  serious  work,  does  not  seem  intrinsically  venerable  ;
it  is  certainly  just  as  liable  to  abuse  as  any  other  game.
And  (2)  if  we  exclude  morbid  or  frivolous  excesses,  the
actual  functioning  of  the  intellect,  even  in  what  are  called
its  most  '  purely  intellectual '  forms,  is  only  intelligible  by
reference  to  human  ends  and  values.

All  testing  of  '  truth,'  therefore,  is  fundamentally  alike.
It  is  always  an  appeal  to  something  beyond  the  original
claim.  It  always  implies  an  experiment.  It  always
involves  a  risk  of  failure  as  well  as  a  prospect  of  success.
And  it  always  ends  in  a  valuation.  As  Prof.  Mach  has
said:1  "knowledge  and  error  flow  from  the  self-same
psychic  sources  ;  the  issue  alone  can  discriminate  between
them."  We  arrive,  therefore,  at  our  first  definition  of
Pragmatism  as  the  doctrine  that  (i)  truths  are  logical
values,  and  as  the  method  which  systematically  tests
claims  to  truth  in  accordance  with  this  principle.

1  Erkenntnis  und Irrtum,  p.  1 14.  The  German  word  'Erfolg,'  translated '  issue, '
covers  both  '  consequence '  and  '  success '  :  it  is,  in  fact,  one  of  those  numerous
words  by  which  language  spontaneously  testifies  to  the  pragmatic  nature  of
thought.  Cp.  'fact' — 'made,'  'true' — 'trow' — 'trust,'  'false1 — 'fail,'  'verify,'
'  object '=' aim ';  and  in  German  'wirklich' — '  wirken,'  '  wahr' — ' bewahren ,'
'  Wahrufhmung,'  etc.


8  STUDIES IN  HUMANISM  i

II

It  is  easily  apparent  that  it  directly  follows  from  this
definition  of  truth  that  all  '  truths '  must  be  verified  to
be  properly  true.  A  '  truth '  which  will  not  (or  cannot)
submit  to  verification  is  not  yet  a  truth  at  all.  Its  truth
is  at  best  potential,  its  meaning  is  null  or  unintelligible,
or  at  most  conjectural  and  dependent  on  an  unfulfilled
condition.  To  become  really  true  it  has  to  be  tested,
and  it  is  tested  by  being  applied.  Only  when  this  is
done,  only  that  is  when  it  is  used,  can  it  be  determined
what  it  really  means,  and  what  conditions  it  must  fulfil  to
be  really  true.  Hence  all  real  truths  must  have  shown
themselves  to  be  useful ;  they  must  have  been  applied  to
some  problem  of  actual  knowing,  by  usefulness  in  which
they  were  tested  and  verified.

Hence  we  arrive  at  a  second  formulation  of  the  prag-
matic principle,  on  which  Mr.  Alfred  Sidgwick  has  justly
laid  such  stress,1  viz.  that  (2)  the  'truth'  of  an  assertion
depends  on  its  application.  Or,  in  other  words,  '  abstract '
truths  are  not  fully  truths  at  all.  They  are  truths  out  of
use,  unemployed,  craving  for  incarnation  in  the  concrete.
It  is  only  in  their  actual  operations  upon  the  world  of
immediate  experience  that  they  cast  off  their  callous
ambiguity,  that  they  mean,  and  live,  and  show  their
power.  Now  in  ordinary  life  men  of  ordinary  intelli-
gence are  quite  aware  of  this.  They  recognise  that  truth
depends  very  essentially  upon  context,  on  who  says  what,
to  whom,  why,  and  under  what  circumstances  ;  they  know
also  that  the  point  of  a  principle  lies  in  the  application
thereof,  and  that  it  is  very  hazardous  to  guide  oneself
by  abstract  maxims  with  a  doctrinaire  disregard  of  the
peculiarities  of  the  case.  The  man  of  science  similarly,
for  all  the  world-embracing  sweep  of  his  generalisations,
for  all  his  laudations  of  inexorable  '  law,'  is  perfectly
aware  that  his  theoretic  anticipations  always  stand  in
need  of  practical  confirmation,  and  that  if  this  fails  his
'  laws  '  are  falsified.

1  See  his  article  on  "Applied  Axioms"  in  Mind,  xiv.  N.S.  No.  53.


i  PRAGMATISM AND HUMANISM  9

The  intellectualist  philosopher  alone  has  blinded  him-
self to  these  simple  facts.  He  has  dreamt  a  wondrous
dream  of  a  truth  that  shall  be  absolutely  true,  self-testing,
and  self-dependent,  icily  exercising  an  unrestricted  sway
over  a  submissive  world,  whose  adoration  it  requites  with
no  services,  and  scouting  as  blasphemy  all  allusion  to  use  or
application.  But  he  cannot  point  to  any  truth  which  really
realises  this  ideal.1  Even  the  abstract  truths  of  arithmetic,
upon  which  alone  he  seems  to  rest  his  case,  now  that  the
invention  of  metag^eometries  has  shown  the  '  truth  of
geometry'  to  involve  also  the  question  of  its  application,
derive  their  truth  from  their  application  to  experience.
The  abstract  statement,  e.g.  that  "two  and  two  make
four,"  is  always  incomplete.  We  need  to  know  to  what
'  twos '  and  '  fours '  the  dictum  is  applied.  It  would  not
be  true  of  lions  and  lambs,  nor  of  drops  of  water,  nor  of
pleasures  and  pains.  The  range  of  application  of  the
abstract  truth,  therefore,  is  quite  limited.  And  conceivably
it  might  be  so  restricted  that  the  truth  would  become
inapplicable  to  the  outer  world  altogether.  Nay,  though
states  of  consciousness  could  always  be  counted,  so  long
as  succession  was  experienced,  it  is  impossible  to  see  how
it  could  be  true  to  an  eternal  consciousness.  The  gods,
as  Aristotle  would  have  said,  seeing  that  they  cannot
count,  have  no  arithmetic.

In  short,  truths  must  be  used  to  become  true,  and  (in
the  end)  to  stay  true.  They  are  also  meant  to  be  used.
They  are  rules  for  action.  And  a  rule  that  is  not  applied,
and  remains  abstract,  rules  nothing,  and  means  nothing.
Hence  we  may,  once  more  following  Mr.  Alfred  Sidgwick,
regard  it  as  the  essence  of  the  pragmatic  method  that  (3)
the  meaning  of  a  rule  lies  in  its  application.  It  rules,  that
is,  and  is  true,  within  a  definite  sphere  of  application  which
has  been  marked  out  by  experiment.

Perhaps,  however,  it  is  possible  to  state  the  pragmatic
character  of  truth  still  more  incisively  by  laying  it  down
that  ultimately  (4)  all  meaning  depends  on  purpose.  This
formulation  grows  naturally  out  of  the  last  two.  The

1  Cp.  Essay  ii.  §§  16-18.


io  STUDIES IN HUMANISM  i

making  of  an  assertion,  the  application  of  an  alleged
truth  to  the  experience  which  tests  it,  can  only  occur  in
the  context  of  and  in  connexion  with  some  purpose,  which
defines  the  nature  of  the  whole  ideal  experiment.

The  dependence  of  meaning  on  purpose  is  beginning
to  be  somewhat  extensively  recognised,  though  hardly  as
yet  what  havoc  this  principle  must  work  among  the  ab-
stractions of  intellectualist  logic.  For  it  is  one  of  the  most
distinctive  ways  in  which  the  pragmatic  view  of  truth
can  be  enunciated,  and  guards  against  two  of  the  chief
failings  of  Intellectualism.  It  contains  an  implicit  protest
against  the  abstraction  of  logic  from  psychology :  for
purpose  is  as  clearly  a  psychological  conception  as  meaning
is  professedly  a  logical  one.1  And  it  negatives  the  notion
that  truth  can  depend  on  how  things  would  appear  to  an
all-embracing,  or  '  absolute,'  mind.  For  such  a  mind  could
have  no  purpose.  It  could  not,  that  is,  select  part  of  its
content  as  an  object  of  special  interest  to  be  operated
on  or  aimed  at.2  In  human  minds,  on  the  other  hand,
meaning  is  always  selective  and  purposive.

It  is,  in  fact,  a  biological  function,  intimately  related
to  the  welfare  of  the  organism.  Biologically  speaking,
the  whole  mind,  of  which  the  intellect  forms  part,  may  be
conceived  as  a  typically  human  instrument  for  effecting
adaptations,  which  has  survived  and  developed  by  showing
itself  possessed  of  an  efficacy  superior  to  the  devices
adopted  by  other  animals.  Hence  the  most  essential
feature  of  Pragmatism  may  well  seem  its  insistence  on
the  fact  that  (5)  all  mental  life  is  purposive.  This  insist-  \
ence  in  reality  embodies  the  pragmatic  protest  against
naturalism,  and  as  such  ought  to  receive  the  cordial
support  of  rationalistic  idealisms.  But  it  has  just  been
shown  that  absolutist  idealisms  have  their  own  difficulties
with  the  conception  of  purpose,  and  besides,  it  is  an  open
secret  that  they  have  for  the  most  part  long  ago  reduced
the  '  spiritual  nature  of  reality  '  to  a  mere  form,  and  retired
from  the  struggle  against  naturalism.3  A  '  spiritual  nature

1  See  Essay  iii.  §  9.  '2  Cp.  Essay  ix.  §  5.

3  Cp.  Essay  xii.  §  5.


i  PRAGMATISM  AND  HUMANISM  n

of  reality'  which  accepts  all  the  naturalistic  negations  of
human  activity  and  freedom,  and  leaves  no  room  for
any  of  the  characteristic  procedures  and  aspirations  of  the
human  spirit,  is  a  more  dangerous  foe  to  man's  spiritual
ambitions  than  the  most  downright  materialism.

Pragmatism,  therefore,  must  enter  its  protest  against
both  the  extremes  that  have  so  nearly  met.  It  must
constitute  itself  into  (6)  a  systematic  protest  against  all
ignoring  of  the  purposiveness  of  actual  knowing,  alike
whether  it  is  abstracted  from  for  the  sake  of  the  im-
aginary '  pure  '  or  '  absolute  '  reason  of  the  rationalists,
or  eliminated  for  the  sake  of  an  equally  imaginary  '  pure
mechanism '  of  the  materialists.  It  must  insist  on  the
permeation  of  all  actual  knowing  by  interests,  purposes,
desires,  emotions,  ends,  goods,  postulations,  choices,  etc.,
and  deny  that  even  those  doctrines  which  vociferate  their
abhorrence  of  such  things  are  really  able  to  dispense  with
them.  For  the  human  reason  is  ever  gloriously  human,
even  when  most  it  tries  to  disavow  its  nature,  and  to  mis-
conceive itself.  It  mercifully  interposes  an  impenetrable  veil
between  us  and  any  truth  or  reality  which  is  wholly  alien
to  our  nature.  The  efforts,  therefore,  of  those  who  ignore
the  nature  of  the  instruments  they  use  must  ever  fail,  and
fail  the  more  flagrantly  the  more  strenuously  they  persist
in  thinking  to  the  end.

If,  however,  we  have  the  courage  and  perseverance  to
persist  in  thinking  to  the  end,  i.e.  to  form  a  metaphysic,
it  is  likely  that  we  should  arrive  at  some  sort  of  Volun-
tarism. For  Voluntarism  is  the  metaphysic  which  most
easily  accords  and  harmonises  with  the  experience  of
activity  with  which  all  our  thinking  and  all  our  living
seem  to  overflow.  Metaphysics,  however,  are  in  a
manner  luxuries.  Men  can  live  quite  well  without  a
conscious  metaphysic,  and  the  systems  even  of  the  most
metaphysical  are  hardly  ever  quite  consistent,  or  fully
thought  out.  Pragmatism,  moreover,  is  not  a  metaphysic,
though  it  may,  somewhat  definitely,  point  to  one.  It  is
really  something  far  more  precious,  viz.  an  epistemological
method  which  really  describes  the  facts  of  actual  knowing.


12  STUDIES IN HUMANISM  i

But  though  it  is  only  a  method  in  the  field  of  logic,  it
may  well  confess  to  its  affinities  for  congenial  views  in
other  sciences.  It  prides  itself  on  its  close  connexion
with  psychology.  But  it  clearly  takes  for  granted  that
the  psychology  with  which  it  is  allied  has  recognised  the
reality  of  purposes.  And  so  it  can  be  conceived  as  a
special  application  to  the  sphere  of  logic  of  standpoints
and  methods  which  extend  far  beyond  its  borders.  So
conceived  we  may  describe  it  as  (7)  a  conscious  application
to  epistemology  (or  logic)  of  a  teleo logical  psychology,  which
implies,  ultimately,  a  voluntaristic  metaphysic.

These  seven  formulations  of  the  essence  of  Pragmatism
look,  doubtless,  very  different  in  words ;  but  they  are
nevertheless  very  genuinely  equivalent.  For  they  are
closely  connected,  and  the  '  essence,'  like  the  '  definition,'
of  a  thing  is  relative  to  the  point  of  view  from  which  it
is  regarded.  And  the  problems  raised  by  Pragmatism  are
so  central  that  it  has  points  of  contact  with  almost  every
line  of  philosophical  inquiry,  and  so  is  capable  of  being
defined  by  its  relation  to  this.  What  is  really  important,
however,  is  not  this  or  that  formulation,  but  the  spirit  in
which  it  approaches,  and  the  method  by  which  it  examines,
its  problems.  The  method  we  have  observed  ;  it  is  em-
pirical, teleological,  and  concrete.  Its  spirit  is  a  bigger
thing,  which  may  fitly  be  denominated  Humanism.

Ill

/  '

Humanism  is  really  in  itself  the  simplest  of  philosophic

standpoints  :  it  is  merely  the  perception  that  the  philo-
sophic problem  concerns  human  beings  striving  to  com-
prehend a  world  of  human  experience  by  the  resources  of
human  mindsT  Not  even  Pragmatism  could  be  simpler
or  nearer  to  an  obvious  truism  of  cognitive  method.  For
if  man  may  not  presume  his  own  nature  in  his  reasonings
about  his  experience,  wherewith,  pray,  shall  he  reason  ?
What  prospect  has  he  of  comprehending  a  radically  alien
universe?  And  yet  not  even  Pragmatism  has  been  more
bitterly  assailed  than  the  great  principle  that  man  is  the


i  PRAGMATISM AND HUMANISM  13

measure  of  his  experience,  and  so  an  ineradicable  factor
in  any  world  he  experiences.  The  Protagorean  principle
may  sometimes  seem  paradoxical  to  the  uninstructed,  be-
cause they  think  it  leaves  out  of  account  the  '  independence '
of  the  '  external '  world.  But  this  is  mere  misunderstand-  .
ing.  Humanism  has  no  quarrel  with  the  assumptions  of
common-sense  realism  ;  it  does  not  deny  what  is  popularly
described  as  the  '  external '  world.  It  has  far  too  much
respect  for  the  pragmatic  value  of  conceptions  which  de
facto  work  far  better  than  those  of  the  metaphysics  which
despise  them.  It  insists  only  that  the  '  external  world '
of  realism  is  still  dependent  on  human  experience,  and
perhaps  ventures  to  add  also  that  the  data  of  human
experience  are  not  completely  used  up  in  the  construction
of  a  real  external  world.1  Moreover,  its  assailants  are  not
realists,  though,  for  the  purpose  of  such  attacks,  they  may
masquerade  as  such.2

The  truth  is  rather  that  Humanism  gives  offence,  not
because  it  leaves  out,  but  because  it  leaves  in.  It  leaves
in  a  great  deal  Intellectualism  would  like  to  leave  out,  a
great  deal  it  has  no  use  for,  which  it  would  like  to  extir-
pate, or  at  least  to  keep  out  of  its  sight.  But  Humanism  will
not  assent  to  the  mutilations  and  expurgations  of  human
nature  which  have  become  customary  barbarisms  in  the
initiation  ceremonies  of  too  many  philosophic  schools.  It
demands  that  man's  integral  nature  shall  be  used  as  the
whole  premiss  which  philosophy  must  argue  from  whole-
heartedly, that  man's  complete  satisfaction  shall  be  the
conclusion  philosophy  must  aim  at,  that  philosophy  shall
not  cut  itself  loose  from  the  real  problems  of  life  by  making
initial  abstractions  which  are  false,  and  would  not  be  admir-
able, even  if  they  were  true.  Hence  it  insists  on  leaving  in
the  whole  rich  luxuriance  of  individual  minds,  instead  of
compressing  them  all  into  a  single  type  of  mind,'  feigned  to
be  one  and  immutable  ;  it  leaves  in  also  the  psychological
wealth  of  every  human  mind  and  the  complexities  of  its
interests,  emotions,  volitions,  aspirations.  By  so  doing  it
sacrifices  no  doubt  much  illusory  simplicity  in  abstract

1  Cp.  Essay  xx.  §  14.  a  Cp.  Essay  xx.  §4.


14  STUDIES IN HUMANISM  i

formulas,  but  it  appreciates  and  explains  vast  masses  of
what  before  had  had  to  be  slurred  over  as  unintelligible
fact.1

The  dislike  of  Humanism,  therefore,  is  psychological
in  origin.  It  arises  from  the  nature  of  certain  human
minds  who  have  become  too  enamoured  of  the  artificial
simplifications,  or  too  accustomed  to  the  self-inflicted
mutilations,  and  the  self-imposed  torments,  whereby  they
hope  to  merit  absorption  in  absolute  truth.  These  ascetics
of  the  intellectual  world  must  steadfastly  oppose  the  free
indulgence  in  all  human  powers,  the  liberty  of  moving,  of
improving,  of  making,  of  manipulating,  which  Humanism
vindicates  for  man,  and  substitutes  for  the  old  ideal  of  an
inactive  contemplation  of  a  static  truth.  TE  is  no  wonder
that  the  SirneOiii  stylite"  of "Ihe  oTd  order,  hoisted  aloft
each  on  the  pillar  of  his  metaphysical  '  system,'  resent  the
disturbance  of  their  restful  solitude, '  alone  with  the  Alone,'
by  the  hoots  of  intrusive  motor-cars ;  that  the  Saint
Antonys  of  the  deserts  of  Pure  Thought  are  infuriated  by
their  conversion  into  serviceable  golf-links ;  and  that
the  Juggernaut  Car  of  the  Absolute  gets  fewer  and  fewer
votaries  to  prostrate  themselves  beneath  its  wheels  every
time  it  is  rolled  out  of  the  recesses  of  its  sanctuary — for
when  man  has  grown  conscious  of  his  powers  he  will  prefer
even  to  chance  an  encounter  with  a  useful  machine  to
being  run  over  by  a  useless  '  deity.'

The  active  life  of  man  is  continuously  being  trans-
formed by  the  progress  of  modern  science,  by  the  know-
ledge which  is  power.  But  not  so  the  '  knowledge '  which
is  '  contemplation,'  which  postpones  the  test  of  action,
and  struggles  to  evade  it.  Unfortunately,  it  is  hard  to
modernise  the  academic  life,  and  it  is  this  life  which  is
the  fountain-head  of  intellectualism.  Academic  life  natur-
ally tends  to  produce  a  certain  intellectualistic  bias,  and  to
select  the  natures  which  incline  to  it.  Intellectualism,
therefore,  in  some  form  will  always  be  a  congenial  philo-
sophy which  is  true  to  the  academic  life.

1  Contrast  Mr. Joachim's  Nature  of  Truth  throughout,  and  especially  pp.
167-68,  and  compare  Essay  ii.  §  16.


i  PRAGMATISM AND HUMANISM  15

Genuine  whole-hearted  Humanism,  on  the  other  hand,
is  a  singularly  difficult  attitude  to  sustain  in  an  academic
atmosphere  ;  for  the  tendencies  of  the  whole  mode  of  life
are  unceasingly  against  it.  If  Protagoras  had  been  a  univer- I
sity  professor,  he  would  hardly  have  discovered  Humanism  ;
he  would  more  likely  have  constructed  a  Nephelococcygia
of  a  system  that  laid  claim  to  absolute,  universal,  and
eternal  truth,  or  spent  his  life  in  overthrowing  the  dis-
crepant, but  no  less  presumptuous,  systems  of  his  col-
leagues. Fortunately  he  lived  before  universities  had
been  invented  to  regulate,  and  quench,  the  thirst  for
knowledge  ;  he  had  to  earn  his  living  by  the  voluntary
gratitude  for  instructions  which  could  justify  themselves
only  in  his  pupils'  lives  ;  and  so  he  had  to  be  human  and
practical,  and  to  take  the  chill  of  pedantry  off  his  discourses.

Just  because  Humanism,  then,  is  true  to  the  larger  life
of  man  it  must  be  in  some  measure  false  to  the  artificially
secluded  studies  of  a  '  seat  of  learning ' ;  and  its  accept-
ance by  an  academic  personage  must  always  mean  a
triumph  over  the  obvious  temptation  to  idealise  and  adore
the  narrownesses  of  his  actual  life.  However  much  it  exalts
the  function  of  man  in  general,  it  may  always  be  taken, to
hint  a  certain  disparagement  of  the  academic  man.  It
needs  a  certain  magnanimity,  in  short,  in  a  professor  to
avow  himself  a  Humanist.

Thorough  Humanists,  therefore,  will  always  be  some-
what rare  in  academic  circles.  There  will  always  be  many
who  will  not  be  able  to  avoid  convincing  themselves  of
the  truth  of  a  method  which  works  like  the  pragmatic  one
(and  indeed  in  another  twenty  years  pragmatic  convictions
will  be  practically  universal),  without  being  able  to  over-
come the  intellectualistic  influences  of  their  nature  and
their  mode  of  life.  Such  persons  will  be  psychologically
incapacitated  to  advance  in  the  path  which  leads  from
Pragmatism  to  Humanism.

Yet  this  advance  is  in  a  manner  logical  as  well  as
psychological.  For  those  whose  nature  predisposes  them
towards  it  will  find  it  reasonable  and  satisfying,  and  when
they  have  reached  the  Humanist  position  and  reflect  upon


16  STUDIES IN HUMANISM  i

the  expansion  of  Pragmatism  which  it  involves,  there  will
seem  to  be  a  '  logical '  connexion.  Pragmatism  will  seem
a  special  application  of  Humanism  to  the  theory  of  know-
ledge. But  Humanism  will  seem  more  universal.  It
will  seem  to  be  possessed  of  a  method  which  is  applicable
universally,  to  ethics,  to  aesthetics,  to  metaphysics,  to
theology,  to  every  concern  of  man,  as  well  as  to  the  theory
of  knowledge.

Yet  there  will  be  no  '  logical '  compulsion.  Here,  as
always  when  we  come  to  the  important  choices  of  life,  we
must  be  free  to  stop  at  the  lower  level,  if  we  are  to  be
free  to  advance  to  the  higher.  We  can  stop  at  the
epistemological  level  of  Pragmatism  (just  as  we  can  stop
short  of  philosophy  on  the  scientific  plane,  and  of  science
on  the  plane  of  ordinary  life),  accepting  Pragmatism  indeed
as  the  method  and  analysis  of  our  cognitive  procedure,
but  without  seeking  to  generalise  it,  or  to  turn  it  into  a
metaphysic.  Indeed  if  our  interest  is  not  keen  in  life  as
a  whole,  we  are  very  likely  to  do  something  of  the  kind.


IV

What,  then,  shall  be  said  of  metaphysics  ?  As  Prag-
matism and  Humanism  have  been  defined,  neither  of  them
necessitates  a  metaphysic.1  Both  are  methods  ;  the  one

1  Hence  the  criticism  to  which  both  have  frequently  been  subjected  on  the
ground  that  they  were  not  metaphysically  complete  philosophies  (e.g.  by  Dr.  S.  H.
Mellone  in  Mind,  xiv.  pp.  507-529)  involves  a  certain  misconstruction.  I  can
only  reply  that  I  have  not  yet  attempted  to  formulate  a  (or  rather  my]  pragmatic  or
humanist  metaphysic.  The  essay  on  '  Axioms  as  Postulates  '  in  Personal  Idealism
was  epistemological  throughout ;  so  were  the  pragmatic  parts  of  Humanism.
'Activity  and  Substance'  does  indeed  contain  some  metaphysical  construction,  but
it  is  not  distinctively  pragmatic.  When,  therefore,  Dr.  Mellone  (I.e.  p.  528)
ascribes  to  me  the  assumption  of  an  absolute  chaos  as  the  prius  of  experience,
condemns  it  as  unthinkable,  and  finally  complains  of  feeling  a  '  collapse '  when
' '  this  incredible  metaphysical  dogma  is  suddenly  transformed  into  a  methodo-
logical postulate,"  he  has  made  his  difficulty  by  construing  my  epistemology  as
metaphysics.  Antecedently  this  misinterpretation  would  never  have  seemed
possible  to  me,  and  so  I  thought  it  unnecessary  to  insert  a  warning  against
it.  But  that  several  able  critics  have  fallen  into  this  error  shows  the  extent
of  the  confusion  of  thought  induced  by  the  deliberate  blurring  of  the
boundaries  between  logic  and  metaphysics  which  we  owe  to  Hegelising
philosophers.  If,  however,  Dr.  Mellone  will  do  me  the  honour  of  re-reading
my  doctrine  as  purely  epistemological,  he  will  see  that  both  the  difficulty
and  the  '  collapse '  were  in  his  own  preconceptions.  In  itself  the  conception


i  PRAGMATISM  AND  HUMANISM  17

restricted  to  the  special  problem  of  knowing,  the  other
more  widely  applicable.  And  herein  lies  their  value  ;  for
methods  are  necessities  of  scientific  progress,  and  there-
fore indispensable.  Metaphysics,  on  the  other  hand,  are
really  luxuries,  personal  indulgences  that  may  be  conceded
to  a  lifelong  devotion  to  science,  but  of  no  coercive
objective  validity.  For  there  is  an  immense  discrepancy
between  the  ideal  claims  of  metaphysics  and  the  actual
facts.  By  definition  metaphysics  is  (i.e.  tries  to  be)  the
science  of  the  final  synthesis  of  all  the  data  of  our  experi-
ence. But  de  facto  these  data  are  (i)  insufficient,  and  (2)
individual.  Hence  (i)  the  metaphysical  synthesis  is
lacking  in  cogency  :  it  is  imaginative  and  conjectural.  It
is  the  ideal  completion  of  an  image  of  reality  which  is
rough-hewn  and  fragmentary ;  it  is  the  reconstruction  of
a  torso.  Whoever  therefore  prefers  to  remain  within  the
bounds  of  actual  knowledge,  is  entitled  to  refrain  from
pledging  himself  to  a  metaphysic.  He  may  recognise  any
realities,  he  may  employ  any  conceptions  and  methods,  he
finds  necessary  or  expedient,  without  affirming  their
ultimate  validity.

(2)  And  so  those  whose  spirits  crave  for  an  ideal
completion  and  confirmation  of  knowledge  by  a  meta-
physical construction  must  abate  their  pretensions.  They
must  renounce  the  pretence  of  building  what  is  universal,
and  eternal,  and  objective,  and  compulsory,  and  '  valid  for

of  knowledge  as  developing  by  the  progressive  determination  of  a  relatively
indeterminate  and  plastic  '  matter '  never  pretended  to  be  more  than  an  analysis
of  knowledge.  It  does  indeed  point  to  the  conceptual  limit  of  a  '  first  matter  '
in  which  as  yet  no  determinations  have  been  acquired,  but  it  does  not  affirm  its
positive  existence,  and  it  is  quite  conceivable  (i)  that  our  analysis  may  be  brought
up  against  some  irreducible  datum  of  fact,  and  (2)  that  it  should  never  actually
get  back  to  the  metaphysical  origin  of  things.  Anyhow,  the  question  of  the  proper
metaphysical  interpretation  of  the  conceptions  used  in  pragmatic  epistemology
was  not  raised.  Epistemologically,  however,  the  conception  of  a  determinable
plastic  '  matter '  seems  useful  enough  as  descriptive  of  our  knowing,  and  as  inno-
cent and  at  least  as  valid  as  the  Aristotelian  notion  that  knowledge  always  arises
out  of  pre-existent  knowledge.  Of  course  such  notions  get  into  difficulties  when
we  try  to  extract  from  them  accounts  of  the  absolute  origin  of  knowledge.  But
is  it  so  sure  that  absolute  origins  can  ever  be  traced  ?  They  are  certainly  not  to
be  had  for  the  asking.  For  they  always  seem  to  involve  a  demand  for  the
derivation  of  something  out  of  nothing.  And  I  am  not  aware  that  any  theory
has  up  to  date  answered  these  questions.  But  I  am  confident  that  when
Humanist  metaphysics  are  constructed,  they  will  not  be  so  wildly  irrelevant  to
actual  life  as  in  the  past  metaphysical  attempts  have  mostly  been.

C


1 8  STUDIES IN HUMANISM  i

intelligence  as  such.'  In  view  of  the  actual  facts,  does  it
not  argue  an  abysmal  conceit  and  stupendous  ignorance
of  the  history  of  thought  to  cherish  the  delusion  that  of
all  philosophies  one's  own  alone  was  destined  to  win
general  acceptance  ipsissimis  verbis,  or  even  to  be  reflected,
undimmed  and  unmodified,  in  any  second  soul  ?  Every
metaphysic,  in  point  of  fact,  works  up  into  its  structure
large  masses  of  subjective  material  which  is  individual,  and
drawn  from  its  author's  personal  experience.  It  always
takes  its  final  form  from  an  idiosyncrasy.

And,  furthermore,  this  is  quite  as  it  should  be.  If  it
really  is  the  duty  of  metaphysics  to  leave  out  nothing,  to
undo  abstractions,  to  aspire  to  the  whole  of  experience,
it  must  have  this  personal  tinge.  For  a  man's  personal
life  must  contribute  largely  to  his  data,  and  his  idiosyn-
crasy must  colour  and  pervade  whatever  he  experiences.
It  is  surely  the  most  sinister  and  fatal  of  abstractions  to
abstract  from  the  variety  of  individual  minds,  in  order  to
postulate  a  universal  substance  in  which  personal  life  is
obliterated,  because  you  are  too  ignorant  or  indolent  to  cope
with  its  exuberance.  Two  men,  therefore,  with  different
fortunes,  histories,  and  temperaments,  ought  not  to  arrive  at
the  same  metaphysic,  nor  can  they  do  so  honestly ;  each
should  react  individually  on  the  food  for  thought  which
his  personal  life  affords,  and  the  resulting  differences
ought  not  to  be  set  aside  as  void  of  ultimate  significance.
Nor  is  it  true  or  relevant  to  reply  that  to  admit  this
means  intellectual  anarchy.  What  it  means  is  something
quite  as  distasteful  to  the  absolutist  temper,  viz.  tolera-
tion, mutual  respect,  and  practical  co-operation.

It  means  also  that  we  should  deign  to  see  facts  as
they  are.  For  in  point  of  fact,  the  protest  against  the
tyrannous  demand  for  rigid  uniformity  is  in  a  sense
superfluous.  No  two  men  ever  really  think  (and  still
less  feel)  alike,  even  when  they  profess  allegiance  to  the
self-same  formulas.  Nor  does  the  universe  appear  to
contain  the  psychological  machinery  by  which  such
uniformity  could  be  secured.  In  short,  despite  all
bigotry,  a  philosophy  is  always  in  the  last  resort  the


i  PRAGMATISM  AND HUMANISM  19

theory of  a  life, and not of  life in  general  or  in  the
abstract.

But  though  Pragmatism  and  Humanism  are  only
methods  in  themselves,  it  should  not  be  forgotten  (i)  that
methods  may  be  turned  into  metaphysics  by  accepting  them
as  ultimate.  Whosoever  is  wholly  satisfied  by  a  method
may  adopt  it  as  his  metaphysic,  just  as  he  may  adopt
the  working  conceptions  of  a  science.  Both  Pragmatism
and  Humanism,  therefore,  may  be  held  as  metaphysics  :
this  will  induce  no  difference  in  their  doctrines,  but  only
in  the  attitude  towards  them.

(2)  Methods  may  have  metaphysical  affinities. Thus
our  last  definition  of  Pragmatism  conceived  it  as  derivative
from a voluntarist metaphysic. Humanism, similarly,
may  be  affiliated  to  metaphysical  personalism.

(3)  Methods may  point,  more or  less  definitely, to
certain  metaphysical  conclusions. Thus  Pragmatism  may
be taken to  point to the ultimate reality of human
activity  and  freedom,1  to  the  plasticity  and  incompleteness
of  reality,2  to  the  reality  of  the  world-process  '  in  time,'
and  so  forth. Humanism,  in  addition,  may  point  to  the
personality  of  whatever  cosmic  principle  we  can  postu-
late as  ultimate,  and  to  its  kinship  and  sympathy  with
man.

Clearly,  therefore,  there  is  no  reason  to  apprehend
that  the  growth  of  the  new  methods  of  philosophising
will  introduce  monotonous  uniformity  into  the  annals  of
philosophy.  '  Systems '  of  philosophy  will  abound  as
before,  and  will  be  as  various  as  ever.  But  they  will
probably  be  more  brilliant  in  their  colouring,  and  more
attractive  in  their  form.  For  they  will  certainly  have  to
be  put  forward,  and  acknowledged,  as  works  of  art  that
bear  the  impress  of  a  unique  and  individual  soul.3  Such

1  Cp.  Essay  xviii.  2  Cp.  Essay  xix.

3  In  point  of  fact  this  is  already  beginning  to  happen.  Personally,  after
perpetrating  as  pretty  a  metaphysic  as  most,  in  the  pre-pragmatic  era,  viz.
Riddles  of  the  Sphinx,  I  now  stand  almost  alone  in  threshing  the  old  straw,  in
persevering  with  the  logical  elaboration  of  the  new  methods,  and  in  shrinking
from  more  than  transient  dips  in  the  ocean  of  metaphysics,  which  Professors
James  and  Dewey  have  bravely  begun  to  traverse.  Mr.  Sturt  is  meditating  a
new  religion,  while  Signor  Papini  is  proclaiming  the  advent  of  the  Uorno-Dio,


20  STUDIES IN  HUMANISM  i

has  always  been  their  nature,  but  when  this  is  frankly
recognised,  we  shall  grow  more  tolerant  and  more
appreciative.  Only  we  shall  probably  be  less  impressed,
and  therefore  less  tormented,  than  now,  by  unclear  thinking
and  bad  writing  which  try  to  intimidate  us  by  laying
claim  to  absolute  validity.  Such  '  metaphysics  '  we  shall
gently  put  aside.

It  is  clear,  therefore,  that  Metaphysic  also  must  hence-
forth submit  its  pretensions  to  the  pragmatic  test.  It  will
not  be  valued  any  longer  because  of  the  magniloquent
obscurity  with  which  it  speaks  of  unfathomable  mysteries
which  have  no  real  concern  with  human  life,  or  because  it
paints  fancy  pictures  which  mean  nothing  to  any  but  their
painters.  It  will  henceforth  have  to  test  all  its  assumptions
by  their  working,  and  above  all  to  test  the  assumption  that
'  intellectual  satisfaction '  is  something  too  sacred  to  be
analysed  or  understood.  It  will  have  to  verify  its  con-
jectures by  propounding  doctrines  which  can  be  acted
on,  and  tested  by  their  consequences.  And  that  not
merely  in  an  individual  way.  For  subjective  value  any
philosophy  must  of  course  have — for  its  inventor.  But  a
valid  metaphysic  must  make  good  its  claims  by  greater
usefulness  than  that.  It  need  not  show  itself  '  cogent '
to  all,  but  it  must  make  itself  acceptable  to  reasonable
men,  willing  to  give  a  trial  to  its  general  principles.

Such  a  valid  metaphysic  does  not  exist  at  present.
But  there  is  no  reason  why  it  should  not  come  into
being.  It  can  be  built  up  piecemeal  bit  by  bit,  by  the
discovery  that  truths  which  have  been  found  useful  in  the
sciences  may  be  advantageously  taken  as  ultimate,  and
combined  into  a  more  and  more  harmonious  system.
The  opposite  procedure,  that  of  jumping  to  some  vast
uncomprehended  generality  by  an  a  priori  intuition,1  and

man  the  maker  of  reality.  Mr.  Alfred  Sidgwick,  on  the  other  hand,  will  not
commit  himself  to  Pragmatism  save  as  a  logical  method.  Prof.  Santayana's
Life  of  Reason  has  exquisitely  fused  together  a  naturalistic  metaphysic  and  a
stoical  ethic  with  a  pragmatic  theory  of  knowledge.  II  y  en  a  pour  tons  les
go-tits ! — meme  pour  le  de'gout — our  absolutist  friends  will  hasten  to  add  !  But
for  my  part  I  welcome  them  all.

1  It  matters  not  at  all  what  that  intuition  is. Whether  we  proclaim  that
All  is  'Matter,'  or  'Spirit,'  or  'God,'  we have said nothing,  until  we have


i  PRAGMATISM  AND  HUMANISM  21

then  finding  that  it  does  not  connect  up  with  real  life,  is
neither  scientifically  tolerable,  nor  emotionally  edifying
in  the  end.  All  experience  hitherto  has  proved  it  a
delusion.  The  procedure  of  a  valid  metaphysical  con-
struction must  be  essentially  '  inductive,'  and  gradual
in  its  development.  For  a  perfect  and  complete  meta-
physic  is  an  ideal  defined  only  by  approximation,  and
attainable  only  by  the  perfecting  of  life.  For  it  would
be  the  theory  of  such  a  perfect  life.

made  clear  what  'God,'  'Spirit,'  and  'Matter'  are  in  their  application  to
our  actual  experience,  and  wherein  one  practically  differs  from,  and  excels,
the  other.  But  it  is  just  at  this  point  that  intuitions  are  wont  to  fail  their
votaries,  and  to  leave  them  descanting  idly  on  the  superiority  of  one  synonym
of  '  the  blessed  word  Mesopotamia '  over  the  others.


II

FROM PLATO  TO PROTAGORAS1

ARGUMENT

§  I.  The  value  of  classical  studies  and  their  relation  to  a  '  liberal '  education.
§  2.  The  paradox  of  Greek  thought — its  development  from  science  to
theology.  Philosophic  pantheism  obvious,  but  anti-scientific.  Why  did
the  Greek  gods  preserve  their  personality  ?  §  3.  The  genesis  of  Science.
Anaximander's  '  Darwinism. '  Why  so  little  experimentation  ?  §  4.
The  great  Sophistic  movement  humanistic,  but  not  therefore  anti-
scientific.  §  5-  Protagoras's  great  discovery.  Is  the  individual  man
the  measure  of  all  things  ?  The  transition  from  '  men '  to  '  man,'  from
subjective  to  objective  truth.  Protagoras's  speech  in  the  Theaetetus.
Its  humanism  is  not  scepticism,  nor  has  Plato  refuted  it,  or  understood
it.  §  6.  Plato's  anti-empirical  bias  leads  to  misconstruction  of  Prota-
goras and  Heraclitus,  and  ultimately  ruins  Greek  science.  §  7.  Plato's
genius  and  personality.  §  8.  The  scientific  importance  and  anti-scientific
influence  of  the  Ideal  Theory.  §  9.  The  difficulty  of  formulating  it.
Had  Plato  two  theories  ?  The  '  later  theory  of  Ideas '  criticised.  It
does  not  remove  the  difficulties  of  the  'earlier.'  §  10.  The  unity  of
Plato's  theory  defended.  §  n.  Its  primary  aspect  is  the  logical,  and
this  too  is  the  source  of  its  metaphysical  embarrassments.  §  12.  The
Idea  as  Plato's  solution  of  the  predication  problem,  and  as  the  mediation
between  Heraclitus  and  Parmenides.  Ideas  as  '  systems '  and  as
necessarily  connected  inter  se.  §  13.  The  culmination  of  the  Ideal
system  in  the  Idea  of  Good,  a  teleological  postulate.  Its  degeneration
into  an  abstract  unity  under  mathematical  analogies.  §  14.  Plato's
misconception  of  the  Idea's  relation  to  perception  leads  to  a  reduction
of  the  sensible  to  a  '  non-existent,'  and  an  impossibility  of  knowing  it.
His  confusion  of  ethical  with  epistemological  'sensationalism.'  §  15.
From  this  epistemological  dualism  arises  the  metaphysical  chasm  between
the  Real  and  the  Sensible.  It  is  at  bottom  a  collapse  of  intellectualistic
logic.  §  1 6.  The  'transcendence'  of  the  Idea  as  tsi  translation  into
metaphysics.  Plato  well  aware  of  its  failure,  but  unable  to  remedy  it
with  his  notion  of  the  Concept.  Platonism  has  two  worlds  only  from
its  critics'  standpoint,  but  relapses  into  Eleaticism.  On  which  side  of
'  Plato's  chasm '  should  we  stand  ?  Aristotle's  inability  to  extricate  himself.
§  17.  The  functional  nature  of  the  concept  not  perceived  by  Plato  or
his  followers.  His  two  mistakes:  abstraction  (l)  from  personality;  (2)

1  §§  2-9  of  this  essay  are  a  considerably  expanded  form  of  part  of  an  article
which  appeared  in  the  Quarterly  Review  for  January  1906.


ii  FROM PLATO  TO PROTAGORAS  23

from  the  growth  of  truth.  Concepts  are  not  immutable  unless  they  are
cut  loose  from  human  knowing,  and  then  they  become  useless,  because  in-
applicable to  our  knowing.  Human  concepts  grow  and  are  not  '  eternal.'
But  ideal  knowledge  is  denned  as  something  humanly  unattainable.
Intellectualism  is  less  clear-sighted  Platonism.  §  18.  'Back  to  Plato,'  there-
fore, and  from  Plato  to  Protagoras.  Knowledge  not  to  be  dehumanised.

§  i.  AN  essay  on  Greek  Philosophy  should  nowadays
be  prefaced  by  an  excursus  on  classical  education —
desperate  as  its  vindication  may  appear.  For  the  only
thing  which  can  justify  our  continued  preoccupation  with
the  past  as  the  staple  procedure  of  a  '  liberal '  education
is  that  the  past  should  not  be  studied  entirely  for  its  own
sake,  i.e.  in  a  merely  historical  spirit.  This  latter  notion
is  one  which  never  stands  in  need  of  support :  academic
pedantry  may  always  be  trusted  to  champion  it.  A  host
of  specialists  is  ever  eager  to  exaggerate  the  modicum  of
truth  which  it  conceals,  and  it  is  notorious  that  if  only
the  specialists  are  allowed  to  have  their  way,  they  will
not  only  'ruin  every  system  of  education  ever  devised,
but  will  themselves  become  so  triumphantly  unintelligible
and  illiterate,  as  to  render  indigestible  and  innutritious
every  science  and  every  study  society  has  endowed  them
to  cultivate.  It  is  probably  by  this  senseless  policy  of
insisting  (falsely)  on  the  uselessness  of  knowledge  in
order  to  arouse  intellectual  interests  in  the  young,  that
these  same  sages  have  fostered  the  '  deficient  interest  in
the  things  of  the  mind,'  which  they  are  wont  to  deplore.
Human  indolence  does  indeed  naturally  shrink  from  the
labour  of  learning,  but  there  would  probably  be  far  less
ground  for  complaint,  if  the  victims  of  their  educational
prejudices  were  allowed  to  learn  how  knowledge  is  the
most  useful  and  salutary  of  all  things,  and  shown  the
uses  even  of  the  staple  methods.  Nay,  if  the  peda-
gogical value  of  interest  were  more  extensively  exploited,
even  the  optimistic  dictum  of  Aristotle  that  '  all  men
by  nature  desire  knowledge '  might  cease  to  seem  a
pathetic  paradox.

Such  a  policy,  moreover,  would  afford  far  less  nutri-
ment to  the  '  sordid  utilitarianism,'  which  it  is  so  customary
and  so  hypocritical  to  denounce,  than  the  working  of  our


24  STUDIES IN HUMANISM  n

actual  institutions.  For  inasmuch  as  it  is  not  considered
legitimate  to  lay  stress  on  the  intrinsic  usefulness  of  know-
ing, on  the  value  of  language  as  our  means  of  communi-
cating with  each  other,  on  the  value  of  science  as  our
means  of  controlling  the  world,  on  the  value  of  philosophy
as  our  means  of  controlling  ourselves,  extraneous  motives
of  a  far  baser  kind  have  to  be  supplied  to  arouse  the
interest  which  sets  in  motion  the  wheels  of  our  educa-
tional machinery.  All  the  talk  about  the  nobility  of  a  dis-
interested pursuit  of  learning  is  almost  wholly  cant.  In
point  of  fact  '  liberal  education  '  in  England  at  the  present
day  rests  not  on  the  legendary  '  love  of  knowledge  for  its
own  sake,'  but  on  the  twin  pillars  of  Commercialism  and
Competition,  buttressed  perhaps  in  some  few  cases  by  the
additional  support  of  snobbishness.  These  two  major
motives  have  been  combined  in  the  crafty  device  of
'  scholarships,'  awarded  on  the  results  of  competitive
examination,  and  their  operation  on  the  minds  alike  of
parents  and  of  children  is  practically  irresistible.  This
coarsely  and  artificially  utilitarian  system  extends  from  the
preparatory  school  right  through  the  public  schools  and
universities,  gathering  momentum  as  it  rises,  until  finally,
in  the  great  Civil  Service  examination,  the  reward  of
successful  competition  is  an  honourable  career  for  life  !
Surely  such  inducements  would  be  sufficient  to  sustain
any  amount  of  nonsense  ;  they  would  render  useful,  and
therefore  interesting  (at  all  events  pro  tem.\  the  silliest
subtleties,  the  most  abstruse  absurdities  which  an  ex-
aminer's intelligence  may  have  succeeded  in  excogitating  !
If  the  advocates  of  '  useless  knowledge '  had  not  sternly
suppressed  their  ('  useless '  ?)  sense  of  humour,  they  would
surely  wear  a  perpetual  Roman  augur's  smile  at  the
exquisite  figure  which  our  '  liberal '  studies  cut,  so  long
as,  e.g.  in  the  Oxford  '  school '  of  '  Humaner  Letters '
three-fourths,  and  in  that  of  '  Pure '  Mathematics  practi-
cally all,  of  the  students  are  paid  anything  between  thirty
and  two  hundred  pounds  per  annum  to  tolerate  and  to
abate  their  vaunted  '  uselessness.'

The  natural  and  true  way  of  making  a  classical  educa-


ii  FROM  PLATO  TO  PROTAGORAS  25

tion  really  '  liberal '  is  not  to  bolster  it  up  with  scholarships
and  prizes,  but  to  make  it  as  intrinsically  useful  as  possible
as  a  means  of  appreciating  language,  that  indispensable
instrument  of  human  thought  and  intercourse,  of  develop-
ing the  power  of  using  it,  and  of  bracing  and  expanding
the  mind  by  training  it  to  trace  the  interesting  and  in-
structive connexions  and  contrasts  which  exist  between
ancient  and  modern  civilisation.  It  is,  moreover,  to  its
efficiency  in  performing  these  very  functions  that  the
Oxford  School  of  Liters  Humaniores  owes  its  very  real
value  as  an  educational  instrument  As  a  training  school
of  a  '  disinterested '  interest  in  knowledge  it  is  a  complete
and  utter  failure  ;  as  a  mode  of  mental  training  its  success
and  survival  is  a  marvel,  more  particularly  to  those  who
are  in  a  position  to  appreciate  the  constant  struggle  to
preserve  its  value,  and  are  aware  of  the  perils  which  con-
tinually beset  its  existence.

§  2.  The  above  considerations  must  form  my  apology
for  venturing  upon  a  sketch  of  some  important  points  in
the  history  of  Greek  thought  which  have  hitherto  been
neglected,  or,  perhaps,  were  not  visible  from  the  stand-
points hitherto  adopted.  Their  discussion  will  display  a
certain  unity,  owing  to  the  fact  that  they  may  all  be
grouped  around  the  problems  presented  by  the  genesis,
the  growth,  the  arrest,  and  the  decline  of  Greek  science,
and  their  outcome  will  be  to  exhibit  Plato  as  the  great
fountain-head  of  intellectualism,  his  victory  over  Protagoras
as  the  great  clog  upon  science,  his  failure  to  give  a  true
account  of  the  function  of  the  Concept  and  of  the  nature  of
Truth,  as  the  secret  canker  vitiating  all  philosophy,  and  a
return  to  the  frankly  human  view  of  knowledge  advocated  by
Protagoras  as  the  surest  guarantee  of  philosophic  progress.

Let  us  begin,  then,  by  observing  that  the  paradoxical
character  of  Greek  genius  shows  itself  also  in  the  course
of  Greek  thought  ;  for  in  Greece  the  development  of
thought  reverses  the  direction  taken  in  all  other  nations.
It  begins,  apparently,  where  the  others  end,  and  it  ends
where  the  others  begin.  Broadly  viewed,  the  movement
of  Greek  thought  is  from  science  to  theology,  or  rather


26  STUDIES IN  HUMANISM  n

theosophy  ;  elsewhere  it  starts  from  theology  and  struggles
towards  science.  The  emancipation  from  theological  pre-
occupations with  which  the  scientific  philosophy  of  the
lonians  appears  to  have  started,  is  an  extraordinary  and
unique  phenomenon.  In  Egypt,  in  Babylonia,  in  India,
reflection  never  frees  itself  from  the  fascinations  of  religi-
ous speculation.

The  religious  independence  of  Greek  thought,  therefore,
is  utterly  unparalleled.  It  is,  moreover,  psychologically
unnatural.  The  natural  development  of  a  polytheistic
religion  when  transformed  by  reflection  is  not  into  science,
but  into  philosophic  pantheism.  The  interest  in  the  problem
of  life  arises  in  a  religious  context ;  what  more  natural,
therefore,  than  that  the  answers  given  should  be  couched
in  the  familiar  religious  terms  ?  The  more  so  that  these
answers  look  easy  and  seem  adequate.  It  is  easy  enough
for  thought  to  fuse  the  multitude  of  discrepant  deities,  the
a/j,€vr)va  Kaprjva  of  imperfectly  personified  gods,  into  one
vast  power  which  pervades  the  universe,  7ro\\G)v  OVO/JMTWV
/j>op(f>r)  pia.  This  process  is  typically  shown  in  the  evolu-
tion of  Hindu  thought.  And  pantheism  is  not  only  easy,
but  also  specious.  At  the  various  stages  of  its  develop-
ment it  seems  capable  of  satisfying  all  man's  spiritual
needs  ;  to  the  end  it  satisfies  one  craving  of,  perhaps  the
most  reflective,  souls.  Whoever  conceives  religion  as
nothing  more  than  an  emotional  appreciation  of  the  unity
of  the  universe  may  rest  content  with  pantheism,  and  even
derive  from  its  obliteration  of  all  differences  the  most
delirious  satisfaction.  Whoever  demands  more,  such  as,
e.g.  a  moral  order  and  a  guiding  and  sympathising  per-
sonality, will  ultimately  fail  to  get  it  from  any  theory
which  equates  God  with  the  totality  of  being.

But  a  mighty  effort  at  clear  and  persistent  thinking  is
needed  to  perceive  these  limitations  ;  and,  scientifically  at
first,  pantheism  seems  adequate  enough.  It  needs  a  very
clear  grasp  of  the  nature  of  science  to  perceive  that  the
One  is  as  useless  scientifically  as  it  is  morally,  because  a
principle  which  explains  everything,  whether  it  be  called
'  God  '  or  '  the  devil,'  or  conceived  as  the  '  higher  synthesis  '


n  FROM PLATO  TO PROTAGORAS  27

of  both,  really  explains  nothing.  If,  however,  we  seem
to  ourselves  to  have  reached  the  conviction  that  the  one
thing  really  worth  the  toil  of  knowing  is  that  all  is
'  Brahma/  or  '  the  Absolute,'  and  that  plurality  is  but
phenomenal  illusion,  why  should  we  trouble  laboriously
to  unravel  the  intricate  web  of  a  multitude  of  partial
processes,  to  study  the  relations  of  a  multitude  of  partial
beings,  as  if  they  were  real  and  important  and  independent,
and  as  if  anything  they  could  do  or  suffer  could  in  any
wise  affect  the  absolute  and  immutable  truth  of  the  one
reality  ?  Pantheism,  therefore,  is  prejudicial  to  science  ;
and  Greece  was  fitted  to  become  the  birthplace  of  science
by  the  fortunate  circumstance  that  in  Greece  alone  philo-
sophic pantheism  was  developed  too  late  to  destroy  all
the  germs  of  scientific  progress.  It  makes  its  appearance,
indeed,  in  the  Eleatic  philosophy,  significantly  enough  dis-
guising its  anti-scientific  bias  in  the  delightfully  stimulating
paradoxes  of  Zeno  ;  but  its  sterilising  influence  could  never
overpower  the  original  Greek  tendency  to  pry  unceasingly
into  every  fact  that  an  infinitely  various  world  presented.
We  may,  therefore,  regard  the  non-religious  and  non-
pantheistic  character  of  early  Greek  philosophy  as  con-
nected with  the  genesis  of  science,  and  also  connect  these
anomalies  with  the  striking  uniqueness  of  all  the  really
important  things  in  history.  Science,  like  civilisation,  has
only  been  invented  once.  Monotheism  arises  similarly
through  an  anomaly  of  religious  development  which,  else-
where than  in  Judaea,  reached  unity  only  by  sacrificing
personality.  A  similar  refusal  to  give  up  the  personality
of  the  divine  probably  underlies  the  failure  of  philosophic
reflection  to  transform  Greek  popular  religion  into  a  pan-
theism. But  in  Greece  the  motives  for  this  refusal  were
certainly  different.  The  philosophers  could  not  effect  a
unification  of  Olympus,  because  the  personality  of  the
gods  was  strong  enough  to  resist  the  merger.  But  this
personality  did  not  rest  on  moral  or  intellectual  con-
ceptions ;  it  was  essentially  an  aesthetic  or  artistic  thing.
The  clearness  and  intensity  with  which  the  Greeks  con-
ceived their  gods  under  definitely  sensuous  shapes  is  one


28  STUDIES IN HUMANISM  n

of  the  earliest  and  most  distinctive  features  of  their
religion.  Homer  already  could  use  the  divine  shapes  as
standards  for  the  description  of  human  beings.  Agamem-
non, he  once  tells  us  (Iliad,  2,  478-9),  went  to  battle  with
head  and  eyes  like  thunder-loving  Zeus,  with  a  waist  like
Ares,  and  a  chest  like  Poseidon.

Thus  the  gods  possessed  an  artistic,  humanly  beauti-
ful personality,  uncorrupted  by  the  unaesthetic  symbolism
which  encumbers  Hindu  deities  with  superfluous  limbs.
And  we  may  be  sure  that,  as  Greek  sculpture  developed
its  glories,  it  would  become  less  and  less  plausible  to
confound  Apollo  with  Ares,  or  Athene  with  Aphrodite.
If,  therefore,  the  philosophers  had  ever  attempted  to
interpret  the  gods  into  a  unity,  they  would  have  found
that  Zeus,  for  example,  was  so  essentially  the  god  with
hyacinthine  locks  that  it  was  absurd  to  transfigure  him
into  a  cosmic  unity.  To  do  them  justice,  they  never
seriously  attempted  it ;  they  were  glad  enough  that  the
lack  of  organisation  of  the  popular  cults  and  the  non-
existence  of  a  professional  priesthood  permitted  them  to
pursue  their  scientific  researches  with  only  nominal  and
ritual  concessions  to  the  established  forms  of  divine
worship.

§  3.  Science,  therefore,  owes  its  genesis  to  a  curious  and
unique  emancipation  from  the  pressure  of  religious  problems,
and  this  dominance  of  the  scientific  interest  in  the  early
Greek  philosophy  is  well  brought  out  in  Prof.  Gomperz's
admirable  Greek  Thinkers.  In  dealing  with  the  whole  of
pre-Platonic  philosophy  the  historian  is,  however,  woefully
hampered  by  the  fragmentary  condition  of  his  material.
He  has  to  reconstruct  systems  of  thought  out  of  scanty
references  and  more  or  less  casual  quotations  in  later
writers,  who  are  usually  biassed,  and  often  careless  or
incompetent.  The  palaeontologist's  task  in  reconstructing
fossils  from  a  tooth  or  a  bone  is  child's-play  in  comparison  ;
for  the  bones,  at  least,  of  Pithecanthropus  erectus  (the  miss-
ing link)  cannot  lie,  while  in  Greece  the  Cretans  had  many
rivals.

At  times,  therefore,  the  process  of  writing  a  history  of


ii  FROM  PLATO  TO  PROTAGORAS  29

early  Greek  philosophy  rather  resembles  that  of  making
bricks  without  clay  out  of  the  scattered  straws  of  a  dubious
tradition.  At  others  we  get  singularly  suggestive  but
ambiguous  glimpses,  which  suggest  alternative  interpreta-
tions, between  which  it  is  impossible  to  decide.  For
example,  our  accounts  of  Anaximander's  doctrine  are  so
wretchedly  inadequate  that  we  may  please  ourselves  as
to  how  far  we  believe  him  to  have  carried  his  anticipa-
tions of  Darwinism.  If  we  choose  to  suppose  that  the
tatters  of  his  reasoning,  which  their  very  quaintness  has
preserved,  were  merely  childish  guesses  of  an  infant  science,
we  shall  regard  these  anticipations  merely  as  coincidences.
If,  on  the  other  hand,  we  note  the  singular  acuteness  of
the  observations,  and  the  cogency  of  the  reasoning  which
they  still  display,  there  is  little  to  hinder  us  from  hailing
him  as  the  scientific  discoverer  of  organic  evolution.  Prof.
Gomperz  inclines  rather  to  the  former  view,  but  he  might
have  changed  his  opinion  if  he  had  noted  how  clearly
and  completely  Anaximander  anticipated  the  argument
for  evolution  from  the  helplessness  of  the  human  infant,
by  which  an  American  Spencerian,  Prof.  John  Fiske,
gained  great  glory.1  Our  record  runs  as  follows  : 2 —
"  Further,  he  says  that  man  originally  was  generated
from  animals  of  a  different  kind,  seeing  that  other
animals  are  quickly  able  to  manage  for  themselves,
whereas  man  alone  requires  protracted  nursing.  Where-
fore he  could  not  as  such  originally  have  been  pre-
served." How  could  the  case  be  put  more  concisely  or
scientifically  ?

The  scientific  promise  of  the  Ionian  philosophy  is  so
great  that  it  becomes  a  legitimate  perplexity  to  account
for  the  fact  that  it  was  so  imperfectly  fulfilled,  and  that,
after  making  steady  progress  for  three  centuries,  science
should  begin  to  languish  shortly  after  Aristotle  had
codified  knowledge  and  apparently  provided  the  sciences
with  a  firm  platform  for  more  extensive  operations.  It
is  part  of  the  same  puzzle  that  the  Greeks,  though,  as

1  Outlines  of  Cosmic  Philosophy,  ii.  343.

2  Plutarch  Strom.  2,  Doxogr.  579,  17.


30  STUDIES IN HUMANISM  n

Prof.  Gomperz  is  careful  to  notice,  they  undoubtedly  ex-
perimented,1 never  did  so  systematically,  and  that,  in
spite  of  their  devotion  to  mathematics  and  enthusiasm
for  '  measure,'  they  never  had  recourse  to  exact  measure-
ments nor  constructed  instruments  of  precision.  Why,  a
modern  is  disposed  to  wonder,  when  it  had  been  perceived
that  '  all  things  flow,'  was  not  the  next  question,  '  at  what
rate  ? '  Why,  when  it  had  been  laid  down  that  '  man  is
the  measure  of  all  things,'  was  not  the  next  question,
'  How,  then,  does  he  measure  ? '  It  is  idle  to  suggest  that
the  Greeks  lacked  instruments.  Had  they  wished  to  ex-
periment they  would  have  constructed  them.

We  believe  that  it  is  possible  to  point  out  some,  at
least,  of  the  influences  which  conduced  to  the  disappoint-
ing end  of  Greek  philosophy.  Experimentation  demands
manual  dexterity  and  familiarity  with  mechanisms,  as  well
as  ingenuity.  In  a  slave-holding  society,  however,  any-
thing savouring  of  manual  training  is  despised  as  illiberal
and  '  banausic.'  '  No  gentleman,'  Plutarch  nai'vely  tells
us,  '  however  much  he  might  delight  in  the  Olympian
Zeus  or  the  Argive  Hera,  would  like  to  have  been  their
sculptor,  a  Phidias  or  a  Polyclitus.'  Whence  we  may
infer  the  depth  of  the  contempt  for  experiment  enter-
tained by  a  nobleman  of  Plato's  distinction.

§  4.  The  rise  of  Sophistry  is  sometimes  regarded  as
another  reason  for  the  progressive  alienation  from  science
exhibited  by  Greek  thought.  And  there  is  perhaps  a
certain  measure  of  truth  in  this.  The  natural  acuteness
of  the  Greek  mind  and  the  great  practical  value  of  forensic
and  political  speechifying  no  doubt  tended  to  an  over-
development of  dialectical  habits  of  thought.  As  Prof.
Gomperz  says  : 2  "  The  preference  for  dialectic  expressed
here  and  elsewhere  in  Plato  bespeaks  an  intellectual  atti-
tude which  is  almost  the  opposite  of  that  of  modern
science.  For  him  all  that  is  given  in  experience  counts
as  a  hindrance  and  a  barrier  to  be  broken  through  :  we
are  learning  to  content  ourselves  more  and  more  with
what  is  so  given."  But,  as  his  example  shows,  it  would

1  Greek  Thinkers,  \.  291.  2  Loc.  cit.  Hi.  88.


ii  FROM  PLATO  TO  PROTAGORAS  31

be  most  unjust  to  render  the  Sophists  responsible  for  this.
The  great  humanistic  movement  of  the  fifth  century  B.C.,
of  which  they  were  the  leaders,  is  now  beginning  to  be
appreciated  at  its  true  value.  Prof.  Gomperz,  following
Grote,  points  out  that  the  source  of  the  whole  develop-
ment lay  in  the  political  situation.  The  rise  of  democracies
rendered  a  higher  education  and  a  power  of  public  speak-
ing a  sine  qua  non  of  political  influence — and,  what
acted  probably  as  a  still  stronger  incentive — of  the  safety
of  the  life  and  property,  particularly  of  the  wealthier
classes.  The  Sophists,  '  half  professors,  half  journalists,'
or  as  one  might  perhaps  say  with  a  still  closer  approxi-
mation to  modern  conditions, '  university  extension  lecturers
hampered  by  no  university,'  professed  to  supply  this  great
requisite  of  practical  success.  And  their  professional
success  attests  the  solid  value  of  their  instructions.  It
seems  almost  incredible  that  an  age  in  which  it  was
deemed  revolutionary  to  be  educated,  and  monstrous  to
have  to  pay  your  teachers,  when  it  had  not  yet  become
a  fashionable  pastime  to  go  to  college,  when  pupils  were
allowed  and  encouraged  to  appraise  their  professors'  in-
structions at  their  spiritual  value  and  to  remunerate  them
accordingly,1  should  have  been  the  Golden  Age  of  the
teaching  profession,  in  which  rara  temporum  felicitate
'  Sophists '  could  grow  rich  by  intellectual  labour.  And
yet  Plato's  glowing  descriptions  of  the  numbers  and
enthusiasm  of  the  youths  who  flocked  to  hear  the  great
Sophists  are  too  embittered  by  envy  to  be  suspected  of
exaggeration.  The  fact,  moreover,  was  that  the  Sophists
had  discovered  for  their  pupils  a  way  both  to  honour  and
to  safety.  As  Prof.  Gomperz  tersely  puts  it  (i.  417),  in
so  litigious  and  quarrelsome  a  place  as  Athens  their
function  was  analogous  to  that  of  '  professors  of  fencing
in  a  community  where  the  duel  is  an  established  institu-
tion.' Nowadays  the  rich  no  longer  become  lawyers :
they  hire  them.  But  the  lucrative  profession  of  the  law
had  not  yet  been  invented.

The  result  was  a  great  development  of  rhetoric  and

1  An  astonishing  custom  of  Protagoras.


32  STUDIES IN HUMANISM  n

dialectic,  to  which,  it  may  be  noted,  Socrates  (whom  it
is  quite  unhistorical  to  oppose  to  the  Sophists  *)  appears
to  have  contributed  the  invention  of  the  art  of  cross-
examination,  which  Plato,  when  it  suits  him,  denounces  as
'  eristic.'  Naturally,  however,  this  sophistic  education
was  not  popular  with  those  who  were  too  poor  or  too
niggardly  to  avail  themselves  of  it,  i.e.  with  the  extreme
democrats  and  the  old  conservatives  ;  it  was  new,  and  it
seemed  to  bestow  an  unfair  and  undemocratic  advantage
on  those  who  had  enjoyed  it.  Further  reasons  for  the
bad  name  acquired  by  the  Sophists  are  to  be  found  in
the  jealous  polemic  directed  by  the  philosophers  (especially
by  Plato)  against  rival  teachers  and  in  what  Prof.
Gomperz  calls  'the  caprice  of  language'  (i.  422).  This,
however,  is  more  properly  an  accident  in  the  history  of
logic.  When  the  Sophists  first  began  to  reflect  on  reason-
ing they  had  to  make  logic  along  with  rhetoric  and
grammar.  They  naturally  fell  into  many  errors,  which
their  successors  gradually  corrected.  And  so  what  was  of
value  in  their  logical  researches  came  to  be  appropriated
by  later  logicians  (Plato  and,  above  all,  Aristotle),  while
their  crude  failures  clung  to  them  and  engendered  the
mistaken  impression  that  '  Sophists '  were  men  foolish
enough  to  specialise  in  bad  reasoning.

§  5.  Intrinsically,  then,  there  was  no  reason  why  this
great  intellectual  movement  should  have  injured  scientific
interests.  It  ought  more  properly  to  have  broadened  its
basis  by  adding  the  psychological  and  moral  inquiries,
the  sciences  of  man,  to  those  of  nature  ;  and  perhaps  there

1  In  Plato's  dialogues  he  converses  with  them  on  amicable  and  familiar  terms.
In  Aristophanes  he  is  actually  selected  as  their  representative,  largely,  no  doubt,
by  reason  of  his  well-known  ugliness  and  the  aid  his  physiognomy  afforded  to  a
comic  mask,  while  the  nature  of  the  conservative  prejudices  is  revealed  by  the
pursuits  for  which  he  is  derided  ;  they  are  scientific  rather  than  philosophic,  and
nowadays,  e.g.  an  entomologist  who  had  measured  the  length  of  a  flea's  leap
would  be  listened  to  with  respect,  and  perhaps  quoted  in  Tit-Bits.  The  fact,
again,  that  his  conversations  were  probably  too  rambling  and  unsystematic  to  earn
money  can  just  as  little  be  held  to  constitute  an  essential  difference  between
Socrates  and  the  Sophists,  as  the  fact  that  Socrates  was  an  amateur  who  neglected
his  duties  (as  a  sculptor  and  a  husband  and  a  father)  in  order  to  teach,  while  the
Sophists  were  professional  teachers  who,  apparently,  fulfilled  theirs.  In  short,  as
Socrates  had  not  started  a  regular  philosophic  school  like  Plato  and  Aristotle,
there  was  no  reason  for  any  antagonism  between  him  and  the  Sophists  on  account
of  the  struggle  for  pupils.


ii  FROM PLATO  TO PROTAGORAS  33

actually  was  a  chance  of  events  taking  this  course  if  only
the  great  idea  of  Protagoras,  the  greatest  of  the  Sophists,
had  been  scientifically  interpreted  and  properly  elaborated.
His  famous  dictum  that '  man  is  the  measure  of  all  things  '
must  be  ranked  even  above  the  Delphic  '  Know  thyself,'
as  compressing  the  largest  quantum  of  vital  meaning  into
the  most  compact  form.

It  must  be  admitted,  of  course,  that  we  do  not  know  its
exact  context  and  scope,  and  so  can  interpret  it  in  various
ways.  But,  however  we  understand  it,  it  is  most  im-
portant and  suggestive,  and,  in  every  way  but  one,  it  is  a
fundamental  truth.  That  one  way,  of  course,  is  Plato's,
and  of  it  more  anon.  It  might  have  proved  impossible
to  refute  his  version  of  Protagoras,  if  it  had  not  lapsed
into  discrepancies  within  itself.  Even  as  it  stands  it  is
plausible  enough  to  have  mostly  been  accepted  without
cavil,  and  even  those  who  realised  the  danger  of  accepting
Plato's  polemics  without  a  large  grain  of  salt  have  been
beguiled  by  it.  It  is  needless,  however,  with  Prof.  Gom-
perz,  to  adopt  the  expedient  of  denying  the  plain
application  of  the  words  to  the  individual,  and  to  insist
that  '  man '  in  the  dictum  must  be  understood  generically.
This  would  render  the  dictum  as  tame  as  Plato  rendered
it  nonsensical.  Nor  does  it  follow  that  Plato's  rendering
is  authentic.  Indeed,  we  take  it  that  the  extraordinary
value  and  suggestiveness  of  Protagoras's  dictum  largely
reside  in  the  conciseness  which  has  led  to  these  divergent
interpretations.

Their  great  mistake  is  that  each  should  lay  claim  to
exclude  the  other.  For  this  procedure,  however,  there  is
neither  logical  nor  linguistic  warrant.  Protagoras  may
well  have  chosen  an  ambiguous  form  in  order  to  indicate
both  the  subjective  and  the  objective  factor  in  human
knowledge  and  the  problem  of  their  connexion.  Initially,
no  doubt,  his  dictum  emphasises  the  subjective  factor.
And  this  is  most  important.  For  whatever  appears  to
each  that  really  is — to  him.  And  also  to  others  in  so  far
as  they  have  to  deal  with  him  and  his  ideas.  Hallucina-
tions, illusions,  whims,  individual  preferences  and  private

D


34  STUDIES IN HUMANISM  n

judgments,  idiosyncrasies  of  every  kind,  are  real,  and  woe
betide  any  thinker  or  manager  of  men  who  fancies  that
he  can  ignore  them  with  impunity !  It  is  a  fact,  more-
over, that  individuals  are  infinitely  different,  and  that  the
more  carefully  they  are  studied  the  less  true  does  it  seem
to  lump  them  all  together.  To  have  been  the  first  to
have  an  inkling  of  all  this  was  Protagoras's  great  achieve-
ment, for  the  sake  of  which  science  owes  him  an  eternal
debt  of  gratitude.

The  subjective  interpretation,  therefore,  of  the  dictum
embodies  a  great  scientific  truth  ;  and  it  is  astonishing
that  this  should  have  been  ignored  in  order  to  denounce
it  as  subversive  of  all  truth,  especially  by  thinkers
who,  starting  uncritically  from  the  opposite  assumption,
have  themselves  completely  failed  to  develop  a  coherent
theory  of  truth.  Surely  was  there  no  occasion  to
conceive  it  as  denying  what  it  did  not  state  directly,  the
objectivity  of  truth,  and  to  assume  Protagoras  to  have
been  unaware  of  this.  The  fact  that  a  man  makes  a  great
discovery  does  not  necessarily  deprive  him  of  all  common
sense.  And  that  there  is  objective  truth,  in  some  sense
4  common '  to  mankind,  is  a  matter  of  common  notoriety.
The  difficulty  about  '  objective  truth '  lies,  not  in  observing
the  fact,  but  in  devising  a  philosophic  theory  of  its  pos-
sibility ;  and  concerning  this  philosophers  are  still  at
variance.  That  reality  for  us  is  relative  to  our  faculties
is  likewise  a  clear  truth  which  must  be  assumed  even  in
questioning  it.

Man,  therefore,  is  the  measure  also  in  the  generic  sense
of  man  ;  and  it  is  very  unlikely  that  Protagoras  should
have  overlooked  these  obvious  facts.  Nor  had  he  any
motive  to  ignore  them.  It  is  most  likely,  therefore,  that
he  would  placidly  have  accepted  the  truisms  which  are
commonly  urged  against  him.  His  Humanism  was  wide
enough  to  embrace  both  '  man '  and  '  men,'  and  it  could
include  the  former  because  it  had  included  the  latter.

There  only  remains,  therefore,  the  question  of  what
is  the  connexion  between  the  two  senses  in  which  the
dictum  is  true.  What,  in  other  words,  is  the  transition


ii  FROM  PLATO  TO  PROTAGORAS  35

from  subjective  truth  for  the  individual  to  objective  truth
for  all  ?  That  we  must  pass  from  the  one  to  the  other,
and  succeed  in  doing  so,  is  obvious  ;  but  how  we  do  so
forms  a  very  pretty  problem.  And  to  any  scientifically
disposed  mind  it  should  have  been  clear  that  here  was  a
splendid  subject  for  research,  e.g.  along  the  lines  since
taken  by  modern  psychological  experiment.  Conceived,
therefore,  in  a  scientific  spirit,  the  Protagorean  dictum
yields  great  openings  for  science.

But  is  there  any  reason  to  suppose  that  Protagoras
himself  conceived  it  so,  and  had  formed  any  ideas  as  to
how  objective  truth  arose  ?  Constructively  the  tolerant
humaneness  of  his  temper  (even  in  Plato's  account),  his
'  strictly  empirical  method,' l  and  the  caution  and  candour
implied  in  his  complaint  (for  which  he  suffered  martyrdom),2
that  he  had  never  been  able  to  obtain  trustworthy  informa-
tion about  the  gods,  almost  entitles  us  to  answer  both
these  questions  in  the  affirmative.

But  much  more  direct  evidence  can  be  extracted  from
Plato's  own  polemic.  In  the  Thecetetus  (166-8)  Prota-
goras is  represented  as  replying,  that  though  one  man's
perceptions  could  not  be  truer  than  another  man's  they
might  yet  be  better.  So  far,  therefore,  from  admitting
that  on  his  theory  men,  pigs,  and  dog-headed  baboons
must  all  alike  and  equally  be  the  measure  of  all  things,
the  Platonic  '  Protagoras '  very  lucidly  explains  that  the
wise  man  is  he  who,  when  something  appears  amiss  and
is  '  bad '  to  any  one,  is  able  to  alter  it  so  as  to  make  it
appear  to  be  '  good '  to  him  instead,  and  to  bring  him
from  a  bad  to  a  better  state  of  mind.  In  other  words,  he
is  represented  as  recognising  distinctions  of  value  among  the
individual  perceptions  to  all  of  which  '  reality  '  is  conceded.

And  not  only  that.  There  are  distinct  traces  in  that
marvellous  speech  on  behalf  of  Protagoras  of  other  doctrines

1  Gomperz,  i.  455.

2  A  fact  which,  like  the  similar  cases  of  Anaxagoras  and  Aristotle,  Dr.  Caird
appears  to  have  forgotten  when  he  says,  in  his  Evolution  of  Theology  in  the  Greek
Philosophers  (i. p.  44),  that  Socrates  was  "  the  only  martyr  of  philosophy  in  the
ancient  world,  the  only  man  who  can  be  said  to  have  suffered  for  the  freedom  of
thought." What  rendered  the  case  of  Socrates  different  in  its  issue  was  merely
his  obstinate  refusal  to  go  into  exile.


36  STUDIES  IN HUMANISM  n

to  which  attention  has  only  been  recalled  in  the  last  few
years.  ( I )  It  is  plainly  hinted  throughout  that  the  attain-
ment of  wisdom  is  not  a  matter  of  idle  speculation,  but  of
altering  reality,  within  oneself  and  without.  (2)  There
are  repeated  protests  against  the  dialectical  spirit  which
argues  solely  from  the  customary  uses  of  words,  and  un-
critically accepts  verbal  '  contradictions,'  as  if  they  proved
more  than  the  incompleteness  of  the  human  knowledge
which  has  been  embodied  in  the  words.  And  (3)  in  one
or  two  passages  (167  A,  168  A)  the  point,  though  some-
what obscured  in  the  Platonic  statement,  seems  genuinely
to  be  a  repudiation  of  the  intellectualistic  trick  of  repre-
senting all  moral  shortcomings  as  defects  of  intelligence.
The  diseased  man,  '  Protagoras  '  protests,  is  not  merely
'  uninstructed '  ;  he  has  to  experience  a  change  of  heart.
Nor  is  education  merely  intellectual  instruction  ;  it  is  the
making  of  a  new  man  and  the  getting  rid  of  an  old  self.
These  hints  are  all  of  a  tantalising  brevity,  but  they  evince
a  depth  of  moral  insight  with  which  nothing  else  in  the
orthodox  Greek  ethics,  corrupted  as  they  were  by  intel-
lectualism  and  enervated  by  aestheticism,  can  at  all  compare.
And  they  very  distinctly  savour  of  the  moral  fervour  of
St.  Paul.

The  doctrine  as  a  whole,  however,  is  perfectly  clear,
rational,  and  consistent.  It  differs  from  that  of  modem
Humanism,  apparently,  only  in  the  terminological  point
that '  true  '  and  '  false'  are  not  regarded  as  values  essentially
cognate  with  '  good  '  and  '  bad,'  or,  in  other  words,  that
they  are  used  primarily  of  the  individual  claims  to  cog-
nitive value  rather  than  of  their  subsequent  recognition.
But  this  is  a  secondary  divergence,  if  such  it  is.  It  is
quite  possible  that  Protagoras  already  perceived  the
'  ambiguity  of  truth,' *  and  that  his  distinction  has  merely
been  blurred  in  the  Platonic  statement.  As  regards  the
necessity  of  altering  reality,  and  of  connecting  this  process
with  the  making  of  truth,  and  the  impossibility  of  reducing
evil  to  ignorance,  Protagoreanism  and  Neo-Protagoreanism
would  appear  to  be  at  one.

1  Cp.  Essay  v.


ii  FROM  PLATO  TO PROTAGORAS  37

The  only  question,  therefore,  that  remains  is,  how  far
this  whole  doctrine  can  be  transferred  from  the  Platonic
to  the  historical  Protagoras,  and,  as  in  the  similar  case  of
the  Platonic  'Socrates,'  complete  cogency  cannot  be  attained
by  arguments  on  this  point.  The  historic  Socrates  wrote
nothing  ;  the  magnum  opus  of  the  historic  Protagoras,  his
book  on  Truth,  has  been  destroyed.  It  began  with  too
incisive  a  declaration  that  its  subject  was  logic,  and  not
theology  ;  and  so  the  Athenians  set  the  hangman  to  burn  it.
What  few  copies  escaped  him  probably  perished  of  neglect
during  the  long  reign  of  Platonic  intellectualism.  And
so  the  combined  bigotries  of  vulgar  piety  and  dogmatic
philosophy  have  deprived  us  of  what  was  probably  one  of
the  greatest  monuments  of  Greek  genius.

Nevertheless,  it  seems  extremely  probable,  on  internal
evidence,  that  the  '  defence  of  Protagoras,'  so  far  as  it  goes,
embodies  genuine  doctrines  of  his,  greatly  curtailed,  no
doubt,  and  perhaps  somewhat  mangled  in  the  reproduction.
For  the  reason,  mainly,  that  Plato  manifestly  has  not
understood  its  argument  at  all.  Nowhere  else  does  he
betray  the  slightest  suspicion  of  the  doctrine  that  the
nature  of  truth  is  essentially  dependent  upon  the  '  altera-
tion '  of  reality.  Had  he  examined  it,  he  would  not
only  have  escaped  the  negative  results  of  his  Tkeatetus,
but  would  have  had  to  transform  his  whole  view  of  know-
ledge. Nowhere  else  does  he  perceive  the  radical  vice  of
the  intellectualistic  analysis  of  wickedness  as  ignorance.
To  the  end  he  retained  his  faith  in  the  dialectical  play
with  concepts  as  the  method  of  penetrating  to  the  secret
of  the  universe.  And,  most  significantly  of  all,  the  recog-
nition by  '  Protagoras '  of  distinctions  of  value  in  percep-
tions is  treated  as  wholly  non-existent  or  unintelligible.
Not  only  does  Plato  fail  to  see  that  it  is  a  complete
answer  to  the  trivial  objections  and  shallow  gibes  of  his
'  Socrates,'  not  only  does  he  fail  to  answer  it,  but  he
feels  that  he  must  divert  attention  from  the  plea  of
'  Protagoras '  by  recourse  to  the  most  artistically  brilliant
digressions.  The  whole  subsequent  course  of  the  dis-
cussion shows  that  he  had  not  the  faintest  idea  of  the


38  STUDIES IN HUMANISM  n

scope  and  significance  of  the  argument  he  had  stated.  It
is  clear  that  if  he  had  grasped  the  meaning  of  his  '  Prota-
goras,' the  whole  argument  of  his  Thecetetus  would  have
had  to  proceed  and  end  differently.  It  seems  incredible,
therefore,  that  Plato  should  have  invented  a  distinction
which  he  did  not  know  how  to  handle,  and  it  remains
that  he  was  really  candid  enough  to  reproduce  the  genuine
contentions  of  Protagoras.

If,  then,  this  doctrine  that  truth  is  a  valuation,  and  to  be
discriminated  from  '  error  '  as  '  good  '  from  '  bad,'  can  really
be  attributed  to  Protagoras,  it  is  easy  for  us  to  see  how  it
might  provide  him  with  the  means  of  passing  from  subjective
to  objective  judgments  in  a  perfectly  valid  and  scientific
manner.  For  if  there  is  a  mass  of  subjective  judgments
varying  in  value,  there  must  ensue  a  selection  of  the  more
valuable  and  serviceable,  which  will,  in  consequence,  sur-
vive and  constitute  growing  bodies  of  objective  truth,
shared  and  agreed  upon  by  practically  all.  It  is  highly
probable  that  the  general  agreement  about  sense  per-
ceptions has  actually  been  brought  about  by  a  process  of
this  sort ;  l  and  it  is  still  possible  to  observe  how  society
establishes  an  '  objective '  order  by  coercing  or  cajoling
those  who  are  inclined  to  divergent  judgments  in  moral
or  aesthetic  matters.  And,  though  no  doubt  Protagoras
himself  could  not  have  put  the  point  as  clearly  as  the
discovery  of  natural  selection  enables  us  to  do,  it  seems
highly  probable  that  he  saw,  at  least,  the  beginnings  of  the
very  real  connexion  between  the  two  meanings  of  his
dictum.

§  6.  Plato's  interpretation,  therefore,  of  the  Protagorean
dictum  is  merely  a  trick  of  his  anti-empiricist  polemic,
and  it  may  be  very  closely  paralleled  by  similar  charges
which  have  been  brought  against  modern  revivals  of
Protagoreanism,  and  are  not  likely  similarly  to  prevail
only  because  they  cannot  command  the  services  of  a
Plato  and  an  executioner.  To  say  'that  '  man  is  the
measure  of  all  things  '  necessarily  conducts  to  subjectivism
and  to  scepticism  is  simply  not  true.  To  a  mind  desirous

1  Cp.  pp.  316-20.


ii  FROM PLATO  TO PROTAGORAS  39

of  scientific  knowledge  the  dictum  should  be  fertile  only
of  a  multitude  of  instructive  observations  and  experiments.
Unfortunately  this  was  not  the  spirit  in  which  it  was
received.  A  spirit  of  dialectical  refutation  cared  nothing
for  the  varieties  of  physical  endowment  and  of  psychical
reaction  ;  it  took  no  interest  in  the  problems  and  methods
of  scientific  measurement.  The  question,  '  If  man  is  the
measure,  then  how  do  we  manage  to  measure  ? '  was  not
raised.  What  was  raised  was  the  unfair,  untrue,  and
uninstructive  cry,  '  then  knowledge  becomes  impossible  ! '
The  levity  with  which  this  outcry  rises  to  the  lips  of  a
priori  metaphysicians  is  as  extraordinary  as  the  vitreous-
ness  of  the  abodes  which  ultimately  house  their  own  con-
victions. It  has  often  been  remarked  that  the  '  deceptions  '
and  '  contradictions '  of  the  senses,  which,  to  the  ancients,
provided  only  texts  for  sceptical  lamentation  and  excuses
for  taking  refuge  in  '  supra-sensible '  Ideas  (which  were
really  nothing  more  than  the  acquired  meanings  of  words),
have  yielded  to  modern  energy  valuable  starting-points
for  scientific  inquiries.  To  the  dialectical  temper  the  fact
that  a  stimulus  may  feel  both  hot  and  cold  simultaneously
would  merely  be  a  contradiction  ;  to  the  scientific  temper
it  gives  a  clue  to  the  discovery  of  the  '  cold '  and  '  hot '
spots  of  cutaneous  sensibility.  Similarly  such  notions  as
'  solid  solutions,'  and  '  liquid  crystals,'  and  '  subconscious  '
mental  life,  seem  mere  foolishness  until  we  realise  that  the
work  of  science  is  not  to  avoid  verbal  contradiction,  but  to
frame  conceptions  by  which  we  can  control  the  facts.

Another  parallel  is  afforded  by  the  treatment  of
Heraclitus's  great  discovery  of  the  universality  of  process
or  change.  It  too  was  taken  to  mean  that  knowledge
was  impossible,  as  if,  forsooth,  men  were  usually  altered
beyond  recognition  overnight,  and  rivers  changed  their
courses  daily.  If  the  Greeks,  instead  of  indolently  content-
ing themselves  with  a  qualitative  enunciation  of  its  truth,
had  attempted  a  quantitative  estimation  of  the  universal
process,  they  might  have  anticipated  some  of  the
most  signal  triumphs  of  modern  science  ;  and,  it  may  be
added,  they  would  speedily  have  convinced  themselves  of


40  STUDIES IN  HUMANISM  n

the  practical  innocuousness  of  the  Flux,  and  perhaps  even
have  learnt,  from  the  impossibility  of  any  but  relative
determinations,  that  practical  limitations  and  a  relation  to
practical  application  are  inherent  in  the  very  nature  of
truth,  and  that  the  pretensions  of  '  ideals  '  which  cannot
be  applied,  and  can  only  condemn  all  human  experience
as  unintelligible,  prove  nothing  but  the  ludicrous  falsity  of
such  ideals.  But  this  assumes  that  they  wanted  to  know
and  were  willing  to  view  these  doctrines  in  a  scientific
spirit,  And  this  is  just  where  they  lamentably  failed.

§  7.  That  the  Hellenic  will  to  know  scientifically  gave
out  at  this  point  is  a  fact  which  must  certainly  be  connected
most  vitally  with  the  appearance  of  the  stupendous  genius
whom  history  knows  only  by  his  nickname,  Plato.  This
extraordinary  man  was  equally  great  as  a  writer  and  as
a  thinker.  He  was  at  once  a  poet  and  a  philosopher,  a
prophet  and  a  professor,  an  initiator  and  an  imitator,  a
theologian  and  a  sceptic ;  and  he  excelled  in  all  these
parts.  Regarded  from  the  literary  side  he  is  admirable
as  a  parodist,  as  a  maker  of  stories  and  inventor  of  fairy-
tales, as  a  delineator  of  character,  as  a  critic,  as  a  dissector
of  arguments.  Regarded  as  a  thinker,  he  maintains  in
equipoise  the  most  contrary  excellences.  One  hardly
knows  whether  to  admire  more  the  grandeur  of  his  con-
structions, or  the  subtlety  of  his  criticisms,  the  compre-
hensive sweep  of  his  '  synoptic '  view,  or  the  patience
which  descends  into  the  minutest  details.  Regarded  as
a  wit,  he  was  capable  of  the  most  reckless  raillery,  the
most  savage  satire,  the  gentlest  humour,  and  a  persiflage
so  graceful,  that  Aristophanes  compared  with  him  seems
coarsely  farcical  ;  and  yet  in  his  serious  moods  he  could
reach  heights  of  solemnity  in  which  the  slightest  hint  of
comedy  would  seem  a  profanation.  In  spite,  or  perhaps
by  reason,  of  a  life-long  devotion  to  philosophy,  he  never
scrupled  to  deride  the  pretensions  of  philosophers.  The
most  devoted  of  disciples,  he  yet  became  the  most  potent
of  masters.  One  of  the  world's  great  artists,  he  was  yet
one  of  the  most  puritanical  of  the  censors  of  art.  The
idealising  apologist  of  erotic  passion,  he  was  also  the  most


ii  FROM  PLATO  TO  PROTAGORAS  41

austere  of  moralists  and  the  eulogist  of  asceticism.  A
typical  intellectualist,  he  was  also  intensely  emotional.
By  birth  a  man  of  quality,  he  yet  knew  how  to  withdraw
from  the  world  of  fashion  without  offending  it ;  an
abstainer  from  political  life,  he  was  yet  the  most  inspiring
of  radical  reformers  ;  by  turns  a  counsellor  of  princes  and
a  recluse  in  the  groves  of  Academe.

It  is  plain  that  no  great  man  has  laid  upon  the  world
a  harder  task  in  imposing  on  it  '  the  duty  of  understand-
ing him ' ;  and  it  is  no  wonder  that  posterity  has  but
imperfectly  succeeded.  We  read  his  writings,  preserved
for  us  in  far  more  perfect  shape  than  those  of  any  other
ancient  thinker,  and  are  plunged  in  unending  perplexities
as  to  their  meaning.  We  listen  to  the  comments  of  one
of  his  immediate  pupils,  and  doubt  whether,  after  eighteen
years  of  intimacy,  Aristotle's  genius  has  comprehended
Plato's.  We  flatter  ourselves  that  we  should  understand
him  better  if  we  knew  more  facts  about  the  historical
order  of  his  works  and  the  circumstances  which  evoked
them,  and  hope  by  the  minutest  tabulation  of  his  tricks
of  style  to  extort  the  secrets  of  their  history.  But  Plato
was  master  of  so  many  styles,  and  could  parody  himself
with  such  consummate  ease,  that  it  is  no  wonder  that  the
conclusions  of  '  stylometry '  are  dubious,  and  hardly  com-
patible with  any  coherent  view  of  Plato's  philosophic
development.  Moreover,  even  if  we  knew  the  facts  we
now  desiderate,  it  is  quite  probable  that  our  perplexities
would  only  recur  in  subtler  forms.  For  they  ultimately
spring  from  the  personality  of  their  author.

The  core  of  the  Platonic  problem  is  Plato's  person-
ality, a  personality  whose  diversity  and  many-sidedness
is  the  delight  of  his  readers  and  the  despair  of  his  critics.
How  can  the  clumsy  canons  of  a  formal  criticism  ever
determine  what  degree  of  seriousness  and  literality
attaches  to  any  of  his  statements,  and  how  far  its
meaning  should  be  modified  by  a  touch  of  irony,  of
humour,  of  satire,  of  imagination  ?  The  simplest  even  of
Platonic  myths  is  infinitely  baffling.  Who  will  undertake
to  expound  its  meaning  fully,  to  determine  where  precisely


42  STUDIES IN HUMANISM  n

its  formal  teaching  melts  into  its  imaginative  setting,  how
much  of  its  detail  was  premeditated,  how  much  of  it  the
spontaneous  outgrowth  of  the  fairy  tale?  What  again
of  the  dialogue  form  ?  What  at  any  point  is  the  working
compromise  between  the  dogmatic  and  the  dramatic
interest  by  which  the  course  of  the  proceedings  is  deter-
mined ?  No  one,  assuredly,  who  has  ever  tried  so  far  to
enter  into  Plato's  spirit  as  to  imitate  his  literary  methods,
will  delude  himself  into  thinking  that  these  questions
are  ever  likely  to  be  answered  with  exactness.  Plato's
personality  is  far  too  rich  for  the  precise  analysis  all
pedants  love.

And  yet,  perhaps,  we  may  observe  a  conspicuous  gap
even  in  the  far -extended  spectrum  of  this  giant  soul.
It  seems  incapable  of  vibrating  in  response  to  the  en-
lightenment of  merely  empirical  fact ;  and  this  defect
has  had  tremendous  consequences.  For  similarly  con-
stituted souls  are  common  ;  and  Plato  has  become  their
greatest  spokesman.  Yet  the  pathetic  futility  of  apriorism
appears  again  in  this,  that  ultimately  the  whole  world  is
empirical  and  all  that  therein  is.  However,  therefore,
we  may  try  to  hedge  round  portions  of  it  against  the
intrusions  of  the  unexpected,  the  very  facts  that  our
hedges  can  withstand  intruders,  that  we  desire  to  keep
them  in  repair,  and  that  all  this  will  continue  to  be  true,
are  as  empirical  as  the  greatest  brute  of  a  fact  against
which  our  reason  sought  protection.  Of  what  value,  then,
are  a  priori  guarantees,  if  the  continuance  of  their  applica-
bility to  experience,  and  of  their  own  apriority  are  both
empirical,  and  cannot  be  guaranteed  ?

§  8.  We  must  affirm,  therefore,  that  Plato's  anti-
empirical  bias  renders  him  profoundly  anti-scientific,  and
that  his  influence  has  always,  openly  or  subtly,  counter-
acted and  thwarted  the  scientific  impulse,  or  at  least
diverted  it  into  unprofitable  channels.  The  potency  of
this  influence  may  best  be  gauged  by  observing  how
completely  Plato's  greatest  pupil,  Aristotle,  has  fallen  under
his  spell.  For  if  ever  there  was  a  typically  scientific
mind  it  was  Aristotle's.  That  he  should  revolt  against


ii  FROM PLATO  TO  PROTAGORAS  43

his  master  was  inevitable  for  many  reasons.  That  he
should  assail  the  citadel  of  Plato's  power,  the  theory  of
the  '  Ideas,'  in  which  Plato  had  hypostasised  and  deified  the
instruments  of  scientific  research  and  uplifted  them  beyond
the  reach  of  human  criticism,  evinced  a  sound  strategic
instinct.  But  in  the  end  his  spirit  also  proved  unable  to
escape  out  of  the  magic  circle  of  conceptual  realism,
which  he  renders  more  prosaic  without  making  it  more
consistent  or  more  adequate  to  the  conduct  of  life.
Indeed  his  analytic  sharpness,  by  exaggerating  into
opposition  the  rivalry  between  practical  and  theoretic
interests,  which  Plato  had  sought  to  reconcile  in  too
intellectualist  a  fashion,  probably  contributed,  much
against  his  intentions,  an  essential  motive  to  that  aliena-
tion from  scientific  endeavour  which  marks  the  decline
and  fall  of  Greek  philosophy.

It  has  already  been  suggested  that  the  theory  of  Ideas
was  the  fountain-head  whence  flowed  Plato's  baleful
influence  on  the  growth  of  knowledge.  This  influence
it  would  be  hard  to  overrate.  The  cognitive  function  of
the  Concept,  which  Socrates  (if  we  conceive  ourselves  to
have  any  really  authentic  information  about  his  doctrine)
may  perhaps  be  said  to  have  discovered,  was  so  exalted
and  exaggerated  by  Plato  that  it  became  the  subtlest  and
most  dangerous  of  obstacles  to  the  attainment  of  the  end
it  is  its  proper  function  to  subserve.  And  so,  wherever
there  is  hypostasisation  and  idolatry  of  concepts,  and
wherever  these  interpose  between  the  mind  and  things,
wherever  they  lead  to  disparagement  of  immediate  experi-
ence, wherever  the  stubborn  rigidity  of  prejudice  refuses
to  adapt  itself  to  the  changes  of  reality,  wherever  the
delusive  answers  of  an  a  priori  dialectic  leave  unanswered
questions  of  inductive  research,  wherever  words  lure  and
delude,  stupefy  and  paralyse,  there  Truth  is  sacrificed  to
Plato,  even  by  barbarians  who  have  never  heard  his
name.  The  Ideal  Theory  resembles  a  stranger  tor-
pedo-ray than  that  to  which  Plato  in  the  Meno  likens
Socrates.  Itself  one  of  the  great  achievements  of  the
human  intellect,  it  both  electrifies  the  mind  with  brilliant


44  STUDIES IN HUMANISM  n

vistas  of  supra -sensible  dominion  for  the  soul,  and  yet
numbs  and  paralyses  some  of  its  highest  functions.  For
it  deludes  us  into  thinking  that  man  was  made  for  Ideas,
to  behold  and  contemplate  them  for  ever,  and  not  Ideas
for  man  and  by  man,  to  serve  the  ends  of  action.

§  9.  Not  the  least  extraordinary  fact  about  this
wondrous  theory  is  that,  strictly  speaking,  we  do  not
even  know  what  precisely  it  was.  The  culminating  point
of  conceptual  Idealism  has  always  been  screened  by
impenetrable  clouds  from  the  gaze  of  the  faithful  as  of
the  profane,  and  the  former  have  always  had  to  accept
a  '  myth  '  in  lieu  of  the  final  revelation  of  truth  absolute.
The  justification  of  this  assertion  is  necessarily  somewhat
technical,  but  will  go  far  to  initiate  us  into  the  secret  of
Plato's  fascination.

That  there  is  some  ground  for  doubting  whether  any
one  really  knows  what  exactly  the  Ideal  Theory  was,
may  be  perceived  when  we  ask  how  many  Ideal  Theories
Plato  really  had.  For  it  seems  impossible  to  trace  a
single  consistent  view  throughout  his  writings  ;  and  in
the  course  of  fifty  or  sixty  years  of  authorship  even  a
strenuous  denier  of  the  Flux  may  change  his  views.  It
is  plain,  moreover,  that  new  problems,  new  difficulties,
new  methods,  and  new  points  of  view  sprang  up  in
Plato's  mind,  though  it  is  usually  hard  to  determine  how
far  they  modified  his  earlier  convictions.  The  critics,
however,  agree  that  the  Ideal  Theory  is  not  one,  but
several,  and  that  an  earlier  may  be  distinguished  from  a
later  form  thereof.

The  earlier  theory,  as  described,  e.g.  by  Zeller,  forms
the  typical  or  standard  Platonism  to  which  the  others
are  referred.  It  is  extracted  mainly  from  the  Meno,  the
Phcedrus,  the  Ph<zdo,  and  the  Republic,  and  is  certainly
the  most  picturesque  and  fascinating  form  of  conceptual
Idealism.  It  describes  the  true  home  of  the  soul  in  a
supra-sensible  supercelestial  world  of  True  Being,  where,
pure,  incorporeal,  and  without  passions,  it  leads  a  holy,
blessed,  and  eternal  life,  contemplating  the  beauty  and
excellent  harmony  of  the  Ideas,  the  indivisible  and  im-


ii  FROM PLATO  TO PROTAGORAS  45

mutable  archetypes  of  the  fleeting  phenomena  that  flow
in  multitudinous  confusion  before  our  dazzled  senses.
Thence  it  is  driven  (by  some  inscrutable  necessity)  to-
make  periodical  descents  into  the  perishable  world  of
Sense,  which  is  not  truly  real,  but  is  saved  from  utter
unreality  by  its  relation  to  the  ideas  in  which  it  can
mysteriously  '  participate.'  To  know  such  a  world,  but
for  the  Ideas,  would  be  impossible,  and  to  know  is  really
to  remember  these.

The  weak  point  in  this  theory  lies  in  the  difficulty  of
conceiving  the  connexion  between  the  Ideal  world  and
the  phenomenal,  i.e.  the  precise  nature  of '  participation.'
That  in  some  sense  Plato  felt  this  weakness  is  brilliantly
attested  by  the  incisive  criticism  he  inflicts  on  what
seems  to  be  his  own  theory  in  the  Parmenides.  On  the
strength  of  this  it  is  commonly  supposed  that  Plato  must
have  altered  his  views  ;  and  the  evolution  of  his  '  later
theory  of  Ideas '  is  thought  to  be  traceable  in  a  series  of
critical  and  '  dialectical '  dialogues,  which  include  also  the
Theatetus,  the  Sophist,  and  the  Politicus.

The  puzzle,  however,  is  to  find  the  theory  in  its  developed
form.  It  must  lurk  either  in  what  are  regarded  as  his
latest  works,  the  Laws,  the  Philebus,  and  the  Timceus,  or
in  the  oral  lectures,  of  which  Aristotle's  Metaphysics  give
a  very  obscure  and  polemical  account.  But  the  search
through  the  Laws  and  the  Philebus  yields  little  that  is
enlightening,  while  the  Timaus  is  so  mythical  in  form
that  it  is  hard — or  fatally  easy — to  find  anything  therein.
Nevertheless  a  '  later  theory  of  Ideas '  has  been  extracted
or  constructed.  Its  distinguishing  marks  are,  the  substitu-
tion of  an  ideal  exemplar  (TrapaSeiypa),  which  is  copied
or  imitated  by  the  sensible,  for  the  discarded  notion  of
'  participation '  (/z,e#e|fi9)  ;  the  restriction  of  Ideas  to
'  natural  kinds ' ;  the  reduction  of  '  not-being '  to  differ-
ence ;  and  the  recognition  of  an  efficacy  or  spiritual
activity  in  the  Ideas,  which  converts  them  into  efficient
causes.

Unfortunately  this  '  later  theory  of  Ideas '  is  by  no
means  well  authenticated.  The  external  evidence  is  dead


46  STUDIES IN HUMANISM  n

against  it.  Aristotle  also  has  a  notion  of  a  '  later '
Platonic  theory.  But  he  represents  his  aging  master,
not  as  soaring  to  an  absolute  idealism,  but  as  sinking
into  childish  habits  of  pythagoreanising.  Prof.  Gomperz
points  out l  that  this  is  confirmed  by  the  growing  import-
ance of  mathematics  shown  in  the  creative  operations
of  the  Timceus,  and  in  the  educational  methods  of  the
Laws,  in  which  they  wholly  take  the  place  of  '  dialectic.'
For  the  restriction  of  Ideas  to  '  natural  kinds '  some
Aristotelian  support  may,  it  is  true,  be  invoked.  But  is
it  not  unfortunate  for  this  aspect  of  the  '  later  theory  of
Ideas  '  that  in  the  Parmenides  this  very  procedure  should  be
derided  as  a  youthful  error  ?  And  we  shall  presently  see
reason  to  doubt  whether  it  was  an  improvement.  In  any
case,  Aristotle's  account  of  Platonism  does  not  at  all
square  with  the  theory  of  a  substantially  altered  '  later '
theory.  The  theory  he  mainly  combats  is  the  old  one  ;
and  he  parades  all  the  old  objections  of  the  Parmenides
without  a  doubt  of  their  complete  relevance,2  nay,  with  an
air  of  having  invented  them  himself.3  But  to  suppose  that
Aristotle  misunderstood  Plato's  fundamental  doctrine  is  a
monstrous  assumption.  And,  we  may  add,  a  futile  one.
For  it  makes  out  Aristotle  to  have  been  either  a  fool,  if

1  L.c.  iii.  246-47.

2  His  objection  that  the  Ideas  are  not  efficient  causes  would  be  particularly
curious  and  inept,  if  Plato  had  adhered  to  the  alleged  discovery  of  the  Sophist
(247  E)  that  substance  is  activity, and  had  thereby  anticipated  Aristotle's  own
conception  of  ^/ryeia. But  the  context  shows  that  Plato  had  not  overcome  the
antithesis  of  motion  and  rest,  and  the  whole  passage  is  only  one  of  those  which
express  his  inability  to  unite  the  human  and  the  Ideal. Cp.  §  17.

3  If  we  can  put  the  Parmenides  so  late  as  360  B.C.,  it  is  just  possible  that  he
did. For  we  can  then  read  this  puzzling  dialogue  as  an  attempt by  Plato  to
abate  the  conceit  of  his  obstreperous  pupil  by  narrating  a  fictitious  parallel  to  an
existing  situation  in  the  form  of  a  discussion  between  the  venerable  '  Parmenides '
and the youthful 'Socrates.' In the self-criticism of 'Parmenides' which
follows, depths  of  metaphysics  are  sounded  which are  intended to  make  the
objections  to  the  Ideas  seem  shallow,  and  to  show  that  their  author  still  retains
his  mastery,  while  an  earlier  '  Aristotle '  is  satirically  made  to  give  his  later  name-
sake a  lesson  in  manners  by  prettily  and  amiably  answering  just  what  is  required,
because, forsooth, he  is  too 'young' to  raise  vexatious  objections. But the
dates  seem  a  serious  obstacle. For  even  if  it  be  supposed  that  the  genius  of
Aristotle  at  twenty-four  was  capable  of  propounding  posers  which  the  genius  of
Plato  could  not  cope  with,  this  dating  of  the  Parmenides  would  leave  only  a  dozen
years  of  Plato's  life  for  the  composition  of  all  his  later  dialogues. And  after  all,
if  neither  Plato  nor  his  school  had  ever  answered  the  objections  of  the  Parmenides,
Aristotle  had  a  perfect  right  to  reiterate  them.


ii  FROM  PLATO  TO  PROTAGORAS  47

he  could  not  understand  it,  or  a  knave,  if  he  knowingly
misrepresented  it.  Or  rather,  in  this  case,  he  would  have
been  a  fool  as  well  as  a  knave,  if  he  supposed  that  his
iniquitous  procedure  could  escape  exposure  at  the  hands
of  Plato's  other  pupils.

The  '  later  theory  of  Ideas '  appeals  essentially  to
internal  evidence.  But  here  also  its  case  is  none  too
strong.  Prof.  Gomperz,  who  is  a  friendly  critic  and
accepts  the  order  of  the  Platonic  dialogues  which  the
theory  demands,  has  to  call  attention  to  the  persistence
of  phrases  characteristic  of  the  '  earlier '  theory,  even
in  the  Timceus.  And  Dr.  Horn  boldly  challenges  the
fashionable  placing  of  the  '  dialectical '  dialogues  after
the  Republic}  Far  from  agreeing  with  Prof.  Gomperz  (Hi.
357)  that  the  latest  of  them,  the  Statesman,  is  "  manifestly
the  bridge  leading  from  the  Republic  to  the  Laws'1  he
argues  forcibly  that  it  is  quite  a  preliminary  sketch,  which
would  have  been  pointless  after  the  Republic.  The  logical
point  involved  when  the  same  author  treats  the  same
subject  twice  with  more  and  less  fulness  clearly  does  not
admit  of  absolute  decision.  The  later  version  may  be
either  an  elaboration  of  an  earlier  sketch  or  a  succinct
reference  to  a  fuller  treatment.  It  is  fallacious  also  to
assume  that,  because  a  theory  has  jbeen  remodelled,  it
has  been  improved.  So  here.  Even  Prof.  Gomperz,
who  believes  in  a  '  later '  theory,  but  holds  that  it  did  not
answer  the  Parmenides,  and  amounted  really  to  "  con-
signing the  Ideas  to  a  sphere  of  dignified  repose  in
conferring  upon  them  divine  rank," 2  has  to  admit  that
in  some  respects  its  transformation  was  retrograde.8

This  possibility  is  the  less  negligible  because  the  '  later
theory  of  Ideas '  comes  out  very  badly  under  logical
examination.  Its  advocates  seem  unable  to  show  us  how
it  escapes  from  the  dilemmas  of  the  Parmenides.  How
does  the  suggestion  that  the  Ideas  are  models  for  sensible
phenomena  to  '  imitate,'  bridge  the  dualistic  chasm  between
the  worlds  of  '  reality '  and  of  '  appearance  '  ?  If  Ideas  '

1  Platonstudien ,  ii.  379  foil.
2  L.c.  iii.  181.  3  L.c.  iii.  173.


48  STUDIES IN HUMANISM  n

and  '  things '  are  different  in  essence  and  unrelated  in
function,  how  can  they  be  so  connected  that  the  things
can  take  cognisance  enough  of  the  Ideas  to  imitate
them  ?  In  the  Tim&us  Plato  escapes  the  difficulty  by
the  divine  fiat  of  his  Demiurge  ;  but  this  expedient  the
modern  '  friends  of  the  Ideas '  would  certainly  condemn
as  '  mythical.'  The  question  is  the  more  urgent  because
somewhere  or  other  it  reappears  in  all  systems  of  con-
ceptual Idealism.1

Moreover,  it  would  seem  that  this  later  version  of  the
Ideas  is  very  fatal  to  their  logical  function.  If  phenomena
become  intelligible  only  by  being  subsumed  under  con-
cepts, there  must  be  Ideas  of  everything  that  can  be
predicated,  of  relations  and  of  artefacts,  of  hair  and  dirt
and  evil,  of  doubleness  and  if-ness  ;  their  restriction  to
'  natural  kinds,'  despite  its  metaphysical  attractiveness,  is
the  grossest  logical  inconsequence.  And  that  a  desire
to  justify  the  procedures  of  predication  and  to  explain
the  nature  of  knowledge  was  one  of  the  main  motives  of
the  Ideal  Theory  seems  undeniable,  although  Plato  does
not  make  this  as  explicit  as  its  metaphysical  aspect.
Nor  can  we  be  wrong  in  thinking  that  he  intended  it  to  be
logically,2  as  well  as  metaphysically,  a  via  media  between
Eleaticism  and  Heracliteanism,  both  of  which  seemed  to
him  to  render  significant  assertion  incomprehensible.
But  to  serve  this  logical  purpose  the  Ideas  had  to  be
conceived  after  the  fashion  of  his  '  earlier '  theory.  They
had  to  be  single,  stable,  self-identical  predicates  common
(i.e.  applicable)  to  an  infinite  plurality  of  particulars.
They  had  to  live  in  a  world  apart  in  order  to  transcend
the  flux  that  would  otherwise  have  swamped  them.
They  had  to  have  communion  inter  se,  in  order  that
the  connexions  of  our  predications  might  be  absolutely
validated  by  conforming  to  those  of  their  eternal  arche-
types. They  had  to  be  immutable  ;  for  how  else  could
truth  be  absolute?

Whatever  the  difficulties,  therefore,  which  they  might
seem  to  involve,  they  could  not  be  disavowed  without,

1  Cp.  p.  177.  2  Especially  in  the  Thecztetus.


ii  FROM  PLATO  TO  PROTAGORAS  49

in  Plato's  way  of  thinking,  abolishing  the  very  notion  of
truth  and  all  knowledge  of  reality.  It  is  quite  probable,
therefore,  that,  despite  the  candour  of  the  Parmenides,  he
never  really  made  concessions  to  criticism,  and  that  all  the
objections  he  encountered  only  seemed  to  him  to  proceed
from  a  failure  to  reach  his  standpoint,  and  to  argue  logical
incapacity  to  grasp  the  cogency  of  the  grounds  on  which
his  theory  reposed.  And  in  a  manner  he  was  right.
The  logical  cohesion  of  the  fabric  of  his  thought  was  such,
that  no  one,  who  had  once  attributed  to  concepts  a  reality
superior  to  that  of  the  phenomena  they  interpret,  could
question  it  without  succumbing  ultimately  to  the  very
difficulties  brought  against  himself.

§  10.  If,  therefore,  we  desire  to  account  both  for
Plato's  self-criticism  in  the  Parmenides,  and  the  reiteration
of  its  arguments,  almost  in  so  many  words,  by  Aristotle,
and  yet  to  retain  the  belief  that  Plato's  Ideal  Theory  was
one  of  the  great  landmarks  in  the  history  of  thought,  and
that  its  author  never  quite  abandoned  it,  what  shall  we
do  ?  We  shall  have,  certainly,  to  discard  the  notion  of
diminishing  our  difficulties  by  doubling  the  Ideal  Theories,
which  have  to  be  grasped,  expounded,  and  defended
against  substantially  the  same  objections.  By  trying  to
extract  two  theories  from  Plato  we  only  complicate  the
situation  with  the  problem  of  their  relation  and  that  of
Plato's  psychological  development ;  and  we  sacrifice  the
unity  of  Platonism.

Let  us  try  rather  to  find  the  one  theory  which  in-
dubitably is  in  Plato,  and  to  understand  that  thoroughly.
It  may  then  appear  that  it  leaves  no  real  room  for  any
other.  We  may  then  perceive  that  it  forms  the  soul  of
Plato's  thought,  which  is  neither  abandoned,  nor  altered,
nor  improved  in  any  points  which  can  be  treated  as
essential,  but  persists  substantially  the  same  throughout.
Not  that,  of  course,  Plato  may  not  have  varied  at  different
times  the  emphasis  and  attention  bestowed  on  its  various
aspects ;  but  the  truth  is,  that  it  could  not  be  really
altered  without  renouncing  what  seemed  to  Plato  the  most
essential  of  truths,  and  that  so,  however  clearly  he  had

E


50  STUDIES  IN HUMANISM  n

perceived  its  difficulties,  he  was  equally  unable  to  remedy
them  or  to  remodel  it.  Plato  was  perfectly  aware  of  his
difficulties,  and  perfectly  unable  to  remove  them  ;  because
he  was  aware  also  that  they  were  directly  connected  with
what  most  he  valued  in  his  theory.  But  it  is  just  in  this
that  his  greatness  appears  ;  his  critics  and  successors,  from
Aristotle  downwards,  have  perceived  his  difficulties,  but
not  their  own  ;  they  do  not  perceive,  that  is,  that  their
own  conception  of  knowledge  is  at  bottom  identical  with
Plato's,  that  the  difficulties  are  common  to  them  and  him,
and  that  there  is  no  escape  from  them,  except  by  a
complete  abandonment  of  Plato's  intellectualistic  pre-
supposition, and  a  thorough  correction  of  his  fundamental
error  as  to  the  nature  of  the  Concept's  function.  And  so
their  gibes  recoil  upon  their  own  heads,  and  their  im-
perfectly thought-out  theories  of  knowledge  either  stop
short  of  these  ultimate  difficulties,  or,  if  they  reach  them,
wreck  themselves  on  the  same  rock,  and  in  the  same
helpless  and  inevitable  way  as  Plato's  ;  while  they  periodi-
cally raise  the  cry  of  '  back  to  Plato,'  without  perceiving
that  Plato  can  teach  them  nothing  if  they  are  not  willing
to  take  to  heart  the  lesson  of  his  failure.  In  short,  the
grounds  of  Plato's  embarrassments  are  also  those  of  his
success  ;  but  to  prove  this,  it  is  necessary  to  hark  back
much  farther  than  Platonic  criticism  is  wont  to  go,
namely  to  the  beginnings  of  the  Ideal  Theory,  and  to
examine  its  deepest  roots.

§  ii.  Broadly  considered,  the  Ideal  Theory  has  two
main  aspects,  the  one  metaphysical  or  ontological,  the
other  logical.  It  is,  on  the  one  hand,  Plato's  account  of
the  true  and  ultimate  reality,  and  on  the  other,  his  account
of  the  problem  of  thought,  and  his  solution  of  '  the
predication  puzzle,'  as  to  how  S  can  be  P.  Of  these  two
aspects  we  have  already  noted  (§  9)  that  the  first  has
been  made  more  prominent  by  Plato's  readers,  rather
than  by  Plato  himself.  Men  are  more  interested  to
arrive  at  ultimate  reality  than  careful  to  scrutinise  the
logical  soundness  of  the  steps  by  which  they  hope  to  reach
it.  And  yet,  from  a  scientific  standpoint,  it  is  probably  the


ii  FROM  PLATO  TO  PROTAGORAS  51

logical  aspect  of  the  Ideal  Theory  which  is  more  worthy
of  admiration  ;  and  it  will  also  prove  to  be  more  funda-
mental. For  the  metaphysical  difficulties  of  Platonism,
which  have  attracted  such  wide-spread  attention,  are
really  secondary  ;  they  arise  from  deeper  logical  difficulties
which  have  been  hardly  noticed.  Hence  the  impasse  in
which  the  Ideal  Theory  ends ;  hence  the  perplexities
about  its  meaning,  and  that  of  the  whole  Platonic
problem ;  hence,  too,  the  predestined  failure  of  the
unceasing  attempts  to  repair  the  metaphysic  of  Platonism
without  rectifying  its  logic.

Plato  could  not  cure  his  metaphysical  troubles
because  he  could  not  disavow  their  logical  foundations.
He  could  not  disavow  these  foundations  because  of  his
conception  of  the  Concept,  to  renounce  which  seemed  to
him  to  revert  to  intellectual  chaos ;  and  rather  than
provoke  this,  he  was  content  to  recognise  a  final  in-
explicability  in  his  theory  of  reality.  After  all  it  might
seem  better  to  retain  an  important  and  valuable  truth,
while  honestly  avowing  its  shortcomings,  than  to  reject
it  wholly  because  it  was  not  complete.  Such  an  attitude
is  natural  and  pardonable  ;  it  only  becomes  indefensible,
if  the  theory  which  has  to  confess  to  final  failure  originally
claimed  a  completeness  which  it  cannot  realise.

§  12.  Without,  therefore,  attempting  to  fathom  the
vicissitudes  of  Plato's  psychological  development,  which
were  doubtless  many  though  not  necessarily  recorded  in
his  writings,  we  may  follow  the  logical  order  of  his  train
of  thought,  and  see  how, it  conducted  him  to  his  final  crux.

It  seemed  evident  to  Plato  that  his  philosophic  prede-
cessors had  left  knowledge  in  an  impossible  position.
Neither  the  '  Flux '  of  Heraclitus,  nor  the  one  '  Being '  of
the  Eleatics,  admitted  of  significant  assertion.  In  the  one
case  predication  was  rendered  meaningless  ;  how  could  it
be  asserted  that  '  6"  tsP'?  If  neither  5  nor  P  remain
identical  for  two  moments  together,  how  can  it  be  truer
to  say  that  5  is  P  than  that  5  is  not  P  ?  Nay,  if  both
are  in  a  continual  flux,  if  5  is  for  ever  passing  into  not-S,
and  P  into  not-P,  how  can  any  assertion  mean  anything


52  STUDIES IN HUMANISM  n

at  all  ?  The  Eleatic  alternative  is  no  better.  It  so
emphasises  the  identity  and  unity  of  Being  as  to  exclude
all  difference  ;  it  cannot  be  asserted  that  5  is  P,  but  only
that  6"  is  S,  and  necessarily  incapable  of  '  becoming '  P.
But  is  not  this  to  restrict  truth  to  idle  tautologies,  and  to
invalidate  the  very  form  of  judgment  ?

To  Plato,  as  he  meditated  on  this  problem,  salvation
seemed  to  lie  in  the  Concept,  which  seemed  to  mediate
between  and  to  reconcile  the  logical  demands  of  the
antagonistic  metaphysics.  The  philosophical  discovery  of
the  Concept's  function  had,  perhaps,  been  effected  by
Socrates,  but  it  is  not  probable  that  he  had  used  it  as  the
basis  for  a  complete  Weltanschauung.  The  Socratic  Concept
was  still  used  merely  in  its  natural  '  pragmatic '  way,
as  the  ideal  unity  whereby  the  human  mind  classifies  and
controls  the  confusing  and  confused  multitude  of  par-
ticulars, and  orders  its  experience.  It  was  thus  essentially
an  instrument  of  human  cognition  ;  but  it  may  be
doubted  whether  Socrates  had  recognised  its  fundamental
importance  for  logic.

Plato  was  immensely  struck  with  the  concept's
apparent  character  as  a  unity  in  plurality.  Here  was
a  '  one '  which  apparently  controlled  a  '  many,'  which
obediently  meant  nothing  but  the  '  one '  they  exemplified  ;
a  '  one '  which  pervaded,  instead  of  excluding  a  '  many,'
and  stood  related  to  them,  and  yet  stood  aloof,  i.e.  was
not  affected  by  them  nor  merged  in  the  flux  of  sense  ;  a
'  one,'  therefore,  which  could  form  the  stable  centre  for  a
fixed  scheme  of  classification,  whereby  the  fleeting  flux  of
indefinite  and  infinite  perceptions  could  be  measured  and
apprehended.  The  Concept  thus  became  the  principle  of
permanence  and  knowableness,  opposed  to  change  and
ignorance,  as  well  as  the  principle  of  unity.  In  so  far  as
anything  could  be  said  really  to  be,  and  really  to  be
known,  it  was  by  predicating  some  concept  of  it.  The
'  is '  of  predication  was  different  in  kind  from  the
'  becomes '  of  sense-perception  ;  but  it  was  the  meaning  of
the  latter  and  the  solution  of  its  mystery.

The  more  he  meditated  on  the  nature  of  the  concept,


n  FROM PLATO  TO  PROTAGORAS  53

the  clearer  it  seemed  to  Plato  that  it  supplied  the  remedy
for  the  defects  of  both  his  predecessors.  By  it  the
Heraclitean  flux  of  sense  was  arrested,  and  provided  with
a  stable  standard  of  reference,  and  thereby  rendered
intelligible.  By  it  was  vindicated  not  only  the  indepen-
dence, but  the  reality  of  thought — nay,  its  superior
reality,  as  against  the  turbulent  confusion  of  the  senses.
By  it,  again,  was  rendered  intelligible  the  rigid  unity  of
the  Eleatic  One,  which  now  became  flexible  and  adaptable
to  the  world  ;  for  the  '  Idea '  could  be  predicated  of  the
flux  without  losing  its  unity  and  identity.

Nay,  more,  what  was  true  of  each  Idea  in  its  relation
to  its  particulars  was  a  fortiori  true  of  the  Ideas  in  their
relation  to  each  other.  The  World  of  Ideas  formed  a
system  of  interrelated  concepts,  the  fixed  relations  of
which  could  be  made  to  guarantee  the  truth  of  the
predications  which  reproduced  this  order.  Thus  the
undifferentiated  unity  of  Eleaticism  was  expanded  and
articulated  into  a  well-knit  system  of  perfectly  knowable
Ideas.

Plato,  in  short,  had  discovered  the  function  of  the
Concept  in  the  organisation  of  experience.  He  had
become  aware  of  '  the  ideal  network,'  by  means  of  which
we  fish  out  what  is  of  value  for  our  life  out  of  the  swirl
of  events.  And  he  had  not  discovered  this  by  halves.
It  seems  impossible  to  suppose  that  he  had  first  dis-
covered the  existence  of  Ideas,  and  then  realised  the
need  of  connecting  them  into  a  system,  and  thereupon
improved  his  former  theory.  For  no  first-rate  philosopher
could  have  discovered  the  one  without  at  once  inferring
the  other.  The  systematic  character  of  the  Ideas  is
implicit  from  the  first  in  the  assertion  of  the  Idea  as  the
'  one '  in  the  '  many,'  as  the  unity  pervading  the  flow  of
perceptions.  Each  concept,  that  is,  is  a  scheme,  or
rubric,  or  pigeon-hole,  for  the  organisation  and  control  of
a  stream  of  particulars.  It  is,  in  short,  a  system.  And  it
is  equally  manifest  that  these  systems  are  parts  of  larger
ones.  Concepts  are  manifestly  related  to  each  other.
They  congregate  into  Sciences,  and  the  study  of  these


54  STUDIES IN  HUMANISM  „

easily  points  to  the  conception  of  an  Ideal  which  will
completely  unify  our  conceptual  world.

Accordingly,  it  is  not  in  the  least  surprising  that
the  dialogue  which  is  usually  conceived  as  the  cul-
minating point  of  the  '  earlier '  theory  of  Ideas,  the
wonderful  Republic,  should  already  contain  in  principle  the
chief  points  elaborated  in  the  '  later '  theory,  or  that  in  it
Plato  should  unequivocally  recognise  the  systematic  charac-
ter of  the  Ideas  and  the  need  for  their  unification  by  an
ultimate  Ideal.  The  mutual  participation  in  one  another
of  the  Ideas  (Koivwvla  et'&wi/),  which  is  introduced  as  a
familiar  notion  in  476  A,  is  just  as  essential  and  integral
a  postulate  of  the  Ideal  Theory  as  the  '  participation '  of
the  Sensible  in  the  Idea.  For  it  would  be  of  little  use
to  be  able  to  predicate  Ideas  of  sensible  things,  if  Ideas
could  not  be  predicated  of  one  another.  Such  '  participa-
tion '  is  also  a  necessary  presupposition  of  the  Ideal  of  the
'  Idea  of  Good,'  by  which  Plato  puts  the  coping-stone  on
his  theory  of  knowledge.  This  grand  conception  is  so
simple,  and  has  been  so  completely  misinterpreted,  that  we
may  devote  a  section  to  the  elucidation  of  its  '  mystery.'

§  13.  The  '  Idea  of  Good,'  in  its  actual  functioning,  is
Plato's  substitute  for  '  God,'  the  Prime  Cause  of  all  Good-
ness, Beauty,  Knowableness,  and  True  Being  in  the  world.
But  it  is  exalted  to  this  supreme  position  by  gradual
steps  which  it  is  possible  to  trace,  and  to  which  the  clue
lies  in  an  exact  translation  of  the  Greek.  Its  exact
meaning  is  '  the  Concept  of  End.'  So  translating  it  we
see  at  once  that  it  represents  not  only  the  ideal  of  unifica-
tion of  knowledge,  but  also  (what  is  quite  as  important)
the  absorption  into  Platonism  of  Anaxagoras's  conception
of  Purposive  Reason  (Nofc),  as  the  cosmic  principle  of
order  and  discrimination,  or,  as  we  should  say,  selection.
It  demands,  that  is,  not  only  that  knowledge  shall  be
unified  and  ordered,  but  that  its  order  shall  be  Ideological,
'  rational,'  and  '  good.'  A  complete  explanation  of  the
world  must  be  in  terms  of  '  ends,'  and  not  of  '  causes ' ;  the
principle  of  cosmic  order  must  be  assimilated  to  the  pro-
cedure of  human  reason  and  to  human  recognitions  of


ii  FROM PLATO  TO  PROTAGORAS  55

moral  values. It  is,  in  short,  the  postulate  of  a  complete
teleological  explanation  of  the  universe.

Now  Plato  was  quite  well  aware  that  this  was  a  pos-
tulate which  in  the  existing  state  of  the  sciences  it  was
impossible  to  satisfy.  When  the  time  comes  for '  Socrates  '
in  the  Republic  ($  3  2  E)  to  expound  to  '  Glaucon  '  the  actual
nature  of  the  process  whereby  the  teleological  deduction  of
everything  real  and  intelligible  is  to  be  demonstrated,  he
simply  declares  that  he  cannot,  because  the  latter  has  not
studied  mathematics  far  enough.  This  obviously  means
that  Plato  cannot  tell  us,  because  Science  is  not  sufficiently
advanced.  But  Plato  thought  that  the  discovery  of  the
secret  of  the  universe  was  not  far  off;  hence  the  ardour
with  which  he  subsequently  devoted  himself  to  the  pursuit
of  the  sciences,  which  in  his  time  were  most  advanced,
which  seemed  most  plainly  a  priori  and  '  independent  of
experience/  and  appeared  to  illustrate  most  lucidly  both
the  '  participation '  of  Ideas  in  one  another  and  their  fixed
ordering  by  a  superior  principle,  viz.  the  mathematical.
Can  we  not  see  how,  e.g.  in  arithmetic,  the  numbers  stand
in  fixed  and  intelligible  relations  to  one  another,  and  are
yet  pervaded  and  systematised  by  the  nature  of  the  unit  ?
What  wonder,  then,  that  when  Plato  essayed  to  expound
the  nature  of  the  Good  and  its  relation  to  the  universe,
his  lectures  should  grow,  as  we  are  told,  so  clogged  with
abstruse  mathematics  as  to  drive  away  the  throngs  which
had  been  attracted  by  their  title  ?  What  wonder,  again,
that  the  Good  should  insensibly  degenerate  again  into  the
One,  and  that  a  bare,  formal,  intellectual  unity  should  take
the  place  of  the  purposive  harmony  which  the  Ideal  of  the
Good  had  at  first  demanded  ?  For  it  was  most  unfor-
tunate to  try  to  illustrate  the  content  of  the  Supreme  Pur-
pose from  mathematics.  These  sciences,  no  doubt,  are
ultimately  purposive  structures,  and  admirably  illustrate
the  systematic  character  of  knowledge  ;  but  superficially
their  procedure  is  not  teleological  at  all.  To  reduce  the
Good,  therefore,  to  a  mere  demand  for  a  formal  unity,
verbally  implicit  in  the  notion  of  a  universe,  was  to  stultify
the  whole  conception.


56  STUDIES IN HUMANISM  „

§  1 4.  Plato  had  discovered  the  function  of  the  Concept,
and  constructed  the  ideal  of  perfect  knowledge.  But  his
Theory  of  Ideas  overshot  the  mark  in  losing  sight  of  the
Concept's  instrumental  character.  Consequently  he  pro-
ceeded to  misconceive  (i)  its  relation  to  perception,  and
(2)  the  real  nature  of  the  Concept  itself.

(i)  He  had  perceived  that  concepts  colligated  and
classified  percepts,  which  are  '  known '  by  such  conceptual
classifications.  He  perceived  also  that  this  '  knowing,'
however  completely  it  may  satisfy  our  immediate  interest,
never  exhausts  the  potential  significance  of  percepts.
However  many  '  Ideas '  are  predicated  of  a  percept,  it
still  admits  of  further  predications  (should  any  one  have
occasion  to  make  them).  What  this  really  proves  is  the
excellence  of  an  instrument  which  cannot  be  worn  out
by  use.

But  Plato  took  it  as  a  defect.  Not  in  the  concept,
however,  but  in  the  percept.  It  meant  that  the  percept
was  such  as  to  elude  the  grasp  of  thought.  It  was  too
impermanent,  too  various,  too  unstable,  too  indefinable,  to
be  fully  known,  to  be  really  knowable.  Whatever  you
might  say  it  was,  it  was  always  something  else  as  well ;
it  was  always  turning  into  an  '  other.'  The  perceptual
was  always  changing,  that  is,  always  '  becoming '  ;  and
'  becoming '  set  reason  at  defiance.  It  could  only  be
thought  as  an  unintelligible  union  of  'not -being'  with
'  being.'  Hence  the  perceptual  world  was  stained  with  an
ineradicable  taint ;  it  did  not  possess  true  being,  nor  the
permanence  which  that  entailed.  It  was  vitiated  through
and  through  by  a  '  non-existent,'  a  /i^  ov,  which  rendered  it
impermanent,  and  imperfect,  and  individual,  and  in  general
accounted  for  the  flux  of  sense.

It  followed  that  the  Sensible  was  not  strictly  to  be
known.  Knowledge  is  only  of  universals,  'Ideas';  that
which  eludes  the  ^universal,  the  infinite  particularity  of  the
'  this,'  '  here,'  and  ,rnow,'  is  strictly  unknowable.  Science
takes  no  account  of  the  differences  between  one  man  and
another ; *  demonstration  stops  with  the  least  general

1 Theaetetus,  209. Cp.  Essay,  iii.  §  18.


ji  FROM  PLATO  TO  PROTAGORAS  57

'  law '  (which,  however,  is  still  a  universal)  ; 1  there  can  be
no  definition  of  the  individual.  True  knowledge,  there-
fore, is  wholly  conceptual,  and  essentially  independent  of
'  sense,'  even  though  for  unreal  beings,  wallowing  in  the
obscurities  of  the  phenomenal,  it  may  have  to  be
perceived,  and  extracted  from  a  '  this-here-now.'

An  easy  fusion,  further,  of  the  ethical  with  the  epis-
temological  meaning  of  '  living  by  the  senses,'  here  forms
a  natural  starting-point  for  a  moral  development  of  the
Ideas  as  Ideals,  which  made  the  Platonic  disparagement
of  the  world  of  sense  a  basis  for  asceticism  and  a
jumping-off  place  to  a  '  heaven '  of  pure  thought,  which
assuredly  no  individual  souls  could  have  attained.2

§  I  5.  The  question  which  naturally  arises  at  this  point
is  as  to  why  any  one  should  look  any  further  for  the
source  of  the  Platonic  ^apia-pos,  the  '  transcendence '  or
'  hypostasisation  '  of  the  Platonic  Ideas.  The  metaphysical
dualism  of  the  Ideal  Theory  is  plainly  implicit  in  its
epistemological  dualism.  The  dualistic  chasm  between
the  Real  and  the  Phenomenal  is  merely  the  translation
into  ontological  language,  the  application  to  the  meta-
physical problem,  of  the  dualistic  antithesis  between
'  thought '  and  '  sensation,'  '  knowledge '  and  '  opinion,'
merely  a  consequence  of  a  formulation  of  an  ideal  of
knowledge  which  had  abstracted  from  personality  and
ignored  individuality,  and  so  had  constitutionally  incapa-
citated itself  from  understanding  actual  knowing.

The  Platonic  Idea  has  emancipated  itself  from  man  ;
it  has  become  so  '  independent '  as  to  have  lost  all  intrinsic
connexion  with  human  knowing ;  it  has  soared  to  so
'  supercelestial '  an  Empyrean  that  human  effort  and
human  aspiration  can  no  longer  follow  it.  Consequently
when  it  revisits  the  terrestrial  scene,  it  '  descends  into  the
Cave,'  and  demeans  itself  by  consorting  with  man,  whose
whole  life,  with  its  interests,  individuality,  and  imper-

1  Cp.  Rep.  511  B. ,  and  Essay,  vi.  §§3,  4.

2  Whether,  however,  Plato  himself  perceived  the  incompatibility  of  individual
immortality  with  his  theory  of  knowledge  is  doubtful. His  arguments,  as  Teich-
muller  has  shown,  never  '  prove '  more  than  the  immortality  of  soul  as  a  prin-
ciple ;  but  he  may  have  taken  the  plurality  of  souls  for  granted  empirically.


58  STUDIES IN HUMANISM  n

manence,  it  must  heartily  despise.  For  the  '  Ideal '
Theory  of  knowledge  has  no  intrinsic  connexion  with
human  life ;  man  for  it  is  an  encumbrance  to  be  over-
come, and  not  a  master  to  be  served.  The  connexion
which  appears  to  exist  between  the  two  is  intrinsically
unintelligible,  because  they  are  not  really  related  ;  it  is
impossible  to  explain  how  man  can  rise  to  the  contem-
plation of  eternal  truth,  or  why  the  Idea  should  descend
and  distort  itself  in  human  thoughts.  And  what  is  the
relation  of  the  Ideal  archetype  to  its  human  '  copies '  is
the  greatest  unintelligibility  of  all.  To  shirk  this  ques-
tion by  merely  remarking  that  all  the  copies  are  imper-
fect is  plainly  insufficient.  For  this  does  not  explain  the
various  sorts  and  degrees  of  inadequacy  with  which  human
ideas  are  afflicted,  nor  account  for  their  occurrence  in  the
place  and  at  the  time  they  occur.  And  since  ex  hypothesi
the  ideal  Idea  is  never  realised  on  earth,  it  cannot  be
appealed  to  to  discriminate  between  one  man's  idea,  and
one  man's  ideal,  and  another  man's  :  the  whole  notion  of
the  eternal  Idea  is,  in  short,  devoid  of  application.

§  1 6.  If,  however,  undismayed  by  this  logical  collapse,
we  proceed  to  translate  the  theory  into  metaphysics,  we
inevitably  reach  the  results  on  which  the  charge  of
dualism  is  commonly  based.

The  Ideas  are  the  true  Reality  which  exists  eternally
in  absolute  self-sufficing  independence  {avro  Ka0'  avro
aet  6V) :  sensible  things,  which  '  somehow '  are  debased
unintelligible  '  copies  '  of  them,  are  not  truly  real.  Human
ideas  ('  opinions ')  are  in  general  at  a  still  lower  level  of
imitation  (elfcao-ia) ;  and  yet  the  philosopher  can  '  some-
how '  rise  to  a  vision  of  the  true  Ideas,  and,  when  he  does
so,  he  grasps  reality,  and  his  ideas  are  rendered  true  because
they  predicate  the  eternal  relations  of  the  absolute  Ideas.

This  is  all  the  metaphysical  version  of  the  Ideal
Theory  comes  to,  the  substance  of  Platonic  metaphysics.
Only  Plato,  being  a  poet,  translates  the  '  somehow '  into
brilliantly  pictorial  imagery  and  the  most  gorgeous
'  myths.'  His  modern  imitators,  who  are  not  poets,  can
eke  out  this  jejune  '  somehow '  only  by  pseudo-religious


ii  FROM PLATO  TO  PROTAGORAS  59

homilies  on  the  necessary  limitations  of  human  knowledge,
and  the  presumption  of  trying  to  understand  wholly  what
is  avowedly  a  theory  of  absolute  truth  ;  but  it  is  a  moot
point  whether  they  perceive  the  grotesque  contradiction
between  the  claims  and  the  achievements  of  their  theory.1

There  is  no  reason  to  suppose,  however,  that  Plato
himself  was,  even  transiently,  deceived.  Even  without  the
Parmenides,  the  variegated  metaphors  with  which  he  else-
where describes  the  relation  which  is  null,  the  connexion
which  is  impossible,  between  the  Ideal  and  the  Sensible,
the  Real  and  the  inexplicable  unreality  of  the  Apparent,
between  Absolute  Truth  and  absolutely  incomprehensible
Error,  should  convince  us  that  his  language  was  intended
to  be  pictorial.  It  does  not  really  matter  whether  the
Sensible  is  said  to  '  participate  '  in  the  Real,  or  to  '  imitate  '
it,  or  to  '  copy '  it  as  an  archetypal  model.  It  does  not
really  matter  whether  '  the  world  of  Ideas '  is  situated  in
'  a  heavenly  place '  or  in  '  supercelestial  space,'  whether
human  knowledge  is  derived  from  '  recollections '  of  pre-
natal visions,  or  elicited  from  potentialities  of  eternal
truth  inherent  in  the  mind,  whether  human  souls  are  one
or  many,  incarnated  or  reincarnated,  composed  of  mortal
or  immortal  '  parts,'  or  both  ;  in  every  case  the  real  diffi-
culty is  one  and  the  same.  The  descent  from  the  Ideal
is  an  unmediated,  incomprehensible  Fall,  a  submergence
of  the  Real  in  a  Flux  of  Illusion.

It  is  quite  superfluous,  therefore,  to  indict  Plato's  meta-
physic  for  its  failure  '  to  derive  the  Sensible,1  to  connect
the  Real  with  the  Transcendent,  to  bridge  the  chasm

1  Prof.  J.  S.  Mackenzie's  article  in  Mind,  NS.  xv.  No.  59,  must  surely  be  ironical.
For  after  professing  to  advocate  what  he  calls  his  '  old  idealism '  (which,  as
attenuated  in  his  statement,  becomes  indiscernible  from  realistic  monism)  on  the
ground  that  ' '  the  theory  seems  to  make  the  universe  intelligible  to  us,  and  that  we
cannot  think  of  any  alternative  theory  that  does  "  (p.  323),  and  alleging  that  this  is
"  the  only  ultimate  kind  of  proof  that  can  be  given,"  he  goes  on  to  say  that  "  it
would  be  absurd  to  expect  any  system  of  Idealism  to  show  the  rationality  of  the
universe  in  such  a  sense  as  this,"  i.e.  by  a  Ideological  explanation  of  particular
events  and  physical  processes,  such  as  Plato  himself  demanded  in  the  Phaedo !
And  finally  it  turns  out  that  even  so  '  Idealism  '  cannot  fulfil  the  duty  to  which  it
has  restricted  itself,  and  he  will  "  by  no  means  affirm  that  it  can,  in  this  present
life,  become  completely  intelligible  to  us  "  (p.  328).  Truly,  if  serious,  this  would
be  an  amazing  confession  from  a  theory  which  demanded  acceptance  on  the  ground
of  its  unique  ability  to  render  the  world  completely  intelligible  !


60  STUDIES IN HUMANISM  n

between  the  Ideal  and  the  Human.  Habemus  confitentem
reum  ;  Plato  himself  has  admitted  and  deplored  the  fact,
far  more  completely  and  compactly,  and  in  far  finer
language  than  any  of  his  critics  and  successors.1  Plato
has  anticipated  all  their  difficulties,  objections,  and  sugges-
tions for  a  cure — the  problem  of  the  '  transcendence '  or
'  independence  '  of  the  Idea — Aristotle's  '  third  man,'  i.e.
the  infinite  series  of  impotent  mediators  between  the  Idea
and  the  sensible  thing — the  problem  of  the  unity  of  an
Idea  which  is  exemplified  in  and  distributed  among  in-
finite particulars — the  objection  to  recognising  eternal
Ideas  of  everything  that  can  be  named  or  invented — the
nullity  of  a  thought  which  neither  is  nor  can  be  thought
by  anyone — the  vain  device  of  an  absolute  thinker  to
retain  in  thought  the  Ideas  not  in  human  use  2 — the  fatal
divorce  between  human  and  Ideal  truth — the  unknowable-
ness  of  the  latter  and  its  unconcern  about  the  former — the
incapacity  of  the  Divine,  just  because  it  is  divine,  to  know
the  human — all  these  were  familiar  to  Plato  as  conse-
quences of  his  theory.

But  it  is  fallacious  to  argue  that,  because  he  recognised
these  difficulties,  he  was  able  or  willing  to  remove  them.
He  appears  to  have  regarded  them  as  the  price  which
had  to  be  paid  for  the  Ideal  Theory.  And  he  never
declares  himself  unwilling  to  pay  the  price.  All  that  in
the  Parmenides  (135  C)  he  has  to  set  against  the  objec-
tions he  has  enumerated  is,  that  if  the  Ideas  are  abandoned,
knowledge  is  impossible  ;  and  this  remark  is  significantly
put  into  the  mouth  of  '  Parmenides,'  who  has  just  played
the  ruthless  critic  of  the  'Socratic'  theory.  If  the  price
seems  to  us  stupendous,  and  the  gain  incommensurate,  we
should  at  least  reflect  that  the  cost  of  an  (approximately)
consistent  intellectualism  has  not  been  reduced  since  Plato's
day,  and  that,  even  with  all  its  difficulties,  Plato  might  well
remain  convinced  of  the  fundamental  value  of  his  theory.

For  after  all  was  not  all  knowledge,  in  the  true
sense,  still  manifestly  conceptual  ?  Were  not  Ideas,  and

1  Cp.  especially  Parmenides,  131-4.

2  For  this  would  seem  to  be  implied  in  the  '  thinking  Ideas  '  of  Farm.  132  C.


ii  FROM PLATO  TO PROTAGORAS  61

nothing  but  Ideas,  used  in  all  predication  ?  Was  not
that  which  is  not  '  Idea '  incapable  of  being  thought,  or
expressed,  or  understood  ?  Nay,  in  the  end,  what  but
an  Idea  could  be  predicated  as  existent,  i.e.  could  be  at
all  ?  All  this  was  true  and  most  important,  and  much
less  specious  theories  have  often  been  upheld  on  much
feebler  grounds.

What,  then,  of  the  charge  that  Plato  has  wantonly  and
vainly  duplicated  the  real  world  by  his  Ideal  world  ?  It
is  simply  not  true  that  he  has  asserted  the  existence  of
two  real  worlds,  of  which  the  one  is  superfluous.  He  has
asserted  only  one  real  world,  viz.  the  Ideal  world,  just  as
he  has  asserted  only  one  form  of  true  '  knowledge,'
viz.  that  of  concepts.  He  has  had  to  admit,  indeed,  that
besides  the  real  world  there  appears  to  exist  also  a  world  of
sense,  which  is  a  world  of  illusion,  and  can  be  perceived,
but  is  not  to  be  rendered  fully  intelligible  even  by  the  Ideas
which  pervade  it.  But  his  metaphysic  is  no  more  really
dualistic  than  that  of  the  Eleatics.  Parmenides  also  had
described  a  '  way  of  opinion  '  to  deal  with  the  sensible  world
which  '  somehow  '  coexisted  with  the  Absolute  One.  Plato's
account  is  essentially  the  same,  with  two  improvements.  He
has  articulated  the  One  into  a  system  of  Ideas  ;  and  he
has  suggested  that  though  the  illusion  is  incomprehen-
sible, we  can  yet  in  a  way  comprehend  why  it  should,
and  that  it  must,  be  so.  For  we  can  understand  that  if
reasoning  as  such  inevitably  predicates  Ideas,  a  rational
deduction  of  what  is  not  Idea  is  inconceivable.  Thus  the
very  existence  of  the  non-existent  is  to  be  grasped  only
by  '  a  spurious  reasoning.'

And  yet  it  was  most  natural  that  the  Platonic  doctrine
should  be,  at  once  and  persistently,  misunderstood.  The
truth  of  Plato's  theory  is  evident  only  to  those  who  can
see  with  Plato's  eye  and  from  Plato's  point  of  view.  His
doctrine  must  appear  as  an  assertion  of  two  real  worlds
as  soon  as  ever  we  presume  the  initial  reality  of  our
phenomenal  world  of  sense.  To  view  it  in  this  way  at
once  renders  the  Ideal  world  a  second  world,  which  claims
superior  reality,  but  is  ludicrously  unable  to  make  good  its


62  STUDIES IN  HUMANISM  n

claim,  because  it  fails  to  establish  any  real  connexion  with
the  primary  reality  of  the  world  it  essays  to  control.

But  this  interpretation  is  false  to  Plato's  thought.
Plato  had  never  admitted  the  primary  reality  of  our
phenomenal  world.  On  the  contrary,  he  had  denounced
it  as  tainted  with  unreality.  For  Plato,  therefore,
Platonism  is  a  one-world  view ;  its  dualism  lies  not  in
metaphysics,  but  in  epistemology.

For  Aristotle,  his  unknown  predecessors  (answered  in
the  Parmenides\  and  his  successors,  it  is  no  doubt  a  two-
world  view,  split  by  a  metaphysical  chasm  between  the  two
worlds.

It  all  depends,  therefore,  on  the  standpoint.  The
true  Platonic  standpoint  assumes  the  reality  of  the  Ideal,
and  starts  with  it,  but  is  unable  to  get  down  to  the
human  world.  The  Aristotelian  standpoint,  which  is
that  of  common  sense,  assumes  the  reality  of  the  human
world,  starts  with  that,  comes  to  the  brink  of  the  same
chasm  from  the  opposite  side,  and  is,  of  course,  unable  to
leap  across  it  to  the  Ideal.  There  is  not  really  any  differ-
ence of  opinion  about  the  actual  facts  of  the  situation  :
both  sides  come  to  the  same  gap,  and  are  stopped  by  it.

The  sole  question  is  as  to  which  is  our  proper  stand-
point. Now  this  question  might  be  argued  with  endless
subtlety;  for  on  the  one  hand  absolute  truth  would  seem
to  be  visible  only  from  the  Ideal  standpoint ;  on  the  other
human  truth  would  seem  to  be  that  proper  to  man.
What,  however,  cuts  the  discussion  short  is  the  simple
fact  that  before  a  man  can  maintain  the  Ideal  standpoint  it
must  be  reached  from  the  human  by  a  man.  And  if  man  can
attain  it,  he  ought  to  be  able  to  leave  it  again.  If,  there-
fore, it  appears  that  there  is  no  road  back  to  the  human
from  the  Ideal,  it  clearly  cannot  possibly  have  been  reached
by  valid  means.  And  so  what  Plato  has  forgotten  is  the
deduction  of  his  standpoint.  He  must  have  jumped  to
his  Ideal  standpoint.  Once  he  got  to  it,  all  went
swimmingly,  until  the  time  came  for  a  return  to  earth  ;
and  then  he  found  he  could  not  return,  but  without  under-
standing why.  Accordingly  all  he  can  say  is  that  the  Ideal


ii  FROM  PLATO  TO  PROTAGORAS  63

world  is  certainly  real,  that  the  world  of  sense  is  not,  and
that  if  the  Ideas  are  denied,  thinking  must  stop,  because
all  predication  uses  concepts.  And  all  these  things,
which  are  in  a  manner  true,  he  says  unweariedly  from
first  to  last.  That  his  attitude  has  seemed  perplexing
and  obscure  is  wholly  due  to  his  critics'  lack  of  per-
ception. They  have  not  penetrated  to  the  depths  of
Plato's  problem,  nor  seen  that  the  real  difficulty  springs
from  his  conception  of  knowledge.

And  so  they  have  actually  thought  themselves  entitled
to  scorn  Plato's  metaphysic  while  submissively  accepting
his  notion  of  the  concept !  But  this  is  no  way  of  breaking
Plato's  spell ;  and  the  resulting  failures  to  solve  his  problem,
nay,  to  avoid  repeating  his  confessions  of  embarrassment,
in  almost  the  same  words,  are  distinctly  humorous.
Aristotle's  devices,  for  example,  for  avoiding  the  tran-
scendence of  the  Idea  seem  deliciously  naive.  He
declares  that,  of  course,  '  universals '  must  be  conceived
as  immanent  in  their  '  particulars ' ;  but  how  this  can  be,
he  is  quite  unable  to  explain.  He  protests  (rightly
enough)  that  individual  substances  are  primary  reality,
and  that  universals  are  only  '  second  substances '  ;  but  for
lack  of  insight  into  the  instrumental  function  of  the  latter,
his  theory  of  knowledge  ends  in  the  unresolved  contradic-
tion that,  since  knowledge  is  essentially  of  universals,  the
metaphysical  order  is  epistemologically  impossible,  and
individuals,  which  in  metaphysics  are  ultimate  reality,  in
epistemology  are  as  such  unknowable !  It  thereupon
seems  only  a  secondary  mishap  that  after  all  his  denuncia-
tions of  Platonic  ^tuptoyio?  he  should  have  to  make  his  own
1/01)9  something  ^copta-rov,  or  to  postulate  the  transcendence
of  his  deity,  who  is  really  quite  as  much  dissevered  from
the  universe  as  the  Platonic  Idea,  and  can  act  on  it  only
by  the  magic  of  the  world's  desire  for  his  perfect  '  form.'

As  for  Plato's  followers,  whose  name  is  legion,  their
labour  has  been  that  of  Danaids.  They  have  been  trying
to  carry  the  waters  of  truth  in  Plato's  conceptual  sieve,
without  so  much  as  perceiving  that  the  vessel  leaked.
And  this,  at  least,  Plato  may  claim  to  have  perceived,


64  STUDIES IN  HUMANISM  n

even  though  he  was  at  a  loss  for  means  to  stop  the
leakages  of  truth  through  the  holes  in  his  conception  of
the  Concept

§  17.  For  the  only  real  escape  from  his  embarrass-
ments lay  in  a  direction  in  which  he  could  not  and  would
not  look  for  it,  viz.  in  a  radical  recognition  of  the  func-
tional and  instrumental  nature  of  the  Concept.  But  this
would  have  involved  a  rehabilitation  of  the  senses  and  of
immediate  experience,  and  a  complete  remodelling  of
Plato's  conceptions  of  Truth  and  Reality.  Even  if  by
some  strange  chance  he  had  caught  a  glimpse  of  this
way  out,  he  would  have  averted  his  eyes  from  the  im-
pious spectacle.  The  view  that  concepts  are  not  unalter-
able and  only  relatively  constant  (like  mere  material
things),  being  essentially  tools  slowly  fashioned  by  a
practical  intelligence  for  the  mastery  of  its  experience,
whose  value  and  truth  reside  in  their  application  to  the
particular  cases  of  their  use,  and  not  in  their  timeless
validity  nor  in  their  supra-sensible  otium  cum  dignitate  in
a  transcendent  realm  of  abstractions,  would  have  seemed
to  him  as  paradoxical  and  monstrous  and  unsatisfying  as
it  still  does  to  his  belated  followers.  And  yet  it  is  this
notion  of  Truth,  this  insight  into  the  function  of  Ideas,
which  the  working  of  Science  has  slowly  brought  to  light,
after  many  centuries  of  incessant  and  by  no  means  always
successful  warfare  against  the  glamour  of  the  gorgeous
castles  which  Platonism  has  erected  in  and  out  of  the
air.

There  had  been  a  couple  of  huge  mistakes  in  Plato's
conception  of  the  Concept's  function  :  (i)  The  initial
abstraction  from  its  human  side  was  really  illegitimate  ;
and  so  (2)  no  provision  had  been  made  for  the  growth
of  truth.

(i)  Because  in  ordinary  cases  our  reasoning  can  often
abstract  from  the  personal  peculiarities  of  this  man  or
that,  it  does  not  follow  that  we  can  abstract  from  all
men — that  truth  as  a  whole  can  be  dehumanised.  Because
we  make  truth  what  may  be,  roughly,  called  '  independent,'
it  does  not  follow  that  it  can  be  absolutely  so,  or  that  it


ii FROM  PLATO  TO  PROTAGORAS 65

is  logically  irrelevant  that  we  make  it  so  for  certain  purposes
of  our  own.  In  point  of  fact,  the  whole  depersonalising
or  dehumanising  of  truth  (and  of  reality)  must  be  con-
ceived, and  limited,  pragmatically.  It  is  a  procedure
which  is  useful,  and  works  for  certain  limited  purposes  ;
but  it  breaks  down  woefully  and  irretrievably  when  it  is
conceived  as  ultimate.  '  Pure  Reason,'  defecated  of  all
human  interests,  can  assert  its  rationality  as  little  as  its
existence.

(2)  One  of  the  chief  characteristics  of  human  truth  is
its  progressiveness.  It  is  essentially  a  thing  that  must
grow  and  develop  through  stages  subsequently  known  as
'  errors.'  Ideal  truth,  on  the  other  hand,  is  conceived  as
inerrant,  and  as  fixed  and  immutable  in  its  perfection.
When,  therefore,  Platonism  abstracted  from  the  human
side  of  knowing,  it  implicitly  rejected  also  the  conception
of  a  growth  of  knowledge.  To  render  such  growth  con-
ceivable, concepts  must  not  be  conceived  as  rigid,  but  as
improvable  and  adjustable  to  new  conditions.  It  is
here  that  a  priori  dogmatism  fails.  Its  fallacy  does  not
lie  in  its  deductive  procedure,  but  in  its  tacit  as-
sumption that  the  conceptions  it  argues  from  are  final
and  not  to  be  revised.  But  for  this  assumption,  a
4  contradiction '  might  only  prove  that  the  conceptions
used  were  insufficient  for  their  work.  And  if  there  is
always  this  alternative  inference  from  an  apparent  case  of
contradictory  conceptions,  how  can  the  intellectualist
belief  in  a  purely  formal  criterion  of  truth,  which  regards
it  as  mere  self-consistency,  be  sustained,  or  the  pragmatic
appeal  to  consequences  be  averted  ?

The  Platonic  Ideas  illustrate  this  situation  admirably.
Plato  had  perceived  that  stable  concepts  were  needed  for
significant  assertion  and  profitable  inquiry.  But  (as  in
the  similar  cases  of  the  '  independence  '  of  '  reality,'  and  of
'  truth ')  this  stability  was  not  conceived  pragmatically,  i,e.
as  the  amount  and  sort  of  stability  needed  by  concepts  in
the  fulfilment  of  their  actual  function.  It  was  cut  loose
from  human  knowing,  and  taken  as  absolute.  Concepts
thereby  became  immutable.  But  if  our  concepts  are

F


66  STUDIES  IN HUMANISM  n

immutable,  our  knowledge  cannot  grow.  And  conversely,
if  our  knowledge  grows,  our  concepts  cannot  be  im-
mutable. If,  therefore,  there  are  immutable  concepts,
they  cannot,  at  any  rate,  be  ours.  They  are  different  in
kind,  and  so  cannot  explain  human  knowledge.  The
inability,  in  short,  of  the  Platonic  Idea  to  descend  to
earth  is  inherent  in  its  construction.

If,  without  realising  this  fundamental  divorce  between
the  Ideal  and  the  human,  into  which  Platonism  has  been
beguiled,  we  try  to  adjust  the  Platonic  Idea  to  the  growth
of  knowledge,  we  at  once  evolve  a  tissue  of  absurdities.

(1)  If  the  Ideal  World  is  to  remain  connected  with
ours,  and  to be affected by  our  judgments,  it would
follow  that  any  change  in  our  world  would  have to  be
reflected  in  the  Ideal. Every  time  anyone  hit  upon  a
new  predication  which  could  sustain  its  claim  to truth,
every  time  a  new  reality,  say  a  motor  car,  was  made  or
generated,  or  an  old  one,  say  a  dodo,  became  extinct,
there  would  have  to  ensue  a  responsive  readjustment  in
the  eternal  system  of  Ideas. But  would  not  this  destroy
its  eternity,  and  effectively  include  it  in  the  sphere  of  the
Sensible  ? How  could Ideas,  thus  subject  to  Becoming,
thus  perfected  in  time,  any  longer  function  as  representa-
tive of  timeless  '  Being '  ?

(2)  But  even  if  a  Becoming  of  the  Ideas  were  admitted,
it  would  not  explain  the  Becoming  of  the  Sensible. The
Ideal  Bed  may  be,  as  we  are  told  in  the  Republic  (596),
the  eternal  '  truth '  and  reality,  of  which  all  real  beds  are
imperfect  copies  ;  but  how  does  it  assist  or  explain  the
genesis  of  the  latter  ? Humanly speaking, beds were
invented  by  men,  in response  to  human needs,  by  the
exercise  of  their  practical intelligence  for  the manipula-
tion of  reality,  at  a  definite  stage  in  the  history  of  man's
progress. And  it  is  impossible  to  see  that  eternal  Ideas
had  anything  to  do  with  any  part  of  this  history. How
can  the  eternal  nature  of  the  Ideal Bed  account  for  the
time,  or  the  place,  or  the  material,  or  the  inventor  of  the
first construction of  beds, or  for their subsequent  im-
provements, and  the  consequent  expansion  in  our  notions


ii  FROM  PLATO  TO  PROTAGORAS 67

of  what  an  ideal  bed  requires  ?  Shall  we  assert  that  the
Ideal  Bed,  e.g.  had  spiral  springs  all  along,  because  the
best  beds  now  possess  them,  or  deny  this,  because  in
Plato's  time  such  modern  improvements  had  not  been
thought  of?

(3)  If,  on  the  other  hand,  we  rigidly  maintain  the
transcendence  of  the  Ideal,  we  must  lose  connexion  with
human  knowing.  The  latter  becomes  a  self-directing
process  which  Pure  Reason  cannot  sanction  or  understand,
while  Ideal  Truth  becomes  the  meaningless  monopoly  of
Gods  who,  as  Plato  said,  cannot  know  the  human.1  How
clearly  Plato  himself  had  seen  this  objection  is  attested
also  by  a  remarkable  passage  in  the  Sophist  (247-249),
in  which  he  points  out  that  knowledge  of  the  Ideas
implies  an  interaction  between  them  and  us,  and  so  their
alteration,  and  thereby  a  sacrifice  of  their  independence,
absoluteness,  and  immutability.  In  return,  they  are
promised  motion,  life,  soul,  intelligence,  and  purposive
reason  :  but  what  of  their  stability  ?  Plato  can  see  a
way  to  reconcile  these  conflicting  postulations  as  little
as  in  the  Parmenides ;  he  leaves  the  contradiction  un-
resolved.

It  is  easy,  of  course,  to  say  that  he  ought  on  no
account  to  have  put  up  with  it.  He  ought  to  have
adopted  the  more  tolerable  alternative  ;  he  ought  to  have
upheld  at  all  costs  the  relevance  of  the  Ideas  to
human  knowing ;  he  ought  to  have  taken  account  of
the  growth  of  knowledge  ;  he  ought  to  have  sacrificed
the  eternity  and  immutability  of  truth.

It  is  easy  for  us  to  say  this,  because  we  can  realise
that  the  concepts  we  use  are  continuously  changing  as
our  knowledge  grows,  though  more  slowly  than  our
percepts,  and  that  immutability  is  neither  a  fact  nor  a
necessity.  We  can  see,  indeed,  that  so  far  from  postulating
immutability,  our  concepts  could  not  perform  their
functions  if  they  did  not  change.  We  are  thus  com-
pelled to  conceive  any  '  absolute '  truth  which  is  relevant
to  actual  knowing  as  nothing  more  than,  as  it  were,

1  Parmenides,  134  E.


68  STUDIES  IN HUMANISM  n

humanly  absolute,  i.e.  as  an  ideal  for  us,  which  we  are
really  making  and  realising,  and  which  must,  for  that  very
reason,  not  be  eternally  accomplished.

But  Plato  could  not  see  this.1  He  could  not  see  his
way  to  changing  his  notion  of  the  Concept  without
abolishing  knowledge.  He  could  see  no  way  of  com-
bining the  purity  of  knowledge  per  se  with  its  attainment
by  us.  He  could  not  see  that  the  constancy  of  a  concept
predicated,  need  not  be  greater  than  sufficed  for  expressing
the  purpose  and  conveying  the  meaning  of  a  judgment.
He  could  not  see  this,  because  the  purpose  was  just  part
of  that  Protagorean  '  subjectivism  '  (i.e.  humanism),  which
he  had  interpreted  and  eliminated  as  scepticism.

But  though  he  did  not  see  this,  he  saw  far  more
than  his  successors.  The  whole  intellectualist  theory  of
knowledge  is  a  washed  out  replica  of  Platonism,  inferior
to  it  in  design  and  execution  and  vividness  of  colouring,
and  above  all  in  significance.  For  the  clearness  with
which  Plato  had  pointed  to  the  flaw  of  his  theory  ought
to  have  suggested  the  need  for  a  thorough  re-examination
of  the  function  of  the  Concept.  In  point  of  fact  it  did
nothing  of  the  kind.  The  later  intellectualists  hardly
realised  how  completely  they  were  dependent  on  Plato
for  the  foundations  on  which  they  built ;  they  hardly  ever
penetrated  to  the  fundamental  difficulty  of  their  common
theory.

§  1 8.  To  us  at  last  the  way  is  clear.  We  must
conceive  the  Concept  as  an  instrument  of  human  know-
ledge, and  its  nature  as  something  relative  to,  and  revealed

1  Quite  recently,  however,  Prof.  J.  A.  Stewart  has  propounded  (in  Mind,  N.S.
No.  60)  a  brilliant  and  original  theory  that  the  so-called  '  Socratic '  dialogues,
so  far  from  being  scientifically  negligible,  are  really  essential  to  the  complete
statement  of  the  Ideal  Theory,  and  should  be  taken  as  exemplifying  the  function
of  the  Concept  in  use,  and  as  supplementing  the  account  of  the  abstract  concept
given  in  the  dogmatic  dialogues,  on  which  alone  the  traditional  descriptions  of
Platonism  have  been  based.  If  this  attractive  theory  can  be  substantiated  in
detail,  the  current  estimates  of  Plato  will  have  to  be  profoundly  modified,  and  we
also  can  no  longer  treat  him  as  a  complete  intellectualist.  He  could  be  charged
only  with  a  failure  to  make  clear  the  logical  connexion  between  his  two  types  of
dialogue,  and  to  emphasise  the  vital  importance  of  the  functional  view  of  the
Concept.  Even  on  the  most  favourable  interpretation,  however,  we  can  hardly
ascribe  to  him  a  full  perception  of  the  fact  that  the  whole  meaning  of  concepts
depends  on  their  u*e  and  application.


ii  FROM  PLATO  TO  PROTAGORAS 69

in,  its  use,  and  therefore  to  be  discovered  by  the
attentive  study  of  actual  knowing,  and  not  by  meditation
and  dialectical  '  criticism '  of  abstracted  and  unmeaning
'  forms  of  thought'  Let  us  go  back  to  Plato,  by  all
means ;  but  let  us  go  back,  not  with  the  intention  of
repeating  his  mistake  and  painfully  plunging  into  the
'  chasm '  he  has  made,  but  in  order  to  correct  his  initial
error.  But  to  do  this  we  must  return  from  Plato  to
Protagoras.  We  must  abandon  the  attempt  to  de-
humanise knowledge,  to  attribute  to  it  an  '  independ-
ence' of  human  purposes,  an  'absoluteness'  which
divorces  it  from  life,  an  '  eternity '  which  is  unrelated  to
time.

Or  rather,  if  we  wish  to  retain  these  hallowed  terms,
we  must  construe  them  pragmatically.  '  Independence '
must  not  be  construed  as  a  denial  of  connexion  with
human  life,  but  as  a  description  of  the  selective  valuation
which  discriminates  some  more  precious  contents  in  human
experience  from  others  of  inferior  value.  '  Absoluteness  '
must  designate  the  ideal  of  complete  adequacy  for  every
human  purpose,  while  the  '  eternity '  of  truth  must  mean
its  applicability  at  whatever  time  we  will.

But  to  follow  up  the  promise  of  these  novel  courses,
we must start once more, with Protagoras, from  the  ~^
individual  judgments  of  individual  men,  and  study  their )
developments,  the  ways  in  which  they  originate  under  the /
promptings  of  complex  psychic  forces,  the  ways  in  which V
they are  combined  into  systems,  and  are  verified, and /
claim  and  secure  '  objective '  validity,  and  engender  the (
final  ideal  of  an  independence  and absoluteness  which
are  so  easily misinterpreted into  a nullification  of  the /
processes that generated them. We must radically /
disabuse  our  minds  of  the  notion  that  Humanism means/
Subjectivism,  or  Subjectivism  Scepticism.

That  Subjectivism  need  not  coincide  with  Scepticism
is  apparent  from  the  fact  that  even  the  extremest
Solipsism  need  not  doubt  its  own  sufficiency.  In  point
of  fact,  it  is  Intellectualism  which  is  most  prone  to
Scepticism :  it  engenders  Scepticism  so  soon  as  the


70  STUDIES  IN  HUMANISM  n

breakdown  of  its  impossible  demands  becomes  evident  to
those  who  cannot  bear  to  part  with  it.

As  for  Subjectivism,  no  Protagorean  would  admit  the
charge.  He  would  not  admit  that  in  starting  with  the
individual  he  had  also  committed  himself  to  finish  up  with
him.  In  knowing,  also,  the  beginning  and  the  end  of
man's  career  lie  far  asunder.  And  he  sees,  of  course,
that  of  the  individual  judgments  made  only  a  small
percentage  are  ever  recognised  as  valid.  But  he  observes
also  that  every  one  has  a  strong  interest  to  get  his
claims  validated.  Truth  is  one,  of  the  very  few  objects
of  human  desire  of  which  no  one  desires  the  exclusive
rights.1  For  if  it  could  win  no  recognition,  it  would  so
far  not  work,  and  so  fail  to  be  '  true.'  It  is  easy  to  see,
therefore,  that  beings  who  live  socially  must  speedily
accumulate  large  bodies  of  what  they  take  to  be  '  objective  '
truth,  and  that  such  truth  must,  on  the  whole,  involve
and  facilitate  salutary  adjustments  of  action.  In  point
of  fact,  the  great  social  problem  is  not  how  to  control
the  individual  and  to  secure  conformity  with  existing
valuations,  but  how  to  secure  and  promote  the  individual
variations  which  initiate  improvements.

There  is,  therefore,  nothing  in  the  notion  that  the  two
supreme  maxims  of  Hellenic  wisdom,  Know  thyself,  and
Man  is  the  Measure,  are  in  conflict  with  each  other,
with  the  facts  of  life,  or  with  their  prosperous  manipula-
tion. They  yield,  at  any  rate,  a  better  guidance  and  a
saner  inspiration  for  man  than  the  unattainable  phantom
of  an  Ideal  which  exists  eternally,  immutably,  and
absolutely  for  itself.

1  Cp.  Humanism,  p.  58.


Ill

THE  RELATIONS  OF  LOGIC  AND
PSYCHOLOGY l

ARGUMENT

§  i .  Humanism  as  logical  '  psychologism. '  §  2.  It  is  beneficial  to  a  Logic
which  has  lapsed  into  scepticism,  because  it  has  abstracted  from  actual
knowing.  §  3.  Definition  of  Psychology  as  a  descriptive  science  of
concrete  mental  process.  It  can  recognise  cognitive  values  an '  claims,
though  §  4  Logic  must  evaluate  them,  and  thus  arises  out  of  Psychology.
Impossibility  of  forbidding  it  to  describe  cognitive  processes.  §  5.
Definition  of  Logic,  a  normative  science  arising  out  of  the  existence
of  false  claims.  §  6.  Interdependence  of  the  two  sciences.  The  risks
of  abstracting  from  any  psychical  fact.  §  7.  (l)  Thinking  depends
essentially  on  psychological  processes,  such  as  interest,  purpose,  emotion,
and  satisfaction.  §  8.  (2)  The  fundamental  '  logical '  conceptions,
'necessity,'  'certainty,'  'self-evidence,'  'truth'  are  primarily  psychical
facts.  '  Logical '  certainty  due  to  the  extension  of  potential  beyond
actual  purpose  in  thinking.  §  9.  (3)  The  fundamental  '  logical '  opera-
tions have  psychological  aspects.  E.g.  the  postulate  of  '  identity. '
Meaning  dependent  on  context  and  purpose.  The  actual  meaning  vs.
the  meaning  per  se.  The  problem  of  understanding.  The  '  logical '

1  The  necessity  of  treating  this  subject  from  a  Humanist  point  of  viesv  has
long  been  evident  to  me.  But  it  was  recently  borne  in  upon  me  with  peculiar
force  by  two  circumstances.  The  first  was  that  the  excellent  articles  on  '  Prag-
matism versus  Absolutism,'  published  by  Mr.  R.  F.  A.  Hoernle  in  Mind  (xiv.
N.S.  55  and  56),  though  giving  the  best  general  account  of  the  Pragmatic  move-
ment which  is  extant,  yet  seemed  to  imply  a  serious  misapprehension  of  the  con-
ception of  Psychology  which  we  are  bound  to  entertain.  Such  misapprehension,
however,  is  so  natural  and  pardonable,  so  long  as  no  formal  treatment  of  the
interrelations  of  Logic  and  Psychology  is  in  print,  that  it  seemed  imperative  to
attempt  its  removal.

Secondly,  being  called  upon  last  year  to  start  a  discussion  before  the  Aristo-
telian Society,  in  which  Professor  Bosanquet  and  Dr.  Hastings  Rashdall  also
consented  to  participate,  I  selected  the  question  whether  Logic  can  abstract  from
the  psychological  conditions  of  thinking.  The  discussion  which  ensued  will  be
found  in  the  Society's  Proceedings  for  1905-6,  and  though  it  was  rather  at  cross
purposes,  and  on  the  whole  illustrates  only  the  difficulty  philosophers  have  in
understanding  one  another,  it  enabled  me  to  realise  what  a  radical  difference
exists  between  the  Humanist  and  the  intellectualist  conceptions  of  these  sciences.
It  seemed  helpful,  therefore,  to  discuss  these  conceptions,  and  so  this  essay  is
based  in  part  on  the  '  symposium '  of  the  Aristotelian  Society.

71


72  STUDIES  IN  HUMANISM  m

abstractions  as  to  meaning  dangerous  and  false.  Judgment  an  inti-
mately personal  affair,  which  cannot  be  depersonalised,  and  is  naturally
related  to  questions  and  postulates.  §  10.  Can  even  desire  be
abstracted  from?  A  case  of  postulatory  reasoning  examined.  §  II.
As  meaning  always  depends  on  context,  and  context  on  personality,  is
Logic  entitled  to  abstract  from  the  knower's  personality?  §  12.  The
anti-psychological  standpoint  of  intellectualist  logic.  Its  assumptions.
(i)  'Pure,'  and  (2)  'independent'  thought.  (3)  '  Depersonalisa-
tion.'  (4)  The  separation  of  thinking  from  'willing'  and  'feeling.'
§  13.  Is  its  standpoint  descriptive  or  normative?  or  both  and  either?
§  14.  Incompetence  of  Logic  for  psychological  description :  its
unjust  encroachment  on  psychology  and  result,  §  15,  the  stultifica-
tion of  psychology  and  the  suicide  of  logic,  teste  Prof.  Bosanquet.
§  1 6.  The  great  abstraction  which  ruins  logic.  §  17.  '  Depersonalisa-
tion '  involves  abstraction  from  error,  which  must  yet  be  acknowledged
to  exist.  Mr.  Joachim's  confessions.  Hence  §  18  the  complete  break-
down of  intellectualist  logic,  owing  to  a  separation  of  the  ideal  and  the
human  which  renders  both  meaningless.  This  is  Plato's  old  error,
exemplified  in  the  Theaetetus.  §  19.  The  remedy  is  to  refrain  from
dehumanising  knowledge,  by  (l)  etherealising  it,  i.e.  abstracting  from
its  application,  and  (2)  depersonalising  it,  i.e.  abstracting  from  the
knower's  purpose.

§  i.  IT  will,  probably,  be  conceded  by  all  philosophers
that  the  sciences  are  all  (in  some  sense)  connected  with  one
another,  and  that  the  precise  way  in  which  their  connex-
ion is  conceived  will  depend  on  the  way  we  conceive  the
sciences  themselves.  It  will  hardly,  moreover,  be  disputed
that  since  the  definitions  of  a  growing  science  must  to  some
extent  change  with  the  growth  of  our  knowledge  of  the
data  of  that  science,  the  relations  of  such  sciences  to  each
other  cannot  be  immutable.  Consequently  it  may  be
inferred  with  some  confidence  that  the  Humanist  move-
ment must  have  introduced  some  modifications  and  novel-
ties into  our  conceptions  of  Logic  and  of  Psychology,  and
of  their  relations  to  each  other.  This  has,  indeed,  been
pretty  widely  recognised.  In  Germany,  for  example,  the
analogous  tendencies  are  commonly  described,  and  de-
nounced, as  '  Psychologism,'  and  if  '  Psychologism '  means
a  demand  that  the  psychical  facts  of  our  cognitive  func-
tioning shall  no  longer  be  treated  as  irrelevant  to  Logic,
it  is  clear,  both  that  Humanism  is  Psychologism,  and  that
the  demand  itself  is  thoroughly  legitimate,  and  not  to  be
dismissed  with  a  mere  nonpossumus.  For  when  Humanism
demands  that  philosophy  shall  start  from,  and  satisfy,  the
whole  man  in  his  full  concreteness,  and  not  exclusively


in  LOGIC  AND  PSYCHOLOGY  73

concern  itself  with  a  sort  of  elegant  extract,  a  highly
perfumed  and  sophisticated  '  essence '  of  man,  dubbed  '  the
rational  intelligence,'  there  is  certainly  included  in  its
demand  a  much  greater  respect  for  the  actual  procedures
of  human  cognition  and  a  much  less  easy-going  acceptance
of  petrified  conventions  than  the  traditional  Logic  will
find  at  all  convenient.

§  2.  And  yet  a  sincere  attempt  to  comply  with  the
demands  made  upon  it,  whether  in  the  name  of  Psycho-
logy or  of  Humanity,  would  do  Logic  no  harm.  Nay,  it
might  even  prove  its  salvation.  For  its  present  condition
is  anything  but  a  happy  one.  It  has  lapsed  into  an
impotent  scepticism,  which  is  irremediable  so  long  as  it
cannot,  or  will  not,  emancipate  itself  from  intellectualistic
presuppositions  which  render  actual  knowing  inherently
'  irrational.'  So  it  has  been  forced  practically  to  abandon
the  attempt  to  account  for  knowing.  It  has  been  driven
to  represent  the  processes  by  which  de  facto  knowledge
is  increased  as  logically  invalid.  Predication  has  become
for  it  a  puzzle,  inference  a  paradox,  proof  an  impossibility,1
discovery  a  wonder,  change  a  contradiction,  temporal
succession  incompatible  with  Science  (which  all  the  while
is  busily  engaged  with  predicting  the  future !),  indivi-
duality an  irrelevance,  experience  an  impertinence,  sensa-
tion a  piece  of  unmeaning  nonsense,  thinking  '  extra-
logical,'  and  so  forth  and  so  on.  After  delivering  itself
of  these  valuable  '  criticisms '  of  our  ordinary  cognitive
procedures,  it  has  retired  into  an  '  ideal '  world  of  its  own
invention,  out  of  space,  out  of  time,  out  of  sight  (and
almost  out  of  mind  !),  where  it  employs  its  ample  leisure
with  studying  '  types '  that  never  lived  on  land  or  sea,  and
constructing  a  hortus  siccus  of  '  forms,'  and  compiling
unworkable  '  systems,'  and  concocting  unrealisable  '  ideals,'
of  '  Thought,'  all  of  which  have  about  as  much  relation  to
actual  knowing  and  to  human  truth  as  the  man  in  the
moon  !  But  even  in  its  supra-sensible  asylum  the  Erinyes
of  the  Reality  it  has  abandoned  and  betrayed  pursue  it ;

See  Prof.  Case's  article  on  '  Logic '  in  the  Encyclopedia  Britannica  (loth  ed.
.  338)  for  a  lucid  exposition  of  this  situation,  with  some  excellent  comments.


74  STUDIES  IN HUMANISM  ni

it  cannot  manipulate  to  its  satisfaction  even  the  figments
and  phantoms  of  the  imaginary  world  which  haunt  it.
Its  '  forms '  do  not  afford  it  aesthetic  satisfaction  ;  its
'  types  '  are  broken  before  ever  they  are  used  ;  its '  systems  '
will  not  hold  together  ;  its  '  ideals '  decline  to  be  harmoni-
ous. In  vain  does  it  cry  out  to  metaphysics  to  save  it
from  imminent  collapse  into  the  abyss  of  scepticism  ;
its  cognate  metaphysics  have  abundant  troubles  of  their
own,  and  are  even  more  hopelessly  involved  in  morasses
that  border  the  brink  of  the  pit ;  they  find,  moreover,  all
the  sciences  beset  by  similar  distresses,  and  can  vouchsafe
no  answer  save  that  the  Real,  at  all  events,  does  not
•appear,  nor  can  what  appears  be  real.

In  such  a  desperate  plight  it  is  surely  not  unbecoming
to  approach  the  logician  with  the  suggestion  that  his
troubles  may  be  largely  of  his  own  making,  that  possibly
his  conception  of  Logic  is  at  fault  and  capable  of  amend-
ment, and  to  point  out  to  him  that  after  all  what  he
originally  undertook  to  do,  but  has  now  apparently  quite
forgotten,  was  to  provide  a  reasoned  theory  of  actual
knowing,  that  the  existence  of  such  actual  knowing  is  an
empirical  fact  which  is  not  abolished  by  his  failure  to
understand  it,  that  this  fact  constitutes  his  datum  and  his
raison  d'etre,  that  he  may  as  well  accept  it  as  the  touch-
stone of  his  theories,  and  that  it  is  the  '  ideals  of  thought '
which  must  be  accounted  wrong  if  they  cannot  be  rendered
compatible  with  the  facts  which  formed  their  basis.  He
may  at  least  be  called  upon  to  consider  the  possibility
that,  if  he  consents  to  start  from  actual  knowing,  and
refrains  from  welcoming  '  ideals '  until  they  have  been
authenticated  by  their  connexion  with  the  facts  and  veri-
fied by  their  working  when  applied,  he  may  reach  an
altogether  more  profitable  and  effective  conception  of
Logic  than  that  which  is  falling  to  pieces.

§  3.  Let  us  make  bold,  then,  to  re-define  our  sciences
and  to  re-conceive  their  relations.

And  first  of  all  let  us  consider  the  wider  and  lower  of
these  sciences,  to  wit  Psychology.  Without  concerning
ourselves  with  the  questions  as  to  how  far  Psychology  is,  or


in  LOGIC  AND  PSYCHOLOGY  75

may  be,  experimental  or  explanatory,  and  even  as  to  how  far
its  descriptions  should  be  '  functional '  rather  than  '  struc-
tural,' as  not  affecting  our  present  purpose,  we  may  most
conveniently  conceive  it  at  present  as  a  descriptive  science,
whose  aim  is  the  description  of  mental  process  as  such.
It  is  implied  in  this,  and  hardly  in  need  of  explicit  state-
ment, that  the  mental  processes  of  individual  minds  are
intended.  For  we  cannot  experience  or  observe  mental
processes  in  any  other  way.  Still  it  is  worth  noting  that,
in  this  implication,  Psychology  gives  us  a  very  necessary
guarantee  that  it  will  do  justice  to  the  concreteness  of
the  actual  human  soul ;  so  far,  at  least,  as  the  necessary
abstraction  of  its  standpoint  consequent  on  the  limitation
of  its  purpose  permits  it  to  do.

The  definition  we  have  adopted  clearly  assigns  to
Psychology  a  very  extensive  field  of  operations — prac-
tically the  whole  realm  of  direct  experience.  It  recognises
a  psychological  side  also  to  everything  that  can  be  known,
inasmuch  as  everything  known  to  exist  must  be  connected
with  our  experience,  and  known  by  a  psychical  process.
In  so  far  as  any  real  is  known,  a  process  of  experiencing
is  involved  in  it,  and  this  process  appertains  to  the  science
of  Psychology.  Thus  all  physical  objects  and  questions
become  psychological,  so  soon  as  we  ask  how  they  can  be
experienced,  and  whether  the  psychical  process  of  experi-
encing them  warrants  our  claiming  for  them  an  '  objective
reality.'  In  some  cases,  as  e.g.  with  regard  to  the  exist-
ence of  sea-serpents,  N-rays,  and  ghosts,  the  question
about  the  '  reality '  of  these  objects  is  really  one  as  to
whether  the  psychological  treatment  does  not  exhaust
their  significance,  or  whether  the  psychical  processes  are
such  as  to  justify  our  interpreting  them  as  indicative  of
'  objective  reality.'

Now  among  mental  processes  those  which  may  be
called  '  cognitive '  are  very  common  and  predominant,  and
therefore  the  description  of  cognitive  process  will  properly
fall  into  the  province  of  Psychology.  It  stands  to  reason,
moreover,  that  it  must  be  described  as  it  occurs,  and
without  arbitrary  attempts  at  reserving  some  of  its  aspects


76  STUDIES IN HUMANISM  m

for  the  exclusive  consideration  of  another  science.  Now,
as  cognitive  process  is  naturally  productive  of  '  knowledge,'
and  valuable  as  such,  it  follows  that  cognitive  values  are
properly  subject  to  psychological  description.  Mental
Life  is,  naturally  and  in  point  of  fact,  packed  with  values
ethical,  aesthetical,  and  cognitive  ('  logical '),  of  which  it  is
the  vehicle.1  It  is  the  plain  duty,  therefore,  of  Psychology
to  record  this  fact,  and  to  describe  these  values.  Cogni-
tive values,  as  psychical  occurrences,  are  facts  for  Psycho-
logy. It  is  their  specific  character  which  subsequently
renders  them  subjects  for  Logic.  Their  specific  character
is  that  they  are  claims  to  truth,  and  employ  the  predicates
'  true '  and  '  false ' ;  precisely,  e.g.  as  ethical  judgments  use
the  predicates  '  right '  and  '  wrong.'

The  special  value,  however,  of  these  specific  valuations
and  their  functions  in  the  organisation  of  Life  form  no
part  of  the  purpose  of  Psychology.  Having  a  merely
descriptive  purpose,  it  is  content  to  record  all  values
merely  as  made,  and  as  facts.  Thus  it  is  psychologically
relevant  to  recognise  that  the  predication  of  '  true '  and
'  false '  occurs,  and  that  what  A  judges  '  true,'  B  may
judge  to  be  '  false.'  But  it  is  psychologically  indifferent
that  A  is  a  much  better  judge  than  B.  Psychology,  that
is,  does  not  seek  to  evaluate  these  claims,  to  decide  which
is  really  '  right,'  or  what  is  really  '  true ' ;  still  less  to  frame
generalisations  as  to  how  in  general  claims  are  to  be  sus-
tained, and  humanly  valid  judgments  to  be  attained.  All
processes  of  immanently  and  reciprocally  criticising,
systematising,  harmonising,  and  utilising  the  claims
actually  made  fall  as  such  without  its  purpose  :  they  are
the  business  of  Logic.

§  4.  The  relation  of  the  two  sciences  to  cognitive  process,
and  to  each  other,  is  thus  quite  simple.  Yet  it  has  been
woefully  misunderstood.  Thus  it  is  commonly  asserted
that  Psychology  does  not  recognise  values,  nor  Logic  care
about  psychical  existence.  Yet  if  so,  how  could  values  enter
human  minds,  and  how  could  truths  ever  become  facts  ? 2

1  Cp.  Humanism,  p.  163.

2  No  one,  probably,  has  given  greater  currency  to  this  fallacious  notion  than


in  LOGIC  AND  PSYCHOLOGY  77

Still  more  extraordinary  is  the  assumption  that  Psy-
chology is  not  to  describe  values.  Yet  this  assumption  is
made  without  the  least  consciousness  of  its  monstrosity,  and
without  the  slightest  attempt  to  defend  it,  as  if  it  were
self-evident,  by  writers  of  repute.  Dr.  Hastings  Rashdall
gravely  assures  us  that  "  the  Psychologist  .  .  .  knows
nothing  of  the  truth  or  falsity  of  judgments."  l  And  even
Mr.  Hoernle  takes  it  for  granted 2  that  "  truth,  in  fact,  is  not
an  object  of  inquiry  to  Psychology  at  all.  That  certain
of  the  mental  processes  which  it  studies  have  the  further
character  of  being 3  true  or  false,  is,  for  Psychology,  an
accident,"  and  infers  that  "  this  inability  to  deal  with
validity  seems  to  beset  all  psychologies  alike."  This
arbitrary  restriction  on  the  functions  of  Psychology  is  no
doubt  in  the  interest  of  an  impracticable  conception  of
Logic,  which  instinctively  seeks  to  reduce  Psychology  to
an  equal  or  greater  futility ;  but  we,  assuredly,  can  have
no  reason  to  accept  it.

For  us  the  function  of  Logic  develops  continuously,
rationally,  and  without  antagonism,  out  of  that  of
Psychology.  Cognitive  values  and  claims  to  truth  exist

Mr.  Bradley,  by  the  sharp  contrast  he  drew  in  his  Logic  (ch.  i.  e.g.  pp.  7,  8,  and
p.  526)  between  the  validity  of  the  '  idea '  (  =  concept)  and  the  psychical  existence
of  the  'idea'  (  =  mental  image).  It  has,  unfortunately,  not  been  as  extensively
recognised  that  his  remark  in  Appearance  and  Reality  (p.  51),  that  "it  is  not
wholly  true  that  'ideas  are  not  what  they  mean,'  for  if  their  meaning  is  not
psychical  fact,  I  should  like  to  know  how  and  where  it  exists,"  is,  inter  alia,  a
scornful  self-correction.

Prof.  Bosanquet  (Logic,  i.  p.  5)  declares  that  "in  considering  an  idea  as  a
psychical  occurrence  we  abstract  from  its  meaning"  ;  but  ibid.  ii.  p.  16  «. ,  he
advocates  the  remarkable  doctrine  that  ' '  when  psychical  images  come  to  be
employed  for  the  sake  of  a  meaning  which  they  convey,  they  ex  hypothesi  are
not  treated  as  fact.  And  their  meaning  is  not  itself  a  psychical  fact,  but  is  an
intellectual  activity  which  can  only  enter  into  fact  by  being  used  to  qualify
reality."  This  is  sufficiently  oracular,  and  it  would  be  interesting  to  hear  the
reasons  why  Psychology  should  be  debarred  from  recognising  '  intellectual
activities '  as  psychical  facts.

1  Arist.  Soc.  Proc.,  1905-6,  p.  249.

J  Mind,  xiv.  p.  473.

3  This  should  be  ' claiming  to  be'  \  for  no  one  supposes  that  Psychology  is
concerned  with  the  decision  between  conflicting  claims  to  truth.  Whether  what
claims  to  be  true  really  is  true,  is  admittedly  left  to  Logic.  Here,  however,  it
seems  to  be  argued  that  because  Psychology  cannot  decide  between  claims,  it  may
not  even  register  them,  nor  describe  cognitive  values.  I  fear  that  Mr.  Hoernle
throughout  has  not  steered  quite  clear  of  the  confusion  between  claim  (psycho-
logical fact)  and  validation  (logical  fact),  which  so  effectively  vitiates  the  intel-
lectualistic  theories  of  truth.  For  the  distinction  see  Essay  v. ,  especially  §  i.


78  STUDIES IN  HUMANISM  m

as  empirical  facts.  If  they  were  all  indefeasible,  con-
gruous, and  compatible  with  each  other,  as,  e.g.  my  having
a  toothache  is  compatible  with  your  not  having  one,  there
would  be  no  ground  for  a  further  science.  But  in  point
of  fact  false  claims  to  truth  are  commoner  than  valid  ones,
and  they  not  only  conflict  with  '  the  truth,'  but  also  with
each  other,  so  that  the  problem  of  error  cries  out  for
further  treatment.

§  5.  There  is  need,  therefore,  for  a  discipline  which
will  evaluate  these  claims,  and  try  to  determine  the  various
degrees  of  validity  and  trustworthiness  which  may  be
assigned  to  them.  Logic  is  the  traditional  name  for  the
science  which  undertakes  this  function.  It  may  be  defined
as  the  systematic  evaluation  of  actual  knowing.  It  is  a
normative  science,  because  it  not  only  records,  but  pre-
scribes ;  it  reflects  on  the  claims  actually  made,  and
prescribes  methods  for  their  evaluation.  But  its  norma-
tive function  arises  quite  naturally  out  of  our  actual
procedures,  from  the  observation  that  some  cognitive
processes  are  in  point  of  fact  more  valuable,  and  from
the  necessity  of  selecting  the  more  valuable  among  con-
flicting claims.  Thus  the  need  for  Logic,  its  genesis  and
its  procedures,  all  seem  to  be  essentially  empirical,  and  it
is  quite  conceivable  that  no  special  science  of  Logic  should
ever  have  arisen.  If  all  claims  were  ipso  facto  true  and
valid,  if  we  had  never  been  confronted  with  conflicting
claims  or  driven  by  our  'errors'  to  rescind  our  first
assertions,  what  need  were  there  for  Logic  ?  Our  attention
would  never  be  called  to  the  problem  of  values,  our  primary
attributions  would  stand,  and  no  superior  science  would  be
devised  to  adjudicate  between  conflicting  judgments.

As  it  is,  the  natural  process  has  to  be  regulated  and
controlled,  and  so  falls  a  prey  to  two  sciences.  The  same
cognitive  values  occur  twice  over,  first  in  Psychology  as  so
many  facts,  then  in  Logic,  as  subjects  for  critical  evalua-
tion. Nor  is  it  difficult  to  understand  how  two  sciences
can  work  over  the  same  ground  :  they  cultivate  it  with  a
different  purpose,  and  so  raise  different  crops.

§  6.  It  is  manifest,  moreover,  that  the  two  sciences  must


in  LOGIC  AND  PSYCHOLOGY  79

work  together  hand  in  glove.  Logic  requires  trustworthy
descriptions  of  cognitive  happenings  before  it  can  evaluate
them  with  safety  ;  for  these  it  should  be  able  to  rely  on
the  co-operation  of  Psychology.  In  other  words,  the
collection  and  preparation  of  the  material  which  the
logician  proposes  to  use  is  essentially  a  psychological
function,  alike  whether  it  is  performed  by  a  psychologist
who  bears  in  mind  the  need  of  Logic  and  the  needs  of
Logic,  or  whether  the  logician  is  enough  of  a  psychologist
to  do  it  for  himself.  In  the  latter  case  he  resembles  a
painter  who,  like  those  of  old,  makes  and  mixes  his  own
colours  ;  the  logician,  on  the  other  hand,  who  proposes  to
dispense  with  the  aid  of  Psychology  is  like  a  painter  who
will  not  use  anything  so  gross  as  colours  wherewithal  to
paint  his  '  ideal '  pictures.

Thus  Logic  and  Psychology,  though  perfectly  distinct,
are  perfectly  inseparable.  And,  moreover,  it  is  because
they  are  so  intimately  related  that  they  must  be  so  sharply
distinguished,  and  because  they  have  been  so  clearly  dis-
tinguished that  they  can  be  so  closely  connected.  It  is
practically  impossible  to  exaggerate  the  intimacy  of  their
relations.  Nothing  psychological  can  be  affirmed  a  priori
to  be  irrelevant  to  Logic.  The  logician,  no  doubt,  from
motives  of  practical  convenience  or  necessity,  often  abstracts
provisionally  from  trivial  characteristics  of  the  actual  psychic
process  ;  but,  except  in  cases  where  he  has  learnt  from  ex-
perience what  features  are  unessential  and  may  safely  be
neglected,  he  always  takes  a  certain  risk  in  so  doing.
Now  this  risk  may  be  fatal  to  the  validity  of  his  argument,
and  in  any  case  impairs  its  theoretical  exactness.  The
formal  logician,  therefore,  can  never,  as  such,  claim  to  be
the  final  judge  of  the  value  of  any  argument.  He  can
never  by  his  '  rules '  preclude  the  examination  of  its
'  material '  worth  ;  however  formally  perfect  the  syllogism
which  expresses  it,  a  fatal  flaw  may  lurk  in  its  actual
application  ;  however  grotesque  its  formal  fallacy,  a  road
to  truth  may  be  barred  by  its  rejection.  If  he  is  wise,
therefore,  he  will  not  magnify  his  office  of  reminding
reasoners  of  what  they  are  about,  and  of  how  far  their


8o  STUDIES IN HUMANISM  m

reasonings  are  attaining  the  ends  they  aim  at.  Thus  the
burden  of  proof,  at  any  rate,  lies  on  those  who  affirm  that
the  logician  may  assume  the  irrelevance  of  any  psychic
fact.

Nay,  more.  One  never  can  tell  whether  the  proper
answer  to  a  '  logical '  claim  does  not  lie  in  the  psycho-
logical domain,  and  take  the  form  of  a  psychological
explanation.  Thus  a  claim  to  have  discovered  the
secret  of  the  universe  is  not  usually  met  by  a  '  logical '
refutation,  but  by  an  inquiry  into  the  assertor's  '  state  of
mind,'  and  the  revelations  of  mystic  ecstasies  are  treated
as  exhibitions  of  mental  pathology.  We  know,  in  short,
that  it  is  folly  to  reason  with  the  mentally  deranged,  and
that,  even  in  dealing  with  the  sane,  it  is  usually  more
effective  to  persuade  than  to  convince.

We  may  take  it,  therefore,  that  the  logician's  ignoring
of  Psychology,  and  abstracting  from  the  psychical  con-
comitants of  actual  thinking,  can  only  be  very  hazardous
affairs,  which  must  be  understood  to  be  strictly  conditioned
and  limited  by  the  requirements  of  his  temporary  purpose.
When  the  logician  really  knows  what  he  is  about  he  does
not  intend  them  to  be  more  than  provisional,  nor  dream
of  transcending  human  experience  by  their  aid.  Unfortun-
ately, however,  this  simple  situation  has  been  misappre-
hended so  long,  and  so  profoundly,  that  it  is  imperative  to
set  forth  in  greater  detail  the  thoroughgoing  dependence
of  Logic  on  psychological  assistance.  We  shall  do  well,
therefore,  to  show  (i)  that  without  processes  which  are
admittedly  psychological  the  occurrence  of  cognition,  and
even  of  thinking,  is  impossible  ;  (2)  that  all  the  processes,
which  are  regarded  as  essentially  and  peculiarly  '  logical,'
have  a  well-marked  psychological  side  to  them,  and  that
their  logical  treatment  develops  continuously  out  of  their
psychological  nature.

§  7.  (i)  All  actual  thinking  appears  to  be  inherently
conditioned  throughout  by  processes  which  even  the
most  grasping  logician  must  conceive  as  specifically
psychological.  It  is  difficult  to  see,  therefore,  on  what
principle  logic  has  any  business  to  ignore  them,  and  to


Ill


LOGIC  AND  PSYCHOLOGY  81


claim  to  be  '  independent '  of  what  must  influence  its
own  structures  in  every  fibre.  At  any  rate  the  onus
probandi  would  seem  to  lie  on  those  who  affirm  that
these  correlated  and  interpenetrating  processes  do  not
influence  each  other,  and  that,  therefore,  their  psychical
nature  may  be  treated  as  logically  irrelevant.  Without,
however,  standing  on  ceremony,  let  us  show  by  actual
examples  that  our  thinking  depends  for  its  very  existence
on  the  presence  in  it  of  (a)  interest,  (£)  purpose,  (c}
emotion,  (d)  satisfaction,  and  that  the  word  '  thought '
would  cease  to  convey  any  meaning  if  these  were  really
and  rigidly  abstracted  from.

(a)  Where  can  we  discover  anything  deserving  of  the
name  of  thought  which  is  not  actuated  by  psychological
interest  ?  To  affirm  this,  moreover,  seems  merely  a
truism.  It  is  merely  to  deny  that  thinking  is  a
mechanical  process  like,  e.g.  gravitation.  It  is  to  assert
that  the  processes  during  which  the  course  of  conscious-
ness comes  nearest  to  being  a  purposeless  flux  of  mental
images  are  most  remote  from  cognition.  It  is  to  deny
that  thinking  proceeds  without  a  motive  and  without
an  aim,  and  to  assert  that,  in  proportion  as  interest  grows
more  disciplined  and  concentrated,  thought  becomes  more
vigorous  and  more  definitely  purposive.

The  only  way  of  contesting  our  inference  would  seem
to  be  to  affirm  that  the  specifically  logical  interest  is
sui  generis,  and  not  to  be  confounded  with  the  common
herd  of  its  psychological  congeners.1  This  contention,
however,  we  must  regard  as  merely  an  arbitrary  fiat.  It
is  merely  a  refusal  to  let  Psychology  describe  all  interests
as  such.  And  this  refusal  can  only  be  prompted  by
ulterior  motives.  Moreover,  even  if  the  allegiance  this
special  interest  owes  to  Logic  exempted  it  from  psycho-

1  This  I  take  to  be  the  meaning  of  Prof.  Bosanquet's  remarks  in  Arist.
Soc.  Proc.  1905-6,  p.  238.  He  insists  that  it  can  either  be  "adequately  in-
vestigated within  the  bounds  of  logic  proper,"  so  as  to  leave  nothing  for  "a
further  scrutiny  of  these  phenomena  as  purely  psychical  disturbances,"  or  that
the  common  psychological  element  can  make  no  specific  difference  in  the  logical
interest.  But  how,  as  a  logician,  is  he  to  know  all  this?  And  how  if  the
psychologists  dispute  this  claim  ?  He  is  setting  up  as  a  judge  in  a  case  to  which
he  is  a  party.

G


82  STUDIES IN HUMANISM  m

logical  description,  it  could  do  so  only  qua  its  specific
nature.  As  an  interest  it  would  still  fall  into  the  province
of  the  science  which  describes  the  generic  nature  of
interests.  Lastly,  a  Humanist  Logic  can  recognise  no
reasons  for  relegating  the  cognitive  interest  to  a  world
apart,  as  if  it  were  unconcerned  with  life  and  dissociated
from  personality.  On  all  these  grounds,  then,  we  must
repudiate  the  claim  that  a  thought  which  depends  on
interest  can  be  independent  of  Psychology.

(#)  Purpose  may  be  conceived  as  a  concentration  of
interest,  and  thinking  must  be  conceived  as  essentially
purposive,  and  as  the  more  consciously  so,  the  more
efficient  it  grows.  Whenever  Logic,  therefore,  seeks  to
represent  the  actual  nature  of  thinking,  it  can  never  treat
of  '  the  meaning '  of  propositions  in  the  abstract.  It
must  note  that  the  meaning  depends  on  the  use,  and  the
use  on  the  user's  purpose.  Now  this  purpose  is  primarily
a  question  of  psychical  fact,  which  admits  of  being
psychologically  determined,  and  which  no  theory  can
safely  ignore.  If  we  attribute  to  logical  rules  a  sort  of
inherent  validity,  a  sort  of  discarnate  existence  apart  from
their  application  to  cases  of  actual  thinking,  we  reduce
them  to  phantoms  as  futile  as  they  are  unintelligible.

(c)  Emotion  accompanies  actual  cognition  as  a  shadow
does  light.  Even  so  unexciting  an  operation  as  counting  has
an  emotional  tone.  The  effect  of  this  emotional  tone  seems
to  be  various,  but  may  be  salutary  ;  we  can  often  observe
how  love  and  hate  inspire  men  with  an  insight  to  which
the  fish-like  eye  of  cold  indifference  could  never  penetrate.
It  need  not  be  denied,  however,  that  in  some  people  and
in  some  forms  it  may  have  a  hurtful  effect  on  the  value
of  the  cognitive  results.  But  this  must  be  shown,  and
cannot  be  assumed,  in  any  given  case.  And  its  alleged
hurtfulness  is  no  reason  for  denying  the  existence  of  this
emotional  bias,  except  to  those  who  are  very  far  gone  in
that  application  of  '  Christian  Science '  to  philosophy
which  declares  all  evil  to  be  '  appearance.'  Our  only
chance  of  counteracting  emotional  bias,  moreover,  lies  in
admitting  its  existence.


in  LOGIC  AND  PSYCHOLOGY  83

(d)  If  a  feeling  of  satisfaction  did  not  occur  in  cognitive
processes  the  attainment  of  truth  would  not  be  felt  to
have  value.  In  point  of  fact  such  satisfactions  super-
vene on  every  step  in  reasoning.  Without  them,  logical
"  necessity,"  "  cogency,"  and  "  insight "  would  become
meaningless  words.

It  seems  clear,  therefore,  that  without  these  psycho-
logical conditions  which  have  been  mentioned,  thinking
disappears,  and  with  it,  presumably,  Logic.1  They  can-
not, therefore,  be  dispensed  with.  Purpose,  interest,  desire,
emotion,  satisfaction,  are  more  essential  to  thinking  than
steam  is  to  a  steam-engine.

§  8.  (2)  The  most  fundamental  conceptions  of  Logic,
like  '  necessity,'  '  certainty,'  '  self -evidence,'  '  truth,'  are
primarily  descriptions  of  processes  which  are  psychical
facts.  They  are  inseparably  accompanied  by  specific
psychical  feelings.  What  is  called  their  '  strictly  logical '
sense  is  continuous  with  their  psychological  senses,  and
whenever  this  connexion  is  really  broken  off,  its  meaning
simply  disappears.  This  need  not  here  be  set  forth  at
length.  The  logician's  embarrassments  in  discriminating
'  logical '  from  '  psychological '  necessity 2  and  self-evidence
are  well  known.  It  is  also  beginning  to  be  clear  that
he  had  not,  until  the  pragmatic  controversy  arose,  ever
seriously  considered  what  was  the  nature  of  truth- pre-
dication as  a  psychic  process.

But  the  conception  of  '  certainty '  is  often  considered
the  essential  differentia  of  logical  thought,  and,  therefore,
may  deserve  a  brief  discussion.  Every  one,  of  course,
would  have  to  admit  that  all  '  certainty '  in  its  actual
occurrence  was  accompanied  by  a  psychical  feeling  of
certainty  in  various  degrees  of  intensity.  An  appeal
might,  however,  be  made  to  the  distinction  of  '  logical '
and  '  psychological '  certainty.  Psychological  certainty,
we  commonly  say,  is  '  subjective,'  and  exists  for  in-
dividuals ;  '  logical '  certainty  is  '  objective,'  and  imposed

1  Some  symbolic  logicians, however, would  seem to  regard thinking, i.e.
judging  and  inferring,  as  so  inherently  psychological  as  to  be  extra-logical.
•  Cp.  Personal  Idealism,  p.  70  n.


84  STUDIES IN HUMANISM  m

on  intelligence  as  such.  Again,  psychological  certainty
may  set  in  long  before  logical  proof  is  complete,  often
long  before  it  ought ;  and  conversely  our  psychological
stupidity  may  rebel  against  mathematically  demonstrated
truths.  From  these  current  distinctions  the  logician  is
apt  to  infer  that  psychological  and  logical  certainty  have
really  nothing  to  do  with  each  other  and  ought  not  to  be
confused.  But  if  this  be  true,  why  are  they  both  called
by  the  same  name  ?  Surely,  if  logicians  wished  to  keep
them  apart  and  could  afford  to  do  so,  they  could  label
them  differently.  That  they  have  not  done  so  is  a
strong  presumption  that  it  is  impracticable.

Indeed,  the  truth  would  seem  to  be,  (a)  that  if  the
feeling  of  certainty  is  eliminated  the  word  becomes  un-
meaning, and  (b}  that  '  logical '  is  quite  continuous  with
psychological  certainty.  The  notion  of  '  logical '  certainty
arises  from  the  extension  of  potential  beyond  actual
purpose  in  thinking.  We  actually  stop  at  the  point  at
which  we  psychologically  are  satisfied  and  willing  to
accept  a  claim  to  truth  as  good  ;  but  we  can  sometimes
conceive  ulterior  purposes  which  would  require  further
confirmation,  and  other  minds  that  would  be  satisfied  less
easily.  This  engenders  the  ideal  of  a  complete  '  logical '
proof  transcending  that  which  is  good  enough  for  us,  and
capable  of  compelling  the  assent  of  all  intelligences.  But
even  if  it  could  be  attained,  its  certainty  would  still  be
psychological,  as  certainly  psychological  as  is  our  capacity
to  project  the  ideal.  Both  are  dependent  on  the  actual
powers  of  individual  minds.  Thus  for  the  moment
mathematical  demonstration  seems  to  satisfy  the  logical
ideal  of  most  intellectualist  logicians,  and  is  praised  as
absolutely  certain.  But  that  they  think  it  so  is  merely
psychical  fact.  For  the  reason  simply  is  that  so  far  they
do  not  seem  to  have  psychologically  conceived  the  thought
of  varying  the  postulates  on  which  such  demonstration
rests.  If  they  had  recognised  the  hypothetical  basis  of
mathematical  certainty,  they  could  conceive  something
more  '  certain.'

§  9.  The  fundamental  logical  operations,  like  meaning,


in  LOGIC  AND  PSYCHOLOGY  85

conceiving,  discriminating,  identifying,  judging,  inferring, all
have  psychological  aspects,  and  could  not  come  about  by
'  pure  '  thought.  I  have  suggested  elsewhere  1  that  logical
identity  is  always  a  postulate.  It  should  be  stated  as  that
'  what  I  will  shall  mean  the  same,  is  (so  far}  the  same'
And  by  '  the  same '  I  do  not  mean  indistinguishable
(though  this  criterion  too  rests  on  a  psychological  property)
as  Mr.  Bradley  does  in  what  he  considers  "  the  indis-
putable basis  of  all  reasoning,"  the  axiom  that  "  what
seems  the  same  is  the  same"  which  he  himself  calls  " a
monstrous  assumption."2  Logical  identity  emphatically
does  not  rest  on  an  easy  acquiescence  in  appearances  or
psychical  carelessness  about  noticing  differences.  It  is
a  conscious  act  of  purposive  thinking,  performed  in  spite
of  observed  differences.  '  The  same '  means  a  claim,  that
for  our  purposes  these  differences  may  be  ignored,  and
the  two  terms  treated  alike.

The  principle,  therefore,  is  not  mere  psychological  fact,
carrying  no  logical  consequences.  Nor  certainly  is  it  a
mere  tautology,  '  A  is  A.'  It  is  ultimately  one  of  the
devices  we  have  hit  upon  for  dealing  -with  our  experience.
As  such  it  may  be  supposed  to  have  passed  through  an
experimental  stage  as  a  mere  postulate  ;  and  even  now  a
certain  risk  remains  inherent  in  its  use.  That  there  shall
be  identity  we  have  good  grounds  for  insisting,  but  our
claim  that  any  A  is  A  may  often  be  frustrated.  That
therefore  every  attempted  '  identification '  should  come
true,  would  be  the  experience  only  of  an  omnipotent
being,  whose  volitions  the  course  of  events  could  never
contravene.  Only  to  such  a  being  (if  such  can  be
conceived)  would  it  be  self -evidently,  invariably,  and
'  necessarily  '  true  that  '  A  is  A  '  ;  in  our  human  thinking
the  identities  we  select  may  prove  to  be  mistaken.  Thus
the  validity  of  the  principle  in  the  abstract  in  no  wise
guarantees  its  validity  in  its  actual  use,  or  its  application
to  any  particular  case.  But  on  the  whole  the  principle
is  valuable  enough  for  us  to  ascribe  our  failures,  not  to

1  Personal  Idealism,  pp.  94-104.
2  Principles  of  Logic,  p.  264.


86  STUDIES IN HUMANISM  m

its  inapplicability  to  our  world,  but  to  our  own  stupidity
in  selecting  the  '  wrong '  identities.

Meaning  is  a  psychical  fact  which  should  have  great
interest  for  Psychology.  It  is  also  a  fundamental  function
for  Logic.  But  unfortunately  intellectualist  logicians,  by
abstracting  too  easily  from  its  concrete  nature  as  a
psychical  process,  have  involved  the  whole  subject  in
confusion  and  completely  obscured  the  problem  of  under-
standing.

As  we  saw  in  Essay  i.  §  2,  meaning  depends  upon
purpose,  i.e.  upon  context,  as  the  purpose  lies  in  the  con-
text. Now  that  context  is  of  logical  importance  is,  in  a
manner,  recognised.  But  this  recognition  takes  the  form
of  asserting  that  the  meaning  (and  truth)  of  an  assertion
depends  on  the  totality  of  knowledge  ;  and  this  at  once
rules  out  human  knowledge.  For  as  we  cannot  know
this  totality,  if  meaning  depends  on  this,  it  is  impossible.
This  interpretation  of  context,  however,  is  quite  false.
Meaning  is  not  in  the  first  instance  logical  at  all,  but
psychological.  It  is  primarily  a  question  of  what  the
person  who  made  the  assertion  actually  meant.  And  as,
of  course,  the  whole  of  his  concrete  personality  went  to  the
making  of  the  assertion,  and  contributed  to  his  actual
meaning,  a  case  must  be  made  out  for  its  mutilation
by  '  Logic.'  The  next  question  is  the  problem  of  the
'  understanding '  or  transference  of  the  meaning.  We
have  to  discover  not  merely  what  the  assertor  meant,  but
also  how  he  was  understood.  The  inherent  difficulty  of
this  problem,  to  which  since  the  days  of  Gorgias  '  logic '
has  paid  little  heed,  lies  in  this  that  practically  meaning
must  be  transferred  by  verbal  symbols,  and  conveyed  in
'  propositions.'  But  such  propositions  must  always  be
ambiguous.  They  may  mean  whatever  they  can  be
used  to  mean.  They  are  blank  forms  to  be  filled  up
with  concrete  meanings  according  to  requirements.  They
afford,  therefore,  no  security  that  the  meaning  which  they
are  taken  as  conveying  is  identical  with  that  which  they
were  intended  to  convey.  Until  we  have  assured  our-
selves of  this,  it  is  vain  to  discuss  '  the  meaning '  of  the


m  LOGIC  AND  PSYCHOLOGY  87

assertion,  or  to  attempt  its  logical  evaluation.  Conse-
quently the  logical  treatment  of  meaning  is  meaningless,
until  these  psychological  preliminaries  have  been  settled.

What  now  is  the  way  in  which  these  matters  have
been  treated  by  '  Logic '  ?  It  has  made  a  series  of
monstrous  abstractions,  which  break  down  as  soon  as
they  are  applied  to  the  facts  of  actual  knowing.

(i)  It  has  abstracted  from  context,  i.e.  from  the
actual  context  in  which  the  assertion  was  made  and
tried  to  convey  its  meaning,  as  being  psychological  and
irrelevant.  This  is  a  gigantic  blunder,  after  which  it  is
vain  to  seek  to  provide  for  the  '  logical '  relevance  of
context.  For  the  '  logical '  context  never  recovers  its  full
concreteness,  and  so  can  never  guarantee  to  '  Logic '  a
knowledge  of  the  actual  meaning.  (2)  It  has  framed
the  abstraction  of  '  the  logical  meaning '  of  the  assertion,
which  it  has  usually  conceived  also  as  existing  per  se
and  independently  of  human  assertors,  and  taken  it  for
granted  that  it  could  be  used  as  the  standard  to  which
to  refer  the  meanings  meant  and  understood.  But  in
actual  knowing  '  the  meaning '  is  the  problem.  It  is  not
what  we  may  presume,  but  what  we  must  discover.  It
is  an  ideal  to  be  reached,  and  not  a  presupposition  to  be
started  from.  It  does  not  exist ;  it  has  to  be  made — by
mutual  understanding.  Moreover,  for  the  reasons  given
above,  the  abstract  '  meaning  per  se '  of  the  assertion
reduces  itself  in  practice  to  the  average  meaning  of  a
form  of  words  which  will  probably  be  used  in  a  certain
sense,  but  may  be  used  in  any  sense  in  which  any  one
can  convey  (or  try  to  convey)  his  meaning.  '  The  mean-
ing,' therefore,  is  infinitely  ambiguous}  And  hence  to
operate  with  it  is  always  hazardous  and  often  false.  (3)
In  abstracting  from  the  assertor's  actual  meaning, '  Logic '
always  runs  the  risk  of  excluding  the  real  point.  For
this  may  lie  in  some  of  the  '  irrelevant '  psychical  details
of  the  actual  meaning,  whose  essence  may  not  lie  in

1  Thus  the  assertion  '  Smith  is  red-haired '  has  as  many  '  meanings '  as  there
are  past,  actual,  and  potential  'Smiths,'  of  whom  it  can  be  (truly  or  falsely)
predicated,  and  occasions  on  which  it  can  be  made.


88  STUDIES IN HUMANISM  m

its  plain  surface  meaning,  but  in  some  subtle  innuendo.
Moreover,  even  where  '  the  logical  meaning '  does  not
miss  the  real  point,  it  nearly  always  fails  to  convey  the
whole  meaning.  For  the  actual  meaning  is  fully  concrete,
and  contains  much  more  than  it  conveys,  and  infinitely
more  than  '  the  logical  meaning '  of  the  form  of  words.
The  latter,  therefore,  is  always  something  less  than  what
was  actually  meant,  and  fails  to  express  it  fully.  For
the  appropriateness  of  an  assertion  always  depends  in
some  degree  on  the  personality  of  the  assertor  and  the
particularity  of  the  occasion.  (4)  '  Logic,'  in  abstracting
from  the  psychological  problem,  has  burked  the  whole
question  of  the  communication  of  meaning.  It  has
assumed  that  there  is  only  one  meaning  with  which  it
need  concern  itself,  and  that  every  one  must  understand
it.  In  point  of  fact,  there  are  usually  two  or  more
meanings  concerned  in  every  question.  For  the  assertor
commonly  fails  to  convey  his  meaning,  or  his  whole
meaning,  and  his  assertion  is  taken  in  a  meaning
different  from  that  in  which  it  was  meant.  There  are,
in  consequence,  at  least  as  many  '  meanings '  as  parties
to  the  discussion,  and  the  '  logic '  which  is  concerned  only
about  '  the  meaning '  is  troubling  about  the  non-existent.
Whereas  if  it  were  recognised  that  what  is  called  '  the
meaning '  is  an  indication,  but  not  a  guarantee,  of  the
real  meaning,  and  that  the  meaning  understood  may  not
be  that  intended,  we  should  take  more  care  to  secure  a
real  identity  of  meaning  before  beginning  to  dispute,  and
so  the  chances  are  that  many  '  logical  questions '  would
never  arise.

(5)  Lastly,  'Logic'  has  assumed  not  only  that  'the
meaning '  of  an  assertion  can  be  ascertained  without
regard  to  the  psychological  facts,  but  also  that  it  can
be  quite  dissociated  from  the  personality  of  its  assertor.
It  becomes,  consequently,  a  matter  of  indifference  whether
it  was  made  by  A  or  by  B,  nay  even  whether  or  not  it
was  (or  could  be)  made  by  any  one.  Whoever  made  it,
'  it '  is  equally  true,  even  though  A  was  a  fool  or  a  crank
asserting  it  at  random,  and  B  a  great  authority  who


in  LOGIC  AND  PSYCHOLOGY  89

knows  the  subject.  Our  common-sense  accordingly  pro-
tests against  this  paradox,  and  urges  that  the  status  of
the  assertor  must  make  a  difference  to  the  assertion.
And  the  practice  of  science  would  seem  to  bear  this  out.
The  logical  value  of  an  assertion  is  constantly  treated  as
conditioned  by  the  qualifications  of  its  author.  If  these
are  adequate,  it  is  received  with  respect ;  if  they  are  nil,
it  is  treated  as  scientifically  null  and  disregarded.  Thus
dozens  of  sailors  have  sighted  sea  -  serpents,  but  the
testimony  of  the  two  competent  naturalists  on  the
Valhalla  is  far  more  likely  to  shake  the  incredulity
of  zoologists.1  On  the  other  hand,  when  Prof.  Curie
reported  the  extraordinary  and  unparalleled  properties
of  radium,  his  assertions  were  at  once  accepted.  The
solution  of  the  paradox  lies  of  course  in  the  falsity  of
the  assertion  that  when  two  persons  '  say  the  same
thing '  (i.e.  use  the  same  form  of  words]  they  make  the
same  assertion.  They  really  make  two  assertions,  which
may  (or  may  not)  subsequently  be  made  to  coincide  and
identified  with  the  (usual)  meaning  of  the  proposition
they  use.  But  they  need  not  mean  the  same  thing,  nor
understand  alike.  They  will  probably  make  the  assertion
on  different  grounds,  and  will  certainly  have  different
motives  and  aims.  What  their  assertion  means  will  vary
accordingly.  And  so  will  its  logical  value,  which  here
plainly  shows  itself  as  dependent  on  psychological  circum-
stances. Why  then  should  '  Logic '  stubbornly  blind  itself
to  these  facts,  and  insist  on  cutting  meaning  loose  from
its  psychological  roots,  and  on  confounding  in  its  abstract
'  forms '  cases  which  all  actual  knowing  must  discriminate  ?
The  practical  convenience  and  rough  adequacy  of  the
easy-going  convention  that  '  the  meaning '  may  be  taken
as  identical  with  the  meanings  meant  and  understood,  is
surely  no  defence  an  intellectualistic  logical  theory  can  plead
against  the  charge  of  false  abstraction  and  inadequate
analysis.

As regards judging,  it  may suffice  to suggest that
'  the  judgment '  is as  dangerous  an  abstraction  as  '  the

1  Cp.  Nature,  No.  19141  p.  202.


90  STUDIES  IN HUMANISM  m

meaning '  which  is  ascribed  to  it.  For  what  is  called  one
is  usually  many.  It  follows,  moreover,  from  our  last  dis-
cussion both  that  every  judgment,  in  its  actual  use,  is  an
intimately  personal  affair,  and  that  its  personal  aspects
often  have  (and  always  may  have)  important  bearings  on
its  logical  value.  No  judgment  could  come  into  being,
even  in  the  world  of  thought,  if  some  individual  mind
were  not  impelled  by  its  total  psychical  contents  and
history  to  affirm  itt  upon  some  suitable  occasion,  and  to
stake  its  fortunes  on  this  personal  affirmation.  And  even
after  it  has  come  into  being,  its  logical  status  is  still
vitally  dependent  on  its  relations  to  the  minds  which
entertain  it.  The  judgment,  therefore,  essentially  presup-
poses a  mind,  a  motive,  and  a  purpose.  To  'deperson-
alise '  it  is  to  do  violence  to  its  concrete  nature.  Similarly,
its  '  objective  validity '  is  not  a  question  of  the  interrelation
of  absolute  static  truths  in  a  super-celestial  sphere.  It
depends  on  its  adaptation  to  our  world  and  its  congruous-
ness  with  the  opinions  and  aims  of  others.  Hence  every
recognition  of  a  judgment  by  others  is  a  social  problem,
often  of  a  very  complicated  character.

To  bring  out  the  unreality  of  the  logician's  conception
of  Judgment,  we  may  note  also  that  '  Logic '  is  always
held  to  exclude  the  evaluation  of  questions  and  com-
mands. And  yet  are  not  postulates  often  the  basis  of
our  reasonings,  and  most  of  our  judgments  the  implicit  or
explicit  answers  to  a  question  ?  Is  it  not  truly '  illogical/
then,  to  sever  the  connexion  between  things  which  belong
so  closely  together?  To  confine  Logic  to  categorical
statements  in  the  indicative  mood,  is  to  abstract  at  one
blow  from  almost  the  whole  of  the  actual  use  of  judgments.
Contrast  with  this  an  intellectualist  view  of  the  question's
function.  Prof.  Bosanquet,  e.g.  is  "  disposed  to  doubt
whether  we  can  interrogate  ourselves "  otherwise  than
rhetorically,  and  urges  that  questions  which  we  cannot
answer  and  know  that  we  cannot  answer  cannot  be
"  genuine  questions."  He  concludes  that  "  thus  a  question
cannot  be  an  act  of  thought  as  such,  just  as  a  lie  is  not,
and  for  the  same  reason,  that  it  is  not  an  attitude  that  the


in  LOGIC  AND  PSYCHOLOGY  91

intellect  can  maintain  within  itself.  ...  It  is  a  demand
for  information ;  its  essence  is  to  be  addressed  to  a
moral  agent,  not  ourselves,  in  whom  it  may  produce
action  "  (Logic,  i.  p.  36).

Clearly,  however,  this  whole  paradox  rests  on  the
abstraction  of  truth  from  its  consequences,  on  the  divorce
of  '  thought '  from  its  psychical  context.  The  question  is
taken  as  unrelated  to  anything  that  precedes  and  follows.
If  this  is  done,  only  two  cases  remain  ;  we  ask  ourselves
a  question  to  which  we  either  do,  or  do  not,  know  the
answer.  And  of  course  the  question  is  in  both  cases
futile.  In  actual  knowing,  however,  we  only  ask  our-
selves questions  where,  though  we  do  not  yet  know  the
answers,  we  want  to  know  them  and  are  willing  to  take
steps  to  find  them  out.  A  question,  therefore,  is  logically
futile  only  if  we  decline  to  act  on  it,  and  this  would  be
equally  true  of  a  question  addressed  to  others,  if  they,
similarly,  did  not  react  upon  it.  Really,  therefore,  the
putting  of  questions  is,  as  the  Greeks  well  knew,  a  natural
and  necessary  process  as  a  preliminary  to  the  satisfaction
of  a  cognitive  need,  and  one  which  may  be  of  the  greatest
value,  if  the  right  questions  are  clearly  formulated.

§  10.  Lastly,  not  so  much  because  further  illustration
should  be  needed,  as  in  order  to  force  a  clear  issue,  let  us
consider  one  more  case,  that  which  has  been  most  dis-
puted, viz.  that  of  reasoning  openly  inspired  by  desire,
i.e.  of  a  conclusion  affirmed  because  we  should  like  it  to
be  true.  Is  it  always  true  that  we  attain  truth  only  by
suppressing  desire  ?  Take  the  familiar  argument :  The
world  is  bad,  therefore  there  must  be  a  better.  It  all  rests
on  the  desire  for  good  and  the  postulate  of  perfection.
Now  if  postulation  is  as  such  invalid,  and  desire  a  mere
obstacle  to  truth,  it  clearly  follows  that  this  argument  is
hopelessly  illogical  ;  which  is  accordingly  what  intellectu-
alist  logicians  have  everywhere  maintained.1  A  bad  world

1  Qua  human  they  have,  of  course,  not  infrequently  relapsed  into  the  postu-
latory  way  of  reasoning.  Thus  it  is  a  favourite  inference  from  the  fact  that  all  the
parts  of  the  world  are  imperfect,  that  the  whole  must  be  perfect.  But  if  in  this
case  it  is  legitimate  to  argue  to  the  ideal  from  the  defects  of  the  actual,  why  not  in
others  ?


92  STUDIES IN HUMANISM  m

is logically  evidence  against,  not  for,  the  existence  of  a
better.

Now,  against  such  abstract  and  a  priori  notions  of
what  is  good  reasoning,  we  may  lay  it  down  that  good
reasoning  is  that  which  leads  us  right  and  enables  us  to
discover  what  we  are  willing  to  acclaim  as  truth.  And
so  tested  the  desire-inspired  reasoning  may  clearly  often
be  the  better.  It  may  prompt  to  more  active  inquiry,  to
keener  observation,  to  more  persevering  experiment.  The
logician  who  declares  de  non  apparentibus  et  non  existentibus
eadem  est  ratio,  who  declines  to  look  for  what  he  wants
but  does  not  see,  who  does  not  seek  to  penetrate  beyond
the  veil  of  appearances,  is,  frankly,  an  ass.  He  frustrates
his  avowed  purpose,  the  discovery  of  truth,  by  debarring
himself  from  whatever  truth  lies  beneath  the  surface.
His  self-approbation,  therefore,  of  the  heroic  self-sacrifice
of  his  volitional  preferences  to  '  objective  truth '  which  he
'  feels  himself  bound '  to  commit,  is  simply  silly.  What
right,  indeed,  has  he  even  to  '  feel  bound '  ?  Does  not  the
phrase  betray  the  emotional  origin  also  of  his  attitude  to
truth  ?  He  accomplishes  the  sacrifice  of  '  personal  pre-
ference '  to  '  objective  truth '  by  dint  of  an  emotional
desire  to  mortify  himself  (or,  more  often,  others),  the
satisfaction  of  which  appears  to  him  as  a  good.  How
then  is  he  other  or  better  than  the  voluntarist  who  makes
bold  to  postulate,  and  verifies  his  anticipations?

Moreover,  if  we  supply  the  missing  premiss  in  the
contention  of  the  intellectualist,  we  find  that  it  must  take
a  form  something  like  this,  that  it  is  wrong  to  anticipate
nature,  to  go  beyond  what  you  can  see,  wicked  to  try
whether  the  apparent  '  facts '  cannot  be  moulded  or  re-
moulded into  conformity  with  our  desires.  He  must  say
"  it  is  wrong"  For  he  cannot  say  "  it  is  impossible."
For  it  is  constantly  done,  and  with  the  happiest  effects.

If  now  we  ask,  Why  wrong?  we  force  the  intellectualist
to  reveal  the  full  measure  of  his  prejudice.  To  defend
his  assumption  he  must  do  one  of  two  things:  (i)  He
may  fall  back  upon  his  own  feeling  of  the  aesthetical  or
ethical  impropriety  of  the  voluntarist's  procedure.  But  if


in  LOGIC  AND  PSYCHOLOGY  93

so,  his  objection  ceases  to  be  purely  logical.  It  may  be
declared  to  be  only  his  idiosyncrasy,  and  be  met'  by  the
retort — "  but  it  does  not  seem  improper  to  me.  I  do  not,
will  not,  and  cannot  worship  disagreeable  fact  and  un-
welcome truth  as  you  do.  I  do  not,  cannot,  and  will
not  call  a  universe  good  which  does  not  satisfy  my  desires,
and  I  feel  strongly  that  it  ought  to  do  so.  Whether  it
does,  or  can  be  made  to  do  so,  I  do  not  know  as  yet ;  it
is  one  of  the  chief  things  I  am  staying  in  the  universe  to
find  out.  If  (a)  it  does,  or  can,  then  my  desires  are  to  be
regarded  as  a  sound,  logical  indication  of  the  nature  of
reality  and  a  valid  method  of  penetrating  to  its  core.  If
(b)  it  does  not,  I  may  have,  no  doubt,  to  admit  unwelcome
truths  and  unpalatable  facts.  But  I  shall  do  so  provision-
ally, and  with  a  clear  intention  of  abolishing  them  as  soon
and  as  far  as  I  am  able.  If  (c)  it  sometimes  does,  and
sometimes  not,  why  then  I  am  entitled,  nay  bound,  to
try  both  methods.  I  have  a  right  both  to  treat  my  wishes
as  clues  to  reality,  and  to  subordinate  them  on  occasion
to  facts  which  are  too  strong  for  me.  And  I  observe  that
(whether  you  approve  or  blame)  this  is  what,  in  fact,  men
have  always  done."

If  (2)  the  intellectualist  tries  to  find  something  more
objective  than  his  instinctive  feeling  of  the  wrongness  of
the  voluntarist's  procedure,  what  resource  has  he  ?  Must
he  not  appeal  to  the  consequences  of  the  two  methods  ?
Must  he  not  try  to  show  that  the  consequences  of  sub-
mission are  always,  or  mostly,  good — those  of  postulation
always,  or  mostly,  bad  ?  But  can  he  show  this  ?
Notoriously  he  cannot.  And  in  either  case  has  he  not
used  the  pragmatic  test  of  logical  value  ?

It  is  vain,  therefore,  to  seek  an  escape  from  the  con-
clusion that  actual  thinking  is  pervaded  and  conditioned
through  and  through  by  psychological  processes,  and  that
Logic  gains  nothing,  and  loses  all  vitality  and  interest,  all
touch  with  reality,  by  trying  to  ignore  them.  To  em-
phasise this  is  not,  of  course,  to  deny  that  for  logical
purposes  some  psychological  conditions  may  sometimes
be  irrelevant.  Thus  in  using  concepts  it  is  generally


94  STUDIES IN  HUMANISM  m

possible  to  abstract  from  the  particular  nature  of  the
psychological  imagery.  The  reason  is  that  identity  of
meaning  overpowers  diversity  of  imagery  ;  if  this  were
otherwise,  the  use  of  concepts  would  be  impossible.
Again  an  error,  say  of  counting,  may  be  psychologically
a  very  complex  fact ;  it  may,  nevertheless,  be  logically  a
very  simple  error.  By  my  counting  2  and  3  as  6,
there  may  hang  a  lengthy  tale  ;  but  for  the  logician  it
may  be  enough  to  say  that  the  result  ought  to  have  been
5.  It  should  be  observed,  however,  even  here,  that  the
logical  description  of  this  process  as  an  '  error '  involves
an  appeal  to  psychology ;  the  error  could  not  be  recognised
as  such  but  for  my  capacity  to  correct  it,  or  at  least  to
admit  the  validity  of  processes  which  enable  others  to
correct  it.  If  I  were  psychologically  incapable  of  counting
2  +  3  as  other  than  6,  I  could  not  recognise  my  '  error,'
a  '  common '  arithmetic  would  disappear,  and  there  would
remain  no  way  of  deciding  which  process  was  counting
and  which  miscounting,  but  the  experience  of  the  respec-
tive consequences  and  the  test  of  survival.

§11.  Whenever,  then,  the  logician  abstracts  from  the
concrete  facts  of  reasoning,  he  should  do  so  with  a  con-
sciousness of  the  nature  and  dangers  of  his  procedure.
He  should  feel  that  he  may  have  left  out  what  is  essential,
that  he  may  have  failed  to  notice  the  actual  meaning  of
the  thought  he  examined,  and  have  substituted  for  it  some
wholly  different  imagination  of  his  own.  The  proposition
which  he  solemnly  writes  down  an  '  error '  or  a  '  fallacy  '
may  not  have  been  a  prosaic  affirmation  at  all  ;  it  may
have  been  poetical  hyperbole  or  an  hypothesis,  a  jest  or
a  sarcasm,  a  trap  or  a  lie.  He  will,  therefore,  get  a  very
little  way  into  the  analysis  of  actual  thinking  if  he
declines  to  recognise  that  in  its  actual  use  the  same  form
of  words  may  serve  all  these  purposes,  and  cannot  be
treated  logically  until  he  has  found  out  what  its  actual
meaning  is.  A  lie,  I  presume,  is  a  proposition  which
claims  truth  like  any  other.  But  the  claim  is  for  export
only ;  the  liar  himself  knows  it  to  be  '  false,'  and  has
rejected  the  claim,  even  though  he  has  persuaded  all  the


in  LOGIC  AND  PSYCHOLOGY  95

world.  How  can  '  the  meaning '  of  such  a  proposition
be  represented  as  single  and  simple  ?  How  can  its  logical
status  even  be  discussed  without  going  into  these  facts  ?
Does  it  not  follow  that  logicians  have  no  right  to  their
habit  of  speaking  of  '  the  meaning '  of  a  proposition  as  if
it  were  a  logical  fixture  ?  The  actual  meaning  is  always
a  psychical  fact,  which  in  the  case  of  an  ambiguity
intended,  implied,  or  understood,  may  be  many.  The
'  logical '  meaning  is  potential  ;  it  is  at  best  the  average
meaning  with  which  the  proposition  is  most  commonly
used.  It  is  only  more  or  less  probable,  therefore,  as  the
interpretation  of  an  actual  judgment.  And  to  build  a
system  of  apodictic  doctrine  on  foundations  such  as  these
what  is  it  but  to  build  a  house  of  cards  ?

It  would  be  possible  to  show  in  this  manner,  and  with
the  utmost  fulness  and  unlimited  examples,  that  vastly
more  than  the  text-books  recognise  is  really  relevant  to
Logic,  that  every  logical  process,  conception,  method,  and
criterion  springs  naturally  and  continuously  out  of  psycho-
logical soil,  and  is  essentially  a  selection  from,  and  valuation
of,  a  more  extensive  psychical  material.  But  enough  has
probably  been  said  to  suggest  that  Logic  can  take  nothing
for  granted,  and  itself  least  of  all.  In  view  of  the  complete
dependence  and  reliance  of  every  logical  process  on  the
psychical  nature  of  man  in  general  and  of  men  in  particular,
in  view  of  the  manifest  adjustment  of  every  logical  prin-
ciple to  the  needs  of  human  life,  is  it  not  high  time  that
a  systematic  doubt  were  cast  on  the  assumption  that  the
theory  of  knowledge  must  abstract  from  the  personality  of
the  knowert

§  12.  It  should  now  be  clear  what  is  the  meaning,  the
ground  and  the  aim  of  our  Humanist  '  psychologism,'  but
we  may  clinch  the  argument  by  supplementing  it  nega-
tively by  a  proof  that  the  antagonistic  conception  of  an
'  independent '  Logic  ( I )  involves  unintelligible  and  self-
contradictory  misdescriptions  ;  (2)  assumes  a  standpoint
which  it  cannot  justify,  and  (3)  is  so  unable  to  deal  with
actual  knowing,  that  (4)  it  ends  in  scepticism  and  intel-
lectual collapse.  It  will  be  seen,  in  short,  that  the


96  STUDIES IN HUMANISM  m

intellectualistic  treatment  of  Logic  "  necessarily  conducts
to  a  complete  debacle  of  the  intellect." 2

It  has  already  been  implied  that  it  is  usual  to  formulate
the  conception,  and  to  expound  the  claims,  of  Logic  in  an
anti-psychological  way  radically  opposed  to  ours.  One
still  hears  of  Logic  as  the  science  of  '  pure '  thought,
endowed  with  a  standpoint  and  nature  of  its  own,  which
is  '  free '  and  '  independent '  of  man  and  human  psychology,
and  anything  it  may  do  or  say  about  such  merely  human
processes  as  '  willing '  and  '  feeling,'  as  a  science  which  by
'  depersonalising '  itself  has  risen  to  communion  with  the
eternal  and  immutable  Ideal,  and  of  course  cares  not  one
jot  about  our  personal  interests  or  attitude  towards  truth.

Most  of  these  epithets,  however,  are  clearly  ornamental,
and  as  a  whole  they  merely  serve  to  indicate  the  nature
of  the  assumptions  on  which  it  is  attempted  to  rest  the
science.

( i )  The  notion  of  '  pure  thought,'  for  example,  must  not
be  pressed.  It  is  not  a  fact  of  actual  knowing,  but  a
barefaced  fiction,  which  can  at  most  be  defended  as  a
methodological  necessity  for  the  purposes  of  intellectualist
logicians.  Its  fictitious  nature  has  nowadays  to  be
avowed,  whenever  it  is  directly  challenged.  Even  Mr.
Bradley  "  agrees "  with  Prof.  Dewey,  that  "  there  is  no
such  existing  thing  as  pure  thought,"  —  it  is  true  only
just  before  proceeding  to  declare  that  "  if  there  is  to  be
no  such  thing  as  independent  thought,  thought  that  is
which  in  its  actual  exercise  takes  no  account  of  the
psychological  situation,  I  am,  myself,  in  the  end,  led  in-
evitably to  scepticism.  The  doctrine  that  every  judgment
essentially  depends  on  the  entire  psychical  state  of  the
individual,  and  derives  from  this  its  falsehood  or  truth,
is,  I  presume,  usually  taken  to  amount  to  complete
scepticism." z  '  Pure  thought,'  then,  clearly  is  not  the

1  Captain  H.  V.  Knox  in  Mind,  xiv.  p.  210.

2  Mind,  xiii.  p.  309  n. Italics mine. We  learn  from  this  amazing  passage
that  it  is  complete  scepticism  to  take  complete  account  of  the  facts  in  a  cognitive
procedure,  and  that  if  we  will  not  deliberately  falsify  them,  we  are  doomed  to  end
as  sceptics  ! It  is  surely  strange  that  such  falsification  should  be  a  necessary  pre-
liminary to  the  search  for  truth,  and  one  is  tempted  to  reply,  that  if  '  Logic '
demands  this  falsification,  then  the  sooner  the  conception  of  Logic  is  amended


in  LOGIC  AND  PSYCHOLOGY  97

same  as  '  independent.'  But  what  is  '  pure  '  thought  pure
from  ?  Psychological  contamination  ?  If  so,  will  it  not
coincide  with  '  independent '  thought  ?  For  that  too
"  takes  no  account  of  the  psychological  situation."  But
if  so,  has  not  an  imperious  need  of  Logic  been  equated
with  a  non-existent  ?  The  puzzle  grows  more  perplexing
when  we  recall  the  pronounced  emotionalism  which  is
somehow  combined  with  Mr.  Bradley's  intellectualism,  and
to  which  Mr.  Sturt  has  lately  drawn  attention.1  How  can
an  intellect  so  emotionally  conditioned  be  either  '  pure  '
or  '  independent '  ?

The  truth,  however,  seems  to  be  that  the  sacrifice  of
'  pure  thought '  goes  greatly  against  the  grain  of  intellect-
ualism. Only  constant  vigilance  can  prevent  it  from
wriggling  itself  back  into  the  claim  to  be  an  actual  fact,
and  whether  intellectualism  can  afford  wholly  to  dispense
with  it,  especially  in  its  arguments  about  '  useless '  know-
ledge, seems  more  than  doubtful.

(2)  The  '  independence  '  of  Logic  and  its  standpoint
is  in  every  way  a  most  difficult  notion.  It  is  hard  to
understand,  harder  to  derive,  hardest  to  justify.  Nay,  in
the  end  it  will  turn  out  so  anarchical  as  to  be  fatal  to
the  theory  that  entertained  it.  For  the  present,  however,
it  may  suffice  to  point  out  the  difficulty  of  ascertaining
the  meaning  of  a  word  which  is  constantly  employed  in
current  discussions,  -and  never  defined.  Its  meaning
appears  to  vary  with  the  work  it  has  to  do.  In  its  most
rigorous  sense  it  describes  the  iniquity  of  pluralism  in
claiming  '  independence '  for  its  reals,  the  impossibility  of
which  provides  an  a  priori  refutation  of  this  metaphysical
'  heresy.' 2  In  this  sense  it  means  apparently  '  totally
unconnected  with.'  A  more  lenient  sense  is  in  vogue

the  better.  But  it  is  evidently  Mr.  Bradley  who  is  predestined  to  scepticism  :
every  theory  of  Logic  he  touches  turns  to  scepticism  in  his  hands,  and  even
when  he  flees  to  metaphysics  he  fares  no  better  (cp.  Essay  iv.  §  3).  Probably
the  peculiarity  is,  in  his  case,  psychological.  I  should  add  that  a  fuller  discus-
sion of  this  passage  will  be  found  in  Arist.  Soc.  Proc.  1905-6,  pp.  226-8  ;
it  elicited  a  defence  of  Mr.  Bradley  by  Prof.  Bosanquet  (pp.  242-5),  which
baffles  my  understanding.

1  Idola  Theatri,  ch.  v.  §§  4-7.

2  Appearance  and  Reality,  ch.  x.

H


98  STUDIES  IN HUMANISM  m

when  intellectualism  has  to  defend  its  abstractions  against
Humanist  attacks.  For  in  that  case  we  learn,  e.g.  that
every  Logic  is  '  independent '  of  Psychology,  nay,  that
every  well-conducted  theoretic  truth  preserves  a  virtuous
independence.  Similarly  we  are  told  by  '  realists,'  that
in  the  act  of  knowing  the  object  of  knowledge  is  quite
'  independent '  of  the  knowing  act.  And,  finally,  Mr.
Bradley  sometimes  equates  it  with  '  relative  freedom ' !  1
It  is  clear  that  if  these  ambiguities  were  done  away  with,
either  the  argument  about  the  impossibility  of  pluralism,
or  that  about  the  independence  of  pure  thought  and
Logic,  would  have  to  disappear  from  the  armoury  of
our  intellectualists.

(3)  The '  depersonalisation  ' which is regarded as
characteristic of an '  independent ' Logic is usually
defended  by  the example  of Science,  which  is  said  to
ignore  all  human  interest  as  irrelevant. But  this  assertion
is  hardly  true. The  abstraction  practised  by  Science  is
not  analogous  to  that  advocated  for  Logic. It  is  not  true
that Science  as  such  abstracts  from all  human  interest.
It  does  not  abstract  from  the  interest  in each particular
science. And  this  is  still  a  human  interest. For  it  is
what  generates  the  science,  and  incites  men  to  its  study.2
Psychologically it  represents,  not  an absence,  but  a  con-
centration of  interest,  such  as  is  demanded,  more  or  less,
for  the  attainment  of  every  purpose,  and  for  the  satisfac-
tion of  every  interest. And  it  can  occur  only  in  a  highly
developed  personality. The '  depersonalisation,'  therefore,
which  is  postulated  for  Logic obtains  no  support  what-
ever from  scientific  procedure. And  we  shall  subsequently
see  how  ill  it  serves  the  ends  of  '  Logic.'

(4)  The analysis  of  psychic  process into  'thinking,'
'  willing,'  and  '  feeling,'  in  order  to  justify  the  restriction
of  '  Logic ' to  the  first and the exclusion  of  the two
latter,  appears to be  an unwarranted  piece  of  amateur
psychologising. For  the  analysis  in  question  is  valuable

1  Mind,  xiii.  p.  322,  and  cp.  Essay  iv.  §  9  s.f.

8  This  remark,  of  course,  is  not  inconsistent  with  the  pragmatic  doctrine
that  all  science  is  ultimately  useful.  For  it  refers  only  to  the  immediate
psychological  motive.


in  LOGIC  AND  PSYCHOLOGY  99

only  as  a  rough  reference  for  popular  purposes,  and  is
really  a  survival  from  the  old  '  faculty '  psychology.
Scientifically  its  descriptive,  like  its  explanatory,  value
is  nil.  No  one  nowadays  seriously  supposes  that  a
soul  can  actually  be  put  together  out  of  'thought,'
'  will,'  and  '  feeling,'  or  that  this  '  analysis '  represents  its
actual  genesis.1  For  in  actual  knowing  all  three  always
co-operate.  There  is  no  thought-process  which  is  not
purposively  initiated  and  directed  (i.e.  more  or  less  'willed '),
or  which  is  not  coloured  by  feelings  and  emotions.  It  is
false,  therefore,  to  conceive  '  thought '  in  abstraction  from
'  will '  and  '  feeling,'  if  we  intend  to  examine  actual
knowing.  But  it  is  just  this  intention  which  intellectualism
leaves  in  doubt.  It  is  hard  to  see,  therefore,  why  a
'  thought,'  which  has  abstracted  from  purpose,  interest,
emotion,  and  satisfaction,  should  any  longer  be  called
thought  at  all ;  at  any  rate,  it  is  no  longer  human  thought,
and  can  have  no  relation  to  human  life.

But  the  unfortunate  fact  remains  that  all  these  phrases
have  long  been  taken  for  granted,  with  little  or  no
warrant  or  criticism.  They  are  traditionally  part  and
parcel  of  an  '  independent '  Logic  which  has  begged  its
'  standpoint'

§  13.  Formally  this  standpoint  is  bafflingly  in-
determinate. It  is  neither  consistently  descriptive  nor
consistently  normative,  but  either,  or  both,  as  suits  the
occasion.  Sometimes  it  appeals  to  what  logical  procedure
actually  is,  sometimes  to  what  it  ideally  ought  to  be  ;  i.e.
what  by  us  would  be  called  psychological  and  logical
considerations  alternate  in  the  most  confusing  way.  In
its  own  phraseology  this  confusion  is  cloaked  by  its
conception  of  '  the  logical  Ideal,'  which  can  be  represented
either  as  what  human  thought  naturally  aspires  to,  or  as
what  controls  its  wayward  vagaries.

Let  us  consider  a  few  representative  examples.  Mr.
Bradley  prefaces  his  Principles  of  Logic  with  the  confession
that  he  is  not  sure  where  Logic  begins  or  ends  ;  but  no
attentive  reader  can  fail  to  see  that  his  '  Logic '  begins  in

1  Cp.  Essay  iv.  §  10.


ioo  STUDIES  IN HUMANISM  m

Psychology  and  ends  in  Scepticism.  It  is,  moreover,  just
because  the  standpoints  of  fact  and  of  validity  are  so
inextricably  mingled  that  nothing  can  save  his  '  Logic '
from  surrender  to  Scepticism,  except  a  desperate  appeal
to  metaphysics,  the  aid  of  which  Appearance  and  Reality
was  subsequently  to  prove  illusory.1

Prof.  Bosanquet  seems  to  incline  more  distinctly
to  the  descriptive  standpoint  He  declines  to  call  Logic
normative;  but  calls  its  object  'self- normative.' 2  The
preface  of  his  Logic  tells  us  that  "  the  conception  of
Logical  Science  which  has  been  my  guide  is  that  of  an
unprejudiced  study  of  the  forms  of  knowledge  in  their
development,  their  interconnexion,  and  their  comparative
value  as  embodiments  of  truth."  In  his  discussion  with
me  he  calls  it  "  the  science  which  considers  the  nature
of  thought  as  manifested  in  a  fully  self  -  consistent
form." 3

Still,  even  here,  both  sides  are  observable.  A  '  study
of  the  forms  of  knowledge,'  and  of  '  the  nature  of  thought,'
sounds  like  a  purely  descriptive  undertaking.  But  the
notion  of  '  comparative  value '  is  as  distinctly  normative  ;

1  Cp.  Essay  iv.  §  3.  It  is  not,  of  course,  to  be  denied  that  nevertheless
Mr.  Bradley's  Logic  is  a  great  work,  which  has  exercised  a  well-deserved
influence  on  English  thought.  But  its  defects  are  so  glaring  that  its  influence
has  been  very  mixed.  The  sort  of  thing  complained  of  may  be  illustrated,
e.g.  by  comparing  Mr.  Bradley's  criticism  of  Mill's  conception  of  induction
with  his  criticism  of  the  syllogism.  When  he  objects  to  the  former  that
induction  is  not  proof,  his  standpoint  is  clearly  that  of  validity.  But  when  he
protests  that  the  syllogism  is  not  the  universal  form  of  (de  facto)  valid  reasoning,
and  gives  '  specimens  of  inference '  which  are  not  syllogistic  as  they  stand
and  rest  on  relations  evident  to  us  on  empirical  and  psychological  grounds,  has
he  not  plainly  passed  over  to  the  standpoint  of  description  of  the  actual  ?

2  Arist.  Soc.  Proc.  1905-6,  p.  263.  This  looks  suspiciously  like  an  attempt
to  run  with  the  hares  and  to  hunt  with  the  hounds.  At  any  rate,  it  involves
the  '  depersonalisation '  we  have  objected  to,  and  ignores  the  fact  that  logical
norms  are  values  for  man,  and  the  offspring  of  our  interests.

3  L.c.  p.  237.  He  gives  as  an  alternative  to  this,  "as  manifest  in  the
endeavour  to  apprehend  truth."  But  it  would  appear  that,  even  in  these
definitions,  Logic  has  not  succeeded  in  manifesting  herself  in  a  fully  consistent
form.  For  even  if  we  make  explicit  what  is  presumably  intended,  viz.  that
they  take  '  truth '  as  =  '  the  fully  self-  consistent  form '  of  thought  (an
essentially  formal  view  which  seems  to  render  it  a  wholly  intrinsic  affair  of
thought,  and  to  rule  out  all  testing  of  our  predications  on  the  touchstone  of
reality),  the  two  definitions  cannot  be  made  to  coincide.  For  '  the  endeavour
to  apprehend  truth '  adds  a  consideration  wholly  extraneous  and  alien  to  the
formal  self  -  consistency  of  thought,  and  one,  moreover,  which  is  plainly
psychological.


in  LOGIC  AND  PSYCHOLOGY  101

so  is  that  of  a  fixed  ideal  or  '  system '  which  claims  to
regulate  and  control  the  natural  development  of  cognitive
procedures,  quite  irrespective  of  their  use  as  the  means  to
the  ends  of  human  knowing.

§  14.  This  whole  conception  of  the  logical  standpoint
is,  however,  open  to  the  gravest  objection.  Qua  descrip-
tive, it  either  instigates  Logic  to  poach  on  the  preserves
of  Psychology,  and  to  interfere  with  its  functions,  or,  if
you  please,  to  become  itself  Psychology.  In  the  latter
case  it  must  become  bad  or  ignorant  Psychology.  In  the
former  case  it  must  either  prohibit  Psychology  from  de-
scribing cognitive  processes,  or  duplicate  the  psychological
descriptions.  We  should  get,  that  is,  a  twofold  descrip-
tion of  the  same  events,  the  one  dubbed  '  Logic '  and  the
other  '  Psychology.'  One  or  the  other  of  these  would
surely  be  superfluous  or  mistaken.  Or  if  both  of  them
could  somehow  (e.g.  by  a  reference  to  the  different
purposes  of  the  two  sciences  ?)  be  maintained,  it  would
become  necessary  to  consider  their  relation  to  each  other.
This  would  be  just  as  necessary,  and  much  more  difficult,
when  both  sciences  are  conceived  as  descriptive,  as  when
one  is  conceived  as  normative.  For  the  attempt  to  adjust
their  relations  would  have  to  start  from  an  open  conflict
about  the  ground  each  was  to  cover.

Moreover,  even  as  descriptive  Psychology,  this  Logic
would  be  defective.  It  would  either  have  to  ignore  the
'  willing '  and  '  feeling '  indubitably  present  in  cognition,  or
to  insist  on  describing  them,  as  far  as  its  purposes  required.
In  the  former  case  it  would  be  certain,  in  the  latter  it
would  be  probable,  that  the  description  would  be  incom-
plete. For  the  descriptive  interest  would  be  restricted
by  the  logical  purpose,  and  in  any  case,  would  not  extend
to  the  whole  psychical  context.

But  surely,  when  we  describe,  we  should  try  to  describe
completely,  without  obliterating  psychical  values  and  with-
out any  arriere  pense"e.  The  omission  of  any  feature
which  de  facto  accompanies  knowing  demands  caution
and  an  explicit  justification.,  For  how  can  it  be  taken
for  granted  that  anything  is  unessential  ?  The  context


102  STUDIES IN HUMANISM  m

of  any  reasoning  extends  indefinitely  into  the  psycho-
logical :  and  the  actual  meaning  may  always  depend
upon  the  context.  Before  any  train  of  thought  can  be
submitted  to  logical  analysis,  it  must  somehow  be  deter-
mined what  features  in  it  are  important  and  vital,  and
what  unimportant  and  unessential.  But  how  can  the
logician  determine  this,  without  the  aid  either  of
Psychology  or  of  experience  ?  There  is  little  prospect
then  that  his  descriptions  will  be  adequate,  either  logi-
cally or  psychologically.

Even  though,  therefore,  some  one  should  suggest  as  a
compromise  that  Logic  and  Psychology  should  both  de-
scribe the  actual  psychic  process,  but  that  Logic  should
have  a  monopoly  of  the  cognitive  features,  the  compro-
mise would  be  equally  futile  and  intolerable.  For  if  so,
who  or  what  is  to  decide  which  is  which,  and  how
much  of  the  whole  is  logically  relevant?  What  if
the  parties  disagree,  and  the  subjects  decline  to  be
separated  ?

Finally,  in  assigning  to  Logic  a  descriptive  function,
a  serious  concealment  has  been  practised.  Its  study  of
cognitive  process  assuredly  was  not  '  unprejudiced.'  It
has  made  de  facto,  but  secretly  and  unconsciously,  very
definite  and  peculiar  assumptions  as  to  the  nature  of  the
logical  standpoint.  A  big  encroachment  has  been  made
on  the  domain  of  Psychology,  which  has  been  robbed  of
the  most  valuable  portion  of  its  territory.  It  has  been
assumed  (as  we  saw  in  §  4)  that  Psychology  has  no  right
to  treat  cognitive  values,  and  must  perforce  content  itself
with  what  is  left  over  after  Logic  has  claimed  all  it  has
a  mind  to  for  its  province.  And  this  despoliation  has
been  committed  by  sheer  importunity,  without  the  least
pretence  of  a  rational  delimitation  of  scientific  frontiers,
and  with  no  attempt  at  an  equitable  arbitration  of  the
dispute  !

§  I  5.  The  results  of  this  monstrous  injustice  are  not
slow  to  show  themselves.  First  of  all,  Psychology  is
reduced  to  absurdity,  to  the  care  of  the  shreds  and  dregs
of  a  disrupted  soul.  And  then,  by  a  thoroughly  deserved


in  LOGIC  AND  PSYCHOLOGY  103

Nemesis,  the  unjust  abstraction  made  by  Logic  ends  in
her  own  paralysis  !

The  first  stage  of  this  process,  the  arbitrary  stultifica-
tion of  Psychology,  may  best  be  studied  in  Prof.
Bosanquet's  Aristotelian  Society  papers  l ;  the  second,  the
suicide  of  '  independent '  Logic,  in  Mr.  H.  H.  Joachim's
book,  The  Nature  of  Truth.

"  Psychological  process,"  says  Prof.  Bosanquet,  "  when
it  differs  from  the  process  which  is  the  object-matter  of
logic,  differs  by  being  inarticulate,  circuitous,  fragmentary.
It  is  the  logical  process  broken  up  and  disguised,"  "  a
Glaucus,"  whose  divine  original,  however,  is  "  never  found
typically  perfect  in  actual  psychological  process."  2  Thus
"  logical  process  is  the  psychological  process  in  its
explicit  and  self-consistent  form,"  freed  from  the  "  in-
terruptions "  and  "  irrelevance "  of  "  purely  psychical
disturbances."

And  so  the  'self- normative,'  'independent'  Logic,
"  dropping  out  abstract  psychical  processes,"  haughtily
"  goes  forward  on  the  path  of  concrete  fulfilment  or
individuality  " 3 — to  what  end  will  presently  appear.

Now  the  division  of  territories  propounded  in  these
words  should  certainly  secure  to  Logic  the  most
brilliantly  prosperous  career.  It  appears  to  give  Logic
every  advantage.  It  reduces  Psychology  to  such  im-
potence that  its  voice  can  scarce  be  heard  in  the  Council
of  the  Sciences.  One  hardly  dares  to  point  out  in  re-
monstrance that  Prof.  Bosanquet's  "psychological  process"
with  "  pure  "  and  "  mere  "  conditions  differs  widely  from
the  concrete  psychical  process  of  Humanist  Psychology,
and  one  has  to  admit  that  it  is  obviously  quite  incapable  of
performing  the  functions  of  the  latter.  It  is  conceived  as
a  miserable  abstraction,  not  (as  is  legitimate  in  a  special
science)  as  regards  limitation  of  standpoint,  but  as  regards
the  content  it  is  permitted  to  treat,  and  is  almost  deserving
of  the  contempt  poured  upon  it.  For  what  is  it  but  a
mere  rubbishy  residuum,  all  that  is  left  behind  when  its

1  L.c.  pp.  237-247,  262-265.
2  L.c.  pp.  239,  240.  3  L.c.  p.  265.


104  STUDIES IN  HUMANISM  m

values  have  been  extracted  from  the  actual  psychic  process,
and  its  life  has  been  extinguished  ?

Compared  with  this  "  misshapen  Glaucus  "  postulated
by  logical  theory,  almost  anything  may  claim  to  be
concrete.  Even  Prof.  Bosanquet's  '  logic-process,'  which
has  been  allowed  to  select  all  that  seemed  to  be  of  value,
and  to  abstract  only  from  the  merest  and  most  worthless
dross.  So  at  least  it  seems,  in  the  triumphant  self-
assertion  of  an  '  independent '  Logic.  It  seems  almost
fantastic  to  suggest  a  doubt  whether  after  all  'Psychology'
has  been  despoiled  enough,  whether  after  assigning  to  the
'  logical '  the  whole  purposiveness  of  psychic  process  and
leaving  the  psychological  a  purposeless  chaos,  Prof.
Bosanquet  has  not  abstracted  from  something  which  was
needed  to  make  thought  truly  purposive.

§  1 6.  Meanwhile,  what  can  we  reply  ?  Nothing,  it  is  to
be  feared,  our  intellectualist  logicians  will  deign  to  listen  to.

We  shall  protest  in  vain  that  the  '  mere '  or  '  pure '
psychological  conditions,  which  Prof.  Bosanquet  flung
aside  as  worthless  on  the  rubbish  heap,  are  pure  fictions
which  bear  no  resemblance  to  the  psychical  processes  of
actual  knowing,  that  we  never  meant  to  relate  them  to
Logic,  that  what  we  meant  was  not  this  fantastic
abstraction,  but  the  most  concrete  thing  imaginable,
viz.  the  actual  psychic  process  in  its  all-inclusive  activity,
and  with  nothing  at  all,  however  worthless  it  might  seem,
abstracted  from.  We  shall  observe  in  vain  that  however
'  concrete '  the  logic-process  may  appear  by  comparison
with  the  artificial  abstraction  of  the  '  merely  psychological,'
it  is  admitted  to  be  an  ideal  never  realised  in  actual
thinking,  that  therefore  it  has  abstracted  from  something,
and  that  it  remains  to  be  seen  whether  that  was  really
as  unessential  as  was  asserted,  or  whether  an  immense
abstraction  has  unwittingly  been  made,  which  in  the  end
proves  ruinous  to  Logic.  We  shall  ask  in  vain  how
Logic  has  arrived  at  a  standpoint  which  gives  it  such
crushing  superiority  over  Psychology,  and  entitles  it  to
take  and  leave  whatsoever  it  likes,  without  condescending
to  give  reasons  for  its  procedure.


in  LOGIC  AND  PSYCHOLOGY  105

We  shall  ask  all  these  questions  vainly,  because  Logic
is  'independent,'  nay  autocratic.  It  gives  an  account  of
its  self-normative  procedure  to  no  man  or  science.  "  It
can  only  be  judged  by  itself  at  a  further  stage,"  its  friends
haughtily  declare.1  We  must  therefore  perforce  let  it  go
its  own  way.  It  cannot  be  refuted ;  it  can  only  be
developed.

§  17.  Let  us  therefore  follow  the  developments  of
'  Logic.'  Having  successfully  maintained  her  right  to
'  depersonalise '  herself,  having  got  rid  of  the  '  merely
psychological '  encumbrances  of  her  '  Glaucus,'  her  '  old
man  of  the  sea,'  she  should  be  able  to  soar  to  the  illimit-
able heights  of  an  infinite  '  ideal '  of  a  "  timelessly  self-ful-
filled," "  all-inclusive,  significant  whole,"  "  whose  coherence
is  perfect  truth." 2  She  proceeds  to  do  so,  until  only
our  deep-seated  British  respect  for  what  we  cannot  under-
stand hinders  us  from  declaring  that  in  her  Hegelian
disguise  she  has  become  wholly  unintelligible,  and  that
clouds  of  German  metaphysics  have  rendered  her  invisible
in  her  ascension.

But  just  as  we  had  despaired  of  ever  seeing  her  again,
to  our  amazement  there  ensues  a  catastrophe  which  brings
her  back  to  earth  with  more  than  Icarian  suddenness,  and
in  as  completely  shattered  a  condition.

There  was  an  error  in  her  calculations  which  has
brought  about  her  fall.  Or  rather  Error'; was  not  taken
into  her  calculations,  when  she  assumed  her  standpoint,
discarded  the  merely  human  as  '  merely  psychological,'
and  constructed  her  ideal.  '  The  Ideal '  does  not  admit
of  Error :  and  yet  on  earth  Error  impudently  takes
the  liberty  to  exist.  It  is,  of  course,  a  mere  illusion,
but  its  persistent  phantom  yields  not  to  the  exorcisms  of
Logic.

The  situation  must  be  set  forth  in  the  words  of  one
who  has  seen  the  vision,  and  suffered  its  dtnotiment :  our
own  would  be  suspect  and  inadequate.3  "  The  confused

1  Prof.  Bosanquet  (I.e.  p.  265).

2  H.  H.  Joachim,  The  Nature  of  Truth,  pp.  169-170  and  passim.

3  Mr.  Joachim's  Nature  of  Truth,  pp. 167-68. For  further  selections  see
Essay  vi.,  which  should  be  compared  throughout,  especially  §§  2,  3.


io6  STUDIES  IN  HUMANISM  m

mass  of  idiosyncrasies,"  we  are  told,  which  are  "  my  and
your  thinking,  my  and  your  '  self,'  the  particular  temporal
processes,  and  the  extreme  self -substantiation  of  the
finite  '  modes,'  which  is  error  in  its  full  discordance  :  these
are  incidents  somehow  connected  with  the  known  truth,
but  they  themselves,  and  the  manner  of  their  connexion,  are
excluded  from  the  theory  of  knowledge"  ^  which  "  must  rule
out  as  irrelevant  some — perhaps  most,  but  certainly  not
all — of  the  temporal  and  finite  conditions  under  which
truth  is  known."  "  Truth,  beauty,  and  goodness  "  (for  all
the  ideals  as  conceived  by  intellectualism  must  break
down  in  the  same  way  when  they  try  to  transcend  their
reference  to  man)  "  are  timeless,  universal,  independent
structures ;  and  yet  it  is  also  essential  to  them  to  be
manifested  in  the  thinking  of  finite  subjects,  in  the  actions
and  volitions  of  perishing  agents."2  Hence  Error  is
"  unthinkable,"  "  a  declaration  of  independence,  where
that  which  declares  is  nothing  real,  and  nothing  real  is
declared." 2

But  why  should  not  '  Logic '  free  herself  from  these
embarrassments  by  cutting  the  last  thin  thread  that
attaches  her  to  an  earthly  existence  and  a  human  function
which  are  infested  with  '  merely  psychological '  accidents
and  idiosyncrasies,  and  vitiated  by  the  errors  of  human
beings  of  which  she  ought  surely  to  have  divested  herself
when  she  proceeded  to  'depersonalise'  herself?  Why  do
these  human  trappings  cling,  like  a  shirt  of  Nessus,  to
the  naked  Truth  ?  Can  it  be  that  '  Logic '  could  not
'  depersonalise '  herself  completely,  nay,  that  her  effort
was  a  sheer  delusion  ?

Mr.  Joachim  makes  answer.3  Logic  "  must  render
intelligible  the  dual  nature  of  human  experience.  ...  It
must  show  how  the  complete  coherence,  which  is  perfect
truth,  involves  as  a  necessary  '  moment '  in  its  self-
maintenance  the  self-assertion  of  the  finite  modal  minds  :
a  self-assertion  which  in  its  extreme  form  is  Error.  It
must  reconcile  this  self-assertive  independence  with  the

1  Italics  mine.  2  L.c.  p.  163.

3  L.c.  pp.  170-171.


m  LOGIC  AND  PSYCHOLOGY  107

modal  dependence  of  the  self-asserting  minds.  .  .  .  Other-
wise human  knowledge  remains,  for  all  we  can  tell,  un-
related to  ideal  experience."  *

In  other  words,  when  '  Logic '  commenced  her
nuptial  flight  towards  '  the  Ideal,'  she  quite  forgot  that
after  all  human  forces  raised  her,  that  all  her  beaute-
ous visions  were  conceived  by  the  eye  of  human  minds,
and  that  she  has  repaid  our  devotion  by  disavowing  her
creators.

The  natural  result  is  sheer,  unmitigated,  inevitable,
and  irreparable  contradiction,  as  Mr.  Joachim  most
honourably  recognises.  Logic  is  met  by  "  demands
which  both  must  be  and  cannot  be  completely  satisfied."  2
To  satisfy  them  completely,  complete  truth  would  have
to  be  manifest  to  itself.  Whereas  what  we  can  conceive
ourselves  as  attaining  is  only  complete  truth  manifest  to
us.  And  as  manifested  in  human  truth  the  opposition  of
subject  and  object  persists ;  our  knowledge  is  always
thought  about  an  Other :  "  the  opposition  of  the  thought
and  its  Other  is  apparently  vital."  It  cannot  attain  to
union  with  its  Other ;  and  so  the  significant  Whole,
cleft  by  a  self-diremption,  falls  into  halves.3  The  whole
theory,  therefore,  "  falls  short  of  the  absolute  truth  mani-
fest to  itself." 4  The  "  theory  of  truth,  based  on  the
coherence-notion,  is  not  itself  true  qua  coherent."  5  It  is
"  not  only  de  facto  unaccomplished,  but  is  impossible  by
the  very  nature  of  the  case." 5

And  so  Mr.  Joachim,  though  he  tries  to  soften  the
effect  of  his  idol-breaking  blows  for  the  benefit  of  his
friends  by  protesting  that  their  common  theory  is  "  as
true  as  a  theory  can  be"  6  finishes  up  as  a  sceptic  malgrt
lui  amid  the  ruins  of  all  the  intellectualistic  conceptions
of  Logic,  and  of  his  own  '  Hegelian  '  metaphysic.

§  1 8.  Of  a  surety  we  did  well  to  allow  Logic  to  go  on
her  way,  and  to  be  "  judged  by  herself  at  a  further  stage,"
by  her  "  approach  to  completeness  and  comprehensive-

1  L.c.  p.  172.  2  L.c.  p.  171. The  italics  are  Mr.  Joachim's.

3  L.c. pp.  171-172  (in  substance).
4  L.c.  p.  178.  6  L.c.  p.  176.  6  L.c.  p.  178.


io8  STUDIES IN  HUMANISM  m

ness."  l Her  debacle  has  certainly  approached  complete-
ness, and  is  quite  comprehensible  to  us.

For  there  is  nothing]  either  new  in  her  overthrow  or
obscure  in  its  causes.

The  Hegelian  theory  of  knowledge  and  reality — for
Mr.  Joachim,  taught  perhaps  by  the  negative  outcome
of  Appearance  and  Reality,  has  rightly  renounced  the
pretence  of  salving  Logic  by  Metaphysics  2 — has  broken
down  completely.  It  has  broken  down  precisely  as  it
was  predicted  that  it  must  break  down  as  soon  as  it  was
thought  out  consistently  and  to  the  end.3  It  has  broken
down  precisely  as  every  intellectualistic  conception  of
Logic  has  always  broken  down,  at  precisely  the  same
point  and  for  precisely  the  same  reasons.  It  has  not
failed,  assuredly,  for  any  lack  of  ingenuity  or  perseverance
in  its  advocates,  who  have  left  no  stone  unturned  to  save
a  hopeless  situation,  and  could  no  doubt  with  ease  have
lifted  the  burden  of  Sisyphus  to  the  summit  of  any  hill  of
hell.  But  their  labour  was  more  than  Sisyphean  :  they
had,  unfortunately,  committed  '  Logic '  to  a  fundamental
blunder.  It  has  wilfully,  wantonly,  and  of  malice
prepense  abstracted  from  humanity.  Instead  of  con-
ceiving God  as  incarnating  himself  in  man,  it  has  sought
God  by  disavowing  and  belittling  man.  And  as  a  reward
it  has  itself  been  terrified  to  death  by  an  incredible
monster — the  creature  of  its  own  unhealthy  nightmare  !

In  other  words,  it  has  fallen  into  a  ^wptoyio?,  a  fatal
separation  between  the  human  and  the  ideal  which
renders  both  unmeaning,  but  was  rendered  inevitable
and  irretrievable  by  its  presuppositions  as  to  the  value
of  human  psychology.  Once  our  psychic  processes  are
denied  logical  value  and  excluded  from  the  nature  of
truth,  we  are  playing  with  abstractions,  even  though  we
may  not  realise  this  until  at  the  end  our  '  Ideal '  is
required  to  find  room  for  our  errors.  Once  we  exalt  the
limited  and  relative,  and  merely  '  pragmatic/  '  independ-
ence '  of  truth,  which  remains  safely  immanent  within  the

1  Arist.  Soc.  Proc.  1906,  p.  265.  a  Cp.  Essay  iv.  §  3.

*  Cp.  Humanism,  p.  48.


in  LOGIC  AND  PSYCHOLOGY  109

sphere  of  human  valuations  and  can  always  be  withdrawn
and  modified  as  our  needs  and  purposes  require,  into  an
absolute  and  infinite  '  independence '  which  entirely  trans-
cends our  human  experience,  we  have  ascribed  to  truth
the  '  dual  nature,'  which  so  perplexes  Mr.  Joachim,  and
can  by  no  device  be  unified.  For  a  dualistic  chasm  has
been  constructed  between  the  human  and  '  psychological,'
and  the  ideal  and  '  logical.'  No  real  relation  can  be
established  between  them ;  all  attempts  at  connecting
them  break  down  so  soon  as  they  are  tested.  Nor  can
any  real  theoretic  progress  be  made.  The  utmost
ingenuity  only  brings  '  logicians '  to  the  brink  of  the
chasm.  And  that  is  '  nearer '  to  the  other  side  only  in
an  illusory  fashion.  It  remains  only  to  postulate  a  re-
conciliation of  the  discrepant  halves  of  a  knowledge  which
is  rent  asunder  from  top  to  bottom,  by  a  supreme  and
mystic  act  of  faith.1  But  as  the  jejune  rationalism  of  the
theory  in  question  had  previously  prohibited  all  acts  of
faith,  it  has  manifestly  fallen  into  a  pit  of  its  own  digging.

Or  shall  we  rather  say,  of  Plato's  ? 2  For  he  it  was
that  first  led  the  way  into  the  pit  into  which,  with  a  few
despised  exceptions,  the  whole  company  of  philosophers
has  followed  him,  as  patiently  and  submissively  as  a
flock  of  sheep  follows  its  bell-wether,  and  out  of  which  no
one  has  been  able,  and  not  too  many  have  even  tried,  to
escape.

Throughout  the  Theaetetus,  for  example,  Plato  has
made  the  assumptions  that  '  knowledge '  is  of  '  universals '
and  not  concerned  or  connected  with  the  fleeting  and
variable  judgments  of  individual  men  about  their  personal
experience,  that  thought  and  sense-perception  are  anti-
thetical and  hostile,  that  the  logical  concept  is  something
wholly  superior  to  and  independent  of  the  psychical
process  (e.g.  152  D),  and  that  the  Protagorean  suggestion,
to  start  the  theory  of  knowing  from  the  actual  knowing
of  the  individual's  perceptions  is  a  proposal  for  the
abolition  of  truth.  No  wonder  after  this  that  it  becomes  for

1  Cp.  The  Nature  of  Truth,  pp.  172,  177.
2  Compare  the  last  Essay.


no  STUDIES IN HUMANISM  m

him  a  serious  '  contradiction '  when  A  judges  to  be  warm
what  B  judges  to  be  cold,  seeing  that  '  it '  cannot  be  both.
But  '  it '  does  not  exist  in  abstraction  from  the  divergent
judgments ;  '  it '  stands  in  this  case  for  the  problem  of
constructing  a  '  common '  perception  ;  if  the  two  '  its '  are
to  be  brought  together  into  an  '  objective '  scheme  of
temperature,  A  and  B  must  set  to  work  to  construct  a
thermometer,  as  to  the  readings  of  which  they  can  agree.1
Plato,  therefore,  has  merely  debarred  himself  from  under-
standing the  de  facto  genesis  and  development  of  our
common  world  of  subjective  intercourse, and  by  starting  with
abstraction  from  the  personal  character  of  both  judgments,
he  has  manufactured  a  fallacious  contradiction.  Can  we
wonder  after  this  that  the  Platonic  theory  of  knowledge
remains  plunged  in  unmitigated  dualism,  and  that  in  the
end  it  has  to  be  admitted  (209)  that  '  knowledge '  can
never  condescend  to  the  particular  and  personal,  and  is
unable  to  discriminate  between  Theaetetus  and  Socrates  ?
For  had  it  not  pledged  itself,  ex  vi  definitionis,  to  leave
out  whatever  part  of  reality  concerns  a  '  this}  '  here]
and  '  now '  ?  But  instead  of  inferring  from  this  im-
potence, and  from  the  self-abnegation  of  an  '  ideal '  of
knowledge  which  is  not  even  ideally  adequate,  because  it
renounces  the  duty  of  knowing  the  individual  perfectly
in  its  uniqueness?  that  there  must  be  a  radical  flaw  in  a
conception  of  knowledge  which  has  led  to  this  absurdity,
what  does  Plato  do  ?  He  proclaims  the  Sensible  un-
knowable and  unintelligible  as  such,  attributes  to  all
'  phenomenal '  reality  an  all-pervasive  taint  of  '  Not-being,'
and  retains  his  Ideal  Theory  though  well  aware  that  it
cannot  cross  the  gulf  between  the  truly  Real  and  the
Sensible  ! 3  How  very  human  are  even  the  greatest  of
philosophers  !

It  would  never,  therefore,  occur  to  us  to  be  surprised
that  not  only  should  the  Theaetetus  in  the  end  leave  the
problem  of  error  unsolved  and  confess  to  utter  inability
to  say  what  knowledge  is,  but  that  the  whole  Platonic

1  Cp.  p.  315-20.  2  Cp.  Humanism,  p.  126.

3  Essay  ii.  §§  14-16.


in  LOGIC  AND  PSYCHOLOGY  in

theory  of  knowledge  should  remain  immersed  in  obscurity
and  contradiction.  But  one  thing  is  clear,  viz.  that  who-
ever had  learnt  the  lesson  of  the  Theaetetus  could  have
predicted  the  failure  of  all  intellectualistic  epistemologies
down  to  The  Nature  of  Truth.

§  19.  And  the  remedy  for  this  sceptical  paralysis  of  In-
tellectualism  ?  It  is  simple — so  simple  that  it  will  be
hard  to  get  philosophers  to  look  at  it.  But  it  cuts  very
deep.  It  demands  a  complete  reversal  of  inveterate
assumptions,  and  a  re -establishment  of  Logic  on  very
different  foundations.  We  have  merely  to  refrain  from
the  twin  abstractions  which  every  intellectualistic  logic
makes,  and  which  must,  if  carried  through  consistently,
prove  fatal  to  its  very  existence.  These  two  assumptions,
which  have  troubled  us  throughout,  may  now  be  called
(l)  the  ether ealising,  and  (2)  the  depersonalising  of  truth,
and  together  they  effect  the  complete  dehumanising  of
knowledge.

( I )  By  the  etherealising  of  truth  is  meant  the  abstrac-
tion from  the  actual  use  and  verification  of  an  assertion,
which  is  made  in  assuming  that  its  truth  is  independent
of  its  application.  This  really  destroys  its  whole  signi-
ficance, although  at  first  it  seems  to  leave  its  '  truth '  a
matter  of  self-consistency  and  intrinsic  '  coherence.'  But
if  we  try  to  take  truth  in  this  purely  formal  way,  we
identify  truth  with  claim  to  truth,1  and  render  the  testing
of  claims  extralogical.  And  it  is  then  discovered  that  all
reference  to  reality  has  been  excluded,2  that  '  self-con-
sistency' means  nothing  but  a  juggle  with  words  whose
meanings  are  presumed  to  be  perfect  and  stable  in  their
truth,  and  that  the  distinction  between  truth  and  error
has  become  incomprehensible.  Error  (as  contrasted  with
self-contradiction,  which  destroys  the  meaning  wholly)
is  nothing  inherent  in  the  form  of  the  judgment,  but  lies
in  a  failure  of  its  application.  It  is  a  failure  of  our

1  Cp.  Essay  v.

2  It  is  characteristic  of  intellectualist '  logic '  not  to  have  noticed  the  dis-
crepancy between  its  two  assertions  ( i )  that '  truth '  is  wholly  a  matter  of  the
intrinsic  'self-consistency'  of  its  'ideal,'  and  independent  of  all  'consequences'  ;
and  (2)  that  all  judgment  involves  a  '  reference  to  reality'  beyond  itself.


112  STUDIES IN HUMANISM  m

thought  to  attain  its  object.  And  as  our  conception  of
'  truth '  is  determined  by  its  contrast  with  error,  to
abstract  from  error  is  really  to  abstract  from  '  truth.'
Hence  a  Logic  which  abstracts  from  error  implicitly
despairs  also  of  giving  an  intelligible  account  of  truth.
It  ceases  at  any  rate  to  be  a  theory  of  real  knowledge,
and  the  formal  'truth,'  the  semblance  of  meaning,  which
it  verbally  retains,  no  longer  possesses  relevance  to  human
knowing.

(2)  But  the  depersonalising  of  truth  deprives  the  Logic
of  Intellectualism  even  of  this  show  of  meaning.  It
makes  abstraction  from  the  meaning  actually  intended,
from  the  purpose  of  the  meaner.  Now  as  every  judgment
is  prompted  and  kept  together  by  a  purpose  which  forms
the  uniting  bond  between  its  subject  and  its  predicate,
the  purpose  is  logically  vital.  It  is  also  a  concrete  fact  of
an  intensely  personal  kind,  which  ramifies  indefinitely
into  human  psychology.  Hence  it  is  often  logically  in-
convenient, as  complicating  the  situation  beyond  the
powers  of  formal  analysis.  But  to  abstract  from  it,
wholly  and  systematically,  is  to  disintegrate  the  judgment.
To  do  this  destroys  its  intrinsic  coherence,  as  well  as  its
reference  to  real  truth.  It  amounts  to  a  complete  annihila-
tion of  meaning.

It  is  difficult  to  suppose,  therefore,  that  when  in-
tellectualist  Logic  fully  realises  the  situation  to  which
its  abstractions  lead,  it  will  continue  to  presume  without
trial  that  the  full  concreteness  of  psychic  process  is
logical  irrelevance,  and  that  man  is  a  negligible  quantity
in  the  formation  of  truth.

A  reformed  and  rehumanised  Logic,  on  the  other
hand,  will  flatly  refuse  to  immolate  all  human  knowledge,
all  fact,  and  all  reality  to  intellectualist  prejudices.  It  will
conceive  and  value  the  old  abstractions  merely  as  instru-
ments, as  methodological  simplifications,  which  may  be
freely  used,  so  long  as  the  limits  of  their  usefulness  are
not  overlooked,  and  their  authority  is  not  made  absolute.

And  here  will  be  the  rub.  For  these  abstractions
have  been  misconceived  so  long !  It  is  such  a  time-


in  LOGIC  AND  PSYCHOLOGY  113

honoured  custom  with  philosophers  to  believe  that  '  uni-
versals '  are  loftier  and  more  sacred  than  '  particulars,'
that  their  formation  is  not  to  be  inquired  into,  that
their  value  is  wholly  independent  of  their  application,
that  they  would  subsist  in  unsullied  excellence  and
truth,  even  though  they  never  were,  nor  could  be,  used.
It  will  take,  therefore,  a  generation  or  two  for  philo-
sophers to  convince  themselves  that  the  essential  function
of  universals  is  to  apply  to  particulars,  that  they  are
actually  true  only  because,  and  when,  they  are  used,  that
their  abstraction,  therefore,  from  time,  place,  and  in-
dividuality is  only  superficial  and  illusory,  and  that  in
short  they  are  instruments  for  the  control  and  improve-
ment of  human  experience.

'  But  will  not  the  attempt  to  build  knowledge  on  so
untried  and  paradoxical  a  basis  be  fraught  with  un-
suspected difficulties,  and  in  its  turn  conduct  us  back  to
scepticism  ?  Is  it  credible  that  so  many  generations  of
thinkers  can  have  been  mistaken  in  acquiescing  in  the
belief  that  Protagoreanism  necessitates  scepticism  ? '

In  view  of  the  outcome  of  intellectualistic  '  Logic,'
this  menace  of  scepticism  seems  a  grotesque  impertinence,
and  we  might  well  retort  that  even  an  untried  basis  was
better  than  one  which  had  been  tried  and  found  to  be
self-destructive  and  impossible.  But  the  threat  has  been
used  so  often  that  it  will  hardly  be  relinquished  all  at
once :  so  we  had  better  face  it.  It  is  a  mere  bogey — a
Chimaera  summoned  from  the  House  of  Hades  to  scare  us
back  into  the  Labyrinth  of  the  Minotaur.  No  proof  has
ever  been  vouchsafed  of  its  contention.  And  seeing  that
Plato's  genius  has  failed  so  signally  to  refute  Protagoras,
we  may  await  with  equanimity  the  advent  of  a  greater
man  than  Plato  to  confute  the  inherent  Humanism  of
man's  thought.


IV
TRUTH AND MR.  BRADLEY1

ARGUMENT

§  I.  Mr.  Bradley's  attack  on  Humanism  in  spite  of,  §  2,  the  hesitations  in
his  intellectualism.  §  3.  His  perception  of  the  difficulties  in  the
'  correspondence '  view  of  truth.  §  4.  Pragmatism  as  the  way  to
avoid  logical  scepticism.  §  5.  Mr.  Bradley  rejects  this  way  and
prefers  to  stay  in  'Jericho.'  §  6.  The  total  irrelevance  of  his  criti-
cism. §  7.  His  reversion  to  the  '  correspondence '  view,  and  its  diffi-
culties, which  coincide  with  those  of  realism.  The  inability  of  Abso-
lutism to  disavow  it.  §  8.  Mr.  Bradley's  troubles  with  the  relations
of  'truth'  and  'fact,'  and  with  the  subjective  activity  in  the  appre-
hension of  'fact.'  The  'double  nature  of  truth.'  §  9.  The  antithesis
of  'practice'  and  'theory.'  What  does  the  'independence'  of  theory
mean?  §  10.  Humanism  as  overcoming  this  antithesis  and  unifying
life  in  voluntarist  terms.  The  advantages  of  voluntaristic  descriptions.
§  II.  Mr.  Bradley's  definition  of  'practice.'  §  12.  His  failure  to
distinguish  between  axioms  and  postulates.  §  13.  His  intellectualistic
conceptions  of  'will.'  §  14.  His  summary  of  his  objections.  §  15.
His  attempt  to  raise  the  odium  theologicum.  §  1 6.  His  relapse  into
agnosticism.  §  17.  His  concessions.  §  18.  His  preference  for  a
difficult  philosophy.

§  i.  MR.  F.  H.  BRADLEY'S  characteristic  paper  on
"  Truth  and  Practice "  in  the  July  1 904  number  of
Mind  (vol.  xiii.  N.S.  No.  51)  must  be  regarded  as  the  most
significant,  though  hardly  the  most  valuable,  of  the  hostile
criticisms  which  the  Humanist  movement  has  so  far  en-
countered. For  Mr.  Bradley  is  an  acknowledged  leader  of
the  sect  of  absolutists  which  has  long  dominated  philosophic
instruction  in  this  country,  and  is  incomparably  the  most

1  The  substance  of  this  paper  appeared  as  a  reply  to  Mr.  Bradley  in  Mind,
vol.  xiii.  N.S.  No.  52  (October  1904).  It  has,  however,  been  considerably  altered,
partly  by  the  excision  of  matters  of  ephemeral  and  merely  personal  interest,  partly
by  some  expansion  of  the  argument.  Mr.  Bradley,  as  might  have  been  expected,
did  not  reply.

114


iv  TRUTH AND MR.  BRADLEY  115

brilliant  and  formidable  of  its  champions.  Ever  since  he
made  his  ctibut  a  quarter  of  a  century  ago  by  triumphantly
dragging  the  corpse  of  Mill  round  the  beleaguered  strong-
hold of  British  philosophy,  he  has  exercised  a  reign  of
terror  based  on  an  unsparing  use  of  epigrams  and  sarcastic
footnotes,  "  more  polished  than  polite,"  as  Mr.  Hoernle
wittily  remarks.1  He  has  shown  also  that  however
much  he  may  despise  personalities  in  his  monistic  meta-
physics, he  yet  loves  them  like  a  pluralist  in  his  polemics.

§  2.  And  yet  until  this  paper  appeared,  it  was  quite  open
to  doubt  what  attitude  Mr.  Bradley  would  assume  towards
the  new  philosophic  movement.  It  was  open  to  him  to
disarm  revolt  by  judicious  concession,  nay  to  put  himself  at
the  head  of  it,  by  developing  ideas  not  obscurely  implicit
in  his  own  writings.  It  was  by  no  means  self-evident  that
he  must  utterly  condemn  even  a  systematic  protest  against
intellectualism.  For  though  Mr.  Bradley  no  doubt
seemed  in  the  end  to  come  down  on  the  intellectualist
side  of  the  fence,  the  reason  plainly  seemed  to  be  that  he
had  not  subjected  the  notions  with  which  he  stopped,  those
of  the  '  intellect '  and  its  '  satisfaction,'  to  stringent  scrutiny.
And  it  was  evident  that  his  intellectualism  had  not
desiccated  his  soul,  nor  did  it  seem  so  deeply  ingrained,  or
of  so  extreme  and  naive  a  type,  as  that  of  his  more
rigidly  '  Hegelian  '  allies.  Nay,  it  seemed  at  times  to
have  been  only  by  a  distinctly  wilful  fiat  that  he  had
arrested  himself  on  the  path  to  pragmatism,  as,  for
example,  in  Appearance  and  Reality,  p.  154.  And  even
the  final  intellectualism  of  his  description  of  the  false  as
'  the  theoretically  untenable  '  and  of  the  aim  of  philosophy
as  'the  satisfaction  of  the  intellect,'  might  have  easily
been  mitigated  into  harmony  with  the  Humanist  view  by
shifting  the  emphasis  from  the  '  intellect '  to  the  '  satis-
faction? and  by  adopting  a  pragmatic  interpretation  of
the  '  intellect's '  structure  and  of  its  '  theoretic  '  functioning.

§  3.  Again,  from  the  position  Mr.  Bradley  had  reached
at  the  end  of  his  Principles  of  Logic,  a  pragmatic  Logic
might  well  have  seemed  the  promised  land.  Students  of

1  Mind,  N.S.  No.  55,  p.  332.


n6  STUDIES IN HUMANISM  iv

that  brilliant  and  entertaining  work  will  doubtless  re-
member that  the  situation  Mr.  Bradley  finally  found
himself  in  was  one  of  logical  scepticism  tempered  by
prophetic  allusions  to  a  not  yet  extant  metaphysic.  This
plight,  however,  cannot  be  said  to  have  been  mended
when  his  Appearance  and  Reality  ended  in  a  far  more
complete  scepticism,  tempered  only  by  the  postulation  of
an  unknowable  Absolute  invoked  to  set  all  things  right
( somehow.'

Yet  this  whole  perplexity  arose  from  a  very  simple
cause.  His  examination  of  the  function  of  our  thought
had  irresistibly  pointed  to  the  conclusion  that  knowing,
in  very  many,  if  not  all,  cases  involves  an  arbitrary  mani-
pulation ('  mutilation  ')  of  the  presented  data.  Hence  if
it  was  assumed  that  the  business  of  thought  was  funda-
mentally to  '  copy '  reality,  it  was  clear  that  thought  was
a  failure.  It  did  not  '  copy '  ;  it  abstracted,  it  selected,  it
mutilated,  it  recombined,  it  postulated — all  in  what  seemed
a  thoroughly  arbitrary  manner.1  If,  therefore,  truth
meant  '  correspondence  with  reality,'  it  seemed  plain  that
inference  as  such  was  invalid,  and  truth  unattainable.
Nowhere  could  Mr.  Bradley  discover  a  case  where  "the
truth  of  the  consequence  does  not  rest  upon  our  interfer-
ence "  with  the  data.  In  vain  he  clings  to  the  possibility
that  "  though  the  function  of  concluding  depends  upon  my
intellect,  the  content  concluded  may  be  wholly  unhelped,
untouched,  and  self-  developed." 2  This  possibility  is
clearly  preposterous,  even  though  it  is  guaranteed  by
'  logical  postulates '  which  have  constantly  to  be  invoked.
"  Rightly  or  wrongly,"  we  are  told,  "  logic  assumes  that  a
mere  attention,  a  simple  (sic  /)  retaining  and  holding
together  before  the  mind's  eye,  is  not  an  alteration,"  and
"  we  are  forced  to  assume  that  some  processes  do  not
modify  their  consequence,"  3  and  that  "  some  operations  do
but  change  our  power  of  perceiving  the  subject  and  leave
the  subject  itself  unaltered  .  .  .  even  where  our  wilful
and  arbitrary  choice  selects  the  process  and  procures  the

1  Prlnc.  of  Logic,  pp.  500-10.  2  L.c.  p.  502.

3  L.c.  p.  506.


iv  TRUTH AND MR.  BRADLEY  117

result." 1  But,  as  we  saw,  these  logical  postulates
were  then  consigned  to  metaphysics,  and  finally  entered
that  cave  of  the  Absolute  whence  no  '  finite '  truths  ever
issue  forth  again.

In  short  the  '  correspondence  -with  -reality '  view  of
truth  is  '  riddled  with  contradictions '  by  Mr.  Bradley
in  the  concluding  chapters  of  his  Logic,  and  driven  to
seek  refuge  in  an  arbitrary  '  postulate,'  to  be  hereafter
established  by  metaphysics.  This  feat  his  metaphysic
fails  to  accomplish  :  but  it  solaces  the  wounds  of  Logic
by  riddling  everything  else  with  contradictions  too.

§  4.  And  yet  the  remedy  was  close  at  hand.  Mr.
Bradley  had  merely  to  grasp  his  nettle  firmly,  to  take  his
bull  by  the  horns,  to  sit  down  on  his  praying  carpet,  in  order
to  effect  a  magical  transformation  of  the  whole  situation,  in
the  simplest  and  most  satisfying  way  !  He  remarks  :  "  in
A — B,  B — C,  the  identity  of  B  is  the  bond  of  the  construc-
tion. If  I  'made  that  identity,  I  should  certainly  in  that
case  have  manufactured  the  consequence.  And  it  may  be
contended  that  it  lies  in  my  choice  to  see  or  to  be  blind,
and  that  hence  my  recognition  does  make  what  it  per-
ceives. Against  such  a  contention  I  can  here  attempt  no
further  answer.  I  must  simply  fall  back  on  the  logical
postulate,  and  leave  further  discussion  to  metaphysics."  -

But  now  suppose  that  instead  of  '  falling  back '  he  had
gone  on  boldly  and  stayed  in  logic  ?  Suppose  he  had
followed  the  indications  of  logic  and  accepted  the  omens  ?
Suppose  he  had  allowed  himself  to  see  that  we  make  the
identity  always  and  everywhere,  that  selection  and
voluntary  manipulation  are  of  the  essence  of  all  cognitive
process,  and  that  even  our  most  '  passive '  reception  of
sensory  stimuli  is  at  bottom  selective,  because  it  ignores
a  multitude  of  other  processes  in  nature,  and  volitionally
so,  because  determined  by  the  organism's  choice  of  life,  by
the  way  in  which  its  '  will  to  live '  has  moulded  it  ?

If  Mr. Bradley had been  willing  to  do  this,  to  say

1  L.c.  p.  518,  where  too  Mr.  Bradley  catches  a  glimpse  of  the  dependence  of
'  truth  '  on  possibility  of  application  (§  24).
•  L.c.  p.  502.


n8  STUDIES IN  HUMANISM  iv

(with  me)  that  logical  identity  is  always  made,  being  a
great  postulate,  by  means  of  which  we  successfully  operate
upon  our  experience,1  he  would  have  passed  easily  and
naturally  on  to  the  pragmatic  view  of  truth  and  of  the
nature  of  logic.  If  in  all  thinking  identities  are  '  made,'
then  this  normal  procedure  cannot  possibly  be  made  a
reproach  to  thought.  If  '  truth  '  means  successful  opera-
tion on  '  reality,'  then  reasoning  cannot  be  invalidated  so
long  as  it  is  successful.  If  thought  has  not  to  '  correspond  '
or  '  copy,'  but  to  be  efficacious,  then, it  need  not  be  despised
for  failing  to  do  what  it  was  not  concerned  to  do.  In
short  the  theory  of  knowledge  is  out  of  the  wood.2

§  5.  What,  then,  prevented  Mr.  Bradley  from  perceiving
all  this  ?  So  far  as  one  can  see,  nothing  but  sheer  pre-
judice. He  simply  will  not  allow  practical  success  to
validate  a  cognitive  process.  He  will  not  let  us  "  plead
that  because  logic  works,  logic  cannot  be  wrong."  3  But
at  the  time  when  he  wrote  the  Logic,  Mr.  Bradley  was
still  far  from  "  a  blind  acquiescence  in  the  coarsest
prejudices  of  popular  (i.e.  intellectualisf]  thought," 4  and
it  might  well  seem  possible  that  he  would  determine  to
advance  instead  of  retrograding,  and  hopelessly  miring
himself  in  the  slough  of  scepticism.

Unfortunately  Mr.  Bradley  has  chosen  otherwise.  He
has  preferred  to  revert  to  the  correspondence  view  of
truth,  of  which  he  had  formerly  so  clearly  exposed  the
absurdities.5  And  when  the  princes  of  Moab  tempted
him,  he  went  and  cursed  the  newcomers  with  a  vehemence
which  must  have  well-nigh  exhausted  the  resources  even
of  his  vocabulary,  perhaps  because  none  of  his  faithful
followers  dared  to  open  their  mouths  to  utter  a  word  of
warning.  He  has  chosen  to  conceive  the  philosophic  con-
troversy of  the  day  as  a  mere  raid  by  a  horde  of  vagrant
nomads  upon  the  citadel  of  Absolutism,  and  mingled

1  Personal  Idealism,  pp.  103-4.

2  Cp.  Mr.  Sturt's  criticism  of  these  notions  of  Mr.  Bradley 's  in  Idola  Theatri,
pp.  291-2.

8  L.c.  p.  531.  4  L.c.  p.  534.

6  Mind,  N.S.  No.  51.  P.  311,  "  If  my  idea  is  to  work,  it  must  correspond  to
a  determinate  being  it  cannot  be  said  to  make."  P.  312,  "The  whole  of  this  is
fact  to  which  my  idea  has  got  first  to  correspond. "


iv  TRUTH  AND MR.  BRADLEY  119

wit  with  venom  in  his  own  inimitable  way  when  he
declares,  "  I  forget  before  how  many  blasts  of  the  trumpet
the  walls  of  Jericho  fell,  but  the  number,  I  should  judge,
has  already  been  much  exceeded.  The  walls  of  Jericho,
so  far  as  I  can  see,  have  no  intention  of  moving,  and  the
dwellers  in  Jericho  tend  irreverently  to  regard  the  sound
as  the  well-known  noise  which  comes  from  the  setters
forth  of  new  pills  or  plasters."  3

One  knows  of  course  what  is  the  controversial  meaning
of  abusing  the  plaintiff's  attorney,  but  our  appreciation  of
Mr.  Bradley's  fun  should  not  deter  us,  either  from  regret-
ting his  retrogression,  or  from  welcoming  his  simile.  We
all  remember  what  happened  to  the  walls  of  Jericho,  and
can  all  value  Mr.  Bradley's  testimony  to  the  '  jerry-built '
character  of  the  defences  he  has  done  so  much  to  raise.2
Let  us  therefore  accept  the  omen  and  proceed  to  consider
the  objections  which  Mr.  Bradley  seems  to  think  im-
portant.

§  6.  Mr.  Bradley  boldly  begins  with  an  avowal  that  he
has  so  far  failed  to  understand  the  new  philosophy.3  This
did  not  seem  a  very  credible  or  promising  premiss  for  a
critic  of  Mr.  Bradley's  calibre  to  set  out  from,  but  long
before  I  had  finished  reading  I  found  myself  entirely  in
agreement  with  him.  What  he  had  failed  to  understand,
that  is,  or  perhaps,  as  Prof.  James  suggested,4  had  not
sought  to  understand,  was  the  doctrine  I  had  maintained  ;
what  he  had  refuted  with  much  superfluous  subtlety  was
a  mass  of  misconceptions  which  he  had  developed  into
misrepresentations,  and  finally  distorted  into  absurdities

1  L.c.  p.  330.

2  It  may  be  worth  noting  that  this  probably  indicates  the  real  derivation  of
the  word. '  Jerry-built '  =  '  Jericho-built. ' The  mythical  '  Jerry  and  Co. '  probably
arose  by  '  tmesis '  from  Jeri-cho,  and  the  term  thus  embodies  a  jocular  ration-
alising of  the  recorded  miracle.

8  In  his  controversial  methods  this  does  not  preclude  a  subsequent  claim  to
understand  it  much  better  than  its  author,  who,  he  informs  us,  with  marvellous,
but  too  evidently  telepathic,  insight,  ' '  has  made  no  attempt l  to  realiset  he  true
meaning  of  his  own  doctrine"  (pp.  322,  333).  Afterwards  he  reaffirms  his
inability  to  understand  (p.  329),  which  finally  (p.  335),  with  the  agnosticism
which  seems  to  be  the  natural  reaction  from  pretensions  to  absolute  knowledge,
extends  itself  to  all  things  !

4  Mind,  N.S.  No.  52,  p.  458.

1  The  italics  (mine)  indicate  the  points  misapprehended.


120  STUDIES IN HUMANISM  iv

entirely  irrelevant  to  my  position.  Now  if  these  mis-
conceptions had  really  been  contained  in  a  fair  interpreta-
tion of  anything  I  had  said,  I  should  feel  duly  contrite,
and  would  gladly  admit  the  obligation  of  removing  the
occasion  for  them.  In  point  of  fact,  however,  it  is  difficult
to  see  how  the  text  of  any  of  my  essays  anywhere  lends
itself  to  any  of  Mr.  Bradley's  interpretations,  and  in  the
absence  of  precise  references  to  it,  it  seems  impossible  even
to  conjecture  what  occasioned  them.

Where,  if  point-blank  questions  may  be  put,  has  Mr.
Bradley  ever  found  it  stated  that  '  no  object  counts  for
any  more  than  a  worthless  means  *  [!  how  can  a  worthless
means  be  a  means  at  all  ?]  to  one's  own  mere *  activity,'
or  that  '  truth  consists  in  the  -mere J  practical  working  of
an  idea,'  or  that  '  the  words  true  and  false  have  not  a
specific  meaning,'  or  that  '  truth  everywhere  subserves
practice  directly]  *  or  that  '  the  entire 1  nature  of  the  situa-
tion is  first  made  by  the  idea,'  or  that  an  idea's  'agreement
or  discord  with  fact  other  than  my  will  can  be  excluded,'
or  that  '  the  entire x  truth  is  made  by  my  end  and  my
ideas '  and  is  '  a  mere *  deed,'  or  '  a  means  to  a  foreign  J
end '  or  '  merely J  what  happens  to  prevail '  ?  I  do  not
ask,  bien  entendu,  for  literal  quotations  in  support  of  these
allegations  (for  I  know  these  do  not  exist),  but  even  for
passages  which  can  legitimately  be  said  to  countenance
them,  and  meanwhile  must  question  whether  Mr.  Bradley
has  at  all  entered  into  the  pragmatist  conception  of  the
'  making '  of  '  truth  '  and  '  reality.'  Else  he  would  hardly
have  wholly  ignored  or  dismissed  as  unessential 2  such
cardinal  doctrines  as  the  presence  of  limiting  conditions  in
each  experiment  and  the  voluntary  acceptance  3  of  a  basis
taken  as  factual,  the  distinction  of  postulate  and  axiom,
the  selection  and  verification  of  postulates  by  subsequent

1  The  italics  (mine)  indicate  the  points  misapprehended.

2  Especially  Personal  Idealism,  pp.  54-63  and  95, and  Humanism,  pp.  12,
55-60. Indeed  one  would  not  suppose  that  he  had  read  beyond  the  Preface  in
the  latter  work,  but  for  his  strange  manipulation  of  the  former.

3  I  am  gratified  to  find  the  importance  of  this  in  the  recognition  of  '  fact '  so
strongly  emphasised  by  Prof.  Royce  in  his  valuable  paper  on  ' '  The  Eternal  and
the  Practical "  (Phil.  Rev.  for  March  1904). Strictly,  nothing  further  is  needed
to  establish  the  pragmatic  view  of  '  fact. '


iv  TRUTH AND  MR.  BRADLEY  121

experience,  and  the  psychological  and  social  criticism
which  inevitably  purifies  the  passing  wishes  of  the  indi-
vidual.

Now  controversially  nothing  is  more  embarrassing  than
a  criticism  which  is  totally  irrelevant.  Absolute  irrelevance
induces  a  sort  of  dazed  feeling  in  its  victim,  who  thinks
that  his  inability  to  see  the  application  must  be  due  to  his
own  lack  of  intelligence,  especially  when  it  is  accompanied
by  an  air  of  condescension,  and  a  careful  avoidance  of
references.  To  meet  it  one  must  either  restate  one's  own
position,1  or  criticise  the  critic.

In  this  case  I  should  have  been  only  too  glad  to  show
more  explicitly  what  is  actually  the  contention  of  Human-
ism regarding  the  conception  of  '  truth '  and  its  relation
to  '  fact,'  and  how  exactly  it  disposes  of  Mr.  Bradley's
difficulties,  and  achieves  what  hitherto  all  idealisms  have
attempted  in  vain,  viz.  the  abolishing  of  the  dualisms  of
1  truth  '  and  '  fact '  and  '  fact '  and  '  value.'  In  view,
however,  of  my  critic's  reluctance  to  consider  the  new
doctrines  in  their  connexion,  I  feel  constrained  to  devote
my  energies  chiefly  to  showing  critically  that,  whether  we
are  right  or  wrong,  the  old  doctrine  at  all  events  cannot
stand.

§  7.  I  must  observe,  therefore,  that  even  Mr.  Bradley
can  state  nothing  tenable  or  coherent  on  either  of  the
points  alluded  to.  As  regards  the  conception  of '  truth,'  he
seems  only  just  to  have  realised  that  there  is  a  question  as
to  the  '  specific  meaning '  of  the  attributions  '  true '  and
'  false '  (p.  311  ).2  But  he  excuses  himself  from  telling  us
what  he  takes  it  to  be !  Surely  so  long  as  our  critics
have  no  positive  conception  of  what  the  predication  of
truth  means,  their  criticisms  have  no  real  locus  standi.

On  the  relation  of  '  Truth  '  and  '  Fact '  he  is  somewhat
more  explicit.  But  he  has  not  realised  how  deadly  a
blow  at  Absolutism  Prof.  Dewey  has  dealt  by  his  admir-
able proof  of  the  superfluity  of  an  absolute  truth-to-be-
copied,  existing  alongside  of  the  human  truth  which  is

1  Cp.  for  this  Essays  xviii.  and  xix.
2  Cp.  p.  144.


122  STUDIES IN HUMANISM  iv

made  by  our  efforts.1  Its  peculiar  deadliness  is  due  to
the  fact  that  the  absolute  idealist  can  hardly  disavow  a
contention  with  which  he  himself  is  wont  to  ply  the
realist,  viz.  that  an  existent  beyond  human  knowledge,
which  does  nothing  to  explain  that  knowledge,  is  invalid,
alike  whether  it  is  called  an  '  independent '  reality  or  an
'  absolute '  truth.  The  fact  is  that  this  fundamental
difficulty  in  absolutism  and  realism  is  the  same.  In
both  cases  our  knowing  has  to  be  related  to  something
which  transcends  it  and  claims  to  be  '  independent '  of  it
and  unaffected  by  it,  through  the  very  process  of  our
knowing ;  and  the  '  correspondence  '-notion  is  merely  a
verbal  cover  for  this  crux.  It  cannot,  therefore,  be  really
and  wholly  discarded.  In  the  last  resort  human  truth
must  still  be  conceived  as  '  corresponding '  to  absolute
truth,  whatever  obscurities  and  absurdities  this  may
involve.  It  is  only  when  we  interpret  the  transcendence
pragmatically  that  we  perceive  the  nullity  of  the  problem,
because  the  '  independent '  reality  and  truth  are  not
absolutely  so,  but  alike  conceptions  immanently  evolved
in  human  knowing,  and  do  not  therefore  require  to  be
forced  into  relation  with  it.2  From  his  own  point  of
view,  therefore,  Mr.  Bradley  is  in  a  manner  right  in
reverting  to  the  correspondence -with -reality  view  of
truth,  as  we  saw  above  (p.  118).  But  it  is  indicative
of  the  intellectual  disintegration  which  Prof.  Dewey's
bombshell  has  produced  in  the  intellectualist  camp  that
most  of  his  followers  have  tried  to  abandon  it.  Mr.
H.  W.  B.  Joseph  admits  that  "  the  conception  of  truth  as
correspondence "  is  "  a  difficult  notion "  and  "  open  to
criticism."  3  Prof.  A.  E.  Taylor  goes  so  far  as  to  suppose
that  his  master  has  dropped  it  too,4  while  both  he  and
Mr.  H.  H.  Joachim  prefer  to  rely  on  the  notion  of
'  system,'  without  perceiving  that  the  difficulty  of  the

1  Mr.  Bradley,  who  (for  purposes  of  contrast  ?)  praises  Prof.  Dewey,  also  does
not  seem  to  have  noticed  that  something  faintly  like  the  doctrine  of  '  doing  for
doing's  sake,'  which  he  vainly  tries  to  fasten  on  me,  appears  to  be  upheld  by  Prof.
Dewey,  so  that  in  this  important  respect  his  form  of  Pragmatism  would  seem  to
be  the  most  radical  in  the  field.

2  Cp.  Essays  vii.  §  i  and  xx.  §  2.  3  Mind,  xiv.  N.S.  No.  53,  p.  35.
4  Phil.  Rev.  xiv.  3,  p.  288.


iv  TRUTH AND MR.  BRADLEY  123

'  correspondence '  will  then  occur  between  the  two
'  systems,'  ideal  and  human.  Hence  the  latter,  after
assuming  an  'ideal'  of  a  self-supporting  systematic
coherence,  finds  himself  face  to  face  with  the  problem
of  connecting  it  with  actual  human  knowing.  It  then
turns  out  that  the  existence  of  error  is  inconsistent
with  that  of  his  ideal,  and  so  his  whole  essay  on  The
Nature  of  Truth  ends,  avowedly,  in  failure.  But  surely
it  should  have  been  obvious  from  the  first  that  the
notion  of  '  system '  is  not  only  purely  human  but  also
purely  formal.  It,  therefore,  could  not  be  expected  to
throw  any  light  on  the  nature  of  '  truth/  until  means
had  been  devised  for  discriminating  systematic  '  truth '
from  systematic  '  error.'  Thus  if  Mr.  Joachim  had  conde-
scended to  start  from  human  knowing,  the  problem  of
error  would  have  formed  an  initial  obstacle  and  not  a
final  crux.  These  examples  may  serve  to  show  that  the
intellectualist  theory  of  knowledge  is  as  completely  non-
plussed to-day  by  the  notion  of  truth  as  Plato  was  when
he  wrote  the  Theaetetus  more  than  2000  years  ago.1

§  8. Mr.  Bradley's  embarrassments  are  no  less  painful.

(i)  By  retaining  perforce  this  'correspondence'  view
he  pledges  himself  to  the  assumption  that  Truth  is
determined  by  Fact,  by  which  it  is  '  dictated.'  Fact
exists  whether  we  will  it  or  not,  whether  or  not
we  acknowledge  it,  and  to  it  our  "  idea  has  first  to
correspond "  (p.  3 1 2).  It  has  naturally  to  be  left
obscure  what  part  is  played  by  the  intelligence  which
accepts  this  '  dictation,'  and  how  the  facts  manage  to
'  dictate '  to  us  the  ideas  with  which  we  work  and  which
we  have  to  acknowledge  as  true,  because  they  are  thus
called  for.  And  it  is  manifestly  an  unanswerable  question
how  we  ascertain  the  nature  of  the  eternal  text,  the  super-
celestial  Koran,  which  the  dictation  reveals  ;  nor  can  we
venture  to  ask  how  we  are  to  authenticate  the  correctness
of  the  dictates  we  receive.  For  it  must  clearly  be  ignored,
that  the  '  facts '  we  recognise  are  always  relative  to  the
'truths'  we  predicate;  that  of  facts -in -themselves  and

1  Cp.  Essays  vi.  and  ii.  §  16.


124  STUDIES IN HUMANISM  iv

independent  of  our  knowledge  we  can  know  nothing.
Neither  must  we  ask  whether  these  imagined  facts  in
their  own  right  are  correctly  '  represented '  by  the  facts  as
we  take  them  to  be.

(2)  But  these  difficulties  are  old,  and  ought  to  be
familiar  to  all  but  the  naivest  realism,  of  which  Mr.
Bradley's  language  here  grows  strangely  redolent.1  Let
us  pass,  therefore,  to  a  still  more  perplexing  subject,
Mr.  Bradley's  present  handling  of  what  puzzled  him
before,  viz.  the  subjective  activity  in  the  apprehension  of
'  fact.'  For  '  truth,'  it  seems,  is  after  all  not  mere  re-
production of  '  fact ' :  the  '  right '  idea  is  not  merely
'dictated,'  it  has  also  to  be  'chosen'  (p.  311).  How
then,  we  ask,  can  this  hapless  Truth  serve  two  such
different  masters  ?  How  can  it  on  the  one  hand  adjust
itself  to  human  demands  and  interests,  and  yet  on  the
other  slavishly  copy  and  respectfully  reproduce  a  con-
genitally  'outer,'  and  already  pre-existing,  '  fact '?  No
'  logical  postulate '  is  invoked  to  perform  this  unparal-
leled feat,  but  at  times  we  find  this  subjective  influence
which  goes  to  the  making  of  '  Truth '  called  merely  a
congt  d'elire  (p.  312),  i.e.  a  formality,  presumably,  which
is  not  held  seriously  to  impair  the  dependence  of  truth
upon  an  already  determinate  '  fact.'  And  yet  in  the  same
breath  a  '  selection '  is  mentioned.  If  this  is  not  to  involve
volitional  preference  and  acceptance,  what  can  it  mean  ?
Surely  it  is  something  more  than  a  mechanical  registration
of  an  outside  '  fact '  ?  Elsewhere  it  is  admitted  that  our
idea  "  reacts  and  then  makes  the  whole  situation  to  be
different"  (p.  311),  that  "truth  may  not  be  truth  at  all
apart  from  its  existence  in  myself  and  in  other  finite
subjects,  and  at  least  very  largely  that  existence  depends
on  our  wills."  2  Nay,  our  moral  ends  in  their  turn  'dictate'
even  to  truth  and  beauty  (pp.  320-1).  Indeed  in  one
aspect  at  least  truth  is  an  ideal  construction  (pp.

324-5).

Now  what  are  we  to  make  of  this  double  nature  of

1  As  Mr.  Hoernle  also  notices  (Mind,  xiv.  p.  442,  s.f.).
3  P.  320,  italics  mine.


iv  TRUTH AND  MR.  BRADLEY  125

Truth  ?  Is  it  not  clear  that  if  there  is  to  be  a  real  selec-
tion there  must  be  real  alternatives,  which  can  be  chosen  ?
And  is  it  not  almost  as  clear  that  even  in  a  '  forced '
choice  such  alternatives  are  really  presented  ?  Even  the
poor  bread-and-butter  fly  (now  extinct)  that  would  live
only  on  the  '  weak  tea  with  plenty  of  cream  in  it '  which
it  could  not  get,  and  consequently  '  always  died,'  exempli-
fies this.  We  get  then  this  dilemma :  if  our  '  choice,'
'  selection,'  or  '  congt  cTelire '  does  not  affect  the  rigidity  of
'  fact,'  it  is  an  illusion  which  ought  not  even  to  seem  to
exist,  and  we  have  certainly  no  right  to  talk  about  it :  if,
on  the  other  hand,  there  really  is  'selection'  (as  is  asserted),
will  it  not  stultify  the  assumption  of  a  rigid  fact,  introduce
a  possibility  of  arbitrary  manipulation,  and  lead  to  al-
ternative constructions  of  reality?  In  other  words,  how
is  a  belief  in  a  real  selection  compatible  with  the  denial
of  a  real  freedom  of  human  choice  and  of  a  real  plasticity
in  reality  at  large  ?  1

Mr.  Bradley's  insistence  on  the  '  determinateness '  of
being  does  not  help  us  in  the  least.  For  he  does  not
specify  whether  he  conceives  the  determination  to  be  (a)
absolute,  or  (b]  partial.  If  (a\  then  how  is  it  to  be  altered
by  our  '  reaction  '  ?  That  reaction  too,  indeed,  must  be
wholly  determinate,  and  the  '  selecting '  must  be  mere
illusion.  If  (£)  the  determination  is  only  partial,  it  will
form  the  starting-point  for  alternative  modes  of  operating
upon  '  fact '  and  alternative  results.  That  is,  '  fact '  will
be  plastic,  and  responsive  to  our  will.

In  short,  a  constructive  conception  of  the  relation  of
Truth  to  Fact  is  nowhere  to  be  grasped.  Everywhere
Mr.  Bradley's  meaning  seems  swiftly  to  evaporate  into
metaphor  or  to  dissipate  into  ambiguity.

Not  that  these  difficulties  are  likely  to  prove  a  per-
manent embarrassment.  Eventually,  no  doubt,  some
subtlety  can  be  requisitioned  from  the  Christological
controversies  of  the  sixth  century  wherewith  to  reconcile
the  '  divine '  with  the  '  human '  nature  in  the  body  of
the  one  Truth.  But  at  present  what  Mr.  Joachim  signi-

1  Cp.  p.  392.


126  STUDIES  IN HUMANISM  iv

ficantly calls  "  the  dual nature  of  human experience "
forms  the rock on which the logic of Intellectualism
deliberately  wrecks  itself,  and  one  cannot  find  that  it  has
anything  even apparently  coherent  to  substitute  for  the
pragmatist  account  it  rejects  so  haughtily.

§  9.  We  pass  to  Mr.  Bradley's  second  point,  which  con-
cerns the  relation  of  Practice  to  Theory.  The  importance
of  this  seems  to  me  to  be  secondary,  because  our  differences
rest  largely  on  the  connotation  of  terms  whose  meaning
is  somewhat  a  matter  of  convention,  and  not  completely
settled.

I  should  not  dream,  however,  of  denying  that  the  end
must  be  "  the  fullest  and  most  harmonious  development
of  our  being  "  (p.  3 1 9),  and  still  less  that  this  "  coincides
with  the  largest  amount  of  mere  doing  " — except  in  so  far
as  I  repudiate  the  notion  of  '  mere  doing ' !  It  is  grati-
fying also  to  find  Mr.  Bradley  so  emphatic  that  "  every
possible  side  of  our  life  is  practical,"  that  there  is  nothing
"to  which  the  moral  end  is  unable  to  dictate"  (p.  320),
"  and  even  truth  and  beauty,  however  independent,  fall
under  its  sway."  These  dicta  ought  to  be  decisive  dis-
avowals of  the  old-fashioned  intellectualism,  and  it  may  be
conjectured  that,  but  for  lapses  of  inadvertence,  very  little
more  will  be  heard  of  it.

Difficulties  begin  when  we  try  to  follow  Mr.  Bradley's
attempt  nevertheless  to  provide  for  an  '  independence '  of
the  theoretical.  What  precisely  does  he  mean  by  '  inde-
pendence '  ?  We  are  told  that  though  all  the  ends  and
aspects  of  life  are  practical,  yet  in  a  sense  they  are  also
not  practical.  There  exists,  it  seems,  an  attitude  of '  mere  '
theory  and  '  mere '  apprehension,  which  has  indeed  to
demean  itself  by  '  altering  things '  and  becoming  '  prac-
tical,' but  "  so  far  as  it  remains  independent "  is  "  essen-
tially "  not  practice.  Both  truth  and  beauty  therefore  are
practical  "  incidentally  but  not  in  their  essence  "  and  "  at
once  dependent  and  free  "  (p.  320), '  free '  in  their  '  nature,'
dependent  in  their  actual  functioning.  Whether  this
claims  for  theoretic  truth  something  like  Kant's  noumenal

1 The  Nature  of  Truth,  pp.  163,  170,  etc.


,v  TRUTH AND MR.  BRADLEY  127

freedom  and  phenomenal  necessity  it  is  hard  to  say.  But
it  is  clearly  an  important  article  of  Mr.  Bradley's  faith  :
"  we  believe  in  short  in  relative  freedom "  and  "  this  is
even  dictated  by  the  interest  of  the  spiritual  common-
wealth "  and  identified  with  "  the  independent  cultivation
of  any  one  main  side  of  our  nature  "  (p.  322).

Now,  quite  humbly  and  sincerely,  I  must  here  beg  for
further  elucidation.  I  cannot  in  the  least  conceive  how
this  semi-detached  relation  is  possible.  Evidently  there
is  here  between  us  a  divergent  use  of  terms  which  must
breed  confusion.  What  (i)  means  the  antithesis  of
'  incident '  and  '  essence '  ?  And  how  are  they  related  to
Aristotle's  o-ty-t/Se/fy/eo?  and  ovcria  ?  '  Essence  '  is  a  word
which  had  a  definite,  though  highly  technical,  meaning  in
the  philosophies  of  Plato  and  Aristotle  and  their  deriva-
tives, but  which  has  now  lost  this,  and  lends  itself  to  much
looseness  of  thought.  It  clearly  does  not  imply  to  Mr.
Bradley,  as  it  does  to  a  pragmatist,  a  reference  to  purpose.
But  I  suppose  it  means  something  important.  And  if  so,
why  is  it  not  divulged  ?  Again  (2)  does  it  not  evince  a
serious  laxity  of  terminology  to  equate  a  '  relative  free-
dom '  with  '  independence  '  ?  And  it  would  be  instructive
to  watch  Mr.  Bradley  dealing  with  the  same  equation  in
other  contexts,  e.g.  in  pluralistic  attempts  to  derive  the
'  unity  '  of  the  world.

§  I  o.  However  Mr.  Bradley  may  answer  these  questions,
and  indeed  whether  or  not  he  sees  his  way  to  answer  them
at  all,  it  must  once  more  be  added  that,  be  the  argument
coherent  internally  or  meaningless,  it  is  at  all  events  irrele-
vant. It  attacks  a  position  which  has  never  been  defended  ;
it  fails  to  repel  the  real  attack.  For  it  is  not  our  intention
to  turn  dualists,  to  prove  that  Theory  and  Practice  are
fundamentally  different,  and  foreign  to  each  other,  and
then  to  enslave  Theory  to  Practice,  Intellect  to  Will.
Something  of  the  sort  may  possibly  be  extracted  from
that  great  matrix  of  the  most  various  doctrines,  the  philo-
sophy of  Kant.1  But  we  contend  rather  that  there  can

1  I  do  not  say  justly,  because  I  am  convinced  that  if  Kant  had  been  twenty
years  younger  when  he  attained  his  insight  (such  as  it  was)  into  the  nature  of


128  STUDIES  IN HUMANISM  iv

be  no  independence  of  theory  (except  in  popular  lan-
guage) and  no  opposition  to  practice,  because  theory  is  an
outgrowth  of  practice  and  incapable  of  truly  '  independent '
existence.  And  what  our  epistemology  tries  to  do  is  to
trace  this  reference  to  practice  throughout  the  whole
structure,  and  in  all  the  functions,  of  the  intellect.  There
is  no  question  therefore  of  degrading,  and  still  less  of
annihilating,  the  intellect,  but  merely  one  of  its  reinter-
pretation.  We  deny  that  properly  speaking  such  a  thing
as  pure  or  mere  intellection  can  occur.  What  is  loosely
so  called  is  really  also  purposive  thought  pursuing  what
seems  to  it  a  desirable  end.  Only  in  such  cases  the  ends
may  be  illusory,  or  may  appear  valuable  for  reasons  other
than  those  which  determine  their  value.1  What,  there-
fore, we  have  really  attempted  is  to  overcome  the  anti-
thesis of  theory  and  practice,  and  to  unify  human  life  by
emphasising  the  all -pervading  purposiveness  of  human
conduct.

Such  attempts  at  unification  are  not  new,  but  they
have  usually  been  conducted  with  an  intellectualist  bias,
and  with  the  purpose  of  reducing  all  'willing'  and  'feel-
ing '  to  cognition.  And  this  has  often  been  supposed  to
be  something  magnificent  and  inspiring.  I  cannot  see,
however,  that  there  is  any  greater  spiritual  elevation  in
saying  All  is  Thought  than  in  saying  all  is  Feeling  or  Will.
The  only  advantage  which  the  voluntarist  formulation  of
the  unity  of  the  faculties  can  claim  over  its  rivals  is  that
'  will '  is  de  facto  conceived  as  in  a  manner  intermediate
between  '  thought '  and  '  feeling.'  Hence  it  is  easiest  to
describe  all  mental  life  in  voluntarist  terms.  If  either  of
the  others  is  taken  as  fundamental,  '  will '  easily  succumbs
to  an  illusory  '  analysis  ' ;  it  can  be  termed  the  strongest
'  desire  '  or  the  '  self-realisation  '  of  ideas.  But  it  is  not
so  easy  to  describe  either  of  the  extremes  in  terms  of

postulation,  he  would  have  rewritten  his  Critique  of  Pure  Reason  on  pragmatist
lines.  At  all  events  he  lays  the  foundations  of  Pragmatism  in  a  remark  no  prag-
matist would  seek  to  better,  when  he  says  that  ' '  all  interest  is  ultimately  practical,
and  even  that  of  the  speculative  reason  is  merely  conditional,  and  only  complete  in
its  practical  use"  (Krit.  d.  prak.  Vern.,  II.  2,  iii.  s.f. ),
1  Cp.  Humanism,  pp.  58-60.


iv  TRUTH AND MR. BRADLEY  129

the  other.  Hence  '  panlogism '  of  the  Hegelian  type
is  a  height  to  which  intellectualism  rarely  attains,  and
even  this  is  only  achieved  by  regarding  '  feeling '  as
irrational  '  contingency '  which  is  '  nothing  for  thought,'
i.e.  inexplicable.  More  commonly  intellectualism  has  to
come  to  terms  with  '  feeling,'  as  in  Mr.  Bradley's  own
philosophy,  which  derides  the  Hegelian's  '  unearthly  ballet
of  bloodless  categories,'  and  as  Mr.  Sturt  has  shown,  in
some  respects  exalts  '  feeling '  even  above  intellect.1

But  the  truth  is  that  the  whole  question  seems  merely
one  of  the  convenience  and  use  of  psychological  classifica-
tions, and  that  none  of  these  descriptions  have  explanatory
value.  All  three  '  faculties '  are  at  bottom  only  labels  for
describing  the  activities  of  what  may  be  called  indifferently
a  unitary  personality,  or  a  reacting  organism.

And  so  when  Mr.  Bradley  wonders  (p.  327)  what  I  am
"  to  reply  when  some  one  chooses  to  assert  that  this  same
whole  is  intelligence  or  feeling,"  I  am  not  dismayed.  I
should  merely  underline  the  "  chooses"  and  beg  both
parties  to  observe  that  this  is  what  they  are  severally
'  choosing  to  assert]  and  therefore  arbitrary.  Not  more
arbitrary,  doubtless,  than  my  own  choice,  but  far  more
awkward  for  their  scheme  of  classification  than  for  mine.
For  on  mine  I  should  expect  to  find  that  ultimate  questions
sooner  or  later  involved  acts  of  choice ;  as  indeed  I  have
repeatedly,  though  perhaps  too  unobtrusively,  pointed  out.2
Moreover,  I  have  expressly  guarded  myself  against  this
particular  criticism  by  passages  in  Personal  Idealism
(p.  86)  and  Humanism  (p.  53).  These  no  doubt  occur
in  footnotes,  but  then  Mr.  Bradley  will  hardly  accuse  me
of  putting  too  much  into  footnotes.

§11.  Finally,  before  leaving  this  part  of  Mr.  Bradley's
argument  I  must  say  something  about  his  definition  of
Practice  (p.  317)  as  an  alteration  of  existence.  This  seems
altogether  too  narrow.  For  (i)  I  cannot  possibly  assent
to  Mr.  Bradley's  proposal 3  to  exclude  not  only  theoretic

1  Idola  Theatri,  chaps,  v.  and  ix.  I  do  not  think,  however,  that  this  homage
paid  to  feeling  is  really  anything  but  a  reluctant  recognition  of  the  difficulties  of  the
situation.

3  E.g.  Humanism,  pp.  49,  153,  157.  3  P.  334.

K


130  STUDIES IN HUMANISM  ,v

interests,  but  all  values,  ethical  and  aesthetical,  from  the
sphere  of  '  practice.'  It  is  an  integral  part  of  the
Humanist  position  to  contend  that  '  truths '  are  values,
and  that  values  are  all  -  important  and  really  effica-
cious, being  the  real  motives  which  make,  unmake,  and
alter  reality,  because  the  whole  of  our  practical  activity
aims  at  their  attainment.  To  take  the  activity  in  abstrac-
tion from  the  values  it  aims  at,  and  to  conceive  the  values
without  reference  to  the  activity  which  realises  them,
seems  to  me  equally  preposterous.

Hence  (2)  the  means  to  an  alteration  of  existence
must  surely  be  called  practical,  and  among  these  are  of
course  included  the  greater  part  of  what  have  hitherto
been  regarded  as  the  '  purely  theoretic '  functions.  If  Mr.
Bradley  will  not  concede  this,  cadit  quaestio}  I,  at  any
rate,  should  never  have  asserted  the  absorption  of  the
theoretical  in  the  practical,  if  I  had  thought  that  the  means
to  an  end  were  excluded  from  the  practical.  And  (3)
we  do  not,  even  in  practice,  always  seem  to  aim  at  altera-
tion of  existence.  The  preservation  of  the  desirable  seems
frequently  to  be  our  end.

Again  (4)  the  fruition  of  the  end  attained  would  fall
outside  Mr.  Bradley's  definition.  Whereas  to  me  it  would
seem  intolerable  to  exclude  from  Practice,  e.g.  the  'Evepyeia
'Ajuvifffiaf,  which  forms  the  ideal  of  life  and  the  goal  of
effort.  I  could  wish  only  that  it  were  practicable,  as  well
as  practical  !

It  seems  necessary,  therefore,  to  conceive  '  practice'  more
broadly  as  the  control  of  experience,  and  to  define  as  'practical'
whatever  serves,  directly  or  indirectly,  to  control  events.  So
to  conceive  it  will  probably  render  it  quite  obvious  that  the
aim  of  the  doctrine  of  the  '  subordination '  of  '  theory '  to
'  practice '  (more  properly  of  the  secondary  character  of  the
former)  is  merely  voluntarism,  merely  to  make  '  practice '
cover  practically  (i.e.  with  the  exception  of  certain  intel-
lectualistic  delusions)  the  whole  of  life,  or  in  other  words
to  insist  on  bringing  out  the  active  character  of  experience,

1  He  finally  (p.  334  s.f. )  seems  to  concede  this  when  he  says  "  in  a  secondary
sense  anything  is  practical  so  far  as  it  is  taken  as  subserving  a  practical  change."


iv  TRUTH  AND  MR.  BRADLEY  131

just  as  it  is  the  aim  of  intellectualism,  alike  in  its  sensa-
tionalistic  and  in  its  rationalistic  forms,  to  obscure  and
exclude  this  character  and  to  declare  the  conception  of
activity  unmeaning.1  Intellectualism,  in  short,  is  deeply
committed  to  what  Mr.  Sturt  has  well  denominated  '  the
fallacy  of  Passivism  '  in  all  its  forms.

If,  on  the  other  hand,  we  press  Mr.  Bradley's  remark
that  "  my  practice  is  the  alteration  by  me  of  existence
inward  and  outward,"  it  would  seem  that  the  notion  of  an
'  independent '  theoretic  life  must  speedily  collapse.  For
even  the  most  '  theoretical '  of  thoughts  will  induce  at
least  an  inward  '  alteration.'  And  this,  presumably,  will
show  itself  in  differences  of  '  outward '  action,  and  so  have
'  practical  consequences.'

If,  again,  '  alteration  of  existence  '  is  not  meant  un-
equivocally to  imply  the  activity  of  a  human  agent,  if  it
is  intended  to  cover  the  possibility  that  it  may  come
about  of  itself,  or  as  the  result  of  an  immanent  self-develop-
ment of  a  non-human  Absolute,  it  would  be  interesting
to  know  whether  Mr.  Bradley  would  attribute  '  practice '
also  to  his  Absolute,  or  whether  it  would  resemble  the
Aristotelian  '  gods '  in  having  none.  In  short,  the  formula
is  woefully  lacking  in  explicitness.

•  But  even  if  we  accepted  Mr.  Bradley's  definition,  we
should  continue  to  be  perplexed  by  his  needlessly  ambigu-
ous use  of  '  practical.'  We  seem  to  find  the  '  practical '
subdivided  into  the  practical  and  the  non-practical  (p.  319):
we  are  told  (pp.  322  s.f.  and  333)  that  Mr.  Bradley  is
clear  (!)  that  in  the  end  there  is  no  distinction  between
'  theory '  and  '  practice ' ;  and  then  again  (what  I  own  I
had  suspected)  that  there  are  several  senses  of  '  practical '
such  that  what  in  one  sense  is  practical  is  not  so  in
another  (p.  323).2  But  is  it  not  the  duty  of  a  writer  who

1  Cp. Mr. Bradley's teaching on this subject {Appearance  and  Reality?
pp.  116-117  and  483-485)  and  the  comments  of  Prof.  James  in  his  admirable  paper
on  '  the  Experience  of  Activity'  in  the  Psychological  Review  for  January  1905  (xii.  i).

2  In  his  Note  on  pp.  332-334  Mr.  Bradley  recurs  to  the  point  in  a  way  which
seems  to  betray  a  feeling  that  his  first treatment  was not  wholly  satisfactory.
After  again  asserting  that  the  distinction  of  practical  and  non-practical  is  ulti-
mately one  of  degree,  he  lays  it  down  that  nevertheless  a  '  practical '  activity  may
be  so  called  "  when  and  so  far  as  its  product  directly  qualifies  the  existence  which


132  STUDIES  IN HUMANISM  iv

confessedly  uses  a  term  in  several  senses  to  explain
distinctly  what  those  senses  are  ?

§  12.  One  hardly  knows  how  much  notice  to  take  of  an
apparently  casual  remark  on  page  322  to  the  effect  that  if
I  understood  my  own  doctrine,  I  should  have  to  hold  that
any  end  however  perverted  was  rational,  and  any  idea
however  mad  was  truth,  so  soon  as  any  one  insisted  on  it.
For  subsequently  (p.  329)  Mr.  Bradley  seems  graciously
to  decide  that  he  will  not  attribute  so  '  insane '  a  doctrine
even  to  me.  Why  then  did  he  mention  it  as  if  it  were
relevant?  Did  he  not  know  that  he  was  merely  dishing
up  an  old  objection  to  Protagoras,  the  effeteness  of  which
even  Plato  was  candid  enough  to  avow  ? l  Since  then
this  caricature  has  often  been  exposed,  most  recently  in
the  explicit  account  of  the  development  of  objective  truth
out  of  subjective  valuations  given  in  Humanism,  pages
58-60,  its  reappearance  now  that  the  conceptions  of
variation  and  selection  are  in  universal  use  is  simply
stupefying,  and  if  it  is  intended  as  a  serious  argument,  it
shows  clearly  that  Mr.  Bradley  has  yet  to  grasp  the  essen-
tial difference  between  an  axiom  and  a  postulate.  And
in  any  case  Mr.  Bradley  could  do  his  followers  a  great
service  if,  instead  of  so  crudely  travestying  my  argument,
he  supplied  them  with  an  alternative  to  it,  and  showed
them  how  to  deal  with  the  empirical  existence  of  the
infinite  variety  in  ends  and  ideas.  Or  does  he  not  admit
this  to  constitute  a  scientific  problem,  and  is  it  merely  in
"  appearance  "  that  our  views  diverge  ?

§  I  3.  Mr.  Bradley's  article  is  so  rich  in  provocations  of  all
sorts  that  I  forbear  to  reply  to  all  of  them  on  this  occasion.
Still  I  should  have  liked  to  discuss  the  difficulties  he  raises

is  altered." — This  involves  a  distinct  correction  of  the  definition  given  before.  A
little  later  he  admits  that  "in  a  secondary  sense  anything  is  practical  so  far  as  it
is  taken  as  subserving  a  practical  change." — This  surely  would  include  every-
thing and  amply  account  for  the  '  perception  of  a  horse '  which  Mr.  Bradley  is
pleased  to  call  a  'revelation.'  For,  as  the  psychologists  are  daily  showing,  our
very  modes  of  perception  are  relative  to  our  practical  needs.  The  human  eye  is
not  like  the  eye  of  an  eagle  or  a  cat,  because  it  is  used  differently,  and  the  per-
ception of  the  horse  would  never  have  been  attained,  unless  it  had  been  useful  to
such  of  our  ancestors  as  had  acquired  eyes.  Presumably  the  eyes  of  Micromegas
would  be  fitted  to  see  a  horse  as  little  as  Mr.  Bradley's  are  to  see  a  microbe  or  a
ghost.

1 Theaetetus,  166-7,  and  cp.  Essay  ii.  §  5-6.


iv  TRUTH AND  MR.  BRADLEY  133

about  the  conception  of  Will,  which  seems  to  be  the  only
other  point  which  may  be  thought  to  possess  some  rele-
vance to  the  controversy,  did  we  not  seem  so  far  from
agreeing  on  the  meaning  of  the  term.  And  so  rather
than  plunge  into  a  long  disquisition  on  the  proper  senses
of  '  Will,'  and  their  proper  correlation,  I  will  relinquish
the  attempt  to  clear  up  matters.  I  will  remark  only  that
Mr.  Bradley's  second  definition  of  (a  depersonalised)  Will
as  "  a  process  of  passage  from  idea  into  existence  "  is  as
intellectualistic  and  as  little  acceptable  as  "  the  self-realisa-
tion of  an  idea,"  and  am  curious  to  know  how  he  gets  from
one  to  the  other  without  exemplifying  the  pragmatist
doctrine  that  definitions  are  relative  to  purpose.  More-
over, it  seems  exceedingly  arbitrary  and  inconvenient  to
deny  the  volitional  quality  of  an  achievement  simply
because  the  Will  has  realised  itself,  and  now  accepts  and
sustains  the  situation  it  has  created.  In  the  theological
language  Mr.  Bradley  affects  in  this  article,  this  would  be
equivalent  to  the  assertion  that  because  God  is  the  Creator,
He  cannot  also  be  the  Sustainer,  of  the  universe.  I  con-
clude, therefore,  by  pointing  out  that  all  the  arguments
which  Mr.  Bradley  bases  on  his  conceptions  of  Will  are
to  me,  once  more,  corrupted  by  irrelevance.

I  shrink,  similarly,  from  meeting  many  other  interest-
ing points  (most  of  them  highly  barbed  !)  with  which  Mr.
Bradley's  paper  bristles.  The  most  relevant  of  these
would  seem  to  be  his  curiosity  about  Prof.  Bain's  theory
of  belief  (p.  315),  but  I  will  not  attempt  to  say  how
far  I  think  he  has  refuted  it,  because  I  have  always  found
it  very  hard  to  recognise  it  in  the  account  given  of  it  in
Mr.  Bradley's  Logic  (as  usual  without  specific  references).
I  have,  however,  sufficiently  justified  my  conviction  that,  so
far  from  refuting  Pragmatism  by  anticipation,  Mr.  Bradley
appears  to  me  to  have  very  nearly  stumbled  into  it.

§  1 4.  On  page  331  Mr.  Bradley  appears  to  summarise
under  four  heads  that  part  of  his  paper  which  may  be
called  argumentative.  In  the  first  charge  that  '  the
whole  essence '  of  truth  has  been  subverted,  I  would  read
'  analysed '  for  '  subverted.'  The  second  calls  it '  a  thought-


134  STUDIES  IN  HUMANISM  iv

less  compromise '  to  treat  the  result  of  past  volitions  as
being  my  will  and  choice.  But  why  a  '  compromise '  ?
With  whom  or  what?  What  have  I  compromised  but
Mr.  Bradley's  preconceptions,  by  declining  to  ignore  the
volitional  acceptance  in  the  recognition  of  '  fact '  or  to
plunge  into  the  flagrant  contradictions  of  his  own
account  ?  And  why  '  thoughtless  '  ?  Because  it  does  not
lend  itself  to  Mr.  Bradley's  travesties  ?  The  third  charge
is  partly  irrelevant,  in  so  far  as  it  rests  on  definitions  of
'  will '  which  I  reject,  partly  answered  by  the  account  I
have  given  of  the  factual  basis  in  our  cognitive  procedure.

As  for  Mr.  Bradley's  fourth  difficulty,  I  must  own  that
I  should  never  have  guessed  from  his  very  perfunctory
and  obscure  exposition  of  it  that  he  attached  any  par-
ticular importance  to  it.  And  even  after  I  had  perceived
that  it  was  to  be  made  into  a  capital  charge,  it  failed  to
impress  me.  And  so  it  seems  sufficient  to  point  out  that
if  knowledge  be  conceived  as  secondary  without  being
divorced  from  action,  and  if  due  reflection  is  thus  rendered
a  useful  habit,  there  is  no  paradox  in  holding  that  it  may
also  profitably  reflect  on  its  own  genesis.  So  far  from
condemning  philosophic  reflection,  I  could  even  wish  that
its  use,  especially  when  conducted  on  the  right  humanist
lines,  were  more  extensive.

§  15.  These  replies  would  perhaps  suffice,  were  it  not
that  Mr.  Bradley's  paper  contains  much  more  than  argu-
ments. He  makes  also  what  looks  like  an  attempt  to
arouse  theological  prejudice  against  us.

It  is  very  surprising  to  observe  the  general  air  of
religiosity  in  which  Mr.  Bradley  has  enveloped  himself.
I  looked  in  vain  for  my  beloved  bete  noire,  the  Absolute,
and  wondered  why  it  had  been  sent  to  dwell  with  Hegel
in  eternal  night.  In  its  place  one  found  not  only  the  old
ambiguous  use  of  '  God '  in  all  its  philosophic  deceptive-
ness,1  but  even  allusions  to  the  Jehovah  of  Mr.  Bradley's
youth,  and  wondered  why  the  Baal  of  '  Jericho '  received
no  honourable  mention.  Now,  as  I  had  always  respected
Mr.  Bradley's  philosophy  for  never  seeking  to  curry

1  Cp.  Essay  xii.  §  6.


iv  TRUTH AND  MR.  BRADLEY  135

favour  with  theology  by  playing  on  ambiguous  phrases,
I  was  naturally  greatly  puzzled  by  this  change  of  face.
Was  it  to  be  regarded  as  a  reversion,  like  the  return  to
the  '  correspondence  '  view  of  truth,  or  respected  as  an
indication  of  a  change  of  heart,  of  a  pathetic  recrudes-
cence of  what  Mr.  Bradley  had  learnt  (or,  as  he  says,
'imbibed')  in  his  youth  about  Jehovah  (p.  332)?  Or
were  we  witnessing  a  strategic  movement  of  the  absolutist
host,  necessitated  by  the  unexpected  force  of  the  enemy,
and  a  recoil  of  its  '  left '  upon  its  '  right '  wing  ?  Or  lastly,
was  it  to  be  interpreted,  less  charitably,  as  an  attempt  to
enlist  religious  prejudices  against  the  new  philosophy  by
unfair  appeals  to  a  few  travestied  formulas  of  a  musty
theology.

The  last  seemed  the  boldest  and  riskiest  strategy,  and
I  should  have  thought  Mr.  Bradley  too  prudent  to  attempt
it.  The  controversial  maxim  verketzern  gilt  nicht  has
not  yet  taken  such  firm  root  in  Oxford  that  it  should  be
superfluous  for  us  to  safeguard  ourselves  by  repudiating
an  interpretation  and  an  impression  which  his  language
may  countenance.  I  must  protest  therefore  against  the
insinuation  that  because  our  views  do  not  conform  with
the  dogmatic  definition  of  religion  it  has  pleased  Mr.
Bradley  to  impose,  we  may  fitly  be  branded  as  irreligious
and  as  blasphemers  against  the  deity  whom  Mr.  Bradley
so  strangely  denominates  "  the  lord  of  suffering  and  of  sin
and  of  death  "  (p.  315 ).  Now  I  am  well  aware  that  the
definition  of  religion  is  a  difficult  matter,  and  that  many
of  its  empirical  manifestations  accord  ill  with  any  of  its
definitions.  But  since  the  publication  of  James's  Varieties
of  Religious  Experience,  I  should  have  thought  that  there
were  two  things  that  even  the  hardiest  apriorist  would
have  shrunk  from.  The  first  is  dogmatising  concerning
what  religion  must  mean,  without  troubling  to  inquire
what  psychologically  the  various  forms  of  religious  senti-
ment have  meant  and  do  mean.  Now  if  Mr.  Bradley  had
condescended  for  a  moment  to  contemplate  the  objective
facts  of  concrete  religion,  he  could  not  but  have  been
struck  with  the  fact  that  Humanism  has  the  closest


136  STUDIES IN HUMANISM  iv

affinities  with  such  important  religious  phenomena  as
Newman's  'grammar  of  assent'  and  the  widespread
theology  of  Ritschl.  And  from  James  also  he  might
have  learnt  that  amid  all  the  varieties  of  religious  feeling
the  one  most  constant  conception  of  the  divine  has  been,
not  some  desiccated  formula  about  the  Unity  of  the
Universe,  but  a  demand  for  something  to  respond  to  the
outcry  of  the  human  heart.

I  should  have  thought,  therefore,  secondly,  that  what-
ever might  be  said  about  the  logical  subversiveness  of  the
new  views,  their  value  for  religion  was  secured  against
attack.  For  has  not  James's  doctrine  of  the  Will  to
believe  made  manifest  the  pragmatic  value  of  faith,  and
put  the  religious  postulates  on  the  same  footing  with
those  of  science?1  Nay,  has  not  the  common  charge  against
us  been  that  our  doctrines  pander  to  all  the  crudest
superstitions  of  the  vulgar  ?  Mr.  Bradley,  I  suppose,
acquits  us  on  this  charge  ;  but  his  own  is  far  less  plausible.

And  when  one  remembers  further  how  Mr.  Bradley
has  himself  described  religion  as  mere  '  appearance '
riddled  with  contradictions  and  denied  that  "  a  God
which  is  all  in  all  is  the  God  of  religion,"  2  it  seems — well
— slightly  humorous  to  find  him  now  setting  up  standards
of  '  orthodox '  theology  and  solemnly  anathematising
those  who  have  doubted  the  omnipotence  of  their  '  God  '
and  the  religious  value  of  his  (p.  331,  cp.  p.  316).  One
is  inclined  merely  to  retort  in  the  words  of  Valentine —
" Lass  unsern  Herr  Gott  aus  dem  Spass"

His  attacks  (p.  331)  on  the  two  clerical  contributors
to  Personal  Idealism,  Dr.  Rashdall  and  particularly  Dr.
Bussell,  are  peculiarly  invidious  as  being  ad  captandum
appeals  to  "  the  more  orthodox  theologians "  and  preju-
dicial to  their  professional  status.  But  it  seems  some-
what doubtful  whether  he  will  find  any  one  nai'vely
'  orthodox '  enough  to  reduce  Christianity  to  a  sort
of  Crypto -Buddhism  at  the  behest  of  the  author  of
Appearance  and  Reality.

1  Essay  xvi.  §§2,  9.
2  Appearance  and  Reality ;  p.  448  (ist  ed. ). Cp.  Essay  xii.  §6.


iv  TRUTH AND MR.  BRADLEY  137

Mr.  Bradley  must  have  been  well  aware  that  his
language  was  wholly  '  popular.'  He  must  have  known,
as  well  as  Dr.  Rashdall  or  I,  that  the  '  omnipotence '  he
claims  for  his  Absolute  is  not  the  '  omnipotence '  of  the
theologians,  and  that  his  Absolute  is  not  obviously  identical
with  the  superhuman  power,  adequate  to  all  human  needs,
which  the  religious  sentiments  legitimately  postulate.
He  must  know  too  that  in  no  religion  is  the  Divine,  the
principle  of  Help  and  Justice,  ever  actually  regarded  as
omnipotent  in  practice.1  Again,  seeing  that  he  has  plainly
shown  us  that  his  Absolute  possesses  the  religious  attri-
butes only  as  it  possesses  all  else,  and  that  for  all  human
purposes  it  is  impotent  and  worthless,  was  it  not  most
injudicious  to  attack  us  on  religious  grounds  ?  And  has
he  not  justly  provoked  the  retort  that  we  feel  his  whole
Absolutism  to  be  a  worthless  technicality,  if  its  true
character  is  revealed,  and  a  fulsome  fraud  upon  all  man's
most  sacred  feelings,  if  it  is  not  ?

§  1 6.  Curiously  enough,  however,  Mr.  Bradley's  paper
does  not  close  with  the  enigmatic  piety  which  has  provoked
these  strictures.  It  is  followed  by  a  fit  of  agnosticism
which  might  have  come  straight  out  of  Herbert  Spencer's
Autobiography?  The  promise  of  philosophy  "  even  in  the
end  is  no  clear  theory  nor  any  complete  understanding  or
vision  "  ;  "  its  certain  reward  is  a  continual  evidence  and
a  heightened  apprehension  of  the  ineffable  mystery  of
life."  Only  Spencer  and  Mr.  Bradley  tend  in  opposite
directions  :  the  former,  more  truly,  feels  that  this  final
incomprehensibility  is  a  "  paralysing  thought,"  and  inclines
towards  the  authoritative  dogma  of  some ,  religion  that
will  claim  to  know ;  the  latter  seems  to  regard  it  as
edifying,  and  abandons  the  religious  formulas  to  dis-
burden himself  of  his  contradictions  in  the  bottomless  pit
of  the  Absolute.  To  the  one,  religion  holds  out  more
hopes  of  knowledge  than  philosophy,  to  the  other,  less.
But  as  a  satisfaction  to  the  philosophic  craving,  to  the
will-to-know,  neither  policy,  alas,  seems  to  promise  much.

1  Cp.  Essay,  xii.  §  6.
2  Cp.  that  work,  ii.  pp.  469-471.


138  STUDIES IN HUMANISM  iv

The  philosopher's  reasoning  is  rewarded  merely  with  the
sorry  privilege  accorded  by  Polyphemus  to  Odysseus.

For  what  profit  is  it,  if  break  down  it  must,  that  it
should  perish  somewhat  later  ?  What  a  satire  too  it  is
upon  a  philosophic  quest  that  started  with  the  most  con-
fident anticipations  of  the  rationality  of  the  universe  to
have  to  end  in  such  fiasco  !  Can  Mr.  Bradley  wonder,  if
this  is  really  all  his  philosophy  can  come  to,  that  philo-
sophy is  disregarded  and  despised,  or  that  other  philo-
sophers prefer  to  bend  their  footsteps  in  more  promising
directions  ?  And  it  seems  still  stranger  that  it  should  be
deemed  appropriate  to  scathe  all  fresh  attempts  at  ex-
ploration with  unmeasured  contumely  a  priori.  Surely  a
somewhat  humbler  and  less  '  hybristic '  note  would  better
become  the  actual  situation  !

§  1 7.  One  notes  indeed  with  satisfaction  that  in  places
Mr.  Bradley  seems  to  evince  some  dim  consciousness  of
the  real  predicament.  At  all  events  he  is  growing  more
liberal  in  throwing  open  for  discussion  questions  which
we  have  always  been  assured  on  his  side  had  been
definitively  closed.  We  may  welcome,  therefore,  and  note
for  future  use,  Mr.  Bradley's  admission  of  "  well-known
difficulties  "  in  the  infinity  of  God  (p.  331 ),  his  description
of  pluralism  as  "  a  very  promising  adventure,"  and  the
"  pleasure "  it  would  give  him  to  learn  that  its  diffi-
culties can  be  surmounted  (p.  327).  The  tone  of  these
admissions,  it  is  true,  still  smacks  of  the  judge  who  was
'  open  to  conviction,  but  by  Jove  would  like  to  see  the
man  who  could  convince  him.'  And  he  hastens  to  add
that  there  are  '  obvious  difficulties '  (not  stated)  on  the
other  side.  Nor  does  he  make  it  clear  why,  if  real  anti-
nomies exist  on  these  points,  he  should  have  so  decisively
adopted  the  one  alternative,  instead  of  suspending  judgment
and  looking  out  for  a  real  solution.

But  on  the  whole  I  read  these  admissions  as  a  hopeful
sign  that  the  dwellers  in  '  Jericho '  are  not  so  content  with
their  gloomy  ghettoes  as  they  had  seemed,  nor  so  sure  that
it  is  in  very  deed  the  heavenly  Jerusalem.  Ere  long  they
may  come  out  to  parley  of  their  own  accord  and  offer  us


iv  TRUTH AND MR.  BRADLEY  139

terms,  nay  themselves  dismantle  antiquated  defences  that
are  useless  against  modern  ordnance !  And  when  the
stronghold  of  the  Absolute  is  once  declared  an  open  town,
no  longer  cramped  within  walls,  nor  serving  as  a  strait
prison  for  the  human  soul,  it  can  be  refurbished  and
extended  for  those  to  dwell  in  whose  tastes  its  habitations
please.  We  too  shall  then  have  no  further  motive  to  molest
an  Absolutism  which  has  ceased  to  oppress  us  and  to  be
a  menace  to  the  liberty  of  thought.  We  may  still  decline
to  go  to  'Jericho,'  and  prefer  the  open  country,  abiding
in  our  tents  with  the  household  gods  who  suffice  for  our
needs  and  need  our  co-operation  because  of  their  "  pathetic
weakness."1  But  why  should  we  contend  against  Absolutes
like  Prof.  Taylor's,  which  is  finally  reduced  to  an  emotional
postulate,2  or  Prof.  Royce's 3  genial  conception,  which
becomes  the  ultimate  satisfaction  of  our  social  instincts
and  forms  a  sort  of  salon  where  all  are  at  home  and  can
meet  their  friends,  so  long  as  we  escape  the  grim  all-
compelling  monster  of  Mr.  Bradley's  nightmare  ?  And
when  we  are  no  longer  treated  as  Ishmaelites,  there  will
be  peace  in  the  land,  a  peace  attained,  not  by  what  must
surely  by  this  time  seem  the  impossible  method  of  snub-
bing and  snuffing  out  the  new  philosophy,  but  by  a
mutual  toleration  based  on  respect  for  the  various  idio-
syncrasies of  men.4  Nor  will  there  then  any  longer  be
occasion  to  reproach  Philosophy  that  its  favourite  idolon
fori  is  simply  Billingsgate.

§  1 8.  Life  will  be  easier  in  those  days,  and  with  it  philo-
sophy. For  philosophers  will  have  ceased  to  confound
obscurity  with  profundity,  difficulty  with  truth,  and  to
expect  that  because  some  truths  are  hard,  therefore  all
hard  sayings  are  true.  Nor  will  they  any  longer  feel

1  In  Dr.  Bussell's  striking  phrase  (Personal  Idealism,  p.  341).

a  Elements  of  Metaphysics,  p.  317  ;  cp.  p.  253,  and  Professor  Taylor's  dis-
claimer in  Mind,  N.S.  No.  57,  p.  86,  from  which  it  must  be  inferred  that  the
claim  to  universal  cogency  is  maintained  and  that  the  argument  for  a  postulated
Absolute  was  only  ad  hominem.  But  my  objection  to  a  postulated  Absolute  is
not  to  the  principle  as  such,  but  merely  to  the  fact  that  this  postulate  frustrates
itself.

3  On  the  Eternal  and  the  Practical.

4  Cp.  Essay  xii.  §§  8,  10.


140  STUDIES IN HUMANISM  iv

aggrieved,  like  Mr.  Bradley  (p.  335  s.f.}  at  the  prospect
of  everything  that  would  render  philosophy  easier  and
more  attractive.  For  they  will  realise  that  the  intrinsic
difficulties  of  thinking  as  an  exercise  of  faculty  will  always
suffice  to  preserve  the  '  dignity '  of  philosophy,  and  that  it
is  needless  to  enhance  them  by  adding  unintelligibilities
and  aimless  word-play.

Philosophy  will  always  be  hard,  I  agree.  In  some
respects  and  for  three  reasons  :  because  thinking  is  the
hardest  of  exercises,  because  it  presupposes  much  special
knowledge  to  grasp  the  use  of  general  conceptions  which
are  devoid  of  meaning  in  abstraction  from  the  experience
they  serve  to  organise,  and  because  to  rethink  old  con-
ceptions into  new  ones  is  irksome  and  frequently  demands
a  flash  of  insight  before  we  can  really  '  see '  it  all.  But
one  might  well  despair  of  the  human  reason  if  what  had
once  been  clearly  thought  could  not  always  be  lucidly
expressed.  Obscurity  of  expression  is  nothing  admirable  ;
it  is  always  a  bar  to  the  comprehension  of  any  subject,
and  it  is  fatal  in  a  subject  where  the  intrinsic  difficulties
are  so  great  and  the  psychological  variations  of  the
minds  which  apprehend  them  so  extreme  ;  it  is,  moreover,
an  easy  refuge  for  confusion  of  thought.  And  it  is
surely  one  of  the  quaintest  of  academic  superstitions  to
think  that  obscurity  and  confusion  of  thought  have  as
such,  '  pedagogical  value.'  In  view  of  these  facts  what
reason  can  there  be  for  making  Philosophy  anything
like  so  obscure,  hard,  repulsive,  and  unprofitable  as  the
intellectualist  systems  which  have  obfuscated  us  so  long?


THE  AMBIGUITY  OF  TRUTH1

ARGUMENT

The  great  antithesis  between  Pragmatism  and  Intellectualism  as  to  the  nature
of  Truth.  I.  The  predication  of  truth  a  specifically  human  habit.  The
existence  of  false  claims  to  truth.  How  then  are  false  claims  to  be  dis-
criminated from  true  ?  Intellectualism  fails  to  answer  this,  and  succumbs
to  the  ambiguity  of  truth  ('  claim  '  and  '  validity ').  Illustrations  from
Plato  and  others.  II.  Universality  and  importance  of  the  ambiguity.
The  refusal  of  intellectualism  to  consider  it.  III.  The  pragmatic
answer.  Relevance  and  value  relative  to  purpose.  Hence  '  truth '  a
valuation.  The  convergence  of  values.  IV.  The  evaluation  of  claims
proceeds  pragmatically.  '  Truth  '  implies  relevance  and  usually  reference
to  proximate  ends.  V.  The  pragmatic  definition  of  '  Truth ' :  its  value
for  refuting  naturalism  and  simplifying  the  classification  of  the  sciences.
VI.  A  challenge  to  Intellectualism  to  refute  Pragmatism  by  evaluating
any  truth  non-pragmatically.

THE  purpose  of  this  essay  is  to  bring  to  a  clear  issue,  and
so  possibly  to  the  prospect  of  a  settlement,  the  conflict  of
opinion  now  raging  in  the  philosophic  world  as  to  the
nature  of  the  conception  of  '  truth.'  This  issue  is  an
essential  part  of  the  greater  conflict  between  the  old  in-
tellectualist  and  the  new  '  pragmatist '  school  of  thought,
which  extends  over  the  whole  field  of  philosophy.  For,
in  consequence  of  the  difference  between  the  aims  and
methods  of  the  two  schools,  there  is  probably  no  intel-
lectualist  treatment  of  any  problem  which  does  not  need,
and  will  not  bear,  restatement  in  voluntarist  terms.  But
the  clash  of  these  two  great  antithetical  attitudes  towards
life  is  certainly  more  dramatic  at  some  points  than  at
others.  The  influence  of  belief  upon  thought,  its  value

1  A  revised  form,  somewhat  expanded  in  §  i,  of  a  paper  which  appeared  in
Jlfindfor  April  1906  (N.S.  No.  58).

141


142  STUDIES  IN HUMANISM  v

and  function  in  knowledge,  the  relation  of  '  theory '  to
'  practice,'  the  possibility  of  abstracting  from  emotional
interest,  and  of  ignoring  in  logic  the  psychological  con-
ditions of  all  judgment,  the  connexion  between  knowing
and  being,  '  truth  '  and  '  fact,'  '  origin '  and  '  validity,'  the
question  of  how  and  how  far  the  real  which  is  said  to  be
'  discovered  '  is  really  '  made,'  the  '  plasticity '  and  deter-
minable  indetermination  of  reality,  the  contribution  of
voluntary  acceptance  to  the  constitution  of  '  fact,'  the
nature  of  purpose  and  of  '  mechanism,'  the  value  of  teleo-
logy, the  all-controlling  presence  of  value-judgments  and
the  inter-relations  of  their  various  forms,  the  proper  mean-
ing of 'reason,'  'faith," thought,'  'will,'  'freedom,'  'necessity,'
all  these  are  critical  points  at  which  burning  questions
have  arisen  or  may  arise,  and  at  all  of  them  the  new
philosophy  seems  able  to  provide  a  distinctive  and  con-
sistent treatment  Thus  there  is  throughout  the  field
every  promise  of  interesting  discoveries  and  of  a  success-
ful campaign  for  a  thoroughgoing  voluntarism  that  un-
sparingly impugns  the  intellectualist  tradition.

But  the  aim  of  the  present  essay  must  be  restricted.
It  will  be  confined  to  one  small  corner  of  the  battlefield,
viz.  to  the  single  question  of  the  making  of  '  truth '  and
the  meaning  of  a  term  which  is  more  often  mouthed  in  a
passion  of  unreasoning  loyalty  than  subjected  to  calm  and
logical  analysis.  I  propose  to  show,  ( I )  that  such  analysis
is  necessary  and  possible  ;  (2)  that  it  results  in  a  problem
which  the  current  intellectualist  logic  can  neither  dismiss
nor  solve  ;  (3)  that  to  discard  the  abstractions  of  this
formal  logic  at  once  renders  this  problem  simple  and
soluble  ;  (4)  that  to  solve  it  is  to  establish  the  pragmatist
criterion  of  truth  5(5)  that  the  resulting  definition  of  truth
unifies  experience  and  rationalises  a  well-established
classification  of  the  sciences  ;  and  (6)  I  shall  conclude
with  a  twofold  challenge  to  intellectualist  logicians,  failure
to  meet  which  will,  I  think,  bring  out  with  all '  desirable
clearness  that  their  system  at  present  is  as  devoid  of  in-
tellectual completeness  as  it  is  of  practical  fecundity.

This  design,  it  will  be  seen,  deliberately  rules  out  the


v  THE  AMBIGUITY  OF  TRUTH  143

references  to  questions  of  belief,  desire,  and  will,  and  their
ineradicable  influence  upon  cognition,  with  which  Volun-
tarism has  made  so  much  effective  play,  and  this  although
I  am  keenly  conscious  both  that  their  presence  as  psychical
facts  in  all  knowing  is  hardly  open  to  denial,1  and  that
their  recognition  is  essential  to  the  full  appreciation  of
our  case.  But  I  am  desirous  of  meeting  our  adversaries  as
far  as  possible  on  their  own  ground,  that  of  abstract  logic,
and  of  giving  them  every  advantage  of  position.  And  so,
even  at  the  risk  of  reducing  the  real  interest  of  my
subject,  I  will  discuss  it  on  the  ground  of  as  '  pure,'  i.e.  as
formal,  a  logic  as  is  compatible  with  the  continuance  of
actual  thinking.


Let  us  begin  then  with  the  problem  of  analysing  the
conception  of  '  truth,'  and,  to  clear  up  our  ideas,  let  us  first
observe  the  extension  of  the  term.  We  may  safely  lay  it
down  that  the  use  of  truth  is  tStov  av0pa>7ra),  a  habit
peculiar  to  man.  Animals,  that  is,  do  not  attain  to  or
use  the  conception.  They  do  not  effect  discriminations
within  their  experience  by  means  of  the  predicates  '  true '
and  '  false.'  Again,  even  the  philosophers  who  have  been
most  prodigal  of  dogmas  concerning  the  nature  of  an
'  infinite '  intelligence  (whatever  that  may  mean  !),  have
evinced  much  hesitation  about  attributing  to  it  the  dis-
cursive procedures  of  our  own,  and  have  usually  hinted
that  it  would  transcend  the  predication  of  truth  and
falsehood.  As  being  then  a  specific  peculiarity  of  the
human  mind,  the  conception  of  '  truth '  seems  closely
analogous  to  that  of  '  good  '  and  of  '  beautiful,'  which  seem
as  naturally  to  possess  antithetical  predicates  in  the  '  bad  '
and  the  '  ugly,'  as  the  '  true '  does  in  the  '  false.'  And  it
may  be  anticipated  that  when  our  psychology  has  quite
outgrown  the  materialistic  prejudices  of  its  adolescence,
it  will  probably  regard  all  these  habits  of  judging  ex-

1  In  point  of  fact  such  denial  has  never  been  attempted  :  the  inquiries  as  to
how  a  '  pure '  thought,  abstracted  from  the  psychological  conditions  of  actual
thinking,  can  validly  be  considered  by  logic  have  merely  been  ignored.


144  STUDIES IN HUMANISM  v

periences  as  just  as  distinctive  and  ultimate  features  of
mental  process  as  are  the  ultimate  facts  of  our  perception.
In  a  sense,  therefore,  the  predications  of  '  good  '  and  '  bad,'
'  true  '  and  '  false,'  etc.,  may  take  rank  with  the  experiences
of  '  sweet,'  '  red,'  '  loud,'  '  hard,'  etc.,  as  ultimate  facts  which
need  be  analysed  no  further.1

We  may  next  infer  that  by  a  truth  we  mean  a  pro-
position to  which  this  attribute  '  true '  has  somehow  been
attached,  and  which,  consequently,  is  envisaged  sub  specie
veri.  The  Truth,  therefore,  is  the  totality  of  things  to
which  this  mode  of  treatment  is  applied  or  applicable,
whether  or  not  this  extends  over  the  whole  of  our  ex-
perience.

If  now  all  propositions  which  involve  this  predication
of  truth  really  deserved  it,  if  all  that  professes  and  seems
to  be  '  true '  were  really  true,  no  difficulty  would  arise.
Things  would  be  '  true '  or  '  false '  as  simply  and  un-
ambiguously as  they  are  '  sweet '  or  '  sour,'  '  red  '  or  '  blue,'
and  nothing  could  disturb  our  judgments  or  convict  them
of  illusion.  But  in  the  sphere  of  knowledge  such,  notori-
ously, is  not  the  case.  Our  anticipations  are  often  falsified,
our  claims  prove  frequently  untenable.  Our  truths  may
turn  out  to  be  false,  our  goods  to  be  bad  :  falsehood  and
error  are  as  rampant  as  evil  in  the  world  of  our  ex-
perience.

This  fact  compels  us  (i)  to  an  enlargement,  and  (2)  to
a  distinction,  in  the  realm  of  truth.  For  the  logician
'  truth '  becomes  a  problem,  enlarged  so  as  to  include
'  falsity '  as  well,  and  so,  strictly,  our  problem  is  the  con-
templation of  experience  sub  specie  veri  etfalsi.  Secondly,
if  not  all  that  claims  truth  is  true,  must  we  not  distinguish
this  initial  claim  from  whatever  procedure  subsequently
justifies  or  validates  it?  Truth,  therefore,  will  become
ambiguous.  It  will  mean  primarily  a  claim  which  may  or
may  not  turn  out  to  be  valid.  It  will  mean,  secondarily,
such  a  claim  after  it  has  been  tested  and  ratified,  by

1  The  purport  of  this  remark  is  to  confute  the  notion,  which  seems  dimly  to
underlie  some  intellectualist  criticisms,  that  the  specific  character  of  the  truth-
predication  is  ignored  in  pragmatist  quarters.


v  THE  AMBIGUITY  OF  TRUTH  145

processes  which  it  behoves  us  to  examine.  In  the  first
sense,  as  a  claim,  it  will  always  have  to  be  regarded  with
suspicion.  For  we  shall  not  know  whether  it  is  really
and  fully  true,  and  we  shall  tend  to  reserve  this  honour-
able predicate  for  what  has  victoriously  sustained  its
claim.  And  once  we  realise  that  a  claim  to  truth  is
involved  in  every  assertion  as  such,  our  vigilance  will  be
sharpened.  A  claim  to  truth,  being  inherent  in  assertion
as  such,  will  come  to  seem  a  formal  and  trivial  thing,
worth  noting  once  for  all,  but  possessing  little  real  interest
for  knowledge.  A  formal  logic,  therefore,  which  restricts
itself  to  the  registration  of  such  formal  claims,  we  shall
regard  as  solemn  trifling  ;  but  it  will  seem  a  matter  of
vital  importance  and  of  agonised  inquiry  what  it  is  that
validates  such  claims  and  makes  them  really  true.  And
with  regard  to  any  '  truth '  that  is  asserted,  our  first
demand  will  be  to  know  what  is  de  facto  its  condition,
whether  what  it  sets  forth  has  been  fully  validated,  or
whether  it  is  still  a  mere,  and  possibly  a  random,  claim.
For  this  evidently  will  make  all  the  difference  to  the
meaning  and  logical  value  of  an  assertion.  That
'2  +  2  =  4'  and  that  '  truth  is  indefinable '  stand,  e.g.
logically  on  a  very  different  footing  :  the  one  is  part  of
a  tried  and  tested  system  of  arithmetical  truth,  the  other
the  desperate  refuge  of  a  bankrupt  or  indolent  theory.

Under  such  conditions  far-reaching  confusions  could
be  avoided  only  by  the  unobtrusive  operation  of  a  bene-
ficent providence.  But  that  such  miraculous  intervention
should  guard  logicians  against  the  consequences  of  their
negligence  was  hardly  to  be  hoped  for.  Accordingly
we  find  a  whole  cloud  of  witnesses  to  this  confusion,
from  Plato,  the  great  originator  of  the  intellectualistic  in-
terpretation of  life,  down  to  the  latest  '  critics  '  of  Pragma-
tism with  all  their  pathetic  inability  to  do  more  than
reiterate  the  confusions  of  the  Theaetetus.  For  example,
this  is  how  Plato  conducts  his  refutation  of  Protagoras  in
a  critical  stage  of  his  polemic  : —  1

"Socrates. And  how  about  Protagoras  himself? If

1  Theaetetus,  170  E-i 71  B,  Jowett's  translation. Italics  mine.

L


146  STUDIES IN HUMANISM

neither  he  nor  the  multitude  thought,  as  indeed  they  do
not  think,  that  man  is  the  measure  of  all  things,  must  it
not  follow  that  the  truth  (validity]  of  which  Protagoras
wrote  would  be  true  (claim]  to  no  one  ?  But  if  you
suppose  that  he  himself  thought  this,  and  that  the  multi-
tude does  not  agree  with  him,  you  must  begin  by  allowing
that  in  whatever  proportion  the  many  are  more  than  one,
his  truth  (validity]  is  more  untrue  (claim]  than  true  ?  "  (not
necessarily,  for  all  truths  start  their  career  in  a  minority
of  one,  as  an  individual's  claims,  and  most  obtain  recogni-
tion only  after  a  long  struggle).

"  Theodorus.  That  would  follow  if  the  truth  (validity)
is  supposed  to  vary  with  individual  opinion.

Socrates.  And  the  best  of  the  joke  is  that  he  acknow-
ledges the  truth  (as  claim,  Protagoras  ;  as  validity,  Plato)
of  their  opinion  who  believe  his  own  opinion  to  be  false  ;
for  he  admits  that  the  opinions  of  all  men  are  true  (as
claims]."  (Cp.  also  p.  309.)

For  a  more  compact  expression  of  the  same  ambiguity
we  may  have  recourse  to  Mr.  Bradley.  "About  the  truth
of  this  Law"  (of  Contradiction)  "  so  far  as  it  applies,  there
is  in  my  opinion  no  question.  The  question  will  be  rather
as  to  how  far  the  Law  applies  and  how  far  therefore  it  is
true^  *  The  first  proposition  is  either  a  truism  or  false.
It  is  a  truism  if  '  truth '  is  taken  in  the  sense  of  '  claim  ' ;
for  it  then  only  states  that  a  claim  is  good  if  the  ques-
tion of  ,its  application  is  waived.  In  any  other  sense  of
'truth'  it  is  false  (or  rather  self -contradictory),  since  it
admits  that  there  is  a  question  about  the  application  of
the  '  Law,'  and  it  is  not  until  the  application  is  attempted
that  validity  can  be  tested.  In  the  second  proposition  it
is  implied  that  '  truth '  depends,  not  on  the  mere  claim,
but  on  the  possibility  of  application.

Or,  again,  let  us  note  how  Prof.  A.  E.  Taylor  betters
his  master's  instruction  in  an  interesting  article  on  '  Truth
and  Practice'  in  the  Phil.  Rev.  for  May  1905.  He  first  lays
it  down  that  "  true  propositions  are  those  which  have  an
unconditional  claim  on  our  recognition  "  (of  their  validity,

1  Mind,  v.  N.S.,  20,  p.  470. Italics  mine.


v  THE  AMBIGUITY  OF  TRUTH  147

or  merely  of  their  claim  ?),  and  then  pronounces  that
"  truth  is  just  the  system  of  propositions  which  have  an
unconditional  claim  to  be  recognised  as  valid"  *  And  lest
he  should  not  have  made  the  paradox  of  this  confusion
evident  enough,  he  repeats  (p.  273)  that  "the  truth  of  a
statement  means  not  the  actual  fact  of  its  recognition "
(i.e.  of  its  de  facto  validity),  "  but  its  rightful  claim  on  our
recognition"  (p.  27/j.).2  In  short,  as  he  does  not  distin-
guish between  '  claim '  and  '  right,'  he  cannot  see  that  the
question  of  truth  is  as  to  when  and  how  a  '  claim '  is  to
be  recognised  as  '  rightful.'  And  though  he  wisely  refrains
from  even  attempting  to  tell  us  how  the  clamorousness  of
a  claim  is  going  to  establish  its  validity,  it  is  clear  that
his  failure  to  observe  the  distinction  demolishes  his
definition  of  truth.

Even  Mr.  R.  F.  A.  Hoernle,  by  far  the  ablest  of  the
critics  of  Pragmatism,  lapses  at  times  into  this  confusion.
Thus  on  p.  475  of  his  excellent  article  in  Mind,  xiv.,
his  argument  fails  to  distinguish  between  '  validity '  and
'  claim  to  validity.'  Mr.  Joachim's  Nature  of  Truth  does
not  exemplify  the  confusion  so  clearly  merely  because  it
does  not  get  to  the  point  at  which  it  is  revealed.  His
theory  of  truth  breaks  down  before  this  point  is
reached.  He  conceives  the  nature  of  truth  to  concern
only  the  question  of  what  '  the  ideal '  should  be,  even
though  it  should  be  unattainable  by  man,  as  indeed  it
turns  out  to  be.  Thus  the  problem  of  how  we  validate
claims  to  truth  is  treated  as  irrelevant.3  Hence  it  is  only
casually  that  phrases  like  '  entitled  to  claim '  occur  (p.
109),  or  that  the  substantiating  of  a  claim  to  truth  is  said
to  consist  in  its  recognition  and  adoption  "  by  all  intelligent
people"  (p.  27).  Still  on  p.  I  18  it  seems  to  be  implied
that  a  "  thought  which  claims  truth  as  affirming  universal
meaning  "  need  not  undergo  any  further  verification.  It
is  evident,  in  short,  that  not  much  can  be  expected  from
theories  which  have  overlooked  so  vital  a  distinction.

1  Pp.  271,  288. Italics  mine.

2  Cp.  also  pp.  276  and  278.

3  As  it  is  by  Mr. Bradley,  who,  as  Mr.  Hoernle  remarks, "deals  with  the
question  how  uv  correct  our  errors  in  a  footnote  !  "  (Mind,  xiv.  321).


148  STUDIES IN HUMANISM  v

Their  unawareness  of  it  will  vitiate  all  their  discussions
of  the  nature  of  '  truth,'  by  which  they  will  mean  now  the
one  sense,  now  the  other,  and  now  both,  in  inextricable
fallacy.

II

Our  provisional  analysis,  therefore,  has  resulted  in  our
detecting  an  important  ambiguity  in  the  conception  of
truth  which,  unless  it  can  be  cleared  up,  must  hopelessly
vitiate  all  discussion.  In  view  of  this  distressing  situation
it  becomes  our  bounden  duty  to  inquire  how  an  accepted
truth  may  be  distinguished  from  a  mere  claim,  and  how  a
claim  to  truth  may  be  validated.  For  any  logic  which
aims  at  dealing  with  actual  thinking  the  urgency  of  this
inquiry  can  hardly  be  exaggerated.  But  even  the  most
'  purely '  intellectual  and  futilely  formal  theory  of  know-
ledge can  hardly  refuse  to  undertake  it.  For  the
ambiguity  which  raises  the  problem  is  absolutely  all-
pervading.  And,  as  we  saw,  a  formal  claim  to  truth  is
coextensive  with  the  sphere  of  logical  judgment.  We
are  always  liable,  therefore,  to  misinterpret  every  judg-
ment. We  may  take  as  a  validated  truth  what  in  point
of  fact  is  really  an  unsupported  claim.  But  inasmuch  as
such  a  claim  may  always  be  erroneous,  we  are  constantly
in  danger  of  accepting  as  validly  true  what,  if  tested,  would
be  utterly  untenable.  Every  assertion  is  ambiguous,  and
as  it  shows  no  outward  indication  of  what  it  really  means,
we  can  hardly  be  said  to  know  the  meaning  of  any
assertion  whatsoever.  On  any  view  of  logic,  the  disastrous
and  demoralising  consequences  of  such  a  situation  may
be  imagined.  It  is  imperative  therefore  to  distinguish
sharply  between  the  formal  inclusion  of  a  statement  in
the  sphere  of  truth-or-falsity,  and  its  incorporation  into  a
system  of  tested  truth.  For  unless  we  do  so,  we  simply
court  deception.

This  possibility  of  deception,  moreover,  becomes  the
more  serious  when  we  realise  how  impotent  our  formal
logic  is  to  conceive  this  indispensable  distinction  and  to
guard  us  against  so  fatal  a  confusion.  Instead  of  proving


v  THE  AMBIGUITY  OF  TRUTH  149

a  help  to  the  logician  it  here  becomes  a  snare,  by  reason
of  the  fundamental  abstraction  of  its  standpoint.  For  if,
following  Mr.  Alfred  Sidgwick's  brilliant  lead,  we  regard
as  formal  logic  every  treatment  of  our  cognitive  processes
which  abstracts  from  the  concrete  application  of  our  logical
functions  to  actual  cases  of  knowing,  it  is  easy  to  see  that
no  such  logic  can  help  us,  because  the  meaning  of  an  asser-
tion can  never  be  determined  apart  from  the  actual  applica-
tion.1 From  the  mere  verbal  form,  that  is,  we  cannot  tell
whether  we  are  dealing  with  a  valid  judgment  or  a  sheer
claim.  To  settle  this,  we  must  go  behind  the  statement :  we
must  go  into  the  rights  of  the  case.  Meaning  depends  upon
purpose,  and  purpose  is  a  question  of  fact,  of  the  context
and  use  of  the  form  of  words  in  actual  knowing.  But
all  this  is  just  what  the  abstract  standpoint  of  formal
logic  forbids  us  to  examine.  It  conceives  the  meaning
of  a  proposition  to  be  somehow  inherent  in  it  as  a  form
of  words,  apart  from  its  use.  And  so  when  it  finds  that
the  same  words  may  be  used  to  convey  a  variety  of
meanings  in  various  contexts,  it  solemnly  declares  the
form  of  judgment  to  be  as  such  ambiguous,  even  though
in  each  actual  case  of  use  the  meaning  intended  may  be
perfectly  clear  to  the  meanest  understanding !  It  seems
to  me  extremely  doubtful,  therefore,  whether  a  genuine
admission  of  the  validity  of  our  distinction  could  be
extracted  from  any  formal  logician.  For  it  is  greatly
to  be  feared  that  even  if  he  could  be  induced  to  admit
it  in  words,  he  would  yet  insist  on  treating  it  too  as
purely  formal,  and  rule  out  on  principle  attempts  to
determine  how  de  facto  the  distinction  was  established
and  employed.

Although,  therefore,  our  distinction  appears  to  be  as
clear  as  it  is  important,  it  does  not  seem  at  all  certain
that  it  would  be  admitted  by  the  logicians  who  are  so
enamoured  of  truth  in  the  abstract  that  they  have  ceased
to  recognise  it  in  the  concrete.  More  probably  they
would  protest  that  logic  was  being  conducted  back  to
the  old  puzzle  of  a  general  criterion  of  truth  and  error,

1  Cp.  Essays  i.  §  2,  and  iii.  §  10.


150  STUDIES  IN  HUMANISM  v

and  would  adduce  the  failures  of  their  predecessors  as  a
valid  excuse  for  their  present  apathy.  Or  at  most  they
might  concede  that  a  distinction  between  a  truth  and  a
claim  to  truth  must  indeed  be  made,  but  allege  that  it
could  not  take  any  but  a  negative  form.  The  sole
criterion  of  truth,  that  is,  which  can  be  given,  is  that  truth
is  not  self-contradictory  or  incoherent.

This  statement,  in  the  first  place,  means  a  refusal  to
go  into  the  actual  question  how  truth  is  made  :  it  is  an
attempt  to  avoid  the  test  of  application,  and  to  conceive
truth  as  inherent  in  the  logical  terms  in  the  abstract.
But  this  is  really  to  render  '  truth '  wholly  verbal.  For
the  inherent  meanings  are  merely  the  established  meanings
of  the  words  employed.  It  is,  secondly,  merely  dogmatic
assertion  :  it  can  hardly  inspire  confidence  so  long  as  it
precedes  and  precludes  examination  of  the  positive  solu-
tions of  the  problem,  and  assumes  the  conceptions  of '  self-
contradiction  '  or  '  incoherence '  as  the  simplest  things  in
the  world.  In  point  of  fact  neither  of  them  has  been
adequately  analysed  by  intellectualist  logicians,  nor  is
either  of  them  naturally  so  translucent  as  to  shed  a  flood
of  light  on  any  subject.  As,  however,  I  cannot  now  enter
upon  their  obscurities,  and  examine  whether  either
'  coherence '  or  '  consistency '  really  means  anything  in
the  abstract,  it  must  suffice  to  remark  that  Captain
Knox's  masterly  article  in  the  April  (1905)  number  of
Mind1  contains  ample  justification  for  what  I  have  said
about  the  principle  of  contradiction.  If  on  the  other
hand  the  '  negative  criterion '  be  stated  in  the  form  of
incoherence,  I  would  inquire  merely  how  intellectualist
logic  proposes  to  distinguish  the  logical  coherence,  to
which  it  appeals,  from  the  psychological  coherence,  which
it  despises.  Until  this  difficult  (or  impossible?)  feat  has
been  achieved,  we  may  safely  move  on.2

1  N.S.  No.  54.  2  Cf.  also  Humanism,  pp.  52-53.


v  THE  AMBIGUITY  OF  TRUTH  151

III

Let  us  proceed  therefore  to  discard  old  prejudices  and
to  consider  how  in  point  of  fact  we  discriminate  between
'  claims '  and  '  truths,'  how  the  raw  material  of  a  science
is  elaborated  into  its  final  structure,  how,  in  short,  truth
is  made.  Now  this  question  is  not  intrinsically  a
hopeless  one.  It  is  not  even  theoretically  particularly
difficult  to  answer.  For  it  concerns  essentially  facts
which  may  be  observed,  and  with  care  and  attention  it
should  be  possible  to  determine  whether  the  procedures
of  the  various  sciences  have  anything  in  common,  and  if
so  what.  By  such  an  inductive  appeal  to  the  facts,
therefore,  we  greatly  simplify  our  problem,  and  may
possibly  discover  its  solution.  Any  obstacle  which  we
may  encounter  will  come  merely  from  the  difficulty  of
intelligently  observing  the  special  procedures  of  the
many  sciences  and  of  seizing  their  salient  points  and
general  import ;  we  shall  not  be  foredoomed  to  failure
by  any  intrinsic  absurdity  of  our  enterprise.

Now  it  would  be  possible  to  arrive  at  our  solution
by  a  critical  examination  of  every  known  science  in
detail,  but  it  is  evident  that  this  procedure  would  be
very  long  and  laborious.  It  seems  better,  therefore,
merely  to  state  the  condensed  results  of  such  investigations.
They  will  in  this  shape  stand  out  more  clearly  and  better
exhibit  the  trend  of  an  argument  which  runs  as  follows  : —

It  being  taken  as  established  that  the  sphere  of  logic
is  that  of  the  antithetical  valuations  '  true '  and  '  false,'
we  observe  in  the  first  place  that  in  every  science  the
truth  or  falsehood  of  an  answer  depends  on  its  relevance
to  the  question  raised  in  that  science.  An  irrelevant
answer  is  justly  treated  as  non-existent  for  that  science,
i.e.  as,  strictly,  neither  '  true '  nor  '  false.'  We  observe,
secondly,  that  every  science  has  a  definitely  circumscribed
subject-matter,  a  definite  method  of  treating  it,  and  a
definitely  articulated  body  of  interpretations.  Every
science,  in  other  words,  forms  a  system  of  truths  about
some  subject.  But  inasmuch  as  every  science  is  con-


152  STUDIES  IN HUMANISM  v

cerned  with  some  aspect  of  our  total  experience,  and  no
science  deals  with  that  whole  under  every  aspect,  it  is
clear  that  sciences  arise  by  the  limitation  of  subjects,  the
selection  of  standpoints,  and  the  specialisation  of  methods.
All  these  operations,  however,  are  artificial,  and  in  a
sense  arbitrary,  and  none  of  them  can  be  conceived  to
come  about  except  by  the  action  of  a  purposing  intelli-
gence. It  follows  that  the  nature  of  the  purpose  which
is  pursued  in  a  science  will  yield  the  deepest  insight  into
its  nature ;  for  what  we  want  to  know  in  the  science  will
determine  the  questions  we  put,  and  their  bearing  on  the
questions  put  will  determine  the  standing  of  the  answers
we  attain.  If  we  can  take  the  answers  as  relevant  to
our  questions  and  conducive  to  our  ends,  they  will  yield
'  truth  '  ;  if  we  cannot,  '  falsehood.' 1

Seeing  thus  that  everywhere  truth  and  falsehood
depend  on  the  purpose  which  constitutes  the  science  and
are  bestowed  accordingly,  we  begin  to  perceive  that  the
predicates  '  true  '  and  '  false  '  are  not  unrelated  to  '  good  '
and  '  bad.'  For  good  and  bad  also  (in  their  wider  and
primary  sense)  have  reference  to  purpose.  '  Good  '  is  what
conduces  to,  '  bad '  what  thwarts,  a  purpose.  And  so  it
would  seem  that  '  true  '  and  '  false  '  were  valuations,  forms
of  the  '  good  '-or-'  bad  '  which  indicates  a  reference  to  an
end.  Or,  as  Aristotle  said  long  ago,  in  a  passage  the
significance  of  which  I  am  ashamed  to  have  observed
only  quite  recently,  "  in  the  case  of  the  intelligence  which
is  theoretical,  and  neither  practical  nor  productive,  its
'  good '  and  '  bad  '  is  '  truth '  and  '  falsehood.'  "  2

Truth,  then,  being  a  valuation,  has  reference  to  a
purpose.  What  precisely  that  reference  is  will  depend
on  the  purpose,  which  may  extend  over  the  whole  range
of  human  interest.  But  it  is  only  in  its  primary  aspect,
as  valued  by  individuals,  that  the  predication  of  '  truth '
will  refer  thus  widely  to  any  purpose  any  one  may
entertain  in  a  cognitive  operation.  For  it  stands  to

1  But  cp.  note  on  p.  154.

2  Eth.  Nic. vi.  2,  3. Cp.  De  Anim.  iii. 7,  431,  b  10,  where  it  is  stated
that "the true and false are in  the same class  with  the  good and bad,"
i.e.  are  valuations.


v  THE  AMBIGUITY  OF  TRUTH  153

reason  that  the  power  of  constituting  'objective'  truth
is  not  granted  so  easily.  Society  exercises  almost  as
severe  a  control  over  the  intellectual  as  over  the  moral
eccentricities  and  nonconformities  of  its  members  ;  indeed
it  often  so  organises  itself  as  to  render  the  recognition
of  new  truth  nearly  impossible.  Whatever  therefore
individuals  may  recognise  and  value  as  '  true,'  the  '  truths  '
which  de  facto  prevail  and  are  recognised  as  objective
will  only  be  a  selection  from  those  we  are  subjectively
tempted  to  recognise.  There  is,  therefore,  no  real  danger
lest  this  analysis  should  destroy  the  '  objectivity  '  of  truth
and  enthrone  subjective  licence  in  its  place.

A  further  convergence  in  our  truth-valuations  is  pro-
duced by  the  natural  tendency  to  subordinate  all  ends  or
purposes  to  the  ultimate  end  or  final  purpose,  '  the  Good.'
For  in  theory,  at  least,  the  '  goods,'  and  therefore  the
'  truths,'  of  all  the  sciences  are  unified  and  validated  by
their  relation  to  the  Supreme  Good.  In  practice  no  doubt
this  ideal  is  far  from  being  realised,  and  there  arise  at
various  points  conflicts  between  the  various  sorts  of  values
or  goods,  which  doubtless  will  continue  until  a  perfect
harmony  of  all  our  purposes,  scientific,  moral,  aesthetic,
and  emotional  has  been  achieved.  Such  conflicts  may,  of
course,  be  made  occasions  for  theatrically  opposing  '  truth '
to  (moral)  '  goodness,'  '  virtue  '  to  '  happiness,'  '  science  '  to
'  art,'  etc.,  and  afford  much  scope  for  dithyrambic  declama-
tion. But  a  sober  and  clear-headed  .thought  will  not
be  intolerant  nor  disposed  to  treat  such  oppositions  as
final  and  absolute  :  even  where  under  the  circumstances
their  reality  must  provisionally  be  admitted,  it  will  essay
rather  to  evaluate  each  claim  with  reference  to  the  highest
conception  of  ultimate  good  which  for  the  time  being
seems  attainable.  It  will  be  very  chary,  therefore,  of
sacrificing  either  side  beyond  recall ;  it  will  neither  allow
the  claims  of  truth  to  oppress  those  of  moral  virtue  nor
those  of  moral  virtue  to  suppress  art.  But  it  will  still  more
decidedly  hold  aloof  from  the  quixotic  attempt  to  conceive
the  sphere  of  each  valuation  as  independent  and  as  wholly
severed  from  the  rest.


154  STUDIES IN HUMANISM  v

IV

We  have  seen  so  far  that  truth  is  a  form  of  value,  and
the  logical  judgment  a  valuation  ;  but  we  have  not  yet
raised  the  question  as  to  what  prompts  us  in  bestowing
or  withholding  this  value,  what  are  our  guiding  principles
in  thus  evaluating  our  experience.  The  answer  to  this
question  takes  us  straight  into  the  heart  of  Pragmatism.
Nay,  the  answer  to  this  question  is  Pragmatism,  and  gives
the  sense  in  which  Pragmatism  professes  to  have  a  criterion
of  truth.  For  the  pragmatist  contends  that  he  has  an
answer  which  is  simple,  and  open  to  inspection  and  easily
tested.  He  simply  bids  us  go  to  the  facts  and  observe
the  actual  operations  of  our  knowing.  If  we  will  but  do
this,  we  shall  '  discover '  that  in  all  actual  knowing  the
question  whether  an  assertion  is  '  true '  or  '  false '  is
decided  uniformly  and  very  simply.  It  is  decided,  that  is,
by  its  consequences,  by  its  bearing  on  the  interest  which
prompted  to  the  assertion,  by  its  relation  to  the  purpose
which  put  the  question.  To  add  to  this  that  the  conse-
quences must  be  good  is  superfluous.  For  if  and  so  far
as  an  assertion  satisfies  or  forwards  the  purpose  of  the
inquiry  to  which  it  owes  its  being,  it  is  so  far  '  true '  ;  if
and  so  far  as  it  thwarts  or  baffles  it,  it  is  unworkable,
unserviceable,  '  false.'  And  '  true  '  and  '  false,'  we  have
seen,  are  the  intellectual  forms  of  '  good  '  and  '  bad.'  Or
in  other  words,  a  '  truth '  is  what  is  useful  in  building  up
a  science  ;  a  '  falsehood '  what  is  useless  or  noxious  for
this  same  purpose.  A  '  science,'  similarly,  is  '  good '  if  it
can  be  used  to  harmonise  our  life  ;  if  it  cannot,  it  is  a
pseudo-science  or  a  game.  To  determine  therefore  whether
any  answer  to  any  question  is  '  true '  or  '  false,'  we  have
merely  to  note  its  effect  upon  the  inquiry  in  which  we
are  interested,  and  in  relation  to  which  it  has  arisen.  And
if  these  effects  are  favourable,  the  answer  is  '  true '  and
'  good '  for  our  purpose,  and  '  useful '  as  a  means  to  the
end  we  pursue.1  Here,  then,  we  have  exposed  to  view

1  Strictly  both  the  '  true '  and  the  '  false '  answers  are,  as  Mr.  Sidgwick  says,
subdivisions  of  the  '  relevant, '  and  the  irrelevant  is  really  unmeaning. But  the


v  THE  AMBIGUITY  OF  TRUTH  155

the  whole  rationale  of  Pragmatism,  the  source  of  the
famous  paradoxes  that  '  truth '  depends  on  its  conse-
quences, that  the  '  true  '  must  be  '  good  '  and  '  useful '  and
'  practical.'  I  confess  that  to  me  they  have  never  seemed
more  than  truisms  so  simple  that  I  used  to  fear  lest  too
elaborate  an  insistence  on  them  should  be  taken  as  an
insult  to  the  intelligence  of  my  readers.  But  experience
has  shown  that  I  was  too  sanguine,  and  now  I  even  feel
impelled  to  guard  still  further  against  two  possible  mis-
apprehensions into  which  an  unthinking  philosopher  might
fall.

I  would  venture  to  point  out  in  the  first  place  that
when  we  said  that  truth  was  estimated  by  its  consequences
for  some  purpose,  we  were  speaking  subject  to  the  social
character  of  truth,  and  quite  generally.  What  conse-
quences are  relevant  to  what  purposes  depends,  of  course,
on  the  subject-matter  of  each  science,  and  may  sometimes
be  in  doubt,  when  the  question  may  be  interpreted  in
several  contexts.  But  as  a  rule  the  character  of  the
question  sufficiently  defines  the  relevant  answer  which  can
be  treated  as  true.  It  is  not  necessary  therefore  seriously
to  contemplate  absurdities  such  as,  e.g.,  the  intrusion  of
ethical  or  aesthetical  motives  into  the  estimation  of  mathe-
matical truths,  or  to  refute  claims  that  the  isosceles
triangle  is  more  virtuous  than  the  scalene,  or  an  integer
nobler  than  a  vulgar  fraction,  or  that  gravitating  bodies
must  move  not  in  ellipses  but  in  circles,  because  the  circle  is
the  most  perfect  figure.  Pragmatism  is  far  less  likely  to
countenance  such  confusions  than  the  intellectualist
theories  from  which  I  drew  my  last  illustration.  In  some
cases,  doubtless,  as  in  many  problems  of  history  and
religion,  there  will  be  found  deep-seated  and  enduring
differences  of  opinion  as  to  what  consequences  and  what
tests  may  be  adduced  as  relevant :  but  these  differences
already  exist,  and  are  in  no  wise  created  by  being
recognised  and  explained.  Pragmatism,  however,  by

unmeaning  seems  to  be  relevant  until  it  is  detected  ;  it  baffles  our  purpose  as
surely  as  the  '  false, '  and  the  '  false '  answer  does  not  mean  what  we  meant  to
get,  viz.  something  we  can  work  with,  and  is  so  far  unmeaning.  Hence  there  is
no  great  harm  in  treating  all  that/aiTr  us  as  'false.'


156  STUDIES IN HUMANISM  v

enlarging  our  notions  of  what  constitutes  relevant  evidence,
is  far  more  likely  to  conduce  to  their  amicable  settlement
than  the  intellectualisms  which  condemn  all  faith  as
inherently  irrational  and  irrelevant  to  knowledge.  And,
ideally  and  in  principle,  such  disagreements  as  to  the  ends
which  are  relevant  to  the  estimation  of  any  evidence  are
always  capable  of  being  composed  by  an  appeal  to  the
supreme  purpose  which  unifies  and  harmonises  all  our
ends  :  in  practice  no  doubt  we  are  hardly  aware  of  this,
nor  agreed  as  to  what  it  is  ;  but  the  blame,  surely,  attaches
to  the  distracted  state  of  our  thoughts  and  not  to  the
pragmatic  analysis  of  truth.  For  it  would  surely  be  pre-
posterous to  expect  a  mere  theory  of  knowledge  to
adjudicate  upon  and  settle  offhand,  by  sheer  dint  of  logic,
all  the  disputed  questions  in  all  the  sciences.

My  second  caution  refers  to  the  fact  that  I  have  made
the  predication  of  truth  dependent  on  relevance  to  a  proxi-
mate rather  than  an  ultimate  scientific  purpose.  This  I
have  done  because  I  believe  it  represents  our  actual
procedure.  The  ordinary  '  truths  '  we  predicate  have  but
little  concern  with  ultimate  ends  and  realities.  They  are
true  (at  least  pro  tern.}  if  they  serve  their  immediate
purpose.  If  any  one  hereafter  chooses  to  question  them,
he  is  at  liberty  to  do  so,  and  if  he  can  make  out  his  case,
to  reject  them  for  their  inadequacy  for  his  ulterior  purposes.
But  even  when  the  venue  and  the  context  of  the  question
have  thus  been  changed,  and  so  its  meaning,  the  truth  of
the  original  answer  is  not  thereby  abolished.  It  may
have  been  degraded  and  reduced  to  a  methodological  status,
but  this  is  merely  to  affirm  that  what  is  true  and  service-
able for  one  purpose  is  not  necessarily  so  for  another.
And  in  any  case  it  is  time  perhaps  to  cease  complaining
that  a  truth  capable  of  being  improved  on,  i.e.  capable  of
growing,  is  so  far  not  absolutely  true  and  therefore  some-
what false,  and  worthy  of  contempt.  For  such  complaints
spring  from  an  arbitrary  interpretation  of  a  situation  that
might  more  sensibly  be  envisaged  as  meaning  that  none
of  the  falsehoods,  out  of  which  our  knowledge  struggles  in
its  growth,  is  ever  wholly  false.  But  in  actual  knowing


v  THE  AMBIGUITY  OF  TRUTH  157

we  are  not  concerned  with  such  arbitrary  phrases,  but
with  the  bearing  of  an  answer  on  a  question  actually  pro-
pounded. And  whatever  really  answers  is  really  '  true,'
even  though  it  may  at  once  be  turned  into  a  stepping-
stone  to  higher  truth.1


We  now  find  ourselves  in  a  position  to  lay  down  some
pragmatic  definitions.  Truth  we  may  define  as  logical
value,  and  a  claim  to  truth  as  a  claim  to  possess  such
value.  The  validation  of  such  claims  proceeds,  we  hold,
by  the  pragmatic  test,  i.e.  by  experience  of  their  effect

1  Cp.  Essay  viii.  §  5.  If  therefore  we  realise  that  we  are  concerned  with
human  truth  alone,  and  that  truth  is  ambiguous,  there  is  no  paradox  in  affirma-
tively answering  Prof.  A.  E.  Taylor's  question  (Phil.  Rev.  xiv.  268)  as  to  whether
"  the  truth  of  a  newly  discovered  theorem  is  created  "  (it  should  be  "  made,"  i.e.
out  of  earlier  'truth')  "by  the  fact  of  its  discovery."  He  asks  "did  the  doc-
trine of  the  earth's  motion  become  true  when  enunciated  by  the  Pythagoreans,
false  again  when  men  forgot  the  Pythagorean  astronomy,  and  true  a  second  time
on  the  publication  of  the  book  of  Copernicus?  "  The  ambiguity  in  this  question
may  be  revealed  by  asking  :  '  Do  you  mean  "  true  "  to  refer  to  the  valuation  of
the  new  ' '  truth"  by  us,  or  to  the  re-vahiation  of  the  old  ?'  For  the  '  discovery  '  in-
volves both,  and  both  are  products  of  human  activity.  If  then  we  grant  (what  is,
I  suppose,  the  case)  that  the  Pythagorean,  Ptolemaic  and  Copernican  systems
represent  stages  in  a  progressive  approximation  to  an  adequate  account  of  celestial
motions,  it  is  clear  that  each  of  them  was  valued  as  '  true '  while  it  seemed  adequate,
and  re-valued  as  '  false '  when  it  was  improved  on.  A  very  slight  improvement,
moreover,  might  occasion  such  a  change  in  valuation.  Prof.  Taylor  has  failed  to
observe  that  he  has  conceived  the  scientific  problem  too  loosely  in  grouping
together  the  Pythagorean  and  the  Copernican  theory  as  alike  cases  of  the  earth's
motion.  No  doubt  they  may  both  be  so  denominated,  but  the  scientific  value  of
the  two  theories  was  very  different,  and  the  Ptolemaic  system  is  intermediate  in
value  as  well  as  in  time.  He  might  just  as  well  have  taken  a  more  modern  in-
stance and  argued  that  the  emission  theory  of  light  was  true  all  along  because  the
discovery  of  radio-activity  has  forced  its  undulatory  rival  to  admit  that  light  is
sometimes  produced  by  the  impact  of  '  corpuscles.'

The  reason  then  why  it  seems  paradoxical  to  make  the  very  existence  of  truth
depend  on  its  '  discovery '  by  us,  is  that  in  some  cases  there  ensues  upon  the  dis-
covery a  transvaluation  of  our  former  values,  which  are  now  re-valued  as  '  false,'
while  the  new  '  truth  '  is  antedated  as  having  been  true  all  along.  This,  however,
is  conditioned  by  the  special  character  of  the  case,  and  would  have  been  impos-
sible, but  for  the  human  attempt  to  verify  the  claim.  And  so  the  whole  distinc-
tion remains  within  the  human  evaluation  of  truth,  and  affords  no  occasion  for
attributing  to  '  truth '  any  real  independence  of  human  cognition  :  the  attempt
to  do  so  really  misrepresents  our  procedure  ;  it  is  a  mere  error  of  abstraction  to
think  that  because  a  '  truth '  may  be  judged  '  independent '  after  human  manipu-
lation, it  is  so  per  se,  irrespectively  of  the  procedure  to  which  it  owes  its  '  inde-
pendent '  existence.  And  to  infer  further  that  therefore  logic  should  wholly
abstract  from  the  human  side  in  knowing,  is  exactly  like  arguing  that  because
children  grow  '  independent '  of  their  parents,  they  must  be  conceived  as  essenti-
ally independent,  and  must  have  been  so  'all  along.'


158  STUDIES IN HUMANISM  v

upon  the  bodies  of  established  truth  which  they  affect.  It
is  evident  that  in  this  sense  truth  will  admit  of  degrees,
extending  from  the  humble  truth  which  satisfies  some
purpose,  even  though  it  only  be  the  lowly  purpose  of  some
subordinate  end,  to  that  ineffable  ideal  which  would
satisfy  every  purpose  and  unify  all  endeavours.  But  the
main  emphasis  will  clearly  fall  on  the  former :  for  to
perfect  truth  we  do  not  yet  attain,  and  after  all  even  the
humblest  truth  may  hold  its  ground  without  suffering
rejection.  No  truth,  moreover,  can  do  more  than  do  its
duty  and  fulfil  its  function.

These  definitions  should  have  sufficiently  borne  out
the  claim  made  at  the  beginning  (p.  142),  that  the
pragmatic  view  of  truth  unifies  experience  and  rationalises
the  classification  of  the  normative  sciences  ;  but  it  may
not  be  amiss  to  add  a  few  words  on  both  these  topics.
That,  in  the  first  place,  the  conception  of  the  logical
judgment  as  a  form  of  valuation  connects  it  with  our  other
valuations  and  represents  it  as  an  integral  part  of  the
e<£eo-£9  TOU  (i<yaOov,  of  the  purposive  reaction  upon  the
universe  which  bestows  dignity  and  grandeur  upon  the
struggle  of  human  life  is,  I  take  it,  evident.  The  theoretic
importance  of  this  conception  is  capital.  It  is  easily  and
absolutely  fatal  to  every  form  of  Naturalism.  For  if
every  '  fact '  upon  which  any  naturalistic  system  relies  is
at  bottom  a  valuation,  arrived  at  by  selection  from
a  larger  whole,  by  rejection  of  what  seemed  irrelevant,  and
by  purposive  manipulation  of  what  seemed  important,
there  is  a  manifest  absurdity  in  eliminating  the  human
reference  from  results  which  have  implied  it  at  every  step.
The  pragmatic  doctrine  therefore  (at  all  events  in  its
'Humanist'  development)  affords  a  protection  against
Naturalism  which  ought  to  be  the  more  appreciated  by
those  interested  in  taking  a  '  spiritual '  view  of  life  now
that  it  has  become  pretty  clear  that  the  protection
afforded  by  idealistic  absolutism  is  quite  illusory.  For
the  '  spiritual  nature  of  the  Absolute '  does  nothing  to
succour  the  human  aspirations  strangled  in  the  coils  of
materialism  :  '  absolute  spirit '  need  merely  be  conceived


v  THE  AMBIGUITY  OF  TRUTH  159

naturalistically  to  become  as  impotent  to  aid  the  theologian
and  the  moralist  as  it  has  long  been  seen  to  be  to  help
the  scientist.1

And  the  unification  of  logic  with  the  other  normative
sciences  is  even  more  valuable  practically  than  theoreti-
cally. For  it  vindicates  man's  right  to  present  his  claims
upon  the  universe  in  their  integrity,  as  a  demand  not  for
Truth  alone,  but  for  Goodness,  Beauty,  and  Happiness  as
well,  commingled  with  each  other  in  a  fusion  one  and
indiscerptible  ;  and  what  perhaps  is  for  the  moment  more
important  still,  it  justifies  our  efforts  to  bring  about  such
a  union  as  we  desire.  Whether  this  ideal  can  be
attained,  cannot,  of  course,  be  certainly  predicted  ;  but
a  philosophy  which  gives  us  the  right  to  aspire,  and
inspires  us  with  the  daring  to  attempt,  is  surely  a
great  improvement  on  monisms  which,  like  Spinoza's,
essay  to  crush  us  with  blank  and  illogical  denials  of
the  relevance  of  human  valuations  to  the  truth  of
things.

In  technical  philosophy,  however,  it  is  good  form  to
profess  more  interest  in  the  formal  relations  of  the
sciences  than  in  the  cosmic  claims  and  destinies  of  man,
and  so  we  may  hasten  to  point  out  the  signal  aid  which
pragmatism  affords  to  a  symmetrical  classification  of  the
sciences.  If  truth  also  is  a  valuation,  we  can  understand
why  logic  should  be  a  normative  science  along  with  ethics
and  aesthetics  :  if  all  the  natural  sciences  make  use  of
logical  judgments  and  lay  claim  to  logical  values,  we  can
understand  also  how  and  why  the  normative  sciences
should  have  dominion  over  them.  And  lastly  we  find
that  the  antithetical  valuations  and  the  distinction
between  claims  and  their  selection  into  norms  run
through  all  the  normative  sciences  in  a  perfectly
analogous  way.  Just  as  not  everything  is  true  which
claims  truth,  so  not  everything  is  good  or  right  or
beautiful  which  claims  to  be  so,  while  ultimately  all  these
claims  are  judged  by  their  relation  to  the  perfect  harmony
which  forms  our  final  aspiration.

1  Essay  xii.  §  5.


160  STUDIES IN HUMANISM  v

VI

This  essay  was  pledged  at  the  outset  to  conclude  with
a  twofold  challenge,  and  now  that  it  has  set  forth  some  of
the  advantages  proffered  by  the  pragmatic  view  of  truth,
we  must  revert  to  this  challenge,  in  a  spirit  not  of  conten-
tiousness so  much  as  of  anxious  inquiry.  For  it  is  to  be
feared  that  a  really  resolute  adherent  of  the  intellectualist
tradition  would  be  unmoved  and  unconvinced  by  anything
we,  or  any  one,  could  say.  He  would  simply  close  his  eyes
and  seal  his  ears,  and  recite  his  creed.  And  perhaps  no
man  yet  was  ever  convinced  of  philosophic  truth  against
his  will.  But  there  are  beginning  to  be  signs  (and  even
wonders)  that  our  intellectualism  is  growing  less  resolute.
And  so  perhaps  even  those  who  are  not  yet  willing  to
face  the  new  solutions  can  be  brought  to  see  the  gaps  in
the  old.  If  therefore  we  bring  these  to  their  notice  very
humbly,  but  very  persistently,  we  may  enable  them  to
see  that  the  old  intellectualism  has  left  its  victims  un-
provided with  answers  to  two  very  momentous  questions.
Let  us  ask,  therefore,  how,  upon  its  assumptions,  they
propose  (i)  to  evaluate  a  claim  to  truth,  and  (2)  to  dis-
criminate between  such  a  claim  and  an  established  truth  ?
These  two  questions  constitute  the  first  part  of  my
challenge.  They  are,  clearly,  good  questions,  and  such
that  from  any  theory  of  knowledge  with  pretensions  to
completeness  an  answer  may  fairly  be  demanded.  And
if  such  an  answer  exists,  it  is  so  vital  to  the  whole  case
of  intellectualism,  that  we  may  fairly  require  it  to  be  pro-
duced. If  it  is  not  produced,  we  will  be  patient,  and  hope
that  some  day  we  may  be  vouchsafed  a  revelation  of
esoteric  truth  ;  but  human  nature  is  weak,  and  the  longer
the  delay  the  stronger  will  grow  the  suspicion  that  there
is  nothing  to  produce.

The  second  part  of  our  challenge  refers  to  the  intel-
lectualist's  rejection  of  our  solution.  If  we  are  so  very
wrong  in  our  very  plain  and  positive  assertion  that  the
truth  (validity)  of  a  truth  (claim)  is  tested  and  established
by  the  value  of  its  consequences,  there  ought  surely  to  be


v  THE  AMBIGUITY  OF  TRUTH  161

no  difficulty  about  producing  abundant  cases  in  which  the
truth  (validity)  of  a  doubtful  assertion  is  established  in
some  otlier  way.  I  would  ask,  therefore,  for  the  favour
of  one  clear  case  of  this  kind}  And  I  make  only  one
stipulation.  It  should  be  a  case  in  which  there  really
was  a  question,  so  that  the  true  answer  might  have,  before
examination,  turned  out  false.  For  without  this  proviso
we  should  get  no  illustration  of  actual  knowing,  such  as
was  contemplated  by  the  pragmatist,  whose  theory  pro-
fesses to  discriminate  cases  in  which  there  is  a  real
chance  of  acquiring  truth  and  a  real  risk  of  falling  into
falsity.  If  on  the  other  hand  specimens  merely  of
indubitable  or  verbal  truths  were  adduced,  and  it  were
asserted  that  these  were  true  not  because  they  were
useful,  but  simply  because  they  were  true,  we  should  end
merely  in  a  wrangle  about  the  historical  pedigree  of  the
truth.  We  should  contend  that  it  was  at  one  time  doubtful,
and  accepted  as  true  because  of  its  tested  utility :  our
opponent  would  dispute  our  derivation  and  assert  that  it
had  always  been  true.  We  should  agree  that  it  was  now
indisputable,  we  should  disagree  about  the  origin  of  this
feature  ;  and  the  past  history  would  usually  be  too  little
known  to  establish  either  view.  And  so  we  should  get
no  nearer  to  a  settlement.

By  observing  on  the  other  hand  truth  in  the  making,
inferences  may  be  drawn  to  the  nature  of  truth  already
made.  And  whether  truth  is  by  nature  pragmatic,  or
whether  this  is  a  foul  aspersion  on  her  character,  it  is
surely  most  desirable  that  this  point  should  be  settled.
Hitherto  the  chief  obstacle  to  such  a  decision  has  been
the  fact  that  while  in  public  (and  still  more  in  private)
there  has  been  much  misconception,  misrepresentation
and  abuse  of  our  views,  there  have  been  no  serious
attempts  to  contest  directly,  unequivocally,  and  outright,
any  of  our  cardinal  assertions.2  And  what  perhaps  is

1  Prof.  Taylor  attempted  to  answer  an  earlier  form  of  this  challenge  in  Mind,
N.S.  No.  57.  My  reply  appeared  in  N.S.  No.  59,  under  the  name  '  Pragma-
tism and  Pseudo- Pragmatism,'  and  showed  that  he  had  completely  misunderstood
even  the  elementary  '  principle  of  Peirce. '

*  Prof.  Taylor  may  now  perhaps  be  said  to  have  supplied  this  desideratum,  by

M


162  STUDIES IN HUMANISM  v

still  more  singular,  our  critics  have  been  completely
reticent  as  to  what  alternative  solutions  to  the  issues
raised  they  felt  themselves  in  a  position  to  propound.
The  whole  situation  is  so  strange,  and  so  discreditable  to
the  prestige  of  philosophy,  that  it  is  earnestly  to  be  hoped
that  of  the  many  renowned  logicians  who  so  vehemently
differ  from  us  some  should  at  length  see  (and  show  us  !)
their  way  to  refute  these  '  heresies,'  as  clearly  and  articu-
lately as  their  OvpoeiBes1  permits  their  <J>i\6cro<j>ov,1  and
as  boldly  as  their  $>i,\6<ro<f)ov  permits  their  #u/AoetSe9,  to
express  itself.

denying  that  psychology  has  any  relevance  to  logic  (Phil.  Rev.  xiv.  pp.  267,  287).
And  yet  immediately  after  (p.  287)  he  feels  constrained  to  argue  that  the
efficient  cause  of  his  accepting  any  belief  as  true  is  a  specific  form  of  emotion  !
I  should  have  thought  that  the  fact  that  no  truth  could  be  accepted  without  this
feeling  constituted  a  pretty  substantial  connexion  between  psychology  and
logic.  Cp.  Essay  iii.

1  The  '  spirited '  and  '  philosophic '  parts  of  the  soul,  according  to  Plato.


VI
THE  NATURE  OF  TRUTH1

ARGUMENT

I.  The  making  of  ideals  is  vain  if  they  are  divorced  from  human  life.  II.
Mr.  Joachim's  abstraction  from  the  human  side  of  truth.  III.  The
consequent  failure  of  his  '  ideal. '  IV.  Truth  and  error  in  the  Hegelian
4  Dialectic. '  The  '  concrete  '  universal  really  abstract.  Scientific  '  laws '
truly  concrete  and  not  timeless,  as  alleged.  The  chasm  between  the
human  and  the  ideal  in  intellectualist  epistemology.  V.  Contrast  with
the  Humanist  solution.  The  '  correspondence  '  and  the  '  independence '
view  of  truth.  Both  are  inevitable  for  intellectualism,  as  is  the  scepticism
in  which  they  end.


OF  all  the  animals  that  creep  and  breathe  upon  the  earth
man  is  the  most  iconoclastic — because  he  is  also  the  most
iconoplastic.  He  is  ever  engaged  in  forming  ideals  for
his  delectation  and  worship,  and  continually  discovering
his  worship  to  be  idolatry  and  shattering  his  own  crea-
tions.

The  reason  for  this  absurdly  wasteful  procedure  is
always  the  same.  The  ideal  has  been  constructed,  the
idol  has  been  set  up,  too  uncritically.  Too  little  care
has  been  devoted  to  the  foundations  of  the  ideal  to  build
upon  them  an  enduring  structure.  The  requirements
which  an  ideal  must  satisfy  have  been  ignored.  Yet
these  requirements  are  simple.  They  may  be  formulated
as  follows : —

i.  The  ideal  must  be  attainable  by  a  thought  which
starts  from  our  actual  human  standpoint.

1  This  essay  appeared,  as  a  review  of  Mr.  H.  H.  Joachim's  book  with  the
same  title,  in  the  Journal  of  Philosophy,  iii.  20  (27th  Sept.  1906).  It  has  been
somewhat  expanded.

163


1 64  STUDIES IN  HUMANISM  vi

2.  When constructed it  must be  relevant to  actual
human  life.

3.  The  ideal  must  be  realisable  by  the  development
of  man's  actual  life.

4.  Yet it must have '  independent ' authority over
actual  human  life. Or,  more  briefly,  the  ideal  must  (a)
be  an  ideal  for  man,  and  yet  (b)  have  authority  over  man.

Unless  the  first  condition  is  complied  with,  it  is
evident  that  the  ideal  will  be  the  arbitrary  creation  of  a
fancy  which  uses  the  actual  only  as  a  jumping-off  place
into  cloudlands  and  dreamlands.  And  any  ideal,  which
is  arrived  at  thus  per  saltum,  is  bound  to  reveal  its  illusory
nature  so  soon  as  an  attempt  is  made  to  get  back  from  the
ideal  to  the  actual,  i.e.  to  apply  the  ideal  to  human  life.
We  then  find  that  we  cannot  get  back  from  the  standpoint
of  the  ideal ;  with  its  glamour  in  our  eyes  the  actual
seems  hideous  and  distorted,  alien  and  unintelligible.
Whereat,  enraged,  we  may  feel  tempted  to  pronounce,  not
the  ideal,  but  the  actual,  radically  false  and  vicious,  and  to
build  out  our  '  ideal  '  into  a  veritable  paradise  of  fools.

Unless  the  second  condition  is  complied  with,  our
ideal  becomes  non-functional,  and  therefore  really  mean-
ingless. A  real  ideal  for  man  must  be  applicable  to  the
world  of  man's  experience.  An  ideal  which  is  not  so
applicable  is  no  ideal  for  man,  even  though  it  might
entrance  angels  and  redeem  Absolutes.  And  clearly  an
ideal  which  has  been  reached  by  a  jump  is  pretty  certain
to  prove  thus  inapplicable.  As  it  was  not  reached  by  a
gradual  approach  from  the  actual,  it  cannot  return  to  the
actual  world  and  enlighten  its  gropings.  It  owed  its
being  to  invalid  fancy ;  it  owes  its  application  to  an
irrational  fiat.

Unless  the  third  condition  is  complied  with  the  ideal
loses  its  compelling  power.  The  impossible  is  no  source
of  obligation,  no  centre  of  attraction  ;  nor  is  it  rational  to
aim  at  its  attainment.  The  notion  that  an  ideal  would
not  be  an  ideal  if  it  were  realisable,  is  a  false  inference
from  the  fact  that  ideals  are  progressive,  and  expand  as
actuality  approaches  the  level  of  what  once  seemed  the


vi  THE NATURE  OF  TRUTH  165

ideal.  It  overlooks  the  fact  that  throughout  this  whole
process  the  ideal  has  to  be  conceived  as  essentially
realisable.  If  this  belief  in  its  possibility  failed  us,  our
devotion  would  at  once  be  stultified.

It  is,  however,  to  the  fourth  condition  that  the  other
three  have  usually  been  sacrificed.  Ideals  have  been
unnaturally  projected  into  a  non-human  sphere,  they  have
been  rendered  inefficacious  and  impossible  by  being  dis-
sociated from  human  life,  in  order  to  guarantee  their
independence  and  to  enhance  their  authority.  That  this
procedure  is  self-defeating  has  already  been  explained.
It  may  be  shown  also  to  rest  on  radically  false  con-
ceptions of  the  authority  and  '  independence '  of  ideals.
Their  '  authority '  must  not  be  conceived  as  imposed  on
man  ;  it  must  be  freely  constituted  and  recognised  by
him.  Nor  can  their  '  independence '  be  conceived  as
absolute  ;  it  cannot  mean  absence  of  relation  to  human
life.  It  can  at  most  be  relative,  a  tentative  simplification
of  the  actual  facts,  an  exclusion  of  this  or  that  un-
important circumstance,  of  this  or  that  discrepant  desire,
of  this  or  that  discordant  claim.  But  to  set  up  an
ideal  wholly  independent  of  terrestrial  conditions,  human
psychology,  and  individual  claims,  to  argue  that  because
experience  shows  that  some  such  features  may  be  set
aside,  all  may  in  a  body  be  excluded  a  priori^  seems
merely  to  exemplify  the  fallacy  of  '  composition.'  It
should  never  be  forgotten  that  in  any  actually  working
ideal  the  '  independence '  is  functional,  and  strictly  limited
to  the  sense  and  extent  which  its  efficacy  requires.


II

These  reflections  have  not  been  wholly  inspired  by
Mr.  Joachim's  interesting  and  instructive  essay,  but  they
find  in  it  abundant  illustration.  It  is  always  an  affecting
spectacle  to  behold  the  good  man  conscientiously  practis-
ing the  idol-breaking  art  upon  the  idols  of  his  soul,  but
the  total  failure  of  Mr.  Joachim's  investigation  of  the
nature  of  truth,  which  he  himself  confesses  in  such  hand-


166  STUDIES IN HUMANISM  vi

some  terms  (pp.  171-180),  might  have  been  predicted  by
any  one  who  had  examined  the  functioning  of  human
ideals.

Mr. Joachim has  courted  failure  by  the  fundamental
assumptions  which  pervade  his  ideal  of  Truth.

1 i )  He  has  assumed  that  the  '  Critical '  question  is  out
of  date. Nowhere  does  he  betray  any  consciousness  of
the  need  for  asking,  '  How  can  I  know  all  this  that  I  have
assumed  ? How  are  the  facts  assumed  compatible  with
my  knowing  them  ? ' He  has  not  in  consequence  raised
the  question  how  his  ideal  was  arrived  at.

(2)  He  has  thereby  been  enabled to  assume  an  im-
possible standpoint, without realising until it  was  too
late  that  nothing  could  be  said  from  it  that  was  in  the
least  degree  relevant  to  the  facts  of  human  life. Assuming
that  '  the  nature  of  truth '  concerned  "  the  character  of  an
ideally  complete  experience,"  and  not  the  actual  procedures
of  human  minds,  he  inevitably  lays  it  down  that  "  there
can  be  one  and  only  one  such  experience  :  or  only  one
significant  whole the  significance  of  which is self-con-
tained  in  the  sense required. For it is absolute  self-
fulfilment, absolutely self-contained significance, that  is
postulated  ;  and  nothing  short  of  absolute  individuality —
nothing  short of  the  completely  whole  experience — can
satisfy  this  postulate. And  human  knowledge,  not  merely
my  knowledge  or  yours,  but  the  best  and  fullest  knowledge
in  the  world  at  any  stage  of  its  development — is  clearly
not  a  significant  whole  in  this ideally complete sense.
Hence  the  truth  is — -from  the  point  of  view  of  the  human
intelligence — an Ideal, and an Ideal which can never
as such)  or  in its completeness, be  actual as human
experience."  x

(3)  Having  assumed  such  an  ideal,  he  is  compelled  to
abstract,  as  far  as  possible,  from  everything  human,  real,

1  Pp.  78-79.  The  ideal  described  is  clearly  not  an  ideal  for  man.  And,
naturally,  Mr.  Joachim  finds  the  resources  of  human  language  inadequate  to
describe  it.  Cp.  p.  83  n. ,  where  he  declares  that  though  he  calls  it
'experience,'  the  word  is  'unsatisfactory,'  and  that  he  uses  it  only  because
1  God  '  would  be  '  misleading,'  and  '  the  Absolute  '  and  '  the  Idea'  have  become
bywords.


vi  THE NATURE  OF  TRUTH  167

and  concrete.  But  ultimately  this  abstraction  proves
impracticable,  and  when  at  last  his  conception  of  truth  is
brought  into  contact  with  the  fact  of  human  error,  its
breakdown  is  as  irretrievable  as  it  was  inevitable  :  for  it
is  the  collapse  into  its  interior  emptiness  of  the  bubble
of  a  false  ideal  under  pressure  from  the  real  it  had
scouted.

That  Mr.  Joachim  has  really  made  all  these  assump-
tions can  be  made  plain  in  his  own  words.  Thus — (i)
he  describes  on  p.  178  his  assumption  of  the  standpoint
"  That  the  truth  itself  is  one  and  whole  and  complete,
and  that  all  thinking  and  all  experience  moves  within  its
recognition  and  subject  to  its  manifest  authority  ;  this  I
have  never  doubted."  Perhaps  if  he  had  been  more
willing,  not  necessarily  to  doubt,  but,  let  us  say,  to
examine,  this  assumption,  he  would  not  have  been  forced
to  doubt  so  much  in  the  end.  For  it  was  decidedly
uncritical  thus  to  rule  out  the  question  of  whence  came
the  features  in  the  ideal  he  postulated.  It  was  also  by
definition  that  he  had  ruled  out  the  conception  of  truth
as  a  human  ideal.  Hence  it  was  quite  superfluous  to
state  in  the  preface  that  he  was  not  going  to  discuss
the  Humanist  conception  of  truth.  He  could  not :  from
his  point  of  view  the  Humanist  position  was  invisible,
and  was  bound  to  seem  "  a  denial  of  truth  altogether."

From  Mr.  Joachim's  standpoint  human  knowing
could  not  possibly  appear  as  anything  but  an  inexplicable
falling  away  from  the  serenity,  purity,  and  perfection  of
'  the  Ideal,'  as  a  chaos  of  '  unreal  abstractions '  which  it  is
his  duty  '  to  do  his  best  to  discredit '  (p.  5  9).  Or,  as  he
says  more  fully  (pp.  167-68),  "The  differences  of  this  and
that  knowing  mind  —  a  fortiori,  the  confused  mass  of
idiosyncrasies  which  together  distinguish  this  '  person '  or
'  self  from  that — are  recognised  only  to  be  set  aside  and,
if  necessary,  discounted.  They  are  accidental  imperfec-
tions, superficial  irregularities,  in  the  medium  through
which  truth  is  reflected ;  limitations  in  the  vessels
through  which  knowledge  is  poured.  They  are,  so  to
say,  bubbles  on  the  stream  of  knowledge ;  and  the


1 68  STUDIES  IN HUMANISM  vi

passing  show  of  arbitrary  variation,  which  they  create  on
the  surface,  leaves  the  depths  untroubled  —  a  current
uniform  and  timeless.  My  and  your  thinking,  my  and
your  self,  the  particular  temporal  processes,  and  the
extreme  self-substantiation  of  the  finite  '  modes '  which  is
error  in  its  full  discordance  :  these  are  incidents  somehow  l
connected  with  the  known  truth,  but  they  themselves
and  the  manner  of  their  connexion  are  excluded  from  the
theory  of  knowledge."

The  theory  of  knowledge,  then, "  studies  the  known  truth
qua  timeless  and  universal"  (p.  168),  and  the  judgments
of  science  cannot  be  "  concerned  with  the  concrete
thinking  of  the  individual  mind  qua  '  this  '  or  that,'  qua
differentiated  by  the  idiosyncrasies  developed  through  its
particular  psychological  history"  (p.  93),  "in  all  the
accidental  and  confused  psychical  setting"  (p.  115).

Or  lastly  and  most  frankly  (p.  1 18),  u  I  do  not  inquire
how  the  logician  can  pass  from  the  '  psychological
individual '  to  the  '  logical  subject,'  from  this  actual
thinking  (with  all  its  psychical  machinery  and  particular
setting)  to  the  thought  which  claims  truth  as  affirming
universal  meaning.  The  logician,  I  am  convinced,  never
really  starts  with  this  individual  thinker  in  the  sense
supposed  ;  and,  if  he  did,  the  passage  from  this  psycho-
logical fiction  to  the  subject  of  knowledge  would  be
impossible."

It  is  clear  that  Mr.  Joachim  at  any  rate  has  never
started  with  '  this  individual  thinker,'  but  equally  so
that  he  never  gets  to  him.  He  has,  like  Plato,  assumed
his  '  logical '  standpoint,  and  never  doubts,  even  when  it
proves  unworkable,  that  the  discrepancy  of  psychical  fact
is  mere  irrelevance  and  confusion.  "  We  have  been
demanding  all  along,"  he  says  (p.  82),  "  an  entire  reversal
of  this  attitude "  (of  starting  from  the  actual).  "In  our
view  it  is  the  Ideal  which  is  solid  and  substantial  and
fully  actual.  The  finite  experiences  are  rooted  in  the

1  The  magic  word,  to  which  the  logic,  like  the  metaphysic,  of  intellectualism
always  in  the  end  appeals,  when  its  false  abstractions  fail !  A  critic's  brutal
candour  is  tempted  to  substitute  Humpty  Dumpty's  favourite  word  '  Nohow  ! '
in  all  such  passages.


vi  THE  NATURE  OF  TRUTH  169

Ideal.  They  share  its  actuality l  and  draw  from  it  what-
ever being  and  conceivability  they  possess.  It  is  a
perverse  attitude  to  condemn  the  Ideal  because  the  con-
ditions under  which  finite  experiences  exhibit  their
fragmentary  activity  do  not  as  such  restrict  its  being,
or  to  deny  that  it  is  conceivable,  because  the  conceiva-
bility of  such  incomplete  expressions  is  too  confused  and
turbid  to  apply  to  it."


Ill

What,  then,  is  this  standpoint  of  the  Ideal  ?  Page  76
tells  us  that  "  Truth  in  its  essential  nature  is  that  systematic
coherence  which  is  the  character  of  a  significant  whole.
A  '  significant  whole '  is  an  organised  individual  ex-
perience, self-fulfilling  and  self-fulfilled.  Its  organisation
is  the  process  of  its  self-fulfilment,  and  the  concrete
manifestation  of  its  individuality."

Brave  words,  if  only  the  standpoint  of  '  the  Ideal '
could  be  maintained,  if  only  the  '  individual  thinker '
could  be  wholly  dismissed  from  the  inquiry !  Unluckily
he  cannot.

The  tree  of  knowledge  cannot  be  guarded  against
human  profanation,  even  in  the  logician's  paradise,  once
it  is  '  somehow '  revealed  to  man.  Nay,  the  logician  is
ultimately  driven  out  by  the  diabolical  machinations  of
"  the  dual  nature  of  human  experience,"  which  has  "  its
universality  and  independence  and  yet  also  its  individuality
and  its  dependence  on  personal  and  private  conditions  "
(p.  29).  "  Truth,  beauty,  goodness  are  timeless,  universal,
independent  structures ;  and  yet  also  is  it  essential  to
them  to  be  manifested  in  the  thinking  of  finite  subjects,
in  the  actions  and  volitions  of  perishing  agents"  (p.  163).
They  "appear  in  the  actual  world  and  exist  in  finite
experience  .  .  .  and  their  life  (at  least  on  one  side  of
itself)  is  judgment,  emotion,  volition — the  processes  and
activities  of  finite  individuals.  Truth,  if  it  is  to  be  for  me,

1  This  is  how  Mr.  Joachim  glides  over  the  '  participation '  difficulty. Plato
at  least  perceived  its  seriousness.


i/o  STUDIES IN  HUMANISM  vi

must  enter  into  my  intellectual  endeavour,"  however
'  independent '  it  is  "  of  the  process  by  which  7  come  to
know  it"  (p.  21).

No  wonder  '  human  experience '  is  '  paradoxical '
(p.  23),  and  that  in  the  end  its  'dual  nature'  is  too
much  for  '  the  Ideal ' !  It  has  no  room  for  Error  ;  and
yet  Error  inexplicably  exists.  Thus  Error  becomes  the
"  declaration  of  independence "  of  the  finite,  something
utterly  '  unthinkable '  "  where  that  which  declares  is
nothing  real  and  nothing  real  is  declared"  (p.  163).

And  so  '  the  Ideal '  of  '  coherence '  "  suffers  shipwreck
at  the  very  entrance  of  the  harbour"  (p.  171).  "It  must
render  intelligible  '  the  dual  nature  of  human  experience ' '
(p.  170) ;  it  fails  to  meet  '  demands '  which  "  both  must  be
and  cannot  be  completely  satisfied  "  (p.  171).  And  so  the
whole  "  voyage  ends  in  disaster,  and  a  disaster  which  is
inevitable"  (p.  171).

It  would  be  ungenerous  in  those  who  declined  to
commit  themselves  to  the  ill-found  craft  which  Mr.
Joachim  has  gallantly  navigated  to  foredoomed  failure
to  crow  over  this  catastrophe ; l  but  it  is  permissible  to
point  out  why  it  was  inevitable  from  the  start.

The  whole  ideal,  despite  its  protestations  of '  concrete-
ness  '  and  aspirations  towards  a  '  self-fulfilling  individuality,'
rested  all  along  on  an  unjustified  abstraction  from  the
most  essential  features  of  the  only  knowledge  and  truth
we  are  able  or  concerned  to  attain  and  examine.  As
Prof.  Stout  says,2  "  The  only  knowing  with  which  we  are
primarily  acquainted  is  knowing  on  the  part  of  individuals,
of  empirical,  historical  selves."  All  actual  truth  is  human,
all  actual  knowing  is  pervaded  through  and  through  by
the  purposes,  interests,  emotions,  and  volitions  of  a  human
personality.  Mr.  Joachim  had  no  right  to  treat  these
facts  as  distorting  disturbances  :  they  are  the  roots  of  the
tree  of  knowledge.  He  had  no  right  to  treat  knowledge
as  if  it  were  impersonal  :  the  '  personal  equation '  is  never

1  But  in  view  of  it  Mr. Bradley's  boasting  about  the  security  of  '  Jericho '
seems  particularly  misplaced  ! Cp.  Essay  iv.  §  5.

2  Arist.  Soc.  Proc.  1905-6,  p.  350.


vi  THE NATURE  OF  TRUTH  171

really  eliminated  even  in  science,  and  in  philosophy  the
attempt  to  abstract  from  its  all-pervasive  influence  stands
self-condemned.  He  had  no  right  to  assume  that  to  take
our  knowledge  in  its  full  concreteness  would  be  fatal  to
its  '  objectivity ' ;  he  should  have  studied  how  men  proceed
from  individual  judgments  to  social  agreements  about
truth,  and  ultimately  construct  ideals  which  are  intended
to  guide  our  aspirations,  but  are  at  once  bereft  of  their
significance  when  they  lose  touch  with  human  knowing.

Mr.  Joachim  has  had,  of  course,  to  pay  the  penalty  of
these  uncritical  assumptions.  He  has  failed  to  describe
anything  at  all  resembling  the  actual  processes  of  human
knowing.  He  has  failed  equally  to  portray  the  operations
of  science.  He  has  failed  even  to  render  his  abstract
ideal  self-supporting  :  it  crumbles  under  its  own  weight ;
for  all  its  claim  to  absoluteness  it  possesses  no  authority  ;
for  all  its  aspiration  to  '  coherence '  it  does  not  cohere,
even  in  itself.

These  defects,  moreover,  are  closely  intertwined.
Because  he  has  assumed  the  absolute  standpoint  and
abstracted  from  the  personal  context  of  every  judgment,
he  can  never  seize  the  actual  meaning  of  any  judgment.
He  cannot  see  that  it  lies  in  the  use  of  the  judgment,  in
its  relation  to  a  cognitive  end,  in  its  adjustment  to  a
particular  case,  in  its  satisfaction  of  a  need.  By  ignoring
(what  is  obvious  from  the  opposite  point  of  view)  that
meaning  depends  on  purpose  and  demands  application,
he  has  restricted  himself  to  potential  meaning,  and  moves
in  a  world  of  impotent  phantoms.  It  is  only  in  such  a
phantasmagoria  of  depersonalised,  hypostasised  abstrac-
tions that  truth  can  appear  timeless  and  unalterable,  that
judgments  can  bear  meaning  in  isolation  (p.  90),  and  are
possessed  of  a  '  truth '  which  they  '  affirm '  and  '  demand '
(pp.  108-9),  tnat  thoughts  move  and  live  and  expand  out
of  space  and  time  (p.  176).

But  these  are  all  illusions  incidental  to  an  imprac-
ticable standpoint,  and  the  whole  Witches'  Sabbath  of  the
Hegelian  Dialectic  is  really  started  by  the  wanton  and
impossible  dehumanising  of  knowledge.


i;2  STUDIES IN  HUMANISM  vi

IV

The  Hegelian  Dialectic  is  essentially  an  attempt  to
determine  the  concatenation  of  meanings  per  se  and  in
abstraction  from  their  application  and  actual  function,
and  in  a  sense  the  culmination  of  all  such  attempts.
But  it  fails  because  it  too  has  not  realised  that  per  se
'  categories '  do  not  mean  anything,  and  that  the  meaning
of  a  category  lies  in  the  purpose  with  which  it  is  employed.
Hegel  had  perceived — and  it  is  greatly  to  his  credit  that
he  should  have  done  so — that  taken  per  se  the  '  higher '
abstractions  were  also  the  emptier :  thus  in  the  '  philo-
sophic '  (i.e.  abstract)  contemplation  of  thought  there
seemed  to  occur  a  progressive  loss  of  meaning,  a  gradual
evisceration  of  content,  until  the  highest  'category'  of  all,
'  Being,'  appeared  to  be  de  facto  indistinguishable  from
'  nothing.'  Seeing  that  this  was  wrong,  Hegel  set  himself
to  find  a  remedy  for  this  disease  of  thought,  and  prescribed
his  '  Dialectic '  as  the  way  by  which  thought  might
return  to  the  concreteness  of  '  spirit.'  He  perceived,
that  is,  that  the  concrete  is  really  higher  than  the  abstract,
and  so  demanded  that  a  universal  which  was  to  be  really
valuable  should  be  conceived  as  '  concrete.'  The  '  con-
crete universal '  is  thus  a  demand  for  a  something  to
rectify  the  error  of  abstraction.  But  unfortunately  it  does
not  go  far  enough.  For  Hegel  did  not  see  (i)  that  his
problem  was  unreal ;  and  (2)  that  his  solution  of  it  was
illusory.

(i)  The  disease  of  thought  which  Hegel  undertook  to
cure  does  not  really  exist :  it  is  a  figment  of  the  philoso-
phers, the  product  of  a  defective  analysis  of  actual  human
knowing.  If  we  refrain  from  abstracting  from  the  actual
functioning  of  thought,  there  is  no  need  to  evolve  a
concrete  universal,  by  the  convolutions  of  the  Dialectic.
For  in  their  actual  use  all  universals  are  concrete.  For
they  are  applied  to  a  concrete  situation.  And  this  is  as
true  of  '  Being '  as  of  '  Spirit'  Whenever  we  actually
have  occasion  to  predicate  '  being,'  i.e.  to  include  anything
in  that  summum  genus^  we  mean  to  relate  it  to  the  concrete


vi  THE  NATURE  OF  TRUTH  173

whole  of  reality r,  not  to  include  it  in  an  empty  category.
And  if  the  purpose  of  the  train  of  thought  which  led  to
the  predication  had  not  been  abstracted  from,  this  would
have  been  evident  throughout.  All  abstractions  are  made
for  a  purpose,  and  are  meant  to  be  applied,  and  recover
full  concreteness  in  their  power  over  the  particular  cases
of  their  application.  Their  '  abstractness,'  therefore,  con-
stitutes no  problem  for  a  pragmatic  theory  of  knowledge,
and  the  'error  of  abstraction'  is  cured  simply  by  a
perception  of  the  use  of  abstraction.

(2)  Even  if  Hegel's  difficulty  had  not  been  one  of
those  which  one  gets  out  of  by  never  getting  into,  his
'  concrete  universal '  is  no  way  out  of  it.  In  its  unapplied
condition,  it  is  never  fully  concrete.  The  '  Dialectic '  no
more  gets  back  to  the  concrete  individual,  from  which
the  (purposive)  process  of  abstraction  started,  than  the
Platonic  Idea.  It  stops  short  with  the  '  category '  of
'  Spirit,'  the  application  of  which  to  concrete  '  spirits '  is  the
real  problem.  The  '  concrete  universal's  '  claim  to  be  con-
crete, therefore,  is  a  mere  '  bluff.'  It  is  and  remains  a  rank
abstraction,  because  it  has  not  comprehended  the  function
of  abstractions.  It  has  abstracted  from  the  personal  aspects
of  the  knowing  process,  without  perceiving  that  in  so
doing  it  has  abolished  its  own  raison  d'etre.  Nor  is  it
what  it  pretends  to  be  in  other  respects.  It  is  not  even  a
true  universal,  because  it  has  no  power  over  particulars  ;
and,  for  all  its  theoretical  assurances,  in  practice  it  repels
them  as  confusing  and  irrational.  Whereas  the  '  universals '
which  are  really  functional  and  are  used  in  actual  knowing
are  always  particulars,  i.e.  they  are  applied  to  a  '  this  '  in  a
'  here '  and  '  now?

Hence  the  Hegelian  '  universal '  never  occurs  either  in
ordinary  or  in  scientific  knowing.  The  '  universals '
('  laws ')  of  the  sciences  live  only  in  their  application  to
particular  cases ;  they  try  to  formulate  the  habits  of
things,  and  are  intended  to  be  rules  which  guide  us  in  our
treatment  of  them.  It  is,  therefore,  the  less  important
half  of  the  truth  to  assert  (p.  no)  that  "  scientific  thought
moves  in  universals  "  and  that  "  in  the  science  of  botany


174  STUDIES  IN  HUMANISM  vi

a  judgment  of  perception  like  '  this  tree  is  green '  finds,
as  such,  no  place."  For  in  reality  the  universals  are
applied  universals,  and  the  science  of  botany  would  be
valueless  if  it  did  not  deal  with  the  behaviour  of  particular
trees,  nor  would  it  value  the  more  abstract  judgments  if
they  did  not  show  their  pragmatic  power  by  applying
to  a  greater  number  of  '  particulars.'  Our  scientific  pro-
cedure, in  short,  gives  no  sanction  whatever  to  the  notion
that  universals  which  cannot  be  applied  have  any  value,
and  the  alleged  '  eternity '  of  scientific  truth  is  merely  an
illusion  engendered  by  the  abstraction  from  purpose.1

The  Hegelian  '  universal,'  however,  not  merely  mis-
represents the  scientific  '  law,'  it  no  less  distorts  our  vision
of  the  '  particular.'  An  abstraction  itself,  it  constructs
the  bogey  of  '  the  individual  mind,'  presumably  in  order
that  something  more  monstrous  than  itself  may  deter  us
from  acknowledging  plain  facts.  But  its  '  individual
mind '  is  a  figment,  formed  by  expunging  all  values  from
the  concrete  mind.2  In  actual  minds  the  values  are  all
present,  as  psychical  facts,  with  the  ideals  and  the  idiosyn-
crasies, all  capable  of  contributing  harmoniously  to  the
conservation  of  the  individual  life.3

There  is  no  occasion  or  temptation,  therefore,  to  oppose
'  particular '  to  '  universal,'  and  to  reject  any  of  the  mind's
actual  contents  as  '  accidental,'  '  irrelevant,'  or  '  confused.'
For  one,  that  is,  who  really  starts  from  the  '  finite  ex-
periences.' But  it  is  only  an  amiable  delusion  of  Mr.
Joachim's  to  imagine  that  he  has  tried  to  do  so  (p.  115).
His  assumption  of  '  the  Ideal '  has  really  incapacitated
him  from  describing  human  experience  as  it  is.  He  has
in  reality  dissevered  it  into  a  part  which  is  (to  his  think-
ing) superhuman,  and  another  which  is  despicable,  if  not
bestial.  But  the  two  will  not  cohere,  nor  even  come  into
contact,  and  between  them  his  theory  of  knowledge
founders.

1  As  Mr.  Hoernle  neatly  says,  "  Science  only  formulates  its  conceptions  and
laws  apart  from  their  temporal  setting  in  any  given  case,  that  it  may  be  the
better  able  to  understand  and  control  the  succession  of  phenomena  in  time  "
(Mind,  xiv.  329).  Cp.  Humanism,  pp.  103-5.

2  Cp.  Essay  iii.  §  14.  3  Cp.  Essay  iii.  §  3.


vi  THE  NATURE  OF  TRUTH  175

In  other  words,  Mr.  Joachim  has  contrived  to  reopen
an  old  wound  that  was  never  really  healed.  In  every
absolutist  theory  of  knowledge,  when  it  is  really  thought
out  to  the  end,  there  is  and  must  be  a  dualistic  chasm
gaping  between  the  '  human  '  and  the  '  absolute '  aspects
of  truth.  Across  this  chasm  there  is  no  bridge ;  but  the
mystic  often  fancies  that  he  can  be  wafted  across  it  on
the  wings  of  desire.  Mr.  Joachim  is  too  sceptical  and  too
honest  to  play  such  tricks,  but  the  old  mistakes  have
conducted  him  to  the  old  impasse.  Once  more  the  ideal
has  been  severed  from  its  roots  in  the  real  ;  once  more  it
has  been  incited  to  transcend  our  experience  ;  once  more
it  has  refused  to  return  to  earth  and  to  redeem  it.  It
is  vain  to  protest  (p.  62)  that  "a  universal  is  not  another
entity  existing  alongside  of  its  particulars."  He  himself
has  made  it  such,  by  refusing  to  conceive  it  as  human  and
as  humanly  inhabiting  them.

If  he  will  not  conceive  the  universal  as  a  human
instrument,  as  existing  in  and  for  its  use,  if  he  will  insist
that  it  must  be  '  independent,'  it  must  be  so  exalted  as  to
lose  all  real  significance  for  us.  Thus  the  old  Aristotelian
protest  against  the  Platonic  Idea  has  still  to  be  reiterated
against  the  Hegelian  universal.  If  it  holds  aloof  from
human  knowing,  it  manifestly  fails,  because  it  becomes  a
vain  duplication,  which  has  no  meaning  or  interest  for  us  :
if  it  essays  to  deal  with  human  knowing,  it  becomes  an
inhuman  monster  which  tries  to  absorb  the  human  and,
still  more  manifestly,  fails,  and  then  revenges  itself  by
abusing  and  depreciating  us.  In  neither  case  can  the
human  and  the  ideal  be  harmoniously  combined,  or  their
'  duality  '  overcome.  But  this  duality  was  produced  by
the  initial  assumption  of  a  non-human  standpoint ;  if  the
inquiry  had  commenced  by  investigating  how  '  truths '
are  verified  and  errors  detected,  no  '  duality '  need  ever
have  arisen  to  bar  the  way.1

1  Cp.  for  all  this  the  argument  in  Essays  ii.  §§  16-18,  and  iii.  §§  17-18.


1/6  STUDIES IN HUMANISM  Vi

V

To  discuss  Mr.  Joachim's  standpoint  really  implies
the  highest  praise  that  could  be  bestowed  on  Mr.  Joachim's
essay.  For  it  means  that  having  assumed  it,  he  has
worked  out  its  implications  with  consistency  and  rigour
to  the  bitter  end.  Indeed,  it  seems  that  of  all  the  writers
of  the  '  Anglo  -  Hegelian '  school  he  has  most  firmly
grasped  their  central  problem,  most  honestly  faced  their
difficulties,  most  clearly  shown  what  their  doctrines  really
mean  and  to  what  they  really  lead.  That  his  conclusions
should  be  welcome  to  all  (or  even  to  any)  of  the  members
of  the  school  is  not,  perhaps,  to  be  expected  ;  but  it  is  no
slight  service  to  philosophy  to  have  set  the  issue  in  so
clear  a  light.  Other  philosophers,  who  stand  remote
enough  to  enjoy  the  light  of  Mr.  Joachim's  criticism
without  being  scorched  by  its  fire,  will  appreciate  that
service  at  its  true  value.  Humanists,  in  particular,
will  derive  much  instruction  from  the  uncompromising
and  almost  inhuman  expression  Mr.  Joachim  has  given
to  an  attitude  diametrically  opposed  to  theirs.  They  will
note  with  satisfaction  how  close  is  the  parallel,  and  how
complete  the  antithesis,  between  him  and  them  on  all
essential  points,  and  regard  this  as  testimony  to  the
inner  consistency  of  rival  views  whose  divergence  springs
from  different  answers  to  the  same  question.  They  will
rejoice  that  Mr.  Joachim  has  unequivocally  expressed  a
multitude  of  notions  they  had  long  suspected  their
opponents  of  harbouring,  and  desired  to  see  stated  in  cold
print.  Nor  will  they  have  any  reason  to  regret  the
negative  outcome  of  Mr.  Joachim's  labours.  On  the
contrary,  the  more  extensively  it  is  recognised  as  the  final
breakdown  of  intellectualistic  attempts  to  explain  '  how
knowledge  is  possible'  without  regard  to  the  actual
functioning  of  knowledge  in  human  life,  the  better  they
will  be  pleased.

In  view  of  the  fundamental  value  of  Mr.  Joachim's
work  it  seems  ungracious  to  allude  to  secondary  blemishes.
But  it  is  a  pity  that  instead  of  starting  from  the  simplest


vi  THE  NATURE  OF  TRUTH  177

form  of  the  '  correspondence-with-reality '  view  of  truth,
he  has  altogether  omitted  to  consider  it.  For  it  is  in  its
sensationalists  form,  as  referring  thoughts  to  the  test  of
perceptions,  that  this  view  is  most  plausible  and  least
inadequate.  Indeed,  apart  from  ulterior  interpretations,
it  is  plainly  descriptive  of  processes  which  actually  occur
in  our  knowing,  and  is  not  so  much  false  as  incomplete.
It  ordinarily  means  no  more  than  that  when  our
judgments  anticipate  perceptions,  the  perceptions  do  not
belie  them.

Again,  one  feels  that  the  most  consistent  attempt  to
work  out  the  notion  of  the  '  independence '  of  reality  on
intellectualistic  lines,  viz.  that  made  by  Messrs.  Bertrand
Russell  and  G.  E.  Moore,  is  rejected  rather  than  refuted
on  pp.  51-55.  At  any  rate  the  objections  urged  against
the  theory  seem  to  press  equally  upon  that  to  which,  in
spite  of  its  collapse,  Mr.  Joachim  remains  attached  :  the
fundamental  assumption  is  the  same  for  both,  viz.  that
experiencing  ought  not  to  make  a  difference  to  the  '  facts';
so  is  their  fundamental  difficulty,  that  of  getting  this
'  independent '  truth  into  relation  with  human  minds  after
it  has  been  postulated.  Now  such  a  relation  has  to  be
conceived  as  a  '  correspondence '  somehow  ; a  and  so  it
would  seem  that  in  criticising  the  correspondence
notion  Mr.  Joachim  has  once  more  refuted  his  own
assumptions.2

This,  indeed,  would  seem  to  be  the  conclusion  of  the
whole  matter :  when  we  find  the  logic  of  Mr.  Joachim
and  Mr.  Russell  failing  just  where  that  of  Plato  had
failed  in  the  Theaetetus,  viz.  over  the  existence  of  error,
and  failing  just  for  the  same  reason,  viz.  on  account  of
its  wanton  abstraction  from  the  human  knowing  which
falls  into  error,  failing  just  where  that  of  Mr.  Bradley  had

1  Cp.  Essay  iv.  §  7.

2  Of  course  the problem has, in both  cases, been wrongly formulated.
Instead  of  asking, '  How  can  our  judgments reveal independent  facts?'  we
ought  to  have  inquired  when  and  why  and  in  virtue  of  what  intrinsic  peculiarities,
some  of  our  judgments  have  this  transcendent  '  reference  to  an  independent  fact '
ascribed  to  them. It  would  then  appear  that  the  reason  is  pragmatic  :  those
judgments  refer  to  '  independent  facts '  which  have  reached  (relative)  stability
and  pragmatic  trustworthiness.

N


i;8  STUDIES IN  HUMANISM  vi

failed,  failing  just  where  its  failure  was  predicted  ; l  when
we  find  logicians  unable  to  account  for  the  empirical  fact
of  knowledge,  and  plunging  deeper  and  deeper  into  the
quicksands  of  scepticism  the  more  they  try  to  explain
it,  when  inference  becomes  a  '  paradox '  and  a  mystery
exceeding  those  of  theology,  when  our  reasoning  has
to  be  treated  as  either  '  irrational '  or  extra-logical,  and
when  we  contrast  the  fact  to  which  Prof.  A.  W.  Moore
has  justly  drawn  attention,2  that  all  the  time  our  actual
knowledge  is  growing  and  progressively  ameliorating  the
lot  of  man,  is  it  not  high  time  that  we  should  stop  and
bethink  ourselves  of  a  possible  alternative  to  a  course
which  is  both  fatal  and  ridiculous  ?  Has  not  the  time
come  when  Kant's  '  Copernican  change  of  standpoint '
might  at  last  be  put  into  practice  seriously,  and  when
Truth,  instead  of  being  offered  up  to  idols  and  sacrificed
to  '  ideals,'  might  at  length  be  depicted  in  her  human
beauty  and  simplicity  ?

1  Cp.  Humanism,  p.  48,  and  Essay  iv.  §§  3-5.

2  The  Functional  versus  the  Representational  Theory  of  Knowledge  in  Locke's
Essay,  ch.  i.


VII
THE  MAKING  OF  TRUTH

ARGUMENT

§  I.  The  problem  of  relating  '  truth '  to  '  fact.'  Difficulties  of  conceiving
'  fact '  as  '  independent '  of  our  knowing  :  (a)  The  paradoxes  of  realism  ;
(b)  the  additional  contradictions  of  rationalism.  The  old  assumptions
to  be  given  up.  (l)  Truth  is  human  ;  (2)  fact  is  not  '  independent ','  but
(3)  dependent  and  relative  to  our  knowing,  §  2.  The  problem  of  vali-
dating claims  to  truth,  and  avoiding  error.  §  3.  Actual  knowing  our
starting-point  :  its  seven  features  dominated  by  the  pragmatic  test  of
truth,  §  4.  The  fact  of  previous  knowledge.  §  5-  The  acceptance  of
a  basis  of  fact.  The  ambiguity  of  fact  :  '  real '  fact  evolved  from
'  primary,'  by  a  process  of  selection.  Individual  variations  as  to
acceptance  of  fact.  Fact  never  merely  objective.  §  6.  The  problem  of
'objectivity.'  It  does  not  =  unpleasantness.  Pragmatic  recognition  of
'  unpleasant  fact '  and  its  motives.  §  7.  The  place  of  interest  and
purpose  in  our  knowing.  '  Goods' and  '  ends.'  §8.  The  validation  of  a
claim  by  its  consequences.  §  9.  (a)  Complete  success  ;  (6)  partial  and
conditional  success  leading  to  methodological  or  practical  '  truth ' ;  (c)
failure,  to  be  variously  explained.  §  10.  The  growth  of  knowledge  a
growth  of  efficiency  as  well  as  of  '  system,'  but  '  system '  tested  by  its
efficiency.  §  n.  The  making  of  truth  in  its  application  to  the  future
and  the  past.  Antedating  and  re-valuing  of  truth.  Can  all  truth  be  con-
ceived as  '  made '  ?  Difficulties.  No  '  creation  out  of  nothing. '  The
problems  of  'previous  knowledge'  and  'acceptance  of  fact.'  §  12.  The
'  previous  knowledge '  to  be  treated  pragmatically.  Uselessness  of  funda-
mental truths  which  cannot  be  known.  §  13.  The  'making  of  truth'
ipso  facto  a  '  making  of  reality '  :  (a)  beliefs,  ideas,  and  desires,  as  real
forces  shaping  the  world  ;  (b)  the  efficacy  of  ideals  ;  (c)  the  dependence
of  '  discovery '  upon  endeavour.  §  14.  The  further  analysis  of  the  factual
basis  is  really  metaphysics,  and  pragmatic  method  need  not  be  carried
so  far.  Conflict  between  the  pragmatic  value  (i)  of  the  real  world  of
common-sense,  and  (2)  of  the  making  of  truth.  But  (2)  is  of  superior
authority  because  ( i )  is  a  pragmatic  construction.  Also  the  real  making
of  reality  may  be  analogous  to  our  own.

§  i.  THE  problem  of  'the  making  of  truth'  issues  from
the  epistemological  situation  of  the  day  at  two  points.
It  arises  out  of  two  burning  questions — ( i )  how  '  truth '  is

179


i8o  STUDIES IN HUMANISM  vn

related  to  '  fact '  ;  and  (2)  how  '  truth '  is  discriminated
from  '  error,'  or  how  '  claims '  to  truth  are  '  validated.'

On  both  these  questions  we  have  already  abundantly
seen  that  the  intellectualistic  theories  of  knowledge  have
argued  themselves  into  a  complete  impasse.  They  have
put  the  questions  in  such  a  way  that  no  answer  is
possible.  Their  '  doctrines '  in  the  end  amount  merely  to
confessions  of  failure.  They  cannot  understand  how
error  is  possible,  or  how,  if  it  nevertheless  exists,  it  can  be
discriminated  from  truth  ;  and  the  only  answer  they  can
give  to  the  question  how  truth  is  made,  is  to  declare  that
it  is  never  really  made>  but  must  pre-exist  ready-made  as
an  eternal  ideal  (whether  in  a  non-human  mind,  or  a
supercelestial  space,  or  in  independent  being,  is  a  matter
of  taste),  to  which  our  human  truths  have  to  approximate.
But  when  it  turns  out  on  their  own  showing  that  the
attainment  of  this  ideal  by  us  is  eternally  impossible,  what
option  have  we  but  to  treat  this  answer  as  no  answer  at
all?

Again,  they  involve  themselves  in  insuperable  diffi-
culties as  to  the  relation  of  truth  to  fact.  They  start
from  an  uncriticised  assumption  that  truth  must  be  the
apprehension  of  '  independent '  fact  ;  but  they  cannot
understand  how  '  fact '  can  be  '  independent '  of  our
knowing.  For  how,  if  it  is  in  any  way  dependent  on  us,
can  it  remain  '  fact,'  or  '  truth '  remain  true  ?  Can  we
make  '  truth  '  and  '  fact '  ?  Away  with  the  monstrous,
impious  thought !  And  yet  it  is  too  plain  that  our
human  knowing  seems  to  do  these  very  things.  And
that  in  what  must  seem  to  them  the  most  dubious  ways.
For  it  employs  a  multitude  of  arbitrary  processes,
commended  only  by  the  psychological  hold  they  have
over  our  mortal  nature,  and,  when  these  are  abstracted
from,  it  simply  ceases  to  work.  But  how,  Intellectualism
must  ask,  can  such  processes  be  more  than  subjective,
how  dare  we  attribute  them  to  an  eternal  mind,  to  an
independent  reality  ?  It  would  be  flat  absurdity.  But  if
they  are  merely  subjective,  must  they  not  hopelessly
vitiate  the  facts,  distort  the  image  of  reality,  and  utterly


vii  THE  MAKING  OF  TRUTH  181

unfit  our  '  truth '  to  be  the  passionless  mirror  of  reality
which  it  is  assumed  it  has  to  be  ?

Nor  does  it  matter  from  what  side  this  puzzle  is
approached.  If  it  is  approached  from  the  '  realist '  side,
we  come  upon  the  sheer,  unmitigated,  incredible  paradoxes
that  the  '  independent  fact  'is  ( i )  to  be  known  by  and
in  a  process  which  ex  hypothesi  it  'transcends';  (2)  to
be  apprehended  by  a  subjective  activity  which  is  confessed
to  be  largely,  if  not  wholly,  arbitrary  ;  that  (3)  this  is  to
make  no  difference  whatsoever  to  the  fact  ;  and  (4)  that  we
are  to  know  this  also,  to  know,  that  is,  that  the  '  correspond-
ence '  between  the  '  fact,'  as  it  is  in  itself  and  outside
our  knowledge,  and  the  fact  as  it  appears  in  our  knowledge,
is  somehow  perfect  and  complete  !

If  we  come  upon  it  from  the  absolutist  side,  we  find
an  '  eternal  ideal  of  truth '  supervening  upon,  or  perhaps
taking  the  place  of,  the  '  independent  fact.'  In  the
former  case  we  have,  evidently,  achieved  nothing  but  a
complication  of  the  problem.  For  it  will  now  be  a
question  how  '  eternal  truth '  is  related  to  '  independent
fact,'  and  also  how  both  of  them  are  to  be  related  to
'  truth '  and  '  fact '  for  us.  But  even  in  the  latter  case
there  is  no  gain,  because  this  ideal  also  is  still  supposed
to  be  '  independent '  of  us  and  our  doings.  The  difficul-
ties, therefore,  remain  precisely  the  same.  Nay,  they
are  added  to  by  the  demand  that  we  are  to  know  that
the  '  correspondence '  between  the  human  and  the  ideal
must  be  imperfect  as  well  as  perfect  \  For  the  ideal  has
been  so  constructed  that  our  knowledge  cannot  fully
realise  it,  while  yet  it  must  fully  realise  it,  in  order  that
we  may  assure  ourselves  of  its  '  truth,'  by  observing  its
'  correspondence  '  with  the  ideal !  Absolute  truth,  there-
fore, as  conceived  by  absolutism,  is  not  merely  useless  as
a  criterion  of  our  truth,  because  we  do  not  possess  it,  and
cannot  compare  it  with  our  truth,  nor  estimate  where  and
to  what  extent  our  truth  falls  short  of  its  '  divine '
archetype  ;  it  is  not  merely  the  adding  of  one  more  to
the  multitude  of  (human)  truth-conceptions  which  have  to
be  accommodated  to  one  another,  and  out  of  which  there


182  STUDIES IN HUMANISM  vn

has  to  be  compounded  the  '  objective '  truth  and  the
'  common  '  world  of  practical  life.  It  is  positively  noxious,
actively  disruptive  of  the  whole  notion  of  truth,  and
pregnant  with  self-destructive  consequences.

Surely  this  situation,  the  development  of  which  has
been  traced  in  Essays  ii.,  iii.,  iv.,  §§  3-5  and  7-8,  and  vi.,
should  be  painful  and  irrational  enough  to  stagger  even
the  most  rationalistic  faith  in  the  sufficiency  of  intel-
lectualistic  assumptions,  and  to  impel  it  at  least  to
investigate  the  alternative  conception  of  the  problem  which
Pragmatism  has  had  the  boldness  to  propound  !

To  us,  of  course,  it  will  be  as  clear  as  daylight  that
the  old  assumptions  are  wrong,  proved  to  be  wrong  by  the
absurdity  of  their  consequences,  and  must  be  given  up.
We  shall  infer  frankly — (i)  that  whether  or  not  we  can
succeed  in  constructing  a  wholly  unexceptionable  theory
of  knowledge,  it  is  folly  any  longer  to  close  one's  eyes
to  the  importance  and  all  -  pervasiveness  of  subjective
activities  in  the  making  of  truth.  It  must  frankly  be
admitted  that  truth  is  human  truth,  and  incapable  of
coming  into  being  without  human  effort  and  agency  ;  that
human  action  is  psychologically  conditioned  ;  that,  there-
fore, the  concrete  fulness  of  human  interests,  desires,
emotions,  satisfactions,  purposes,  hopes,  and  fears  is
relevant  to  the  theory  of  knowledge  and  must  not  be
abstracted  from.

(2)  We  shall  perceive  that  the  futile  notion  of  a  really
'  independent '  truth  and  fact,  which  cannot  be  known  or
related  to  us  or  to  each  other,  even  by  the  most  gratuitous
of  miracles,  must  be  abandoned. If  we  insist  on  preserving
the  word,  it  must at  any rate be  used  no  longer  as  a
label  for  the  problem  of  relating  the  human to  a  non-
human  which  cannot  possibly  be  related  to  it. It  must,
at least,  be  interpreted pragmatically,  as  a  term  which
discriminates certain behaviours, which distinguishes
certain valuations, within the cognitive process which
evolves  both  '  truth  '  and  '  fact '  for  man.1

(3)  Instead of  wasting our ingenuity, therefore, in

1  Cp.  Essay  xix.  §  10.


vii  THE  MAKING  OF  TRUTH  183

trying  to  unite  contradictory  conceptions  which  we  have
ourselves  made  so,  let  us  try  the  alternative  adventure  of
a  tJwroughly  and  consistently  dependent  truth,  dependent,
that  is,  on  human  life  and  ministering  to  its  needs,  made
by  us  and  referring  to  our  experience,  and  evolving
everything  called  '  real '  and  '  absolute  '  and  '  transcendent '
immanently  in  the  course  of  its  cognitive  functioning.
It  will  have  at  least  this  great  initial  advantage  over
theories  which  assume  an  antithesis  between  the  human
and  the  '  ideal '  or  the  '  real,'  that  its  terms  will  not  have
to  be  laboriously  brought  into  relation  with  each  other
and  with  human  life.

§  2.  The  second  question,  as  to  how  claims  to  have
judged  '  truly '  are  to  be  made  good,  and  how  '  truth '  is
to  be  distinguished  from  '  error,'  raises  the  problem  of  the
'  making  of  Truth  '  in  a  still  more  direct  fashion.  Indeed
it  may  in  this  form  be  said  to  be  the  pragmatic  problem
par  excellence,  and  we  have  already  taken  some  steps
towards  its  solution.  We  have  seen  the  nature  of  the
distinction  between  '  claim '  and  '  validity '  and  its  im-
portance (Essay  v.).  We  may  also  take  it  for  granted
that  as  there  is  nothing  in  the  claim  itself  to  tell  us
whether  it  is  valid  or  not  (Essay  iii.  §  18),  the  validation
of  claims  must  depend  on  their  consequences  (Essay  L).
We  have  also  vindicated  the  right  of  our  actual  human
knowledge  to  be  considered  by  Logic  in  its  full  concrete-
ness  (Essay  iii.).  We  have  noted,  lastly,  that  the
collapse  of  the  rationalistic  theory  of  truth  was  to  be
traced  to  its  inveterate  refusal  to  do  this  (Essays  v.,  ii.,  vi.,
and  iii.),  and  more  particularly  to  recognise  the  problem  of
error,  and  to  help  human  reasoners  to  discriminate
between  it  and  truth.

But  all  this  is  not  enough  to  give  us  a  positive  grasp
of  the  making  of  truth.  To  do  this  we  must  analyse  a
simple  case  of  actual  knowing  in  greater  detail.  But  this
is  difficult,  not  so  much  because  of  any  intrinsic  difficulty
of  being  aware  of  what  we  are  doing,  as  because  the  con-
templation of  actual  human  knowledge  has  fallen  into
such  disuse,  and  the  simplest  facts  have  been  translated


1 84  STUDIES IN  HUMANISM  vn

into  the  language  of  such  weird  fictions,  that  it  is  hard  to
bespeak  sufficient  attention  for  what  actually  occurs.
Philosophers  have  strained  their  ingenuity  to  prove  that
it  is  impossible,  or  at  least  indefensible,  to  test  the  simplest
truth  in  the  most  obvious  manner,  without  dragging  in
'  the  a  priori  Deduction  of  the  Categories/  or  the
'  Dialectic  of  the  Notion.'  And  all  the  while  they  are
oblivious  of  the  very  real  presuppositions  of  our  knowing,
and  systematically  exclude  from  their  view  the  fact  that
all  our  '  truths '  occur  as  personal  affirmations  in  the  life
of  persons  practically  interested  to  attain  truth  and  to
avoid  error.  Thus,  when  I  take  some  one  coming
towards  me  from  a  distance  to  be  my  brother,  and
subsequently  perceive  that  he  is  not,  this  correction  of  a
false  claim  seems  an  act  of  cognition  well  within  the
powers  of  any  man  :  it  seems  gratuitous  to  regard  it  as  a
privilege  reserved  for  the  initiates  of  '  the  higher  Logic,'
the  seers  of  '  the  Self  -  development  of  the  Absolute
Idea,'  while  totally  ignoring  such  facts  as  that  I  was  (a)
anxiously  expecting  my  brother,  but  also  (b}  unfortunately
afflicted  with  short-sightedness.

§  3.  Let  us  begin,  then,  quite  simply  and  innocently,
with  our  immediate  experience,  with  the  actual  knowing,
just  as  we  find  it,  of  our  own  adult  minds.  This  pro-
posal may  seem  hopelessly  '  uncritical,'  until  we  realise —
(i)  that  our  actual  minds  are  always  the  de  facto  starting-
points,  from  which,  and  with  the  aid  of  which,  we  work
back  to  whatever  '  starting-points '  we  are  pleased  to  call
'original'  and  'elementary';  (2)  that  we  always  read
our  actual  minds  into  these  other  starting-points  ;  (3)
that  no  subtlety  of  analysis  can  ever  penetrate  to  any
really  certain  and  undisputable  principles  to  start  with ;
(4)  that  such  principles  are  as  unnecessary  as  they  are
impossible,  because  we  only  need  principles  which  will
work  and  grow  more  certain  in  their  use,  and  that  so
even  initially  defective  principles,  which  are  improved,
will  turn  out  truer  than  the  truest  we  could  have  started
with ;  (5)  that  in  all  science  our  actual  procedure  is
inductive,  experimental,  postulatory,  tentative,  and  that


vii  THE  MAKING  OF  TRUTH  185

the  demonstrative  form,  into  which  the  conclusions  may
afterwards  be  put,  is  merely  a  trophy  set  up  to  mark  the
victory.  If  we  are  met  with  reluctance  to  accept  these
very  reasonable  contentions,  let  us  not  delay  in  order  to
argue  them  out,  but  proceed  with  the  pragmatic  confidence
that,  if  they  are  provisionally  assumed,  the  usefulness
of  the  resulting  view  of  knowledge  will  speedily  establish
them.

By  tentatively  assuming,  then,  this  '  common-sense '
starting-point,  we  are  enabled  to  observe  that  even  one
of  the  simplest  acts  of  knowing  is  quite  a  complicated
affair,  because  in  it  we  are  (i)  using  a  mind  which  has
had  some  prior  experience  and  possesses  some  knowledge,
and  so  (2)  has  acquired  (what  it  greatly  needs)  some
basis  in  reality,  which  it  is  willing  to  accept  as  'fact,'
because  (3)  it  needs  a  'platform'  from  which  to  operate
further  on  a  situation  which  confronts  it,  in  order  (4)  to
realise  some  purpose  or  to  satisfy  some  interest,  which
defines  for  it  an  '  end '  and  constitutes  for  it  a  '  good.'
(5)  It  consequently  experiments  with  the  situation  by
some  voluntary  interference,  which  may  begin  with  a
mere  predication,  and  proceed  by  reasoned  inferences,  but
always,  when  completed,  issues  in  an  act.  (6)  It  is
guided  by  the  results  ('  consequences ')  of  this  experiment,
which  go  to  verify  or  to  disprove  its  provisional  basis,
the  initial  '  facts,'  predications,  conceptions,  hypotheses,
and  assumptions.  Hence  (7)  if  the  results  are  satisfac-
tory, the  reasoning  employed  is  deemed  to  have  been
pro  tanto  good,  the  results  right,  the  operations  performed
valid,  while  the  conceptions  used  and  the  predications
made  are  judged  true.  Thus  successful  predication
extends  the  system  of  knowledge  and  enlarges  the
borders  of  '  fact.'  Reality  is  like  an  ancient  oracle,  and
does  not  respond  until  it  is  questioned.  And  to  attain
our  responses  we  make  free  to  use  all  the  devices  which
our  whole  nature  suggests.  But  when  they  are  attained,
the  predications  we  judge  to  be  'true'  afford  us  fresh
revelations  of  reality.  Thus  Truth  and  Reality  grow  for
us  together,  in  a  single  process,  which  is  never  one  of


186  STUDIES IN HUMANISM  vn

bringing  the  mind  into  relation  with  a  fundamentally
alien  reality,  but  always  one  of  improving  and  extending
an  already  existing  system  which  we  know.

Now  this  whole  process  is  clearly  dominated  by  the
pragmatic  test  of  truth.  The  claims  to  truth  involved
are  validated  by  their  consequences  when  used.  Thus
Pragmatism  as  a  logical  method  is  merely  the  conscious
application  of  a  natural  procedure  of  our  minds  in  actual
knowing.  It  merely  proposes  (i)  to  realise  clearly  the
nature  of  these  facts,  and  of  the  risks  and  gains  which
they  involve,  and  (2)  to  simplify  and  reform  logical  theory
thereby.

§  4.  We  may  next  consider  some  of  these  points  in
greater  detail.  First  as  to  the  use  of  an  already  formed
mind  (§  3  (i)).  That  empirically  knowledge  arises  out  of
pre-existing  knowledge,  that  we  never  operate  with  a  raw
and  virgin  mind,  has  been  an  epistemological  common-
place ever  since  it  was  authoritatively  enunciated  by
Aristotle,  though  the  paradox  it  involves  with  regard  to
the  first  beginning  of  knowledge  has  never  quite  been
solved.  For  the  present,  however,  we  need  only
emphasise  in  addition  that  the  development  of  a  mind
is  a  thoroughly  personal  affair.  Potential  knowledge
becomes  actual,  because  of  the  purposive  activity  of  a
knower  who  brings  it  to  bear  on  his  interests,  and  uses  it
to  realise  his  ends.  The  growth  of  knowledge  is  not  by
a  mechanical  necessity,  nor  by  the  self-development  of
abstract  ideas  in  a  psychological  vacuum.

§  5.  Next,  as  to  the  acceptance  of  a  basis  of  fact
(§  3  (2)  )•  It  is  extraordinary  that  even  the  most  blindly
hostile  critic  should  have  supposed  Pragmatism  to  have
denied  this.  It  has  merely  pointed  out  that  the  acceptance
must  not  be  ignored,  and  that  it  is  fatal  to  the  chimera
of  a  '  fact '  for  us  existing  quite  '  independently '  of  our
'  will.'

It  is,  however,  important  to  notice  the  ambiguity  of
'fact'  (i)  In  the  wider  sense  everything  is  'fact,'  qua
experienced,  including  imaginings,  illusions,  errors,  hal-
lucinations. '  Fact '  in  this  sense  is  anterior  to  the


vii  THE  MAKING  OF  TRUTH  187

distinction  of  '  appearance '  and  '  reality,'  and  covers  both.
To  distinguish  it  we  may  call  it  '  primary  reality.' l  Its
existence  is  undeniable,  and  in  a  sense  most  important.
For  it  is  the  starting-point,  and  final  touchstone,  of  all
our  theories  about  reality,  which  have  for  their  aim  its
transformation.  It  may,  certainly,  in  a  sense,  be  called
'  independent '  of  us,  if  that  comforts  any  one.  For  it  is
certainly  not  '  made '  by  us,  but  '  found.'  But,  as  it
stands,  we  find  it  most  unsatisfactory  and  set  to  work  to
remake  it  and  unmake  it.  And  it  cannot  possibly  be
taken  as  '  real  fact '  or  '  true  reality.'  For,  as  immediately
experienced,  it  is  a  meaningless  chaos,  merely  the  raw
material  of  a  cosmos,  the  stuff  out  of  which  real  fact  is
made.  Thus  the  need  of  operating  on  it  is  the  real
justification  of  our  cognitive  procedures.

These  make  it  into  (2)  'fact'  in  the  stricter  and  more
familiar  sense  (with  which  alone  scientific  discussion  is
concerned),  by  processes  of  selection  and  valuation,  which
segregate  the  '  real '  from  the  '  apparent '  and  the  '  unreal.'
It  is  only  after  such  processes  have  worked  upon  '  primary
reality '  that  the  distinction  of  '  appearance '  and  '  reality  '
appears,  on  which  intellectualism  seeks  to  base  its  meta-
physic.  But  it  has  failed  to  observe  that  the  ground  it
builds  on  is  already  hopelessly  vitiated  for  the  purpose  of
erecting  a  temple  to  its  idol,  the  '  satisfaction  of  pure
intellect.'  For  in  this  selection  of  '  real  reality '  our
interests,  desires,  and  emotions  inevitably  play  a  leading
part,  and  may  even  exercise  an  overpowering  influence
fatal  to  our  ulterior  ends.

Individual  minds  differ  as  greatly  in  their  acceptance  of
'  facts '  as  in  other  respects.  Some  can  never  be  got  to
face  unpleasant  '  facts,'  or  will  accept  them  only  at  the
point  of  the  sword.  Most  prefer  to  contemplate  the
more  agreeable  alternative.  A  few  are  driven  by  their
fears  unduly  to  accept  the  worse  alternative.  The
devices  for  ideally  rectifying  the  harshnesses  of  actual
experience  are  endless.  We  console  ourselves  by  pos-
tulating ideal  realities,  or  extensions  of  reality,  capable

1  Cp.  Humanism,  pp.  192-3,  and  Essays  viii.  §  n,  ix.  §  4.


188  STUDIES IN HUMANISM  vn

of  transfiguring  the  repugnant  character  of  actual  life.
We  so  conceive  it,  or  interpret  it,  as  to  transform  it  into
a  '  good.'  Or  sometimes  plain  and  generally  recognised
'  facts '  are  disposed  of  by  a  sheer  assertion  of  their
'  unreality,'  as  is,  e.g.,  the  existence  of  pain  by  '  Christian
Science,'  and  of  evil  by  absolutist  metaphysics.  It  is
clear  that  psychologically  all  these  attitudes  towards
'  fact '  more  or  less  work,  and  so  have  a  certain  value.

It  is  clear  also  that  the  recognition  of  'fact'  is  by  no
means  a  simple  affair.  '  Facts '  which  can  be  excluded
from  our  lives,  which  do  not  interest  us,  which  mean
nothing  to  us,  which  we  cannot  use,  which  are  ineffective,
which  have  little  bearing  on  practical  life,  tend  to  drop
into  unreality.  And,  moreover,  our  neglect  really  tends
to  make  them  unreal,  just  as,  conversely,  our  preference
for  the  ideals  we  postulate  makes  them  real,  at  least  as
factors  in  human  life.

The  common  notion,  therefore,  that  '  fact '  is  some-
thing independent  of  our  recognition,  needs  radical
revision,  in  the  only  sense  of  '  fact '  which  is  worth
disputing.  It  must  be  admitted  that  without  a  process
of  selection  by  us,  there  are  no  real  facts  for  us,  and  that
this  whole  process  is  immensely  arbitrary.  It  would,
perhaps,  be  infinitely  so,  but  for  the  limitations  of  human
imagination  and  tenacity  of  purpose  in  operating  on
apparent  fact.

§  6.  Through  this  atmosphere  of  emotional  interest,
how  shall  we  penetrate  to  any  '  objective '  fact  at  all  ?
Where  shall  we  find  the  '  hard  facts '  our  forefathers
believed  in,  which  are  so  whether  we  will  them  or  not,
which  extort  recognition  even  from  our  sturdiest  reluc-
tance, whose  unpleasantness  breaks  our  will  and  does  not
bend  to  it  ?

Certainly  it  may  not  be  quite  easy  to  discern  the  old
objective  facts  in  their  new  dress,  but  that  is  a  poor
reason  for  denying  them  the  subjective  atmosphere  in
which  they  have  to  live.

(i)  We  may  begin,  however,  by  remarking  on  the
curious  equating  of  '  objective '  with  '  unpleasant '  facts


vii  THE  MAKING  OF  TRUTH  189

and  truths.  Its  instinctive  pessimism  seems  to  imply  a
mind  which  is  so  suspicious  of  fact  that  it  can  be  driven
to  recognise  the  reality  of  anything  only  by  pains  and
penalties,  which  is  so  narrowly  contented  with  its
existing  limitations  as  to  be  disposed  to  regard  all
novelties  as  unwelcome  intrusions,  which  has,  in  short,  to
be  forced  into  the  presence  of  truth,  and  will  not  go  forth
to  seek  it  and  embrace  it.  Such,  certainly,  is  not  the
frame  of  mind  and  temper  of  the  pragmatist,  who  prefers
to  conceive  '  the  objective '  as  that  which  he  aims  at  and
from,  and  contends  that  though  '  facts '  may  at  times
coerce,  it  is  yet  more  essential  to  them  to  be  '  accepted,'
to  be  '  made,'  and  to  be  capable  of  being  '  remade'

(2)  At  all  events,  he  thinks  that  the  coerciveness  of
'  fact '  has been enormously exaggerated by failure to
observe that it is never sheer coercion, but always
mitigated  by  his  acceptance,  by  which  it  ceases  to  be  de
facto  thrust upon him,  and becomes de jure '  willed.'
Even  a  forced  move,  he  feels,  is  better  than  no  power  to
move  at  all ; and  the  game  of  life  is  not  wholly  made
up  of  forced  moves.

(3)  He  finds  no  difficulty,  therefore,  in  the  conception
of unpleasant '  fact.' It indicates the better of two
disagreeable  alternatives. And  he  can  give  good  reasons
for  accepting  unpleasant fact,  without  on that  account
conceiving  '  fact '  as  such  to  be  unpleasant  and  coercive.
He  may  (a)  accept  it  as  the  less  unpleasant  alternative,
and  to  avoid  worse  consequences,  much  as  man  may  wear
spectacles  rather  than  go  blind. He  may  (&)  prefer  to
sacrifice a  cherished  prejudice rather  than to  deny,  e.g.,
the  evidence  of  his  senses,  or  to  renounce  the  use  of  his
'  reason.' He may (c) accept it  provisionally,  without
regarding  it  as  absolute,  merely  for  the  purposes  of  the
act  or  experiment  he  is  contemplating. For  to  recognise
the  pragmatic  reality  of  an  unpleasant  fact  means  nothing
metaphysical, and  entails  no  serious consequences. It
only  implies  willingness  to  accept  it  for  the  time  being,
and  is  quite  compatible  with  a  disbelief  in its  ultimate
reality,  and  with  its  subsequent  reduction  to  unreality  or


190  STUDIES IN HUMANISM  vn

illusion.  Hence  (d}  such  a  pragmatic  acceptance  of
unpleasant  fact  does  not  impair  our  liberty  of  action  ;  it
is  no  obstacle  to  subsequent  experimentation,  which  may
'  discover '  the  illusoriness  of  the  presumed  '  fact.'  But
even  where  it  does  not  lead  to  this,  it  may  (e)  be  a
preliminary  to  making  the  unpleasant  fact  unreal,  and
putting  something  better  in  its  place  ;  thus  proving,  in
another  way,  that  it  never  was  the  absolute  hard  fact  it
was  supposed  to  be,  but  dependent  on  our  inaction  for
its  continued  existence.

Thus  (4)  it  turns  out  that  the  existence  of  unpleasant
fact,  so  far  from  being  an  objection  to  the  pragmatic
view  of  fact,  is  an  indispensable  ingredient  in  it.  For  it
supplies  the  motive  for  that  transformation  of  the  existing
order,  for  that  unmaking  of  the  real  which  has  been  made
amiss,  which,  with  the  making  fact  of  the  ideal  and  the
preservation  of  the  precious,  constitutes  the  essence  of
our  cognitive  endeavour.  To  attain  our  '  objective,'  the
'  absolutely  objective  fact,'  which  would  be  absolutely
satisfactory,1  we  need  a  '  platform '  whence  to  act  and
aim.  '  Objective  fact '  is  just  such  a  platform.  Only
there  is  no  need  to  conceive  it  as  anchored  to  the  eternal
bottom  of  the  flux  of  time  :  it  floats,  and  so  can  move
with  the  times,  and  be  adjusted  to  the  occasion.

§  7.  As  to  §  3  (4),  we  have  already  seen  that  interest
and  purpose  can  be  eliminated  from  cognitive  process
only  at  the  cost  of  stopping  it  (Essay  iii.  §  7).  A  being
devoid  of  interests  would  not  attend  to  anything  that
happened,  would  not  select  or  value  one  thing  rather  than
another,  nor  would  any  one  thing  make  more  of  an
impression  on  its  apathy  than  any  other.  Its  mind  and
its  world  would  remain  in  the  chaos  of  primary  reality
(§  5),  and  resemble  that  of  the  'Absolute'2  (if  it  can  be
said  to  have  a  mind).

The  human  mind,  of  course,  is  wholly  different  It  is
full  of  interests,  all  of  which  are  directly  or  indirectly
referable  to  the  functions  and  purposes  of  life.  Its

1  Cp.  Essay  viii.  §  12  ; and  Humanism,  pp.  198-203.
2  Cp.  Essay  ix.  §  5.


vii  THE  MAKING  OF  TRUTH  191

organisation  is  biological  and  teleological,  and  in  both
cases  selective.  If  we  except  a  few  abnormal  and  morbid
processes  such  as  idiocy,  insanity,  and  dream,  mental  life
may  be  called  wholly  purposive  ;  that  is,  its  functioning
is  not  intelligible  without  reference  to  actual  or  possible
purposes,  even  when  it  is  not  aiming  at  a  definite,  clearly-
envisaged  end.  Definite  purposes  are,  it  is  true,  of
gradual  growth.  They  arise  by  selection,  they  crystallise
out  from  a  magma  of  general  interestedness  and  vaguely
purposive  actions,  as  we  realise  our  true  vocation  in  life,
much  as  '  real '  reality  was  selected  out  of  '  primary.'
Thus  we  become  more  and  more  clearly  conscious  of  our
'  ends,'  and  more  and  more  definite  in  referring  our
'  goods '  to  them.  But  this  reference  is  rarely  or  never
carried  through  completely,  because  our  nature  is  never
fully  harmonised.  And  so  our  '  desires '  may  continue  to
hanker  after  '  goods  '  which  our  '  reason  '  cannot  sanction
as  conducive  to  our  ends,  or  our  intelligence  may  fail  to
find  the  '  good '  means  to  our  ends,  and  be  deceived  by
current  valuations  of  goods  which  are  really  evils.  Thus
the  '  useful '  and  the  '  good '  tend  to  fall  apart,  and
'  goods '  to  seem  incompatible.  But  properly  and  ideally,
there  are  no  goods  which  are  not  related  to  the  highest
Good,  no  values  which  are  not  goods,  no  truths  which
are  not  values,  and  therefore,  none  which  are  not  useful  in
the  widest  sense.

§  8.  As  to  §  3  (5),  Experience  is  experiment,  i.e.  active.
We  do  not  learn,  we  do  not  live,  unless  we  try.  Passivity,
mere  acceptance,  mere  observation  (could  they  be  con-
ceived) would  lead  us  nowhere,  least  of  all  to  knowledge.

(i)  Every  judgment  refers  sooner  or  later  to  a
concrete  situation  which  it  analyses.  In  an  ordinary
judgment  of  sense-perception,  as,  e.g.,  '  This  is  a  chair,'  the
subject,  the  '  this,'  denotes  the  product  of  a  selection  of
part  of  a  given  whole.  The  selection  is  arbitrary,  in  that
it  ignores  all  the  rest  of  the  situation  '  given '  along
with  the  '  this.'  If  taken  in  abstraction,  as  intellectualism
loves  to  do,  it  seems  wholly  arbitrary,  unintelligible,  and
indefensible.  In  the  concrete,  however,  the  judgment


192  STUDIES IN HUMANISM  vn

when  made  is  always  purposive,  and  its  selection  is
justified,  or  refuted,  by  the  subsequent  stages  of  the  ideal
experiment.  The  '  objective  control '  of  the  subjective
freedom  to  predicate  is  not  effected  by  some  uncom-
prehended  pre-existing  fact :  it  comes  in  the  consequences
of  acting  out  the  predication.  And  so  our  analyses  are
arbitrary  only  if  and  in  so  far  as  we  are  not  willing  to
take  their  consequences  upon  us.  Similarly  the  predicate,
which  includes  the  '  this  '  in  a  conceptual  system  already
established,  is  arbitrary  in  its  selection.  Why  did  we
say  '  chair,'  and  not  '  sofa  '  or  '  stool '  ?  To  answer  this
we  must  go  on  to  test  the  predication.

For  (2)  every  judgment  is  essentially  an  experiment,
which,  to  be  tested,  must  be  acted  on.  If  it  is  really
true  that  '  this  '  is  a  chair,  it  can  be  sat  in.  If  it  is  a
hallucination,  it  cannot.  If  it  is  broken,  it  is  not  a  chair
in  the  sense  my  interest  demanded.  For  I  made  the
judgment  under  the  prompting  of  a  desire  to  sit.

If  now  I  stop  at  this  point,  without  acting  on  the
suggestion  contained  in  the  judgment,  the  claim  to  truth
involved  in  the  assertion  is  never  tested,  and  so  cannot  be
validated.  Whether  or  not  '  this  '  was  a  chair,  cannot  be
known.  If  I  consent  to  complete  the  experiment,  the
consequences  will  determine  whether  my  predication  was
'  true  '  or  '  false.'  The  '  this '  may  not  have  been  a  chair
at  all,  but  a  false  appearance.  Or  the  antique  article  of
ornamental  furniture  which  broke  under  my  weight  may
have  been  something  too  precious  to  be  sat  in.  In  either
case,  the  '  consequences '  not  only  decide  the  validity  of
my  judgment,  but  also  alter  my  conception  of  reality.
In  the  one  case  I  shall  judge  henceforth  that  reality  is
such  as  to  present  me  with  illusory  chairs  ;  in  the  other,
that  it  contains  also  chairs  not  to  be  sat  in.  This  then  is
what  is  meant  by  the  pragmatic  testing  of  a  claim  to
truth.1

§  9.  As  to  the  reaction  of  the  consequences  of  an
experimental  predication  upon  its  '  truth '  (§  3  (6) ),  the

1  Cp. Dewey's Logical  Studies  for  the  experimental  nature  of  predication,
especially  ch.  vii.


vii  THE  MAKING  OF  TRUTH  193

simplest  case  is  that  (i)  of  a  successful  validation.  If,
in  the  example  of  the  last  section,  I  can  sit  in  the
'  chair,'  my  confidence  in  my  eyesight  is  confirmed  and  I
shall  trouble  little  whether  it  ought  not  rather  to  have
been  called  a  '  sofa  '  or  a  '  stool.'  Of  course,  however,  if
my  interest  was  not  that  of  a  mere  sitter,  but  of  a
collector  or  dealer  in  ancient  furniture,  my  first  judgment
may  have  been  woefully  inadequate,  and  may  need  to  be
revised.  '  Success,'  therefore,  in  validating  a  '  truth,'  is  a
relative  term,  relative  to  the  purpose  with  which  the  truth
was  claimed.  The  '  same  '  predication  may  be  '  true  '  for
me  and  '  false '  for  you,  if  our  purposes  are  different.  As
for  a  truth  in  the  abstract,  and  relative  to  no  purpose,  it  is
plainly  unmeaning.  For  it  never  becomes  even  a  claim,  and
is  never  tested,  and  cannot,  therefore,  be  validated.  Hence
the  truth  of  '  the  proposition  '  '  S  is  P,'  when  we  affirm  it
on  the  strength  of  an  actually  successful  predication,  is
only  potential.  In  applying  it  to  other  actual  cases  we
always  take  a  risk.  The  second  time  'this'  may  not  be
a  '  chair,'  even  though  it  may  look  the  '  same '  as  the  first
time.  Hence  even  a  fully  successful  predication  cannot
be  converted  into  an  '  eternal  truth '  without  more  ado.
The  empirical  nature  of  reality  is  such  that  we  can  never
argue  from  one  case  to  a  similar  one,  which  we  take  to  be
'  the  same,'  with  absolute  assurance  a  priori,  and  hence  no
'  truth '  can  ever  be  so  certain  that  it  need  not  be  veri-
fied, and  may  not  mislead  us,  when  applied.  But  this  only
means  that  no  truth  should  be  taken  as  unimprovable.

(2)  Experiments,  however,  are  rarely  quite  successful.
We  may  (a)  have  had  to  purchase  the  success  we  attain
by  the  use  of  artificial  abstractions  and  simplifications,  or
even  downright  fictions,  and  the  uncertainty  which  this
imports  into  the  '  truth '  of  our  conclusions  will  have  to
be  acknowledged.  We  shall,  therefore,  conceive  ourselves
to  have  attained,  not  complete  truths  without  a  stain
upon  their  character,  which  there  is  no  reason  to  doubt,
but  only  '  approximations  to  truth '  and  '  working  hypo-
theses,' which  are,  at  most,  'good  enough  for  practical
purposes.'  And  the  principles  we  used  we  shall  dub

O


194  STUDIES IN HUMANISM  vn

methodological '  truths  '  or  '  fictions,'  according  to  our  bias.
And,  clearly,  the  cognitive  endeavour  will  not  in  this  case
rest.  We  shall  not  have  found  a  '  truth '  which  fully
satisfies  even  our  immediate  purpose,  but  shall  continue
the  search  for  a  more  complete,  precise,  and  satisfactory
result.  In  the  former  case,  the  cognitive  interest  of  the
situation  could  be  renewed  only  by  a  change  or  growth
of  purpose  leading  to  further  judgments.

(3)  The  experiment  may  fail,  and  lead  to  unsatisfac-
tory results.  The  interpretation  then  may  become
extremely  complex.  Either  (a)  we  may  put  the  blame
on  our  subjective  manipulation,  on  our  use  of  our  cognitive
instruments.  We  may  have  observed  wrongly.  We  may
have  reasoned  badly.  We  may  have  selected  the  wrong
conceptions.  We  may  have  had  nothing  but  false  con-
ceptions to  select  from,  because  our  previous  knowledge
was  as  a  whole  inadequate.  Or  we  may  be  led  to  doubt
(ft)  the  basis  of  fact  which  we  assumed,  or  (c)  the
practicability  of  the  enterprise  we  were  engaged  in.  In
either  of  the  first  two  cases  we  shall  feel  entitled  to  try
again,  with  variations  in  our  methods  and  assumptions  ;
but  repeated  failure  may  finally  force  even  the  most
stubborn  to  desist  from  their  purpose,  or  to  reduce  it  to
a  mere  postulate  of  rationality  which  it  is  as  yet  impossible
to  apply  to  actual  experience.  And,  needless  to  say,  there
will  be  much  difference  of  opinion  as  to  where,  in  case  of
failure,  the  exact  flaw  lies,  and  how  it  may  best  be
remedied.  Herein,  however,  lies  one  reason  (among
many)  why  the  discovery  of  truth  is  such  a  personal
affair.  The  discoverer  is  he  who,  by  greater  perseverance
or  more  ingenious  manipulation,  makes  something  out  of
a  situation  which  others  had  despaired  of.

§  10.  We  see,  then,  how  truth  is  made,  by  human
operations  on  the  data  of  human  experience.  Knowledge
grows  in  extent  and  in  trustworthiness  by  successful
functioning,  by  the  assimilation  and  incorporation  of  fresh
material  by  the  previously  existing  bodies  of  knowledge.
These  '  systems '  are  continually  verifying  themselves,
proving  themselves  true  by  their  'consequences,'  by  their


vii  THE  MAKING  OF  TRUTH  195

power  to  assimilate,  predict  and  control  fresh  '  fact.'  But
the  fresh  fact  is  not  only  assimilated  ;  it  also  transforms.
The  old  truth  looks  different  in  the  new  light,  and  really
changes.  It  grows  more  powerful  and  efficient.  Formally,
no  doubt,  it  may  be  described  as  growing  more  'coherent '
and  more  highly  '  organised,'  but  this  does  not  touch  the
kernel  of  the  situation.  For  the  '  coherence '  and  the
1  organisation '  both  exist  in  our  eyes,  and  relatively  to
our  purposes :  it  is  we  who  judge  what  they  shall  mean.
And  what  we  judge  them  by  is  their  conduciveness  to
our  ends,  their  effectiveness  in  harmonising  our  experience.
Thus,  here  again,  the  intellectualist  analysis  of  knowledge
fails  to  reach  the  really  motive  forces.

§  II.  It  is  important,  further,  to  point  out  that  looking
forward  the  making  of  truth  is  clearly  a  continuous,
progressive,  and  cumulative  process.  For  the  satisfaction
of  one  cognitive  purpose  leads  on  to  the  formulation  of
another  ;  a  new  truth,  when  established,  naturally  becomes
the  presupposition  of  further  explorations.  And  to  this
process  there  would  seem  to  be  no  actual  end  in  sight,
because  in  practice  we  are  always  conscious  of  much  that
we  should  like  to  know,  if  only  we  possessed  the  leisure
and  the  power.  We  can,  however,  conceive  an  ideal
completion  of  the  making  of  truth,  in  the  achievement  of
a  situation  which  would  provoke  no  questions  and  so
would  inspire  no  one  with  a  purpose  to  remake  it.

Looking  backwards,  the  situation,  as  might  have  been
expected,  is  less  plain.  In  the  first  place  there  are
puzzles,  which  arise  from  the  natural  practice  of  re-valuing
superseded  '  truths '  as  '  errors,'  and  of  antedating  the  new
truths  as  having  been  '  true  all  along.'  And  so  it  may
be  asked :  '  What  were  these  truths  before  they  were
discovered  ? '  But  this  query  is  essentially  analogous  to
the  child's  question  : '  Mother,  what  becomes  of  yesterday?  '
and  by  any  one  who  has  understood  the  phraseology  of
time  in  the  one  case  and  of  the  making  of  truth  in  the
other,  the  difficulty  will  be  seen  to  be  merely  verbal.  If
'  true '  means  (as  we  have  contended)  '  valued  by  us,'  of
course  the  new  truth  becomes  true  only  when  '  discovered ' ;


196  STUDIES IN  HUMANISM  vn

if  it  means  '  valuable  if  discovered,'  it  was  of  course  hypo-
thetically  '  true '  ;  if,  lastly,  the  question  inquires  whether
a  past  situation  would  not  have  been  altered  for  the  better,
if  it  had  included  a  recognition  of  this  truth,  the  answer
is :  '  Yes,  probably ;  only,  unfortunately,  it  was  not  so
altered.'  In  none  of  these  cases,  however,  are  we  dealing
with  a  situation  which  can  be  even  intelligibly  stated
apart  from  the  human  making  of  truth.1  Again,  it  is  by
no  means  easy  to  say  how  far  our  present  processes  of
making  truth  are  validly  to  be  applied  to  the  past,  how
far  all  truth  can  be  conceived  as  having  been  made  by
the  processes  which  we  now  see  in  operation.

(1)  That  we  must  try  to  conceive  it  »thus  is,  indeed,
obvious. For  why  should  we  gratuitously assume  that
the  procedure  by  which  '  truth '  is  now  being  made  differs
radically from that whereby truth initially came into
being  ? Are  we  not  bound  to  conceive,  if  possible,  the
whole  process as continuous,  truth  made,  truth  making,
and  truth  yet  to  be  made,  as  successive  stages  in  one  and
the  same  endeavour  ? And  to  a  large  extent  it  is  clear
that  this  can be  done,  that  the  established  truths,  from
which  our  experiments  now start,  are  of  a like nature
with  the  truths  we make,  and  were  themselves  made  in
historical  times.

(2)  Before,  however,  we  can  generalise  this  procedure,  we
have  to  remember  that  on  our  own  showing  we  disclaimed
the  notion  of  making  truth  out  of  nothing. We  did  not
have recourse  to the very dubious notion of  theology
called  '  creation  out  of  nothing,'  which  no  human  opera-
tions ever  exemplify. We  avowed  that  our  truths  were
made  out  of  previous  truths,  and  built  upon  pre-existing
knowledge  ;  also  that  our  procedure  involved an initial
recognition  of  '  fact.'

(3)  Here, then, would seem to  be two serious, if
not fatal,  limitations  upon  the  claim  of  the  pragmatic
'  making  of  truth '  to  have  solved  the  mystery  of  know-
ledge. They will need, therefore, further  examination,
though  we  may  at  once  hasten  to  state  that  they  cannot

1  Cp.  p.  157  note,  and  Essay  viii.  §  5.


vii  THE  MAKING  OF  TRUTH  197

affect  the  validity  of  what  the  pragmatic  analysis  pro-
fessed to  do.  It  professed  to  show  the  reality  and
importance  of  the  human  contribution  to  the  making  of
truth  ;  and  this  it  has  amply  done.  If  it  can  carry  us
further,  and  enable  us  to  humanise  our  world  completely,
so  much  the  better.  But  this  is  more  than  it  bargained
to  do,  and  it  remains  to  be  seen  how  far  it  will  carry  us
into  a  comprehension  also  of  the  apparently  non-human
conditions  under  which  our  manipulations  must  work.

§  1 2.  Now  as  regards  the  previous  knowledge  assumed
in  the  making  of  truth,  it  may  be  shown  that  there  is  no
need  to  treat  it  in  any  but  a  pragmatic  way.  For  (i)
it  seems  quite  arbitrary  to  deny  that  the  truths  which  we
happen  to  assume  in  making  new  truths  are  the  same  in
kind  as  the  very  similar  truths  we  make  by  their  aid.
In  many  cases,  indeed,  we  can  show  that  these  very
truths  were  made  by  earlier  operations.  There  is,  there-
fore, so  far,  nothing  to  hinder  us  from  regarding  the
volitional  factors  which  actual  knowing  now  exhibits,  viz.
desire,  interest,  and  purpose,  as  essential  to  the  process
of  knowing,  and  similarly  the  process  by  which  new
truth  is  now  made,  viz.  postulation,  experiment,  action,  as
essential  to  the  process  of  verification.

Moreover  (2),  even  if  we  denied  this,  and  tried  to
find  truths  that  had  never  been  made,  it  would  avail  us
nothing.  We  never  can  get  back  to  truths  so  funda-
mental that  they  cannot  possibly  be  conceived  as  having
been  made.  There  are  no  a  priori  truths  which  are
indisputable,  as  is  shown  by  the  mere  fact  that  there
is  not,  and  never  has  been,  any  agreement  as  to  what
they  are.  All  the  'a  priori  truths,'  moreover,  which  are
commonly  alleged,  can  be  conceived  as  postulates
suggested  by  a  previous  situation.1

(3)  Methodologically,  therefore,  it  leads  us  nowhere
to  assume  that  within  the  truth  which  is  made  there
exists  an  uncreate  residuum  or  core  of  elementary  truth,
which  has  not  been  made.  For  we  can  never  get  at  it,
or  know  it.  Hence,  even  if  it  existed,  the  theory  of  our

1  Cp.  '  Axioms  as  Postulates '  in  Personal  Idealism.


198  STUDIES IN HUMANISM  vn

knowing  could  take  no  note  of  it.  All  truth,  therefore,
must,  methodologically,  be  treated  as  if  it  had  been
'  made.'  For  on  this  assumption  alone  can  it  reveal  its
full  significance.  In  so  far,  therefore,  as  Pragmatism  does
not  profess  to  be  more  than  a  method,  it  has  no  occasion
to  modify  or  correct  an  account  of  truth  which  is
adequate  .to  its  purpose,  for  the  sake  of  an  objection
which  is  methodologically  null.

(4)  It  seems  a  little  hard  on  Pragmatism  to  expect
from  it  a  solution  of  a  difficulty  which  confronts  alike  all
theories  of  knowledge.  In  all  of  them  the  beginning
of  knowledge  is  wrapped  in  mystery.  It  is  a  mystery,
however,  which  even  now  presses  less  severely  on
Pragmatism  than  on  its  competitors.  For  the  reason
that  it  is  not  a  retrospective  theory.  Its  significance
does  not  lie  in  its  explanation  of  the  past  so  much  as
in  its  present  attitude  towards  the  future.  The  past  is
dead  and  done  with,  practically  speaking  ;  its  deeds  have
hardened  into  '  facts,'  which  are  accepted,  with  or  with-
out enthusiasm  ;  what  it  really  concerns  us  to  know  is
how  to  act  with  a  vieiv  to  the  future.  And  so  like  life,
and  as  befits  a  theory  of  human  life,  Pragmatism  faces
towards  the  future.  It  can  adopt,  therefore,  the  motto
solvitur  ambulando,  and  be  content  if  it  can  conceive  a
situation  in  which  the  problem  would  de  facto  have  dis-
appeared. The  other  theories  could  not  so  calmly
welcome  a  '  psychological '  solution  as  '  logically '  satisfac-
tory. But  then  they  still  dream  of  '  theoretic  '  solutions,
which  are  to  be  wholly  '  independent '  of  practice.

§  1 3.  The  full  consideration  of  the  problem  involved
in  the  initial  '  acceptance  of  fact '  by  our  knowing  will
have  to  be  reserved  for  a  later  essay  on  the  '  Making  of
Reality,'  in  which  we  shall  have  to  examine  the  meta-
physical conclusions  to  which  the  Pragmatic  Method
points.  At  present  it  must  suffice  to  show  (i)  that  the
'  making  of  truth '  is  necessarily  and  ipso  facto  also  a
'  making  of  reality ' ;  and  (2)  what  is  the  exact  nature  of
the  difficulty  about  accepting  the  making  of  truth  as  a
complete  making  also  of  reality.


vn  THE  MAKING  OF  TRUTH  199

(i)  (a)  It  is  clear,  in  the  first  place,  that  if  our  beliefs,
ideas,  desires,  wishes,  etc.,  are  really  essential  and  integral
features  in  actual  knowing,  and  if  knowing  really  trans-
forms our  experience,  they  must  be  treated  as  real  forces,
which  cannot  be  ignored  by  philosophy.1  They  really
alter  reality,  to  an  extent  which  is  quite  familiar  to  '  the
practical  man,'  but  which,  unfortunately,  '  philosophers '
do  not  yet  seem  to  have  quite  adequately  grasped,  or  to
have  '  reflected  on '  to  any  purpose.  Without,  however,
going  into  endless  detail  about  what  ought  to  be  quite
obvious,  let  us  merely  affirm  that  the  '  realities '  of
civilised  life  are  the  embodiments  of  the  ideas  and  desires
of  civilised  man,  alike  in  their  material  and  in  their  social
aspects,  and  that  our  present  inability  wholly  to  subdue
the  material,  in  which  we  realise  our  ideas,  is  a  singularly
poor  reason  for  denying  the  difference  between  the
present  condition  of  man's  world  and  that  of  his  miocene
ancestors.

(b)  Human  ideals  and  purposes  are  real  forces,  even
though  they  are  not  yet  incorporated  in  institutions,  and
made palpable  in the rearrangements  of bodies. For
they  affect  our  actions,  and  our  actions  affect  our  world.

(c)  Our  knowledge  of  reality,  at  least,  depends  largely
on the  character  of  our  interests,  wishes,  and  acts. If
it  is  true  that  the  cognitive  process  must  be  started  by
subjective interest  which  determines  the  direction  of  its
search,  it  is  clear  that  unless  we  seek  we  shall not  find,
nor  '  discover ' realities  we  have  not  looked  for. They
will  consequently  be  missing  in  our  picture  of  the  world,
and  will remain non-existent for  us. To  become real
for  us  they  (or  cognate  realities — for  we  do  not  always
discover  just  what  we  went  forth  to  find,  as  witness  Saul
and  Columbus)  must  have  become  real  objects  of  interest
hypothetically ; and as this making of '  objects of
interest '  is  quite  within  our  power,  in  a  very  real  sense
their  '  discovery ' is a '  making of reality.' 2 Thus, in

1  Cp.  Prof. Dewey's  article  on  '  Beliefs  and  Realities '  in  Phil.  Rev.  xv. 2,
which  makes  this  point  very  forcibly.

2  For  the  reason  why  we  distinguish  between  these  two  cases  at  all,  see  Essay
xix.  §  5.


200  STUDIES  IN  HUMANISM  vn

general,  the  world  as  it  now  appears  to  us  may  be
regarded  as  the  reflexion  of  our  interests  in  life :  it  is
what  we  and  our  ancestors  have,  wisely  or  foolishly,
sought  and  known  to  make  of  our  life,  under  the
limitations  of  our  knowledge  and  our  powers.  And
that,  of  course,  is  little  enough  as  compared  with  our
ideals,  though  a  very  great  deal  as  compared  with  our
starting-point.  It  is  enough,  at  any  rate,  to  justify  the
phrase  '  the  making  of  reality '  as  a  consequence  of  the
making  of  truth.  And  it  is  evident  also  that  just  in  so
far  as  the  one  is  a  consequence  of  the  other,  our  remarks
about  the  presupposition  of  an  already  made  '  truth '
will  apply  also  to  the  presupposition  of  an  already  made
'  reality.'

§  1 4.  The  difficulty  about  conceiving  this  '  making  of
reality/  which  accompanies  the  '  making  of  truth,'  as  more
than  '  subjective,'  and  as  affording  us  a  real  insight  into  the
nature  of  the  cosmic  process,  lies  in  the  fact  that  it  is
complicated  with  the  difficulty  we  have  already  recognised
in  trying  to  conceive  the  making  of  truth  as  a  completely
subjective  process,  which  should  yet  be  self-sufficient  and
fully  explanatory  of  the  nature  of  knowledge  (§  1 1).  It
is  because  the  making  of  truth  seemed  to  presuppose  a
certain  '  acceptance  of  fact,'  which  was  indeed  volitional
qua  the  '  acceptance '  and  even  optional,  but  left  us  with
a  surd  qua  the  '  fact,'  that  it  seems  impossible  to  claim
complete  objectivity  for  the  making  of  reality,  and  that
our  knowing  seems  to  many  merely  to  select  among
pre  -  existing  facts  those  which  we  are  interested  to
'  discover.'

It  is  inevitable,  moreover,  that  the  pre-existing  facts,
which  the  making,  both  of  truth  and  of  reality,  seems  to
presuppose  as  its  condition,  though,  properly  speaking,  it
only  implies  the  pre-existo^ft  of  'primary  reality'  (§  5),
should  be  identified  with  the  '  real  world '  of  common-
sense,  in  which  we  find  ourselves,  and  which  we  do  not
seem  to  have  made  in  any  human  sense.  In  other  words,
our  theory  of  knowledge  is  confronted  at  this  point  with
something  which  claims  ontological  validity,  and  is


viz  THE MAKING  OF  TRUTH  201

requested  to  turn  itself  into  a  metaphysic  in  order  to
deal  with  it.

This,  of  course,  it  may  well  refuse  to  do.  It  can  insist
on  remaining  what  it  originally  was,  and  has  so  far  pro-
fessed to  be,  viz.  a  method  of  understanding  the  nature  of
our  knowledge.  And  we  shall  not  be  entitled  to  censure
it,  however  much  we  may  regret  its  diffidence,  and  desire
it  to  show  its  power  also  in  coping  with  our  final
difficulties.

We  ought,  however,  to  be  grateful,  if  it  enables  us  to
perceive  from  what  the  difficulty  really  arises.  It  arises
from  a  conflict  between  pragmatic  considerations,  both  of
which  are  worthy  of  respect.  For  (i)  the  belief  in  the
world  theory  of  ordinary  realism,  in  a  '  real  world '  into
which  we  are  born,  and  which  has  existed  '  independently  '
of  us  for  aeons  before  that  event,  and  so  cannot  possibly
have  been  made  by  us  or  any  man,  has  very  high
pragmatic  warrant.  It  is  a  theory  which  holds  together
and  explains  our  experience,  and  can  be  acted  on  with
very  great  success.  It  is  adequate  for  almost  all  our
purposes.  It  works  so  well  that  it  cannot  be  denied  a
very  high  degree  of  truth.1

(2)  On  the  other  hand,  it  is  equally  plain  that  we
cannot  deny  the  reality  of  our  cognitive  procedure  and  of
the  human  contribution  it  imports  into  the  making  of
reality.  It,  too,  is  a  tried  and  tested  truth.  The  two,
therefore,  must  somehow  be  reconciled,  even  though  in  so
doing  we  may  have  to  reveal  ultimate  deficiencies  in  the
common-sense  view  of  the  world.

The  first  question  to  be  raised  is  which  of  the  two
pragmatically  valuable  truths  should  be  taken  as  more
ultimate.

The  decision,  evidently,  must  be  in  favour  of  the
second.  For  the  '  reality  of  the  external  world  '  is  not  an
original  datum  of  experience,  and  it  is  a  confusion  to
identify  it  with  the  '  primary  reality '  we  recognised  in  §  5.
It  cannot  claim  the  dubious  '  independence '  of  the  latter,
just  because  it  is  something  better  and  more  valuable

1  Cp.  Essay  xx.  §  6.


202  STUDIES IN  HUMANISM  vn

which  has  been  '  made '  out  of  it.  For  it  is  a  pragmatic
construction  within  primary  reality,  the  product,  in  fact,
of  one  of  those  processes  of  selection  by  which  the  chaos
is  ordered.  The  real  external  world  is  the  pragmatically
efficient  part  of  our  total  experience,  to  which  the
inefficient  parts  such  as  dreams,  fancies,  illusions,  after-
images, etc.,  can,  for  most  purposes,  be  referred.  But
though  this  construction  suffices  for  most  practical
purposes,  it  fails  to  answer  the  question — how  may
'  reality '  be  distinguished  from  a  consistent  dream  ?  And
seeing  that  experience  presents  us  with  transitions  from  an
apparently  real  (dream)  world  into  one  of  superior  reality,
how  can  we  know  that  this  process  may  not  be  repeated,
to  the  destruction  of  what  now  seems  our  '  real  world  '  ? l

We  must  distinguish,  therefore,  between  two  questions
which  have  been  confused — ( I )  '  Can  the  making  of  truth
be  conceived  as  a  making  also  of  "  primary  reality  "  ?  '  and
(2)  '  Can  it  be  conceived  also  as  a  making  of  the  real
"  external  world  "  of  ordinary  life  ? ' — and  be  prepared  to
find  that  while  the  first  formulates  an  impossible  problem,2
an  answer  to  the  second  may  prove  feasible.  In  any  case,
however,  it  cannot  be  affirmed  that  our  belief  in  the
metaphysical  reality  of  our  external  world,  which  it  is  in
some  sense,  or  in  no  sense,  possible  to  '  make,'  is  of  higher
authority  than  our  belief  in  the  reality  of  our  making  of
truth.  The  latter  may  pervade  also  forms  of  experience
other  than  that  which  gets  its  pragmatic  backbone  from
the  former.  Indeed,  one  cannot  imagine  desiring,  purpos-
ing, and  acting  as  ceasing  to  form  part  of  our  cognitive
procedure,  so  long  as  '  finite '  minds  persist  at  all.  All  we
can  say,  therefore,  is  that  so  long  as,  and  in  so  far  as,  our
experience  is  such  as  to  be  most  conveniently  organised
by  the  conception  of  a  pre-existing  real  world,  (in  a
relative  sense)  '  independent '  of  us,  it  will  also  be  con-
venient to  conceive  it  as  having  been  to  a  large  extent
'  made '  before  we  took  a  part  in  the  process.3

Nevertheless, it is quite possible (i) that this

1  Cp.  Essay  xx.  §§  19-22.  2  Essay  xix.  §  7.

3  Cp.  Riddles  of  the  Sphinx,  chap.  .ix.  §  32.


vn  THE  MAKING  OF  TRUTH  203

'  pragmatic '  recognition  of  the  external  world  may  not  be
final,  because  it  does  not  serve  our  ultimate  purposes  ;  and
(2)  that  the  human  process  of  making  reality  may  be  a
valuable  clue  also  to  the  making  of  the  pragmatically  real
world,  because  even  though  it  was  not  made  by  us,  it  was
yet  developed  by  processes  closely  analogous  to  our  own
procedure,  which  this  latter  enables  us  to  understand.  If
so,  we  shall  be  able  to  combine  the  real '  making  of  reality  '
and  the  human  '  making  of  reality  '  under  the  same  concep-
tion. But  both  of  these  suggestions  must  be  left  to  later
essays  to  work  out.1  Before  we  embark  upon  such  adven-
turous constructions,  we  must  finally  dispose  of  the  meta-
physical and  religious  pretensions  of  the  Absolutism  whose
theory  of  knowledge  has  ended  in  such  egregious  failure.

1  Essays  xix.  and  xx.


VIII

ABSOLUTE  TRUTH AND  ABSOLUTE
REALITY

ARGUMENT

I.  The  Conception  of  Absolute  Truth. §  i.  The  sceptical  tendency  of  the

historical  study  of  Thought  is  due  to  reflection  on  the  falsifying  of
human  truths.  §  2.  The  Ideal  of  an  absolute  truth  as  a  standard  to
give  stability  to  human  truths.  §  3.  But,  being  conceived  as  separate,
it  turns  out  to  be  futile.  (i)  It  guarantees  nothing,  and  (2)  it  is
different  in  kind.  §  4.  It  is  also  pernicious,  as  leading  either  to
scepticism  or  to  stagnation.  §  5.  The  real  growth  of  Truth  is  by  a
constant  revaluation  of  truths  which  are  '  verified '  as  well  as  falsified.
§  6.  The  real  meaning  of  '  absolute '  truth.

II.  The  Conception  of  Absolute  Reality. §  7. The  character  of  scientific
reality  which  absolute  reality  is  supposed to  guarantee. § 8. It  is,
however, futile, because  (i)  its  notion is  no help to finding it de

facto,  and  (2)  it  must  be  kept  away  from  our  reality.  §  9.  It  is  also
pernicious,  as  disintegrating  human  reality  and  discouraging  efforts  to
improve  it.  §  10.  The  real  growth  of  reality  never  involves  the  notion
of  absolute  reality.  §  1 1 .  '  Primary '  would  be  accepted  as  ultimate
reality  by  '  purely '  cognitive  beings.  §.12'  Real '  reality  selected  by
human  interests.  The  real  meaning  of  '  absolute '  reality.


I. THE CONCEPTION OF ABSOLUTE TRUTH

§  i. The  Sceptical  Tendency  q/  the  Historical  Study  of
Thought.

THE  reflective  student  of  the  history  of  human  know-
ledge is  apt  to  receive  an  overwhelming  impression  of
the  instability  of  opinion,  of  the  mutability  of  beliefs,  of
the  vicissitudes  of  science,  in  short  of  the  impermanence
of  what  is,  or  passes  for,  'truth.'  Despite  the  boastful
confidence  of  Platonically- minded  system -builders  that
they  have  'erected  monuments  more  perennial  than

204


via ABSOLUTE  TRUTH AND REALITY 205

bronze '  and  coerced  '  eternal '  truth  to  abide  immutably
within  the  flimsy  shelters  which  their  speculations  have
erected,  the  universal  flux  of  reality  sways  the  world  of
ideas  even  more  rapidly  and  visibly  than  the  world  of
things.  What  truths  have  lasted  like  the  Alps,  or  even
like  the  Pyramids  ?  All  human  truth,  as  it  actually  is
and  historically  has  been,  seems  fallible  and  transitory.
It  is  of  its  nature  to  be  liable  to  err,  and  of  ours  to
blind  ourselves  to  this  liability.  The  road  to  truth  (if
such  a  thing  there  is)  grows  indiscernible  amid  the  many
bypaths  of  error  into  which  it  branches  off  on  either  side,1
and  whichever  of  these  mazes  men  adopt,  they  plunge
into  it  as  gaily,  follow  it  as  faithfully,  and  trust  it  as
implicitly,  as  if  it  were  the  one  most  certain  highroad.
But  only  for  a  season.  For  sooner  or  later  they  weary
of  a  course  that  leads  to  nothing,  and  stop  themselves
with  a  shock  of  distressed  surprise  at  the  discovery  that
what  they  had  so  long  taken  to  be  '  true '  was  really
'  false.'  And  yet  so  strong  is  the  dogmatic  confidence
with  which  nature  has  endowed  them,  that  they  start
again  almost  at  once,  all  but  a  very  few  of  the  wisest,
upon  the  futile  quest  of  a  truth  which  in  the  end  always
eludes  their  human  grasp.

Thus  human  truth  cannot  substantiate  its  claim  to
absoluteness :  the  truths  of  past  ages  are  at  present
recognised  as  errors  ;  those  of  the  present  are  on  the  way
to  be  so  recognised.  They  can  inspire  us  with  no  more
confidence,  they  ought  to  inspire  us  with  far  less,  than
that  with  which  exploded  and  superseded  errors  inspired
our  forefathers,  who  in  their  day  were  equally  con-
temptuous of  the  errors  of  an  earlier  age.  We  have  no
right  to  hold  that  this  universal  process  will  be  arrested
at  this  single  point,  and  that  our  successors  will  find
reason  to  spare  our  present  truths  and  shrink  from
discarding  them  when  they  have  had  their  day.

Nor  can  the  feeling  of  conviction  which  has  gathered

1  Cp.  Poincarg,  La  Valeur  de  la  Science,  p.  142  :  toute  v£rit6  particuliere  peut
6videmment  6tre6tendue  d'une  infinite  de  manieres.  Entre  ces  mille  chemins  qui
s'ouvrent  devant  nous,  il  faut  faire  un  choix,  au  moins  provisoire.


206  STUDIES  IN HUMANISM  vm

round  our  present  '  truths '  guarantee  them  permanent
validity.  All  '  truths '  claim  to  be  '  true '  without  a
hint  of  doubt,  and  come  upon  the  scene  with  similar
assurance  and  similar  assurances.  And  all  alike  evoke
the  feeling  of  loyalty  which  truth-seeking  men  are
anxious  to  bestow  upon  whatever  comes  to  them  in  the
guise  of  truth.  But  all  too  often  our  trust  is  woefully
misplaced.  The  truths  we  trusted  are  transformed  into
hideous  errors  in  our  hands,  and  after  many  bitter  dis-
appointments we  are  driven  to  grow  wary,  and  even
sceptical.

Thus  our  faith  in  the  absoluteness  of  our  truth  grows
ever  fainter,  shrinks  ever  more  into  an  unreasonable
instinct,  until,  in  our  most  lucid  intervals,  we  may  even
come  to  doubt  whether  our  '  truth '  is  ever  more  than
the  human  fashion  of  the  ruling  fancy.

§  2. The  Conception  of  Absolute  Truth.

In  this  distress,  for  man  by  nature  is  the  most  credulous
of  creatures,  the  thought  of  an  absolute  truth,  serenely
transcending  all  this  turmoil,  so  distinct  in  nature  as  to  be
independent  of  the  misfortunes  and  exempt  from  the  vicis-
situdes of  human  truth,  presents  itself  as  a  welcome  refuge
from  the  assaults  of  scepticism.  If  such  a  thing  can  be
conceived,  it  will  form  a  model  for  human  truth  to  imitate,
a  standard  for  evaluating  our  imperfect  truths,  and  an
impregnable  citadel  into  which  no  change  can  penetrate.
The  wish  is  so  urgent,  the  thought  is  so  natural,  that  we
are  not  disposed  to  be  critical,  and  it  is  no  wonder  that
it  has  become  nearly  universal.  And  yet  when  we  force
ourselves  really  to  scrutinise  the  habitation  which  our
hopes  have  built,  we  may  have  reason  to  fear  that  it  is
founded  on  illusion,  and  results  in  disaster  to  the  very
hopes  to  which  it  promised  satisfaction.

The  notion  of  an  absolute  truth  suggested  itself  as
an  expedient  for  escaping  from  the  continuous  revaluation
and  transvaluation  of  truths,  which  forms  the  history  of
human  knowledge.  The  efficacy  of  the  expedient  con-


vin ABSOLUTE  TRUTH AND  REALITY 207

sists  essentially  in  constituting  a  distinction  between
actual  or  human,  and  absolute  or  ideal  truth,  and  in  so
separating  them  that  the  latter  can  be  fished  up  out  of
the  flux  of  reality  and  set  up  aloft  on  an  immutable
pedestal  for  the  adoration  of  the  faithful.  But  in  this
very  separation  lurk  the  dangers  which  render  vain  our
idolatry  and  our  sacrifices,  and  in  the  end  conduct  the
whole  conception  to  failure  and  futility.

For  the  conception  of  an  absolute  truth  was  not  won
without  cost  We  had  to  value  it  above  our  human
truth,  and  so  to  derogate  from  the  latter's  authority,  and
yet  to  keep  the  two  related  ;  and  so  these  sacrifices  will
be  vain  if  we  fail  to  show  (i)  that  the  conception  of
absolute  truth  solves  our  original  problem  and  really
guarantees  our  truths  ;  and  (2)  that  the  new  problem  it
provokes  as  to  the  relation  of  the  actual  changing  human
truth  to  its  superhuman  stable  standard  is  capable  of
satisfactory  solution.

§  3. The  Futility  of  Absolute  Truth

Now  as  to  ( I )  we  soon  see  reason  to  doubt  whether  the
conception  of  an  immutable  truth  really  gives  our  actual
truths  the  guarantee  we  sought.  Rather  it  seems  to  leave
the  problem  where  we  found  it.  For  manifestly  we  cannot
argue  that  because  absolute  truth  exists  and  is  immutable,
therefore  our  truths  do  not  need  correction.  On  the
contrary,  we  shall  have  to  admit  as  a  general  principle
that,  just  because  human,  they  cannot  be  absolute.  Still
less  can  we  assume  that  any  particular  truth  that  is
recognised  at  a  particular  time  is  absolute  and  destined  to
be  permanent.  Even  though  therefore  the  logician's
heaven  were  packed  tight  with  a  mass  of  absolute  and
eternal  verities,  rigid  and  immutable,  they  could  not
miraculously  descend  to  transform  our  truths  and  to  cure
the  impermanence  of  our  conceptions.  Neither  could  the
latter  aspire  to  their  superhuman  prerogatives.  Or  even
if  they  could  so  descend,  we  could  never  discover  this,  and,
like  other  deities,  they  would  have  lost  heaven  without
redeeming  earth.


208  STUDIES IN  HUMANISM  vm

Absolute  truth,  therefore,  to  benefit  human  truths,
must  be  conceived  as  capable  of  being  identified  with
them.  So  long  as  it  is  not  so  conceived,  it  does  nothing
to  redeem  them  from  suspicion.  And  conversely,  so  long
as  human  knowledge  is  not  absolute,  so  long  as  it  cannot
even  seriously  claim  to  be  so,  absolute  truth  is  irrelevant
to  human  knowledge,  and  it  is  gratuitous  to  assume  its
existence.

(2)  To  save  the  conception,  therefore,  we  must
examine  the  relation  of  human  to  absolute  truth,  in
order  to  see  whether  they  may  not  be  so  connected  that
some  divine  virtue  from  the  latter  may  magically  be
instilled  into  the  former.  Let  us  try  to  conceive,  that  is,
human  truth  as  a  reflexion  of  absolute,  imperfect  indeed
but  valid,  being  mysteriously  transubstantiated  by  the
immanence  of  the  absolute  and  sharing  in  its  substance.

The  first  point  which,  on  this  assumption,  must  excite
surprise  is  that  the  appearance  of  our  truth,  in  spite  of
the  sanctification  it  is  said  to  have  undergone,  remains
strangely  unregenerate.  Its  salient  features  are  in  com-
plete contrast  with  those  of  the  original  it  claims  to
reproduce.  It  is  fluid,  not  rigid  ;  temporal  and  temporary,
not  eternal  and  everlasting ;  arbitrary,  not  necessary  ;
chosen,  not  inevitable  ;  born  of  passion  and  sprung  (like
Aphrodite)  from  a  foaming  sea  of  desires,  not  '  dis-
passionate '  nor  '  purely '  intellectual  ;  incomplete,  not
perfect ;  fallible,  not  inerrant ;  absorbed  in  the  attaining  of
what  is  not  yet  achieved  ;  purposive  and  struggling  towards
ends,  and  not  basking  in  their  fulfilment.  Surely  if  the
two  are  really  one,  and  the  distortion  which  dissevers
them  lies  only  in  the  human  eye  that  sees  amiss,  our  trust
in  the  competence  of  our  cognitive  apparatus  will  be  worse
shaken  than  before.

And  secondly,  these  features  of  human  truth  seem
definitely  bound  up  with  the  conditions  that  make  it
truth  at  all.  Human  truth  is  discursive,  because  it  cannot
embrace  the  whole  of  reality ;  it  is  fallible,  because  it
never  knows  the  whole,  and  so  may  ever  need  correction
by  wider  knowledge.  It  is,  in  a  word,  essentially  partial.


vin ABSOLUTE  TRUTH AND  REALITY 209

Absolute  truth,  on  the  other  hand,  extends  to  and  depends
on  a  knowledge  of  the  whole.  Its  absoluteness  rests  on
its  all-embracingness.  If  there  is  not  completely  adequate
knowledge  of  a  completed  system  of  reality  there  can  be
no  absolute  truth.

But  can  such  knowledge  be  ascribed  to  human
minds?  Can  we  conceive  ourselves  as  contemplating  the
whole  from  the  standpoint  of  the  whole  ?  If  not,  our
truth,  just  because  it  is  partial,  and  rests  on  partial  data,  and
is  generated  by  the  partialities  of  selective  attention,  and
is  directed  upon  partial  ends,  which  it  achieves  by  playing
off  parts  of  the  universe  against  the  others,  can  never
aspire  to  the  absoluteness  which  pertains  only  to  the
whole.

Thus  the  chasm  of  a  difference  in  kind  begins  to  yawn
between  truth  human  and  truth  absolute.  And  this
perhaps  we  ought  to  have  expected.  For  did  we  not
succeed  in  postulating  an  absolute  truth  by  exempting  it
from  all  the  defects  that  seemed  to  mar  our  truth  ?  We
have  been  only  too  successful ;  the  separation  we  enforced
has  been  too  effectual  ;  absolute  truth  is  safe  from  con-
tamination, but  it  can  do  nothing  to  redeem  our  truth  :
the  two  are  different  in  kind,  and  have  no  intercourse  or
interaction.

Must  we  not  conclude,  therefore,  that  our  assumption
of  absolute  truth  is  futile  and  has  availed  us  nothing?
Even  if  it  existed,  it  could  not  help  us,  because  we  could
not  attain  it.  Even  if  we  could  attain  it,  we  could  not
know  that  we  had  done  so.  Even,  therefore,  if  it  could
remove  doubt,  it  would  not  do  so  to  our  blinded  eyes.

§  4. The  Pernidousness  of  the  Conception  of  Absolute

Truth

But  there  is  more  to  be  said  against  the  notion  of
absolute  truth.  Its  futility,  perhaps,  will  seem  no  serious
drawback.  It  does  but  little  harm,  and  induces  at  the
worst  a  loss  of  time  which  leisurely  philosophy  can  well
afford  to  part  with.  What  is  that  compared  with  the

P


210  STUDIES IN HUMANISM  vm

delight  of  rolling  in  our  mouths  such  dainty  words  as
'  absolute '  and  '  truth  '  ?

To  which  it  may  be  replied  that  those  who  conceive
philosophy,  not  as  a  game  for  indolent  spectators  of  the
battle  of  life,  but  as  the  culmination  of  our  efforts  to  grasp
and  control  the  struggle,  will  not  easily  condone  a  futile
waste  of  time.

But  they  will  condemn  the  conception  of  an  absolute
truth  also  on  more  weighty  grounds.  They  will  proceed  to
urge  against  it — (i)  that  it  leads  to  a  shipwreck  of  the
theory  of  knowledge  ;  that  (2)  it  interposes  itself  between
us  and  the  truth  we  need  ;  and  (3)  by  obfuscating  the  real
nature  of  the  problem,  it  prevents  us  from  recognising  the
true  solution.

(l)  The  pernicious  influence  of  the  notion  of  absolute
truth  on  our  theory  of  knowledge  will  differ  according  as
the  difference  between  it  and  human  truth  is  (a)  perceived,
or  (£)  not.

If  (a)  it  is  perceived  (in  the  manner  shown  above),  we
shall  of  course  be  tempted  to  suppose  that  absolute  truth
is  something  grander  and  more  precious  than  ours.  It
will,  therefore,  cast  a  slur  upon  all  human  knowledge,  which
will  be  despised  as  a  ludicrous  and  vain  attempt  to
achieve  the  impossible,  viz.  to  reflect  the  absolute.  To
the  pain  and  loss  of  discovering  that  our  '  truths  '  are  null —
the  malady  which  afflicted  us  before — there  is  now  added
contempt  for  the  human  presumption  which  tries  to  inflate
man  into  a  measure  of  the  universe.

The  more  clear-sighted  of  absolutists  therefore  will  to
all  practical  intents  be  sceptics,  and  even  though  they  will
contend  that  it  is  only  for  the  greater  glory  of  the
Absolute  that  they  have  shattered  human  truth,  they  will
find  it  hard,  even  theoretically,  to  draw  the  very  fine
line  which  marks  them  off  from  the  downright  sceptic.
The  most  eminent  of  absolutists,  Mr.  F.  H.  Bradley,  has
signally  illustrated  this  inevitable  consequence.1

1  To  him  may  now  be  added  Mr.  Joachim,  whose  '  ideal '  of  knowledge  breaks
down  just  in  the  way  anticipated,  although  this  was  written  before  his  book
appeared.  Cp.  Essay  vi.


vin ABSOLUTE  TRUTH AND  REALITY 211

(£)  If  the  difference  is  not  perceived,  if  by  drugs  and
prayers  the  eye  of  the  soul  is  sufficiently  dimmed  to  take
our  truth  for  absolute,  the  consequences  will  be  very
nearly  as  disastrous.  It  will  not  indeed  be  all  truth  that
will  run  the  risk  of  rejection,  but  all  new  truth.  For  if  a
recognised  '  truth '  is  regarded  as  '  absolute,'  it  is  naturally
stereotyped,  (i)  Alteration  will  become  impossible,  the
effort  to  improve  it  will  be  discouraged  and  will  cease  ;
in  short,  the  path  of  progress  will  be  blocked.  And  even
formally,  a  theory  of  knowledge  which  cannot  account  for
its  growth  has  no  great  claim  upon  our  veneration.  (2)
The  belief  that  our  truth  is  absolute  is  pernicious,  not
only  as  checking  its  development,  but  also  as  incapacitating
us  from  understanding  its  real  nature,  and  (3)  the  true
nature  of  the  problem  presented  by  the  growth  of  know-
ledge, and  its  true  solution.  For  it  renders  us  impatient
of  following  the  real  clues  to  the  development  of  truth,
and  so  prevents  us  from  perceiving  that,  properly  under-
stood, this  affords  no  ground  for  the  sceptical  inferences  to
escape  from  which  we  vainly  appealed  to  the  notion  of
absolute  truth.

§  5. The  Real  Nature  of  the  Growth  of  Truth

If  we  adopt  the  Humanist  view  that  '  truth '  is
essentially  a  valuation,  a  laudatory  label  wherewith  we
decorate  the  most  useful  conceptions  which  we  have
formed  up  to  date  in  order  to  control  our  experience,
there  is  not  the  slightest  reason  why  the  steady  flow
of  the  stream  of  '  truths '  that  pass  away  should  inspire
us  with  dismay.  That  a  '  truth '  should  turn  out  '  false '
is  a  calamity  only  if  we  are  unable  to  supplant  it  by
a  '  truer.'  But  if  instead  of  practising  dialectics  in  the
study,  we  condescend  to  observe  the  actual  growth  of
knowledge,  we  find  that  this  latter  is  what  usually  occurs.
We  are  enabled  to  declare  an  old  '  truth  '  '  false '  because
we  are  able  to  find  a  new  one  which  more  than  fills  its
place.  We  do  not  discard  a  valuable  and  serviceable
conception,  until  we  have  something  more  valuable  and


212  STUDIES IN HUMANISM  vm

convenient,  i.e.  truer,  to  serve  us  in  its  stead.  Even  where
it  is  necessary  to  condemn  the  old  truth  as  '  false,'  and
this  harsh  necessity  is  commonly  imposed  on  us  only  by
the  pertinacity  with  which  unprogressive  thinkers  cling  to
it,  its  '  falsity '  does  not  mean  revolution  so  much  as
development.  The  '  false '  is  absolute  as  little  as  the
'  true.'  It  is  commonly  a  term  attached  to  an  earlier
phase  of  the  process  which  has  evolved  the  '  truth.'  Hence
to  regard  the  discarded  ex-truth  as  merely  '  error '  is  to
fail  to  do  justice  to  its  record,  to  fail  to  express  the
continuity  of  the  process  whereby  knowledge  grows.

Thus  the  abstract  intellectualist  view  of  truth  creates
a  dialectical  difficulty  which  does  not  really  exist.  Our
'  truth '  is  not  merely  being  ( falsified,'  but  also  being
'  verified '  in  one  and  the  same  process  ;  it  is  corrected
only  to  be  improved.  And  so  the  Humanist  can  recognise
necessary  errors  as  well  as  necessary  truths,  errors,  that
is,  which  are  fruitful  of  the  truths  which  supersede
them.

Herein  lies  the  explanation  also  of  the  otherwise
paradoxical  fact  that  those  who  have  most  experience  of
the  fallibility  of  human  truth  are  least  disposed  to  be
sceptical  about  it.  For  being  actively  engaged  in  '  making '
or  '  discovering '  truth,  they  are  too  busy  with  anticipating
achievement  to  reflect  upon  the  failures  that  strew  the
path  of  every  science.  It  is  not  to  the  invalidation  of  the
old  truths,  but  to  the  establishment  of  the  new,  that  they
are  attending.  And  thus  the  whole  procedure  carries  with
it  a  feeling  of  fulfilment,  which  is  encouraging  and  not
depressing.  They  see  the  new  truth  continuously  growing
out  of  the  old,  as  a  more  satisfactory  mode  of  handling
the  old  problems.  The  growth  of  truth  cannot  therefore
suggest  to  them  a  growth  of  doubt,  as  it  naturally  does
to  the  indolent  spectator.

Nor  is  it  really  a  paradox  to  maintain  that  our  '  errors  '
were  '  truths '  in  their  day.  For  they  were  the  most
adequate  ways  we  then  had  of  dealing  with  our  ex-
perience. They  were  not,  therefore,  valueless.  Nor  were
they  gratuitous  errors.  More  commonly  they  were  natural,


vin ABSOLUTE  TRUTH AND  REALITY 213

or  even  indispensable,  stages  in  the  attainment  of  better
'  truths.'

And  so  the  prospect  of  further  improvements  in  the
formulas  whereby  we  know  the  world,  which  will  supersede
our  present  truths,  does  not  appal  us.  They  will  be
welcome  when  and  as  they  come.  They  will  not  put  us
to  intellectual  confusion,  unless  we  narrow-mindedly
exclude  them  :  on  the  contrary  they  will  mean  a  more
adequate  fulfilment  of  what  we  now  desire.

Viewing  truth  in  this  way,  we  shall  regard  it  neither
disdainfully  nor  unprogressively.  We  shall  regard  no
truth  as  so  rigidly  '  absolute '  as  to  be  incapable  of
improvement.  But  we  shall  not  despise  it  for  displaying
so  convenient  a  flexibility.  We  shall  honour  it  the  more
for  thus  adjusting  itself  to  the  demands  of  life.  It  will
fulfil  its  function,  even  if  it  perishes  in  our  service,  pro-
vided that  it  has  left  behind  descendants  more  capable  of
carrying  on  its  salutary  work.

§  6.  Absolute  Truth  as  an  Ideal

Shall  we  conclude,  then,  that  the  conception  of  an
absolute  truth  is  a  mere  will-o'-the-wisp  ?

No  ;  rightly  conceived,  it  has  inestimable  value  as  a
valid  ideal  for  human  knowledge.  The  ideal  of  a  truth
wholly  adequate,  adequate  that  is  to  every  human  purpose,
may  well  be  called  truth  absolute.  Nor  did  the  absolutist
err  in  describing  its  formal  character.  It  would  be,  as  he
says,  stable,  immutable,  and  eternal.  His  fatal  mistake
is  merely  to  conceive  it  as  already  actual.  For  by  thus
attributing  actual  existence  to  it  in  a  non-human  sphere,
he  spoils  it  as  an  ideal  for  man  ;  he  dissevers  it  from  the
progress  of  human  knowledge,  and  disables  it  as  an  en-
couragement to  human  effort.

Moreover,  so  to  conceive  it  is  at  one  blow  to  reduce
our  actual  knowledge  to  superfluity  and  illusion.  If  the
truth  is  already  timelessly  achieved,  what  meaning  can
our  struggles  to  attain  it  ultimately  claim  ?  They  cannot
make  a  truth  already  made,  they  cannot  add  to  a  perfection


2i4  STUDIES IN HUMANISM  vm

already  possessed,  they  cannot  enrich  a  significance  already
complete.  They  must  inexorably  be  condemned  as
unmeaning  surplusage.  Thus  the  real  function  of  the
ideal  has  been  destroyed  by  untimely  haste  to  proclaim
its  reality.

II. THE CONCEPTION OF ABSOLUTE REALITY

§  7.  It  is  an  integral  part  of  the  Humanist  theory  of
knowledge  that  the  System  of  Truth  and  the  world  of
Reality  are  constructed  by  one  and  the  same  purposive
manipulation  out  of  the  materials  provided  by  crude  or
immediate  experience,  and  that  consequently  the  processes
of  knowing  reality  and  of  establishing  truth  must  not  be
separated  even  in  statement.  The  discussion,  therefore,
of  the  conception  of  Absolute  Reality  will  naturally  run
parallel  to  that  of  Absolute  Truth  ;  but  as  the  pragmatic
handling  of  this  theme  is  still  sufficiently  novel  to  be  fre-
quently misunderstood,  it  will  be  advantageous  to  reiterate
the  general  argument  in  its  special  application  to  a  distinct
question.

And  to  begin  with,  we  must  consider  the  characteristics
of  Reality  which  our  science  recognises  and  de  facto  deals
with.  Scientific  reality,  i.e.  as  it  enters  into  and  is  treated
in  the  sciences,  normally  exhibits  the  following  features.

(1)  It  is  not  rigid,  but  plastic  and  capable  of  development;

(2)  it  is  not  absolute  nor  unconditionally  real,  but  relative
to our experience and dependent  on  the  state  of  our
knowledge  ;  (3)  our  conception  of  it  changes,  and  so  (4)
often  reduces  to  unreality  what  had  long  been  accepted  as
real  ;  (5)  initial  reality  (like  initial  truth)  is  claimed  by
everything  in  experience  ;  (6)  we  need  therefore  a  principle
which  acts  selectively  to  discriminate  between  initial  reality,
or primary experience, and '  real ' reality which has
survived  the  fire  of  criticism  and  been  promoted  to  superior
rank ; (7) even more markedly than in the case of
truth,  the  constant  substitution  of  more  for  less  adequate
conceptions  of  reality  does  not  engender  scepticism. At
every  step  we  are  confident  that here at  last  we have


via ABSOLUTE  TRUTH AND  REALITY 215

reached  the  real ;  but  even  though  the  next  step  may  show
that  we  were  too  sanguine,  we  are  never  undeceived  and
never  doubt  our  powers  to  attain  reality.

Nevertheless  the  idea  of  an  Absolute  Reality  has
cropped  up  here  also  as  a  device  for  avoiding  the  restless-
ness of  a  dynamic  reality,  and  as  a  short  cut  to  intellectual
repose.  Here  also  it  is  supposed  to  support  and  guarantee,
to  round  off  and  confirm,  the  realities  we  actually  deal
with.

§  8. The  Futility  of  Absolute  Reality

Here  also  the  notion  is  delusive.  For  ( i )  the  Absolute
Reality  gives  us  no  aid  in  dealing  with  the  realities  we
actually  recognise  ;  (2)  it  cannot  be  related  to  these  realities ;
(3)  it  therefore  disparages  the  value  of  our  realities,  and  (4)
forms  an  obstacle  to  a  more  adequate  knowledge  of  reality ;
(5)  as  before,  the  mistake  consists  in  the  attempt  to  project
into  reality  a  misconceived  ideal,  with  the  result  that
the  ideal  loses  its  value,  and  the  nature  of  the  real  is
obscured.

(1)  It  is  an  entire  mistake  to  suppose  that  the  general
conviction  that  there  is  absolute  reality  is  a  reason  for
declaring  absolute  any  apparent  reality. It  is  not  even  a
ground for discriminating between conflicting realities
which  claim  to  be  truly  real. For  how  are  we  to  decide
that anything in particular  is  (or  is  not)  as  real  as  it
seems  ? The  belief  in  an  absolute  reality  will  but  justify
us  in  looking  for  it ;  the  risk  in  identifying  it  when  found
will  remain  precisely  what  it  was. And  will  it  not  always
be  presumptuous  to  assume  that  we have attained it  ?
And  if  we  had  Jassumed  it,  how  could  we  prove  it  ? All
the old  difficulties  which  arise  from  the  growth  of  our
knowledge  of  reality,  from  the  discarding  of  old  supersti-
tions, from  the  '  discovery '  of  new  facts,  would  beset  us
as before. Beyond the satisfaction of believing that
absolute reality existed somewhere in the  world,  our
practical  gain  would  be  nil.

(2)  It  would  be  very  difficult,  moreover,  to  establish
any  effective  connexion  between  the  absolute  reality  we


2i6  STUDIES IN  HUMANISM  vm

had  postulated,  and  our  own.  Our  reality  seems  in  all
respects  to  fall  short  of  the  ideal  of  a  reality,  stable,
immutable,  perfect,  unconditional,  self-sufficing,  such  as
alone  could  be  dignified  with  the  title  of  '  absolute.'  The
reals  we  know  all  seem  corruptible  and  transitory  ;  they
are  incessantly  changing  ;  they  are  penetrated  through
and  through  with  imperfections ;  it  is  their  nature  to
be  dependent  on  others  and  to  be  as  little  able  to  satisfy
them  as  themselves.  To  realise  our  ideal,  therefore,  they
would  have  fundamentally  to  change  their  nature.

These  defects  the  notion  of  absolute  reality  does
nothing  to  alleviate.  It  cannot  even  affect  them,  for  it
can  never  get  into  touch  with  them.  Absolute  reality
must  in  self-defence  eschew  all  relation  with  ours.  For
such  relation  would  involve  a  dependence  on  the  imperfect
which  would  disturb  its  own  perfection.  Relation  among
realities  implies  interaction,  and  interaction  with  the  un-
stable and  changing  must  import  a  reflected  instability
into  the  nature  of  the  absolute  reality  and  destroy  its
equipoise.  The  only  way  therefore  for  the  perfect  to
preserve  its  perfection  is  to  keep  aloof :  but  if  it  does  that,
how,  pray,  shall  it  be  known  by  us  ?

§  9. The  Perniciousness  of  the  Notion  of  Absolute  Reality

(3)  The  mere  notion,  moreover,  of  an  absolute  reality
has  a  disintegrating  effect  on  the  realities  of  human
knowledge.  The  more  glowing  the  colours,  the  greater
the  enthusiasm,  with  which  absolute  reality  is  depicted,
the  more  precarious  grows  the  status  of  human  reality.  It
sinks  into  the  position  of  an  illusion,  adjusted  no  doubt
to  the  imperfection  of  '  finite '  being,  but  for  this  very
reason  ineradicable  and  irremediable.  For  from  the
standpoint  of  absolute  reality  there  is  no  difficulty  to  sur-
mount. Sub  specie  absoluti  there  is  no  imperfection  at  all.
We  have  no  case  against  absolute  reality,  because  our
woes  are  illusory.  So  are  we.  It  need  not  and  cannot
help  us,  because  neither  they  nor  we  exist  for  it.  If  we
start  from  the  other  side,  we  come  upon  the  same


vin ABSOLUTE  TRUTH AND  REALITY 217

impasse :  if,  in  defiance  of  all  that  is  rational,  finite  beings
nevertheless  seem  to  themselves  to  exist  and  to  battle
with  imperfect  realities,  this  shows  that  such  illusion  is  not
repugnant  to  the  perfection  of  absolute  reality.  But  if
such  illusion  does  not  impair  this  perfection  now,  there  is
no  reason  why  it  ever  should  in  times  to  come  (if  it  is  not
nonsense  to  speak  of  future  times  in  connexion  with  the
Absolute) :  for  all  the  Absolute  knows  or  cares,  '  finite '
beings  may  continue  to  seem  to  exist  and  continue  to  seem
imperfect  to  themselves  and  to  each  other  for  evermore.
We  have  not  therefore  altered  the  dimensions  or  the
urgency  of  our  troubles  :  we  have  merely  denied  the  cosmic
significance  of  human  life.

Or,  looking  at  it  in  another  way,  from  the  standpoint
of  human  reality,  all  that  the  thought  of  an  absolute
reality  effects  is  subtly  and  all -pervasively  to  discredit
whatever  reality  we  have  felt  it  right  to  recognise.  It
merely  warns  us  that  there  is  something  more  real,  but
unattainable,  beyond.

The  conclusion  therefore  is  inevitable,  that  the  notion
of  an  absolute  reality  is  doubly  pernicious :  (a)  as
reducing  our  reality  to  unreality  in  comparison  with  a
higher  reality,  and  (£)  as  making  the  ideal  of  reality
seem  unattainable.  These  results  follow  if  the  disparity
between  absolute  reality  and  reality  for  us  is  perceived.

(4)  If  there  is  no  perception  of  the  difference,  if,  that
is,  there  is  confusion  between  the  notion  of  the  two,  all
sorts  of  realities  will  be  taken  for  absolute  merely  because
they  happen  to  exist.  They  will  accordingly  be  regarded
with  the  respect  due  to  absolute  reality,  and  the  disastrous
consequence  will  ensue  that  it  will  be  almost  impossible
to  experiment  with  the  purpose  of  (i)  rendering  them
unreal,  (2)  improving  them,  and  (3)  discovering  further
realities  to  supersede  or  supplement  them.

The  effects  of  this  superstition  will  indeed  here  be
more  deleterious  than  in  the  parallel  case  of  '  absolute '
truth.  For  the  old  '  truths '  which  could  not  be  got  rid
of  because  they  were  taken  to  be  absolute,  were,  after  all,
not  wholly  bad.  If  they  had  not  been  valuable,  they


2i8  STUDIES IN  HUMANISM  vm

would  never  have  been  called  truths ;  they  worked  and
served  our  purposes  fairly  well,  and  faute  de  mieux  we
could  get  on  with  them.  The  realities  we  have  to  accept,
on  the  other  hand,  are  often  intrinsically  abominable  and
worthy  of  destruction,  and  to  perpetuate  their  reality  is
wantonly  to  inflict  unnecessary  suffering.  The  belief,
therefore,  that  they  are  ultimate  and  sanctioned  by  a  fixed
order  of  things,  prevents  the  attainment  of  what  is  good,
as  well  as  preserving  what  is  evil.

In  order  to  symbolise  numerically  the  extent  of  this
mischief,  we  might  represent  the  known  and  accepted
realities  as,  say,  one  million.  But  these,  as  we  have
learnt  from  past  experience,  do  not  exhaust  the  possi-
bilities of  the  universe.  There  may  ( I )  exist  in  addition,
say,  ten  million  other  realities  which  may  be  '  discovered,'
i,e.  found  to  be  '  real,'  if  certain  experiments  are  per-
formed which  are  in  our  power.  Moreover  (2)  of  the
million  known  realities  one -half,  say  500,000,  may
deserve  to  be  rendered  unreal,  and  may  be  removable
from  the  world  which  they  contaminate.  (3)  There  may
be  as  many  more  potential  realities,  unreal  at  present,
but  capable  of  being  brought  into  existence  by  our  efforts.

Now  all  these  three  desirable  operations  are  barred
by  the  notion  that  our  existing  realities  are  absolute.
The  rigidly  monistic  way  of  conceiving  the  universe  is
singularly  unimaginative  and  lacking  in  variety.  It  cuts
down  the  possibilities  to  the  actualities  of  existence.  It
shuts  us  off  from  infinite  possibilities  of  things  beautiful,
good,  and  true,  by  the  wanton  dogmatism  of  its  assump-
tion that  the  absolute  is  already  real,  and  that  the  attempt
to  remake  it  is  as  vain  as  it  is  blasphemous.

Consider,  on  the  other  hand,  the  advantages  of  dis-
carding this  notion.  We  can  then  permit  ourselves  to
recognise  that  reality  is  still  in  the  making.  Nothing  is
absolutely  settled.  Human  operations  are  real  experi-
ments with  a  reality  that  really  responds,  and  may
respond  differently  to  different  manipulations.  Reality
no  doubt  has  its  habits,  good  and  bad,  useful  and
inconvenient  (as  we  have),  and  is  not  easily  induced  to


viri ABSOLUTE  TRUTH AND  REALITY 219

change  them.  But  at  bottom  they  are  habits,  and  leave
it  plastic.  Consequently  at  every  point  at  which  we
have  alternative  ways  of  manipulating  either  ourselves  or
other  reals  there  exists  a  choice  between  two  really,  and
for  ever,  divergent  universes.  Thus  our  actual  experience
contains  literally  infinite  possibilities  of  alternative  uni-
verses, which  struggle  for  existence  in  the  minds  of
every  agent  who  is  capable,  in  however  limited  a  degree,
of  choosing  between  alternatives.1  Every  impulse  we
repress  or  yield  to,  every  act  we  do  or  leave  undone,
every  inquiry  we  pursue  or  neglect,  realises  a  new  uni-
verse which  was  not  real,  and  need  never  have  become  so.
Thus  it  is  our  duty  and  our  privilege  to  co-operate  in  the
shaping  of  the  world  ;  among  infinite  possibilities  to
select  and  realise  the  best.  That  is  not  much  perhaps,
though  it  is  as  much  as  God  could  do  in  the  intellectual-
istic  scheme  of  Leibniz  ;  but  it  is  enough  to  encourage  us
and  to  confirm  our  faith.  For  herein  surely  lies  the
most  bracing  of  responsibilities,  the  chief  attraction  of
pluralism,  and  the  most  grievous  wrong  which  monism
has  inflicted  upon  our  aspirations  and  our  self-respect.

§  I  o.  How  Reality  really  grows

(5)  After  proving  that  the  assumption  of  absolute
realities  is  futile,  i,e.  unnecessary  and  self-defeating,  and
pernicious,  it  might  seem  superfluous  to  show  that  they
are  also  '  untrue,'  i.e.  that  they  caricature  the  development
of  reality  as  it  actually  takes  place  in  our  knowledge.

But  it  is  so  difficult  to  get  even  '  philosophically-
trained  '  minds  to  look  at  the  simple  facts  of  actual
knowing  that  no  means  of  illumination  should  be
neglected.

It  is  a  simple  fact  that  the  conception  of  absolute
reality  does  not  enter  into  our  actual  knowing  of  reality.
The  conceptions  of  '  primary,'  '  ulterior '  and  ultimate,
of  '  lower '  and  '  higher '  realities  do.  Yet  our  episte-
mology  has  hitherto  allowed  itself  to  be  so  dazzled  by  the

1  Cp.  Essay  xviii.  §§  9-12.


220  STUDIES IN HUMANISM  vm

supernatural  effulgence  of  the  former  as  to  blind  itself  to
the  really  important  .function  of  the  latter.  And  so  the
attainment  of  epistemological  knowledge  has  been  sacri-
ficed to  the  pursuit  of  metaphysical  will-o'-the-wisps.

§11. The  Conception  of  Primary  Reality

We  start  uncritically  with  the  acceptance  of  whatever
seems  to  be.  '  Whatever  is,  is  real/  is  what  we  begin  with.
If  we  were  purely  cognitive  beings,  we  should  also  stop
with  this.  For  it  is  utterly  false  to  imagine  purely  intel-
lectual '  contradictions  of  appearance '  as  initiating  the
process  of  real  knowing,  and  the  dialectical  diversions  of
the  young  men  of  Athens  some  2000  years  ago  have  been
treated  far  too  seriously  by  staid  philosophers  who  did  not
appreciate  Platonic  humour.  The  problem  as  to  how
Socrates,  being  greater  than  a  flea  and  less  than  a  whale,
can  be  both  greater  and  less,  has  very  little  to  do  with
the  difficulties  of  real  knowing.  But  there  are  no  con-
tradictions in  appearance  so  long  as  you  are  merely
contemplating  it :  so  long  as  you  do  not  care  what
appears,  no  course  of  events  can  be  any  more  '  contra-
dictory' than  the  shifting  scenes  of  a  kaleidoscope.
Whatever  appears  '  is,'  even  though  it  lasts  only  for  a
second.1  Its  reality,  such  as  it  is,  is  not  impaired  by  its
impermanence,  nor  by  the  fact  that  something  else  comes
up  and  takes  its  place  in  the  twinkling  of  an  eye.

There  is  no  contradiction  in  change — until  we  have
ourselves  imported  it  by  developing  a  desire  to  control
the  changes  by  means  of  identities  we  trace  in  them.
For  until  then  we  do  not  seek  for  identities  in  the
changeful  ;  change,  taken  merely  as  such,  is  merely  what
Kant  called  '  alternation.'  As  it  presents  nothing
'  identical '  either  in  the  object  or  in  the  subject,  the
problem  as  to  how  anything  can  '  change,'  and  yet  remain

1  Mr.  Bradley  here  bears  us  out  by  saying  (Appearance  and  Reality,  p.  132)
"what  appears,  for  that  sole  reason,  indubitably  is;  and  there  is  no  possibility
of  conjuring  its  being  away  from  it."  Capt.  H.  V.  Knox  has,  however,  shown
that  the  coherence  of  this  doctrine  with  the  rest  of  Mr.  Bradley's  metaphysic  is
very  dubious  (Mind,  xiv.  217).


vm ABSOLUTE  TRUTH AND  REALITY 221

'  the  same,'  does  not  arise.  Events  flit  across  the  stage
of  Reality  in  the  theatre  of  Being,  to  adapt  Hume's
famous  simile  ;  but  a  merely  intellectual  spectator  would
have  no  reason  for  rejecting  anything,  for  selecting  some
things  as  more  real  and  important  than  others,  no
occasion  to  criticise  and  to  wonder  how  things  got  there.
Even  though  he  were  privileged  to  become  a  '  spectator
of  all  time  and  all  existence,'  he  would  not  be  able  to
'  spectate '  to  any  purpose,  nor  be  really  an  intelligent
spectator.  Having  no  interest  to  guide  his  contempla-
tions he  would  not  analyse  the  flow  of  events,  because
he  would  not  attend  to  anything  in  particular.  He
would  not  even  be  interested  to  distinguish  '  subject '  from
'  object.'  This  distinction  too  is  teleological,  and  rooted
in  feeling.

In  short,  at  the  level  of  primary  reality,  conceived  as
'  purely '  cognitive,  everything  would  be,  and  remain,  in
an  unmeaning,  undiscriminated  flow.

§  12.  'Real*  Reality  versus  Appearance

But  the  mind  is  not  of  such  a  nature  as  to  put
up  with  this  imaginary  situation.  It  is  interested,
and  purposive,  and  desirous  of  operating  on,  and  con-
trolling, its  primary  reality.  And  so  it  proceeds  to
discriminate,  to  distinguish  between  '  appearance '  and
'  reality,'  between  '  primary '  and  '  real '  reality,  to  accept
what  appears  with  mental  reservations  and  provisionally,
to  operate  upon  it,  and  to  alter  it.  And  as  interests
grow  various  and  purposes  are  differentiated,  '  real
reality'  grows  more  complex.  It  is  differentiated  into
a  series  of  realities  which  are  referred  to  a  series
of  systems  co-ordinated  and  subordinated  to  each
other.  But  as  yet  only  imperfectly.  The  ultimate
reality  which  we  envisage  as  the  goal  of  our  interpreta-
tions of  primary  reality,  recedes  into  a  more  and  more
distant  ideal.  It  forms  the  further  pole  of  our  cog-
nitive attitude  towards  the  primary  reality,  the  control
of  which  is  the  motive  for  the  whole  procedure,  and  ever


222  STUDIES IN  HUMANISM  vm

forms  our  final  criterion.  For  it  is  upon  this  touchstone
of  direct  experience  that  we  test  the  value  of  the  assumed
realities  which  claim  authority  to  interpret  it.

And  so  by  a  painful  and  laborious  process  we  supple-
ment the  inadequacies  of  our  actual  experience  by
assumed  realities  whose  reality  is  assured  to  us  by  their
value,  by  the  salutary  transformations  which  they  help  us
to  effect  in  our  life.  The  process  is  as  unending  as  the
pursuit  of  happiness.  We  are  never  wholly  satisfied  ;  we
are  never  therefore  wholly  willing  to  accept  reality  as  it
appears.  So  we  conjure  into  existence  the  worlds  of  the
'  higher '  realities,  from  mathematics  to  metaphysics,  from
the  idealised  abstractions  of  the  humblest  science  to  the
heaven  of  the  loftiest  religion.  Their  function,  one  and  all,
is  to  control  and  to  transform  the  reality  we  have.  But
to  do  this  they  have  to  remain  related  to  it,  to  sympathise
with  its  career,  to  share  in  its  vicissitudes.  And  so
long  as  they  succeed  in  this,  they  will  have  their  reward  :
they  are  not  called  in  doubt,  however  much,  and  however
often,  they  are  required  to  transform  themselves.  For  at
every  transformation  we  can  feel  ourselves  to  be  advancing
from  a  less  to  a  more  adequate  plane  of  operations,  and
can  say,  '  This  then,  which  we  mistook  until  now,  was  real
all  along.'

So  soon,  however,  as  this  dependence  on  and  inter-
action with  immediate  experience  is  renounced,  i.e.  so
soon  as  the  higher  reality  is  taken  to  be  something  apart
and  absolute,  its  whole  function  is  destroyed.  It  can  no
longer  serve  even  as  an  ideal ;  for  an  ideal  can  only  be
functional  if  it  is  conceived  as  attainable,  though  not
attained.1  If  therefore  absolute  reality  is  either  unattain-
able, or  already  attained,  or,  worst  of  all,  both  (i.e.
attained,  but  unattainable  by  us),  it  ceases  to  be  a  valid
ideal.

And  yet  it  was  a  beautiful  ideal  until  it  was  miscon-
ceived. It  could  inspire  our  efforts  to  reach  a  perfect
harmony,  and  justify  our  aspirations.  For  the  pragma-
tist  also  may  cherish  the  ideal  of  an  absolute  Reality.

1  Cp.  Essay  vi.  §  i.


vin ABSOLUTE  TRUTH  AND  REALITY 223

Nay,  he  can  even  determine  its  formal  character.
Nothing  is  easier.  That  reality  (and  that  alone)  will
be  pragmatically  absolute,  which  every  one  will  accept
as  real  and  no  one  will  seek  to  alter.  For  a  universe
completely  satisfied  would  not  seek  to  change  itself,  and
indeed  could  not  so  much  as  entertain  the  thought  of
change.

The  real  difficulty  lies  not  in  framing  ideals,  but  in
achieving  them,  and  this  is  a  difficulty,  not  of  philosophy,
but  of  life.  And  the  noblest  service  philosophy  can
render  us  is  to  pass  a  self-denying  ordinance,  and  to  draw
our  attention  away  from  idle  and  inactive  speculation
about  reality  in  the  abstract,  to  the  real  ways  in  which
ideals  are  realised  and  the  world  of  reality  is  rendered  fit
to  live  in.


IX
EMPIRICISM  AND  THE  ABSOLUTE1

ARGUMENT

§  I.  The  conflict  between  Evolutionism  and  a  static  metaphysic.  The  back-
sliding of  Spencer.  §  2.  The  protest  of  Humanism.  Its  acceptance  of
common-sense,  and  criticism  of  metaphysical,  assumptions.  The  new
issues.  Prof.  Taylor's  attempts  at  compromise.  §  3.  Can  purpose  be
ascribed  to  the  Absolute  ?  The  external  contemplation  of  purpose  false.
Hume's  trick.  §  4.  Prof.  Taylor  on  selective  attention  and  Berkeley's
passivism.  §  5.  His  own  Berkeleian  basis.  The  impossibility  of
selection  in  the  Absolute,  which  cannot  be  ideological.  §  6.  Other
mitigations  of  intellectualism.  §  7.  Impossibility  of  combining  Absolut-
ism and  Humanism,  exemplified  (a)  in  the  doctrine  of  appearance  and
reality ;  §  8  (b)  of  the  dual  criteria  of  reality ;  §  9  (c)  the  relations  of
axioms  and  postulates  ;  §  10  (d)  intellectualism  ;  and  §  n  the  Absolute.
Its  derivation,  which,  §  12,  depends  wholly  on  the  validity  of  the
'  ontological '  argument.  §  13.  The  Absolute  is  really  a  postulate,
§  14,  intended  to  satisfy  the  craving  for  unity,  and  to  yield  an  a  priori
guarantee  for  the  future.  The  fear  of  the  future  as  the  root  of
rationalism.  §  15.  The  inadequacy  of  the  postulated  Absolute.

§  i.  PHILOSOPHY  just  now  is  in  a  very  interesting
condition.  For  Evolutionism,  the  great  scientific  move-
ment of  the  nineteenth  century,  is  at  length  investing  the
last  well-nigh  inaccessible  stronghold  of  '  pure '  meta-

1  This  essay,  which  was  intended  to  clear  up  the  situation  created  by  Prof.
A.  E.  Taylor's  Elements  of  Metaphysics,  and  appeared  in  Mind  for  July  1905
(N.S.  55),  in  its  original  form  treated  his  views  as  possibly  intended  to  be
crypto-pragmatic.  After  his  reply,  however,  in  N.S.  57,  he  must  be  ex-
onerated from  the  charge  of  talking  Pragmatism  (except  in  the  way  in  which
M.  Jourdain  talked  prose)  ;  his  utterances  can  now  only  be  treated  as  '  pseudo-
pragmatic,'  and  as  in  some  respects  seriously  inconsistent.  The  reasons  for
these  statements  may  be  found  set  out  in  full  in  N.S.  59,  pp.  375-390  ;  but  the
whole  discussion,  though  amusing  and  instructive  also  for  its  bearing  on  the
question  of  'useless  knowledge,1  of  which  Prof.  Taylor  attempted  to  produce
some  examples  (cp.  pp.  384-8),  grew  too  minutely  controversial  to  be  included
here.  I  have,  however,  profited  by  it  to  make  some  modifications,  additions,
and  omissions,  and  have  tried  to  note  the  gist  of  Prof.  Taylor's  replies  in  foot-
notes.

224


ix EMPIRICISM AND  THE  ABSOLUTE 225

physics,1  and  systematically  grappling  with  the  ultimate
abstractions  which  human  thought  has  recognised  and
respected  for  ages,  but  has  never  succeeded  in  rendering
really  useful  and  intelligible.  In  saying  this  I  am  of
course  well  aware  that  the  application  of  Evolutionism  to
metaphysics  is  supposed  to  have  been  accomplished  by
the  Synthetic  Philosophy  of  Herbert  Spencer.  This
popular  belief,  however,  is  easily  shown  to  be  a  mis-
apprehension. If  we  take  as  the  essence  of  Evolutionism
the  doctrine  that  the  world  is  in  process,  and  as  its  chief
corollaries  its  vindication  of  the  reality  of  change  and  of
the  belief  that  real  (and  not  merely  apparent)  novelties
occur,  it  is  easily  seen  (i)  that  the  old  metaphysic  must
ultimately  reject  these  doctrines,  and  (2)  that  Spencer's
final  surrender  to  its  prejudices  involves  a  failure  to  work
out  a  truly  evolutionist  philosophy.

As  to  the  first  point,  it  has  always  been  assumed
that  ultimately  Reality  must  be  a  closed  system,  a  fixed
quantity,  immutable  substance,  or  absolute  whole.  What
has  not  always  been  perceived  to  be  an  inevitable  con-
sequence is  that  Reality  must,  in  the  last  resort,  be
stationary^  that  if  so,  there  can  be  neither  increase  nor
decrease  in  Being,  and  that  the  changes,  processes,  and
novelties  we  suppose  ourselves  to  experience  and  observe
do  not  really  mean  alterations  in  the  substance  of  the
All.  They  must,  in  other  words,  be  human  illusions  (or,
more  politely,  "  appearances  "),  which  do  not  penetrate  to,
or  affect,  the  eternally  complete  and  immutable  Reality.
If,  resenting  this  paradox  of  metaphysics,  we  plead  that
these  "  appearances "  are  inextricably  intertwined  with
the  whole  reality  of  human  life,  we  are  baffled  by  the  retort
that  this  only  shows  that  we  too  are  '  appearance.'

Such  metaphysic  plainly  is  not  to  be  silenced  by  mere
common-sense :  it  must  be  fought  with  its  own  weapons.
And  so  it  is  probably  more  profitable  to  point  out  that  in
strict  consistency  these  metaphysicians  should  demand,
not  merely  that  change,  etc.,  should  be  illusions,  but  also
that  such  illusions  should  be  impossible.  As  Prof.  Stout

1  Felicitously  entitled  'Jericho'  by  Mr.  Bradley  {Mind,  xiii.  p.  330).

Q


226  STUDIES  IN  HUMANISM  ix

has  pointed  out,  you  can  call  all  '  reality '  illusion,  but  in
so  doing  you  imply  the  reality  of  the  illusion.  If  then
change  is  truly  irrational  and  unthinkable,  it  should  not
be  able  to  maintain  even  an  illusory  existence  in  a
rational  universe ;  and  the  very  existence  of  such  an
illusion  is  itself  as  irrational  and  unthinkable  as  the  reality
which  was  condemned  as  illusory.  Abstract  metaphysic,
therefore,  is  unable  to  explain,  and  unwilling  to  accept,
phenomenal  change,  process,  and  novelty  :  if  it  desires  to
be  consistent,  it  must  simply  deny  them,  and  revert  as
nearly  as  possible  to  its  earliest  form,  viz.  Eleaticism.  To
evoke  a  philosophic  meaning  from  the  everyday  facts  of
change  and  novelty  and  from  the  scientific  testimonies  to
vast  cosmic  processes,  we  need  a  different  method,  which
will  deign  to  consider  whether  we  should  not  do  as  well,
or  better,  by  frankly  accepting  the  apparent  facts  of
ordinary  life  and  science,  and  regarding  rather  our  prefer-
ence for  the  constant  and  immutable  as  an  artificial
device  which  is  susceptible  of  derivation  and  limited  in
application.  In  other  words,  we  need  Humanism.

(2)  Now  Spencer,  in  his  attempt  at  an  evaluation  of
the  idea  of  Evolution,  unfortunately  committed  himself  to
a  use  of  physical  principles  which  belong  inalienably  to>
the  static  series  of  conceptions,  and  are  designed  to  satisfy
our  craving  for  constancy.  The  indestructibility  of  matter
and  the  conservation  of  energy  ('  persistence  of  force ')
are  constitutionally  incapable  of  yielding  a  justification
for  the  belief  in  a  real  process,  a  real  progress,  and  a  real
alteration  in  the  meaning  of  the  world.  In  consequence,
the  phenomena  of  life  and  consciousness,  in  which  the
reality  of  such  evolution  is  most  manifest  (for  psychically
every  experience  is  more  or  less  '  new '),  have  to  be  reduced
by  Spencer  to  physical  terms.  And  thus  the  whole
evolutionary  process  becomes  nugatory  in  the  end.
Spencer  has  to  admit  that  the  differentiation -process
which  forms  the  cosmic  diastole  has  for  its  counterpart  a
systole  which  restores  all  things  to  homogeneity,  and  that
throughout  both  processes  the  axiom  of  the  Persistence  of
Force  remains  uninfringed.  In  terms  of  ultimate  reality,


ix EMPIRICISM  AND  THE  ABSOLUTE 227

therefore,  both  processes  mean  the  same,  and  at  the  end
of  the  infinite  toil  and  struggle  of  the  cosmic  agony,  the
universe  is  where  it  was,  neither  richer  nor  poorer,  neither
better  nor  worse.  Evolution  therefore  has  turned  out  a
merely  subjective  illusion,  engendered  by  our  incapacity
to  follow  the  giant  swing  of  the  cosmic  pendulum.

§  2.  But  can  we  hesitate  to  declare  this  result  to  be,
humanly  speaking,  most  unsatisfactory,  and  indeed  pro-
foundly irrational  ?  And  is  it  not  worth  while  at  least
to  entertain  proposals  for  the  radical  revision  of  the  meta-
physical prepossessions  that  have  brought  us  to  such  a
pass  ?  Why,  after  all,  should  we  insist  on  starting  from
the  conception  of  an  absolute  Whole  presumed  to  be
unalterable?  Why  should  we  not  set  out  rather  from
the  facts  of  our  '  finite '  struggling  life,  and  pluck  up
courage  to  scrutinise  the  construction  of  the  scientific,  or
rather  metaphysical,  bogies  that  stand  in  the  way  of  a
thorough-going  Evolutionism  ?  So  at  least  the  Humanist
must  argue.  He  takes  for  granted  all  those  features  of
our  experience  which  are  undeniable  on  the  common-1
sense  level  of  life.  He  takes  as  the  sole  essential  problem
of  philosophy  the  harmonising  of  a  life,  which  is  as  yetj
inharmonious,  but  which  he  is  willing  to  believe  may  be
transmuted  into  harmony.  And  instead  of  contenting
himself  with  a  verbal  '  proof  that  all  evil  is  '  appearance  '
which  is  '  transcended '  sub  specie  aeternitatis,  and  then
submitting  tamely  to  the  cosmic  nightmare  in  saeciila-
saeculorum,  he  accepts  all  the  apparent  features  of  life,  its
transitoriness,  cruelty,  ignorance,  uncertainty,  struggle  ;
the  reality  of  its  chances  and  changes,  of  its  gains  and
losses,  of  its  pains  and  pleasures,  of  its  values,  ethical,
logical,  and  aesthetical,  of  its  goods  and  evils,  truths  and
errors,  as  alike  data  for  thought  to  grapple  with  and  to
transform,  and  holds  that  only  by  achieving  this  does  our
thought  vindicate  its  use,  and  our  truth  become  truly
true.  Not  that  the  Humanist  imagines  that  all  these
features  will  in  the  end  turn  out  to  be  equally  significant :
he  contends  only  that  they  cannot  be  proved  delusions
a  priori,  that  the  sole  way  of  proving  them  unreal  is  by


228  STUDIES IN HUMANISM  ix

abolishing  them,  and  that  until  they  have  been  so
abolished  they  must  be  reckoned  with  as  facts.

In  the  rationalistic  intellectualism,1  on  the  other  hand,
in  which  the  method  of  abstract  metaphysics  culminates,
all  these  initial  facts  of  common  life  are  contemptuously
ignored.  Nothing  less  than  the  absolute  totality  of
existence  is  worthy  of  its  notice  or  worth  assuming.  This
totality  it  supposes  itself  to  demonstrate  by  some  version
of  the  ontological  proof,  and  aims  at  developing,  by
a  priori  reasoning,  into  a  coherent  and  consistent,  self-
determined  and  unalterable  system.

To  the  Humanist,  on  the  other  hand,  this  whole  pro-
cedure seems  a  tissue  of  fallacious  and  futile  assumptions.
Why  should  he  assume  that  experience  necessarily  forms
a  whole  before  he  has  got  it  all  together  ?  that  it  forms  a
system  before  he  has  traced  it  out,  that  the  system  is  one,
before  he  has  found  that  his  actual  world  can  intelligibly
be  treated  as  such,  that  the  system  is  perfect  (in  any  but
a  verbal,  intellectualist  sense)  before  he  has  tried  it  ?  And
if  he  assumes  these  things  because  he  would  like  them  to
be  true,  what  does  he  make  the  totality  of  Reality  but  a
conceptual  postulate,  perhaps  of  rationality,  perhaps  of  a
subtler  irrationality,  which  can  be  tested  only  by  its  work-
ing, and  can  in  no  case  be  argued  from  a  priori?  What
in  general  are  the  a  priori  truths  but  claims,  what  are
axioms  but  postulates  ?  As  for  the  complete  determina-
tion of  the  universe,  is  not  both  the  fact  and  its  value
open  to  doubt  ?  As  for  its  unity,  is  not  its  value  emotional
and  illusory  rather  than  scientific,  so  long  as  we  can  neither
avoid  assuming  a  plurality  of  factors  in  all  scientific
calculation,  nor  identify  our  actual  world  with  the  one
immutable  universe,  so  long  as  it  seems  to  us  subject  to

1  It  is  better  to  avoid  the  term  '  idealism,"  as  being  too  equivocal  to  be  useful.
There  are  too  many  '  idealisms '  in  the  market,  many  of  them  more  essentially
opposed  to  each  other  than  to  views  classified  as  '  realism. '  Plato,  e.g. ,  has
an  indefeasible  claim  to  the  title  of  'idealist,'  but  Mr.  G.  E.  Moore,  in  reviving
the  Platonic  hypostasisation  of  abstract  qualities  in  an  extreme  form,  prefers
to  call  himself  a  '  realist. '  Berkeley  again  is  firmly  established  in  the  histories
of  philosophy  as  the  typical  idealist,  but  his  sensationalism  constitutes  a  most
irritating  challenge  to  the  rationalists'  claim  to  monopolise  the  name.  In
addition,  there  are  'subjective'  and  'personal'  and  'empirical'  'idealists'
galore.


ix EMPIRICISM  AND  THE  ABSOLUTE 229

irruptions  from  without  its  known  limits  and  to  the  erup-
tion of  novelties  within  them  ? l  As  for  its  immutability,
is  it  not  a  direct  defiance  of  our  primary  experience  and
a  wanton  stultification  of  the  evolutionist  method  ?  And
finally,  is  not  the  fundamental  intellectualism  of  the  old
metaphysic  a  gross  parody  of  our  actual  thought,  which
proceeds  from  a  purposive  intelligent  activity,  and  was
not,  and  is  not,  and  never  can  be,  separated  from  the
practical  needs  of  life  ?

Humanism  therefore  challenges  all  the  assumptions  on  f
which  rationalistic  intellectualism  has  reposed  ever  since
the  days  of  Plato.  Against  such  a  challenge  the  old
catchwords  of  its  warfare  with  the  sensationalistic  intel-
lectualism of  the  British  empiricists  are  no  longer  adequate.
They  are  as  plainly  outranged  by  the  novelty  as  its  pre-
judices are  outraged  by  the  audacity  of  the  voluntarist
attack.  A  complete  change  of  front,  and  a  thorough  re-
arrangement of  its  forces,  have  become  imperative.  And
by  the  younger  men  among  its  exponents  this  is  begin-
ning to  be  perceived.  Prof.  A.  E.  Taylor  has  not  yet
perhaps  fully  realised  the  magnitude  and  difficulty  of  the
readjustment  which  is  needed  in  his  camp,  and  he  has
certainly  not  succeeded  in  repelling  the  attack  ;  but  he  has
perceived  that  the  creed  of  the  '  Anglo-Hegelian  ' 2  Intel-
lectualism rests  on  a  dangerously  narrow  basis.  The  lucid
and  agreeable  form  of  his  Elements  of  Metaphysics,  his
manifest  anxiety  to  assimilate  at  least  as  much  of  the  new
material  as  may  be  needed  to  leave  the  old  positions
tenable,  and  the  importance  of  making  clear  just  where
the  difficulties  of  mediating  between  Absolutism  and
Humanism  lie,  amply  warrant  a  detailed  examination  of
this  side  of  his  work.

As  the  result  of  such  examination,  it  will  be  found  that
though  Prof.  Taylor  has  not  been  able  to  bridge  the  gulf
between  the  old  philosophy  and  the  new — indeed,  he  has
hardly  been  invested  with  full  authority  by  his  party — he
has  effected  some  instructive  modifications,  and  discovered
some  interesting  jumping-off  places.

1  Cp.  Essay  xii.  §  9.  2  As  he  calls  it  (Mind,  xv.  p.  90).


230  STUDIES  IN HUMANISM  ix

§  3.  (i)  Perhaps  the  most  striking  of  Prof.  Taylor's
innovations  is  his  constant  use  of  the  language  of  purpose
and  teleology.1  For,  in  words  at  least,  this  seems  to
concede  the  main  principle  for  which  Humanism  has
contended,  viz.  the  purposiveness  of  human  thought  and
experience.

Unfortunately,  however,  for  the  fruitful  application  of
this  principle,  Prof.  Taylor  hardly  seems  to  conceive  pur-
pose in  the  natural  way.  He  habitually  regards  it  rather
from  the  external  standpoint  of  the  contemplative  spectator
than  from  that  of  the  purposing  agent,  and  it  will  always
be  found  that  a  philosophy  which  refuses  to  enter  into
the  feelings  of  the  agent  must  in  the  end  pronounce
the  whole  conception  of  agency  an  unmeaning  mystery.
Now  this  external  way  of  conceiving  agency  from  the
standpoint  of  a  bystander  was  Hume's  fundamental  trick,
the  root  of  all  his  naturalism,  and  the  basis  of  his  success
as  a  critic  of  causation.  It  seems  curious,  therefore,  that
rationalists  should  never  try  to  emancipate  themselves
from  it,  but  should  accept  it  meekly  and  without  question,
the  more  so  as  their  '  answers  to  Hume '  are  always  upset
by  it.  For  it  would  be  possible  to  show  that  once  this
assumption  is  made,  there  is  (i)  no  real  answer  to  Hume,
(2)  no  escape  from  naturalism,  and  (3)  no  room  left  for
the  conception  of  agency  ;  and  it  may  be  suggested  that
the  radical  unsoundness  of  the  transcendentalists'  position
at  this  point  is  the  real  reason  for  the  obscurity  and
unsatisfactoriness  of  their  own  treatment  of  causation  ever
since  the  days  of  Kant.  So  long  as  Hume's  specious
arguments  against  our  immediate  experience  of  agency
are  accepted,  agents  and  activities  cannot  be  recognised
anywhere  in  the  universe,  and  we  are  driven  to  the  desperate
contradiction  of  ascribing  an  '  activity '  to  the  whole  which
is  denied  to  all  its  parts  and  ought  not  to  exist,  even  as  a
word  ;  it  is  a  fortiori  impossible,  therefore,  to  see  how  we

1  Cp.  especially  pp.  55,  58,  66,  106,  162,  204.  Prof.  Taylor  retorted  that
his  debt  was  to  Professors  Ward  and  Royce  (Mind,  N.S.  xv.  88).  I  replied  (i)
that  neither  of  these  fitted  into  a  Bradleian  metaphysic  ;  (2)  that  it  was  necessary
to  have  an  explanation  with  Humanist  teleology  ;  and  (3)  that  he  had  been
challenged  to  explain  how  an  Absolute  could  have  a  purpose  (Mind,  xv.  p.  377).


ix EMPIRICISM AND  THE  ABSOLUTE 231

could  be  active  enough  to  lay  down  '  rules  '  for  the  appre-
hending of  events.1

Prof.  Taylor,  therefore,  seems  to  fall  into  an  insidious
but  far-reaching  error  when  he  says  (p.  55)  "all  that  I
mean  is  that  the  processes  of  conscious  life  are  as  a  matter
of  fact  only  intelligible  with  reference  to  the  results  in
which  they  culminate  ...  or  again  that  they  all  involve
the  kind  of  continuity  of  interest  which  belong  (sic]  to
attention."  2  Similarly  in  defining  spirit  (p.  99)  "  where
you  have  a  connected  system  of  factors  which  can  only
be  understood "  (why  not  understand  tJiemselves  ?)  "  by
reference  to  an  explicit  or  implicit  end  which  constitutes
their  unity,  you  have  spirit"3  On  this  it  seems  obvious
to  remark  that  unless  'you'  were  an  actively  purposing
spirit,  you  could  never  regard  any  connexion  of  things  as
teleological.  And  the  human  spirit  is,  of  course,  teleo-
logical,  because  it  attends  and  operates  selectively.  But
these  very  facts  suggest  the  deepest  doubt  as  to  the
transfer  of  these  features  to  the  Whole.  Can  an  Absolute
attend  or  act  selectively,  can  it  be  '  teleological '  or
'  spiritual '  in  any  humanly  intelligible  sense  ?

§  4.  To  answer  this  question,  let  us  examine  Prof.
Taylor's  treatment  of  selective  attention.  It  is  most
instructive.  The  conception  does  not  occur  in  his  master,
Mr.  F.  H.  Bradley,  who  is  too  much  under  the  spell  of
Hume  to  admit  the  notion  of  activity.  He  has  taken  it
from  Prof.  Stout,  and  is  eager  to  use  it  as  a  good  stick
for  beating  the  elder  (and  saner)  brother,  whom  '  absolute  '
idealists  are  always  so  anxious  to  disparage  and  so  unable
to  dispense  with,  viz.  Berkeleian  idealism.  Accordingly
he  points  out  (p.  66) — what  is  true  of  intellectualism  as
such,  but  less  patently  applicable  to  Berkeleianism  than
to  most  rationalistic  forms  of  intellectualism — viz.  that
Berkeley  conceived  the  mind  as  passive,  and  did  not  allow
for  its  interests  and  purposes.  "  Berkeley,"  he  says,
"  omits  selective  attention  from  his  psychological  estimate
of  the  contents  of  the  human  mind.  He  forgets  that  it

1  Cp.  James  on  '  The  Experience  of  Activity '  in  Psych.  Rev.  xii.  i.
-  Italics  mine.  s  P.  3 ;  cp.  also  pp.  5  and  44. Italics  mine.


232  STUDIES IN  HUMANISM  ix

is  the  interests  for  which  I  take  note  of  facts  that  in  the
main  determine  which  facts  I  shall  take  note  of,  an  over-
sight which  is  the  more  remarkable,  since  he  expressly
lays  stress  on  '  activity '  as  the  distinguishing  property  of
'  spirits.'  When  we  make  good  the  omission  by  empha-
sising the  teleological  aspects  of  experience,  we  see  at
once  that  the  radical  disparity  between  the  relation  of  the
supreme  and  the  subordinate  mind  to  the  world  of  facts
disappears.  I  do  not  receive  my  presented  facts  passively
in  an  order  determined  for  me  from  without  by  the
supreme  mind  ;  in  virtue  of  my  power  of  selective  atten-
tion, on  a  limited  scale,  and  very  imperfectly,  I  recreate
the  order  of  their  succession  for  myself.  .  .  .

The  very  expression  '  selective  attention  '  itself  carries
with  it  a  reminder  that  the  facts  which  respond  to  my
interests  are  but  a  selection  out  of  a  larger  whole.  And
my  practical  experience  of  the  way  in  which  my  own
most  clearly  defined  and  conscious  purposes  depend  for
their  fulfilment  upon  connexion  with  the  interests  and
purposes  of  a  wider  social  whole  possessed  of  an  organic
unity,  should  help  me  to  understand  how  the  totality  of
interests  and  purposes  determining  the  selective  attention
of  different  percipients  can  form,  as  we  have  held  that  it
must,  the  harmonious  and  systematic  unity  of  the  absolute
experience.  ...  It  is  hardly  too  much  to  say  that  the
teleological  character  which  experience  possesses  in  virtue
of  its  unity  with  feeling  is  the  key  to  the  idealistic  inter-
pretation of  the  universe."

§  5.  Philosophy  would  become  delightfully  easy  if  the
fundamental  deficiencies  of  intellectualism  could  be  cured
in  the  facile  fashion  of  this  passage  ;  but  Prof.  Taylor's
whole  procedure  is,  alas,  illusory.  It  should  be  observed,
in  the  first  place,  that  in  spite  of  his  continual  protests
against  Berkeley,  he  himself  has  to  proceed  from  a  subjec-
tive basis.  He  has  to  argue,  that  is,  from  the  behaviour
of  his  mind  to  that  of  the  Absolute.  His  mind  attends
selectively,  he  finds,  and  thereby  constitutes  reality ;  ergo
the  Absolute  is  conceived  to  act  similarly.

It  is  difficult  to  refrain from  conjecturing  that  when


ix EMPIRICISM AND  THE  ABSOLUTE 233

Prof.  Taylor  argued  thus,  he  must  have  completely  '  for-
gotten '  the  nature  of  the  absolute  mind  and  the  meaning
of  which  it  is  the  expression.  Otherwise  he  could  not
but  have  been  impressed  by  the  difference  between  its
functioning  and  that  of  a  human  mind.

A  human  mind  initially  commences  its  career  in  a
jumble  resembling  a  chaotic  rag-bag.  It  finds  itself  con-
taining things  valuable,  worthless,  and  pernicious,  dreams,
illusions,  fancies,  delusions,  incongruities,  inconsistencies,
etc.,  all  jostling  the  materials  for  what  are  subsequently
construed  as  realities.  If,  therefore,  anything  approaching
a  harmonious  life  is  to  be  constructed  out  of  such  stuff,
a  large  amount  of  selection  is  necessary.  The  pernicious
contents  must  be  kept  under  and  as  far  as  possible  elimin-
ated ;  the  worthless  and  useless  must  be  neglected  ;  and
so  chaos  must  be  turned  into  something  like  a  cosmos.
This  we  do  by  selectively  attending  to  what  turns  out  to
be  valuable,  and  by  ignoring  those  elements  in  our  experi-
ence which  we  cannot  use.

And  similarly  in  our  actions  we  never  operate  with  or
upon  the  universe  as  a  whole.  We  choose  our  ends  and
select  our  means  ;  we  dissect  out  '  effects '  and  '  causes '
from  the  unaccentuated  flow  of  events  ;  it  is  essential  to
our  science  to  select  limited  and  partial  subjects  of  inquiry.
In  short,  'action'  seems  to  connote  selection,  and  selec-
tion must  seem  arbitrary  and  indefensible  if  human  pur-
poses have  been  abstracted  from.

Now  compare  the  '  absolute  mind '  of  philosophic
theory.  It  was  conceived  as  all-inclusive  ;  its  business
and  function  is  to  contain  everything.  It  must  therefore
ex  officio  and  ex  vi  termini  include  all  the  rubbish  every
human  mind  is  encumbered  with  and  has  such  trouble  to
get  rid  of.  For  though  we  can  condemn  it  as  '  appear-
ance,' the  Absolute  cannot.  For  ultimately  even  '  appear-
ance '  is  a  sort  of  '  reality,'  and  must  be  included  in  its
proper  place.  And  this  place  is  the  Absolute,  which  has
room  for  all  things,  for  which  all  things  are  valuable,  nay
essential,  seeing  that  if  they  were  not,  they  would  not
exist !  Or  if  it  be  maintained  that  the  Absolute  can


234  STUDIES IN HUMANISM  ix

purify  itself  by  recognising  nothing  but  '  reality '  in  the
fullest  sense,  will  it  not  inevitably  follow  that  the  human
mind  and  all  its  belongings  are  cast  out  upon  the  rubbish-
heap  of  appearances  which  are  unworthy  of  the  Absolute's
notice?  And  in  that  case  of  what  value  is  the  Absolute
.as  a  conception  to  explain  our  experience  ?

If,  then,  the  Absolute  has  to  include  everything  to
fulfil  its  function,  if  it  exists  for  us  in  order  to  include
what  we  reject,  how  can  it  selectively  attend  to  part  of  its
contents  ?  Must  not  all  that  is  be  valuable  to  All-that-
is  ?  What  private,  limited,  and  partial  interests  can  it
have  to  compel  it  .to  '  select '  facts  out  of  a  larger  whole  ?
It  is  itself  the  '  larger  whole,'  and  its  sole  interest  must  be
to  represent  that.  It  cannot  abnegate  this  function,  and

*  select '  like  '  finite ' man,  without becoming  partial and
ceasing  to  be  itself.

Manifestly,  therefore,  no  argument  holds  from  selective
attention  in  us  to  selective  attention  in  the  Absolute.
For  one  can  hardly  press  Prof.  Taylor's  language  as
seriously  advocating  a  naive  fallacy  of  composition  to  the
effect  that  because  all  (distributively)  are  interested  in
some  things,  therefore  all  (collectively)  are  interested  in  a
totality  in  which  all  special  emphasis  has  disappeared.

And  his  further  procedure  in  arguing  from  selective
attention  in  the  individual  to  the  recognition  of  a  social,
and  ultimately  of  an  absolute,  environment  is  equally
fallacious.  He  has  failed  to  observe  that  the  mere  prac-
tice of  selective  attention  does  not  carry  him  off  the
subjective  ground  he  started  on.  We  have  seen  that  a
selective  ordering  of  experiences  is  a  vital  necessity.  It
would  be  so  equally  to  a  solipsist  who  had  refrained  from
postulating  an  '  external  world  '  populated  by  '  other  '
minds.  He  too  would  have  to  order  his  experiences
and  to  discriminate  their  values.  Only  he  would  reach
analogous  results  by  different  methods.  It  is  only  when
our  various  postulates  have  been  made  and  found  to  work,
that  our  experience  can  be  systematised  in  ways  which
recognise  them  by  name,  and  that  so  we  can  speak  of  our

*  social '  environment.


ix EMPIRICISM AND  THE  ABSOLUTE 235

And  even  then  the  taking  account  of  wider  environ-
ments must,  it  would  seem,  stop  short  of  the  whole.  The
Absolute,  strictly  and  properly  conceived,  can  never  be
the  explanation  of  anything  in  particular.  It  can  there-
fore enter  any  valid  purpose  as  little  as  it  can  itself  have
a  purpose,  or  aim  at  completing  what  is  already  the  whole.
Neither,  therefore,  has  it  teleological  value  itself,  nor  is  its
own  nature  teleological.  What  warrant,  then,  has  any
absolutist  philosophy  to  treat  human  purposiveness  as
more  significant  than  anything  else  included  in  the  whole,
or  to  attribute  cosmic  value  to  human  teleology  ?

We  must  conclude,  therefore,  that  Prof.  Taylor's  recog-
nition of  the  purposiveness  of  human  thought  and  action
is  either  illusory  or  so  inconsistent  with  his  fundamental
views  that  it  could  not  but  lead  him  away  from  the
absolutism  he  professes,  if  he  would  work  it  out.  And
the  objections  to  this  particular  syncretism  have  turned
out  to  be  sufficiently  general  to  render  it  one  of  the  most
urgent  desiderata  of  absolutist  metaphysics  to  show  how
the  typically  human  conception  of  purpose  can  be  attri-
buted to  the  Absolute  and  conceived  as  a  specific  function
of  the  Absolute.  But  the  omens  augur  ill  for  such  an
undertaking.

§  6.  (2)  His  psychological  studies  seem  to  have  some-
what emancipated  Prof.  Taylor  from  the  fatal  fiction  of  a
disinterested  intellect.  He  even  dares  to  represent  meta-
physics as  the  product  of  an  "  instinctive  demand  of  our
intellect  for  coherency  and  consistency  of  thought."1  In
science  this  interest  is  definitely  practical,  and  its  original
object  "  is  practical  success  in  interference  with  the  course
of  events"  (p.  226).  Historically,  therefore,  science  is  an
offshoot  of  the  arts  (p.  385),  and  to  this  day  "  the  ultimate
object  of  all  physical  science  is  the  successful  formulation
of  such  practical  rules  for  action  "  (p.  284).  2

Hence  (3)  Science,  Prof.  Taylor  agrees,  makes  use  of

1  P.  3  ;  cp.  also  pp.  5  and  44. Italics  mine.

-  Cp. ,  however,  pp.  121-2,  where  to  aim  at  "practical  success  in  action
rather  than  at  logical  consistency  in  thinking  "  is  called  a  pre-scientific  attitude,
and  the  aim  of  Science  is  reduced  to  that  of  '  metaphysics, '  viz.  consistent
systematisation.


236  STUDIES IN HUMANISM  «

Postulates,  which  serve  its  practical  purposes  without
being  ultimately  true.  Thus  the  principle  of  causality
"  must  be  pronounced  to  be  neither  an  axiom  nor  an
empirical  truth,  but  a  postulate,  in  the  strict  sense  of  the
word,  i.e.  an  assumption  which  cannot  be  logically  justi-
fied, but  is  made  because  of  its  practical  value,  and  depends
for  confirmation  on  the  success  with  which  it  can  be
applied.  In  the  sense  that  it  is  a  postulate  which  experi-
ence may  confirm  but  cannot  prove,  it  may  properly  be
said  to  be  a  priori,  but  it  is  manifestly  not  a  priori  in  the
more  familiar  Kantian  sense  of  the  word"  (p.  I67).1

Similarly  (pp.  175-6)  the  analysis  of  events  into  in-
dependent series,  and  their  mathematical  calculability,
are  postulates.  It  is  too  "  a  practical  methodological
postulate  that  the  reign  of  law  in  physical  nature  is
absolute"  (p.  223),  and  a  possible  failure  of  experience
to  confirm  it  is  disregarded  because  of  our  interest  to
discover  such  uniformities.  "  We  treat  all  sequences  as
capable,  by  proper  methods,  of  reduction  to  uniformity,
for  the  same  reason  that  we  treat  all  offenders  as  possibly
reclaimable.  We  desire  that  they  should  be  so,  and  we
therefore  behave  as  if  we  knew  that  they  were  so "  (p.
200).  "  Space  and  Time  are  phenomenal,  the  result  of
a  process  of  construction  forced  on  us  by  our  practical
needs"  (p.  23o).2

1  Cp.  also  pp.  227-229. It  is  difficult  to  estimate  how  far  this  doctrine  is
modified  in  Prof. Taylor's  interesting "Side  Lights  on Pragmatism" (in  the
M'Gill  University  Magazine,  iii.  2). For  though  Prof.  Taylor  again  instances
(p.  61)  among  the  "beliefs  which  are  useful  but  cannot  be  proved  independently
to  be  true,"  "our  scientific  beliefs  in  causation or in the  existence  of  laws  of
nature,"  and  tells  us  that  "  for  the  purpose  of  formulating  practical  rules  for  the
manipulation of  bodies it  is  advantageous  to be  assured that  . . . whatever
happens  . . . will  happen  again  without  variation,"  he  is  by  no  means  clear
about  the  logical  position  of  this  postulate. Immediately  after  he  goes  on  to  say
that  because  such  assumptions  are  merely  considered  true  because  they  are  con-
venient, "we  have  no  right  to  say  that  they  are  true  except  within  the  limits  in
which  they  have  been  verified  by  actual  experience. " This  would  again  invalidate
them  as  methods  of  prediction,  and  exactly  parallels  Mill's  famous  stultification
of  the  causal  principle  when  he  admitted  that  it  might  not  hold  in  distant  parts
of  the  stellar  regions. Prof.  Taylor  exhibits  this  contradiction  in  a  more  compact
form,  but  with  as  profound  an  unconsciousness  of  its  logical  import.

2  I  cannot  see  why  after  this  Prof.  Taylor  should  insist  on  treating  the  Con-
servation of  Mass  and  of  Energy  as  only  empirical  generalisations  (p.  177). In
his  reply  he  treats  the  recognition  of  postulates  as  something  which  might  have
occurred  to  any  one, but  denies  that  they  are  found  in  arithmetic  (Mind,  xv.
p.  89). I  commented  on  the  awkwardness  of  the  anomaly,  etc.  (I.e.  p.  378).


ix EMPIRICISM  AND  THE  ABSOLUTE 237

It  will  be  clear  from  the  above  that  Prof.  Taylor  has
no  mean  grasp  of  the  epistemological  convenience  of  pos-
tulates, and  though  their  relations  to  the  axioms  are  far
from  clear,  and  he  does  not  apparently  perceive  their
importance  as  an  epistemological  clue,  it  seems  indisput-
able that  he  has  surrendered  some  of  the  most  characteristic
features  of  the  Kantian  and  post-Kantian  apriorism.1

(4)  Occasionally  Prof.  Taylor  catches  still  deeper
glimpses  of  the  function  of  thought  in  the  service  of
humanity.  Rightly  denying  the  possibility  of  an  a  priori
theory  of  knowledge,  he  remarks  (p.  1 7)  that  "  the  instru-
ment can  only  be  studied  in  its  work,  and  we  have  to
judge  of  its  possibilities  by  the  nature  of  its  products."  2

After  two  such  apercus  a  relapse  into  intellectualism
would  hardly  seem  logically  possible,  the  more  so  as
Prof.  Taylor  also  recognises  the  teleological  character  of
the  construction  of  identity,  and  regards  it  as  a  metho-
dological assumption  that  "  there  are  situations  in  the
physical  order  which  may  be  treated,  with  sufficient
accuracy  for  our  practical  purposes,  as  recurring  iden-
tically "  8  (p.  284).  It  is  difficult  not  to  take  this  as  subor-
dinating the  conception  of '  identity '  to  practical  purposes.
In  the  physical  order,  at  all  events,  '  identity '  would  seem
to  be  not  '  found  '  but  '  made  '  or  '  taken  '  with  a  purpose
which  conditions  its  existence,  and  when  we  remember  the
terrible  embarrassments  in  which  the  fact  of  this  '  arbitrary
making '  of  identities  involves  intellectualistic  logic,4  it  will
seem  strange  that  after  departing  so  far  from  the  spirit  of
Mr.  Bradley's  scepticism,  he  should  have  stopped  short  of
recognising  all  logical  identifying  to  be  a  pragmatically
justified  experiment.5

1  Kant personally  he  is  only  too  eager  to  throw  overboard, accusing  his
epistemological  position  of  confusion  (pp.  40,  134,  242).

2  Cp.  p.  32  ;  italics  mine. Prof.  Taylor  denies  that  this  was  intended  to  bear
a  pragmatic  meaning,  but  proceeds  to  explain  what  he  meant in  a  way  which
seems  to  me  to  bring  out  still  more  clearly  the  pragmatism logically  implicit  in
his  dictum.

3  Cp.  also  pp.  335  and  98.

4  Cp.  Essays,  iii.  §  8,  iv.  §  4.

5  In  spite  of  saying  that  "  all  identity  appears  in  the  end  to  be  teleological"
(EUm.  of  Met.  p.  335), he  denies,  however,  that  he  meant  to  conceive  logical
identity  as  a  postulate. Cp.  Pers.  Ideal,  pp.  94-104  ;  and  Mind,  xv.  p.  380.


238  STUDIES IN  HUMANISM  ix

And  so  finally  (5)  Prof.  Taylor  is  sometimes  beguiled
into  what  looks  suspiciously  like  the  most  radical  empiri-
cism. He  says  (p.  23)  that  "the  real  is  experience,  and
nothing  but  experience  [!],  and  experience  consists  of
psychical  matter-of-fact.  Proof  of  this  proposition  can
only a  be  given  in  the  same  way  as  of  any  other l  ultimate
truth,  by  making  trial  of  it?  Again  (p.  38)  "the  true
character  of  any  scientific  method  can  of  course  only *  be
discovered  by  the  actual  use  of  it."  3

Prof.  Taylor  hereupon  explains  (Mtnd,-xv.  91)  that  the
remark  only  means  that  "  you  cannot  analyse  the  methods
of  a  science  properly  until  you  have  them  embodied  before
you  in  examples,"  and  has  no  bearing  on  the  issue  between
rationalists  and  empiricists.  After  this  one  is  more  at  a
loss  than  ever  to  understand  how  the  definition  of  truth
can  be  laid  down  a  priori  and  the  nature  of  logic  be
determined  without  reference  to  their  actual  functioning
when  applied  to  experience.  Are  we  to  suppose  that  a
methodological  rule  which  applies  to  the  sciences  is  not
to  be  applied  to  knowledge  in  general  ?

§  7.  It  should  be  sufficiently  apparent  from  the  above
samples  that  Prof.  Taylor's  book  exhibits  an  interesting
development  of  Absolutism,  which,  until  he  disclaimed
the  intention,  and  protested  his  innocence,  might  well  be
conceived  as  an  attempt  to  transfer  to  it  some  of  the
most  distinctive  features  of  Humanism,  in  order  to  enrich
the  barren  doctrine  that  the  Absolute  is  absolute.  In
view  of  his  disclaimer,  however,  it  must  be  assumed
that  the  approximations  are  more  apparent  than  real,
and  that  his  '  pragmaticoid '  utterances  are  in  reality
pseudo-pragmatic,  even  where  they  seem  incompatible
with  his  system,  and  where  pragmatism  would  seem  to  be
their  logical  implication.  It  remains,  therefore,  only  to
show  that  Absolutism  and  Humanism  cannot  be  com-
bined, and  that  Prof.  Taylor's  work,  so  far  from  affording
a  basis  for  such  a  combination,  really  remains  open  to  all

1  Italics  mine.

2  Cp.  p.  319  s.f.  and  p.  351  n.

3  Italics  mine. Prof.  Taylor  now  wishes  it  to  be  understood  that  "  the  trial
referred  to  was  purely  logical  and  a  priori."


ix EMPIRICISM  AND  THE  ABSOLUTE 239

the  insuperable  objections  which  have  often  been  urged
against  the  Absolute  from  a  human  point  of  view.
Fortunately  Prof.  Taylor's  lucidity  greatly  facilitates  the
proof  of  this  fundamental  incompatibility :  he  has  not
cared  to  remember  that  there  are  views  which  flourish
best,  like  fungi,  in  obscurity,  and  which  it  is  fatal  to
expose  to  the  light,  and  so  has  probably  done  Absolutism
doubtful  service  by  making  too  clear  its  constitutional
inability  to  meet  the  demands  either  of  the  human  intel-
lect or  of  the  human  heart.

In  proof  of  which  let  us  select  for  consideration  (A)
Prof.  Taylor's  account  of  the  relations  of  '  appearance '
and  '  reality,'  (Z?)  his  criteria  of  ultimate  reality,  (C)  his
conception  of  axioms  and  postulates,  (D)  his  intellectualism,
and  (E}  his  derivation  of  the  Absolute,  with  the  doctrine
of  '  degrees  of  reality '  and  the  '  ontological  proof.'

(A}  The  antithesis  of  '  appearance '  and  '  reality '  is
the  bed-rock  of  Prof.  Taylor's  as  of  Mr.  Bradley 's  philo-
sophy. But  its  assumption  seems  inadequately  justified
by  the  simple  remark  that  we  must  rid  experience  of  its
contradictions  (p.  2).  Getting  rid  of  contradictions  is  no
doubt  one  aspect  of  our  efforts  to  harmonise  our  experi-
ence, but  it  is  by  no  means  the  easiest  or  most  logical
starting-point.  For  ( I )  before  we  can  use  the  test  of  con-
tradiction we  have  to  make  sure  that  we  know  what  '  self-
contradiction  '  is  to  mean.  (2)  We  have  to  make  sure
that  it  does  not  mean  that  what  we  have  to  get  rid  of  is,,
not  the  '  self-contradictory  '  '  appearance,'  but  the  concep-
tions by  which  we  have  tried  to  know  it.  And  (3)  as
regards  the  self-contradiction  itself,  before  we  can  get  rid
of  a  contradiction  we  have  to  make  sure  that  we  have  a
real  contradiction  to  get  rid  of.  Before  making  contra-
diction our  criterion,  therefore,  we  must  find  a  criterion  to
discriminate  between  real  and  apparent  contradictions.
Thus  the  antithesis,  which  it  was  to  transcend,  breaks  out
again  within  the  '  absolute  criterion  '  itself.1

1  The  levity  with  which  these  difficulties  have  been  ignored  is  admirably
brought  out  in  Mind,  N.S.  xiv.  54,  by  Capt.  Knox's  masterly  paper  on  "Mr.
Bradley 's  Absolute  Criterion,"  and  it  is  to  be  hoped  that  henceforth  appeals  to  it
will  be  more  cautious.


240  STUDIES IN  HUMANISM  ix

Nor  again  is  success  in  removing  contradictions  quite
the  alpha  and  omega  of  philosophy  as  intellectualists  are
fond  of  assuming.  If  it  were,  philosophy  would  be  in  a
bad  way.  A  severe  construction  of  the  principle  would
work  sad  havoc  with  most  philosophic  systems,  and  Prof.
Taylor  also  would  have  been  more  judicious  not  to  plume
himself  upon  a  consistency  too  great  for  mortal  logic.
For  to  a  harsher  stickler  for  literal  consistency  than
myself,  many  of  Prof.  Taylor's  statements  would  seem  to
need  a  good  deal  of  reconciling.

What  does  appear  to  me  to  be  somewhat  deplorable
is  the  way  in  which  he  misconceives  the  logical  implica-
tions of  his  doctrine.  He  fails  to  make  it  clear  that  (i)
Nothing  whatsoever  can  be  condemned  as  '  appearance,'
unless  the  superior  reality  which  corrects  it,  is  already
known  ;  and  (2)  that  even  then,  whenever  the  superior
reality  is  not  a  matter  of  immediate  experience,  its  validity
has  to  be  established  by  the  control  it  gives  us  over  the
'  appearance.' x  It  is  fallacious,  therefore,  to  claim  ulti-
mate reality  for  anything  that  is  not  (i)  known  or  know-
able,  and  (2)  useful  in  operating  on  our  apparent  realities.
Now  as  the  Absolute  has  never  yet  been  shown  to  be
capable  of  satisfying  either  of  these  tests,  this  would
conduct  us  to  the  distressing  dilemma  that  we  must
either  renounce  the  Absolute  or  the  favourite  antithesis
between  appearance  and  reality.

§  8.  (H]  Incidentally  it  has  already  been  mentioned
that  Prof.  Taylor  liberally  allows  himself  two  criteria  of
metaphysical  reality.  This  seems  to  exceed  the  legiti-
mate luxury  of  speculation,  and  may  perhaps  seem  as
gross  a  self-indulgence  to  the  strict  metaphysician  as
bigamy  does  to  the  moralist.  There  is,  however,  no
doubt  of  the  fact.2  The  first  of  Prof.  Taylor's  criteria
is  empirical,  and  its  formulations  have  been  quoted
in  §  6.  Its  ultimateness  cannot  be  doubted,  either  as
stated  or  intrinsically.  For  any  principle  can  be  con-

1  For both these points see my essay on "Preserving Appearances,"
Humanism,  pp.  191,  195.

2  Prof.  Taylor's  reply  on  this  point  has  seemed  to  me  so  unconvincing  that  I
have  not  altered  this  passage. Cp.  Mind,  xv.  p.  91,  with  p.  381.


ix EMPIRICISM AND  THE  ABSOLUTE 241

ceived  as  a  postulate,  the  value  of  which  is  established
by  trial.  It  must  be  supposed  therefore  that  Prof.  Taylor,
when  he  states  it,  really  means  what  he  says,  and  is  not
merely  lax  in  his  language.  But  Prof.  Taylor  retains
also  an  intellectualistic  criterion  which  announces  itself  as
ultimate,  and  is  put  forward  independently  and  indeed
with  more  formal  pomp.  It  is  Mr.  Bradley's  familiar
maxim  that  Reality  is  not  self-contradictory.  This  Prof.
Taylor  argues  (p.  22)  must  be  a  metaphysical  as  well  as
a  logical  principle.  For  to  think  truly  about  things  is  to
think  in  accord  with  their  real  nature.  But  to  think
them  as  contradictory  is  not  to  think  them  truly.

In  its  essence  this  would  seem  to  be  a  form  of  the
'  ontological '  argument  whereby  a  claim  of  our  thought  is
turned  into  a  revelation  about  reality.  But  in  addition
there  is  surely  involved  a  twofold  fallacy,  viz.  (i)  an
equivocation  in  the  word  '  truth,'  which  is  used  both  of
the  internal  self-consistency  of  thought  and  of  its  '  corre-
spondence with  reality,'  and  (2)  the  unworkable  view  of
truth  as  the  correspondence  of  thought  with  reality.1

And  so  it  must  surely  be  suggested  that  the  principle
of  Non-contradiction  is  a  postulate,  if  ever  there  was  one.
At  one  time  (p.  19)  Prof.  Taylor  seems  to  perceive  this,
and  speaks  of  the  audacity 2  of  making  "  a  general  state-
ment about  the  whole  universe  of  being "  as  resulting
from  our  "  refusing 2  to  accept  both  sides  of  a  contradic-
tion as  true."  But  on  the  next  page  his  faith  in  the
infallibility  of  postulation  has  become  so  robust  that  he
proceeds  to  treat  it  as  knowledge  about  reality,  and  as
justifying  a  "  confident "  assertion  that  "  it  is  positively
certain  that  Reality  or  the  universe  is  a  self-consistent
systematic  whole ! "  A  mere  pragmatist  would  gasp  at
the  audacity  of  such  expeditious  modes  of  overleaping  all
distinctions  between  wish  and  fact,  assertion  and  proof,
postulate  and  axiom  ;  but  when  Prof.  Taylor  is  in  the
mood  no  obstacles  can  check  him.

§  9. (Q It seems doubtful whether he has quite

1  For  the  first  point  see  Humanism,  p.  98  ;  for  the  second,  pp.  45-6.

2  Italics  mine.

R


242  STUDIES IN HUMANISM  IX

arrived  at  the  perfect  clearness  which  is  so  desirable  with
regard  to  the  relations  of  axioms  and  postulates.  His
procedure,  however,  is  instructive.  Without  formal
discussion  he  assumes  (i)  that  there  are  axioms  which
belong  to  the  fundamental  structure  of  our  intellect  (pp.
I9>  378)  >  (2)  that  postulates  are  methodological
assumptions,  defensible  on  the  ground  of  their  practical
usefulness,  but  only  so  far  as  they  actually  succeed  (pp.
227,  167,  169),  and  sometimes  to  be  spoken  of  con-
temptuously as  "  mere  practical  postulates"  (p.  239) ;  (3)
that  questions  of  '  origin '  (i.e.  past  history)  have  no
bearing  on  the  '  validity '  of  our  conceptions.  Origins,
indeed,  he  concedes  whole-heartedly  to  the  pragmatists
(P-  385):  historically  the  true  is  the  useful,  science  an
offshoot  of  the  arts  (and  why  not  all  axioms  promoted
postulates  ?).  But  this  does  not  matter,  once  the  in-
tellectual ideal  has  been  developed.  It  can  judge,  and
condemn,  the  very  process  which  constituted  the  tribunal.
Hence  (4)  it  is  more  likely  than  not  that  postulates  do
not  yield  us  final  truth,  as  is  indeed  the  case  with  the
postulates  of  which  Prof.  Taylor  makes  most  explicit
mention.  Hence  (5)  it  appears  that  not  only  do  logical
defects  not  impair  the  usefulness  of  a  conception  (p.  168),
but  (p.  182)  "any  form  of  the  causal  postulate  of  which
we  can  make  effective  use  necessitates  the  recognition  of
that  very  Plurality  of  Causes,  which  we  have  seen  to  be
logically  excluded  by  the  conception  of  cause  with  which
science  works  "  (or  rather  doesrit  \ ),  and  "  any  form  of  the
principle  in  which  it  is  true  is  useless,  and  any  form  in
which  it  is  useful  is  untrue."  This  sweeping  affirmation
of  the  validity  of  useless  truth  and  methodological  fiction
may  be  commended  to  the  timid  souls  who  shrink  from
the  more  moderate  inferences  from  the  facts  of  postulation,
which  are  drawn  by  the  pragmatists,  viz.  that  the  true  is
useful  and  that  the  useless  is  untrue}  To  others  it  will
seem  queer  that  a  doctrine  of  the  thorough  rationality  of
the  universe  should  reach  the  result  that  the  highest
truths  (e.g.  the  metaphysics  of  the  Absolute)  should  be

1  Cp.  Humanism,  p.  38.


ix EMPIRICISM  AND  THE  ABSOLUTE 243

useless,  while  the  useful,  viz.  the  postulates,  are  mostly
untrue  !  It  should  be  noted  (6)  as  a  final  perplexity  that
on  the  same  page  (29)  the  psychical  nature  of  Reality  is
called  both  an  initial  postulate  and  a  fundamental  meta-
physical principle.  Are  we  to  infer  from  this  that  the
fundamental  principles  are  seen  to  be  postulates,  or  that
Prof.  Taylor's  language  has  relaxed  under  the  strain  of
accommodating  his  theory  to  the  actual  procedure  of  our
minds  ?

These,  then,  are  Prof.  Taylor's  dicta  on  the  subject  of
axioms  and  postulates,  and  certainly  they  seem  variegated
beyond  necessity.  A  living  and  rapidly  growing  philo-
sophy will  no  doubt  always  find  it  hard  to  sustain  the
appearance  of  a  rigid  verbal  consistency,  and  I  do  not  in
the  least  hold  with  the  cynics  that  demanding  consistency
from  a  metaphysician  is  as  absurd  as  demanding  demon-
stration from  a  logician — because  in  neither  case  will  you
get  it !  A  certain  amount  of  inconsistency,  therefore,  is
human  and  pardonable.  But  I  somewhat  doubt  whether
Prof.  Taylor  has  not  occasionally  exceeded  these  limits.
I  am  more  interested  to  observe  (i)  that  it  seems  a
great  exaggeration  of  the  pragmatist  doctrine  of  methodo-
logical assumptions  to  infer  that  because  they  are  useful
they  are  probably  untrue.  For  usefulness  is  no  presumption
of  untruth,  but  rather  the  reverse.  It  is  not  qua  useful
that  our  assumptions  are  judged  untrue,  but  qua  useless.
To  assume  a  principle,  therefore,  for  methodological
reasons,  i.e.  as  conducive  to  some  proximate  purpose,  in
nowise  prejudices  its  claim  to  ulterior  truth.  It  is  '  true  '
as  far  as  it  goes,  and  whether  it  goes  all  the  way  is  still
an  open  question.  The  more  useful,  therefore,  it  turns
out  to  be,  the  truer  we  judge  it :  whatever  limitations  it
develops  render  it  useless  for  our  ulterior  purposes,  and
become  pro  tanto  motives  for  judging  it  untrue,  and  for
trying  to  recast  it  into  a  more  widely  applicable  form.
It  is  therefore  for  pragmatism  the  reverse  of  true  that
logical  defects  do  not  matter :  only  it  contends  that  in
abstraction  from  its  use  a  conception  has  no  actual
meaning,  and  that  it  is  the  limitations  which  its  use


244  STUDIES IN  HUMANISM  ix

reveals  which  persuade  us  of  its  logical  defectiveness,
rather  than  vice  versa.

(2)  Prof.  Taylor  hardly  seems  to  dispose  of  the  strong
appeal  which  Pragmatism  makes  to  the  history  of  our
axioms  by  merely  trotting  out  the  musty  old  antithesis
of  origin  and  validity.  For  in  the  first  place  to  say  that
'  origin '  does  not  decide  '  validity '  gives  no  positive  in-
formation on  the  very  vital  questions  as  to  what  it  does
decide,  and  what  is  the  connexion  of  the  two ;  and,
secondly,  overlooks  the  fact  that  the  appeal  is  not  really
to  origin  so  much  as  to  past  history}

Concerning  the  origin  indeed  of  anything  whatsoever
not  more  than  two  fundamentally  distinct  views  can  be
entertained.  We  may  either  (i)  welcome  its  novelty  and
originality,  and  ascribe  its  appearance  to  a  providential
interposition  (Oeia  polpa),  hailing  it  as  a  gift  of  the  gods,
or  we  may  reluctantly  recognise  it  as  an  '  accidental
variation.'  Metaphysically  these  explanations  are  equiva-
lents. Or  (2)  we  may  sacrifice  the  recognition  of  novelty
to  the  vindication  of  systematic  connexion,  and  labour  to
show  that,  much  as  the  apparent  novelty  has  perturbed
us,  nothing  has  occurred  that  was  not  fully  contained  in,
and  determined  by,  its  antecedents,  so  that  the  identical
content  of  Reality  has  suffered  no  alteration  from  the
occurrence.  It  is  easy  to  predict  that  Intellectualism  is
sure  to  prefer  the  second  of  these  views,  and  to  regard
the  first  as  the  very  acme  of  irrationality.

But  when  it  argues  thus,  it  only  shows,  perhaps,  how
far  it  is  from  understanding  wherein  irrationality  consists
for  its  opponents.  For  to  a  pragmatist  there  is  nothing
essentially  irrational  in  the  first  account,  because  he  has
not  assumed  that  the  value  of  a  thing  depends  on,  and  is
eternally  determined  by,  its  origin.  If  the  value  of
everything  depends  on  its  efficiency  in  use,  it  is  clear  that
the  rationality  of  the  universe  will  consist  not  in  its
a  priori  inclusion  in  a  metaphysical  Absolute,  but  just  in
the  actual  way  in  which  things  manage  to  fit  and  work
together.  Things,  therefore,  neither  acquire  nor  lose  any

1  Cp.  Personal  Idealism,  pp.  123-5.


ix EMPIRICISM  AND  THE  ABSOLUTE 245

real  rationality  by  their  mode  of  origin.  Axioms  may  arise
as  postulates,  thoughts  as  wishes,  values  as  '  accidents ' —
their  real  validation  in  every  case  comes  from  subsequent
experience.  Not  that  our  Humanism  can  be  indifferent
to  the  pragmatic  equivalents  '  chance  or  purposing  in-
telligence.' Only  it  seems  that  this  further  question  also
can  only  be  decided  ex  post  facto,  when  the  novelties  that
burst  into  the  dull  routine  of  a  mechanically  calculable
world  have  run  their  course,  and  we  can  judge  them  by
their  fruits  whether  indeed  they  were  of  God.

Thus  Pragmatism  can  rebut  the  charge  of  irrationality,
and  indeed  retort  it,  by  pointing  out  that  desirable  as  it
is  for  all  bur  scientific  purposes  to  regard  the  world  as
wholly  calculable,  our  anxiety  may  yet  involve  us
ultimately  in  absurdity,  if  it  leads  us  totally  to  deny
the  occurrence  of  real  novelty.  What  should,  therefore,
be  pointed  out  to  Prof.  Taylor  is  that  Pragmatism,  in
appealing  to  the  past  history  of  conceptions  for  light  upon
their  value,  is  not  laying  stress  on  their  origin.  It  is
assuming  merely  that  the  nature  of  a  thing  is  revealed
empirically  in  its  behaviour,  and  that  therefore  to  under-
stand it,  we  should  do  well  to  make  the  most  extensive
study  of  that  behaviour.  If,  moreover,  it  should  be  in
process,  it  will  be  from  a  study  of  its  history  that  we  shall
see  the  drift  of  that  process,  and  if  that  process  should
admit  of,  or  demand,  teleological  interpretation,  we  shall
thus  be  enabled  to  forecast  its  end,  and  to  anticipate  its
future,  sufficiently  for  our  purposes,  even  though  the
whole  nature  of  a  thing  could  only  be  fully  expressed  in
its  whole  history.  The  attempt,  on  the  other  hand,  to
determine  the  '  validity '  of  a  thing  apart  from  its  history
and  prospects  would  seem  sheer  folly.  For  it  tries  to
contemplate  in  abstraction  a  mere  cross-section  of  Reality
and  claims  final  validity  for  what  may  only  be  a  mis-
leading present  phase  of  its  total  evolution.

Of  course,  however,  the  comparative  merits  of  these
two  procedures  might  be  completely  altered  if  it  were
possible  to  pronounce  upon  the  nature  of  a  thing  a  priori.
For  in  that  case  there  would  be  no  need  to  wait  upon


246  STUDIES IN  HUMANISM  ,x

experience,  and  science  and  history  would  have  no
bearing  upon  ultimate  Reality.  This,  no  doubt,  would
be  convenient,  and  forms  perhaps  the  hidden  motive  for
the  anxiety  of  metaphysicians  to  attain  some  sort  of
a  priori  at  any  cost.

(3)  Just  as  Prof.  Taylor  failed  to  see  the  full  logical
force  of  the  pragmatist  treatment  of  axioms,  so  too,  I
fear,  he  has  not  quite  apprehended  the  place  which  the
new  views  assign  to  intellection.  For  he  appears  to
think  that  pragmatist  appeals  to  practical  results  can
be  sufficiently  met  by  saying  that  the  intellect  is  not
wholly  practical  (pp.  121-2).  It  aspires  beyond  practical
success  in  action  to  logical  consistency  in  thinking,  and  so
the  ideals  of  truth  and  moral  goodness  fall  asunder,  and
metaphysics  '  plays  its  game '  according  to  its  own  rules,
and  demands  that  ultimate  truth  shall  satisfy  the  intellect,
and  that  alone  (pp.  384-6).

Unfortunately,  however,  these  propositions  do  not
meet  the  pragmatist  contentions,  and,  in  so  far  as  relevant,
are  disputable.  Not  only  does  Prof.  Taylor  appear  to
confuse  the  proposition  that  every  (valid)  thought  aims  at
a  practical  end  with  the  assertion  that  it  aims  at  moral
goodness  (p.  385),  but  he  has  not  realised  that  the
position  he  has  to  refute  is  that  the  intellect  itself  is
practical  throughout.  If  this  be  true,  the  truths  of  meta-
physics (if  there  are  any)  will  be  just  as  practical  as  the
rules  of  conduct  and  the  methods  of  science,  and  it  is  vain
to  pit  '  logic '  against  '  practice.'  For  the  reference  to
the  use  which  verifies  them  can  no  more  be  eliminated
from  the  logical  than  from  the  ethical  valuations.1

§  10.  (Z?)  As  a  natural  result  of  his  failure  to  perceive
the  full  scope  of  Pragmatism,  Prof.  Taylor  can  never
really  overcome  the  intellectualism  of  his  school.  He
does  not  indeed  carry  it  to  the  extreme  of  denying  the
rationality  of  the  existence  of  anything  but  thought,  and
follows  Mr.  Bradley  in  recognising  the  existence  of
'  Feeling,'  though  he  too  leaves  its  relation  to  intellect  in
obscurity.  But  the  aim  of  philosophy  is  still  for  him  to

1  Cp.  Humanism,  pp.  55,  160-3.


ix EMPIRICISM  AND  THE  ABSOLUTE 247

understand,  and  not  to  transform  and  improve  experience,
and  that  there  is  an  inherent  connexion  between  the  two,
that  we  '  understand '  in  order  to  transform,  and  that  it
is  the  '  transforming '  which  assures  us  of  the  '  understand-
ing,' has  not  yet  dawned  upon  him.  He  too,  that  is,  has
not  yet  asked  himself  by  what  tests  other  than  the  prag-
matic we  can  or  do  pronounce  upon  the  claim  of  a
proposition  to  validity.  The  intellectualist  prejudice
which  he  has  consequently  been  able  to  retain  oozes  out
spontaneously  in  all  sorts  of  places.  Thus  (i)  the
purposive  operations  of  our  intelligent  manipulation  of
experience  are  constantly  striking  him  as  '  arbitrary '  (e.g.
PP-  35.  US.  175.  1/8,  256).  He  regards  (2)  an
'  indefinite  regress  '  as  a  mark  of  unreality  or  '  appearance,'
without  discriminating  between  the  cases  where  it  means
the  defeat  of  a  purpose,  and  those  in  which  it  means  a
successful  accomplishment  of  the  same,  and  indicates
that  an  intellectual  operation  (e.g.  '  counting '  or  assigning
what  for  our  purpose  is  the  '  cause '  of  an  event)  can  be
performed  as  often  as  we  please  and  need.  Again  (3),  to
be  free,  he  says,  is  to  know  one's  own  mind  (p.  381).
And  lastly,  and  most  flagrantly,  (4)  Evil  is  merely  the
intellectual  incompleteness  incident  to  the  restricted  purview
of 'finite'  beings  (pp.  113-5.  121-2,  340,  387,  389,  393,
396).

§  II.  (E)  And  so  we  come  to  the  infinite  being  to
which  all  else  is  '  appearance.'  The  Absolute  appears
early  in  Prof.  Taylor's  philosophy  and  stays  to  the  bitter
end.  It  is  regarded  as  so  axiomatic  a  principle  that  its
derivation  is  somewhat  perfunctory  (pp.  53-61).  We
may,  however,  represent  the  steps  of  this  derivation  and
the  assumptions  they  involve  as  follows  : —

1.  The  universe  is  ultimately  a  system  [=  an  applica-
tion a  priori  of  a  human  conception  to  reality,  depending
on  the  validity  of  the  '  ontological  proof '].

2.  If  it  is  a  system  at  all,  it  must  be  a  rigid  system,
and  "  must  finally  have  a  structure  "  (why  only  one  ?)  "  of
such  a  kind 'that  any  purpose  which  ignores  it  will  be
defeated." [But  must  not  the  sort  of  system  which  the


248  STUDIES IN  HUMANISM  ix

universe  is  be  determined  by  experience  rather  than  a
priori  ?  And  why  should  a  system  be  absolutely  rigid  ?
Might  it  not  be  plastic,  with  no  predetermined  structure,
but  with  potentialities  of  varying  response  to  varying
efforts  ?  Determinism  (which,  by  the  way,  Prof.  Taylor
professes  to  reject  in  Book  iv.  chap,  iv.)  is  not  so  absolute
a  postulate  that  a  determinable  indetermination  in
Reality  should  be  inconceivable.  And  why,  lastly,
should  the  purposes  which  ignore  the  Absolute  be
defeated  by  it?  Why  should  there  not  be  purposes
which,  though  they  ignore  the  Absolute,  are  ignored  by
it  ?  Where,  indeed,  is  there  an  indisputably  valid
purpose  which  needs  to  take  the  Absolute  into  account  ?]

3.  Hence  to  deny  the  Absolute  would  be  to  reduce
the  world  to  a  mere  chaos. [I have  never found  this
to  be  so. And  do  we  as  a  matter  of  fact  ever  import
order into our experience by arguing down from the
Absolute  ? Do we not rather start from apparent
chaos, and work our way out by the most empirical
experiments  ?]

4.  The  whole  of  Reality  is  the  one  and  only  perfect
and  complete  individual  (p. 113). ['  Complete]  however,
we  must  be  careful  to  understand  in  a  merely  intellectual
way  as  = '  all-embracing,'  '  not  omitting  anything,'  rather
than as  '  feeling  no  want.' And  yet I doubt whether
Prof.  Taylor's  readers  will  always  succeed  in  distinguish-
ing these  two  senses  when  they  peruse  his  eulogies  on
the  perfection  and  harmony  of  the  Absolute.]

5.  The  Absolute  is  infinite  experience,  not  like  ours
limited,  and  still  less  collective.1 Though  neither  a  self
nor  a  person,2  it  is  a  conscious  life  which  embraces  the
totality of existence all at once and in a perfect,
harmonious, systematic unity,3 as the contents of its
experience. [But  how,  if  it  is  not  limited,  can  '  purpose '
be  ascribed  to  it? The  time  has  surely  come  when  the
apparently  self-contradictory  notion  of  an  infinite  purpose
should  be  either  explained  or  dropped. How  again  can
one life embrace  another,  i.e. not merely  -know  it,  but

1  PP-  343.  396-  2  Pp-  343>  346-  3  p-  6o-


ix EMPIRICISM  AND  THE  ABSOLUTE 249

experience  it  with  its  unique  limitations  ?  And  this  in
an  indefinite  number  of  conflicting  and  mutually  con-
tradictory cases  !  Surely  the  difficulties  of  the  Kenosis
in  Christian  theology,  of  the  combination  of  divine
omniscience  with  human  ignorance,  are  child's  play  in
comparison  with  these  vagaries  of  what  calls  itself  a
rational  metaphysic  !]

6.  The  Absolute  is  out  of  Time  and  Space  and
cannot  evolve.  Hence  all  things  in  our  experience  are
for  it  contradictory  appearance.  But  this  does  not  mean
'  illusion.'  For  (p.  1 09)  there  are  degrees  of  Reality  or
individuality,  and  those  things  which  are  more  complete
and  more  systematic  are  more  real.  Or,  put  otherwise,
things  are  more  real  the  more  they  approximate  to  the
ideal  of  perfect  self-consistency  and  the  less  the  modifica-
tion which  our  knowledge  would  require  to  transform  them
into  complete  harmony  with  themselves  (pp.  37,  105,  108).

On  this  I  remark  that  by  the  time  Prof.  Taylor  has
proved  Space  and  Time  '  appearances '  which  cannot  be
attributed  to  the  Absolute,  he  appears  to  have  quite
forgotten  the  vital  distinction  between  perceptual  and
conceptual  Space  and  Time  which  he  began  (p.  243)  by
calling  of  '  fundamental  importance.'

This,  however,  is  a  slight  matter  compared  with  the
'  saving  doctrine '  of  the  Degrees  of  Reality,  in  stating
which  Prof.  Taylor  does  not  seem  to  have  materially
improved  its  Bradleian  form,  (i)  It  still  seems  to  be  a
pure  assumption  that  what  appears  to  us  to  be  the  order
of  ascertained  reality,  must  coincide  with  the  absolute
order  of  merit.  (2)  Nor  is  it  in  the  least  self-evident
that  what  seems  to  need  less  modification  is  actually
nearer  to  ultimate  Reality  and  more  likely  to  attain  it.
The  little  more  may  be  unattainable,  and  something
worlds  away  may  be  on  the  right  line  of  development.
If,  e.g.,  Prof.  Taylor  had  cast  his  prophetic  eye  on  the
Jurassic  age  would  he  not  have  prognosticated  the
descent  of  the  fowls  of  the  air  from  soaring  Pterodactyls
of  the  period  rather  than  from  clod-hopping  Dinosaurs?
And  yet  it  is  certain  that  the  former  never  evolved  into


250  STUDIES  IN  HUMANISM  «

the  true  avian  form,  while  the  latter  very  probably  did  !
(3)  How,  we  may  ask,  are  we  to  know  how  much
'  modification '  or  '  transformation '  a  thing  may  need
to  become  ultimate  reality  ?  Is  this  also  to  be  known
a  priori,  or  judged  by  casual  appearances  ?  How  can
we  tell  what  the  difficulties  really  are  until  we  have
overcome  them  ?  For  our  finite  apprehension,  therefore,
the  doctrine  of  degrees  is  quite  unworkable,  and  indeed
unmeaning.  And  (4)  the  criterion  in  any  case  is  quite
delusive.  For  ex  hypothesi  it  fails  us  :  nothing  ever  de
facto  reaches  ultimate  reality,  or  can  be  conceived  as  so
doing.  We  are  carefully  warned  that  a  '  finite '  appear-
ance could  do  so  only  by  ceasing  to  be  finite.  But
impossibility  has  no  degrees,  and  hence  to  say  '  you  shall
become  perfectly  harmonious  and  fully  real  when  you
become  the  Absolute '  is  like  saying  '  you  shall  catch  the
Snark  on  the  Greek  Kalends.'

7.  Despite,  however,  the  manifestly  illusory  character
of  our  hopes  of  becoming  real  by  becoming  the  Universe,
we  are  still  bidden  to  believe  (p.  16)  that  the  Absolute
realises  our  aspirations  and  satisfies  our  emotions.
Even  though  (p.  411)  "the  all-embracing  harmonious
experience  of  the  Absolute  is  the  unattainable^  [!]  goal
towards  which  finite  intelligence  and  finite  volition  are
alike  striving,"  we  must  have  faith  (p.  394)  that  "all
finite  aspiration  must  somehow^-  be  realised  in  the
structure  of  the  Absolute  whole,  though  not  necessarily
in  the  way  in  which  we  ...  actually  wish  it  to  be
realised"!  For  (p.  386)  "it  is  simply  inconceivable  in
a  rational  universe  that  our  abiding  aspirations  should
meet  with  blank  defeat."  It  is  not  to  this  final
apocalypse  that  Prof.  Taylor  applies  the  incisive  words
"  an  uncritical  appeal  to  unknown  possibilities "  :  but
the  phrase  seems  singularly  apt.

§  12.  Now  that  we  have  seen  what  the  claims  of  the
Absolute  are,  we  can  proceed  to  examine  its  logical
foundations.  No  great  acuteness  is  needed  to  perceive
that  the  whole  tissue  of  affirmations  concerning  the

1  Italics  mine.


ix EMPIRICISM AND  THE  ABSOLUTE 251

Absolute  depends  logically  on  the  question  whether  the
conception  of  a  whole  can  be  applied  to  Reality  a  priori,
and  whether  consequently  it  can  validly  be  taken  as
certain  that  Reality  forms  a  harmonious  system.

In  other  words,  the  '  ontological  proof,'  z.e.  the  trans-
mutation of  a  conceptual  ideal  into  absolute  fact,  is  a
vital  necessity  for  Prof.  Taylor's  metaphysic.  He  him-
self is  well  aware  of  this,  and  furnishes  us  (pp.  402-3)
with  a  revised  version  of  it,  drawn  from  the  armoury  of
Bradleian  logic.

Every  idea,  he  tells  us,  has  a  reference  to  reality,
outside  its  own  existence,  which  it  means  or  stands  for.
"  In  its  most  general  form,  therefore,  the  ontological
argument  is  simply  a  statement  that  reality  and  meaning
for  a  subject  mutually  imply  each  other."  But  (as  we
saw)  thoughts  represent  the  reality  they  mean  with  very
different  degrees  of  adequacy,  and  so,  of  reality.  Only
the  thought  of  a  perfectly  harmonious  system  can  be  an
adequate  representation  of  the  reality  which  it  means.
As  therefore  we  have  in  the  Absolute  a  way  of  thinking
about  Reality  "  which  is  absolutely  and  entirely  internally
coherent,  and  from  its  own  nature  must  remain  so,  however
the  detailed  content  of  our  ideas  should  grow  in  complexity^-
we  may  confidently  say  that  such  a  scheme  of  thought
faithfully  represents  the  Reality  for  which  it  stands."

In  this  form,  then,  the  'ontological  proof  satisfies  Prof.
Taylor ;  but  it  hardly  brings  out  what  is  really  its
cardinal  feature,  viz.  the  a  priori  character  of  its  claim.
Unless  reality  can  be  predicated  a  priori  of  its  ideal,  the
'proof  is  worthless  for  the  purposes  of  absolutist  meta-
physics. For  the  conception  of  the  Absolute  must  be
valid  of  any  and  every  course  of  experience  in  a  wholly
non-empirical  and  a  priori  way,  to  enable  us  to  pro-
nounce our  knowledge  and  our  opinion  of  it  to  be
incapable  of  modification  by  the  course  of  events.  It
follows  that  the  Absolute  must  be  rigid,  and  its  con-
ception one  which  differs  radically  in  its  nature  and
meaning  from  any  other  idea.  For  other  ideas  acquire

1  Italics  mine.


252  STUDIES  IN  HUMANISM  ix

their  meaning  in  the  process  of  experience,  which  moulds
and  modifies  them,  and  is  continually  testing  the  validity
of  their  '  reference  to  reality.'  Their  '  objective  reference  '
is  at  first  no  more  than  a  formal  claim,  which  experience
must  confirm  and  develop  and  show  to  be  really
applicable.  Whereas  in  the  Absolute's  case,  the  mere
making  of  a  claim,  by  reason,  I  suppose,  of  its  peculiarly
sweeping  and  impudent  character,  is  held  to  be  sufficient
warrant  of  its  a  priori  truth.

In  other  words,  Prof.  Taylor's  argument  is  a  petitio
principii  \  it  amounts  only  to  a  covert  re-statement  of  the
contested  claim.  The  dispute  was  whether  a  subjective
demand  of  ours  could  authenticate  the  existence  of
something  which  satisfies  that  demand.1  The  'proof
consists  in  reiterating  that  the  meaning  of  the  conception
involves  this  same  claim  to  reality.  But  what  we  still
want  to  know  is  whether  this  claim  can  be  sustained,
whether  reality  will  actually  conform  itself  to  our  con-
ceptions, whether  the  meaning  we  attribute  to  them  is
actually  true.  And  to  assure  us  of  this  we  are  given
nothing  but  the  Absolute's  own  assurance !  This  may
be  rationalism,  but  it  does  not  look  rational.

§  13.  And  yet,  of  course,  the  facts  are  plain  enough.
The  Absolute  is  a  postulate  of  the  extremest  and  most
audacious  kind.  And  so  far  from  its  being  true  that  our
concept's  claim  to  reality  is  in  this  instance  independent
of  experience,  it  is  dependent  upon  every  experience  and
distinguished  from  other  such  claims  only  by  the  greater
difficulty  of  subjecting  it  to  any  adequate  verification.
The  question  of  whether,  say,  my  idea  of  '  dog '  '  corre-
sponds with  the  reality,'  is  easily  settled  by  observing
whether  what  I  take  to  be  a  '  dog '  behaves  in  the
manner  I  expect  a  '  dog '  to  behave.  But  to  establish
that  all  Reality  behaves  in  a  manner  conformable  with
my  notion  of  a  perfectly  harmonious  system,  and  that
my  notion  may  consequently  be  safely  predicated  of

1  It  is  amusing  that  this  should  turn  out  to  be  the  essence  of  the  '  onto-
logical  proof,'  when  one  remembers  how  wroth  rationalists  get  when  they
imagine  that  pragmatists  are  attempting  this  very  feat !


ix EMPIRICISM AND  THE  ABSOLUTE 253

Reality,  is  a  desperate  undertaking.  Well  might  rational-
ists imagine  that  if  it  was  not  done  a  priori,  it  could  not
be  done  at  all !  For  the  claim  is  so  large  that  its
empirical  proof  might  well  seem  impracticable  :  because
the  Absolute  is  all-embracing,  the  claim  has  to  be
substantiated  in  the  case  of  all  things  in  existence.

Of  course  it  can  still  be  postulated,  and  indeed  this
may  be  expedient.  For  it  is  doubtless  methodologically
just  as  judicious  to  give  the  universe,  as  the  dog,  a  good
name,  if  you  do  not  wish  to  quarrel  with  it.  But  to  prove
my  postulate,  to  make  sure  that  the  universe  really
deserves  my  praises,  and  that  my  eulogy  is  not  a  fabric
of  adulation  on  a  basis  of  desire,  I  should  have  to  be  in  a
position  to  explain  away  every  trace  and  appearance  of
disharmony  !  It  is  only  our  interested  bias,  therefore,  that
leads  us  to  argue l  that  the  apparent  evil  must  be  really
good.  If  we  were  quite  impartial,  i.e.  void  of  interest  in
the  matter,  it  would  be  intellectually  just  as  easy,  and  as
tenable,  to  infer  from  our  mixed  universe  that  the  apparent
good  was  really  evil.

That  the  Absolute  is  really  a  postulate  is  all  but  con-
ceded by  Prof.  Taylor  in  one  passage,2  where  he  argues
that  as  it  is  the  satisfaction  of  a  human  aspiration,  and
as  his  peace  of  mind  depends  on  speculation  about  it,  it
must  be  regarded  as  pragmatically  '  useful,'  and  therefore
valid.

To  which  I  reply  that  the  path  from  usefulness  to
validity  leads  through  verification.  Not  that  Pragmatism
has  the  slightest  objection  to  the  principle  of  an  Absolute
conceived  as  a  postulate.  And  if  it  makes  Prof.  Taylor
happy  to  believe  that  there  is  such  a  thing,  and  he  won't
be  happy  till  he  gets  it,  by  all  means  let  him  try  it,  and
see  whether  it  will  give  him  his  heart's  desire.  In  matters
of  postulation  all  are  called,  and  all  may  hope  to  be

1  As  Prof.  Taylor  does  on  p.  396.

-  P.  317  n.  The  passage  may  be  read  as  an  argumentum  ad  hominem,  but
fails  as  such,  because  (i)  we  have  always  conceded  the  fullest  liberty  to  postulate,
and  (2)  Prof.  Taylor  has  ignored,  as  our  critics  have  usually  done,  the  necessity
of  verifying  postulates.  Besides,  the  Absolute  is  palpably  a  postulate,  so  mistaken
and  ineffective  that  it  never  develops  into  the  '  necessity  of  thought '  it  is  assumed
to  be.


254  STUDIES  IN  HUMANISM  JX

chosen.  But  this  reduces  the  claim  originally  made  to
quite  modest  dimensions.  The  Absolute  was  put  forward
as  an  actually  existing  reality  which  no  sane  intelligence
could  deny.  What,  therefore,  we  have  rejected  was  a
pretended  axiom  of  universal  cogency  ;  what  it  may  yet
be  possible  to  retain  is  a  queer  sort  of  emotional  postulate.
§  14.  And  yet  I  wonder  whether  the  Absolute,  after
undergoing  so  capital  a  diminution  of  its  logical  status,
will  continue  to  find  favour  with  our  metaphysicians.  It
was  cherished  for  two  reasons.  In  the  first  place,  as  a
response  to  a  supposed  necessity  of  thought,  that  of
conceiving  the  universe  as  one,  i.e.  as  a  systematic  order.
This  has  turned  out  to  be  a  mere  craving,  and  a  doubt
has  arisen  as  to  whether  this  postulate  fully  understands
its  own  nature.  Is  it  really  all  that  we  need  demand  of
our  experience  that  it  should  be  an  ordered  whole  ?  Do
we  not  demand  also  that  its  order  should  be  worthy  of  our
approbation  ?  To  any  one  not  pledged  to  intellectualism
at  all  costs,  the  thesis  must  seem  indefensible.  For  the
demand  for  intellectual  order  is  but  part  of  a  greater  moral
claim,  without  which  it  is  not  really  intelligible.  For
what  has  happened  ?  We  claim  to  have  been  enabled  by
the  '  Absolute '  to  think  the  universe  as  a  whole  :  but  only
by  leaving  out,  as  irrelevant  and  unreal  '  appearance,'  all
of  its  initial  features.  The  result  is  the  self-contradiction
that  the  world  is  said  to  become  a  whole  only  by  extruding
its  parts.  Surely  a  grotesque  derision  of  our  postulate  !
To  satisfy  its  real  meaning,  therefore,  we  must  retrace  our
steps,  and  argue  either  that  the  world  is  not  a  whole  at
all,  if  that  conception  involves  the  reduction  of  all
empirical  reality  to  illusion,  or  that  if  it  is,  the  conception
has  been  grossly  misconceived,  and  must  be  amended  in
such  wise  as  to  admit  of  a  real  interaction  of  the  world's
constituents,  of  a  real  purpose,  and  a  real  history,  and  a
real  achievement  of  a  good  end.  Either,  therefore,  it  is
no  use  to  postulate  an  Absolute,  because  as  conceived  it
cannot  explain  the  facts  of  experience,  or  we  must
postulate  an  Absolute  which  is  plastic,  and  not  rigid,  and
not  subversive  of  the  '  appearances '  in  which  we  live.


ix EMPIRICISM AND  THE  ABSOLUTE 255

But  this  latter  alternative  is  ruled  out  by  the  other
main  incentive  to  Absolutism.  The  Absolute  was
cherished,  in  the  second  place,  as  a  means  to  what  all
Rationalism  craves,  viz.  an  indefeasible  guarantee  against
the  contingency  of  experience.  This  needs,  perhaps,  a
word  of  explanation.  When  we  have  seen  that  as  there
is  no  such  thing  as  '  pure  reason '  we  can  no  longer  define
the  rationalist  as  one  who  is  guided  by  it,  it  becomes
necessary  to  redetermine  his  essential  type  of  mind  in
pragmatic  terms.  And  when  we  make  a  psychological
study  of  his  character  and  his  works,  we  shall  find  that
his  master  passion  is  not  so  much  a  love  of  reason  as  a
fear  of  experience.  I  should  define  him,  therefore,  as
essentially  a  person  who  will  not  trust  experience,  who
wants  at  all  costs  to  be  insured  against  the  risks,  surprises,
and  novelties  of  life,  and  to  feel  that,  in  principle,  nothing
can  occur  which  has  not  been  provided  for  in  the  closed
circle  of  existence.  What  he  has  failed  to  perceive  is  .merely
that  such  a  guarantee  can  be  obtained  only  at  the  cost  of
rendering  all  change  and  process  unmeaning  and  illusory.
For  he  can  only  obtain  it  by  dissociating  the  stable,
immutable,  ideal  Reality  from  the  flux  of  human  reality  ;
but  once  these  are  dissevered,  what  power  can  the  former
retain  over  the  latter  ?  The  Absolute  is  set  above  change
and  process  ;  certainly  :  but  change  and  process  as  illusions
continue  to  dominate  the  illusory  world  wherein  we  are
involved  inextricably,  nor  can  any  demand  for  their  cessa-
tion be  urged  upon  an  Absolute  which  already  possesses
eternally  the  absolute  reality  to  which  we  everlastingly
aspire  in  vain.

Regarding  them,  then,  from  this  point  of  view  we  see
that  all  the  infinite  convolutions  and  contortions  of  a  priori
philosophies  mean  just  this,  that  the  contingency  of  the
future,  the  dependence  on  experience  of  what  most  we
value,  must  '  somehow '  be  eliminated.  It  was  thus  as
a  method  of  satisfying  a  natural  (and  not  wholly  ignoble)
instinct  that  rationalists  had  recourse  to  the  Absolute.
But  its  power  to  satisfy  this  emotional  demand  depended
on  its  strict  apriority  to  all  experience.  It  is  not  enough


256  STUDIES IN HUMANISM  IX

that  the  universe  should  really  be  a  harmonious  system
and  that  we  should  gradually  come  to  '  discover '  this.  It
is  not  enough  that  the  potential  harmony  should  be  a
valid  postulate  which  we  may  help  to  realise.  What  was
demanded  was  an  initial  .and  absolute  assurance  beyond
all  possibility  of  peradventure.  And  if  the  ontological
argument  is  disallowed,  the  Absolute  no  longer  yields
this.  Why  then  should  it  continue  to  be  postulated  ?

§  15.  But  may  not  the  Absolute  still  retain  its  place
as  a  postulated  satisfaction  for  other  desires  ?  I  hardly
think  so.  Man  craves  no  doubt  for  an  object  of  worship,
and  when  in  sore  distress  will  worship  almost  anything.
But  how  can  the  Absolute  afford  him  this  satisfaction,  if
finite  minds  can  hardly  worship  it  without  "  a  certain
element  of  intellectual  contradiction"  (p.  399)?  Again,
we  desire  a  moral  ideal :  but  though  Prof.  Taylor
desperately  invokes  the  doctrine  of  degrees  to  show  that
goodness  possesses  more  reality  than  badness,  and  that
therefore  the  Absolute  is  not  morally  indifferent,  he  is
driven  to  confess  that  it  is  "  not  one  of  the  combatants  ;
it  is  at  once  both  the  combatants  and  the  field  of  combat."  *
Again,  those  of  us  in  whom  intellectual  abstractions  have
not  dried  up  the  fount  of  human  sympathy  and  feeling
desire  at  least  an  explanation  of  the  existence  of  Evil
(pending  the  achievement  of  its  entire  obliteration) :  but
what  is  the  response  to  this  demand  which  Absolutism
proffers  ?  It  regards  Evil  merely  as  the  necessary  incom-
pleteness of  the  parts  of  a  whole  !

It  is  difficult  to  discuss  this  proposition  in  a  temperate
manner.  For  all  I  know  there  may  be  people  intel-
lectualist  enough  to  contemplate  without  a  twinge  the
dismembered  corpses  on  a  reeking  battlefield  and  to  say :
'  That  only  shows  how  incapable  the  parts  are  of  becoming
the  whole.'  But  that  this  defect  is  regarded  as  the  source
of  all  evil  is  certainly  not  true,  psychologically,  of  ordinary
human  feeling.  Man  is  not  miserable  because  he  is  not
the  universe,  but  because  he  seems  to  be  flung  without
rhyme  or  reason  into  a  discordant  scheme  of  things,  and

1  P.  399  n.


ix EMPIRICISM  AND  THE  ABSOLUTE 257

exposed  to  cruelty,  injustice,  and  disappointment,  disease,
decay,  and  death.  I  should  imagine  too  that  a  desire
to  be  the  Absolute  was  a  sufficiently  rare  idiosyncrasy.
Certainly  I  myself  have  no  trace  of  it ;  the  prospect
would  appal  me,  not  only  because  of  its  responsibilities,
but  also  on  account  of  its  dulness.1  Prof.  Taylor,  of
course,  may  be  differently  constituted.  If  so,  psychologic
science  should  certainly  record  this  curious  fact  about
him  ;  but  I  sincerely  hope  that  there  may  be  an  error  in
his  auto-diagnosis,  and  that  his  grievances  are  really  of  a
more  human  calibre.  And  logically  also  the  proposition
that  because  the  Whole  is  perfect,  all  its  parts  must  be  im-
perfect seems  far  from  obvious  :  to  me  it  would  seem  far
more  plausible  that  if  the  Whole  were  perfect,  all  its  parts
must  be  perfect  too,  and  that  if  any  part  so  much  as  seems
imperfect,  the  Whole  cannot  be  perfect.  And  why,  to
raise  a  prior  question,  should  it  be  assumed,  apart  from
our  interests  and  desires,  that  a  whole  is  necessarily  perfect?
Why  should  not  the  intrinsic  scheme  of  things  be  evil  at
the  core,  i.e.  utterly  discordant  or  imperfect  in  any  nameable
degree  ?  Has  any  philosopher  the  right  to  allow  his
intellectualist  proclivities  to  burke  the  whole  question  of
pessimism  in  this  flagrant  way  ?

It  would  seem,  then,  that  regarded  as  a  postulate,  the
Absolute  is  a  bad  one,  because  it  does  not  work,  nor  secure
us  what  we  wanted :  regarded  as  an  axiom  it  stands —
and  falls — with  the  ontological  fallacy.  Is  it  not  there-
fore as  a  mere  private  fad,  rooted  in  the  idiosyncrasy  of
a  few  philosophic  minds,  that  it  can  continue  to  figure,
and  that  we  must  continue  to  respect  it  ?  But  will  not
those  who  desire  real  answers  to  the  real  questions  of  life
more  and  more  audibly  protest  against  the  imprisonment
of  all  human  thought  in  the  dismal  void  of  the  conception
of  a  Whole  which  can  neither  be  altered  nor  improved,
and  demand  the  liberty  to  think  the  world  as  one  in  which
progress  and  goodness  can  be  real  ?

1  For  the  Absolute, were  it  conscious,  would  have  to  be  a  solipsist. Cp.
Essay  x.


X

IS 'ABSOLUTE IDEALISM' SOLIPSISTIC  ? l

ARGUMENT

§  i.  The  affinity  of  solipsism  to  idealism  as  such.  §  2.  An  amended  defi-
nition of  solipsism  ;  §  3,  applies  to  the  Absolute ;  and,  §  4,  escapes
the  stock  objections.  §  5-  The  difficulties  of  absolute  solipsism  ;  §  6,
destroy  absolute  idealism  ;  and,  §  7,  are  avoided  only  by  its  self-
elimination.

§  I.  THE  possibility  of  solipsism  and  its  consequences  is
one  of  many  important  philosophic  questions  which  after
long  and  undue  neglect  seem  now  at  length  to  be  attract-
ing attention.  The  question  of  solipsism  in  its  various
aspects  really  has  a  most  vital  bearing  on  the  ultimate
problems  of  metaphysics.  It  is  easy  to  see  that  every
idealistic  way  of  interpreting  experience  cannot  honestly
avoid  an  explicit  and  exhaustive  discussion  of  its  relations
to  solipsism.  For  every  approach  to  idealism  is  so  closely
beset  on  either  side  by  the  precipices  of  solipsism  that
every  step  has  to  be  careful,  and  a  false  step  must  at  once
be  fatal.  The  course  of  realistic  philosophies,  no  doubt,
is  in  this  respect  less  dangerous  ;  but  they,  too,  are
interested  in  the  problem.  They  have  a  direct  interest
in  precipitating  all  idealisms  into  solipsism.  They  tend,
however,  to  treat  it  too  lightly  as  a  reductio  ad  absurdum,
without  sufficiently  explaining  why.  Its  absurdity
appears  to  be  regarded  as  practical  rather  than  as
theoretical,  but  even  so  the  instinctive  feeling  that  solip-
sism '  won't  do '  should  be  elaborated  into  a  conclusive

1  This appeared in the  Journal  of  Philosophy,  Psychology,  and  Scientific
Methods  for  Feb.  15,  1906  (vol.  iii.  No.  4).

258


x  ABSOLUTISM  AND  SOLIPSISM 259

proof  that  it  must  of  necessity  lead  to  impracticable  con-
sequences. And  this  might  not  prove  to  be  quite  so  easy
as  it  is  customary  to  assume.  Lastly,  as  a  final  proof  of
the  prevalent  vagueness  of  philosophic  thought  on  this
subject,  it  may  be  mentioned  that  it  has  even  been
debated  whether  radical  empiricism  is  not  solipsistic.1

It  would  seem,  therefore,  decidedly  opportune  to
inquire  further  into  the  philosophic  affinities  of  solipsism,
and  more  particularly  into  its  unexplored  relations  to
absolute  idealism.  For  that  form  of  idealism  has  hitherto
escaped  suspicion  by  reason  of  the  loudness  of  its  pro-
testations against  solipsism.  But  such  excessive  protests
are  themselves  suspicious,  and  it  should  not  be  surprising
to  find  that  whether  or  not  solipsism  is  a  bad  thing  and
an  untenable,  whether  or  not  other  idealisms  can  escape
from  it,  absolute  idealism,  at  all  events,  contains  implica-
tions which  reduce  it  to  a  choice  between  solipsism  and
suicide.

§  2.  To  show  this,  our  first  step  will  have  to  be  the
amending  of  the  current  definition  of  solipsism.  For  by
reason,  doubtless,  of  the  scarcity  or  non-existence  of
solipsists  interested  in  their  own  proper  definition,  its
statement  is  usually  defective.  When  solipsism  is  defined
as  the  doctrine  that  as  all  experience  is  my  experience,  I
alone  exist,  it  is  taken  for  granted  (i)  that  there  can  be
only  one  solipsist,  and  (2)  that  he  must  be  '  I  '  and  not
'  you.'

Both  of  these  assumptions,  however,  are  erroneous.
Indeed,  the  full  atrocity  of  solipsism  only  reveals  itself
when  it  is  perceived  that  solipsists  may  exist  in  the
plural,  and  attempt  to  conceive  me  as  parts  of  them.
The  definition,  therefore,  of  solipsism  must  not  content
itself  with  providing  for  the  existence  of  a  single  solipsist,
i.e.  with  stating  how  '  I '  could  define  '  my '  solipsism  (if  I
were  a  solipsist).  It  should  provide  me  also  with  a  basis
for  argument  against  '  your '  solipsism  and  that  of  others.
For  that  is  the  really  intolerable  annoyance  of  solipsism.
If  I  felt  reckless  or  strong  enough  to  shoulder  the  respon-

1  See  the  Journal  of  Philosophy,  vol.  ii.  No.  5  and  No.  9.


260  STUDIES  IN  HUMANISM  x

sibility,  I  might  not  object  to  a  solipsism  that  made  me
the  all  by  emphasising  the  inevitable  relation  of  experience
to  an  experient ;  the  trouble  comes  when  other  experients
claim  a  monopoly  of  this  relation  in  the  face  of  conflicting
claims,  and  propose  to  reduce  me  to  incidents  in  their
cosmic  nightmare.

Solipsism,  therefore,  should  be  conceived  with  greater
generality.  It  should  cover  the  doctrine  that  the  whole
of  reality  has  a  single  owner  and  is  relative  to  a  single
experient,  and  that  beyond  such  an  experient  nothing
further  need  be  assumed,  without  implying  that  I  am  the
only  '  I '  that  owns  the  universe.  Any  '/'  will  do.  Any
I  that  thinks  it  is  all  that  is,  is  a  solipsist.  And  solipsism
will  be  true  if  any  one  of  the  many  '  I's '  that  are,  or  may
be,  solipsists  is  right,  and  really  is  all  that  is.  Provided,
of  course,  he  knows  it.

§  3.  How,  now,  can  this  amended  definition  be  applied
to  the  case  of  absolute  idealism  ?  We  must  note  first  that
my  (our)  experience  is  not  to  be  regarded  as  wholly
irrelevant  to  that  philosophy.  Indeed,  in  all  its  forms  it
seems  to  rest  essentially  on  an  argument  from  the  ideality
of  my  (our)  experience  to  the  ideality  of  all  experience.
For  the  former  is  taken  as  proof  that  all  reality  is
relative  to  a  knower,  who,  however,  is  not  necessarily
the  individual  knower,  but  may  (or  must)  be  an  all-
embracing  subject,  sustaining  us  and  all  the  world  besides.
Indeed  absolute  idealists  have  so  convinced  themselves  of
the  moral  and  spiritual  superiority  of  their  absolute
knower  that  they  habitually  speak  in  terms  of  con-
temptuous disparagement  of  their  'private  self  as  'a
miserable  abstraction.' *  And  from  the  standpoint  of  their
private  self  such  language  is  no  doubt  justified  ;  it  inflicts
on  it  salutary  humiliations  and  represses  any  tendency  it
might  otherwise  have  to  expand  itself  solipsistically  into
the  all.

But  how  does  it  look  from  the  standpoint  of  the
absolute  self?  For  that,  too,  has  been  conceived  as
a  self,  and  therefore  as  capable  of  raising  solipsistic

1  E.g.  Mr.  Bradley,  Appearance  and  Reality,  p.  259.


x  ABSOLUTISM  AND  SOLIPSISM 261

claims.  Can  the  absolute  self  be  deterred  from  excesses
of  self-elation  by  the  reflection  that  it  is  not,  after  all,  the
totality  of  existence  ?  Assuredly  not ;  for  ex  hypotJiesi
that  is  precisely  what  it  is.  It  includes  all  things  and  is
all  things  in  all  things.  If  it  cannot  be  said  to  '  create '
all  things,  it  is  only  on  the  technical  ground  that  since  a
subject  implies  an  object,  and  the  world  must  be  coeternal
with  its  '  creator,'  '  creation  '  is  an  impossible  idea.  Never-
theless, the  dependence  of  all  things  on  the  absolute  self
must  be  absolute.  And  if  it  is  conscious,  it  'must  know
this.  For  else  the  ultimate  truth  about  reality  would  be
hidden  from  the  absolute  knower,  though  apparently  re-
vealed to  the  (comparative)  ignorance  of  quite  a  number
of  philosophers.

But  is  not  this  equivalent  to  saying  (i)  that  the
Absolute  must  be  a  solipsist,  and  (2)  that  solipsism  is  the
absolute  truth  ?

§  4.  The  inference  is  plain,  and  confirmed  also  by  the
admirable  fitness  of  the  Absolute  to  play  the  solipsist  in
other  ways.  For  the  arguments  against  solipsism  have
derived  what  success  they  have  achieved  from  the  habit  of
conceiving  it  as  the  freak  of  an  individual  self;  they  recoil
helplessly  from  an  absolute  solipsism.  Even  Mr.  Bradley
would  probably  admit,  e.g.  that  the  Absolute,  being  out  of
time,  would  not  be  perplexed  by  the  necessity  of  trans-
cending its  present  experience  in  order  to  complete  itself.

Indeed,  it  may  here  be  remarked  that  Mr.  Bradley's
refutation  of  solipsism  in  Appearance  and  Reality,  ch.  xxi.,
seems  to  fail  for  (at  least)  three  reasons,  (i)  Solipsism
no  doubt  does  not  rest  upon  '  direct '  experience  merely,
i.e.  it  is  not  a  congenital,  but  an  acquired,  theory.  Still
'  indirect '  experience  must  sooner  or  later  return  to  and
enter  into  direct  present  experience,  under  penalty  of
ceasing  to  be  '  experience '  at  all.  And  so  the  solipsistic
hypothesis,  though  doubtless  it  is  not  what  any  one  starts
with,  may  suggest  itself  as  the  explanation  of  experience
and  be  confirmed,  even  as  the  solipsistic  interpretation  of
part  of  it,  viz.  our  dream-experience,  is  now  confirmed,
namely  by  the  discovery  that  there  is  after  all  nothing


262  STUDIES IN HUMANISM  x

in  direct  experience  which  forbids  its  adoption.  Mr.
Bradley,  therefore,  fails  to  pin  solipsism  down  to  the
alternative  'based  either  on  direct  or  on  indirect  experience.'
It  can  rest  on  both.  (2)  He  objects  to  the  enriching  of
the  '  this '  of  direct  experience  by  the  results  of  indirect
experience,  on  the  ground  that  they  are  imported,  i.e.  were
not  originally  in  it  (p.  251).  Yet  immediately  after,  on
p.  254,  he  disavows  the  relevance  of  the  argument  from
origins !  (3)  His  argument  never  really  gets  to,  and
consequently  never  really  gets  at,  the  solipsistic  stand-
point, and  he  always  presupposes  the  more  usual  assump-
tions as  to  "  a  palpable  community  of  the  private  self
with  the  universe."  But  the  solipsist  has  not,  and  can-
not have,  a  private  self  to  distinguish  (except  in  appear-
ance) from  the  universe,  just  because  he  is  a  solipsist  and
includes  all  things.  His  position,  therefore,  leaves  no
foothold  for  Mr.  Bradley's  argument.

§  5.  But  though  the  inference  from  absolute  idealism
to  solipsism  thus  seems  unavoidable,  it  would  be  affec-
tation to  pretend  that  it  involves  no  difficulties.  We  need
not  count  among  these  the  fact  that  it  will  probably  be
exceedingly  unpalatable  to  many  absolute  idealists,  and
may  even  compel  them  to  temper  their  denunciations
of  subjective  idealism.  For,  after  all,  they  are  men  (by
their  own  confession)  accustomed  to  follow  truth  where-
soever she  flits,  and  to  sacrifice  their  personal  feelings.
But  there  does  seem  to  arise  a  deplorable  difficulty  about
bringing  into  accord  the  Absolute's  point  of  view  with
our  own.

For  the  Absolute,  solipsism  is  true  and  forms  a  stand-
point safe,  convenient,  and  irrefragable.  But  for  us  there
arises  an  antinomy.  We  have  on  the  one  hand  to  admit
that  solipsism  is  absolute  truth,  seeing  that  the  stand-
point of  the  Absolute  is  absolute  truth,  and  that  our  im-
perfect human  truth  is  relative  to  this  standard.  Now
it  is  highly  desirable,  from  the  standpoint  of  absolute
idealism,  that  human  truth  should  be  identified  with
absolute  wherever  this  is  possible.  For  to  admit  any
divergence  between  the  two  is  very  dangerous.  If  such


x  ABSOLUTISM  AND  SOLIPSISM 263

divergence  should  culminate  in  the  assertion  that  human
truth  can  never  attain  to  absoluteness,  it  would  at  once
destroy  the  value  of  absolute  truth  as  a  human  ideal.1
An  absolute  truth  which  no  human  mind  can  enunciate
and  hold  to  be  true  acts  only  as  a  sceptical  disparagement
of  human  knowledge,  which,  moreover,  would  be  gratuitous
and  untenable.  The  absolute  idealist,  therefore,  must  seek
to  maintain  that  every  absolute  truth  which  human  minds
can  entertain  is  also  human  truth.  And  here,  fortunately,
this  is  feasible.  Solipsism  is  a  view  which  human  minds
can  entertain.  If,  therefore,  solipsism  is  true  sub  specie
Absolutiy  and  we  can  know  it  to  be  so,  we  ought  to  think
it  so.  We  ought,  that  is,  to  think  it  true  that  '  I  am  all
that  is.'  The  Absolute  has  proved  it.  And  not  only  for
itself,  but  equally  for  any  other  '  I.'  For  regarded  as  a
function  to  which  all  experience  is  related,  no  '  I '  differs
from  any  other.  Any  '  I,'  therefore,  may  claim  to  profit
by  the  truth  of  solipsism.  It  will  be  awkward,  no  doubt,
at  first,  to  have  to  conceive  a  plurality  of  solipsists,  each
claiming  to  be  the  sole  and  sufficient  reason  for  the  exist-
ence of  everything — but  I  suppose  we  might  get  used  to
that.

§  6.  It  seems,  however,  a  more  serious  implication  that
each  of  them,  if  his  claim  were  admitted,  would  render
superfluous  the  assumption  of  an  Absolute  Knower
beyond  himself.  Instead  of  being  absorbed  in  the
Absolute,  as  heretofore,  each  individual  solipsist  would
swallow  up  the  Absolute.  This  consequence  may  seem
bizarre,  but  in  metaphysics  at  least  we  must  not  refuse  to
follow  valid  arguments  to  the  queerest  conclusions.

The  same  conclusion  follows  also  in  another  way.
The  Absolute  ex  hypothesi  is  and  owns  each  '  private  self.'
And  the  Absolute  is  a  solipsist.  This  feature,  therefore,
of  the  truth  must  be  reflected  in  each  private  self.  They
must  all  be  solipsists.  But  this  is  merely  the  truth  of
solipsism  looked  at  from  the  standpoint  of  the  private
self.  It  must  claim  to  be  all  because  the  Absolute  is  all
and  it  is  the  Absolute  as  alone  the  Absolute  can  be

1  Cp.  Essay  viii.  §  4.


264  STUDIES IN HUMANISM  x

known.  The  absorption  of  the  Absolute  and  the  indi-
vidual thus  is  mutual,  because  it  is  merely  the  same  truth
of  their  community  of  substance  differently  viewed.

On  the  other  hand,  it  seems  most  unfortunate  that  in
practice  we  all  negate  the  truth  of  solipsism,  and,  Absolute
or  no,  must  continue  so  to  do.  Even  if  the  impractic-
ability of  solipsism  had  been  exaggerated,  and  philosophy
had  been  too  hasty  in  assuming  this,  the  working
assumptions  of  ordinary  life  would  be  rendered  ridiculous,
and  our  feelings  would  be  hurt,  if  solipsism  were  true.
It  may  be  contended,  however,  that  the  practical  absurdity
and  inconvenience  of  a  theory  is  no  argument  against  it,
at  least  in  the  eyes  of  a  thoroughgoing  intellectualism.
And  a  thoroughgoing  intellectualism  would  be  a  very
formidable  philosophy,  if  any  one  had  had  the  courage  to
affirm  it.

But  even  waiving  this,  does  it  not  remain  an  intellectual
difficulty  that  we  have  ourselves  destroyed  the  path  that
led  from  idealism  to  the  Absolute  ?  The  Absolute  was
reached  (rightly  or  wrongly)  as  a  way  of  avoiding  the
solipsistic  interpretation  of  experience,  which  it  was
feared  idealism  might  otherwise  entail.  It  now  turns  out
that  the  Absolute  itself  is  the  reason  for  insisting  on  the
truth  of  solipsism.  And  yet  if  solipsism  is  true,  there  is
no  reason  at  all  for  transcending  the  individual  experience
of  each  solipsist !  It  would  seem,  therefore,  that  we  can-
not admit  the  truth  of  solipsism  without  ruining  our
Absolute,  nor  admit  our  Absolute  without  admitting  the
truth  of  solipsism.  We  are  eternally  condemned,  therefore,
either  to  labour  under  an  illusion,  viz.  that  that  is  false
which  is  really  true,  and  which  we  really  know  to  be
true  though  we  cannot  treat  it  as  true  without  leaving  our
only  standpoint,  the  human,  or  to  reject  the  very  source
and  standard  of  truth  itself.

§  7.  In  conclusion,  I  can  only  very  briefly  indicate  what
seems  to  me  to  be  a  way  by  which  absolute  idealism  can
escape  these  difficulties,  even  though  it  may  perhaps  lead
it  into  further  troubles.  Of  course,  from  the  standpoint
of  absolute  idealism  the  truth  of  solipsism  is  only  valid


x  ABSOLUTISM  AND  SOLIPSISM  265

if  the  Absolute  is  assumed  to  be  conscious.  We  can,
therefore,  avoid  the  fatal  admission  by  assuming  that  it  is
not.  The  Absolute,  that  is,  is  unconscious  mind,  as
von  Hartmann  long  ago  contended.  But  what  is  un-
conscious mind?  The  inherent  weakness  of  the  'proof
of  absolute  idealism  lies  in  its  proceeding  from  the  finite
human  mind,  which  we  know,  to  an  '  infinite '  non-human
mind  very  imperfectly  analogous  to  it,  and  (apparently)
incapable  of  being  known  by  us.  This  transition  becomes
more  and  more  hazardous  the  further  Hve  depart  from  the
analogy  with  human  minds.  It  may  fairly  be  disputed,
therefore,  whether  there  is  any  sense  in  calling  an  un-
conscious mind  a  mind  at  all.  But  if  the  unconscious
Absolute  ceases  to  be  conceived  as  mind,  what  becomes
of  the  idealistic  side  of  absolutism  ?  Among  the  ab-
solutists many,  no  doubt,  would  be  quite  willing  (under
pressure)  to  move  towards  the  conclusions  thus  outlined  ;
but  would  not  this  involve  a  final  breach  with  their
theological  allies,  to  whom  the  chief  attraction  of  absolute
idealism  has  always  been  that  it  appeared  to  provide  for
a  '  spiritual '  view  of  existence  ?  But  it  might  possibly  be
contended,  on  the  other  hand,  that  neither  philosophy  nor
theology  would  suffer  irreparable  loss  by  the  self-elimina-
tion of  absolute  idealism.  And  this  contention  is  at
least  deserving  of  attention.


XI


ABSOLUTISM  AND  THE  DISSOCIATION OF
PERSONALITY1

ARGUMENT

I.  The  discrepancy  between  absolutist  theory  and  the  apparent  facts  of  life
arising  from  (l)  the  imperviousness  and  (2)  the  discords  of  the  individual
minds  supposed  to  be  included  in  the  Absolute.  II.  But  if  experience
is  appealed  to,  a  plurality  of  minds  can  be  conceived  as  subliminally
united,  and  communicating  '  telepathically.'  III.  The  possibilities  of  a
'  dissociated  personality '  as  exemplified  in  the  '  Beauchamp '  family.

IV.  These  may  be  transferred  to  the  Absolute. Its  dissociation  =  the
'  creation  of  the  world. ' The  solution  of  the  '  one  and  many '  problem.

V.  Would  a  dissociated  Absolute  be  defunct  or  mad  ?

§  i.  AMONG  the  major  difficulties  which  Absolutism  en-
counters in  its  attempts  to  conceive  the  whole  world  as
immanent  in  a  universal  mind,  must  be  reckoned  what
may  be  called  the  imperviousness  of  minds,  which  seem
capable  of  communicating  with  each  other  only  by
elaborate  codes  of  signalling  and  the  employment  of
material  machinery,  and  the  very  unsatisfactory  character
of  the  relations  between  the  subordinate  minds  which  are
supposed  to  be  included  in  the  same  Universal  Conscious-
ness. There  appear,  indeed,  to  exist  very  great  contrasts
between  the  internal  contents  of  the  alleged  Universal
Mind  and  the  contents  of  a  typically  sane  human  mind.
In  a  sane  human  mind  the  contents  of  its  consciousness
exist  harmoniously  together  ;  they  are  not  independent
of,  nor  hostile  to,  each  other ;  they  succeed  or  even
supplant  each  other  without  a  pang,  in  a  rational  and

1  This  essay  appeared  in  the  Journal  of  Philosophy,  Psychology,  and  Scientific
Methods  for  Aug.  30,  1906  (iii.  18).

266


xi  DISSOCIATION  OF  PERSONALITY 267

agreeable  way ;  even  where  there  is  what  is  meta-
phorically called  a  mental  '  struggle,'  the  process  is  not
painful  to  the  contents,  but  if  to  any  one,  to  the  mind  as
a  whole  which  feels  the  struggle  and  the  distress.  If,  on
the  other  hand,  we  conceive  ourselves  as  thoughts  of  a
Universal  Mind,  what  a  chaos  we  must  think  that  mind
to  be  !  How  strangely  dissevered  into  units  which  seem
independent  and  shut  up  in  themselves  !  How  strange
that  each  of  its  thoughts  should  fight  for  its  own  hand
with  so  little  regard  for  the  rest,  and  fight  so  furiously  !
How  strange,  in  short,  upon  this  hypothesis  that  the
world  should  appear  as  it  does  to  us !  Well  may
absolutists  be  driven  to  confess  "  we  do  not  know  why
or  how  the  Absolute  divides  itself  into  centres,  or  the
way  in  which,  so  divided,  it  still  remains  one."  l

On  the  face  of  the  apparent  facts,  therefore,  it  cannot
be  denied  that  the  assertions  of  absolute  idealism  are  not
plausible.  In  contrast  with  its  monism  the  world  on  the
face  of  it  looks  like  the  outcome  of  a  rough-and-tumble
tussle  between  a  plurality  of  constituents,  like  a  coming
together  and  battleground  of  a  heterogeneous  multitude
of  beings.  It  seems,  in  a  word,  essentially  pluralistic  in
character.  And  if,  nevertheless,  we  insist  on  forcing  on  it
a  monistic  interpretation,  does  it  not  seem  as  though  that
monism  could  only  be  carried  through  on  the  lowest
plane,  on  which  existences  really  seem  to  be  continuous,
viz.  as  extended  bodies  in  space  ?  In  other  words,  must
not  our  monism  be  materialistic  rather  than  idealistic  ?
The  ideal  union  of  existences  in  an  all-embracing  mind
seems  a  sheer  craving  which  no  amount  of  dialectical
ingenuity  can  assimilate  to  the  facts,  and  no  meta-
physic  can  a  priori  bridge  the  gulf  between  them  and
this  postulate.

There  are,  however,  so  many  to  whom  the  idealistic
monism  of  Absolutism  forms  a  faith  which  satisfies  their
spiritual  needs,  that  it  should  be  doing  them  a  real  service
to  aid  them  in  thinking  out  their  fundamental  conception
with  the  utmost  clearness  and  precision,  and  it  should  not

1  F.  H.  Bradley,  Appearance  and  Reality1,  p.  527.


268  STUDIES  IN HUMANISM  xi

be  taken  as  an  impertinence  to  point  out  how  much  more
there  is  to  be  said  in  its  favour  than  its  advocates  appear
as  yet  to  have  discovered.  For  if  only  '  absolute  idealists  '
will  consent  to  appeal  to  experience  and  empirical  evidence,
modern  psychology  puts  at  their  disposal  analogies  which
can  remove  some  of  the  difficulties  which  most  embarrass
them.

§  2.  The  imperviousness  and  mutual  exclusiveness  of
individual  minds  may  be  conceived  and  explained  by  an
extended  use  of  the  conception  of  the  threshold  of  con-
sciousness. It  is,  of  course,  well  known  that  this  is  vari-
able, that,  e.g.,  the  raising  of  the  limen  which  accompanies
intense  mental  concentration,  thrusts  into  subconscious-
ness  a  multitude  of  processes  which  normally  are  conscious.
On  the  other  hand,  much  that  normally  goes  on  in  the
organism  without  consciousness,  or  full  consciousness,
may  become  conscious  by  an  abnormal  lowering  of  the
threshold.  There  is  nothing  absurd,  therefore,  in  the
idea  that  we  might  become  conscious  again  of  every
function  of  the  body,  say,  of  the  circulation  of  the  blood,
of  the  growth  of  every  hair,  of  the  life  of  every  cell.
Indeed,  the  only  reason  why  we  are  not  now  so  conscious
would  seem  to  be  that  no  useful  end  would  be  served
thereby,  and  that  it  is  teleologically  necessary  to  restrict
consciousness  to  those  processes  which  cannot  yet  be
handed  over  with  impunity  and  advantage  to  a  material
mechanism.

Now  it  is  clearly  quite  easy  to  push  this  conception
one  step  further,  and  to  conceive  individual  minds  as
arising  from  the  raising  of  the  threshold  in  a  larger  mind,
in  which,  though  apparently  disconnected,  they  would
really  all  be  continuously  connected  below  the  limen,  so
that  on  lowering  it  their  continuity  would  again  display
itself,  and  mental  processes  could  pass  directly  from  one
mind  to  another.  Particular  minds,  therefore,  would  be
separate  and  cut  off  from  each  other  only  in  their  visible
or  supraliminal  parts,  much  as  a  row  of  islands  may
really  be  the  tops  of  a  submerged  mountain  chain  and
would  become  continuous  if  the  water-level  were  suddenly


xi  DISSOCIATION OF  PERSONALITY 269

lowered.  Or  to  use  a  more  dynamic  analogue,  they
might  be  likened  to  the  pseudopodia  which  an  amoeba
puts  forth  and  withdraws  in  the  course  of  its  vital
function.  Empirically  this  subliminal  unity  of  mind  might
be  expected  to  show  itself  in  the  direct  transmission  of
ideas  from  one  mind  to  another,  of  ideas,  moreover,  that
would  spring  up  casually,  mysteriously,  and  vaguely  in  a
mind  in  which  they  do  not  seem  to  originate.  Now  this
is  on  the  whole  the  character  of  the  alleged  phenomena
of  '  telepathy,'  and  if  absolutists  really  want  to  convince
men  of  the  plausibility  of  their  ideas,  they  could  adopt  no
more  effective  policy  than  that  of  establishing  the  reality
of  telepathy  on  an  irrefragable  basis.

§  3.  Abnormal  psychology,  moreover,  yields  further
enlightenments.  No  one  can  read  Dr.  Morton  Prince's
fascinating  book  on  the  Dissociation  of  a  Personality?
without  being  dazzled  by  the  light  thrown  on  the  nature
of  personality  by  the  tribulations  of  the  '  Beauchamp '
family.  Here  were  B.  I., 'the  Saint';  B.  III.,  'Sally';
and  B.  IV.  '  the  Idiot '  (not  to  mention  the  minor
characters)  all  apparently  complete  beings  with  ex-
pressions, beliefs,  tastes,  preferences,  etc.,  of  their  own,  so
diverse  and  distinctive  that  no  one,  who  had  once  dis-
criminated them,  could  doubt  which  of  them  was  at  any
time  manifesting  through  the  organism  they  shared  in
common.  And  yet  they  were  all  included  in  a  larger
self,  which  was  sometimes  aware  of  them  and  through
which  knowledge  occasionally  passed  from  one  to  the
other.  '  The  Saint '  and  '  the  Idiot '  were  shown  to  be
nothing  but  products  of  the  dissociation  of  '  the  original
Miss  Beauchamp,'  who,  when  she  was  recalled  into  exist-
ence by  the  astute  manipulations  of  Dr.  Prince  and  put
together  again,  remembered  the  careers  of  both,  and
recognised  them  as  morbid  states  of  herself.  In  the
relations  between  '  Sally '  and  '  the  real  Miss  Beauchamp '
the  common  ground  lay  apparently  still  deeper,  and  the
restoration  of  the  latter  did  not  mean  the  reabsorption  of
the  former,  but  only  her  suppression ;  still  it  may  fairly

1  Longmans,  1906.


270  STUDIES IN HUMANISM  xi

be  assumed  that  their  common  relation  to  the  same
body  must  indicate  the  existence  of  a  plane  on  which  (if
it  could  be  reached)  '  Sally '  and  '  the  real  Miss  Beau-
champ  '  would  be  unified,  and  would  coalesce  into  a
single  being.  It  was  thereby  shown  that  a  large  amount
of  superficial  diversity  and  dissociation  might  co-exist
with  a  substantial  unity  beneath  the  surface.  The  several
'  Miss  Beauchamps '  were  to  all  appearance  independent
personages,  variously  cognitive  of  each  other,  hating,
loving,  despising,  pitying,  fearing,  fighting  each  other,
capable  of  combining  together  or  opposing  each  other,
and  so  enjoying  their  troubled  life  that  most  of  them
were  determined  to  maintain  their  existence,  and  resented
the  restoration  of  '  the  real  Miss  Beauchamp '  as  their
own  extinction.  The  amusing  history  of  their  contentions
reads  very  much  like  that  of  a  very  disorderly  girls'  school ;
but  we  can  hardly  flatter  ourselves  that  the  case  is  too
abnormal  to  have  any  application  to  ourselves,  because
our  normal  life  too  plainly  exhibits  the  beginnings  of
similar  dissociations  of  personality  in  us,  e.g.  in  dreams,
which  the  '  Sallies '  within  us  clearly  weave  out  of  the
contents  of  our  minds  whenever  we  are  sufficiently
disturbed  to  be  susceptible  to  their  wayward  pranks.

The  great  philosophic  lesson  of  the  case  is,  however,
this,  that  the  unity  of  a  common  substance  only  con-
stitutes a  very  partial  and  imperfect  community  of
interests,  and  is  no  sort  of  guarantee  of  harmony  in  the
operations  and  aspirations  of  the  personalities  that
possess  it.

§  4.  If  now  we  apply  this  lesson  to  the  universe,  it  is
clear  that  we  have  only  to  multiply  indefinitely  the  pheno-
mena presented  by  this  remarkable  case  to  get  an  exact
representation  of  the  cosmic  situation  as  conceived  by
Absolutism.  On  this  theory  all  existences  would  be
secondary  personalities  of  the  one  Absolute,  differing
infinitely  in  their  contents,  character,  and  capacity,  and
capable  of  co-existence  and  concurrent  manifestation  to  a
much  greater  extent  than  were  the  members  of  the
'  Beauchamp '  family,  in  which  this  power  was  possessed


xi DISSOCIATION  OF  PERSONALITY 271

only  by  '  Sally.'  We  should  accordingly  all  be  the
'  Idiots,'  '  Saints,'  and  '  Sallies '  of  the  Universal  Beau-
champ  Family  which  had  been  engendered  by  the  '  dis-
sociation '  of  the  Absolute.  This  might  not  be  altogether
pleasing  to  all  of  us  (especially  to  those  who,  like  the
writer,  would  seem  to  have  been  predestined  to  be  among
the  '  Sallies '  of  the  Absolute) ;  but  the  idea  itself  would
be  quite  conceivable  and  free  from  theoretical  objection.

Indeed,  it  would  throw  much  light  upon  many
theoretic  problems.  If  discordance  of  contents  is  no  bar
to  unity  of  substance,  the  extraordinary  jumble  of  con-
flicting existences  which  the  world  appears  to  exhibit
would  become  intelligible,  and  would  cease  to  be  a  cogent
argument  in  favour  of  pluralism.  The  disappearance,
again,  of  personalities  at  death  might  merely  portend  that
they  were  temporarily  driven  off  the  scene  like  '  B.  I.'
or  '  B.  IV.,'  when  the  other,  or  '  Sally,'  controlled  the
organism  ;  '  dead,'  that  is,  in  the  sense  of  unaware  of  what
was  going  on  and  unable  to  manifest,  but  yet  capable  of
reappearing  and  resuming  the  thread  of  their  interrupted
life  after  '  losing  time.'  And  so  support  might  here  be
found  for  the  doctrines  of  palingenesia  and  of  a  cyclic
recurrence  of  events  in  an  unchanging  Absolute.

Again,  it  would  become  possible  to  explain  the  nature
and  to  define  the  date  of  '  Creation  '  better  than  hitherto.
The  '  Creation  of  the  World '  would  mean  essentially  the
great  event  of  the  '  dissociation  '  of  the  original  '  One '
into  a  '  Many,'  and  would  be  comparable  with  the
catastrophe  which  broke  up  '  the  original  Miss  Beauchamp  '
in  1893.  In  tne  Absolute's  case  the  date  itself  could  not,
of  course,  be  fixed  with  such  precision,  but  the  date  of
the  creation  (or,  perhaps,  rather  '  emanation  ')  of  the  world
might  be  defined  as  the  date  at  which  its  present  '  dis-
sociation '  set  in.  This  change  itself  it  would  hardly  be
possible,  and  would  certainly  not  be  necessary,  to  regard  as
an  intelligible  event.  For  we  should  be  absolved  from  the
duty  of  trying  to  explain  it  by  the  fact  that  ex  kypothesi
it  was  the  dissociation  of  the  rational  repose  of  the  One.

As  regards  that  One  again  some  very  pretty  problems


272  STUDIES IN  HUMANISM  xi

would  arise,  e.g.  as  to  whether  it  continued  to  exist
subliminally,  able  though  not  willing  to  recover  its  unity
and  to  reabsorb  the  world,  or  whether  its  existence  was
really  suspended,  pending  the  restoration  of  its  unity  and
the  reabsorption  of  the  Many,  or  whether  its  '  dissociation  '
into  a  plurality  of  related  beings  was  to  be  regarded  as  a
final  and  irretrievable  act  entailing  the  permanence  of  the
plural  world  thus  generated.  The  last  alternative  no
doubt  would  be  that  most  directly  indicated  by  the
analogy  of  the  '  Beauchamp '  case.  For  Miss  Beauchamp
could  hardly  have  recovered  her  unity  without  the  skilful
intervention  (from  the  outside)  of  Dr.  Morton  Prince.
But  in  the  world's  case  nothing  analogous  would  seem  to
be  conceivable.  As  by  definition  the  Absolute  is  the
totality  of  things,  it  can  never  be  exposed  to  outside
stimulation,  and  therefore  could  not,  if  once  '  dissociated,'
reunite  itself,  under  curative  suggestions  from  without.

The  same  conclusion  results  from  a  comparison  of  this
conception  of  the  relation  of  the  One  and  the  Many  with
the  very  interesting  anticipation  of  it  which  may  be  found
in  Mainlander's  Philosophic  der  Erlosung.  Mainlander
very  acutely  pointed  out  that  in  order  to  explain  the
unity  of  the  universe  it  was  quite  superfluous  to  assume  a
still  existing  One.  It  was  quite  enough  to  ascribe  to  the
Many  a  common  origin,  a  common  descent  from  the  One.
Being  a  pessimist,  he  further  suggested,  therefore,  that  the
One  had  committed  suicide,  i.e.  dissolved  itself  into  a
Many,  who  sharing  in  its  original  impulse  were  also
slowly  dying  out,  so  that  the  aimless  misery  of  existence
would  in  the  end  be  terminated  by  a  universal  death.
By  substituting,  however,  the  notion  of  a  '  dissociation '  of
the  One  for  that  of  its  '  suicide,'  it  is  possible  not  only  to
adduce  a  definite  psychological  analogy,  but  also  to  render
the  process  more  intelligible  and  to  safeguard  the  con-
tinuance of  the  world.  Altogether,  therefore,  the  vexed
problem  of  the  One  and  the  Many,  the  puzzle  of  how  to
conceive  the  reality  of  either  without  implicitly  negating
that  of  the  other,  seems  to  be  brought  several  steps  nearer
to  an  intelligible  solution  by  these  empirical  analogies.


xi DISSOCIATION  OF  PERSONALITY 273

§  5.  Not  that,  of  course,  these  conceptions  would  entail
no  drawbacks.  It  is  a  little  startling,  e.g.,  at  first  to  have
to  think  of  the  Absolute  as  morbidly  dissociated,  or  even
as  downright  mad.  But  a  really  resolute  monist  would  not
allow  himself  to  be  staggered  by  such  inferences.

For,  in  the  first  place,  the  objection  to  a  mad  Absolute
is  only  an  ethical  prejudice.  And  he  would  have  read
Mr.  Bradley  to  little  purpose,1  if  he  had  not  learnt  that
ethical  prejudices  go  for  very  little  in  the  realm  of  high
metaphysics,  and  that  the  moral  point  of  view  must  not  be
made  absolute,  because  to  make  it  so  would  be  the  death
of  the  metaphysic  of  the  Absolute.  The  fact,  therefore,
that  to  our  human  thinking  a  dissociated  Absolute  would
be  mad,  would  only  prove  the  limitations  of  our  finite
intelligence  and  should  not  derogate  from  its  infinite  perfec-
tion. Moreover,  secondly,  if  the  Absolute  is  to  include  the
whole  of  a  world  which  contains  madness,  it  is  clear  that,
anyhow,  it  must,  in  a  sense,  be  mad.  The  appearance,
that  is,  which  is  judged  by  us  to  be  madness,  must  be
essential  to  the  Absolute's  perfection.  All  that  the
analogy  suggested  does  is  to  ascribe  a  somewhat  higher
'  degree  of  reality '  to  the  madness  in  the  Absolute,  and
to  render  it  a  little  more  conceivable  just  how  it  is
essential.

Less  stalwart  monists  may,  no  doubt,  be  a  little  dis-
mayed by  these  implications  of  their  creed,  and  even  dis-
posed to  develop  scruples  as  to  whether,  when  pursued
into  details,  its  superiority  over  pluralism  is  quite  as
pronounced  as  they  had  imagined  ;  but  in  metaphysics
at  least  we  must  never  scruple  to  be  consistent,  nor
timorously  hesitate  to  follow  an  argument  whithersoever
it  leads.  It  must,  therefore,  be  insisted  on  that  absolutism
is  in  these  respects  a  perfectly  thinkable,  if  not  exactly
an  alluring,  theory.  And  we  may  well  display  our
intellectual  sympathy  with  it  by  helping  to  work  out  its
real  meaning  more  clearly  than  its  advocates  have  hitherto
succeeded  in  doing,  or  the  public  in  understanding.

1  See  Appearance  and  Reality,  ch.  xxv.


XII
ABSOLUTISM  AND RELIGION

ARGUMENT

§  I.  The  philosophic  'breakdown  of  Absolutism.  But  may  it  not  really  be  a
religion,  and  to  be  judged  as  such  ?  §  2.  The  pragmatic  value  of
religion,  and  academic  need  of  a  religious  philosophy.  §  3.  The  history
of  English  Absolutism  :  its  importation  from  Germany  as  an  antidote  to
scientific  naturalism.  §  4.  Its  success  and  alliance  with  theology.  Its
treatment  of  its  own  '  difficulties.'  §  5.  Its  revolt  against  theology.
The  victory  of  '  the  Left. '  §  6.  The  discrepancy  between  Absolutism
and  ordinary  religion,  exemplified  in  (i)  its  conception  of  'God,'  and  (2)
its  treatment  of  'Evil.'  §  7-  The  psychological  motives  for  taking
Absolutism  as  a  religion.  §  8.  Its  claim  to  have  universal  cogency
compels  us,  §  9,  to  deny  its  rationality  to  our  minds,  (i)  The  'craving
for  unity '  criticised.  (2)  The  guarantee  of  cosmic  order  unsatisfactory.
(3)  An  a  priori  guarantee  illusory.  (4)  The  meaninglessness  of  monism.
An  '  Infinite  whole '  a  contradiction.  The  inapplicability  of  absolutist
conceptions.  §  10.  The  inability  of  Absolutism  to  compromise  its  claim
to  universality,  leads  it  to  institute  a  Liberum  Veto  and  to  commit
suicide.

§  i.  WE  have  constantly  had  occasion  to  criticise  the
peculiar  form  of  rationalistic  intellectualism  which  styles
itself  Absolute  Idealism  and  may  conveniently  be  called
Absolutism,  and  to  observe  how  it  has  involved  itself
in  the  most  serious  difficulties.  It  has  been  shown,  for
example  (in  Essay  ix.),  that  the  proof  of  the  Absolute
as  a  metaphysical  principle,  and  its  value  when  assumed,
were  open  to  the  gravest  objections.  It  has  been  shown
(in  Essays  ii.-vii.)  that  the  absolutist  theory  of  knowledge
has  completely  broken  down,  and  must  always  end  in
scepticism.  It  has  been  shown  (in  Essay  x.)  that  if  the
idealistic  side  of  the  theory  is  insisted  on,  it  must  develop
into  solipsism.  It  has  been  shown  (in  Essay  xi.)  that

274


xii  ABSOLUTISM AND  RELIGION  275

if  a  serious  attempt  is  made  to  derive  the  Many  from  the
One,  to  deduce  individual  existences  from  the  Absolute,
the  result  inevitably  is  that  the  Absolute  is  either  '  dis-
sociated,' or  mad,  or  defunct,  because  it  has  committed
suicide  in  a -temporary  fit  of  mental  aberration.

In  short,  if  a  tithe  of  what  we  have  now  and  formerly1
had  to  urge  against  the  Absolute  be  well  founded,
Absolutism  must  be  one  of  the  most  gratuitously  absurd
philosophies  which  has  ever  been  entertained.  And  if
so,  how  comes  it  that  men  professedly  and  confessedly
pledged  to  the  pursuit  of  pure  unadulterated  truth  can
be  found  by  the  dozen  to  adhere  to  so  indefensible  a
superstition  ?

To  answer  this  question  will  be  the  aim  of  this  essay.

It  is  not  enough  to  reply,  in  general  terms,  what  at
once  occurs  to  the  student  of  human  psychology,  viz.
that  intellectual  difficulties  are  hardly  ever  fatal  to
an  attractive  theory,  that  logical  defects  rarely  kill
beliefs  to  which  men,  for  psychological  reasons,  remain
attached.  This  is  doubtless  true,  but  does  not  enable  us
to  understand  the  nature  of  the  attraction  and  attachment
in  this  case.  Nor  can  it  be  reconciled  with  the  manifest
acumen  of  many  absolutist  thinkers  to  suppose  that  they
have  simply  failed  to  notice,  or  to  understand,  the  objec-
tions brought  against  their  theory.  If,  therefore,  they
have  failed  to  meet  them  with  a  logical  refutation,  the
reason  must  lie  in  the  region  of  psychology.

And  this  reflection  may  suggest  to  us  that  we  have,
perhaps,  unwittingly  misunderstood  Absolutism,  and  done
it  a  grave  injustice.

For  we  have  treated  it  as  a  rational  theory,  resting  its
claim  on  rational  grounds,  and  willing  to  abide  by  the
results  of  logical  criticism.  But  this  may  have  been  a
huge  mistake.  What  if  this  assumption  was  wrong?
What  if  its  real  appeal  was  not  logical,  but  psychological,
not  to  the  '  reason '  but  to  the  feelings,  and  more
particularly  to  the  religious  feelings  ?  Does  not  Mr.
Bradley  himself  hint  that  philosophy  (his  own,  of  course)

1  Cp.  Humanism,  pp.  2-4,  14,  59,  191,  286-7  •  and  Riddles  of  the  Sphinx,  ch.  x.


276  STUDIES IN HUMANISM  xn

may  be  "  a  satisfaction  of  what  may  be  called  the
mystical  side  of  our  nature  "  ?  l

If  so,  a  fully-developed  case  of  Absolutism  would
never  yield  to  merely  philosophic  treatment.  It  might
be  driven  to  confess  the  existence  of  logical  difficulties,
but  these  would  not  dismay  it.  It  would  go  on  believing
in  what  to  its  critics  seemed  the  absurd  and  impossible,
with  a  pathetic  and  heroic  faith  that  all  would  '  some  day ' 2
be  explained  '  somehow.' 3

§  2.  This  possibility,  at  any  rate,  deserves  to  be
examined.  For  religions  are  as  such  deserving  of  re-
spectful and  sympathetic  consideration  from  a  Humanist
philosophy.  They  are  pragmatically  very  potent  influ-
ences on  human  life,  and  the  religious  instinct  is  one  of
the  deepest  in  human  nature.  It  is  also  one  of  the
queerest  in  the  wide  range  of  its  manifestations.  There
are  no  materials  so  unpromising  that  a  religion  cannot  be
fashioned  out  of  them.  There  are  no  conclusions  so
bizarre  that  they  cannot  be  accepted  with  religious
fervour.  There  are  no  desires  so  absurd  that  their  satis-
faction may  not  be  envisaged  as  an  act  of  worship,  lifting
a  man  out  of  his  humdrum  self.

There  is,  therefore,  no  antecedent  absurdity  in  the
idea  that  Absolutism  is  at  bottom  a  religious  creed,  a
development  of,  or  a  substitute  for,  or  perhaps  even  a  per-
version of,  some  more  normal  form  of  religious  feeling,  such
as  might  well  be  fomented  in  an  academic  atmosphere.

Once  this  theory  is  mooted,  confirmations  pour  in  on
every  side.  The  central  notion  of  Absolutism,  the
Absolute  itself,  is  even  now  popularly  taken  to  be
identical  with  the  '  God '  of  theism.  It  seems,  at  any
rate,  grand  and  mysterious  and  all-embracing  enough  to
evoke,  and  in  a  way  to  satisfy,  many  of  the  religious
feelings,  as  being  expressive  of  the  all-pervasive  mystery
of  existence.

There  is,  moreover,  in  every  university,  and  especially

1  Appearance  and  Reality,  p.  6.

2  Cp.  Dr.  McTaggart's  Hegelian  Dialectic,  ch.  v.

3  Cp.  Mr.  Bradley's  Appearance  and  Reality ,  passim.


xii  ABSOLUTISM  AND  RELIGION  277

in  Oxford,  a  standing  demand  for  a  religious,  or  quasi-
religious,  philosophy.  For,  rightly  or  wrongly,  established
religions  always  cater  in  the  first  place  for  the  unreflective.
They  pass  current,  and  are  taught,  in  forms  which  cannot
bear  reflection,  as  youthful  minds  grow  to  maturity.  Con-
sequently, when  reflection  awakens,  they  have  to  be
transformed.  This  is  what  gives  his  opportunity  to  the
religious  philosopher.  And  also  to  the  irreligious  phil-
osopher, who  '  mimics '  him.  They  both  offer  to  the
inquiring  minds  of  the  young  a  general  framework  into
which  to  fit  their  workaday  beliefs — a  framework  which
in  some  respects  is  stronger  and  ampler,  though  in  others
more  meagre  and  less  lovely,  than  the  childlike  faith
which  reflection  is  threatening  to  dissolve,  unless  it  is  re-
modelled. Hence  the  curious  fascination,  at  a  certain
stage  of  mental  development,  of  some  bold  '  system  '  of
metaphysics,  which  is  accepted  with  little  or  no  scrutiny
of  its  wild  promises,  while  in  middle  age  the  soul  soon
comes  to  crave  for  more  solid  and  less  gaseous  nutriment.
It  is  proper,  then,  and  natural,  that  an  absolutist  meta-
physic  should  take  root  in  a  university,  and  flourish
parasitically  on  the  fermentation  of  religious  instincts
and  beliefs.

§  3.  The  history  of  English  Absolutism  distinctly  bears
out  these  anticipations.  It  was  originally  a  deliberate
importation  from  Germany,  with  a  purpose.  And  this
purpose  was  a  religious  one — that  of  counteracting  the
anti-religious  developments  of  Science.  The  indigenous
philosophy,  the  old  British  empiricism,  was  useless  for
this  purpose.  For  though  a  form  of  intellectualism,  its
sensationalism  was  in  no  wise  hostile  to  Science.  On  the
contrary,  it  showed  every  desire  to  ally  itself  with,  and  to
promote,  the  great  scientific  movement  of  the  nineteenth
century,  which  penetrated  into  and  almost  overwhelmed
Oxford  between  1850  and  1870.

But  this  movement  excited  natural,  and  not  un-
warranted, alarm  in  that  great  centre  of  theology.  For
Science,  flushed  with  its  hard -won  liberty,  ignorant  of
philosophy,  and  as  yet  unconscious  of  its  proper  limitations,


278  STUDIES IN HUMANISM  xn

was  decidedly  aggressive  and  over-confident.  It  seemed
naturalistic,  nay,  materialistic,  by  the  law  of  its  being.
The  logic  of  Mill,  the  philosophy  of  Evolution,  the  faith
in  democracy,  in  freedom,  in  progress  (on  material  lines),
threatened  to  carry  all  before  them.

What  then  was  to  be  done  ?  Nothing  directly  ;  for  on
its  own  ground  Science  seemed  invulnerable,  and  had
a  knack  of  crushing  the  subtlest  dialectics  by  the  knock-
down force  of  sheer  scientific  fact.  But  might  it  not  be
possible  to  change  the  venue,  to  shift  the  battle-ground
to  a  region  ubi  instabilis  terra  innabilis  unda,  where  the
land  afforded  no  firm  footing,  where  the  frozen  sea  could
not  be  navigated,  where  the  very  air  was  thick  with  mists,
so  that  phantoms  might  well  pass  for  realities — the
realm,  in  short,  of  metaphysics  ?  Germany  in  those  days
was  still  the  promised  land  of  the  metaphysical  mystery-
monger,  where  everything  was  doubted,  and  everything
believed,  just  because  it  had  been  doubted,  and  the
difference  between  doubt  and  belief  seemed  to  be  merely
a  question  of  the  point  of  view  :  it  had  not  yet  become
great  by  the  scientific  exploitation  of  '  blood  and  iron '
(including  organic  chemistry  and  metallurgy).

Emissaries  accordingly  went  forth,  and  imported
German  philosophy,  as  the  handmaid,  or  at  least  the
ally,  of  a  distressed  theology.  Men  began  to  speak  with
foreign  tongues,  and  to  read  strange  writings  of  Kant's
and  Hegel's,  whose  very  uncouthness  was  awe-inspiring
and  terrific.  Not  that,  however,  it  should  be  supposed
that  the  Germanisers  were  all  consciously  playing  into
the  hands  of  clericalism,  as  Mark  Pattison  insinuated.
T.  H.  Green,  for  example,  was,  by  all  accounts,  sincerely
anxious  to  plunge  into  unfathomed  depths  of  thought,
and  genuinely  opposed  to  the  naturalistic  spirit  of  the
age ;  and  if  there  was  anything  transparent  about  his
mind,  it  was  assuredly  its  sincerity.  His  philosophy — so
it  was  commonly  supposed  by  Balliol  undergraduates  in
the  eighties — was  encouraged  by  the  Master  (Jowett)  on
the  ground  that,  inasmuch  as  metaphysics  was  a  sort  of
intellectual  distemper  incidental  to  youth,  it  was  well


xir  ABSOLUTISM AND  RELIGION  279

that  it  should  assume  a  form  not  too  openly  divergent
from  the  established  religion.1

Others,  again,  welcomed  the  new  ideas  on  pedagogical
grounds,  being  haunted  by  the  academic  dread  lest  Mill's
Logic  should  render  philosophy  too  easy,  or  at  least
contrast  too  markedly  with  the  crabbed  hints  of  the
Posterior  Analytics.  And  so  German  Absolutism  con-
cluded its  alliance  with  British  theology,  soon  after  its
demise  in  its  native  country.

§  4.  The  results  at  first  seemed  excellent,  theologically
speaking.  The  pressure  of  '  modern  science '  was  at  once
relieved.  It  soon  began  to  be  bruited  abroad  that  there
had  been  concocted  in  Germany  a  wonderful  '  metaphysical
criticism  of  science,'  hard  to  extract  and  to  understand,
but  marvellously  efficacious.  It  was  plain,  at  any  rate,  that
the  most  rabid  scientists  could  make  no  reply  to  it — because
they  had  insuperable  difficulties  in  comprehending  the  terms
in  which  it  was  couched.  Even  had  they  learnt  the
language,  the  coarser  fibre  of  their  minds  would  have
precluded  their  appreciating  the  subtleties  of  salvation  by
Hegelian  metaphysics.  So  it  was  rarely  necessary  to  do
more  than  recite  the  august  table  of  the  a  priori  categories
in  order  to  make  the  most  audacious  scientist  feel  that  he
had  got  out  of  his  depth  ;  while  at  the  merest  mention
of  the  Hegelian  Dialectic  all  the  '  advanced  thinkers '  of
the  time  would  flee  affrighted.

The  only  drawback  of  this  method  was  that  so  few
could  understand  it,  and  that,  in  spite  of  the  philosophers,
the  besotted  masses  continued  to  read  Darwin  and
Spencer,  Huxley  and  Haeckel.  But  even  here  there
were  compensations.  What  can  never  be  popularised,
can  never  be  vulgarised.  What  cannot  be  understood,
cannot  be  despised  or  refuted.  And  it  is  grateful  and
comforting  to  feel  oneself  the  possessor  of  esoteric
knowledge,  even  when  it  does  not  go  much  beyond
ability  to  talk  the  language  and  to  manipulate  the  catch-
words.

1  In  reality,  however,  he  seems  latterly  to  have  deplored  Green's  influence  as
tending  to  draw  men  away  from  the  practical  pursuits  of  life.


280  STUDIES  IN  HUMANISM  xn

As  regards  the  direct  support  German  philosophy
afforded  to  Christian  theology,  on  the  other  hand,  it  would
be  a  mistake  to  lay  too  much  stress  on  it.  Kant's  three-
fold postulation  of  God,  Freedom,  and  Immortality  could
not  add  much  substance  to  an  attenuated  faith.  And
besides  the  agnostic  element  in  Kant,  which  had  seemed
well  enough  so  long  as  Mansel  used  it  to  defend  orthodoxy,
was  recognised  as  distinctly  dangerous,  when  Spencer,
soon  afterwards,  proceeded  to  elaborate  it  into  his
doctrine  of  the  Unknowable.  Hegel's  '  philosophy  of
religion,'  indeed,  promised  more.  It  professed  to  identify
God  the  Father  with  the  '  thesis,'  God  the  Son  with  the
'  antithesis,'  and  God  the  Holy  Ghost  with  the  '  synthesis  '
of  a  universal  '  Dialectic/  and  thus  to  provide  an
a  priori  rational  deduction  of  the  Trinity.  But  it  could
hardly  escape  the  acuteness  of  the  least  discerning
theologians  that,  though  such  combinations  might  seem
'  suggestive '  as  '  aids  to  faith,'  they  were  not  quite
demonstrative  or  satisfactory.  The  more  discerning
realised,  of  course,  the  fundamental  differences  between
Hegelian  philosophy  and  Christian  theology.  They
recognised  that  the  Hegelian  Absolute  was  not,  and
could  not  be,  a  personal  God,  that  its  real  aim  was  the
self-development,  not  of  the  Trinity,  but  of  an  immanent
'  Absolute  Idea,'  and  that  the  world,  and  not  the  Holy
Ghost,  was  entitled  to  the  dignity  of  the  Higher  Synthesis.
They  felt  also  the  awkwardness  of  supporting  a  religion
which  rested  its  appeal  on  a  unique  series  of  historical
events  by  a  philosophy  which  denied  the  ultimate
significance  of  events  in  Time.

So,  on  the  whole,  Absolutism  did  not  prove  an
obedient  handmaid  to  theology,  but  rather  a  useful  ally  :
their  association  was  not  service  so  much  as  symbiosis,
and  even  this  was  eventually  to  develop  into  hostile
parasitism.

The  gains  of  theology  were  chiefly  indirect.  Phil-
osophy instituted  a  higher,  and  not  yet  discredited,  court
for  the  trial  of  intellectual  issues,  to  which  appeal  could
be  made  from  the  decisions  of  Science.  And  it  checked,


xii  ABSOLUTISM AND  RELIGION  281

and  gradually  arrested,  the  flowing  tide  of  Science,  if
not  among  scientific  workers,  yet  among  the  literary
classes.

It  supported  theology,  moreover,  by  a  singularly  useful
parallel.  Here  was  another  impressive  study  of  the
abstrusest  kind,  with  claims  upon  life  as  great  and  as
little  obvious  as  those  of  theology,  and  yet  not  open  to
the  suspicion  of  being  a  pseudo-science  devised  for  the
hoodwinking  of  men.  For  was  not  philosophy  a  purely
intellectual  discipline,  a  self-examination  of  Pure  Reason  ?
If  it  was  abstract,  and  obscure,  and  unprofitable,  and
hard  to  understand,  and  full  of  inherent  '  difficulties,'
why  then  condemn  theology  as  irrational  and  fraudulent
for  exhibiting,  though  to  a  less  degree,  the  like  character-
istics ?

Thus  could  theologians  use  the  defects  of  philosophy
to  palliate  those  of  theology,  and  to  assuage  the  doubts
of  pupils,  willing  and  anxious  to  clutch  at  whatever
would  enable  them  to  retain  their  old  beliefs,  by  repre-
senting them  as  inevitable,  but  not  fatal,  imperfections
incidental  to  the  make-up  of  a  '  finite '  mind.

To  a  large  extent,  moreover,  these  services  were
mutual.  It  was  the  religious  interest,  and  the  need  of
studying  theology,  which  brought  young  men  to  college,
and  so  provided  the  philosophers  with  hearers  and
disciples.

And  theology  reciprocated  also  by  infusing  equanimity
into  philosophy  with  regard  to  its  own  intrinsic  '  diffi-
culties.' For,  alas,  nothing  human  is  perfect,  not  even
our  theories  of  perfect  knowledge  !  The  new  philosophy
soon  developed  most  formidable  difficulties,  which  would
have  appalled  the  unaided  reason.  It  was  taught
to  '  recognise '  these  '  difficulties '  (when  they  could  no
longer  be  concealed),  and  to  plead  the  frankness  of
this  recognition  as  an  atonement  for  the  failure  to
remove  them,  to  analyse  their  grounds,  or  to  reconsider
the  assumptions  which  had  led  to  them.  Or,  if  more
was  demanded,  it  was  shown  that  they  were  old,  that
similar  objections  had  been  brought  ages  ago  (and


282  STUDIES IN HUMANISM  xn

remained  similarly  unanswered)  ;  and,  finally,  the  philo-
sophic exposition  of  the  nature  of  Pure  Reason  would  end
in  an  exhortation  to  a  reverent  agnosticism,  based  on
a  recognition  of  the  necessary  limitations  of  the  human
mind  !  Only  very  rarely  did  bewildered  pupils  note  the
discrepancy  between  the  mystical  conclusion  and  the
initial  promise  of  a  completely  rational  procedure  :  after
a  protracted  course  of  abstract  thinking  the  exhausted
human  mind  is  only  too  apt  to  acquiesce  in  a  confession
of  failure,  which  seems  to  equalise  the  master's  and  the
pupil's  intellect.  Lest  we  should  seem,  however,  to  be
talking  in  the  air,  let  us  adduce  a  notorious  example  of
such  a  '  philosophic  '  treatment  of  a  '  difficulty.'

It  has  now  for  more  than  a  quarter  of  a  century  been
recognised  by  absolutist  philosophy  that  there  exists  at
its  core  a  serious  gap  between  the  human  and  the  super-
human '  ideal '  which  it  deifies,  and  that  it  possesses  no
logical  bridge  by  which  .to  pass  from  the  one  to  the  other.
Thus  T.  H.  Green  professes  to  discover  that  knowledge  is
only  possible  if  the  human  consciousness  is  conceived  as
the  '  reproduction '  in  time  of  an  Eternal  Universal  Con-
sciousness out  of  time.  But  as  to  the  nature  of  the
connexion  and  interaction  between  them,  as  to  how  the
Eternal  Consciousness  renders  human  minds  its  '  vehicles,'
he  can,  of  course,  say  nothing.  Nay,  he  is  finally  driven
to  confess  that  these  two  '  aspects '  of  consciousness,
qua  human  and  qua  eternal,  "  cannot  be  comprehended  in
a  single  conception."  l  In  other  words,  '  consciousness  '
is  merely  a  word  used  to  cover  the  fundamental  dis-
crepancy between  two  incompatible  conceptions,  and  an
excuse  for  shirking  the  most  fundamental  of  philosophic
problems.

This  being  so,  it  is  interesting  to  see  what  his  friends
and  followers  have  made  of  a  situation  which  ought
surely  to  be  intolerable  to  a  rational  theory.  Has  its
rationalistic  pride  been  in  any  way  abated  ?  Not  a  whit.

1  Prolegomena  to  Ethics,  §  68.  Capt.  H.  V.  Knox  has  drawn  attention  to
the  vital  importance  of  this  extraordinary  passage  (Mind,  x.  N.S.  No.  33,  vol.  ix.
p.  64),  and  Mr.  Sturt  has  also  commented  on  it  in  Idola  Theatri,  p.  238.


xii  ABSOLUTISM  AND  RELIGION  283

Has  its  doctrine  ceased  to  be  taught  ?  Not  at  all.  Has
it  been  amended  ?  In  no  wise.  Have  attempts  been
made  to  bridge  the  chasm  ?  No  ;  but  its  existence  has
repeatedly  been  '  recognised.'  Mr.  Bradley  '  recognises  '
it  as  the  problem  how  the  Absolute  '  transmutes '
'  appearances '  ( =  the  world  of  our  experience)  into
'  reality '  (  =  his  Utopian  ideal)  ;  but  his  answer  is  merely
that  the  trick  is  achieved  by  a  gigantic  '  somehow.'  Mr.
Joachim  '  recognises '  it  as  '  the  dual  nature  of  human
experience,' l  but  will  not  throw  over  it  even  a  mantle  of
words.  Prof.  J.  S.  Mackenzie  '  recognises '  it  by  remark-
ing "  that  a  truly  conceptual  object  cannot,  properly
speaking,  be  contained  in  a  divine  mind,  any  more  than  in
a  human  mind,  unless  the  divine  mind  is  something  wholly
different  from  anything  that  we  understand  by  a  mind."  :
Has  the  difficulty  led  to  any  analysis  of  its  grounds,  or
revision  of  its  assumptions  ?  Not  to  my  knowledge.  It
has  been  '  recognised,'  and  is  now  recognised  as  '  old ' !
and  familiar  and  venerable  ;  and  what  more  would  you
have  ?  Surely  not  an  answer  ?  Surely  not  a  Rationalism
which  shall  be  rational  ?  It  is,  and  remains,  a  '  difficulty,'
and  that  is  the  end  of  it  !

§  5.  But  though  in  point  of  intellectual  achievement
our  '  Anglo-Hegelian  '  philosophy  must  be  pronounced  to
be  stationary,  its  mundane  history  has  continued,  and  its
relations  to  theology  have  undergone  a  startling  change.
As  it  has  become  more  firmly  rooted,  and  as,  owing  to
the  reform  of  the  universities,  the  tutorial  staff  of  the
colleges  has  ceased  to  be  wholly  clerical,  the  alliance
between  Absolutism  and  theology  has  gradually  broken
down.  Their  co-operation  has  completely  disappeared.
It  now  sounds  like  an  untimely  reminiscence  of  a  bygone
era  when  Mr.  Bradley  vainly  seeks  to  excite  theological
odium  against  his  philosophic  foes.4

In  part,  no  doubt,  the  need  for  the  alliance  has  grown
less.  Science  is  far  less  aggressive  towards  theology  than

1  Cp.  Essay  vi.  §  3.

2  Mind,  xv.  N.S.  59,  p.  326  «. Italics  mine.

8  As  we  have  seen,  it  is  essentially  as  old  as  Plato.
4  Cp.  Essay  iv.  §  15.


284  STUDIES IN HUMANISM  xn

of  yore.  It  has  itself  probed  into  unsuspected  depths  of
being,  which  make  blatant  materialism  seem  a  shallow
thing,  and  have  destroyed  the  illusion  that  it  knows  all
about  '  matter.'  It  has  become  humble,  and  begun  to
wonder  whether,  after  all,  its  whole  knowledge  is  more
than  '  a  system  of  differential  equations  which  work '  ;  in
other  words,  it  has  ceased  to  be  dogmatic,  and  is  dis-
covering that  its  procedure  is,  in  truth,  pragmatic.

Absolutism,  on  the  other  hand,  has  grown  secure  and
strong  and  insolent.  It  has  developed  a  powerful  '  left
wing,'  which,  as  formerly  in  Germany,  has  triumphed
within  the  school,  and  quarrelled  with  theology.  Mr.
F.  H.  Bradley,  Dr.  McTaggart,  Prof.  B.  Bosanquet,  Prof.
A.  E.  Taylor,  Mr.  H.  H.  Joachim,  Prof.  J.  S.  Mackenzie  are
among  its  best-known  representatives.  The  '  right  wing '
seems  to  have  almost  wholly  gone  from  Oxford,  though
it  still  appears  to  flourish  in  Glasgow.  As  for  the  '  centre,'
it  is  silent  or  ambiguous.1

But  about  the  views  of  the  Left  there  can  be  no
doubt.  It  is  openly  and  exultingly  anti-theological.  It
disclaims  edification.  It  has  long  ago  made  its  peace  with
Naturalism,  and  boasts  that  it  can  accept  all  the  conclu-
sions of  the  latter,  and  reproduce  them  in  its  own  language.
It  has  now  swallowed  Determinism  whole  and  without  a
qualm.2  As  a  whole,  it  has  a  low  opinion  of  ethics,  and
it  has  even  lapsed  into  something  remarkably  resembling
hedonism.3  In  short,  its  theological  value  has  become  a
formidable  minus  quantity,  which  is  mitigated  only  by  the
technicality  of  its  onslaughts,  which  in  their  usual  form  can
be  appreciated  only  by  the  few.  Still,  even  this  consola-
tion fails  in  dealing  with  Dr.  McTaggart's  most  recent
and  entertaining  work,  Some  Dogmas  of  Religion,  which
puts  the  case  against  Christianity  quite  popularly,  with  a
lucidity  which  cannot  be  surpassed,  and  a  cogency  which
can  be  gainsaid  only  by  extensive  reliance  on  the  pragmatic

1  Prof.  J.  A.  Stewart's  invitation  to  the  school  to  refute  Mr.  Bradley  before
continuing  the  use  of  edifying  phrases  has  met  with  no  response  whatever  (see
Mind,  N.S.  xi.  p.  376).

2  T.  H.  Green  was  a  '  soft '  determinist.

3  Cp. F. H. Bradley's  Appearance  and  Reality,  ch. xxv.  ; A. E.  Taylor's
Problem  of  Conduct ;  and  J.  M.  E.  McTaggart's  Hegelian  Cosmology.


xii  ABSOLUTISM AND  RELIGION  285

considerations  which  EJr.  McTaggart  has  conspicuously
neglected.  He  has,  indeed,  relented  in  some  few  respects,
and  no  longer  defines  '  God '  as  an  impossible  being,  as  he
did  in  his  Hegelian  Cosmology,  and  now  admits  that  a
finite  God  is  thinkable  ;  but  he  still  prefers  to  call  himself
an  atheist,  and  there  is  no  saying  how  much  mischief  his
popular  style  might  not  do  among  the  masses  were  not
his  book  published  at  half-a-guinea  net.

All  this  is  very  sad  in  many  ways  ;  but  one  could
pardon  these  attacks  on  theology  if  only  they  advanced
the  cause  of  truth.  For  we,  of  course,  in  no  wise  hold  a
brief  for  theology,  which  we  have  reason  to  regard  as  in
the  main  an  intellectualistic  corruption  of  an  essentially
pragmatic  religion.  Unfortunately,  however,  the  prosperity
of  Absolutism  does  not  mean  an  end  to  our  intellectual
troubles.  We  have  already  seen  that,  when  consistently
thought  out,  it  ends  in  scepticism.  And  it  has  not  merely
quarrelled  with  theology,  but  is  undermining  a  far  greater
thing,  namely,  religion,  in  its  ordinary  acceptance,  as  we
must  now  try  to  understand.

§  6.  Absolutism  may  be  itself  a  religion,  but  it  diverges
very  widely  from  what  is  ordinarily  known  as  such,  and
relies  on  motives  which  are  not  the  ordinary  religious  feel-
ings. This  may  be  shown  as  regards  the  two  most  crucial
cases — the  problem  of  '  God  '  and  the  problem  of  Evil.

( i )  There  is  an  essential  difference  as  regards  the  con-
ception of  '  God  '  between  the  absolutist  and  the  religious
man.  The  term  '  God '  is  used  by  philosophers,  perhaps
unavoidably,  with  a  great  latitude  of  meanings,  and  so
disputants  too  often  finish  with  the  confession  "  your  '  God'
is  my  '  devil ' ! "  But  still,  if  we  apply  the  pragmatic
test,  it  must  be  possible  to  discover  some  points  in  which
the  consequences  of  a  belief  in  a  '  God '  differ  from  those
of  a  belief  in  no  '  God.'  '  God,'  that  is,  if  we  really  and
honestly  mean  something  by  the  term,  must  stand  for
something  which  has  a  real  influence  on  human  life.  And
in  the  ordinary  religious  consciousness  '  God '  does  in
point  of  fact  stand  for  something  vital  and  valuable  in
this  pragmatic  way.  In  its  most  generalised  form  '  God  '


286  STUDIES IN  HUMANISM  XI1

probably  stands  for  two  connected  principles.  It  means
(a)  a  human  moral  principle  of  Help  and  Justice  ;  and  (b}
an  aid  to  the  intellectual  comprehension  of  the  universe,
sometimes  supposed  to  amount  to  a  complete  solution  of
the  world-problem.  In  the  ordinary  religious  conscious-
ness, however,  these  two  (rightly)  run  together,  and  coalesce
into  the  postulate  of  a  Supreme  Being,  because  no  intel-
lectual explanation  of  the  world  would  seem  satisfactory,  if
it  did  not  also  provide  a  moral  explanation,  and  a  response
to  human  appeals.

But  in  Absolutism  these  two  sides  of  '  God  '  fall  hope-
lessly asunder.  In  vain  does  T.  H.  Green,  after  conceiving
'  God  '  as  a  purely  intellectual  principle,  declare  that  '  God  '
for  religious  purposes  must  also  be  such  as  to  render
morality  possible.1  For  Absolutism  conceives  pure  in-
tellectual satisfaction  as  self-sufficing,  and  puts  it  out  of
relation  to  our  moral  nature,  nay,  to  all  human  interests.
But  if  so,  the  moral  side  of  '  God '  must  wholly  disappear.
If  the  Absolute  is  God,  '  God '  cannot  be  personal,  or
interested  in  persons  as  such.  Its  relation  to  persons
must  be  a  purely  logical  relation  of  inclusiveness.  The
Absolute  includes  everything,  of  course,  and  ex  officio.
But  the  Whole  cannot  be  partial,  in  either  sense  of  the
term.  It  must  sustain  all  its  '  parts  '  impartially,  because
it  approves  of  them  all  alike — inasmuch  as  it  maintains
them  in  existence.

The  ordinary  religious  consciousness,  on  the  other
hand,  definitely  postulates  a  partial  God,  a  God  to  succour
and  to  sympathise  with  us  poor  '  finite '  fragments  of  a
ruthless  Whole.  As  Mr.  Bradley  scornfully  but  quite
truly  puts  it,2  "the  Deity,  which  they  want,  is  of
course  finite,  a  person  much  like  themselves,  with
thoughts  and  feelings  mutable  in  the  process  of  time.3
They  desire  a  person  in  the  sense  of  a  self,  among
and  over  against  other  selves,  moved  by  personal
relations  and  feelings  towards  these  others  —  feelings

1  Works,  ii.  p.  74  ».

2  Appearance  and  Reality1,  p.  532. Italics  mine.

8  Cp.  Plato's  description  of  an  '  Idea '  which  should  be  really  human  in  the
Sophist,  249  ;  and  p.  67.


xii  ABSOLUTISM AND  RELIGION  287

and  relations  which  are  altered  by  the  conduct  of
the  others.  And,  for  their  purpose,  what  is  not  this,  is
really  nothing.  Of  course  for  us  to  ask  seriously  if  the
Absolute  can  be  personal  in  such  a  way,  would  be  quite
absurd."  The  absolutist  '  God,'  therefore,  is  no  moral
principle.  Neither  has  it  scientific  value,  even  when  taken
as  an  intellectual  principle.  For  it  is  not  the  explanation
of  anything  in  particular,  just  because  it  is  the  explana-
tion of  everything  in  general  ;  and  what  is  the  meaning  of
a  general  explanation  which  explains  nothing  in  particular,
is  apparently  a  question  it  has  not  yet  occurred  to  our
absolutists  to  ask.

It  is  quite  clear,  however,  that  the  Absolute  is  not
God  in  the  ordinary  sense,  and  many  of  our  leading
absolutists  are  now  quite  explicit  in  avowing  this,  and
even  in  insisting  on  it.  As  we  have  already  seen  what
Dr.  McTaggart  thinks  (§  5),  let  us  once  more  consult  Mr.
Bradley's  oracle.  "  We  may  say  that  God  is  not  God,
till  he  has  become  all  in  all,  and  that  a  God  which  is  all
in  all,  is  not  the  God  of  religion."  "  We  may  say  that
the  God,  which  could  exist,  would  most  assuredly  be  no
God."  "  Short  of  the  Absolute,  God  cannot  rest,  and
having  reached  this  goal,  he  is  lost  and  religion  with
him."  *

(2)  The  problem  of  Evil  is  probably  the  most  funda-
mental, and  certainly  the  most  pressing,  of  religious
problems  ;  it  is  also  that  most  manifestly  baffling  to
ordinary  religious  feeling.  It  is,  however,  divisible  into  a
practical  and  a  theoretic  problem.  The  former  of  these
is  simply  the  problem  of  how  de  facto  to  get  rid  of  evils.
This  is  a  difficult,  but  not  a  desperate  or  irrational,
endeavour.  The  theoretic  problem,  on  the  other  hand,  has
been  mainly  manufactured  by  theology.  It  arises  from
the  impossibility  of  reconciling  the  postulated  goodness
with  the  assumed  omnipotence  of  God.  This  problem
troubles  the  religious  consciousness  only  in  so  far  as  it
assents  to  these  two  demands.  Now  this  in  a  manner  it
may  certainly  be  said  to  do.  The  postulate  of  God's

1  Appearance  and  Reality1,  pp.  448,  449,  447.


288  STUDIES IN  HUMANISM  xu

goodness  is,  as  we  have  seen,  essential.  But  the  assent
to  the  notion  of  divine  omnipotence  is  never  more  than
verbal.  In  practice  no  real  religion  can  ever  work  with
a  single,  unrestricted  principle.  Without  a  duality,  or
plurality,  of  principles  the  multiplicity  of  the  cosmic
drama  cannot  be  evolved.  Hence  the  religious  conscious-
ness, and  all  but  the  most  '  philosophic '  forms  of  theology,
do  in  point  of  fact  conceive  evil  as  due  to  a  power  which
is  not  God,  and  somehow  independent :  it  is  variously
denominated  '  matter,'  '  free-will,'  or  '  the  devil.'  The
more  '  philosophic '  theologians  try  to  conceive  a  '  self-
limitation  '  either  of  the  divine  power  or  of  the  divine
intellect  ;  in  the  latter  case  following  Leibniz's  suggestion
that  in  creating  the  world  God  chose  the  best  universe
he  could  think  of.  But  on  the  whole  the  theoretical
explanation  of  Evil  is  acknowledged  to  form  more  or  less
of  a  '  difficulty.'

What  now  has  Absolutism  to  say  on  the  subject?
It  cannot,  of  course,  construe  God's  omnipotence  with  the
amiable  laxity  of  popular  religion  ;  it  must  insist  on  the
strictest  interpretation.  Its  '  God '  must  be  really  all  in
all ;  the  Whole  cannot  be  controlled  or  limited  by
anything,  either  within  it  or  without  it.  It  must  be
perfect :  its  seeming  imperfection  must  be  an  illusion
of  imperfect  finite  beings — though,  to  be  sure,  that
illusion  again  would  seem  to  be  necessary  and  essential
to  the  perfection  of  the  Whole.

It  is  clear  that  such  a  theory — which  at  bottom
coincides  with  that  of  Eleaticism — must  make  short  work
of  the  religious  attempts  to  understand  the  existence  of
Evil.  Human  '  free-will '  it  has  long  schooled  itself  to
regard  as  "  a  mere  lingering  chimera  "  ; l  the  resistance  of
'  matter '  it  gaily  consigns  to  '  the  devil,'  who  in  his  turn
is  absorbed  with  '  God '  in  the  '  Higher  Synthesis '  of
the  Absolute.  Evil,  therefore,  is  not  ultimately  and
metaphysically  real.  It  is  '  mere  appearance,'  '  tran-
scended,' '  transmuted,'  etc.,  in  the  Absolute  along  with
all  the  rest.

1  Appearance  and  Reality  1,  p.  435  n.


xn  ABSOLUTISM  AND  RELIGION  289

All  this  is  very  pretty  and  consistent  and  '  philo-
sophical.' But  it  is  hardly  a  solution  of  the  problem,
either  practically  or  theoretically.  Not  practically,
because  it  throws  no  light  on  the  question  why  anything
in  particular  should  be  as  it  is  ;  nor  yet  theoretically,
because  it  is  avowedly  a  mystery  how  the  Absolute
contrives  to  transcend  its  '  appearances.'

Thus  the  net  outcome  is  that  the  religious  conscious-
ness, so  far  from  obtaining  from  '  philosophy '  any
alleviation  of  its  burdens,  not  to  speak  of  a  solution  of
the  problem  of  Evil,  is  driven  forth  with  contumely  and
rebuked  for  having  the  impudence  to  ask  such  silly
questions  !  Assuredly  Mr.  Bradley  does  well  to  remark
that  (absolutist)  "  metaphysics  has  no  special  connexion
with  genuine  religion." l

§  7.  How,  then,  can  Absolutism  possibly  be  a  religion  ?
It  must  appeal  to  psychological  motives  of  a  different
sort,  rare  enough  to  account  for  its  total  divergence  from
the  ordinary  religious  feelings,  and  compelling  enough
to  account  for  the  fanaticism  with  which  it  is  held  and
the  persistence  with  which  the  same  old  round  of
negations  has  been  reiterated  through  the  ages.  Of
such  psychological  motives  we  shall  indicate  the  more
important  and  reputable.

(i)  It  is  decidedly  flattering  to  one's  spiritual  pride
to  feel  oneself  a  '  part '  or  '  manifestation  '  or  '  vehicle  '  or
'  reproduction  '  of  '  the  Absolute  Mind,'  and  to  some  this
feeling  affords  so  much  strength  and  comfort  and  such
exquisite  delight  that  they  refrain  from  inquiring  what
these  phrases  mean,  and  whether  the  relation  they
indicate  would  seem  equally  satisfactory  if  regarded
conversely  from  the  standpoint  of  the  Absolute  Mind.
It  is,  moreover,  chiefly  the  strength  of  this  feeling  which
explains  the  blindness  of  absolutists  towards  the  logical
defects  of  their  theory.  It  keeps  them  away  from
'  Plato's  Chasm,'  the  insuperable  gap  between  the  human
and  the  ideal ; 2  for  whenever  they  imagine  that  they

1  Appearance  and  Reality^,  p.  454.
2  Cp.  Essays  ii.  and  vi.

U


290  STUDIES IN HUMANISM  xn

have  '  advanced  towards  a  complete  solution '  by  ap-
proaching its  brink,  they  find  that  the  glow  of  feeling  is
chilled.

(2)  There  is  a  strange  delight  in  wide  generalisation
merely as  such,  which  when  pursued  without reference
to  the  ends  which  it  subserves,  and  without  regard  to  its
actual functioning, often results in a sort of logical
vertigo. This probably has much to do with the
peculiar '  craving for unity ' which is held to be the
distinctive affliction  of philosophers. At  any  rate, the
thought  of  an  all-embracing  One  or  Whole  seems  to  be
regarded  as  valuable  and  elevating,  quite  apart  from  any
definite function it performs in knowing, or service  it
does,  or  light  it  throws  on  any  actual  problem.

(3)  The  thought  of  an  Absolute  Unity  is  cherished  as
a  guarantee  of  cosmic  stability. In  face  of  the  restless
vicissitudes  of  phenomena  it  seems  to  secure  us  against
falling  out  of  the  universe. It  assures  us  a  priori — and
that  is  its  supreme  value — that  the  cosmic  order  cannot
fall  to  pieces,  and  leave  us  dazed  and  confounded  among
the  debris  of  a  universe  shattered,  as  it  was  compounded,
by  the  mere  chance  comings  and  goings  of  its  fortuitous
constituents. We  want  to have  an absolute assurance
of  the  inherent  coherence  of  the  world  ;  we  want  to  have
an  absolute  assurance  a  priori  concerning  the  future  ;  and
the  thought  of  the Absolute  seems  designed  to  give  it.
It  is  probably  this last  notion that,  consciously  or  un-
consciously, weighs most in the psychology of the
absolutist  creed.

§  8.  Such,  if  we  are  not  mistaken,  are  the  essential
foundations  of  the  absolutist's  faith — the  things  which  he
'  believes  upon  instinct '  and  for  which  he  proceeds  to
'  find  bad  reasons,'  to  quote  Mr.  Bradley's  epigram  about
(his  own  ?)  metaphysics.1  And  we,  of  course,  to  whom
human  instincts  are  interesting  and  precious  and  sacred,
should  naturally  incline  to  respect  them,  whether  or  not
we  shared  them,  whether  or  not  the  reasonings  prompted
by  them  struck  us  as  logically  cogent.  We  should

1  Appearance  and  Reality,  p.  xiv.


xii  ABSOLUTISM  AND  RELIGION  291

respect  Absolutism,  like  any  other  religion,  if  we  could,
and  were  allowed  to.

Unfortunately,  however,  Absolutism  is  absolutism,  and
will  not  let  us.  It  will  not  tolerate  freedom  of  thought,
and  divergence  of  opinion,  and  difference  of  taste.  It  is
not  content  to  rest  on  wide-spread  feelings  which  appeal
to  many  minds  :  it  insists  on  its  universal  cogency.  All
intelligence  as  such  must  give  its  assent  to  its  scheme ;
and  if  we  will  not  or  cannot,  we  must  either  be  coerced
or  denied  intelligence.  Differences  of  opinions  and  tastes
and  ideals  are  not  rationally  comprehensible :  hence  it  is
essentially  intolerant,  and  where  it  can,  it  persecutes.

'We  are  compelled,  therefore,  to  fight  it  in  self-defence,
and  to  maintain  that  its  contentions  are  not  logically
cogent.  For  unless  we  can  repulse  its  tyrannical  pre-
tensions, we  lose  all  we  cared  for,  viz.  our  liberty  to
think  our  experience  in  the  manner  most  congenial  to
our  personal  requirements.

§  9.  But  in  order  that  we  may  not  imitate  its  bad
example,  let  us  not  contend  that  because  Absolutism
fails  of  being  a  rational  system  cogent  for  all  minds,  it
collapses  into  incoherent  self -contradictory  nonsense  ;
but  let  us  merely,  quite  mildly,  explain  why  and  where
it  falls  short  of  perfect  rationality  to  our  individual
thinking.  For  then,  even  if  we  succeed  in  making  good
our  case,  we  shall  not  have  attacked  the  absolutist's
amour  propre,  which  is  the  '  amor  intellectualis  Dei ' ;  he
can  still  escape  defeat  by  the  unassailed  conviction  that
to  his  mind  his  case  remains  unanswerable.  And  so  we
shall  both  be  satisfied  ;  if  only  he  will  recognise  a  plurality
of  types  of  mind,  and  consequent  thereon,  a  possibility
of  more  than  one  '  rational '  and  '  logically  cogent '  system
of  philosophy.

Armed,  then,  with  the  consoling  assurance  that  our
'  logical '  criticism  is  at  bottom  psychological,  and  cannot
therefore,  in  defending  our  own  disputed  rationality,  hurt
the  religious  feelings  of  the  absolutist,  let  us  proceed  to
declare  roundly  that  the  grounds  of  Absolutism  are  (to
our  minds]  logically  quite  inadequate.


292  STUDIES  IN HUMANISM  Xn

(1)  In pragmatic  minds the  emotional 'craving  for
unity  '  described  in  §  7  (2)  is  not  an  all-absorbing  passion.
It  is  rationally  controlled  by  calm  reflection  on  its  functional
value. Merely  to  be  able  to  say  that  the  universe  is  (in  some
sense)  one,  affords  them  no  particular  delight. Before  they
grow  enthusiastic  over  the  unity  of  the  universe,  they  want
to  know  a  good  deal  more  about  it ;  they  want  to  know
more  precisely  what  are  the  consequences  of  this  unity,  what
good  accrues  to  anything  merely  in  virtue  of  its  inclusion
in  a  universe,  how  a  world  which  is  one  is  superior  as
such  to  a  congeries  of  things  which  have  merely  come  to
act  together. All these matters can doubtless be ex-
plained, only Absolutism has not  yet  condescended  to
do  so  ;  it  will  be  time  to  welcome  it  when  it  has. More-
over, when  these  questions  have  been  answered,  it  will  be
asked  further  as  to  why  it  feels  justified  in  ascribing  its
ideal  of  unity  to  our  experience,  and  how  it  proposes  to
distinguish  between  the  two  cases  of  a  real  and  a  pseudo-
unity. How,  in  short,  can  it  be  ascertained  whether  a
world,  of  which  unity  can  be  predicated  in  some  respects,
possesses  also,  and  will  evermore  continue  to  manifest,  all
the  qualities  which  have  been included in our  ideal  of
unity  ?

(2)  We  shall  further  be  desirous  of  inquiring  what  is
the  value  of  the  apparent  guarantee  of  cosmic  order  by
the  '  systematic unity,' the  '  self-fulfilling ' coherence of
the  Absolute? What  precisely  are  (a)  its benefits,  and
(fr)  the  grounds  of  the  guarantee  ?

(a)  From  a  human  point  of  view  the  benefits  of  the
postulate  of  cosmic  order,  though  great,  are  not  nearly
enough  fully  to  rationalise  existence.  And  they  have
to  be  paid  for.  On  the  one  hand,  there  can  be  no  in-
determination  in  the  rigid  real.  Absolutism  is  absolute
determinism.  And  there  can  be  no  intervention  of  a
higher  power  in  the  established  order  of  nature.  That  is,
there  can  be  neither  '  free  '  choice  nor  '  miracle.'  Both  are
the  acme  of  irrationality  from  the  absolutist's  point  of
view,  and  would  put  him  to  intellectual  confusion.  On
the  other  hand,  this  sacred  '  order '  of  the  Absolute  does


xn  ABSOLUTISM  AND  RELIGION  293

not exclude  the  most  stupendous  vicissitudes,  the  most
appalling  catastrophes,  in  the  phenomenal  world.

Let  us,  therefore,  take  a  concrete  case,  viz.  (i)  the
total  volatilisation  of  the  earth  and  all  that  creeps  upon
it,  in  consequence  of  the  sun's  collision  with  another  star ;
and  (2)  an  opportune  miracle  which  enables  those  who
will  avail  themselves  of  it  to  escape,  say  to  Mr.  H.  G.
Wells's  '  Utopian  double '  of  our  ill-starred  planet.  Now
it  is  clear  that  intellectually  (i)  would  not  be  a  catas-
trophe at  all.  The  established  laws  of  the  '  perfect '
universe  provide  such  '  catastrophes '  in  regular  course.
They  happen  one  or  two  a  year.  And  we  do  not  mind.
We  think  them  rather  pretty,  if  the  '  new  stars '  flare  up
brilliantly  enough,  and  are  gratified  to  find  that  the
'  reign  of  law '  obtains  also  in  '  distant  parts  of  the
stellar  regions ' ;  (2),  on  the  other  hand,  would  be
intellectually  a  real  disaster.  An  irruption  of  miracle,
however  beneficent,  destroys  the  (conception  of  a)  system
of  nature.  A  consistent  absolutist,  therefore,  would  not
hesitate  to  choose.  (He  has  no  freedom  of  choice  any-
how !)  He  would  decline  to  be  saved  by  a  miracle.  He
would  refuse  to  be  put  to  intellectual  confusion.  He
would  prefer  to  die  a  martyr's  death  in  honour  of  an
unbroken  order  of  nature.

A  Humanist  would  not  be  so  squeamish.  He  would
reflect  that  the  conception  of  an  '  order  of  nature '  was
originally  a  human  device  for  controlling  human  experience,
and  that  if  at  any  time  a  substitute  therefor  turned  up,  he
was  free  to  use  it.  He  would  have  no  ingrained  objection
even  to  a  miraculous  disorder,  provided  that  it  issued  in  a
sequence  of  events  superior  to  that  which  '  inexorable
laws '  afforded.  And  he  would  marvel  that  the  absolutist
should  never,  apparently,  have  thought  of  the  possibility
that  his  whole  martyrdom  might  be  stultified  by  his
ignorance  of  what  the  cosmic  order  included  or  excluded  ;
so  that  if  he  had  known  more,  he  might  have  seen  that
the  '  miracle '  he  had  scouted  was  really  part  of  a  higher
and  more  humanly  '  rational '  order,  while  the  collision  he
had  so  loyally  accepted  was  nothing  of  the  kind,  but  in


294  STUDIES IN HUMANISM  xn

truth  an  '  accident.'  And  in  either  case  is  it  not  clear
that  each  man's  choice  would  be  determined,  not  by  the
pure  rationality  of  the  alternatives  and  an  irresistible  logic
of  the  situation,  but  by  the  preferences  of  his  individual
idiosyncrasy  ?

(3)  (^)  We  have  already  often  hinted  that  our
ignorance,  and  the  difficulties  of  identifying  our  actual
knowledge  with  the  ideal  truth,  are  continually  under-
mining the  value  of  rationalistic  assumptions  and  defeat-
ing the  aims  it  sets  out  to  attain.  So  in  this  case.
When  the  a  priori  guarantee  of  the  coherence  and  pre-
dictability of  the  universe  by  means  of  the  Absolute  comes
to  be  examined,  it  turns  out  to  be  of  the  flimsiest  kind.

It  rests  on  three  assumptions — (i)  that  the  order  of
nature  which  we  have  postulated,  and  which  has,  for  the  last
few  hundreds  or  thousands  of  years,  shown  itself  (more  or
less)  conformable  to  our  demand,  is  really  adequate  to
our  '  ideal '  and  will  fully  realise  it.  This  assumption
manifestly  rests  in  part  on  non-intellectual  considerations,
in  part  on  the  dubious  procedure  of  the  ontological
proof,1  in  part  on  the  assumed  correctness  of  the  '  ideal.'
(2)  It  is  assumed  that  we  know  (a)  the  Whole,  (b}  the
world,  and  (c]  our  own  minds,  well  enough  to  know  that
we  shall  continue  to  make  the  same  demands  and  to
find  that  reality  will  continue  to  conform  to  them.  Now
it  seems  to  be  distinctly  hazardous  to  affirm  that  even
the  human  mind  must  continue  to  make  even  its  most
axiomatic  demands  to  all  eternity  :  that  even  the  known
world  contains  many  more  surprises  for  us,  seems  quite
probable  ;  while  it  seems  fantastic  to  claim  that  we  know
the  total  possibilities  of  existence  well  enough  to  feel
sure  that  nothing  radically  new  can  ever  be  evolved.
And  yet  any  irruption  of  novelty  from  any  of  these  three
sources  would  be  enough  to  invalidate  our  present
Absolutism,  and  to  put  it  to  intellectual  confusion..  It
is  false,  therefore,  to  assume  (3)  that  what  would  now
seem  to  be  '  irrational,'  and  to  put  us  to  '  intellectual
confusion,'  may  not  really  be  part  of  a  larger  design,  and

1  Cp.  Essay  ix.  §  12.


xii  ABSOLUTISM  AND  RELIGION  295

possessed  of  a  higher  rationality.  Hence  the  rationalist's
protest  against  irrationalism  must  always  fail,  if  the  latter
chooses  to  claim  a  higher  (and  other)  rationality.

Now  all  these  assumptions  may  be  more  or  less
probable,  but  it  cannot  surely  be  asserted  that  their
acceptance  is  obligatory,  and  that  their  rejection  entails
intellectual  suicide.  Hence  there  remains,  in  Absolutism,
as  in  all  other  philosophies,  an  empirical  element  of  risk
and  uncertainty,  which  '  the  Absolute '  only  conceals,  but
does  nothing  to  eradicate.

(4)  Lastly,  and  perhaps  most  fundamentally  and
cogently,  what  sense  is  there  in  calling  the  universe  a
universe  at  all  ?  How,  that  is,  can  the  notion  be  applied
at  all  ?  To  call  our  world  '  the  universe '  is  to  imply  that
it  is  somehow  to  be  conceived  as  a  whole.  But  we  could
never  actually  treat  it  as  such.  For  we  could  never  know
it  well  enough.  It  might  be  of  such  a  kind  as  not  to  be
a  completed  whole,  and  never  to  become  one,  either
because  it  was  not  rigid,  but  unpredictably  contained
within  itself  inexhaustible  possibilities  of  new  develop-
ments, or  because  it  was  really  a  mere  fragment,  subject
to  incalculable  influxes  and  influences  from  without,  which,
if  reality  were  truly  infinite,  might  never  cease.  But
either  of  these  possibilities  would  suffice  entirely  to
invalidate  reasonings  based  on  the  assumed  identity  of
our  world  with  the  universe.1

It  is  somewhat  remarkable  'that  this  difficulty  should
not,  apparently,  have  been  perceived  by  absolutists,  and
it  is  significant  of  the  emotional  character  of  their  whole
faith,  that  they  should  habitually  delight  in  the  colloca-
tion of  '  infinite '  with  '  whole,'  without  suspecting  the  gross
contradiction  this  implies.  The  '  infinite '  is  that  which
cannot  be  got  together  into  a  whole,  and  the  whole  is
that  which  must  be  complete.  But  the  truth  is  that,  as
used  by  Absolutism,  neither  term  is  used  with  much
precision.  Both  are  mainly  labels  for  emotions.

It  would  be  possible,  but  not  very  instructive,  to  go
through  the  whole  series  of  absolutist  catchwords,  to

1  Cp.  p.  333.


296  STUDIES  IN  HUMANISM  xn

expose  their  vagueness  and  ambiguity,  and  to  show  that
in  the  end  they  are  all  meaningless,  because  they  are  all
inapplicable  to  our  actual  experience.  Inapplicable,  that  is,
without  risk.  But  if  they  are  once  admitted  to  involve
risks,  they  are  in  the  first  place  empirical,  and  in  the
second  lacking  in  complete  intellectual  cogency.  Whoever
wills  may  decline  to  take  the  risks,  and  by  so  doing
renounce  the  absolutist  interpretation  of  experience.
And  his  procedure  may  be  for  him  quite  as  rational  as
that  of  the  absolutist.  But  is  not  this  to  have  shown  that
Absolutism  can  rationally  be  rejected  ?

§  IO.  This  conclusion  is  all  we  need,  and  if  only  it
can  be  similarly  accepted  by  the  absolutist,  will  constitute
a  true  eirenicon.  This  is  the  last  possibility  we  have  to
examine.

Our  arguments  were  satisfactory  to  us,  because  they
seemed  rational  to  us.  We  only  undertook  to  show  that
we  could  make  out  a  rational  case  for  ourselves.  Of
course,  however,  in  calling  them  rational  we  implied  a
claim  that  all  similar  minds  would  assent  to  them.  We
did  not  dogmatise  about  all  minds,  because,  for  all  we
can  know  a  priori,  there  may  be  minds  differently  con-
stituted from  our  own.  Only,  if  there  are,  they  are  not
'  similar '  minds  (for  our  present  purposes).  The  differ-
ences in  functioning  and  constitution  between  these  minds
and  ours  are  worthy  of  examination,  and  may  (or  may
not)  be  capable  of  explanation.  But  it  is  at  any  rate
useless  to  argue  with  them.  That  is  all.

But  the  case  looks  materially  different  from  the
absolutist's  standpoint.  He  was,  ex  hypothesi,  unable  to
combat  our  case  with  arguments  which  seemed  rational  to
us.  But,  at  the  same  time,  he  does  not  accept  the
arguments  which  seem  rational  to  us.  They  seem  to  him
as  little  'cogent'  as  his  do  to  us.  To  resolve  this  dead-
lock, he  is  offered  the  suggestion  that  in  some  respects
there  exist  intrinsic  differences  in  the  logical  texture  of
human  minds,  and  that  consequently  we  may,  and  must,
agree  to  differ.  Thus  if  he  accepts  this,  he  too  is  safe
against  all  attacks,  and  peace  must  ensue.


xii  ABSOLUTISM  AND  RELIGION  297

But  can  the  absolutist  content  himself  with  this
solution  ?  If  he  does,  will  he  not  debar  himself  from  his
original  claim  that  his  theory  is  absolutely  cogent  and
valid  for  intelligence  as  such  ?  For  was  it  not  part  of
his  theory  that  such  complete  cogency  existed,  and  was
possessed  by  his  arguments  ?  He  cannot,  therefore,  com-
promise his  claim.  He  must  insist  on  proving  his  case
literally  to  every  one  of  his  adversaries,  and  similarly  on
disproving  theirs  to  their  own  complete  (logical)  satisfac-
tion, and  not  merely  to  his !  It  is  evident  that  this
imposes  on  him  a  stupendous  burden  of  proof.  To  fail  to
admit  the  logical  cogency  of  a  single  step  in  his  argument
is  to  shake  the  whole  structure  to  its  foundations.  To
renounce  it,  is  to  refute  it.  A  single  dissentient,  therefore,
will  be,  not  merely  a  theoretical  impeachment  and  a
practical  nuisance,  but  actually  an  unanswerable  argument
against  the  truth  of  the  theory,  of  which  it  will  be  at  all
costs  necessary  to  persuade  him  !  Is  it  a  wonder  that
absolutists  are  irritated  by  the  mildest  of  protests  against
the  least  of  their  beliefs  ?  Their  whole  view  of  the
universe  is  imperilled :  they  are  put  to  intellectual
confusion,  if  the  objector  is  not  '  somehow '  silenced  or
removed.

But  have  they  any  one  to  thank  for  their  dilemma  but
themselves?  Why  did  they  devise  a  theory  which,  by
its  very  hostility  to  individual  liberty,  by  its  very  insist-
ance  on  absolute  conformity,  is  finally  forced  to  sanction
the  Liberum  Veto  in  philosophy,  and  thereby  to  ensure  its
own  destruction  ?  It  was  not  prudent.  Nor  is  it  a  wise
theory  which  offers  such  facilities  for  its  own  refutation.
The  situation  might  move  to  compassion  the  most  relent-
less enemy.  But  we  are  helpless.  The  equitable  com-
promise we  offered  has  been  rejected.  Absolutism  has
foisted  upon  us  the  Liberum  Veto,  and  forced  us  to
exercise  it.  It  has  thrust  the  sword  into  our  hands  upon
which  it  proceeds  to  fall.  And  we,  after  all,  have  not
much  reason  to  regret  this  issue.  It  saves  much  argu-
ment when  one's  opponent  commits  the  happy  dispatch.


XIII
THE  PAPYRI OF  PHILONOUS

I. PROTAGORAS THE HUMANIST. II. A DIALOGUE
CONCERNING GODS AND PRIESTS

THE  manuscripts  from  which  the  two  following  papers  have
been  translated  were  found  '  in  a  battered  leaden  casket
among  the  ruins  of  the  temple  of  Dionysus  at  Mende  on
the  Thracian  coast,'  and  conclude  with  a  statement  that
they  were  records  of  conversations  held  with  Antimorus,
the  wisest  of  priests,  in  the  month  before  he  died,  written
down  by  Philonous,  the  son  of  Antinous,  and  by  him
dedicated  to  the  god,  before  he  set  out  to  war  with  the
Olynthians.

To  us  their  value  is  threefold.  If  they  are  authentic,
and  their  portrait  of  Protagoras  is  quite  as  likely  to  be
authentic  as  Plato's  of  Socrates,  they  may,  in  the  first
place,  supply  an  intelligible  and  much-needed  context  to
the  bare  dicta  about  the  gods  and  Man  the  Measure,  to
which  the  thought  of  that  great  thinker  has  practically
been  reduced  for  us,  and  show  that  the  true  significance
of  Protagorean  theology  was  not  agnosticism  any  more
than  the  true  significance  of  Protagorean  epistemology
was  scepticism.  And  though  they  cannot  undo  the
irreparably  fatal  work  of  Athenian  bigotry  in  collecting
and  publicly  burning  the  copies  of  Protagoras's  book  on
Truth,  they  may  at  least  lead  us  to  hesitate  before  con-
demning him  on  the  evidence  of  two  short  sentences.

They  may  serve,  in  the  second  place,  as  a  wholesome

298


xin  THE  PAPYRI  OF  PHILONOUS  299

corrective  of  Plato's  brilliant  but  partisan  picture  of  Greek
philosophic  activity  at  the  close  of  the  fifth  century  B.C.
And  especially  they  may  vindicate  the  memory  of  Prota-
goras.

The  greatness  of  Protagoras  was  indeed  sufficiently
evident  to  the  discerning  eye  even  before  this  discovery.
For  Plato's  own  account  of  him  to  some  extent  supplied
its  own  corrective.  In  the  Protagoras  he  seems  as  clearly
to  excel  Socrates  in  nobility  of  moral  sentiment  as  he
falls  short  of  him  in  dialectical  quibbling.  In  this
dialogue  it  is  Protagoras  who  is  the  moralist,  and
Socrates  who  is  the  '  sophist.'  In  the  Theaetetus  Plato,
while  still  expressing  his  respect  for  the  moral  character
of  Protagoras,  makes  a  desperate  attempt  to  convict  his
Humanist  theory  of  knowledge  of  scepticism  and  sensa-
tionalism. But  he  clearly  shows  that  he  has  not  under-
stood the  doctrine  he  criticises,1  and,  but  for  the  magic  of
his  writing,  no  one  would  be  beguiled  into  supposing  that
the  charming  digressions  and  the  irrelevant  by -play
about  timid  boys  and  Thracian  handmaids  which  follow
(168-179)  on  the  candid  and  powerful  defence  of  Prota-
goras in  1 66- 8,  contain  any  answer  to  the  essential
points,  to  wit,  the  contention  that  the  dialectical  para-
doxes, which  the  recognition  of  truth  -  making  by
individual  men  may  seem  to  involve,  vanish  so  soon  as
it  is  observed  that  such  '  truths '  are  claims,  that  claims
to  truth  vary  in  value,  and  that  the  '  wise  '  man  is  he  whose
claims  are  valuable,  and  so  are  accepted  as  valid.  Plato
manifestly  evades  this  issue  of  the  validation  of  claims  ;
he  reverts  instead  to  the  old  abstraction  which  treats  it
as  irrelevant  to  truth  who  makes  a  claim  (171),  and  is
content  to  show  that  a  chaos  of  opinions  must  result.
The  fallacy  is  the  same  as  that  of  the  Shah  of  Persia,
mentioned  by  James,2  who  refused  to  go  to  the  Derby  on
the  ground  that  he  already  knew  that  one  horse  could  run
faster  than  another.  Similarly,  if  different  individuals  put
forward  different  valuations,  and  you  refuse  to  evaluate  these
claims, '  the '  opinion  on  any  subject  must  remain  a  chaos,

1  See  also  Essays  ii.  §  5,  iii.  §  17,  and  v.  §  i. 2  Princ.  of  Psych.  ii.  675.


300  STUDIES  IN  HUMANISM  xm

and  every  '  truth '  will  be  judged  to  be  both  '  true '  and
'  false.'  But  not  by  the  same  people,  and  not  so  as  to
render  the  right  to  put  forward  individual  claims  (which
is  all  that  the  Protagorean  maxim  amounts  to)  intrinsically
contradictory.  It  is  mere  ignoratio  elenchi,  therefore,  to
treat  Plato's  argument  as  a  refutation  of  Protagoras  or  as
an  answer  to  his  proposal  to  evaluate  the  conflicting
claims.  After  this  Plato  passes  off  into  a  magnificently
eloquent  description  of  the  philosophic  character,  which
ever  since  has  served  as  an  apologia  for  the  futilities  of
countless  pedants.  And  finally  (179  B.),  having  taken
his  readers  off  the  scent  by  these  digressions,  he  trium-
phantly proves  that  one  man  is  wiser  than  another,  and
that  therefore  not  every  one  is  '  the  measure,'  as  if  '  wiser '
were  identical  with  'truer,'  instead  of  being  an  equivoca-
tion between  it  and  '  better,'  and  as  if  he  had  not  himself
attributed  to  Protagoras  a  distinction  between  the  claim
to  truth,  which  any  one  can  make,  and  its  validation,
which  is  achieved  only  by  the  '  wise.'  In  short,  he  merely
reiterates  the  objection  which  his  own  '  Protagoras '  had
refuted.1

In  the  third  place,  we  may  gather  from  these  MSS.
how  men  of  high  spirituality  and  great  acuteness  of  mind,
but  nurtured  in  a  religious  creed  absurd  and  outworn
beyond  anything  we  can  easily  imagine,  might  confront
the  uncertainties  of  human  fate.  And  it  is  curiously
instructive  to  note  how  very  modern,  in  spite  of  the
immense  progress  which  both  science  and  religion  have
made,  the  Protagorean  attitude  towards  theology  still
sounds  to  us.

The  reason  probably  is  that  human  nature  has
changed  but  little.  Man  himself  is  still  the  greatest
obstacle  in  the  way  of  man's  knowledge  of  what  it  most
concerns  man  to  know.  His  indolence  and  his  fears  still


1  It  is  not,  however,  by  any  means  so  certain  that  Protagoras  regarded  all
views  as  equally 'true,'  as  that  he  regarded  some  as  'better'  than  others.
Plato's  way  of  extracting  this  admission  ( Theaet.  152  c)  rather  suggests  that  it
may  be  only  a  bit  of  intellectualist  misunderstanding,  and  it  is  quite  possible  that
Protagoras  already  distinguished  between  a  'claim'  and  a  'truth,'  and  only
attributed  to  individual  judgments  the  value  of  '  claims.'


xni  THE  PAPYRI  OF  PHILONOUS  301

prompt  him  to  declare  impious  and  forbidden,  or  impos-
sible, the  knowledge  which  would  transform  his  cosmic
outlook.  He  still  prefers  to  conceive  religion  conser-
vatively rather  than  progressively.  He  still  keeps  the
treasures  of  divine  revelation  hidden  away  in  his  sanc-
tuaries, for  fear  lest  the  attempt  to  make  use  of  them
should  lead  to  their  loss,  and  not  to  their  augmentation.
There  is  a  most  instructive  contrast  between  the  hypocrisy
of  science  and  of  religion  ;  that  of  the  former,  while  pro-
fessing abject  obedience  to  nature,  has  stealthily  mastered
it ; l  that  of  the  latter,  while  claiming  to  commune  with
the  supernatural,  has  secretly  shrunk  away  from  it ;  and
so  the  faith  which  in  the  one  case  expands  into  know-
ledge, in  the  other  shrivels  into  make-believe.2

1  Natura  non  nisi  parendo  vincitur,  Bacon  could  humorously  write,  with  a
pen  on  paper  and  in  a  study,  man  had  made  by  moulding  reality  to  his  pur-
poses. But  to  keep  on  repeating  this  as  a  reply  to  Humanism  is  not  humorous,
but  stupid.

2  Cp.  Essay  xvi.  §§  9,  10.


XIV
PROTAGORAS  THE  HUMANIST

ANTIMORUS  (  of  Mende,  a  small  Greek  city  in  Chalcidice,  devoted
PHILONOUS  (  to  the  production  and  consumption  of  wine.

PROTAGORAS,  of  Abdera.
MoROSOPHUS,  an  Eleatic  philosopher.
SOPHOMORUS,  his  son.

Time — About  370  B.C. Place — Before  the  temple  of  Dionysus  at  Mende.

ARGUMENT

Philonous  consults  Antimorus  about  his  project  of  studying  philosophy
under  Plato,  and  is  warned  by  him  that  Plato's  accounts  of  Athenian
philosophy  cannot  be  trusted.  For  example,  he  had  wholly  mis-
represented Protagoras.  In  proof  whereof  Antimorus  reads  out  his
notes  concerning  a  discussion  between  Protagoras  and  two  Eleatics  of
the  dictum  that  Man  is  the  Measure  of  all  things.  Philonous  professes
himself  to  be  converted,  but  his  enthusiasm  is  restrained  by  Antimorus.

Antimorus.  Desire  of  what,  Philonous,  has  driven
you  now  first  to  visit  me  ?

Philonous,  I  hope  you  will  pardon  my  boldness,
Antimorus,  in  venturing  to  visit  uninvited  one  who  I
hardly  thought  would  have  known  me.

A.  It  is  always  an  honour  for  an  old  man  to  be  visited
by  the  young  and  fair  ;  and,  fortunately,  I  was  able  to
recognise  you  at  once.  You  are  like  your  mother,  and
singularly  like  your  grandmother.

P. Was  not  my  grandmother  very  beautiful  ?

A.  So  beautiful  that  when  I  was  your  age,  Philonous,
I  should  have  preferred  Eudora  to  any  other  gift  of  the
gods.  But  her  father  esteemed  Philcenus  the  better
match.  You  are  welcome,  therefore — not  only  on  your
own  account.

302


xw  PROTAGORAS  THE HUMANIST 303

P. How  strange !

A.  And  you  are  the  more  welcome,  and  by  far  more
wonderful,  Philonous,  in  that  you  have  come  to  me  instead
of  looking  on  at  the  show.  For  I  fancy  that  you  and  I
alone  of  the  Mendeans  will  this  day  be  absent  from  the
theatre.  Surely  it  is  not  a  slight  matter  that  has  brought
you  ?

P.  It  is  one  so  great  that  I  came  with  trepidation,
and  even  now  hardly  know  how  to  put  it.

A. Tell  me. Are  you  in  love?

P. Yes,  but  very  strangely.

A. How  ? With  a  Lamia  ?

P.  I  am  in  love  with  Wisdom,  and  deem  that  you  of
all  men  here  can  best  tell  me  how  to  obtain  her.

A.  Unhappy  boy,  Wisdom  is  worse  than  any  Lamia,
excelling  them  all  in  the  perplexing  shapes  she  takes,
and  in  the  enchantments  whereby  she  lures  her  victims  to
destruction  !

P.  But  is  it  not  true,  Antimorus,  that  in  your  youth
you,  too,  were  zealous  to  pursue  Wisdom,  and  shrinking
from  no  danger,  journeyed  far,  even  to  Athens,  and  listened
to  the  converse  of  the  great  sages  of  antiquity  ?

A.  To  Athens,  aye,  and  farther.  You  will  not  easily
find  another,  either  in  Hellas  or  among  the  barbarians,
who  has  asked  the  Sphinx  her  riddles  and  questioned  also
the  priests  of  the  Egyptians,  and  Judeans,  and  Hyper-
boreans, the  Magians,  and  the  Gymnosophists.

P.  How  wonderful !  How  much  wisdom  you  must
have  learnt !

A.  A  bitter  wisdom,  to  be  ignorant  of  which  you
might  well  prefer  to  much  money  !

P.  Will  you  not  tell  me  what  it  was  ?  For  money
seems  to  me  as  nothing  in  comparison  with  wisdom.

A.  First,  that  priests  are  priests  throughout  the  world,
however  different  the  gods  they  serve.  Next,  that  the
god  whom  sophists  serve  is  everywhere  the  same.  Next,
that  wisdom  is  as  hard  to  find  in  a  barbarian  land  and  in
unintelligible  speech  as  in  the  familiar  commonplaces  of
our  tongue  and  country.  Next,  that  folly  is  everywhere  at


304  STUDIES IN  HUMANISM  xiv

home,  and  densest  in  the  densest  crowd.  Next,  that  to
war  with  folly  is  the  luxury  of  gods,  and  that  for  mortals
it  is  enough  to  make  a  living.  For  as  the  poet  says —

With  folly  even  gods  contend  in  vain.

P.  A  bitter  wisdom,  truly  !  And  not  acceptable  to
one  who  is  aiming  at  being  sent  at  the  public  expense  to
study  the  wisdom  of  Athens.

A.  Ah,  you  wish  to  do  as  the  scholars  from  Rhodes  !
But  be  not  discouraged,  and  learn  rather  how  many  times
the  greater  includes  the  less.  When  you  have  learnt  the
folly  of  Athens  you  will  be  glad  to  return  to  Mende.

P.  And  is  this  the  reason  why  you  have  returned  to
us,  and  are  content  to  live  here  in  seclusion,  instead  of
becoming,  as  we  hoped,  the  most  famous  of  the  teachers
of  Hellas  ?

A.  That,  and  sheer  weariness.  But  if  I  had  not
returned  ill  and  with  great  difficulty,  from  vainly  searching
the  icy  Caucasus  for  the  most  glorious  victim  of  divine
malignity,  Prometheus,  I  should  hardly  have  taken  to  piety
and  drink  by  accepting  this  priesthood  of  Dionysus,  nor
would  you  now  every  year  admire  the  skill  with  which  I
exhort  the  Mendeans  at  the  great  festival  to  get  merry  in
honour  of  the  god.  Not  that  they  need  the  exhortation  ;
but  my  speeches  are  considered  most  stimulating  and
pleasing  to  gods  and  men  !  However,  there  are  compen-
sations, and  the  old  wine  in  the  temple  cellars  is  really
excellent.

P. So  I  have  heard.

A.  You  shall  celebrate  with  me  your  election  to  a
studentship  at  Athens  !

P.  I  thank  you.  But  just  now  I  would  rather  hear
about  the  sages  you  have  met.  Were  none  of  them  truly
great  and  wise  ?

A.  One  there  was  upon  whose  like  the  sun  will  not
shine  again  for  ten  thousand  years.

P. And  that,  I  suppose,  was  Socrates  ?

A.  What !  The  boon  companion  of  all  the  dissolute
young  swells  in  Athens  !  I  knew  him  well,  as  well  as  I


xiv  PROTAGORAS  THE  HUMANIST 305

wanted  to.  At  times,  and  for  a  little  while,  he  was  not
unamusing.  It  was  as  stupid  as  it  was  cruel  to  make
him  drink  the  hemlock.  But  he  had  angered  the
Athenians  beyond  endurance,  and  when  fools  get  angry
they  are  as  likely  to  commit  a  crime  as  a  blunder.  No
one,  however,  who  knew  him,  and  wished  to  speak  the
truth,  would  speak  of  him  as  I  have  spoken  of  the  wisest
of  men  from  the  foolishest  of  cities,  Protagoras  from
Abdera !

P. It  is  true,  then,  that  you  were  his  companion  ?

A.  Only  for  a  little  while,  alas  !  For  in  the  fifth  year
of  my  intercourse  with  him  the  Athenians  condemned
him  for  impiety — because  he  had  both  spoken  and  written
'  the  Truth  ! '

P.  Yes,  I  have  heard.  He  preached  atheism,  did  he
not,  and  said  "  concerning  the  gods  I  have  never  been
able  to  discover  whether  they  exist  or  not :  life  is  too
short  and  the  subject  too  obscure  "  ?

A.  That  is  how  they  slandered  him  !  For  of  all  the
men  that  ever  lived  Protagoras  was  the  most  anxious  to
know  about  the  gods.  Whereas  the  many  have  no  wish
to  know  ;  it  is  enough  for  them  to  believe  what  they
have  heard.  And  of  the  gods  they  will  believe,  anything,
whether  it  be  holy  or  unholy,  provided  that  it  makes  a
pleasing  tale.  What  alone  they  will  not  endure  is  that
any  one  should  think  about  divine  things,  or  do  what  he
believes  the  gods  desire  rather  than  what  they  desire.  Now
Protagoras  wanted  to  know  and  tried  to  find  out.  But
he  was  not  allowed.  For  in  every  city  they  told  him
other  tales  about  the  gods,  and  when  he  compared  their
several  versions  they  said  that  he  was  impious  !  And  so,
taking  one  sentence  out  of  many,  they  condemned  him
unjustly,  in  word  indeed  because  of  his  impiety,  but  in
fact  because  he  had  refused  to  give  Hypocrites  the
Sycophant  a  talent  wherewith  to  celebrate  the  shameful
mysteries  of  Cotillon.1

/>. And  did  the  Athenians  give  him  poison  too?

1  So  the  MS. ,  but  we  should  no  doubt  read  Cotytto  (an  unsavoury  Thracian
goddess  popular  in  Athens).

X


306  STUDIES  IN HUMANISM  xiv

A.  No,  that  they  keep  for  their  own  citizens.  Nor
did  my  master  stay  to  be  condemned.  But  they  drove
him  out,  and  forced  him  to  flee  for  refuge  to  Sicily.  The
ship  was  unseaworthy,  and  he  never  arrived.

P.  The  Athenians  seem  to  attract  wise  men  only  to
destroy  them  !  I  marvel  that  men  call  their  city  the
Lamp  of  Hellas  !

A.  Not  unreasonably.  Does  not  the  lamp  attract
moths  and  destroy  them  ?

P.  It  would  seem  then,  Antimorus,  that  you  think
very  differently  concerning  Protagoras  from  Plato,  who  has
mentioned  him  in  several  dialogues,  and  indeed  you  also
once.1  Did  you  know  Plato  ?  and  have  you  read
him  ?  They  say  that  no  one  now  at  Athens  will  listen
to  any  philosophy  but  his.

A,  If  that  be  true,  I  would  counsel  him  to  change
his  philosophy  frequently !  For  the  Athenians  are  ever
eager  for  something  that  sounds  new.  They  are  always
demanding  new  truth,  lest  they  should  be  asked  to  put
some  old  truth  into  practice.  As  for  Aristocles  the  son
of  Ariston,  whom  you  call  by  his  nickname,  he  was  but  a
lad  when  we  left  Athens,  promising  indeed  and  full  of
poetry,  but  not  as  yet  taking  part  in  philosophical
discussion.

P.  But  do  you  not  think  his  writings  wonder-
ful?

A.  He  is  a  poet  still.  But  if  he  had  not  become
imbued  with  the  belief  that  virtue  is  knowledge,  and  that
knowledge  is  concerned  about  the  eternal  and  super-
human, he  might  have  done  more  than  most  to  render
virtue  beautiful  and  knowledge  profitable  in  the  eyes  of
men.

P.  And  what  do  you  think  of  his  portrait  of  Pro-
tagoras ?  You  know  that  he  has  named  a  dialogue  after
him  ?

A. Very  little. You  must  not  believe  a  word  he  says.

P. Is  his  account  untrue  then  ?

A. Pure  and  malicious  fiction.

1  Protagoras,  31 5 A,  where  our  MSS.  read  'Avri/jLOipos  instead  of ' Avri[j.upos.


xiv  PROTAGORAS  THE  HUMANIST 307

P.  What !  the  whole  story  of  the  encounter  of  Socrates
and  Protagoras  ?

A.  Certainly.  You  can  easily  see  for  yourself  that
there  is  not  a  word  of  truth  in  it.

P. You  astonish  me  !

A.  You  will  be  still  more  astonished  to  learn  that  the
Callias,  at  whose  house  the  conversation  is  said  to  have
taken  place,  did  not  succeed  to  the  fortune  of  the
Daduchs  until  his  father  Hipponicus  had  fallen  in  the
battle  of  Delium  about  the  eighty-eighth  Olympiad.1  And
by  this  time  Pericles  the  son  of  Xanthippus  must  have
been  dead  more  than  five  years,  having  lost  his  sons  by  the
plague.  And  yet  both  his  sons  are  said  by  Plato  to  have
been  present !  And,  moreover,  the  incipient  beard  of
Alcibiades,  mentioned  in  the  beginning,  which  Socrates
in  his  infatuation  professes  to  admire,  must  have  been
sprouting  for  at  least  ten  years  upon  a  man  who  had
already  campaigned  both  at  Delium  and  at  Potidaea.
Nor  would  you  easily  gather  from  Plato's  story  that
Socrates  was  only  about  ten  years  younger  than  Prota-
goras. If,  therefore,  Plato  blunders  so  grossly  about
simple  facts  which  he  might  easily  have  ascertained,  how
can  you  trust  him  to  report  correctly  the  subtleties  of  a
philosophical  debate  ?

P.  What  you  tell  me,  Antimorus,  is  as  distressing  as
it  is  astonishing.  For  if  the  writings  of  Plato  are  not  to
be  believed,  what  shall  I  be  able  to  fancy  that  I  know
either  about  Socrates  or  about  Protagoras  or  any  of  the
old  philosophers  ?

A.  Was  it  not  well  said  by  Bias  that  "  to  know  we
know  not  is  the  beginning  of  knowledge  "  ?  And  are  there
not  those  yet  alive  who  can  tell  you  the  truth  both
about  the  "  Truth  "  of  Protagoras  and  the  "  ignorance  "  of
Socrates  ?

P.  I  would  beseech  you,  Antimorus,  to  enlighten  mine
before  you  expound  that  of  Socrates.  For  at  present  I
have  no  longer  any  reason  to  believe  anything,  not  even
that  Protagoras  declared  that  Man  is  the  measure  of  all

1 424  B.C.


308  STUDIES IN HUMANISM  xiv

things,  but  shall  have  to  suspect  this  too  to  be  a  wicked
figment  of  Plato's,  until  you  have  given  me  the  true
measure  of  the  man.

A.  Because  you  have  had  the  good  fortune  to  be  born
the  grandson  of  Eudora,  and  the  boldness  to  search  for
truth  in  this  old  wine-jar,  there  shall  be  revealed  to  you
what  no  one  yet  has  grasped,  the  meaning  of  Protagoras!

P.  Is  that  a  still  greater  mystery  ?  And  was  I
wrong  in  thinking  Plato's  exposition  had  made  this  clear
to  me?

A.  Which  of  them  ?  That  in  which  he  makes  Prota-
goras mean  that  one  man  is  as  good  a  measure  as
another,1  or  that  in  which  he  admits  that  Protagoras
might  justly  prefer  the  judgment  of  the  wise  ? 2  that  in
which  the  dictum  is  said  to  mean  that  knowledge  is
sensation,3  or  that  in  which  it  is  too  contradictory  to
mean  anything  at  all  ?  4

P.  I  have  always  understood  these  accounts  to  mean
the  same.

A.  You  are  young,  Philonous,and  Aristocles  has  grown
into  a  great  dialectician.  But  the  "  Truth  "  of  Protagoras
he  has  neither  understood  nor  tried  to  understand.  Like
all  these  dialecticians,  he  has  attacked  that  in  Protagoras
which  is  in  truth  the  merest  truism  ;  that  which  is  truly
important  he  has  not  grasped,  while  of  that  which  is  truly
daring  but  delightful,  novel  but  hazardous,  he  has  never
had  a  glimmering.  Perhaps,  however,  you  can  tell  me
how  you  have  understood  all  Plato's  accounts  to  mean  the
same.

P.  I  feel  more  reluctance,  Antimorus,  and  more  doubt
in  arguing  with  you  than  ever  before  since  I  have  con-
cerned myself  with  philosophy.  For  though  it  all  seemed
difficult  of  access  to  the  vulgar  and  full  of  subtlety,  it  yet
seemed  certain  and  to  be  grasped  by  pure  intelligence.
Whereas  now  it  seems  to  me  that  you  not  only  question
all  that  has  been  received  as  true,  but  also  that  you  are
able  to  prove  it  false  if  in  any  respect  it  is  untrue.  And

1 Theaetetus,  1620.  2  Ibid.  1660.

3  Ibid.  1600.  4  Ibid.  1710.


xiv  PROTAGORAS  THE  HUMANIST 309

so I begin  to  doubt  even  whether I correctly  remember
what  Plato  argued,  and  whether  I  have  fully  understood  it.

A.  You  are  young,  Philonous,  else  you  would  never
be  ashamed  to  recite  whatever  has  been  received  as  true.
When  you  are  older  you  will  fear  to  do  anything
else.  Be  of  good  cheer,  therefore,  and  tell  me  the
tradition.

P.  Is  it  not  possible  (i)  to  take  Protagoras  to  mean
each  individual  man  ?  And  (2)  was  not  his  preference  for
a  wise  man  as  the  measure  the  pleasing  inconsistency  of
a  surrender  to  fact?  As  for  the  inference  (3)  that  know-
ledge is  sensation,  must  not  that  be  drawn  from  the
assertion  that  what  appears,  is,  to  each  ?  For  is  not
sensation  "  what  appears "  ?  And,  lastly  (4),  is  it  not
clear  that  if  what  appears  to  each  is  true,  and  if  things
appear  differently  to  different  men,  everything  both  is
and  is  not  at  the  same  time  ?  And  so  is  not  everything  in
contradiction  with  itself,  and  knowledge  quite  destroyed  ?
And  is  it  not  the  best  of  the  joke  that  in  destroying  his
own  argument  Protagoras  has  escaped  his  own  notice  ?
For  what  he  maintains  appears  true  to  him,  but  not  to
the  rest !  And  so  is  not  what  they  say  is  truth  by  so
much  c  truer '  than  what  he  says  it  is  as  they  are  more
numerous  than  he  ?

A.  And  so  you  are  quite  satisfied  that  Protagoras
meant  what  Aristocles  has  said  he  meant?

P.  To  speak  frankly,  I  have  sometimes  wondered,  and
the  more  so  now  that  you  question  me,  whether  he  really
meant  the  individual  man  to  be  the  universal  measure.
It  seems  so  much  simpler  and  more  sensible  to  have
meant  mankind  by  "  man,"  and  I  suspect  that  this  is  how
you  will  defend  Protagoras.

A.  Protagoras  needs  not  defence  as  yet  so  much  as
you.  Did  you  not  observe  that  even  Aristocles  makes
Protagoras  affirm  that  the  wise  man's  judgment  may  be
far  better  than  that  of  the  rest  ?

P.  I  now  remember  a  distinction  I  did  not  then  think
much  of.  But  even  so,  would  this  make  the  wise  man's
judgment  truer"?


310  STUDIES  IN HUMANISM  xiv

A.  Perhaps  not,  if  you  imagine  the  "  true  "  to  have
no  relation  to  the  "  good."  If  by  "  true  "  you  mean  what
merely  is,  the  opinions  held  by  the  veriest  fool  or  madman
may  seem  just  as  "  true,"  just  as  much  ".facts,"  as  those  of
Protagoras  himself.  And  yet  the  latter  will  far  surpass
them  in  value.  But  perhaps  you  may  some  day  be
persuaded  that  you  do  not  understand  the  "  true "
aright  until  you  have  seen  that  it  is  embraced  in  the
"  Rood,"  and  that  therefore  the  "  better "  is  also  the
"  truer."

P. I  do  not  quite  understand. Will  you  not  explain  ?

A.  When  you  have  completed  your  defence  !  Did
you  not  observe,  secondly,  that  when  Protagoras  made  man
the  measure,  he  did  not  mean  any  part  of  him,  his  smell
or  his  sight,  his  palm  or  his  foot,  but  the  whole  man,
with  all  his  powers  ?

P. How  stupid  of  me  not  to  have  noticed  this  !

A.  You  would  not  now  say,  then,  that  man's  life  was
wholly  sensation  ?

P.  Of  course  not.  We  reason  also,  and  purpose,  and
desire.

A.  Was  it  fair  then  to  make  Protagoras  mean  that
knowledge  is  sensation  ?

P. I  suppose  not.

A.  You  are  convicted  then,  Philonous,  of  doing  an
injustice  to  Protagoras.

P.  I  must  confess  it,  and  ask  you  to  pardon  me,  on
his  behalf!

A.  Again,  why  should  you  say  that  it  is  contradictory
for  the  same  to  appear  different  in  different  relations  or
to  different  persons?  Is  it  contradictory  that  I,  for  in-
stance, should  appear  large  to  you  here,  but  small  from
the  top  of  Mount  Athos,  or  large  to  a  mouse  and  small
to  an  elephant  ?  And  have  you  never  in  winter  tried  to
mix  warm  water  with  cold,  and  after  putting  one  hand  in
the  one  and  the  other  in  the  other,  found  that  the  same
mixture  appeared  warm  to  the  hand  which  had  been  in
the  cold  water,  and  cold  to  that  which  had  been  in  the
warm  ?


xiv  PROTAGORAS  THE  HUMANIST 311

P.  No,  I  have  not  tried,  but  I  have  no  difficulty  in
perceiving  all  this.

A.  Why  then  should  it  be  absurd  that  different  people
should  think  differently  about  the  same  subjects  ?  If  it
is  customary  among  the  Thracians  never  to  speak  to  their
mothers-in-law,  and  among  the  Hellenes  to  speak  to  them
with  honied  words,  shall  we  say  that  the  notion  of  mother-
in-law  is  that  of  something  which  both  is  and  is  not  to  be
spoken  to,  and  are  mothers-in-law  on  this  account  con-
tradictory and  impossible  ?

P.  Perhaps  not,  and  yet  I  well  remember  my  father
Antinous,  saying  that  his  mother-in-law,  my  grandmother
Eudora,  was  both  contradictory  and  an  impossible  woman.

A.  Why  then  should  Aristocles  regard  it  as  absurd
that  each  should  judge  in  his  own  way  concerning  what
he  perceives,  and  that  nevertheless  one  man's  judgment
should  be  ten  thousand  times  as  good  as  another's  ?

P.  I  would  no  longer  call  it  absurd.  But  though  what
you  say  seems  reasonable,  can  you  tell  me  how  it  comes
about  that  we  all  perceive  the  same  things,  and  live  in  a
world  which  is  common  to  us  all  ?  And  how,  if  you
admit  this,  does  it  follow  from  the  saying  of  Protagoras  ?

A.  I  see,  Philonous,  that  you  have  not  yet  thought
deeply  enough  to  ask  what  we  mean  by  a  "  common "
perception.  If  you  had,  you  would  be  ripe  to  understand,
not  only  Protagoras,  but  also  far  better  the  "  common  "
world  we  live  in.

P.  We  seem  to  have  come  to  the  brink  of  a  great
thought.

A. Aye,  and  one  which  Aristocles  has  never  reached.

The  question  you  have  asked  is  one  which  Protagoras
alone  has  raised,  and  to  which  he  alone  gives  the  answer.
And  so,  as  a  reward,  you  shall  hear  an  argument  between
the  Master  and  two  philosophers  of  Elea.  I  was  myself
present,  and  my  record  is  correcter  by  far  than  anything
Aristocles  has  said  either  about  him  or  about  Socrates.
Let  us  go  within  to  get  it,  and  to  refresh  ourselves  with
some  of  my  most  sacred  wine.


312  STUDIES IN HUMANISM  xiv

You  have  heard  of  Parmenides,  of  course,  Philonous  ?

P. The  most  wonderful  of  philosophers  !

A.  The  boldest,  certainly,  in  wandering  farthest  from
the  truth  into  the  formless  void.  Then  you  may  have
heard,  too,  of  his  son,  Morosophus  ?

P. Not  until  now. Was  he  too  a  philosopher  ?

A.  He  preferred  to  be,  rather  than  to  be  thought,
one.

P. That,  I  suppose,  is  why  I  have  never  heard  of  him.

A.  Then  you  are  probably  ignorant,  too,  of  his  son
Sophomorus  ?

P.  Entirely.  What  prevented  him  from  becoming
famous  ?

A. He  said  it  was  all  one,  and  did  not  care.

P.  But  concerning  what  did  they  discourse  with
Protagoras  ?

A.  It  was  on  the  day  after  Protagoras  had  shown  us
how  Man  is  the  maker  of  Truth,  and  how  Truth  is  the
useful  and  good,  and,  in  short,  that  whereby  Man  lives.
All  this  he  spoke  of  wondrously,  telling  us  also  a  sacred
story  of  the  Babylonian  priests  concerning  a  garden  in
which  Man  was  to  live  gloriously  and  happily  for  ever,
if  he  would  but  eat  of  the  fruit  of  the  Tree  of  Knowledge
which  is  the  Tree  of  Life,  and  how  by  reason  of  the  hard-
ships of  climbing  the  tree,  and  its  thorns,  and  the  rough-
ness of  its  bark,  Man  would  not,  and  was  driven  out  by
God,  and  has  lived  miserably  ever  since,  a  life  dull,  brutish,
short,  and  utterly  unlike  that  for  which  the  goodness  of
God  had  destined  him.  And  all  were  glad  to  listen,
save  only  Sophomorus,  who  had  been  brought  up  to
contend  with  words  alone,  and  cared  not  for  realities.  So
the  next  day,  bringing  with  him  his  father  Morosophus,  a
man  of  sad  appearance  and  with  bushy  eyebrows,  they
attacked  Protagoras  with  verbal  puzzles  they  had  ex-
cogitated overnight.

P. I  should  love  to  hear  their  discourse !

A. You  shall  (reads] : —

"  Sophomorus.  Behold,  Protagoras,  my  father,  Moro-
sophus, to  whom  I  related  last  night  your  discourse


xiv  PROTAGORAS  THE  HUMANIST 313

concerning  the  usefulness  of  truth.  He  is  quite  as  wise  as
his  father,  Parmenides,  though  not  so  famous,  because  he  is
too  proud  to  contend  with  sophists  such  as  you.

Protagoras.  Then  I  am  honoured  indeed  that  he
should  now  deign  to  converse  with  me  !

S.  Oh,  as  to  that  you  need  not  be  too  conceited  !
I  had  great  difficulty  in  persuading  him  to  come.  Only
he  has  thought  out  some  arguments  which  are  invincible,
and  I  want  to  see  you  overthrown.

P.  I  am  glad  you  have  come,  Morosophus,  for  what-
ever reason.  Shall  I  begin  to  state  my  case,  or  will  you
begin  the  attack  in  force  ?

Morosophus.  I  have  not  come,  Protagoras,  to  argue
with  you.  It  is  as  unworthy  of  the  one  and  only  true
philosophy  to  contend  against  upstart  follies  such  as  yours,
as  it  is  of  masters  to  contend  with  their  revolted  slaves.
And  so,  far  from  attacking  you  with  an  array  of  arguments,
I  am  minded  rather,  like  the  Scythians  in  the  story  of
Herodotus,  to  chastise  you  with  whips,  to  repress  you  with
the  sort  of  discipline  my  father  used  to  inflict  upon  the
fools  who  thought  that  the  Many  were.

P.  You  promise  great  things,  oh  Morosophus  !  May
I  take  it  that  as  in  the  Scythians'  case  you  mention,
the  attack  with  the  more  usual  weapons  of  honourable
warfare  has  been  beaten  off?  And  will  it  surprise  you  to
find  that  a  free  spirit  which  was  never  childish  enough
to  be  enslaved  to  your  ancestral  philosophy  is  not  likely
to  be  slavish  enough  to  be  terrified  by  your  '  whips '  ?

S. You  soon  will  be  !

P. Bring  out  your  whips  then  and  try !

S. Go  in  and  smash  him,  father  !

M.  You  asserted,  did  you  not,  that  the  true  was
useful ?

P. Assuredly.

M. Is  that  assertion  true  ?

P. I  hope  so.

M.  Then  do  you  not  see,  most  foolish  one,  that  you
have  failed  in  your  endeavour  to  reduce  truth  to  useful-
ness ?  Have  you  not  admitted  that  here  is  a  truth  of


314  STUDIES IN  HUMANISM  xiv

which  your  doctrine  does  not  hold  ? Will  you  not  bare
your  back  to  this  whip  and  flee  ?

P.  You  are  as  kind  as  you  are  clever,  Morosophus,
but  with  your  leave  I  should  prefer  to  face  your  '  whip.'
I  do  not  admit  that  what  you  say  impairs  my  argument.
For  that  the  true  is  useful  is  not  only  true,  but,  as  being
true,  is  also  useful,  and  judged  to  be  '  true '  because  it  is
useful.  It  confirms,  therefore,  instead  of  refuting,  my  first
assertion.

M.  And  yet,  Protagoras,  you  would  have  to  admit
that  it  was  true  that  it  was  useful  that  it  was  true  that
the  true  is  useful.

P.  And  likewise  you,  that  it  was  useful  that  it  was
true  that  it  was  useful  that  it  was  true  that  the  true  is
useful.  Clearly,  however  often  you  choose  to  predicate
truth,  I  can  predicate  usefulness,  if  the  true  be  useful.  I
do  not  see  what  you  gain  by  making  me  repeat  that  any
'  truth '  you  can  name  will  be  admitted  only  if  it  can  be
shown  to  be  also  useful.  So  the  magic  by  which  you
turn  the  one  into  the  infinite  is  vain.

M.  What  I  gain  is  to  compel  you  to  pursue  the
Infinite.

P.  Only  if  my  patience  is  infinite.  But  even  if
it  were,  what  do  you  gain  ?

M.  An  argument  which  pursues  the  infinite  is  vain,
and  therefore  false.  Or  do  you  not  know  that  the
Infinite  is  bad?

P.  It  seems  to  be  both  bad  and  good  in  your
opinion.  At  least  I  seem  to  remember  your  father  (or
was  it  his  follower  Melissus  ?)  arguing  that  the  Whole
was  infinite,  and  also  good.

M. That  was  the  good  Infinite.

P.  How  then  do  you  distinguish  them  ?  Nay,  how
can  you,  if,  as  you  say,  all  things  are  one  ?  For  if
you  distinguish  two  infinites,  are  they  not  twol  But
whether  you  have  one  infinite,  or  two,  or  twenty,  they  do
not  help  you  here.  For  all  I  have  asserted  is  that  of
every  truth  I  will  display  the  use.  This  you  do  not
refute  by  repeating  that  every  truth  is  also  '  true.'  For


xiv  PROTAGORAS  THE HUMANIST 315

this  I  have  never  denied.  And  yet  you  yourself  seem  to
think  your  view  of  truth  useful — for  refuting  me !

5. Try  another  whip  upon  him,  father  !

M.  Is  it  possible,  Protagoras,  that  you  deny  that  the
One  alone  is?

P.  Concerning  the  One  I  cannot  say  whether  it  is
or  is  not.  It  is  one  of  many  things  for  which  life  is
too  short  and  philosophy  too  long.  All  I  can  say  is
that  I  have  never  yet  met  the  One,  and  that  it  is  nowhere
visible  to  the  naked  eye  of  unbesotted  reason.

M.  It  is  to  be  seen  only  with  the  eye  of  Intelligence.
Perhaps  it  is  in  this  that  you  are  lacking.

P.  Perhaps  this  lack  is  the  reverse  of  loss.  The
Many  are  enough  for  me,  and  sometimes  more  than
enough.

M. Without  the  One  there  is  no  Many.

P.  So  you  have  said  before,  and  your  father  before
you.  But  can  you  never  explain  how  ?

M.  Without  the  One,  you  could  not  perceive  the
world.  Nor  could  you  and  I  perceive  the  same
world.

P. I  am  not  so  sure  that  we  do,  quite.

M.  What,  will  you  destroy  the  world  with  the
*  Measure  '  of  your  folly  ?

P.  I  hoped  rather  to  discover  how  we  set  out  to
build  up  a  world.

M.  That  is  impossible.  If  each  man  is  the  measure,
there  can  be  no  common  measure,  no  common  world,  and
no  universal  truth.

P.  Pardon  me  if  I  hold  that  there  can  be  as  much
(and  more)  of  all  these  things  as  we  in  fact  possess,  and
that,  if  you  listen,  I  can  show  you  how.

M.  It  is  sad  that  you  should  talk  such  nonsense,
and  sadder  that  I  should  have  to  listen.

P.  You  have  provoked  me,  but  I  will  be  merciful,
and,  therefore,  brief.  And,  first,  let  me  ask  you  whether
you  admit  that  we  each  perceive  things  in  our  own
peculiar  way  ?

M. How  can  I  admit  the  impossible  and  that  which


316  STUDIES IN HUMANISM  xiv

is  contrary  to  reason  ?  I  admit  only  that  it  is  what  you
ought  to  mean,  if  you  wished  to  be  consistent.

P.  I  am  consistent,  and  more  concerned  to  find  out
what  truly  is,  before  I  consider  whether  it  is  contrary
to  reason.  And  it  does  not  seem  to  me  folly  to  say
that  whatever  is,  is  not  impossible.  Now  that  we  each
perceive  things  in  our  own  way  is  what  I  must  infer  from
all  the  evidence.  For  is  this  not  why  we  differ  in  our
tastes  and  opinions  and  acts  ?  And  so  since  what  we
experience  is  different,  we  reasonably  act  differently.

M.  How  would  you  prove  that  we  perceive  differently?
And  how  would  you  discover  that  in  some  things  we  are
different,  unless  in  others  we  were  the  same  ?

P.  True,  Morosophus,  you  state  the  reason  why
I  always  first  of  all  assume  that  you  agree  with  me
and  perceive  as  I  do,  until  I  find  out  that  you  do  not.
But  this  seems  to  me  a  reason,  not  for  getting  angry  or
for  inventing  a  One  which  is  no  explanation,  but  for
inquiring  into  what  is  really  important,  namely,  how  we
come  to  be  alike  in  some  things  and  to  remain  different  in
others,  and  what  therefore  is  meant  by  '  perceiving  the
same.'  For  either  if  we  all  perceived  all  things  alike,  or
if  we  all  perceived  all  things  differently,  there  would  be  no
difficulty.  In  the  one  case  we  could  not  get  sufficiently
apart  to  quarrel,  in  the  other  we  could  not  get  sufficiently
together,  and  each  would  dream  as  it  were  his  own  life-
dream  without  hindrance  from  any  one  besides.  But  as
it  is,  does  it  not  seem  to  you  a  mixed  world,  compounded
wondrously,  of  good  and  evil,  reason  and  unreason,  agree-
ments and  disagreements?  As  to  your  other  question,
did  you  ever  meet  Xanthias,  the  son  of  Glaucus  ?

M.  Yes,  but  he  seemed  to  me  a  very  ordinary  man
and  quite  unfit  to  aid  in  such  inquiries.

P.  To  me  he  seemed  most  wonderful,  and  a  great
proof  of  the  truth  I  have  maintained.  For  the  wretch
was  actually  unable  to  distinguish  red  from  green,  the
colour  of  the  grass  from  that  of  blood  !  You  may
imagine  how  he  dressed,  and  how  his  taste  was  derided.
But  it  was  his  eye,  and  not  his  taste,  that  was  in  fault.  I


xiv  PROTAGORAS  THE  HUMANIST 317

questioned  him  closely  and  am  sure  he  could  not  help  it.
He  simply  saw  colours  differently.  How  and  why  I  was
not  able  to  make  out.  But  it  was  from  his  case  and
others  like  it,  but  less  startling,  that  I  learnt  that  truth
and  reality  are  to  each  man  what  appears  to  him.
For  the  differences,  I  am  sure,  exist,  even  though  they
are  not  noticed  unless  they  are  very  great  and  in-
convenient.

M.  But  surely  Xanthias  was  diseased,  and  his  judg-
ments about  colour  are  of  no  more  importance  than  those
of  a  madman.

P.  You  do  not  get  rid  of  the  difference  by  calling  it
madness  and  disease.  And  how  would  you  define  the
essential  nature  of  madness  and  disease  ?

M.  I  am  sure  I  do  not  know.  You  should  ask
Asclepius.

P.  Ah,  he  is  one  of  those  gods  I  have  never  been
able  to  meet !  Let  me  hazard,  rather,  a  conjecture  that
madness  and  disease  are  merely  two  ways  of  showing
inability  to  keep  up  that  common  world  in  which  we  both
are  and  are  not,  and  from  which  we  seem  to  drop  out
wholly  when  we  die.1

M.  A  strange  conjecture  truly  for  a  strange  case  !
Would  you  apply  it  also  to  disease  ?  For  in  that  case
the  difficulty  seems  to  be  rather  in  conforming  oneself  to
things  than  to  one's  fellow-men.

P.  To  both,  rather.  Does  not  a  fever  drive  one
madly  out  of  the  common  world  into  a  world  of  empty
dreams  ?  And  is  not  the  diseased  body  part  of  the
common  world  ?

M.  Perhaps,  but  such  conjectures  do  not  interest
me.  Will  you  not  rather  give  an  account  of  your  own
disease  or  madness,  that  of  thinking  that  the  common
world  can  be  compounded  out  of  a  multitude  of  individual
worlds  ?

P.  Willingly.  Conceive  then  first  of  all  a  varied
multitude,  each  of  whom  perceived  things  in  a  fashion
peculiar  to  himself.

1  Cp.  Humanism,  pp.  285-7.


3i8  STUDIES IN  HUMANISM  xiv

M. You  bid  me  conceive  a  world  of  madmen  !

P.  It  does  not  matter  what  you  call  them,  nor  that
our  world  was  never  in  so  grievous  a  condition.  I  only
want  you  to  see  that  such  '  madmen  '  would  in  nowise
be  able  to  agree  or  act  together,  and  that  each  would  live
shut  up  in  himself,  unintelligible  to  the  others  and  with
no  comprehension  of  them.

M. Of  course.

P.  Would  you  admit  also  that  such  a  life  would  be
one  of  the  extremest  weakness  ?

M. So  weak  as  to  be  impossible  !

P.  Perhaps.  And  now  suppose  that  by  the  inter-
position of  some  god,  or  as  the  saying  is,  'by  a  divine
chance,'  some  of  these  strange  beings  were  to  be  endowed
with  the  ability  to  agree  and  act  together  in  some  partial
ways,  say  in  respect  to  the  red  and  the  sweet,  and  the
loud  and  the  pleasant.  Would  this  not  be  a  great
advantage  ?  And  would  they  not  be  enabled  to  join
together  and  to  form  a  community  in  virtue  of  the
communion  they  had  achieved  ?  And  would  they  not
be  stronger  by  far  than  those  who  did  not  '  perceive  the
same '  ?  And  so  would  they  not  profit  in  proportion  as
they  could  '  perceive  the  same '  ?  and  would  not  a  world
of  '  common  '  perception  and  thought  thus  gradually  grow
up?

M.  Only  if  they  really  did  perceive  the  same :  to
'  agree  in  action  '  and  to  '  perceive  the  same '  are  not  the
same,  and  when  you  have  reached  the  former  you  have
not  proved  the  latter.

P.  As  much  as  I  need  to.  For  by  '  perceiving
the  same'  I  mean  only  perceiving  in  such  a  way  that
we  can  act  together.  Thus  if  we  are  told  that  a  red  light
means  '  danger '  and  a  green  light  '  assistance,'  then  if  we
both  flee  from  the  red  and  welcome  the  green,  we  are  said
to  '  perceive  the  same.'  But  whether  what  I  perceive  as
red  is  in  any  other  sense  '  the  same '  as  what  you  perceive
as  red,  it  is  foolish  even  to  inquire.  For  I  cannot  carry
my  '  red '  into  your  soul  nor  you  yours  into  mine,  and  so
we  cannot  compare  them,  nor  see  how  far  they  are  alike  or


xiv  PROTAGORAS  THE  HUMANIST 319

not.  And  even  if  I  could,  my  comparing  of  my  '  red  '  with
yours  would  not  be  the  same  as  your  comparing  them.
Moreover,  if  we  imagined,  what  to  me  indeed  is  absurd
but  to  you  should  be  possible,  namely,  that  when  I
perceive  '  red '  I  feel  as  you  when  you  perceive  '  green,'
and  that  your  feeling  when  you  perceive  '  red '  is  the  same
as  mine  when  I  perceive  '  green,'  there  would  be  no  way
of  showing  that  we  did  not  perceive  alike.1  For  we  should
always  agree  in  distinguishing  '  red '  and  '  green.'  The
'  sameness,'  therefore,  is  not  the  cause  of  the  common
action,  but  its  effect.  Or  rather  it  is  another  way,  less
exact,  but  shorter,  of  asserting  it.  And  so  there  arises
the  opinion  that  we  all  perceive  alike,  and  that  if  any  one
does  not,  he  is  mad.  And  this  is  true  as  opinion,  being  as
it  is  convenient  and  salutary,  and  enough  for  ordinary  life.
But  for  the  purposes  of  science  we  must  be  more  precise,
and  regard  '  perception  of  the  same '  not  as  a  starting-
point,  but  as  a  goal,  which  in  some  matters  we  have
almost,  and  for  some  purposes  we  have  quite  reached.
In  short,  we  always  at  bottom  reason  from  the  '  common '
action  to  the  '  common '  perception,  and  not  conversely.
Hence,  too,  when  we  wish  to  speak  exactly,  we  must  infer
that  no  two  ever  quite  '  perceive  the  same,'  because  their
actions  never  quite  agree.  Moreover,  this  makes  clear
why  we  agree  about  some  things  and  judge  the  same,
and  not  about  others,  but  judge  differently.  We  agree
about  the  things  it  is  necessary  to  agree  about  in  order  to
live  at  all  ;  we  vary  concerning  the  things  which  are  not
needed  for  bare  life,  even  though  they  may  conduce  to  a
life  that  is  beautiful  and  good.  But  it  is  only  when  we
do  not  act  at  all  that  we  are  able  to  live  our  own  private
life  apart,  and  to  differ  utterly  from  all  others.

M.  And  what,  pray,  is  this  strange  life  in  which  we
do  not  act?

P.  Do  you  not  remember  the  saying  of  Heraclitus,.
"  For  the  waking  there  is  one  common  world,  but  of  those
asleep  each  one  turns  aside  to  his  own  privacy  "  ?  And
do  you  suppose  that  if  we  acted  on  our  dreams,  we  could

1  Cp.  Poincar£,  La  Valeur  de  la  Science,  pp.  262-3.


320  STUDIES IN HUMANISM  xiv

with  impunity  do  what  we  dream  ?  Is  it  not  merely
because  we  lie  still,  and  do  not  stir,  that  we  can  indulge
our  fancies  ?

M.  All  this  might  be  true,  and  persuasive  to  one
less  fixed  in  true  opinion  than  myself,  Protagoras,  were
it  not  that  all  along  you  have  assumed  that  there  is
•one  common  world  which  all  are  bound  to  imitate  within
them.  It  is  only  if  they  agree  about  this  that  they  can
live,  and  live  together,  as  you  say.

P.  I  am  not  astonished  that  you  should  think,
Morosophus,  that  such  was  my  assumption.  But  though
I  spoke  without  precision,  I  can  extend  my  way  of
conceiving  the  growth,  or  the  making  of  a  world  also
to  existences  very  different  from  men.  The  elements,
too,  may  have  joined  together  in  a  world,  because  they
grew  into  the  habit  of  taking  notice  of  each  other,
and  prospered  by  so  doing.  And  so  the  world  may
be  a  city,  and  ruled  by  laws  which  are  the  customs
-of  its  citizens.  Only  you  must  remember  that  habits
endure  and  form  the  '  nature '  which  we  find.  And  so  it
seems  to  us  that  we  come  into  a  world  already  made  and
incapable  of  change.  But  this  is  not  the  truth.  We
'  find '  a  world  made  for  us,  because  we  are  the  heirs  of
bygone  ages,  profiting  by  their  work,  and  it  may  be  suffer-
ing for  their  folly.  But  we  can  in  part  remake  it,  and
reform  a  world  that  has  slowly  formed  itself.  But  of  all
this  how  could  we  get  an  inkling  if  we  had  not  begun  by
perceiving  that  of  all  things,  Man,  each  man,  is  the
measure  ?

M.  It  seems  to  me,  Protagoras,  that  you  have  now
made  him,  not  only  the  measure,  but  also  the  maker.
And  this  shows  that  your  first  dictum  was  not  the  greatest
absurdity  that  Man  has  ever  made.

P.  Even  this,  that  Man  is  a  maker  of  his  world  has
a  sense  in  which  it  is  not  absurd  !

M.  Can  you  not  see,  man,  that  Reality  is  not  made
by  you,  but  pre-exists  your  efforts,  immutable,  sublime,
.and  unconcerned,  not  to  be  fully  grasped  by  man,  even
when  he  discovers  it  ?  Do  you  not  feel  the  reverential


xiv  PROTAGORAS  THE HUMANIST 321

awe  which  hedges  round,  as  you  approach  it,  the  One,  the
Whole,  which  is  and  was  and  will  be  ?

P.  Frankly,  I  do  not,  and  it  is  your  feeling  which
seems  to  me  absurd.  For  if  the  Real  were  really  in-
accessible to  man,  he  could  in  no  wise  discover  it.  And
if  the  mystery  really  were  sacred,  it  would  be  impious
even  to  desire  its  disclosure.  And  so  I  will  not  believe
that  the  Real  is  unknowable  or  immutable,  or  pre-existent
in  the  way  you  assume.  The  Real  I  deal  with  is  a
real  which  I  acknowledge,  and  I  know,  because  my  action
alters  it.  And  what  alone  seems  funny  and  absurd  to
me  is  that  whenever  we  have  made  it  different,  and  more
to  our  liking,  we  should  say  that  it  was  all  along  what  we
have  with  endless  difficulty  persuaded  it  to  become.  But
surely  this  trick  of  ours  does  not  really  make  it  pre-
existent  absolutely,  nor  independent  of  our  action.  For
though  our  actions  mostly  start  from  something  which  we
take  as  pre-existent,  it  did  not  pre-exist  as  that  which  it
was  altered  into.  And  so  that  which  becomes  real  by  our
efforts  is  ever  said  to  be  more  real  than  that  which  we
started  from,  and  altered,  and  thereby  proved  to  be  unreal,
or  real  only  for  the  purpose  with  which  it  was  taken.  I
do  not  know  whether  you  understand  this,  Morosophus,
as  our  habits  of  speech  render  it  difficult  to  grasp.

M.  I  understand  at  least  that  you  destroy  all  reality
by  rendering  it  relative  to  human  purposes.  For  in  what
way  can  anything  be  said  to  be  absolutely  real,  if  it  is
ever  dependent  upon  the  fleeting  fancy  of  the  moment  ?
And  without  an  absolute  reality  what  is  philosophy  ?

P.  In  one  way  only,  and  that  the  only  philosophic
way  !  The  absolutely  real  will  be  that  which  fulfils
our  every  purpose,  and  which  therefore  we  do  not  seek
to  alter,  but  only  to  maintain.  It  will  be  immutable
because  no  one  will  wish  it  otherwise,  and  not  because
no  one  is  able  to  improve  it.  But  your  mistake  lies  in
supposing  that  such  a  unity  or  harmony  already  exists,
as  something  we  can  start  from.  And  you  are  still
more  mistaken,  if  you  suppose  that  because  it  does  not
appear  to  exist,  what  appears  to  exist  is  not  real,  but  the

Y


322  STUDIES IN  HUMANISM  xiv

outcome  of  some  strange  illusion.  The  absolutely  real
can  be  reached  only  through  the  apparently  real,  by  re-
moulding it  into  a  perfect  harmony.  And  whether  you
or  I  can  achieve  this,  I  cannot  tell  ;  but  that  we  should
attempt  it  is  clearly  fitting,  and  is  the  only  thing  that
matters."

Philonous.  I  cannot  help  stopping  you,  Antimorus,  to
say  how  greatly  your  Protagoras  delights  me  !  What  I
had  always  disliked  about  what  I  was  taught  to  believe
his  doctrine  was  its  preference  for  what  is  merely  human,
and  relative,  and  happens  in  experience.  For  this  seemed
to  leave  me  with  nothing  firm  and  fixed  and  certain.
And  so  I  longed  for  something  not  dependent  on  ex-
perience, and  the  Ideas  of  Plato  and  even  the  immutable
One  of  Parmenides,  though  one  felt  they  were  far  from
desirable  in  many  other  respects  and  hardly  related  to
most  of  our  interests,  seemed  a  sort  of  guarantee  that
all  order  would  not  be  swept  away  in  a  chaotic  flux  of
happenings.  But  now  it  seems  that  I  was  wrong,  and
that  we  may  look  hopefully  to  the  future  for  the  realisa-
tion of  all  our  desires,  if  only  we  will  bestir  ourselves  to
bring  about  what  seems  the  best !  But  I  interrupted  you,
and  am  still  eager  to  hear  how  the  argument  went  on.
With  such  dazzling  prospects  it  must  have  reached  a
glorious  conclusion.  Tell  me,  did  Protagoras  persuade
Morosophus,  as  he  has  persuaded  me  ?

Antimorus.  Of  course  not ;  in  real  life  an  argument
does  not  conclude,  like  one  of  Plato's  dialogues,  at  its
best.  You  have  heard  the  best  part  of  my  notes,  and  I
will  spare  you  the  rest.

P. But  will  you  not  tell  me  how  it  ended  ?

A.  Morosophus,  who  to  do  him  justice  was  clever
enough  in  his  way,  at  once  began  to  dispute  the  reality  of
change,  which,  he  said,  Protagoras  had  assumed.  You
know  how  hard  it  is  to  refute  these  Eleatic  tricksters,  who
will  not  look  at  the  plain  facts  of  common  experience,  and
Protagoras  had  not  got  far  into  his  explanation  before
that  young  ass,  Sophomorus,  interrupted  and  insisted


xiv  PROTAGORAS  THE  HUMANIST 323

on  bringing  out  some  more  of  his  "whips."  And  so
Protagoras,  courteous  as  ever,  was  forced  to  reply  to
further  futilities  about  the  true  and  the  useful,  of  the  sort
which  are  now  being  called  sophistries,  but  might  more
fitly  be  called  philosophemes,  seeing  that  philosophers
have  invented  nearly  all  of  them.

P.  What  was  the  question  about  the  true  and  the
useful ?

A.  The  question  was  whether  when  Protagoras  had
asserted  that  the  true  was  useful  he  had  also  to  admit
that  the  useful  was  true,  and  so  either  that  any  lie  which
was  convenient  for  a  passing  purpose  was  absolutely  true,
or  that  truth  was  unmeaning.  And  so  the  end  was  that
Protagoras,  after  pointing  out  that  if  he  admitted  that  the
useful  was  always  true  he  would  have  to  admit  what  he
had  always  denied,  viz.  that  there  was  useless  know-
ledge, had  to  give  Sophomorus  a  lesson  in  elementary
logic.

P.  And  did  you  never  learn  from  Protagoras  by  doing
what  he  thought  we  might  attain  the  end  which  he  divined,
the  harmony  which  is  absolutely  real,  or  the  absolute
reality  which  is  a  perfect  harmony  ?

A.  Not  with  any  exactness.  For  Protagoras  did  not
suppose  that  he  had  found  more  than  the  beginnings  of
the  way.  And  the  whole,  he  said,  would  be  long  and  diffi-
cult, and  fit  only  for  the  strong  and  brave.  But  though
he  was  ever  zealous  that  we  should  trust  all  our  powers
to  help  us  in  our  quest,  yet  he  seemed  to  rely  most  on
the  increase  of  knowledge^  and  was  wont  to  deny  that  any
knowledge  was  useless,  because  it  was  always  a  way  of
mastering  the  real.

P.  How  splendid  !  I  do  not  understand  how  you
can  speak  about  it  all  so  calmly  !  Why  have  you  not
cried  out  aloud  this  Truth  of  Protagoras  throughout  the
cities  of  the  Hellenes  ?

A.  And  why  have  I  become  the  priest  of  Dionysus  ?
Did  I  not  tell  you  why  ?  I  am  old,  oh  grandson  of
Eudora,  and  you  are  very  young  ;  but  you  would  have  to
live  to  be  far  older  than  ever  I  shall  be,  before  you  could


324  STUDIES IN  HUMANISM  xiv

persuade  the  Hellenes  or  Barbarians  to  care  about  the
Truth  !  Had  I  done  as  you  bid  me,  I  should  soon  have
needed  the  hellebore  of  Anticyra  to  escape  the  hemlock
of  Athens  !  Can  you  wonder  that  one  who  had  seen
and  suffered  so  much  should  prefer  the  sweet  poison  of
Mende  ?

P.  But  in  Mende  at  least  you  might  have  made  a
beginning.  Nay,  we  might  still !  For  in  all  the  city
who  is  there  so  well-born  as  you,  the  Asclepiad,  or  I,  the
Nelid,  and  as  highly  thought  of?  And  who  as  clever?
Why  should  we  not  easily  persuade  the  Mendeans  of  this
new  "  Truth,"  and  even  be  honoured  for  teaching  it  ?

A.  I  will  tell  you  why,  Philonous.  Because  "  truth  "
for  the  Mendeans  lies  in  wine  alone,  and  the  true  is  profit-
able only  in  this  form.  Because  it  was  not  given  to  the
Asclepiads  to  cure  men  of  their  folly.  Because  I  am  the
priest  of  Dionysus,  to  honour  whom  is  to  disgrace  oneself,
and  it  beseems  me  least  of  all  men  to  introduce  new
worships.  Because  the  Mendeans  will  elect  a  Nelid  gladly
enough  as  their  general,  if  you  ask  them,  but  will  never
honour  you,  or  any  one,  as  their  teacher.  For  what  they
will  want  of  you  is  not  truth  but  victory.

P.  But  I  care  not  whether  they  honour  me  or  not,  nor
value  the  petty  prizes  of  their  politics.  I  will  live  for
truth  alone,  whether  it  benefits  others,  or  only  me.

A.  If  you  can,  Philonous.  But  it  seems  to  me  more
likely  that  the  Mendeans  will  not  let  you.  They  will
force  you  to  die  the  beautiful  death  of  a  patriot,  in  some
silly  skirmish  with  the  boors  of  Thrace  or  with  the  stout
burghers  of  Stagira.  As  for  me,  I  am  too  old,  and  should
be  thinking  of  that  last  long  journey  to  the  house  of
Hades,  to  the  vile  inn  (iravboiceiov}  that  receives  us  all,  the
best  and  the  worst  alike,  and  yet  is  never  full.

P.  Has  your  philosophy,  then,  no  cure  for  the  fear  of
death  ?

A.  Because  it  has  none  for  the  love  of  ignorance  !
For  knowledge  is  power,  knowledge  is  life,  while  ignorance
is  death,  and  leads  to  death,  and  ends  in  death.  And
because  the  many  have  loved  ignorance  and  hate  the


xiv  PROTAGORAS  THE HUMANIST 325

truth,  I  too  must  soon  descend,  together  with  the  rest,
unknowing  but  not  unresentful.

P.  You  think,  then,  that  our  Vision  of  Truth  was  but
a  madman's  dream  ? '

A.  Let  us  dismiss  both  vain  dreams  and  maddening
realities  !  *  *  *  And  yet  the  dreams  may  be  truer  than
the  realities,  if  the  better  be  the  truer  !  Nay,  this  life  itself
may  be  wholly,  or  in  part,  an  evil  dream.  But  who  knows,
and  why  torment  ourselves  ?  We  two  at  least  shall  never
know.  We  were  born  too  early  by  ten  thousand  years.
Come  therefore,  let  us  flee  to  the  consolations  of  the  god
I  serve,  and  pledge  me  copious  cups  of  this  my  sovereign
anodyne !


XV

A DIALOGUE CONCERNING GODS
AND PRIESTS

PHILONOUS  ) f  M ,  PROTAGORAS  of  Abdera

ANTIMORUS  j  °  MELETUS  of  Athens

ARGUMENT

Philonous  asks  Antimorus  whether  he  agrees  with  Protagoras's  agnostic
attitude  towards  the  gods.  Antimorus  will  not  tell  him,  but  criticises
the  arguments  for  the  existence  of  gods  propounded  by  Philonous.
(l)  That  from  the  existence  of  priests:  can  they  serve  the  non-
existent ?  It  is  objected  that  this  would  prove  too  much.  (2)  God
as  the  One.  But  does  not  this  reduce  all  human  reality  to  illusion
and  separate  it  wholly  from  '  God '  ?  The  logical  difficulties  about
predicating  unity  of  our  world.  If  unity  is  inapplicable,  is  it  not
meaningless  to  call  the  One  '  God '  ?  (3)  The  argument  from  human
desire.  It  is  an  indispensable  condition  of  the  discovery  of  gods,  but
primarily  proves  only  their  psychological  reality.  Have  then  real  gods
been  discovered  thus  ?  asks  Philonous.  Antimorus  again  excuses  him-
self, but  reads  him  a  conversation  of  Protagoras  with  Meletus,  explaining
his  seeming  agnosticism.  Philonous  gives  up  the  problem,  and  is  con-
soled with  an  Egyptian  Myth.

Philonous.  I  can  never  sufficiently  make  out  from  what
you  say,  Antimorus,  whether  or  not  you  believe  in  the
gods,  or  agree  with  your  master  Protagoras  that  their
existence  lies  beyond  our  ken.  And,  ever  since  the  day
when  I  went  to  see  you  in  preference  to  the  play,  you
have  been  so  kind  to  me  that  I  am  sure  you  will  pardon
me  when  I  beg  you  to  remove  my  perplexity.  For  the
matter,  assuredly,  is  one  of  no  slight  importance,  alike  for
public  and  for  private  affairs.  For  if  there  are  gods,  as
nearly  all  men  profess  to  believe,  is  it  not  most  important
that  men  should  win  their  approval  by  worshipping  them
aright,  it  may  be  in  ways  very  different  from  those  now

326


xv  GODS  AND PRIESTS  327

in  vogue  among  the  Hellenes  and  among  the  Barbarians  ?
If,  again,  there  are  no  gods,  why  should  we  both  publicly
and  in  private  spend  so  much  money  on  sacrifices  and
costly  temples,  and  expect  vainly,  as  gifts  from  the  gods,
benefits  which  we  might  perchance  secure  by  our  own
exertions  ?  I  am  sure  that  you  must  have  reflected  on
these  things  far  longer  and  more  deeply  than  I  have  yet
been  able  to  do,  and  so  I  am  in  hopes  that  you  can  answer
my  question.

Antimorus.  You  are  looking  very  well  to-day,  my
dear  Philonous,  and  your  question  is  a  good  one.  More-
over, it  touches  a  subject  which  is  very  nearly  as  import-
ant as  men  profess  to  think  it,  and  much  more  important
than  they  really  think  it.  But  I  am  the  last  person,  not
only  in  Mende  but  in  the  world,  to  answer  it.  You  surely
cannot  have  forgotten  that  I  am  myself  a  priest  ?

P.  Of  course  not ;  but  what  of  that  ?  Nay,  are  not
priests  of  all  men  the  most  likely  to  know  whether  or  not
the  gods  exist  ?

A.  How  charming  of  you,  Philonous,  to  say  this  !
But  even  if  you  think  priests  the  most  likely  to  know,
do  you  also  think  them  the  most  likely  to  tell  ?

P. Yes  :  if  there  are  gods.

A. And  if  not,  what  ? Or  if  they  do  not  know  ?

P.  It  seems  to  me,  Antimorus,  that  one  might,  in  a
manner,  argue  from  the  existence  of  priests  to  that  of
gods.  For  if  there  were  no  gods,  would  there  be  priests
to  serve  them  ?  How  could  they  serve  the  non-existent  ?

A.  Very  subtle,  and  better  than  most  of  the  argu-
ments of  theologians !  And  so  you  would  say  that
because  I  am  the  priest  of  Dionysus  there  must  be  a
Divine  Drunkard,  and  because  there  are  Atti,  a  Mother  of
the  Gods  ?  Would  you  argue  similarly  from  the  worships
of  the  Egyptians  that  there  must  be  a  Divine  Crocodile
and  a  Divine  Jackal  and  a  Divine  Onion  ?

P. It  does  seem  a  little  absurd.

A.  Not  a  little.  And  are  not  Divine  Men  and
Women  just  as  absurd  ?

P. I  suppose  so. But  nevertheless  there  are  some


328  STUDIES IN  HUMANISM  xv

of  the  gods  whom  I  should  be  sorry  to  lose.  Apollo,  for
example,  and  the  Muses.  But  no  doubt  you  are  right,
and  we  should  worship  no  god  but  the  one  who  moves
and  lives  in  all  things,  taking  all  shapes  but  tied  to  none,
and  exceeding  far  in  beauty  and  goodness  and  health  and
might  all  notions  men  can  frame.

A. It  is  Proteus,  I  suppose,  whom  you  mean?

P.  Never !  The  God  I  mean  is  no  juggler.  He
is  the  One  and  the  All,  that  has  made  the  world,  and
made  it  a  Cosmos.  For  surely  there  must  be  some  reason
why  the  world  is  one,  and  all  things  work  together  for
good  ?

A.  And  you  think  that  the  Cause  of  this  should  be
deemed  the  Deity?

P.  Yes,  and  a  God  of  all  gods,  who  must  needs
exist,  because  his  existence  is  revealed  in  all  things  that
exist.  This  is  the  God  too  whom  philosophers  seem
to  me  to  hint  at,  though  obscurely.  And  does  he  not
seem  to  you  the  offspring  of  a  noble  thought  ?

A.  So  noble  that  it  seems  to  me  oblivious  of  the
simple  truth.  Too  noble  to  have  a  humble  origin  in  the
facts  of  life.  While  as  for  the  philosophers,  so  far  from
rendering  God's  existence  certain  and  necessary,  they  seem
rather  to  render  it  impossible  !

P. How  so  ?

A. Did  you  not  say  God  was  the  One  and  the  All  ?

P. Yes.

A.  And  also  that  he  excelled  in  beauty  and  goodness
and  might  ?

P.  It  is  as  all-good,  and  all-beautiful,  and  all-mighty
that  I  would  conceive  him.

A.  Would  you  say,  then,  that  because  all  things
are  God,  all  things  are  good  and  beautiful  ?  And  if
the  Many,  though  one  in  God,  yet  contend  against  each
other,  would  you  say  that  God  was  divided  against  him-
self, and  distracted  by  intestine  war?  And  is  he  such  as
to  delight  in  this  condition  ?  Or  is  he  discordant  and
miserable,  and  unable  to  cure  himself  of  this  disease  ?
Or  is  he  perchance  wholly  unaware  of  the  plight  we  see


xv  GODS  AND  PRIESTS  329

him  to  be  in  ?  As  for  his  might,  how  would  you  measure
it  ?  Can  you  measure  it,  if  there  is  nothing  to  measure  it
upon  ?  If  all  things  are  but  manifestations  of  God's
power,  and  his  playthings,  if  in  all  conflicts  God  is  merely
sparring  with  himself,  how  can  you  know  whether  or  not
his  might  is  irresistible  ?  What,  therefore,  does  almighty
power  mean  ?

P.  These  are  difficulties  I  had  never  thought  of,
and  I  do  not  feel  that  I  can  answer  you  sufficiently  at
present.  But  I  am  unwilling  to  yield  to  you  wholly,
Antimorus.  And  so  might  one  not  hold  that  God  at
heart  is  good  and  beautiful,  even  though  many  things
seem  otherwise  to  us  ;  that  he  is  not  really  struggling
against  himself,  though  we  as  parts,  who  cannot  see  the
whole,  seem  to  see  him  so  ;  and  that  so  the  disease  of  the
world  is  curable,  nay  cured,  because  it  is  not  real  ?

A. One  might  indeed,  Philonous,  on  one  condition.

P. And  what  is  that  ?

A.  You  can  save  the  perfection  of  the  One  by
sacrificing  all  on  the  altar  of  the  One,  and  condemning
the  Many  to  utter  unreality.

P. How  ?

A.  It  is  true  that  the  troubles  of  the  Many  and  the
imperfections  of  appearances  cannot  mar  the  perfection
of  the  One,  if  they  exist  only  for  us,  and  not  for  it.
But  then  we  also  cannot  exist  for  it  For  our  troubles
are  inherent  in  our  nature,  and  to  get  rid  of  them  the  One
would  have  also  to  get  rid  of  us.

P. But  might  they  not  be  our  illusion  ?

A. Yet  is  not  the  illusion  inevitable  and  existent?

P. Perhaps.

A. And  if  it  is  inevitable,  is  it  not  real  ?

P.  Not  if  the  One  does  not  suffer  from  it.  For  all
things  truly  are  as  they  appear  to  it,  and  not  to  us.

A.  I  am  glad  you  said  this  ;  for  it  is  just  what  I
was  wishing  you  to  see.  If  things  truly  are  as  they
appear  to  the  One,  then  they  can  never  appear  to  us
as  they  truly  are.  And  conversely,  the  One  can  never
perceive  things  as  they  truly  appear  to  us.  You  can


330  STUDIES IN HUMANISM  xv

make  the  One  perfect,  but  at  the  cost  of  separating  it
from  a  world  which  is  utterly  unreal,  and  would  be
abhorrent  to  its  unpolluted  calm.  Consider  now  the  con-
sequences.

P. What  ?

A.  You  have  imagined  an  image  of  divine  perfec-
tion. But  that  image  floats  above  our  world,  and  nowhere
touches  it.  The  One  cannot  know  our  existence,  and  if
it  could  know  it,  could  regard  it  only  as  a  disordered
nightmare.  It  can  afford  us,  therefore,  no  assistance
toward  the  betterment  of  life.  How  then  have  we
secured  its  divine  aid  ?  And  is  not  the  disease  of  appear-
ance incurable,  just  because  it  is  imaginary  and  unreal,
and  God  takes  no  note  of  it  ?  What  then  have  we  gained
by  convicting  ourselves  and  our  knowledge  of  illusion  ?
And  worst  of  all,  we  have  not  even  got  an  answer  to  our
question.

P. To  what  question  ?

A.  To  the  question  how  our  argument  could  climb
from  earth  to  heaven,  and  infer  the  existence  of  a  god
from  the  nature  of  the  world.

P. Yet  did  we  not  find  a  ladder?

A.  But  so  queer  a  one  that  we  had  to  cast  it  down
immediately  we  got  to  heaven.  And  when  we  got  to
heaven  no  one  would  take  notice  of  us — we  were  treated
as  unreal.  And  to  earth  we  cannot  redescend.  Or  do
you  see  a  way  ?

P.  Not  from  our  present  position.  But  tell  me,
how  would  it  be  if  we  gave  up  the  notion  that  the
One  is  beautiful  and  good — for  it  is  this  which  seems
to  be  impracticable  ?

A,  By  all  means  give  it  up.  But  how  would  you
proceed  ?

P.  After  all,  goodness  and  beauty  are  only  human
feelings,  which  we  might  as  rightly  hesitate  to  ascribe
to  God  as  human  shapes  and  human  passions.  And
so  might  we  not  worship  him  as  simply  great  ?

A.  There  are  those,  no  doubt,  who  would  be  willing
to  do  this.


xv  GODS  AND PRIESTS  331

P. And  why  not  you?

A.  I  am  not  so  ready  to  give  up  the  search  for
beauty  and  goodness  in  the  cosmos.  I  will  not  worship
mere  greatness,  nor  deem  a  whale  more  admirable  than  a
man  simply  because  he  is  many  times  as  large.

P.  But  has  not  the  argument  shown  that  the  Divine
cannot  be  beautiful  and  good  ?

A.  Or  that  what  is  not  beautiful  and  good  cannot
be  called  divine  ?

P. How  do  you  mean  ?

A.  I  mean  that  if  the  One  is  neither  of  these  things,
I  will  not  worship  it,  nor  call  it  God.  If  it  is  indifferent
to  our  good,  I  am  indifferent  to  its  existence.

P.  But  have  you  not  still  ground  to  fear  it  ?  Will  it
not  resent  your  indifference  ?

A.  Why  should  it  ?  I  too  am  part  of  it,  if  I  am  at
all,  fashioned  by  it  to  please  itself.  And  if  it  is  indifferent
to  what  seems  good  to  man,  why  should  it  care  about
what  seems  evil  to  man  ?

P.  But  how  if  its  nature  was  to  resent  all  disrespect,
and  while  not  rewarding  the  good,  to  inflict  evil  on  the
imprudent  or  irreverent  ?

A.  Why  should  my  irreverence  offend  rather  than
amuse  it  ?  And  why  should  it  inflict  evil  on  itself
because  a  part  of  itself  offended  it  ?  Besides,  if  this  were
somehow  possible,  you  would  only  have  turned  your  god
into  an  evil  demon.  And  even  so,  I  should  not  reason-
ably change  my  conduct.

P.  Why  not  ?  Would  you  not  be  made  to  suffer
for  it  ?

A.  I  might  be  made  to  suffer  for  my  impiety,  but
not  more  probably  than  you  for  your  piety.  For,  being
evil,  the  Demon  would  dole  out  evils  to  all,  to  good  and
bad  alike.

P. I  do  not  see  that. Why  ?

A.  Because  if  he  did  not,  but  allowed  himself  to  be
propitiated  by  rites,  however  strange  and  horrible,  there
would  be  a  way  of  making  him  good.  For  he  would
cease  to  be  evil  to  those  who  propitiated  him,  and  so


332  STUDIES IN HUMANISM  xv

would  become  good,  and  this  would  be  contrary  to  our
hypothesis.

P.  It  would  seem  then  that  the  One  can  be  neither
good  nor  evil,  but  must  be  indifferent.

A.  But  if  it  is  indifferent,  does  it  remain  an  object
of  worship  ?

P. It  seems  not.

A.  If  this  then  be  truth,  shall  we  not  be  really
atheists  ?

P.  Hardly  that.  For  do  you  not  think  that  it
will  still  be  a  great  gain,  not  perhaps  for  purposes  of
public  worship,  but  for  the  private  communings  of  the
soul,  that  we  should  feel  that  we  do  not  live  at  random
in  a  random  concourse  of  things,  but  in  a  cosmos  which
is  truly  one  ?

A.  You  are  satisfied  with  small  gains,  if  you  think
this  one.  Still  even  small  gains  are  not  despicable,  if
they  are  sure.  But  who  can  feel  sure  about  this  gain
of  yours  ?

P.  What  ?  Do  you  think  an  error  still  lurks  in  my
argument  ?

A.  No,  but  that  it  flaunts  itself  over  its  whole
surface.

P.  Do  you  not  admit,  then,  that  the  universe  is
one  ?  I  do  not  see  how  any  one  can  doubt  this.

A. Not  if  you  define  the  universe  amiss.

P. How  ?

A. As  the  totality  of  things  known  and  unknown.

P. And  is  not  this  the  right  definition  ?

A. Only  for  one  desiring  to  beg  the  real  question.

P. I  do  not  understand.

A.  Do  you  suppose  that  what  you  now  perceive  and
know  is  all  that  is  and  was  and  ever  will  be,  the  whole
universe  in  short  ?

P.  Of  course  not,  nor  what  any  man  perceives  and
knows.

A.  It  is  possible,  therefore,  that  additions  may  be
made  to  the  known  universe  out  of  the  multitude  of
unknown  things  ?


xv  GODS  AND  PRIESTS  333

P. Yes,  I  suppose  so.

A.  How  would  you  ascertain  whether  these  additions
were  really  new  births  within  the  universe,  or  really
additions  from  without,  from  what  had  not  before  formed
part  of  it  ?

P. I  hardly  know.

A. Nor  I. But  see  what  follows.

P. I  am  looking  eagerly.

A.  The  world  at  every  moment  would  appear
to  you  to  be  such  that  it  might  either  give  birth  to
endless  novelties  within  itself,  or  come  into  contact  with
illimitable  realities,  which  had  until  then  existed  out  of
connexion  with  it.  Your  conception,  therefore,  of  the
whole  as  one,  could  never  cover  all  that  was.  There
would  always  be  a  Many  bursting  into  or  out,  in  what
you  had  taken  to  be  one.  And  so  in  neither  case  could
its  unity  ever  be  effectively  maintained,  could  you  ever
get  an  assurance  that  you  really  knew  all  there  was.

P. I  suppose  not.

A.  Then  what  sense  is  there  in  calling  our  world
the  universe  ?  The  universe  is  the  totality  of  things ;
but  to  this  totality  we  do  not  attain,  nor  could  we
know  it,  if  we  did.  We  can  never  make  certain,  therefore,
that  we  are  dealing  with  the  real  universe,  that  we  have
really  got  all  things  together  in  a  universe,  and  that  what
is  true  of  it  is  true  of  the  things  we  know.

P.  But  would  not  this  uncertainty  make  it  the  more
interesting  ?

A.  Perhaps  ;  but  it  would  spoil  your  argument  from
the  notion  of  a  universe.

P. How  ?

A.  Because  you  could  never  apply  your  notion
to  the  world  you  lived  in.  That  the  universe  was  the
totality  of  existences  no  one  need  trouble  to  deny.  For
the  notion  could  never  be  applied.  Nor  would  you,  by
possessing  it,  learn  anything  about  the  world  you  lived  in.
For  that  the  world  we  know  was  the  totality  of  things
could  never  be  asserted.  And  what  we  thought  about
the  world  would  never  justify  prediction  :  it  would  always


334  STUDIES IN  HUMANISM  xv

be  at  the  mercy  of  the  changes  introduced  by  the  new
things  that  entered  it.

P. Would  you  explain  this  further  ?

A.  It  is  very  simple.  If  you  don't  know  the  whole
of  a  thing  and  are  in  doubt  about  its  character,  may  not
your  opinion  alter  as  you  get  to  know  more  of  it  ?

P. Not  unreasonably.

A.  It  will  seem,  therefore,  better  or  worse  as  a  whole,
according  as  the  new  parts  of  it  seem  better  or  worse  ?

P. Certainly.

A.  If,  then,  God  is  the  whole,  and  the  whole  we
know  is  not  the  true  whole  but  a  part,  will  not  our
reverence  for  an  incomplete  whole,  of  necessity  be  the
worship  of  a  false  god  ?

P. Perhaps.

A.  And,  moreover,  will  not  God  for  us  grow  with
our  knowledge,  growing  better  or  worse,  or  better  and
worse  alternately,  without  ceasing  ?

P.  It  will  be  very  inconvenient,  if  he  grows  very
different !

A.  It  will.  And  do  you  not  think,  therefore,  that  it
will  be  very  inconvenient  to  worship  such  a  thing  at  all  ?

P. It  would  not  be  as  delightful  as  I  had  hoped.

A.  It  would  be  quite  as  absurd  as  worshipping
the  onion.  And  not  nearly  so  useful.  For  you  can
use  the  onion,  and  if  need  be  eat  it,  ere  it  grows  too
large,  but  what  can  any  man  do  with  the  universe  ?

P.  Is  it  then  the  desire  of  Antimorus  the  Wise
that  I  should  proclaim  him  priest  of  the  Non-existent,
and  must  we  once  more  call  ourselves  atheists  ?

A. By  no  means. Remember  that  I  am  priest.

P. Aye,  a  priest  who  refutes  all  gods !

A.  No,  who  refutes  bad  arguments.  When  have  I
ever  said  there  were  no  gods  ?

P.  But  have  you  not  refuted  all  the  arguments  the
human  mind  has  conceived  ?

A. All,  perhaps,  that  your  mind  has  conceived.

P. Has  yours,  then,  conceived  others  ?

A. Perhaps.


xv  GODS AND PRIESTS  335

P. Then  lose  no  time  in  telling  me.

A. They  are,  perhaps,  not  so  different  from  yours.

P. Then  why  did  you  refute  mine?

A.  Perhaps  they  were  not  rightly  stated,  nor  rightly
argued  from.  You  are  ever  so  hasty,  Philonous,  and
too  eager  to  make  an  argument  achieve  more  than  its
strength  will  bear.  And  when  it  does  not  at  once  do
what  you  wish,  you  reject  it  utterly ;  whereas  you  should
not  make  a  leaping-pole  out  of  a  reed.

P.  What  strength  is  left  in  any  of  the  arguments  I
mentioned  ?  Have  you  not  laid  them  low  one  by  one
without  exception  ?

A.  The  first  one,  about  the  connexion,  between  the
existence  of  priests  and  of  gods,  was  not  a  bad  one.

P.  You  mean  that  there  cannot  be  priests  unless
there  are  gods  ?  But  is  it  not  possible  that  priests
should  be  instituted  by  deluded  men  of  false  gods,  and
so  exist,  even  though  there  are  no  gods  at  all  ?

A.  Not  quite  that :  you  must  look  at  things  more
subtly.

P. How  then  ?

A.  Leaving  aside  the  gods  for  a  time,  let  me  ask
you  why  you  suppose  that  priests  exist  ?

P. That  is  hard  to  say. I  have  often  wondered  why.

A.  You  would  not  say,  I  suppose,  that  priests
exist  because  gods  exist  ?

P.  No ;  for  what  we  are  trying  to  prove  is  that
gods  exist  because  priests  exist.

A.  Nor  yet  that  there  are  priests  in  order  that  they
may  have  superior  knowledge  of  divine  things  ?

P,  But  surely  they  do  !  You  are  the  first  priest
I  have  known  who  did  not  profess  to  have  ;  and  even
as  to  you  I  am  not  sure.

A.  The  knowledge  I  mean  is  not  concerning  sacred
stories,  of  which  indeed  they  know  a  great  abundance :
it  concerns  such  matters  as  we  have  been  conversing
about,  the  cause  of  being  and  of  life  and  of  suffering
and  of  evil,  and  the  things  after  death  and  in  Hades.
Have  you  ever  anywhere  met  a  priest  who  could  give


336  STUDIES IN HUMANISM  xv

a  reasonable  account  about  such  things,  or  answer
questions  such  as  would  be  asked  about  them  by  a
reasonable  man  desirous  of  clear  notions  ?

P. Not  unless  you  are  the  man  !

A,  However  much  you  flatter  me,  I  fear  that  I  shall
disappoint  you.

P. Not  unless  you  break  off  the  inquiry  !

A.  Then  you  must  suggest  a  better  reason  for  the
existence  of  priests.

P.  Shall  we  say  that  we  must  have  them  in  order
that  the  sacred  rites  may  be  performed  aright?

A.  Yes,  that  is  a  better  answer.  For  assuredly
it  is  for  the  sake  of  ritual  rather  than  of  philosophy  that
men  need  priests.  But  why  do  they  need  ritual  ?

P.  It  seems  so  natural.  Perhaps  without  it  many
would  become  disorderly,  and  so  it  is  beneficial  to  the
State.

A.  Do  you  think  that  our  Bacchanalian  festivals  are
conducive  to  good  order  ?

P.  Perhaps  not,  but  does  not  the  fear  of  Zeus,  the
guardian  of  the  oath,  stop  men  from  swearing  falsely  ?

A.  How  strange  then  that  perjury  is  still  so
common  !  Or  how  weak  the  fear  of  Zeus  !  Or  will  you
say  perhaps  that  it  is  fear  of  some  stronger  god  than
Zeus  which  leads  men  to  forswear  themselves  ?  And  do
you  not  fear  that  the  fear  of  Zeus  will  lead  men  to
imitate  him  in  other  ways  as  well  ?

P.  A  god  may  do  without  blame  what  it  would
be  atrocious  for  a  man  to  do.

A.  How  then  is  a  man  to  know  whether  it  is  good
to  do  as  the  gods,  or  bad  ?

P.  I  confess,  Antimorus,  I  cannot  defend  the  actions
of  the  gods  as  they  are  narrated,  and  that  the  sacred
stories  seem  to  me  most  impious.  That  is  just  why  I  am
so  anxious  to  know  what  to  think  about  the  whole  matter.

A.  Well  said.  But  you  have  not  yet  told  me  what
need  men  have  for  priests.

P.  I  can  perceive  none,  and  yet  I  am  persuaded
that  they  need  them.  Perhaps  it  is  just  a  desire.


xv  GODS  AND  PRIESTS  337

A.  Very  good  indeed !  We  have  priests  because
we  need  them,  and  need  them  to  satisfy  our  desire.  And
what  do  priests  desire?

P. Gods,  I  should  think.

A.  Excellent !  And  do  you  think  that  they  alone
desire  gods  ?

P.  No,  we  all  do,  except  perhaps  a  few  scoundrels
who  dread  their  vengeance.

A.  Good  again !  Are  we  not  agreed,  then,  that
gods  are  the  embodiments  of  human  desires,  and  exist
as  surely,  and  as  long,  as  the  desires  which  they  gratify  ?
Can  you  wonder  any  longer  that  Bacchus  is  a  god,  and
Plutus,  and  Aphrodite,  and  the  Onion  ?  For  are  they
not  all  objects  of  desire  ?

P.  It  seems  to  me,  Antimorus,  that  you  go  too
fast,  and  prove  too  much.  If  you  could  prove  any  god
thus,  you  would  certainly  prove  the  existence  of  the
Divine  Lust  and  the  Divine  Onion.  And  was  it  not  just
by  adducing  these  that  you  laughed  me  out  of  my  argu-
ment that  the  existence  of  priests  involved  that  of  their
gods  ?  You  have  substituted  the  worshippers  for  the
priests  as  the  causes  of  the  gods'  existence,  but  otherwise
the  argument  is  the  same.

A.  Pardon  me,  Philonous,  it  was  you  who  dropped
the  argument  at  the  first  touch  of  ridicule.  You  will
never  be  a  great  philosopher  until  you  consent  to  make
yourself  very  ridiculous,  and  to  laugh  at  your  own  ideas
as  well  as  at  those  of  others.  For  if  the  truth  did  not
seem  ridiculous  and  paradoxical,  do  you  suppose  that
errors  would  be  so  common,  so  commonplace,  so  solemn,
and  so  reputable  ?

P.  Even  so,  I  think  there  are  objections  to  your
argument.

A. Then  let  us  discuss  them  before  we  go  further.

P.  Well  then,  in  the  first  place,  if  desire  makes
gods,  can  it  not  also  unmake  them  ?

A.  No  doubt,  but  desires  are  far  more  permanent
than  philosophies  or  theologies.

P.  Again,  I  do  not  admit  that  the  desire  for  a  thing

Z


338  STUDIES  IN HUMANISM  xv

is  a  reason  for  thinking  that  that  thing  exists,  or  in
any  way  brings  it  into  existence.  The  desire  for  food
does  not  feed  me,  nor  make  me  wealthy.  Nor  do  the
Helmet  of  Hades  and  the  Elixir  of  Life  exist  because
I  should  greatly  desire  them.  And  in  this  case  of  the
gods  this  magic  of  desire  is  the  less  likely  to  have
creative  power,  seeing  that  a  god  is  a  more  difficult  and
precious  thing  for  a  desire  to  make  than  even  an  elixir
of  life.

A.  You  argue  well  against  a  doctrine  I  have  not
affirmed.  For  the  gods  I  spoke  of  as  creations  of  desire,
I  supp'osed  to  exist  in  the  opinions  of  men,  and  not  on
the  heights  of  Olympus.

P. Then  they  do  not  really  exist  ?

A.  Yes,  they  do  really  exist  in  the  souls  of  men.
And  it  is  there  that  they  are  most  potent,  and  far  excel
the  dwellers  of  far-away  Olympus,  seeing  that  they  are
so  much  nearer.

P.  But  that  is  not  what  I  meant,  nor  what  men
commonly  mean  when  they  ask  about  the  existence  of
the  gods.  They  inquire  about  gods  who  hold  the  shining
mansions  of  the  skies,  and  not  about  those  who  hold  the
hearts  of  men.

A, You  admit,  then,  the  existence  of  these  latter  ?

P.  Yes,  but  they  do  not  answer  my  question,  and
have  no  connexion  with  the  real  gods.

A.  That  remains  to  be  seen.  For  we  must  advance
step  by  step,  and  before  we  try  to  climb  the  heights  of
Olympus,  we  must  try  to  fathom  the  depths  of  human
nature.  For  I  should  not  wonder  if  the  latter  showed  us
the  way  to  the  former.

P.  I  do  not  oppose  your  considering  them  if  you
please.

A.  That  is  right,  my  dear  Philonous  ;  for  you  have
escaped  your  own  notice  saying  some  very  wrong  things
about  the  gods  who  are  born  of  desire  and  dwell  in  the
souls  of  men.

P. What,  pray,  are  these  ?

A. Did  you  not  say  that  your  desire  for  food  had  no


xv  GODS  AND  PRIESTS  339

power  to  make  you  believe  that  food  existed,  or  to  satisfy
your  hunger  ?

P.  How  can  it  have  ?  The  desire  has  no  arms  and
legs!

A.  No ;  but  you  have.  Have  you  not  observed
four  things  ?  First,  that  men  do  not  usually  get  de-
sirable things  unless  they  actually  desire  them :  next,
that  if  they  desire  them,  they  usually  find  a  way  of
getting  them  :  thirdly,  that  when  a  thing  is  desired,  there
is  apt  to  arise  a  belief  that  it  is  existent  and  attainable  :
and  lastly,  that  when  it  is  attained,  it  is  often  supposed  to
have  existed  all  along.

P.  But  it  does  not  become  existent  because  it  is
desired.  Nor  is  it  attained  because  it  is  desired,  but
because  it  exists.

A.  Quite  right !  But  you  would  admit,  I  suppose,
that  it  might  remain  unknown  to  all  eternity,  for  lack
of  a  desire  to  know  it  ?

P. Certainly.

A.  And  so,  as  no  one  looked  for  it,  no  one  found  it,
and  it  remained  non-existent  for  us  ?

P. Certainly.

A.  Desire  then  is  the  cause  of  our  discovery  of  that
which  exists  beyond  our  former  knowledge  ?

P.  It  may  often  be  this.  But  only  if  we  are  willing
to  bestir  ourselves  to  get  what  we  desire.

A.  Doubtless.  But  does  it  seem  to  you  reason-
able that  the  man  who  will  not  act  nor  trouble  himself
to  look,  should  be  thought  deserving  of  truth  or  know-
ledge any  more  than  of  any  other  good  thing  ?

P. Perhaps  not.

A.  Is  he  not  as  silly  as  the  sophist's  ass,  who  was
so  consumed  with  desire  that  he  could  himself  consume
neither  of  the  two  bundles  of  hay  before  his  nose,  and
wasted  away  ?

P.  I  do  not  believe  that  any  real  ass  would  be  as
stupid  as  Buridan's.

A.  Nor  any  real  philosopher.  Even  Thales  was
practical  enough  when  put  to  it.  He  made  a  fortune


340  STUDIES IN HUMANISM  xv

by  cornering  the  oil  presses.  They  show  "  the  philo-
sopher's corner"  still  in  the  market  at  Miletus.

P.  So  I  have  heard,  and  I  am  sure  the  others,  much
as  they  profess  to  scorn  wealth,  are  secretly  consumed
with  envy,  and  really  proud  of  Thales.

A.  And  rightly  too !  But  I  must  not  forget  that  just
now  I  made  a  mistake  to  gratify  you.

P. What  was  that  ?

A. I  admitted  that  a  desire  could  not  make  its  object.

P. Why  ought  you  not  to  have  admitted  this  ?

A. Because  it  sometimes  can.

P. How  ?

A.  Have  you  not  observed  how  many  desires  bring
about  their  own  satisfaction  and  make  real  their  own
objects  ?

P. For  example  ?

A.  I  will  take  one  with  which  you  doubtless  are
familiar.  Is  it  not  true  that  the  lover  desires  his  be-
loved to  return  his  love,  and  if  he  loves  wisely  and  fortu-
nately, does  not  his  desire  awaken  a  responsive  passion  in
the  beloved  ?  And  so  has  not  the  desire  for  love  impelled
love,  to  make  love  real  ?

P.  Yes,  but  the  desire  makes  real  what  was  not
real  before.  It  does  not  prove  that  what  was  desired
existed  before  it  was  desired.  It  lied,  therefore,  in  assum-
ing this.

A.  Say  rather,  it  hoped  for  the  best !  Or  if  it  lied,
was  it  not  the  noblest  lie  ?

P. What  is  that  ?

A.  That  which  is  prophetic  of  the  truth,  and  engenders
it.  But  I  am  not  sure  that  it  lied.  For  I  never  said  that
the  object  desired  must  exist  before  the  desire  which  creates
it.  It  is  enough  that  it  should  have  been  created  by  the
desire  for  it.  And  this  assuredly  is  what  the  desire  for
gods  should  have  done  for  us.  Perhaps  it  will  also  some
day  make  them  good  and  kind  and  responsive  to  our
wishes.

P.  I  begin  to  understand  your  gods  that  live  in  the
hearts  of  men.  They  are  real  as  the  ideal  responses  to


XV


GODS AND  PRIESTS  341


real  human  needs,  which  really  move  us.  But  I  do  not
yet  perceive  their  connexion  with  the  gods  that  live  above,
the  real  gods  as  I  called  them.

A.  That  surely  is  not  difficult.  If  we  must  seek,
to  find,  desire,  to  know,  it  is  clear  that  the  inner  gods
alone  control  the  roads  that  lead  to  the  gods  above,  and
render  them  propitious  to  our  wishes.  They  are  our
intermediaries.  They  hold  the  gates  through  which  all
our  prayers  and  petitions  must  ascend.  And  by  them  too
all  the  messages  from  above  are  re-worded  and  translated
from  the  language  of  the  gods  into  a  speech  our  souls  can
comprehend.  Nor  is  there  any  other  way  by  which  the
real  gods  can  be  reached.

P.  It  seems  a  long  way,  and  we  may  not  yet  have
reached  them.

A.  Aye,  and  we  may  not  have  wanted  to !  Or,
having  set  out,  we  may  have  turned  back  in  dismay.

P.  At  last  we  are  getting  to  the  point !  Do  you
think  that  we  have  now  reached  the  point  where  the
gods  above  us  and  without  us  can  communicate  with
those  within,  and  transmit  their  will  to  us  ?

A.  I  have  long  feared  that  we  might  reach  a  point
at  which  it  would  no  longer  be  holy  for  me  to  answer
you.  For  by  the  body  of  my  Lord  Bacchus,  I  dare  not
say  no  \  And  how  can  you  ask  one  who  has  studied  the
rites  of  many  gods  among  the  Hellenes  and  the  barbarians
to  say  frankly  yest

P. Then  you  will  disappoint  me  at  the  end  ?

A.  I  told  you  that  I  should.  But  I  will  treat
you  to  something  better  than  my  own  opinions,  to  the
thoughts  of  my  great  master  Protagoras,  whose  mouth  was
not  sealed  and  whose  office  was  to  teach  the  truth  freely.

P. I  shall  be  delighted  to  hear  more  of  Protagoras.

A.  You  know  that  he  was  gravely  suspected  of
impiety  and  atheism  ?

P. Yes.

A.  Unjustly  indeed,  but  not  without  plausibility.
For  how  much  satisfaction  could  the  established  rites
offer  to  one  like  Protagoras  who,  being  deeply  con-


342  STUDIES IN  HUMANISM  xv

cerned  about  divine  things  and  the  wonders  of  existence,
really  wanted  to  know,  and  would  not  content  himself
with  '  sacred  stories  '  ?

P.  To  me  also  they  often  seem  to  be  stories  told  to
children,  and  not  good  even  for  them.

A.  Well,  you  shall  hear  how  Protagoras  dealt  with
Meletus,  the  tragic  poet,  who  was  as  a  tragic  poet  comic,
and  as  a  theologian  tragic.

P. The  same  who  accused  Socrates  ?

A.  Yes,  but  that  was  later.  He  had  been  reading
Protagoras's  new  book  on  Truth,  and  like  most  men
had  not  really  understood  a  word.  For  truth  was  but
a  word  to  him,  and  he  had  never  asked  himself  what
it  was  in  very  deed.  But  of  course  he  had  been  stirred
up  by  the  saying  about  the  gods.  And  so  he  naturally
taxed  Protagoras  with  atheism.  You  shall  hear  how
skilfully  the  master  answered  him.

{Gets  out  a  roll  and  reads.}

"  Protagoras.  You  are  mistaken  surely,  Meletus,  if  you
think  that  I  have  denied  that  there  are  gods.  I  only  said
that  I  had  neither  met  them,  nor  been  able  to  find  out
anything  for  certain  about  them.  And  so  I  am  to  be
pitied  rather  than  blamed  :  for  surely  no  one  is  ignorant
of  his  own  will ;  the  fault  therefore  is  not  mine,  but  that
of  others,  whether  of  the  gods  or  of  men,  I  cannot  say.

Meletus.  But  it  is  your  fault,  if  you  have  been  un-
willing either  to  inquire  diligently  into  the  stories  men
tell  about  the  gods  or  to  believe  them  when  they  were
told  you.

P.  Once  more  you  are  mistaken,  Meletus.  For  I
have,  as  you  know,  travelled  far  and  long  throughout
Hellas,  and  from  my  youth  I  have  always  asked  the
wisest  men  concerning  what  they  knew  about  the  gods,
wherever  I  went.  And  they  were  always  glad  to  tell  me
their  sacred  stories,  which  I  noted  down.  I  now  have  a
large  collection  of  them,  which  some  might  think  most
entertaining.  But  as  for  believing  them,  why  not  even
Herodotus  could  compass  that !  In  Thessaly,  for  example,


xv  GODS  AND  PRIESTS  343

they  will  tell  you  that  Zeus  lives  on  a  mountain  named
Olympus,  but  in  Asia  they  tell  you,  no,  the  mountain  is
in  Mysia,  and  with  them  Homer  also  seems  to  hold.  In
Crete,  again,  they  affirm  stoutly  that  Zeus  no  longer  lives
at  all,  in  token  whereof  they  even  show  his  sepulchre.
In  Arcadia,  Artemis  is  the  Huntress-Maid,  in  Ephesus  she
is  a  mother  with  more  breasts  than  any  sow.  And  so
forth,  that  I  may  mention  nothing  more  unseemly.
Which,  then,  of  these  stories  do  you  wish  me  to  believe,
seeing  that  they  cannot  all  be  true  ?

M.  With  the  gods  all  things  are  possible,  and  it
is  impious  to  question  sacred  stories.

P.  That  is  just  what  I  cannot  think.  For  it  seems
to  me  that  the  sacred  stories  malign  the  gods,  if  there
are  gods,  and  were  the  inventions  of  wicked  men.  Or
else  they  have  become  wicked  by  the  lapse  of  time,
because  they  were  thought  too  sacred  to  be  retold  in
ways  befitting  the  greater  insight  of  a  later  age.

M.  No.  The  sacred  stories  are  told  by  holy  men,
priests,  and  if  you  would  reverently  listen  to  them,  you
would  know  what  to  think.  You  should  honour  the
priests,  therefore,  and  believe  what  they  tell  you.

P. But  do  the  priests  themselves  know  ?

M.  They,  if  any  men.  For  they  have  preserved  the
revelations  made  by  the  gods  of  old.

P.  It  seems  to  me  that  if  so,  they  have  preserved
them  very  badly.  And  who  knows  whether  the  stories
are  now  told  as  they  happened  ?

M.  You  will  find  that  they  tell  the  sacred  stories
precisely  as  they  received  them  from  their  ancestors,  many
of  whom  were  themselves  children  of  the  gods  and  must
surely  have  known  their  parents.  And  so  it  is  reasonable
to  believe  that  the  sacred  tradition  is  exact,  and  that  we
know  quite  as  much  about  the  gods  as  those  did  to  whom
they  revealed  themselves.

P.  That  is  just  what  I  complain  of,  and  what  leads
me  to  fear  that  the  priests  know  no  more  than  I  !

M. How  so?

P. You said,  did you not,  that the priests know


344  STUDIES IN HUMANISM  xv

the  revelations  made  by  the  gods  of  old,  both  con-
cerning themselves  and  all  things  which  it  is  good  for
man  to  know  ?

M. I  did.

P.  And  you  said  also  that  they  have  preserved  this
knowledge  exactly?

M. Certainly.

P. Then  we  know  no  less  than  the  men  of  old  ?

M. So  I  contend.

P. Nor  any  more  ?

M.  How  could  we,  unless  there  had  been  fresh
theophanies  !

P. And  such  there  have  not  been  ?

M. Don't  you  believe  it !

P.  And  yet  I  have  met  many  who  affirmed  this
stoutly.  They  seemed  indeed  to  be  somewhat  ecstatic
persons,  but  not  liars.

M. They  were  deceived  then.

P.  This  I  am  willing  to  believe.  But  is  it  not
possible  that  your  friends  also  were  deceived,  and  have
handed  down  stories  similar  to  those  now  told  ?

M. Possible,  but  not  likely.

P.  Not  unlikely,  I  should  say.  And  in  other
ways  also  it  would  seem  either  that  the  priests  have
been  bad  guardians  of  sacred  truths,  or  good  guardians
of  unholy  falsehoods.  For  consider :  is  not  the  true,
good  ?

M. Certainly.

P. Then  to  attain  truth  should  make  us  better  ?

M. Is  not  this  what  sacred  truths  do  ?

P. And  also  better  able  to  attain  more  truth  ?

M. Perhaps.

P.  Why  then  have  we  not  attained  better  knowledge
of  holy  things  by  the  aid  of  the  theophanies  of  former
days  ?

M. I  cannot  say.

P.  Again,  is  it  the  nature  of  benefactors  to  abandon
those  to  whom  they  have  shown  kindness,  and  of  the
benefited  to  keep  away  from  their  benefactors  ?


xv  GODS  AND  PRIESTS  345

M. It  ought  not  to  be.

P.  And  yet  does  not  something  of  this  sort  seem  to
happen  when  gods  benefit  men  ?

M. In  what  way  ?

P.  Why,  do  you  not  think  that  the  gods,  after
bestowing  on  us  beneficial  revelations  of  themselves,
have  withdrawn  themselves  from  our  ken  ?  And  men
similarly,  after  acquiring  some  little  knowledge  of  the
gods,  show  plainly  that  they  desire  to  know  no  more
about  them.

M,  Never  have  I  heard  this  said  by  any  one,
Protagoras.  But  many  have  lamented  over  their,  ignor-
ance of  the  gods.

P.  In  words,  no  doubt.  But  do  not  their  deeds
cry  out  louder  than  their  words  ?  And  of  those  who
claimed  to  believe  in  gods,  have  you  ever  found  any  one
to  act  as  if  this  belief  opened  out  to  him  a  way  to
real  knowledge  and  more  knowledge,  and  knowledge  not
to  be  attained  by  those  who  are  not  willing  to  believe  in
the  gods  ?

M.  It  is  not  holy  to  desire  more  knowledge  than
the  gods  have  granted,  or  to  seek  to  pry  into  their  secrets.

P.  What  god  has  revealed  this  to  you,  Meletus  ?
And  how  else  do  you  know  that  the  gods  do  not  desire
you  to  desire  more  knowledge  concerning  themselves
before  they  will,  or  can,  reveal  more  ?  How  again  do
you  know  that  men  should  not  pry  into  the  secrets  of
the  gods  ?  Do  you  perchance  suspect  the  gods  of  having
evil  secrets  ?

M.  No,  but  I  suspect  you  of  undermining  all
established  worship,  and  of  wishing  to  improve  on  the
gods  of  the  city.  For  no  religion  could  exist  with  new
knowledge  and  new  gods  and  new  worships  ever  coming
in  to  upset  the  old.

P.  I  wonder.  And  I  deem  it  strange  that  in  other
matters  which  men  try  and  suppose  themselves  to  know,  it
is  not  so,  but  the  more  they  know,  the  more  eager  they
grow  and  the  more  able  to  learn,  and  the  greater  and
stronger  and  more  precious  and  more  intelligible  their


346  STUDIES IN  HUMANISM  xv

knowledge  seems  to  them.  Either,  therefore,  knowledge
about  the  gods  is  not  really  knowledge,  or  men  are  not
willing  to  treat  it  as  really  knowledge.  In  either  case  I
am  prevented  from  knowing,  as  I  said.  Why  then  should
I  be  blamed  ?  How  can  I  help  it  ?  Either  there  is
nothing  for  me  to  know,  or  I  am  not  allowed  to  know  it.

M.  Still  less,  Protagoras,  are  you  allowed  to  in-
quire. Let  me  speak  to  you  as  a  friend.  I  liked  your
rhetoric,  and  thought  your  lectures  the  best  I  ever  listened
to.  But  if  you  are  wise,  you  will  in  the  first  place  erase
from  your  book  that  terrible  sentence  about  the  gods,  and
in  the  next  place  retire  from  Athens  till  the  storm  blows
over.

P.  I  am  sure  your  advice  is  kindly  meant.  But
I  do  not  at  all  agree  with  you.  I  would  rather  that
my  whole  book  on  Truth  should  perish — excepting  of
course  what  I  said  about  man  being  the  measure,  for  that
I  feel  assured  cannot  die — and  that  that  one  sentence  be
preserved,  than  that  it  should  perish  and  all  the  rest  be
preserved.  For  I  greatly  fear  that  the  major  part  of  my
Truth  is  too  subtle  for  the  dull  sight  of  men  such  as  now
are.  And  as  for  leaving  Athens,  let  the  Athenians  drive
me  out  if  they  think  fit.  I  am  a  stranger  and  accustomed
to  wander  over  the  face  of  the  earth.  And  so  I  will  wait
to  see  whether  it  will  be  accounted  a  crime  in  me  to  have
spoken  and  written  the  '  Truth.'

M.  Then  may  the  gods  you  doubt  help  you  !  But
your  days  are  numbered.

P.  Are  they  not  that  in  any  case,  to  one  who  has
passed  his  three-score  years  and  ten  ?  "

Antimorus. Well,  Philonous,  how  do  you  like  that  ?

Philonous.  Wondrously,  and  yet  it  always  makes  me
uncomfortable,  too,  to  listen  to  Protagoras  or  you.  You
are  so  different  from  the  other  philosophers,  and  so
disturbing.  You  never  seem  to  fear  either  the  gods  or
even  men,  and  least  of  all,  what  is  most  terrible  to  the
prudent,  to  wit,  what  it  has  been  customary  to  say.  And
you  always  throw  out  hints  of  something  new  and  un-


xv  GODS  AND  PRIESTS  347

heard  of  to  come,  that  might  at  any  time  break  in  upon
our  life  and  transform  it  beyond  all  recognition.  And
yet  you  will  never  tell  us  what  you  think  it  is.

A.  So  long  as  the  unknown  God  is  undesired,
he  is  unknowable.  Moreover,  all  you  ever  want  to
hear  is  a  pleasing  tale.  You  Greeks  are  children,
like  the  others.  You  have  need  of  priests,  because
you  will  not  trust  the  gods  within  you ;  and  yet
you  will  not  truly  believe  even  your  priests.  You  only
want  them  to  sing  you  lullabies  about  the  gods  ;  and
whatever  saves  you  thought  and  trouble  you  are  willing
to  believe — after  a  fashion.  And  whether  what  we
chant  is  true  and  certain,  you  care  not,  provided  it  is
comforting,  nor  what  our  comforting  is  worth.  And  to
please  you,  we  humour  you,  and  tell  you  what  you  wish
to  hear,  even  though  we  know  that  you  had  much  better
test  the  hidden  oracle,  and  seek  the  lonely  way  that  leads
to  the  unknown  God  each  soul  that  dares  and  perseveres.

P.  I  do  believe  you  are  right,  Antimorus.  And  so
too  are  the  others.  For  these  things  are  too  high  for
mortals.  I  too  am  afraid  !  I  would  rather  trust  priests
and  rites  and  sacrifices  and  expiations  and  sacred  stories,
nay  chants  and  charms  and  amulets,  than  my  naked  self.
Philosophy  becomes  too  terrible  when  it  bids  us  do  such
things.

A.  You  have  not  yet  learnt  that  the  most  efficacious
of  all  expiations  is  to  sacrifice  your  fears,  and  you  fear
philosophy  so  soon  as  it  ceases  to  be  idle  babble,  and
requires  you  to  think  things  out  and  act  on  your  con-
victions !  But  never  mind,  my  poor  boy,  I  will  comfort
you  with  a  most  sacred  story,  which  was  told  me  by
the  oldest  of  the  priests  of  Ra  at  Thebes  in  Egypt,
a  man  so  old  and  holy  that  he  had  forgotten  even  his
own  name,  and  become  one  with  his  god,  and  answered
to  the  name  of  Ra.

P. I  should  dearly  love  to  hear  it.

A.  You  have  heard,  perhaps,  that  in  truth,  not
Uranus,  but  Eros  was  the  oldest  of  the  gods  ?


348  STUDIES  IN HUMANISM  xv

P. I  have  heard  it  as  a  secret  doctrine.

A.  Consider  it  then  to  be  true,  if  you  are  willing  to
believe  the  divine  genealogies  of  my  Egyptian  priest.

P. I  will. But  what  of  the  rest  of  the  genealogy  ?

A.  Many  things  he  said  which  are  contrary  to  received
opinions,  especially  holding  it  to  be  false  that  older
things  are  better,  and  the  gods  happier  than  mortals.
For,  he  said,  the  divinest  of  all  things  is  to  endure  suffering
without  dying.  And  the  gods  in  the  beginning  suffered
ineffably  in  their  endeavours  to  make  a  cosmos.  And
most  of  all  Eros,  seeing  that  he  was  very  eager,  and  yet
blind,  and  encompassed  about  with  darkness.  And  in
darkness  he  would  have  remained,  had  he  not  encountered
Pistis,1  whose  nature  it  is  to  bring  light  and  brightness
wherever  she  is.  And  she  enlightened  Eros,  so  that  he
was  enabled  to  see,  and  consorting  with  him,  she  bare
Praxis,2  who  again,  when  she  was  of  age,  mingled  with
Chaos.  And  there  were  born  to  Praxis  and  Chaos  two
sons,  Pragma  and  Prometheus,  whereof  the  former  was
very  large,  being  a  giant  of  a  violent  and  intractable
disposition.  And  he  often  threatened  to  swallow  up
both  his  mother  and  the  other  gods.  Wherefore
Prometheus,  who  was  crafty,  slew  him  by  stealth,  and
his  mother  cut  him  up  into  many  things,3  and  thus  made
the  world  we  now  inhabit.  But  Eros  was  wroth  with
Prometheus,  and  chained  him  for  ever  to  the  collar-bone
of  the  brother  he  had  slain — which  is  Mount  Caucasus.

P.  I  suppose  it  is  this  story  which  Agathon  means
when  he  says  :

"Action  of  old  discriminated  all  things."4

A.  Doubtless  :  but  the  time  has  come  for  my  even-
ing sacrifice  to  Dionysus.  So  run  away,  Philonous,  and
get  yourself  elected  a  general  by  the  Mendeans.  There
may  not  be  a  war  after  all,  and  even  if  there  is,  it  is
easier  to  face  the  risk  of  death  than  of  eternal  life.

1  Faith.  2  Action.  :i  T

*  n/>a£ts  jrdXcu  StetXe  -K&.VTO.  Trpdy/j.a.Ta.


XVI
FAITH, REASON,  AND  RELIGION1

ARGUMENT

§  I.  The  problem  of  religious  philosophy  that  of  the  relations  of  'faith'  and
'  reason. '  The  rationalistic  criticism  of  religion,  and  the  pragmatic
criticism  of  rationalism.  §  2.  Faith  as  a  specifically  religious  principle.
Its  revival  as  a  philosophic  principle,  and  a  presupposition  of  reason.
§  3.  The  Will-to-believe  and  to  disbelieve.  Humanism  as  a  recognition
of  actual  mental  process.  §  4.  The  analysis  of  'reason.'  §  5.  Thought
dependent  on  postulation,  i.e.  'faith.'  §6.  The  definition  of  'faith.'
§  7.  The  pragmatic  testing  of  faith  and  knowledge.  §  8.  The  incom-
pleteness of  this  process.  §  9.  The  analogy  of  scientific  and  religious
faith.  §  10.  Their  differences.  §  II.  Five  spurious  conceptions  of
faith.  §  12.  The  possibility  of  verifying  religious  postulates.  §  13.
Humanist  conclusions  as  to  the  philosophy  of  religion.  The  pragmatic
character  of  Christianity  obscured  by  an  intellectualist  theology.

§  I.  THE  nature  of  religion,  and  the  extent  to  which
what  is  vaguely  and  ambiguously  called  '  faith,'  and  what
is  (quite  as  vaguely  and  ambiguously)  called  '  reason '
enter  into  it,  rank  high  among  the  problems  of  perennial
human  interest — in  part,  perhaps,  because  it  seems  im-
possible to  arrive  at  any  settlement  which  will  appear
equally  cogent  and  satisfactory  to  all  human  minds.  Of
late,  however,  the  old  controversies  have  been  rekindled
into  the  liveliest  incandescence,  in  consequence  of  two
purely  philosophic  developments.

On  the  one  hand,  Absolutism,  despite  its  long  coquet-
tings  with  theology,  has  revealed  itself  as  fundamentally
hostile  to  popular  religion  (see  Essay  xii.).  In  works  like

1  This  essay  appeared  in  substance  in  the  Hibbert  Journal  for  January  1906.
It  has  been  retouched  in  a  few  places  to  fit  it  more  effectively  for  its  place  in
this  volume.

349


350  STUDIES IN HUMANISM  xvi

Mr.  Bradley's  Appearance  and  Reality,  and  still  more
formidably,  because  more  lucidly  and  simply,  in  Dr.
McTaggart's  Some  Dogmas  of  Religion,  it  has  reduced
Christian  Theism  to  what  seems  a  position  of  grotesque
absurdity  by  an  incisive  criticism  from  which  there  is  no
escape  so  long  as  its  victim  accepts  the  rationalistic  tests
and  conceptions  of  truth  and  proof  with  which  it  operates.

On  the  other  hand,  it  has  simultaneously  happened
that  just  these  tests  and  conceptions  have  been  impugned,
and  to  a  large  extent  condemned,  by  the  pragmatic
movement  in  philosophy.  It  threatens  to  deprive  Ration-
alism *  of  its  favourite  weapons  just  as  it  is  about  to  drive
them  home.  It  promises  to  lead  to  a  far  juster  and  more
sympathetic,  because  more  psychological,  appreciation  of
the  postulates  of  the  religious  consciousness,  and  to
render  possible  an  unprejudiced  consideration  of  the
non-'  rational  '  and  non-rationalistic  evidence  on  which
religion  has  all  along  relied.  And  so  rationalistic
philosophers  have  at  once  taken  alarm.

Hence,  though  this  movement  appears  to  affect  immedi-
ately nothing  but  technicalities  of  the  theory  of  knowledge,
it  has  been  extensively  taken  as  an  attempt  at  a  revolution-
ary reversal  of  the  relations  of  Faith  and  Reason.  The  new
philosophy  was  promptly  accused  of  aiming  at  the  oppres-
sion, nay,  at  the  subversion,  of  Reason,  of  paving  the  way
to  the  vilest  obscurantism  and  the  grossest  superstition  with
the  ruins  of  the  edifice  of  truth  which  its  scepticism  had
exploded  ;  in  short,  of  attempting  to  base  Religion  on
the  quicksands  of  irrationality.  But,  it  was  urged,  the
dangerous  expedients  which  are  used  recoil  upon  their
authors:  the  appeal  to  the  will -to -believe  ends  by
sanctioning  the  arbitrary  adoption  of  any  belief  any  one
may  chance  to  fancy,  and  thus  destroys  all  objectivity
in  religious  systems  ;  religious  sentiment  is  freed  from  the
repressive  regime  of  a  rigid  rationalism  only  to  be  ignobly
dissipated  in  excesses  of  subjective  licence.

1  I  am  using  the  term  strictly  as  =  '  a  belief  in  the  all-sufficiency  of  reason,'
and  not  in  its  popular  sense  as  = '  criticism  of  religion. '  A  rationalist  in  the
strict  sense  may,  of  course,  be  religious,  and  per  contra  a  voluntarist,  or  a
sensationalist,  may  be  a  rationalist  in  the  popular  sense.


xvi FAITH,  REASON,  AND  RELIGION 351

Now,  the  first  thing  that  strikes  one  about  such
denunciations  is  their  premature  violence.  The  opponents
of  the  new  Humanism  should  have  met  it  on  the  logical,
and  still  more  on  the  psychological,  ground  whence  its
challenge  proceeded,  before  they  hastened  to  extract  from
it  religious  applications  which  had  certainly  not  been
made,  and  possibly  were  not  even  intended,  by  its  authors,
and  which  there  is,  as  yet,  hardly  a  sign,  in  this  country
at  least,  that  the  spokesmen  of  the  religious  organisations
are  willing  to  welcome.  And  until  the  leaders  of  the
churches  show  more  distinct  symptoms  of  interest,  both
in  the  disputes  of  philosophers  in  general  and  in  this
dispute  in  particular,  it  seems  premature  to  anticipate
from  this  source  the  revolution  which  is  decried  in  ad-
vance. Theologians,  in  general,  have  heard  '  Wolf ! '
cried  too  often  by  philosophers  anxious  to  invoke  against
their  opponents  more  forcible  arguments  than  those  of
mere  reason,  they  have  found  too  often  how  treacherous
were  the  specious  promises  of  philosophic  support,  they
are  too  much  absorbed  in  historical  and  critical  researches
and  perplexities  of  their  own  to  heed  lightly  outcries  of
this  sort.

The  controversy,  then,  has  not  yet  descended  from  the
study  into  the  market-place,  and  it  seems  still  time  to
attempt  to  estimate  philosophically  the  real  bearing  of
Humanism  on  the  religious  problem,  and  to  define  the
functions  which  it  actually  assigns  to  reason  and  to  faith.
It  may  reasonably  be  anticipated  that  the  results  of  the
inquiry  will  be  found  to  justify  neither  the  hopes  of  those
who  expect  an  explicit  endorsement  of  any  sectarian
form  of  religion  (if  such  there  are),  nor  the  fears  of  those
who  dread  a  systematic  demolition  of  the  reason.

§  2.  Perhaps  a  brief  historic  retrospect  will  form  the
best  approach  to  the  points  at  issue.  Thoughtful
theologians  have  always  perceived,  what  their  rationalistic
critics  have  blindly  ignored,  viz.  that  religious  truths  are
not,  like  mathematical,  such  as  directly  and  universally  to
impose  themselves  on  all  minds.  They  have  seen,  that
is,  that  the  religious  attitude  essentially  implies  the


352  STUDIES IN HUMANISM  xvi

addition  of  what  was  called  '  faith  '  for  its  proper  apprecia-
tion. This  '  faith,'  moreover,  was  conceived  as  an  in-
tensely personal  act,  as  an  emotional  reaction  of  a  man's
whole  nature  upon  a  vital  issue.  It  followed  that  it
was  unreasonable,  on  the  part  of  rationalists,  to  ignore
this  specific  character  of  religious  truth  or  to  treat  it  as
irrational.  And  it  was  this  perception  which  prompted
a  Pascal  to  array  the  '  reasons  of  the  heart '  against
the  (abstract)  reasons  of  '  the  head,'  a  Newman  to  compile
his  Grammar  of  Assent,  and  a  Ritschl  to  spurn  the
pseudo-demonstrations  of  (a  Hegelian)  philosophy,  and
to  construct  an  impregnable  citadel  for  the  religious
sentiment  in  the  exalted  sphere  of  '  judgments  of  value.'

Accordingly,  when  that  great  student  of  the  human
soul,  William  James,  proclaimed  the  right  of  inclining
the  nicely-weighted  equipoise  of  intellectual  argumentation
by  throwing  into  the  scales  a  will-to-believe  whichever
of  the  alternatives  seemed  most  consonant  with  our
emotional  nature,  it  might  well  have  seemed  that  he  was
merely  reviving  and  re-wording  a  familiar  theological
expedient  which  philosophy  had  long  ago  discredited  as
the  last  desperate  resource  of  an  expiring  religious
instinct.

It  turned  out,  however,  that  there  was  an  important
novelty  in  the  doctrine  as  revived.  It  reappeared  as  a
philosophic  doctrine,  firmly  resting  on  psychological  and
epistemological  considerations  which  were,  intrinsically,
quite  independent  of  its  religious  applications,  and  took
the  field  quite  prepared  to  conduct,  on  purely  philosophic
grounds,  a  vigorous  campaign  against  the  intellectualist
prejudices  of  the  current  rationalism.  In  other  words,  by
conceiving  the  function  of  '  faith '  as  an  example  of
a  general  principle,  the  religious  applications,  through
which  the  principle  had  first  been  noticed  and  tested,
were  rendered  derivative  illustrations  of  a  far-reaching
philosophic  view.  It  ceased,  therefore,  to  be  necessary  to
oppose  the  reasons  of  the  heart  to  those  of  the  head  ;  it
could  be  maintained  that  no  '  reasons '  could  be  ex-
cogitated by  an  anaemic  brain  to  which  no  heart  supplied


xvi FAITH,  REASON,  AND  RELIGION 353

the  life-blood  ;  it  could  be  denied  that  the  operations  of
the  '  illative  sense  '  and  the  sphere  of  value-judgments
were  restricted  to  religious  truths.  The  new  philosophy,
moreover,  as  we  have  seen,1  has  been  taught  by  the
sceptical  results  to  which  the  old  abstractions  led,  that
knowledge  cannot  be  depersonalised,  and  that  the  full
concreteness  of  personal  interest  is  indispensable  for  the
attainment  of  truth.  Hence  the  theologians'  insistence  on
the  personal  character  of  '  faith,'  which  on  the  old  assump-
tions had  seemed  a  logical  absurdity,  was  completely  vindi-
cated. And  so  the  indications  of  emotional  influence,  and
the  proofs  of  the  ineradicability  of  personality,  multiplied
throughout  the  realm  of  truth,  until  the  apparently  dispas-
sionate procedure  of  mathematics  ceased  to  seem  typical
and  became  a  paradox.2  Thus,  throughout  the  ordinary
range  of  what  mankind  esteems  as  '  truth,'  the  function
of  volition  and  selection,  and  the  influence  of  values  in
all  recognition  of  validity  and  reality,  have  become  too
clear  to  be  ignored,  and  there  has  resulted  the  curious
consequence  that,  by  the  very  process  of  working  out  the
claims  of  faith  fairly  to  their  logical  conclusion,  '  faith '
has  ceased  to  be  an  adversary  of  and  a  substitute  for
'reason,'  and  become  an  essential  ingredient  in  its
constitution.  Reason,  therefore,  is  incapacitated  from
systematically  contesting  the  validity  of  faith,  because
faith  is  proved  to  be  essential  to  its  own  validity.

§  3.  The  sweeping  nature  of  this  change  was  at  first
obscured  by  the  accident  that  the  new  philosophy  was
first  applied  in  a  paper  written  for  a  theological  audience,
and  promulgated  as  a  '  Will-to-believe,'  without  sufficient
emphasis  on  the  corresponding  attitudes  of  a  Will-to-
disbelieve  or  to  play  with  beliefs,  or  to  suspend  belief,  or
to  allow  belief  to  be  imposed  by  what  had  already  been

1  Cp.  Essays  ii. ,  iii. ,  and  vi.

2  Of  course,  the  discrepant  character  of  mathematical  truth  as  '  self-evident '
and  '  independent '  of  our  arbitrament,  is  only  apparent. It  arises  mainly  from
the  ease  with  which  its  fundamental  postulates  are  made  and  rendered  familiar,
from  the  general  agreement  about  their  sphere  of  application,  from  the  complete
success  of their  practical  working, and  from  the  obvious  coherence  of  truths
which  are  tested  in  whole  systems  rather  than  individually. Cp. Humanism,
pp.  91,  92;  and  Personal  Idealism,  pp.  111-17,  and  70  «.

2  A


354  STUDIES IN HUMANISM  xvi

accepted  as  external  '  fact.'  Thus  it  was  the  special
character  of  the  first  application  that  led  the  less  dis-
cerning to  overlook  the  general  character  of  the  principle
and  the  universal  scope  of  the  method.  But  in  itself  the
new  doctrine  is  perfectly  general  and  impartial  in  its
application  to  all  cognitive  states.  It  proceeds  essentially
from  simple  observations  that,  on  the  one  hand,  pure
cognition  is  not  an  actual  process  in  any  human  mind,
but  at  best  a  fiction  for  theoretic  purposes  (of  the  most
dubious  character) ;  while,  on  the  other,  all  actual  mental
procedure  is  thoroughly  personal  and  permeated  through
and  through  with  purposes  and  aims  and  feelings  and
emotions  and  decisions  and  selections,  even  in  such  cases
where  these  features  are  ostensibly  abstracted  from.

Fundamentally,  therefore,  the  new  Humanism  is
nothing  but  an  attempt  to  dismiss  from  psychology
fictions  which  have  been  allowed  to  engender  a  brood  of
logical  monsters,  which  in  their  turn  have  tyrannised
over  human  life,  and  driven  back  the  healthy  human
instinct  to  experiment,  and  thereby  to  know,  from  what
they  perniciously  proclaimed  forbidden  ground.  And  as
this  fundamental  position  has  never  directly  been  im-
pugned, does  it  not  become  an  easy  and  inevitable
inference,  that  the  attitude  of  the  denier,  the  doubter,  and
the  believer  cannot  be  discriminated  by  the  '  pureness '  of
the  thought,  by  the  test  of  the  presence  or  absence  of
emotion  ?  If  no  thought  is  ever  '  pure,'  if  it  is  neither
4  self-evident '  nor  true  in  point  of  fact  that  the  more
nearly  '  pure '  it  is  the  better  it  is  for  all  purposes,  if
emotion,  volition,  interest,  and  bias  impartially  accompany
all  cognitive  procedures,  is  it  not  preposterous  to  treat
the  concrete  nature  of  the  mind,  the  personal  interests
which  give  an  impulse  to  knowledge  and  a  zest  to  life,
merely  as  impediments  in  the  search  for  truth  ?  What
emotions,  etc.,  must  be  repressed,  to  what  extent,  for
what  purposes,  depends  entirely  on  the  character  of  the
particular  inquiry  and  of  the  particular  inquirer.  Thus,
the  anger  which  leaves  one  man  speechless  will  add
eloquence  and  effect  to  the  speeches  of  another ;  and  the


xvi FAITH,  REASON,  AND  RELIGION 355

desire  to  prove  a  conclusion,  which  impairs  the  judgment
of  one,  will  stimulate  another  to  the  most  ingenious
experiments  and  the  most  laborious  efforts.  It  is  useless,
therefore,  to  generalise  at  random  about  the  cognitive
effect  of  these  psychological  influences.  They  must  be
admitted  in  principle,  and  evaluated  in  detail.  It  must
surely  be  futile  to  protest  against  the  normal  functioning
of  the  mind  ;  it  must  be  rational  to  recognise  influences
which  affect  us,  whether  we  approve  of  them  or  not.
For  how  can  they  be  estimated  and  treated  rationally,
unless  we  consent  to  recognise  their  potency  ?  Has  it
not  then  become  necessary  to  examine,  patiently  and  in
detail,  how  precisely  these  forces  act ;  how,  when,  and  to
what  extent  their  influence  may  be  helpful  or  adverse,
how  they  may  be  strengthened  and  guided  and  guarded
or  controlled  and  disciplined  ?  And  is  it  not  a  strange
irony  that  impels  a  purblind  rationalism  to  denounce  as
irrational  so  reasonable  an  undertaking  ?

§  4.  Let  us  therefore  set  aside  such  protests,  and  pro-
ceed with  our  inquiry.  Like  most  terms  when  scrutinised,
neither  reason  nor  faith  are  conceived  with  sufficient
precision  for  our  scientific  purpose,  and  it  would  be  hard
to  say  which  of  them  had  been  misused  in  a  more  flagrant
or  question-begging  way.  Reason  to  the  rationalist  has
become  a  sort  of  verbal  fetish,  hedged  round  with
emotional  taboos,  which  exempt  it  from  all  rational
criticism.  It  is  credited  with  supra-mundane  powers  of
cognition  a  priori ;  it  is  sacrosanct  itself ;  and  when  its
protecting  aegis  is  cast  over  any  errors  or  absurdities,  it
becomes  blasphemy  and  '  scepticism '  to  ask  for  their
credentials.  Hence  it  is  only  with  the  utmost  trepidation
that  we  can  dare  to  ask — What,  after  all,  does  reason
mean  in  actual  life?  When,  however,  we  ask  this
question,  and  ponder  on  the  answer,  we  shall  not  be
slow  to  discover  that,  in  the  first  place,  reason  is  not
reasoning.  Reasoning  may,  of  course,  enter  into  the
'  rational '  act,  but  it  is  by  no  means  indispensable,  and
even  when  it  does  occur,  it  only  forms  a  small  part  of
the  total  process.  Ordinarily  instinct,  impulse,  and  habit


356  STUDIES IN  HUMANISM  xvi

account  for  by  far  the  greater  number  of  our  '  rational  '
acts.  On  the  other  hand,  it  is  not  rational  to  '  reason  '
three  hours  a  day  about  the  clothes  one  is  going  to  put
on  ;  the  reasoning  of  the  victims  of  such  '  abulia,'  so  far
from  being  taken  as  a  mark  of  superior  rationality,  is
taken  as  a  symptom  of  a  loss  of  reason.

In  the  next  place,  'reason  '  is  not  a  faculty.  It  stands
for  a  group  of  habits  which  men  (and  to  some  extent
some  animals)  have  acquired,  and  which  we  find  extremely
useful,  nay  necessary,  for  the  successful  carrying  on  of
life.  Among  these  habits  may  be  mentioned  that  of
inhibiting  reaction  upon  stimulation,  i.e.  of  checking  our
natural  and  instinctive  tendencies  to  act,  until  we  have
reflected  what  precisely  it  is  we  are  dealing  with.  To
determine  this  latter  point,  we  have  developed  the  habit
of  analysis,  i.e.  of  breaking  up  the  confused  complex  of
presentations  into  '  things '  and  their  '  attributes,'  which
are  referred  to  and  '  identified '  with  former  similar  ex-
periences, and  expressed  in  judgments  as  to  what  the
situation  '  really  is.'  This  enables  us  to  rearrange  the
presented  connexions  of  attributions,  and  the  whole
reasoning  process  finds  its  natural  issue  and  test  in  an
action  which  modifies  and  beneficially  innovates  upon  the
original  habit  of  reaction.

§  5-  In  other  words,  thinking  or  judging  is  one  of  the
habits  that  make  up  man's  '  reason,'  and  thinking  or
judging  is  a  highly  artificial  and  arbitrary  manipulation
of  experience.  The  '  rational '  connexion  of  events  and
the  '  rational '  interpretation  of  experiences  are  very  far
removed  from  our  immediate  data,  and  are  arrived  at  only
by  complicated  processes  of  thought.  Now,  thinking
involves  essentially  the  use  of  concepts,  and  depends
ultimately  upon  a  number  of  principles  (identity,  contra-
diction, etc.),  which  have  long  been  regarded  as  funda-
mental '  axioms,'  but  which  reveal  themselves  as  postu-
lates to  a  voluntarist  theory  of  knowledge  which  tries  to
understand  them.

Now,  a  postulate  is  not  a  self-evident '  necessary '  truth
— it  ceases  to  be  necessary  so  soon  as  the  purpose  which


xv! FAITH,  REASON,  AND  RELIGION 357

called  it  into  being  is  renounced.  Neither  is  it  a  passively
received  imprint  of  experience.  It  is  an  assumption,
which  no  doubt  experience  has  suggested  to  an  actively
inquiring  mind,  but  which  is  not,  and  cannot  be,  proved
until  after  it  has  been  assumed,  and  is  often  assumed
because  we  desire  it,  in  the  teeth  of  nearly  all  the  apparent
'  facts.'  It  is  therefore  a  product  of  our  volitional  activity,
and  initially  its  validity  is  uncertain.  It  is  established
ex  post  facto  by  the  experience  of  its  practical  success.  In
other  words,  it  is  validated  in  just  the  same  way  as  are
the  other  habits  that  make  up  our  '  reason.'  In  so  far  as,
therefore,  reasoning  rests  on  postulates,  and  postulates  are
unproved  and  open  to  doubt  at  the  outset,  our  attitude  in
adhering  to  them  implies  '  faith,'  i.e.  a  belief  in  a  '  verifica-
tion '  yet  to  come.  Must  we  not  say,  then,  that  at  the
very  roots  of  '  reason '  we  must  recognise  an  element  of
'  faith  '  ?  And  similarly  it  would  seem  that  as  the  funda-
mental truths  of  the  sciences  are  attained  in  the  same
way,  they  all  must  presuppose  faith,  in  a  twofold  manner —
(i)  as  making  use  of  reasoning,  and  (2)  as  resting  upon
the  specific  postulates  of  each  science.

§  6.  That  the  principle  of  faith  is  commonly  conceived
very  variably  and  with  great  vagueness  has  already  been
admitted,  though  its  critics  seem  unfairly  to  incline
towards  the  schoolboy's  definition  that  it  is  '  believing  a
thing  when  you  know  it's  not  true.'  Even  this  definition
would  not  be  wholly  indefensible,  if  it  were  only  written
'  believing  when  you  know  it's  not  true,'  and  if  thereby
proper  attention  were  drawn  to  the  fact  that  a  belief
sustained  by  faith  still  stands  in  need  of  verification  to
become  fully  '  true.'  On  the  whole,  however,  it  would
seem  preferable  to  define  it  as  the  mental  attitude  which,
for  purposes  of  action,  is  willing  to  take  upon  trust
valuable  and  desirable  beliefs,  before  they  have  been  proved
'  true,'  but  in  the  hope  that  this  attitude  may  promote
their  verification.  About  this  definition  it  is  to  be  noted
(i)  that  it  renders  faith  pre-eminently  an  attitude  of  will,
an  affair  of  the  whole  personality  and  not  of  the  (abstract)
intellect  ;  (2)  that  it  is  expressly  concerned  with  values,


358  STUDIES IN HUMANISM  xvi

and  that  the  worthless  and  unimportant  is  not  fitted  to
evoke  our  faith  ;  (3)  that  it  involves  risk,  real  stakes,  and
serious  dangers,  and  is  emphatically  not  a  game  that  can
be  played  in  a  casual  and  half-hearted  way  ;  (4)  that  a
reference  to  verification  is  essential  to  it,  and  that  there-
fore it  is  as  little  to  be  identified  with,  as  to  be  divorced
from,  knowledge.  Now,  verification  must  come  about  by
the  results  of  its  practical  working,  by  presuming  the
'  truth '  of  our  faith  and  by  acting  on  its  postulates ;
whence  it  would  appear  that  those  theologians  were  right
who  contended  that  real  faith  must  justify  itself  by  works.
On  the  other  hand,  we  might  anticipate  that  spurious
forms  of  faith  would  fall  short  in  one  or  more  of  these
respects,  and  so  account  for  the  confusion  into  which  the
subject  has  drifted.

§  7.  Such,  then,  being  the  nature  of  the  faith  which  is
said  to  envelop  and  sustain  reason,  and  to  engender
knowledge,  can  it  be  fairly  charged  with  forming  a
principle  of  unbridled  individualism  which  abrogates  all
distinctions  between  subjective  fancy  and  objective  reality  ?
Nothing  surely  could  be  further  from  the  truth.  At  first,
no  doubt,  it  looks  as  though  to  recognise  the  psychological
necessity  and  logical  value  of  the  will  to  believe  opened
the  door  to  a  limitless  host  of  individual  postulates.  But
the  freedom  to  believe  what  we  will  is  so  checked  by  the
consciousness  of  the  responsibility  and  risk  attaching  to
our  choice,  that  this  part  of  the  doctrine  becomes  little
more  than  a  device  for  securing  an  open  field  and  a  fair
trial  to  every  relevant  possibility.  Furthermore,  all  such
subjective  preferences  have  to  submit  to  a  severe  sifting
in  consequence  of  the  requirement  that  our  postulates
must  stand  the  test  of  practical  working,  before  their
claim  to  truth  can  be  admitted.  Whatever  our  faith,  it
must  be  confirmed  by  works,  and  so  prove  itself  to  be
objectively  valid.

Alike,  therefore,  whether  it  is  applied  to  knowledge  or
to  faith,  the  pragmatic  test  is  a  severe  one.  It  allows,
indeed,  the  widest  liberty  to  experiment :  but  it  inexorably
judges  such  experiments  by  the  value  of  their  actual


xvi FAITH,  REASON,  AND  RELIGION 359

achievements,  and  sternly  withholds  its  sanction  from
insincere  phrasemongering,  from  ineffectual  aspiration,
from  unworkable  conceptions,  from  verbal  quibblings  and
dead  formulas.  Throughout  the  intellectual  world  the
pedantry  of  the  past  has  heaped  up  so  much  rubbish
which  the  application  of  this  pragmatic  test  would  clear
away,  that  it  is  not  always  easy  to  repress  a  suspicion
that  much  of  the  philosophic  alarm  at  the  consequences
of  applying  our  test  may  have  been  inspired,  more  or
less  unconsciously,  by  an  unavowed  dread  lest  it  should
insist  on  pensioning  off  some  of  the  more  effete  veterans
among  philosophic  traditions.

For  really  the  pragmatic  value  of  much  that  passes  for
philosophy  is  by  no  means  easy  to  discern.  Metaphysical
systems,  for  instance,  hardly  ever  seem  to  possess  more
than  individual  value.  They  satisfy  their  inventors,  and
afford  congenial  occupation  to  their  critics.  But  they
have  hitherto  shown  no  capacity  to  achieve  a  more  general
validity  or  to  intervene  effectively  in  the  conduct  of  life.
Again,  it  is  inevitable  that  the  pragmatic  inquiry  as  to
what  difference  their  truth  or  falsehood  can  be  supposed
to  make  should  be  raised  concerning  many  metaphysical
propositions,  such  as  that  the  universe  is  '  one  '  or  '  perfect,'
or  that  truth  is  '  eternal,'  or  that  '  substance '  is  immutable,
which,  in  so  far  as  they  are  not  taken  as  merely  verbal
(and  this  is  all  they  usually  profess  to  be  when  criticised),
seem  only  very  distantly  and  doubtfully  connected  with
life.  Their  prestige,  therefore,  is  seriously  imperilled.

Now,  similar  dogmas  abound  in  religion,  and  are  not
wholly  absent  even  from  the  sciences.  But  their  occur-
rence is  outbalanced  by  that  of  assertions  which  carry
practical  consequences  in  the  most  direct  and  vital  way.
Hence  the  pragmatic  importance  and  value  of  science  and
religion  can  hardly  be  contested.  And  as  tested  by  their
material  results  in  the  one  case  and  by  their  spiritual
results  in  the  other,  they  both  indisputably  '  work.'  It  is
inevitable,  therefore,  that  we  should  regard  them  as  resting
on  conceptions  which  are  broadly  '  true,'  or  '  true '  at  all
events  until  superseded  by  something  truer.  They  have


360  STUDIES  IN HUMANISM  xvi

nothing,  consequently,  to  fear  from  our  method  of  criticism:
if  anything,  its  application  may  be  expected  to  invigorate
their  pursuit,  and  to  relieve  them  of  the  burden  of  non-
functional superfluities  with  which  an  officious  formalism
has  encumbered  them.

Selection,  then,  of  the  valuable  among  a  plurality  of
alternatives  is  essential  to  the  life  and  progress  of  religious,
as  of  secular,  truth.  Truth  is  not  merely  '  what  each  man
troweth,'  but  (in  its  fulness)  also  what  has  stood  its  tests
and  justified  our  trust.

§  8.  But  experience  would  seem  to  show  that  (at  least
while  the  winnowing  process  is  still  going  on)  the  results
of  this  testing  are  not  so  decisive  as  to  eliminate  all  the
competitors  but  one.  Over  an  extensive  range  of  subjects
the  most  various  opinions  appear  tenable,  and  are  success-
fully maintained.  But  why  should  this  astonish  us  ?
For  (i)  what  right  have  we  to  expect  filial  results  from
an  incomplete  process  ?  (2)  What  right  have  we  to  assume
that  even  ultimate  '  truth '  must  be  one  and  the  same
for  all  ?  The  assumption  is  no  doubt  convenient,  and  in
a  rough  and  ready  way  it  works ;  but  does  it  do  full
justice  to  the  variety  of  men  and  things  ?  Is  the  '  same-
ness '  we  assume  ever  really  more  than  agreement  for
practical  purposes,  and  do  we  ever  really  crave  for  more
than  this  ?  And  provided  we  achieve  this,  why  should
not  the  '  truth,'  too,  prove  more  subtly  flexible,  and
adjust  itself  to  the  differences  of  individual  experience,
and  result  in  an  agreement  to  differ  and  to  respect  our
various  idiosyncrasies?  (3)  It  is  difficult  to  see  why  a
phenomenon,  which  is  common  in  the  sciences  and  normal
in  philosophy,  without  exciting  indignation,  should  be
regarded  as  inadmissible  in  the  religious  sphere.  It  is  a
normal  feature  in  the  progress  of  a  science  that  its  '  facts '
should  be  established  by  engendering  a  multitude  of
interpretations,  none  of  which  are  capable,  usually,  of
covering  them  completely,  and  none  so  clearly  '  false '  as
to  be  dismissible  without  a  qualm.  Why,  then,  should
we  be  alarmed  to  find  that  the  growth  of  religious  truth
proceeds  with  an  analogous  exuberance  ?  (4)  Anyhow,


xvi FAITH,  REASON,  AND  RELIGION 361

whether  we  like  or  dislike  the  human  habit  of  entertain-
ing divergent  beliefs,  the  plurality  of  the  opinions  which
are  held  to  be  '  true '  is  an  important  fact,  and  forms  one
of  the  data  which  no  adequate  theory  of  knowledge  can
afford  to  overlook.

§  9.  It  is  useless,  therefore,  to  close  our  eyes  to  the
fact  that  faith  is  essentially  a  personal  affair,  an  adventure,
if  you  please,  which  originates  in  individual  options,  in
choices  on  which  men  set  their  hearts  and  stake  their
lives.  If  these  assumptions  prosper,  and  if  so  by  faith  we
live,  then  it  may  come  about  that  by  faith  we  may  also
know.  For  it  is  the  essential  basis  of  the  cognitive
procedure  in  science  no  less  than  in  religion  that  we  must
start  from  assumptions  which  we  have  not  proved,  which
we  cannot  prove,  and  which  can  only  be  '  verified  '  after
we  have  trusted  them  and  pledged  ourselves  to  look  upon
the  facts  with  eyes  which  our  beliefs  have  fortunately
biased.  Of  this  procedure  the  belief  in  a  causal  con-
nexion of  events,  the  belief  which  all  natural  science  pre-
supposes and  works  on,  is  perhaps  the  simplest  example.
For  no  evidence  will  go  to  prove  it  in  the  least  degree
until  the  belief  has  boldly  been  assumed.  Moreover,  as
we  have  argued  (in  Essays  ii.,  iii.,  and  vi.),  to  abstract  from
the  personal  side  of  knowing  is  really  impossible.  Science
also,  properly  understood,  does  not  depersonalise  herself.
She  too  takes  risks  and  ventures  herself  on  postulates,
hypotheses,  and  analogies,  which  seem  wild,  until  they
are  tamed  to  our  service  and  confirmed  in  their  allegiance.
She  too  must  end  by  saying  Credo  ut  intelligam.  And
she  does  this  because  she  must.  For,  as  Prof.  Dewey
has  admirably  shown,1  all  values  and  meanings  rest  upon
beliefs,  and  "  we  cannot  preserve  significance  and  decline
the  personal  attitude  in  which  it  is  inscribed  and  operative."
And  the  failure  of  intellectualist  philosophy  to  justify
science  and  to  understand  '  how  knowledge  is  possible,'  we
have  seen  to  be  merely  the  involuntary  consequence  of  its
mistaken  refusal  to  admit  the  reality  and  necessity  of  faith.

1  In  his  important  paper  on '  Beliefs  and  Realities '  in  the  Phil.  Rev.  xv.  p.
113,  foil.


362  STUDIES IN HUMANISM  xvi

I  find  it  hard,  therefore,  to  understand  why  a  religious
assumption,  such  as,  e.g.  the  existence  of  a  '  God,'  should
require  a  different  and  austerer  mode  of  proof,  or  why  the
theologian  should  be  debarred  from  a  procedure  which  is
always  reputable,  and  sometimes  heroic,  in  a  man  of
science.

We  start,  then,  always  from  the  postulates  of  faith,
and  transmute  them,  slowly,  into  the  axioms  of  reason.
The  presuppositions  of  scientific  knowledge  and  religious
faith  are  the  same.  So,  too,  is  the  mode  of  verification
by  experience.  The  assumptions  which  work,  i.e.  which
approve  themselves  by  ministering  to  human  interests,
purposes,  and  objects  of  desire,  are  '  verified  '  and  accepted
as  '  true.'  So  far  there  is  no  difference.  But  we  now
come  to  the  most  difficult  part  of  our  inquiry,  viz.,  that  of
applying  our  general  doctrine  to  the  religious  sphere,  and
of  accounting  for  the  different  complexion  of  science  and
religion.  For  that  there  exists  a  marked  difference  here
will  hardly  be  denied,  nor  that  it  (if  anything)  will  account
for  the  current  antithesis  of  faith  and  reason.  It  must  be,
in  other  words,  a  difference  in  the  treatment  of  the  same
principles  which  produces  the  difference  in  the  results.

§  10.  Now,  it  is  fairly  easy  to  see  that  certain  differ-
ences in  treatment  are  necessarily  conditioned  by  differ-
ences in  the  subjects  in  which  the  verification  of  our
postulates  takes  place.  In  ordinary  life  we  deal  directly
with  an  '  external  world '  perceived  through  the  senses  ;  in
science  with  the  same  a  little  less  directly  :  in  either  case
our  hypotheses  appeal  to  some  overt,  visible,  and  palpable
fact,  by  the  observation  of  which  they  are  adequately
verified.  But  the  data  of  the  religious  consciousness  are
mainly  experiences  of  a  more  inward,  spiritual,  personal
sort,  and  it  is  obvious  that  they  can  hardly  receive  the  same
sort  of  verification.  The  religious  postulates  can  hardly
be  verified  by  a  direct  appeal  to  sense,  we  think  ;  and
even  if  theophanies  occurred,  they  would  not  nowadays
be  regarded  as  adequate  proofs  of  the  existence  of
God.

But  this  difference  at  once  gives  rise  to  a  difficulty.


xvi FAITH,  REASON,  AND  RELIGION 363

The  opinion  of  the  great  majority  of  mankind  is  still  so
instinctively  averse  from  introspection,  that  it  is  not  yet
willing  to  treat  the  psychical  facts  of  inward  experience
as  facts  .just  as  rightfully  and  in  as  real  a  way  as  the
observations  of  the  senses.  It  does  not  recognise  the
reality  and  power  of  beliefs.  It  does  not  see  that  "  beliefs
are  themselves  real  without  discount,"  "  as  metaphysically
real  as  anything  else  can  ever  be,"  and  that  "  belief,  sheer,
direct,  unmitigated,  personal  belief,"  can  act  on  reality
"  by  modifying  and  shaping  the  reality  of  other  real
things."  1  And  because  it  has  not  understood  the  reality
of  beliefs  as  integral  constituents  of  the  world  of  human
experience,  and  their  potency  as  the  motive  forces  which
transform  it,  it  has  disabled  itself  from  really  understand-
ing our  world.

But  it  has  disabled  itself  more  seriously  from  under-
standing the  dynamics  of  the  religious  consciousness.
It  rules  out  as  irrelevant  a  large  and  essential  part  of  the
evidence  on  which  the  religious  consciousness  has  every-
where instinctively  relied.  It  hesitates  to  admit  the  his-
toric testimony  to  the  '  truth  '  of  a  religious  synthesis  which
comes  from  the  experience  of  its  working  through  the
ages,  even  though  it  may  not,  like  the  old  rationalism,
dismiss  it  outright  as  unworthy  of  consideration.  It
suspects  or  disallows  many  of  the  verifications  to
which  the  religious  consciousness  appeals.  And  this  is
manifestly  quite  unfair.  The  psychological  evidence  is
relevant,  because  in  the  end  there  is  a  psychological  side
to  all  evidence,  which  has  been  overlooked.  The  historical
appeal  is  relevant,  because  in  the  end  all  evidence  is
historical,  and  the  truth  of  science  also  rests  on  the  record
of  its  services.  The  controversy,  therefore,  about  the
logical  value  of  religious  experience  will  have  henceforth
to  be  conducted  with  considerably  expanded  notions  of
what  evidence  is  relevant.  Nor  must  we  be  more  severe
on  religion  than  on  science.  But  it  is  plain  that  we  are.
We  ought  not  to  be  more  suspicious  of  the  religious  than  of
the  many  scientific  theories  which  are  not  capable  of  direct

1  Prof.  Dewey  in  I.e.  pp.  127,  124.


364  STUDIES IN HUMANISM  xvi

verification  by  sense -perception.  But  even  though  the
ether,  e.g.,  is  an  assumption  which  no  perception  can  ever
verify,  it  is  yet,  in  scientific  theory,  rendered  so  continuous
with  what  is  capable  of  perceptual  verification  that  the
discrepancy  is  hardly  noticed.  The  system  of  religious
truths  is  much  less  closely  knit ;  the  connexion  of  the
postulates  with  our  spiritual  needs  and  their  fulfilling
experiences  is  much  less  obvious  ;  the  methods  and
possibilities  of  spiritual  experiment  are  much  less  clearly
ascertained.

And  the  reason,  no  doubt,  partly  is  that  in  the  religious
sphere  the  conceptions  for  which  the  support  of  faith  is
invoked  are  much  more  vaguely  outlined.  It  would  be  a
matter  of  no  slight  difficulty  to  define  the  conception  of
religion  itself,  so  as  to  include  everything  that  was
essential,  and  to  exclude  everything  that  was  not.  And
it  would  not  be  hard  to  show  that  at  the  very  core  of  the
religious  sentiment  there  linger  survivals  of  the  fears  and
terrors  with  which  primitive  man  was  inspired  by  the
spectacle  of  an  uncomprehended  universe.

Again,  consider  so  central  a  conception  of  religion  as,
e.g.  '  God.'  It  is  so  vaguely  and  ambiguously  conceived
that  within  the  same  religion,  nay,  within  the  same  Church,
the  word  may  stand  for  anything,  from  the  cosmic
principle  of  the  most  vaporous  pantheism  to  a  near
neighbour  of  the  most  anthropomorphic  polytheism.
And  it  is  obvious  that  while  this  is  so,  no  completely
coherent  or  '  rational '  account  can  be  given  of  a  term
whose  meanings  extend  over  almost  the  whole  gamut  of
philosophic  possibilities.  But  it  is  also  obvious  that  there
is  no  intrinsic  reason  for  this  state  of  things,  and  that
theologians  could,  if  they  wished,  assign  one  sufficiently
definite  meaning  to  the  word,  and  then  devise  other  terms
as  vehicles  for  the  other  meanings.  It  may  be  noted,  as
a  happy  foretaste  of  such  a  more  reasonable  procedure,
that  already  philosophers  of  various  schools  are  beginning
to  distinguish  between  the  conceptions  of  '  God '  and  of
'  the  Absolute,'  though  it  is  clear  to  me  that  the  latter
'  conception '  is  still  too  vague  and  will  in  its  turn  have


xvi FAITH,  REASON,  AND  RELIGION 365

to  be  either  abolished  or  relegated  to  a  merely  honorary
position.

§11.  It  must  be  admitted,  thirdly,  that  a  widespread
distrust  of  faith  has  been,  not  unnaturally,  provoked  by
the  extensive  misuse  of  the  principle  in  its  religious
signification.  Faith  has  become  the  generic  term  for
whatever  religious  phenomena  co-existed  with  an  absence
of  knowledge.  Under  this  heading  we  may  notice
the  following  spurious  forms  of  faith  :  —  ( I )  Faith  may
become  a  euphemism  for  unwillingness  to  think,  or,  at
any  rate,  for  absence  of  thought.  In  this  sense  faith  is
the  favourite  offspring  of  intellectual  indolence.  It  is
chiefly  cherished  as  the  source  of  a  comfortable  feeling
that  everything  is  all  right,  and  that  we  need  not  trouble
our  heads  about  it  further.  If  we  'have  faith'  of  this
kind,  no  further  exertion  is  needed  to  sustain  our  spiritual
life  ;  it  is  the  easiest  and  cheapest  way  of  limiting  and
shutting  off  the  spiritual  perspective.  (2)  It  is  not  un-
common to  prefer  faith  to  knowledge  because  of  its
uncertainty.  The  certainty  about  matters  of  knowledge
is  cold  and  cramping :  the  possibilities  of  faith  are
gloriously  elastic.  (3)  Our  fears  for  the  future,  our
cowardly  shrinkings  from  the  responsibilities  and  labours
of  too  great  a  destiny,  nay,  our  very  despair  of  knowledge
itself,  may  all  assume  the  garb  of  faith,  and  masquerade
as  such.  (4)  '  Faith '  may  mean  merely  a  disingenuous
disavowal  of  a  failure  to  know,  enabling  us  to  retain
dishonestly  what  we  have  not  known  (or  sought)  to  gain
by  valid  means.  To  all  these  spurious  forms  of  faith,  of
course,  our  Humanism  can  furnish  no  support,  though  it
is  alert  to  note  the  important  part  they  play  (and
especially  the  first)  throughout  our  mental  life.

The  fifth  form  of  faith  is  not  so  much  fraudulent  as
incomplete  ;  its  fallacy  consists  in  allowing  itself  to  be
stopped  short  of  works,  and  to  renounce  the  search
for  verification.  This  is  the  special  temptation  of  the
robuster  forms  of  faith :  if  our  faith  is  very  strong  it
produces  an  assurance  to  which,  psychologically,  no  more
could  be  added.  Why,  then,  demand  knowledge  as


366  STUDIES IN HUMANISM  Xvi

well  ?  Does  not  this  evince  an  unworthy  distrust  of  faith
at  the  very  time  when  faith  has  shown  its  power?  To
which  it  may  be  replied  that  we  also  can  and  must
distinguish  psychological  assurance  from  logical  proof,
even  though  the  latter  must  induce  the  former,  and  the
former  must  lay  claim  to  logical  value  as  it  grows  more
nearly  universal.  The  difference  lies  in  the  greater  psycho-
logical communicability  of  the  '  logical '  assurances  and  their
wider  range  of  influence.  At  first  sight  emotional  exhor-
tations (sermons,  etc.)  may  seem  to  produce  far  intenser  and
more  assured  beliefs  than  calmer  reasonings.  But  they  do
not  appeal  so  widely  nor  last  so  well,  and  even  though  it
is  hazardous  to  assume  that  '  logical '  cogency  is  universal,1
it  is  certainly,  on  the  whole,  of  greater  pragmatic  value.

Moreover,  the  motives  of  an  unreasoning  faith  are
easily  misread  ;  the  faith  which  is  strong  enough  to  feel
no  need  of  further  proof  is  interpreted  as  too  weak  to
dare  to  aspire  to  it.  And  so  a  properly  enlightened  faith
should  yield  the  strongest  impetus  to  knowledge  :  the
stronger  it  feels  itself  to  be,  the  more  boldly  and  eagerly
should  it  seek,  the  more  confidently  should  it  anticipate,
the  more  probably  should  it  attain,  the  verificatory
experiences  that  recompense  its  efforts.

§  12.  It  must  be  admitted  for  these  reasons  that  the
mistaken  uses  of  the  principle  of  faith  have  retarded  the
intellectual  development  of  the  religious  view  of  life.  It
has  lagged  so  far  behind  the  scientific  in  its  formal
development  that  theologians  might  often  with  advantage
take  lessons  from  the  scientists  in  the  proper  use  of  faith.
But  intrinsically  the  religious  postulates  are  not  in-
susceptible of  verification,  nor  are  religious  '  evidences '
incapable  of  standing  the  pragmatic  test  of  truth.  And
some  verification  in  some  respects  many  of  these  postulates
and  much  of  this  evidence  may,  of  course,  be  fairly  said
to  have  received.  The  question  how  far  such  verification
has  gone  is,  in  strict  logic,  the  question  as  to  the  sphere
of  religious  '  truth.'  The  question  as  to  how  much  further
verification  should  be  carried,  and  with  what  prospects,  is,

1  Cp.  Essay  xii.  §  8.


xvi FAITH,  REASON,  AND  RELIGION 367

strictly,  the  question  of  the  sphere  of  the  claims  to  truth
which  rest  as  yet  only  upon  faith.

§  1 3.  To  attempt  to  determine  with  scientific  precision
what  amount  of  established  truth  must  be  conceded  to
religion  as  it  stands,  and  what  claims  to  truth  should  be
regarded  as  reasonable  and  valuable,  and  what  not,  is
a  task  which  probably  exceeds  the  powers,  as  it  certainly
transcends  the  functions,  of  the  mere  philosopher.  It  would
in  any  case  be  fantastic,  and  probably  illusory,  to  expect
any  philosophy  to  deduce  a  priori  and  in  so  many  words  the
special  doctrines  of  any  religion  which  bases  its  claims
on  historic  revelation,  and  may,  by  its  working,  be  able
to  establish  them.  For  what  would  be  the  need  and  the
use  of  revelation  if  it  added  nothing  to  what  we
might  have  discovered  for  ourselves  ?  Moreover,  in  the
present  condition  of  the  religious  evidence,  any  attempt
to  evaluate  it  could  only  claim  subjective  and  personal
interest.  No  two  philosophers  probably  would  evaluate
it  just  in  the  same  way  and  with  the  same  results.

It  seems  better,  therefore,  to  make  only  very  general
observations,  and  to  draw  only  general  conclusions.  As
regards  the  general  psychology  of  religion,  it  is  clear
( i )  that  all  our  human  methods  of  grasping  and  remould-
ing our  experience  are  fundamentally  one.  (2)  It  is
clear  that  the  religious  attitude  towards  the  facts,  or
seeming  facts,  of  life  is  in  general  valid.  (3)  It  is  clear
that  this  attitude  has  imperishable  foundations  in  the
psychological  nature  of  the  human  soul.  (4)  It  is  clear
that  the  pragmatic  method  is  able  to  discriminate  rigorously
between  valid  and  invalid  uses  of  faith,  and  offers  sufficient
guarantees,  on  the  one  hand,  against  the  wanderings  of  in-
dividual caprice,  and,  on  the  other,  against  the  narrownesses
of  a  doctrinairism  which  would  confine  our  postulates  to  a
single  type — those  of  the  order  falsely  called  '  mechanical.' *

.  1  Strictly  interpreted,  the  word  confirms  the  Humanist  position  which  it  is
so  often  used  to  exclude,  For  a  '  mechanism '  is,  properly,  a  device — a  means
to  effect  a  purpose.  And,  in  point  of  fact,  it  is  as  a  means  to  ordering  our
experience  that  '  mechanical '  conceptions  are  in  use.  To  abstract  from  this
ideological  function  of  all  '  mechanism,'  therefore,  is  to  falsify  the  metaphor  :  a
device  of  nobody's,  for  no  purpose,  is  a  means  that  has  no  meaning.


368  STUDIES IN HUMANISM  xvi

It  can  show  that  it  is  not  '  faith '  to  despise  the  work  of
'  reason,'  nor  '  reason  '  to  decline  the  aid  of  '  faith  '  ;  and
that  the  field  of  experience  is  so  wide  and  rough  that
we  need  never  be  ashamed  to  import  religion  into  its
cultivation  in  order  to  perfect  the  fruits  of  human  life.

As  regards  the  concrete  religions  themselves,  it  is  clear
(i)  that  all  religions  may  profit  by  the  more  sympathetic
attitude  of  Humanism  towards  the  religious  endowment
of  human  nature,  and  so  towards  their  evidences  and
methods.  And  this  for  them  is  a  gain  not  to  be  despised.
For  it  invalidates  the  current  rationalistic  attacks,  and
secures  religions  against  the  ordinary  '  dialectical '  refuta-
tions. It  gives  them,  moreover,  a  chance  of  proving  their
truth  in  their  own  appropriate  way.  It  is  clear  (2)  that
all  religions  work  pragmatically  to  a  greater  or  less
extent.  And  this  in  spite  of  what  seem,  theoretically,
the  greatest  difficulties.  The  obvious  explanation  is  that
these  '  theoretical '  difficulties  are  really  unimportant,
because  they  are  either  non-functional  or  pragmatically
equivalents,  and  that  the  really  functional  parts  of  all
religions  will  be  found  to  be  practically  identical.  It
follows  (3)  that  all  religions  will  be  greatly  benefited  and
strengthened  by  getting  rid  of  their  non  -  functional
accretions  and  appendages.  These  constitute  what  may,
perhaps,  without  grave  injustice  be  called  the  theological
side  of  religion  ;  and  it  nearly  always  does  more  harm
than  good.  For  even  where  '  theological  '  systems  are
not  merely  products  of  professional  pedantry,  and  their
'  rationality '  is  not  illusory,  they  absorb  too  much  energy
better  devoted  to  the  more  truly  religious  functions.  The
most  striking  and  familiar  illustration  of  this  is  afforded
by  our  own  Christianity,  an  essentially  human  and
thoroughly  pragmatic  religion,  hampered  throughout  its
history,  and  at  times  almost  strangled,  by  an  alien
theology,  based  on  the  intellectualistic  speculations  of
Greek  philosophers.  Fortunately  the  Greek  metaphysic
embodied  (mainly)  in  the  '  Athanasian '  creed  is  too
obscure  to  have  ever  been  really  functional ;  its  chief
mischief  has  always  been  to  give  theological  support  to


xvi FAITH,  REASON,  AND  RELIGION 369,

'  philosophic '  criticisms,  which,  by  identifying  God  with
'  the  One,'  have  aimed  at  eliminating  the  human  element
from  the  Christian  religion.1  As  against  all  such  attempts,
however,  we  must  hold  fast  to  the  principle  that  the
truest  religion  is  that  which  issues  in  and  fosters  the
best  life.

1  Cp.  Prof.  Dewey.  I.e. ,  pp.  118-9.


2  B


XVII
THE  PROGRESS  OF  PSYCHICAL  RESEARCH1

ARGUMENT

§  I .  The  impotence  of  '  facts '  to  resist  interpretations  prompted  by  bias.
The  attempts  to  interpret  '  psychical  phenomena '  systematically.  §  2.
The  work  of  Frederic  Myers.  §  3.  The  conception  of  the  Subliminal.
§  4.  Myers's  usej  of  it  to  transcend  terrestrial  existence.  §  5-  The
argument  of  his  Human  Personality.  §  6.  Current  criticisms  of  it.
§  7.  Replies  to  these.  §  8.  The  'proof  of  immortality.  §  9.  The
need  for  organised  and  endowed  inquiry.

§  i.  IT  is  a  popular  superstition  that  the  advancement  of
truth  depends  wholly  on  the  discovery  of  facts,  and  that
the  sciences  have  an  insatiable  appetite  for  facts  and
consume  them  raw,  like  oysters ;  whereas,  really,  the
actual  procedure  of  the  sciences  is  almost  the  exact
opposite  of  this.  For  the  facts  to  be  '  discovered '  there
is  needed  the  eye  to  see  them,  and  inasmuch  as  the  most
important  facts  do  not  at  first  obtrude  themselves,  it  has
usually  to  be  a  trained  eye,  and  animated  by  a  persevering
desire  to  know.  Thus  radium,  for  instance,  with  the
revolution  in  our  whole  conception  of  material  nature
which  it  imports,  after  vainly  bombarding  an  inattentive
universe  for  aeons,  has  only  just  succeeded  in  getting  itself
discovered,  and  its  wonderful  activity  appreciated  and
ranked  as  '  fact.'

Again,  the  sciences  are  anything  but  heaps  of  crude
facts.  They  are  coherent  systems  of  the  interpretation  of
what  they  have  taken  as  '  fact,'  and  they,  very  largely,  make
their  own  facts  as  they  proceed.  Nor  are  '  facts  '  facts  for

1  This  essay  appeared  in  the Fortnightly  Review  for  January  1905. It  is
reprinted  by  the  courtesy  of  the  editor,  with  a  few  additions  towards  the  end.

370


xvn  PSYCHICAL  RESEARCH  371

a  science  until  it  has  prepared  them  for  assimilation,  and  can
swallow  them  without  unduly  straining  its  structure.  In
other  words,  the  sciences  always  select  and  '  cook '  their
facts.  '  Fact '  is  always  '  faked  '  to  some  extent.  Hence
what  is  fact  for  one  science,  and  from  one  point  of  view,  is
not  so  for  and  from  another,  and  may  be  irrelevant  or  a
fiction.  If,  therefore,  rival  theorists  are  determined  to
occupy  different  points  of  view,  and  to  stay  there  without
seeking  common  ground,  they  can  controvert  each  other's
'  facts '  for  ever.  For  their  assertions  concern  what  are
really  different  facts.  So  there  is  no  way  of  settling  the  dis-
pute save  by  the  good  old  method  of  letting  both  continue
until  harvest-time,  and  finding  which  contributes  more  to
human  welfare.  Facts,  in  short,  are  far  from  being  rigid,
irresistible,  triumphant  forces  of  nature ;  rather  they  are
artificial  products  of  our  selection,  of  our  interests,  of  our
hopes,  of  our  fears.  The  shape  they  assume  depends  on
our  point  of  view,  their  meaning  on  our  purpose,  their
value  on  the  use  we  put  them  to  ;  nay,  perhaps,  their
very  reality  on  our  willingness  to  accept  them.  For  if
there  lurks  within  them  some  backbone  of  rigidity  which
we  cannot  hope  to  alter,  it  is  at  least  something  to  which
we  have  not  yet  penetrated,  and  which  it  would  be  fatal
rashly  to  assume,  so  long  as  the  facts  that  face  us  are  still
such  that  we  want  to  alter  them.

Now  most  of  this  has  long  been  known  to  the
logicians,  though  for  various  reasons  they  have  not  yet
thought  fit  to  make  it  clear  to  the  uninitiated  public.  Nor
should  I  now  dare  to  divulge  these  mysteries  of  the  higher
logic  were  it  possible  to  discuss  the  history  of  Psychical
Research  without  reference  to  the  striking  way  in  which
it  illustrates  this,  our  human,  treatment  of  fact.  This
history  has  been  a  tragedy  (or  tragi-comedy)  with  three
main  actors,  Fact,  Prejudice  or  Bias,  and  Interpretation  ;
and  the  greatest  of  these  is  Prejudice.  For  it  has  deter-
mined the  interpretation,  which  in  turn  has  selected  the
facts.  And  thus  the  impotence  of  Fact  has  been  most
clearly  shown.  For  of  facts  bearing  on  the  subject  there
has  always  been  abundance :  mankind  has  always  had


372  STUDIES IN HUMANISM  xvn

experience  of  ghosts,  trances,  inspirations,  dreams,  fancies,
illusions,  hallucinations,  and  the  like.  Some  men  have
always  been  ill-balanced,  as  others  stolid,  some  responsive
to  the  unusual,  as  others  indifferent.  And  divergent
prejudices  have  always  been  strong  to  emphasise  what-
ever told  in  their  favour,  and  to  suppress  whatever  did
not.  And  so  '  what  the  facts  really  were  '  has  manifestly
depended  on  the  interpretations  put  upon  them.

Of  such  interpretations  the  two  extremes  have  always
been  conspicuous.  The  one  is  often  called  the  super-
stitious and  the  other  the  scientific.  The  names  indeed
are  bad,  and  beg  the  question  :  for  any  interpretation  has
a  right  to  be  called  scientific  if  it  is  coherent  and  works,
while  any  is  superstitious  which  rests  on  mere  prejudice
and  can  give  no  coherent  account  of  itself.  But  still,  the
interpretation  which  treats  all  psychic  phenomena  as
essentially  pathological  has  hitherto  been  preferred  by  the
more  scientific  people,  and  has  therefore  been  worked  out
and  applied  more  scientifically,  while  hardly  anything  has
been  done  to  elicit  the  latent  scientific  value  of  its  rival.

Since  the  formation  of  the  Society  for  Psychical
Research,  however,  this  situation  has  been  changed,  and
its  work  has  begun  to  tell  both  on  the  facts  and  on  their
interpretation.  Not  that  as  yet  much  progress  has  been
made  in  altering  the  mode  in  which  the  facts  appear,  i.e.
in  obtaining  control  of  them,  in  making  them  experi-
mental, or  in  eliciting  new  ones.  But  the  quality  of  the
old  facts  has  been  greatly  improved  ;  they  are  beginning
to  be  received  with  a  more  discriminating  hospitality,  to
be  scrutinised  with  a  more  intelligent  curiosity,  to  be
recorded  with  something  like  precision.  And  what,  in
the  light  of  their  past  history,  is  probably  quite  as  im-
portant— for  what  is  the  use  of  collecting  facts  which  no
one  understands  ? — much  has  been  done  to  render  their
interpretation  more  scientific,  and  it  is  upon  this  aspect
of  the  progress  of  Psychical  Research  that  this  essay  is
intended  to  enlarge.

The  better  understanding  of  the  traditional  phenomena
has  been  greatly  advanced  by  a  series  of  notable  books


xvn  PSYCHICAL  RESEARCH  373

proceeding  from  the  inner  circles  of  the  Society  for
Psychical  Research.  First  to  be  mentioned  is  Prof.
William  James's  profound  and  delightful  Varieties  of
Religious  Experience,  which  has  so  signally  shown  the
psychological  significance  of  much  that  from  the  patho-
logical point  of  view  would  seem  sheer  excesses  of
spiritual  morbidity.  Secondly,  Mr.  Podmore's  History  of
Modern  Spiritualism  has  shown  how  the  '  facts '  look  to
an  intelligent,  competent,  but  intensely  sceptical,  criticism.
And,  lastly,  the  late  Frederic  Myers's  Human  Personality
has  made  a  brilliant  and  suggestive  effort  to  look  at  the
same  material  with  a  constructive  purpose,  and  to  put
upon  it  a  coherent  interpretation  which  will  convert  the
whilom  playground  of  the  will-o'-the-wisps  of  superstition
into  a  stable  habitation  of  science.  This  enterprise  seems
interesting  and  important  enough  to  warrant  an  attempt
to  estimate  its  outcome,  now  that  the  first  rush  of  readers
and  the  first  clash  of  critics  has  rolled  by.

Myers's  conception  of  the  function  of  the  Society
for  Psychical  Research  differs  widely  from  that  of  Mr.
Podmore  :  it  is  for  him  not  an  organisation  for  the  harrying
of  spiritual  impostors,  but  a  possible  training  school  for
the  future  Columbus  of  an  ultra-terrestrial  world.  And
so  he  is  inspired  by  the  spirit  of  research,  nay,  of
adventure,  which  is  the  prelude  to  discovery.

§  2.  Perhaps,  however,  the  first  reflection  he  provokes  is
one  on  the  waywardness  of  genius,  on  its  annoying  habit
of  not  sticking  to  its  last,  and  not  allowing  quiet  folk  to
drowse  on  in  their  old  ancestral  ways,  but  of  making  un-
expected incursions  into  fresh  territories  and  dragging  an
unwilling  humanity  in  its  train.  For  there  can  be  little
doubt  that  Mr.  Myers  was  a  genius,  though  not  at  all  of
the  kind  that  would  (antecedently)  have  been  suspected
of  attempting  epoch-making  contributions  to  science  and
philosophy.  His  gifts  were  clearly  of  a  literary  and
poetic  character,  such  as  seemed  to  promise  him  a  dis-
tinguished place  and  an  agreeable  career  among  the
English  men  of  letters,  but  might,  in  the  first  instance,
well  be  thought  to  have  unfitted  him  for  the  close


374  STUDIES IN HUMANISM  xvn

reasoning  and  laborious  experimenting  that  are  needed  by
the  man  of  science.  But  a  strong  passion  of  his
emotional  nature  turned  his  powers  in  quite  a  different
direction.  A  wicked  fairy  (I  suppose)  afflicted  him  with
a  well-nigh  unique  and  unequalled  longing  to  know,  before
he  trod  it,  the  path  all  souls  must  travel ;  and  this  desire
formed  the  tragedy  and  glory  of  his  life.  It  is  usual  to
suppose  that  a  passionate  desire  is  a  mere  hindrance  in
the  search  for  truth  ;  but  a  more  observant  psychology
must  acknowledge  what  strength,  what  perseverance,  and
what  daring  it  may  bestow  upon  the  searcher.  Of  this
power,  Myers's  case  affords  a  signal  example  ;  for  by  dint
of  his  desire  to  know  he  transformed  himself.  He  turned
himself  into  a  man  of  science,  keenly  watchful  and
thoroughly  cognisant  of  every  scientific  fact  that  seemed
to  bear,  however  remotely,  on  his  central  interest,  and
though,  I  think,  he  never  quite  secured  his  footing  on  the
tight-ropes  of  technical  philosophy,  he  made  himself
sufficiently  acquainted  with  the  abstruser  mysteries  of
metaphysics.  And  so  he  actually  trained  his  Pegasus,  as
it  were,  to  pull  the  ark  of  the  covenanted  immortality  out
of  the  slough  of  naturalism.

And  then  it  appeared  to  the  marvel  of  most  beholders
that  there  is  work  for  the  imagination  to  accomplish  in
science  no  less  than  in  poetry.  It  was  the  poetry  in
Myers  that  enabled  him  to  grasp  at  great  conceptions,
whose  light  could  not  have  dawned  on  duller  souls,  and
to  build  up  out  of  the  rubbish  heaps  of  uncomprehended
and  unutilised  experience  the  impressive  structure  which,
if  it  be  not  the  temple  of  ultimate  truth,  yet  for  the
present  marks  the  '  furthest  north '  of  scientific  striving
towards  one  of  the  great  poles  of  human  interest.  And,
similarly,  it  was  his  desire  that  gave  him  driving-power.
For  twenty  years  he  laboured  unremittingly  himself,  and
enlisted  by  his  enthusiasm  the  co-operation  of  others.
Like  other  pioneers,  those  of  psychical  research  will  never,
probably,  obtain  the  recognition  due  to  their  courage,
endurance,  and  faith  in  an  undertaking  which  not  only
their  social  surroundings,  but  their  own  misgivings,  pro-


xvn  PSYCHICAL  RESEARCH  375

nounced  futile  and  absurd.  It  was  mainly  due  to  Myers's
tact  and  enthusiasm  that  the  Society  was  nerved  to
persist  in  the  tedious  task  of  observing  and  collecting  the
erratic  bits  of  evidence,  the  perplexing  phantasmagoria  of
experiences,  which  he  has  now  so  brilliantly  fitted  together
into  his  fascinating  picture  of  the  subliminal  extent  and
transcendent  destiny  of  the  human  spirit.  True,  the
picture  is  impressionist :  in  some  parts  it  is  sketchy  ;  in
others  its  completion  was  cut  short  by  death  ;  nowhere
perhaps  will  it  bear  a  pedantically  microscopic  scrutiny.
But  it  is  the  picture  of  a  master  none  the  less,  and
takes  the  place  of  a  mere  smear  of  meaningless  detail
and  shadowy  outline.  Wherefore  it  is  an  achievement,
and  its  scientific  value  is  incontestable,  whether  or  not  we
are  willing  to  accept  it  as  a  real  image  of  the  truth.

§  3.  Accordingly,  it  is  no  wonder  that,  whereas  those
who  applied  strictly  technical  standards,  and  looked  for
what  it  is  vain  to  expect,  and  difficult  to  use,  in  an  inchoate
science,  viz.  a  formal  precision  of  spick  and  span  con-
ceptions, have  been  somewhat  disconcerted  by  the  heuristic
and  tentative  plasticity  of  Myers's  terms,  the  greatest  of
living  psychologists,  Prof.  William  James,  himself  no
mean  adept  in  psychical  researches,  should  thus  testify  to
his  suggestiveness.  "  I  cannot  but  think,"  he  says,1  "  that
the  most  important  step  forward  that  has  occurred  in
psychology  since  I  have  been  a  student  of  the  science,  is
the  discovery,  first  made  in  1886,  that  in  certain  subjects
at  least  there  is  not  only  the  consciousness  of  the  ordinary
field,  with  its  usual  centre  and  margin,  but  an  addition
thereto  in  the  shape  of  a  set  of  memories,  thoughts,  and
feelings,  which  are  extra -marginal  and  outside  of  the
primary  consciousness  altogether,  but  yet  must  be  classed
as  conscious  facts  of  some  sort,  able  to  reveal  their
presence  by  unmistakable  signs."  This  then  is  '  the
problem  of  Myers,'  the  great  question  as  to  the  nature
of  the  subconscious  or  subliminal  extension  of  what  we
may,  perhaps,  still  call  the  self.

1 Varieties  of  Religion  Experience,  p.  233. Cp.  also  his  fuller  appreciation
of  Myers's  work  in  the  Proceedings  of  the  S.  P.  R.,  Part  42,  pp.  13-23.


376  STUDIES IN HUMANISM  xvn

To  Myers  this  conception  of  the  Subliminal  Self  is  the
great  clue  that  guides  him  through  the  labyrinth  of
abnormal  and  supernormal  fact,  and  holds  together  phe-
nomena so  various  as  sleep,  dream,  memory,  hypnotism,
hysteria,  genius,  insanity  (largely),  automatisms,  chromatic
hearing,  hallucinations,  ghosts,  telepathy  and  telergy,
clairvoyance  and  the  like,  and  even  '  ectoplasy.'  It  is
evident  therefore  that  it  is  essential  for  an  appreciation
of  Human  Personality  to  grasp  this  great  conception  of
the  Subliminal  Self,  and  the  considerations  which  conduct
to  it.

Psychological  experiment  has  confirmed  what  the  best
philosophic  speculation  had  previously  suspected,  viz.  that
the  world  of  sense  is  limited.  That  is,  there  exist  limits
beyond  which  any  particular  sense-perception  either  ceases
or  is  transformed.  It  is  only  within  a  limited  range  that
disturbances  in  the  air  are  perceived  as  sounds,  and  in  the
'ether'  as  sights.  There  are  ultra-violet  'rays,'  and
infra-red  '  rays,'  which  are  both  invisible,  and  there  are
*  tones '  too  high  and  too  low  to  be  heard.  There  are
limits  of  intensity  also  to  sensation.  A  very  slight
stimulation  is  not  felt ;  e.g.  a  small  fly  crawling  across
the  hand  arouses  no  sensation.  And  yet  we  cannot  say
that  this  crawling  passes  quite  unnoticed.  For,  if  there
are  half-a-dozen  such  flies,  we  feel  them  collectively.  But
does  not  this  imply  that  each  separately  must  have  con-
tributed something  ?  For  six  ciphers  would  add  up  to
nothing.  In  this  way,  then,  we  form  the  notion  of  a
limen  or  '  threshold '  over  which  a  '  sensation '  must
pass  to  enter  consciousness.  This  threshold  is  not,  how-
ever, a  fixed  point :  it  may  be  shifted  up  and  down,  raised
so  as  to  contract,  or  lowered,  so  as  to  enlarge  the  range  of
consciousness,  to  an  unknown  extent,  according  to  the
variations  of  attention,  mental  condition,  etc.  At  present
the  range  of  variation  in  the  limen  is  almost  unexplored  ;
but  it  is  undeniable  that  both  the  hyper-aesthesia  which
results  from  a  lowering,  and  the  abnormal  concentration,
or  '  abstraction,'  which  results  from  a  raising,  and  still
more  from  a  combination  of  the  two  (as  in  some  hypnotic


xvn  PSYCHICAL  RESEARCH  377

states),  may  easily  lead  to  abnormalities  that  would  hitherto
have  been  accounted  miracles.

It  should  be  noted,  furthermore,  that  we  cannot  evade
the  paradox  of  unfelt  'sensations'  by  interpreting  the
limen  in  terms  of  physiology.  At  first  sight  it  seems  easy
enough  to  assume  that  there  is  nothing  mental  out  of
consciousness,  and  to  explain  that  the  bodily  disturbances
(due  to  the  crawling  flies)  have  to  attain  a  certain  magni-
tude before  the  mind  reacts  upon  them.  We  may  suppose,
that  is,  that  it  is  not  worthy  of  the  mind  to  take  note  of
the  nervous  excitation  due  to  the  crawling  of  a  single  fly.
But  this  only  transfers  the  difficulty  from  the  sense  organs
to  the  central  brain  :  it  still  remains  a  fact  that  a  mind
which  responds  to  a  sum  of  slight  disturbances  in  the  brain
must,  in  summing  them,  have  apprehended  them  sublimi-
nally  in  their  separation.  Nay,  in  the  end  must  not  this
weird  power  of  unnoticed  noticing  be  ascribed  to  '  matter '
generally?  For  how  could  anything  ever  respond  to  a
sum  of  stimulations  if  the  constituents  of  the  sum  had
not  been  somehow  noticed  ?  It  would  seem,  then,  that
from  this  notion  of  the  subliminal  there  is  no  escape.

§  4.  But  instead  of  being  a  nuisance  and  a  paradox,  it
may  be  made  into  a  principle  of  far-reaching  explanation.
This  is  what  Myers  has  done.  He  has  extended  this
scientific  notion  of  subliminal  ( perception '  from  the
parts  to  the  whole,  and  instead  of  recognising  it  grudg-
ingly and  piecemeal,  he  gladly  generalises  it  into  a
principle  of  almost  universal  application.  When  this  is
done,  the  supraliminal  and  the  subliminal  seem  to  change
places  in  our  estimation,  and  our  normal  supraliminal
consciousness  shrinks  into  a  mere  selection  of  the  total
self,  which  the  necessities  of  mortal  life  have  stirred  us  to
condense  into  actual  consciousness,  while  behind  it,  em-
bracing and  sustaining  all,  there  stretches  a  vast  domain
of  the  subliminal  whose  unexplored  possibilities  may  be
fraught  with  weal  or  woe  ineffable.  Who  after  this  will
question  the  potency  of  the  poetic  seer  to  evolve  romance
out  of  the  disjointed  data  of  academic  science?  And
yet,  like  all  great  feats,  it  is  like  the  egg  of  Columbus


378  STUDIES IN  HUMANISM  xvn

and  very  simple.  At  bottom  it  is  only  a  shifting  of
standpoint,  a  throwing  of  our  spirit's  centre  of  gravity
over  into  the  subliminal.  Let  us  for  a  moment  cease  to
regard  as  the  true  centres  of  our  being  the  conscious
persons  of  a  definite  kind,  hedged  in  by  social  restrictions
and  psychical  and  physical  incapacities  of  all  sorts,  which
we  appear  to  be,  and  whom,  in  spite  of  philosophic  warn-
ings, we  assume  ourselves  to  know  so  well  :  let  us  regard
them  as  mere  efficient,  though  imperfect,  concentrations
of  our  being  upon  the  practical  purposes  of  normal  life.
And  then,  hey  presto  !  the  thing  is  done  !  We  return
transfigured  to  the  surface  from  our  dive  into  the  sub-
liminal. We  are  greater,  perhaps  more  glorious,  than  our
wildest  dreams  suspected.  We  have  transcended  the
limits  of  terrestrial  being,  and  flung  aside  the  menace  of
materialism.  Or,  in  more  technical  philosophic  language,
which  it  is  a  pity  Myers  did  not  in  this  instance  use,  we
find  ourselves  contemplating  the  correlation  of  physical
and  psychical  from  the  point  of  view  of  the  transmission,
not  of  the  production,  theory  of  the  latter.1  Psychic  life,
that  is,  is  not  engendered  by  the  phantom  dance  of
'  atoms,'  but  conversely,  its  veritable  nature  pierces  in
varying  degrees  the  distorting  veil  of  '  matter  '  that  seems
so  solid,  and  yet,  under  scientific  scrutiny,  so  soon  dis-
solves into  the  fantastic  fictions  of  '  vortex -rings '  or
ethereal  '  voids  '  and  '  stresses,'  or  '  energy  '  equations.
And  the  beauty  of  this  change  of  attitude  is  that  whereas
no  facts  can  be  discovered  which  will  invalidate  this  rein-
terpretation,  it  is  quite  possible  that  new  discoveries  may
make  its  materialistic  rival  simply  unworkable.

Myers  has  two  great  similes  for  illustrating  what  he
conceives  to  be  the  relation  of  the  conscious  to  the  sub-
conscious personality.  It  is  like  unto  the  visible  portion
of  an  iceberg  of  whose  total  mass  eight  -  ninths  float
beneath  the  surface.  Or  it  is  like  the  visible  spectrum
beyond  which  there  extend  at  either  end  infra-red  and
ultra-violet  rays,  to  say  nothing  of  yet  more  mysterious
modes  of  radiation,  as  potent,  or  more  potent,  than  those

1  Cp.  James's  Human  Immortality,


xvii  PSYCHICAL  RESEARCH  379

our  eyes  enable  us  to  see.  The  latter  image  has  indeed
this  further  advantage,  that  close  inspection  will  reveal
dark  lines  and  discontinuities  even  within  the  narrow
band  of  visible  light  Just  so  there  are  abundant  breaks
of  continuity  in  our  conscious  life,  which  may  be  made
to  spell  out  messages  to  the  psychologist  from  the
hidden  depths  of  the  soul,  much  as  the  dark  lines  in  a
stellar  spectrum  reveal  to  the  astronomer  the  composition
of  far  distant  stars.  And  he  believes  that  in  the  super-
normal phenomena  of  which  his  book  supplies  a  pro-
visional codification,  we  have  something  corresponding  to
the  '  enhanced  '  lines  of  spectroscopy.

§  5.  Hence  it  is  natural  enough  that  Myers  should  begin
his  survey  by  tracing  the  subliminal  support  in  the  normal
operations  of  our  consciousness.  Morbid  disintegrations
of  personality  prove  that  at  least  we  are  not  rounded-off
and  self-complete  souls,  which  must  be  in  their  integrity,
or  not  be  at  all.  And  yet  not  all  the  features  of  such
cases  look  like  mere  decay  ;  they  are  interspersed  with
signs  of  a  complete  memory  and  of  supernormal  faculty,
and  of  connexions  deep  below  the  surface.  The  analysis
of  genius  is  next  attempted,  in  perhaps  the  least  con-
vincing chapter  in  the  book,  which  derives  genius  from
'  subliminal  uprushes.'  In  the  fourth  chapter  sleep  is
dealt  with,  and  considered  as  a  differentiation  of  psychic
life  parallel  with  waking  life,  preserving  a  more  antique
complexion,  and  showing  (in  dreams)  symptoms  of  a
closer  connexion  with  and  access  to  the  subliminal.
Chapter  V.  deals  with  the  extension  of  normal  into
hypnotic  sleep,  and  the  enhanced  control  of  the  organism
which  it  often  carries  with  it.  In  these  first  chapters  the
facts  to  which  Myers  so  copiously  appeals  throughout
are,  on  the  whole,  beyond  dispute,  though  there  still  is
abundant  difference  of  opinion  about  their  interpretation.
But  in  the  sixth  chapter  he  approaches  a  region  in  which
the  ordinary  man  and  ordinary  science  evince  a  stubborn
unwillingness  to  admit,  and  even  to  ascertain,  the  facts.
Starting  with  an  ingenious  suggestion  that  syncesthesia,
like  '  coloured  hearing,'  are  vestiges  of  a  primitive  sensi-


380  STUDIES IN HUMANISM  xvn

tivity  not  yet  definitely  attached  to  special  organs  of
sense,  he  proceeds  to  other  forms  of  sensory  automatism,
which  convey  messages  from  the  subliminal  to  the  con-
scious self.  These  may  take  the  form  of  spontaneous
hallucinations,  or  be  experimentally  induced  by  '  crystal-
gazing/  and  often  reveal  telepathic  influence.

Of  telepathy,  Mr.  Myers  is  not  long  content  to  retain
the  provisional  description,  officially  prescribed  by  the
Psychical  Society,  as  '  a  mode  of  communication  not
requiring  any  of  the  recognised  channels  of  sense.'  He
soon  takes  it  more  positively  as  a  law  of  the  direct  inter-
course of  spirit  with  spirit,  as  fundamental  as  gravitation
in  the  physical  world.  And  so  it  becomes,  not  an  alter-
native to  the  spiritistic  interpretation,  as  with  Mr.
Podmore,  but  rather  its  presupposition,  and  a  way  of
rendering  it  feasible  and  intelligible.  Granting,  therefore,
that  spirits  as  such  are  in  immediate  telepathic  interaction
in  a  subliminal  '  metetherial '  (i.e.  spiritual)  world,  it  be-
comes arbitrary  to  deprive  them  of  this  power  on  account
of  the  mere  fact  of  death.  Telepathy  from  the  dead
becomes  credible,  and  the  seventh  chapter,  on  '  phantasms
of  the  dead,'  revels  in  ghost  stories.  The  eighth  chapter,
on  motor  automatism,  expounds  and  interprets  the
phenomena  of  planchette  writing,  table  tilting,  etc.,  and
the  evidence  of  discarnate  intelligence  they  often  seem  to
involve,  which  seems  sometimes  to  amount  to  a  '  psychical
invasion,'  or  '  possession '  of  the  automatist.  Hence
there  is  an  easy  transition  in  the  ninth  chapter  to  the
subjects  of  trance,  possession,  and  ecstasy,  in  which  the
organism  may  be  operated  entirely  by  alien  '  spirits,'
while  the  normal  owner  may  be  enjoying  a  subliminal
excursion  into  a  spiritual  world.  As  finally  the  action  of
spirit  on  matter  is  a  mystery  anyhow,  and  as  the  actual
limitation  of  our  power  to  produce  movements  to  bodies
directly  touched  by  our  organism  is  wholly  empirical,  and
may  result  only  from  the  unimaginative  habits  of  the
supraliminal  self,  and  as,  moreover,  discarnate  spirits  may
possess  a  greater  and  more  conscious  power  to  manipulate
the  molecular  arrangements  of  matter,  there  is  no  a  priori


xvii  PSYCHICAL  RESEARCH  381

reason  even  for  discrediting  the  stories  of  telekinesis  and
ectoplasy,  which  form  the  so-called  '  physical  phenomena  '
of  spiritism.

§  6.  Such,  in  barest  outline,  and  without  attempt  to  re-
produce his  multitudinous  references  to  cases,  and  the  felici-
ties of  his  phrasing,  is  Myers's  argument  for  the  extension
of  human  personality  beyond  its  habitual  limits.  It  will
be  thought  by  many  to  pander  to  the  human  love  of  well-
told  fairy-tales,  and  to  recall  within  the  bounds  of  scientific
possibility  every  aberration  of  savage  superstition.  And
certainly  Myers  has  cast  his  net  very  wide  and  deep,  and
brought  into  it  not  only  a  fine  collection  of  fish,  of  which
some  are  very  rare  and  queer  specimens,  but  also  not  a
few  of  the  abhorrent  monsters  of  the  abyss  which  common
sense  can  hardly  bear  to  look  upon.

Moreover,  in  a  sense  criticism  is  easy  ;  in  token  whereof
we  may  instance  some  of  its  more  valid  forms.  It  has  been
objected  then  :  (l)  That  Myers  deals  largely  in  suggestions
which,  after  all,  are  merely  possibilities  ;  (2)  that  he  never
defines  the  nature  of  the  personality  for  which  he  claims
survival  of  death,  and  never  proves  that  what  seems  to
survive  is  truly  personal ;  (3)  that  such  of  his  facts  as
would  be  generally  admitted  are  capable  of  alternative
interpretations  ;  while  (4)  for  the  disputed  phenomena,
even  the  copious  evidence  adduced  is  inadequate  and
dubious  ;  (5)  that  telepathy  among  the  living  is,  as  yet,
assumption  enough  to  explain  everything  ;  (6)  that  his
theory  is  a  jumble  of  physiological  materialism  with  the
wildest  spiritualism  ;  (7)  that  he  is  absurdly  optimistic  in
his  anticipations  both  as  to  the  benefits  to  be  derived
from  the  study  of  our  '  metetherial '  environment ;  and  also
(8)  as  to  the  reasonableness  of  incarnate  and  discarnate
spirits  in  forwarding  his  aim.

§  7.  To  these  objections  it  might  fairly  be  replied  :  as  to
(i),  that  Myers  himself  claims  no  more,  and  more  cannot
fairly  be  expected  of  him.  As  to  (2),  that  while  he
certainly  takes  personality  for  granted,  our  immediate
experience  fully  entitles  us  to  do  so.  The  people  who
decline  to  admit  the  existence  of  personality  until  it  has


382  STUDIES IN  HUMANISM  xvn

been  abstractly  defined  to  their  liking,  are  beyond  the  pale
of  ordinary  scientific  argument.  On  the  other  hand,  it
must  be  granted  that  the  proof  of  personality  in  the
subliminal,  and  of  the  persistence  of  a  human  person  after
death  is,  as  yet,  on  Myers's  own  showing,  somewhat
incomplete.  But  the  indications  point  that  way,  and  it
was  a  merit  in  Myers  to  refrain  from  the  usual  philo-
sophers' leap  to  the  absolute  world-ground  as  soon  as
they  are  driven  off  the  field  of  ordinary  experience.

(3)  It  is  quite  true  that  for  most  of  the  admitted  facts
of  secondary  personality,  hypnotism,  automatism,  sleep,
dream,  etc.,  there  exist  alternative  interpretations.  That
is,  there  are  descriptions  of  them  in  technical  formulas.
But  these  in  no  case  amount  to  real  explanations.  More-
over, they  are  various  and  complicated,  and  Myers's
conception  of  a  single  subliminal  self  would  effect  a  great
simplification.  Further,  it  is  precisely  some  of  these
comparatively  normal  facts  that  seem  to  need  his  theory
most  clearly.  As  this  point  will  bear  some  further
emphasis,  it  may  be  pointed  out  that  the  orthodox  psycho-
logical treatment  of  dreams,  e.g.,  is  plainly  insufficient.
The  conscious  self  is  in  no  proper  sense  the  creator  of  its
dreams.  Even  if  we  grant  that  the  stuff  that  dreams  are
made  of  is  taken  from  the  experiences  of  waking  life
(though  dreams  of  '  flying,'  e.g.,  show  that  this  is  not.
strictly  true),  this  does  not  explain  the  selection.  Nor
does  it  avail  to  point  to  probabilities  of  peripheral  stimula-
tions as  the  physiological  foundation  of  dreams.  The
extraordinary  transmutation  of  the  stimuli  thus  supplied
needs  explanation.  Why  should  a  mosquito  bite  during
sleep  set  up  a  thrilling  tale  of  battle,  murder,  and  sudden
death  ?  Who  is  the  maker  of  these  vivid  plots  to  which  the
dreamer  falls  a  victim  ?  It  is  certainly  not  the  conscious
self  of  the  dream  which  may  be  (more  or  less)  identified
with  that  of  waking  life.  Must  we  not  assume  some  sort
of  subliminal  self?  1

1  Dr.  Morton  Prince's  fascinating  study  of  the  tribulations  of  the  '  Beauchamp '
family  (The  Dissociation  of  a  Personality)  warrants,  perhaps,  the  suggestion  that
one  of  its  heroines,  '  Sally, '  was  such  a  subliminal  self.


xvii  PSYCHICAL  RESEARCH  383

Or  should  we  venture  further  yet,  and  argue  that  since
dreams  (while  we  dream  them)  have  all  the  marks  of  an
independent  reality,  are  immersed  in  a  space  and  a  time
of  their  own,  and  contain  personages  just  as  external  to
us,  and  as  uncontrollable  in  their  actions  as  those  of
waking  life,  these  dream-worlds  really  exist,  and  are
actually  visited  by  us  ?  Philosophically  something  might
be  said  for  this,  and  still  more  for  the  converse  of  this
view,  viz.  that  our  waking  life  is  but  an  incoherent  dream,
whose  full  explanation  would  lie  in  an  awakening  yet  to
come.

This,  indeed,  was  the  view  taken  by  one  of  Myers's
best  '  spirits,'  Mrs.  Piper's  '  G.  P.,'  whose  communication
may  be  cited  in  answer  to  complaints  that  '  spirits '  have
never  yet  revealed  anything  novel  or  worth  knowing.1
"You  to  us,"  he  says  (ii.  254), "  are  sleeping  in  the  material
world  ;  you  look  shut  up  as  one  in  prison,  and  in  order
for  us  to  get  into  communication  with  you,  we  have  to
enter  into  your  sphere,  as  one  like  yourself,  asleep.  This
is  just  why  we  make  mistakes,  as  you  call  them,  or  get
confused  and  muddled."

The  truth  is  that  psychologists  have  hitherto  accepted
the  rough  criteria  of  practical  life,  and  disregarded  the
theoretic  study  of  dreams,  because  they  seemed  to  yield
so  little  fit  to  use  for  the  purposes  of  practice.  And  yet,
what  is  it  but  an  empirical  observation  that  dream-worlds
are  worlds  of  inferior  reality  ?2  Is  it  not  conceivable,
therefore,  that  we  should  discover  some  of  superior  reality
and  value  ?  At  present,  therefore,  while  psychology  seems
confronted  with  the  choice  between  the  Scylla  of  the
Subliminal  and  the  Charybdis  of  real  dream-worlds,  can
one  wonder  that  it  should  try  to  put  off  the  evil  day  as
long  as  possible  ?

1  Cp. ,  too,  Dr.  Wiltse's  dream  (ii.  315)  for  a  striking  account  of  what  '  death  '
feels like. A  genuine  experience  like  this will  always  bear  comparison with
literary  imitations  even  by  so  consummate  an  artist  as  Plato,  e.g.  in  his  '  vision
of  Er,'  and  will  be  felt  to  be,  psychologically,  more  convincing. The  best  re-
production of  the  psychological  quality  of  such  genuine  experiences  with  which  I
am  acquainted in literature, is  to  be  found, to  my  thinking, in  the  '  dream  '
finale  of  Mr.  G.  L.  Dickinson's  Meaning  of  Good.

2  Cp.  Essay  xx.  §  22.


384  STUDIES IN HUMANISM  xvn

(4)  It  must  be  admitted  that  all  over  the  field  covered
by  Mr.  Myers  very  much  more  evidence  is  required,  and
that  a  critic  with  the  knowledge  and  temper  of,  e.g.,  Mr.
Podmore,  could  pick  endless  holes  in  nearly  all  of  it.
The  possibilities  of  fraud  and  error  seem  inexhaustible,
especially  if  semi-conscious  cheating  in  abnormal  mental
states  be  common.  It  is  true  also  that  in  default  of
better  material  Myers  will  sometimes  use  half-baked
bricks,  just  to  complete  his  structure.  But  he  himself
was  quite  aware  of  this,  and  when  a  man  knows  that  he
has  only  months  before  him  to  complete  his  life's  work,
and  feels  that  if  he  does  not  succeed  in  putting  together
the  scattered  material  into  a  synthesis  (however  provisional)
no  one  else  will  do  so,  he  may  well  be  pardoned  if  he
makes  what  use  he  can  of  the  material  that  lies  handy.
It  should  be  recognised  also  that  a  synthesis  which
embraces  such  a  multitude  of  facts  does  not  rest  solely
on  any  one  set  of  them,  and  in  a  sense  grows  independent
of  them  all.  That  is,  the  mere  coherence  of  the  interpreta-
tion becomes  a  great  point  in  its  favour  as  against  a
variety  of  unconnected  alternatives.  Again,  the  collection
and  correction  of  the  evidence  is  the  proper  function  of
the  Psychical  Society,  for  which  Myers's  system  provides
the  aid  of  a  working  theory,  a  provisional  classification,
and  a  technical  terminology.

(5)  It  is  possible  that  telepathy  (in  its  original  sense)
might  be  stretched  over  all  the  facts  which  it  seems  too
harsh  to  dismiss. But,  then,  telepathy  is  itself  a  mere
description,  and  in  no  way  an  explanation. It  has  to  be
interpreted,  either  in definitely  physical or  in definitely
spiritual terms  ;  it  can  hardly  stand  by  itself  as  a  fact
which  transcends  the  physical  order  without  opening  out
upon  another. Hence  the  attempt  to  conceive  it  as  the
adit  to  a  spirit-world  must  be  pronounced  legitimate.

(6)  Myers  no  doubt  might  have  considerably  improved
his statement by  greater  reliance  on  the  contentions  of
an  idealist philosophy,  but  the  charge  of  confusing  the
physical and the spiritual seems in the main to fail.
For,  as  we  saw  (p.  378),  Myers  has  silently  adopted  the


xvn  PSYCHICAL  RESEARCH  385

'  transmission '  view  of  soul,  and  this  entitles  him  to
the  free  use  of  all  the  facts  that  are  presented  on  the
materialistic  side.

(7)  Omne  ignotum  pro  magnifico  may  be  a  generous
delusion,  but  at  least  it  makes  a  good  stimulus  to  research.
Lastly,  as  to  (8),  he  is  well  aware  that  his  gospel
will  impinge  on  rooted  prejudice  and  meet  the  bitterest
hostility.  He  knows  how  "  immemorial  ignorance  has
stiffened  into  an  unreasoning  incredulity "  (i.  157).  He
tell  us  (ii.  77)  "that  the  novelties  of  this  book  are  intended
to  work  upon  preconceptions  which  are  ethical  quite  as
much  as  intellectual."  l

But  still  he  underrates  the  resistance  which  human
minds  and  tempers  are  sure  to  offer  to  his  doctrine.
Concerning  any  considerable  novelty  of  thought  the
prediction  may  be  made  that  hardly  any  one  above  thirty
will  be  psychologically  capable  of  adopting  it,  unless  he  had
previously  been  looking  for  just  such  a  solution.  Myers,
therefore,  will  no  more  persuade  the  existing  generation
of  psychologists  than  Darwin  persuaded  the  biologists  of
his  age.  It  is  vain  to  expect  it.  Novelty  as  such  must
always  make  its  appeal  to  the  more  plastic  minds  of  the
young  who  have  not  yet  aged  into  great  authorities.

Again,  it  is  obvious  that  Myers's  whole  trend  of  thought
must  be  utterly  distasteful  to  the  numerous  people  who
do  not  believe  that  they  have  more  than  an  illusory
personality  now,  and  (rightly  or  wrongly)  have  no  desire
to  have  it  perpetuated  after  death.  Then,  again,  there
are  many  whose  a  priori  sense  of  spiritual  dignity  is
outraged  by  what  they  think  the  indecorum  in  which
'  ghosts '  have  been  observed  to  indulge,  and  who,  as
Myers  observes,  are  the  spiritual  descendants  of  the  people
who  would  not  listen  to  a  heliocentric  astronomy,  on  the
ground  that  it  was  unworthy  of  heavenly  bodies  to  move
in  elliptical,  and  not  in  circular,  orbits.  Many  others  will
not  care  to  look  beyond  the  fact  that  the  new  '  psychical
science '  seems  superficially  to  revive  old  superstitions  of
savage  thought — though  why  it  should  enhance  their

1  Cp.  also  i.  185,  and  ii.  2,  ii.  79-80.

2  C


386  STUDIES IN HUMANISM  xvn

confidence  in  human  knowledge  to  find  that  immemorial
traditions  had  been  wholly  wrong,  or  destroy  it  to  find
that  from  the  first  men  had  possessed  some  inkling  of  the
truth,  is  perhaps  a  feeling  it  were  hard  to  refine  into  a
logical  lucidity.  In  short,  no  one  who  has  learnt  from
Mr.  Balfour  that  the  causes  of  belief  are  hardly  ever
rational,  will  expect  an  immediate  revolution  in  habitual
modes  of  thinking  from  the  work  of  Myers.

§  8.  "  However  this  may  be,  do  you  in  point  of  fact
believe  that  immortality  is  proved  ? "  If  I  were  point
blank  asked  this  question,  I  should  probably  reply  that
most  people  are  still  unaware  of  the  nature  of  proof.
They  imagine  that '  proofs '  can  be  provided  which  appeal
to  '  plain  facts,'  and  rest  upon  indisputable  principles.
Whereas  we  saw  that  really  no  science  deals  with  plain
facts  or  rests  on  absolutely  certain  principles.  Its  '  facts '
are  always  relative  to  its  principles,  and  the  principles
always  really  rest  on  their  ability  to  provide  a  coherent
interpretation  of  the  facts.  All  proof,  therefore,  is  a
matter  of  degree  and  accumulation,  and  no  science  is
more  than  a  coherent  system  of  interpretations,  which,
when  applied,  will  work.  In  every  science,  therefore,
there  is  a  finite  number  of  facts  which  would  have  to  be
rejected  or  reinterpreted,  and  a  small  number  of  principles
which  would  have  to  be  modified  or  withdrawn,  in  order
to  qualify  as  '  false '  the  system  of  that  science.  In  a
science,  however,  of  a  high  degree  of  certainty,  the
principles  are  well  tested  and  very  useful,  and  the  facts
are  capable  of  being  added  to  at  pleasure.  Also,  the
subject  is  sufficiently  explored  to  minimise  the  danger  of
discovering  an  anomaly.  That  a  new  fact  like  radium
should  prima  facie  threaten  to  derange  so  fundamental  a
principle  as  the  Conservation  of  Energy,  and  should  have
to  be  bought  off  by  giving  up  the  old  sense  of  the
Indestructibility  of  Matter,  is  an  incident  which  occurs
but  rarely  in  a  respectable  science  like  Chemistry,  and  it
speaks  well  for  the  open-mindedness  of  chemists  and  their
confidence  in  the  stability  of  their  system  that  they  should
have  admitted  its  existence  as  soon  as  M.  Curie  had


xvn  PSYCHICAL  RESEARCH  387

announced  it.  But  Psychology  is  not  so  firmly  rooted,
and  at  present  shows  the  inhospitable  temper  that  comes
from  a  secret  lack  of  self-assurance.  And  so  psychologists
dare  not  be  as  open-minded  ;  they  do  not  credit  them-
selves or  others  with  sanity  of  soul  enough  to  encounter
abnormal  facts  without  loss  of  mental  balance.  In
Psychical  Research  all  is  still  quite  inchoate,  and  there-
fore plastic,  and  the  final  interpretation  of  its  data  must
depend  on  inquiries  yet  to  make.

One  can  only  say,  therefore,  that  Myers's  interpretation
has  for  the  first  time  rendered  a  future  life  scientifically
conceivable,  and  rendered  much  more  probable  the  other
considerations  in  its  favour.  And,  above  all,  it  has  rendered
it  definitely  provable.  The  scientific  status  of  a  hypothesis
depends  chiefly  on  the  facilities  for  experimental  verifica-
tion it  affords.  No  matter  how  probable  it  may  seem  at
first  sight  (i.e.  how  concordant  with  our  prejudices),  it  is
naught,  if  naught  can  verify  it ;  no  matter  how  wild  it
seems,  it  is  useful,  and  tends  to  be  accepted,  if  it  can
suggest  experiments  whereby  to  test  it,  and  to  grapple
with  the  facts.  Now  it  is  one  of  the  greatest  merits  of
Myers's  book  that  he  throughout  conceives  his  hypothesis
in  this  scientific  spirit.  His  cry  is  ever  for  further  observa-
tion, more  thought,  and  keener  experimentation.  And  his
conception  is  capable  at  every  point  of  definite  investiga-
tion, and  at  many  actually  appeals  to  definite  experiment.
And  whoever  has  a  vestige  of  the  scientific  spirit  must
regard  this  as  the  atonement  for  his  initial  daring.

It  may  well  be  that  in  this  way  there  will  gradually
grow  up  a  consistent  body  of  interpretations,  embodying
our  most  convenient  way  of  regarding  the  facts,  which
can  be  adopted  as  a  whole,  even  though  no  single  member
of  the  system  taken  in  isolation  will  be  sufficient  to  compel
assent.  And  then  human  immortality  will  be  scientifically
'  proved.'  Until  then  it  will  remain  a  matter  of  belief,
however  '  probable '  it  grows.

§  9.  How  long  the  'proof  will  be  in  coming  who  can
say?  If  we  sit  down  and  wait,  we  may  wait  for  ever.
Something  will  depend  on  the  activity  of  the  Society


388  STUDIES IN  HUMANISM  Xvn

for  Psychical  Research  and  kindred  bodies,  more  on
the  attitude  of  the  general  world.  To  work  out  fully
all  the  rich  suggestions  of  Myers's  grandiose  scheme
might  well  absorb  all  the  available  psychological
energies  of  hundreds,  nay,  at  the  former  rate  of  pro-
gress, of  thousands  of  years.  But  short  of  this,  if  we
tried  to  verify  only  the  main  ideas,  it  would  be  a
question  of  whether,  say,  half-a-dozen  first-rate  minds
could  be  induced  to  take  up  the  subject,  not  (as  now)  in
the  scanty  leisure  of  professional  preoccupations,  but  as
their  life's  work.  If  they  will,  comparatively  slight
discoveries  might  raise  the  subject  from  the  observational
to  the  experimental  plane,  and  so  indefinitely  quicken  the
pulse  of  progress.  In  psychical,  as  in  all  other,  science
we  must  get  staid  professionals  to  consolidate  the  work
of  the  enthusiastic  amateurs  who  opened  out  the  way.

But  it  is  obvious  that  to  secure  them  funds  are  needed,
and  that  on  a  generous  scale.  To  some  small  extent,
perhaps,  these  may  come  from  a  growth  in  the  numbers
of  the  Society,  which  has  also  started  an  Endowment  Fund.
It  modestly  asks  for  at  least  £Sooo  in  order  to  subsidise
a  young  psychologist  for  special  work.  But  this  trifling
sum  has  not  yet  been  raised.  And  for  anything  like  a
thorough  investigation  money  will  be  needed  on  a  far  more
liberal  scale.  A  vigilant  literary  committee  to  record  and
probe  the  spontaneous  evidence,  and  an  expensive  labora-
tory for  experimental  tests  are  obvious  necessaries,  and
instead  of  one,  a  dozen  specialists.  For  all  this  ;£  100,000
would  scarcely  be  enough.  There  is  nothing  unreasonable
in  the  view  of  the  Hon.  Sec.  of  the  Society,  who  assures
me  that  he  would  undertake  to  find  permanent  and  profit-
able employment  for  the  income  of  half  a  million.

The  situation,  however,  is  so  discreditable  as  to  warrant
a  bolder  suggestion.  In  every  civilised  community  many
millions  are  annually  spent  by  and  on  organisations  which
profess  to  be  the  depositaries  of  invaluable  truths  concern-
ing spiritual  things,  and  to  regard  it  as  their  most  sacred
duty  to  teach  and  to  sustain  elaborate  systems  of  spiritual
knowledge.  It  is,  however,  a  serious  drawback  to  their


xvii  PSYCHICAL  RESEARCH  389

efficacy  that  considerable  and  growing  doubt  exists  about
the  authenticity  of  this  knowledge.  The  position  of  every
church  could  be  indefinitely  strengthened,  if  it  could  obtain
further  verification  of  the  evidence  on  which  its  claims  are
based.  These  claims,  moreover,  rest  largely  on  allega-
tions susceptible  of  verification.  The  spiritual  truths  pro-
fessed, that  is,  are  not  wholly  matters  of  direct  personal
experience  (though  these  perhaps  are  the  most  distinctive
features  of  the  religious  experience) ;  they  concern  also
what  were  not  originally  or  in  intention  '  matters  of  faith  '
at  all,  but  matters  of  observation  and  experiment,  and  are
therefore  capable  of  continuous  verification  by  analogy.1

The  notion  of  an  initially  perfect  revelation  is,  like  that
of  an  initially  absolute  truth,  a  prejudice.  Even  if  we  had
it,  the  mere  lapse  of  time  would  fatally  impair  its  value.
Even  initially  dubious  revelations,  on  the  other  hand,
would  authenticate  themselves  by  becoming  progressive
and  increasingly  valuable.  Yet,  strange  to  say,  no  church
anywhere  bestows  any  of  its  energy  and  its  income  upon
substantiating  in  this  way  its  claim  to  truth.  The  apolo-
getics of  all  churches  are  merely  arguments,  and  wholly
overlook  the  simplest,  most  scientific,  and  effective  means
of  establishing  their  case.  The  ideas  that  the  proper
function  of  a -church  is  to  be  a  channel  of  communication
between  the  human  and  the  superhuman,  that  its  know-
ledge should  be  progressive  like  that  of  secular  science,
that  its  '  talents '  should  not  be  stowed  away  for  safe
custody,  that  its  revelations  should  be  employed  so  as  to
earn  more,  that  its  present  apathy  is  slowly  but  inevitably
sapping  the  confidence  of  mankind  in  the  genuineness  of
religious  truths,  in  short,  that  theology  could  and  should
be  made  into  an  experimental  science,  seems  never  to
have  occurred  to  any  one  of  them.

And  yet  if  the  churches  should  awaken  to  the  fact  that
religious  truths  need  verification  like  any  others,  and  that
they  offer  to  intelligent  and  persevering  research  rewards  as
great  and  probable  as  those  of  science,  they  could  not  but
recognise  that  they  should  not  merely  tolerate  psychical

1  Cp.  Humanism,  p.  237.


390  STUDIES IN HUMANISM  xvn

research,  but  even  actively  participate  in  it.  For  such
research  might  make  important  contributions  to  the  veri-
fication needed.  The  churches,  therefore,  would  have  to
organise  themselves,  in  part  at  least,  for  the  purpose  of
psychical  research,  primarily,  no  doubt,  along  the  lines
indicated  by  their  several  creeds  ;  and  thus  the  difficulty
about  finding  the  means  and  the  workers  of  a  systematic
inquiry  would  to  a  large  extent  be  overcome.

However  this  may  be,  the  money  will  no  doubt
eventually  be  raised  in  one  way  or  another.  For  the
human  reason  may  surely  be  trusted  finally  to  realise  how
monstrous  it  is  that  for  our  last,  our  longest,  and  most
momentous  journey  alone  we  make  no  preparation,  nor
seek  to  know  the  dangers  or  the  routes,  but  set  out
blindly  and  stolidly  like  brutes,  or  at  best  like  children,
equipped  only  with  the  vaguely-apprehended  consolations
of  a  '  faith '  we  have  never  dared  to  verify.


XVIII
FREEDOM

ARGUMENT

§  I.  Humanism  must  establish  the  reality  of  Freedom.  §  2.  Real  freedom
involves  indetermination.  §  3.  The  difficulty  of  the  question  due  to  a
clash  of  Postulates.  §  4.  Determination  a  postulate  of  science.  Its
methodological  grounds.  §  5.  The  moral  postulate  of  Freedom ;  it
implies  an  alternative  to  wrong  but  not  to  right  action.  §  6.  The
empirical  consciousness  of  freedom  shows  that  moral  choices  are  neither
common  nor  unrestricted  nor  unconnected  with  character.  §  7.  The
reconciliation  of  the  scientific  and  the  moral  postulates.  The  methodo-
logical validity  of  determinism  compatible  with  real,  but  limited,
indetermination.  §  8.  Why  the  alternative  theories  make  no  practical
difference.  §  9.  The  positive  nature  of  freedom  and  its  connexion
with  the  plasticity  of  habits  and  the  incompleteness  of  the  real.  §  10.
Human  freedom  introduces  indetermination  into  the  universe.  §  1 1 .
Is  human  the  sole  freedom  in  the  universe  ?  It  need  not  be  supposed.
The  possibility  of  ascribing  a  measure  of  indetermination  to  all  things.
The  incompleteness  of  the  proof  of  mechanism.  §  12.  The  metaphysical
disadvantages  and  advantages  of  Freedom.  Is  predestinate  perfection
thinkable,  or  an  incomplete  reality  unthinkable  ?

§  I.  IT  is  one  of  the  most  striking  features  of  a  new  philo-
sophy that  it  not  only  breaks  fresh  ground  but  also  brings
up  old  issues  in  a  new  form,  and  exhibits  them  in  a  new
light.  Accordingly,  it  is  natural  enough  that  Humanism
should  have  something  distinctive  to  say  about  the  old
puzzle  concerning  freedom  and  determination.  It  is  in
fact  under  obligation  to  treat  this  subject,  because  it  has
implicitly  committed  itself,  as  its  chief  exponents  have  of
course  been  perfectly  aware.1  It  has  assumed  that  human

1  See  James's  '  Dilemma  of  Determinism '  in  The  Will  to  Believe,  which  is
the  only  profitable  thing  written  on  the  whole  subject  in  English  for  the  last
thirty  years.  My  aim  in  this  essay  is  merely  to  carry  a  little  further  and  to  render
a  little  more  explicit  the  consequences  of  Prof.  James's  principles.  Mr.  R.

391


392  STUDIES IN HUMANISM  xvm

action  is  endowed  with  real  agency  and  really  makes  a
difference  alike  to  the  system  of  truth  and  to  the  world
of  reality.  Without  this  assumption  all  the  talk  about
the  '  making '  of  truth  and  reality  would  be  meaningless
absurdity.  And  the  assumption  itself  would  be  equally
absurd,  if  all  human  actions  were  the  completely  deter-
mined products  of  a  rigidly  necessary  order  of  events.

It  is  obvious,  therefore,  that  unless  the  selections  and
choices  which  are  shown  to  pervade  our  whole  cognitive
function  are  real,  the  system  of  our  science  will  collapse
as  surely  as  our  conception  of  moral  agency,  and  that  there
can  be  no  real  making  of  either  truth  or  reality.  And
conversely,  if  a  philosophy  finds  it  necessary  to  recognise
choices  and  selections  anywhere,  it  must  provide  for  their
ultimate  reality  and  collide  with  a  theory  which
declares  them  to  be  ultimately  illusory.  Our  trust  in  an
immediate  experience  which  presents  us  at  least  with  an
appearance  of  alternatives  and  choices  stands  in  need  of
vindication,  and  if  we  distrusted  this  appearance,  we  should
engender  a  scepticism  about  our  cognitive  procedure  to
which  it  would  be  hard  to  set  limits.  Thus  our  imme-
diate experience  plainly  suggests  the  reality  of  an  indeter-
mination  which  seems  irreconcilable  with  the  assumption
of  determinism  ;  and  immediate  experience  our  Humanism
dare  not  disavow.

Humanism,  therefore,  has  to  defend  and  establish  the
reality  of  this  indetermination,  and  so  to  conceive  it  that
it  ceases  to  conflict  with  the  postulates  of  science,  and
fits  harmoniously  into  its  own  conception  of  existence.
It  has,  in  other  words,  to  make  good  its  conception  of  a
determinable  indetermination  and  to  show  that  it  is
involved  in  the  assertion  of  a  really  evolving,  and  there-
fore as  yet  incomplete,  reality.  This  it  can  do  by  showing
that  the  indetermination,  though  real,  is  not  dangerous,
because  it  is  not  unlimited,  and  because  it  is  determinable,
as  the  growth  of  habit  fixes  and  renders  determinate

F.  A.  Hoernle  has  detected  the  vital  importance  of  this  criticism  of  determinism,
and  gives  an  excellent  account  of  the  Humanist  attitude  towards  it  in  Mind,  N.S.
56,  pp.  462-67.


FREEDOM  393

reactions  which  were  once  indeterminate.  But  no  one
who  is  at  all  acquainted  with  the  complexities  of  human
thought  will  suppose  that  this  goal  of  Humanist  endeavour
will  be  easily  attained.

§  2.  What  we  must  mean  by  '  freedom '  should  be
clear  from  what  has  been  said,  and  it  will  be  unnecessary
to  delay  the  discussion  by  examining  attempts  to  conceive
'  freedom '  in  any  less  radical  fashion.  There  have  been
of  course  a  variety  of  attempts  to  conceive  freedom  as  a
sort  of  determinism,  and  these  have  been  admirably  classi-
fied by  William  James  as  '  soft '  determinisms.  But  under
sufficient  pressure  they  always  harden  into  the  most
adamantine  fatalism,  and  a  '  soft '  determinism  usually
indicates  only  the  amiable  weakness  of  an  intelligence
seeking  for  a  compromise.

Thus  the  notion  of  '  self-determination,'  for  example,
when  thought  out,  will  be  found  to  involve  that  of  self-
creation,  and  it  may  be  doubted  whether  any  being,
actual  or  imagined,  could  completely  satisfy  its  require-
ments, if  we  except  the  jocose  paradoxes  of  a  few  Indian
creation-myths  in  which  the  Creator  first  lays  the  World-
Egg,  and  then  hatches  himself  out  of  it.  In  all  the
ordinary  exemplifications  of  the  notion,  the  being  which
is  supposed  to  determine  itself  is  ultimately  the  necessary
product  of  other  beings  with  which  it  can  no  longer
identify  itself.  We  are  made  by  a  long  series  of  ancestors,
and  these  in  their  turn  were  inevitably  generated  by  non-
human  forces — of  a  purely  physical  kind,  if  science  is  to
be  trusted.  Nor  do  we  escape  this  derivation  of  the  '  self-
determining  '  agent  from  a  not-self  by  postulating  a  non-
natural  cosmic  consciousness,  and  trusting  to  it  to  break
through  the  chains  of  natural  necessity.  For  such  a  being
must  be  conceived  either  as  itself  the  imponent  of  the
natural  necessity  to  which  we  are  enslaved,  or,  if  it  escapes
therefrom  itself,  as  abrogating  it  so  thoroughly  as  to
invalidate  our  whole  faith  in  a  stable  order  of  nature.
Moreover,  in  neither  case  would  such  a  being  be  our
'self  any  more  than  is  the  stellar  nebula,  among  the  last
and  least  of  whose  differentiations  we  are  bidden  to  enrol


394  STUDIES IN HUMANISM  xvm

ourselves.  Any  '  universal  consciousness  '  must  be  common
to  us  all,  and  cannot  therefore  be  that  which  is  peculiar
to  each,  and  the  source  of  our  unique  individuality.  It  is
better,  therefore,  to  accept  the  doctrine  of  our  '  self-deter-
mination '  by  identification  with  the  Absolute  as  sheer
dogma  than  to  try  to  think  it  out.

We  shall  dismiss,  therefore,  from  consideration  any  use
of  '  freedom '  which  does  not  primarily  involve  the  pos-
sibility of  real  alternatives,  between  which  real  choices
have  to  be  made,  which  are  not  merely  illusory.

§  3.  Now  the  difficulty  of  the  question  of  freedom
arises  from  the  fact  that  it  lies  in  the  focus  where  two  of
the  great  postulates  that  guide  our  actions  meet  and
collide.  But  herein  also  lies  its  interest  and  its  instructive-
ness  for  the  theory  of  knowledge.  For  nothing  is  better
calculated  to  reveal  the  nature  of  our  postulation  than  the
way  in  which  we  treat  such  cases.

The  two  postulates  in  question  are  the  Scientific
Postulate  of  Determinism  and  the  Ethical  Postulate  of
Freedom.  The  first  demands  that  all  events  shall  be
conceived  as  fully  determined  by  their  antecedents,  in
order  that  they  may  be  certainly  calculable  once  these
are  known  ;  the  second  demands  that  our  actions  shall
be  so  conceived  that  the  fulfilment  of  duty  is  possible  in
spite  of  all  temptations,  in  order  that  man  shall  be
responsible  and  an  agent  in  the  full  sense  of  the  term.

It  is  clear,  however,  that  these  postulates  conflict.  If
the  course  of  events  really  conforms  to  the  determinist
postulate,  no  alternatives  are  possible.  No  man,  there-
fore, can  act  otherwise  than  he  does  act.  Nor  is  there
any  sense  in  bidding  him  do  otherwise  than  he  does  or
be  other  than  he  is  ;  for  good  or  for  evil  his  predestined
course  seems  to  be  inevitably  marked  out  for  him,  down
to  the  minutest  detail,  by  forces  that  precede  and  trans-
cend his  individual  personality.  To  speak  of  respon-
sibility or  agency  in  respect  to  such  a  being  seems  a
mockery ;  man  is  but  a  transitory  term  in  an  infinite
series  of  necessitated  events  which  recedes  into  the  past,
and  portends  its  extension  into  the  future,  without  end  ;


xvni  FREEDOM  395

so  that  at  no  point  can  any  independence  or  initiative  be
ascribed  to  him.

We  are  confronted,  then,  by  this  dilemma,  that  if  the
course  of  events  is  wholly  determined,  the  whole  of  the
ideas  and  beliefs  and  phraseology  which  imply  the  con-
trary must  rest  upon  illusion.  There  are  not  really  in
the  world  any  alternatives,  disjunctions,  contingencies,
possibilities  ;  hypotheses,  doubts,  conditions,  choices,  selec-
tions are  delusions  of  our  ignorance,  which  could  not  be
harboured  by  a  mind  which  saw  existence  as  it  really  is,
steadily  and  as  a  whole.  If  per  contra  the  course  of
events  is  not  determined,  we  seem  to  reject  the  sole
assumption  on  which  it  can  be  known  and  calculated,  and
to  reduce  nature  to  a  chaos.  We  must  sacrifice  either  our
knowledge  or  ourselves.  For  what  alternative  can  be
found  to  these  imperious  postulates  ?  If  all  things  are
determined,  all  are  irredeemably  swept  along  in  one  vast
inhuman  flow  of  Fate  ;  if  anything  is  undetermined,  we
have  sold  ourselves  to  a  demon  of  caprice  who  can  every-
where disrupt  the  cosmic  order.

It  speaks  well  for  the  levelheadedness  of  humanity
that  it  has  not  allowed  itself  to  be  scared  to  death  by
the  appalling  pretensions  of  these  philosophic  bogies  ;  and
that  on  the  whole  mankind  has  exhibited  an  equanimity
almost  equal  to  the  sangfroid  of  Descartes  when  he  set
himself  to  doubt  methodically  everything  that  existed,
but  resolved  meanwhile  not  to  change  his  dinner  hour.

In  point  of  fact  determinists  and  indeterminists  for  all
practical  purposes  get  on  quite  well  with  each  other  and
with  uncritical  common  sense.  They  profess  to  think  the
universe  a  very  different  thing,  but  they  all  behave  in  very
much  the  same  way  towards  it.

Still  it  is  worth  while  to  try  to  account  for  so  strange
a  situation.  And  if  we  have  the  patience  to  analyse
precisely  the  nature  of  the  conflicting  postulates,  and  of
the  immediate  consciousness  of  freedom,  we  shall  perhaps
perceive  how  the  puzzle  is  constructed.

§  4.  Determinism  is  an  indispensable  Postulate  of  Science
as  such.  Its  sway  extends,  not  merely  over  the  natural


396  STUDIES IN HUMANISM  xvm

sciences,  in  which  it  is  nowadays  often  thought  to
originate  because  its  somewhat  discreditable  ethical  origin
has  been  forgotten,1  but  quite  as  cogently  over  theology
and  ethics.  Unpredictable  miracles  and  incalculable
choices  are  just  as  disconcerting  and  subversive  as  inter-
ruptions of  the  mechanical  sequence  of  happenings.

The  reason  is  that,  always  and  everywhere,  we  are
interested  in  predicting  the  future  behaviour  of  things,
because  we  wish  to  adjust  our  conduct  accordingly.  We
welcome,  therefore,  an  assumption  which  will  constitute
a  general  justification  of  our  habitual  procedure,  and
encourages  us  to  try  to  predict  the  future  of  all  things
from  their  known  antecedents.

The  assumption  of  Determinism,  therefore,  has  primarily
a  moral  significance ;  it  is  an  encouragement  and  not  a
revelation.  It  does  not  in  itself  enable  us  to  predict  how
anything  will  behave ;  to  discover  this  we  have  to
formulate  the  special  '  laws '  of  its  behaviour.  But  it
gives  us  a  general  assurance  to  counteract  the  primary
impression  of  confusion  with  which  the  universe  might
otherwise  afflict  us.  It  justifies  us  in  looking  for  special
laws  and  rejecting  a  priori  the  attribution  of  events  to
lawless  and  incalculable  chance.  Whenever  experience
confronts  us  with  '  facts '  which  exhibit  such  a  character,
we  feel  emboldened  to  declare  them  to  be  mere  '  appear-
ances.' The  facts,  we  affirm,  are  really  law-abiding,  only
we  do  not  yet  know  their  laws.  And  to  a  perfect  know-
ledge all  events  would  be  completely  calculable.  In  short,
by  making  the  determinist  assumption  we  nerve  human
science  to  carry  on  from  age  to  age  its  heroic  struggle
against  the  brute  opacity,  the  bewildering  variety,  of  the
presented  sequence  of  events.

But  there  is  nothing  in  all  this  to  carry  the  assumption

1  This  very  prettily  exemplifies  the  divergence  between  the  origin  of  a  belief
and  its  validity.  For  as  a  matter  of  history  determinism  was  devised  as  an
excuse  for  the  bad  man,  and  arose  out  of  the  Socratic  intellectualism.  We  see
from  Aristotle's  Ethics  (Eth.  Nic.  iii.  ch.  5)  that  in  his  time  the  moralist  had
to  contend  against  the  view  that  vice  is  involuntary  while  virtue  is  voluntary.
Aristotle  meets  it  by  showing  that  the  argument  proves  virtue  to  be  as  involun-
tary as  vice.  This  inference  has  merely  to  be  accepted  to  lead  to  full-blown  deter-
minism. Accordingly  we  find  that  in  the  next  generation  this  was  done,  and
the  '  freewill '  controversy  was  started  between  the  Stoics  and  the  Epicureans.


xvin  FREEDOM  397

out  of  the  realm  of  methodology  into  that  of  metaphysics.
By  conceiving  Determinism  as  a  postulate  we  go  a  very
little  way  towards  showing  that  determination  is  actual
and  complete  and  an  ultimate  fact.  For  it  is  quite  easy
to  accept  it  as  a  methodological  assumption  without  claim-
ing for  it  any  ontological  validity.  So  long  as  we  restrict
ourselves  to  the  methodological  standpoint  any  postulate
is  good  while  it  is  serviceable  ;  its  ultimate  validity  is  not
required  nor  inquired  into  :  nay,  it  may  continue  to  be
serviceable  even  after  it  has  been  discovered  to  be  false.

This  point  may  be  illustrated  by  an  instructive
example  suggested  by  the  late  Prof.  Henry  Sidgwick.1
He  supposes  that  "  we  were  somehow  convinced  that  the
planets  were  endowed  with  Free  Will,"  and  raises  the
question  how  far  this  would  reasonably  impair  our  con-
fidence in  the  stability  and  future  of  the  Solar  System.
Now,  according  to  the  ordinary  account  of  the  matter  as
given  by  a  dogmatic  and  metaphysical  rendering  of
Determinism,  the  consequences  should  be  terrible.  The
fatal  admission  of  indetermination  should  carry  with  it
the  death-knell  of  astronomy,  and  ultimately  of  all  science.
For  of  course  we  should  always  have  to  face  the  con-
tingency that  the  planets  might  depart  incalculably  from
their  orbits,  and  so  our  most  careful  calculations,  our
most  cogent  inferences,  could  always  be  refuted  by  the
event.  '  What  use,  therefore,  is  it  any  longer,'  a  convinced
determinist  might  exclaim,  '  to  try  to  know  anything
when  the  very  basis  of  all  knowing  is  rendered  funda-
mentally unknowable  ? '

But  a  practical  man  of  science  would  decline  to  concur
in  so  alarmist  an  estimate  of  the  situation.  He  would
wait  to  see  whether  anything  alarming  happened.  He
would  reflect  that  after  all  the  planets  might  not  exercise
their  freedom  to  depart  from  their  courses,  and  might
abstain  from  whirling  the  Solar  System  headlong  to
perdition,  at  least  in  his  time.  And  even  if  they  did
vary  their  orbits,  their  vagaries  might  prove  to  be  so
limited  in  extent  that  they  would  not  be  of  practical

1  Methods  of  Ethics,  bk.  i.  ch.  v.  §  3.


398  STUDIES IN HUMANISM  xvm

importance.  In  fact,  the  divergences  might  be  so  small
as  to  be  cloaked  by  the  discrepancies  between  the
calculated  and  the  observed  orbits,  which  until  then  had
been  ascribed  to  the  imperfection  of  our  knowledge.  It
would  only  be  if  de  facto  he  found  himself  a  horrified
spectator  of  heavenly  bodies  careering  wildly  across  the
sky  that  he  would  renounce  the  attempt  to  predict  their
behaviour.  Until  then  he  would  continue  to  make  his
calculations  and  to  compile  his  nautical  almanachs,  hoping
and  praying  the  while  that  the  Sun's  influence  would
prevent  Mars  and  Venus  from  going  wrong.  For  however
much  his  inward  confidence  in  the  practical  value  of  his
labours  might  be  abated,  his  methods  would  be  affected  not
one  jot.  So  long  as  it  was  worth  while  to  calculate  the
planets'  orbits,  he  would  have  to  assume  methodologically
that  they  were  determined  according  to  the  law  of
gravitation,  just  as  before.  He  would  realise,  that  is,
that  the  methodological  use  of  his  deterministic  principle
could  survive  the  discovery  of  its  metaphysical  falsity.
For  since  the  '  free '  act  was  ex  hypothesi  incalculable,  the
truth  of  freedom  as  a  metaphysical  fact  could  yield  no
method  by  which  calculations  could  be  made  and
behaviour  predicted,  and  hence  science  would  unavoid-
ably ignore  it.

We  see,  then,  (i)  that  in  whatever  way  the  meta-
physical question  is  decided,  the  methodological  use  of
the  determinist  principle  is  not  interfered  with,  and
that  science  in  consequence  is  safe,  whatever  metaphysics
may  decree.  And  (2)  the  principle,  and  with  it  science,
in  so  far  as  it  depends  on  the  principle  and  not  on
actual  experience,  is  practically  safe  whatever  the  actual
course  of  events.  For  however  irregularly  and  intricately
things  might  behave,  they  could  not  thereby  force  us
to  renounce  our  postulate.  We  should  always  prefer  to
ascribe  to  our  ignorance  of  the  law  what  might  really  be
due  to  inherent  lawlessness.  The  postulate  would  only
be  abandoned  in  the  last  resort,  when  it  had  ceased  to
be  of  the  slightest  practical  use  to  any  one,  even  as  a
merely  theoretic  encouragement  in  attempting  the  control


xviii  FREEDOM  399

of  events.  (3)  It  should  follow  from  this  that  the
scientific  objection  to  a  doctrine  of  Freedom  was  strictly
limited  to  its  introduction  of  an  unmanageable  contingency
into  scientific  calculations.  It  would  hold  against  an
indeterminism  which  rendered  events  incalculable,  but
not  against  a  belief  in  Freedom  as  such.  A  conception
of  Freedom,  therefore,  which  allowed  us  to  calculate  the
'  free '  event,  would  be  scientifically  quite  permissible.
And  a  conception  of  Freedom  which  issued  in  a  plurality
of  calculable  alternatives  would  be  scientifically  un-
objectionable, even  though  it  would  smother  meta-
physical Determinism  with  kindness  and  surfeit  it
with  an  embarras  de  richesses.  We  should  prepare
ourselves,  therefore,  to  look  out  for  such  a  conception  of
Freedom.

§  5.  In  considering  the  moral  Postulate  of  Freedom
we  should  begin  by  noting  that  the  moralist  has  no
direct  objection  to  the  calculableness  of  moral  acts  and
no  unreasoning  prejudice  in  favour  of  indeterminism.
He  seems  to  need  it  merely  in  order  to  make  real  the
apparent  alternatives  with  which  the  moral  life  confronts
him.  But  he  would  have  as  much  reason  as  the
determinist  to  deplore  the  irruption  into  moral  conduct
of  acts  of  Freedom,  if  they  had  to  be  conceived  as
destructive  of  the  continuity  of  moral  character :  he
would  agree  that  if  such  acts  occurred,  they  could  only
be  regarded  as  the  irresponsible  freaks  of  insanity.  But
he  might  question  whether  his  dissatisfaction  with
determinism  necessarily  committed  him  to  so  subversive
a  conception  of  moral  freedom.  He  would  deny,  in
short,  that  rigid  determination  or  moral  chaos  were  the
only  alternatives.

The  moralist,  moreover,  if  he  were  prescient,  would
admit  that  he  could  perfectly  conceive  a  moral  life
without  indetermination.  Nay,  he  might  regard  a  moral
agent  as  possessed  of  the  loftiest  freedom  whose  conduct
was  wholly  calculable  and  fully  determined,  and  there-
fore absolutely  to  be  trusted.  For  whether  or  not  he
regarded  a  course  of  conduct  as  objectionable  would


400  STUDIES  IN HUMANISM  Xvm

naturally  depend  on  its  moral  character,  and  a  good
life  is  all  the  better  for  resting  on  a  staunch  basis  of
fixed  habits.

As  compared  with  such  a  life,  it  would  of  course
have  to  be  admitted  that  an  indetermination  in  moral
action  which  implied  a  possibility  of  wrong-doing  was
a  stain  upon  the  agent's  character,  and  indicative  of  a
defect  or  incomplete  development  of  the  intelligence
or  moral  nature.  The  moralist,  therefore,  would  agree
with  Aristotle  that  the  divine  ideal  would  be  that  of  a
'  necessary '  being,  fully  determined  in  its  actions  by  its
own  nature,  and  therefore  '  free '  to  follow  its  promptings,
and  to  realise  without  impediment  its  own  perfections.
Why  then,  and  where,  does  the  moralist  come  into  con-
flict with  determinism  ?  It  is  only  when  we  have  to
deal  practically  with  the  bad  man  that  it  becomes  morally
necessary  to  insist  that  an  alternative  to  his  bad  life
must  be  really  possible.  The  bad  man's  life  may  be
habitually  bad,  but  his  case  is  not  hopeless,  unless  he  is
necessitated  to  go  on  in  the  way  he  is  going.  If
alternatives  are  possible,  his  redemption  is  possible.  But
his  redemption  is  hopeless,  if  there  never  was  but  one
way  for  him  and  all  the  world.  The  moralist,  therefore,
demands  an  alternative  to  the  bad  man's  foredoomed
badness,  in  order  to  rationalise  the  moral  universe.

He  wants  to  be  able  to  say  to  the  bad  man  :  '  You
need  not  have  become  the  leper  you  are.  You  might
have  moulded  yourself  otherwise.  Your  villainous
instincts  and  unhappy  circumstances  do  not  exculpate
you.  You  might  have  resisted  your  temptations.  Even
now  your  case  is  not  quite  hopeless.  Your  nature  is  not
wholly  rigid.  In  God's  universe  no  moral  lapses  are
wholly  irretrievable.  Occasions  therefore  will  present
themselves  in  which,  even  for  you,  there  will  be  real
alternatives  to  evil-doing,  and  if  you  choose  to  do  right,
you  may  yet  redeem  yourself.'  But  he  does  not  need
or  desire  to  say  analogously  to  the  good  man  :  '  In  spite
of  the  deeply  ingrained  goodness  of  your  habits,  you  are
still  free  to  do  evil.  May  I  live  to  see  the  day  when


xvin  FREEDOM  401

you  commit  a  crime  and  vindicate thereby  your  moral
freedom  ! '

The  moralist,  in  short,  insists  on  the  reality  of  the
alternative  in  the  one  case  only  ;  he  has  no  objection  to  a
freedom  which  transcends  itself  and  is  consolidated  into
impeccable  virtue.  In  other  words,  he  does  not  wish  to
conceive  all  moral  acts  as  indeterminate,  but  only  some  ;
and  he  has  no  need  whatever  to  conceive  them  as  inde-
terminable. This  alone  suffices  to  constitute  an  essential
difference  between  the  real  demand  for  moral  freedom
and  the  bogey  of  indeterminism  which  determinists  seek
to  put  in  its  place.

It  should  further  be  observed  that  there  is  no  moral
need  to  insist  on  an  unlimited  indetermination  even  in
order  to  impress  the  bad  man.  A  very  slight  degree  of
plasticity  will  suffice  for  all  ethical  demands.  And  in
point  of  fact  no  moralist  or  indeterminist  has  ever  denied
the  reality  of  habits.  Any  notable  alteration  of  habit
or  sudden  conversion  is  always  regarded  as  more  or  less
miraculous,  if  it  tends  in  the  right  direction,  or  as  morbid,
if  it  does  not.  We  see,  therefore,  that  the  moral  postulate
of  Freedom  is  by  no  means  in  itself  an  absurd  or  extreme
one,  even  though  it  is  not  yet  apparent  how  it  can
scientifically  be  satisfied.

§  6.  We  may,  however,  obtain  light  on  this  subject  by
next  considering  the  empirical  consciousness  of  Freedom.
Consciousness  certainly  appears  to  affirm  the  existence  of
real  alternatives,  and  of  real  choices  between  them.  But
it  can  hardly  be  said  to  testify  to  a  freedom  which  is
either  unceasing  or  unrestricted.

( i )  What  we  feel  to  be  '  free '  choices  are  compara-
tively rare  events  in  a  moral  life  of  which  the  greater  part
seems  to  be  determined  by  habits  and  circumstances  leaving
us  neither  a  real,  nor  even  an  apparent,  choice.  Empirically
our  free  choices  occur  as  disturbances  in  the  placid  flow
of  experiences,  as  distinctly  upsetting  to  the  equilibrium
of  our  lives  as  the  crises  in  which  we  feel  '  unfree '  and
constrained  to  do  what  we  would  rather  not.  Both  felt
freedom  and  felt  necessity,  in  short,  are  symptoms  of  a

2  D


402  STUDIES IN HUMANISM  xvm

crisis,  and  mark  the  turning-points  of  a  life.  They  are
in  a  sense  correlative  and  indicative  of  a  certain  (specific-
ally human)  stage  in  moral  development.1

(2)  The  alternatives  which  we  empirically  encounter
never  seem  to  be  unlimited. We  never  feel  '  free '  to  do
anything  and  everything. Intellectually  our  choice  seems
always  to  be  one  between  alternative  ways  of  achieving
an  end,  of  realising  a  good. Morally  it  seems  always  to
be  a  choice  between  '  duty '  and  '  inclination/  '  right '  and
'  wrong.' We  feel  '  free '  to  choose,  but  not  at  random  ;
the  alternatives  are  definitely  labelled  '  wrong  but  pleasant '
and  '  right  but  repugnant.'

(3)  These  alternatives  do  not  seem  unconnected  with
our  character. So  far  from  appearing  to  be  so,  it  is  of
the  essence  of  our  '  choice '  that  both  alternatives  should
appeal to us. Alike  if our  sense  of  duty  had  grown
strong  enough,  and  we  had  no  inclination  to  do  anything
but  what  is right ; and if  evil indulgences had utterly
destroyed  our  sense  of  duty,  and  we  retained  no  inkling
of  what  was  right,  our  choice  would  disappear,  and  with
it  the  feeling  that  we  were  '  free.'

Our  moral  '  freedom,'  therefore,  seems  to  indicate  a
moral  condition  intermediate  between  that  of  the  angel
and  that  of  the  devil.  It  seems  to  lie  in  the  indeterminate-
ness  of  a  character  which  is  not  yet  fixed  in  its  habits  for
good  or  evil,  but  still  sensitive  to  the  appeals  of  both.
Similarly,  the  intellectual  alternatives  would  disappear  for
intelligences  either  vastly  more  perfect  or  vastly  less
perfect  than  our  own.  A  mind  that  could  unerringly  pick
out  the  best  means  for  the  realisation  of  its  ends  would
not  be  perplexed  by  alternatives,  any  more  than  a  mind
that  was  too  stupid  to  perceive  any  but  the  one  most
obvious  course.  In  either  case,  therefore,  the  reality  of
the  alternatives  and  the  feeling  of  '  freedom  '  which  accom-
panies our  choice  seem  to  be  relative  to  definite  moral
and  intellectual  states  which  occur  at  a  definite  stage  of
habituation.  A  mind  to  which  the  truths  of  arithmetic
are  still  contingent,  which  sometimes  judges  12  x  12  to

1  As  I  pointed  out  long  ago  in  Riddles  of  the  Sphinx,  pp.  464-5.


xviii  FREEDOM  403

be  1 44  and  sometimes  not,  is  not  yet  decided  in  its  habits
of  arithmetical  calculation.  A  will  to  which  moral  alter-
natives are  contingent,  which  when  entrusted  with  a  bottle
of  whisky  doubts  whether  to  get  drunk  or  to  stay  sober,
is  not  yet  established  in  its  virtue.

In  both  cases,  no  doubt,  the  contingency  of  our  reaction
betokens  a  defect.  To  a  perfect  knowledge  the  best
course  would  allow  no  inferior  alternative  to  be  enter-
tained ;  a  perfect  will  would  not  be  tempted  by  an  alter-
native to  the  right  course.  To  a  combination,  therefore,
of  perfect  will  with  perfect  knowledge  no  alternatives  of
any  sort  could  exist,  and  no  act  could  ever  be  '  contingent.'

But  why  should  this  prevent  us  from  recognising  the
alternatives  that  seem  to  exist  for  us  ?  It  only  renders
them  relative  to  the  specific  nature  of  man.  It  does  not
render  them  unintelligible.  They  are  not  irruptions  from
nowhere.  They  spring  from  a  character  in  which  they  are
naturally  rooted,  because  that  character  is  still  contingent.

When,  therefore,  the  determinist  attempts  to  represent
our  freedom  as  incalculably  upsetting  the  continuity  of
character,  he  is  stooping  to  sheer  calumny.  If  I  am
perplexed  to  choose  between  a  number  of  possible  means
to  my  end,  it  is  because  just  my  intelligence  presents  just
those  alternatives  to  me  under  just  those  circumstances.
A  mind  whose  make-up,  knowledge,  and  training  were
even  slightly  different  might  have  quite  different  alterna-
tives, or  none  at  all,  or  be  puzzled  in  cases  when  I  should
not  feel  the  slightest  hesitation.  So  too  our  moral  choices
are  personal  ;  they  presuppose  just  the  characters  and
circumstances  they  arise  from.

§  7.  It  is  extremely  important  to  observe  the  precise
character  of  these  empirical  appearances,  because  if  this
is  done,  it  is  easy  to  perceive  in  them  the  real  solution  of
the  whole  crux.  They  directly  suggest  a  way  of  recon-
ciling the  scientific  and  the  ethical  postulate ;  a  way  so
simple  that  it  would  seem  incredible  that  no  one  should
have  perceived  it  before,  had  we  not  learnt  from  long  and
sad  experience  that  the  simplest  solutions  are  usually  the
last  which  the  philosophic  mind  is  able  to  hit  upon  or


404  STUDIES IN HUMANISM  xvm

willing  to  accept,  especially  if  such  solutions  happen  also
to  be  empirically  obvious.  And  yet  what  could  be  simpler
than  the  inferences  from  the  facts  we  have  described  ?  If
it  is  true  that  empirically  the  '  free '  acts  always  seem  to
spring  from  the  given  situation,  if  the  alternatives  always
seem  to  exist  for  a  particular  mind  under  particular
circumstances,  does  it  not  follow  at  once  that  whichever
of  the  alternatives  is  chosen,  it  will  appear  to  be  rationally
connected  with  the  antecedent  circumstances  ?  There  will
be  no  break,  and  no  difficulty  of  transition  from  the  act
to  its  antecedents  and  back  again.

If,  therefore,  the  actual  course  of  events  is  contem-
plated ex  post  facto,  it  will  always  be  possible  to  argue
that  it  is  intelligible  because  it  sprang  from  character  and
circumstances.  And  if  our  purpose  is  deterministic,  it
can  always  be  maintained  that  no  other  course  could
have  been  adopted  ;  that  because  it  was  intelligible,  no
other  course  would  have  been.  But  this  is  manifestly
false  ;  the  alternative,  had  it  been  adopted,  would  have
seemed  equally  intelligible,  just  because  it  was  such  as  to
be  really  entertained  by  the  agent  under  the  circum-
stances, and  as  naturally  rooted  in  them.  After  the  event,
therefore,  the  determinist  is  in  the  position  to  argue
'  heads  I  win,  tails  you  lose ' ;  whatever  the  issue,  he  can
claim  it  as  a  confirmation  of  his  view.  Before  the  event,
on  the  other  hand,  he  was  always  impotent  ;  he  could
always  modestly  disclaim  prediction  (and  therewith  avoid
refutation)  on  the  ground  of  insufficient  knowledge.  His
position,  therefore,  seems  inexpugnable.

And  yet  what  has  happened  has  really  utterly  upset
him  ;  for  we  have  come  upon  a  sort  of  third  alternative
to  Determinism  and  Indeterminism.  The  determinists
had  argued  that  if  the  course  of  events  was  not  rigidly
determined  it  must  be  wholly  indeterminable  ;  that  if  it
was  not  uniquely  calculable,  it  could  not  be  calculated  at
all.  But  here  we  appear  to  have  a  case  in  which  alternative
courses  are  equally  calculable,  and  to  be  confronted  with
a  nature  which  is  really  indeterminate  and  really  deter-
minable  in  alternative  ways,  which  seem  equally  natural


xvm  FREEDOM  405

and  intelligible.  The  determinist,  therefore,  is  really
baffled.  It  no  longer  follows  from  the  rejection  of  his
theory  that  we  must  give  up  calculating  and  understand-
ing the  course  of  things.  If  their  nature  is  such  that  at
various  points  they  engender  real  alternatives,  they  will
engender  a  plurality  of  intelligible  possibilities,  and  the
choice  between  them  will  constitute  a  real  '  freedom,'  with-
out entailing  any  of  the  dreadful  consequences  with  which
determinism  and  indeterminism  both  seemed  to  menace
us.  Thus  we  need  neither  overturn  the  altar  of  science
nor  sacrifice  ourselves  upon  it :  the  freedom,  which  seemed
lost  so  long  as  only  one  course  of  nature  seemed  rational,
intelligible,  and  calculable,  is  restored  when  we  recognise
that  two  or  more  may  seem  intelligible,  because  equally
natural  and  calculable.  We  can  satisfy,  therefore,  the
scientific  postulate  of  calculability  without  denying  the
reality  of  the  alternatives  which  our  moral  nature  seems
both  to  require  and  to  attest.  For  we  can  confidently
lay  it  down  that  no  event  will  ever  occur  which  will  not
seem  intelligibly  connected  with  its  antecedents  after  it
has  happened.  It  will,  therefore,  be  judged  to  have  been
calculable,  even  though  this  inference  will  contain  a
certain  modicum  of  illusion.  For  though,  no  doubt,  if
we  had  known  enough,  we  might  have  calculated  it  out
as  a  real  possibility,  we  could  not  have  made  sure  that
just  this  possibility  and  not  any  of  its  alternatives  would
actually  be  realised.  But  practically  this  is  more  than
enough  for  science,  and  would  admit  of  far  greater  success
in  calculation  than  the  deficiencies  of  our  knowledge  now
actually  concede  to  us.

It  must  not  be  thought,  however,  that  the  conception
of  Freedom  we  have  thus  arrived  at  constitutes  a  refuta-
tion of  Determinism.  Methodological  postulates  as  such
cannot  be  refuted  ;  they  can  only  be  disused.  And  meta-
physical dogmas  also,  that  is,  ultimate  attitudes  of
thought,  cannot  be  refuted  ;  they  can  only  be  chosen  or
rejected  ;  for  they  form  the  foundations  on  which  our
demonstrations  rest.  Determinism,  then,  as  a  scientific
postulate,  has  not  been  endangered  ;  as  a  metaphysical


406  STUDIES IN HUMANISM  Xvm

creed  it  reduces  itself,  like  all  such  ultimate  assumptions,
to  a  matter  of  free  choice.  And  herein,  in  this  case,  lies
a  paradox,  perhaps  ;  for  as  we  cannot  vindicate  our  free-
dom unless  we  are  determined  to  be  free,  so  we  cannot
compel  those  to  be  free  who  are  free  to  be  determined,
and  prefer  to  think  it  so.1

§  8.  But  though  this  paradox  may  be  left  to  the  care-
ful consideration  of  determinists,  we  can  now  resolve
another — that  which  was  noted  in  §  5 — as  to  the  charming
agreement  which  obtains  between  determinists,  libertarians,
and  ordinary  folk,  in  their  practical  behaviour.  For  if  the
postulates  are  really  methodological  necessities,  every  one
in  his  practice  will  have  to  use  them,  however  he  may
think  about  them  metaphysically,  and  whether  or  not  he
thinks  about  them  at  all.  The  theoretic  divergences,
therefore,  in  our  views  will  make  no  practical  difference  ;
both  parties  will  use  both  postulates,  and  will  have  a
right  to  do  so.

(i)  Every  one  has  to  take  it  for  granted  that  the
course  of  events  is  calculable  in  so  far  as  he  is  interested
in  forecasting  it.  This,  indeed,  is  merely  a  periphrasis  of
the  statement  that  determinism  is  a  methodological  postu-
late. The  libertarian,  therefore,  has  the  same  right  as
any  one  else  to  treat  events  as  calculable,  to  try  to  calcu-
late all  he  can  and  knows.  He  may  be  conscious  that
this  aim  can  never  be  fully  realised,  that  things  are  not
wholly  calculable  ;  but  while  he  calculates  he  must  hope
that  they  will  behave  as  if  they  were  determined,  and  will
not  frustrate  his  efforts  by  exhibiting  their  freedom.
Even  if  he  fails,  it  will  be  his  interest  to  attribute  his
lack  of  success,  not  to  the  real  contingency  he  has
admitted  into  nature,  but  rather  to  the  defects  of  his
knowledge.  He  will  wholly  agree,  therefore,  with  the
determinist  that  if  he  had  known  more,  his  calculation
would  have  succeeded.  And  he  would  defend  himself  by
urging  that  anyhow  the  contingency  introduced  into  our

1  As  William  James  well  says,  freedom  "  ought  to  be  freely  espoused  by  men
who  can  equally  well  turn  their  backs  upon  it.  In  other  words,  our  first  act  of
freedom,  if  we  are  free,  ought  in  all  inward  propriety  be  to  affirm  that  we  are
free  "  (  Will  to  Believe,  p.  146).


xvin  FREEDOM  407

world  by  our  ignorance  must  vastly  exceed  that  due  to
any  real  indetermination  in  the  nature  of  things.

In  dealing,  on  the  other  hand,  with  cases  which  evoke
the  moral  postulate  of  freedom,  the  libertarian  will,  of
course,  recognise  the  reality  of  the  freedom  he  has
assumed.  But  this  will  not  debar  him  from  calculating.
He  will  assume  the  indetermination  in  the  nature  he  is
studying  to  be  real,  and  calculate  the  alternative  courses
to  which  it  can  be  supposed  to  lead.  And  if  he  has  a
pretty  clear  conception  of  the  nature  of  his  '  free '  fellow-
men,  his  success  in  forecasting  their  behaviour  will  not
fall  sensibly  short  of  his  success  in  calculating  that  of
more  remote  natures  which  he  takes  to  be  fully
determined.

(2)  The  determinist  regards  the  scientific  postulate  as
the  expression  of  an  ultimate  truth  about  reality.  But
in  practice  it  reduces  itself  to  the  expression  of  a  pious
hope.  '  If  I  knew  all  the  antecedents,  I  could  calculate
all  the  consequences,'  is  an  aspiration  and  a  wish  rather
than  a  positive  achievement.  This  was  why  we  treated
it  in  §  4  as  essentially  a  moral  encouragement  to
endeavour.  Even  the  determinist,  moreover,  must  be
dimly  conscious  that  his  wish  will  never  be  granted  him,
that  the  whole  course  of  events  never  will  be  calculated
by  him.  Why,  then,  should  he  repine  at  learning  that
the  impossibility  of  his  ideal  rests  ultimately  on  the
inherent  nature  of  reality  rather  than  on  the  ineradicable
weakness  of  his  mind  ?  Practically  it  makes  no  difference.
He  finds  de  facto  that  he  cannot  calculate  all  events.  He
tries  them  all,  just  like  the  libertarian.  But  he  is  baffled
in  just  the  same  way.  Both,  therefore,  must  agree  that
contingencies  exist  in  their  common  world  which  they
cannot  calculate.  To  deny  their  ultimate  reality  is  no
practical  assistance  ;  it  only  adds  the  annoyance  that  we
must  conceive  ourselves  to  be  subject  to  illusion  and
incapable  of  perceiving  things  as  they  really  are.

On  the  other  hand,  in  dealing  with  moral  contingencies
the  determinist  has  to  treat  them  as  just  as  real  as  the
libertarian.  However  firmly  he  may  be  convinced  that


408  STUDIES  IN HUMANISM  xvm

his  neighbour's  acts  are  rigidly  determined,  he  does  not
always  feel  certain  that  he  knows  his  nature  sufficiently
to  predict  them.  He  is  fortunate  if  he  can  feel  sure
what  alternatives  are  most  likely  to  appeal  to  him,  and
calculate  the  consequences  and  adjust  his  own  course
accordingly.  In  practice,  therefore,  he  will  do  just  as  the
libertarian  did :  he  will  have  to  recognise,  that  is,  real
but  calculable,  alternatives  which  exist,  at  all  events
for  him.

In  other  words,  the  pragmatic  difference  between  the
rival  theories  tends  to  be  evanescent ;  in  practice  both
parties  have  to  pocket  their  metaphysics  and  to  act
sensibly ;  in  theory  the  differences  are  such  that  their
influence  on  practice  is  very  remote,  and  mainly  emotional.
For  common  sense,  again,  there  are  no  practical  alter-
natives ;  the  whole  metaphysical  controversy,  therefore,
seems  nugatory,  and  is  regarded  with  the  utmost
equanimity.  And  is  not  this  all  as  it  should  be  in  a
universe  in  which  thought  is  secondary  to  action  ?

§  9.  We  have,  however,  pushed  forward  our  doctrine
of  Freedom  somewhat  rapidly,  and  shall  do  well  to
analyse  its  nature  in  order  to  secure  our  ground.

We  should  realise,  in  the  first  place,  that  we  took  a
risk  in  declaring  the  immediate  consciousness  of  Freedom
to  contain  the  solution  of  the  puzzle.  There  is  always  a
risk  in  taking  appearances  to  contain  ultimate  truth.
But  it  is  not  so  serious  as  to  take  them  as  containing  no
truth  at  all.  And  to  our  Humanism  it  will  naturally
seem  a  better  risk  to  take  to  trust  appearances  than  to
invalidate  them  for  no  sufficient  reason.  Let  us  there-
fore bravely  accept  the  risk  and  pose  our  critics  by
asking,  Why,  after  all,  should  the  alternatives  which
seem  to  be  real  not  be  really  real  ?  Because  to  regard
them  as  real  renders  science  impossible  and  life  chaotic  ?
That  allegation  we  have  shown  to  be  untrue.  Science  is
in  no  danger  from  our  doctrine,  and  for  the  purposes  of
life  we  all  assume  the  reality  of  contingencies.  Because
we  do  not  yet  understand  the  positive  nature  of  Freedom,
beyond  this  that  it  involves  indetermination  ?  And  because


xvm  FREEDOM  409

a  real  indetermination  ultimately  leads  to  a  metaphysically
unthinkable  view  of  the  universe  ?

These  latter  suggestions  are  more  deserving  of  con-
sideration. And  so  let  us  first  explore  the  positive
nature  of  the  sort  of  Freedom  we  have  seemed  to  find,
considering  it  empirically  and  psychologically,  before
attempting  to  evaluate  its  metaphysical  significance.

There  does  not  seem  to  be  any  reason  why  we  should
not  accept  the  empirical  reality  of  psychological  indeter-
mination, once  we  have  really  disabused  our  minds  of
the  prejudice  engendered  by  a  misconception  of  the
scientific  postulate.  Such  indetermination,  indeed,  appears
to  be  a  natural  incident  in  the  growth  of  a  habit,  and  the
capacity  for  retaining  a  certain  plasticity  and  growing  new
habits  seems  to  be  essential  to  existence  in  a  universe
which  has,  on  the  one  hand,  acquired  a  certain  stability
and  order,  and  yet,  on  the  other,  is  still  evolving  new
conditions,  to  which  novel  adjustments  are  from  time  to
time  required.  A  nature,  therefore,  which  was  entirely
indeterminate  in  its  reactions,  and  one  which  was  entirely
rigid  and  determinate,  would  alike  be  inefficacious  and
unsuited  to  our  world.  To  live  in  it  we  need  a  certain
degree  of  plasticity  and  the  intelligence  to  perceive  when
better  adjustments  can  be  effected  by  varying  our  habits
of  reaction.  This  power,  indeed,  seems  to  be  the  essence
of  our  '  reason.' l  Why  then  should  philosophy  insist  on
regarding  this  plasticity  as  quite  illusory  ?

It  appears,  further,  to  be  a  misapprehension  when  this
plasticity  of  habit  is  regarded  as  conflicting  with  the  con-
ception of  '  law.'  Law,  subjectively  regarded  from  the
standpoint  of  a  knower  trying  economically  to  conceive
the  universe,  means  regularity,  and  therefore  calculable-
ness  and  trustworthiness.  Phrasing  it  intellectualistically,
this  constitutes  the  '  intelligibility '  of  the  natural  order.
Regarded  objectively,  however,  '  law '  means  nothing  but
habit.  The  '  laws  of  nature/  however  they  may  be
thought  to  originate,  are  de  facto  the  established  habits  of
things,  and  their  constancy  is  an  empirical  fact  of

1  Cp.  Essay  xvi.  §  4.


410  STUDIES IN  HUMANISM  xvm

observation.  It  is  from  experience  alone  that  we  learn
that  nature  in  general  conforms  itself  to  our  postulate  of
regularity  and  renders  it  so  applicable  that  we  can  take
it  to  be  '  true.'

But  experience  never  fully  warrants  the  assertion  that
the  habits  of  nature  are  absolutely  fixed  and  constant.
For  all  we  can  prove  to  the  contrary,  even  the  most
fundamental  laws  may  be  changing  —  let  us  hope
'  evolving '  into  something  better.  Over  large  tracts  of
nature — wherever  we  can  trace  the  working  of  intelligence
— the  laws  do  not  even  appear  to  have  an  absolute
constancy.  All  this,  however,  will  not  interfere  with  our
methodological  assumption  of  constancy  unless  the  changes
in  habits  are  very  rapid  ;  as  rapid,  say,  as  the  changes  in
the  fashions.  Nor  will  it  necessarily  render  the  course  of
things  unintelligible.  On  the  contrary,  we  have  seen  that
adaptive  innovations  in  habits,  intelligent  divergences  from
law,  are  the  very  essence  of  '  reason,'  and  if  the  changes
of  fashions  are  irrational  in  their  frequency,  they  are  at
the  same  time  rational,  as  satisfying  the  desire  to  display
one's  credit  with  one's  dressmaker  or  tailor.

There  is  then  no  real  psychological  difficulty  about  the
idea  that  the  plasticity  of  habit  carries  with  it  a  certain
indetermination,  which,  however,  is  intelligible  and  calcul-
able and  salutary.  The  only  difficulty  really  involved
lies  in  conceiving  a  nature  which  is,  as  it  were,  divided
against  itself  and  advancing  at  different  rates  in  different
parts,  in  such  a  way  that  the  '  desires '  may  engender
internal  friction  by  persistently  hankering  after  ingrained
habits  of  behaviour  long  after  the  '  reason  '  has  condemned
their  inappropriateness  under  the  now  altered  circum-
stances. And  this  difficulty  no  doubt  deserves  more
attention  than  psychologists  and  moralists  have  yet
bestowed  upon  it.  But  in  whatever  way  it  may  be
explicable,  it  can  hardly  be  denied  that  something  of  the
sort  really  exists  ;  and  for  our  present  purpose  this
suffices.

Metaphysically,  on  the  other  hand,  the  difficulty  which
the  existence  of  indetermination  involves  is  a  very  big


XVIH  FREEDOM  411

one.  If,  that  is,  it  is  admitted  to  exist  at  all,  it  touches
the  last  problems  of  ontology.  For  it  resolves  itself
into  the  question  of  the  possibility  of  thinking  a  really
incomplete  reality,  a  world  which  is  really  plastic  and
growing  and  changing.  And  the  a  priori  sort  of  meta-
physics has  always  found  the  reality  of  change  an  in-
superable stumbling-block.1  We,  on  the  other  hand,  may
think  the  reality  of  change  too  evident  to  argue  over,  we
may  deem  the  objections  raised  against  it  silly  quibbles,
we  may  see  that  to  deny  it  only  leads  to  phantom
universes  having  no  relation  to  our  own  ;  but  we  must
recognise  the  reality  of  a  formidable  prejudice.  It  will
be  more  prudent,  therefore,  to  postpone  the  final  tussle
with  this  prejudice  till  we  have  considered  (i)  how  far  the
consequences  of  the  human  Freedom  we  have  conceived
may  be  traced  throughout  the  world  ;  (2)  how  far  some-
thing analogous  can  be  attributed  to  the  other  existences
in  the  world  ;  and  (3)  how  we  should  value  a  world  whose
nature  is  ultimately  '  free.'

§  10.  If  human  freedom  is  real,  the  world  is  really
indeterminate.  This  is  easily  demonstrable.  For  if  we
really  have  the  power  to  choose  between  alternatives,  the
course  of  things  will  necessarily  differ  according  as  we  do
one  thing  or  an  other.  This  follows  alike  whether  we
conceive  the  rest  of  the  world  to  be  fully  determined,  or
to  have  itself  some  power  of  spontaneous  choice.  If  a
single  variable  factor  is  introduced  among  a  mass  of
invariable  antecedents,  the  consequents  will  needs  be
different.  If  it  is  introduced  amid  a  mass  of  antecedents
which  themselves  are  variable,  the  final  outcome  may
indeed  remain  the  same,  but  only  if  these  other  factors
set  themselves  intelligently  to  counteract  and  thwart  the
first.  Thus  the  intermediate  course  of  events  will  yet
be  different,  seeing  that  it  will  have  been  altered  to
encounter  the  first  variable.  In  either  case,  therefore,
there  will  be  alternative  courses  of  history,  and  a  real
indetermination  in  a  universe  which  harbours  a  free  agent.

Humanly  speaking,  the  first  case  seems  clearly  to  be

1  Cp.  Essay  ix.  §  i.


412  STUDIES  IN  HUMANISM  xvm

congruous  with  the  facts.  Human  purposes  have  not  all
been  thwarted  ;  they  have  left  their  mark  upon  the  earth
and  made  it  a  very  different  place  from  what  it  would
otherwise  have  been.  Of  course,  however,  we  may  hold
that  their  realisation  has  occurred  only  in  so  far  as  it  has
not  thwarted  an  ulterior  and  diviner  purpose  which  has
a  countermove  to^every  human  sin  and  error.1

This  consequence,  then,  of  human  freedom  is  too  clear
to  be  denied.  It  can  only  be  minimised.  After  all,  it
may  be  said,  what  does  human  freedom  come  to  ?  It  can
only  effect  infinitesimal  changes  on  the  surface  of  the
earth.  It  cannot  divert  the  stars  in  their  courses,  it
cannot  even  regulate  the  motions  of  the  earth,  it  cannot
ward  off  the  ultimate  collapse  of  the  Solar  System.

To  which  it  may  be  replied  (i)  that  our  agency  is
not  necessarily  negligible  because  it  cannot  control  the
cosmic  masses  ;  (2)  that  our  interests  are  chiefly  confined
to  the  earth's  surface,  and  that  it  matters  not  a  little
whether  or  not  we  can  manipulate  that;  (3)  that  the  extent
to  which  we  can  alter  the  course  of  things  depends  on
the  extent  to  which  we  can  render  things  plastic  to  our
purposes  ;  (4)  that  with  audacity  and  study  we  may  find
the  world  far  more  plastic  than  as  yet  we  dare  to  think.
Science  is  as  yet  only  beginning,  and  mankind  is  only
beginning  to  trust  itself  to  science,  which  as  yet  hardly
dares  to  speculate  about  all  that  it  might  possibly  attempt.
Lastly  (5),  even  differences  of  choices  which  at  first
seem  infinitesimal  may  lead  to  growing  divergences,  and
ultimately  constitute  all  the  difference  between  a  world  in
which  we  are  saved  and  one  in  which  we  are  damned.

On  the  whole,  therefore,  we  shall  do  well  not  to  think
too  meanly  of  our  powers,  but  to  reflect  rather  on  the
responsibilities  involved  even  in  our  most  trivial  choices.
If  we  can  really  make  our  '  fate '  and  remake  our  world,
it  behoves  us  to  make  sure  that  they  shall  not  be  made
amiss.

§  1 1.  It  will  next  be  politic  to  face  an  objection  which
has  probably  long  been  simmering  in  our  readers'  minds.

1  Cp.  James, Will  to  Believe,  pp.  181-2.


xvin  FREEDOM  413

'  Is  it  credible,'  they  will  incline  to  ask,  '  that  man  alone
should  be  free  and  form  an  exception  to  the  rest  of  the
universe  ?  And  if  the  rest  of  the  universe  is  determined,
is  it  not  probable  that  man  will  be  likewise  ? '

Now  it  cannot  be  admitted  that  our  view  of  man
should  necessarily  be  falsified  in  order  to  accommodate  it
to  our  beliefs  about  the  rest  of  the  universe.  But  at  the
same  time  the  human  mind  finds  exceptions  irksome,  and
is  disposed  to  question  them.  We  can,  however,  get  rid
of  this  '  exception  '  in  another  way.  Instead  of  sacrificing
our  freedom  to  cosmic  analogies,  let  us  try  to  trace  some-
thing analogous  to  our  freedom  throughout  the  universe.

It  is  evident,  in  the  first  place,  that  a  higher  and  more
perfect  being  than  man,  if  the  intelligent  operations  of
such  a  one  are  traceable  in  the  world,  would  be  both
1  freer '  than  man,  that  is  more  able  to  achieve  his  ends
and  less  often  thwarted,  and  also  more  determinate  in
his  action,  and  more  uniform  and  calculable  in  the
execution  of  his  purposes.  It  is  clear,  therefore,  that  a
God  '  would  work  by  '  law '  rather  than  by  '  miracle,'  in
proportion  as  he  really  controlled  the  world,  and  that
consequently  it  would  be  very  easy  to  misinterpret  his
agency,  and  to  ascribe  it  to  a  mechanical  necessity  ;
which  of  course  is  what  has  usually  been  done.

Turning  next  to  beings  lower  in  the  scale  than  our-
selves, we  have  of  course  good  reason  to  attribute  to  the
higher  animals  a  mental  constitution  very  like  our  own.
And  that  should  carry  with  it  something  very  like  our
sense  of  freedom.  A  dog,  for  example,  appears  to  be
subject  to  conflicting  impulses,  to  doubt  and  hesitate,
to  attend  selectively  and  choose,  and  sometimes  to  exhibit
a  spontaneity  which  baffles  calculation  almost  as  com-
pletely as  that  of  his  master.  We  can  indeed  imagine
the  great  motives  that  broadly  determine  his  conduct,  but
in  some  respects  his  motives  are  harder  to  appreciate,
because  his  mind  is  remoter  from  our  own.

As  we  descend  the  scale  of  life  these  difficulties  grow
more  marked  ;  our  spiritual  sympathy  with,  and  inward
understanding  of,  the  conduct  we  observe  grow  less  and


414  STUDIES IN  HUMANISM  xvm

less.  The  feelings  which  prompt,  and  the  motives  which
impel,  to  the  spontaneous  acts  we  notice  grow  ever  more
mysterious.  But  externally  we  can  still  predict  the  lower
animal's  behaviour.  We  do  not  understand  the  why  of
its  spontaneous,  random  motions.  But  we  observe  that
these  variations  lie  between  certain  narrow  limits,  which
are  narrowed  down  as  intelligence  is  lowered.  An  amoeba
never  does  anything  startling  to  shock  the  biologist.
Hence  as  intelligence  diminishes  or  grows  alienated  from
our  own,  conduct  becomes  more  uniform,  and  therefore  in
a  way  more  calculable.  Only  it  is  in  another  way.  We
have  become  external  spectators  of  acts  to  which  we  have
lost  the  inner  clue.

Nevertheless  when  we  descend  to  the  inanimate,  and
meet  apparently  perfect  regularity,  we  feel  that  we  have
reached  the  true  home  of  mechanical  '  law '  which  knows
no  breaking,  disturbed  by  no  intelligence,  and  varied  by
no  vestige  of  spontaneous  choice.  But  we  have  no
inward  comprehension  whatever  of  the  processes  we  watch.
Why  should  material  masses  gravitate  inversely  as  the
square  of  the  distance  ?  What  satisfactions  can  they
derive  from  this  ratio  in  particular  ?  Why  should  atoms
dance  just  in  the  mazy  rhythms  they  severally  choose  ?
Why  should  electrons  carry  just  the  '  charges '  they
empirically  bear  ?  All  this  is  sheer,  brute,  uncompre-
hended  fact,  of  which  no  philosophy  since  Hegel  has  had
the  folly  to  essay  an  a  priori  explanation.  But  little  we
care,  or  scientifically  need  care,  so  long  as  it  all  happens
with  a  '  mechanical '  regularity  which  can  be  accurately
calculated.

It  is  convenient,  therefore,  to  assume  that  the  inorganic
is  the  realm  of  rigid  mechanism  and  devoid  of  every  trace
of  spontaneous  spirit.  But  this  is  an  assumption  which
is  strictly  indemonstrable.  The  regularity  to  which  we
trust  is  no  adequate  proof.  For,  taken  in  large  masses,
human  actions  show  a  similar  constancy.  Averages
remain  regular  and  calculable,  even  though  their  indi-
vidual components  may  vary  widely  and  incalculably  from
the  mean.  Under  stable  and  normal  conditions  of  society


XVHI  FREEDOM  415

the  statistics  of  births,  marriages,  and  deaths  do  not  vary
appreciably  from  year  to  year.  Yet  some  of  these  events
are  usually  set  down  to  individual  choices.

Now  in  observing  the  inorganic  we  are  dealing  with
the  world's  constituents  in  very  large  numbers.  Physical
and  chemical  experiments  operate  with  many  thousands
and  millions  of  millions  at  a  time.  The  least  speck
visible  under  the  microscope  is  composed  of  atoms  by  the
million.  Consequently  the  regularity  we  observe  may
very  well  be  that  of  an  average.  If,  then,  a  single  atom
here  or  there  displayed  its  extraordinary  intelligence  or
original  perverseness  by  refusing  to  do  as  the  rest,  how
pray  should  it  ever  be  detected  by  us  ?  How  should  we
ever  suspect  that  the  process  rested  upon  choice  and  was
not  utterly  mechanical  ?

Thirdly,  it  must  be  borne  in  mind  that  we  may  fail  to
observe  the  differences  in  the  behaviour  of  individual
atoms  or  electrons  merely  because  our  experiments  are
too  ignorant  and  clumsy  to  discriminate  between  them,
so  as  to  tempt  some,  without  alluring  others.  Their
complete  qualitative  identity  is  inferred  from  experiments
which  are  as  crude  and  barbarous  as  would  be  experiments
which  concluded  to  the  non-existence  of  human  indi-
viduality from  the  fact  that  when  men  were  hurled  over  a
precipice  in  large  quantities  they  were  all  equally  dashed
to  pieces.

How  coarse  our  methods  are  we  usually  discover  only
when  they  are  improved.  Thus  it  long  seemed  inexplicable
how  a  grain  of  musk  could  retain  its  fragrance  for  years
without  sensibly  losing  weight,  if  this  quality  really  rested
on  the  emission  of  particles ;  but  this  mystery  is  now  to
a  large  extent  solved  by  the  discovery  of  radio-activity.
It  has  turned  out  that  the  electroscope  is  a  far  more
delicate  instrument  than  the  most  sensitive  balance,  which
remains  unaffected  by  the  violent  propulsion  of  electrons
which  accompanies  the  disruption  of  atomic  matter.  And
so  the  whole  doctrine  of  the  indestructibility  of  matter
may  be  radically  wrong,  and  its  apparent  proofs  due
merely  to  the  roughness  of  our  former  measurements.  In


4i6  STUDIES  IN HUMANISM  xvm

experimenting  with  radium  we  have  managed  to  select
those  '  atoms '  which  are  nearing  their  explosive  end,  and
to  concentrate  them  until  their  death  agonies  grow  visible
to  us  ;  but  concerning  the  generation  of  atoms  we  are  still
in  the  dark,  though  we  suspect  a  good  deal,  enough  at
any  rate  to  entertain  the  idea  that  the  constancy  of  matter
may  be  merely  the  stability  of  an  average.  Similarly  it
is  possible  that  long -continued  fractionations  might  sift
out  the  chief  individual  differences  in  all  the  chemical
'  elements.'  It  is  therefore  quite  fallacious  to  infer  that
things  have  a  rigid  and  unalterable  nature,  because  they
show  their  indifference  to  us  by  reacting  alike  to  modes
of  treatment  which  to  our  eyes  seem  different.  In  view
of  our  ignorance  of  their  inner  nature  this  may  only  show
that  differences  which  seem  important  to  us  do  not  seem
important  to  them.1

Deficient  as  our  observations  are  in  delicacy,  they  are
still  more  deficient  in  endurance.  The  evidence  that  the
'  laws '  of  nature  remain  really  constant  is  hardly  complete
even  for  the  last  few  centuries.  The  discrepancies,  for
example,  between  the  historically  recorded  and  the  retro-
spectively calculated  eclipses  of  the  sun  and  the  moon  are
too  great  to  be  compatible  with  existence  of  our  present
planetary  orbits  even  a  few  centuries  ago.2  To  explain
them  we  have  to  choose  between  the  assumptions  that  our
records  are  false,  that  the  moon  is  slowly  escaping  us,  that
the  earth's  diurnal  rotation  is  slowing  down,  that  the  sun's
motion  or  attraction  is  altering,  or  that  the  law  of  gravita-
tion is  changing,  or  whatever  combination  of  these  and
other  hypotheses  we  can  devise  to  fit  the  facts  more
nearly.  To  guide  that  choice  we  have  only  the  vague
methodological  maxim  that  it  is  well  to  try  first  such
hypotheses  as  involve  the  least  disturbance  of  the  accepted
system  of  science.  But  even  the  greatest  readjustments
may  be  needed.  If  now  we  supposed  the  primary  laws
of  nature  to  be  changing  slowly  and  continuously,  most  of

1  Cp.  Humanism,  p.  n,  note.

2  See  an  article  on "Ancient  Eclipses"  by  Prof. P. H. Cowell  in  Nature,
No.  1905.


xvni  FREEDOM  417

the  evidence  which  is  now  held  to  imply  their  rigid
constancy  would  be  seen  to  be  inconclusive.  Thus  even
in  the  inorganic  world  habits  might  be  plastic  and  '  laws '
might  be  gradually  evolving.

If  this  be  so,  it  is,  moreover,  clear  that  we  ourselves
might  take  a  part  in  determining  this  evolution.  Our
operations  might  induce  things  to  develop  their  habits  in
one  way  rather  than  another,  and  so  we  should  literally
be  altering  the  laws  of  nature.  It  is  even  permissible  to
surmise  that  we  may  already  sometimes  have  accom-
plished this.  The  chemist,  for  example,  seems  often  so
to  play  upon  the  acquired  habits  of  his  substances  as
to  bring  into  existence  compounds  which  but  for  him
would  never  have  existed,  and  never  could  have  existed
in  a  state  of  nature.  And  so  he  may  induce  new
habits  ;  for  once  these  combinations  have  been  formed,
they  may  leave  permanent  traces  on  the  natures  that
take  part  in  them,  and  so  alter  their  '  affinities '  for  the
future.

The  speculations  whereby  we  have  illustrated  the
possibility  that  individuality,  plasticity,  and  freedom  may
pervade  also  the  inorganic  world  will  seem  wild  and
unfamiliar.  But  they  are  such  that  science  may  some  day
verify  them,  if  they  are  looked  for.  At  present  we  blind
ourselves  to  their  possibility  by  making  the  methodo-
logical assumptions  of  determinism  and  mechanism.  But
it  should  be  clearly  confessed  that  it  is  entirely  possible
that  the  world  may  now  be,  and  may  always  have  been,
such  as  to  contain  a  certain  indetermination  throughout
its  structure,  which  we  have  only  failed  to  discover  because
we  have  closed  our  eyes  to  it,  in  order  to  have  a  more
easily  calculable  universe.  If,  however,  that  postulate  is
modified  so  that '  free  '  acts  also  are  conceived  as  calculable,
our  eyes  may  be  opened,  as  it  were  by  magic,  and  the
evidences  of  '  freedom '  may  everywhere  pop  up  and  stare
us  in  the  face.

§  12.  We  come  at  last  to  the  ultimate  metaphysical
advantages  and  disadvantages  of  the  belief  in  Freedom
which  we  have  developed.  That  it  has  its  drawbacks  is

2  E


418  STUDIES IN  HUMANISM  xvm

fairly  obvious.  Indeterminism,  even  when  it  has  been
tamed,  i.e.  limited,  and  rendered  calculable  and  determin-
able,  still  means  chance ;  and  chance  means  risk  ;  and
risk  a  possibility  of  failure.  Our  craven  instincts,  there-
fore, our  indolence,  our  diffidence,  will  always  demand  an
assurance  of  salvation,  a  universe  which  cannot  go  astray,
but  is  predestined  to  be  perfect.

The  prejudices  thus  engendered  are  probably  among
the  strongest  of  the  secret  motives  which  inspire  the
absolutist's  aversion  from  Pragmatism.  As  Prof.  Muir-
head  opportunely  confesses,  the  admission  of  contingency
seems  to  turn  the  universe  into  "  a  joint-stock  enterprise
under  God  and  Co.,  Limited,  without  insurance  against
accident" l  and  this  would  be  very  much  of  a  pis  alter
to  predestinate  perfection.

But  is  predestinate  perfection  possible  or  really  think-
able ?  And  what  is  the  '  insurance  against  accident '
offered  us  by  the  agents  of  the  Absolute  really  and  truly-
worth  ?

If  the  universe  as  we  know  it  is  predestined  to  any-
thing, it  is  predestined  to  go  on  as  it  is  upon  its  fatal
course.  For  the  universe,  we  are  assured,  contains  no
free  agents,  human  or  divine,  to  work  out  beneficial  trans-
formations in  its  nature.  It  is  predestined,  therefore,  to
be  an  unmeaning  dance  of  cosmic  matter,  diversified  at
intervals  by  catastrophes,  as  blind  blundering  suns  go
crashing  into  each  other's  systems  and  make  holocausts
of  the  values  and  polities  which  some  powerless  race
of  planetary  pygmies  has  painfully  evolved.  It  is
predestined  to  a  fate  which  nothing  can  avert,  which
no  one  can  mitigate  or  improve.

And  to  make  our  '  insurance '  doubly  sure,  we  are
furthermore  assured  that  this  universe,  which  extorts  its
tribute  of  tears  from  every  feeling  breast,  is  already  perfect,
if  only  we  could  see  it — which  being  necessarily  '  finite  '  we
cannot !  There  is  not,  therefore,  the  slightest  reason
why,  for  finite  minds,  the  universe  should  ever  seem,  or
become,  more  satisfactory  than  now  it  is.  The  absolutist

1  Hib&ert  Journal,  vol.  iv.  p.  460. Italics  mine.


xvin  FREEDOM  419

in  his  determinism  at  bottom  entirely  agrees  with
Mephistopheles —

Glaub'  unser  einem  dieses  Ganze
1st  nur  fur  einen  Gott  gemacht.

The  only  boon  which  his  view  '  insures '  us  is  that  a
world  which  with  all  its  faults  had  seemed  plastic  and
improvable,  becomes  a  hopeless  hell  for  the  wanton  and
superfluous  torture  of  helpless  '  finite '  beings,  whose  doom
was  predestined  from  all  eternity  !

For  my  part,  I  should  prefer  a  universe  marred  by
chance  to  such  a  certainty.  For  the  '  chance '  in  this
case  means  a  chance  of  improvement.  Of  course  a  world
that  was  really  perfect  in  a  simple  and  human  way,  and
was  incapable  of  declining  from  that  perfection  because
it  contained  no  indetermination,  would  be  better  still.
But  such  a  world  ours  plainly  is  not,  though  it  has  a
chance  of  developing  such  perfection  by  becoming  wholly
harmonious  and  determinate.  And  is  it  not  '  assurance  '
enough  for  all  reasonable  requirements  that  in  a  world
wholly  harmonised  no  one  could  upset  its  harmony  nor
have  any  motive  for  changing  his  habits  and  the  way  of
the  world  ?

There  remains  to  be  discussed  the  metaphysical
objection  to  the  conception  of  indetermination  which  was
postponed  in  §  9.  It  is  at  bottom  an  objection  to  the
reality  of  change  in  ultimate  reality,  to  the  notion  of  its
incompleteness  and  development.  It  is,  however,  merely  a
survival  of  Eleatic  prejudice,  and  the  simplest  way  to  dispose
of  it  is  by  a  demand  for  its  credentials.  For  why  should
it  be  taken  as  certain  a  priori  that  the  real  cannot  change  ?
All  we  knozu  about  reality  negatives  this  notion.  And  if
our  immediate  experience  cannot  convince  us  of  the
reality  of  change,  of  what  can  anything  convince  us  ?  Or
if  it  is  claimed  that  the  impossibility  of  change  can  be
made  dialectically  evident  by  a  priori  reasoning  from
ideas,  our  reply  will  be  that,  if  so,  the  ideas  in  question
must  be  faulty.  For  our  ideas  should  be  formed  to
understand  experience,  not  to  confute  it.  Ideas  which


420  STUDIES IN HUMANISM  xvm

are  inapplicable  are  invalid.  Ideas  which  contradict
experience  are  either  false,  or  in  need  of  verification  by
the  altering  of  the  reality  which  contradicts  them.  In
short,  it  is  vain  to  threaten  libertarians  with  the  meta-
physical terrors  of  what  James  calls  '  the  block-universe.'
That  conception  is  usually  mystical,  when  it  is  not  a
materialistic  corollary  from  an  obsolescent  physics ;  it
can  never  be  really  thought  out  in  metaphysics  except
into  sheer,  unmitigated  Eleaticism.  And,  as  in  Zeno's  time,
the  puzzle  '  solvitur  ambulando '  by  those  who  really  wish
to  know :  we  leave  it  aside  and  pass  on.

To  sum  up  ;  our  Freedom  is  really  such  as  it  appears ;
it  consists  in  the  determinable  indetermination  of  a  nature
which  is  plastic,  incomplete,  and  still  evolving.  These
features  pervade  the  universe  ;  but  they  do  not  make  it
unintelligible.  Nay,  they  are  the  basis  of  its  perfecti-
bility.


XIX
THE MAKING OF REALITY

ARGUMENT

i.  Hegel's  great  idea  of  a  thought  process  which  was  to  be  also  the  cosmic
process  spoilt  by  his  dehumanising  of  the  former.  The  false  abstractions
of  the  '  Dialectic '  from  time  and  personality  lead  to  its  impotence  to
explain  either  process.  §  2.  Humanism  renews  Hegel's  enterprise  by
conceiving  the  '  making  of  truth  '  to  be  also  a  '  making  of  reality. '  Its
epistemological  validity.  §  3.  The  problem  of  a  metaphysical  '  making
of  reality.'  §  4.  Its  difficulties,  (i)  Can  reality  be  wholly  engendered
by  our  operations  ?  (2)  Can  the  Pragmatic  method  yield  a  metaphysic  ?
§  5.  Even  epistemologically  we  must  (r)  distinguish  between  'discover-
ing '  and  '  making '  reality.  The  distinction  may  mark  the  division
between  Pragmatism  and  Humanism.  But  it  is  itself  pragmatic,  and  in
some  cases  the  difference  between  '  making '  and  '  finding '  becomes
arbitrary.  §  6.  (2)  The  great  difference  between  original  and  final
'  truth '  and  '  fact '  in  the  process  which  validates  '  claims  '  and  makes
'  realities.'  The  Pragmatic  unimportance  of  starting-points.  Initial
truth  as  '  sheer  claim '  and  initial  fact  as  mere  potentiality.  Their
methodological  worthlessness.  §  7.  (3)  The  methodological  nullity  and
metaphysical  absurdity  of  the  notion  of  an  '  original  fact. '  Ultimate
reality  something  to  be  looked  forward,  and  not  back,  to.  §  8.  The
transition  to  metaphysics.  Humanism  and  metaphysics.  §  9.  The  four
admitted  ways  in  which  the  '  making  of  truth '  involves  a  '  making  of
reality.'  The  fifth — knowing — makes  reality  by  altering  the  knowers,
who  are  real.  §  IO.  But  is  the  object  known  also  altered,  and  so
'  made  '  ?  Where  the  object  known  is  not  aware  it  is  known,  it  is
treated  as  'independent,'  because  knowing  seems  to  make  no  difference.
The  fallaciousness  of  the  notion  of  mere  knowing.  Knowing  as  a  pre-
lude to  doing.  §  1 1.  The  apparent  absence  of  response  to  our  cognitive
operations  on  the  part  of  '  things,'  due  to  their  lack  of  spiritual  com-
munion with  us.  But  really  they  do  respond  to  us  as  physical  bodies,
and  are  affected  by  us  as  such.  §  12.  Hylozoism  or  panpsychism  as
a  form  of  Humanism.  '  Catalytic  action  '  and  its  human  analogues.
§  13.  Hence  there  is  real  making  of  reality  by  us  out  of  plastic  facts.
§  14.  The  extent  of  the  plasticity  of  fact,  practically  and  methodologically.
§  15.  The  non-human  making  of  reality.  §  16.  Our  two  indispensable
assumptions  :  (i)  the  reality  of  freedom  or  determinable  indetermination,
and  (2)  §  17,  the  incompleteness  of  reality,  as  contrasted  with  the
Absolutist  notion  of  an  eternally  complete  whole,  which  renders  our
whole  world  illusory.

421


422  STUDIES IN HUMANISM  xix

§  i .  IT  was  a  great  thought  of  Hegel's  l  that  truth  and
reality,  logic  and  metaphysics,  belonged  together  and
must  not  be  separated,  and  that,  to  make  the  world  truly
intelligible,  the  making  of  truth  and  the  making  of
reality  must  be  made  to  coincide.  He  tried,  therefore,  to
conceive  the  cosmic  process  as  one  with  the  thought
process,  and  to  represent  all  the  events  which  happened
in  the  real  evolution  of  the  world  in  time  as  incidents  in
the  self-development  of  a  '  dialectical  process  '  in  which
the  Absolute  Idea  arrived  at  a  full  logical  comprehension
of  its  own  eternal  meaning.

But,  unfortunately,  he  spoilt  this  great  idea  (with  which
Dr.  McTaggart  alone  of  his  English  followers  seems  to  con-
cern himself)  in  the  execution.  He  tried  to  conceive  thought
as  out  of  time,  and  its  '  eternity '  as  higher  than  the  time-
process  of  reality,  and  as  containing  the  '  truth '  and
meaning  of  the  latter.  But  this  equation  of  the  eternal
'  logic-process  '  with  the  temporal '  cosmic  process  '  did  not
work  out  to  a  real  solution.  The  one  was  eternally
complete,  the  other  manifestly  incomplete  ;  and  no  real
correspondence  could  be  established  between  their  re-
spective terms.2  Moreover,  the  real  events  of  the  cosmic
process  stubbornly  refused  to  be  reduced  to  mere  illus-
trations of  a  dialectical  relation  of  '  categories,'  and  the
desperate  attempt  of  the  '  Dialectic  '  to  declare  the  surplus
of  meaning,  which  the  real  possessed  over  the  logical,  to
be  really  a  defect,  to  be  mere  meaningless  '  contingency '
which  reason  could  not,  and  need  not,  account  for,  was
really  a  covert  confession  of  its  fundamental  failure.

This  failure,  moreover,  was  really  an  inevitable  con-
sequence of  its  own  fundamental  assumptions.  It
had  begun  by  misconceiving  the  '  thought  -  process,'
which  was  to  be  its  clue  to  reality.  It  had  begun
by  abstracting  from  its  concrete  nature,  from  the
actual  thinking  of  human  beings.  It  had  begun,  that  is,
by  misconceiving  the  function  of  abstraction.  It  had
begun,  in  short,  by  dehumanising  thought  in  order  to

1  Or  rather  of  Fichte's  ;  but  Hegel  appropriated  it.
'2  Cp.  Humanism,  pp.  95-109.


xix  THE MAKING  OF  REALITY  423

make  it  more  adequate  to  ultimate  reality.  But  the
result  was  that  it  destroyed  the  real  link  between  reality
and  thought.  For  it  is  only  as  concrete  human  thinking
that  we  know  thought  to  be  a  real  process  at  all.  Once
this  link  is  severed,  once  the  human  side  of  thought  is
flung  aside  as  meaningless  and  worthless,  thought  per  se,
however  '  absolute '  and  '  ideal '  and  '  eternal  '  we  may
call  it,  is  wafted  away  from  earth  into  the  immense
inanity  of  abstractions  which  have  lost  touch  with  a
reality  to  which  they  can  never  again  be  applied.

This  fate  has  overtaken  the  '  Dialectic.'  The  self-
development  of  its  '  categories '  is  not  the  real  develop-
ment of  any  actual  thought.  It  is  not,  consequently,
the  real  explanation  of  any  actual  process.  It  still
bears  a  sort  of  ghostly  resemblance  to  our  concrete
thinking,  to  the  body  of  incarnate  truth  from  which  it
was  abstracted  ;  and,  therefore,  it  can  still  claim  a
shadowy  relevance  to  the  real  events  of  life.  But  it  is
too  abstract  ever  to  grasp  either  of  them  in  their  full
concreteness.  Thus  its  claim  to  predict  events  is  very
like  the  weather  prophecies  in  Zadkiets  Almanack — so
vaguely  worded  that  almost  anything  may  be  said  to  con-
firm it.  But  it  can  never  suggest  any  definite  reason
why  definite  persons  at  any  definite  time  should  think
just  those  thoughts  which  they  think,  or  use  just  the
categories  which  they  use,  rather  than  any  other.  It
can  never  allege  any  reason  why  events  should  exemplify
the  logical  relation^  of  the  categories  in  the  precise  way
they  are  said  to  do,  rather  than  in  a  dozen  other  ways
which  would  do  equally  well,  or  why,  conversely,  the
categories  should  achieve  exemplification  by  just  the
events  which  occur,  rather  than  by  a  myriad  others
which  would  perform  this  function  no  less  well.  All
such  definite  questions  it  waves  aside  as  concerned
merely  with  the  impenetrable  '  contingency '  of  the
phenomenal.  Even,  therefore,  if  we  take  the  most
favourable  view  of  its  claims,  and  admit  it  to  be  an
explanation  of  everything  in  general,  it  still  fails  to
satisfy  the  demands,  either  of  science  or  of  practice,  by


424  STUDIES IN HUMANISM  XiX

being  too  vague  and  too  ambiguous  to  be  the  ex-
planation of  anything  in  particular.  It  is  truly  the
"  unearthly  ballet  of  bloodless  categories,"  Mr.  Bradley
has  called  it,  a  mere  Witches'  Sabbath  of  disembodied
abstractions,  from  which  the  true  seeker  after  the  mean-
ing of  reality  will  no  more  distil  spiritual  satisfaction
than  Dr.  Faustus  did  from  the  Walpurgisnacht  on  the
Brocken.  And  even  as  an  intellectual  debauch,  as  a
sowing  of  spiritual  wild  oats,  it  is  better  to  avoid  what
may  so  seriously  confuse  and  debilitate  the  mind.

It  remains,  however,  to  show  that  the  points  at  which
the  Hegelian  Dialectic's  failure  becomes  patent  are  in
direct  connexion.  It  fails,  practically  on  its  own  show-
ing, to  account  for  the  whole  of  the  time  process,  because
it  fails  to  account  for  the  whole  of  the  thought  process.
For  it  has  in  both  cases  made  the  same  fatal  abstraction.
It  has  assumed  that  because  for  the  practical  purposes  of
human  knowing  it  is  convenient  and  possible  and
sufficient  to  abstract  from  the  full  concreteness  ('  par-
ticularity ')  of  the  Real,  what  we  neglect,  and  often  have
Jtp  neglect,  is  really  meaningless.  But  this  is  not  the  case.
There  is  nothing  '  accidental '  and  void  of  significance
about  the  Real,  nothing  which  a  complete  theory  of  events
can  afford  to  ignore.  The  minutest  '  incident '  has  its
meaning,  every  least  shade  of  personality  its  importance,
even  though  our  limitations  may  practically  force  us
to  neglect  them.  Such  concessions  may  be  accorded  to
the  humility  of  a  pragmatic  theory  of  knowledge :  they
cannot  be  rendered  compatible  with  the  all  -  embracing
claims  of  a  theory  of  absolute  knowledge.  Hence  the
pretensions  of  the  Dialectic  to  absolute  completeness  do
not  entitle  it  to  the  arrogance  of  such  abstractions.  If
it  cannot  or  will  not  explain  everything,  it  forfeits  its
claim  to  be  '  concrete '  and  to  be  valid.  It  has  mis-
understood, moreover,  the  nature  '  of  abstraction.  The
abstraction  which  occurs  in  actual  thinking  is  human,
and  not  absolute  ;  it  is  relative  to  a  restricted  purpose,
and  can  be  rectified  by  altering  the  purpose  whenever
this  is  requisite  or  desirable.  Abstraction,  in  other


xix  THE  MAKING  OF  REALITY  425

words,  is  an  instrument  of  thought,  and  not  a  good  per  se.
It  should  not  be  dehumanised  any  more  than  any  other
feature  of  our  thinking.  And  if  we  refrain  from  de-
humanising our  thought,  we  shall  not  be  forced  to
'  de-realise '  reality  in  order  to  make  it  '  intelligible.'

§  2.  Let  us  try,  therefore,  to  renew  Hegel's  enterprise
of  the  identification  of  the  making  of  truth  and  the
making  of  reality,  under  the  better  auspices  of  a  logic
which  has  not  disembowelled  itself  in  its  zeal  to  become
true.  That  the  pragmatic  theory  of  knowledge  does
not  start  with  any  antithesis  of  '  truth '  and  '  fact,'  but
conceives  '  reality '  as  something  which,  for  our  knowledge
at  least,  grows  up  in  the  making  of  truth,  and  conse-
quently recognises  nothing  but  continuous  and  fluid  tran-
sitions from  hypothesis  to  fact  and  from  truth  to  truth,
we  have  already  seen  in  Essays  vii.  and  viii.  It  follows
that  the  '  making  of  truth  '  is  also  in  a  very  real  sense  a
'  making  of  reality.'  In  validating  our  claims  to  '  truth  '
we  really  '  discover '  realities.  And  we  really  transform
them  by  our  cognitive  efforts,  thereby  proving  our
desires  and  ideas  to  be  real  forces  in  the  shaping  of
our  world.

Now  this  is  a  result  of  immense  philosophic  import-
ance. For  it  systematically  bars  the  way  to  the
persistent  but  delusive  notion  that  '  truth '  and  '  reality '
somehow  exist  apart,  and  apart  from  us,  and  have  to  be
coaxed  or  coerced  into  a  union,  in  the  fruits  of  which  we
can  somehow  participate.  The  making  of  truth,  it  is
plain,  is  anything  but  a  passive  mirroring  of  ready-made
fact.  It  is  an  active  endeavour  in  which  our  whole
nature  is  engaged,  and  in  which  our  desires,  interests,
and  aims  take  a  leading  part.  Nevermore,  therefore,
can  the  subjective  making  of  reality  be  denied  or  ignored,
whether  it  be  in  the  interests  of  rationalism,  and  in
order  to  reserve  the  making  of  reality  for  an  '  absolute
thought,'  or  whether  it  be  in  the  interests  of  realism,  and  in
order  to  maintain  the  absoluteness  of  an  '  independent '
fact.  Taken  strictly  for  what  it  professes  to  be,  the
notion  of  '  truth '  as  a  •'  correspondence '  between  our


426  STUDIES IN HUMANISM  Xix

minds  and  something  intrinsically  foreign  to  them,  as  a
mirroring  of  alien  fact,  has  completely  broken  down.
The  reality  to  which  truth  was  said  to  '  correspond,'  i.e.
which  it  has  to  know,  is  not  a  '  fact '  in  its  own  right,
which  pre-exists  the  cognitive  functioning.  It  is  itself  a
fact  within  knowing,  immanently  deposited  or  '  precipi-
tated '  by  the  functioning  of  our  thought.  The  problem
of  knowledge,  therefore,  is  not — '  how  can  thought
engender  truth  about  reality  ? '  It  is  rather — '  how  can
we  best  describe  the  continuous  cognitive  process  which
engenders  our  systems  of  '  truth '  and  our  acceptance  of
'  reality,'  and  gradually  refines  them  into  more  and
more  adequate  means  for  the  control  of  our  experience  ? '
It  is  in  this  cognitive  elaboration  of  experience  that  both
reality  and  truth  grow  up  pari  passu.  'Reality'  is  reality
for  us,  and  known  by  us,  just  as  '  truth '  is  truth  for  us.
What  we  judge  to  be  '  true,'  we  take  to  be  '  real,'  and
accept  as  '  fact.'  And  so  what  was  once  the  most
vaporous  hypothesis  is  consolidated  into  the  hardest
and  most  indubitable  '  fact.'  Epistemologically  speaking,
therefore,  so  far  as  our  knowledge  goes  or  can  go,  the
making  of  truth  and  the  making  of  reality  seem  to  be
fundamentally  one.

§  3.  But  how  about  metaphysics  ?  Does  this  '  mak-
ing of  truth '  supply  a  final  answer  to  all  the
questions  we  can  ask  ?  This  is  by  no  means  obvious.
Even  on  the  epistemological  plane  the  making  of  truth
seemed  to  recognise  certain  limitations,  the  exact  nature
of  which,  being  unable  to  pursue  the  subject  into  the
depths  of  metaphysics,  we  were  not  able  to  determine.
We  had  to  leave  it  doubtful,  therefore,  how  far  a  coin-
cidence of  our  cognitive  making  of  truth  with  the  real
making  of  reality  could  be  traced,  and  whether  ulti-
mately both  processes  could  be  combined  in  the  same
conception.  It  seemed  possible  that  our  so-called  mak-
ing of  reality  would  not  in  the  end  amount  to  a  revela-
tion of  the  ultimate  essence  of  the  cosmic  process,  and
that  the  analogies  between  the  two  would  finally  prove
fallacious  or  insufficient.


xix  THE  MAKING  OF  REALITY  427

We  postponed,  therefore,  the  further  consideration  of
these  questions,  and  have  been  rewarded  since  then  by
lighting  upon  a  number  of  truths  which  may  be  distinctly
helpful  in  a  renewed  attack  upon  our  problem  of  the
'  making  of  reality.'

(1)  We  have  seen in Essay  ix.  § I that  an  evolu-
tionist philosophy  ought  not  prematurely  to  commit  itself
to  a  static  view  of  Reality,  and  that  it  is  not  an  ineluctable
necessity of thought, but  a  metaphysical prejudice, to
believe  that  Reality  is  complete  and  rigid  and  unimprov-
able, and  that  real  change  is  therefore  impossible. We
have  thus  gained the notion  of  a  plastic, growing, in-
complete  reality,  and this  will  permit  us  to  conceive  a
'  making  of  reality  '  as  really  cosmic.

(2)  The examination  of  Freedom in the  last essay
(§§  9-12)  brought  us  once  more  into  contact  with  this
idea  of  a  really  incomplete  reality. For it  seemed  that
there  might  after  all  be  a  vein  of  indetermination  running
through the universe,  and  that  the  behaviour  and  the
habits of things could still be altered. This idea
cropped up as a logical consequence  of  the reality  of
human  freedom,  which  we  found  it  possible  to  maintain
on  other  grounds. This  freedom  and  plasticity,  moreover,
would  explain  and  justify  our  treatment  of  our  ideas  as
real  forces,  and  our  claim  that  the  '  making  of  truth '  was
necessarily  also  a  making  of  reality. For  the  plasticity
of  the  real  would  explain  how  it  was  that  our  subjective
choices  could  realise  alternative  developments  of  reality.

And  (3)  it  appeared  to  be  possible  that  this  plasticity
of  things  might  involve  not  merely  a  passive  acquiescence
in  our  manipulations,  but  a  modicum  of  initiative,  and
that  thus  '  freedom '  might  not  be  confined  to  human
nature,  but  might  in  some  degree  pervade  the  universe.
If  so,  not  only  would  the  possibilities  of  '  making  reality '
be  vastly  enlarged,  but  we  should  have  established  the
existence  of  a  very  real  and  far-reaching  identity  in  nature
between  human  and  non- human  reality,  which  would
justify  the  expectation  of  very  considerable  likeness  in  the
processes  by  which  they  severally  adjust  themselves  to


428  STUDIES  IN HUMANISM  xix

their  environment.  Accordingly,  we  might  feel  entitled
to  look  for  analogues  also  to  the  human  making  of  truth
and  reality,  and  these  might  help  to  render  intelligible
the  vast  masses  of  reality,  which  it  seemed  at  the  end  of
Essay  vii.  we  could  not  humanly  claim  to  have  '  made.'

§  4.  Still  it  will  not  do  to  underrate  the  difficulties  of
the  situation.  The  Pragmatic  Method,  we  have  always
admitted,  has  definitely  postulated  an  initial  basis  of  fact
as  the  condition  of  its  getting  to  work  at  all.  And
although  any  particular  '  fact '  can  always  be  conceived  as
having  been  '  made '  by  a  previous  cognitive  operation,
this  latter  in  its  turn  will  always  presuppose  a  prior  basis
of  fact.  Hence,  however  rightly  we  may  emphasise  the
fact  that  what  we  call  reality  is  bound  up  with  our  knowing
and  dependent  on  our  manipulations,  there  will  always
seem  to  be  an  insuperable  paradox  in  the  notion  that
reality  can,  as  suck  and  wholly ',  be  engendered  by  the  con-
sequences of  our  dealings  with  it.

Our  Pragmatic  Method,  moreover,  has  so  far  fought
shy  of  metaphysics.  It  has  pleaded  that  originally  it
had  professed  to  be  merely  epistemological  in  its  scope,
and  has  gravely  doubted  whether  metaphysics  were  not
for  it  ultra  vires}  It  may  be  well,  therefore,  to  indulge
the  foibles  of  our  method,  to  the  extent  at  least  of  con-
sidering what  more  can  be  said  about  the  making  of  reality
on  strictly  epistemological  ground,  before  we  transform  it,
by  claiming  for  it  universal  application  and  expanding  it
to  cosmic  dimensions,  and  thereby  soar  to  metaphysics.

§  5.  In  point  of  fact  there  is  a  good  deal  more  to  be
said.  For  example,  (i)  the  difficulty  about  conceiving
the  acceptance  of  fact  as  the  basis  of  the  pragmatically
developed  situation  should  be  treated,  not  as  an  objection
to  the  Pragmatic  Method,  but  as  a  means  of  bringing  out

1  I  do  not  think  that  the  text  of  Axioms  as  Postulates  anywhere,  even  in
isolated  paragraphs,  entitles  critics  to  read  it  in  a  metaphysical  sense.  And
certainly  the  whole  method  and  purpose  of  that  essay  should  have  made  it  un-
mistakable that  it  was  nowhere  intended  to  be  taken  in  any  but  an  epistemological
sense.  If  so,  it  is  beside  the  point  to  object  to  pp.  54-63  of  Personal  Idealism
as  not  giving  a  satisfactory  account  of  the  creation  of  the  universe.  Really  that
would  have  been  too  much  to  expect  even  from  the  untamed  vigour  of  a  new
philosophy  !  That  the  question  under  discussion  referred  only  to  our  cognitive
making  of  reality  was  quite  plainly  stated  on  p.  61.


xix  THE  MAKING  OF  REALITY  429

its  full  significance.  For  it  can  be  made  to  bring  out  the
important  distinction  between  the  reality  which  is  '  made '
only  for  us,  i.e.  subjectively,  or  as  we  say  '  discovered,'  and
that  which  we  suppose  to  be  really  '  made,'  made  objec-
tively and  in  itself.  That  we  make  this  distinction  is
obvious  ;  but  why  do  we  make  it  ?  If  both  the  subjective
and  the  objective  '  making  of  reality '  are  products  of  the
same  cognitive  process,  of  the  same  '  making  of  truth '
by  our  subjective  efforts,  how  can  this  distinction  arise,
or,  ultimately,  be  maintained  ?

Now  it  is  clear,  in  the  first  place,  that  acceptance  of
the  Pragmatic  Method  in  no  wise  compels  us  to  ignore
this  distinction.  Nor  does  it  as  such  compel  us  to  assert
the  '  making  of  reality '  in  the  objective  sense.  It  seems
quite  feasible  to  conceive  the  making  as  merely  subjective,
as  referring  only  to  our  knowledge  of  reality,  without
affecting  its  actual  existence.1  Nay,  the  existence  of  the
distinction  may  itself  legitimately  be  appealed  to  show
that  common  sense  draws  a  clear  line  at  this  point.  And
so  it  may  be  denied  that  we  '  make  '  reality  metaphysically,
though  not  that  we  '  make '  it  epistemologically.

The  validity  of  this  position  may  provisionally  be
admitted.  Let  it  merely  be  observed  that  it  is  com-
patible with  a  full  acceptance  of  Pragmatism  as  a  method,
and  even  with  a  very  extensive  '  making  of  reality '  by
our  efforts.  For  these  efforts  are  still  indispensable  in
order  that  reality  may  be  '  discovered.'  It  is  still  true
that  our  desires  and  interests  must  anticipate  our  '  dis-
coveries,' and  point  the  way  to  them, — and  that  so  our
conception  of  the  world  will  still  depend  on  our  subjective
selection  of  what  it  interested  us  to  discover  in  the
totality  of  existence.  And  of  course  the  '  making  of
reality,'  in  so  far  as  we  mould  things  to  suit  us,  and  in
so  far  as  social  institutions  are  real  forces  to  be  reckoned
with  and  potent  in  the  moulding  of  men,  is  also  unaffected
by  the  refusal  to  conceive  the  ultimate  making  of  reality
as  proceeding  identically,  or  analogously,  with  our  '  making

1  Hence  it  seems  possible  to  be,  e.g. ,  a  pragmatist  in  epistemology,  and  a  realist
in  metaphysics,  like  Prof.  Santayana.


430  STUDIES INJUJMANISM  xix

of  truth.'  So  that  it  is  quite  possible  to  be  a  good  prag-
matist  without  attempting  to  turn  one's  method  into  a
metaphysic.

Secondly,  it  is  clear  that  if  the  Pragmatic  Method  is
true,  the  distinction  between  '  discovering  '  and  '  making  '
reality  must  itself  have  a  pragmatic  ground.  It  must  be
evolved  out  of  the  cognitive  process,  and  be  validated  by
its  practical  value.  And  this  we  find  to  be  the  case.
The  distinction  is  a  practical  one,  and  rests  on  the  various
behaviours  of  things.  A  reality  is  said  to  be  discovered,
and  not  made,  when  its  behaviour  is  such  that  it  is
practically  inconvenient  or  impossible  to  ascribe  its  reality
for  us  entirely  to  our  subjective  activity.  And  as  a  rule
the  criteria  of  this  distinction  are  plain  and  unmistakable.
To  wish  for  a  chair  and  find  one,  and  to  wish  for  a  chair
and  make  one,  are  experiences  which  it  is  not  easy  to
confuse,  and  which  involve  very  different  operations  and
attitudes  on  our  part.  In  the  one  case,  we  have  merely
to  look  around,  and  our  trusty  senses  present  to  us  the
object  of  our  desire  in  effortless  completion  :  in  the  other
a  prolonged  process  of  construction  is  required.

More  verbally  confusing  cases  arise  when  we  have
made  a  claim  to  reality  which  we  cannot  sustain,  or  denied
a  reality  which  we  subsequently  recognise.  These  cases
seem  to  lend  themselves  to  the  belief  in  an  '  independent '
reality,  because  in  our  dealings  with  them  we  do  not
seem  to  alter  '  reality,'  but  only  our  beliefs  about  it.  The
confusion,  however,  is  at  bottom  one  between  a  reality  (or
truth)  which  is  claimed,  and  one  which  is  verified.  If  a
claim  is  falsified,  the  new  truth  (or  reality)  which  takes  its
place  may  always  be  antedated,  and  conceived  as  having
existed  independently  of  the  claim  which  it  refutes.  But
it  cannot  be  said  to  be  similarly  independent  of  the
process  which  has  established  it.  The  truth  is  that  what
in  such  a  case  we  have  made  is  not  a  reality,  but  a
mistake.  ^  And  a  mistake  is  a  claim  to  reality  (or  truth)
which  will  not  work,  and  has  to  be  withdrawn.  But  the
failure  of  a  cognitive  experiment  is  no  proof  that  experi-
mentation is  a  mistake.  Nor  does  the  fact  that  a  reality


xix  THE  MAKING  OF  REALITY  431

existed,  which  we  mistakenly  denied,  prove  that  it  was
not  '  made,'  even  by  ourselves.

In  other  cases  the  line  is  not  so  clear,  and  the  '  finding  '
seems  to  involve  a  good  deal  of  '  making.'  Our  language
itself  often  testifies  to  this.  Thus  we  often  '  find '  that
when  we  have  '  made '  mistakes,  the  precise  amount
of  wilfulness  involved  in  the  '  making '  is  difficult  to
estimate.  Or  consider  our  dealings  with  other  beings
spiritually  responsive  to  our  action.  Our  behaviour  to
them  may  really  determine  their  behaviour  to  us,  and
make  them  what  we  believed  or  wanted  them  to  be.1
Thus  '  making  love '  and  '  finding  love '  are  not  in  general
the  same.  But  you  may  make  love,  because  you  find
yourself  in  love,  and  making  love  may  really  produce  love
in  both  parties  to  the  suit.  Few  people,  moreover,  would
really  '  find '  themselves  in  love,  if  the  object  of  their
affections  had  done  absolutely  nothing  to  '  make '  them
fall  in  love.  And  every  married  couple  has  probably
discovered  by  experience  that  the  reality  and  continuance
of  their  affection  depends  on  the  behaviour  of  both  parties.

It  is  clear  then  ( I )  that,  roughly  and  in  the  main,  there
is  a  real  pragmatic  distinction  between  '  discovering '  and
'making'  reality.  But  (2)  we  also  get  some  suggestive
hints  that  this  distinction  may  not  be  absolute,  and  that
in  our  dealings  with  the  more  kindred  and  responsive
beings  in  the  world  our  attitude  towards  them  may  be  an
essential  factor  in  their  behaviour  towards  us.  If  so,  we
shall  have  sufficient  ground  for  the  belief  that  our  manipu-
lations may  really  '  make,'  and  not  merely  '  find  '  reality,
and  sufficient  encouragement  to  pursue  the  subject  farther.

§  6.  (2)  In  admitting  that  the  pragmatic  making  of
truth  always  presupposed  a  prior  basis  of  fact  an  important
point  was  omitted.  We  neglected  to  notice  also  the
great  and  essential  difference  between  the  nature  of  the
truth  and  the  reality  as  it  enters  the  process  at  the  begin-
ning and  as  it  emerges  from  it  at  the  end.  Both  the  truth
and  the  reality  have  been  transformed.  Their  originally
tentative  character  has  disappeared.  The  '  truth/  which

1  Cp.  Humanism,  p.  12,  n.


432  STUDIES IN HUMANISM  xix

entered  the  process  as  a  mere  claim,  has  now  been  validated.
The  '  reality,'  which  at  first  was  a  suspicion,  a  hope,  a
desire,  or  a  postulate,  is  now  fully  substantiated,  and  an
established  fact.  The  difference  wrought  by  the  pragmatic
verification,  therefore,  is  as  great  in  the  case  of  the  '  reality  '
as  in  that  of  the  truth,  and  it  was  surely  worth  the  whole
labour  of  rethinking  the  traditional  formulas  in  pragmatic
terms  to  have  had  our  attention  drawn  to  its  existence.

For  the  pragmatic  theory  of  knowledge  initial  principles
are  literally  ap^al,  mere  starting-points,  variously,  ar-
bitrarily, casually  selected,  from  which  we  hope  and  try
to  advance  to  something  better.  Little  we  care  what  their
credentials  may  be,  provided  that  they  are  able  to  conduct
us  to  firmer  ground  than  that  from  which  we  were  fain  to
start.  We  need  principles  that  work,  not  principles  that
possess  testimonials  from  the  highest  a  priori  quarters.
Even  though,  therefore,  their  value  was  prospective  and
problematical,  they  were  accepted  for  the  services  they
proffered.  For  we  knew  better  than  to  attach  undue
importance  to  beginnings,  than  to  seek  for  principles  self-
evident,  and  realities  undeniable  to  start  with.1  We
divined  from  the  first  that  truth  and  reality  in  the  fullest
sense  are  not  fixed  foundations,  but  ends  to  be  achieved.

Consequently,  the  question  about  the  nature  of  initial
truth  and  reality  cannot  be  allowed  to  weigh  upon  our
spirits.  We  have  not  got  to  postpone  knowing  until  we
have  discovered  them.  For  actual  knowing  always  starts
from  the  existing  situation.2  Even,  therefore,  if  we  fail  to
penetrate  to  such  absolute  beginnings  our  theory  can
work.  And  it  is  not  disposed  to  regard  initial  facts  or
truths  as  specially  important,  even  if  they  could  be
ascertained.  Indeed  our  method  must  treat  them  as
conceptual  limits  to  which  actual  cognition  points,  but
which  it  never  rests  on.  Initial  truth  it  will  regard  as
sheer  claim,  unconfirmed  as  yet  by  any  sort  of  experience,
and  undiscriminatingly  inclusive  of  truth  and  falsehood.
A  really  a  priori  truth,  i.e.  a  claim  which  really  preceded
all  experience,  would  be  as  likely  to  be  false  as  true  when

1  Cp.  Essay  ix.  §  9.  2  Cp.  Essay  vii.  §  3.


xix  THE  MAKING  OF  REALITY  435

it  was  applied.  It  has  no  value,  therefore,  for  a  theory  of
knowledge  which  is  wishful  to  discriminate  between  true
and  false.  Initial  reality,  similarly,  would  be  sheer
potentiality,  the  mere  v\tj  of  what  was  destined  to  develop
into  true  reality.  And  whatever  value  metaphysics  may
attach  to  them,  the  theory  of  knowledge  can  make
nothing  of  sheer  claims  and  mere  potentialities.  Methodo-
logically we  may  and  must  assume  that  every  truth  and
every  reality  now  recognised  is  to  be  conceived  as  evolved
from  the  cognitive  process  in  which  we  now  observe  it,
and  as  destined  to  have  a  further  history.

For  if  we  declined  to  treat  it  so,  we  should  lose  much
and  gain  nothing.  We  should  gratuitously  deprive  our-
selves of  the  right  of  improving  on  the  imperfect  and
unsatisfactory  realities  and  truths  which  we  now  have.
By  conceiving  them  as  rigid,  i.e.  as  fixed  and  unalterable
from  the  beginning,  we  should  merely  debar  ourselves
from  discovering  that  after  all  they  were  plastic,  if  such
chanced  to  be  their  nature.  If,  on  the  other  hand,  they
chanced  to  be  rigid,  we  should  not  be  put  to  shame  ;  we
should  merely  suppose  that  we  had  not  yet  found  the
way  to  bend  them  to  our  will.  The  sole  methodological
principle,  therefore,  which  will  serve  our  purpose  and
minister  to  a  desire  for  progressive  knowledge  is  that
which  conceives  no  reality  as  so  rigid  and  no  truth  as  so
valid  as  to  be  constitutionally  incapable  of  being  improved
on,  when  and  where  our  purposes  require  it.  We  may  be
de  facto  quite  unable  to  effect  such  an  improvement.  But
why  should  that  compel  us  to  forbid  effort  and  to  close
the  door  to  hope  for  all  eternity  ?

To  sum  up  then  :  even  though  the  Pragmatic  Method
implies  a  truth  and  a  reality  which  it  does  not  make,  yet  it
does  not  conceive  them  as  valuable.  It  conceives  them  only
as  indicating  limits  to  our  explanations,  and  not  as  reveal-
ing the  solid  foundations  whereon  they  rest.  All  effective
explanation,  however,  starts  from  the  actual  process  of
knowing,  which  is  pragmatic,  and  not  from  hypothetical
foundations,  which  are  dubious.  And  all  effective  truth
and  reality  result  from  the  same  pragmatic  process.

2  F


434  STUDIES IN HUMANISM  xix

§  7  (3).  It  is  clear,  then,  that  we  have,  on  methodo-
logical grounds,  a  certain  right  to  demur  to  the  demand  for
an  explanation  of  the  initial  basis  of  fact.  It  is  quite  true
that  our  method  logically  implies  a  previous  fact  as  its
datum.  But  it  is  also  true  that  since  any  determinate  char-
acter in  a  '  fact '  may  be  conceived,  and  must  be  assumed,
to  have  been  derived,  this  original  datum  is  reduced  for  us
in  principle  to  a  mere  potentiality,  an  indeterminate
possibility  of  what  is  subsequently  made  of  it.  And  so
methodologically,  as  we  saw  in  the  last  section,  it  need  not
trouble  us,  because  we  are  concerned,  not  with  presupposi-
tions, but  with  ends.

It  is  only,  however,  when  this  notion  of  an  original
fact  is  translated  into  the  language  of  metaphysics  that
its  methodological  nullity  is  fully  revealed.  When  the
doctrine  of  the  making  of  reality  out  of  a  relatively
indeterminate  material  is  construed  metaphysically,  and
pushed  back  to  the  '  beginning,'  it  seems  to  assert  the
formation  of  the  Real  out  of  a  completely  indeterminate
Chaos,  of  which  nothing  can  be  said  save  that  it  was
capable  of  developing  the  determinations  it  has  developed
under  the  operations  which  were  performed  upon  it.

But  how,  it  is  asked,  with  a  fine  show  of  indignation,  by
philosophers,  who  have  forgotten  Plato's  Segapevr)  and  the
creation  stories  of  all  the  religious  mythologies  from  the
book  of  Genesis  downwards,  can  such  a  notion  be
put  forward  as  a  serious  explanation  ?  How  can  a
wholly  indeterminate  '  matter '  be  determined  by  experi-
ment ?  What  would  any  experiment  have  to  go  upon  ?
By  what  means  could  it  operate  ?  And  why  should  the
*  matter '  react  in  one  way  rather  than  in  any  other  ?
And  then,  without  awaiting  a  reply  or  crediting  us  with
any  awareness  of  some  of  the  oldest  and  least  venerable
of  metaphysical  puzzles,  they  hastily  jump  to  the  con-
clusion that  Pragmatism  has  no  real  light  to  throw  on  the
making  of  reality,  and  that  they  may  just  as  well  revert  to
the  cover  of  their  ancient  formulas.

It  is,  however,  from  their  conclusion  only  that  we
.should  dissent.  We  may  heartily  agree  that  these


xix  THE  MAKING  OF  REALITY  435

questions  should  be  put  in  a  metaphysical  sense,  if  only
in  order  that  it  may  be  seen  what  their  answers  would
involve.  We  may  agree  also  to  some  of  their  terms.  It
is  obvious,  for  example,  that  to  derive  reality  from  chaos
is  not  seriously  to  explain  it.  But  then  we  never  said  or
supposed  it  was.  On  the  other  hand  we  should  not  admit,
at  least  not  without  cause  alleged,  that  because  a  thing  is
indeterminate  it  is  necessarily  indeterminable,  or  that  if  it
is  indeterminate,  it  must  be  conceived  as  infinitely  so,
merely  because  we  are  not  able  before  the  event  to  predict
in  what  ways  it  will  show  itself  determinable.  We  shall
plead,  in  short,  the  doctrine  that  the  accomplished  fact  has
logical  rights  over  the  '  original '  fact.

Still  Chaos  is  no  explanation.  This  is  just  our  reason
for  the  methodological  scruple  about  the  whole  notion  of
expecting  a  complete  metaphysical  explanation  of  the
universe  from  the  pragmatic  analysis  of  knowledge.  It
may  reasonably  be  contended  that  the  whole  question  is
invalid  because  it  asks  too  much.  It  demands  to  know
nothing  less  than  how  Reality  comes  to  be  at  all,  how
fact  is  made  absolutely.  And  this  is  more  than  any
philosophy  can  accomplish  or  need  attempt.  In
theological  language,  it  is  to  want  to  know  how  God
made  the  world  out  of  nothing.  Nay  it  includes  a
demand  to  know  how  God  made  himself  out  of  nothing  !
But  this  is  not  only  a  question  to  which  we  are  never
likely  to  get  an  answer,  but  also  one  which,  as  Lotze
wisely  remarked,  is  logically  inadmissible.  For  it  ignores
the  facts  that  something  must  be  taken  for  granted  in  all
explanation,  and  that  the  world,  just  as  we  have  it  now,
is  the  presupposition  de  facto  of  every  question  we  ask
about  it,  including  those  as  to  its  past  and  its  '  origin.'
Thus  in  a  methodological  sense  the  existing  world,  with
its  pragmatic  situation,  is  the  necessary  presupposition  of
the  original  datum  from  which  it  is  held  to  be  derived.

Moreover,  even  if  per  impossibile  the  demand  could
somehow  be  satisfied,  and  we  could  learn  how  the  first
fact  was  made,  there  is  no  reason  to  think  that  the  pro-
cedure would  strike  us  as  particularly  '  rational '  or


436  STUDIES IN HUMANISM  xix

enlightening,  or  that  this  '  knowledge '  would  leave  us  any
the  wiser.  It  would  certainly  appear  to  have  been  a
making  of  something  out  of  nothing.  And  the  first
'  something '  would  probably  seem  something  despicable
or  disgusting.  It  would  very  likely  look  to  us  like  the
primordial  irruption  into  the  world  we  now  have  of  that
taint  of  corruption,  evil,  or  imperfection,  which  phil-
osophers have  tried  so  often  to  think,  and  so  rarely  to  do,
away.

The  fact  is  that  the  conception  of  ultimate  reality
looks  forward,  and  not  back,  and  must  do  so  (like
Orpheus)  if  it  is  to  rescue  our  life  from  the  house  of
Hades.  It  cannot  be  separated  from  that  of  ultimate
satisfaction.1  We  can  conceive  ourselves,  therefore,  as
getting  an  answer  to  the  question  about  the  beginning  of
the  world-process  only  at  the  end.  And  it  will  be  no
wonder  if  by  that  time  we  should  have  grown  too  wise
and  too  well  satisfied  to  want  to  raise  the  question.  And
to  us,  at  least,  it  is  no  paradox  that  a  psychological  inability
or  unwillingness  to  raise  a  problem  may  also  be  its  only
logical  solution.  When  Perfection  has  been  attained,  the
universe,  having  at  last  become  harmonious  and  truly  one,
will  perforce  forget  its  past  in  order  to  forget  its  sufferings.
For  us,  meanwhile,  it  should  suffice  to  think  that  Perfec-
tion may  be  attained.2

To  reject  this  would  be  to  allow  the  validity  of
von  Hartmann's  objection  to  the  existence  of  a  God  on
the  ground  that,  if  he  were  conscious,  he  would  go  mad
over  trying  to  understand  the  mystery  of  his  own  exist-
ence. Von  Hartmann  infers  that  the  Absolute  must
be  unconscious  ;  but  even  that  does  not  apparently
prevent  it  from  going  mad,  as  we  saw  in  Essay  xi.

The  objection,  therefore,  which  has  troubled  us  so
long  may  now  finally  be  put  aside.  Methodologically  an
original  fact  is  unimportant,  because  it  is  unknowable,
and  because  no  actual  fact  need  be  treated  as  original.

-,1  Cp.  Humanism,  pp.  200-3.1

2  Cp. Essay  vii. §  12  s.f. Humanism, pp. 202-3, 212-9, 226-7  ! Personal
Idealism,  p.  109  ;  Kiddles  of  the  Sphinx,  ch.  xii.


xix  THE  MAKING  OF  REALITY  437

The  demand  to  know  it,  moreover,  is  invalid,  and  cannot
be  satisfied  by  any  philosophy  in  any  real  way.  'Original
fact '  is  a  metaphysical  impostor.  For  it  could  be  the
explanation  of  nothing,  not  even  of  itself.  And,  lastly,
we  now  perceive  that  the  way  to  satisfy  what  is  legitimate
in  the  demand  is,  not  by  conceiving  an  original  fact,  but
by  conceiving  a  final  satisfaction.

§  8.  The  only  obstacle,  therefore,  which  can  still
impede  our  progress  on  our  projected  excursion  into  meta-
physics, is  that  which  arises  from  the  native  reluctance  of
the  Pragmatic  Method  itself  to  sanction  such  adventures.
But  at  this  point  we  may  bethink  ourselves  that  this
method  itself  is  not  final.  We  have  conceived  it  from
the  first  as  included  in,  and  derivative  from,  a  larger
method,  which  may  show  itself  more  obliging.  Our
Pragmatism,  after  all,  was  but  an  aspect  of  our  Human-
ism.1 And  Humanism,  though  itself  only  a  method,
must  surely  be  more  genial.  It  cannot  but  look
favourably  on  an  attempt  thoroughly  to  humanise  the
world  and  to  unify  the  behaviour  of  its  elements,  by
tracing  the  occurrence  of  something  essentially  analogous
to  the  human  making  of  reality  throughout  the  universe.
It  will  not,  moreover,  severely  repress  us,  when  we  try  to
answer  any  question  of  real  human  interest,  on  the  ground
of  its  metaphysical  character.

For  '  metaphysics,'  it  will  say,  '  though  adventures,
and  so  hazardous,  are  not  unbecoming  or  unmanly.  There
is  not  really  much  harm  in  them,  provided  that  they  are
not  made  compulsory,  that  no  one  is  compelled  to
advance  into  them  farther  than  he  likes,  and  that  every
one  perceives  their  real  character  and  does  not  allow
them  to  delude  him.  The  worst  that  can  happen  to  you
is  that  you  should  find  yourself  unable  to  advance,  or  to
reach  the  summit  of  your  hopes.  If  so,  you  can  always
retire  with  safety,  and  be  no  worse  off  than  if  you  had
never  attempted  an  enterprise  too  great  for  your  powers.
So,  too,  if  you  grow  tired.  What  alone  renders  meta-
physics offensive  and  dangerous  are  the  preposterous

1  Cp.  Humanism,  pp.  xv.-xxi.


438  STUDIES  IN  HUMANISM  xix

pretensions  sometimes  made  on  their  behalf.  For,  so  far
from  being  the  most  certain  of  the  sciences  (as  is  their
proud  aspiration),  they  are  de  facto  the  most  tentative,  just
because  they  ought  to  be  the  most  inclusive.  Every  new
fact  and  advance  in  knowledge,  and  every  new  variation
of  personality,  may  upset  a  system  of  metaphysics.  You
must  not,  therefore,  grow  fanatical  about  your  metaphysi-
cal affirmations,  but  hold  them  with  a  candid  and  constant
willingness  to  revise  them,  and  to  evacuate  your  positions
when  they  become  untenable.  And  after  all,  you  have
always  a  safe  fortress  to  retire  upon  if  the  worst  should
come  to  the  worst.  If  the  objective  "  making  of  reality  "
should  prove  illusory,  you  can  take  refuge  with  the
subjective  making  of  reality  which  the  Pragmatic  Method
has  quite  clearly  established.'

Thus  encouraged,  let  us  see  how  far  a  real  making  of
reality  can  be  predicated  of  our  world.

§  9.  Dare  we  affirm,  then,  that  our  making  of  truth
really  alters  reality,  that  mere  knowing  makes  a  differ-
ence, that  things  are  changed  by  the  mere  fact  of  being
known  ?  Or  rather,  to  elicit  more  precise  responses,  let
us  ask  in  what  cases  these  things  may  be  affirmed  ?

For  we  have  seen  l  that  in  some  cases  these  assertions
are  plainly  true,  and  refer  only  to  facts  which  should  have
been  noticed  long  ago,  and  which  the  Pragmatic  Method
has  now  firmly  established.  Thus  (i)  our  making  of  truth
really  alters  '  subjective  '  reality.  It  first  '  makes  '  real
objects  of  interest  and  inquiry,  and  then  '  finds '  realities
to  satisfy  them.  (2)  Our  knowledge,  when  applied,  alters
'real  reality,'  and  (3)  is  not  real  knowledge,  if  it  cannot
be  applied.  Moreover,  (4),  in  some  cases,  e.g.  in  human
intercourse,  a  subjective  making  is  at  the  same  time  a
real  making  of  reality.  Human  beings,  that  is,  are  really
affected  by  the  opinion  of  others.  They  behave
differently,  according  as  their  behaviour  is  observed  or
not,  as  e.g.  in  '  stage  fright,'  or  in  '  showing  off.'  Even
the  mere  thought  that  their  behaviour  may  be  known
alters  it.  And  as  we  saw  in  §  5,  the  difference  between

1  Essay  vii.  §  13.


xix  THE  MAKING  OF  REALITY  439

'  making  '  and  '  discovering '  reality  tends  in  their  case  to
get  somewhat  shadowy.

Still  none  of  this  has  amounted  to  what  we  must  now
proceed  to  point  out,  viz.  (5)  that  mere  knowing  always
alters  reality,  so  far  at  least  as  one  party  to  the  transaction
is  concerned.  Knowing  always  really  alters  the  knovver  ;
and  as  the  knower  is  real  and  a  part  of  reality,  reality  is
really  altered.  Even,  therefore,  what  we  call  a  mere
'  discovery '  of  reality  involves  a  real  change  in  us,  and  a
real  enlightenment  of  our  ignorance.  And  inasmuch  as
this  will  probably  induce  a  real  difference  in  our  sub-
sequent behaviour,  it  entails  a  real  alteration  in  the
course  of  cosmic  events,  the  extent  of  which  may  be
considerable,  while  its  importance  may  be  enormous.

§  10.  But  what  about  the  other  party  to  the  cognitive
transaction,  the  '  object '  known  ?  Can  that  be  conceived
as  altered  by  being  known  and  so  as  '  made '  by  the
process  ?

Common  sense,  plainly,  would  seriously  demur  to
asserting  this,  at  least  in  the  ordinary  sense  of  '  knowing.'
In  many  cases  the  objects  known  do  not  seem  to  be  visibly
altered  by  our  mere  knowing,  and  in  such  cases  we  prefer
to  speak  of  them  as  '  independent '  facts,  which  our
knowing  merely  '  discovers.'  This  is  the  simple  source  of
the  notion  of  the  '  independent  reality '  which  the  meta-
physics of  absolutism  and  realism  agree  in  misinterpreting
as  an  absence  of  dependence  upon  human  experience.
But  we  have  already  seen  (in  §  5)  that  the  distinction
between  '  making '  and  '  discovering '  is  essentially  prag-
matic, and  cannot  be  made  absolute :  we  must  now
examine  further,  when  and  under  what  conditions  it  may
be  alleged.

Whether  a  reality  is  called  '  independent '  of  our
knowing,  and  said  to  be  merely  '  discovered '  when  it  is
known,  or  not,  seems  to  depend  essentially  on  whether  it
is  aware  of  being  known  ;  or  rather  on  how  far,  and  in
what  ways,  it  is  aware  of  being  known.

In  the  case  of  beings  who  are  in  close  spiritual
communion  with  us,  and  thoroughly  aware  of  the  meaning


440  STUDIES IN HUMANISM  xix

of  our  operations,  there  is  great  sensitiveness  to  our
becoming  aware  of  them.  When  we  cognise  them,  and
recognise  their  reality,  they  react  suitably  and  with  a
more  or  less  complete  comprehension  of  our  action.  Such
awareness  is  shown,  e.g.  by  our  fellow-men  and  by  such
animals  as  are  developed  enough  to  take  note  of  us,  and
to  have  their  actions  disturbed  and  altered  by  our
knowing,  or  even  by  the  thought  that  we  may  know
them  and  are  observing  them.  It  is  amusing  to  note,
for  example,  how  a  marmot  will  show  his  perturbation
and  whistle  his  shrill  warning,  long  before  the  casual
intruder  on  his  Alpine  solitudes  has  suspected  his  exist-
ence.

But  how  does  this  apply  to  the  lowest  animals  and  to
inanimate  things?  They  surely  are  quite  indifferent  to
our  knowledge  of  them  ?  To  them  mere  knowing  makes
no  difference.

This  case  looks,  plainly,  different,  and  language  is
quite  right  to  distinguish  them.  But  before  we  deal  with
it  we  must  elucidate  the  notion  of  '  mere  knowing.'
Mere  knowing  does  not  seem  capable  of  altering  reality,
merely  because  it  is  an  intellectualistic  abstraction,  which,
strictly  speaking,  does  not  exist.  In  the  pragmatic  con-
ception, however,  knowing  is  a  prelude  to  doing.  What
is  called  '  mere  knowing,'  is  conceived  as  a  fragment  of
a  total  process,  which  in  its  unmutilated  integrity  always
ends  in  an  action  which  tests  its  truth.  Hence  to
establish  the  bearing  on  reality  of  the  making  of  truth,
we  must  not  confine  ourselves  to  this  fragmentary  '  mere
knowing,'  but  must  consider  the  whole  process  as  com-
pleted, z>.  as  issuing  in  action,  and  as  sooner  or  later
altering  reality.

Now  that  this  pragmatic  conception  of  knowing  is  the
one  really  operative,  the  one  which  really  underlies  our
behaviour,  is  shown  by  the  actions  of  beings  who  display
sensitiveness  to  our  observation.  The  actor  who  exhibits
stage  fright  is  not  afraid  of  mere  observation.  He  is
afraid  of  being  hissed,  and  perhaps  of  being  pelted.
And  the  marmot  who  whistles  in  alarm  is  not  afraid


xix  THE  MAKING  OF  REALITY  441

of  merely  having  his  procedures  noted  down  by  a
scientific  observer :  he  is  afraid  of  being  killed.  Neither
the  one  nor  the  other  would  care  about  a  mere
spectator  who  really  did  nothing  but  observe.  If  such
a  being  really  existed,  and  Plato's  intellectualistic  ideal
were  realised,  he  would  be  the  most  negligible  thing  in
the  universe.  But  knowing  is  pragmatic,  and  '  mere '
knowing  is  a  fable.  And,  tlierefore,  it  is  terrible,  and
potent  to  make  and  unmake  reality.  It  was  not  for
nothing  that  the  gods  kept  Prometheus  chained  :  it  is  not
for  nothing,  though  it  is  in  vain,  that  Intellectualism  tries
to  muzzle  Pragmatism.

§11.  For  one  being  to  take  note  of  another  and  to
show  itself  sensitive  to  that  other's  operations,  it  must  be
aware  of  that  other  as  capable  of  affecting  its  activities
(whether  for  good  or  for  evil),  and  so,  as  potentially
intrusive  into  its  sphere  of  existence.  Man  is  sensitive
to  man  because  man  can  affect  the  life  of  man  in  so
many  ways.  Hence  the  variety  of  our  social  reactions
and  the  wealth  of  our  social  relations.  But  consider  the
relations  of  man  and  the  domestic  animals.  The  range
of  mutual  response  is  very  much  contracted.  Newton's
dog  Diamond,  though  no  doubt  he  loved  his  master,  had
no  reverence  for  the  discoverer  of  gravitation.  He  in
return  had  no  appreciation  of  the  rapture  of  a  rabbit
hunt.  The  marmot,  similarly,  conceives  man  only  as  a
source  of  danger.  Hence  the  simplicity  of  his  reaction,
just  a  whistle  and  a  scurry.  Why  then  should  we  search
for  anything  more  recondite  in  order  to  account  for  the
apparent  absence  of  response  to  our  operations  when  we
come  to  deal  with  beings  who  are  no  longer  capable  of
apprehending  us  as  agents  ?  This  would  merely  mean
that  they  were  too  alien  to  us  and  our  interests  to  concern
themselves  about  us.  Their  indifference  would  only
prove  that  we  could  not  interfere  with  anything  they
cared  about,  and  so  that  they  treated  us  as  non-existent.
We,  too,  treat  their  feelings,  if  they  have  any,  as  non-
existent, because  we  cannot  get  at  them,  and  they  seem
to  make  no  difference  in  their  behaviour.


442  STUDIES IN HUMANISM  xix

But  is  this  absence  of  response  absolutely  real  ? A
stone, no doubt, does not apprehend us as spiritual
beings,  and  to  preach  to  it  would  be  as  fruitless  (though
not  as  dangerous)  as  preaching  to  deaf  ears. But  does
this  amount  to saying that it  does not apprehend us
at all,  and takes no note whatever  of our  existence  ?
Not  at  all  ;  it  is  aware  of  us  and  affected '  by  us  on  the
plane  on which  its  own  existence  is passed,  and quite
capable  of  making  us  effectively  aware  of  its  existence
in  our  transactions  with  it. The  '  common  world  '  shared
in by  us  and  the  stone  is  not,  perhaps,  on  the  level  of
ultimate  reality. It  is  only  a  physical  world  of  '  bodies,'
and  '  awareness '  in  it  can  apparently  be  shown  only  by
being hard and heavy and coloured and space-filling,
and  so forth. And all these things the stone is,  and
recognises  in other '  bodies.' It  faithfully exercises all
the physical functions, and influences us by  so doing.
It gravitates and resists pressure, and obstructs ether
vibrations,  etc.,  and  makes  itself  respected  as  such  a  body.
And  it  treats  us  as  if  of  a  like  nature  with  itself,  on  the
level  of  its understanding,  i.e.  as bodies, to  which  it  is
attracted  inversely  as  the  square  of  the  distance,  moder-
ately hard  and  capable  of  being  hit. That  we  may  also
be  hurt  it  does  not  know  or  care. But  in  the  kind  of
cognitive operation which interests it, viz. that which
issues  in  a  physical  manipulation  of  the  stone,  e.g.  its  use
in  house-building,  it  plays  its  part  and  responds  according
to the measure  of  its capacity. Similarly, if '  atoms '
and '  electrons ' are more than counters of physical
calculation,  they  too  know  us,  after  their  fashion. Not
as human beings,  of course,  but as  whirling mazes  of
atoms and electrons like themselves, which somehow
preserve  the  same  general  pattern  of  their dance,  influ-
encing them  and  reciprocally  influenced. And  let  it  not
be  said  that  to  operate  upon  a  stone  is  not  to  know  it.
True, to throw a stone is not usually described as a
cognitive  operation. But it presupposes  one. For  to
throw  it,  we  must  know  that  it  is  a  stone  we  throw,  and
to  some  extent  what  sort  of  a  stone  it  is. Throwing  a


xix  THE MAKING  OF  REALITY  443

pumice-stone,  e.g.  requires  a  different  muscular  adjust-
ment from  throwing  a  lump  of  lead.  Thus,  to  use  and
to  be  used  includes  to  know  and  to  be  known.  That  it
should  seem  a  paradox  to  insist  on  the  knowledge
involved  even  in  the  simplest  manipulations  of  objects,
merely  shows  how  narrow  is  the  intellectualistic  notion
of  knowledge  into  which  we  have  fallen.

§  12.  'But  is  not  this  sheer  hylozoism  ? '  somebody
will  cry.  What  if  it  is,  so  long  as  it  really  brings  out  a
genuine  analogy  ?  The  notion  that  '  matter '  must  be
denounced  as  '  dead  '  in  order  that  '  spirit '  may  live,  no
longer  commends  itself  to  modern  science.  And  it  ought
to  commend  itself  as  little  to  philosophy.  For  the
analogy  is  helpful  so  long  as  it  really  renders  the
operations  of  things  more  comprehensible  to  us,  and
interprets  facts  which  had  seemed  mysterious.  We  need
not  shrink  from  words  like  '  hylozoism,'  or  (better)
'  panpsychism,'  provided  that  they  stand  for  interpretations
of  the  lower  in  terms  of  the  higher.  For  at  bottom  they
are  merely  forms  of  Humanism, — attempts,  that  is,  to  make
the  human  and  the  cosmic  more  akin,  and  to  bring  them
closer  to  us,  that  we  may  act  upon  them  more  successfully.

And  there  is  something  in  such  attempts.  They  can
translate  into  the  humanly  intelligible  facts  which  have
long  been  known.  For  example,  we  have  seen  (§  1 1 )
that  in  a  very  real  sense  a  stone  may  be  said  to  know  us
and  to  respond  to  our  manipulation,  nay,  that  this  sense
is  truer  than  that  which  represents  knowing  as  unrelated
to  doing.  Again,  there  is  a  common  phenomenon  in
chemistry  called  '  catalytic  action.'  It  has  seemed  mysteri-
ous and  hard  to  understand  that  although  two  bodies,  A
and  B,  may  have  a  strong  affinity  for  each  other,  they
should  yet  refuse  to  combine  until  a  mere  trace  of  an
'  impurity,'  C,  is  introduced,  and  sets  up  an  interaction
between  A  and  B,  which  yet  leaves  C  unaltered.  But
is  not  this  strangely  suggestive  of  the  idea  that  A  and
B  did  not  know  each  other  until  they  were  introduced
by  C,  and  then  liked  each  other  so  well  that  poor  C  was
left  out  in  the  cold  ?  More  such  analogies  and  possi-


444  STUDIES IN HUMANISM  xix

bilities  will  probably  be  found  if  they  are  looked  for,  and
in  any  case  we  should  remember  that  all  our  physical
conceptions  rest  ultimately  on  human  analogies  suggested
by  our  immediate  experience.

It  is  hardly  true,  then,  that  inanimate  '  things '  take  no
notice  of  our  '  knowing,'  and  are  unaltered  by  it.  They
respond  to  our  cognitive  operations  on  the  level  on
which  they  apprehend  them.  That  they  do  not  respond
more  intelligently,  and  so  are  condemned  by  us  as
'  inanimate,'  is  due  to  their  immense  spiritual  remoteness
from  us,  or  perhaps  to  our  inability  to  understand  them,
and  the  clumsiness  and  lack  of  insight  of  our  manipula-
tions, which  afford  them  no  opportunity  to  display  their
spiritual  nature.

§  1 3.  Even,  however,  on  the  purely  physical  plane  on
which  our  transactions  with  other  bodies  are  conducted,
there  is  response  to  our  cognitive  manipulation  which
varies  with  our  operation,  and  therefore  there  is  real
making  of  reality  by  us.

Even  physically,  therefore,  '  facts '  are  not  rigid  and
immutable.  Indeed,  they  are  never  quite  the  same  for
any  two  experiments.  The  facts  we  accept  and  act  on
are  continually  transformed  by  our  very  action,  and  so
the  results  of  our  efforts  can  slowly  be  embodied  in  the
world  we  mould.  The  key  to  the  puzzle  is  found  in
principle,  once  we  abandon  intellectualism  and  grasp  the
true  function  of  knowledge.  For  the  alien  world,  which
seemed  so  remote  and  so  rigid  to  an  inert  contemplation,
the  reality  which  seemed  so  intractable  to  an  aimless  and
fruitless  speculation,  grows  plastic  in  this  way  to  our
intelligent  manipulations.

§  14.  The  extent  of  this  plasticity  it  is,  of  course,
most  important  for  us  to  appreciate.  Practically,  for
most  people  at  most  times,  it  falls  far  short  of  our  wishes.
Nay,  we  often  feel  that  if  reality  is  to  be  remade,  it
must  first  be  unmade,  that  if  we  could  only  grasp  the  sorry
scheme  of  things  we  should  shatter  it  to  bits  before  remould-
ing it  nearer  to  the  heart's  desire.  Still,  this  is  not  the
normal  attitude  of  man.  There  is  usually  an  enormous


xix  THE  MAKING  OF  REALITY  445

mass  of  accepted  fact  which  we  do  not  desire  to  have
remade,  and  which  so  has  the  sanction  of  our  will.  Other
facts  it  has  never  occurred  to  us  to  desire  to  remake.  In
other  cases,  we  do,  indeed  regard  an  alteration  as  desirable
in  the  abstract,  but  for  some  reason  or  other,  perhaps
merely  because  we  are  too  lazy,  or  too  faintly  interested,
or  too  much  engrossed  by  more  pressing  needs,  we  do
not  actually  attempt  to  effect  an  alteration.  The  amount
of  '  fact,'  therefore,  which  it  is  ordinarily  felt  to  be  im-
peratively necessary  to  alter  is  comparatively  small,  and
this  is  why  most  people  find  (or  '  make '  ?)  life  tolerable.

But  whatever  our  actual  desire  and  power  to  alter
our  experience,  it  is  an  obvious  methodological  principle
that  we  must  regard  the  plasticity  of  fact  as  adequate  for
every  purpose,  t\e.  as  sufficient  for  the  attainment  of  the
harmonious  experience  to  which  we  should  ascribe
ultimate  reality.  For  (a)  if  we  do  not  assume  it,  we
may  by  that  very  act,  and  by  that  act  alone,  as  William
James  has  so  eloquently  shown,  shut  ourselves  out  from
countless  goods  which  faith  in  their  possibility  might
realise,  (b]  Some  facts,  at  least,  are  plastic,  and  others  look
plastic,  at  least  to  common  sense.  And  even  though  some
4  facts  '  do  not  look  as  if  they  would  speedily  yield  to  human
treatment,  there  is  (<:)  no  reason  in  this  for  abandoning
our  methodological  principle  of  complete  plasticity.  For
a  partial  plasticity  would  be  nugatory  and  unworkable.
If  we  had  assumed  it,  it  might  always  be  declared  to  be
inapplicable  to  the  case  to  which  it  was  applied.  And
conversely,  even  if  we  could  somehow  know,  non-
empirically  and  a  priori,  that  on  some  points  the  world
was  quite  inflexible,  we  could  not  use  this  knowledge
because  we  should  not  know  what  these  points  were.
Nor  should  we  be  entitled  to  infer  that  we  had  found
them  out,  even  from  our  failures.  For  a  failure,  if  it
does  not  discourage  us,  warrants  nothing  but  the
inference  that  we  cannot  get  what  we  want  in  just  the
way  we  tried.  Hence  for  the  purposes  of  any  particular
experiment  it  would  still  be  necessary  to  assume  that  the
world  was  plastic.  Whatever  '  theoretic '  views,  there-


446  STUDIES IN HUMANISM  xix

fore,  we  may  privately  cherish  as  to  the  unalterable
rigidity  of  facts,  we  must  act  as  if  '  fact '  were  as  flexible
as  ever  is  needed,  if  we  would  act  effectively.  And  as
the  principle  is  methodological,  it  would  not  affect  or
undermine  the  stability  of  fact,  wherever  that  was  needed
for  our  action.

§  15.  Our  position,  then,  as  genuine  makers  of  reality
seems  to  be  pretty  well  established.  We  do  not  make
reality  out  of  nothing,  of  course,  i.e.  we  are  not  '  creators/
and  our  powers  are  limited.  But  as  yet  we  are  only
beginning  to  realise  them,  and  hardly  know  their  full
extent ;  we  are  only  beginning  cautiously  to  try  to  remake
reality,  and  so  far  (with  the  exception  of  some  improvement
in  domesticated  plants  and  animals)  our  activities  have
been  mainly  destructive  :  in  every  direction,  however,  there
seems  to  extend  a  wide  field  of  experiments  which
might  be  tried  with  a  fair  prospect  of  success.  Nor  do
we  yet  know  the  full  extent  of  the  co-operation  which  our
aims  might  find,  or  obtain,  from  other  agents  in  the
universe.

For  it  seems  clear  that  we  are  not  the  sole  agents  in
the  world,  and  that  herein  lies  the  true  explanation  of
those  aspects  of  the  world,  which  we,  the  present  agents,  i.e.
our  empirical  selves,  cannot  claim  to  have  made.  There  is
no  reason  to  conceive  these  features  as  original  and  rigid.
Why  should  we  not  conceive  them  as  having  been  made  by
processes  analogous  to  those  whereby  we  ourselves  make
reality  and  watch  its  making  ?  For,  as  we  have  seen,  all
the  agents  in  the  universe  are  in  continuous  interaction,
adjusting  and  readjusting  themselves  according  to  the
influences  brought  to  bear  upon  them.  The  precise
nature  of  these  influences  varies  according  to  the  character
and  capacity  which  the  various  agents  have  acquired.
There  is  no  need  to  assume  any  character  to  be  original.
All  the  '  laws  of  nature,'  in  so  far  as  they  are  really
objective  and  not  merely  conveniences  of  calculation,
may  be  regarded  as  the  habits  of  things,  and  these
habits  as  behaviours  which  have  grown  determinate,  and
more  or  less  stable,  by  persistent  action,  but  as  still


xix  THE  MAKING OF  REALITY  447

capable of further determinations under the proper
manipulation.1

And  lest  we  should  be  thought  to  limit  our  outlook
too  narrowly  to  the  agents  which  our  science  at  present
consents  to  recognise,  it  ought  also  definitely  to  be
realised  that  among  the  agencies  which  we  have  not  yet
found,  because  we  have  not  yet  looked,  or  looked  only  in
a  half-hearted  and  distrustful  manner,  there  may  be  a  being
(or  perhaps  more  than  one)  so  vastly  more  potent  than
ourselves  that  his  part  in  the  shaping  of  reality  may  have
been  so  preponderant  as  almost  to  warrant  our  hailing
him  as  a  '  creator.'  And  again,  it  is  possible  that  our  own
careers,  and  so  our  own  agency,  may  extend  much  farther
back  into  the  past  than  now  we  are  aware.

But  these  suggestions  will  seem  wild  to  many,  and
need  not  be  emphasised  or  enlarged  on.  They  do  not
affect  the  conceivability  of  the  making  of  reality,  nor  the
conceptual  unity  of  a  cosmic  process  in  which  there  may
always  be  distinguished  a  certain  aspect  of  what  may  be
called  '  cognition,'  and  another  of  '  action,'  but  in  which
the  former  is  always  subsidiary  to,  tested  and  completed
by,  the  latter.

§  1 6.  What  may,  however,  more  plausibly  be  thought
to  affect  the  conception  of  the  making  of  reality  are  two
closely  connected  metaphysical  assumptions  which  we
have  implied  throughout.  They  may  be  called  (i)  the
reality  of  freedom  or  the  determinable  indetermination  of
reality,  and  (2)  the  incompleteness  of  reality.  Both  of
these  conceptions  we  discovered,  and  to  some  extent
justified,  towards  the  end  of  the  last  essay  (§§  10-12).
But  it  may  not  be  amiss  to  add  a  few  words  in  justifica-
tion and  confirmation  of  our  choice.

It  is  evident,  in  the  first  place,  that  if  we  have  no
freedom,  and  cannot  choose  between  alternative  manipula-
tions and  reactions,  we  are  not  agents,  and,  therefore,
cannot  '  make  reality.'  Freedom,  therefore,  is  a  postulate
of  the  Humanist  making  of  reality.  Strictly  speaking,
however,  human  freedom  would  suffice  to  validate  the

1  Essay  xviii.  §  n.


448  STUDIES IN HUMANISM  xix

notion.  For  if  we  can  operate  alternatively,  we  can
initiate  alternative  courses  of  reality.

But  there  are  no  stringent  reasons  for  confining
freedom,  and  the  plastic  indetermination  of  habit  on
which  it  rests,  to  man  alone.1  It  may  well  be  a  feature
which  really  pervades  the  universe.  All  beings  in  the
world  may  be  essentially  determinable,  but  still  partly
indeterminate,  in  their  habits  and  actions.  That  such  is
the  nature  of  the  universe  may  indeed  be  argued  from
the  fact  that  it  responds  variously  to  various  modes  of
handling.  And  once  it  is  admitted  to  be  partly  un-
determined, it  is  not  a  question  of  principle  how  far  the
indetermination  goes.  Many  or  all  of  the  other  agents
beside  ourselves  may  be  capable  of  more  or  less  varying
their  responses  to  stimulation,  of  acquiring  and  modifying
their  habits.  Thus  the  whole  universe  will  appear  to  us
as  literally  the  creature  of  habit,  but  not  its  slave.  And
the  more  of  this  '  freedom '  we  can  attribute  to  the
universe,  the  more  plastic  to  good  purposes  we  may
expect  to  find  it.  For  we  shall  expect  to  find  habit  more
rigid  where  intelligence  is  lacking  to  suggest  readjustment
and  amendment,  more  plastic  where  there  is  more  striving
towards  a  better  state ;  and  yet,  on  the  other  hand,  more
stable  where  there  is  less  impediment  to  perfect  function-
ing ;  but  everywhere,  let  us  hope,  latently  plastic  enough
to  render  the  notion  of  a  perfect,  and  therefore  universal,
harmony  that  of  an  attainable  ideal.2

§  17.  If  there  is  freedom  in  the  world,  and  reality  is
really  being  made,  it  is  clear  that  reality  is  not  fixed  and
finished,  but  that  the  world-process  is  real  and  is  still
proceeding.  And  so  we  come  once  more  upon  the
metaphysical  objection  to  the  growing,  incomplete,  reality
which  seems  to  be  demanded  by  a  philosophy  of  Evolution.
We  have  already  twice  challenged  or  defied  this  prejudice,*
and  may  this  time  try  to  vanquish  it  by  explaining  how
it  comes  about.

This  objection  springs,  we may frankly  admit,  from

1  Cp.  Essay  xviii.  §  9.  2  Cp.  Humanism,  p.  181.

3  Cp.  Essays  ix.  §  i,  xviii.  §  12.


xix  THE  MAKING  OF  REALITY  449

a  sound  methodological  principle  which  has  great  prag-
matic value.  When  we  can  allege  no  reason  why  a
thing  should  change,  we  may  assume  that  it  remains  the
same.  Applying  this  maxim  to  the  quantum  of  existence,
we  conclude  that  the  amount  of  being  is  constant.  Apply-
ing it  to  the  totality  of  existence,  we  conclude  that  the
universe  as  a  whole  cannot  change  in  any  real  way,  but
must  be  complete  and  rigid.

These  two  applications,  however,  are  neither  on  the
same  footing  nor  of  equal  value.  The  first  yields  the
sound  working  assumptions  of  the  indestructibility  of
'  matter '  and  the  conservation  of  '  energy,'  which  are  of
the  utmost  pragmatic  value  in  physics.  They  are,  in  the
first  place,  the  easiest  assumptions  to  work  with.  For  it
is  far  easier  to  make  calculations  with  constant  factors
than  with  variable.  They  are,  in  the  second  place,
applicable ;  for  although  these  principles,  like  all  pos-
tulates, are  not  susceptible  of  complete  experimental
proof,  experience  does  not  confute  them  by  discrepancies
so  great  or  so  inexplicable  as  seriously  to  impair  their
usefulness.1  In  the  third  place,  they  are  applied  only  to
those  abstract  aspects  of  physics  which  have  shown  them-
selves amenable  to  quantitative  treatment,  and  in  regard
to  which,  therefore,  such  treatment  seems  valid.  The
scientific  use,  therefore,  of  the  principle  of  constancy  is
pragmatically  justified  by  the  peculiar  nature  of  the
subject-matter  to  which  it  is  applied.

But  can  as  much  be  claimed  for  its  metaphysical
double?  It  is  not  self-evident  that  the  quantitative
aspect  of  reality  is  of  paramount  authority.  It  is  not
easy  to  apply  the  quantitative  notion  to  the  spiritual
aspects  of  existence.  It  is  very  difficult  to  conceive  a
'  conservation  '  of  spiritual  values.  It  is  still  more  difficult
to  obtain  empirical  confirmation  of  this  notion.  It  is

1  Of  course,  however,  it  should  be  remembered  that  the  leakage  of  energy,
which  takes  place  de  facto  in  its  transformations,  is  only  theoretically  stopped  by
the  notion  of  its  '  degradation '  or  '  dissipation. '  Moreover,  to  conceive  the
universe  as  '  infinite '  is  really  to  render  the  postulate  of  conservation  inap-
plicable to  it.  For  by  what  test  can  it  be  known  whether  an  infinite  quantity
of  matter  or  energy  is,  or  is  not,  '  conserved '  ?

2  G


450  STUDIES  IN HUMANISM  Xix

almost  absurd  to  deny  the  reality  of  our  continual
experience  of  change,  out  of  deference  to  a  metaphysical
postulate.  And,  lastly,  every  human  motive  urges  us  to
deny  the  completeness  of  Reality.

For,  humanly  speaking,  this  atrocious  dogma  reduces
us  and  our  whole  experience  to  illusion.  If  we  think
out  its  demands,  we  must  concede  that  nothing  is  really
happening  ;  there  is  no  world-process,  no  history,  no  time  ;
motion  and  change  are  impossible  ;  all  our  struggles  and
strivings  are  vain.  They  can  accomplish  nothing,  because
everything  that  truly  is  is  already  accomplished.  The
sum  total  of  Reality  has  been  reckoned  up,  and  there  is
lacking  not  a  single  cipher.  So  all  our  hopes  and  our
fears,  our  aspirations  and  our  desperations,  do  not  count.
For  we  ourselves  are  illusions,  we,  and  all  our  acts  and
thoughts  and  troubles — all,  save  only,  I  suppose,  the
thought  of  the  rigid,  timeless,  motionless,  changeless  One,
which  we  have  weakly  postulated  to  redeem  our  experi-
ence, and  which  rewards  us  and  resolves  our  problems  by
annihilating  us  !  It  is  a  pity  only  that  it  does  not  make  a
clean  job  of  its  deadly  work,  that  it  does  not  wholly  absorb
us  in  its  all-embracing  unity.  For  after  all  ought  it  not
to  annihilate  the  illusion  as  well  as  its  claim  to  reality  ?
If  we,  and  the  time-process,  and  the  making  of  reality,
are  all  fundamentally  unreal,  we  ought  not  to  be  able  to
seem  real  even  to  ourselves.  And  still  less  should  we  be
able  to  devise  such  blasphemous  objections  against  the
One !  Somehow,  not  even  the  One  knows  how,  the
'  Illusion  '  falls  outside  the  '  Reality ' !

And  for  us,  at  all  events,  it  is  reality.  For  us  Reality
is  really  incomplete  ;  and  that  it  is  so  is  our  fondest  hope.
For  what  this  means  is  that  Reality  can  still  be  remade,
and  made  perfect !

It  is  this  genuine  possibility,  no  assured  promise,  it  is
true,  nor  a  prophecy  of  smooth  things,  but  still  less  a
proffer  of  false  coin,  which  our  Humanist  metaphysic
secures  to  us.  It  does  not  profess  to  know  how  the
Making  of  Reality  will  end.  For  in  a  world  which
contains  real  efforts,  real  choices,  real  conflicts,  and  real


xix  THE  MAKING  OF  REALITY  451

evils,  to  the  extent  our  world  appears  to  do,  there  must  be
ground  for  a  real  doubt  about  the  issue.  We  hardly
know  as  yet  how  the  battle  of  the  Giants  and  the  Gods
is  going ;  we  hardly  know  under  what  leader,  and  with
what  strategy,  we  are  contending ;  we  do  not  even  know
that  we  shall  not  be  sacrificed  to  win  the  day.  But  is
this  a  reason  for  refusing  to  carry  on  the  fight,  or  for
denying  that  Truth  is  great  and  must  prevail,  because  it
has  the  making  of  Reality  ?


XX

DREAMS  AND  IDEALISM1

ARGUMENT

§  i.  The  popularity  and  ambiguity  of  Idealism.  Can  Humanism  be  the
higher  synthesis  of  it  and  realism  ?  §  2.  A  degenerate  '  idealism '  which
pragmatically  =  a  monistic  realism.  §  3.  The  drift  in  'absolute  ideal-
ism '  towards  realism.  The  common  objection  to  absolutism  and
realism,  and  the  coincidence  of  their  standpoints  humanistically.  Realism
as  a  shelter  for  absolutism.  §  4.  Realistic  velleities  in  absolutism
in  order  to  meet  the  alleged  subjectivism  of  Humanism.  Their  futility.
§  5.  The  cry  'back  to  Plato.'  Platonism  as  either  realism  or  idealism.
But  realism  is  pluralistic,  and  if  the  Absolute  also  is  sacrificed,  only  the
intellectualism  remains  in  'absolute  idealism.'  §  6.  Common -sense
realism  is  pragmatic ;  but  its  working  has  limits.  ( I )  Religiously  ;
'  Heaven'  is  a  second  'real  world.'  (2)  Philosophically  ;  the  real  world
is  a  construction,  individual  and  social.  (3)  Pragmatic  realism  does
not  transcend  the  experience-process.  §  7.  Philosophic  realism  has
overlooked  the  Humanist  alternative.  §  8.  Other  idealisms,  personal,
subjective,  absolute.  §  9.  An  attempt  to  prove  absolute  idealism.  §  10.
The  inadequacies  and  fallacies  of  this  proof,  (i)  The  ambiguity  of
'reality  is  experience.'  (2)  The  'subject'  depends  on  the  'object'  as
much  as  vice  versa.  (3)  The  Absolute  does  not  explain  human  experi-
ences, and  vainly  complicates  the  problem  of  a  common  world.  §  II.
(4)  Kant's  argument  from  the  'making  of  reality'  criticised.  §  12.  (5)
The  psychological  subjectivity  of  experiences  presupposes  a  '  real '
world.  §  13.  Can  Idealism  be  proved  pragmatically?  §  14.  Its
fundamental  dictum  is  reality  is  'my'  experience.  Why  this  is  not
necessarily  solipsistic.  Why  it  is  idealistic.  §15.  The  extrusion  of  the
'objective'  world,  and  its  volitional  character.  §  16.  The  case  for
solipsism.  §  17.  The  solipsistic  interpretation  of  dreams  has  a
pragmatic  motive,  but  §  1 8  so  has  the  realistic  interpretation  of  waking
life,  which  remains  immanent  in  experience,  and  cannot  be  more  real
than  that.  §  19.  Dreams  prove  that  this  reality  need  not  be  absolute.
§  20.  The  philosophic  import  of  dreams.  §  21.  A  simple  argument  for
idealism.  §  22.  Seven  objections  to  it  and  their  refutation.  §  23.  Is
Idealism,  then,  proved  ?  A  paradoxical  form  of  Realism.  §  24.  The
final  confutation  of  Realism.  §  25.  The  final  confutation  of  Idealism.
§  26.  The  Humanist  solution,  which  combines  the  objective  and  sub-
jective factors  harmoniously.  The  Humanist  Ideal.

1  This  essay  appeared  in  the  Hibbert  Journal  for  October  1904.  It  has  been
extensively  recast  and  added  to,  in  order  to  make  more  explicit  its  connexion  with
the  general  line  of  thought  of  these  Studies,  and  to  clinch  their  argument.

452


xx  DREAMS  AND IDEALISM  453

§  i.  FOR  some  reason,  which  it  is  not  difficult  to  guess
at,  and  which  is  probably  not  unconnected  with  the  con-
venient ambiguities  of  the  word,  it  has  become  more
reputable  for  philosophers  to  call  themselves  '  idealists '
than  '  realists.'  But  it  is  merely  a  popular  misapprehension,
which  no  serious  student  of  philosophy  should  countenance,
to  suppose  on  this  account  that  any  doctrine  called
'  idealism  '  must  specially  concern  itself  with  the  vindica-
tion of  ideals.  In  point  of  fact  the  term  '  idealism '  is
very  variously  and  vaguely  used,  the  line  between  it  and
'  realism '  is  by  no  means  an  easy  one  to  draw  in  practice,
and  the  classification  of  many  doctrines  is  somewhat
arbitrary.  Moreover,  it  seems  hard  to  say  whether  the
new  pragmatic  doctrines  are  more  akin  to  '  realism '  or  to
'  idealism.'

It  seems,  therefore,  that  we  can  most  fitly  conclude
these  Studies  by  devoting  ourselves  to  an  examination  of
the  present  condition  of  the  controversy  between  '  realism  '
and  '  idealism,'  with  a  view  to  determining  to  which  of
them  Humanism  has  more  affinity,  and  how  completely
it  can  assimilate  the  truths  they  severally  contain.  For
it  is  probable  that  here  too,  in  dealing  with  what  is
perhaps  the  ultimate  antithesis  of  intellectualist  meta-
physics, Humanism  is  enabled  to  play  the  part  of  a
mediator  who  transcends  their  strife,  and  incorporates
in  a  higher  synthesis  all  that  is  really  valuable  in
both.

§  2.  We  begin,  then,  with  Idealism,  which,  as  we
noted,  has  attained  a  certain  primacy  over  Realism,  and
developed  into  a  perplexing  multitude  of  forms.  The
more  degenerate  of  these  come  to  very  little,  and  are
significant  only  as  illustrating  the  tendency  of  more
highly  differentiated  philosophic  thought  to  revert  to  the
simpler  and  more  convenient  theories  of  ordinary  life.
To  many  '  idealists '  their  '  idealism '  hardly  seems  to
mean  more  than  this,  that  they  conceive  themselves  to  be
entitled  to  speak  of  the  universe  as  somehow  and  in  some
sense  '  spiritual ' ;  as  for  the  rest  they  think  and  act
exactly  like  nal've  realists.  But  how  and  in  what  sense


454  STUDIES  IN  HUMANISM  xx

the  world  is  'spiritual'  it  is  impossible  to  extract  from
their  ambiguous  dicta  ;  often  one  suspects  that  all  they
can  really  mean  is  that  the  spiritual  is  included  in  the
universe.  At  any  rate  they  are  careful  to  leave  undefined
the  meaning  of '  spiritual,'  and  unelucidated  the  problem
of  the  exact  relation  and  analogy  between  the  spiritual
character  ascribed  to  the  universe  and  our  human
spirits.  It  is  useless,  again,  to  ask  them  for  a  proof,  or
derivation,  of  their  standpoint :  they  are  too  prudent  to
attempt  it.

It  is  clear  that  such  flabby  '  idealism  '  cannot  commend
itself  to  pragmatic  thinkers,  who  will  want  to  know  why
that  should  be  called  idealism  which,  both  in  its  practical
consequences  and  in  the  efficacious  part  of  its  theory,
coincides  with  realism.  It  is,  accordingly,  no  wonder
that  when  the  slightest  logical  pressure  is  put  upon  it,
this  sort  of  idealism  tends  to  disappear,  or  rather  to
transform  itself  into  a  monistic  realism,  or  realistic
absolutism.

§  3.  All  forms  of  absolutist  '  idealism,'  moreover,  have
recently  been  subjected  to  very  severe  pressure  in  con-
sequence of  pragmatist  attacks.  They  have  not  only
been  asked  a  number  of  awkward  questions  which  they
have  never  been  able  to  answer,  but  the  functional  value
and  logical  validity  of  their  answers  to  the  questions
which  they  always  thought  they  could  answer,  and  on  which
they  most  prided  themselves,  have  been  systematically
impugned.  For  this  transformation  of  the  logical  situation
Prof.  Dewey's  Studies  in  Logical  Theory  have  been  largely
responsible,  and  the  effect  upon  many  idealisms  has  been
highly  paradoxical.  For  it  has  apparently  driven  them
in  the  direction  of  realism  !

And  yet  at  bottom  nothing  was  more  natural.  There
is  nothing  like  community  in  misfortune  to  awaken
philosophic  sympathy.  And  Prof.  Dewey  had  put
absolute  idealism  in  the  same  box,  or  rather  in  the  same
hole,  with  realism.  He  had  shown,  that  is,  quite  clearly,
and  in  a  manner  which  has  not  yet  been  disputed,  that
the  favourite  weapon  of  idealists  in  their  debates  with


xx  DREAMS  AND IDEALISM  455

realism  might  be  turned  against  them.  They  had  for
years  been  accustomed  to  condemn  the  fatuity  of  realism
in  assuming  that  knowledge  could  be  accounted  for  by  a
'  transcendent '  real  which  could  not  be  known.  And  then
suddenly  it  turned  out  that  their  own  theory  involved  this
same  fatuity  in  an  aggravated  form  !  For  it  appeared
that  absolute  knowledge,  as  they  had  conceived  it,  failed
at  every  point  to  account  for  human  knowledge,  and  that
between  the  two  there  lay  what  we  have  named  in
honour  of  its  first  discoverer  (or  maker  ?)  '  Plato's  Chasm,'
to  the  brink  of  which  their  theories  could  approach,  but
which  they  could  never  cross.

Fundamentally,  therefore,  as  regards  the  theory  of
knowledge,  the  position  of  absolute  idealism  coincides,  in
all  the  epistemologically  important  points,  with  that  of
realism.  Both  have  tried  to  conceive  ultimate  reality  as
essentially  '  independent '  of  our  knowing,  as  intrinsically
unrelated  to  our  life.  In  order  to  satisfy  this  postulate
both  have  postulated  that  our  knowing  must  somehow
transcend  itself,  and  be  able  to  bring  us  tidings  of  some-
thing which  is  unaffected  by  our  process  of  cognition.
Both  involve  the  fundamental  self-contradiction  that  this
something  is  conceived  both  as  related  to  us,  and  as  not
related,  in  and  by  the  same  process.  Both  have  failed  to
perceive  that  there  is  a  much  simpler  solution  of  the
problem  which  involves  no  such  difficulties,  that  they
have  misinterpreted  the  postulates  on  which  they  try  to
build  the  self-contradictory  structures  of  their  theories  of
knowledge,  and  that  the  '  transcendent '  and  the  '  inde-
pendent '  and  the  '  absolute '  can  far  better  be  conceived
as  staying  comfortably  within  the  experience  process.
Both,  in  short,  have  failed  to  reckon  with  a  Humanist
epistemology.

In  comparison  with  these  fundamental  points  of  agree-
ment, the  differences  between  '  realism '  and  '  absolute
idealism '  are  really  negligible.  What  does  it  matter
whether  the  reality  to  which  our  knowing  has  to  '  corre-
spond '  is  called  an  absolute  '  fact '  or  an  absolute  '  thought '  ?
In  neither  case  can  it  be  reached  from  the  human  stand-


456  STUDIES IN HUMANISM  xx

point :  in  either  case  it  would  abolish  our  thought  or
render  it  nugatory,  if  it  could  be  reached.  Still,  as  we
saw  in  Essays  iv.  §  7  and  vii.  §  I ,  though  these  difficulties
are  all  insuperable,  yet  realism  really  involves  a  few  less
of  them.  Absolute  idealism  has  involved  itself  in  some
additional  complications,  owing  to  the  way  in  which
absolute  thought  reduces  our  thought  to  an  unreal  '  appear-
ance,' which  can  yet  somehow  persist  in  asserting  its
reality.  There  is,  therefore,  a  sort  of  gain  for  it  in
becoming  realistic  ;  and  this,  together  with  the  perception
of  their  common  entanglement,  would  amply  suffice  to
account  for  the  recent  drift  of  '  idealists '  towards  realism,
if  one  could  credit  them  with  a  full  perception  of  the
difficulties  of  their  theory.  But  as  yet  this  is  hardly  the
case.  They  still  conceive  them  as  '  difficulties '  incidental
to  a  fundamentally  sound  theory :  they  have  not  yet
realised  its  utter  rottenness.

§  4.  They  have,  moreover,  further  motives  for  their
aspirations  towards  '  a  more  objective '  view  of  reality.
They  have,  in  the  first  place,  committed  themselves  to  an
interpretation  of  the  pragmatic  theory  of  knowledge
which  renders  it  controversially  desirable  to  give  a  more
realistic  turn  or  tone  to  absolutism.  This  interpretation
is  one  which  their  preconceptions,  no  doubt,  rendered
natural,  and  perhaps  inevitable,  but  which  is  nevertheless
wholly  mistaken.  They  have  interpreted  Pragmatism  as
sheer  subjectivism,  identified  it  with  Protagoreanism,
adopted  Plato's  identification  of  the  latter  with  scepticism,
admitted  his  claim  to  have  refuted  it,  and  added  that  this
has  been  done  for  all  time,  and  that  there  is  nothing  new
under  the  sun.

But  all  these  assertions  happen  to  be  false,  as  we
have  fully  shown.  What  is  true  about  them  is  merely
that  Pragmatism  has  tried  to  recall  philosophy  to  the  con-
sideration of  actual  human  thinking,  and  that  this  is
always  personal  and  individual.  Hence  the  absolutist
misinterpretation  of  this  undertaking  only  proves  how  the
continued  contemplation  of  '  ideal '  abstractions  can  vitiate
a  human  mind.  The  absolutists  who  argue  as  above


xx  DREAMS  AND  IDEALISM  457

have  evidently  so  disaccustomed  themselves  to  observe
the  concrete  facts  of  human  existence  that  all  actual
thinking  seems  to  them  to  be  of  necessity  '  merely  sub-
jective.' That  actual  thinking  should  necessarily  start
with  the  '  subjective,'  and  naturally  reach  the  '  objective '
by  an  immanent  development  which  engenders  all  dis-
tinctions, '  transcends '  them  because  it  includes  them,
and  reconciles  them  because  it  never  misconceives  them
as  absolute,  sounds  to  their  ears  incredible.  They  will
not  believe  it  even  when  they  see  it  set  down  plainly  in
cold  print.  Yet  such  is  nevertheless  the  case,  and  probably
was  the  case  from  the  first,  and  implied  in  the  first  sketch
of  a  Humanist  theory  of  knowledge  by  Protagoras.1

Hence  the  attempt  to  refute  Humanism  and  to  baffle
its  attack  by  growing  more  '  realistic '  seems  unlikely  to
succeed.  For  the  Humanist  account  of  the  cognitive
process  really  transcends  both  '  realism '  and  '  idealism '  as
hitherto  maintained.  It  explains  both,  by  tracing  their
genesis  and  pointing  out  exactly  where  they  have  severally
drawn  unwarrantable  inferences.  It  can  afford,  therefore,
to  remain  on  excellent  terms  with  Realism,  more  particu-
larly with  what  is  really  the  most  practically  important
and  efficient  form  of  it,  viz.  the  common-sense  theory  of
ordinary  life,  of  the  pragmatic  value  of  which  it  is  keenly
appreciative.  It  does  not  profess  to  despise  it,  to  '  criticise  '
or  '  overcome '  it ;  it  simply  includes  it.  It  simply  points
out  that,  good  as  it  is  so  far  as  it  goes,  it  does  not  go  the
whole  way,  and  must  be  supplemented.2

It  hardly  seems  worth  while,  therefore,  for  '  absolute
idealism '  to  take  the  trouble  of  becoming  realistic,  in
order  to  differ  from  and  to  confute  a  '  subjectivism '  its
critics  are  not  committed  to.

§  5.  Still,  once  the  cry  '  back  to  Plato  '  has  been  raised,
it  cannot  readily  be  hushed.  We  have  ourselves  joined
in  it  heartily,  and  insisted  that  the  lesson  which  Platonism
has  for  all  attempts  to  separate  the  ideal  from  the  human
should  never  be  forgotten.  But  this  cry  must  render
an  idealism  which  adopts  it  in  a  manner  realistic.  For  (in
1  Cp.  Essay  ii.  §  5.  2  Cp.  §  6.


458  STUDIES IN  HUMANISM  xx

a  sense)  the  Platonic  philosophy  seems  capable  of  forming
a  common  meeting -ground  for  realistic  and  idealistic
intellectualisms,  so  much  so  that  it  may  alternatively  be
called  a  realism  or  an  idealism.  Hitherto  '  idealists '  have
preferred  to  call  Plato  '  the  great  idealist ' ;  in  future  they
may,  as  justly  or  unjustly,  call  him  the  great  realist.  It
really  does  not  matter.  For,  on  the  one  hand,  his  Theory
of  Ideas  is  surely  '  idealism,'  and  on  the  other,  the  Ideas
are  objective  entities,  and  independent  and  free  from  all
subjective  taint.  And  it  seems  to  be  little  more  than
an  accident  that  the  champion  '  realists '  of  the  day,
Messrs.  G.  E.  Moore  and  Bertrand  Russell,  have  entitled
their  ultra-Platonic  hypostasisation  of  predicates  '  realism  '
rather  than  idealism.'  If,  then,  these  tendencies  are
worked  out  to  their  logical  conclusions,  it  may  well  be
confessed  before  long  that  '  absolute  idealism '  is  really
obsolete  idealism,  at  least  so  far  as  its  substantive  part  is
concerned.

A  promising  career  might  thus  be  predicted  for  an
absolutism  calling  itself  a  realistic  idealism  or  an  idealistic
realism,  which  Janus-like  could  always  smile  triumphantly
with  one  face,  however  much  the  other  was  smitten,  were
it  not  for  two  sad  circumstances.  The  first  of  these  is
the  existence  of  Plato's  Chasm,  across  which  neither
Platonism  nor  Realism  can  help  it.  The  second  is  Prof.
Dewey's  proof  that  in  the  end  all  forms,  both  of  meta-
physical realism  and  of  metaphysical  absolutism,  must  fall
into  this  chasm,  and  that  neither  can  exonerate  the  other
from  objections  which  press  equally  on  both.  It  seems
more  likely,  therefore,  that  upon  further  reflection,  and
when  the  nature  of  the  situation  is  clearly  perceived,  this
attempt  of  absolutism  to  array  itself  in  the  serviceable
sheepskin  of  an  honest  realism  will  be  seen  to  be  cankered
in  the  bud,  and  will  be  nipped  off  quietly.

After  all,  the  enterprise  was  always  paradoxical  and
never  really  safe,  and  it  may  mitigate  regrets  to  point  out
that  in  any  case  '  absolute  idealism '  could  hardly  have
really  paid  the  price  of  an  alliance  with  Realism.  In  all
but  its  materialistic  forms,  Realism  seems  profoundly


xx  DREAMS  AND IDEALISM  459

pluralistic;  in  its  most  modern  philosophic  form  it  is  un-
mitigated pluralism.  Platonism  itself  would  be  pluralistic,
but  for  the  Idea  of  the  Good  ; *  and  even  this  unifying
principle  de  facto  remains  an  aspiration,  which  avowedly
cannot  be  applied  to  the  actual  systems  of  the  sciences.
To  purchase,  therefore,  the  support  of  Realism,  '  absolute
idealism  '  would  have  to  surrender  its  adjective  as  well  as
its  substantive,  and  to  evaporate  into  mere  general  intel-
lectualism.  But  this,  perhaps,  is  what  '  absolute  idealists '
have  at  bottom  cared  for  most.

§  6.  As  the  '  idealisms '  we  have  considered  have
brought  up  the  subject  of  Realism,  we  may  now  improve
the  occasion  to  have  a  preliminary  explanation  with  this
doctrine.  And  to  begin  with,  we  must  draw  a  sharp
distinction  between  ( I )  the  common-sense  or  naive  realism
of  ordinary  life,  and  (2)  philosophic  realism.

With  the  first  of  these  our  Humanism  will  be  loth  to
quarrel  or  part  company.  For  it  manifestly  is  a  theory
of  very  great  pragmatic  value.  In  ordinary  life  we  all
assume  that  we  live  in  an  '  external '  world,  which  is
'  independent '  of  us,  and  peopled  by  other  persons  as  real
and  as  good,  or  better,  than  ourselves.  And  it  would  be
a  great  calamity  if  any  philosophy  should  feel  it  its  duty
to  upset  this  assumption.  For  it  works  splendidly,  and
the  philosophy  which  attacked  it  would  only  hurt  itself.

Common -sense,  or,  as  we  may  now  also  call  it,
pragmatic  realism,  works  for  almost  every  purpose.  It  is
only  when  he  tries  to  satisfy  therewith  his  religious
cravings  that  the  ordinary  man  discovers  that  it  has  its
limitations.  For  the  real  world  he  lives  in  is  not  an  ideal
world,  and  he  can  find  no  room  in  it  for  his  ideals.
'  Heaven '  cannot  be  found  in  the  heavens.  He  is  driven,
accordingly,  to  the  thought  of  '  another  world,'  which  is
not  wholly  continuous  with  the  real  world.  Yet  it  must
be  real  too,  nay,  more  truly  real  than  our  world.  He  gets,
therefore,  two  worlds,  the  '  reality '  of  each  of  which  has
somehow  to  be  accommodated  to  that  of  the  other.  The
puzzles  involved  in  this  relation  the  ordinary  man,  very

1  Essay  ii.  §  13.


460  STUDIES  IN  HUMANISM  xx

naturally,  declines  to  think  out.  But  he  must  admit
that  they  form  a  legitimate  starting-point  for  a  philosophic
elaboration  of  his  working  assumption.

The  philosopher,  for  his  part,  may  discover  further
limits  to  the  pragmatic  sufficiency  of  ordinary  realism.
A  few  odds  and  ends  of  experience,  which  are  usually  put
aside  as  '  unreal,'  come  under  his  notice.  By  investigating
them  he  slowly  comes  to  realise  that  the  pragmatically
real  world  is  not  an  original  datum  of  experience  at  all,
but  an  elaborate  construction,  made  by  us,  individually
and  socially,  by  a  purposive  selection  of  the  more
efficacious,  and  a  rejection  of  the  less  efficacious  portions
of  a  '  primary  reality '  which  seems  chaotic  to  begin  with,
but  contains  a  great  deal  more  than  the  '  external  world '
extracted  from  it.1  The  exact  nature  of  the  process  by
which  the  '  real  world '  is  constructed  by  us,  remains,
indeed,  in  some  respects  obscure.  It  is  clear,  however,
that  the  child,  from  the  first  day  of  its  individual  life,  sets
to  work  to  organise  the  chaos  of  its  primary  experience
in  ways  which  are  certainly  as  far  as  possible  removed
from  a  '  disinterested '  interest  in  pure  knowing,  and  are
almost  certainly  volitional.  But  the  baby  is  not  much  of
a  psychologist,  and  by  the  time  it  has  organised  its
experience  enough  to  be  able  to  watch  its  own  procedures
and  to  tell  us  about  them,  it  has  long  ago  forgotten  the
details  of  its  world-ordering  achievements.  The  nearest
approximation  we  can  get  to  an  account  of  the  process
from  inside,  is  probably  to  be  found  in  the  fascinating  and
unique  account  by  the  Rev.  '  Mr.  Hanna '  of  how  he
recovered  from  total  amnesia  produced  by  a  fall  from  a
cart.2  But  even  here  '  Mr.  Hanna '  had,  all  unwittingly,
a  previous  existence  to  fall  back  upon,  which  helped  him
greatly  in  giving  him  cues  and  suggesting  the  interpreta-
tions of  his  '  chaos.'  And  this  suggests  that  even  if  the
baby  has  not  similarly  got  dim  memories  of  previous
existences  to  aid  it  in  getting  a  world  to  know  and  know-

1  Cp.  Essay  vii.  §  5,  §  14  ;  Essay  xix.  §  7.

2  The narrative forms Part ii. in Drs. Sidis and Goodhart's Multiple
Personality.


xx  DREAMS  AND IDEALISM  461

ing  it  (a  view  which  Plato  of  yore  and  many  hundreds  of
millions  of  men  at  present  have  professed  to  hold),  it  is
equipped  with  a  bodily  structure  which  instigates  it  to  a
multitude  of  traditional  modes  of  selective  functioning.
Thus  the  individual's  procedure  points  back  (for  us  at
least)  to  a  human  past,  and  this  again  to  a  non-human
past,  until  our  thought  is  cast  back  to  the  apparently
invalid  notion  of  a  beginning  in  absolute  chaos.1

It  is  clear,  then,  that,  taken  metaphysically,  ordinary
realism  develops  difficulties  which  preclude  our  conceiving
it  as  ultimately  and  completely  true,  even  on  pragmatic
grounds.  It  evidently  contains  much  truth,  but  that  truth
will  have  to  be  re-interpreted.

The  root  error  of  the  philosophic  treatment  of
'  pragmatic  realism '  is  perhaps  to  take  pragmatic  asser-
tions as  metaphysical  dogmas,  which  they  cannot  be,
and  which  they  were  never  really  meant  to  be.  The
pragmatic  realism  which  works  is  not  concerned  with
ultimate  realities.  It  is  relative  to  life  and  to  the  facts  of
life.  When,  therefore,  it  speaks  of  '  absolute  facts '  and
'  independent  realities,'  it  must  not  be  understood  too
literally.  It  does  not  mean  anything  that  exists  out  of
relation  to  us.  For  such  things  would  have  no  pragmatic
interest  or  value.  These  terms,  too,  must  be  interpreted
pragmatically.  "  There  is  none  but  a  pragmatic  tran-
scendency even  about  the  more  absolute  of  the  realities
thus  conjectured  or  believed  in "  as  William  James
declares.2  And  we  have  ourselves  seen  that  the  '  independ-
ence '  ascribed  to  certain  realities  does  not  really  transcend
the  cognitive  process.3  It  only  means  that  in  our
experience  there  are  certain  features  which  it  is  con-
venient to  describe  as  '  independent '  facts,  powers,
persons,  etc.,  by  reason  of  the  peculiarities  of  their
behaviour.  In  the  sense,  therefore,  in  which  the  term  is
intended  it  is  quite  legitimate.  But  the  whole  is  "an
intra-experiential  affair." 4  It  becomes  false  only  when  it
is  misinterpreted  into  a  metaphysical  dogma,  and  credited

1  Essay  xix.  §  7.  2  Journal  of  Philosophy,  ii.  5,  p.  117.

8  Essays  vii.  §  14,  and  xix.  §  10.  4  James,  I.e.  p.  118.


462  STUDIES IN HUMANISM  xx

with  a  miraculous  capacity  to  jump  out  of  the  universe  of
experience  and  back  again  as  it  pleases,  without  anybody's
being  a  bit  the  better  (or  the  worse)  for  it.  Such
acrobatic  feats,  of  course,  are  pragmatically  quite  uncalled
for.  They  are  also  humanly  quite  unnecessary.  In  short,
they  are  a  mistake,  and  with  them  vanishes  all  ground  for
a  conflict  between  Humanism  and  the  common-sense
realism  which  is  pragmatically  valid,  and  which  the  former
merely  cleanses  of  an  unessential  admixture  of  erroneous
metaphysics.

§  7.  Towards  the  philosophic  realism,  which  attempts
to  construct  a  metaphysical  theory  of  a  strictly  independent
reality  which  can  nevertheless  be  known,  Humanism  can-
not assume  an  equally  indulgent  attitude.  We  have
already  more  than  once  rehearsed  the  insoluble  puzzles
which  this  theory  involves,1  and  need  therefore  dwell  on
them  no  further.  But  it  must  still  be  pointed  out  that
even  if  this  sort  of  realism  involved  itself  in  no  intrinsic
difficulties,  it  would  yet  be  lacking  in  conclusiveness,
because  it  has  overlooked  an  alternative  to  the  idealism
which  it  combats.  Humanism  forms  a  third  alternative
to  Realism  and  Idealism,  and  can  give  alternative  inter-
pretations of  the  conceptions  on  which  they  severally  rely.
As  regards  Realism,  for  example,  it  is  possible  to  conceive
of  a  '  truth '  and  a  '  reality '  which  are  valid,  not  because
they  are  '  independent '  of  us,  but  because  we  have  '  made  '
them,  and  they  are  so  completely  dependent  on  us  that  we
can  depend  on  them  to  stay  '  true '  and  '  real '  independently
of  us.  It  is  possible,  in  other  words,  to  conceive  all  the
terms  of  the  realist  epistemology  humanistically,  as  values
selectively  attached  by  us  to  phenomena  within  the
knowledge -process,  which  is  both  'objective'  and  'sub-
jective,' and  '  makes,'  as  incidents  in  its  development,  all
the  terms  used  by  the  other  theories  of  knowledge.

It  would  seem,  therefore,  that  the  relations  of  Humanism
to  Realism  are  comparatively  simple.  Pragmatic  realism
it  incorporates  ;  philosophic  realism  it  convicts  of  a  mis-
conception of  its  own  epistemological  terminology.

1  §  3,  Essays  iv.  §  7,  and  vii.  §  i.


xx  DREAMS  AND IDEALISM  463

§  8.  Humanism,  however,  is  as  yet  far  from  having
concluded  its  discussion  of  Idealism,  and  here  the  situation
is  far  more  complicated.  For  there  exist,  in  the  first
place,  a  number  of  idealisms  which  more  or  less  obviously
escape  from  the  objection  we  have  urged  against  the
realisms  and  absolutisms  we  have  mentioned.  '  Personal
idealism,'  for  example,  in  all  its  forms,  clearly  abstains  from
making  the  fatal  abstraction  from  personality  which  is  so
ruinous  to  knowledge  ;  and  it  is,  at  least,  a  moot  point
whether  Berkeleianism  also  may  not  claim  exemption  from
condemnation  on  account  of  the  personalistic  element  which
it  contains  alongside  of  its  sensationalist  epistemology.
Subjective  idealisms,  again,  which  culminate  in  outright
solipsism,  cannot  be  accused  of  ignoring  the  subjective
aspects  of  cognition.  All  these  idealisms,  therefore,  if
they  fail  at  all,  fail  at  other  points  and  for  other  reasons
than  those  which  have  been  mentioned.

And  we  have  not  yet  done  even  with  '  absolute
idealism.'  For  we  have  not  yet  examined  the  most
stalwart  form  of  it,  which  is  a  genuine  idealism  and
unwilling  to  compromise  itself  with  realism.  It  makes,
moreover,  a  real  attempt  to  prove  its  standpoint,  and
instead  of  merely  abusing  Berkeley's  '  subjectivism,'  with-
out supplying  any  other  basis  for  idealism,  it  builds  on
him,  and  tries  to  exploit  his  argument  for  its  own  purposes.
Lastly,  it  really  tries  to  mediate  between  the  human  and
the  '  divine.'  Its  undertaking,  therefore,  is  instructive  and
deserving  of  detailed  examination,  though  undoubtedly
beset  with  perils.  For  it  aims  at  steering  a  safe  and
rational  course  between  the  Scylla  of  subjective  idealism
and  the  Charybdis  of  realism.  Actually,  however,  it
would  seem  rather  to  sacrifice  part  of  its  crew  to  Scylla
and  the  rest  to  Charybdis,  and  finally  to  founder  in  an
abyss  of  fallacy.

§  9.  (i)  It  sets  out  from  what  may  stand  as  the
fundamental  tenet  of  all  genuine  idealism,  to  which,  in  its
own  sense,  Humanism  willingly  assents,  viz.  the  assertion
that  reality  is  experience.  But,  as  thus  baldly  stated,  this
proposition  needs  expansion  if  it  is  to  account  for  the


464  STUDIES IN HUMANISM  xx

facts,  and  idealistic  absolutism  also  has  to  develop  it.  It
proceeds,  therefore,  to  add,  on  the  one  hand,  that  the
experience  which  is  co-extensive  with  reality  is  not  to  be
identified  with  our  experience — as  the  subjective  idealists
falsely  suppose — while  yet,  on  the  other,  the  assertion  that
reality  is  independent  of  our  experience  is  not  to  involve
a  lapse  into  realism.

It  protests,  therefore,  (2)  that  subjective  idealism  is
absurd.  The  subjectivist  cannot  really  suppose  that
things  cease  to  exist  when  he  is  not  perceiving  them,
nor  that  his  fellow-men  are  but  phantoms  of  his  own
creation.  But  this  very  sensible  contention  at  once
raises  a  difficulty.  For  does  not  this  concession  block
the  original  road  to  Idealism,  and  bring  us  back  to
Realism?  (3)  The  absolutist,  therefore,  tries  to  save  his
idealism  by  adding  to  the  assertion  that  reality  is  ex-
perience— 'yes,  but  the  Absolute 's,  not  ours'  The  Absolute
is  an  infinite  experience  which  includes  all  our  finite
experiences,  and  eternally  perceives  the  system  of  the
universe,  thus  providing  a  habitation  for  realities  (ideas)
which  have  lapsed  from  the  minds  of  individual  thinkers.
(4)  The  finite  subject's  self-elation  is  thus  put  down,  but
the  qualities  of  the  absolute  experience  remain  to  be
determined.  And  this  might  be  difficult  if  the  finite
spirit,  of  which  alone  we  seem  to  have  direct  knowledge,
were  wholly  worthless.  But  it  can  be  declared  an  im-
perfect reflexion  of  the  Absolute,  and  then  observations
of  finite  experience  may  once  more  be  appealed  to  to
give  a  content  to  the  notion  of  '  experience.'  By  their
propitious  aid  the  void  and  formless  Absolute  gets  itself
determined  as  individual,  purposive,  and  spiritual,  some-
times even  as  conscious  and  personal,  while  any  doubts  as
to  whether  these  human  qualities  will  stand  the  transfer  to
the  Absolute  are  silently  evaded.

It  is,  I  think,  apparent  that,  when  thus  reduced  to  its
bare  essentials,  this  absolutist  proof  of  Idealism  seems  by
no  means  satisfactory.  Nor  would  so  many  philosophers
have  felt  bound  to  accept  it  faute  de  mieux  had  they  not
come  upon  it  with  two  settled  convictions — the  one,  derived


xx  DREAMS  AND IDEALISM  465

from  their  studies,  that  Realism  is  impossible,  and  the
other  from  their  natural  instincts,  that  subjective  idealism
is  practically  absurd.

A  little  reflection,  however,  will  show  that  if  the
above  argument  be  the  best  Idealism  can  do,  then  no  form
of  Idealism  is  tenable.  But  this  as  yet  it  would  be
premature  to  assert.  A  strictly  logical  idealism  must
certainly  steer  nearer  to  subjectivism  than  to  absolutism,
and  avoid  the  assumption  of  an  absolute  experience
as  self-defeating  and  as  accounting  for  the  '  independent '
existence  of  the  '  real '  world  as  little  as  the  wildest
solipsism.  But,  even  so,  it  would  be  exposed  to  grave
objections.

§  i  o.  For  it  must  at  length  be  noted  that  all  the  stock
arguments  for  Idealism  are  fallacious  or  inadequate.  Thus
(i)  the  mere  experiencing  of  a  world  cannot  be  taken  as
an  adequate  proof  of  Idealism,  because  it  would  occur
equally  if  Realism  were  right.  For,  however  '  independent '
the  reality  might  be  in  itself,  it  would  be  real  for  us  only
as  experienced.  Still  less  could  it  validly  be  urged
against  a  view  which  conceives  the  reality  and  the
experiencing  as  evolving  pari  passu.

(2)  It  seems  vain merely to  show  that  without  an
experiencing  subject there  can be no  object, and  that,
therefore,  reality  is  spiritual. For  this  fails  to  show  that
reality  is wholly  spiritual,  if spiritual means  subjective.
For  the  '  subject '  in this  argument  is  just  as  much  con-
ditioned by  the  '  object '  as  vice  versa. Each  is  implied  in
the  other,  and  neither  can  claim  the  priority. Experience
is  a  process  which  plays  between  two  poles,  both  of  which
are  necessary  to  its  reality. The  idealistic  interpretation,
therefore,  is,  at  most,  a  half  truth.

(3)  The argument that as the  world  is  plainly  not
dependent  on '  my '  experience,  it  must  be  on  the  Ab-
solute's, succumbs  to  the  slightest  criticism. It  is  traceable,
of  course,  to  the  old Berkeleian  doctrine  that  the esse
of  things  is  their  percipi,  whence  it  infers  that  as  there  is
a  permanent  world-order  there  must  also  be  a  continuous
divine  percipient. In this, however,  some  serious sub-

2  H


466  STUDIES  IN HUMANISM  xx

reptions  have  already  been  committed.  Thus  it  has  been
taken  for  granted  (i)  that  there  already  is  what  as  yet
we  are  only  struggling  towards,  viz.  a  world-order  strictly
'  common'  to  a  plurality  of  percipients  ;l  and  (2)  that  the
alleged  permanence  of  the  world  as  it  appears  to  the
postulated  non-human  mind  is  available  as  an  explanation
of  '  my '  intermittent  experience,  and  yields  a  common
ground  for  individual  experiences  to  meet  on.  The
Absolute,  in  short,  is  used  as  an  asylum  ignorantice,  which
hides  from  view  the  real  difficulties,  both  of  the  practical
and  of  the  metaphysical  problem  of  a  '  common '  world.

The  absolutist  form  of  this  argument,  moreover,  is
greatly  inferior  to  the  Berkeleian.  For  Berkeley  had  at
least  claimed  the  right  to  conceive  the  divine  mind  in
a  sufficiently  human  fashion  to  render  plausible,  if  not
unexceptionable,  the  analogy  between  it  and  the  human
mind.  But  all  such  analogies  utterly  break  down  when
an  impersonal,  inhuman  Absolute  is  substituted  for  God.
For  then  the  world  is  not  '  in '  my  consciousness  in  the
same  way  as  it  is  in  .the  Absolute's,  nor  does  it  exist  'for'
my  mind  in  the  same  way  as  it  is  supposed  to  do  for  the
Absolute's.  Indeed,  it  is  only  in  a  different  and  quite
improper  sense  that  mind  and  consciousness  can  be
attributed  to  the  totality  of  things  —  the  Absolute.
Moreover,  its  experience  '  includes '  other  experiences  in
a  way  '  mine '  does  not.  Nor  does  their  inclusion  in  an
absolute  '  mind '  render  things  any  the  less  extra-mental
to  me,  or  alleviate  the  pressure  of  an  alien  reality.  From
our  human  point  of  view,  therefore,  this  absolute  idealism
is  the  crassest  realism  :  it  has  wholly  lost  also  the  chief
emotional  advantage  of  idealism,  the  power,  to  wit,  ot
fostering  a  feeling  of  kinship  with  the  universe.2

And,  finally,  it  is  merely  an  illusion  that  the  existence
of  an  Absolute  at  all  accounts  for  the  common  world  of
individual  percipients.  For  (i)  it  is  practically  useless  ;
it  does  nothing  to  alleviate  our  practical  difficulties  of
understanding  one  another — of  communicating  ideas  and
experiences.  (2)  It  leaves  the  individual  variations  just

1  Cp.  pp.  4  «. ,  no,  315-20.  2  Cp.  Humanism,  pp.  197-8.


xx  DREAMS  AND IDEALISM  467

the  same.  But  (3)  it  renders  their  existence  theoretically
incomprehensible.  For  even  when  we  have  hastily  taken
it  to  solve  the  question  of  the  possibility  of  a  common
world  (by  begging  it),  we  find  ourselves  involved  instead
in  a  still  more  puzzling  problem,  viz.  that  of  accounting
for  an  indefinite  plurality  of  fragmentary  distortions  of
the  absolute  world-image.  To  dismiss  these  cavalierly  as
'  appearances '  is  to  exhibit  temper,  not  to  solve  the
problem.  For,  after  all,  it  was  these  human  experiences
which  the  Absolute  was  invoked  to  explain.  Not  only
does  it  refuse  to  do  this,  but  it  leaves  us  (4)  with  our
difficulty  doubled.  We  had  to  explain  how  the  many
individual  perceptions  could  correspond  with  one  another
and  coalesce  into  a  common  world.  We  have  now  to
explain,  in  addition,  how  each  of  them  can  correspond
with  an  absolute  perception  as  well !

Is  it  too  much,  therefore,  to  conclude  that  the  argument
from  the  human  to  the  '  absolute '  mind  does  not  hold
because  there  is  no  analogy  between  them  ?  An  Ab-
solute, of  course,  may  still  be  conceived  to  '  include '  us
and  all  things,  but  there  is  no  reason  whatsoever  to
regard  it  as  '  spiritual '  or  as  spiritually  valuable.  The
Absolute  will  help  us  neither  to  regard  Reality  as  spiritual,
nor  to  escape  from  the  difficulties  of  Idealism.

§  II.  (4)  We  may  consider  next  the  idealistic  argu-
ment which  goes  back  to  Kant,  and  forms  the  core  of
his  '  transcendental  idealism,'  namely,  the  important  and
indispensable  part  played  by  human  activity  in  the  con-
stitution of  '  reality.'  To  accept  from  Kant  the  details
of  the  operations  of  thought  in  building  up  reality  is  a
feat  which  none  of  his  disciples  have  so  far  achieved,  and
which  is  no  doubt  impossible.  But  his  main  principle  is
sound  ;  reality  for  us  is  largely  of  our  making.  Indeed,
so  far  from  disputing  this,  our  Humanist  theory  of
knowledge  has  only  made  it  clearer.  It  has  become
manifest  that  selective  attention  and  purposive  manipula-
tion are  essential  and  all -pervasive  influences  in  the
construction  of  the  '  real '  world,  and  even  the  funda-
mental axioms,  which  (like  Causation)  long  seemed


468  STUDIES IN  HUMANISM  xx

objective  and  '  independent '  facts,  and  by  Kant  were
still  regarded  as  facts  of  mental  structure,  are  now  shown
to  originate  in  subjective  demands.1  A  Humanist  philo-
sopher, therefore,  is  not  likely  to  undervalue  whatever
testimony  to  Idealism  may  be  derivable  from  the  mould-
ing of  our  experience  of  reality  by  our  activity.  But
candour  compels  him  to  avow  that  no  proof  of  complete
Idealism  seems  attainable  in  this  fashion.  For  it  cannot
be  proved  that  reality  is  wholly  of  subjective  manufacture.
Kant  himself  found  that  the  '  forms  of  thought '  must
be  supplied  with  '  matter '  from  '  sensation,'  to  render
possible  the  construction  of  an  '  objective  '  nature  :  nor  is
a  disavowal  of  his  antithesis  a  solution  of  his  problem.
A  second  factor,  therefore,  not  of  our  making,  must  be
admitted  into  our  '  reality.'  This  we  may  (and  must)
attenuate  into  a  mere  indeterminate  potentiality,2  or
disparage  by  protesting  that  the  true  reality  of  things  is
never  to  be  sought  in  what  they  originally  were,  but
rather  in  what  they  have  been  enabled  to  become  : 3  but
such  pragmatic  ways  of  dealing  with  the  difficulty  are
not  open  to  the  Kantian  idealist.  He  is  still  intellectualist
enough  to  shrink  from  the  assertion  that  what  is  methodo-
logically null  and  practically  valueless  may  be  ignored  by
a  theory  of  knowledge.  And  so  for  him  there  still
remains  a  given  material  for  his  constructive  manipulation
— an  objective  condition  of  his  activity.  However  much,
therefore,  he  emphasises  the  function  of  constructive  activity
in  the  cognition  of  reality,  he  still  falls  short  of  a  proof
that  reality  is  wholly  psychical.

§  12.  (5)  Psychology  has  supplied  an  interesting  argu-
ment to  the  subjectivity  of  all  experiences  from  the
variations  of  individual  perceptions.  But  it  too  is  in-
sufficient to  prove  Idealism.  For  it  has  already  pre-
supposed a  '  real '  world  in  the  very  experiments  which
establish  the  existence  of  these  subjective  differences  in
perception.  Hence,  though  their  significance  has  been
unduly  overlooked  by  philosophers,  and  their  proper

1  Cp.  Personal  Idealism,  pp.  47-133.
2  Essay  xix.  §  6.  3  Essay  xix.  §  7.


xx  DREAMS  AND IDEALISM  469

observation  may  be  scientifically  most  important,  and
throws  much  light  on  the  de  facto  ways  in  which  the
'  common '  world  of  social  intercourse  is  established  and
extended,  the  proof  that  reality  is  psychical  is  ultra  vires
also  for  this  argument.  It  can  be  appealed  to  only  after
it  has  been  shown  that  the  '  real '  world  which  it  pre-
supposes is  already  '  ideal.'

§  1 3.  Shall  it  be  admitted,  then,  that  the  '  proofs '  of
Idealism  one  and  all  break  down  ?  Certainly,  if  what  we
required  was  an  a  priori  proof  independent  of  experience.
Our  ultimate  assumptions  cannot  be  proved  a  priori ;
they  can  only  be  assumed  and  tried.  And  Idealism  also
may  claim  to  be  too  fundamental  to  be  derivable  from
anything  more  ultimate.  It  too  may  appeal  to  the
pragmatic  test,  and  thereby  win  our  sympathies.  Let  it
be  assumed,  then,  tentatively,  and  to  see  how  it  works.
If  it  is  content  to  be  proved  in  this  way,  it  may  claim,
and  perhaps  substantiate  its  claim,  to  yield  a  successful
and  adequate  interpretation  of  experience.  And,  more-
over, by  conceiving  and  assuming  it  thus,  we  may  come
upon  one  real,  though  empirical,  argument  in  its  favour,
which  seems  to  go  a  long  way  towards  confirming  its
contention.

§  14.  In  attempting  such  a  proof  we  must  be  bold  as  well
as  sympathetic.  We  must  not  fear  to  follow  our  assump-
tions into  their  most  incisive  and  instructive  consequences.
It  will  be  futile,  therefore,  to  shrink  from  the  proposition
that  the  fundamental  dictum  of  Idealism  must  be  formu-
lated as  being  that  Reality  is  '  my '  experience.  This
dictum  has  a  subjective  tinge,  which  has  terrified  most  of
the  soi-disant  '  idealists,'  and  driven  them  blindly  into  the
nearest  refuge  for  the  intellectually  destitute.  But  there
is  no  great  harm  in  it,  if  we  do  not  allow  it  to  harden
into  solipsism,  and  are  careful  to  conceive  a  sufficiently
intimate  and  plastic  correlation  between  the  world  or
reality  and  the  self  or  experient.  And  we  must  avoid
the  fatal  blunder  of  imagining  that  when  we  have  pro-
nounced our  dictum,  we  know  all  about  the  self  and  the
world,  and  have  nothing  more  to  learn  from  experience.


470  STUDIES IN HUMANISM  xx

We  still  have  almost  everything  to  learn.  For  we  have
really  still  to  learn  both  what  we  are  and  what  the  world
is,  and  what  precisely  we  mean  by  calling  it  ours.  We
may  not,  therefore,  so  far  treat  our  knowledge  of  the  self
as  primary  and  our  knowledge  of  the  world  as  secondary,
as  solipsism  tries  to  do.  It  is  truer  to  treat  the  knowledge
of  each  as  defining  the  other,  and  to  say  that  the  world
cannot  be  known  without  knowing  the  self,  nor  the  self
without  knowing  the  world.

This  relation  of  mutual  implication  of  self  and  world,
therefore,  might  just  as  well  be  denominated  realism  as
idealism.  What  alone  gives  superior  plausibility  to  its
idealistic  interpretation  is  the  empirical  fact  that  the
interpenetration  of  the  self  and  the  world  is  not  complete.
The  self  is  not  exclusively  implicated  in  our  '  real '  world.
It  has  experience  also  of  the  '  primary  reality ' *  out  of
which  the  real  world  is  constructed,  and  it  extends  also,  as
we  shall  see  (§§  23,  26),  into  '  unreal '  worlds  of  experience.
It  is  not,  therefore,  tied  to  the  one  pragmatically  real
world,  and  this  enables  it  to  conceive  itself  as  transcend-
ing it,  and  gives  it  a  certain  primacy.

§15.  Still  the  proposition  that  reality  is  '  my  '  experience
is  not  pragmatically  workable.  The  initial  statement,
therefore,  of  Idealism  must  at  once  be  expanded,  and
subjected  to  a  modification  which  amounts  to  a  correction.
I  have  to  realise  that,  though  the  reality  may  be  really
mine,  it  has  yet  been  largely  '  ejected '  or  extruded  from
my  consciousness,  and  endowed  with  an  '  independent '
existence  or  '  transcendent '  reality.  And  the  motives  for
this  procedure  need  analysis.

Looking  into  this  question,  we  soon  perceive  that  our
motives  were  volitional.  We  were  not  constrained  by
any  logical  compulsion,  but  impelled  by  our  emotions  and
desires.  We  refused  to  accept  as  ours  the  whole  of  our
experience  ;  and  that  on  grounds  as  emotional  as  they
are  empirical.  This  is  once  more  illustrated  by  the  strange
case  of  '  Mr.  Hanna,'  who,  in  consequence  of  being
pitched  out  of  a  carriage  on  to  his  head,  became  as

1  §6.


xx  DREAMS  AND  IDEALISM  471

a  new-born  babe  with  an  adult  intelligence.  He  sub-
sequently described  how  he  surrendered  his  natural
solipsism  on  being  restrained  by  the  doctors,  who
thought  him  delirious.  "  The  first  that  I  was  really  sure
that  there  was  something  beside  me  was  when  Dr.  O.
jumped  on  me.  Then  I  was  sure  there  was  something
against  me."  "But  before  you  thought  it  was  yourself?"
"  Yes,  but  I  thought  I  didn't  know  it  all."  "  Did  you
know  why  he  jumped  on  you  ?  "  "  No  ;  I  knew  I  was
trying  to  reach  out,  and  he  was  trying  to  push  me  back,
and  I  saw  that  Dr.  O.  was  the  only  one,  and  I  could  not
really  make  out  that  there  were  many  of  them  in  the
room.  It  seemed  to  me  that,  after  all,  it  was  all  one
thing  that  was  against  me,  and  that  they  were  all  like
a  part  of  me" '  Our  experience,  it  is  clear,  happens  to
be  of  such  a  sort  that  we  will  not  accept  the  entire
responsibility  for  it.  And  so  we  postulate  an  external
extra-mental  reality,  to  which  we  can  attribute  most  of  its
offensive  features.2

It  is,  however,  quite  conceivable  that  experience  might
be,  or  become,  such  that  our  objection  to  owning  it  would
disappear.  If,  e.g.  events  invariably  took  the  course  we
desired,  should  we  not  succumb  to  the  temptation  of
fancying  ourselves  the  omnipotent  creators  of  the  cosmic
history  ?  Or,  again,  if  pleasure  and  pain  (or  even  pain
alone)  were  eliminated  from  our  experience,  should  we
retain  self-consciousness  enough  to  frame  the  antithesis  of
'self  and  'world'?  And  what  motive  would  remain  for
ascribing  any  feature  in  the  course  of  events  to  an
'  independent '  world  ?

§  1 6.  That  there  was  no  logical  necessity  about  the
conception  of  an  external  world  follows  also  from  the
possibility  of  solipsism.  It  is  unfortunate  that  the  mere
mention  of  this  theory  annoys  philosophers,  especially
those  who  plume  themselves  on  being  '  idealists,'  to
the  very  verge  of  aphasia,  and  that  in  consequence  they

1  Sidis  and  Goodhart,  Multiple  Personality,  p.  109,  cp.  p.  205.

2  The  primitive  instinct  is  to  assign  to  an  external  cause  even  the  most  clearly
subjective  disorders. Hence  diseases  of  body  and  mind  are  ascribed  to  possession
by  demons.


472  STUDIES IN HUMANISM  xx

rarely  produce  an  articulate  refutation  of  it.  For  solipsism
is  intellectually  quite  an  entertaining  doctrine,  and  not
logically  untenable  ;  it  is  only  practically  uncomfortable.
We  might,  had  we  willed  it,  have  taken  a  solipsist
view  of  the  situation,  if  we  were  willing  to  take  the
consequences.  Any  one  madly  logical  enough  might  always
insist  that  he  was  the  sole  and  omnipotent  creator  of
his  whole  experience.  When  he  fell  into  a  ditch  he
might  applaud  his  subtle  sense  of  humour  in  hoaxing
himself.  When,  touching  fire,  he  was  burned,  he  might
still  proudly  claim  the  authorship  of  the  fire.  And  when,
annoyed  at  his  fatuity,  you  went  up  and  boxed  his  ears,
he  might  still  ascribe  the  indignity  to  the  bad  regulation
of  his  creative  fancy !  In  short,  no  logic  could  refute
him  so  long  as  he  himself  did  not  refuse  to  own  whatever
incidents  befell  him,  and  was  willing  to  accept  them  as
characteristic  of  his  nature.  It  might  be  demonstrated,
of  course,  that  such  a  nature  must  be  inherently  absurd
and  perverse,  self-contradictory  and  self-tormenting,  and
even  self-destroying,  as,  e.g.  if  he  declined  to  manipulate
that  idea  of  his  which  he  calls  his  legs  in  such  a  way  as
to  avoid  a  contact  between  it  and  that  idea  of  his  which
he  calls  an  angry  bull.  But  if  he  were  blandly  willing
to  admit  all  this,  what  then  ?  However  you  maltreated
him,  you  could  not  force  him  to  admit  your  '  independent '
reality.

But,  you  will  say,  the  solipsist  is  mad,  and  no  sane
person  can  entertain  such  fancies.  Even  about  this  it  is
not  safe  to  dogmatise.  The  point  whether  a  being,  to
which  there  must  be  attributed  an  inherently  discordant
and  conflicting  nature,  is  mad,  would  have  been  settled
with  the  philosophers  of  the  Absolute.  For  must  not
their  idol,  which  '  includes,'  '  is',  and  '  owns  '  the  weltering
mass  of  suffering,  struggling,  and  conflicting  experiences
that  make  up  our  world,  have  very  much  the  constitution
of  our  imaginary  solipsist  ?  And  is  it  not  a  queer  con-
clusion for  any  philosophy  to  come  to  that  solipsism  is
absolutely  true  and  yet  for  us  unthinkable  ? *

1  Cp.  Essay  x.


xx  DREAMS  AND IDEALISM  473

§  1 7.  And,  further,  before  we  condemn  the  solipsist  as  an
outrageous  fool,  should  we  not  reflect  whether  we  do  not
ourselves  agree  with  him  ?  Are  we  not  in  the  habit  of
claiming  as  of  our  own  fabrication  large  portions  of  our
experience  which  are  just  as  absurd  and  incoherent  as
those  of  the  poor  solipsist  ?  Do  we  not,  that  is,  regard
ourselves  as  the  authors  and  inventors  of  our  own  night-
mares ?  And  so  is  it  not  a  flagrant  inconsistency  to
adopt  a  solipsistic  interpretation  for  our  '  dreams '  and
a  realist  interpretation  for  our  '  waking '  experiences  ?

What  makes  this  worse  is  that  it  is  quite  hard  at
times  to  know  to  which  portion  of  life  an  experience
ought  to  be  assigned,  and  that  no  fundamental  differences  in
character  between  the  two  can  be  established.  For  a
dream-world,  like  that  of  waking  life,  runs  its  course  in
time  and  extends  itself  in  space,  and  contains  persons
and  things  that  seem  '  independent,'  and  sometimes  are
pleasing,  and  sometimes  the  reverse.  There  is  therefore
no  theoretic  reason  for  the  difference  in  our  attitude.
The  reason  is  purely  practical,  and  excellent  so  far  as
it  goes.  Dream-worlds  are  of  inferior  value  for  our
purposes,  and  are  therefore  judged  '  unreal!  What  pre-
cisely is  their  philosophic  value  remains  to  be  elucidated  ;
but  at  any  rate  they  show  that  the  solipsistic  interpreta-
tion of  experience  is  neither  impossible  nor  theoretically
wrong.

§  1 8.  The  realistic  interpretation,  therefore,  of  our
waking  life  and  the  '  independent  reality '  of  the  world
we  experience  is  not  an  inevitable,  but  a  pragmatic
inference,  and  involves  no  real  inconsistency.  It  is  the
result  of  an  extrusion  by  which  we  resent  the  intrusion
of  unwelcome  incidents.  It  need  not,  therefore,  ever
have  suggested  itself;  we  might  all  have  lived  and  died
as  chaotic  solipsists  to  all  eternity.  But  once  the  happy
thought  occurred  to  any  one,  that  he  might  postulate  an
independent  reality  to  account  for  the  incoherencies  in
his  experience,  the  foundations  of  realism  were  laid.  The
procedure  was  a  great  and  instant  success.1  The  notion

1  Cp.  §  6,  and  Personal  Idealism,  pp.  114-5.


474  STUDIES IN  HUMANISM  xx

of  an  independent  external  world  and  independent  other
persons  has  indisputably  worked,  and  philosophic  argu-
ments are  impotent  against  it.  If  philosophy  disputes
it,  it  will  only  earn  contempt.  For  common  sense  is
always  ready  to  suppose  that  whatever  works  is  true,
and,  fortunately,  philosophy  is  now  tending  to  admit  that
common  sense  is,  mainly,  right.

But  though  the  Realism  of  ordinary  life  and  science  is
right  so  far  as  it  goes,  it  is  not  a  complete  proof  of
absolute  Realism.  The  '  independent  reality '  which  has
been  postulated  is  not  after  all  independent  of  experience,
but  relative  to  the  experience  which  it  serves  to  harmonise.
It  is  nothing  absolute  ;  it  means  '  real '  in  and  for  that
experience.  It  may  be,  therefore,  as  real  as  that  experi-
ence, but  can  never  be  more  real.  The  external  world  and
my  fellow-creatures  therein  are  real  '  independently '  of
me,  because  this  assumption  is  essential  to  my  action,
and  therefore  as  real  as  the  experience  I  am  thereby
trying  to  control,  provided  always  that  the  situation
which  evoked  the  postulate  continues.  Thus  the  c  independ-
ence '  of  the  real  world  is  limited  by  the  very  postulate
which  constructed  it ;  it  is  an  independence  subject  to
the  one  condition  that  its  postulation  should  not  cease.
If,  therefore,  anything  should  happen  in  my  experience
leading  me  to  doubt  its  ultimateness,  the  reality  of  the
'  independent '  external  world  would  be  at  once  affected.

§  19.  Now,  curiously  enough,  it  is  a  fact  that  our  ex-
perience as  a  whole  is  such  as  to  suggest  doubts  of  its  own
finality.  It  is  not  wholly  real  ;  we  predicate  unreality  and
illusion  of  large  tracts  of  it :  '  real  reality  '  is  only  a  species,
with  '  unreality,'  in  the  larger  genus  of  primary  reality.
Thus  it  "is  these  discontinuities  in  our  experience  which
familiarise  us  with  the  notion  of  different  orders  of
reality.  We  experience  abrupt  transitions  from  one
plane  to  another  of  reality,  and  in  consequence  we  often
find  ourselves  revising  our  belief  in  the  independent
reality  of  much  that  at  first  was  accepted  without  qualms.
Our  dream-experiences,  of  course,  are  a  signal  illustration
of  all  this.  They  are  facts  which  incontestably  show


xx  DREAMS  AND IDEALISM  475

that  a  claim  to  reality  is  no  proof  of  it,  and  that  our
pragmatic  realities  need  not  be  ultimate.

This  only  shows,  it  may  be  said,  that  philosophers  are
dreamers,  and  that  you  are  no  better  than  the  rest.  I
can  swallow  the  insult  if  I  am  allowed  to  exculpate  the
other  philosophers.  For  really  there  are  few  subjects
which  philosophers  have  more  persistently  forborne  to
work  out,  not  to  say  neglected,  than  the  philosophic
import  of  dreams.  And  yet  reflection  on  their  existence
might  have  led  to  corollaries  of  the  greatest  value  for  the
proper  understanding  of  experience.

§  20.  (i)  The  fact  of  dream-experience,  in  principle,
involves  an  immense  extension  of  the  possibilities  of
existence.  It  supplies  a  concrete,  easy,  and  indisputable
illustration  of  how  to  understand  the  notion  of  other
worlds  that  are  really  '  other,'  and  the  manner  of  a
transition  from  one  world  to  another.  It  shows  us  that
Paradise  cannot  be  found  by  travelling  north,  south,  east,
or  west,  however  far — that  it  is  vain  to  search  the  satellites
of  more  resplendent  suns  for  more  harmonious  conditions
of  existence.  We  must  pass  out  of  our  '  real '  space
altogether,  even  as  we  pass  out  of  a  dream-space  on
awaking.  In  short,  we  may  confidently  claim  that  to
pass  from  a  world  of  lower  into  one  of  higher  reality
would  be  like  waking  from  an  evil  dream  ;  to  pass  from  a
higher  into  a  lower  world  would  be  like  lapsing  into
nightmare.1

(2)  More  than  this,  dream -experience  suggests  a
definite  doubt  of  the  ultimateness  of  our  present  waking
life,  and  a  definite  possibility  of  worlds  of  higher  reality
('heavens')  related  to:  our  present  waking  life  just  as
the  latter  is  to  dream-life.  Thus  a  thought  which
Religion  long  ago  divined,  dimly  and  with  incrusta-
tions of  mythopceic  fancy,  Philosophy  expounds  as  a
reasoned  and  reasonable  possibility,  and  urges  Science
to  verify  in  actual  fact.2  And  already  this  unverified
conception  may  sanction  the  consoling  hope  that  of  the
evil  and  irrationality  that  oppress  us  not  a  little  may  be

1  Cp.  Humanism,  p.  282.  2  Cp.  ibid.  p.  283.


476  STUDIES IN HUMANISM  xx

due  to  our  not  yet  having  found  a  way  to  dissipate  the
spell  of  a  cosmic  nightmare  which  besets  us.

§  21.  (3)  Do  not  dreams  yield  the  simplest  and  most
cogent  of  all  pleas  for  Idealism  ?  Do  they  not  afford  a
brilliant  vindication  to  the  idealist's  contention  that  whole
worlds  of  vast  complexity  may  be  subjective  in  their
origin,  and  that  their  seeming  reality  is  no  sufficient
warrant  for  their  extra-mental  nature  ?  Do  they  not
triumphantly  enforce  our  warning  that  the  ascription  of
reality  to  the  contents  of  experience  must  not  be  made
more  absolute  than  is  necessary?  For  while  we  dream
them,  our  dream-experiences  may  seem  as  '  independent '
of  our  wishes  and  expectations  as  any  incident  in  our
waking  life ;  but  that  this  independence  was  deceptive,
and  conditional  upon  the  dream's  continuance,  we  mostly
realise  on  waking  up.

We  seem  to  derive,  therefore,  from  the  empirical,  but
incontestable,  fact  of  dreaming  a  striking  confirmation
of  the  original  idealist  assertion,  viz.  that  as  reality  is
experience,  the  psychic  factor  in  it  is  essential  to  its
existence,  and  also  a  proof  that  apparent  need  not  be  real
'  reality!  And  this  is  proved,  not  of  '  dreams '  alone,  but  of
'  waking '  life  no  less.  For  the  existence  of  the  former
enables  us  to  grasp  the  thought  of  a  fuller  reality  tran-
scending waking  life,  as  the  latter  transcends  dreams.1

Just  how  far  these  propositions  go  to  prove  Idealism
and  to  disprove  Realism  of  any  kind,  may  fitly  be  con-
sidered when  the  doctrine  has  encountered  a  few  of  the
objections  which  are  easily  suggested,  and  as  easily
refuted.

§  22.  (i)  Thus  it  is  clear  that  our  view  provides  for
the  fullest  recognition  of  empirical  reality.  Such  recog-
nition is  usually  just  as  full  in  dreams  as  in  waking
life.  I  run  away  from  a  dream-crocodile  on  a  dream-
river  with  the  same  unhesitating  alacrity  as  I  should
display  if  I  met  a  real  crocodile  on  the  banks  of  the
Nile.

(2)  'But,'  it  may  be  objected,  'do  you not  in  your

1  Cp.  Riddles  of  the  Sphinx,  pp.  284-7.


xx  DREAMS  AND IDEALISM  477

dreams  see  through  the  illusion  and  detect  the  unreality  ?
Do  you  not  know  that  you  are  dreaming  ? '  Sometimes,
I  reply  ;  but  then  I  sometimes  also  suspect  the  reality
of  my  waking  life.  In  fact,  that  is  what  I  am  disputing
just  now.  And  in  support  of  my  suspicions  I  am  able
to  quote  a  whole  host  of  religious,  scientific,  and  philo-
sophic doctrines  concerning  the  '  true  reality '  of  worlds
other  than  that  of  sense-appearance.

(3)  'But  is  not  dream-life  merely  a  parody  of  real  life,
a  grotesque  rehash  of  past  experiences  containing  nothing
novel  or  original  ?  Why  question  the  conventional
explanation  of  science,  which  assumes  the  primary  reality
of  waking  life  and  treats  all  other  modes  of  experiencing
as  aberrations  from  it?'

We  are,  of  course,  aware  that  the  philosophic  claim
we  are  making  for  dreams  is  from  the  standpoint  of
common  science,  a  giant  paradox.  Nor  should  we
dispute  that  for  the  ordinary  purposes  of  practice  that
standpoint  will  suffice.  But  with  the  wider  outlook  of
philosophy  one  must  remember  (i)  that  the  exclusive
reality  of  '  waking '  experience  is  not  a  primary  fact,  but
the  outcome  of  a  long  process  of  differentiation  and
selection  (§  6)  which  is  not  yet  quite  complete,  as  is
shown  by  the  survival  of  the  belief  in  the  prophetic  signifi-
cance of  dreams.  The  process  can  be  traced  and  practically
justified,  but  it  can  never  subvert  the  immediate  reality
of  '  unreal '  experience.  (2)  It  is  not  quite  true  that
there  is  no  originality  in  dreams.  There  do  occur  in
them,  though  rarely,  experiences  which  cannot  as  such
be  directly  paralleled  from  waking  life.  Do  we  not  fly
in  dreams,  and  glide,  and  fall  down  precipices  without
hurt?  Yet  these  are  achievements  we  have  never
accomplished  while  awake.  Nor  can  I  imagine  what
justified  me  once  in  dreaming  that  I  was  a  beautiful
woman  well  over  eight  feet  high  !  I  remember  that  it
felt  most  uncomfortable.  (3)  Whatever  may  be  the  ex-
tent and  meaning  of  this  originality  in  dreams,  it  is  not
essential  to  our  answer.  For  the  '  scientific  '  objection  to
dreams  is  in  any  case  unable  to  rebut  the  suggestion


478  STUDIES IN HUMANISM  xx

that,  instead  of  imitating  '  waking '  life,  it  and  dream-life
may  both  be  imitating  a  higher  and  more  real  experience
of  which  for  the  moment  we  have  grown  oblivious,  that
this  is  the  real  source  of  the  similarity  between  them,  and
that  on  awaking  from  our  '  waking '  life  we  should  dis-
cover this,  and  then  only  really  understand  both  our  earth-
life  and  our  dream-life.

(4)  '  But is it not an essential difference that
"  dreams "  are short and fleeting, while waking  reality
abides  ? ' No,  I  reply,  the  difference  in  duration  does  not
matter. Our  subjective  time-estimation is enormously
elastic  ;  some  dreams,  as  experienced,  may  teem  with  the
events  of  a  lifetime. That,  on  awakening,  they  should
shrivel  ex  post  facto  into  a  few  moments  of  '  waking'  time
is  irrelevant. In  the  time  of  a  more  real  world  might  not
a similar condensation and condemnation overtake  our
waking  life  ? It  is  as  possible  to  have  a  time  within  a
time,  and a dream  within a dream,  as to have a  play
within  a  play,  and  the  fact  that  we  criticise  a  dream-time
and  a  dream-reality  within  another  of  the  same  kind  no
more proves the latter's absolute reality  than the  fact
that Hamlet  can discourse about the players'  play to
Ophelia  proves  that Shakespeare  did  not  write  both  the
plays.

(5)  '  But  is  it  not  an  important  difference  that  whereas
the  breaks  in  waking  life  are  yet  bridged  so  that  it  can
continue coherently from day to day, each dream-ex-
perience forms  a  unique  and  isolated  world  to  which  we
never  can  return  ? ' There is a  difference  here,  but  too
much  must  not  be  made  of  it. For  it  seems  to  be  merely
an  empirical  accident  that  we  do  not  usually  resume  our
dreams  as  we  do  our  waking  life. And  that  the  fact  has
not  imposed  on  our  writers  is  attested,  e.g.,  by  the  tales  of
Peter  Ibbetson,  the  Brush-wood  Boy,  and The  Pilgrims  of
the Rhine. Moreover,  cases of  dreams  continued  from
night to night are on record.1 The trance  -  person-
alities, too,  of  many  mediums are  often  best  interpreted
as continuous dreams ; as, for instance, the strange

1  Cp.  Journal  of  the  Society  for  Psychical  Research,  i.  pp.  353-77.


xx  DREAMS  AND IDEALISM  479

trance  lives  of  Mile.  '  Helene  Smith,'  studied  by  Prof.
Flournoy.1

Again,  there  are  on  this  point  assertions  implied  in  all
the  great  religions  which  should  be  most  embarrassing  to
the  common-sense  confidence  in  the  unreality  of  dreams.
'  Visions '  and  '  revelations '  of  more  real  worlds,  and
experiences  of  spiritual  ecstasies,  are  not  merely  the
central  reality  of  all  mysticism,  but  permeate  the  Scriptures
and  the  lives  of  the  founders  of  religions  which  count
their  adherents  by  the  million.  Is  not  every  good
Mohammedan  bound  to  believe  that  his  Prophet  was
carried  up  to  '  heaven '  on  the  celestial  camel  Borak,  and
there  copied  the  sacred  text  of  the  eternal  Koran  ?  Must
not  good  Jews  and  good  Christians  similarly  concede  the
authenticity  of  the  theophanies  to  Moses  and  St.  Paul  ?
And  yet  from  the  standpoint  of  waking  life  all  these
experiences  were  indubitably  of  the  '  unreal '  order.  No
doctor,  e.g.  would  hesitate  for  an  instant  to  ascribe  the
experiences  of  Jesus  at  the  Temptation  to  hallucinations
engendered  by  the  forty  days'  fast  on  which  they  followed.
We  have  learnt,  indeed,  from  Prof.  James  that  this  'medical
materialism '  does  not  dispose  of  the  spiritual  value  of
such  '  abnormal '  experiences.2  But  the  fact  remains  that
if  the  religions  are  to  stand,  they  must  contend  that
plienomena  which  would  ordinarily  be  classified  as  unreal
may,  properly,  belong  to  a  world  of  higher  reality.  The
ordinary  man,  therefore,  must  choose  between  abandoning
his  religion,  and  admitting  that  experiences  on  a
different  level  from  that  of  waking  life  are  in  some  way
real,  and  that  it  is  not  their  discrepancy  from  ordinary
life,  but  their  own  contents,  which  decide  in  what  way.
They  are  not  necessarily  discontinuous,  incoherent,  and
unimportant  because  they  diverge  from  the  ordinary  level  :
they  may  claim,  and  possess,  greater  spiritual  value  and
a  superior  reality.

And  so,  lastly,  it  may  be  pointed  out  that  the  unreality
we  allege  against  ordinary  dreams  rests  really  on  their

1  Des  Indes  a  la  planete  Mars.
- The  Varieties  of  Religious  Experience,  ch.  i.


480  STUDIES  IN HUMANISM  xx

intrinsic  shortcomings.  '  Real '  and  '  unreal '  are  really
distinctions  of  value  within  experience ;  the  '  unreal '  is
what  may  safely  be  ignored,  the  '  real '  what  it  is  better  to
recognise.  If  in  our  sleep  we  habitually  'dreamt'  a
coherent  experience  from  night  to  night,  such  a  dream-life
would  soon  become  a  '  real '  life,  of  which  account  would
be  taken,  and  to  which,  as  in  Bulwer  Lytton's  story,
waking  life  might  even  be  sacrificed.  We  should  have
to  regard  ourselves  as  living  in  two  worlds,  and  which  of
them  was  more  '  real '  would  depend  largely  on  the  interest
we  took  in  our  several  careers.

(6)  Leaving such psychological complexities, our
objector  might  take simpler and more  practical  ground.
'  Dwelling on dreams,'  he might say,  '  is  pernicious. It
undermines our faith in the reality of  waking  life ;  it
impairs  the  vigour  of  the  action  which  presupposes  such
reality.' And,  of  course,  if  this  were  true,  if  our  doctrine
were  practically  paralysing  and  calculated  to  unnerve  us,
no  more  serious  objection  could  be  brought  against  it  in
pragmatic  eyes. But  there  is  no  reason  to  anticipate  any
such  debilitating  consequences. Logically  there  is  nothing
in  the  thought  of  a  higher  reality  that  should  lead  us  to
neglect  the  highest  reality  with  which  we  are  in contact,
or  that  should  lead  us  to  suppose  that  the  right  principles
of  action  in  our  world  would  be  wholly  abrogated  in  a
higher. Once more we might appeal to the religious
conceptions of  '  higher ' worlds  for confirmation. The
'  other '  worlds  they  postulate  are  not  intended  as  reduc-
tions of  the  earthly  life  to  unimportance,  but  as  enhance-
ments of  its  significance.

And  psychologically,  also,  it  does  not  seem  true  that  we
do  not  take  our  dream-worlds  seriously  while  they  last,
or  are  more  careless  about  our  actions  in  them ;  the
terrors  of  a  nightmare  are  surely  often  among  the  most
real  and  intense  feelings  of  a  lifetime,  and  a  man  who
could  discover  a  way  of  controlling  the  dreams  of  others
would  speedily  master  the  '  real '  world.

(7)  Lastly,  a  still more personal  objection may be
taken. If  waking life  may  be as unreal  as a  '  dream,'


xx  DREAMS  AND IDEALISM  481

may  not  those  for  whom  we  have  cared  in  it  turn  out  to
be  as  unreal  as  the  personages  of  our  dreams  ?  And  will
not  this  atrocious,  but  inevitable,  inference  rob  life  of  most
of  its  personal  interest  ?

This  argument,  in  the  first  place,  cuts  both  ways.  Not
all  persons  are  pleasant,  and  it  might  be  quite  a  relief  to
find  that  some  of  the  bad  characters  in  our  experience
were  but  the  monsters  of  a  dream.  Secondly,  it  does  not
follow  that  because  persons  (and  things)  belong  to  a
dream-life  they  do  not  belong  also  to  a  world  of  higher
reality.  Our  dreams,  that  is,  may  be  veridical  and
reminiscent  of  past  terrors  ;  and  they  may  refer  to,  or
foreshadow  true  reality,1  even  as  already  we  may  dream
of  the  persons  and  events  of  our  '  waking '  lives.

§  23.  All  these  objections,  then,  are  capable  of  being
met,  and  the  doctrine  that  dreams  emancipate  us  from
too  absolute  a  subservience  to  the  realities  of  waking  life
cannot  be  shown  to  deprive  our  life  of  any  element  of
value,  while  it  opens  out  possibilities  of  an  indefinite
enhancement  of  that  value.  But  we  have  still  to  ask  how
far  we  may  take  this  as  meaning  that  Idealism  has  been
established,  and  Realism  confuted,  beyond  doubt.

Taking  the  latter  question  first,  it  would  seem  that,  so
far  as  this  argument  goes,  uncompromising  Realism,  viz.
the  assertion  that  existence  is  quite  independent  of  ex-
perience, is  still  tenable.  If,  that  is,  it  is  ever  really  true
that  the  real  world  is  independent  of  us,  then  the  existence
of  dream-worlds  does  not  render  the  belief  untenable.
But  it  remains  tenable  only  at  the  cost  of  a  paradox
which  most  realists,  perhaps,  would  shrink  from.  For
inasmuch  as  it  has  been  shown  that  a  complete  parallelism
exists  between  '  dream '  worlds  and  '  real '  worlds,  the
resolute  realist  must  take  the  bull  by  the  horns,  and
boldly  allege  that  all  experiences  are  cognitions  of  real
worlds,  and  the  dream-worlds  are  real  too !  He  might
explain  further  that  the  coexistence  of  an  indefinite
plurality  of  real  worlds,  of  infinitely  various  kinds  and
degrees  of  completeness,  complexity,  extent,  coherence,

1  Cp.  Humanism,  p.  284.

2 I


482  STUDIES IN HUMANISM  xx

pleasantness,  rationality,  etc.,  was  quite  conceivable.
Habitually,  no  doubt,  we  were  confined  to  one  of  these,
but  occasionally,  as  in  dreams,  we  (or  our  '  souls ')  were
enabled,  we  knew  not  by  what  magic,  to  make  fleeting
incursions  into  these  other,  equally  real,  worlds,  and  there
to  make  new  acquaintances  or  to  meet  old  ones,  to  act
and  suffer,  and  finally  to  return  and  say  (falsely)  that  '  it
was  all  a  dream.'  Such  is  the  sole  interpretation  of  the
facts  a  consistent  Realism  could  come  to,  and  though  it
has  not  yet  been  advocated  with  full  philosophic  con-
sciousness, it  is  not  very  far  removed  from  some  early
speculations  about  dreams  which  are  still  entertained  by
savages.

And,  like  most  consistent  views  in  metaphysics,  it
would  not  be  quite  easy  to  refute.  It  would  seem  like  an
appeal  to  taste  rather  than  to  principle,  e.g.  to  urge  that
to  assume  such  a  plurality  of  worlds  was  needlessly  to
complicate  existence,  or  that  more  idealistic  interpreta-
tions of  dream  -  worlds  were  to  us  personally  more
attractive.

§  24.  So  it  is  better,  perhaps,  to  fall  back  upon  our
general  objections  to  metaphysical  Realism,  which  we
have  meanwhile  held  in  abeyance,  and  to  improve  them
into  a  final  confutation  of  this  theory.

Let  us  then,  once  more,  emphatically  affirm  that  the
entire  independence  of  experience  which  it  attributes  to
the  real  is  in  every  way  impossible  and  incredible.  It  is,
moreover,  an  unwarranted  misinterpretation.  For  (i)  the
fact  we  start  from,  and  must  continue  to  start  from,  is  not
a  '  reality '  which  is  '  independent,'  but  one  which  is
experienced.  The  mutual  implication  of  '  experience  '  and
'reality,'  in  other  words,  forbids  their  divorce  (§  14).
And  (2)  the  '  independent  reality '  attributed  to  some  of
the  objects  of  our  experience  does  not  mean  what  the
metaphysical  realist  supposes.  It  does  not  assert  an
absolute  independence,  but  is  relative  to,  and  rightly
understood,  means  to  be  relative  to  the  experiencing  mind
which  asserts  it.  The  reality  we  predicate,  therefore,  is
never  'extra-mental';  it  has  at  its  heart  a  reference  to


xx  DREAMS  AND IDEALISM  483

the  experience  which  it  serves  to  explain.  If,  therefore,
Realism  is  taken  to  mean  a  denial  that  experience  and
reality  belong  together,  it  becomes  a  metaphysic  for  which
there  neither  is,  nor  can  be,  any  positive  evidence.

§  25.  But  the  same  considerations  will  confute  also
any  idealism  which  asserts  existence  to  be  merely  mental,
and  a  fortiori  if  mental  is  taken  solipsistically,  If,  as  we
have  seen,  '  reality  '  and  '  experience '  are  correlated  terms,
it  is  false  in  principle  to  reduce  the  former  to  the  latter.
The  mind  can  no  more  be  real  without  a  '  real  world '  of
some  sort  to  recognise  and  know,  than  the  real  world
known  can  be  real  without  a  mind  to  know  it.  There  is
nothing,  either  in  the  logical  situation  or  in  our  actual
experience,  which  warrants  either  the  '  idealist '  or  the
'  realist '  assertion.  This  was  why  we  were  so  cautious
never  to  admit  that  reality  was  only  '  my '  experience,  or
wholly  psychic.  In  so  far,  therefore,  as  this  claim  is
implied  in  the  fundamental  position  of  Idealism,  Idealism
is  finally  false,  and  as  false  as  Realism.  But  is  it  ?  One
can  hardly  answer,  because  so  much  depends  upon  usage.
Moreover,  though  it  matters  a  great  deal  whether  or  not
we  grasp  a  doctrine  clearly,  it  matters  far  less  whether  we
label  it  in  one  way  or  another.  The  old  labels,  however,
have  grown  so  worn  and  dirty,  and  have  had  so  many
conflicting  directions  inscribed  upon  them,  they  have
suffered  so  many  erasures  and  corrections,  that  even  the
most  optimistic  philosopher  may  well  doubt  whether  they
can  convey  the  treasures  of  our  truth  safely  to  our  destina-
tion, and  the  most  conservative,  whether  we  had  not
better  start  afresh  with  new  ones.  Humanists,  at  all
events,  will  have  a  special  motive  for  discarding  both  the
old  labels.  For  some  of  them  hitherto  had  been  ac-
customed to  describe  their  doctrines  as  realistic,  others  as
idealistic ;  others  have  varied  their  descriptions  as  the
exigencies  of  exposition  seemed  to  require.  For  them,
at  all  events,  it  will  be  simpler  to  regard  the  doctrine  we
have  developed  as  neither  realistic  nor  idealistic,  but  as
humanistic.

§  26.  They  will  be  confirmed  in  this  view  by  observing


484  STUDIES IN HUMANISM  xx

that  the  illustration  from  dreams,  though  it  seemed  to
arise  from  a  defence  of  Idealism,  did  not  fail  to  bring  out
this  most  important  point,  that  a  recognition  of  reality
was  always  involved.  For  the  appeal  to  dreams  showed
the  ideal  character  of  the  real  only  by  referring  to  a
higher  reality  in  which  the  unreality  of  the  '  dream '  could
be  revealed.  The  notion  of  reality,  therefore,  was  not
abolished,  but  reaffirmed.  We  merely  abandoned  a  less
for  a  more  satisfactory  form  of  reality.  For  we  were  led
to  the  thought  of  a  higher  reality  which,  so  far  from  being
merely  subjective  appearance,  was  needed  for  its  detection.
Thus  a  recognition  of  reality  was  the  condition  of  the
condemnation  of  appearance,  nor  could  anything  be
condemned  as  a  '  dream '  until  we  had  already  awakened
to  something  more  truly  '  real.'

Thus  an  'objective'  factor  and  a  recognition  of
'  reality '  were  always  essential.  But  so  was  their  rela-
tion to  our  experience,  nay  to  '  my '  experience.  For
ultimately  to  every  '  me '  the  recognition  of  reality
depends  on  its  pragmatic  efficacy  in  harmonising  and
organising  '  my '  experience.  If  and  when  it  comes
about  that  '  my '  experience  changes,  '  my '  reality  must
change  accordingly.

Thus  full  justice  is  done  also  to  the  '  subjective '  factor,
and  both  are  harmoniously  combined  in  the  Humanist
theory.  If,  nevertheless,  it  may  seem  that  the  balance
finally  inclines  somewhat  to  the  '  subjective '  side,  because,
after  all,  it  is  still  held  to  be  possible  that  every  individual
soul  may  some  day  '  awake '  to  find  the  reality  of  its
world  with  all  its  works  abolished  for  it  overnight,  the
fault  lies,  not  in  our  theory,  but  in  the  actual  facts.  For,
as  we  saw  at  the  end  of  §  14,  the  real  world  is  not  yet
coextensive  with  the  totality  of  existence,  with  the
whole  of  the  self's  experience.  It  is  a  selection,  the
arbitrariness  and  inadequacy  of  which  engender  doubts
which  mere  '  faith  '  cannot  fully  cure.  But  those  doubts
would  vanish  with  an  alteration  in  the  character  of
our  experience.  As  the  '  reality '  we  '  recognised  '  became
more  harmonious  and  more  adequately  assimilative  of


xx  DREAMS  AND IDEALISM  485

our  whole  experience,  we  should  trust  it  more.  And,
even  as  it  is,  we  can  draw  a  certain  comfort  from  these
doubts.  So  long  as  '  the  real  world,'  for  so  many  and  so
often,  is  so  like  a  hideous  nightmare,  it  is  consoling  to
think  that  it  can  wholly  be  transfigured,  that  it  can
wholly  be  escaped  from.  And  so,  though  as  pragmatists
we  must  insist  that  it  is  our  primary  duty  to  alter  and
improve  our  present  world,  and  to  remake  it  into  greater
conformity  with  our  ideals,  we  cannot  humanly  blame
those  who  have  at  all  times  sighed  religiously  for
'  heavens,'  in  which  all  wrongs  should  be  righted  and  all
evils  overcome.  We  should  teach  them  merely  that  the
celestial  and  the  earthly  aspirations  are  not  incompatible,
that  the  kingdom  of  heaven  does  not  come  by  observa-
tion, that  to  remake  earth  is  to  build  up  heaven,  that
there  is  continuity  enough  in  the  world  to  warrant  the
belief  that  the  same  forces  and  efforts  are  needed  and
operative  and  efficacious  in  both  spheres,  and  that  what-
ever is  to  be  perfected  in  heaven  must  have  been  begun
on  earth.

But  at  this  point  apprehension  may  be  felt  by  some
lest  this  series  of  realities  embracing  and  annulling  dreams
should  be  infinite,  so  that  nothing  we  could  ever  experience
could  ever  be  real  enough  to  be  final  and  to  assure  us  that
it  could  never  turn  out  to  have  been  a  dream.  This  fear,
however,  would  rest  upon  a  misconception.  Our  pro-
cedure has  throughout  assumed  that  the  reality  of  every
experience  is  accepted  until  grounds  for  doubting  it
arise.  This,  indeed,  is  why  '  dreams '  at  first  deceive
us.  The  grounds  for  doubt,  moreover,  we  have  seen,
are  in  the  last  resort  intrinsic ;  they  consist  either  in
some  breach  with  the  continuity  of  the  rest  of  ex-
perience, or  in  some  disharmony  which  shocks  us
into  a  denial  of  its  ultimate  reality.  Perhaps,  indeed,
the  first  case  is  really  resolvable  into  the  second  ;  for  a
breach  of  continuity  as  such  involves  an  unpleasant  jar.
And  if  our  experience  were  always  wholly  pleasant,  and
its  smooth  flow  never  jarred  with  our  ideals,  should  we
not  pay  scant  heed  to  any  incoherencies  it  might  involve  ?


486  STUDIES IN  HUMANISM  xx

If  life  were  one  great  glorious  pageant,  should  we  dream
of  questioning  its  incidents  ?  Should  we  not  accept  them
all  in  the  spirit  of  little  children  watching  the  gorgeous
transformations  of  a  pantomime?  Perhaps  such  a  child-
like attitude  is  feasible  in  heaven,  but  on  earth  it  is  out
of  place.  For  we  as  yet  experience  discordant  planes  of
reality,  and  so  can  and  must  conceive  ideals  of  a  more
harmonious  universe.  We  can  and  must  doubt,  too,
the  ultimateness  of  our  present  order ;  but  we  could  not
and  should  not  doubt  the  absolute  reality  of  an  experi-
ence which  had  become  intellectually  transparent  and
emotionally  harmonious.  For  then  we  should  not  need
to  postulate  anything  beyond  our  experience  to  account
for  it.  Our  immediate  experience  would  cease  to  hint
that  it  was  the  symbol  of  an  unmanifest  reality.

Can  such  a  situation  be  described  in  terms  of  Idealism
or  of  Realism  ?  Assuredly  it  can  be  described  in  either
way.  For  in  such  an  experience  everything  would  be
absolutely  real  ;  and  yet  '  I '  should  disown  no  part  of  it.
It  is  merely  a  verbal  question  whether  '  heaven '  is  better
defined  idealistically  as  a  condition  in  which  whatever  is
desired  is  realised,  or  realistically  as  one  in  which  what-
ever is  real  is  approved  of.  But  why  not  simply  say  that
Humanism  is  alike  the  true  Idealism  and  the  true  Realism,
and  has  conceived  the  true  Ideal,  in  which  experience  has
become  divine  without  ceasing  to  be  human,  because  it
has  wholly  harmonised  itself,  and  achieved  a  perfect  and
eternal  union  with  a  perfected  Reality?


INDEX


Absolute,  the,  224-5?  passim,  viii,
14,  27,  116,  131,  134,  137,  139,
158,  166  n.,  190,  217,  239,  288,
292,  294,  295,  394,  418  ;  its  disso-
ciation, 267,  271,  273  ;  as  mad,
273,  472  ;  as  not  =  '  God,'  286-8,
364  ;  as  a  postulate,  252-7  ;  as  re-
lated to  experience,  464-7 ;  as  a
solipsist,  257,  261-5,  472 !  as  un"
conscious,  265,  436

Absolute  Mind,  10,  233,  289,  467

Absolutism,  ix,  119,  121-2,  137,  181,
203,  229,  255,  439  ;  and  Dissocia-
tion of  Personality,  266-73  >  anc^
Religion,  27^-97 ;  its  end  in
scepticism,  xiii,  285  ;  its  incom-
patibility with  Humanism,  238  ;  its
realistic  trend,  454-9

Abstraction,  of  Logic,  87,  103  ;  of  the
universal,  173-4,  from  human  think-
ing, 422-4

Action,  answers  questions,  91,  involves
selection,  233,  makes  common
world,  318,  its  primacy,  408,  447,
tests  truth,  440

Activity,  130,  131,  230,  232,  357,
468

Agency,  230,  392

Alternatives,  implied  in  selection,  125,
in  Humanism,  392-417

Anaxagoras ,  35,  54

Anaximander,  29

Appearance,  220,  225,  227,  233,  239-
40,  247,  249-50,  254,  273,  288-9,
456,  467

Application,  a  test  of  truth,  8,  9,  40,
82,  in,  146,  149,  296

A  priori,  in  relation  to  experience,
245-6,  to  mathematics,  55,  to
postulates,  197,  236-7,  to  truth,
42,  251-5,  432-3

Apriorism,  42,  237

Aristophanes,  32,  40

Aristotelian  Society,  71  n.

Aristotle,  9,  23,  29,  32,  35,  41,  42,


45,  46,  49,  50,  60,  62,  63,  127,  152,

186,  396  n. ,  400

Arithmetic,  9,  55,  94,  236  n. ,  402
Attention,  selective,  231-5,  467
Axioms, xii, 120, 236-7, 241-5, 356,

467

Bacon,  301  n.

Bain,  A.,  133

Balfour,  A.  /.,  386

'  Beauchamp, '  Miss,  269,  270,  272

Becoming,  of  Ideas,  66

Belief,  353,  363

Bergson,  x

Berkeley,  xiv,  228  n. ,  231-2,  463,  466

Bosanquet,  B.,  71  n. ,  77,  81,  90,  97,
100,  103,  105,  284

Bradley,  F.  H.,  xii,  xiii,  4  «.,  77,  81,
85,  96,  97,  99,  101,  ii 4-140 passim,
146,  147,  177,  220  n. ,  225  n.,  231,
237,  239  «.,  241,  260,  261-2,  267,
273,  275,  276,  283,  284,  286,  287,
289,  290,  360,  424

Buridan,  339

Bussell,  F.  W.,  136,  139

Caird,  E. ,  35

Case, T.,  73

Causation,  236  n.,  242,  361,  467

Certainty,  83-4

Chance,  245,  318,  396,  418-9

Change,  39,  220  ;  as  illusion,  225,
255'  45°  I  as  real'  227>  322-  411-
4J9,  45°

Choice,  127,  129,  219,  292-4,  358,  392,
394-5,  400-3.  406,  415.  427

Colour-blindness,  316-7

Common  World,  the,  4  ». ,  no,  182,
311,  315-20,  442,  466-7,  469

Concept,  function  of,  356  ;  immutable,
64-5 ;  instrumental,  56,  64 ;  Plato's
theory  of,  25,  50/1  See  also  '  Uni-
versal '

Consistency,  as  criterion  of  truth,  65,
zoo,  in,  150,  243


487


488


STUDIES IN HUMANISM


Contingency,  403,  406,  407,  418,  422.

See  also  '  Chance '
Contradiction, law  of, 146, 150 ; no

criterion,  239-41  ;  of  the  senses,  39,

no, 220, 309-10; of insufficient

concepts,  65,  239
Cowell,  P.  H.,  416
Creation,  196,  261,  271,  434-5,  446,

447

Criterion,  as  consistency,  65,  149-50  ;
as  control,  222  ;  as  non-contradic-
tion, 239-41

Curie,  P. 89,  386

Darwin,  279,  385

Darwinism,  29

Definition,  1-2

Dehumanising,  xiv, 64,  69,  106,  171,

422,  425
Depersonalising,  98,  100  «. ,  106,  112,

1 7L  353.  3.61
Derealising,  xiv,  425
Descartes,  395
Desire,  in  relation  to  truth,  91-3,  339-

40  ;  to  postulates, 256, 337-41  ;  to

reality,  338-40,  425
Determinism, 125, 248, 284, 292,

392-420
Dewey,  /. , ix, 19  n., 96, 121, 122,

199,  361,  363,  369,  454,  458
Dialectic,  46, 171, 172-4,  279,280,422-4
Dialectical, spirit, 39,  211,  220;  dia-
logues, 45,  47
Dickinson,  G.  L.,  383  n.
Dreams,  202,  261,  316,  317,  319,  325,

382-3,  473-85
Dualism,  of  fact  vs. truth  and  value,

121  ;  of  Plato,  57,  61-2

Education,  23-5

Eleaticism,  48,  51,  53,  226,  288,  420

Emotion,  82,  99,  162,  354

Empiricism,  224-57,  259>  277

Error,  problem  of,  3,  78,  105  -  6,
147  n. ,  170,  177,  180,  183;  as
failure,  111-2;  as  psychological,  94  ;
as  related  to  knowledge,  7,  123,
149  ;  to  truth-making,  65,  205,  212  ;
as  valuation,  38

Ethics,  postulate  freedom,  399-401

Eucken,  R.,  xii

Evaluation,  of  claims  to  truth,  4,  76,
157  n. ;  of  meanings,  87

Evil,  82,  188,  227,  247,  253,  256-7,
287-9.  SSL  436

Evolutionism,  224-7,  27%>  448

Experience,  direct,  222 ;  immediate,
392 ;  religious,  363 ;  relation  to
experiment,  191  ;  to  reality,  202,
463-5,  469-70,  473-4.  482-6;  to


understanding, 247 ; to solipsism,

259-60  ;  fear  of,  255
Experiment,  191,  193,  364
External world,  13,  201-2, 234, 362,

459,  471,  474

Fact,  as  accepted,  120,  185,  186,  198,
200,  354,  426,  428  ;  as  independent,

124,  181, 425  ; initial, 428-31,
434-7  I  objective,  188,  190  ;  plastic,

125,  371,  445-6  ;  primary,  186  ;  and
truth, 121, 123-4, 370-2, 431; as
unpleasant,  93,  188-90  ;  unreal,  188.
See  also  '  Reality  '

Faith,  276,  290,  301,  389 ;  relation
to  reason  and  religion,  34^-6^

False,  as  valuation,  6,  143-4,  151,
154-5,  192-3,  212

Fatalism,  393

Feeling,  128-9,  24^

Fichte,  422  n.

Fiske,  J. ,  29

Flournoy,  T. ,  479

Flux,  40,  48,  51-3,  233,  255

God,  ambiguousness  of,  134,  285,  364  ;
definition  of,  136,  285  ;  infinity  of,
138 ;  omnipotence  of,  137,  287-8,
329,  418  ;  proofs  of,  305,  327,  335,
336-41,  344,  362  ;  as  creator,  435-6,
447  ;  as  postulate,  362  ;  source  of
values,  219,  244-5  ;  relation  to  the  all,
26,  276,  285,  328-34,  364,  369,  436

Gomperz,  T.,  28-33,  35  n->  4^>  47

Good,  and  bad,  6,  37, 152, 154;  denned,
152  ;  kinds  of,  191  ;  and  true,  6,
152,  154,  310  ;  Idea  of,  54-5,  459 ;
The,  153,  and  the  One,  55

Goodhart,  Dr.,  460,  471

Goodness,  moral,  153,  246  ;  of  gods,
331-2

Gorgias,  86

Greek,  philosophy,  23  f. ,  43,  368  ;
science,  25

Green,  T.  H. ,  278,  279,  282, 284». ,  286

Grote,  31

Habit,  and  freedom,  400-3,  409  ;  plas-
ticity of,  409-10,  417,  448

Haeckel,  279

' Hanna,'  Rev.  Mr.,  460,  471

Hartmann,  E.  von,  265,  436

Hegel,  xiv,  134,  172,  278,  280,  414,
422,  425

Heine,  viii

Heraclitus,  39,  51,  319

Herodotus,  313

Hoffding,  H.,  xi

Hoernle,  R.  F.  A.,  71  n.,  77,  115,  146,
174  n.,  392  n.


INDEX


489


Horn,  F.,  47

Humanism,  definition,  5  n. ,  10-16  ;  a
method,  16,  19  ;  of  Protagoras,  34,
68,  113  ;  relation  to  Absolutism,
238 ;  to  faith,  365  ;  to  freedom,
391-2,  408  ;  to  idealism,  453,  457,
463,  486  ;  to  metaphysics,  16,  19,
226,  229,  443,  450  ;  to  psychology,
72,  354  ;  to  realism,  453,  457,  459-
62,  486;  to  religion,  135-6,  351,
368 ;  to  scepticism,  69 ;  to  sub-
jectivism, 69,  457,  463  ;  to  truth,  121

Humanism,  vii-viii,  ix,  129,  132  ;  and
notes  16,  70,  120,  128,  178,  187,
190,  241,  242,  246,  275,  317,  353,
416,  422,  431,  436,  437,  448,  466,

475-  48i

Hume,  221,  230-1
Huxley,  T.  H.,  279

Idea,  communion  of,  48,  54 ;  de-
pendent on  experience,  252,  420 ;
as  psychical  fact,  77  ;  of  Good,  54-5,

459

Ideal,  its  formation,  4,  163-6,  223  ;
reality,  199  ;  relation  to  application,
40,  164  ;  to  idealism,  453  ;  to  man,
xiv,  70,  107-9,  I23>  164-6,  187,
213,  222  ;  to  truth,  i66/.,  180-1

Ideal  Theory,  of  Plato,  43/".,  109-10,
322,  457-9

Idealism,  453-86 ;  ambiguity  of,  228  n. ,
453  ;  difficulty  of,  48  ;  relation  to
solipsism,  258-65.  See  also  '  Ab-
solutism,' '  Personal  Idealism,'  and
'  Subjectivism '

Identity,  85,  237,  319

Imagery,  94

Immortality,  proof  of,  386-7 ;  and
Platonism,  57

Independence,  of  dream-worlds,  473,
475-6;  of  external  world,  13,  201,
474  ;  of  ideals,  165  ;  of  Logic,  95,
97-9,  103-5  ;  of  Plato's  Ideas,
57-8,  60,  175  ;  of  reality,  65,  122,
177,  i8o/,  321,  430,  439,  455,
474 ;  of  theory,  126-8,  131  ;  of
thought,  96 ;  of  truth,  65,  69,  157  n. ,
177,  182

Indetermination,  248,392-420,  427,  448

Indeterminism,  392-420

Infinite,  295,  314,  449

Intellect,  its  games,  7,  154 ;  its  satis-
faction, 115,  246;  pure,  7,  128

Intellectualism,  xii,  xiv,  4,  5,  10,  98,
99,  126,  129,  131,  160,  180,  228-9,
237,  244,  246,  264,  396  n. ,  441,
444,  458-9  ;  its  psychology,  14 ;  re-
lation to  experience,  13,  191  ;  to
Plato,  25,  145  ;  to  scepticism,  xiii,


69,  96,  in,  176.  See  also  '  Ration-
alism '  and  '  Sensationalism  '
Interest,  logical  and  psychological,  81;
relation  to  purpose,  82  ;  to  reality,
199-200,  221,  438  ;  to  science,  98,
235  ;  to  truth,  5,  188,  190

James,  W.,  x,  5  n.,  19  n.,  119,  131,
135,  136,  231  «.,  299,  352,  373,  375,
378  n.,  391  n.,  393,  406,  420,  445,
461,  479

'Jericho,'  xiii,  119,  134,  138,  139,
170  n. ,  225

Jerusalem,  W.,  xii

Joachim,  H.  H.,  163-78  passim,  3  ». ,
14  n.,  103,  105-9,  I22'  J47'  283,284

Joseph,  H. W.  £.,  122

JoTvett,  B.,  145  n. ,  278

Judgment,  89-90,  96,  no,  in  n.,
191-2,  356

Kant, 126, 127, 178, 220,  230,  237,

278,  280,  467,  468

Knowing,  makes  real  differences,  438-44
Knox, H. V., x,  xv,  96,  150,  220  n.,

239  n. ,  282  n.

Language,  pragmatic,  7  n.

Law,  application  of,  8,  173-4  •'  con-
stancy of,  416-7 ;  and  miracle,  293,
413  ;  as  habit,  320,  409-10,  446  ;
as  mechanical,  414 ;  as  postulate,
396,  398  ;  as  rule,  409

Leibniz,  219,  288

Liberum  Veto,  297

Lie,  94,  323,  340

Logic,  definition  of,  78,  100  ;  formal,
3,  79,  96,  142-3,  148-9  ;  Humanist,
82  ;  normative,  99-101,  159  ;  prag-
matic, 115,  143  ;  traditional,  4,  142  ;
of  sophists,  32  ;  relation  to  actual
knowing,  74  ;  to  Psychology,  77-
77j,  162  n.,  366,  436

Logical  connection,  also  psychological,
16,  76,  80,  95,  436

Lotze,  435

Lytton,  480

Mac  A,  £.,  xi,  7

Mackenzie,  J.  S.,  59  n,  283,  284-5

McTaggart,  J. M. £., 276 »., 284,

287,  350,  422
Mainldnder,  272
Man  the  Measure,  xv,  13,  33-9,  210,

298,  307-11,  315,  320
Mansel,  280

Materialism,  n,  267,  284,  378
Mathematics,  55,  84,  222,  353
Matter,  377.  415,  434,  443,  449.  468
Meaning,  86-89  ;  and  ambiguity,  87  ;


49°


STUDIES IN HUMANISM


and  application,  9,  149,  171,  243  ;
and  context,  86,  95,  102,  149  ;  and
fact,  77  n.,  86,  95  ;  and  purpose,  9,
82,  112,  149,  171,  371

Mechanism,  367,  414

Melissus,  314

Mellone,  S.  H.,  16  n.

Metaphysics,  xiii,  i,  u,  16-21,  201,
277,  426,  437-8,  462  ;  aids  to  faith,
278  ;  depend  on  personality,  18  ;
not  coercive,  17,  359  ;  Plato's,  58/1
relation  to  ethics,  273  ;  to  evolution,
225-8,  411  ;  to  freedom,  398,  405,
408,  417-20  ;  to  Humanism  and
Pragmatism,  16,  20,  244,  428-9,
434-5,  450 ;  to  practice,  246  ;  to
higher  realities,  222  ;  to  scepticism,
74,  100,  108,  116-7

Mill,  J.  S.,  ioon.,  115,  236  n.,  278,
279

Miracle,  293,  396,  413

Monism,  159,  219,  267.  See  also
'  Absolutism '

Moore,  A. W.,  178

Moore,  G.  £.,  177,  228,  458

Muirhead,  J.  H. ,  418

Myers,  F. W.  H. ,  373-88  passim

Myths,  of  Plato,  41-2  ;  of  religions,
305.  336,  342-8

Naturalism,  10,  158,  230,  284

Natural  Selection,  38

Necessity,  83

Newman,  J.  H.,  136,  352

Newton,  441

Not-being,  56,  no

Novelty,  244-5,  294.  333"4.  385

One,  the,  314-6,  320,  328-34,  369;
and  the  Many,  271-2,  315,  328-9,
450  ;  as  Absolute,  61  ;  as  the  Good,
55  ;  as  the  Idea,  52-3

Ontological  proof,  228,  241,  251-2

Origin  and  history,  244-5,  396  n.

Ostwald, W.,  xi

Panpsychism,  443

Pantheism,  26-7,  364

Papini,  G.,  xi,  19  n.

Parmenides,  61,  312,  313,  322

'  Parmenides ' of  Plato,  45-7,  49,  59,

60,  62,  67
Participation difficulty in Plato, 45,

54-5-  59-  169

Particularity  unknowable,  56
Pascal,  352
Pattison,  M.,  278
Peirce,  C.  S.,  ix,  5,  161  n.
Perception,  177,  311,  316-20
Personal  Idealism,  4  w. ,  16,  228  n,  463


Personal  Idealism,  vii,  129,  and  notes
16,  83,  85,  118,  120,  197,  353,  428,
436,  468,  473

Personality,  its  dissociation,  266-73  >
implied  in  science,  98  ;  its  nature,
129,  381-2  ;  not  to  be  abstracted
from,  95,  353-4,  424,  463  ;  relation
to  meaning,  86,  88

Pessimism,  189,  257,  272

Philosophy,  difficulty  of,  139-40,  308  ;
failure  of,  137-8,  359

Plato,  xiii,  xiv,  6,  25,  30,  32-70,  109-
10,  113,  123,  127,  132,  145,  162  n.,
168,  169  n. ,  177,  228  n. ,  229,
283,  286,  298-300,  306-11,  322,
434,  441,  456,  457,  458,  461

Plato's  Chasm,  57,  58,  59,  62,  69,  109,
175,  289,  455,  458

Pluralism,  97,  127,  138,  219,  267,  271,

273.  459

Plutarch,  30

Podmore,  F.,  373,  380,  384

Poincare',  H.,  xi,  205,  319  n.

Postulates,  120,  197,  234,  241-5,  353,
356-62,  471  ;  of  the  Absolute,  252-4;
of  determinism,  394-9,  405-7 ;  of
freedom,  399-401  ;  of  Logic,  116-8,
236-7  ;  methodological,  397-8,  405-
407,  417,  449  ;  of  rationality,  194,
292

Postulation,  91,  93,  280,  394

Practice,  ambiguity  of,  131  ;  definition
of,  129-30  ;  relation  to  theory,  126-8,
246

Pragmatic  Method,  x,  xiii,  367,  428-9,
433.  436-8

Pragmatic  Reality,  190,  433,  475

Pragmatic  Test,  93,  157,  186,  192,
358-9,  366,  469

Pragmatic  Value,  of  religion,  359,
368  ;  of  science,  359

Pragmaticism,  5  n.

Pragmatism,  154-5,  198,  246,  418,
441  ;  definition  of,  3-12  ;  as  method,
16,  20  n. ,  186,  429-30;  relation  to
F.  H.  Bradley,  115,  133;  to  Hum-
anism, 15-6,  245,  437;  to  Kant,
128  ;  to  metaphysics,  16,  19,  224,
428-9,  434

Predication,  experimental,  192  ;  a
puzzle,  73

Prince,  Dr.  Morton,  269,  272,  382

Proof,  386-7

Protagoras,  xiv,  4  «. ,  15,  25,  31  «. ,
33-8,  69,  113,  132,  145-6,  298-348,

457

Psychical  Research,  370-90
Psychologism,  xii,  72,  95
Psychology,  definition  of,75;  abnormal,

268,  387  ;  relation  to  evidence,  363  ;


INDEX


491


to  Humanism,  354 ;  to  idealism,
268  ;  to  Logic,  71-113,  275,  2<)if.,
366  ;  to  purpose,  12  ;  to  religion,
337-4L  363>  367-8  ;  to  subjectivity,
468-9

Pure  Thought,  14,  96-7,  143,  354
Purpose, and  Absolutism, 10, 230-5,
248  ;  and  interest,  82  ; and  reality,
412  ; and  science, 152  ; definition
of,  133  ;  ultimate,  55,  156,  158
Purposiveness of  mental life, 10,  82,
99,  128,  191,  235,  247,  354

Questions,  90-1

Rashdall,  ff.,  71  n. ,  77,  136,  137
Rationalism, 350, 352, 425 ; fears
experience,  255  ; not rational,  xiii,
252,  355. See  also  Intellectualism
Realism, 13, 122, 181, 201, 228  n. ,
258,  425,  439,  453-62, 464-6, 470,
473-4.  476,  481-3.  486

Reality,  absolute,  214-223,  321,  486  ;
dynamic,  215  ;  higher,  222,  431-2,
475-7,480;  incomplete,  411,  419,
427,  448-51 ;  independent,  321,  430,
461-2,  465,  470,  473,  481  ;  initial,
432-3;  plastic,  427,  433,  444-5;
primary,  187,  201-2,  220-2,  233,
460,  470,  474 ;  real,  221-2,  438,
474-5,  484  ;  rigid,  419,  427,  433  ;
static,  225,  427 ;  ultimate,  250,
436,  485  ;  its  antedating,  339,  430 ;
itsdegrees,  249-50 ;  its  discovery,  429-
31,  439  ;  its  'making,'  422-451,  120,
198-203,  218,  320-2,  34O/~. ,  462,  467;
relation  to  dreams,  202,  473,  477,
479-81 ;  toexperience,  469-70,  482-4;
to  interest,  199,  438  ;  to  predication,
192-8  ;  to  truth,  185,  198,  422-5  ;
as  claim,  252,  430  ;  as  value,  473,
480  ;  as  a  whole,  248,  251

Reason,  its  relation  to  Faith  and
Religion,  349-69  \  its  function,
355-6,  409,  410  ;  pure,  viii,  65,  67,
255,  281-2

Religion,  its  relation  to  Absolutism,
274-97,  345  ;  to  Faith  and  Reason,
349-69  ;  its  definition,  135-7

Revelation,  344-5,  389

Kiddles  of  the  Sphinx,  notes  19,  202,
275,  402,  436,  476

Ritschl,  136,  352

Royce,  /. ,  120  ».,  139,  230  n.

Russell,  B.  A.  W.,  177,  458

St.  Paul,  36

Santayana,  G.,  x,  20  n. ,  429  n.
Satisfaction,  of  intellect,  115,  246  ;  of
truth,  83  ;  of  ultimate  reality,  436


Scepticism,  about  Logic,  73-4  ;  relation
to  intellectualism,  xiii,  69,  96,  100,
116,118,178,206,  210,237;  toProta-
goreanism,  38,  68,  113,  298,  456  ;
to  subjectivism,  69

Schopenhauer,  xi

Sckultz,  /. ,  xii

Science,  and  Aristophanes,  32  n.  ;  and
'  contradictions,'  39  ;  and  faith,  301,
361,  366  ;  and  freedom,  397-9  ;  and
man,  98,  171,  412  ;  and  pantheism,
27 ;  and  postulates,  236  ;  and
Protagoras,  34-5  ;  and  purpose,
152 ;  and  theology,  26-8,  277-82,
364 ;  and  time,  73 ;  as  system,
151-2  ;  its  aim,  235  n.

Selection, 38, 125, 132, 187, 190-1,

202, 231-5, 360, 371, 382, 392,

429,  460,  484
Self-determination,  393-4
Sensationalism, 177, 228, 277, 299,

309-10

Sense-perception,  becomes  objective,  38
Sensible,  its  Becoming,  66  ;  relation  to

Idea,  56,  59
Shakespeare,  478

Sidgwick,  Alfred,  x,  8,  9,  20  n. ,  149
Sidgwick,  Henry,  397
Sidis,  B.,  460,  471
Society  for  Psychical  Research,  372-90,

478
Socrates, 32, 35, 37, 43, 52, 220,

298-9,  304,  307,  311
Solipsism, 69, 234, 257  n. , 258-265,

463-4,  469-73
'  Somehow,'  as  the  ultima  ratio,  58,  61,

168,  250,  255,  276,  297
'Sophist,'  of  Plato,  46  «.,  67,  286
Sophists,  30-3,  299
Spencer,  H.,  137,  225-6,  279
Spinoza,  159

Stewart,  J.  A.,  68  n.,  284  n.
Stout,  G.  F.,  170,  225,  230
Sturt,  H. C.,  x,  I9«.,  97,  118,  129,

131,  282

Subjectivism,  457,  463-4  ;  and  Prota-
goras, 38,  68,  70,  456  ;  and

scepticism,  69,  456
Subliminal  Self,  375-9

Taylor,  A.  £., 224-51 passim, 122,

139,  146,  157,  161  n. ,  284
Teichmiiller ;  57
Teleology, 12, 230-5  ; and Idea of

Good,  55

Telepathy,  380,  384
Thales,  339
'  Theaetetus,'  of  Plato,  xiii,  35,  37,  38,

48  n.,  109-10,  123, 132, 145, 299,

308


492


STUDIES IN HUMANISM


and


Theology,  26,  135,  178,  196,  278-81,
283,  285,  288,  349,  351-2,  368  ;  of
Protagoras,  298,  300,  341-6
Theory  vs.  practice,  126-8
Time,  and  Christianity,  280  ;
eternity,  422  ;  and  science,  73
Transcendence,  illusory,  183,  461  ;  of
Ideas,  57;  of  knowing,  122,  177,  455
Transmission  theory  of  soul,  378,  386
Truth,  absolute,  48,  67-8,  122,  181,
204-214,  263  ;  abstract,  8,  193  ;
dehumanised,  xiii,  64-5  ;  disagree-
able, 93  ;  efficacious,  118,  195  ;
eternal,  174,  205  ;  ideal,  non-human,
60,  67,  106-9,  I7°'  207-9  i  inde-
pendent, 64,  157  n.,  182;  methodo-
logical, 194  ;  objective,  34,  38,  70,
92,  153,  182  ;  potential,  8  ;  its
ambiguity,  141-162,  241  ;  its  ante-
dating, 157  n.,  195,  430;  its  de-
personalising, xiii,  112,  171,  353;
its  etherealising,  111-2;  its  '  making,  '
4,  120,  124,  142,  151,  161,  179-203,
312,  422,  425-6,  431,  438,  462  ;  its
progressiveness,  65,  157,  194-5,
211-3  ;  its  variety,  360  ;  as  claim,
3,  66,  76,  77,  78,  94,  in,  144-162,
183,  186,  206,  299-300,  367,  389,  425,
432  ;  as  consistency,  100,  107,  241  ;
as  correspondence  with  reality,  ix,
xiv,  116-8,  122-4,  177,  181,  241,
425,  426,  455  ;  as  dependent,  182-3,
195-6,  206;  as  system,  123,  169  f.,
195  ;  as  valuation,  38,  76,  130,  i43/i  ,
162,  195,  211,  299,  310  ;  in  relation
to  consequences,  6,  91,  in,  154-5,
185,  186,  192,  357  ;  to  context,  8  ;
to  desire,  91-3,  338-41,  374  ;  to  dis-
covery, 157  n.,  194-5,  429I  to  fact,
121-5,  180,  185,  370-2  ;  to  interest,


5,  154;  to  man,  5,  143,  263,  426;
to  meaning,  vii,  142  ;  to  purpose,
10,  112,  152-4,  156,  193,  194;  to
reality,  185,  198,  422-5  ;  to  satis-
faction, 83 ;  to  success,  1 18, 193,  362

Universals,  Aristotle's,  63,  175 :  as
applicable,  113  ;  as  concrete,  172-5  ;
and  particulars,  113,  173-4

Universe,  alternatives,  219  ;  as  fated,
418  ;  idea  of,  295,  333  ;  as  monistic,
218  ;  as  plastic,  448  ;  as  satisfied,
223  ;  as  system,  247-8  ;  its  unity,
127,  136,  290,  292-5,  332-4

Universities,  15,  277

Usefulness,  and  truth,  8,  161,  185,
243'  3I3-5.  323  I  and  good,  191

'  Useless '  knowledge,  24,  242

Validity,  and  claim,  144-59,  247  ;  and

origin, 242-5  ; of  postulates,  357  ;

objective,  90
Values, distinguished by Protagoras,

35,  299-300,  309-11 ; dependent  on

use, 244  ; as psychical  facts,  174  ;

logical, 7, 157  ; vital, 76, 358  ;

subject  to  logic,  78  ; to  psychology,

76
Verification,  essential  to  truth,  8,  193,

197,  246,  253, 357-8, 362, 365-6,

389-90,  432
Voluntarism,  11,  92,  128, 130,  142, 143

Ward,  J. ,  230  n.
Wells,  H.  G.,  293

Will,  99,  128,  133,  357  ;  to  believe,
13°.  35°.  353.  358

Zeller,  £.,  44
Zeno,  27,  420


THE END


Printed  by  R.  &  R.  CLARK,  LIMITED,  EdMurgh.


University  of  California

SOUTHERN  REGIONAL  LIBRARY  FACILITY

405  Hilgard  Avenue,  Los  Angeles,  CA  90024-1388

Return  this  material  to  the  library

from  which  it  was  borrowed.


JAN  21  1993


UC  SOUTHERN  REGIONAL  LIBRARY  FACILITY


A 000  879  465 3
