Formal Logic: A Scientific and Social Problem
F. C. S. Schiller (1912)
========================================================================

PROVENANCE NOTE (Tower of Babel staging): F. C. S. Schiller's Formal Logic (1912) — the pragmatist attack on formal logic: logic as a human instrument.

========================================================================

I


MACMILLAN  AND  CO.,  LIMITED

LONDON  •  BOMBAY  •  CALCUTTA
MELBOURNE

THE MACMILLAN COMPANY

NEW  YORK  •  BOSTON  •  CHICAGO
DALLAS  -  SAN  FRANCISCO

THE  MACMILLAN  CO. OF  CANADA,  LTD.

TORONTO


FORMAL LOGIC


BY  THE  SAME  AUTHOR

RIDDLES OF THE SPHINX

A  STUDY IN THE PHILOSOPHY OF HUMANISM
NEW  AND REVISED EDITION 1910


STUDIES IN HUMANISM

HUMANISM

PHILOSOPHICAL  ESSAYS


"AXIOMS  AS POSTULATES"

IN

PERSONAL IDEALISM

EDITED  BY  HENRY  STURT
LONDON: MACMILLAN  AND  CO., LTD.


PLATO OR PROTAGORAS?

BEING  A  CRITICAL  EXAMINATION  OF  THE  'PROTA
GORAS'  SPEECH  IN  THE  THE&TETUS,  WITH
SOME  REMARKS  UPON  ERROR

OXFORD :  B.  H.  BLACKWELL
LONDON:  SIMPKIN,  MARSHALL,  AND  CO.,  1908


S334

FORMAL LOGIC

A  SCIENTIFIC  AND  SOCIAL
PROBLEM


BY


F.  C.  S.  SCHILLER,  M.A.,  D.Sc.

FELLOW AND SENIOR TUTOR OF CORPUS CHRISTI COLLEGE, OXFORD


MACMILLAN AND CO., LIMITED

ST.  MARTIN'S STREET,  LONDON

1912


COPY  JUG  HT


TO THE MEMORY

OF

THE LAST GREAT LIBERATOR

OF THE HUMAN SPIRIT

WILLIAM JAMES


17


PREFACE

FOR  over  two  thousand  years  Formal  Logic  has  been  a
stock  subject  of  academic  instruction.  It  has  been  estab
lished  and  endowed  with  a  multitude  of  official  defenders
chosen  from  the  ablest  and  acutest  intelligences  the
human  race  has  produced.  Its  subject-matter,  moreover,
is  so  far  from  being  recondite  that  it  should  be  familiar
to  every  rational  being.  It  professes  to  study  an  opera
tion  every  one  professes  to  perform  habitually,  viz.  thinking,
and  to  explain  how  we  ought  to  think.  It  might  be
supposed,  therefore,  that  by  this  time  the  subject  of  Logic
was  completely  explored,  that  every  embellishment  of
technicality  had  been  added,  and  every  logical  question
settled  beyond  a  shadow  of  a  doubt.

Instead  of  this,  what  do  we  find  ?  Not  only  that
ordinary  human  thinking  continues  to  pay  scant  respect
to  Logic,  but  that^the  logicians  themselves  continue  to
differ  widely  as  to  the  nature,  the  function,  the  value,  and
even  the  existence,  of  their  science.  Nor  has  Formal
Logic,  despite  its  establishment,  ever  quite  been  able  to
silence  the  voice  of  the  critic.  Of  late  criticisms  have  so
multiplied  in  number  and  increased  in  severity,  and  that
among  the  very  professionals  who  seemed  pledged  to
uphold  the  doctrines  on  which  their  dignity  and  livelihood
depended,  that  it  is  hard  to  see  how  a  study  which  labours
under  such  imputations  can  be  called  scientific.  To
these  criticisms  Formal  logicians  have  hardly  attempted

vii


viii  FORMAL  LOGIC

a  reply.  Strong  in  the  consciousness  that  they  were
beati  possidentes,  and  that  their  subject,  though  it  might
be  nonsense,  was  at  any  rate  consecrated  by  a  tradition
of  2000  years,  and  that  the  history  of  education  proves
that  nothing  has  a  greater  hold  on  the  human  mind  than
nonsense  fortified  by  technicality,  because  the  more  non
sensical  it  is  the  more  impervious  it  becomes  to  rational
objection,  the  more  impossible  it  is  to  amend  it,  and  so
the  better  it  lasts,  they  have  trusted  that  their  traditional
scheme  of  instruction  would  weather  this  storm,  as  it
had  survived  the  revolt  of  renascent  literature  against
Medieval*  Scholasticism  and  the  nineteenth-century  revolt
of  science  against  dogma  and  tradition.

Nor  are  such  calculations  very  far  wrong.  The
prestige  of  tradition  is  so  overwhelming,  the  force  of
habit  is  so  insidious,  that  it  is  not  at  all  unlikely  that
this  whole  revolt  will  come  to  nothing,  and  that  Logic
will  continue  to  be  taught  on  the  traditional  lines,  unless
the  various  criticisms  that  have  broken  down  the  Formal
scheme  in  various  points  can  be  derived  from  some  single
principle,  and  shown  to  lead  up  to  a  systematic  recon
struction  of  Logic,  which  will  render  it  a  more  fruitful
study  of  the  procedures  of  human  knowing.

The  present  work,  however,  is  only  intended  to  achieve
the  former,  and  intrinsically  the  less  important,  of  these
aims.  It  is  an  attempt  to  expound  the  traditional
doctrine  strictly,  in  its  dependence  on  its  fundamental
assumption,  viz.  that  it  is  possible  to  study  the  formal
truth  of  thought  irrespective  of  its  truth  in  point  of  fact,
and  to  show  that  this  fundamental  abstraction  everywhere
leads  to  failure,  failure  both  to  account  for  the  procedures
of  human  thinking  and  failure  to  attain  even  formal
consistency.  Thus  the  various  defects  of  the  Formal
doctrine  are  all  derived  from  the  falsity  of  the  initial
principle  which  defines  the  '  science.'


PREFACE  ix

I  confess  that  to  myself  the  discovery  of  the  source  of
Logic's  troubles  came  as  a  great  relief.  For,  in  common
with  most  teachers  of  Formal  Logic,  I  had  found  it  a
very  difficult  subject  to  teach  without  loss  of  self-respect.
It  so  constantly  seemed  to  be  necessary  to  slur  over  the
real  difficulties  to  which  the  traditional  doctrines  conduct
honest  thinking,  to  palliate  masses  of  inconsistency  in
what  professes  to  be  a  logic  of  formal  consistency,  to
refuse  arbitrarily  to  pursue  the  problems  raised,  on  the
plea  that  they  extended  beyond  the  field  of  '  Logic '  into
*  metaphysics '  or  '  psychology,'  and  to  draw  the  line
between  the  '  logical '  and  the  '  extra-logical '  in  a  wholly
illogical  manner.  All  logicians,  I  believe,  have  felt  these
difficulties  more  or  less,  and  seen  that  nothing  is  easier
than  to  attack  and  condemn  Formal  Logic  with  its  own
weapons.  Indeed  in  the  details  of  its  criticisms  this
book  will  probably  be  found  to  present  little  that  is
wholly  new.  What  alone  may  claim  to  be  something
of  a  novelty  is  the  diagnosis  of  the  malady  which  has
paralysed  Logic  from  the  beginning,  and  rendered  it  so
unsatisfactory  a  subject  of  instruction,  and  so  impotent
to  guide  the  course  of  human  thinking.  //  is  NOT  possible
to  abstract  from  the  actual  use  of  the  logical  material  and  to
consider  'forms  of  thought '  in  themselves^  without  incurring
thereby  a  total  loss,  not  only  of  truth  but  also  of  meaning.

The  conviction  that  its  Formal  definition  is  what  has
vitiated  Logic,  is  the  positive  background  of  what  might
otherwise  appear  a  wearisome  round  of  negative  criticisms.
Such  criticism  is,  however,  a  necessary  preliminary  at
present,  before  a  study  of  the  marvellous  ways  in  which
human  minds  assimilate  and  develop  knowledge  can  be
made  to  instruct  and  interest  every  one  as  it  should.  It
is  necessary  to  pull  down  the  pseudo-science  of  Formal
Logic,  and  to  show  what  an  incoherent,  worthless,  and
literally  unmeaning  structure  it  is,  before  it  is  possible  to


B  x  FORMAL  LOGIC

build  up  the  true  Logic  of  real  reasoning  which  starts
from  the  act  of  thought  and  so  does  not  lose  touch  with
Science  and  practical  life.

It  was  necessary,  moreover,  to  prove  the  case  against
Formal  Logic  formally  and  dialectically,  because  Formal
Logic  cannot  profess  itself  insensitive  to  defects  of
form,  and  because  at  present  nearly  all  logicians  are  (alas  !)
dialecticians.

This  latter  fact  is  curious,  and  largely  explains  the
,career  of  Formal  Logic.  It  could  never  have  escaped
'detection  so  long,  if  it  had  not  been  ranked  among  the
1  literary '  subjects.  The  effect  was  unfortunate,  in  that
it  exempted  logicians  from  the  salutary  study  of  scientific
knowing,  and  directed  their  attention  upon  verbal  quibbles
and  matters  of  historic  erudition,  and  rendered  them
slow  to  perceive  the  discrepancies  between  their  theories
and  the  facts,  both  of  Science  and  of  Life.

But  Logic  was  also  prevented  thereby  from  doing  all
the  harm  which  its  false  analysis  of  thought  might  other
wise  have  done  to  Science.  When  Science  at  last  escaped
from  the  clutches  of  medieval  Scholasticism  (which  was
itself  a  hybrid  between  theology  and  Formal  Logic),  it
happened  that  *  Logic '  remained  in  the  old  curriculum.
So  the  students  of  Science  were  not  taught  it,  and  conse
quently  were  not  paralysed  by  its  technicalities  and  inepti
tudes.  They  could  therefore  go  ahead,  and  advance  their
subjects  by  the  light  of  nature,  without  being  blocked  at
every  step  by  sterile  subtleties.  That  the  students  of
Logic  continued  to  derive  their  'mental  training'  from
these  subtleties,  and  that  even  when  they  were  tardily
taught  the  '  theory  of  Science '  they  were  regaled  with
methods  which  neither  had  been,  nor  could  be,  actually
used,  mattered  comparatively  little.  For  in  any  case  their
lack  of  experience  of  actual  research  would  have  rendered
it  difficult  for  them  to  detect  the  futility  of  these  methods,


PREFACE  xi

and  being  'literary,'  they  were  not  likely  anyhow  to  con
tribute to the advancement of knowledge. So both
'  Logic '  and Science could academically  prosper under
the  delightfully  paradoxical regulations  of, e.g., Oxford,  \
where  what  is  supposed  to  be  the  theory  of  Science  is  only  j

.

taught  to  those  who  know  nothing  of  its  practice,  while
those  who  are  experts  in  the  practice  of  Science  are  not
allowed  to  study  a  '  theory  of  Science '  which  could  only
delay  their  progress.

Thus  Formal  Logic  has  survived,  in  spite,  and  largely
by  reason,  of  its  falsity,  and  so  long  as  it  survives  in
examination  papers  its  technicalities  have  to  be  taught.
But  they  should  be  taught  in  a  critical  spirit,  and  with  a
minimum  of  pedantry  and  reverence  for  forms.  It  is
such  a^jnntical  tev  tjapok,  for  the  use  of  the  more  pro
gressive  teachers  in  a  most  unprogressive  subject,  that  I
have  tried  to  produce,  hoping  that  it  may  be  provisional,
and  succeed  in  superseding  the  need  for  its  own  existence.
With  some  hesitation,  I  have  thought  it  better  not  to  give
explicit  references  for  the  Formal  doctrines  discussed.  It
would  have  been  easy  to  do  so,  for  they  are  to  be  found
(with  more  or  less  of  reservation  and  protest)  in  all  the
text-books.  But  it  would  also  have  been  unfair.  For
though  there  is  not  perhaps  at  present  any  logician  who
quite  escapes  Formalism — with  the  notable  exception  of
Mr.  Alfred  Sidgwick,  to  whose  original  and  penetrating
work  my  extensive  indebtedness  would  be  obvious,  even  if
I  were  not  proud  to  confess  it — no  one  takes  a  consistently  r"\J
Formal  view  of  Logic.  To  be  a  consistent  Formal
logician  is  probably  beyond  the  power  of  any  man,
psychologically  as  well  as  logically,  and  even  the  greatest
Formalists  do  not  find  in  their  *  Logic '  complete  intel
lectual  satisfaction,  and  may  not  infrequently  be  caught
deviating  from  their  ideal  into  excellent  sense.  Since,
then,  all  are  better  than  their  creed,  it  would  have  been


xii  FORMAL  LOGIC

invidious  to  single  out  a  few,  and  too  cumbrous  to  refer
to  all.  And  after  all,  when  the  fundamental  assumptions
of  an  old-established  intellectual  industry  are  shown  to  be
unsound,  the  fear  is  rather  that  too  many  heads  will
complain  that  the  cap  fits  too  tightly  than  that  too  many
stomachs  will  unobservantly  assimilate  such  unexpectedly
potent  nutriment.

As  regards  the  production  of  the  book,  my  thanks  are
due,  in  the  first  place,  to  Capt.  H.  V.  Knox,  who  has  read
it  both  in  manuscript  and  in  proof,  compiled  the  index,
and  enriched  it  with  many  subtle  and  valuable  suggestions.
But  I  must  thank  also  others  of  my  friends  for  consenting
to  spoil  their  appetite  for  the  whole  by  piecemeal  nibbling
at  imperfect  proofs,  to  wit,  Mr.  R.  R.  Marett  of  Exeter
College,  Mr.  Alfred  Sidgwick,  Dr.  H.  M.  Kallen,  Signor
Mario  Calderoni,  and  Mr.  D.  L.  Murray,  and  gratefully
acknowledge  the  benefit  I  have  derived  from  their
comments.

OXFORD,  October  1911.


CONTENTS

CHAPTER I

PAGE

THE  NATURE  OF  LOGIC .  .  i

§  i.  The  Definition  of  Logic.  §  2.  Form  and  Matter  of
Thought.  §  3.  The  Difficulties  of  Formal  Logic.  §  4.  The
Failure  of  Formal  Logic.  §  5.  A  Logic  to  discriminate  between
True  and  False  wanted.  §  6.  The  Self-contradiction  of  Formal
Logic.

CHAPTER II
TERMS .  .  .  .  .  .  .12

§  i.  Terms  as  Abstractions  from  Judgments.  §  2.  Terms
as  Convenient  Fictions.  §  3.  Terms  as  Dictionary-Meanings.
§  4.  The  Verbality  of  Terms.  §  5.  Subject  and  Predicate.
§  6.  Abstract  and  Concrete  Terms.  §  7.  Common,  Singular,
and  Collective  Terms.  §  8.  Ambiguity  and  Equivocation  of
Terms.  §  9.  Relative  and  Absolute  Terms.  §  10.  Positive,
Negative,  and  Privative  Terms.  §  II.  The  Relativity  of  Formal
Classifications.

CHAPTER III

THE  EXTENSION  AND  INTENSION  OF  TERMS .  . 32

§  i.  The  Fourfold  Analysis  of  Propositions.  §  2.  The  In
verse  Variation  of  Extension  and  Intension.  §  3.  Comprehen
sion,  Subjective  Intension,  and  Connotation.  §  4.  The  Meaning
of  Proper  Names.

CHAPTER IV

THE  CATEGORIES  .  .  .  .  .  -39

§  i.  Aristotle's  List.  §  2.  A  general  Objection  to  the  Notion
of  Categories.  §  3.  Special  Objections  to  Aristotle's  List.

xiii


xiv  FORMAL  LOGIC

CHAPTER V

PAGE

THE  PREDICABLES  45

§  i.  Their  Meaning.  §  2.  Their  Metaphysical  Basis.  §  3.
The  Five  Questions  about  a  '  Kind.'  §  4.  The  Difficulty  about
the  Individual.  §5.  The  Difficulties  about  Accident.  §6.  The
Meaninglessness  of  the  Inapplicable.  §  7.  The  Logical  and
Metaphysical  Aspects  of  the  Theory  of  Predicables.  §  8.  Darwin
v.  Formal  Logic.  §  9.  Is  Mathematical  Truth  of  a  different
nature?  §  10.  Are  the  Predicables  applicable  or  not?

CHAPTER VI
DEFINITION  AND  DIVISION  .  .  .  .62

§  i.  The  Function  of  Definition  and  Division.  §  2.  The
Traditional  Doctrine.  §  3.  The  Limits  of  Definition.  §  4.
Criticism  of  the  Traditional  Doctrine.  §  5.  The  Real  Nature
of  Definition.  §  6.  Division.  §  7.  The  Difficulties  of
Division.  §  8.  Classification  v.  Division.  §  9.  Dichotomy.
§  10.  Conclusions.

CHAPTER VII

THE  THEORY  OF  IDEAS .  .  .  .  -79

§  i.  Ideas,  Universals,  and  Concepts.  §  2.  Plato's  Theory
of 'Ideas.'  §  3.  The  Difficulties  of  the  Ideal  Theory.  §  4.
Aristotle  v.  Plato.  §  5.  Realism.  §  6.  Nominalism.  §  7.
Conceptualism.  §  8.  The  Errors  of  Realism,  Nominalism,  and
Conceptualism.  §  9.  What,  then,  are  '  Concepts  '  ?

CHAPTER VIII
THE  FORMAL  THEORIES  OF  JUDGMENT .  .  .92

§  I.  The  Formal  Aspects  of  Judgment.  §  2.  Judgment  as  a
Compound.  §  3.  Judgment  as  Truth-Claim.  §  4.  Judgment
as  True-or-False.  §  5.  Judgment  as  Reference  to  Reality.

CHAPTER IX

THE  IMPORT  OF  PROPOSITIONS .  .  .  .103

§  I.  The  Proposition  as  Verbal.  §  2.  The  Formal  Analysis
of  the  Proposition.  §  3.  The  Interpretation  of  Propositions.
§  4.  Universes  of  Diction.


CONTENTS  xv

CHAPTER X

PAGE

THE  LAWS  OF  THOUGHT  .  .  .  .  .no

§  i.  The  Statement  of  the  Laws.  §  2.  In  what  sense  are
they  '  Laws '  ?  §  3.  Aristotle's  Account  of  these  Principles.
§  4.  Are  they  Principles  of  Thought  or  of  Things?  §  5.  The
Meaning  of  Identity.  §  6.  The  Principle  of  Contradiction.
§  7.  The  Principle  of  Excluded  Middle.  §  8.  The  Principles
of  Thought  as  Postulates.  §  9.  The  Purposiveness  of  Thought.
§  10.  Identity  as  a  Postulate.  §  u.  The  Principle  of  Contra
diction  as  a  Postulate.  §  12.  Excluded  Middle  as  a  Postulate.
§  13.  Conclusion.

CHAPTER XI
THE  FORMS  OF  JUDGMENT  .  .  .  .134

§  i.  The  Classifications  of  Judgments.  §2.  Are  they  Forms
of  Judgments  or  of  Propositions  ?  §  3.  The  Forms  of  Quantity.
§  4.  The  Forms  of  Affirmation  and  Negation.  §  5.  The  '  Sub
jectivity '  of  Negation.  §6.  The  Forms  of  Relation.  §7.  Are
the  Forms  of  Relation  Exclusive  ?  §  8.  The  '  Subjectivity '  of
Hypotheticals  and  Disjunctives.  §  9.  The  Ambiguities  of
Modality.  §  10.  The  Subjectivity  of  Modality.  §  1 1.  Synthetic
and  Analytic  Judgments.


CHAPTER XII

THE DISTRIBUTION OF TERMS AND OPPOSITION OF

PROPOSITIONS  .  .  .  .  .152

§  i.  The  Propositions  A,  E,  I,  and  O.  §  2.  The  Distri
bution  of  Terms.  §  3.  The  '  Ambiguity '  of  the  Forms.  §  4.
The  Quantification  of  the  Predicate.  §  5.  The  Opposition  of
Propositions.


CHAPTER XIII

CONVERSION  AND  OTHEP FORMS  OF IMMEDIATE INFER
ENCE  .  .  .  .  .  .  .160

§  i.  Immediate  Inference.  §  2.  Conversion.  §  3.  Permu
tation,  Conversion  by  Negation,  and  Contraposition.  §  4.
Criticism.


xvi  FORMAL  LOGIC


CHAPTER XIV

PAGE

THE  GENERAL  NATURE  OF  INFERENCE .  .  .165

§  i.  The  Problem  of  Inference.  §2.  The  Notion  of  '  Valid
Inference.'  §  3.  The  'Necessity'  of  Inference.  §  4.  The
'  Novelty  '  in  Inference.  §  5.  Is  '  Valid  Inference  '  unmeaning  ?
§  6.  Conclusion.


CHAPTER XV
THE  SYLLOGISM ...  .  . 179

§  i.  The  Structure  of  the  Syllogism.  §  2.  The  Rules  of  the
Syllogism.  §  3.  The  Valid  Moods.  §  4.  Reduction.  §  5.
Criticism.

CHAPTER XVI

THE  THEORY  OF  THE  SYLLOGISM  .  .  .187

§  i.  The  Syllogism  as  a  Discovery.  §  2.  The  Origins  of
the  Syllogism.  §  3.  Aristotle's  Account  of  the  Syllogism.
§  4.  The  Postulation  of  True  Premisses.  §  5.  The  Intrinsic
Necessity  of  the  Syllogism.  §  6.  The  Formal  Ambiguity  of  the
Middle  Term.  §  7.  The  Function  of  the  'Ambiguity.'  §  8.
The  Claim  to  Novelty.  §  9.  Is  the  Syllogism  a  Petitio  Prin-
cipiil  §  10.  The  Real  Meaning  of  Novelty.  §  n.  Non-
syllogistic  Forms.  §  12.  The  Argument  from  Particulars.
§  13.  The  Syllogistic  Dicta.  §  14.  Conclusion.

CHAPTER XVII
HYPOTHETICAL  AND  DISJUNCTIVE  FORMS  .  . 223

§  i.  The  Relation  of  Conditional  Reasoning  to  Syllogism.
§  2.  Hypothetical  Syllogisms.  §  3.  Disjunctive  Syllogisms.
§  4.  The  Dilemma.  §  5.  Criticism.

CHAPTER XVIII

THE  PROBLEM  OF  INDUCTION .  .  .  .231

§  i.  The  Origins  of  the  Problem  of  Induction.  §  2.  Does
Syllogistic  Proof  involve  an  Infinite  Regress?  §  3.  Intuition
as  the  Foundation  of  Induction.  §  4.  Generalization  as  the
Basis  of  Induction.  §  5.  Postulation  as  the  Source  of  Universal
Propositions.  §  6.  How  is  it  possible  to  reason  from  Facts  ?
§  7-  How  to  reason  from  Facts.


CONTENTS  xvii

CHAPTER XIX

?AGE

THE  FORMS  OF  INDUCTION  .  .  . .  . 251

§  i.  The  Mistaken  Aims  of  Inductive  Logicians.  §  2.  Aris
totle's  Accounts  of  Induction.  §  3.  Bacon's  Theory  of  In
duction.  §  4.  Mill's  Notion  of  Induction.  §  5.  Mill's
Experimental  Methods.  §  6.  Criticism  of  Mill's  Methods.  §  7.
How  to  give  a  Meaning  to  Mill's  Methods.

CHAPTER XX
CAUSATION  ...... 272

§i.  The  Problem  of  Causation.  §2.  Philosophic  Criticisms
of  the  Common-sense  Notion  of  Cause.  §  3.  The  True  Inter
pretation  of  the  Common-sense  Notion  of  Cause.  §  4.  The
Derivation  of  Causation:  (i)  from  Experience.  §  5.  (2)  Is
Causation  a  'Necessity  of  Thought'?  §  6.  (3)  Causation
derived  from  Postulation.  §  7.  Formulas  of  Causation.  §  8.
The  Uniformity  of  Causation.  §  9.  The  Reciprocity  of  Cause
and  Effect.

CHAPTER XXI
LAWS  OF  NATURE  .  .  .  .  .310

§  i.  The  Practical  Value  of  the  'Law  of  Causation.'  §  2.
Laws  of  Nature.  §  3.  '  Laws '  and  their  Makers.  §  4.  The
Interdependence  of '  Law '  and  '  Fact. '  §  5.  The  '  Law '  and  the
'Case.'  §  6.  The  Mutability  of  Laws.  §  7.  The  'Eternity'
of  Laws.  §8.  Transition  to  the  'Objective'  Law.  §9.
Why  do  'Laws'  work?  §  10.  Can  the  Habits  of  Things
change?  §  u.  'Inductive'  and  'Deductive'  Reasoning.

CHAPTER XXII
ACCESSORIES  OF  INDUCTION  .... 337

§i.  The  Artificiality  of  Formal  Distinctions.  §2.  Observa
tion  and  Experiment.  §  3.  Hypothesis.  §  4.  Analogy.  §  5.
Explanation.  §  6.  Verification.

CHAPTER XXIII
FALLACIES  .  .... 349

§  i.  The  Notion  of  Formal  Fallacy.  §  2.  Its  Futility.
§  3.  The  Formal  Fallacies.  §  4.  The  '  Material '  Fallacies.
§  5.  The  '  Semi-logical '  Fallacies.  §  6.  Miscellaneous  Fallacies.


xviii  FORMAL  LOGIC


CHAPTER XXIV


PAGE


THE  OUTCOME  OF  FORMAL  LOGIC  • 374

§  i.  The  Notion  of  Formal  Logic.  §  2.  Is  Formal  Logic
consistent?  §  3.  Can  Formal  Logic  cover  the  Traditional
Logic  ?  §  4.  Can  Formal  Logic  deal  with  Actual  Thinking  ?
§  5.  Is  Formal  Logic  meaningless  ?  §  6.  The  Law  of  Signifi
cant  Assertion.  §  7.  The  Defence  of  Formal  Logic.  §  8.
Formal  Logic  as  Mental  Training.  §  9.  Formal  Logic  as  a
Game.  §  10.  Concessions  to  Psychologic,


CHAPTER XXV

THE  SOCIAL  EFFECTS  OF  FORMAL  LOGIC  394

§  i. The Social Importance of  Formal Logic. §  2. Its
Educational  Effects. §  3. Its  False  Ideals. §  4- Their  Effects
on  Science. §  5. Their  Effects  on  Religion. §  6.  Their  Effects
.jQ,rjiJMankind. §  7.  Conclusion.

INDEX  -  .4ii


CHAPTER I
THE NATURE OF LOGIC

§  i. The  Definition  of  Logic

THE  derivation  of  Logic  from  the  ambiguous  Greek  word
\oyiK7j  would  seem  to  indicate  that  it  is  a  study  either  of
words  or  of  reasoning.  And  this  ambiguity  is  significant;
for  it  accompanies  Logic  throughout  its  whole  career.  It
is  the  constant  aim  of  Logic  to  deal  with  reasoning,  and
its  perpetual  danger  to  fail  to  deal  with  anything  more
than  words,  and  to  substitute  classification  of  verbal
distinctions  for  the  study  of  actual  thinking.

Logicians,  however,  are  agreed  that  '  reasoning '  is  a
complex  process  which  involves  the  more  elemental  pro
cesses  of  *  thinking.'  Hence  their  science  is  often  defined
as  concerned  with  the  nature  of  thinking.  But  this  is
manifestly  too  vague.  It  is  necessary,  therefore,  to  add  in
what  way  precisely  Logic  is  concerned  with  thinking.
This  should  lead  to  prefacing  the  study  of  Logic  by  a
plain  description  of  what  the  processes  of  thinking  and
reasoning  actually  are,  as  they  occur  in  human  life,  and
what  are  the  functions  they  perform.  But  unfortunately
such  descriptions  are  regarded  as  belonging  to  Psychology,
the  science  which  aims  at  describing  all  processes  of
experiencing  as  they  occur.

So  it  is  held  that  Logic  deals  with  thinking  in  a
different  way.  It  is  not  concerned  with  the  actual
occurrence  of  processes  of  thinking  and  reasoning,  but
rather  with  their  products^  the  thoughts  and  reasonings

i  B


2  FORMAL  LOGIC  CHAP.

which  our  intelligence  thereby  achieves.  It  is  interested
not  in  the  arguings,  but  in  the  arguments.

Even  this  distinction,  however,  will  not  suffice.  For
it  appears  that  Logic  does  not  accept  all  thoughts  and
reasonings  without  discrimination.  It  does  not  consider
-  all  thoughts  to  have  equal  value.  It  is  a  science  which
appreciates  or  values,  and  does  not  merely  describe.  In
(distinguishing  between  good  thinking  and  bad,  between
right,  sound,  valid,  and  valuable  reasoning  and  such  as  is
wrong,  foolish,  perverse,  and  invalid,  it  resembles  the
other  studies  that  consider  values,  viz.  ethics,  aesthetics,
and,  in  a  way,  grammar.  In  English  the  best  words  for
expressing  the  common  nature  of  these  sciences  of  valua
tion  are  probably  afforded  by  the  terms  '  good '  and  *  bad.'
For  these  seem  to  be  the  terms  which  imply  relation  to  a
purpose.  The  '  good '  is  good  for  an  end  ;  the  '  bad  '  is
what  defeats  or  thwarts  a  purpose.  There  are,  however,
special  names  for  the  good  and  bad  in  the  several  sciences
of  valuation.  In  morals  the  good  and  bad  is  called  right
and  wrong,  in  art  beautiful  and  ugly.  The  special  terms
proper  to  the  study  of  thought  are  true  and  false,  truth
and  error.  But  just  because  these  sciences  are  all  akin,
it  is  common  in  most  languages  to  transfer  metaphorically
the  proper  terms  of  each  science  to  the  others.  We  not
only  speak  of  a  good  argument  but  of  a  beautiful  proof,
and  call  reasoning  wrong  as  well  as  false  or  bad,  and  con
versely  we  can  speak  of  true  and  false  art,  or  friends.

The  fundamental  interest  of  Logic,  therefore,  is  in  the
truth  or  value  of  thinking  ;  the  fundamental  distinction
in  logical  value  is  between  the  true  and  the  false.

But  this  very  distinction  implies  that  not  all  thinking
or  reasoning  yields  products  which  are  '  true.'  If  it  did,
there  would  be  little  need  for  Logic.  If  we  could  no
]  more  help  thinking  and  reasoning  rightly  or  truly  than
we  can  help  gravitating  according  to  Newton's  law,  and
if  error  were  equally  valuable  and  desirable  with  truth,
there  would  be  no  need  of  teaching  us  to  think  rightly,
and  the  theory  of  thought  would  be  as  simply  descriptive
as  that  of  gravitation.


i  THE  NATURE  OF  LOGIC  3

It  is  therefore  the  fact  that  truth  is  mixed  with  error,
that  the  true  has  everywhere  to  be  distinguished  from  the
false,  that  determines  the  nature  of  Logic  as  a  science  of
values  or  norms.  It  is  also  what  renders  it  practically
important  and  theoretically  difficult.  The  former  because
it  is  a  great  human  interest  to  discover  truth  and  to  avoid
error  ;  the  latter  because  Logic  cannot  satisfy  us  by  giving
a  theory  of  thinking  in  general  but  must  aim  at  distinguish
ing  true  thinking  from  false.  This  aim,  however,  will  be
found  to  involve  it  in  complications  from  which  it  can
extricate  itself  only  by  a  radical  reform  of  its  traditional
procedure.

§  2. Form  and  Matter  of  Thought

Of  these  ulterior  difficulties,  however,  the  traditional
Logic  is  blissfully  unconscious.  But  it  proceeds  to  notice
others.  If  its  function  is  to  give  an  account  of  true
thinking,  is  it  not  thereby  committed  to  lay  claim  to  all
truth  and  universal  knowledge  ?  Must  it  not  profess  to
discern  truth  and  to  correct  error  in  all  the  sciences  ?
Yet  a  pretension  which  would  make  Logic  coextensive  with
science  could  only  seriously  be  entertained  in  the  Middle
Ages.1

Logicians,  therefore,  hasten  to  disclaim  so  embarrassing
an  ambition. They  explain  that  their  science  deals  only
with  formal  and  not  with  material  truth,  and that  the  I
formal value of a reasoning may be judged without  i ;
possessing  competence  about  the  material facts. When  i
asked  to  explain  further  what  they  mean  by  form  and
matter,  they  allude  to  the  familiar  fact  that  the  shape  of
things  and  the  stuff  thereof  may  vary  without  affecting
each  other. Different  stuffs  may  take  the  same  shape,
and  the  same  stuff  may  be  taken  for  different  shapes. A
medal  may  be  struck  in  gold,  silver,  copper,  etc.,  and  each
of  these  metals  may  be  moulded  into  the  most  various
forms. Why  should  not  the  case  of  thought,  therefore,

1  And  in  the  University  of  Oxford. The  writer,  e.g. ,  is  a  Doctor  of  Science,
N/ because  originally  '  Science  '  in  Oxford  meant  Logic.


4  FORMAL  LOGIC  CHAP.

be  analogous  ?  The  brilliant  idea  naturally  occurred  to
logicians.  If  their  science  could  study  the  forms  of
thought  and  treat  the  matter  as  irrelevant,  they  could  sit
In"  judgment  on  the  sciences.  They  could  criticize  all
knowledge,  without  producing,  or  even  acquiring,  any.
Only,  it  is  true,  in  respect  of  its  form.  But  was  any
human  knowledge  ever  formally  perfect  ?  Or  again,  could
any  material  knowledge  vie  with  the  absolute  validity  of
formal  truth  ?  A  glorious  career  seemed  to  be  opened
out  to  the  logician.  He  became  the  infallible  judge  of
the  formal  value  of  an  argument  in  any  science,  and  he
could  claim  to  produce  necessary  truth  which  no  rational
being  could  dispute,  provided  only  that  the  plodding
workers  at  the  dull  details  of  the  sciences  kept  him
properly  supplied  with  propositions  that  were  true  in
matter  and  in  point  of  fact.

This  last  proviso  was  passed  over  lightly  as  a  matter
of  course,  heedless  of  the  fact  that  the  detection  and
accumulation  of  '  material '  truth  forms  the  whole  work  of
every  science,  and  that  any  failure  or  defect  in  the  supply
of  material  truths  vitiates  and  frustrates  all  the  formal
inferences  drawn  by  Logic.  The  full  scope  of  this
problem  Logic  has  been  singularly  slow  to  realize.

§  3. The  Difficulties  of  Formal  Logic

It  could  hardly  avoid,  however,  recognizing  two  funda
mental  difficulties,  (i)  Formal  distinctions  soon  showed
a  distressing  tendency  to  become  verbal,  and  formal  Logic
was  continually  tempted  to  degenerate  into  verbal  trifling
that  never  penetrated  to  the  real  problems  of  science.1
The  source  of  this  fiasco,  however,  the  Formal 2  logician

1  It is pathetic to note how  each successive logician brings against his
predecessors the same charges  of  acquiescence  in  illusions  and incapacity  to
attain  real  truth,  which  were  subsequently  to  be  brought  against  his  own  logical
method. Plato condemns the logic of the Sophists as a sham, Aristotle
convicts  the  '  Dialectic '  of  Plato  of  formal  inability  to  yield  a  demonstration,
Bacon denounces the sterility of  Aristotle's '  apodictic ' demonstration, Mill
deplores the inadequacy  of  Baconian induction, Mill's critics show  that  his
induction  is  as  formal  and  as  futile  as the  rest  of  the  tradition. It  is  clear,
therefore,  that  the  root  of  the  trouble  is  very  deep-seated.

2  I  shall  follow  Dr.  Boyce  Gibson's  Problem  of  Logic  (p.  6)  in  distinguishing
between  '  Formal '  and  '  formal. ' '  Formal '  will  refer  to  the  view  of  the  actual


i  THE  NATURE  OF  LOGIC  5

could  never  discover.  For  it  lay  in  the  erroneousness  of
his  original  assumption  that  the  actual  process  of  thought
could  be  put  aside  as  psychological  and  irrelevant  to  its
evaluation.  By  thus  abstracting  from  the  meaning  of
assertions  as  made,  he  unwittingly  abstracted  from  real
meaning  altogether.  That  is,  he  condemned  himself  to
consider  only  forms  of  words,  which,  though  potentially
significant,  were  no  longer  actually  asserted.  He  thereby
necessarily  blinded  himself  to  the  facts  that  the  same
meaning  can  be  conveyed  in  many  different  forms  and
that  the  same  form  can  be  utilized  for  conveying  many
different  meanings.  It  is  never  possible,  therefore,  to
argue  without  a  risk  from  the  meaning  of  the  words  to  the
meaning  of  the  man  who  used  them,  or  to  assume  that
because  the  man  had  a  certain  meaning  to  convey  he
must  employ  a  particular  form  of  words.  The  result  was
a  complete  divorce  between  the  form  and  the  meaning,
by  which  the  form  was  reduced  to  verbality.

(2)  The  second  difficulty  was  perceived  by  the  more
discerning,  and  admitted  by  the  more  candid,  among  the
logicians  themselves.  It  appeared  that  Form  and  Matter
could  not  in  the  end  be  wholly  separated  ;  certain  forms  ,  {
were  appropriate  to  certain  matter,  certain  meanings  were
expressed  more  naturally  in  one  form  than  in  another.
It  could  not  be  maintained,  therefore,  that  the  material  of
thought  exercised  no  influence  at  all  upon  the  form,  and
could  be  disregarded  by  Logic  altogether ;  it  had  to  be
admitted  that  the  forms  of  thought  were  diversely
modified  according  to  the  various  matters  thought  about.

But  even  then  logicians  did  not  see  either  that  this
was  to  give  up  the  notion  of  Formal  truth  in  principle
and  to  raise  the  problem  of  how  the  *  matter '  determined
the  '  form/  or  that  their  admissions  should  have  carried
them  much  farther  than  they  wished  to  go.  They  did
not  see  that  ultimately  in  every  case  of  actual  thinking
the  question  involved  was  bound  to  be  that  of  express
ing  a  particular  meaning,  and  that  therefore  the  form

forms  to  which  Formal  Logic  stands  committed  by  its  abstraction  from  '  material '
truth.


FORMAL  LOGIC


CHAP.


employed  had  to  be  relative  to  a  particular  purpose.
Hence  it  was  always  necessary  to  analyse  the  'matter'  in
order  to  discover  the  real  (as  opposed  to  the  verbal)  form.
The  material  nature  of  truth  asserted,  therefore,  not  only
always  had  a  general  influence  on  the  form,  and  could  not
be  abstracted  from,  but  it  determined  the  choice  of  the
form  actually  employed.


r\


§  4. The  Failure  of  Formal  Logic

Still  less  did  logicians  realize  the  fundamental  falsity
of  the  assumption  that  the  existence  of  material  truth
might  be  taken  for  granted,  and  need  not  form  a  subject
for  logical  investigation  (§  2  s.f.).  The  importance  of  this
^oversight  will  appear  in  the  sequel.  We  shall  see  at
'  every  step  in  our  progress  through  the  traditional  *  Logic '
that  so  long  as  Logic  puts  aside  this  problem  of  material
truth  it  can  neither  attain  to  a  logic  of  Science,  nor  yet
clear  its  doctrines  of  constant  lapses  into  contradiction
and  inanity,  and  cannot  become  itself  a  real  science  at  all.
For  it  must  decline  to  undertake  any  real  study  of  actual
thought,  and  content  itself  with  formulas  which  are  un
applied  and  probably  inapplicable.

j  So  important  is  this  point  that  we  must  class  together
under  the  head  of  Formal  Logic  all  views,  however
conscious  they  may  be  of  the  defects  of  other  formal
views,  which  take  material  truth  for  granted  as  a  datum
and  decline  to  consider  how  real  truth  is  determined.  We
shall  thereupon  find  (i)  that  all  the  traditional  logics  are
extensively  infected  with  Formalism  in  the  sense  of  this
definition  ;  (2)  that  for  this  very  reason  they  are  incur
ably  inconsistent ;  (3)  that  their  doctrines  only  become
intelligible  (and  sometimes  tenable)  when  reconsidered
in  the  light  of  the  view  that  the  distinction  between  truth
and  error  is  not  irrelevant  to  Logic,  but  is  the  very  core
of  its  being.

The  first  of  these  statements  will  receive  such
abundant  illustration  in  the  sequel  that  it  need  not  be
dwelt  on  here  ;  but  the  proof  that  any  logic  which  declines


i  THE  NATURE  OF  LOGIC  7

to  consider  the  question  of  the  real  truth  of  the  reasonings

it  attempts to deal  with  necessarily  condemns  itself  to

utter  formality  is  easily  given,  and  very  instructive. It  is

a  formal  characteristic  of every  assertion  that  it  claims

truth)  absolutely  and  without  reservation  or  suggestion  of

fallibility. Hence  it  follows  both  if  (a)  the  question  of  the

actual  value  of  this  claim  is  ruled  out  of  order,  and  if  (£)

the  assertion  is  accepted  at  its  own estimation,  that  the

distinction  between  true  and false  must,  in  fact  though

not  in  name,  disappear  from Logic. For  all  assertions

will be held true because they formally claim truth  ;

because  none  profess  to  be  false,  error  no  longer  exists —

I  for  Logic. Thus  the  logical  form  of  an  assertion  affords

I  no  means  of  deciding  upon  the  real  value  of  its  claim  to

I  truth,  and  hence  any  logic  which  restricts  itself  to  the

/ study  of  this  form  inevitably  accepts  a  truth-claim  as  the

equivalent  of  real  truth. It  is  like  a  bank  which  does

• not  distinguish  between  promises  to  pay  and  hard  cash.'

Now  in  a  sense  this  is  a  simplification.  It  renders
invisible  the  existence  of  falsity  and  error.  It  rules  out
the  difficult  and  complex  problem  of  how  in  point  of  fact
truths  are  established  and  errors  corrected.  But  it  pays
a  price  for  these  advantages  which  should  be  prohibitive,
(i)  It  involves  a  radical  departure  from  the  ordinary
meaning  of  truth.  For  the  '  truth '  which  it  considers  is
not  one  which  is  opposed  to  and  exclusive  of  error,  but
one  which  has  amiably  concluded  a  truce  with  error  and
been  reconciled  to  falsity.  Formal  claims  to  truth  are
indiscriminately  true  and  false,  but  Formal  Logic  makes
no  attempt  to  sift  them.  Its  '  truth '  therefore  is  some-  /
thing  radically  different  from  what  truth  means  in  science
and  in  ordinary  life.

(2)  As  a  way  of  getting  rid  of  the  problem  of  error
and  falsity  the  expedient  seems  extremely  naive.  Error
and  falsity  hardly  seem  to  cease  to  exist,  to  ravage  the
intellectual  world  and  to  require  to  be  dealt  with,  merely
because  a  formal  fiction  forbids  Logic  to  recognize  them.
And  if  it  is  really  true  that  Logic  is  compelled  to  make
this  abstraction,  what  this  would  prove  would  be  not


8  FORMAL  LOGIC


CHAP.


the  non-existence  of  error,  but  the useless  artificiality  of
the  Formal  point  of  view.


v


§  5.  A  Logic  to  discriminate  between  True  and
False  wanted


(3)  The  proper  inference,  therefore,  from  the  situation,
as  Formal  Logic  has  conceived  it,  is  not  that  we  should
acquiesce  in  its  impotence,  but  that  we  should  earnestly
cast  about  for  a  further  discipline,  which,  whether
decorated  with  the  traditional  title  of  Logic  or  not,  will
consent  to  consider  the  problem  of  real  truth  and  show
itself  capable  of  conceiving  truth  in  a  way  that  does  not
confound  together  true  and  false.  (^We  need,  in  short,  a
second  Logic  which  will  be  applicable  to  life  and  relevant
to  actual  thought.  ~\  For  in  real  life  the  distinction  between
true  and  false  is  always  present  to  consciousness,  and  to
discriminate  between  the  true  and  the  false  is  one  of  our
most  pressing  and  vital  concerns.  Nor  can  it  be  con
tended,  short  of  the  completest  scepticism,  that  this
discrimination  is  never  effected.  £_lt  must  be  possible,
^  therefore,  to  formulate  a  theory  of  what  is  actually
practised.  A  logic  of  real  truth  must,  therefore,  be
possible.  But  once  it  is  constructed,  it  must  supersede
Formal  Logic  and  condemn  it  to  unutterable  triviality.  ^


§  6. The  Self-contradiction  of  Formal  Logic

(4)  Formal  Logic  is  not  only  incapacitated  by  its  self-
imposed  limitations  from  dealing  with  the  problems  of
actual  thinking  and  from  rationally  interpreting  the  con
ception  of  truth  implied  in  such  thinking ;  it  is  at  the
same  time  incapable  of  dispensing  with  this  notion.
Hence  its  whole  doctrine  here  rests  upon  an  avowed
and  formal  self-contradiction.

In  other  words,  to  delimit  the  field  of  Logic  and  to
disentangle  the  nature  of  logical  assertion  from  various
psychological  processes  with  which  it  is  bound  up  in  its
actual  occurrence,  it  is  necessary  to  have  recourse  to  the


i  THE  NATURE  OF  LOGIC  9

conception  of  truth  which  has  been  disclaimed.  In  actual
fact  logical  assertion  grows  up  in  the  jungle  of  wishes,
desires,  emotions,  questions,  commands,  imaginations,
hopes  and  fears,  which  constitutes  the  psychic  life  of
every  living  person.  In  real  life  logical  assertion  is  in
timately  bound  up  with  this  context ;  it  is  either  the
answer  to  or  the  raising  of  a  question,  and  so  an  integral
part  of  a  larger  process.  Hence  it  can  be  extricated  and
contemplated  apart  only  by  a  forcible  abstraction.  The
instrument  by  which  this  extrication  is  effected,  the
criterion  by  which  the  subject-matter  of  Logic  is  defined,  is
the  very  conception  of  truth  which  Formal  Logic  sub
sequently  shows  itself  so  unable  to  handle.  For  logical
assertion  is  defined  as  that  product  of  a  thought  which
can  be  true  or  false,  and  thereby  distinguished  from
questions,  wishes,  commands,  and  the  mere  play  of
imagination  in  which  nothing  is  affirmed.  To  none  of
these  other  incidents  in  concrete  thinking  can  the  pre
dicates  true  and  false  be  properly  applied.  They  can  be
said  to  belong,  therefore,  to  the  psychical  concomitants
of  thinking  and  banished  from  Logic.

There  is  something  to  be  said  for  this  doctrine  on  the
score  of  convenience.  But  for  the  purposes  of  Formal
Logic  it  is  open  to  the  fatal  objection  that  it  is  wholly
inconsistent  with  the  position  it  has  already  taken  up  on
the  subject  of  formal  truth.  For  to  distinguish  logical
assertion  as  true-or-false  implies  a  conception  of  truth
which  discriminates  between  them  in  a  way  formal  truth-
claim  cannot  do.

Moreover,  the  attempt  thus  to  abstract  logical  assertion
from  its  natural  context  inevitably  breaks  down.  In  actual
knowing  the  forces  which  generate  the  assertion  and  deter
mine  its  actual  meaning  reside  in  the  psychical  context.
It  came  as  an  answer  to,  or  an  occasion  for,  a  question.
Or  it  was  a  thought  to  which,  wittingly  or  unwittingly,
legitimately  or  illegitimately,  a  wish  was  father.  Or  it  was
subtly  prompted  and  coloured  by  emotions  which  were  all
the  more  dangerous  and  insidious  because  our  official  Logic
had  ignored  their  existence,  and  we  were  neither  aware


io  FORMAL  LOGIC


CHAP.


of  their  potency  nor  of  their  charm.  Or  it  expressed,  or
followed  from,  one  of  those  imperatives  which  we  address
to  nature  at  the  prompting  of  our  wishes,  and  gradually
succeed  in  getting  confirmed  by  the  complaisance  of
nature,  until  our  postulates  grow  into  axioms  and  become
great  principles  for  setting  our  experience  in  order  a
priori^  and  their  humble  origin  in  human  wishes  is
ignored.  Or,  lastly,  it  may  even  have  been  suggested  by
sheer  play  of  imagination,  which  is  often  a  fertile  means-
of  stumbling  upon  truths.

Clearly,  therefore,  if  such  was  the  original  meaning  of
the  assertion,  it  must  be  wholly  transformed  or  destroyed
when  it  is  violently  severed  from  its  context.  For  it  has
its  roots  in  these  things,  and  unless  they  are  adequately
known,  no  one  can  tell  what  is  the  logical  meaning  it
actually  intends  when  it  is  made.  Sever  it  from  the
sources  of  its  meaning  in  the  personality  of  its  assertor,
and  every  guarantee  that  it  means  what  it  meant  in
situ^  or  that  any  one  still  means  to  assert  it,  disappears.
The  only  meaning  left  to  it  is  the  meaning  of  the
words •,  i.e.  the  usual  or  average  meaning  in  which
the  words  that  expressed  the  actual  meaning  are
commonly  employed.  But  there  is  no  evidence  that
this  coincides  with  the  actual  meaning,  and  a  strong
probability  that  it  does  not  express  the  whole  of  it.
Hence  the  Formal  view  is  restricted  to  the  meaning  of
the  words,  and  purchases  exemption  from  the  psychology
of  individual  minds  by  a  plunge  into  verbalism.  The
alternative  of  either  a  recognition  of  personal  human
thinking  or  a  contented  lapse  into  mere  verbality  forms
the  Scylla  and  Charybdis  between  which  Formal  Logic
vainly  tries  to  pass,  and  we  shall  throughout  have
occasion  to  note  the  recurrence  of  its  failures.

Similarly  the  contradiction  that  it  both  cannot,  and
yet  must,  use  a  conception  of  truth  which  excludes  error
reappears  in  the  logical  definition  of  Judgment.  For  it
is  both  the  earliest  and  still  the  simplest  of  the  defini-

1  A  word  which  is  either  ambiguous  or  unmeaning  to  such  an  extent  that  its
continued  use  constitutes  a  serious  reflection  on  the  honesty  of  philosophers.


i  THE  NATURE  OF  LOGIC  n

tions  of  this  central  logical  function,  first  enunciated  by
Aristotle  himself,  and  frequently  repeated  since,  that
Judgment  is  that  which  is  either  true  or  false.  Now  this
is  clearly  not  a  Formal  definition  because,  as  we  saw,
the  formal  claim  of  Judgment  is  always  to  be  'true.'
Either,  therefore,  this  definition  of  Judgment,  or  the
abstraction  from  real  truth  and  actual  thinking  which
Formal  Logic  perpetrates,  must  be  abandoned.  That
a  revision  of  its  initial  abstractions  is  the  proper  policy
for  Logic  to  pursue  is  the  alternative  which  has  probably
already  suggested  itself  to  the  reader.  But  it  is  not  part
of  the  design  of  this  inquiry  to  show  that  this  easy
alternative  is  rational,  practicable,  and  profitable.  Its
aim  is  only  to  show  that  the  alternative  preferred  by
Formal  Logic  leads  everywhere  to  self-contradictions  and
absurdities,  which  can  only  be  cleared  away  if  the  attempt
in  Logic  to  abstract  from  actual  thinking,  to  ignore  per
sonality,  to  dehumanize  thought,  is  renounced  sincerely,
systematically,  and  finally,  at  the  beginning.


CHAPTER II

TERMS

§  I. Terms  as  Abstractions  from  Judgments

TRADITIONALLY  the  logical  analysis  of  thought  is  (like
Caesarian  Gaul)  divided  into  three  parts,  entitled  the
doctrine  of  the  Term,  the  Proposition,  and  the  Syllogism.
This  is  the  nomenclature  best  suited  to  the  essentially
verbal  character  of  the  analysis,  but  when  logicians  attempt
to  distinguish  the  process  of  thought  from  its  expression
in  words,  and  to  show  themselves  conscious  of  the  dangers
of  verbalism,  they  often  prefer  the  terms,  Concept  or
Universal,  Judgment  and  Inference.  The  difference  is
not  important,  because,  on  the  assumptions  of  Formal
Logic  as  it  stands,  the  actual  processes  of  thought  can
never  be  analysed,  and  because  in  either  case  the  same
difficulties  present  themselves.

(i)  It  is  soon  seen  that  no  real  act  of  thought  can
correspond  to  the  logical  division  entitled  Term  or  Con
cept.  A  Proposition  or  Judgment  is  the  simplest  product
of  thought  that  can  claim  to  be  true,  the  minimum  vehicle
of  truth  (or  falsity).  If  I  say  '  The  air  is  hot/  I  assert
what  may  be  true  or  false.  But  if  I  subdivide  the
verbal  vehicles  of  this  assertion  into  the  '  terms '  '  air '
(the  subject)  and  '  hot '  (the  predicate]  and  conceive  them
as  put  together  by  the  copula  *  is/  neither  term  continues
to  convey  any  assertion.  I  may  utter  the  words  aloud,
but  I  neither  affirm  nor  deny  anything,  and  convey  no
meaning.  If  my  hearers  are  familiar  with  the  words
and  take  for  granted  that  I  am  trying  to  use  them  to

12


CHAP. II


TERMS  13


convey  a  meaning,  I  shall  at  most  provoke  the  question,
'  Well,  what  about  the  air  and  hot  ? '  The  terms  there
fore  carry  meaning,  and  are  subjects  for  logical  study,
only  in  the  proposition,  and  any  analysis  which  destroys
its  integrity  reduces  them  to  mere  words.  The  very
word  '  term '  indicates  that  it  is  only  the  terminal  point
of  a  proposition.  Similarly  in  the  case  of  the  Concept.
Concepts  live  only  in  judgments.  They  are  not  really
thought  unless  they  are  affirmed  or  denied.  Where
there  is  neither  affirmation  nor  denial,  there  is  no  think
ing,  but  either  such  '  extra-logical '  mental  process  as
wishing,  questioning,  etc.  (cp.  Chap.  I,  §  6),  or  a  mere  con
templation  or  succession  of  mental  images,  which  mean
nothing  until  they  are  used  in  a  judgment.1  It  would
seem,  therefore,  that  by  its  own  definition  of  its  subject
Formal  Logic  was  bound  to  begin  with  the  doctrine  of
the  Proposition  or  Judgment  and  regard  that  of  the
Term  as  illusory  or  verbal.

(2)  It  may  also  be  contended  that  not  only  should
Formal  Logic  begin  with  the  Judgment,  but  that  it
should  also  stop  there,  because  it  cannot  embark  on
inquiries  about  connexions  of  propositions  or  judgments
without  further  assumptions  which  it  has  itself  ruled  out.
For  at  a  first  view  the  possibilities  of  connecting  and
combining  judgments  seem  to  be  unlimited.  Any  pro
position  may  serve  as  a  point  of  departure  in  any  direc
tion  :  from  it  we  can  ultimately  argue  to  any  other  in
the  world  of  knowledge.  What,  then,  determines  that
the  course  of  thought  should  actually  proceed  in  one
direction  rather  than  another  ?  Having  judged  '  the  air
is  hot,'  why  proceed  '  then  I  will  stop  at  home,'  or  *  you
had  better  not  go  out,'  rather  than  *  but  it  does  not

1  The  mental  attitude  called  '  supposal '  or  '  entertaining  an  idea,'  which  is
sometimes  thought  to  precede  judgment,  would  seem  to  be  really  complex  and
posterior  to  judgment.  It  consists  in  first  forming  various  judgments  about  the
same  subject,  and  then  playing  with  them,  without  definitely  accepting  or  reject
ing  any  of  them.  This  play  is  no  doubt  anterior  to  the  final  decision  to  which
it  should  lead  up,  but  this  does  not  alter  the  fact  that  the  play  implies  the  power
of  judging.  The  judgments  are  made  hypothetically,  i.e.  made  and  then
inhibited,  instead  of  being  seriously  used.  The  process  belongs,  like  other
phases  of  doubt,  hesitation,  and  inquiry,  to  the  psychology  of  the  knowing
mind.


i4  FORMAL  LOGIC


CHAP.


matter,'  or  '  then  the  grapes  will  ripen,'  or  *  oh,  for  the
seaside  breezes  ! '  ?  All  these  thoughts  might  reasonably
enter  one's  mind — why,  then,  should  some  of  them  be
treated  as  logical  inferences  and  the  rest  ignored  ?  Why
is  Formal  Logic  so  confident  that  the  sole  proper  and
natural  inference  is — '  Some  hot  things  are  air '  ?

Formal  Logic  has  no  answer  to  these  questions.  It
-  .does  not  appear  that  it  has  anywhere  or  at  any  time
considered  the  vital  problem  of  how  the  passage  from
one  judgment  to  another  is  ever  effected  at  all.  All  it
can  say  is  that  from  time  immemorial  it  has,  as  a
matter  of  course,  manipulated  propositions  in  certain
peculiar  ways  and  called  them  '  valid  inferences.'  But
that  these  ways  are  only  a  few  out  of  many  it  does  not
seem  to  be  aware,  nor  yet  that  in  actual  thinking  every
I  way  is  determined  by  the  special  interest  of  the  manipu-
;  lator,  and  that  to  abstract  from  these  special  interests  is  to
>  render  the  whole  advance  of  thought  unintelligible.  It
ignores  the  whole  topic  of  interest  altogether,  and  so
is  saved  from  the  discovery  of  what  a  petty  and  narrow
interest  it  is  that  supports  its  own  procedure.  Whenever
an  attempt  is  made  to  point  out  that  in  every  step  in
actual  thinking  a  person  intervenes  and  directs  the  course
of  thought  in  accordance  with  his  interests  and  ideas,  and
that  therefore  to  understand  the  sequence  and  connexion
of  thought  this  fact  must  be  taken  into  account,  the  cry
is  raised  that  this  is  psychology,  and  an  attack  upon  the
dignity  and  integrity  of  logic.  It  may  be  so,  but  it  does
not  follow  that  the  fact  can  therefore  be  disregarded.  It
may  be  that  the  sole  alternative  to  a  logic  which  comes
to  terms  with  psychology  is  one  which  is  enslaved  by
grammar.1  It  may  only  follow  that  the  existing  border
line  between  psychology  and  logic  is  inconvenient  and
indefensible,  and  should  be  drawn  differently.  And  the
sooner  Formal  Logic  realizes  that  it  will  have  to  pay
the  penalty  for.  its  false  abstractions  in  the  reduction
of  its  own  pet  doctrines  to  absurdity,  the  better  it  will
be  for  the  study  of  human  thought.

1  Cf.  H.  V.  Knox  in  the  Quarterly  Review,  No.  419,  pp.  402-4.


ii  TERMS  1 5

§  2. Terms  as  Convenient  Fictions

However,  instead  of  reconsidering  and  amending  its
assumptions,  Formal  Logic  defends  its  practice  by  a
series  of  lame  excuses.

(i)  It  meets  the  objection  to  the  logical  status  of
Terms  by  an  apparently  frank  appeal  to  expediency.
It  is  convenient  to  treat  terms  as  if  they  could  exist
independently  of  the  proposition,  and  possess  meaning
in  themselves.  Nay,  it  is  also  consonant  with  common-
sense.  For  do  we  not  currently  speak  of  the  meanings
of  words,  and  compile  dictionaries  to  contain  them  ?
Why,  then,  should  we  not  indulge  in  logical  classifications
of  terms  taken  out  of  their  logical  context  ?  Similarly,
though  it  is  doubtless  true  that,  strictly,  concepts  function
as  such  only  when  actually  used  and  thought  about,  yet
are  there  not  objects  of  thought  which  are  constantly
thought  about,  and  so  become  far  more  permanent,  and,
as  it  were,  more  solid,  than  the  fleeting  thoughts  which
generate  them  ?  And  do  they  not  deserve  to  be  recog
nized  by  name  as  Concepts  or  (better)  Universals  ?

In  this  defence  several  points  demand  comment.  It
contains  the  first  avowal  by  Formal  Logic  of  its  use  of
the  principle  of  scientific  fiction.  Now  this  principle  may
be  said  to  be  legitimate,  because  all  the  sciences  have
in  the  first  instance  to  adopt  whatever  principles  they  can
find  on  '  methodological '  grounds,  i.e.  because  they  suggest
methods  of  working ;  and  they  may  continue  to  find
them  useful  long  after  they  have  discovered  them  not
to  be  strictly  true.  But  no  science  probably  makes  so
extensive  and  shameless  a  use  of  methodological  fictions
as  Formal  Logic.  It  is  so  largely  constructed  out  of
them  that  it  has  incurred  the  gibe  (which  in  Oxford
is  traditionally  fathered  upon  Jowett)  that  Logic  is
neither  a  science  nor  an  art,  but  a  dodge.  Even  this
protest  might  be  passed  off  with  a  laugh  if  the  logical
use  of  its  fictions  were  actually  successful.  But  we  shall
find  abundant  reasons  for  disputing  this.  The  double
charge  against  the  fictions,  assumptions,  and  abstractions


1 6  FORMAL  LOGIC  CHAP.

of  Formal  Logic  is  that  they  both  ignore  the  purpose
which  a  scientific  Logic  ought  to  set  before  itself,  that
of  understanding  human  thought,  and  also  defeat  the  aim
of  Formal  Logic  itself,  that  of  compiling  a  consistent  and
self-contained  structure  of  formal  doctrine.


§  3. Terms  as  Dictionary -Meanings

(2)  That  logical  terms  appeal  to  the  meaning  of  the
word  is  significant  and  instructive.  For  it  bears  out  what
has  already  been  suspected  as  to  the  tendency  of  Formal
Logic  to  become  verbal.  Indeed,  in  its  practice  the
meaning  of  the  term  is  just  the  meaning  of  the  word,  and
it  is  precisely  the  existence  of  dictionaries  which  suggests
and  facilitates  the  *  logical '  treatment  of  '  terms.'  To
clear  up,  therefore,  the  whole  mystery  of  Formal  meaning
we  have  merely  to  examine  the  current  notion  of  the
meaning  of  words.

It  will  probably  be  conceded  that  the  meanings  of
words  are  not  original  but  acquired  ;  i.e.  that  there  is
nothing  in  the  nature  of  an  articulate  sound,  like  e.g.
'  key,'  that  compels  all  men  to  use  it  to  mean  what  it
does  in  English  and  not  what  it  means  in  French.  A
little  reflection,  therefore,  shows  that  the  meaning  of  the
word  must  have  arisen  out  of  the  use  of  the  sound  by
persons  who  managed  to  convey  their  meaning  thereby.

Clearly,  also,  while  this  process  was  going  on  the
meaning  of  the  word  could  not  be  taken  as  fixed ;  whence
it  follows  that  it  is  never,  theoretically,  quite  fixed,  so
long  as  the  word  continues  to  be  used.  For  some  one
may  always  contrive  to  extend  or  restrict  or  transfer  or
vary  its  meaning  by  the  way  he  uses  it,  if  he  can  persuade
others  to  follow  his  usage.  Because  a  word  is  essentially
an  instrument  for  the  conveying  of  meaning,  it  is  always
in  a  measure  pliant.  It  acquires  its  meaning  or  its  mean
ings  (for  in  time  it  is  sure  to  grow  more  than  one,  even
for  dictionary  purposes)  in  the  service  of  man,  and  must
always  be  prepared  to  take  on  new  shades  of  meaning  in
that  service.


'  s -

.  iAi


'

„  TERMS  17

And  conversely,  if  we  consider  the  problem  of  convey
ing  a  meaning,  we  find  that  it  always  arises  in  a  definite
situation,  for  definite  persons.  The  question  is  always —
how  can  a  particular  meaning  be  conveyed,  and  what
resources  does  a  language  contain  to  convey  it  ?  It  is
thus  the  desire  to  communicate  meaning  which  dictates
the  choice  of  the  words  used,  and  ultimately  controls
their  meaning.  For  the  original  compilers  of  dictionaries
get  the  word's  meanings  from  an  examination  of  the
passages  in  which  it  has  been  used  in  print.  Nevertheless
the  meaning  (or  meanings)  as  formulated  in  a  dictionary
never  can  be  an  absolute  and  infallible  guide  to  actual
usage.  It  represents  merely  the  average  meaning,  with
which  the  word  has  been  used  in  the  past,  and  the  prob
able  meaning,  with  which  it  will  be  used  in  the  future  ;
but  it  cannot  prohibit  its  modification.  To  understand
any  particular  sentence,  we  may  have  (as  every  schoolboy
translator  has  painfully  to  discover)  to  go  beyond  any
thing  we  find  in  our  dictionaries,  and  in  any  case  we  have
to  select  the  { right '  meaning  from  those  given,  and  to
adjust  their  dicta  to  our  special  problem.  No  critic  of  a
bad  translation  would  allow  the  excuse  that  the  wrong
meanings  given  to  the  mistranslated  words  had  been
found  in  a  dictionary.

Now  what  is  the  bearing  of  this  on  the  logical  doctrine
of  meaning?  Clearly  it  follows  that  if  the  meaning  of
terms  is  nothing  but  the  dictionary-meaning  of  the  words,
it  cannot  be  trusted  to  give  us  the  actual  meaning-in-use
of  any  proposition.  We  ought  always  to  go  behind  it  to
what  its  assertor  is  actually  trying  to  express.  This
actual  meaning  should  never  be  ignored  and  sacrificed  to
the  meaning  of  the  term  in  abstraction.  For  the  latter
is  not  actual  meaning  at  all.  It  is  only  potential  meaning
— at  best  a  rough  guide  to  the  real  meaning,  to  detect
which  we  must  always  use  our  intelligence.  But  this
result  bodes  ill  for  the  value  of  the  Formal  classifications
of  terms  which  we  shall  have  to  consider  (§§  5-10).  We
must  expect  to  find  in  them  dangerous  snares,  because
they  fix  our  attention  upon  the  trivial  and  unimportant

C


1 8  FORMAL  LOGIC


CHAP.


differences  which  would  hardly  deceive  a  child,  and
distract  it  from  the  real  problem  of  meaning.  And
moreover  they  cannot  ultimately  stand  really  scientific
treatment.  For  the  Formal  treatment  of  terms  blinds
itself  to  the  real  logical  meaning  by  systematically
ignoring  the  problem  of  the  application  of  the  potential
dictionary-meaning  to  the  actual  case  of  the  use  of  the
term.  What  it  actually  tries  to  grasp  is  an  elusive
phantom  compounded  out  of  an  unattainable  ideal  and
a  verbal  husk.

§  4. The  Verbality  of  Terms

(3)  In  the  notions  of  permanent  concepts  and  objects
there  lurk  similar  dangers.  '  Concepts '  and  '  objects  '  are
generated  in  an  entirely  analogous  way,  viz.  by  people
thinking  about  them,  and  they  persist  by  becoming  objects
of  sustained  personal  interest.  But  this  hardly  seems  to
explain  the  enormous  role  they  play  in  human  life.  They
seem  to  be  vastly  more  than  words  for  ways  of  habitual
behaviour.  It  is  hard  to  realize  that  *  money '  is  only  a
something  whereby  a  vast  number  of  exchanges  are  daily
effected,  that  *  reason '  is  only  a  collective  term  for  multi
tudinous  processes  of  reasoning,  or  that  '  poetry '  would
vanish  from  the  world  if  men  ceased  to  take  up  a  certain
attitude  towards  life.  And  so  all  such  objects  of  thought
should  probably  be  subjected  to  a  severe  discount.  It
should  not  be  assumed  that  because  a  thing  is  called  an
*  object  of  thought '  it  is  actually  thought  about — any
more  than  a  word  has  an  actual  meaning  simply  because
it  is  in  a  dictionary,  or  an  author  is  read  because  he  is
mentioned  as  a  '  classic '  in  a  history  of  literature.  What
is  the  real  object  of  thought  must  be  determined  by
reference  to  the  particular  case  ;  it  can  never  safely  be
decided  by  knowing  about  objects  of  thought  in  general.

It  cannot,  therefore,  be  allowed  that  Formal  Logic
does  well  to  take  terms  out  of  their  context  in  the  actual
judgment.  Its  procedure  debars  it  from  determining  the
actual  meaning  of  thought,  and  confines  it  to  the  potential


ii  TERMS  19

"meanings  of  forms  of  words.  This  procedure  is  wrong
in  principle,  and  how  unsatisfactory  it  is  in  detail  will
appear  when  we  examine  the  Formal  classifications  of
terms  which  are  commonly  enumerated.  Not  one  of
them  turns  out  to  have  any  scientific  value  as  a  guide
to  the  nature  of  thought ;  all  of  them  of  necessity  reduce
themselves  to  verbal  distinctions.

\\£*?n

§  5.  (i) Subject  and  Predicate

The  first  of  these  Formal  distinctions  is  that  resulting
from  the  logical  analysis  of  judgments  into  Subject,  Pre
dicate,  and  Copula,  which  has  already  been  mentioned.
To  be  scientifically  intelligible  this  analysis  should  be
conceived  to  rest  on  psychological  observations  that  in  a
situation  which  evokes  thought  one  feature  is  commonly
singled  out  as  the  problematic  '  thing '  about  which
affirmations  (or  denials)  require  to  be  made,  by  means
of  the  previous  knowledge  which  is  attached  to  (or  de
tached  from)  this  *  subject '  and  is  then  said  to  be  pre
dicated  of  it.  Thus  the  predicate  and  the  copula  together
represent  an  ideal  experiment  or  operation  performed  on
the  subject,  and  an  adequate  psychological  description  of
what  the  judgment  means  implies,  of  course,  a  knowledge
of  the  particular  situation  in  which  it  occurs.

But  so  soon  as  the  study  of  the  act  of  judging  is
renounced,  the  judgment  becomes  a  form  of  words,  and
the  indicative  sentence  takes  the  place  of  the  real  judgment.
It  makes  a  very  poor  representative,  which  soon  convinces
the  logician  that  the  forms  of  language  are  very  inade
quate  to  the  expression  of  thought.  A  meaning  may  be
conveyed  in  a  single  word — QaXarra  may  mean  '  there  is
the  sea  !'  and  '  villain  '  *  you  are  a  villain.'  Predicate  and
copula  may  fuse  together,  and  the  very  language  may
protest  against  the  pedantry  of  analysing  *  he  runs '  into
'  he  is  running.'  The  subject  may  verbally  disappear
('  cogito/  '  currit,'  etc.),  or  the  verbal  subject  may  not  be  v
the  real  one  ('  nothing  endures  ').  None  of  the  complica-  .
tions  with  which  the  idiosyncrasies  of  language  thus  J


20  FORMAL  LOGIC


CHAP


encumber  Formal  Logic  would  demand  a  mention  if  it
had  not  chosen  to  adopt  the  study  of  words  as  a  short
cut  to  that  of  thought,  nor  would  it  continue  to  seem
a  logical  question  whether  a  word  can  be  used  as  a  term
by  itself  or  only  along  with  others,  and  so  is  to  be  called
categorematic  or  syncategorematic.

§  6. (ii)  Abstract  and  Concrete  Terms

The  next  distinction  it  is  important  to  notice  is
the  division  of  Terms  into  abstract  and  concrete.  A  con
crete  term,  it  is  said,  is  the  name  of  a  person  or  thing,
an  abstract  term  that  of  a  quality  or  attribute.  These
definitions  are  open  to  a  number  of  objections  which
raise  the  profoundest  philosophic  issues,  and  indeed  will
probably  result  in  the  conviction  that  the  attempted  dis
tinction  is  very  ambiguous,  wholly  unscientific,  and  in  the
end  merely  verbal.

(i)  In  the  first  place  we  may  ask,  how  is  it  possible
that  the  name  of  a  person  or  thing  should  be  concrete  ?
A  thing  is  called  concrete  because  in  the  metaphysics  of
Aristotle  it  was  somehow  composed  (in  a  way  Aristotle
never  succeeded  in  specifying)  out  of  a  union  of  Form
(eZSo?)  and  Matter  (y\tf).  As  such  it  was  fundamentally
opposed  to  the  concept.  For  the  concept  is  universal
and  pervasive  of  a  multitude  of  things  ;  whereas  each
real  concrete  thing  is  unique,  and  no  two  which  are  wholly
alike  are  ever  found.

But  it  is  one  thing  to  call  a  thing  concrete,  and  quite
another  to  call  its  name  so.  The  name  never  seems  to  parti
cipate  in  the  thing's  uniqueness.  If  we  take  the  concretest
term  imaginable,  the  Proper  Name,  what  do  we  find  ?  A
Proper  Name  is,  of  course,  intended  to  be  the  name  of
the  particular  real  thing  to  which  it  is  applied.  What
its  use  means  is  that  the  peculiarities  of  the  thing  bulk  so
large  in  our  eyes,  that  its  differences  from  other  things  of
its  kind  seem  so  important,  that  we  need  to  set  apart  a
special  word  for  its  service.  It  is  not  itself  more  unique  than
the  rest  of  real  things  which  have  no  Proper  Names  ;  but


ii  TERMS  21

these  we  can  handle  in  the  mass.  So  it  suffices  to  give
them  names  which  designate  their  kinds,  and  are  con
sequently  called  Common  Terms.  We  are  sufficiently
interested  in  our  children,  our  dogs,  our  horses,  our
mountains,  our  rivers,  and  (in  a  fighting  age)  our  swords
(*  Excalibur '),  to  bestow  upon  them  Proper  Names  ;  but
we  do  not  usually  take  the  trouble  to  decorate  similarly
our  sheep,  our  boots,  and  our  toothpicks,  and  when  things
are  as  like  as  two  peas  we  judge  that  their  individual
differences  may  for  ordinary  purposes  be  ignored.

Now  in  its  actual  use  the  Proper  Name  is  as  unique
as  the  thing  it  designates,  if  it  is  successful  as  a  vehicle  of
meaning.  The  name  '  Tom  Jones '  means  a  particular
individual  and  no  other,  if  it  conveys  to  others  the  meaning
that  is  intended.  If  you  fail  to  understand  which  '  Tom
Jones '  I  mean,  there  is  to  that  extent  a  failure  in  the
function  of  the  name.  But  this  does  not  alter  the  fact
that  I  mean  that  particular  Tom  Jones.

This  uniqueness,  however,  appears  to  reside  in  the
application  of  the  name  to  the  unique  individual,  and  not
in  the  name  per  se.  You  might  give  the  name  to  an
indefinite  number  of  puppies,  kittens,  or  Welshmen.
There  is  nothing  about  the  name  itself  to  prevent  it  from
being  appropriated  to  any  being  deemed  worthy  of  dis
tinction  by  a  Proper  Name.  The  words  themselves  are
equally  applicable  to  an  infinite  class  of  potential  bearers
of  the  name.

Hence  it  follows  (a)  that,  taken  in  abstraction  from  the
application  or  use,  the  Proper  Name  is  quite  abstract,  and
not  at  all  concrete  or  unique  ;  and  (b)  that  it  at  once
becomes  concrete  when  used.

(2)  But  the  same  thing  would  appear  to  be  true  of
the  '  Common  Terms,'  which  are  the  names  of  kinds.
The  term  '  cat '  is  taken  to  be  less  concrete  than  *  Tom/
because  it  is  applicable  indifferently  to  any  number  of
individuals  of  a  kind  ;  it  seems  to  contain  no  suggestion
of  an  unique  individuality  like  the  Proper  Name.

But  this  is  only  because  the  term  is  taken  in  its
*  dictionary '  sense  and  in  abstraction  from  its  actual


22  FORMAL  LOGIC


CHAP.


meaning.  When  it  actually  conveys  meaning,  i.e.  when
it  is  applied  and  used,  it  becomes  fully  concrete.  It
makes  no  difference,  e.g.,  whether  you  do  not  know  the
personal  name  of  a  cat  and  address  it  politely  as  (  Puss/
or  knowing  the  same,  can  call  it  '  Tom ' ;  you  mean  the
same  cat  in  both  cases.

(3)  This  suggests  a  further  inquiry  as  to  whether  the
case  of  the  so-called  '  abstract '  names  is  really  so  different.
When  there  is  a  real  question  about  an  abstract  term  like
*  wealth  '  or  '  happiness,'  it  is  never  the  quality  per  se  that
is  debated. In  the  actual  use  of  the  term  the  quality  is
always  conceived  as  inhering  in  and  exemplified  by  some
real  object. When  people  talk  at  large  about  abstractions
and  ask  c  What  is  Love  ?  '  and  '  What  is  Truth  ? '  the  reason
why  so little  usually  comes  of  it  is  that they tend to
forget  this,  and  lose  sight  of  the  concrete  facts  to  which
their  terms  apply,  so  that  the  discussion  has  really  lost
its  meaning.

'  Abstract '  terms,  therefore,  when  properly  understood
and  really  successful  in  conveying  meaning,  are  as  concrete
as  any  other.  They  too  refer  to,  and  indicate,  features  in
the  unique  succession  of  real  events.  They  are  abstract
only  in  their  dictionary  sense,  as  the  '  meaning  of  words ' ;
but  in  this  sense  all  terms,  even  Proper  Names,  are
abstract  and  their  meaning  is  only  potential  (cf.  p.  24).

(4)  What,  then,  is  the  real  difference  between  the  terms
called '  abstract '  and  *  concrete  '  ? It  is  a  difference  in
use. We  have  seen  that  there  are  beings  in  the  world
whose  claims  on  our  attention  are  so  insistent  that  it  is
convenient to bestow upon them Proper Names, in
addition  to  the  Common  Terms  which will do for the
masses of objects. Both these classes of beings are
capable  of  presenting  themselves  as  objects  of  perception
and  are  recognized  as  realities  in  their  own  right  by  the
common-sense  view  of  the  world. But  for  many  of  the
purposes  of  life  the  merely  perceptual  analysis  of  experi
ence  does  not  suffice. We  have  not  only  to recognize
things,  but  also  their  qualities. For  by  recognizing  the
'  same '  qualities  in  different  things,  and  different  qualities


ii  TERMS  23

in  the  same  thing,  we  can  forecast  their  behaviour  far
better,  and  adjust  our  own  to  the  course  of  events.

Hence  the  analysis  of  experience  has  to  be  carried
further.  We  must  single  out  the  *  abstract '  qualities,
which  do  not  actually  exist  save  in  the  things,  as  distinct
(or  '  independent ')  objects  of  thought.  Thus  '  concrete  *
terms  are  devised  for  use  upon  the  objects  of  perception
as  they  present  themselves,  while  '  abstract '  terms  involve
a  further  analysis  of  these  same  objects.

(5)  Nevertheless  there  is  a  further  sense  in  which  all
terms  may  be  regarded  as  abstract,  i.e.  as  arising  through
a  process  of  abstraction.

For  the  common-sense  analysis  of  experience  into  the
interactions  of  things  possessing  various  qualities,  though
it  is  now  the  point  from  which  all  philosophic  reflection
must  originally  start,  does  not  ultimately  turn  out  to  have
been  the  primary  condition  of  our  experience.  It  is  an
achievement,  probably  the  greatest  philosophic  feat  of  the
human  race,  and  so  valuable  that  it  has  become  common
property  (Chap.  XX,  §  3).

But  it  was  not  thus  that  the  world  first  presented
itself  to  the  nascent  mind.  Reflective  self-examination
shows  that  before  every  act  of  thought  there  is  present  to
the  mind  far  more  than  it  is  desirous  of  grasping,  capable
of  focussing,  or  interested  in  communicating.  It  has
therefore  to  select  what  is  important  and  relevant  from
a  mass  of  irrelevant  context,  by  concentrating  attention
upon  it  and  excluding  the  rest.  It  is  necessary  therefore
to  abstract,  to  free  the  points  of  interest  which  we  wish
to  think  about,  from  their  entanglement  in  the  irrelevance
that  chokes  them,  to  reject  as  well  as  to  select,  to  ignore
and  to  abstract  from  the  latter.  Being  selective,  this  pro
cess  may  be  called  (in  a  sense)  arbitrary  and  is  certainly
risky  ;  for  we  may  err  in  what  we  select  as  relevant  to  the
purpose  of  our  thinking,  and  so  retain  what  is  irrelevant
and  reject  what  turns  out  to  have  been  relevant.

But  just  because  in  this  sense  all  thinking  is  '  abstract/
no  distinction  between  abstract  and  concrete  terms  is
feasible.  f  Abstraction '  becomes  the  condition  of  all


24  FORMAL  LOGIC


CHAP.


effective  exercise  of  thought.  Without  it  we  should
continue  to  be  tossed  about  in  a  confused  chaos  of
impressions  and  never  emerge  into  the  perception  of
definite  objects  or  the  possession  of  an  orderly  experience.
But  to  recognize  the  general  necessity  for  abstraction  of
this  kind  decides  nothing,  of  course,  as  to  the  particular
sort  of  abstraction  to  be  used  in  any  subject.  It  does
not  sanction,  for  example,  the  abstractions  of  Formal
Logic,  nor  compel  us  to  approve  of  the  Formal  division
of  terms  into  '  abstract '  and  '  concrete.'  For  it  is  an
essential  feature  in  this  Formal  treatment  of  terms  that
among  the  points  abstracted  from  is  their  relation  to  a
particular  context,  their  application  to  a  particular  case.
Once  this  is  done,  they  all  become  abstract  in  the  sense
that  their  meaning  becomes  potential  and  conjectural.
Even  the  most  '  concrete,'  even  Proper  Names,  cease,  as
we  saw  (p.  2 1 ),  to  be  names  of  particular  objects  and
become  names  for  classes  of  things.  Not  that,  however,
this  should  be  regarded  as  a  defect.  For  we  want  our
names  to  be  general  and  capable  of  an  indefinitely
extended  use.  It  would  be  very  inconvenient,  e.g.,  if  the
fact  that  some  one  had  once  been  called  *  Tom  Jones '
debarred  every  one  else  from  bearing  this  illustrious  name
for  ever  afterwards.  But  it  is  clear  that  neither  this  para
dox  nor  any  of  the  others  which  beset  the  distinction  can
be  cleared  up  so  long  as  logic  considers  itself  debarred
from  distinguishing  between  the  verbal  and  the  actual
meaning  of  terms.

§  7. (iii)  Common,  Singular,  and  Collective  Terms

We  proceed  to  a  distinction,  which  we  have  already
anticipated  in  part,  between  terms  common  (or  general)  and
singular.  A  general  term  is  defined  as  one  which  may
be  used  of  any  number  of  individuals  of  a  kind  in  the
same  sense  ;  a  singular  term  as  one  which  is  meant  to
apply  only  to  one  individual  in  the  same  sense.  Thus
the  Proper  Name  is  one  kind  of  singular  term,  though
a  singular  term  is  not  necessarily  a  Proper  Name.  '  The


n  TERMS  25

Pope  '  and  '  the  King  '  are  singular  terms  ('  designations  ')
but  the  Proper  Names  of  the  persons  so  designated  are
'  Pius  X '  and  '  George  V.'

The  practical  reason  for  these  distinctions  of  speech
has  already  been  explained,  and  is  indeed  fairly  obvious.
But  Formal  Logic  errs  in  asserting  that  general  terms
are  used  of  individuals  in  quite  the  same  sense.  E.g.,  if
I  call  two  cats,  whose  names  I  do  not  know,  both  *  Puss/
I  do  not  mean  '  puss '  in  quite  the  same  sense  in  both
cases.  Indeed,  if  the  wrong  puss  responded  to  the  call,
I  might  say,  '  No,  I  did  not  mean  you,  puss,'  and  tell  her
to  go  away.  This  shows  that  the  general  term  is  not
strictly  common  ;  it  applies  to  the  different  specimens  of
the  kind  in  an  individually  specified  manner,  and  does  not
mean  that  we  are  unaware  of  the  differences  between
them.  Of  course,  when  the  application  (use)  is  abstracted
from,  these  differences  vanish,  and  the  term  becomes
abstractly  common,  i.e.  applicable.  But  this  neither  means
that  no  differences  exist  between  individuals,  nor  that  we
do  not  see  them.  Only,  when  we  use  a  common  term,
we  usually  mean  that  these  differences  are  irrelevant  and
that  the  individuals  may  for  our  purpose  be  grouped
together.  Thus  our  purpose  constitutes  the  bond  which
renders  the  common  term  applicable  to  particular  cases.
Hence  if  the  Formal  definition  is  to  be  preserved,  it  should
at  least  be  explained  that  '  the  same '  should  not  in  logic
be  taken  to  mean  more  than  '  equivalent  for  a  purpose.'

(iv)  We  may  not  only  require  to  conceive  individuals
as  members  of  a  class  or  kind,  but  also  to  refer  to
them  in  their  groupings.  For  this  purpose  we  have
devised  what  Logic  calls  collective  terms.  The  term
'  army '  enables  us  to  mean  an  assemblage  of  soldiers,  the
term  '  Parliament '  the  collective  product  of  the  nation's
political  wisdom,  the  term  '  truth '  the  body  of  truths,  etc.
But  here  again  it  is  the  use  that  affords  the  only  real  clue  to
the  meaning,  and  from  the  abstractly  Formal  standpoint
*  collective '  terms  cannot  be  distinguished  from  '  general.'
For  the  same  word  may  be  used  as  either,  and  is  some
times  collective,  sometimes  general.  Every  collection  of


26  FORMAL  LOGIC


CHAP.


individuals  may  be  viewed  as  a  case  of  other  similar
collections ;  and  so  when  we  compare  the  different
'  armies,'  we  no  longer  use  the  term  collectively,  but
distributively,  as  a  general  term.

§ 8.  (v)  Ambiguity  and  Equivocation  of  Terms

It  has  already  had  to  be  pointed  out  that  the  same
words  are  frequently  used  in  various  senses,  and  the
complexities  and  confusions  which  this  practice  introduces
into  philosophic  terminology  are  probably  chief  among
the  obstacles  which  strike,  and  impede,  the  student  of
philosophy.  At  the  same  time,  it  must  not  be  imagined
that  the  language  of  ordinary  life  is  free  from  ambiguities.
Indeed  it  is  full  of  them,  and  they  usually  escape  both
notice  and  censure.  So  it  should  be  one  of  the  chief
benefits  derived  from  the  study  of  Logic  to  open  the  eyes
of  the  soul  to  the  all-pervasiveness  of  ambiguity.

But  it  may  be  doubted  whether  Formal  Logic  has  not
the  very  opposite  effect.  By  restricting  itself  to  *  forms  '
it  selects  a  subject-matter  which  is  necessarily  verbal  and
'  ambiguous.'  For  '  forms '  are  forms  for  meaning,  and
may  be  used  to  convey  very  different  meanings.  It  is
vain,  therefore,  to  prophesy  what  the  real  meaning  will  be
simply  by  staring  at  the  verbal  form.  Moreover,  Formal
Logic  is  constrained  by  its  chosen  standpoint  to  con
found  together  verbal  and  real  ambiguity,  and  so  it  diverts
attention  from  real  and  serious  failures  to  convey  meaning
to  mere  diversities  of  usage  which  an  intelligent  mind  has
no  difficulty  in  understanding.  How  this  comes  about
will  easily  appear  if  we  consider  how  these  two  sorts  of
ambiguity  arise.

In  a  Formal  sense  the  ambiguous  use  of  words  is
inevitable  and  ineradicable.  For  we  have  far  more
experiences  than  words  wherewith  to  label  and  describe
them.  The  number  of  words  in  any  language  is  limited,
but  the  number  of  phenomena  with  which  we  have  to
deal  seems  infinite.  There  are,  therefore,  an  infinite
number  and  variety  of  meanings  we  may  desire  to  express


n  TERMS  27

and  convey  with  limited  resources  of  language.  Clearly,
therefore,  every  word  will  have  to  do  duty  in  many
contexts,  and  with  shades  of  meaning  which  it  takes  from
its  contexts  ;  it  will  have  to  be  worked  for  all  it  is  worth,
and  more.  This  is  why  every  word  is  (or  may  be)  actually
used  in  a  plurality  of  senses.  But  so  long  as  it  serves  to
convey  the  meaning  actually  intended,  the  more  meanings
it  can  convey,  the  greater  its  capacity,  the  better  it  is  as  a
word,  the  more  useful,  efficient,  and  economical  it  grows.
It  is  verbally  ambiguous,  but  not  really.  If  we  look  up
a  word  in  the  dictionary  and  find  that  it  rejoices  in  a
multitude  of  meanings,  the  right  reflection  is  not  '  How
terribly  ambiguous  ! '  but '  What  a  useful  word  it  must  be  ! '
The  word  '  fly,'  e.g.,  is  not  really  ambiguous  because  it  can
be  used  as  a  verb  or  a  noun,  for  a  vehicle  as  well  as  for  an
insect  and  a  fishing  device.  All  such  ambiguities,,  which
it  would  be  better  to  call  plurality  of  senses^  are  merely

v  verbal  ;  they  exist  only  in  the  abstract  meaning  of  the
word,  and  not  in  the  actual  use.

Real  ambiguity  is  a  very  different  affair.  It  means
that  a  form  of  words,  when  actually  used,  fails  to  convey
the  meaning  intended,  or  conveys  one  meaning  to  one
man  and  another  to  another,  or  is  intended  to  convey
several  meanings  to  a  choice  between  which  the  assertor
will  not  commit  himself.1  It  consequently  leads  to

,  misunderstanding  or  failure  to  understand,  and  alters  or
destroys  logical  meaning.  It  is  therefore  something  to  be
really  feared,  especially  as  it  is  common  enough,  though

1  To  this  last  case  it  would  be  well  to  appropriate  exclusively  the  term
'  equivocation,"  which  is  at  present  used  as  a  synonym  for  '  ambiguity.'  Indefinite-
ness  and  Indeterminateness  of  meaning  should  also  be  discriminated  from
ambiguity,  though  either  may  lead  to  ambiguity.  A  meaning  is  indefinite  if  it
fails  to  take  account  of  possible  distinctions,  indeterminate  if  it  disregards  them.
All  meanings  are  liable  to  develop  indefiniteness  under  criticism,  if  further  distinc
tion  is  demanded  of  them,  and  all  indefiniteness  involves  indetermination,  because
in  fact  it  leaves  alternatives  open.  But  an  indeterminate  meaning  may  be  perfectly
definite,  because  the  alternatives  it  leaves  open  may  really  be  irrelevant  for  the
purpose  in  hand.  For  example,  to  say  that  '  meaning  is  relative  to  purpose '  leaves
the  purpose  indeterminate  ;  but  it  is  not  indefinite,  and  may  be  a  pointed  protest
against  logics  which  ignore  relation  to  purpose.  Again,  if  any  one  divides  the
denizens  of  the  air  only  into  'insects'  and  'birds,'  he  will  have  to  call  a  bat  a
bird  ;  yet,  '  It's  a  bat  and  not  a  bird  ! '  will  be  an  effective  rebuke  to  such  in
definiteness,  whether  or  not  we  know  the  specific  name  of  the  bat  we  are  indeter
minately  judging  about.


28  FORMAL  LOGIC


CHAP.


infinitely  rarer  and  more  dangerous,  because  less  noticed,
than  mere  plurality  of  senses.

If, then,  we  lay  it down that there is no effective

ambiguity  except  where  there  is  misunderstanding,  it  is

<  clear  that  Formal  Logic  has  no  right  ever  to  call  a  term

'  ambiguous.' For  as  it  has  abstracted  from  its  actual  use

and  confined  itself  to  the  dictionary-sense  of  the  word,

I  it  can  never  say  whether  the  term  will  be  wrongly  under-

ls,toqd  on  any  actual  occasion. It  can  only  record  that

it  has  been  misunderstood. But  on  this  score  all  terms

would  be  ambiguous  ;  for  nothing can  be  expressed  so

simply and clearly that stupidity or malice cannot

contrive  to  miss  its  meaning. Hence  Formal  Logic  once

more  fails  to  establish  its  distinction.

§ 9. (vi)  Relative  and  Absolute  Terms

An  object  or  quality  considered  in  itself  is  said  to
yield  an  absolute  term  ;  if  in  relation  to  another,  a  relative,
while  the  related  terms  are  called  correlatives.

This  distinction  plainly  cannot  possibly  be  made
sharp.  For  nothing  is  ever  really  absolute  in  its
existence  ;  everything  is  always  related  in  some  way  or
other  to  other  things.  To  consider  it  in  itself,  therefore,
is  possible  only  by  an  act  of  abstraction,  and  in  actual
thinking  this  implies  both  a  relation  to  the  other  term
of  the  judgment  and  to  the  context  abstracted  from.
Conversely,  as  in  every  act  of  thinking  all  terms  are
always  related  to  others,  those  called  '  relative '  must  be
distinguished  by  their  capacity  to  enter  into  special  sorts
of  relation.  In  point  of  fact  the  relations  which  give
rise  to  '  relative '  terms  are  those  in  common  use,  and
so  easily  and  habitually  suggested.  '  Parent '  suggests
'  child,'  <  son  '  '  father,'  *  half  '  double/  '  greater '  '  less,'  etc.
But  the  whole  basis  of  the  distinction  is  psychological,
and  accordingly  the  *  correlatives '  of  the  same  terms  will
be  found  to  vary  in  different  minds.  It  is  therefore
wise  of  Formal  Logic  not  to  enter  into  such  questions  as
why  the  correlative  of  *  son '  should  not  be  *  mother,'  of


ii  TERMS  29

'  parent'  'grandparent,'  of  'half  'whole/  of  'double'
'  quits,'  of  '  greater '  '  equal,'  etc.

§  10.  (vii)  Positive,  Negative,  and  Privative

T,  ,jf  /£,
A  further  division  of  Terms  into  positive,  negative,  and

privative  hardly  seems  to  repay  the  trouble  it  has  caused
to  Formal  logicians  themselves.  A  positive  term  is  said
to  imply  the  presence,  a  negative  the  absence,  of  a  quality
(as  '  equal '  and  '  unequal '),  while  the  privative  term  is
used  to  indicate  the  absence  of  a  quality  which  the  object
might  be  expected  to  have.  Thus  when  we  encounter
dumb  dogs,  blind  guides,  and  senseless  doctrines  we  should
appreciate  their  '  privative  '  character.

Of  these  distinctions  the  third  may  be  dismissed  at
once  with  the  remarks  that  what  qualities  objects
normally  have  is  a  matter  of  experience,  that  our  normal
expectations  about  them  are  a  matter  of  psychology,  and
that  neither  the  one  nor  the  other  is  a  concern  of  Formal
Logic.

The  distinction  of  positive  and  negative  terms,  on  the
other  hand,  is  an  unsuccessful  attempt  to  anticipate  in
the  doctrine  of  terms  an  important  distinction  which
properly  belongs  to  the  doctrine  of  judgment.  Affirma
tion  and  denial  are  distinct  and  antagonistic  psychic
attitudes,  which  have  found  distinctive  expression  in
language.  Hence  the  idea  suggests  itself  to  stereotype
affirmations  and  denials  in  the  words  which  they
commonly  employ.  And  language  to  some  extent  lends
itself  to  this  design,  though  it  also  puzzles  Formal  Logic
with  forms  like  '  atom '  and  '  individual,'  which  are  no
longer  negative,  and  '  void '  and  *  Absolute,'  which  are
hardly  positive,  and  '  infinity,'  '  evil/  and  '  error '  which
are  debatable.  However,  the  objection  soon  occurs  that
the  so-called  negative  term  usually  or  always  indicates
more  than  the  absence  of  a  quality  and  implies  the
presence  of  an  opposite  quality.  Formal  Logic  welcomes
the  suggestion  and  bids  us  distinguish  further  between
negative  terms  which  are  contraries,  merely  opposed


30  FORMAL  LOGIC  CHAP.

within  the  same  general  subject,  like  *  black  '  and  c  white,'
'  equal '  and  '  unequal/  and  such  as  are  true  contradictories,
like  '  equal '  and  '  not-equal/  '  white  '  and  *  not-white.'  It
assures  us  that  the  latter  must  divide  the  universe  between
them,  because  not-white  includes  all  the  things,  like
virtues,  fallacies,  and  stones,  to  which  the  notion  of
colour  is  (strictly)  inapplicable.1

The  slightest  reference  to  actual  thinking,  however,
shows  that  this  doctrine  carries  the  use  of  logical  figments
beyond  the  limits  of  the  tolerable.  We  never  actually
use  such  '  contradictories.' 2  It  is  not  profitable  to  talk
about  the  universe  at  large  and  to  contrast  a  single
aspect  of  it  with  all  that  remains.  We  always  know
enough  about  anything  we  are  discussing  not  to  leave  its
position  as  vague  as  that,  and  hence  language  does  not
form  pairs  of  words  in  the  form  *  A '  and  '  not- A.'  In
actual  thinking  we  are  always  interested  in  quite  a
limited  sphere  of  references  within  which  all  our  assertions
and  denials  are  understood  to  fall.  If  I  deny  that  a
thing  is  white,  I  am  supposed  to  imply  that  it  is  some
other  colour.  It  may,  of  course,  happen  that  the
alternatives  are  limited  to  two,  as  that  a  man  is  either
*  awake '  or  *  asleep,'  *  alive '  or  c  dead,'  and  that  the
qualities  in  question  are  really  exclusive.  But  Logic  will
have  to  regard  this  as  a  fact  about  the  subject-matter,
and  not  as  anything  to  be  extracted  from  the  form  of
terms.

Nevertheless,  a  useful  caution  may  be  derived  from
this  Formal  doctrine.  In  actual  thinking  it  is  most
important  that  there  should  be  no  mistake  about  the
sphere  to  which  our  thought  refers,  technically  called  the
universe  of  diction  or  suppositio.  For  if  there  is  dispute
or  obscurity  as  to  this,  meaning  cannot  be  conveyed,  and
disputants  will  either  be  arguing  at  cross  purposes  or
about  nothing  at  all.  The  very  absurdity,  therefore,  of

1  In practice it is, of  course, impossible to guard against the play of
metaphor,  and  so  virtues  may  be 'lily-white,'  fallacies 'glaring,' and  stories
'  black '  or  even  '  lurid. '

2  The  philosophic  disputations  about Being and Not-Being,  as  in Plato's
Sophist,  are  only  apparent  exceptions. For  it  turns  out  both  that  Not-Being  is
not  a  mere  negation  and  that  it  is  a  sort  of  Being.


ii  TERMS  31

questions  which  transgress  the  suppositio  may  often  be
useful,  by  forcing  us  to  realize  what  answers  can  really
be  relevant  to  our  question,  especially  if  they  only  just
transgress  it.  The  question  '  Are  virtues  green  or  not-
green  ? '  will  hardly  aid  ethical  discussion,  but  '  Is  a  circle
visible  or  not-visible  ? '  may  force  us  to  realize  the  ideal
nature  of  geometry.

§11. The  Relativity  of  Formal  Classifications

Lastly,  it  may  be  noted  that  all  the  Formal  classifica
tions  of  Terms  are  involved  in  a  certain  indistinctness  and
arbitrariness  owing  to  the  fact  that  not  only  may  the
meaning  of  a  word  be  found  habitually  to  reside  on  the
border-line  between  the  Formal  classes,  but  that  it  may
carry  a  multitude  of  associations  on  the  basis  of  which  it
can  be  classified,  and  that  we  have  to  choose  between  a
number  of  classifications,  and  may  choose  variously.  It
is  the  logician,  therefore,  who  has  to  decide  whether  a
term  like  *  empty '  or  '  injustice '  is  to  be  called  relative,
negative,  or  privative,  and  whichever  way  he  decides,  his
choice  seems  to  exclude  some  part  of  the  full  meaning.
Formal  Logic,  therefore,  does  not  fully  exploit  even  the
knowledge  which  is  stored  up  in  the  dictionary.

Our  examination  of  the  Formal  distinctions  of  terms
has  everywhere  led  to  the  same  conclusion.  They  are
not  distinctions  in  thought,  but  in  words,  and  at  best
refer  to  their  average  meaning  and  probable  use.  No
appeal  to  them  from  the  actual  meaning  of  terms  in  use
can  therefore  be  allowed  ;  the  question  of  what  in  fact
an  assertion  meant  can  never  be  omitted  ;  to  hope  to
dispense  with  it  by  an  appeal  to  formal  cut-and-dried
distinctions  is  merely  to  cut  off  Logic  from  all  contact
with  real  thinking.


CHAPTER  III

THE  EXTENSION  AND  INTENSION  OF  TERMS

§  i. The  Fourfold  Analysis  of  Propositions

FORMAL  Logic  has  chosen  to  treat  as  an  ambiguity  in
Terms  what  is  really  an  existence  of  alternatives  in  the
meanings  which  any  form  of  words  may  be  used  to
convey.  It  is  therefore  important  to  realize  at  the  outset
(i)  that  this  'ambiguity'  can  only  occur  in  propositions
(judgments),  and  (2)  that  it  is  not  properly  a  real
ambiguity  at  all,  but,  normally  at  least,  a  case  of
phtrality  of  senses  (cf.  Chap.  II,  §  8).

In  framing  judgments  about  the  objects  of  our  thought
there  are  four  varieties  of  meaning  which  can  be  formally
distinguished.  We  may  intend  to  assert  (i)  about  the
relations  of  concrete  things  to  each  other,  (2)  about  the
relating  of  a  quality  or  'attribute'  to  a  thing,  (3)  about
the  interrelation  of  qualities,  or  (4)  about  a  quality  in
relation  to  a  thing.  As  examples  of  phrases  which
would  most  commonly  be  meant  and  understood  in  each
of  these  ways  we  may  give  as  a  case  of  the  first,  *  some
philosophers  are  Christians,'  of  the  second,  '  the  house  is
big,'  of  the  third,  *  Virtue  is  Knowledge,'  of  the  fourth,
'  all  that  glitters  is  not  gold '  ( = '  lustrous  qualities  do
not  imply  the  presence  of  a  gold  object  ').*

Now  it  is  evident  that  the  second  and  fourth  of  these
interpretations  differ  only  in  the  matter  of  emphasis.  In
the  second  the  object  about  which  we  are  thinking  figures

1  Of  course  these  phrases  are  not  really  judgments  unless  they  are  used,  i.e.
applied,  in  a  suitable  context,  to  a  concrete  situation.

32


CHAP,  m EXTENSION  AND INTENSION  33

as  the  Subject  of  the  sentence,  and  the  quality  we  are
attaching  to  it  or  detecting  in  it  stands  as  the  predicate.
In  the  fourth  this  quality  is  so  prominent  in  thought  that
it  is  made  the  (verbal)  Subject  and  trails  the  object,  to
which  really  it  belongs,  after  it  as  the  predicate.  Now
this  is  unusual,  because,  as  we  saw  (Chap.  II,  §  5),  the
reason  why  we  analyse  what  is  before  the  mind  into
things  and  their  qualities  is  precisely  that  ordinarily  the
things  arrest  our  attention  before  their  qualities  are
noticed.  Hence  judgments  which  suggest  this  interpreta
tion  are  necessarily  rare,  and  their  real  meaning  can
easily  be  expressed  in  the  second  form.  On  the  other
hand,  the  other  three  interpretations  indicate  permanent
topics  of  scientific  interest.  We  are  interested  in  the
relations  of  things  to  each  other,  and  to  their  qualities,
and  in  the  interrelations  of  their  qualities.

Which  of  these  interests  a  judgment  in  any  given  case
expresses  is  of  course  a  matter  of  fact,  granting  that  its
assertor  is  clear  as  to  what  he  means.  It  is  likewise  a
matter  of  psychic  fact  that  its  author  may  not  be  clear  as
to  which  or  how  many  of  these  interpretations  he  means,
and  that  his  assertion  may  be  interpreted  otherwise  than
he  intended.  Only  in  such  cases  will  there  be  real
ambiguity  ;  in  the  others  the  meaning  intended  may  be
perfectly  clear  to  every  one,  even  though  no  one  can  say
what  the  form  of  a  judgment  means  as  such,  and  whether
e.g.  '  all  men  are  mortal '  is  in  the  abstract  intended  to
be  of  type  I  or  type  2.

§  2. The  Inverse  Variation  of  Extension  and  Intension

Such  in  brief  is  the  situation  out  of  which  Formal
Logic  has  evolved  its  terribly  involved  discussions  as  to
the  meaning  of  terms  in  Extension  and  Intension.  It
begins  by  taking  the  matter  out  of  its  connexion  with  the
actual  judgment  of  the  living  thinker.  It  then  translates
the  facts  into  a  technical,  but  ambiguous  and  highly  con
fusing,  terminology.  When  the  terms  refer  to  the  '  con
crete  '  objects  themselves,  they  are  said  to  be  taken  in

D


34  FORMAL  LOGIC


CHAP.


•  extension  or  denotation  ;  when  to  the  qualities  of  objects,

*  in  intension  or  connotation. Words  '  denote  '  things  and
*  connote  ' qualities. It then tries to determine what
terms  *  have  '  extension  and  intension,  and  what  are  lack
ing  in  either,  and  why  ;  how  extension  is  related  to  inten
sion  per  se,  and  what  a  '  connotative  '  term  is  to  mean.

It  contemplates  a  number  of  common  terms  arranged
in  a  serial  classification,  say  '  ship,'  *  steamship/  *  steel
steamship,'  '  battleship,'  *  Dreadnought/  and  decides  that
in  such  a  series  the  intension  grows  greater  as  the  exten
sion  progressively  diminishes.  There  are  fewer  *  steam
ships  '  than  '  ships/  fewer  *  battleships  '  than  *  steamships/
etc.  And  yet  the  qualities  intended  seem  to  increase.
A  '  steamship  '  means  a  ship  propelled  by  steam,  '  steel
steamship  '  specifies  an  additional  quality,  a  '  battleship  '
is  a  steel  steamship  with  heavy  armour,  while  a  '  Dread
nought  '  is  an  '  all-big-gun  battleship.'  Thus  each  higher
but  less  extensive  class  seems  to  carry  all  the  meaning  of
the  lower,  and  to  add  something  of  its  own.  On  this
observation  is  based  a  *  law  '  that  extension  and  intension
vary  inversely,  and  that  as  the  extension  diminishes  the
intension  increases,  while  as  the  extension  increases  the
intension  diminishes.

It  should  follow  from  this  *  law  '  that  when  a  class
becomes  so  very  select  as  to  have  only  one  member,  its
intension,  i.e.  the  qualifications  of  which  it  implies  the
possession,  should  become  infinite  ;  while  when  it  extends
itself  so  as  to  become  all-embracing,  its  intension  should
become  nil.  Thus  a  term  like  *  being  '  or  *  universe/  just
because  applicable  to  all  things,  should  mean  nothing,
while  conversely  every  Proper  Name  should  be  fraught
with  infinite  significance.

Such,  however,  is  not  the  doctrine  of  Formal  Logic,
although,  curiously  enough,  both  these  contentions  might
well  be  upheld  on  its  principles.

(i)  Since  the  number  of  qualities  or  attributes  implied
in  the  definition  of  a  common  term  grows  larger  as  the
class  is  more  specialized,  an  adequate  definition  of  each
successive  class  would  grow  longer  and  longer  after  the


in  EXTENSION AND INTENSION  35

pattern  of  The  House  that  Jack  built.  When,  therefore,
the  individual  thing  is  reached,  it  is  to  be  expected  that
an  infinite  list  of  qualities  would  be  needed  to  define  it.
If,  moreover,  this  inference  were  logically  drawn,  Logic

|  would  opportunely  warn  Metaphysics  to  respect  the
dignity  of  the  individual  real,  which  presents  an  inex
haustible  subject  of  study.  Instead  of  this,  Logic  sacri
fices  consistency  and  rigour  of  thought  to  the  practical

I  convenience  of  an  artificial  simplification.  An  infinitely-
extended  definition  is  evidently  not  practicable.  What
ever,  therefore,  demands  such  a  definition  is  practically

|  indefinable:  a  definition  to  be  useful  must  be  handy  and
compendious.  So  Formal  Logic  allows  definitions  to
rest  on  a  selection  of  a  thing's  qualities  and  to  disclaim
exhaustiveness.  This  is  why  it  prefers  to  teach  that
individuals  are  indefinable,  and  that  Proper  Names  have
no  intension  (cf.  Chap.  VI,  §  2).

(2)  As  we  advance  to  more  and  more  inclusive  classes
in  our  series  of  terms,  we  progressively  eliminate  the
specific  differences  which  defined  the  lower  class,  and  with
the  removal  of  each  specific  quality  the  meaning  seems
to  grow  more  indeterminate.  When,  therefore,  the  all-
embracing  class  is  finally  reached,  it  seems  to  mean
everything  in  general  and  nothing  in  particular.  This
reasoning  again  the  traditional  doctrine  recognizes  when
it  declares  that  the  Summum  Genus,  the  highest  and  most
extensive  class  of  all,  is  as  indefinable  as  the  Proper
Name.  But  it  was  a  just  criticism  of  such  a  procedure  to
declare  that  it  left  nothing  in  the  notion  of  *  being '  to
distinguish  it  from  nothing,  and  that  if  so  empty  an
abstraction  formed  the  culmination  of  thought,  it  could
be  only  by  a  radical  revulsion  which  returned  to  the
concrete  that  thought  could  retain  any  meaning.1

1  This  obvious  difficulty  in  Formal  Logic  is  apparently  what  underlies  the
Hegelian  'Logic.'  Hegel  started  his  'Dialectic'  from  the  paradox  that  Being
and  Nothing  are  the  same,  and  tried  to  show  that  thought  could  not  purge  itself
from  '  contradiction '  until  it  had  returned  thence  to  the  concrete,  i.e.  to  the  cate
gory  of  '  Spirit. '  But  he  did  not  see  that  so  long  as  any  '  category  '  is  unapplied  it
remains  abstract,  and  that  when  applied,  not  only  '  spirit '  but  also  '  being  '  become
concrete  and  significant.  So  he  followed  the  Formal  Logic  whose  adequacy  he
was  questioning  into  its  abstraction  from  actual  thinking,  and  thereby  rendered
futile  his  enormous  labour.  The  real  solution  of  the  puzzle  is  much  simpler,


36  FORMAL  LOGIC


CHAP.


But  there  is  a  much  simpler  objection  to  the  traditional
logic  which  cuts  much  deeper.  It  often  occurs  spontane
ously  to  the  common-sense  of  beginners,  and  is  really
sound,  though  teachers  of  Formal  Logic  have  to  disallow
it.  It  is  true  that  though  the  qualities  stated  in  the
definition  of  a  more  extensive  class  or  genus  are  fewer
and  less  determinate  than  those  stated  in  the  definition
of  its  species,  yet  the  qualities  possessed  are  more.  For  a
genus  must  have  the  qualities  of  all  its  species.  After  all,
the  qualities  of  '  battleships '  are  among  the  qualities  of

*  ships.' Hence  it  is  plainly  false  that  the  qualities  implied
diminish  as  the  classes  grow  more  extensive. '  Being '  in
the  end means  everything,  and  not  nothing. It  is  true
that  nothing  is  left  outside  it,  by  contrast  with  which  it
may  be  defined  ;  but  this  does  not  prevent  us  from  think
ing  of  the  qualities  it  has,  when  we  really  think  about  it.
For  each  and  all  of  them  will  serve  to  distinguish  it  from
Nothing. When,  therefore,  it  figures  in  actual  thought

*  Being '  means  the  whole  wealth of beings  ; what  has
turned out to be logically meaningless is only the
dictionary-meaning  of  the  word.

§  3. Comprehension,  Subjective  Intension,  and  Connotation

The  painful  truth  is  that  the  doctrine  of  Extension
and  Intension  can  never  be  cleared  of  perplexities  until
logicians  make  up  their  minds  to  which  of  three  sets  of
qualities  they  want  it  to  refer,  and  devise  distinct  names
for  each.

The  qualities  intended  may  be  : —

(1)  The  sum  total  of  qualities  possessed  by  all the
objects  to  which  the  term may  be  applied,  whether  these
qualities  are  known  to  us  or  not.

(2)  The qualities which the term suggests to our
minds. These  are  never  the  whole,  but  always  more  than

(3)  the  qualities  necessarily  implied  in  any  application
of  the  term,  the  minimum  of  meaning  that  serves  to  dis
tinguish  the  term  from  all  others  and  is  embodied  in  the
dictionary  definition  of  the  word.


in  EXTENSION  AND INTENSION  37

Now  the  traditional  doctrine  will  hold  only  of  the
third.  If  applied  to  the  first  sense,  it  is  flagrantly  untrue  ;
if  to  the  second,  it  may  be  falsified  by  the  accident  that  a
term  of  wider  extension,  say  '  whale,'  may  be  more  familiar
to  us  than  one  more  specific,  say  Balaena  mysticetus,  so
that  it  means  more  to  us.  But  this  is  plainly  a  psycho
logical  fact  and  so  excluded  from  logic  as  defined.

It  is  only,  therefore,  to  cases  where  the  third  set  of
qualities  may  be  distinguished  that  the  Formal  doctrine
applies,  and  with  it  the  limitation  of  the  possibilities  of
definition.  Incidentally  this  illustrates  the  verbal  origin
of  the  traditional  Logic.  For  if  a  dictionary  is  searched
the  verbal  definitions  of  summa  genera  will  be  found  to  be
very  defective,  while  definitions  of  Proper  Names  will  not
be  found  at  all.

If,  however,  we  follow  Dr.  J.  N.  Keynes T  in  dis
tinguishing  these  three  sets  of  qualities,  as  (i)  the  Com
prehension^  (2)  the  Subjective  Intension,  and  (3)  the
Connotation  of  the  term,  these  anomalies  will  be  found
to  disappear.  All  terms  have  Comprehension,  because
all  can  be  used  to  mean  any  or  all  of  the  qualities  of  the
things  they  apply  to.  All  terms  that  are  understood  to
have  meaning  (i.e.  actually  function  as  vehicles  of  mean
ing)  have  also  Subjective  Intension.  But  neither  summa
genera  nor  Proper  Names  have  Connotation  in  the  restricted
sense,  nor  can  they  be  formally  defined.

§  4. The  Meaning  of  Proper  Names

It  is  possible,  therefore,  to  dismiss  the  protracted
dispute  as  to  the  meaning  of  Proper  Names  very  shortly.
J.  S.  Mill,  after  defining  as  '  connotative '  terms  that  both
denoted  objects  and  implied  qualities,  and  as  '  non-
connotative '  those  that  failed  either  to  denote  objects  or
to  imply  attributes,  found  that  he  had  lumped  together
terms  so  unlike  in  function  as  abstractions  and  Proper
Names.  For  what  could  an  abstraction  be  said  to  denote,2

1  Formal  Logic.

2  The  difficulty  arises  solely  from  the  abstractness  of  the  Formal  standpoint.
For  as  we  saw  (Chap.  II,  §  6)  abstract  terms  in  actual  use  always  have  a  concrete
application,  and  can  thus  be  said  to  denote  whatever  subject  is  under  discussion.


38  FORMAL  LOGIC  CHAP,  m

and  a  Proper  Name  to  imply  ?  Nor,  again,  could  it  be
said  that  a  Proper  Name  of  itself  meant  any  quality  more
than  any  other.

His  critics  thereupon  proceeded  to  identify  lack  of
Connotation  with  lack  of  meaning,  and  to  denounce  Mill.
Now  Proper  Names  are  certainly  not  meaningless.  A
name  like  Publius  Cornelius  Scipio  Africanus  Aemilianus
means  a  whole  chapter  of  Roman  History.  Does  not  a
Proper  Name,  therefore,  mean  the  person  to  whom  it
applies  with  all  his  qualities  ?  (Comprehension).  Does
it  not  suggest  his  qualities  to  those  who  know  him  ?
(Subjective  Intension).

The  disputants  clearly  were  at  cross-purposes.  Mill's
doctrine  was  right  enough  as  regards  the  restricted  sense
of  Connotation,  though  he  did  not  distinguish  it  from  the
Subjective  Intension  and  Comprehension,  which  Proper
Names  of  course  possess.  We  cannot  make  a  com
pendious  selection  of  an  individual's  qualities,  regard  it  as
the  core  of  his  being,  and  call  it  his  essence.  And  even
if  we  could,  this  '  meaning '  would  not  get  attached  to  the
name  itself.  For  the  name  is  detachable,  and  can  be
transferred  to  any  number  of  other  individuals.

Now  it  is  a  peculiarity  of  Proper  Names  that  when
they  are  thus  transferred  from  one  individual  to  another
their  meaning  changes  totally.  A  similar  transfer  of  a
common  term  hardly  seems  to  affect  its  meaning  at  all.
When  '  man '  is  transferred  from  Tom  to  Dick,  a  solid
nucleus  of  common  *  humanity '  in  both  seems  to  survive
the  change.1

1  On  this  objective  fact  fantastic  doctrines  of  '  universals,'  of  abstract  qualities
mystically  'common'  to  all  the  individuals  of  a  kind  [cf.  Chaps.  VII,  §  2,  §  9,
VIII,  §  5],  have  always  been  based  by  philosophers.  But  the  facts  of  pre
dication  form  a  very  slender  basis  for  such  metaphysics.  When  we  called  Tom
and  Dick  both  '  men,'  we  hardly  meant  to  represent  them  as  participating  in  the
identity  of  a  '  universal '  that  somehow  pervaded  all  the  '  cases '  of  its  '  kind. '
We  merely  meant  that,  for  some  passing  purpose,  it  was  convenient  to  ignore
the  differences  between  them  and  to  call  attention  to  the  general  likeness  in  their
appearance  and  behaviour.  The  intrusion  of  metaphysics  into  the  simple  practice
of  predication,  moreover,  begins  to  look  less  edifying  when  we  reflect  that  we
might  have  called  them  '  rascals '  or  '  ruffians,"  and  so  have  foisted  upon  the
universe  an  eternal  universal  of  '  rascality '  or  '  ruffianism. '


CHAPTER IV

THE CATEGORIES

§  I.  Aristotle's  List

THE  Categories  represent  another  ancient,  famous,  and
futile  attempt  to  prescribe  Formal  laws  to  the  activity  of
thinking  and  to  confine  its  operation  within  the  pigeon
holes  of  a  rigid  classification.  They  were  put  into  Logic
by  Aristotle,  and  have  remained  in  because  no  one  has
ventured  to  remove  them.

The  line  of  thought  which  leads  to  their  recognition
proceeds  as  follows.

Since  judgments  can  (if  we  ignore  tenses  *)  be  thrown
into  the  form,  a  subject  is  a  predicate  ('  S  is  P '),  the
attempt  might  be  made  to  classify  all  the  predicates  that
the  copula  *  is '  attaches  to  the  subject.  And  since  the
copula  always  seems  to  predicate  '  being,1  we  can  ask,
What  are  the  sorts  of  Being  we  can  predicate  ?  Hence
the  Categories  were  described  by  Aristotle  as  76^77  ro>z/
oWwi/,  kinds  of  ways  of  saying  *  is.'  Unhappily  the
phrase  proved  ambiguous.  A  classification  of  predicates
seems,  prima  facie  at  least,  a  possible  enterprise  for  Jogic.
But  if  'being'  is  taken  ontologically  as  meaning  real  |
existence,  and  the  Categories  are  allowed  to  become  |
'  kinds  of  existence,'  there  is  initiated  a  profound  and  I

1  This  abstraction  from  distinctions  of  time,  which  renders  thought  logically
timeless  or  'eternal,'  is  one  of  the  most  questionable  of  logical  devices,  and  the
source  of  endless  confusion  and  sophistry.  For  our  actual  thoughts  not  only
occur  at  definite  points  in  the  time-series,  but  usually  are  meant  to  refer  to  such,
and  so  the  abstraction  from  time  is  made  an  excuse  for  abstracting  from  the
actual  meaning.  But  the  subject  is  too  complicated  to  be  discussed  as  yet.

39


r


FORMAL  LOGIC


CHAP.


ineradicable  confusion  between  logic  and  metaphysics,
and  logic  is  forced  into  the  false  position  of  having  to
dogmatize  a  priori  about  the  possibilities  of  real  existence.

The  attempt,  therefore,  to  ascribe  metaphysical  value
to  the  Categories,  to  identify  the  '  is '  of  predication  with
that  of  real  existence,  which  will  meet  us  again  in
discussing  the  question  of  the  existential  value  of  the
Copula  (Chap.  IX,  §  4),  suffices  to  vitiate  the  traditional
doctrine.

The  situation,  however,  is  really  worse.  For  Aristotle,
in  compiling  the  actual  list  of  his  Categories,  seems  to
have  been  guided  neither  by  logical  nor  by  metaphysical
considerations.  His  Categories  embody  rather  the  results
of  reflection  on  the  forms  of  the  Greek  language,  and  are
among  the  best  illustrations  of  the  Formal  logician's  com
mon  assumption  that  the  nature  of  thought  is  faithfully
mirrored  by  its  expression  in  language,  and  that,  therefore,
a  study  of  words  may  conveniently  take  the  place  of  that
of  living  thought.  Now  in  general  this  assumption  is
(roughly)  true  ;  the  forms  of  language  are  expressive  of
the  nature  of  thought  because  they  have  been  moulded
by  it.  A  comparative  study  of  linguistic  forms,  therefore,
would  possibly  yield  a  fairly  complete  list  of  the  needs  of
expression  which  had  become  common  enough  to  have
received  such  embodiment.  But  the  belief  that  a  single
language,  with  all  its  defects  and  idiosyncrasies,  could  pro
vide  a  fixed  and  infallible  guide  to  the  ultimate  nature  of
thinking  and  being,  is  only  surpassed  in  naivete  by  the
tacit  assumption  of  every  metaphysician  that  his  system
expresses  the  absolute,  universal,  and  final  truth  about  the
universe.

In  justice  to  Aristotle's  doctrine  of  the  Categories,
however,  it  should  be  admitted  that  the  assumption  of
finality  is  here  less  obtrusive  than  elsewhere  in  his  logical
system.  He  never  seems  to  claim  exhaustiveness  for  his
list  of  Categories,  and  rarely  troubles  to  enumerate  them
to  the  maximum  number  of  ten.  Moreover,  he  consents
himself  to  recognize  differences  in  their  value  and  import
ance.  The  first,  Substance  (ova-la),  overshadows  the  rest.


IV


THE  CATEGORIES  41


Its  genesis  is  to  be  sought  in  the  noun  substantive.  The
next  three,  Quantity  (woow),  Quality  (TTOLOV),  and  Relation
(777)09  TL),  are  clearly  expressive  of  adjectives.  The  fifth
and  sixth  represent  adverbs  of  Place  (TTOV)  and  Time
(Trore).  The  last  four  are  attempts  to  formulate  the
logical  functions  of  the  verb,  which  are  suggested  by  the
general  distinction  of  the  active  and  passive  voice,  viz.
Activity  (Troielv)  and  Passivity  (7racr^en>),  and  by  peculiar
ities  of  Greek  usage,  viz.  Situation  (KeldOai)  and  State


§  2.  A  general  Objection  to  the  Notion  of  Categories

The  logical  value  of  this  classification  is  open  to  much
dispute.

(i)  First  of  all,  and  as  a  matter  of  principle,  it  must
be  denied  that  the  problem  of  the  Categories,  as  conceived
by  Formal  Logic,  is  scientifically  soluble  at  all.  For  on
reflection  it  must  occur  to  us  that  .there  must  be.  as.  many
ways  of  predicating,  of  attaching  a  predicate  to  a  subject,
as  there  are  distinct  problems  in  the  sciences.  For  though
the  sciences  (more  or  less)  use  the  common  forms  of
speech,  because  they  have  to,  yet  they  always  mean  them
in  the  senses  appropriate  to  their  own  subject-matter.
For  example,  a  geometer  may  say,  '  These  lines  are
parallel/  and  a  psychologist  or  teacher  of  perspective  may
reply,  '  No,  they  are  convergent  '  ;  an  artist,  *  Yonder
mountain  is  blue,'  and  a  geologist,  '  No,  it  is  basalt  '  ;  J
'  a  theologian,  '  The  law  of  life  is  self-sacrifice/  and
an  economist,  *  No,  it  is  the  production  of  wealth  '  ;  a
chemist,  '  Man  is  mostly  water  '  ;  a  moralist,  '  No,  he
is  mostly  wicked.'  But  these  contradictions  are  only
apparent,  because  each  of  these  experts  is  speaking
from  his  own  point  of  view,  and  they  are  not  using  the
word  'is'  in  the  same  sense.  When  we  understand  the

1  If  an  actual  example  is  preferred,  we  may  take  one  from  the  opening  of
W.  S.  Symonds*  Old  Stones.  "  «  What  may  these  hills  be,  sir  ?  '  said  a  gentleman
one  day  as  the  train  was  running  rapidly  along  between  Worcester  and  Chelten
ham.  I  replied,  '  Oh,  they  are  Plutonic  rocks/  "  to  the  dismay  of  the  questioner,
who  wanted  the  answer  '  the  Malvern  Hills  '  i


42  FORMAL  LOGIC  CHAP.

meaning  in  its  proper  context  and  with  reference  to  its
peculiar  subject-matter,  the  assertions  become  compatible.
Unless,  therefore,  the  logician  can  claim  to  understand  all
the  scientific  problems  there  are  or  have  been  or  ever  will  be,
he  cannot  compile  an  exhaustive  list  of  the  categories  which
predicate  '  being '  of  a  subject.  But  from  claiming  such
omniscience  he  is  debarred,  not  only  by  its  absurdity,  but
also  by  his  own  initial  disclaimer  of '  material '  knowledge.
And  even  if  neither  candour  nor  consistency  availed  to
check  him,  his  ambition  would  be  baffled  by  the  facts  that
new  problems,  needing  new  '  categories/  may  arise  or  be
devised,  and  that  certain  problems  are  classifiable  at  will
in  various  categories.  For  example,  the  nature  of  life
may  be  treated  physically,  biologically,  psychologically,
ethically,  metaphysically,  poetically,  according  as  we
please.  Hence  no  table  of  Categories  could  possibly  do
more  than  provide  a  rough  guide  to  the  probable  meaning
of  any  predication.

§  3. Special  Objections  to  Aristotle's  List

(2)  Many  difficulties  of  detail  arise  in  connexion  with
Aristotle's  list  of  Categories.

(a)  The  first  of  these  concerns  the  position  of  Sub
stance.  Is  the  (logical)  subject  to  be  included  in  the  list
of  Categories  ?  Clearly  it  ought  not  to  be ;  for  it  is  that
which  the  predication  is  about.  If,  therefore,  the  list  is
taken  logically  as  a  classification  of  predicates,  the  subject
is  not  a  Substance.  But  if  the  Categories  are  c  kinds  of
being '  (in  the  metaphysical  sense  of  76^77  TWV  6Wo>i>),  the
subjects  of  our  predicates  cannot  be  excluded  from  the
list  of  existences.  Indeed  they  generally  are  substances
par  excellence,  the  ultimate  realities  we  are  trying  to  know.

So  into  the  list  they  have  gone,  producing  the  distinc
tion  between  first  and  second  '  substances '  (yrp&Tat,  and
Bevrepai,  overlap  i.e.  concrete  things  and  their  attributes.
It  was  the  more  necessary  to  include  them,  because  the
word  which  marks  the  subject  of  one  predication  so  often
and  so  easily  becomes  the  predicate  in  the  next,  and  so


iv  THE  CATEGORIES  43

upsets  the  belief  in  any  ultimate  difference  of  logical
nature  between  subject  and  predicate.1  Nevertheless
Aristotle  held  that  '  first  substances/  i.e.  concrete  things,
were  not  properly  to  be  used  as  predicates,  and  later
philosophers  have  found  more  convincing  examples  of
subjects  which  could  never  be  predicates  than  any  he
adduced.  Aristotle,  for  example,  had  not  yet  discovered
the  strange  case  of  the  Self  or  '  I '  which  appears  to  be  a
subject  ex  officio.  In  general  his  doctrine  is  near  enough
to  linguistic  usage,  though  the  existence  of  phrases  like
'  It  is  I '  forces  the  logician  to  explain  that  here  the  *  I '  is
not  in  thought  the  true  predicate.  But  even  in  thought
it  is  not  clear  that  the  Self  cannot  be  conceived  as  a
predicate,  unless  all  monistic  philosophies  are  inconceiv
able  ;  for  they  always  seem  to  think  of  all  selves  as  pre
dicates  of  the  One.  Similarly  in  materialisms  they  are
all  thought  of  as  a  function  of  matter.  What  is  clear,  how
ever,  is  that  the  category  of  Substance  easily  gets  involved
in  very  abstruse  questions  of  metaphysics.

(£)  The  rest  of  the  list  exhibits  defects  both  of  re
dundance  and  of  omission.  It  is  redundant,  because  it  is
perfectly  feasible  to  regard  all  the  other  categories  as
forms  of  Relation  :  it  is  defective,  because  the  enumeration
of  relations  is  very  incomplete  and  the  mention  of  those
selected  seems  arbitrary.  It  is  true,  indeed,  that  theoretic
ally  the  number  of  relations  is  infinite,  seeing  that  the
nature  of  a  relation  varies  with  the  peculiarity  of  its  terms
(cf.  §  2).  But  even  if  we  confine  ourselves  to  a  practically
convenient  amount  of  distinction,  why  should  many
obvious  distinctions  which  are  in  common  use  obtain  no
place  in  the  list  ?  There  is  no  apparent  reason  on  Formal
principles  why,  e.g.t  the  Category  of  Quality  should  not
have  been  subdivided  into  the  various  qualities  of  sensa-

1  Of  course  in  any  actual  predication  the  '  second  substance '  must  be  either
subject  or  predicate,  and  cannot  be  both.  It  is  only  when  the  actual  use  is
abstracted  from  that  its  logical  position  becomes  ambiguous.  But,  as  usual,  we
are  then  no  longer  dealing  with  actual  meanings,  but  only  with  verbal  symbols
for  them.  When  a  question  is  raised  whether  Pithecanthropus  erectus\va.s  a  man,
'  man  '  is  a  predicate  in  a  definite  scientific  context ;  when  the  question  is  whether
man  is  mortal  it  is  as  definitely  a  subject  in  another  sort  of  scientific  context  :  but
the  identity  of  these  two  uses  is  only  verbal.


44  FORMAL  LOGIC  CHAP,  iv

tion,  colour,  sound,  etc.,  or  why  no  categories  should  be
provided  for  the  conceptions  of  values  and  ends,  or  for  the
distinction  of  persons  and  things.  Lastly  it  should  be
observed  that  the  categories  of  Activity  and  Passivity
embody  a  scientific  blunder.  It  is  true  that  this  dis
tinction  demands  recognition  on  the  plane  of  ordinary
life  and  speech.  It  is  real  for  immediate  experience,
because  to  do  a  thing  and  to  have  it  done  to  one  feel
different.  But  physics  has  long  taught  us  that  neither
activity  nor  passivity  exist  by  themselves,  and  that  all
the  apparent  cases  of  either  really  contain  both,  and  result
from  an  interaction.  Hence  a  category  of  Interaction  (or
*  Reciprocity ')  should  either  have  been  added  to  the  list
or  substituted  for  '  Activity  '  and  '  Passivity.' *

1  The  twelve  Categories  of  Kant  are  logically  superior  to  Aristotle's  in  the
important  respect  that  they  are  less  clogged  with  metaphysics  and  refer  more
definitely  to  the  logical  process  of  knowing.  But  they  are  open  to  similar
objections.  Schopenhauer  rightly  said  of  them  that  they  could  all  be  reduced  to
Substance  and  Causality  ;  and  even  then  it  should  be  noted  that  substance  is  not
knowable  without  causality.  Moreover,  the  very  fact  which  makes  Kant  proudest
of  his  list,  viz.  the  systematic  deduction  of  the  Categories  from  the  forms  of
Judgment,  really  suffices  to  ensure  their  condemnation  by  a  critic  of  Formal  Logic.
They  can  no  more  touch  real  truth  than  it.


CHAPTER V

THE PREDICABLES

§  I. Their  Meaning

THE  'Five  Words'  in  the  list  entitled  the  Predicables
contain  distinctions  of  terms  which  the  student  of  Formal
Logic  often  finds  it  hard  to  differentiate  from  those  of  the
Categories.  It  would  appear,  however,  that  the  problem
of  which  the  Predicables  are  given  as  the  solution  is  that
of  classifying  predicates,  not  as  they  are  in  themselves
'  out  of  syntax  'or  as  '  kinds  of  being,'  but  as  they  are
in  the  judgment — or  rather  in  the  form  thereof.  They
should  therefore  be  less  abstract  than  the  Categories  and
nearer  the  actual  judgment.  But  in  practice  they  have
been  so  adapted  and  sacrificed  to  the  needs  of  a  particular
theory  of  Definition  and,  prospectively,  of  Proof,  that  the
subject  has  become  one  of  the  most  intricate  chapters  in
the  whole  of  Formal  Logic.  Moreover,  it  has  been  com
plicated  by  the  fact  that  whereas  the  theory  of  the
Predicables  originally  rested  on  and  led  up  to  a  peculiar
theory  of  knowing  which  has  been  radically  impugned,
and  (in  the  writer's  opinion)  definitively  refuted,  by  the
procedure  of  modern  science,  the  growing  perception  of
this  fact  has  never  been  allowed  to  lead  to  a  radical
reform  of  the  Predicables.

§  2. Their  Metaphysical  Basis

The theory of knowledge assumed in the original
account  of  the  Predicables  by  Aristotle  may  be  briefly

45


46  FORMAL  LOGIC  CHAP.

stated  as  follows,  (i)  Scientific  knowledge,  in  the  strict
sense  of  the  term,  is  not  about  individuals,  but  about
kinds.1  (2)  Kinds  are  not  Concepts,  not  mere  devices  of
human  thinking,  but  Universals,  real  entities  eternally
fixed  in  the  order  of  nature.  (3)  Man  already  knows  (by
intuition,  '  reminiscence/  and,  perhaps,  experience)  what
these  kinds  are,  and  has  laid  down  his  knowledge  in
language,  which  therefore  may  safely  be  appealed  to  for
the  decision  of  questions  about  the  definition  and  nature
of  things.  (4)  Science  therefore  may  start  from  the  name
of  such  a  kind,  technically  called  a  Species,  and  interrogate
language  about  it.

§  3. The  Five  Questions  about  a  *  Kind  '

Five  questions  may  be  asked  about  it.  (a)  First  of
all,  What  is  it  ?  What  is  its  Essence,  that  which  it  most
truly  is,  that  which  makes  it  what  it  is  ?  The  answer  is
given  in  the  Definition  of  the  kind,  which  is  (or  should  be)
a  statement  of  its  Essence.2  (b)  How  is  it  related  to
other  such  kinds  in  the  fixed  order  of  nature  ?  And,
particularly,  to  the  kind  immediately  above  it,  the
proximate  Genus  which  includes  it  ?  (c)  How  is  it
distinguished  from  the  other  kinds  in  the  genus  ?
Technically,  what  is  its  Specific  Difference?  (d)  What
are  the  permanent  qualities  which  are  characteristic  of
and  peculiar  to  it,  and  essential  to  its  remaining  what  it
is  ?  These  will  constitute  its  Properties  and  will  be
deducible  from  its  Definition,  as  e.g.  the  Properties  of
geometrical  figures  are  from  Euclid's  definitions.  Thus
to  have  three  angles  equal  is  a  Property  of  equilateral
triangles,  without  being  part  of  its  Definition.  (e)
Lastly,  kinds  exhibit  qualities  or  modes  of  behaviour
which  seem  unconnected  with  their  Essence,  and  the
reason  for  these  we  do  not  fully  understand.  But  our

1  This  assumption  stands  out  much  more  clearly  in  Plato  than  in  Aristotle,  in
whom  there  seems  to  be  a  discrepancy  between  logical  and  metaphysical  theory.
His  logical  position  seems  to  involve  the  above  assumption,  but  he  nevertheless
holds  that  individuals  are  metaphysically  real  and  therefore  the  ultimate  subjects
of  predication. Cf.  his  distinction  of  Trpwrcu  and  Seirrepcu  ovaiat.  (Chap.  IV,  §  3),

2  For  this  see  Chap.  VI.


v  THE  PREDICABLES  47

classification  provides  for  them  the  rubric  of  Accident.
Whatever  cannot  be  demonstrated  by  being  deduced
from  the  Essence  is  therefore  an  Accident.  But  true
science  scorns  accidents.  They  vary  too  much,  they
come  and  go,  and  things  may  have  them  or  not  as  may
chance  ;  they  are  therefore  *  contingent '  and  science  aims
at  the  necessary.  Things  may  do  without  them  without
losing  caste  and  ceasing  to  be  themselves,  whereas  to  lose
its  Essence  would  be  a  thing's  annihilation.

So  every  object  of  thought  seems  to  be  satisfactorily
provided  for.  Whatever  is  predicated  of  a  Species  must
be  either  its  Definition,  Genus,  Difference,  or  one  of  its
Properties  or  Accidents.  Theoretically  its  place  in  the
universe  is  fixed,  and  it  is  knowable  throughout,  even
though  the  rubric  of  Accident  looks  remarkably  like  a
residuum  or  rubbish-heap,  suggestive  of  the  well-known
item  *  sundries '  in  making  up  accounts.  It  is  a  simple
corollary  from  this  classification  that  the  right  Definition
of  a  Species  is  by  stating  its  Genus  and  its  Difference,
and  an  obvious  observation  that  the  whole  doctrine
(which  in  its  essentials  goes  back  to  Plato)  is  based  on
reflection  on  the  nature  of  the  mathematical  sciences  as
they  then  appeared  to  the  philosophic  eye.

§  4. The  Difficulty  about  the  Individual

The  whole  doctrine  of  the  Predicables  is  constructed
to  deal  with  kinds,  which  alone  were  predicable  and
knowable  in  Plato's  philosophy,  from  which  his  great
pupil  Aristotle  could  never  quite  emancipate  himself.
But  after  all,  on  the  common-sense  level  of  life  at
least,  there  are  other  things  in  the  world.  There  are
individuals,  and  for  dealing  logically  with  these  the  Pre
dicables  provided  no  apparatus.  They  were  a  despic
able  horde  of  pariahs  seething  lawlessly  beyond  the
limits  of  the  scheme.  Those  limits  were  clearly  marked.
The  applicability  of  the  Predicables  extended  from  the
Summum  Genus  above,  the  highest  all-inclusive  class
which  could  no  longer  be  defined  per  genus  et  differ entiam,


48  FORMAL  LOGIC


CHAP.


because  there  was  no  higher  class  of  which  it  could  form
a  species,  to  the  Infima  Species,  the  lowest  class  which
could  be  subdivided  only  into  individuals.  And  good
reasons  were  given  for  drawing  this  line  also.  For  the
nature  of  the  individual  cannot  be  defined.  The  indi
vidual  has,  as  such,  no  Essence.  All  his  qualities  and
behaviours  seem  equally  necessary  to  his  being,  and  no
essential  extract  can  be  made.  His  uniqueness  is  in
exhaustible  and  the  list  of  his  qualities  endless.  Hence
the  distinction  between  Property  and  Accident  becomes
unmeaning.  Nor,  again,  can  the  differences  between  one
individual  and  another  of  the  same  kind  be  stated  in  a
neat  and  handy  formula  ;  they  are  infinite,  and  so  there
is  no  Difference.  Science,  therefore,  stops  short  of  the
individual.  It  must  assume  either  that  he  is  as  such
unknowable,  or  that  for  scientific  purposes  the  individuals
of  a  Species  may  be  taken  as  equivalent.  To  extend  the
Predicables  to  him  is,  therefore,  wrong  in  principle.

§  5. The  Difficulties  about  Accident

Nevertheless  this  extension  was  attempted,  at  least  as
early  as  the  third  century  A.D.  (by  Porphyry),  and  that  not
only  for  practical  reasons.  It  looks  like  a  gap  in  logical
doctrine,  if  it  has  nothing  to  say  as  to  how  to  predicate
about  individuals ;  and  after  all  Predicables  are  un
doubtedly  asserted  of  individuals.

Now  if  the  Predicables  are  extended  to  individuals,
there  is  no  reason  why  their  species  should  not  be
predicable  of  them.  An  infima  species  like,  e.g.,  '  man '
therefore  ceases  to  be  the  subject  of  predication  and
becomes  predicable  of  individual  men.  Species  therefore
becomes  a  Predicable,  while  Definition,  being  already
adequately  represented  in  the  list  by  Genus  and  Differ
ence,  which  together  constitute  it,  can  be  relegated  to  a
separate  chapter.

On  the  other  hand,  a  distinction  can  be  made  among
the  individual's  qualities  which  is  analogous  to  that
between  Properties  and  Accidents  in  the  case  of  Species.


v  THE  PREDICABLES  49

For  though  they  are  logically  all  alike  Accidents,  yet  there
are  some  qualities  of  an  individual  which  he  cannot  alter,
e.g.  his  race  or  the  colour  of  his  eyes.  These  then  are
Inseparable  Accidents,  as  contrasted  with  Separable  Acci
dents,  like  the  state  of  his  temper,  or  the  fact  that  he  is
wearing  a  particular  suit  of  clothes.  The  lines,  however,
both  between  Separable  Accidents  and  Inseparable,  and
between  the  latter  and  Properties,  become  hard  to  draw.
The  Inseparable  Accident  is  supposed  to  differ  from  the
Property  in  that  it  could  be  conceived  to  be  otherwise
without  destroying  the  identity  of  the  subject.  But  is
this  really  so  ?  An  Englishman  may  speculate  as  to
whether  he  would  have  burnt  his  mother  at  his  father's
funeral  if  he  had  been  born  a  Hindu,  but  there  would
hardly  be  enough  identity  between  his  two  lives  to  give
meaning  to  the  question.  The  Inseparable  Accident
tends  to  take  the  position  of  a  Property,  of  which  the
connexion  with  the  Definition  has  not  yet  been  made
out,  but  is  still  a  scientific  hope.  Again,  even  the  Separ
able  Accidents  seem  to  be  expressions  of  more  permanent
habits.  A  man's  taste  in  clothes  is  what  ultimately
determines  what  he  wears  at  any  time,  and  his  general
temper  decides  whether  any  particular  incident  pleases  or
annoys  him.

Lastly,  it  is  clear  that  a  consistent  determinist  ought
to  have  difficulty  in  accepting  all  these  distinctions.  He
cannot  believe  that  any  event  could  be  otherwise  than  it
is,  and  must  disbelieve  in  the  reality  of  the  '  contingent.'
Whatever  happens  must  be  the  necessary  consequence  of
its  antecedents.  Hence  nothing  can  be  Accident,  and  if
he  knew  enough  everything  could  be  deduced.  His
only  resource,  therefore,  is  to  render  the  distinction  of
Property  and  Accident  subjective,  and  to  reduce  it  to  a
defect  in  our  knowledge.  But  if  all  Accidents  are  really
Properties,  not  only  is  the  integrity  of  the  five  Predicables
impaired,  but  the  whole  doctrine  splits  up  into  two,  and
the  objective  or  metaphysical  view,  which  denies  the
distinction,  grows  incompatible  with  the  logical  view,
which  retains  it  as  merely  subjective.  This  conflict  is

E


50  FORMAL  LOGIC  CHAP.

further  exacerbated  by  the  fact  that  it  does  not  merely
arise  for  the  metaphysical  determinist.  For  indeter-
minists  also  would  agree  that,  as  a  matter  of  working
assumption,  all  science  assumes  that  events  are  deter
mined,1  and  hence  the  denial  of  accident  and  contingency
becomes  a  postulate  of  scientific  logic.

§  6. The  Meaninglessness  of  the  Inapplicable

It  would  seem,  then,  that  the  doctrine  of  the  Predicables
goes  all  to  pieces  if  it  is  applied  to  individuals.  But  can
it  preserve  itself  by  disclaiming  such  application  ?  This
raises  the  question  whether  the  first  assumption  of  its
underlying  theory  of  knowledge  is  true  in  point  of  fact.
Is  the  individual  a  scientifically  negligible  factor  in  the
universe  ?

The  belief  that  this  is  so  is  one  of  the  oldest  and  most
obstinate  of  philosophic  prejudices,  and  it  is  exceedingly
difficult  to  get  philosophers  to  see  that  it  is  not  borne  out
by  the  practice  of  the  sciences.  Yet,  in  point  of  fact,
the  '  laws/  *  kinds,'  and  '  universals '  are  always  intended
to  be  used,  i.e.  to  be  applied  to  the  facts,  and  if  they  fail
persistently  to  function  so,  they  have  to  be  superseded  by
others.  For  the  truth  is  that  they  are  the  means  by  which
we  forecast,  with  ever-growing  precision,  the  unique  course
of  events,  adjust  our  actions  to  it,  and  are  enabled  to
control  it.  What  science  demands,  therefore,  is  power
over  the  particular  case,  and  what  its  recognition  of
inexhaustible  individuality  means  is  that  no  limits  can
be  assumed  to  the  growth  of  this  power,  or  set  to  its  own
progress.

To  realize  that  there  can  be  no  sense  in  calling  true
a  law  that  is  inapplicable  to  the  individual  case,  we  have
merely  to  suppose  a  discrepancy  between  fact  and  theory,
to  imagine  on  the  one  hand  a  perfectly  coherent  and
symmetrical  system  of  laws,  and  on  the  other  a  world
to  which  that  system  was  wholly  irrelevant,  in  which
things  systematically  happened  otherwise  than  calculated.

1  Cf.  Studies  in  Humanism,  chap,  xviii,  §  4.


v  THE  PRED1CABLES  51

Surely  no  sane  man  would  call  such  '  science '  true  ?  He
might  call  it  the  Code  of  Fairyland,  and  admire  its  beauty
and  formal  perfection,  but  he  would  have  to  devise  another
system  for  the  mundane  purpose  of  guiding  his  expecta
tions.  And  it  would  be  to  this  latter  that  he  would  reserve
the  title  of  '  true.'

Unfortunately  the  abstraction  of  its  standpoint  conceals
from  Formal  Logic  the  failure  of  its  doctrine.  Its  habit
of  abstracting  from  actual  meaning  frequently  beguiles
it  into  abstracting  from  meaning  altogether,  and  then
supposing  that  it  has  reached  the  standpoint  of  the
*  ideal.'  It  has  never  grasped  the  fact  that  the  meaning
of  a  doctrine  depends  on  its  application,  and  that  if,  to
evade  objections,  it  is  so  interpreted  as  to  become  in
applicable,  it  simply  becomes  unmeaning.  For  it  then
escapes  the  only  test  by  which  its  truth  could  be  dis
criminated  from  its  falsity,  and  its  real  validity  established.
A  science  which  was  only  about  kinds  which  were  never
exemplified  by  facts  would  be  empty — a  mere  vagary  of
the  imagination.  It  would  float  in  the  ether  of  fancy
and  never  touch  solid  earth.  If,  therefore,  the  only  way
of  making  the  doctrine  of  Predicables  consistent  is  to
disclaim  application  to  the  particular  case,  it  is  disclaim
ing  not  only  all  usefulness  but  also  all  real  meaning.

Thus  the  principles  which  are  really  at  stake  in  the
apparently  technical  dispute  whether  the  theory  of
Predicables  extends  to  individuals,  are  whether  Logic  is
bound  to  provide  a  theory  which  is  applicable  to  the
facts  of  scientific  procedure,  and  whether  a  doctrine  can  i
intelligibly  be  called  true  when  every  test  of  its  truth  or
falsity  is  ruled  out  of  order.  Those  who  think  it  can
may  defend  themselves  by  the  contention  that  to  claim
truth  is  enough,  and  that  this  formal  claim  is  all  Logic
is  concerned  with.  But  such  at  any  rate  was  not  the
original  claim  of  the  Predicables.  They  laid  claim  to
real  validity  and  an  important  application  to  the  know
ledge  of  reality.  Indeed  it  is  upon  this  claim  that  a
further  serious  objection  to  the  doctrine  must  be  based.


52  FORMAL  LOGIC  CHAP.

§  7. The  Logical  and  Metaphysical  Aspects  of  the
Theory  of  Predicables

Just  as  the  traditional  doctrine  of  the  Categories  was
found  to  involve  a  confusion  between  the  logical  problem
of  classifying  the  various  senses  of  c  is '  used  in  scientific
inquiries,  and  the  ontological  problem  of  classifying  the
various  relations  of  qualities  to  the  substance  which
possesses  them,  a  confusion  typically  expressed  in  the
term  *  attribute/  so  the  theory  of  the  Predicables  fuses
together  two  questions  which  can  only  be  profitably
discussed  apart.  The  question  of  the  logical  nature  of
our  procedure  in  predicating  should  be  kept  distinct  from
the  ontological  problem  of  why  our  predications  work.
For  though  there  is,  of  course,  a  connexion  between  them,
and  a  complete  theory  of  knowledge  would  seek  to  answer
both,  no  clear  understanding  of  either  problem  can  be
reached  if  they  are  confused  together.

The  theory  of  Predicables  is  initially  concerned  with
a  logical  problem.  It  is  a  fact  that  we  do  in  practice
handle  the  objects  we  think  about  by  classifying  them
in  systems  of  genera  and  species,  by  defining  them,  by
analysing  their  behaviour,  and  by  marking  the  relative
importances  of  the  different  modes  of  their  behaviour.
It  is  true  also  that  we  may  be  said  to  effect  these  opera
tions  by  the  instruments  of  thought  called  '  concepts.'
And  it  is  an  obvious  condition  of  our  persistence  in  this
practice  that  (on  the  whole  and  on  the  average)  our
procedure  should  be  successful.  Our  predications  must
work  if  they  are  to  continue.  They  are,  therefore,  held
to  be  true  and  applicable  to  reality.

But  this  does  not  pledge  us  to  the  belief  either  that
all  the  manipulations  to  which  we  find  it  convenient  to
subject  our  concepts  must  have  their  counterpart  in  reality,
or  even  that  they  should  in  any  way  aim  at  copying  the
inner  structure  of  reality.  We  are  free,  then,  to  operate
at  will,  to  feign  whatever  we  need,  on  condition  that  our
results  admit  of  successful  application.  We  may  begin
with  crude  guesses  and  obvious  fictions,  and  never  to  the


v  THE  PREDICABLES  53

end  achieve  anything  else  than  a  translation  of  the  ways
of  the  world  into  an  order  of  our  thought  which  grows
more  and  more  adequate  to  our  purposes.  It  is  not
necessary,  therefore,  that  to  every  distinction  of  thought  \/
there  must  be  assigned  an  objective  validity.1  The
primary  purpose  of  distinctions  is  to  facilitate  our  think
ing,  and  this  may  be  the  proper  function  of  those  also
which  are  enshrined  in  the  list  of  the  Predicables.

The  Predicables,  then,  may  be  taken  in  a  purely  logical
sense,  and  without  reference  to  their  alleged  ontological
significance.  If  this  is  done,  their  artificial  rigidity  will
disappear.  We  shall  naturally  assert  the  right  of  classify
ing  variously  for  various  purposes,  and  of  recognizing  such
genera  and  species  as  our  immediate  purpose  requires.
We  shall  stop  making  species  wherever  we  are  not
interested  to  distinguish  further,  without  imagining  that
every  inquirer  will  hereafter  have  to  stop  at  just  that
point.  Similarly  we  shall  be  able  to  define  variously,
and  to  recognize  as  a  thing's  Essence  and  relevant
Difference,  whatever  happen  to  be  its  most  important
aspects.  That  we  can  predicate  about  individuals  will
be  obvious  ;  for  that  is  what  the  whole  logical  apparatus
is  wanted  for.  Above  all,  we  shall  not  need  to  regard
species  as  more  than  convenient  groupings  of  individuals,
and  can  regard  every  individual  as  potentially  a  species.
The  distinction,  moreover,  between  Property  and  Accident
will  become  a  relative  one.  A  Property  will  mean  a
quality  or  mode  of  behaviour  which  is  relevant  to  a
scientific  interest ;  an  Accident,  one  that  is  judged  to  be
unimportant,  irrelevant,  and  therefore  '  unessential.  It
will  no  longer  seem  a  paradox  that  to  a  moralist  the
weight  of  the  good  man  should  be  as  accidental  as  it  is
essential  to  a  transportation  company.  Thus  this  unstiffen-
ing  of  the  doctrine,  by  relieving  it  of  the  claim  to  absolute
ness,  and  rendering  it  relative  to  purpose  throughout,  will
give  it  the  flexibility  which  is  needed  for  scientific  purposes.

On  the  other  hand,  the  metaphysical  validity  of  our

1  I.e.  it  all  depends  on  the  sense  given  to  'objective.'  If  it  means  'copying
reality '  the  remark  holds,  though  our  distinctions  must  always  be  '  applicable  to
reality. '


54  FORMAL  LOGIC


CHAP.


procedure  will  cease  to  seem  a  burning  question. It  will
cease  to  seem  an  urgent  intellectual  need  to  decide  whether
*  Being '  or  *  Object  of  Thought '  is  the  Summum  Genus,
whether  Man  or  Englishman  is  the  Infima  Species. We
shall  puzzle  no  longer  over  the  fact  that  the  Definition  of
man as a rational animal accounts  for so little of  his
conduct, and shall venture upon alternative definitions,
even in mathematics. Doubts will assail even the
doctrine  of  Essence. How,  it  will  be  asked,  is  any  one
to  know  what  it  is  that  makes  a  thing  what  it  is  ? How
know  that  there  is  such  a  thing  at  all  ? Is  not  all  we
know  of  a  thing  the  way  it  behaves  ? Is  its  '  substance '
more  than  the  sum  of  its  behaviours  ? Is  not  the  notion
of  a  *  substratum  '  which  underlies  them  as  bad  a  metaphor,
and  as  impenetrable  a  mystery,  as  that  of  an  essential
core  ? Why,  then,  should  we  not  content  ourselves  with
selecting  the  most  striking  and  important  of  its  behaviours
(  as  the  true  essence,  and  recognize  that  it  varies  with  the
nature  of  our  interest  ? To  the  theologian  the  essence  of
man  is  -that  fee^Tias  a  soul,  to  the  doctor  that  he  has  a
body,  to  the  cook  that  he  has  a  stomach,  all  of  which  are
liable  to  get  out  of  order. From  different  points  of  view
it  is  equally  essential  to  man's  existence  that  he  should
make  money,  and  that  he  should  make  love. But  why
obscure these facts  by  metaphysics? Lastly,  inasmuch
as  Property  follows  from  Essence,  either  demonstratively
as  consequence  from  ground,  or  in  point  of  fact  as  effect
from  cause,1  and  as  every  actual behaviour  may  become
significant  and  essential  for  some  inquiry,  it  is  clear  that
no  metaphysical  significance  attaches  to  the  distinction  of
Property  and  Accident.

We  conclude,  therefore,  that  the  second  presupposition
of  the  Formal  theory  of  Predicables  (cf.  §  2)  is  false.
The  Predicables  are  primarily  logical,  and  kinds  are
Concepts  which  may  or  may  not  have  (more  or  less)
ontological  validity,  i.e.  application.  Logic  need  not
decide  this  metaphysical  question.

1  This  concession  to  actual  scientific  procedure  has  now  crept  into  most  state
ments  of  the  doctrine  of  Predicables.


v  THE  PREDICABLES  55

There  remains,  however,  the  question  why  our  Concepts
work.  This  fact  has  been  considered  very  remarkable,
and  it  is  alleged  that  the  only  conceivable  explanation
of  it  is  that  in  point  of  fact  they  are  more  than  Concepts.
They  are  *  Universals/  and  Universals  are  not  mere
thoughts  but  things,  real  entities  more  real  (though
different  in  nature)  than  the  objects  of  perception.  Or
else,  it  may  be,  things  are  thoughts,  the  products  of  some
vaster  mind  confusedly  apprehended  by  us.  In  either
case  our  Concepts  work,  because  they  are  identical  in
nature  with  the  things  they  know.

This  explanation  evidently  plunges  very  deep,  like
a  harpooned  whale,  and  cannot  be  pursued  by  us  into
the  murky  depths  of  metaphysics.  Perhaps  it  might  be
brought  back  to  the  light  of  day  by  the  reminder  that  false
Concepts  as  well  as  true  have  to  be  accounted  for  as
objectively  existent  universals,  and  that  every  error  that
has  ever  been  asserted  must  thereby  make  good  its
claim  to  subsist  eternally  in  the  realm  of  ontological
reality.  But  for  our  present  purposes  it  will  probably
suffice  to  deny  that  no  alternative  explanation  of  the
facts  is  feasible.  There  is  in  existence  a  solution  of  the
mystery  which  is  as  simple  and  unromantic  as  that  of
the  mystery  George  III  could  never  fathom,  viz.  how
the  apple  got  inside  the  dumpling.  Our  Concepts  work
and  are  applicable  to  reality,  because  if  they  did  not
work  we  should  not  use  Concepts,  or  at  least  should
not  use  those  we  do.  Besides,  they  never  work  so  per
fectly  that  science  need  despair  of  improving  them.  In
practice  it  is  continually  improving  them.

§  8.  Darwin  v.  Formal  Logic

The  practice  of  Science,  therefore,  conclusively  refutes]
the metaphysical interpretation of  the Predicables. Itj
handles  them  with  the  utmost  freedom,  and  will  recognize
no  finality  about  them. The  contrast  between  the  original
theory  about  the  Predicables  and  their  actual  use  is  glaring.

But it is possible that logicians would never have


56  FORMAL  LOGIC


CHAP.


discovered  it,  if  a  crucial  case  had  not  arisen  to  emphasize
the  conflict.  Biological  science,  in  order  to  satisfy  its
need  of  arranging  its  subject-matter,  had  long  divided
living  beings  into  species,  genera,  families,  orders,  etc.
In  general  agreement  with  the  established  logic,  it  had
regarded  this  ordering  as  objective  and  rigid.  Then
came  Darwin  and  revolutionized  biology  by  discrediting
the  belief  in  the  fixity  of  species.

But  Darwin  was  probably  unaware  that  he  was
also  initiating  an  even  greater  upheaval  in  logic.  For
Darwinism  carries  with  it  a  denial  of  the  ontological
validity  of  the  notion  of  species,  and  proves  it  to  be
only  a  subjective  convenience — a  convenience  signally
attested  by  the  way  in  which  biologists  continue  to
distinguish  species,  although  they  can  no  longer  think
of  them  as  each  a  fixed  and  eternal  metaphysical  entity
pervading  its  individual  members  and  unaffected  by
their  fortunes.  Darwin  conclusively  showed  it  to  be
conceivable  that  one  species  might  develop  into  another
by  the  accumulation  of  individual  differences  under  natural
selection.  Thus  a  species  is  really  nothing  but  a
temporary  grouping  of  individuals,  all  of  whom  are
indefinitely  variable  and  capable  of  developing  in  various
directions.  That  they  form  a  group  at  all  (in  so  far
as  they  do — for  the  distinctions  between  '  species/  '  sub
species/  '  variety '  and  '  race/  are  fluid  and  arbitrary)  is
partly  a  matter  of  convenience,  partly  an  accident.  For
we  happen  to  snapshot  them  in  that  stage  of  their  racial
development  at  which  they  may  conveniently  be  grouped
together.  But  it  is  a  mistake  on  this  account  to  regard
them  as  stereotyped.  If  the  course  of  events  could  be
reversed  before  our  eyes,  and  all  the  past  members  of
a  species  could  be  recalled  to  life,  we  should  watch  each
species  gradually  fusing  with  its  congeners,  the  genera
coalescing  with  their  families,  individuals  exhibiting  the
qualities  of  what  have  since  become  divergent  kinds,  and
at  last  learn  the  lesson  that  all  the  various  forms  of  life
have  had  a  common  ancestry,  and  are  never  realized
except  in  individuals.


v  THE  PREDICABLES  57

Species,  therefore,  ceases  to  exist  as  an  ontological
Reality.  The  individual  alone  is  real.  He  alone  bears
^tHe"  Burden  of  the  whole  past,  and  contains  the  promise
and  potentialities  of  all  future  development  We  con
clude,  therefore,  that  science  cannot  be  indifferent  to
him,  and  that  the  doctrine  of  real  kinds  is  metaphysically
false.1

The  proof  of  its  falsity  in  strictness  only  holds,  of  course,
in  biology.  But  the  evolutionary  method  has  rapidly
spread  into  all  the  sciences  and  everywhere  altered  the
status  of  their  classifications  in  a  similar  way.  The
astronomer  now  conceives  the  notion  of  an  evolution
of  the  different  kinds  of  stars,  the  chemist  of  an  evolution
of  the  *  elements,'  the  physicist  of  an  evolution  of  matter
itself.  The  old  theory  of  the  Predicables  thereupon  at
once  ceases  to  be  applicable  in  these  sciences.  Hence
reluctant  logicians  have  to  admit  that  "  the  problem
of  distinguishing  between  Essence  and  Property  in
regard  to  organic  kinds  may  be  declared  insoluble."  *
"  The  full  nature  of  an  organic  species  is  so  complex,  and
subject  to  so  much  variation  in  different  individuals,  that
even  if  it  could  be  comprised  in  a  definition,  the  task  of
science  would  hardly  consist  in  demonstrating  its  pro
perties.  To  discover  the  properties  of  kinds  belongs  to
the  empirical,  and  not  to  the  scientific,  stage  of  botany
or  zoology."3  The  theory  of  the  Predicables  implies
"  a  scheme  of  knowledge  which  cannot  be  realized  upon
all  subjects."  4

§  9.  Is  Mathematical  Truth  of  a  different  nature  ?

The  knowledge,  then,  to  which  the  theory  of  Predic
ables  would  apply  becomes  an  ideal,  but  one  which  is
still  held  to  be  approximately  exemplified  in  mathematics.

1  Physiological  chemistry  has  already  reached  such  a  pitch  of  perfection  as  to
detect  by  '  haemolytic '  methods  that  ' '  the  red  blood  corpuscles  of  any  individual
are  characterized  by  a  definite  individuality  of  their  own,  and  can  be  distinguished
from  those  of  any  other  individual  of  the  same  species"  (Nature, No.  2121,
P.  5*2).

2  Joseph,  Introduction  to  Logic,  p.  88.

3  Ibid.  p.  89.  4  ifad^  pt  Q2>


58  FORMAL  LOGIC


CHAP.


Thus  the theory's  last appeal is to the science which
suggested  it. If  its  analysis  is  not  true  of  mathematics
I  it  is  not  true  at  all,  and  its  ideal  of  knowledge  is  every
where  falsified.

Now  the  case  of  mathematics  certainly  presents  some
peculiarities,  but  modern  developments  of  the  subject  go
to  show  that  the  ancients  did  not  fully  understand  either
the  nature  of  mathematics  or  its  analogies  with  the  other
sciences.

(1)  It is  a  mistake, for  example,  to regard mathe
matical  conceptions  as  ideal  in  a  way  the  conceptions  of
other  sciences  are not. For  though  mathematical  con
ceptions  are  creations  of  our  intelligence  in  the  sense  of
being  conceptual  ideals  which  the  perceptual  world  could
never  realize — there  are  no  circles  or  triangles  in  nature

— so  are  other  scientific  conceptions.  The  notions  of
a  beginning  and  an  end  just  as  much  transcend  experi
ence  as  that  of  Euclidean  space.  A  perfectly  elastic
body  is  just  as  ideal  as  a  perfectly  round  one.  The
difference  is  in  degree  rather  than  in  kind,  and  in  the
degree  and  amount  of  independence  of  the  empirical
facts  to  which  the  conceptions  appear  to  attain.

(2)  Mathematical conceptions are not, as is often
supposed,  free  creations  of  intelligence. They  were  sug
gested  by  definite  aspects  of  experience. The  empirical
nature  of the  world  imperatively  put certain problems
to our intelligence ; of those problems our current
systems  of  mathematics  proved  to  be  the  best  solutions.
The  origin  of  geometry,  e.g.,  was  not  merely  in  the  need
for land  -  surveying (as the name implies), but more
generally  in that  of  describing  exactly the  shapes  and
motions  of  things. Hence  the  '  self-evident '  principles  of
Euclidean  geometry  and  common  arithmetic  are  not  an
original  possession  of  mankind  ;  they  are  the  assumptions
which  have  established  themselves  either  by  permitting
of  the  most  convenient  application  to  our  world,  or  by
their  simplicity — which  is  another  form  of  convenience.
But  logically  and  historically  alike  they  are  products  of
a  selection  among  alternative  assumptions. What  dis-


v  THE  PREDICABLES  59

tinguishes  mathematics  is  the  variety  of  applications
which  they  admit  of,  and  in  consequence  the  extent  to
which  systematic  deduction  from  their  principles  can
abstract  from  any  one  set  of  applications.  The  things
which  can  be  counted  are  far  more  multifarious  than
those  which  can  be  weighed.

(3)  Nevertheless  it  is  not  true  that  application  to
experience  can  be  dispensed  with  altogether.  Some
things  there  must  be  which  can  advantageously  be
treated  as  if  they  were  the  ideal  objects  of  mathematics,
if  any  system  of  mathematics  is  to  be  more  than  a  play
of  the  imagination.  If  experience  ceased  to  present  us
with  things  whose  behaviour  could  be  predicted  by  our
mathematical  assumptions,  which  could  be  counted  as
units,  and  treated  as  having  figures  conformable  to  the
postulates  of  Euclidean  space,  our  mathematics  would
become  useless  and  irrelevant  to  reality,  and  it  would
gradually  seem  meaningless  to  call  them  true.

Properly  analysed,  therefore,  mathematical  truth  does
not  depart  from  the  type  of  scientific  truth.  In  each  case
we  are  tentatively  applying  a  conceptual  system  to  the
interpretation  of  experience,  and  confirming  its  claim  to
truth  by  the  success  of  its  working.

§  10.  Are  the  Predicables  applicable  or  not?

Only  one  final  obscurity  remains  in  the  theory  of  the
Predicables.  Is  it  (i)  completely  relevant  only  to  an
ideal  which  no  human  knowledge  has  yet  attained,  or  (2)
does  it  claim  to  be  applicable  to  the  actual  distinctions
made  by  the  sciences  ?  Its  advocates  do  not  seem  to
have  made  up  their  minds  about  this,  and  their  practice
too  often  belies  their  theory.  But  there  is  good  reason
for  their  perplexity.

(i)  For  if  the  theory  is  only  strictly  true  at  the  level
of  the  ideal,  if  the  only  true  species  and  genera  are  such
as  no  human  science  has  yet  been  able  to  find  on  earth,
it  will  follow  (a)  that  the  theory  will  be  totally  devoid  of
that  sense  of  truth  which  implies  applicability  to  ex-


60  FORMAL  LOGIC


CHAP.


perience,  and  (#)  that  it  will  flatly  contradict  the  pro
cedure  of  the  sciences.  The  distinctions,  classifications,
and  definitions  of  the  sciences  are  not  of  such  an  ideal
character.  And  they  are  not  supposed  to  be.  They  are
relative  to  the  state  of  our  knowledge  at  the  time,  and
known  to  be  so.  They  are  never,  therefore,  taken  to  be
unimprovable ;  nay,  the  whole  labour  of  the  sciences  is
ever  to  improve  the  conceptual  instruments  they  use.
The  sciences  never  say — *  We  will  assume  our  conceptions
to  be  perfect,  and  show  you  how  they  are  immutably
connected  inter  se.'  To  say  this  would  be  to  renounce
the  hope  of  scientific  progress.  They  say  instead — '  We
never  take  any  truth  to  be  final  and  infallible.  By
assuming  such  and  such  conceptions  we  have  solved  such
and  such  problems  ;  by  restating,  modifying,  and  extend
ing  our  conceptions  we  have  good  hopes  of  solving  such
and  such  further  problems.'

Thus  it  is  utterly  untrue  that  it  is  by  disregarding  the
defects  of  their  actual  concepts,  and  by  reasoning  as  if
the  ideal  level  had  been  reached,  that  the  sciences
progress.

(2)  If,  on  the  other  hand,  it  is  assumed  that  the
actual  may  be  identified  with  the  ideal,  and  that  what  is
hypothetically  true  of  the  ideal  distinctions  holds  of  those
in  actual  use,  a  curious  nemesis  overtakes  the  whole
theory.  If  it  is  assumed  that  Formal  Logic  can  lay
down  Definitions,  state  Essences,  demonstrate  Properties,
and  ascertain  fixed  and  final  truth,  it  can  find  these
things  nowhere  but  in  the  meaning  of  words.  For  it
had  disclaimed  the  right  of  extracting  *  material '  truth.
In  other  words,  it  has  to  be  supposed  that  existing
language  contains  final  truth  about  things.  But  this  is
to  ignore  the  question  how  words  got  their  meaning,  and
so  to  overlook  that  no  word  can  convey  more  knowledge
in  its  *  meaning '  than  was  possessed  by  those  who  used
it  to  convey  their  meaning.  So  the  theory  of  the  Pre-
dicables  becomes  purely  verbal.

This  is  what  actually  happened.  All  that  Formal
reasoning  could  do  was  to  render  explicit  the  knowledge


THE  PREDICABLES


61


already  contained  in  the  meaning  of  words.  It  could
add  nothing,  and  could  make  nothing  of  procedures  by
which  knowledge  was  actually  augmented  and  the  mean
ings  of  words  were  altered  and  enlarged.  Its  whole  pro
cedure  became  trivial  and  futile.  Its  definitions  became
purely  nominal,  and  the  '  properties '  deduced  from  them
purely  verbal.  '  Essential '  propositions  came  to  mean
1  tautologous.'  It  would  triumphantly  prove,  e.g.,  that  all
bodies  were  in  space,  because  it  was  the  '  essence '  of
matter  to  be  extended.  But  for  all  information  about
the  real  behaviour  of  things  one  had  to  go  elsewhere,  to
the  *  accidental '  properties,  which  were  theoretically
despicable,  but  practically  useful.  In  short,  the  attempt
of  the  Formal  doctrine  to  become  indisputable  ended
only  in  its  becoming  unmeaning.


CHAPTER VI

DEFINITION AND DIVISION

§  I . The  Function  of  Definition  and  Division

THE  very  intricate  discussion  of  the  Formal  theory  of  the
Predicables  should  have  facilitated  considerably  criticism
of  the  Formal  doctrine  of  Definition  and  Division.

We  begin  by  noting  that  this  doctrine  has  distinct
reference  to  real  problems  of  knowing.  We  cannot  think
effectively  without  knowing  clearly  what  we  are  trying  to
think  about,  nor  can  we  handle  our  experience  effectively
without  introducing  into  it  some  sort  of  order.  Both  in
order  to  hold  our  meaning  steadily  in  mind,  and  still
more  to  communicate  it  to  others,  we  must  define  the
objects  of  our  thought,  i.e.  lay  down  what  we  mean  by
them  and  thereby  distinguish  them  from  similar  things
which  we  do  not  mean.  And  as  a  consequence  of  this
effort  to  obtain  a  definite  meaning,  we  shall  find  it
necessary  to  arrange  our  objects  in  a  definite  order,  z.e.
to  divide  our  general  subject  into  classes.

In  scientific  knowing  both  these  demands  become
still  more  exacting.  (i)  Every  science  presupposes  a
preliminary  delimitation  of  a  definite  subject  -  matter
which  it  is  the  aim  of  the  science  to  investigate.  (2)
Every  science  tries  to  divide  up  its  subject-matter  by
arranging  it  according  to  a  systematic  scheme  of  classifica
tion.  (3)  Every  science,  as  it  develops,  finds  it  possible
to  define  and  divide  with  greater  and  greater  precision
and  effect,  and  convenient  to  embody  its  growing  know
ledge  in  a  series  of  new  divisions  which  classify  more

62


CHAP,  vi DEFINITION  AND  DIVISION  63

perfectly,  and  of  new  definitions  which  express  the  im
portant  features  of  the  new  knowledge  more  compendiously
and  serviceably.  (4)  Every  science,  therefore,  may  be
said  to  point  to  the  ideal  of  a  rigid  Definition  and  Classifi
cation,  which  would  be  the  embodiment  of  perfect  know
ledge  and  perfect  order.

This  last  is  the  only  aspect  of  this  part  of  the  process
of  knowing  which  the  Formal  theory  of  Definition  and
Division  has  deigned  to  notice,  and  attempted  to  formu
late.  But,  unfortunately,  it  has  not  noted  either  that  the
final  completion  of  science  which  it  contemplated  would
be  the  cessation  of  science,  or  that  its  doctrines  were  (for
this  very  reason)  wholly  inapplicable  to  the  actual  pro
cedures  of  science  and  of  ordinary  thinking.  The  Formal
doctrine  everywhere  will  be  found  to  have  aimed  at  an
impossible  ideal,  to  have  failed  to  account  for  the  actual,
and  to  have  sunk  in  consequence  into  verbality  and
tautology.

§  2. The  Traditional  Doctrine

We  may  begin,  however,  by  stating  the  traditional
doctrine.  Definition,  as  we  saw  in  Chap.  V,  §§  3-5,
was  originally  an  integral  part  of  the  very  definite
theory  of  knowledge  which  engendered  the  Aristotelian
doctrine  of  the  Predicables.  Its  function  was  to  state  the
Essence  of  its  subject  in  order  that  there  might  be  deduced
or  demonstrated  from  this  its  essential  attributes  or  Pro-\
perties.  It  was  a  *  making  known  of  the  Essence,'1  andi
it  was  taken  for  granted  that  things  per  se  had  such  an
essence,  that  they  could  not  have  more  than  one,  and  thati
human  science  could  state  it.  To  state  it,  indeed,  was
easy.  You  had  merely  to  state  the  Genus  of  the  thing  >
and  its  Difference  ;  that  fixed  its  place  in  the  fixed  order
of  nature  by  giving  you  the  class  to  which  it  belonged
and  the  marks  that  distinguished  it  from  the  other  kinds
within  that  group.  All  the  rules  of  Definition  aimed
merely  at  enabling  you  to  state  just  this,  and  neither  more

1  ovaias  TIS  7J/wpto7*6s,  An.  Post,  ii,  3.


64  FORMAL  LOGIC  CHAP.

nor  less.  The  demand,  e.g.,  that  the  definition  should  be
**  ™"fk  its  object,  i.e.  applicable  to  it  and  to
nothing  else,  plainly  bears  this  meaning.  The  rule  that
definitions  should  not  be  negative  was  defensible  on  the
grounds  that  the  essence  could  not  be  negative,  and  that
the  possibilities  of  negation  were  infinite.  The  prohibi
tion  of  tautologous  definition  *  in  a  circle '  meant  that  a
thing's  place  in  nature  could  not  be  fixed  by  its  relation
to  itself,  and  reprehended  a  failure  to  fix  it  by  its  relations
to  its  neighbours.  The  demand  that  definitions  must  not
be  in  obscure  or  figurative  language  does  indeed  at  first
look  more  like  a  concession  to  the  mundane  requirements
of  human  knowing,  and  a  perception  that  even  the  loftiest
science  ceases  to  be  functional  when  it  ceases  to  be  under
stood  ;  but  it  is  probably  simpler  to  trace  it  to  the  con
viction  that  the  essence  must  always  be  a  plain  and
straightforward  fact.

These  rules,  of  course,  fitted  in  perfectly  with  the
theory  of  science  of  which  they  formed  part  and  (some
what  less  well)  with  the  procedure  of  the  sciences  which
had  suggested  them,  viz.  the  mathematical.  Every  science
was  conceived  to  start  by  enunciating  a  number  of  self-
evident  principles,1  and  by  positing  definitions  which
stated  the  essence  of  its  subject-matter.  After  that  there
were  a  finite  number  of  '  Properties '  to  be  demonstrated
and  you  had  finished  your  science,  and  could  shut  up  shop
Whatever  could  not  be  demonstrated  was  '  accident,'  and
scientifically  did  not  matter.

1  It  is  here  that  Aristotle's  advance  on  Plato  is  most  evident.  Plato  indulged
in  the  poetic  vision  of  a  single  '  Idea  of  Good '  from  which  all  the  sciences  and
the  whole  '  intelligible '  world  were  to  be  some  day  deduced  ;  to  Aristotle,  the  dis
coverer  of  the  syllogism,  it  was  clear  that  this  at  least  was  logically  nonsense,  and
that  not  less  than  two  principles  were  needed  to  deduce  anything,  simply  because
the  syllogistic  form  of  demonstration  requires  two  premisses.  He  could  perceive,
therefore,  that  the  body  of  the  sciences  rested  in  fact  on  a  multitude  of  assump
tions.  Unfortunately,  however,  the  mass  of  philosophers  have  here  followed
Plato  rather  than  Aristotle,  and,  in  spite  of  the  manifest  self-contradiction  of  the
theory,  it  is  still  customary  to  represent  a  monistic  derivation  from  a  single
principle  as  the  logical  ideal  of  science,  which,  nevertheless,  is  to  take  the  form  of
a  demonstration  !  (cf.  Chap.  XXII,  §  5).


vi  DEFINITION  AND  DIVISION  65

§  3. The  Limits  of  Definition

Thus  every  science  was  in  principle  finite  and  capable
of  completion.  There  were  a  definite  number  of  sciences,
of  principles,  of  definitions,  and  of  propositions  to  be
proved,  and  hence,  of  course,  definite  limits  of  Definition
itself.

An  upper  limit  to  Definition  was  constituted  by  the
fact  that  the  Summum  Genus  could  not  be  defined.  For
there  could  be  no  higher  genus  in  which  it  could  be
included  as  a  species.  Neither  could  Definition  sink  below
the  Infima  Species^  divisible  only  into  individuals  between
whom  no  specific  difference  existed.  The  individuals  of
such  a  kind  were  taken  as  essentially  identical  and  scien
tifically  equivalent.  If  they  turned  out  not  to  be,  it  was
merely  said  that  they  could  not  then  belong  to  the  same
species,  or  that  their  differences  touched  only  unessential
*  accidents.'  But  the  individual  as  such  was  indefinable,1
because  he  had  no  '  essence ' ;  i.e.  none  of  his  attributes
could  be  regarded  as  more  essential  to  his  being  what  he
was  than  any  other.  You  might  select  a  sufficiency  of
his  qualities  to  distinguish  him  from  others  of  his  kind,
and  offer  this  as  a  Description.  But  this  was  a  later  con
cession  to  the  merely  human  purpose  of  recognizing  him,
and  really  an  inconsistency.  For  science  as  such  could
not  be  interested  in  the  accidental  nor  in  the  individual
as  such.

It  was  admitted,  however,  that  there  were  certain  diffi
culties  inherent  in  the  doctrine,  (i)  How,  for  example,
was  the  initial  delimitation  of  subjects  and  the  positing  of
the  primary  definitions  to  be  effected,  or  a  dispute  about
them  to  be  settled  ?  The  answers  in  detail  were  neces
sarily  vague,  but  one  could  at  least  lay  down  the  principle
of  an  appeal  to  the  faculty  of  Intuitive  Reason  (1/01)5),  and
posit  it  as  an  infallible  authority.  Such  intuitions  had

1  '  Simple '  qualities  are  also  regarded  as  '  indefinable. '  It  is  said  that
qualities  like  'hot,'  'red,'  'pleasant,'  must  be  experienced  to  be  known.  But
the  reason  is  a  different  one.  They  do  not  need  denning,  because  as  a  rule
they  are  such  familiar  experiences.  That  the  same  term  '  indefinable  '  should  be
used  to  describe  their  nature  really  evinces  a  defect  in  the  logical  terminology.

F


66  FORMAL  LOGIC


CHAP.


in  any  case  to  be  postulated,  in  order  to  prop  up  the
theory  of  the  Syllogism,  which  demanded  an  adequate
supply  of  absolutely  certain  premisses  which  were  above
(or  beyond)  proof  (cf.  Chap.  XVIII,  §  3).  Whoever  was
unwilling  to  chime  in  with  a  logician's  intuitions  might
further  be  denounced  as  a  sceptic  who  was  attempting  to
undermine  the  foundations  of  all  reasoning.  In  this  way,
then,  these  objections  might  be  removed,  or  at  least  the
objectors  suppressed.

(2)  Those,  on  the  other  hand,  which  arose  out  of  the
actual  functioning  of  definitions  could  not  but  make
themselves  felt.  Aristotle  himself  observed  that  alongside
of  the  real  definitions  which  scientifically  stated  the
essence,  there  existed  nominal  definitions  which  appeared
to  state  only  the  meaning  of  words,  and  asserted  nothing
as  to  the  existence  of  corresponding  objects.

His  treatment  of  them  was  obscure,  though  hardly
deserving  of  the  nemesis  which  overtook  it.  For,  owing
to  the  unfortunate  assumption  that  Logic  need  not  consider
the  genesis  and  development  of  meaning  and  might  take
the  accepted  meanings  as  fixed  and  final,  it  befell  that
Aristotle's  '  rear  definitions  became  in  practice  nominal,
whereas  his  '  nominal '  definitions  actually  succeeded  in
conveying  real  information  (cf.  Chap.  V,  §  10).  For  it  was
only  by  defining  man  by  his  '  essence '  as  a  '  rational
animal '  that  the  Aristotelian  could  reach  an  indisputable
platitude  no  one  would  trouble  to  deny,  while  he  had
failed  to  grasp  that  any  definition  which  meant  something
because  it  had  a  bearing  on  a  real  question,  was  for  that
very  reason  disputable.  Thus  verbalism  or  inapplicability
once  more  forms  the  alternative  past  which  Formal  Logic
does  not  find  a  way.

§  4. Criticism  of  the  Traditional  Doctrine

That  this  is  inevitable  will  appear  more  clearly  when
we  proceed  to  a  systematic  criticism  of  the  doctrine.  Its
unjustified  assumptions  are  those  which  are  always  met
with  in  Formal  Logic.  It  was  assumed  that  Logic  is


vi  DEFINITION  AND  DIVISION  67

concerned,  not  with  the  actual  procedure  of  human
knowing,  but  with  an  ideal  of  Definition  which  certain
definitions  were  supposed  to  exemplify.  Because  defini
tions  could  be  ideally  conceived  as  precise  and  complete
and  unchangeable,  and  because  certain  mathematical  de
finitions  were  thought  to  possess  these  admirable  qualities,
it  was  assumed  that  all  the  other  qualities  of  definitions
and  all  the  qualities  of  other  definitions  were  logically
negligible.  Because  Definition  might  be  defined  l  as  '  the
exposition  of  the  connotation  of  a  term/  it  was  assumed
to  be  unnecessary  and  unworthy  of  Logic  to  investigate
how  terms  acquired,  retained,  and  modified  their
meanings.  And  because  the  only  terms  of  which  the
meanings  could  approximately  be  regarded  as  possessed
of  these  desiderata  and  as  known  to  all,  were  the  meanings
of  words  in  common  use,  Logic  was  debarred  from  the
testing  of  doubtful  definitions,  the  establishment  of  which
would  lead  to  an  extension  of  knowledge,  and  restricted
to  the  defining  of  what  every  one  was  aware  of  already.

(i)  Inevitably,  therefore,  Formal  Definition  becomes
utterly  inapplicable  to  the  procedures  of  actual  knowing.
For  it  postulates  a  knowledge  of  the  '  essence '  which  is
not  in  fact  either  possible  or  desirable.  In  no  science  are
we  ever  able  to  begin  with  knowing  what  is  important
('  essential ')  to  the  being  of  our  subject.  This  is  precisely
what  we  are  trying  to  find  out.  Even  if,  therefore,  it  has
an  *  essence,'  that  essence  cannot  be  formulated.  Our
initial  definitions,  therefore,  cannot  but  be  provisional,
and  as  our  knowledge  grows  they  must  be  modified.  We
cannot  even  say  that  we  start  with  nominal  definitions
which  are  provisional,  and  finish  with  real  which  are  final.
For  we  never  finish  at  all.  It  is  in  flat  contradiction
with  the  method  of  science  to  assume  a  limit  to  its
progress.  Finality  may  appeal  to  us  as  mortals,  but  it
cannot  be  our  ideal  as  scientists.  We  must  decline  to
arrest,  even  in  thought,  the  continuous  advance  in  know
ledge.  Hence  a  theory  of  Definition  which  postulates

1  Tautologically,  because  (Chap.  Ill,  §  3)  the  '  connotation  '  can  only  be  distin
guished  from  the  rest  of  the  meaning  by  means  of  the  notion  of  definition,  viz.
as  that  part  of  the  total  meaning  which  is  used  in  the  definition.


68  FORMAL  LOGIC  CHAP.

finality  is  not  the  ideal  of  scientific  definition,  any  more
than  it  is  applicable  to  actual  definitions.

It  is  not  applicable  even  to  mathematics,  though
Aristotle  doubtless  thought  so.  Not  even  in  mathematics
is  it  true  that  the  meanings  of  conceptions  remain  un
affected  by  the  progress  of  the  science.  What  the  '  unit '
has  meant  has  been  altered  by  every  step  in  the  develop
ment  of  arithmetic  ;  its  meaning  changed  when  subtraction
was  added  to  addition,  when  multiplication,  division,  and
fractions  were  invented,  when  ^/  —  i  became  a  permissible
symbol.  The  meaning  of  '  triangle,1  similarly,  became
ambiguous,  and  Euclid's  definition  thereof  inadequate,
when  the  conceptions  of  spherical  and  non-Euclidean
*  triangles '  were  evolved.  It  may  indeed  have  been  that
in  some  of  these  cases  it  was  not  judged  expedient  to
change  the  verbal  formulations  of  these  meanings  in
Euclid's  definitions.  But  if  on  this  account  Formal  Logic
imagines  that  the  meaning  of  mathematical  conceptions
does  not  change,  it  is  merely  exhibiting  once  more  its
characteristic  confusion  of  the  ideal  with  the  verbal.

(2)  Even  on  its  own  assumptions,  however,  the  pro
cedure  of  Formal  Definition  seems  indefensible.  It  fails
to  establish  even  the  ideal  unity  of  the  definition.  It
assumes  that  when  the  '  essence '  of  a  thing  has  been
completely  stated,  there  cannot  be  more  than  one  definition
finally  possible.  But  the  very  nature  of  the  process  it
employs  entails  the  consequence  that  a  plurality  of
definitions  of  the  same  thing  must  always  be  conceivable.
For  no  definition  ever  states  the  sum  total  of  the  qualities
that  seem  to  go  to  the  being  of  a  thing,  and  the  impossi
bility  of  stating  this  sum  is  precisely  the  reason  for
declaring  the  individual  indefinable.1  All  definition  rests

1  Quite  illogically,  be  it  noted.  For  if  both  the  '  definition '  of  the  kind  and
the  '  description  '  of  the  individual  are  in  fact  selections  from  the  sum  total  of
their  qualities,  the  distinction  between  definition  and  description  vanishes.  In
neither  case  do  we  -wish  to  enumerate  this  total,  but  in  the  individual's  case  we
either  know,  or  are  interested  in,  more  of  the  real  facts.  We  see  that  all  his
qualities  go  to  make  him  what  he  is  and  that  none  are  irrelevant  :  in  the  case  of
the  '  kind '  we  either  do  not  grasp  this  or  consider  it  irrelevant  for  our  purpose  of
grouping  individuals  in  classes.  But  to  declare  on  this  account  that  our  know
ledge  of  the  individual  is  logically  on  an  inferior  plane  is  a  paradox.  We  can


vi  DEFINITION  AND  DIVISION  69

on  a  selection  of  the  '  essence  '  from  among  the  'properties,'
and  so  involves  a  human  interference,  and  a  risk  of  error.
In  most  subjects  the  choice  is  very  wide,  but  it  exists
even  in  the  apparently  rigid  definitions  of  mathematics.
We  have,  e.g.,  a  choice  whether  we  shall  take  the  postulate
of  parallels  as  the  ultimate  differentia  of  Euclidean  space
and  thereupon  demonstrate  the  equality  of  the  angles  of
a  triangle  to  two  right  angles,  or  assume  the  latter  as  our
necessary  postulate  and  prove  the  postulate  of  parallels.
Either  of  these  assumptions  will  serve  the  purpose  of
exploring  the  properties  of  Euclidean  space,  and  neither,
therefore,  can  be  regarded  as  the  Definition  thereof.  In
the  more  concrete  sciences  it  is  well  understood  that  one
definition  may  be  proper  for  one  purpose,  another  for
another.  For  the  purposes  of  economics,  for  example,
it  may  be  right  to  conceive  man  as  a  wealth-producing
or  as  a  wealth-consuming  animal,  as  essentially  a  worker
or  an  idler,  as  actuated  by  necessity  or  by  desire,  etc.
In  short,  more  or  less  of  an  apparently  arbitrary  selective-
ness  goes  to  the  making  of  every  definition,  and  if  it
be  held  that  arbitrariness  and  selectiveness  vitiate  the
objectivity  of  truth,  it  is  clear  that  the  Formal  doctrine
of  essence  stands  self-condemned.

(3) Its  failure  to  consider  the  question,  viz.  how  far  i;
human  purposes  and  preferences  must  on  the  one  hand$
constitute,  and on the  other vitiate,  our  definitions,  islj
perhaps  the most  fatal defect in the Formal  doctrine.  I
Yet  it  is  easy  to  see  that  once  this  question  is  admitted, »
there  would  seem  to  be  no  end  to  the  modifications  it
entails,  and  that  therefore  the  instinct  of  self-preservation
urges  Formal  Logic  to  be  blind  to  these  difficulties. For
if  no  definitions  are  absolute,  if  all  are  due  to,  and  relative
to,  the  purposes  of  an  inquiry  and  an  inquirer,  there  may
have  to  be  as  many  definitions  as  there  are  purposes,  and
the  neat  finality  of  the  Aristotelian  scheme  is  shattered
beyond repair. The  fear of  the consequences of  such
relativity  is  indeed  as  unreasonable  and  chimerical  as  the

distinguish  individuals  not  because  we  know  less,  but  because  we  know  more,
about  them  than  about  'kinds'  (cf.  Chap.  II,  §  6).


70  FORMAL  LOGIC  CHAP.

fear  lest  the  recognition  of  the  relativity  of  motion  should
render  all  motions  incalculable  and  unknowable  ;  but  it  is
quite  consistent  in  Formal  Logic  to  entertain  it.  For
after  systematically  ruling  out  all  reference  to  the  purposes
of  knowing  at  the  outset  (cf.  Chap.  I),  it  could  not  afford
to  recognize  them  later,  even  in  order  to  understand  the
real  nature  of  Definition.


§  5 . The  Real  Nature  of  Definition

The  real  nature  of  the  logical  import  of  Definition
«  should  by  now  be  fairly  clear.  Relevance  to  purpose  is  the  |
\  primary  requisite  in  a  good  definition,  and  that  which  I
;>  governs  all  its  other  features.  For  definitions  are  needed,  '
and  are  made,  in  order  to  make  clear  what  a  subject
under  discussion  or  investigation  means,  and  are  always
intended  to  bear  on  some  problem  or  dispute.  It  is
impossible  to  inquire  or  discuss  effectively  unless  we
understand  or  agree  upon  what  is  the  point  in  question  ;
it  is  trivial  and  superfluous  to  define  what  is  not  in
dispute ;  and  it  is  irrelevant  to  define  what  is  not
important  for  the  purpose  in  hand.  The  'essence/
therefore,  which  every  definition  tries  to  state  is  simply
I  the  point  which  it  is  for  the  time  being  important  to
i  elucidate.  It  follows  that  the  essences  and  definitions  of
things  are'  necessarily  plural,  variable,  and  'relative/  and
never  '  absolute.'  But  they  are  all  the  better  for  this.
They  are  thereby  rendered  adjustable  to  our  purposes  and
applicable  to  the  problems  of  knowing.  A  single,  un
mistakable,  and  absolute  definition  of  a  thing,  true  without
reference  to  any  context,  would  have  to  be  one  that
would  serve  for  any  purpose  for  which  it  is  convenient  or
possible  to  use  the  term.  Such  a  definition  is  barely
conceivable,  but  quite  incredible,  and  assuredly  not
extant.  To  restrict  '  logic '  to  such  definitions  is  to  render
it  inapplicable,  and  to  leave  the  plurality  of  definitions
in  actual  use  without  the  benefits  of  logical  discrimination
and  correction.

It  follows  no  less  clearly  from  the  primary  purpose  of


vi  DEFINITION  AND  DIVISION  71


Dfifim'tinn  i-W  fl]1  ^^^^npff  ™us*  be  nominal.  They
must  be  intended  to  label  an  object  under  inquiry  or
dispute  in  order  to  facilitate  its  investigation.  By  giving
it  a  name,  and  explaining  that  name  in  terms  already
understood  (this  is  why  obscurity  is  objectionable  !),  we
make  it  something  that  can  be  referred  to  and  debated,
and  perhaps  agreed  upon.  We  render  possible  a  common
meaning,  and  in  all  attempts  at  communicating  opinion
this  is  an  indispensable  preliminary.  The  disputants  who
discovered  in  the  end  that  *  my  "  God  "  is  your  "  Devil  "  !  '
could  have  avoided  much  unprofitable  wrangling  by
starting  with  purely  *  nominal  '  definitions  of  '  God  '  and
<  Devil.'

But  '  nominal  '  definitions  are  never  merely  nominal.
If  I  define  a  '  Grabberwock  '  as  '  an  etherealization  of  a
Brolliwag,'  and  deny  that  I  am  making  personal  remarks
about  any  one,  I  shall  be  understood  to  be  either  joking
or  insane.  In  serious  inquiry  nominal  definitions  are
only  made  to  be  used.  And  if  they  are  not  found  to  be
applicable  to  objects,  and  so  serviceable,  they  are  rejected
or  amended  forthwith.  Every  nominal  definition,  therefore,
must  be  intended  to  give  ns-faffligrj^on  reality,  and  be  to
some  extent  real,  even  though  all  it  enables  us  to  do  (or
even  aims  at  doing)  is  really  to  understand  the  meaning  of
a  view  we  consider  utterly  mistaken.  Hence  it  may
be  true  or  false  as  fulfilling  this  function,  and,  if  true,
it  will  convey  real  information  as  to  the  state  of  another's
mind.  The  only  definitions  which  might  be  considered
purely  nominal,  because  they  are  wholly  inapplicable  to
reality,  would  be  the  *  real  '  definitions  of  logic,  and  even
these  some  logicians  appear  to  believe  in.

The  working  definitions  of  the  sciences,  however,
usually  possess  far  more  reality  than  this.  Being  the
fruits  of  long  experience  and  much  experiment,  their
initial  crudities  have  been  polished  away  and  forgotten  ;
they  have  had  most  of  the  nonsense  knocked  out  of  them,
and  have  become  fairly  adequate  for  the  purposes  for
which  they  are  used.  But  for  this  very  reason  they  can
never  be  trusted  to  cope  with  new  circumstances  which


72  FORMAL  LOGIC


CHAP.


were  not  within  the  purview  of  their  framers,  and  always
remain  subject  to  revision  in  the  light  of  fresh  knowledge.
It  is  never,  therefore,  a  sound  scientific  procedure  to  argue
from  an  accepted  definition  against  new  facts  which
challenge  the  correctness  of  the  definition.  When,  e.g.,
facts  are  brought  to  light  which  point  to  a  new  theory  of
'  species '  or  of  '  truth/  they  cannot  be  disposed  of  by
complaining  that  the  words  *  species '  and  '  truth '  have
always  hitherto  been  defined  and  understood  in  a  way
which  rules  out  such  facts.  The  attempt  to  rule  out
novelty  by  definition  is  like  the  attempt  to  make  a  law
immutable  by  including  in  it  a  clause  to  make  death  the
penalty  for  an  attempt  to  repeal  the  law ;  just  as  to
repeal  the  law  repeals  the  penalty,  so  to  establish  the  new
facts  ipso  facto  invalidates  the  old  definition.  In  such
cases  we  are  forced  to  perceive  how  inadequate  is  this
traditional  doctrine  that  the  denotation  ('  extension ')  of  a
;term  depends  on  its  connotation,  and  not  vice  versa.  It
is  often  more  urgent,  and  better  science,  to  bring  a  new
fact  under  an  accepted  definition,  e.g.  to  include  a  black
bird  under  the  genus  c  swan,'  or  to  extend  the  '  Atomic '
Theory  by  splitting  the  atom  into  '  electrons,'  than  to
preserve  unmodified  an  old  definition  which  declared  that
swans  are  *  essentially  '  white,  or  that  an  atom  is  essentially
indivisible.

The  flexible,  corrigible,  relative  definition,  therefore,
which  is  always  for  a  purpose  and  for  use,  and  never
for  show,  is  the  sort  which  science  needs  and  devises.
'  Formal  Logic  declines  to  provide  this  sort  of  Definition,
or  to  have  anything  to  say  to  it.  But  this  is  to  say  that
Formal  Logic  never  descends  to  earth  and  has  no  concern
with  real  definitions  or  real  knowing.

§  6.  Division

Division  is  usually  defined  as  the  exposition  of  the
denotation  of  a  term,  and  we  have  seen  (§  i)  that  it
represents  the  logician's  conception  of  dealing  with  the
practical  problem  of  ordering  experiences,  which  in  science


vi  DEFINITION  AND  DIVISION  73

becomes  the  problem  of  Classification,  In  science  this
problem  is  very  important  and  leads  to  very  intricate  and
elaborate  schemes  of  Classification  ;  but  logical  Division
does  not  aspire  to  anything  so  systematic,  and  is  content
to  use  only  the  two  ideas  of  genus  and  species  and  to
add  that  these  must  be  understood  relatively.  It  is,  in
fact,  an  attempt  at  the  classification  of  the  things,  or  more
strictly  of  sorts  of  things,  to  which  a  Formal  definition
applies,  and  as  we  have  already  studied  the  difficulty
of  finding  such  things,  we  shall  not  expect  too  much
from  its  doctrine.

The  Formal  logician,  however,  blissfully  oblivious  of
the  fact  that  in  defining  his  subject  he  had  made
abstraction  from  the  problem  of  application,  plunges  hope
fully  into  a  subject  which  taxes  the  resources  of  every
science,  and  gaily  lays  down  the  rules  for  a  perfect
division.  A  genus  is  to  be  taken  and  cut  up  into  its
species.  To  do  this  neatly  a  single  principle  or
fundamentum  divisionis  is  to  be  used  (at  a  time).  When
this  is  done,  the  genus  will  be  divided  exhaustively,  i.e.
the  whole  of  it  will  be  divided  into  species  which  will
exclude  each  other  without  any  transitional  forms  and
there  will  be  no  overlapping  and  no  cross  division.

The  whole  doctrine  seems  so  simple  as  to  be  almost
jjilly..  In  order,  therefore,  to  make  it  feel  scientific,  the
logician  garnishes  it  with  a  few  technicalities,  calling  the
species  membra  dividentia  and  the  genus  the  totum  divisum,
and  pointing  out  that  it  must  be  predicable  of  each  of
its  dividing  members,  and  adding  a  pretty  superfluous
distinction  between  logical  division  and  metaphysical  and
physical  ('  partition ').  His  illustrations  of  the  value  of
logical  division  are  usually  of  a  comical  order.  The
division  of  food  into  *  fish,  flesh,  fowl,  and  good  red
herring '  is  used  to  illustrate  the  horrors  of  Cross  Division,
and  the  *  University,  family  and  pork  butcher '  in  the
Cowley  Road  at  Oxford  is  solemnly  censured  as  illogical,
without  regard  either  to  the  excellence  of  the  advertise
ment  or  the  ease  with  which  the  joke  is  seen,  and  seen
through,  by  the  obtusest  intelligence.  It  is  taken  for


74  FORMAL  LOGIC


CHAP.


granted  that  such  trifling  somehow  has  a  bearing  on  the
hard  work  of  the  sciences.


§  7. The  Difficulties  of  Division

Yet  from  the  first  it  had  been  impossible  to  overlook
grave  defects  in  the  Formal  doctrine.  Inasmuch  as
Division  had  been  advocated  as  the  method  of  science  by
Plato,  it  had  the  advantage  of  being  at  once  criticized  by
Aristotle,  and  the  Formal  account  of  it  got  into  difficulties
so  soon  as  the  questions  were  raised — -How  do  we  come
by  our  fundamenta  divisionis,  and  what  guarantees  the
exhaustiveness  of  our  divisions  ?  Aristotle  had  the
acuteness  to  see  that  the  principles  on  which  divisions
proceeded  were  always  the  products  of  a  selection,  which
seemed^  arbitrary,  and  (in  a  dispute)  had  to  be  granted.
He  consequently  denounced  Plato's  method  as  sheer
^Ujesiion-begging,  and  as  a  '  weak '  anticipation  of  his  own
syllogistic  method,  which  alone,  he  held,  could  compel
assent  and  really  advance  scientifically.1

Aristotle's  criticism  was  unanswerable,  but  for  this
very  reason  failed  to  affect  the  Formal  doctrine.  It
raised  too  large  a  question  to  be  faced.  The  all-
pervasive  selectiveness  of  real  thinking  had  been  too
systematically  overlooked  by  the  Formal  account  of
thought  for  a  casual  appeal  to  it  to  lead  to  a  radical
reform.  Indeed  Aristotle  himself  had  not  seen  the  full
scope  of  his  criticism.  The  formation  of  a  genus  to  be
divided  is  itself  a  signal  example  of  human  selectiveness,
in  which  '  arbitrariness '  is  inevitable  and  error  is  always
possible.  The  only  possible  way  of  meeting  the  objection,
therefore,  would  have  been  to  admit  the  selectiveness  of
thought  but  to  deny  that  it  was  necessarily  a  source  of
error,  and  to  declare  that  it  was  precisely  the  relevance  of
a  selection  to  the  purpose  of  some  inquiry  that  rendered
a  division  needful,  possible,  and  right.  But  such  audacity
Formal  Logic  could  not  have  dreamt  of.

Consequently  the  difficulty  about  exhaustiveness  was

1  Anal.  Prior.  I,  31.


vi  DEFINITION  AND  DIVISION  75,

more  immediately  productive  of  logical  results.  Clearly
a  logical  division  was  worthless,  if  the  fundamentum  used
did  not  divide  the  species  neatly,  either  because  it
occurred  in  several  divisions  or  because  it  left  a  refractory
remainder  to  which  the  fundamentum  would  not  apply.
The  logician  naturally  felt  towards  such  annoying
anomalies  very  much  like  a  regular  party  politician
towards  third  parties  and  *  mugwumps.'  How,  then,  was  a
fundamentum  to  be  secured  which  would  function  in  the
ideal  way  postulated  ?

Logicians  gave  a  twofold  answer.  In  the  first  place,
they  admitted  that  '  material '  knowledge  had  often  to  be
used  in  making  good  divisions,  which  was  in  effect  to
renounce  the  logical  ideal  of  Division  and  to  reduce  it
to  scientific  classification  ;  in  the  second,  they  put  forward
Dichotomy  as  the  ideal  of  Logical  Division.


§  8. Classification  v.  Division

But  they  did  not  at  first  perceive  how  utterly  futile
both  these  expedients  were.  If  material  knowledge  was
once  admitted  to  be  relevant  to .  the  logical  problem  of
Division,  the  logician  became  a  superfluity  and  his
authority  was  superseded.

(i)  The  scientific  expert  could  always  tell  him  that
his  intervention  was  an  impertinence,  that  he  himself  was
alone  competent  to  judge  of  the  manner  in  which  it  was
proper  to  divide  his  subject,  and  that  the  Formal  defects
which  logicians  detected  in  his  divisions  were  only  verbal
and  rested  upon  ignorance.  He  might  say :  '  It  is  quite
true  that  technically  and  verbally  a  division  of  rectilinear
figures  into  triangles,  quadrilaterals,  and  polygons  uses
two  fundament^  the  relations  of  the  sides  and  of  the
angles,  and  that  the  division  of  triangles  into  scalene,
isosceles,  and  equilateral  is  vicious  because  the  third  is  a
case  of  the  second.  But  if  you  knew  any  geometry,  you
would  see  that  this  does  not  matter  and  that  the  divisions
are  in  fact  convenient  and  exhaustive/


76  FORMAL  LOGIC


CHAP.


(2)  Not  only  would  the  logician  be  ruled  out,  but  he
would  have  to  submit  to  an  important  correction  of  his
logical  ideal.  For  the  scientist  discovers  that  in  point  of
fact  there  is  no  end  to  scientific  classifications.  His
classes  have  constantly  to  be  subdivided,  and  reconsidered
in  the  light  of  later  knowledge.  Exhaustive  divisions  are
hardly  obtainable,  and  he  therefore  declines  to  postulate
them  with  the  ignorant  insouciance  of  the  logician.
Nature,  he  finds,  is  extremely  complicated  and  elusive,
and  to  the  simple  rules  he  naturally  starts  with  he  always
finds  exceptions.  Many  subjects  seem  all  compact  of
transitional  forms  and  individual  variations,  and  clean-cut
divisions  are  everywhere  more  or  less  artificial.  They
are  human  devices  for  coping  with  the  exuberance  of
reality.  Nature  sometimes  tolerates  our  passion  for
them,  but  they  are  never  to  be  read  off  from  her
countenance.  Hence  the  scientist  habitually  operates
with  more  than  one  principle  of  classification  at  a  time,
and  is  constantly  revising  his  classifications  as  his  know
ledge  grows.  He  ceases  to  think  of  them  as  final ;  he
realizes  that  they  are  convenient  and  indispensable,  but
subject  to  correction.  Thus  the  logical  inference  from
the  actual  practice  of  the  sciences  is  not  that  exhaustive
division  must  be  postulated  as  the  ideal,  but  that  in  any
applicable  conception  of  the  function  of  classification  it
must  be  explicitly  borne  in  mind  that  the  presumption
of  exhaustiveness  must  never  be  allowed  to  prevail
against  any  evidence  that  in  point  of  fact  the  old  division
had  assumed  exhaustiveness  too  soon.

§  9.  Dichotomy

.  It  would  seem,  then,  that  Formal  Logic's  only  refuge
is  in  Dichotomy,  which  is  the  truly  Formal  device  for
securing  exhaustiveness.  Let  us  divide  the  genus  A
into  B  and  not-B,  and  assure  ourselves  (by  the  Principle
of  Excluded  Middle,  Chap.  X,  §  7)  that  now  no  fish  can
escape  from  our  net.  After  that  B  may  be  once  more
divided  into  C  and  not-C,  and  so  we  go  on  merrily


vi  DEFINITION  AND  DIVISION  77

\  until  we  have  analysed  out  all  the  species,  and  that  which
•  is  not-B,  not-C,  and  not-D,  etc.,  is  =  o.

Nothing  at  first  sight  could  be  simpler  or  neater  than
Dichotomy.  Yet  nothing,  even  in  Formal  Logic,  is  really
[more  futile.  It  does  not  remove  a  single  one  of  the
difficulties  it  was  devised  to  meet.

(1)  It  does  not  secure  exhaustiveness. For  there  is
no  Formal  way  of  making  sure  that  the  class  at  which
division stops,  say not-B-not-C-not-D,  does in  fact  =  o.
The  dichotomist  never  gets  a  Formal  signal  to  tell  him
when to stop, and may exhaust his ingenuity in
suggesting  fundamenta^  but  never  his  subject.

(2)  The  fundamenta  used  remain  as  *  arbitrary '  and
'  precarious '  as  ever. I.e.  they  still  remain  dependent  on
selection. Why  should  one  begin  by  dividing  into  B  and
not-B  rather  than  into  Z  and  not-Z  ? And  why  should
either  B  or  Z  be  relevant  to  a  really  workable  classification
of  the  subject  ?

(3)  If  there  are  no  means  of  securing  relevance  in  the
principles of Division, Dichotomy becomes positively

_  farcical.  One  can  go  on  for  ever  dividing  non-existent
subjects  into  fantastic  classes  by  irrelevant  fundamenta*
*  Fairies/  for  example,  might  be  divided  into  '  liberal '  and
'  not-liberal,'  *  spondaic '  and  *  not-spondaic/  *  hyperbolic  *
and  '  not-hyperbolic/  and  no  lover  of  useless  research  could
be  stopped  from  becoming  the  greatest  authority  on  such
dichotomies,  and  probably  a  professor.  But  if  dicho
tomies  have  to  be  relevant,  if  they  are  to  mean  anything,
it  is  clear  that  the  selection  of  their  fundamenta  must  be
guided  by  *  material '  knowledge,  and  that  even  Dichotomy
is  not  really  Formal.

-  (4^  In  any  applicable  sense  it  is  not  even  true  that  it
may  be  divided  into  B  and  not-B. Dogs,  for  example,

/"may  all  be  watch-dogs  or  not-watch-dogs  ;  but  it  would
be  unsafe  to  rely  on  this  Formal  division  in  practice.  For
\{  your  '  watch-dog '  happens  to  be  also  a  sleeping  dog,  he
may  fail  to  function  as  a  watch-dog  without  ceasing
technically  to  be  one  (cf.  Chap.  II,  §  1 1).  It  seems  fair  to
conclude,  therefore,  that  the  value  of  Dichotomy  is  illusory.


78  FORMAL  LOGIC  CHAP,  vi

§  10. Conclusions

What,  then,  are  the  conclusions  to  which  our  study  of
the  Formal  theory  of  Definition  and  Division  leads  ?  Not
merely  is  it  pervaded  with  difficulties  and  incongruities,
not  merely  is  it  incapable  of  application  and  impotent  to
help  science  in  dealing  with  the  real  problems  of  definition
and  classification,  but  it  is  positively  misleading  and
obstructive.  Not  merely  does  it  suggest  no  means  of
reaching  its  logical  ideal,  but  it  puts  forward  a  false  ideal,
which,  if  it  could  be  realized,  would  be  fatal  to  the  progress
of  knowledge.  Fortunately  its  suggestions  were  so  im
practicable  that  they  had  to  be  ignored  by  all  who  really
wished  to  know  ;  but  it  has  done  incalculable  harm  by
fostering  self-satisfaction  in  those  who  did  not  wish  to
know,  but  only  to  have  a  good  excuse  for  doing  nothing,
.as  arm-chair  critics  of  sciences  they  did  not  trouble  to
acquire.  This  is  why  the  Middle  Ages,  which  were  the
.ages  of  faith  not  in  Christianity  so  much  as  in  Formal
Logic,  when  men  really  believed  in  it  and  tried  to  live  by
it,  were  so  incompatible  with  scientific  progress.


CHAPTER VII

THE THEORY OF IDEAS

§  I.  Ideas,  Universals,  and  Concepts

WE  have  already  been  compelled  to  mention  somewhat
mysterious  entities,  variously  called  Concepts  or  Universals
(or  Ideas,  or  General  Notions,  or  Conceptions],  which  the
logician  is  wont  to  treat  as  the  bricks  out  of  which  all
logical  structures  are  built.  Their  discussion  properly
belongs  to  the  second  part  of  Logic,  as  their  explanation
depends  on  the  theory  of  Judgment ;  but  though  they
are  functional  only  in  the  act  of  judging,  they  were
originally  conceived,  and  are  still  persistently  treated,  as
having  an  independent  existence.  This  existence  it  is
not  possible  to  render  really  intelligible  on  the  assump
tions  commonly  made ;  hence  the  theory  of  Ideas  has
produced  enormous  masses  of  controversy,  alike  in  logic
and  in  metaphysics,  and  is  largely  responsible  for  the
prevalent  confusion  of  these  two  subjects,  and  for  the
difficulty  of  philosophy  generally.  Yet  there  was  a  time
when  it  might  claim  to  rank  as  a  great  discovery.  A
glance  at  the  history  of  the  subject  will  not  only  show
this,  but  also  why  and  where  it  went  astray.

§  2. Plato's  Theory  of '( Ideas'

For  this  purpose  it  will  suffice  to  begin  with  Plato.1
Plato  appears  to  have  been  enormously  impressed  in  his

1  Socrates  is  usually  credited  with  the  discovery  of  the  Ideas.  But  we  have
no  sufficient  evidence  to  show  how  he  conceived  them.  All  the  accounts  of  his
doctrine  are  at  second  hand,  and  moreover  vitiated  by  a  purpose.  The  '  Socrates  '

79


8o  FORMAL  LOGIC


CHAP.


youth  by  the  Heraclitean  doctrine  of  the  all-pervasiveness
of  change.  Although  in  itself  this  doctrine  was  probably
intended  as  a  piece  of  physics  or  of  metaphysics,  it  seemed
to  him  to  carry  logical  implications  which  were  fatal  to  the
existence  of  knowledge.  For  if  everything  was  changing,
so  also  were  the  meanings  of  terms,  and  if  there  was  no
identity  of  meaning,  there  was  no  possibility  of  meaning
anything.  Every  truth  was  falsified  in  the  very  utterance.
To  say  that  A  was  B  no  longer  excluded  A's  being  not-A
and  B's  being  not-B,  nor  even  A's  not  being  B.  Thus
all  meaning  was  dissolved  away  in  the  universal  flux.
While  conceding,  therefore,  that  the  Heraclitean  descrip
tion  applied  to  phenomena  as  they  appeared  to  the  senses,
Plato  thought  that  this  only  rendered  it  the  more  im
perative  to  seek  for  stability  and  repose  in  some  fixed
suprasensible  order  which  might  be  apprehended  by  the
reason.

He  found  what  he  desired  in  the  stable  meanings  of
words  to  which  Socrates  had  called  attention.  The
1  good '  did  not  seem  to  cease  to  be  good  as  good  things
became  bad,  nor  the  '  hot '  to  be  hot  as  hot  things  cooled  ;
hence  it  was  easy  to  infer  that  such  terms  immutably
preserved  their  meanings.  The  good,  the  hot,  the
beautiful,  etc.,  in  short,  every  term  that  could  be  pre
dicated,  per  se  (i.e.  apart  from  their  applications)  were
eternal  and  immutable  entities,  unaffected  by  the  seething
flow  of  appearances  in  which  nothing  endured  or  remained
identical  with  itself.  The  use  of  predication,  then,  elevated
man  above  the  flux  of  the  phenomenal,  and  attested  the
existence  of  a  higher  order  than  that  of  sense-perception.
This  was  Plato's  first  discovery  in  the  borderland  between

of  Aristophanes  is  a  hero  of  comic  opera  ( The  Clouds}.  The  next  in  order  of
seniority,  that  of  Antisthenes,  the  inventor  of  the  '  Socratic '  dialogue,  has
perished,  though  Xenophon's  'Socrates'  may  reproduce  many  of  his  salient
features  (cf.  Joel's  Der  echte  und  der  xenophontische  Sokrates}.  Plato's  is  the  chief
of  the  literary  Socrateses,  but  cannot  be  taken  as  authentic  without  Boswellizing
Plato,  and  tarnishing  beyond  repair  the  glory  of  the  greatest  Greek  philosopher.
Aristotle,  though  he  probably  gives  the  most  trustworthy  estimate  of  the  place  of
Socrates  in  philosophy  when  he  represents  him  as  a  logician  intent  only  on  dis
covering  definitions  of  universals  by  inductive  argument,  is  already  a  retailer  of
the  tradition  which  the  school  of  Plato  had  made.  Hence  it  is  safer  to  consider
the  theory  of  Ideas  in  its  fully  developed  Platonic  form,  in  which  it  already
exhibits  its  characteristic  duality  of  function  as  a  logic  and  as  a  metaphysic.


vii  THE  THEORY  OF IDEAS  81

logic  and  metaphysics.  To  describe  these  suprasensible
sublimated  meanings  he  selected  from  the  language  of  the
artistically-minded  Greeks  the  terms  *  Forms '  or  '  Ideas,'
without  apparently  observing  how  thoroughly  sensuous
were  the  words  with  which  he  hoped  to  wing  his  way  to
the  Empyrean.

He  made,  however,  a  second  great  discovery  by  per
ceiving  that  a  logical  application  could  be  given  to  the
metaphysical  doctrine  of  Parmenides  that  *  only  Being  is,'
and  that  thereby  he  could  not  only  escape  from  the
Heraclitean  flux,  but  (in  theory  at  least)  secure  for  himself
an  eternal  repose  in  the  first  (and  most  rational)  of  the
philosophic  '  heavens.'  He  noticed  that  all  predication
employs  the  term  *  is,'  even  in  describing  change.  The
interpretation  he  put  upon  this  fact  was  that  Being  alone
is  knowable,  and  that  Becoming  is  as  such  self-contra
dictory.  Whatever  '  becomes/  therefore  (i.e.  changes,  or
is  in  process),  is  not  completely  real.  Whatever  *  becomes  '
both  is  and  is  not  what  it  was  and  what  it  turns  into.
It  cannot  be  said  to  *  be,'  but  only  to  be  struggling  from
not -being  towards  being.  By  this  corollary  from  the
forms  of  speech  the  whole  sensible  world  is,  in  principle,
condemned.  It  is  not  truly  real.  It  '  flounders '  in  a
no-man's  land  between  being  and  not-being.  Whatever
reality  it  can  be  said  to  have  is  secondary,  and  somehow
derived  from  the  Ideas  which  alone  truly  are  and  un
changingly  abide,  whereof  the  knowledge  is  the  one  thing
worth  man's  knowing.  Thus  the  popular  belief  in  the
reality  of  sensible  things  is  at  bottom  an  illusion.  For
there  are  not  many  things,  but  only  one  l  form '  for  each
predicable  kind,  bound  up  with  every  other  *  form '  in  one
unchanging  system.

§  3. The  Difficulties  of  the  Ideal  Theory

Every  step  in  this  argument  seemed  to  Plato  so  irre
fragable  that  the  validity  of  reason  was  irrevocably  pledged
to  its  acceptance.  Yet  he  was  fully  aware  of  certain
fundamental  difficulties,  which  he  was  candid  enough  to

G


82  FORMAL  LOGIC


CHAP.


state,  though  he  felt  himself  unable  to  remove  them.
After  all,  the  sensible  world  was  not  wholly  non-existent.
It  had  a  delusive  show  of  existence,  and  though  it  could
not  be  strictly  *  known,'  it  could  be  '  opined  about '  in  the
light  somehow  reflected  on  to  it  from  the  archetypal
world  of  '  Forms/  How  could  this  be  ?  How  could  the
sensible  *  participate  in,'  '  imitate,'  or  '  copy '  the  Ideas  ?
how  could  the  Ideas  be  *  models  '  '  present '  in  the  flux  ?  1
These  questions  had  to  be  answered,  for  unless  there
could  be  conceived  a  connexion  between  the  Ideas  and
the  sensible  world,  the  Ideas  would  be  otiose  and  unable
to  shed  any  light  on  the  sensible  world,  which,  after  all,
was  the  oppressive  puzzle  of  life.  But  Plato  never  found
an  answer  which  satisfied  even  himself.  His  original
notion  of  the  logical  function  of  concepts  was  infected
with  deep-seated  errors  which  rendered  the  problem  in
soluble  for  all  who  had  accepted  it.  His  successors  and
critics,  therefore,  had  an  easy  task  in  exposing  the  diffi
culties  he  had  admitted,  but  an  impossible  one  in  trying
to  escape  from  them  themselves.2

§  4.  Aristotle  v.  Plato

Aristotle,  disgusted  with  Platonism  by  the  injustice  of
the  academic  scandal  which  promoted  not  the  most
eminent  of  Plato's  pupils  to  the  headship  of  the  Academy,
but  his  nephew,  led  the  way.  He  justly  insisted  that  if
the  Ideas  were  'transcendent,1  set  apart  and  separated
from  the  phenomenal  world,  they  explained  nothing.
The  Ideas,  or,  as  he  preferred  to  call  them,  '  universals,'
must  be  '  immanent,'  a  unity  of  the  kind  in  the  many
particulars  which  exemplify  the  kind,  common  to  them

1  If  Plato  had  not  been  in  such  haste  to  fly  to  metaphysics,  and  willing  to
bestow  more  attention  on  the  logical  problem,  he  would  probably  have  perceived
that  precisely  analogous  difficulties  are  involved  in  the  problem  how,  supposing
the  Ideas  to  exist,  they  can  be  known  by  us. For  just  as  sensible  realities  are
bad  imitations  of  the  true  realities,  so  our  ideas  are  imperfect  imitations  of  the
Ideas,  disfigured  by  error  and  subject  to  change. Plato  does  not  seem  to  have
realized  this  problem,  though  in  the  Theaetetus  he  confesses  himself  unable  to
understand  the  existence  of  error  (cf.  my  Plato  or  Protagoras  ?).

2  Not  that  they  tried  very  hard  for  the  most  part. As  a  rule,  they  evince  a
much  shallower  sense  of  the  difficulties  of  the  Ideal  Theory.


VII


THE  THEORY  OF IDEAS  83


and  constituting  their  essence.  The  nature  of  universals
he  conceived  on  the  biological  model  of  the  doctrine  of
fixed  species  as  unaffected  by  individual  variation.

It  was  easy  to  say  this,  but  not  to  explain  how  pre
cisely  the  immanent  universal  could  perform  its  function.
Beyond  assuming  that  individuals  of  a  kind  differed  only
in  their  '  accidents/  and  that  these  were  logically  unim
portant,  Aristotle  made  no  serious  attempt  to  consider
how  the  universal  pervaded  its  particulars,  or  to  solve  the
difficulties  Plato  had  formulated  in  the  Parmenides.
Indeed,  whenever  he  is  off  his  guard  he  relapses  into  the
Platonic  language,  and  returns  to  the  very  phraseology  he
had  so  strenuously  denounced.1  In  short,  he  is  far  too
much  of  a  Platonist  in  his  theory  of  knowledge  to  be  able
to  correct  his  master.

§  5.  Realism

Plato  and  Aristotle  are  the  great  representatives  of  the
logical  doctrine  called  Realism?  In  both  the  possibility
of  knowledge  is  made  to  depend  on  the  assumption  of  Ideas
or  universals.  In  both  the  reality  of  these  universals  is
(on  the  whole)  superior  to  that  of  the  particulars.3  In
neither  is  the  relation  of  particulars  to  universals  properly
cleared  up.  In  both  the  logical  problem  of  '  Why  do  we
in  knowing  use  universals  ? '  is  inextricably  mixed  up  with
the  metaphysical  problem  of  '  Are  there  real  kinds  in
nature,  and  why  does  it  work  to  assume  them  ? '  Com
pared  with  these  essential  agreements  the  differences

1  Thus  he  calls  the  universal  'a  one  alongside  of  the  many'  (where  he  is
dealing  with  Plato's  original  problem  of  getting  stability  out  of  the  flux  of  per
ceptions)  in  Anal.  Post.  ii.  19,  and  in  De  Anima,  iii.  4,  makes  'reason' tran
scendent  in  a  peculiarly  indefensible  way.

2  This logical  '  realism '  must  be  carefully  distinguished  from metaphysical
realism. In  metaphysics  '  realism  '  is  opposed  to  '  idealism  '  and  not  to  '  nominal
ism." It  asserts  that  perceived  objects  are  'independent'  of  their  percipients,  or
that  a  real  world  exists  whether  there  exists  a  mind to  know  it  or  not. How
different  these  uses  are  is  shown  by  the  fact  that,  though  Plato  and  Aristotle  are
both '  realists ' in logic, Plato  would be  called  an  '  idealist '  and  Aristotle  a
'  realist '  in  metaphysics.

3  Aristotle,  it  is  true,  makes  some  reservations  on  this  point  and  tends  in  his
metaphysics  to  treat  the  individual  as  the  primary  reality  (cf.  Chap.  IV,  §  3)
But  even  in  the  Metaphysics  the  individual  is  described,  for  the  purposes  of  know
ing,  as  a  concretion  of  two  universals,  '  matter  '  and  '  form.'


84  FORMAL  LOGIC  CHAP.

between  them  are  secondary.  Aristotle  has  only  one
real  world,  in  which  universals  are  somehow  immanent :
Plato  has  two,  which  are  absolutely  separated  and  yet
somehow  connected  ;  or,  if  he  has  only  one,  his  real  world
is,  at  any  rate,  not  the  real  world  of  Aristotle  and  of
common-sense,  which  he  regards  as  an  illusion.

Hence  in  the  Middle  Ages  they  could  both  be  cited
as  the  champions  of  Realism  and  boiled  down  compendi
ously  to  the  two  formulas,  universalia  ante  rent  (Plato)
and  universalia  in  re  (Aristotle),  where  res  means  the
concrete  particular,  the  reality  of  which  common-sense
everywhere  takes  for  granted.


§  6.  Nominalism

But  from  the  nature  of  the  case  this  doctrine  could
not  remain  uncontested.  Realism  had  never  succeeded
in  giving  a  satisfactory,  or  even  a  coherent,  account  of
how  the  universal  could  be  immanent  in  the  particular.
Nor  had  it  even  attempted  to  explain  in  detail  the
specification  of  genera  and  in  what  way  genera  could  be
real  which  possessed  all  the  incompatible  attributes  of
its  species,  how,  e.g.,  '  the  triangle '  could  be  equiangular,
rectangular,  and  isosceles,  etc.,  or  how  the  infinite  plurality
of  ideal  triangles  was  compatible  with  the  unity  of  the
universal.  If,  therefore,  the  working  assumption  of
ordinary  life  was  right  as  against  Plato,  and  particulars
really  existed  and  were  objects  of  knowledge,  it  was
possible  to  hold  that  they  alone  really  existed  (as  Aristotle
had  given  occasion  to  think),  and  that  universals  were
figments.  So  far  from  being  prior  to  the  particulars,,
they  were  ex  post  facto  devices  to  describe  in  words  the
points  of  agreement  between  individuals.  They  were,
therefore,  post  rem,  nay,  were  verbal  conveniences,  nomina
or  flatus  vocis  and  nothing  more.  They  were  wholly
man-made  and  nothing  in  reality  corresponded  to  them.
This  doctrine  was  called  Nominalism^  and  is  first  trace
able  in  some  objections  made  by  Antisthenes  to  Plato's
theory  when  it  was  first  propounded.  It  became  a


vii  THE  THEORY  OF IDEAS  85

burning  question  1  in  the  medieval  schools  with  Roscellinus,
who  was  condemned  at  Soissons  in  1092,  but  triumphed
with  William  of  Occam  in  the  fourteenth  century.


§  7.  Conceptualise

Conceptualism  may  be  conceived  as  a  less  extreme
(or  perhaps  less  distorted)  form  of  Nominalism.  Uni-
versals  are  not  mere  words,  but  are  admitted  to  be  real
as  psychic  facts,  universalia  in  mente.  They  are  regarded
as  the  instruments  whereby  our  thought  classifies  the
overwhelming  variety  of  phenomena.  It  is  necessary
to  go  behind  words  to  their  '  meanings/  and  permissible
to  ask  how  and  why  that  meaning  serves  its  purpose.
Nay,  in  its  better  forms,  Conceptualism  recognized  that
concepts  or  *  ideas '  exist  only  in  the  judgment  (in
sermoni),  though  it  thought  it  incumbent  on  itself  to
construe  their  existence  on  the  analogy  of  physical
things  and  to  conceive  them  as  distinct  mental  entities,
which  though  '  universal '  per  se  might  yet  be  '  indi
vidualized'  variously  in  their  applications.  In  so  doing
it  was  perpetrating  a  needless  confusion  between  the
logical  and  the  psychological  senses  of  the  word  *  idea.'
If  the  *  idea '  as  the  logical  meaning  is  identified  with
the  psychological '  idea '  or  mental  image,  the  conceptualist
may  well  be  perplexed  by  the  nominalist's  question  how
it  is  possible  to  have  a  '  general  idea '  of  triangle  which
is  "  neither  equilateral,  isocrural,  nor  scalene,  but  all  and
none  of  these  at  once." 2  This  confusion  is,  however,
quite  superfluous.  For  though  it  may  be  true  that
mental  images  accompany  all  thinking,  and  it  is  true
that  if  they  do  they  are  as  particular  as  things,  yet  it
does  not  follow  that  they  have  any  special  logical  im
portance  or  that  the  act  of  meaning  essentially  depends
on  them.  For  not  only  is  it  denied  of  late  by  good

1  Because  it  was  said  to  undermine  the  doctrine  of  the  Trinity,  and  to  lead
to  tritheism. For  how  could  the  three Persons  any  longer  have  a  common
1  essence '  ?

2  Locke's  Essay,  iv. 7,  8  ;  and  cf. Berkeley,  Princ. of  Hum. Know.  §  13.
This  difficulty  exists  only  for  Realism.


86  FORMAL  LOGIC


CHAP.


psychologists  that  imagery  always  accompanies  thought,
but  there  is  no  correlation  between  the  wealth  and
intensity  of  the  imagery  and  of  the  thought.  And
anyhow  the  imagery  is  logically  irrelevant.  It  is  never
the  particular  fluctuating  imagery  we  may  have  in
judging  that  we  mean.  I  may  in  judging  about  dogs
have  in  my  mind  the  visual  image  of  a  yellow  dog,  and
yet  convey  my  meaning  to  another  whose  dog-image  is
black,  provided  that  we  both  know  that  the  colour  of
dogs  is  variable  and  unessential.  Hence  the  impossibility,
signalized  by  Berkeley,  of  forming  images  which  are  not
individual,  is  no  argument  in  favour  of  Nominalism  as
against  Conceptualism.

§  8. The  Errors  of  Realism ,  Nominalism^
and  Conceptualism

The  realistic  doctrine  of  universals  has  a  great  attrac
tion  for  unclear  minds,  which  are  fascinated  by  its  very
defects.  It  is  no  objection  in  their  eyes  that  Realism
r  cannot  be  thought  out  into  a  coherent  account  of  the
relation  of  universals  to  particulars,  that  it  thoroughly
confuses  its  proper  logical  problem  of  understanding  the
working  of  '  ideas '  in  thinking  with  the  metaphysical
problem  of  discovering  real  kinds  in  nature,  and  that  it
cannot  explain  how  its  supposition  that  universals  exist
per  se  forms  any  guarantee  of  the  concepts,  good,  bad,
and  indifferent,  which  we  use.  But  in  scientific  minds
the  cause  of  Realism  has  been  ruined  by  the  further
study  of  the  very  facts  to  which  it  first  appealed.  It
has  become  incompatible  with  science,  and  Darwinism
has  administered  the  coup  de  grace.  The  naive  objectivism
of  attributing  to  the  core  of  reality  every  device  of
scientific  manipulation  (cf.  Chap.  V,  §  7)  has  become
abhorrent  to  modern  science,  which  demands  the  utmost
freedom  to  use  whatever  methods  and  whatever  hypotheses
will  yield  results,  and  finds  it  inconvenient  to  have  to
put  a  metaphysical  construction  on  all  its  passing
expedients.  It  prefers  to  believe,  therefore,  in  the  sub-


VII


THE  THEORY  OF IDEAS  87


jectivity  of  '  universals,'  which  has  been  conclusively
established  by  Darwinism  in  the  crucial  case  of  biological
species  (Chap.  V,  §  8).

It  is,  however,  scientifically  very  instructive  to  trace
back  Realism  to  the  point  where  first  it  went  astray.
The  source  of  the  error  is  to  be  found  in  Plato's  original
assumptions,  (i)  Though  it  is  true  that  everything  is
changing,  it  is  false  that  therefore  the  flux  is  unknowable.
For  things  are  changing  at  very  different  rates,  and  it  is
possible  to  measure  the  more  rapid  changes  by  things
which,  for  all  practical  and  scientific  purposes,  may  be
taken  as  stable.  It  is  the  use  of  such  methods  that
enables  science  to  smile  at  the  idea  that  the  changing
cannot  be  known.  (2)  It  is  false,  therefore,  that  the  fluid
can  only  be  known  by  the  rigid.  (3)  Though  it  is  true
that  '  Ideas '  (properly  understood)  play  an  important
part  in  knowing,  it  is  false  that  they  belong  to  a  supra-
sensible  world  of  superior  reality.  Not  only  is  Aristotelian
realism  right  in  conceiving  them  as  immanent  in  the
phenomenal  world,  but  they  are  just  as  real,  and  as
phenomenal,  as  the  minds  that  harbour  them.  (4)  They
participate  in  consequence  in  the  general  characteristics
of  reality,  and  are  not  exempt  from  change.  Human
ideas  are  originated,  grow,  change,  and  perish,  like  every
thing  else.  To  postulate  another  kind  of  Ideas,  defined
to  be  absolutely  immutable,  is  futile.  For  this  would
only  produce  a  further  insoluble  problem  as  to  how
these  Ideas  are  related  to  our  ideas,  and  how  this  relation
could  be  known  to  us,  even  if  it  existed.  (5)  It  is
essential  to  the  logical  function  of  Ideas  that  they  should
not  be  immutable,  but,  on  the  contrary,  should  be  modifi
able  by  use.  For  only  so  can  they  be  prevented  from
getting  out  of  date  as  our  knowledge  grows.  (6)  It  is,
moreover,  an  undeniable  and  literal  fact  that  every  time
an  'idea'  is  used  in  a  real  judgment  its  meaning  is
modified  thereby.

For  no  judgment  would  be  worth  making  nor  could
it  rationally  be  made,  if  it  did  not  enunciate  or  com
municate  some  truth  that  was  (or  seemed)  new  to  the


88  FORMAL  LOGIC


CHAP.


parties  concerned.  Hence  ever  afterwards  the  meaning
of  its  terms  would  be  modified  for  them  by  the  fact
that  the  judgment  had  brought  them  into  conjunction
(cf.  Chap.  XI,  §  n).  Of  course  in  ordinary  judgments,
that  serve  a  passing  purpose,  the  modification  is  so  slight
as  to  be  hardly  perceptible  ;  it  makes  very  little  difference
to  my  notion  of  '  dog  '  that  any  particular  dog  should  have
contributed  to  its  meaning.  But  in  many  cases  the  differ
ence  is  felt ;  our  first  experiences  that  '  this  is  love,'  or
*  mania/  or  *  seasickness '  probably  add  enormously  to  the
meaning  of  their  terms.  And  of  course  judgments  which
embody  new  discoveries  may  not  only  affect  their  terms,
but  revolutionize  the  state  of  a  science,  and  convey
novelty  to  all  the  world.1

Realism,  then,  has  thoroughly  misinterpreted  the
function  of  the  concept.  It  has  noted  the  facts  that
thinking  uses  concepts  and  that  the  use  of  concepts  is
the  predominant  feature  in  human  intelligence,  but  has
at  once  wandered  off  on  a  metaphysical  interpretation
of  these  facts  which  is  logically  irrelevant,  without  telling
us  either  what  concepts  are  or  why  they  work.  Nor
does  it  explain  how  true  universals  are  to  be  discriminated
from  false.

Nominalism has  value  as  a  protest  against  Realism,

1  It  will  not  do  to  regard  these  cases  as  different  in  principle,  and  the  former
sort  of  novelty  as  only  'psychological,'  while  the  latter  alone  is  'logical.'
For  logical  novelty  is  only  novelty  to  all  individuals.  Or  else,  if  we  try  to
conceive  it  as  absolute,  it  becomes  impossible  altogether.  Sub  specie  aeternitatis
there  cannot  be  novelties  anyhow.  In  the  closed  circle  of  the  Platonic  Ideas,
for  example,  there  can  be  a  coming  into  being  as  little  as  a  passing  away.
Everything  is  eternally  frozen  in  an  absolutely  rigid  scheme  of  relations.  Hence
all  novelty,  reasoning,  and  inference  necessarily  pertain  only  to  the  apprehension
of  this  scheme  by  human  minds,  and  form  part  of  their  psychology.  Plato
himself  hints  as  much  by  using  the  same  term  56£a  both  for  '  opinion  '  and
for  judgment.  This  implies  that  'judgment  '  is  not  a  matter  of  '  knowledge,'  and
is  strictly  extra-logical  (cf.  Chap.  XI,  §  8).  The  more  consistent  among  Formal
logicians  have  had  the  acumen  to  perceive  this.  Mr.  H.  A.  Prichard,  for  example,
who  follows  Plato  in  drawing  a  rigid  line  between  'opinion'  and  'knowledge,'
quite  rightly  stigmatizes  as  '  fallacious '  the  question  '  What  is  judgment  ? '
(Mind,  No.  76,  p.  543  n. ).  But  he  certainly  goes  beyond  Plato  in  regarding
as  equally  fallacious  the  question  '  What  is  the  relation  of  the  universal  to  the
particular?1  For  Plato's  writings  show  that  he  had  seriously  concerned  himself
with  this  question,  though  he  too  could  not  solve  it.  In  actual  human  thinking,
on  the  other  hand,  which  is  another  affair  altogether,  the  mutual  adjustment  of
particular  ('  case ')  and  universal  ('  law  ')  is  the  essence  of  all  reasoning  (cf.  Chap.
XXI,  §  5).


VII


THE  THEORY  OF IDEAS


89


but  beyond  this  tells  us  little.  It  is  obvious  that  words
are  used  to  convey  ideas,  but  it  is  a  mistake  to  reduce
ideas  to  words.  For  words  are  framed  to  express  ideas,
and  languages  grow  with  the  thoughts  of  their  users.
Moreover,  Nominalism  also  fails  to  tell  us  how  words
obtain  and  convey  their  meaning,  and  why  they  should
work.

Conceptualism  has  the  merit  of  emphasizing  that  ideas
are  primarily  devices  of  our  thought,  and  means  of  think
ing  and  ordering  our  experience  (Denkmittel).  But  its
psychology  is  very  defective.  To  conceive  ideas  on  the
analogy  of  '  things  '  is  utterly  to  misrepresent  their  psychic
nature.  And  so  long  as  the  meaning-process  is  ignored,
it  matters  little  whether  they  are  taken  as  psychological
or  as  logical  *  things'

None  of  these  theories,  therefore,  which  regard  ideas
as  entities  can  really  describe  their  psychological  nature
or  understand  their  logical  function.


§  9. What,  then,  are  '  Concepts  '  ?

Concepts  are  not  things.  Judgments  are  not  com
binations  of  concepts,1  nor  do  concepts  exist  outside  of
the  Judgment.  In  fact  they  do  not,  properly  speaking,
exist  at  all.  If  logicians  had  taken  the  precaution  of
examining  the  psychological  process  of  judging  before
constructing  their  theories,  they  could  hardly  have  failed
to  observe  that  the  characteristic  features  in  our  intelli
gence  are  not  '  things  '  but  processes.  Perception  is  a
process,  thinking  is  a  process,  meaning  is  a  process,
attention  is  a  process,  and  '  ideas  '  are  —  a  misinterpretation
of  processes.  Experience  is  hardly  ever  a  passive
receptiveness  towards  '  impressions  '  ;  it  is  nearly  always
a  reaction  upon  the  given.  One  of  the  most  persistent
and  important  of  these  reactions  is  the  assumption,  which
we  make  almost  continuously,  that  what  we  experience
means  something.  This  assumption  is  the  taking  up  of
an  attitude  towards  our  experience  which  is  an  addition


^


1  Aristotle's


vornj.a.Ttav.


90  FORMAL  LOGIC  CHAP.

to  the  mere  experiencing.  It  makes  our  experience  a
problem.  We  question  it  and  ask  what  it  means,  and
test  the  answers  we  obtain.  This  assumption  of  meaning
is  the  logically  important  process  which  underlies  the
formation  of  '  concepts.'

In  itself,  however,  it  has  no  permanence.  It  is  as
fluid  and  changeful,  as  elusive  and  transitory,  as  any
thing  in  perception,  and  as  radically  incapable  of  being
fixed.  Meaning  may  be  expressed  and  conveyed  by
words  and  by  a  variety  of  other  signs  (gestures,  intona
tions,  etc.),  but  it  never  resides  in  the  words  themselves,
but  only  in  the  soul  that  uses  them.  Words  are  vehicles
of  meaning,  but  only  when  they  are  employed ;  the
meaning  of  a  word,  as  it  is  recorded  in  the  dictionary,
is  only  a  possibility  of  using  it  (cf.  Chap.  I,  §  3).

Nevertheless  words  are  important.  They  are  the
channels  for  the  conveying  of  meaning,  and  so  give  a
definite  form  to  the  process.  For  when  a  word  has  been
used  repeatedly  to  convey  a  meaning,  it  becomes  imbued
with  it.  The  sense  becomes  associated  with  the  sound.
The  mere  sound  acquires  the  power  to  ( set  us  thinking,'
i.e.  framing  tentative  judgments  and  wondering  what
^meaning  it  will  have.  Powerful  associations  of  an
emotional  sort  gather  round  the  word,  and  seem  to  give
it  an  intrinsic  meaning  *  independent '  of  its  actual,
transitory  use.  It  becomes  a  radiating  point  which
illumines  and  warms  the  adjacent  regions  of  the  soul.
Moreover,  by  dint  of  stable  usage  such  concretions  of
past  meanings,  condensed  in  words,  lose  much  of  their
initial  plasticity  and  vagueness,  and  become  highly  re
sistant  to  innovations.  The  traditional  meaning  of  a
word  will  always  be  defended,  often  passionately,  against
any  extension  which  the  growth  of  knowledge  may  seem
/  to  require.  The  word,  therefore,  may  easily  seem  the
ultimate  centre  of  mental  energy.

These  are  the  facts  which  form  a  partial  vindication
of  Nominalism,  just  as  the  fact  that  our  thinking  is
applicable  to  reality  and  effective  forms  the  truth  in
Realism.  We  may  even  say  that  if  there  were  concepts,


vii  THE  THEORY  OF IDEAS  91

Nominalism  would  be  the  true  account  of  them,  and  they
would  be  the  meanings  of  words.  But  as  the  existence
of  the  meaning-attitude  is  what  generates  the  belief  in
concepts  and  demands  the  invention  of  words  to  express
it,  it  is  better  to  conclude  that  the  whole  Formal  attempt
to  describe  meanings  as  '  ideas '  is  mistaken,  and  that
we  must  steadily  conceive  meaning  as  a  process.  When
we  realize  this,  we  perceive  that  the  right  name  for  the
theory  of  '  ideas  '  is  the  theory  of  Judgment.


CHAPTER VIII

THE FORMAL THEORIES OF JUDGMENT

§  i. The  Formal  Aspects  of  Judgment

WE  have  steadily  kept  in  view  the  fact  that  Judgment
is  the  primary  act  of  Thought  and  that  the  attempt  of
Formal  Logic  to  '  analyse '  it  into  something  more
elementary  is  a  fictitious  procedure  which  can  be  justified
only  by  its  convenience  and  success  (cf.  Chap.  II,  §§  1-5).
Whether  the  Formal  account  of  a  '  first  part '  of  Logic
prior  to  Judgment  justifies  itself  on  this  score,  may
safely  be  left  to  the  judgment  of  the  reader.  But  there
can  be  no  doubt  that  in  passing  to  the  '  second  part,'  the
doctrine  of  the  Judgment  (or  Proposition),  Formal  Logic
ought  to  be  getting  on  to  less  factitious  ground,  and
dealing  with  real  processes  of  thought,  of  which  it  ought  to
be  possible  to  give  a  formal  account.  Whether  in  point
of  fact  Formal  Logic  ever  wants  to  concern  itself  with
actual  judgment  at  all,  and  whether  what  it  calls  a  judg
ment  is  ever  more  than  an  '  ambiguous '  form  of  words
for  conveying  various  meanings,  we  shall  gradually  dis
cover  ;  but  we  cannot  deny  that  it  makes  a  show  of
giving  a  formal  analysis  of  its  so-called  '  judgments.'

Accordingly  we  find  that  the  multitudinous  theories
of  Judgment  are  susceptible  of  classification  in  no  less
than  four  groups,  according  as  they  emphasize  one  or
other  of  the  formal  aspects  of  Judgment,  (i)  Those
who  believe  that  Judgment  is  not  the  primary  act  of
thought,  but  that  (in  some  sense  or  other)  Terms  or
Concepts  may  be  regarded  as  something  more  elementary,

92


C1I


.  vin  FORMAL  THEORIES  OF  JUDGMENT 93


out  of  which  judgments  are  built,  are  bound  to  regard
Judgment  as  a  mode  of  combining  ideas  or  concepts,  or
of  uniting  subjects  and  predicates.  And  it  is  clear  that
of  this  procedure  a  general  and  formal  account  must  be
given.  (2)  Those  who  observe  that  all  judgments  lay
claim  to  truth  must  regard  this  as  a  formal  differentia
of  Judgment.  (3)  Those  who  consider  how  judgments
differ  from  other  products  of  mental  activity  are  forced
to  define  it  formally  by  its  capacity  of  being  true-or-false.
(4)  Those  who  have  meditated  at  all  upon  its  function
cannot  fail  to  be  struck  by  its  universal  claim  to  be  about
reality,  and  to  reveal  its  nature.

All  these  four  views  apply  to  judgments  irrespective
of  whether  they  are,  in  fact,  true  or  false.  Hence  they
do  not  affect  the  question  of  actual  truth,  and  only  concern
the  Formal  nature  of  Judgment  which  has  abstracted
from  the  problem  of  de  facto  truth  or  falsity  (cf.  Chap.  I,,
§§  3-4)-

§  2.  Judgment  as  a  Compound

Of  these  four  groups  of  views  the  first  need  not  detain
us.  It  has  been  a  great  favourite  with  Formal  Logic
ever  since  Aristotle  defined  Judgment  as  a  *  synthesis
of  concepts  as  though  they  were  one.' 1  But  it  has
already  been  disposed  of  in  our  last  chapter.  If  '  ideas/
as  Logic  understands  them,  are  not  psychic  facts,  if
psychological  '  ideas,'  though  they  are  psychic  facts,  are
logically  irrelevant  (Chap.  VII,  §  7),  and  if  the  simplest  act
of  thought  is  the  assumption  of  a  meaning-attitude  and
the  existence  of  meaning  is  therefore  the  ultimate  fact
for  Logic  (Chap  VII,  §  9),  it  follows  that  nothing  more
elementary  can  be  found  out  of  which  judgments  may
be  composed.  The  complexities  of  structure  analysed
as  subject,  copula,  and  predicate,  or  as  a  combining  of
ideas,  belong  to  the  verbal  expression  of  the  Judgment,
the  Proposition,  and  do  not  penetrate  to  the  unitary
function  of  judging ;  so  that  once  more  Formal  Logic
has  stopped  short  at  words.

1  De  Interpret,  chap.  i.


94  FORMAL  LOGIC  CHAP.

§  3-  Judgment  as  Truth- Claim

This second way of  defining  the formal nature of
Judgment  is  comparatively  recent,  but indisputably  im
portant. It is a remarkable fact about judgments as
such  that  they  all  claim  truth  ;  so  remarkable  indeed  as
to  reflect  anything but credit upon a discipline which
has  failed either to notice it  or  to  advance  beyond  it.
For if its claim to truth is  regarded  as the essential
characteristic  of  Judgment,  it  follows  that  all  judgments
must  be  taken  literally  at  their  face-value. On  the  face
of it,  every  judgment is true because it claims truth.
Judgments as  such,  then,  must be  proclaimed  true  and
infallible. Whatever is asserted asserts truth, and no
matter  how  assertions  clash  and  vary,  they  must  all  pass
as  formally  true,  because  none  of  them  confesses  to  an
intrinsic  doubt  of  its  own  truth. It  becomes,  therefore,
logically  impossible  to  detect  an  error,  a  sarcasm,  a  lie,  or
a joke. From  the  standpoint  of  Formal  Logic,  errors,
sarcasms,  lies,  and  jokes  become  invisible,  and  cannot  be
known  to  exist. They  are  all  happily  included  in  Formal
truth, and the difference between them and what the
ordinary  man  calls  true  judgments  must  be  regarded  as
extra-logical and irrelevant to Logic. This,  no  doubt,
accentuates  the paradoxical  character  of  Formal  Logic,
and  explains  why  this  ex  officio  infallibility  of  every  judg
ment  has  not  been  made  as  prominent  as  its  sensational
character deserved  ; but  it is impossible  to  see  how  a
consistent  Formal Logic  can  either  refuse  to recognize
truth-claims  or  go behind them. It  is  true,  no  doubt,
that  to  confine  itself  to  the  recognition  of  formal  truth-
claims has  the  practical drawback  of  rendering  Formal
Logic utterly inapplicable to the  conduct of thought.
But  can  this  practical  objection  be  allowed  to  impugn  the
validity  of  logical  theory,  and  to  force  upon  it  a  renuncia
tion  of  its  fundamental  assumptions  ? Why  should the
science  of  Formal Logic  trouble  about  the  problems  of
actual  thinking,  or  pander  to  the  demand  for  a  practical
distinction  between  truth  and  error?


viii FORMAL  THEORIES  OF  JUDGMENT 95


§  4.  Judgment  as  True-or-False

No  really  stalwart  logician  would  capitulate  before
such  objections.  But  even  he  might  be  distressed  by
discovering  urgent  reasons  for  defining  Judgment  in  a
different  way,  which  is  quite  incompatible  with  the  above.
For  if  Judgment  has  been  defined  as  inherently  true  in
virtue  of  its  form,  how  can  it  also  be  defined  as  inherently
true-or-false^  For  this  definition  expressly  bases  itself
on  the  distinction  between  truth  and  falsity,  while  the
first  has  ruled  out  the  consideration  of  falsity  as  extra-
logical.  Moreover,  the  conception  of  Judgment  as  that
which  is  true-or-false  is  of  great  antiquity  and  authority.
Aristotle 1  first  enunciated  it,  and  all  logicians  have
followed  him.

They  could  hardly  do  otherwise,  for  it  is  indispensable
to  the  constitution  of  a  Formal  science  of  Logic.  It  is
needed  to  mark  off  the  sphere  of  Logic  from  that  of
Psychology.  Without  it  how  could  judgments  be  dis
tinguished  within  Logic  from  concepts,  and  from  such
extra-logical  processes  as  questions,  wishes,  and  com
mands  ?  And  even  if  we  venture  to  reply  that  Aristotle
was  wrong  in  thinking  that  concepts  could  have  meaning
per  se,2  it  is  yet  vital  to  Formal  Logic  to  make  the
capacity  for  being  true-or-false  the  criterion  of  the
logical.  For  unless  questions,  wishes,  commands,  and
postulates  are  rigidly  excluded  from  the  sphere  of  Logic,
our  whole  science  is  plunged  into  the  abyss  of  psychology.

In  actual  thinking  all  these  *  extra-logical '  processes
are  intimately  interwoven  with  our  judgments,  and  essential
to  the  continuance  of  mental  life.  Every  judgment
originates  in  the  matrix  of  some  mind.  It  is,  explicitly

1  De  Interpret,  chap.  i.

2  Loc.  cit.  he  declares  that  '  goat-stag '  means  something,  even  though  it  is
not  yet  true-or-false. But  what  he  is  evidently  thinking  of  is  only  the  '  meaning
of  the  word.' So  soon  as  the  word  is  pronounced,  it  is  a  psychical  fact  that
it  becomes  a  cue  for  questionings,  and  attempted  judgments  crowd  in  upon  the
mind. E.g.  'Goat-stag! What  is  that,  I  wonder? Is  it  a  mythical  monster,
or  an  antelope,  or  a  nonsense-word  ?  ' None  of  these  suggestions  need  be  affirmed
in  the  end,  but  they  suffice  to  give  a  very  definite  feeling  that  the  word  '  means
something.' (Cf.  Chap.  VII,  §  9.)


96  FORMAL  LOGIC


CHAP.


or  implicitly,  an  answer  to  a  question.  If,  that  is,  it  has
not  been  consciously  intended  as  an  answer,  it  may  always
be  called  in  question.  It  must  be  prompted  by  some
interest,1  and  may  be  prompted  by  a  wish.  Consciously
or  unconsciously,  it  is  the  product  of  a  selection  from
among  alternatives  which  existed  for  its  maker  or  for
others,  and  so  to  some  extent  '  arbitrary '  or  volitional.
Every  principle  similarly  is  in  the  end  a  postulate,  i.e.  a
demand,  and  not  a  '  law '  descriptive  of  the  course  of
nature  (cf.  Chap.  XVIII,  §  5).  Without  principles
(postulates),  hypotheses  (questions),  ideals  (purposes),  and
interests  (motives),  no  science  can  arise  or  prosper.  In
short,  the  nature  and  course  of  thinking  cannot  be  under
stood  without  taking  into  account  this  '  psychological '
side  of  judgment.

But  does  Logic  want  to  take  all  this  into  account,  and
if  it  did,  could  it  remain  Formal  ?  Would  it  not  have  to
concern  itself  with  real  truth  and  error,  instead  of  with
the  formal  distinction  which  a  child  can  make  ?  Would
it  not  have  to  enter  into  all  the  psychological  ramifica
tions  and  subtleties  of  actual  human  minds?  And  how
are  order  and  clarity  to  be  evolved  out  of  this  chaos  ?

Formal  Logic  has  always  assumed  this  to  be  impractic
able.  And  in  spite  of  the  difficulty  of  combining  its
definition  of  Judgment  as  something  which  must  be  true,
and  its  definition  of  it  as  something  which  must  be  true-
or-false,  with  the  respect  it  professes  for  the  '  law '  of
Contradiction,  Logic  may  well  shrink  from  the  adventure,
and  prefer  to  remain  entangled  in  a  fundamental  con
tradiction.  For  it  is  always  possible  to  conceal  its
condition.  The  two  inconsistent  definitions  need  not
be  put  in  juxtaposition,  nor  made  too  plain.  This
policy  has  been  singularly  successful  in  the  past,  and  will
most  likely  last  a  long  time  yet.  And  the  embarrassment
of  Formal  Logic  is  really  such  that  much  may  be  forgiven

1  What  that  interest  is,  and  whether  it  is  popularly  called  '  theoretic  '  or
4  practical,'  is,  of  course,  psychologically  quite  irrelevant.  It  makes  as  little
difference  whether  a  boy  studies  geometry  because  he  likes  it,  or  because  he
desires  to  win  a  prize,  or  is  afraid  of  punishment,  as  whether  he  plays  cricket  for
these  reasons.


viii FORMAL  THEORIES  OF  JUDGMENT 97

it.  We  may  leave,  then,  the  true-or-false  as  the  criterion
of  Judgment  with  the  remark  that,  even  if  Formal  Logic
could  make  good  its  claim  to  it,  it  would  yet  fail  to  dis
tinguish  Judgment  formally  from  Perception  (cf.  Chap.  I,
§6).

§  5-  Judgment  as  Reference  to  Reality

That  Judgment  is  essentially  referred  to  reality,  that
it  claims  to  be  ( about '  reality,  that  thoughts  are  valued
(ultimately)  for  the  purpose  of  handling  '  things/  is
certainly  an  important  formal  feature  about  thinking.
The  only  question  about  it  is  whether  it  is  not  too  formal
to  be  valuable.  As  Formal  Logic  conceives  it,  it  is
impossible  to  see  how  it  can  serve  the  purpose  of  dis
criminating  between  good  thinking  and  bad,  between
reality  and  unreality.  For  the  formal  sense  of  '  reality '
is  so  vague  and  general  as  to  be  useless  for  an  analysis
of  actual  thinking,  and  for  a  critical  appreciation  of  its
value.  It  tells  us  that  every  judgment  refers  to  reality
in  the  widest  sense.  But  this  is  to  tell  us  nothing  we
did  not  know  before.  For  if  the  matter  judged  about
had  not  been  somehow  and  in  some  sense  an  object  of
thought,  how  could  a  judgment  have  been  made  about
it?  Moreover,  this  was  not  what  we  desired  to  know.
We  did  not  desire  to  know  that  reality  in  general  was  in
some  vague  and  remote  way  referred  to  in  the  judgment ;
we  wanted  to  know  what  precisely  was  the  sort  of  reality
it  was  about,  and  whether  it  reached  the  precise  reality  it
aimed  at.  For  we  were  perfectly  aware,  long  before  Formal
Logic  tried  to  confuse  our  minds  on  the  plea  of  en
lightening  them,  that  realities  are  of  many  sorts,  and
that  it  matters  a  great  deal  that  we  should  discriminate
between  them,  and  not  be  beguiled  into  taking  one  sort
for  another.  We  may  even  have  been  aware  that  various
sorts  of  '  unreality '  are  technically  included  by  Logic  in
the  '  reality '  it  talks  about,  though  we  should  search  its
deliverances  in  vain  for  any  confession  of  the  fact.

At  any  rate  the  ordinary  man,  though  he  uses  terms
loosely  enough,  succeeds  in  discriminating  the  different

H


98  FORMAL  LOGIC


CHAP.


orders  of  reality  with  considerable  precision.  He  knows
that  a  fancy,  an  ideal,  a  dream,  a  pain,  a  stone,  a  man,  a
law,  an  atom,  a  lie,  a  circle,  and  a  god  may  all  be  called
real  in  some  sense  without  on  that  account  putting  them
all  on  the  same  level.  He  recognizes  that  they  are  all
formally  capable  of  becoming  objects  of  thought,  and
that  judgments  about  them  may  be  true  or  false.  He
understands  that,  e.g.,  1 1  have  a  toothache'  may  be  true,
or  again  false,  according  as  one  person  says  it  or  another,
at  one  time  or  another.  He  can  discriminate  between
the  true  and  the  false  in  the  judgments  that  '  Egyptian
gods,  centaurs,  and  minotaurs  all  had  animal  heads/  or
that  *  Rebecca  in  Ivanhoe  really  loved  the  Templar  and
married  him,'  without  becoming  a  convert  to  Egyptian
theology  and  Greek  mythology  or  taking  Scott's  novel
for  authentic  history.  Lastly,  he  may  even  perceive  that
in  some  cases  it  depends  on  the  sort  of  reality  intended
whether  a  judgment  is  true  or  false,  and  that  conflicting
judgments  may  both  be  true  if  they  have  different
references.  E.g.  '  A  goat-stag  is  a  mythical  animal '  and
*  a  goat-stag  is  an  antelope '  can  both  be  true,  if  the
reference  in  the  one  case  is  to  Aristotle  and  in  the  other
to  the  modern  zoological  genus  Tragelaphus.

What  gain,  then,  is  it  to  have  Formal  Logic  telling  us
that  Judgment  is  always  about  reality  ?  How  does  it
help  us  to  detect  the  real  reference  and  actual  meaning  of
an  assertion  ?  Is  it  enough  to  know,  quite  generally,
that  a  reference  to  reality  is  intended  ?  Do  we  not  want
to  know  which  sort  of  '  reality '  was  intended  and  whether
the  judgment's  intention  is  actually  achieved,  whether  the
particular  sort  of  reality  referred  to  is  actually  possessed  ?
If  we  have  failed,  is  it  a  consolation  to  be  told,  '  Well,
you  may  not  have  succeeded  in  judging  about  the
reality  you  meant,  but  still  the  lie  or  inconsequence
which  baffled  you  was,  after  all,  a  sort  of  reality  about  a
sort  of  reality,  and  not  blank  nothingness  ! '  ?  Which,  to
put  it  mildly,  seems  a  mockery.

Formal  Logic  sometimes  seems  to  be  dimly  aware
that  it  does  not  afford  much  practical  guidance  to  our


viii FORMAL  THEORIES  OF  JUDGMENT 99

thinking,  but  is  sadly  prone  to  useless  platitude.  But  its
favourite  escape  from  such  criticism  is  a  dive  into  meta
physics  to  conceal  its  logical  fiasco.  So  here.  The
harmless  and  almost  meaningless  doctrine  of  the  formal
objectivity  of  the  Judgment  is  transformed  into  a  meta
physical  revelation.  We  are  assured  that  the  reference
to  reality  in  Judgment  is  not  the  formal  thing  it  seems.
It  means  that  the  universe  is  one  system,  and  all  the  parts
thereof  are  so  indissolubly  connected,  that  whatever  is
affirmed  about  any  part  must  inevitably  in  the  end
qualify  the  whole.  Thus,  whether  its  maker  knows  it  or
not,  whether  he  is  right  or  wrong,  whether  he  speaks  the
truth  or  tells  a  lie,  every  judgment  any  mind  can  formulate
unceasingly  attests  the  glorious  truth  that  the  universe  is
one.

Truly  an  inspiring  revelation  !  It  is  astonishing  that
it  does  not  carry  conviction  as  well  as  consolation  univer
sally  even  to  philosophers,  and  that  metaphysicians  can
still  regard  it  as  a  question  whether  and  in  what  sense
the  sum  of  experiences  can  be  united  in  a  single  system.
Presumably,  therefore,  there  is  something  wrong  about
the  argument.  A  strict  logician,  at  all  events,  will  think
so.  He  will  point  out  that  in  an  ordinary  judgment  no
one  is  raising  the  question  whether  the  '  parts  '  of  the
universe  (if  there  really  is  a  universe)  are  (by  definition)
included  in  it,  but  that  the  real  question  is  whether  we
are  succeeding  in  disentangling  the  part  of  '  the  universe '
which  concerns  us  from  other  parts  we  did  not  intend.
He  will  suggest  also  that  the  formal  reference  to  reality
which  every  object  of  thought  as  such  implies  is  as  far
from  attesting  any  ultimate  reality  as  the  formal  truth-
claim  is  from  guaranteeing  the  truth  of  every  judgment,
and  insist  that  it  is  common  to  the  '  real '  and  the  '  unreal,'
and  that  the  object  of  inquiry  is  always  what  sort  of\
reality  our  objects  have.  To  infer  from  this  scientifically
and  practically  unimportant  form  that  the  form  of  Judg
ment  depends  on  a  metaphysical  relation  to  ultimate
reality,  he  will  regard  as  simply  one  more  example  of
the  irrelevant  confusion  of  logic  and  metaphysics  to


ioo  FORMAL  LOGIC  CHAP.

which  Formal  Logic  has  recourse  so  often.  He  will  deny,
therefore,  that  the  logical  reference  to  reality  pledges  him
to  any  metaphysical  opinion,  and  that  a  monistic  meta-
physic  can  be  established  by  the  analysis  of  any  mere
form  of  the  Judgment.

It  would  indeed  be  strange  if  our  real  meaning  in
judging  should  be  nothing  we  either  consciously  aim  at
or  attain,  but  something  we  cannot  even  aim  at  without
self-contradiction.  The  obvious  objections  to  the  doctrine
that  to  aim  at  metaphysical  reality  as  a  whole  is  the  true
meaning  of  judgment  are  (i)  that  psychologically  it  is
false,  (2)  that  logically  it  is  destructive  of  the  meaning  of
judgment,  and  (3)  that  it  is  inherently  self-contradictory.

(1)  If  I  say,  *  You  have  taken  my  hat  instead  of  yours,'
I  certainly  do  not  mean  to affirm about  reality  at  large.
I  have  no  intention  of  enunciating  an  eternal  truth  about
the totality of reality. But I have a very definite
intention  of  making  an  assertion  about  that  part  of  reality
which  happens  to  concern  me,  and  I  believe  my  judgment
to  be  about  that. I  am  trying  to  make  a  distinction  in  it
between  '  my ' hat  and  *  yours.' If I am forbidden to
select  this  part,  the  meaning  of  my  judgment  disappears.
Whatever  *  the  '  meaning  of  the  judgment  may  now  be  said
to  be,  it  is  no  longer  my  meaning,  and  I  must  repudiate  all
responsibility  for  it. It  has  become  impossible  for  a  part
of  the  world,  and  therefore  for  me,  to  judge  about  parts
of  the  world,  and  judgments  may  no  longer  be  selections.
Now  this is certainly  not the  state  of  affairs  which  my
judgment  either  presupposed,  asserted,  or  aimed  at. If
I had  realized  that  this  was  what I was  attempting,  I
should not have troubled to make  the  judgment, but
should  have  recognized  the  utter  futility  and  inevitable
failure of all human judging. An interpretation of
judgment which contains such implications is hardly
attractive to any but a  sceptic  ; it  is  certainly  a  false
description  of  the  psychical state  of  the  judger's mind,
and  psychologically  indefensible.

(2)  It is also logically impossible, because it lays
down  conditions  of  the  possibility  of  judgment  which  are


vni FORMAL  THEORIES  OF  JUDGMENT 101

logically  unrealizable  and  destroy  the  meaning  of  judg
ment.  If  the  real  aim  of  every  judgment  is  not  to  judge
about  a  selected  part  of  reality  and  to  convey  the  mean
ing  which  its  actual  maker  consciously  has,  but  to  express
a  truth  about  reality  as  a  whole,  it  is  clear  that  no
judgment  can  be  true  until  it  does  express  the  whole
truth  about  the  whole  of  reality.  But  certainly  no  such
judgment  is  known  to  man.  It  is  not  only  unrealized,
but  humanly  unrealizable.  Omniscience  would  be  required
to  make  a  true  judgment.  But  omniscience  would  not
make  it,  because  it  could  have  no  motive  to  make  it ;  for
it  would  add  nothing  to  its  knowledge.  It  would  also
have  to  be  formally  a  tautology,  because  it  would  only  affirm
the  whole  of  reality  of  the  whole  of  reality.  Omniscience,
therefore,  would  not  judge,  but  would  have  all  knowledge
ever-present  to  it,  and  would  presumably  be  bored
ineffably.  The  function  of  judging,  therefore,  essentially
requires  the  selection  of  parts  of  reality  as  subject-matters
for  judgments  which  are  partial,  in  the  sense  of  treating
the  rest  of  reality  as  irrelevant,  and  can  be  true,  because
they  are  thus  partial.  To  proclaim  the  whole  of  reality,
therefore,  as  the  aim  of  every  judgment,  is  not  only  to
render  all  human  judging  futile  and  all  human  judgments
false,  but  also  to  represent  Judgment  itself  as  inherently
unmeaning.

(3)  If,  nevertheless,  we  persisted  in  this  doctrine,  we
should  only  end  by  contradicting  ourselves.  For  if  Judg
ment  could  affirm  the  whole  of  reality,  it  would  have  to
include  also  the  meanings  actually  intended  by  human
knowers.  For  these  meanings  were  indisputably  matters
of  psychical  fact  that  occurred  within  the  whole  of  reality.
But  they  are  also  the  very  things  the  theory  began  by
setting  aside.  It  was  denied  that  they  were  the  mean
ing  of  the  judgment.  But  it  now  turns  out  that  the
true  meaning  of  the  judgment  compels  us  to  reassert
that  they  were  its  true  meaning.  Hence  these  psycho
logical  meanings  are  alternately  denied  and  reasserted.
If  it  be  replied  that  they  are  reasserted  only  as  parts
of  the  truth,  it  is  only  necessary  to  point  out  that  in


102  FORMAL LOGIC  CHAP,  vm

the  first  place  this  does  not  diminish  the  contradiction,
since  what  was  asserted  (by  the  actual  judgers)  and
denied  (by  the  metaphysicians)  was  the  right  to  entertain
partial  meanings  made  by  selections,  and  these  meanings
have  now  to  be  conceded  and  provided  for  ;  and  in  the
second,  that,  though  they  must  somehow  be  included  as
they  were  meant,  they  cannot  be  included  as  they  were
meant.  For  they  were  meant  to  be  true  of  parts  to  the
exclusion  or  neglect  of  the  whole  ;  and  they  have  to  be
included,  in  their  full  refractoriness,  by  a  theory  of  which
it  is  part  that  the  truth  admits  of  no  parts,  and  that
whatever  is  partial  is  ipso  facto  false.

Our  verdict,  then,  must  be  that  if  the  formal  reference
to  reality  in  the  Judgment  is  interpreted  metaphysically,  it
is  a  downright  blunder  and  a  prolific  parent  of  absurdities  ;
if  it  is  understood  logically,  it  is  inadequate  and  mis
leading  ;  while  if  it  is  understood  in  a  common-sense  way
as  meaning  *  reality '  in  the  physical  world,  it  is  emphatic-
cally  false.

Altogether  we  are  driven  to  the  conclusion  that  the
Formal  treatment  of  Judgment  is  quite  unprofitable.  It
can  neither  extricate  itself  from  contradiction  nor  assist  our
actual  thinking.  Nor  is  this  marvellous.  For  the  real
nature  of  Judgment  cannot  be  grasped  without  examining
the  meaning-attitude  in  its  concrete  connexions  with  the
psychic  processes  which  determine  the  course  of  judg
ments.  But  it  is  just  this  inquiry  which  Formal  Logic
has  declared  to  lie  beyond  its  purview.


CHAPTER IX

THE IMPORT OF PROPOSITIONS

§ I. The  Proposition  as  Verbal

FORMAL  Logic  does  much  better  when  it  considers  the
verbal  forms  in  which  judgments  may  be  expressed.  For
words  are  its  most  congenial  hunting-ground.  Conse
quently  its  '  analysis '  of  the  '  Proposition  '  is  brilliant  and
almost  instructive.  Once  the  terrible  entanglement  of
the  actual  judgment  in  a  context  has  been  put  aside,  and
the  inquiry  has  been  safely  restricted  to  a  simple  form  of
words,  it  is  easy  to  classify  exhaustively  '  the  meaning  '
of  its  *  terms.'  Not  that  no  difficulties  present  themselves,
but  they  are  mostly  of  a  trivial  and  soluble  sort.

§ 2. The  Formal  Analysis  of  the  Proposition

Formally,  we  have  seen  (Chap.  I,  §  5),  the  ideal
Proposition  is  analysable  into  a  Subject  about  which  the
assertion  is  made,  and  a  Predicate  which  is  asserted  (or
denied)  about  the  Subject,  and  a  Copula  which  is  the  mark
of  the  predication  and  (by  convention)  some  mode  of
*  being/  i.e.  '  is  '  or  '  are.'  Actual  propositions,  however,
do  not  fully  conform  to  this  logical  model.

(a)  The  whole  meaning  may  sometimes  be  conveyed
in  a  single  word.  The  cries  '  Fire  ! '  or  *  Wolf ! '  may
warn  even  a  logician  as  effectively,  and  more  succinctly,
than  the  propositions  *  There  is  a  fire,'  or  *  A  wolf  is
coming,'  or  even  c  Some  wolf  is  a  member  of  the  class  of
things  that  are  now  approaching.'

103


104  FORMAL  LOGIC


CHAP.


It  may  be  contended  indeed  that  Formal  Logic  is  not
entitled  to  take  note  of  facts  which  imply  such  a  know
ledge  of  human  psychology,  and  should  maintain  rather
that  the  terms  *  fire  '  and  '  wolf  per  se  are  not  propositions  ;
but,  after  all,  the  facts  are  very  obvious,  and  Formal  Logic
may  be  allowed  to  make  the  most  of  a  rare  chance  of
distinguishing  itself  from  verbalism.

(U)  Impersonate  occur,  which  specify  no  Subject.
When  '  it  rains,'  what  is  '  it '  ?  Again,  it  may  be  said,
language  falls  short  of  the  exquisite  precision  of  the
logical  expression.

(c)  It  may happen that the  verbal is not the real
Subject. *  Nobody  is  in  the  room '  is  an  assertion  about
the  room  and  not  about  '  nobody.' The  use  of  ordinary
intelligence  is  to  a  certain  extent  permissible  in Formal
Logic. Or  at  any  rate  it  knows  the  meaning  of  familiar
idioms,  even  though  it  will  not  understand  any  unusual
use  of  a  phrase.

(d)  That  '  The  bowsprit  gets  mixed  with  the  rudder
sometimes '  in  the  Proposition  as  in  The  Hunting  of  the
Snark,  Formal  Logic  fully  knows. I.e.  it  may  sometimes
be  hard to  determine  which  is  the Subject and which
is the Predicate of  a proposition, though such stock
examples as *  Great is Diana  of  the  Ephesians  ! '  would
hardly  lead one to think so. The really hard cases,
however,  cannot  be  mentioned,  because  they  cannot  be
detected  without  knowledge  of  the  context.

(e)  The  Copula  is  often  lurking  in  the  verb,  and  has
to  be  extracted. Formal Logic,  therefore,  triumphantly
analyses 'he philosophizes' into 'he is philosophizing,'
and contemptuously ignores objections to its lack of
linguistic  elegance,  and  even  to  its  abolition  of  recognized
differences  of  meaning,  as,  e.g.,  between  '  he  plays  cricket '
and  '  he  is  playing  cricket.'

(/)  The  restriction  of  the  Copula  to  the  present  tense
of  the  verb  'to  be '  is  more  contentious.  When  '  Queen
Anne  died  in  1714'  is  'logically'  interpreted  as  'Queen
Anne's  death  is  an  event  of  the  year  1714,'  or  '  The  date
of  Queen  Anne's  death  is  1714,'  it  may  fairly  be  objected


ix  THE  IMPORT  OF  PROPOSITIONS 105

that  the  shifting  of  the  emphasis  from  *  Queen  Anne '  to
the  date  amounts  to  a  change  of  meaning,  and  that  the
verbal  elimination  of  the  reference  to  the  past  is  illusory
in  all  cases,  and  perverse  wherever  the  relation  to  the  time
order  was  just  the  point  intended.  Little  seems  to  be
gained,  even  Formally,  by  transforming  '  The  priest  of
Diana  Nemorensis  was  a  run-away  slave '  into  '  The  priest
of  Diana  Nemorensis  is  a  person  who  was  a  run-away
slave,'  and  it  is  hard  to  convince  common-sense  that  the
meaning  of '  You  will  die '  is  adequately  rendered  by  *  Your
death  is  a  future  event.'  The  Formal  analysis  here  does
not  seem  willing  to  preserve  the  true  meaning.


§  3. The  Interpretation  of  Propositions

We  have  seen  in  Chap.  Ill,  §  I,  that  each  of  the  terms
in  a  proposition  may  be  interpreted  in  extension  or
intension,  and  that  there  consequently  result  four
possibilities  of  meaning,  (i)  Both  subject  and  predicate
may  be  construed  in  extension  ('  denotation ')  by  what  is
called  the  class  theory  of  predication.  (2)  The  subject  may
be  taken  in  extension,  the  predicate  in  intension  ('con
notation  '),  so  that  the  aim  of  the  proposition  is  to  assert
an  attribute  of  a  subject.  This  is  called  the  predicative
view.  (3)  Both  subject  and  predicate  are  taken  in
intension,  =  the  *  attributive '  view.  (4)  The  subject  is  taken
in  intension,  the  predicate  in  extension.

There  can  be  no  doubt  that  these  alternatives  are
formally  exhaustive,  nor  that  the  meanings  they  affirm
are  on  occasions  actually  intended,  though  for  reasons
given  in  Chap.  Ill,  §  I,  it  is  psychologically  so  unnatural
to  formulate  one's  meaning  in  the  fourth  form  that  this
type  is  necessarily  rare.  Still  it  cannot  be  denied  that
a  man  may  mean  by  '  man  is  mortal '  '  the  attributes
of  humanity  indicate  an  object  belonging  to  the  class
mortal?  even  as  he  may  mean  by  it  *  the  class  man  is
included  in  the  class  mortal?  or  '  men  have  the  attribute
of  mortality?  or  *  the  attribute  of  mortality  is  implied  in
the  attributes  of  humanity!


io6  FORMAL  LOGIC  CHAP.

Criticism  of  the  Formal  treatment  of  the  Import  of
Propositions,  therefore,  must  proceed  on  other  lines.  It
may  be  pointed  out  that  if  this  classification  is  really
exhaustive,  Formal  Logic  should  have  nothing  more  to
say.  For  the  only  question  which  remains  is  which  of
these  four  possible  meanings  is  the  one  actually  intended
in  each  judgment.  And  this  is  by  no  means  an  easy
question  to  answer.  For  (a)  the  assertor  is  very  often
far  from  clear  on  the  subject  himself  to  start  with,  and
may  depart  from  the  original  meaning  of  his  formula  as
the  discussion  proceeds.  (£)  A  proposition  may  not  mean
what  it  seems  to  say.  Sarcasms  and  jokes,  e.g.,  often
mean  the  very  opposite  of  what  the  words  mean  ;  and
only  a  reference  to  the  actual  context  will  determine
whether  a  meaning  is  to  be  taken  literally  or  not.  (V)  An
assertor's  meaning  may  be  really  indeterminate,  and  he
may  be  willing  to  accept  several  interpretations  of  it,
and  decline  to  choose  between  them.  Or  he  may  say,
'  All  these  aspects  of  my  proposition  I  accept ;  they
are  all  true,  though  this  one  was  most  prominent  in  my
mind  when  I  asserted  it.'  And  as  this  might  be  the
truth,  as  in  fact  it  does  not  follow  from  the  exhaustiveness
of  these  interpretations  that  they  are  also  exclusive,  it
would  be  hard  to  say  how  Formal  Logic  could  object  to
him.  Fortunately,  it  has  not  got  to.  It  can  declare  the
whole  question  of  what  the  proposition  actually  meant  to
be  psychological  and  extra-logical.  This  may  be  baffling
to  our  appetite  for  instruction,  but  is  at  any  rate
consistent  with  the  Formal  attitude.

It  is  more  difficult  to  rebut  the  charge  of  inconsistency
when  Formal  Logic  essays  to  evaluate  these  inter
pretations,  and  to  declare  that  some  of  them  are  better
than  others.  For  if  all  are  possible  meanings,  none  of
them  can  be  the  only  meaning,  or  the  right  meaning,
while  to  discuss  which  is  the  commonest  or  most  natural
meaning  is  to  venture  on  psychological  assertions.  It  is
only,  therefore,  by  means  of  the  covert  introduction  of
an  extraneous  purpose,  such  as  the  putting  of  pro
positions  to  some  scientific  use,  that  the  '  attributive '  or


ix  THE  IMPORT  OF  PROPOSITIONS 107

the  '  predicative '  interpretation  can  be  preferred  to  the
1  class  theory.' l  But  this  is  to  transcend  the  bounds  of
Formal  Logic.

§  4. Universes  of  Diction

The  question  '  whether  the  Copula  asserts  existence '  is
sometimes  discussed  as  if  it  were  a  deep  metaphysical
problem.  But  if  we  will  make  up  our  minds  to  define  what
we  mean  by '  existence,'  it  may  even  appear  quite  a  simple
matter.  The  question  really  is  whether  the  is  of  predication
commits  us  to  an  assertion  about  the  '  real  world '  of
ordinary  life.  If  (a)  by  'existence*  we  mean  existence
in  that  world,  it  is  clear  that  the  Copula  does  not
necessarily  assert  this  ;  if  (b)  we  mean  existence  in  some
other  sphere  of  reality,  it  is  not  improbable,  and  may
even  be  formally  necessary,  that  it  should  '  assert
existence.'

Now  as  regards  (a)  it  is  undeniable  that  we  can
frame  propositions,  true  and  false,  about  objects  which  do
not  belong  to  the  'real  world.'  We  can  discuss,  e.g.
whether  Sirens  had  or  had  not  human  heads,  or  whether
the  wings  of  devils  most  resembled  those  of  bats,  birds,  or
beetles.  This  would  seem  to  show  that  the  Copula  is  a
mere  mark  of  predication,  and  that  the  *  being '  it  asserts
is  that  proper  to  the  sort  of  '  existence '  the  proposition
refers  to.  If  (b)  we  construe  '  existence '  as  referring  to
any  sphere  of  reality  and  as  not  necessarily  restricted  to
the  *  real  world,'  we  get  the  same  result  In  either  case

1  It  is  in  point  of  fact  quite  false,  though  it  is  often  so  argued,  that  any  one
interpretation  possess  scientific  value  exclusively.  For  scientific  purposes  we  need
not  only  to  attribute  qualities  to  subjects  and  to  connect  attributes  together,
but  also  to  classify  our  subjects.  And  such  classifications  often  react  on  the
connotation  of  the  objects  classified,  and  lead  to  important  discoveries.  For
example,  a  scientific  philatelist  may  undertake  to  arrange  a  number  of  stamps  of
the  same  '  kind '  according  to  their  colour-shades,  and  thereby  discover  that  the
collection  in  question  is  really  composed  of  a  number  of  distinct  issues,  and
that  the  '  kind '  ought  to  be  split  up  into  a  number  of  varieties  (or  even  of
•kinds'),  some  of  which  are  unofficial  ('forgeries').  It  is  doubtless  true  that
the  extension  of  a  term  cannot  wholly  abstract  from  its  intension,  and  that
the  objects  in  a  '  class '  would  not  be  in  that  class  unless  they  appeared  to  qualify
for  it  by  possessing  certain  attributes.  But  it  is  similarly  true  that  in  considering
its  intension  its  extension  cannot  be  wholly  ignored.  Science  is  not  a  fanciful
connecting  of  attributes  which  nothing  ever  exemplifies.


1 08  FORMAL  LOGIC  CHAP.

we  have  to  understand  the  sort  of  '  reality  '  the  proposition
refers  to  and  intends  in  order  to  understand  what  it  really
asserts,  and  unless  we  take  this  precaution  there  is  a
serious  risk  that  the  parties  to  every  discussion  will  be
talking  about  different  things  (Chap.  VIII,  §  5).

The  technical  way  Formal  Logic  has  of  making  this  very
necessary  distinction  is  to  say  that  the  Copula  asserts
existence  within  a  universe  of  diction  or  suppositio.  Thus
the  truth  or  falsity  of  propositions  about  Sirens  and
Centaurs  belongs  to  the  realm  of  Greek  mythology  ;  of
propositions  about  Rebecca  and  the  Templar  depends
on  the  text  of  Ivanhoe  ;  of  propositions  about  unicorns
and  red  lions  on  the  conventions  of  heraldry  and  sign-
painting  ;  of  propositions  about  atoms  and  electrons  on  the
speculations  of  physics.  All  these  propositions  have  an
intelligible  sense  in  their  proper  universe,  however  mad
they  would  sound  otherwise.  Even  "  the  transactions  were
mere  scalping  deals  for  quick  turns,  the  leading  bulls
holding  conservative  views  pending  further  crop
developments,"  becomes  rational  when  it  is  traced  to  its
proper  universe  in  the  Stock  Exchange  column  of  a  news
paper.  It  is  evident,  moreover,  that  there  is  an  indefinite
plurality  of  such  universes  of  diction.  Every  science,
every  business,  and  every  work  of  fiction  will  constitute
a  universe  of  its  own,  and  every  sentient  being  has
at  least  one 1  private  universe  of  his  own  personal
and  incommunicable  experiences  (pleasures,  pains,  etc.).

Agreement,  therefore,  on  the  suppositio  is  essential  to
understanding,  and  is  by  no  means  easy.  In  default
of  it  discussion  is  at  cross  purposes,  and  comes  to  nothing.
Here  again  Formal  Logic  ought  to  stop,  having  led  to
nothing  that  is  soul-distending.

Accordingly,  if  we  are  not  satisfied  with  ascertaining
what  in  point  of  fact  is  the  logical  meaning  of  the
proposition  in  situ  in  its  universe  of  diction,  and  are
dissatisfied  with  the  disorderly  plurality  of  universes
logic  seems  to  leave  on  our  hands,  there  is  a  tempta
tion  to  raise  other  questions.  We  can  ask  whether

1  More,  if  he  dreams  or  suffers  from  multiple  personality.


ix  THE IMPORT  OF  PROPOSITIONS 109

these  universes,  however  autonomous  they  seem  to  logic,
are  not  in  reality  all  related,  and  inquire  into  the
metaphysical  nature  of  their  relations.  We  can  then
discover  that  in  point  of  fact  the  common-sense  world  of
bodily  reality  does  form  a  sort  of  ultimate  standard  of
reality,  to  which  the  different  sorts  and  degrees  of  reality
or  '  unreality J  (which  also  is  a  sort  of  reality)  ascribed  to
dreams,  mathematics,  fictions,  philosophies,  religions,
private  experiences,  hallucinations,  etc.,  are  referred,  and
that  thereby  their  '  real '  reality  is  tested.  Thus  the
primary  plurality  of  universes  may  (in  theory)  be
reduced  ;  we  go  on  the  principle  that  the  less  important
and  valuable  are  attached  and  subordinated  to  the  more,
even  though  they  are  not  ever  completely  unified
in  practice.

This  procedure  is  interesting,  but  it  is  not  logic.
It  has  nothing  to  do  with  the  problem  of  ascertain
ing  what  a  proposition  means,  nor  does  it  affect
the  doctrine  that  the  '  being '  predicated  by  the  Copula
is  that  of  the  suppositio,  and  that  until  this  has  been
ascertained,  no  further  use  can  be  made  of  the  proposition
either  by  metaphysics  or  by  anything  else.  The  logical
form  of  the  proposition,  therefore,  yields  us  no  answer
to  the  question  whether  and  to  what  extent  reality  can
be  unified.  The  migration  from  Logic  to  metaphysics
is  itself  an  example  of  neglect  to  ascertain  a  universe  of
diction.


CHAPTER X

THE LAWS OF THOUGHT

§  i . The  Statement  of  the  Laws

IT  is  high  time  that  the  fundamental  Laws  of  Thought
should  now  be  taken  into  consideration.  For  the  inter
relations  of  the  propositions  used  in  thinking  manifestly
appeal  to  these  Laws,  though  they  are  often  so  defined  as  to
apply  also  to  terms  taken  in  abstraction.  It  is  astonishing,
however,  that  more  is  not  made  of  them  in  Formal  Logic.
One  might  have  expected  them  to  be  put  in  the  very
forefront  of  the  science,  and  to  be  fully  discussed.  Instead
of  which  there  is  a  growing  practice  in  modern  Logics  not
to  discuss  them  at  all,  but  to  relegate  them  to  footnotes,
and  subsequently  to  clinch  arguments  by  appealing  to  an
interpretation  of  them  which  has  not  been  established.
The  reason  for  this  curious  treatment  is  doubtless  that
their  difficulties  have  driven  them  underground.  And
well  they  might.  For  in  them  all  the  self-contradictions
and  confusions  of  the  logical  standpoint  reach  their  acme.
We,  however,  cannot  conscientiously  shirk  an  inquiry  which
goes  straight  to  the  roots  of  Formal  Logic.

It  will  be  well  to  start  by  enumerating  these  Laws  as
ordinarily  stated.

(1)  The  LAW  OF  IDENTITY  affirms  that  A  is  A  or
that  every  judgment  (?  proposition)  is  identical  with  itself,

(2)  The LAW OF CONTRADICTION (? Non -Contra
diction)  affirms  that  A  is  not  not-A  or  that  A  cannot  both
be  A  and  not  be  A.

(3)  The  LAW  OF  EXCLUDED MIDDLE  affirms  that

no


CHAP.X  THE  LAWS  OF  THOUGHT  in

everything  must  be  either  A  or  not- A,  or  that  it  must  either
be  A  or  not  be  A.

It  should  be  noted  that  the  double  formulation  is
necessitated  by  the  doubt  whether  these  '  laws '  apply  to
things  (terms,  concepts,  etc.)  or  only  to  propositions.
Still  the  formulas  look  self-evident  and  innocent  enough
at  first  sight.  Nevertheless  a  volume  might  be  written
about  each  of  them.  Their  essential  trickiness  consists  in
the  fact  that  every  mind  is  expected  to  admit  their  truth,
without  inquiring  into  their  meaning,  which  is  in  fact  the
prior  question.  But  how  can  any  one  deny  the  truth  of  that
of  which  he  feels  he  does  not  understand  the  meaning  ?
His  natural  reverence  for  mystery  forbids  him.  But  if  the
question  had  been  raised  what  (if  anything)  these  possibly
indisputable,  but  certainly  unscrutinized,  '  truths '  really
meant,  it  might  have  appeared  that  the  question  as  to
their  truth  did  not  admit  of  a  simple  answer,  because
they  were  (in  different  senses)  both  true  and  false  and
meaningless.

When  therefore  we  inquire  seriously  what  they  mean,  we
soon  begin  to  feel  that,  so  far  from  their  being  self-evident
platitudes,  there  is  a  doubt  rather  whether  they  are  not
either  fantastically  impossible  or  totally  devoid  of  meaning.
For  a  number  of  difficult  questions  arise  both  about  the
*  Laws  '  in  general  and  about  the  meaning  of  each  of  them
in  particular,  and  it  is  found  that  logicians  are  very  far
from  being  in  agreement  about  them,  either  with  each
other  or  with  themselves.  To  select  a  few  of  the  more
urgent  questions — in  what  sense  are  these  formulas  Laws'?
Are  they  laws  of  thought  or  of  things,  or  of  both,  and  if
so,  of  which  primarily  ?  In  what  sense  and  to  what
extent  are  they  consistent  writh  the  principles  of  Formal
Logic  ?  In  what  sense  and  to  what  extent  is  there  truth
in  their  general  idea  ?  What  precisely  is  the  meaning
claimed  by  each  of  them,  and  to  what  objections  is  it
open  ?  How  far  and  in  what  sense  are  they  severally
true?


H2  FORMAL  LOGIC


CHAP.


§  2.  In  what  sense  are  they  Laws  ?

We  may  begin  by  discussing  this  question,  because  it
is  fundamental  and  seems  fairly  straightforward.  The
alternatives  seem  to  be  two.  The  *  Laws  of  Thought '
may  be  either  laws  in  the  natural  science  sense,  i.e.
uniformities  actually  observed  to  obtain  in  the  working  of
our  minds,  or  canons  of  right  thinking.

If  we  take  them  as  natural  laws  they  must  be
exemplified  in  all  thinking.  It  is  difficult  to  see,  therefore,
how  any  one  can  fail  to  observe  them,  or  can  be  accused
of  doing  so.  It  should  be  as  impossible,  e.g.,  to  contradict
oneself  as  to  fail  to  gravitate.  How,  then,  can  self-
contradiction  be  the  name  for  a  possible  offence  in  the
catalogue  of  logical  crimes  ?

The  most  that  could  be  proved  in  an  alleged  case  of
*  self-contradiction '  would  seem  to  be  that  assertions  have
been  made  which  seem  verbally  contradictory,  and  the
most  that  should  follow  would  be  that  their  author  should
be  invited  (courteously)  to  explain  them.  He  has  then
a  choice  between  several  alternatives.  (i)  He  may
explain  that  the  '  contradiction '  is  only  in  words,  and
that  what  he  meant  to  express  is  not  contradictory.  (2)
He  may  say  that  he  has  changed  his  opinions  and  no
longer  holds  one  or  the  other  of  the  conflicting  views.
(3)  In  the  worst  event  he  may  even  admit  that  owing  to
a  lapse  of  memory,  or  lack  of  thought,  or  intentness  on  a
momentary  purpose,  or  excitement  and  emotional  pressure,
or  some  such  psychological  influence,  he  had  failed  to
consider  the  two  propositions  in  their  connexion.  But
now  that  he  is  called  upon  to  do  so,  he  sees,  of  course,
that  he  does  not  believe  them  both  and  must  withdraw
at  least  one  of  them.  He  must  reconsider  his  position,
or  rather  take  up  a  position.  For  he  has  not  yet  really
got  one,  since  the  position  he  was  believed  to  have  is
'  contradictory '  and  untenable.  As  his  meanings  conflict,
and  cancel  each  other,  he  has  not  really  meant  anything,
and  must  make  a  fresh  start,  which  he  humbly  begs  to  be
allowed  to  do.


x  THE  LAWS  OF  THOUGHT  113

All  this,  however,  would  hardly  pacify  a  Formal
logician.  It  is  to  explain  the  '  contradiction '  psycho
logically,  and  not  to  explain  how  contradictions  are
'  logically '  possible.  He  will  insist,  therefore,  that  the
meanings  of  the  two  propositions  remain,  whether  any  one
asserts  them  or  not,  and  are  in  flat  contradiction,  and  that
therefore  a  logical  crime  remains  to  be  somehow  expiated.
Unfortunately  he  does  not  explain  how  a  contradiction,
if  '  real/  can,  on  his  own  showing,  be  more  than  verbal.

It  is  tempting,  therefore,  to  take  the  *  Laws  of
Thought '  as  Canons.  They  do  not  state  how  men  think
nor  condescend  to  inquire  into  the  infinite  confusions  of
human  psychology.  They  enact  ideals  and  declare  how
men  ought  to  think,  and  when  they  are  known  men  can
(imperfectly,  no  doubt)  regulate  their  thinking  by  them.

It  is  far  from  clear,  however,  that  the  '  laws J  can  occupy
the  lofty  ground  thus  assigned  to  them,  (i)  It  is  not
made  clear  on  what  rests  the  obligation  to  think  in
accordance  with  these  canons.  Why  should  they  be
adopted  as  '  ideals,'  seeing  that  they  are  not  conformable
to  our  practice  ?  Should  we  not  be  told  what  advantages
accrue  to  us  by  observing  them,  or  what  penalties  we
incur  by  not  observing  them  ?  (2)  Must  they  not,  like
all  thinking,  be  brought  into  some  connexion  with  human
life  ?  Else  why  think  at  all,  or  trouble  about  ideals  of
thought?  (3)  How  is  it  that  we  can  think  without
knowing  them,  or  at  least  without  knowing  what  the
logician  means  by  them  ?  Why,  moreover,  is  it  that  an
ordinarily  intelligent  man  can  conduct  his  thinking  pretty
nearly  as  successfully  as  a  logician  ?  (4)  Is  it  not  still
left  unexplained  why  these  canons  are  not,  in  fact,  always
observed  ?

Neither  view,  then,  seems  satisfactory.  The  '  Laws  of
Thought '  are  not  merely  uniformities,  but  carry  obligation.
And  *  ought '  implies  *  need  not.'  Nor  are  they  merely
obligations  ;  for  no  one  willingly  defies  them.  Why  not  ?
Why  should  no  one  wish  to  do  what  admittedly  he  can
do  ?  For  their  obligation  no  intelligible  ground  has
appeared.  They  seem  then  to  be  neither  '  Laws '  nor

I


H4  FORMAL  LOGIC


CHAP.


'  Canons.'  Possibly,  however,  there  is  a  third  alternative,
which  accounts  for  their  anomalous  position,  but  has  not
been  grasped  by  Formal  Logic.

§  3.  Aristotle's  Account  of  these  Principles

Perhaps  we  shall  best  advance  our  insight  into  these
perplexities  by  considering  the  first  systematic  account  of
these  principles,  that  of  Aristotle.1  Aristotle  explicitly
recognizes  the  laws  of  Contradiction  and  Excluded  Middle,
and  implicitly  that  of  Identity.  But  he  does  not  treat
them  as  logical  principles.  He  regards  them  as  the  chief
examples 2  of  the  absolutely  axiomatic  principles  from
which  all  demonstrations  must  start.  They  are  therefore
'  common  axioms '  which  underlie  all  the  sciences.  They
belong  accordingly  to  metaphysics,  and  are  fully  discussed
in  Metaphysics  F,  chaps,  iii-viii.  This  explains  why  they
figure  primarily  as  revelations  concerning  the  nature  of
things,  though  they  are  also  treated  as  principles  of
thought.  Aristotle  indeed  tries  alternately  to  show  that
as  principles  of  being  they  must  become  principles  of
thinking3  and  that  as  principles  of  thinking  they  must  be
also  principles  of  being.4  His  formulations  accordingly
vary ;  e.g.  he  declares  that  it  is  ( I )  impossible  at  the  same
time  to  be  and  not  to  be?  or  (2)  for  contraries  to  inhere  at
the  same  time  in  the  same  thing f  or  (3)  that  the  same  thing
in  the  same  respect  should  have  the  same  inhere  in  it  and
not?  or  (4)  at  the  same  time  to  affirm  and  deny  truly?
The  Law  of  Excluded  Middle  is  formulated  at  the
beginning  of  chap,  vii  as  an  impossibility  that  there
should  be  anything  intermediate  between  contradictories  and
a  necessity  that  of  each  subject  each  predicate  must  be

1  Plato  enunciates  the  Law  of  Contradiction,  but  cannot  be  said  to  give  a
critical  account  of  it.

2  They  are  indeed  his  only  examples  of  such  principles. For  the  '  common  '
principles  of  mathematics, which  he  also  sometimes  adduces,  are  not  strictly
common. They  have  not,  he  thinks,  quite  the  same  significance  in  the  several
sciences  ;  the  axiom  of  equality,  e.g. ,  does  not  mean  quite  the  same  in  arithmetic
and  in  geometry,  but  is  coloured  in  each  case  by  the  specific  nature  of  the
science.

3  Met.  1005  b22.  4  L.c.  ion  b  20.  5  L.c.  1006  3.3.
6  L.c.  1005  b26. 7  L.c.  1005  big.


x  THE  LAWS  OF  THOUGHT  115

affirmed  or  denied.  It  is  thus  taken  as  a  law  of  thought,
and  Aristotle  sees  no  incongruity  in  coupling  it  with  the
law  of  Contradiction  conceived  as  a  law  of  things,  and
succinctly  enunciating  them  as  *  it  is  necessary  that  every
thing  should  be  either  affirmed  or  denied  and  impossible  at
the  same  time  to  be  and  not  to  be?  1

The  '  Law  of  Identity '  is  implicitly  appealed  to  in  the
refutation  of  the  critics  of  the  law  of  Contradiction
(chap.  iv).  It  takes  the  form  of  the  assumption  that
the  word  '  be '  or  '  not  be '  has  a  meaning,  that  not  to
have  one  meaning  is  to  have  no  meaning,  and  that  every
{  name '  (word)  has  one  meaning.2

Lastly,  Aristotle  is  aware3  that  in  order  to  meet
logical  objections  the  law  of  Contradiction  must  be
equipped  with  a  number  of  qualifying  clauses,  '  at  the
same  time/  '  in  the  same  subject,'  *  in  the  same  respect.'  4

But  he  does  not  seem  ever  to  have  seen  how  far  such
qualification  might  have  to  go,  nor  to  have  grasped  that
he  was  admitting  a  principle  in  virtue  of  which  any
argument  from  one  case  to  another  might  be  challenged,
and  therefore  fatal  to  his  Formal  conception  of  '  contra
diction.'  Once  the  contentions  are  withdrawn  that  A  is
absolutely  and  eternally  and  without  reservation  A,  and
that  if  a  thing  has  once  been  called  A  it  must  for  ever
remain  A  and  cannot  change  in  any  respect,5  a  critic  of
the  Laws  of  Thought  has  merely  to  insist  that  the  two
cases  of  A  are  not  identical  in  all  respects  and  to  assert
that  their  differences  are  relevant  to  the  point  at  issue.
The  Laws  of  Thought  are  thereby  put  completely  out  of
action,  and  he  can,  unhindered  by  them,  assert  one  thing

1  L.c.  996  b2g.

2  L.c.  1006  a  31,  1006  bg,  1006  b  13. These  are  more  clearly  appeals  to  the
principle  than  the  obiter  dictum  in  Anal.  Prior.  I,  32,  47  a  8,  that  '  all  truth  must
be  entirely  consistent  with  itself/  which  it  is  usual  to  refer  to.

3  As  was  Plato  before  him. Rfp.  436  B.

4  He  entirely  forgets  these,  however,  when  (chap,  v)  he  is  arguing  against  the
Protagoreans  whom  he  conceives  to  deny  the  law. No  doubt  it  follows  from  the
doctrine  that  '  what  appears  to  each  is  true  to  him,'  that  contradictory  beliefs  are
true  '  at  the  same  time '  ;  but  it  is  not,  therefore,  asserted  that  they  are  true  to  the
same  persons  or  in  the  same  respect,  and  the  Protagorean  dictum  merely  requires
us  to  add  these  further  qualifications  before  we  cry  out  against  a  '  contradiction. '

5  Which  is  the  sense  modern  Formalists  try  to  give  to  the  '  Law  of  Identity  '
(cf.  Chap.  XXIV,  §  5).


n6  FORMAL  LOGIC


CHAP.


in  the  one  case  and  another  thing  in  the  other,  merely
telling  his  opponent  that  he  has  erroneously  taken  them
to  be  '  the  same.'  For  it  is  arbitrary  to  admit  that  we
cannot  argue  from  '  A  to-day '  to  c  A  to-morrow '  and  yet
to  deny  the  general  principle  implied  in  this,  viz.  that
the  inference  from  '  A  in  one  context '  to  *  A  in  another,'
or  from  '  A  to  me '  to  '  A  to  you,'  is  similarly  pre
carious.  Nor  is  the  critic  in  so  doing  denying  the
law  of  Contradiction  in  the  abstract ;  he  is,  as  Mr.
Alfred  Sidgwick  has  so  admirably  shown  (e.g.  The
Application  of  Logic,  pp.  109-111),  really  raising  the
question  of  the  relevance  of  the  differences  between  the
two  cases  to  the  point  at  issue.  Now  no  merely  formal
appeal  to  the  '  law  of  thought '  in  the  abstract  can  settle
this  question  of  fact,  for  any  dispute  about  what  is
relevant  implies  a  knowledge  of  the  particular  circum
stances  of  the  '  cases.'

Aristotle's  attempt  to  dispense  with  this  '  material '
knowledge  by  appealing  to  the  meaning  of  the  word  would
seem  almost  childish,  if  it  were  not  so  clearly  the  only
thing  a  Formal  logician  could  say.  We  have  seen  that  it
is  a  mistake  to  regard  meanings  as  independent  of  judg
ments  (Chaps.  VIII,  §  4,  VII,  §  9),  and  as  absolutely
rigid  (Chap.  VII,  §  8).  Besides,  it  ignores  the  fact  that
the  question  really  raised  is  whether  the  same  '  name '  is
properly  applicable  to  the  two  *  cases,'  and  whether  we
are  right  in  taking  them  as  both  '  cases '  under  the  '  law.'
Aristotle's  whole  argument  from  this  point  of  view  be
comes  a  dogmatic  begging  of  the  question,  which  leaves
it  quite  doubtful  how  (if  at  all)  the  principles  of  Identity,
Contradiction,  and  Excluded  Middle  are  to  be  applied.

§  4. Are  they  Principles  of  Thought  or  of  Things  ?

Nevertheless  we  have  made  some  progress.  We  have
seen  that  we  must  make  up  our  minds  whether  to  regard
them  as  principles  of  thinking  or  of  being.  The  former
view  seems  easier,  and  prevails  even  over  Aristotle's
objectivist  bias.


x  THE  LAWS  OF  THOUGHT  117

In  either  case  there  are  further  problems.  If  they  are
principles  of  thinking,  we  have  to  consider  how  they  may
be  applied  to  reality  and  with  what  success.  If  they  are
principles  of  being,  we  want  exhaustive  evidence  that  all
reality  obeys  these  laws,  and  must  at  least  grapple  with
the  paradox  of  Change.  For  the  reality  of  Change  seems
flatly  to  defy  them  all.  A  thing  that  changes  neither
remains  itself,  nor  is  it  incapable  of  assuming  contrary
attributes  in  time  or  even  simultaneously.  It  both  is
and  is  not,  and  cannot  strictly  be  said  to  *  be  '  either  one
thing  or  another.  If  the  moving  arrow  ever  'were'  at
the  points  it  passes  through,  if  we  were  ever  right  in
saying  that  it  was,  Zeno's  inference  would  be  inevitable
that  motion  is  impossible,  and  philosophy  would  part
company  with  common-sense  for  good  and  all.

This  discrepancy  between  the  principles  of  thought
and  the  behaviour  of  things  seems  an  insuperable  ob
jection  to  regarding  them  as  principles  of  being.  But  we
do  not  wholly  escape  from  the  problem  by  conceiving
them  as  principles  of  thought.  For  we  then  have  to
explain  how  it  is  that  though  reality  is  not  as  we  think
it,  it  yet  behaves  as  if  it  were,  to  such  an  extent  that  it
is  worth  while  thinking  about  it.  How  is  it  that  though
things  do  not  remain  '  identical  '  nor  free  from  '  contradic
tion/  they  are  yet  universally  taken  to  be  so  ?  And  why
do  these  assumptions  of  our  thought,  though  they  are
literally  false,1  yet  practically  serve  our  purposes  ?  In
order  to  answer  these  questions  it  will  be  necessary  to
inquire  more  precisely  what  our  principles  severally  mean,


i\ ft  < A\

§  5. The  Meaning  of  Identity

We  have  seen  in  §  i  that  Formal  Logic  treats  the  Law
of  Identity  as  so  self-evident  a  principle  as  hardly  to  think
it  necessary  to  inquire  into  its  meaning.  It  never  dis
covers  in  consequence  that  when  criticism  has  disposed  of
interpretations  which  are  manifestly  impossible  or  un-

1  If  it  is  the  function  of  '  truth  '  to  copy  '  reality.'


n8  FORMAL  LOGIC


CHAP.


meaning,  nothing  is  left  of  it  but  a  definition  of  '  identity/
couched  in  obscure  and  inadequate  terms.

Its  attitude  is  naive  and  charming.  How  can  any  one
question  that  A  is  A  ?  For  what  else  should  it  be  ?  It
must  be  A,  for  it  must  be  something,  and  can  only  be
what  it  is  !  Surely  you  will  not  deny  that  something  is
and  that  it  is  something  ?

If  it  were  worth  while,  it  would  be  easy  to  show  that
this  either  denies  the  possibility  of  change  or  means  nothing.
But  as  Formal  Logic  would  disclaim  the  Eleatic  audacity
of  the  first,  the  second  alternative  alone  seems  open.

This  interpretation  is  supported  also  by  the  fact  that
unless  A  is  A  means  that  A  is  B,  the  '  law  of  Identity '
renders  thought  impossible,  which  seems  a  curious
position  for  a  '  law  of  thought '  to  get  into.  For,  strictly
interpreted,  it  would  be  impossible  to  predicate  anything
but  A  of  A,  and  some  philosophers  have  observed  this
ever  since  the  days  of  Antisthenes.  If  A's  identity  means
that  it  excludes  every  not-A,  it  excludes  all  the  world
from  itself,  and  nothing  but  A  can  truly  be  predicated  of
it.  All  valid  judgments  must  become  tautologies.  But
to  utter  tautologies  is  not  to  think,  nor  are  actual  judg
ments  tautologies,  nor  are  they  couched  in  the  form  A  is
A.  They  employ  the  form  A  is  B,  and  even  when  they
do  not  seem  to,  the  tautology  is  only  apparent.  If  A  is
A  is  the  correct  formulation  of  the  '  law,'  therefore,
identity  is  unmeaning,  and  no  principle  of  thought.

But  need  the  law  of  Identity  mean  this?  Yes,  if  by
1  identity '  we  mean  an  absolute  identity  to  the  exclusion
of  difference.  But  need  we  mean  this  ?  Formal  Logic
hesitates.  It  would  like  to  retain  its  belief  in  absolute
identity,  yet  it  is  too  plainly  destructive  of  all  significant
assertion.  No  judgments  ever  really  intend  to  assert
absolute  identity.  Even  tautological  propositions  like
*  Boys  will  be  boys,'  or  '  As  sure  as  eggs  is  eggs/  are
understood  to  assert  identity  with  a  difference.  Clearly,
therefore,  in  logical  use  there  is  no  identity  which  is
absolute  and  devoid  of  differences.  But  if  identity  is
not  absolute,  to  what  is  it  relative  ?


x  THE  LAWS  OF  THOUGHT  119

Without  seeking  to  answer  this  question,  Formal  Logic
often  comforts  itself  with  the  idea  that  all  will  be  well
if  it  admits  that  identity  must  somehow  come  to  terms
with  difference,  and  accepts  the  Hegelian  dictum  that
c  all  identity  is  identity  in  difference '  as  the  final  word
of  wisdom.  At  this  point  it  stops  exhausted,  and  fre
quently  relapses  into  its  original  position  that  an  inquiry
into  the  question  whether  any  *  A  '  has  changed  sufficiently
to  invalidate  an  argument  based  on  its  '  identity '  may  be
burked  by  pointing  to  the  fact  that  it  is  still  called  '  A/
It  will  hardly  then  understand  a  conscientiousness  that
inquires  further.  Yet  the  Hegelian  response  seems  both
oracular  and  irrelevant.  For  what  does  the  '  identity '  in
the  '  identity  in  difference '  mean  ?  If  it  is  itself  an
'  identity  in  difference '  we  are  bidden  to  define  identity
by  itself;  if  it  is  an  absolute  identity,  we  have  not  after
all  exorcized  that  phantom  monster.  And  in  neither  case
have  we  been  told  what  identity  means,  nor  why  the
situation  should  have  been  described  as  an  identity  per
vading  differences,  rather  than  as  differences  breaking  out
in  what  was  falsely  taken  as  an  identity.

Whether  what  is  called  an  identity  is  an  '  identity '  or
a  '  difference '  seems  wholly  arbitrary.  For,  seeing  that  in
every  pair  of  things  called  '  A '  there  is  always  both
identity  and  difference,  there  is  no  reason  given  for
calling  them  identical  rather  than  different.  We  thus
arrive  at  the  consoling  (though  surprising)  result  that  '  A
is  A,'  instead  of  convicting  all  real  judgments  in  the  form
'A  is  B  *  of  contradiction,  now  makes  self-contradiction
impossible.  For  if  all  differences  are  differences-in-identity
and  all  identities  identities-in-differences,  is  not  everything
both,  and  has  not  the  difference  between  identity  and
difference  wholly  disappeared  ?  So  our  perplexity  forces  us
to  ask  further — What  is  the  difference  between  calling  a
thing  c  identical '  and  calling  it  '  different '  ?  Seeing  that
identity  is  never  absolute  but  a  matter  of  degree,  what
degree  of  identity  justifies  us  in  calling  a  thing  '  identical/
and  what  degree  of  difference  in  calling  it  '  different '  ?
Or  otherwise  what  degree  of  difference  destroys  identity,


120  FORMAL  LOGIC  CHAP.

and  what  amount  of  identity  overrides  difference  ?  To
none  of  these  questions  are  answers  forthcoming  ;  and,
moreover,  even  if  there  were,  they  could  not  be  self-
evident  ;  yet  without  them  the  Principle  of  Identity
would  seem  to  be  unmeaning.

We  are  still  far,  moreover,  from  an  answer  to  the
question  —  How  can  identities  persist  through  change?
The  only  direct  illustration  of  what  this  may  mean  is
afforded  by  the  familiar  case  of  our  own  identity.  This
certainly  is  not  an  identity  which  excludes  change.  We
believe  ourselves  to  change  all  through,  and  yet  to  remain
the  same.  But  how  far  does  this  example  profit  Logic  ?
Is  '  the  same '  always  of  this  sort,  and  does  it  really
change  all  through  ?  Are  terms  and  judgments,  then,  also
subject  to  the  flux,  incapable  of  the  ideal  rigidity  Plato
postulated,  and  capable  only  of  a  functional  equivalence
in  their  several  uses?  (Cf.  Chap.  VII,  §  8.)  If  so,  we
should  have  broken  through  logical  conventions  with  a
vengeance,  and  rendered  every  assertion  of  identity  an
experiment.

Yet  it  may  be  so.  Only  is  not  Formal  Logic  bound  to
perish  rather  than  admit  it  ?  Even  if  it  could  endure  the
thought  that  an  assertion  of  identity  is  never  '  self-evident,'
because  when  the  judgment  is  made  there  must  always
be  a  doubt  whether  the  situation  formerly  described  as
1  A '  is  sufficiently  like  that  now  to  be  described  as  *  A '
to  render  the  predication  successful,  would  it  not  abhor
the  inference  that  an  arbitrary  act  of  choice  is  inherent  in
the  making  of  every  judgment  ?  For  once  it  is  admitted
that  the  '  identical '  changes  and  exhibits  differences,  either
of  its  aspects  may  be  selected.  It  becomes  arbitrary,
therefore,  whether  we  choose  to  call  it  '  the  same '  or
*  different,'  and  why  we  should  do  the  one  rather  than
the  other  becomes  an  unfathomable  mystery  for  Formal
Logic.

To  sum  up:  (i)  to  say  baldly  that  'A  is  A'  is
meaningless  ;  (2)  to  say  that  every  A  is  identical  with
itself  is  perhaps  to  describe  identity,  but  certainly  to
provoke  the  question — How?  If  the  answer  is,  'By


x  THE  LAWS  OF  THOUGHT  121

remaining  unchanged/  the  retort  is  '  Impossible  ! ' ;  if,  *  By
persisting,  modified,  through  change/  it  becomes  optional
and  arbitrary  whether  we  call  it  '  the  same '  or  '  different.'
Thus  the  definition  of  '  identity  '  would  seem  to  coincide  \
with  that  of  'difference.'  (3)  If,  lastly,  we  try  to  apply
these  notions  of  identity,  we  get  varying  results.  The
'  identity '  which  is  exclusive  of  change  does  not  seem  to
apply  to  thoughts  or  things  at  all,  but  only  to  words — spi
long,  at  least,  as  their  (dictionary)  meaning  does  not  change.
The  '  identity  '  which  admits  of  change  applies  to  thoughts  ,
as  well  as  to  things,  but  seems  to  be  merely  another
name  for  '  difference.'

Neither  of  these  results  can  possibly  seem  wholly
satisfactory  to  Formal  Logic.  But  there  can  be  no  doubt
which  it  must  prefer.  With  its  belief  that  every  name
has  (or  ought  to  have)  one  single  rigid  meaning,  and  that
every  proposition  has  a  meaning  which  its  context  cannot
change,  it  is  bound  to  prefer  a  sense  of  Identity  which
is  restricted  to  words  but  accords  with  its  inveterate
verbalism.

1

§  6. The  Principle  of  Contradiction

t*  r<r

The  meaning  of  this  principle  seems  less  unfathom
able,  (i)  Regarded  as  a  principle  of  being,  it  is  con
fronted  by  the  same  difficulties  of  application  as  the
principle  of  Identity.  And  for  just  the  same  reason.
Because  all  things  change,  they  not  only  fail  to  preserve
their  identity,  but  also  succeed  in  assuming  contradictory
attributes.  Consequently  the  maxim  that  a  thing
cannot  both  be  and  not  be  A  will  only  hold  in  cases
where  the  thing  has  not  changed  since  it  was  A.  Hence
discretion  and  infinite  precautions  are  needed  to  apply
it,  nor  can  it  ever  be  asserted  without  a  risk  of  de  facto
failure.  Formal  Logic,  we  have  seen  (§  3),  is  forced  to
recognize  the  need  of  precautions  ;  but  those  it  takes  are
insufficient.  If  it  frankly  admitted  into  its  statement  of
the  principle  all  the  qualifications  which  may  be  relevant
in  its  actual  use,  it  would  cease  to  have  any  impressive-


122  FORMAL  LOGIC  CHAP.

ness  or  meaning  in  the  abstract.  We  should  have  to  say,
e.g.,  '  A  cannot  be  A  and  not-A  at  the  same  time,  in
the  same  place,  in  the  same  respect,  in  the  same  reference,
in  the  same  context,  for  the  same  persons — in  short,  under
precisely  the  same  circumstances  ;  but  probably  such
an  ideal  case  never  occurs,1  and  for  heaven's  sake  don't
ask  me  how  little  difference  in  any  of  these  respects  may
enable  A  to  be  not-A  ! '  Yet  it  is  clear  that  any  such
difference  may  vitiate  an  attempted  application  of  the
principle.  The  exact  point  at  which  a  dog  that  '  eats
bones '  will,  from  sheer  repletion,  refuse  to  eat  another  may
baffle  not  only  a  Formal  logician  but  the  best  canine
psychologist.  Yet  the  bone  may  be  quite  a  little  one.
Or  again,  if  I  say  '  It  is  hot,'  and  you  '  It  is  not,'  both
judgments  may  be  true  as  intended.  For  the  reference
in  each  case  may  have  been  to  the  assertor's  feelings,
and  to  those  of  similarly  constituted  persons.  The  uni
versality  and  objectivity  which  each  judgment  claims  did
not  refer  to  the  feelings  of  a  widely  different  character.
I  should  admit  I  was  not  thinking  of  salamanders,  and
you  that  you  had  not  been  solicitous  about  the  feelings
of  a  polar  bear.  Yet  we  might  both  have  been  mistaken
as  to  the  other's  feelings,  and,  for  the  purpose  of  the
judgment,  differ  as  decisively  as  the  salamander  from
the  polar  bear.  Clearly,  therefore,  the  principle  of  Con
tradiction  must  not  be  used  to  dogmatize  about  reality,
and  the  more  it  is  kept  out  of  metaphysics  the  better  for
both  parties.

(2)  Regarded  as  a  principle  of  thought,  it  defines  the
difference  between  affirmation  and  denial.  Now  it  is
an  important  fact,  of  a  psychological  sort,  that  affirma
tion  and  denial  (in  a  sense)  exclude  each  other.  But  it
does  not  follow  from  this  (as  we  saw  in  §  2)  that
verbally  contradictory  forms  of  affirmation  and  denial  are
incompatible.  For  we  can  never  take  it  for  granted  that
these  forms  express  the  real  meaning  of  the  judgments.
For  example,  though  a  Formal  logician  might  successively

1  Not  to  mention  the  awkward  fact  that  if  it  did  occur,  it  would  be  an
1  absolute '  identity  reducing  the  principle  to  the  tautology  it  is  trying  to  disclaim.


x  THE  LAWS  OF  THOUGHT  123

assert  that  every  judgment  asserted  an  identity,  and  that
no  judgment  did,  he  would  think  it  unfair  to  be  on  this
account  charged  with  self-contradiction.  Even,  however,
where  the  two  contradictory  propositions  were  intended
in  their  literal  meaning,  we  saw  that  the  result  would  not
be  two  contradictory  meanings  but  no  meaning  at  all,
just  because  there  is  a  contradiction  (§  2).

Moreover,  curiously  enough  there  is,  in  spite  of  all  this,
a  sense  in  which,  even  formally,  affirmation  and  denial
do  not  exclude  each  other,  but  imply  each  other  and  go
hand -in -hand.  For  in  the  very  act  of  affirming  the
identity  of  A  we  are  defining  it  over  against  not-A  and
excluding  not-A  from  it.  Thus  every  assertion  includes
a  denial,  omnis  determinate  est  negatio.  Nay,  it  seems  to
deny  far  more  than  it  asserts  ;  for  *  not-A  '  includes  all
the  world  but  A,  if  A  is  taken  literally,  and  all  but  what
can  be  predicated  of  A,  if  it  is  taken  leniently.  Similarly
in  denying  we  are  really  affirming  by  narrowing  down
the  region  in  which  A  may  be  found.  Thus  to  affirm  is
at  the  same  time  to  deny,  and  to  deny  to  affirm  ;  the
very  law  of  Contradiction  seems  to  demand  its  own
abrogation.  The  paradox  of  the  situation  is  well
calculated  to  provoke  that  philosophic  stupor  which
appears  to  be  the  end  of  philosophy  as  commonly  under
stood,  and  Hegel  had  the  wits  to  exploit  it.  But  though
he  was  extensively  accused  of  denying  the  Law  of  Con
tradiction,  his  argument  was  not  refuted.  Still  he  did
not  propound  a  principle  that  should  be  both  applicable
and  undeniable,  and  nothing  less  than  this  can  content
Formal  Logic.

§  7. The  Principle  of  Excluded  Middle

In  dealing  with  things  this  principle  is,  of  course,
involved  in  just  the  same  embarrassments  as  the  rest.
Things  not  only  change,  but  often  change  insensibly.
Hence  the  drawing  of  the  line  between  A  and  not-A
becomes  arbitrary,  and  the  appeal  to  the  Excluded
Middle  to  decide  questions  of  fact  seems  inept.  What


I24  FORMAL  LOGIC  CHAP.

should  we  think,  e.g.,  of  a  Stoic  philosopher  propounding
his  favourite  demonstration  that  death  is  nothing  to  us,
because  we  must  be  either  dead  or  alive,  and  so  long  as
we  are  alive  we  must  be  enjoying  life,  while  once  we  are
dead  we  are  past  feeling  ?  Or  of  a  doctor  assuring  a
dying  man's  wife  that  he  was  certainly  either  dead  or
alive,  and  could  not  be  both  ?

Regarded  as  a  principle  of  thought,  the  Law  of
Excluded  Middle  is  supposed  to  guarantee  that  there
is  no  alternative  to  affirmation  or  denial.  But  this  is
only  true  if  the  conditions  of  actual  thought  are  abstractly
simplified  to  an  enormous  extent,  and  a  number  of
covert  assumptions  are  allowed.  It  is  not  in  practice
necessary  to  choose  between  affirming  A  and  denying  it,
because  (i)  it  is  not  necessary  to  think  about  A  at  all.
A  will  to  think,  therefore,  must  be  assumed  before  the
principle  can  get  under  weigh.  And  this  notoriously  is
not  always  found.  For  after  all  no  one  can  be  forced
to  think,  as  others  besides  schoolboys  are  perfectly  aware.

(2)  A  will  to  think  things  together  must  be  assumed
for  the  '  law '  of  Excluded  Middle  as  for  that  of  Contra
diction. It is perfectly  easy  to cherish  contradictions
in  one's  mind,  provided that  they  are  kept  apart,  and
not  allowed  to  meet. On  this  condition even  the  most
cogent  inferences  cease  to  be  necessary. No  one  can  be
compelled  to  admit  even  that 2  +  2  =  4,  so  l°ng  as  he
can refuse to add them. Most people,  unconsciously
or deliberately,  make extensive use  of their power  to
keep  apart  what it is inconvenient  to  bring together,
and  this  accounts  for  the  vast  masses  of  '  inconsistency '
we  all  discover  in  other minds than  our  own. Logic,
of  course,  cannot  approve  of this  practice,  but  need  it
refuse  to  observe  the  fact?

(3)  ,A will to judge  must be  assumed. Otherwise
suspense of  judgment  forms  an  alternative to  *  it  must
be  either  A  or  not.' Before  judgment  can  be  passed  the
doubt-inquiry  stage  of  the  problem  must  be  over. But
it  rests  with  us  to  say  when  this  shall  be,  and it  need
never  be  unless  we  choose. Even  when  the  alternatives


x  THE  LAWS  OF  THOUGHT  125

have  been  quite  distinctly  formulated,  it  is  possible  to
argue  :  '  Such  and  such  considerations  impel  me  to  assert
that  this  is  true  ;  such  others  that  it  is  not  ;  both  argu
ments  seem  valid.  Yet  if  both  are  true,  they  must  be
consistent,  for  truth  is  consistent.  It  is  true  that  I  can
not  at  present  apprehend  how  they  can  be  brought  into
accord  ;  but  that  is  no  reason  for  rejecting  either  ;  let  me
go  on,  therefore,  affirming  both,  and  trust  to  time  to
evolve  the  higher  synthesis  which  will  remove  the  con
tradiction.'  Even  eminent  philosophers  may  be  found
to  argue  thus  without  confessing  to  logical  suicide  ;  at
any  rate  it  is  clear  that  Formal  Logic  cannot  compel  us
to  judge.

(4)  Injudicious  application  can  easily  make  the
principle  of  Excluded  Middle  look  somewhat  foolish.
We  might,  for  example,  set  out  solemnly  to  affirm  that  a
dog  was  either  a  rat  or  not,  and  if  not  that,  either  a
sausage  or  not,  and  if  not  that,  either  a  fallacy  or  not,
etc.  This  method  of  inquiry  does  not  seem  likely  to  lead
to  any  valuable  information  about  dogs.  Nor  is  it  found
in  real  life.  The  fact,  then,  that  strict  Formal  Logic
sanctions  it  would  seem  to  show  that  some  important
consideration  has  been  overlooked  in  its  scheme.  In
point  of  fact,  significant  affirmation  and  denial  always
imply  a  common  genus  and  a  suppositio  as  to  the  scope  of
the  inquiry.  It  is  because  the  sphere  of  relevant  judg
ment  is  thus  limited,  because  '  not-A  '  is  never  understood
to  mean  the  rest  of  the  universe,  that  negations  and
alternatives  can  advance  the  work  of  science.  But  the
precious  principles  of  Identity  and  Contradiction  convey
no  hint  of  the  fact,  and  Formal  Logic  cannot  say  what
determines  the  sphere  of  the  inquiry.  It  is  debarred  from
admitting  that  it  is  the  interest  of  some  inquirer.


§  8. The  Principles  of  Thought  as  Postulates

Are,  then,  the  'Laws  of  Thought'  unmitigated  nonsense?
Surely  where  there  is  so  much  smoke  there  must  be  some
light  ;  but  the  question  shows  that  we  have  become


\


126  FORMAL  LOGIC  CHAP.

critical  and  are  ripe  for  a  real  solution  of  the  problem.
It  is  necessary  to  renounce  entirely  the  Formal  concep
tion  of  their  function,  in  order  to  see  that  they  really  are
principles  of  thought  and  play  an  essential  part  in  the
functioning  of  our  intelligence.

(1)  We  shall  then  discover  that  in  the  first  place  they
are  neither  *  laws '  of  the  way  in  which  we  all  think,  nor
'  canons ' for thinking rightly. The third alternative
hinted at  in  §  2 is  that  they  are  postulates  we  can use
advantageously.1 Now  a postulate  differs  in important
respects both  from  a  *  law '  and  from a  *  canon.' (a) It
requires the intervention of  a  will. There  is no  com
pulsion about  adopting it ; if  it  is not  willed,  it is  no
necessity  of  thought. If  it  is  willed,  on  the  other  hand,  it
can not  only  appear  to  be  universal,  but  can maintain
itself  against  an  indefinite  amount  of  hostile  experience.
(&) It thus seems to be in a way '  independent ' of
experience. Experience  is  allowed  to  confirm  it  but  not
to  invalidate  it,  and  it  is  none  the  worse,  if  events  do  not
wholly  conform  to  it,  so  long  as  they  conform  sufficiently
not  to  impair  its  usefulness. Thus  the  mere  discrepancy
of  experience  does  not  refute  a  postulate. Hence  it  is
often  supposed to  be  '  self-evident.' But  a  critical logic
will  never  accept  a  principle  on  the  strength  of  the  merely
psychological  criterion  of  '  self-evidence.'

§  9. The  Purposiveness  of  Thought

(2)  Formal Logic fails to recognize the volitional
nature of our postulates, because it has throughout
systematically  shut  its  eyes  to  the  constant  intervention
of  volitions  in the course  of  thinking. It  has  thereby
irrevocably  pledged  itself  to  make  nonsense  of  the  theory
of  any  process  of  thought  which  depends  on  such  inter
vention. It  insists  on  calling  purposiveness  *  arbitrary '  and
is rewarded by finding that all purposive thinking is
4  arbitrary '  and  that  none  of  its  own  explanations  will  work

until  they  are  represented  as  '  arbitrary '  and  irrational.

^""Hsyjfitf*-

1  Cf.  generally  my  Axioms  as  Postulates,  especially  §§  n,  26,  28-34,  36,  and  48.

\


x  THE  LAWS  OF  THOUGHT  127

It  has  to  regard  as  '  arbitrary '  all  its  distinctions  of  Terms
(Chap.  II,  §§  6,  n),  all  practicable  definitions  and
divisions  (Chap.  VI,  §§  4,  9),  all  inference  as  such  (Chap.
II,  §  i,  Chap.  XIV,  §  5),  the  selection  of  relevant  points
of  identity  or  difference  (§  5),  the  drawing  of  the  line
between  A  and  not-A  (§  7),  etc.  The  obvious  cure  for
all  this  manufactured  irrationality  is  to  recognize  thinking
as  the  thoroughly  purposive,  selective,  and  personal  process
it  is,  and  to  deny  that  it  is  thereby  vitiated.  But  this
remedy  Formal  Logic  has  arbitrarily  debarred  itself  from
trying.

§  10.  Identity  as  a  Postulate

If  the  principle  of  Identity  is  formulated  as  a  postulate,
it  is  found  to  demand  that  A  shall  be  A  and  that  a  judg
ment  shall  be  capable  of  being  *  identical '  (i.e.  identified)
with  itself.  This,  of  course,  implies  that  the  cases  of '  A '
need  not  be,  and  prima  facie  are  not,  wholly  or  absolutely
identical  or  indiscernible  in  their  various  occurrences.  It
admits  that  they  are  not  bare  '  A,'  but  A1,  A2,  etc.,  as  they
actually  appear.  It  admits,  therefore,  that  appearances  are
against  *  identity,'  that  all  things  change,  including  the
'  cases  '  of  A,  and  the  recurrences  of  the  '  same  '  judgment.
But  it  asserts  that  nevertheless,  in  spite  of  these  differences^  it
shall  be  possible  to  treat  them  as  cases  of  A^  as  recurrences
of  the  same  judgment,  and  to  argue  from  one  '  case '  to
another  by  substituting  A2  for  A1,  and  assuming  that  the
differences  in  the  contexts  of  the  two  judgments  are
irrelevant  for  the  purpose  of  the  argument.

Evidently  these  postulations  of  identity  are  affronts
to  experience  and  defiances  of  change.  They  are  ad
ventures  of  thought  and  always  involve  a  risk.  For  it
may  always  turn  out  that  the  differences  are  not  irrelevant.
Indeed  it  is  this  risk  that  gives  real  significance  to  the
assertion  of  identity.  If  identity  were  '  self-evident '  and
a  matter  of  course,  we  should  not  trouble  to  assert  it.
But  because  a  doubt  is  cast  upon  it  by  the  existence  of
change,  the  discovery  of  an  identity  that  holds,  and  holds
events  together,  becomes  valuable  and  important.  Just


128  FORMAL  LOGIC  CHAP.

because  all  reality  is  in  a  flux,  because  things,  ideas,  and
meanings  are  continually  changing,  it  is  so  immensely
important  to  affirm  that  nevertheless  predication  is  not
frustrated,  because  there  is  enough  identity  to  argue  from.
It  is  not  absolute  identity,  of  course,  that  is  wanted  ;  for
that  would  be  as  useless  as  it  is  inconceivable.  Nor  is  it
a  ready-made  identity  passively  floating  in  a  pre-existing
sea  of  differences.  It  is  an  identity  which  has  to  be  made,
or  differentiated  and  made  relevant  by  an  act  of  selection,
at  peril  of  our  truth,  and  ultimately  of  our  life,  every  time
it  is  used.  For  it  is  never  an  abstract  identity,  but
always  relative  to  the  purpose  of  an  argument.  For
example,  the  two  peas  which  seem  indiscernible  to  a
maker  of  proverbs  may  be  very  different  for  the  purposes  of
a  Mendelian  gardener.  Or,  again,  it  is  clear  that  whether
we  answer  yes  or  no  to  the  question,  Do  two  persons  ever
see  the  same  rainbow  ?  depends  on  how  we  decide  the
question  whether  the  optical  differences  of  their  rainbows
are  logically  relevant,  so  that  for  some  purposes  rainbows
may  be  '  identical '  and  for  others  not.

Thus  the  postulate  of  Identity  does  not  mean  that
identities  are  ever  found  or  given  as  facts,  nor  confound
the  *  identical '  with  the  indiscernible.  It  means  that  in
some  cases  we  may,  with  our  eyes  open,  neglect  differences
between  similars,  and  substitute  one  for  the  other.  When
we  argue  from  one  *  case  of  A '  to  another,  we  mean  that
we  believe  them  to  be  equivalent  for  our  purpose ;  i.e.  we
use  them  as  '  identical '  cases  of  the  '  same  '  A.  Of  course
we  should  not  succeed  with  this  procedure  unless  there
were  cases  which  submitted  to  such  treatment ;  but  it  is
from  experience  alone  that  we  can  learn  which  they  are
and  that  there  actually  are  objects  of  thought  and  words
and  judgments  which  can  be  treated  as  equivalent  in
different  contexts.  This  does  not  imply  that  they  are
unchanging,  but  only  that  their  changes  may  be  irrelevant
or  insufficient  to  frustrate  the  inference.  Nor  does  it
mean  that  every  alleged  identity  turns  out  to  be  real,  for
of  course  the  similarity,  on  the  strength  of  which  identity
was  postulated,  may  turn  out  to  be  insufficient :  but  it  is


x  THE  LAWS  OF  THOUGHT  129

just  this  possibility  of  error .in  its  application  which  saves
the  principle  from  becoming  a  tautology,  and  gives  a
meaning  to  its  claim  to  be  a  principle  of  thought.

We  see  then  that  Identity  is  always  the  result  of  a
voluntary  operation  performed  on  a  given  similarity,
which  fits  it  for  the  purpose  of  reasoning  from  it,  and  that
it  is  not  necessary  that  the  identical  should  be  immutable.
It  is  enough  that  the  attempted  substitutions  should
function  successfully.

As  for  the  predication-puzzle,  the  solution  is  simple.
No  predicate  is  ever  attached  to  a  subject  except  for  a
purpose.  When,  therefore,  we  judge  that  A  is  B,  we
mean  that  for  our  purpose  the  quality  B  may  stand  as
the  essence  of  A.  We  do  not  mean  that  out  of  this  con
text^  and  apart  from  the  occasion  of  the  actual  asser
tion,  B  in  general  may  be  identified  with  A  in  general.
We  do  not  assert  that  they  are  absolutely  identical  even
now.  We  do  not  deny  their  differences  (and  especially
not  their  verbal  difference),  though  we  take  them  to  be
irrelevant.  Similarly,  in  affirming  the  self-identity  of  A,
we  are  not  denying  that  various  predications  may  be
made  about  it,  or  asserting  that  it  may  not  be  also  B
and  C  and  D,  etc.  We  are  intent  only  on  getting  an
object  of  thought  definite  and  stable  enough  to  attach
predicates  to,  to  accept  some  and  to  reject  others.
Indeed,  what  we  are  really  trying  to  do  is  to  find  out
what  attributes  A  will  tolerate,  and  what  not.  To  dis
cover  this  we  have  to  make  the  assumption  that  A  has
a  nature  of  its  own,  which  is  not  indiscriminately
hospitable  to  every  predicate.  If  A  were  such  that
anything  whatsoever  might  be  predicated  of  it,  it  could
not  mean  anything,  because  no  predicates  would  really
attach  to  it.  It  would  be  anything  and  everything  and
effectively  nothing.1  Clearly,  if  such  were  the  nature  of
reality,  it  would  be  unknowable.  Hence  it  is  a  postulate
of  knowledge  and  of  significant  predication  that  the
world  should  allow  itself  to  be  set  in  order  by  predica-

1  This  is  the  ultimate  logical  reason  why  monistic  metaphysics,  assertions
about  the  Absolute,  and  the  identification  of  '  God '  with  the  totality  of  reality,
all  in  the  end  mean  nothing.

K


130  FORMAL  LOGIC


CHAP.


tions  about  what  things  are  and  are  not.  Thus  the
practice  of  predication  becomes  intelligible,  without
ascribing  to  things  and  thoughts  either  the  absolute
fixity  which  Plato  demanded  in  vain,  or  such  fluidity
that  it  is  wholly  arbitrary  and  indifferent  whether  we
take  them  to  be  the  same  or  different.  Plato  was
right  in  thinking  that  it  is  the  essential  function  of  the
intelligence  to  *  fix '  the  flux,  and  wrong  only  in  thinking
jf~  that  it  needed  fixing  absolutely,  and  not  in  relation  to
human  purposes.  This  very  relation,  however,  implies
the  flexibility  in  identities  which  makes  the  principle
of  Identity  significant.

§11. The  Principle  of  Contradiction  as  a  Postulate

The  principle  of  Contradiction  must  similarly  be
viewed  as  a  demand  that  A  shall  exclude  not-A  ;  but
this  so  far  settles  nothing  as  to  how  A  and  not-A  are
to  be  understood.  A  cannot  indeed  be  understood  as
excluding  everything  but  bare  (verbal)  A,  for  that  again
would  render  predication  invalid.  Let  it  be  understood,
therefore,  as  including  whatever  can  be  truly  predicated
of  A,  and  as  excluding  only  what  is  incompatible  with
its  existence.  We  can  then  defend  the  predication  A
is  B  on  the  ground  that  B  belongs  to  A,  or  more  pre
cisely  that  in  the  total  situation,  in  which  a  part  is
singled  out  as  A,  B  is  connected  with  it,  and  can  defend
the  singling  out  of  A  as  necessary  to  the  truth  of  the
predication.  For  unless  '  A '  were  conceived  to  be
capable  of  excluding  some  predicates  while  accepting
others,  no  meaning  could  attach  to  any  statement  about
it.  Any  object  of  thought  must  be  conceived  as  distinct
enough  to  discriminate  between  what  it  is  and  what
it  is  not,  i.e.  between  true  and  false  attributes  ascribed
to  it.  That  is  the  meaning  of  both  the  demands,  that
it  shall  be  *  itself,'  and  that  it  shall  repel  its  *  other.'

The  facts  in  nature  on  which  this  postulate  is  based  are
that  there  are  distinguishable  objects  and  incompatibilities
of  existence,  and  an  immediately  experienced  difference
of  attitude  between  affirmation  and  denial,  which  is  a


x  THE  LAWS  OF  THOUGHT  131

psychical  fact.  Certain  predicates  do  exclude  each  other,
and  when  I  assert  the  one,  I  mean  to  deny  the  other.
It  is  worth  while,  therefore,  to  try  to  map  out  the
mutually  exclusive  predicates,  in  order  to  know  what  to
expect  from  the  course  of  events.  Of  course,  this  does
not  mean  that  any  given  reality  will  allow  its  attitude
towards  the  rest  of  the  universe  to  be  quite  sharply
defined,  nor  that  any  attempted  predication  may  not
be  wrong ;  it  only  asserts  that  our  postulate  has  an
application  and  a  use.  The  fact  of  change  renders  it
impossible  to  regard  the  principle  of  Contradiction  as
a  fact ;  it  makes  it  into  a  postulate,  and  imports  a  risk
and  a  meaning  into  its  applications  ;  but  it  does  not
destroy  its  use  so  long  as  we  remain  willing  to  learn
from  experience.

The  paradox  that  affirmation  denies  and  denial
affirms  (§  6)  disappears  when  the  purpose  of  our  postu
late  is  understood.  For  we  then  see  that  there  is  neither
*  identity '  nor  '  contradiction  '  per  se,  and  without  reference
to  a  purpose.

When  we  apply  the  principle  to  the  interpretation  of
experience,  there  is  nothing  to  compel  us  to  regard  two
'  events '  as  both  *  cases  of  A/  or  to  regard  it  as  '  contra
dictory  '  that  A  should  have  changed  into  B.  It  is  our
thought  that  has  isolated  these  '  events,'  and  connects
them  together  again  for  the  purposes  of  organizing  its
experience.  And  for  our  purpose  it  is  clear  that  to
affirm  and  to  deny  are  the  same  thing  neither  as  ex
periences  nor  in  intention,  and  that  both  are  useful  for
this  organizing  of  experience  and  play  into  each  other's
hands,  once  we  have  selected  a  limited  genus  within  which
our  affirmations  and  denials  can  operate.  But  in  the
Formal  statement  it  is  not  true  that  affirmation  denies
every  not-A,  or  that  denial  goes  to  affirm  any  A — for
the  simple  reason  that  both  not-A  and  denial  are
infinite  and  Formal  affirmation  and  denial  are  not
significant.  In  real  thinking  there  is  always  a  limited
reference  which  destroys  the  paradox.  For  why  should
it  be  remarkable  that  if  we  assume  that  in  a  certain


132  FORMAL  LOGIC


CHAP.


subject  there  are  a  limited  number  of  alternatives,  of
which  one  has  to  be  selected,  we  may  get  at  it  either
by  picking  it  out  at  once,  or  by  rejecting  the  other
alternatives  ?  The  *  self-contradiction '  of  the  '  law  of
Contradiction '  thus  reduces  itself  to  the  familiar  fact
that  selection  involves  rejection.1


§  12.  Excluded  Middle  as  a  Postulate

The  principle  of  Excluded  Middle  demands  that  it
shall  be  possible  to  draw  the  line  between  A  and  not-A
so  sharply  that  nothing  intermediate  shall  be  conceivable,
and  to  force  an  option  between  affirmation  and  denial.
Manifestly  in  either  form  the  postulate  rests  on  the
fact  that  there  are  cases  where  sharp  distinctions  can
be  drawn,  and  where  we  have  practically  to  decide  yes
or  no?  Clearly,  therefore,  it  may  be  a  convenience  to
postulate  these  conditions  in  other  cases  also  where  they
are  not  known  to  exist,  even  though  it  is  never  a
necessity  of  thought  that  we  should  assume  them  (§  6).
The  significance,  responsibility,  and  risk  of  applying
his  postulate  to  a  possible  case  rests,  as  before,  with  the
assertor,  and  depends  on  the  purpose  of  his  thinking.
For  example,  '  to  be  or  not  to  be '  were  exclusive  alter
natives  for  Hamlet,  meditating  on  suicide,  only  because
for  the  purpose  of  his  meditation  he  had  thought  fit  to
identify  *  being ;  with  existence  in  the  physical  world.

§  1 3. Conclusion

The  conclusion  that  the  '  laws  of  thought '  are  postu
lates,  and  neither  facts  in  nature,  nor  even  necessarily

1  There is, however, an attractive alternative to taking the Principle of
Contradiction  in  this  way  as  a  Postulate  of  Truth. It  may  be  taken  as  a  Law
of  Meaning  which  asserts,  not  that  'A  is  B  '  and  'A  is  not  B'  cannot  both  be
true,  but  that  they  cannot  both  be  meant  (cf.  §  2). Similarly  the  Principle  of
Excluded  Middle  may  be  interpreted  as  asserting  that  either  A  is  B  or  A  is  not
B  must  be  meant  to  be  asserted. The  fact  that both  have  been  so  loosely
conceived  that  they  may  be  taken  either  as  postulates  of  truth  or  as  laws  of
meaning  is  a  curious  comment  on  their  alleged 'self-evidence.' But  Formal
Logic  cannot  conceive  them  thus,  because  it  treats  meaning  as  'psychological,'
and  does  not  admit  it  into  '  Logic '  (cf.  Chap.  XXIV,  §§  5,  6).

2  Never  theoretically,  because  it  is  always  thinkable  that  a  refusal  to  answer
might  be  persisted  in  even  at  the  cost  of  life  itself.


x  THE  LAWS  OF  THOUGHT  133

applicable  to  all  reality,  will  perhaps  be  thought  to
reduce  their  truth  to  the  level  of  (more  or  less)  successful
fictions.  And  certainly  they  are  not  '  true/  if  it  is  the
business  of  thought  to  correspond  with  reality.  For
they  make  no  attempt  to  ( copy '  reality ;  they  openly
and  '  arbitrarily '  idealize  certain  features  in  it,  and
demand  that  reality  shall  conform  to  these  ideals,  although
it  plainly  never  does.  However  convenient  then  they
may  be,  they  cannot  be  more  than  fictions.

This  criticism  would  be  final,  if  it  were  indisputable
that  it  is  the  function  of  thought  to  copy  reality.  If,
on  the  other  hand,  it  is  the  business  of  thought  to  operate
on  reality  and  to  transform  the  flux  in  our  eyes  by
drawing  our  attention  to  its  relatively  permanent  features,
by  selecting  which  we  may  control  it,  it  will  not  seem
obvious  that  the  devices  of  our  thought  have  failed  to
attain  to  truth.  For  '  truth '  will  then  mean  these  very
assumptions  and  devices  by  which  we  operate  on  reality
and  control  the  flux.  They  will  be  precisely  what
constitutes  the  difference  between  '  truth '  and  '  reality.'
The  postulates  of  thinking,  then,  cannot  be  described  as
fictions  so  long  as  they  work,  so  long  as  we  judge  it
well  to  think  before  acting,  and  to  reflect  on  experience.
Their  partial  failure  must  be  set  down,  not  to  their
own  lack  of  truth  (for  before  it  can  be  suggested  that
we  can  make  truer  assumptions  it  ought  to  be  shown  that
others  can  be  made),  but  to  the  recalcitrance  of  Reality.
But  their  failure  is  bound  up  with  their  success ;  and
the  idea  of  making  them  indisputable  by  making  them
inapplicable  could  only  have  occurred  to  Formal  Logic.


CHAPTER XI

THE FORMS OF JUDGMENT

§  I. The  Classifications  of  Judgments

FORMAL  Logic  bases  its  division  of  judgments  on  differences
in  their  QUANTITY,  QUALITY,  RELATION,  and  MODALITY.

(1)  On  the  basis  of  Quantity  it  distinguishes  between
judgments universal,  particular,  and singular,  according
as  they  are  about  the  whole,  a  part,  or  a  single  case  of
their  subject. *  All  units  are  equal,'  '  Some  cherry-stones
float  in  water,'  '  The  first  priest  of  Diana  Nemorensis  was
a  runaway  slave/  would  serve  as  examples.

(2)  On the  basis of Quality  judgments  are divided
into affirmative and negative, e.g.  *  Some cherry-stones
float  in  water/  '  Some  cherry-stones  do  not  float  in  water.'

(3)  On the basis  of  Relation,  judgments categorical,
e.g.  *  The  wish  is  father  to  the  thought/  hypothetical,  e.g.
'  If wishes were horses,  then beggars would ride/  and
disjunctive, e.g.  '  Numbers are  either odd  or even/  are
recognized.

(4)  As regards Modality judgments are assertoric,
problematic,  or  apodictic,  e.g.  *  It  is  true/  '  It  may  be  true/
'  It  must  be  true.'

§  2.  Are  they  Forms  of  Judgments  or  of  Propositions  ?

The  first  and  most  serious  doubt  about  the  value  of
these  schemes  of  classification  is  raised  by  the  question
whether  they  are  forms  of  Judgments  or  of  Propositions.
To  prove  that  they  are  the  former  it  would  be  necessary
to  show  (a)  that  each  form  fully  expresses  the  meaning


CHAP,  xi THE  FORMS  OF  JUDGMENT  135

of  its  assertor,  and  (b)  that  it  does  not  express  more
meanings  than  one.  If  it  should  be  capable  of  expressing  |
a  plurality  of  meanings,  it  is  clearly  nothing  but  a  verbal  _
form  for  conveying  alternative  meanings,  and  in  any  case
of  its  actual  use  its  meaning  will  have  to  be  determined
from  its  context.  If,  therefore,  Formal  Logic  treats  these
forms  as  '  ambiguous '  and  incapable  of  distinguishing
between  very  different  meanings,  and  discusses  what  they
may  mean  and  ought  to  mean,  it  is  in  reality  confessing
that  they  are  only  forms  of  words,  and  propositions,  not
judgments.

We  shall  see  that  in  each  case  it  is  forced  to  this
confession,  and  that  even  so  it  can  offer  no  guarantee
that  the  meanings  it  specifies  exhaust  the  possibilities.
An  exhaustive  catalogue  of  the  meanings  of  judgments
would  no  doubt  be  a  very  formidable  undertaking,  because
it  would  involve  a  reference  to  the  actual  context,  and  a
psychological  study  of  each  assertor's  state  of  mind  ;  and
moreover,  the  simple  categories  of  Formal  Logic  seem  ill-
fitted  to  cope  with  judgments  which  may  have,  and  may
be  intended  to  have,  more  than  one  interpretation,  and
may  convey  one  meaning  only  a  little  more  obviously
than  another.  But  if  Formal  Logic  is  not  disposed  and
equipped  to  deal  with  the  complexities  of  actual  meaning,
it  should  openly  confess  that  it  is  dealing  only  with  forms
of  speech.  Even  these  it  can  manipulate  only  by  doing
violence  to  their  natural  expression,  and  by  postulating  a
number  of  conventions  which  language  does  not  observe.
Instead  of  confessing  its  verbalism,  it  first  abstracts  from
the  actual  meaning  of  the  judgment  in  its  personal
context,  and  substitutes  for  it  a  '  logical  meaning '  con
structed  by  these  conventions,  and  then  undertakes  to
fix  this  logical  meaning  for  good  and  all  from  a  mere
contemplation  of  the  form  of  words.

§  3. The  Forms  of  Quantity

The  classification  of  judgments  into  universal  and
particular  is  neither  linguistically  nor  logically  satis-


136  FORMAL  LOGIC  CHAP.

factory.  Linguistically  it  is  objectionable,  because  it
cannot  deal  with  the  indefinite  propositions  which  leave
the  quantity  of  the  subject  indeterminate.  The  Formal
logician  arbitrarily  asserts  that  the  subject  must  be
quantified  before  he  will  consider  its  meaning,  but  does
not  observe  that  in  so  doing  its  meaning  may  be  altered
and  falsified.  When,  e.g.,  it  is  asserted  that  *  women  are
variable/  or  '  logicians  are  inconsistent,'  the  assertor  may
not  yet  have  made  up  his  mind  whether  his  remark
applies  to  '  some '  or  to  *  all?  or  to  what  percentage  :  the
request  to  quantify  the  subject  may  demand  from  him
a  further  act  of  thought  and  a  difficult  research  which  he
has  neither  the  means  nor  the  need  to  perform.  On  the
other  hand,  an  assertor  is  often  in  a  position  to  make  his
assertions  far  more  definite  than  the  vague  some  which  is
all  that  Formal  Logic  finds  it  convenient  to  recognize.
A  statistician  or  a  biometrician  will  justly  despise  a  mere
statement  that  c  some  men  marry/  and  will  state  the
marriage-rate  per  thousand  of  the  population  exactly,
and  in  many  cases  the  subject  habitually  indicates  its
quantity  ('  a  few/  '  most/  *  nearly  all/  '  all  except  one/
etc.)  far  more  precisely  than  the  logical  '  some/  which
ranges  technically  from  '  at  least  one '  to  '  all  but  one.' *
Here,  then,  is  a  mass  of  actually  expressible  and  habitually
expressed  knowledge,  which  Formal  Logic  simply  throws
away  because  it  has  found  no  way  of  utilizing  it.

Logically  it is admitted  that the *  universal '  forms
suffer  from  much  '  ambiguity '  (i.e.  plurality  of  meaning).

*  All  trespassers  will  be  prosecuted '  may  be  '  enumerative/
'  truly  universal/  or  '  hypothetical.' I.e.  it  may  mean  (in
extension) a threat against certain persons ; it may
enunciate (in intension) a general connexion between
trespassing  and  liability  to  prosecution,  or  it  may  mean

*  if  caught  trespassing,  then  prosecuted.' It  can  mean  all
these  things,  and  which  of  them  it  actually  does  mean  on
any  occasion  depends  on  the  context. In  other  words,  it
is  clearly  a  form  of  words.

1  Indeed,  for  some  Formal  purposes, 'some*  covers  'all*  (cf.  Chap. XII,


xi  THE  FORMS  OF  JUDGMENT  137

Formal  logicians,  especially  those  who  try  to  con
ceive  their  subject  as  scientific,  sometimes  attempt  to
stave  off  this  inference  by  contending  that  though  the
universal  proposition  may  have  all  these  meanings,  yet
it  should  more  rightly  or  properly  be  understood  in  one
of  them.  So  they  lay  it  down  that,  e.g.,  universal  proposi
tions  should  be  interpreted  in  intension,  particular  in
extension,  and  enlarge  on  the  superior  scientific  value  of
universal  propositions,  until  even  a  cautious  man  becomes
almost  ashamed  of  his  reluctance  to  say  it  is  all  or  nothing.

It  would  be  premature  here  to  examine  the  confusions
of  thought  which  underlie  this  doctrine  (Chap.  XVI,  §§  12,
13),  and  it  is,  at  any  rate,  enough  to  show  that  it  is  quite
irrelevant.  For,  from  the  logical  standpoint,  the  function
of  a  proposition  is  to  convey  a  meaning,  and  if  it  is
successful  in  so  doing,  it  is  as  good  a  judgment  as  could
be  desired.  If  it  conveys  the  meaning  intended,  it
fulfils  its  purpose  and  validates  its  form,  whatever  it  may
be.  Surely  it  cannot  be  contended  that  it  will  be  im
proved  by  using  a  form  which  fails  to  convey  its  meaning  ?
How  can  the  use  of  a  universal  form  be  held  to  palliate
ineptitude  in  expressing  one's  meaning  ?  And  even  if  it
were  true  that  universal  forms  were  best  used  for  scientific
purposes,  it  would  not  follow  either  that  particular  forms
were  logically  unsound  or  reprehensible,  or  that  the  mere
use  of  a  universal  proposition  rendered  one  statement
more  valuable  than  another  which  was  expressed  in  a
particular  form.  Why  should  it  be  logically  more  reput
able  to  assert  a  universal  proposition  which  is  false  than
a  particular  one  which  is  true  ?  The  question,  What  is
the  right  judgment  to  make  on  this  subject,  and  how  may
it  best  be  expressed  ?  is  always  a  question  of  fact,  and  its
decision  requires  '  material '  knowledge  and  a  knowledge
of  human  psychology.  It  cannot  be  answered  by  mere
meditation  on  the  forms  of  propositions,  and  it  is  illogical
to  call  a  particular  judgment  which  serves  its  purpose
'incomplete'  because  we  believe  that  for  certain  other
purposes  a  universal  form  of  proposition  would  have  been
used.


CHAP.


138  FORMAL  LOGIC

§  4. The  Forms  of  Affirmation  and  of  Negation

The  fundamental  psychic  fact  underlying  the  classi
fication  of  judgments  on  the  ground  of  Quality  is,  of
course,  the  difference  between  affirmation  and  denial.
This  difference  of  attitude  is  the  real  basis  for  the  postu
late  of  Excluded  Middle,  and  is  so  pronounced  that  it
is  hardly  possible  that  any  one  should,  in  judging,  be
unaware  that  he  is  either  affirming  or  denying.  Indeed,
he  is  probably  aware  also  of  the  motives  that  have  con
ducted  him  to  the  judgment  he  is  formulating  ;  he  knows,
e.g.,  whether  he  is  simply  asserting  what  seems  to  him  an
obvious  fact,  or  denying  what  is  an  obvious  error,  whether
his  denials  and  his  affirmations  are  confident  or  hesitant,
whether  he  is  asserting  in  order  to  deny,  or  denying  in
order  to  assert.  Clearly  there  are  enormous  differences
of  meaning  behind  the  simple  words  of  his  assertion,  and
if  his  audience  do  not  share  in  his  immediate  awareness
of  his  real  meaning,  the  subsequent  course  of  his  thought
may  ordinarily  be  trusted  to  enlighten  them.

But  in  the  forms  of  affirmation  and  denial  none  of
these  important  differences  can  be  preserved.  The
most  casual  observation  and  the  most  closely  reasoned
reaffirmation  of  a  contested  truth  will  both  appear  as
'  affirmative  judgments.'  The  most  perverse  contentious
ness  and  the  most  profound  criticism  will  both  have  to
express  themselves  in  negations.  We  need,  in  short,
knowledge  of  the  actual  context  to  understand  the  actual
meaning  of  a  judgment,  and  whether  it  is  positive  or
negative.  Consequently  the  forms  of  affirmation  and
negation  become  '  ambiguous/  and  cease  to  be  un
equivocal  guides  to  the  actual  meaning.  Formal  Logic
has  once  more  dropped  from  the  Judgment  into  the  Pro
position,  and  can  return  to  the  latter  only  by  considering
the  actual  reasoning  in  its  context.

§  5. The  ''Subjectivity'  of  Negation

If  thought  were  merely  the  mirroring  of  a  static  and
unchanging  '  Being,'  and  perfectly  fulfilled  this  function,


xi  THE  FORMS  OF  JUDGMENT  139

there  would  be  no  room  for  negation.  It  would  merely
have  to  affirm  what  is,  once  for  all,  and  for  ever  after
hold  its  peace ;  it  would  not  have  to  extract  subjects  and
predicates  from  a  chaotic  flow  of  happenings,  nor  to
guard  against  the  confounding  of  one  thing  with  another
(indeed,  there  could  hardly  be  for  it  a  plurality  of  *  things '
at  all),  nor  to  provide  a  truth  that  was  adjustable  to  the
changes  of  reality.  *  Thought '  would  be  so  completely
adequate  to  being  that  there  would  no  longer  be  any
thinking  (which  itself  is  a  form  of  '  becoming '),  and
whether  the  system  of  eternal  and  immutable  *  Ideas '
were  called  '  ideal '  or  '  real '  would  make  no  difference
at  all  to  their  superhuman  nature.

But  as  it  is  neither  the  nature  of  being  to  be  changeless,
nor  the  nature  of  thought  to  mirror  it  and  so  to  win
exemption  from  the  trouble  of  thinking,  we  cannot
acquiesce  in  a  single  all-embracing  affirmation  of  what
is,  nor  think  by  affirmation  alone.  The  flux  of  experience
has  to  be  analysed,  and  '  things '  have  to  be  fished  out  of
it  by  thought,  and  distinguished  from  other  things,  nor  is
there  any  end  to  the  distinctions  we  may  have  to  make
in  what  at  first  we  took  to  be  c  the  same.'  Discrimination
or  Selection,  therefore,  becomes  the  essential  function  of
thought,  and  as  we  saw  in  Chap.  X,  §  II,  selection
implies  rejection.  Now  the  great  instrument  for  express
ing  these  rejections  for  human  purposes  is  negation.  The
'  A '  we  want  to  bring  out  has  to  be  fenced  round
against  the  influx  of  what  would  destroy  its  more  or  less
artificial  distinctness  and  re-engulf  it  in  the  flux,  by  a
series  of  negations  which  declare  what  it  is  not.  Of  such
negations  a  finite  number  must  always  suffice ;  for  if  the
'  not-A '  were  conceived  as  infinite,  negation  could  never
fulfil  its  purpose  of  defining  the  '  A '  we  have  made  an
object  of  our  thought.

It  seems  clear,  therefore,  that  negation  is  always  a
'  subjective,'  or  better  human  device  of  thought.  It  is  a  con
fession  of  human  weakness  that  cannot  go  direct  to  the
positive  core  of  reality.  It  is  a  tribute  to  the  instability
of  being.  It  is  always  relative  to  human  purposes.  It


140  FORMAL  LOGIC  CHAP.

is  never  attributed  to  reality  per  se.  We  never  suppose,
when  we  have  once  been  allowed  to  substitute  formal  ex
amples  for  real  problems,  that  because  it  can  '  truly '  be
judged  that  '  a  man  is  not  a  tea-tray  nor  a  syllogism,'
there  must  be  attributed  to  man  specific  qualities  of
excluding  syllogisms  or  tea-trays.  Of  course  in  actual
thinking  such  bizarre  denials  do  not  occur.  We  do  not
deny  at  large,  but  remain  within  a  limited  suppositio^
determined  by  our  interest  for  the  time  being.  Thus
the  constitution  of  that  suppositio  is  itself  a  further  act  of
human  selection,  and  only  emphasizes  the  human  purpose
of  negation.  How,  then,  is  it  possible  to  give  any
intelligible  account  of  negation  on  the  Formal  assumption
that  its  human  aspect  must  be  ignored  ?

Of  course  philosophers  have  tried.  Plato  in  the
Sophist  tried  to  conceive  negation  objectively.  Each
*  Idea '  (concept)  was  to  contain  an  infinity  of  '  not-being,'
but  its  '  not-being '  was  not  to  be  its  '  contrary,'  and
therefore  to  exclude  it,  but  its  *  other,'  and  therefore  to
be  predicable  of  it.  But  apart  from  the  fact  that  this
does  not  explain  the  real  crux,  viz.  why  an  '  Idea '  admits
of  some  Ideas  and  excludes  others,  Plato  had  unfortun
ately  failed  to  observe  both  that  negation  never  operates
with  an  infinite  '  not- A,'  and  that  he  had  made  his  system
of  '  Ideas '  so  absolute  as  to  make  predication  as  such  a
wholly  human  function.  However,  he  never  seems  to
have  been  quite  satisfied  with  his  accounts  of  the  '  being '
of  '  not-being,'  and  the  logic  of  his  theory  certainly
demanded  a  complete  Eleaticism.1

§  6. The  Forms  of  Relation

That  the  classification  of  Judgments  into  categorical,
hypothetical^  and  disjunctive  is  full  of  ambiguities  Formal
Logic  is  not  unaware.  It  recognizes  that  the  simple
unqualified  assertion  of  fact  which  it  calls  categorical  is

1  What  part  Hegel  really  meant  negativity  to  play  in  reality  it  is  very  difficult
to  say,  because  it  touches  the  fundamental  ambiguities  of  his  position.  The
point  is  still  in  dispute  among  his  disciples  and  need  not  perhaps  be  discussed
by  us.


xi  THE  FORMS  OF  JUDGMENT  141

by  no  means  easy  either  to  get  or  to  detect.  The
categorical  form  may  be  assumed  by  disguised  hypo-
theticals.  'Perfect  happiness  is  complete  adaptation  to
environment'  does  not  assert  that  such  happiness  and
adaptation  exist.  It  means  rather  that  if  there  were  the
one,  there  would  be  the  other.  Conversely,  a  use  of  the
hypothetical  (or  '  conjunctive ')  form  does  not  necessarily
mean  a  lack  of  dogmatic  assurance.  *  If  equals  are  added
to  equals  their  sums  are  equal,'  Euclid  could  confidently
declare,  without  a  suspicion  of  the  psychological  difficulties
lurking  in  the  notion  of  equality.1  And  the  ordinary
logician  usually  classifies  '  laws  of  nature '  as  hypothetical,
though  he  does  not  feel  them  to  be  at  all  precarious.
Yet  there  are  also  real  hypotheses  felt  to  be  such,  which
serve  to  express  real  doubts  and  demand  real  concessions.
'  If  you  accept  me,  I  shall  be  happy,'  for  example,
must  sometimes  pop  an  open  question.  '//",'  then,  is
1  ambiguous ' ;  it  may  merely  assert  a  condition,  or  it
may  express  a  real  doubt.  *  The  hypothetical  judgment,'
therefore,  becomes  a  verbal  form  for  conveying  a  plurality
of  meanings.

§  7.  Are  the  Forms  of  Relation  Exclusive  ?

If  the  Formal  classification  of  the  forms  of  Relation
is  to  hold  good,  the  classes  it  constitutes  should  be
exclusive.  But  Formal  Logic  confesses  to  doubts.
(i)  All  the  forms  seem  to  be  to  some  extent  '  categorical.'
Even  genuine  hypotheticals  seem  to  involve  a  positive
assertion.  They  assert  a  condition  as  a  fact ;  *  if  you
accept  me,  I  shall  be  happy,'  deduces  a  categorical
consequence  from  its  doubtful  clause,  and  '  if  he  had  sold,
he  would  have  made  money,'  conveys  categorical  informa
tion  about  the  state  of  the  market.  So,  too,  disjunctives
assert  a  basis  in  fact  of  the  disjunction  ;  thus,  r It  Is  "either
typhoid  or  malaria '  implies  that  it  is  at  all  events  a  fever.  ;..  (X  *
Yet  '  snarks  either  have  feathers  and  bite  or  have  whiskers
and  scratch '  would  suffice  to  show  that  a  disjunctive  form

1  Cf.  Chap.  XVI,  §  ii.


142  FORMAL  LOGIC  CHAP.

does  not  guarantee  existence  in  anything  but  a  universe
of  diction.

(2)  Conversely,  all  categorical  judgments  may  be  held
to  be  in  a  sense  hypothetical. They  try,  no  doubt,  to
convey  positive  information,  but  do  they  succeed  ? Are
the  facts  such  as they  assert  ? This  latter  doubt  may
perhaps  be  set  aside  as  irrelevant  to  the Formal  stand
point. For  the  question  it  raises  is  not  as  to  the  truth-
claim  of  a judgment,  but  as  to  its  actual truth. And
this,  we  saw  (Chap.  I,  §  4),  is  ruled  out  by  Formal  Logic.

'  No  doubt  every  judgment  is  experimental  and  takes  a
risk  in  claiming  to  be  true  and  to  be  applicable  to  reality,
and  this  is  precisely  the  reason  why  it  is  made ;  but  to
call  it  *  hypothetical '  on  this  account  is  to  use  the  word
in  a  different  sense  from  that  originally  professed.  It  no
longer  expresses  a  formal  doubt,  which  can  be  treated
Formally,  but  a  real  doubt,  which  can  only  be  tested  by
experience.  Moreover,  in  the  '  hypothetical  judgment '
its  maker's  intention  was  not  (primarily  at  least)  to  make  a

*  categorical '  assertion,  while  in  the  *  categorical  judgment '
it  is,  and  there  was  no  intention  to  express  the  possibility
of  failure  which  is  incidental  to  all  significant  judgment.

(3)  Verbally,  it does not  seem to be  true  that  the

*  either  .  .  .  or '  of  a  disjunction  excludes  the  possibility
of  '  both.' Indeed,  in  cases  where  this  does  not  vitiate,
but  confirms,  the  argument,  there  is  no  reason  why  we
should  attempt  to  make  the  reasoning  exclusive. '  If  he
is  either  a  fool  or  a  knave  he  will  do  this.' But  he  is
both. Then  a  fortiori  he  will  do  it.

Hence,  even  disallowing  the  second  objection,  it  is
clear  that  the  Formal  classification  of  judgments  of
Relation  is  very  defective.


§  8. The  '  Subjectivity  '  of  Hypothetical  and
Disjunctives

The  'subjectivity1  of  Judgment  which  Formal  Logic
tries  vainly  to  abstract  from  is  very  evident  in  the  judg
ments  of  Relation.  For  even  though  the  categorical


xi  THE  FORMS  OF  JUDGMENT  143

judgment  might  at  a  pinch  pass  for  a  mere  reflexion  of
reality,  if  no  inquiries  are  made  as  to  why  we  make  it
and  how  we  are  to  know  when  it  is  really  categorical,
yet  hypotheticals  and  disjunctives  do  not  look  as  if  they
could  possibly  be  meant  as  statements  of  objective  fact.
*  If  he  is  alive,  he  will  come  back  ;  but  he  must  be  either
alive  or  dead/  may  enable  us  to  draw  inferences  from
the  course  of  events,  but  there  cannot  really  be  an  'if
about  his  being  alive,  nor  can  *  either  dead  or  alive '
express  a  real  alternative.1  If  only  we  knew  the  facts
more  fully,  we  should  assert  positively  that  he  was  alive
or  that  he  was  dead,  and  proceed  at  once  to  our  inference,
without  having  to  wait  upon  events.

It  is  clear,  then,  that  the  suppositions,  assumptions,  and
alternatives  which  Logic  studies  are  human  attitudes
towards  the  objects  of  our  thought  which  are  conducive
to  the  operations  we  desire  to  perform  upon  them.

But  in  the  actual  use  of  the  categorical  form  there  is
also  implicit  ineradicable  subjectivity.  If  the  verbal  form
5  is  P  be  contemplated  in  abstraction,  it  does  indeed
seem  obvious  that  it  is  quite  as  independent  as  Formal
Logic  wishes  to  believe.  But  if  it  is  conceived  as  an
assertion  actually  made,  it  is  at  once  transformed.  Its
assertor  may  then  be  asked  at  once — '  Why  did  you  say
5  is  P,  and  not  5  is  Q  or  X  is  Y  ? '  He  will  have  to
confess  that  he  selected  5  is  P  in  preference  to  any
alternative  he  could  think  of,  and  may  perhaps  confess
that  he  had  thought  of,  but  rejected,  some  that  were
mentioned.  And  he  must  confess  that  if  he  wishes  to
maintain  his  judgment,  he  must  give  reasons  which  are
(at  least)  sufficient  in  his  eyes  for  his  choice  of  5  is  P.
It  is  clear,  therefore,  that  any  actual  judgment  is  by
origin  *  subjective '  in  two  ways — ( I )  because  it  is  the
product  of  a  human  selection,  and  (2)  because  it  is  the

1  It  is  not  intended  to  deny  that  there  may  be  real  alternatives  in  nature,  if
there  are  realities  which  are  really  (more  or  less)  indeterminate  in  their  action.
In  the  case  of  human  action,  for  example,  there  is  good  reason  for  suspecting  a
measure  of  real  indetermination.  But  our  logical  treatment  of  this  possibility  is
characteristic.  We  always  assume  that  for  the  purposes  of  calculation  the  event
is  really  determined  and  that  if  we  knew  more  we  could  predict  it.  I.e.  we  take
the  alternatives  as  subjective  (cf.  Studies  in  Humanism,  chap,  xviii).


144  FORMAL  LOGIC  CHAP.

selection  of  an  individual  whose  choice  may  or  may  not
win  the  approval  of  others.  We  return,  therefore,  to  the
conclusion  which  has  already  confronted  Formal  Logic
more  than  once  (Chap.  VII,  §  8  n.\  that  if  dependence  on
human  personality  is  really  consistently  excluded  from
the  *  logical '  judgment,  all  judgment  will  be  rendered
impossible.  For  after  all  judging  has  been  declared
extra-logical,  what  can  'the  judgment'  be  but  an  inex
plicable  form  of  words  ?
I

§  9. The  Ambiguities  of  Modality

Even  when  modal  judgments  have  been  (for  logical
purposes)  restricted  to  the  three  forms  must  be  (or  cannot
be),  may  be,  and  ist  they  remain  full  of  ambiguities  and
confusions.

(a)  How,  for  example,  is  an  '  assertoric '  judgment  to
be  distinguished  from  a  '.categorical '  by  the  resources,  and
in  accordance  with  the  principles,  of  Formal  Logic  ?
Both  are  in  the  form  5  is  P,  and  the  difference,  if  any,
must  be  in  their  meaning.  Logicians  accordingly  have
suggested  that  the  assertoric  'is'  differs  by  being  a
reaffirmation  against  a  doubt,1  while  the  categorical  '  is  *
just  asserts  existence.  But  there  is  nothing  to  show
when  we  have  the  one  sort  of  judgment  and  when  the
other.  There  is  no  difference  in  the  form  of  expression,
which  in  consequence  becomes  ambiguous.  I.e.  the
*  judgment '  S  is  P  is  really  a  '  proposition.'  Its  meaning
may  be  '  categorical '  or  *  assertoric.'  The  distinction  Jies
in  a  difference  of  the  reference.  If  we  mean  by  '  S  is  P  '
to  exclude  a  hypothesis  or  a  disjunction,  it  is  '  categorical '  ;
if  to  exclude  a  possibility  or  a  necessity,  it  is  '  assertoric/
But  how  is  any  one  else  to  know  which  we  mean  ?  Must
he  not  know  our  intention  and  state  of  mind  ?  And  is

1  This  doctrine  does  not  seem  to  be  true  in  fact.  When  an  assertion  is
doubted,  stronger  measures  than  mere  reaffirmation  are  needed,  and  usually
employed.  The  assertion  at  once  develops  modality  under  the  challenge.
E.g.  '  I  saw  Smith  yesterday.' — '  But  I  thought  he  had  left  last  week.' — 'Well,
I  may  have  been  mistaken,  but  I  think  it  must  have  been  Smith,  because  ..."
Note  that  though  the  modal  forms  are  intended  to  support  the  original  assertion,
they  do  not  necessarily  imply  any  great  confidence  in  it.


xi  THE  FORMS  OF  JUDGMENT  145

he  not  forbidden  to  ask  because  such  knowledge  belongs
to  'psychology'  and  not  to  Formal  Logic?  The  dis
tinction,  then,  is  plainly  psychological  and  not  Formal.

(fr)  Into  the  problematic  and  apodictic  'judgments'
the  modality  introduces  '  ambiguity  '  for  two  reasons — ( i )
because  it  is  not  able  to  discriminate  between  the  very
different  meanings  and  different  degrees  of  possibility
and  necessity,  and  (2)  because  the  possibility  and  necessity
meant  may  be  either  subjective  or  objective  (§  10),  and
the  form  does  not  discriminate  between  them.

(i)  When  a  dogmatist  says  'You  may  be  right,'  his
real  judgment  does  not  differ  (except  in  politeness)  from
1  You  are  wrong/  On  the  other  hand,  the  phrase  may
also  express  what  is  really  felt  to  be  an  open  question.
'  It  must  be  so,'  similarly,  will  serve  to  convey  any  degree
of  assurance,  from  the  most  absolute  conviction  of  which
the  most  dogmatic  mind  is  capable  to  the  most  dubious
inference  of  a  tentative  train  of  thought.  As  a  rule,
indeed,  the  apodictic  form  does  not  express  any  greater
confidence  than  the  assertoric,  and  not  infrequently  it
means  less.  For  all  it  need  mean  is  that  grounds  have
been  demanded  for  an  assertion  and  that  an  attempt  is
made  to  supply  them.  Hence  it  implies  that  in  fact  the
assertion  has  been  doubted,  and  therefore  is  presumably
doubtful.  The  assertoric  form  may  mean  that  it  has
never  occurred  to  any  one  to  doubt  it,  but  that  it  is
generally  accepted  as  a  '  self-evident '  and  uncontested
truth.  Nor,  on  the  other  hand,  is  its  assertoric  form  any
reason  why  any  judgment  should  get  conceited.  For
though  it  may  show  that  in  fact  it  has  not  yet  been
disputed,  a  doubt  may  arise  at  any  moment.  Sooner  or
later  that  day  comes  for  even  the  most  *  self-evident '  and
self-confident  assertions.  And  then  they  have  to  give
reasons  for  the  truth  they  claim,  and  become  dependent
on  them.  Instead  of  merely  saying  '  It  is  so,'  they  have  to
say  '  It  must  be  so,  because  .  .  .  ,'  and  they  may  thereby
gain  in  security  more  than  they  lose  in  self-assertion.

Nor  is  there  necessarily  much  difference  in  actual
meaning  between  the  problematic  and  the  apodictic

L


146  FORMAL  LOGIC  CHAP.

forms.  Some  prefer  to  use  the  one,  others  the  other.
That  is  a  matter  of  personal  taste  and  temper.  But  the
subjects  they  argue  about  are  in  point  of  fact  always
doubtful.  Else  there  would  be  nothing  to  provoke
inquiry  and  to  get  up  an  argument  about.  In  itself,
therefore,  the  problematic  form  would  seem  to  be  most
appropriate  to  the  perplexities  of  human  knowing.  But
the  use  of  the  apodictic  form  need  not  be  condemned  ;  it
most  often  seems  to  be  merely  a  form  of  inference.  At
any  rate  it  can  hardly  be  contended  that  it  adds  anything
to  the  force  of  a  conclusion  to  say  '  Therefore  S  must  be  P  '
rather  than  '  Therefore  S  is  P.J  Even  where  the  apodictic
form  aims  at  something  loftier,  and  is  intended  to  express
an  immediate  self-evidence,  or  confidence  in  the  grounds
of  the  judgment,  or  what  is  oddly  called  an  *  immediate
necessity,' l  the  logical  situation  is  unaltered.  For  not
only  is  Formal  Logic  quite  unable  to  discover  the  intention
of  a  proposition,  but  neither  the  '  immediacy,'  nor  the
*  self-evidence,'  nor  the  feeling  of  '  necessity,'  nor  any
amount  of  confidence  which  the  proposition  evokes,  can
exempt  it  from  a  critical  examination  of  its  grounds.
But  once  reasons  of  any  kind  are  given  for  an  assertion
it  becomes  logically  a  dependent,  and  the  necessity  claimed
for  it  can  be  nothing  else  than  the  necessity  of  inference.

§  I  o. The  Subjectivity  of  Modality

(2)  The  doubt  as  to  whether  a  modal  proposition  is
meant  to  affirm  an  objective  or  a  subjective  possibility

1  The  phrase  is  really  a  contradictio  in  adjecto  ;  for  '  necessity '  affirms,  and
'  immediacy '  denies,  dependence  on  grounds.  Moreover,  it  is  not  difficult  to
show  that  the  examples  given  of  such  necessity  are  illusory.  E.g.  that  '  a  line
must  be  either  straight  or  curved '  depends  on  the  definition  of  straight  line.  It
follows  from  the  Euclidean  definition  ;  but  the  '  straight '  lines  of  non-Euclidean
geometries  may  be  also  curves,  and  the  '  straight  lines '  of  physical  space  always
are  curved,  e.g.  the  base  line  in  a  geodetic  triangulation.  Lastly,  the  logicians
who  believe  in  '  immediate  necessity  '  refute  their  own  doctrine  by  teaching  also
the  incompatible  theory  that  truth  is  a  systematic  whole  in  which  every  part  is
dependent  on  every  other.  It  follows  from  this  that  no  partial  '  truth '  can  be
true  as  stated,  simply  because  it  does  not  state  the  whole  truth,  and  that
1  immediate  necessity'  cannot  be  a  guarantee  of  truth.  Indeed,  it  is  a  complete
guarantee  of  falsity.  For  it  means  (a  claim)  that  the  judgment  is  true  irre
spective  of  the  Whole  Truth,  which  contradicts  this  theory  of  truth.  Thus,  even
'  2  +  2  =  4'  becomes  false,  just  because  it  claims  to  be  absolutely  and  independently
true  on  its  own  account.


xi  THE  FORMS  OF  JUDGMENT  147

or  necessity  not  only  renders  it  ambiguous  and  refutes  its
claim  to  be  a  judgment,  but  also  raises  several  important
philosophic  questions.

Originally  it  was  thought  (by  Plato  and  Aristotle)
that  the  logical  nature  of  a  judgment  depended  on  the
ontological  nature  of  the  object  judged  about.  Aristotle
also  believed  that  there  were  objects  inherently  '  contingent'
i.e.  capable  of  being  or  not-being,  and  '  necessary}  i.e.
'incapable  of  being  otherwise'  and  immutable.  Conse
quently  our  judgments  about  these  objects  followed  suit,
at  least  in  so  far  as  we  had  true  '  knowledge '  of  them
and  were  not  merely  '  opining.' l  Necessary  judgments,
therefore,  were  simply  judgments  about  *  necessary  beings  '
(God,  the  stars,  and  mathematics)  ;  possible  judgments,
judgments  about  contingent  beings  (everything  sublunary)  ;
impossible  judgments,  judgments  about  impossibilities.

According  to  the  subjective  view,  on  the  other  hand,
possibility  and  necessity  resided  wholly  in  the  mind,  and
consisted  in  a  different  attitude  towards  the  simple
'  assertoric  '  or  *  pure  '  proposition,  '  S  is  P.'  Viewed  not
as  expressive  of  a  '  fact,'  but  as  something  which  might
become  true,  this  becomes  *  S  may  be  P '  ;  viewed  as  an
inference,  it  becomes  *  S  must  be  P.'  Thus  both  the
uncertainty  which  renders  the  proposition  problematic
and  the  certainty  which  renders  it  necessary  are  alike
subjective,  and  neither  of  them  inheres  in  reality  as  such,
which  is  neither  contingent  nor  necessary,  but  just  is.
Modality,  therefore,  is  essentially  a  transformation  of
'  fact '  for  the  purposes  of  human  knowing.

Of  these  two  views  it  soon  became  clear  that  the  latter
was  the  less  inadequate.  The  former  was  manifestly  too
simple.  Many  problematic  judgments,  at  all  events,  did
not  mean  to  affirm  any  real  contingency  at  all.  *  King
Mena  may  have  lived  about  5000  B.C.,  or,  again,  about
3000  B.C.,'  does  not  mean  that  his  vital  elasticity  was

1  The  possibility  of  error  in  judgments  about  'necessary  matter1  (though
admitted  by  Plato  in  the  Theaetetus,  196)  was  hardly  investigated  at  all,  and
explained  as  little  as  the  possibility  of  error  elsewhere.  To  this  day  some
logicians  write  as  if  errors  in  mathematics  were  logically  impossible  and  the  form
of  mathematical  reasoning  guaranteed  infallibility.


148  FORMAL  LOGIC  CHAP.

capable  of  spreading  his  life  alternatively  over  two  thousand
years.  It  means  that  our  uncertainty  about  early  Egyptian
chronology  is  such  that  we  have  to  allow  so  wide  a  range
for  the  actual  date  of  Mena.  Clearly,  then,  a  subjective
contingency,  based  on  human  ignorance,  must  be  admitted
alongside  of  the  objective  contingency  attributed  to  the
inferiority  of  the  '  matter '  in  the  sublunary  parts  of  the
Aristotelian  cosmos.  Indeed,  with  the  rise  of  determinism,
it  became  inconceivable  to  many  philosophers  that  there
should  be  such  a  thing  as  real  contingency  at  all.  All
events  were  necessary,  and  if  we  could  only  know  them
better,  we  should  see  this  too.  Contingency  and  possi
bility,  therefore,  did  not  really  exist ;  they  were  illusions
due  to  our  imperfect  vision,  and  the  differences  between
them  were  illusory  too.  This,  again,  was  a  metaphysical
doctrine,  inspiring,  no  doubt,  to  those  who  relished  it,  but
hardly  in  accord  with  the  logical  facts.  For  what  was
determinism  to  do  with  judgments  expressive  of  an  in-
determination  ?  For  an  indeterminist,  at  any  rate,  '  He
may  marry  her '  and  '  He  may  have  married  her '  do  not
mean  the  same  thing ;  by  the  first  he  may  mean  to
express  a  real  contingency,  and  by  the  second  his  real
ignorance.  And  though  he  may  be  metaphysically
wrong,  yet  the  logical  difficulty  remains.  What  did  his
judgments  mean,  and  what  did  the  difference  between
them  mean  ?  Apparently,  then,  there  is  no  avoiding  the
recognition  of  both  objective  and  subjective  possibilities.

On  the  other  hand,  there  is  no  serious  objection  to
conceiving  all  *  necessity '  as  '  subjective,'  i.e.  as  a  human
addition  to  the  '  facts.'  Indeed,  the  difficulty  is  rather
in  attaching  any  intelligible  meaning  to  the  notion  of

*  necessary  being.' For  how  can  a  fact  be  more  than  fact
or  less  than  fact,  and  how  can  our  certainties  or  doubts
affect  its  being  ? To  bestow  any  sense  upon  the  phrase

*  necessary being,' the notions both of '  fact ' and of
necessity  would  have  to  be  radically  reformed.

Once,  however,  it  is  admitted  that  necessity  and  possi
bility  may  depend  on  human  attitudes  towards  reality,  it
follows  that  they  do  not  belong  to  a  Formal  Logic  which


xi  THE  FORMS  OF  JUDGMENT  149

systematically  excludes  such  attitudes.  The  fact  that
both  are  attitudes  accounts  for  the  affinity  between  them,
while  the  fact  that  they  are  Formally  extra-logical  may
explain  why  Formal  Logic  has  somewhat  neglected  them.

§  II. Synthetic  and  Analytic  Judgments

This  classification  of  judgments  was  thought  by  Kant
to  be  of  enormous  philosophic  importance,  but  deserves  a
mention,  because  it  illustrates  so  well  the  illogicalities  of
Formal  Logic.

Kant  called  a  judgment  analytic,  when  the  predicate
only  explicates  the  meaning  of  the  subject,  and  is  really
contained  in  it ;  synthetic,  when  it  adds  to  its  meaning
something  not  known  to  belong  to  it.  Thus,  according
to  Kant,  '  bodies  are  extended '  is  analytic,  because  the
meaning  of  '  body  '  is  precisely  '  extended  substance,'  and
the  judgment  is  only  an  analysis  of  the  conception  of
body.  '  Bodies  are  heavy,'  on  the  other  hand,  is  syn
thetic,  because  gravitation  is  not  part  of  the  definition
of  body.

Now  this  distinction  is  in  various  ways  objectionable,
and  quite  worthless  for  the  analysis  of  actual  thinking.

(1)  It  reduces  'analytic'  judgments  to  tautologies  and
rests  on a  false  conception  of  logical  identity  (Chap.  X,

§§  5,  10).

(2)  It  renders  it  arbitrary  what  judgments  are  analytic,
just  in  so  far  as  we  perceive  that  there  are  alternatives  of
definition. It  depends  on  the  definition  chosen  whether
it  shall  be  c  analytic '  or  *  synthetic '  to  say  that  bodies  are
extended, and in  point of  fact gravitation is a better
criterion  of  materiality  than  extension.

(3)  It  renders  c  analytic  '  or  '  synthetic  '  relative  to  the
state  of  one's  knowledge. The  same  judgment  may  be
synthetic to A and analytic to B, simply because  he
knows more. It  follows  that it  defies the principle  of
Contradiction,  because  it  is  at  the  same  time  analytic  and
not  analytic. And  if  the  contradiction  is  avoided  by  the
plea,  *  Yes,  but  not  for  the  same  persons,'  it  becomes  clear


150  FORMAL  LOGIC  CHAP.

that  the  reference  of  a  judgment's  meaning  to  the  persons
who  made  it  has  been  conceded  (cf.  Chap.  X,  §  6).

-  (4)  The  existence  of  analytic  judgments  is  rendered
quite  unintelligible.  For  if  they  are  tautologies  and
convey  no  novelty,  why  should  any  one  trouble  to
enunciate  them  ?  Surely  the  maker  of  every  judgment
I  must  feel  it  to  be  synthetic  for  himself  or  instructive  to
those  who  listen  to  it,  else  what  conceivable  reason  can
there  be  for  making  it?

For  example,  when  George  IV  asked  who  was  the
author  of  Waverley  and  was  told  '  Scott  is  the  author  of
Waverleyl  the  answer  was  synthetic  to  him,  and  modified
both  its  terms  in  an  enlightening  way.  If,  however,  he
had  known  this  *  identity,'  he  would  not  have  asked,
neither  would  those  who  knew  have  asserted  it,  unless
he  had  asked,  because  he  did  not  know  (or  felt  doubtful).
The  judgment,  therefore,  could  not  have  come  into  being
without  the  conjunction  of  two  parties,  of  which  the  one
knows  the  identity  of '  Scott '  and  *  the  author  of  Waverley  1
and  the  other  does  not.  Formal  Logic,  by  disregarding
as  extra -logical  the  relation  of  the  judgment  to  this
personal  context,  renders  it  ambiguous,  and  then  proceeds
to  puzzle  itself  with  meaningless  questions,  whether  the
judgment,  per  se  and  in  the  abstract,  is  (not  was !)
'  synthetic '  or  '  analytic,'  and  whether,  because  Scott  was
in  fact  the  author  of  Waverley,  what  the  king  wanted  to
know  was  whether  Scott  was  Scott.

After  this,  one  might  expect  Formal  Logic  to  condemn
the  distinction  between  '  analytic '  and  '  synthetic '  as
*  psychological '  and  wholly  useless.  Far  from  it.  Because
it  is  a  bad  distinction,  it  feels  prompted  to  make  it  worse.
It  explains  elaborately  that  every  judgment  is  both  syn
thetic  and  analytic,  but  forgets  to  mention  that  it  cannot
be  this  at  the  same  time  and  to  the  same  persons.  Nor
does  it  explain  that,  in  order  to  show  this,  it  must  use
both  terms  in  a  different  sense  from  Kant's,  and  no  longer
discusses  Kant's  question,  whether  some  judgments  instruct
and  others  do  not.  Nor  does  it  explain  that  in  actual
use  it  must  be  intended  either  to  analyse  a  given  whole


xi  THE  FORMS  OF  JUDGMENT  151

or  to  put  one  together  out  of  given  parts,  and  that  not
the  form,  but  only  the  actual  use  can  reveal  what  its  real
meaning  is.

We  have  seen,  therefore,  that  throughout  its  discussion
of  the  *  forms  of  judgment,'  Formal  Logic  has  exhibited
a  deplorable  incapacity  either  to  penetrate  beyond
the  verbal  form  or  to  hold  fast  consistently  to  its  own
abstractions.  We  shall  see  in  the  next  chapter  how  much
better  it  can  do  in  dealing  with  the  forms  of  propositions.


CHAPTER XII

THE DISTRIBUTION OF TERMS AND OPPOSITION OF
PROPOSITIONS

§  I. The  Propositions  A,  E,  I,  and  O

IT  is  customary  in  Formal  Logic  to  divide  Propositions
(we  have  seen  in  the  last  chapter  that  it  is  impossible  to
classify  the  real  judgments)  on  the  basis  of  Quantity  and
Quality  together.  This  procedure  yields  four  forms,  viz.
the  Universal  Affirmative,  the  Universal  Negative,  the
Particular  Affirmative,  and  the  Particular  Negative.  For
the  singular  judgment  no  special  provision  is  made,  because
it  may  be  treated  as  universal,  according  to  the  doctrine
of  the  Distribution  of  Terms  (§  2).  These  four  forms  are
then  symbolized  by  the  vowels  A,  E,  I,  O,  taken  from
y4ff/rmo  and  nEgO.  As  examples  we  may  give  :

(1)  Of  A,  'All  units  are  equal.'

(2)  Of  E,  'No  women  are  voters.'

(3)  Of  I,  '  Some  men  are  honest.'

(4)  Of  O,  '  Some  men  are  not  honest.'

There  are  certain  conventions  as  to  the  meanings  of
terms.  Thus  (a)  '  some '  is  taken  as  '  some  at  least,'  and
not  as  '  some,  not  all.'  I.e.  it  does  not  exclude  '  all,'  but
for  logical  purposes  may  include  it.  (b]  It  is  assumed
that  all  judgments  may  be  given  a  meaning  in  extension
(cf.  Chap.  Ill,  §  I,  Chap.  IX,  §  3).  This  is  denied  by
some  logicians,  who  rightly  enough  point  out  that  many
judgments  are  not  meant  in  extension.  But  as  it  is
always  possible  to  interpret  the  words  of  any  judgment
in  extension  and,  as  they  themselves  have  disclaimed  the

152


CH.  xii DISTRIBUTION  AND OPPOSITIONS 153

systematic  exploration  of  actual  meaning,  their  protest
must  be  disallowed.  Formal  Logic,  therefore,  can  under
take  to  analyse  all  judgments  by  reducing  them  to  these
forms.  It  proceeds  to  discuss  the  Distribution  of  the
Terms  in  these  propositions.


§  2. The  Distribution  of  Terms

A  term  is  said  to  be  distributed  when  the  assertion
refers  to  the  whole  of  it,  undistributed  when  it  refers  only
to  part  of  the  term.  Thus  '  all '  and  *  none '  mark  the
distribution  of  the  subject,  *  some  '  and  '  some  not,'  or  their
equivalents,  its  non-distribution.  It  is  assumed  that  the
quantity  of  the  subject  may  always  be  demanded,  but  not
that  of  the  predicate  (cf.  Chap.  XI,  §  3),  and  that  indefinite
judgments  may  be  ignored.  This  is  more  or  less  in  accord
with  language  which  does  not  state  the  quantity  of  the
predicate,  even  when  it  is  thought  of  as  quantified  (e.g.
'  Some  clergymen  were  the  minority '),  and  often  quantifies
the  subject.

Applying  this  distinction  to  the  four  forms,  it  appears  :

(1)  That  an  A  proposition  distributes  its  subject,  but
not  its  predicate. *  All  men  are  mortals '  asserts  nothing
about  all  mortals,  but  must  be  taken  to  mean  that  they
are  some  mortals.

(2)  That  an  I  proposition  leaves  both  its  terms  undis
tributed  ;  *  Some  socialists  are  eugenists '  does  not  assert
that  they  are  all  the  eugenists.

(3)  That  an  E  proposition,  expressing  the  total  separa
tion  of  its  subject  from  its  predicate,  distributes  both.

(4)  That  an  O  proposition  distributes  its  predicate  but
not  its  subject. For  it  excludes  the  predicate  from  the
part  of  the  subject  judged  about ;  '  Some  socialists  are  not
eugenists '  denies  that  these  particular  socialists  are  to  be
found  anywhere  among  the  eugenists.

Or,  more  concisely,  it  may  be  laid  down  that  universal
propositions  distribute  their  subjects,  negative  their  predi
cates,  while  particular  propositions  do  not  distribute  their
subjects.


154


FORMAL  LOGIC


CHAP.


The  singular  proposition  ranks  as  distributed.  For
any  assertion  made  about  its  subject  must  necessarily
refer  to  the  whole  of  it,  as  it  is  only  one.  This  ranking
of  the  individual  with  the  universal  (class)  is  not  very
consistent,  perhaps,  with  the  usual  Formal  estimate  of
their  merits,  but  may  pass.


§  3. The  '  Ambiguity ''  of  the  Forms

The  trouble  begins  when  we  inquire  how  these  four
forms  of  proposition  are  related  to  the  meanings  they  may
be  used  to  convey.  For  it  then  appears  that  there  are
five  possibilities,  (i)  The  whole  of  the  predicate  may  be
predicable  of  the  whole  of  the  subject,  so  that  subject  and
predicate  are  coextensive  ;  e.g. '  Washington  is  the  capital
of  the  United  States/  or  *  Equilateral  triangles  are  equi
angular.'  (2)  Part  of  the  predicate  may  be  predicable  of
the  whole  subject,  so  that  the  extension  of  the  predicate
is  the  greater  ;  e.g.  '  All  men  are  mortal.'  (3)  The  whole
of  the  predicate  may  be  predicable  of  part  of  the  subject,
or  (3*2)  may  be  denied  of  it ;  e.g.  '  Some  animals  are  men/
or '  Some  animals  are  not  men.'  (4)  Part  of  the  predicate
may  be  predicable  of  part  of  the  subject,  and  (40)  part
not ;  e.g.  (  Some  cats  are  male/  and  '  Some  cats  are  not
male.'  (5)  No  part  of  the  predicate  may  be  predicable  of
any  part  of  the  subject ;  e.g.  '  No  triangles  are  one-sided.'

On  symbolizing  these  relations  by  the  diagrams  called
Euler's  circles,  they  may  be  made  evident  to  the  eye.


G>©


Fig.  i.


Clearly  the  forms  A,  I,  O  will  express  more  than  one  of


xii DISTRIBUTION  AND  OPPOSITIONS 155

these  relations.  The  universal  affirmative,  A,  '  all  S  is  P,'
will  apply  both  to  No.  I  and  No.  2  ;  the  particular  affirma
tive,  I,  '  some  S  is  P,'  to  Nos.  3  and  4,  and  in  virtue  of
the  convention  that  '  some '  may  include  *  all,'  also  to  Nos.
i  and  2.  The  particular  negative,  O,  'some  S  is  not  P,'
will  be  true  of  Nos.  3^  and  4<z,  and  in  virtue  of  the  con
vention  about  'some,'  also  of  No.  5.  Lastly,  the  universal
negative,  E,  'no  S  is  P,'  will  be  the  only  form  which
applies  only  to  one  relation,  viz.  No.  5.

Clearly,  therefore,  all  the  forms  except  E  are  capable
of  plurality  of  senses,  and  the  form  in  itself  is  no  clue  to
the  actual  meaning-in-use.  This  leads  Formal  Logic  to
enact  the  further  convention  that,  to  be  on  the  safe  side,
an  A  proposition  shall  always  be  interpreted  as  a  case
of  No.  2,  and  that  No.  I,  in  which  the  predicate  also  is
'  distributed,'  though  it  occurs  frequently  and  is,  e.g.,  the
meaning  of  definitions,  shall  be  ignored  as  much  as
possible.

Secondly,  it  is  obvious  that  all  the  possible  meanings
may  be  exhaustively  covered  by  the  two  pairs,  A  (i  and
2)  and  O  (3*,  40,  5),  and  I  (i,  2,  3,  4)  and  E  (5),  and
this  is  the  fact  on  which  the  doctrine  of  the  Opposition
of  Propositions  rests.

At  the  same  time  it  is  no  wonder  that  the  '  ambiguity '
of  its  forms  should  have  led  Formal  Logic  to  attempt  to
determine  the  actual  meaning  more  precisely.

§  4. The  Quantification  of  the  Predicate

The  device  which  suggested  itself  for  this  purpose  is
known  as  the  Quantification  of  the  Predicate.  It  doubles
the  number  of  available  forms,  but  it  may  easily  be  seen
that  this  is  no  remedy.  For  they  now  err  by  excess
instead  of  by  defect,  and  some  of  them  remain  more
'ambiguous'  than  ever.  Besides  this,  we  now  have
some  utterly  fictitious  forms  to  cope  with.  We  get  the
following  forms  : —

(i)  All  S  is  all  P-U
(a)  All  S  is  some  P  =  A


FORMAL  LOGIC


CHAP.


(3)  Some  S  is  all  P  =  Y

(4)  Some  S  is  some  P  =  I

(5)  All  S  is  no  P  =  E

(6)  All  S  is  not  some  P  =  77

(7)  Some  S  is  no  P  =  O

(8)  Some  S  is  not  some  P  =  co

Here  the  convention  that  '  some '  may  include  '  all '
is  given  up,  and  the  new  propositions  are  symbolized  by
U,  Y,  i)  and  &>.  They  are  next  distributed  over  the
possible  relations  of  S  and  P.  At  first  all  goes  well.  U
applies  only  to  Fig.  i,  A  only  to  Fig.  2,  Y  only  to
Fig.  3,  I  only  to  Fig.  4,  E  only  to  Fig.  5.  But  then  it
turns  out  that  77,  O,  and  «  remain  obstinately  '  ambiguous.'


FIG.  4.


FIG.  5.


FIG.  2.1


FIG.  1.


FIG.  2.


FIG.  3.


FIG.  4.


*  All  S  is  not  some  P  '  applies  to  Figs.  2,  4,  and  5.  '  Some
S  is  no  P '  remains  true  of  Figs.  3,  4,  and  5,  while,  lastly,
'  some  S  is  not  some  P  '  is  compatible  with  every  relation,
not  excepting  that  of  U  (No.  i).4

1  This  retains,  however,  the  conventional  use  of  'some.'

2  Same  sense  of  '  some. '

3  I.e. if  'some'  excludes 'all,'  this  form  is  meaningless, because  it  cannot
denote  any  of  the  actual  relations.

4  Unless  both  S  and  P  are  singular  terms.


xii DISTRIBUTION  AND  OPPOSITIONS 157

There  could  hardly  be  a  better  object-lesson  of  the
futility  of  first  abstracting  from  the  actual  meanings  and
then  trying  to  discover  them  a  priori  by  analysing  verbal
'  forms.'  Possibly  after  this  Formal  Logic  may  become
a  little  less  severe  in  rejecting  *  psychological '  protests
against  the  Quantification  of  the  Predicate  on  the  ground
that  people  do  not  usually  think  of  the  quantity  of  their
predicates  and  therefore  could  not  truthfully  say  what  they
meant  it  to  be.

§  5. The  Opposition  of  Propositions

Being  thus  thrown  back  on  its  '  ambiguous '  forms  A,
E,  I,  O,  Formal  Logic  proceeds  to  investigate  their  inter
relations,  when  they  are  severally  asserted  about  the  same
terms.  It  begins  by  giving  names.  A  and  E  it  calls
Contraries,  as  being  furthest  apart  under  the  same  genus.
A  and  O  are  Contradictories,  as  also  are  E  and  I.  I  and
O  are  Sub  contraries,  A  and  I,  and  E  and  O  are  Subalterns.
The  whole  may  be  put  diagrammatically  in  the  'square
of  oppositions.'

A contrary E

C °n  *<y* v

I  \i/  I

jo  .<> O*  nT

3 JC* O,

C/3  £j>  ^  3

I subcontrary O

We  are  further  told  that  contraries  cannot  both  be  true
and  may  both  be  false,  e.g.  '  All  men  are  honest,'  '  No  men
are  honest.'  Of  two  contradictories  one  must  be  true  and
the  other  false.  The  subcontraries  may  both  be  true  to
gether,  e.g.  '  some  men  are  honest ; '  *  some  men  are  not
honest.'  Of  subalterns  the  truth  of  the  universal  includes
that  of  the  particular,  but  that  of  the  particular  leaves
that  of  the  universal  'doubtful.'  We  are  thus  told  that
we  may  argue —


158  FORMAL  LOGIC  CHAP.

If  A  be  true,  that  E  and  O  are  false  and  I  is  true.
If  E  be  true,  that  A  and  I  are  false  and  O  is  true.
If  I  be  true,  that  E  is  false,  and  A  and  O  are  doubtful.
If  O  be  true  that  A  is  false,  and  E  and  I  are  doubtful.
If  A  be  false,  that  O  is  true  and  E  and  I  are  doubtful.
If  E  be  false  that  I  is  true  and  A  and  O  are  doubtful.
If  I  be  false  that  E  and  O  are  true  and  A  is  false.
If  O  be  false  that  A  and  I  are  true  and  E  is  false.


Curiously  enough,  this  doctrine  is  mostly  correct  and
has  some  value  for  the  guidance  of  actual  thought.  The
distinction  between  contraries  and  contradictories,  for
example,  is  important,  because  most  men  are  apt  to
confuse  them,  and  to  commit  the  inelegance  and  super
fluity  of  trying  to  refute  a  false  universal  by  the  opposed
universal  (which  may  be  false  also)  instead  of  merely  adduc
ing  a  single  contradictory  instance.  It  is  also  well  to
have  impressed  on  us  how  very  precarious  are  universal
propositions,  though  Formal  Logic  does  not  proceed  to
remark  that  in  practice  our  bias  in  their  favour  is  so
strong  that  they  hardly  ever  succumb,  as  they  logically
should,  to  a  single  contradiction.  How  many  ghost
stories  and  miracles  would  have  to  be  authenticated  to
upset  the  cherished  beliefs  that  the  dead  do  not  return
and  that  miracles  are  not  possible  ?

But  the  lightness  of  these  oppositions  does  not  depend
on  the  '  square '  or  the  technicalities,  but  on  the  real
relations  of  subject  and  predicate  which  we  depicted  in
§  3.  Thus  one  of  the  contradictories  must  be  true,
because  between  them  they  exhaust  all  the  possibilities.
But  the  impotence  of  formal  analysis  comes  out  again
in  the  assertion  that  some  of  these  inferences  are  '  doubt
ful.'  This  is  strictly  nonsense.  Because,  if,  e.g.,  I  is  true,
it  is  true  because  the  actual  situation  is  one  of  those
depicted  in  Figs.  1-4.  Now  the  first  two  of  these  are
called  A  and  the  second  two  O.  Either  A  or  O  are
true,  therefore.  But  in  any  actual  case  the  truth  is
definitely  one  of  them  and  therefore  A  or  O,  and  there
need  be  no  doubt  about  it.  It  is  doubtful  only  in  the
abstract,  when  we  have  merely  an  empty  form  before  us,


xii DISTRIBUTION  AND  OPPOSITIONS 159

and  do  not  know  which  of  its  four  possible  meanings  it
will  be  used  to  convey,  and  consequently  cannot  say
what  the  real  facts  are.  Thus  the  Formal  analysis
confuses  a  doubt  about  the  form  with  a  doubt  in  the
real  judgment.


CHAPTER XIII

CONVERSION  AND  OTHER  FORMS  OF  IMMEDIATE
INFERENCE

§  i.  Immediate  Inference

THE  Opposition  of  Propositions  is  the  first  example  of
what Formal Logic  calls  Immediate  Inference  and  con
ceives  as  differing  specifically  from  mediate  or  syllogistic
inference. Whether  this  is  an  appropriate  description  we
may  forbear to discuss until we consider Inference in
general (Chap. XIV). Many logicians seem to doubt
whether  what  is  called  immediate  is  not  rather  a  verbal
manipulation  of  terms,  or  again  whether  as  inference  it
can  really  be  immediate. However  this  may  be,  we  shall
do  well  to  realize  from  the  outset  how  very  artificial  and
arbitrary  is  the  whole  procedure. There  appears  to  be
no need, and very  little reason,  for any of it. Why
should  one  be  compelled  to  infer  from  'all  S  is  P '  that
therefore  *  some  P  is  S '  ? Why  should  one  not,  even  on
Formal  principles,  infer  '  no  S  is  not  P  '  ? Surely  no  one
infers  except  with  a  view  to  some  purpose,  and  neither
this  nor any  other inference  will be  drawn,  unless  this
purpose  requires  it. The  only  purpose,  however,  which
Formal Logic  appears  to  consider  humanity  capable  of
rationally entertaining is that of tracing out all the
complicated consequences of its mistaken abstractions.
Of  course it  does not  openly  say  so. It talks  about
truths  formally  involved  in  other  truths. But,  as  we  have
abundantly  seen,  it  has  no  right  to  speak  of  truth  until
it  has  discovered  and secured a meaning. And this,

1 60


CHAP,  xiir IMMEDIATE  INFERENCES  161

unfortunately,  is  just  what  hitherto  its  forms  have  been
unable  to  do.  They  remained  'ambiguous,'  and  gave  no
clue  to  the  real  meaning  of  those  who  used  them.  Nor
is  it  possible  to  see  how  in  any  case  the  peculiar  purpose
of  the  Formal  doctrine  of  Immediate  Inference,  whether
avowed  or  unavowed,  renders  it  less  dependent  on
purpose  ;  it  only  seems  to  render  it  dependent  on  a
peculiarly  trivial  purpose.  We  shall  accordingly  find
that  the  whole  Formal  doctrine  of  Immediate  Inference
is  on  the  same  level  of  thought  and  open  to  the  same
criticism.  But  the  procedures  known  as  Conversion,  Per-
mutation,  and  Contraposition  may  briefly  be  considered.

§  2. Conversion

Conversion  at  first  sight  appears  to  be  prompted
merely  by  a  morbid  desire  to  change  the  order  of  the
subject  and  the  predicate  in  the  form  of  propositions.
This,  however,  is  not  its  real  motive,  which  turns  out  later
to  be  to  facilitate  the  logical  game  called  the  '  reduction '
of  syllogisms.  But  even  so  the  process  seems  trivial
enough.

The  proposition  to  be  subjected  to  this  manipulation
is  called  the  Convertend,  that  which  emerges  from  it  the
Converse^  and  the  rule  of  the  game  is  that  no  term  must
be  distributed  in  the  converse  which  was  not  distributed  in
the  convertend.  The  reason  given  is  that  we  must  not  (in
order  to  be  formally  correct)  assume  any  fresh  knowledge
beyond  that  implied  in  the  strictest  verbal  construction
of  the  original  proposition,  nor,  consequently,  make  asser
tions  about  the  whole  of  a  term  when  we  only  have
information  about  part.

After  that  operations  on  the  forms  A,  E,  I,  and  O
may  begin.

(i)  'A'  will  not  convert  into  'A.'  We  cannot  infer
from  '  all  S  is  P  '  that  '  all  P  is  S,J  because  affirmative  pro
positions  do  not  distribute  their  predicates  (Chap.  XII,  §  2).
I.e.  we  had  no  right  to  assume  from  the  verbal  form  that
it  was  of  type  I  (Chap.  XII,  §  3).  So  it  is  conventionally

M


1 62  FORMAL  LOGIC


CHAP.


taken  to  be  of  type  II,  and  can  only  be  converted  into
'  some  P  is  S.'  This  arbitrary  and  artificial  limitation,
which  is  unscientific  because  it  fails  to  express  what  is
often  admittedly  the  actual  meaning,  is  called  Conversion
by  limitation,  or  per  accidens.  Hence  the  Conversion  of
A  necessarily  degrades  it  into  I,  and  if  it  is  then  again
converted,  we  get  *  some  S  is  P  '  as  the  inference  from  '  all  S
is  P/  This,  however,  is  counted  as  a  great  triumph  ;  for
is  not  the  truth  of  its  subaltern  *  I '  included  in  that  of
the  universal  '  A  '  ?

(2)  *  I '  gives  no  trouble  at  all  to  the  converter. It
converts  simply,  and  as  often  as  he  pleases. He  can  say,
'  some  S  is  P  '  or  '  some  P  is  S '  indifferently.

(3)  'EJ too is capable of Simple Conversion. It
matters  not  whether  we  say  'no  S  is  P,  or  '  no  P  is  S.'
The  truth  is  that  neither  E  nor  I  afford  any  temptation
to  break  the  rule  about  the  distribution  of  terms,  because
in  E  both,  and  in  I  neither,  of  the  convertend's  terms  were
'  distributed.'

(4)  *  O '  is  refractory. For  in '  some  S is  not  P,'  as
the  quality  is  negative,  and  negative  propositions  distribute
their predicates,  it is impossible  to  convert  it  without
putting  its undistributed  subject  in a  position where it
must be distributed. The form  of  negation demands
that  we  shall  assert  about  the  whole  of  the  predicate,  and
in  this  case  we  have  knowledge  only  about  part. Hence
the rule about the distribution of terms cannot be
observed,  and  the  Conversion  of  O  is  impossible.

§  3.  Permutation,  Conversion  by  Negation,  and
Contraposition

But  it  would  be  seriously  to  underrate  the  resource
fulness  of  Formal  Logic  to  suppose  that  this  obstacle
could  daunt  it.  After  some  centuries  of  hesitation  and
profound  reflection,  it  simply  invented  a  new  process
called  Permutation  or  Obversion,  which  changes  the
quality  of  propositions.

Instead of *  some S is not P,'  let us simply  say


xni  IMMEDIATE INFERENCES  163

*  some  S  is  not-P.J We  have  a  perfect  right  to  do  this,
because  '  P  '  and  '  not-P '  are  contradictory  terms,  and  all
the  world  must  (thanks  to  the  glorious  Law  of  Excluded
Middle)  be  either  P  or  not-P,  however  humble  or  fatuous
a  predicate P  may  intrinsically  be. Hence  by  denying
that  S  is  P  we  ipso  facto  assert  it  is  not-P. After  that,
who can doubt that  the  original  O,  now  conveniently
permuted into an I, can be converted '  simply '  into

*  some  not-P  is  S  '  ?

Having  achieved  this  conversion  and  reduced  O  to
subjection,  Formal  Logic,  it  is  fair  to  say,  does  not  lay
much  stress  on  the  permuting  of  the  rest,1  though  it  just
mentions  that  permutation  and  conversion  is  technically
named  Conversion  by  Negation,  and  that  I  is  recalcitrant
to  this  manipulation  because  the  initial  permutation  has
turned  it  into  an  O.

Conversion  by  Contraposition,  on  the  other  hand,  has
some  importance  attributed  to  it,  because  it  is  regarded
as  a  device  for  avoiding  the  loss  of  universality  inevitable
in  the  Formal  conversion  of  A.  It  consists  of  permuting,
converting,  and  permuting  again.  E.g.  'all  S  is  P '
becomes  'no  S  is  not-P,'  then  '  no  not-P  is  S/  and
finally  *  all  not-P  is  not-S,'  which  is  formally  A.

§  4. Criticism

Hardly  any  logician  of  repute  will  nowadays  contend
that  these  formal  manipulations  of  symbols  represent
actual  thinking,  and  so  our  criticism  may  be  brief.

It  should  suffice  to  point  out  (i)  that  Conversion  can
not  express  any  actual  meaning  of  a  judgment  wherever
the  predicate  is  not  thought  in  extension.  For  it  then
at  once  becomes  impossible  to  say  what  its  '  quantity '
is  to  be  in  the  converse.  The  truth  is  that  it  has  none.

(2)  Conversion  fails  lamentably  to  express  the  full
meaning  of  many  A  propositions,  and  the  device  which
was  intended  to  meet  this  difficulty  and  to  render  all

1  It  mercifully  abstains,  e.g. ,  from  permuting  I  into  '  some  S  is  not  not-P '  and
then  converting  this  into  •  some  not-(not-P)  is  S. '


1 64  FORMAL  LOGIC  CHAP,  xm

conversions '  simple,' viz. the *  Quantification of the
Predicate,'  proved  to  be  futile  (Chap.  XII,  §  4).

(3)  Permutation sins against actual thinking by
obliterating the fundamental difference of attitude
between affirmation and negation,  and representing a
denial of A as an affirmation of not -A. This is
(in  general)  psychologically  intolerable.

(4)  It  also  employs  the  Formal  fiction  of  the  '  infinite3
negative  term  '  not- A,'  which  is  not  an  actual  meaning
(Chaps.  X,§  ii,  II,  §  10).

The  '  second  part '  of  Formal  Logic  then  concludes
with  a  repetition  of  the  old  failure  to  represent  actual
thinking  and  to  determine  actual  meaning.  It  also
leaves  on  our  hands  the  forms  of  '  Immediate  Inference  '
as  a  problem.  We  have  still  to  decide  how  far  they
represent  any  actual  process  of  immediate  inference  there
may  be.  But  we  cannot  do  so  until  we  have  examined
the  general  nature  of  Inference.


CHAPTER  XIV

THE GENERAL NATURE OF INFERENCE

§  i. The  Problem  of  Inference

WITH  Inference  the  ' third  part'  of  Formal  Logic
admittedly  begins,  although  it  is  clear  that  in  the
conception  of  '  immediate  inference '  the  barrier  between
Judgment  and  Inference  has  worn  pretty  thin.  It  is
indeed  a  wholly  artificial  line  which  cuts  across  the
natural  continuity  of  thought.  For  no  actual  judgment
ever  leads  an  isolated  life.  It  is  born  of  parents,  and  is
intended  to  have  offspring.  I.e.  it  is  essentially  inferential.
We  judge  in  order  to  conclude,  or  to  start,  a  train  of
thought.

All  this  is  obvious,  both  to  common-sense  and  to  a
;  logic  which  has  not  tried  to  cut  off  relations  with
{ psychology.  But  Formal  Logic  has  real  difficulty  in
formulating  its  conception  of  Inference.  This  difficulty
is  partly  due  to  the  general  impracticability  of  its  funda
mental  abstractions,  and  partly  also  to  its  obsession  with
the  importance  of  the  Syllogism,  which  it  cannot  help
regarding  as  its  own  culmination  and  as  an  absolutely
certain  form  of  'valid  thought.'  Both  these  prejudices
prevent  it  from  grasping,  and  indeed  from  even  examining,
the  nature  of  inference  as  a  general  problem.

Now,  both  etymologically  and  psychologically  we
must  regard  as  inference  any  process  of  thought  by  which
a  mind  passes  from  one  judgment  to  another,  and  the
general  question  about  Inference  concerns  the  ways,  means,
and  motives  with  which  .any  train  of  thought  proceeds

165


1 66  FORMAL  LOGIC  CHAP.

The  slightest  study  of  this  problem  at  once  reveals  that
the  process  of  inference  is  exceedingly  complex,  and  that
.-•'in  every  concrete  case  of  actual  thinking  the  whole  of  a
man's  personality  enters  into  it  and  colours  it  in  every
part.  It  is  also  obvious  that  the  value  of  the  results
differs  enormously  in  different  inferences,  and  that  however
we  conceive  and  judge  *  value/  some  inferences  are  very
much  better  than  others.

The  Formal  logician  to  some  extent  recognizes  both
these  facts.  ( i )  He  sees  that  if  his  science  is  not  to  be
carried  away  by  floods  of  psychology,  he  must  artificially
simplify  his  problem.  He  tries,  therefore,  to  win  exemption
from  what  seems  to  him  the  hopeless,  or  at  all  events
repugnant,  task  of  observing  and  evaluating  the  actual
processes  of  thought,  by  framing  the  conception  of  valid
inference,  which  alone  is  to  be  a  concern  of  logic.  By  this
means  he  thinks  he  can  dismiss  the  bulk  of  actual
thoughts.

(2)  He  tries  to  associate  this  conception  with  the
judgments  of  value  he  is  naturally  prompted  to  pass
on  the  actual  inferences  of  men.  He  condemns  most
of  them  as  '  bad.'  Others  he  regards  as  '  doubtful,'  as
possibly  right,  in  fact,  but  as  uninteresting  because  de
pendent  on  '  material '  knowledge,  and  few  indeed  will
be  the  inferences  he  can  regard  as  'good,'  because  they
are  '  valid  '  and  '  necessary.'  For  he  conceives  '  validity '  as
a  matter  of  Form.  He  is  haunted  by  an  ideal  of  '  valid
inference '  which  alone  is  '  logical  inference,'  in  which
every  step  forward  is  absolutely  necessitated  by  what  has
gone  before.  Still  he  does  not  despair.  He  believes
himself  to  have  found  such  Formally  *  valid  inferences '
in  (at  least)  two  cases,  in  the  *  immediate  inferences '  we
have  already  considered,  and  in  the  Syllogism.

§  2. The  Notion  of f  Valid  Inference '

However  fervently  a  logician  may  believe  in  '  valid
inference,'  he  cannot  but  recognize  that  the  conception
involves  certain  difficulties.  There  are  three  essential


xiv GENERAL  NATURE  OF  INFERENCE 167

qualities  which  it  is  desirable,  and  indeed  necessary,  that  a
valid  inference  should  have  ;  but  it  is  not  altogether  easy
to  show  either  how  it  has  them  or  how  it  combines  them.

(1)  A  valid  inference  should  be  necessary. It  should
exclude  every  form  of  arbitrariness  or  interference  with
the  rational  self-development  of  thought ;  it  should  follow
inevitably  from  its  grounds.

(2)  Nevertheless  it  should  also possess novelty. It
should  not  merely  reaffirm  what  is  already  known  ; to
do  so  is  not  to  infer,  even  for  Formal Logic. A  valid
inference,  therefore,  should  carry  thought  on  to  something
new. It is essential to  inference  that there  should  be
some difference, and  advance,  of meaning  between the
truth  inferred  and  its  grounds.

For  (3)  only  thus  has  the  act  of  inference  as  such  a
meaning.  And  a  valid  inference  must  be  significant —
significant,  moreover,  as  a  form.  Were  it  merely  to  re
assert  the  same  meaning,  it  would  have  no  meaning.
Were  its  meaning  to  be  essentially  dependent  on  the
actual  circumstances  under  which  it  was  drawn,  it  would
have  no  meaning  a  self-respecting  Formal  Logic  could
descend  to,  and  so  be  worse  than  meaningless.  Nor,
again,  would  it  have  a  meaning,  if  it  merely  promulgated
forms  which  were  said  to  be  absolutely  valid,  but  in
which  no  actual  meaning  could  be  conveyed,  or  which
failed  to  guarantee  our  actual  meanings  when  we  tried  to
express  them  by  their  aid.

This  last  desideratum  has  not  yet  been  clearly  perceived
by  Formal  Logic,  but  it  could  hardly  be  denied.  The
other  two  have  been  familiar  enough  from  the  first.  They
constitute  *  the  paradox  of  Inference]  and  the  difficulty  of
reconciling  them  is  notorious.  For  if  the  judgment
inferred  is  to  be  inevitable  and  wholly  dependent  on  its
Formal  grounds,  how  can  it  do  anything  more  than  render
explicit  what  is  already  known  ?  Whence  can  any  real
novelty  intrude  into  the  Formal  scheme,  and  how  can  it
be  conveyed  ?  If  we  already  understand  that  S  and  P
are  not  connected,  how  can  it  add  to  our  knowledge  to
'  infer '  from  *  no  S  is  P  '  that  *  no  P  is  S  '  ?  Is  not  the


1 68  FORMAL  LOGIC  CHAP.

change  merely  verbal  ?  Or  if  we  know  that '  the  ship  went
down  with  all  on  board,'  and  also  that  '  Smith  was  on
board/  what  advance  in  thought  is  the  '  inference '  that
*  Smith  went  down  '  ?

We  need  not  discuss  this  '  paradox '  until  we  have
considered  these  elements  in  the  notion  of  *  valid  inference J
in  their  order,  but  we  should  prepare  ourselves  to  recognize
it  as  a  still  greater  '  paradox '  if  the  form  of  '  valid  infer
ence  '  should  turn  out  to  be  as  such  unmeaning.

§  3. The  '  Necessity*  of  Inference

What  does  this  mean  ?  Logicians  usually  consider  it
too  obvious  (or  too  psychological)  a  question  to  consider,
and  the  answer  is  consequently  difficult.

(1)  It can  hardly  mean that inferences are accom
panied  by  a  feeling  of  necessity  in  their  makers. This  is
often  a  fact,  and  is  always  liable  to  become  a  fact  when
an  inference,  made  easily  and  without consciousness  of
'  necessity,' is challenged, and reasserted as dependent
upon grounds. But this interpretation will not do  in
Formal Logic. For such a feeling would plainly be
nothing  but  a  psychical  fact  about  the  state  of  mind  of
those  who  inferred,  and  as  such  would be  relegated  to
psychology.

(2)  Can the  '  necessity ' then mean that, no  matter
how  its maker  feels  about  the  inference,  there  is  not  in
fact any alternative but to draw it  ? Does it mean
inevitableness  and  the  absence  of  a  choice  ? This  yields
a  good  c  logical '  meaning,  and  one  more  consonant  with
the prepossessions of Formal Logic. But a question
may  be  raised  whether  it  is  true,  and  whether,  in  fact,
such  necessity  ever  occurs  in  actual  thought

It  may  be  objected  (a)  that  it  is  never  necessary
to  infer,  simply  because  it  is  not  necessary  to  think
(Chap.  X,  §  7).  Nor  can  we  ever  be  compelled  to  go  on
thinking 1 ;  we  can  stop  at  any  point.  No  necessity

1  Except,  of  course,  in  morbid  cases  in  which  the  normal  mechanism  of
inhibition  is  deranged  ;  but  it  will  hardly  be  contended  that  such  thinking  is
typically  '  logical '  or  productive  of  valuable  results.


xiv GENERAL  NATURE  OF INFERENCE 169

of  thought,  therefore,  can be generated without a  will
to  infer.

(b)  A  will  to  infer,  even  if  it  is  granted,  still  leaves  us
free  to  infer  in  every  conceivable direction. It  does  not
tie  us  down  to  the  '  valid  inferences '  which  are Formally
'  necessary/ It  leaves  us  a  choice  between  a  vast  number
of inferences, all of which are Formally arbitrary.
Having  judged  '  the  day  is  fine/  shall I infer  ( I  will  go
out/  or  '  what  a  pity  I have  to  work/  or  '  I  hope  it  will
be  fine  to-morrow/  or  '  I  hate  picnics/  or  *  so  it  is  untrue
that  there  are  no  fine  days  in Scotland/  or  anything  else
that  might  be  suggested  to  my  mind  or  another  ? Which
of  these inferences it is  rational  for me  to draw,  and
which I shall  actually  draw,  depends on my  character
and circumstances, my interests and purposes. But I
shall  get  no  light  upon  the  subject  from Formal Logic.
For  of  all  these  things  it  disclaims  all  knowledge. How,
then,  can  it  judge  whether  my  actual  inference  is  '  good '
or '  bad/ rational or fatuous, '  necessary ' or arbitrary
and  gratuitous  ?

(c)  It cannot even tell me which of  the Formally
necessary  inferences,  which  alone  it  deigns  to  notice, I
am  to  be  compelled  to  draw. For  I  appear  to  have  a
choice  even among the  specifically  '  logical ' inferences.
Why,  e.g.,  should  I say,  *  Among  fine  things  is  this  day/
rather  than  *  Therefore  the day  is  not  not-fine '  ? The
one  inference  is  compulsory  only  if  my  sole  mission  in
life  is  the  conversion  of  propositions,  the  other,  if  it  is
their  permutation. Even  in  the  strictest  formal  necessity
there  is  still  a  choice  ; I need  not  have  converted my
judgment, but might have permuted it, or used it in
various  ways  as  a  syllogistic  premiss.

(d)  Clearly,  therefore,  the term  '  necessity ' is either
ambiguous,  and  means  *  compulsion '  in  one  part  of  the
Formal  argument  and *  inferential  nature '  in the  other
(in  which  case  the  argument  reduces  to  *  all  inference  is
inferential ' !),  or  it  is  always  conditional  and  dependent
on  the  purpose  which  animates  the  thought. But  of  this
essential  reference  to  purpose  in  all  reasoning  we  do  not


170  FORMAL  LOGIC  CHAP.

hear  a  word  in  Formal  Logic,  though  its  own  account  of
Formal  inferences  clearly  implies  purposes  of  a  very
special  kind.

(e)  If  even  Formally  there  are  alternatives  to  any
judgment,  it  is  clear  that  no  Formal  explanation  of  the
inference  actually  drawn  can  ever  be  sufficient.  The  real
ground  of  Inference  can  never  be  Formal,  even  in  cases
when  from  '  All  men  are  mortal '  it  is  inferred  that
'  Smith  l  is  mortal,'  rather  than  '  Some  mortals  are  men.1
And  the  existence  of  this  unstated  and  unknown  ground
of  Inference  disposes  of  the  contention  that  any  judgment
can  be  shown  to  be  Formally  necessary.  There  can  be
no  such  thing  as  Formal  Inference,  because  there  are
always  alternatives  (whether  Formal  or  not)  logically
conceivable,  from  among  which  the  actual  judgment  is
selected.  The  principle  of  this  selection  is  always  of  a
psychological  sort,  and  lies  beyond  the  purview  of  formal
analysis.

(3)  The  real  meaning  of  what  Formal  Logic  con
fusedly  calls  '  necessity  of  inference '  is  revealed  when  we
inquire  how  it  could  ever  get  into  so  untenable  a  position
without  discovering  its  character.

The  whole  trouble  arises  out  of  the  simple  fact  that
Formal  Logic  had  not  made  up  its  mind  as  to  what  it
wanted  to  do.  Was  it  to  trace  the  progress  of  actual
thinking,  or  to  wait  until  that  unquiet  business  was  over
and  pronounce  a  sort  of  obituary  notice  on  its  defunct
form  ?  If  it  tried  to  do  the  former,  it  would  have  to
sacrifice  its  dignified  attitude  of  superiority  to  sordid  fact,
and  to  plunge  into  the  endless  eddies  of  the  turbid  stream
of  actual  thinking.  If  it  tried  to  do  the  latter,  it  would
have  to  pay  the  price  for  the  pleasure  of  serenely
contemplating  the  spectacle  of  thought's  activity.  It
would  have  to  avow  itself  a  mere  spectator,  a  mere  critic
of  results  which  it  was  impotent  to  produce  and  which
were  regulated  by  alien  laws  unknown  to  it.  It  would
be  debarred  from  participating  in  the  advance  of  thought,

1  I  have  ventured  to  substitute  this  more  modern  name  for  the  traditional
'  Socrates. '


xiv GENERAL  NATURE  OF  INFERENCE 171

and  even  from  speaking  about  it.  For  its  own  motion
would  be  essentially  retrograde ;  logical  reflection  would
proceed  from  the  conclusion  to  the  premisses,  and  inquire
whether  the  latter  were  a  sufficient  warrant  for  the  former.
No  wonder  that  the  choice  proved  difficult  and  the
temptation  to  occupy  both  positions,  and  to  flee  from
one  to  the  other  whenever  either  was  attacked,  proved
irresistible.

Still,  on  the  whole  the  attitude  of  ex  post  facto  contem
plation  turned  out  to  be  the  safer,  and  what  the  *  necessity
of  inference '  can  mean  from  this  standpoint  must  now  be
considered.  Let  us  therefore  contemplate  the  *  necessity  '
of  inference  as  it  appears  after  the  inference  has  been
drawn,  and  if  no  question  is  asked  as  to  where  it  was
and  whether  it  existed  before,  and  while  there  was  still  a
question  of  what  inference  should  be  drawn.  Now,  after
the  event  the  inference,  if  it  was  of  the  type  called
1  logical,'  may,  of  course,  appear  as  '  necessary '  ;  it  may
be  seen  to  have  grounds,  and  to  depend  on  them ;  if  it
were  not  in  this  sense  '  necessary,'  it  would  be  irrational
and  indefensible.  But  just  the  same  situation  would
have  appeared  if  any  of  its  rivals  had  in  fact  been
preferred.  Grounds  could  have  been  assigned  to  all  of
them  (sufficient  or  insufficient,  good  or  bad),  but  they
would  never  have  compelled  any  one  to  judge  thus.
Thus  the  '  necessity '  of  such  Formally  logical  inference
is  a  purely  formal  feature  common  to  all  conceivable
inferences.  It  no  more  proves  that  there  was  any  real
necessity  to  draw  any  one  of  them  than  the  formal  truth-
claim  of  all  judgments  proves  that  any  particular
judgment  is  true.  Every  actual  inference  was,  of  course,
inspired  by  motives  which  led  to  it,  and  not  to  any
alternative,  and  these  (whether  good  or  bad)  form  its  real
grounds.  But  of  these  Formal  analysis  knows,  and  can
know,  nothing.  It  proves  nothing  as  to  the  real  grounds
of  any  actual  inference,  simply  because  it  is  not  relevant
thereto.  It  is  merely  an  ex  post  facto  reflection,  governed
by  highly  technical  and  arbitrary  assumptions,  on  an
accomplished  inference  ;  it  is  no  reason  for  expecting  it


172  FORMAL  LOGIC  CHAP.

antecedently,  and  no  guidance  whatsoever  in  predicting
any  course  of  thought  or  explaining  its  advance.

The  whole  Formal  doctrine  of  the  necessity  of
inference,  then,  is  inapplicable  in  advance  to  any  thinking.
Indeed  it  is  nothing  but  a  systematic  confusion  of  two
points  of  view,  and  tries  to  attribute  to  progressive
thinking  the  results  of  looking  back  on  its  completed  and
verbal  form.  From  the  point  of  view  of  actual  thinking
this  attitude  is  utterly  misleading  and  irrelevant.  The
only  way  of  really  explaining  the  course  thought  is  going
to  take  is  to  go  into  its  antecedents,  i.e.  the  motives,
character,  and  circumstances  of  the  thinker.  Such  an
inquiry  may  be  difficult,  but  it  will  not  be  irrelevant,  as
the  Formal  account  of  thought  is  doomed  to  be.

§  4. The  l  Novelty '  in  Inference

r- —

Here  the  antinomy  may  be  sharply  formulated  as
being  that  (a)  psychologically  there  must  be  novelty,  while
(b)  logically  there  cannot  be  novelty.  The  actual  position
of  Formal  Logic  will  be  found  to  flounder  about  between
these  two  alternatives  in  helpless  inconsistency.

'(a)  No  rational  mind  can  be  supposed  to  infer  without
some  reason  for  thinking  at  all  in  the  first  place,  and  for
drawing  the  inference  drawn  rather  than  any  other,  in  the
second  place.  Whatever,  therefore,  the  inference  drawn,
even  if  it  is  as  trivial  as  the  Formal  extraction  of  *  some
S  is  P  '  from  '  all  S  is  P,J  it  must  have  seemed  worth
making.  It  must  have  seemed  to  convey  a  sufficient
degree  of  novelty  to  its  maker  not  to  seem  an  idle  and
pointless  repetition,  at  least  at  the  time  when  he  inferred.
So  soon  as  he  had  finished,  he  may  have  recognized
that  after  all  he  had  inferred  '  nothing  new,'  because
his  conclusion  was  implicit  in  the  premisses  ;  but  at  the
time  he  cannot  have  seen  this,  or  he,  would  not  have
judged.  And  even  if  the  purpose  of  the  judgment  was
to  instruct  others,  it  must  have  been  a  vehicle  of  novelty.
For  though  it  may  have  been  '  nothing  new '  to  its
maker,  he  must  have  imagined  that  he  was  conveying


xiv GENERAL  NATURE  OF  INFERENCE 173

information  to  his  hearers.1  If  he  was  mistaken  about
this,  he  is  a  bore ;  but  if  he  were  in  the  habit  of
knowingly  conveying  information  already  known  to  all,
he  would  be  locked  up  as  a  lunatic.  For,  as  Eliza  said  to
her  husband,  '  Who  wants  to  be  told  what  they  know
already  ? ' 2  It  is  clear,  then,  that  all  actual  judgments,
whether  they  take  the  form  of  '  mediate  '  or  '  immediate  '
inferences,  must  possess  psychological  novelty.  For  only
so  can  they  acquire  logical  relevance  and  actual  existence.

(b)  But  this  psychological  novelty,  which  accompanies
all  actual  inferences,  wholly  evaporates  when  we  take  to
contemplating  logical  '  Forms '  in  abstraction  from  actual
thinking.  Alike  whether  (i)  we  confine  'Logic'  to  bare
*  forms/  or  (2)  sublimate  it  to  an  '  ideal  of  knowledge,'  this
novelty  become  unthinkable.

For  (i)  the  Form  must  always  contain  in  itself  the
full  ground  for  the  '  inference.'  It  can  therefore  only  be
human  stupidity  which  is  surprised,  or  human  ignorance
which  is  enlightened,  when  the  latent  inference  is  success
fully  exhumed.  Ex  post  facto  reflection,  simply  because
it  cannot  arise  until  the  act  of  thought  is  over,  can  never  ^
prove  anything  that  is  not  already  known.

(2)  The  notion  of  an  ideally  complete  system  of
knowledge  renders  inference  a  superfluity.  For  it  means
that  all  truth  must  coexist  as  a  whole,  and  that  nothing
can  be  either  added  or  subtracted.  Nor,  we  may  add,
extracted  from  it.  Any  process  of  selection  or  con
struction,  therefore,  must  be  a  purely  human  operation  on
this  perfect  system  (or  rather  on  a  replica  thereof  in  a
human  mind),  which  would  be  an  outrage  upon  truth's
integrity,  if  it  were  not  impotent.  But,  fortunately,  it  can
neither  dissever  what  nature  has  bound  together,  nor  con
join  what  nature  has  set  apart  ;  it  can  make  no  difference
to  eternal  truth.  If,  therefore,  it  is  the  function  of  Logic
to  cherish  and  contemplate  such  an  ideal,  no  logical,
but  only  psychological,  significance  can  be  assigned  to

1  The  rationale  of  repetition  is,  of  course,  that  it  is  supposed  to  be  more
impressive,  or  to  guard  against  forgetfulness.
3  B.  Pain,  Eliza! s  Husband,  p.  24.


174  FORMAL  LOGIC


CHAP.


inference,  and  a  fortiori  to  the  novelty  which  attends  the
discovery  of  an  eternally  pre-existent  truth  by  a  human
mind.  Or,  if  the  ideal  is  projected  into  the  future  as  an
end  which  thought  may  some  day  attain,  it  will  have  to
be  said  that  as  yet  there  is  inference  and  its  psychology,
but  no  true  logic  ;  but  that  anon  there  will  be  logic,  and
then  neither  psychology  nor  inference.

What,  then,  shall  Formal  Logic  do  ?  Of  the  two
alternatives  it  is  clear  that  it  cannot  choose  the  first.  But
neither  can  it  comfortably  choose  the  second.  To  render
all  inference  and  every  judgment,  with  the  exception  of  a
single  unchanging  and  tautologous  affirmation  of  total
reality,  extra-logical,  is  a  little  extreme,  and  may  be
thought  to  leave  too  little  content  even  for  Formal
Logic.  The  process  of  purification  by  evisceration
cannot  be  carried  beyond  a  certain  pitch  even  by  the
most  inhumanly  ascetic  logic — for  fear  of  committing  the
happy  dispatch.

So  Formal  Logic  compromises.  It  is  inclined  to  admit
that  immediate  inferences  are  only  verbal  rearrangements,
and  do  not  add  to  knowledge.  But  it  clings  to  the  Syllogism,
and  is  reluctant  to  admit  that  as  Formally  conceived  it
always  begs  the  question.  How  precisely  it  conceives
syllogistic  reasoning  to  produce  new  truth  will  have  to
be  considered  in  the  next  chapter.  Meanwhile  it  is
enough  to  note  that  Formal  Logic  on  this  point  of
novelty  has  not  the  courage  of  its  convictions  nor  the
audacity  to  be  consistent.

§  5.  Is  '  Valid  Inference'  unmeaning?

Perhaps  the  most  difficult,  and  yet  most  fundamental,
point  in  the  theory  of  Inference  for  Formal  Logic  to
establish  is  that  its  notion  of  valid  inference  has  any
meaning  at  all.  More  particularly  the  difficulty  is  to  see
how  a  'valid  inference'  can  either  (i)  be  produced  in
rerum  natura,  or  (2)  become  relevant  to  any  actual
problem  and  be  trusted  to  validate  any  actual  thinking.

(i) It has to be remembered that the only  clue


xiv GENERAL  NATURE  OF INFERENCE 175

Formal  Logic  has  to  the  meaning  of  any  judgment  is
just  the  verbal  form  in  which  it  is  expressed.  It  has  on
principle  refused  to  consider  the  history  of  its  making
and  its  psychical  antecedents  in  the  mind  of  its  maker.
It  has  thereby  debarred  itself  from  tracing  the  actual
concatenation  of  his  judgments  and  the  motives  for  his
inferences.  But  how  can  it  supply  this  lack  of  real  causal
connexion  between  the  judgments  that  are  to  constitute
its  Formal  inference  ?  It  must  maintain  that  the  mere
relation  of  '  logical  connexion '  existing  between  two
propositions  in  the  abstract,  unapprehended  and  undesired
by  any  mind,  suffices  of  itself  to  produce  the  transition
from  one  to  the  other.  I.e.  it  must  be  held  that  the
mere  logical  fact,  that,  e.g., '  all  S  is  P  '  and  '  some  P  is  S,J
are  in  the  relation  of  ( convertend '  and  *  converse,'  is
sufficient  to  produce  the  '  conversion,'  to  constitute  the
*  inference  '  and  to  make  it  *  valid.'  But  how  can  it  do
so  ?  And  why  should  it  produce  this  inference  rather
than  any  other  which  is  also  capable  of  standing  in  the  re
lation  of  a  '  valid  inference  '  towards  the  first  ?  And  why
should  logical  facts  generate  valid  inferences  alone  ?  Is
it  not  just  as  much  of  a  logical  fact  that  there  is  a  relation
between  'all  S  is  P  '  and  '  all  P  is  S  '  ?  And  does  there
not  exist  for  it  the  logical  name  of  '  simple  conversion '  ?
And  what  if  logic  calls  the  one  relation  *  valid '  and  the
other  '  invalid  '  ?  Both  seem  to  belong  to  the  investigation
of  forms  and  the  subject-matter  of  logic.  Why,  then,
should  not  Logic  content  itself  with  just  registering  this
difference,  so  long  as  there  is  not  conceived  to  be  any
one  to  whom  the  difference  between  'valid'  and  *  invalid '
reasoning  appeals,  and  makes  such  a  difference  that  he  is
desirous  of  achieving  the  one  and  of  avoiding  the  other  ?

The  strictly  *  logical '  position,  then,  would  seem  to  be
that  every  proposition  stands  eternally  related  to  an
infinity  of  others  in  such  a  way  that  the  '  transitions '  (if
we  continue  to  use  so  inappropriate  a  term)  from  it  to
them  are  in  some  cases  formally  valid,  but  in  most  cases
not.  These  eternal  relations,  however,  do  not  in  them
selves  contain  any  reason  why  any  transitions  from  any


176  FORMAL  LOGIC  CHAP.

one  of  them  to  any  of  the  others  should  in  fact  occur.
Hence  they  constitute  no  ground  for  inference,  nor  any
reason  why  the  transition  should  proceed  towards  any  one
of  them  rather  than  towards  any  other.  It  follows  that
the  notion  of  a  formally  valid  inference  is  a  misnomer
for  these  relations  which  fails  to  express  their  essential
stability.  They  are  not,  and  cannot  be,  strictly  inferences  ;
nor  can  any  inference  be  really  Formal  (cf.  §  3  (2)  (#)).
The  notion  of  '  valid  inference,'  like  that  of  the
'  necessity '  of  thought,  is  an  unmeaning  confusion,  due  to
a  failure  to  distinguish  between  reflection  on  the  formal
aspect  of  a  completed  inference  and  the  actual  process  of
drawing  the  (psychological)  inference  (cf.  §  3  (3)).

(2)  Even  if  the  traditional  schemes  of  '  valid  inference  '
were  intelligible  and  possessed  of  any  real  meaning,  it
would  not  follow  that  they  could  be  trusted  to  validate  or
guarantee  any  actual  reasonings.  I.e.  it  would  not  follow
that  because  they  were  Formally  '  valid '  in  the  abstract
they  were  valid  in  their  applications.

(a)  The  first  difficulty  which  confronts  any  attempt  to
apply  any  of  these  Formal  schemes  to  actual  thinking  is
that  of  determining  the  actual  meaning  of  any  judgment.
And  this  difficulty  is theoretically  insoluble for  a  con
sistently  Formal  logic. For  as  we  have  abundantly  seen
(Chap.  XI,  §  2),  all  these  ' forms'  are  capable  of  plurality
of  senses,  and  the  actual  sense  of  the  words  used  on  any
occasion can only be determined by referring to the
context  of  the  actual  live  judgment. But  such  reference
is Formally  inadmissible. Again,  no Formal guarantee
is possible  that  the  recognized  '  forms '  exhaust  all  the
possibilities  of  meaning. For  what  a  man may  manage
to mean,  and to make intelligible,  with a  *  form '  is a
question  for psychological observation. Thus the  very
bricks,  out  of  which  the  rigid  fabric  of  Formal  inference  is
to  be  built,  are  involved  in  a  Protean  flux. Not  even  to
so simple a question as *  Is "  all S is P " meant in
extension  or  in  intension  ? J  is  a  Formal  answer  possible.

(b)  It follows that whatever interpretation of an
argument  a  Formal  logician  might  (arbitrarily)  adopt,  he


xiv GENERAL  NATURE OF INFERENCE 177

is  always  liable  to  be  controverted.  His  interpretation
can  carry  no  assurance,  because  it  can  always  be  con
tested  as  a  misinterpretation  of  the  actual  meaning,  to
which  there  is  always  an  appeal  in  fact,  whether  or  not
it  is  admitted  into  '  logic.'  When  the  real  nature  of
Formal  Logic's  position  on  this  point  is  properly  under
stood,  it  is  so  far  from  being  an  assured  method  of  settling
disputes  as  to  be  irresistibly  provocative  of  objections  even
in  the  most  pacific  minds.  Hence  the  practical  man's
contempt  for  a  '  logic '  which  never  intervenes  in  actual
disputes  save  to  darken  counsel  and  to  sanction  quibbling.
The  particular  way  in  which  the  form  of  the  Syllogism
exhibits  this  fundamental  defect  of  the  Formal  conception
of  Inference  will  be  considered  in  Chap.  XVI,  §  6,
Meanwhile,  we  may  so  far  anticipate  as  to  declare  the
belief  that  by  putting  a  reasoning  into  any  particular  form
it  can  be  made  better  or  absolutely  certain,  and  raised
above  the  possibility  of  criticism  and  confutation,  to  be
nothing  but  an  illusion.

<»-  \  £-\t-^-s  -f »  %A
§  6. Conclusion

We  may  conclude,  then,  that  the  general  discussion  of
the  nature  of  Inference  bodes  no  good  to  the  Formal
analysis  of  the  Syllogism.  It  would  be  a  miracle,  if  in
view  of  the  suspicions  generated  by  its  Formal  origin  it
could,  nevertheless,  establish  itself  as  a  useful  form  of
c  valid '  inference.

As  regards  Immediate  Inferences,  we  may  now  decide
that  in  so  far  as  any  one  really  has  occasion  to  use  these
forms,  they  must  be  real  inferences,  and  as  such  must
involve  real  novelty.  There  need  not  be  much  of  it ;  the
novelty,  e.g.,  in  a  transition  from  '  no  S  is  P  '  to  *  no  P  is  S  '
may  be  only  in  the  shifting  of  the  emphasis  which  the
new  subject  involves  ;  but  if  and  when  it  is  judged  to
be  worth  making,  it  suffices  to  justify  the  making  of
the  inference,  though  it  does  not  justify  its  formal  claim
to  be  *  necessarily  '  true.  For  of  course,  just  as  a  shifting
of  the  verbal  order  may  alter  and  destroy  the  rhythm  of  a

N


1 78  FORMAL  LOGIC  CHAP,  xiv

sentence,  so  a  shifting  of  emphasis  may  alter  and  falsify
the  meaning  which  was  originally  intended,  and  a  formal
change  of  '  subject '  may  '  change  the  subject '  materially.
Hence  in  real  reasoning  even  the  most  trivial  of  immediate
inferences  involves  a  risk,  and  may  need  scrutiny,  nor
does  it  ever  f  follow  of  necessity.'  If  its  assertor  denies
that  he  has  asserted  anything  new,  he  is  met  by  the
retort,  '  Why,  then,  did  you  assert  it  ? ' ;  if  he  admits  it,  he
admits  also  that  the  value  of  the  novelty  may  be  inquired
into.  Mere  verbal  transformation  for  verbal  transforma
tion's  sake  does  not  occur  in  actual  thinking  ;  whether
it  occurs  in  Formal  Logic  and  is  the  essence  of  the  whole
*  science '  (or  game)  must  be  left  to  the  conscience  of
Formal  logicians.


CHAPTER XV

THE SYLLOGISM

§  I . The  Structure  of  the  Syllogism

BEFORE  studying  the  disputed  questions  about  the  function
of  the  Syllogism  and  its  value  as  an  analysis  of  thought,
it  is  necessary  to  familiarize  oneself  with  its  structure,  and
we  must,  therefore,  briefly  rehearse  the  essentials  of  the
syllogistic  tradition.

The  Syllogism  is  a  combination  of  three  Propositions
so  arranged  that  the  third,  called  the  Conclusion,  follows
with  logical  necessity  from  the  first  two,  called  the
Premisses.  By  '  logical  necessity '  is  meant  that  no  one
who  has  once  accepted  the  premisses  as  true  can  refuse  to
acknowledge  the  truth  of  the  conclusion.  Whether,  how
ever,  the  premisses  are  in  fact  true  is  a  question  of
'  material '  knowledge,  and  does  not  affect  this  formal
necessity.  Only,  if  the  premisses  are  in  fact  true,  the
conclusion  also  must  be  in  fact  true.  For  the  Syllogism's
structure  is  such  that  no  truth  can  be  lost  in  the  advance
from  the  premisses  to  the  conclusion.  If  the  premisses
are  false,  nothing  can  be  inferred  as  to  the  truth  of  the
conclusion  ;  it  cannot  be  taken  as  true,  nor  yet  as  false  ;
it  may  be  true,  or,  again,  false  ;  the  form  of  the  reasoning
yields  no  clue.

The  three  Propositions  contain  three  Terms,  called  the
major,  the  minor,  and  the  middle.  They  are  so  arranged
that  each  occurs  twice,  and  the  middle  term,  by  occurring
in  each  of  the  premisses,  renders  possible  or  *  mediates  '
an  inference  about  the  relation  of  the  minor  to  the  major,

179


i8o  FORMAL  LOGIC  CHAP.

which  is  expressed  in  the  conclusion.  The  minor  term  is
the  subject  in  the  conclusion,  the  major  the  predicate.
The  middle  term  is  eliminated,  and  does  not  occur  in  the
conclusion.  The  major  premiss  is  that  which  contains  the
major  and  the  middle,  the  minor  premiss  that  which
contains  the  minor  and  the  middle.

A  *  valid '  syllogism  is  one  which  fulfils  all  the  con
ditions  necessary  to  generate  the  formal  truth  (conditional,
in  fact,  on  the  truth  of  the  premisses)  of  its  conclusion.
*  Invalid'  syllogisms  are  pseudo- syllogisms ,  which  only
mimic  the  syllogistic  form,  but  may  be  detected  by  testing
them  by  the  rules  of  the  Syllogism.

Of  'valid'  syllogisms  there  are  a  number  of  kinds,
generated  (i)  by  differences  in  the  position  of  the  middle
term  in  the  premisses,  and  (2)  by  differences  in  the  sorts
of  propositions  used.

(i)  Differences  of  the  first  kind  are  called  differences
of  Figure.  There  are  formally  four  figures  of  the
Syllogism.

(a)  If  the  middle  term  is  the  subject  in  the  major
premiss,  and  it  is  the  predicate  in  the  minor  premiss,  the
argument  is  in  the  first  Figure.

(U)  It  is  in  the  second,  if  the  middle  term  is  the
predicate  in  both  premisses.

(c)  It  is  in  the  third,  if  the  middle  is  the  subject  in
both  premisses.

(d)  It  is  in  the  fourth,  if  the  order  is  the  converse;  of
the  first,  i.e.  if  the  middle  term  is  the  predicate  in  the
major  and  the  subject  in  the  minor  premiss.

It  is  evident  that  these  four  arrangements  exhaust  the
possibilities.  They  may  be  put  symbolically  thus  : —

Fig.  i. MP Fig.  2.  PM Fig.  3.  MP Fig.  4.  PM
SM  SM  MS  MS

.-.  SP  .*.  SP  .'.  SP  .-.  SP

where  M  stands  for  the  middle  term,  S  for  the  minor,  the

subject,  and  P  for  the  major •,  the  predicate^  of  the  conclusion.

(2) Differences in the  sort  of  propositions  used are

called differences  of  moods. As  each proposition  of  a


XV


THE  SYLLOGISM  181


syllogism  must  be  either  A,  E,  I,  or  O,  every  syllogism
can  be  expressed  by  three  of  these  four  letters.  Thus
AAA  will  mean  a  syllogism  in  which  the  major  and  the
minor  premiss  and  the  conclusion  are  all  universal
affirmative  propositions.  It  is  usual  to  state  the  mood  in
this  order,  i.e.  with  the  major  premiss  first  and  the  con
clusion  last.

§  2. The  Rules  of  the  Syllogism

The  number  of  valid  moods  in  the  four  figures  can  be
determined  by  means  of  the  eight  Rules  of  the  Syllogism,
as  follows  : —

(1)  A syllogism must  contain three  terms  only. The
third  term  is  needed  to  form  a  relation  between  the  other
two. It is the pivot of the reasoning,  and must be
identical  in  the  two  premisses. If  it  is  not,  it  is  ambiguous,
and  breaks  the  argument  in  two. We  cannot  argue  from
P  and  MI  and  from  S  and  M2  to  any  relation  between  S
and  P. The  fallacy  of  Ambiguous  Middle  is  a  form  of  the
fallacy  of  Four  Terms,  quaternio  terminorum,  which  is  open
to  the  same  objection  (cf.  Chap.  XXIII,  §  3). An  argu
ment  which,  whether  true  or  not,  uses  four  terms  is  not  a
syllogism.

(2)  The  Middle  Term  must  be  (  distributed*  at  least  once.
For  unless  we  assert  about  the  whole  of  the  middle  (or  the
middle  as  such)  at  least  once,  there  is  nothing  to  prevent
us  from  relating  the  minor  to  one part,  and  the  major
to  another  part,  of  the  middle,  which  would  not  establish
a  relation  between  the  major  and  the  minor  at  all. To
ignore this rule  results in the fallacy  of Undistributed
Middle,  which  may  be  illustrated  thus  : —


All  P  is  M

All  S  is  M

Yet  no  S  is  P.


182


FORMAL  LOGIC


CHAP.


(3)  No  term  must  be  'distributed'  in  the  conclusion  which
was  not  distributed  in  the  premisses.  For  to  assume  know
ledge  of  the  whole  in  the  conclusion  when  only  knowledge
of  part  was  given  would  be  to  go  beyond  our  evidence,
and  destroy  the  formal  self-sufficiency  of  our  argument.
Neglect  of  this  rule  entails  the  fallacies  of  Illicit  Process
of  the  major,  or  of  the  minor  term.  Symbolically


All  M  is  P

All  M  is  S

.-.  All  S  is  P

=  Illicit  Process  of  the  Minor.

All  M  is  P

No  S  is  M

.'.  No  Sis  P

=  Illicit  Process  of  the  Major.


(4)  From  two  negative  premisses  no  conclusion  can  be
drawn. For  by  denying  the  same  thing  of  two  others  we
do  not  connect  them.

(5)  If  either  premiss  is  negative,  the  conclusion  must  be.
For  if  the  one premiss  asserts,  and  the  other  denies,  a
relation  of  one  of  the  other  terms  to  the  middle,  the  term
excluded  from  the  middle  cannot  be  related  to  that  term
(or  part  of  the  term) which  is  included  in the  middle.
E.g.  from  all  M  is  P,  no  S  is  M,  it  does  not  follow  that
any  part  of  S  is  P.

(6)  Conversely,  to  prove  a negative  conclusion  one  of
the  premisses  must  be  negative. For  from  two  affirmative
premisses only relations, and not absence of relation,
between  the  major  and  the  minor  term  can  be  inferred.

(7)  From  two  particular  premisses  no  conclusions  can
be drawn. For  there  are  not  in  the  premisses  enough
*  distributed ' terms to avoid fallacies of either Un
distributed Middle  or Illicit  Process. The  working  out
of  this  derivative  rule  forms  a  pretty  exercise  in  Formal
Logic.

(8)  If  one  premiss  is  particular  the  conclusion  must  be
particular. For  the  same  reason  as  in  the  last  case. On


xv  THE  SYLLOGISM  183

the  other  hand,  a  particular  conclusion  may  often  be  the
only  one  to  be  validly  drawn  from  universal  premisses.

§  3. The  Valid  Moods

By  the  application  of  these  Rules  to  the  possible  com
binations  of  the  letters  A,  E,  I,  and  O,  three  at  a  time  in
the  four  figures,  the  Valid  Moods  of  the  Syllogism  may
be  determined.  These  may  also  be  arrived  at  by  con
sidering  the  possible  conclusions  from  the  combinations  of
A,  E,  I,  and  O  two  at  a  time  as  premisses  in  the  four
figures.  The  first  method  first  discovers  that  out  of  the
possible  64  combinations  only  1 1  do  not  involve  a  breach
of  one  or  other  of  the  syllogistic  rules,  and  then  examines
each  of  them  in  the  four  figures  to  see  whether  in  those
figures  they  do  not  entail  a  false  distribution  of  terms,
under  Rules  2  and  3.  It  turns  out  that  out  of  a  possible
44  only  24  are  unexceptionable.  But  five  of  these,  called
subalterns,  and  drawing  a  *  weakened,'  i.e.  particular,  con
clusion  when  a  universal  was  legitimate,  are  practically
neglected  as  inelegant.  The  second  method  is  more
expeditious,  because  there  are  only  16  combinations  to
be  tested.

AA  ?  A  or I  EA  ?  E  or  O  I A  ?  I  OA  ?  O

AE  ?  E  or  O  El ?  O  [IE]  [OE]

AI ?I  [EE]  [II]  [01]

AO  ?  O  [EO]  [IO]  [OO]

Of  these,  8  may  be  eliminated — EE,  EO,  OE,  and  OO
under  Rule  4;  II,  IO,  and  OI  under  Rule  7;  and  IE
(with  a  little  reasoning)  under  Rule  3.  The  rest  must
be  tested  as  before  in  the  several  figures  and  yield  the
same  results,  which  are  embodied  in  the  famous  mnemonic
verses.

Barbara*  Cdarent*  Darii,  jFerzoque  prioris ;
Cesare,*  Camestres*  Festino,  Baroko  secundae ;
Tertia  Darapti,  Disamis,  Datisi,  Felapton,
Bokardo,  Ferison  habet ;  quarta  insuper  addit
Bramantip,  Camenes,*  Dimaris,  Fesapo,  Fresison ;
Quinque  subalterni,  totidem  generalibus  orti,*
Nomen  habent  nullum,  nee,  si  bene  colligis,  usum.


1 84  FORMAL  LOGIC  CHAP.

§  4.  Reduction

Aristotle  believed  that  the  syllogisms  of  the  first  figure
rested  on  the  self-evident  principle  known  as  the  Dictum
de  Omni  et  Nullo,  and  that  their  truth,  i.e.  formal  validity,
was  indisputable.  This  he  did  not  hold  to  be  equally
the  case  in  the  other  figures.  So  he  set  himself  to  show
how  the  arguments  in  the  other  figures  might  be  trans
formed  into  the  first  figure,  and  thereby  raised  beyond
dispute.  This  process  is  called  Reduction,  and  the  mne
monic  verses  quoted  above  not  only  state  the  valid  forms
but  also  contain  instructions  for  their  Reduction.  Thus
the  initial  letters  B,  C,  D,  F  of  the  first  four  moods  indicate
also  the  forms  to  which  the  reduction  is  to  take  place.  The
letter  s  means  that  the  proposition  it  follows  should  be
'  converted '  simply,  the  letter/  that  it  should  be  conversion
per  accidens  (Chap.  XIII,  §  2),  m  ('  muta')  means  that  the
premisses  should  be  transposed,  and  k  that  the  reduction
is  to  take  place  per  impossibile  through  an  argument  in
Barbara.  The  last  of  these  processes  is  not  merely  a
pleasant  exercise  for  the  logical  mind,  but  throws  an
instructive  light  on  the  principles  of  the  Syllogism.  If
we  take,  e.g.,  a  syllogism  in  Baroko,  '  all  P  is  M,  some  S
is  not  M,  /.  some  S  is  not  P/  it  is  clear  that  to  get  it  into
the  order  of  the  first  figure  we  must  either  convert  the
major  premiss  or  the  conclusion,  and  thereby  turn  the
major  premiss  into  the  minor.  But  if  we  convert  the
major  premiss  we  get  an  I  proposition  instead  of  an  A,
and  from  two  particular  premisses  there  is  no  valid  con
clusion  (Rule  7).  On  the  other  hand,  the  conclusion
cannot  be  converted  because  the  conversion  of  O  is
impossible  (Chap.  XIII,  §  2).  'Permutation'  also  had
not  yet  been  devised  (Chap.  XIII,  §  2).  But  the  logician
could  appeal  to  the  internal  coherence  of  the  Syllogism.
He  could  argue  that  if  the  Syllogism  was,  as  he  believed,  so
coherent  that  from  true  premisses  syllogistically  arranged
no  false  conclusion  could  be  drawn,  a  disputed  form  of
syllogism  could  be  invalidated  only  by  showing  that  it
might  yield  a  false  conclusion  from  true  premisses.  If,


XV


THE  SYLLOGISM  185


therefore,  Baroko  was  an  invalid  form,  its  conclusion  might
be  false  while  yet  its  premisses  remained  true.  Let  us
assume,  therefore,  that  the  conclusion  of  Baroko  is  false.
If  so,  its  contradictory  '  all  S  is  P '  must  be  true.  We
now  have  two  A  propositions  and  can  argue

All  S  is  P
All  P  is  M

.-,  All  S  is  M.

This  is  an  argument  in  Barbara,  but  its  conclusion
contradicts  our  original  minor  premiss  '  some  S  is  not  M.'
In  other  words,  the  price  of  disputing  the  validity  of
Baroko  is  a  denial  of  the  material  truth  of  one  of  its
premisses.  But  as  it  has  been  throughout  assumed  that
there  is  no  difficulty  about  the  supply  of  true  premisses,
this  price  is  prohibitive,  and  the  validity  of  its  form  is
thus  indirectly  established.

§  5. Criticism

Systematic  criticism  of  the  assumptions  on  which  this
formal  scheme  is  constructed  must  be  postponed  until
we  have  examined  the  motives  and  circumstances  of  its
authors  in  the  next  chapter ;  but  it  is  well  to  point  out
how  closely  knit  and  consistent  (within  limits)  is  the
whole  structure  of  the  Syllogism.  It  rests  throughout
on  the  notion  of  formal  necessity  and  ignores  all  else.
It  postulates  the  existence  of  true  premisses  and  disdains
conclusions  which  may,  but  need  not,  be  true,  even
though  their  probability  may  indefinitely  approach
certainty.  If  I  know  that  *  nearly  all  Conservatives  are
opposed  to  Mr.  Lloyd  George's  fiscal  policy/  and  that
'  Smith  is  a  Conservative,'  I  can,  and  probably  do,  con
fidently  assume  that  '  Smith  is  opposed  to  Mr.  Lloyd
George's  fiscal  policy.'  But  the  syllogistic  form  condemns
me ;  I  have  committed  an  c  undistributed  middle,'  and
my  conclusion  is  not  '  necessary.'  That  it  is  probably
true  is  no  extenuation.

All  the  Rules of the Syllogism are based  on this


1 86  FORMAL  LOGIC  CHAP,  xv

assumption  that  a  conclusion  is  worthless,  unless  it  is
necessary.  But  in  actual  reasoning  we  often  succeed
in  carrying  conviction  by  arguments  which  are  not
expressed  in  '  valid '  forms.  ( i )  We  may  argue  with
what  are,  technically,  four  terms.  E.g.  '  A  is  equal  to
B,  B  is  equal  to  C,  .'.  A  is  equal  to  C.'  (2)  An  *  un
distributed  middle '  may,  as  we  saw  above,  lead  to  a
highly  probable  conclusion.  (3)  Illicit  Processes  may  in
particular  cases  be  de  facto  true,  e.g.

1  all  equiangular  triangles  are  equilateral/

*  all  equiangular  triangles  have  their  angles  equal  to
two  right  angles,

' .'.  all  equilateral  triangles  have  their  angles  equal  to
two  right  angles.'

(4)  Formality  apart,  who  will  say  that  nothing  can  be
inferred  from  the  two  negative  premisses — *  The  girl  did
not  accept  Smith '  and  '  she  did  not  accept  Jones '  ?
(5)  Even  though  '  all  M  is  P}  and  'some  S  is  not  M'
necessitates  a  negative  conclusion  only,  yet  in  point  of
fact  '  some  S '  may  be  '  P,'  to  wit,  the  part  about  which
the  minor  premiss  asserted  nothing.  (6)  If  '  a  majority
voted  for  A  at  an  election  and  also  for  B,'  some  must
have  voted  both  for  A  and  for  B  and  very  possibly  all
who  voted  for  A  also  voted  for  B.  Yet  the  inference  is
technically  '  from  two  particulars/

In  short,  necessity,  and  not  mere  truth  in  point  of
fact,  is  what  the  Syllogism  sets  out  to  achieve,  and  what
it  must  achieve  if  its  claim  is  to  be  accepted.  Why  it
should  make  this  claim  and  how  it  tries  to  uphold  it  we
shall  see  in  the  next  chapter.


CHAPTER XVI

THE THEORY OF THE SYLLOGISM

§  I. The  Syllogism  as  a  Discovery

OF  all  the  discoveries  which  man  has  made  by  dint  of
sheer  reflection  the  Syllogism  is  assuredly  the  greatest.
Its  rise  was  as  sudden  and  complete  and  fundamental  and
epoch-making  and  irresistible  as  Newton's  discovery  of
gravitation  in  the  realm  of  physics.  And  unlike  other
first-class  discoveries,  and  more  signally  even  than  in
Newton's  case,  this  discovery  had  not  been  anticipated
by  any  one.  Not  even  the  tooth  of  envy  could  detract
from  the  originality  of  its  discoverer  or  suggest  that  its
glory  ought  to  have  been  shared  with  others  safely
resting  in  their  graves.

Aristotle  quite  realized  the  greatness  of  his  discovery,
and  exploited  it  to  the  full.  It  gave  him  a  sense  of
immeasurable  superiority  over  all  his  predecessors,  and  an
agreeable  conviction  that  he  had  built  himself  a  monu
ment  for  all  time.  His  self-esteem  it  is  hard  to  censure  ;
for  he  had  not  only  made  a  capital  discovery,  but  had
worked  out  its  consequences  with  singular  acumen  and
completeness.

Yet  it  is  possible  that  he  exaggerated  the  value,  and
overlooked  the  defects,  of  his  discovery,  and  that  his  false
estimate  has  impressed  itself  as  indelibly  on  the  human
mind  as  the  Syllogism  itself.  He  was  in  a  manner
entitled  to  think  that  his  discovery  was  the  making  of
Logic.  It  certainly  made  Logic  a  subject  the  meanest
intelligence  could  not  but  recognize  as  definite,  and  the

187


1 88  FORMAL  LOGIC  CHAP.

least  pedantic  as  worthy  of  examination.  It  was  there
fore  at  once  adopted  for  educational  purposes,  and  its
very  defects  have  assured  it  an  honourable  place  in  the
literary  curriculum  ever  since.  Next  to  *  Euclid '  it  has
been  the  most  profitable  of  Greek  speculations.  To  this
day  hundreds  of  professors  owe  their  daily  bread  to
Aristotle.

Yet  from  the  standpoint  of  scientific  logic  the
Syllogism  was  a  more  doubtful  boon.  It  may,  indeed,
be  contended  that  although  it  made  Logic,  it  also  made
its  progress  almost  impossible.  For  it  soon  became  an
obsession  from  which  there  was  practically  no  escape.
Even  when  subsequent  logicians  were  stirred  to  protests
against  its  authority,  they  still  allowed  the  fascination
of  its  form  to  determine  their  ideal  of  knowledge,  and
then,  sooner  or  later,  more  obviously  or  more  obscurely,
they  fell  back  into  the  clutches  of  the  Formal  Logic  of
which  the  Syllogism  remained  the  acme  and  ne  plus  ultra.
What  they  attempted  to  put  in  the  Syllogism's  place,
therefore,  was  always  something  quite  as  formal,  quite  as
impotent,  and  quite  as  illusory.  The  great  majority  of
logicians,  however,  were  no  rebels.  For  more  than  two
thousand  years  they  have  piously  believed  that  in  the
Syllogism  they  had  discerned  the  universal  form  of  valid
thought  and  reached  its  haven,  nay,  its  heaven.  So  they
carefully  shaped  their  doctrines  so  as  to  lead  up  to
the  Syllogism.  The  classifications  of  propositions,  their
oppositions  and  conversions,  definition  and  division,  all
had  for  their  real  aim  the  easier  manipulation  of
syllogisms.

Of  late,  however,  it  has  become  more  and  more  difficult
to  stifle  the  voice  of  criticism.  In  spite  of  their  traditional
dependence  on  Aristotle,  attacks  by  logicians  on  the
central  citadel  of  Formal  Logic  have  multiplied  *  in  fre
quency  and  severity,  until  the  logician's  paradise  threatens
to  become  his  purgatory.  A  good  many  of  these  attacks
can  be  repulsed  (with  more  or  less  loss  on  both  sides),
but  all  are  worthy  of  examination.  Because,  if  any  one

1  Even  in  Oxford.


xvi THE  THEORY  OF  THE  SYLLOGISM 189

of  them  is  unanswerable,  it  means  the  downfall  of  Formal
Logic.1

§  2. The  Origins  of  the  Syllogism

Greek  Logic,  like  all  the  sciences,  arose  out  of  a
practical  need.  It  was  necessary  to  make  a  definite
tribunal,  to  discover  an  authoritative  standard,  for  the
decision  of  disputes.  The  growth  of  democracy  in  the
fifth  century  B.C.,  which  rendered  political  distinction
dependent  on  skill  in  public  debates  before  assemblies
of  the  sovereign  people,  and  security  of  life  and  property
dependent  on  the  forensic  arts  of  working  on  the  feelings
of  large  bodies  of  jurymen,  put  an  enormous  premium  on
the  development  of  rhetoric  and  logic.  It  was  soon  dis
covered  that  though  persuasion  was  the  ultimate  aim  of
the  public  speaker,  yet  the  persuasiveness  of  a  good
argument  was  far  greater  than  that  of  a  bad  one.  What,
then,  was  a  good  argument,  and  how  could  it  be  distin
guished  from  a  bad  one  ?  The  desire  to  answer  this
question  led  to  the  development  of  logic.  The  Sophists
began  the  inquiry,  and  the  philosophers,  abandoning  for
a  while  unprofitable  speculations  about  physics  and  meta
physics,  followed  in  their  wake.  The  schools,  both  of
sophists  and  philosophers,  became  practising  grounds  for
the  serious  business  of  public  speaking.  Socrates  invented
the  art  of  cross-examination,  and  enormously  stimulated
the  fashionable  game  of  '  dialectics  ' ;  Plato  and  Aristotle
perfected  the  tradition.  Each  generation  of  thinkers  went
about  seeking  for  a  sign  by  which  they  might  surely  know
when  they  had  proved  their  case.

The  surest  sign  they  could  find  was  that  an  opponent
should  be  forced  to  confess  himself  beaten,  either  by  ad
mitting  the  truth  of  what  he  had  begun  by  denying,  or
by  contradicting  himself  and  denying  what  he  had  asserted.
The  rules  of  the  game  of  *  Dialectic '  were  quite  strict :  a
thesis  must  be  upheld  in  its  verbal  integrity,  and  any

1  Intellectually,  of  course,  not  practically.  Practically  it  can  only  be
superseded  by  an  alternative  which  appeals  as  strongly  to  the  instincts  which,
generated  it.  And  these  instincts  lie  very  near  the  roots  of  our  intellectual  life.


190  FORMAL  LOGIC  CHAP.

departure  from  its  formulation  meant  defeat.  Socrates  in
particular  was  an  adept  at  entangling  his  opponent  in
the  toils  of  a  confutation  (e\eyx°^  an^  inducing  him  to
contradict  himself.  Plato  appears  to  have  added  a
method  of  systematically  driving  an  opponent  into  a
corner  by  a  progressive  narrowing  of  the  field  of  discourse
by  successive  *  Divisions.'  But  neither  of  these  methods
seemed  to  Aristotle  to  be  sufficiently  cogent.  They  might
beguile  an  opponent  into  an  untenable  position,  but  they
could  not  force  him  into  it,  and  compel  him  to  surrender.
He  had  to  be  convicted  by  concessions  out  of  his  own
mouth,  and  so  long  as  concessions  had  to  be  asked  for
he  might  be  wily  enough  to  refuse  them.  Dialectics,
therefore,  could  not  be  made  coercive.

Nor  were  they  truly  scientific,  for  true  science  also,
as  opposed  to  the  laxity  of  mere  *  opinion/  was  coercive,
and  capable  of  extorting  assent  to  its  conclusions  from
all  minds.  What  was  wanted,  therefore,  alike  for  the
conduct  of  disputes  and  for  the  framing  of  demonstrations,
was  a  method  so  coercive  that,  once  committed  to  it,  there
was  no  escape  for  any  one.

Aristotle  believed  that  in  the  Syllogism  he  had
obtained  an  instrument  which  would  achieve  both  these
desiderata.  On  the  one  hand,  it  could  be  used  to  clinch
discussion  and  to  provide  an  easy  and  applicable  test  for
deciding  which  of  the  contending  parties  was  right ;  in
face  of  a  valid  syllogism  starting  from  true  premisses  all
dispute  must  cease.  On  the  other  hand,  it  formulated
also  the  ideal  of  true  knowledge,  and  the  universal  form
of  demonstrative  reasoning.  All  scientific  truths  were
capable  of  formulation  in  scientific  syllogisms,  which,
proceeding  from  principles,  c  primary,'  '  true,' '  self-evident,'
'  prior,'  and  *  better  known,'  stated  the  '  causes '  (or
grounds)  of  the  conclusions  which  they  demonstrated.

What  was  common  to  both  the  dialectical  and  the
scientific  use  of  the  syllogistic  form  was  its  irresistible
cogency,  the  '  necessity'  on  which  we  saw  (Chap.  XV,  §  5)
all  the  rules  of  the  Syllogism  rested.  If  Aristotle  had
considered  it  possible  that  the  premisses  of  a  syllogism


xvi THE  THEORY  OF  THE  SYLLOGISM 191

might  be  severally  accepted  and  yet  its  conclusion  be  denied
when  they  were  combined,  he  would  have  felt  that  the
Syllogism  had  failed  of  its  dialectical  function.  Similarly,
if  he  had  thought  that  science  could  not  realize  the  ideal
of  absolute  demonstration,  and  that  its  advances  did  not
depend  on,  demand,  or  amount  to,  demonstration,  he
would  have  felt  that  the  syllogistic  form  had  been
stripped  of  its  scientific  raison  d'etre.  It  has  been  left  to
professional  upholders  of  Formal  Logic  to  continue
calmly  to  exploit  it  after  they  had  noted  its  impotence
in  both  these  respects.


§  3.  Aristotle* s  Account  of  the  Syllogism

Accordingly  Aristotle  makes  the  coerciveness  of
the  Syllogism,  its  power  to  compel  assent,  one  of
the  chief  features  in  his  definition.  A  syllogism  is  *  a
reasoning  in  which  there  results,  (i)  from  certain
premisses  posited^  (2)  of  necessity  and  in  virtue  of
their  being  such,  (3)  something  other  than  those  pre
suppositions.'  *

This  definition  embodies  the  three  characteristic
demands  of  the  Syllogism,  viz.  (i)  the  postulation  of  true
premisses,  (2)  the  demand  for  an  intrinsic,  self-contained
and  formal  necessity,  (3)  the  requirement  of  novelty.  On
the  other  hand,  it  really  defines  more  than  the  actual
Syllogism.  It  is  a  definition  of  the  Formal  conception
of  a  '  valid  inference.'  So  it  does  not  mention  that  the
premisses  must  be  two  and  the  terms  three,  and  held
together  by  the  identity  of  the  middle  term.  This,
however,  is  really  an  advantage  ;  for  it  makes  it  clearer
that  with  the  Aristotelian  definition  of  Syllogism  stands
and  falls  the  whole  Formal  conception  of  Inference.  It
is,  therefore,  in  the  first  instance  these  three  fundamental
claims  which  must  be  shown  to  be  unfounded  by  those
who  suspect  the  soundness  of  the  Formal  conception  of
Inference.

1  Prior  Analytics,  I,  chap.  xxiv.


192  FORMAL  LOGIC  CHAP.

§  4. The  Postulation  of  True  Premisses

This  question  is  not  really  a  question  for  Logic,  but
for  Science.  Or,  rather,  the  logical  postulate  about  true
premisses  is  an  assumption  about  the  nature  of  scientific
knowledge,  which,  though  it  long  seemed  plausible,  can  no
longer  be  regarded  as  true.  It  assumes  that  the  sciences
are  the  handmaids  of  Logic,  eager  and  able  to  do  all  the
dirty  work  of  research,  and  on  its  completion  to  hand  over
to  the  logician  the  material  he  requires  for  his  purer
contemplations.  But,  as  was  hinted  in  the  beginning
(Chap.  I,  §  2),  this  conception  of  the  ability  and  attitude
of  Science  does  not  seem  to  accord  with  the  facts.  The
sciences  never  seem  to  finish  their  operations  in  time  for
the  logician  to  begin  his.  They  never  profess  themselves
convinced  of  the  absolute  truth  of  their  results.  They
take  them  as  true,  no  doubt,  for  the  time  being,  and  until
they  can  be  corrected  or  superseded  by  better,  but  they
seem  to  object  on  principle  to  any  assertion  of  finality.  If,
therefore,  the  logician  demands  absolutely  certain  truth,
he  will  not  get  any  science  to  guarantee  it  him,  nor  will
he  be  listened  to  when  he  censures  the  sciences  for  not
yielding  him  the  impossible  sort  of  truth  he  desires.

In  view  of  this  fact  he  ought  seriously  to  reconsider
his  position.  He  should  admit  that  he  has  no  right  to  take
the  truth  of  his  premisses  as  more  than  probable,  and  the
truth  of  his  conclusion  as  more  than  conditional.  Now
this  means  that  he  cannot  entirely  emancipate  himself
as  he  thought,  from  the  consideration  of  truth  of  fact ',  and
devote  himself  wholly  to  truth  of  form.  For,  however
perfect  his  reasoning  may  be  within  the  syllogism,  his
result  may  always  be  wrong  in  fact,  because  there  has
been  a  hitherto  unsuspected  error  in  the  premisses.
Indeed,  the  wrongness  in  fact  of  the  results  deduced  by
the  logician  may  be  what  convinces  the  scientist  that
he  has  supplied  false  premisses.  The  logician  should
be  proud  of  this  service,  while  the  scientist  should  be
grateful  for  the  correction.  Unfortunately,  this  is  not  how
the  logician  commonly  takes  the  situation.  He  is  more


xvi THE  THEORY  OF  THE  SYLLOGISM 193

apt  to  regard  it  as  what  Huxley  called  '  Herbert  Spencer's
idea  of  a  tragedy/  viz.  '  a  deduction  killed  by  a  fact/  and
to  show  himself  annoyed  that  his  deduction  has  been
refuted,  annoyed  with  the  scientist,  and  annoyed  by  the
facts  ;  nay,  tempted  to  uphold  his  '  deductions '  against
them.  This,  however,  he  has  no 'logical  right  to  do.  For
the  event  has  merely  shown  that  the  guarantee  of  the
truth  of  his  premisses  was  insufficient.

The  logical  effect  should  rather  be  the  renunciation,  or
relegation  to  another  and  better  world,  of  the  Aristotelian
ideal  of  scientific  demonstration.  If  the  scientist  repudiates
it  as  too  high  for  his  powers,  the  logician  must  acquiesce.
He  must  not  be  obstinate  in  upholding  an  '  ideal '  of 'demon
stration  '  which  has  no  application  to  human  knowledge.
He  must  confess  that  much  as  he  would  have  liked  to
prove  truths  categorically  about  reality  by  the  force  of  pure
reasoning  alone,  he  can  in  fact  only  prove  conditionally
and  subject  to  continuous  confirmation  by  experience.
But  he  may  console  himself  with  the  idea  that  he  is  after
all  quite  as  useful,  if  not  quite  as  exalted,  a  personage,  if
he  cuts  his  coat  according  to  his  cloth  and  assists  the
scientist  in  the  establishment  of  '  earthly '  truths,  as  if  he
strutted  about  in  '  ideal '  habiliments  which  are  not
visible  to  the  eye  of  Science,  like  Hans  Andersen's
shockingly  underdressed  Emperor.

For,  after  all,  it  is  no  great  hardship  that  the  Syllogism
.should  cease  to  demand  absolute  truth  from  its  premisses.
I  The guarantee it could give was never more than
^hypothetical  ('zythe  premisses  were  true  my  conclusion  is
I  true'),  and  it  had  no  means  of  really  assuring  itself  of
the  alleged  truth  of  the  premisses  it  had  taken  on  trust.
The effect of  its  postulate  was  entirely imaginary  and
emotional. It made no difference to the form of a
syllogistic argument. It contributed nothing to its
strength. It  does  not  alter  its  practice. For  the  logician,
though he  despises them,  is perfectly  familiar  with  con
ditionally  true  premisses,  and  can  argue  with  them  just  as
well. Why,  then,  should  he  care,  qua  logician,  whether
his  premisses  are  true  absolutely,  or  provisionally,  or  not

O


194  FORMAL  LOGIC  CHAP.

at  all  ?  How  is  his  status,  qua  logician,  lowered  ?  It
is  only  as  a  revealer  of  reality,  or  qua  metaphysician,
that  his  role  is  not  so  important  as  Aristotle  had  imagined.
But,  then,  had  he  a  right  to  play  this  part  at  all  ?  Would
it  not  be  better  to  keep  apart  the  problem  of  logical  proof
from  the  business  of  constructing  scientific  truths  and  the
aspiration  of  detecting  ultimate  reality  ?

The  Syllogism,  then,  is  not  seriously  damaged  by  being
shorn  of  its  pretensions  to  enunciate  (in  unspecified  cases)
absolute  verities,  and  by  withdrawing  its  demand  for  more
truth  than  science  can  supply.

§  5. The  Intrinsic  Necessity  of  the  Syllogism

The  Syllogism's  claim  to  necessity  is  much  more  vital
both  as  regards  its  validity  as  a  form  and  its  value  as  an
instrument  of  logic.  We  have  seen  in  Chap.  XV  how  its
whole  structure  was  dominated  and  pervaded  by  the
idea  of  necessity,  and  in  §  2  how  greatly  its  professional
triumph  depended  on  its  ability  to  compel  assent.  If
therefore  its  claim  to  necessity  breaks  down,  both  its
logical  function  and  its  internal  structure  would  seem  to
be  destroyed.  Yet  this  claim  is  far  from  invulnerable,
and  our  preliminary  discussion  of  logical  necessity  in  Chap.
XIV,  §  3,  may  be  thought  to  presage  a  collapse.

It  is  easy,  in  the  first  place,  to  detect  that  the  *  necessity'
of  syllogistic  reasoning  is  wholly  of  the  ex  post  facto
character  which  was  explained  and  criticized  in  Chap.  XIV,
§  3.  It  exists,  after  the  syllogism  has  been  constructed,  in
the  completed  form.  It  lies  in  the  relation  between  the
conclusion  and  the  premisses,  which  is  found  after  the
premisses  have  been  put  together.  But  it  has  no  connexion
whatever  with  any  necessity  of  constructing  the  syllogism,
nor  has  it  anything  to  say  about  this.  About  the  making
of  any  actual  syllogism  Formal  Logic  tells  us  nothing,
knows  nothing,  and  is  willing  to  learn  nothing.  Here  we
come  upon  a  region  full  of  interesting  questions  which  the
Formal  Syllogism  entirely  ignores.  How  did  the  premisses
come  about,  and  come  together  ?  Why,  of  all  the  proposi-


xvi THE  THEORY  OF  THE  SYLLOGISM 195

tions  that  might  have  been  asserted  was  the  major  premiss
chosen  ?  And  why  the  minor  ?  Did  the  conclusion  come
first  or  last  ?  Was  it  a  bona  fide  deduction  from  ad
mitted  truths,  or  a  thesis  bolstered  up  with  reasons  ?

The  Syllogism  in  its  Formal  completeness  has  no
answer  to  such  questions.  But  is  it  self-evident  that  they
are  irrelevant  and  extra-logical  ?

It  is  clearly  hazardous  silently  to  antedate  the  ex  post
facto  necessity,  and  to  transfer  it  to  what  is  for  Formal
Logic  unexplored  ground.  Indeed  the  logician's  claim
that  his  syllogism  proves  the  necessity  of  thought  from
start  to  finish,  and  reveals  its  universal  form,  simply
because  this  structure  has  been  generated  somehow  and
he  sees  no  way  of  repudiating  its  conclusion,  is  much  as
though  a  social  reformer,  looking  at  a  row  of  jerry-built
three-roomed  cottages  should  agree  that  they  exhibited
the  universal  and  formally  perfect  type  of  building
houses  ;  because,  you  know,  no  part  of  them  could  be
removed  without  entailing  a  collapse  of  the  whole.  True,
we  exclaim  in  both  cases,  true  of  the  building ;  but  what,
pray,  of  the  builder  ?  Need  he  have  built  thus,  and  there,
and  then,  and  out  of  such  materials  ?

The  necessity  of  a  syllogistic  structure  after  it  has
been  compiled  must  be  regarded  as  wholly  distinct  from,
and  irrelevant  to,  the  question  of  what  necessity  was
inherent  in  the  thought  which  constructed  it.  And  only
the  latter  is  relevant  to  the  question  whether  the  syllogism
can  compel  assent.  For  if  any  disputant  may  go  into
its  making,  he  can  dispute  its  application,  its  relevance
to  the  issue,  and  declare  it  an  ignoratio  elencki,  without
impugning  its  formal  completeness.  He  may,  therefore,
refuse  to  make  this  particular  syllogism.  But  if  he
cannot  be  compelled  to  combine  the  premisses  which
lead  to  this  particular  conclusion,  what  is  the  use  of
pointing  out  that  the  conclusion  would  be  inevitable,
if  he  (or  some  one)  would  only  be  good  enough  to
make  it  so  by  adopting  the  premisses  ?  If  he  is  in
point  of  fact  at  liberty  to  select  premisses  of  his  own  as
he  pleases,  and  to  reject  one  or  both  of  those  his  opponent


196  FORMAL  LOGIC


CHAP.


has  chosen,  what  sense  is  there  in  saying  that  he  can  be
forced  to  the  desired  conclusion  ?  There  may  possibly
ensue  a  wrangle  about  what  premisses  are  admissible
and  relevant  to  the  disputed  point,  but  there  are  no
Formal  ways  of  settling  it,  nor  is  there  any  compulsion.
This  explains,  of  course,  why  the  discovery  of  the
Syllogism  has  not  in  fact  altered  the  methods  of  contro
versy  nor  affected  the  vitality  of  disputes.  The  contend
ing  parties  do  not  use  or  acknowledge  the  same  premisses,
and,  therefore,  do  not  draw  the  same  conclusions.  A
party  that  has  reason  to  suspect  that  the  use  of  certain
premisses  would  be  formally  fatal  to  its  claims  simply
does  not  accept,  but  contests  or  ignores,  those  premisses.
It  only  looks  at,  and  for,  premisses  which  will  support  its
own  conclusions.  For  any  argument  to  be  decisive,  the
parties  to  it  must  be  willing  to  argue  the  matter  out
honestly,  and  must  begin  by  placing  themselves  on  some
common  ground.  And  this  they  rarely  consent  to  do,
and  can  never  be  compelled  to  do.

As  a  form,  therefore,  the  Syllogism  is  impotent  and
has  no  power  of  compulsion.  The  initial  selection  of  the
premisses  to  any  argument  rests  as  much  on  mutual
concessions  and  agreements  as  ever  it  did  in  Plato's
Dialectic.  But  this  result,  which  is  the  condemnation  of
the  Syllogism  in  the  eyes  of  bigots  and  dogmatists,  is
really  greatly  to  its  credit.  For  it  means  that  even  the
chosen  instrument  of  dogmatism  which,  in  the  hands  of
multitudinous  professors,  has  wrought  more  woe  to  the
freedom  of  thought  than  even  the  Inquisition  at  its  worst,
the  Syllogism  itself,  points,  after  its  fashion,  to  a  better
theory  which  makes  satisfaction,  and  not  compulsion,  into
its  differentia  of  truth  (cf.  Chap.  XXV,  §§  3,  5).

And  if  we  follow  the  clue  put  in  our  hands  by  the
failure  of  the  Formal  account  of  the  Syllogism's  nature,
we  shall  easily  see  that  the  selection  of  its  premisses  is
always  the  product  of  a  free  choice  among  the  infinite
possibilities  of  knowledge.1  We  may  put  together  our

1  Not,  of  course,  that  in  any  particular  case  the  choice  is  ever  practically
unlimited.


xvi THE  THEORY  OF  THE  SYLLOGISM 197

premisses  from  any  acknowledged  bodies  of  truth,  and
discover  new  relations  between  them  which  revolutionize
the  routine  of  human  thought.  Thus  Newton  took  one
premiss  from  the  moon,  and  another  from  his  apple-tree,
and  put  them  together  into  the  theory  of  gravitation.
Darwin  took  one  premiss  from  Malthus  and  another
from  the  experience  of  stock-breeders,  both  of  which
were  perfectly  familiar  and  undeniable  but  which  had
never  been  viewed  together,  and  produced  as  their  con
clusion  his  new  theory  of  Natural  Selection,  which
changed  the  principles  of  biology,  ethics,  politics,  and
theology,  and  is  even  tardily  transforming  the  remote  ab
stractions  of  Formal  Logic  (cf.  Chap.  V,  §  8).  Similarly,
we  may  take  an  undeniable  premiss  from  psychology,  to
wit,  the  existence  of  purposes,  and  another  from  logic,  to
wit,  the  existence  of  error,  and  produce  thereby  a  new
theory  of  knowledge  which  transforms  all  the  old  dogmas
to  the  intense  disgust  of  old-fashioned  logicians.  So  long
as  all  the  relations  of  every  truth  with  every  other  have
not  been  worked  out,  every  science  must  remain  exposed
to  such  discoveries.  And  when  they  have  been  all  worked
out,  how  could  Inference  survive  the  last  discovery  ?  For
who  could  have  a  reason,  or  the  heart,  to  reiterate  idly
truths  that  were  already  known  to  all  ?

It  is  necessary  then  to  vindicate  the  Freedom  of
Thought  against  the  '  Necessity '  of  Formal  Logic,  and  to
show  the  impotence  of  the  latter  to  curb  the  former.
With  this  demonstration  an  essential  part  of  the  Formal
Syllogism  is  disposed  of.  Its  formal  cogency  is  of  our
making  and  our  choosing,  and  need  never  involve  any
real  compulsion.

As  for  the  *  necessity  of  logical  connexion,'  it  is  nothing
but  an  illusion  engendered  by  Formal  Logic.  While  the
process  of  thought  is  still  active,  the  logician  keeps  out  of
the  way,  and  has  nothing  to  say  to  it ;  for  his  vulturine
'  analysis  '  never  ventures  to  attack  a  living  thought.  He
appears  upon  the  scene  when  the  thinking  is  defunct  and
over.  He  then  strips  the  carcase  of  its  flesh  and  blood,
that  is,  abstracts  from  the  thought's  relations  to  the


198  FORMAL  LOGIC  CHAP.

interests  and  idiosyncrasies  of  those  who  thought  it.  He
disarticulates  it,  and  casts  aside  the  sinews,  the  value  and
purpose  of  the  reasoning,  as  *  merely  psychological/  and
joins  together  its  bare  bones,  to  wit  the  verbal  forms  of
the  '  propositions '  it  has  used,  with  the  artificial  wiring  he
calls  '  connecting  logically,'  and  finally  offers  us  the  jerky
contortions  of  this  anatomical  preparation  in  lieu  of  the
graceful  flow  of  the  actual  thought.  In  other  words,
1  logical  analysis '  first  destroys  the  real  connexions  be
tween  thoughts,  and  then  feigns  false  ones  that  suit  the
arbitrary  abstractions  of  Formal  Logic.  What  it '  analyses '
cannot  be  real,  and  what  is  real  it  refuses  to  analyse,  and
for  this  double  falsification  it  demands  the  approval  of  all
rational  intelligence  !


§  6. The  Formal  Ambiguity  of  the  Middle  Term

But  criticism  may  burrow  yet  deeper  in  the  Syllogism's
vitals.  Is  it  after  all  true  that>  taken  as  a  form,  the
Syllogism  is  incontestable  ?  Is  there  no  way  of  accepting
its  premisses  and  yet  denying  its  conclusion  ?  Logicians
have  universally  believed  there  was  none,  until  Mr.  Alfred
~  Sidgwick's  epoch-making  criticism  broke  through  the  very
centre  of  the  Formalist  position.1

The  c  last  infirmity  of  even  the  most  faultless  syllogisms/
as  he  says,  is  '  liability  to  the  defect  technically  called
(-ambiguity  of  the  middle  term*  (cf.  Chaps.  XV,  §  2,  XXIII,
§  3).  And  as  this  '  defect '  will  be  found  to  be  incurable,
and  inherent  both  in  the  form  and  in  the  use  of  the
Syllogism  as  such,  it  seems  clear  that  no  disputant
need  ever  be  compelled  by  the  mere  form  of  any
syllogism  to  accept  its  conclusion.  He  can  always
retort — '  No,  your  syllogism  is  null  and  void  ;  there  is  an
ambiguity  in  your  Middle  ;  and  so,  though  I  quite  admit
your  premisses  separately  and  in  the  abstract,  they  are
fallacious  in  their  combination,  and  your  conclusion  does
not  hold.'

1  See  especially  The  Use  of  Words  in  Reasoning,  chap,  ii,  §  13,  and  chap,  iv,
§  28.


xvi THE  THEORY  OF  THE  SYLLOGISM 199

It  is  astonishing  that  to  so  simple  and  so  deadly  an
objection,  which  goes  straight  to  the  heart  of  the  Syllogism,
Formal  Logic  should  have  attempted  no  reply ;  the
explanation  probably  is  that  though  Mr.  Sidgwick's  point
was  so  simple  it  was  too  novel  for  logicians  to  grasp.  A
real  novelty  has  to  be  born  many  times  over  before  some
minds  will  consent  to  see  it :  they  cannot  understand
anything  new  until  it  has  grown  old,  which  is  why  they
cling  to  the  belief  that  there  is  nothing  new  under  the
sun.  We  must  try,  therefore,  to  reiterate  the  point  of
Mr.  Sidgwick's  criticism,  and  to  drive  it  home.

The  identity  of  the  middle  term  was,  as  we  saw
(Chap.  XV,  §  2),  admittedly  the  pivot  on  which  the  whole
Syllogism  hinged.  If  it  splits  in  two,  the  whole  argument
goes  to  pieces.  We  also  found  (Chap.  X,  §  10)  that  in  a
significant  judgment  the  '  identity  '  could  never  be  absolute,
but  must  always  mean  the  postulate  of  an  irrelevance  of
differences.  Hence  it  follows  that  the  reality  of  the
identity,  which  the  Syllogism  claims  to  express  in  the
middle  term,  or  otherwise,  the  irrelevance  of  the  differences
which  are  abstracted  from,  must  always  be  open  to
question.  It  must  always  be  possible  to  say — '  this  which
you  have  taken  to  be  an  identity  entitling  you  to  reason
from  one  case  of  "  the  same "  to  another,  is  a  merely
verbal  identity.  There  is  an  important  difference  between
the  two  cases,  which  the  word  slurs  over,  and  your  middle
term  breaks  in  two.'  This  is  in  effect  what  Mr.  Sidgwick
says.

Now,  how  is  Formal  Logic  prepared  to  meet  this
attack  ?  Ordinarily  the  identity  of  the  middle  term  is
postulated  as  a  matter  of  course  on  merely  verbal
evidence  ;  we  are  merely  warned  that  if  the  middle  is
ambiguous,  there  is  no  syllogism.  But  if  the  middle  may
always  be  ambiguous,  is  there  ever  a  syllogism  ?  And
does  a  form  of  words  which  looks  like  a  syllogism  ever
prove  anything?  Manifestly  this  official  explanation
does  not  meet  the  case  where  each  of  the  premisses,  in
ordinary  contexts  and  for  ordinary  purposes,  would  be
true,  and  where  in  consequence  they  would  be  called  true


200  FORMAL  LOGIC


CHAP.


in  the  abstract,  and  regarded  as  applicable  to  the  general
run  of  cases,  but  where,  nevertheless,  when  the  premisses
are  put  together  for  the  purpose  of  drawing  a  particular
conclusion,  one  or  the  other  of  them  ceases  to  be  true  in
that  context,  and  becomes  misleading,  so  that  the  inference
turns  out  to  be  de  facto  wrong.  For  example,  it  may  be
generally  true  that  *  all  men  love  good  stories,'  and
undeniable  that  *  Smith  is  a  man '  ;  yet  the  inference  that
'  therefore  Smith  loves  this  good  story,'  may  be  falsified
in  this  particular  case  by  the  fact  that  the  story  is  told
about  him,  and  that,  therefore,  he  hates  it.  Now  techni
cally  this  result  may  be  ascribed  to  an  ambiguity  of  the
middle  term.1  Smith  is  in  general  a  '  man  '  and,  therefore,
loves  good  stories,  but  he  is  not  a  *  man '  for  the  purpose
of  this  particular  conclusion  ;  and  so  the  sense  of  4  man '
in  the  two  premisses  is  not  the  same,  and  this  vitiates  the
argument.

It  may  easily  be  seen  both  that  any  syllogism  is
exposed  to  the  same  objection,  and  that  Formal  Logic
has  no  means  of  coping  with  it.  For  the  ambiguity  does
not  exist  in  the  form,  nor  in  the  words  of  the  premisses,
nor  even  in  the  premisses  separately  and  in  the  abstract.
The  attempt,  therefore,  to  treat  *  ambiguity  of  the  Middle '
as  formally  *  fallacious '  is  a  failure,  and  (incidentally)
breaks  down  the  whole  distinction  between  'form '  and
'  matter '  on  which  Formal  Logic  rests.  For  whether  in
any  actual  syllogism  the  Middle  is  *  ambiguous '  and  the
argument  therefore  suffers  from  the  formal  defect  of
quaternio  terminorum  or  not,  depends  on  material  know
ledge  of  its  actual  context.  No  amount  of  reflection  on  the
form  of  the  syllogism  will  reveal  the  ambiguity,  because  it
arises  only  when  the  premisses  are  combined  for  the  purpose
of  using  them,  i.e.  of  applying  them  to  a  particular  case.

1  It  may  also  be  called  a  'fallacy  of  accident,'  which  is  not  classified  as  a
formal  fallacy  ;  but  this  does  not  alter  the  fact  that  it  is  the  form  as  such  of  the
Syllogism  which  is  liable  to,  and  the  standpoint  of  Formal  Logic  which  is
responsible  for,  the  result.  Or  otherwise,  it  is  arbitrary  whether  the  ambiguity
of  the  middle  is  described  as  a  '  fallacy  of  accident,'  or  the  form  of  the  Syllogism
is  itself  regarded  as  involving  this  fallacy,  as  Capt.  H.  V.  Knox  would  prefer  to
put  it :  in  either  case  it  is  clear  that  the  Syllogism  argues  a  dicto  simpliciter,  viz.
the  general  rule  laid  down  in  the  major  premiss,  ad  dictum  secundum  quid,  viz.
to  a  particular  application  of  it  (cf.  Chap.  XXIII,  §  5).


xvi THE  THEORY  OF  THE SYLLOGISM 201

And  concerning  the  combining  of  premisses  and  the  con
struction  of  syllogisms  we  saw  that  Formal  Logic  could
tell  us  nothing  (§  5).  It  was  entitled,  nay,  bound,  to
regard  the  subject  as  extra-logical,  because  it  clearly
implies  a  psychological  knowledge  of  the  nature  and
purposes  of  the  makers  of  syllogisms.  Yet  it  now
appears  that  to  leave  men  at  liberty  to  combine  premisses
and  to  construct  syllogisms  as  they  please,  leaves  them
the  power  to  defeat  any  formal  inference  and  to  repudiate
the  authority  of  Formal  reasoning.  Formal  Logic  no
doubt  did  not  perceive  the  far-reaching  consequences  of
its  haughty  refusal  to  concern  itself  with  the  making  of
syllogisms.

The  only  way  of  meeting  a  contention  that  the
application  of  a  syllogistic  form  to  an  actual  case  has
engendered  ambiguity  in  the  middle,  is  not  open  to  Formal
Logic.  It  consists  in  asking  wherein  lies  the  ambiguity
for  the  purpose  of  the  particular  argument,  and  in  denying
that  the  mere  formal  possibility  that  the  postulated
identity  may  not  be  sound  and  that  the  ignored  differ
ences  may  be  relevant,  suffices  in  this  case  to  vitiate  the
argument.  But  this  reply,  of  course,  implies  that  the
argument  is  recognised  to  have  a  purpose,  and  that  we
must  know  it  in  order  to  understand  the  argument.  But
neither  of  these  admissions  can  be  made,  without  giving
up  the  abstraction,  and  destroying  the  ideal,  of  Formal
Logic.

§  7. The  Function  of  the  '  Ambiguity  '

In  the  eyes  of  Formal  Logic,  therefore,  the  ambiguity
of  the  middle  is  a  fatal  and  incurable  defect,  which  utterly
invalidates  and  destroys  the  Syllogism's  claim  to  be
necessarily  true  as  a  matter  of  form.  Nor  would  it  avail
to  attempt  consolation,  and  to  point  to  compensations.
It  could  never  be  brought  to  see  that  in  actual  reasoning
the  so-called  '  defect '  works  out  as  a  safeguard  against
hasty  inference.  It  is  only  for  a  logic  of  real  reasoning
that  the  'defect'  would  disappear.  For  such  a  logic
would  have  grasped  that  it  is  a  condition  of  significant


202  FORMAL LOGIC  CHAP.

assertion  that  a  judgment  should  bear  on  a  real  doubt,
and  that  question-begging  by  means  of  merely  verbal
identities  is  a  constant  danger  to  right  reasoning.  It
would  consequently  see  that  the  syllogistic  form  has  value
only  if,  and  in  so  far  as,  it  serves  to  elucidate  a  disputed
point.  Now,  theoretically,  there  is  always  a  risk  in
arguing  from  one  *  case  '  to  another.  There  are,  and  must
be,  always  differences  between  the  cases,  and  these  must
always  be  ignored,  in  order  to  construct  the  *  identities '
we  reason  with.  There  may  always  be  a  question  whether
we  have  done  right.  The  advantage  of  putting  the
argument  in  syllogistic  form  is  that  experience  shows  that
when  we  have  done  wrong  the  mischief  shows  itself  as  an
ambiguity  in  the  middle  term.  And  in  this  shape  it  may
be  easier  to  detect.  Thus  the  real  value  of  this  possibility
of  ambiguity  is  that  it  raises  in  a  concise  and  crucial  way
the  question  whether  an  argument  is  really  sound.  Its
middle  term  is  always  an  abstraction.  The  abstraction
is  challenged,  and  has  to  be  defended.  It  is  defended  by
showing  that  the  differences  insisted  on  are  not  relevant
to  the  point  at  issue,  and  that  the  identity  is  never
theless  for  that  purpose  sound.  So  the  real  moral  of  the
difficulty  becomes  that  the  meaning  of  the  Syllogism
cannot  be  dissevered  from  its  use,  nor  its  use  from  the
purposes  of  its  users,  and  that  the  contrary  view  refutes
itself  by  rendering  the  abstract  form  unmeaning  and,  even
formally,  '  invalid.'

§  8. The  Claim  to  Novelty

The  Syllogism's  claim  to  novelty  is  by  no  means  new,
but  it  does  not  seem  to  grow  more  convincing  as  it  grows
older.  To  discuss  it  we  must  first  of  all  distinguish
sharply  between  the  questions,  (i)  whether  novelties  can
be  conveyed  in  syllogistic  forms,  and  (2)  whether  the
syllogistic  form  as  such  indicates  how  novelty  may  be
conveyed.  The  former  claim  we  have  admitted  (§  5),
but  it  does  not  help  the  Formal  interpretation  of  the
Syllogism.  As  for  the  second  claim  we  saw  in  Chap.


xvi THE  THEORY  OF  THE  SYLLOGISM 203

XIV  that  novelty  was  essentially  '  psychological/  and
could  not  exist  in  the  *  ideal '  of  completed  knowledge
(§  4),  but  also  that  the  notion  of  a  Formally  *  valid '
inference  was  inherently  unmeaning  (§  5),  because  the  very
notion  of  inferring  implies  the  constructing  of  the  system
of  truths  which  the  notion  of  validity  assumes  to  be  already
completed.  What,  then,  can  it  mean  to  claim  novelty  for
the  conclusion  of  the  syllogistic  form  ?

(1)  There is clearly  a  verbal  difference,  and  this  is
perhaps  all  that  Aristotle  really  meant. For  he  only  said
that  the  conclusion  was  *  other  '  than  the  premisses,  and
abstained  from  calling  it  *  new.' But  Formal  Logic  now
aspires,  however  vainly,  to  be  more  than  verbal.

(2)  Logicians  are  nowadays  agreed  that  the Formal
Syllogism  is  not  an  instrument  of  discovery,  and  that  their
science is not an '  organon ' whereby new truths are
calculated  into  existence  without  dependence  on  experi
ence,  as  was  believed  for  just  about  2000  years,  from  the
third  century  B.C.  to the seventeenth century A.D. In
this sense,  then, novelty is no longer claimed for the
Syllogism.

(3)  The  real  puzzle  about  the  novelty  of  the  conclusion
is  to  understand  how  it  can  possibly  be  compatible  with
its  dependence  on  the  premisses. If  the  dependence  is
to  be  formal,  the  premisses  must  already  contain  the  con
clusion  ;  otherwise  the  conclusion  will  not  follow  from  them
alone,  but  demands  *  material '  knowledge  as  well. But
if  the conclusion already is formally  contained in the
premisses,  how  can  it  possibly  be  new  ? How  can  the
premisses  truly  be  asserted  unless  the  truth  of  the  con
clusion  is  already  known  ? And  does  it  not,  then,  become
a  solemn  farce  to  extract  the  conclusion  from  them,  and
to  exhibit  it  as  something  new  ? If  '  all  men  are  mortal '
and  *  Smith  is  a  man,'  what  is  there  new  in  '  Therefore
Smith  is  mortal '  ? For  unless  it  had  been  known  that
Smith  was  mortal,  it  could  not  truly  have  been  asserted
that  all  men  were  mortal. The  Syllogism,  therefore,  as  a
form  of  reasoning,  seems  necessarily  to  argue  in  a  circle  :
openly  and  officially  the  truth  of  the  conclusion  depends


204  FORMAL  LOGIC  CHAP.

on  that  of  the  premisses  ;  but  the  truth  of  the  premisses
secretly  presupposes  the  truth  of  the  conclusion,  and
assumes  the  point  it  professes  to  prove,  and  the  technical
name  for  such  begging  of  the  question  is  Petitio  Principii
(Chap.  XXIII,  §  4).  Is  such,  then,  the  real  nature  of  the
typical  form  of  '  valid  inference '  ?

§  9.  Is  the  Syllogism  a  Petitio  Principii  ?

The  case  looks  pretty  black,  and  no  extenuating
circumstances  or  technicalities  will  acquit  the  accused.  It
will  not  do  e.g.  to  plead  that  the  fallacy  of  petitio  principii
technically  implies  two  Syllogisms,  or  that  the  premisses
have  been  acquired  successively,  or  that  though  the  con
clusion  follows  necessarily,  it  is  from  the  two  premisses
together  and  not  from  either  of  them  alone,  and  is  not
begged,  because  the  real  inference  lies  in  the  combining
of  the  premisses.  A  consistent  Formal  Logic  can  find  no
way  of  escape  in  any  of  these  directions,  because  it  con
templates  the  Syllogism  only  as  a  completed  form.

Still  it  does  not  despair  of  making  a  defence  even  on
Formal  grounds.

(1)  It admits that  if  the Syllogism  is  construed in
extension,  the  question  is  begged. If  *  all  men  are  mortal '
means  all  the  individual  men,  the  mortality  of  Smith  is
certainly  part  of  the  evidence  for  the  truth  of  the  major
premiss  ; if  it  was  known,  therefore,  there was no real
inference  and  nothing  new  ;  if  not,  it  is  just  the  question
to  be  proved. In neither  case  do  the  premisses really
prove  the  conclusion.

(2)  It  admits  also  that  to  take  the  major  premiss  as
a  definition,  and  so  to  exclude  from  the  kind  or  species
*  man '  any  creature,  however  man-like  otherwise,  who  did
not  possess  the  essential  attribute  of  mortality,  is  only  a
subterfuge  which  does  nothing  but  shift  the  petitio  from
the major  premiss  to  the minor. For if  we say that
Smith  must  be mortal,  because  if  he  is  not,  he  is  not  a
man,  we  beg  the  question  in  calling  him  a  man  ;  or  else
we  are  using  '  man  '  ambiguously,  as  implying  mortality


xvi THE  THEORY  OF  THE  SYLLOGISM 205

ex  vi  definitions  in  the  major  premiss,  but  not  in  the
minor  (cf.  §  6).  On  either  view  the  argument  is  formally
unsound.

All  that  this  defence,  therefore,  brings  out  is  the  power
we  have  of  keeping  our  definitions  technically  '  true  '  by  an
arbitrary  fiat  in  spite  of  the  facts,  and  the  logician  may
even  be  ill  advised  enough  to  point  with  pride  to  frequent
cases  in  the  sciences  where  convenient  '  truths '  have  not
been  sacrificed  to  growing  knowledge.  For  example,  the
truth  that  '  all  swans  are  white '  was  not  upset  by  the
discovery  of  black  swans  in  Australia.  For  science  did
not  judge  fit  to  allow  them  to  blacken  the  spotless
reputation  of  the  genus  Cygnus,  but  accommodated  them
under  another,  as  Chenopis  atrata.  Hence  the  assertion
'  some  swans  are  black '  could  be  triumphantly  refuted
by  *  No,  sir,  this  black  bird  is  not  properly  a  swan  ;
it  may  look  like  one,  but  it  is  Chenopis  and  not  Cygnus?

(3)  The  Formal  Logician,  however,  really  hopes  to
rebut  the  accusation  by  interpreting  the  syllogism  in
intension.  He  does  not  stoop  to  explain  how  his
interpretation,  even  if  true,  would  vindicate  syllogisms
intended  in  extension,  nor  how  he  would  discriminate
valid  reasonings  in  intension  from  invalid  question-beggings
in  extension  by  their  form  alone,  seeing  that  in  form  they
do  not  differ,  and  that  an  appeal  to  their  actual  meaning
involves  '  psychological '  knowledge.  But  still  his  inter
pretation  seems  more  plausible,  and  the  petztzo,  if  it  exists,
is  at  least  less  obvious.

1  All  men  are  mortal,'  then,  properly  means  that  by  a
law  of  nature  mortality  is  an  attribute  of  humanity.
It  is  no  attempt  at  an  exhaustive  enumeration  of  all
men.  Similarly,  the  minor  premiss  is  a  placing  of  an
individual  in  a  class  with  others.  '  Smith  is  a  man '
brings  him  under  the  '  kind  '  to  which  he  belongs,  and
the  conclusion  successfully  attaches  to  him  an  attribute
of  his  kind,  which  otherwise  we  should  not  have  known
he  possessed.

Perhaps,  however,  this  interpretation  also  begs  the
question  in  a  subtler  way.  How  do  we  know  that  because


206  FORMAL  LOGIC


CHAP


Smith  is  a  *  man '  he  possesses  all  the  attributes  of
humanity  ?  And  how  do  we  arrive  at  the  class  *  man  '  ?
And  how  do  we  know  that '  Smith  '  is  rightly  classed  in  it  ?

Of  course  it  is  clear  that  if  it  is  true  that  there  are
real  classes  in  nature  and  we  have  really  discovered  them,
and  if  it  is  further  true  that  all  the  individuals  of  a  class
have  precisely  the  same  attributes,  and  that  every  in
dividual  is  necessarily  provided  with  a  class  and  properly
classified  in  it,  and  if  we  can  know  all  this  for  certain,
*  Smith '  cannot  prove  recalcitrant  to  the  cosmic  order,
and  the  conclusion  about  him  holds.  But  if  these
assumptions  are  not  true,  the  Syllogism  still  remains  a
begging  of  the  question.

Now,  in  fact,  all  these  assumptions  are  false,  or  at  least
extremely  doubtful,  (i)  Even  if  'kinds'  are  real,  and
not  merely  conveniences  of  classification,  as  Darwinism
gives  us  every  reason  to  believe  (Chap.  V,  §  8),  it  can  hardly
be  maintained  that  we  have  completely  discovered  them.
(2)  It  is  certainly  untrue  that  because  an  individual
belongs  to  a  class  for  most  purposes,  he  can  also  have
attributed  to  him  all  the  qualities  found  in  other  members
of  this  class.  A  Papuan  logician  with  a  limited  know
ledge  of  mankind  might  no  doubt  argue  that  because  all
(or  even  some)  *  men '  are  frizzly-haired  black  cannibals,
Smith  was  the  same.  If  we  answered — £  No,  he  need
only  have  the  essential  qualities  of  his  kind,  and  he
happens  to  be  a  fair  straight-haired  vegetarian,'  should  we
not  be  admitting  that  from  the  qualities  actually  found
among  men  a  selection  has  to  be  made?  (cf.  Chap.  V,  §  7).
And  does  not  whoever  makes  a  selection  take  a  risk  ?
May  he  not  select  what  is  *  unessential,'  i.e.  unimportant
for  his  purpose,  and  omit  what  is  essential  ?  If  so,  his
reasoning  is  always  liable  to  go  wrong.  It  may  be  that
to  prove  his  conclusion  he  should  not  have  classified
Smith  in  the  class  '  man,'  but  in  some  sub-class.  And  (3)
to  the  process  of  subdividing  classes  in  order  to  accommo
date  special  '  cases '  there  is  no  theoretic  end.  Smith
may  be  an  individual  so  peculiar,  and  the  purpose  for
which  he  is  being  argued  about  may  be  so  special,  that


xvi THE  THEORY  OF  THE  SYLLOGISM 207

he  will  turn  out  to  be  sui  generis,  like  an  angel,  and  dis
appoint  all  expectations  based  on  his  likeness  to  other
'  men.'  Lastly  (4)  if  it  were  true  that  universal  rules
about  a  'kind'  formed  an  absolute  guarantee  of  the
behaviour  of  every  *  case '  of  the  '  kind/  should  we  not
be  merely  relapsing  into  the  old  dilemma  ?  For  if  we
know  this  to  be  true,  Smith's  submission  to  the  law  of
mortality  tells  us  nothing  new  ;  if  we  do  not  know  it,  is
it  not  assumed  without  a  warrant  ?

It  is  our  duty,  therefore,  to  ask  how  much  of  all  this
the  logician  may  be  supposed  to  know  when  he  asserts
that  because  Smith  is  a  man  he  is  mortal.  Does  he  know
that  Smith  is  a  '  man  '  for  the  purpose  of  his  conclusion  or
does  he  nott

If  (a)  he  does  know  this,  his  '  inference '  is  a  sham,
and  his  result  is  nothing  new.  For  ex  hypothesi  he  already
knows  that  Smith's  case  comes  under  the  law,  that
1  humanity '  is  predicable  of  him  and  likewise  *  mortality.'
There  was  no  need,  therefore,  to  make  a  syllogism,  to
appeal  to  his  humanity  to  prove  his  mortality ;  he  knew
all  along  that  mortality  was  among  Smith's  attributes.

If  (b)  he  does  not  know  that  Smith's  case  comes  under
the  law,  but  thinks  it  possible  that,  by  some  divine  grace
or  wonderful  discovery,  Smith  has  been  enabled  to  evade
it,1  he  begs  the  question.  For  he  assumes  that  because
Smith  is  in  many  other  respects  like  the  men  who  die,  he
too  is  bound  to  die.  But  this  is  the  very  point  to  be
proved.  The  question  was — Is  the  likeness  of  the  right
kind  and  sufficient  to  warrant  the  inference  ?  Are  the
differences  really  irrelevant?  It  is  no  proof  of  this  to
assert  that  there  is  some  likeness.  Because  Smith  is  like
enough  to  other  '  men '  to  be  called  '  man,'  it  does  not
follow  that  he  is  like  enough  to  be  called  ' mortal.'  If
this  be  the  true  meaning  of  the  syllogistic  form,  viz.  that
a  *  case  '  of  a  '  rule '  (or  *  law  '  or  {  universal ')  is  *  proved  '
to  be  no  exception  to  the  general  rule,  by  assuming  that
the  rule  applies  to  it,  then  this  last  interpretation  of  the

1  Cf.  Cardinal  Newman's  argument  about  Elijah  in  the  Grammar  of  Assent
p.  280.


208  FORMAL  LOGIC  CHAP.

Syllogism  makes  it  the  supreme  example  of  a  shameless
Petitio  Principii.


§  I  o. The  Real  Meaning  of  Novelty

The  demand  for  novelty,  therefore,  cannot  be  Formally
sustained.  If  the  Syllogism  yields  novelty,  it  begs  the
question.  If  it  disclaims  novelty,  it  becomes  vain  repeti
tion.  As  a  form,  therefore,  it  is  either  futile  or  false,
and  Formal  Logic  is  just  as  incapable  of  giving  a  real
meaning  to  the  demand  for  novelty  as  to  the  demands  for
necessity  and  truth.

The  simple  reason  for  its  fiasco  is  that  it  has  refused
to  consider  anything  but  the  form  of  inference,  and  has
abstracted  from  its  matter,  its  maker,  its  making,  and  its
purpose,  without  seeing  that  it  was  thereby  abstracting
from  its  meaning.  It  has  contemplated  only  the  com
pleted  form  and  asked  no  questions  as  to  how  and  why
it  was  formed.  Had  it  inquired  into  this,  it  would
speedily  have  found  that  its  embarrassments  were  of  its
own  making.

In  actual  reasoning  the  primary  fact  about  a  Syllogism
(as  about  any  other  sort  of  real  inference  '  valid  '  or  invalid)
is  that  it  has  to  be  made.  If,  therefore,  we  condescend  to
study  actual  thought,  we  have  to  study  its  making.  Its
premisses  have  to  be  asserted  and  combined,  and  motives
have  to  be  felt  for  asserting  and  combining  them.  Now,
it  may  often  happen  that  we  effect  combinations  of
premisses  which  surprise  us,  and  strike  us  as  novel.  They
may  strike  others  equally.  But  whether  we  or  others,
some  or  all,  appreciate  the  novelty,  does  not  alter  its
character.1  It  is  in  all  cases  '  psychological ' ;  and  it  is
over  when  the  inference  is  over.  The  inference  is  over
when  the  premisses  have  been  brought  together.  That  is
the  real  achievement  of  thought ;  the  conclusion  follows,
as  a  matter  of  course,  or  of  verbal  '  necessity.'  In  other
words,  any  one  can  see  that  it  'must  be  drawn,  and  that

1 '  Logical '  novelty  would  thus  seem  to  mean  only  inference  which  strikes  all
minds  as  novel.


xvi THE  THEORY  OF  THE  SYLLOGISM 209

it  was  contained  in  the  premisses.  Of  course,  if  this  tense
is  ignored  and  the  conclusion  is  antedated,  the  novelty
disappears  and  the  inference  becomes  unintelligible.
Inability  to  understand  inference  is  thus  part  of  the  price
Formal  Logic  has  to  pay  for  abstracting  from  the  time-
relations  in  actual  thought  (cf.  Chap.  IX,  §  2).  What,  then,
remains  for  it  to  contemplate  ?  What  remains  after  the
inferring  is  dead  and  done  with  is  not  the  real  inference,
but  only  its  defunct  *  form  '  in  words.  The  '  form  '  does
not  contain  novelty,  because  it  does  not  contain  meaning.
It  is  a  form  for  meaning ;  its  meaning  is  potential,  not
actual.  Hence  no  '  analysis '  can  ever  extract  a  meaning
that  has  departed  from  it.  The  real  meaning,  the  real
novelty,  the  real  validity,  lay  in  the  act  of  inferring,  lay
in  the  irretrievable  past,  and  all  this,  for  various  bad
reasons,  Formal  Logic  has  held  to  be  *  extra-logical ' !

We  get  the  same  disappearance  of  novelty  in  the
transition  from  actual  thinking  to  the  '  form,'  when  instead
of  tracing  the  motion  of  thought  from  premisses  to  con
clusion,  we  study  the  opposite  case  of  a  recoil  of  thought
upon  its  grounds.  In  this  case  there  is  no  discovering  or
drawing  of  the  conclusion.  The  conclusion  is  what  we
start  from.  It  is  a  judgment  we  have  made,  for  sundry
psychological  reasons,  which  has  now  to  be  supported
'  logically.'  Naturally  the  novelty  now  does  not  lie  in
the  '  conclusion,'  but  in  the  grounds  which  may  be  given
for  it.  The  problem,  therefore,  is  to  find  premisses  which
will  prove  it.  But  is  it  not  as  serious  an  indictment  as
can  well  be  imagined  of  the  Formal  *  analysis '  of  the
reasoning  that  it  should  not  distinguish  between  these
two  cases,  the  finding  of  the  conclusion  and  the  finding
of  the  premisses,  but  should  confound  the  forward  and
the  backward  movement  of  thought,  simply  because  in
the  completed  *  form,'  when  the  movement  has  ceased,
they  are  indiscernible  ?

Once  we  have  disabused  our  minds  of  the  idea  that
the  Formal  standpoint  anywhere  gets  in  touch  with  actual
meaning,  we  can  easily  rehabilitate  the  syllogistic  forms.
Once  they  are  supplied  with  the  flesh  and  blood  of  human

P


210  FORMAL  LOGIC


CHAP.


thinking,  they  become  alive  and  capable  of  answering  our
questions.  We  begin  to  see  how  they  must  be  interpreted
so  as  not  to  beg  the  question,  and  that  when  alive  they
are  without  exception  '  valid/  Thus  even  our  hackneyed
example  of  Smith's  mortality  would  be  validated  in  all
its  meanings  if  it  ceased  to  be  taken  as  a  defunct  form
and  were  made  to  occur  in  actual  thinking.  All  that  is
necessary  in  each  case  to  give  it  a  real  meaning  is  that
it  should  have  been  generated  by  a  real  question  and  have
a  bearing  on  a  real  doubt  in  a  real  context.  According
as  the  question  our  syllogism  is  designed  to  test,  i.e.  its
actual  meaning,  is  whether  Smith  is  as  other  men,  whether
the  definition  of  *  man '  is  correct,  or  whether  a  *  case '
of  a  '  kind '  necessarily  has  a  certain  attribute  because
the  '  kind '  in  general  has  it,  the  words  of  the  syllogism
have  to  be  interpreted  differently.  But  under  none  of
these  interpretations  does  the  real  argument  either  become
otiose  or  beg  the  question.

(1)  Taking  it  in  extension, '  all  men  are  mortal '  means
'  all  those  whose  death  has  been  recorded '  and  does  not
include  Smith  (who  is  still  alive),  nor,  therefore,  beg  the
question. *  Smith '  here  stands  for  a  new  case  which  has
not  been  examined r,  and  it  is  of  course  always  thinkable
that he should prove discrepant. There is always a
question whether  a  rule which has been derived from
experience  of  past cases will bear extension  to  a  new
case. And there is also raised the general question,
Why  should the future  resemble  the past  ? which has
posed  all  philosophers  ever  since  it  was  first  put  to  them
by  Hume.

(2)  The  same  doubt  about  the  conformity  of  the  '  case  '
to  its  supposed  *  law '  also  underlies  the  interpretation  of
the  major  premiss  as  a  definition. Clearly,  if  it  is  part  of
the  definition  of 'man'  to  be  mortal,  then,  if  a  'man'  appears
whose  mortality  is  doubtful,  e.g.  a  '  ghost '  called  by  its
'  medium  ' '  Smith,'  his  humanity  also  is  disputable. But  so
also  is  the  correctness  of  the  definition  of  '  man.' After
all,  definitions  are  meant  to  apply  to  cases,  and  if  they  do
not  they  become  useless  and  are  ultimately  discarded  as


xvi THE  THEORY  OF  THE  SYLLOGISM 211

mistaken. So  if  cases multiplied  in  our experience  of

*  men '  who  were  also  *  ghosts/  a  question  would  arise  of
whether  it  was  more  convenient  to  deny  them  the  name  of

*  man  '  because  of  their  annoying  lack  of  an *  essential '
human  attribute,  or  to  call  men  '  men '  irrespective  of  the
liability  to  die. And  the  raising  of  this  question  would
be  the  real  meaning  of  the  syllogism.

(3)  Similarly,  the  third  interpretation  presupposes  a
real  question  whether  and  how  far  the  general  character
of  a  '  kind '  can  be  taken  as  a  guarantee  that  each  of  its
members  will  be  found  on  any  particular  occasion  to
possess  that  character  in  full.  This  is  a  very  real  and
most  important  question  for  science,  and  it  is  inexcusable
that  logic  should  ignore  it,  or  try  to  evade  it,  by  pointing
to  the  merely  verbal  fact  that  after  all  it  is  called  a  '  case '
of  some  *  kind.'  It  is,  then,  always  a  real  doubt  which
makes  sense,  and  is  the  sense,  of  the  argument  that  Smith
must  be  mortal  because  he  is  human.

In  all  these  cases,  therefore,  it  is  so  far  from  true  that
the  syllogism  demands  absolutely  true  and  certain  pre
misses  that  it  actually  becomes  formally  invalid  if  the
reasoning  is  supposed  to  proceed  from  such.  When  we
dig  below  the  verbal  form,  every  real  syllogism  (as  opposed
to  the  defunct  form  of  words  which  Formal  Logic  substitutes
for  the  real  reasoning)  is  the  expression  of  an  experiment
which  tests  the  consistency  of  our  knowledge.  The
conclusion  states  what  on  the  strength  of  previous
knowledge  we  had  a  right  to  expect ;  but  it  has  to  be
confirmed  in  fact.  And  if  we  had  not  felt  it  to  be
doubtful,  we  should  not  have  reasoned.  Actually,  there
fore,  the  syllogism  does  not  beg,  but  raises  a  question.
And  this  perhaps  reveals  the  deepest  difference  between
the  different  types  of  logic.  For  while  Formal  Logic
seems  to  hold  that  all  questions  may  be  begged  with
impunity,  a  critical  study  of  actual  thinking  inclines  us
rather  to  the  conviction  that  all  questions,  or  at  all
events  all  logical  questions,  should  be  raised.


212  FORMAL  LOGIC


CHAP.


§11.  Non-syllogistic  Forms

The  main  struggle  with  the  Formal  analysis  of  the
Syllogism  is  over.  It  is  clear  that  it  makes  nonsense
of  the  Syllogism,  alike  as  an  instrument  of  thought  and
as  a  test  of  reasoning.  If  the  Formal  account  deserves
to  be  called  even  '  an  ex  post  facto  analysis  of  a  valid
reasoning/  it  must  at  least  be  added  that  it  '  analyses '
the  Syllogism  into  what  can  neither  be  reasoning  nor
valid  nor  significant  Once  this  is  clearly  grasped  the
questions  that  remain  become  subsidiary,  and  may  be
treated  briefly  as  corollaries.

For  example,  there  is  a  much-debated  question  among
logicians  as  to  the  '  validity '  of  certain  non-syllogistic
forms,  and  as  to  whether  they  should  be  recognized  as
such  or  reduced  to  syllogisms.  The  discussion  will  not
be  found  to  throw  much  fresh  light  on  anything  but
the  mental  confusion  which  Formal  Logic  naturally
engenders.

It  is  argued  in  the  first  place  that  syllogistic  reasoning
is  properly  confined  to  terms  standing  in  the  relation  of
subject  and  predicate,  and  that  there  are  other  relations
which  are  not  *  naturally  '  thus  interpreted  but  nevertheless
give  rise  to  conclusions  just  as  cogent  as  those  of  the
Syllogism.  Consider  for  example,  (i)  A  is  equal  to  B,
B  is  equal  to  C,  .*.  A  is  equal  to  C  ;  (2)  A  is  east  of
B,  B  is  east  of  C,  /.  A  is  east  of  C  ;  (3)  A  is  earlier
than  B,  B  is  earlier  than  C,  /.  A  is  earlier  than  C  ;  (4)  A
is  as  bright  as  (or  in  tune  with)  B,  B  is  as  bright  as  (or
in  tune  with)  C,  .*.  A  is  as  bright  as  (or  in  tune  with)
C;  (5)  A  is  brother  to  B,  B  is  brother  to  C,  .'.  A  is
brother  to  C.  The  relations  which  mediate  these  infer
ences  are  various,  but  none  of  them  are  syllogisms.  Yet
how  can  the  truth  of  their  conclusions  be  denied  ?

Of  course  the  strictest  sect  of  Formal  logicians  will
have  none  of  them.  They  will  reply  :  *  Certainly  your
examples  show  that  we  often  neglect  to  reason  in
syllogistic  forms.  But  that,  of  course,  we  have  always
admitted  and  deplored.  That  was  just  why  we  were  so


xvi THE  THEORY  OF  THE  SYLLOGISM 213

insistent  that  the  "  naturally "  slipshod  reasonings  of
common  men  should  be  formulated  exactly  in  syllogisms.
And  though  these  curiosities  of  yours  are  not  syllogisms,
they  can  all  be  turned  into  such  with  ease.  Thus  (i)
becomes  "things  which  are  equal  to  equals  are  equal
(Euclid)  ;  now  A  and  C  are  things  equal  to  an  equal  (B),
/.  A  and  C  are  equal."  You  may  call  this  clumsy  if  you
like,  and  less  obvious  than  the  original  reasoning.  But
this  sort  of  objection  may  often  be  raised  to  scientific
accuracy,  and  does  not  intimidate  us.  Moreover,  we  are
astounded  that  you  should  urge  it.  For  have  you  not
until  now  been  good  Formal  logicians,  abjuring  the  study,
and  despising  the  practices,  of  human  minds,  and  keeping
your  logic  untainted  by  psychology  ?  Yet  what  are  your
objections  to  clumsiness  and  obscurity  but  appeals  to
psychological  prejudices  ?  We  are  thoroughly  ashamed
of  you,  and  grieved  that  after  so  long  upholding  the
banner  of  pure  thought  you  should  exhibit  so  hideous
and  illogical  a  backsliding.

*  We  beg  to  point  out  to  you  furthermore  that  your
"  non- syllogistic  forms"  are  not  formally  valid,  but
manifestly  depend  on  material  knowledge.  They  really
rely  on  such  empirical  relations  as  the  order  of  things
in  space  and  time,  and  the  facts  of  human  relationship.
These  relations  are  very  familiar,  and  so  the  inferences
are  quite  easy  and  evident.  But  this  again  is  psychology
and  not  logic.  And  that  it  is  not  their  form  which  valid
ates  them  is  shown  by  the  fact  that  other  reasonings
in  precisely  the  same  forms  are  not  valid  at  all.  If  we
were  to  argue,  for  example,  "  A  was  contemporary  with  B,
B  with  C,  therefore  A  with  C,"  or  "A  is  cousin  (or  friend)
to  B,  B  is  cousin  (or  friend)  to  C,  therefore  A  is  cousin
(or  friend)  to  C,"  the  inference  would  not  hold.'

The  human  inconsistencies  of  Formal  logicians  do  not
concern  us,  for  we  have  consistently  maintained  that
Formal  Logic  was  nothing  if  it  was  not  consistent,  and
that  it  must  always  be  taken  in  its  best,  i.e.  most  con
sistent,  form.  But  we  may  proceed  to  point  out  that  the
recognition  of  non-syllogistic  forms  of  valid  inference,


2i4  FORMAL  LOGIC  CHAP.

whether  or  not  it  can  formally  be  justified,  in  no  way
removes  the  exceptions  we  have  taken  to  the  whole
Formal  treatment  of  Inference.  It  was  the  Formal
notion  of  valid  inference  as  such  that  we  objected  to  as  an
unintelligible  and  unmeaning  caricature  of  actual  thinking.
And  so  we  find  that  these  new  *  forms '  are  also  open  to
objections.  Not  only  do  they  involve  just  the  same
difficulties  when  we  try  to  account  formally  for  their
formation  (cf.  §  5),  but  they  are  just  as  much  exposed
to  '  Sidgwick's  ambiguity '  (§  6),  and  just  as  liable  to
break  down  in  the  application.  Lastly,  if  they  are  taken
as  *  forms,'  like  the  Syllogism,  they  became  tautologies
or  beggings  of  the  question.

Thus,  though  in  the  abstract  it  is  undeniable  that
'  things  equal  to  the  same  thing  are  equal  to  each  other/
because  that  is  the  definition  of  'equality/  it  is  not
necessarily  true  in  the  application.  Psychologists  have
ingeniously  laboured  to  show  us  that  though  A  and  B
and  also  B  and  C  may  be  so  equal  that  no  human  sense
and  no  human  instrument  can  detect  any  difference,
there  may  yet  be  a  perceptible  difference  when  A  and  C
are  directly  compared.  *  A  is  east  of  B,  B  is  east  of
C,  .*.  A  is  east  of  C '  may  be  logically  true  on  the  face
of  it,  but  it  is  not  necessarily  true  on  the  face  of  the
earth.  No.  3  is  not  necessarily  true,  if  the  beings  who
judge  whether  '  A  is  earlier  than  C '  have  a  different
'  time-span '  from  those  who  discriminated  the  order  of
A  and  B  and  of  B  and  C  ;  and  No.  4  has  the  same  flaw
as  No.  I.  No.  5  is  positively  false  if  'brother'  be  taken
to  include  half-brother,  and  so  forth  in  all  the  cases  that
might  be  quoted.

To  show  that  these  forms  do  not  escape  the  charge
of  tautology  or  petitio^  it  should  be  sufficient  to  point
out  that  their  reasoning  may  always  be  reduced  to  a
syllogistic  form.  Thus  '  A  =  B,  B  =  C,  .'.  A  =  C  '  reduces
to  '  all  things  which  =  B  =  C,  A  =  B,  .'.  A  =  C.'  It
would  be  strange  indeed  if  so  slight  an  alteration  in  the
form  could  turn  a  bad  argument  into  a  good  one.  But
we  may  also  point  out  directly  that  the  original  form


xvi THE  THEORY  OF  THE  SYLLOGISM 21$

presupposes  either  ( I )  that  we  have  discovered  that  there
is  such  a  thing  as  '  equality '  by  examining  the  cases  like
A,  B,  C,  and  that  the  argument  really  raises  (or  begs)  the
question  whether  A,  B,  and  C  are  like  enough  to  be
taken  as  *  equal ' ;  or  (2)  that  we  have  defined  it  so  that
the  '  conclusion '  follows  (which  is  in  this  case  the
favourite  retort,  for  when  A  does  not  in  fact  =  C,  we  say,
then  A  and  B  and  B  and  C  were  not  *  equal ');  or  (3)  we
have  ourselves  made  A,  B,  and  C  '  equal '  by  abstracting
from  their  differences.

Taken  as  forms,  therefore,  these  reasonings  are  just
as  vulnerable  as  the  Syllogism.  Valid  reasoning  may
appear  in  these  forms  just  as  they  may  appear  as
syllogisms,  but  they  are  not  valid  because  of  their  form.
No  reasoning  is  valid  for  any  other  but  *  material '
reasons,  and  there  are  no  means  of  establishing  its
Formal  truth  apart  from  its  truth  in  point  of  fact.

§  12. The  Argument  from  Particulars

The  question  whether  it  is  possible  (or  legitimate)  to
reason  from  *  Particulars '  is  also  one  which  has  greatly
exercised  logicians.  It  is  urged,  on  the  one  hand,  that
men  habitually  argue  straight  from  facts  to  facts  without
formulating  any  general  rule,  and  on  the  other,  that  the
particulars  they  use  are  never  mere  particulars,  but  always
conceived  as  cases  of  some  '  universal,'  and  that  this
alone  renders  the  process  logically  respectable  (or  even
psychologically  possible  ?).

Both  parties  seem  to  confuse  the  issue.  Is  the
question  whether  we  do  argue  from  *  facts '  to  '  facts '  or
whether  we  ought  to?  Or  is  it  whether  'facts'  are
'  mere  particulars '  or  '  universals  '  ?  At  any  rate,  if  it
is  a  fact  that  we  often  argue  from  facts  to  facts,  it  is  a
fact  of  psychology.  How  then  is  this,  as  such,  a  proof
that  it  is  a  procedure  logically  to  be  recommended?
Yet  if  it  is  a  psychological  fact,  how  can  it  be  proved
not  to  occur  by  the  fact  that  it  is  logically  reprehensible  ?
The  argument  from  particulars  should  be  shown  to  be


216  FORMAL  LOGIC  CHAP.

psychologically  impossible,  and  then  its  logical  claims,
whatever  they  are,  would  vanish  of  themselves.  Or  both
parties  should  at  least  consider  the  possibility  that  this
mode  of  reasoning  plays  a  part  in  the  formation  of
our  beliefs  without  being  logically  '  valid.'  Again,  the
disputants  do  not  seem  to  mean  the  same  things  by
their  terms.  The  c  facts '  of  the  one  are  not  the  c  mere
particulars '  of  the  other,  and  when  the  others  call  '  facts '
*  universals '  because  they  involve  abstraction,  they  do
not  surely  mean  that  they  are  not  to  be  distinguished
from  other  universals.  Again,  the  alternatives  they  offer
do  not  seem  to  be  exhaustive.  It  may  be  that  we
neither  argue  from  mere  facts  nor  from  mere  universals,
but  from  what  we  may  regard  as  both  or  neither,  and
that  neither  party  has  conceived  aright  the  nature  of
reasoning.

These  possibilities  seem  worth  developing.  We
certainly  seem  often  to  reason  from  particular  '  facts,'
and  yet  we  probably  take  them  as  *  cases '  of  an  un
expressed  rule.  Again,  we  often  reason  from  rules,  but
yet  we  conceive  them  as  intrinsically  related  to  cases.
If,  that  is,  a  rule  did  not  apply  to  any  case,  it  would  be
regarded  as  false  (or  properly  '  unmeaning ').  Thus  the
'  cases  '  always  seem  to  be  cases  of  a  rule,  and  the  '  rules  '
to  be  rules  for  cases.  The  *  facts  '  or  '  cases '  and  the
1  universals '  or  '  rules '  seem  to  be  relative  to  each  other,
and  it  follows  that  the  antithesis  between  them  is  a
mistaken  one.

And  this  will  seem  quite  natural  if  we  inquire  how
we  ever  came  to  formulate  the  cases  and  the  rules.  Both
are  then  seen  to  arise  from  the  same  sort  of  operation  on
the  flux  of  experiences.  We  select  both  our  '  facts '  and
our  '  rules,'  and  in  both  cases  take  a  risk  that  our  selection
has  not  been  a  good  one,  but  has  missed  the  relevant,  and
included  the  irrelevant,  for  our  cognitive  purpose.  It  is
natural,  therefore,  that  '  facts '  and  '  laws J  should  play
into  each  other's  hands.  Neither  are  the  *  facts '  so
absolute  as  the  one,  nor  are  the  '  laws '  so  independent  of
the  facts  as  the  other,  party  thought.


xvi THE  THEORY  OF  THE SYLLOGISM 217

But  if  we  conceive  their  relation  thus,  it  certainly  does
not  seem  obvious  why  we  should  not  argue  from  so-
called  '  particulars  '  or  '  facts.'  The  '  facts  '  we  argue
from  are  understood  to  be  *  cases '  of  laws  ;  so  are  the
'  facts '  we  argue  to.  But  why  should  those  '  laws '  be
stated  ?  They  can,  of  course,  be  stated  on  demand  ;  but
how  does  this  add  to  the  value  of  the  reasoning  ?  If  we
argue  directly  from  the  cases,  we  argue  by  analogy,  and
if  it  is  to  be  a  good  analogy  the  cases  must  be  relevant  ;
if  we  formulate  a  rule,  we  merely  state  the  ground  of  this
same  analogy.  The  analogy  does  not  become  better  by
being  formulated  as  a  universal  rule,  nor  is  its  risk
diminished.  For  after  all  the  rule  was  drawn  from  a
study  of  cases,  and  it  can  never  in  advance  quite  guarantee
its  application  to  the  next  case  (§  10).  Whoever  then
fails  to  see,  or  to  trust,  the  analogy  between  the  two
cases,  may  equally  repudiate  the  rule  with  its  assumption
that  the  cases  are  '  identical ' ;  whoever  has  faith  in  the
rule  may  just  as  well  trust  to  the  analogy  between  the
cases,  if  he  sees  it.  Indeed,  it  is  often  psychologically
much  easier  to  see  analogies  than  to  formulate  rules,  and
most  of  our  rules  have,  like  the  Common  Law  of  England,
probably  originated  in  such  perceptions.  Also,  to  abstain
from  formulating  the  rule  will  check  the  premature
hardening  of  the  rule.  To  assert  dogmatically,  therefore,
that  we  must  not  argue  from  fact  to  fact,  is  simply  to
recur  to  the  old  delusion  that  the  form  of  a  reasoning
as  such  can  make  it  good  ;  whereas  all  it  can  do  is  to
reveal  its  nakedness,  and  to  show  where  (if  anywhere)  its
claim  may  be  attacked.

§  1 3. The  Syllogistic  Dicta

A  similar  treatment  will  dispose  also  of  the  vexed
question  about  the  value  of  the  syllogistic  Dicta.  Aris
totle  believed  that  it  was  somehow  an  additional  pro
tection  to  the  validity  of  syllogistic  reasoning  if  it  were
represented  as  dependent  on  a  universal  principle.  Hence
originated  the  Dictum  de  Omni  et  Nullo,  and  the


218  FORMAL  LOGIC  CHAP.

alternatives  and  disputes  which  it  provoked.  To  the
Dictum,  which  was  usually  formulated  to  the  effect  that
'  whatever  is  predicated  of  a  whole  is  predicated  of  any
part  of  it/  it  was  objected  (i)  that  it  only  applied  to
reasonings  in  extension,  and  (2)  that  it  only  applied  to
reasonings  in  the  First  Figure.  For  the  first  defect  the
Formal  remedy  appeared  to  be  more  Dicta — why  not
manufacture  as  many  as  science  might  require,  Dicta  for
reasonings  in  intension  and  for  each  Figure  ?  So  Formal
Logic  buttressed  itself  with  further  technicalities,  the  Nota
Notae  for  reasonings  in  intension,  and  Dicta  de  Diverse,
de  Exemplo,  and  de  Reciproco  for  the  second,  third,  and
fourth  Figures,  etc.  Of  the  second  defect  Aristotle's  cure
was  (as  we  saw  in  Chap.  XV,  §  4)  *  Reduction ' ;  his
successors  made  various  attempts  to  represent  the
4  imperfect '  Figures  as  independent,  and  to  show  that
certain  reasonings  were  '  naturally '  (i.e.  psychologically)
formulated  in  them.

But  the  fundamental  questions  were  never  raised,
whether  any  Dictum  was  psychologically  '  natural/  or
logically  necessary  and  valuable  at  all.  For  to  have
raised  these  would  have  been  to  raise  the  question
whether  the  value  of  an  argument  depended  on  its  form
or  on  its  *  matter.'  And  this  would  have  been  too
revolutionary.

Yet  it  may  plainly  be  contended  (i)  that  if  the  formal
validity  of  an  argument  is  not  apparent  in  itself,  it  is  not
rendered  more  apparent  by  being  restated,  more  obscurely
and  cumbrously,  in  a  *  dictum/  and  (2)  that  it  is  quite
possible  and  reasonable  to  admit  the  argument  in  a
particular  case,  without,  therefore,  consenting  to  consider
or  admit  it  as  a  universal  rule.

(i)  If  any  one  chooses,  like  the  late  'Lewis  Carroll/
to  be  heretical  enough  about  syllogistic  forms  to  deny
that  because  he  has  accepted  the  premisses  of  a  formal
syllogism  he  must  also  accept  the  conclusion,1  what  means
has  Formal  Logic  to  compel  him  ?  His  position  can  only
be  assailed  with  another  formal  syllogism,  which  he  can,

1  Cf.  Mind,  N.S.,  iv,  p.  278.


xvi THE  THEORY  OF  THE  SYLLOGISM 219

of  course,  consistently  deny  also  ;  while  to  suppose  that
he  must  surrender  to  any  dictum,  which  merely  enunciates
the  principle  he  is  contesting,  in  a  more  general  form,  is
clearly  too  nai've.  Nor  can  a  Formal  logician  appeal  to
his  feelings  as  a  man  and  brother  not  to  be  so  unkind.
For  this  would  be  another  disgraceful  lapse  into
psychology,  unworthy  of  the  lofty  detachment  of  Formal
Logic.

(2)  Commoner  perhaps,  but  quite  as  unanswerable,
would  be  the  second  sort  of  objector.  It  is  certainly
easier  psychologically  to  see  that  if  all  men  are  mortal
any  man  must  be  mortal,  than  that  c  whatever  falls  under
the  condition  of  a  rule  falls  under  the  rule,'  or  even  to
grasp  that  the  two  arguments  are  meant  to  mean  the
same  thing.  But  would  any  one  who  admitted  the  first
necessarily  be  bound  to  admit  the  second,  or  even
reasonably  do  so  ?  Would  not  a  critical  and  cautious
mind  reasonably  balk  at  a  request  to  commit  itself  to  a
sweeping  principle  of  unknown  application,  merely  because
the  principle  had  seemed  to  it  to  work  in  a  particular
case  ?  Is  it  not  surely  more  reasonable  to  inquire  first
what  other  cases  the  principle  is  intended  to  cover,  and
whether  there  may  not  be  discovered  limits  to  its
applicability  ?

In  point  of  fact  the  objector  would  be  quite  right.
For  the  question  of  the  validity  of  a  principle  can  never
be  wholly  dissevered  from  that  of  its  application.  It  is
never  valid  merely  as  a  '  form.'  The  form  may  always
break  down  under  the  strain  of  application  to  a  fresh
case  (§  6).  For  the  rule  must  always  be  extended  to  a
*  case '  of  which  the  conformity  is  not  certain^  if  the
argument  is  to  be  significant  (§  10).  Hence  we  must
always  be  prepared  to  admit,  after  the  experiment,  that
the  rule  '  did  not  really  apply/  or  that  the  case  '  was  not
really  a  case.'  To  ask  us  to  surrender  this  right  of
correcting  the  errors  in  our  rules  and  predictions  in  the
light  of  experience,  which  is  so  necessary  to  the  actual
use  of  syllogistic  reasoning,  is  to  ask  us  to  cease  to  be
critical.  The  plea  that  by  admitting  a  principle  in  one


220  FORMAL  LOGIC


CHAP.


case  we  have  admitted  it  in  all,  is  an  attempt  to  cheat  us
out  of  a  recognition  that  circumstances  alter  cases  and
that  cases  must  be  considered  on  their  own  merits.
Formal  Logic,  of  course,  does  not  mean  to  be  dishonest
when  it  thus  asks  us  to  pledge  ourselves  in  advance  to
a  multitude  of  dubious  applications  ;  it  only  wants  to
simplify.  But  its  '  simplification '  is  only  plausible  so
long  as  no  attempt  is  made  to  go  beyond  verbal  forms
into  the  meaning  of  actual  reasoning.  The  importance
attached  to  the  syllogistic  Dicta  is  thus  a  measure  of  the
extent  to  which  it  is  desired  to  reduce  reasoning  to
unmeaning  *  forms.'

§  14. Conclusion

It  is  time  to  sum  up  our  results.  The  question
throughout  has  been  whether  the  Syllogism  should  be
regarded  as  a  pure  form  of  valid  inference,  or  as  an
instrument  of  actual  reasoning.  The  result  of  our  inquiry
seems  pretty  decisive.  The  notion  of  valid  inference  has
evaporated  (§§  8-9),  and  in  its  Formal  sense  the  Syllogism
is  formally  invalid  and  actually  unworkable  (§  10).
Thus  it  has  resulted  from  the  formal  interpretation  of  its
function  (i)  that  the  Syllogism  could  not  itself  secure
the  truth  of  its  premisses,  but  could  only  demand  them,
and  that  the  truth  of  all  its  conclusions  was  in  consequence
conditional.  (2)  The  '  necessity  of  thought,'  which  it  pro
fessed  to  display,  lay  merely  in  an  ex  post  facto  reflection
on  the  completed  form,  and  did  not  exist  in  the  actual
reasoning.  (3)  The  actual  construction  of  syllogisms  had
to  be  declared  extra-logical,  because  (4)  the  notion  of
valid  inference  was  void  and  Inference  as  such  was  extra-
logical.  (5)  Even  intrinsically,  no  conclusion  of  a  syl
logism  need  be  admitted  as  a  matter  of  form,  because
it  was  always  possible  to  accuse  its  Middle  of  ambiguity,
and  to  this  charge  no  formal  answer  could  be  given.  (6)
Formally  the  Syllogism  was  either  a  Petitio  Principii  or  a
tautology,  according  as  it  did,  or  did  not,  claim  novelty
for  its  conclusion.  (7)  The  non-syllogistic  forms  were  no


xvi THE  THEORY  OF  THE  SYLLOGISM 221

better  than  the  syllogistic.  (8)  Neither  the  passage
through  a  universal  rule  nor  the  appeal  to  universal  Dicta
added  anything  to  the  real  force  of  an  argument.

In  the  end,  therefore,  Formal  Logic  can  be  said  to
vindicate  the  theoretic  function  of  the  Syllogism  as  little
as  to  leave  it  a  wide  sphere  of  practical  usefulness.  Its
account  of  the  Syllogism  no  more  makes  it  an  '  ex  post
facto  analysis  of  a  valid  argument '  than  it  is  an  applic
able  method  of  drawing  conclusions.  For  it  is  not
a  correct  analysis  of  any  actual  reasoning.  As  an
analysis  it  commits  the  double  atrocity  of  both  sup
pressing  the  true  account  of  reasoning  and  of  offering
in  its  stead  another  which  is  wholly  fictitious  and  false.
What  does,  in  fact,  generate  and  hold  together  any  actual
inference  is  the  personality  of  the  man  who  draws  it  in  a
particular  context,  and  the  nature  of  his  intelligence,
interests,  purposes,  and  ends  ;  its  value  is  determined  partly
by  its  relevance  to  these,  partly  by  the  social  impression
it  makes  on  others  whose  thinking  is  similarly  personal.
But  all  these  actual  connexions  of  thought  Formal  Logic,
though  it  cannot  deny  their  existence,  feels  bound  to  ignore
on  principle.  Lest,  however,  the  drawing  of  inferences
should,  in  consequence,  become  wholly  unintelligible,  it
proceeds  to  substitute  for  the  real  connexions  '  logical '
connexions,  which  could  not  possibly  draw  the  inference
and  whose  efficacy  is  wholly  imaginary.  It  was  shown  in
§  5  that  the  *  logical  necessity '  of  a  syllogism  was  never
a  psychic  fact,  and  only  became  visible  in  the  deceptive
light  of  logical  reflection,  after  the  reasoning  was  over,  and
by  dint  of  abstracting  from  the  real  process  of  thought.
It  is,  in  fact,  an  illusion  which  inheres  only  in  the  words
of  the  inference,  and  can  have  a  meaning  only  for  those
who  accept  the  (potential)  meaning  of  words  as  sufficient
to  satisfy  the  ambitions  of  Logic.  But  with  real  reasons
and  real  meaning  Logic  has,  on  this  interpretation,  nothing
whatever  to  do.

On  the  second  theory  the  Syllogism,  in  order  to
acquire  real  meaning,  has  to  sacrifice  many  ancient  claims.
It  can  no  longer  pretend  either  (i)  to  yield  absolute


222  FORMAL  LOGIC  CHAP,  xvi

certainty  and  to  relieve  the  mind  from  further  questionings  ;
or  (2)  to  compel  assent  ;  or  (3)  to  account  for  the
course  of  thought ;  or  (4)  to  c  demonstrate '  conclusions
with  *  absolute'  certainty;  or  (5)  to  be  undeniable  in
virtue  of  its  mere  form  ;  or  (6)  to  be  the  only  form
in  actual  use  ;  or  (7)  that  the  use  of  forms  makes  an
argument  ipso  facto  valid,  because  (8)  it  is  no  longer
tenable  to  think  that  mere  forms  have  any  meaning.

But  after  renouncing  all  these  claims  the  Syllogism
still  retains  an  important  critical  function.  All  arguments
can  be  put  in  syllogistic  form,  with  more  or  less  manipula
tion.  Now,  to  put  an  argument  in  syllogistic  form  is  to
strip  it  bare  for  logical  inspection.  We  can  then  see
where  its  weak  points  must  lie,  if  it  has  any,  and  consider
whether  there  is  reason  to  believe  that  it  is  actually  (i.e.
materially)  weak  at  those  points.  We  thereby  learn
where  and  for  what  the  argument  should  be  tested
further.  No  one  who  realizes  how  difficult  it  is  to  test  a
claim  to  truth  will  underrate  the  importance  of  this
function,  or  repine  that  the  notions  of  '  formal  truth  '  and
'formal  proof  should  have  turned  out  to  be  wholly  illusory.
Nor  will  any  one  who  realizes  that  real  thinking  pre
supposes  real  doubting  marvel  at  the  paradox  that  the
Syllogism,  which  was  invented  to  set  doubts  at  rest,  should,
in  fact,  bring  out  what  points  are  doubtful.


CHAPTER XVII

HYPOTHETICAL AND DISJUNCTIVE FORMS
§  I . The  Relation  of  Conditional  Reasoning  to  Syllogism

IN elaborating the Forms of Syllogism the ordinary

logician  commonly  conceives  himself  to  have  achieved  his

aim  of  formulating  the  ideal  of  thought He  tends  in

consequence  to  regard  the  occurrence  of  reasonings  which

appear to make use of hypothetical and disjunctive

judgments  as  quite  a  secondary  fact,  and  to  treat  their

forms  as  a  sort  of  appendix  to  the Syllogism. For  the

purpose  of  reasoning  is  tacitly  supposed  to  be  the  making

of  a  dogmatic  categorical  affirmation  which  possesses  a

logical  necessity  from  which  there  is  no  appeal. Now,  as

the  hypothetical  and  disjunctive  reasonings  show  by  their

very  form  that  to  begin  with,  at  any  rate,  they  fall  short

of  this  ideal,  it  seems  imperative  to  prove  their  '  validity '

by  converting  them  into  the  categorical  form  by  various

verbal  devices,  such  as  the  transformation  of '  if  A  is  B,

B  is  C,'  into  *  the  case  of  A's  being  B  is  the  case  of  B's  being

C.' On  the  other  hand,  the  better  sort  of  Formal  logicians,

confusing  the  logical  problem  of  a  judgment's  hypothetical

form  with  the  ontological  problem  of  its  application  to

reality,  i.e.  confusing  logical  and  real  validity,  and  dimly

perceiving  that  the  latter  must  in  a  significant  judgment

always  be  open  to  a  certain doubt,  are  wont  to  debate

rather whether '  truly scientific ' universal propositions

should  not  be  interpreted  as  hypotheticals,  and  whether

hypothetical and disjunctive judgments do not rank

epistemologically higher than the simple categorical

223


224  FORMAL  LOGIC  CHAP.

judgment,  because they  are more clearly  expressive of
necessities  of  thought.

To  us  neither  of  these  attitudes  will  seem  satisfactory.
For  we  have  abandoned  the  idea  that  the  Syllogism  is
either  able  or  intended  to  be  a  machine  for  yielding
categorical  certainty,  nor  do  we  regard  an  air  of  dogmatic
assurance  as  the  end-all  and  be-all  of  true  science.  Dog
matic  certainty  is  the  end  of  science,  precisely  in  the
sense  in  which  death  is  the  end  of  life.  The  very  life  of
science  and  the  source  of  its  infinite  progress  depends  on
the  fact  that  its  '  truths '  are  never  so  '  absolutely '  certain
that  it  may  not  strive  to  improve  them.  It  must  always
value  a  living  truth  above  a  dead  certainty,  and  whether  the
forms  used  are  '  categorical J  or  '  hypothetical '  the  meaning
to  be  expressed  is  always  relative  to  a  doubt  or  a  dispute
or  an  alternative.  If,  then,  the  real  purpose  and  use  of  the
Syllogism  is  to  test  doubtful  cases,  its  categorical  form
ceases  to  seem  a  ground  for  claiming  superiority,  and  is
really  irrelevant.  If  all  reasoning  is  *  hypothetical '  in  the
sense  of  being  tentative,  a  difference  in  form  ceases  to  be
an  infallible  index  to  a  difference  in  meaning.  It  is  no
longer  necessary  to  hold  that  there  must  be  more  than
a  verbal  difference  behind  the  forms  '  if  two  things  are
equal  to  the  same  thing  they  are  equal  to  each  other '  and
1  all  things  equal  to  the  same  thing  are  equal  to  each  other/
Neither,  on  the  other  hand,  shall  we  feel  it  our  duty  to
blur  the  distinctions,  which  are  found  in  the  actual  meaning,
in  the  opposite  way.  The  state  of  mind  which  naturally
expresses  itself  as  a  categorical  assertion  is  different  from
that  which  expresses  itself  hypothetically,  and  we  shall
insist  that  the  psychological  questions  as  to  an  assertor's
state  of  mind  can  and  must  be  distinguished  from  onto-
logical  questions  about  the  real  validity  of  his  assertions.
And  we  shall  as  usual  reproach  both  parties  with  a
Formalism  which  is  too  superficial  and  devoid  of  psycho
logical  subtlety  to  penetrate  to  the  real  meaning  of  the
reasoning,  and  to  express  its  actual  varieties,  or  even  to
'  analyse '  adequately  the  forms  themselves.


xvn  HYPOTHETICALS  AND  DISJUNCTIVES  225

§  2.  Hypothetical  Syllogisms

Hypothetical  reasonings  are  classified  under  two  forms,
( I )  the  Modus  Ponens,  or  '  mood  that  posits '  the  ante
cedent,  and  is  constructive^  and  (2)  the  Modus  Tollens^
which  sublates  the  consequence,  and  is  destructive.  In  both
the  *  major  premiss '  is  the  same  and  alone  hypothetical,
and  states  the  condition  or  Antecedent  from  which  the
Consequent  follows.  The  c  minor  premiss  '  is  categorical
(if  a  categorical  conclusion  is  to  be  drawn)  in  both,  and
affirms  the  antecedent  in  the  Modus  Ponens,  and  denies
the  consequent  in  the  Modus  Tollens.  The  quality  of  the
conclusion  is  the  same  as  that  of  the  minor.

Thus  we  get —

(1)  If  A  is  B,  it  is  C, or  If  A  is  B,  C  is  D, or  If  A  is  not  B,  it  is  not  C,
now  A  is  B  now  A  is  B  now  A  is  not  B

.-.  A  is  C.  .'.  C  is  D.  .\A  is  notC.

(2)  If  A  is  B,  it  is  C, or  If  A  is  B,  C  is  D, or  If  A  is  not  B,  it  is  not  C,
now  A  is  not  C  now  C  is  not  D  now  it  is  untrue  that  A  is  not  C

.  • .  A  is  not  B.  .  • .  A  is  not  B.  .  • .  it  is  untrue  that  A  is  not  B.

Clearly,  then,  either  the  Antecedent  is  affirmed  or  the
Consequent  is  denied.  The  opposite  procedure  is  held  to
be  fallacious,  viz.  either  to  affirm  the  Consequent  or  to  deny
the  Antecedent.  The  reason  given  is  that  in  *  if  A  is  B,
C  is  D,'  the  Antecedent  is  not  said  to  be  the  sole  condition
of  the  truth  of  the  Consequent.  Hence  the  Consequent
may  occur  on  other  grounds  ;  e.g.  '  If  you  hang  the  dog
he  dies/  does  not  imply  that  the  dog  may  not  be  got
rid  of  in  other  ways.  Similarly,  because  the  Antecedent
gives  a  false  reason,  it  does  not  follow  that  the
Consequent  will  not  ensue.  From  the  truth  that  *  if  a  dog
is  beaten  he  will  howl '  it  does  not  follow  that  if  he  is
not  beaten  he  will  not  howl.  We  cannot  infer,  in  short,
from  'if  A  is  B,  C  is  D'  that  '  if  C  is  D,  A  is  B.J  In
other  words,  the  relation  is  not  reciprocal.

By  converting  the  reasonings  into  categorical  form
they  may  be  shown  to  be  analogous  to  syllogistic  fallacies.
For  whereas  affirming  the  Antecedent  reduces  to  a
syllogism  in  Barbara,  and  denying  the  Consequent

Q


226  FORMAL  LOGIC


CHAP.


to  one  in  Camestres,  affirming  the  Consequent  produces
an  '  Undistributed  Middle,'  and  denying  the  Antecedent
an  *  Illicit  Process  of  the  Major.'

The  case  of  A's  being  B  is  a  case  of  C's  being  D,
This  is  a  case  of  C's  being  D
.'.  This  is  a  case  of  A's  being  B.

The  case  of  A's  being  B  is  a  case  of  C's  being  D,
This  is  not  a  case  of  A's  being  B
.'.  This  is  not  a  case  of  C's  being  D.

§  3.  Disjunctive  Syllogisms

A  disjunctive  syllogism  is  defined  as  consisting  of  a
disjunctive  major  premiss,  a  categorical  minor,  and  a  cate
gorical  conclusion.  Two  '  valid  '  moods  are  recognized,
viz.  the  Modus  Tollendo  Ponens  and  the  Modus  Ponendo
Tollens,  but  of  each  several  forms  are  admissible.  Thus —

(i)  A  is  either  B  or  C,  (2)  Either  A  is  B  or  C  is  D,

It  is  not  C  (or  not  B)  C  is  not  D  (or  A  is  not  B)

.-.  It  is  B  (or  not  C).  .'.  A  is  B  (or  C  is  D).

(3)  Either  A  or  B  is  C,  (4)  A  either  is  B  or  it  is  not  C,

B  is  not  C  (or  A  is  not) A  is  not  B
/.  A  is  C  (or  B  is).  .'.  A  is  not  C.

(5)  A  either  is  not  B  or  it  is  not  C,
It  is  untrue  that  A  is  not  B
/.  A  is  not  C.

They  would  all  be  counted  as  cases  of  Tollendo  Ponens •,
because  the  denial  of  the  one  alternative  leads  to  the
assertion  of  the  other.  Similarly  the  following  are  cases
of  Modus  Ponendo  Tollens.

(i)  A  is  either  B  or  C,  (2)  Either  A  is  B  or  C  is  D,

A  is  B  (or  C)  A  is  B  (or  C  is  D)

.-.  A  is  not  C  (or  B).  .'.  C  is  not  D  (or  A  is  not  B).

(3)  Either  A  or  B  is  C,  (4)  A  either  is  B  or  it  is  not  C,

A  is  C  (or  B  is)  A  is  B

.-. B  is  not  C  (or  A  is  not). .'.  it  is  untrue  that  it  is  not  C.

(5)  A  either  is  not  B  or  it  is  not  C,
A  is  not  B
.'.  it  is  untrue  that  it  is  not  C.


xvn  HYPOTHETICALS  AND  DISJUNCTIVES 227

It  is  manifest  that  in  both  these  disjunctive  Moods
the  cogency  of  the  reasoning  depends  on  the  assumption
that  the  alternatives  expressed  in  the  disjunction  are
strictly  exclusive.  In  practice  this  is  the  real  difficulty  of
disjunctive  reasoning,  because  it  so  often  turns  out  that
other  alternatives  have  been  overlooked ;  but  Formal
Logic  simply  postulates  this  ideal  disjunction,  without
regard  for  the  fact  that  '  either  .  .  .  or '  are  frequently  not
intended  to  be  strict  alternatives,  and  that  sometimes
this  vitiates  the  disjunctive  argument,  and  sometimes
strengthens  it.  For  instance,  if  it  is  argued  that  '  if  he
is  either  a  fool  or  a  knave,  he  will  do  this,'  then  if  he  is
both  fool  and  knave,  he  may  do  this  a  fortiori.

§  4. The  Dilemma

The  practical  difficulties  in  the  use  of  these  forms
recur  in  the  Dilemma^  which  is  the  prettiest  and
dialectically  the  most  effective  form  of  conditional
Syllogism.  It  consists  in  driving  a  disputant  from  a  con
dition  he  has  admitted  to  a  choice  between  one  of  two
alternatives  (the  c  horns '  of  the  dilemma),  both  of  which
are  repugnant  to  him.  Technically  this  form  is  said  to
be  composed  of  a  compound  hypothetical  major  premiss,
a  disjunctive  minor,  and  a  disjunctive  (or  categorical)
conclusion.  There  are  a  number  of  varieties,  constructive
or  destructive^  simple  or  complex^  but  there  is  no  new
principle  involved  in  them.  The  following  examples
will  symbolize  the  Complex  and  the  Simple  Constructive
Dilemmas.

(1)  If  A  is  B,  C  is  D,  and  if  E  is  F,  G  is  H,
But  either  A  is  B  or  E  is  F

.'.  either  C  is  D  or  G  is  H.

(2)  If  A  is  B,  C  is  D,  and  if  E  is  F,  C  is  D,
But  either  A  is  B  or  E  is  F

.-.  either  way  C  is  D.

The weak point in the structure of dilemmas is
usually  in the disjunction. If alternatives have  been


228  FORMAL  LOGIC


CHAP.


overlooked,  a  counter-dilemma  can  be  constructed  where
with  to  rebut  the  first,  as  is  best  illustrated  in  the
classical  tale  of  Protagoras  and  Euathlus.  Euathlus
had  promised  to  pay  half  of  the  fee  he  owed  to
Protagoras  for  his  instructions  in  the  noble  art  of  self-
defence  in  the  Athenian  law-courts,  on  winning  his  first
case  ;  but  as  he  merely  wished  to  be  prepared  for  attacks,
he  did  not  for  some  time  give  Protagoras  an  opportunity
of  claiming  his  fee.  Protagoras,  growing  impatient  and
suspicious,  finally  sued  him,  and  expected  to  win  with  a
Simple  Constructive  Dilemma,  arguing  that  if  the  court
decided  in  his  favour  Euathlus  would  have  to  pay  by
order  of  the  court ;  if  the  court  decided  against  him,
Euathlus  would  have  to  pay  under  the  agreement,  but
that  the  court  would  either  decide  for  him  or  against,  and
therefore  in  either  case  Euathlus  would  have  to  pay.  His
pupil,  however,  rebutted  him  with  a  retort  that  he  would
not  have  to  pay,  either  under  the  agreement  if  he  lost
his  case,  or  by  order  of  the  court  if  he  won  it,  and  the
court,  with  a  truly  Greek  delight  in  dialectics,  proved
them  both  wrong  by  postponing  judgment  for  a  hundred


years.1


§  5. Criticism


(i)  We  may  begin  our  criticism  of  these  Formal
doctrines  by  reverting  to  the  question  mooted  in  §  i
as  to  whether  hypothetical  reasoning  can  properly  be
rendered  in  the  categorical  form.  Now  it  is  evident  in
the  first  place  that  the  verbal  transformation  of 'if  into
'the  case  of  cannot  be  supposed  to  alter  the  real  nature
of  the  reasoning.  A  little  reflection  on  the  psychological
facts,  moreover,  will  show  that  not  only  is  there  a
difference  between  hypothetical  and  categorical  reasoning,,
but  that  there  are  far  more  differences  than  Formal  Logic
takes  into  account.  It  is  theoretically  possible  to  go
on  developing  hypothetical  consequences  indefinitely,

1  Theoretically  this  was  a  third  alternative  to  a  decision  in  favour  of  either
party,  though  practically  it  was  a  decision  in  favour  of  Euathlus.  In  equity,  of
course,  Protagoras  ought  to  have  been  paid.  He  could,  however,  have  got  his
money  by  first  bringing  a  frivolous  action  against  Euathlus  and  losing  it.


xvn HYPOTHETICALS  AND  DISJUNCTIVES  229

arguing,  e.g.,  that  if  A  is  B,  C  is  D,  and  if  C  is  D,  E  is  F,
and  that,  therefore,  if  A  is  B,  E  is  F,  and  if  E  is  F,  G  is
H,  etc.  ;  but  even  the  most  assiduous  spinner  of  hypotheses
would  at  last  grow  impatient  and  desire  to  come  to
something  that  could  be  affirmed  categorically  and
found  to  be  true  or  false,  if  it  were  only  to  test  the
value  of  his  theorizing.  It  follows,  therefore,  that  a  real
psychical  difference  is  (or  may  be)  blurred  in  reducing
hypothetical  to  categorical  form.

(2)  The  real  objection  to  the  Formal  hypothetical  is
rather  that  it  is  itself  '  ambiguous '  (i.e.  subject  to  plurality
of  senses),  and  therefore  blurs  further  distinctions  which
are  often clearly intended and understood in actual
reasoning,  and  are  indeed  familiar  enough  to  have  won
recognition  in language. But  here  we  must  distinguish.
(a)  The hypothetical form may be used to express
merely  the  logical  dependence  of  consequence  on  ground
without  any  intention  of  expressing any doubt — doubt
actually  felt  by  the  assertor. '  If  you  are  bitten  by  a  cobra,
you  die,'  may  merely  convey  scientific  information  about  the
venom of  a species of  snake. But (£) it  is likewise
possible that a *  hypothetical ' may be intended to
express  a doubt. '  If  I have been bitten by  a cobra,
I  shall  die/  may  be  an  expression  of  acute  agony. Again,
it is  perfectly  possible  to  express  varying  intensities  of
doubt. The form itself  shows, e.g., differences in the
extent  and  character  of  the  doubt  between  '  if  A  is  B  it
is  C,'  <  if  A is  B  it  will  (or  would)  be  C,J  '  if  A  were  B  it
would  be  C,'  '  if  A  had  been  B  it  would  have  been  C/
etc. Clearly, if the dogmatic interest had not so
completely  carried  the  day  against  the  psychological,  it
would  have been possible to study these forms, even
Formally.

(3)  It  deserves  to  be  recorded  to  the  credit  of  Formal
Logic  that  it  should  have  recognized  as  a  '  fallacy '  the
tendency  to take as reciprocal the relation of ground
and consequence,  and to argue that because  a  certain
consequence  was  found  a  certain  ground  for  it  must  be
there,  or  that because  a  certain ground  was illusory a


230  FORMAL  LOGIC


CHAP.  XVII


certain  consequence  could  not  occur.  But  unfortunately
the  Formal  theory  of  Induction  at  once  proceeds  labori
ously  to  undo  this  good  effect  by  arguing  that  the  true
1  cause '  must  always  be  conceived  to  be  in  reciprocal
relation  with  its  effect  (Chap.  XX,  §§  7,  9).

(4)  Similarly  it  seems  vain  to  insist  that  disjunctions
must  be  complete,  and  that  '  A  is  either  B  or  C '  should
always  have  '  or  both  or  neither '  added  to  it,  if  we  are  not
to  be  warned  that  in  fact  the  disjunctions  we  argue  from
are  never  absolute  and  are  taken  to  be  adequate  for  the
purpose  of an  inference  at  our  peril,  nor  to  be  allowed  to
confess  that  we  are  often  enough  quite  aware  of  this  and
do  not  mean  them  to  be  absolute.

(5)  This  last  fact,  it  may  be  pointed  out,  renders  the
Formal convention that '  either  ...  or ' shall mean
strict  exclusion  highly  arbitrary.

(6)  Just  as  there  was  a  question  whether  the  hypo
thetical  could  be  reduced  to  categorical  form,  so  it  may
be debated whether the whole  sense  of a disjunctive
can be rendered in hypothetical form. *  A is either
B  or  C  '  may  be  '  analysed '  into  *  if  A  is  B,  it  is  not  C  ;
if  A  is  C,  it  is  not  B  ;  if  A  is  not  B,  it  is  C  ;  if  A  is  not
C,  it  is  B/ But  this  assemblage  of  hypothetical  seems
to  have  eliminated  the  categorical  assertion  of  a  choice
between  B  and  C  altogether.

We  may  conclude,  then,  that  the  Formal  account
of  Conditional  reasoning  exhibits  no  point  where  its
doctrine  is  more,  and  several  where  it  is  considerably
less,  than  verbal.


CHAPTER XVIII
THE PROBLEM OF INDUCTION

§  I . The  Origins  of  the  Problem  of  Induction

THE  problem  of  Induction  forces  itself  upon  the  attention
of  the  Formal  logician  in  two  distinct  ways,  which  after
wards  turn  out  to  be  closely  connected.

(1)  We  noted  in  Chap.  XVI,  §  4,  that  the  syllogistic
form  never  guaranteed  the  truth  of  the  premisses  of  any
argument,  and  suggested  that,  therefore,  the  logician  had
no  right  to  assume  that  his  premisses  were  ever  materially
true,  and  ought  to  admit  that  the  truth  of  his  conclusions
was  always  more  or  less  hypothetical  and  questionable.
Unless,  therefore,  the  logician  is  willing  to  admit  also  that
he  has  no  need  to  assume  material  truth,  it  is  plain  that
there  arises  a  logical  problem  of  pressing  importance,  as
to  how  true premisses  are  to  be  arrived  at  in  point  of
fact. The  logician's  name  for  what  he  conceives  to  be
the  solution  of  this  problem  is  Induction.

(2)  A  second  source  of  Induction  is  to  be  found  in
the problem of reasoning from 'facts/ This too is
indisputably a real problem, although logicians have
differed  greatly  in  their  manner  of  conceiving  the  nature
and  value  of  *  fact '  and  its  relation  to  *  theory '  or  *  law/
For  it  seems  undeniable  that  men  do  somehow  habitually
reason from,  and  about,  what  they  are  pleased  to  call
'  facts.' Hence  the  logician  felt  bound  to  consider,  criticize,
and  regulate  (or  condemn)  the  practice.

These  two  sources  of  Inductive  Logic  were,  moreover,
brought  into  connexion  by  the  fact  that  upon  one  of  the

231


232  FORMAL  LOGIC  CHAP.

two  traditional  theories  of  reasoning  about  facts  the  true
premisses,  which  syllogistic  proof  demanded,  were  to  be
ultimately  secured  to  it  by  generalization  from  *  facts,'
whereas  the  other,  though  it  denied  that  the  validity  of
ultimate  principles  rested  on  correct  observation  of  facts,
yet  asserted  that  it  was  only  in  a  process  of  meditation
upon  facts  that  the  *  self-evident '  truth  of  principles  could
be  grasped  by  human  intelligence.  In  addition  to  these
two  traditional  ways  of  getting  premisses  for  the  Syl
logism  there  has  recently  been  put  forward  a  view  that
ultimate  principles  are  essentially  postulates,  based  on
'  facts/  though  not  proved,  but  only  suggested,  by  them.

We  get  then  two  questions  which  underlie  the  Theory
of  Induction  :

(a]  How  are  the  principles  which  form  the  premisses  of
syllogistic  reasoning  ultimately  to  be  obtained  ?

To  this  there  are  three  answers  which  have  to  be
examined,  viz.  (i)  by  Intuition,  (2)  by  Generalization,
(3)  by  Postulation.

(b}  How  are  we  to  reason  from  facts  ?

But  before  we  go  into  these  questions,  we  have  to
realize  what  a  very  embarrassing  defect  springs  up  in
the  Syllogism  so  soon  as  an  attempt  is  made  to  use  it
in  actual  reasoning.  For  once  it  ceases  to  be  regarded
as  a  mere  form  and  is  brought  into  the  context  of  an
argument,  it  is  reduced  to  an  almost  desperate  position
by  the  question,  What  proof  have  you  of  the  truth  of
your  premisses  ?

§  2.  Does  Syllogistic  Proof  involve  an  Infinite  Regress  ?

(i)  Dialectically  the  situation  seems  hopeless,  as  we
might  have  expected  from  Chap.  XVI,  §§  5  and  13.
No  disputant  need  ever  capitulate  before  the  most
imposing  syllogism.  For  the  wretched  thing  always
has  two  feet  of  clay.  It  stands  on  its  premisses,  and
to  upset  it,  it  is  enough  to  question  one  of  them.
*  Certainly/  he  can  say,  '  your  syllogism  is  quite  crushing
if  its  premisses  are  sound.  But  are  they  ?  I  notice  that


xviii THE  PROBLEM  OF  INDUCTION 233

you  have  not  proved,  but  only  asserted  them,  and  expected
me  to  admit  them.  I  am  not  contentious,  but  should  like
to  see  you  prove  them  ;  but  to  show  that  I  am  only  desirous
of  understanding  the  true  nature  of  syllogistic  reasoning,
I  will  only  ask  you  to  prove  your  major.'  This  forces
the  syllogizer  to  propound  another  syllogism  in  order  to
prove  his  major  premiss,  only  to  find  that  his  new  major
is  once  more  questioned,  and  he  is  called  upon  to  '  prove
that'  The  process  can  be  carried  on  until  the  ingenuity
and  the  temper  of  the  syllogizer  are  exhausted,  and  it  is
usually  before  the  fourth  repetition  of  *  prove  that '  that
even  the  sweetest-natured  logician  lapses  into  language
which  cannot  possibly  be  regarded  as  logically  relevant.

Another  and  in  some  ways  more  plausible  way  of
playing  the  same  trick  on  the  logician  is  to  assert  that
his  major  premiss  '  begs  the  question/  and  to  repeat
this  charge  whatever  ulterior  ground  he  may  adduce
for  it.

Clearly,  therefore,  syllogistic  reasoning  is  in  practice
ex  concessis ;  and  if  it  is  to  be  used,  disputants  must
agree  to  accept  certain  principles  as  unquestionable  and
decisive,  at  least  for  purposes  of  the  argument.

(2)  The  difficulty,  however,  is  not  merely  dialectical.
It  is  in  a  way  inherent  in  the  logical  form.  For  it  is
after  all  incidental  to  the  form  of  the  Syllogism  that  it
has  two  premisses,  which  may  be  false,  and  which  must
be  proved  true  for  the  conclusion  to  stand.  If,  therefore,
any  doubt  is  raised,  genuinely  or  perversely,  about  the
truth  of  the  premisses,  both  premisses  must  be  proved.
And  this  they  can  only  be  by  two  other  syllogisms,  each
of  which  again  has  two  questionable  premisses.

Thus  to  prove  the  two  premisses  four  further  true
premisses  are  required,  and  at  the  next  step  eight,  and
so  on  ad  infinitum.  The  number  of  true  premisses  is
doubled  at  each  step,  and  they  must  always  be  new  ones
as  well.1  For  if  we  tried  to  use  one  which  had  already

1  E.g. If  we  tried  to  argue  (i)  all  B  is  C,  (2)  all  D  is  C,  (3)  all  D  is  B,

all  A  is  B,  all  B  is  D,  all  A  is  D,

.  • . all  A  is  C,  . ' .  all  B  is  C,  .  • .  all  A  is  B,
'  all  D  is  B  '  would  be  an  '  invalid  '  conversion.


234  FORMAL  LOGIC  CHAP.

been  used  and  questioned,  we  should  clearly  be  arguing
in  a  circle.

The  form  of  the  Syllogism,  therefore,  implies  an
infinite  regress  when  we  try  to  use  it,  and  this  should  be
where  Formal  Logic  leaves  the  matter,  with  the  addition
perhaps  of  a  warning  that  this  shows  how  much  too
sacred  forms  are  to  be  used.  Instead  of  which  Formal
Logic  has  always  repudiated  this  result.  It  has  always
here  yielded,  quite  inconsistently,  to  the  temptation  of
becoming  a  theory  of  knowledge,  and  suggested  methods
of  cutting  short  the  regress.

To  declare  that  our  ultimate  premisses  are  *  self-
evident  '  intuitions  is  one  such  method.  To  declare  that
we  must  ultimately  accept  '  facts '  is  another.  But  both
are  arbitrary  assertions,  unlikely  to  win  assent  and  unable
to  extort  it.

Nor  do  either  of  them  realize  that  the  difficulty  they
attempt  to  meet  really  results  from  an  uncriticized
assumption  as  to  the  nature  of  real  reasoning  which
they  have  both  in  secret  made,  and  which  happens  to  be
wrong.  It  is  assumed  that  *  proof  must  always  start
from  certainty.  From  this  it  follows  that  the  premisses
of  a  demonstration  must  themselves  be  certainly  true,
and  the  pursuit  of  this  initial  truth  backwards  yields  the
infinite  regress  we  have  been  considering.

But  what  if  it  be  not  true  that  to  reason  we  must  have
certainty  ?  What  if  reasoning  be  essentially  experimental,
a  testing  of  hypothetical  premisses  by  the  truth  of  a
conclusion  yet  to  be  observed,  an  attempt  to  see  whether
experience  will  confirm  conclusions  which  have  been
deduced  from  assumed  premisses  of  doubtful  validity  ?
That  such  is  the  nature  of  actual  reasoning  has  already
been  suggested  (Chap.  XVI,  §§  10,  14),  and  it  utterly  trans
forms  our  problem.  Instead  of  an  infinite  regress,  an
unending  search  for  elusive  '  foundations '  which  are  for
ever  sinking  out  of  our  reach,  we  get  an  infinite  progress^
an  ever-growing  mass  of  confirmations  which  verify  our
premisses  by  the  de  facto  truth  of  the  results  they  have
predicted.  The  Syllogism's  formal  incapacity  to  yield


xvm THE  PROBLEM  OF  INDUCTION 235

'  absolute  proof  thus  turns  out  to  be  really  a  refusal  on
its  part  to  pander  to  the  monstrous  demands  of  a  mistaken
conception  of  knowledge,  and  to  stultify  Science  by  setting
any  limit  to  its  progress.  Moreover,  it  was  precisely  its
faith  in  the  infinite  possibility  of  progress  which  led  Science
to  refuse  its  assent  to  the  Aristotelian  ideal  of  demonstrative
knowledge  (Chap.  XVI,  §  4).  For  clearly,  if  absolutely
certain  premisses  are  neither  obtainable  nor  desirable,  and  if
it  is  enough  that  the  truth  of  premisses  can  be  continuously
verified  by  their  consequences,  why  should  Science  allow
itself  to  be  arrested  by  a  theory  which  begins  by  postu
lating  the  impossible  ?

§  3.  Intuition  as  the  Foundation  of  Induction

Yet  Aristotle  knew  his  business,  and  made  his  Formal
Logic  cohere  far  better  than  it  has  done  since.  His
solution  of  the  problem  of  Induction  has  at  least  the
merit  of  a  high  degree  of  consistency.  He  explicitly
assumed  that  demonstration  starts  from  a  limited  number
of  absolutely  certain  premisses,  of  which  it  is  true  he  has
omitted  to  give  us  a  list,  and  inferred  that  every  science
consists  of  a  limited  number  of  truths.  He  saw  that  to
realize  such  an  ideal  the  infinite  regress  of  premisses  must
somehow  be  stopped.

He  stopped  it  accordingly  by  positing  a  special  faculty
which  he  regarded  as  the  highest,  precisely  because  it  had
to  confer  superior  truth  upon  the  ultimate  principles  of
syllogistic  demonstration.  He  called  it  Intuitive  Reason
(Nous)  and  confined  it  to  gods  and  men.  Its  function
was  to  grasp,  immediately  and  infallibly,  the  first  principles
which,  though  indemonstrable,  were  more  certain  than
anything  deducible  from  them.  Demonstration,  therefore,
always  went  back  until  the  premisses  consisted  of  self-
evident  axioms,  and  then  stopped  as  a  matter  of  course.
A  disputant  who  questioned  an  indemonstrable  axiom
was  politely  told  he  was  '  uneducated.'

In  this  way  Aristotle  got  a  conception  of  Science  as
conveniently  finite  and  artistic  as  his  conception  of  the


236  FORMAL  LOGIC  CHAP.

spherical  cosmos  with  its  divinely-inspired  circular  motion.
But  though  it  was  artistic  it  could  hardly  be  called
critical,  and  *  intuition  '  is  always  a  dangerous  card  to  play,
because  it  can  be  played  in  so  many  ways.  Aristotle's
proof  of  the  existence  of  the  faculty  he  needed  was  simply
dogmatism,  and  of  its  '  infallibility  '  simply  verbalism.  He
simply  fell  back  on  his  definition  of  judgment  as  what  was
capable  of  being  true-or-false  (Chap.  VIII,  §  4)  and  inferred
that  Intuitive  Reason,  not  being  a  judgment,  could  not  be
false.1  Nor  could  there  be  any  doubt  of  its  ability  to
yield  principles,  for  was  it  not  the  faculty  of  principles  ?

At  this  point  Aristotle  was  content  to  leave  matters,
without  attempting  either  to  give  a  complete  list  of  the
principles  he  believed  to  be  guaranteed  by  Intuition,  or
to  discriminate  between  principles  which  seemed  to  have
this  guarantee,  but  were  false,  and  those  which  really  had
it.  Had  the  point  been  put  to  him  he  would,  as  a  true
Formal  logician,  doubtless  have  been  content  with  an  ex
post  facto  confession  that  since  the  *  intuitive '  principle
had  turned  out  to  be  false,  it  had  not  been  guaranteed  by
infallible  *  Reason,'  but  by  some  fallible  imitation.

But  it  is  clear  that  a  critical  Logic  must  examine  the
attempt  to  base  proof  on  intuition  more  thoroughly.  It
is  clear  (i)  that  if  intuition  is  to  be  made  the  criterion
of  self-evident  truth,  the  deliverances  of  '  Intuitive  Reason '
must  be  strictly  discriminated  from  those  of  instinctive
unreason.  It  is  useless  to  say  that  NoO?  is  infallible  if
you  admit  that  there  is  a  pseudo-Novs  which  is  fallible,
from  which  it  cannot  be  discriminated.  Now,  in  point
of  fact,  c  intuitions '  are  not  a  monopoly  of  philosophers.
All  sorts  of  people  are  liable  to  them  and  believe  in
them,  geniuses  (like  Prof.  Bergson  2),  ladies,  and  lunatics
being  particularly  prone  to  them.  The  philosopher,
therefore,  who  relies  upon  intuitions  finds  himself  in
very  various  company,  and  may  be  compelled  to

1  There  seems  to  be  some  confusion  in  this. For  though  a  '  faculty  '  is  not  a
judgment,  yet  it  may  give  rise  to  judgments  ;  and  if  these  are  in  fact  false,  the
faculty  can  hardly  be  deemed  '  infallible.

2  Not  that  he  means  really  the  same  thing  by  his  '  intuition,'  or  that  it  deserves
censure  as  uncritical.


xvni THE  PROBLEM  OF INDUCTION 237

call  in  the  aid  of  a  psychiatrist  in  order  to  decide
which,  if  any,  of  these  *  intuitions '  are  sane  and  sound.
For  it  is  quite  conceivable  that  all  these  intuitions  might
be  insane  obsessions,  from  which  human  minds  could
not  free  themselves,  even  though  they  corresponded  to
nothing  in  the  nature  of  things  and  were  constantly  being
refuted  by  the  course  of  events.

At  any  rate  (2)  it  is  clear  that  as  the  criterion  yields
false  results  as  well  as  true,  it  cannot  be  ultimate.

(3)  Nor  is  it one to  yield concordant results,  even
among philosophers. An exhaustive list of intuitions
has  never  been  compiled  by  any  philosopher,  and  there
have been enormous differences  of opinion. We  have
seen  in  Chap.  X  how  difficult  it  was  to  vindicate  a  meaning
even  for  the  most  obvious  of  these  principles,  the  '  laws '
of Identity and Contradiction. There is hardly an
absurdity  for  which self-evidence  has  not  been claimed  ;
there  is  no  '  self-evident  truth '  which  has  not  been  dis- w
puted. Intuitions  have  proved  false  in  all  the  sciences,  even
in  mathematics.1 Philosophers  have  tried  to  tone  down
the  awkwardness  of  these  facts  by  contending  that an

'  intuition '  need  not  be  known  in  advance  of  the  truth  it
guarantees,  and  that,  therefore,  a  complete  list  of  its  intui
tions  need  not  be  published  in  advance  by  any  science.
This  is,  of  course,  to  postpone  the  day  of  reckoning  until
the  day  of  the  Last  Judgment ;  but  it  yields  no  answer
to  the  question  how  we  are  now  to  discriminate  between
true  '  intuitions '  and  false,  nor  does  it  guarantee  any
particular  intuition  we  may  be  interested  in  alleging.

(4)  The  truth  is  that  the  appeal  to  Intuition  is  to  a
wholly and incurably psychological principle. That a
certain  proposition  strikes  me  as  self-evident  and  certain
and  indemonstrable,  is  a  fact  about  my  mind. That  it
strikes  others  similarly  is  a  number  of  facts  about  their
minds. Even  if  it  could  be  shown,  as  it  cannot,  that  it
is  capable  of  striking  all  other  human  minds,  past,  present,
and to  come,  similarly,  it  would  still  remain a  fact of

1  Prof.  H.  Poincar6  mentions  a  curious  instance.  It  seemed  self-evident
that  there  could  be  a  tangent  to  every  curve,  but  it  was  not  true  (Science  et
mt!thodet  p.  130).


238  FORMAL  LOGIC  CHAP.

human  psychology,  and  be  just  as  much  an  empirical  fact
of  observation  as  any  other.1  In  none  of  these  cases  is
there  any  proof  that  therefore  it  is  true.  It  might  still
be  an  illusion  incidental  to  our  mind's  structure,  just  as
the  convergence  of  distant  parallels  is  an  illusion  incidental
to  our  eye's  structure.  And  for  Formal  Logic  to  base
itself  on  a  psychological  peculiarity  of  disputable  logical
value  seems  the  height  of  inconsistency.

(5)  At  any  rate  logicians  ought  to  see  that  before  they
can  derive  their  principles  from  a  faculty  of  Intuition,
they  ought  to  show  that  this  is  the  only  way  of  account
ing  for  them.  They  make  no  attempt  to  do  this,  and,  in
point  of  fact,  not  only  can  the  facts  they  rely  on  be  ex
plained  otherwise,  but  the  alternative  theories  can  dispose
also  of  the  difficulties  which  confront  the  intuitionist
theory.


§  4. Generalization  as  the  Basis  of  Induction

The  way  of  arriving  at  general  statements  which
commends  itself  most  to  common-sense  is  the  observation
of  fact.  It  is  a  very  familiar  process  even  to  the  least
observant,  and  it  seems  a  matter  of  course  that  if  facts
enough  can  be  observed,  general  statements  can  be
formulated.  Logicians  have  always  been  more  or  less
susceptible  to  this  mode  of  thinking,  and  from  the  first
have  tried  to  base  thereon  an  ideal  method  of  reasoning
from  experience.  The  '  facts,'  when  examined  exhaust
ively,  were  to  yield  the  '  law '  which  governed  them  and
assured  men  of  the  everlasting  recurrence  of  the  *  facts '
exemplifying  the  '  law,'  and  was  thus  to  justify  prediction.
The  only  difficulty  about  the  process  lay  in  the  observa
tion  of  sufficient  facts ;  their  formulation  into  laws
occurred  of  itself.  Nor  was  there  any  difficulty  about
the  facts  ;  facts  were  facts  whatever  might  befall,  the
same  for  every  one  and  to  be  recognized  by  all.  If  only
all  the  facts  could  be  properly  observed,  the  problem  of

1  So  it  is  not,  in  the  end,  even  true  that  any  rationalistic  theory  of  knowledge
«an  avoid  dependence  upon  correct  observation  of  fact.


xvm THE  PROBLEM  OF  INDUCTION 239

the  Syllogism  was  solved  ;  for  the  generalizations  which
embodied  them  could  not  be  erroneous  and  would  provide
the  absolutely  certain  foundations  which  the  Syllogism
needed.  Hence  arose  the  logical  *  ideal '  of  an  exhaustive
and  formally  complete  enumeration  of  facts  or  of  a
4  perfect '  induction  (Chap.  XIX,  §  2).

Not  even  Aristotle  quite  escaped  the  fascination  of
this  ideal  (as  witness  his  formal  conception  of  Induction),
though  he  did  not  detect  its  central  difficulty.  But  it
was  soon  discovered  that  this  difficulty  existed.  How
could  one  make  sure  that  the  enumeration  on  which  the
generalization  rested  was  complete  ?  Did  it  not  pre
suppose  complete  knowledge  of  the  existing  facts,  of
their  past  and  of  their  future  ?  And  were  not  all  these
things  impossible  ?  Supposing  even  that  observation
had  shown  that,  e.g.,  nowhere  in  the  stellar  universe  was
there  a  planet  with  beings  so  like  ourselves  as  to  be
called  *  men '  who  nevertheless  did  not  die,  would  it  be
possible  to  prove  in  this  way  that  '  all  men  are  mortal '  ?
Would  it  not  be  necessary  to  have  equally  extensive
knowledge  of  the  whole  past  ?  And  what  about  the
future?  By  what  magic  does  the  logician  become  the
greatest  of  the  prophets  ?  How  has  he  or  any  other
philosopher  ever  answered  Hume's  question,  *  How  do
we  know  that  the  future  will  resemble  the  past  ?  '  Surely
it  is  evident  that  even  the  most  extensive  observation  of
'  facts '  never  covers  more  than  an  infinitesimal  fraction
of  their  total  number,  and  that  if  the  validity  of  our
*  laws '  rests  on  such  observation,  the  results  must  be
extremely  hazardous.

The  attempt,  moreover,  to  escape  from  the  impossible
task  of  examining  all  the  facts  by  professing  a  belief  in
universal  laws  of  nature  which  uniformly  determine  the
facts  seems  merely  an  evasion.  For  (i)  the  law  is
supposed  to  be  itself  derived  from  experience,  i.e.  from
the  observation  of  what  are  supposed  to  be  its  cases  ;  but
as  the  examination  of  the  cases  can  never  be  assumed  to
be  either  exhaustive  or  correct,  observation  may  always
fail  to  reveal  the  true  law,  and  the  law  accepted  may  be


240  FORMAL  LOGIC


CHAP.


false.  (2)  There  is,  in  consequence,  no  guarantee  that
what  is  said  to  be  the  law  is  the  law,  nor  even  if  it  is  can
it  be  known  to  be.  (3)  Even  if  the  law  had  been  dis
covered  that  held  for  the  existing  order,  there  would  be
no  guarantee  that  the  law  itself  would  not  change,  and
consequently  no  guarantee  for  the  future.  Lastly  (4)  the
very  belief  in  the  existence  of  laws  would  seem  to  demand
justification.

For  the  roots  of  the  mischief  lie  still  deeper.  For  the
inductive  logician,  as  for  common-sense,  the  conceptions  of
*  fact '  and  *  law '  seemed  too  obvious  to  require  explana
tion.  There  seemed  to  be  no  possible  doubt  of  the  inde
pendence  of  facts  or  the  reality  of  laws.  Yet  neither  facts
nor  laws  seriously  pretend  to  be  given  independently  of
the  other,  or  indeed  to  be  given  at  all.  What  we  take
to  be  the  facts  of  nature  depends  on  what  we  conceive  to
be  the  laws  of  nature  ;  and  conversely,  if  we  decide  that
certain  alleged  facts,  hitherto  discredited,  are  really  facts,
we  alter  our  old  laws  or  formulate  new  ones.  Both  facts
and  laws,  moreover,  have  to  be  extracted  from  a  continuous
kaleidoscopic  flow  of  happenings,  which  alone  is  given  as
the  material  out  of  which  the  cosmic  order  is  fashioned.
Until  we  have  decided  where  one  *  fact '  ceases  and
another  begins,  we  have  nothing  that  can  be  viewed  as  a
'  case '  of  any  '  law.'  Clearly,  then,  it  is  not  as  simple  and
easy  to  generalize  *  facts '  as  the  logician  supposed,  just
as  the  sweet  simplicity  of  trust  in  intuitions  may  be
betrayed.

§  5. Postulation  as  the  Source  of  Universal  Propositions

Neither  intuition,  then,  nor  observation  of  facts,  seems
to  yield  general  propositions  in  a  logically  defensible
way.  Yet  it  can  hardly  be  denied  that  in  practice  we
often  rely  both  on  self-evidence  and  on  facts.  Who  but
a  philosopher  would  ever  question  the  intuitive  self-
evidence  of  mathematical  truth,  or  assume  that  events
occur  without  a  *  cause/  or  doubt  the  evidence  of  his
senses  ?  And  would  these  attitudes  be  persisted  in


xvm THE  PROBLEM  OF INDUCTION 241

unless  they  had  somehow  justified  themselves  ?  Clearly,
then,  our  actual  procedure  must  in  some  sense  be  justifi
able,  and  if  Logic  does  not  justify  it,  its  own  account  of
the  matter  becomes  suspect.

It  may  be  suspected  also  that  the  errors  in  both  these
extreme  views  are  the  same.  They  both  seem  to  consider
the  logical  intellect  in  abstraction  from  the  rest  of  the
man  and  to  ignore  the  psychological  side  of  his  nature.
Nor  do  they  seem  to  suspect  that  the  taking  of  risks  and
the  need  of  enterprise  and  active  exertion,  which  are
characteristic  of  our  life,  must  be  reflected  also  in  the
functions  of  our  intelligence.  So  they  accept  their
'  intuitions  '  and  '  facts  '  as  simply  given,  without  inquiry
into  their  genesis  ;  and  then  find  that  they  seem  arbitrary
and  irrational.1  But  if  they  would  only  regard  them  as
gradually  evolved  through  a  long  intercourse  of  our
intelligence  with  reality,  they  might  understand  both
their  rationality  and  their  ratification.  Their  logical
value  does  not  depend  either  on  the  superficial  appear
ance  of  their  '  forms,'  or  even  on  their  psychological
mode  of  genesis,  but  on  their  past  history  and  past
services,  and  to  see  this  is  to  see  that  the  questions  of
origin  and  of  value  must  be  kept  distinct,  and  must
diminish  the  reluctance  to  admit  that  there  exists  a  third
way  of  obtaining  generalizations  which  is  normal  in  our
intelligence.  Formal  logicians  have  overlooked  it,  because
it  is  not  the  sort  of  thing  they  were  looking  for ;  it  does
not  claim  that  its  results  are  valid  on  their  first  appear
ance,  and  never  claims  that  they  are  valid  in  virtue  of
their  form.  But  it  is,  nevertheless,  the  way  in  which  we
acquire  the  universal  truths  we  use.

It  is  true  that  we  reason  from  '  facts/  however
obtained  ;  it  is  true  also  that  we  cannot  reason  from  all
the  facts,  because  we  never  know  all  the  facts.  But  it
is  not  true  that  we  need  to  know  all  the  facts  in  order
to  reason.  So,  too,  it  is  true  that  we  reason  from
'  intuitions '  which  seem  to  us  (psychologically)  certain  ;
but  it  is  not  true  that  they  are  therefore  logically  {  proved,'

1  Cf.  Chap.  XX,  §§  3,  4.


242


FORMAL  LOGIC


CHAP.


*>


V


nor  even  that  we  always  think  so.  It  is  true  that  we
use  universal  premisses,  but  not  that  they  are  certain
when  we  begin  to  use  them.  Nor  is  it  true  that  in  order
to  acquire  truth  we  must  begin  by  possessing  it.  It  is
not  true,  lastly,  that  the  premisses  must  prove  the
conclusion  ;  it  is  quite  possible  that  the  truth  of  the
conclusion  may  establish  the  premisses.

The  human  mind,  fortunately,  does  not  require  the
stupendous  certitudes  postulated  by  the  older  theories.
If  in  order  to  know  anything  we  must  first  know  that  our
principles  are  eternal  a  priori  truths,  and  our  facts  absolute
and  immutable,  it  is  painfully  clear  that  knowledge  is  im
possible,  because  we  have  not  even  now  such  facts  and
principles.  But  then  we  do  not  need  them.  All  the
equipment  that  we  need  to  start  upon  the  discovery  of
truth  is  a  willingness  to  experiment  and  a  willingness  to
learn.  Granting  these  (and  they  are  by  no  means
common  qualities),  our  experience  will  supply  us  with
abundance  of  material.  Indeed  the  chief  difficulty  will
be  to  select  the  best  and  most  workable  from  among  the
multitudinous  suggestions  and  analogies  with  which  the
world  bombards  an  actively  inquiring  mind.  Fortunately
there  is  abundant  time  for  such  selection.  It  has  been
going  on  for  ages,  and  even  the  lowest  organisms  are  to
some  extent  selective  in  their  reactions  to  stimulation.
The  selectiveness  of  man  is  enormous  and  all-pervading,
and  he  is  also  conscious  of  it.  Is  it  a  wonder,  then,  that
the  results  of  this  whole  history  should  have  crystallized
into  *  axioms '  which  now  seem  self-evident,  and  into
*  facts '  which  now  seem  solid  ?  Yet  the  logical  value  of
the  products  which  our  ordinary  thinking  now  takes  for
granted  is  not  original  but  acquired.  Nor  are  they,  even
now,  immutable,  or  worthy  of  superstitious  reverence  ;
but  they  are  secured  against  frivolous  attacks.

The  psychological  procedures  by  which  suggestions  are
utilized  and  analogies  *  recognized '  may  be  classed
together  under  the  name  of  fostulation.  They  differ  in
various  respects  both  in  their  objects  and  in  the  degree
of  consciousness  they  involve,  but  have  in  common  the


xvm THE  PROBLEM  OF  INDUCTION 243

fact  that  they  are  all  spontaneous  reactions  which  go
beyond  their  data  and  yield  something  new  that  was  not
necessarily  involved  in  the  data.  From  a  Formal  point  of
view,  therefore,  these  processes  are  always  '  arbitrary/  and
risky,  but  this  accusation  will  not  daunt  those  who  have
realized  that  an  '  arbitrary '  choice  between  alternatives
cannot  be  eliminated  even  from  the  most  formal
reasoning  (Chaps.  X,  §  7,  XIV,  §  3,  XVI,  §§  5,  10).  Any
thing  like  an  adequate  description  of  the  varieties  of  our
postulatory  procedure,  therefore,  would  have  to  go  deeply
into  psychology,  and  would,  after  all,  be  wasted  upon
Formal  Logic.  We  may  content  ourselves,  therefore,
with  a  few  illustrations.

When  postulation  occurs  with  a  clear  consciousness  of
the  scientific  nature  of  its  aims,  the  reasoning  will  be
found  to  run  somewhat  as  follows  :  *  I  have  made  such
and  such  observations  and  they  could  be  generalized  in
such  and  such  ways  ;  of  these  this  one  would  be  the  most
convenient,  because  the  simplest,  the  most  consonant  with
my  prejudices  or  previous  knowledge,  or  most  fertile  of
suggestions,  the  most  amusing  or  most  directly  advan
tageous,  etc.  Let  me,  therefore,  try  it,  and  see  whether
I  can  make  it  work.'  Accordingly  a  *  law '  is  postulated
and  its  *  truth '  is  tested  by  the  success  of  the  predictions
it  enables  us  to  make.  If  such  a  postulated  law  is  of
high  generality  and  usefulness  and  has  been  confirmed
by  much  experience,  it  naturally  comes  to  be  regarded  as
an  *  axiomatic '  principle,  like,  e.g.,  gravitation.  Now  this
means  that  it  becomes  to  a  large  extent  immune  against
the  further  attacks  of  experience.  For  we  start  with  so
strong  a  prejudice  in  its  favour  that  even  when  *  facts '
are  recorded  which  seem  incompatible  with  it,  it  is  more
convenient  to  doubt  or  explain  away  the  facts.  The
non-scientific  reader  can  obtain  some  idea  of  the  strength
of  such  prejudices  by  asking  himself  what  sort  and
amount  of  *  facts '  would  lead  him  to  doubt  and  to  discard,
e.g.i  his  most  cherished  religious  beliefs.  In  science  the
resistance  to  attempts  to  question  *  axiomatic '  principles
reaches  its  maximum  when  the  principle  has  methodo-


244  FORMAL  LOGIC  CHAP.

logical  value  as  a  principle  of  inquiry.  For  example,  it
would  never  be  admitted  that  an  event  had  happened
without  a  '  cause '  so  long  as  it  was  possible  to  imagine
that  an  undiscovered  cause  had  been  at  work,  and  it  is
preferable  to  suppose  an  error  in  an  experiment  or  a
defect  in  an  instrument  rather  than  to  question  the
indestructibility  of  matter  or  the  conservation  of  energy.
Such  is  our  endless  ingenuity  in  devising  excuses  for
them,  that  it  is  practically  impossible  to  disprove  prin
ciples  which  have  once  been  raised  to  axiomatic  rank
in  any  mind,  as  *  atheists  '  soon  discover  when  they  attack
the  conception  of  '  God.'

The  only  ways  of  getting  rid  of  an  *  axiom  '  which  is
suspected  of  falsity  is  to  prove  that  it  is  useless,  or  not
indispensable,  or  incompatible  with  other  principles  which
are  still  more  highly  valued.  It  becomes,  therefore,  very
easy  for  such  principles  to  pass  as  self-evident  and
'  absolutely '  true.  Yet  a  study  of  scientific  history  would
often  conduct  us  to  a  time  when  a  principle  was  unknown
or  even  regarded  as  false,  and  there  are  usually  definite
alterations  in  the  facts,  or  in  our  knowledge  of  them,
which  would  lead  us  to  prefer  an  alternative  c  axiom.'
Moreover,  experience  shows,  as  we  might  have  anticipated,
that  no  degree  of  psychological  self-evidence  and  no
amount  of  past  success  really  guarantee  an  axiom
completely.  After  a  triumphant  reign  of  over  2000
years  the  '  axioms '  of  geometry  have  turned  out  to  be
postulates,  which  the  makers  of  '  metageometries '  can
reject  and  vary  at  pleasure.  The  scientific  status  of  the
indestructibility  of  matter  has  in  the  last  few  years  been
seriously  impaired  by  the  discovery  of  radio-activity.
The  postulate  of  causal  determination  has  never  overcome
the  postulate  of  moral  freedom.  And  the  principle  of
the  conservation  of  energy  can  be  brought  into  accord
with  the  facts  only  by  setting  down  to  the  '  dissipation
of  energy '  whatever  amounts  are  '  apparently  '  lost — a
procedure  very  like  the  familiar  balancing  of  accounts
by  the  immoral  aid  of  the  item  '  sundries.'

Of  course,  the  less  consciously  a  postulate  is  made  the


xvm THE  PROBLEM  OF  INDUCTION 245

more  easily  is  it  taken  as  self-evident.  Moreover,  the
great  postulates  of  rationality,  such  as  causation,  number,
time,  self,  God,  freedom,  and  immortality,  are  of  enormous
antiquity,  and  the  reasons  for  them  are  inextricably
intertwined  with  men's  deepest  emotions.  It  is  almost
impossible  to  dissect  them  in  cold  blood,  so  as  to  exhibit
their  logical  nature.  Even  philosophers  rarely  try  to  do
this,  and  when  they  do  it  makes  no  difference.  The
great  majority  of  men  will  not  tolerate  the  desecration
which  their  examination  seems  to  involve,  and  gladly
grasp  at  any  excuse  for  leaving  them  untouched.  Is  it
a  wonder,  then,  that  they  should  continue  to  be  thought
of  as  self-evident  ?

Similarly  there  is  no  psychological  difficulty  in  the
transition  from  '  some '  cases  to  '  all '  which  a  pedant
logic  feels  bounds  to  censure.  So  long  as  the  *  cases '
examined  feel  numerous  and  all  point  in  the  same
direction,  it  is  easy  enough  to  pass  to  a  universal  asser
tion,  even  though  only  an  infinitesimal  fraction  of  the
whole  number  has  been  observed.  And  there  is  logical
reason  for  the  practice.  The  serious-minded  man  who
argued  that c  all  the  stories  in  this  book  are  jokes,  so  then
this  story  is  a  joke  also,'  though  he  did  not  see  it,  was
not  poking  fun  at  the  Syllogism.  His  doubt  was  real,
and  therefore  he  did  not  really  beg  the  question.  As
was  shown  in  Chap.  XV,  §  I  o,  the  '  all '  we  argue  from
does  not  psychologically  include  the  doubtful  case  we  are
arguing  to.  We  are  experimentally  extending  our  rule
to  a  fresh  case  which  looks  analogous  to  the  old  cases,
and  are  risking  an  assertion  of  their  identity  ;  we  are
therefore  more  or  less  aware  that  the  analogy  may  not
hold,  and  that  the  c  identity  '  may  fail.  And  it  is  precisely
because  we  are  thus  bringing  our  syllogism  to  the  test
of  experience  that  we  argue.  Here  again,  therefore,  the
process  of  validating  a  postulate  is  quite  distinct  from,  and
in  a  way  independent  of,  our  motives  for  formulating
it.  The  process  of  formulating  a  postulate  is  always
volitional,  and  therefore  when  viewed  with  an  intellectualist
bias  seems  *  arbitrary,'  though  it  is  probably  never  as


246  FORMAL  LOGIC  CHAP.

wantonly  and  randomly  arbitrary  as  intellectualism  is
wishful  to  believe ;  but  the  process  of  confirming,
validating,  or  verifying  a  postulate  is  always  selective  and
in  the  main  determined  by  experience  of  the  working  of
the  postulate,  and  it  is  in  this  latter  process  that  the
universal  truths  which  are  in  common  use  have  actually
arisen.  Thus  their  past  history  bestows  on  our  principles
such  enormous  amounts  of  stability  that  on  the  average
they  are  far  more  powerful  than  even  the  best  established
'  facts,'  and  when  '  facts  '  conflict  with  *  principles  '  it  is
usually  the  former  that  give  way.

§  6.  How  is  it  possible  to  reason  from  Facts  ?

Indeed,  so  powerful  are  postulates  that  the  logi
cian  even  has  great  difficulty  in  discovering  a  real
function  for  arguments  from  facts.  From  a  strictly
Formal  standpoint  '  facts '  seem  to  exist  merely  in
order  to  exemplify  *  laws '  and  to  be  '  cases '  of
*  universals/  and  all  the  additional  features  which  they
exhibit,  such  as  their  plurality,  individuality,  and  non
conformity,  seem  to  be  logically  impertinence,  or  worse.
For  it  is  their  bounden  duty  to  be  what  they  are  called,
viz.  *  cases '  of  the  law.  They  must  conform,  therefore,  to
their  law  ;  or  else  how  could  we  predict  them  by  its  aid  ?
If  they  fail  to  conform  they  cease  to  be  truly  cases,  and
become  mere  particulars  which  a  self-respecting  logic
cannot  recognize.  In  so  far  as  they  are  '  mere  particulars/
diverging  incalculably  from  their  universal  types,  they
become  unmeaning  and  unintelligible.

Yet  in  so  far  as  they  exactly  exemplify  the  universal
type  they  seem  to  be  superfluous.  If  all  the  '  cases '  are
bound  to  be  alike,  and  we  can  know  this  in  advance,  why
need  we  trouble  to  observe  the  idle  repetitions  which
experience  brings  ?  One  *  case  '  is  as  good  as  a  thousand
in  the  eyes  of  logic,  nay  much  better,  because  much
more  convenient  to  argue  from.  Indeed,  is  it  not  an
illusion  that  we  ever  really  argue  from  '  fact '  even  in  the
one  case  ?  Is  it  not  the  function  of  fact  merely  to


xvm THE  PROBLEM OF INDUCTION 247

stimulate  the  mind's  faculty  of  intuition  to  grasp  in  its
self-evident  independence  and  rational  necessity  the  law
which  makes  the  fact?  Was  not  Aristotle  right  when
he  denied  that  the  first  principles  of  demonstration
depended  on  the  process  which  discovered  them,  and
declared  that  Induction  could  not  demonstrate,  but  only
revealed  the  principle  which  springs  up  eternal  in  the
logician's  breast  ?

Thus  encouraging  himself  the  Formal  logician  proceeds
to  view  inference  from  experience  as  a  paradox,  and
arguing  from  facts  as  a  delusion.  It  is  assumed  that
the  business  of  science  is  to  demonstrate  '  universals/
the  properties  of  *  kinds '  that  are  far  more  real  than  the
particulars  that  reveal  (or  recall)  them.  For,  strange  to
say,  though  knowledge  of  the  true  essences  and  kinds
is  in  a  way  innate,  yet  the  defective  human  intellect  is
somehow  so  perverse  that  it  can  grasp  them  only  upon
the  (strictly  irrelevant)  stimulation  of  what  seems  an
empirical  fact.  Thus  even  the  a  priori  truths  of  arithmetic
have  to  be  learnt  ;  it  is,  e.g.,  only  when  you  begin  to
count  that  you  understand  the  eternal  laws  of  number
and  their  rational  necessity.  Without  presuming  to
explain  this  mystery,  let  us  go  on  to  observe  that  the
premisses  from  which  we  argue  about  *  facts '  must  be
certain  ;  and  certain  they  can  be  only  by  intuition  or
by  demonstration.  Now  demonstration  leads  only  to
an  infinite  regress  (cf.  §  2) ;  hence  you  must  accept
intuition  as  the  basis  of  all  reasoning  even  from  experience.

For  the  third  alternative,  viz.  that  certainty  should  be
dispensed  with  and  reasoning  regarded  as  tentative  all
through,  is  too  horrible  to  contemplate,  and  we  doubt
whether  a  logical  mind  could  face  it  and  preserve  its  sanity.
For  just  think  what  it  means.  Are  we  to  try  to  prove  what
we  do  not  already  know  ?  To  start  from  principles  that
are  hypotheses,  postulates,  or  fictions  and  facts  that  are
disputable  ?  To  try  to  know  a  fact  we  do  not  know
to  be  true  by  a  principle  we  do  not  know  to  be  true,  and
conversely  to  establish  a  principle  we  do  not  fully  know
to  be  true  by  facts  we  do  not  fully  know  to  be  true  ?  The


248  FORMAL  LOGIC  CHAP.

risk  is  awful,  and  the  reasoning  is  circular.  For  if  the
fact  is  to  be  true,  the  principle  must  already  be  so,  while
if  the  principle  is  to  be  true,  the  fact  must  already  be  so  !
And  do  not  tell  us  that  you  are  only  bidding  us  argue
from  experience  and  as,  in  fact,  the  sciences  all  do,  and
that  experience  bears  you  out !  For  how  can  any  one
learn,  truly  learn,  from  experience  ?  The  very  fact  that
experience  supports  such  incredible  proceedings  is  a
fresh  problem.  It  ought  to  be  a  matter  of  perpetual
astonishment  to  a  reflecting  being.  We  cannot  under
stand  how  experience  can  have  any  logical  bearing,  or
indeed  be  possible  at  all.

§ 7.  How  to  reason  from  Facts

To  common-sense  this  anti-empirical  position  seems
extreme,  and  its  reliance  on  intuitions  pathetic  (cf.  §  3)  ;
yet  the  difficulty  is  far  from  despicable.  A  logical
meaning  can  be  given  to  reasoning  from  experience  only
if  experience  really  contributes  something  to  the  truth  ot
our  principles,  and  if  nevertheless  it  is  not  a  foregone
conclusion  that  it  must  bear  them  out  ex  officio.  In
other  words,  the  appeal  to  experience  is  needed,  and  is
rational,  only  if  both  the  principles  and  the  facts  are
conceived  otherwise  than  Formal  Logic  has  hitherto
preferred.  Both  must  be  conceived  as  subject  to  testing
and  correcting  in  the  process  of  experience.  Their  claim
to  absolute  certainty  must  be  repudiated,  and  they  must
be  regarded  as  plastic,  and  indefinitely  adjustable  until
they  fit  each  other,  and  relative  to  the  purpose  of  the
inquiry.  Whether  the  '  fact '  and  the  '  law '  have  been
properly  selected  for  the  purposes  of  the  inquiry,  whether
a  '  fact '  is  truly  a  fact,  whether  it  is  one  or  many  or  a
fraction,  whether  it  is  truly  relevant  and  a  '  case '  in  the
sense  required,  must  all  be  treated  as  important  and  open
questions.  So,  too,  it  must  be  conceived  as  worthy  of
inquiry  whether  the  *  law '  experimented  with  is  the  true
law  or  the  true  law  for  the  case,  or  formulated  in  the
truest  way,  and  whether  in  arguing  from  the  law  which


xvm THE  PROBLEM  OF  INDUCTION 249

has  held  in  the  known  cases  to  others  which  are  doubt
fully  'cases,'  the  analogy  will  hold  (cf.  Chap.  XVI,  §  10).
We  must  also  frankly  recognize  that  though  the  case  and
the  law  exist  for  each  other  and  reciprocally  influence
each  other,  it  is  by  no  means  easy  to  consummate  their
union.  The  case  is  meant  to  be  brought  under  the  law,
and  the  law  to  apply  to  the  case.  But  after  all  the  law
was  extracted  from  former  cases ;  and  every  case  is
different,  and  so  there  is  always  a  doubt  whether  it  may
be  taken  as  identical  with  its  predecessors  and  whether
the  difference  is  irrelevant,  especially  as  it  may  be  relevant
for  some  purposes  and  not  for  others.  A's  Mr.  Sidgwick
wittily  remarks,  a  thermos-flask  may  for  some  purposes
be  taken  as  a  case  of  a  '  hot-water  bottle.' l  Nor  will
fine  words  about  the  dignity  of  universals  remove  this
doubt  ;  it  can  be  set  at  rest  only  by  experience.  And
this  is  why  experience  is  always  relevant  to  reasoning,
not  only  in  *  induction,'  but  even  in  mathematics.2

The  only  answer,  therefore,  which  those  seem  to
deserve  who  dispute  the  possibility  of  reasoning  from  facts
is  to  dispute  the  prejudices  and  preconceptions  on  which
their  objections  rest.

(1)  To  the  objection  that  'valid'  reasoning  must  not
go  beyond  its  data,  the  reply  is  that  real  reasoning  must
We  must  try  to  prove  what  we  do  not  already  know,  for
otherwise  our  reasoning  would  be  irrational. To  prove
only  what  we  already  know  would  be  superfluous.

(2)  The  interrelation  and  mutual  adjustment  of  {  fact '
and  '  law '  are  not  circular,  when  neither  the  one  nor  the
other  is  held  to  be  absolutely  proved. On  the  contrary,
the more clearly inadequate is the evidence for a
theory,  the  more  ambiguous  and  perplexing  are  the  facts,
the more necessary  is it  to experiment  with theories

1  The  Application  of  Logic,  p.  108.

2  Formal  Logic  tends  to  regard  mathematical  reasoning  as  a  sort  of  super
human  type  of  logical  excellence. But  it  differs  from  other  reasoning  only  in  the
antiquity  and  familiarity  of  the  postulates  on  which  it  rests,  and  the  ease  with
which  it  is  conceded  that  they  form '  ideals ' to which experience does not
'correspond.' Nevertheless  it  cannot  escape  the  test  of  application  altogether.
If,  e.g. ,  experience  were  to  change  so  that  it  no  longer  presented  us  with  countable
things,  the  principles  of  arithmetic  would  gradually  lose  their  meaning.


250  FORMAL  LOGIC  CHAP,  xvm

that  will  test  the  facts  and  guide  research.  Ex  post
facto  theorizing  is  scientifically  useless ;  it  is  only  by
theorizing  in  advance  of  the  facts  that  we  thereby  save
time  and  trouble.  Conversely,  when  we  use  hypotheses
upon  the  facts  we  need  not,  and  do  not,  regard  them  as  fully
established.  If  they  were,  what  would  they  gain  from
a  wearisome  confrontation  with  facts  that  are  superfluous !

(3)  Until some attempt is made  to  show that we
cannot  use  hypotheses  (postulates),  it  seems  vain  to  insist
that  our  principles  must  somehow  be  rendered  absolutely
certain  before  they  can  be  used.

(4)  It  is  vain  to  dispute  the  fact  that  men do  reason
from experience,  and allow to such reasonings logical
weight. Hence logic must somehow account for this
process.

(5)  If,  however,  it  merely  contents  itself  with  setting
up  a  logical  ideal  which  is  unrealizable  and  incompatible
with  our  actual  knowing,  is not  this  merely  an  arbitrary
way  of  fostering  a  subtler  scepticism  ? For  to  say  that
true  '  knowledge '  demands  features  no  human  knowledge
can  ever  have  is  merely  a  way  of  denying  the  value  of
human knowledge,  and  an irrational  way  at that. For
after  all  even  '  ideals of  knowledge '  must  be applicable
to  the  knowledge  they  idealize.

We  may  conclude,  then,  our  discussion  of  the  Problem
of  Induction  by  observing  that  this  logical  mystery  is
solved  when  we  cease  to  regard  principles  and  facts  as
existing  in  abstraction  from  each  other,  and  from  the
human  mind  that  discriminates  and  uses  them,  and
recognize  instead  that  both  alike  are  elaborated  from
and  tested  by  experience,  and  exist  for  a  mind  that
always  operates  selectively  and  volitionally,  and  is
neither  real  nor  rational  unless  it  does  this.


CHAPTER XIX

THE FORMS OF INDUCTION

§  i. The  Mistaken  Aims  of  Inductive  Logicians

THE  inquiries  of  our  last  chapter  should  have  shown  how
badly  inductive  reasoning  lends  itself  to  the  purposes  of
Formal  Logic,  and  how  much  reason  there  is  for  the
antagonism  between  '  inductive  '  and  *  deductive  '  methods
which  runs  through  the  history  of  Logic.  This  antagonism
has  often  been  perceived,  and  inductive  logicians  have
usually  been  in  full  and  conscious  revolt  against  the
tyranny  of  the  Syllogism.  Nevertheless  it  is  a  curious
fact  that  in  the  end  they  have  always  succumbed  to  its
fascination.  One  after  the  other  they  adopt  again  the
ideal  of  Formal  Logic,  and  try  to  represent  inductive
reasoning  in  the  guise  of  a  formally  necessary  type  of
'  valid  inference,'  and  labour  to  discover  infallible  methods,
to  yield  results  absolutely  true  irrespective  of  their
*  matter,'  instead  of  contenting  themselves  with  observing
how  the  logical  value  of  reasonings  from  facts  is  developed
and  tested.

As  it  was,  their  failure  was  inevitable.  In  so  far  as
they  succeeded  in  apprehending  the  nature  of  inductive
reasoning,  they  failed  to  arrive  at  forms  which  were
absolutely  *  valid,'  and  were  jeered  at  by  Formal  logicians
for  their  pains.  In  so  far  as  they  succeeded  in  getting
c  valid '  Forms,  they  were  disappointed  to  find  that  they
were  the  old  ones,  that  they  had  failed  to  revolutionize
Formal  Logic,  and  that  their  reasoning  was  just  as  formal
and  deductive  as  the  Syllogism.  Unfortunately  they

251


252  FORMAL  LOGIC  CHAP.

never  saw  why  their  fiasco  was  inevitable,  nor  how  they
had  brought  it  on  themselves.  Neither  they  nor  their
critics  ever  understood  what  the  failures  of  l  inductive '
logic  really  meant  and  really  proved.  They  really  meant
that  Formal  Logic  was  a  failure,  because  Formal  reasoning
was  a  false  ideal,  and  that  '  material '  truth  was  not  to  be
reached  that  way.  The  failure  of  '  inductive '  logic  to
provide  *  deductive '  with  the  material  truth  it  needed  in
order  to  be  more  than  an  intellectual  game,  was  really  a
disproof  of  the  Formal  ideal,  and  due  to  the  fact  that
inductive  logic  had  not  discarded  it.  Instead  of  derid
ing  the  '  inductive '  logicians,  therefore,  their  deductive
colleagues  should  have  joined  them  on  the  stool  of
repentance  and  laboured  with  them  to  get  rid  of  the
fatal  assumption  that  Formal  truth  was  capable  of  in
dependent  existence.

As  it  was,  the  inductive  logicians  remained  under
the  spell  of  Formalism,  and  their  revolt  proved
abortive.  They  never  quite  realized  that  to  aim  at  a
valid  form  of  Induction  was  to  aim  at  something  which
would  of  necessity  be  as  futile  and  impotent  as  the  rest
of  Formal  Logic,  and  that,  if  real  truth  was  desired,  the
ideal  of  '  valid  inference '  was  a  radically  false  one  to
pursue,  for  the  reason  that  no  '  inference '  would  be  worth
inferring  unless,  irrespective  of  its  form,  there  was  a  real
question  of  its  being  false  as  well  as  true.  Hence  no
really  true  inference  could  become  unquestionable,  and
have  its  truth  guaranteed,  by  its  mere  form,  and  a  theory
of  Induction  which  professed  to  have  discovered  such
forms  would  of  necessity  stultify  itself  and  be  inapplicable
to  the  procedures  of  the  sciences,  and  incapable  of  solving
the  real  doubts  with  which  they  are  struggling.

The  theory  of  Induction,  therefore,  throughout  its
history  consists  of  a  series  of  vain  attempts  to  serve
both  God  and  Mammon,  to  draw  attention  to  the  real
procedures  of  knowing,  and  yet  to  force  them  into  forms
which  assume  that  the  real  knowing  is  over,  and  that
logical  interest  is  restricted  to  the  contemplation  of  its
verbal  products.


xix  THE  FORMS  OF INDUCTION  253

§  2.  Aristotle's  Accounts  of  Induction

As  usual  Aristotle  led  the  way.  He  devised  the
name  Induction,  though  he  nowhere  makes  it  clear
why  he  selected  it,  nor  even  how  the  different  senses  in
which  he  uses  it  were  connected  in  his  mind.  It  is
not,  however,  impossible  to  trace  a  connexion  between
them,  provided  that  we  distinguish  sharply  between  four
senses  of  the  word  in  Aristotle,  viz. :

1 I )  The  reasoning  from  particulars  to  universals.

(2)  The  adducing  of  examples  of  a  rule.

(3)  The  exhaustive  enumeration  of  the  species  of  a  genus ',
in  order  to  justify  assertions  about  the  whole  genus.

(4)  The  intuitive  perception  of  a  universal  in  a  case..

In  the  first  of  these  senses  *  induction  '  is  the  formu
lation  rather  than  the  solution  of  a  problem,  and  neither
in  this  sense  nor  in  the  second  can  it  pretend  to  formal
validity.  In  the  third  sense  Aristotle  regards  it  as
formally  valid.  The  fourth  sense  he  regards  as  sometimes
(and  perhaps  always)  operative  in  the  other  three,  and  as
somehow  inspiring  and  validating  what  would  otherwise
be  invalid  processes,  in  virtue  of  the  infallibility  of  the
Intuitive  Reason  which  he  had  assumed  (cf.  Chap.  XVIII,
§  3).  All  the  four  senses,  however,  are  open  to  serious
objections.

(i)  The  first  raises  the  question  of  how  we  reason
from  experience.  Aristotle's  answer  may  be  extracted
from  the  interesting  sketch  of  the  psychical  genesis  of  a
'universal,'  which  concludes  the  Posterior  Analytics  (ii,
1 9).  The  process  starts  with  repeated  perceptions,  which
are  stored  up  by  memory  and  ultimately  establish  a
stable  concept  which  '  comes  to  rest '  in  the  mind.  The
account  is  remarkable  for  the  purely  scientific  spirit  of
its  psychologizing  and  for  its  bold  attempt  to  bridge  the
Platonic  breach  between  sense-perception  and  conceptual  \
thinking.  But  it  represents  the  formation  of  universals
naturalistically  as  an  entirely  automatic  and  inevitable  j
process,  once  a  certain  grade  of  mental  development  has
been  attained,  and  contains  no  hint  of  the  selectiveness  !


254  FORMAL  LOGIC  CHAP.

and  purposiveness  which  mark  every  step  in  the  formation
of  our  ideas.  And  it  is  evident  that  so  purely  mechanical
a  psychological  description  must  abstract  from  the  value
of  the  products  and  the  difference  between  true  and  false
concepts.  At  the  end,  however,  there  comes  a  jump  from
psychology  into  logic.  It  is  suddenly  suggested  that
when  the  *  principle '  is  reached  the  merit  of  the  achieve
ment  is  due,  not  to  the  visible  progress  of  perceptual
experience,  but  to  the  '  Intuitive  Reason,'  which  has
apparently  been  guiding  the  whole  process  unseen.  The
motive  for  this  transition  is  evidently  the  desire  to  guar
antee  the  products  of  the  psychological  process  by  the
infallibility  of  intuition,  but  it  is  painfully  obvious  that
Aristotle  is  totally  oblivious  of  the  fact  that  false  concepts
grow  up  in  the  mind  quite  as  naturally  and  readily  as  true.
Until,  then,  means  have  been  suggested  for  discriminating
between  true  and  false  *  induction  '  of  universal  rules,  the
whole  account  remains  on  the  level  of  psychological
description,  without  rising  to  the  level  of  logic.

(2)  This  method  also  is  psychologically  quite  familiar.
We  frequently  argue  from  individual  cases,  either  to  a
universal  rule  or  direct  to  other  cases,  and  the  event  often
bears  out  our  predictions.  But  until  our  natural  intelli
gence  is  corrupted  by  the  ideals  of  Formal  Logic  it  never
occurs  to  us  to  imagine  that  such  reasonings  are,  or  ought
to  be,  formally  valid  and  irresistibly  cogent.  We  are
aware  that  there  is  a  risk,  and  look  to  experience  to  bear
out  our  predictions.  Of  course,  therefore,  this  procedure
does  not  satisfy  the  logicians.  They  call  it  induction  by
simple  enumeration,  and  condemn  it  as  puerile  and  pre
carious.  So  it  is,  if  we  demand  a  valid  form.  It  is  not
dependent  on  its  form  for  its  success.  It  is  dependent  on
our  sagacity  and  experience,  and  does  not  profess  to  be
either  exhaustive  in  its  enumeration  or  cogent  in  its  con
clusion.  But  it  is  indisputably  a  method  that  can  be  used,
and  often  is  used,  to  reach  generalizations.

In  Aristotle  it  appears  chiefly  in  the  form  of  reasoning
from one case to  another  and  is  called  Example^  and

1  Anal.  Prior,  ii,  24.


XIX


THE  FORMS  OF  INDUCTION  255


distinguished  from  *  Induction '  (in  the  third  sense).  But
it  is  the  nearest  Aristotle  gets  to  reasoning  from  and
about  facts,  and  we  saw  that  it  makes  no  logical  difference
whether  we  argue  from  rules,  or  from  facts  which  are
taken  as  'cases'  of  rules  (Chap.  XVI,  §12).  Aristotle
notes  that  this  adducing  of  examples  is  not  formally  valid,
because  its  enumeration  of  the  cases  is  incomplete.  He
evidently  had  not  realized  either  how  impossible  complete
enumeration  was,  or  that  if  '  intuition  '  could  ever  guarantee
generalization  it  might  just  as  well  perceive  it  in  a  single
case  as  in  a  thousand.

(3) He  described Formally  valid  induction,  therefore,
as  dependent  on  an  exhaustive  enumeration  in  the  form —

A,  B,  C,  etc.  are  P,
A,  B,  C,  etc.  are  S,
.*.  all  Sare  P;

pointing  out  that  this  reasoning  is  valid  if  the  minor
premiss  exhaustively  enumerates  the  cases  of  S,  because
then  it  is  possible  to  convert  it  *  simply '  into  *  all  S  are  A,
B,  C,  etc.,'  and  to  turn  the  argument  into  a  syllogism  in
Barbara.  But,  oddly  enough,  he  chooses  to  illustrate  his
doctrine  not  by  a  reasoning  from  '  facts '  but  by  a  weird
biological  superstition  about  a  connexion  between  gall-
lessness  and  longevity  of  which  *  man,  horse,  mule '  con
stitute  the  evidence.  In  other  words,  what  have  to
be  enumerated  are  the  species  of  a  genus  and  not  the
individuals  of  a  species.  And  some  logicians  have
supposed  that  he  meant  this  and  deserved  credit  for  it,
because  it  was  not  so  impracticable  to  enumerate  species
as  individuals.  But  they  had  not  reckoned  with
Darwinism,  and  did  not  apparently  observe  that  their
pre-Darwinian  interpretation  leaves  Aristotelian  logic
with  no  '  valid '  way  of  reasoning  from  facts  at  all.  And
if  we  challenge  the  assumption  that  all  the  *  cases '  of  a
*  kind '  are  necessarily  identical  for  all  purposes,  because
they  would  not  be  grouped  into  a  kind  unless  they  were
identical  for  some^  this  logic  has  no  way  of  reasoning  about
facts  at  all.  Yet  it  is  evidently  of  the  greatest  scientific


256  FORMAL  LOGIC  CHAP.

importance  to  know  how  far  individuals,  who  in  general
may  be  classed  together,  may  be  treated  as  equivalent  for
any  special  purpose.

Secondly,  the  notion  that  the  difficulty  about  ex
haustive  enumeration  is  diminished  if  we  substitute
species  for  individuals,  is  quite  illusory.  Not  only
are  species  variable,  and  is  their  past  unknown,  and  their
future  unpredictable,  but  every  individual  may  form
a  point  of  departure  for  new  species  (cf.  Chap.  V,  §  8).
Except  from  the  temporary  standpoint  of  human
convenience,  it  is  impossible  to  say  where  genus  ends
and  species  begins,  where  species  ends  and  variety
begins,  where  variety  ends  and  individuality  begins ;
while  as  for  the  ending  of  individuality,  so  soon  as  we
agree  to  consider  experience  at  all,  we  find  that  we  can
only  say  that  if  it  ended  anywhere  science  would  end
with  it.

It  is  clear,  then,  that  the  exhaustion  of  the  empirical
material  is  an  unrealizable  postulate,  which  should  be
abandoned  by  a  rational  logic.  The  relevant  *  facts  '  from
which  we  reason  must  be  as  inexhaustible  as  our  interests,
points  of  view,  and  purposes,  and  in  general  our
experience.  Practically  we  come  nearest  to  complete
enumeration  and  strict  universality  in  some  of  our  most
'  arbitrary '  and  most  plainly  man-made  truths  ;  that  the
days  of  the  week  should  be  seven,  and  the  months  of  the
year  twelve,  and  the  scale  of  notation  ten,  are  '  facts  '  which
will  probably  endure  as  long  as  the  human  race.  Not
though  they  are  of  our  making  but  because  of  this.  Yet
it  is  plain  that  all  these  institutions  could  be  changed
if  it  seemed  good  to  us,  and  attempts  to  change  them
are  on  record.  But  facts  which  depend  on  the  stability
of  human  wills  are,  after  all,  only  a  small  fraction  of  the
facts  which  concern  us  ;  from  the  rest  of  our  *  inductions '
we  can  never  eliminate  the  risk  that  the  uncontrolled
course  of  events  may  turn  them  into  falsehoods.  And  to
endeavour  to  conceal  this  risk  is  to  endeavour  to  deceive
oneself.  It  is  to  use  a  logical  formula  as  a  sort  of
immaterial  talisman.


xix  THE  FORMS  OF  INDUCTION  257

(4)  Concerning  the  attempt  to  make  risky  reasoning
safe  by  alleging  the  guarantee  of  Intuition  we  need  say
little  after  Chap.  XVIII,  §  3.  The  appeal  to  intuition
is  always  intellectually  demoralizing,  because  it  blocks
further  inquiry,  and  induces  an  attitude  of  mind  in
which  plausible  assertions  are  accepted  without  criticism.
This  would  be  detrimental  even  if  the  '  intuitions  '  accepted
happened  to  be  true  ;  but  seeing  that  many  things  which
claim  to  be  intuitions  are  certainly  false,  to  look  out  for
intuitions  is  a  direct  encouragement  to  self-deception.

To  reject  Intuition  when  it  claims  to  be  an  infallible
means  of  securing  the  formal  truth  of  an  induction  is  not,
however,  to  deny  that  it  occurs  as  a  psychological  process
of  perceiving  the  relevance  of  a  fact  to  a  particular  train
of  thought.  We  saw  in  the  last  chapter  (§§  4,  5)  that
*  facts '  could  not  be  taken  as  given,  but  were  always
to  some  extent  relative  to  the  purpose  with  which
they  were  observed  and  the  products  of  a  selection.
Hence  there  is  ample  scope  for  an  intuitive  perception
in  the  selection  of  the  *  fact '  or  '  case '  which  is  relevant
to  a  particular  rule,  and  psychologically  such  intuitions
may  be  of  great  value.

Nor  does  Aristotle  totally  ignore  this.  He  just  mentions
a  sagacity  (ay%ivoia)  in  instantaneously  hitting  upon  the
suitable  middle  terms  in  an  argument.1  And  equally
cursory  mentions  may  be  found  in  other  Formal
logicians.  But  the  topic  is  always  passed  over  lightly.
'  Sagacity '  exists,  but  Formal  Logic  can  make  nothing
of  it.2  For  it  is  impossible  to  give  formal  rules  for  it,
nor  are  its  inferences  cogent.  The  process  is  '  psychology/
for  it  is  not  Formal  Logic.  It  may  be  possible  (and
true)  to  infer  (as  Aristotle  suggests)  that  a  poor  man
seen  talking  to  a  rich  is  trying  to  borrow  money  ;  but
there  is  no  *  logical  necessity '  about  the  *  sagacious '

1  Anal.  Prior,  i,  34.

2  Cf.  Mill,  Logic,  bk.  iii,  chap,  i,  §  2. "There  is  no  science  which  will  enable  a
man  to  bethink  himself  of  that  which  will  suit  his  purpose. But  when  he  has
thought  of  something"  (which  '  will  suit  his  purpose'  presumably!), "science
can  tell  him  whether  that  which  he  has  thought  of  will  suit  his  purpose  or  not."
I.e.  when  he  has  found  out  without  logic,  logic  can  tell  him  he  has  done  right  t
What  admirable  caution  ! And  yet  how  true  to  all  Formal  Logic.

S


258  FORMAL  LOGIC  CHAP.

guess.  Of  the  real  logical  function  of  sagacity  Formal
Logic  can  have  no  conception,  because  it  has  no
conception  of  the  need  for  intelligent  selection  in  the
making  of  the  logically  relevant  'fact*  and  has  not
grasped  that  a  true  inference  is  never  a  '  valid '  one,  but
always  establishes  its  truth  by  a  victory  over  a  doubt.1


§  3.  Bacon's  Theory  of  Induction

Bacon's  conception  of  Science  is  remarkable  for  its
intense  preoccupation  with  the  need  of  somehow  discover
ing  a  way  of  utilizing  experience,  as  also  for  his  enormous
belief  in  the  human  value  of  knowledge  and  keen
consciousness  of  the  revolutionary  character  of  his
doctrine.  At  the  same  time,  his  account  of  Induction
will  hardly  convince  even  the  most  sympathetic  critic
that  he  succeeded  in  discovering  an  unexceptionable
way  of  reasoning  from  facts,  either  for  the  purposes  of
Science  or  for  those  of  Formal  Logic.  Formally  his
method  appears  to  be  neither  new  nor  strictly  valid ;
scientifically  it  is  certainly  neither  adequate  nor  workable.
The  pathos  of  his  position  lies  in  the  fact  that  he  is  so
sublimely  unconscious  of  its  defects.

He  begins  by  rejecting  as  unscientific  empiricism  the
induction  by  simple  enumeration  of  medieval  science.  He
points  out  that  a  single  contradictory  instance  will  upset
it,  but  is  Formalist  enough  not  to  see  that  for  scientific
use  this  is  not  necessarily  an  objection,  if  the  instance  can
suggest  the  substitution  of  a  new  generalization  which  is  an

1  It  has  recently  been  suggested  in  Oxford  that  Aristotle's  real  account  of
Induction  is  given  in  the  Topics,  which  discuss  the  '  dialectical '  commonplaces
by  which  assertions  might  be  attacked  without  any  special  knowledge  of  their
subject-matter.  Some  of  these  T^TTOI  appear  to  possess  a  certain  resemblance
to  modern  '  methods  of  induction '  by  '  Agreement '  and  '  Concomitant
Variations.'  But  Mr.  Joseph,  who  has  forcibly  urged  this  view  (Introduction  to
Logic,  p.  360  foil.),  has  to  admit  that  in  the  Topics  Aristotle  is  concerned  with
'  Dialectic,'  i.e.  probable  reasoning,  and  not  with  what  he  conceived  to  be  the
conditions  either  of  formal  validity  or  of  scientific  demonstration.  His  aim,
therefore,  is  radically  different  from  that  of  the  logicians  who  sought  in  their  formal
account  of  Induction  to  lay  bare  the  nature  of  scientific  reasoning.  Moreover,  it
will  be  time  enough  to  hail  Aristotle  as  the  discoverer  also  of  the  theory  of
Induction  when  we  have  examined  the  value  of  the  account  it  gives  of  scientific
procedure.


xix  THE  FORMS  OF  INDUCTION  259

improvement  on  the  old  one.  It  is  only  if  it  is  assumed
that  certainty  at  all  costs  and  by  the  shortest  route  is
the  sole  aim  of  inquiry  that  a  method  must  be  rejected  so
soon  as  it  is  seen  not  to  be  formally  infallible.  Bacon  next
assumes  that  Nature  is  composed  of  a  definite  plurality
of  *  Forms,'  i.e.  structural  principles  intermediate  between
Aristotelian  '  universals '  and  modern  *  laws,'  which
in  their  combinations  account  for  the  whole  sensible
variety  of  phenomena.  These  *  Forms '  it  is  the  business
of  science  to  discover,  and  it  is  thus  enabled  to  explain
and  predict  the  given  phenomena  which  result  from  their
combinations.  To  do  this  we  are  instructed  first  to
draw  up  exhaustive  tables  of  the  phenomena  and  Forms
under  investigation,  and  then  to  exclude  from  our  list
any  '  Form '  which  does  not  invariably  co-exist  with  the
phenomenon  of  which  the  Form  is  sought.  For  example,
if  we  are  trying  to  discover  the  Form  of  Heat  it  will  not  do
to  adduce  *  celestial  nature ' ;  for  though  the  sun's  light  is
hot,  that  of  the  moon  is  cold.  After  a  series  of  such
exclusions,  Bacon  believed  that  a  single  Form  would
finally  remain,  to  be  the  invariable  cause  of  the
phenomenon  investigated  and  of  nothing  else.

It  is  easy  to  show,  and  has  often  been  shown,  that  in
point  of  form  there  is  no  novelty  about  this  Method  of
Exclusions.  Formally  the  process  is  simply  a  disjunctive
reasoning  easily  symbolized  thus  : — *  The  Form  of  A  is
either  a  or  b  or  c  .  .  .  etc.  It  is  not  a,  for  it  occurs
where  a  does  not,  nor  b  .  .  .  etc.  Therefore  it  is  z!
The  validity  of  this  reasoning  depends,  of  course,  on  the
completeness  with  which  the  alternatives  are  stated,  but
Bacon  seems  to  have  realized  neither  the  enormous
material  difficulties  of  securing  such  completeness,  nor
yet  the  puerile  simplicity  of  his  Formal  exclusions.  In
this  respect  he  shows  himself  a  true  pupil  of  the  Formal
logicians  ;  he  exhibits  all  their  contempt  or  ignorance  of
the  problems  of  scientific  knowing  and  their  childish
reliance  on  forms  which  are  impossible,  and  would  be
superfluous,  if  they  were  not.  Nay,  he  also  illustrates
their  uncritical  acceptance  of  the  established  forms  of


260  FORMAL  LOGIC  CHAP.

speech,  the  postulate  of  the  infallibility  of  words.
Because  language  presented  him  with  a  certain  pre
liminary  analysis  of  phenomena  into  discrete  '  things '
with  '  causes '  and  '  effects,'  he  assumes,  like  Aristotle,
that  it  must  be  a  sufficient  classification  for  all  scientific
purposes.  That  the  stock  of  words  with  which  any
inquiry  starts  is  merely  the  embodiment  of  the  results  of
past  inquiries,  and  that  for  any  further  inquiry  we  must
be  prepared  to  find  it  inadequate,  occurred  to  him  as
little  as  to  any  of  the  '  dialecticians '  whose  ultimate
appeal  is  to  *  the '  meaning  of  words.

Yet  once  the  claims  of  verbality  are  challenged,  his
method  goes  all  to  pieces.  If  the  makers  of  language
did  not  have  perfect  knowledge  of  the  phenomenon  and
its  causes,  it  cannot  be  assumed  that  the  existing  stock
of  words  is  adequate,  and  that  the  list  of  Forms  is
exhaustive.  For  to  assume  this  is  to  assume  that  it  is
known  within  what  limits  the  *  cause '  is  to  be  found.
Nor  can  it  be  assumed  that  the  '  Forms '  are  rightly
formulated ;  that  they  include  all  that  is  relevant  or
exclude  even  the  most  grossly  irrelevant.  What
ultimately  turns  out  to  be  the  true  explanation  of  the
phenomenon  they  may  not  recognize  in  words  at  all ;
and  to  extract  it  from  the  initial  description  may  be  as
hopeful  a  task  as  discovering  the  laws  of  meteorology  by
inquiring  why  '  Zeus  rains/  Or,  again,  they  may  classify
it  partly  under  one  word  and  partly  under  another,
or  ambiguously  under  several.  In  short,  if  scientific
induction  could  ever  proceed  by  first  stating  all  the
probably  relevant  alternatives  and  then  eliminating  all
those  that  actually  were  not,  it  would  be  child's  play
indeed,  and  far  more  '  puerile '  than  the  simple  enumera
tion  Bacon  condemned.  But  in  point  of  fact  it  cannot
start  with  exhaustion,  and  must  never  take  it  for  granted  ;
it  must  always  remain  alive  to  the  possibilities  that  there
are  undiscovered  alternatives  to  be  taken  into  account,
and  that  the  conceptual  tools  with  which  the  inquirer  has
to  work  are  inadequate,  and  have  to  be  re-worded.

It  is  no  wonder,  then,  that  Bacon's  inductive  method


xix  THE  FORMS  OF  INDUCTION  261

failed,  even  on  his  own  showing.  He  did  not  find  in  the
scientific  language  of  his  day  the  data  from  which  a
tenable  theory  of  heat  could  be  extracted  by  a  series  of
simple  exclusions.  His  method  deserved  to  fail,  as  the
Syllogism  it  tried  to  supplant,  and  only  succeeded  in
imitating,  failed,  and  for  the  same  reason.  Like  it,  it
had  begun  by  taking  as  done  what  it  is  the  whole
business  of  science  to  do,  and  had  then  tried  to  construct
an  ex  post  facto  valid  form,  which  was  to  be  infallible  in
the  abstract,  but  only  turned  out  to  be  inapplicable  to
the  concrete.  Like  it,  it  had  abstracted  from  the  proving
of  truths  in  order  to  elaborate  a  *  form '  of  proof,  though
when  it  is  met  with  the  objection  that  in  point  of  fact  we
cannot  reason  by  such  forms,  it  had  not  the  Syllogism's
sublime  audacity  of  retorting,  *  Well,  that  only  shows  that
I  am  the  ideal  of  reasoning.'

§  4.  Mill's  Notion  of  Induction

Inductive  logicians  learnt  nothing  from  Bacon's
splendid  failure.  They  continued  to  accept  the  ideal  of
Formal  Logic,  and  to  look  for  formally  valid  '  methods '
of  Induction.  But  their  researches  only  brought  out  the
self-contradictory  and  self-defeating  nature  of  the  task
they  had  set  themselves.  We  may  briefly  illustrate  this
from  the  case  of  the  best  known  of  inductive  logicians,
J.  S.  Mill.

Mill's  ambition  was  to  formulate  '  experimental '
Methods  of  Induction  which  should  both  formulate  the
actual  procedure  of  scientific  reasoning  from  facts,  and
also  yield  canons  for  such  reasoning  of  such  stringency
that  any  reasoning  in  conformity  with  them  would  have
to  be  regarded  as  formally  proved.1  But  the  incom-

1  Mill  defines  induction  as  an  inference  'from  the  known  to  the  unknown,'
from  '  what  we  know  to  be  true  in  a  particular  case  or  cases '  to  what  '  will  be
true  in  all  cases  which  resemble  the  former  in  certain  assignable  respects,'  or  as
inferring  from  some  instances  to  '  all  instances  of  a  certain  class  ;  namely,  in  all
which  resemble  the  former  in  what  are  regarded  as  the  material  circumstances,1
or  more  briefly  as  '  the  operation  of  discovering  and  proving  general  propositions  '
(Logic,  iii,  2,  §  i  ;  3,  §  i  ;  i,  §  2).  Mill  does  not  realize  what  difficult  questions
he  has  begged  in  the  words  italicized.  Can  we  ever  presume  that  our  data  are
perfectly  known,  that  our  '  cases '  are  rightly  selected,  that  they  constitute  a  real


262  FORMAL  LOGIC  CHAP.

patibility  of  these  two  aims  reveals  itself  in  the  fact  that
any  interpretation  of  them  which  is  scientifically  tenable
renders  them  formally  invalid,  while  any  that  renders
them  formally  cogent  also  renders  them  scientifically
superfluous,  because  it  represents  inductive  inference  as
either  impossible  or  unmeaning.

Mill's  superiority  over  Formal  logicians  of  the
'  deductive '  variety  consists  in  his  firm  conviction  that  it
must  be  possible  to  utilize  experience,  and  that  knowledge
of  fact  must  be  logically  relevant.  He  accordingly
conceives  the  problem  of  Induction  as  being  that  of
reasoning  from  'facts,'  or  more  precisely  that  of  dis
covering  the  '  causes  '  of  phenomena  ('  effects ').  But
that  '  facts '  may  be  taken  as  given  in  a  discrete  series,
that  they  have  determinate  '  causes,'  that  every  *  cause '  is
unambiguous  and  is  the  unconditional  and  invariable
antecedent  of  its  *  effect '  (though  there  is  an  apparent
'  plurality  of  causes '  which  is  scientifically  troublesome),
is  taken  for  granted  with  little  or  no  inquiry.  And  the
Methods  are  then  propounded  as  scientifically  adequate
and  logically  cogent  ways  of  inferring  regularities  of
causes  from  observed  regularities  of  events.

The  general  presupposition  of  the  procedure  is  the
axiomatic  Law  of  Causation  or  Uniformity  of  Nature.
It  yields  a  general  guarantee  that  events  shall  occur  in
an  intelligible  order,  and  will  have  to  be  discussed  by  us
in  the  next  chapter.  Mill  regards  it  neither  as  an
intuitive  self-evident  truth  nor  as  a  postulate,  but  as  a
fully  proved  induction  from  experience.  It  is  proved,
however,  not  by  any  formally  cogent  method,  but  by  a
simply  enumerative  induction  from  an  enormous  mass  of
uncontradicted  experience  of  great  antiquity.  But  he
also  sees,  more  clearly  than  many  philosophers,  that  such
a  general  principle  of  Induction  is  scientifically  quite
inadequate.  It  is  not  enough  to  believe  that  every


whole,  that  the  circumstances  '  regarded  '  as  '  material '  really  are  so,  that  the
resemblance  argued  from  will  justify  our  assertion  of  identity,  that  methods  of
discovery  ever  amount  to  formal  proof?  And  if  science  does  not  and  cannot
presume  any  of  these  things,  is  it  not  clear  that  a  theory  of  Induction  based  on
them  must  be  irrelevant  to  its  actual  procedures  ?


xix  THE  FORMS  OF  INDUCTION  263

event  has  some  cause,  if  one  cannot  particularize  the
4  cause '  of  any  particular  event.  Accordingly  there  is
a  need  for  special  Methods  to  determine  when  we  are
entitled  to  say  we  know  the  cause  of  any  event.

§  5.  Milts  Experimental  Methods

The  first  of  Mill's  five  methods  is  called  that  of  Agree
ment  and  formulated  as  follows  : *-

(1)  "If  two or more instances of  the phenomenon
under investigation have only one circumstance in
common,  the  circumstance  in  which  alone  all  the  instances
agree  is  the  cause  of  the  given  phenomenon."

The  second,  the  Method  of  Difference,  runs  thus  :—

(2)  "  If  an  instance  in  which  the  phenomenon  under
investigation  occurs,  and  an  instance  in  which  it  does  not
occur  have  every  circumstance  in  common  save  one,  that
one  occurring  only  in  the  former  ; the  circumstance in
which  alone  the  two  instances  differ  is  the  cause  of  the
phenomenon."

The  Joint  Method  of  Agreement  and  Difference  is
really  "  a  double  employment  of  the  Method  of  Agree
ment,"  consisting  of  agreement  in  the  absence  and  in  the
presence  of  the  suspected  cause.  Its  canon  is  stated
thus  :—

(3)  "  If  two  or  more  instances  in  which  the  phenomenon
occurs  have  only  one  circumstance  in  common,  while  two
or  more  instances  in  which  it  does  not  occur  have  nothing
in  common  save  the  absence  of  that circumstance,  the
circumstance in which  alone  the two sets of  instances
differ  is  the  cause  of  the  phenomenon."

The  fourth  Method,  called  the  Method  of  Residues,
is  formulated  as  follows  : —

(4)  "  Subduct  from  any  phenomenon  such  part  as  is
known  by  previous  inductions  to  be  the  effect  of  certain
antecedents,  and  the  residue  of  the  phenomenon  is  the
effect  of  the  remaining  antecedents."

1  The  phrases  which  are  designed  to  adjust  these  Canons  to  reasoning  from
causes  to  effects  are  throughout  omitted  as  irrelevant  complications.  For  the
real  problem  of  Induction  is  to  get  to  the  '  cause. '


264  FORMAL  LOGIC  CHAP.

Lastly,  in  cases  where  a  phenomenon  cannot  be  wholly
suppressed  but  only  varied  in  amount,  the  Method  of  Con
comitant  Variations  must  be  used.  It  declares  that —

(5)  "Whatever  phenomenon  varies  in  any  manner
whenever  another  phenomenon  varies  in  some  particular
manner,  is  a  cause  of  that  phenomenon  (or  connected
with  it  through  some  fact  of  causation)."

Now  it  is  evident,  and  indeed  emphasized  by  Mill
himself,  that  logically  there  is  a  great  sameness  about  these
Methods.  The  Joint  Method  of  Agreement  and  Differ
ence  is  really  a  double  application  of  the  Method  of
Agreement.  The  method  of  Concomitant  Variations
is  a  modification  of  that  of  Difference.  The  Method  of
Residues  is  plainly  secondary,  seeing  that  it  openly  appeals
to  'previous  inductions/  and  so  cannot  be  credited  with
capacity  to  operate  on  unscrutinized  crude  '  facts.'  But
there  is  great  similarity  also  between  the  Methods  of
Agreement  and  Difference.  Both  are  methods  of  elimina
tion  ;  i.e.  they  try  to  eliminate  from  a  complex  of
phenomena  in  which  the  desired  *  cause '  is  suspected  to  be
lurking^  the  irrelevant  '  circumstances '  which  conceal  it
from  view.  Thus  the  procedure  is  formally  just  the  same,
and  the  same  as  in  Bacon's  Method  of  Exclusions,  and  as
in  disjunctive  reasoning.  Its  '  inductive  '  character,  there
fore,  cannot  consist  in  the  form  of  reasoning,  but  only  in
the  selection  of  the  facts  reasoned  from.  In  logical
cogency,  however,  there  is  admittedly  a  great  difference
between  the  two  Methods.  The  Method  of  Agreement
has  no  means  of  determining  whether  the  '  event '  it  takes
to  be  the  *  effect '  is  really  one,  and  not  so  vaguely  con
ceived  as  to  be  something  which  may  ensue  upon  a
number  of  causes  ;  hence  what  is  called  the  '  plurality  of
causes '  (Chap.  XX,  §§  7,  9)  may  always  baffle  it.  Mill's
theory  of  Induction  really  stands  and  falls  logically  with
the  Method  of  Difference.  All  of  this  has  long  been
recognized,  and  was  practically  admitted  by  Mill  himself.

What  has  not  been  as  strongly  emphasized  is  that
this  whole  theory  of  Induction  is  applicable  only  to  one
particular  stage  in  scientific  knowing,  and  that  by  no


xix  THE  FORMS  OF  INDUCTION  265

means  the  most  difficult.  A  glance  at  these  canons  shows
that  they  all  presuppose  a  very  definite  state  of  the
scientific  inquiry.  They  imply  that  the  *  phenomenon '  is
unequivocally  given,  with  its  limits  clearly  mapped  out
and  without  a  question  as  to  what  are  '  instances '  of  it
and  what  not.  Similarly  the  antecedent  '  circumstances  '
are  taken  to  be  '  given,'  distinct,  definite,  and  definitely
observable.  In  short,  the  *  facts '  must  be  such  as  to
allow  the  reasoning  to  be  adequately  formulated  in
symbols  as  follows  : —

(1)  Agreement.

ABC  flbc

ADE  ade

AMN  flmn
.*.  A  is  the  cause  of  a.1

(2)  Difference.

ABC  abc

BC  be

.'.  A  is  the  cause  of  a.

(3)  Double  Agreement.

ABC  tfbc  B'FG  b'fg

ADE  ade  D'HI  d'hi

.'.  A  is  the  cause  of  a.

(4)  Residues.

(?X)BC  abc

BC  be

.*.  X  is  the  cause  of  a.

(5)  Concomitant  Variations.

ABC  abc

2ABC  2<*bc

ABC  abc

2  2

In  other  words,  the  Methods  are  trustworthy  tran
scriptions  of  scientific  procedure  only  if,  and  in  so  far  as,
the  state  of  knowledge  they  presuppose  actually  occurs
in  scientific  research.

1  It  is  not  worth  while  to  conceal  the  barefaced  question -begging  of  the
symbolizing  by  writing  ABC— ^ef,  AMN— ^gh,  etc.,  so  long  as  the  definite
character  of  the  '  circumstances  '  is  preserved.


266  FORMAL  LOGIC  CHAP.

§  6. Criticism  of  Mill's  Methods

(1)  Now, the first thought that must occur to a
scientific critic is that the state  of  things  presupposed
does not  exist in the beginnings of  any science. No
science  starts  with  a  clear  knowledge  of  its  proper  field
of  operation,  with  its  '  facts  '  sorted  out  into  *  antecedents  '
and '  consequents  '  and  '  circumstances  '  and  '  instances  *
in  the  manner  Mill's  Methods  suppose. It  is  confronted
rather with a continuous flow of happenings, where
nothing  is  distinct  and everything seems  to pass into
everything  else  in  an  incalculable  way. It can hardly
guess,  therefore,  what  belongs  to  what,  or  what  it  all  means,
and its initial guesses are all  wrong,  though  a  few  of
them  may  be  found  useful  stepping-stones  in  the  advance
to  firmer  ground. Moreover,  this  initial  stage  of  scientific
development  is  the  longest,  as  it  is  the  most  arduous,  and
no  theory  of  Induction  that  professes  to  be  scientifically
helpful should ignore it. Yet the Inductive Methods
plainly  do  ;  it  is  clear  that  even  if  they  argue  from  facts  at
all,  they  do  not  argue  from  crude  facts,  but  from  a  material
which  has  already  somehow  been  cut  into  definite  scientific
shapes. They  do  not,  therefore,  begin  at  the  beginnings
of  Induction,  nor  do  they  adequately  describe  the  whole
of  the  inductive  process.

(2)  It  is  almost  equally  obvious  that  upon  any  literal
interpretation  the  demands  of  the  Methods  can  never  be
complied  with. We  never  find  two  cases  which  have  c  no
circumstance  in  common  but  one,'  so  that  we  can  apply
the  Method  of  Agreement,  or  differing  in  nothing  but  the
presence  of  one  circumstance,  so  that  we  can  apply  the
Method  of  Difference. Literally  construed,  the Method
of  Agreement  postulates  an all  but  total  change  in  the
'circumstances,'  and  that  of  Difference an almost  total
immutability of the universe, and both demands are
impossible. The persistence of the cosmic order,  the
sun,  the  earth,  and  the  atmosphere,  is  sufficient  to  refute
the  one,  the  universality  of  change  the other,  while if
any  attempt  is  made  to  consider  them  collectively  they


xix  THE  FORMS  OF  INDUCTION  267

are  at  once  seen  to  be  incompatible.  For  together  they
demand  that  the  world  shall  be  capable  both  of  entire
change  and  of  entire  stability,  in  every  circumstance
but  one.

Both,  moreover,  are  formally  vitiated  by  an  extra
ordinary  omission  which  also  renders  them  scientifically
nugatory.  Both  have  forgotten  the  scientific  observer,
who  is  surely  an  indispensable  '  antecedent '  to  every
experiment.  His  effect  on  the  Method  of  Agreement  is
either  that  the  two  '  cases '  always  have  two  antecedents
in  common,  viz.  *  A  '  and  the  observer,  or  that  the  observer
is  himself  the  sole  persistent  antecedent.  Now  in  the
former  case  the  Method  is  formally  vicious,  while  in  the
latter  it  will  conduct  to  the  inference  that  he  is  himself
the  cause  of  the  phenomenon  and  the  author  of  the
uniformity  of  nature.  Nor  can  the  identity  of  the
observer  be  given  up,  for  if  he  did  not  remain  '  the  same  *
throughout,  the  resulting  change  in  his  personality  would
probably  vitiate  his  observations  still  more  seriously.  In
an  argument  by  the  Method  of  Difference,  on  the  other
hand,  the  observer  forms  part  of  the  rest  of  the  universe
which  is  supposed  to  undergo  no  change  as  the  ex
periment  progresses.  But  is  not  this  to  demand  that
the  experiment  shall  make  no  difference  to  him,  i.e.  that
he  is  to  be  at  the  end  as  he  was  at  the  beginning  ?  And
does  not  this  mean  that  he  is  to  have  no  understanding
of  what  he  is  doing?  So  soon  as  he  understands
what  his  experiment  means,  two  circumstances  have
changed  and  his  inference  becomes  formally  invalid  !

The  Methods  of  Double  Agreement  and  Concomi
tant  Variations  share,  of  course,  the  defects  of  their
primaries,  the  former  being  remarkable  for  the  way  it
heaps  impossibility  on  impossibility.  For  how  can
instances  be  discovered  in  the  same  universe  which  have
nothing  in  common  save  the  '  absence '  of  a  circumstance  ?
Will  not  any  two  ( instances '  have  innumerable  absences
in  common  ?  And  what  is  to  guarantee  the  relevance  of
the  two  sets  of  circumstances  to  each  other  ?  If  we  are
prospecting  for  gold,  will  it  be  reasonable  to  note,  not


268  FORMAL  LOGIC  CHAP.

only  that  gold  does  occur  in  certain  rocks,  but  also  that
it  does  not  grow  on  trees  nor  occur  in  pumpkins  or  black
beetles?  The  defects  of  the  method  are  so  glaring  that
in  most  modern  statements  a  clause  has  been  introduced
to  ensure  a  sort  of  general  relevance  of  the  sets  of
circumstances,  stipulating  that  the  points  of  resemblance
and  difference  shall  be  '  important '  or  '  material.'  But
the  omission  of  plain  irrelevance  yields  no  guarantee  of
the  inclusion  of  the  really  relevant,  and  besides  this
proviso  at  once  opens  up  entirely  new  points  of  view,
which  cannot  be  tolerated  on  the  ground  of  Formal
Logic.  The  strict  logician,  therefore,  is  within  his  rights
when  he  protests  against  such  vague  phrases  and  inquires
who  is  to  be  the  judge  of  the  c  importance '  of  a
resemblance,  and  how  it  is  to  be  ascertained.  For  if  it  is
to  be  decided  in  advance,  mistakes  will  be  frequent ;  while
if  it  is  only  decided  after  experiment,  it  will  be  known  only
ex  post  facto >,  and  will  be  scientifically  useless.

§  7.  How  to  give  a  Meaning  to  Mill's  Methods

In  spite  of  all  these  unanswerable  criticisms  the
Methods  were  not  so  far  wrong  in  what  they  meant.
Only  it  is  clear  that  they  do  not  mean  what  they  say.
To  give  them  a  good  scientific  meaning,  and  to  remedy
their  misconstruction  of  scientific  procedure,  it  is  necessary
to  insert  one  little  word,  a  magic  word,  however,  which
disrupts  the  whole  of  Formal  Logic.  Instead  of  talking
about  facts  at  large,  let  us  say  relevant  facts.  The  reference
to  relevance  will  then  at  once  transform  the  Methods,  and
render  them  scientifically  workable.  It  will  relieve  the
Method  of  Agreement  of  the  burden  of  enormous  masses
of  cosmic  sameness,  and  the  Method  of  Difference  of
incalculable  multitudes  of  changes,  if  we  can  make  sure
that  the  persistences  in  the  one  case  and  the  changes  in
the  other  are  both  irrelevant  at  least  for  the  purposes  of
the  observation.  It  may  thus  become  true  that  two
observations  have  only  one  relevant  (or  *  important '  or
'  essential ')  circumstance  in  common  and  that  two


xix  THE  FORMS  OF  INDUCTION  269

experiments  differ  only  in  one  relevant  point.  It  is  also
a  very  easy  correction  to  make,  and  one  that  is  made  tacitly
in  every  scientific  description.

And  this,  of  course,  is  why  Mill's  Canons  seemed  to
work,  and  to  represent  the  procedure  of  science.  The
practical  insight  or  sagacity  of  the  scientist  always  tacitly
applied  them  to  relevant  facts,  and  supplied  the  logician
with  illustrations  from  sciences  which  had  already  prac
tically  and  painfully  worked  out  what '  facts  '  were  relevant
to  a  given  sort  of  experiment,  and  what  not.  But  all  these
illustrations  were  ex  post  facto  and  did  not  illustrate  any
actual  case  of  knowing,  while  no  attempt  was  ever  made
to  show  how  the  Methods  could  ever  be  applied  to
questions  that  were  really  undecided.

Nevertheless  the  appeal  to  *  relevance '  will  not  save
the  formal  validity  of  the  Inductive  Methods.  For  it  has
to  be  paid  for  and  exacts  a  price  no  Formalism  can  pay.
It  implies  a  number  of  things  which  are  fatal  to  the  *  ideal '
of  Formal  Induction.

(1)  It  makes  it  clear  in  the  first  place  that  the  Canons
have no application to  the  early  gropings  of  a  science
when  little  or  nothing  can  be  pronounced  irrelevant.

(2)  It  means  relation  and  relativity  to  purpose. For
a feature in the total content of  experience which is
selected  as  a  'fact*  relevant  to  one  purpose  need  not  be
so  to  another. So  relevance,  purposiveness,  and  selection
deprive scientific *  fact ' of its absoluteness and '  in
dependence.1

(3)  They  mean,  as  we  have  noted  at  intervals  through
out, what  a consistent Formal Logic must abhor as
'  psychology.1 The '  relevant ' (as its very etymology
shows)  is  what  is  selected  by  a  knower  as  '  helpful '  for  his
purpose.

(4)  To  admit relevance  is to  renounce  the  ideal  of
Formal  validity. For  the  decision  about  what  is  relevant
or not can never be a Formal  affair,  but  presupposes
a  knowledge  of  the  actual  circumstances  and  purpose  of
the  inquiry, and must always depend  on the  material
knowledge  possessed  at  the  inception  of  the  inquiry  and


270  FORMAL  LOGIC  CHAP.

be  corrected  by  the  accretions  of  material  knowledge  which
accrue  during  its  progress.  Formally,  then,  the  relevant
and  the  irrelevant  '  facts  '  are  indistinguishable.

(5)  There must not only  be an absence of  formal
cogency about inductive reasoning from relevant fact,
but  a  presence  of  real  doubt. For  there  must  always  be
risk  in  drawing  the  line  between the relevant and the
irrelevant,  and  the  logician  at  least  should  be  conscious
of  it. This  risk  can  only  be  shown  to  have  been  ground
less  ex  post  facto  by  the  success  of  an  experiment,  and
even this never yields  a  theoretically  incontestable or
absolute  proof. The  risk  must  always,  therefore,  be  allowed
for  in  an  account  of  actual  knowing. Science,  therefore,
has  always  to  treat  it as  real,  and  can only  marvel  at
a  '  logic '  which  gaily  ignores  it.

(6)  It  follows  that  nearly  all  philosophers  have  been
completely  wrong  in their conception of the ideal of
knowledge. The ideal is not all  -  inclusiveness and
indiscriminate  hospitality  to every  aspect  of fact,  how
ever  insignificant  and  remote  from  human  interests,  but
selectiveness  and  deliberate  concentration  on  the  relevant.
Now  this  implies  a  stern  exclusion  of  the  irrelevant,  and
it  is  not  too  much  to  say  that  it  discredits  utterly  the  search
for  all-inclusive  unity  as  a  principle  of  knowledge. For
it  implies  that  any  unity  which  seems  to  be  given,  such
as the  objects  of  sense-perception,  is  not known,  while
that  which  is  attained,  such  as  the  system  of  a  science,  is
an artificial product of selections,  and cannot be all-
inclusive,  just  because  it  rests on the exclusion of  the
irrelevant.1

Perhaps,  however,  an  attempt  may  be  made  to  evade
these  consequences  by  declaring  the  relevance  of  the  facts
argued  from  to  be  a  formal  postulate  of  Induction,
analogous  to  the  Syllogism's  postulate  of  materially  true
premisses.  But  if  so  we  should  merely  be  making  out
a  case  for  a  third  branch  of  Logic,  underlying  both
Induction  and  Deduction,  which  would  determine  the
relevance  of  '  fact '  and  be  more  important  than  either.

1  Cf.  Chap.  XX,  §  3.


xix  THE  FORMS  OF  INDUCTION  271

And  even  then  we  should  arrive  at  no  better  result  than
in  the  case  of  deductive  proof.  For  though  the  region
of  relevance  is  that  which  surrounds  the  precise  point
of  the  inquiry,  it  is  not  itself  the  point  we  are  trying
to  get  to.  If,  therefore,  boldness  in  postulation  were
enough  to  advance  science,  why  not  postulate  at  once
that  we  had  got,  not  merely  to  the  relevant,  but  to  the
actual  point,  which  alone  is  relevant  in  the  end  ?  If,  then,
relevance  may  really  be  postulated,  i.e.  if  the  '  facts '  really
are  all  relevant,  and  known  to  be  so,  where  will  be  the
inference  ?  And  what  need  will  there  be  for  the  process
of  induction  ?  Why  enumerate  masses  of  irrelevance,  and
go  through  the  farce  of  eliminating  it,  if  we  already  know
that  nothing  is  relevant  to  the  occurrence  of  a  but  the
antecedence  of  A  ?  Why  trouble  about  the  other  '  circum
stances  '  at  all  and  mention  ABC,  ADE,  etc.  ?  If  we
can  postulate  that  our  antecedents  shall  be  partly  relevant,
why  not  postulate  that  they  are  so  wholly  ?  But  in  that
case  the  inference  again  becomes  unreal,  as  it  did  in  the
Syllogism,  when  it  was  taken  as  certain  that  whatever  was
called  a  '  case '  of  a  '  law '  must  conform  to  the  law.

The  formal  verdict  on  the  Methods  of  Induction,
therefore,  inevitably  is  that  they  are  impossible,  if  the
relevance  of  the  facts  they  use  is  not  yet  established,
or  superfluous,  if  it  is.  As  before,  real  reasoning  cannot
be  reduced  to  Formal  shape,  and  the  '  cogent '  Forms  are
not  forms  of  reasoning.  And,  as  before,  the  only  way
of  avoiding  this  dilemma  lies  in  recognizing  that  real
reasoning  is  never  concerned  with  initial  certainties,  but
always  refers  to  a  real  doubt.  In  the  case  of  reasonings
from  *  facts '  this  doubt  concerns  the  relevance  of  the
selections  from  experience  which  are  called  the  '  facts/
and  the  correctness  of  these  selections  is  precisely  the
point  to  be  tested.  In  any  real  use  of  inductive  reasoning
this  relevance  must  always,  therefore,  be  initially  doubtful,
and  cannot  be  postulated.


CHAPTER XX
CAUSATION

§  i . The  Problem  of  Causation

THE  conception  of  Causation  is  a  most  important  part
of  that  equipment  of  general  notions  for  application  to
experience  with  which  all  men  start,  and  which  no  man
is  wont  to  question.  It  is  entrenched  in  the  forms  of
every  one's  language  and  the  habits  of  every  one's
thought,  and  has  the  backing  of  immemorial  experience.
It  is  no  wonder,  therefore,  that  we  naturally  resent  any
thing  that  seems  like  an  attempt  to  question  the  meaning
of  so  familiar  an  assumption.  Logicians  are  in  this
respect  like  other  mortals  ;  but  their  position  is  different,
because  for  the  purposes  of  their  study  it  is  their  duty
to  give  a  coherent  account  of  the  meaning,  function,
value,  and  validity  of  the  causal  explanation  of  phenomena.
It  is  not  too  much  to  demand  of  them,  therefore,  that
they  should  consent  to  observe  the  actual  use  that  is
made  of  the  conception  in  ordinary  and  scientific  thinking,
before  laying  down  the  law  as  to  what  it  ought  to  mean,
or  betaking  themselves  to  '  metaphysics '  in  order  to  avoid
'  contradictions '  which  too  often  arise  only  from  their
own  failure  to  understand  the  real  function  of  the  causal
principle.

If  they  would  consent  to  do  this,  they  would  at  once
observe  a  number  of  patent  facts,  which,  in  the  present
state  of  Logic,  we  shall  be  able  to  arrive  at  only  after  a
protracted  struggle  with  factitious  puzzles  and  paradoxes.
It  would  be  observed,  for  example,  (i)  that  experience

272


CHAP,  xx  CAUSATION  273

does  not  originally  come  to  us  all  nicely  labelled  and
dissected  into  *  causes '  and  '  effects/  but  floods  us  with
an  undiscriminated  gush  of  happenings,  and  that  it  is  the
function  of  causal  analysis  to  protect  us  in  this  torrent
and  to  preserve  our  sanity.  Not  that  it  is  ever  quite
successful ;  it  is  powerless  to  alter  the  nature  of  ex
perience,  and  even  our  conceptual  interpretation  never
completely  dissevers  it  into  connexions  of  causes  and
effects,  even  to  the  most  finely  analytic  intelligence
But  (2)  it  is  clear  that  the  function  of  the  causal  analysis
is  to  transform  experience  by  dissecting  it  ideally  and
substituting  for  its  chaotic  flow  an  orderly  series  of  causes
and  effects.  (3)  This  procedure  is  plainly  an  interpreta
tion  we  put  upon  experience,  and  on  the  face  of  it
arbitrary  and  improbable.  Hence  (4)  it  must  naturally
seem  monstrous  to  all  who  hold  that  man's  role  in  knowing
is  only  passive,  and  counts  for  nothing  in  the  construc
tion  of  reality.  Our  procedure,  therefore,  is  not  '  self-
evident/  but  almost  self-refuting.  It  clashes  sharply  with
deep-seated  philosophic  prejudices,  and  will  not  be  easy
to  justify  in  philosophic  eyes.  And  yet  the  fact  remains
that  causal  analysis  is  in  full  operation,  and  that  without
it  both  our  science  and  our  practice  lapse  into  shapeless
ruin.  And  then  what  would  be  left  for  philosophy  to
'  contemplate '  ?

Philosophy  has,  since  Hume,  in  a  manner  dimly  seen
that  it  could  neither  live  at  all  without  the  causal
principle  nor  comfortably  with  it,  while  its  own  prejudices
prevented  it  from  recognizing,  and  often  from  seeing,  the
obvious  facts  aforesaid.  It  felt  bound  to  'criticize'  the
working  creed  of  ordinary  life  and  science,  but  not  to
put  anything  workable  in  its  place.  Nor  indeed  could
it ;  for  not  only  had  it  uncritically  adopted  their  most
untenable  assumptions,  but  it  had  proceeded  to  discard
the  checks  on  them  which  common-sense  had  recognized
in  practice.  No  wonder  such  a  procedure  led  to  *  diffi
culties  '  which  blossomed  into  absurdities,  when  they  were
sublimated  into  metaphysics.  The  philosophic  *  analysis '
of  the  conception  of  Causation  became  a  systematic

T


274  FORMAL  LOGIC  CHAP.

misinterpretation  which  gradually  eliminated  all  that  was
true  and  valuable  in  the  common-sense  notions  on  the
subject ;  but  we  must  follow  it  in  the  hope  that  systematic
error  may  prove  more  enlightening  than  confusion.


§  2.  Philosophic  Criticisms  of  the  Common-sense  Notion

of  Cause

Any  philosophic  criticism  of  a  conception  in  common
use  must  accept  it  to  some  extent.  For  the  very  fact
that  it  is  in  general  use  proves  that  it  has  value,
and  cannot  be  wholly  wrong.  Unfortunately,  however,
philosophy  has  in  this  case  discarded  the  right  and
accepted  the  wrong  elements  in  the  working  conception
of  Causation.  It  rejected  the  ideas  that  *  causes '  were
plural  and  partial  and  '  arbitrary '  and  prior  to  their
'  effects ' ;  it  accepted  the  ideas  that  they  were  given  and
necessary,  denied  that  they  were  partial^  and  concluded
that  they  were  identical.  The  disastrous  consequences
may  be  briefly  sketched.

(i)  Common-sense  had  assumed  that  'causes'  and
*  effects  '  were  given  as  such.  But  as  it  had  not  reflected
on  the  subject,  it  was  not  pledged  to  deny  that  the
apparently  ready-made  '  effects  '  and  '  causes  '  from  which
it  started  might  be  products  of  past  discoveries,  gradually
fished  out  of  the  flow  of  happenings  and  fixed  by
tradition.  But  when  philosophy  accepted  the  results
of  common-sense  analysis,  it  could  not  be  satisfied  with
anything  so  humdrum  as  the  belief  that  men  may
gradually  have  succeeded  in  disentangling  certain
sequences  of  events  which  may  with  reasonable  confidence
be  regarded  as  guides  to  other  events,  and  that  this  is
all  that  causal  analysis  does  or  aims  at  doing.  It  did
not  seem  enough  merely  to  have  empirical  knowledge
of  particular  causes  ;  the  dignity  of  philosophy  aspired
to  understanding  the  causal  principle  or  '  Law  of  Causa
tion.'  *  Cause,'  therefore,  must  mean  something  grander,
and  be  equipped  with  a  worthier  pedigree.  It  was
natural,  therefore,  to  conceive  it  as  a  universal  axiom


XX


CAUSATION  275


of  the  necessary  connexion  of  events,  and  to  denominate
it  an  a  priori  necessity  of  thought As  such  it  must  be
prior  by  nature  to  its  effect,  which  it  infallibly  guarantees. ,
And  to  criticize  it  is  sacrilege.

Naturally  enough  critical  inquiry  into  the  evidence
for  the  current  conception  was  most  unwelcome,  and
when  Hume  began  it,  it  was  universally  decried  as
*  scepticism.'  But  before  the  inquiry  was  concluded  the
very  schools  which  had  tried  most  laboriously  to  answer
Hume  had  themselves  gone  far  beyond  him  in  the
destructiveness  of  their  results.  The  event  showed  then
that  Hume's  '  scepticism '  had  not  gone  far  enough.

Hume,  unfortunately,  had  not  called  in  question
the  givenness  of  *  causes '  and  *  effects.'  Indeed,  his
interpretation  carried  to  an  extreme  the  logical  trick
of  presuming  that  done  which  it  is  the  whole  work  of
science  to  do ;  he  assumed  that  the  causal  analysis
was  complete,  and  that  every  distinguishable  psycKic
content  was  a  distinct  existence,  with  the  result  that  he
was  unable  to  discover  any  connexions  between  events
that  had  been  rendered  *  entirely  loose  and  separate.'
He  consequently  overlooked  the  continuity  of  the  flux  of
experience  altogether,  and  in  this  gross  oversight  his
critics  obediently  followed  him.

(2)  But  he  directed  his  criticism  very  effectively  upon
another  element  of  the  current  conception,  the  belief  in
a  necessary  connexion  between  '  cause  '  and  '  effect.'  He
pointed  out  that  it  was  nowhere  an  observable  fact,1  but
always  a  subjective  addition  made  to  the  temporal
succession  of  events.  This  addition,  however,  he  con
ceived  as  a  habit  of  expectation  mechanically  engendered
by  uniformities  of  experience  in  a  passively  receptive
mind,  and  not  as  the  act  of  an  actively  analytical
intelligence.  In  other  words,  nature  was  conceived  as
an  assemblage  of  discrete  successions,  among  which  those

1  Not  even  in  the  psycho-physical  sequence  of  volition-motion,  which  is  the
only  case  where  causal  efficacy  or  power,  if  it  exists,  would  be  a  matter  of  direct
experience.  Hume's  proof  of  this  is,  however,  at  bottom  only  an  assertion  of  his
resolve  to  treat  his  own  acts  as  if  they  were  external  phenomena.  Cf.  my  article
on  "  Humism  and  Humanism"  in  the  Aristotelian  Society's  Proceedings,  1907.


276  FORMAL  LOGIC  CHAP.

sequences  which  recurred  frequently  came  to  be  thought
together  ('  associated ')  so  firmly  that  human  minds  could
not  but  expect  them.  Thus  causal  necessity  was  merely
the  subjective  reflexion  of  objective  regularity.

That  '  necessary  connexion '  is  not  a  fact  of  observa
tion  was  undeniable,  after  it  had  once  been  pointed  out,
and  none  of  the  confuters  of  Hume  could  deny  it.  But
it  seemed  at  first  as  though  Hume's  other  discovery,  viz.
that  it  is  a  subjective  addition  imposed  on  the  given
facts  by  us,  might  lead  to  a  proper  appreciation  of  the
part  played  by  human  activity  in  causal  analysis.  Kant
had  the  great  merit  of  seeing  that  Hume's  discovery
would  cease  to  mean  c  subjectivism,'  if  analogous  pro
cedures  could  be  traced  throughout  what  was  universally
admitted  to  be  experience  of  objective  reality,  and  that
the  only  difference  entailed  would  be  a  new  analysis  of
the  notion  of  *  objectivity.'  But  unfortunately  he  had
been  brought  up  in  the  strictest  sect  of  rationalistic
faculty-psychologists,  and  was  accustomed  to  divide  the
concrete  personality  into  a  number  of  discrete  '  faculties.'
So  he  tried  to  doctor  the  disconnected  Humian  *  im
pressions  '  with  a  whole  army  of  faculties  almost  as
disconnected.

'  Cause '  became  one  of  an  apostolic  band  of  a  dozen
'  categories '  or  *  pure  conceptions  of  the  understanding/
which  the  intellectual  nature  of  the  mind  inevitably
imposed  a  priori  on  the  atomized  '  matter  of  sensation '
which  was  *  given  '  it.  More  specifically,  it  was  the  formu
lation  of  an  a  priori  rule  applicable  to  the  succession  of
events.  Kant,  however,  was  so  taken  up  with  elaborating
the  system  of  the  a  priori  contributions  of  the  mind  to
the  formation  of  experience  that  he  never  troubled  to
consider  how  in  scientific  practice  such  a  rule  was  to  be
applied,  why,  that  is,  the  category  of  Causality  should  be
chosen  in  contemplating  any  experience  rather  than  any
other  category,  and  why  the  sequence  A  —  B  should  be
regarded  as  causal  and  A  —  a  not,  how  causal  sequences
were  to  be  discriminated  from  casual,  otherwise  than
ex  post  factO)  and  how  from  a  belief,  however  firm,  in


XX


CAUSATION  277


a  priori  truth  of  the  existence  of  causes  a  transition  was
to  be  effected  to  a  discovery  of  particular  causal  laws.
In  other  words,  Kant  was  far  from  grasping  that  in  order
to  bring  his  a  priori  forms  to  bear  on  experience  there
was  need  of  a  process  of  selection,  and  that  the  Causal
problem  both  for  science  and  for  common-sense  is  always
how  to  assign  particular  events  to  particular  causes.

(3)  To  perceive  that  the  function  of  Causation  is  to
explain  particular  events  is  to  perceive  that  '  causes '
must  be  partial^  and  selections  from  the  totality  of
phenomena ;  while  nothing  more  signally  proves  the
failure  of  current  philosophy  to  grasp  the  cognitive
function  of  Causation  than  the  protest  it  raises  against
the  notion  of  partial  causes.

It  starts  by  observing  that  alike  in  the  scientific  and
in  the  common-sense  use  of  the  causal  principle  no
attempt  is  ever  made  to  state  the  antecedents  of  the
'  effect '  exhaustively.  What  is  sought  for,  and  accepted,
as  the  *  cause '  is  always  a  selection  from  the  totality  of
antecedents.  And,  as  is  natural  in  selections,  it  varies.
The  *  same '  event  may  have  a  multitude  of  causes,  and
different  persons  may  determine  its  *  cause '  differently.
What  '  the  cause '  of  an  event  is  (or  is  called)  depends  on
the  speaker's  interest  and  the  purpose  of  his  inquiry.
The  *  cause '  of  a  death  may  be  found  in  an  '  accident/
or  in  the  man  who  let  off  the  gun,  or  in  the  injury  to
his  victim's  organs,  or  in  his  general  state  of  health,  or
in  his  happening  to  move  into  the  line  of  fire,  or  in  his
carelessness  or  drunkenness,  or  in  that  of  the  man  who
fired,  or  in  the  mechanical  nature  of  the  gun,  or  the
physical  nature  of  the  powder,  etc.,  etc.  All  these
circumstances  were  among  the  antecedents,  and  each
may  be  regarded  as  the  essential  point  thereof  by  the
agent,  or  the  patient,  or  the  doctor,  or  the  coroner,  or
the  moralist,  or  the  physicist,  etc.,  who  is  interested  in
the  event.  If  any  of  them  were  asked  whether  the  other
antecedents  were  not  equally  present  and  indispensable
to  the  event,  he  would  assent,  but  make  a  distinc
tion  between  the  'cause'  and  the  'conditions'  which,


278  FORMAL  LOGIC  CHAP.

though  indispensable,  were  not  worthy  to  be  called  the
<  cause.'

Now  all  this  seems  utterly  illogical  to  the  philosopher.
Is  it  not  utterly  arbitrary  to  select  a  single  antecedent,
and  to  restrict  the  title  of  cause  to  that  ?  And  is  not
the  distinction  of  '  causes '  and  '  conditions '  quite  as
arbitrary  and  unsound  ?  The  *  conditions '  are  just  as
;  necessary  to  the  event's  occurrence  as  the  *  cause/
Why,  then,  should  they  be  excluded  ?  Surely  a  truly
philosophic  view  must  try  to  state  the  whole  cause,
or  what  we  had  perhaps  better  call  the  ground,  and
eschew  the  impropriety  and  inconsistency  of  scientific
practice.

(4)  How,  then,  shall  we  conceive  this  cause  or  ground  ?
Ultimately  it  must  include  the  totality  of  reality.  For
every  '  antecedent J  ramifies  indefinitely,  and  we  can  never
show  that  if  anything  had  been  different  the  event  would
have  been  the  same.  It  is  clear,  therefore,  that  the  true
1  cause '  produces  not  merely  the  beggarly  '  event/  on
which  common-sense  and  science  had  fixed  their  myopic
eyes,  but  vastly  more.  The  total  *  effect '  is  the  totality
of  reality,  and  it  is  only  by  an  illusion  of  abstraction  that
partial  '  causes '  and  c  effects '  seem  to  exist.  Here  at
last  is  something  worthy  of  philosophy  !  The  Whole  of
Reality  is  the  Cause,  and  nothing  is  too  mean  or  too
recalcitrant  to  be  included  in  it ;  and  the  Whole  of
Reality  is  the  Effect,  and  nothing  is  too  recondite  to  be
included  in  it.

But  what,  then,  is  the  difference  between  them  ?  Are
you  not  making  *  cause '  and  *  effect '  the  same  ?  And
what  has  become  of  change  and  of  the  cause's  antecedence
to  the  effect  ?

How  can  you  ask  so  foolishly?  Why,  of  course
Cause  and  Effect  are  identical.  '  Antecedence '  is  a
superstition,  and  change  is  an  illusion.  For  consider :  no
sooner  do  you  get  the  last  antecedent  than  you  get  the
effect.  Put  your  gunpowder  under  the  Houses  of
Parliament  and  secure  the  benevolent  neutrality  of  the
rest  of  the  universe  and  then  apply  your  match.  You


XX


CAUSATION  279


have  not  an  *  antecedent '  of  the  explosion,  but  the
explosion  itself.  Believe  us  or  try  it !

It  is  only  on  the  lower  planes  of  insight,  then,  that
*  cause '  is  prior  to  *  effect.'  Neither  is  before  the  other.
The  time-relation  is  irrelevant ;  it  vanishes  in  the  full
daylight  of  philosophy.  It  is  gone,  and  with  it  go  the
whole  host  of  popular  superstitions.  Nothing  is  left  but
the  glorious  conviction  of  the  unity  of  the  universe  !

Nothing  assuredly  of  common  -  sense  or  science.
Nothing  that  either  wished  to  have  explained.  Their
problems  have  disappeared,  or  rather  have  been  exploded.
But  have  we  after  all  got  what  we  wanted  ?  Is  the  truth
to  which  philosophy  has  led  us  the  truth  we  had  set  out
to  find  ?  Did  we  not  desire  to  learn  how  to  connect  in
reasoning  '  facts '  in  the  plural  ?  And  lo  !  there  are  no
more  facts  ;  they  are  all  taken  up  and  assimilated  in  the
Whole  !  But  did  we  wish  to  know  that  the  universe  is
one,  when  we  asked  what  was  the  '  cause '  of  a  particular
event  ?  And  was  this  all  we  wished  to  know  ?  Is  that
the  universal  answer  to  every  question  ?  It  is  all  we  are
told,  but  is  it  the  answer  to  our  question,  or  indeed  to
any  question  ?

Apparently  it  is  not,  but  what  of  that?  You  may
not  have  got  what  you  wanted,  but  you  have  got  some
thing  higher  and  better.  Be  content  with  that.  Why
molest  a  philosophic  theory  with  the  perplexities  of
practice?  When  philosophy  is  satisfied,  it  befits  science
and  practice  to  be  reverently  mute.

The  logician  qua  philosopher  may  profess  himself
entirely  satisfied  with  this  result,  but  qua  scientist  how
can  he  acquiesce  in  it  ?  For  he  has  got  a  result  which
for  practical  and  scientific  purposes  is  perfectly  useless,
because  it  is  impossible  to  argue  from  it.  If  the  attempt
to  state  the  antecedents  of  an  event  in  their  full
particularity  could  ever  be  successful,  their  uniqueness
would  be  so  clearly  revealed  that  we  should  see  that  they
led  up  to  just  that  event  and  to  no  other,  and  to  reason
from  this  case  would  in  consequence  be  impossible.
Formally,  of  course,  it  would  be  possible  still  to  represent


280  FORMAL  LOGIC  CHAP.

it  as  a  generalization,  but  in  reality  the  generalization
would  be  a  sham.  As  Alfred  Sidgwick  ironically  points
out,  who  ever  cares  to  know  that  "  all  cases  presenting
exactly  the  details  found  in  the  Rue  Morgue  are  cases
where  a  double  murder  has  been  committed  on  two
helpless  women  by  a  large  fulvous  orang-outang  of  the
Bornese  species,  escaped  from  a  sailor  belonging  to  a
Maltese  vessel "  ? 1  We  know  that  just  those  circum
stances  will  never  recur,  and  that  the  whole  of  them  can
never  be  relevant  to  any  future  case  of  a  mysterious  murder.

Moreover,  this  doctrine  conveys  just  as  little  comfort  to
the  logician.  For  logically  it  seems  meaningless.  For  all
it  asserts  is  the  tautology  that '  the  universe  =  the  universe/
and  that  it  does  not  matter  whether  we  call  it  'cause'
or  '  effect.'  How  is  this  piece  of  verbalism  to  enable  any
one  for  any  purpose  to  trace  any  particular  connexion
between  any  particular  cause  and  any  particular  effect,  or  to
predict  anything  in  particular  ?  And  yet,  unless  he  can
do  this,  how  can  he  reason  about  causes  and  effects  at  all  ?
If,  then,  the  truth  of  the  causal  principle  rests  on  the  unity
of  reality,  it  falsifies  every  use  of  it  in  actual  knowing.

Is  it  a  wonder,  then,  that  this  staggering  paradox,
which  is  well  worthy  to  rank  with  the  strictly  Formal
notion  of  proof,  which  was  bound  to  regard  Inference  as
extra-logical  (Chap.  XVI,  §  10),  should  excite  some
comment?  Can  a  course  of  criticism  be  on  the  right
track  which  comes  to  the  conclusion  that  in  any  sense
in  which  the  conception  of  Causation  is  philosophically
tenable  it  is  useless,  and  in  any  sense  in  which  it  is
scientifically  useful  it  is  false  ?  2  Is  it  not  more  probable
that  philosophic  criticism  has  somehow  gone  astray  ?

§  3. The  True  Interpretation  of  the  Common-sense
Notion  of  Cause

The  logician  at  all  events  should  have  no  doubts
about  his  proper  policy.  He  is  not  bound  to  side  with

1  The  Application  of  Logic,  p.  31.

2  Cf.  Riddles  of  the  Sphinx,  p.  69  (new  ed.)  ;  and  A.  E.  Taylor,  Elements  of
Metaphysics,  p.  182.


XX


CAUSATION  281


'  metaphysics '  in  its  quarrel  with  science  and  practice,
nor  to  help  it  to  find  shelter  in  unmeaning  verbiage.
His  proper  business  is  to  explain  how  causal  reason
ing  is  possible.  And  so  he  may  avow,  if  he  finds  it  to
be  the  fact,  that  the  only  possibility  of  explaining  it
seems  to  him  to  lie  in  defending,  emphasizing,  and  ex
tending  the  very  features  in  it  which  have  hitherto  been
targets  for  the  greatest  philosophic  scorn,  and  in  ques:
tioning  those  which  have  hitherto  met  with  philosophic
acceptance.

In  the  first  place,  then,  any  account  of  Causation
which  is  based  on  its  actual  function  in  knowing  must
utterly  refuse  to  apologize  for  or  retract  the  partial
character  of  '  causes.'  Causal  explanation  is  analysis  of
the  given,  and  not  synthesis,  and  its  meaning  is  un
intelligible  unless  this  is  grasped.  Its  aim  is  not  to  state  !
the  whole  of  the  '  antecedents '  or  *  conditions  '  but  a  part,
to  extract  the  relevant  and  important  part  which  it  calls}
the  cause  :  to  require  it  to  include  the  whole  is  to  ask  it
to  stultify  itself,  as  the  result  of  the  philosophic  '  criticism  '
sufficiently  establishes.

The  very  last  thing,  therefore,  that  causal  analysis  is
concerned  to  assert  is  the  unity  of  the  universe,  and  the
'  identity '  of  effect  and  cause.  For  in  one  sense  ,such
unity  and  undiscriminated  identity  is  the  very  thing  it  starts  -f
with  and  is  trying  to  get  rid  of ;  in  another  it  is  so  distant
an  ideal  that  it  hardly  enters  into  scientific  calculations.
The  error  of  the  enthusiasts  for  unity  is  due  to  their  failure
to  discriminate  between  unity  as  a  datum  and  unity  as
an  ideal.  Unity  is  a  datum  in  the  shape  of  a  chaotic
flux  of  experience  in  which  *  cause/  and  *  effect,'  and
plurality  are  not  yet  discriminated  ;  it  is  an  ideal  in  the
shape  of  a  perfectly  articulated  and  all-embracing  system
of  cognitions.  But  between  them  lies  the  whole  world
and  work  of  science,  and  only  the  most  blindly  un
observant  philosophy  will  confuse,  and  only  the  most
recklessly  rationalistic  will  identify  them.  There  is  no
royal  road  to  absolute  knowledge  which  metaphysics  can
traverse  by  a  leap.  The  only  way  of  passing  from  the


282  FORMAL  LOGIC  CHAP.

first  to  the  second  sort  of  *  unity '  is  by  the  long  way  of
Science.  Now  the  way  of  Science  begins  by  turning  its
back  resolutely  on  the  notion  that  knowledge  is  repro
duction  of  the  given.  It  is  analysis,  rearrangement
transformation,  nay,  if  you  please,  '  mutilation '  and
falsification,  of  the  given.  That  is,  it  begins  and  ends
with  selective  operations  of  our  thought  upon  our
datum.  No  wonder  that  the  one  order  it  aims  at  is  so
different  from  the  one  chaos  that  is  given,  and  that
unless  this  is  clearly  understood  philosophy  beats  the
air  and  makes  no  progress.

It  is  evident  then  that,  if  we  really  wish  to  know,  we
cannot  grasp,  and  ought  not  to  imagine  that  we  are
grasping,  reality  as  a  whole,  but  must  take  it  piecemeal.
No  significant  judgment  ever  aims  at  anything  so
impossible  and  self-defeating  as  stating  the  whole  of
reality.1  For  not  only  would  it  fail  in  fact,  but  it  would
be  frustrated  by  its  very  form — the  distinction  between
its  subject  and  its  predicate  would  necessarily  import
duality  into  what  it  was  trying  to  conceive  as  a  unity.

Whenever,  therefore,  we  apply  the  causal  principle,
we  look  for  '  causes '  in  the  plural  of  t  effects '  in  the
plural.  We  refuse  to  accept  the  given  in  its  undiffer-
entiated  confusion,  and  declare  our  determination  to
dissect  it.  And  we  claim  a  right  to  do  this.  The  very
first  act  of  ideal  dissection  of  the  datum,  the  first  singling
out  of  a  *  thing '  from  the  flux  of  events,  the  first  recog
nition  of  a  distinct  *  event '  as  an  object  of  inquiry,  is  an
c  arbitrary,'  artificial,  human  interference  with  the  given.
Alike  for  science  and  for  action  every  l fact'  is  man-made,
as  a  condition  of  its  being  a  particular  fact  at  all.  It  has

1  The  judgments  of  philosophers  about  the  unity  of  the  universe  are  certainly
no  exceptions  to  this.  For  they  are,  in  fact,  of  a  highly  selective  character.
They  never  aim  at  including  literally  everything,  at  reproducing  every  blunder,
every  imperfection,  every  silliness,  every  frivolity,  and  every  atrocity  of  reality.
The  more  convinced  a  '  monist '  is,  the  less  is  he  likely  to  admit  that  the  errors
also  of  his  '  pluralist '  adversaries  must  be  thought  by  him  to  be  essential  to  the
rationality  and  perfection  of  the  universe  ;  the  more  solemn,  the  less  willing  will
he  be  to  say  as  much  for  every  triviality  and  every  joke.  The  '  unity '  which
evokes  enthusiasm  is  therefore  only  a  very  small  part  of  the  totality  ;  so  small,
indeed,  that  it  is  often  so  construed  as  to  omit  everything  that  is  of  real  im
portance  in  the  eyes  of  ordinary  men.


xx  CAUSATION  283

been  carved  out  of  the  plastic  mass  of  crude  experience,
and  hardened  by  use  and  usage.

Let  us  be  frank,  and  cease  to  deceive  ourselves.
Whoever  denies  us  (and  himself)  the  right  to  be  thus
'  arbitrary '  can  have  nothing  more  to  say  to  our  procedure.
But  life  and  science  will  have  nothing  more  to  say  to  him,/
For  all  their  *  facts '  are  similarly  generated,  and  are
products  of  repeated  dissections  and  selections.  They
exist  only  in  virtue,  and  in  consequence,  of  acts  of
attention  and  volition,  which  discriminated  them  from
their  matrix.

There  is  never,  therefore,  a  problem  of  connecting
'  facts/  as  upon  the  theory  which  Hume  uncritically  took
over  from  common  -  sense,  Kant,  still  more  uncritically,
tried  to  turn  into  a  theory  of  knowledge,  and  the  post-
Kantians,  most  uncritically  of  all,  into  metaphysics.  The
'  facts '  of  common-sense  should  never  have  been  taken
for  granted.  They  are  the  achievements  of  long  ages  of
human  analysis  and  experiment.  Philosophy  should
have  seen  this  and  seen  that  in  reality  they  are  still
floating  in  a  continuum  from  which  they  can  never  quite
be  severed,  and  are  only  lifted  out  of  it  for  our  varying
purposes  by  a  voluntary  effort.  Divert  your  attention,
change  your  purposes,  and  leave  them  to  themselves,  and
they  sink  back  into  the  whole  you  were  trying  to  control
by  singling  them  out.  The  real  problem,  therefore,  is
always  whether  what  has  been  taken  as  a  *  fact '  will
really  function  as  such  for  the  purpose  of  the  inquiry,
whether  the  course  of  events  will  condone  or  ratify  our
interference  with  it.

'  Facts  '  then  are  not  '  given,'  either  as  '  causes  '  or  as
\  *  effects,'  or  even  as  *  events/  but  have  always  to  be
'made/  and  confirmed  by  the  successful  working  of  our
selections.  Doubtless  that  is  not  the  way  the  world  now
presents  itself  to  common-sense.  Even  the  stupidest  and
least  resourceful  knower  now  has  at  his  disposal  many
modes  of  operating  on  experience,  and  so  of  making
'  facts/  which  are  easy,  and  familiar,  and  traditional,  and
conventional,  and  convenient,  and  even  inevitable,  as


284  FORMAL  LOGIC


CHAP.


\


being  embodied  in  the  selective  functioning  of  his  very
organs.  They  consequently  impose  themselves  on  every
one,1  and  are  so  stable  that  they  seem  to  be  veritably
*  given.1  But  even  so  there  is  abundance  of  unformed
material  and  of  '  facts '  that  need  re-forming,  and  it  is
vital  to  the  life  of  science  that  man  should  ever  be
reminded  of  his  duty  and  his  powers.  If  philosophy  has
not  the  courage  to  probe  beneath  the  surface,  and  dares
not  tell  him  that  the  separateness  of  his  '  facts '  is  just  as
arbitrary  and  artificial,  and  relative  to  his  needs  and  his
mode  of  life,  as  is  the  separateness  of  the  *  things '  he
perceives  in  space,  but  need  be  none  the  less  '  real '  and
valuable  for  that,  it  will  be  conspicuously  lacking  in  the
scientific  courage  shown,  e.g.  by  physics  and  the  other
sciences  in  their  corrections  of  common -sense.  The
social  justification  of  every  study  lies  in  the  improvements
it  effects  in  the  crudity  of  common-sense.

Having  made  our  c  facts,'  i.e.  discriminated  and  singled
out  features  in  the  flow  of  experience  which  we  venture
to  judge  relevant,  we  proceed  to  a  further  big  assumption.
Though  we  see  that  the  '  facts '  are  all  really  immanent
in  the  flux  and  '  parts '  of  it,  we  nevertheless  assume  that
for  our  purposes  they  may  be  handled  apart,  either
because  its  nature  is  so  peculiar  that  their  immanence
does  not  impair  their  independence,  or  because  its
influence  is  irrelevant  to  our  inquiry.  We  assume,
therefore,  that  the  integral  flow  of  reality  may  be  dis
membered  into  causal  series  or  chains  which  pursue  each
their  own  course  without  mutual  interference.  It  is
evident  that  for  purposes  of  prediction  and  control  this
is  a  very  convenient  and  essential  assumption,  because  it
is  only  so  that  the  search  for  partial  '  causes '  can  be
justified.  But  it  is  no  less  evident  that  it  implies  a
disregard  of  the  unity  of  the  universe.  And  antecedently
it  seems,  of  course,  improbable.  It  seems  strange  that
the  way  to  analyse  experience  should  be  to  treat  its  flow
as  a  tangled  coil  of  causal  strands  ;  but  the  procedure

1  His  own  existence  as  a distinct  entity, and  that  of  others, are  striking
examples.


XX


CAUSATION  285


cannot  be  objected  to  as  being  too  great  an  interference
with  the  given.  It  was  taking  at  least  as  great  a  liberty
to  substitute  a  disorderly  plurality  for  an  undifferentiated
unity.

The  reply  in  either  case  is  that  what  we  do  has  the
sanction  of  success ;  improbable  as  our  assumptions
sound,  they  work,  nor  has  any  one  as  yet  devised  any
thing  else  that  does  better.  The  objector,  therefore,
should  either  submit  to  this  mode  of  proof  or  try  to
dispense  with  causal  analysis  :  to  use  it  because  he  must,
and  yet  vindictively  to  call  it  false,  because  it  shocks  his
a  priori  prejudices,  is  dastardly.

But  it  follows  of  course — and  accords  excellently  with
what  we  have  everywhere  found  to  be  the  nature  of
real  reasoning — that  there  is  always  variety  and  risk  in
the  selection  of  our  '  causes '  and  '  effects.'  And  it  is
quite  right  that  these  features  should  be  found  here.
They  should  not  be  eliminated  as  contradictions,  but  their
functions  should  be  understood.

The  variety  of  '  causes '  that  may  be  alleged  for  the
same  '  event '  essentially  means  that  the  event  is  an  object
of  interest  for  many,  and  capable  of  entering  into  a
variety  of  systems  of  purposes.  It  is  accordingly
viewed  with  different  eyes,  and  different  features  in  it  are
selected  as  '  essential.'  All  these  selections  may  be
right  or  may  be  wrong,  but  they  are  all  possible,  and
involve  no  intellectual  contradiction.  It  is  no  more
impossible,  '  contradictory,'  or  inconsistent  that  the  same
course  of  events  should  be  analysed  variously  than  that
the  same  alimentary  substance  (e.g.  pork)  should  be
one  man's  meat  and  another's  poison.  Socially  and
scientifically,  therefore,  this  actual  plurality  of  analyses
must  be  recognized.  That  does  not,  of  course,  prevent
any  one  who  pleases  from  conceiving  an  ideal  of  an
ultimate  unification  of  purposes  such  that  all  will  always
be  aiming  at  precisely  the  same  ends  and  accordingly
analysing  and  perceiving  everything  alike.  Whether
this  ideal  strikes  one  as  inspiring  or  depressing  is  entirely
a  matter  of  taste.  At  any  rate  it  forms  no  reason  for


286  FORMAL  LOGIC  CHAP.

closing  one's  eyes  to  the  actual  facts  and  denying  the
existence  of  a  plurality  of  causal  analyses  and  their
relevance  to  the  purposes  actually  cherished.

Similarly  the  existence  of  a  risk  in  causal  selection
should  be  emphasized,  and  not  denied.  For  it  is  pre
cisely  what  gives  a  motive  and  a  zest  to  our  procedure.
The  first  risk  we  take  is  in  the  selection  of  the  c  effect.'
Are  we  picking  out  an  *  event '  which  may  be  treated  as
4  effect '  for  which  we  can  analyse  out  a  '  cause '  ?
There's  the  rub.  Experiment  alone  can  yield  the  answer
in  the  course  of  experience.  If  the  answer  is  propitious,
all  is  well.  We  have  really  got  at  the  real '  cause '  of  a
real  '  effect.'  If  not,  there  remains  a  doubt.  Either  the
•*  cause  '  or  the  '  effect '  may  be  suspected  as  a  bad  selection.
More  frequently  it  is  the  '  cause '  which  is  suspected  to  be
wrong,  because  of  its  inability  to  give  the  desired
knowledge  of  the  effect's  behaviour.  We  are  usually
pretty  clear  about  the  '  effect ' ;  we  know  where  the
shoe  pinches  long  before  we  discover  the  why  of  this
unpleasant  interruption  of  the  routine  of  our  life.  But
that  this  is  a  prejudice  is  strongly  suggested  by  the
history  of  science,  which  has  often  shown  that  the
unanswerable  questions  were  only  those  which  had  been
wrongly  put.

Both  the  selection  of  the  *  effect,'  therefore,  and  the
selection  of  the  '  cause  '  must  be  conceived  as  fallible,
and  therefore  *  risky.'  But  they  may  yield  real  truth  for
this  very  reason,  because  they  rest  upon  interferences  with
the  '  given '  and  '  arbitrary  '  decisions.  If  causal  analysis
could  be  infallible  in  virtue  of  its  mere  form,  it  would  be
incapable  of  answering  real  questions,  of  yielding  real
truth,  of  possessing  real  meaning.  Formal  Logic,  as  we
have  seen  (§2)  and  shall  continue  to  see,  does  make  its
usual  attempt  to  secure  formal  '  infallibility,'  and  arrives
at  its  usual  failure  to  secure  real  meaning,  by  destroying
the  distinction  between  'cause'  and  'effect7  in  the
tautology  of  an  '  identity  '  which  denies  difference.  But
its  lucubrations  are  irrelevant  to  the  real :  work  of  the
sciences.  In  this  our  best  earnest  of  success  lies  in  the


XX


CAUSATION  287


opposite  policy.  We  should  be  fully  aware  of  what  we
are  doing,  and  instead  of  concealing  and  disclaiming  our
essential  arbitrariness  and  our  inevitable  risks,  should
boldly  recognize  them,  and  be  thankful  that  we  had
the  courage  to  re-make  the  given.

To  sum  up,  then,  the  reply  to  the  philosophic  critic  of
the  practice  of  causal  analysis  is  that  in  essentials  the
practice  of  common-sense  and  of  the  sciences  is  right,  and
right  for  the  best  of  reasons,  because  it  works.  The
only  misconception  to  which  it  may  give  rise  is  that  of
taking  '  causes '  and  '  effects '  as  ready-made  and  given
facts.  But  though  they  cannot  be  this  strictly,  ultimately,
and  absolutely,  there  may  be  no  harm  in  taking  them
thus  for  the  purposes  of  a  particular  inquiry.  All  the
rest  is  defensible,  and  indeed  necessary.  That  the
'  effects  '  and  *  causes  '  concerned  should  be  *  partial '  and
1  plural '  is  no  defect,  but  an  essential  presupposition  of
the  use  of  causal  analysis.  That  they  should  rest  on
what  the  critic  calls  *  arbitrariness,'  and  we  '  selectiveness,'
is  inseparable  from  all  our  cognitive  procedures,  and  can
only  be  got  rid  of  by  repudiating  them  en  bloc.  That  it
always  means  a  risk,  because  we  may  always  select  the
irrelevant  and  miss  the  relevant,  is  true  ;  but  it  is  not
regrettable,  because  it  is  just  in  the  taking  of  such  risks
successfully  that  the  good  reasoner  differentiates  himself
from  the  bad.

§  4. The  Derivation  of  Causation  : ( I )  from  Experience

In  vindicating  our  working  conception  of  Causation
we  shall  be  found  to  have  settled  also  the  vexed  question
of  the  origin  of  the  causal  principle.  If  the  account  we
have  given  of  its  function  is  correct,  it  can  neither  be
a  generalization  from  experience,  nor  a  self-evident  in
tuitive  truth,  but  is  clearly  a  postulate  we  have  devised
to  operate  upon  the  flow  of  happenings.  But  it  can  do
no  harm  to  show  this  more  explicitly.

I.  The  impossibility  of  the  old  empiricist  account  of  the
origin  of  the  causal  principle  may  be  shown  in  various  ways.


288  FORMAL  LOGIC  CHAP.

(a)  It follows implicitly from Hume's proof that
causal  connexion  is  not  an  observable  fact  in  rerum  natura.
For  if  it  has  first  to  be  read  into  the  facts  before  it  can
be  extracted  from  them,  how  can  we  say  we  found  it  there  ?
And  if  it  is  nothing  but  an  expectation  produced  in  us
by association, how can we ascribe to other things a
similar  idiosyncrasy  ? The  more  clearly  its  '  subjectivity '
is  brought  to  light,  the  more  miraculous  it  becomes  that
our fiction should  work, and the less possible that it
should  be  a  mere  '  fact/

(b)  The  impossibility  of  the  empiricist  account  may  be
inferred also from the intrinsic embarrassments and
inconsistencies  of  the  doctrine  itself,  which  does  not  even
succeed  in  formulating  itself  unequivocally. Thus  (T)  it
disclaimed belief  in  '  necessary  connexion/  and yet  de
fined the *  cause ' as an invariable antecedent. Now
'  invariable ' means '  that which cannot vary/ and
'  empiricism J means that we are not to speculate in
advance  of  the  facts  :  how,  then,  can  it  have  cognizance  of
more  than  an  observed  absence  of  variation,  and  how  can
it  infer  an  absence  of  a  '  power '  it  had  declared  to  be
an illusion  ? Clearly  the  transition from  *  unvaried  '  to
'  invariable '  is  beyond  its  power.

(2)  How  could  mere  observation  of  the  succession  of
events  ever  generate  a  belief  in  their  more  intimate
connexion  ?  If  the  belief  in  causality  is  supposed  to
have  ever  been  absent,  no  experience  could  produce  it.
We  can  still  see  this  in  the  case  of  sequences  presumed
to  be  casual,  i.e.  devoid  of  any  connexion  between  their
successive  *  events.'  They  afford  no  basis  for  expecta
tion  ;  and  hence  nothing  in  their  empirical  character,  not
even  the  greatest  regularity,  ever  leads  us  to  regard  them
as  more  than  casual  ;  or  else,  if  we  do  argue  that  their
regularity  must  mean  something,  it  is  precisely  because
and  in  so  far  as  we  have  retracted  the  belief  that  they
are  casual.  This  we  can  do,  because  we  are  familiar  with
the  notion  of  causal  connexions  ;  but  it  would  have  been
impossible  to  a  mind  which  had  not  yet  discovered  their
existence.  Hence  it  follows  that  no  sort  of  experience


xx  CAUSATION  289

could  ever  force  the  principle  upon  us,  because  it  could
never  be  proved  to  be  caused  until  it  had  been  assumed
to  be  so.

(3)  Even  if  we  assumed  that the belief  in causality
had somehow been arrived at by men, e.g. (as was
probably the fact) by acceptance of the immediate
experience  of  voluntary  motion,  yet  to  a  mere  empiricism
this would afford no reason to believe that  anything
more,  and  still  less  that  everything,  was  caused. For  in
the  earlier  stages  of  man's  control  of  experience  it  must
seem  just  as manifest  that most things are capricious
and  incalculable  and  uncaused^  as  that  a  few  things  are
regular  and  calculable  and  '  caused.' Why,  then,  should  a
wholly  disinterested  and  indifferent  observer,  such  as  the
old  empiricism  loved  to  postulate,  fly  in  the  face  of  the
facts,  and  suppose  that  the  bulk  of  phenomena  were  not
such  as  they  seemed  ? His mere  observation of the
fact of causation in himself would give him neither
a  motive  nor  a  right  to  destroy  the  distinction  between
the casual and the causal, and to strive to extend
the dominion of the latter over the whole of his
experience.

(4)  Lastly,  if  the  habit  of  causal  analysis  rests  merely
on experience  of  the  past  course  of  events,  it  will  not
justify  any  prediction about the  future,  nor  in  general,
about  the  unknown. Strictly  we  can  only  say  that  those
events  which  we  have  observed  were  caused.1 We  cannot
say how events will behave  beyond the range  of  our
knowledge.2 Nor will it help us to descant on the
intensity of our expectations of  a  continuance  of  the
regularity we have experienced. For that is merely
psychology,  and  to  expect  the  world  to  behave  everywhere

1  And  even  then,  if  the  hitherto  observed  sequence  A  -  B  should  at  any  sub
sequent  time  turn  out  not  to  be '  invariable, '  our  principle  would  tempt  us  to
deny  that  A  had  ever  been  the  *  cause  '  of  B.

2  Mill  at  times  confesses  this  ;  cf.  his  famous  doubt  whether  the  law  of  Causa
tion  could  be  confidently  affirmed  to  hold  '  in  distant  parts  of  the  stellar  regions  '
(Logic,  iii,  21,  §  4). But  he  does  not  appear  to  have  seen  that  he  was  thereby
stultifying  the  law  for  the  primary  purpose  of  arguing  from  the  known  to  the
unknown,  nor  that  the  restriction  of  his  empiricism  to  actual  observation  was
precisely  what  the  apriorists  objected  to, when  they  complained  that  no  true
universality  could  be  extracted  from  experience.

U


29o  FORMAL  LOGIC  CHAP.

and  always  in  the  way  to  which  we  are  accustomed  is
merely  to  beg  the  question.

(c)  But  the  most  convincing  method  of  exhibiting  the
error  of  this  theory  of  causal  analysis  is  undoubtedly  to
show  that  in  point  of  fact  it  cannot  account  for  our  actual
procedure.  It  cannot  explain  the  selection  of  the  '  facts,'
of  the  *  events '  which  form  the  effects  to  be  investigated.
Nor  can  it  explain  the  choice  of  the  antecedent  which  is
accepted  as  the  '  cause/  nor  the  variations  in  that  choice.
The  whole  of  our  'arbitrary*  manipulation  of  the  given
must  seem  to  it  hopelessly  indefensible,  and  its  actual
success  an  insoluble  mystery.  That  in  point  of  fact  we
never  hesitate  for  a  moment  before  demanding  a  '  cause,'
however  distant  in  space  and  time,  for  any  '  event,'  which
we  are  interested  in  explaining,  must  seem  to  it  utterly
inexplicable.  In  short,  the  old  empiricist  version  of  the
derivation  of  our  principle  is  plainly  insufficient.

§  5.  (2)  Is  Causation  a  'Necessity  of  Thought*  ?

II.  But  does  it  follow  that  the  rationalistic  version
must  be  adopted  ?  Its  advocates  have  always  been  de
sirous  of  inferring  this.  They  have  agreed  that  inasmuch
as  the  principle  was  scientifically  necessary  and  empirically
unexplained,  it  must  be  justifiable  as  an  intuitive,  self-
evident,  or  a  priori  axiom,  and  accepted  as  an  ultimate
4  necessity  of  thought.'  This  plea  was  never  even  formally
cogent ;  for  it  does  not  follow  that  because  one  explana
tion  is  wrong  another  must  be  right,  nor  that  because  no
one  up  to  date  has  thought  of  a  third  alternative,  such  an
alternative  may  be  treated  as  logically  non-existent.1
And  in  view  of  the  actual  character  of  the  rationalist
conception  the  logician's  choice  at  the  best  of  times  was
between  the  devil  and  the  deep  sea.  Now,  however,  that
a  far  more  efficient  alternative  has  for  some  time  been
in  being,  continued  adherence  to  the  apriorist  theory

1  Practically,  no  doubt,  it  is  good  policy  not  to  anticipate  trouble,  and  to  say
de  non,  apparentibus  et  non  existentibus  eadem  est  ratio.  But  that  is  only  a
counsel  of  prudence  necessitated  by  the  limitations  of  our  science  and  our
foresight.


XX


CAUSATION  291


can  only  be  ascribed  to  the  glamour  of  the  unintelligible.
For  the  truth  is  that  this  theory  is  neither  (a)  an  explana
tion,  nor  (fr)  a  justification,  of  our  procedure,  nor  (c)
consistent  with  the  facts.

(a)  It  is  no  explanation  to  say  that  the  principle  of
causality  is  an  ultimate  necessity  of  thought.  It  is
merely  a  refusal  to  allow  it  to  be  investigated  further,' ji
lt  may,  of  course,  be  that  at  this  (or  any  other)  point  we
have  reached  our  limit  and  can  discover  nothing  more  ;
but  it  is  both  dogmatism  and  bad  method  ever  to  assume
this.  For  suppose  that  we  thought  we  had  reached  the
ultimate  fact,  but  were  wrong ;  should  we  not  have  de
barred  ourselves  by  our  arbitrary  and  foolish  assumption
from  discovering  anything  further?  Hence  such  things
as  '  intuitions,'  *  necessities  of  thought/  *  ultimate  facts
of  mental  structure,'  etc.,  should  only  be  regarded  as
provisional  halting-places  of  the  scientific  analyst  and
permanent  structures  of  dogma  should  not  be  built
upon  them.

(#)  Even,  however,  if  it  were  conceded  that  the  causal
principle  was  a  structural  necessity  of  our  mental  constitu-  ]/
tion,  would  it  follow  that  it  was  true,  and  that  its  working  j
could  implicitly  be  trusted  ?  It  seems  impossible  to  infer  ';
this.  For  in  itself,  and  until  it  is  confirmed  by  experience,
the  principle  would  be  merely  a  psychological  fact  (even  if
universal)  about  the  nature  of  the  human  mind.  And  what
is  to  guarantee  that  this  fact  is  to  help  us  in  acquiring
knowledge  ?  It  might  be  a  universal  delusion,  a  flaw  in
our  minds  analogous  to  the  defects  of  our  senses,  like  the
astigmatism  of  the  eye.  It  might  be  only  a  pernicious
prejudice  which  hampered  us  in  the  acquisition  of  truth.
Or  again  it  might  be  useful  and  serviceable  on  the
whole,  without  being  infallible.  If  so,  it  would  have  to  be
appealed  to  with  discretion.  The  question,  therefore,
whether  and  how  far  the  course  of  nature  conforms  to  the
structure  of  our  minds  is  initially  an  open  one,  and  should
be  treated  as  such.  To  start  with  what  is  patently  a
psychological  fact,  and  to  convert  it  a  priori  into  an
absolute  principle,  seems  a  reckless  procedure,  the  more  so


292  FORMAL  LOGIC  CHAP.

that  after  all  no  answer  has  been  forthcoming  to  Hume's
objection  to  the  assumption  of  a  '  necessary  connexion '
between  the  '  cause '  and  the  effect.  For  clearly  there
has  been  no  independent  proof  that  the  connexion
exists  objectively  in  the  events,  nor  any  explanation  of
what  it  means  ;  and  to  assume  that  it  is  valid,  because  it
has  been  read  into  them  from  the  mind's  structure,  is
merely  to  beg  the  question.

(c)  As  regards  the  ability  of  the  apriorist  theory  to
account  for  the  facts  of  our  causal  analysis,  it  must  be  ad
mitted  that  it  can  account  for  some  points  that  nonplussed
the  empiricist.  If  we  are  so  constructed  as  always  to
import  the  idea  of  causation  into  our  experience,  it  is  a
matter  of  course  that  we  shall  regard  it  as  universal,  and
have  the  utmost  confidence  in  it,  until  at  least  we  learn
from  experience  to  distrust  it.  But  there  remains  a  long
list  of  facts  which  the  rationalist  theory  is  quite  unable  to
account  for.

(1)  In the first place,  what about the distinction
between  casual  and  causal  sequences  ? When  we  recognize
a  sequence  as  casual,  or  even  debate  whether  it  may  not
be  so,  why  are  we  not  necessitated  to  import  causality
into  it?

(2)  What  about  the  future? What  is  to  guarantee
on  this  theory  either  that  our  mental  structure  will  remain
unchanged  so  as  to  continue  to  import  causality  into  its
view of  experience, or that the course of nature will
continue  to  conform  itself  to  the  nature  of  our mind  ?
Rationalism  here  seems  as  impotent  as  empiricism. It
can  never  give  us  an  indefeasible  assurance  so  long  as
it  dares  not  deny  the  possibility  of  change. And  if  it
denied  that,  would  its  dogmas  continue  to  be  applicable  to
the  world  of  our  experience  ?

(3)  We  have  seen  already  (§3)  that  the  actual  pro
cedure  of  causal  analysis  was  anything  but  self-evident.
It  struck  the  rationalist  as  to  the  last  degree  arbitrary,
improbable,  and  risky,  and  we  had  to  admit  that,  on  his
assumptions,  it  must  seem  so. And  much  as  we  should
like  to  spare  his  feelings,  we  must  now  go  on  to  insist


xx  CAUSATION  293

emphatically  that,  so  far  from  being  intuitively  certain  and
rationally  self-evident,  the  procedures  of  causal  analysis
are  the  very  opposite  of  this.

(4)  They  are  triumphant  paradoxes,  and  unmitigated
eyesores  in  the  eyes  of  the  rationalist.  The  dissection  of
the  given,  the  '  making '  of  *  facts,'  the  selections  of
'  causes '  and  '  effects/  their  relativity  and  variety,  the
preference  for  the  partial  and  the  plural,  the  apparent
setting  aside  of  the  whole,  the  dependence  of  the  whole
process  on  the  personality  and  purposes  of  the  knower,
are  so  many  incomprehensible  outrages  upon  his  sense  of
cosmic  rationality  and  propriety.  Yet  how  can  he  deny
them  to  be  facts  ?  If  it  is  true  that  human  interference
does  nothing  but  vitiate  '  fact,'  then  the  theory  of
Causation  is  certainly  one  of  the  most  magnificently
irrational  parts  of  an  incredible  scheme  of  things.

§  6.  (3)  Causation  derived  from  Postulation

III.  It  is  clearly  time  that  we  betook  ourselves  to  the
third  alternative,  if  we  are  not  utterly  to  lose  our  faith  in
the  rationality  of  the  universe.  After  all  the  causal
principle  may  be  a  postulate,  confirmed  and  rationalized
by  experience.  We  have  seen  (Chap.  XVIII,  §  5)  that
postulation  is  a  well-defined  and  typically  human  way  of
obtaining  general  propositions  which,  when  they  have
been  sufficiently  verified  in  use,  may  attain  the  highest
degrees  of  certainty  and  be  looked  upon  as  axioms.  Now
the  principle  of  causation  is  one  of  the  most  valuable  and
characteristic  of  our  postulates,  and  when  its  genesis  and
function  are  properly  understood  it  can  easily  account  for
all  the  facts  that  were  such  stumbling-blocks  to  the  rival
theories.

(i)  It  is,  of  course,  natural  and  proper  that  a  postulate
should  involve  human  interference  with  the  given  and
anticipation  of  experience,  and  also  that  it  should  be
condemned  as  arbitrary  and  hazardous  by  theories  which
close  their  eyes  to  the  volitional  inspirations  of  our  thought.
But  the  dissections,  selections,  and  choices  which  dis-


294  FORMAL  LOGIC  CHAP.

tinguish  causal  analysis  are  quite  in  accord  with  a
voluntarist  view  of  our  knowing  which  recognizes  the
essentially  selective  nature  of  thought.

(2)  Conceived  as  a  postulate  the  principle  of  Causation
combines  the  strength  and  avoids  the  weakness  of  its
two  competitors,  and  is  far  more  plastic  and  adaptable
than  either.  It  possesses  the  *  strict  universality  *  and
*  independence  of  experience'  of  the  rationalist  view.1
For  it  is  not  tied  down  to  past  observation  and  paralysed
by  a  congenital  incapacity  to  advance  a  step  beyond  it.
All  it  requires  is  that  experience  should  somehow  have
suggested  its  postulation,  and  it  can  then  develop  into
as  universal  a  demand  upon  all  subsequent  experience  as
any  one  can  desire.  Yet  it  remains  far  more  intimately
connected  with  experience  than  a  mere  necessity  of
thought  could  presume  to  be,  and  is  not  exposed  to  the
danger  of  total  alienation  from  fact  which  besets  the  latter.
And  withal  it  has  not  the  unbending  rigidity  of  an  un
alterable  fact  either  of  mental  structure  or  past  history.

For  (3)  it  is  precisely  as  universal  and  necessary  as
we  want  it  to  be,  and  is  applicable  precisely  so  far  as
we  desire  to  apply  it.  Hence  there  is  no  difficulty  or
inconsistency  in  the  practice  of  discriminating  between
casual  and  causal  successions,  and  of  recognizing  the
existence  of  the  former.  A  *  casual '  series  of  events  is
either  one  to  which  for  some  reason  or  other  we  refuse
to  apply  the  causal  postulate,  or  one  which  we  purpose
to  analyse  into  a  number  of  distinct  causal  series.

(4)  We  can  thereby  explain  also,  what  would  other
wise  seem  an  inexplicable  fact,  that  in  the  past  the  causal
principle  was  not  applied  to  all  events.  If  '  cause '  is  a
postulate,  whatever  is  not  an  object  of  interest  to  any
one  can  be  calmly  left  without  a  '  cause/  or  if  a  question
is  raised  about  it,  *  chance '  may  be  the  '  cause '  assigned
to  it.2  This  explains  also  why  a  certain  realm  of  *  con
tingency7  finds  a  place  even  in  highly  rationalistic
philosophies.  Similarly,  wherever  there  seem  to  be

1  Cf.  "Axioms  as  Postulates,"  §  u,  Personal  Idealism,  p.  69.
2  Even  Aristotle  regularly  enumerates  '  chance  '  in  his  list  of  '  causes.'


XX


CAUSATION  295


reasons  for  not  applying  the  postulate,  the  validity  of
its  application  may  easily  be  disputed  For  it  is  possible
to  cease  using  the  postulate,  and  as  easy  to  stop  pos
tulating  as  to  begin  it.  So  when  questions  are  raised
as  to  what  is  the  *  cause '  of  God  or  of  existence  in
general,  the  causal  demand  is  wont  to  be  vehemently
called  to  order  by  the  very  philosophers  who  had
previously  magnified  it  as  an  inexorable  necessity  of
thought.  But  the  clearest  example  of  this  is  afforded
by  the  Free-Will  Controversy,  in  which  strong  moral
reasons  seem  to  demand  for  the  will  an  exemption  from
the  law  of  causation.1  It  is  not,  of  course,  the  logician's
business  to  settle  such  disputes  ;  but  he  should  observe
their  existence,  and  explain  how  they  can  arise.

(5)  The  only  feature  about  our  causal  analysis  which
is  not  easily  and obviously  explained  by  treating  it  as
a  postulate,  is the fact  of its  extension  to the future
without  any  apparent  diminution  of  the  confidence  placed
in  it. But  a  little  reflection  will  show  that  this  is  precisely
what  ought  to be  expected  of  a  postulate. Postulates
always  refer  to  the  future  ; they  are  always  in  a  sense
attempts  to  'bluff'  experience  ;  they  all  anticipate  further
confirmation. But  they  are  quite  frank  about  it  and  do
not  pretend  to  be  more  than  the  assumptions  they  are.
Hence  the  uncertainty  as  to  whether  such  confirmation
will  accrue,  which  was  so  fatal  an  objection  to  the  rival
theories,  can  make  no  difference  to  them. If  they  are
genuine  postulates,  and  methodological  necessities,  i.e.  if
we  really  need  them  and  can  obtain  no  better  guarantee,
we  must  continue  to  act  as  if  they  would  hold,  however
much  we  may  fear  that  they  will not  turn  out  to  do  so.
Now  in  this  case  it  is  obvious  that  we  should  gain  nothing
by  assuming  that  in  future  the  course  of  experience  will
be  such  as  to  defy  causal  analysis  ;  hence  the  impossibility
of  proving  a  priori  that  it  will  not  baffle us  does  not
affect the confidence with which we contemplate the
future  application  of  our  postulates.

(6)  Lastly,  by  conceiving the causal principle as  a

1  Cf.  Chap.  XI,  §  8  n.t  and  Studies  in  Humanism,  chap,  xviii,  §§3-5.


296  FORMAL  LOGIC


CHAP.


postulate,  we  escape  what  would  otherwise  be  a  fatal
objection  to  its  use  and  its  truth.  If  its  use  is  supposed
to  be  obligatory,  either  because  it  inevitably  comes  out
of  experience  or  because  we  cannot  help  applying  it  to
experience,  it  follows  that  we  can  never  legitimately  stop
applying  it.  And  so  the  causal  principle  from  being  our
servant  becomes  our  master,  and  thereupon  both  torments
us  and  stultifies  itself.  For  no  c  cause '  we  arrive  at  will
now  afford  us  rest  and  satisfaction.  We  shall  always
be  driven  further  back  and  have  to  ask,  *  What  is  the
cause  of  that  ?  '  But  this  would  be  to  render  all  '  causes  '
illusory  and  all  causal  explanation  futile.  Whereas,
if  we  realize  from  the  first  that  *  cause '  and  '  effect '  are
both  selections  made  for  the  sake  of  human  interests,
we  shall  never  embark  on  this  infinite  regress,  nor
pursue  this  will-o'-the-wisp  of  a  '  cause '  which  claims  to
be  absolute  for  all  purposes,  because  it  is  related  to  none.
We  shall  be  enabled  and  entitled  to  stop  wherever  we
please,  wherever,  that  is,  we  have  arrived  at  a  '  cause '
which  suffices  for  the  purpose  of  the  inquiry.  And  again
we  find  that  what  our  theory  sanctions  is  only  what  is
in  fact  the  practice  of  science.

/The  origination  of  the  causal  postulate  presents  no
special  difficulty.  It  is  clear  that  a  being  which  is  in
capable  of  handling  experience  as  a  whole  must  devise
some  means  of  analysing  it,  if  it  is  to  live.  The  principle
of  Causation  is  the  device  which  man  has  adopted.  Its
adoption  was  doubtless  suggested  by  the  experience  of
voluntary  motion,  and  its  extension  was  fostered  by  the
attribution  to  all  nature  of  vague  forms  of  animation.
Its  vogue  was  certainly  facilitated  by  its  vagueness,  which
disposed  men  to  accept  almost  anything  as  a  satisfactory
*  cause'  of  events.  Beyond  asserting  the  possibility  of
some  analysis  and  a  possibility  of  some  control,  the  causal
postulate  commits  us  to  nothing  in  particular.

Persons,  things,  gods,  devils,  laws,  miracles,  antecedents,
ends,  science,  magic,  chance,  appealed  to  conjointly,
separately,  or  vicariously,  were  all  considered  capable
of  functioning  as  ' causes'  and  explaining  the  course  of


XX


CAUSATION  297


nature.  A  '  cause '  was  in  fact  anything  that  could  be
supposed  to  aid  in  the  forecasting  and  control  of  the  flux,
anything  that  could  serve,  in  idea  or  in  fact,  as  a  clue
through  the  labyrinth  of  life.  And  to  this  day  great
vagueness  clings  to  the  notion,  as  we  shall  see  in
discussing  the  formulations  of  the  principle  in  the  next
section.  As  William  James  aptly  says,1  it  is  "  an  altar
to  an  unknown  god,  an  empty  pedestal  marking  the
place  of  a  hoped-for  statue."  Or  perhaps  it  is  rather  a
pulpit  whence  a  number  of  doctrines  make  their  appeal  to
man.  At  any  rate  there  can  be  no  doubt  that  the  identity
of  the  word  '  cause '  is  often  all  that  cloaks  profound
differences  in  the  methods  of  operating  on  experience.

This  intrinsic  vagueness  and  variability  of  our  postu
late  renders  it  difficult  to  determine  to  what  extent  it
is  really  valid,  i.e.  succeeds  in  analysing  our  experi
ence.  In  a  general  way,  of  course,  the  universality  of
its  use  attests  its  value,  and  the  primary  importance  of
the  methodological  need  of  causal  analysis  is  clearly
beyond  dispute.  But  so  long  as  men  are  content  to  let
so  many  different  things  count  as  *  causes/  and  accept
even  verbal  and  illusory  '  causes '  in  preference  to
nothing  at  all,  how  shall  we  detect  how  any  one  view
of  causation  really  works  in  detail  ?  We  should  remember
how  hard  it  is  to  displace  postulates  which  have  become
axiomatic  (Chap.  XVI,  §10).  And  yet  we  must  never
forget  that  unless  a  principle  is  such  that  it  can  also
be  disproved  by  its  workings,  it  does  not  apply  and
cannot  really  be  tested  or  proved,  nor  be  really  true.
The  principle  of  Causation  in  general  certainly  comes
perilously  near  the  border  -  line  which  separates  the
axiomatic  from  the  unmeaning ;  just  because  it  applies
to  all  things  and  means  various  things  to  various  men,
it  means  and  guarantees  so  little  in  particular.  What
do  we  really  learn  about  the  world  by  being  told  that
'  every  event  has  a  cause,'  if  anything  may  be  a  (  cause '  ?
But  perhaps  it  will  be  replied  that  the  fault  lies  in  the
looseness  of  formulation  to  which  ordinary  thought  is

1  Principles  of  Psychology,  ii,  p.  671.


298  FORMAL  LOGIC  CHAP.

prone,  and  which  philosophy  usually  contrives  to  aggra
vate  ;  and  that  in  science  at  least  causality  has  a
definite  meaning  to  which  logic  should  restrict  itself.
By  all  means  let  us  accept  this  suggestion,  and  examine
how  the  principle  is  formulated  for  the  use  of  science.


§  7.  Formulas  of  Causation

It  may  seem  strange  that  we  should  all  this  time  have
neglected  to  consider  how  the  principle  of  Causation  is
actually  formulated  and  what  it  actually  asserts  ;  but  the
omission  was  intentional.  It  seemed  better  first  to
discuss  the  problems  which  cling  to  it  however  it  is
formulated,  and  to  bring  out  incidentally  the  great
varieties  of  meaning  it  is  made  to  cover.  For  this
experience  may  dispose  us  also  to  perceive  that  the  same
difficulties  persist  to  a  serious  extent  in  what  the  logician
considers  the  scientific  formulation  of  Causation.

The  '  Law  of  Causation '  which  figures  in  Inductive
Logic  is  in  reality  a  very  complicated  affair.  It  is
usually  identified  with  the  principle  of  the  Uniformity  of
Nature,  which  is  itself  by  no  means  a  simple  conception.
The  need  for  further  analysis  will  appear  if  we  make  a
list  of  the  conceptions  implicated.

1 i )  We  need a definition of *  cause.' Now that a
'  cause '  is  something  which  makes  the  '  event '  intelligible
and  gives  us  control  of  it,  is  agreed. But  beyond  this
there  is  no  agreement as  yet,  even  in  the  sciences  ; a
*  cause ' is variously conceived as an antecedent, or a
consequent  ('  end '),  or  a  law,  or  a  power,  or  a  person,  or
an  identity. It  is  clear,  therefore,  that  so  far  our  principle
tells  us  next  to  nothing.

(2)  We  make  the  existence  of "'  causes'  into  a  postulate.
But  here  we  must  be  careful  to  choose  the  right  formula.
Shall we  say  every  thing  has a cause or every  eventt
Common-sense does not hesitate to say '  thing,' but
science  is  more  wary. The  postulate  is,  in  fact,  meant
for  use  upon  events,  so  why  assert  more  ? Moreover,  by
restricting it to events we may escape the awkward


xx  CAUSATION  299

puzzle  about  the  infinite  regress  of  causes.  So  long  as
we  extend  the  causal  demand  to  every  *  thing,'  every
'  cause '  we  find  must  be  treated  as  the  *  effect '  of  an
ulterior  cause,  and  no  cause  in  its  own  right  is  ever
attainable.  It  consequently  begins  to  look  as  though
our  principle  was  fooling  us.  Whereas,  if  we  stop  short
with  'events,'  we  are  not  committing  ourselves  to  more
than  a  human  manipulation  of  experience,  and  can  rely
on  the  purposive  selection  of  the  event  to  cut  short  the
regress  of  '  causes.'  Causal  inquiry  will  then  legitimately
stop  wherever  we  reach  a  '  cause '  which  answers  the
question  we  raised  about  the  '  event.'

But  however  skilfully  we  formulate  our  postulate  it
does  not  carry  us  far.  To  declare  that  '  every  event  has
a  cause '  is  only  to  express  a  general  desire,  and  to  claim
a  general  right,  to  investigate  events.  It  does  not  bring
us  perceptibly  nearer  to  discovering  what  is  the  cause  of
any  particular  event.  And  what  right  have  we  to  assume
that  there  are  '  events '  ?

(3)  This  assumption  is  evidently  prior  to  the  assump
tion  that  events  have  causes. Yet  the  current  accounts
of the Law of Causation pass it over in silence. It
should be  made explicit,  and is evidently  a postulate,
which  is  false  if  it  is  supposed  to  reproduce  reality,  and
true  only  if  it  is  meant  to  substitute  a  conceptual  order
for  a  perceptual  chaos.

(4)  Another  omitted postulate  refers  to  the  relation
of cause and effect. It assumes that the 'effect' is
dependent  on its '  cause ' alone, and that  the  cause  is
productive  of  its  effect  alone,  or  in  other  words  that  the
causal  relation  is  entitled  to  abstract  from  the  rest  of  the
universe  as  irrelevant. That this postulate is  essential
to  the  validity  of  the  causal  analysis  we  have  seen  (§  3).
Without  it  there  would  be  no  analysis,  and  '  cause '  and
'  effect '  would  lapse  into  meaningless  tautology.

(5)  As  a  sort  of  compensation  for  neglecting  to  notice
these two  important postulates  which are necessary  to
the  working  of  the  *  Law  of  Causation,'  the  logician  has
declared that Science demands two  further postulates,


300  FORMAL  LOGIC


CHAP.


which  may  be  called  the  Uniformity  of  Causation,  and
the  Reciprocity  of  Cause  and  Effect.

The  former  asserts  that  *  causes '  act  uniformly,  i.e.
that  the  same  '  cause1  will  always  produce  the  same
'  effect.1

(6)  The  latter  demands  the  converse  of  this,  viz.  that
every  'effect'  always  has  the  same  'cause/  i.e.  that  the
effect  '  reciprocates '  with  the  cause,  and  that,  therefore,
there  is  not  really  any  '  plurality  of  causes  '  (cf.  Chap.  XIX,

§§  5,  9).

Both  these  assumptions  are  quite  debatable,  and
indeed  in  a  way  untrue,  so  before  we  discuss  them  let
us  complete  our  list  by  mentioning  a  further  principle,
(7)  the  Uniformity  of  Events,  which,  together  with  the
other  six,  makes  up  what  is  called  the  '  Uniformity  of
Nature.'  This  principle  must  be  carefully  distinguished
from  the  fact  (if  it  is  a  fact)  that  the  course  of  nature  is
uniform  or  regular.  For  it  is  a  postulate  which  demands
what  an  actual  uniformity  of  events  would  supply,  and
as  such  is  really  an  extension  of  the  (third)  postulate
that  there  shall  be  'events.'  It  adds  the  demand  that
these  events  shall  be  of  a  certain  character,  viz.  regular
and  '  uniform.'

It  is  evident  that  this  is  scientifically  a  postulate  of
the  greatest  importance.  Without  it  the  other  postulates
would  not  amount  to  a  demand  for  a  scientifically  know-
able  world.  To  postulate  that  there  are  '  causes '  and
that  there  are  '  events,'  and  that  all  '  events '  shall  have
'  causes '  and  depend  on  them,  and  that  causes  shall  act
uniformly  and  be  convertible  with  their  effects,  all  these
things  are  vain,  unless  '  events '  are  also  to  be  regular.
For  if  the  course  of  nature  were  such  that  the  same
'  events '  never  recurred,  the  same  '  causes '  could  not  be
expected,  and  vice  versa  ;  moreover,  the  postulate  of  the
uniformity  of  causation  by  itself  could  not  secure  a
regular  recurrence  of  events.  It  would  not  necessarily
be  falsified  and  might  remain  hypothetically  true,  but  it
would  become  more  or  less  inapplicable  to  the  actual
world.  I.e.  it  might  remain  an  indefeasible  postulate


xx  CAUSATION  301

that  if  the  same  '  cause '  occurred  the  same  '  effect '  would
ensue,  and  yet  every  '  cause '  might  be  such  that  it  could
never  be  treated  as  the  '  same '  with  any  that  had  occurred
before.  The  uniformity  of  causation,  therefore,  would
become  an  idle  postulate,  and  a  logician  who  held  that
truth  ultimately  involved  application  to  experience  would
even  have  to  deny  its  claim  to  be  true.  The  addition,
therefore,  to  our  array  of  postulates  made  by  the
1  Uniformity  of  Events '  is  essential,  and  it  is  difficult  to
find  excuses  for  the  logicians  who  have  thought  either
that  it  is  covered  by  the  '  Uniformity  of  Causation '  or
that  it  can  be  dispensed  with.

All  these  postulates  together,  or  such  of  them  as  it
may  seem  on  reflection  possible  to  maintain,  have,  of
course,  to  make  good  their  claim  to  be  applicable  to  the
actual  course  of  nature.  But  this  is  not  a  question  that
can  be  settled  by  making  postulates,  however  strenuously  ;
it  depends  on  experience,  and,  as  we  urged  against  the
rationalist  theory,  must  always  continue  to  do  so.  For
even  if  they  hold  good  up  to  date,  it  is  always  con
ceivable,  though  never  presumable,  that  nature  may
become  more  recalcitrant  to  our  postulations.

§  8. The  Uniformity  of  Causation

With  regard  to  this  postulate  there  are,  however,
further  questions.  We  have  seen  that  in  itself  it  is
impotent.  Unless  it  were  backed  by  the  Uniformity  of
Events,  the  belief  that  c  same '  causes  would  have  '  same '
effects  would  remain  purely  academic.  But  is  even  this
much  either  necessary  or  even  true  in  fact?  Must  we
assume  that  when  we  allege  the  '  same '  cause  we  must
expect  the  same  effect  ?  And  do  we  in  point  of  fact
always  do  so  ?

The  fact  that  such  doubts  can  be  raised  would  seem
to  show  that  the  principle  is  not  self-evident,  and  its
actual  validity  would  appear  to  be  still  more  doubtfuL
Indeed  experience  seems  continually  to  refute  it.  The
expectation  that  history  will  repeat  itself  seems  destined  to


302  FORMAL  LOGIC  CHAP.

frequent  disappointments.  Experience,  therefore,  affords
ample  ground  for  challenging  the  assumption.  How
shall  it  be  defended  ?

It  is  tempting  to  'prove'  it  by  arguing  in  a  circle.
It  is  so  easy  to  say,  when  confronted  with  a  difference  in
the  '  effect '  of  what  had  seemed  the  '  same '  cause,  *  Oh
then  the  cause  must  have  been  different.'  But  this  ex
post  facto  judgment  is  not  available  for  scientific  inquiry.
A  logic  that  professes  to  describe  the  procedure  of  actual
knowing  must  not  descend  to  such  devices,  which  indeed
seem  mere  tautologies,  when  the  causes  are  really  the
1  same,'  while  if  they  only  seem  l  the  same,'  they  must  not
be  allowed  to  divert  us  from  the  real  question,  viz.  when
may  we  take  the  temptingly  similar  effects  as  really  '  the
same '  ?

A  more  tenable  reply  is  suggested  by  the  fact  that  the
principle  is  a  postulate.  We  may  retort :  ' Well,  why
should  not  the  same  cause  have  the  same  effect  ?  If  you
admit  that  the  cause  is  the  same,  why  should  you  expect
the  effect  to  be  different?  Is  not  our  postulate  easier,
simpler,  and  more  reasonable  than  to  suppose  that  causes
|  produce  different  effects  for  no  reason  at  all  ?  In  saying
•  this  we  are  not  forgetting  that  the  identity  of  the
;  "  cause "  is  always  a  hypothesis,  relative  to  the  purpose
of  an  argument.  Nothing  ever  remains  absolutely  the
same  for  two  moments  together.  We  admit  that  identity
without  difference  is  a  myth  and  an  impossibility.  But
for  this  very  reason  it  is  meaningless  to  ask  whether
"  same  causes "  are  to  be  asserted  in  this  sense.  The
identities  we  assert  are  never  found,  but  made  (Chap.  X,
§  10),  and  in  making  them  we  take  a  risk.  But  it  is
likewise  true  that  in  making  them  we  mean  them  to  be
stable,  and  certainly  do  not  desire  to  sacrifice  them  to  any
idle  doubt.  In  the  real  meaning  of  an  argument  from
identity,  therefore,  there  is  always  an  implication  that  the
differences  between  the  "  cases  "  of  the  "  same  "  cause  are
irrelevant,  and  that  therefore  the  argument  will  hold.
This  you  cannot  dispute,  while  if  you  wish  to  dispute  the
argument,  why  not  dispute  the  identity  it  asserts  and


XX


CAUSATION  303


deny  that  the  differences  between  the  cases  can  rightly
be  ignored  ? '

All  this  is  sound  enough.  It  is  clear  that  we  could
have  no  interest  in  asserting  the  existence  of  a  '  cause '
of  which  the  effects  were  wholly  indeterminate  and
indefinitely  variable.  Nor  in  fact  do  we  ever  do  so.
But  this  hardly  proves  that  the  'effects'  of  a  'cause'
must  be  regarded  as  wholly  determinate.  What  if  there
are  cases  in  which,  for  other  reasons,  we  are  desirous  of
asserting  causes  capable  of  producing  alternative  effects  ?
We  have  plausible  reasons  to  do  so  in  the  case  of  *  free '
actions,  which  we  conceive  as  not  wholly  determined :
shall  we  deny  that  such  '  free  causes '  are  conceivable,  or
deny  that  they  invalidate  the  postulate  of  the  uniformity
of  Causation  ?

Perhaps  we  may  escape  from  this  dilemma  by  ob
serving  that  there  is  no  need  to  conceive  the  alternative
*  effects '  as  incalculable.  If  we  decline  to  make  this
gratuitous  assumption,  we  can  suppose  that  the  in
determinate  '  cause '  C  is  such  as  to  produce  either  E1  or
E2,  but  not  anything  and  everything.  We  can  then
forecast  both  the  possibilities  and  prepare  ourselves  for
either.1  It  is  true  that  a  cause  which  produced  only  E
would  be  simpler ;  but  it  is  not  on  this  account  more  cal
culable.  This  sufficiently  explains  why  science  naturally
prefers  to  begin  by  assuming  the  complete  determina
tion  of  the  effect  by  the  cause.  But  it  is  untrue  to
say  that  this  is  necessarily  postulated,  or  that,  if  it
were  not,  causal  analysis  would  have  to  cease.  It
would  cease  only  if  the  effect  were  wholly  indeter
minate.  But  in  that  case  what  would  be  the  sense  in
discriminating  it  ?

We  see,  then,  that  the  Uniformity  of  Causation,
though  it  enunciates  a  sound  methodological  rule,  is  by  no
means  the  absolute  and  intractable  principle  that  has  been
supposed.  Instead  of  guaranteeing  the  uniformity  of
events,  it  is  the  latter  which  gives  it  a  meaning  and  a
status  in  the  world  of  reality.

1  Cf. Studies  in  Humanism,  chap,  xviii.


^  , <  ¥'"

304  FORMAL  LOGIC  CHAP.

l


V


§  9- The  Reciprocity  of  Cause  and  Effect

The  claims  of  this  postulate  are  still  more  difficult  to
defend,  because  the  resistance  which  experience  offers  it
seems  to  render  it  scientifically  so  useless  as  to  cast  a
doubt  on  the  propriety  of  postulating  it.  We  shall  do
well,  therefore,  to  consider  first  the  cogency  of  the  reasons
for  making  the  postulate.

It  seems,  in  the  first  place,  that  it  would  be  a  great
convenience  if  we  could  discover  'causes'  which
reciprocated  completely  with  their  *  effects.'  For  then
we  could  by  noting  the  effect  at  once  divine  the
cause ;  or  if  we  knew  the  cause,  could  feel  assured  of
the  effect.  It  is  possible,  however,  to  exaggerate  the
importance  of  this  convenience,  because  after  all  it
would  not  get  rid  of  the  risk  in  selecting  either  the
cause  or  the  effect ;  what  would  be  the  use  of  knowing
that  the  true  'cause'  was  convertible  with  its  'effect,'  if
we  felt  no  certainty  that  we  had  in  fact  truly  analysed
out  the  cause  ?

A  second  reason  appeals  more  especially  to  Formal
logicians.  Their  whole  theory  of  Induction  depends
on  the  assumption  that  reciprocating  causes  can  be
discovered,  and  that  effects  are  not  due  to  a  plurality  of
'  causes '  capable  of  acting  vicariously.  Unless  this  is
granted,  their  methods  of  elimination  are  helpless  and
false.  They  all  notoriously  assume  that  what  can  be
eliminated  cannot  be  the  cause,  and  that  what  cannot  be
eliminated  must  be  the  cause.  But  both  assumptions
break  down  if  the  same  '  effect '  may  be  produced  now
by  one  'cause'  and  now  by  another,  or  in  part  by  the
one  and  in  part  by  the  other,  while  some  irrelevant
incident  is  substituted  for  the  true  causes,  because  it  is
persistent.  Thus,  symbolically,  an  inquiry  conducted
according  to  the  Canon  of  Agreement  (Chap.  XIX,  §  5)
might  infer  from  NADC — #bc,  ^VADE — ade,  and  MA^BC
— flbc,  not  that  A  was  the  cause  of  a  in  the  first  two  cases
and  M  in  the  third,  but  that  the  irrelevant  circumstance
N  was  the  cause  throughout.  Similarly  two  successive


XX


CAUSATION  305


experiments  by  the  Method  of  Difference  might  yield
the  results  ABC — abc,  BC — be  and  MBC — abc,  BC — be,
whence  it  would  not  seem  certain  that  A  was  in  general
the  cause  of  a.1

Formal  logicians,  therefore,  have  to  choose  between
correcting  their  Canons  by  restricting  their  applicability
to  cases  where  there  is  no  '  plurality  of  causes/  and
abstracting  from  applicability  altogether.  The  second
alternative  has  so  far  surpassed  their  powers.  The  first,
which  commended  itself  to  those  who,  like  Mill,  were
still  solicitous  to  remain  in  touch  with  the  facts  of  science,
is  open  to  the  fatal  objection  that  the  absence  of
plural  causes  can  never  be  assumed.  Hence  Mill's
supposition  that  sufficiently  extensive  observation  will
indefinitely  diminish  the  probability  of  plural  causes  is
inadequate.  The  progress  of  knowledge  by  demanding
subtler  distinctions  and  greater  refinements  engenders  as
much  plurality  as  it  removes.  To  be  Formally  safe,
therefore,  reciprocating  causes  must  be  relegated,  or
elevated,  to  an  ideal  world  altogether.  This  is  what  the
more  rigidly  Formal  logicians  have  seen  ;  they  simply
declare  that,  whether  or  not  they  are  attainable  by  man,
they  constitute  the  ideal  of  scientific  knowledge.

Now  if  the  assertion  of  any  thing  as  an  *  ideal '  were
merely  a  euphemistic  way  of  denying  its  reality,  it  would
have  to  be  conceded  that  the  case  for  postulating
'  reciprocity '  was  quite  convincing.  But  if  ideals  cannot
be  wholly  severed  from  all  relation  to  experience,  the
working  of  a  postulate  must  reflect  on  our  right,  or  at
any  rate  on  our  policy,  in  making  it.  And  an  *  ideal  *
which  it  is  impossible  to  realize  in  practice,  and  which,
if  assumed  in  theory,  has  the  effect  of  blocking  scientific
inquiry,  does  not  seem  to  have  an  indisputable  claim  to
figure  as  the  '  ideal '  of  science.  If  philosophers  insist  on
regarding  it  as  the  ideal  of  their  philosophy,  it  is  difficult
to  prevent  them,  but  it  may  fairly  be  considered  to  be
the  final  condemnation  of  that  philosophy.

1  If  the  argument  is  content  to  prove  that  in  the  first  case  A  caused  a,  it  gives  up
the  claim  to  generalize.


306  FORMAL  LOGIC  CHAP.

Now  such  appears  to  be  the  position  to  which  the
ideal  of  a  reciprocating  cause  conducts,  and  the  fact  that
logicians  have  not  clearly  seen  this,  must  be  due  to  their
antecedent  conviction  that  ' plurality  of  causes '  is  nothing
but  a  preliminary  obstacle  to  scientific  research,  and  not
a  normal  incident  in  its  progress.  But  this  only  means
that  they  have  not  seen  it  is  normally  one  of  the  products
of  research,  and  that,  therefore,  no  method  of  research  can
ever  set  it  aside  as  irrelevance.  On  the  contrary  it  must
always  conceive  the  'effect'  studied  to  be  capable  of
further  analysis,  and  the  ( cause '  assigned  to  it  as  there
fore  potentially  '  plural.5  For  it  is  inevitable  that  at  first
only  the  general  outlines  of  a  problem  should  present
themselves  to  our  intelligence.  Hence  the  '  effect '
selected  for  study  will  be  relative  to  a  broad  and
comprehensive  purpose  which  has  not  yet  been  specialized.
The  medical  man  inquires  into  the  cause  of  *  disease/  the
biologist  into  that  of  '  life.'  But  as  they  go  on  and  come
to  closer  quarters  with  their  subject,  their  '  facts '  multiply
and  ramify,  and  grow  more  complex.  They  find  that
'  diseases '  and  forms  of  '  life '  are  many,  and  that  what  is
true  of  one  is  not  necessarily  true  of  another,  and  that  in
consequence  their  original  questions  have  become  too
ambiguous  to  be  answered.  To  work  effectively,  there
fore,  they  must  restrict  themselves  to  a  single  *  disease,1
say  cancer,  and  to  a  single  form  of  '  life,'  say  sea-urchins,
and  then  they  find  that  they  can  spend  their  whole  life
in  studying  the  '  forms  '  of  these.

Is  it  not  quite  unscientific,  therefore,  to  assume  that
this  process  can  be  cut  short  anywhere,  and  an  *  effect '  '  E  '
secured,  which  will  never  need  to  be  discriminated  into
E1  and  E2  by  any  future  growth  of  knowledge  ?  But  if
the  analysis  of  '  effects '  may  go  on  indefinitely,  so  must
that  of  '  causes,'  and  a  '  cause '  '  C '  so  uniquely  adequate
to  its  effect  as  never  to  develop  plurality  and  to  split  up
into  C1  and  C2,  can  never  be  assumed.  All  the  pretty
Methods  of  Formal  Induction,  therefore,  which  are  based
on  this  assumption,  are  radically  vicious.  For  they  are
inapplicable  to  the  actual  data  of  Science,  and  impossible


xx  CAUSATION  307

as  its  '  ideal.1  For  how  can  it  be  the  ideal  of  Science  to
stop  inquiry  ?

Yet  the  opposite  policy  seems  to  promise  as  little
satisfaction  to  the  Formal  logician.  Where,  he  may
justly  ask,  is  this  constant  splitting  up  of  effect  and
cause  to  stop?  Will  not  your  'effect*  ultimately  be  a
wholly  individual  affair,  referable  only  to  an  equally
individual  '  cause '  ?  l  And  how  can  any  one  generalize
from  such  a  state  of  affairs?  (§2).  A  'cause'  that
reciprocated  with  the  'effect'  in  its  full  particularity
would  occur  once  and  never  again  ;  and  what  would  be
the  good  of  that  to  Science  ?

None  whatsoever,  we  shall  reply,  but  we  are  surprised
to  hear  you  urging  this.  For  the  difficulty  is  of  your  own
construction,  and  fatal  to  your  conception,  not  to  ours.
Why,  if  you  saw  all  along  that  *  cause '  and  *  effect '  must
be  selections  to  have  any  scientific  meaning,  did  you  insist
on  holding  that  the  cause  must  be  the  complete  ground  ?
Why,  if  you  thought  that  selections  were  permissible,  did
you  denounce  the  making  of  a  plurality  of  selections,  and
ignore  their  makers  ?  Why,  if  you  saw  that  causal
analysis  is  a  purposive  process,  did  you  condemn  as
*  arbitrary '  the  arresting  of  the  analysis  at  the  point
where  the  inquirer's  purpose  was  achieved  ?  Your
attitude  seems  to  us  both  arbitrary  and  inconsistent  and
ineffective.  You  first  insist,  in  defiance  of  all  usage,  that
'  cause '  must  mean  what  it  never  does  mean  in  practice.
You  then  refuse  to  recognize  '  plurality  of  causes,'  and
declare  for  the  '  ideal '  of  a  *  reciprocating '  cause  ;  but
when  confronted  with  the  facts  that  such  a  cause  can
neither  be  found  nor  approved,  you  turn  round  and
denounce  us  for  a  conception  of  '  cause '  which  stultifies
generalization.  Yet  it  is  precisely  one  of  the  defects

1  This  is  the  perception  which  underlies  the  '  philosophic '  doctrine  that  only
the  whole  universe  is  the  '  true  cause, '  and  that  this  is  identical  with  the  '  effect '
(§  2).  If  absolutely  all  the  circumstances  of  a  '  case '  are  to  be  taken  into
account,  and  '  identity '  is  not  to  rest  on  selection  of  the  relevant,  every  case
must  be  expanded  until  it  includes  the  whole  universe.  Any  '  two '  effects  (or
causes)  will  then  be  identical,  nay,  so  completely  identical  that  they  cease  to  be
two,  and  to  differ  from  each  other  and  their  '  causes. '  The  difference  between
the  '  effects '  and  their  '  causes '  having  thus  disappeared,  it  and  the  logical
doctrine  based  on  it  will  have  become  purely  verbal.


308  FORMAL  LOGIC  CHAP.

of  your  notion,  with  which  you  are  now  falsely  and  vainly
charging  us.  Your  notion  that  the  cause  should  be  the
complete  'ground,'  being  implicitly  a  denial  that  it  is  a
selection,  was  bound,  if  thought  out,  to  arrive  at  a
perception  that  the  course  of  events  is  unique,  and  no
complete  repetition  is  conceivable.  It  followed  that  we
could  never  argue  from  the  past  to  the  future.  Now
you  seemed  to  see  that  you  had  made  '  cause '  and
'  effect '  identical,  and  were  proud  of  it,  but  not  that  you
had  thereby  made  inference  nugatory  and  induction
impossible.  And  now  you  try  to  regard  all  this  as
somehow  an  objection  to  our  view  !

But  you  are  utterly  mistaken.  The  procedure  of
Science  has  no  terrors  for  us.  We  have  simply  to  hold
fast  to  the  perception  that  every  predication  is  relative
to  a  purpose.  Consequently  we  can  stop  wherever  and
whenever  no  purpose  is  served  by  going  on.  The
theoretic  right  we  claim  Science  exercises  in  fact.  It
does  not  fritter  away  its  time  and  strength  in  investigat
ing  questions  too  vague  and  ambiguous  to  be  answered,
but  confines  itself  to  those  which  hold  out  a  hope  of
scientific  profit.  Of  course  it  is  quite  true  that  the  flow
of  events  is  unique,  and  that  its  dissection  into  events
depends  on  a  voluntary  act.  But  this  very  fact  is  the
best  and  only  security  that  such  dissection  will  not  be
carried  to  an  unreasonable  pitch ;  it  is  controlled  by  a
higher  purpose.  Your  theory  offers  no  such  security ;
alike  whether  you  suppose  that  events  are  given  as
discrete,  or  that  we  isolate  them  by  an  irresistible
compulsion,  it  would  logically  follow  that  there  is  no
possible  limit  to  the  analysing  out  of  their  particularity.
You  consequently  cannot  stop  until  you  come  to  '  effects '
so  particular  that  they  cannot  recur,  and  therefore  are  no
guides  to  prediction.  In  other  words,  it  is  impossible  to
reason  from  them  ;  and  to  us  this  looks  like  a  refutation
of  the  whole  intellectualistic  basis  of  your  theory.

It  does  not  seem  to  be  true,  then,  that  real  knowing
demands  reciprocating  causes.  No  doubt  it  often,  and
indeed  usually,  treats  *  causes '  as  reciprocating,  because


xx  CAUSATION  309

it  wishes  to  argue  deductively  from  cause  to  effect ;  but
the  assumption  is  never  dogmatic  and  always  provisional.
There  is  always  a  donee  corrigatur  understood,  and  the
conclusions  of  the  deduction  have  to  be  confirmed  in  fact.
If  the  results  do  not  turn  out  to  be  satisfactory,  we  are
willing  to  correct  our  assumption,  and  to  subdivide  the
1  effect '  and  the  '  cause '  as  often  as  may  be  required.
And  it  is  this  willingness  thus  to  learn  from  experience
which  is  the  true  ideal  of  Science.


CHAPTER XXI

LAWS OF NATURE

§  I. The  Practical  Value  of  the  '  Law  of  Causation  '

THE  Formal  theory  of  Induction  so  far  has  probably
disappointed  even  the  most  moderate  expectations.
Regarded  as  an  account  of  scientific  knowing  it  yields
singularly  little  information,  and  what  there  is  of  it
seems  to  be  pretty  uniformly  wrong.  And  yet  its
discussion  of  the  Law  of  Causation  is  the  culmination
of  its  philosophic  interest.  Its  remaining  topics,  such
as  the  Laws  of  Nature  and  their  Explanation,  Observation,
Experiment,  Analogy,  and  Hypothesis,  are  consequential
or  subsidiary,  and  receive  only  perfunctory  treatment.
It  behoves  us,  therefore,  to  ask  what  we  have  gained,
either  in  reality  or  in  the  eyes  of  Formal  Logic,  by
formulating  the  Law  of  Causation.  What  light  has
been  thrown  on  the  procedure  of  scientific  reasoning,
what  help  has  been  afforded  to  the  reasoner,  by  logical
'  reflection '  ?

The  answer,  however  it  is  regarded,  comes  to  very
little.  If  (a)  we  take  the  '  Law  of  Causation '  at  the
valuation  put  upon  it  by  the  logicians,  we  find  that  we
have  not  taken  a  single  step  towards  any  real  knowledge
of  the  world.  For  we  have  learnt  nothing  save  that
there  are  '  causes '  in  nature,  and  that  any  causes  we  may
discover  will  exemplify  the  universal  '  law '  of  causation.
Our  gratitude  for  this  information  will  be  as  great  as
for  other  ex  post  facto  approvals  of  accomplished  facts.
When  we  have  discovered  a  *  cause,'  the  logician  deigns

310


CHAP,  xxi  LAWS  OF NATURE  311

to  acknowledge  it,  and  refrains  from  denouncing  it  as
a  fiction  or  a  miracle.  And  that  perhaps  is  something
to  be  thankful  for,  as  Formal  Logic  goes.  But  have
we  received  any  practical  help  in  the  investigation  of
nature  ?  It  is  difficult  to  see  that  we  have.

For  (i)  the  'Universal  Law  of  Causation'  is  no
guarantee  of  any  scientific  law  of  nature.  It  is  only  a
guarantee  that  there  are  laws  of  nature  in  general,  and
this  does  not  even  guarantee  that  they  shall  be  discover
able  in  general  and  still  less  in  particular.  It  is  quite
possible  to  hold  that  such  laws  exist  without  supposing
that  any  man  can  find  them  out.  Moreover,  the  guarantee,
such  as  it  is,  is  practically  superfluous.  It  is  not  necessary
to  assume  it  in  order  to  discover  laws  of  nature.  The
desire  and  capacity  to  discover  particular  laws  may
co-exist  with  complete  indifference  towards  the  Law  of
Causation.  All  that  is  needed  is  that  we  should  have
assumed  that  something  in  some  sphere  of  our  interest
is  *  subject  to  law,'  and  should  then  find  a  formula  by
which  we  can  interpret  the  happenings  in  it.  In  so
doing  we  need  not  encumber  ourselves  with  assertions
about  the  whole  of  nature.  Scientifically  it  makes  no
difference  at  all  that  the  investigator  of  one  subject
should  believe  that  another  (in  which  he  is  not  interested)
is  the  sport  of  chance  ;  except  in  so  far  as  this  belief
may  induce  him  to  confine  himself  more  strictly  to
his  own  sphere  of  the  knowable,  and  so  promote  his
efficiency.

(2)  But  even  if  the  investigator  should  prefer  to  accept
the  belief  in  the  universality  of  Causation,  he  would  not
get any  help from it. It would be perfectly  useless,
because  it  would  neither  supply  any  clue  to  the  discovery
of  any  particular  law  nor  any  means  of  deciding  which
among the rival formulas that would always present
themselves  was  worthy  of  adoption  as  the  right  (or  '  true ')
law  of  the  phenomena. For  clearly  all  the  alternatives
would  equally  exemplify  the  universal  law. Thus  from
the  notion  of  '  Law '  no  laws  are  deducible.

(3)  It is not  true,  then,  that the universal Law  of


312  FORMAL  LOGIC  CHAP.

Causation,  as  understood  in  Formal  Logic,  is  any  help
to  science.  Indeed  it  is  rather  a  hindrance.  It  deludes
the  student  with  the  idea  that  the  greatest  difficulty  has
been  surmounted.  It  perverts  the  relations  of  science
to  philosophy,  and  ministers  to  the  latter's  conceit,  which
imagines  that  it  is  bestowing  a  valuable  guarantee  upon
science,  whereas,  in  fact,  it  is  only  the  actual  discovery
of  particular  laws  that  gives  any  value  or  meaning  to
the  belief  in  universal  law,  and  supplies  it  with  the
confirmation  needed  to  render  it  more  than  an  idle
postulate.  So  far,  therefore,  from  its  being  true  that
belief  in  the  particular  depends  on  belief  in  the  universal,
the  logical  connexion  is  rather  the  other  way.  Nay,  the
opposite  belief  does  harm,  because  it  fills  the  philosopher
with  self-satisfaction  at  having  enunciated  the  universal  law.
He  thereupon  gladly  washes  his  hands  of  the  menial
office  of  discovering  the  particular  laws.  Give  him  the
elevating  consciousness  that  all  events  must  happen
according  to  law,  and  he  feels  entitled  to  despise  the
scientific  drudges  who  are  labouring  to  find  out  according
to  what  law  they  happen.  And  this  attitude  is  bad
both  for  philosophy  and  for  science.

(4)  Even  formally  there  is  a  glaring  breach  between
the  philosophic  faith  in  the  Universal  Law  of  Causation
and  the  actual  methods  of  science.  Not  only  is  there
no  continuity  between  the  two,  but  for  the  rationalist
there  is  even  an  impassable  chasm.  Rationalism  con
ceives  the  Universal  Law  of  Causation  as  an  '  a  priori
necessity  of  thought/  but  it  is  willing  to  concede  to  the
facts  of  scientific  history  that  the  particular  laws  of
causal  connexion  are  derivable  only  from  experience.
The  incongruity  is  obvious.  How  is  it  that  an  a  priori
law  does  not  permit  of  exemplification  a  prior  it  How
is  it  that  empirical  laws  can  become  relevant  at  all  to
the  proof  of  an  a  priori  principle  ?

(b)  No  doubt  this  lack  of  connexion  between  the
universal  principle  and  its  exemplifications  is  not  pro
duced  if  the  former  is  conceived  correctly  as  a  postulate.
But  even  on  this  view  of  its  character  the  principle  only


XXI


LAWS  OF  NATURE  313


takes  us  to  the  threshold  of  science,  and  there  leaves  us
with  a  general  encouragement  to  go  in  and  win.  In
Chap.  XX  the  '  Universal  Law  of  Causation,'  when
completely  analysed,  turned  out  to  be  a  complicated  set
of  postulates,  all  of  which  required  confirmation  by
experience.  This  confirmation  they  can  receive  only
from  the  actual  discovery  of  *  causal '  sequences.  Hence
they  logically  presuppose  the  actual  discovery  of  laws,
even  though  psychologically  the  belief  that  a  particular
series  of  events  was  causally  connected  was  presupposed
in  the  successful  analysis.  It  stands  to  reason,  therefore,
that  our  postulates  are  not  logically  independent  of  their
working,  and  of  the  actual  laws  of  nature,  by  which  their
working  is  attested.  Nor  can  they  attempt  to  guarantee
the  working  of  any  particular  law.  Their  service  to
science  merely  amounts  to  giving  a  general  licence  to
practice,  and  encouraging  the  worker  in  one  department
by  reminding  him  of  the  successes  of  his  colleagues  in
the  others.

But  is  not  this  quite  enough  ?  Was  it  after  all
reasonable  to  imagine  that  the  laws  of  nature  were  to
be  discovered  by  a  mere  profession  of  faith  in  nature's
conformity  to  law  ?  And  however  superfluous  the
question  may  seem  to  the  prejudices  of  Formal  logicians,
we  are  getting  into  closer  contact  with  the  realities  of
science  by  asking — How  are  particular  laws  of  nature
discovered?  To  answer  this  question  we  must,  however,
first  examine  the  conception  of  Laws  of  Nature  and  their
relations  to  the  particular  '  cases '  which  are  taken  to
exemplify  them.

§  2.  Laws  of  Nature

The  belief  that  there  are  Laws  of  Nature,  in  the  }•
plural,  is  the  scientific  assumption  par  excellence,  and
their  discovery  is  the  unceasing  concern  of  science.  A
Law  of  Nature  may,  however,  be  considered  in  two  ways,
which  should  be  distinguished,  but  need  not  be  separated.
We  may  inquire  ( I )  logically  or  subjectively,  what  do  we
mean  by  postulating  *  laws/  how  do  they  help  us,  what


314  FORMAL  LOGIC


CHAP.


function  do  they  perform  in  our  knowing  of  reality?
Or  (2)  we  may  wonder  ontologically  or  objectively^  what  is
it  in  nature  that  responds  to  our  postulate,  why  do  things
behave  as  if  their  course  were  controlled  by  laws  ?
Strictly,  the  first  question  alone  concerns  logic,  and  the
second  may  be  relegated  to  metaphysics  ;  at  any  rate  we
ought  to  begin  by  considering  the  first.

For  logical  purposes  a  Law  of  Nature  is  a  com
pendious  formula  which  is  intended  to  describe  the
actual  behaviour  of  some  selected  series  of  events,  and  is
not  known  to  be  merely  a  convenient  fiction.1  The
function  of  such  a  formula  is  to  enable  us  to  analyse,  to
predict,  and  ultimately  to  control,  the  course  of  events.

The  genesis  of  such  a  formula  and  how  we  come  by
it,  is  various,  and  does  not  logically  matter.  It  may
appear  to  have  all  the  irresistible  '  givenness '  of  observed
fact,  as  that  '  all  crows  are  black  and  swans  white ' ;  or  it
may  arise  as  a  deduction  from  a  subtle  and  complicated
theory,  like  the  interpretation  of  the  behaviour  of  *  radio
active  '  bodies.  It  may  have  been  puzzled  out  by  patient
experiment,  or  compiled  out  of  arid  statistics,  or  have
flashed  upon  the  mind  as  a  happy  thought.  It  may  be
the  fruit  of  a  secular  growth  of  error,  illusion,  superstition,
and  fraud,  or  the  reward  of  conscientious  adherence  to
elaborately  tested  truths.  But  all  these  differences  in
the  origin  of  the  magical  formula  do  not  affect  its  value,
nor  alter  the  constant  logical  features  which  indissolubly
bind  the  Maw,'  (i)  to  the  mind  which  frames  it,  and  (2)
to  the  '  facts '  which  it  formulates.

§  3.  *  Laws '  and  their  Makers

Laws  of  Nature  resemble  those  of  a  civilized  com
munity  in  two  respects  at  least  ;  they  have  first  to  be
made,  and  in  their  making  the  personality  of  the  law
maker  is  by  no  means  negligible.  Indeed  the  sagacity

1  It  is  necessary  to  add  this  last  clause  in  order  to  differentiate  the  '  law '  from
recognized  fictions,  such  as  those  which  are  used  in  applying  mathematics  to
experience,  or,  in  pure  mathematics  itself,  in  feigning  a  curve  to  be  composed  of
an  infinite  number  of  straight  lines.


xxi  LAWS  OF  NATURE  315

to  divine  the  '  law '  which  sets  in  order  a  chaos  of
phenomena  is  an  essential  equipment  of  the  scientific
genius  which  ordinary  logic  consistently  ignores  with  the
ordinary  jealousy  of  the  ordinary  for  the  extraordinary,
because  it  is  professionally  pledged  to  reduce  the  new  to
the  old.  But  Formal  Logic  should  at  least  recognize  its
bias  to  the  extent  of  seeing  that  the  personality  of  the
inventor  does  not  cease  to  operate  because  its  own
weakness  has  despaired  of  formulating  it,  and  its  pedantry
has  ruled  it  out  of  order.

Secondly,  the  interest  of  the  law -maker's  inventive
mind  is  always  highly  selective.  He  never  uses  all  the
'  facts '  that  present  themselves  to  his  mind  ;  his  genius
and  efficiency  are  exhibited  in  making  the  selection  which
forwards  his  purpose,  in  picking  out  the  relevant  and
important,  in  casting  aside  the  irrelevant,  and  in  taking
successfully  the  risks  inseparable  from  a  procedure  which
bias,  prejudice,  and  stupidity  also  take,  without  the
sanction  of  success.

This  process  of  selection  begins  with  the  first  analysis
of  the  presented  continuum,  and  persists  until  the  decision
between  rival  theories  is  finally  effected.  The  masterful
selectiveness  of  the  human  genius  in  the  higher  reaches  of
speculation  it  is  hardly  possible  to  overlook  ;  such  makers
of  new  values  as  Heraclitus,  Plato,  Descartes,  Galileo,
Newton,  Darwin,  and  James  have  made  reality  a  different
thing  to  live  with  for  all  succeeding  generations.  But
that  selection  takes  place  also  in  the  earlier  stages  of  our
cognitive  procedure  is  less  obvious,  and  has  not  been
noted  ;  for  the  reason  that  the  analysis  of  the  perceptual
data  which  yields  the  first  '  facts '  necessarily  proceeds
mainly  on  traditional  lines,  determined  by  the  operation
of  sense-organs,  which  no  genius  can  greatly  alter.
Nevertheless  the  organs  of  sense  are  themselves  selective
instruments,  and  even  that  *  all  crows  are  black '  is  not
strictly  *  fact '  until  we  have  made  it  so.  To  make  it  so
there  had  to  be  picked  out  of  a  continuous  field  of  vision
certain  independently  mobile  spots  of  blackness,  and
identified  as  '  crows  ' ;  then  '  crows  '  had  to  be  distinguished


316  FORMAL  LOGIC  CHAP.

from  other  '  birds,'  and  the  blackness  observed  in  the
first  crow  had  to  be  taken  as  a  '  quality  '  not  individual
but  specific,  in  order  that  it  might  be  expected  of  all  other
'  crows.'  Lastly,  the  treatment  of  possible  exceptions
had  to  be  considered  :  was  the  occurrence  of  white  crows
to  dictate  a  retractation  of  our  '  law '  of  corvine  coloration,
or  to  be  explained  away,  by  '  albinism  '  or  *  accident '  or
change  in  the  definition  of  '  crow  '  ?  1  These  alternatives
are  largely  matters  of  policy  and  necessarily  'arbitrary';
but  they  may  sometimes  be  so  difficult  that  they  cannot  be
decided  without  statistical  information  about  the  relative
frequency  of  white  crows  and  a  consideration  of  the
convenience  of  ignoring  them.  But  by  the  time  all  these
points  have  been  settled,  is  it  not  clear  that  we  have
departed  far  from  the  naive  immediacy  of  the  *  simple  fact
of  perception  '  that  a  crow  is  black,  and  from  the  conviction
that  no  one  (not  even  a  blind  man)  is  at  liberty  to  see
it  otherwise  ?  Is  it  so  absurd,  then,  to  contend  that  the

*  law  '  (if  it  is  a  law)  that  '  crows  are  black  '  is  as  decidedly
a  human  invention as Newton's  law  of  gravitation  ? It
cannot be denied that  the  '  law '  is  in a  sense  a  made
thing, simply because human activity, and analysis,
rearrangement  and  selective interpretation of  the  given,
begin  already  at  the  level  of  what  seems  merely  '  passive '
perception of  '  fact.' It follows that the logical con
sideration  of  the  *  law  '  must  not  sever  it  from  the  '  cases '
of  which  it  is  the  '  law.'

§  4. The  Interdependence  of  '  Law '  and  '  Fact '

It  is  a  fatal  mistake  to  regard  the  distinction  between

*  law '  and  '  fact '  either  as  absolute  or  as  absolutely  given.
Each  is  relative  to  the  other. The  '  event '  we  single  out
is  meant  to  be  a  *  case  '  for  a  '  law.' The  '  law '  is  meant
to  be  applicable  to  the  '  case,'  and  to  form  a  bridge  from
one  *  case '  to  another. For  only  so  can  the  conception
of  laws  of  nature  enable  us  to  reason  from  one  case  to
another,  and  to  forecast  the  course  of  reality. A  '  law  '  that

1  As  in  the  case  of  the  whiteness  of  '  swans,'  cf.  Chap.  XVI,  §  9.


xxi  LAWS  OF  NATURE  317

was  exemplified  by  no  *  facts '  would  be  as  worthless  and
scientifically  as  intolerable  as  a  '  fact '  that  was  recalcitrant
to  all  '  law.'  Every  '  fact '  is  fact  always  in  relation  to
some  *  law.'  Either  is  convertible  into  the  other.  A
'  law/  nay,  even  a  guess,  hypothesis,  or  theory,  may
become  a  *  fact ' ;  conversely,  '  facts '  may  engender
'  laws  '  without  a  break  of  scientific  continuity.

Nor  is  either  *  fact '  or  *  law '  rigid  and  immutable.
As  our  knowledge  grows,  either  or  both  may  have  to  be
restated.  The  history  of  every  science  attests  this,  and
exhibits  the  most  astounding  transformations  both  of  the
'  facts  '  and  of  their  *  laws.'  The  astronomical  *  fact '  behind
4  sunset '  and  '  sunrise '  is  now  the  axial  rotation  of  the
earth  ;  the  *  fact '  in  '  witchcraft '  is  hypnotism  and
hysteria,  and  in  '  malaria '  a  joint  parasite  of  man  and  a
mosquito  ;  the  '  indivisible '  atom  has  grown  into  a  ball
room  for  hosts  of  revolving  '  electrons.'  *  Facts '  are
sensitive  to  every  breath  of  scientific  doctrine.  They
have  their  day  like  *  theories '  and  dogs,  and  a  logic
which  treats  them  as  absolute  starting-points  is  as  false
to  science  as  one  which  allows  '  a  priori '  laws  to  remain
inapplicable  and  exempt  from  refutation  by  fact.

The  logical  justification  for  the  way  in  which  science
actually  handles  both  '  facts '  and  *  laws '  is,  of  course,.
that  both  were  from  the  first,  and  throughout  remain,
relative  to  man  and  instrumental  to  human  knowledge.
It  is  precisely  the  ineradicable  *  subjectivity '  of  both  that
accounts  for,  and  justifies,  the  '  arbitrary '  manipulation
to  which  they  are  subjected.  It  is  because  they  are  both
abstractions  of  our  making,  though  at  different  levels,
that  we  can  treat  them  so.  We  saw  in  Chap.  XX,  §  3,
that  'facts '  had  to  be  extracted  by  selective  attention
from  the  flux  of  reality  ;  and  until  there  are  '  facts,'  there
is  nothing  for  a  '  law '  to  apply  to  and  connect  But  the
flow  of  reality  is  unique,  and  never  repeats  itself.  Hence
a  '  fact '  that  can  recur  identifiably,  and  a  '  law '  that  can
be  exemplified  in  a  plurality  of  '  cases  '  are  interdependent
artefacts.

Science  must  abstract,  even  to  get '  facts,'  in  order  to  get


318  FORMAL  LOGIC  CHAP.

*  cases '  for  making  '  laws.'  It  must  get  away  from  the
unique  whole  to  get  '  facts/  it  must  get  away  from  the
infinite  ' particularity '  of '  facts  '  to  get '  laws.'  For  neither
of  these  admit  of  the  definite  prediction  science  aims  at,
because  neither  of  them  are  capable  of  recurrence.  Logic
hitherto  has  seen  that  science  could  not  utilize  a  dis
connected  plurality  of  *  facts,'  but  not  that  an  unanalysed
whole  was  equally  obnoxious,  and  that  both  at  bottom
were  only  different  names  for  the  same  thing,  viz.  the
impracticable  uniqueness  of  immediate  experience.
Scientific  thought,  therefore,  (in  thought)  abolishes  both
together,  and  replaces  them  by  something  different  in
kind.  It  formulates  particular  uniformities  which  are
separately  traceable  without  regard  to  their  immanence
in  the  flux,  and  are  exemplified  in  *  cases '  which  can  be
treated  as  cases  of  '  the  same.'

This  procedure  seems,  of  course,  'arbitrary'  and
audacious,  but  its  validity  can  be  disputed  only  by  one
who  does  not  shrink  from  abdicating  the  use  of  his
intelligence.  It  cannot,  however,  be  vindicated  without
cost.  It  is  part  of  the  cost  that  the  right  to  abstract  must
be  conceded  to  man,  and  to  make  truth  by  departing  from
the  given.  The  notion  that  '  truth  '  can  be  conceived  as
a  slavish  reproduction  of  '  reality '  (i.e.  of  the  flux)  must
go,  for  good  arid  all.  It  is  part  of  the  cost,  also,  that
the  risk  of  all  real  reasoning  must  be  faced  and  not
concealed,  and  that  the  hope  of  finding  '  forms '  which
eliminate  all  risk  must  be  abandoned.  The  theorist  of
reasoning  must  forget  as  little  as  the  practitioner  that  when
we  abstract,  and  select,  and  reject,  we  may  always  choose
wrongly,  and  that  no  '  formal  validity '  protects  against  such
'  errors  of  judgment'  And  as  all  Formal  Logic  has  been
an  attempt  to  reach  such  validity,  it  has  adopted  a  false
and  impossible  ideal,  and  can  never  attain  to  truth.

§  5. The  '  Law '  and  the  <  Case '

It  has  now,  however,  become  possible  to  understand
how  we  really  reason. In  logical  form  our  procedure  is


xxi  LAWS  OF  NATURE  319

always  essentially  the  same  and  extremely  simple.  We
select  a  '  fact '  tentatively ',  as  a  '  case '  of  a  '  law,'  and
try  to  find  a  '  law '  that  fits  the  '  fact.'  Whether  the

*  law ' is old and known already, or new and formu
lated  for  this  case,  does  not  matter. Nor  is  it  important
whether  the  Maw'  was  suggested  (to  us) by the  *  fact/
or  was  deduced  from  other  '  laws '  and  was  operative  in
the  extraction  of  the  '  fact.' The  interactions  of  '  fact '
and  *  law '  may  be  very  various  and  complex. But  what
is  essential  is  that  both  our  selections  should  be  conceived
as experimental, indefinitely improvable,  and mutually
adjustable. The distinction between '  induction ' and

*  deduction '  is  not  fundamental,  because  the  reasoning  in
both  is  essentially  an  experiment  which  is  tested  by  its
consequences  ; nor does  it  matter  whether  we use  one
'  fact '  or  a  multitude  in  formulating  the  '  law.'

It  is,  however,  essential  that  the  *  law '  should  be
empirically  tested  by  its  working.  It  has  no  value  until
it  is  verified,  or  at  least  not  the  value  it  claimed.  Now
to  be  verified,  i.e.  confirmed,  or,  more  probably,  expanded
and  corrected,  it  must  be  applied  to  fresh  '  cases.'  It
is  not  really  *  true '  until  it  has  shown  itself  useful,  and
any  test  which  will  prove  it  true  may  also  prove  it  false,
and  lead  to  its  rejection.1  Failure  in  application  means
uselessness,  and  sooner  or  later  entails  rejection.

Thus  application  to  *  cases  '  is  indispensable  to  the  truth
of  the  '  law.'  For  the  '  law '  is  needed  in  order  to  reason
from  *  case  '  to  c  case.'  This  process  of  reasoning  is  logic
ally  uniform  and  not  difficult  to  symbolize.  Even  in  the
simplest  case  of  real  reasoning  the  '  facts '  which  are  taken
as  '  cases '  are  never  quite  the  same.  They  always  differ
in  an  indefinite  number  of  respects.  Hence  to  reason
from  them  is  possible  only  on  the  assumption  that  these
differences  are  irrelevant,  and  that  for  our  purpose  they
may  be  taken  as  the  same.  If  then  we  symbolize  them

1  Hence  an  a  priori  truth  is  a  contradiction  in  adjecto  ;  it  is  a  '  truth  '  that
claims  to  evade  the  test  of  verification.  On  the  other  hand,  if  a  'law'  has
worked  well  in  the  past,  or  is  felt  to  have  emotional  value,  it  is  not  surrendered
to  the  first  discrepancy  of  'fact.'  Hence  'axioms,'  metaphysics,  and  personal
prejudices  are  very  difficult  to  refute,  even  when  they  work  badly.


320  FORMAL  LOGIC


CHAP.


as  a  i  and  #2,  the  postulate  of  all  reasoning  is  that  both
a  I  and  a2  may  be  taken  as  cases  of  A,  the  Maw'  or
*  universal/  In  any  actual  case  a\  and  a2  are  always
known  to  be  more  than  A,  to  be  really  ai  +  .  .  .  and
a2  +  .  .  . ;  but  this  overplus  of  fact  and  so  of  possible
meaning  is  ignored  and  taken  to  be  irrelevant.  That  it
is  so,  is  the  hypothesis  or  experiment  which  the  reasoning
makes  and  which  experience  has  to  confirm,  and  it  is
the  condition  of  the  possibility  of  reasoning.

But  herein  lies  also  its  liability  to  error.  If  the  *  cases
of  A'  are  really  '  ai  +  .  .  . '  '  a2  +  .  .  .,'  they  may
contain  also  B,  C,  etc.,  and  it  may  be  that  for  our  pur
pose  one  or  other  of  them  will  not  act  as  a  '  case  of  A/
but  rather  as  a  '  case  of  B,'  or  of  something  else.  It
depends,  therefore,  on  the  nature  of  our  interest  whether
its  analysis  as  a  *  case  of  A  '  was  '  true  '  or  *  false.'  For
example,  whether  a  'metre'  is  3  feet,  39  inches,  or
39-37  inches,  and  the  value  of  TT  is  ^  or  3-1416,  depends
on  the  degree  of  accuracy  which  any  particular  calcula
tion  demands.  A  greater  accuracy  than  is  needed  is  a
waste  of  energy  and  therefore  irrational  ;  a  less,  is  failure
to  attain  a  purpose,  and  is  therefore  wrong.  Without  a
knowledge,  therefore,  of  the  actual  circumstances  of  the
application  or  use  of  a  '  law,'  it  is  impossible  even  to
ask  whether  or  not  it  is  '  true.'  The  notion  of  a  merely
formal  truth  of  a  '  law '  is  meaningless.  It  is  clear  also
that  a  *  law '  may  be  *  true  enough '  for  one  purpose,
without  being  adequate  for  another.1

A  '  law,'  in  short,  is  not  an  absolute  self-evident  and
self-dependent  certainty  to  be  imposed  on  reality  by
main  force  ;  it  is  a  flexible  formula  for  application  to
cases,  and  gets  its  real  meaning  from  the  cases  to  which
it  has  been  successfully  applied.

Thus  the  Law  of  Nature  is,  in  several  essential
respects,  like  the  Common  Law  of  the  realm.  Like  it,  it

1  The  notion  of  absolute  accuracy  in  real  measurement  is  impossible  and  strictly
unmeaning.  For  there  are  limits  to  the  accuracy  of  all  our  instruments  and
organs  of  perception.  The  results  of  mathematics  can  be  absolutely  accurate
while  they  are  '  pure,'  only  because  they  are  ideal ;  no  sooner  are  they  applied
than  they  become  approximations.


xxi  LAWS  OF  NATURE  321

is  'case  law.1  That  is,  it  is  not  the  application  of  a
pre-existing  rigid  code  to  cases  that  are  certain  to  submit
to  it,  but  rests  on  a  perception  that  circumstances  alter
cases  and  the  decision  of  cases  the  state  of  the  law.  The
law,  indeed,  is  nothing  but  the  outcome  of  right  decisions
of  past  cases.  Its  value  and  its  validity  depend  on  its
success  in  handling  the  case.  And  just  as  the  judge's
right  decisions  of  cases  make  the  Common  Law,  so  the
scientist's  successful  predictions  make  true  the  '  law  of
nature '  used  in  arriving  at  them.

Moreover,  just  as  the  judge  has  to  take  the  responsi
bility  and  the  risk  of  deciding  which  legal  principle  is
to  be  applied  and  argues  from  case  to  case  by  setting
aside  as  irrelevant  (some  of)  the  individual  features  of
each,  so  the  scientist  has  the  responsibility  of  deciding
how  much  of  the  unique  course  of  nature  may  be  treated
as  irrelevant,  and  of  devising  a  form  which  will  cover
all  that  is  essential  in  the  '  facts.'  Both  also  will  find  that
successful  application  alters  their  *  law.'  The  principle
used  is  extended  or  restricted,  made  more  precise  or
comprehensive,  has  its  perspective  and  centre  of  gravity
shifted, by  its  use.  Thus  both  yield  decisions  without  finality,
whereas  Formal  Logic,  after  closing  its  eyes  to  the  existence
of  alternatives,  labours  vainly  to  attain  finality  without
decisions.  And  both  recognize  that  they  are  confronted
by  the  difficulty  of  choosing  the  right  principle.  In  judicial
proceedings  the  existence  of  this  choice  is  formally
recognized.  Not  only  is  it  the  judge's  duty  to  decide
the  case  aright,  but  the  parties  interested  are  officially
empowered  to  suggest  the  right  principles  for  the  case,
and  the  dispute  to  be  decided  therefore  usually  turns
upon  the  question  of  the  relevant  precedents.  Is  the  case
more  justly  conceived  as  case  a\  of  law  A  or  as  case  b\
of  law  B  ?  In  science  the  technique  of  listening  to  both
sides  of  the  case  before  attempting  a  decision  is  not  so
elaborately  developed  ;  yet  on  all  real  scientific  questions
there  are  generally  differences  of  opinion  between
different  schools  of  inquirers,  each  of  which  urges  its
own  view  of  the  case,  and  thus  to  some  extent  performs

Y


322  FORMAL  LOGIC


CHAP.


the  functions,  and  yields  the  safeguards,  of  the  legal
procedure.  It  is  one  of  the  chief  mischiefs  of  the  mis
conception  of  scientific  law  which  we  owe  to  Formal
Logic  that  it  has  systematically  slurred  over  the  normal
existence  of  alternatives  in  scientific  inquiry  ;  for  this  has
kept  us  unaware  both  of  the  manner  and  of  the  motive
of  decisions  between  rival  interpretations,  and  of  the
immense  harm  which  is  done  both  to  science  and  to
society  by  encouraging  a  dogmatic  and  intolerant  habit
of  mind.

§  6. The  Mutability  of  Laws

The  function  of  Laws  of  Nature  as  instruments  for
the  progressive  analysis  of  experience  requires  them  to
be,  as  we  have  insisted  (§§  3,  4),  provisional  formulas.
Man  must  have  complete  freedom  to  change  them  as  the
state  of  his  '  facts '  may  from  time  to  time  require,
History,  moreover,  shows  that  he  has  continually
exercised  this  right  and  changed  his  formulas.  But,
overawed  by  Formal  Logic,  he  has  done  so  apologetically
and  with  a  bad  conscience.  He  has  tried  to  conceal
the  nature  of  his  procedure  even  from  himself.  He  has
kept  old  terms  in  use  with  new  meanings,  and  by  means
of  their  verbal  identity  has  denied  or  minimized  the
change.  He  has  anxiously  explained  that  the  Laws
of  Nature  themselves  have  not  changed,  but  only  his
knowledge  of  them.  He  has  pleaded  that  only  the
formulation  of  the  law  has  been  amended.  He  has
admitted  that  he  has  been  mistaken  now  and  again,  but
not  that  his  past  *  mistakes '  were  humanly  the  proper  way
to  his  present  *  truths.'  He  has  ever  since  he  began  been
correcting  the  truths  he  had,  and  after  every  improvement
has  deluded  himself  with  the  conviction  that  now  at  last
he  had  attained  final  and  absolute  truth.  When  the
'sceptics,'  who  alone  have  shown  some  glimmering  of
the  real  nature  of  his  proceedings,  have  animadverted
upon  the  transitoriness  of  human  *  truth,'  he  has  proudly
pointed  out  how  well  some  of  his  laws  have  lasted,  and


XXI


LAWS  OF  NATURE  323


instanced  the  truths  of  common  arithmetic  as  forming  a
common  measure  of  the  savage  and  the  scientific  mind.

But  all  these  things  are  subterfuges,  and  impediments
to  scientific  progress.  In  point  of  fact  the  *  Laws  of
Nature/  as  known  to  usy  are  in  a  constant  flux,  which  is
relatively  slow  only  by  comparison  with  the  torrential
flow  of  immediate  experience.  To  keep  them  unchanged,
we  should  have  to  arrest  the  growth  of  knowledge,  and  so
the  more  rapidly  they  change,  the  more  signally  do  they
attest  the  progress  of  science.  Even  where  identities
are  to  be  traced  between  the  modern  formulas  and  the
ancient,  they  are  only  verbal.  It  is  not  true  that  the  laws
even  of  arithmetic  are  immutable,  and  that  '  2  +  2  =  4  '
means  the  same  thing  to  the  savage  (once  he  has  learnt
to  count)  and  to  the  mathematician.  For  in  the  latter's
mind  it  is  coloured  by,  and  continuous  with,  an  immensely
larger  system  of  truths,  which  admits  of  operations  (like
(  fractions  '  which  '  divide  the  unit ')  that  would  have  seemed
impious  and  impossible  to  primitive  arithmeticians.  Nor
again  are  all  errors  tragic,  or  things  for  science  to  be
ashamed  of;  if  she  has  not  been  too  conceited  to  learn
from  them,  they  may  have  made  stepping-stones  for  her
advance  and  put  into  her  hands  the  clues  to  discovery  ;
the  more  plentifully  they  are  detected,  the  better  evidence
do  they  yield  of  the  scientific  activity  which  has  tran
scended  them.  A  mind,  in  short,  which  has  come  to  rest
in  a  truth  it  fancies  '  absolute/  is  not  the  ideal  of  science  ;
the  ideal  of  science  is  not  a  fool's  paradise,  but  a
perpetual  progress  by  unremitting  work.

The  belief  in  the  immutability  of  Natural  Law  has
only  two  points  in  its  favour,  one  of  which  is  an  advantage
of  method,  and  the  other  an  emotional  prejudice.  It  is,
in  the  first  place,  a  convenience  not  to  have  to  change  too
often  the  formulas  we  use  in  our  calculations.  Sciences
use  text-books,  and  it  is  a  nuisance  to  have  to  be
constantly  rewriting  them.

Secondly,  it  is  exceedingly  comforting  to  many  minds
to  feel  themselves  subject  to  a  stable,  fixed,  unchanging
order,  which  seems  to  promise  them  the  fulfilment  of


324  FORMAL  LOGIC  CHAP.

their  purposes.  But  into  this  belief  there  enters  a  con
siderable  element  of  illusion.  For  (i)  this  fixed  order
of  nature  is  quite  compatible  with  what  to  us  are  the
most  appalling  catastrophes,  and  convulsions  of  nature
like  the  Messina  earthquake  do  not  become  less  deadly
because  we  have  ceased  to  ascribe  them  to  the  wrath  of
gods  or  the  malignity  of  devils  and  now  regard  them
as  strictly  *  natural,'  and  due  to  quite  trivial  '  faults '  in  the
geological  structure  of  the  terrestrial  crust.  (2)  A  nature
capable  of  changing,  or  of  being  altered,  for  the  better,
seems  humanly  preferable  to  one  that  is  unchanging,
(3)  The  belief  in  an  unchanging  order  is  connected  with
that  in  the  immutability  of  scientific  formulas  only  by
a  confusion.  The  objective  order  is  thought  to  guarantee
the  immutability  of  the  subjective  order.  But  this  is  an
entire  mistake.  The  stability  of  reality  could  only
render  our  knowledge  stable,  if  and  when  we  had  dis
covered  the  whole  truth.  This  could  only  be,  therefore,,
when  progress  of  knowledge  had  become  impossible,  be
cause  everything  was  known.  So  long  as  knowledge
can  grow,  there  is  no  reason  for  refusing  to  alter  our
scientific  laws,  because  of  the  assumed  immutability  of
reality.  Nay,  there  is  good  reason  for  consciously  view
ing  our  scientific  conceptions  as  mutable.  For  this  will
make  us  more  willing  to  improve  them,  and  more
ready  to  look  out  for  better  formulations.  A  constant
readiness  to  test  the  accepted  '  laws,'  and  to  modify
them  until  they  work  as  well  as  possible,  is  a  much
better  guarantee  of  maximizing  truth  than  the  most  firmly
fanatical  faith  in  the  immutability  of  '  Nature.'

§  7.  The  '  Eternity '  of  Laws

The  belief  in  the  '  eternity '  of  Laws  of  Nature  is
closely  connected  with  that  in  their  immutability,  and
exemplifies  a  similar  confusion  between  the  ideal  and  the
actual,  the  abstract  and  the  concrete.  This  confusion  is
of  course  supported  by  scandalous  laxity  in  the  use  of  the
term  '  eternal.'  It  would  seem  that  no  less  than  five-


XXI


LAWS  OF  NATURE  325

senses  are  involved,  (i)  'Eternal'  is  often  used  as  an
equivalent  of  'everlasting,'  i.e.  enduring  throughout  all
time.  (2)  'Eternal'  may  mean  'changeless,'  or  (3)
*  timeless,'  i.e.  that  which  cannot  be  an  '  event,'  or  be
related  to  events,  as,  e.g.,  geometrical  truths,  which  form
part  of  an  ideal  system  which  has  abstracted  from  time-
relations  once  and  for  all.  But  (4)  '  eternal '  is  also  used
as  meaning  '  applicable  at  any  time  and  to  any  event.'
And  lastly,  (5)  'eternal'  may  refer  to  the  fixed  dating  of
temporal  events.

Now  it  is  clear  that  '  Nature '  may  or  may  not  be
'  eternal '  in  the  first  sense  without  necessarily  being
'  eternal '  in  the  sense  of  '  changeless/  and  that  the  same
will  be  true  of  its  '  laws.'  Neither  '  Nature  '  nor  its  '  laws,'
however,  can  be  wholly  unrelated  to  events  in  time,  as
these  are  facts  in  nature  and  the  '  laws '  are  supposed  to
regulate  them.  Hence  the  '  laws  '  are  not  strictly  '  time
less  '  (sense  3),  but  rather  'applicable  at  any  time'
(sense  4).  And  lastly,  every  event  determined  by  a  Law
of  Nature  may  be  conceived  to  have,  and  for  ever  to
retain,  a  fixed  date  (sense  5).

If,  however,  Nature,  or  at  least  its  '  laws '  are  conceived
as  changeless  (sense  2),  what  is  assumed  of  the  per
fect  order  may  be  falsely  transferred  to  the  order  of
nature  as  we  know  it,  and  it  may  then  be  inferred  that
the  formulas  by  which  we  represent  the  order  of  nature
cannot  be  changed,  because  the  Laws  of  Nature  ought  to
be  '  eternal.'

As  regards  '  timelessness,'  the  third  and  fourth  senses
are  commonly  confused,  because  the  '  law '  is  contem
plated  only  in  the  abstract  and  not  in  its  use.  In  the
abstract  a  Law  of  Nature  seems  to  abstract  from  time
altogether.  It  does  not  specify  any  particular  time,  nor
mention  the  time-context  of  the  events  from  which  it
was  extracted.  It  is  tempting  to  construe  this  as  an
essential  timelessness  and  independence  of  the  time-
series,  especially  for  philosophers,  who  are  not  proposing  to
use  the  law  for  the  purpose  of  predicting  events,  and  are
content  merely  to  '  contemplate  '  it.  They  consequently


326  FORMAL  LOGIC  CHAP.

fail  to  observe  that  the  time-context  was  abstracted  from
in  framing  the  law,  because  it  was  judged  to  be  irrelevant.
Or  rather,  it  had  to  be  abstracted  from,  in  order  that  it
might  perform  its  function  of  serving  as  an  instrument  of
calculation  and  prediction. It  is precisely  by  ignoring
its  temporal  connexions  that  a  '  causal '  sequence  A  —  B
is liberated from its immanence in the flux of the
moment,  and  becomes transferable  to  other portions of
it,  and  able  to  analyse  them. As  this  is  the  function  we
require  of  our  *  law,'  it  is  clear  that  its  '  timelessness '  is
provisional,  and an artifice. The *  law '  is  meant  as  a
device  for  predicting  the  behaviour  of  '  cases ' ;  and  every
'  case ' to  which  the  '  law ' applies is immersed in the
time-series. The  timelessness  of  the  law,  then,  does  not
mean absence of  relation to  the time-series  (as  in  the
third  sense),  but  applicability  toy  and  at,  any  time. It  is  a
device  to  ensure  usefulness,  but  leaves  the  actual  use  of
the  laws  and  its  exemplification  in  the  case  as  temporal  as
ever. Formal Logic  has  mistaken  its  nature,  because,  as
usual,  it  has  neglected  to  consider  the  use  of  its  fictions.

Is  it  not  in  any  case  somewhat  childish  to  imagine
that  we  can,  by  devising  formulas  which  express  no
reference  to  time,  prevent  reality  from  changing,  or
ensure  that  it  shall  change  only  in  the  ways  to  which  we
are  accustomed  ?  The  fact  that  this  belief  appears  to  be
seriously  entertained  curiously  attests  the  continuity  of
metaphysical  philosophy  with  the  sympathetic  magic  of
primitive  man.  In  point  of  fact,  of  course,  the  question
whether  the  c  Laws  of  Nature  '  are  objectively  changeable
or  stable  can  only  be  investigated  (and  perhaps  decided)
empirically,  and  cannot  be  affected  by  any  intention
of  ours  to  preserve  our  formulas  unchanged.  Should
reality  change,  our  refusal  to  change  them  will  only  have
the  effect  of  rendering  them  inapplicable  to  reality  and
of  compelling  us  to  devise  fresh  formulas  that  will  apply
to  the  altered  state  of  things.  Why  this  should  seem
preferable  to  the  admission  that  a  Law  of  Nature  may
change,  it  is  difficult  to  say.

'  But,'  it  is  objected,  '  does  it  not  remain  an  "  eternal  "


LAWS  OF  NATURE  327

truth  that  the  old  laws  applied  when  they  did  apply  ?
And  does  not  that  prove  their  eternity?'  (sense  5).  No,
it  proves  only  that  they,  like  all  events,  can  be  given  a
determinate  place  in  the  time-order.  But  '  eternity '  in
this  sense  means  '  once  and  never  again'  and  is  the  exact
opposite  of  the  first.  The  result,  then,  is  that  until  the
logical  doctrine  of  the  *  eternity '  of  truth  ceases  to
confound  together  (i)  endurance  through  time,  (2)
transcendence  of  time,  (3)  unrelatedness  to  time,  (4)
abstraction  from  a  particular  time,  and  (5)  determinate
position  in  time,  it  will  be  best  for  science  to  trouble
about  it  as  little  as  possible  in  its  manipulation  of  the
Laws  of  Nature.

§  8. Transition  to  the  '  Objective'  Law

No  superstitious  reverence,  therefore,  for  the  creations
of  our  minds  need  impede  us  in  handling  the  Laws  of
Nature  as  freely  as  the  purposes  of  science  may  require.
We  need  not  blind  ourselves  to  the  fact  that  so  far  the
1  properties  '  of  these  *  laws  '  consist  essentially  of  fictions
and  postulates.  Nay  more,  there  is  in  them  also  a  strong
infusion  of  pure  verbalism.  Thus  we  are  commonly
told  that  Laws  of  Nature  differ  from  those  of  man  in
that  they  cannot  be  '  broken.'  But  they  cannot  be
broken,  not  because  '  nature '  (or  *  God ')  is  so  much  more
powerful  than  any  human  authority  and  can  make  its
laws  respected,  but  simply  because  an  exception,  once  we
admit  it,  destroys  our  '  law.'  The  *  law '  has  been  defined
as  covering  all  its  '  cases '  ;  hence,  if  an  apparent
exception  crops  up,  something  has  to  be  done.  Either
we  must  show  that  it  is  no  real  exception,  or  deny  that  it
is  a  case  of  the  law,  or  we  must  alter  the  law  until  the  case
ceases  to  defy  a  formula  which  is  universal  by  definition.
In  the  last  case  we  simply  say  that  the  law  which  is  now
abrogated  never  was  the  *  true '  law.  As,  moreover,  it
rests  with  us  not  only  to  formulate  the  law,  but  also  to
say  what  are  to  be  *  cases '  of  it  and  '  exceptions '  to  it,  it
is  evident  that  we  can  do  very  much  what  we  please  in


328  FORMAL  LOGIC  CHAP.

such  cases.  The  impossibility  of  '  breaking '  a  Law  of
Nature  proves  nothing  but  our  determination  to  uphold  a
phraseology  we  have  found  convenient.  It  is  by  our
convenience  also  that  we  determine  which  alternative  to
prefer,  when  a  law  is  confronted  with  an  apparent
exception.

Nevertheless  there  are  limits  to  the  efficacy  of  con
venience  in  our  attitude  towards  '  nature.'  Or  rather,
it  is  an  essential  element  in  our  c  convenience '  that  our
devices  should  sooner  or  later  conform  with  what  is
commonly  called  '  the  objective  nature  of  reality/  and
that  our  manipulations  should  hold  at  least  to  the  extent
of  predicting  the  course  of  events.  This  need  for  empirical
confirmation  sufficiently  controls  and  redeems  the  initial
arbitrariness  of  our  procedure.

Not  that  it  has  appreciably  troubled  the  scientist.
He  can  in  general  take  a  conformity  between  the
procedure  of  science  and  the  course  of  reality  for
granted.  He  can  assume  that  any  formulas  that  concern
him  must  more  or  less  apply  to  reality,  and  that  his
business  is  not  to  inquire  why  they  apply,  but  only  to
test  them  and  to  find  out  which  of  them  applies  best
and  is  most  convenient,  and  then  to  select  the  one
which  works  best  and  to  call  it  '  true '  until  he  can
improve  on  it.

But  the  logician  must  go  deeper  into  the  problem  of
what  is  meant  by  the  objective  nature  of  things,  and  the
dependence  of  truth  on  '  agreement '  or  '  correspondence  '
with  it.  He  may  perhaps  leave  aside  as  metaphysics  the
question  what  makes  reality  as  subservient  as  it  seems  to
be  to  many  of  our  manipulations  ;  but  he  must  at  least
point  out  that  their  success  shows  that  Laws  of  Nature
cannot  be  merely  the  arbitrary  creatures  of  the  scientific
imagination  they  seem  at  first.  At  the  very  least  it
must  be  noted  that  reality  is  such  that  our  guesses  come
true,  and  that  its  behaviour  can  be  divined.  We  come,
therefore,  upon  the  question,  postponed  in  §  2,  as  to  why
our  assumption  of  '  laws '  works,  and  why  things  behave
as  if  they  were  subject  to  laws.


xxi  LAWS OF  NATURE  329


§  9. Why  do  '  Laws  '  work  ?

That  our  assumption  of  '  Laws  of  Nature '  should
enable  us  to  analyse  the  course  of  experience  is  sufficiently
surprising.  Nothing  at  first  seems  more  wildly  unlikely
than  that  nature  should  allow  itself  to  be  predicted  and
controlled  by  so  arbitrary  a  device.  It  is  surely  strange
that  we  should  be  entitled  to  extract  from  anything  we
are  pleased  to  regard  as  an  '  event/  a  general  formula
which  has  eliminated  all  reference  to  the  place,  time,  and
circumstances  of  the  event,  but  can  nevertheless  be
transferred  to  an  indefinite  number  of  similarly  selected
other  events,  and  assure  us  in  advance  of  their  future
course,  despite  of  the  unique  peculiarity  of  their  time,  place,
and  circumstances.

It  is  pardonable  that  this  remarkable  fact  of  experience
should  often  have  upset  the  balance  of  the  human  mind,
and  have  led  men  to  idolize  their  *  laws,'  as  they  idolized
other  similar  achievements  of  their  intelligence,  such  as
their  '  numbers/  their  '  figures/  and  their  '  calendar.'  It
seemed  natural  to  attribute  to  these  laws  a  higher  and
holier  kind  of  being  than  that  of  the  fleeting  '  particulars '
from  which  they  were  elicited.  For  man  worships  what
is  very  useful,  especially  if  he  does  not  quite  understand
its  use.1  No  wonder,  therefore,  metaphysics  sought  for
a  more  mystical  relationship  between  man  and  nature
than  any  which  science  could  fathom  or  even  utilize,  and
spoke  oracularly  of  '  Universals/  which  '  somehow '  were
to  be  both  the  inmost  core  of  reality  and  direct  revelations
of  its  ideal  meaning  to  the  mind  of  man.

But  this  Platonizing  attitude  is  tenable  only  at  a  safe
philosophic  distance  from  the  realities  of  science,  and
while  the  process  of  framing,  modifying,  and  amending
scientific  laws  is  not  studied  in  detail.  The  scientist  in

1  On  the  other  hand,  the  worship  sometimes  persists  after  the  use  has  ceased.
Star-worship,  for  example,  though  it  was  generated  by  the  urgent  agricultural
need  of  discovering  the  length  of  the  year,  endured  long  after  the  calendar  had
been  settled,  and  by  a  strange  irony  astronomical  knowledge  became  for  the
Greek  philosophers  the  pattern  of  the  '  higher '  knowledge,  which  was  to  be
humanly  useless  and  all  the  more  admirable  for  it.


330  FORMAL  LOGIC  CHAP.

these  days  has  become  unromantic  enough.  It  does  not
seem  to  him  at  all  marvellous  that  the  human  intelligence
should  have  grown  modes  of  thought  which  are  (roughly
and  in  general)  adapted  to  the  needs  of  human  life.  He
simply  points  out  that  if  man  had  not  succeeded  in
devising  forms  of  thought  which  were  applicable  to
reality,  he  would  either  have  perished,  or  have  adjusted
himself  to  reality  in  other  ways  than  by  the  use  of  his
intelligence.  Had  he  not,  moreover,  tried  all  sorts  of
other  devices,  before  he  grew  content  to  rely  for  his
control  of  experience  on  his  skill  in  formulating  f  laws '  ?
What  were  the  various  modes  of  prayer,  divination,  and
magic  but  alternatives  and  forerunners  of  the  method
which  gave  birth  to  science,  because  it  was  found  to
work  the  best  ?

True,  prayer  and  magic  also  presupposed  for  their
efficacy  a  certain  regularity  in  the  agencies  appealed  to.
An  incantation,  or  a  talisman,  or  a  prophecy,  had  to  work
sufficiently  at  least  to  keep  up  the  belief.  But  this
regularity  did  not  attain  to  the  austere  impersonality  of
the  abstract  Law  of  Nature,  and  was  hardly  greater  than
was  implied  in  the  stability  of  the  agent's  own  familiar
character.  A  god  or  a  talisman  could  be  trusted  like  a
friend,  if  you  treated  them  rightly.  Thus  the  belief  in
their  efficacy  involved  only  the  general  correctness  of  the
dissection  of  the  flux  into  a  plurality  of  interacting
'  things,'  which  exhibit  more  or  less  complete  and  remote
analogies  with  human  nature.

Nor  does  science  to  this  day  repudiate  these  analogies.
The  plurality  of  things  is  still  recognized.  The  '  Law  of
Nature '  is  still  conceived  as  a  law  of  the  behaviour  of
things.  And  so  far  as  laws  are  conceived  as  c  objective,'
the  analogy  of  their  behaviour  with  our  own  still  yields
the  easiest  explanation  of  the  law's  nature.  If  things
are  sufficiently  like  men,  they  will  tend  to  form  habits,
and  to  go  on  behaving  in  a  routine  way  to  which  they
are  accustomed.  These  habits  will  then  appear  to  us  as
de  facto  regularities  in  their  behaviour.  In  other  words,
objectively  regarded  the  l  Laws  of  Nature '  are  simply  the


XXI


LAWS  OF  NATURE  331


Habits  of  Nature,  and  it  is  the  rule  of  Habit  that  makes
the  whole  world  kin.  The  more  deep-seated  the  habit,
the  more  '  mechanical '  the  regularity  it  shows,  the  easier
it  is  to  find  a  formula  for  it,  to  call  it  a  '  quality '  of  the
thing,  and  to  predict  how  it  will  behave.  It  is  thus
because  things  have  habits  that  we  can  understand  them,
predict  them,  and  exploit  them.  Hurrah,  then,  for  the
force  of  Habit,  and  the  intelligence  which  detects  it !

But  can  habits  be  absolutely  trusted  ?  Is  there  not
another  side  to  them  which  is  less  convenient  for  our
purposes  ?  We  find  that  though  we  are  all  the  creatures
of  habits,  yet  we  are  not  wholly  their  slaves.  We  can
all  to  some  extent  (at  all  events  while  we  are  young  and
teachable)  modify  our  old  habits,  start  new  ones,  and,  in
so  far  as  we  can  do  this,  our  behaviour  cannot  be  pre
dicted.  The  question,  therefore,  whether  the  order  of
nature  is  fixed,  or  '  Laws  of  Nature '  can  change,  assumes
a  new  aspect.  To  answer  it  we  should  ask — Are  the
habits  of  all  things  unchangeable,  and  if  not,  which  can
be  changed,  and  why,  and  how?

§  I  o. Can  the  Habits  of  Things  change  ?

If  we  leave  aside  as  irrelevant  to  our  problem  the
case  of  a  possible  being  who  is  perfectly  adapted  to  all
emergencies,  and  would,  of  course,  have  no  motive  to
change,  and  consider  only  beings  whose  adaptation  to
their  conditions  of  existence  is  imperfect,  we  find  (i)  that
though  both  Habit  and  Intelligence  must  be  instruments
of  adaptation  there  is  a  certain  antagonism  between  them,
and  (2)  that  the  capacity  to  change  depends  on  the
amount  of  their  intelligence.  The  unchecked  control  of
action  by  Habit  would  mean  general  adaptation  to
regular  conditions,  but  would  entail  failure  to  effect
adjustment  to  exceptional  circumstances.  The  guidance
of  action  by  Habit,  therefore,  would  be  adequate  only  if
all  the  emergencies  of  life  could  be  treated  as  '  cases '  of
a  comparatively  small  number  of  rules ;  it  must  fail
wherever  the  special  circumstances  of  the  case  demand  a


332  FORMAL  LOGIC  CHAP.

modification  in  the  habitual  response.  Moreover,  just
because  every  case  has  individual  features,  the  adjustment
to  it  by  means  of  the  rule  or  habit  can  never  be  exact.
There  is  room,  therefore,  for  a  faculty  of  effecting  a  more
exact  adaptation  to  the  case,  which  takes  account  of  its
peculiarities,  and  of  modifying  habitual  action  accordingly.
For  example,  it  is  vain  that  a  trout  should  have  formed
the  habit  of  rising  to  flies,  and  in  thousands  of  cases  found
in  them  its  natural  nutriment,  if  he  fails  to  distinguish
from  them  the  artificial  fly  which  puts  an  end  to  his
career.  The  name  for  this  power  of  modifying  habitual
responses,  inhibiting  natural  impulses,  and  taking  account
of  particular  circumstances  is  Intelligence,  or  in  its  highest
developments  Reason,  and  this  is  why  its  possession  is
such  a  valuable  equipment  in  the  struggle  for  existence.
All  *  intelligent '  beings  possess,  more  or  less,  the  power
to  modify  their  habits,  and  the  existence  of  this  power  is
the  surest  indication  of  intelligence.  It  is  because  they
show  traces  of  it  that  we  ascribe  a  certain  intelligence  to
plants  and  the  lower  animals  ;  it  is  because  their  behaviour
does  not  so  obviously  suggest  it  that  we  usually  deny
intelligence  to  crystals  and  other  forms  of  c  inanimate
matter.'  Moreover,  the  higher  the  intelligence,  the
greater  the  variability  of  action,  because  the  greater  is
the  revolt  against  mere  habit,  and  the  more  account  is
taken  of  the  special  circumstances  of  each  case.  An
ideally  intelligent  being,  therefore,  would  be  able  to
adjust  his  action  in  a  unique  way  to  every  unique
situation,  and  would  never  act  from  unintelligent  routine.
But  for  this  very  reason  his  act  could  never  be  absolutely
predicted  by  mere  observation  of  his  '  habits ' ;  it  could
be  anticipated  only  by  a  similarly  intelligent  under
standing  of  his  aims.  This  is  why  intelligence  and
personality  are  usually  regarded  as  such  stumbling-blocks
to  the  rough  methods  of  '  mechanical '  science.

On  the  other  hand,  the  lower  the  intelligence,  the
further  it  would  sink  into  routine  habits,  the  more  nearly
would  it  approach  the  ideal  of  '  mechanical '  regularity,
and  complete  predictability,  and  the  more  conveniently


xxi  LAWS  OF  NATURE  333

could  it  be  calculated  in  a  purely  external  way.  The
realm,  therefore,  to  which  the  Laws  of  Nature  really  apply
is  that  of  the  inanimate  and  unintelligent,  and  there  is
a  definite  contrast  between  its  behaviour  and  that  of
intelligent  nature.  For  though  man,  despite  his  stupidity,
pedantry,  and  cowardice,  far  surpasses  all  other  beings  in
his  will  and  power  to  modify  his  habits,  animals  and
plants  also,  more  slowly,  change  their  habits  when  the
conditions  of  their  life  are  changed  ;  but  the  properties
of  '  matter '  seem  to  endure  immutably.

And  yet  are  we  really  certain  even  of  this  ?  Have
we  really  unquestionable  evidence  that  the  habits  of  the
inanimate  do  not  change  ?  Man  has  observed  the  ways
of  nature  for  a  few  hundred  years  at  most,  and,  until
the  last  ten  years  or  so,  with  a  universal  and  enormous
bias  in  favour  of  immutability.  In  this  brief  period
moderately  slow  changes  would  not  be  observed,  and
had  they  been  observed  would  not  have  been  accepted.
It~~is  no  wonder,  therefore,  that  no  decisive  evidence
of  change  was  found  ;  but  this  does  not  warrant  our
dismissing  as  unfounded  the  suggestion  that  even  the
most  automatic  and  mechanical  beings  in  the  world  may
be  slowly  modifying  even  their  most  fundamental  habits
in  the  course  of  ages,  or  in  other  words,  that  even  the
*  Laws  of  Nature '  may  be  '  evolving.'

Of  course  it  is  not  to  be  expected  that  this  possibility
will  be  proved  speedily  or  easily ;  but  it  has  definitely
begun  to  loom  large  on  the  scientific  horizon.  In  the
sciences  that  are  concerned  with  living  beings  the  triumph
of  Evolutionism  may  be  regarded  as  complete.  The
victory  of  Darwinism  has  routed  the  belief  that  the
sun  shines  upon  nothing  new  in  the  organic  world.  But
Evolutionism  is  now  invading  also  chemistry  and  physics.
The  Periodic  Law  looks  suspiciously  like  a  first  formula
tion  of  the  law  of  the  Evolution  of  the  *  Elements.'  And
the  facts  of  *  Radio-activity '  are  still  more  suggestive.
Their  best  interpretation  seems  to  be  that  a  good  few
of  the  metals,  and  notably  '  uranium,'  have  ceased  to
be  stable,  and  are  breaking  up.  The  '  eternity '  of  the


334  FORMAL  LOGIC  CHAP.

'  elements/  therefore,  was  a  superstition,  a  creation  of  our
prejudice.  But  shall  our  prejudices  never  recoil  more
than  one  step  at  a  time?  Shall  we  infer  only  that
'  uranium '  has  always  had  this  habit  ?  If  so,  it  would
seem  to  follow  that  the  world's  stock  of  uranium  is  a
constantly  diminishing  quantity,  and  cannot  last  more
than  a  definite  (and  perhaps  calculable)  time.  It  cannot,
therefore,  have  existed  unchanged  from  all  eternity,  but
must  have  come  into  being  in  sortie  definite  amount  at
some  definite  point  in  the  past.  This  brings  science
uncomfortably  near  to  the  thought  of  a  beginning  (and
therefore  of  an  end)1  of  the  cosmic  scheme,  and  to  a
denial  of  its  '  eternity.'  It  might,  therefore,  involve  a
less  shock  to  prejudice  to  accept  the  alternative  that
*  radio-activity '  may  itself  be  an  acquired  habit,  which
radio-active  bodies  did  not  possess  from  all  eternity,  and
thus  to  admit  the  possibility  that  all  things  may  acquire
new  habits  of  behaviour.  This  interpretation  would
seem  to  be  supported  by  calculations  showing  that  if  the
radio-active  bodies  are  distributed  throughout  the  earth
in  the  same  proportions  as  in  the  crust  we  can  examine,
and  if  their  '  dissociation '  has  been  proceeding  ever  since
the  earth's  formation,  they  would  have  radiated  so  much
heat  that  the  earth's  temperature  should  be  much  higher
than  in  fact  it  is.  But  without  attaching  too  much
weight  to  investigations  which  avowedly  are  incomplete,
we  may  clearly  insist  on  the  logical  point  that  the  im
mutability  of  the  Laws  of  Nature  has  not  been  proved,
but  only  postulated,  and  that  if  the  *  Laws '  are  habits,
there  is  a  presumption  that  it  is  not  absolute.

Practically  this  result  need  make  no  difference  to
scientific  calculations.  No  doubt  the  possibility  of  pro
gressive  change  will  introduce  a  certain  complexity  and
inconvenience  into  our  view  of  nature,  and  render  the
remote  future  harder  to  calculate  ;  but  for  most  purposes
it  will  be  negligible.  Science  is  already  quite  accustomed
to  cope  with  similar  situations.  It  does  not,  e.g.,  hesitate

1  If  all  the  more  solid and  active '  elements  '  are  gradually  '  dissociating '
into  helium  and  other  '  inert '  gases,  the  universe  will  in  the  end  simply  evaporate.


XXI


LAWS  OF  NATURE  335


to  treat  the  '  day '  as  a  definite  duration  which  is  worth
determining  with  the  most  laborious  accuracy,  although
it  knows  that  the  friction  of  the  tides  must  be  gradually
slowing  down  the  earth's  revolution  on  its  axis,  and  that
ultimately,  therefore  (if  the  solar  system  does  not  come
to  a  bad  end  first),  the  '  day '  must  grow  as  long  as  the
'year.'  Nor  has  an  event  which  is  50,000,000  or
100,000,000  years  off  any  appreciable  effect  on  the
feelings  of  any  living  man.  Revolutionary  but  remote
changes,  then,  which  are  brought  about  by  *  Laws  '  believed
to  be  unchanging,  make  no  difference  ;  why  should  they
upset  us  if  they  are  ascribed  to  '  laws '  believed  to  be
'  evolving '  ?  Practically  the  '  laws  '  have  to  be  somehow
changed  if  the  order  of  events  changes  ;  practically  they
may  be  taken  as  constant,  if  it  does  not.  We  have  no
need  or  right,  then,  to  conceive  the  stability  of  the  Laws
of  Nature  as  other  than  a  convenient  assumption  ;  we
must  reserve  the  right  to  modify  it  whenever  and  wher
ever  our  science  demands  it.

§11.'  Inductive '  and  *  Deductive '  Reasoning

If  the  function  of  the  instruments  of  thought  called
Laws  of  Nature  has  been  sufficiently  cleared  up  by  the
foregoing  account,  it  will  be  intelligible  both  how  they
are  related  to  '  facts '  and  how  we  reason  from  *  facts.'
It  will  not,  however,  be  out  of  place  to  add  a  few  remarks
on  the  relation  between  '  Induction  '  and  '  Deduction.'  As
we  have  already  noted  (§  4),  our  account  cannot  recognize
any  essential  difference  between  them.  Our  procedure  in
reasoning  is  always  the  same.  It  is  always  experimental,
whether  we  assume  a  '  law '  (or  rule)  and  *  deduce '  (apply
it  to)  a  '  case/  or  assume  a  '  case '  by  a  selection  from  the
*  given '  and  infer  from  it  a  *  law.'  It  is  always  risky,
because  the  abstraction  or  extraction  involved  may  always
prove  wrong.  It  is  always  empirical,  because  our  result
has  always  to  be  verified  by  its  working  in  experience.
The  difference  will  only  be  that  what  (successful)  experi
ence  attests  in  the  case  of  *  Deduction  '  is  that  the  antici-


336  FORMAL  LOGIC  CHAP,  xxi

pated  result  is  realized,  in  that  of  '  Induction '  that  the
cases  really  conform  to  the  formula  assumed  for  them.  In
'  Deduction '  we  start  from  the  formula  and  argue  to  the
*  case/  in  *  Induction '  we  start  from  the  '  cases '  and  argue
to  the  formula  ;  but  as  both  the  *  cases  *  and  the  *  law  *
are  being  tested,  and  as  neither  are  taken  to  be  certain,
t  there  is  in  both  a  doubt  which  further  experience  alone

(can  progressively  remove,  and  in  both  the  logical  value  of
,pur  procedure  depends  on  its  success.  Thus,  verification
is  as  essential  to  the  conclusions  of  a  deduction  as  to  the
most  hazardous  '  induction '  of  a  hypothetical  Law  of
Nature.  The  distinction  between  Deduction  and  In
duction,  therefore,  is  merely  Formal,  and  has  no  signifi
cance  in  real  reasoning.  The  interaction  of  *  case '  and
'  law,'  and  the  reference  of  both  to  experience,  are  the
vital  points  in  real  reasoning  wherever  it  occurs.


CHAPTER XXII

ACCESSORIES OF INDUCTION
§  I. The  Artificiality  of  Formal  Distinctions

THE  remaining  topics  in  the  Formal  theory  of  Induc
tion  must  be  dealt  with  briefly,  not  because  they  are
unimportant  in  themselves,  and  could  all  be  neglected  if
we  were  attempting  a  complete  study  of  real  knowing,
but  because  Formal  Induction  has  so  profoundly
misapprehended  them  that  its  account  is  not  worth
correcting,  the  more  so  that  the  real  nature  of  reasoning
has  been  explained  in  the  last  chapter.  It  is  only  when
the  Formal  view  has  completely  obscured  this  that,  e.g.,
Observation,  Experiment,  Hypothesis,  and  Analogy  can
be  treated  as  distinct  '  forms '  of  inductive  reasoning.

§  2. Observation  and  Experiment

1  Inductive '  logicians  usually  think  it  their  duty  to
distinguish  between  Observation  and  Experiment,  because
they  proceed  from  a  false  theory  of  knowledge.  They
accept  the  belief  in  the  passivity  of  mind,  and  then
regard  '  observation  '  as  a  passive  reception  of  impressions,'
while  '  experiment '  is  a  symptom  of  mental '  activity.'  On
their  own  showing  the  distinction  hardly  seems  worth
making ;  for  they  have  to  call  *  experiment '  active
1  observation/  and  it  is  obviously  awkward  to  use  the
same  name  for  species  and  genus.

What  is  more  serious  is  that  the  whole  antithesis
between  *  activity '  and  '  passivity '  is  unsound,  and  that

337  Z


338  FORMAL  LOGIC  CHAP.

psychology  and  biology  do  not  warrant  our  describing
any  mental  process  as  more  than  relatively  *  passive.'
Biologically  the  functioning  of  every  sense-organ,  and
indeed  every  part  of  an  organism's  behaviour,  must  be
conceived  as  a  reaction  upon  stimulation,  and  therefore  as
'  active.'  Psychologically  all  functioning  is  selective,  and
marked  by  extraordinary  amounts  of  blindness  and
sensitiveness  in  different  directions.  These  can  only  be
understood  as  due  to  the  organism's  past  or  present
preferences  for  one  mode  of  living  as  against  others,
and  so  are  intimately  correlated  with  its  '  will  to  live '  in
one  way  rather  than  in  another.  The  '  passivity '  of  sen
sations  is  inadmissible,  because  '  sensations '  are  mere
figments  of  theory,  and  what  is  actually  experienced
are  '  perceptions,'  which  imply  activity  and  interpret
stimulations  in  the  light  of  previous  experience.  More
over  'observation,'  to  be  of  scientific  use,  requires  both
attention  and  purpose,  i.e.  a  knowledge  of  the  points  to
be  observed.  Logically,  we  have  seen  (Chaps.  XVIII,  §  2,
XIX,  §  7,  XX,  §  3),  every  judgment  is  an  experiment,
and  involves  a  risk  of  error.

It  follows  on  all  these  grounds  that  the  '  passivity '  of
any  mental  process  can  never  be  absolute.  *  Passivity '
means  a  slackening  of  the  volitional  directing  of
experience,  a  lapse  into  automatism  and  routine,  a
mechanical  and  thoughtless  way  of  accepting  experiences
as  they  come.  Up  to  a  point  it  is  of  course  possible  to
get  into  such  conditions,  but  they  are  not  valuable  for
scientific  purposes  nor  exclusively  associated  with  the
functioning  of  sense-perception.  There  is  quite  as  much
and  quite  as  harmful  '  passivity '  about  the  unthinking
acquiescence  in  verbal  and  meaningless  formulas  in
philosophy  and  science  as  about  the  laziest  self-
abandonment  to  the  '  impressions  '  of  the  senses.

Secondly,  good  observation  is  anything  but  passive.
It  involves  active  watchfulness.  It  demands  enormous
concentration  of  the  attention  on  the  point  of  the  inquiry,
enormous  indifference  to,  and  ruthless  abstraction  from,
everything  else.  It  is  therefore  subject  to  the  same  risk


xxn  ACCESSORIES  OF  INDUCTION 339

as  experiment,  and  as  apt  to  go  wrong,  if  misdirected.
Indeed  it  is  only  another  sort,  or  perhaps  another  stage,
of  experiment.  In  both  we  begin  by  changing  the
conditions  experimentally  before  observing,  even  if  in
'  observation '  the  change  is  merely  that  of  taking  up  an
attitude  of  watchfulness  towards  certain  objects.  And
conversely,  experiment  would  be  useless  if  it  were  not
accompanied  by  observation.

On  the  whole,  therefore,  a  theory  of  knowledge  which
recognizes  the  all-pervasiveness  of  mental  activity  and
realizes  how  very  strenuous  a  thing  scientific  knowing  is,
will  hardly  think  it  worth  while  to  maintain  the  distinction,
by  inflating  the  differences,  between  Observation  and
Experiment,  nor  waste  its  time  over  drawing  a  line  in
theory  which  is  mostly  invisible  in  practice.

§  3.  Hypothesis

The  recognition  of  mental  activity  enormously
simplifies  the  problem  of  Hypothesis.  It  is  unnecessary
to  discuss  either  the  question  of  principle,  whether
hypotheses  are  permissible,  or  questions  of  detail  as  to
what  hypotheses  are  '  valid  '  and  how  a  '  good '  one  may
be  distinguished  from  a  c  bad  '  one.  If  every  *  fact '  rests
on  selection  and  involves  an  experimental  analysis  of  the
given,1  and  if  every  *  law '  is  provisional  and  in  need  of
confirmation,  it  follows  that  there  is  something  hypo
thetical  about  every  act  of  thought,  and  that  the  dis
tinctions  between  fact,  interpretation,  theory,  hypothesis,
and  guess  are  plastic  and  fluid,  and  that  the  same
condition  of  a  scientific  inquiry  may  be  differently
judged  by  different  observers.  And  if  the  truth-claim  of
every  judgment  needs  to  be  verified,  it  is  superfluous  to
insist  that  unverifiable  hypotheses  are  of  no  use  to  science,
and  so  *  invalid.'  Nor  need  the  logician  attempt  to
figure  in  advance  the  features  of  the  good  hypothesis  ;
he  would  only  be  adventuring  on  problems  of  which  he
is  no  judge.  So  long  as  he  is  inexorable  in  the  demand

,  as  Prof.  Bergson  calls  it.


340  FORMAL  LOGIC  CHAP.

that  scientific  hypotheses,  like  all  truth-claims,  must  work,
and  that  relevantly  to  the  problem  they  concern,  the  less
he  ties  the  hands  of  scientific  insight  by  pedantic  rules,
which  are  not,  and  cannot  be,  observed  in  practice,  the
better.

It  is  more  to  the  purpose  perhaps  to  draw  attention  to
the  difference  between  Hypothesis  and  Fiction^  and  the
curious  relations  which  obtain  between  them  in  practice.
Theoretically  they  seem  to  be  quite  distinct.  A  hypo
thesis  (in  the  narrower  sense)  is  imagined  to  repre
sent  reality,  while  a  fiction  is  a  creation  of  unrestricted
imagination.  But  in  fact  each  transforms  itself  into  the
other  on  the  slightest  provocation.  The  hypotheses
which  we  had  trusted  to  give  us  an  insight  into  reality
are  continually  turning  out  to  be  fictions,  while  as  a
compensation  our  conscious  fictions  sometimes  seem  to
come  much  nearer  the  truth  than  their  authors  ever
imagined.  Nothing  could  illustrate  this  better  than  the
logical  history  of  the  '  Atom.'  The  Atom  began  its
career  as  a  sheer  dogma,  as  an  attempt  of  metaphysics
to  satisfy  one  of  its  grossest  prejudices,  and  to  obtain
1  simple '  elements  from  which  to  derive  everything
complex.  But  in  the  course  of  time  it  developed  so
much  scientific  usefulness  in  the  study  of  the  definite
proportions  of  chemical  combination,  that  '  atoms '  were
extensively  believed  to  be  real  entities  in  nature.
Nevertheless  the  logical  defects  in  the  conception
remained  so  glaring  that  the  more  critical  scientists
preferred  to  interpret  it  as  a  useful  fiction  which  facilitated
thinking.  And  then,  just  as  it  seemed  about  to  be
removed  from  science  as  mere  '  scaffolding/  the  discovery
of  radio-activity,  and  its  interpretation  as  due  to  atomic
dissociation,  restored  the  atom  to  the  realm  of  fact,  and
for  the  first  time  adduced  positive  evidence  of  the
existence  of  individual  atoms.  For  the  flashes  of  light
to  be  counted  on  a  sensitive  screen  exposed  to  bombard
ment  by  radio-active  bodies  are  plausibly  interpreted  as

1  For  this  see  Prof. Vaihinger's  exhaustive  and  very  able  treatment in his
Philosophic  des  A  Is  Ob.


xxn  ACCESSORIES  OF  INDUCTION  341

due  to  the  impacts  of  atoms,  which  are  therefore  again
believed  *  really  to  exist,'  although  they  are  no  longer
imagined  to  be  indivisible  and  ultimate.

We  cannot  admit,  then,  that  because  we  have  sincerely
believed  our  conceptions  to  be  true  images  of  reality  they
become  more  than  fictions,  nor  that  because  we  have
framed  them  as  fictions  for  our  convenience  they  cannot
become  as  fully  true  as  any  knowledge  can  be.  Science,
in  fact,  not  infrequently  finds  herself  in  the  curious
position  of  '  the  old  priest  of  Peru/  who  *  dreamt  he  had
converted  a  Jew,'  and  is  astounded  to  find  that  when
she  awakes  to  the  nature  of  her  procedure,  her  '  dreams '
(guesses,  hypotheses,  fictions)  have  a  knack  of  being  c  per
fectly  true.'  The  moral  to  be  drawn  from  this  is  not  that
Science  has,  in  order  to  succeed  at  all  costs,  sold  herself
to  the  powers  of  darkness  and  must  abjure  these  formally
illegitimate  devices,  but  rather  that  it  is  vain  to  prohibit
the  play  of  mental  activity  with  the  given,  and  unwise  to
restrict  its  freedom.  The  products  of  our  activity  do  not
acknowledge  the  jurisdiction  of  Formal  Logic,  and  escape
from  its  hard-and-fast  classifications  ;  they  are  judged  only
by  their  success,  by  their  actual  efficacy  in  reshaping  into
more  satisfactory  forms  the  problems  which  the  given
suggests  to  the  inquirer.  Whatever,  therefore,  the  psycho
logical  genesis  of  any  hypothesis,  its  logical  value  lies  in
its  verification  by  its  working.  This  is  the  only  appli
cable  condition,  and  it  suffices.

§  4. Analogy

Arguing  by  Analogy  originally  meant  arguing  from  an
equality  or  identity  of  ratios ',  but  it  is  now  commonly  taken
more  laxly  as  arguing  from  any  sort  of  likeness,  and  as
differing  from  *  induction,'  in  that  it  compares  two  things
in  many  points  instead  of  comparing  many  things  in  one
point.  In  spite  of  this  affinity,  inductive  logicians  do  not
think  much  of  it  It  is  not,  alas,  '  formally  valid,'  and
they  ought  not  to  labour  to  formulate  the  conditions  under
which  analogies  can  be  held  to  be  '  true '  and  *  false.'


342  FORMAL  LOGIC  CHAP.

i/* /

They  should  have  realized  rather  that  the  trouble  is

not  only  with  arguments  from  analogy.  If  analogical
argument  is  not  '  formally  valid,'  no  argument  can  be
'  formally  valid.'  For  every  argument,  whether  '  inductive  '
or  *  deductive,' l  is  really  analogical.  In  '  induction  '  we
argue  from  a  number  of  *  cases '  to  a  '  law '  or  rule.  In
;  *  deduction '  we  apply  a  rule  or  law  to  a  number  of  cases,
or,  more  precisely,  extend  the  rule's  application  to  fresh
cases.  In  both,  therefore,  several  '  cases '  of  a  law  are
involved.  But  no  two  cases  are  ever  absolutely  '  identical' ;
they  are  known  to  be  only  *  similar,'  and  their  '  identity '
is  always  constituted  by  abstracting  from  their  differences,
which  are  judged  to  be  irrelevant.  Hence  every  argu
ment  from  *  case '  to  '  case '  must  rest  upon  an  analogy,
and  be  '  bad '  or  *  good '  according  as  the  differences
abstracted  from  turn  out  to  be  relevant  or  not.  The
analogy  may,  however,  be  taken  in  the  strict  sense  of
an  *  identity  of  ratios.'  It  means  that  if,  and  in  so  far
as,  a  i  and  a  2  are  both  '  cases/  they  stand  in  the  same
relation  to  A,  viz.  as  'cases  of  A.'  Whether  they  are  good
'  cases/  whether  the  analogy  is  true  or  false,  whether  they
can  successfully  be  identified  as  *  cases  of  A/  is  merely
the  risk  which,  as  we  saw  (Chap.  XXI,  §  5),  all  reasoning
takes.

Once  more,  then,  we  come  upon  the  experimental  risk
which  it  is  essential  to  reasoning  to  take,  and  to  Formal
Logic  to  try  (vainly)  to  eliminate.  It  appears  in  another
and  very  simple  way  that  on  the  showing  of  the  Formal
logicians  themselves  no  reasoning  can  be  '  formally  valid.'
The  only  way  in  which  Formal  Logic  can  repudiate  this
conclusion  is  by  asserting  that  the  '  identity '  between  the
cases  is  absolute,  and  denying  that  there  are  differences
which  are  neglected,  in  the  cases  taken  as  identical  (cf.
Chap.  X,  §  5);  but,  if  so,  what  sense  is  there  in  calling
them  '  cases '  in  the  plural  ?  Surely  to  conceive  the
identity  as  absolute  would  exclude  even  that  amount  of
difference  which  makes  the  '  cases '  two  ?

1  Cf.  Chap.  XVI,  §  12


xxii  ACCESSORIES  OF  INDUCTION  343

§  5.  Explanation

The  belief  in  Explanation  as  a  way  of  augmenting  the
formal  validity  of  Laws  of  Nature  is  part  and  parcel  of
the  Formalism  which  has  everywhere  shown  so  little
appreciation  of  the  real  problem  of  knowing.  It  rests
on  the  persuasion  that  deduction  can,  merely  as  a  form,
assure  the  absolute  certainty  of  a  conclusion,  and  that
therefore  any  Law  of  Nature  is  fortified  and  secured
against  revision  and  correction  by  a  *  deduction '  from
laws  of  greater  generality,  which  forms  its  '  explanation?
Now  this  is  merely  one  form  of  the  belief  that  the
syllogistic  form  is  proof,  and  ultimately  and  strictly  the
only  certain  proof,  which  was  so  signally  exemplified  in
the  Aristotelian  notion  of  demonstration.  But  it  has  no
reply  to  the  doubt  whether  the  form  in  which  an  inference
is  put  can  affect  its  real  value.

The  belief  in  Explanation  has,  however,  another  root
in  the  conception  of  System^  which  penetrates  still  deeper
into  the  past.  If  a  number  of  propositions,  each  of  which
we  have  grounds  for  considering  true  individually,  can
be  brought  into  connexion  with  one  another,  and  shown
to  imply  each  other,  it  is  manifest  that  no  one  of  them
can  be  rejected  without  discarding  also  the  rest.  They
thus  support  one  another  as  a  system,  and  stand  and  fall
together.  Whoever,  therefore,  attacks  any  one  of  them
must  be  prepared  to  attack  also  the  rest,  or  else  to  break
down  the  connexions  between  them  and  to  show  that
others  are  equally  thinkable.  This  is  as  a  rule  not  diffi
cult,  but  nevertheless  it  is  true  that  systematic  connexion
is  a  potent  way  of  fortifying  a  truth,  for  the  simple
psychological  reasons  that  it  enormously  increases  the
task  of  the  attack  and  the  unwillingness  of  the  defence
to  surrender  to  the  new  truth.  It  is  also  true  that
the  sciences  as  they  develop  grow  more  and  more
systematic.

But  on  these  facts  inferences  have  been  based,  which
not  only  do  not  formally  follow,  but  even  directly  contra
vene  the  formalities  of  proof.  It  has  often  been  inferred


344  FORMAL  LOGIC  CHAP.

that  the  ideal  of  knowledge  would  be  to  form  an  all-
embracing  system,  and  the  ideal  of  Explanation  to
deduce  all  knowledge  from  a  single  self-evident  principle.
Now,  in  the  first  place,  these  two  propositions  do  not
imply  each  other.  The  all-embracing  system  need  not
depend  on  a  single  principle,  but  may  consist  in  an
indefinite  multitude  of  truths,  which  (more  or  less)
support  one  another.  This  is,  in  fact,  the  character  of
scientific  systems.

Secondly,  the  notion  of  a  single  principle,  by  deduction
from  which  all  knowledge  is  to  be  unified,  is  a  curious
survival  of  pre-Aristotelian  logic.  It  goes  back  to  one
of  the  loftiest  flights  of  Plato's  poetic  imagination,  in
which  he  conceived  the  grandiose  fancy  of  a  supreme
4  Idea  of  the  Good '  from  which  all  the  other  '  Ideas '
were  to  be  deduced,  thereby  rendering  all  knowledge
accessible  at  one  stroke.1  In  other  words,  all  the  Laws
of  Nature  were  to  be  '  explained  '  by  being  derived  from
a  single  law  which  was  to  be  the  Universal  Key  to  the
whole  intelligible  world.  Plato  indeed  stops  short  of
complete  monism.  He  never  says  that  the  whole  world
is  to  be  unified  thus.  For  the  whole  world  is  not
intelligible,  since  the  phenomenal  world  is  tainted  with
unreality.  But  he  clearly  means  that  a  plurality  of
Ideas  are  to  be  shown  to  *  depend,'  i.e.  to  be  deducible
from  one.

Now,  ever  since  the  discovery  of  the  Syllogism  it
ought  to  have  been  manifest  that  this  notion  is  formally
impossible.  To  deduce  a  conclusion  two  premisses  are
required,  while  to  deduce  any  considerable  number  of
conclusions  a  large  supply  of  primary  truths  is  needed.2

1  Republic,  bk.  vi. It  is  probable  that  later  in  life  Plato  realized  some  of  the
difficulties  of  working  out  this  notion  ; at  any  rate  it  does  not  reappear  in  his
later  dialogues.

2  Thus  it  can  be  shown  arithmetically  that  with  5  primary  principles  only  10
conclusions  can  be  proved,  whereas  with  50  it  would  be  possible  to  prove  1225.
Hence  the  importance  of  assuming  premisses  hypothetically, instead of  being
forbidden  to  deduce  until  an  adequate  supply  of  absolutely  certain  premisses  has
been  acquired  (Chap.  XVIII,  §  2). It  is  clear,  moreover,  that  the  Formal  theory
of  deduction  puts  itself  out  of  court  as  a  theory  of  science  by  its  arithmetical  inability
to  allege  that  it  has  a  stock  of  intuitively  certain  premisses  anything  like  adequate
to  the  needs  of  the  sciences  with  their  multitudinous  conclusions.


xxn  ACCESSORIES  OF  INDUCTION  345

Nothing,  therefore,  can  be  deduced  from  the  Idea  of
Good,  or  from  any  other  principle  alone,  nor  can  Deduc
tion  result  in  unification.  The  mistake  was  pardonable
in  Plato,  who  was  a  poet  and  lived  before  Aristotle
had  discovered  the  Syllogism  ;  it  is  inexcusable  in
philosophers  who  had  neither  excuse,  and  professed  to
have  studied,  and  grasped,  Formal  Logic.  They  had,
moreover,  Aristotle's  own  example  to  guide  them.
Aristotle  clearly  saw  that  sciences  always  proceed  from
a  plurality  of  principles,  though  he  did  not  think  it
necessary  (or  possible  ?)  to  enumerate  them  fully.  No
doubt  he  was  mistaken  in  not  taking  the  analysis  of
scientific  principles  beyond  the  point  at  which  they  seem
'  self-evident ' ;  but  at  all  events  his  recognition  of  a
plurality  of  sciences,  each  equipped  with  its  own  peculiar
principles,  and  his  refusal  to  unify  all  knowledge,  are
significant  departures  from  the  Platonic  ideal,  which
indicate  both  that  he  had  fully  grasped  the  formal  nature
of  '  Deduction,'  and  also  to  a  considerable  extent  the
actual  structure  of  the  sciences.  Plato's  ideal,  on  the
other  hand,  was  scientifically  as  impracticable  as  it  was
formally  unthinkable.  Strictly  interpreted,  it  demanded
that  science  was  to  proceed  from  certain  principles,  and
asserted  that  all  certainty  was  derivative  from  the
Idea  of  Good.  Until,  therefore,  this  Idea  was  ascer
tained,  scientific  knowing  was  prohibited,  or  at  most
confined  to  such  philosophic  meditation  upon  the
'  hypotheses '  of  science  as  might  reveal  their  universal
ground.1

The  logical  value  of  Explanation,  then,  rests  on  the
psychological  difficulty  and  inconvenience  of  discarding
large  bodies  of  connected  truth.  But  this  vindication  is
plainly  psychological,  and  'psychology'  is  taboo  to
Formal  Logic,  which  should  consistently  maintain  that

1  Of  course  the  commentators  usually  conceal  this  anti-scientific  inference
from  Plato's  conception  of  the  relations  of  science  and  philosophy.  But  Plato
seems  to  have  put  forward  the  astounding  pretension  of  arresting  the  development
both  of  science  and  of  practice  in  all  seriousness.  Until  the  absolute  rule  of
philosophy  could  be  instituted  over  both  of  them,  neither  was  worth  anything,
and  their  independent  progress  was  declared  impossible.


346  FORMAL  LOGIC  CHAP.

every  truth  is  either  true  absolutely  or  not  at  all,  and
that  if  it  is  true,  it  cannot  be  rendered  truer  by  being
1  deduced.'

§  6. Verification

Formal  Logic  has  a  very  poor  opinion  of  Verification.
It  cannot  *  prove.'  To  infer,  from  the  fact  that  the
observed  consequences  are  such  as  they  would  be  if  a
hypothesis  were  true,  that  therefore  the  hypothesis  is
true,  is  *  fallacious.'  For  the  observed  consequences
might  result  as  well,  or  better,  from  another  hypothesis.
The  fallacy  is  that  of  '  affirming  the  consequent '
(Chap.  XVII,  §  2),  and  Verification  is  liable  to  it,
because  it  does  not  make  sure  that  there  is  strict
reciprocity  between  the  cause  and  the  effect.  We  must
be  able  to  argue,  not  '  if  the  theory  is  true,  the  effect  will
be  so  and  so,  it  is  so  and  so,  therefore  the  theory  is  true,'
but  '  only  if  the  theory  is  true/  etc.,  i.e.  if  the  effect  can
be  attributed  to  that  theory  alone.

It  is  clear,  therefore,  that  from  a  Formal  standpoint
the  situation  looks  very  black  for  the  Verification  of
truth-claims  by  their  working.  Yet  such  verification
seemed  to  be  the  only  safeguard  actual  reasoning  had  to
offer  to  the  scruples  of  Logic.  There  was  no  security
in  the  formulation  of  the  claim,  which  might  be  due  to  a
guess,  or  a  fancy,  or  a  postulate,  and  seemed  hopelessly
1  arbitrary '  and  '  subjective.'  Verification  alone  seemed
to  appeal  to  something  '  objective,'  though  even  that  was
merely  '  empirical.'  Yet  now,  it  seems,  Verification  also
breaks  down  utterly  in  the  eyes  of  Formal  Logic.  It
was  hardly  necessary,  therefore,  so  sedulously  to  omit  all
references  to  it  in  denunciations  of  the  *  arbitrariness '  of
voluntarist  accounts  of  knowledge.

From  the  Formal  standpoint  all  this  is  true,  and  if
that  standpoint  were  tenable  the  consequences  to  scientific
reasoning  would  be  very  serious.  *  Valid '  reasoning
would  have  to  proceed  either  from  '  self-evident '  certain
principles,  or  would  become  impossible,  and  the  ordinary
reasonings  of  empirical  science  which  appeal  to  Verifica-


xxii  ACCESSORIES  OF INDUCTION  347

tion  would  have  to  be  ruled  out  of  order.  Science  would,
in  short,  be  restricted  to  a  choice  between  scepticism  and
apriorism.

Perhaps,  however,  the  situation  is  more  serious  for
Formal  Logic  than  for  Science,  and  it  is  the  former
that  falls  into  the  pit  it  had  digged  for  empirical  science.
It  had  to  admit  under  cross-examination  that  '  reciprocat
ing  causes '  are  very  rare — nay,  that  the  elimination  of
plural  causes  is  'only  an  ideal'  (Chap.  XX,  §  9).  We
had  to  object  that  this  was  no  ideal  for  science,  and  to
deny  that  reciprocating  causes  were  in  fact  attainable.  We
have  also  denied  that  self-evidence  has  any  logical  value
(Chap.  XVIII,  §  3).  Moreover,  whatever  a  priori  principles
we  might  now  choose  to  accept  as  '  self-evident,'  would
still  have  to  be  verified  by  their  working.  For  after  all
no  one  could  guarantee  the  continuance  of  their  *  self-
evidence  '  in  the  future,  either  for  himself  or  for  others.
Hence  apriorism  is  impossible.

But  is  scepticism  the  sole  alternative?  For  the
Formal  logician  doubtless  ;  for  no  amount  of  discrepancy
between  his  *  ideal '  and  the  actual  procedure  of  science
induces  him  to  doubt  the  former.

But  for  a  logic  which  is  not  so  intransigent  towards
the  facts  the  difficulty  is  not  insuperable.  In  fact  there
is  no  difficulty.  Its  answer  to  the  attack  on  Verification
is  to  concede  all  that  was  asserted,  and  to  deny  that  it
matters.  It  is  perfectly  true  that  Verification  does  not
yield  absolute  certainty  ;  because  nothing  does.  It  is
perfectly  true  that  it  is  not  Formal  proof;  because
Formal  proof  is  impossible.  It  is  perfectly  true  that  no
amount  of  Verification  yields  finality  and  justifies  repose  ;
but  then  finality  would  mean  the  end  of  science,  and
repose  the  end  of  scientific  activity.  It  is  perfectly  true
that  inferences  from  '  effects '  to  *  causes '  are  risky  and
not  cogent,  and  that  '  verified '  hypotheses  may  require
to  be  improved  and  even  discarded  ;  but  what  does  this
matter,  if  risk  is  inseparable  from  real  reasoning,  and
willingness  to  make  improvements  is  the  condition  of
scientific  progress?


348  FORMAL  LOGIC  CHAP,  xxn

Thus  once  again  the  notion  of  Formal  proof  appears
impossible,  and  the  logical  values  dependent  on  it
prove  unattainable.  The  real  alternative  for  Logic  is
whether  it  will  obstinately  adhere  to  it  and  for  its
sake  declare  knowledge  impossible,  or  will  abandon
the  Formal  ideal.


CHAPTER XXIII

FALLACIES
§  I . The  Notion  of  Formal  Fallacy

A  Fallacy  is  a  reasoning  which  may  be  known  to  be
'  bad '  from  an  inspection  of  its  form.  Or  more
technically  and  strictly,  it  is  an  argument  which  appears
to  be  conclusive,  when  in  fact  it  is  not  so,  by  reason  of
some  offence  it  has  committed  against  the  rules  of  Formal
Logic.  Its  reasoning  is  thus  *  bad '  or  '  unsound/  in  the
sense  that  it  is  Formally  inconclusive  or  invalid,  and  it
is  thus  the  counterpart  of  a  Formally  valid  reasoning.
It  is  clear,  therefore,  that  the  notion  of  Formal  '  fallacy '
stands  and  falls  with  that  of  Formal  'validity.'  If  there
is  good  reason  to  dispute  the  existence  and  possibility
of  Formally  valid  reasoning,  it  follows  that  there  can
be  no  such  thing  as  reasoning  which  can  be  known  to
be  bad  by  the  vice  of  its  form.

It  would  be  possible,  therefore,  to  argue  that  as
Formal  Validity  had  revealed  itself  as  an  impossible
*  ideal,'  the  notion  of  Formal  Fallacy  also  must  be
discarded  ;  but  it  will  be  more  instructive  to  start  afresh,
and  to  examine  whether  the  Formal  doctrine  of  Fallacies
is  in  fact  coherent  and  intelligible  on  its  own  showing.

The  first  difficulty  which  presents  itself  is  that  of
discovering  what  precisely  a  formal  fallacy  is  held  to
prove.  May  we  take  it  that  it  proves  the  actual  un-
soundness  and  falsity  of  the  '  fallacious  '  reasoning  ?  That,
no  doubt,  is  the  impression  apt  to  be  left  by  the  Formal
doctrine,  and  it  is,  perhaps,  not  infrequently  shared  by

349


350  FORMAL  LOGIC  CHAP.

the  Formal  logicians  themselves. But  it  clearly  does  not
follow.

(i)  Formal  Logic  has  nothing  whatever  to  do  with
real  truth.  It  has  set  aside  the  distinction  between  true
and  false  by  choosing  as  its  subject  the  conditions  of
Formal  '  validity.'  This  definition  has  substituted  the
distinction  between  the  Formally  *  valid  '  and  the  Formally
*  invalid '  for  that  between  the  true  and  the  false,  and
henceforth  no  inference  leads  from  the  one  to  the  other.
A  Formally  valid  thought  may  be  actually  false,  and  a
Formally  invalid  thought  may  be  actually  true.  Hence
the  presence  of  Formal  fallacy  is  no  disproof  of  the  real
worth  of  an  argument,  and  does  not  really  dispose  of  it,
a  fact  which  no  doubt  explains  the  vitality  of '  fallacies  '
in  real  disputes.  The  technical  and  Formal  '  badness '
of  an  argument,  in  short,  proves  nothing  as  to  its  real
value,  and  no  inspection  of  its  form  will  entitle  us  to
dismiss  it  without  going  into  the  real  evidence  behind  it.
l»  ^  (2)  The  Formal  definition  of  Fallacy  is  defective,
and  leaves  vital  questions  undecided.  It  says  nothing
about  arguments  which  are  Formally  inconclusive  and
known  to  be  such,  but  nevertheless  used  as  evidence
and  considered  to  have  some  value,  even  though  that
value  is  not  supposed  to  amount  to  '  proof.'  It  does  not
tell  us  how  to  judge  them.  Are  they  '  fallacies  '  or  not  ?

(a)  If  they  are,  all  probable  reasonings,  i.e.  all  reason
ings  which  fall  short  of  absolute  proof,  will  be  *  fallacies.'
But  so  far  as  we  have  been  able  to  discover,  this  applies
to  all  reasonings  whatsoever. Shall  it  be  admitted,  then,
that  all  actual  reasonings  are  '  fallacies  '  ? Formal  Logic
would probably  shrink  from this paradox,  though  it  is
quite  consistent  with  its  principles,  and,  as  we  shall  see
(p.  354),  it  is  not  in  the  end  very  far  from  the  admission
of  this  conclusion  itself.

(b)  The  only  alternative  would  seem  to  be  to  explain
that  an  inconclusive  argument  is  a  *  fallacy '  only  when  it
is  taken  to  be  conclusive,  i.e.  when  its  real  character  is
not perceived. Its fallaciousness will then consist in
its deceptiveness, in its pretension to cogency, in the


XXIII


FALLACIES  351


illusion  it  tries  to  engender  as  to  its  value.  This  again
is  an  interpretation  which  the  actual  treatment  of
Fallacies  by  logicians  might  well  be  used  to  support.
It  yields  a  plausible  differentiation  of  '  fallacy '  and
'probability.'  For  example,  an  Undistributed  Middle
can  hardly  be  called  a  fallacy,  if  the  inference  drawn
from  *  Nearly  all  crabs  live  in  water ;  this  is  a  crab,
therefore  it  lives  in  water,'  merely  means  to  assert  the
probability  that  the  animal  is  not  a  land-crab.

But  to  conceive  Fallacy  thus  is  nevertheless  Formally
inadmissible.  It  is  to  make  the  differentia  of  a  fallacy
its  capacity  to  deceive  the  reasoner  (or  rather  its  failure  to
do  so),  and  this  is  to  make  the  conception '  psychological.'
The  same  reasoning  is  *  fallacious '  or  not,  according
as  it  deceives  or  not.  It  may  therefore  be  a  '  fallacy '
to  one  reasoner  and  not  to  another ;  or  rather  there
can  only  be  *  fallacy  '  when  this  is  the  case.  For  alike
when  both  parties  are  deceived,  and  when  both  perceive
the  real  value  of  the  argument,  there  is  no  *  fallacy.'
But  all  this  is  *  psychologism '  with  a  vengeance,  and
defines  the  notion  of  Fallacy  as  lying  essentially  in  the
relations  of  the  reasoning  to  human  minds,  which  it  both
deceives  and  fails  to  deceive.  Formal  Fallacy  thus
means  human  ignorance  as  to  the  real  value  of  an  argu
ment.  Further,  it  once  more  follows  from  this  definition
that  all  arguments  are  '  fallacies/  since  no  human  mind
can  claim  to  be  completely  aware  of  the  whole  value
of  an  argument,  and  every  one  must  admit  at  least  the
theoretic  possibility  that  some  of  its  implications  have
escaped  him.  But,  if  so,  his  ignorance  of  its  real  value
may  always  render  the  argument  deceptive  for  him,  and
so  fallacious.


§  2. The  Futility  of  the  Notion  of  Formal  Fallacy

It  would  seem,  then,  that  Formal  Logic  itself  un
wittingly  and  unwillingly  testifies  to  the  difficulty  of
defining  the  notion  of  Fallacy,  and  to  its  uselessness  for
the  purpose  of  distinguishing  good  reasoning  from  bad.


352  FORMAL  LOGIC  CHAP.

This  result,  however,  need  surprise  no  one  but  a
Formal  logician.  For  if  the  notion  of  Formal  Validity
is  incompetent  to  act  as  a  guide  to  actual  reasoning,  the
fear  of  Formal  Fallacy  must  be  equally  incapable  of  acting
as  a  deterrent.  In  practice  the  notion  of '  Fallacy  '  shows
its  impotence  in  four  sorts  of  inability:  (i)  to  distinguish
between  recognized  *  fallacies  '  and  other  arguments  which
are  not  Formally  '  conclusive';  (2)  to  deny  that  these  latter,
though  not  'cogent,'  may  nevertheless  be  valuable  ;  (3)  to
distinguish  *  fallacies  '  from  valid  forms  of  reasoning  ;  (4)
to  show  that  the  recognized  forms  of  Fallacy  are  more
than  verbal.  The  all-pervasiveness  of  these  defects  will
best  be  illustrated  by  going  through  the  traditional  list  of
Fallacies,  and  showing  how  futile  they  render  the  Formal
treatment  of  all  these  'errors  of  reasoning.'  For  this
purpose  it  will  not  be  necessary  to  go  into  the  intricate
and  unprofitable  disputes  as  to  how  Fallacies  may  best
be  classified,  and  under  which  head  the  various  fallacies
fall ;  it  will  suffice  to  accept  the  commonest  of  these
classifications,  that  into  Formal^  Material^  and  Semi-logical
fallacies.

§  3. The  Formal  Fallacies

The  strictly  Formal  Fallacies  are  Undistributed  Middle,
Illicit  Process  of  the  Major  or  of  the  Minor  Term,  and
Quaternio  Terminorum,  of  which  Ambiguous  Middle  is  a
shining  example  (cf.  Chap.  XV,  §  2).  To  these  we  may
add  Affirming  the  Consequent  and  Denying  the  Antecedent ',
if  we  decline  to  reduce  '  hypothetical '  reasoning  to
'  categorical,'  and  so  to  reduce  these  '  invalid '  procedures
to  Undistributed  Middle  and  Illicit  Process  of  the  Major.
The  Assumption  of  False  Premisses,  which  is  also  some
times  mentioned  under  this  head,  is  clearly  not  a  Formal
fallacy.  For  Formal  Logic  is  neither  able  nor  entitled
to  pronounce  when  premisses  are  '  false.'

It  will  be  observed  that  these  Formal  Fallacies  defy
the  Rules  of  the  Syllogism,  and  are  therefore  Formally
as  reprehensible  as  possible.  Yet  reasonings  which
commit  them  may,  in  fact,  have  considerable  value.


XXIII


FALLACIES  353


For  example,  the  real  value  of  an  argument  which
has  an  *  undistributed  middle '  will  depend  on  how
completely  or  probably  the  middle  in  the  two  premisses
may  be  identifiable  in  spite  of  its  offering  no  formal
guarantee  of  identity.  From  '  All  the  clever  boys  got
prizes  ;  all  the  hard-working  boys  got  prizes/  it  is  not
unreasonable  to  infer  that  *  All  the  clever  boys  were
hard-working/  in  spite  of  the  Formal  '  impossibility  *
of  a  positive  conclusion  in  the  second  figure  (Chap.
XV,  §  2).  Nor  will  it  be  misleading  to  infer  from
*  All  Liberals  hold  these  opinions ;  he  holds  these
opinions,'  that  *  He  is  a  Liberal,'  if  only  the  opinions
are  distinctive  enough,  so  that  practically  none  but
Liberals  hold  them.

In  the  case  of  Illicit  Process  the  formal  defect  of  the
reasoning  consists  in  inferring  about  the  whole  of  a
term  what  is  known  only  of  part  of  it.  But  this  does
not  necessarily  deprive  the  argument  of  actual  value.
For  the  unknown  factor  need  not  actually  invalidate  the
inference.  What  is  true  of  the  part  may  be  true  of  the
whole.  Moreover,  if  the  known  part  is  very  nearly  the
whole,  the  Formal  defect  may  actually  be  negligible.

Further,  the  Formal  defect  is  usually  to  be  cured  by
c  converting '  one  or  the  other  of  the  premisses,  and  this
we  may  actually  be  entitled  to  do,  although  we  may  not
know  it  as  yet.  The  test-case  here  is  that  of  the  formal
validity  of  'Induction'  (Chap.  XIX,  §  2).  Here  the
1  cases '  enumerated  function  as  the  middle  term,  and  if
the  enumeration  can  be  made  exhaustive,  it  is  clear  that
the  minor  premiss  can  be  '  converted,'  and  the  reasoning
turned  into  a  formally  valid  syllogism  in  Barbara.  Hence
it  was  natural  to  conceive  '  exhaustion '  as  the  '  ideal '  of
Induction.  But  can  it  seriously  be  contended  that  until
exhaustion  is  attained  the  enumeration  of  cases  has  no
logical  value,  and  that  as  confirmation  pours  in  it  does
not  become  more  and  more  probable  that  *  all  S  is  P '  ?
If  so,  would  it  not  be  vain  to  try  to  argue  from  *  cases '
at  all  ?

As  for  the  Fallacy  of  Four  Terms,  we  have  seen  that

2  A


354  FORMAL  LOGIC  CHAP.

many  logicians  hold  that  many  arguments  which  are
'valid'  habitually  commit  it  (Chap.  XVI,  §  n).  But
we  also  saw  that  a  purely  verbal  transformation  will  cure
this  defect.  So  that  here,  apparently,  the  difference
between  a  '  fallacy '  and  a  *  valid '  reasoning  is,  in  the
opinion  of  Formal  Logic  itself,  entirely  verbal.

Still  more  significant  is  the  case  of  the  Ambiguous
Middle.  We  saw  in  Chap.  XVI,  §  6,  that  no  one  could
tell  by  looking  at  the  abstract  form  of  an  argument
whether  or  not  it  would  involve  an  '  ambiguity '  in  the
Middle,  whenever  any  one  tried  to  make  an  actual
application  of  the  form.  But  what  does  this  mean  but
that  Formal  Logic  is  unable  to  distinguish  Formally
between  a  gross  'fallacy*  and  its  supreme  form  of  'valid*
reasoning  ? 1

Concerning  the  Fallacies  of  Affirming  the  Consequent
and  Denying  the  Antecedent  it  may  suffice  to  say  that  the
reasoning  is  good  if  in  any  case  the  '  cause '  may  be
taken  as  '  reciprocating '  with  the  *  effect/  and  that  whether
it  may  or  not  is  a  question  which  inevitably  arises  in
every  attempt  to  reason  from  the  relation  of  *  cause '  and
'effect'  (Chap.  XX,  §  9,  Chap.  XXII,  §  6).  Formally,
therefore,  a  '  good  '  reasoning  from  a  '  reciprocating  '  cause
is  indistinguishable  from  a  *  fallacious '  one  in  any  case
where  reciprocation  cannot  be  assumed  for  the  purpose  of
the  argument.

1  It  may  plausibly  be  contended,  indeed,  that  this  difficulty  is  still  more
far-reaching.  If  the  middle  term  may  develop  '  ambiguity '  in  use,  owing
to  the  special  context  to  which  it  is  applied,  does  not  the  same  principle
apply  also  to  the  other  two  ?  E.g.  '  The  members  of  the  Oxford  Alpine
Club  dine  once  a  year,  X.  is  a  member  of  the  O.  U.A.C. ,  .'.  he  dines  once
a  year.'  How  can  we  argue  from  S  (or  P)  in  one  context  to  S  (or  P)  in
another?  Clearly  there  is,  in  asserting  their  'identity,'  a  risk,  which  we  can
deny  only  if  we  deny  absolutely  that  the  context  can  make  any  difference  at  all,
and  conceive  our  '  terms  '  as  absolutely  rigid.  But  this  is  plainly  false  in  fact,
and  only  tenable  in  theory  if  the  '  identity '  of  the  terms  is  referred  either  to  the
identity  of  the  words,  or  to  the  abstraction  from  context  which  is  incidental  to
the  unapplied  form.  Hence  the  Formal  doctrine  of  the  Syllogism's  '  three
terms '  only  holds  either  of  the  words  or  of  the  unused  form.  So  soon  as  we
try  actually  to  reason,  our  '  terms '  may  double  in  their  contexts,  and  our
1  syllogism  '  may  develop  six  terms,  and  lead  us  astray.  This  is  the  truth  in
Herbert  Spencer's  doctrine  that  every  '  valid  '  syllogism  always  has  six  terms,
because  the  identity  of  any  term  in  two  appearances  is  a  fiction.  But  Spencer
did  not  see  that  this  fiction  is  needed  in  order  to  reason,  and  that  the  risk
involved  is  tested  by  the  issue.


XXIII


FALLACIES  355


§  4. The  '  Material*  Fallacies

These,  of  course,  look  like  a  gross  inconsequence.  To
a  consistently  Formal  logic  material  error  should  be  as
indifferent  as  material  truth.  But  as  the  name  is  there,
and  there  is  a  list  of  them,  and  it  is  not  uninstructive  to
examine  them,  we  may  proceed  to  note  that  they  cause
Formal  Logic  just  the  same  embarrassments  as  the
Formal  Fallacies.

I.  The  list  of  the  Material  Fallacies  is  headed  by  that
denominated  the  Fallacy  of  Accident.  It  is  defined  as  an
attempt  to  argue  falsely  from  a  rule  which  is  true  in
general  to  a  case  in  which,  owing  to  particular  circumstances,
the  rule  does  not  hold.  The  traditional  illustration  is
4  What  you  buy  to-day  you  eat  to-morrow  ;  you  buy  raw
meat  to-day,  therefore  you  eat  raw  meat  to-morrow/

The  first  comment  which  suggests  itself  on  this
'  fallacy '  is  that  there  is  a  real  scientific  problem  involved,
of  which  the  *  fallacy '  has  caught  a  misleading  glimpse.
It  has  perceived  what  the  rest  of  Formal  Logic  has  either
failed  to  see  or  been  careful  to  conceal,  viz.  that  there
always  are  *  particular  circumstances,'  that  there  is  a
real  difficulty  in  applying  a  rule  and  arguing  from
a  *  law '  to  a  '  case/  because  it  is  possible  to  misapply
rules  and  necessary  to  find  the  right  rule  for  the  case
(Chap.  XXI,  §  5).  But  it  seems  strangely  perverse  to
disguise  this  very  important  discovery  in  the  shape  of  a
1  fallacy.'  The  problem  involved  is  precisely  that  of  all
deductive  reasoning.  We  are  always  reasoning  from  a
universal  rule  to  what  we  take  to  be  an  example  of  it ;
we  are  always  liable  to  find  that  we  were  mistaken,  and
that  the  rule  does  not  apply  in  this  case.  If,  so  soon
as  we  apply  a  rule,  we  become  liable  to  a  'fallacy  of
Accident,'  a  new  and  startling  light  is  thrown  on  the
use  of  rules.  For  if  they  may  betray  us  so  soon  as  we
try  to  use  them,  they  are  indisputable  and  safe  only
while  they  are  not  applied.  Here,  then,  is  the  reason
why  Formal  Logic,  which  has  instinctively  scented  the
danger,  fights  so  shy  of  application  in  its  pursuit  of


356  FORMAL  LOGIC  CHAP.

a  priori  safety.  Yet  what  is  the  use  of  inapplicable  rules  ?
How  can  they  retain  a  meaning?  This  difficulty  also
Formal  Logic  more  than  half  suspects.  But  its  notion
of  meeting  it  is  by  secretly  abstracting  from  meaning
altogether,  and  making  this  abstraction  its  fundamental
postulate  (Chap.  XXIV,  §  5).  Thus,  either  by  leaving
its  doctrines  inapplicable,  or  by  disclaiming  all  relation
to  meaning,  Formal  Logic  contrives  to  escape  empirical
confutation.  But  it  is  hard  to  see  how  either  can  be
supposed  to  help  us.  For  in  all  our  reasoning  we  may
still  fall  victims  to  the  Fallacy  of  Accident,  though  we
can  give  this  name  to  our  failure  only  after  the  event.
Nor  can  any  study  of  Formal  Logic  protect  us  against
this  risk  ;  our  risk  is  simply  that  of  all  real  reasoning,
and  it  is  indifferent  whether  we  ascribe  it  to  the  Fallacy
of  Accident  or  to  Ambiguity  of  the  Middle  (cf.  Chap.
XVI,  §  6).

Again,  if  our  Formalism  so  far  unbends  as  to  allow  us
to  conceive  the  tendency  to  this  '  fallacy '  psychologically,
and  we  accordingly  follow  Lotze  in  declaring  it  the
characteristic  fallacy  of  the  doctrinaire  who  will  not
admit  that  circumstances  alter  cases  and  affect  the
application  of  rules,  we  shall  yet  have  to  point  out  that
formally  this  intellectual  vice  of  taking  particulars  as
cases  of  the  wrong  '  law '  is  indistinguishable  from  the
valuable  quality  of  seeing  them  as  cases  of  the  right  law.

II.  The  Converse  Fallacy  of  Accident  is  defined  as
wrongly  turning  what  is  true  under  the  peculiar  cir
cumstances  of  a  case  into  a  general  law  for  all  cases.
Or  more  technically,  whereas  the  Fallacy  of  Accident
argued  a  dicto  simpliciter  ad  dictum  secundum  quid,  it
goes  a  dicto  secundum  quid  ad  dictum  simpliciter.  As
examples  we  may  quote  the  fanatical  opponent  of  alcohol
or  gambling  who  argues  from  the  extreme  cases  of  ruinous
vice  that  whoever  drinks  a  drop  or  stakes  a  penny  is
doomed  to  die  a  drunkard  or  a  gambler.  Here  we  have
essentially  the  same  situation  as  before,  the  relation  of
the  '  law  '  and  the  *  case '  and  the  amount  of  qualification
which  application  to  the  latter  demands  in  the  former.


XXIII


FALLACIES  357


Clearly  we  may  go  as  wrong  in  starting  from  the  case
and  not  perceiving  that  the  case  is  peculiar  and  must
not  be  generalized  as  in  starting  from  the  law  and  not
seeing  that  it  has  to  be  adjusted  to  the  case.  And
just  as  our  former  failure  could  be  correlated  with
doctrinairism,  so  our  present  error  may  be  connected  with
narrow-mindedness  and  inability  to  disentangle  a  general
law  from  its  particular  applications.  Psychologically
both  vices  are  of  course  common  enough  ;  some  minds
can  never  accommodate  their  vague  generalities  to  facts,
others  can  never  see  beyond  facts.  But,  again,  why
should  this  be  noted  in  Formal  Logic,  and  noted  as  a
'  fallacy '  ?

It  would  seem,  moreover,  that  the  distinction  between
the  two  fallacies  of  '  Accident '  is  in  practice  highly
artificial.  Which  name  is  given  to  our  error,  after
our  failure  has  convinced  us  that  we  have  made  one,
all  depends  on  whether  the  '  rule '  we  choose  to  think
of  has  the  *  case '  for  its  '  fallacious '  application,  or  is
conceived  as  itself  a  special  case  of  a  more  general  rule.
Thus  drinking  brandy  may  be  conceived  either  as  a  case
of  taking  '  poison  '  or  of  taking  '  medicine '  ;  in  the  one
case  the  '  fallacy '  will  consist  in  supposing  that  what  is
poison  in  general  is  so  also  in  small  quantities  (accident),
in  the  other,  that  what  is  medicinal  in  small  quantities  is
so  also  in  large  (converse  accident}.  But  whether  the
reasoning  is  or  is  not  sound  does  not  depend  on  its  form
at  all ;  it  is  simply  a  question  whether  we  have  selected
our  '  case '  rightly  and  found  the  applicable  rule  for  it.

III.  The  Fallacy  of  Ignoratio  Elenchi,  or  Irrelevant
Conclusion^  originally  meant  something  quite  definite,  viz.
arguing  to  the  wrong  point,  and  proving  something  else
than  the  *  confutation '  (i.e.  the  contradictory)  of  an
opponent's  thesis  in  a  discussion.  From  missing  the
point  to  be  proved  it  has  been  extended  to  mean
irrelevant  argument  in  general,  without  definite  reference
to  an  opposed  thesis.  But  the  detection  of  Irrelevance  is
utterly  beyond  the  power  of  Formal  Logic.

(a)  For  the relevance of  any part of  an argument


358  FORMAL  LOGIC  CHAP.

depends  on  the  purpose  of  the  whole  and  a  knowledge
thereof,  and  Formal  Logic  thought  it  clever  to  simplify
its  task  by  ruling  out  the  relation  of  reasoning  to  purpose
(Chap.  I,  §  3).

(b)  Relevance is excluded from Formal Logic not
only  because  of  its  relation  to  purpose,  but  also  on  its
own account. For the relevant is  never  more  than  a
part of the whole (Chap.  VIII,  § 5),  and Logic has
always officially professed to aim at all-inclusiveness.
References to considerations of relevance have only
trickled in quite recently and surreptitiously among
English logicians,1  and  it is significant that the only
language  which  possesses  a  clear  and  complete  vocabulary
for  the  conception  is  the  English.2

(c)  If  irrelevance  is  to  be  treated  as  a  '  fallacy,'  all  error
ought  to  fall  under  this  head. For  all  error  is  *  not  to
the  purpose.' Moreover,  in  all  reasoning  the  real  ques
tion is  always  whether the  relevant has  been properly
extracted,  and the  irrelevant  duly excluded. But this
question  cannot be decided by recognizing  the Formal
possibility  of  an  '  irrelevant  conclusion.'

(d)  Even if Ignoratio Elenchi is restricted to its
original Aristotelian  sense,  it  still  is  not  a  formal  fallacy.
As  a  syllogism  its  reasoning  may  be  perfectly  valid,  and
may  prove  its  conclusion  flawlessly. That  the  conclusion
proved  is not  that  required  in  its  actual  context  on  this
occasion cannot  be  discovered  by  contemplating  its  form.
To  detect  it,  therefore,  demands  knowledge  of  the  actual
context  and  use,  and  psychological  knowledge,  to  boot,  of
the  point  aimed  at  in  the  actual  discussion.

It  may  further  be  pointed  out  that  even  if  Formal
Logic  could  consistently  deal  with  this  fallacy,  it  would  yet
be  quite  unable  to  explain  wherein  it  differed  from  a  sound
argument.  For  the  difference  between  what  are  relevant
and  irrelevant  considerations  under  any  circumstances  is
never  formally  obvious.  Indeed  it  is  often,  and  even
usually,  a  difficult  and  disputable  question,  which  the

1  Dr.  W.  R.  Boyce  Gibson  and  Prof.  Stout  here  deserve  honourable  mention.

2  Thanks,  not  to  logicians,  but  to  Scotch  lawyers. See  the  Oxford  English
Dictionary ,  sub  voce.


XXIII


FALLACIES  359


Formal  naming  of  the  'fallacy'  does  not  help  us  to
decide.  As  an  illustration  of  this  '  fallacy '  the  writer
was  once  given  in  an  examination  the  statement,  *  When
Socrates  was  accused  of  corrupting  the  youth,  he  replied
that  his  accuser  did  not  know  the  youth'  But  it  is  obvious
that  if  Socrates  had  been  inspired  to  make  this  defence,
its  relevance  would  at  once  have  struck  every  juryman
with  a  sense  of  humour  and  a  knowledge  of  the  morals
of  the  young  bloods  of  Athens.  Even  in  the  stock
illustration  of  Ignoratio  Elenchz,  the  brief  marked  '  No
case  ;  abuse  the  plaintiffs  attorney,'  the  irrelevance  only
seems  obvious  because  the  words  seem  to  admit  that  the
defendant  has  no  case.  For  it  is  not  in  general  true
to  say  that  the  character  of  the  advocates  of  a  view  is
irrelevant  to  our  estimation  of  its  value.  But  even  in
this  case  it  is  permissible  to  suppose  that  the  defendant
may  have  had  '  no  case,'  merely  because  a  charge  had
been  trumped  up  so  skilfully  that  no  legal  refutation
seemed  feasible  ;  so  that,  though  he  was  innocent,  his  only
relevant  defence  was  to  insist  on  the  evil  character  of  his
opponents  and  their  notorious  skill  in  suborning  false
evidence.

This  particular  form  of  *  Irrelevance,'  which  attacks
not  the  case  but  its  advocates,  has  received  the  special
name  of  an  argument  ad  hominem.  Others  have  been
similarly  equipped  with  technical  names,  ad  populum,
ad  captandum  gratiam^  ad  misericordiam,  ad  hoc,  adbaculum,
etc.  In  each  case  there  may  be  a  dispute  whether  in
any  particular  use  the  appeal  is  in  fact  to  circumstances
which  are  irrelevant.  At  any  rate  such  appeals  are
constant  and  inevitable  just  because  the  reasoners  are
human,  and  all  arguments  make  them  more  or  less.  No
audience,  for  example,  can  help  being  impressed  to  some
extent  by  a  speaker's  fine  presence,  show  of  sincerity,
melodiousness  of  voice  and  eloquence  of  diction,  and
prejudiced  by  their  contraries ;  yet  who  will  say  that
these  things  are  strictly  '  relevant '  ?  Unfairness,  bias,
prejudice,  preconception,  preparedness,  openness  to  con
viction  shade  off  into  each  other  insensibly,  as  does


360  FORMAL  LOGIC  CHAP.

open-mindedness  into  indifference  ;  nor,  if  a  man  could
be  found  who  was  wholly  free  from  every  sort  of  bias,
would  he  be  the  best  reasoner  ;  he  would  more  probably
be  quite  indifferent,  or  an  idiot.  Thus  truth  as  well  as
error  may  be  elicited  by  what  is  Formally  *  irrelevance/
and  the  valuable  and  the  worthless  are  generated  by  the
same  process.

IV.  Petitio  Principii,  or  Begging  of  the  Question ,  is
another  '  fallacy '  that  exhibits  no  formal  defect  and  can
be  detected  only  by  a  knowledge  of  its  context.  Again
it  is  necessary  to  know  the  actual  aim  and  purpose  of
the  argument.  Supposing  this  to  be  known,  the  nature
of  the  *  fallacy '  can  be  defined  as  assuming  as  part  of
the  grounds  for  a  conclusion  a  proposition  which  itself
rests  on  the  truth  of  that  conclusion.  The  effect  of
this  procedure  will  be  that  ultimately  two  propositions,
neither  of  which  have  been  proved  to  be  true,  are  used
alternately  to  '  prove '  each  other,  by  an  argument  in  a
circle,  and  the  *  fallacy '  is  refuted  by  extracting  these
two  propositions,  and  displaying  their  interdependence.
A  good  example  is  in  A.  R.  Wallace's  Darwinism  (p.  167)  :
"  In  pre-Darwinian  times  it  was  so  universally  the  practice
to  argue  in  a  circle,  and  declare  that  the  fertility  of  the
offspring  of  a  cross  proved  the  identity  of  species  of  the
parents  that  experiments  in  hybridity  were  usually  made
between  very  remote  species,  to  avoid  the  possibility  of
the  reply  :  '  They  are  both  really  the  same  species ' ;  and
the  sterility  of  the  hybrid  offspring  of  such  remote  crosses
of  course  served  to  strengthen  the  popular  belief."

The  offence  of  this  fallacy  so  far  seems  plain  and
heinous  enough,  and  yet  it  is  wonderful  how  hard  it  is
to  distinguish  formally  between  '  arguing  in  a  circle '  and
arguing  in  a  system^  which  is  so  far  from  being  regarded  as
*  fallacious  '  that  it  is  even  conceived  as  the  ideal  of  con
sistency.  For  arguments  in  a  system  also  seem  to  cohere
and  support  one  another,  and  that  whether  the  system  is
true  or  false.  No  wonder,  therefore,  that  thoroughly
coherent  and  consistent  reasoners,  such  as  were  a  few
of  the  metaphysical  system-builders,  always  seem  to  their


XXIII


FALLACIES  361


opponents  to  argue  most  irritatingly  in  circles,  and  to
have  begged  every  question  that  was  worth  discussing.

The  Fallacy  of  Petitio  Principii  has,  however,  a  further
claim  to  be  regarded  as  a  nuisance  by  Formal  Logic.
For  it  bears  so  strong  a  resemblance  to  the  Syllogism,
that  all  the  enemies  of  the  latter  have  always  accused
it  of  being  a  petitio  which  systematically  '  begged '  the
conclusions  it  professed  to  'prove.'  We  have  seen  that
this  charge  was  by  no  means  unfounded  (Chap.  XVI,  §  9),
and  even  that  no  Formal  conception  of  the  Syllogism
can  escape  from  it ;  at  any  rate  it  is  indisputable  evidence
of  the  difficulty  of  distinguishing  '  valid '  forms  from
formal  '  fallacies.'

V.  The  Fallacy  of  Non  Sequitur  seems  to  have  the
advantage  that  we  may  symbolize  it  formally,  without
travelling  outside  a  single  syllogism  and  being  forced  to
inquire  into  what  is  actually  in  a  reasoner's  mind.
It  denotes  so  glaring  an  absence  ot  logical  connexion
between  the  premisses  and  the  conclusion  of  an  argument,
that  the  conclusion  '  does  not  follow '  and  the  whole
structure  falls  to  pieces.  It  thus  indicates  a  profounder
departure  from  continuity  of  thought  than  was  revealed
by  an  ignoratio  elenchi  \  the  Non  Sequitur  fails  to
cohere,  not  only  with  the  general  train  of  thought,  but
even  with  itself.

Incoherence  of  mind  is,  of  course,  as  psychologists
know,  common  enough,  and  it  is  no  wonder  that  it  should
trouble  also  the  logicians  ;  but  it  cannot  be  said  that
their  formal  analysis  of  the  defect  is  a  success.  After
all  it  will  not  do  to  condemn  an  argument  merely  because
its  conclusion  does  not  verbally  seem  to  you  to  follow
from  its  premisses ;  to  know  what  its  real  point  and
real  force  are,  it  is  necessary  to  have  some  understanding
of  the  reasoner's  mind.  This  knowledge  is  no  doubt
strictly  *  psychological ' ;  but  it  really  is  not  safe  to  infer
that  the  logical  thread  of  connexion  has  been  severed
because  you  cannot  trace  any  verbal  identity  between
the  terms  in  the  conclusion  and  in  the  premisses.  The
apparent  non  sequitur  may  be  merely  due  to  an  elliptical


^


362  FORMAL  LOGIC


CHAP.


statement  on  the  part  of  the  reasoner,  or  even  to  a  use
of  language  you  do  not  understand ;  actual  inquiry
may  show  that  there  is  a  good  connexion  lurking  in  his
mind,  though  it  does  not  appear  on  the  face  of  his  argu
ment.  Nor  again  can  you  infer  that  because  there  is
a  non  sequitur  for  you  it  exists  also  for  him,  and
that  you  are  right  about  it.  It  may  only  be  that  he
goes  too  fast  or  too  deep  for  you,  or  that  you  are  stupid
and  cannot  see  the  connexion.  This  indeed  is  the  retort
which  profound  thinkers  (and  impostors  /)  have  always
made,  to  the  commonplace  critics  who  *  cannot  follow  *
their  abstruse  reasoning.  All  that  an  '  inability  to  follow  '
a  train  of  thought,  therefore,  really  proves  is  that  the
reasoning  is  either  '  fallacious '  and  a  non  sequitur^  or
sound  (perhaps),  but  too  difficult  for  the  vulgar ;  but
which  of  these  alternatives  is  the  truth  Formal  Logic  has
no  means  of  telling  us.

VI.  False  Cause,  or  Post  hoc  ergo  propter  hoc,  is  almost
openly  beyond  the  reach  of  Formal  analysis.  For  it
consists  in  asserting  a  causal  connexion  which  is  false,
and  in  mistaking  a  sequence  for  a  consequence.  But  see
ing  that  a  mere  sequence  of  events  is  all  that  we  ever  start
from  in  our  search  for  causal  connexion  (true  or  false),
that  '  events/  sequences,  and  '  causes '  are  all  of  them
selections  of  our  making  (Chap.  XX,  §  3),  and  that  the
risk  of  arguing  from  sequences  to  consequences  has  to
be  taken  by  all  inferences  good  or  bad,  it  is  clear  that  no
Formal  criticism  of  this  *  fallacy '  is  attainable.  Before
denouncing  it  logicians  should  have  exhibited  a  little
sympathy  with  the  concrete  difficulties  of  science,  the
history  of  which  shows  that  the  c  true '  *  cause '  has  been
slowly  discriminated  from  the  *  false '  only  by  its  success.
And  rightly  ;  for  how  was  any  one  to  tell  a  priori  and
merely  from  his  prepossessions  as  to  what  were  '  true
causes/  and  without  long  watching  and  experimentation
and  manifold  mistakes,  that  there  existed  differences  in
the  efficacy  of  '  heavenly  bodies '  so  enormous  that
whereas  the  sun  controlled  all  terrestrial  processes,  the
moon  affected  only  the  tides,  and  the  planets  and  the  stars


XXIII


FALLACIES  363


nothing  at  all  (to  speak  of),  and  that  therefore  the
influence  of  the  moon  on  the  weather  and  of  the  planets
on  individual  lives  were  *  false  causes/  and  astrology  was
not  a  *  science  '  but  a  'superstition'?  The  ex  post  facto
verdict  of  logic  is  merely  an  idle  insult  to  the  vanquished
in  the  struggle  for  existence  of  scientific  theories.

VII.  The  Fallacy  of  Many  Questions,  lastly,  is  defined
as  the  putting  of  questions  to  which  no  simple  answer
can  be  given,  so  that  if  an  answer  is  attempted,  the
respondent  is  ensnared  whatever  he  replies.  At  first
sight  this  *  fallacy '  appears  to  be  merely  verbal,  and
many  of  the  examples  given  of  it,  such  as  the  famous,
'  Have  you  left  off  beating  your  father  ? '  or,  *  When  did
you  give  up  drink  ? '  are  in  fact  merely  verbal  tricks
which  could  amuse  only  the  childish.

But  to  dispose  of  them  it  is  nevertheless  necessary
to  introduce  two  new  principles,  both  of  which  Formal
Logic  must  veto.  In  the  first  place,  it  is  not  really
obligatory  to  answer  yes  or  no  to  a  question  which
cannot  be  adequately  answered  thus.  It  is  often
legitimate  to  refuse  to  answer  altogether,  or  until  the
question  has  been  re-worded,  on  the  ground  that  as  put
it  was  confused,  or  unmeaning,  or  ambiguous,  or  obscure,
and  that  you  do  not  understand  what  its  meaning  was
intended  to  be.1  In  such  cases  the  proper  logical
answer  is  to  ask,  '  What  do  you  mean  ? '  or  to  reply,
'  Yes  or  no,  according  as  you  mean  one  thing  or  the
other.'  But  to  give  the  logician  a  right  to  go  beyond
the  verbal  form  and  to  inquire  into  the  real  meaning
is  a  second  novelty  of  the  utmost  importance,  and
Formal  Logic  could  not  concede  it  without  committing
the  happy  dispatch.  Its  game  would  be  up,  if  it  were
once  admitted  that  not  every  verbal  question  is  a  real
question,  and  that  it  is  often  imperative  to  go  beyond
the  form  of  words,  and  to  demand  information  about
the  actual  meaning.

But Formal Logic not only takes verbalities too

1  Why  should  there  not  be  a  '  Fallacy  of  the  Unmeaning  Question,'  etc.,  as
well  as  of  '  Many  Questions  '  ?


364  FORMAL  LOGIC  CHAP.

seriously ;  it  also  does  not  take  the  real  complexities
of  thought  seriously  enough.  It  assumes  that  the
nature  of  the  '  fallacy '  of  Many  Questions  is  quite  plain
and  that  any  one  can  see  whether  a  question  is  simple,
and  whether  to  answer  it  would  betray  the  answerer.
But  this  is  by  no  means  easy  to  determine.  Because
all  subjects  are  more  or  less  connected,  no  question  is
as  simple  as  it  looks ;  because  all  minds  are  more  or
less  coherent,  a  man's  attitude  towards  one  question  more
or  less  reveals  his  position  towards  others.  Hence  in  real
life  even  the  most  innocent  and  straightforward  questions
and  answers  may  disclose  far  more  than  they  say,  and
be  eloquent  of  the  character,  views,  and  even  secrets,
of  the  parties  to  the  conversation.  True,  these  again
are  matters  of  *  psychology.'  But  if  Formal  Logic
rejects  its  aid,  what  means  has  it  of  deciding  either  when
a  question  is  multiple,  or  when  questioning  is  unfair  and
'  fallacious  '  ?

For  after  all  it  has  been  overlooked  that  such
questioning  may  compel  the  respondent  to  reveal  truth,
as  well  as  to  entangle  himself  in  verbal  falsehood.  The
art  of  Cross-examination  is  rightly  regarded  as  one  of
the  law's  most  potent  methods  for  eliciting  truth  from
reluctant  witnesses.  Yet  what  is  Cross-examination
formally  but  a  systematic  practice  of  the  '  fallacy '  of
Many  Questions?  True,  each  question  may  individually
admit  of  a  simple  answer ;  but  the  series  as  a  whole
does  not,  and  its  aim  is  to  get  the  (?  lying)  witness  to
commit  himself  by  putting  to  him  questions  of  which
he  does  not  see  the  interconnexion  and  the  scope,  so
that  however  he  answers,  his  answers  may  collectively
betray  him.  Sometimes  it  may  be  very  disputable
whether  a  question  is  unfair  and  fallacious  or  not.
Thus  the  famous  question  which  Abraham  Lincoln  put
to  Stephen  Douglas,  when  they  were  rival  candidates  for
the  Illinois  Senatorship,  as  to  whether  slavery  should  be
introduced  into  a  new  settlement  against  the  will  of  99
per  cent  of  the  inhabitants,  if  it  were  legal,  was  in  one
sense  fair  enough.  Yet  Lincoln  foresaw  that  'if  he


XXIII


FALLACIES  365


answers  it  one  way,  it  will  lose  him  the  Senatorship '  (by
offending  the  Northern  Democrats) ;  '  if  he  answers  it  the
other,  the  Presidency  '  (by  offending  the  Southern  Demo
crats,  who,  in  fact,  split  the  party,  and  so  brought  about
Lincoln's  election  in  1860).  Here  again,  then,  Formal
Logic  cannot  discriminate  between  a  '  fallacy '  and  a
'  valid '  form.

§  5. The  '  Semi-logicar  Fallacies

These  are  presumably  so  called  because  logicians  did
not  know  how  else  to  accommodate  them.  The  term
seems  indefensible,  for  they  must  either  belong  to  logic
or  not.  But  whether  or  not  they  are  '  half  logical,  it
is  clear  that  they  are  more  than  half  psychological  and
wholly  verbal.

We  get  a  hint  of  this  verbalism  from  the  Aristotelian
name  for  these  fallacies  in  dictione^  but  in  fact  the  name
designates  fallacies  of  'ambiguity/  and  ambiguity  is  of
course  taken  in  a  merely  verbal  way  (cf.  Chap.  II,  §  8).
As  might  be  expected,  therefore,  the  Formal  treatment
is  successful  neither  in  dealing  with  the  real  difficulties
of  thought,  nor  even  in  distinguishing  the  '  fallacies  '  from
the  c  valid  '  forms.

I.  The  head  of  the  list  might  well  be  made  to  cover
all  the  rest ;  for  Equivocation  could  apply  to  all  cases
of  words  that  can  be  used  in  several  senses,  and  so  may
possibly  mislead.  We  have  also  seen  that  equivocation
in  the  middle  term  constitutes  the  Formal  Fallacy  of
Ambiguous  Middle,  and  similar  ambiguities  might
occasion  also  Illicit  Processes ;  so  the  classification  of
these  '  fallacies '  does  not  seem  to  be  formally  a  happy  one.

What  is  more  serious,  however,  is  that  Formal  Logic
conveys  the  impression  that  some  words  alone  are
ambiguous,  and  that  the  rest  may  be  misused  with
impunity  (cf.  Chap.  II,  §  8).

In  reality  all  terms  are  used  in  a  context,  and
have  their  actual  meaning  in  that  context,  and  more-

1  Trapa  TTJV  A^£iz>.


366  FORMAL  LOGIC  CHAP.

over,  to  reason  with  them,  we  must  transfer  them  from
one  context  to  another.  Consequently  there  is  always
a  question  whether  this  transplantation  has  succeeded,
because  the  difference  between  the  meaning  in  the  two
contexts  is  irrelevant  for  the  purpose  of  the  argument,  or
whether  the  transfer  has  affected  their  meaning  and
rendered  them  'ambiguous'  (cf.  §3).  A  possibility  of
1  Equivocation,'  therefore,  i.e.  of  real  ambiguity  as  dis
tinguished  from  '  plurality  of  senses,'  is  always  present,
and  cannot  be  treated  as  a  mere  question  of  form.
Whether  it  has  occurred  or  not  can  be  decided  only  from
a  knowledge  of  the  subject-matter  and  the  precise  con
text  of  the  argument.  The  logical  illustrations  of  this
fallacy  are  fictitious  paper  cases,  such  as  would  not  occur
in  real  thinking.

II.  Amphibology  is  a  special  form  of  ambiguity,
consisting  in  the  use  of  a  phrase  which  may  be
construed  variously,  and  is  supposed  to  have  been  the
great  resource  of  prophets  and  oracles  desirous  of
*  hedging.'  When  the  Delphian  Apollo  encouraged
Croesus  to  attack  Cyrus  by  telling  him  that  if  he  crossed
the  Halys  he  would  destroy  a  mighty  empire,  he  was
committing  an  '  amphibology.'  And  the  writer  once
heard  an  audience  of  philosophers  solemnly  accept  as  an
authentic  quotation  from  William  James  the  reading,  '  If
you  are  radically  tender,  you  will  take  up  with  the
Mormonistic  form  of  philosophy  '  (*  more  monistic ' !).
This,  if  we  do  not  choose  to  dignify  it  with  a  separate
title  or  to  classify  it  alternatively  as  a  fallacy  of  'Accent '  or
of  '  Figure  of  Speech  '  (q.v.)  rather  than  as  an  amphibology,
seems  to  show  that  not  only  sentences  but  single  words
may  be  misconstrued.  Indeed  Formal  Logic  might  fairly
be  required  to  warn  us  that  the  possibilities  of  mis
construction  are  endless.  There  is  nothing  that  cannot
be  misconstrued,  and  probably  nothing  that  has  not
been  ;  and  in  most  subjects  the  misconstructions  are
gross,  extensive,  and  persistent.  But  they  are  never
merely  formal,  and  cannot  be  exposed  without  a  knowledge
of  real  minds  and  real  meanings.


XXIII


FALLACIES  367


III.  and  IV.  The  Fallacies  of  Composition  and
Division  are  usually  defined  as  confusions  between  the
distributive  and  the  collective  senses  of  terms  (Chap.  II,
§  7).  To  argue  that  'All  the  angles  of  a  triangle  are
equal  to  two  right  angles'  (collectively),  and  to  infer
that  'therefore  the  angle  ABC  is  equal  to  two  right
angles'  (distributively),  will  then  exemplify  the  error  of
wrong  Division  ;  while  '  All  the  angles  of  a  triangle  are
less  than  two  right  angles,  ABC,  ACB,  BAC  are  all  the
angles,  therefore  ABC,  ACB,  and  BAC  are  (together)  less
than  two  right  angles '  (collectively),  will  illustrate  wrong
Composition.  Or  again,  to  argue  that  because  England  is
a  rich  country,  any  individual  Englishman  is  rich,  will  be
a  fallacy  of  Division  ;  while  to  infer  from  the  fact  that  a
protective  duty  on  foreign  competitors  will  benefit  each
trade,  therefore  a  general  tariff  will  benefit  all,  may  be
held  to  savour  of  that  of  Composition.

As  they  are  usually  stated,  these  catches  are  merely
verbal  and  laughable,  and  in  real  life  they  would  be
easily  eluded  either  by  asking  *  What  do  you  mean  ? '  or
by  denying  that  the  real  nature  of  the  argument  had
been  correctly  represented.  For  example,  our  third  case
would  in  the  concrete  probably  arise  in  the  context  of  a
hotel  bill  and  mean  that  a  certain  traveller  would  stand
pretty  stiff  charges,  while  in  the  fourth  case  the  argument
for  protection  is  certainly  subtler  and  less  puerile  than  it
is  made  out  to  be.  Even  J.  S.  Mill's  famous  '  proof  of
Utilitarianism,1  which  on  the  face  of  it  seemed  to  argue
from  a  universal  desire  of  all  men  for  their  own  happiness
to  a  desire  for  the  general  happiness,  is  neither  as  simple
nor  as  fallacious  as  a  mere  *  fallacy  of  Composition.'

Logic,  however,  might  also  be  required  to  note  that  the
scientific  problem  of  arguing  from  parts  to  wholes  and  from
wholes  to  parts  is  much  too  complex  to  be  settled  by  the
mere  labelling  of  a  couple  of  *  fallacies.'  Under  what
conditions  may  we  presume  that  a  character  which  is  found
in  the  cases  of  a  kind  pervades  it  and  is  predicable  of  it  as
a  whole,  and  conversely,  when  are  the  characters  of  a  whole

1  Utilitarianism,  chap,  iv.


368  FORMAL  LOGIC  CHAP.

predicable  of  its  parts  ?  How,  in  other  words,  does  a
science  determine  what  qualities  of  a  c  kind  '  are  'essential,'
and  what  only  individual  ?  The  answers  to  these
questions  are  clearly  not  matters  of  form  but  of  real
knowledge,  and  the  facts  that  the  parts  and  the
wholes  have  both  to  be  distinguished  by  us,  and  that
any  *  composition  '  and  *  division '  may  in  a  sense  be  called
arbitrary,  do  not  render  the  problem  of  right  reasoning
about  such  matters  more  amenable  to  Formal  treatment.

V.  The  Fallacy  of  Accent  is  consecrated  to  misunder
standings  arising from  a  wrong  distribution  of  emphasis
on  the  words  of  a  sentence. The  printer  who  inserted
italics  in  '  And  he  said,  "  Saddle  me  the  ass,"  and  they
saddled  him!  and  the  translator  of  the  Psalms 1  who  did  not
foresee  to  what  a  heresy  he  would  be  committed  by  the
slightest  stress on '  name '  in  *  Praise  the  Name of  the
Lord  ;  for His Name only is excellent/ may  serve to
illustrate  this  '  fallacy,' though  both examples  are  only
jokes  that  could not  really  deceive  in  their  context. It
is more  important  to  remark  that  as  all  languages  rely
largely  on  emphasis, intonation,  and gesture to convey
meaning  and  to discriminate between serious assertion
and irony  or  jest,  it  is  clear  that  there  is  here  a  great
field for  misunderstandings. But  mere  knowledge  of  the
verbal  form  will not  usually  enable  us  even  to  suspect
them. It should,  moreover,  have occurred to Formal
Logic that there must always be  some distribution  of
emphasis,  and  whatever  it  is,  it  may  fail  to  convey  the
meaning intended. For example,  the most scrupulous
monotony of voice in reading  aloud (which  has been
recommended  as  a  specific)  would  be  no  protection  against
a  '  fallacy  of  Accent,'  if  it  produced an  impression that
the  book  was a very  dull  one. The question, Which
is  the  right  accent,  and  which  the  wrong  ?  is  not,  in  short,
one  of  form,  but  of  fact.

VI.  The  list  of  the  '  Semi-logical ' Fallacies  tails  off
miserably with the Fallacy  of  Figure  of  Speech. It is
the most trivial  of these ambiguities,  and consists in

1  Ps.  cxlviii.  13.


XXIII


FALLACIES  369


mistaking  one  part  of  speech  for  another,  and  though
this  might  conceivably  occur  to  persons  who  have
an  imperfect  knowledge  of  a  language,  Formal  Logic
here  does  not  seem  to  afford  much  assistance  even  to
grammar.  Logically,  it  seems  less  worthy  of  enumeration
than  many  other  traps  for  the  unwary.  For  example,  the
fallacy  of '  proving  too  much,'  though  doubtless  rarer  than
that  of  proving  too  little,  and  its  relation  to  the  argument
a  fortiori,  might  well  engage  logical  attention.

§  6. Miscellaneous  Fallacies

We  have  seen  that  the  enumeration  of  Fallacies  is  not
only  vain  but  also  incomplete,  and  in  a  sense  Formal
Logic  may  be  said  to  perceive  this.  For  in  addition  to
the  fallacies  we  have  considered  it  also  applies  the  name
to  certain  other  misleading  arguments.  To  do  so,  how
ever,  it  has  to  extend  the  notion  of  c  fallacy/  and  no
longer  takes  it  as  denoting  formal  inconclusiveness,  but
general  trickiness  or  deceptiveness.

Under  this  head  come  most  of  the  great  *  fallacies '
which  have  won  their  name  and  fame  in  antiquity,  and
been  conscientiously  recorded  ever  since.  They  are,
however,  the  most  valuable,  as  well  as  the  oldest,  part  of
the  traditional  logic,  being  really  interesting,  because
they  raise  real  philosophic  problems  in  an  agreeable
if  somewhat  puzzling  form,  and  cannot  possibly  be
represented  as  depending  on  mere  questions  of  form.

The  Zenonian  '  fallacies '  about  the  impossibility  of
motion,  for  example,  bring  out  real  difficulties  in  the
conceptual  construction  of  Space  and  Time.  The
'Arrow'  cannot  move  if  its  continuous  path  is  really
made  up  of  discrete  sections  with  real  halting-places
marked  off  at  A,  B,  C,  etc.,  at  each  of  which  we  say  the
arrow  '  is*  It  is  easy  to  reply  that  of  course  the  arrow
cannot  move,  if  it  has  to  move  by  jumps,  but  that  this
representation  utterly  fails  to  make  the  arrow's  path
continuous,  as  it  must  be  in  fact.  But  if  the  path  is
really  made  continuous,  is  it  not  made  unknowable  ?

2  B


370


FORMAL  LOGIC


CHAP.


For  do  we  not  calculate  the  continuous  by  feigning  that
it  is  composed  of  discrete  sections  ?  Three  important
problems,  then,  which  are  mooted  by  this  fallacy  are  that
of  the  nature  of  continua,  that  of  the  '  correspondence '
between  our  percepts  and  our  concepts,  and  that  of  the
value  of  scientific  fiction  ;  and  what  alone  is  '  fallacious '
in  the  Zenonian  statement  is  that  its  whole  meaning  is
not  to  be  elicited  without  questioning.

Much  the  same  may  be  said  about  the  famous  race  of
Achilles  and  the  Tortoise.  The  problem  here  is  that  of
the  relation  of  the  infinite  divisibility  of  conceptual  Space
and  Time  to  the  real  (perceptual)  motions  we  measure
by  our  concepts.  If  it  is  true  that  to  every  thinkable
interval  there  must  correspond  a  real  experience,  Achilles
can  only  catch  the  Tortoise  after  an  infinity  of  events
has  elapsed,  i.e.  never.  For  there  will  then  be  events
corresponding  to  the  thoughts  of  '  Achilles -running-
a-yard,'  and  '  the-Tortoise-crawling-a-tenth-of-a-yard,'
and  of  c  Achilles-running-a-millionth-of-a-yard/  and  '  the-
Tortoise-crawling-a-ten-millionth-of-a-yard,'  etc.,  and  the
Tortoise's  start,  being  infinitely  divisible  in  fact,  can  never
become  zero.  But  if  we  deny  that  such  *  correspondence  '
need  be  assumed,  i.e.  deny  that  '  truth '  need  copy  *  reality/
or  if  we  put  the  problem  as  being  that  of  finding  at  what
point  and  after  how  long  a  slower  body  with  a  certain  start
will  be  overtaken  by  a  faster,  the  objection  to  the  victory
of  Achilles  will  be  found  to  disappear.  Thus  the  answers
are  different  according  as  the  '  fallacy '  was  meant  to  raise
one  question  or  another,  and  once  more,  the  paradox  is  to
be  censured  only  for  the  ambiguity  of  its  expression,
and  the  question,  which  can  always  be  put  to  a  real
assertion  and  is  only  ruled  out  by  an  artifice  of  Formal
Logic,  *  Do  you  mean  this  or  that  ? '  if  it  is  admitted,
will  cut  short  its  career.

The  Sorites,  which  asks  how  many  grains  of  sand
make  a  heap,  or  how  many  sheep  a  flock,  has  the  merit
of  drawing  attention  to  the  difficulty  and  arbitrariness  of
'  drawing  the  line '  in  the  application  of  our  terms  to
reality.  On  the  other  hand,  it  shows  reprehensible  laxity


xxm  FALLACIES  371

in  the  use  of  technical  terms  that  Formal  Logic  should
also  denominate  Sorites  two  forms  of  syllogistic  reasoning,
which  have  no  raison  cCetre,  beyond  that  of  occasioning
some  rules  about  their  formal  validity.

The  foolish  mother  who  bargained  with  the  Crocodile
about  the  restoration  of  her  baby  should,  of  course,  have
made  further  inquiries  before  accepting  the  treacherous
monster's  proposal  to  restore  her  child,  if  she  would  tell
him  truly  whether  he  intended  to  do  so  or  not.  For
the  crocodile's  offer  was  really  very  indeterminate  (or
rather  indefinite)  in  its  wording.  Nothing  was  said  about
any  criterion  of  his  intention,  and  of  the  *  truth '  of  the
mother's  answer.  And  in  all  probability,  if  the  question
of  the  meaning  of  truth  had  been  raised,  and  the  crocodile
been  required  to  digest  all  that  has  been  written  on  this
subject,  he  would  have  preferred  to  give  up  the  baby
unconditionally.

The  fallacy  of  Fatalism^  involved  in  the  "Apyos  Aoryo?
of  the  sick  man  who  declined  to  call  in  a  doctor,  because
it  was  certain  that  he  would  either  die  or  get  well,  involves
a  similar  indetermination  in  the  conditions.  Did  he
think  that  the  result  was  fated,  whatever  human  agency
could  do,  or  did  he  take  the  human  agencies  as  fated  too,
and  his  own  refusal  to  be  itself  one  of  the  unalterable
conditions  of  a  fully-determined  order  of  events  ?  If  so,
he  had  merely  to  explain  that  the  belief  in  alternatives
to  the  actual  order  of  nature  was  an  illusion,  and  that  he

*  could not help '  refusing,  to  win  the  respect of  every
consistent  determinist,  and  an  admission  of  the  cogency
of  his  reasoning.

Epimenidesy  who  said  *  All  Cretans  are  liars,'  and  then,
by  admitting  that  he  himself  was  a  Cretan,  is  supposed
to  have  initiated  an  apparently  endless  series  of  proofs
and  disproofs  of  the  truth  of  his  assertion,  was  also
deplorably  indefinite  in  his  statements.  Did  he  mean
by  a  *  liar '  one  who  lied  always  and  never  deviated  into
truth-speaking  ?  Did  he  think  that  from  the  untruth  of

*  All  Cretans  are  liars '  it  could  be  inferred  with  formal
validity that he, a Cretan, became a regular George


372  FORMAL  LOGIC  CHAP.

Washington  who  always  spoke  the  truth,  and  so  had  to
be  believed  also  when  he  declared  all  Cretans  to  be  liars  ?

Or  is  it  permissible  to  whisper  the  solution  commended
by  common-sense  psychology?  If  we  might  inquire
what  Epimenides  meant,  it  would  probably  appear  that
when  he  said  '  all  Cretans,'  he  meant  all  other  Cretans.

But,  if  so,  there  is  no  logical  difficulty  at  all  about  the
real  meaning  of  Epimenides,  if  only  it  is  treated  as  his
assertion ;  the  whole  paradox  arises  only  when  it  is  treated
as  an  independently  significant  form  of  words.  And  all
it  then  proves  is  that  such  forms  of  words  may  turn  out
to  be  nonsense,  and  frustrate  the  aim  of  verbalism.

There  is  raised,  however,  by  such  factitious  puzzles,  a
grave  question  of  principle.  Epimenides  having  failed  to
say  what  he  meant ',  is  the  concern  of  Logic  to  be  with
what  he  has  actually  said  or  with  what  he  has  actually
meantt  In  real  life  there  would  be  no  doubt  about  our
choice  ;  both  courtesy  and  common -sense  would  allow
assertors  to  purge  themselves  of 'contradiction'  by  explain
ing  what  they  meant  (cf.  Chap.  X,  §  2).  A  real  logic,
(therefore,  would  not  consider  it  fair  or  reasonable  to  pit
[the  meaning  of  the  words  against  the  meaning  of  the  man
who  used  them,  nor  regard  it  as  *  illogical '  to  ascertain  his
actual  meaning.  It  is  only  to  a  completely  verbalized  and
formalized  logic  that  it  seems  natural  and  congenial  to
assume  that  the  actual  meaning  is  *  psychological '  and  in
admissible,  whereas  the  meaning  of  the  words  is  so  indis
putably  *  logical '  that  it  must  not  be  questioned,  even
when  it  ends  in  paradox  and  nonsense.

However  this  may  be,  Epimenides  has  been  tran
scended  by  the  logicians  who  gravely  consider  the
dilemma  of  the  king  who  erected  a  gallows  on  his
frontier,  and  required  all  who  crossed  it  to  declare  truly
what  they  were  going  to  do  in  his  realm,  under  penalty
of  being  hanged  if  they  lied,  and  then  was  nonplussed  by
a  wag  who  declared  that  he  was  going  to  be  hanged  on  the
gallows,  or  the  less  picturesque,  but  simpler,  case  of  the
man  who  declares  '  I  lie.'  Yet  it  should  occur  to  the
logicians  to  advise  the  king  to  hang  the  fellow,  and  then


xxm  FALLACIES  373

to  justify  himself  formally  by  pointing  out  that  though
the  announcement  had  been  that  all  liars  were  to  be
hanged  on  the  gallows,  and  he  had  spoken  the  truth,  yet
there  had  been  no  pledge  that  the  gallows  should  not  be
utilized  also  for  pestilent  knaves  who  quibbled  with  the
king's  majesty.  As  for  the  declaration  '  I  lie,'  and  the
answers  yes  to  the  question  *  Are  you  asleep  ? '  and  no  to
the  question  '  Are  you  alive  ? '  it  may  again  be  suggested
that  logicians  should  look  at  the  context,1  and  would
do  well,  at  this  point,  if  not  before,  to  contemplate
the  psychological  possibility  of  jokes,  and  the  logical
possibility  of  meaningless  forms  of  speech.  In  real
life  the  admission  '  I  lie '  would  no  doubt  either  be  a
joke  or  else  refer  to  what  had  gone  before ;  but  of
course  there  is  nothing  in  a  form  of  words  to  prevent  a
humourist  from  collocating  them  in  as  '  self-contradictory,'
i.e.  meaningless,  manner  as  ever  he  pleases.2  The  cure
for  such  diversions  is  always  to  ask  what  is  meant,  and  to
insist  on  a  real  meaning  ;  but  Formal  Logic  has  to  regard
this  as  an  unprofessional  excursion  into  '  psychology/

This  indeed  is  the  great  lesson  of  the  Formal  treat
ment  of  '  Fallacies ' ;  the  formal  analysis  everywhere
reveals  its  inadequacy,  and  leaves  us  a  choice  between
verbalism  and  *  psychology.'  This  conclusion,  however,
entirely  accords  with  those  we  have  reached  elsewhere,
and  fortified  by  the  agreement  of  our  results,  we  may
now  drag  Formal  Logic  to  its  final  reckoning  and  settle
our  account  with  it.

1  Thus  when  M. Valdemar  in  Poe's  Tales  exclaimed,  "  For  God's  sake! —
quick  ! — quick  ! — put  me  to  sleep — or, quick  ! — waken  me  ! — quick  ! — /  say  to
you  that  I  am  dead  f"  the  reader  finds  that  he  is  faced,  not  by  a  logical  paradox,
but  by  a  psychological  horror.

2  In  modern  times  Mr.  Bertrand  Russell  has  delighted  the  philosophic  world
with  many  puzzles  of  this  sort, most  recently  by  giving  as  an  example  of  an
4  unknowable  truth '  the  statement  that  '  all  the  multiplication  sums  that  never
have  been,  and  never  will  be,  thought  of  by  any  human  being,  deal  with  numbers
over  a  thousand '  (Journal  of  Philosophy,  viii,  6). Before  treating  this  either  as
a  'proof  or  as  an  'antinomy,'  however,  it  might  be  well  to  ask  Mr.  Russell  to
remove  the  indefiniteness  of  '  multiplication  sum '  and '  thought  of, ' lest  their
ambiguity  should  turn  out  to  have  destroyed  the  meaning  of  his  problem  !


CHAPTER XXIV

THE OUTCOME OF FORMAL LOGIC

§  I. The  Notion  of  Formal  Logic

WE  have  tried  so  far  to  conceive  the  traditional  body
of  logical  doctrine  as  a  consistent  system  of  what  we
have  called  '  Formal  Logic/  and  in  view  of  the  reticence
or  carelessness  of  logicians  about  their  fundamental
assumptions,  have  defined  it  by  two  criteria.  What
makes  a  logic  Formal  is  (i)  the  belief  that  it  is  possible
to  consider  '  formal  validity '  as  a  thing  apart  and  in
dependent  and  to  abstract  from  '  material '  truth,  (2)  the
belief  that  it  is  possible  to  treat  '  logic '  without  regard
to  psychology  and  to  abstract  from  the  actual  context
in  which  assertions  grow  up,  viz.  the  time,  place,  circum
stances,  and  purpose  of  the  assertion  and  the  personality
of  the  assertor.  Both  these  abstractions  are  plainly  of
the  nature  of  simplifications,  and  analogous  to  other
similar  assumptions  in  other  sciences.  Still  this  does
not  establish  their  soundness  and  guarantee  their  success.
Nor  have  they  been  adequately  discussed,  though  the
very  definite  consequences  they  carry  with  them  are
in  a  general  way  affirmed  by  the  traditional  logic,
which,  however,  nowhere  appears  to  work  them  out
completely,  consciously,  and  consistently.  It  seemed
our  duty,  therefore,  to  attempt  to  do  this,  in  order  to
test  whether  Formal  Logic  would  in  the  first  place  yield
a  coherent  system,  and  then  to  see  whether  it  could  be
regarded  as  a  successful  account  of  thought,  or  even  of
the  current  topics  of  Logic.  Accordingly  we  must  now

374


CHAP,  xxiv  THE  OUTCOME  375

sum  up  our  results  and  consider  what  light  they  throw
on  the  questions  (i)  whether  Formal  Logic  does  form
a  consistent  system,  (2)  whether  it  succeeds  in  dealing
with  the  recognized  topics  of  Logic,  and  (3)  with  actual
human  thinking  and  knowing.

§  2.  Is  Formal  Logic  consistent  ?

This  question  has  clearly  answered  itself.  At  no
point  in  its  career  has  Formal  Logic  been  able  to  adhere
consistently  to  its  fundamental  assumptions,  or  to  work
out  its  doctrines  with  an  ordinary  regard  for  the  laws
of  consistency.  It  has  nowhere  been  able  to  dispense
with  assertions  which  involve  a  knowledge  of  human
psychology  and  *  material '  fact.  To  remind  us  of  its
shortcomings  in  these  respects,  it  will  probably  suffice
to  refer  to  its  treatment  of  the  two  central  notions  of
(i)  Judgment  and  (2)  Inference.

(i)  Formal  Logic  was  forced  by  the  requirements
of  its  position  to  defy  what  it  regards  as  the  supreme
law  of  consistency,  the  Principle  of  Contradiction,  in
its  definition  of  Judgment.  In  order  to  get  a  strictly
Formal  definition  of  Judgment,  and  to  avoid  discussing
questions  of  the  real  truth  of  judgments,  it  had  to
define  all  judgments  as  *  true/  and  to  ignore  the  existence
of  '  false '  judgments.  It  accepted,  that  is,  truth-claims
as  adequate  evidence  of  real  truth,  and  took  *  truth '  in
a  sense  in  which  it  includes  'error'  (Chap.  VIII,  §  3).

Yet,  finding  it  no  less  imperative  to  distinguish
Judgment  from  other  '  psychological '  processes,  it  had
also  to  define  Judgment  as  the  intellectual  process  or
function  which  could  be  true-or-false  (Chap.  VIII,  §  4).

These  two  definitions,  however,  are  hopelessly  in
consistent  with  each  other.  The  second  reintroduces
the  conception  of  falsity,  which  the  first  had  ruled  out,
and  at  once  leads  to  the  inference  that  some  judgments
are  not  true ;  and  this  is  either  a  direct  contradiction
of  the  formal  doctrine  that  '  all  judgments  are  true',  or
a  fatal  inconsistency  in  the  use  of  the  notion  of  truth,


376  FORMAL  LOGIC  CHAP.

and  a  covert  admission  that  the  attempt  to  treat  the
formal  '  truth '  (which  includes  error),  without  regard
to  the  real  truth  (which  excludes  it),  has  broken  down.

(2)  In  its  treatment  of  Inference  the  inconsistency
of  Formal  Logic  is  no  less  glaring.  It  is  constrained
to  hold  both  that  truth  forms  a  superhuman  coherent
i  system  of  eternal  truths  which  are  rigid  and  immutable,
and  also  that  there  are  transitions  from  point  to  point
of  this  ideal  structure,  which  are  somehow  to  be  '  real
novelties.'  I.e.  these  transitions,  though  real,  are  to  fall
within  the  rigid  system  and  to  entail  no  mobility  of  its
parts.  There  are  to  be  '  inferences '  without  inferring,
)  and  the  *  new '  arrived  at  is  always  to  be  old,  without
detriment  to  its  *  novelty.'

Now  the  only  way  of  satisfying  the  requirements  of
this  '  paradox  of  Inference,'  which  for  over  2000  years
any  logician  has  been  able  to  suggest,  is  to  take  these
novelties,  not  as  occurrences  in  the  uneventful  realm  of
Eternal  Truth,  but  as  enlightenings  of  human  ignorance,  privi
leged  to  catch  growing  glimpses  of  the  immutable  system.

Hence  Formal  Logic  is  compelled  to  admit  that
strictly  all  novelties  must  be  'psychological?  They  should,
therefore,  be  for  it  taboo,  But  with  '  novelty '  admittedly
goes  '  Inference/  which  must  finally  be  declared  to  be
Formally  *  extra-logical.'  How  then  can  Formal  Logic
consistently  continue  to  discourse  about  the  '  valid  forms
of  Inference'?  (cf.  Chaps.  XIV,  §  5,  XVI,  §  7).  And
what  becomes  of  its  initial  disclaimer  that  nothing
'  psychological '  concerned  it  ?  Had  it  been  content  to
be  a  human  science,  it  might  have  been  pardoned  a  human
degree  of  failure  to  attain  its  own  ideal  ;  but  in  view
of  its  pretensions  it  cannot  be  judged  so  leniently.

§  3. Can  Formal  Logic  cover  the  Traditional  Logic?

Here  again  we  may  be  brief,  in  view  of  our  results.
If  we  set  ourselves  to  ask  how  many  of  the  traditional
topics  can  legitimately  fall  within  the  purview  of  a
consistently  Formal  logic,  we  should  have  monotonously


xxiv  THE  OUTCOME  377

to  exclude  one  after  the  other.  So  let  us  ask  instead
to  what  consistency  would  reduce  the  Formal  view.
The  answer  must  be,  to  very  little.  For  in  the  first
place  the  whole  theory  of  *  Induction '  must  go,  not
because  it  has  failed  to  describe  scientific  procedure,  but
because  it  has  failed  to  vindicate  its  own  formal  validity
(Chap.  XIX,  §  i).  But  the  true  Formal  logician
can,  perhaps,  it  is  thought,  dispense  with  '  inductive '
logic  ;  its  formal  failure  does  not  greatly  grieve  him,  and
its  scientific  failure  even  rejoices  his  heart ;  for  he  is
proud  to  believe  that  no  actual  science  attains  to  his
ideal  requirements.  The  situation  gets  more  serious
when  Inference  is  expunged  as  psychological  (§  2),  and
rigour  demands  that  Judgment  too  should  be  declared
'  extra-logical '  (Chap.  XI,  §  8).  Yet  it  is  undeniable  that
Judgment  always  involves  an  '  arbitrary '  selection  from
a  larger  whole,  and  so  is  both  '  psychological '  and  a
departure  from  '  reality,'

Nothing  then  remains  but  an  '  ideal  of  thought,'  which
consists  in  the  single  system  of  eternal  truths  aforesaid
(§  2).  But  how  can  that  be  called  the  *  ideal  of  thought '
which  presupposes  the  abolition  of  thought  ?  And  how
is  this  '  ideal '  to  be  attained  ?  No  means  seem  to  be
provided  of  knowing  it,  and  so,  pace  Plato,  there  is  no
reason  whatever  to  think  that  it  exists.  The  '  World  of
Ideas '  seems  to  be  nothing  but  a  bad  inference  from
the  human  use  of  ideas,  and  bad  because  the  latter  does
not  exhibit  the  characters  postulated  for  the  Ideas.  For
human  ideas  are  not  independent  of  man,  not  indifferent
to  human  needs,  not  unaffected  by  their  use,  and  not
immutable.  Is  not  the  World  of  Ideas,  then,  a  mere
fairy-tale  which  may  amuse  the  Formal  logician,  but  leaves
the  traditional  problems  of  Logic  unsolved  and  insoluble,
and  has  no  relevance  to  any  process  of  human  knowing  ?

§  4. Can  Formal  Logic  deal  with  Actual  Thinking?

This,  our  next,  question  has  really  been  answered.  If
the  Formal  '  ideal '  has  completely  dehumanized  itself,  it


378  FORMAL  LOGIC  CHAP.

is  for  ever  divorced  from  every  actual  problem  of  science
or  life.  It  scorns,  and  is  bound  to  scorn,  any  problem
which  is  relative,  and  relevant,  to  any  questioning,
doubting,  inferring,  experimenting,  testing,  reconsidering,
human  intelligence,  to  any  decision  (which  whether  bold
or  cautious  is  always  risky)  about  the  real  ('  material ')
truth  of  any  assertion,  and  to  any  truth  which  arises
in,  and  refers  to,  a  concrete  context  in  space  and  time.
But  such  problems  are  the  whole  concern  of  human
knowers.  All  the  problems  of  real  knowing,  therefore,
which  Formal  Logic  deigns  to  mention,  it  eviscerates  of
their  meaning  and  casts  aside.

But  it  does  not  mention  all  of  them.  Its  reticence  is
remarkable.  There  are  some  extraordinary  lacunae  in
its  scheme,  even  if  it  is  construed  with  the  traditional
laxity  or  liberality.  We  have  in  expounding  and
criticizing  the  traditional  doctrine  had  frequent  occasion
to  mention  and  to  use  a  number  of  conceptions  which  are
of  primary  importance  and  indispensable  to  the  analysis
|of  real  thinking,  such  as  Meaning  (and  with  it,  of  course,
the  communication  and  taking  of  Meaning,  i.e.  Under-
\.  standing),  Truth,  Error,  Selection,  Relevance,  and  Risk.
But  not  one  of  these  has  a  chapter  devoted  to  it  in  any
Formal  logic.

Nay  more,  the  Formal  doctrine  really  rests  on  their
exclusion,  and  this  is  why  the  incidental  and  perfunctory
references  to  these  topics  which  we  found  were  so
incoherent  and  inconsistent.

In  most  of  these  cases  the  lack  of  logical  recognition
is  clearly  not  accidental  but  intentional.  Risk  is  ex
cluded,  as  we  saw  (Chap.  XVI,  §  7),  because  it  is  the
aim  of  the  notion  of  *  formal  validity  '  to  transcend  all
risk.  Relevance  and  Selection  are  treated  similarly,
because  the  Formal  *  ideal '  is  all-inclusiveness,  and  cannot
recognize  preferential  emphasis  on  the  important,  whereas

*  relevance  '  implies  selection  of  the  {  helpful '  part  from  a
whole  of  which  the  rest  is  left  behind  as  '  irrelevant.' Selec
tion,  moreover,  is  a  responsible  act,  and  so  cannot  be  purely

*  theoretic  ' ;  it  is  also  volitional,  and  so  must  be  '  arbitrary/


xxiv  THE  OUTCOME  379

Error  is  excluded  because  the  notion  of  Formal  '  fallacy '
(Chap.  XXIII)  takes  its  place;  and  Truth,  because,  in
the  first  place,  Formal  Logic  has  not  any  real  notion  of
Truth  (having  excluded  reflection  upon  its  nature),  and,
secondly,  is  compelled  to  use  the  term  in  two  incompatible
senses  (§  2).  The  case  of  Meaning  may  be  reserved  for
the  next  section,  but  even  without  it  it  does  not  seem
strange  that  a  discipline  which  ignores  these  topics
should  be  incapable  of  grasping  actual  thought.  But  is
it  not  still  stranger  that  such  a  discipline  should  be  called
a  science  of  Thought  ?  Ought  it  not  rather  to  be
dismissed  as  unmeaning?

§  5.  Is  Formal  Logic  meaningless  ?

As  this  question  has  come  up  naturally,  it  must  be
discussed.  It  might  be  discussed  as  a  final,  but  not
unprovoked,  expression  of  disgust  with  the  general  futility
of  Formal  Logic.  But  it  will  be  more  profitable  to
discuss  it  quite  specifically,  and  with  reference  to  the  last
of  the  lacunae  we  have  just  noted  in  the  programme  of
Formal  Logic.

We  may  well  ask,  What  does  the  absence  of  a  discussion
of  Meaning  mean  ?  It  is  certainly  a  very  extraordinary
fact  ;  for  Meaning  is  the  first  and  most  fundamental  of
the  problems  of  thought.  It  must  be  raised  even  before
the  question  of  Truth  ;  for  if  an  assertion  does  not  mean
anything,  it  is  vain  and  unmeaning  to  ask  whether  it
is  true — in  any  sense  whatever.  Hence  the  omission
to  recognize  a  problem  here  is  vital,  and  highly  significant.
But  does  it  mean  that  Formal  Logic  has  merely  not
noticed  the  existence  of  a  problem  of  Meaning,  as  in  the
case  of  Truth,  or  that  it  has  neglected  it  as  clashing
with  and  inconveniencing  favourite  assumptions  of  its  own,
as  in  the  case  of  Risk,  Relevance,  and  Selection,  or  that  it
has  despaired  of  it,  as  in  the  case  of  Error  ?  Or  does  it
mean  something  still  more  important  and  discreditable  ?

It  will  be  necessary  here  to  revert  to  our  discussion  of
the  Laws  of  Thought  (Chap.  X)  and  the  question  of


38o  FORMAL  LOGIC  CHAP.

what  was  meant  by  the  Law  of  Identity.  We  saw  that
in  its  traditional  form,  as  '  A  is  A,'  this  fundamental
*  Law  of  Thought '  was  obscure  and  confessedly  unmean
ing  (Chap.  X,  §  i).  It  also  seemed  to  be  obviously
incompatible  with  the  form  of  significant  assertion,
'  A  is  B*  (Chap.  X,  §  5).  It  had,  therefore,  to  be  inter
preted  to  give  it  a  meaning.  We  accordingly  took  the
liberty  of  interpreting  it  as  a  postulate,  namely,  as  the
postulate  that  objects  of  thought  should  be  found  to
persist  as  such,  without  changing  in  such  a  way  as  to
falsify  our  predications  (Chap.  X,  §  10).  But  we  did
not  discuss  what  significant  assertion  might  involve  and
what  its  law  might  be.  Nor  did  we  imagine  that  our
interpretation  of  Identity  would  commend  itself  to  the
Formalists.

Nor,  of  course,  does  it.  The  few  Formal  logicians
who  have  concerned  themselves  with  the  problem  of
giving  a  meaning  to  the  cryptic  formula  '  A  is  A,'  explain
it  quite  differently.  It  means,  they  hold,  the  'eternity'
or  immutability  of  Truth  :  '  Once  true,  always  true/  '  If
A  once,  then  A  always.'  Or  as  Prof.  G.  F.  Stout  puts
it  for  them  (more  plainly),1  it  means  a  claim  that  "  the
truth  of  a  proposition  is  unaffected  by  variation  of  time,
place,  and  circumstances,  or  of  the  minds  which  apprehend
it,"  or  otherwise,  that  the  context  and  the  making  of  the
judgment  do  not  affect  its  '  truth.'

Now  this  is  a  very  important  and  interesting  claim,
which  reveals  the  inwardness  and  aim  of  Formal  Logic
as  nothing  else  has  done.  It  is  not  an  accident,  or
an  oversight,  or  a  blunder,  but  a  deliberate  policy.
Predication  is  to  be  set  free  thereby  from  all  dependence
on  events  in  time  and  place  and  all  subservience  to  the
personality  and  needs  of  the  knower.  And  this  is  to  be
done  by  laying  it  down  as  the  primary  Law  (i.e.  postulate)
of  Thought  that  *  A  '  is  *  A '  wherever  it  occurs,  eternally
and  immutably.  The  '  Universal '  is  to  be  freed  from
the  vicissitudes  of  events  and  the  risks  of  misapplication  ;
the  different  occasions  on  which  *  A  '  is  asserted  by

1  In  his  very  enlightening  preface  to  Miss  Jones's  New  Law  of  Thought.


xxiv  THE  OUTCOME  381

different  persons  for  different  purposes  in  different  con
texts  are  not  to  affect  its  '  identity,'  or  at  least  are  to
be  treated  as  not  affecting  it.  That  'A  is  A '  is  to  be
an  absolute  truth  and  the  basis  of  all  others,  and  the
knowledge  of  the  universal  per  se  is  also  somehow
supposed  to  yield  a  guarantee  that  it  will  not  be
misapplied  in  use.

It  is  well,  however,  not  to make  all  this too plain,
lest  it  provoke  objections  or  at  least  questioning.

(1)  It  is  difficult  to  see  how  to  vindicate  the  eternal
truth  of  '  A '  (per  se and unapplied) is to protect us
against misapplication of it in the concrete, and to
guarantee  the  truth  of  any  particular  '  A,'  or  what,  if  the
Law as such  is not concerned with the difficulties  of
applying  it,  is  the  value  of  an  absolute  truth  which  can
never  be  applied.

(2)  Manifestly, therefore,  this  '  eternal '  truth  of  *  A '
overlooks  or  abstracts  from  the  mundane  possibility  of  false
assertion  of  A,  and  so  commits  us  to  a  setting  aside  of
the  problem  of  Error  and  of  any  sense  of  Truth  in  which
1  truth  '  is  distinguished  from  '  error.' This,  however, is
consistent  with  the Formal  conception  of  Judgment as
'true'  formally,  absolutely,  and infallibly, and with the
identification  of  truth  and  truth-claim.

(3)  It  seems  sordid, and  is  probably  vain,  to  object
that  the  doctrine  appears  to  be  in  fact  false,  and  ruinous
to  any  distinction between  *  true  '  and '  false.' For  how
can mere truth of  fact impede the flights of Formal
Logic? Why point out, then,  that the real trutJi  of
any  judgment  is  always relative to  the  context  which
generated  it,  and  to  which  it  is  applied  ? The  '  material '
falsity  of  its  postulate  will  only  enhance  its  value  in  the
eyes  of  Formal Logic,  and  augment  the  '  independence '
of  its  '  formal  validity.'

(4)  But  we have not  yet  fathomed the  full meaning
of  the  doctrine. It  means  a  good  deal  more. It  means
that the judgment's  actual  meaning  in  its  context  when
made is not to be allowed to complicate the logical
situation. It  means  abstraction  from  actual  meaning,  as


382  FORMAL  LOGIC  CHAP.

well  as  from  actual  truth,  and  reveals  this  as  the  deepest
foundation  of  the  whole  superstructure  of  Formal  Logic,  a
foundation  too  deep  for  the  language  of  common-sense
criticism  to  sink  to  it.

That  actual  meaning  depends  on  context  is  manifest.
What,  e.g.,  '  It  is  hot '  means  depends  on  who  says  it,  why,
when,  where,  to  whom,  about  what ;  and  all  these  ques
tions  are  particular.  Again,  real  truth  depends  on  the
value  of  the  truth-claim  meant,  and  not  on  the  abstract
1  meaning  of  the  words/  To  abstract,  therefore,  from  the
particular  context  in  which  the  judgment  arises,  to
universalize  it  without  regard  to  its  application,  is  not
only  to  abstract  from  its  ('  material ')  truth  or  falsehood,
but  also  to  abstract  from  its  meaning  altogether.  If
Formal  Logic  makes  this  abstraction,  it  is  in  the  strictest
and  completest  sense  meaningless.

§  6. The  Law  of  Significant  Assertion

That such is,  in  fact,  the real  character  of  Formal
Logic, and the ultimate source of  its peculiarities,  we
have long suspected, and upon occasion hinted. It
comes  out  best,  however,  if  we  study  the  conditions  of
Significant  Assertion. Here  we  may  begin by  guiding
ourselves by Miss Constance Jones's interesting little
book,  A  New  Law  of Thought  and  its  Logical  Bearings.
After  showing  that  '  A  is A '  is  unmeaning,  Miss  Jones
starts  from  the  form  of  significant  assertion  '  A  is  B,'  and
asks  how  it  is  to  be  interpreted. Her  answer  is  that  it
means  to  assert  an  '  identity  of  denotation  (i.e.  application)
in diversity of connotation' (i.e. *  dictionary  -meaning,'
cf. Chap. II, §  3). Although 5 and P as  terms  are
different, yet the judgment claims that they denote,
or  apply  to,  the  same  thing. While  in  general  and  in
the  abstract  it  would  be  ludicrous  to  identify  S  and P
(as  unused  notions  and  in  their  dictionary-meanings),  yet
on  this  occasion  of  their  actual use  they  both  apply  to
the  same  object. E.g. '  The  Morning  Star  is  the  Evening
Star '  does  not  mean  that  the  idea  of  a  star  shining  in


XXIV


THE  OUTCOME  383


the  evening  is  identical  with  that  of  a  star  shining  in
the  morning,  nor  that  the  judgment  would  be  true
whenever  made,  e.g.  if  made  about  newspapers  ;  it  only
means  that  in  this  case  both  terms  apply  to  the  same
celestial  body,  otherwise  known  as  the  planet  Venus.
What,  therefore,  a  significant  judgment  really  means
is  a  claim  that  for  an  actual  purpose  the  two  notions
('  dictionary-meanings  ')  symbolized  by  *  S  '  and  *  P  '  may
be  combined  and  applied  to  the  same  thing  or  situation.
The  actual  meaning,  therefore,  is  always  the  meaning-in-
use,  and  meaning  in  general  is  rendered  dependent  on
use  or  application.1

Now  it  is  evident  that  this  analysis  of  Significant
Assertion  is  wholly  incompatible  with  the  Law  of
Identity  as  construed  by  Formal  Logic.  So  far  from
attempting  to  free  the  '  truth  '  of  *  A '  from  the  vicissitudes
and  risks  of  the  particular  occasions  on  which  it  is  used
(successfully,  i.e.  '  truly,'  or  otherwise),  it  insists  that  it
gets  its  meaning  from  its  application,  and  that  until  it
has  been  equipped  with  a  meaning  it  is  meaningless  to
inquire  whether  it  is  '  true.'  Thus,  not  only  the  '  truth  '
but  the  very  meaning  of  the  *  universal '  lives  in  and  for
its  applications  to  particular  cases,  and  to  render  it
inapplicable  is  to  render  it  unmeaning.  So  far  from
holding  the  truth  of  the  Law  to  be  '  absolute,'  it  holds
that  the  mere  aspiration  to  absoluteness  must  be  purchased
by  the  sacrifice  of  significance.  So  far  from  regarding
it  as  *  self-evident '  that  *  A  is  A,'  it  regards  it  as  the

1  At  first  sight  this  doctrine  seems  incompatible  with  the  '  fourfold  analysis  '
of  propositions  in  extension  ('denotation')  and  intension  ('connotation')
(Chap.  Ill,  §  i),  and  indeed  Miss  Jones  herself  takes  it  thus.  Closer  examina
tion,  however,  does  not  support  this  impression.  The  Law  of  Significant
Assertion  is  much  more  fundamental  than  the  '  fourfold  analysis. '  It  states  the
primary  condition  of  there  being  meaning  at  all,  viz.  that  '  terms  '  must  be  used,
and  so  converts  '  dictionary-meanings  '  into  actual  meaning.  It  is  only  after
this  has  been  done  that  the  further  question  arises  whether  we  are  using  our
terms  to  indicate  '  things  '  or  their  '  qualities  '  (attributes),  and  it  is  with  this
that  the  fourfold  analysis  is  concerned.  Even  propositions,  therefore,  which  on
paper  seem  mere  connexions  of  attributes,  like  '  Virtue  is  knowledge, '  must  be
applied  to  a  context  to  become  judgments,  and  must  then  '  denote  '  this  context  ;
it  is,  moreover,  this  application  which  renders  possible  the  '  identification  '  of  the
diverse  attributes  which,  as  terms,  remain  different.  The  difficulty,  therefore,
arises  from  an  ambiguity  in  the  term  '  denote,'  which  in  Miss  Jones's  use  means
actual  application,  whereas  in  the  Formal  analysis  of  propositions  a  term  is  said
to  '  have  denotation/  if  it  is  merely  applicable  to  things.


384  FORMAL  LOGIC  CHAP.

meaning  of  every  assertion  to  raise  and  test  the  question
whether  *  A  '  is  '  A '  or  only  called  '  A.'  And  so  far  from
holding  that  this  question,  and  the  risk  of  error  which  it
avows,  is  a  defect  to  be  eliminated  or  ignored  in  logical
thinking,  it  holds  that  it  is  precisely  this  risk,  and  the  desire
to  settle  this  doubt,  which  gives  the  impetus  to  thinking
and  a  meaning  to  assertion.  So  far  from  holding  that
*  A '  is  immutable  simply  because  it  does  not  change  its
name,  it  holds  that  it  always  changes  (more  or  less)  from
one  application  ('case')  to  another,  and  that  therefore
there  is  always  a  question  whether  the  '  identification  '
will  succeed,  and  the  change  be  irrelevant,  and  not  fatal
to  the  proposed  application.

There  are  very  good  reasons,  then,  why  Formal  Logic
should  fight  so  shy  of  the  logical  notions  enumerated  in
§  4.  The  mystery  of  the  missing  chapters  in  Logic  is
solved  when  we  realize  that  Formal  Logic  rests  on  an
abstraction  from  Meaning,  and  was  consequentially  bound
to  ignore  (real)  Truth,  Error,  Selection,  Relevance,  and
Risk.  For  all  these  are  bound  up  with  real  Meaning,
and  essential  to  its  constitution.  Whoever,  then,  wants
his  logic  to  be  meaningless  must  rule  out  also  these  other
implications  of  real  Meaning  ;  and  conversely,  whoever
wants  to  rule  out  one  of  the  others,  commits  himself  to
an  abstraction  from  Meaning.  But  are  we  not  entitled
to  complain  that,  if  this  was  the  real  meaning  of  the
proposal  to  consider  forms  in  their  purity,  Formal  Logic
should  have  had  the  candour  to  admit  this  honestly  in
the  beginning,  instead  of  having  it  extorted  from  it
reluctantly  in  the  end  ?

§  7. The  Defence  of  Formal  Logic

Is  this  the  end  of  Formal  Logic  ?  Can  it  survive
the  discovery  that  its  fundamental  abstractions  have
committed  it  also  to  a  complete  abstraction  from
meaning  ?  At  first  it  seems  incredible  that  in  a  rational
organization  of  human  life  there  can  continue  to  be  room
for  an  unmeaning  pseudo-science,  and  still  more  that  this


XXIV


THE  OUTCOME  385


should  actually  be  accepted  as  the  orthodox  theory  of
Thought  to  the  exclusion  of  a  logic  of  real  meaning,  real
reasoning,  and  real  knowing.

But  a  knowledge  of  the  world  and  of  the  actual
working  of  human  minds  and  institutions  will  hardly  bear
out  the  hasty  optimism  of  this  expectation.  To  prove
Formal  Logic  radically  incompetent,  inconsistent,  and
finally  unmeaning  is  a  deadly  attack  upon  its  scientific
character.  But  is  it  enough  to  destroy  it  as  a  science  in
being  ?  This  by  no  means  follows.  Many  of  the  defects
we  have  found  in  it  have  always  been  known  to  be

*  difficulties '  ;  a  good many  more  have  been  extensively
suspected. In  spite  of  them,  Formal  Logic  has  managed
to  flourish  for  two thousand years. The parallel with

*  Euclid ' is more instructive than encouraging. The
facts  that  some  of  the  foundations  of  Euclidean  geometry
were  unsound,  and  that  many  of  its  proofs  were  lacking
in rigour,  were  known to mathematicians for  centuries  ;
but  they  did  not  prevent  its  use  as  a  text-book  continuing
for  over  two  thousand  years. The  scientific  breakdown
of  Formal Logic  is  doubtless  more  complete  ;  but  to  an
even greater extent than '  Euclid ' it has managed to
become a tradition and an institution^ supported by
literary  and educational  conventions,  and the academic
spirit  everywhere. As  an  institution  Formal  Logic  gives
instruction  to  a  large  percentage  of  the  ablest  minds,  and
employment  to  a  large  number  of  able  men,  all  of  whom
are professionally  averse  from a radical reform of  their
subject,  all  of  whom  have  their  logic  lectures  written  out,
many of whom have committed themselves in print,
while  not  a  few,  and  among  these  precisely  most  of  the
senior  *  authorities,'  have  undergone  that  hardening  of  the
mental fibre and loss of its elasticity which age and
dogmatic  habits tend to  bring  about How,  then, is it
psychologically  probable that logicians  will adopt,  con
sider, or even understand, far-reaching novelties of
thought  ? A  mere proof, then, that Formal Logic is
scientifically nugatory and intrinsically unmeaning is
hardly  sufficient  to  destroy  its  academic  status. It  will

2C


386  FORMAL  LOGIC  CHAP.

damage,  it  may  even  paralyse,  it  will  probably  infuriate  ;
but  it  will  neither  reform  nor  kill.

Indeed  it  is  much  more  likely  that  the  attack  will  really
put  Formal  Logic  on  its  mettle.  For  over  two  thousand
years  it  has  lorded  it  unopposed  over  the  submissive
human  mind,  and  played  the  *  Old  Man  of  the  Sea '  to
the  '  Sinbad '  of  Science,  and  has  never  encountered  any
serious  questioning  of  its  principles.  This  has  not  only
been  bad  for  humanity  (cf.  Chap.  XXV),  but  also  for
Formal  Logic  itself.  It  has  become  brutally  and  blindly
dogmatic,  and  unaccustomed  to  argue  reasonably.  It
will  now  have  occasion  to  develop  some  ingenuity  in
justifying  its  continued  existence,  in  spite  of  the  indict
ment  brought  against  it.

It  will  be  well,  therefore,  that  we  should  consider  some
of  the  excuses  for  its  existence  that  will  be  alleged,  in  order
to  see  whether  we  cannot  effect  a  compromise  with  so
redoubtable  an  adversary.  For  after  all  both  prudence
and  collegiality  admonish  us  to  withdraw,  if  possible,  our
objection  to  the  very  existence  of  Formal  Logic,  and  to
allow  it  to  go  on,  if  in  return  it  will  only  consent  to  let
us  construct  a  theory  of  real  meaning,  real  truth,  and  real
knowing,  and  give  us  leave  to  appreciate  the  procedures
of  Science.  If  Formal  Logic  can  tolerate  by  its  side  a
logic  of  human  knowing,  it  becomes  comparatively  harm
less,  and  we  can  then  consider  whether  it  can  justify  itself
either  as  mental  training  or  as  an  intellectual  game.

§  8.  Formal  Logic  as  Mental  Training

A  defence  of  Formal  Logic  on  the  ground  that  though
it  is  not  true  it  forms  an  excellent  mental  training,  is
worth  considering,  though  it  hardly  seems  adequate,  and
a  large  body  of  educational  experts  would  dissent  from  it.
For  (i)  Formal  Logic  does  not  in  fact  seem  capable
of  getting  a  grip  on  a  large  proportion  of  human  minds.
They  either  fail  to  acquire  it,  or  are  influenced  by  it  only
by  way  of  repulsion.  Indeed  a  real  taste  for  it  seems  to
be  as  special  as  that  for  mathematics,  though  much  rarer,


THE  OUTCOME  387

even  among  philosophers.  Hence  only  a  small  propor
tion  of  those  who  benefit  by  a  training  in  philosophy  can
be  said  to  take  at  all  kindly  to  Formal  Logic.  The  rest
find  it  dull,  distasteful,  and  unprofitable.  Even  in  the
university  which  still  assigns  most  importance  to  logical
training  in  its  curriculum,  that  of  Oxford,  the  percentage
of  those  who  study  it  is  small,  the  extent  to  which  they
study  it  is  slight,  and  the  benefit  they  derive  from  it  is
doubtful.

(2)  Indeed, a general doubt may be raised as to
whether  Formal  Logic  is  in  fact  a  good  training  even  for
the  minds  it  can  influence. It  not  infrequently  appears
to  induce  a  deplorable  narrow-mindedness  and  incapacity
to  grasp  concrete  fact,  which  in  extreme  cases  amounts  to
a  sort  of  mental  paralysis.

(3)  Experience  does  not  seem  to  bear  out  the  belief  that
Formal  Logic  improves  reasoning. It  frequently  produces
*  logic-chopping '  and  '  quibbling '  of  an  unprofitable  kind,
without increasing coherence and vigour of thought.
That  it  should  do  this  is  not,  perhaps,  surprising,  in  view
of  the  actual  character  of  Formal  Logic.

But  it  is  a  curious  fact  that  it  does  not  even  seem
appreciably  to  improve  the  formal  accuracy  of  thinking.
Formal  logicians  are  apparently  just  as  liable  as  other
mortals  to  fall  into  formal  traps,  e.g.  to  argue  from
ambiguous  terms  or  to  convert  A  propositions  wrongly.
The  reason  probably  is  that  just  because  Formal  Logic  is
so  alien  to  real  thought  its  lessons  are  cast  to  the  winds
so  soon  as  any  one  begins  to  do  his  real  thinking.  The
pedantry  which  paralyses  the  free  movement  of  intelligence
has  to  be  thrown  off,  even  by  the  logician,  when  he
applies  his  mind  to  any  intellectual  problem.

(4)  It  is  surely  a  misfortune  that  the  mental  training
(whatever  its  value)  which  Formal  Logic  provides,  should
profess to have  for  its  subject  (or  victim) anything so
vitally  important  as  the  theory  of  Knowledge,  and  speci
fically of Science. For men of science and their
sympathizers  may  legitimately  ask  why,  if  it  is desired
to  indoctrinate  men  with  meaningless  falsehoods  in  the


388  FORMAL  LOGIC  CHAP.

guise  of  '  mental  training,'  it  should  have  been  necessary
to  select  the  theory  of  science  as  the  proper  subject  about
which  the  possession  of  false  ideas  should  form  part  of  a
'  liberal  education.'

(5)  Moralists  might  dispute  alike  the  propriety  and
the  use  of  needlessly  teaching  falsehoods  for  the  sake  of
mental  training  ;  and  lastly,  (6)  the  pupils  of  the  Formal
logicians  might  themselves  discover,  and  resent,  the  fact
that  they  had  been  taught  as  truth  what  was  false,  or
even  meaningless.

On  the  whole,  therefore,  it  does  not  seem  that  a  very
strong  case  can  be  made  out  for  Formal  Logic  as  mental
training.

§  9.  Formal  Logic  as  a  Game

Formal  Logic  gets  on  much  firmer  ground  when  it
claims  to  be  a  good  game  for  intellectually-minded  men,
or  at  all  events  for  Formal  logicians.  For  from  this
point  of  view  most  of  the  objections  to  it  fall  to  the
ground.  It  will  no  longer  matter  that  it  has  severed  all
connexion  with  real  knowing,  that  its  ideals  are  impossible
and  its  objects  fictitious,  non-existent,  and  unmeaning.
They  may  be  all  the  better  for  this,  as  counters  in  an
intellectual  game.  And  such  games  surely  are  legitimate.
If  a  logician  takes  aesthetic  pleasure  in  the  thought  of  a
superhuman  Ideal  of  Pure  Thought  and  loves  the  pure
unearthly  beauty  of  its  simple  laws  and  outlines,  and  feels
that  to  contemplate  it  amuses  him,  or  even  does  him
good,  why  on  earth  should  he  not  be  allowed  to  devote
his  leisure  to  it  ?

Let  us  defend  him,  therefore,  against  the  Puritanical
Philistines  who  would  intolerantly  suppress  him  as  the
useless  practitioner  of  a  futile  pseudo-science,  and  plead
with  them  as  follows  : —

'  Friends,  your  judgment  is  too  harsh.  You  must  not
judge  Logic  by  your  own  feelings,  nor  condemn  it  because
you  have  no  use  for  it.  You  should  live,  and  let  Logic  live.
Moreover,  it  really  has  a  use.  Its  use  is  to  keep  logicians
employed  and  amused.  The  study  of  Formal  Logic  makes


xxiv  THE  OUTCOME  389

a  highly  intellectual  game,  which  has  its  rules,  intricate
and  difficult  enough  to  call  forth  the  highest  intellectual
skill.  You  think  it  a  silly  game  ;  well,  in  a  sense  all
games  are  silly.  It  is,  at  all  events,  a  fairly  harmless
game,  and  playing  it  will  not  make  the  world  either
appreciably  wiser  or  sillier.  Why  then  prohibit  it  ?  You
need  not  play  it  yourself.  If  it  amuses  logicians,  why
should  they  not  play  it  ?  Are  not  they  too  entitled  to
have  amusements  ?  We  cannot  all  be  working  all  the
time,  but  need  relaxation  ;  remember  neque  semper
arcum  tendit  Apollo.  So  long,  then,  as  these  logicians
exist  and  society  thinks  them  worth  having  and  endowing,
have  they  not  ordinary  human  rights  ?  It  is  not  every
one  who  has  a  head  for  chess  or  bridge.  If  they  were
not  allowed  to  play  at  Formal  Logic,  there  is  no  saying
what  they  might  not  do.  After  all,  there  are  not  many  of
these  logicians,  and  they  are  not  greatly  on  the  increase.
And  lastly,  we  can  assure  you  that  even  Formal  Logic  has
an  incidental  use.  On  several  occasions  during  the  past
two  thousand  years  logicians  have  hit  upon  truths  which
were  of  serious  import  for  the  theory  of  real  knowing.'  *

In  defending  Formal  Logic,  we  have  had,  however,
to  repress  a  serious  misgiving.  Is  it  really  such  a  good
game,  even  for  those  who  like  it  ?  Can  that  be  a  good
game  of  which  the  rules  are  so  loose  and  the  terms  so
ambiguous  ?  It  is  trying  to  use  ordinary  words  in  techni
cal  senses  which  have  to  be  forced  upon  them  by  fictions
and  conventions  ;  but  its  fictions  cannot  be  worked  con
sistently,  and  in  practice  they  keep  slipping  back  into
their  ordinary  senses.  Hence  throughout  Formal  Logic

1  The  humble  tone  of  this  defence  will  probably  seem  to  the  pure  logicians

hopelessly  inadequate  to  the  dignity  of  their  subject. But  it  might  appease  the

Philistines,  who,  they  should  remember,  form  the  vast  majority,  and  have  it  in

their  power  to  confiscate  the  professorships  of Logic,  and  to  endow  with  the

proceeds  '  really  useful '  chairs  of  engineering  or  agriculture. And  in  that  case

not only  Formal Logic, but the whole theory  of  (real) knowing would  be

relegated  to  another  world  ;  which  would  be  a  pity,  because  it  is  still  quite  a

young  science  which  has  been  so  overshadowed  that  it  has  never  yet  had  a  chance

of  showing  what  it  can  do  for  the  good  of  humanity. There  is  a  very  serious

•*'  danger in these days that the democracy  will try  to suppress  all  intellectual

; pursuits  which do  not justify themselves  by  their direct and obvious social

,  service,  and  in  view  of  this  it  seems  most  dangerous  to  boast  of  the  '  uselessness '

of  higher  culture  and  '  theoretic  '  science.


390  FORMAL  LOGIC  CHAP.

seems  to  be  highly  suggestive  of  the  game  of  croquet
played  by  Alice  at  the  court  of  Wonderland,  with  hedge
hogs  as  balls  and  flamingoes  as  mallets.  And  the  worst
of  it  is  that  some  of  the  '  pure '  logicians  are  of  the  same
opinion.  They  propose,  therefore,  to  make  the  rules
more  rigorous,  and  to  substitute  (unvarying)  symbols  for
words,  assuring  us  that  this  will  much  improve  the  game
and  extend  its  scope.  And  it  seems  plain  that  on
Formal  principles  they  are  right,  and  that  the  old-
fashioned  logicians  have  not  answered  them  because  they
cannot.  They  call  this  new  game  Symbolic  Logic,  and
exhibit  so  much  ingenuity  that  it  is  impossible  not  to
speak  of  it  with  awe.  To  examine  its  claims  fully  would
demand  much  space  and  much  abstruse  knowledge.  But
it  may  suffice  for  our  purposes  to  give  three  reasons
why  it  cannot  be  accepted  as  the  right  solution  of  the
logical  problem.

(1)  Practically  Symbolic  Logic  cannot  be  a  substitute
for  Formal. It  is  too  new  and  too  difficult  to  have  settled
down  to  any  teachable  traditional  form. It  is  not  there
fore  as  yet  examinable,  like  Formal  Logic,  which,  though
it is strictly nonsense, has the advantage that it is
eminently examinable nonsense,  which (with  care)  can
be  taught  even  to  the  Oxford  Passman,  and  is  found  by
him  easier  to  assimilate  than quite elementary mathe
matics. Symbolic  Logic,  on  the  other  hand,  presupposes
not  only  a  mathematical  turn  of  mind,  but  also  a  good
deal  of  mathematical  knowledge.

(2)  Symbols  are  not  meanings -,  but  only  forms  for  them.
Each  symbol  can  actually  convey  a  multitude  of  meanings
in  different  contexts. If  a  mathematician  declares  (in  a
context)  that  x  =  yy  he  implies  that  his  equation  holds
whatever  values  are  given  to  x  and  y  in  any  actual  case.1
But  he  may  equally  well  write  also  lx=2y'  and  inspire
the Symbolic Logician  to  start  an inquiry  whether  the
two propositions  ' x—yy  and ^x—2y^ form a  'contra
diction.' Verbally  insoluble  puzzles  may  thus  be  manu
factured,  until  it  is  realized  that  so  far  these  symbolic

1  Though  not,  of  course,  that  intrinsically  and/^r  se,  x  andj  are  equal.


xxiv  THE  OUTCOME  391

forms  mean  nothing,  because  no  one  has  yet  asserted  them.
Both  are  (abstractly  and  potentially)  true,  because  the
values  of  either  formula  may  be  useful ;  neither  is  actually
true,  because  no  one  is  actually  meaning  and  using  them,
and  until  there  is  a  meaning  there  can  be  no  contradicting
of  it.  The  only  advantage,  therefore,  symbols  have  over
words,  is  that  they  are  not  so  easy  to  juggle  with  ;  but
when  human  ingenuity  has  triumphed  over  honesty  in
dealings  with  them,  the  trickery  is  much  harder  to  detect.
Symbolic  Logic,  then,  though  its  symbols  are  less  liable,
perhaps,  to  misuse  than  words,  is  still  essentially  verbal^
and  as  impotent  (or  impenitent)  in  its  attitude  towards
real  meaning  and  actual  assertion  as  the  loosest  Formal
Logic.  And  in  the  end  it  falls  into  the  same  embarrass
ments.

(3)  Symbolic  Logic,  therefore,  is  still  Formal,  and
makes  a  game  of  the  same  kind  as  Formal  Logic,  played
with  symbols  instead  of  words.  Indeed  it  is  the  same
thing,  only  more  so.  It  is  much  more  consistently
Formal.  But  it  shares  the  fundamental  assumptions  of
Formal  Logic,  though  it  is  clear-headed  enough  not  to
endorse  all  its  untenable  claims  about  the  real  validity
of  its  results.  It  is  in  fact  essentially  an  attempt  to
cure  what  informally  the  main  defect  (though  practically
the  chief  asset)  of  Formal  Logic,  viz.  that  its  terms  are
so  loose  and  '  ambiguous.'  But  Symbolic  Logic  thinks
that  they  can  be  fixed  by  conscientious  and  elaborate
definition,  and  for  ever  after  kept  from  '  wobbling,'  so
that  the  insensible  shifting  and  growth  of  actual  meanings
will  no  longer  disturb  the  gyrations  of  Logic.1

This,  however,  is  an  entire  mistake.  It  is  the  nature
of  living  thought  to  modify  and  develop  the  terms  it
uses,  because  it  is  psychologically  impossible  to  judge
without  claiming  some  degree  of  novelty  for  the
combination  of  terms  effected  by  the  judgment,  and  so
modifying  the  old  '  meaning  of  the  terms '  used  by  their
new  associations,  and  our  proper  policy,  therefore,  is  not

1  Noli  turbare  circulos  meos,  it  might  reply  (like  Archimedes)  to  the  demand
for  progressive  knowledge.


392  FORMAL  LOGIC  CHAP.

to  try  vainly  to  arrest  this  growth,  but  to  learn  to  reason
with  plastic  terms  and  growing  meanings,  and  to  under
stand  the  process.  To  have  to  play  with  hedgehogs  and
flamingoes  does  not  mean  that  we  can  have  no  fun,
but  only  that  we  had  better  not  pretend  that  the  game
to  play  with  them  is  croquet.

§  10. Concessions  to  Psychologic

Nevertheless  the  logic  of  real  thinking  need  not  try
to  prohibit  the  Formal  game,  with  whatever  counters  its
champions  prefer  to  play  it,  if  in  return  it  can  obtain
a  few  reasonable  concessions.

(1)  The Formal  logician  must  be  asked  to  give  up
his  intolerant  dogmatism  and  to  admit  that  logics can
be  constructed  on  other  assumptions  than  his  own.

(2)  He must be asked to confine himself strictly
within  the  formal limits  he  has marked  out  for  himself,
and  must  not  pronounce  upon  those  logical  topics  which
involve a knowledge either of  '  material ' truth or of
human  psychology.

(3)  He must be required to recognize that actual
human  thinking in science and  in ordinary  life forms
a real problem  which  urgently  needs  to  be considered.
As  he  has  made  it  quite  clear  that  his  initial  assumptions
forbid  him  to  consider  it,  he  must  leave  its  consideration
to  others. It  will  be  necessary  to  devise  a  new  science
which  will  not  abstract  from psychology  and real  truth
and meaning, but  will deal with actual meaning and
the difficulties of conveying it and of  mutual under
standing, with material truth, real error,  the processes
of  judging  and  inferring,  the  activity  of  human  thought
in interfering  with data,  postulating,  feigning,  guessing,
and  experimenting,  with  its  arbitrariness  and  selectiveness,
with  its  rejections  and  prejudices,  its  desires  and  emotions,
and  the  influence  (for  good  and  evil)  of  all such  things
on  knowing. He  himself  has,  rightly  or  wrongly,  scorned
to  plunge  into  this  psychological  *  mess.' But  this  mess
has to be cleared up somehow. If  he  refuses  to  let


xxiv  THE OUTCOME  393

this  discipline  be  called  logic  and  claims  pre-emption  of
the  name,  we  must  not  haggle  with  him  about  terms.
Provided  that  he  will  let  us  frame  a  science  which  will
concern  itself  with  the  aspects  of  intellectual  functioning
which  are  excluded  from  the  Ideal  of  Pure  Thought,  let
him  restrict  '  logic '  to  what  he  means  thereby.

We  shall  merely  have  to  adopt  another  term.  Let  us
call  this  other  study  Psychologic,  therefore,  and  demand
the  right  to  cultivate  it  by  the  appropriate  methods.
It  will  extend  over  the  whole  field  of  human  knowing
and  try  to  understand  the  sciences  which  are  engaged
in  discovering  truths,  and  the  practices  of  actual  reasoning.
And  when  it  has  understood  these,  it  may  be  able
modestly  to  make  some  very  general  suggestions  for
conducting  such  procedures,  which  may  have  practical
value,  and  will  at  any  rate  evince  real  understanding.

Thus  will  contentions  cease  and  interscientific  peace
be  restored.  Formal  Logic  may  be  left  to  its  own
devices  henceforth,  and  Psychologic  will  study  real
knowing  without  impediment.  But  there  remains  a
final  problem,  viz.  Will  society  ratify  this  compromise  ?
Is  it  well,  on  social  grounds,  to  leave  Formal  Logic  alone  ?
This  important  question  will  occupy  our  final  chapter.


CHAPTER XXV

THE SOCIAL EFFECTS OF FORMAL LOGIC

§  I . The  Social  Importance  of  Formal  Logic

WE  saw  in  the  last  chapter  that  it  was  perfectly  possible
to  effect  a  compromise  between  Psychologic  and  Pure  or
Formal  Logic,  which  is  scientifically  tolerable.  Formal
Logic  can  be  conceived  as  a  sort  of  intellectual  game
which  Science  can  afford  to  ignore  as  an  irrelevant  by
product  of  the  development  of  knowledge.  But  can
society  afford  to  despise  it  as  a  harmless  craze  ?  The
answer  will  depend  on  the  view  taken  of  its  social  effects.

(i)  Contempt,  at  any  rate,  seems  quite  uncalled  for.
However  inconsistent  and  unreasonable  Formal  Logic
may  have  shown  itself,  however  incapable  of  appreciating
real  knowing,  it  is  not  something  to  be  despised,  but
something  to  be  feared,  for  the  enormous  influence  it
exercises  upon  human  thought  and  social  action.

Practical  common-sense  will  doubtless  be  astonished
to  hear  this,  and  loth  to  admit  it.  It  will  think  it  a
great  exaggeration  to  attribute  any  appreciable  social
importance  to  Formal  Logic  and  its  errors.  It  will
point  to  the  facts  that  the  exponents  of  Formal  Logic
are  few,  and  that  their  writings  are  obscure  and  not
read  by  the  general  public.  It  will  urge  that  in  point
of  fact  the  world  is  not  managed  by  theorizers  of  any
sort,  but  by  practical  men  who  find  out  the  way  to  do
things  by  trying,  and  trouble  themselves  not  at  all  as
to  whether  their  methods  are  '  theoretically  sound,'  and
approved  by  the  pedants  and  pundits  of  the  universities.

. 394


CHAP,  xxv  SOCIAL  EFFECTS  395

Nevertheless  it  is  possible  to  give  reasons  for  thinking
that  common-sense  is  in  this  case  wrong,  and  is  greatly
underrating  the  potency  of  Formal  Logic.  It  has  over
looked  both  the  direct  educational  effects  of  Formal
Logic  and  also  the  influence  which  it  exercises  indirectly
through  Science  and  Religion.  And,  however  unimportant
one  may  wish  to  think  Logic,  who  will  dare  to  think  the
same  of  Science  and  Religion  ?


§  2. The  Educational  Effects  of  Formal  Logic

The  educational  effects  of  Formal  Logic  have  already
been  discussed  from  the  point  of  view  of  their  value
(Chap.  XXIV,  §  8),  but  not  as  yet  from  the  point  of  view
of  their  extent.  It  will  be  found  that  the  educational
position  of  Formal  Logic  enables  it  to  exercise  an  influence
wholly  disproportionate  to  its  real  value,  and  to  the
amount  of  actual  thought  devoted  to  it.  For  though  the
number  of  persons  who  study  it  at  all  deeply  is  very
small,  the  number  of  those  who  are  compelled  to  get  a
certain  acquaintance  with  its  terminology  and  standpoint
is  very  large.  In  former  days  it  included  the  whole  of
the  educated  classes,  and  though  nowadays  the  scientists
and  doctors  have  mostly  emancipated  themselves  from
its  study,  clerics,  schoolmasters,  and  lawyers  are  still
indoctrinated  with  it.  In  other  words,  the  professional
and  literary  classes  are  still  pupils  of  the  Formal  logician,
bad  and  unwilling  pupils  it  may  be,  and  ready  to  revolt,
but  unable  to  make  their  discontent  effective.  For  Formal
Logic  does  not  rule  by  love,  but  by  fear.  Its  pupils
might  learn  to  detest  it,  so  long  as  they  learnt  to  fear  the
Syllogism  and  all  its  works.  Oderint  dum  metuant.
And  even  if  they  desired  to  question  its  authority,  there
was  no  escape  from  it,  and  no  alternative  exc  2pt  in  blind
unreason.  And  though  Irrationalism  is  often  a  relatively
rational  reaction  against  the  excessive  irrationality  of
Rationalism,  it  will  not  do  as  a  permanent  creed,  because
it  deprives  man  of  his  chief  weapon  in  fighting  the  cosmic
chaos,  namely,  his  reason.


396  FORMAL  LOGIC  CHAP.

The  instinctive  revolt  against  Formal  Logic,  therefore,
was  always  hitherto  predestined  to  failure.  It  found  the
whole  vocabulary  of  knowledge  moulded  by  Formalism
and  the  whole  technical  language  which  literature  had
to  use.  There  was  no  opposition  to  Formalism  in  Logic.
The  sciences  were  apathetic  or  indifferent.  They  had
all  either  admitted  the  claim  of  Formal  Logic  to  have
accounted  for  their  procedures,  or  been  browbeaten  into
confessing  their  inferiority  in  rigour  and  cogency  to  the
logical  *  ideal.'  They  were,  moreover,  too  busy  with  their
own  work  to  reflect  upon  their  methods  and  to  exhibit
more  than  passing  puzzlement  when  they  found  that  these
did  not  in  fact  conform  to  the  logical  models.  Moreover,
in  the  sciences,  as  in  the  whole  academic  world,  the
principle  of  authority  is  very  strong.  The  specialists  in
each  science  expect  to  have  their  results  accepted  ;  cuique
in  sua  arte  credendum,  and  so  interscientific  comity  for
bade  the  questioning  of  the  results  of  Formal  Logic.  It
was  so  much  easier,  politer,  and  more  profitable,  to  mind
one's  own  business.

It  is  only  in  quite  recent  times  that  this  scientific  equi
librium  has  been  upset  to  the  detriment  of  Formal  Logic.
Scientific  education  has  been  allowed  to  escape  from  its
sway,  less  from  design  than  from  the  apathy  of  logicians
who  thought  they  had  exhausted  the  meaning  of  Science
long  ago  and  did  not  wish  to  be  troubled  with  the  com
plexities  of  so  much  new  *  material '  knowledge.  A  new
science,  moreover,  has  slowly  risen  into  prominence,  in  the
shape  of  Psychology,  which  has  already  exercised  some
influence  on  literature.  And  however  anxiously  psycho
logists  might  shrink  from  a  conflict  with  '  Logic/  and
restrict  themselves  to  highly  technical  descriptions  and
very  dull  experiments,  it  could  not  in  the  long  run  remain
hidden  that  the  accounts  they  gave  of  the  processes  of
thought  were  utterly  discrepant  from  those  traditionally
presupposed  by  the  logicians,  and  indeed  in  many  points
convicted  them  of  obvious  error.  Hence  the  educational
position  of  Formal  Logic  is,  for  the  first  time  in  two
thousand  years,  seriously  threatened.  But  it  is  still


xxv  SOCIAL  EFFECTS  397

immensely  strong,  for  Formal  Logic  is  established  and
endowed,  and  the  mere  fact  that  it  is  wrong  and  exten
sively  known  to  be  so,  will  not  prevent  it  from  continuing
to  be  taught,  unless  a  certain  amount  of  social  pressure  is
brought  to  bear  upon  Formal  logicians.

§  3. The  False  Ideals  of  Formal  Logic

If  error  were  harmless,  it  would  not  be  worth  avoiding
or  condemning.  If  the  falsity  of  Formal  Logic  were
merely  '  theoretic,'  it  would  excite  no  interest  in  any  one.
It  is  because  of  their  practical  effects  that  the  false  '  ideals  '
of  Formal  Logic  are  worthy  of  mention  and,  in  any  sig
nificant  sense,  false.  That,  however,  the  Formal  ideal  of
knowledge  has  important  and  harmful  practical  effects
may  be  seen  by  considering  some  of  its  chief  corollaries.

(1)  Formalism's  'ideal'  of  the  motion  of  Thought  is
that  it  should be,  not  free,  but compulsory. Even as a
slave's  evidence  was not  good  in  Roman Law  unless  it
had  been  given  under  torture,  so  a  conclusion  is  worthless
in  Formal  Logic  unless  it  has  been  forced  upon  the  mind.
'  Inference'  is  to  be  'logically  necessary,'  all  'proof  is  to
be  'coercive.1 Its  aim  is  to  terrorize,  and  not  to  attract.
Truth  is  to  be  believed,  not  because  it  is  desirable  and
good to believe, and  better  than error, but  because it
imposes  itself  by  sheer  force  on  a  mind  that  '  cannot  help  '
believing it,  and because it can  wring assent from a
reluctant  and  tormented  soul. Evidently  this  '  ideal '  has
educational  affinities  with  the  barbarism  of  the  old  dis
ciplinary  methods  ;  but  is  it  calculated  to  promote  a  love
of  truth  ?

(2)  Its  ideal  of  formal  perfection  is  Fixity. Because
in  the  perfect  truth there can be  no change,  therefore
change  in  a  system  of  beliefs  is  symptomatic  of  its  falsity,
and  the  less  we  change  our  beliefs  the  better. Even  if
these  inferences  do  not  strictly  follow  from  their  premisses,
they  are  yet  extremely  natural  ; and  it  is  evident  that
they must serve to commend Formal Logic to the
blindest  and  most  intractable  sort  of  conservatism.


398  FORMAL  LOGIC


CHAP.


(3)  Its  ideal  of  'proof  is  that  it  should  proceed  from
and  arrive  at,  Certainty. To  ensure  certainty  it  tries  to
avoid  all  risk,  and to  ignore  all  thinking  which  involves
it. Until  premisses  have  been  discovered  for  a  conclusion
which  are  absolutely  certain,  all  the  reasoning  is  unsound,
'  invalid/  and not worth considering. Merely  probable
conclusions  are  merely  despicable. Probability  may  be
the  guide  of  life and  the  acme  of  science,  but  Formal
Logic  will  not  demean its  ideal  to  take  note  of  it. If
certainty is unattainable, then so much the worse for
Science  and  for  Life  :  let  the  Logical  Ideal  break  off  all
relations  with  them  !

(4)  Truth, being absolute,  is true without  regard to
circumstances. If  concrete  '  cases  '  are  always  individual,
and '  truth ' in  them is  always relative to a particular
context  and  a  personal  meaning,  and  if  there  is  no  way
of  preserving  the integrity  of  absolute  truth  while  con
tinuing  to  apply  it,  why  then  the  remedy  is  simple  :  let
us  cease  to  apply  it ! And  if  in  reply  it  is  urged  that
a truth which is  not and cannot be applied becomes
unmeaning,  by  all  means  let  us  abstract  from meaning
too  ! Our  ideal  is  to  be  '  independent,'  and  is  not  meant
to  be  relative  to  man  and  human  uses  !

Absence  of  meaning,  however,  must  not  be  held  to
detract  either  from  the  absoluteness  of  the  Ideal  or  from
its  authority  over  man.  Indeed  it  would  not  be  absolute
if  man  were  allowed  any  say  in  the  matter,  a  voice  and
a  vote  in  the  making  of  truth.  Man  is  not  free  to  make
truth,  which  is  '  necessary '  and  *  eternal.'  *  Necessity  '
is  as  evidently  the  tyrant's  plea  in  logical  as  in  political
absolutism,  and  neither  has  any  use  for  the  freedom  of
human  activity.

(5)  The  absolute  system  of  immutable  Truth  is  one.
Not  more than  one  view,  therefore,  can  be  true. You
either  have  The  Truth,  or  you  have  not. If  you  have
it  not,  you  are  lost ; if  you  have  it,  no  one  should  dare
to  contradict  you. You  do  right,  therefore,  to  get  angry
with  those  who  dispute  The  Truth. The  Truth  is  yours,
nay,  it  is  you,  if  you have  truly  purged  yourself  of  all


Xv


XXV


SOCIAL  EFFECTS  399


human  feelings. La  verite  c'est  moi,  the  Formal  logician
can  then  proudly  say.

These  corollaries  from  Formal  Logic  are  surely
remarkable  and  distinctive  enough.  It  would  be  strange
if  they  had  no  practical  effects  upon  the  minds  that
entertain  them  and  try  to  live  up  to  them.  Let  us  see,
therefore,  what  effects  may  justly  be  attributed  to  them
in  Science,  in  Religion,  and  in  social  life.

§  4. Their  Effects  on  Science

It  is  clear  that  if,  and  so  far  as,  Science  allows  itself
to  be  impressed  by  the  Formal  ideals,  its  procedure  must
be  seriously  affected.

(1)  The Freedom and attractiveness of scientific
research must seem something inexplicable, abnormal,
and  monstrous. The  pleasures  of  discovery  ought  to  be
forbidden to those who are the slaves, and not the
masters,  of  truth.

(2)  All  existing  systems  of  Science  will  be  condemned
by  their  lack  of  fixity  and  their  systematic  incompleteness.
It  will  be  unintelligible  that  Science  should  thrive  on  the
constant  alteration of  its theories,  and never condemn
itself for its uncritical credulity in accepting as true
to-day what its whole past predicts it will probably
abandon  as  false  to-morrow. In  short,  the  progressiveness
of  actual  science  is  Formally  indefensible.

So  (3)  is  its  Tentativeness  and  lack  of  certainty  ^  and
readiness  to  run  the  risk  of  its  fictions,  postulates,  and
hypotheses.  Its  Formal  offence  will  only  be  augmented
by  the  inept  defence  that  in  scientific  fact  absolute
certainty  is  quite  unnecessary,  that  it  is  very  easy  and
convenient  to  argue  from  assumptions  provisionally  taken
as  true,  with  the  intention  of  testing  them  by  their
working,  and  that  so  the  truth  of  premisses  may  be,  and
is,  established  empirically  by  the  truth  of  their  con
clusions.  For  all  this  is  only  to  abandon  more  explicitly
the  ideals  of  Formal  demonstration  and  absolute  truth.
And  the  only  thing  that  could  be  more  atrocious  than


400  FORMAL  LOGIC  CHAP.

this theoretic defection from the *  Ideal '  is the claim
(apparently  well  founded)  to  prosper  without  it  in  practice.

(4)  The scientific  readiness  to  learn  from experience,
to  adjust  rules  to  cases,  to  modify  formulas  as  the  facts
seem to  require, and generally to handle *  facts ' and
1  laws '  with  the  utmost  freedom,  as  if  they  were  relative  to
each  other  and  to  human  desires  to  control  phenomena,
must  seem  utterly  repulsive  to Formal Logic. It  must
protest  that  though  Science  professes  to  pride  herself  on
her  recognition of  universal *  law,' it  is not  really  law-
abiding in a Formal way.  ~J  For not  only  does  every
science  claim,  and  exercise,  the  right  to make laws  in
an  autonomous  way,  but  in so  doing  it  consults  merely
its momentary convenience, and respects neither the
conventions  of Formal consistency, nor even the con
venience of other sciences nor its own past. It is
continually  revising  its  laws,  and  changes  them  unblush-
ingly  ; and  this  is  to  import  democracy  into  Science,  or
rather  anarchism.

(5)  If  Truth  is  Formally  one,  and  there  can  Formally
be  but  one true theory  of  anything,  it  is  clear  that  it
leaves no  room either  for  a  plurality  of  sciences  or  for  a
plurality  of  theories  within each science. Yet most  of
the sciences would fight hard (and justly) for their
independence. The sciences demand, moreover, the
right  to  make,  and  to  use,  a  plurality  of  hypotheses,  and
to  test  them  concurrently,  instead  of  proving  one  to  be
absolutely  false before taking up and testing another.
And they praise, and largely practise, a Freedom of
Thought, which involves difference of opinion, and a
plurality  of  theories  which  are  actually  held  to  be  true,
and  are  treated  with  tolerance  if  they  promise  to  promote
the  growth  of  the  science.

On  the  whole,  then,  it  is  clear  that  both  the  formal
character  and  the  best  practice  of  Science  would  be
profoundly  altered  if  it  had  to  adapt  itself  to  the  logical
'  ideal.'  It  is  not  to  be  denied,  however,  that  in  the  past
Science  has  attempted  so  to  adapt  itself,  and  claimed
infallibility,  and  fixity,  and  exhibited  dogmatism  and


XXV


SOCIAL  EFFECTS


401


intolerance.  But  was  it  in  that  past  that  Science  was
most  progressive  and  successful  ?  And  was  it  not  in  that
past,  during  the  long  darkness  and  sterility  of  the
Middle  Ages,  that  Formal  Logic  ruled  unquestioned  ?
Is  not  Science  now  entitled  to  regard  all  its  accom
modations  to  Formal  Logic  as  blunders  and  impediments
to  scientific  progress  ?


n


§  5. Their  Effects  on  Religion

It  is  not  too  much  to  say  that  a  large  proportion  of
the  best  human  thought  has  become  profoundly  alienated
from  Religion,  thanks  to  the  malign  influence  of  Formal
Logic.

This  influence  has  led  astray  both  the  advocates  and
the  adversaries  of  Religion,  by  implanting  in  them  a
common  Rationalism,  which  fatally  misapprehended  the
true  function  and  vital  value  of  Religion.  And  this
Rationalism  had  its  roots  in  nothing  else  than  Formal
Logic.

Rationalism  has  beguiled  the  opponents  of  Religion  to
criticize  religions  as  purely  rational  systems  of  beliefs,  to
be  judged  by  rigid  canons  of  formal  consistency,  and  to
be  condemned  for  the  moral  deficiencies  and  atrocities
to  which  the  attempts  to  carry  out  religiously  the
requirements  of  Formal  Logic  committed  them.  They
argued  that  because  the  systems  of  theology  which
rationalistic  theologians  had  compiled  were  not  consistent,
therefore  all  religions  were  false,  and  there  was  neither
truth  nor  use  in  them  ;  they  did  not  perceive  that  even
the  poorest  religion  is  more  than  an  exercise  in  Formal
Logic,  and  that  no  religion  can  be  consistent  so  long  as
they  all  try  to  adapt  themselves  to  Formal  ideals  which
ignore  and  condemn  their  essential  meaning.  Or  again,
the  humaner  rationalists  argued  that  because  theological
dogmatism  had  driven  the  Churches  into  appalling
intolerance  and  abominable  persecutions,  therefore  all
religions  were  bad  ;  and  here  too  their  case  was
rationalistically  unanswerable.  For  their  theological

2  D


402  FORMAL  LOGIC  CHAP.

opponents  could  only  have  replied  with  a  tu  quoque,  to
the  effect  that  since  admittedly  Truth  was  one,  and
absolute,  and  certain,  and  fixed,  and  coercive,  all  were
in  duty  bound  to  act  upon  their  beliefs  and  to  force  The
Truth  on  unbelievers.  *  Instead  of  bleating,  therefore,
about  the  barbarism  of  burning  heretics,'  a  clear-headed
Inquisitor  with  a  firm  grasp  of  Formal  Logic  might
reply,  '  you  too  should  have  the  courage  of  your
convictions  and  retaliate  by  assassinating  bishops  at
every  convenient  opportunity.'  These,  in  fact,  are  still
essentially  the  lines  on  which  religious  controversy  is
conducted  on  the  Continent,  and  it  is  only  the  happy
illogicality  of  the  Anglo-Saxon  mind  which  has  shrunk
from  applying  in  practice  the  intolerant  conclusions  to
which  the  theories  of  both  sides  inevitably  led.

But  anti-clericalism  is  after  all  a  secondary  pheno
menon,  and  a  mild  reaction  against  the  far  more  serious
outrages  upon  the  freedom  of  human  thought  and
action  and  the  dictates  of  common  humanity,  which  have
been  perpetrated  for  centuries,  in  the  name  of  Religion,  at
the  behest  of  Formal  Logic.  It  is  piteous  to  trace  how  step
by  step  Religion  has  been  sacrificed  and  mangled  by
theologians  who  honestly  believed  the  lessons  they  had
all  learnt  from  Formal  Logic,  and  preferred  its  letter
to  the  spirit  of  their  faith.

(T)  To  conceive  The  Truth  as  compulsory  and  coercive
is  in  principle  to  authorize  every  form  and  measure  of
persecution.  It  makes  the  sword  and  the  stake  the
proper  instruments  for  effecting  religious  conversions.
This  inference  from  Formal  Logic  easily  prevailed  even
over  the  most  explicit  tenets  of  the  religions  themselves.
However  ardently  their  founders  might  advocate  reason
ing  and  persuasion  and  insist  on  the  beauty  and  value  of
their  beliefs,  their  followers  thought  it  their  sacred  duty
to  practise  persecution.  Why?  Whence  came  this
departure  from  the  religious  spirit  ?  Surely  to  a  large
extent  because  they  had  been  taught  to  believe  that  men
must  be  brought  to  embrace  *  The  Truth/  by  compulsion
for  choice,  seeing  that  all  truth  was  coercive.  Formal  Logic


xxv  SOCIAL  EFFECTS


403


thus underlies  all that  has  been falsely  called  '  religious '
persecution.

(2)  What insuperable  obstacles the Formal ideal of
Fixity  has  placed  in  the  path  of  religious progress and
reform  is  too  notorious  to  be dwelt  on. But  it  may  be
pointed  out  that  here again an  intrusive  inference  from
Formal  Logic  has  prevailed  over  the  ideas  involved  in  the
substance of the religions themselves. No religions
originally  show  themselves  so  obsessed  with  the  idea  of
fixity ; at their first appearance they do not conceive
themselves as final, but  all look forward to Messiahs,
Second Comings, Mahdis, and other forms of future
consummation. Their formulation into rigid Creeds
which must be believed in every  syllable and on no
account  be  revised,  is  a  phenomenon  which  comes  later,
when  logically  trained  theologians  have  got  the  religious
movement  under  control.

How  profoundly  irreligious  this  change  is,  appears
from  the  negation  of  the  notion  of  revelation  which  it
involves.  For  is  not  progressiveness  implied  in  the  j
very  notion  of  a  *  revelation  '  ?  Can  the  divine  revealing
of  a  new  truth  be  conceived  to  leave  a  mind  that  imbibes
it  unaltered  and  unfortified,  and  in  no  better  posture  for
religious  growth  ?  A  revelation  that  carries  with  it  no
spiritual  enlightenment,  that  forms  no  stimulus  to  spiritual
progress,  but  merely  fixes  a  status  quo^  is  a  futility  and
in  no  credible  sense  a  revelation  at  all.  It  reveals
nothing  but  the  inveterate  antagonism  between  Formal
Logic  and  Progress.

(3)  The Formal ideal of Certainty has rendered
Doubt  a  capital  offence in theological opinion,  and  in
flicted  unspeakable  torments  on  countless  generations  of
honest  doubters. But  it  is  clear  that  intellectually  doubt
is  ineradicable. No  religion  has  ever  been  such,  or  in  all
probability  can  ever  be  such,  that  its  certainty  is  absolute,
that  its evidence is intellectually  complete,  and  that  to
doubt  it  is  impossible. To  demand  a  religion,  therefore,
that  can  refute  all  doubts  is  to  demand  an  impossibility,
and  in fact  a  religion that will refute  itself. For  the


404


FORMAL  LOGIC


CHAP.


more  strenuously  it  tries  to  satisfy  this  rationalistic
demand,  the  more  pitiably  it  exposes  its  formal  weakness.

But  the  demand  for  a  suppression  of  Doubt  is  also  a
demand  for  a  religion  divorced  from  Life  and  Science.
For  in  real  thinking  Doubt  is  the  stimulus  to  thought,
all  real  questions  imply  real  doubt  about  the  answer,
and  every  '  truth '  gets  its  meaning  from  its  relation  to
a  doubt.1  In  the  growth  of  scientific  truth  this  relation
to  a  doubt  is  very  manifest ;  it  is  the  reality  of  the
question  which  evokes  and  tests  the  answer.  In  action
also  we  find  that  its  freedom  consists  in  its  resolution  of
alternatives  and  decision  of  questions.  Both  science  and
action,  therefore,  exhibit  to  us  the  notion  of  a  practical
certainty,  which  springs  from,  and  is  relative  to,  doubts.
Why,  then,  should  Religion  sever  its  nature  from  those
of  Life  and  Science,  and  eschew  the  methods  by  which
they  flourish  exceedingly  ?  If  Doubt  is  to  be  exterminated,
it  can  be  only  by  suppressing  thought.  All  religions
have  been  beguiled  by  Formal  Logic  into  attempting  this
fatal  policy,  though  not  all  have  entirely  succeeded  in
producing  thereby  religious  atrophy  and  moral  revolt.

And  yet  Formal  Logic  itself  should  have  warned  them
that  by  their  very  fidelity  to  the  Formal  ideal  they  were
committing  both  a  religious  and  a  formal  inconsequence,
and  disrupting  their  own  consistency.  No  religion  is
a  product  of  pure  ratiocination.  Religions  always  con
tain  much  that  is  super-rational,  if  '  reason  '  be  taken  in  its
narrowest  (and  most  unreasonable)  sense,  as  well  as  a  good
deal  that  looks  irrational.  It  is  therefore  easy  for  the
rationalist  to  lump  all  the  non-rational  elements  together,
and  to  condemn  the  whole.  Hence  nothing  is  more
certain  to  produce  '  self-contradiction '  in  the  fabric  of  a
faith  than  the  attempt  to  convert  it  into  an  absolutely
certain  '  creed,'  to  be  adequately  apprehended  by  bare
reason.  For  this  is  to  eliminate  its  character  as  a  * faith'
which,  nevertheless,  the  religions  all  (inconsistently)  regard
as  essential.  Now  *  faith  '  cannot  be  '  knowledge.'  How-

1  This  is  the  great  (though  simple)  discovery  which  has  been  made  (independ
ently)  by  John  Dewey  and  Alfred  Sidgwick.


xxv  SOCIAL  EFFECTS  405

ever  superior  we  may  find  it  spiritually,  it  is  inferior  to
knowledge  in  the  point  of  intellectual  certainty.  We
have  faith  in  what  we  do  not  (  know  for  certain.'  It  is
precisely  because  there  is  so  little  (if  anything)  that  we
can  know  for  certain,  that  there  is  so  much  need  for  faith,
which  is  '  the  support  of  our  hopes/  of  the  hopes  we
need  to  live}  If,  then,  religious  knowledge  has  to  be
absolutely  certain,  it  leaves  no  room  for  faith.  Is  *  faith/
then,  to  be  excluded  merely  because  it  has  affinities
with  Doubt?  Psychology  assures  us  that  in  point
of  present  fact  the  religious  life  is  intimately  related
to  the  pangs  of  doubt  and  the  distresses  of  disbelief;
if  these  things  lie  at  the  roots  of  actual  belief,  why
disavow  them  in  theology?  It  is  not  essential  to  Religion
that  its  '  truth  '  should  be  represented  as  coercive,  absolute,
and  abhorrent ;  it  is  only  the  needs  of  Formal  Logic,  and
not  those  of  the  religious  life,  that  constrain  theology  to
make  a  sine  qua  non  of  Certainty  and  a  crime  of  Doubt.

(4)  'Heresy'  is  another  theological  crime,  fabricated
wholly  out  of  Formal  Logic.  For  '  heresy '  is  merely
thinking  and  choosing  for  oneself,  and  taking  the
responsibility  for  one's  opinions,  instead  of  taking  them
mechanically  at  second-hand.  It  is,  in  short,  personalism
in  Religion,  and  seems  intrinsically  harmless.  What,
then,  is  the  religious  objection  to  it  ?  Is  it  merely  the
fear  that  if  freedom  of  thought  is  allowed,  no  two
people  will  freely  and  voluntarily  agree  upon  the  religious
value  of  any  belief,  and  that  therefore  every  organized
religion  would  fall  to  pieces  ?  That,  surely,  is  a  fear
no  believer  in  the  truth  of  any  religion  dare  avow.  Do
not  the  threats  against  'heretics/  then,  of  hell -fire
and  incineration  proceed,  not  from  Religion,  but  from  a
Formal  Logic  thai  cannot  allow  individual  thinking  about
individual  cases  ?  Nor  is  it  hard  to  understand  why  a
logic  which  has  allowed  no  reference  to  the  fact  that  every
judgment  implies  a  choice,  should  prohibit  choices  in  all
the  subjects  it  can  control.

1  Not  '  the  substance  of  things  hoped  for,'  as  the  translators  have  shamefully
intellectualized  St.  Paul.


406  FORMAL  LOGIC  CHAP.

(5)  The  intolerant  conviction  that  there  is  only  one
true  religion  and  that  the  rest  are  worthless,  is  a  direct
corollary  from  the  Formal  belief  in  the  absolute  unity
of  truth.  It  is  not  a  corollary  from  anything  else,  and
neither  morally  a  counsel  of  perfection,  nor  diplomatically
a  counsel  of  prudence.  The  mischief  it  has  wrought  has
been  incalculable.  And,  after  all,  the  bloodshed  it  has
instigated  has  been  all  in  vain.  History  has  declared
against  intolerance,  and  in  practice  we  have  all  to  confess
nowadays  that  there  is  truth  beyond  the  limits  of  the
beliefs  we  hold,  because  they  seem  to  us  the  truest.

Surely,  then,  Formal  Logic,  long  ancilla  theologiae  in
name  alone,  has  completely  mastered  her  mistress,  and
given  Religion  good  reason  to  claim  compensation  for
the  evil  it  has  wrought.  Religion,  on  the  other  hand,  may
well  expect  a  revival  from  the  demise  of  Formal  Logic,
if  it  could  happily  be  brought  about.

§  6. Their  Effects  on  Mankind

Our  study  of  the  educational,  scientific,  and  religious
effects  of  Formal  Logic  has  to  a  large  extent  rendered
superfluous  by  anticipation  the  inquiry  into  the  social
effects  which  may  reasonably  be  ascribed  to  the  vogue
of  Formal  Logic.  Its  fruits  are  dogmatism,  intolerance,
pedantry  and  contentiousness,  timidity  of  thought,  and
a  cowardly  avoidance  of  risks.  It  will  probably  be
admitted  that  these  tendencies  are  not  unmitigated
blessings  socially,  and  far  too  common.  But  a  word
or  two  of  explanation  may  be  added.

The__  dogmatic^  temper  is  a  widespread  social  curse.
But  it  is  not  solely  engendered  by  Formal  Logic.  It
is  often  congenital,  and  it  is,  in  virtue  of  his  office,  the
besetting  sin  of  the  teacher.  But  it  can  hardly  be
doubted  that  the  encouragement  and  justification  it  seems
to  draw  from  Formalism  greatly  tend  to  aggravate  the  evil.
A  habit,  on  the  other  hand,  of  remembering  that  thought
is  about  real  questions,  and  springs  from  real  doubts,  would
be  a  potent  check  upon  dogmatism  everywhere.


xxv  SOCIAL  EFFECTS  407

Intolerance,  again,  is  to  some  extent  an  innate  tendency,
though  it  is  mostly  aggravated  by  bad  manners.  There
is,  however,  a  real  use,  socially,  for  a  limited  amount  of
it.  For  it  is  evident  that  up  to  a  point  it  welds  society
together,  and  facilitates  common  action.  A  gregarious
creature  like  man  must  show  himself  somewhat  sensitive
to  the  ways  of  his  fellows,  and  must  put  some  check  on
the  waywardness  of  dissenters.  He  has  consequently
grown  a  certain  instinct  of  intolerance,  which  insists  on
social  conformity.  But  the  thing  is  usually  overdone,  and
we  mostly  tend  to  excessive  conventionality  and  snobbish
ness.  Moreover,  beyond  a  certain  point,  the  intolerant
craving  for  uniformity  overreaches  itself.  It  breeds  con
tentions  and  destroys  social  harmony  and  the  interest  of
human  variety.  Even  this,  however,  would  not  matter  so
much,  if  social  pressure  contented  itself  with  securing
community  of  action  and  left  opinions  free.  But  the
intolerant  temper,  when  egged  on  by  the  Formal  con
ceptions  of  truth,  is  wont  to  feel  that  it  is  theoretically
justified,  and  to  exercise  itself  especially  upon  matters
of  opinion,  most  of  which  are  really  doubtful,  and  should
be  treated  accordingly.  It  does  not  perceive  that  socially
also  freedom  of  thought  is  a  great  safety-valve,  and  that
so  long  as  society  can  secure  the  requisite  amounts  of
agreement  in  action,  it  need  not  care  what  variety  of
reasons  men  give  for  them.

Are  not  the  pedantic  and  the  bureaucratic  spirit,  more
over,  direct  descendants  of  the  dogmatic?  Are  they  not
both  forms  of  faith  in  the  absoluteness  and  all-sufficiency
of  Rules  >  without  regard  to  their  concrete  applications  to
actual  cases  ?  And  hitherto  the  men  of  rules  (dogmatists,
pedants,  bureaucrats),  who  look  to  rules  to  exempt  them
from  the  responsibilities  of  acting,  have  always  been
supported  by  the  authority  of  Logic  in  suppressing  the
revolts  of  the  men  of  action,  who  live  by  deciding  the
particular  case  aright  (whether  it  be  a  case  of  law,  or  of
conscience,  the  making  of  an  observation,  or  the  under
taking  of  an  experiment),  of  the  artists,  who  must  see
beauty  in  some  sensuous  embodiment,  and  not  in  any


408  FORMAL  LOGIC  CHAP.

attract  schematism  (to  which  Plato  would  divert  their
gaze),  and  of  the  historians,  who  have  to  trace  the  unique
procession  of  events  and  find  that  the  *  philosophy  of
history'  merely  invites  them  to  falsify  their  facts.  All
these  have  always  had  ample  experience  of  the  inadequacy
of  rules,  and  of  the  need  of  discrimination  and  discretion
in  applying  them.  But  their  protests^  against  the  evils
ofpedantry  and  officialism  could  always  be  met  by  the
triumphant  reply  :  '  However  badly  our  rules  may  seem
to  work  out  in  your  case,  you  cannot  at  any  rate  deny
that  theoretically  we  are  right.'  They  could  not  retort :
1  No,  theoretically  you  are  wrong.  Your  inapplicable
rules  are  wholly  destitute  of  meaning.  The  difficulties
of  applying  rules,  which  you  despise  as  unworthy  of
the  attention  of  the  truly  philosophic  eye,  are  the  real
difficulties  of  whosoever  has  to  perceive  a  fact  or  to
decide  upon  an  act.  ["You  have  made  them  irrelevant
to  your  "  science,"  and  have  made  your  rules  "  abso
lutely  "  true ;  but  only  by  abstracting  from  application
altogether.  ^Your  rules  apply  to  nothing  on  earth,
and  how  on  earth  men  contrive  to  reason,  you  cannot
understand.  But  what  right  have  your  rules  to  pre
suppose  what  can  never  be  known  for  certain  in  advance,
viz.  that  the  nature  of  the  case  is  not  to  entail  a  revision
of  the  rule  ?  And  the  more  you  boast  that  your  con
clusions  are  "  formally  valid,"  the  less  surprised  we  are
to  find  that  they  are  not  "  really  true." '

But  common-sense  and  experience,  even  though  backed
by  satire,  were  bound  to  fight  in  vain  against  the
mechanical  tyranny  of  rules,  so  long  as  it  was  regarded
as  a  legitimate  simplification  of 'Logic'  to  abstract  from
the  problem  of  application,  and  to  argue  about  verbal
symbols  and  not  about  real  meanings.

By  discouraging  intellectual  enterprise  and  inducing
a  reluctance  to  take  risks,  the  Formal  ideals  also  do  much
social  harm  in  another  way.  For  they  impede  our  adap
tation  to  the  nature  of  a  world  which,  despite  all  our
ingenuity  and  forethought,  remains  wild  and  incalculable,
so  that  everything  in  it,  from  agriculture,  which  is  a


xxv  SOCIAL  EFFECTS  409

speculation,  to  marriage,  which  is  a  lottery,  demands  from
us  the  taking  of  risks.  Society,  therefore,  needs  to  en
courage  activity  and  boldness,  instead  of  holding  up  to  the
human  mind  the  irrelevant  model  of  a  static  truth  from
which  all  risk  has  been  expunged.  It  suffers  chronically
from  absence  of  originality  and  lack  of  enterprise  in
its  members,  especially  in  the  discovery  of  truth.  For  it
has  been  customary  to  represent  genuine  truth  as  persist
ing  immutably  from  time  immemorial  :  new  truth,  there
fore,  has  always  been  quoted  at  a  heavy  discount ;  the
whole  apparatus  of  Logic  has  been  directed  to  making
the  new  seem  old,  and  to  putting  a  premium  on  senilities.
So  not  even  the  poets,  to  whom  a  certain  license  is  ac
corded,  have  ventured  to  preach  the  salutary  doctrine  that
'  none  but  the  brave  deserve  the  true '  as  the  fair,  and  that
terrestrial  truth  lasts  about  as  long  as  terrestrial  beauty,
but  is  not  the  less  precious  for  that !

§  7. Conclusion

Our  task  is  accomplished.  We  have  struggled  per-
severingly  to  clear  up  the  real  nature  of  Formal  Logic,
its  real  motives  and  its  actual  effects.  But  though  Formal
Logic  has  ceased  to  be  a  problem  for  science,  it  continues
to  be  one  for  society.  The  practical  question  of  what  is  to
be  done  in  consequence  remains  unsolved,  and  a  difficulty.
It  is,  however,  a  difficulty  for  the  statesman  and  the
moralist,  nay,  even  for  the  scientist  and  the  theologian,
rather  than  for  us.  For  it  is  their  duty  to  devise  a
practical  policy  for  protecting  themselves  from  misrepre
sentation  and  the  people  from  deception.  To  us,  as
logicians,  it  must  suffice  to  have  set  our  house  in  order,
and  to  have  cleared  the  ground  for  a  new  Logic  that
will  not  disdain  to  reflect  upon  real  thinking,  nor  confine
itself  to  fictions  and  falsifications.


INDEX


A  dicto  simpliciter  ad  dictum  secundum

quid,  356

A  fortiori  argument,  142,  227,  369
A  priori  truth,  certainty,  etc.,  10,  242,

247,  275-6,  290,  347, 356  ;  as  a

contradictio  in  adject  o,  319  n.
Absolute,  29  ;  the,  129  n.  ;  and  relative,

70  ; terms,  ii,  §  9
Absolutism,  logical  and  political,  398  ;

in  philosophy,  see  Truth,  absolute,

Monism
Abstract, and concrete, confused,

324  f.  ;  terms,  ii,  §  6
Abstraction,  and  fact,  216,  250,  317  f.;

terms  engendered  by,  23-4
Accent,  fallacy  of,  366,.  368
Accident, fallacy of, 200  n., 355-6',

converse,  356-7  ;  logical,  53-4  and

v,  passim,  64, 83  ;  separable  and

inseparable,  49

Accuracy,  in  relation  to  interest,  320
'  Achilles  and  the  Tortoise,'  370
Action,  378,  408  ;  and  reality,  282  f.  ;

social  agreement  in,  407
Activity,  398  ;  as  a  category,  41,  44  ;

mental,  341,  392  ;  and  '  passivity,'

3i6,  JJ7-9
Adaptation, in relation to Formal

ideals, 408-9  ; and Intelligence,


Affirmation,  and  denial,  29,  131-2,
xi,  §§  4,  5,  164  ;  alternatives  to,
124-5  (cf.  Middle,  excluded)  ;  how
incompatible,  122-3

Affirmative  judgments,  134

'Affirming  the  consequent,'  fallacy  of,
225-6,  346,  354

'  Agreement,'  method  of,  258  n.  ,  263-5,
266-8,  304

'Agreement  and  Difference,  '  joint
method  of,  263-5

'All,1  Formal  meaning  of,  152,  156

Alternatives,  in  judgment,  96,  124-5,
x,  §§  ii,  12,  143-4,  230,  243,  316,
322,  328  ;  in  reasoning,  227,  243


(cf.  Middle,  excluded)  ;  real,  143,
371

Ambiguity,  365-6,  373  n. ;  as  =  Equivo
cation,  distinguished  from  in-
definiteness,  etc.,  ii,  §  8 \  real
and  verbal,  32-3  ;  of  Middle,  q.v.

'Ambiguous  middle,'  fallacy  of.  See
Middle  term

Amphibology,  366

Analogy,  242,  310,  337,  341-2  ;  argu
ment  from,  217,  xxii,  §  4

Analysis,  causal,  see  Causal  analysis  ;
'  logical '  entails  double  falsifica
tion,  iqS  ;  and  real  meaning,  209

Analytic  'judgments,'  xi,  §  ii

Antecedence,  of  cause  to  effect,  278-80

Antecedent,  (a)  in  Hypothetical  Syllo
gism,  225-6

Antecedents,  (b)  in  Causation,  266,
277-8,  290,  296 ;  relevant  and
irrelevant,  are  Formally  indis
tinguishable,  268-70

Ante-dating,  of  truth,  209

Antisthencs,  80  n. ,  84,  118

Apodictic  judgments,  47,  134,  144-5

Applicability,  necessary  to  meaning,
v>  §  6,  59  f. ,  383-4  ;  entails  possi
bility  of  error,  355-7,  383-4.  Cf.
Application,  Law,  Case

Application  (or  use),  8,  13,  25,  32^,.
71-3,  90,  123,  133,  217,  326,  330.
380-4  passim ;  and  denotation,
37  n.;  and  ontological  validity,  54;
of  '  Laws  of  Thought ,'  difficul
ties  of,  x,  passim  ;  of  mathematical
truths,  249  n. ,  320  n.  ;  abstraction
from,  by  Formal  Logic,  6,  18,  24,
51,  70,  78,  261,  383-4,  407-8,  and
passim  ;  determines  meaning,  18,

21-2,  24-5,  JO/.,  129, 131-3, 202,

220,  223,  305/,  310 f.,  321  (and
cf.  Applicability)

Arbitrariness,  in  causal  analysis,  290,
293.  307  /,  317:  in  judgment,
etc.,  23,  31,  66,  74,  96,  120,


411


4I2


FORMAL  LOGIC


726-7,  2°5.  2S  2  f.,  3l6>  346,  368,
378,  392

Archimedes,  391 ;/.

Argument,  ad  baculum,  ad  captandum
gratiam.  ad  hoc,  ad  hominem,  ad
misericordiam,  ad  populum,  359  ;
'  in  a  circle,'  and  in  a  system,  360

Aristophanes,  80  n.

Aristotle,  4  «. ,  u,  20,  iv,  §§/-j,  45  f. ,
46  n,,  47,  64 n.,  66-9  passim,  74,
80  n.,  vii,  §§  4-8 passim,  89,  93,
95-  98,  x,  §  J,  147.  I84.  187-91,
194,  203,  217-8,  235-6,  239,  247,
253-8,  258  n.,  294//.,  345

Arithmetic,  114  n. ,  247,  249  n.,  323

Arrow,  paradox  of  the,  117,  369-70

Assertoric  judgments,  how  distinguished
from  '  categorical,'  144-5,  Z47

Association,  and  causality,  288/1

'  Assumption  of  false  premisses,'  352

Atom,  29,  72,  108,  340-1

Attention,  89  ; selective,  23,  283,  338

Attitude,  mental,  13  n,,  89-91,  93,
101,  131,  138,  143,  147,  148-9

1  Attributive  '  theory  of  predication,  105

Automatism,  338

Axioms,  114,  290,  293,  319  ;  as  postu
lates,  242-6  ;  and  Demonstration,

235  f-
Axioms  as  Postulates,  126  n.,  294  n.

Bacon,  Francis,  qn.,  258-61,  264

'  Barbara,'  183-5,  225,  353

'  Baroko, '  183-5

Beauty,  and  truth,  409  ;  as  value,  2

Becoming,  81,  139. Cf.  Change,  Flux

'  Begging  the  question,'  v.  Petitio
principii

Being,  34,  39,  42,  54,  81,  109 ;
1  necessary,'  147-8  ;  principles  of,
and  logical  principles,  114-7,  anc^
x,  passim  ;  and  Becoming,  81,
139  ;  and  not-being,  xi,  §  5

Bergson,  //.,  236,  339  n.

Berkeley,  85  n. ,  86

Bias,  315,  333,  359-6°

Biology,  56,  338

'  Camestres,'  183,  226

Carroll,  Lewis,  218

Case,  and  '  law. ' Sec  Laws  of  Nature

Case law, analogous to scientific,

320-2

Categorematic,  20

Categorical  judgments,  134,  xi,  passim
Categories, Aristotle's, iv ; Hegel's,

35  n.  ;  Kant's,  276
Causal,  how  distinguished  from  casual,

288,  292,  294,  362-3
Causal analysis, 273-4, 276, 285  f.,


289-90,  292,  294,  303,  313-6  ;  as
purposive,  307  f. ,  320  ;  yields
plurality  of  causes,  306  f.  ;  vs.
synthesis,  281

Causal  efficacy  ( or  'power'),  275«.,288
Causal 'necessity,' 288 f.  ; Hume's
criticism  of,  275  f.  ;  not  a  necessity
of  thought,  xx,  §  5

Causation,  Law  of,  (a)  262,  267,  xix,
xx-xxi ;  its  various  meanings,  297-
298  ;  in  relation  to  applicability,
300-1  ;  to  relevance,  268-71

(b]  as  an  induction  from  experience,
262

(c)  as  =  Uniformity  of Nature, xx,
§§  7,  8  ;  no  guarantee  of  scientific
law,  311  f. ,  362

(d]  as  an  a  priori  axiom,  274-5,  312  '<
neither  explains,  291;  nor  justifies,
291-2  ;  nor  agrees  with  fact,  292

(e)  not a generalization from ex
perience,  287-90  ;  nor  a  '  necessity
of  thought,'  290-3  ;  but  a  postulate,
293-8  ;  or  set  of  postulates, 298-
303;  how  universal  and  independent
of  experience,  294  f.  ; its  practical
value,  xxi,  §  i

Cause,  240,  244-5,  260;  how  'free,'
303  ;  as  complete  ground,  278-80,
307  n.  \  how  true  discriminated
from  false,  362-3 ;  and  'conditions,'
277-8  ;  and  voluntary  motion,  289,
296  ;  and  common-sense,  xx,  §§  2,
3,  298  ;  and  infinite  regress,  296,
299;  and  control,  296-7 ,  298  ;  as
partial,  277-87,  307  f.

Cause  and  effect,  240,  260,  302,  306  ;
identity  of,  274,  278-9,  makes
causation  meaningless,  280-5,  307-
309;  particularity  of,  277-80  ;  reci
procity  of,  230,  300,  xx,  §  o,  346-7.
Cf.  Events

Causes,  plurality  of,  262,  264,  300,
304-5,  347  ;  as  a  product  of
research,  306  f.  ;  as  relative  to
variety  of  interests,  285,  307  f.

Certainty,  359  ;  absolute,  and  verifica
tion,  347  ;  initial,  not  necessary,
234-5,  398  (cf.  Doubt,  Risk)  ;
Plato's  demand  for,  344-5  ;  practi
cal,  404  ;  and  religious  faith,  403-
405  ;  as  subjective,  147.  See  also
Indisputability

Chance,  as  'cause,'  294??.,  296.  Cf.
Contingency

Change,  81,  82  n.,  128,  139,  278-9;
of  'laws  of  nature,'  xxi,  §§  6,
10  ;  contradicts  '  laws  of  thought,'
117,  1 20,  1 30.  See  also  Causation ,
Evolution,  Flux


INDEX


413


Chaos,  273,  299. Cf.  Flux

Choice, 6, 17, 31, 321  ; in  religion,

405. Cf.  Selection
Classification,  107  n.  ;  Formal,  ii,  §  i ;

scientific,  vi  (esp. §§  6-ro], 206,

341  ; and current language,

260
Class-theory  of  predication, iii, § i,

ix,  §3
Cogency,  theoretic, 190,  350,  352  ;  in

relation to real reasoning, 197,

257-8,  270-1
Coherence of thought, and Formal

Logic,  387

Collective  terms,  ii,  §  7,  367
Common  Law,  217,  320-1
Common -sense, 238, 240, 248  ; and

Formal  Logic, 382,  394-5,  408  ;

and philosophy, 117, 165, 273,

275-7,  298

Common  terms,  21,  22,  ii,  §  7,  38
'Composition,'  fallacy  of,  367-8
Comprehension,  of  terms,  iii,  §§  3,  4
Concepts,  12-15,  46,  vii  (esp.  §  9),  370  ;

false, 55  ; as  opposed  to  things,

20  ;  as  instruments  of  thought,  52,

55,  60  ;  not  fixed,  60,  67-8
Conceptualism,  vii,  §§  7-9
Conclusion,  of  syllogism,  779  and  xv,

passim,  xvi,  passim
'Concomitant  variations,"  method of,

258  n.,  "2.64-5
Concrete  terms,  ii,  §  6
'  Confutation/ 357  ;  dialectical,  190
Connotation, 67, 107  ; distinguished

from Subjective Intension and

Comprehension, iii, §§  j,  4  ; of

proper  names,  iii,  §  4
'  Connotative  '  terms,  34,  37
Consequence,  and  sequence,  362-3
Consequent —

(a)  in  Hypothetical  Syllogism,  225-6;
fallacy  of  affirm  ing  the ,  see  Fallacies ,
formal

(b)  in  causation. See  Causation
Consistency,  formal,  and  religion,  401

f. ;  and  science,  400

Context,  and  selection,  23  ;  in  assertions
of  identity,  128-9;  abstracted  from,
10,  24,  42,  221,  373-4,  378  I  de
termines  real  meaning,  gf. ,  15,  18-
19,  24,  27-8,  42,  70,  103-4,  106,
116,  135-6,  138,  199-200,  210,
221,  358,  365-7-  373-4-  378  I  vs.
'  eternity '  of  truth,  380  f.

Contingency,  47, 49  f., 147  f., 294,

?"

Continuum,  370  ;  of experience, 275,

315, in  relation to 'facts,' 283.
Cf.  Flux


Contradiction —

(a)  as  a  Formal  law  of,  96,  no,
ii2,  124,  149;  as  a  principle  of
being,  either  meaningless  or  false,
121-2  ;  as  a  principle  of  thought,
self-contradictory,  123,  132.  See
also  Laws  of  thought,  Self-con
tradiction

(b}  as  a  postulate,  x,  §  if  ;  as  a  law
of  meaning,  132

Contradictory  propositions,  157-9,  357;
terms,  29-31,  1:63

Contraposition,  xiii,  §  3

Contrary  propositions,  157  f . ;  terms,
29-30

Convenience,  in  reasoning,  etc.,  9,  15,
24,  an,  243,  256,  283  f.,  304.
323,  328,  335,  341,  345

Conventions,  '  logical,' 389-90

Converse  proposition,  161

Conversion  of  propositions,  xiii

Convertend  proposition,  161

Copula,  12,  19,  39,  93,  103-5,  H5;
and  'real  existence,'  40,  z>,  §  4

Correlative  terms,  28
/Correspondence,  of  concepts  and  per
cepts, 370  ; theory  of truth, see
Reality,  reproduction  of

'Crocodile'  puzzle,  371

Cross-examination,  189,  364

Dativin,  C.t  86,  197,  206,  255,  315,
333  ;  vs.  Formal  Logic,  v,  §  d?

Deceptiveness,  vs.  Formal  'fallacy,'
350-1

Decision,  of  cases,  affects  '  laws,'  321  ;
of  questions,  378

Deduction,  and  explanation,  343-6  ;
and  fact,  193  f. ,  and  induction,
3I9.  335-6,  342;  of  'laws  of
nature,'  314

Definition,  v,  passim,  vi,  127,  155,
188,  210;  Formal,  traditional  rules
of,  63-4;  'real'  and  'nominal,'
66  f. ,  71;  tautologous,  64;  and
description,  65,  68  «.;  limits  of,
vi,  §  3  ;  in  relation  to  'essence,'
v,  §  J'  64,  69  ;  its  real  nature,
vi,  §  5i  relevant  to  purpose,  70  ;
cannot  arrest  growth  of  actual
meaning,  205,  391-2 ;  rests  on
selection,  35  f. ,  69,  149

Dehumanization  of  thought,  n,  377-9

Demonstration,  4  n.,  47,  64^.,  190-1,
I93»  258  n.,  343.  Cf.  Certainty,
Experience,  Necessity

Denotation,  ambiguity  of,  383  n. ;  and
cf.  Extension

'  Denying  the  antecedent,'  fallacy  of,
225-6,  352,  354


414


FORMAL  LOGIC


Descartes,  315

Description,  65,  68  n.

Desires,  95  f. ,  392

Determination  and  negation,  122

Determinism,  and  'accidents,'  49-50;
and  contingency,  49-50,  148  ;  and
freedom,  244,  371.  Cf.  Contin
gency,  Indeterminism

Dewey,  /.,  405  n.

Dialectic,  4  n. ,  189-91,  196,  258  ft.

Dichotomy,  75,  vi,  §  9

Dicta,  of  syllogism,  184,  xvi,  §  13,  221

Dictionary-meaning  of  terms,  vs.  Mean-
ing-in-use,  //,  §  j,  28,  36,  382-3,
not  fixed,  16.  Cf.  Meaning

Difference,  andequality,  214 ;  '  specific,'
35,  48,  53,  63  ;  and  Identity,  q.v.

'  Difference,'  method  of, 263-7, 268,

305

Differences,  'individual,'  ignored  by
Formal  Logic,  48,  65  ;  their  irrele
vance  always  questionable,  .799,
3*9  f->  342,  366,  384

Dilemma,  xvii,  §  4  ;  forms  of,  227  ;
weakness  of,  227

Dilemma,  of  Formal  Logic,  271  ;  of
the  syllogism,  207

Discovery,  313,  409  ;  and  proof,  203,
261  n.  See  also  Novelty

Disjunction,  in  dilemmas,  227-8

Disjunctive,  forms  of  reasoning,  xvii,
§§  3.  4  :  judgments,  xi,  §  i,  §§  6-8,
144  ;  '  subjectivity  '  of,  xi,  §  8

Distribution  of  terms,  xii,  §  2  ;  in
Syllogism,  xv,  §  2

Distributive  terms,  26,  367

Division,  vi,  §  6  undpassim,  188  ;  cross,
73  ;  dialectical,  190  ;  difficulties
of,  vi,  §  7  ;  fallacy  of,  367-8  ;  vs.
classification,  vi,  §  8

Doctrinairism,  356-7

Dogmatism,  145,  196,  224,  237,  291,
322,  392,  400 ;  as  a  fruit  of
Formal  Logic,  406

Doubt,  141  ;  in  relation  to  real  reason
ing,  144-8,  201-2,  234-5,  245 ;
necessary  for  real  meaning  and

truth, 2OI-2, 2JO-I, 222, 223-4,

247 f. , 252, 258, 270-1  ;  in  re
ligion,  403-5. See  also  Risk

S6£a,  88  n.

Dreams,  98,  108  «. ;  scientific,  341

Education,  influence  of  Formal  Logic

on,  387-8,  395-7
Effect. See  Cause,  and  Event
Efficacy. See  Causal  efficacy
Eleaticism,  140
Elimination,  264,  304
Emotions,  in  assertions,  9,  392


Empiricism, 288-9, 292, 335  ', vs>

apriorism,  346  f.
Energy,  conservation  of,  244
Ends,  44  ;  as  causes,  296
Enumeration,  '  exhaustive,'  253,  235-6;

as unrealizable, 256; 'simple,'

254

Enumerative  propositions,  136

Epimcnidef  puzzle,  371-2

Equality,  axiom  of,  not  necessarily
applicable,  214

Equivocation,  Fallacy  of,  365-6  ;  of
terms,  distinguished  from  verbal
ambiguity,  ii,  §  8

Error,  29,  74,  82  n. ,  88,  94,  146  ».,
147/2.,  197,  244,  274,  282  n.,  318,
322-3,  357,  360,  396-8  ;  its  possi
bility,  essential  to  meaning,  129,
131,  J20,384(andcf.  Doubt,  Risk);
problem  of,  ignored  by  Formal
Logic,  7/.,  lo-n,  93,  3SS.37S-6,
378-9.  381,  392  and  passim  ;  in
premisses,  192-4.  Cf.  Truth

Essence,  85,  247,  368;  and  definition,
46,  63-4,  66  ;  rests  on  selection,
5J-4>  57'  66-70  ;  risks  error,  69

'  Essential '  propositions,  tautologous,
61

Eternity,  of  elements,  333-4 ;  of
thought  and  truth,  39  n.,  175-6,
242,  380-1  ;  means  (a)  everlast
ing,  (£)  changeless,  (c)  'timeless,'
(d)  applicability  at  any  time,  (<?)
'  dated,'  xxi,  §  7

Euclid,  46,  58,  68, 141, 146  n. ,  188,

213.  385

Euler  s  circles,  154

Events,  causal  and  casual,  288,  292,
294,  362-3  ;  control  of,  289,  297-8,
314,  329  ;  existence  of,  a  postulate,
200  ;  Hume's  conception  of,  275  ;
nature  of,  262,  264-6,  272-4,
282 f.,  297-9,  3°S,  3*6  f. ,  362;
prediction  of,  q.v.  ;  regularity  in,
274-6,  289  ;  distinct  from  Uni
formity  of  Nature,  300-1 ;  required
by  law  of  causation,  303  ;  in  re
lation  to  time  and  'eternity,'

324-7
Evidence, real, vs.  Formal 'validity,'

350.  397
Evolution,  and  classification,  57  ;  of

'  Laws,'  (a)  subjectively,  xxi,  §  6,

(b] objectively, xxi, § 10. Cf.

Darwin
Ex  concessis  reasoning,  syllogism  as,

196,  233
Ex  post  facto,  judgments  of  Formal

Logic, 171 f., 194, 220-1, 236,

261,  268-9,  302,  310,  363


INDEX


415


Examinations,  and  Formal  Logic,  390

'Example,'  254-5

4  Excluded  Middle,'  a  Law  of
'Thought,'  76,  x,  passim,  138,
163  ;  stated,  no-i  ;  a  Law  of
Meaning,  132  ;  a  postulate,  x,  §§
8,  10  ;  a  principle  of  thought  or
things,  x,  §  7  ;  criticism  of,  x,
§  7.  Cf.  Alternatives,  Laws  of
Thought

'  Exclusions,'  Bacon's  Method  of,  259,
264

Exhaustion,  as  '  ideal '  of  Induction,
254-6,  260,  353  ;  in  classification,
73-8  passim  ;  not  aimed  at  in
definition,  35

Existence,  real,  and  the  copula,  ix,
§  4 ;  and  scientific  '  fictions,'
340-1

Experience,  29,  46,  89,  133,  142,  254,
256,  262,  271,  276,  299,  341,
408  ;  immediate,  uniqueness  of,
318  ;  and  '  demonstration,'  193,
203,  210-1,  219  /,  224,  234-5,
245-6  ;  and  postulation,  126-7,
241-50,  293-4,  296-7,  305,  313  ;
control  of,  289,  330  ;  organization
of,  131,  139,  282  f.\  as  a  flux,
139,  266,  272-5,  282-4',  in  relation
to  Definition,  71  ;  to  assertions
of  Identity,  128 ;  to  '  laws  of
nature,"  239-40,  292,  302,  322,
329,  335  (cf.  Induction) ;  to  real
reasoning,  246-50  passim  ;  infer
ence  from,  Formal  paradox,  247^! ;
facts  about,  vs.  '  facts  '  of,  272-4.
Cf.  Empiricism,  Fact,  Flux

Experiment,  71,  120,  242,  244,  270,
283,  286,  305,  311,  314,  319-20,
335>  392>  4°7  >  ideal,  19,  and  see
sub  Judgment  ;  and  observation,
xxii,  §  2

Explanation,  and  Bacon's  '  Forms,'
260;  of  'laws  of  nature,'  310,

343f-

Extension  and  intension,  of  terms,  Hi,
72,  107  n.,  137,  163;  inverse
variation  of,  iii,  §  2  ;  relation  to
theory  of  propositions,  ix,  §  3,
152,  163,  176,  382,  383  n.

Extra-logicality  of,  context,  150  ;  infer
ence,  174,  194-5,  201,  220,  280,
376-7  ;  judgment,  88  n.,  144,  174,
377  ;  material  truth,  94  ;  meaning,
1 06,  209,  xxiv,  §§  5,  6  ;  modality,
149  ;  psychical  concomitants  of
thought,  13,  95

Fact,  175,  193,  216,  234,  238  n. ,  288,
314  ;  and  law,  xviii,  §  4,  243,  xxi,


§§  4>  S  (cf-  '  Laws '  of  Nature,
'  Case  ') ;  and  Theory,  see  Theory;
human  selection  and  making  of,

257-8, 266-^1, 282-5, 290, 2O3,

317-8,  339  (cf.  Selection);  reason
ing  from,  xvi,  §  12,  231-2,  xviii,
§§  4-7,  xix,  passim  ;  Formally  in
explicable,  247-8,  279-80.  Cf.
Experience,  Induction

Faculties,  276

Faith,  and  doubt,  404-5

Fallacies,  xxiii

(a)  Formal, defined, 349  ; their
differentia 'psychological,' 351;
their  notion  futile,  xxiii,  §  2  f.

(b)  'Material,' xxiii, § 4; their
Formal  inconsequence,  355

(c)  '  Semi-logical,'  xxiii,  §  5  ;  defects
in  their  classification,  365

(d)  Miscellaneous,  xxiii,  §  6

'  False  Cause, '  Fallacy  of,  362-3

Falsification,  of  the  given,  by  science,
282  (cf.  Fact,  Selection) ;  of
thinking,  by  Formal  Logic,  409

Fatalism,  fallacy  of,  371

Fictions,  methodological  and  scientific,
52,  133,  247  f.,  288,  311,  314,
370,  399  ;  unscientific  and  useless,
of  Formal  Logic,  7  f . ,  15  f.,  30,
326,  389  f.,  409  ;  and  Hypothesis,
340-1

'Figure  of  Speech,'  Fallacy  of,  366,
368-9

Figures,  of  syllogism,  180

Finality,  40  ;  not  a  scientific  ideal,  60,
67-8,  347,  400-1  (cf.  Progress,
Ideals  of  Knowledge)

Fixity,  of  belief,  as  a  formal  ideal,  397  ;
injurious  to  Religion,  403  f . ;  of
concepts,  an  illusion,  60  (cf.
Finality)  ;  of  meanings  of  words,
a  fiction,  16  f . ;  of  nature,  63  (cf.
Flux)

Flux,  80-2,  83  n. ,  120,  133,  139,  240,
266,  273,  282 f.,  297,  323,  330  ;
its  continuity,  275  ;  its  uniqueness,
317-8 ;  not  unknowable,  87,  128-
130,  133

'Form,'  in  Bacon,  259-61  ;  in  Plato,
81

'  Form  '  and  '  Matter  ' —

(a)  in  metaphysics,  83  n.,  148
(3)  of  thought,  the  distinction  be
tween,  i,  §  2,  5-6,  42,  60,  185,
378-9  ;  it  breaks  down  owing  to
possible  ambiguity  of  middle  term,
200-r,  220  ;  and  to  absence  of
meaning,  363,  373  ;  is  really  one
between  form  and  meaning,  5,
*35<  I36»  *38>  202.  200,  221-2,


FORMAL  LOGIC


356,  xxiv,  §§  j,  6.  Cf.  Meaning,
Formal  Logic,  Material  truth
'  Formal,'  and  '  formal,'  4  n.
Formal  Logic,  defined,  6,  374  ;  and
Hegelism,  119-21  ;  and  Life,  8,
283,  378,  392-3,  xxv,  passim  ;
and  '  Psychologic,'  392-3  ;  and
Psychology,  xxiv,  §  10,  394  ;  and
Science,  q.v.  ;  and  Symbolic
Logic,  390-2;  its  abstractions  from
Application  (use),  q.v.  ;  from
Context,  q.v.  ;  from  Interest,  14,
96,  125  ;  from  inferring,  88  n.,
208  ;  from  judging,  88  //.,  175;
from  real  truth,  see  Material  truth  ;
from  real  meaning,  see  Form  and
Matter  of  thought ;  from  purpose,
70,  74,  201-2,  x,  §  o,  309,  374
(cf.  Purpose,  Selection)  ;  from  re
sponsibility,  10-11,  144,  221,  267,
293*  3J5>  374  '<  from  time  rela
tions  of  thought,  39  n. ,  279  ;
difficulties  of,  i,  §  3  ;  failure  of,
i,  §  4,  2fj  ;  impossibility  of  its
ideals,  63,  173-4,  318,  377  (cf.
Ideals  of  Knowledge)  ;  incon
sistency  of,  i,  §  6,  viii,  §  4,  144,
172,  355,  xxiv,  §§  2,  3  ;  injurious
intellectually,  xxv,  §§3,  4  ;  to
mankind,  xxv,  §  6  ;  to  religion,
xxv,  §  5  ;  its  uses  as  a  business,
389  n. ;  as  an  institution,  385;
as  a  game,  xxiv,  §  9,  394  ;  as
'  mental  training, '  xxiv,  §  8  ;  as
examinable  nonsense,  390  ;  as  a
pseudo-science,  xxiv,  §  7  ;  verb-
ality  of,  4-6,  10,  ii,  §  4,  66,  /j>j,
172,  199,  230,  252,  307  «...  327-
328,  354,  363-4  (cf.  Words)  ;
leading  to  meaninglessness,  202,
209,  xxiv,  §§  j,  6,  398  (cf.  Form,
Meaning)

'  Four  terms,'  fallacy  of,  181,  352,  354
Freedom,  moral,  244-5,  295>  3°3  '<  of
thought  and  research, vs. Ideals
of  Formal  Logic,  321-4,  398-409
Function,  biological,  as  selective,  338
Fundamentum  divisionis,  73,'  75,  77
Future,  the,  and  postulation,  295

Galileo,  315

Generalization, 255  ; real  and  sham,

279-80 ;  as  a  basis  of  Induction,

232,  xxii,  §  4,  307  f.
Genus, 125, 131  ; proximate, 46  ;

summum,  35,  37,  47  f. ,  54,  65-;  and

species,  35, 36,  v  and  vi  passim,

255.  337

Geometry,  31,  114  n.,  244. Cf.  Euclid
Gibson, W.  R.  Boyce,  4  n.,  358  n.


Given, dissection  of  the, 282-7, 293,

308,  330,  339
'Goat-stag,'  95  n.

God,  129  n.,  244,  245,  295,  296,  330
Good,  as  value,  2; 'Idea'  of, 64  ;/.,

344-5

Grammar, 14
Ground,  in  causation,  278-80,  307  n.  ;

in  relation  to  consequence,  229-30

Habits,  of  organisms,  331-3  ;  of  things,
330-1  ;  as  changeable,  333-5

Hallucinations,  109

Hegel,  35  «. ,  123,  140  n.

Heraclitus,  80,  315

'  Heresy,"  405

Hume,  210,  239,  273-6,  283,  288,  292

Huxlev,  T.  H.,  193

Hypothesis,  96,  247-50,  310,  317,  320,
337,  xxii,  §  3,  399,  400  ;  and
doubt,  140-1,  299

Hypothetical —

(a)  judgment, 134, 141-2  ; of  am
biguity, 140  -  i  ; subjectivity of,

142-3

(b)  Forms of reasoning, xvii  ;
rules of, xvi, §§ 2, 3  ; express
logical  dependence  as  well  as  real
doubt,  229

Idealism,  83  n.

Ideals,  '  philosophic,'  of  Knowledge,
59-60,  63,  64  n.,  76,  78,  96,  113,
173-4,  203,  223,  227,  250,  261,
270-1,  30^  f.,  344-5.  347-8<  349.
377,  388  ;  vs.  ideal  of  science,
323,  xxv,  §  3,  400

Ideas  (see  Concepts)  ;  Theory  of,  vii  ;
in  Aristotle,  vii,  §§  4,  5,  46  n.  ;  in
Plato,  vii,  §§  2,  3,  §  5,  140,  344-5.
377  ;  according  to  Conceptualism,
vii,  §  7  ;  to  Nominalism,  vii,  §  6  ;
to  Realism,  vii,  §  5  ;  criticism  of,
vii,  §§  8,  9

Identity —

(a)  absolute,  makes  '  law  of  identity '
unmeaning,  118,  120,  122,  128,
149,  342  ;  of  cause  and  effect,
makes  causation  unmeaning,  278-
281,  286

(b}  Formal,  and  change,  117, 120-1 ;
how  distinguished  from  difference,
119-21  ;  of  Middle  Term  in  syl
logism,  cannot  ensure  identity  of
meanings,  199-201  (cf.  354  n. ;  and
Middle  Term);  absence  of,  does
not  necessitate  a  non  sequitur,^^,
361-2  ;  as  purely  verbal,  80,  121,
322-3

(c)  real,  and  similarity, 128  f. ; in


INDEX


417


relation  to  personal  context,  149-
150  ;  in  relation  to  differences  in
'  cases,'  127-9,  202<  245>  249>  302,
342;  does  not  exclude  change,  ibid. ;
is  made,  128,  302  ;  means  '  equiva
lence  for  a  purpose,'  25,  127-9,
249  ;  involves  relevance,  ibid. ,
115-6,  302-3,  307  n.\  is  never  self-
evident,  120,  127,  202,  245,  249,
302,  342

(d]  of  ratios  (  =  analogy),  341-2

(e)  Formal  law  of,  x,  §  5  and  passim,
237  ;  as  basis  of  '  absolute  truth,'
380-2,  sacrifices  meaning  to  indis
putability,  382-4

(/)  as  a  postulate,  x,  §§  8-10, 199,  380  ;
and  significant  assertion,  382-4

IgnoratioElenchi,  357-60  ;  and  Formal
syllogism,  195

'  Illicit  process,'  fallacy  of,  182,  186,
226,  352-3,  365

Imagery,  mental,  85-6

Immanence,  of  the  Ideas,  82  f.

Imperative,  10,  95

Impersonal  propositions,  104  *

Import  of  propositions,  ix

Incoherence,  mental,  361

Indefinables,  individuals,  35,  48,  65,
68  ;  '  simple  '  qualities,  65  n.

Indefinite  propositions,  136,  153

Indefiniteness,  of  meaning,  371-3  ;  dis
criminated  from  ambiguity,  27  n.

'  Independence,'  of  ideals  of  thought,
398  ;  of  truth,  380-2  (cf.  Truth)

Indeterminateness,  of  meaning,  dis
criminated  from  ambiguity,  27  n.

Indeterminism,  371  ;  and  action,
134  «.,  295,  303

Indisputability,  as  =  meaninglessness,
61,  66,  123,  133,  202,  261,  286,
381-2.  Cf.  Certainty,  Doubt,
Intuition,  Risk

Individual,  29,  46,  v,  §  4,  50,  53,  65,
255  ;  as  indefinable,  35,  48,  65,
68  ;  as  primary  reality,  46 n.,  57,

83
Induction —

(a)  theories of, xix ; in Aristotle,
§ 2 ; in Bacon, §  3  ; in Mill,
§§  4,  5,  261  n. ,  his  '  Methods  '  of,
see(c] ;  their  Formalism,  §  i  ;  and
failure,  252,  377

(b]  as  problem  of (i) finding true
premisses, (ii) reasoning from
facts,  xviii  ;  defined,  231-2  ;  '  per
fect,' its imperfections, 239  f.  ;
'  by  simple enumeration, ' 254-6,
258, 260, 353 ; and deduction,
270-1, 319, 335-6,  342, 344-6;
and demonstration, 247 ; and


generalization,  xviii,  §  4,  258,
307  f.  ;  and  intuition,  xviii,  §  3  ;
and  postulation,  232,  xviii,  §3 ;  in
relation  to  doubt,  252  (cf.  Doubt,
Risk)  ;  to  '  fact,'  xviii,  §§  6,  7  and
passim,  xix,  passim
(c)  Mill's  Methods  of,  xix,  §§  4-7  ;
stated,  263-5  •  aim  to  formu
late  actual  scientific  procedure  and
to  yield  formal  proof,  261-2  (cf.
251-2)  ;  their  presuppositions,
262  ;  their  limited  applicability,
264-5,  269  ;  compared  with  Bacon's
Method,  264 ;  transformed  by
the  notion  of  relevance,  268-
271

Infallibility,  in  judgment,  see  Indis
putability  ;  of  '  Intuitive  Reason,'
253  ;  of  Words,  as  a  postulate,
259-60

Inference,  12,  127,  146-7,  xiv,  191,
308,  397 ;  defined,  165  ;  actual
and  'logical  connexion,'  175;
'  immediate,' xiii,  §  if.,  165,  174;
its  '  necessity '  ( '  validity  ' )  no
guarantee  of  truth,  177-8  ;  its
notion,  xiv,  §  2  ;  purely  formal,
1 66,  171  ;  embodies  a  systematic
confusion,  172,  176 ;  really  un
meaning,  xiv,  §  5,  203,  214-5,
220,  252,  376  (cf.  Validity)  ;
paradox  of,  combines  psycho
logical  novelty  and  '  logical
necessity,"  88  n. ,  167,  xiv,  §  4,
376  ;  '  psychological '  factors  in,
166-72  ;  '  extra  -  logical, '  88  n. ,
173-4,  220,  280,  376-7  ;  rela
tion  to  judgment,  165

Infima  species,  48,  54,  65

Infinite  Regress,  of  '  proof,'  xviii,  §  2,
235;  of  'cause,'  296,  299

Instruments,  of  knowledge,  16,  60

Intellectualism  vs.  psychologism,  241-6

Intelligence,  and  adaptation,  330-3

Intension  of  terms,  iii  ;  subjective,
distinguished  from  Comprehension
and  Connotation,  iii,  §§  3,  4

Intention,  of  assertor,  33,  101,  105-6,
134  f.,  137,  142,  144-6,  326,  372

Interaction,  44

Interest,  abstraction  from,  14,  96,  125  ;
determines  relevance,  23,  256 ;
necessary  to  meaning,  14  ;  in
causal  analysis,  277-8,  296,  311,
315  ;  variety  of,  causes  '  plurality
of  causes,'  285

Intolerance,  400-7

Intuition,  as  basis  of  induction,  xviii,
§  3,  232,  257-8  ;  as  provisional,
291  ;  as  psychological,  237-8,

2  E


418


FORMAL  LOGIC


241-2,  257  ;  in  relation  to  instinct
and  obsession,  236-7,  257

Irrationalism,  395

Irrelevance,  6,  23,  59,  68  n.,  70,  77,
93-4,  iof,  172,  195,  216,  224,
247,  260,  261  n.,  279,  284,  299,

3°4.  3IS-  321,  326.  378,  408-9  J
of  antecedent  events  always  ques
tionable,  268-71  ;  of  differences
always  questionable,  127-8,  799,
249,  310  f.,  342,  366,  384;  can
not  be  detected  by  Formal  Logic,
JJ7-6o

'  Irrelevant  Conclusion. '  See  Ignoratio
Elenchi

James, William,  297,  315,  366

Jokes,  in  relation  to  Formal  Logic,  73,
94,  106,  368,  373  ;  to  monism,
282  n.

Jones,  E.  E.  C.,  382,  383  n.

Joseph,  H. W.  B. ,  57,  258  n.

Jowett,  B.,  15

Judgment,  analytic  and  synthetic,  xi,
§  ii  ;  and  sentence,  19-20,  143-4;
significant,  involves  risk  of  error,
131,  338-9 ;  but  not  necessarily
'hypothetical,'  142;  'valid,'  as
tautology,  118  ;  and  inference,
165  ;  contradictory  definitions  of,
9,  IO-H,  96-7,  375  ;  dehumaniza-
tion  of,  destroys  meaning,  9-10,
96,  125,  135,  137,  140,  144,  150,
380-4;  'Forms'  of,  134,  really
verbal,  134-3  >  formal  objectivity
of,  99  ;  suspense  of,  124-5  ;  as
answer  to  a  question,  9,  96,  124-5,
201-2  (cf.  Doubt)  ;  as  '  arbitrary,'
see  Arbitrariness  ;  as  a  choice,  96,
143-4,  405  ;  as  a  compound,  viii,
§  2  ;  conveys  novelty,  8j-8 ;
refers  to  reality,  viii,  §  5  ;  is  true-
or-false,  viii,  §  4,  142,  375  ;  is
truth-claim,  viii,  §  i,  142,  171,
375  ;  is  unit  of  thought,  12-14,
33.  79,  89-91,  93,  383  «.,  391  f.  ;
aiming  at  totality  is  unmeaning,
roo-2,  125,  130,  282  (cf.  Monism,
Relevance,  Universe  of  diction)  ;
is  formally  'extra-logical,'  88  n. ,
144,  174,  377

Kant,  4472.,  149,  276-7,  283

Keynes,  /.  N. ,  37

Kinds,  21,  v,  §§  2,  3  and  passim^  46,
51,  57,  83,  86,  107  n.,  205-7,
211,  255,  367

Knowledge,  scientific,  is  not  reproduc
tion  of  the  given,  282-5  ;  and
Being,  81  ;  and  'opinion,'  8 if.,


88»., 147, 190; incompatible
with  inference, 173-4 (c^- Ideals
of  Knowledge)  ; theory  of,  234,
238  ».,  337,  339.  385.  387.  389
Knox,  H. V.,  1472.,  200  n.

Language,  and  thought,  40,  46

Law,  and  particular  laws,  311  f.

Laws  of  Nature,  xxi,  141,  205,  259  ;
defined,  xxi,  §  2  ;  subjective  or
objective,  327-8  ;  and  cases,  50  /. ,
116,  131,  206-8,  210-1,  216-20,
230-40,  245-50,  255,  271,  xxi,
§§  4-  5-  326-8,  331-2,  335-6,  342,
353.  35l>-7'  383~4>  398,  407-8;
and  explanation,  343  f.  ;  their
eternity,  a  confusion,  xxi,  §  7,  and
prejudice,  323-4 ;  their  justifica
tion,  240  ;  as  habits  of  nature,
331-5  ;  as  man-made,  240,  xxi,
§§  3-6,  339  ;  exceptions  to,  327-
328  ;  why  they  work,  xxi,  §  9.  Cf.
Causation,  Induction

Laws  of  Thought —

(a)  Formal, x ; stated, x, § i  ;
their  meaning, rn  ; their  'self-
evidence, '  132; as  'principles  of
thought ' are nonsense, and as
'  principles  of  being  '  conflict  with
facts, 112-3, IJ7> I2I» I23f.,
126  f. ,  131,  133,  x,  passim, xxiv,
§  25 (see Contradiction (a), Ex
cluded  Middle,  Identity)

(b]  as  postulates, x,  §§  8-13, xviii,

§5

Liar,  a  fallacy,  372-3

Lies,  94,  98

Limitation,  conversion  by,  162

Lincoln,  A.,  364-5

Locke,  85  n.

Logic,  ambiguity  of,  i  ;  derivation
of,  i  ;  definition  of,  1-3  ;  origin
of,  in  practical  need,  xvi,  §  2

Lotze,  H.,  356

Magic,  296,  326,  330

Major  Premiss,  180,  184,  204,  210-1

Major  Term,  179-80,  182

Malthus,  197

Man,  43  n.,  210-1

'  Many  Questions,'  fallacy  of,  363-4

Material  (  =  real)  truth,  abstracted  from
in  Formal  Logic,  3  f.,  42,  60,
374,  378,  382  ;  indispensable  in
actual  reasoning,  75,  137,  203,
213,  269-70,  J7<?-9,  392-3 1  vs.
'logical  necessity,'  xv,  §5,  xvi,
§  4  ;  ostensibly  provided  by  '  in
ductive  logic,'  231  ;  but  not  really,
252,  260-7 f.  Cf.  Form  and  Matter


INDEX


419


of thought, Formal Logic, In
duction

Materialism,  43

Mathematics, 47, 54, v,  §9, 64, 68,

114  «.,  147  «.,  237,  240,  249  n.,
314  n. , 320  n., 386  ;  not  a  free
creation,  58-9

Matter —

(a)  the indestructibility of, 244  ;
immutability  of,  333-5

(b)  and  Form,  in  metaphysics,  83  n.,
148

(c)  of  thought,  see  Form  and  Material
truth

Meaning,  actual  and  verbal,  5,  13,  17-
18,  21-6,  31,  39,  43  n. ,  92,  103-9,
122-3,  152-3,  155,  157,  161-4,
174-7,  209-11,  220-2,  224,  229,
260-1,  302,  363,  365, 372-3,  381-4
(cf.  Form  and  Matter  of  thought) ;
ambiguity  of,  q.v.  ;  indefmiteness
of,  q.  v.  ;  indeterminateness  of,
q.v . ;  '  logical,'  as  abstraction  from
real  meaning,  see  Form  and  Matter
of  thought ;  real,  ibid,  (and  supra,
Meaning,  actual  and  verbal) ;
and  application,  q.v.  ;  and  con
tent,  q.v. ;  and  formal  defi
nition,  61,  62,  66-8,  71,  391  ;
and  flux,  80,  89-90,  128  ;  and
mental  images,  85-6  ;  and  novelty,
167,  xiv,  §  4,  391-2  ;  and  person-  I
ality,  17,  134,  149-50,  202,  208,  |
372-3  ;  and  purpose,  ibid. ,  and
see  Purpose  ;  and  risk,  see  Indis
putability  ;  and  symbols,  390-1,
408  ;  of  propositions,  iii,  §  i,
ix  ;  of  proper  names,  iii,  §  4  ;
of  terms,  in  extension  and  in
tension,  iii,  §§  2,  3  ;  (of  words)
in  relation  to  the  '  law  of  identity ,'

115  (cf. Identity)  ; failure of,  in
self-contradiction,  112,  123, 132  ;
limitation of, see Universe of
diction  ; particularity of, 5-6  ;
more  fundamental  as a problem
than  truth,  160,  379

Metageometry,  146  ?i. ,  244  (cf.  Euclid)
Metaphysics  (or  Ontology),  35,  38  n. ,
39-40,  43,  44  n.,  J2-J,  79-83.
99,  109,  114,  122,  129  n. ,  147-
148,  194,  223,  272-3,  281,  283,
314,  319,  328-9,  340
Middle  Term,  of  Syllogism,  179-80,
257;  'Undistributed,1  fallacy  of,
181,  185,  226,  351,  352-3;  i
'  ambiguity '  of,  xvi,  §§  6,  7,  220,
352,  354,  356 ;  breaks  down
distinction  between  form  and
matter,  200;  as  an  abstraction,  202


Mill, /. S., 4  n. , 37, 257 n.,  xix,

§§4-7.  289  «-.  305.  367
Minor  Premiss,  180,  184
Minor  Term,  of  syllogism,  179-80,  182
Modality, 134  ; ambiguities of, xi,

§  9  ;  subjectivity  of,  xi,  §  10
Modus,  (i)  ponens,  (ii)  tollens,  (iii)  tol-

lendo  ponens,  (iv)  ponendo  tollens,

225-6
Monism,  43,  100,  129  n.,  282  n.,  344,

398, 400, 402. Cf. Reality, in

judgment

Moods,  of  syllogism,  180  ;  valid,  xv,  §3
Motion, 70, 369-70 ;  voluntary, and

cause,  289,  296  ;  of  thought,  397
Motives,  in  judgment,  96,  171

Names,  abstract  and  concrete,  20-4  ;
proper,  34,  iii,  §  4  ;  unique  only
while  applied,  20-1,  24.  Cf.
Terms

Narrow-mindedness,  357,  387
Nature,  Laws  of,  see  s.v.  ; Uniformity

of,  see  sub  Causation,  Induction
Necessity —

(a)  causal,  see  Causal  necessity
(6) 'logical,'  47, 126, 779, 185-6,
190-1, xvi, § 5, 208-9, 220-4,
257. 397  I  its ambiguity, 144-9,
xiv, § 3  ; 'immediate,' as a
guarantee  of  falsity,  146  n.
(c]  as  a  feeling,  168
Negation, 29-31, 64, 123, 134, xi,
§  4, 162  ; infinite, 131  f., 164  ;
subjectivity  of,  xi,  §  5  ;  conversion
by,  163
Negative premisses, a fallacy, 182,

186  ;  terms,  ii,  §  10
Newman,  J ,  H. ,  207  n,
Newton,  2,  187,  197,  315-6
Nominalism,  83  n. ,  vii,  §§  6-9
Nonsense. See  Laws  of  Thought
Non-sequitur,  fallacy  of,  361-2
Non-syllogistic  forms  of  reasoning,  xvi,

§n

Not-being,  30  n. ,  35,  36,  81

NoOs,  65-6,  253-4  ;  and  pseudo-Nous,

235-7

Novelty,  71-2,  87-8,  167,  xiv,  §  4,
177-8,  191,  xvi,  §§  8,  10,  207,  315,

3?6<  385-  39!-2.  409
Number,  245. Cf.  Arithmetic  4

O  propositions,  conversion  of,  162-3
'  Objectivity,'  53;  formal,  of  judgment,
99  ; of nature, xxi, § 8  ; and
'  subjectivity,'  xvi,  §§5,  8,  and  10,

*45.  313-4.  324

Observation,  238,  310,  337,  407  ;  and
experiment,  xxii,  §  2


42O


FORMAL  LOGIC


Obversion  of  propositions,  162

Occam, William  of,  85

Omniscience, vs. meaning, 100-2,

279-80

1  Opinion. ' See  Knowledge
Opposition  of  propositions,  xii,  §  5
'  Organon,'  Syllogism  as  an,  203
Origin,  of  'axioms/  241  /,  314

Pain,  B.t  173  n.

Parmenides,  81

Part,  and  Whole,  367-8,  378.  Cf.
Selection

Particular,  Judgments,  134,  xi,  §  3  ;
Premisses,  a  fallacy,  182,  186  ;
Propositions,  134,  152,  xii  and  xiii,
passim

Particulars,  argument  from,  xvi,  §  12
(and  cf.  Universals)

'  Partition,'  73

Passivity,  mental,  and  activity,  316,
337-9''  category  of,  41,  a
scientific  blunder,  44

Past  and  Future,  210,  239,  308

Paul,  St.,  405  n.

Pedantry,  407-8

Perception,  97,  and  see  Sense-perception

Periodic  Law,  333

Permutation,  162,  164,  184

Persecution,  as  practical  expression  of
Formal  '  ideals,' 402-6

Personality,  and  meaning  (cf.  Mean
ing,  Intention) ;  in  relation  to  judg
ment  and  inference,  10-11,  127,
144,  149-50,  166,  172,  175,  208,
221,  267,  293,  314 f.,  332,  J<fo/ 1
multiple,  108  ;;.

Persons,  44,  276  ;  names  of,  20  f.

Petitio  principii  (  =  Question-begging),
202,  210-r,  214-5,  233-4.  26S  «••
292,  360-1  ;  Formal  syllogism  as
a,  174,  203-4,  xvi,  §9,  220

Philosophy,  and  Common -sense,  see
s.v.  ;  and  science,  in  Plato,  345

Plasticity,  of  meanings,  391-2

Plato,  4  n. ,  30  n. ,  46  n. ,  47,  64  n. ,
74,  79-84,  87,  88  n. ,  114  n.,  115
n.,  120,  130,  140,  147,  189-90,
196,  315-  344-5.  377.  4°8

'  Plato  or  Protagoras  f 82  71.

Play,  of  thought,  13  n.,  341

Plurality,  of  causes  (see  Causes)  ;  of
hypotheses,  400 ;  of  principles,
345  ;  of  senses,  32,  135-6,  155,
366  ;  distinguished  from  real  am
biguity,  27-8 ;  of  sciences,  345,
400  ;  of  things,  330  ;  of  universes
of  diction,  108

Poe,  E.  A.,  373  n.

Poincare~,  H.,  237


Porphyry,  49

Positive  terms,  ii,  §  10

Possibility,  144  f.

Post  hoc  ergo  propter  hoc,  362-3

Postulates,  10,  50,  69,  95-6,  126,  x,
§§  8-13,  185,  199,  mj.xvJH.  §j,
246-7,  250,  xx,  §§  6-8,  304-5,
312-3,  346,  356,  392,  399

Postulation,  of  true  premisses,  179,  185-
186,  191,  xvi,  §  4,  231,  xviii,  §  2,
270  ;  blocks  scientific  progress,
235,  398  ;  necessitates  infinite  re
gress,  234,  (cf.  Ideals)

Practice,  279,  281,  345  n.

Predicables,  v

Predicate,  and  Subject,  see  s.v.  ;
1  quantification '  of,  xii,  §  4,  164

Predication,  significant,  see  Significant
Assertion  ;  and  reality,  52  f.  ;
theories  of,  105-9,  380  f.  ;  in  re
lation  to  the  flux,  80,  128  f.  (cf.
Judgment,  Proposition)

Predication-puzzle,  its  solution,  129  f.

Prediction,  238,  254,  284,  289,  295,
308,  318,  326,  329,  331-2

Premisses,  179-80  and  xv,  passim  ;  and
Conclusion,  relation  between,  xvi,
§§  5"10.  361  ;  '  material '  truth  of,
see  Postulation

Prichard,  H.  A.,  88  «.

Privative  terms,  ii,  §  10

Probability,  350-1,  398. Cf.  Modality

Problematic  judgments,  134,  xi,  §§  9,  10

Progress,  of  science,  56,  60,  67,  224,

234-5.  305.  323.  347.  399  (cf.
Proof,  Finality)

Proof,  absolute,  necessitates  infinite
regress,  232-4  ;  scientific,  is  pro
gressive,  234-5,  241-7,  270-1

'  Proof,'  vs.  Verification,  xx,  §  6

Properties,  46,  47-8,  53-4,  57,  60- 1,
63-4.  69

Propositions,  12,  14,  z'.r,  xii  ;  analysis
of,  iii,  §  i,  ix,§  2,  383  n. ;  interpre
tation  of,  ix,  §  3  ;  forms  of,  xii,  §  3  ;
opposition  of, xii,  §  5  ;  verbality  of,
32  n.,  135,  137,  144,  146-7

Protagoras,  115  n.,  228

Proximate  Genus,  46

'  Psychologic,'  392-3

Psychology,  in  relation  to  Logic,  i,  5>
9  f . ,  13  n. ,  14,  19,  29,  88  n. ,  89,
95-6,  104,  106,  113,  126,  132,
137-8,  145,  157,  164,  165-6,  168,
170,  xiv,  §  4,  176,  197-8,  201,
203,  205,  208-9,  213-5,  218-9,
221,  224,  229,  237-8,  241-6,  254,
269,  289,  291,  313,  338,  345,
35L  356-  358,  361,  364.  372-3-
374-7*  39'-3>  396,  4°5


INDEX


421


Purpose,  in  relation  to  meaning  and
truth,  2,  25,  38  n.,  69-72,  74,  x,
§  9,  128-9,  130-2,  137,  139,  142,
160-1,  169-70,  198,  199,  201-2,
207-8,  223-4,  230,  249,  254,  256-
257,  269,  277,  283,  293,  307-8,

3IS«  325.  331-  338,  374
Purposes,  Cross,  30,  38,  108

Qualities  (or  attributes),  20,  22,  23,  Hi,
passim,  107  n. ;  as  a  'category/
41,  43,  65  ».,  316,  331,  383  n.\
of  propositions,  134,  152,  162

Quantification  of  the  predicate,  xii,  §  4;
of  the  subject,  136,  153.  Cf.  Dis
tribution  of  terms

Quantity,  a  category,  41  ;  of  terms,
134,  xi,  §  3,  xii,  §§  i,  2,  163

Quaternio  terminorum,  iSi,  352,  354

Question-begging,  and  -raising,  210-1,
215;  by  symbols  in  'inductive'
methods,  265  n.  ;  by  verbal  identi
ties,  202.  Cf.  Petitio  principii

Questions,  real,  22,  imply  real  doubt,
66,  404  (cf.  Indisputability);  real,
verbal  and  unmeaning,  363-4  ;  in
relation  to  assertion,  9,  31,  95-6,
210,  248,  363,  370,  378

Radio-activity,  333-41  340-1

Rationalism  and  irrationalism,  395  ;
and  religion,  401  f . ;  vs.  empiri
cism,  293,  312  (cf.  Intellectual-
ism)

Realism,  logical,  vii,  §§  5,  <?,  85  n.,  90

Reality,  52,  55,  57,  71,  81,  128,  139,
143'  I94>  3X5.  33°  '<  total,  as
'cause'  and  effect,  278,  280,  282,
and  change,  326  (cf.  Change) ;  and
forms  of  thought,  330  ;  kinds  of,
aimed  at  in  judgment,  97  f.,  107-
109  ;  reproduction  of  ( '  copying  ' ),
/53«.,  117.  ^33-  299.  J*&,  328,
340,  370  ;  Tn"  judgment  always
partial,  100-2,  125,  146  n.,  174,
284

Reason,  its  biological  value,  332

Reasoning,  i,  j>,  88  n, ,  223;  real,  as
experimental,  234-3,  32°.  335-6,
339,  342  (cf.  Inference,  Risk,
Thinking,  Validity)

Reciprocation,  of  cause  and  effect,  q.v.

Reduction,  of  syllogism,  xv,  §  4

Relation,  '  category'  of,  41,  43  ;  forms
of,  134,  xi,  §§  6-S

Relative  terms,  ii,  §  9  (p.  28)

Relativity,  28,  31,  70

Relevance,  8,  23,  31,  70,  74,  77,  115-
116,  121,  125,  127-8, 173-4,  216-7,
221,  256-8,  260,  262,  267,  280-1,


284,  286-7,  307  ».,  315,  340,  342,
377-9.  384  i  effect  on  Formal
Logic,  268-71

Religion,  395,  399,  401-6,  xxv,  §  j

'  Residues,'  method  of,  263-5

Responsibility  of  assertor,  132

Revelation,  403

Riddles  of  the  Sphinx,  280  n.

Right  and  wrong,  as  values,  2

Risk  involved  in  real  judgment  and
reasoning,  23,  69,  121,  128-9,
131,  216,  230,  241,  243,  245,
248,  254,  270,  285,  286-7,  292>
302,  304,  325,  318,  320,  335,  338,
342,  347*  362,  378-80,  383-4,
308,  399,  406,  408-0

Roscellinus,  85

Rules  of  the  syllogism,  180,  xv,  §  2

Russell,  Hon.  B.  A. W.,  373  n.

Sagacity,  254,  257  f.,  269,  314  f.

'Scaffolding,'  scientific,  and  fact,  340

Scepticism,  100,  250,  275,  322,  347

Schopenhauer,  44  n.

Science,  3-4,  6,  41,  50,  JJ-60,  62-6,
72,  74,  78,  86-7,  96,  107  «.,  125,
190-1,  292-4,  205,  211,  224,  235,
243-6,  266-71,  273,  278,  281-4,
296,  298-9,  303,  305-0,  311-3,
317-8,  321-3,  327-8,  329-30,
332,  339,  34i,  347,  S62,  386-7,
392,  394-6,  399-401 1  Aristotle's
theory  of,  46,  igo,  235-6,  247  ;
Bacon's,  xix,  §  3  ;  Plato's,  344-5

Selection,  17,  23,  35,  54,  68  n.,  69,  74,
77,  100-3,  I27.  JSO-S,  139-40,
144,  169-70,  173  f.,  195  f-.  2°6.
216,  242-8,  253  f.,  257-8,  260-
27 1,  277-8,  282-6,  290,  293-4,  296,
299,  304,  307-8,  315,  329,  335,
338-9,  362,  377-9,  384,  392

Self,  43,  245

Self-contradiction,  real  and  verbal,
41  f.,  112,  122-3,  272>  285,  372  ;
of  judgment,  as  necessary,  100,
118  ;  as  impossible,  119  ;  failure
of  meaning  in,  132.  See  also
Contradiction

Self-evidence,  64,  126-7,  132,  145-6,
232,  234,  240,  244-5,  262,  291,
293,  301,  344-7  (cf.  Indisput
ability,  Nous)

Sensations,  not  passive,  338

Sense-organs,  as  selective,  315,  338

Sense-perception,  55,  80,  89,  253,  270,
338,  370

Sentence,  replaces  judgment  in  Formal
Logic,  96,  134-5

Sidgwick,  A.,  1 1 6,  J0$-o,  214,  249,
280,  405  n.


422


FORMAL  LOGIC


Significant  Assertion, 129  f. , 201-2,

282, 380  (cf.  Meaning) ; law  of,

xxiv,  §  6

Similarity,  and  identity,  128
Singular  judgments,  134  ;  propositions,

154  ;  terms,  ii,  §  7
Society,  and  Formal  Logic,  322,  xxv
Socrates,  79  n. ,  80,  189-90,  359
'Some,'  in  Formal  Logic,  136  n. ,  156
Sophists,  4  n.,  189
Sorites,  370-1
Space,  58-9,  68-9,  146  n. ;  perceptual

and  conceptual, 370 (cf. Euclid,

Geometry)
Species,  in  logic,  see  Kind,  Genus  ;  in

biology,  83  ; fixity  of,  j<5,  86,  206

(cf.  Darwin)

Specific  Difference,  35,  46-7,  53,  63,  65
Spencer,  H.,  193,  354  n.
Stout,  G.  F.,  358  «.,  380
Struggle  for  Existence,  Reason  in,  332  ;

of  scientific  theories,  363
Studies  in  Humanism,  50  n. ,  143  n.,

295  n. ,  303  n.
Subaltern,  Moods, 183  ;  propositions,

157  f. ,  162

Sub-contrary  propositions,  157  f.
Subject,  and  predicate,  12,  ii,  $5,  33,

39, 42-3, 93, 103-6, 139, 149,

153-9,  161, 177  f-,  180,  212,  282  ;

and  substance,  42-3, 46  n.  ;  quanti
fication  of,  136
Subjectivism,  Hume's,  276
Subjectivity,  317,  346
Substance,  as  a  'category,'  40 f.,  54;

as  '  first '  and  '  second,'  42-3,  46  n.
Substratum,  54

Success,  in  reasoning,  315,  362,  383-4
Summum  Genus,  35,  37,  47  f.,  54,  6j
Supposal,  13  n.

Suppositio. See  Universe  of  diction
Syllogism,  Formal —

(a)  12,  66, 166,  177,  xv,  xvi, 261,
xvii  ;  Aristotle's  definition  of,  xvi,
§  3  ;  his  discovery  of,  187  f. ;  Dicta
of, xvi, § 13  ; figures of, 180,
their  '  reduction,'  xv,  §  4  ;  moods
of,  xv,  §  3  ;  rules  of,  180,  xv,  §  2,
352  ;  structure  of,  xv,  §  i ;  rela
tion  to  deduction,  64  n.,  344-5  ;  to
'Formal  Fallacy,'  xxiii,  §§  3-5

(b)  as  indistinguishable  from  Fallacy
of  Accident,  200  n.,  355-6  ;  as  fail
ing  to  distinguish  between  forward
thinking and reflection, 194-6,
209  ; as a  Petitio  principii, see
s.v.  ;  its  general  futility,  xvi,  §  10,
14  ; its  indifference  to  '  material  '
truth, 179, 186  ; its '  necessity '
dependent  on  verbal  '  identity '  of


middle  term  (see  Identity  (b),
Middle  Term  and  Necessity,  'logi
cal')  ;  its  postulation  of  true  pre
misses  involves  an  infinite  regress
(see  Postulation)

(c) actual meaning of, gives up
'cogency' and 'necessity,'  202,

2O()-II, 221-2, 245

Symbolic  Logic,  390-2
Symbols,  are  not  meanings,  390-1
Symonds, II''.  S.,  41  n.
Syncategorematic,  20
Synthetic  judgments,  xi,  §  u
System,  99,  270,  323,  343-4  ;  absolute,
377.  398  f.

Tautology,  61,  122,  149-50,  214,  299,
302; in 'valid'  judgment, 118  ;
and  inference,  220,  280,  286
Taylor,  A.  £.,  280  n.

Terms,  ii,  Hi,  127  ;  verbality  of,
«•  §§  3>  4  (cf-  Meaning)  ;  of
syllogism,  see  Major,  Middle,
Minor

Theology,  vs.  Religion,  401-6

Theory,  and  fact,  50-1,  72,  231,  249  f. ,
317  ;  and  practice,  96  «.,  279,
305,  399-400,  408  ;  and  verifica
tion,  346

Things,  19,  20,  22-3,  32-5,  43-4,  46,
89,  in,  115,  .r,  §4,  121, 123,  128,
130,  260,  296,  298-9,  328  ;  habits
of,  330,  xxi,  §  10  ;  made  by  selec
tion,  139,  282

Thinking,  actual,  relation  to  logic,  i,  8,
31,  210-1,  214,  220-2,  271,  308,
318,346-7,  377-9, 384-6,  389,  391,
392,  304  ;  as  purposive,  selective
and  personal,  127

Thought,  see  Inference,  Judgment,
Laws  of  Thought,  Thinking;  pure,
213,  388,  393

Time,  a  category,  41  ;  conceptual  and
perceptual,  370  ;  abstraction  from,
39  n.,  209,  279,  326,  323-9

'  Timelessness, '  of  Laws  of  Nature,
326.  Cf.  Eternity

Transcendence,  of  Plato's  Ideas,  82  f.

Truth,  2,  4  n.,  25,  59,  60,  72,  93,  99,
125,142,  205,  214,  320,  360,  371,
397,  404  ;  a  priori,  q.v.  ;  absolute,
vs.  scientific,  224,  242,  322-3,  345,
408,  and  see  Certainty,  absolute,
initial ;  formal,  see  material  ;
mathematical,  see  mathematics  ;
'necessary,'  4  (cf.  Necessity,
'logical');  new,  see  Novelty;
partial  and  total,  146  n.  (cf.
Monism,  Omniscience,  Universe  of
diction) ;  real,  and  error,  dis-


INDEX


423


tinction  between,  is  vital  to  logic,
3,  10  f.,  i,  §§  4,  5,  viii,  §  4,  381,
but  abstracted  from  in  Formal
Logic,  93,  350,  375,  381  (cf.
Truth -claim)  ;  scientific,  see
Science  ;  universal,  its  origin  in
postulation,  xviii,  §  5  (cf.  Uni-
versals} ;  'unknowable,'  373  n.  ;
and  the  flux,  80,  133 ;  and
system,  q.v.  ;  of  premisses,  see
Postulation  ;  satisfaction  as  differ
entia  of,  196  ;  test  of,  see  Truth-
claim,  Verification  ;  as  coercive,
402, 405  (cf.  Cogency) ;  as  eternally
existent,  and  antinomy  of  infer
ence,  173-4,  376-7  (cf.  Eternity)  ;
v/as  reproduction  of  reality,  see

Reality

Truth-claim  (=  formal  'truth'),  7,  9,
59,  93,  viii,  §j,  99,  142,  145,
171,  375  f-  38i-2\  test  of,  51,
59,  222,  243,  339-40.  Cf.
Verification

Understanding,  378

Uniformity  of  nature.  See  Causa
tion  (c)

Uniqueness,  20-1

Unity,  as  (a)  all-inclusive,  (b]  exclusion
of  irrelevance,  270  ;  as  (a)  datum,
(£)  an  'ideal,'  confused  in  philo
sophy,  281-2  ;  of  universe,  a
tautology,  279-80.  Cf.  Monism

Universal  judgments,  134,  A-Z,  §  j ;
and  postulation,  xviii,  §  5

Universal  ('A')  propositions,  152,
158,  161  f.,  163  f.

Universals,  12,  15,  38  n.,  jo,  55,  mi,
§  i,  259,  329-30,  380  f.  ;  in
relation  to  particulars,  vii,  xvi,
§  12,  xviii,  §§  J,  6,  320,  383.
Cf.  Laws  of  Nature

Universe,  30,  34,  47,  99 ;  as  '  true
cause,'  makes  causation  unmean
ing,  280,  307  n.  ;  of  diction  (sup-
positio],  30-1,  ix,  §4.  Cf.  Reality,
in  judgment,  Judgment


Unreality,  a  sort  of  'reality,'  97,  109
Use. See  Application
Uselessness,  and  '  higher  '  knowledge,
329  «.,  389  n.

Vaihinger,  H.,  340  n.

Valid  Moods,  xv,  §  3

Validity,  'formal*  (or  'logical'),
212,  217,  239,  318,  343,
349'  374-  376,  381  ;  and  real,
confused,  223-4  ;  as  an  Ideal,  in
compatible  with  relevance,  269-70;
is  unattainable  and  undesirable,
219-20,  234-5,  258,  342,  346-8,
352,  j>77  ;  in  practice,  is  purely
verbal,  358-9  ;  its  absence,  proves
nothing  as  to  real  value  of  argu
ments,  350,  352  (cf.  Inference,
notion  of)  ;  '  objective  '  (or  onto-
logical),  53-5

Value,  logical,  2,  7,  202,  221,  241,
243  f.,  272,  297,  314,  343,  348,
3SO-2.  359  I  of  knowledge,  258

Values,  2,  44  ;  new,  315

Verbalism,  in  Formal  Logic,  4-6  and
passim.  Cf.  Form  and  Matter
of  thought,  Identity,  Inference,
Meaning,  Validity

Verification,  vs.  Formal  '  proof,'  234-5,
243-6,  319,  336,  339,  341,  xxii,
§  6,  399.  Cf.  Truth-claim,  test  of

Voluntarism,  346

Wallace,  A.  R.,  360

Whole  and  part,  367-8,  378

Will,  96,  283,  378  ;  to  experiment,
242  ;  to  infer,  168-9  ;  to  learn,
242,  309  ;  to  live,  selective,  338  ;
to  think,  124-6  (cf.  Judgment,
Reality,  Selection,  Relevance)

Words,  1 6-1 8,  42,  89-91,  115-6  ;  their
meaning  as  Platonic  '  Ideas,'  80  f.

Worship,  and  utility,  329  n.

Xenophon,  80  n.
Zeno,  117,  369


THE END


Printed  by  R.  &  R.  CLARK,  LIMITED,  Edinburgh.


BY  DR.  F.  C.  S.  SCHILLER.

Svo. Ss.  6d.  net.

HUMANISM

PHILOSOPHICAL ESSAYS


CRITICAL  REVIEW. — "These  are  essays  of  the  deepest
interest,  written  in  the  clearest  language,  in  a  most  alluring  style,  and
packed  with  thought.  We  find  Mr.  Schiller  most  attractive  when  our
dissent  is  clearest  and  most  vehement.  In  fact,  whether  we  agree  or
disagree,  he  commands  our  attention,  and  for  the  time  rules  our  think
ing.  It  is  pleasant  to  find  out  that  philosophy  may  also  be  literature,
and  that  grace  of  form  and  simplicity  of  expression  are  not  alien  to
deep  thought."

DAILY  NEWS. — "This  new  and  fascinating  work  is  written
with  all  Mr.  Schiller's  well-known  brilliancy  and  wit.  .  .  .  To  the
thousands  of  educated  men  who,  without  being  specialists,  are  crying
out  for  a  philosophy  which  shall  really  face  the  facts  of  life,  and  shall
not  be  content  with  either  merely  bolstering  up  orthodoxy  or  con
temptuously  dismissing  religion  as  '  Philistine,'  this  book  and  the
movement  it  signifies  will  be  welcome — the  more  so,  the  more  its
true  import  is  understood."

SPECTATOR. — "This  is  not  only  a  book  which  all  philosophic
students  will  be  benefited  by,  although  they  may  disagree  with  its
doctrine,  but  one  which  the  '  ordinary  reader '  cannot  fail  to  enjoy."

MIND.—"  The  growing  number  of  those  who  are  interested  in
seeing  the  new  philosophical  movement  develop  and  declare  itself
will  be  glad  of  this  collection  of  essays.  It  is  true  that,  as  Mr.
Schiller  admits  and  regrets,  the  book  is  not  a  systematic  treatise,  but
it  is  chiefly  his  opponents  who  at  the  present  stage  will  complain  of
that.  No  doubt  a  systematic  treatise  would  offer  more  opportunities
to  the  fault-finder,  but  it  might  easily  also  be  less  alive  and  stirring."

MACMILLAN  AND  CO., LTD.,  LONDON.


BY  DR.  F.  C.  S.  SCHILLER.

Svo. ios.  net.

STUDIES IN HUMANISM

HIBBERT  JOURNAL. — "The  essays  contained  in  this  volume
constitute  a  valuable  addition  to  the  literature  of  the  controversy  with
which  they  deal.  .  .  .  Certain  aspects  and  bearings  of  Pragmatism
are  treated  here  for  the  first  time  with  a  fulness  which  one  has
desired  to  see  ;  especially  the  question  of  the  relation  of  logic  to
psychology  is  faced  with  characteristic  boldness  and  honesty.  We
are  once  more  impressed  by  Dr.  Schiller's  merits  as  a  writer  on
philosophical  subjects  ;  passages  might  be  selected  in  many  parts  of
the  book  as  conspicuous  examples  of  lucid  and  incisive  exposition.
.  .  .  An  attractive  and  stimulating  book — marked  by  acuteness  and
lucidity."

ATHENAEUM.— "The  most  systematic  and  closely-reasoned
contribution  to  the  literature  of  this  subject  which  has  appeared  for
many  a  long  year."

REVIEW  OF  THEOLOGY  AND  PHILOSOPHY.— "Viz
cannot  do  better  than  exhort  even  those  who  do  not  agree  with  Dr.
Schiller  to  read  his  book.  They  may  find  many  of  his  sayings
irritating,  but  not  a  few  also  will  set  them  thinking.  And,  in  any
case,  they  will  read  a  very  clever  and  entertaining  book."

8vo. ios.  net.

RIDDLES OF THE SPHINX

A  STUDY  IN  THE  PHILOSOPHY  OF  HUMANISM

CONTENTS.

BOOK  I. — Chap.  i.  Introductory.  2.  Agnosticism.  3.  Scep
ticism.  4.  Pessimism.  BOOK  II. — Chap.  5.  Reconstruction.
6.  The  Method  of  Philosophy.  7.  The  Metaphysics  of  Evolu
tion.  8.  Formulas  of  the  Law  of  Evolution.  BOOK  III. — Chap.  9.
Man  and  the  World.  10.  Man  and  God.  n.  Immortality.
12.  Conclusion.  Appendix  I.  Freedom  and  Necessity.  II.
Choice.  III.  Science  and  Religion.

MACMILLAN  AND  CO.,  LTD.,  LONDON.


WORKS  ON PHILOSOPHY

CREATIVE  EVOLUTION.  By  Prof.  HENRI  BERGSON.
Translated  by  ARTHUR  MITCHELL,  Ph.D.  8vo.  ios.net.

LAUGHTER :  An  Essay  on  the  Meaning  of  the  Comic.
By  Prof.  HENRI  BERGSON.  Authorised  Translation  from  the
Sixth  Edition  by  CLOUDESLEY  BRERETON,  L.  es  L.  (Paris),
M.A.  (Cantab.) ;  and  FRED  ROTHWELL,  B.A.  (London).  Extra
Crown  8vo.  35.  6d.  net.

A  CRITICAL  EXPOSITION  OF  BERGSON'S  PHILO
SOPHY.  By  J.  M'KELLAR  STEWART,  B.A,  D.Phil.  8vo.
55.  net.

By  Professor  HENRY  SIDGWICK
THE  METHODS  OF  ETHICS. 8vo. 8s.  6d.  net.

OUTLINES  OF  THE  HISTORY  OF  ETHICS  FOR
ENGLISH  READERS.  Crown  8vo.  35.  6d.

PHILOSOPHY :  Its  Scope  and  Relations. 8vo. 6s.  6d.  net.

LECTURES  ON  THE  ETHICS  OF  T.  H.  GREEN,  MR.
HERBERT  SPENCER,  AND  J.  MARTINEAU.  8vo.
8s.  6d.  net.

LECTURES  ON  THE  PHILOSOPHY  OF  KANT,  AND
OTHER  PHILOSOPHICAL  LECTURES  AND  ESSAYS.
8vo.  i  os.  net.

By  Professor  HARALD HOFFDING

A  HISTORY  OF  MODERN  PHILOSOPHY  :  a  Sketch  of
the  History  of  Philosophy  from  the  Close  of  the  Renaissance  to
our  own  Day.  Translated  by  B.  E.  MEYER.  Two  vols.  8vo.
155.  net  each.

THE  PROBLEMS  OF  PHILOSOPHY.  Translated  by  GALEN
M.  FISHER,  and  a  Preface  by  WILLIAM  JAMES.  Globe  Svo.
45.  6d.  net.

THE  PHILOSOPHY  OF  RELIGION.  Translated  by  B.  E.
MEYER.  8vo.  125.  net.

MACMILLAN  AND  CO.,  LTD.,  LONDON.


WORKS  ON PHILOSOPHY

IDOLA  THEATRI:  A  Criticism  of  Oxford  Thought  and
Thinkers  from  the  Standpoint  of  Personal  Idealism.  By  HENRY  STURT.
8vo.  IDS.  net.

PERSONAL  IDEALISM.  Philosophical  Essays.  Edited  by
HENRY  STURT.  8vo.  los.  net.

THE  MEDIEVAL  MIND.  A  History  of  the  Development  of
Thought  and  Emotion  in  the  Middle  Ages.  By  HENRY  OSBORN  TAYLOR.
Two  vols.  8vo.  2is.  net.

THE  PRINCIPLE OF INDIVIDUALITY AND VALUE.

Being  the  Gifford  Lectures  for  1911. By  BERNARD  BOSANQUET,  LL.D.,
D.C.L. Svo. i  os.  net.

THE  ORIGIN  AND  DEVELOPMENT  OF  THE  MORAL

IDEAS. By EDWARD WESTERMARCK, Ph.D. Two  vols. Svo.
145.  net  each.

A  SHORT  HISTORY  OF  ETHICS  —  GREEK  AND
MODERN.  By  REGINALD  A.  P.  ROGERS,  Fellow  and  Tutor  of  Trinity
College,  Dublin.  Crown  Svo.  33.  6d.  net.

THE  PHILOSOPHY  OF  GASSENDL  By  G.  S.  BRETT.  Svo.
IDS.  net.

HISTORY  OF  PHILOSOPHY. With  Especial  Reference  to

the  Formation  and  Development  of  its  Problems  and  Conceptions. By
Dr.  W.  WINDELBAND. Translated  by  J.  H.  TUFTS. Svo. 173.  net.

HISTORY  OF  THE  PROBLEMS  OF  PHILOSOPHY. By

PAUL  JANET  and  GABRIEL  SKAILLES. Translated  by  ADA  MONAHAN
and  Edited  by  HENRY  JONES,  LL.D. Two  vols. Svo. IDS.  net  each.

PHILOSOPHICAL REMAINS OF R. L. NETTLESHIP.

Edited,  with  Biographical  Sketch,  by  Prof.  A. C. BRADLEY. Second
Edition. Extra  Crown  Svo. 8s.  6d.  net.

LECTURES  ON  THE  REPUBLIC  OF  PLATO. By  R.  L.

NETTLESHIP. Edited  by  G.  R.  BENSON. Extra  Crown  Svo. 8s.  6d.  net.

A  HANDBOOK  OF  MORAL  PHILOSOPHY.  By  Rev.
HENRY  CALDERWOOD,  LL.D.  Third  Edition.  Crown  Svo.  6s.

A  REVIEW  OF  THE  SYSTEMS  OF  ETHICS  FOUNDED
ON  THE  THEORY  OF  EVOLUTION.  By  C.  M.  WILLIAMS.
Crown  Svo.  125.  net.

MACMILLAN  AND  CO.,  LTD.,  LONDON.


UNIVERSITY  OF  TORONTO
LIBRARY


Acme Library Card Pocket

Under  Pat.  "  Ref.  Index  File."
Made  by  LIBRARY  BUREAU
