Space and Time in Contemporary Physics: An Introduction to the Theory of Relativity and Gravitation (Moritz Schlick (Henry L. Brose, trans.), 1920)
Public domain. Sourced from Internet Archive: pre-1931 edition scan (https://archive.org/details/spacetimeinconte00schlrich). Schlick's philosophical introduction to relativity — the Vienna Circle's founding statement on physics.
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

==============================================================================

Engineering
Library


SPACE AND TIME

IN  CONTEMPORARY  PHYSICS


AN INTRODUCTION  TO


THE  THEORY  OF
RELATIVITY  AND  GRAVITATION


BY


MORITZ  SCHLICK

U
PROFESSOR OF PHILOSOPHY AT ROSTOCK UNIVERSITY


RENDERED  INTO  ENGLISH  BY

HENRY  L.  BROSE
WITH  AN  INTRODUCTION  BY

F.  A.  LINDEMANN

PROFESSOR OF EXPERIMENTAL PHILOSOPHY IN THE UNIVERSITY OF OXFORD


NEW  YORK
OXFORD UNIVERSITY PRESS

AMERICAN  BRANCH:  35  WEST  S*ND  STREET
LONDON,  TORONTO.  MELBOURNE,  AND  BOMBAY

1920 5 ;,  :;'  vi  *'


Engineering
JUbrary


COPYRIGHT,  1920

BY THE

OXFORD  UNIVERSITY  PRESS

AMERICAN BRANCH


Printed  in  U.  S.  A.


INTRODUCTION

PROBABLY  no  physical  theory  in  recent  times  has  given
rise  to  more  discussion  amongst  philosophers  than  the
principle  of  relativity.  One  school  of  thought  agrees  that
physicists  may  well  be  led  to  recast  their  notions  of  space
and  time  in  the  light  of  experimental  results.  Another
school,  however,  is  of  opinion  that  these  questions  are  no
concern  of  the  physicists,  who  should  make  their  theories  fit
the  philosophers '  conceptions  of  these  fundamental  units.

The  theory  of  relativity  consists  of  two  parts,  the  old
special  theory,  and  the  more  recent  general  theory.

The  main  philosophic  achievement  of  the  special  theory
of  relativity  is  probably  the  recognition  that  the  description
of  an  event,  which  is  admittedly  only  perfect  if  both  the
space  and  time  co-ordinates  are  specified,  will  vary  accord-
ing to  the  relative  motion  of  the  observer ;  that  it  is  impos-
sible to  say,  for  instance,  whether  the  interval  separating
two  events  is  so  many  centimetres  and  so  many  seconds,  but
that  this  interval  may  be  split  up  into  length  and  time  in
different  ways,  which  depend  upon  the  observer  who  is
describing  it.

The  reasons  which  force  this  conclusion  upon  the  physi-
cist may  be  made  clear  by  considering  what  will  be  the  im-
pression of  two  observers  passing  one  another  who  send  out
a  flash  of  light  at  the  moment  at  which  they  are  close  to-
gether. The  light  spreads  out  in  a  spherical  shell,  and
it  might  seem  obvious,  since  the  observers  are  moving
relatively  to  one  another,  that  they  cannot  both  remain  at
the  centre  of  this  shell.  The  celebrated  Michelson-Morley
experiment  proves  that  each  observer  will  conclude  that  he


4 19J55 •


iv  Introduction

does  remain  at  the  centre  of  the  shell.  The  only  explana-
tion for  this  is  that  the  ideas  of  length  and  time  of  the  one
observer  differ  from  those  of  the  other.  It  is  not  difficult  to
find  out  exactly  how  much  they  differ,  and  it  may  be  shown
that  there  is  only  one  set  of  transformations,  the  Lorentz-
Einstein  transformations,  which  account  for  the  fact  that
each  observer  believes  himself  to  be  at  the  centre  of  the
spherical  shell.  It  is  further  a  simple  matter  of  geometry
to  show  that  these  transformations  are  equivalent  to  a
rotation  about  the  axis  at  right  angles  to  the  relative  veloc-
ity and  the  time.  In  other  words,  if  the  world  is  regarded
as  a  four-dimensional  space-time-manifold,  the  Lorentz-
Einstein  equations  imply  that  each  observer  regards  sec-
tions at  right  angles  to  his  own  world-line  as  instantaneous
times.  He  is  quite  justified  in  doing  so  since  the  principle
of  relativity  asserts  that  the  space-time-manifold  is  homa-
loidal.  There  is  no  more  intrinsic  difference  between  length
and  time  than  there  is  between  length  and  breadth.

The  main  achievement  of  the  general  theory  of  relativity
has  causd  almost  more  difficulty  to  the  school  of  philoso-
phers, who  would  like  to  save  absolute  space  and  time,  than
the  welding  of  space  and  time  itself.  Briefly  this  may  be
stated  as  the  recognition  of  the  fact  that  it  is  impossible  to
distinguish  between  a  universal  force  and  a  curvature  of
the  space-time-manifold,  and  that  it  is  more  logical  to  say
the  space-time-manifold  is  non-Euclidean  than  to  assert
that  it  is  Euclidean,  but  that  all  our  measurements  will
prove  that  it  is  not,  on  account  of  some  hypothetical  force.
Perhaps  a  simple  analogy  may  make  this  clearer.  Suppose
a  golfer  had  always  been  told  that  all  the  greens  were  level,
and  had  always  found  that  a  putt  on  a  level  green  proceeded
in  a  straight  line.  Now  suppose  he  were  playing  on  a
strange  course  and  found  that  a  ball  placed  on  the  green
rolled  into  the  hole,  that  any  putt  ran  in  a  spiral  and  finally


Introduction  v

reached  the  hole.  If  he  were  sufficiently  imbued  with  the
conviction  that  all  greens  are  and  must  be  level,  he  might
conclude  that  there  was  some  force  attracting  the  ball  to  the
hole.  If  he  were  of  an  inquiring  turn  of  mind  the  golfer
might  try  another  make  of  ball,  and  possibly  quite  different
types  of  balls  such  as  tennis  balls  or  cricket  balls.  If  he
found  them  all  to  behave  in  exactly  the  same  way,  though
one  was  made  of  rubber,  another  of  leather,  and  another
filled  with  air,  he  might  reasonably  begin  to  doubt  the  as-
sumption that  there  was  a  mysterious  force  acting  on  all
these  balls  alike  and  begin  to  suspect  the  putting-green.

In  gravitational  phenomena  we  are  confronted  with  an
analogous  case.  Anywhere  at  a  distance  from  matter  a
body  set  in  motion  continues  on  a  straight  course.  In  the
neighbourhood  of  matter,  however,  this  course  is  deflected.
All  bodies,  whether  large  or  small,  dense  or  gaseous,  behave
in  exactly  the  same  way  and  are  deflected  by  the  same
amount.  Even  light,  which  is  certainly  as  different  from
matter  as  two  things  can  well  be,  obeys  the  universal  law.
Are  we  not  therefore  bound  to  consider  whether  our  space-
time-manifold  may  not  be  curved  rather  than  flat,  non-
Euclidean  rather  than  Euclidean?

At  first  sight  it  might  appear  that  there  must  be  an  easy
way  to  settle  the  question.  The  golfer  has  only  to  fix  three
points  on  his  putting-green,  join  them  by  straight  lines,  and
measure  the  sum  of  the  three  angles  between  these  lines.
If  the  sum  is  two  right  angles  the  green  is  flat,  if  not,  it  is
curved.  The  difficulty,  of  course,  is  to  define  a  straight  line.
If  we  accept  the  definition  of  the  shortest  line,  we  have
carried  out  the  experiment,  for  the  path  of  a  ray  of  light  is
the  shortest  line  and  the  experiment  which  determines  its
deflection  may  be  read  as  showing  that  the  three  angles
of  the  triangle — star — comparison  star — telescope — are  not
equal  to  two  right  angles  when  the  line  star-telescope


vi  Introduction

passes  near  the  sun.  But  some  philosophers  appear  not  to
accept  the  shortest  line  as  the  straight  line.  What  defini-
tion they  put  in  its  place  is  not  clear,  and  until  they  make  it
clear  their  position  is  evidently  a  weak  one.  It  is  to  be
hoped  they  will  endeavour  to  do  this,  and  to  explain  the  ob-
served phenomena  rather  than  adopt  a  merely  negative
attitude.

This  translation  of  Schlick's  book  should  interest  a  wide
circle,  especially  amongst  those  who  are  concerned  with  the
general  conceptions  rather  than  the  details.  It  would  jus-
tify all,  and  more  than  all,  the  trouble  that  has  been  ex-
pended on  it,  if  it  served  to  render  philosophers  more  con-
versant with  the  physicist's  point  of  view  and  to  enlist  their
co-operation  in  the  serious  difficulties  in  modern  physics,
which  yet  await  solution.

F.  A.  LINDEMANN.
CLAEENDON  LABORATORY,

OXFORD.
March,  1920.


AUTHOR'S PREFACE TO  THE SECOND
EDITION

THE  second  edition  of  this  book  differs  from  the  first
chiefly  in  Chapters  II  and  IX,  which  are  entirely  new
additions.  The  second  chapter  gives  a  brief  account  of  the
'  special  '  theory  of  relativity.  It  will  probably  be  welcome
to  many  readers.  It  seemed  advisable  not  to  assume  the
reader  to  be  acquainted  with  the  earlier  theory  since  it  has
appeared  that  many  have  acquired  the  book,  who  are  quite
unfamiliar  with  the  subject.  The  book  itself  gains  con-
siderably in  completeness  by  this  addition,  as  it  now  repre-
sents an  introduction  to  the  whole  set  of  ideas  contained  in
the  theory  of  relativity,  i.e.  to  the  special  theory  as  well  as
to  the  general  theory.  The  beginner  need  not  seek  an
entrance  to  the  rudiments  of  the  former  from  other  sources.

Chapter  IX  of  the  present  edition  is  also  quite  new,  and
cannot  be  omitted  in  a  description  of  the  fundamental  no-
tions of  the  theory  of  relativity.  It  develops  the  highly  sig-
nificant ideas  of  Einstein  concerning  the  construction  of  the
cosmos  as  a  whole,  by  which  he  crowned  his  theory  about
two  years  ago,  and  which  are  of  paramount  importance  for
natural  philosophy  and  for  our  world-view.  The  essential
purpose  of  the  book  is  to  describe  the  physical  doctrines
under  consideration  with  particular  reference  to  their  im-
portance for  our  knowledge,  i.e.  their  philosophic  signifi-
cance, in  order  that  the  relativity  and  gravitation  theory  of
Einstein  may  exert  the  influence,  to  which  it  is  justly  en-
titled, upon  contemporary  thought.  The  fact  that  the  sec-
ond edition  has  rapidly  succeeded  the  first  is  welcomed  as
an  indication  of  a  general  wish  to  imbibe  the  new  ideas  and
to  strive  to  digest  them.  The  book  again  offers  its  help  in
this  endeavour.  May  it  be  of  service  in  bringing  this  goal
ever  nearer.

I  owe  Professor  Einstein  my  hearty  thanks  for  giving  me
many  useful  hints  as  in  the  first  edition.

MORITZ  SCHLICK.
EOSTOCK,  January  1919.


PREFACE  TO THE  THIRD EDITION

SINCE  the  appearance  of  the  second  edition  the  physical
theory  which  is  expounded  in  the  book  has  been  brilliantly
confirmed  by  astronomical  observations  (v.  page  65).  Gen-
eral interest  has  been  excited  to  a  high  degree,  and  the
name  of  its  creator  shines  with  still  greater  lustre  than  be-
fore. The  fundamental  importance  of  the  theory  of  rela-
tivity is  beginning  to  be  recognized  more  and  more  on  all
sides,  and  there  is  no  doubt  but  that,  before  long,  it  will  be-
come an  accepted  constituent  of  the  scientific  world-view.
The  number  of  those  who  are  filled  with  wonder  at  this
achievement  of  genius  has  increased  much  more  rapidly
than  the  number  of  those  who  thoroughly  understand  it.
For  this  reason,  the  demand  for  explanations  of  the  under-
lying principles  of  the  theory  has  not  decreased  but,  on  the
contrary,  is  growing.  This  is  shown  by  the  fact  that  the
second  edition,  although  more  numerous  than  the  first,  be-
came exhausted  more  rapidly.

The  present  edition  varies  from  the  previous  one  only  in
small  additions  and  other  slight  improvements.  I  have
endeavoured  to  meet  the  wishes  which  observant  readers
have  expressed  to  me  personally  or  in  writing.  I  hope  that
the  book  will  now  somewhat  better  fulfil  its  good  purpose
of  leading  as  far  as  possible  into  the  wonderful  thought-
world  of  the  theory  of  relativity.  Among  those  to  whom  I
am  indebted  for  suggestions,  I  wish  to  express  my  special
thanks  to  Professor  E.  Cohn,  of  Strassburg  (now  at  Ros-
tock). MOEITZ  SCHLICK.

ROSTOCK,  January  1920.


BIBLIOGRAPHICAL NOTE

KEFEBENCE  may  be  made  to  the  following  books  dealing
with  the  general  theory  of  relativity:

A.  S.  Eddington. Report  on  the  Relativity  Theory  of

Gravitation. Fleetway  Press.

A.  S.  Eddington.  Space,  Time,  and  Gravitation.  Camb.
Univ.  Press.  (In  the  Press.)

An  elementary  account  is  given  in :

Erwin Freundlich. The Foundations of Einstew's

Theory  of  Gravitation  (trans,  by  Henry  L.  Brose).

Camb.  Univ.  Press.
1  Albert  Einstein. The  Special  and  General  Theory  of

Relativity  (trans,  by  R.  W.  Lawson). Messrs.  Methuen.
Henry  L.  Brose. The  Theory  of  Relativity. An  Essay.

B.  H.  Blackwell,  Oxford.

The  most  important  German  book  on  the  subject  is :
Hermann  Weyl. Raum,  Zeit  und  Materie. Jul  Springer,

Berlin. This  gives  all  the  details  of  the  mathematical

reasoning.

Einstein's  epoch-making  papers  are:

'Grundlagen  der  allgemeinen  Relativitatstheorie.' Ann.

d.  Physik,  4.  Folge. Bd.  49,  S.  769.
.  Grundlagen  des  allgemeinen  Relativitdtsprincips. J.  A.

Barth. Leipzig. 1916.

'Erklarung  der  Perihelbewegung  des  Merkur  aus  der
allgemeinen  Relativitatstheorie.'  Sitzungsberichte  der
Jconigl.  preuss.  Akad.  der  Wissenschaften,  Nov.  1915.
Bd.  xlvii.


x  Bibliographical  Note

The  evolution  of  the  ideas  which  are  discussed  in  Chapter
X  of  the  present  book  may  be  traced  in  the  following  works,
in  addition  to  those  mentioned  in  the  text :
Jevons. The  Principles  of  Science. Macmillan  &  Co.
H. Poincare. La Valeur de la  Science. Paris. — La

Science  et  V  Hypothese. Paris.
,  Ernest  Mach. Erkenntnis  und  Irrtum. Leipzig. — Die

Analyse  der  Empfindungen.
Jos.  Petzoldt. Das  Weltproblem. Leipzig.
Aloys  Miiller. Das  Problem  des  absoluten  Raumes  und
seine Beziehung zum allegemeinen Raumproblem.
Vieweg,  Braunschweig.

Moritz Schlick. Allegemeine Erkenntnislehre. Jul.
Springer,  Berlin.

I  wish  to  take  this  opportunity  of  thanking  Mr.  J.  W.  N.
Smith,  M.A.,  of  Christ  Church  (now  at  Eugby)  for  the
great  care  he  has  taken  in  revising  the  proof-sheets.  Pro-
fessor Schlick  and  Dr.  Wichmann  kindly  compared  the
translation  with  the  original,  and  made  a  number  of  help-
ful suggestions.  I  am  indebted  to  Miss  Olwen  Joergens  for
the  English  rendering  of  the  quotation  from  Giordano
Bruno.  Professor  Mitchell,  Vice-Chancellor  of  Adelaide
University,  kindly  verified  the  philosophical  terminology
of  the  last  chapter.

HENEY  L.  BEOSE.

CHRIST  CHURCH,  OXFORD,
March,  1920.


CONTENTS

PAGE

I. From  Newton  to  Einstein . .  .  1

II. The  Special  Principle  of  Eelativity  ... 7

III.  The  Geometrical  Relativity  of  Space . . 22

IV.  The Mathematical Formulation of Spatial

Relativity 28

V. The  Inseparability  of  Geometry  and  Physics

in  Experience 32

VI. The  Relativity  of  Motions  and  its  Connexion

with  Inertia  and  Gravitation  .... 37

VII.  The  General  Postulate  of  Relativity  and  the
Measure-Determinations  of  the  Space-time
Continuum  ....  ...  46

VIII. Enunciation  and  Significance  of  the  Funda-
mental Law  of  the  New  Theory ... 57

IX. The  Finitude  of  the  Universe .  . . 67

X. Relations  to  Philosophy 76

INDEX  89


FROM  NEWTON  TO  EINSTEIN

AT  the  present  day  physical  research  has  reached  such  a
degree  of  generalization  of  its  first  principles,  and  its  stand-
point has  attained  to  such  truly  philosophic  heights,  that
all  previous  achievements  of  scientific  thought  are  left  far
behind.  Physics  has  ascended  to  summits  hitherto  visible
only  to  philosophers,  whose  gaze  has,  however,  not  always
been  free  from  metaphysical  haziness.  Albert  Einstein  is
the  guide  who  has  directed  us  along  a  practicable  path  lead-
ing to  these  summits.  Employing  an  astoundingly  ingeni-
ous analysis,  he  has  purged  the  most  fundamental  concep-
tions of  natural  science  by  removing  all  the  prejudices
which  have  for  centuries  past  remained  undetected  in  them :
thus  revealing  entirely  new  points  of  view,  and  building  up
a  physical  theory  upon  a  basis  which  can  be  verified  by
actual  observation.  The  fact  that  the  refinement  of  the  con-
ceptions, by  a  critical  examination  of  them  from  the  view-
point of  the  theory  of  knowledge,  is  simultaneously  com-
bined with  the  physical  application  which  immediately
made  his  ideas  experimentally  verifiable,  is  perhaps  the
most  noteworthy  feature  of  his  achievement :  and  it  would
be  remarkable,  even  if  the  problem  with  which  he  was  able
to  grapple  by  using  these  weapons  had  not  happened  to  be
gravitation — that  riddle  of  physics  which  so  obstinately  re-
sisted all  efforts  to  read  it,  and  the  solution  of  which  must
of  necessity  afford  us  glimpses  into  the  inner  structure  of
the  universe.

i


to  Einstein


The  most  fundamental  conceptions  in  physics  are  those
of  Space  and  Time.  The  unrivalled  achievements  in  re-
search, which  in  past  centuries  have  enriched  our  knowl-
edge of  physical  nature,  left  these  underlying  conceptions
untouched  until  the  year  1905.  The  efforts  of  physicists
had  always  been  directed  solely  at  the  substratum  which
occupied  space  and  time :  they  had  taught  us  to  know,  more
and  more  accurately,  the  constitution  of  matter  and  the  law
of  events  which  occurred  in  vacuo,  or  as  it  had,  till  recently,
been  expressed,  in  the  i aether'.  Space  and  Time  were  re-
garded, so  to  speak,  as  vessels  containing  this  substratum
and  furnishing  fixed  systems  of  reference,  with  the  help  of
which  the  mutual  relations  between  bodies  and  events  had
to  be  determined:  in  short,  they  actually  played  the  part
which  Newton  had  set  down  for  them  in  the  well-known
words:  *  Absolute,  true  and  mathematical  time  flows  in  vir-
tue of  its  own  nature  uniformly  and  without  reference  to
any  external  object';  and  'absolute  space,  by  virtue  of  its
own  nature  and  without  reference  to  any  external  object,
always  remains  the  same  and  is  immovable'.

From  the  standpoint  of  the  theory  of  knowledge,  the
objection  was  quite  early  raised  against  Newton,  that  there
was  no  meaning  in  the  terms  Space  and  Time  as  used  with-
out t reference  to  an  object';  but,  for  the  time  being,  physics
had  no  cause  to  trouble  about  these  questions:  it  merely
sought  to  explain  observed  phenomena  in  the  usual  way,  by
refining  and  modifying  its  ideas  of  the  constitution  and  con-
sistent behaviour  of  matter  and  the  'aether'.

An  example  of  this  method  is  the  hypothesis  which  was
put  forward  by  H.  A.  Lorentz  and  Fitzgerald,  that  every
body  which  is  in  motion  relatively  to  the  aether  is  subject  to
a  definite  contraction  along  the  direction  of  motion  (the  so-
called  Lorentz-contr action),  which  depends  upon  the  veloc-
ity of  the  body.  This  hypothesis  was  set  up  in  order  to  ex-


From  Newton  to  Emstem  3

plain  why  it  seemed  impossible  to  detect  'absolute'  rectilin-
ear motion  of  our  instruments  by  means  of  the  experiment
of  Michelson  and  Morley  (which  will  be  discussed  below),
whereas,  according  to  the  prevalent  physical  ideas  of  the
time,  this  should  have  been  possible.  The  whole  trend  of
physical  discovery  made  it  evident  that  this  hypothesis
would  not  be  permanently  satisfactory  (as  we  shall  see  im-
mediately), and  this  meant  that  the  time  was  come  when  the
consideration  of  motion  in  physics  had  to  be  founded  on  re-
flections of  a  philosophic  nature.  For  Einstein  recognized
that  there  is  a  much  simpler  way  of  explaining  from  first
principles  the  negative  result  of  Michelson  and  Morley 's
experiment.  No  special  physical  hypothesis  at  all  is  re-
quired. It  is  only  necessary  to  recognize  the  principle  of
relativity,  according  to  which  a  rectilinear  uniform  'abso-
lute' motion  can  never  be  detected,  and  the  fact  that  the  con-
ception of  motion  has  only  a  physical  meaning  when  re-
ferred to  a  material  body  of  reference.  He  saw  also  that  a
critical  examination  of  the  assumptions  upon  which  our
space-  and  time-measurements  have  hitherto  been  tacitly
founded  is  necessary.  Amongst  these  unnecessary  and
unwarrantable  assumptions  were  found,  e.g.  those  which
concerned  the  absolute  significance  of  such  space-  and  time-
conceptions  as  'length',  'simultaneity',  &c.  If  these  assump-
tions are  dropped,  the  result  of  Michelson  and  Morley 's
experiment  appears  self-evident,  and  on  the  ground  thus
cleared  is  constructed  a  physical  theory  of  wonderful  com-
pleteness, which  develops  the  consequences  of  the  above
fundamental  principle;  it  is  called  the  'special  theory  of
relativity,  because,  according  to  it,  the  relativity  of  motions
is  valid  only  for  the  special  case  of  uniform  rectilinear
motion.

The  special  principle  of  relativity  indeed  takes  one  con-
siderably beyond  the  Newtonian  conceptions  of  Space  and


4  From  Newton  to  Einstem

Time  (as  will  be  seen  from  the  short  account  in  the  next
chapter),  but  does  not  fully  satisfy  the  philosophic  mind,
inasmuch  as  this  restricted  theory  is  only  valid  for  uniform
rectilinear  motions.  From  the  philosophic  standpoint  it  is
desirable  to  be  able  to  affirm  that  every  motion  is  relative,
i.e.  not  the  particular  class  of  uniform  translations  only.
According  to  the  special  theory,  irregular  motions  would
still  be  absolute  in  character;  in  discussing  them  we  could
not  avoid  speaking  of  Space  and  Time  *  without  reference
to  an  object'.

But  since  the  year  1905,  when  Einstein  set  up  the  special
principle  of  relativity  for  the  whole  realm  of  physics,  and
not  for  mechanics  alone,  he  has  striven  to  formulate  a  gen-
eralized principle  which  is  valid  not  only  for  uniform  recti-
linear motions,  but  also  for  any  arbitrary  motion  whatso-
ever. These  endeavours  were  brought  to  a  happy  conclusion
in  1915,  being  crowned  with  complete  success.  They  led  to
such  an  extreme  degree  of  relativization  of  all  space-  and
time-determinations  that  it  seems  impossible  to  extend  it
any  further;  these  space-  and  time-determinations  will
henceforth  be  inseparably  connected  with  matter,  and  will
have  meaning  only  when  referred  to  it.  Moreover,  they
lead  to  a  new  theory  of  gravitational  phenomena  which
takes  physics  very  far  beyond  that  of  Newton.  Space,
time,  and  gravitation  play  in  Einstein's  physics  a  part
fundamentally  different  from  that  assigned  to  them  by
Newton.

The  importance  of  these  results,  in  their  bearing  upon  the
underlying  principles  of  natural  philosophy,  is  so  stupen-
dous that  even  those  who  have  only  a  modest  interest  in
physics  or  the  theory  of  knowledge  cannot  afford  to  pass
them  by.  One  has  to  delve  deep  into  the  history  of  science
to  discover  theoretical  achievements  worthy  to  rank  with
them.  The  discovery  of  Copernicus  might  suggest  itself  to


From  Newton  to  Einstein  5

the  mind;  and  if  Einstein's  results  do  not  exert  as  great  an
influence  on  the  world-view  of  people  in  general  as  the
Copernican  revolution,  their  importance  as  affecting  the
purely  theoretical  picture  of  the  world  is  correspondingly
greater,  inasmuch  as  the  deepest  foundations  of  our  knowl-
edge concerning  physical  nature  have  to  be  remod-
elled much  more  radically  than  after  the  discovery  of
Copernicus.

It  is  therefore  easy  to  understand,  and  gratifying  to  note,
that  there  is  a  general  desire  to  penetrate  into  this  new
field  of  thought.  Many  are,  it  is  true,  repelled  by  the  exter-
nal form  of  the  theory,  because  they  cannot  acquire  the
highly  complicated  mathematical  technique  which  is  neces-
sary for  an  understanding  of  Einstein's  researches :  but  the
wish  to  be  initiated  into  these  new  views,  even  without  this
technical  help,  must  be  satisfied,  if  the  theory  is  to  exercise
its  rightful  influence  in  forming  the  modern  view  of  the
world.  And  it  can  be  satisfied  without  difficulty,  for  the
principles  are  as  simple  as  they  are  profound.  The  concep-
tions of  Space  and  Time  were  not  in  the  first  place  evolved
by  a  complicated  process  of  scientific  thinking,  but  we  are
compelled  to  use  them  incessantly  in  our  daily  life.  Start-
ing from  the  most  familiar  conceptions  of  everyday  life,  we
can  proceed  step  by  step  to  exclude  all  arbitrary  and  un-
justified assumptions,  until  we  are  finally  left  with  Space
and  Time  in  the  simple  form  in  which  they  play  their  part
in  Einstein's  physics.  We  shall  adopt  this  plan  here,  in
order  to  crystallize  the  fundamental  ideas  in  particular  of
the  new  theory  of  Space.  We  get  them  without  any  effort,
by  merely  expelling  from  the  traditional  notion  of  Space  all
ambiguities  and  unnecessary  thought-elements.  We  shall
clear  a  way  leading  to  the  general  theory  of  relativity,  if  we
get  our  ideas  of  Space  and  Time  precise  by  subjecting  them
to  a  critical  examination,  inasmuch  as  they  serve  as  a


6  From  Newton  to  Einstein

foundation  for  the  new  doctrine  and  make  it  intelligible.
We  shall  prepare  ourselves  for  this  task  by  considering
first  the  thoughts  underlying  the  'special'  theory  of  rela-
tivity.


II

THE  SPECIAL  PRINCIPLE  OF  RELATIVITY

MICHELSON  and  Morley's  experiment  forms  the  best  intro-
duction to  this  principle,  both  historically  and  for  its  own
sake.  Historically,  because  it  gave  the  first  impulse  towards
setting  up  the  relativi ty- theory ;  and  in  itself,  because  the
suggested  explanations  of  the  experiment  bring  the  old  and
new  currents  of  thought  into  strongest  relief  with  one  an-
other.

The  condition  of  affairs  was  as  follows.  The  electro-
magnetic waves,  of  which  light  is  composed,  and  which
propagate  themselves  with  a  velocity  c  equal  to  300,000  kilo-
metres per  second  (186,000  miles  per  sec.),  were  regarded
by  the  older  physicists  as  changes  of  state,  transmitted  as  a
wave-disturbance  in  a  substance  called  l aether',  which  com-
pletely filled  all  empty  space,  including  even  that  between
the  smallest  particles  of  material  bodies.  Accordingly,  light
would  be  transmitted  relatively  to  the  aether  with  the  above
velocity  c  (i.e.  one  would  obtain  the  value  300,000  kilometres
per  second)  if  the  velocity  were  measured  in  a  co-ordinate
system,  fixed  in  the  aether.  If,  however,  the  velocity  of  light
were  to  be  measured  from  a  body  which  was  moving  rela-
tively to  the  aether  with  the  velocity  q  in  the  direction  of  the
light-rays,  the  observed  velocity  of  the  light-rays  should  be
c  —  q,  for  the  light  waves  would  hurry  past  the  observer
more  slowly  since  he  is  moving  with  them  in  their  direction.
If  he  were  moving  directly  towards  the  waves  of  light,  he
should  get  c  +  q  for  its  velocity  by  measurement.

7


8  The  Special  Principle  of  Relativity

But,  so  the  argument  continues,  we  on  the  earth  are
exactly  in  the  position  of  the  observer  moving  relatively  to
the  aether :  for  numerous  observations  had  compelled  us  to
assume  that  the  aether  does  not  partake  of  the  motion  of
bodies  moving  through  it,  but  preserves  its  state  of  undis-
turbed rest.  This  means  that  our  planet,  our  measuring  in-
struments, and  all  other  things  on  it,  rush  through  the
aether,  without  in  the  slightest  dragging  it  along  with  them ;
it  slips  through  all  bodies  with  infinitely  greater  ease
than  the  air  between  the  planes  of  a  flying  machine.  Since
the  aether  is  nowhere  in  the  world  to  take  part  in  any  mo-
tion of  such  bodies,  a  co-ordinate-system  which  is  station-
ary in  it  fulfils  the  function  of  a  system  which  is  'absolutely
at  rest';  and  there  would  thus  be  meaning  in  the  phrase
'absolute  motion'  in  physics.  This  would  indeed  not  be  ab-
solute motion  in  the  strictly  philosophical  sense,  for  we
should  understand  it  as  a  motion  relative  to  the  aether,  and
we  could  still  ascribe  to  the  aether  and  the  cosmos  embedded
in  it  any  arbitrary  motion  or  rest  in  'space' — but  the  pos-
sibility is  quite  devoid  of  meaning,  as  we  should  no  longer
be  dealing  with  observable  quantities.  If  there  is  an  aether,
the  system  of  reference  which  is  fixed,  i.e.  at  rest,  in  it  must
be  unique  amongst  all  others.  The  proof  of  the  physical
reality  of  the  aether  would  necessarily,  and  could  only,  con-
sist in  discovering  this  unique  system  of  reference.  For
example,  we  might  show  that  only  with  reference  to  this  sys-
tem is  the  velocity  of  transmission  of  light  the  same  in  all
directions,  viz.  c,  and  that  this  velocity  is  different  when
measured  relatively  to  other  bodies. — After  what  has  been
said,  it  is  clear  that  this  unique  system,  which  is  absolutely
at  rest,  could  not  be  moving  with  the  earth,  for  the  earth
traverses  about  30  kilometres  per  second  in  its  course  round
the  sun.  Our  instruments  thus  move  with  this  velocity  rela-
tive to  the  aether  (if  we  neglect  the  velocity  of  the  solar  sys-


The  Special  Principle  of  Relativity  9

tern,  which  would  have  to  be  added  to  this).  This  velocity
of  30  kilometres  per  second — for  a  first  approximation  we
may  suppose  it  to  be  uniform  and  rectilinear — is  indeed
small  in  comparison  with  c\  but,  with  the  help  of  a  suffi-
ciently delicately  arranged  experiment,  it  should  be  pos-
sible to  measure  a  change  of  this  order  in  the  velocity  of
light,  without  difficulty.  Such  an  experiment  was  devised  by
Michelson  and  Morley.  It  was  carefully  arranged  in  such  a
way  that  even  the  hundredth  part  of  the  expected
amount  could  not  have  escaped  detection  if  it  had  been
present.

But  no  trace  of  a  change  was  to  be  found.  The  principle
of  the  experiment  consisted  in  a  ray  of  light  being  reflected
to  and  fro  between  two  fixed  mirrors  placed  opposite  to  one
another,  the  line  joining  the  centres  of  the  mirrors  being  in
one  case  parallel  to  the  earth's  motion,  and  in  another  per-
pendicular to  it.  An  easy  calculation  shows  that  the  time
taken  by  the  light  to  traverse  the  space  between  the  two
mirrors  (once  to  and  fro)  is  in  the  second  case  only
VI  —  q2/c2  of  the  value  obtained  in  the  first  case,  if  q  de-
notes the  velocity  of  the  earth  relatively  to  the  aether.  The
absence  of  any  change,  in  the  initial  interference  fringes,
proves  with  great  accuracy  that  the  time  taken  is  exactly
the  same  in  both  cases.

Hence  the  experiment  teaches  us  that  light  also  propa-
gates itself  in  reference  to  the  earth  with  equal  velocity
in  all  directions,  and  that  we  cannot  detect  '  absolute  '
motion  (i.e.  motion  with  respect  to  the  aether)  by  this
means.

The  same  result  holds  for  other  methods;  for,  besides
Michelson  and  Morley 's  attempt,  other  experiments  (for
instance,  that  of  Trouton  and  Noble  concerning  the  be-
haviour of  a  charged  condenser)  have  led  to  the  conclusion
that  absolute  motion  (we  are  throughout  these  remarks


10  The  Special  Principle  of  Relativity

only  speaking  of  uniform  rectilinear  motion)  cannot  be
established  in  any  way.

This  fact  seemed  new  as  far  as  optical  and  other  electro-
magnetic experiments  were  concerned.  It  had  long  been
known,  on  the  other  hand,  that  it  was  impossible  to  detect
any  absolute  rectilinear  uniform  motion  by  means  of  me-
chanical experiments.  This  principle  had  been  clearly  stated
in  Newtonian  mechanics.  It  is  a  matter  of  everyday  ex-
perience that  all  mechanical  events  take  place  in  a  system
which  is  moving  uniformly  and  rectilinearly  (e.g.  in  a  mov-
ing ship  or  train)  exactly  in  the  same  way  as  in  a  system
which  is  at  rest  relatively  to  the  earth.  But  for  the  inevi-
table occurrence  of  jerks  and  rocking  (which  are  non-uni-
form motions)  an  observer  enclosed  in  a  moving  air-ship
or  train  could  in  no  wise  establish  that  his  vehicle  was
moving.

To  this  old  theorem  of  mechanics  there  was  now  to  be
added  the  corollary  that  electrodynamical  experiments
(which  include  optical  ones)  give  an  observer  no  indication
as  to  whether  he  and  his  apparatus  are  at  rest  or  moving
uniformly  and  rectilinearly.

In  other  words,  experience  teaches  us  that  the  following
theorem  holds  for  all  physics:  'All  laws  of  physical  nature
which  have  been  formulated  with  reference  to  a  definite  co-
ordinate system  are  valid,  in  precisely  the  same  form,  when
referred  to  another  co-ordinate  system  which  is  in  uniform
rectilinear  motion  with  respect  to  the  first.'  This  empirical
law  is  called  the  'special  theory  of  relativity ',  because  it  af-
firms the  relativity  of  uniform  translations  only,  i.e.  of  a
very  special  class  of  motions.  All  physical  events  take  place
in  any  system  in  just  the  same  way,  whether  the  system  is  at
rest  or  whether  it  is  moving  uniformly  and  rectilinearly.
There  is  no  absolute  difference  between  these  two  states;
I  may  regard  the  second  equally  well  as  being  that  of  rest.


The  Special  Principle  of  Relativity  11

The  empirical  fact  of  the  validity  of  the  special  principle
of  relativity,  however,  entirely  contradicts  the  considera-
tions made  above  concerning  the  phenomenon  of  light-
transmission,  as  founded  upon  the  aether-theory.  For,  ac-
cording to  the  latter,  there  should  be  one  unique  system
of  reference  (that  which  is  fixed  with  reference  to  the
6  aether  '),  and  the  value  obtained  for  the  velocity  of  light
should  have  been  dependent  upon  the  motion  of  the  sys-
tem of  reference  used  by  the  observer.  Physicists  were
confronted  with  the  difficult  problem  of  explaining  and
disposing  of  this  fundamental  contradiction;  this  is  the
point  of  divergence  of  the  old  and  the  new  physics.

H.  A.  Lorentz  and  Fitzgerald  removed  the  difficulty  by
making  a  new  physical  hypothesis.  They  assumed  that  all
bodies,  which  are  put  in  motion  with  reference  to  the  aether,
suffer  a  contraction  to  VI  —  <£/c*  of  their  length  in  the
direction  of  their  motion.  Hereby  the  negative  result  of
Michelson  and  Morley's  experiment  would  in  fact  be  com-
pletely explained;  for,  if  the  line  between  the  two  mirrors
used  for  the  purpose  were  to  shorten  of  its  own  accord  as
soon  as  it  is  turned  so  as  to  be  in  the  direction  of  the  earth's
motion,  light  would  take  less  time  to  traverse  it,  and  indeed,
the  reductions  would  be  exactly  the  amount  given  above
(viz.  that  by  which  the  time  of  passage  should  have  been
greater  than  in  the  position  perpendicular  to  the  earth's
motion).  The  effect  of  the  absolute  motion  would  thus  be
exactly  counterbalanced  by  this  Lorentz-Fitzgerald  con-
traction ;  and,  by  means  of  similar  hypotheses,  it  would  also
be  possible  to  give  a  satisfactory  account  of  Trouton  and
Noble's  condenser  experiment  and  other  experimental
facts.

We  thus  see  that,  according  to  the  point  of  view  just
described,  there  is  actually  to  be  an  absolute  motion  in  the
physical  sense  of  the  term  (viz.  with  reference  to  a  material


12  The  Special  Principle  of  Relativity

aether) ;  but,  since  such  a  motion  cannot  be  observed  in  any
way,  special  hypotheses  are  devised  to  explain  why  it
always  eludes  our  perception.  In  other  words,  according
to  this  view  the  principle  of  relativity  does  not  hold,  and  the
physicist  is  obliged  to  explain,  by  means  of  special  hy-
potheses, why  all  physical  phenomena  in  spite  of  this  take
place  actually  as  if  it  did  hold.  An  aether  is  really  to  exist,
although  a  unique  body  of  reference  of  this  kind  nowhere
manifests  itself.

In  opposition  to  this  view,  modern  physics,  following
Einstein,  asserts  that,  since  experience  teaches  us  that  the
special  principle  of  relativity  actually  holds,  it  is  to  be  re-
garded as  a  real  physical  law ;  since,  furthermore,  the  aether
as  a  substance  obstinately  evades  all  our  attempts  at  observ-
ing it,  and  all  phenomena  occur  as  if  it  did  not  exist,  the  word
' aether*  lacks  physical  meaning,  and  therefore  aether  does
not  exist.  If  the  principle  of  relativity  and  the  non-exist-
ence of  the  aether  cannot  be  brought  to  harmonize  with  our
previous  arguments  about  the  transmission  of  light,  these
arguments  must  clearly  be  reconsidered  and  revised.  It  is
to  Einstein  that  the  credit  falls  of  discovering  that  such  a
revision  is  possible,  viz.  that  these  arguments  are  based  on
assumptions  concerning  the  measurement  of  space  and  time
which  have  not  been  tested,  and  which  we  only  require  to
discard  in  order  to  do  away  with  the  contradiction  between
the  principle  of  relativity  and  our  notions  about  the  trans-
mission of  light.

Thus,  if  an  event  propagates  itself,  with  respect  to  a  co-
ordinate system  K,  in  any  direction  with  the  velocity  c,  and
if  a  second  system  Kl  move  relative  to  K  in  the  same  direc-
tion with  the  velocity  q,  the  velocity  of  transmission  of  the
event  as  viewed  from  the  system  K1  is  of  course  only  equal
to  c — g,  if  it  is  assumed  that  distances  and  times  are  meas-
ured in  the  two  systems  with  the  same  measuring  units.  This


The  Special  Principle  of  Relativity  13

assumption  had  hitherto  been  tacitly  used  as  a  basis.
Einstein  showed  that  it  is  in  no  wise  self-evident :  that  one
could  with  equal  right  (indeed  with  greater  right,  as  the
results  will  show)  put  the  value  for  the  velocity  of  trans-
mission in  both  systems  equal  to  c;  and  that  the  lengths  of
distances  and  of  times  then  have  different  values  for  differ-
ent systems  of  reference  moving  with  reference  to  one  an-
other. The  length  of  a  rod,  the  duration  of  an  event,  are  not
absolute  quantities,  as  was  always  assumed  in  physics  be-
fore the  advent  of  Einstein,  but  are  dependent  on  the  state
of  motion  of  the  co-ordinate  system  in  which  they  are
measured.  The  methods  which  are  at  our  disposal  for
measuring  distances  and  times  yield  different  values  in
systems  which  are  in  motion  relatively  to  one  another.  We
shall  now  proceed  to  explain  this  more  clearly.

For  the  purpose  of  *  measurement',  i.e.  for  the  quantitative
comparison  of  lengths  and  times,  we  require  measuring-
rods  and  clocks.  Rigid  bodies,  the  size  of  which  we  assume
to  be  independent  of  their  position,  serve  as  measuring-rods ;
the  term  clock  need  not  necessarily  be  confined  to  the
familiar  mechanical  object,  but  may  denote  any  physical  con-
trivance which  exactly  repeats  the  same  event  periodically;
e.g.  light- vibrations  may  serve  as  a  clock  (this  was  the  case
in  Michelson  and  Morley's  experiment).

No  essential  difficulty  arises  in  determining  a  moment
or  the  duration  of  an  event,  if  a  clock  is  at  our  disposal  at
the  place  where  the  event  is  happening;  for  we  need  only
note  the  reading  of  the  clock  at  the  moment  the  event  under
observation  begins,  and  again  at  the  moment  it  ceases.  The
sole  assumption  we  make  is  that  the  conception  of  the
1  simultaneity  (time-coincidence)  of  two  events  occurring  at
the  same  place'  (viz.  the  reading  of  the  clock  and  the  begin-
ning of  the  event)  has  an  absolutely  definite  meaning.  We
may  make  the  assumption,  although  we  cannot  define  the


14  The  Special  Principle  of  Relativity

conception  or  express  its  content  more  clearly ;  it  belongs  to
those  ultimate  data,  which,  become  directly  known  to  us  as
an  experience  of  our  consciousness.

The  position  is  different,  however,  when  we  are  dealing
with  two  events  which  occur  at  different  places.  To  compare
these  events  in  point  of  time,  we  must  erect  a  clock  at  each
place,  and  bring  these  two  clocks  into  agreement  with  one
another,  viz.  regulate  them  so  that  they  beat  synchronously,
i.e.  give  the  same  reading  at  the  'same  moment'.  This
regulation,  which  is  equivalent  to  establishing  the  conception
of  simultaneity  for  different  places,  requires  a  special  proc-
ess. We  are  obliged  to  resort  to  the  following  method.  We
send  a  light-signal  from  the  one  clock  placed  at  A  (let  us
say)  to  the  second  at  B,  and  reflect  it  thence  back  to  A.  Sup-
pose that,  from  the  moment  of  sending  to  that  of  receiving
the  signal,  the  clock  A  has  run  on  for  two  seconds,  then  this
is  the  time  which  the  light  has  required  to  traverse  the  dis-
tance AB  twice.  Now  since  (according  to  our  postulate)
light  propagates  itself  in  all  directions  with  the  same  veloc-
ity c,  it  takes  just  as  long  for  the  initial  as  for  the  return
journey,  i.e.  one  second  for  each.  If  we  now  emit  a  light-
signal  in  A  at  precisely  twelve  o'clock,  after  having  ar-
ranged with  an  observer  in  B  to  set  his  clock  at  one  second
past  12  o'clock  when  he  receives  the  signal,  then  we  shall
rightly  consider  that  we  have  solved  the  problem  of  syn-
chronizing the  two  clocks.  If  there  are  other  clocks  at  other
places,  and  if  we  bring  them  all  into  agreement  with  the  one
at  A  according  to  the  method  described  for  B,  then  they  will
agree  amongst  themselves  if  compared  by  the  same  process.
Experience  teaches  us  that  the  only  time-data  which  do  not
lead  to  contradictions  are  those  which  are  got  by  using
signals  which  are  independent  of  matter,  i.e.  are  transmitted
with  the  same  velocity  through  a  vacuum.  Electro-magnetic
waves  travelling  with  the  speed  of  light  fulfil  this  condition.


The  Special  Principle  of  Relativity  15

If  we  were  to  use  sound-signals  in  the  air,  for  instance,  the
direction  of  the  wind  would  have  to  be  taken  into  account.
The  velocity  of  light  c  thus  plays  a  unique  part  in  Na-
ture.

Hitherto  we  have  assumed  that  the  clocks  are  at  rest
relatively  to  one  another  and  to  a  fixed  body  of  reference  K
(as  the  earth).  We  shall  now  suppose  a  system  of  reference
Kl  (e.g.  a  railway  train  travelling  at  an  enormous  rate)
moving  relatively  to  K  with  the  velocity  q  in  the  direction
of  A  to  B.  The  clocks  at  different  points  in  K1  are  to  be
supposed  regulated  with  one  another  in  exactly  the  same
way  as  was  just  described  for  those  in  K.  K1  may  for  this
purpose  be  considered  to  be  at  rest  equally  well  as  K,  when
its  clocks  were  regulated.  What  happens  when  observers
in  K  and  K1  attempt  to  get  into  communication  with  one
another!

Suppose  a  clock  A1  at  rest  in  K1  to  be  in  immediate  proxi-
mity to  the  clock  A  at  rest  in  K,  at  precisely  the  moment
at  which  both  clocks  A  and  A1  indicate  12;  and  suppose
a  second  clock  B1  at  rest  in  K1  to  be  at  the  place  B,  whilst
the  corresponding  clock  at  rest  in  K  at  the  same  place
indicates  12.  An  observer  on  K  will  then  say  that  A1  coin-
cides with  A  at  the  same  moment,  i.e.  simultaneously  (at
exactly  12  o'clock)  when  B1  coincides  with  B.  At  the
moment  when  the  coincident  clocks  A  and  A1  both  indicate
12,  let  a  light-signal  flash  out  from  their  common  position.
The  rays  reach  B  when  the  clock  at  B  indicates  one  second
past  12 ;  but  the  clock  Z?1,  being  on  the  moving  body  K1,  has
moved  away  from  B  a  distance  q,  and  will  have  moved
slightly  further  away  before  it  is  reached  by  the  light-signal.
This  means  that,  for  an  observer  at  rest  on  K,  the  light  takes
longer  than  one  second  to  travel^  from  A1  to  B\  It  will  now
be  reflected  at  B1,  and  will  arrive  back  at  A l  in  less  than
one  second,  since  A*,  according  to  the  observer  in  K,  moves


16  The  Special  Principle  of  Relativity

towards  the  light.  This  observer  will  therefore  conclude  that
the  light  takes  longer  to  traverse  the  distance  from  A1  to  B1
than  that  from  Bl  to  A1 :  since  in  the  first  case  B1  hastens
away  from  the  light-ray,  whereas  in  the  second  case  A1
goes  to  meet  it.  An  observer  in  K1,  however,  judges  other-
wise. Since  he  is  at  rest  relatively  to  A1  and  B1,  the  times
taken  by  the  signal  to  travel  from  A1  to  B1,  and  thence  back
from  B1  to  A\  are  exactly  the  same :  for,  with  reference  to
his  system  K1,  light  propagates  itself  with  equal  velocity  c
in  both  directions  (according  to  the  postulate  we  have
established  on  the  basis  of  Michelson  and  Morley's  re-
sult).

We  thus  arrive  at  the  conclusion  that  two  events,  which
are  of  equal  duration  in  the  system  Kl,  occupy  different
lengths  of  time  when  measured  from  the  system  K.  Both
systems  accordingly  use  a  different  time-measure ;  the  con-
ception of  duration  has  become  relative,  being  dependent  on
the  system  of  reference,  in  which  it  is  measured.  The  same
holds  true,  as  immediately  follows,  of  the  conception  of
simultaneity:  two  events,  which,  viewed  from  one  system,
occur  simultaneously,  happen  for  an  observer  in  another
system  at  different  times.  In  our  example,  when  A  coin-
cides with  A1  in  position,  the  two  clocks  at  the  common
point  indicate  the  same  time  as  the  clock  B  when  B  coincides
with  B1',  but  the  clock  Z?1,  belonging  to  the  system  K\
indicates  a  different  time  at  this  place.  The  former  two  co-
incidences are  thus  only  simultaneous  in  K  but  not  in  the
system  K1.

All  this  arises,  as  we  see,  as  a  necessary  consequence  of
the  regulation  of  clocks,  which  was  founded  upon  the
principle  that  light  always  transmits  itself  with  constant
velocity:  no  other  means  of  regulation  is  possible  without
introducing  arbitrary  assumptions.

We  also  obtain  different  values  for  the  lengths  of  bodies


The  Special  Principle  of  Relativity  17

taken  along  the  direction  of  motion,  if  they  are  measured
from  different  systems.  This  is  immediately  evident  from
the  following.  If  I  happen  to  be  at  rest  in  a  system  K,  and
wish  to  measure  the  length  of  a  rod  AB  which  is  moving
with  reference  to  K  in  the.  direction  of  its  own  axis,  I  must
either  note  the  time  that  the  rod  takes  to  move  past  a  fixed
point  in  K,  and  multiply  this  time  by  the  velocity  of  the  rod
relative  to  K  (by  doing  which  we  should  find  the  length  to  be
dependent  on  the  velocity,  on  account  of  the  relativity  of
duration) ;  or  I  could  proceed  to  mark  on  K  at  a  definite
moment  two  points  P  and  Q,  which  are  occupied  by  the  two
ends  A  and  B  respectively  at  that  precise  moment,  and  then
measure  the  length  of  PQ  in  K.  Since  simultaneity  is
a  relative  conception,  the  coincidence  of  A  with  P,  if  I
make  observations  from  a  system  moving  with  the  rod,  will
not  be  simultaneous  with  the  coincidence  of  B  with  Q :  but  •
at  the  time  that  A  coincides  with  P,  the  point  B  will,  for  me,
be  at  a  point  Q1  slightly  removed  from  Q,  and  I  shall  regard
the  distance  PQ1  as  the  true  length  of  the  rod.  Calculation
shows  that  the  length  of  a  rod,  which  has  a  value  a  in
a  system  with  reference  to  which  it  is  at  rest,  assumes  the
value  a  VI  —  q2/c2  for  a  system  which  is  moving  relatively
to  it  with  the  velocity  q.  This  is  precisely  the  Lorentz-con-
traction.  It  no  longer  appears  as  a  physical  effect  brought
about  by  the  influence  of  *  absolute  motion.',  as  was  the  case
according  to  Lorentz  and  Fitzgerald,  but  is  merely  the  result
of  our  methods  of  measuring  length  and  times.  The  ques-
tion which  is  often  put  forward  by  the  beginner,  as  to  what
the  'real'  length  of  a  rod  is,  and  whether  it  'really'  contracts
on  being  moved,  or  whether  the  change  in  length  is  only  an
apparent  one — is  suggested  by  a  misunderstanding.  The
diverse  lengths,  which  are  measured  in  various  systems
moving  with  uniform  motion  relatively  to  one  another,  all
'really'  belong  to  the  rod  equally;  for  all  such  systems  are


18  The  Special  Principle  of  Relativity

equivalent.  No  contradiction  is  contained  in  this,  since
'length'  is  only  a  relative  conception.

The  conceptions  'more  slowly'  and  'more  quickly'  (not
only  'slowly'  and  'quickly')  are,  according  to  the  new  theory,
relative.  For,  if  an  observer  in  K  always  compares  his
clock  with  the  one  in  K1,  which  he  just  happens  to  be  passing,
he  will  find  that  these  clocks  lag  more  and  more  behind  his
own :  he  will  hence  declare  the  rate  of  the  clocks  in  K*  to  be
slower  than  his  own.  Exactly  the  same,  moreover,  happens
to  the  observer  in  K\  if  he  compares  his  clock  with  the
successive  clocks  of  K  which  he  happens  to  encounter.  He
will  assert  that  the  clocks  fixed  in  his  own  system  are  going
at  a  faster  rate ;  and  this  indeed  with  just  as  much  right  as
the  other  had  in  affirming  the  contrary.

All  these  connected  results  can  be  most  easily  followed  if
they  are  expressed  mathematically;  we  can  then  grasp
them  as  a  whole.  For  this  purpose  we  only  require  to  set
up  the  equations,  which  enable  us  to  express  the  time  and
place  of  an  event,  referred  to  one  system  by  corresponding
quantities  referred  to  the  other  system.  If  xi,  x2,  xs  are  the
space-co-ordinates  of  an  event  happening  at  the  time  t  in
the  system  K\  and  if  #\,  xl2,  &\  t1  are  the  corresponding
quantities  referred  to  K1  ;  then  these  equations  of  transfor-
mation (they  are  termed  the  'Lorentz-transformation')
enable  us  to  calculate  the  quantities  x\9  x*2j  x\  t1,  if  xi9  x29
#3,  t  are  given  and  vice  versa.  (For  further  details  see
the  references  at  the  end  of  this  book.)

Such  are,  in  a  few  words,  the  main  features  of  the  kine-
matics of  the  special  theory  of  relativity.  Its  great  impor-
tance in  physics  is  derived  from  the  electro-dynamics  and
mechanics  which  correspond  to  this  type  of  kinematics.
But  for  our  present  purpose  it  is  not  necessary  to  go  into
greater  detail.  We  shall  only  mention  one  extraordinary
result.


The  Special  Principle  of  Relativity  19

Whereas  in  the  older  physics  the  law  of  Conservation  of
Energy  and  that  of  Conservation  of  Mass  existed  entirely
unrelated,  it  has  been  shown  that  the  second  law  is  no  longer
strictly  in  agreement  with  the  former,  and  must  therefore  be
abandoned.  Theory  leads  to  the  following  view.  If  a  body
take  up  an  amount  of  energy  E  (measured  in  a  system  which
is  at  rest  with  reference  to  that  of  the  body),  the  body  be-

E

haves  as  if  its  mass  were  increased  by  the  amount  — .  That

c2

is,  we  cannot  say  that  each  body  has  a  constant  factor  m
which  has  the  significance  of  a  mass  independent  of  its  veloc-

E
ity. If,  now,  the  quantity  —  is  to  be  regarded  as  an  actml

c2

increase  of  mass,  i.e.  if  energy  has  the  property  of  inertia,
it  is  an  obvious  step  not  only  to  trace  the  increase  of  mass
back  to  an  increase  of  energy  but  also  to  regard  the  inertial
mass  m  as  being  dependent  upon  a  quantity  of  energy
E  =  me2  contained  by  the  body.  This  amount  is  very  great
owing  to  the  enormous  value  of  c,  the  velocity  of  light.  This
assumption  is  in  very  good  agreement  with  the  enormous
store  of  internal  energy  of  the  atom,  as  deduced  from  recent
researches.  Physics,  therefore,  no  longer  recognizes  both
of  the  above  laws,  but  only  that  of  the  Conservation  of
Energy.  The  Principle  of  Conservation  of  Mass,  which  has
hitherto  been  regarded  as  a  distinct  fundamental  law  of
natural  science,  has  been  traced  back  to  the  Principle  of
Energy,  and  has  been  recognized  as  being  only  approxi-
mately true.  It  is  found  to  be  nearly  true,  inasmuch  as  all
increases  of  energy  which  are  experimentally  possible  are
in  general  negligible  compared  with  the  enormous  store  of
internal  energy  me2,  so  that  these  changes  of  mass  are
scarcely  observable.
That  which  particularly  interests  us  here  is  that  the


20  The  Special  Principle  of  Relativity

theory  of  relativity  entirely  does  away  with  the  traditional
conceptions  of  space  and  time,  and  banishes  '  aether '  as  a
substance  out  of  physics.  We  saw  earlier  that  the  existence
of  such  an  aether  implied  in  physical  terms  that  a  definite
co-ordinate  system  (that  which  is  at  rest  relatively  to  the
aether)  would  have  to  be  unique  amongst  all  others,  i.e.
with  reference  to  this  system  physical  laws  would  assume  a
particular  form.  As  our  theory  allows  no  such  unique
system,  and  since,  on  the  contrary,  all  systems  which
have  a  uniform  translation  with  regard  to  one  another
are  equivalent,  the  belief  in  a  material  aether  is  incom-
patible with  the  principle  of  relativity.  We  may  no  longer  re-
gard light- waves  as  a  change  in  the  condition  of  a  substance,
in  which  they  are  propagated  with  the  velocity  c ;  for  then
this  substance  would  have  to  be  at  rest  in  all  equivalent
systems,  and  that  of  course  entails  a  contradiction.  The
electromagnetic  field  is,  on  the  contrary,  to  be  regarded  as
being  independent  and  not  requiring  a  'carrier'.  Since  we
are  free  to  use  words  at  pleasure,  there  is  no  objection  to
using  the  word  ' aether'  in  future  to  represent  the  vacuum
(empty  space)  with  its  electromagnetic  field,  or  as  endowed
with  the  metrical  properties  which  are  to  be  discussed  be-
low; we  must  be  very  cautious,  however,  not  to  picture  it  as
matter.

We  thus  see  that,  in  addition  to  the  conceptions  of  space
and  time,  that  of  substance  is  crystallized  in  a  purified  form
by  the  critical  application  of  the  special  theory  of  relativity.
This  process  only  reaches  completion,  however,  in  the
general  theory  of  relativity.  However  great  the  revolution
wrought  by  the  special  theory  may  have  seemed,  the  claim
that  all  motions  without  exception  should  be  of  a  relative
character  (i.e.  that  only  motions  of  bodies  relatively  to  one
another  are  to  enter  into  physical  laws)  brings  about  such
a  strange  world-picture  and  leads  to  such  bold  conclusions


The  Special  Principle  of  Relativity  21

that,  in  comparison  with  it,  the  reconstruction  of  conceptions
imposed  upon  us  by  the  special  theory  of  relativity  seems
modest  and  incomplete.

To  gain  an  easy  approach  to  the  formidable  structure  of
ideas  contained  in  the  general  theory  of  relativity,  we  shall
start  afresh  with  quite  elementary  reflections  and  simple
questionings.


m

THE  GEOMETRICAL  RELATIVITY  OF  SPACE

THE  most  fundamental  question  which  may  be  asked  con-
cerning Space  and  Time  is,  to  express  it  in  familiar  language
for  the  present:  are  Space  and  Time  actually  real?

From  the  earliest  times  an  inconclusive  controversy  was
waged  by  the  philosophers  as  to  whether  empty  space,  the
xevov,  were  real,  or  merely  identical  with  nothingness.  But
even  at  the  present  day  not  every  one,  be  he  scientist,  philo-
sopher, or  general  reader,  would  straightway  answer  this
question  by  a  simple  negative  or  affirmative.  No  one,  in-
deed, regards  Space  and  Time  as  real  in  quite  the
same  sense  as  the  chair  on  which  I  sit,  or  the  air  which
I  breathe.  I  cannot  deal  with  space  as  with  material  objects
or  with  energy,  which  I  can  transport  from  one  place  to
another,  manipulate  at  will,  buy  and  sell.  Every  one  feels
that  there  is  some  difference  between  them ;  Space  and  Time
are,  in  some  sense  or  other,  less  independent  than  the  things
which  exist  in  them ;  and  philosophers  have  often  emphasized
this  lack  of  independence  by  stating  that  neither  exists  in
itself.  We  could  not  speak  of  Space  if  there  were  no
material  bodies ;  and  the  conception  of  Time  would  likewise
be  devoid  of  meaning  if  no  events  or  changes  took  place  in
the  world.  But,  even  for  the  popular  mind,  Space  and  Time
are  not  merely  nothing ;  for  are  there  not  great  departments
of  engineering  which  are  wholly  devoted  to  overcoming
them?

Of  course  the  decision  of  this  question  depends  upon
what  is  understood  by  ' Reality'.  Now,  even  if  this  concep-


The  Geometrical  Relativity  of  Space  23

tion  is  difficult,  perhaps  even  impossible,  to  define,  yet  the
physicist  is  in  the  happy  position  of  being  able  to  satisfy
himself  with  a  definition  which  allows  him  to  fix  the  limits
of  his  realm  with  absolute  certainty.  *  Whatever  can  be
measured  is  real.'  The  physicist  may  use  this  sentence  of
Planck's  as  a  general  criterion,  and  say  that  only  that  which
is  measurable  possesses  indisputable  reality,  or,  to  define  it
more  carefully,  physical  objectivity.

Are  Space  and  Time  measurable?  The  answer  seems
obvious.  What  would  indeed  be  measurable  if  it  were  not
Space  and  Time?  Do  not  our  clocks  and  measuring-scales
serve  just  this  purpose?  Is  there  not  even  a  special  science
which  is  concerned  with  nothing  else  than  with  the  measure-
ment of  space,  without  reference  to  any  bodies,  viz.  metrical
geometry?

But  let  us  be  cautious !  It  is  known  that  there  is  differ-
ence of  opinion  about  the  nature  of  geometrical  objects
— even  if  this  were  not  the  case,  we  have  recently  learnt  to
look  searchingly  into  the  fundamental  conceptions  of  the
sciences  above  all  for  concealed  or  unproved  premises.  We
shall  thus  have  to  investigate  whether  the  current  view  of
geometry,  as  a  doctrine  of  the  properties  of  space,  is  not
influenced  by  certain  unjustified  notions,  from  which  it  must
be  released.  In  fact,  philosophic  criticism  has  for  some  time
affirmed  the  necessity  for  doing  so,  and  busied  itself  with
the  task,  and  has  thereby  already  developed  ideas  about  the
relativity  of  all  spatial  relations.  We  may  regard  the  space-
time-view  of  Einstein's  theory  as  the  logical  shaping  and
application  of  these  ideas;  a  continuous  path  leads  from
them  to  the  theory,  along  which  the  meaning  of  the  question
of  the  reality  of  Space  and  Time  becomes  ever  clearer.  We
shall  use  this  road  as  a  means  of  access  to  the  new  ideas.

Let  us  begin  by  reflecting  on  a  simple  imaginary  experi-
ment, which  almost  every  one  who  has  thought  about  these


24  The  Geometrical  Relativity  of  Space

matters  has  performed  mentally  and  which  is  particularly
well  described  by  Henri  Poincare.  Let  us  suppose  that  all
material  bodies  in  the  world  increase  enormously  in  size
over-night  to  a  hundred  times  their  original  dimensions ;  my
room,  which  is  to-day  six  metres  long,  would  to-morrow  have
a  length  of  600  metres.  I  myself  should  be  a  Goliath  180
metres  high,  and  should  be  inscribing  letters  a  metre  high  on
paper  with  a  pen  15  metres  long;  and  similarly  all  other
dimensions  of  the  universe  are  to  be  supposed  altered  to
a  like  degree,  so  that  the  new  world,  although  a  hundred
times  increased,  would  still  be  geometrically  similar  to  the
old  one.  'What  would  my  impressions  be  in  the  morning/
Poincare  asks,  *  after  this  astonishing  change  T  And  he
answers:  'I  should  not  observe  the  slightest  difference.  For
since,  according  to  our  assumption,  all  objects,  including  my
own  body,  all  measuring-scales  and  instruments,  have  shared
in  this  hundredfold  magnification,  every  means  of  detecting
this  change  would  be  wanting;  I  should  call  the  length  of
my  room  6  metres  as  before,  since  my  metre-scale  would
divide  into  it  six  times,  and  so  on.'  What  is  still  more  im-
portant, this  whole  alteration  would  exist  only  for  those  who
erroneously  argue  that  Space  is  absolute.  Truth  compels  us
to  say  that,  since  space  is  relative,  no  change  has  taken  place,
and  that  this  is  the  reason  why  we  were  unable  to  notice
anything.  Thus,  the  universe,  which  we  imagined  magnified
a  hundredfold,  is  not  only  indistinguishable  from  the  orig-
inal one;  it  is  simply  the  same  universe.  There  is  no  mean-
ing in  talking  of  a  difference,  because  the  absolute  size  of  a
body  is  not  'reaP.

The  exposition  of  Poincare  must  be  carried  a  little  further
to  be  quite  convincing.  The  fiction  of  a  universal  alteration
in  the  size  of  the  world,  or  a  part  of  it,  is  devoid  of  any  ap-
preciable meaning  from  the  very  outset,  unless  definite  as-
sumptions are  made  as  to  how  the  physical  constants  are  to


The  Geometrical  Relativity  of  Space  25

behave  in  this  deformation.  For  natural  bodies  have  not
only  a  geometrical  shape,  but  they  also  possess  physical
properties,  e.  g.  mass.  If,  after  a  hundredfold  linear  mag-
nification of  the  world,  we  substitute  the  former  values  for
the  mass  of  the  earth  and  the  objects  it  contains,  in  New-
ton's attraction  formula,  we  shall  only  get  a  10,000th  of  the
previous  value  for  the  weight  of  a  body  on  the  earth's
surface,  since  this  weight  is  inversely  proportional  to  the
square  of  the  distance  from  the  earth's  centre.  Can  we  not
establish  this  change  in  weight,  and  thus  arrive  indirectly
at  the  absolute  increase  in  size!  We  might  think  that  this
would  be  possible  by  observations  of  a  pendulum,  for  the
time  of  vibration  (period)  of  a  pendulum  would  be  just
1,000  times  slower  on  account  of  the  decrease  in  weight  and
increase  in  length.  But  would  this  retardation  be  observ-
able? Would  it  possess  physical  reality?  The  question  is
again  unanswerable,  unless  it  is  stated  how  the  rotational
velocity  of  the  earth  is  affected  by  the  deformation ;  for  our
time-measures  are  based  upon  comparison  with  the  former.

The  attempt  to  observe  the  decrease  in  weight  by  means
of  a  spring-balance  (say)  would  likewise  be  in  vain;  for
special  assumptions  about  the  behaviour  of  the  coefficient  of
elasticity  of  the  spring  would  again  be  necessary  in  this
supposed  magnification.

The  fiction  of  a  purely  geometrical  deformation  of  all
bodies  is  therefore  entirely  without  significance;  it  has
no  definite  physical  meaning.  If  one  fine  day  we  were
to  observe  a  slowing  down  of  all  our  pendulum-clocks,
we  could  not  infer  that  the  universe  had  been  magnified
during  the  night,  but  the  remarkable  phenomenon  could  be
explained  by  means  of  other  physical  hypotheses.  Inversely,
if  I  assert  that  all  linear  dimensions  have  been  lengthened
a  hundredfold  since  yesterday,  no  experience  could  prove
the  contrary ;  I  should  only  have  to  affirm  at  the  same  time


26  The  Geometrical  Relativity  of  Space

that  while  all  masses  had  increased  a  hundredfold  in  value,
the  rate  of  the  earth's  spin  and  of  other  events  had,  on  the
other  hand,  decreased  to  a  hundredth  of  their  former  value.
It  is  easily  seen  from  the  elementary  formulae  of  Newtonian
Mechanics  that,  with  these  assumptions,  exactly  the  same
numbers  result  from  the  calculations  as  before  for  all
observable  quantities  (at  least  as  far  as  gravitational  and
inertial  effects  are  concerned).  The  change  has  thus  no
physical  meaning.

From  reflections  of  this  kind,  which  may  be  multiplied  at
pleasure,  and  which  are  still  based  on  Newtonian  mechanics,
it  is  already  clear  that  space-time  considerations  are  in-
separably bound  up  with  other  physical  quantities;  and
if  we  abstract  some  from  the  rest,  we  must  by  careful  com-
parison with  experience  try  to  discover  in  what  sense  a  real
meaning  is  to  be  attached  to  the  abstraction.

The  reflections  of  Poincare,  supplemented  in  the  manner
indicated,  teach  us  beyond  doubt  that  we  can  imagine  the
world  transformed  by  means  of  far-reaching  geometrical-
physical  changes  into  a  new  one,  which  is  completely
indistinguishable  from  the  first,  and  which  is  completely
identical  with  it  physically,  so  that  the  transformation
would  not  actually  signify  a  real  happening.  We  started
by  considering  the  case  in  which  the  imaginary  transformed
world  is  geometrically  similar  to  the  original  one;  the
conclusions  drawn  are  not  in  the  slightest  affected  by
dropping  this  assumption.  If  we,  for  instance,  assumed  that
the  dimensions  of  all  objects  are  lengthened  or  shortened  in
one  direction  only,  say  that  of  the  earth's  axis,  we  should
again  not  notice  this  transformation,  although  the  shape
of  bodies  would  have  changed  completely,  spheres  becoming
ellipsoids  of  rotation,  cubes  becoming  parallelopideds,  and
indeed  perhaps  very  elongated  ones.  But  if  we  wished  to
establish,  by  means  of  a  measuring-scale,  the  change  in


The  Geometrical  Relativity  of  Space  27

length  as  compared  with  the  breadth,  our  effort  would  be
in  vain ;  since  our  measuring-rod,  when  we  turned  it  into  the
direction  of  the  earth's  axis  for  the  purpose  of  carrying
out  a  measurement,  would,  according  to  our  supposition,  be
correspondingly  lengthened  or  shortened.  Nor  could  we  be-
come aware  of  the  deformation  directly  by  means  of  the
senses  of  sight  or  touch ;  for  our  own  body  has  likewise  be-
come deformed,  as  well  as  our  eye-balls,  and  also  the  wave-
surfaces  of  light.  Again,  we  must  conclude  that  there  is
no  'real'  distinction  between  the  two  worlds;  the  imagined
deformation  is  not  ascertainable  by  any  measurement,  i.e.
has  no  physical  objectivity.  It  is  easily  seen  that  the  argu-
ments just  presented  may  be  generalized  still  further :  we
can  imagine  with  Poincare  that  the  objects  in  the  universe
are  arbitrarily  distorted  in  arbitrary  directions,  and  the  dis-
tortion need  not  be  the  same  for  all  points,  but  may  vary
from  place  to  place. — As  long  as  we  suppose  that  all  meas-
uring instruments,  including  our  own  bodies  with  their
sense-organs,  share  in  the  local  deformation  for  each  place,
the  whole  transformation  immediately  becomes  unascer-
tainable;  it  does  not  t really'  exist  for  the  physicist.


IV


THE  MATHEMATICAL  FORMULATION  OF
SPATIAL  RELATIVITY

IN  mathematical  phraseology  we  can  express  this  result
by  saying:  two  worlds,  which  can  be  transformed  into  one
another  by  a  perfectly  arbitrary  (but  continuous  and  one-to-
one)  point-transformation,  are,  with  respect  to  their  phys-
ical reality,  identical.  That  is :  if  the  universe  is  deformed  in
any  way,  so  that  the  points  of  all  physical  bodies  are  dis-
placed to  new  positions,  then  (taking  account  of  the  above
supplementary  considerations),  no  measurable,  no  'real'
change  has  happened  at  all,  if  the  co-ordinates  of  a  physical
point  in  the  new  position  are  any  arbitrary  functions  what-
soever of  the  co-ordinates  of  its  old  position.  Of  course,
it  will  have  to  be  postulated  that  the  points  of  the
bodies  retain  their  connexion,  and  that  points  which  were
neighbouring  before  the  deformation  remain  so  after  it
(i.e.  these  functions  must  be  continuous) ;  and,  moreover,
to  every  point  of  the  original  world  only  one  point  of
the  new  world  must  correspond,  and  vice  versa  (i.e.  these
functions  must  be  one-valued).

It  is  easy  to  picture  the  relations  described  by  imagining
space  to  be  divided  by  three  families  of  planes,  respectively
parallel  to  the  co-ordinate  planes,  into  a  number  of  little
cubes.  Those  points  of  the  world,  which  lie  on  such  a 'plane
(e.g.  the  ceiling  of  a  room)  will,  after  the  deformation,  form
a  more  or  less  bent  surface.  The  second  world  will  thus  be
divided  by  the  system  of  these  bent  planes  into  eight-

28


The  Mathematical  Formulation  of  Spatial  Relativity 29

cornered  cells,  which  will  in  general  be  different  in  size
and  form.  But  in  this  world,  we  should,  just  as  before,
denominate  these  surfaces  ' planes'  and  their  curves  of  inter-
section ' straight  lines',  and  the  cells  'cubes';  for  every
means  of  proving  that  they  are  not  'really'  so  would
be  lacking.  If  we  suppose  the  planes  numbered  in  order,
then  every  physical  point  of  the  deformed  world  is  defined
by  three  numbers,  namely  the  numbers  of  the  three  surfaces
which  intersect  at  it;  we  can  thus  use  these  numbers  as
co-ordinates  of  this  point,  and  shall  fittingly  call  them
'Gaussian  co-ordinates',  since  they  signify  the  same  for
three-dimensional  configurations  as  the  co-ordinates  which
Gauss  in  his  time  introduced  for  the  examination  of  two-
dimensional  configurations  (surfaces).  He  supposed  two
intersecting  families  of  curves  to  be  drawn  on  any  arbitrar-
ily curved  surface  in  such  a  way  as  to  lie  entirely  on  the  sur-
face. Each  surface-point  is  then  defined  by  specifying  the
two  curves  (one  member  from  each  family)  which  pass
through  the  point.  It  is  now  evident  that  with  these  assump-
tions the  bounding  surfaces  of  bodies,  the  path  of  light-
rays,  all  motions  and  all  natural  laws  in  the  deformed  world,
expressed  in  these  new  co-ordinates,  will  be  represented  by
identically  the  same  equations  as  the  corresponding  objects
and  events  of  the  original  world,  referred  to  ordinary  Car-
tesian co-ordinates,  provided  that  the  numbering  of  the  sur-
faces is  carried  out  correctly.  A  difference  between  the  two
worlds  exists,  as  we  havo  said,  only  so  long  3|S  one  erro-
neously supposes  that  planes  and  lines  can  be  defined  in
space  at  all  without  reference  to  bodies  in  it,  as  if  it  were
endowed  with  'absolute'  properties.

But,  if  we  regard  the  old  co-ordinates,  i.e.  the  system  of
perpendicularly  intersecting  planes,  from  the  point  of  view
of  the  new  universe,  these  planes  will  now — reciprocally —
seem  to  be  an  entirely  curved  and  distorted  system;  and  geo-


30 The  Mathematical  Formulation  of  Spatial  Relativity

metrical  forms  and  physical  laws,  when  referred  to  this  sys-
tem, assume  an  entirely  new  appearance.  Thus,  instead  of
saying  that  I  deform  the  world  in  a  certain  way,  I  can
equally  well  say  that  I  am  describing  the  unchanged  world
by  means  of  new  co-ordinates,  the  plane-system  of  which  is
deformed  in  some  definite  way  as  compared  with  the  first.
Both  processes  are  truly  the  same;  and  these  imaginary  de-
formations would  not  signify  any  real  alteration  of  the
world,  but  merely  a  reference  to  other  co-ordinates.

We  may  therefore  also  regard  the  world  in  which  we
live  as  the  distorted  one,  and  say  that  the  surfaces  of
bodies  (e.g.  the  ceiling  of  a  room),  which  we  call  planes,  are
not  'really'  such;  our  straight  lines  (light-rays)  are  'in
reality'  curved  lines,  &c.  We  could,  without  any  contra-
diction manifesting  itself,  assume  that  a  cube  which  is  taken
into  another  room  alters  its  shape  and  size  considerably  on
the  way ;  we  should  not  be  aware  of  the  change,  because  we
ourselves,  with  all  measuring  instruments  and  the  whole
surroundings,  suffer  analogous  changes ;  certain  curved  lines
would  have  to  be  considered  as  the  'true'  straight  lines.
The  angles  of  our  cubes,  which  we  call  right  angles,  would,
'in  reality',  not  be  so— yet  we  could  not  establish  this :  since
the  measure  by  means  of  which  we  have  determined  the
arms  of  the  angles  would  correspondingly  change  in  length,
when  we  turned  it  round  to  measure  the  circular  arc  belong-
ing to  the  angle.  The  sum  of  the  angles  of  our  square  would
'in  reality'  not  amount  to  four  right  angles — in  short,  it
would  be  as  if  we  used  a  geometry  other  than  Euclidean.
The  whole  assumption  would  be  tantamount  to  maintaining
that  certain  surfaces  and  lines,  that  appear  curved  to  us,
are  really  'true'  planes  and  straight  lines,  and  that  we
should  have  to  use  them  as  co-ordinates.

Why  do  we  not  actually  suppose  anything  of  the  sort,
although  it  would  be  theoretically  possible,  and  although  all


The  Mathematical  Formulation  of  Spatial  Relativity 3i

our  observations  could  be  explained  by  this  means?  Simply
because  this  explanation  could  be  given  only  in  a  very
complicated  way,  viz.  by  assuming  extremely  intricate
physical  laws.  The  shape  of  a  body  would  be  dependent
upon  its  position;  it  would,  if  sufficiently  far  removed  from
the  influence  of  external  forces,  describe  a  curved  line,  &c. ;
in  a  word,  we  should  arrive  at  a  very  involved  system  of
physics,  and — most  important  of  all — it  would  be  quite  arbi-
trary ;  for  there  would  be  an  unlimited  number  of  similarly
complicated  systems  of  physics,  which  would  all  serve
equally  well  for  describing  Experience.  Compared  with
these,  the  usual  system,  which  applies  Euclidean  geometry,
distinguishes  itself  as  the  simplest,  as  far  as  can  be  judged
up  to  the  present.  The  lines  which  we  call ' straight'  play  a
special  role  in  physics ;  they  are,  as  Poincare  expresses  it,
more  *  important'  than  other  lines.  A  co-ordinate  system
founded  on  these  lines  therefore  leads  to  the  simplest  for-
mulae for  physical  laws.


THE  INSEPARABILITY  OF  GEOMETRY  AND
PHYSICS  IN  EXPERIENCE

THE  reasons  for  preferring  the  usual  system  of  geometry
and  physics  to  all  other  possible  ones,  and  for  considering  it
to  be  the  only  'true'  one,  are  exactly  the  same  as  those
which  make  the  Copernican  view  of  the  world  superior  to
that  of  Ptolemy;  the  former  leads  to  a  much  simpler  system
of  celestial  mechanics.  The  formulation  of  the  laws  of  plane-
tary motions  become  excessively  complicated,  if  we  refer
them,  as  Ptolemy  did,  to  a  co-ordinate  system  rigidly  at-
tached to  the  earth ;  on  the  other  hand,  the  process  becomes
quite  simple,  if  a  co-ordinate  system  which  is  at  rest  with
respect  to  the  fixed  stars  be  chosen.

We  thus  see  that  experience  in  no  wise  compels  us  to  make
use  of  an  absolute  geometry,  e.g.  that  of  Euclid,  for  the
physical  description  of  nature.  It  teaches  us  only  what
geometry  we  must  use,  if  we  wish  to  arrive  at  the  simplest
formulae  to  express  the  laws  of  physics.  From  this  it
immediately  follows  that  there  is  no  meaning  in  talking  of
an  absolute  geometry  of  ' space',  omitting  all  reference  to
physics  and  the  behaviour  of  physical  bodies;  for,  since
experience  leads  us  to  choose  only  a  certain  geometry,  in
that  it  shows  us  in  what  way  the  behaviour  of  bodies  can  be
described  most  simply  in  mathematical  language,  it  is  mean-
ingless to  attempt  to  assign  a  distinctive  position  to  any  one
geometry,  as  long  as  we  leave  material  bodies  out  of  account.
Poincare  has  expressed  this  tersely  in  the  words:  'Space

32


Inseparability  of  Geometry  cmd  Physics  in  Experience 33

itself  is  amorphous;  only  the  things  in  it  give  it  a  form.'
I  shall  just  recall  a  few  remarks  of  Helmholtz,  in  which
he  expresses  the  same  truth.  At  the  conclusion  of  his
lecture  on  the  Origin  and  Significance  of  the  Axioms  of
Geometry,  he  says:  'If  for  some  particular  reason  we  were
to  find  it  expedient,  we  could  quite  logically  consider  the
space  in  which  we  live  to  be  like  the  apparent  space  as
pictured  in  a  convex  mirror,  wherein  lines  converge  and  the
background  is  contracted;  or,  we  could  take  a  limited  spheri-
cal portion'of  our  space,  beyond  the  boundaries  of  which  our
perceptions  do  not  extend,  and  regard  it  as  boundless
pseudo-spherical  space.  We  should,  in  that  case,  have  to
ascribe  to  bodies  which  appear  rigid  to  us,  and  to  our  own
bodies  at  the  same  time,  only  the  corresponding  extensions
and  contractions ;  and  we  should,  of  course,  have  to  alter  our
system  of  mechanical  principles  entirely.  For  even  the
simple  theorem  that  every  point  which  is  in  motion  and  is  not
acted  on  by  any  forces  continues  to  move  in  a  straight  line
with  invariable  velocity,  no  longer  holds  true  for  the  world
which  is  represented  in  a  convex  mirror.  .  .  .  Geometrical
axioms  are  in  no  way  confined  to  relations  in  space  alone,
but  also  make  assertions  about  the  mechanical  behaviour  of
our  most  rigid  bodies  when  in  motion.'

Since  the  time  of  Riemann  and  Helmholtz  we  have  been  ac-
customed to  talk  of  plane,  spherical,  pseudo-spherical  and
other  spaces,  and  discriminate  from  our  observations  to
which  of  these  classes  our  'real'  space  belongs.  We  now  un-
derstand how  to  interpret  this :  viz.  not  as  if  one  of  these  can
be  predicated  of  space,  without  taking  account  of  objects  in
it ;  but  in  the  sense  that  experience  teaches  us  only  whether  it
is  more  practical  to  use  Euclidean  or  non-Euclidean  geom-
etry for  the  physical  description  of  nature.  Riemann  him-
self, and  likewise  Helmholtz,  was  quite  clear  about  the  ques-
tion ;  but  the  results  of  both  these  investigators  have  often


34 Inseparability  of  Geometry  and  Physics  in  Experience

been  misinterpreted,  so  that  they  have  occasionally  even
been  used  to  strengthen  the  belief  that  absolute  space  has  a
particular  form  of  its  own  ascertainable  from  experience.
We  must  be  on  our  guard  against  assuming  that  space  has
any  *  physical  reality'  in  this  sense.  It  is  well  known  that
Gauss  tried  to  measure  directly,  by  means  of  theodolites,
whether  the  sum  of  the  angles  of  a  very  large  triangle
amount  to  two  right  angles  or  not.  That  is,  he  measured  the
angles  which  three  light-rays,  emitted  from  three  'fixed
points  (The  Brocken,  Hoher  Hagen,  and  Inselberg),  made
with  each  other.  Supposing  that  a  deviation  from  two  right
angles  had  manifested  itself,  we  could  either  regard  the
light-rays  as  curved  and  still  use  Euclidean  geometry,  or
we  could  still  call  the  path  of  a  light-ray  straight,  but  we
should  then  have  to  introduce  a  non-Euclidean  geometry.
It  is  therefore  not  correct  to  say  that  experience  could  ever
prove  space  to  be  *  non-Euclidean  in  structure',  i.e.  could
ever  compel  us  to  adopt  the  second  of  these  alternatives.  On
the  other  hand,  Poincare  also  errs  when  he  somewhere  ex-
presses the  opinion  that  the  physicist  would  actually  always
choose  the  first  assumption.  For  no  one  was  able  to  predict
whether  it  might  not  some  time  be  necessary  to  depart  from
Euclidean  measure-determinations  in  order  to  be  able  to  de-
scribe the  physical  behaviour  of  bodies  most  simply.

All  that  could  be  affirmed  at  that  time  was  that  we  should
never  find  occasion  to  depart  from  Euclidean  geometry  to
any  considerable  degree,  since  otherwise  our  observations,
particularly  in  astronomy,  would  long  ago  have  called  our
attention  to  this  fact.  Hitherto,  however,  by  using
Euclidean  geometry  as  a  foundation,  we  have  admirably
succeeded  in  arriving  at  simple  physical  principles.  From
this  we  may  conclude  that  it  will  always  be  suited  for  at  least
an  approximate  description  of  physical  events.  If,  therefore,
to  attain  simplicity  of  expression,  it  should  prove  convenient


Inseparability  of  Geometry  and  Physics  in  Experience 35

to  give  up  Euclidean  measure-determinations  in  physics,
such  resulting  deviations  could  only  be  slight,  and  would
show  differences  only  in  regions  on  the  outskirts  of  our  field
of  observation.  The  essential  significance  of  these  devia-
tions, whether  great  or  small,  naturally  remains  the  same.
This  case,  hitherto  only  a  theoretical  possibility,  has  now
presented  itself.  Einstein  shows  that  non-Euclidean  rela-
tions must  actually  be  used  in  representing  spatial  condi-
tions in  physics  so  that  it  may  be  possible  to  maintain  the
extraordinary  simplification  of  the  principles  underlying  our
view  of  physical  nature,  as  embodied  in  the  general  theory
of  relativity.  We  shall  return  to  this  point  presently.  Mean-
while, we  shall  accept  the  result  that  space  itself  in  no  wise
has  a  form  of  its  own ;  it  is  neither  Euclidean  nor  non-Euclid-
ean in  constitution,  just  as  it  is  not  a  peculiarity  of  distance
to  be  measured  in  kilometres  and  not  in  miles.  In  the  same
way  as  a  distance  only  acquires  a  definite  length  when  we
have  chosen  a  particular  measure  as  unit,  and  in  addition  set
out  the  mode  of  measurement,  so  a  definite  geometry  can  be
applied  to  physical  reality  only  when  a  definite  method  has
been  fixed  upon,  according  to  which  spatial  conditions  are  to
be  abstracted  from  physical  conditions.  Every  measurement
of  spatial  distances,  when  reduced  to  the  essentials,  is  per-
formed by  placing  one  body  against  another ;  if  such  a  com-
parison between  two  bodies  is  to  become  a  measurement,
it  must  be  interpreted  by  taking  due  account  of  certain
principles  (e.g.  one  must  assume  that  certain  bodies  are
to  be  regarded  as  rigid,  i.e.  endure  a  translation  without
change  of  form).  Precisely  similar  reflections  may  be  made
mutatis  mutandis  for  time.  Experience  cannot  compel  us
to  found  our  description  of  physical  nature  upon  a  definite
measure  and  rate  of  time ;  we  choose  just  that  measure  and
rate  which  enable  us  to  formulate  physical  laws  most  simply.
All  time-determinations  are  just  as  indissolubly  associated


36 Inseparability  of  Geometry  and  Physics  in  Experience

with  physical  occurrences  as  spatial  ones  are  with  physical
bodies.  Quantitative  observations  of  any  physical  occur-
rence, such  as  e.g.  the  propagation  of  light  from  one  point
to  another,  imply  that  readings  must  be  taken  from  a  clock,
and  thus  assume  a  method  according  to  which  clocks  in
different  localities  are  to  be  regulated  with  one  another.
Without  this  means,  the  conceptions  of  simultaneity  and
equal  duration  have  no  definite  meaning.  These  are  matters
to  which  we  called  attention  earlier,  when  we  were  discussing
the  special  theory  of  relativity.  All  time-measurements  are
undertaken  by  comparing  two  events,  and  if  they  are  to  have
the  significance  of  a  true  measurement,  some  convention  or
principle  must  be  assumed,  the  choice  of  which  will  again
be  determined  by  the  endeavour  to  obtain  physical  laws  in
the  simplest  form.

We  thus  see:  Time  and  Space  can  be  dissociated  from
physical  things  and  events  only  in  abstraction,  i.e.  mentally.
The  combination  or  oneness  of  space,  time,  and  things  is
alone  reality;  each  by  itself  is  an  abstraction.  Whenever
we  make  an  abstraction,  we  must  always  ask  whether  it
has  a  physical  meaning,  i.e.  whether  the  products  of  ab-
straction are  actually  independent  of  one  another.


VI

THE  EELATIVITY  OF  MOTIONS  AND  ITS
CONNEXION  WITH  INERTIA  AND  GRAVITATION

IF  one  had  not  lost  sight  of  this  last  truth,  the  celebrated
controversy,  whch  was  always  being  renewed,  about  so-
called  absolute  motion  would  from  the  very  outset  have
assumed  a  different  aspect.  The  conception  of  motion  has,
in  the  first  place,  a  real  meaning  only  in  dynamics,  as  the
change  of  position  of  material  bodies  with  time;  so-called
pure  kinematics  (known  as  'phoronomy'  in  Kant's  time)
arises  out  of  dynamics  by  abstracting  from  mass,  and  is  thus
the  time-change  of  the  position  of  mere  mathematical  points.
How  far  this  product  of  abstraction  may  serve  for  describing
physical  nature  can  be  decided  only  by  experience.  Before
the  time  of  Einstein,  the  opponents  of  absolute  motion
(e.g.  Mach)  always  argued  thus:  Every  determination  of
position,  being  only  defined  for  a  definite  system  of  refer-
ence, is,  as  regards  its  conception,  relative,  and  therefore
also  every  change  of  position.  Hence  only  relative  motion
exists,  i.e.  there  can  be  no  unique  system  of  reference;
for,  since  the  conception  of  rest  is  only  relative,  I  must
be  able  to  regard  every  system  of  reference  as  being  at
rest.  This  method  of  proof,  however,  overlooks  the  fact  that
the  definition  of  motion  as  being  merely  change  of  position
applies  to  motion  only  in  the  kinematical  sense.  For  real
motions,  i.e.  for  mechanics  or  dynamics,  this  conclusion
need  not  be  regarded  as  final;  experience  must  prove
whether  it  is  justified.  From  the  purely  kinematical  point

37


38  Relativity  of  Motions  and  its  Connexion

of  view,  it  is,  of  course,  the  same  to  say  that  the  earth
rotates  as  that  the  stellar  heavens  are  rotating  around
the  earth.  It  does  not  follow,  however,  that  both  state-
ments are  indistinguishable  dynamically.  Newton,  as  is
known,  assumed  the  contrary.  He  believed — apparently  in
perfect  agreement  with  experience — that  a  rotating  body
could  be  distinguished  from  one  at  rest  by  the  appearance
of  centrifugal  forces  (with  resultant  flattening) ;  and  abso-
lute rest  (leaving  out  of  account  any  motion  of  uniform
translation)  would  be  denned  by  the  absence  of  centrifugal
forces.  In  realizable  experience,  every  accelerated  change
of  position  is  accompanied  by  the  appearance  of  inertial  re-
sistances (e.g.  centrifugal  forces) ;  and  it  is  quite  arbitrary
to  declare  one  of  these  factors,  which  both  belong  equally  to
physical  motion,  and  are  only  separable  in  abstraction,  to  be
the  cause  of  the  other,  viz.  to  regard  the  inertial  resistances
as  the  effect  of  the  acceleration.  It  cannot  therefore  be
proved  out  of  the  mere  conception  of  motion  (as  Mach  en-
deavoured to  do)  that  there  can  be  no  unique  system  of  ref-
erence, i.e.  that  there  can  be  no  absolute  motion;  the  de-
cision can  only  be  left  to  observation.

Newton  certainly  erred  in  believing  that  observation  had
already  decided  this  question,  viz.  in  the  sense  that  two  uni-
form rectilinear  motions  were  in  fact  relative  (i.e.  that  the
laws  of  dynamics  are  exactly  the  same  for  two  systems  of
reference  which  are  moving  uniformly  and  rectilinearly
with  regard  to  one  another),  but  that  this  was  not  true  for
accelerated  motions  (e.g.  rotations).  Accelerations,  he
thought,  were  of  an  absolute  nature ;  certain  systems  of  ref-
erence were  unique  in  that  the  Law  of  Inertia  held  for  them
alone.  They  were  therefore  called  Inertial  Systems.  Ac-
cording to  Newton,  an  Inertial  System  would  thus  be  de-
fined and  recognizable  as  one  in  which  a  body,  upon  which
no  forces  act,  would  move  uniformly  and  rectilinearly  (or


with  Inertia  and  Gravitation  39

remain  at  rest) ;  and  consequently  centrifugal  forces  (or
flattening)  would  only  fail  to  manifest  themselves  in  or  on  a
body  if  it  were  not  rotating  with  reference  to  the  inertial
system.  Newton  used  these  views  as  a  foundation  for  me-
chanics unjustifiably;  for  actually  they  are  not  sufficiently
founded  on  experience.  No  observation  shows  us  a  body  on
which  no  forces  are  acting,1  and  no  experience  has  yet
proved  whether  a  body  which  is  at  rest  in  an  inertial  system
might  not  be  subject  to  centrifugal  forces  if  an  extraordi-
narily great  mass  were  to  rotate  near  it,  i.e.  whether  these
forces  are  not,  after  all,  only  peculiarities  of  relative
rotation.

The  state  of  affairs  was  in  fact  as  follows.  On  the  one
hand,  the  experiences  so  far  known  did  not  suffice  to  prove
the  correctness  of  Newton's  assumption  that  absolute  ac-
celerations existed  (i.e.  unique  systems  of  reference) ;  on
the  other  hand,  the  general  arguments  in  favour  of  the  rela-
tivity of  all  accelerations,  e.g.  Mach's,  were  not,  as  we  have
just  shown,  conclusive.  From  the  standpoint  of  actual  ex-
perience, both  points  of  view  had  for  the  time  being  to  be
considered  admissible.  But,  regarded  philosophically,  the
standpoint  which  denied  the  existence  of  unique  systems  of
reference,  thus  affirming  all  motions  to  be  relative,  is  very
attractive,  and  possesses  great  advantages  over  the  New-
tonian view;  for,  if  it  were  realizable,  it  would  signify  an
extraordinary  simplification  of  our  picture  of  the  world.
It  would  be  exceedingly  satisfactory  to  be  able  to  say  that
not  only  uniform,  but  indeed  all,  motions  are  relative.  The
kinematical  and  dynamical  conception  of  motion  would  then
become  identical  in  essence.  To  determine  the  character  of
motion,  purely  kinematical  observations  would  suffice.  It
would  not  be  necessary  to  add  observations  about  centrifu-

iMach and Pearson called particular attention to this. Karl Pearson,
Grammar  of  Science,  Chap.  VIII,  §  4.


40 Relativity  of  Motions  and  its  Connexion

gal  forces,  as  it  was  for  the  Newtonian  view.  A  system  of
mechanics  built  up  on  relative  motions  would  thus  result  in
a  much  more  compact  and  complete  view  of  the  world  than
that  of  Newton.  It  would  not  indeed  (as  was  apparently
the  opinion  of  Mach)  'be  proved  to  be  the  only  correct  view
of  the  universe;  but  (as  Einstein  points  out)  it  would
recommend  itself  from  the  very  outset  by  its  imposing  sim-
plicity and  finish.1

Up  to  the  time  of  Einstein,  however,  such  a  world-view,
i.e.  the  idea  of  a  system  of  mechanics  founded  on  relative
motions,  had  been  only  a  desire,  an  alluring  goal;-  such  a
system  of  mechanics  had  never  been  enunciated,  nor  had  a
possible  way  to  it  even  been  pointed  out.  There  was  no
means  of  knowing  whether,  and  under  what  conditions,  it
was  possible  at  all  or  compatible  with  empirical  facts.  In-
deed, science  seemed  to  be  constrained  to  develop  in  the
contrary  direction;  for,  whereas  in  classical  mechanics  all
systems  moving  uniformly  and  rectilinearly  with  respect
to  one  inertial  system  were  likewise  inertial  systems  (so
that  at  least  all  uniform  motions  of  translation  preserved

i  Einstein  adds  that  Newton's  mechanics  only  seemingly  satisfies  the
demands  of  causality,  e.g.  in  the  case  of  bodies  which  are  rotating  and  suffer
a  flattening.  But  this  mode  of  expression  does  not  appear  to  me  to  be  quite
free  from  objection.  We  need  not  look  upon  the  Newtonian  doctrine  as
making  Galilean  space,  which  is  of  course  not  an  observable  thing,  the  cause
of  centrifugal  forces;  but  we  can  also  consider  the  expression  *  absolute
space*  to  be  a  paraphrase  of  the  mere  fact  that  these  forces  exist.  They
would  then  simply  be  immediate  data;  and  the  question  why  they  arise  in
certain  bodies  and  are  wanting  in  others  would  be  on  the  same  level  with
the  question  why  a  body  is  present  at  one  place  in  the  world  and  not  at
another.  Absolute  rotation  need  not  be  regarded  as  the  cause  of  the  flatten-
ing, but  we  can  say  that  the  former  is  defined  by  the  latter.  In  this  way
I  believe  that  Newton's  dynamics  is  quite  in  order  as  regards  the  principle
of  causality.  It  would  be  easy  to  defend  it  against  the  objection  that  purely
fictitious  causes  are  introduced  into  it,  although  Newton's  own  formulation
was  incorrect.


with  Inertia  and  Gravitation  41

the  character  of  being  relative),  in  the  case  of  electromag-
netic and  optical  phenomena,  even  this  no  longer  seemed  to
hold;  in  Lorentz's  Electrodynamics  there  was  only  one
unique  system  of  reference  (the  one  which  is  '  at  rest  in
the  aether  ').  Only  after  Einstein  had  succeeded  in  ex-
tending the  special  principle  of  relativity,  which  was  valid
in  classical  mechanics,  to  all  physical  phenomena,  could  the
idea  of  the  entirely  general  relativity  of  any  arbitrary
motions  again  be  taken  up  on  the  ground  thus  prepared;
and  again  it  was  in  the  hands  of  Einstein  that  it  bore
fruit.  He  transplanted  it  as  it  were  from  regions  of  phil-
osophy to  those  of  physics,  and  thereby  brought  it  within
the  range  of  scientific  research.

Although  the  philosophical  arguments  were  so  powerful
in  themselves,  Einstein  gave  them  additional  weight  by  add-
ing to  them  the  physical  argument  that  all  motions  were
most  probably  endowed  with  a  relative  character.  This
physical  argument  is  built  on  the  equality  of  inertial  and
gravitational  mass.  We  can  see  it  more  clearly  in  the  fol-
lowing way.  If  we  assume  all  accelerations  to  be  relative,
then  all  centrifugal  forces,  or  other  inertial  resistances
which  we  observe,  must  depend  on  motion  relative  to  other
bodies;  we  must  therefore  seek  the  cause  of  these  inertial
resistances  in  the  presence  of  those  other  bodies.  If,  for
example,  there  were  no  other  body  present  in  the  heavens
except  the  earth,  we  could  not  speak  of  a  rotation  of  the
earth,  and  the  earth  could  not  be  flattened  at  the  poles.  The
centrifugal  forces,  as  a  consequence  of  which  the  earth's
flattening  comes  about,  must  thus  owe  their  existence  to  the
action  on  the  earth  of  the  heavenly  bodies.  Now,  as  a  matter
of  fact,  classical  mechanics  is  acquainted  with  an  action
which  all  bodies  exert  on  one  another,  viz.  Gravitation.
Does  experience  lend  any  support  to  the  suggestion  that  this
gravitational  influence  might  be  made  answerable  for  the


42  Relativity  of  Motions  and  its  Connexion

inertial  effects?  This  support  is  actually  to  be  found,  and
is  very  remarkable ;  it  consists  in  the  circumstance  that  one
and  the  same  constant  plays  the  determining  role  for  both
inertial  and  gravitational  effects,  viz.  the  quantity  known  as
mass.  If,  for  instance,  a  body  describes  a  circular  path
relatively  to  an  inertial  system,  the  necessary  central  force
is,  according  to  classical  mechanics,  proportional  to  a  factor
m  which  is  a  characteristic  for  the  body ;  but  if  the  body  is
attracted  by  another  body  (e.g.  the  earth)  in  virtue  of  gravi-
tation, the  force  acting  on  it  (e.g.  its  weight)  is  proportional
to  this  same  factor  m.  It  is  on  account  of  this  that,  at  the
same  place  in  a  gravitational  field,  all  bodies  without  excep-
tion suffer  the  same  acceleration;  for  the  mass  of  a  body
eliminates  itself,  since  it  occurs  as  a  factor  of  proportion-
ality both  in  the  expression  for  the  inertial  resistance  and
in  that  for  the  attraction.

Einstein  has  made  the  connexion  between  gravitation  and
inertia  extraordinarily  clear  by  the  following  reflection.  If
a  physicist,  enclosed  in  a  box  somewhere  out  in  space,  were
to  observe  that  all  objects  left  to  themselves  in  the  box  ac-
quired a  certain  acceleration,  e.g.  fell  to  the  bottom  with
constant  acceleration,  he  could  interpret  this  phenomenon
in  two  ways: — in  the  first  place,  he  could  assume  that  his
box  was  resting  on  the  surface  of  some  heavenly  body,  and"
he  would  then  ascribe  the  falling  of  the  objects  to  the  gravi-
tational influence  of  the  heavenly  body;  or,  he  could  assume
instead  that  the  box  was  moving  '  up  wards'  with  constant
acceleration,  and  then  the  behaviour  of  the  *  falling'  bodies
would  be  explained  by  their  inertia.  Both  explanations  are
equally  possible,  and  the  enclosed  physicist  would  have  no
means  of  discriminating  between  them.  If  we  now  assume
that  all  accelerations  are  relative,  and  that  a  means  of  dis-
crimination is  essentially  wanting,  this  may  be  generalized.
We  may  consider  the  observed  acceleration  of  any  body  left


with  Inertia  and  Gravitation  43

to  itself,  at  any  point  in  the  universe,  to  be  due  to  the  effect
either  of  inertia  or  of  gravitation,  i.e.  we  may  either  say
'the  system  of  reference,  from  which  I  am  observing  this
event,  is  accelerated7  or  'the  event  is  taking  place  in  a
gravitational  field'.  We  shall  follow  Einstein,  and  call
the  statement  that  both  interpretations  are  equally  jus-
tifiable the  Principle  of  Equivalence.  It  is  founded,  as  we
have  seen,  on  the  identity  of  inertial  and  gravitational
mass.

The  circumstance  of  the  identity  of  these  two  factors  is
very  striking,  and  when  we  get  to  realize  its  full  import,  it
seems  astonishing  that  it  did  not  occur  to  any  one  before
Einstein  to  bring  gravitation  and  inertia  into  closer  con-
nexion with  one  another.  If  something  analogous  had  been
observed  in  another  branch  of  physics  (e.g.  if  an  effect  had
been  found  which  was  proportional  to  the  quantity  of  elec-
tricity associated  with  a  body)  we  should  immediately  have
brought  it  into  relationship  with  the  remaining  electrical
phenomena ;  we  should  have  regarded  electrical  forces,  and
the  supposed  new  effect,  as  different  manifestations  of  one
and  the  same  governing  principle.  In  classical  mechanics,
however,  not  the  slightest  connexion  was  introduced  be-
tween gravitational  and  inertial  phenomena ;  they  were  not
comprised  under  one  sole  principle,  but  existed  side  by  side
totally  unrelated.  The  fact  that  one  and  the  same  factor —
mass — played  a  similar  part  in  each  seemed  mere  chance  to
Newton.  Is  it  really  only  chance?  This  seems  improbable
in  the  highest  degree.

The  identity  of  inertial  and  gravitational  mass  is  thus  the
real  ground  of  experience  which  gives  us  the  right  to  assume
or  assert  that  the  inertial  effects  which  we  observe  in  bodies
are  to  be  traced  back  to  the  influence  which  is  exerted
upon  them  by  other  bodies.  (This  influence  is,  of  course,
in  accordance  with  modern  views,  to  be  conceived  not  as


44  Relativity  of  Motions  and  its  Connexion

an  action  at  a  distance,  but  as  being  transmitted  through
a  field.)

The  above  assertion  (of  identity)  implies  the  postulate  of
an  unlimited  relativity  of  motions ;  for,  since  all  phenomena
are  to  depend  only  on  the  mutual  position  and  motion  of
bodies,  reference  to  any  particular  co-ordinate  system  no
longer  occurs.  The  expression  of  physical  laws,  with  refer-
ence to  a  co-ordinate  system  attached  to  any  arbitrary  body
(e.g.  the  sun),  must  be  the  same  as  with  reference  to  one
attached  to  any  other  body  whatsoever  (e.g.  a  merry-go-
round  on  the  earth) ;  we  should  be  able  to  look  upon  both
with  equal  right  as  being  'at  rest'.  The  laws  of  Newtonian
mechanics  had  to  be  referred  to  a  perfectly  definite  system
(an  Inertial  System)  which  was  quite  independent  of  the
mutual  position  of  bodies ;  for  the  Law  of  Inertia  held  for
these  only.  In  the  new  mechanics,  on  the  other  hand,  which
has  to  look  upon  inertial  and  gravitational  forces  as  the  ex-
pression of  a  single  fundamental  law,  not  only  gravitational
phenomena,  but  also  inertial  phenomena,  are  to  depend  ex-
clusively on  the  position  and  motion  of  bodies  relative  to
one  another.  The  expression  for  this  fundamental  law
must  accordingly  be  such  that  no  co-ordinate  system  plays
a  unique  part  compared  with  the  others,  but  that  all  remain
valid  for  any  arbitrary  system.  It  is  evident  that  the  old
Newtonian  dynamics  can  signify  only  a  first  approximation
to  the  new  mechanics ;  for  the  latter  demands,  in  contradis-
tinction to  the  former,  that  centrifugal  accelerations,  for
example,  must  be  induced  in  a  body  if  large  masses  rotate
around  it;  and  the  contradiction  between  the  new  theory
and  classical  mechanics  does  not  come  into  evidence  in  this
particular  case,  merely  because  these  forces  are  so  small,
even  for  the  greatest  available  masses  in  the  experiment,
that  they  escape  our  observation.

Einstein  has  actually  succeeded  in  establishing  a  funda-


with  Inertia  and  Gravitation  45

mental  law  which  comprises  inertial  and  gravitational
phenomena  alike.  We  are  now  better  prepared  to  follow
the  line  of  argument  by  which  Einstein  arrived  at  this
result.


VII


THE  GENERAL  POSTULATE  OF  RELATIVITY
AND  THE  MEASURE-DETERMINATIONS  OF
THE  SPACE-TIME  CONTINUUM

THE  idea  of  relativity  has  only  been  applied  in  the  preced-
ing pages  to  physical  thought  in  so  far  as  it  bears  on  mo-
tions. If  these  are  really  relative  without  exception,  any  co-
ordinate systems  moving  arbitrarily  with  reference  to  one
another  are  equivalent,  and  space  loses  its  objectivity,  in  so
far  as  it  is  not  possible  to  define  any  motions  or  accelera-
tions with  respect  to  it.  Yet  it  still  preserves  a  certain  ob-
jectivity, so  long  as  we  tacitly  imagine  it  to  be  provided  with
absolutely  definite  metrical  properties.  In  the  older  physics
every  process  of  measurement  was  unhesitatingly  founded
on  the  notion  of  a  rigid  rod,  which  preserved  the  same
length  at  all  times,  no  matter  what  its  position  and  sur-
roundings might  be;  and  proceeding  from  this,  all  measure-
ments were  determined  according  to  the  rules  of  Euclidean
geometry.  This  process  was  not  changed  in  any  way  in  the
new  physics  which  is  based  on  the  special  theory  of  relativ-'
ity,  provided  that  the  condition  was  fulfilled  that  the  meas-
urements were  all  carried  out  within  the  same  co-ordinate
system,  by  means  of  a  rod  respectively  at  rest  with  regard
to  each  system  in  question.  In  this  way  space  was  still  en-
dowed with  the  independent  property,  as  it  were,  of  being
1  Euclidean'  in  t structure',  since  the  results  of  these  meas-
ure-determiations  were  regarded  as  being  entirely  inde-

46


Measure-Determinations  of  the  Space-time  Contmuum  47

pendent  of  the  physical  conditions  prevailing  in  space,  e.g.
of  the  distribution  of  bodies  and  their  gravitational  fields.
Now  we  have  seen  that  it  is  always  possible  to  fix  the  posi-
tion- and  magnitude-relations  of  bodies  and  events  accord-
ing to  the  ordinary  Euclidean  rule,  e.g.  by  means  of  Car-
tesian co-ordinates,  so  long  as  the  laws  of  physics  have  been
correspondingly  formulated.  But  we  are  subject  to  a  limi-
tation :  we  had  set  out  to  determine  them,  if  possible,  in  such
a  manner  that  the  general  postulate  of  relativity  would  be
fulfilled.  Now  it  by  no  means  follows  that  we  shall  succeed
in  fulfilling  this  condition  if  we  use  Euclidean  geometry.
We  have  to  take  into  account  the  possibility  that  this  may
not  be  so.  Just  in  the  same  way  as  we  found  that  the  postu-
late of  special  relativity  could  be  satisfied  only  if  the  con-
ception of  time  which  had  previously  prevailed  in  physics
was  modified,  it  is  likewise  quite  possible  that  the  general-
ized principle  of  relativity  might  compel  us  to  depart  from
ordinary  Euclidean  geometry.

Einstein,  by  considering  a  very  simple  example,  comes  to
the  conclusion  that  we  are  actually  compelled  to  make  this
departure.  If  we  fix  our  attention  upon  two  rotating  co-
ordinate systems,  and  assume  that  in  one  of  them,  say  K,
the  positional  relations  of  the  bodies  at  rest  (in  K)  can  be
determined  by  means  of  Euclidean  geometry  (at  least  in
a  certain  domain  of  K),  then  this  is  certainly  not  possible
for  the  second  system  K1.  This  is  easily  seen  as  follows.
Let  the  origin  of  co-ordinates  and  the  £-axis  of  the  two
systems  coincide,  and  let  the  one  system  rotate  relatively  to
the  other  about  this  common  axis.  We  shall  suppose  a
circle  described  about  the  origin  as  centre  in  the  #-?/-plane
of  K;  for  reasons  of  symmetry  this  is  also  a  circle  in  K1.
If  Euclidean  geometry  holds  in  K,  then  the  ratio  of  the  cir-
cumference to  the  diameter  is  in  this  system  n ;.  but  if  we
determine  this  same  ratio  by  means  of  measurements  with


48  General  Postulate  of  Relativity  and

rods  which  are  at  rest  in  Kl,  we  obtain  a  value  greater  than
TT.  For,  if  we  regard  this  process  of  measurement  from  the
system  K,  the  measuring-rod  has  the  same  length  in  meas-
uring the  diameter  as  if  it  were  at  rest  in  K:  whereas  in
measuring  the  circumference  it  is  shortened,  owing  to  the
Lorentz-Fitzgerald  contraction ;  the  ratio  of  these  numbers
thus  becomes  greater  than  n  and  the  geometry  which  holds
in  K1  is  not  Euclidean.  Now,  the  centrifugal  forces  with
respect  to  K1,  which  are  due  to  inertial  effects  (on  the  old
theory),  may,  however,  be  regarded  at  every  point,  accord-
ing to  the  Principle  of  Equivalence,  as  gravitational  effects.
From  this  it  can  be  seen  that  the  existence  of  a  gravita-
tional field  demands  that  non-Euclidean  measure-determina-
tions be  used.  Strictly  speaking,  there  is,  however,  no  finite
domain  which  is  entirely  free  from  gravitational  effects ;  so
that,  if  we  wish  to  maintain  the  postulate  of  general  rela-
tivity, we  must  refrain  from  describing  metrical  and  posi-
tional relations  of  bodies  by  Euclidean  methods.  This  does
not  mean  that  in  place  of  Euclidean  geometry  we  are  now  to
use  some  other  definite  geometry,  such  as  that  of  Lobats-
chewsky  or  Riemann,  for  the  whole  of  space  (cf.  Section  IX
below),  but  that  all  types  of  measure-determination  are  to
be  used :  in  general,  a  different  sort  at  every  place.  Which
it  is  to  be,  depends  upon  the  gravitational  field  at  the  place.
There  is  not  the  slightest  difficulty  in  thinking  of  space  in
this  way;  for  we  fully  convinced  ourselves  above  that  it  is
only  the  things  in  space  which  give  it  a  definite  structure
or  constitution ;  and  now  we  have  only  to  assign  this  role —
as  we  shall  immediately  see — to  gravitational  masses  or
their  gravitational  fields  respectively.  It  becomes  impossible
to  define  and  measure  lengths  and  times  (as  may  likewise
easily  be  shown)  in  a  gravitational  field  in  the  simple  man-
ner described  in  Section  II,  by  means  of  clocks  and  measur-
ing-rods. Since  gravitational  fields  are  nowhere  absent,  the


Measure-Determinations  of  the  Space-time  Continuum 49

special  theory  of  relativity  nowhere  holds  accurately;  the
velocity  of  light,  for  instance,  is  never  in  truth  absolutely
constant.  It  would,  however,  be  quite  wrong  to  say  that  the
special  theory  had  been  proved  to  be  false,  and  had  been
overthrown  by  the  general  theory.  It  has  really  only  been
assimilated  in  the  latter.  It  represents  the  special  case
into  which  the  general  theory  resolves  when  gravitational
effects  become  negligible.

It  follows,  then,  from  the  general  theory  of  relativity  that
it  is  quite  impossible  to  ascribe  any  properties  to  space  with-
out taking  into  account  the  things  in  it.  The  relativization
of  space  has  thus  been  carried  out  completely  in  physics,  as
was  shown  by  the  above  general  considerations  to  be  the
most  likely  result.  Space  and  Time  are  never  objects  of
measurement  in  themselves ;  only  conjointly  do  they  consti-
tute a  four-dimensional  scheme,  into  which  we  arrange
physical  objects  and  processes  by  the  aid  of  our  observa-
tions and  measurements.  We  choose  this  scheme  in  such  a
way  that  the  resultant  system  of  physics  assumes  as  simple
a  form  as  possible.  (We  are  free  to  choose,  since  we  are
dealing  with  a  product  of  abstraction.)

How  is  this  arrangement  to  be  fitted  into  the  scheme?
What  is  it  that  we  really  observe  and  measure?

It  is  easily  seen  that  the  possibility  of  observing  accur-
ately depends  upon  noting  identically  the  same  physical
points  at  various  times  and  in  various  places ;  and  that  all
measuring  reduces  itself  to  establishing  that  two  such
points,  upon  which  we  have  fixed,  coincide  at  the  same  place
and  at  the  same  time.  A  length  is  measured  by  applying  a
unit  measure  to  a  body,  and  observing  the  coincidence  of  its
ends  with  definite  points  on  the  body.  With  our  apparatus
the  measurement  of  all  physical  quantities  resolves  finally
into  the  measurement  of  a  length.  The  adjustment  and
reading  of  all  measuring  instruments  of  whatsoever  va-


50  General  Postulate  of  Relativity  and

riety — whether  they  be  provided  with  pointers  or  scales,
angular-diversions,  water-levels,  mercury  columns,  or  any
other  means — are  always  accomplished  by  observing  the
space-time-coincidence  of  two  or  more  points. .  This  is  also
true  above  all  of  apparatus  used  to  measure  time,  familiarly
termed  clocks.  Such  coincidences  are  therefore,  strictly
speaking,  alone  capable  of  being  observed ;  and  the  whole  of
physics  may  be  regarded  as  a  quintessence  of  laws,  accord-
ing to  which  the  occurrence  of  these  space-time-coincidences
takes  place.  Everything  else  in  our  world-picture  which  can
not  be  reduced  to  such  coincidences  is  devoid  of  physical  ob-
jectivity, and  may  just  as  well  be  replaced  by  something
else.  All  world  pictures  which  lead  to  the  same  laws  for
these  point-coincidences  are,  from  the  point  of  view  of
physics,  in  every  way  equivalent.  We  saw  earlier  that  it
signifies  no  observable,  physically  real,  change  at  all,  if  we
imagine  the  whole  world  deformed  in  any  arbitrary  manner,
provided  that  after  the  deformation  the  co-ordinates  of
every  physical  point  are  continuous,  single-valued,  but
otherwise  quite  arbitrary,  functions  of  its  co-ordinates  be-
fore the  deformation.  Now,  such  a  point-transformation
actually  leaves  all  spatial  coincidences  totally  unaffected;
they  are  not  changed  by  the  distortion,  however  much  all
distances  and  positions  may  be  altered  by  them.  For,  if  two
points  A  and  B,  which  coincide  before  the  deformation  (i.e.
are  infinitely  near  one  another),  are  at  a  point  the  co-ordi-
nates of  which  are  #1,  x2,  #3,  and  if  A  arrives  at  the  point
2/1',  x2',  Xz,  as  a  result  of  the  deformation,  then,  since  by
hypothesis  the  x's  are  continuous  single-valued  functions
of  the  o?'s,  B  must  also  have  the  co-ordinates  #/,  x2,  xB'9
after  the  deformation — i.e.  must  be  at  the  same  point  (or
infinitely  near)  A.  Consequently,  all  coincidences  remain
undisturbed  by  the  deformation.

Earlier,  we  had  only,  for  the  sake  of  clearness,  investi-


Measure-Determinations  of  the  Space-time  Continuum 51

gated  these  effects  in  the  case  of  space ;  we  may  now  gen-
eralize by  adding  the  time  t  as  a  fourth  co-ordinate.  Better
still,  we  may  choose  as  our  fourth  co-ordinate  the  product  ct
(  —  x±)  in  which  c  denotes  the  velocity  of  light.  These  are
conventions  which  simplify  the  mathematical  formulation
and  our  calculations,  and  have  a  merely  formal  significance
for  the  present.  It  would  therefore  be  wrong  to  associate
any  metaphysical  speculations  with  the  introduction  of  the
four-dimensional  point  of  view.

Over  and  above  its  convenience  for  this  formulation,  we
can  see  other  advantages  which  accrue  from  our  regarding
time  as  a  fourth  co-ordinate,  and  recognize  therein  an  essen-
tial justification  for  this  mathematical  view.  To  show  this
clearly,  let  us  suppose  a  point  to  move  in  any  way  in  a  plane
(that  of  Xi-toz  may  be  chosen).  It  describes  some  curve  in
this  plane.  If  we  draw  this  curve,  we  can,  by  looking  at
it,  get  an  impression  of  the  shape  of  its  path,  but  not  of  any
other  data  of  its  motion,  e.g.  the  velocity  which  it  has  at
different  points  of  its  path,  or  the  time  at  which  it  passes
through  these  points.  But  if  we  add  time  #4  as  a  third  co-
ordinate, the  same  motion  will  be  represented  by  a  three-
dimensional  curve,  the  form  of  which  immediately  gives  us
information  about  the  character  of  the  motion;  for  we  can
recognize  directly  from  it  which  x±  belongs  to  any  point  Xi  x2
of  the  path,  and  we  can  also  read  off  the  velocity  at  any  mo-
ment from  the  inclination  of  the  curve  to  the  #i-#2-plane.
We  shall  follow  Minkowski  by  appropriately  calling  this
curve  the  world-lime  of  the  point.  A  circular  motion  in  the
#i-#2-plane  would  be  represented  by  a  helical  world-line  in
the  #i-#2-3vmanifold.  This  trajectory  of  the  point  only
arbitrarily  expresses,  as  it  were,  one  aspect  of  its  motion,
viz.  the  projection  of  the  three-dimensional  world-line  on  the
#i-#2-plane.  Now,  if  the  motion  of  the  point  itself  takes
place  in  three-dimensional  space,  we  obtain  for  its  world-


52  General  Postulate  of  Relativity  of

line  a  curve  in  the  four-dimensional  manifold  of  the  xiy  o?2,
#3,  #4,  and  from  this  line  all  characteristics  of  the  motion  of
the  point  can  be  studied  with  the  greatest  ease.  The  path  of
the  point  in  space  is  the  projection  of  the  world-line  on  the
manifold  of  the  Xi9  x2,  x3,  and  thus  gives  an  arbitrary  and
one-sided  view  of  a  few  properties  only  of  the  motion:
whereas  the  world-line  expresses  them  all  in  their  en-
tirety.

Our  considerations  about  the  general  relativity  of  space
may  immediately  be  extended  to  the  four-dimensional  space-
time  manifold;  they  apply  here  also,  for  to  increase  the  num-
ber of  co-ordinates  by  one  "does  not  alter  the  underlying
principle.  The  system  of  world-lines  in  this  x^Xz-x^-x^
manifold  represents  the  happening  in  time  of  all  events  in
the  world.  Whereas  a  point  transformation  in  space  alone
represented  a  deformation  of  the  world,  i.e.  a  change  of
position  and  a  distortion  of  bodies,  a  point-transformation
in  the  four-dimensional  universe  also  signifies  a  change  in
the  state  of  motion  of  the  three-dimensional  world  of
bodies:  since  the  time  co-ordinate  is  also  affected  by  the
transformation.  We  can  always  imagine  the  results  which
arise  from  the  four-dimensional  forms,  by  picturing  them
as  motions  of  three-dimensional  configurations.  If  we  sup-
pose a  complete  change  of  this  sort  to  take  place,  by  which
every  physical  point  is  transferred  to  another  space-time
point  in  such  a  way  that  its  new  co-ordinates,  x\,  #'2,  a?'3,  x'4,
are  quite  arbitrary  (but  continuous  and  single-valued)  func-
tions of  its  previous  co-ordinates  a?,,  a?2,  x3,  x4:  then  the  new
world  is,  as  in  previous  cases,  not  in  the  slightest  degree
different  from  the  old  one  physically,  and  the  whole  change
is  only  a  transformation  to  other  co-ordinates.  For  that
which  we  can  alone  observe  by  means  of  our  instruments,
viz.  space-time-coincidences,  remains  unaltered.  Hence
points  which  coincided  at  the  world-point  0/1,  x2,  xs,  x±  in  the


Measure-Determinations  of  the  Space-time  Continuum 53

one  universe  would  again  coincide  in  the  other  at  the  world-
point  a?'i,  x2j~Xz,  #'*•  Their  coincidence — and  this  is  all  that
we  can  observe — takes  place  in  the  second  world  precisely
as  in  the  first.

The  desire  to  include,  in  our  expression  for  physical  laws,
only  what  we  physically  observe  leads  to  the  postulate  that
the  equations  of  physics  do  not  alter  their  form  in  the  above
arbitrary  transformation,  i.e.  that  they  are  valid  for  any
space-time  co-ordinate  systems  whatever.  In  short,  ex-
pressed mathematically,  they  are  'covariant'  for  all  substi-
tutions. This  postulate  contains  our  general  postulate  of
relativity;  for,  of  course,  the  term  ( all  substitutions'  in-
cludes those  which  represent  transformations  of  entirely
arbitrary  three-dimensional  systems  in  motion.  But  it  goes
further  than  this,  inasmuch  as  it  allows  the  relativity  of
space,  in  the  most  general  sense  discussed  above,  to  be  valid
even  within  these  co-ordinate  systems.  In  this  way  Space
and  Time  are  deprived  of  the  'last  vestige  of  physical  ob-
jectivity', to  use  Einstein's  words.

As  explained  above,1  we  may  determine  the  position  of
a  point  by  supposing  three  families  of  surfaces  to  be  drawn
through  space,  and  then,  after  assigning  a  definite  number,
a  parametric  value,  to  each  successive  surface  of  each  fam-
ily, we  may  regard  the  numbers  of  the  three  surfaces  which
intersect  at  the  point  as  its  co-ordinates.  (Each  family
must  be  numbered  independently  of  the  others.)  Of  course,
the  relations  between  co-ordinates  which  are  defined  in  this
way  (Gaussian  co-ordinates)  will  not  in  general  be  the  same
as  those  which  hold  between  the  ordinary  Cartesian  co-ordi-
nates of  Euclidean  geometry.  The  Cartesian  #-co-ordinate
of  a  point,  for  example,  is  ascertained  by  marking  off  the  dis-
tance from  the  beginning  of  the  #-axis  by  means  of  a  rigid
unit  measure;  the  number  of  times  this  measure  has  to  be

iPage  29.


54  General  Postulate  of  Relativity  and

applied  end  to  end  gives  the  desired  co-ordinate  number.  In
the  case  of  the  new  co-ordinates  other  conditions  hold  (cf.
page  48  above),  since  the  value  of  a  parameter  is  not  im-
mediately obtainable  as  a  number  by  applying  the  unit
measure.  We  must  consequently  regard  the  Xi,  x2,  xs,  x4  of
the  four-dimensional  world  as  parameters,  each  of  which
represents  a  family  of  three-dimensional  manifolds;  the
space-time  continuum  is  partitioned  by  four  such  famil-
ies, and  four  three-dimensional  continua  intersect  at
each  world-point,  their  parameters  thus  being  its  co-or-
dinates.

If  we  now  consider  that  the  principle  by  which  the  co-
ordinates are  to  be  fixed  consists  in  a  perfectly  arbitrary
partition  of  the  continuum  by  means  of  families  of  surfaces
— for,  physical  laws  are  to  remain  invariant  for  arbitrary
transformation — it  seems  at  first  sight  as  if  we  no  longer
had  any  firm  footing  or  means  of  orientation.  We  do  not
immediately  see  how  measurements  are  possible  at  all,  and
how  we  can  succeed  in  ascribing  definite  number  values  to
the  new  co-ordinates,  even  if  these  are  no  longer  directly
results  of  measurement.  Comparing  measuring-rods  and
observing  coincidences  result  in  a  measurement,  as  we  have
seen,  only  if  they  are  founded  on  some  idea,  or  some  physi-
cal assumption  or,  rather,  convention;  the  choice  of  which,
strictly  speaking,  is  essentially  of  an  arbitrary  nature,  even
if  experience  points  so  unmistakably  to  it  as  being  the  sim-
plest that  we  do  not  waver  in  our  selection.  We  therefore
find  it  necessary  to  make  some  convention,  and  we  arrive  at
this  by  a  sort  of  principle  of  continuation,  as  follows.  In
ordinary  physics  we  are  accustomed  to  assume  without
argument  that  we  may  speak  of  rigid  systems  of  reference,
and  can  realize  them  to  a  certain  degree  of  approximation;
length  may  then  be  regarded  as  being  one  and  the  same
quantity  at  every  arbitrary  point,  in  every  position  and


Measure-Determinations  of  the  Space-time  Continuum 55

state  of  motion.  This  assumption  had  already  been  modi-
fied to  a  certain  extent  in  the  special  theory  of  relativity.
According  to  the  latter,  the  length  of  a  rod  is  in  general  de-
pendent upon  its  velocity  relative  to  the  observer;  and  the
same  holds  of  the  indications  of  a  clock.  The  connexion
with  the  older  physics,  and,  as  it  were,  the  continuous  transi-
tion to  it,  are  due  to  the  circumstance  that  the  alterations  in
the  length-  and  time-data  become  imperceptibly  small,  if  the
velocity  is  not  great;  for  small  speeds  (compared  with  those
of  light)  we  may  regard  the  assumptions  of  the  old  theory
as  being  allowable.  The  special  theory  of  relativity  so  ad-
justs its  equations  that  they  degenerate  into  the  equations
of  ordinary  physics  for  small  velocities.

In  the  general  theory,  the  relativity  of  lengths  and  time
goes  much  further  still ;  the  length  of  a  rod,  according  to  it,
can  also  depend  on  its  place  and  its  position.  To  gain  a
starting  point  at  all,  a  dot  poi  nov  GT&,  we  shall  of  course
maintain  continuity  with  the  physics  which  has  hitherto
proved  its  worth,  and  accordingly  assume  that  this  relativity
vanishes  for  extremely  small  changes.  We  shall  thus  con-
sider the  length  of  a  rod  to  remain  constant  as  long  as  its
place,  its  position,  and  its  velocity  change  only  slightly — in
other  words,  we  shall  adopt  the  convention  that,  for  infi-
nitely small  domains,  and  for  systems  of  reference,  in  which
the  bodies  under  consideration  possess  no  acceleration,  the
special  theory  of  relativity  holds.  Since  the  special  theory
uses  Euclidean  measure-determinations,  this  includes  the
assumption  that,  for  the  systems  designated  above,  Eucli-
dean geometry  is  to  remain  valid  for  infinitely  small  por-
tions. (Such  an  infinitely  small  domain  may  still  be  large
compared  with  the  dimensions  which  are  used  elsewhere  in
physics.)  The  equations  of  the  general  theory  of  relativity
must  be,  in  the  special  case  mentioned,  transformed  into
those  of  the  special  theory.  We  have  now  founded  our


56 Measure-Determinations  of  the  Space-time  Continuum

theory  on  an  idea  which  makes  measurement  possible,  and
we  have  reviewed  the  assumptions  by  means  of  which  we
can  successfully  solve  the  problem  proposed  by  the  postu-
late of  general  relativity.


VIII


ENUNCIATION  AND  SIGNIFICANCE  OF  THE
FUNDAMENTAL LAW OF THE NEW THEORY

IN  accordance  with  the  last  remarks,  we  shall  turn  our
attention  to  the  realm  of  the  infinitely  small,  and  in  it  choose
a  three-dimensional  Euclidean  system  of  co-ordinates,  in
such  a  way  that  the  bodies  which  are  to  be  considered  have
no  perceptible  acceleration  with  respect  to  it.  This  choice
is  equivalent  to  the  introduction  of  a  definite  four-dimen-
sional co-ordinate  system  for  the  domain  in  question.  Let
us  fix  any  point-event  in  this  domain,  i.e.  a  world-point  A  in
the  space-time-continuum,  the  co-ordinates  of  which  we
shall  assume  to  be  Xi,  X2,  X3,  X4,  in  our  local  system;  of
these  Xi,  X2,  Xs  are  measured  by  applying  a  small  measur-
ing rule  of  unit  length  end  to  end,  and  the  value  of  X4  is
determined  by  the  reading  of  a  clock.  B  is  to  represent  a
space-time  point-event  infinitely  near  A ;  its  co-ordinates
differ,  by  the  values  dXj,  dX2,  dX3,  dX4,  from  those  of  A.
The  *  distance'  of  these  two  world-points  is  then  given  by
the  well-known  simple  formula

ds2  =  dXl  +  dXt  '-£  dXl  -  dX!

This  *  distance',  the  line-element  of  the  world-line,  connect-
ing A  and  B,  is,  of  course,  not  in  general  a  space-distance
[length],  but,  since  it  is  a  combination  of  space-  and  time-
quantities,  has  the  physical  significance  of  a  motional  event,
as  we  clearly  pointed  out  in  introducing  the  notion  of  world-
lines.  The  numerical  value  of  ds  is  always  the  same,  what-
ever orientation  the  chosen  local  co-ordinate  system  may
have.

57


58  Enunciation  and  Significance  of  the

(The  special  theory  of  relativity  throws  a  clearer  light  on
ds.  If,  for  example,  ds2  is  negative,  it  states  that  we  can,  by
appropriately  choosing  co-ordinate  directions,  obtain  ds2  —
— dXi,  whilst  the  other  three  dX's  vanish.  There  is  then  no
difference  between  the  space  co-ordinates  of  the  two  world-
points;  the  events  corresponding  to  them  thus  occur  in  this
system  at  the  same  place,  but  with  a  time-difference  cLX4.
In  this  case  ds  is  said  to  belong  to  the  *  time-class'  of  events ;
on  the  other  hand  it  is  assigned  to  the  *  space-class'  of
events  if  '  ds2 '  is  positive ;  for  in  the  latter  case  the  co-
ordinate directions  may  be  so  chosen  that  dX4  vanishes.
The  two  point-events  then  take  place  simultaneously  for
this  system,  and  ds  gives  a  measure  of  the  distance  which
separates  them.  Finally  ds  =  0  signifies  a  motion  which
takes  place  with  the  velocity  of  light,  as  is  easily  seen  if  we
substitute  for  dX4  its  value  c-dt.)

We  shall  now  introduce  any  new  co-ordinates  Xi,  xz,  xs,  x4,
which  are  quite  arbitrary  functions  of  Xi,  X2,  X8,  -X4,  i.e.  we
shall  pass  from  our  local  system  to  any  other  arbitrary  sys-
tem. Certain  co-ordinate  differences  dxly  dx2,  dxs,  cb4,  cor-
respond to  the  'distanced  between  the  points  A  and  B  in
this  new  system,  and  the  old  co-ordinate  difference  dX  can
be  expressed  in  terms  of  the  new  cb's  by  using  elementary
formulae  of  the  differential  calculus.1  If  we  insert  the  ex-
pressions thus  obtained  for  the  dX's  in  the  above  formula
for  the  line-element,  we  obtain  its  value  expressed  in  the
new  co-ordinates  in  the  following  form :

ds2  =  gndrj  +  g^&xl '+  g^dxl  "-fg&dxl  +  2gl2dx,dx2


Fmdamental  Law  of  the  New  Theory  59

i.e.  as  a  sum  of  ten  terms,  in  which  the  ten  quantities  g
are  certain  functions  of  the  co-ordinates  X.1  They  do  not
depend  on  the  particular  choice  of  the  local  system,  for
the  value  of  ds2  was  itself  independent  thereof.

When  Biemann  and  Helmholtz  examined  three-dimen-
sional non-Euclidean  continua,  they  regarded  the  factors  g,
which  occur  above  in  the  expression  for  the  line-element,  as
purely  geometrical  quantities,  by  which  the  metrical  prop-
erties of  space  were  determined.  They  were  perfectly
aware,  however,  that  we  could  not  well  speak  of  measure-
ments and  space  without  making  some  physical  assump-
tions. Helmholtz  's  words  were  quoted  above  ;  here  we  need
only  allude  to  Riemann's  remarks  at  the  close  of  his  in-
augural dissertation  (p.  268  of  his  Gesammelte  Werke).
He  there  states  that,  in  the  case  of  a  continuous  manifold,
the  principle  of  its  measure-relations  is  not  already  con-
tained in  the  conception  of  the  manifold,  but  must  'come
from  elsewhere';  it  is  to  be  sought  in  'binding  forces',  i.e.
the  ground  of  these  measure-relations  must  be  physical  in
nature.  We  know  that  reflections  in  the  realm  of  metrical
geometry  acquire  a  meaning  only  when  its  relationship  to
physics  is  borne  in  mind.  The  above  #'s  do  not  therefore
merely  allow  a  physical  interpretation,  but  indeed  demand
it.  Einstein's  general  theory  of  relativity  gives  them  such
an  interpretation  directly.  For,  to  recognize  the  signifi-
cance of  the  g  's,  we  need  only  call  to  mind  the  physical  mean-
ing of  the  transformation  from  a  local  system  to  the  general
system,  as  was  discussed  just  above.  The  former  was  de-

performing  the  operations  indicated  we  easily  find  that:


2 3 3 ,  4 4

*  ~  ''


60  Enunciation  and  Significance  of  the

fined  by  the  property  that  a  material  point,  left  to  itself  in
the  space  of  the  Xi,  X2,  X3,  moves  rectilinearly  and  uni-
formly in  this  space;  its  world-line,1  i.e.  the  law  of  its
motion,  is  consequently  a  four-dimensional  straight  line,  the
line  element  of  which  is  given  by :

ds2  =  dX2  +  dXi  +'  dX§  —  dX42.

If  we  transform  to  the  new  co-ordinates  o?i,  x2,  xs,  a/4,  this
means  that  we  are  viewing  the  same  event,  the  same  motion
of  the  point,  from  some  other  arbitrary  system,  with  respect
to  which  the  local  system  is  of  course  moving  with  accelera-
tion in  some  way.  Therefore,  in  the  space  of  the  Xi,  x2,  #3,
the  point  moves  curvilinearly  and  non-uniformly.  The
equation  of  its  world-line,  i.e.  its  law  of  motion,  alters,  in-
asmuch as  its  line-element,  expressed  in  the  new  co-ordi-
nates, is  now  given  by :

ds2  =#u  ctof  +  .  .  .  .  +'#i2  ctoi  dx2  +  .  .  .

We  now  recall  the  *  Principle  of  Equivalence'  (p.  41).  Ac-
cording to  this,  the  statement  that  *a  point  left  to  itself
moves  with  certain  accelerations '  is  identical  with  the  state-
ment that  'the  point  is  in  motion  under  the  influence  of  a
gravitational  field  \  The  equation  of  the  world-line  ex-
pressed in  the  new  co-ordinates  thus  represents  the  motion
of  a  point  in  the  gravitational  field.  The  factors  g  are  hence
the  quantities  which  determine  the  field.  We  see  that  their
part  in  the  new  theory  is  analogous  to  that  played  by  the
gravitational  potential  in  the  Newtonian  theory.  We  may,
therefore,  term  them  the  10  components  of  the  gravitational
potential.

The  world-line  of  the  point,  which  was  a  straight  line  for
the  local  system,  i.e.  the  shortest  connecting  line  between

ilts  equation,  expressed  in  the  form  of  the  shortest (geodetic) line,  is


Fundamental  Law  of  the  New  Theory  61

two  world-points,  likewise  represents  a  shortest  line  in  the
new  system  of  xl9  x2,  a?8,  a*,  for  the  definition  of  a  geodetic
line  is  independent  of  the  co-ordinate  system.  If  we  could
now  regard  the  domains  of  the  'local'  system  as  being  in-
finitesimal, the  whole  world-line  in  it  would  shrink  to  an
element  ds.  The  reflection  made  above  would  become  mean-
ingless, and  we  could  draw  no  further  inferences.  Since  the
Law  of  Inertia  and  the  Special  Theory  of  Relativity  have,
however,  been  so  widely  confirmed  by  experience,  it  is  clear
that  there  must  in  reality  be  finite  regions,  for  which,  if
we  choose  a  suitable  system  of  reference,  ds2  =  dxi2  +  cb22
+  dtf!—cLrf:  viz.  those  parts  of  the  world  in  which,  with
this  chosen  system,  no  perceptible  influence  of  gravitating
matter  exists.  In  it  the  world-line  is  for  this  system  a
straight  line,  and  consequently  for  arbitrary  systems  a  geo-
detic line.  We  now  again  recall  our  Principle  of  Continuity
(according  to  which  the  new  laws  are  to  be  assumed,  in  such
a  way  that  the  old  laws  are  contained  in  them  unchanged  as
nearly  as  possible,  and  the  new  ones  resolve  into  the  latter
for  the  limiting  case) ;  and  we  then  make  the  hypothesis  that
the  relation  obtained  in  this  way  is  valid  quite  generally  for
every  motion  of  a  point  under  the  influence  of  inertia  and
gravitation,  i.e.  that  the  world-line  of  the  point  is  always  a
geodetic  even  when  matter  is  present.  This  gives  us  the
desired  fundamental  law.  Whereas  the  Law  of  Inertia  of
Newton  and  Galilei  states:  'A  point  under  no  forces  moves
uniformly  and  rectilinearly',  the  Einstein  Law,  which  com-
prises both  inertial  and  gravitational  effects,  asserts :  The
world-line  of  a  material  point  is  a  geodetic  line  in  the  space-
time  continuum.  This  laws  fulfils  the  condition  of  relativ-
ity ;  for  it  is  an  invariant  for  any  arbitrary  transformations,
since  the  geodetic  line  is  defined  independently  of  the  sys-
tem of  reference.
We  must  again  emphasize  that  the  co-ordinates  Xi  .  .  x*


62  Enunciation  and  Significance  of  the

are  number- values,  which  fix  the  time  and  place  of  an  event,
but  have  not  the  significance  of  distances  and  times  as
measured  in  the  ordinary  way.  The  *  line-element'  ds,  on
the  other  hand,  has  a  direct  physical  meaning,  and  can
be  ascertained  by  means  of  measuring-scales  and  clocks.
It  is,  by  definition,  independent  of  the  system  of  co-ordi-
nates; hence  we  need  only  betake  ourselves  to  the  local
system  of  Xl  .  .  X4,  and  the  value  which  we  there  obtain
for  ds  is  valid  generally.

Those  steps  have  now  been  taken  which  are  of  general
philosophic  importance,  and  fundamental  for  the  view  of
space  and  time  according  to  the  new  doctrine:  it  is  in
these  that  we  are  here  primarily  interested.  For  Einstein
they  were  merely  the  preliminary  stage  for  the  physical
problem  of  getting  at  the  actual  values  of  the  quantities
g,  i.e.  of  discovering  how  they  depend  upon  the  distribution
and  motion  of  the  gravitating  masses.  In  accordance  with
the  Principle  of  Continuity,  Einstein  starts  here  again  by
working  from  the  results  of  the  special  theory  of  relativity.
The  latter  had  taught  us  that  not  only  matter  in  the  ordi-
nary sense,  but  also  every  kind  of  energy,  has  gravitational
mass,  and  that  inertial  mass  is  altogether  identical  with
energy.  This  implies  that  not  the  'masses'  but  the  ener-
gies *  should  figure  in  the  differential  equations  giving  the
g's.  The  equations  must  of  course  remain  covariant  for
any  arbitrary  substitutions.  In  addition  to  these  initial
assumptions  which,  from  the  point  of  view  of  the  theory,
are  quite  obvious,  Einstein  makes  the  further  assumption
that  the  differential  equations  are  of  the  second  order;  he
was  guided  by  the  fact  that  the  old  Newtonian  potential  sat-
isfied a  differential  equation  of  just  this  type.  In  this  way
we  arrive  at  perfectly  definite  equations  for  the  g's,  and

iThey  are represented in  the special theory  of relativity  by the  com-
ponents of  a  four-dimensional  'tensor',  the  Impulse-energy  tensor.


Fundamental  Law  of  the  New  Theory  63

thus  the  problem  of  establishing  them  is (theoretically)
solved.

So  we  see  that,  except  for  the  last-mentioned  purely  for-
mal analogy,  the  entire  theory  is  built  on  foundations  which
have  absolutely  nothing  in  common  with  Newton's  old
theory  of  potential ;  it  is,  on  the  contrary,  developed  purely
from  the  postulate  of  general  relativity,  and  from  well-
known  results  of  physics  (as  given  by  the  special  principle
of  relativity).  It  is  so  much  the  more  surprising  that  the
new  equations,  which  have  been  obtained  by  such  different
means,  actually  degenerate  into  the  Newtonian  formula  for
general  mass-attraction  for  a  first  approximation.  This  is
in  itself  such  an  excellent  confirmation  of  the  lines  of  argu-
ment that  it  must  inspire  very  considerable  confidence  in
their  correctness.  But,  as  we  know,  the  achievements  of  the
new  theory  do  not  end  here.  For,  if  we  work  out  the  equa-
tions to  a  second  approximation,  there  immediately
emerges,  without  the  help  of  any  auxiliary  assumptions,  a
quantitatively  exact  explanation  of  the  anomalous  motion
of  Mercury's  perihelion,  a  phenomenon  which  the  Newto-
nian Theory  could  account  for  only  by  introducing  special
hypotheses  of  a  rather  arbitrary  nature.  These  are  aston-
ishing results,  the  scope  of  which  cannot  easily  be  over-
estimated :  and  we  must  agree  with  Einstein  when  he  says
at  the  conclusion  of  §  14  of  his  essay  Die  Grundlage  der  all-
gemeinen  Relativitatstheorie' :  'The  fact  that  the  equa-
tions deduced  from  the  postulate  of  general  relativity  by
purely  mathematical  processes  .  .  .  give  us  to  a  first  ap-
proximation the  Newtonian  law  of  attraction,  and  to  a  sec-
ond approximation  the  motion  of  Mercury's  perihelion  .  .  .
discovered  by  Leverrier,  is  a  convincing  proof  that  the
theory  is  physically  correct'.  The  new  fundamental  law
has  an  additional  advantage  over  the  Newtonian  attraction
formula,  inasmuch  as  it  is  expressed  as  a  differential  law;


64  Enimciation  and  Significance  of  the

i.e.  according  to  it,  events  at  one  point  in  the  space-time
manifold  depend  only  upon  the  events  of  points  infinitely
near  it  on  all  sides,  whereas  in  Newton's  attraction  formula
gravitation  occurs  as  a  force  acting  at  a  distance.  This
means  that  we  have  considerably  simplified  the  physical
picture  of  the  world,  and  consequently  have  now  advanced
another  step  in  the  theory  of  knowledge,  by  banishing
gravitation,  the  last  force  acting  at  a  distance,  out  of
physics,  and  expressing  all  the  laws  underlying  physical
events  solely  by  differential  equations.

All  the  other  laws  must,  of  course,  also  be  formulated  in
such  a  way  that  they  remain  invariant  after  any  arbitrary
transformations.  The  method  of  doing  this  is  prescribed
by  the  special  principle  of  relativity  and  the  principle  of
continuity,  and  has  already  been  applied  by  Einstein  and
others.  Chief  interest  circles  around  electrodynamics,  from
which  it  is  to  be  hoped  that,  by  combining  it  with  the  new
theory  of  gravitation,  it  will  be  possible  to  build  up  a  flaw-
less system  of  physics.  It  is  the  great  problem  for  physi-
cists of  the  future  to  bring  electrodynamics  and  gravita-
tional theory  under  a  common  law,  and  thus  embrace  both
realms  in  one  theory.  The  endeavours  which  have  been
carried  out  in  this  direction  have  so  far  been  unavailing;
probably  this  is  due,  above  all,  to  the  absence  of  further
data  of  experience,  in  which  gravitational  and  electrical
phenomena  occur  simultaneously.

In  addition  to  the  astronomical  confirmation  mentioned
above,  there  are  still  other  possibilities  of  verifying  the
theory  by  observation ;  for,  according  to  it,  there  should  be
a  still  perceptible  lengthening  of  the  time  of  oscillation  of
light  in  a  very  strong  gravitational  field,  and  a  curvature  of
the  light  rays  should  manifest  itself.  (The  path  of  the  lat-
ter being  the  geodetic  lines  ds  =  0.)  The  presence  of  the
first  effect,  which  consists  in  a  displacement  of  the  spectral


Fundamental  Law  of  the  New  Theory  65

lines  towards  the  red  end,  has  not  yet  been  definitely  estab-
lished. Whereas  the  efforts  to  detect  this  shift  in  the  gravi-
tational field  of  the  sun  have  so  far  been  fruitless,  observa-
tions of  the  spectra  of  other  fixed  stars  seem  to  indicate
with  great  probability  that  it  actually  exists.  The  second
effect,  however,  viz.  the  deflection  of  light  by  gravitation
was  established  beyond  doubt  on  May  29,  1919,  on  the  oc-
casion of  the  total  eclipse  of  the  sun.  The  light  from  a  star
which,  on  its  way  to  the  earth,  passes  close  by  the  sun,  is
attracted  by  the  latter 's  intense  gravitational  field.  This
should,  according  to  theory,  express  itself  in  an  apparent
displacement  of  the  star.  Since  these  stars  which  happen
to  be  near  the  sun  (as  projected  on  the  celestial  sphere)  are
only  visible  to  the  eye  or  a  photographic  plate  during  a  total
eclipse  of  the  sun,  this  inference  from  theory  can  only  be
tested  upon  such  occasions.  Two  expeditions  were  sent  out
from  England  to  observe  the  above  eclipse.  They  succeeded
in  finding  that  the  displacement  of  the  apparent  position  of
these  stars  was  actually  such  as  had  been  prophesied  by
Einstein,  and,  indeed,  to  the  exact  amount  he  had  previ-
ously calculated.  This  confirmation  is  doubtless  one  of  the
most  brilliant  achievements  of  human  thought,  and,  in  its
theoretical  significance,  even  surpasses  the  famous  discov-
ery of  the  planet  Neptune  from  the  calculation  of  Leverrier
and  Adams.  The  general  theory  of  relativity  has  in  this
way  successfully  undergone  the  severest  tests.  The  world
of  science  pays  homage  to  the  triumphant  power  with  which
the  correctness  of  the  physical  content  of  the  theory  and
the  truth  of  its  philosophical  foundations  are  confirmed  by
experience.

The  assertion  that  all  motions  and  accelerations  are  rela-
tive is  equivalent  to  the  assertion  that  space  and  time  have
no  physical  objectivity.  One  statement  comprehends  the
other.  Space  and  time  are  not  measurable  in  themselves:


66  Fundamental  Law  of  the  New Theory

they  only  form  a  framework  into  which  we  arrange  physical
events.  As  a  matter  of  principle,  we  can  choose  this  frame-
work at  pleasure ;  but  actually  we  do  so  in  such  a  way  that  it
conforms  most  closely  to  observed  events  (e.g.  so  that  the
*  geodetic  lines'  of  the  framework  assume  a  distinctive
physical  role) ;  we  thus  arrive  at  the  simplest  formulation
of  physical  laws.  An  order  has  no  independent  existence,
but  manifests  itself  only  in  ordered  things.  Minkowski  had
as  a  result  of  the  special  theory  of  relativity  enunciated
the  proposition  in  terse  language  (perhaps  not  wholly  free
from  criticism)  that  space  and  time  in  themselves  are  re-
duced to  the  status  of  mere  shadows,  and  only  an  indis-
soluble synthesis  of  both  has  an  independent  existence.  So,
on  the  basis  of  the  general  theory  of  relativity,  we  may  now
say  that  this  synthesis  itself  has  become  a  mere  shadow,  an
abstraction;  and  that  only  the  oneness  of  space,  time,  and
things  has  an  independent  existence.


IX

THE  FINITUDE  OF  THE  UNIVERSE

IN  Newton's  mechanics,  and,  indeed,  in  pre-Einsteinian
physics  altogether,  space  played  a  part  which  was  alto-
gether independent  of  any  considerations  about  matter.
Just  as  a  vessel  can  exist  free  of  content  and  preserve  its
form,  space  was  to  preserve  its  properties,  whether  '  occu-
pied' by  matter  or  not.  The  general  theory  of  relativity
has  taught  us  that  this  view  is  groundless  and  misleading.
*  Space',  according  to  it,  is  possible  only  when  matter  is
present,  which  then  determines  its  physical  properties.

This  standpoint,  which  arises  out  of  the  general  theory  of
relativity,  is  proved  to  be  the  only  justifiable  one,  when  we
approach  the  cosmological  question  of  the  structure  of  the
universe  as  a  whole.  Certain  difficulties  had  already  been
encountered  earlier,  which  clearly  showed  that  Newton's
cosmology  was  untenable ;  but  it  never  suggested  itself  to
anyone  that  Newton's  doctrine  of  space  might  be  partly  re-
sponsible for  these  difficulties.  The  relativity  theory  yields
an  unexpected  and  wondrous  solution  of  the  discrepancies,
which  is  of  exceeding  importance  for  our  picture  of  the
world.

It  was  generally  believed  by  the  ancients  that  the  cosmos
was  bounded  by  a  mighty  sphere,  to  the  inner  surface  of
which  the  fixed  stars  were  thought  to  be  attached  in  some
way.  Even  Copernicus  did  not  succeed  in  destroying  this
belief.  He  had  placed  the  sun  in  the  middle  of  the  planets
moving  around  it,  and  recognized  the  earth  as  one  planet

67


68  The  Finitude  of  the  Universe

amongst  many  others,  but  not  yet  the  sun  as  one  of  many
fixed  stars.  In  comparison  with  this  naive  view,  the  picture
of  the  world  must  have  seemed  to  become  both  enriched  and
exalted  when  Giordano  Bruno  propounded  the  doctrine  of
the  infinity  of  the  worlds  in  space.  It  was  alluring  to  the
imagination  to  think  of  the  innumerable  stars  as  being  also
suns  similar  to  our  own,  and  poised  in  space,  and  of  space
as  extending  to  infinity,  not  limited  by  any  rigid  sphere,  nor
enclosed  by  any  'crystal  dome'.  Bruno  glorifies  the  free-
dom of  spirit  which  emanates  from  this  extension  of  the
world  system  in  rapturous  lines :

Now  unconfined  the  wings  stretch  out  to  heaven,
Nor  shrink  beneath  a  crystal  firmament
Aloft  into  the  aether's  fragrant  deeps,
Leaving  below  the  earth-world  with  its  pain,
And  all  the  passions  of  mortality.

Up  to  the  present  day  the  conception  of  the  world  as  a
whole  described  in  these  lines  has  had  complete  sway.  It
was  certainly,  from  an  aesthetic  standpoint,  most  attractive
and  most  satisfactory  for  the  philosopher  to  picture  the
cosmos  as  composed  of  the  world  of  matter  infinitely  ex-
tended into  infinite  space;  a  traveller  on  the  way  to  infi-
nitely distant  regions  meets  with  ever  new  stars,  even  if
he  continue  through  all  eternity,  without  reaching  the  limits
of  their  realms  or  exhausting  their  number.  It  is  true  that
the  stars  have  been  sown  with  great  scarcity  in  the  heav-
enly regions ;  a  comparatively  small  amount  only  of  matter
is  scattered  over  a  great  volume  of  space;  but  its  mean
density  is  to  be  the  same  everywhere,  and  is  not  to  become
zero  even  at  infinity.  So  that,  if  we  fix  upon  a  certain
amount  of  mass  in  some  great  volume  of  celestial  space,  and
divide  it  by  the  size  of  this  volume,  we  should  by  choosing
a  continually  larger  volume  arrive  at  a  constant  finite  value


The  Fmitude  of  the  Universe  69

for  the  mean  density.  From  the  point  of  view  of  natural
philosophy,  such  a  picture  of  the  world  would  be  highly  sat-
isfactory. It  would  have  neither  beginning  nor  end,  neither
a  centre  nor  boundaries,  and  space  would  nowhere  be
empty.

But  the  celestial  mechanics  of  Newton  is  incompatible
with  this  view.  For,  if  we  assume  the  strict  validity  of
Newton's  gravitational  formula,  according  to  which  masses
exert  a  mutually  attractive  force  varying  inversely  as  the
square  of  the  distance,  calculation  shows  that  the  effects  at
a  certain  point  of  an  infinite  number  of  masses  present  at
infinite  distances,  according  to  the  above  view,  do  not  sum
up  to  a  certain  finite  gravitational  force  at  the  point,  but
that  only  infinite  and  indeterminate  values  are  obtained.

Einstein  proves  this  in  an  elementary  way  as  follows :  If
p  is  the  average  density  of  matter  in  the  universe,  then  the
amount  of  matter  contained  in  a  large  sphere  of  radius  R  is
4/3  Ttp  R3.  The  same  expression  (by  a  familiar  theorem  of
the  theory  of  potential)  gives  the  number  of  'lines  of  force',
due  to  gravitation  which  pass  through  the  surface  of  the
sphere.  The  extent  of  this  surface  is  4?r#2,  so  that  there  are
ipR  lines  of  force  to  every  unit  area  of  surface.  But  this
latter  number  expresses  the  intensity  of  the  force  which  is
exerted  by  the  gravitational  effect  of  the  contents  of  the
sphere  at  a  point  on  the  surface :  it  clearly  becomes  infinite,
if  R  increases  beyond  all  limits.

As  this  is  impossible,  the  universe  cannot,  on  Newton's
theory,  be  constituted  as  was  just  portrayed;  gravi-
tational potential  must  become  zero  at  infinity,  and
the  cosmos  must  present  the  picture  of  an  island  of  finite
extent  surrounded  on  all  sides  by  infinite  ' empty  space':
and  the  mean  density  of  matter  would  be  infinitely  small.

But  such  a  picture  of  the  universe  would  be  unsatisfactory
to  the  highest  degree.  The  energy  of  the  cosmos  would  con-


70  The  Finitude  of  the  Universe

stantly  decrease,  as  radiation  would  disappear  into  infinite
space ;  and  matter,  too,  would  gradually  disperse.  After  a
certain  time  the  world  would  have  died  an  inglorious  death.

Now  these  exceedingly  awkward  consequences  are  insep-
arably connected  with  Newton's  theory.  The  astronomer
Seeliger,  who  laid  bare  these  shortcomings  to  their  full  ex-
tent, sought  to  escape  them  by  assuming  that  the  attractive
force  between  two  masses  decreased  more  rapidly  than
Newton's  law  demands.  With  the  help  of  this  hypothesis,
he  actually  succeeds  in  maintaining  without  contradiction
this  idea  of  a  world  infinitely  extended,  filling  all  space  with
matter  of  a  mean  density.  An  unsatisfactory  feature  of  this
theory  is,  however,  contained  in  the  fact  that  the  hypothesis
is  invented  ad  hoc,  and  is  not  occasioned  or  supported  by
any  other  experience.

Great  interest  thus  circles  round  the  question  whether
it  is  not  possible  to  solve  the  cosmological  problem  by  some
new  theory  which  is  entirely  satisfactory  in  every  way.  The
suggestion  forces  itself  upon  us  that  the  general  theory  of
relativity  might  be  able  to  do  this ;  for,  in  the  first  place,  it
gives  us  information  about  the  nature  of  gravitation  towards
which  the  Newtonian  law  represents  only  an  approximation ;
secondly,  it  sheds  an  entirely  new  light  on  the  problem  of
space.  We  have  therefore  reason  for  hoping  that  it  will  give
us  important  disclosures  about  the  question  of  the  finitude
of  the  world  in  space.

When  Einstein  investigated  whether  his  theory  was  to  be
brought  into  closer  harmony  with  the  assumption  of  an  in-
finite world  with  an  average  uniform  density  of  distribution
of  stars  than  had  been  possible  for  Newton's  theory,  he  first
met  with  disappointment.  For  it  appeared  that  a  universe
constructed  in  accordance  with  the  hopes  expressed  above
was  just  as  little  compatible  with  the  new  mechanics  as  with
that  of  Newton.


The  Fmitude  of  the  Universe  71

As  we  know,  the  space  of  the  new  theory  of  gravitation
is  not  Euclidean  in  structure,  but  departs  somewhat  from
this  shape,  conforming  in  its  measure-relations  to  the  distri-
bution of  matter.  Now  if  it  were  possible  that,  correspond-
ing to  the  world-picture  of  Giordano  Bruno,  a  uniform  dis-
tribution of  stars  on  the  average  existed  for  infinite  space,
then,  in  spite  of  deviations  in  particular  places,  space  could
still  roughly  be  called  Euclidean  as  a  whole :  just  as  I  might
call  the  ceiling  of  my  room  plane,  by  forming  an  abstraction
which  neglects  the  little  roughnesses  of  its  surface.  Calcula-
tion, however,  shows  that  such  a  structure  of  space — Ein-
stein calls  it  quasi-Euclidean — is  not  possible  in  the  general
theory  of  relativity.  On  the  contrary,  according  to  this
theory,  the  mean  density  of  matter  must  necessarily  be  zero
in  infinite  non-Euclidean  space ;  i.e.  we  are  again  driven  to
the  world-system  which  was  discussed  above,  which  would
consist  of  a  finite  aggregation  of  matter  in  otherwise  empty
space  of  infinite  dimensions.

This  view,  which  was  unsatisfactory  for  Newton's  theory,
is  still  more  so  for  the  general  theory  of  relativity.  Not  only
do  the  objections  which  were  pointed  out  above  apply  in  this
case  also,  but  new  ones  arise  in  addition.  For,  if  we  seek  to
find  the  mathematical  boundary  conditions  for  the  quantities
g  at  infinity,  which  correspond  to  this  case,  Einstein  shows
that  we  may  attempt  it  in  two  ways.  We  might,  in  the  first
place,  think  of  assigning  to  the  g 's  the  same  boundary  values
which  are  allotted  to  them  at  infinity  in  the  mathe-
matical treatment  of  planetary  motions.  For  the  planetary
system  certain  limiting  values  (g^  =  g22  —  gzs  —  —  1,  #44  =
'+'  1,  the  other  #'s  =  0)  are  permissible,  since  we  have  still  to
take  into  account  the  presence  of  the  stellar  system  at  great
distances;  but  the  extension  of  this  method  to  the  whole
universe  is  incompatible  with  the  fundamental  ideas  of  the
relativity  theory  in  two  respects.  First,  a  perfectly  definite


72  The  Finitude  of  the  Universe

choice  of  co-ordinate  systems  would  be  imperative  for  this ;
and  second,  the  inertial  mass  of  a  body  would,  contrary  to
our  hypotheses,  no  longer  be  solely  due  to  the  presence  of
other  bodies ;  but  a  material  point  would  still  possess  inertial
mass  if  it  were  at  an  infinite  distance  from  other  bodies,  or
even  if  it  were  entirely  isolated  and  left  alone  in  the  world-
space.  This  is  contrary  to  the  trend  of  thought  of  the
general  principle  of  relativity;  and  we  see  that  only  those
solutions  come  into  consideration  in  which  the  inertia  of  a
body  vanishes  at  infinity.

Einstein  now  showed  (and  this  appeared  to  be  the  second
way)  that  one  might  indeed  assume  boundary  conditions  for
the  g  's  at  infinity,  which  would  fulfil  the  latter  demand ;  and
that  a  world-picture  drawn  in  this  way  would  even  have  an
advantage  over  the  Newtonian  one,  inasmuch  as  no  star  and
no  ray  of  light,  according  to  it,  could  disappear  in  infinite
space,  but  would  finally  have  to  return  into  the  system.  But
he  also  showed  that  such  boundary  conditions  would  be  in
absolute  disagreement  with  the  actual  state  of  the  stellar
system,  as  experience  presents  it  to  us.  The  gravitational
potentials  would  have  to  increase  at  infinity  beyond  all
limits,  and  very  great  relative  velocities  of  the  stars  would
necessarily  occur,  whereas,  in  fact,  we  observe  that  the  mo-
tions of  the  stars  take  place  extremely  slowly  compared  with
the  velocity  of  light.  The  fact  of  the  small  velocity  of  the
stars  is  indeed  one  of  the  most  striking  peculiarities,  com-
mon to  all  members  of  the  stellar  system,  which  offer  them-
selves to  observation,  and  can  be  used  as  a  basis  for  cos-
mological  speculations.  In  virtue  of  this  property,  we  can
unhesitatingly  regard  the  matter  in  the  cosmos  as  at  rest  to
a  first  approximation  (if  we  choose  an  appropriate  system
of  reference) ;  we  consequently  base  our  calculations  on  this
assumption.

We  thus  find  that  the  second  method  likewise  does  not


The  Finitude  of  the  Universe  73

lead  to  the  goal.  The  inference  is  that,  according  to  the
relativity  theory,  the  universe  cannot  be  a  finite  complex  of
stars  existing  in  infinite  space;  this,  after  the  above  re-
marks, means  that  we  cannot  regard  space  as  quasi-
Euclidean.  What  possibility  now  remains?

At  first  it  seemed  as  if  no  reply  was  forthcoming  from
the  theory;  but  Einstein  soon  discovered  that  it  was  still
possible  to  generalize  his  original  gravitational  equations
slightly  further.  After  this  small  extension  of  the  formulae,
the  general  theory  of  relativity  has  the  inestimable  advan-
tage of  giving  us  an  unmistakable  answer,  whereas  the  pre-
vious Newtonian  theory  left  us  in  total  uncertainty,  and
could  only  rescue  us  from  forming  a  highly  undesirable  pic-
ture of  the  universe  by  making  new  and  unconfirmed  hy-
potheses.

If  we  again  suppose  the  matter  of  the  universe  to  be
distributed  with  absolutely  uniform  density  and  to  be  at  rest,
the  calculation  leaves  no  doubt  but  that  space  is  spherical
in  structure  (there  is  the  additional  possibility  that  it  might
be  *  elliptical'  in  constitution,  but  we  may  neglect  this  case,
which  seems  to  be  of  mathematical  rather  than  of  physical
interest).  Since  matter  does  not  actually  occupy  space  uni-
formly and  is  not  at  rest,  but  only  shows  the  same  density
of  distribution  as  a  mean,  we  must  regard  space  as  quasi-
spherical  (i.e.  on  the  whole  it  is  spherical,  but  departs  from
this  form  in  its  smaller  parts,  just  as  the  earth  is  only  an
ellipsoid  as  a  whole,  but  is,  when  considered  in  smaller
portions,  possessed  of  an  irregularly  formed  surface).

What  the  term  *  spherical  space'  is  intended  to  convey  is
probably  known  to  the  reader  through  Helmholtz's  popular
essays.  He,  as  we  know,  describes  the  three-dimensional
analogy  to  a  spherical  surface ;  the  former  has,  like  the  lat-
ter, the  property  of  being  circumscribed,  i.e.  it  is  unlimited
and  yet  finite.  The  comparison  with  the  surface  of  a  sphere


74  The  Fmitude  of  the  Universe

must  not  mislead  one  to  confuse  in  one's  mind  *  spherical'
with  sphere-shaped.  A  sphere  is  bounded  by  its  surface,
the  latter  cutting  it  out  of  space  as  a  part  of  it  ;  spherical
space,  however,  is  not  a  part  of  infinite  space,  but  has  sim-
ply no  limits.  If  I  start  out  from  a  point  of  our  spherical
world  and  continually  proceed  along  a  i  straight  line  ',  I  shall
never  reach  a  limiting  surface;  the  'crystal  dome',  which
according  to  the  ancients  was  supposed  to  encompass  the
universe,  exists  just  as  little  for  Einstein  as  it  did  for
Giordano  Bruno.  There  is  no  space  outside  the  world;
space  exists  only  in  so  far  as  matter  exists,  for  space  in
itself  is  merely  a  product  of  abstraction.  If,  from  any
point,  we  draw  the  straightest  lines  in  all  directions,  these
at  first,  of  course,  diverge  from  one  another,  but  then
approach  again,  in  order  finally  to  meet  at  one  point  as
before.  The  totality  of  such  lines  fills  the  world-space
entirely,  and  the  volume  of  the  latter  is  finite.  Einstein's
theory  even  enables  us  to  calculate  its  numerical  value  for
a  given  density  of  distribution  ;  we  thus  obtain  the  volume

7.1041
F  =  -  cubic  centimetres  —  an  enormously  high  figure  ;


for  p,  the  mean  density  of  matter,  has  an  exceedingly  small
value.  The  structure  of  the  universe,  which  the  general
theory  of  relativity  unveils  to  us,  is  astounding  in  its  logical
consistency,  imposing  in  its  grandeur,  and  equally  satisfying
for  the  physicist  as  for  the  philosopher.  All  the  difficulties
which  arose  from  Newton's  theory  are  overcome  ;  yet  all  the
advantages  which  the  modern  picture  of  the  world  presents,
and  which  elevate  it  above  the  view  of  the  ancients,  shine
with  a  clearer  lustre  than  before.  The  world  is  not  confined
by  any  boundaries,  and  is  yet  harmoniously  complete  in
itself.  It  is  saved  from  the  danger  of  becoming  desolate,  for
no  energy  or  matter  can  wander  off  to  infinity,  because


The  Finitude  of  the  Universe  75

space  is  not  infinite.  The  infinite  space  of  the  cosmos  has
certainly  had  to  be  rejected;  but  this  does  not  signify  such
sacrifice  as  to  reduce  the  sublimity  of  the  picture  of  the
world.  For  that  which  causes  the  idea  of  the  infinite  to  in-
spire sublime  feelings  is  beyond  doubt  the  idea  of  the  end-
lessness of  space  (actual  infinity  could  not  in  any  case  be
imagined) ;  and  this  absence  of  any  barrier,  which  excited
Giordano  Bruno  to  such  ecstasy,  is  not  infringed  in  any  way.
By  a  combination  of  physical,  mathematical,  and  philo-
sophic thought  genius  has  made  it  possible  to  answer,  by
means  of  exact  methods,  questions  concerning  the  universe
which  seemed  doomed  for  ever  to  remain  the  objects  of
vague  speculation.  Once  again  we  recognize  the  power  of
the  theory  of  relativity  in  emancipating  human  thought,
which  it  endows  with  a  freedom  and  a  sense  of  power  such  as
has  been  scarcely  attained  through  any  other  feat  of  science.


EELATIONS  TO  PHILOSOPHY

IT  is  scarcely  necessary  to  mention  that  the  words  space
and  time  in  the  preceding  chapters  have  been  used  only  in
the  *  objective'  sense  in  which  these  conceptions  occur  in  nat-
ural science.  'Subjective'  psychological  experience  of  exten-
sion in  space  and  order  in  time  is  quite  distinct  from  these.

Ordinarily  there  is  nothing  to  induce  us  to  analyse  this
difference  in  detail;  the  physicist  does  not  need  to  concern
himself  in  the  slightest  with  the  investigations  of  the  psy-
chologist into  spatial  perception.  But  when  we  wish  to
form  a  clear  picture  of  the  ultimate  epistemological  founda-
tions of  natural  science,  it  becomes  necessary  to  give  an
adequate  account  of  the  relationship  between  these  two
points  of  view.  This  is  the  task  of  the  philosopher ;  for  it  is
generally  accepted  that  it  is  for  philosophy  to  reveal  the
fundamental  assumptions  of  the  separate  sciences,  and  bring
them  into  harmony  with  one  another.

What  leads  us  to  speak  of  space  and  time  at  all?  What
is  the  psychological  source  of  these  notions?  There  is  no
doubt  that  all  our  perceptions  of  space,  and  the  conclusions
resulting  therefrom,  emanate  from  certain  properties  of  our
sense-impressions,  viz.  from  those  properties  which  we  term
'spatial'  and  which  do  not  allow  of  closer  definition :  for  we
get  our  knowledge  of  them  only  from  direct  experience.
Just  as  it  is  impossible  for  me  to  explain  to  a  person  who
has  been  born  blind,  by  means  of  a  definition  in  words,  what
I  experience  when  I  see  a  green  surface,  so  it  is  impossible

76


Relations  to  Philosophy  77

for  me  to  describe  what  is  meant  when  I  ascribe  to  this  green
appearance  a  definite  extension  and  position  in  the  field  of
vision.  In  order  to  know  what  is  meant,  we  must  be  able
to  'behold'  it:  we  must  have  visual  perceptions  or  impres-
sions. This  spatial  quality,  which  is  an  essential  accompani-
ment of  visual  impressions,  is  thus  intuitive  ('anschaulich').
We  assign  the  term  in  an  extended  sense  to  all  the  other
data  of  our  world  of  presentations  and  perceptions,  not
only  the  visual  ones.  The  perceptions  of  the  other  senses,
more  particularly  the  tactual  and  kinaesthetic  (muscular
and  articular)  presentations,  have  properties  which  we
likewise  term  'spatial'.  In  fact  the  intuition  which  the
blind  have  of  space  consists,  exclusively,  of  such  data.  A
sphere  feels  different  from  a  cube  to  the  touch:  I  experience
different  muscular  sensations  in  the  arm,  according  as
I  describe  with  my  hand  a  long  or  a  short,  a  gently  curved  or
a  zigzag  line.  These  differences  constitute  the  space  quality
(Raumlichkeit)  of  the  tactual  and  muscular  perceptions:  it
is  these  that  the  person  born  blind  has  in  his  mind  when  he
hears  of  different  localities  or  dimensions.

The  data,  however,  of  the  various  realms  of  perception
cannot  be  compared  with  one  another  (e.g.  the  space  arising
out  of  tactual  presentations  is  entirely  dissimilar  in  kind
from  that  of  the  optical  presentations:  a  man  born  blind,
who  has  a  knowledge  of  the  first  only,  cannot,  from  it,  form
any  notion  of  the  latter).  Tactual  space  has  so  far  not  the
slightest  resemblance  to  visual  space,  and  the  psychologist
finds  himself  obliged  to  say  that  there  are  just  as  many
spaces  for  our  intuition  as  we  have  senses.

The  space  of  the  physicist,  however,  which  we  set  up  as
objective  in  opposition  to  these  subjective  spaces,  is  a  single
definite  one,  and  we  think  of  it  as  independent  of  our  sense
impressions  (but  of  course  not  independent  of  physical
objects;  on  the  contrary,  it  is  only  real  in  conjunction  with


78  Relations  to  Philosophy

them).  It  is  not  identical  with  any  of  the  above  spaces  of
intuition,  for  it  has  quite  different  properties.  If  we  look  at
a  rigid  cube,  for  instance,  we  find  that  its  form  changes  for
our  visual  sense  according  to  the  side  at  which,  or  the  dis-
tance from  which,  we  view  it.  The  apparent  length  of  its
edges  varies,  and  yet  we  ascribe  to  it  the  same  physical
shape.  We  get  a  similar  result,  in  forming  a  judgment  about
a  cube,  by  means  of  our  sense  of  touch :  by  which  we  also  re-
ceive entirely  different  impressions,  according  as  we  touch
larger  or  smaller  parts  of  its  surface,  or  according  to
the  parts  of  the  skin  which  come  in  contact  with  it ;  yet  in
spite  of  these  different  impressions  we  pronounce  the  cubical
form  of  the  object  to  have  remained  unaltered.  The  objects
of  physics  are  therefore  not  the  data  of  sense :  the  space  of
physics  is  not  in  any  way  given  with  our  perceptions,  but  is
a  product  of  our  conceptions.  We  cannot  therefore  ascribe
to  physical  objects  the  space  of  intuition  with  which  our  vis-
ual perceptions  have  made  us  acquainted,  nor  that  which  we
find  present  in  our  tactual  presentations,  but  only  a  concep-
tual arrangement,  which  we  then  term  objective  space,  and
determine  by  means  of  a  suitably  disposed  manifold  of  num-
bers (co-ordinates).  Hence  we  see  that  the  same  thing  holds
true  for  intuitional  space  as  for  other  qualities  of  the  sense-
data  such  as  tones,  colours,  &c.  Physics  does  not  know  col-
our as  a  property  of  the  object  with  which  it  is  associated,
but  only  frequencies  of  the  vibrations  of  electrons.  It  has
no  knowledge  of  qualities  of  heat,  but  only  of  kinetic  energy
of  the  molecules.

Similar  arguments  apply  in  the  consideration  of  subjec-
tive psychological  time.  A  special  psychological  time  can-
not indeed  be  claimed  for  the  realm  governed  by  each  partic-
ular sense ;  for  it  is  one  and  the  same  time-character  which
permeates  all  experiences — not  only  those  of  the  senses — in
the  same  way.  This  direct  experience  of  duration,  of  earlier


Relations  to  Philosophy  79

and  later,  is  nevertheless  an  ever-changing  intuitional  fac-
tor, which  makes  one  and  the  same  objective  event  appear,
according  to  mood  and  attentiveness,  now  long,  now  short :
a  factor  which  vanishes  altogether  during  sleep,  and  bears
an  entirely  different  stamp  according  to  the  wealth  of
associations  of  the  experience.  In  short,  it  is  easily  dis-
tinguishable from  physical  time,  which  only  signifies  an
arrangement  having  the  properties  of  a  one-dimensional
continuum.  This  objective  order  or  arrangement  has  just  as
little  to  do  with  the  intuitional  experience  of  duration  as  the
three-dimensional  order  of  objective  space  has  to  do  with  the
intuitional  experiences  of  extension,  as  presented  optically
or  tactually.  In  recognizing  this,  we  get  the  pith  of  Kant's
doctrine  of  the  'Subjectivity  of  Time  and  Space',  according
to  which  both  are  merely  *  forms'  of  our  intuition,  and
cannot  be  ascribed  to  the  '  things-in-themselves '.  Kant
himself  does  not  give  clear  expression  to  this  truth ;  for  he
always  talks  of  t space'  only,  without  drawing  a  dividing
line  between  the  intuitional  spaces  of  the  various  senses,  or
between  them  and  the  space  of  bodies  as  implied  in  physics.
Instead  of  this,  he  merely  opposes  the  unknowable  arrange-
ment of  the  '  things-in-themselves '  to  the  space  and  time  of
the  things  as  given  by  the  senses.  We,  on  the  other  hand,
find  occasion  to  distinguish  only  between  the  intuitional  psy-
chological spaces  and  non-intuitional  physical  space.  Just
because  the  latter  is  purely  conceptual,  it  is  quite  impossible
— contrary  to  the  opinion  of  many  a  follower  of  Kant — for
intuition  to  give  us  the  slightest  information  as  to  whether
physical  space  is  Euclidean  or  not.  In  conjunction  with
objective  time,  physical  space  is  designated  by  the  four-
dimensional  scheme  which  we  have  repeatedly  discussed
above,  and  which  in  mathematical  language  can  simply  be
treated  as  the  manifold  of  all  number  quadruples  o?i,  x2,  x3,  x*.
In  this  objective  scheme  there  is  no  distinction  between  a


80  Relations  to  Philosophy

'time'  distance  and  a  ' space'  distance.  This  is  the  point
which  receives  full  recognition  for  the  first  time  through
the  theory  of  relativity.  Both  simply  appear  as  one-
dimensional  continua;  and  there  is  no  room  left  in  this
conception  for  the  intuitional  difference  between  duration
(length  of  time)  and  extension  (length  of  space).  It  does
not  matter  how  fundamental  a  part  this  difference  plays  for
consciousness.

It  is  obvious  that  in  the  first  instance  only  the  intuitional
psychological  spaces  and  times  are  given  us;  and  we  must
inquire  how  we  have,  by  starting  from  them,  arrived  at  the
construction  of  the  objective  space-time  manifold.  This
construction  is  not  indeed  a  product  of  natural  science,  but
is  a  necessity  of  our  daily  life ;  for  when  we  ordinarily  talk
of  the  position  and  shape  of  bodies,  we  are  always  already
thinking  of  physical  space,  which  is  conceived  as  independent
of  individuals  and  of  the  organs  of  sense.  Of  course,  we
always  represent  to  our  consciousness  shapes  and  distances,
about  which  we  are  thinking,  by  visual  and  tactual  means  and
kinaesthetic  presentations :  because  we  always  strive,  as  far
as  possible,  to  exhibit  non-intuitional  conceptual  relations  in
our  thinking  by  sensory  substitutes  which  may  act  as  their
representatives,  but  are  no  more  than  sense-representatives
of  the  physical  conception  of  space.  The  former  are  not  to
be  confused  with  the  latter,  nor  must  they  lead  one  to  regard
the  latter  with  Kant  as  likewise  intuitional.

The  answer  to  our  question,  as  to  the  genesis  of  the
physical  conception  of  space  from  the  intuitional  data  of
the  psychological  spaces,  is  now  quite  plain.  These  spaces
are  essentially  dissimilar  and  incapable  of  comparison  with
one  another;  but  they  have,  as  our  experiences  teach  us,
a  perfectly  definite  uniform  functional  relation  to  one
another.  Tactual  perceptions,  e.g.,  correlate  themselves  with
visual  perceptions.  A  certain  correspondence  exists  between


Relations  to  Philosophy  81

the  two  spheres;  and  through  this  correspondence  it  is
possible  to  arrange  all  spatial  perceptions  into  one  scheme,
this  being  just  what  we  call  objective  space.  If  in  feeling
over  an  object  my  skin  nerves  receive  a  perception-complex
of  the  'cube  form',  I  can,  by  adopting  proper  measures
(lighting  a  candle,  opening  my  eyes,  &c.),  receive  certain
visual  perception  complexes,  which  I  likewise  designate  as
'cube  form'.1  The  optical  impression  is  toto  caelo  different
from  the  tactual  one ;  but  experience  teaches  me  that  they  go
hand  in  hand  with  one  another.  In  the  case  of  persons  born
blind,  who  acquire  the  sight  of  their  eyes  through  an  opera-
tion, we  have  an  opportunity  of  studying  their  gradual  train-
ing in  associating  the  data  of  the  two  realms  of  sight  and
touch.2

Now  it  is  important  to  understand  quite  clearly  what  par-
ticular experiences  lead  us  to  connect  a  perfectly  definite
element  of  optical  space  with  a  perfectly  definite  element  of
tactual  space,  and  thereby  to  form  the  conception  of  a
'  point '  in  objective  space.  For  it  is  here  that  experiences
arising  out  of  coincidences  come  into  account.  In  order
to  fix  a  point  in  space,  we  must  in  some  way  or  other,  di-
rectly or  indirectly,  point  to  it:  we  must  make  the  point
of  a  pair  of  compasses,  or  a  finger,  or  the  intersection  of
cross-wires,  coincide  with  it  (i.e.  bring  about  a  time-space
coincidence  of  two  elements  which  are  usually  apart).  Now
these  coincidences  always  occur  consistently  for  all  the  in-
tuitional spaces  of  the  various  senses  and  for  various  indi-

1  Vide  Locke's  Essay  on  Human  Understanding,  bk.  ii,  ch.  9,  s.  8.

2  This  view  is  familiar  to  the  English  reader  from  Berkeley's  New  Theory
of  Vision. (Fraser,  Oxford  edition,  vol.  i.) Cf.  Dufaur,  Archives  des  sciences
physiques  et  naturelles,  tome  58,  p.  232.

Schopenhauer  cited  various  instances  in  chap,  iv  of  his  Fourfold  Root  of
the  Principle  of  Sufficient  Reason,  mentioning  in  partcular  Cheselden's  blind
man,  a  case  recorded  in  Phil.  Trans,  vol.  35  (Trans.).


82  Relations  to  Philosophy

viduals.  It  is  just  on  account  of  this  that  a  t  point  '  is
denned  which  is  objective,  i.e.  independent  of  individual  ex-
periences and  valid  for  all.  An  extended  pair  of  com-
passes applied  to  the  skin  excites  two  sensations  of  prick-
ing; but  if  I  bring  the  two  points  together  so  that  they
occupy  the  same  spot  in  optical  space,  I  only  get  one  sen-
sation of  pricking,  and  there  is  also  coincidence  in  tact-
ual space.  Upon  close  investigation,  we  find  that  we  arrive
at  the  construction  of  physical  space  and  time  by  just  this
method  of  coincidences  and  by  no  other  process.  The
space-time  manifold  is  neither  more  nor  less  than  the  quin-
tessence of  objective  elements  as  defined  by  this  method.
The  fact  of  its  being  a  four-dimensional  manifold  follows
from  experience  in  the  application  of  the  method  itself.

This  is  the  outcome  of  our  analysis  of  the  conceptions  of
space  and  time;  it  is  an  analysis  of  psychological  data
regarded  as  our  sources  of  knowledge.  We  see  that  we
encounter  just  that  significance  of  space  and  time  which
Einstein  has  recognized  to  be  essential  and  unique  for
physics,  where  he  has  established  it  in  its  full  right.
For  he  rejected  Newton's  conceptions,  which  denied
the  origin  we  have  assigned  to  them,  and  founded  physics
on  the  conception  of  the  coincidence  of  events.  Here  we
have  the  realization  of  an  eminently  desirable  point  of  con-
tact between  physical  theory  and  the  theory  of  knowledge.

In  one  matter  physical  theory  goes  far  beyond  the  bounds
within  which  we  have  psychological  data.  Physics  intro-
duces, as  its  ultimate  indefinable  conception,  the  coincidence
of  two  events;  on  the  other  hand,  the  psycho-genetic  analy-
sis of  the  idea  of  objective  space  ends  in  the  conception  of
the  space-time  coincidence  of  two  elements  of  perception.
Are  they  to  be  regarded  simply  as  one  and  the  same  thing?

Rigorous  positivism,  such  as  that  of  Mach,  affirms  them
to  be  so.  According  to  him,  the  directly  experienced  ele-


Relations  to  Philosophy  83

ments  such  as  colours,  tones,  pressures,  warmths,  &c.,  are
the  sole  reality,  and  there  are  no  other  actual  events  be-
yond the  coming  and  going  of  these  elements.  Wherever
else  in  physics  other  coincidences  are  mentioned,  they  are
only  abbreviated  modes  of  speech,  economical  working-
hypotheses,  not  realities  as  perceptions  are.  Looked  at
from  this  point  of  view,  the  conception  of  the  physical
world  in  its  objective  four-dimensional  scheme  would
merely  be  an  abridged  statement  of  the  correspondence  of
the  subjective  time-space  experiences  in  the  realms  of  the
various  senses,  and  nothing  more.

This  view  is,  however,  not  the  only  possible  interpreta-
tion of  scientific  facts.  If  distinguished  investigators  in  the
domain  of  the  exact  sciences  do  not  cease  to  urge  that  the
picture  of  the  world  as  offered  by  Mach  fails  to  satisfy
them,  the  ground  for  it  is  doubtless  to  be  sought  in  this,
that  the  quantities  which  occur  in  physical  laws  do  not  all
indicate  ' elements'  in  Mach's  sense.1  The  coincidences
which  are  expressed  by  the  differential  equations  of  physics
are  not  immediately  accessible  to  experience.  They  do  not
directly  signify  a  coincidence  of  sense-data;  they  denote
non-sensory  magnitudes,  such  as  electric  and  magnetic  in-
tensities of  field  and  similar  quantities.  There  is  no  argu-
ment whatsoever  to  force  us  to  state  that  only  the  in-
tuitional elements,  colours,  tones,  &c.,  exist  in  the  world.
We  might  just  as  well  assume  that  elements  or  qualities
which  cannot  be  directly  experienced  also  exist.  These  can
likewise  be  termed  'real',  whether  they  be  comparable  with
intuitional  ones  or  not.  For  example,  electric  forces  can
just  as  well  signify  elements  of  reality  as  colours  and  tones.
They  are  measurable,  and  there  is  no  reason  why  episte-
mology  should  reject  the  criterion  for  reality  which  is  used

i  The  English reader will find  the  corresponding  theory  in  K. Pearson,
Grammar  of  Science.


84  Relations  to  Philosophy

in  physics  (v.  p.  21).  The  conception  of  an  electron  or  an
atom  would  then  not  necessarily  be  a  mere  working  hy-
pothesis, a  condensed  fiction,  but  could  equally  well  desig-
nate a  real  connexion  or  complex  of  such  objective  ele-
ments: just  as  the  conception  of  the  'ego'  denotes  a  real
complex  of  intuitional  elements.  The  picture  of  the  world,
as  presented  by  physics,  would  then  be  a  system  of  symbols
arranged  into  a  four-dimensional  scheme,  by  means  of
which  we  get  our  knowledge  of  reality;  that  is,  more  than  a
mere  auxiliary  conception,  allowing  us  to  find  our  way
through  given  intuitional  elements.

The  two  views  stand  in  opposition;  and  I  believe  that
there  is  no  rigorous  proof  of  the  correctness  of  the  one
and  the  falseness  of  the  other.  The  reasons  which  induce
me  to  declare  myself  in  favour  of  the  second — which  may,
in  contrast  to  the  strictly  positivist  view,  be  called  realistic
— are  as  follows : —

First,  it  seems  to  me  to  be  purely  arbitrary,  nay,  dog-
matic, to  allow  only  the  intuitional  elements  and  their  rela-
tionships to  be  valid  as  realities.  Why  should  intuitional
experiences  be  the  only  'events'  in  our  world?  Why
should  there  not  be  other  events  besides  these?

We  find  that  the  processes  of  science  do  not  justify  us  in
thus  narrowing  the  conception  of  reality.  It  was  put  for-
ward in  opposition  to  certain  fallacious  metaphysical
views ;  but  these  can  be  avoided  in  other  ways.

Secondly,  the  strictly  positivist  picture  of  the  world
seems  to  me  to  be  unsatisfactory  on  account  of  a  certain
lack  of  continuity.  In  narrowing  down  the  conception  of
reality  in  the  above  sense,  we  tear,  as  it  were,  certain  holes
in  the  fabric  of  reality,  which  are  patched  up  by  mere
auxiliary  conceptions.  The  pencil  in  my  hand  is  to  be  re-
garded as  real,  whereas  the  molecules  which  compose  it  are
to  be  pure  fictions.  This  antithesis,  often  uncertain  and


Relations  to  Philosophy  85

fluctuating,  between  conceptions  which  denote  something
real  and  those  which  are  only  working-hypotheses,  finally
becomes  unbearable.  It  is  avoided  by  the  assumption,
which  is  certainly  allowable,  that  every  conception  which  is
actually  of  use  for  a  description  of  physical  nature  can  like-
wise be  regarded  as  a  sign  of  something  real.  I  believe
that,  in  striving  to  illuminate  even  the  innermost  recesses
of  the  theory  of  knowledge,  we  need  never  give  up  this  as-
sumption, and  that  it  renders  possible  a  view  of  the  world
harmonious  in  its  last  details  and  perfect  in  itself,  which
also  satisfies  the  demands  imposed  upon  thought  by  the
realist's  attitude  of  mind,  but  without  making  it  necessary
to  give  up  any  of  the  advantages  of  the  positivist  view  of
the  world.

One  of  its  chief  advantages  is  that  the  relation  of  the
separate  theories  to  one  another  receives  due  recognition
and  a  proper  measure  of  value.  We  felt  ourselves  impelled
several  times  in  the  course  of  the  discussion  to  explain
clearly  to  ourselves  that,  in  many  cases,  there  is  no  possi-
bility, and  no  urgent  need,  to  distinguish  one  point  of  view
from  the  others  as  the  only  true  one.  It  can  never  be
proved  that  Copernicus  alone  is  in  the  right,  and  that
Ptolemy  is  wrong.  There  is  no  logical  ground  which  can
compel  us  to  set  up  the  theory  of  relativity  as  the  only  true
one  in  opposition  to  the  absolute  theory,  or  to  declare  that
the  Euclidean  determinations  of  measure  are  merely  right
or  wrong.  The  most  that  can  be  done  is  to  show  that,  of
these  alternatives,  the  one  view  is  simpler  than  the  other,
and  leads  to  a  more  finished,  more  satisfactory  picture  of
the  world.

Every  theory  is  composed  of  a  network  of  conceptions
and  judgments,  and  is  correct  or  true  if  the  system  of  judg-
ments indicates  the  world  of  facts  wiiquely.  For,  if  such  a
unique  correspondence  exists  between  conceptions  and


86  Relations  to  Philosophy

reality,  it  is  possible,  with  the  assistance  of  the  network  of
judgments  in  the  theory,  to  derive  the  successive  steps  in
the  phenomena  of  nature,  e.g.  to  predict  occurrences  in  the
future.  And  the  fulfilment  of  such  prophecies,  the  agree-
ment between  calculation  and  observation,  is  the  only
means  of  proving  that  a  theory  is  true.  It  is,  however,  pos-
sible to  indicate  identically  the  same  set  of  facts  by  means
of  various  systems  of  judgments;  and  consequently  there
can  be  various  theories  in  which  the  criterion  of  truth  is
equally  well  satisfied,  and  which  then  do  equal  justice  to
the  observed  facts,  and  lead  to  the  same  predictions.  They
are  merely  different  systems  of  symbols,  which  are  allo-
cated to  the  same  objective  reality :  different  modes  of  ex-
pression which  reproduce  the  same  set  of  facts.  Amongst
all  the  possible  views  which  contain  the  same  nucleus  of
truth  in  this  way,  there  must  be  one  which  is  simplest ;  and
our  reason  for  preferring  just  this  one  is  not  founded  upon
reasons  of  practical  economy,  a  sort  of  mental  indolence  (as
has  been  held  by  some).  There  is  a  logical  reason  for  it,  in-
asmuch as  the  simplest  theory  contains  a  minimum  number
of  arbitrary  factors.  The  more  complicated  views  neces-
sarily contain  superfluous  conceptions,  of  which  I  can  dis-
pose at  pleasure,  and  which  are  consequently  not  condi-
tioned by  the  facts  under  consideration ;  about  which,  there-
fore, I  am  right  in  asserting  that  nothing  real  corresponds
to  them,  regarded  apart  from  the  other  conceptions.  In  the
case  of  the  simplest  theory,  on  the  other  hand,  the  role  of
each  particular  conception  is  made  imperative  by  the  facts :
such  a  theory  forms  a  system  of  symbols,  all  of  them  in-
dispensable. Lorentz's  aether- theory  (v.  p.  10),  for
example,  declares  one  co-ordinate  system  to  be  unique
among  all  others,  but  does  not  essentially  afford  the  means
of  ever  actually  specifying  this  system.  His  theory  is  thus
encumbered  with  the  conception  of  absolute  motion,


Relations  to  PMltf&cpfy  V^  87

whereas  the  conception  of  relative  motion  suffices  for  a
unique  description  of  the  facts.  The  former  is  never
capable  of  application  alone,  but  only  in  certain  combina-
tions, which  are  embraced  in  the  conception  of  relative
motion.

Now,  the  conceptions  of  space  and  time,  in  the  form  in
which  they  have  hitherto  occurred,  in  physics  are  included
among  these  superfluous  factors.  This  we  have  recognized
as  a  result  of  the  general  theory  of  relativity.  They,  too,
cannot  be  applied  separately;  but  only  in  so  far  as  they
enter  into  the  conception  of  the  space-time  coincidence  of
events.  We  may  therefore  reiterate  that  only  in  this  union
do  they  indicate  something  real,  but  not  when  taken  alone.

We  see  how  stupendous  is  the  theoretical  range  of  these
new  views.  Einstein's  analysis  of  the  conceptions  of  space
and  time  belongs  to  the  same  category  of  philosophic  evolu-
tion as  David  Hume's  criticism  of  the  ideas  of  substance
and  causality.  In  what  way  this  development  will  continue,
we  cannot  yet  say.  The  method  which  characterizes  it  is
the  only  fruitful  one  for  the  theory  of  knowledge,  consist-
ing as  it  does  in  a  searching  criticism  of  the  fundamental
ideas  of  science,  stripping  off  everything  that  is  superfluous
and  with  ever-increasing  clearness  exposing  the  ultimate
pure  content.


INDEX


Adams,  65.

Aether,  8,  20.

Arbitrary  transformations,  54.

Berkeley,  81.

Bruno,  Giordano,  68,  71.

Centrifugal  forces,  39,  40,  44.

Clocks,  50.

Conservation  of  Energy  and  Mass,  19.

Continuity,  61,  62.

Copernicus,  5,  67,  85.

Distances,  80.

Einstein,  4,  37,  40-45,  53,  59,  61-64,

72,  73,  87.

Equivalence,  Principle  of,  43,  60.
Euclid,  34,  35,  46,  55.

Four-dimensional  manifold,  52.

Galilei,  61.

Gaussian  co-ordinates,  29.
Geometry,  Foundations  of,  34.
Gravitation,  42,  48.

Helmholtz,  33,  59.
Hume,  87.

Inertial  systems,  38.
Kant,  79,  80.

Leverrier,  63,  65.
Line-element,  57.
Lobatschewsky,  48.


Locke,  81.

Lorentz  and  Fitzgerald,  2,  11,  17.

Mach,  37,  39,  82,  83.
Mercury,  Perihelion  of,  63.
Michelson  and  Morley,  3,  11,  13,  16.
Minkowski,  51,  66.

Newton,  2,  4,  38,  39,  40,  69,  70,  71,

74,  82.
Non-Euclidean  geometry,  48.

Objective  and  Subjective,  76.

Pearson,  39,  83.
Poincare",  24-7,  32,  33,  34.
Positivism,  82,  83,  84.
Potentials,  gravitational,  60,  71.
Ptolemy,  32.

Reality,  22,  23.
Relativity  of  length,  17.
Riemann,  33,  48,  59.
Rotation,  39.

Schopenhauer,  81.

Space,  33.

Space,  spherical,  73.

Space  and  Time,  2,  4,  5,  23,  36,  53,

76.

Special  Theory  of  Relativity,  7  et  seq.
Straight  lines,  30,  31.

Tensor,  62.

Trouton  and  Noble,  9,  11.

World-line,  51,  60,  61.
World-point,  57.


89


THIS  BOOK  IS  DUE  ON  THE  LAST  DATE
STAMPED  BELOW

AN  INITIAL  FINE  OP  25  CENTS

WILL  BE  ASSESSED  FOR  FAILURE  TO  RETURN
THIS  BOOK  ON  THE  DATE  DUE.  THE  PENALTY
WILL  INCREASE  TO  SO  CENTS  ON  THE  FOURTH
DAY  AND  TO  $1.OO  ON  THE  SEVENTH  DAY
OVERDUE.


ENGINEERING

LIBRARY

.-;  ;

;
| -

\Jf~\IV "-1 \J i*J*+/

JAN  a 19b2  /

^

JUL  28  19525

AUG  1 1952.5

*

10m-7,'44(1064s)

4  !.955i


Engineer!]
Library


UNIVERSITY  OF  CALIFORNIA  LIBRARY
