The Christian Faith
Friedrich Schleiermacher (H. R. Mackintosh and J. S. Stewart, trans.) (1928)
========================================================================

PROVENANCE NOTE (Tower of Babel staging): Schleiermacher's Der christliche Glaube (1821–22) — the magnum opus of liberal Protestant theology: the feeling of absolute dependence. H. R. Mackintosh and J. S. Stewart's 1928 translation, complete.

========================================================================

eS eeetrenattt


LIBRARY OF


Western I'nion follege
LE MARS, IOWA


WESTMAR COLLEGE LIBRARY


Digitized by the Internet Archive
in 2024


https://archive.org/details/christianfaithenOO00Ofrie


THE CHRISTIAN FAITH


iMsao
CHRISTIAN FAITH


BY


FRIEDRICH SCHLEIERMACHER


English Translation of the
Second German Edition


EDITED BY


H. R. MACKINTOSH, D.Phil., D.D.


PROFESSOR OF THEOLOGY, NEW COLLEGE, EDINBURGH


AND


J. S. STEWART, M.A., B.D.


MINISTER OF BEFECHGROVE UNITED FREE CHURCH, ABERDEEN


Edinburgh: T. & T. CLARK, 38 George Street
1928


PRINTED IN GREAT BRITAIN BY


MORRISON AND GIBB LIMITED


FOR


T & £T. CLARK, EDINBURGH


LONDON SIMPKIN, MARSHALL, HAMILTON, KENT, AND CO. LIMITED
NEW YORK: CHARLES SCRIBNER’S SONS


EDITORS’ PREFACE


TuIs translation of Schleiermacher’s chief dogmatic work was
projected some years ago by a group of persons interested
in the study of nineteenth-century theology, and anxious that
one exceptionally influential source should be made accessible
to English readers. Since the war, as everyone knows, the
costs of publication have been high. It therefore was resolved
in 1924 to send out an appeal for financial aid to Theological
Colleges and Seminaries throughout the English-speaking
world. To this appeal a response came so prompt and
generous that the way for action opened up, and incidentally
the urgency of the demand for a translation was made clearer
than ever. A special debt of gratitude for timely assistance
is due to the Hibbert Trustees and to a number of friends
associated with Hartford Seminary, Connecticut.

In the opinion of competent thinkers the Christian
Fath of Schleiermacher is, with the exception of Calvin’s
Institutes, the most important work covering the whole field
of doctrine to which Protestant theology can point. To say
this is not necessarily to adopt either his fundamental principles
or the detailed conclusions to which these principles have
guided him. On all such matters a nearly unbroken con-
troversy has long prevailed. Indeed, at the moment a for-
midable attack is being delivered upon his main positions
by a new and active school of thought in Germany. But,
whether for acceptance or rejection, it is necessary for serious
students to know what Schleiermacher has to say. Books
devoted to the interpretation and criticism of his views have
been not merely numerous but of unusually good quality.
Surprise may not unnaturally be felt that during the century
which has elapsed since the German original was issued, no
attempt has been made to render it in English. For this
delay, doubtless, good reasons could be assigned. But it was
all the more desirable, in view of the growing sense of united


Wi


vi EDITORS’ PREFACE


purpose among Christian thinkers everywhere, that no more
time should be lost before making Schleiermacher’s great
treatise available for a wider circle.

The translation has been executed by various hands.
Paragraphs 1-31 were translated by the Rev. D. M. Baillie,
M.A., of Cupar ; 32-61 by the Rev. Professor W. R. Matthews,
D.D., of King’s College, London, and Miss Edith Sandbach-
Marshall, M.A., B.D.; 62-85 by the Rev. Professor A. B.
Macaulay, D.D., of the United Free Church College, Glasgow,
and the late Rev. Alexander Grieve, Ph.D., of that city ;
86-105 by the Rev. Professor J. Y. Campbell, M.A., of the
Divinity School, Yale University ; 106-125 by the Rev. R. W.
Stewart, B.D., of Cambuslang; and 126-172 by the Rev.
Professor H. R. Mackintosh, D.D., of New College, Edinburgh,
who also has exercised a general supervision over the work as
a whole. Dr. Grieve had promised to act as joint-editor, and
the book would have gained much from his scholarly and
unselfish care ; but his too early death in 1927 broke off the
plan. His place was taken by the Rev. J. S. Stewart, B.D.,
of Aberdeen, who assumed a full share in preparing the MS.
for press and has collaborated in reading the whole proof.

The Editors wish to express their cordial thanks to the
Publishers for the courteous and unfailing help they have
given in the production of the book.


AUTHOR’S PREFACE TO THE
SECOND EDITION


THERE lies before me, at this moment, the Preface with which
I accompanied this work on its first appearance nine years ago.
And just because I do not intend to reprint it, I dwell with pleasure
on the wish expressed at its conclusion—namely, that, if possible
by its own contents, but if not, then by the antagonism which its
imperfections must excite, the book might contribute to an ever
clearer understanding as to the meaning of our Evangelical Faith.
That wish, thank God, has not remained unfulfilled; though I
cannot quite make out how much of the excitement it has aroused
among the theological public, or of the antagonism it has encountered,
is to be set down to the truth it contains, and how much to its
imperfections. This point facts will decide, as the controversy,
now so vigorous, goes on its way. May this controversy keep its
proper limits; and may no one suppose that acts of violence,
even if perpetrated within the Church itself, are the fire which will
most surely declare who has built with stubble, and who with
precious stones. The issue of conflicts so alien in character can
never guarantee the goodness of a cause.

My procedure in this new edition, in essentials, I have already
explained elsewhere.t None the less, many readers may possibly
find the difference between the two editions, even apart from the
Introduction, greater than they had expected. Yet however great
it may be, no leading proposition has been omitted, and none has
had its specific content modified. With all my efforts, I have not
on the whole succeeded in attaining greater brevity. Success,
indeed, was hardly possible, for experience has shown that explana-
tions themselves stood much in need of explanation. Still I did
the best I could, and my hope is that many points have been put,
if not with greater brevity, at least with greater clearness, and
that misapprehensions have been eased or avoided. This chiefly
has strengthened my confidence that the time is not far off when


1Cf, Dy. Schleteymacher’s Sendschreiben tibey seine Glaubenslehre an Dr.


Liicke.
vii


viii AUTHOR’S PREFACE TO THE SECOND EDITION


it will no longer be necessary to write with fulness on topics many
of which either are by now finally antiquated or even yet are mis-
understood. When that time comes, some later thinker occupying
the same standpoint will beable to write a much shorter Dogmatic.
That in the future such a Dogmatic will be written, I have no
doubt at all; though at the same time I must protest most em-
phatically against the honour recently done me in some quarters
of bringing me forward as the head of a new theological school.
I protest against this, because I am without either of the two
requisite qualifications. In the first place, I have invented nothing,
so far as I remember, except my order of topics and here or there
a descriptive phrase ; and similarly in my thinking I have never
had any other aim than that of communicating my thoughts by
way of stimulus, for each to use in his own fashion. Further, it
is only in this sense—not as a mine of formule by the repetition
of which members of a school might recognize each other—that
I issue this book for the second and certainly the last time. Even
if I am permitted longer life, I should prefer to attempt what would
be at least brief outlines treating of other theological disciplines.

In my first edition I assumed too much when I said that my
book was the first Dogmatic which had been composed with special
reference to the Union of the two Protestant communions—the
Lutheran and the Reformed. This honour I now gladly yield to
my dear friend, Herr G. K. R. Schwarz, of Heidelberg ; merely
remarking that it ought to be regarded as a fundamental character-
istic of the Union accomplished in these lands that there exists no
necessity for any dogmatic adjustment between the two sides,
still less for a new Confession ; and that accordingly it was specially
incumbent upon me, not only to proceed on this assumption, but
also to the best of my power to give effect to it as a fixed principle,
by a free and conciliatory treatment of the relevant documents.

Finally, I may observe that as the two volumes of the first
edition proved so very unequal in size, I have included one part
of the former second volume in the first volume of this edition :
but this external change has no bearing on the inner structure of
the whole work.


BERLIN, Apyil 22, 1830.


a


CONTENTS


INTRODUCTION
PAGES
CHAPTER I.—THE DEFINITION oF DoGMATICS s 3-93
I. The Conception of the Church: ache ce borrowed from
Ethics 0 ; 5-31
Il. The Diversities of Religions feommmunions in General : Pro-
positions borrowed from the Philosophy of Religion : 31-52
III. Presentation of Christianity in its Peculiar Essence : Proposi-
tions borrowed from Apologetics . c : 52-76
IV. The Relation of Dogmatics to Christian Ficts : : 70-93
CuapTeR II1.—THE MertHop or DoGMATICS é 94-128
I. The Selection of the Dogmatic Material ; ; . 95-112
Il. The Formation of the Dogmatic System z : . 112-128
FIRST PART OF THE SYSTEM OF DOCTRINE
The Development of that Religious Self-Consciousness which
is always both presupposed by and contained in every
Christian Religious Affection : ; : . 131-256
Introduction : F : : é - 131-141
BIRSD SECTION
A Description of our Religious Self-Consciousness in so fay as the
Relation between the World and God ts expressed in it . . 142-193
Introduction : ; P : : . 142-149
First Doctrine: Creation . c : : . 149-156
First Appendix: The Angels . : : - 156=1%60
Second Appendix: The Devil . : ; . 161-170
Second Doctrine : Preservation : : : . 170-193
SECOND SECTION
The Divine Attributes which ave related to the Religious Self-Conscious-
ness so fay as tt expresses the General Relationship between God
and the World 5 : ; : “ . 194-232
Introduction : : : 9 : . 194-203
First Doctrine : God is Eternal ‘ ; Plas . 203-206
Second Doctrine : God is Omnipresent : , = 206-21!
Third Doctrine : God is Omnipotent A : . 211-219
Fourth Doctrine : God is Omniscient 0 : - 219-228
Appendix : Some other Divine Attributes . : . 228-232


ix


x CONTENTS


THIRD SECTION


The Constitution of the World which is indicated in the Religious
Self-Consciousness, so far as it expresses the General Relationship
between God and the World

Introduction : : é : :
First Doctrine : The Original Perfection of the World
Second Doctrine : The Original Perfection of Man .


PAGES


233-256
233-237
238-244
244-256


SECOND PART OF THE SYSTEM OF DOCTRINE


Explication of the Facts of the Religious Self-Consciousness,
as they ave determined by the Antithesis of Sin and Grace .
Introduction


FIRST ASPECT OF THE ANTITHESIS: EXPLICATION OF
THE CONSCIOUSNESS OF SIN
Introduction z 3
First SECTION: Sin as a State of Man
First Doctrine ; Original Sin
Second Doctrine: Actual Sin . A 3
SECOND SECTION: The Constitution of the World in Rela-
tion to Sin ; : : E :
THIRD SECTION: The Divine Attributes which relate to the
Consciousness of Sin.
Introduction 5
First Doctrine : God is Holy
Second Doctrine : God is Just.
Appendix: The Mercy of God.


SECOND ASPECT OF THE ANTITHESIS: EXPLICATION
OF THE CONSCIOUSNESS OF GRACE


Introduction


First SECTION: The State of the Christian as Conscious of
the Divine Grace
Introduction


First Division: Christ
Introduction : :
First Doctrine : The Person of Christ
Introduction
First Theorem
Second Theorem
Third Theorem
Appendix : é
Second Doctrine : The Work of Christ
Introduction é
First Theorem .
Second Theorem
Third Theorem


259-751
259-268


269-354
269-270
270-281
282-304
304-314


BAY)
S35) iV)


371-524
375-378
374-475
374-376
377-424
377-390
391-398
398-413
413-417
417-424
425-475
425-441
441-450
451-466
400-475


ee a eT


CONTENTS xi


Second Division: The Manner in which Fellowship with ins
the Perfection and Blessedness of the Redeemer
expresses itself in the Individual Soul 3 . 476-524

Introduction : F . : , . 476-478
First Doctrine: Regeneration . ‘ ; - 478-505
Introduction . . ; : . 478-480
First Theorem : Conversion , : : . 480-495
Second Theorem: Justification . é 5 . 496-505
Second Doctrine : Seca oe : 5 . 505-524
Introduction . : . 505-510
First Theorem : The Sine of the Regenerate : . 510-517


Second Theorem: The Good Works of the Regenerate 517-524


SECOND SEcTrion: The Constitution of the World in Relation


to Redemption : ; : : . 525-722
Introduction , : : : 9 . 525-532
First Division: The es of the Church ; é . 532-581
Introduction . $ : a ; . 532-536
First Doctrine: Election : , : . 536-560
Introduction . : : > 530-545
First Theorem : Predesonaucn é 6 . 546-551
Second Theorem: The Grounds of Election . . 551-560


Second Doctrine: The. Communication of the Holy


Spirit. ; : : ; . 4500-§81>


Introduction . = : SOO 5 OO
First Theorem : : ; : . 569-574
Second Theorem : ; : F . 574-578
Third Theorem ‘ : > i . 578-581
Second Division: The Subsistence of the Church alongside
of the World : : 2 ‘ . 582-695
Introduction . 6 . é ; soz —5 55
First Half; The Essential and Invariable Features of the
Churches. : : : ; . 586-675
Introduction . . 586-591
fir Doctrine; ay Scrptuse = easton
Introduction . 591-596
First Theorem , 5 : : . 597-603
Second Theorem i ; ; ; . 604-608
Postscript : ; : é . . 608-611
Second Doctrine: The Ministry of the Word of God . 611-619
Introduction . : : : ‘ . 611-614
First Theorem : ; : : . 614-617
Second Theorem ‘ : : 5 . 617-619
Third Doctrine : Baptism : : ; . 619-638
Introduction . ; 5 : ‘ . 619-626
First Theorem c . : : . 626-633


Second Theorem : ; : : . 633-638


xii CONTENTS


Fourth Doctrine : The Lord’s Supper
Introduction . A
First Theorem
Second Theorem :
Appendix: The Name ‘ Saeramient 4
Fifth Doctrine : The Power of the Keys .
Introduction
Theorem


Sixth Doctrine: Prayer in the Name of Christ
Introduction .
Theorem °


Second Half: The Mutable Bienen Ciara of the
Church in Virtue of its Coexistence with the World
Introduction . : : 2 : :
First Doctrine : The Plurality of the Visible Churches in
Relation to the Unity of the Visible
Introduction . :
First Theorem
Second Theorem


.


Second Doctrine : The Pallibility of the Visible Church in


Relation to the Infallibility ‘of the Invisible
Introduction :


First Theorem

Second Theorem

Appendix c . . :
Third Division: The Consummation of the Church

Introduction a . ;

First Prophetic Doctune: The Return of Christ


Second Prophetic Doctrine: The Resurrection of the
Flesh


Third Prophetic Doctrines The Last Judgment
Fourth Prophetic Doctrine : Eternal Blessedness
Appendix: On Eternal Damnation . .

THIRD SECTION: The Divine Attributes which relate to

Redemption

Introduction . (
First Doctrine : The Divine Love
Second Doctrine : The Divine Wisdom


CONCLUSION: The Divine Trinity .


INDEXES
A. SUBJECTS


° °


B. AUTHORS AND SOURCES.
C. SCRIPTURE REFERENCES.


PAGES
638-657
638-651
651-655
655-657
657-660
660-668
660-662
662-668
668-675
668-671
671-675


676-695
676-681


681-687
681-683
683-685
685-687


687-692
687-689
689-691
691-692
692-695
696-722
696-707
Ll oD


709-713
713-717
717-720
720-722


1237/39
723-727
727-132
732-437,


738-751


753-756
750-757
758-760


THE CHRISTIAN FAITH


Poet OD SU Cor row


§1. The purpose of this Introduction is, first, to set forth the con-
ception of Dogmatics which underlies the work itself ; and
secondly, to prepare the reader for the method and arrangement
followed in tt.


1. It can never be superfluous to begin the treatment of any
branch of study with a definition of that branch, except when
complete agreement on the matter can be confidently taken for
granted. And this can only be done when there has never been
any controversy as to how the study is to be practised, or when it
belongs to a larger scientific whole which is always delimited and
articulated in the same way.

As regards the first of these conditions: we can, of course,
start from the fact that most Christian churches have made use of
Dogmatics in their internal tradition and in their external inter-
course with other churches ; but what it really is, and what gives
propositions of religious and Christian import a dogmatic status—
on these questions agreement would be hard to find. As regards
the second condition : Dogmatics would indeed by general consent
be placed in that province which we designate by the term ‘ theo-
logical sciences.’ But one need only compare the most reputed
of the encyclopedic surveys of this department to see how variously
it is articulated, how differently different writers understand the
individual disciplines, relate them to each other, and estimate their
value ; and this is true in an especial degree of Dogmatics. It
would doubtless be a natural thing for me to take as my basis
the definition of Dogmatics given in my own Outline ;1 but that
book is so short and aphoristic that it is not superfluous to come
to its aid with some elucidations. The very title of the present
work, in which the name ‘ Dogmatics’ is avoided, contains the


1 Kurze Darstellung, § 3. [Eng. trans., Brief Outline of the Study of
Theology, p. 92.)


I


2 THE CHRISTIAN FAITH [§ 1


elements of a definition, but not with completeness ; and, more-
over, the component parts of the title are themselves not beyond
all need of definition. Therefore this part of the Introduction will
go its own way independently, and only as the argument gradually
unfolds itself will the reader be referred to the relevant passages
of the Brief Outline. And since the preliminary process of defining
a science cannot belong to the science itself, it follows that none
of the propositions which will appear in this part can themselves
have a dogmatic character.

2. The method and arrangement of a work, when the nature of
the subject permits of diversities (and this is the case in a marked
degree with Dogmatics, as the facts themselves show), will of course
best justify themselves by the result. But the most favourable
results can only be obtained if the reader is made acquainted with
both method and arrangement at the outset. For that will make
it possible for him to view each proposition at once in all its manifold
relations. Moreover, the comparison of particular sections with the
corresponding sections of similar works which have a different
structure may under these conditions become instructive, while
they would otherwise be merely confusing.

The greatest diversities in order and method will, of course, be
those which follow from the particular way in which Dogmatics is
conceived, and which thus disappear when a different conception
of Dogmatics is taken as basis. But there are also lesser diversities
among which choice may be exercised even by those who start
from the same definition of the subject.


CEPAIPST-E Re I
THE DEFINITION OF DOGMATICS


§ 2. Since Dogmatics is a theological discipline, and thus pertains
solely to the Christian Church, we can only explain what it is
when we have become clear as to the conception of the Christian
Church.

Notre.—Cf. the Brief Outline, Introduction, §§ 1, 2, 5, 22, 23; and in the
First Part, Introd., §§ 1, 2, 3, 6, 7; First Section, §§ 1, 2, Also Sack’s A polo-
gettk, Introd., §§ 1-5.

1. The expression ‘ theological discipline ’ is here taken in the
sense which is explicated in the first of the above-mentioned
passages. From this it follows that the present work entirely
disclaims the task of establishing on a foundation of general
principles a Doctrine of God, or an Anthropology or Eschatology
either, which should be used in the Christian Church though it did
not really originate there, or which should prove the propositions
of the Christian Faith to be consonant with reason. For what can
be said on these subjects by the human reason in itself cannot have
any closer relation to the Christian Church than it has to every
other society of faith or of life.

2. Granted, then, that we must begin with a conception of the
Christian Church, in order to define in accordance therewith what
Dogmatics should be and should do within that Church: this
conception itself can properly be reached only through the concep-
tion of ‘ Church ’ in general, together with a proper comprehension
of the peculiarity of the Christian Church. Now the general
concept of ‘ Church,’ if there really is to be such a concept, must
be derived principally from Ethics, since in every case the ‘ Church ’
is a society which originates only through free human action and
which can only through such continue to exist. The peculiarity
of the Christian Church can neither be comprehended and deduced
by purely scientific methods nor be grasped by mere empirical
methods. For no science can by means of mere ideas reach and
elicit what is individual, but must always stop short with what is


1Cf. Brief Outline, Introd., § 22; Phil. Theol., § 1,
3


4 THE CHRISTIAN FAITH [§ 2


general. Just as all so-called a priors constructions in the realm
of history come to grief over the task of showing that what has
been in such-and-such wise deduced from above is actually identical
with the historically given—so is it undeniably here also. And the
purely empirical method, on the other hand, has neither standard
nor formula for distinguishing the essential and permanent from
the changeable and contingent. But if Ethics establishes the
concept of the ‘ Church,’ it can, of course, also separate, in that
which forms the basis of these societies, the permanently identical
from the changeable elements, and thus by dividing up the whole
realm it can determine the places at which the individual forms
could be placed as soon as they put in an appearance historically.
And the task of thus exhibiting in a conceptually exhaustive way,
according to their affinities and gradations, the totality of all those
‘Churches’ which are distinguished from each other by peculiar
differences of basis—this task would be the business of a special
branch of historical science, which should be exclusively designated
Philosophy of Religion ; just as, perhaps, the name Philosophy of
Right would best be reserved for an analogous critical study which,
as bearing on the general conception of the State as developed in
Ethics, would have to do the same thing for the different individual
forms of civic organization. The performance of this task of the
Philosophy of Religion has, of course, been attempted in a variety
of ways ; but these attempts do not rest upon a sufficiently universal
scientific method, nor do they sufficiently maintain the balance
between the historical and the speculative, for us to be able to
appeal to them in our theological studies as admittedly satisfactory.
To begin with, these results of the Philosophy of Religion would
have to be accepted by Apologetics, which, starting from that
point, would lay down as foundation a description of the peculiar
essence of Christianity and its relation to other ‘ Churches.’ If,
however, it were duly recognized that Apologetics is a theological
discipline which needs to be refashioned for these present times, it
would not be advisable to defer its appearance until the arrival of
a satisfactory exposition of the Philosophy of Religion. Rather
would Apologetics have to strike out in the interval upon an
abbreviated course of its own. It would then begin at the same
point as the Philosophy of Religion, and take the same road, but
would leave aside, without working it out, all that does not directly
contribute to the purpose of ascertaining the nature of Christianity.
But now, since this discipline of Apologetics is only just beginning


§ 3] THE DEFINITION OF DOGMATICS 5


to come to life again, the following exposition has to perform this
task for itself.

3. Thus this first part of our Introduction has only to collate
and apply borrowed propositions, i.e. propositions which belong to
other scientific studies, in this case to Ethics, Philosophy of Religion,
and Apologetics. Of course, the results of an investigation which is
put together out of such component parts cannot lay claim to any
general recognition, except when that form of Ethics and of the
Philosophy of Religion which underlies the investigation is likewise
recognized. From this it is clear that even here at the very beginning
there is plenty of opportunity for very diverse definitions and con-
ceptions of Dogmatics, each of which can only regard itself as
preparatory for a future one when the scientific studies of which it
has to take account will be more firmly established, while, never-
theless, Christianity itself remains entirely the same.

Postscript 1—In this connexion it is by no means intended to
assert that these propositions must, in the independent treatment
of the sciences to which they belong, occur in the same form in
which they are here set forth. That is in itself improbable, since
in this work we have before us none of the matter which would in
those sciences lead up to the propositions.

Postscript 2.—By Ethics is here understood that speculative
presentation of Reason, in the whole range of its activity, which
runs parallel to natural science. By Philosophy of Religion is
understood a critical presentation of the different existing forms of
religious communion, as constituting, when taken collectively, the
complete phenomenon of piety in human nature. The expression
Apologetics is explained in the Brief Outline, § 309.


I. THE CONCEPTION OF THE CHURCH: PROPOSITIONS
BORROWED FROM ETHICS.


§3. The piety which forms the basis of all ecclesiastical communions
is, considered purely in itself, neither a Knowing nor a
Doing, but a modification of Feeling, or of immediate self-
CONSCLOUSNESS.
Nore.—Cf. the Speeches on Religion (Ing. trans.), pp. 28 ff.

1. That a Church is nothing but a communion or association
relating to religion or piety, is beyond all doubt for us Evangelical
(Protestant) Christians, since we regard it as equivalent to degenera-
tion in a Church when it begins to occupy itself with other matters
as well, whether the affairs of science or of outward organization ;


6 THE CHRISTIAN FAITH Bs


just as we also always oppose any attempt on the part of the leaders
of State or of science, as such, to order the affairs of religion. But,
at the same time, we have no desire to keep the leaders of science
from scrutinizing and passing judgment from their own point of
view upon both piety itself and the communion relating to it, and
determining their proper place in the total field of human life ;
since piety and Church, like other things, are material for scientific
knowledge. Indeed, we ourselves are here entering upon such a
scrutiny. And, similarly, we would not keep the leaders of State
from fixing the outward relations of the religious communions
according to the principles of civil organization—which, however,
by no means implies that the religious communion is a product of
the State or a component part of it.

However, not only we, but even those Churches which are not
so clear about keeping apart Church and State, or ecclesiastical and
scientific association, must assent to what we have laid down. For
they cannot assign to the Church more than an indirect influence
upon these other associations ; and it is only the maintenance,
regulation, and advancement of piety which they can regard as the
essential business of the Church.

2. When Feeling and Self-consciousness are here put side by
side as equivalent, it is by no means intended to introduce generally
a manner of speech in which the two expressions would be simply
synonymous. The term ‘ feeling’ has in the language of common
life been long current in this religious connexion ; but for scientific
usage it needs to be more precisely defined ; and it is to do this that
the other word is added. So that if anyone takes the word ‘ feeling ’
in a sense so wide as to include unconscious states, he will by the
other word be reminded that such is not the usage we are here
maintaining. Again, to the term ‘ self-consciousness ’ is added the
determining epithet ‘immediate,’ lest anyone should think of a
kind of self-consciousness which is not feeling at all; as, e.g., when
the name of self-consciousness is given to that consciousness of self
which is more like an objective consciousness, being a representa-
tion of oneself, and thus mediated by self-contemplation. Even
when such a representation of ourselves, as we exist in a given
portion of time, in thinking, ¢.g., or in willing, moves quite close to,
or even interpenetrates, the individual moments of the mental
state, this kind of self-consciousness does appear simply as an
accompaniment of the state itself. But the real immediate self-
consciousness, which is not representation but in the proper sense


§ 3) PIETY A FORM OF FEELING 7


feeling, is by no means always simply an accompaniment. It may
rather be presumed that in this respect everyone has a twofold
experience. In the first place, it is everybody’s experience that
there are moments in which all thinking and willing retreat behind
a self-consciousness of one form or another ; but, in the second place,
that at times this same form of self-consciousness persists unaltered
during a series of diverse acts of thinking and willing, taking up no
relation to these, and thus not being in the proper sense even an
accompaniment of them. Thus joy and sorrow—those mental
phases which are always so important in the realm of religion—are
genuine states of feeling, in the proper sense explained above ;
whereas self-approval and self-reproach, apart from their subse-
quently passing into joy and sorrow, belong in themselves rather
to the objective consciousness of self, as results of an analytic con-
templation. Nowhere, perhaps, do the two forms stand nearer to
each other than here, but just for that reason this comparison puts
the difference in the clearest light.

Note.—Steffen’s account of feeling is closely akin to mine, and the passage
from it to mine is easy (Falsche Theologie, pp. 99, 100). ‘ The immediate
presence of whole undivided Being, etc.’ On the other hand, the account
given by Baumgarten-Crusius (Einleitung in das Studium dev Dogmatik, p. 56),
apart from its antithesis between feeling and self-consciousness, (a) does not
comprehend the whole, but only the higher regions, of feeling, and (>) seems
to transfer feeling into the realm of the objective consciousness by using the
word ‘ perception’ (Wahrnehmung).

3. Our proposition seems to assume that in addition to Know-
ing, Doing, and Feeling, there is no fourth. This is not done,
however, in the sense which would be required for an apagogic
proof; but those other two are placed alongside of Feeling simply
in order that, with the exposition of our own view, we may at the
same time take up and discuss those divergent views which are
actually in existence. So that we might leave the question entirely
aside whether there is a fourth such element in the soul, but for two
reasons : namely, in the first place, that it is our duty to convince
ourselves as to whether there is still another region to which piety
might be assigned; and, in the second place, that we must set
ourselves to grasp clearly the relation which subsists between
Christian piety in itself, on the one hand, and both Christian belief
(so far as it can be brought into the form of knowledge) and Christian
action, on the other. Now, if the relation of the three elements
above-mentioned were anywhere set forth in a universally recognized
way, we could simply appeal to that. But, as things are, we must


8 THE CHRISTIAN FAITH [§ 3


in this place say what is necessary on the subject ; though this is
to be regarded as simply borrowed from Psychology, and it should
be well noted that the truth of the matter (namely, that piety is
feeling) remains entirely independent of the correctness of the
following discussion. Life, then, is to be conceived as an alterna-
tion between an abiding-in-self (Insichbleiben) and a passing-
beyond-self (Aussichheraustreten) on the part of the subject. The
two forms of consciousness (Knowing and Feeling) constitute the
abiding-in-self, while Doing proper is the passing-beyond-self.
Thus far, then, Knowing and Feeling stand together in antithesis
to Doing. But while Knowing, in the sense of possessing knowledge,
is an abiding-in-self on the part of the subject, nevertheless as the
act of knowing, it only becomes real by a passing-beyond-self of the
subject, and in this sense it is a Doing. As regards Feeling, on the
other hand, it is not only in its duration as a result of stimulation
that it is an abiding-in-self : even as the process of being stimulated,
it is not effected by the subject, but simply takes place in the
subject, and thus, since it belongs altogether to the realm of re-
ceptivity, it is entirely an abiding-in-self ; and in this sense it
stands alone in antithesis to the other two—Knowing and Doing.

As regards the question whether there is a fourth to these three,
Feeling, Knowing, and Doing ; or a third to these two, abiding-in-
self and passing-beyond-self : the unity of these is indeed not one
of the two or the three themselves ; but no one can place this unity
alongside of these others as a co-ordinate third or fourth entity.
The unity rather is the essence of the subject itself, which manifests
itself in those severally distinct forms, and is thus, to give it a name
which in this particular connexion is permissible, their common
foundation. Similarly, on the other hand, every actual moment of
life is, in its total content, a complex of these two or these three,
though two of them may be present only in vestige or in germ.
But a third to those two (one of which is again divided into two)
will scarcely be found.

4. But now (these three, Feeling, Knowing, and Doing being
granted) while we here set forth once more the oft-asserted view
that, of the three, Feeling is the one to which piety belongs, it is not
in any wise meant, as indeed the above discussion shows, that piety
is excluded from all connexion with Knowing and Doing. For,
indeed, it is the case in general that the immediate self-conscious-
uess is always the mediating link in the transition between moments
in which Knowing predominates and those in which Doing pre-


§ 3] FEELING, KNOWING, AND DOING )


dominates, so that a different Doing may proceed from the same
Knowing in different people according as a different determination
of self-consciousness enters in. And thus it will fall to piety to
stimulate Knowing and Doing, and every moment in which piety
has a predominant place will contain within itself one or both of
these in germ. But just this is the very truth represented by our
proposition, and is in no wise an objection to it ; for were it other-
wise the religious moments could not combine with the others to
form a single life, but piety would be something isolated and
without any influence upon the other mental functions of our
lives. However, in representing this truth, and thus securing to
piety its own peculiar province in its connexion with all other
provinces, our proposition is opposing the assertions from other
quarters that piety is a Knowing, or a Doing, or both, or a state
made up of Feeling, Knowing, and Doing ; and in this polemical
connexion our proposition must now be still more closely considered.

If, then, piety did consist in Knowing, it would have to be,
above all, that knowledge, in its entirety or in its essence, which is
here set up as the content of Dogmatics (Glaubenslehre) : otherwise
it must be a complete mistake for us here to investigate the nature
of piety in the interests of our study of Dogmatics. But if piety 7s
that knowledge, then the amount of such knowledge in a man must
be the measure of his piety. For anything which, in its rise and
fall, is not the measure of the perfection of a given object cannot
constitute the essence of that object. Accordingly, on the hypo-
thesis in question, the most perfect master of Christian Dogmatics
would always be likewise the most pious Christian. And no one
will admit this to be the case, even if we premise that the most
perfect master is only he who keeps most to what is essential and
does not forget it in accessories and side-issues ; but all will agree
rather that the same degree of perfection in that knowledge may be
accompanied by very different degrees of piety, and the same
degree of piety by very different degrees of knowledge. It may,
however, be objected that the assertion that piety is a matter of
Knowing refers not so much to the content of that knowledge as
to the certainty which characterizes its representations ; so that
the knowledge of doctrines is piety only in virtue of the certainty
attached to them, and thus only in virtue of the strength of the
conviction, while a possession of the doctrines without conviction
is not piety at all. Then the strength of the conviction would be
the measure of the piety; and this is undoubtedly what those


se) THE CHRISTIAN FAITH (§ 3


people have chiefly in mind who so love to paraphrase the word
Faith as ‘fidelity to one’s convictions.’ But in all other more
typical fields of knowledge the only measure of conviction is the
clearness and completeness of the thinking itself. Now if it is to
be the same with this conviction, then we should simply be back
at our old point, that he who thinks the religious propositions most
clearly and completely, individually and in their connexions, must
likewise be the most pious man, If, then, this conclusion is still to
be rejected, but the hypothesis is to be retained (namely, that con-
viction is the measure of piety), the conviction in this case must be
of a different kind and must have a different measure. However
closely, then, piety may be connected with this conviction, it does
not follow that it is connected in the same way with that knowledge.
And if, nevertheless, the knowledge which forms Dogmatics has to
relate itself to piety, the explanation of this is that while piety is,
of course, the object of this knowledge, the knowledge can only be
explicated in virtue of a certainty which inheres in the determina-
tions of self-consciousness.

If, on the other hand, piety consists in Doing, it is manifest
that the Doing which constitutes it cannot be defined by its content ;
for experience teaches that not only the most admirable but also
the most abominable, not only the most useful but also the most
inane and meaningless things, are done as pious and out of piety.
Thus we are thrown back simply upon the form, upon the method
and manner in which the thing comes to be done. But this can
only be understood from the two termini, the underlying motive
as the starting-point, and the intended result as the goal. Now
no one will pronounce an action more or less pious because of the
greater or less degree of completeness with which the intended
result is achieved. Suppose we then are thrown back upon the
motive. It is manifest that underlying every. motive there is a
certain determination of self-consciousness, be it pleasure or pain,
and that it is by these that one motive can most clearly be dis-
tinguished from another. Accordingly an action (a Doing) will be
pious in so far as the determination of self-consciousness, the feeling
which had become affective and had passed into a motive impulse,
is a pious one.

Thus both hypotheses lead to the same point: that there are
both a Knowing and a Doing which pertain to piety, but neither of
these constitutes the essence of piety : they only pertain to it inas-
much as the stirred-up Feeling sometimes comes to rest in a thinking


$331 FEELING, KNOWING, AND DOING rt


which fixes it, sometimes discharges itself in an action which
expresses it.

Finally, no one will deny that there are states of Feeling, such
as penitence, contrition, confidence, and joy in God, which we
pronounce pious in themselves, without regard to any Knowing or
Doing that proceeds from them, though, of course, we expect both
that they will work themselves out in actions which are otherwise
obligatory, and that the reflective impulse will turn its attention
to them.

5. From what we have now said it is already clear how we must
judge the assertion that piety is a state in which Knowing, Feeling,
and Doing are combined. Of course we reject it if it means that
the Feeling is derived from the Knowing and the Doing from the
Feeling. But if no subordination is intended, then the assertion
might just as well be the description of any other quite clear and
living moment as of a religious one. For though the idea of the
goal of an action precedes the action itself, at the same time it
continues to accompany the action, and the relation between the
two expresses itself simultaneously in the self-consciousness through
a greater or less degree of satisfaction and assurance ; so that even
here all three elements are combined in the total content of the
state. A similar situation exists in the case of Knowing. For the
thinking activity, as a successfully accomplished operation, ex-
presses itself in the self-consciousness as a confident certainty.
But simultaneously it becomes also an endeavour to connect the
apprehended truth with other truths or to seek out cases for its
application, and thus there is always present simultaneously the
commencement of a Doing, which develops fully when the oppor-
tunity offers; and so here also we find Knowing, Feeling, and
Doing all together in the total state. But now, just as the first-
described state remains, notwithstanding, essentially a Doing, and
the second a Knowing, so piety in its diverse expressions remains
essentially a state of Feeling. This state is subsequently caught
up into the region of thinking, but only in so far as each religious
man is at the same time inclined towards thinking and exercised
therein ; and only in the same way and according to the same
measure does this inner piety emerge in living movement and
representative action. It also follows from this account of the
matter that Feeling is not to be thought of as something either
confused or inactive ; since, on the one hand, it is strongest in our
most vivid moments, and either directly or indirectly lies at the


12 THE CHRISTIAN FAITH ($4


root of every expression of our wills, and, on the other hand, it can
be grasped by thought and conceived of in its own nature.

But suppose there are other people who would exclude Feeling
altogether from our field, and therefore describe piety simply as a
Knowledge which begets actions or as a Doing which proceeds
from a Knowing: these people not only would have to settle
first among themselves whether piety is a Knowing or a Doing, but
would also have to show us how a Doing can arise from a Knowing
except as mediated by a determination of self-consciousness.
And if they have eventually to admit this point, then they will
also be convinced by the above discussion that if such a complex
does bear the character of piety, nevertheless the element of Know-
ing in it has not in itself got the length of being piety, and the
element of Doing is in itself no longer piety, but the piety is just
the determination of self-consciousness which comes in between the
two. But that relationship can always hold in the reverse order
also: the Doing has not got the length of being piety in those
cases in which a determinate self-consciousness only results from
an accomplished action ; and the Knowing is in itself no longer
piety when it has no other content than that determination of self-
consciousness caught up into thought.


§ 4. The common element in all howsoever diverse expressions of
prety, by which these are conjointly distinguished from all
other feelings, or, in other words, the self-identical essence
of piety, is this: the consciousness of being absolutely
dependent, or, which 1s the same thing, of being in relation
with God.


Notre.—For the word schlechthinig [translated ‘ absolute ’], which occurs
frequently in the following exposition, I am indebted to Professor Delbriick.
I was unwilling to venture upon its use, and I am not aware that it has occurred
anywhere else. But now that he has given it me, I find it very convenient
to follow his lead in using it.


1. In any actual state of consciousness, no matter whether it
merely accompanies a thought or action or occupies a moment for
itself, we are never simply conscious of our Selves in their un-
changing identity, but are always at the same time conscious of a
changing determination of them. The Ego in itself can be re-
presented objectively ; but every consciousness of self is at the
same time the consciousness of a variable state of being. But
in this distinction of the latter from the former, it is implied that
the variable does not proceed purely from the self-identical, for in


§ 4] ABSOLUTE DEPENDENCE 33


that case it could not be distinguished from it. Thus in every
self-consciousness there are two elements, which we might call
respectively a self-caused element (em Sichselbstsetzen) and a
non-self-caused element (ein Sichselbstnichtsogesetzthaben) ; or a
Being and a Having-by-some-means-come-to-be (ein Sein und ein
Irgendwiegewordensein). The latter of these presupposes for
every self-consciousness another factor besides the Ego, a factor
which is the source of the particular determination, and without
which the self-consciousness would not be precisely what it is.
But this Other is not objectively presented in the immediate self-
consciousness with which alone we are here concerned. For though,
of course, the double constitution of self-consciousness causes us
always to look objectively for an Other to which we can trace the
origin of our particular state, yet this search is a separate act with
which we are not at present concerned. In self-consciousness
there are only two elements: the one expresses the existence of
the subject for itself, the other its co-existence with an Other.

Now to these two elements, as they exist together in the temporal
self-consciousness, correspond in the subject its Receptivity and its
(spontaneous) Activity. If we could think away the co-existence
with an Other, but otherwise think ourselves as we are, then a self-
consciousness which predominantly expressed an affective condi-
tion of receptivity would be impossible, and any self-consciousness
could then express only activity—an activity, however, which,
not being directed to any object, would be merely an urge out-
wards, an indefinite ‘ agility ’ without form or colour. But as we
never do exist except along with an Other, so even in every out-
ward-tending self-consciousness the element of receptivity, in some
way or other affected, is the primary one; and even the self-
consciousness which accompanies an action (acts of knowing in-
cluded), while it predominantly expresses spontaneous movement
and activity, is always related (though the relation is often a quite
indefinite one) to a prior moment of affective receptivity, through
which the original ‘ agility’ received its direction. To these pro-
positions assent can be unconditionally demanded ; and no one
will deny them who is capable of a little introspection and can find
interest in the real subject of our present inquiries.

2. The common element in all those determinations of self-
consciousness which predominantly express a receptivity affected
from some outside quarter is the feeling of Dependence. On the
other hand, the common element in all those determinations which


14 THE CHRISTIAN PAGE (§ 4


predominantly express spontaneous movement and activity is the


feeling of Freedom. The former is the case not only because it is


by an influence from some other quarter that we have come to
such a state, but particularly because we could not so become except
by means of an Other. The latter is the case because in these
instances an Other is determined by us, and without our spontaneous
activity could not be so determined. These two definitions may,
indeed, seem to be still incomplete, inasmuch as there is also a
mobility of the subject which is not connected with an Other at all,
but which seems to be subject to the same antithesis as that just
explained. But when we become such-and-such from within out-
wards, for ourselves, without any Other being involved, that is the
simple situation of the temporal development of a being which
remains essentially self-identical, and it is only very improperly
that this can be referred to the concept ‘ Freedom.’ And when we
cannot ourselves, from within outwards, become such-and-such,
this only indicates the limits which belong to the nature of the
subject itself as regards spontaneous activity, and this could only
very improperly be called ‘ Dependence.’

Further, this antithesis must on no account be confused with
the antithesis between gloomy or depressing and elevating or joyful
feelings, of which we shall speak later. For a feeling of dependence
may be elevating, if the ‘ having-become-such-and-such ’ which it
expresses is complete ; and similarly a feeling of freedom may be
dejecting, if the moment of predominating receptivity to which the
action can be traced was of a dejecting nature, or again if the
manner and method of the activity prove to be a disadvantageous
combination.

Let us now think of the feeling of dependence and the feeling
of freedom as ome, in the sense that not only the subject but the
corresponding Other is the same for both. Then the total self-
consciousness made up of both together is one of Reciprocity be-
tween the subject and the corresponding Other. Now let us suppose
the totality of all moments of feeling, of both kinds, as one whole :
then the corresponding Other is also to be supposed as a totality
or as one, and then that term ‘reciprocity’ is the right one for
our self-consciousness in general, inasmuch as it expresses our
connexion with everything which either appeals to our receptivity
or is subjected to our activity. And this is true not only when
we particularize this Other and ascribe to each of its elements a
different degree of relation to the twofold consciousness within us,


§ 4] DEPENDENCE AND FREEDOM 15


but also when we think of the total ‘ outside’ as one, and more-
over (since it contains other receptivities and activities to which
we have a relation) as one together with ourselves, that is, as a
World. Accordingly our self-consciousness, as a consciousness of
our existence in the world or of our co-existence with the world,
is a series in which the feeling of freedom and the feeling of depend-
ence are divided. But neither an absolute feeling of dependence,
1.€. without any feeling of freedom in relation to the co-deter-
minant, nor an absolute feeling of freedom, 7.e. without any feeling
of dependence in relation to the co-determinant, is to be found in
this whole realm. If we consider our relations to Nature, or those
which exist in human society, there we shall find a large number of
objects in regard’to which freedom and dependence maintain very
much of an equipoise : these constitute the field of equal reciprocity.
There are other objects which exercise a far greater influence upon
our receptivity than our activity exercises upon them, and also
vice versa, so that one of the two may diminish until it is imper-
ceptible. But neither of the two members will ever completely
disappear. The feeling of dependence predominates in the relation
of children to their parents, or of citizens to their fatherland ; and
yet individuals can, without losing their relationship, exercise upon
their fatherland not only a directive influence, but even a counter-
influence. And the dependence of children on their parents,
which very soon comes to be felt as a gradually diminishing and
fading quantity, is never from the start free from the admixture
of an element of spontaneous activity towards the parents: just
as even in the most absolute autocracy the ruler is not without
some slight feeling of dependence. It is the same in the case of
Nature: towards all the forces of Nature—even, we may say,
towards the heavenly bodies—we ourselves do, in the same sense
in which they influence us, exercise a counter-influence, however
minute. So that our whole self-consciousness in relation to the
World or its individual parts remains enclosed within these limits.

3. There can, accordingly, be for us no such thing as a feeling
of absolute freedom. He who asserts that he has such a feeling
is either deceiving himself or separating things which essentially
belong together. For if the feeling of freedom expresses a forth-
going activity, this activity must have an object which has
been somehow given to us, and this could not have taken place
without an influence of the object upon our receptivity. There-
fore in every such case there is involved a feeling of dependence


16 THE CHRISTIAN FAITH [8 4


which goes along with the feeling of freedom, and thus limits it.
The contrary could only be possible if the object altogether came
into existence through our activity, which is never the case abso-
lutely, but only relatively. But if, on the other hand, the feeling of
freedom expresses only an inward movement of activity, not only
is every such individual movement bound up with the state of our
stimulated receptivity at the moment, but, further, the totality of
our free inward movements, considered as a unity, cannot be
represented as a feeling of absolute freedom, because our whole
existence does not present itself to our consciousness as having
proceeded from our own spontaneous activity. Therefore in any
temporal existence a feeling of absolute freedom can have no place.
As regards the feeling of absolute dependence which, on the other
hand, our proposition does postulate : for just the same reason,
this feeling cannot in any wise arise from the influence of an object
which has in some way to be given to us ; for upon such an object
there would always be a counter-influence, and even a voluntary
renunciation of this would always involve a feeling of freedom.
Hence a feeling of absolute dependence, strictly speaking, cannot
exist in a single moment as such, because such a moment is always
determined, as regards its total content, by what is given, and
thus by objects towards which we have a feeling of freedom. But
the self-consciousness which accompanies all our activity, and
therefore, since that is never zero, accompanies our whole exist-
ence, and negatives absolute freedom, is itself precisely a conscious-
ness of absolute dependence ; for it is the consciousness that the
whole of our spontaneous activity comes from a source outside of
us in just the same sense in which anything towards which we
should have a feeling of absolute freedom must have proceeded
entirely from ourselves. But without any feeling of freedom a
feeling of absolute dependence would not be possible.

4. As regards the identification of absolute dependence with
‘relation to God’ in our proposition: this is to be understood in
the sense that the Whence of our receptive and active existence,
as implied in this self-consciousness, is to be designated by the
word ‘ God,’ and that this is for us the really original signification
of that word. In this connexion we have first of all to remind
ourselves that, as we have seen in the foregoing discussion, this
‘Whence ’ is not the world, in the sense of the totality of temporal
existence, and still less is it any single part of the world. For we
have a feeling of freedom (though, indeed, a limited one) in relation


§ 4] RELATION TO GOD 07:


to the world, since we are complementary parts of it, and also since
we are continually exercising an influence on its individual parts ;
and, moreover, there is the possibility of our exercising influence
on all its parts ; and while this does permit a limited feeling of
dependence, it excludes the absolute feeling. In the next place,
we have to note that our proposition is intended to oppose the
view that this feeling of dependence is itself conditioned by some
previous knowledge about God. And this may indeed be the more
necessary since many people claim to be in the sure possession of
a concept of God, altogether a matter of conception and original,
z.e. independent of any feeling ; and in the strength of this higher
self-consciousness, which indeed may come pretty near to being
a feeling of absolute freedom, they put far from them, as something
almost infra-human, that very feeling which for us is the basic
type of all piety. Now our proposition is in no wise intended to
dispute the existence of such an original knowledge, but simply
to set it aside as something with which, in a system of Christian
doctrine, we could never have any concern, because plainly enough
it has itself nothing to do directly with piety. If, however, word
and idea are always originally one, and the term ‘ God’ therefore
presupposes an idea, then we shall simply say that this idea, which
is nothing more than the expression of the feeling of absolute
dependence, is the most direct reflection upon it and the most
original idea with which we are here concerned, and is quite in-
dependent of that original knowledge (properly so called), and
conditioned only by our feeling of absolute dependence. So that
in the first instance God signifies for us simply that which is the
co-determinant in this feeling and to which we trace our being in
such a state ; and any further content of the idea must be evolved
out of this fundamental import assigned to it. Now this is just
what is principally meant by the formula which says that to feel
oneself absolutely dependent and to be conscious of being in re-
lation with God are one and the same thing ; and the reason is that
absolute dependence is the fundamental relation which must include
all others in itself. This last expression includes the God-conscious-
ness in the self-consciousness in such a way that, quite in accordance
with the above analysis, the two cannot be separated from each
other. The feeling of absolute dependence becomes a clear self-
consciousness only as this idea comes simultaneously into being.
In this sense it can indeed be said that God is given to us in feeling
in an original way ; and if we speak of an original revelation of


2


THE CHRISTIAN FAITH ie)


ole dependence which characterizes ne ay

ee en but all temporal existence, there is given to man also the
immediate self-consciousness of it, which becomes a consciousness
of God. In whatever measure this actually takes place during the
course of a personality through time, in just that measure do we
ascribe piety to the individual. On the other hand, any possi-
bility of God being in any way given is entirely excluded, because
anything that is outwardly given must be given as an object ex-
posed to our counter-influence, however slight this may be. The
transference of the idea of God to any perceptible object, unless one
is all the time conscious that it is a piece of purely arbitrary sym-
bolism, is always a corruption, whether it be a temporary trans-
ference, i.e. a theophany, or a constitutive transference, in which
God is represented as permanently a particular perceptible
existence.


§5. What we have thus described constitutes the highest grade of
human self-consciousness ; but in its actual occurrence it 1s
never separated from the lower, and through its combination
therewith in a single moment it participates in the antithesis
of the pleasant and the unpleasant.


I. The relation between these two forms of self-consciousness,
namely, the feeling of absolute dependence and the self-conscious-
ness which, as expressing the connexion with perceptible finite
existence, splits up into a partial feeling of dependence and a partial
feeling of freedom, will best be seen if we bring in yet a third form.
If we go back to the first obscure period of the life of man, we find
there, all over, the animal life almost solely predominating, and
the spiritual life as yet entirely in the background; and so we
must regard the state of his consciousness as closely akin to that
of the lower animals. It is true, indeed, that the animal state is
to us really entirely strange and unknown. But there is general
agreement that, on the one hand, the lower animals have no know-
ledge, properly so called, nor any full self-consciousness which
combines the different moments into a stable unity, and that, on
the other hand, they are nevertheless not entirely devoid of con-
sciousness. Now we can hardly do justice to this state of affairs
except by postulating a consciousness of such a sort that in it the
objective and the introversive, or feeling and perception, are not
really distinct from each other, but remain in a state of unresolved


§ 5] GRADES OF SELF-CONSCIOUSNESS 19


confusion. The consciousness of children obviously approximates
to this form, especially before they learn to speak. From that time
on, this condition tends more and more to disappear, confining itself
to those dreamy moments which form the transition between sleep
and waking ; while in our wide-awake hours feeling and perception
are clearly distinct from each other, and thus make up the whole
wealth of man’s sensible life, in the widest sense of the term. In
that term we include (speaking simply of the consciousness, and
leaving out action proper), on the one hand, the gradual accumula-
tion of perceptions which constitute the whole field of experience
in the widest sense of the word, and, on the other hand, all deter-
minations of self-consciousness which develop from our relations to
nature and to man, including those which we described above (§ 4, 2)
as coming nearest to the feeling of absolute dependence ; so that
by the word ‘sensible ’ we understand the social and moral feelings
no less than the self-regarding, since they all together have their
place in that realm of the particular which is subject to the above-
mentioned antithesis. The former division [t.e. the accumulation
of perceptions] which belongs to the objective consciousness, we
pass over, as it does not concern us here. But in the whole of the
latter class, consisting of feelings which we have designated sensible,
the corresponding co-determinant to which we trace the constitu-
tion of the present state belongs to the realm of reciprocal action ;
so that, whether we are at the moment more conscious of depend-
ence or of freedom, we take up towards it, in a sense, an attitude
of equal co-ordination, and indeed set ourselves as individuals (or
as comprised within a larger individual, as, e.g., in our patriotic
feelings) over against it as another individual. Now it is in this
respect that these feelings are most definitely distinguished from
the feeling of absolute dependence. For while the latter from its
very nature negatives absolute freedom (§ 4, 3), though it does it under
the form of self-consciousness, this is not the consciousness of our-
selves as individuals of a particular description, but simply of our-
selves as individual finite existence in general ; so that we do not
set ourselves over against any other individual being, but, on the
contrary, all antithesis between one individual and another is in
this case done away. Hence there seems to be no objection to
our distinguishing three grades of self-consciousness : the confused
animal grade, in which the antithesis cannot arise, as the lowest ;
the sensible self-consciousness, which rests entirely upon the anti-
thesis, as the middle ; and the feeling of absolute dependence, in


20 THE CHRISTIAN FAITH [85


which the antithesis again disappears and the subject unites and
identifies itself with everything which, in the middle grade, was set
over against it, as the highest.

2. If there did exist a feeling of absolute freedom, in it also the
above antithesis would be done away. Only, such a subject could
never stand in any relation with other similarly constituted sub-
jects, but whatever is given to it must be given as purely susceptible
or passive material. And since, for this reason alone, such a feeling
is never found in man, the only immediate self-consciousness in
man on that grade is the feeling of absolute dependence which we
have described. For every moment which is made up of a partial
feeling of freedom and a partial feeling of dependence places us in
a position of co-ordinate antithesis to a similar Other. But now
there remains the question, whether there exists any other self-
consciousness, not immediate but accompanying some kind of
knowledge or action as such, which can be ranked along with that
which we have described. Let us then conceive, as the act or
state of an individual, a highest kind of knowledge in which all
subordinate knowledge is comprised. This, indeed, in its province
is likewise elevated above all antithesis. But its province is that
of the objective consciousness. However, it will of course be
accompanied by an immediate self-consciousness expressive of
certainty or conviction. But since this concerns the relation of
the subject as knower to the known as object, even this self-con-
sciousness which accompanies the highest knowledge remains in
the realm of the antithesis. In the same way, let us conceive 4
highest kind of action, in the form of a resolve which covers the
whole field of our spontaneous activity, so that all subsequent
resolves are developed out of it, as individual parts,! which were
already contained in it. This also in its province stands above all
antithesis, and it is likewise accompanied by a self-consciousness.
But this also concerns the relation of the subject as agent to that
which may be the object of its action, and thus has its place within
the antithesis. And since obviously this must be equally true of
every self-consciousness which accompanies any particular know-
ledge or action, it follows that there is no other self-consciousness
which is elevated above the antithesis, and that this character
belongs exclusively to the feeling of absolute dependence.

3. While the lowest or animal grade of consciousness gradually
disappears as the middle grade develops, the highest cannot develop


1 See Ueber die Behandlung des Pflichtbegriffs, 1824, pp. 4-6.


§ 5] GRADES OF SELF-CONSCIOUSNESS 2


at all so long as the lowest is present ; but, on the other hand, the
middle grade must persist undiminished even when the highest has
reached its perfect development. The highest self-consciousness
is in no wise dependent on outwardly given objects which may
affect us at one moment and not at another. As a consciousness
of absolute dependence it is quite simple, and remains self-identical
while all other states are changing. Therefore, in itself it cannot
possibly be at one moment thus and at another moment otherwise,
nor can it by intermission be present at one moment and absent at
another. Either it is not there at all, or, so long as it is there, it is
continuously there and always self-identical. Now if it were im-
possible for it to co-exist with the consciousness of the second grade
(as it cannot with that of the third), then either it could never make
an appearance in time, but would always remain in the concealment
in which it lay during the predominance of the lowest grade, or it
must drive out the second and exist alone, and, indeed, in ever-
unchanging identity. Now this latter supposition is controverted
by all experience, and indeed is manifestly impossible unless our
ideation and action are to be entirely stripped of self-consciousness,
which would irrevocably destroy the coherence of our existence for
our own minds. It is impossible to claim a constancy for the
highest self-consciousness, except on the supposition that the sensible
self-consciousness is always conjoined with it. Of course, this con-
junction cannot be regarded as a fusion of the two: that would be
entirely opposed to the conception of both of them which we have
established. It means rather a co-existence of the two in the same
moment, which, of course, unless the Ego is to be split up, involves
a reciprocal relation of the two. It is impossible for anyone to be
in some moments exclusively conscious of his relations within the
realm of the antithesis, and in other moments of his absolute de-
pendence in itself and in a general way ; for it is as a person deter-
mined for this moment in a particular manner within the realm of
the antithesis that he is conscious of his absolute dependence. This
relatedness of the sensibly determined to the higher self-conscious-
ness in the unity of the moment is the consummating point of the
self-consciousness. For to the man who once recognizes what
piety is, and appropriates it as a requirement of his being, every
moment of a merely sensible self-consciousness is a defective and
imperfect state. But even if the feeling of absolute dependence in
general were the entire content of a moment of self-consciousness,
this also would be an imperfect state ; for it would lack the definite-


2a THE CHRISTIAN FAITH [§ 5


ness and clearness which spring from its being related to the deter-
mination of the sensible self-consciousness. This consummation,
however, since it consists in the two elements being related to each
other, may be described in two different ways. Described from
below it is as follows: when the sensible self-consciousness has
quite expelled the animal confusion, then there is disclosed a higher
tendency over against the antithesis, and the expression of this
tendency in the self-consciousness is the feeling of absolute depend-
ence. And the more the subject, in each moment of sensible self-
consciousness, with his partial freedom and partial dependence,
takes at the same time the attitude of absolute dependence, the more
religious is he. Described from above it is as follows: the ten-
dency which we have described, as an original and innate tendency
of the human soul, strives from the very beginning to break through
into consciousness. But it is unable to do so as long as the anti-
thesis remains dissolved in the animal confusion. Subsequently,
however, it asserts itself. And the more it contributes to every
moment of sensibly determined self-consciousness without the
omission of any, so that the man, while he always feels himself
partially free and partially dependent in relation to other finite
existence, feels himself at the same time to be also (along with
everything towards which he had that former feeling) absolutely
dependent—the more religious is he.

4. The sensibly determined self-consciousness splits up of
itself, in accordance with its nature, into a series of moments that
differ in their content, because our activity exercised upon other
beings is a temporal one, and their influence upon us is likewise
temporal. The feeling of absolute dependence, on the other hand,
being in itself always self-identical, would not evoke a series of
thus distinguishable moments ; and if it did not enter into relation
with such a series in the manner described above, either it could
never become an actual consciousness in time at all, or else it must
accompany the sensible self-consciousness monotonously without
any relation to the manifold rising and falling variations of the
latter. But, as a matter of fact, our religious consciousness does
not take either of these forms, but conforms to the description
we have given above. That is tosay: being related as a constituent
factor to a given moment of consciousness which consists of a partial
feeling of freedom and a partial feeling of dependence, it thereby
becomes a particular religious emotion, and being in another moment
related to a different datum, it becomes a different religious emotion ;


§ 5] PLEASURE AND PAIN 23


yet so that the essential element, namely, the feeling of absolute
dependence, is the same in both, and thus throughout the whole
series, and the difference arises simply from the fact that it becomes
a different moment when it goes along with a different determina-
tion of the sensible self-consciousness. It remains always, how-
ever, a moment of the higher power ; whereas, where there is no
piety at all, the sensible self-consciousness breaks up (as was like-
wise described) into a series of moments of the lower power, while
in the period of animal confusion there does not even take place a
definite separation and antithesis of the moments for the subject.
It is the same with the second part of our proposition. That
is to say : the sensible self-consciousness splits up also, of itself and
from its very nature, into the antithesis of the pleasant and the
unpleasant, or of pleasure and pain. This does not mean that the
partial feeling of freedom is always pleasure, and the partial feeling
of dependence always pain, as seems to be assumed by those who
wrongly think that the feeling of absolute dependence has, of its
very nature, a depressing effect. For the child can have a feeling
of perfect well-being in the consciousness of dependence on its
parents, and so also (thank God) can the subject in his relation to
the government ; and other people, even parents and governments,
can feel miserable in the consciousness of their freedom. So that
each may equally well be either pleasure or pain, according to
whether life is furthered or hindered by it. The higher self-con-
sciousness, on the other hand, bears within it no such antithesis.
Its first appearance means, of course, an enhancement of life, if a
comparison arises with the isolated sensible self-consciousness. But
if, without any such reference, we think of it in its own self-identity,
its effect is simply an unchanging identity of life, which excludes
any such antithesis. This state we speak of under the name of the
Blessedness of the finite being as the highest summit of his perfec-
tion. But our religious consciousness, as we actually find it,
is not of that character, but is subject to variation, some pious
emotions approximating more to joy, and others to sorrow. Thus
this antithesis refers simply to the manner in which the two grades
of self-consciousness are related to each other in the unity of the
moment. And thus it is by no means the case that the pleasant
and the unpleasant, which exist in the sensible feeling, impart the
same character to the feeling of absolute dependence. On the
contrary, we often find, united in one and the same moment (as
a clear sign that the two grades are not fused into each other or


24 THE CHRISTIAN FAITH (§ 5


neutralized by each other so as to become a third) a sorrow of the
lower and a joy of the higher self-consciousness ; as, ¢.g., whenever
with a feeling of suffering there is combined a trust in God. But
the antithesis attaches to the higher self-consciousness, because it
is the nature of the latter to become temporal, to manifest itself in
time, by entering into relation with the sensible self-consciousness
so as to constitute a moment. That is to say: as the emergence
of this higher self-consciousness at all means an enhancement of
life, so whenever it emerges with ease, to enter into relation with a
sensible determination, whether pleasant or unpleasant, this means
an easy progress of that higher life, and bears, by comparison, the
stamp of joy. And as the disappearance of the higher conscious-
ness, if it could be perceived, would mean a diminution of life, so
whenever it emerges with difficulty, this approximates to an absence
of it, and can only be felt as an inhibition of the higher life.

Now this alternation undeniably forms the feeling-content of
every religious life, so that it seemed superfluous to illustrate these
formule by examples. But we may now go on to ask how this usual
course of the religious life is related to that which we have at an
earlier point described, if only problematically, as the highest
development of it. Suppose that the opposite characters are both
continuously being strongly imprinted upon the individual religious
emotions, so that both alternately rise to a passionate level: this
gives to the religious life an instability which we cannot regard as
of the highest worth. But suppose that the difficulties gradually
disappear, so that facility of religious emotions becomes a permanent
state ; and that gradually the higher grade of feeling comes to pre-
ponderate over the lower, so that in the immediate self-conscious-
ness the sensible determination asserts itself rather as an oppor-
tunity for the appearance of the feeling of absolute dependence than
as containing the antithesis, which is therefore transferred into the
realm of mere perception: then this fact, that the antithesis has
almost disappeared again from the higher grade of life, indisputably
means that the latter has attained its richest content of feeling.

5. From the above it follows directly that (and in what sense)
an uninterrupted sequence of religious emotions can be required
of us, as indeed Scripture actually requires it ; and it is confirmed
every time a religious soul laments over a moment of his life which
is quite empty of the consciousness of God (since no one laments
the absence of anything which is recognized to be impossible). Of
course, it goes without saying in this connexion that the feeling of


ih ti sit Aart lta


515) THE SENSIBLE SELF-CONSCIOUSNESS 25


absolute dependence, when it unites with a sensibly determined
self-consciousness, and thus becomes an emotion, must vary as
regards strength. Indeed, there will naturally be moments in which
a man is not directly and definitely conscious of such a feeling at all.
And yet, indirectly, it can be shown that in these moments the
feeling was not dead ; as, e.g., when such a moment is followed by
another in which the feeling strongly asserts itself, while the second
is not felt to be of a different character from the first or a definite
departure from it, but to be linked up with it tranquilly as a con-
tinuation of its essentially unchanged identity (which is not the
case when the preceding moment was one from which the feeling
was definitely excluded). Also, of course, the different formations
assumed by the sensible self-consciousness in virtue of the highly
manifold minglings of the feeling of freedom and the feeling of
dependence, differgin the degree in which they evoke or encourage
the appearance of the higher self-consciousness ; and in the case
of those which do it in a lesser degree, a weaker appearance of the
higher need not be felt as an inhibition of the higher life. But
there is no determination of the immediate sensible self-conscious-
ness which is incompatible with the higher ; so that there is no
kind of necessity for either of the two ever to be interrupted, except
when the confused state of consciousness gains ground, and both
retire behind it.

Postscript—If thus the direct inward expression of the feeling
of absolute dependence is the consciousness of God, and that
feeling, whenever it attains to a certain clearness, is accompanied
by such an expression, but is also combined with, and related to, a
sensible self-consciousness : then the God-consciousness which has
in this way arisen will, in all its particular formations, carry with
it such determinations as belong to the realm of the antithesis
in which the sensible self-consciousness moves. And this is the
source of all those anthropomorphic elements which are inevitable
in this realm in utterances about God, and which form such a
cardinal point in the ever-recurring controversy between those who
accept that fundamental assumption and those who deny it. For
those who rejoice in the possession of an original idea of the Supreme
Being derived from some other quarter, but who have no experience
of piety, will not tolerate the statement that the expression of that
feeling posits the action of the very same thing which is expressed
in their original idea. They assert that the God of feeling is a
mere fiction, an idol, and they may perhaps even hint that such a


26 THE CHRISTIAN FAITH [§ 6


fancy is more tenable in the form of Polytheism. And those who
will not admit either a conception of God or a feeling which repre-
sents Him, base their position on the contention that the representa-
tion of God which is put together out of such utterances, in which
God appears as human, destroys itself. Meanwhile, religious men
know that it is only in speech that they cannot avoid the anthropo-
morphic : in their immediate consciousness they keep the object
separate from its mode of representation, and they endeavour to
show their opponents that without this integration of feeling no
certainty is possible even for the strongest forms of objective con-
sciousness or of transitive action, and that, to be consistent, they
must limit themselves entirely to the lower grade of life.


§ 6. The religious self-consciousness, like every essential element in
human nature, leads necessarily in its development to fellow-
ship or communion ; a communion which, on the one hand,
as variable and fluid, and, on the other hand, has definite
limits, 1.e. 1s a Church.


1. If the feeling of absolute dependence, expressing itself as
consciousness of God, is the highest grade of immediate self-
consciousness, it is also an essential element of human nature.
This cannot be controverted on the ground that there is for every
individual man a time when that consciousness does not yet exist.
Tor this is the period when life is incomplete, as may be seen both
from the fact that the animal confusion of consciousness has not
yet been overcome, and from the fact that other vital functions
too are only developing themselves gradually. Nor can it be
objected that there are always communities of men in which this
feeling has not yet been awakened ; for these likewise only exhibit
on a large scale that undeveloped state of human nature which
betrays itself also in other functions of their lives. Similarly it
cannot be argued that the feeling is accidental (non-essential),
because even in a highly developed religious environment in-
dividuals may be found who do not share it. For these people
cannot but testify that the whole matter is not so alien to them but
that they have at particular moments been gripped. by such a
feeling, though they may call it by some name that is not very
honouring to themselves. But if anyone can show, either that
this feeling has not a higher value than the sensible, or that there
is besides it another of equal value—only then can anyone be
entitled to regard it as a merely accidental form, which, while it


§ 6] FELLOWSHIP 27


may perhaps exist for some people in every age, is nevertheless
not to be reckoned as part of a complete human nature for
everybody.

2. The truth that every essential element of human nature
becomes the basis of a fellowship or communion, can only be fully
explicated in the context of a scientific theory of morals. Here
we can only allude to the essential points of this process, and then
ask everybody to accept it as a fact. Fellowship, then, is de-
manded by the consciousness of kind which dwells in every man,
and which finds its satisfaction only when he steps forth beyond
the limits of his own personality and takes up the facts of other
personalities into his own. It is accomplished through the fact
that everything inward becomes, at a certain point of its strength
or maturity, an outward too, and, as such, perceptible to others.
Thus feeling, as a self-contained determination of the mind (which
on the other side passes into thought and action, but with that we
are not here concerned), will, even qua feeling, and purely in virtue
of the consciousness of kind, not exist exclusively for itself, but
becomes an outward, originally and without any definite aim or
pertinence, by means of facial expression, gesture, tones, and
(indirectly) words ; and so becomes to other people a revelation
of the inward. This bare expression of feeling, which is entirely
caused by the inward agitation, and which can be very definitely
distinguished from any further and more separate action into which
it passes, does indeed at first arouse in other people only an idea
of the person’s state of mind. But, by reason of the consciousness
of kind, this passes into living imitation ; and the more able the
percipient is (either for general reasons, or because of the greater
liveliness of the expression, or because of closer affinity) to pass into
the same state, the more easily will that state be produced by
imitation. Everybody must in his own experience be conscious of
this process from both its sides, the expressing and the perceiving,
and must thus confess that he always finds himself, with the con-
currence of his conscience, involved in a multifarious communion
of feeling, as a condition quite in conformity with his nature, and
therefore that he would have co-operated in the founding of such
a communion if it had not been there already.

As regards the feeling of absolute dependence in particular,
everyone will know that it was first awakened in him in the same
way, by the communicative and stimulative power of expression
or utterance.


28 THE CHRISTIAN FAITH [§ 6


3. Our assertion that this communion is at first variable and
fluid follows from what we have just been saying. For as indi-
viduals in general resemble each other in variable degrees, both
as regards the strength of their religious emotions and as regards
the particular region of sensible self-consciousness with which
their God-consciousness most easily unites, each person’s religious
emotions have more affinity with those of one of his fellows than
with those of another, and thus communion of religious feeling
comes to him more easily with the former than with the latter. If
the difference is great, he feels himself attracted by the one and
repelled by the others; yet not repelled directly or absolutely,
so that he could not enter into any communion of feeling with them
at all; but only in the sense that he is more powerfully attracted
to others ; and thus he could have communion even with these, in
default of the others, or in circumstances which specially drew them
together. For there can hardly exist a man in whom another
would recognize no religious affection whatever as being in any
degree similar to his own, or whom another would know to be quite
incapable of either moving or being moved by him. It remains
true, however, that the more uninterrupted the communion is to be,
z.e. the more closely the kindred emotions are to follow each other,
and the more easily the emotions are to communicate themselves,
so much the smaller must be the number of people who can partici-
pate. We may conceive as great an interval as we like between the
two extremes, that of the closest and that of the feeblest com-
munion ; so that the man who experiences the fewest and feeblest
religious emotions can have the closest kind of communion only
with those who are equally little susceptible to these emotions, and
is not in a position to imitate the utterances of those who derive
religious emotion from moments where he himself never finds
it. A similar relation holds between the man whose piety is
purer, in the sense that in every moment of it he clearly distin-
guishes the religious content of his self-consciousness from the
sensible to which it is related, and the man whose piety is less pure,
7.e. more confused with the sensible. However, we may conceive
the interval between these extremes as being, for each person, filled
up with as many intermediate stages as we like ; and this is just
what constitutes the fluidity of the communion.

4. This is how the interchange of religious consciousness
appears when we think of the relation of individual men to each
other But if we look at the actual condition of men, we also find


ES |


tO ts et ol


§ 6] THE WORD ‘RELIGION ’ 29


well-established relationships in this fluid, and therefore (strictly
speaking) undefined communion or fellowship. In the first place,
as soon as human development has advanced to the point of a
domestic life, even if not a completely regulated one, every family
will establish within itself such a communion of the religious self-
consciousness—a communion which, however, has quite definite
limits as regards the outside world. For the members of the family
are bound together in a peculiar manner by definite congruity and
kinship, and, moreover, their religious emotions are associated
with the same occasions, so that strangers can only have an
accidental and transitory, and therefore a very unequal, share
in them.

But we also find families not isolated but standing collectively
in distinctly defined combinations, with common language and
customs, and with some knowledge or inkling of a closer common
origin. And then religious communion becomes marked off among
them, partly in the form of predominating similarity in the in-
dividual families, and partly by one family, which is particularly
open to religious emotions, coming to predominate as the para-
mountly active one, while the others, being as it were scarcely
out of their nonage, display only receptivity (a state of affairs
which exists wherever there is a hereditary priesthood). Every
such relatively closed religious communion, which forms an ever
self-renewing circulation of the religious self-consciousness within
certain definite limits, and a propagation of the religious emotions
arranged and organized within the same limits, so that there can
be some kind of definite understanding as to which individuals
belong to it and which do not—this we designate a Church.

Postscript.—This will be the best place to come to an under-
standing, from our own point of view, as to the different senses
in which the word Religion is customarily used—though indeed,
as far as possible, we here confine ourselves to an occasional and
cursory employment of the word for the sake of variety.’ In the
first place, then, when people speak of a particular religion, this
is always with reference to one definite ‘Church,’ and it means
the totality of the religious affections which form the foundation
of such a communion and are recognized to be identical in the
various members, in its peculiar content as set forth by


1 [That is to say, Schleiermacher normally uses the word Fyémmigkeit, which
we usually translate ‘ piety,’ while we translate the adjective fromm some-
times by ‘ pious’ and sometimes by ‘ religious.’—TRANSL. ]


30 THE CHRISTIAN FAITH [§ 6


contemplation and reflection upon the religious emotions. Corre~
spondingly, the individual’s susceptibility (which admits of different
degrees) to the influence of the fellowship or communion, as also
his influence upon the latter, and thus his participation in the
circulation and propagation of the religious emotions—this is
designated Religiosity (Religiositat). Now if a man, on the analogy
of ‘Christian Religion’ and ‘Mohammedan Religion,’ begins to
speak also of ‘ Natural Religion,’ he is again abandoning the rule
and confusing the use of words, because there is no natural “ Church ’
and no definite compass within which the elements of natural
religion can be sought. If the expression ‘ Religion in general’ be
employed, it again cannot signify such a whole. Nothing can
fitly. be understood by it but the tendency of the human mind in
general to give rise to religious emotions, always considered, how-
ever, along with their expression, and thus with the striving for
fellowship, t.e. the possibility of particular religions (but without
regard to the distinction between fluid and defined fellowships).
It is only that tendency, the general susceptibility of individual
souls to religious emotion, that could be called ‘ religion in general.’
These expressions, however, are seldom clearly distinguished in
actual use.

Now, in so far as the constitution of the religious affections
of the individual contains more than can be recognized as uniform
in the communion, this purely personal element is usually, in regard
to its content, called Subjective Religion, while the common element
is called Objective Religion. But this usage becomes in the highest
degree inconvenient whenever (as is now the case among ourselves)
a large Church splits up into several smaller communions without
entirely giving up its unity. For the peculiarities of the smaller
Churches would then also be ‘subjective religion’ in comparison
with what was recognized as common to the larger Church, while
they would be ‘ objective ’ in comparison with the peculiarities of
their particular members. Finally, in the religious emotions
themselves, a distinction can be made between the inner deter-
mination of self-consciousness and the manner of its outward
expression, though these are closely connected; and thus the
organization of the communicative expressions of piety in a com-
munity is usually called Outward Religion, while the total content
of the religious emotions, as they actually occur in individuals, is
called Inward Religion.

Now, while these definitions may well be the best, as compre-


§ 7] DIVERSITIES OF COMMUNIONS 31


hending the various and very arbitrary usages, we have only to
compare the expressions with the explanations given, in order to
realize how indeterminate it all is. Therefore it is really better
to avoid these designations in scientific usage, especially as the
term ‘religion,’ as applied to Christianity, is quite new in our
language.


Il. THE DIVERSITIES OF RELIGIOUS COMMUNIONS IN GENERAL:
PROPOSITIONS BORROWED FROM THE PHILOSOPHY OF
RELIGION.


§7. The various religious communions which have appeared in
history with clearly defined limits are related to each other in
two ways: as different stages of development, and as different
kinds.

1. The religious communion which takes the form of household
worship within a single family cannot fitly be regarded as an
appearance in the realm of history, because it remains in the
obscurity of an inner circle. Moreover, the transition from this to
a really historical appearance is often very gradual. The beginning
of it is seen in the large style of the patriarchal household, and the
persisting association between families of sons and grandsons that
live near each other; and it is out of these alone that the two
fundamental forms previously mentioned (§ 6, 4) can be developed.
In these transitions, if several of them are placed beside each other,
both kinds of difference can be found at least in germ.

Now in the first place, as regards the different stages of de-
velopment: the historical appearance is in itself a higher stage,
and stands above the mere isolated household worship, just as the
civic condition, even in its most incomplete forms, stands above
the formless association of the pre-civic condition. But this
difference by no means relates only to the form or the compass of
the fellowship itself, but also to the constitution of the underlying
religious affections, according as they attain to clearness in conscious
antithesis to the movements of the sensible self-consciousness.
Now this development depends partly on the whole development
of the mental powers, so that for that reason alone many a com-
munion cannot continue longer in its own peculiar mode of exist-
ence ; as, ¢.g., many forms of idol-worship, even though they might
claim a high degree of mechanical skill, are incompatible with even
a moderate scientific and artistic education, and perish when con-
fronted by it. Yet it is also partly true that the development


32 THE CHRISTIAN FAITH (8 7


takes its own course ; and there is no contradiction in saying that,
in one and the same whole, the piety may develop to its highest
consummation, while other mental functions remain far behind.

But all differences are not to be thus regarded as distinct stages
or levels. There are communal religions (Greek and Indian poly-
theism are good cases in point), of which one might well seem to be
at the same point in the scale as the other, but which are yet very
definitely different from each other. If, then, several such exist
which belong to the same stage or level, the most natural course
will be to call them different kinds or species. And indisputably
it can be shown, even at the lowest stage, that most religious
communions which are geographically separated from each other
are also divided by inner differences.

2. But of course these two distinctions, into stages of develop-
ment and into kinds (genera) or species, cannot in this realm, or
indeed generally in the realm of history or of so-called moral
‘persons,’ be maintained so definitely or carried through so surely
as in the realm of Nature. For we are not here dealing with
invariable forms which always reproduce themselves in the same
way. Each individual communion is capable of a greater or lesser
development within the character of its kind or genus. Let us,
now, consider that in this way, just as the individual may pass from
a more imperfect religious communion to a higher one, so a parti-
cular communion might, without prejudice to its generic character,
develop beyond its original level, and that this may happen equally
to all. Then the idea of stages would naturally disappear, for the
last phase of the lower and the first of the higher might be con-
tinuously connected, and it would then be more correct to say
that each genus works itself up by a series of developments from
the imperfect to the more perfect. But, on the other hand,
we may take the fact that, just as we say an individual becomes
in a certain sense a new man by passing to a higher form of religion,
so the generic character of a communion must be lost when it
rises to a higher level. Then even on any one level, if the inner
development is to go on, the generic character would become
uncertain and altogether unstable, while the levels or stages would
be all the more sharply and definitely distinguished.

This variability, however, does not discredit the reality of
our twofold distinction. For every religious communion which
appears in history will be related to the others in this twofold way.
It will be co-ordinate with some, and subordinate or superior to


§ 7] CHRISTIANITY AND OTHER RELIGIONS 33


|
others ; and thus it is distinguished from the former in the one


manner and from the latter in the other. And if those who busy
themselves most with the history and criticism of religions have
given less attention to the task of fitting the different forms into
this framework, this may be partly because they confine them-
selves almost exclusively to the individual, and partly also because
it may be difficult in particular cases to lay bare these relation-
ships and properly to distinguish and separate co-ordinates and
subordinates. It may here suffice us to have established the
twofold distinction in a general way, since our sole concern is to
investigate how Christianity is related, in both respects, to other


religious communions and forms of faith.

3. Our proposition does not assert, but it does tacitly pre-
suppose the possibility, that there are other forms of piety which
are related to Christianity as different forms on the same level of
development, and thus so far similar. But this does not contradict
the conviction, which we assume every Christian to possess, of the
exclusive superiority of Christianity. In the realm of Nature also
we distinguish perfect and imperfect animals as different stages of
the development of animal life, and again on each of these stages
different genera, which thus resemble each other as expressions
of the same stage ; but this does not mean that one genus of the
lower stage may not be nearer to the higher, and thus more perfect,
than the others. Similarly, though several kinds of piety belong
to the same stage as Christianity, it may yet be more perfect than
any of them.

Our proposition excludes only the idea, which indeed is often
met with, that the Christian religion (piety) should adopt towards
at least most other forms of piety the attitude of the true towards
the false. For if the religions belonging to the same stage as
Christianity were entirely false, how could they have so much
similarity to Christianity as to make that classification requisite ?
And if the religions which belong to the lower stages contained
nothing but error, how would it be possible for a man to pass
from them to Christianity ? Only the true, and not the false, can
be a basis of receptivity for the higher truth of Christianity. The
whole delineation which we are here introducing is based rather on
the maxim that error never exists in and for itself, but always
along with some truth, and that we have never fully understood
it until we have discovered its connexion with truth, and the
true thing to which it is attached. With this agrees what the


3


34 THE CHRISTIAN FAITH s8


apostle says when he represents even Polytheism as a perversion
of the original consciousness of God which underlies it, and when,
in this evidence of the longing which all these fancies have failed to
satisfy, he finds an obscure presentiment of the true God."


§ 8. Those forms of piety in which all religious affections express the
dependence of everything finite upon one Supreme and Infumte
Being, i.e. the monotheistic forms, occupy the highest level ;
and all others are related to them as subordinate forms, from
which men are destined to pass to those higher ones.


1. As such subordinate stages we set down, generally speaking,
Idol-worship proper (also called Fetichism) and Polytheism ; of
which, again, the first stands far lower than the second. The
idol-worshipper may quite well have only one idol, but this does
not give such Monolatry any resemblance to Monotheism, for it
ascribes to the idol an influence only over a limited field of objects
or processes, beyond which its own interest and sympathy do not
extend. The addition of several idols is merely an accident, usually
caused by the experience of some incapacity in the original one,
but not aiming at any kind of completeness. Indeed, the main
reason why people remain on this level is that the sense of totality
has not yet developed. The old ééava of the original Greek tribes
were probably idols in the proper sense, each being something in
itself alone. The unification of these different worships, by which
one Being was substituted for several such idols, and the rise of
several cycles of myths by which these creations were brought into
connexion with each other—this was the development through
which the transition from Idol-worship to Polytheism proper took
place. But the more the idea of a multiplicity of local habitations
clung to the Beings thus constituted, the more did Polytheism
continue to savour of Idol-worship. Polytheism proper is present
only when the local references quite disappear, and the gods,
spiritually defined, form an organized and coherent plurality, which,
if not exhibited as a totality, is nevertheless presupposed and
striven after as such. The more, then, any single one of these
Beings is related to the whole system of them, and this system, in
turn, to the whole of existence as it appears in consciousness, the
more definitely is the dependence of everything finite, not indeed
on a Highest One, but on this highest totality, expressed in the
religious self-consciousness. But in this state of religious faith there


21 Rom, 174M.) Acts 1727-30,


-_


§ 8] MONOTHEISM AND POLYTHEISM 35


cannot fail to be here and there at least a presentiment of One
Supreme Being behind the plurality of higher Beings; and then
Polytheism is already beginning to disappear, and the way to
Monotheism is open.

2. As for this difference, of believing in one God on whom the
religious man regards himself as being (along with the world of
which he is a part) absolutely dependent, or in a group of gods
to whom he stands in different relations according as they divide
the government of the world among them, or finally in particular
idols which belong to the family or the locality or the particular
occupation in which he lives: it seems at first, indeed, to be only
a difference in the mode of representation, and therefore, from
our point of view, only a derivative difference. And only a differ-
ence in the immediate self-consciousness can for us be a fit measure
of the development of religion. But it is also very easy to
show that these different representations depend on different
states of self-consciousness. Idol-worship proper is based upon a
confused state of the self-consciousness which marks the lowest
condition of man, since in it the higher and the lower are so little
distinguished that even the feeling of absolute dependence is
reflected as arising from a particular object to be apprehended by
the senses. So, too, with Polytheism: in its combination of the
religious susceptibility with diverse affections of the sensible self-
consciousness, it exhibits this diversity in such a very preponderant
degree that the feeling of absolute dependence cannot appear in its
complete unity and indifference to all that the sensible self-conscious-
ness may contain ; but, instead, a plurality is posited as its source.
But when the higher self-consciousness, in distinction from the
sensible, has been fully developed, then, in so far as we are open
in general to sensible stimulation, 7.e. in so far as we are constituent
parts of the world, and therefore in so far as we take up the world
into our self-consciousness and expand the latter into a general
consciousness of finitude, we are conscious of ourselves as absolutely
dependent. Now this self-consciousness can only be described in
terms of Monotheism, and indeed only as we have expressed it in
our proposition. For if we are conscious of ourselves, as such and
in our finitude, as absolutely dependent, the same holds true of all
finite existence, and in this connexion we take up the whole world
along with ourselves into the unity of our self-consciousness. Thus
the different ways of representing that existence outside of us to
which the consciousness of absolute dependence refers, depend


36 THE CHRISTIAN FAITH [§ 8


partly on the different degrees of extensiveness of the self-conscious-
ness (for as long as a man identifies himself only with a small part
of finite existence, his god will remain a fetich) ; and partly on the
degree of clearness with which the higher self-consciousness is
distinguished from the lower. Polytheism naturally represents in
both respects an indeterminate middle stage, which sometimes is
very little different from Idol-worship, but sometimes, when in the
handling of the plurality there appears a secret striving after unity,
may border very closely on Monotheism ; whether it be that the
gods rather represent the forces of Nature, or that they symbolize
the human qualities which are operative in social relationships, or
that both these tendencies are united in the same cult. Otherwise
it could not in itself be explained how the correlative term in the
feeling of absolute dependence could be reflected as a plurality of
beings. But if the higher consciousness has not become quite
distinct from the lower, then the correlative can only be conceived
in a sensible way, and then for that very reason it contains the
germs of plurality. Thus it is only when the religious consciousness
expresses itself as capable of being combined with all the states of
the sensible self-consciousness without discrimination, but also as
clearly distinct from the latter, in such a way that in the religious
emotions themselves no sharper distinction appears than that
between the joyful and the depressing tone—it is only then that
man has successfully passed beyond those two stages, and can
refer his feeling of absolute dependence solely to one Supreme Being.

3. It can therefore justly be said that as soon as piety has any-
where developed to the point of belief in one God over all, it may be
predicted that man will not in any region of the earth remain
stationary on one of the lower planes. For this belief is always
and everywhere very particularly engaged, if not always in the best
way, in the endeavour to propagate itself and disclose itself to the
receptive faculties of mankind ; and this succeeds eventually, as
we can see, even among the rudest human races, and by a direct
transition from Fetichism without any intermediate passage through
a stage of Polytheism. On the other hand, there is nowhere any
trace, so far as history reaches, of a relapse from Monotheism, in
the strict sense. In the case of most of those Christians who under
persecution went back to heathenism, it was only an apparent
return. Where it was a matter of real earnest, these people must,
previously, at their conversion to Christianity, have been simply
carried on by a general movement, without having appropriated


ee a ae eee ee ee ee |


§ 8] JUDAISM AND ISLAM 37


the essence of this belief into their own personal consciousness.
However, we must not, from all this, draw the conclusion that the
existence of Fetichism requires for its explanation the assumption
of a still lower stage, in which religious emotion would be altogether
lacking. Many have, indeed, described the original state of man-
kind as such a brute-existence ; but, even if we cannot deny all
trace of such a state, it can be neither proved historically nor
imagined in a general way how of itself this state should have given
rise to the development of something higher. No more can it be
shown that Polytheism has anywhere transformed itself, by a sheer
process from within, into genuine Monotheism ; although this can
at least be conceived as possible, as has been indicated above. In
any case, we must secure ourselves against the demand that, since
we have definitely exhibited such a gradation, we are bound also
to give a definite account of such an original state of religion ; for
in other connexions also it is the case that we never get back to
origins. If, then, we keep simply to our presuppositions, without
resorting to any historical statements about a period which is
altogether prehistoric, we are left with a choice between two ways
of conceiving it. Either that quite obscure and confused form of
religion was everywhere the original form, and advanced to Poly-
theism through the concentration of several small tribes into one
larger community ; or a childish Monotheism (which for that very
reason was subject to a confused mingling of the higher and the
lower) was the original stage, and among some people darkened
completely into idol-worship, while among others it clarified into a
pure belief in God.

4. On this highest plane, of Monotheism, history exhibits only
three great communions—the Jewish, the Christian, and the Moham-
medan ; the first being almost in process of extinction, the other
two still contending for the mastery of the human race. Judaism,
by its limitation of the love of Jehovah to the race of Abraham,
betrays a lingering affinity with Fetichism ; and the numerous
vacillations towards idol-worship prove that during the political
heyday of the nation the monotheistic faith had not yet taken fast
root, and was not fully and purely developed until after the Baby-
lonian Exile. Islam, on the other hand, with its passionate char-
acter, and the strongly sensuous content of its ideas, betrays, in
spite of its strict Monotheism, a large measure of that influence of
the sensible upon the character of the religious emotions which else-
where keeps men on the level of Polytheism. Thus Christianity,


38 THE- CHRISTIAN FAITE [§ 8


because it remains free from both these weaknesses, stands higher
than either of those other two forms, and takes its place as the
purest form of Monotheism which has appeared in history. Hence
there is strictly no such thing as a wholesale relapse from Christianity
to either Judaism or Mohammedanism, any more than there is from
any monotheistic religion to Polytheism or idol-worship. Individual
exceptions will always be connected with pathological states of
mind ; or, instead of religion, it will prove to be simply one form of
irreligion that is exchanged for another, which indeed is what
always happens in the case of renegades. And so this comparison
of Christianity with other similar religions is in itself a sufficient
warrant for saying that Christianity is, in fact,! the most perfect
of the most highly developed forms of religion.

Postscript 1.—The above account is at variance with the view
which sees no real piety at all, but only superstition, in the religions
of the lower levels, mainly because they are supposed to have had
their source simply in fear. But the honour of Christianity does
not at all demand such an assertion. For since Christianity itself
affirms * that only perfect love casts out all fear, it must admit that
imperfect love is never entirely free from fear. And likewise it is
always the case, even in idol-worship, if the idol is worshipped as a
protector at all, and not as an evil being, that the fear is by no means
quite without any impulses of love, but is rather an adaptation,
corresponding to the imperfect love, of the feeling of absolute
dependence. Moreover (quite apart from the fact that many of
these religions are too cheerful to be explicable by fear), if we should
set out to discover for them a quite different origin from that of
true religion, it would be difficult to show what sort of tendency
this is in the human soul, and what its inner aim is, which engenders
idol-worship, and which must again be lost when the latter gives
place to Religion. The truth is, rather, that we must never deny
the homogeneity of all these products of the human spirit, but must
acknowledge the same root even for the lower powers.

Postscript 2—But for the assonance of the names there would
scarcely be any occasion for us expressly to remark that it is not
at all our present business to say anything about that way of think-
ing which is called Pantheism. For it has never been the confession
of a religious communion which actually appeared in history, and
it is only with these that we are concerned. Moreover, this name
was not originally used even by individuals to designate their own


Chie yy, By iy joloue, eet


§ 9] THEISM AND PANTHEISM 39


views, but crept in as a taunt and nickname ; and in such cases it
always remains difficult to hold consistently to any one meaning.
The one thing concerning the subject which can be discussed in this
place (and indeed only in such a place as this) is the question of the
relation of this way of thinking to piety. It is admitted that it
does not, like the three above-described theories, spring from the
religious emotions, by direct reflection upon them. But it may be
asked whether, having once arisen in some other way—by the way
of speculation or simply of reasoning—it is yet compatible with
piety. To this question an affirmative answer may be given without
hesitation, provided that Pantheism is taken as expressing some
variety or form of Theism, and that the word is not simply and
solely a disguise for a materialistic negation of Theism. If we look
at idol-worship, and consider how it is always conjoined with a
very limited knowledge of the world, and is also full of magic and
sorcery of every sort, it is very easy to see that in very few cases
can one speak of a clear distinction on this level between what is
assigned to God and what is assigned to the world. And why
could not a Hellenic polytheist, embarrassed by the entirely human
shapes of the gods, have identified his great gods with the evolved
gods of Plato, leaving out the God whom Plato represents as
addressing them, and positing only the enthroned Necessity ?
This would not imply any change in his piety, yet his representation
of it would have become pantheistic. But let us think of the
highest stage of religion, and let us accordingly hold Pantheism
fast to the usual formula of One and All: then God and world will
remain distinct at least as regards function, and thus such a man,
since he reckons himself as belonging to the world, can feel himself,
along with this All, to be dependent on that which is the corre-
sponding One. Such states of mind can scarcely be distinguished
from the religious emotions of many a Monotheist. At any rate,
the distinction (always rather a curious one, and, if I may say so,
roughly drawn) between a God who is outside of and above the
world, and a God who is in the world, does not particularly meet
the point, for nothing can strictly be said about God in terms of the
antithesis between internal and external without imperilling in
some way the divine omnipotence and omnipresence.


§ 9. The widest diversity between forms of piety is that which exists,
with respect to the religious affections, between those forms
which subordinate the natural in human conditions to the


40 THE CHRISTIAN FAITH [$9


moral and those which, on the contrary, subordinate the moral
to the natural.


1. It is primarily in the interests of Christianity, and therefore
only for the highest level, that we shall here attempt a conceptual
division of religions which appear as co-ordinate (a cross-division,
i.é., in relation to our division of the whole field). Whether this
division holds for the subordinate stages too, is a question that
does not here concern us. But for the highest stage the attempt
is necessary. For even if this stage is, as a matter of history,
exhausted in the three above-mentioned communions, yet we need
a more exactly defined position in which to fix Christianity ; for
otherwise we could only distinguish it empirically from the other
two, and could never be certain whether the more essential differ-
ences were being brought to light or whether we were only getting
hold of accidental characteristics. Hence our attempt cannot be
held to have succeeded until we find a basis of division by which
Christianity is either clearly distinguished, in itself, from the two
others, or along with one of the others distinguished from the third.

Now, since the feeling of absolute dependence is in itself perfectly
simple, and the conception of it provides no basis of differentiation,
such a basis can be derived only from the fact that that feeling, in
order to realize itself in an actual moment, must first unite with a
sensible stimulation of self-consciousness, and that these sensible
stimuli must be regarded as infinitely various. Now it is true that
the feeling of absolute dependence in itself is equally related to all
these stimulations, and is highly susceptible to them all alike.
But nevertheless it may, by analogy, be assumed that this relation-
ship in actual reality differentiates itself variously not only in
individual men but also in larger masses. And thus with some
people a certain class of sensible feelings develops easily and surely
into religious emotion, and another opposite class with difficulty
or not at all, while with other people the case is precisely reversed.
Or it may be that the same sensible states of self-consciousness
develop into religious moments with some people in one set of
conditions, and with other people in the opposite set of conditions.
As regards the former alternative, we might first of all divide these
states into the more physical and the more spiritual, into those
which arise through the infiuence of men and their actions and
those which arise through the influence of external Nature. But
this could only hold of individual men, that some are more sus-


eS


§ 9] TELEOLOGICAL AND AESTHETIC RELIGION 4t


ceptible to religious emotion through the impressions of external
Nature, and others through social relationships and the temper
which they produce. The difference between one religious com-
munion and another cannot be thus explained, since every such
communion includes all these diversities, and none excludes from
its pale either the one or the other kind of emotion, or even makes
the one less prominent than the other to any significant extent.
Again, we might point to the fact that, our whole life being an inter-
penetration and succession of activity and passivity, a man is
sometimes more conscious of himself as active and sometimes more
as passive. And this might be held better to provide a common
constitution for larger masses of people—the fact that in certain
quarters the active form of self-consciousness more easily rises into
religious emotion, and the passive remains on the sensible level,
while in other quarters this is reversed. Only, of course, this so
simply conceived distinction remains a merely fluid one between a
more and a less, so that the same moment may be conceived as
either more active or more passive according as it is compared with
one or with another. If a grand division of universal application
is to be made between the different forms of piety, the above fluid
distinction must be transformed into such a subordination as is
indicated in our proposition. This subordination is on the one
side most strongly marked when the passive states (whether pleasant
or unpleasant, whether occasioned by external Nature or by social
relationships) only arouse the feeling of absolute dependence in so
far as they are referred to the spontaneous activity, 7.e. in so far
as we know that some particular thing (just because we stand in that
relation to the totality of existence which is expressed in our passive
state) has to be done by us, so that the action which depends on
and proceeds from that state has thus precisely this God-conscious-
ness as its impulse. Thus where piety has taken this form, the
passive states, having risen into religious emotion, become simply
an occasion for the development of a definite activity which can
only be explained as the result of a God-consciousness of that
particular description. And in the realm of such religious emotions
all passive relations of man to the world appear as simply means
for evoking the totality of his active states, whereby the antithesis
between the sensibly pleasant and the unpleasant therein is over-
come and retires into the background ; while, on the contrary, it
of course remains predominant in the cases in which the sensible
feeling does not rise into religious emotion. This subordination we


42 THE CHRISTIAN FAITH [§9


designate teleological Religion ; an expression which indeed is else-
where somewhat differently used, but which is here meant to signify
simply that a predominating reference to the moral task constitutes
the fundamental type of the religious affections. Now if the
action which is prefigured in the religious emotion is a practical
contribution to the advancement of the Kingdom of God, the
mental state is an elevating one, whether the feeling which occasioned
it be pleasant or unpleasant. But if the action is a retreat into
oneself, or a seeking for help to relieve a perceptible obstruction of the
higher life, the mental state is a subduing one, whether the feeling
which occasioned it was pleasant or unpleasant. The reverse form
of this subordination appears in its completeness when the self-
consciousness of a state of activity is taken up into the feeling of
absolute dependence only in proportion as the state itself appears
as a result of those relations which exist between the subject and all
the rest of existence, and is thus referred to the passive side of the
subject. But every individual state of activity is simply a particular
expression of the disposition of common human faculties which
exists in the subject and constitutes his personal peculiarity. Con-
sequently, in every religious emotion of this sort, that disposition
itself is posited as the result of the influences, ordered by the Supreme
Being, of all things upon the subject ; and thus in the elevating
emotions, as harmony, 1.e. as beauty of the individual life, and in
the unpleasant or subduing emotions, as discord or ugliness. Now
this form of piety, in which each moment of spontaneous activity,
simply as a determination of the individual by the whole of finite
existence, and thus as referred to the passive side, is taken up into
the feeling of absolute dependence, we will call esthetic Religion.
These two fundamental forms are definitely opposed to each other,
in virtue of the opposite subordination of the elements which are
common to both; and every kind of religious fellow-feeling or
sympathy is naturally found in both forms, just as is the personal
feeling, since the former is simply an expanded, the latter a con-
tracted, self-consciousness.

2. A general demonstration as to whether the actual historical
faiths can best be classified according to this antithesis would be
the business only of a general critical History of Religions. Here
we are simply concerned as to whether the division so far justifies
itself, as to provide a means of distinguishing Christianity from
religions co-ordinate with it, and by more narrowly determining
its position to facilitate the task of isolating its peculiar essence.


§ 9] TELEOLOGICAL AND AESTHETIC RELIGION 43


As a matter of fact, the religion which is chiefly present to our minds,
as being sharply opposed in this respect to Christianity, is not
co-ordinate with it, but belongs to a lower level, namely, Greek
Polytheism. In this religion the teleological trend falls entirely
into the background. Neither in their religious symbols nor even
in their Mysteries is there any considerable trace of the idea of a
totality of moral ends to which a man’s mental states are in general
to be related. On the contrary, what we have called the esthetic
outlook very definitely predominates, inasmuch as even the gods
are principally intended to exhibit different dispositions of the
activities of the human soul, and thus a peculiar form of inward
beauty. Now no one can well deny that Christianity, even apart
from the fact that it belongs to a higher level, is sharply opposed
to this type. In the realm of Christianity the consciousness of God
is always related to the totality of active states in the idea of a
Kingdom of God. As for the idea of a beauty of the soul, regarded
as the result of all the influences of Nature and the world, this has
always remained so foreign to Christianity (in spite of Christianity’s
early absorption of Hellenism en masse) that it has never been
adopted into the cycle of current expressions in the realm of Christian
piety, and has never been maintained in any treatise of Christian
morals. But that figure of a Kingdom of God, which is so important
and indeed all-inclusive for Christianity, is simply the general
expression of the fact that in Christianity all pain and all joy are
religious only in so far as they are related to activity in the Kingdom
of God, and that every religious emotion which proceeds from a
passive state ends in the consciousness of a transition to activity.
But now we have to determine whether the above-mentioned
antithesis between the teleological and the esthetic trend is not,
after all, necessarily bound up with the distinction between the
two levels, so that all Polytheism would necessarily belong to the
esthetic side and all Monotheism to the teleological. To this end
we must simply take our stand upon the highest level, and ask
whether the two other monotheistic faiths are like Christianity
in this respect or not. As for Judaism, then, though it relates
the passive states to the active rather in the form of divine punish-
ments and rewards than in the form of moral challenge and influ-
ence, nevertheless the predominating form of God-consciousness
is that of the commanding Will ; and thus, even when it proceeds
from passive states, it necessarily turns to the active. Islam, on
the other hand, in no way shows this subordination of the passive


44 THE CHRISTIAN FAITH [§ 10


to the active. Rather does this form of piety come to complete
rest in the consciousness of immutable divine appointments, and:
even the consciousness of spontaneous activity is only united with
the feeling of absolute dependence in the sense that its deter-
mination is supposed to rest upon those appointments. And this
fatalistic character reveals in the clearest manner a subordination
of the moral to the natural. Thus the monotheistic stage appears
divided, the teleological type being most expressed in Christianity,
and less perfectly in Judaism, while Mohammedanism, which is
quite as monotheistic, unmistakably expresses the esthetic type.
All this points us for our present task to a definitely limited field,
and what we are going to establish as the peculiar essence of Chris-
tianity must no more deviate from the teleological line than it may
descend from the monotheistic level.


§10. Each particular form of communal piety has both an outward
unity, as a fixed fact of history with a definite commence-
ment, and an inward unity, as a peculiar modification of
that general character which 1s common to all developed faiths
of the same kind and level ; and it is from both of these taken
together that the peculiar essence of any particular form is
to be discerned.


Note.—Cf. Speeches on Religion (Eng. trans.), pp. 210 ff.


1. The first part of this proposition would be false if it could
be shown, or even conceived as possible, that Christian piety could
anywhere arise, as it were of itself, quite apart from any historical
connexion with the impulse which proceeded from Christ. The
same thing would in that case be true of Mohammedan and Jewish
piety too, with reference to Moses and Mohammed. But the
possibility of it will be admitted by nobody. Of course this outward
unity is not so rigid on the subordinate levels of religion ; partly
because in these cases the starting-point often falls in the pre-
historic period (as it does in the case of the pre-Mosaic mono-
theistic worship of Jehovah); partly because many of these
historical forms, such as the Greek, and still more the Roman,
Polytheism, present to us a composite whole which, from many
very diverse starting-points, has gradually been woven together or
even grown together of itself. The same might indeed be said of
the Norse and Indian systems. But these apparent exceptions
rather confirm the rule laid down in our proposition. For the less
the outward unity can be definitely exhibited, the more precarious


;


§ 10] ORIGIN OF A COMMUNION 45


becomes the inward unity too. It appears that, just as in the
realm of Nature the species are less definite on the lower levels of
life, so in this realm of religion also the uniform consummation
of the outward and the inward unity is reserved for the higher
development ; and thus in the most perfect form (which we may
say in advance is Christianity) the inward peculiarity must be
most intimately bound up with that which forms the historical
basis of the outward unity.

The second part of our proposition would be false if it could
be asserted that the different religious communions were really
separated only by space and time without having any genuinely
inward difference. But this would imply that whenever two such
communions came into contact spatially they would necessarily
recognize their identity with each other, and so become one, and
that nothing could hinder this except (to a certain extent) a foolish
self-will which was anxious to cling to the name of the founder.
It would also imply that each individual could, without undergoing
any inward change, pass from his own religious communion to a
quite different one, simply by dissolving the one historical con-
nexion and entering into another. But this would be contrary
to all experience. Indeed it would, on this hypothesis, be im-
possible that one religious communion should spring up within
another and break away from it; for if nothing new came in,
there could be no new beginning where the same elements had been
already present.

2. With respect to the actual beginning of each religious com-
munion there need be no further discussion. Whether a new
variety of the feeling of absolute dependence takes shape first
simply in one individual or in several simultaneously, is a matter
of indifference, though everyone will see that the latter is, generally
speaking, less probable than the former. It would also be futile to
try to distinguish the different ways in which such a new form can
arise in the soul, since the communion can only arise through its
communication and transmission. But what our proposition says
about the inward difference requires some further discussion.
Our proposition makes the statement (which, however, in accord-
ance with our present purpose, we are going to apply only to the
religious communions of the highest level) that the same thing is
present in all, but present in a quite different way in each. The pre-
vailing view, on the contrary, is that the greater part is the same in
all communions of the highest level, and that to this common matter


46 THE CHRISTIAN FAITH [§ 10


there is simply added in each some special element of its own ;
so that perhaps, to give a rough illustration, the belief in one God,
with all that it involves, is the element common to all these com-
munions, but in the one there is added obedience to commandment,
in another the belief in Christ, and in a third the belief in the
prophets. But if the belief in Christ°had no influence upon the
separately pre-existing consciousness of God and on its mode of
uniting with the sensible emotions, either that belief would stand
quite outside the realm of religion, and would consequently (since
no other realm can be assigned to it) be a mere nothing, or Christ
would at any rate be only one particular object producing im-
pressions which could be united with the consciousness of God,
in which case also one could not properly speak of a belief in Christ.
Suppose however the meaning is that the belief in Christ has an in-
fluence only on some of the religious emotions, while the majority of
them take exactly the same form in Christianity as in other mono-
theistic faiths. This would involve the assertion that this belief has
not so much an influence on the consciousness of God (which, after
all, must be the same in all religious emotions of the same man at
the same time, 7.e. so long as he belongs to the same religious
communion), but rather has an influence merely upon the sensibly
stimulated consciousness ; and such an influence could not be the
basis of a distinctive way of faith. Hence there remains for us
only the view adopted in our proposition, which implies that in
each really distinctive religious communion the self-consciousness
itself must have a different determination, since only on this con-
dition can the religious emotions be all differently determined.
Now just as each individual instance necessarily makes it clear
that the presence of an absolutely identical element in two different
ways of faith can be only in appearance, if the God-consciousness
itself is differently determined in the two: so also it is only in
appearance that each faith has some element which is entirely
absent in others. Otherwise, if in other faiths also we find God
becoming Man, and a communication of the Divine Spirit, what
would be the absolutely new thing in Christianity ? But the same
thing may be seen in a general way. For if, on the supposition of a
quite similarly determined consciousness of God, some element is
found in one faith which is not found in another, this could only
be caused by a different field of experience, and so the whole differ-
ence would necessarily disappear if the experiences were brought
into line with each other,


§ 10] THE INDIVIDUAL 47


3. Though it was only in a somewhat indefinite way that we
were able to establish the conception of kind in our present pro-
vince, the conception of the Individual has here a firmer basis, and
the formula set up in our proposition is the same which holds for
all individual differences within the same kind. For every man
has in him all that another man has, but it is all differently deter-
mined ; and the greatest similarity is only a diminishing or (re-
latively) vanishing difference. So also every species has the same
characteristics as every other species of its genus, and everything
which is really additional is merely accidental. But the discovery
of this differentiating matter in any individual existence is a task
which can never be perfectly, but only approximately, discharged
in words and sentences. And hence naturalists and historians are
wont to bring forward only certain marks as distinguishing signs,
without meaning to assert that these express everything distinctive
and characteristic ; and the man who describes religion must in
most cases be content with the same procedure. But if we must
make an attempt at some kind of general statement, in order that
the apologist of any particular faith may be the less likely to fall
into error, we should be content with saying this: in every in-
dividual religion the God-consciousness, which in itself remains
the same everywhere on the same level, is attached to some relation
of the self-consciousness in such an especial way that only thereby
can it unite with other determinations of the self-consciousness ;
so that all other relations are subordinate to this one, and it com-
municates to all others its colour and its tone. If it should seem
that by this we are expressing merely a different rule for the con-
necting of religious moments, rather than a difference of form or of
content, we have only to note that every moment is itself a con-
nexion, as being the transition from the preceding to the following
moment, and thus must become a different moment when the
religious self-consciousness is placed in a different connexion.

Postscript.—It is only by means of the two points set up in
our proposition (namely, the distinctive beginning to which each
religious communion goes back, and the peculiar form which the
religious emotions and their utterances take in each communion)
that it is possible to regulate the usage of the familiar terms
‘ positive’ and ‘ revealed.’ It is well known that these terms are
used somewhat confusedly, being often applied in exactly the same
manner at one moment to the individual doctrines, at another to
the faith in general, and being at one time opposed to the natural,


48 THE CHRISTIAN FAITH [§ 10


at another to the rational. Hence it would be a difficult task so
to fix their meaning as to secure for them a uniformly consistent
usage in the realm of scientific theology. For the former of the
two terms we are given a good lead by the use made of it in the
theory of Law, where positive rights are contrasted with natural
rights. If we compare the two, one finds that natural right never
appears in the same sense as positive, namely, as the basis of a
civic community. Even the simplest and most original relation-
ships, such as paternal authority or the marriage union, are in each
society defined in a distinctive manner—in the developed State by
express legislation, and in earlier stages by prevailing custom.
Natural right, however, is simply what can be abstracted in a
similar manner from the legislation of all societies. And even if,
as pure knowledge, it were to come into existence in another way,
yet everyone would admit that when you come to the application of
it, it must first be more precisely defined, and therefore, as applic-
able to practice, can only be traced back to this act of more precise
definition. Now it is the same with Natural Religion. It never
appears as the basis of a religious communion,! but is simply what
can be abstracted uniformly from the doctrines of all religious
communions of the highest grade, as being present in all but differ-
ently determined in each. Such a natural religion would mark
out the common elements in all religious affections which are
found in the ecclesiastical communions, and if we conceive of all
religious communions as already given, and also of all the different
philosophical systems as having adjusted their differences as regards
the terminology of such a doctrine, this natural religion would be
everywhere the same, and would remain ever self-identical. But
it would never anywhere be more than a mere private possession,
which would belong, in addition to their definite type and manner
of piety and its expression in doctrine, to those individuals in the
various religious communions who, acknowledging from their own
standpoint the other communions in their inter-relation, were able
to view together in a higher unity things which are separated in
actuality. Moreover, it would not be difficult to show that what
is called natural religion did actually arise in this way, and, further,
that any attempt to make this secondary product the basis of an
ecclesiastical communion has always failed, and must always fail.
But that is hardly our business here. Agreed, then, that in any
case, even if it should have arisen in a different way, such a natural


1 Cf. § 6, Postscript,


§ 10] RELIGION POSITIVE AND REVEALED 49


religion, or rather, properly speaking, natural theology, being a
mere collocation of doctrines, would be simply the common element
in all monotheistic faiths : then the positive element in each would
be seen to be the individualized element, which, as shown above, is
found in each of them not simply here and there but, strictly con-
sidered, all over them, though it may be more prominent at one
point than at another. It simply betrays a misapprehension when
people attempt to distinguish the actually existing religious com-
munions from each other by the principle that the positive element
is found in one at one point and in another at another point, as,
é.g., that in Christianity it is the doctrines, in Judaism the com-
mandments.t For if in one communion the commands are more
elaborated and the doctrines less, and in another vice versa, it is
simply that in the one case the doctrine is concealed in the command
as in a symbol, and in the other the doctrine itself appears as a
command that it be expressed and confessed. Moreover, it would
be equally false to deny that the precepts of Christian morals are
positive and to deny that the doctrine of Jehovah in Judaism is
positive. In any case, neither the command, as the expression of
a common mode of action, nor the doctrine, as the expression of a
common mode of representation, is an original element : both are
based on a common distinctive quality of the religious emotions.
Now since without this the particular communion itself could not
have come into existence, and since it has maintained an existence
dating from, and in relation to, the fact which marked its beginning,
it must be dependent on that fact for the peculiar stamp of its
religious emotions. This, then, is what is to be signified by the
term ‘ positive’: the individual content of all the moments of the
religious life within one religious communion, in so far as this
content depends on the original fact from which the communion
itself, as a coherent historical phenomenon, originated.

The words ‘ reveal,’ ‘ revealed,’ ‘ revelation,’ present still further
difficulties, since even originally they sometimes signify the illumina-
tion of what was obscure, confused, unobserved, and sometimes
rather the disclosing and unveiling of what was hitherto concealed
and kept secret, and still further confusion has been introduced by
the distinction between mediate and immediate (direct and in-
direct) revelation. To begin with, all will at once agree that the
word ‘revealed’ is never applied either to what is discovered in
the realm of experience by one man and handed on to others, or to

1 See M. Mendelssohn's Jerusalem.


4


50 THE CHRISTIAN FAITH [§ 10


what is excogitated in thought by one man and so learned by others ;
and further, that the word presupposes a divine communication
and declaration. And in this sense we find the word very generally
applied to the origin of religious communions. For of what re-
ligious mysteries and varieties of worship, either among the Greeks
or among the Egyptians and Indians, would it not be asserted that
they originally came from heaven or were proclaimed by Deity in
some way which fell outside the human and natural order? Not
seldom, indeed, we find even the beginning of civic communities
(just as from the beginning we often find the moral and the religious
unseparated) traced to a divine sending of the man who first
gathered the tribe together into a civic union, and so the new
organization of life is based on a revelation. Accordingly we
might say that the idea of revelation signifies the originality of
the fact which lies at the foundation of a religious communion, in
the sense that this fact, as conditioning the individual content of the
religious emotions which are found in the communion, cannot itself
in turn be explained by the historical chain which precedes it.
Now the fact that in this original element there is a divine
causality requires no further discussion ; nor does the fact that it is
an activity which aims at and furthers the salvation of man. But I
am unwilling to accept the further definition that it operates upon
man as a cognitive being. For that would make the revelation to be
originally and essentially doctrine ; and I do not believe that we
can adopt that position, whether we consider the whole field covered
by the idea, or seek to define it in advance with special reference
to Christianity. If a system of propositions can be understood
from their connexion with others, then nothing supernatural was
required for their production. But if they cannot, then they can,
in the first instance, only be apprehended (we need only appeal for
confirmation to the first principles of Hermeneutics) as parts of
another whole, as a moment of the life of a thinking being who
works upon us directly as a distinctive existence by means of his
total impression on us ; and this working is always a working upon
the self-consciousness. Thus the original fact will always be the
appearing of such a being, and the original working will always be
upon the self-consciousness of those into whose circle he enters.
That this does not exclude doctrine, but implies it, is obvious. For
the rest, it always remains very difficult, indeed almost impossible,
to give definite limits to this idea, and, if it is thus definitely grasped,
to explain its rise wherever it appears. For everywhere in the


§ 10] _ REVELATION 51


realm of mythology, Greek as well as Oriental and Norse, these
divine communications and declarations border so closely on the
higher states of heroic and poetic inspiration that it is difficult to
distinguish them from each other. And thus it becomes difficult
to avoid a widened application of the idea, to the effect that every
original ideal which arises in the soul, whether for an action or for
a work of art, and which can neither be understood as an imitation
nor be satisfactorily explained by means of external stimuli and
preceding mental states, may be regarded as revelation. For the
fact that the one is greater and the other less cannot here make a
dividing line. And, indeed, the inward generation of a new and
peculiar idea of God in a moment of inspiration has often been one
and the same thing with the rise of a distinctive worship. Indeed,
it would be difficult to draw any clear dividing line at all between
what is revealed and what comes to light through inspiration in a
natural way, unless we are prepared to fall back on the position
that revelation is only to be assumed when not a single moment
but a whole existence is determined by such a divine communica-
tion, and that what is then proclaimed by such an existence is to
be regarded as revealed. This, in the polytheistic religions, would
include not only the divine declarations and oracles attached to
certain holy places which the divinity has made known to be his
specially chosen habitations, but also those persons who, because
they are descended from the divinity, make known the divine
archetype in a human life in an original way which cannot be
explained by the historical context. In this same sense Paul calls
even the world the original revelation of God.t_ But this may again
lead us to the conclusion that no particular thing, since it always
belongs to the world, can in itself be regarded as divine revelation.
For just as the dawning of an archetypal idea in an individual soul,
even if it cannot be explained by the previous states of that very
soul, can certainly be explained by the total state of the society to
which the individual belongs: so even the men who are credited
with divine descent always appear as determined by the character
of their people, and thus it is from the total energy of the people that
their existence is to be explained or comprehended. Hence even
if we do venture to establish, in the way we have done above, the
relation of the idea of ‘revelation’ and ‘revealed’ to the idea of
the ‘ positive’ for the whole realm of historically actual religious
communions, we shall nevertheless naturally and inevitably find


1 Rom. 12°,


82 THE CHRISTIAN FAITH [§ 11


that the application of the idea to the fact which forms the basis
of any particular religious communion will be contested by all other
communions, while each will claim it for its own basal fact.

Finally, this must be added : that if one faith wishes to establish
the validity of its own application of the idea as against the others,
it cannot at all accomplish this by the assertion that its own divine
communication is pure and entire truth, while the others contain
falsehood. For complete truth would mean that God made Him-
self known as He is in and for Himself. But such a truth could not
proceed outwardly from any fact, and even if it did in some in-
comprehensible way come to a human soul, it could not be appre-
hended by that soul, and retained as a thought ; and if it could
not be in any way perceived and retained, it could not become
operative. Any proclamation of God which is to be operative
upon and within us can only express God in His relation to us ;
and this is not an infra~human ignorance concerning God, but the
essence of human limitedness in relation to Him. On the other
hand, there is the connected fact that a consciousness of God which
arose in a realm of complete barbarity and degradation might be
really a revelation, and might nevertheless, through the fault of the
mind in which it arose, become, in the form in which it was appre-
hended and retained, an imperfect one. And therefore it may
truly be said even of the imperfect forms of religion, so far as they
can be traced, in whole or in part, to a particular starting-point and
their content cannot be explained by anything previous to that
point, that they rest upon revelation, however much error may be
mingled in them with the truth.


III. PRESENTATION OF CHRISTIANITY IN ITS PECULIAR
ESSENCE : PROPOSITIONS BORROWED FROM APOLOGETICS.


§ 11. Christianity is a monotheistic faith, belonging to the teleological
type of religion, and is essentially distinguished from other
such faiths by the fact that in it everything is related to the
redemption accomplished by Jesus of Nazareth.

1. The only pertinent way of discovering the peculiar essence
of any particular faith and reducing it as far as possible to a formula
is by showing the element which remains constant throughout
the most diverse religious affections within this same communion,
while it is absent from analogous affections within other com-
munions. Now since we have little reason to expect that this
peculiarity is equally strongly marked in all the different varieties of


§ 11] THE ESSENCE OF CHRISTIANITY 53


emotions, there is all the greater possibility of our missing the mark
in this attempt, and so coming in the end to the opinion that there
is no hard-and-fast inward difference at all, but only the outward
difference as determined by time and place. However, we may
with some certainty conclude from what has been said above,!
that we shall be least likely to miss the peculiarity if we keep
principally to what is most closely connected with the basal fact,
and this is the procedure which underlies the formula of our pro-
position. But Christianity presents special difficulties, even in
this fact alone, that it takes a greater variety of forms than other
faiths and is split up into a multiplicity of smaller communions
or churches ; and thus there arises a twofold task, first, to find the
peculiar essence, common to all these communions, of Christianity
as such, and secondly, to find the peculiar essence of the particular
communion whose right is to be authenticated or whose system of
doctrine is to be established. But still further difficulty lies in the
fact that even in each particular ecclesiastical communion almost
every doctrine appears with the most multifarious variations at
different times and places ; and this implies as its basis, not indeed,
perhaps, an equally great diversity in the religious affections them-
selves, but always at least a great diversity in the manner of under-
standing and appraising them. Indeed, the worst of all is that,
owing to this variation, the bounds of the Christian realm become
a matter of dispute even among Christians themselves, one asserting
of this form of teaching, and another of that form, that though it
was indeed engendered within Christianity it is nevertheless really
un-Christian in content. Now, if he who wishes to solve our problem
belongs himself to one of these parties, and assumes at the outset that
only what is found within the realm of that one view ought to be
taken into account in ascertaining what is distinctive of Christianity,
he is at the outset taking controversies as settled, for the settle-
ment of which he professes to be only discovering the conditions.
For only when the peculiar essence of Christianity has been ascer-
tained can it be decided how far this or that is compatible or incom-
patible with it. But if the investigator succeeds in freeing himself
from all partiality, and therefore takes into account everything,
however opposed, so long as it professes to be Christian, then on the
other hand he is in danger of reaching a result far scantier and more
colourless in its content, and consequently less suitable to the aims
of our present task. That is the present state of affairs, and it


1§ 10, Postscript.


54 THE CHRISTIAN FAITH [§ 11


cannot be concealed. Now since each man, the more religious he
is, usually brings his individual religion the more into this investiga-
tion, there is a large majority of the people who form their idea of
the peculiar essence of Christianity according to the interests of
their party. But for the interests of Apologetics as well as of
Dogmatics it seems advisable rather to be content with a scanty
result at the beginning and to hope for its completion in the course
of further procedure, than to begin with a narrow and exclusive
formula, which is of necessity confronted by one or more opposing
formule, with which there must be a conflict sooner or later. And
it is in this sense that the formula of our proposition is set up.

2. It is indisputable that all Christians trace back to Christ the
communion to which they belong. But here we are also pre-
supposing that the term Redemption is one to which they all con-
fess: not only that they all wse the word, with perhaps different
meanings, but that there is some common element of meaning which
they all have in mind, even if they differ when they come to a more
exact description of it. The term itself is in this realm merely
figurative, and signifies in general a passage from an evil condition,
which is represented as a state of captivity or constraint,’ into a
better condition—this is the passive side of it. But it also signifies
the help given in that process by some other person, and this is the
active side of it. Further, the usage of the word does not essentially
imply that the worse condition must have been preceded by a better
condition, so that the better one which followed would really
be only a restoration: that point may at the outset be left quite
open. But now apply the word to the realm of religion, and suppose
we are dealing with the teleological type of religion. Then the evil
condition can only consist in an obstruction or arrest of the vitality
of the higher self-consciousness, so that there comes to be little
or no union of it with the various determinations of the sensible
self-consciousness, and thus little or no religious life. We may
give to this condition, in its most extreme form, the name of God-
lessness, or, better, God-forgetfulness. But we must not think this
means a state in which it is quite impossible for the God-conscious-
ness to be kindled. For if that were so, then, in the first place, the
lack of a thing which lay outside of one’s nature could not be felt
to be an evil condition ; and in the second place, a re-creating in


1 [This does not apply as precisely to the English word redemption as to
ae cn word Evlésung, which primarily means release or deliverance.—
RANSL.


§ 11] REDEMPTION 55


the strict sense would then be needed in order to make good this
lack, and that is not included in the idea of redemption. The
possibility, then, of kindling the God-consciousness remains in
reserve even where the evil condition of that consciousness is
painted in the darkest colours.'_ Hence we can only designate it
as an absence of facility for introducing the God-consciousness into
the course of our actual lives and retaining it there. This cer-
tainly makes it seem as if these two conditions, that which exists
before redemption and that which is to be brought about by re-
demption, could only be distinguished in an indefinite way, as a
more and a less ; and so, if the idea of redemption is to be clearly
established, there arises the problem of reducing this indefinite
distinction to a relative opposition. Such an opposition lies in the
following formule. Given an activity of the sensible self-con-
sciousness, to occupy a moment of time and to connect it with
another: its ‘exponent’ or ‘index’ will be greater than that of
the higher self-consciousness for uniting itself therewith ; and given
an activity of the higher self-consciousness, to occupy a moment
of time through union with a determination of the sensible, its
“exponent ’ or ‘index ’ will be less than that of the activity of the
sensible for completing the moment for itself alone. Under these
conditions no satisfaction of the impulse towards the God-con-
sciousness will be possible ; and so, if such a satisfaction is to be
attained, a redemption is necessary, since this condition is nothing
but a kind of imprisonment or constraint of the feeling of absolute
dependence. These formule, however, do not imply that in all
moments which are so determined the God-consciousness or the
feeling of absolute dependence is at zero, but only that in some
respect it does not dominate the moment ; and in proportion as
that is the case the above designations of Godlessness and God-
forgetfulness may fitly be applied to it.

3. The recognition of such a condition undeniably finds a place
in all religious communions. For the aim of all penances and puri-
fications is to put an end to the consciousness of this condition or
to the condition itself. But our proposition establishes two points
which in this connexion distinguish Christianity from all other
religious communions. In the first place, in Christianity the in-
capacity and the redemption, and their connexion with each other,
do not constitute simply one particular religious element among
others, but all other religious emotions are related to this, and this


1 Rom, 1!8f.


56 THE CHRISTIAN FAITH [§ 11


accompanies all others, as the principal thing which makes them
distinctively Christian. And secondly, redemption is posited as
a thing which has been universally and completely accomplished
by Jesus of Nazareth. And these two points, again, must not be
separated from each other, but are essentially interconnected. Thus
it could not by any means be said that Christian piety is attributable
to every man who in all his religious moments is conscious of being
in process of redemption,even if he stood in no relation to the person
of Jesus or even knew nothing of Him—a case which, of course, will
never arise. And no more could it be said that a man’s religion is
Christian if he traces it to Jesus, even supposing that therein he is
not at all conscious of being in process of redemption—a case which
also, of course, will never arise. The reference to redemption is in
every Christian consciousness simply because the originator of the
Christian communion is the Redeemer ; and Jesus is Founder of a
religious communion simply in the sense that its members become
conscious of redemption through Him. Our previous exposition
ensures that this will not be understood to mean that the whole
religious consciousness of a Christian can have no other content than
simply Jesus and redemption, but only that all religious moments,
so far as they are free expressions of the feeling of absolute depend-
ence, are set down as having come into existence through that re-
demption, and, so far as the feeling appears still unliberated, are set
down as being in need of that redemption. It likewise goes without
saying that, while this element is always present, different religious
moments may and will possess it in varying degrees of strength or
weakness, without thereby losing their Christian character. But it
would, of course, follow from what has been said, that if we conceive
of religious moments in which all reference to redemption is absent,
and the image of the Redeemer is not introduced at all, these
moments must be judged to belong no more intimately to Chris-
tianity than to any other monotheistic faith.

4. The more detailed elaboration of our proposition, as to how
the redemption is effected by Christ and comes to consciousness
within the Christian communion, falls to the share of the dogmatic
system itself. Here, however, we have still to discuss, with refer-
ence to the general remarks we made above,! the relation of Chris-
tianity to the other principal monotheistic communions. These
also are traced back each to an individual founder. Now if the
difference of founder were the only difference, this would be a


1§ Io.


§ 11] CHRISTIANITY AND ITS FOUNDER 57


merely external difference, and the same thing would be true if
these others likewise set up their founder as a redeemer and thus
related everything to redemption. For that would mean that in
all these religions the religious moments were of like content, only
that the personality of the founder was different. But such is not
the case: rather must we say that only through Jesus, and thus
only in Christianity, has redemption become the central point of
religion. For inasmuch as these other religions have instituted
particular penances and purifications for particular things, and
these are only particular parts of their doctrine and organization,
the effecting of redemption does not appear as their main business.
It appears rather as a derivative element. Their main business is
the founding of the communion upon definite doctrine and in
definite form. If, however, there are within the communion con-
siderable differences in the free development of the God-conscious-
ness, then some people, in whom it is most cramped, are more in
need of redemption, and others, in whom it works more freely, are
more capable of redemption ; and thus through the influence of the
latter there arises in the former an approximation to redemption ;
but only up to the point at which the difference between the two
is more or less balanced, simply owing to the fact that there exists
a communion or fellowship. In Christianity, on the other hand,
the redeeming influence of the Founder is the primary element, and
the communion exists only on this presupposition, and as a com-
munication and propagation of that redeeming activity. Hence
within Christianity these two tendencies always rise and fall
together: the tendency to give pre-eminence to the redeeming
work of Christ, and the tendency to ascribe great value to the
distinctive and peculiar element in Christian piety. And the same is
true of the two opposite tendencies : the tendency to regard Chris-
tianity simply as a means of advancing and propagating religion
in general (its own distinctive nature being merely accidental and
secondary), and the tendency to regard Christ principally as a
teacher and the organizer of a communion, while putting the redeem-
ing activity in the background.

Accordingly, in Christianity the relation of the Founder to
the members of the communion is quite different from what it is
in the other religions. For those other founders are represented as
having been, as it were, arbitrarily elevated from the mass of similar
or not very different men, and as receiving just as much for them-
selves as for other people whatever they do receive in the way of


58 THE CHRISTIAN FAITH [§ 11


divine doctrine and precept. Thus even an adherent of those
faiths will hardly deny that God could just as well have given the
law through another as through Moses, and the revelation could
just as well have been given through another as through Mohammed.
But Christ is distinguished from all others as Redeemer alone and
for all, and is in no wise regarded as having been at any time in
need of redemption Himself ; and is therefore separated from the
beginning from all other men, and endowed with redeeming power
from His birth.

Not that we mean here to exclude at the outset from the
Christian communion all those who differ from this presentation of
the matter (which is itself capable of manifold shades of variation)
in holding that Christ was only later endowed with redeeming
power, provided only that this power is recognized as something
different from the mere communication of doctrine and rule of life.
But if Christ is regarded entirely on the analogy of the founders of
other religions, then the distinctive peculiarity of Christianity can
only be asserted for the content of the doctrine and rule of life,
and the three monotheistic faiths remain separate only in so far as
each holds unflinchingly to what it has received. But now suppose
them all together capable of advancing still to perfection, and
suppose they were able to find for themselves, sooner or later, the
better doctrines and precepts of Christianity: then the inward
difference would entirely disappear. Suppose that finally the
Christian Church is likewise to move on beyond what has been
received from Christ : then nothing else remains for Christ but to
be regarded as an outstanding point in the development, and this in
such a sense that there is a redemption from Him as well as a
redemption through Him. And since the perfecting principle can
only be Reason, and this is everywhere the same, all distinction
between the progress of Christianity and that of other monotheistic
faiths would gradually disappear, and all alike would only have a
validity limited to a definite period, so far as their distinctive
character was concerned.

In this way the difference becomes clear between two widely
divergent conceptions of Christianity. But at the same time the
lines leading from the one to the other become visible. If the
latter of the two conceptions were ever to present itself as a complete
doctrine, such a communion would perhaps of its own accord sever
its connexion with the other Christian communions. But other-
wise it could still be recognized as a Christian communion, unless


a ry


§ 11] CHRISTIANITY AND ITS FOUNDER 59


it actually declared itself to be now freed from the necessity of
adherence to Christ. Still less should participation in the Christian
communion be denied to individuals who approximate to that
view, so long as they desire to maintain in themselves a living con-
sciousness of God along with, and by means of, that communion.

5. This development of the argument will, it is hoped, serve to
confirm what we have established for the purpose of determining
the distinctive element of Christianity. For we have tried, as it
were by way of experiment, to single out from among the common
elements of Christian piety that element by which Christianity is
most definitely distinguished externally ; and in this attempt we
were guided by the necessity of regarding the inner peculiarity and
the outward delimitation in their interconnexion. Perhaps in a
universal Philosophy of Religion, to which, if it were properly
recognized, Apologetics could then appeal, the inner character of
Christianity in itself could be exhibited in such a way that its
particular place in the religious world would thereby be definitely
fixed. This would also mean that all the principal moments of
the religious consciousness would be systematized, and from their
interconnexion it would be seen which of them were fitted to have
all the others related to them and to be themselves a constant con-
comitant of all the others. If, then, it should be seen that the
element which we call ‘redemption’ becomes such a moment as
soon as a liberating fact enters a region where the God-consciousness
was in a state of constraint, Christianity would in that case
be vindicated as a distinct form of faith and its nature in a sense
construed. But even this could not properly be called a proof of
Christianity, since even the Philosophy of Religion could not
establish any necessity, either to recognize a particular Fact as
redemptive, or to give the central place actually in one’s own con-
sciousness to any particular moment, even though that moment
should be capable of occupying such a place. Still less can this
present account claim to be such a proof; for here, in accordance
with the line we have taken, and since we can only start from a
historical consideration, we cannot even pretend to do as much as
might be done in a complete Philosophy of Religion. Moreover, it
is obvious that an adherent of some other faith might perhaps be
completely convinced by the above account that what we have set
forth is really the peculiar essence of Christianity, without being
thereby so convinced that Christianity is actually the truth, as to
feel compelled to accept it. Everything we say in this place is


60 THE CHRISTIAN FAITH [§ 12


relative to Dogmatics, and Dogmatics is only for Christians ; and so
this account is only for those who live within the pale of Christianity,
and is intended only to give guidance, in the interests of Dogmatics,
for determining whether the expressions of any religious conscious-
ness are Christian or not, and whether the Christian quality is
strongly and clearly expressed in them, or rather doubtfully. We
entirely renounce all attempt to prove the truth or necessity of
Christianity ; and we presuppose, on the contrary, that every
Christian, before he enters at all upon inquiries of this kind, has
already the inward certainty that his religion cannot take any other
form than this.


§ 12. Christianity does indeed stand in a special historical connexion
with Judaism ; but as far as concerns its historical existence
and its aim, its relations to Judaism and Heathenism are
the same.


1. We here take Judaism to mean primarily the Mosaic institu-
tions, but also, as preparing the way for these, every earlier usage
which helped to separate the people from other peoples. With
this Judaism, then, Christianity has an historical connexion through
the fact that Jesus was born among the Jewish people, as indeed
a universal Redeemer could scarcely spring from any other than a
monotheistic people, once such a people was in existence. But we
must not represent the historical connexion in a too exclusive
manner. At the time of the appearance of Christ the religious
thought of the people was no longer based exclusively on Moses and
the prophets, but had been in many ways remoulded through the
influence of non-Jewish elements which it had absorbed during and
after the Babylonian Dispersion. And, on the other hand, Greek
and Roman Heathendom had been in many ways prepared for
Monotheism, and in these quarters the expectation of a new phase
was most intense ; while contrariwise among the Jews the Messianic
promises had been partly given up and partly misunderstood. So
that when one puts together all the historical circumstances, the
difference becomes much smaller than it appears at the first glance.
And Christ’s descent from Judaism is largely counterbalanced by
the facts that so many more heathen than Jews went over to
Christianity, and that Christianity would not have been received
by the Jews even as much as it was, had they not been permeated
by those foreign elements.

2. The truth rather is that the relations of Christianity to


—


§ 12] CHRISTIANITY AND JUDAISM 61


Judaism and Heathenism are the same, inasmuch as the transition
from either of these to Christianity is a transition to another
religion. The leap certainly seems greater in the case of Heathen-
ism, since it had first to become monotheistic in order to become
Christian. At the same time, the two processes were not separated,
but Monotheism was given to the heathen directly in the form of
Christianity, as it had been previously in the form of Judaism. And
the demand made upon the Jews, to give up their reliance upon
the law, and to put a different interpretation upon the Abrahamitic
promises, was just as large a demand. Accordingly we must
assume that Christian piety, in its original form, cannot be explained
by means of the Jewish piety of that or of an earlier time, and so
Christianity cannot in any wise be regarded as a remodelling or a
renewal and continuation of Judaism. Paul does indeed regard
the faith of Abraham as the prototype of Christian faith, and
represents the Mosaic Law simply as something slipped in between ; !
and from this it might, of course, be inferred that he meant to
represent Christianity as a renewal of that original and pure
Abrahamitic Judaism. But his meaning was only that Abraham’s
faith was related to the promise as ours is to the fulfilment, and not
by any means that the promise was the same to Abraham as the
fulfilment is to us. Where he expressly speaks of the relation of
the Jews and the Heathen to Christ, he represents it as being exactly
the same :? he represents Christ as being the same for both, and
both as being alike very far from God and so in need of Christ.
Now if Christianity has the same relation to Judaism as to Heathen-
ism, it can no more be regarded as a continuation of the former
than of the latter: if a man comes from either of them to Chris-
tianity, he becomes, as regards his religion, a new man. But the
promise to Abraham, so far as it has been fulfilled in Christ, is
represented as having had its reference to Christ only in the divine
decree, not in the religious consciousness of Abraham and his
people. And since we can only recognize the self-identity of a
religious communion when there is a uniformity of the religious
consciousness, we can no more recognize an identity between
Christianity and Abrahamitic Judaism than between it and the
later Judaism or Heathenism. And neither can it be said that
that purer original Judaism carried within itself the germ of Chris-
tianity, so that it would have developed of itself by natural progress
from Judaism without the intervention of any new factor; nor
1 Gal. 3% 14. 23-25, 2 Rom, 222-12 321-24 2 Cor, 51617, Eph. 213-18,


62 THE CHRISTIAN FAITH (§ 13


that Christ Himself lay in the line of this progress in such a way
that a new communal life and existence could not begin with Him.
3. The widely prevalent notion of one single Church of God,
existing from the beginning of the human race to the end of it, is
opposed to our proposition more in appearance than in reality.
If the Mosaic Law belongs to the one chain of this divine economy
of salvation, then we must, according to approved Christian
teachers, include also the Greek philosophy,! especially that which
tended towards Monotheism ; and yet we cannot, without quite
destroying the peculiarity of Christianity, assert that its teaching
forms a single whole with the heathen philosophy. If, on the other
hand, this doctrine of the one Church is chiefly intended to express
the fact that Christ’s active relation to all that is human knows no
limits, even with regard to the time that was past, this is an in-
tention upon which we cannot yet pass judgment, but which is quite
compatible with our proposition. And even in Old Testament
prophecy there is ascribed to the New Covenant a different char-
acter from the Old,” and this direct antithesis expresses the inward
separation in the most definite way. Hence the rule may be set
up that almost everything else in the Old Testament is, for our
Christian usage, but the husk or wrapping of its prophecy, and
that whatever is most definitely Jewish has least value. So that
we can find rendered with some exactness in Old Testament passages
only those of our religious emotions which are of a somewhat
general nature without anything very distinctively Christian.
For those which are distinctively Christian, Old Testament sayings
will not provide a suitable expression, unless we think certain
elements away from them and read other things into them. And
that being the case, we shall certainly find quite as near and
accordant echoes in the utterances of the nobler and purer Heathen-
ism ; as indeed the older Apologists were no less glad to appeal to
what they held to be heathen Messianic prophecies, and thus
recognized there a striving of human nature towards Christianity.


§ 13. The appearance of the Redeemer in history is, as divine revela-
tion, neither an absolutely supernatural nor an absolutely
supra-rational thing.


1. As regards revelation, it has already® been granted that
the starting-point of any entity which has a distinctive constitu-


fs i Hikéras oby Lovdatous wer vduos"EANnor 5¢ piocopia wéxps Tis mapovolas’ évredOev
de 7) KMijows 1 KAGOALKH Eis meptovarov dikaroovvys Aadv. Clemens Alex., Sivom. vi.
Osim Gus 3 § 10, Postscript.


§ 13] THE ABSOLUTELY SUPERNATURAL 63


tion of its own, still more of any communion and especially a
religious communion, can never be explained by the condition of
the circle in which it appears and operates ; for if it could, it would
not be a starting-point, but would itself be the product of a spiritual
process. But though its existence transcends the nature of the
circle in which it appeared, there is no reason why we should not
believe that the appearing of such a life is the result of the power
of development which resides in our human nature—a power which
expresses itself in particular men at particular points according to
laws which, if hidden from us, are nevertheless of divine arrange-
ment, in order through these men to help the others forward.
And indeed, apart from such a supposition, any progress of the
human race as a whole or any part of it would be inconceivable.
Every outstanding endowment of an individual, through whose
influence any spiritual institution within a particular circle takes
shape anew, is such a starting-point ; only, the more such ex-
pressions are temporally and spatially limited in their influence,
the more do they appear, if not explicable by what went before,
yet conditioned by it. Therefore when we designate all these men
as heroes, each in his own sphere, and ascribe to them a higher
inspiration, this is what is meant : that for the good of the definite
circle in which they appear they have been quickened and inspired
from the universal fountain of life. And the fact that such men
appear from time to time must be regarded as due to the working
of a law, if we are to maintain the higher significance of human
nature at all. The case of all such individuals is therefore analogous
to that of the idea of revelation, which it is better to apply only to
the region of the higher self-consciousness. No one will object to
the supposition that in all founders of religions, even on the sub-
ordinate levels, there is such an endowment, if only the doctrine
and communion which proceed from them have a distinctive and
original character. But if this is to be applied in the same sense
to Christ, it must first of all be said that, in comparison with Him,
everything which could otherwise be regarded as revelation again
loses this character. For everything else is limited to particular
times and places, and all that proceeds from such points is from
the very outset destined to be submerged again in Him, and is thus,
in relation to Him, no existence, but a non-existence ; and He alone
is destined gradually to quicken the whole human race into higher
life. Anyone who does not take Christ in this universal way as
divine revelation cannot desire that Christianity should be an


64 THE CHRISTIAN FAITH [§ 13


enduring phenomenon. But notwithstanding, it must be asserted
that even the most rigorous view of the difference between Him
and all other men does not hinder us from saying that His appear-
ing, even regarded as the incarnation of the Son of God, is a natural
fact. For in the first place : as certainly as Christ was a man, there
must reside in human nature the possibility of taking up the divine
into itself, just as did happen in Christ. So that the idea that the
divine revelation in Christ must in this respect be something
absolutely supernatural will simply not stand the test. Even the
Protevangelium,! by linking the prediction of Christ directly to the
Fall, declares entirely against the idea that human nature is some-
how incapable of taking up into itself the restorative divine element
and that the power to do so must first be introduced into it. But
secondly » even if only the possibility of this resides in human nature,
so that the actual implanting therein of the divine element must be
purely a divine and therefore an eternal act, nevertheless the
temporal appearance of this act in one particular Person must at
the same time be regarded as an action of human nature, grounded
in its original constitution and prepared for by all its past history,
and accordingly as the highest development of its spiritual power
(even if we grant that we could never penetrate so deep into those
innermost secrets of the universal spiritual life as to be able to
develop this general conviction into a definite perception). Other-
wise it could only be explained as an arbitrary divine act that the
restorative divine element made its appearance precisely in Jesus,
and not in some other person. But the supposition of divine
arbitrariness in particular matters belongs to an anthropopathic
view of God, and Scripture does not declare itself in favour of such
a view, but rather seems itself to point to our view that the act
is conditioned.”

2. We now come to the supra-rational. Christ could not in
any way be distinguished as Redeemer from the totality of man-
kind if those phases of His life by which He accomplishes redemp-
tion were explicable by means of the reason which dwells equally
in all other men. For then those conditions would also be found
in the others, and they also could work redemption. We may
further take for granted that in redeemed people there are states
of mind which are conditioned solely by Christ’s communication
or influence, and apart from this, one could not say that redemp-
tion has taken place in them. Consequently, these states cannot

*[1.e. Gen. 3%°.] 2 Gal. 44.


§ 13] THE ABSOLUTELY SUPRA-RATIONAL 65


be explained solely by the reason which has dwelt in them from
their birth—though, indeed, this does play an indispensably
necessary part, since such states can never exist in a soul devoid
of reason. Accordingly, the supra-rational certainly has a place
in the Redeemer and the redeemed, and consequently in the whole
compass of Christianity ; and anybody who refused to recognize
this in any form would be incapable of understanding redemption
in the proper sense, and could only acknowledge Christianity as an
institution, to continue until a better appeared, for the transmission
of the influence of a human reason which, especially in the form of
its self-consciousness, was affected in a remarkable and superior
manner. This supra-rational quality is also recognized almost
without exception in the utterances of those who confess Christ,
and is expressed in various forms as an indwelling (either from the
beginning, or coming in later and continuing, or confined to one
moment) of God or of the Adyos in Christ, and as a moving of the
redeemed by the Holy Spirit. But however great a difference
we make between this supra-rational and the common human
reason, it can never, without falling into self-contradiction, be set
up as an absolutely supra-rational element. For the highest goal
that is set for these workings of redemption is always a human
state which not only would obtain the fullest recognition from the
common human reason, but in which also it is impossible always to
distinguish, even in the same individual, between what is effected
by the divine Spirit and what is effected by the human reason.
Inasmuch, then, as the reason is completely one with the divine
Spirit, the divine Spirit can itself be conceived as the highest
enhancement of the human reason, so that the difference between
the two is made to disappear. But further: even at the very
outset, whatever opposes the movements of the divine Spirit is
the same as what conflicts with human reason; for otherwise
there could not exist in man (as there does), before the entry of
those divine influences, a consciousness of the need of redemption,
which these very influences set at rest. If, then, the human reason
itself in a sense contains that which is produced by the divine
Spirit, the latter does not in this connexion, at least, go beyond
the former. Now what is true of the redeemed may also be said
of the Redeemer. For even the people who do not assume any
kind of divine indwelling in Him do nevertheless, for their part,
extol the very same activities, ideas, and practical precepts of His
(which others explain by divine indwelling) as being the highest


5


66 THE CHRISTIAN FAITH [§ 13


pitch of the rational, and thus with their human reason apprehend
them with approval ; which apprehension, again, those others do
not reproach or reject, but likewise recognize with approval.
Postscript—According to the view of religion which we have
taken as our basis, the peculiar being of the Redeemer and of the
redeemed in their connexion with Him is the original point at
which this question of the supernatural and the supra-rational
in Christianity emerges ; so that there is no ground whatever for
admitting anything supernatural or supra-rational which is not
connected with the appearing of the Redeemer but would in itself
form another original element. The question is usually handled,
partly with reference to the individual facts for which a super-
natural quality is especially claimed (we cannot yet speak of them
here), and partly with reference to the Christian doctrines, which
are for us nothing but the expressions given to the Christian self-
consciousness and its connexions. But if the supernatural in the
Christian self-consciousness consists in the fact that it cannot, in
the form in which it actually exists, be produced by the activity
of reason, it by no means follows from this that the expressions
given to this self-consciousness must also be supra-rational. For
in the same sense in which the Christian self-consciousness is supra-
rational, the whole of Nature is supra-rational too, and yet we do not
apply that epithet to the things we say about Nature, but call them
purely rational. But the whole process of formulating our ex-
pressions concerning the religious self-consciousness is just as much
a rational process as in the case of Nature ; and the difference is
merely that this objective consciousness is given at first hand only
to him who is affected by Nature, while that (Christian) self-
consciousness is given only to him who is affected by the Redeemer
in the manner which is peculiar to His followers. Now this itself
makes plain what we are to think of the prevalent view that Chris-
tian doctrine consists partly of rational and partly of supra-rational
dogmas. It is, indeed, of itself obvious that this can be no more
than a juxtaposition, and that these two kinds of dogmas cannot
form one whole. Between the rational and the supra-rational
there can be no connexion. This further becomes pretty clearly
evident in all treatises upon Christian doctrine which divide them-
selves into a natural theology, purely rational and thus valid not
only within, but also outside of Christianity, and a positive supra-
rational theology, valid only within the compass of Christianity.
For then the two are and remain separate from each other. The


§ 13] SUPRA-RATIONAL DOCTRINE 67


apparent practicability of a union of the two arises from the fact
that there are, of course, Christian dogmas in which the peculiarly
Christian element retreats considerably into the background, so
that they may be taken to be purely rational in those respects in
which the others are recognized as supra-rational. But if that
‘peculiarly Christian element were not in them at all, they would,
of course, not be Christian dogmas. Hence the truth of the matter
is as follows. In one respect all Christian dogmas are supra-
rational, in another they are all rational. They are supra-rational
in the respect in which everything experiential is supra-rational.
For there is an inner experience to which they may all be traced :
they rest upon a given ; and apart from this they could not have
arisen, by deduction or synthesis, from universally recognized and
communicable propositions. If the reverse were true, it would
mean that you could instruct and demonstrate any man into being
a Christian, without his happening to have had any experience.
Therefore this supra-rationality implies that a true appropriation
of Christian dogmas cannot be brought about by scientific means,
and thus lies outside the realm of reason: it can only be brought
about through each man willing to have the experience for himself,
as indeed it is true of everything individual and characteristic, that
it can only be apprehended by the love which wills to perceive.
In this sense the whole of Christian doctrine is supra-rational. It
may, however, be further asked whether the dogmas which give
expression to the religious affections of the Christian and their
connexions are not subject to the same laws of conception and
synthesis as regulate all speech, so that the more perfectly these
laws are satisfied in such a presentation, the more will each in-
dividual be constrained to apprehend correctly what is thought
and intended, even if he cannot, for lack of the fundamental in-
ward experience, convince himself of the truth of the matter. It
must be answered that in this sense everything in Christian doctrine
is entirely according to reason. Accordingly, the supra-rationality
of all particular Christian dogmas is the measure by which it can be
judged whether they succeed in expressing the peculiarly Christian
element ; and again, their rationality is the test of how far the
attempt to translate the inward emotions into thoughts has
succeeded. But to assert that it cannot be demanded that what
goes beyond reason should be rationally presented, appears to be
only a subterfuge designed to cover up some imperfection in the
procedure ; just as the opposite view that in Christian doctrine


68 THE CHRISTIAN FAITH [§ 14


everything must be, in every sense, based on reason, is simply
meant to cover up the lack of a fundamental experience of one’s
own.

The usual formula, that the supra-rational in Christianity must
not be contrary to reason, seems intended to say the same thing
as our proposition. For it implies, on the one hand, the recognition
of the supra-rational, and, on the other hand, the task of showing
that it is not contrary to reason, and this can only be achieved by
means of a rational presentation.


§ 14. There is no other way of obtaining participation in the Christian
communion than through faith in Jesus as the Redeemer.


1. To participate in the Christian communion means to seek
in Christ’s institution an approximation to the above-described ?
state of absolute facility and constancy of religious emotions. No
one can wish to belong to the Christian Church on any other ground.
But since each can only enter through a free resolve of his own,
this must be preceded by the certainty that the influence of Christ
puts an end to the state of being in need of redemption, and pro-
duces that other state ; and this certainty is just faith in Christ.
That is to say, this term always signifies, in our present province,
the certainty which accompanies a state of the higher self-conscious-
ness, and which is therefore different from, but not for that reason
less than, the certainty which accompanies the objective conscious-
ness. In the same sense we spoke above ? of faith in God, which was
nothing but the certainty concerning the feeling of absolute de-
pendence, as such, 7.e. as conditioned by a Being placed outside of
us, and as expressing our relation to that Being. The faith of which
we are now speaking, however, is a purely factual certainty, but a
certainty of a fact which is entirely inward. That is to say, it
cannot exist in an individual until, through an impression which he
has received from Christ, there is found in him a beginning—
perhaps quite infinitesimal, but yet a real premonition—of the
process which will put an end to the state of needing redemption.
But the term ‘faith in Christ’ here (as the term ‘ faith in God’
formerly) relates the state of redemption, as effect, to Christ as
cause. That is how John describes it. And so from the beginning
only those people have attached themselves to Christ in His new
community whose religious self-consciousness had taken the form
of a need of redemption, and who now became assured in themselves


*$ 5, 4- ec iae


§ 14] FAITH IN THE REDEEMER 69


of Christ’s redeeming power.1_ So that the more strongly those two
phases appeared in any individual, the more able was he, by re-
presentation of the fact (which includes description of Christ and
His work) to elicit this inward experience in others. Those in
whom this took place became believers, and the rest did not.?
This, moreover, is what has ever since constituted the essence of all
direct Christian preaching. Such preaching must always take the
form of testimony ; testimony as to one’s own experience, which
shall arouse in others the desire to have the same experience. But
the impression which all later believers received in this way from
the influence of Christ, 7.e. from the common Spirit communicated
by Him and from the whole communion of Christians, supported
by the historical representation of His life and character, was just
the same impression which His contemporaries received from Him
directly. Hence those who remained unbelieving were not blamed
because they had not let themselves be persuaded by reasons, but
simply because of their lack of self-knowledge, which must always
be the explanation when the Redeemer is truly and correctly
presented and people show themselves unable to recognize Him as
such. But even Christ Himself represented this lack of self-
knowledge, 1.e. of the consciousness of needing redemption, as the
limit to His activity. And so the ground of unbelief is the same
in all ages, as is also the ground of belief or faith.

2. The attempt has often been made to demonstrate the
necessity of redemption, but always in vain. We need not, how-
ever, appeal to these cases, for it is clear in itself that the thing
is impossible. Any man who is capable of being satisfied with
himself as he is will always manage to find a way out of the argu-
ment. And no more can it be demonstrated, once the conscious-
ness of this need has been awakened, that Christ is the only One
who can work redemption. In His own time there were many who
did believe that redemption was near, and yet did not accept Him.
And even when we have a more correct idea of the end to be sought,
it is not easy to see how it could be proved that any particular
individual is in a position to achieve the desired effect. For in this
matter we are concerned with amount of spiritual power, which we
have no means of calculating ; and even if we had, we should also
require some fixed datum against which the calculation could be
set. It cannot even be proved in a general way that such a re-
demption is bound to come, even if we presuppose a general know-


MN Yi@iownt Te AO (LN OL Wta vie KEL 2 Acts 237. 41,


70 THE CHRISTIAN FAITH (§ 14


ledge not only of what men are like but also of what God is like.
There would still be plenty of room for different sophistical argu-
ments to draw opposite conclusions from the same data, according
as God’s purpose for man was conceived in one way or in another.

Agreed, then, that we must adhere to the kind of certainty
which we have just described, and that faith is nothing other than
the incipient experience of the satisfaction of that spiritual need by
Christ : there can still be very diverse ways of experiencing the
need and the succour, and yet they will all be faith. Moreover, the
consciousness of need may be present for a long time in advance, or
it may, as is often the case, be fully awakened only by the contrast
which the perfection of Christ forms with our own condition, so that
the two things come into existence simultaneously, the supreme
consciousness of need and the beginning of its satisfaction.

3. It is true that in the Scriptures themselves proofs are often
mentioned, which the witnesses of the Gospel employed.t Yet it
is never asserted that faith sprang from the proof, but from the
preaching. Those proofs were only applied among the Jews, with
reference to their current ideas of the coming Messiah, in order to
repulse the opposition presented by these ideas to the witness of
the Gospel, or to anticipate any such opposition. This was an
indispensable line of defence for witnesses of Christ who were Jews
and who were dealing with Jews. If they wished to assert that
they themselves had never expected any other kind of redemption
than this, or that their expectations had been transformed by the
appearing and the influence of Christ, they must either break with
the whole Jewish religion, which they had no warrant for doing, or
show that the prophetic representations were applicable to this
Jesus as Redeemer. If we took the other view of the matter, it
would mean that the faith of the Gentile Christians was not the
same as that of the Jewish Christians ; and then it would not have
been possible for these two to become really one, but the Gentiles
would have had to become Jews first, in order then to be brought
to Christ by the authority of the prophets.

Postscript.—Our proposition says nothing of any intermediate
link between faith and participation in the Christian communion,
and is accordingly to be taken as directly combining the two, so
that faith of itself carries with it that participation ; and not only
as depending on the spontaneous activity of the man who has
become a believer, but also as depending on the spontaneous


1 Acts 69-10 920-22) algo 1827. 28,


§ 14] MIRACLE aI


activity of the communion (Church), as the source from which the
testimony proceeded for the awakening of faith. At the same time,
in shutting up the whole process between these two points, the
witness or testimony and its effect, our proposition is intended to
make an end of everything which, in the form of demonstration, is
usually brought to the aid of the proper witness or even substituted
for it. This refers principally to the attempts to bring about a
recognition of Christ by means of the miracles which He performs,
or the prophecies which predicted Him, or the special character of
the testimonies originally borne to Him, regarded as the work of
divine inspiration. In all this there seems to be more or less
illusion on the following point: that the efficacy of these things
somehow always presupposes faith, and therefore cannot produce it.

First consider Miracle, taking the word in its narrower sense,
so that prophecy and inspiration are not included, but simply
phenomena in the realm of physical nature which are supposed not
to have been caused ina natural manner. Whether we confine our-
selves to those performed by Jesus Himself, or include those which
took place in connexion with Him, these miracles cannot bring
about a recognition of Him at all. In the first place, we know of
these miracles only from those same Holy Scriptures (for the
miracles related in less pure sources are never adduced along with
them) which relate similar miracles of people who did not adhere
to Christianity at all, but are rather to be reckoned among its
enemies ; and Scripture gives us no marks for distinguishing
evidential miracles from non-evidential. But further, Scripture
itself bears witness that faith has been produced without miracles,
and also that miracles have failed to produce it ; from which it
may be concluded that even when it has existed along with miracles
it was not produced by miracles but in its own original way. Hence
if the purpose of miracles had been to produce faith, we should have
to conclude that God’s breaking into the order of Nature proved
ineffectual. Accordingly, many find the purpose of miracles simply
in the fact that they turn the attention to Christ. But this, again,
is at least so far contradicted by Christ’s oft-repeated command
not to make the miracles more widely known, that we should have
to limit their efficacy to the immediate eye-witnesses, and thus this
efficacy would no longer exist to-day. But, finally, the following
question cannot be avoided. In any other context than that of
such faith and its realm, we may encounter any number of
facts which we cannot explain naturally, and yet we never think


72 THE CHRISTIAN FAITH [§ 14


of miracle, but simply regard the explanation as deferred until we
have a more exact knowledge both of the fact in question and of
the laws of Nature. But when such a fact occurs in connexion
with some faith-realm which has to be established, we think at
once of miracle ; only, each man claims miracle as real for the
realm of his own faith alone, and sets down the others as false.
On what is this distinction based? The question can hardly be
answered except as follows. In general we do, perhaps, assume so
exclusive a connexion between miracles and the formation of a
new faith-realm, that we only admit miracle for this kind of case ;
but the state of each individual’s faith determines his judgment of
the alleged miracle, and so the miracle does not produce the faith.
As regards that universal connexion, however, the state of the
case seems to be as follows. Where a new point in the develop-
ment of the spiritual life, and indeed primarily of the self-con-
sciousness, is assumed to exist, new phenomena in physical Nature,
mediated by the spiritual power which is manifested, are also ex-
pected, because both the contemplative and the outwardly active
spiritual states all proceed from the self-consciousness, and are
determined by its movements. Thus, once Christ is recognized as
Redeemer, and consequently as the beginning of the supreme de-
velopment of human nature in the realm of the self-consciousness,
it is a natural assumption that, just because at the point where
such an existence communicates itself most strongly, spiritual
states appear which cannot be explained from what went before,
He who exercises such a peculiar influence upon human nature
around Him will be able, in virtue of the universal connexion of
things, to manifest also a peculiar power of working upon the physical
side of human nature and upon external Nature. That is to say,
it is natural to expect miracles from Him who is the supreme
divine revelation ; and yet they can be called miracles only in a
relative sense, since our ideas of the susceptibility of physical
Nature to the influence of the spirit and of the causality of the
will acting upon physical Nature are as far from being finally settled
and as capable of being perpetually widened by new experiences as
are our ideas of the forces of physical Nature themselves. Now,
since, in connexion with the divine revelation in Christ, phenomena
presented themselves which could be brought under this concept of
miracle, it was natural that they should actually come to be regarded
from this point of view, and adduced as confirmation of the fact
that this was a new point of development. But this confirmation


§ 14] PROPHECY 73


will be effectual only where there is already present a beginning
of faith ; failing that, the miracle would either be declared false
or be reserved, as regards the understanding of it, for some natural
explanation which the future would reveal. Still less could it be
proved from the miracles which accompanied it that Christianity
is the supreme revelation, since similar phenomena are on the
same grounds to be expected in the lower faiths too, and miracles
themselves cannot, as such, be divided into higher and lower.
Indeed, the possibility cannot be excluded that similar phenomena
might occur even apart from all connexion with the realm of re-
ligion, whether as accompanying other kinds of development or as
signalizing deeper movements in physical Nature itself. Similarly,
on the other hand, it seems to be a matter of course that such
supernatural phenomena, which accompany revelation, disappear
again in proportion as the new development, freed from its point
of origin in the external realm, is organized, and so becomes Nature.

The same thing may be said with regard to Prophecies, in case
anyone should wish to assign to them a more powerful réle than
that which we have granted above. Let us confine ourselves to
the prophecies of the Jewish prophets regarding Christ, for in more
recent times the heathen prophecies have been universally set aside,
and we are not here immediately concerned with the prophecies
of Christ and His apostles. Suppose, then, that we wished to make
more use of those prophetic utterances among Jews. It is quite
conceivable that a Jew should become a Christian because he came
to see that those prophecies were to be referred to Jesus, and that
nevertheless he should possess neither the real faith nor the true
participation in the Christian communion, understanding it all,
perhaps, in a quite different way, because he did not feel any need
of redemption. But suppose these prophecies were to be univer-
sally set before unbelievers, in order to produce in them the will
to enter into communion with Christ. It might be made out at the
start that these prophecies are all to be regarded as belonging to-
gether, that they all have in view an individual, and indeed one and
the same individual (for otherwise the fulfilment of them all in one
and the same person would really be a non-fulfilment), and further
that they have all come to fulfilment in Christ, each in the sense
in which it was meant, not those figuratively meant being fulfilled
in a literal sense and those literally meant in a figurative sense (for
that also would not be a real fulfilment). But, after all, it always
comes to this in the end: that Jesus must be taken to be the


74 THE CHRISTIAN FAITH [§ 14


Redeemer, because the Redeemer was predicted with descriptive
details which are found in Him. But this argument presupposes
that people already have faith in the prophets who predicted, as
such ; and it is impossible to imagine how an unbeliever outside
of Judaism should come to have such a faith, except on the supposi-
tion that the inspiration of the prophets is proved to him, and with
this we shall deal below. Without such a faith the collocation of
prophecies and their fulfilments would be a mere signpost, giving
an impulse to seek fellowship with Christ only to those people who
were already feeling the need of redemption ; and this only in so
far as the need expressed in the prophecies is analogous to their
own, and at the same time the thing prophesied has a manifest
connexion with that need ;1 that is to say, in so far as each man
could himself have prophesied the same thing out of his own need.
The impulse, however, could only issue in his seeking to have the
experience for himself,? and only when this attempt succeeded
would there be faith. And certainly this impulse can now, when
facts speak so loud, be given much more powerfully and surely in
other ways than by means of the prophecies. This becomes especi-
ally clear when we reflect how the case really stands with regard to
the above-mentioned presuppositions ; namely, that it can never be
proved that those prophets foresaw Christ as He really was, and still
less the Messianic kingdom as it really developed in Christianity.
Thus it must be admitted that a proof from prophecy of Christ as
the Redeemer is impossible ; and in particular, the zealous attempt
to seek out for this purpose prophecies or prototypes which relate
to accidental circumstances in the story of Christ must appear
simply as a mistake. A clear distinction must, therefore, be made
between the apologetical use which the apostles made of the pro-
phecies in their intercourse with the Jews, and a general use which
might be made of them as evidences. When, however, faith in
the Redeemer is already present, then we can dwell with great
pleasure on all expressions of the longing for redemption awakened
by earlier and inadequate revelations. And this is the real signifi-
cance (and it has, of course, a confirmative and corroborative value)
of Messianic prophecies, wherever they appear and in however
obscure presentiments they are shrouded: they disclose to us a
striving of human nature towards Christianity, and at the same

In this sense perhaps the prophecy quoted in Matt. 1219-20 is the most
pregnant prophecy.

2 John j4l. 46


“ree eT. Se


Lew EN PS eC ee em,


§ 14] INSPIRATION 75


time give it as the confession of the best and most inspired of
earlier religious communions, that they are to be regarded only as
preparatory and transitory institutions. As for the prophecies
made by Christianity itself, it is, of course, natural that at the
beginning of the development of a new thing the outlook is directed
very much towards the future, t.e. towards its completion, and so
one can understand the questions of the disciples, to which answers
—on the basis of which they afterwards made further prophecies—
could not altogether be denied. But Christ’s prophecies cannot
serve as a proof of His unique office and His exclusive vocation as
Redeemer, for the simple reason that others also have admittedly
prophesied. Again, it was equally natural that the more the new
dispensation became established as an historical phenomenon, the
more the interest in the future decreased and prophecy disappeared.

Now from all this it follows that, if faith in the revelation of
God in Christ and in redemption through Him has not already
arisen in the direct way through experience as the demonstration
of the Spirit and of power, neither miracles nor prophecies can pro-
duce it, and indeed that this faith would be just as immovable even
if Christianity had neither prophecies nor miracles to show. For
the lack of these could never refute that demonstration, or prove a
mere delusion the experience of need satisfied in the fellowship of
Christ. From the lack of these, indeed, nothing could be concluded
except that those natural assumptions do not always prove true,
and that the beginning of the most perfect form of religious self-
consciousness appeared more suddenly, and confined its working
more closely to its own immediate realm.

We come finally to Inspiration. In Christianity this conception
has a wholly subordinate significance. It cannot be related at all
to Christ, since the divine revelation through Him, however it is
conceived, is always conceived as identical with His whole being,
and not as appearing fragmentarily in sporadic moments. And as
for what the apostles received from the Spirit, Christ traces that
entirely to His own instruction, and those who through their testi-
mony became believers did not believe because the testimony
sprang from inspiration, for of that they knew nothing. The con-
ception therefore relates only in the first place to the prophets of
the Old Covenant, and in the second place to the composition of
the New Testament Scriptures ; and so we have to deal with it
here only in so far as concerns the attempt to compel faith de-
monstratively by means of Holy Scripture, when this is first assumed


76 THE CHRISTIAN FAITH (§ 15


to be inspired. But as regards the Old Testament, Prophecy
cannot be understood alone without Law and History ; and this
whole, taken all together, is so consistently theocratic that (while
we can indeed distinguish in it two ‘ poles,’ one of which exercises
attraction, the other repulsion, towards the New Testament), if,
apart from the New Testament, we succeeded in making anyone
believe in the prophetic inspiration (which, however, could hardly
be accomplished except upon their own testimony that the word of
God came to them), yet from this there could not be developed a
faith in Christ as the end of the Law. We shall rather express
the whole truth if we say that we believe in the prophetic inspira-
tion simply because of the use which Christ and His apostles make
of the utterances of the prophets. As regards the New Testament,
the faith had been disseminated for two hundred years before that
Testament was unanimously established as having peculiar validity.
And, moreover, it was not a matter of Christian faith being in the
meantime always mediated by faith in the Old Testament, for
among the great mass of the heathen, who went over to Christianity
without having been previously Judaized, this was by no means
the case. But even now, and even supposing that the inspiration
of the New Testament Scriptures can be proved from these Scriptures
themselves, this would nevertheless presuppose a very perfect
understanding of these Scriptures. And thus, since this is possible
only for a few, we should still require some other way in which
faith might arise, so that there would be two kinds of faith. And
further, it is still impossible to see how an objective conviction of this
kind could exercise such an influence on the self-consciousness, that,
from the mere knowledge that those people were inspired who
asserted that men need redemption and that Christ is their Re-
deemer, this assertion would immediately come to contain for all
an inward truth. All that this conviction in itself can do is
merely to give an impulse towards the awakening of a fuller
self-consciousness and towards the winning of a total impression
of Christ ; and only from this will faith then proceed.


IV. THE RELATION OF DoGMATICs TO CHRISTIAN PIETY.
§15. Christian doctrines are accounts of the Christian religious
affections set forth in speech.

Notre.—Cf. § 3, 5.

1. All religious emotions, to whatever type and level of religion
they belong, have this in common with all other modifications of


§ 15] RELIGIOUS EMOTIONS wu,


the affective self-consciousness, that as soon as they have reached
a certain stage and a certain definiteness they manifest themselves
outwardly by mimicry in the most direct and spontaneous way,
by means of facial features and movements of voice and gesture,
which we regard as their expression. Thus we definitely distinguish
the expression of devoutness from that of a sensuous gladness or
sadness, by the analogy of each man’s knowledge of himself. Indeed,
we can even conceive that, for the purpose of maintaining the
religious affections and securing their repetition and propagation
(especially if they were common to a number of people), the elements
of that natural expression of them might be put together into
sacred signs and symbolical acts, without the thought having per-
ceptibly come in between at all. But we can scarcely conceive such
a low development of the human spirit, such a defective culture,
and such a meagre use of speech, that each person would not,
according to the level of reflection on which he stands, become in
his various mental states likewise an object to himself, in order to
comprehend them in idea and retain them in the form of thought.
Now this endeavour has always directed itself particularly to the
religious emotions ; and this, considered in its own inward meaning,
is what our proposition means by an account of the religious affec-
tions. But while thought cannot proceed even inwardly without
the use of speech, nevertheless there are, so long as it remains
merely inward, fugitive elements in this procedure, which do indeed
in some measure indicate the object, but not in such a way that
either the formation or the synthesis of concepts (in however wide
a sense we take the word ‘concept ’) is sufficiently definite for
communication. It is only when this procedure has reached such
a point of cultivation as to be able to represent itself outwardly in
definite speech, that it produces a real doctrine (Glaubenssatz), by
means of which the utterances of the religious consciousness come
into circulation more surely and with a wider range than is possible
through the direct expression. But no matter whether the expres-
sion is natural or figurative, whether it indicates its object directly
or only by comparison and delimitation, it is still a doctrine.

2. Now Christianity everywhere presupposes that consciousness
has reached this stage of development. The whole work of the
Redeemer Himself was conditioned by the communicability of His
self-consciousness by means of speech, and similarly Christianity
has always and everywhere spread itself solely by preaching. Every
proposition which can be an element of the Christian preaching


78 THE CHRISTIAN FAITH [§ 16


(xijpvypa) is also a doctrine, because it bears witness to the deter-
mination of the religious self-consciousness as inward certainty.
And every Christian doctrine is also a part of the Christian preach-
ing, because every such doctrine expresses as a certainty the approxi-
mation to the state of blessedness ! which is to be effected through
the means ordained by Christ. But this preaching very soon split
up into three different types of speech, which provide as many
different forms of doctrine: the poetic, the rhetorical (which is
directed partly outwards, as combative and commendatory, and
partly inwards, as rather disciplinary and challenging), and finally the
descriptively didactic. But the relation of communication through
speech to communication through symbolic action varies very much
according to time and place, the former having always retreated
into the background in the Eastern Church (for when the letter of
doctrine has become fixed and unalterable, it is in its effect much
nearer to symbolic action than to free speech), and having become
ever more prominent in the Western Church. And in the realm of
speech it is just the same with these three modes of communication.
The relation in which they stand to each other, the general degree of
richness, and the amount of living intercourse in which they unfold
themselves, as they nourish themselves on one another and pass
over into one another—these things testify not so much to the
degree or level of piety as rather to the character of the communion
or fellowship and its ripeness for reflection and contemplation.
Thus this communication is, on the one hand, something different
from the piety itself, though the latter cannot, any more than any-
thing else which is human, be conceived entirely separated from
all communication. But, on the other hand, the doctrines in all
their forms have their ultimate ground so exclusively in the emotions
of the religious self-consciousness, that where these do not exist
the doctrines cannot arise.


§ 16. Dogmatic propositions are doctrines of the descriptively didactic
type, im which the highest possible degree of definiteness is
aimed at.

Nore.—Cf. § 3, 4and5; and § 13, rand 2.

1. The poetic expression is always based originally upon a
moment of exaltation which has come purely from within, a moment
of enthusiasm or inspiration ; the rhetorical upon a moment whose
exaltation has come from without, a moment of stimulated interest


1 See § 5, 4.


§ 16] RELIGIOUS POETRY AND RHETORIC 79


which issues in a particular definite result. The former is purely
descriptive (darstellend), and sets up in general outlines images and
forms which each hearer completes for himself in his own peculiar
way. The rhetorical is purely stimulative, and has, in its nature,
to do for the most part with such elements of speech as, admitting
of degrees of signification, can be taken in a wider or narrower sense,
content if at the decisive moment they can accomplish the highest,
even though they should exhaust themselves thereby and subse-
quently appear to lose somewhat of their force. Thus both of these
forms possess a different perfection from the logical or dialectical
perfection described in our proposition. But, nevertheless, we can
think of both as being primary and original in every religious com-
munion, and thus in the Christian Church, in so far as we ascribe
to everyone in it a share in the vocation of preaching. For when
anyone finds himself in a state of unusually exalted religious self-
consciousness, he will feel himself called to poetic description, as
that which proceeds from this state most directly. And, on the
other hand, when anyone finds himself particularly challenged by
insistent or favourable outward circumstances to attempt an act of
preaching, the rhetorical form of expression will be the most natural
to him for obtaining from the given circumstances the greatest
possible advantage. But let us conceive of the comprehension and
appropriation of what is given in a direct way in these two forms,
as being now also wedded to language and thereby made com-
municable : then this cannot again take the poetic form, nor yet
the rhetorical ; but, being independent of that which was the im-
portant element in those two forms, and expressing as it does a
consciousness which remains self-identical, it becomes, less as
preaching than as confession (émoAoyfa), precisely that third form
—the didactic—which, with its descriptive instruction, remains
distinct from the two others, and is made up of the two put together,
as a derivative and secondary form.

2. But let us confine ourselves to Christianity, and think of its
distinctive beginning, namely, the self-proclamation of Christ, Who,
as subject of the divine revelation, could not contain in Himself any
distinction of stronger and weaker emotion, but could only partake
in such a diversity through His common life with others. Then we
shall not be able to take either the poetic or the rhetorical form of
expression as the predominating, or even as the really primary and
original, form of His self-proclamation. These have only a sub-
ordinate place in parabolic and prophetic discourses. The essential


80 THE CHRISTIAN FAITH [§ 16


thing in His self-proclamation was that He had to bear witness
regarding His ever unvarying self-consciousness out of the depths
of its repose, and consequently not in poetic but in strictly
reflective form; and thus had to set Himself forth, while at the
same time communicating His alone true objective consciousness of
the condition and constitution of men in general, thus instructing
by description or representation, the instruction being sometimes
subordinate to the description, and sometimes vice versa. But this
descriptively didactic mode of expression used by Christ is not
included in our proposition, and such utterances of the Redeemer
will hardly be set up anywhere as dogmatic propositions ; they
will only, as it were, provide the text for them. For in such essential
parts of the self-proclamation of Christ the definiteness was absolute,
and it is only the perfection of the apprehension and appropriation
which reproduces these, that can be characterized by the endeavour
after the greatest possible definiteness. Subordinate to these,
however, there do appear genuinely dogmatic propositions. in the
discourses of Christ, namely, at those points at which He had to
start from the partly erroneous and partly confused ideas current
among His contemporaries.

3. As regards the poetic and rhetorical forms of expression,
it follows directly from what we have said, that they may fall
into apparent contradiction both with themselves and with each
other, even when the self-consciousness which is indicated by
different forms of expression is in itself one and the same. And
a solution will only be possible, in the first place, when it is possible
in interpreting propositions that are apparently contradictory to
take one’s bearings from the original utterances of Christ (a thing
which can in very few cases be done directly), and, in the second
place, when the descriptively didactic expression, which has grown
out of those three original forms put together, is entirely or largely
free from those apparent contradictions. This, however, will not
be possible of achievement so long as the descriptively didactic
expression itself keeps vacillating between the emotional and the
didactic, in its presentation to the catechumens or the community,
and approaches sometimes more to the rhetorical and sometimes
more to the figurative. It will only be possible in proportion as
the aim indicated in our proposition underlies the further develop-
ment of the expression and its more definite separation from the
rhetorical and the poetic, both of which processes are essentially
bound up with the need of settling the conflict. Now, of course,


§ 16] DOGMATIC PROPOSITIONS 81


this demand, that the figurative expression be either exchanged for
a literal one or transformed into such by being explained, and
that definite limits be imposed on the corresponding element in the
rhetorical expressions, is unmistakably the interest which science
has in the formation of language ; and it is mainly with the forma-
tion of religious language that we are here concerned. Hence
dogmatic propositions develop to any considerable extent and gain
recognition only in such religious communions as have reached a
degree of culture in which science is organized as something distinct
both from art and from business, and only in proportion as friends
of science are found and have influence within the communion itself,
so that the dialectical function is brought to bear on the utter-
ances of the religious self-consciousness, and guides the expression
of them. Such a union with organized knowledge has had a place
in Christianity ever since the earliest ages of the Church, and
therefore in no other religious communion has the form of the
dogmatic proposition evolved in such strict separation from the
other forms, or developed in such fulness.

Postscript—This account of the origin of dogmatic propositions,
as having arisen solely out of logically ordered reflection upon the
immediate utterances of the religious self-consciousness, finds its
confirmation in the whole of history. The earliest specimens of
preaching preserved for us in the New Testament Scriptures already
contain such propositions ; and on closer consideration we can
see in all of them, in the first place, their derivation from the original
self-proclamation of Christ, and, in the second place, their affinity
to figurative and rhetorical elements which, for permanent circula-
tion, had to approximate more to the strictness of a formula.
Similarly in later periods it is clear that the figurative language,
which is always poetic in its nature, had the most decided influence
upon the dogmatic language, and always preceded its development,
and also that the majority of the dogmatic definitions were called
forth by contradictions to which the rhetorical expressions had led.

But when the transformation of the original expressions into
dogmatic propositions is ascribed to the logical or dialectical
interest, this is to be understood as applying only to the form.
A proposition which had originally proceeded from the speculative
activity, however akin it might be to our propositions in content,
would not be a dogmatic proposition. The purely scientific activity,
whose task is the contemplation of existence, must, if it is to come
to anything, either begin or end with the Supreme Being ; and so


6


82 THE CHRISTIAN FAITH [§ 16


there may be forms of philosophy containing propositions of
speculative import about the Supreme Being which, in spite of the
fact that they arose out of the purely scientific interest, are, when
taken individually, difficult to distinguish from the corresponding
propositions which arose purely out of reflection upon the religious
emotions, but have been worked out dialectically. But when they
are considered in their connexions, these two indubitably show
differences of the most definite kind. For dogmatic propositions
never make their original appearance except in trains of thought
which have received their impulse from religious moods of mind ;
whereas, not only do speculative propositions about the Supreme
Being appear for the most part in purely logical or natural-scientific
trains of thought, but even when they come in as ethical pre-
suppositions or corollaries, they show an unmistakable leaning
towards one or other of those two directions. Moreover, in the
dogmatic developments of the earliest centuries, if we discount the
quite unecclesiastical Gnostic schools, the influence of speculation
upon'the content of dogmatic propositions may be placed at zero.
At a later time, certainly, when the classical organization of know-
ledge had fallen into ruins, and the conglomerate-philosophy of the
Middle Ages took shape within the Christian Church, and at the
same time came to exercise its influence upon the formation of
dogmatic language, a confusion of the speculative with the dog-
matic, and consequently a mingling of the two, was almost in-
evitable. But this was for both an imperfect condition, from which
philosophy freed itself by means of the avowal, growing ever
gradually louder, that at that time it had stood under the tutelage
of ecclesiastical faith, and therefore under an alien law. Having,
however, since then made so many fresh starts in its own proper
development, it was able to escape from the wearisome task of
inquiring exactly as to what kind of speculative propositions were
at that time taken to be dogmatic, and vice versa. For the Christian
Church, however, which is not in a position ever and anon to begin
the development of its doctrine over again from the start, this separa-
tion is of the greatest importance, in order to secure that speculative
matter (by which neither the poetic and rhetorical nor the popular
expression can consent to be guided) may not continue to be offered
to it as dogmatic. The Evangelical (Protestant) Church in parti-
cular is unanimous in feeling that the distinctive form of its dogmatic
propositions does not depend on any form or school of philosophy,
and has not proceeded at all from a speculative interest, but simply


§ 17] DOGMATIC PROPOSITIONS 83


from the interest of satisfying the immediate self-consciousness
solely through the means ordained by Christ, in their genuine and
uncorrupted form. Thus it can consistently adopt as dogmatic
propositions of its own no propositions except such as can show
this derivation. Our dogmatic theology will not, however, stand
on its proper ground and soil with the same assurance with which
philosophy has so long stood upon its own, until the separation
of the two types of proposition is so complete that, e¢.g., so extra-
ordinary a question as whether the same proposition can be true
in philosophy and false in Christian theology, and vice versa, will
no longer be asked, for the simple reason that a proposition cannot
appear in the one context precisely as it appears in the other :
however similar it sounds, a difference must always be assumed.
But we are still very far from this goal, so long as people take
pains to base or deduce dogmatic propositions in the speculative
manner, or even set themselves to work up the products of specu-
lative activity and the results of the study of religious affections
into a single whole.


§ 17. Dogmatic propositions have a twofold value—an ecclesiastical and
a scientific ; and thei degree of perfection is determined by
both of these and their relation to each other.


1. The ecclesiastical value of a dogmatic proposition consists
in its reference to the religious emotions themselves. Every such
emotion, regarded singly, is indeed for description an infinite, and
all dogmatic concepts, as well as all concepts of psychology, would
have to be used to describe one moment of life. But just as in
such a moment the religious strain may be the dominant one, so
again in every such strain some one relation of the higher self-
consciousness stands out as determinative ; and it is to this strain,
uniformly for all analogous moments of religious emotion, that the
dogmatic propositions refer. Thus, in all completely expressed
dogmatic propositions, the reference to Christ as Redeemer must
appear with the same measure of prominence which it has in the
religious consciousness itself. Naturally, however, this is not
equally strongly the case in all religious moments, any more than
in the life of any civic state the distinctive character of its con-
stitution can appear equally strongly in all moments. Accordingly,
the less strongly the reference to Christ is expressed in a dogmatic
proposition, as, ¢.g., in the religious emotions mediated by our
relation to the external world, the more easily may it resemble a


84 THE CHRISTIAN FAITH (§ 17


doctrinal proposition of another religious communion, in cases
where the distinctive character of that communion too remains
for the most part in the background. Now this occurs even within
the Christian Church itself, in respect of the various modifications
of the Christian consciousness which separate into larger or smaller
groups. Now, if a dogmatic proposition is so formed that it satisfies
the Christian consciousness for all alike, then it actually holds good
in a larger circle, but it is not calculated to show up differences,
which are thus indirectly marked as unimportant or in process of
disappearing. If, on the other hand, it has respect only to one of
these different modifications, then it holds good only within this
smaller compass. Sometimes the former kind of dogma may seem
colourless, and the latter be the right kind; at other times the
latter may be factious or sectarian, and the former be the right kind.
But such differences in dogmatic propositions dealing with the
same subject, which do not represent any differences at all in the
immediate religious self-consciousness, are of no significance for
their ecclesiastical value.

2. The scientific value of a dogmatic proposition depends in the
first place upon the definiteness of the concepts which appear in it,
and of their connexion with each other. For the more definite
these become, the more does the proposition pass out of the in-
definite realm of the poetic and rhetorical, and the more certain will
it be that the proposition cannot enter into apparent contradiction
with other dogmatic propositions belonging to the same form of
religious consciousness. But in forming its concepts Dogmatics
has not succeeded—indeed, one might say that from the nature of
the subject it cannot succeed—in everywhere substituting the exact
expression for the figurative; and thus the scientific value of
dogmatic propositions depends, from this side, for the most part
simply upon the highest possible degree of precision and definiteness
in explaining the figurative expressions which occur. And we can
the more readily leave it at that, since, even if the exact expression
could throughout be substituted for the figurative, the latter is the
original, and therefore the identity of the two would have to be
shown, which would come to the same thing in the end. In the
second place, the scientific value of a dogmatic proposition consists
in its fruitfulness, that is to say, its many-sidedness in pointing us
towards other kindred ones ; and not so much in a heuristic way
(since no dogmatic proposition is based on another, and each one
can only be discovered from contemplation of the Christian self-


§ 18] DOGMATIC PROPOSITIONS 85


consciousness) as in a critical way, because then it can be the more
easily tested how well one dogmatic expression harmonizes with
others. For it is undeniable that, of a number of dogmatic expres-
sions which are supposed to refer to the same fact of the Christian
consciousness, that one will deserve the preference which opens up
and enters into combination with the largest range of other expres-
sions referring to kindred facts. And when we find a realm or
system of dogmatic language which is closely bound together and
forms a self-contained whole, that is an account of the facts which
we may presume to be correct.

A proposition which lacks the first of these two properties, and
which thus belongs entirely to the poetic or the rhetorical realm of
language, has not got the length of being a dogmatic proposition,
A proposition which, as regards the second of the two properties,
goes beyond the principle we have set up, and seeks to establish
anything objectively without going back to the higher self-con-
sciousness, would not be a religious doctrine (Glaubenssaiz) at all,
and would simply not belong to our field.

3. Now since every doctrine of the faith has, as such, an
ecclesiastical value, and since these doctrines become dogmatic
when they acquire a scientific value, dogmatic propositions are the
more perfect the more their scientific character gives them an
outstanding ecclesiastical value, and also the more their scientific
content bears traces of having proceeded from the ecclesiastical
interest.


§ 18. The collocation of dogmatic propositions, for the purpose of con-
necting them and relating them to each other, proceeds from
the very same need which led to the formation of them, and 1s
simply a natural sequel to tt.


1. We distinguish Christ’s own preaching (which was the
starting-point of everything) from dogmatic material, chiefly
because when He went didactically into particular details, He
verged upon the poetic and the rhetorical, and when He proclaimed
Himself in precise and unfigurative language, He never went
beyond a quite summary presentation of His being and His work.t
But every religious emotion which was the direct effect of that
preaching became, in the given life-context of the moment, a
particular emotion, and therefore the apprehension of it in thought,
as an appropriation of that original self-proclamation, was only


E Cie [chu s.e3ts 1080 1260


86 THE CHRISTIAN FATT [§ 18


partial and imperfect ; so that the total mass of the doctrines
which thus arose and were worked out with the greatest possible
definiteness as dogmatic propositions, is simply, taken all together,
the unfolding, ever more and more complete, of that original
preaching. Therefore each individual proposition which has so
arisen implies a striving after the remaining ones, and thus an
endeavour to connect each with others ; and each, just in so far
as it is definitely one individual proposition, obtains its place only
on the presupposition that it has other more or less kindred pro-
positions beside it and around it.

2. Let us begin with the rhetorical and poetic preaching both of
Christ Himself and of His witnesses, which did go into particular
details. From this point the didactic form of expression certainly
arises mainly out of the problem of settling the apparent conflict
between individual metaphors and figures, but partly too out of
the need for freeing the expression from the ambiguity and un-
certainty which attach to it outside of the given context, and of
setting it forth more independently as the same for all. But every
apparent contradiction of that sort makes one apprehensive of a
number of others, because each casts suspicion upon the whole
realm of language in which it occurs, as possibly concealing contra-
dictions. Thus if in a given case an exact and didactic form of
expression is set up, by which one may orientate oneself in relation
to the apparent opposition, our assurance depends entirely upon
the condition that the reconciling expression does not in turn stand
in apparent contradiction with itself, but that this whole realm of
language is immune from any such danger. But certainty on this
point can only be gained by the relating of several such expressions
to each other, and by ever repeated attempts to connect them
together. Now, although the didactic expression is both more
definite and in itself more comprehensible, yet it is always a com-
bination of general ideas which become perfectly definite only when
considered along with the higher ones above them and the lower
ones under them ; just as every such idea, as subject, can only be
fully contemplated in the totality of its predicates, and as predicate,
only in the whole range of its applicability. So that every such
proposition points towards others, in which occur both kindred
ideas and the same ideas in other connexions.

3. Thus it is unthinkable that the religious self-consciousness
should be sufficiently alive to utter and communicate itself, without
at the same time fashioning for itself the didactic form of expression,


ee


§ 18] PREACHING AND TEACHING 87


whether in the looser form of popular usage or in the stricter form
of the schools. And it is equally unthinkable that the particular
elements of this expression should exist in any religious communion
without forming themselves into a wealth of thought-series, which
would partly aim at the original object of describing the religious
emotions themselves in a real succession or in their natural con-
nexion, and partly at working out the didactic expression itself
into the greatest possible lucidity.

When we speak of Christian Preaching, we mean chiefly the
utterance and presentation which have a directly rousing effect.
But when we speak of Christian Teaching or Doctrine (Lehre), we
mean rather that communication which employs the didactic form
of expression, whether in order to rouse by bringing the idea in its
clarity home to the consciousness, as happens in homiletic practice,
or in order to isolate more definitely, through the clarity of the
idea, the immediate religious self-consciousness, and reliably to
establish its independence, which is the business of the dogmatic
schools. But manifestly this can only reach a satisfactory con-
clusion when the system of doctrine has become a complete system,
in which every essential moment of the religious and Christian
consciousness is given its developed dogmatic expression, and all
the dogmatic propositions are brought into relation with each other.
Hence it is far from praiseworthy when respected theologians, per-
haps confounding the thing itself with a perversion of it, reckon the
scholarly study of doctrine as a degeneracy of the Christian com-
munion or as a result of such degeneracy. Mather is it, on the one
hand, the more necessary for the preaching office itself, as modes of
presentation multiply with the variety of languages, that there should
be a system of doctrine elaborated with dialectical precision. And on
the other hand, it is natural that the more the Christian communion
recruits and renews itself out of its own resources, the more does
preaching itself take the form of popular teaching or doctrine, and
the more does this doctrine (which itself in turn, however, requires
the scholarly teaching as norm and limit) become the most important
means to promote the living circulation of the religious consciousness.

Postscript—l{ from this position we survey the whole pro-
cedure proper for dogmatic propositions, which indeed is just the
subject of Dogmatic Theology, we arrive at the conclusion that it
may begin at any point, wheresoever the requirements most demand
it. The syntheses are, then, in part, of the kind which by pre-
ference are occasional, immediately serving the purpose of directly


88 THE CHRISTIAN FAITH [§ 19


communicating the religious consciousness, and claiming only
ecclesiastical value for the propositions in question, as doctrine
which belongs to the realm of preaching and edification. But they
are also, itt part, of the kind where more depends upon their scientific
value, and which keep strictly to the realm of Dogmatic Theology
itself. These may take the form of Monographs, 1.e. explications
of some single proposition in its various relations as these may be
surveyed from the standpoint of the proposition itself. Or they
may take the form of loci theologici (i.e. collections of such
monographs), which, of course, may be complete, so as to include
the whole range of propositions which can be connected with each
other, though this will be seen to be merely accidental, since such
completeness has nothing to do with the form. Or, finally, they
may take the form of a complete System of Doctrine, such as has
been already described. Such a system, again, may be purely
positive, and in that case either merely aphoristic or provided with
an apparatus of explanations. Or it may include the polemical
element, by taking account of other modifications of the religious
and Christian consciousness, or other expressions of the same
modification. Or, finally, it may also include the historical, by
taking account of the development of dogmatic propositions and
the changes which have occurred in the realm of dogmatic
terminology.


§ 19. Dogmatic Theology is the science which systematizes the doctrine
prevalent in a Christian Church at a given time.
Note.—See Brief Outline, §§ 3, 15, 18, 19, 26, 27.

1. This definition does not seem to exclude the possibility that
a person could be a master of Dogmatic Theology and could even
communicate it to others without himself believing in what he
expounded, just as a man may have knowledge of the intercon-
nexion of propositions in philosophical systems which he does not
himself accept. But since the dogmatic procedure has reference
entirely to preaching, and only exists in the interests of preaching,
all who busy themselves therewith must be assumed to possess the
relevant faith, if they are to offer anything profitable, because
otherwise it would be a case of a professed reference and relation
without any real congruity. The thing, however, is inconceivable
except on the supposition that the exponent was not conscious
of any religious emotions, even of a different variety. For other-
wise no one could, without doing violence to himself, conceal the


latina tial


ee eee eee eS Se ee


§ 19] THE DEFINITION OF DOGMATICS 89


contradiction between the position which he expounds as internally
coherent and derived from the Christian consciousness, and the
position which he himself accepts. And so a dogmatic presenta-
tion which takes no sides but is purely historical will always be
sufficiently distinct from a presentation which is also apologetic—
the only kind now in view. Moreover, it can hardly be denied that
those dogmatic presentations (perhaps not uncommon even in our
own Church) which, without any firm personal conviction, keep
strictly to what is ecclesiastically received, either lack rigorous
coherence and inward harmony, or involuntarily betray a weaken-
ing of the conviction.

2. Limitation to the doctrine of one particular Church is not
a characteristic universally valid, for Christendom has not always
been divided into a number of communions definitely separated by
diversity of doctrine. But for the present this characteristic is
indispensable ; for, to speak only of the Western Church, a pres-
entation suitable for Protestantism cannot possibly be suitable for
Catholics, there being no systematic connexion between the
doctrines of the one and those of the other. A dogmatic pres-
entation which aimed at avoiding contradiction from either of
these two parties would lack ecclesiastical value for both in almost
every proposition.

That each presentation confines itself to the doctrine existing
at a certain time, is indeed seldom expressly avowed, but it never-
theless seems to be a matter of course ; and this seems, for the most
part, to be the only possible explanation of the large number of
dogmatic presentations which follow upon each other. It is obvious
that the text-books of the seventeenth century can no longer serve
the same purpose as they did then, but now in large measure belong
merely to the realm of historical presentation ; and that in the
present day it is only a different set of dogmatic presentations that
can have the ecclesiastical value which these had then; and the
same fate will one day befall the present ones too. But of course
it is only from the more universal crises of development that large
alterations in doctrine arise, while the alterations which are con-
tinually going on amount to so little that it takes a long time to
render them perceptible.

3. Now ‘the prevalent doctrine’ is not by any means to be
taken as signifying merely what is expressed in (confessional)
Symbols, but rather all doctrines which are dogmatic expressions
of that which, in the public proceedings of the Church (even if only


go THE CHRISTIAN FAITH [§ 19


in certain regions of it), can be put forward as a presentation of its
common piety without provoking dissension and schism. Hence
this characterization admits of considerable variety in the dogmatic
presentations. None the less it might be held that this makes the
definition too narrow, partly because it seems as if no alterations
could ever come into the dogmatic presentations unless at some
time or other something not yet prevalent were adopted, and partly
because in this way everything individually distinctive is excluded.
But, in the first place, everyone will admit that a system, however
coherent, of purely and entirely individual opinions and views,
which, even if really Christian, did not link themselves at all to
the expressions used in the Church for the communication of
religion, would always be regarded as simply a private confession
and not as a dogmatic presentation, until there came to be attached
to it a like-minded society, and there thus arose a public preaching
and communication of religion which found its norm in that
doctrine. Consequently it may in a general way be said that the
less there is of publicly accepted matter in any such presentation,
the less does it answer to the conception of a Dogmatic. Yet this
does not mean that the individuality of the author may not have an
influence upon the form and manner of treatment, and even assert
itself at particular points by intentional correction of the usual
position. And this of itself makes it clear that our definition by
no means excludes improvements and new developments of
Christian doctrine. But this becomes still clearer when we add
the fact that such improvements and developments hardly ever
proceed directly from the dogmatic discussions themselves, but are
for the most part occasioned, in one way or another, by the
proceedings of public worship or by popular literature for the
dissemination of religion.

4. The correctness of our definition is also made clear by the
following considerations : that when a presentation of Christian
doctrine lacks one of the above characteristics, it no longer falls
within the real field of Dogmatics ; and that the most fundamental
aberrations in the dogmatic field are caused by some one of these
requirements being torn out of its natural connexions and taken
by itself as the only rule for the treatment of the subject.

As for the popular presentation of doctrine, in catechisms and
similar works, for the general instruction of the Church, this does
indeed require completeness and coherence, but it makes no claim
to erudition and systematic arrangement and connexion ; and


aul teed


~~ eee oe


§ 19] THE DEFINITION OF DOGMATICS QI


therefore we separate this from the properly dogmatic field. Further,
many religious books which aim either at mystical depth or at
rational clarity are more of the descriptively didactic type than
of the directly rousing, and these too handle doctrine with a
certain completeness ; but they lack the historical attitude, and the
reference to the public ecclesiastical understanding of the faith, so
that they inform us only about the individual, or one isolated
fragment of the whole; and therefore we do not give them the
title of dogmatic, however coherently systematic they may be in
themselves. Finally let us take the canonical and symbolical
definitions of doctrine which have from time to time entered into
the traffic of dogmatics. These, of course, should always pre-
suppose the science of the complete systematization of doctrine,
and in that sense they of course belong to dogmatic theology. Only
they do not themselves go so far as to give a complete presentation
of this systematic coherence, but are concerned only with particular
points of doctrine.

Similarly, the most fundamental aberrations in the dogmatic
field are accounted for by the one-sided attention paid to one or
other of the characteristics which we established. If from time to
time dogmatic presentations of doctrine come to appear as pretty
much a mere tradition which has become static, this happens be-
cause people aim at no more than establishing the doctrine which
is already publicly accepted, and thus look upon it as an absolutely
given quantity. If, on the other hand, there are to be found
dogmatic presentations which in their time enjoyed a widespread
acceptance, but which, viewed from some distance and compared
with earlier and later ones, appear entirely arbitrary, these are the
ones which, having sprung from some transient and confused move-
ment in the ecclesiastical realm, comprehended that movement
alone, and thus were one-sided, never getting any further than the
one particular phase ; in which circumstances it is easy for arbitrary
caprice and sophistry to take the place of scientific rigour. Finally,
if there are presentations which, while they of course handle
Christian doctrine and profess to be dogmatic, do not go back at
all to the religious affections, these are the ones which aim only at
satisfying the demand for scientific system and coherence, as if
that could at the same time produce what a genuinely dogmatic
presentation must presuppose, namely, faith. Thus they attempt
either directly to deduce and prove what is distinctively Christian
from the universal reason, or to make it disappear, as an imperfect


g2 THE CHRISTIAN FAITH [§ 19


thing, in a purely rational and universally valid doctrine of
religion.

Postscript.—Many theologians are in complete agreement with
the definition of dogmatic theology which we have here established,
but assign this actual Dogmatic to a pretty low level, as being only
concerned with the presentation of ecclesiastical opinions, and assert
that there must stand above it another and higher theology which,
even with disregard of these ecclesiastical opinions, would bring out
and make evident the essential truths of religion.1_ But the Christian
science of God and Salvation cannot possibly recognize such a dis-
tinction between ecclesiastical doctrines and essential truths of
religion (which are yet supposed to be Christian, for otherwise there
can be no talk of them in this connexion at all), either in the sense
that these truths of religion have another source, or in the sense that
their content is of a different type. For there is only one source
from which all Christian doctrine is derived, namely, the self-pro-
clamation of Christ ; and there is only one type of doctrine, for,
whether more perfect or less perfect, it all arises out of the religious
consciousness itself and its direct expression. Therefore, if anybody
is disposed to say that the ecclesiastical doctrine of any given time
and place is mere opinion, because it does not remain ever self-
identical and is not unmixed with error, it must be replied that
nevertheless there is nothing else superior to it in the realm of
Christian knowledge, except the purer and more perfect ecclesiasti-
cal doctrine which may be found in some other period and in other
presentations. But this purifying and perfecting is just the work
and the task of Dogmatic Theology.

But let us suppose this task to have been fully discharged, and
Dogmatic Theology thus to have reached its completion. Even
then we could not agree with those other theologians who make
Dogmatics the whole of Christian theology, and who thus regard
all the other branches of theological study, Scriptural Exegesis and
Church History, both in their widest range and with all their
accessories, as merely auxiliary sciences to Dogmatics. For even
though both of these are necessary to Dogmatics, nevertheless their
whole value does not consist in the service they render to it : each
of them has also its own peculiar value directly for the advancement
and guidance of the Church, which is the ultimate purpose of all


1 See, among other works, Bretschneider’s Entwicklung, § 25, and Handbuch
dey Dogmatik, § 5, where in the end one is in doubt whether Dogmatics belongs
to Christian theology at all.


ee ee


a ee See ee ee eee ee oe ee ee ee ee


§ 19] THE DEFINITION OF DOGMATICS 93


Christian theology, Dogmatics included. Rather would we say
that, though Scriptural Exegesis and Church History are, each in
its own peculiar office, dependent on the study of Dogmatics, and
suffer when Dogmatics is neglected, so that all these different
branches can only approach completion by reciprocally influencing
each other, yet it would be a very suspicious thing if it were just
Dogmatics that principally set the tone in this progress, because it
depends more than the other branches (if only in form) upon Philo-
sophy (Weltweisheit). For philosophy makes frequent new _be-
ginnings, and most of these revolutions engender new combinations
and new expressions for the field from which Dogmatics draws its
vocabulary ; hence it is in this branch of theology that those
variations most easily arise which provoke irrelevant controversy,
and also those restatements which do not exactly represent progress
but rather hinder than advance the theoretic development.


CHA PCE Rag
THE METHOD OF DOGMATICS


§ 20. Since every system of doctrine, as a presentation of Dogmatic
Theology, is a self-contained and closely-connected whole of
dogmatic propositions, we must, with regard to the existing
mass of such propositions, establish in the first place a rule
according to which some will be adopted and others excluded ;
and in the second place, a principle for their arrangement and
interconnexion.


1. It is here presupposed that the individual propositions are
the original, and are in existence earlier than the systematizing
tendency itself ; and this is entirely in line with the foregoing dis-
cussion. Thus it is by no means the case that first of all a principle
is either somehow given externally or invented specially by each
investigator, and that the individual propositions only proceed
from the explication of this principle. That is indeed conceivable
in the speculative realm, but not here. For the Christian self-
consciousness must be already developed in the community before
really dogmatic elements come to be formed, and it is only through
the fragmentary, and perhaps chaotic, presence of these, that the
task of making an orderly connexion arises. This last, however,
only fulfils its purpose when it makes the collocation so complete
that we can be certain we have in the doctrine a record of all
the common elements of the Christian consciousness. Such com-
pleteness is, therefore, the aim of every system of doctrine. For
without it we could not even have the assurance that our dogmatic
expression of the distinctive essence of Christianity was correct,
since the very region which was omitted might furnish proof of the
contrary. This conviction of being correct can only proceed from
having an outline of the whole, which clearly exhibits a compre-
hensive and exhaustive division.

2. It is undeniable that there has been great diversity in systems
of doctrine even at the same times and in the same Churches. And


since this is at least partly due to the. differences of procedure in
94


J J F
I LE ee


§ 21] THE DOGMATIC MATERIAL 95


adopting and connecting doctrines, it is only in very indefinite
form that rules can be established for these two processes. But
each individual system of doctrine characterizes itself best when,
within these forms, it shows its own distinctive point of view with
the greatest possible definiteness.

A double method naturally presents itself here. We could,
starting from our general conception of the Christian consciousness,
sketch an outline of the different ways in which it can express itself
according to the nature of the human soul and of human life, and
seek to fill in this outline with the existing doctrinal material ; and
with this method the only concern would be to make sure that we
were not adopting any mutually incompatible elements. But we
could also take the line of bringing together all expressions of
religious emotion which had developed in one particular region of
Christianity and belonged to one and the same type ; and then it
would only remain to arrange this material in the most convenient
and synoptical way. To place the methods thus side by side is
enough to show that we must combine the two, because each finds
only in the other a security for what it lacks itself.


I. THE SELECTION OF THE DOGMATIC MATERIAL.


§ 21. In order to build up a siystem of doctrine, it 1s necessary first
to eliminate from the total mass of dogmatic material every-
thing that is heretical, and to retain only what is ecclesiastical.

1. If we think of the Christian Church as being what we call
a moral Person, 7.e. as being, though of course made up of many
personalities, nevertheless a genuine individual life, then it must at
once be admitted that in every such life, just as in individual lives
in the narrower sense, there is a distinction between healthy and
diseased conditions. The latter are always conditions which do
not arise from the inward foundation of the life and in its clear
course, but are to be explained only by foreign influences. So when
among any race of people individuals arise who exhibit a quite
alien physiological type, so that they do not take very kindly to the
majority and their mode of life, or when in a republican state
citizens arise with monarchist sentiments, or vice versa, we regard
this as a disease of the whole, and also assume that it can only be
explained by foreign influences. Now, even if this last point might
not be admitted by everybody, yet everybody will reserve the name
of ‘heretical’ in the realm of Christian doctrine for that which
he cannot explain from his idea of the distinctive essence of


96 THE CHRISTIAN FAITH [§ 21


Christianity, and cannot conceive as accordant therewith, but
which nevertheless gives itself out as Christian and seeks to be
regarded as such by others. Now, it is a matter of fact that during
the period of the actual development of Christian doctrine a multi-
tude of such elements appeared which the majority persistently
rejected as of alien type, while they recognized the remainder, as
self-consistent and as forming a coherent continuum, under the
name of Catholic, 7.e. common to the whole Church. In this con-
nexion it may, of course, sometimes be the case that the religious
emotions set forth in the doctrine are themselves at variance with
the true essence of Christian piety ; but sometimes it is only in the
working out of the doctrine that this variance arises, so that the
religious affections themselves are not diseased, and only misunder-
standing or false method produces an appearance of heresy. Now
these two cases are of course seldom properly distinguished, and
therefore many things have been too hastily declared heretical.
But, nevertheless, real heresy has not been lacking ; and in its
case foreign influences will readily be admitted, when one reflects
that the Christian Church originally sprang solely from people who
belonged before to other faiths, so that alien matter could easily
creep in unawares.

2. It is undeniable that this makes the determination of what
is heretical, and must therefore be excluded from the system of
doctrine, appear a very uncertain thing, and people will all fix it
differently who start from different formule of the distinctive
essence of Christianity. But that cannot be otherwise, as the whole
course of events in the Christian Church proves. For new heresies
no longer arise, now that the Church recruits itself out of its own
resources ; and the influence of alien faiths on the frontier and in
the mission-field of the Church must be reckoned at zero so far as
regards the formation of doctrine, though there may long remain in
the piety of the new converts a great deal which has crept in from
their religious affections of former times, and which, if it came to
clear consciousness and were expressed as doctrine, would be recog-
nized as heretical. But concerning the earlier heresies, on the other
hand, there are the most diverse judgments, just as there are
different ways and modes of conceiving the essence of Christianity.
Hence anyone who aims at setting up a system of doctrine can only
follow the rule of our proposition in the sense that he will not adopt
anything which, according to the fundamental type of Christian
doctrine which he has established, can only be traced to a foreign


oS ee


UPI ee ee ee ee oY NO eS ee ee ee ee, a eee re ee ee i


Sy ee Let eRe eine ee


§ 22] THE NATURAL HERESIES Q7


source. If, however, we are not to proceed by haphazard but with
due certainty, we cannot hold by the antithesis of Catholic and
heretical as it presented itself in history down to a certain point,
especially as subsequent revindications of this or that heresy have
not been unheard-of. We must rather start from the essence of
Christianity, and seek to construe the heretical in its manifold forms
by asking in how many different ways the essence of Christianity
can be contradicted and the appearance of Christianity yet remain.
Conducted in this way, the inquiry into the heretical serves to
supplement the inquiry into the essence of Christianity, and the two
confirm each other. The more it turns out that what is thus set up
problematically as heretical is also actually given in history, the
more ground have we to regard the formula upon which the
construction is based as a correct expression of the essence of
Christianity. And the more naturally there develops out of
this same formula the form of doctrine which Christianity has
constantly professed, the more ground have we to regard as really
diseased and worthy of rejection whatever conflicts on any side with
that formula.


§ 22. The natural heresies in Christianity are the Docetic and the
Nazarean, the Manichean and the Pelagian.


1. If in using these expressions we think only of the historical
phenomena which have been so called, the choice of them as desig-
nating the whole range of heresy may seem very arbitrary and very
disproportionate. For while the last two have been very wide-
spread and have frequently recurred, the first two were very
transitory and confined to narrow circles, and there are other
names which are far more important and far more in everybody's
mouth. But these names are here intended only to denote universal
forms which we are here going to unfold, and the definitions of
which they are intended to remind us proceed from the general
nature of the situation, even if, e.g., Pelagius himself should not be
a Pelagian in our sense. But the nature of the situation means
primarily the number of different ways in which the distinctive
fundamental type of Christian doctrine can be contradicted while
the appearance of Christianity yet remains. The question, from
what foreign influences these can have sprung, is a matter of purely
historical investigation, which does not properly concern us here ;
though, of course, the conviction that all alien material, if it is to lay
claim at all to the name of Christian, must fit into one of these


7


98 THE CHRISTIAN FAITH [§ 22


forms, would be the only complete security for the truth of our
presentation of the matter.

2. Now, if the distinctive essence of Christianity consists in the
fact that in it all religious emotions are related to the redemption
wrought by Jesus of Nazareth, there will be two ways in which
heresy can arise. That is to say: this fundamental formula will
be retained in general (for otherwise the contradiction would be
manifest and complete, so that participation in Christian com-
munion could not even be desired), but either human nature will be
so defined that a redemption in the strict sense cannot be accom-
plished, or the Redeemer will be defined in such a way that He
cannot accomplish redemption. But each of these two cases, again,
can appear in two different ways. As regards the former: if men
are to be redeemed, they must both be in need of redemption and be
capable of receiving it. Now, if one of these conditions is openly
posited, but the other covertly denied, the contradiction at the
same time touches the fundamental formula itself, only this is not
directly apparent. If, then, in the first place, the need of redemption
in human nature, 7.¢. its inability to bring the feeling of absolute
dependence into all human states of consciousness, is posited in such
an absolute way that the ability to receive redeeming influences is
made actually to disappear, so that human nature is not simul-
taneously in need of redemption and capable of receiving it, but
only becomes capable of receiving it after a complete transformation,
this is equivalent to an annulling of our fundamental formula. Now
this is the unfailing consequence, if we suppose an Evil-in-itself as
being original and opposed to God, and think of human nature as
suffering from that inability by reason of a dominion which this
original Evil exercises over it ; and therefore we call this deviation
the Manichean. But, on the other hand, suppose the ability to
receive redemption is assumed so absolutely, and consequently any
hindrance to the entry of the God-consciousness becomes so utterly
infinitesimal, that at each particular moment in each individual it
can be satisfactorily counterbalanced by an infinitesimal over-
weight. Then the need of redemption is reduced to zero, at least
in the sense that it is no longer the need of one single Redeemer,
but merely, for each person in one of his weak moments, the need
of some other individual who, if only for the moment, is stronger
as regards the eliciting of the God-consciousness. Thus redemption
would not need to be the work of one particular Person, but would
be a common work of all for all, in which, at most, some would only


>=


ee ee ee ee eS eee eS


§ 22] THE NATURAL HERESIES 99


have a greater share than others ; and this aberration we may with
good reason call, as above, the Pelagian.

Turn now to the other kind of heresy. If Christ is to be the
Redeemer, i.e. the real origin of constant living unhindered evoca-
tion of the God-consciousness, so that the participation of all others
in it is mediated through Him alone, it is, on the one hand, necessary
that He should enjoy an exclusive and peculiar superiority over
all others, and, on the other hand, there must also be an essential
likeness between Him and all men, because otherwise what He
has to impart could not be the same as what they need. Therefore
on this side also the general formula can be contradicted in two
different ways, because each of these two requisites may be con-
ceived so unlimitedly that the other no longer remains co-posited,
but disappears. If the difference between Christ and those who
are in need of redemption is made so unlimited that an essential
likeness is incompatible with it, then His participation in human
nature vanishes into a mere appearance ; and consequently our
God-consciousness, being something essentially different, cannot
be derived from His, and redemption also is only an appearance.
Now though the Docetics, properly so called, directly denied only
the reality of the body of Christ, yet this likewise excludes the
reality of human nature in His Person generally, since we never
find body and soul given in separation from each other; and
therefore we may fitly call this aberration the Docetic. Finally,
if on the other hand the likeness of the Redeemer to those who
are to be redeemed is made so unlimited that no room is left for a
distinctive superiority as a constituent of His being, which must
then be conceived under the same form as that of all other men,
then there must ultimately be posited in Him also a need of re-
demption, however absolutely small, and the fundamental relation-
ship is likewise essentially annulled. This aberration we call by
the name given to those who are supposed first to have regarded
Jesus entirely as an ordinary man, the Nazarean or Ebionitic.

Other kinds of heresy than can be comprehended under one
or other of these four forms cannot be conceived, if the conception
of the Christian religion (piety) is to remain unchanged. For there
are no more points at which the conception can be indirectly
attacked. Andif the conception of redemption is roundly denied, or
another redeemer is set up, and thus it is roundly asserted either that
men are not inneed of redemption or that there isno redeeming power
in Jesus, then the assertion is no longer heretical but anti-Christian.


100 THE CHRISTIAN FAITH [§ 22


3. These concepts of the natural heresies likewise serve, from
our point of view, in the construction of any system of Christian
doctrine, as limiting points which one must avoid if the agreement
of particular details with the remainder is not to be destroyed.
But then this also implies that no formula, in whatever division
of the system it may occur, which avoids the two opposite aberra-
tions, is to be regarded as heretical: however disproportionate
the one side may appear as compared with the other, so long as
neither completely disappears, the formula is still ecclesiastical or
catholic. On the other hand, every formula must be suspect which
can be identified with any one of these aberrations. Only, let
everybody guard in this matter against the illusions so easily
produced by the ‘ foreshortening’ natural to distance. For the
nearer a man stands to the Pelagian line himself, the more easily
will he believe that he sees actually on the Manichean side the man
who really is still standing almost in the middle ; and so, too, with
other cases. And therefore, unless the confusion is to grow ever
greater, it is highly important that people should go to work with
the greatest caution when it comes to declaring anything heretical.

But further, these heresies are specially bound up in pairs.
That is to say, in their relation to the essence of Christianity the
Manichean and the Docetic belong together, and so again do the
Pelagian and the Ebionitic. For if human nature is essentially
infected with positively original Evil, then the Redeemer cannot
have any real participation in human nature ; and if the higher
self-consciousness is hindered by the lower in Christ in the same
way as in all other men, then His contribution to redemption can
only be related to any other man’s contribution as the more to the
less. But if, on the other hand, we have regard to the fact that
what cannot be understood from the essence of Christianity must
have arisen through foreign influences, and that in the period of
the original development of doctrine Christianity came into contact
almost exclusively with Judaism and Greek Heathenism, then the
Manichean and the Nazarean seem rather to belong together, as
being of Judaizing tendency, the one in a purer form, and the
other rather imbued with Orientalism ; while the Docetic and the
Pelagian seem to be of Hellenizing tendency, since mythology led
to the former, and the ethical trend of the Mysteries to the latter.

Postscript.—We are far from wishing to drag in here the
antithesis, at present so intense, between Supernaturalism and
Rationalism. But nevertheless let us note that since in accordance


as eee eT


§ 23] ROMAN CATHOLIC OR PROTESTANT Io


with the above discussion we have to admit, even within the range
of the ecclesiastical, manifold approximations to these heretical
extremes, they also are divided between those two modes of treat-
ment ; and that in supernaturalistic presentations—not only in the
properly dogmatic ones, but in the popular ones too—echoes may be
found of the Docetic and Manichean, just as rationalistic presenta-
tions may with some justice be reproached with approximating to
the Ebionitic and Pelagian. And the fact that any treatment of
doctrine which does not escape one-sidedness altogether, necessarily
inclines to one or other of these two sides, seems to testify to the
correctness of this account of the heretical.


§ 23. A system of doctrine drawn up at the present time within the
Western Church cannot be indifferent to the antithesis between
Roman Catholic and Protestant, but must adhere to one or
the other.

I. Some justification seems to be required for our here making
the antithesis between the Eastern and the Western Church greater
than the antithesis which we have expressed (between Roman
Catholic and Protestant), and then, nevertheless, passing over the
former. The first of these two steps seems to have against it the
fact that the Eastern Church, as anti-Papal, appears to stand on
the side of Protestantism. But suppose it were admitted that that
antithesis 7s greater: then to pass over it seems inconsistent ;
and the common character of the Western Church would first
have to be specified, in order that we might discover within it the
principle for the subordinate antithesis between Romanism and
Protestantism. As against this, however, it is to be noted that
this cannot at all be the place to construe these antitheses in a
completely graduated scale, but only in their relation to the study
of doctrine. And how little the anti-Papal character of the Eastern
Church signifies in this respect, may be seen from the facility with
which individual fragments of that Church acknowledge the Roman
Primacy without giving up their Eastern type, and especially
without making any considerable alteration in their doctrine.
The antithesis 7s indeed a greater one in the precise connexion
with which we are here concerned, in the sense that a lively
activity in the realm of doctrine has remained common to the two
Western Churches even since their separation, whereas the Eastern
Church since its break-away has in this realm become more and
more torpid, and in it the combination of knowledge about religion


102 THE CHRISTIAN FAITH [§ 23


with a really scientific organization is almost entirely destroyed.
But just because of this purely negative character there was the
less to be said here about that Church, since it cannot be determined
whether it will again step back more into connexion with the
world’s intellectual intercourse, and so have the strength to elicit
and develop within itself an antithesis analogous to the Western one.

2. This antithesis has not affected the whole range of doctrine,
for alongside of the doctrines over which the two Churches are
avowedly in conflict there are others for which they set up the
same formule, and yet others about which analogous differences are
found within both Churches. And the antithesis itself, like every
similar one within the Christian communion, must be regarded as
destined some day and somehow to disappear. So one can certainly
conceive of very different modes of procedure in the construction
of the system of doctrine, according as one believes that the anti-
thesis has not yet reached its culminating-point, or that it has
already passed it. In the latter case, it would be a true progress
if we were to seek for, or prepare in advance, mediating formule
in the controversial doctrines, in order to facilitate and help to
bring about, from every standpoint, the approaching abrogation
of the antithesis. Then it would likewise be the correct thing to
establish as firmly as possible the common matter in the non-
controversial doctrines, in order to make it as difficult as possible
for well-meaning zealots who misconceived the whole condition
of the Church, to delay unnecessarily the union of its two parts
by stirring up new and unprofitable controversies. But, in the
other case, we should have to assume the probability that, if the
tension between the two parts is destined still to increase generally,
it will also increase in the realm of doctrine. And in that case
we should, in the same spirit (namely, with a view to accelerating
the whole process in a steady course as much as possible), have to
adopt the opposite line of procedure. A Protestant system of
doctrine has in that case to aim at exhibiting the antithesis in those
portions of doctrine where it has not hitherto appeared ; for only
when it had been developed in all portions could we be quite sure
that it had reached its culminating-point in doctrine. Now since
the course of such an antithesis is seldom quite direct, the main
trend being from time to time interrupted by reactions towards the
opposite side, there may easily arise in the first half of the course
an appearance of one’s being in the second, and vice versa. There-
fore, both modes of treatment are usually found simultaneously


§ 24] PROTESTANTISM AND CATHOLICISM 103


alongside of each other ; but in both there is also found sometimes
more consciousness, sometimes less, of the particular point at which
they stand.

3. The proposition which we have set up therefore excludes
neither of these two modes of treatment. For even he who regards
the tension as now decreasing, and prepares means of accommoda-
tion, cannot (if he remains within the realm of Dogmatics) help
putting forward the distinction as still valid, and professing the side
which corresponds to the rest of his presentation of Christian
doctrine. A system of doctrine could only remain neutral on con-
troversial points if it went back to older formule, and that means,
of course, to less definite ones, out of which the more definite ones
have only developed in the course of controversy. But it is im-
possible in a scientific exposition to confine oneself to the indefinite
when the definite is already given.

We, however, cannot regard the tension as already on the de-
crease. For when there arises in the Evangelical (Protestant)
Church a variety of views regarding any portion of doctrine, the
result of it is never a greater approximation to Roman formule ;
and similarly in the Roman Church those movements which take
an anti-Protestant direction seem to be the most successful. It is
therefore rather to be presumed that, even when the doctrines
sound the same, there are still hidden differences, than that, when
the formule diverge considerably, the difference in the religious
affections themselves is inconsiderable.


§ 24. In so far as the Reformation was not simply a purification and
reaction from abuses which had crept in, but was the origina-
tion of a distinctive form of the Christian communion, the
antithesis between Protestantism and Catholicism may pro-
visionally be conceived thus: the former makes the indt-
vidual’s relation to the Church dependent on his relation to
Christ, while the latter contrariwise makes the individual's
relation to Christ dependent on his relation to the Church.


t. If we confine our attention to the rise of Protestantism, it is
certainly undeniable that the Reformers and their first adherents
were conscious only of the wish to purify. They had no intention
whatsoever of forming a Church of their own, but were simply
driven to it. If, on the other hand, we confine our attention to
the present time, and reflect that the Evangelical (Protestant)
Church never exercises an organized missionary activity upon the


to4 THE CHRISTIAN FAITH [§ 24


Catholic Church, and indeed never expresses, as part of its essential
nature, the desire to bring over the whole Catholic Church into
the Evangelical ; and if we reflect that we could not help doing
these things if we regarded all elements which are alien to us and
peculiar to Roman Catholicism, whether doctrines or institutions
and usages, as simply corruptions of Christianity ; then it follows
that, while we do not cease to combat by word and deed what we
really reckon as corruptions, we at the same time assume that
other matter, which is indigenous there but equally alien to us, is
yet of such a kind that we feel we may leave it standing alongside
of our own religion, as being of a different formation but equally
Christian. It will also be evident that even supposing the Catholic
Church leant towards our definitions in all doctrines that have
become controversial, this would not cause a reunion of the two
Churches ; and this can only be explained by the existence of a
spirit alien to ours, which repels us. But it is plain that the two
conclusions go together : we ascribe such a peculiarity of character
to our own Church, just as we do to the Catholic. And in case we
should be disposed to keep solely to the idea of purification, this
also must be added: in the first place, that, as a universal rule,
what has previously existed never recurs at a later time in quite
the same form; and, in the second place, that no one particular
point of time could be given, all over, to which the Church should
have been brought back by the Reformation. For the Apostolic
Age cannot be brought back, partly because we cannot sacrifice
the dogmatic precision of our ideas, partly because we can as little
re-establish the then relations to Judaism and Heathenism as we
can the political passivity. Some things in the Evangelical Church
may point to earlier periods, and some to later ; but its self-repro-
ducing unity is of a kind which did not formerly exist, though
there may have been individuals whose religion was analogous to it.

2. Now this naturally creates for the Evangelical theologian
the task of bringing to clear consciousness the distinctive character
of Protestantism in antithesis to Catholicism, and thus fixing the
antithesis itself, if possible, in a formula. Otherwise he will no
more be able to perform his work with some degree of security and
completeness than will the Christian theologian in general who has
similarly failed to fix the distinctive essence of Christianity. Now
it is of course very natural that such a formula should not arise
out of the controversy between the two parties themselves; but
unfortunately even we Protestants among ourselves have by no


a ee ee


So ee


beet td ded ead


§ 24) PROTESTANTISM AND CATHOLICISM 105


means come to agree upon such a formula. Usually we reduce the
antithesis to some one salient point which does not explain every-
thing, and we do it in such a way that one of the two parties appears
only negatively defined ; or we treat the antithesis as a more or
less accidental aggregate of individual differences. Some people,
perhaps, have thought that for Evangelical Dogmatics it is already,
unfortunately, too late for such a formula, because the doctrine
of our Church is completely settled in our Symbols, so that no new
element can be gained for it. And others, perhaps, have thought
it is not yet time for such a formula, because the spirit of Protestant-
ism has not yet in doctrine fully developed itself on all sides. But,
as a matter of fact, the relation of the two Churches is at present
such that it is now possible, and also now necessary, to come to a
complete orientation on the point ; and, for another thing, we have
to provide against un-Protestant matter creeping in unawares even
into our own further development. Since, however, so little has
yet been done upon this task, the attempt here made can claim to
be no more than a provisional one.

3. Just as the distinctive essence of Christianity could never be
discovered from the mere concept of religion and of the religious
communion, so the distinctive essence of Protestantism cannot be
discovered from the general expression which we have given to
Christianity. And just as the essence of Christianity could not be
discovered by a merely empirical method, so it would be difficult
to arrive in that way at the principle of the inner unity of the
Evangelical Church. Here, indeed, the difficulty would be still
greater. For, on the one hand, at the rise of Protestantism the
purificatory aim alone appeared definitely, and the distinctive spirit
which began to develop lay unconscious and concealed behind that
aim. And, on the other hand, even the outward unity of the new
Church is much more difficult to define, because there was no unity
of starting-point, and yet there did not arise as many new com-
munions as there were starting-points. Hence amid the great mass
of very diverse and independently developed personal peculiarities,
it must be almost impossible to determine what there was to unite
them apart from that purificatory aim, and how far they belonged
together. Now since the antithesis can be most clearly seen from
the present consolidated existence of the two Churches alongside of
each other, it seemed best to attempt the solution of the problem
by considering what kind of qualities of the one communion most
strongly arouse in the common mind of the other the consciousness


106 THE CHRISTIAN FAITH (§ 24


of the antithesis. Now it is the charge most generally made by
the Roman Church against Protestantism, that it has so much
destroyed the old Church, and yet, by reason of its own funda-
mental principles, is not in a position to build up again a stable
and durable communion, but leaves everything uncertain and in
solution, and each individual standing by himself. The main re-
proach which we, contrariwise, bring against Catholicism is that,
in ascribing everything to the Church and tracing everything to
the Church, it deprives Christ of the honour due to Him, and puts
Him in the background, and even in a measure subordinates Him
to the Church. To this add the fact, that ecclesiastical Protestant-
ism is as little chargeable in the latter respect as Catholicism in the
former ; and consider how nevertheless each party is disposed to
point out in the other chiefly what could most easily lead it astray
from the common ground of Christianity. Plainly the opinion of
the Catholics is that, even though we were to hold fast the reference
to Christ, we should nevertheless be in danger of giving up the
Christian principle by dissolving the communion ; and our opinion
of the Roman Church is that, however fast it may hold this com-
munion, it is nevertheless in danger of becoming un-Christian by
neglecting the reference to Christ. Now add to this the further
fact that the spirit of Christianity which rules in both Churches does
not allow either of them ever to reach that extreme. Then there
follows from this the formula which we have set up. In the con-
troversial doctrines themselves this formula can only justify itself
gradually in the course of the further discussion (unless we want
to anticipate in a fragmentary way a large part of our system of
doctrine). Here we can only make some preliminary remarks in
support of the formula, and draw some conclusions from it regarding
the treatment of Evangelical Dogmatics.

4. In support of our formula it may be said (though we could
not take this as our starting-point) that it ascribes to the two
parties antithetical characters which modify the essence of Chris-
tianity in antithetical ways. For since Christian piety never arises
independently and of itself in an individual, but only out of the
communion and in the communion, there is no such thing as adher-
ence to Christ except in combination with adherence to the com-
munion. That the two should be subordinated to each other in
opposite ways is only possible because the same fact which we
regard as the institution of the Church, to serve the work or influence
of Christ, is regarded by them as a transference to the Church of the


SI


wwe


ea er Pe ae ee Le ee ee ee ee ee ee


§ 24] REFORMED AND LUTHERAN 107


work of Christ. So this, too, speaks well for our formula, that
here, where we are primarily seeking to define the antithesis for
the theoretic side of the doctrine, the formula fastens mainly
upon the concept of the Church. This makes it probable
that what is opposed in the practice of the two Churches and in
the principles of their constitution can also be evolved out of this
formula.

But as regards the treatment of Evangelical Dogmatics, what
follows is that in those portions of doctrine to which the formula
can be most directly applied, the greatest care must be taken not
to carry the antithesis too far, lest we should fall into un-Christian
positions. And, on the other hand, that in those doctrines in
which the antithesis is least prominent, especial care must be taken
not to set up formule which have never got rid of the antithetical
character, or which have perhaps even taken on something of it
once again. In this way it can best be ascertained how far the
distinctive Evangelical spirit has everywhere become developed in
doctrine. At the same time it seems natural that that Church
which places the communion above the relation to Christ also most
easily takes over matter from the earlier religious communions, and
consequently that whatever has a certain flavour of the Jewish or
the Heathen is more in keeping with the Roman Church, just as
every opposition to these elements, even in earlier times, contained
something akin to Protestantism.

Postscript.—What has been said about the indefiniteness of the
outward unity of the Evangelical (Protestant) Church refers especi-
ally to the different branches of it, and in particular to the separa-
tion between the Reformed and the Lutheran Church. For the
original relation was such that, notwithstanding their different
starting-points, they might just as well have grown together into
an outward unity as have come to separate from each other. Now
this presentation of doctrine, even in its very title, professes adher-
ence only to the Protestant Church in general, without naming
either of those two in particular. Thus it starts from the assump-
tion that the separation of the two has lacked sufficient grounds,
inasmuch as the differences in doctrine are in no sense traceable
to a difference in the religious affections themselves, and the two
do not diverge from each other, either in morals and moral theory
or in constitution, in any way which at all corresponds to those
differences of doctrine. Therefore we can only treat of such differ-
ences in the same way as writers in other subjects take notice of


108 THE CHRISTIAN FAITH [§ 25


divergent presentations by different teachers—in short, simply as
an academic matter.


§ 25. Every Evangelical (Protestant) Dogmatic ought to contain a
peculiar and distinctive element; only, this will be more
prominent in some systems than in others, and sometimes more
in some points of doctrine, sometimes in others.

Note.—Cf. Brief Outline, p. 118.


1. We could not at all grant the name of Dogmatics to a pre-
sentation composed purely of original doctrines peculiar to itself.
Even the earliest coherent presentations of the Evangelical Faith
could only bear that name, in so far as they linked themselves to
what went before, and had most of their system in common with
what was ecclesiastically given. And so an epitome of doctrine
which claimed no connexion with that which at the time of the
Reformation either took shape or was for the Evangelical Church
recognized anew, could not by any means pass as an Evangelical
system of doctrine, however opposed all its contents might be to
Romanism. And if we had nothing to show but such an epitome,
then indeed the unity and identity of our Church would not appear
at all in its doctrine, and there would, from this side, be no guarantee
whatever of the mutual kinship of those who call themselves Pro-
testants. If, on the other hand, our system of doctrine were so
perfectly and precisely definite that there could be no divergence
unless one were willing to exclude oneself from the communion of
the Church, then new presentations of the system of doctrine within
our Church would be entirely superfluous and useless. If repeti-
tions of a hard-and-fast letter are to mean anything, there must at
least be change in the turns of expression or in the arrangement
of the propositions. But both of these really always indicate
characteristic alterations, since there never are two expressions
meaning exactly the same thing, and since every proposition
acquires a somewhat different meaning when it is placed in a different
context. And so even where there was only a slight tinge of differ-
ence in a number of different presentations, there would always
likewise be divergent and distinctive doctrines. As a matter of
fact, however, our system of doctrine is very far from having such
a thoroughgoing definiteness, for even in the different confessional
documents the same thing is not always comprehended in the same
letters, and these solely official and perhaps universally recognized
presentations have, after all, only individual parts of the system


§ 25] ADMISSIBLE VARIATIONS 109


of doctrine as their subject. And just as in the Reformation age
this common matter sprang simply out of the free agreement of
individuals, it is still true, since the Protestant Church has become
firmly established, that there is no other way in which anything
can become generally accepted than by the free concurrence of the
results obtained by individuals who are engaged upon the same
subject. The fact that, notwithstanding, common doctrine is not
lacking, sufficiently proves that the individuals are united by some-
thing distinctive which they have in common ; and anything more
than this, as regards unity of doctrine, is not to be expected in the
Evangelical Church, nor is it required.

2. Let us then start from the facts that the system of doctrine
in our Church all over is not a thing absolutely settled, and that it
may indeed be asserted that its distinctive character has not yet
become fully manifest in doctrine. Then we can only proceed on
the supposition that in the further development also of the system
of doctrine in the future these two elements will appear together,
and will penetrate each other—matter which is common to all, and
which makes good its claim as a pure and universally recognizable
expression of the distinctive Protestant spirit; and_ peculiar
matter which expresses the personal views of its exponents. And
every particular presentation of the substance of the doctrine,
which lays claim to an ecclesiastical character, will be the more
perfect the more inwardly it unites in itself and relates together
the common and the peculiar. The common matter naturally
starts from, and becomes most prominent in, those portions of
doctrine which are most akin to the original efforts to purify the
faith. Now if this effort at the time of the Reformation itself did
not transform the whole tenor of doctrine, but allowed much to be
simply taken over unaltered from earlier definitions, this realm will
naturally become a controversial one, and much of what has
hitherto passed as common matter will gradually become obsolete.
The element of peculiarity lies originally in the arrangement of
the individual doctrines, in which there is, and can be, practically
nothing which would be recognized as necessarily of general accept-
ance. But further, all points of doctrine, even while keeping
within the universally recognized mode of expression, permit of
more exact definition in many ways; and everyone achieves
something who makes people recognize this capacity for modifica-
tion, and in his own way makes use of his rights in the matter.
Finally, the element of peculiarity in the presentation touches also


IIO THE CHRISTIAN FAITH [§ 25


the area of what is gradually becoming antiquated, with a view to
remodelling individual doctrines in a way more true to the Pro-
testant spirit. But even the most lively originality cannot aim at
anything higher than to set the common doctrine in the clearest
light ; just as, again, for the common element there is no higher
aim than to encourage the peculiar and original development of
doctrine without disturbing the communion, by establishing as
definitely as possible the Protestant character of the system. The
more the two elements thus interpenetrate each other, the more
ecclesiastical, and at the same time the more favourable to progress,
is the presentation. The more they are detached from each other,
and merely stand side by side as unconnected, the more does the
element which clings to the historical, and is set up as of common
acceptance, appear to be of merely antiquarian interest, and the
original element to be simply ultra-modern.

Postscript.—The terms orthodox and heterodox, which even
etymologically do not form a proper antithesis, are too uncertain
for me to have any great desire to employ them. Consider, how-
ever, how much there is which was originally decried as heterodox in
our Church, and which afterwards came to pass muster as orthodox,
but always through an earlier orthodoxy becoming obsolete.
Then it becomes plain how this antithesis refers solely to what
professes to be common matter. The name of orthodox is then
given to what is in unmistakable conformity with the matter fixed
in the confessional documents ; and what is not thus in conformity
is heterodox. But now, if heterodox matter succeeds in vindicating
itself as being more accordant with the spirit of the Evangelical
Church than is the letter of the confessional documents, then the
latter becomes antiquated and the former becomes orthodox. Now,
since such changes in our Church can never by a special act be
declared universally valid, the employment of these two terms,
for things which are still subject to discussion, is always doubtful
policy. The situations which occasion it will probably never cease
to arise, because what is fixed in the confessional documents
contains exegeses of Scripture, and thus the progress of
the art of exegesis may render doubtful that part of the
Symbols. And similarly, on the other hand, even if the heterodox
cannot be definitely distinguished in content and expression from
the heretical of older times, yet it must not be regarded as heretical,
if only it seeks to make good its claim in connexion with the
commonly accepted elements of our Church’s system of doctrine.


ee, ee ee ee a ae eee ee a ee a ee a ee ee eee ea Pe


ee


nea Pee


§ 26] DOGMATICS AND CHRISTIAN ETHICS TEL


For, in the case of those people who do not desire to separate them-
selves from our Church’s system of doctrine, we must not, even
when there are such divergences, put them down to anything more
than misunderstandings, which are sure to disappear again through
scientific interchange of views within the Church itself. And
especially we must not think there has been any hidden influence
of principles which belong to other religious communions.


§ 26. In the Evangelical (Protestant) Church the Science of Christian
Doctrine and that of Christian Morals have long been
separated : and so here too, for the purposes of our presenta-
tion, we eliminate from the totality of the dogmatic material
such propositions as are elements of the Science of Christian
Morals.

Note.—Cf. Brief Outline, §§ 31 ff.


1. Even the propositions of the Science of Christian Morals
are in the above sense propositions or doctrines of the faith. For
the modes of action which they describe under the form of theorems
or precepts (for the two come to the same thing) are likewise
expressions of the religious affections of the Christian. That is to
say, every religious emotion is essentially a modification of human
existence, and if it is understood as a quiescent state, there arises
a proposition which belongs to the Science of Christian Doctrine.
But every such emotion, unless it either gets interrupted in its
natural course or is too weak from the beginning (and we cannot
here take account of either of these cases), issues just as essentially
in activity ; and if the different modifications of the Christian’s
religious consciousness are understood as activities which arise
in different ways in accordance with the circumstances which at
the time occasion and determine them, there arise propositions
which belong to the Science of Christian Morals. But rules of life
and formule for modes of action which were not of that type would
not belong to the Science of Christian Morals, but either to the
purely rational Science of Morals or to some special technical or
practical study.

2. Now it is clear that only the two taken together represent
the whole reality of the Christian life. For it is inconceivable
that a man should everywhere and always have in his self-con-
sciousness the emotions which are expressed in the doctrines of
the Christian faith, without also acting, everywhere and always, in
the way set forth by Christian morals. And it is equally easy to


I12 THE CHRISTIAN FAITH [§ 27


understand how the two could have been for a long time unified
in presentation, so that they formed a single discipline. For the
issues of the religious emotions in activity can always, when taken
together at suitable points, be described in a supplemental way
even in the Science of Doctrine, as natural consequences of the
described states themselves ; as, ¢.g., what are called duties to God
may come after the treatment of the Divine Attributes. Similarly
there are doctrines which in themselves belong equally to both
studies, and which thus provide in the Science of Doctrine a place
where particular parts of the Science of Morals, or even the whole
of it, could easily be introduced. Such are the portions of doctrine
which treat of Sanctification and of the Church. But in the nature
of the case the Science of Doctrine could equally well be introduced
into the Science of Morals, and in the same twofold manner ;
i.e. the religious affections could be described, each as something
which preceded the developing activities in general, but which also
accompanied and was, as it were, echoed in these ; but they could
also be described at particular points. For since the expression
of the self-consciousness is a moral activity, it would be possible
in a treatment of this latter to introduce the whole Science of
Doctrine as an explication of the thing which is to be expressed.
But (when the two were united) the relation was always a purely
one-sided one, the treatment of the Science of Morals being in-
cluded in the Science of Doctrine. The Science of Doctrine in this
way became shapeless in consequence of unevenly distributed
appendices, and the need for viewing as a connected whole the
modes of action accepted in the Christian Church was not satisfied.
Hence it was inevitable that the ethical interest should sooner or
later lead to the two studies being separated from each other.


II. THE FORMATION OF THE DoGMaTIC SYSTEM.


§ 27. All propositions which claim a place in an epitome of Evan-
gelical (Protestant) doctrine must approve themselves both by
appeal to Evangelical confessional documents, or in default
of these, to the New Testament Scriptures, and by exhibi-


tion of their homogeneity with other propositions already
recognized.


1. It may seem strange that here the confessional documents
of the Evangelical Church, collectively, are, as it were, given a
prior place to the New Testament Scriptures themselves. But this


§ 27] THE APPEAL TO CONFESSIONS £13


must not by any means be taken as establishing a precedence for
these documents. That, indeed, would contradict the documents
themselves, since they always appeal to Scripture. Thus the
appeal to them in fact always implies indirectly an appeal to
Scripture. But the appeal to Scripture can directly prove only
that a proposition which has been set up is Christian, while its
distinctively Protestant content is not decided upon, except in the
few cases where it can be shown that the Catholic Church has
sanctioned an opposite use of the same passages of Scripture. Thus
for the Protestant content there remain only the other two kinds .
of proof ; and, of these, the first place is assured to the proof from
the confessional documents, in virtue of the general demand made
upon Dogmatics to set forth doctrine prevalent in the Church. For
these documents are plainly the first common possession of Pro-
testantism ; and just as all Protestant communities grew together
into the Church primarily through attachment to these, so every
system of doctrine which desires to pass as Protestant must strive
to attach itself to this history. Indeed, this holds of its original and
distinctive elements as much as of its common elements, only that
for the former, it is naturally enough to have an indirect de-
monstration that its propositions are compatible with the Symbols.
Thus the direct appeal to Scripture is only necessary either when
the use which the confessional documents make of the New Testa-
ment books cannot be approved of (and we must at least admit the
possibility that in individual cases all the testimonies adduced,
even if not falsely applied, may nevertheless be unsatisfying, since
other passages of Scripture must be applied as means of proof), or
when propositions of the confessional documents do not themselves
seem sufficiently scriptural or Protestant, and these must accord-
ingly be superannuated and other expressions substituted, which
will then certainly the more easily find acceptance, the more it is
shown that Scripture on the whole favours them or even perhaps
demands them. Therefore this method of always going back in
the first instance to the confessional documents affords at the same
time the advantage, that the ecclesiastical status of any proposition
thereby at once becomes clear, and consequently the significance of
the whole presentation for the further development of the system
of doctrine is much more easily perceived.

From this it follows that, if we look at individual cases, the
proving of a proposition by exhibiting its relation to other pro-
positions already proved in another way is a merely subordinate

8


II4 THE CHRISTIAN FAITH [§ 27


matter, and only suitable to propositions of second rank, which
neither appear directly in the Symbols nor are represented in any
definite way in Scripture. But, on the other hand, when this
reference is added at each point to that original method of proof, it
does properly illuminate for the first time the suitability both of
the arrangement of the system of doctrine and of the terminology
which prevails in it.

2. Now, as we here class together all confessional documents of
the Evangelical Church, in both its main branches, as of equal
right, there is for us no single one which could have proceeded
from the whole Church or even have been recognized by it. And
so the distinction between the greater and more universal authority
of some, and the more doubtful and scantier authority of others,
vanishes as of no significance at all. Indeed, since in the con-
fessional documents, at least of the second stage, Reformed modes
of presentation are directed against Lutheran, and vwice versa, it
must be admitted at the outset that only that part of the con-
fessional documents in which they all agree can be really essential
to Protestantism ; and indeed that, through this conflict between
the different particular confessional documents, the right of holding
different views on all non-essential points has itself, as it were,
received symbolic recognition for the whole Evangelical Church.
Further, it is unquestionable that in a certain sense all our Symbols,
though some more than others, are merely occasional documents,
in which therefore the precise mode of statement of many points
depends upon time and place ; and we have no reason to suppose
that the authors themselves would offer the selected expression
as the only perfectly right one. And here is another related point :
the authors themselves (certainly quite in accordance with their
then convictions, but nevertheless too precipitately for the char-
acter of a confessional document, since they were still engaged in
inquiry) repudiated views then held to be heretical, and, in all
points which had not yet become definitely controversial, testified
to their agreement with the then prevalent doctrine. That sen-
tence of condemnation may have fallen on many a divergence
which had proceeded from the same spirit as the Reformation
itself, because this spirit had not learnt to recognize itself promptly.
And similarly many an older doctrinal view might be taken over,
simply because people failed to see at once how it conflicted with
the essence of Protestantism. From this it follows that, in going
back to the Symbols, if we are to avoid making that procedure a


§ 27] THE ‘APPEAL TO SCRIPTURE 115


hindrance to the further development of doctrine, we must, in the
first place, rather have regard to the spirit than cling to the letter,
and, in the second place, we must apply the exegetical art to the
letter itself, in order to make a right use of it.

3. Our proposition mentions only the New Testament Scrip-
tures, not the Bible in general. We have already to some extent
prepared the reader for this in what we said above about the rela-
tion of Christianity to Judaism.! But, further, everyone must admit
that if a doctrine had neither direct nor indirect attestation in the
New Testament, but only in the Old, no one could have much
confidence in regarding it as a genuinely Christian doctrine ;
whereas if a doctrine is attested by the New Testament, no one
will object to it, because there is nothing about it in the Old. Hence
the Old Testament appears simply a superfluous authority for
Dogmatics. Now it is indeed true that even New Testament
passages can demonstrate no more than that a proposition or
doctrine is Christian. But, nevertheless, this is a thoroughly
Protestant mode of procedure, in the case of every dogmatic pro-
position to go back to Scripture itself, and to human claims only
in so far as they are attested by Scripture, but in this use of Scrip-
ture to allow everyone the free application of the exegetical art,
as based on linguistic science. Naturally, however, the use made
of Scripture varies itself a great deal, according to the differing
character of the propositions. When the original trend towards
purification of the Church is uppermost, the agreement must be so
exact that Scripture can be used polemically against the assertions
of the Roman Church. When it is rather the distinctive character
of Protestantism that is concerned, it is enough to show that this
more particularized form of doctrine is embraced within what
Scripture says, without having to show that this particular form is
the only scriptural one. And, similarly, all that the original and
peculiar element in the presentation can with certainty venture
to assert is, that it contains nothing demonstrably contrary
to Scripture ; the common element, on the other hand, must
definitely attach itself to Scripture.

But this must not by any means be understood to mean that
the Biblical vocabulary should itself be adopted in the system of
doctrine. For since the New Testament is but partially didactic
in form, and is nowhere properly systematic, a mode of expression
which there is perfectly suitable would in most cases only very


1 See § 12, 2 and 3.


116 THE CHRISTIAN FAITH [§ 27


imperfectly answer the demands which are made of a system of
doctrine. And, further, the didactic parts of Scripture are for the
most part occasional discourses and writings, and therefore full of
special references which in a dogmatic presentation must simply
cause confusion. Hence our task cannot be anything like perfectly
discharged by the adducing of some passages of Scripture under
each proposition. This procedure has actually become hurtful in
many ways, to Dogmatics on the one hand, and to Scriptural exegesis
on the other. The relating of particular passages of Scripture to
particular dogmatic propositions can therefore only be done in-
directly, by showing that the former are based on the same religious
emotions which are set forth in the latter, and that the differences of
expression are only such as are occasioned by the different con-
nexions in which they appear. But since this can only be done by
explaining these connexions, there ought to be developed more and
more in this branch of study a large-viewed use of Scripture, not
stressing individual passages torn out of their context, but only
taking account of larger sections, and these particularly fruitful
ones, so as to exhibit in the trains of thought of the sacred writers
those same combinations on which the dogmatic results also are
based. Such an application of Scripture can, however, only be
made allusively in the system of doctrine itself, and its success
depends entirely upon agreement in hermeneutic principles and
methods. Therefore, on this side, Dogmatics can only reach its con-
summation simultaneously with the theory of Scriptural exegesis.
4. Thus there is room for great variety on this side too, so that
Protestant systems of doctrine may be of very different stamp
without losing their ecclesiastical character. When in a Dogmatic
the appeal to the confessional documents and to analogy falls very
much into the background, while the reference to Scripture pre-
dominates throughout, we have what I should call, for the most part,
a Scriptural Dogmatic. In such a Dogmatic, the arrangement will
be the thing of least importance ; but it will be a perfectly ecclesi-
astical arrangement, except where (say) the recognizedly common
Protestant element is sacrificed to what is merely local and tem-
porary in Scripture, or even to an eccentric interpretation of
Scripture, or where it gives up the dialectical development of the
ideas and goes back to the often indefinite and ambiguous language
of the Bible. On the other hand, I should give the name of Scientific
Dogmatic preferably to a Dogmatic which, starting from some
recognized principal points, would make everything clear by its


§ 27] THE CHURCH FATHERS 117


orderly sequence, the parallelism of its members, and the coherence
of its individual propositions, in which case citation from Scripture
and application of the Symbols, of course, falls automatically into
the background. Only, of course, those principal points must be
none other than the fundamental facts of the religious self-conscious-
ness conceived in a Protestant spirit. For if they were speculations,
the system of doctrine might indeed be very scientific, but it would
not be Christian doctrine. Finally, if a Dogmatic attaches itself
principally to the confessional documents alone, and contents
itself with proving everything from these and making everything
dependent on these, without either going back to Scripture in
details or linking up everything more closely by strict arrangement,
this would be a Symbolical Dogmatic ; and in such we cannot fail to
see a certain approximation to the Roman Catholic Church, since it
lays the whole stress on every detail being recognized by the Church.
But so long as it does not, on the one hand, set up the principle
that Scriptural exegesis is subject to authority, and does not, on
the other hand, ascribe to its own propositions a value independent
of their expressing the inner experience of each individual, its Pro-
testant character is not endangered. . Since, however, each of these
forms exposes itself the more to its own peculiar danger, the more it
steers clear of the others, it would certainly seem that the common
aim of all must be to diverge from each other as little as possible.
Postscript.—Our proposition is completely silent as to the very
general custom of appealing in dogmatic systems to the dicta of
other teachers, from the Church Fathers down to the most recent ;
and this certainly means declaring such a procedure to be non-
essential. Nevertheless, these citations may have a value, though
not always the same value. In so far as what is established in our
confessional documents passes over into a system of doctrine,
citation of later theologians cannot increase the conviction of the
ecclesiastical character of the propositions ; and it has a value only
in compendiums, for the purpose of referring the reader to the most
outstanding of later developments. Even ancient Patristic cita-
tions can in this case be of use only in an apologetical or polemical
connexion as against the Roman Church. But it is different in
cases of divergence, whether only in terminology or in content as
well, from the symbolical documents. For the more a proposition
has made itself heard from different quarters, the more claim has it
to present itself as current in the Church. In particular, when a
system of doctrine belongs definitely to one of the three above-


118 THE CHRISTIAN FAITH [§ 28


mentioned forms, it becomes the more complete the more closely it
connects itself with systems which bear equally strongly the stamp
of one of the other forms.


§ 28. The dialectical character of the language and the systematic
arrangement give Dogmatics the scientific form which 1s
essential to 1t.

Note.—Cf. § 13, Postscript; § 16, § 18.


1. The term ‘dialectical’ is here taken in exactly the ancient
sense. The dialectical character of the language therefore consists
simply in its being formed in a technically correct manner, that it
may be used in all intercourse for the communication and correction
of the knowledge in question. Now this cannot be said of either
the poetic or the rhetorical form of expression, nor even of the de-
scriptively didactic, which, having sprung from the other two, has
not become quite separate from them. Thus the expressions amid
which the system of doctrine moves, form (inasmuch as they go back
to the religious feeling) a special realm of language within the
didactically religious, 7.e. the strictest region of it. The questions
of how religious feeling becomes diversified, and what object it refers
to, encroach upon the ground of Psychology, Ethics, and Meta-
physics ; and the proper language of Dogmatics is distinguished
more definitely from the didactically religious in general by its
affinity to the scientific terminology of those realms : a terminology
which is as sedulously avoided in the homiletical and poetical com-
munication of the religious consciousness as it is eagerly sought
after in the dogmatic. Hence the great diversity of views and of
their expressions in all these philosophical realms makes the suitable
management of language in dogmatic presentation a most difficult
problem. However, the only views which are primarily unfit for
use in dogmatic language are those which make no separation
between the conceptions of God and the World, admit no contrast
between good and evil, and thus make no definite distinction in
man between the spiritual and the sensible. For these distinctions
are the original presuppositions of the religious self-consciousness,
because without these the self-consciousness, when widened into a
world-consciousness, could not be set in antithesis to the God-con-
sciousness, nor could one speak of a distinction between a free
and an inhibited higher self-consciousness, nor, consequently, of
redemption and the need for it.2 Now the more frequently philo-


*$ 8,2, OS Try


§ 28] THE LANGUAGE OF DOGMATICS 119g


sophical systems change within those limits, the more frequent also
are the revolutions in dogmatic language. These revolutions are
indeed inevitable only when a system has become antiquated, i.e.
when thinking really no longer conforms to its type. But they
often take place earlier through the more intense zeal of theologians
who have been caught away by a rising system, and who hope that
the new system will be better fitted than any previous one to make
an end of all divisions and misunderstandings in the realm of
Dogmatics. Others again, by the spectacle of that very zeal, are
made apprehensive lest one particular philosophical system should
set itself up as lord and judge in theological matters. But the
apprehension is, as a rule, as unfounded as the hope. The hope is
illusory, because the important misunderstandings are always there
before the expressions used upon the controversial points take on a
strictly dogmatic complexion, and consequently the change result-
ing from the influence of another system does not in itself touch
the origin of the misconceptions, unless the language should thereby
gain a higher degree of clearness and definiteness. And it is the
same with the apprehension referred to. For, in the first place, a
system never, at least in our day, continues to have sole supremacy
for a sufficiently long time. And secondly, as a general considera-
tion, so long as it is really an interest in Christian piety that
evokes the dogmatic presentation, this latter can never turn against
that interest : such a danger can only arise when the whole pro-
cedure has not sprung from that interest, but is alien in type.
Apart from this, there are two other opposite complaints which one
sometimes hears made concerning the language used by theologians,
as regards its connexion with philosophy. The more frequent
complaint is that the language is too abstract and too far removed
from the immediate language of religion, for the sake of which alone
Dogmatics exists. The other one is less frequent—that one cannot
tell from the language used which philosophical system the theolo-
logian assumes as his starting-point. Both complaints appear to be
unfounded. For in our Church it is only the scientifically educated
who can be expected to take their bearings from Dogmatics for the
realm of popular religious teaching, and the key for this they are
bound to have. And as regards the other complaint, for this
purpose it is neither necessary nor profitable to know which philo-
sophical system a theologian adheres to, so long as his language is
correct and self-consistently formed. In all sciences the Schools
always more or less discard their own language for the universal


120 THE CHRISTIAN FAITH [§ 28


language of educated people, and yet the language of the Schools
does always tend to keep itself distinct. Now the more a theologian
keeps to the strictest language of the Schools, the more readily will
he give occasion for the first complaint ; and for the second, the
more use he makes of the elements which have been adopted into
the universal language of humanity. In this latter, indeed, there
remain for long enough elements collected from different periods
and systems. But even out of these, by means of skilful selection
and due explanation, there can be formed a whole which is perfectly
well adapted for dogmatic usage. And thus the danger of an
influence hurtful to the interests of Christian piety completely dis-
appears, and a balance is maintained amid the influences of various
contemporary systems.

2. If, however, Dogmatics is to fulfil its proper vocation, 7.e.
both to clear up the misconceptions which ever and again tend to
arise in the whole business of making communications from the
immediate religious life of the Christian, and also, so far as in it lies,
to prevent such misconceptions by the norm it has established, not
only is a dialectically formed vocabulary indispensable in the
establishing of the system of doctrine, but also as strict and
systematic an arrangement of the subject-matter as possible. For
the more indefinite and more imperfectly formed material offered by
every fragmentary opinion can only be rightly appraised by com-
parison with the perfectly definite and ordered material of the self-
contained system, and only so can it be rectified. For even the
most definite idea and the clearest proposition do not lose every
trace of instability until they have been placed in an absolute
context, for the simple reason that the sense of any proposition is
not fully given except in some definite context. But this is the
very essence of systematic arrangement, that by comprehensive
co-ordination and exhaustive subordination each proposition should
be brought into a perfectly definite relation with all others. Nowa
dogmatic system of doctrine is capable of this in so far as the
subject treated of forms a self-contained whole, i.e., on the one
hand, in so far as all Christian religious emotions of the Protestant
type, wherever they appear, can be represented in a complex of
coherent formule, and, on the other hand, in so far as it is true that
facts of consciousness which can be subsumed under these formule
are not to be found anywhere outside of this communion. Now in
this sense the Evangelical (Protestant) Church, it is true, is not so
perfectly self-contained that there might not be doctrines which


§ 28] THE ARRANGEMENT OF DOGMATICS 121


the Roman Church expresses in exactly the same way, or that, on
the other hand, its doctrines might not for the most part be also
found in other anti-Roman communions which do not form a single
whole with the Evangelical Church. But this latter contingency is
due simply to the fact that outward unity does not depend solely
on doctrine. As far as doctrine is concerned, those small com-
munions do for us really form a single whole with the Evangelical
Church. And the former case disappears when we come to regard
the propositions, not by themselves alone, but in their context ;
and thus at suitable points an Evangelical Dogmatic may legiti-
mately set itself to dispel that impression. In Dogmatics, however,
the arrangement of material can have no resemblance to that
employed in those sciences which are built upon some fundamental
principle or can be developed from within themselves, or in those
either which comprise a definite field of external perception and
in this sense are historical. Instead of a fundamental law, Dog-
matics has simply the fundamental inner fact of Christian piety
which it postulates ; and what it has to arrange consists simply in
the different modifications of this fact which emerge, according to
its differing relations with the other facts of consciousness.!_ Thus
the task of arrangement consists simply in so comparing and so dis-
tinguishing those different relations that the different modifications
themselves appear as a complete whole, and that consequently, by
means of the formule all taken together, the infinite multiplicity
of the particular can be synoptically viewed in a definite plurality.
But the dialectical language and the systematic arrangement re-
quire one another, and also they promote one another. The
dialectical language is too sharply defined for any other kind of
religious communication, and outside of the complete doctrinal
system itself it is permissible only in passages which are extensions
of or outflows from the latter. But a systematic arrangement
would never stand out so clearly, and still less could it win recogni-
tion, if it did not make use of language which admits of a strict
calculus-like procedure for the trying and testing of all connexions
of ideas. But it is self-evident how very much the task of system-
atic arrangement is facilitated when the particulars are given in
dialectical language of uniform consistency, and also how the most
precise expression for the particular is more easily found when a
schematism of sharp distinctions and close connexions has already
been fashioned for that purpose.
ESTOS:


122 THE CHRISTIAN FAITH [§ 28


3. After all we have already said on this point, it seems super-
fluous now expressly to remark or to demonstrate that there is
no other connexion than that which we have exhibited between
Christian Dogmatics and speculative philosophy ; especially since,
in a treatment of the subject developed on the lines we have de-
scribed above, there scarcely remains any point at which speculation
could force its way into the system of doctrine. Our method indeed
would seem to be the one that will most easily get rid of all traces
of the Scholastic mode of treatment, by which philosophy (trans-
formed as it was by the spread of Christianity) and real Christian
Dogmatics were frequently mingled in one and the same work.
There is only one point remaining for discussion here. Those
members of the Christian communion through whose agency alone
the scientific form of Dogmatics arises and subsists are also those
in whom the speculative consciousness has awakened. Now as this
is the highest objective function of the human spirit, while the
religious self-consciousness is the highest subjective function, a con-
flict between the two would touch essential human nature, and so
such a conflict can never be anything but a misunderstanding.
Now it is certainly not sufficient merely that such a conflict
should not arise: the man of knowledge is bound to reach the
positive consciousness that the two are in agreement ; only, this is
not the work of Dogmatics, since even for the same religious stand-
point the procedure would necessarily vary with every different
type of philosophy. If, on the other hand, such a conflict does
arise, and some one rightly or wrongly finds the occasion of mis-
understanding to be on the religious side, that circumstance may
of course lead to his giving up religion altogether, or at least the
Christian religion. But to guard against this, otherwise than by
taking care not to occasion misunderstandings by unconsidered
formule—that again is not the business of Dogmatics, which has
nothing whatever to do with those who do not admit the funda-
mental fact. It is rather the business of Apologetics.

Postscript.—Those expositions of Christian doctrine which have
long flourished under the name of Practical Dogmatics or Popular
Dogmatics do indeed dispense both with dialectical language and
with systematic arrangement. But these lie outside of the realm to
which we here appropriate the name of Dogmatics. They are some-
times compromises between a system of doctrine and a catechism,
and sometimes adaptations of Dogmatics to homiletical ends. The
former have for the most part the aim of communicating the results


§ 29] THE GREAT ANTITHESIS 123


of dogmatic developments with a certain coherence to those who
would not find it easy to follow a scientific argument. But as that
aim is itself somewhat arbitrary, the undertaking seems to lead to
too much confusion and to foster too great superficiality for any-
thing really useful to be achieved. As for the latter kind, its place
will be completely filled if in Practical Theology the needful general
directions are added concerning the matter of religious communica-
tions as well as concerning the form.


§ 29. We shall exhaust the whole compass of Christian doctrine if we
consider the facts of the religious self-consciousness, first, as
they are presupposed by the antithesis expressed in the con-
cept of redemption, and secondly, as they are determined by
that antithesis.

Nore.—Cf. §§ 8, 9, and 11.


1. It is clear, to begin with, that the antithesis between the
inability to inform all moments of life with the feeling of absolute
dependence and the corresponding ability communicated to us by
the Redeemer, presupposes that feeling itself and a knowledge of it.
For since it is never presented to us except in man, we cannot
know about it except in so far as it exists in ourselves ; and without
knowing about it we could not know about an incapacity for it, nor
even about the difference between the Redeemer and ourselves.
Thus the state which precedes the communication of the capacity
cannot be either absolute forgetfulness of God or a mere empty
striving after the God-consciousness, but must somehow contain
this last as a datum in the self-consciousness. It might, however,
be said that such facts of the religious self-consciousness, which
precede fellowship with the Redeemer, cannot belong to the system
of Christian doctrine, but only to some general system of doctrine,
or to the system of some religious communion from which one could
pass to Christianity. To this we must reply that these states of
the religious mind do not disappear when the mind has been laid
hold of by Christianity, but are facilitated and encouraged in pro-
portion as the communicated capacity is less or more. Thus they
belong to the religious consciousness of the Christian too, and they
might have been described as states not determined by that anti-
thesis but remaining unchanged on all its different levels ; while
the facts which are determined by the antithesis itself must differ
in their content according as the incapacity or the communicated
capacity has the preponderance. Only, the former kind of facts,


124 THE CHRISTIAN FAITH [§ 29


remaining as they do ever self-identical, will never by themselves
alone occupy completely any moment of the religious life in the
realm of Christian piety, but only partially ; and it is for that
reason, and because none the less we have to consider these facts
in themselves, on account of their different nature, that the mode
of expression used in our proposition has been preferred.

2. If, then, this first element in our proposition does thus belong
to Christian piety, because it necessarily appears in combination
with the second, we further venture to assert that the two taken
together enclose the whole realm of Christian piety. For even if
we assume that by degrees the incapacity disappears completely,
this will not give rise to any new modifications of the religious self-
consciousness, but will simply bring the reality nearer to the formule
which express the condition in its purity. And so our only concern
is to measure out the provinces of the two elements precisely and
completely, that we may be sure of the completeness of the whole.
The two will, then, of course, be so related to each other that the
first part will contain those doctrines (the possibility in general of
which has already been admitted) in which the distinctively
Christian element is less prominent, and which may therefore most
easily be coincident in expression with those of other faiths. These
doctrines, however, are by no means constituent parts of a universal
or so-called natural theology. Not only are they in every case
expressions of the religious self-consciousness, and thus genuinely
dogmatic propositions, but they are also definitely Christian, in
virtue of the distinctively Christian reference which is inherent in
the arrangement of the whole, and which we might repeat in every
proposition. But apart from this, it certainly could be said—
especially as all that belongs to the realm of the Science of Christian
Morals remains excluded—that there are dogmatic propositions
which only express monotheism in general, without making it clear
whether they belong to the teleological or the esthetic point of
view. Therefore it is necessary that, if general allusions to the
Science of Christian Morals are not given in Dogmatics, we should
nevertheless always keep in mind the fact that to a system of
Christian doctrine, of whatever form, there essentially belongs also
a system of Christian morals developing in harmony with it.

3. These two, then, may be identified with each other: facts
which are presupposed by the antithesis, and facts which remain
unchanged throughout the whole development of the antithesis ;
and we have further asserted that these, together with the facts


§ 30] THREE FORMS OF PROPOSITION 125


which are determined by the antithesis, comprise the whole of
Christian doctrine. Now from this. it follows that, strictly con-
sidered, nothing which belongs exclusively to a period preceding the
Christian development of that antithesis, and also nothing which
belongs to a period which will only begin when the incapacity has
been completely overcome and has disappeared, can be brought
within the compass of Christian doctrine in the proper sense. No
matter can be thus introduced except in so far as it has a demon-
strable and definite connexion with the religious affections which are
found within the antithesis. Now since all Christian piety rests upon
the appearing of the Redeemer, the same thing is true of Him too,
namely, that nothing concerning Him can be set up as real doctrine
unless it is connected with His redeeming causality and can be
traced to the original impression made by His existence. Whatever
falls outside these limits either must have its proper place elsewhere
or can make good its position only in virtue of some more distant
relationship to be demonstrated in a special way.


§ 30. All propositions which the system of Christian doctrine has to
establish can be regarded either as descriptions of human
states, or as conceptions of divine attributes and modes of
action, or as utterances regarding the constitution of the
world ; and all three forms have always subsisted alongside
of each other.


1. Since the feeling of absolute dependence, even in the realm
of redemption, only puts in an appearance, 1.e. becomes a real
self-consciousness in time, in so far as it is aroused by another
determination of the self-consciousness and unites itself therewith,!
every formula for that feeling is a formula for a definite state of
mind; and consequently all propositions of Dogmatics must be
capable of being set up as such formule. But any such sensible
determination of the self-consciousness points back to a determinant
outside of the self-consciousness. Now since, in virtue of the
general coherence always postulated in every human consciousness,
this determinant always appears as a part thereof, any modification
which has so arisen of the feeling of absolute dependence may be
known if we can get a description of that element of existence on
which the state in question is based. Thus conceived, the dogmatic
propositions become utterances regarding the constitution of the
world, but only for the feeling of absolute dependence and with


1Cf. § 5.


126 THE CHRISTIAN FAITH [§ 30


reference to it. Finally, not only is the feeling of absolute depend-
ence in itself a co-existence of God in the self-consciousness, but the
totality of being from which, according to the position of the subject,
all determinations of the self-consciousness proceed, is compre-
hended under that feeling of dependence ; and therefore all modi-
fications of the higher self-consciousness may also be represented
by our describing God as the basis of this togetherness of being in
its various distributions.

2. If we compare these three possible forms with each other,
it is clear that descriptions of human states of mind with this
content can only be taken from the realm of inner experience,
and that therefore in this form nothing alien can creep into the
system of Christian doctrine ; whereas, of course, utterances regarding
the constitution of the world may belong to natural science, and
conceptions of divine modes of action may be purely metaphysical ;
in which case both are engendered on the soil of science, and so
belong to the objective consciousness and its conditions, and are
independent of the inner experience and the facts of the higher
self-consciousness. Thus these two forms (the first of which in-
cludes, of course, all propositions of a generally anthropological
content) do not in themselves afford any guarantee that all pro-
positions so conceived are genuinely dogmatic. Hence we must
declare the description of human states of mind to be the funda-
mental dogmatic form ; while propositions of the second and third
forms are permissible only in so far as they can be developed out
of propositions of the first form; for only on this condition can
they be really authenticated as expressions of religious emotions.

3. If, then, all propositions which belong to the system of
Christian doctrine can indisputably be expressed in the funda-
mental form, and propositions which assert attributes of God and
qualities of the world must be reduced to propositions of that
first form before we can be safe from the creeping in of alien and
purely scientific propositions, then it would seem that Christian
Dogmatics has only to carry through consistently that fundamental
form in order to complete the analysis of Christian piety, while the
other two forms might be entirely set aside as superfluous. But if
anyone were to attempt at the present time to treat Christian
Dogmatics in this way, his work would be left isolated without
any historical support ; and not only would it lack a really ecclesi-
astical character, but, however perfectly it rendered the content
of Christian doctrine, it could not fulfil the real purpose of all


§ 31] THE BASAL INTENTION i27


Dogmatics. For since dogmatic language only came to be formed
gradually out of the language which was current in the public
communication of religion, the rhetorical and hymnic elements in
this latter must have been especially favourable to the formation
of conceptions of divine attributes, and indeed these became
necessary in order that those expressions should be kept within due
proportions. Similarly there arose, partly out of these, and partly
out of the need for fixing the relation between the Kingdom of God
and the world, utterances regarding the constitution of the world.
Then, as the habit increased of treating Metaphysics in combination
with Dogmatics, these two kinds of proposition became more
numerous through the addition of similar ones of alien content,
whereas the fundamental form naturally came to be left behind,
and scarcely found any place except in presentations of a less
scientific character. Hence a work which at the present time
tried to confine itself entirely to the proper fundamental form
would have no link with the past, and just for that reason would
be of little practical use, either for purging the doctrinal system
of alien elements, or for maintaining the clarity and verity of
the rhetorical and poetic communications.


§ 31. Thus the division outlined above will have to be fully worked
out according to all these three forms of reflection upon the
religious affections ; but always and everywhere on this same
basis, namely, the direct description of the religious affections
themselves.


1. As the elements of Dogmatics have taken shape in a frag-
mentary manner, and the science itself has therefore been fitted
together externally out of these elements rather than generated
organically, it is easy to understand how, generally speaking,
propositions of all three kinds have been placed together without
distinction, while none of the forms has been worked out with
completeness and perspicuity. But such a state of affairs by no
means satisfies the demands which may justly be made of dogmatic
science ; and in place of that we must of necessity (since, as we
have seen, we cannot confine ourselves to the fundamental form
alone) introduce that completeness of treatment which our pro-
position indicates. Nothing else can satisfy the present need.
Now the general description of the Christian religion given above !
underlies this whole presentation so fundamentally that even our


ES CCnSsLl.


128 THE CHRISTIAN FAITH [§ 31


division of the subject-matter rests upon it. And so each individual
section will have to be prefaced by a similar general description, to
which in turn the further articulation of that section will have
reference ; and with this the ecclesiastical doctrines belonging to
the same province will be brought into connexion: first, those
which come nearest to the direct exposition of the religious affec-
tions, and then those which express the same thing in the form
of divine attributes and qualities of the world.

2. From this it follows that the doctrine of God, as set forth
in the totality of the divine attributes, can only be completed
simultaneously with the whole system: whereas it is usually
treated continuously and without a break, and before any other
points of doctrine. But this divergence from the usual order can
hardly be viewed as a disadvantage. For, not to mention the fact
that divine attributes and modes of action which bear exclusively
on the development of human soul-states (and this can be
said of all the so-called moral attributes of God) cannot be
understood without previous knowledge of these states, it is in
general undeniable that the usual arrangement is peculiarly apt to
conceal the relation of those doctrines both to the feeling of absolute
dependence in general and to the fundamental facts of the Christian
religion, and to give the impression of a quite independent specula-
tive theory. Whereas our method not only makes that connexion
most luminous, but also places in closer juxtaposition things which
can only be understood alongside of and by means of each other.

Postscript.—Further comparison of the schematism here set
forth with those more common in our older and newer textbooks
and systems would exceed the limits of an Introduction which is
not obliged to be polemical. The method here adopted can only be
justified by the finished argument itself.


FIRST PART OF
THE SYSTEM OF DOCTRINE


FIRST PART


The Development of that Religious Self-Consciousness
which is always both presupposed by and contained
in every Christian Religious Affection.


INTRODUCTION


§ 32. The immediate feeling of absolute dependence is presupposed
and actually contained in every religious and Christian self-
consciousness as the only way in which, in general, our
own being and the infinite Being of God can be one in self-
CONSCIOUSNESS.


1. The fact that the whole Christian religious consciousness is
here presupposed is entirely legitimate, for here we abstract entirely
from the specific content of the particular Christian experiences,
and what we have stated is in no way affected by these differences.
Hence nothing can be deduced from the above proposition either
for or against any dogmatic formulation of such specific content.
But if anyone should maintain that there might be Christian
religious experiences in which the Being of God was not involved
in such a manner, 7.¢. experiences which contained absolutely no
consciousness of God, our proposition would certainly exclude him
from the domain of that Christian belief which we are going to
describe. Our proposition appeals, therefore, against such a person
to the religious self-consciousness as it appears and is recognized
everywhere in the Evangelical (Protestant) Church: that is, we
assert that in every religious affection, however much its special
contents may predominate, the God-consciousness must be present
and cannot be neutralized by anything else, so that there can be no
relation to Christ which does not contain also a relation to God.
At the same time, we also assert that this God-consciousness, as
it is here described, does not constitute by itself alone an actual
moment in religious experience, but always in connexion with
other particular determinations ; so that this God-consciousness
maintains its identity through its particular moments in all mani-


131


132 THE CHRISTIAN FAITH [§ 32


festations of Christian piety, just as in life generally the self-
consciousness of an individual does in the different moments of
his existence. Hence the view that in every Christian affection
there must be a relation to Christ does not in the least contradict
our proposition. Much more is this the case when the pious feeling
comes to expression as an actual moment in the form of pleasure or
pain. For the Christian faith, however, the incapacity implied in
religious pain must be ascribed to lack of fellowship with the
Redeemer, while, on the other hand, the ease in evoking pious feeling
which goes along with religious pleasure is regarded as a possession
which comes to us from this fellowship. Thus it is evident that,
within the Christian communion, there can be no religious experi-
ence which does not involve a relation to Christ.

2. It is possible to give a non-religious explanation of this sense
of absolute dependence ; it might be said that it only means the
dependence of finite particulars on the whole and on the system of
all finite things, and that what is implied and made the centre of
reference is not God but the world. But we can only regard this
explanation as a misunderstanding. For we recognize in our self-
consciousness an awareness of the world, but it is different from
the awareness of God in the same self-consciousness. For the
world, if we assume it to be a unity, is nevertheless in itself a divided
and disjointed unity which is at the same time the totality of all
contrasts and differences and of all the resulting manifold deter-
minations, of which every man is one, partaking in all the contrasts.
To be one with the world in self-consciousness is nothing else than
being conscious that we are a living part of this whole ; and this
cannot possibly be a consciousness of absolute dependence ; the
more so that all living parts stand in reciprocal interaction with
each other. This oneness with the whole in each several part is
essentially twofold: a feeling of dependence, indeed, so far as the
other parts act spontaneously upon it, but also a feeling of freedom
in so far as it likewise reacts spontaneously on the other parts.
The one is not to be separated from the other.

The feeling of absolute dependence, accordingly, is not to be
explained as an awareness of the world’s existence, but only as an
awareness of the existence of God, as the absolute undivided unity.
For neither is there in relation to God an immediate feeling of free-
dom, nor can the feeling of dependence in relation to Him be such
that a feeling of freedom can be its counterpart. On the contrary,
at the highest point of Christian devotion and with the clearest


§ 33] ABSOLUTE DEPENDENCE 133


consciousness of the most unimpeded self-activity, the absolute-
ness of the feeling of dependence remains undiminished. This
is what is indicated by the statement that the realization of oneself
as absolutely dependent is the only way in which God and the ego
can co-exist in self-consciousness. If we abolish this distinction
and mistake the self-consciousness which refers to God as referring
only to the world, then we must dispute in the latter the reality of
this feeling of freedom and, indeed, consequently entirely reject
it, since there is no moment in self-consciousness in which we do
not think of ourselves as one with the world. This non-religious
explanation, which casts aside what we hold to be the characteristic
of the religious consciousness as a deception, comes sometimes from
those who explain all feeling of freedom as illusion and sometimes
even from those who, maintaining that there is nothing upon which
we could feel ourselves absolutely dependent, reject all distinction
between the ideas of God and the world.

3. It is obvious that, as we are no longer moving outside the
province of Christian piety, we do not here concern ourselves with
the only partially developed and differentiated religious feeling
which constitutes polytheistic types of belief ; the Christian feeling
can only exist side by side with monotheism. On the other hand,
it may be objected that the foregoing statement is not pertinent
to our subject, because it is not so much peculiarly Christian as
characteristic of monotheism in general. The answer is that there
is no purely monotheistic piety in which the God-consciousness
alone and by itself forms the content of religious experiences.
Just as there is always present in Christian piety a relation to
Christ in conjunction with the God-consciousness,! so in Judaism
there is always a relation to the Lawgiver, and in Mohammedanism
to the revelation given through the Prophet. In our Holy Scrip-
tures for this reason God is constantly referred to by the name of
the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ. The saying of Christ also
(John 147°) implies that every relation to Christ includes also the
God-consciousness.


§ 33. This feeling of absolute dependence, in which our self-conscious-
ness in general represents the finitude of our being (cf. § 8, 2),
is therefore not an accidental element, or a thing which varies
from person to person, but is a universal element of life ; and
the recognition of this fact entirely takes the place, for the


1 Quare in omni cogitatione de Deo et omni invocatione mentes intueantur
Christum, etc. Melanchthon, Loc. de Deo.


134 THE CHRISTIAN FAITH [§ 33


system of doctrine, of all the so-called proofs of the existence
of God.


Melanchth., loc. de Deo: Esse Deum et praecipere obedientiam juxta
discrimen honestorum et turpium impressum humanis mentibus.—Zwingl.,
d. ver. et fals. vel., p. 9. Fucus ergo est et falsa religio, quicquid a Theologis
ex philosophia, quid sit Deus, allatum est.—Clem., Strom. vii. p. 864, mioris pev
ody évdudberdv rh éatw dyabov, Kal dvev Tod (nTew Tov Hedy duooyodca TotTov elvat
Kal doédfovea ws dvra* bev xph amd Tatrns dvayduevoy THs micTews, Kal avénbevra év
avTy xdpire Bed Ti mepl adTod KoulcacOa ws oldv Té eoTL yroou.

I. One cannot concede the postulated self-consciousness with
’ the content we have already described, and yet maintain that it is
something unessential, 7.e. that it may or may not be present in a
man’s life according to whether, in the course of his life, he meets
with this or that experience. For its emergence does not depend
at all upon the fact that something definite and objective is given
in the experience of a partially developed subject, but only on the
fact that in some way or other the sensory consciousness has been
stimulated from without. But what is presupposed on the sub-
jective side is only that which is common to all—the intelligence in
its subjective function, in which the disposition towards God-
consciousness is a constituent element.

That the feeling of absolute dependence as such is the same in
all, and not different in different persons, follows from the fact that
it does not rest upon any particular modification of human nature
but upon the absolutely general nature of man, which contains in
itself the potentiality of all those differences by which the par-
ticular content of the individual personality is determined.

Further, if a difference is admitted between perfection and im-
perfection as measured by greater or less development, this arises
from the fact that the emergence of this feeling depends upon a
contrast having been apprehended in consciousness ; the lack of
development is simply the lack of differentiation of functions. For
when the objective consciousness and self-consciousness are not
yet clearly differentiated in such a way as nevertheless to be dis-
tinctly connected together, in that case the consciousness as a whole
has not yet become genuinely human. And if sensuous Self-
consciousness and the higher self-consciousness are not thus differ-
entiated from one another and related to one another, development
is incomplete.

2. We may conclude then that godlessness within the Christian
community has its cause simply in defective or arrested develop-
ment. Should it occur however in spite of a complete development,


§ 331 TYPES OF GODLESSNESS 135


we can only regard this as illusion and appearance. It is never-
theless possible to distinguish in the main three types of godlessness.

The first is the childish complete lack of God-consciousness,
which as a rule disappears in the course of the natural development
of the individual, and only in exceptional cases degenerates into
brutal godlessness in such as bitterly resist their own wider
development. Both things are to be met with outside the Christian
community for the most part among peoples that innocently or
voluntarily remain on the lowest grade of development. The
existence of this type, however, is hardly to be proved historically.

The second type of godlessness is the sensual. This occurs
when a feeling of absolute dependence actually appears, but in-
timately associated with awareness of that on which there can be
no absolute dependence ; since what is conceived as capable of
passion can give no absolute dependence, for it implies the possi-
bility of self-initiated activity upon it. Face to face with this
contradiction, it may be doubted whether the disposition towards
God-consciousness has really been operative, the appearance merely
being obscured by perverted reflexion, or whether the inner reflexion
corresponds to the original, inner fact, so that the latter does not
really belong to the province of piety. But a comparison of the
way in which in childhood the God-consciousness at first manifests
itself shows that here certainly the disposition to God-consciousness
is already effective ; it is only on account of the imperfect develop-
ment of self-consciousness that the process cannot fully be carried
to its conclusion. This condition is obviously akin to Polytheism,?
for the same germ of multiplicity is there also, only it is restrained
by opposing influences ; further, this anthropomorphic conception
is sometimes of a more pure and spiritual kind and sometimes verges
on Fetichism.

Finally, the third type of godlessness is the so-called definite
denial of God—Atheism, which is propounded as a speculative
theory in the midst of a Christian society, in a condition of full
development and even in the highest stage of culture. This again
is twofold. In part it is a wicked fear of the sternness of the
God-consciousness, and hence, though moments of enlightenment
intervene, clearly a product of licentiousness and thus a sickness of
the soul usually accompanied by contempt of everything intel-
lectual ; and of this (godlessness) it can be said that it is naught,
because it entirely lacks inner truth. And in part it is simply a

1§ 8, 2.


136 THE CHRISTIAN FAITH (§ 33


reasoned opposition to the current and more or less inadequate
representations of the religious consciousness. Moreover, the
atheism of the eighteenth century was, for the most part, a struggle
against the petrified, anthropomorphic presentations of doctrine, a
struggle provoked by the tyranny of the Church. But when, over
and above the defects of representation, the inner facts of self-
consciousness themselves are thus wholly misconstrued, this serious
misunderstanding is none the less merely a disease of the under-
standing which may revive sporadically and from time to time,
but never produces anything that is historically permanent. This
fact cannot therefore be pled against our assertion that the feeling
of absolute dependence, as here expounded, and the God-conscious-
ness contained in it are a fundamental moment of human life.

3. But even supposing its universality could be disputed, still
no obligation would arise for the system of doctrine to prove the
existence of God; that would be an entirely superfluous task.
For since in the Christian Church the God-consciousness should be
developed in youth, proofs, even if youth were capable of under-
standing them, could only produce an objective consciousness,
which is not the aim here, nor would it in any way generate piety.
We are not concerned here with the question whether there are such
proofs, and whether, if we have no immediate certitude of God,
then that of which we do have immediate certitude, and by which
God could be proved, must not itself be God. Our point simply
is that these proofs can never be a component part of the system
of doctrine ; for that is only for those who have the inner certainty
of God, as we have already described it, and of that they can be
directly conscious at every moment. On our interpretation of
Christian doctrine it would be quite unnecessary to enlarge on this
point did it not seem essential to protest against the general
custom of furnishing Dogmatics at this point with such proofs, or
at least of referring to them as already familiar from other sciences.
It is obvious that for the purpose of Dogmatics this reference is
quite useless : for neither in catechetical nor in homiletical nor in
missionary work can such proofs be of any value. Experience,
too, shows how little can be accomplished by such a polemic against
theoretical atheism as above described. Dogmatics must there-
fore presuppose intuitive certainty or faith; and thus, as far as
the God-consciousness in general is concerned, what it has to do is
not to effect its recognition but to explicate its content. That
such proofs are not the concern of Dogmatics is obvious also from


§ 34) THEISTIC PROOFS 137


the fact that it is impossible to give them dogmatic form ; for we
cannot go back to Scripture and symbolical books, since they
themselves do not prove, but simply assert. Moreover, he for whom
such assertion is authoritative needs no further proof.

The prevalent method of inflating Christian doctrine with
rational proofs and criticism had its origin in the confusion of
Dogmatics and philosophy in old Patristic times.!_ Closely related
to this, and therefore to be named here, is the equally erroneous
view that Christian theology, to which Dogmatics also belongs, is
differentiated from Christian religion by its sources of knowledge.
Religion, for instance, it is argued, draws from Scripture only, but
theology draws also from the Fathers, reason and philosophy.
But as theology itself draws from Scripture, and the Scriptures
themselves have arisen out of the Christian religion, what originates
in reason and philosophy cannot be Christian theology. It is
certainly a great gain here, and elsewhere, to banish all material of
this kind from the Christian system of doctrine, for only thus is a
uniformity of method to be established. Such a difficult choice as
that between moral proofs, geometrical proofs, and probable proofs ?
is not a task for any dogmatic theologian to take up, even if it be
only for his own personal satisfaction.

Postscript—Though it lies outside our present scheme we may
remark here that there can be a precisely similar awareness of God
in the objective consciousness, an awareness which in itself does
not take the form of a temporal consciousness, but which in a
like manner can be aroused and brought into existence through
sense-perception ; and in fact all scientific construction, whether
in the sphere of nature or of history, is based upon it. But just
as it could only injure science to employ expressions belonging
to the religious consciousness or to mingle with science anything
belonging to that sphere, so it can only be harmful to faith and the
system of doctrine to intersperse them with scientific propositions
or to make them dependent on scientific foundations. For the
system of doctrine has as little to do immediately with the objective
consciousness as pure science with the subjective.


§34. The feeling of absolute dependence 1s contained 1m every
Christian religious affection, in proportion as in the latter,
1 Augustin., d. ver. vel. 8: Sic enim creditur et docetur, quod est humanae


salutis caput, non aliam esse philosophiam, id est sapientiae studium, et aliam


religionem.
2 Reinhard’s Dogmattk, § 7 and § 30.


138 THE CHRISTIAN FAITH (§ 34


through its co-determining stimuli, we become conscious that
we are placed in a universal nature-system, i.e. mm propor-
tion as we are conscious of ourselves as part of the world.


1. To be conscious of oneself as part of the world is the same
thing as to find oneself placed in a universal nature-system. In
every actual self-consciousness there is either an awareness of a
relation of our being to some object opposed to it or the com-
prehension at one and the same time of a being anda having. That
which is set in opposition to us must naturally decrease as our self-
consciousness widens. Whether we widen it to the self-conscious-
ness of the human race or are simply aware of ourselves as finite
spirit, in either case there is nothing set over against us except what
the spirit does not possess. The expansion takes place only in
virtue of a partial identity (between subject and object), and hence
in virtue of a system of nature; thus in every such process we
discover ourselves to be in a nature-system of spiritual being.

But though in our self-consciousness we constantly distinguish
the system of relations from the spirit in ourselves, nevertheless
the system is seated in the spirit as its original possession, original
just because there is a system of nature. It exists in our self-
consciousness always as influenced by being other than itself and
thus as co-existent with such being in the system of nature. This
system, however, is not posited as having limits ; hence it contains
within itself all finite being, only in undeveloped form. If we
extend our self-consciousness to that of the human species, then
the whole earth co-posited with its external relations is equally
undeveloped, partly as that which is possessed by us and partly as
that which stands over against us. But that which stands over
against us is only in self-consciousness so far as it affects us, and
consequently exists along with us in a nature-system ; and thus
also the whole system of nature or the world exists in our self-
consciousness in so far as we recognize ourselves to be a part of the
world. But this must be the case in every Christian and religious
emotion because it is (at each moment) accompanied by the sensuous
self-consciousness. Even if we were known to ourselves only as
presentational activity (vorstellende Thdatigkeit)—that is to say, as
being centres for ideas—even so the self-consciousness is a centre
for truth ; and that implies a relation of being in the self-conscious-


ness, corresponding to the relation of ideas in the objective
consciousness.


§ 34] THE SYSTEM OF NATURE 139


It is true, one frequently encounters the view that the more
prominent the system of nature is in self-consciousness, the more
the feeling of absolute dependence recedes ; and that, on the other
hand, the latter is most in evidence when something is posited
which abrogates the systematic connexion of nature, i.e. something
miraculous. This we can only regard as an error. The real fact
is that we most abrogate the systematic connexion of nature when
we posit either a dead mechanism or chance and arbitrariness ; and
in both cases the God-consciousness recedes—a clear proof that it
does not exist in inverse proportion to our consciousness of the
relatedness of nature. But the miraculous obviously presupposes
the system of nature: for universal chance excludes everything
miraculous. If, then, the miraculous really aroused the God-
consciousness in a special degree, we should have to find the cause
in the fact that many people only become aware of the rule through
the exception. But this view in itself would justify the conclusion
that this universal God-consciousness emerges more strongly and
frequently in the religious experience of the Roman Church than
in ours : because its adherents, properly speaking, are all immersed
in the miraculous and may expect it at any moment. The pro-
portion in which the God-consciousness appears is in fact the reverse
of this.

Our proposition can be verified also in detail. The daily
revolution of the atmospheric changes frequently appears to us as
a mechanism ; on the other hand, it is pre-eminently the abode of
the seemingly contingent ; whereas the periodical renewing of
life’s functions gives us the most vivid feeling of nature, but obviously
the God-consciousness is more clearly posited in the latter than in
the former.

3. Moreover, no Christian religious emotion can be imagined
in experiencing which we do not find ourselves placed in a nature-
system. Whatever the emotion may express, and whether it issue
in action or in speculation, we must always be conscious of our-
selves in this manner, and this consciousness must also be united
to the God-consciousness ; because otherwise the moment would
be at one and the same time religious and non-religious. The
only thing to which we ought still to call attention is that this
element of our pious moments, so far as their content is concerned,
is the same at each stage of Christian development. It will certainly
occur more frequently when a soul in fellowship with Christ has
already attained a very marked facility in the development of the


140 THE CHRISTIAN FAITH (§ 35


God-consciousness ; and will occur very little in one whom the
sensuous impulse sways so quickly from moment to moment that
such a development can rarely follow. The content, however, is
always the same, for it does not at all depend on any definite rela-
tion or condition, but the individual regards his absolute dependence
as exactly the same as that of every other finite being.

All we have to do in the first part of our exposition is, to the
best of our ability, to describe this religious feeling of nature in
general, apart from the specifically Christian content which is always
attached to it.


§ 35. According to the criterion of the three forms established in § 30
we shall have to treat, first, the relation present in the religious
self-consciousness between the finite being of the world and the
infinite Being of God ; then, in the second section, the attributes
of God in relation to the world as they appear in that self-con-
sciousness ; and lastly, in the third section, the constitution
of the world as therein conceived in wirtue of its absolute
dependence on God.


1. Considered as finite being and hence as representing all finite
being, this consciousness of the absolute dependence of the self as
an inward permanent datum which can be made apparent at any
moment, is a state of our heart or soul (Gemiithszustand) : so that
the first part of our proposition entirely corresponds with what we
expect of the dogmatic basal form. In it must be expressed the
relation of the world (regarded as absolutely dependent on God)
and God (regarded as the Being on Whom the world absolutely
depends), and if the propositions still to be established keep within
these limits it cannot be said that they go outside the real province
of Dogmatics.

2. But that danger certainly does exist in the other two forms.
For these do not immediately reflect the religious self-consciousness,
in which are given only the antithesis and the relation of the anti-
thetic entities to each other; but since the one makes God the
subject of its thesis, and the other the world, great discrimination
must be used lest either of them should express concerning their
subject anything in excess of the immediate content of that self-
consciousness.

The second dogmatic form, which treats of the divine attributes,
is based proximately on the poetical and theoretical expressions
which occur in hymns and sermons. Since it does not sufficiently


§ 35] THREE FORMS OF PROPOSITION I4I


conform these expressions to dialectical usage, it may easily be led
into saying something about the Infinite Being which would con-
tradict the antithesis contained in self-consciousness and represent
the Infinite Being as dependent on the finite, while in fact the
latter was posited as absolutely dependent on the Infinite. Those
expressions would then not correspond to the religious self-con-
sciousness which they ought to set forth.

From another point of view the third form needs careful thought.
For here the world is made the subject of dogmatic propositions ;
and for various reasons—partly on account of the customary con-
fusion between speculative thought and dogmatic, and partly
because those who are ignorant of science like to borrow from it
those general conceptions which they think desirable and which
make clearer their own higher self-consciousness—for such reasons
it can easily occur that, through weak compliance with these mis-
taken demands, objective statements should find their way into
catechetical and homiletic utterances, and that these again should
pass, in a slightly different form, into Dogmatics.

3. If, then, the statements of these two latter forms have gone
beyond the sphere of Dogmatics, and if in practice they have come
to predominate, it is only too natural that statements of the first
form should be more and more assimilated to them, and in this
manner should partake of errors which by themselves they would
have escaped. How far this has occurred up to the present time
in the development of Dogmatics the following argument will show.


FIRST SECTION


A Description of our Religious Self-Consciousness in so
far as the Relation between the World and God is
expressed in tt.


INTRODUCTION


§ 36. The original expression of this relation, i.e. that the world exists
only in absolute dependence upon God, 1s divided in Church
doctrine into the two propositions—that the world was created
by God, and that God sustains the world.


NoTE.—moTevw eis Gedy mavtoxpdropa is also the original simple expression
of the Roman Symbol.—Docent .. . Deum... semper adorandum ut omnium
Dominum ac regem summum in aevum regnantem; ab eoque solo pendere
omnia. Conf. Bohem., Art. iii—Omnia ipsum habere sub potestate et manu.
Catech. Genev.

1. The proposition that the totality of finite being exists only
in dependence upon the Infinite is the complete description of that
basis of every religious feeling which is here to be set forth. We find
ourselves always and only in a continuous existence ; our life is
always moving along a course ; consequently just so far as we
regard ourselves as finite being, apart from all other things, our
self-consciousness can represent this being only in its continuity.
And this in so complete a sense that (the feeling of absolute depend-
ence being so universal an element in our self-consciousness) we may
say that in whatever part of the whole or at whatever point of time
we may be placed, in every full act of reflection we should recognize
ourselves as thus involved in continuity, and should extend the
same thought to the whole of finite being. The proposition that
God sustains the world, considered in itself, is precisely similar.
At least it only seems to have acquired another and lesser content
because we have grown accustomed to think of preservation and
creation together, and thus a beginning is excluded from the range
of the idea of preservation. On the other hand, the proposition,
“God has created,’ considered in itself, lays down absolute depend-
ence, but only for the beginning, with the exclusion of development ;


142


§ 37) CREATION AND PRESERVATION 143


and whether the creation is conceived as taking place once for all
or in the manner of one part after another, it lays down something
which is not immediately given in our self-consciousness. Thus
this proposition appears to belong to Dogmatics only so far as
creation is complementary to the idea of preservation, with a view
of reaching again the idea of unconditional all-inclusive dependence.

2. Thus there is no sufficient reason for retaining this division
instead of the original expression which is so natural. And there
can have been no reason for bringing this distinction into Dogmatics
originally except that it was already to be found in traditional
religious teaching, and that both the suitability of such expressions
and the right measure of their use could be better guarded and
established if the distinction were also adopted in the system of
doctrine. Thus it did not originally arise on purely dogmatic
grounds ; and not only so, but it is not the outcome of any purely
religious interest (which would find complete satisfaction in the
simple expression) ; and thus, left to itself, the distinction between
creation and preservation would fall into oblivion.

But for a human imagination only partially awakened, the
beginning of all spatial and temporal existence is a subject which
it cannot leave alone ; consequently the treatment of the question
is older than the abstract scientific phase of speculation, and belongs
to the period of mythology. The question is linked up for us with
the Mosaic account of creation, but that by itself does not give it a
religious or Christian character any more than other things in the
Pentateuch which have been brought over in the same way from
primitive and prehistoric times. Yet for a long time this repre-
sentation had to submit to being used for purposes of speculation
and of science as well, and, indeed, for the purpose of supporting
opposing theories or even as their source.


§ 37. As the Evangelical (Protestant) Church has adopted both doctrines,
but has not in her confessional documents given to either of
them any distinctive character, it behoves us so to treat them
that, taken together, they will exhaust the meaning of the
original expression.

Note.—Augsburg Conf. i.: ‘A Creator and Sustainer of all things—
visible and invisible.’—Jbid. xix.: ‘Almighty God has created the whole of
Nature and sustains it, etc.’—Conf. et expos. simpl. iii.: Deum credimus .. .
creatorem rerum omnium cum visibilium tum invisibilium ... et omnia


vivificantem et conservantem.’—Conf. Gall. vii.: Credimus Deum cooperantibus
tribus personis—condidisse universa, non tantum coelum et terram omniaque


144 THE CHRISTIAN FAITH (§ 37


iis contenta, sed etiam invisibiles spiritus.—Conf. Angi. i.: Unus est Deus

_ creator et conservator omnium tum visibilium tum invisibilium.—
Conf. Scot. i.: . . . unum Deum... per quem confitemur omnia in coelo
et in terra tam visibilia quam invisibilia creata in suo esse retineri, etc.—
Conf. Hung.: Confitemur Deum verum esse et unum auctorem et conser-


vatorem omnium.

1. These juxtapositions of creation and preservation are all
derived from the later additions made in the Roman creed to the
simple statement cited above,! and still further enlarged in the
Creed of Constantinople.2 As nothing definite is here said about
the manner of creation, there is nothing on which to remark in this
distinction except the intention that nothing, no point of space and
no point of time, should be exempted from the Divine All-Sove-
reignty. Further, the expressions relating to the Trinity are neither
peculiar to the Gallican Confession nor do they first appear in this
period ; the same expressions occur in the Augsburg Confession,
where the Trinity is said to be Creator and Preserver ; and they
originate in the creed Quicunque vult, where omnipotens and dominus
are predicated of the three Persons, which clearly means the same
thing. Since the doctrine of the Trinity is neither presupposed
in every Christian religious experience nor contained’ in it, these
definitions do not belong to our present discussion.

But there is unmistakably a gradation in these expressions, so
that the original expression in the Roman symbol and the Gallican
Confession form the extremes. While in the former there is no
separation, in the latter it is so complete that the doctrine of pre-
servation is not treated at all in connexion with the creation, but is
merged later in the government of the world. The Bohemian and
Scots Confessions are therefore nearest to the former, the Augsburg
and Swiss Confessions to the latter. Moreover, all belong under our
formulation, though they do not all go back to the stimulated
religious self-consciousness as definitely as the expression in the
Bohemian Confession ; for they describe attributes of God as little as
attributes of the world, and concerning God state only ideas of relation
and operation. For it is only by describing God as the sole original
activity that the relation of absolute dependence can be expressed.

2. From this situation it follows? that we of the Evangelical
Church not only have a very wide field for a more diversified exposi-
tion of this article of doctrine, but are also called upon to make use
of it. For, by returning to the first source, we are free not only to


1 els Oedy matépa mavToKpdropa tonrhy odpavod Kal vhs.
2 oparav Te TdvTwv Kal doparupr, RiGEMS Pah Ps


§ 37] CREATION AND PRESERVATION 145


adhere more closely to the oldest and simplest expression, and
develop it without any such distinction as far as the purpose of
Dogmatics requires it, but also in the formulation of the distinction
between the two topics in the Evangelical Church everything must
rank as an opinion men are free to hold which, equally with the
rather broad and vague statements of the different Confessions,
can be traced back to the simple expression of primitive feeling.
If we consider that the attention of the Reformers was not directed
to this doctrine because of its remoteness from what at first was
matter of dispute in the early days of our Church, then (especially
as these doctrines are exposed to so many foreign influences, which
ought to be resisted) it is our duty to inquire whether traces of such
influences are not to be found in the credal formulas themselves.
Even if that is not the case, it is our duty to discover whether they
satisfy our present need and whether, perhaps, the further develop-
ment of the evangelical spirit, and the many revolutions in the
province of philosophy as well as of the natural sciences, do not
necessitate other definitions ; in which case we need have no scruples
in completely abandoning the credal expression.

3. Now in this respect the standard adopted for our treatment
appears to be not only appropriate but adequate. For although
the aim of Dogmatics does undoubtedly compel us to develop the
simple expression to such a point that the language of popular
religious teaching on this fundamental relation of the world to God
can be regulated and guarded, it is clearly appropriate at the present
time to consider the separation of Creation from Preservation.
But the danger threatens us of losing ourselves on alien ground,
and passing from the more peculiarly religious province into the
speculative, and such a danger will be best averted if every in-
dividual proposition, no matter how we may have arrived at it,
is constantly traced back to that simple expression which most
truly interprets the immediate religious self-consciousness. But,
if each of these doctrines completely coincided with that original
expression, so that both ideas were contained in each later doctrine
just as much as in the original one—the doctrine of Preservation
in that of Creation and vice versa—then one or other doctrine would
be superfluous. We should then have either to present the whole
content of the fundamental feeling twice over, or else so to arrange
the two that only when taken together did they make explicit
the undeveloped content of the original expression. This latter
method is evidently to be preferred.

10


146 THE CHRISTIAN FAITH [§ 38


§ 38. The content of the original expression can be evolved out of
either of the two doctrines, provided that in both of them, as in
the original expression, God is regarded as the sole Determinant.

Calvin, Inst. i. 16.1: In hoc praecipue nos a profanis hominibus differre
convenit, ut non minus in perpetuo mundi statu quam in prima ejus origine
praesentia divinae virtutis nobis eluceat.—Nemesius, d. nat. hom., p. 164,
Ed. Ant. : ’Eu yap déyor rls, 6tt ard Thy &E dpxjs yéveow elpu@ mpoBatver TO mpayEua,
rotro av ely Néywr, ore TH KTloer cuvuTdpxEL TdvTWS 7 Tpdvola, Td yap eipu@ mpoBalvew
To krisbév, Sydot TH Tice. ovyKaTaBeBAoOar Thy mpdvorav’ Kal oUrws ovdev Av ado
déyou, ) Tov adbrov elvar ronriy dua Kal mpovonriy Tay dbvTwY.

1. If, with the statements of the Confessions, which uniformly
speak of all things, not of an All, we refer the idea of creation
primarily to particular things, what from this point of view we
conceive of as their origin will really be simply the preservation of
species, which is conditioned by the renewal or re-emergence of
individual things. Since the underlying self-consciousness here
represents the whole of finite being, the concept of species suggests
itself as naturally as that of the individual life, for in our self-
consciousness we always posit ourselves as men; and thus the
statement that the re-emergent things exist through God, will
correspond to the content of this self-consciousness just as ade-
quately as the statement that individual things arise through God.

Now, with our increased knowledge of the world, we may indeed
conceive the heavenly bodies and all the life developing upon them
as particular things which have not all necessarily come into
existence simultaneously ; yet their successive origination must
obviously be also conceived as the active continuance of formative
forces which must be resident in finite existence. And thus,
however far our consciousness extends, we find nothing the origin
of which cannot be brought under the concept of Preservation, so
that the doctrine of Creation is completely absorbed in the doctrine
of Preservation. In the same way, if we regard individual things
as created, and follow this a step further, we find that the preserva-
tion of these same things is equivalent to that alternation of changes
and movements in which their being perdures. But as these always
form more or less coherent series, there is always something new
implied either in the beginning of each series of activities or in the
effects produced by a subject—something which was not formerly
contained in that particular thing. This is, therefore, a new be-
ginning and can be regarded as a creation, and the more properly


' So also Nemesius, p. 163 : és ofv &xacrov ék rod olkelov orépyaros pverar Kal
ov €& NXov mpovolas amovons ;


§ 38] EQUIVALENCE OF THE TWO 147


so regarded the more such a beginning appears to be an important
link in development : nevertheless ‘more’ and ‘less’ here do not
give us ground for a definite distinction. But as every individual
activity forms in itself a fresh series, and its beginning is a new
origin, so, as far as our consciousness extends, all that we are accus-
tomed to regard as object of the divine preservation falls under the
conception of creation. Thus the concept of creation if taken in
its whole range makes the concept of preservation superfluous,
just as we have already seen happens inversely ; for what does not
wholly fall under one of the two is not given for the other.

Popular religious teaching cannot be blamed for clinging to this
freedom and regarding the same event alternatively as either new
creation or preservation in accordance with natural law. And
devotion will scarcely consent to recognize the precedence of either,
as if the one more perfectly, or in a loftier style than the other,
corresponded to the absolute feeling of dependence.

2. This equivalence, however, is certainly dependent on our
conceiving of the divine origination on the one side, and the de-
pendence of the finite being on the other as equally complete,
whether we imagine a thing to be created by God or sustained by
Him. If we think of the creation of the world as a single divine
act and including the whole system of nature, then this conception
may be a complete expression of the feeling of absolute dependence,
so long as we do not conceive of that act as having ceased, and
consequently imagine on the one side, in God, an alternation of
activity and rest relatively to the world, and on the other side, in
the world, an alternation between a determination of the whole
through God and a determination of all single individuals through
each other. In the same way if we regard Preservation as a con-
tinuous divine activity exerted on the whole course of the world,
covering the first beginning no less than each subsequent state,
then this is a complete expression of the self-consciousness in
question, provided we do not think the origin of the world is con-
ditioned by something else before and after that activity. For,
otherwise, in every situation only some elements would be dependent
on the divine activity, while the rest, though ever so small a part,
would be conditioned by what had previously existed. And thus
the divine activity, whose object should be the whole world, would
be always mingled with passiveness.

The same results follow in another way if we conceive of the
divine creative activity, not indeed as momentary, yet as recurring


148 THE CHRISTIAN FAITH [§ 39


only at particular points and certain times. For even though the
sustaining activity extended between these points so that divine
activity never alternated at any point with inactivity, yet creative
activity would then come in distinguishably from sustaining
activity, and each in limiting the other would exclude it ; and thus
the world would certainly remain entirely dependent on God but
irregularly, and on divine activities which mutually restrict each
other. And the position is not altered if we think of the sustaining
activity as unmixed with passivity but suppose either that, follow-
ing on a pure creative act, it has to overcome an opposition which
develops therefrom, or suppose that the creative activity enters
at individual points as another activity. The tendency, however,
to such perverted formulas, which in no way express the pure feeling
of dependence but misrepresent it in every way, is nearly always
unmistakably present. This naturally has its roots, not in Chris-
tian piety, but in a confused world-view which in ordinary life
is only too common—a view which only uses dependence on God
as an explanation of the course of the world where the causal nexus
is concealed, and thus makes use of it mostly where something
severed from what went before as well as separated from its con-
text, appears either as a beginning or in isolation.


§ 39. The doctrine of Creation 1s to be elucidated pre-eminently with
a view to the exclusion of every alien element, lest from the
way in which the question of Origin is answered elsewhere
anything steal into our province which stands in contra-
diction to the pure expression of the feeling of absolute de-
pendence. But the doctrine of Preservation is pre-eminently
to be elucidated so as to bring out this fundamental feeling
ttself in the fullest way.


1. Our self-consciousness, in its universality, as both these
doctrines relate to it, can only represent finite being in general
so far as it is a continuous being ; for we only know ourselves in
this manner but have no consciousness of a beginning of being.
Hence as we have seen, though not impossible, it would be
extremely difficult to develop the same material principally or
exclusively under the form of the doctrine of Creation. Such an
attempt would be just as arbitrary as it would be inappropriate
for the purpose of Dogmatics, in view of the fact that in popular
religious teaching the doctrine of Preservation has a far greater
importance. In general the question of the origin of all finite


§ 40) CREATION 149


being is raised not in the interest of piety but in that of curiosity,
hence it can only be answered by such means as curiosity offers.
Piety can never show more than an indirect interest in it: i.e. it
recognizes no answer to it which brings the religious man into
contradiction with his fundamental feeling. And this is the
position given the doctrine, both when it occurs in the New Testa-
ment and in all regular Confessions of Faith. Whereas the Old
Testament basis of it lies in the beginnings of a history-book which
as such chiefly satisfies the desire for knowledge.

2. In the doctrine of Creation, then, we have pre-eminently
to prevent anything alien from slipping in from the field of know-
ledge. But the opposite danger is also certainly to be kept in view,
namely, the development of our self-consciousness must not be
so conceived as to set the man who desires knowledge in contra-
diction with the principles of research he follows in the sphere of
nature or of history. But as the self-consciousness we have here
to consider itself implies that we are placed in a nature-system,
any doctrine of Preservation which could immediately follow from
this would find no motive in the working out of this self-conscious-
ness for wishing to overthrow that assumption. And this mistake
will be the less likely to occur if the treatment of the doctrine of
Creation already specified has gone before.

3. If the immediate higher self-consciousness which is to be
represented in both doctrines be one and the same, then the aim
of Christian Dogmatics is twofold. On the one hand, to bring
together the various presentations current within our Church in the
different spheres of religious teaching, to show their true content,
and to make them clear and coherent ; on the other hand, to set
up safeguards in order to ensure that nothing should insinuate
itself which—though in any given context the fact might not be
noticed—might contradict what really belongs here. Both doctrines
taken together will then exhaust the dogmatic presentation of the
fundamental feeling of absolute dependence, if in the one we seek
more particularly to secure the necessary precautions, and if in the
other we have predominantly in view its positive development.


First DOCTRINE : CREATION


§ 40. The religious consciousness which is here our basis contradicts
every representation of the origin of the world which excludes
anything whatever from origination by God, or which places


150 THE CHRISTIAN FAITH [§ 40


God under those conditions and antitheses which have arisen
in and through the world.
Actss0 724 Rom, 1320 Pleba nes:

I. The New Testament passages quoted above lead us to reject
any more definite conception of the Creation. The expression
prypare is merely the negative of any closer definition, so as to ex-
clude all idea of instrument or means. It is quite consistent with
it and equally correct to say that the world itself, since it came into
existence through the spoken word, is the word of God.1_ Thus we
may be satisfied to put forward this negative character as a standard
of criticism for that which has, as it seems to us, wrongly intruded
itself as a more exact definition of this conception in Dogmatics.
For as our immediate self-consciousness represents finite being
only in the identity of origination and continuance, we find in that
self-consciousness neither motive nor guidance for a treatment of
origination taken by itself, and therefore we can take no particular
interest in it.

The further elaboration of the doctrine of Creation in Dogmatics
comes down to us from times when material even for natural
science was taken from the Scriptures and when the elements of all
higher knowledge lay hidden in Theology. Hence the complete
separation of these two involves our handing over this subject to
natural science, which, carrying its researches backward into time,
may lead us back to the forces and masses that formed the world,
or even further still. On this assumption we may patiently await
the result, since every scientific endeavour which works with the
ideas ‘God’ and ‘world’ must, without being dependent on
Christian doctrine or becoming so, be limited by the very same
determinations, if these two ideas are not to cease to be two.

2. As the New Testament passages give no material for a further
development of the doctrine of Creation, and dogmaticians have
always referred back to the Scriptures even when confusing their
problem with that of philosophy, we must, in the first place, pass
in review the Mosaic narrative and the Old Testament passages,
which really in a sense are wholly dependent on it.

The Mosaic account was undeniably received by the Reformers
as a genuinely historical narrative.2 Luther’s statements, how-

+‘ What is the whole creation else than a word of God, said and spoken


by God? . . . thus it is for God no harder to create than for us to speak.’—
Luther in Genesis, i. § 51.


_? Luther in Genesis, i. 3, § 43: ‘Moses is writing a history and narrates
things that happened.’—Calvin, Instit. i. 14. 3: Moses vulgi ruditati se accom-


§ 40] BIBLICAL ACCOUNT OF CREATION I51


ever, are chiefly directed against the allegorical interpretation, and
Calvin’s view really excludes any use of the narrative for the
development of a genuine theory. It is an advantage in every
way that nothing on the subject has become a part of Confessions
of Faith, especially as (if we do not force ourselves to look upon
the second account in Genesis as a recapitulating continuation of
the first) the difference between the two is of such importance that
we can hardly attribute to them a genuine historical character.
If we further take into consideration that in the Old Testament
passages referring to the Creation sometimes the same simplicity
prevails as in the New Testament,! and that sometimes the Mosaic
statements, although made fundamental, are very freely handled : ?
also that nowhere is a purely didactic use made of this account, and
that Philo, who absolutely rejects the ‘six days’ in the literal
sense, must certainly have had predecessors who did the same—
in view of all this we may conclude pretty certainly that in that
age the literal interpretation was never universally prevalent, but
that there always survived a somewhat obscure but healthy feeling
that the old record must not be treated as historical in our sense of
the word. We have therefore no reason to maintain a stricter
historical interpretation than the Hebrews themselves did in their
best days.

Supposing, however, we were right in assuming that the Mosaic
description was an historical account communicated in an extra-
ordinary way, it would only follow that in this way we had attained
to a scientific insight we could not otherwise have acquired. But
the particular pieces of information would never be articles of faith
in our sense of the phrase, for our feeling of absolute dependence
does not gain thereby either a new content, a new form, or clearer
definition. That is why it cannot be the task of Dogmatics to give
an explanatory commentary or a criticism of such comments.

3. As regards the stated definitions themselves, it is quite clear
that our feeling of absolute dependence could not refer to the
universal condition of all finite being if anything in it (7.e. that
being) were independent of God or ever had been. It is just as
certain that if there could be anything in the whole of finite existence
as such which entered into it at its origin independently of God,
then because it must exist in us too, the feeling of absolute depend-


modans non alia Dei opera commemiorat in historia creationis, nisi quae oculis
nostris occurrunt.
Aisa. 4518, Jer. 101? aps 33°", Ps. 104, Job 33+


152 THE CHRISTIAN FAITH [§ 41


ence could have no truth even in relation to ourselves. But if,
on the other hand, we think of God the Creator in any way as
limited, and thus in His activity resembling that which should be
absolutely dependent on Him, then the feeling expressing this
dependence likewise could not be true (since equality and depend-
ence neutralize each other), and thus the finite in that it resembled
God could not be absolutely dependent upon Him. But except
in one of these two forms, a contradiction between any theory of
creation and the universal basis of our religious self-consciousness
is not conceivable. With the Christian form of religious self-
consciousness, which presupposes an experience, the doctrine of
mere creation cannot be in contradiction, because it disregards
continuity. Christian piety can, then, have no other interest in
these researches than to avoid both these dangers. Whether this is
easy, or if in avoiding one we only too easily fall into the other,
must be seen from a closer consideration of the corollaries accepted
by Dogmatics.


§ 41. If the conception of Creation is to be further developed, the origin
of the world must, indeed, be traced entirely to the divine
activity, but not in such a way that this activity is thought
of as resembling human activity ; and the origin of the world
must be represented as the event in time which conditions
all change, but not so as to make the divine activity itself a
temporal activity.


Conf. Belg. xii.: Credimus Patrem per verbum hoc est filium suum
coelum et terram ceterasque creaturas omnes quandoque ipsi visum fuit, ex
nihilo creasse.—Joh. Dam., d. orth. f. ii. 5: . . . ék Tod ph bvros els 7d elvan
Tapayayov Ta cbmmravra.—Luther on Genesis, ii. 2, § 7: ‘And God is in short
outside all means and circumstances of time.’—Jbid. : ‘ Everything which God
has willed to create He created at that moment when He spake, though
certainly everything does not at once appear before our eyes... . I am
indeed something new . . . but . . . for God I have been born and preserved
even from the beginning of the world, and this word when He said, ‘‘ Let
us make man,” created me as well.’—Hilar., d. f. Ty. xii. 40: Nam etsi habeat
dispensationem sui firmamenti solidatio—sed coeli terrae ceterorumque
elementorum creatio ne levi saltem momento operationis discernitur,—
Anselm, Monol. 9: Nullo namque pacto fieri potest aliquid rationabiliter ab
aliquo, nisi in facientis ratione praecedat aliquod rei faciendae quasi exemplum,
sive ut aptius dicitur forma . . . quare cum ea quae facta sunt, clarum sit
nihil fuisse antequam fierent, quantum ad hoc quia non erant quod nunc sunt,
nec erat ex quo fierent, non tamen nihil erant quantum ad rationem facientis,
—Phot., Bibl., p. 302, Bekk.: b7e 6 ’Qpeyévys eye cuvatdiov evar rg . . . OG
TO wav. "Re yap, packe, ovk gore Snucoupyds dvev Snusovpyudrwv . . . obde mapv-
Tokpdrwp divev TOY KpaToumévoy . . . avdyKn €& dpxfs abra Urd Tod beod yeverjc bac,


§ 41] CREATION OUT OF NOTHING 153


kal pn elvar xpdvov, bre ovk fv Tadra. el yap tv xpédvos, bre ovK fv To omuara.. .
kal ddNovovabar Kal weraBdddew Tov arperrov Kal dvadNolwrov cuuBhceTrar Oedv* el yap
Uorepov memoinxe TO Tav, OHNov Ore dd TOD wh moeiy els 7d Toveiy weréBade.—Hilar.,
d. f. Ty. xii. 39: Cum enim praepararetur coelum aderat Deo. Numquid
coeli praeparatio Deo est temporalis ? ut repens cogitationis motus subito
in mentem tamquam antea torpidam . . . subrepserit, humanoque modo
fabricandi coeli impensam et instrumenta quaesierit? . . . Quae enim
futura sunt, licet in eo quod creanda sunt adhuc fient, Deo tamen, cui in
creandis rebus nihil novum ac repens est, iam facta sunt: dum et temporum
dispensatio est ut creentur, et iam in divinae virtutis praesciente efficientia
sint creata.—Augustin., d. civ. D. xi. 4. 2: Qui autem a Deo factum fatentur,
non tamen eum volunt temporis habere sed suae creationis initium, ut modo
quodam via intelligibili semper sit factus: dicunt quidem aliquid, etc.—
Ibid. xii. 15: Sed cum cogito cuius rei dominus semper fuerit, si semper
creatura non fuit, affirmare aliquid pertimesco.—Ibid. 17: Una eademque
sempiterna et immutabili voluntate res, quas condidit, et ut prius non
essent egit, et ut posterius essent, quando esse coeperunt.—Ibid. xi. 6:
Procul dubio non est mundus factus in tempore sed cum tempore.—Idem, de
Genes. c. Man. i. 2: Non ergo possumus dicere fuisse aliquod tempus quando
Deus nondum aliquid fecerat.

1. The expression ‘out of nothing’ excludes the idea that
before the origin of the world anything existed outside God, which
as ‘matter’ could enter into the formation of the world. And
undoubtedly the admission of ‘ matter’ as existing independently
of the divine activity would destroy the feeling of absolute de-
pendence, and the actual world would be represented as a mixture
of that which existed through God and that which existed inde-
pendently of God. But since this phrase undeniably recalls
Aristotle’s category é€ ob and is formed on it, it reminds us on
the one hand of human methods in construction which give form
to an already existing matter, and on the other hand of the pro-
cesses of nature in the composition of bodies out of many elements.
The expression is harmless if everything that is a part of the pro-
cesses of nature is strictly separated from the first beginning of
things, and creation is thus raised above mere formation.

Yet from Hilary and Anselm we can see how easily, behind the
denial of matter, may lie the idea of the pre-existence of form
before things, though of course in God and not outside God. This
position, too, appears to be quite harmless in itself, but as the two
terms of the antithesis, matter and form, are not in the same
relation to God, He is drawn away from an attitude of neutrality
to the antithesis and placed in some degree under it. Hence the
existence of forms in God prior to the existence of things but already
related to it may naturally be called a ‘ preparation.’ But in this
way the other rule is violated, and we must regard as valid Luther's


154 THE CHRISTIAN FAITH [§ 41


contention that if there are two divine activities which, like prepara-
tion and creation, can be conceived of only in a definite time-
sequence, then God is no longer outside all contact with time.
Anselm in his own way has expressed this time-relationship most
bluntly and frankly. Hilary would have done away with it, but
he only succeeded in eliminating it with regard to things now
happening separately in time and not in respect of the original
creation. For it cannot be said of the original creation that it was
created by the activity of foreknowledge prior to its actual existence.

Here it can only be remarked in passing that the phrase ‘ out of
nothing ’ is also used frequently to differentiate the creation of the
world from the generation of the Son.!_ If it were generally under-
stood that the latter is eternal and the former temporal, or if we
could come to a general agreement as to the difference between
generation and creation, there would be no necessity to draw any
further distinction. But even so the expression is not essential for
this purpose, for even if we do not at all identify the ‘ Word’ and
the ‘Son,’ the phrase ‘to be created through the “ Word” ’ ?
sufficiently obviates any confusion of this kind ; even if the differ-
ence between creation and generation is not emphasized.

2. If, as suggested above, we strictly isolate the first creation,
so that all things not absolutely primitive are regarded as part of
the developing processes of nature and thus brought under the
conception of preservation, then the question whether the creation
occupied time, is answered in the negative. The distinction between
a first and second creation, or an indirect and direct creation,
always comes back in general to the evolving of the complex from
the simple * and of the organic from the elementary. But to
acknowledge another creation here is either again entirely to
abolish the difference between creation and preservation or to
assume different kinds of matter devoid of inherent forces, which
is surely meaningless. But even if in the case of creation we think


 Fecisti enim coelum et terram non de te, nam esset aequale unigenito
tuo—et aliud praeter te non erat unde faceres ea, et ideo de nihilo fecisti
coelum et terram.—Augustin., Conf. xii. 7.

** All things are so made through God’s word that they may more rightly
be said to be born than made or renewed, for no instrument or means comes in.’
—— chy pe TOD:

STH mev mpdrn nucpa érolnoev 6 eds ba éroincev éx wh dvTwr. Tals dé das
ovK éx pH bvTwv, GAN €& dv erolnoe 7h mpdry jucpa weTeBarev ws 0EAnoe.—Hippolyt.
in Genesis.

“Ta perv odx x mpotimoxemévys UAns, olov ovpavdy (where ovparés is the Aristo-
telian fifth substance) yy dépa mip tdwp Ta 5é éx rovrwy, olov fa urd, etc.—
Joh. Damase. ii. 25.


§ 41] CREATION AND TIME 155


first of matter (though we might equally well think of forces), then,
from that point, living mobile being must have existed and under-
gone a continuous development. Otherwise the creation of bare
matter would only have been a preparation, that is an external
material corresponding to the previously mentioned inner formal
one. We must refer these definitions back to a time when men
delighted in such abstractions because there was then no question
of a dynamic aspect of nature.

Another point with respect to the relation of the creation to
time which does not lie in our purview is the question whether there
was time before the world existed or whether time began with the
world. If we take the world in its widest sense, we cannot admit
the first, since a time before the world could only have referred to
God, and He would then be placed in time. The Confessio Belgica
with its ‘ quando ipsi visum fuit ’ clearly falls into this error, and
in opposition to it we must return to Augustine’s formula.

Finally, the controversy over the temporal or eternal creation
of the world (which can be resolved into the question whether it is
possible or necessary to conceive of God as existing apart from
created things) has no bearing on the content of the feeling of
absolute dependence, and it is therefore a matter of indifference
how it is decided. But in so far as the idea of a creation in time
must be related to that of a beginning of divine activity ad extra or
a beginning of divine sovereignty as Origen suggested, God would
be brought within the region of change and subjected to time.
Thus the antithesis between Him and finite beings would be lessened,
and the purity of the feeling of absolute dependence endangered.

Augustine is hardly more satisfactory when, in order to avoid
this position, he declares that a single act of the Divine Will is
sufficient to account for the earlier non-existence and the later
existence of the world. For if a similar action of the Divine Will is
required to explain the prior non-existence of the world, then we
must suppose that, apart from this Divine Will, the world would
have come into existence earlier, and consequently that there was a
possibility of its coming into existence independently of the Divine
Will. But if we regard the one Divine Will as ineffectual prior to
the existence of the world, neither preventing nor producing any-
thing, then the transition from non-activity to activity remains,
even though it be differently expressed as a transition from willing
to doing ;! while, on the other hand, it is impossible to see how


1 Addamus eum ab aeterno id voluisse. Quicquid enim vult, id voluit


156 THE CHRISTIAN FAITH [§ 42


the idea that God does not exist without something absolutely de-
pendent on Him could weaken or confuse the religious self-conscious-
ness. Just so the tracing of the Word through which God created the
world (a subject not to be considered here) back to the Word which
was with God from eternity, can never be made clearly intelligible *
if there is not an eternal creation through the eternal Word.

Postscript.—We can also attach to this the definition that God
created the world through a free decree. Now it is self-evident
that He on Whom everything is absolutely dependent is absolutely
free. But if we suppose that the free decision implies a prior de-
liberation followed by choice, or interpret freedom as meaning that
God might equally well have not created the world (because we
think that there must have been this possibility, otherwise God was
compelled to create), we have then assumed an antithesis between
freedom and necessity, and, by attributing this kind of freedom
to God, have placed Him within the realm of contradictions.


First APPENDIX. THE ANGELS


§ 42. This conception 1s indigenous to the Old Testament and has
passed over into the New. It contains in itself nothing 1m-
possible and does not conflict with the basis of the religious
consciousness 1n general. But at the same time it never
enters into the sphere of Christian doctrine proper. It can,
therefore, continue to have its place in Christian language
without laying on us the duty of arriving at any conclusion
with regard to its truth.


1. The narratives of Abraham, Lot, Jacob, of the call of Moses
and Gideon and the prophecy of Samson, bear the stamp very clearly
of what we are accustomed to call ‘myth.’ Indeed, in many of
them God Himself and the Angels of the Lord are so interchanged
that the whole can be thought of as a Theophany in which the
appearance perceived by the senses need not be that of a being
independent and different from God. In this indefinite form the idea
is older than these narratives, perhaps even older than the narrated
events. That they are not exclusively Hebraic in the narrower
sense seems clear from many other traces, such as the history of
Balaam. Poetical representations of many kinds in the Psalms


ab aeterno. Jam quod voluerat ab aeterno id aliquando tandem factum est.
Thus He now worked and was active that the world should come into being.’
—Morus, Comment., t. i. § 292.
+ Cf. Luther, W. A., i. pp. 23-28, and iii. pp. 36-40.


§ 42] BIBLICAL IDEA OF ANGELS 157


and the Prophets lead to the same conclusion ; anything can be
called an angel that is a bearer of a divine message. So that some-
times definite individual beings are to be conceived under this term
and sometimes not. Of the former we have scarcely any other
explanation to give than that in general different peoples have
imagined many kinds of spiritual beings in different forms because
of a consciousness of the power of spirit over matter ; and the less
this problem is solved the more that consciousness gives rise to a
tendency to suppose there is more spirit than that manifested in the
human race and different from that in the living animal, whose
powers and mechanical instincts with their own power over matter,
must themselves as matter be brought within our power.

Now we, to whom the majority of the heavenly bodies are
known, satisfy this longing by the familiar supposition that most
or all of these are filled with animated beings of varying grades.
Previously there was no alternative but to people either the earth
or the heavens with hidden and spiritual beings. The Jewish
people seem to have decidedly adhered to the latter method, especi-
ally after the highest Being came to be thought of also as the King
of the people, who therefore must have servants around Him to
send as He chose to every part of His kingdom and to allow them
to share in every branch of administration. This is certainly the
most developed conception of the angels. Consequently we must
distinguish them clearly from our conception of spiritual life
developed on other planets according to their nature and in associa-
tion with an organism, since the Biblical idea cannot be connected
with this, but is something quite different... We ought rather to
think of them as spiritual beings, not belonging to any definite
heavenly body, who could embody themselves temporarily, accord-
ing to their tasks, in the manner in which they have appeared from
time to time in our world. And obviously we know far too little
of the interstellar spaces, as also of the possible relations between
spirit and body, to deny outright the truth of such a notion. Indeed,
if we regard the appearance of such beings as something miraculous,
this is not so much because we must necessarily hold that such a
temporary incursion of alien beings into the order of our lives
would interrupt the course of nature, but much more because (in
Christianity generally and also to a great extent in the Old Testa-
ment) their appearance is associated with special points of develop-
ment and revelation. In the New Testament angels appear at the

1Cf. Reinh., Dogm., § 50.


158 THE CHRISTIAN FAITH (§ 42


Annunciation of Christ and of His forerunner and at Christ’s Birth
in narratives of a more or less poetical character which lie outside
the proper field of the Gospel tradition. This is true also in some
measure of the strengthening angel in Gethsemane, with respect to
whom at any rate no witness is quoted. In the case of the Resurrec-
tion and the Ascension, as well as the conversion of Cornelius and
the liberation of Peter, it is possible to doubt whether angels or men
are meant. In the account of Philip, the expressions ‘angel of the
Lord’ and ‘spirit’ alternate as they doin the Old Testament. But
after this angels disappear altogether even from the Apostolic history.

2. Everywhere, however, in our Holy Scriptures the angels
are assumed ; but nowhere is anything taught respecting them.
Apart from the usual prophetic and poetical language in descrip-
tions of the Last Day,! Christ Himself refers to them only in His
warning against despising little ones 7 and in connexion with Peter’s
useless defence of Him.’ If we want to take this as definite teach-
ing we must also put forward the doctrine that children (and perhaps
every individual) have special angels, that the angels behold the
face of God, and that they can be employed in legions. The same
applies to the Apostolic passages if we refer to angels all the obscure
and ambiguous expressions about thrones and _ principalities.®
Even in the Epistle to the Hebrews ® the angels are not so much
subjects of dogmatic teaching as mediums for such teaching. The
writer maintains that Christ is more exalted than all the angels,
as they are mentioned in the Old Testament, in the Prophets, and
the Psalms; to the angelic appearances in the New Testament
there is no reference. Christ and the Apostles might have said
all these things without having had any real conviction of the
existence of such beings or any desire to communicate it, just as
everyone adopts popular ideas and makes use of them in discussing
other things, as, for example, we might talk of ghosts or fairies,
although these ideas had no definite sort of relation to our actual
convictions. We do not mean to suggest what is usually under-
stood by ‘ accommodation,’ which is often taken to mean adapting
oneself to prevailing ideas whilst holding opposite convictions.

The Confessions of the Protestant Church have accepted these
conceptions only incidentally, and the statements show clearly
enough that they place no value on any teaching about angels.”


1 Matt. 16?” and 2531. =Matt. 1820) 3 Matt. 2653.

* John 1° is plainly figurative. AEG, 1, 6 Heb, 142.,

"Apol. Conf. Art. ix.: Praeterea et hoc largimuy quod angeli orent pro
nobis. Art. Smalc.: Etsi angeli in coelo pro nobis orent, etc.


§ 43] DOCTRINE OF ANGELS 159


This does not in the least mean that the Reformers were unfamiliar
with the subject or doubted the literal truth of the angelic appear-
ances in the Biblical narratives: their Church hymns prove the
contrary, but in the sphere of piety they attached no great value to
the matter.


§ 43. The only tenet which can be established as a doctrine concerning
angels 1s this: that the question whether the angels exist or
not ought to have no influence upon our conduct, and that
revelations of their existence are now no longer to be expected.


1. It is not without considerable hesitation that the confidence
of Christians in the protection of angels can be encouraged. For
in the first place, that they avert the power of evil spirits ! could
hardly be told to any but children without detriment, because
against all that is usually ascribed to the devil, we should use the
spiritual armour recommended by the Bible, and not rely on angelic
protection.” It is not less serious to teach an external protection
through angels. For we must teach that God has no need of angels
for our protection, unless we assume a continual activity on the
part of angels, and thus do away with the entire interdependence
of nature. But it is said that it affords more consolation if God
makes use of angels than if our preservation is effected by natural
means, so that God, in view of our weakness, employs angels and
then reveals the fact to us. On the one hand, this theory could
not be carried through without very limited and almost childish
conceptions of God, and on the other hand, it can only feed our
vanity if we accept the idea that a whole species of higher beings
exists only for our service. Wisely, therefore, in our Confessions—
although strictly in opposition to the saints of the Roman Church—
the intercessions of the angels have taken the place of their active
influence. We cannot, however, take the Biblical passage on
which this is founded as a convincing proof.

That this conception is losing its influence among Christians
follows naturally from the fact that it belongs to a time when our
knowledge of the forces of nature was very limited, and our power
over them at its lowest stage. In every such situation our re-
flections now instinctively take another direction, so that in active
life we do not easily turn to angels. The argument of Luther °


1Luth., Catech. Min.: Tuus sanctus angelus sit mecum ne diabolus
quidquam in me possit.

aE phot 1 Pets sone. 3 Cf. Calvin, Jnustit. i. xiv. 6-11. 4 Zech. 112.

5 In Genesis, ii. § 19: ‘ The angels must be our protectors and guard us,


160 THE CHRISTIAN FAITH (8 43


has, moreover, as regards the angels, tended to repress the levity
so easily elicited by the supernatural. But the confidence he
wishes to strengthen will be the same even if we do not think of the
angels, but expect the divine protection in the usual way. Since
the Church has itself declared against the veneration of angels, we
can rightly say it would be the worst form of veneration if, in
deference to their unknown service to us, we believed we might
omit any of the care recommended us for ourselves and others.

2. But more closely considered, nothing can be concluded from
all the angelic appearances of which we have knowledge, either for
present or future times, partly because these appearances occurred
in that primitive period when the interdependence of man with
nature was not yet settled and he himself was undeveloped ; and,
as even to many a philosopher at that time the notion of an educa-
tion through higher beings was not unfamiliar, these warning
and prophetic appearances might be an echo of that connexion of
ideas. At a later time we find angels almost exclusively at great
points of development when other wonderful events are wont to
happen. Moreover, when the earlier teachers of the Church 1 assert
that the intercourse between men and angels, which for so long a
period had been interrupted, was only restored through Christ,
this, too, must be understood in the same way, for this restoration
did not extend beyond the Apostolic times.

Since they are so entirely outside our province, there is no reason
for more accurate inquiry into the creation of angels either in
itself or in relation to the Mosaic creation story, nor again into their
general nature, manner of life, and activities? On the contrary,
for the actual province of Dogmatics the subject remains wholly
problematic, and none but a private and liturgical use of this con-
ception is to be recognized. The private use of the conception will
always confine itself to visualizing the higher protection so far as
that does not make use of conscious human activities. In the
liturgical use the thought which has been specially in view is that
God must be represented as surrounded by pure and innocent
spirits.$
but only so far as we remain in our path. Christ points to this explanation
when He confronts the devil with the command from Deut. 61*. For thereby
He shows that man’s appointed path is not to fly in the air. Hence, when
we are in our calling or office and have a command from God or from the men
who have the right to direct our calling, then we must believe that the pro-
tection of the dear angels cannot fail us.’


1Cf. Chrysost. on Col. 129,
2 Cf. Reinhard, Dogm., §§ 53, 54. MG, Jelsloy, srattt


§ 44] THE DEVIL 161


SECOND APPENDIX: THE DEvIL


§ 44. The idea of the Devil, as developed among us, is so unstable that
we cannot expect anyone to be convinced of its truth; but,
besides, our Church has never made doctrinal use of the idea.


1. The chief points in this idea are as follows: spiritual beings
of a high degree of perfection, who lived in close relation with God,
voluntarily changed from this state to a state of antagonism and
rebellion against God.

Now we cannot ask anyone to accept this unless we are able
to help him over a great number of difficulties. First, as to the
so-called fall of the good angels: the more perfect these good
angels are supposed to have been, the less possible it is to find
any motive but those presupposing a fall already, e.g. arrogance
and envy ; 1 furthermore, if after the Fall the natural powers of the
devil remained undiminished,? it is impossible to conceive how
persistent evil could exist side by side with superlative insight.
For such insight must, in the first place, have shown every conflict
with God to be an entirely useless undertaking. It can only be
thought to afford a momentary satisfaction even to one lacking
true understanding, whereas an intelligent being, to undertake such
a conflict and persevere in it, must of necessity will to be and
remain unblessed. Now in speaking of such a man we say he is
“ possessed,’ because no explanation of his attitude can be derived
from the subject himself. Is it not, then, still more impossible
to find an explanation in the more perfect condition of the angels—
by whom would they be possessed ? Again, if the devil at the time
of his fall lost the finest and the purest intelligence (and it is indeed
the worst possible derangement to become the bitterest and most
obdurate enemy of God after being His friend), then it is incon-
ceivable, on the one hand, how through one error of the will the
intelligence could be for ever lost, unless the error was already due
to a lack of intelligence ; and on the other hand, how could the devil,
after such a loss of intelligence, be so dangerous an enemy? For
nothing is easier than to contend with senseless wickedness. It is
just as difficult to explain the relation of the fallen angels to other

1So rightly Luther (Hall. ed.), Th. i. p. 36. In Bernard, too, the idea
is to be found that Lucifer perceived in God that man was to be raised above


the angelic nature ; hence that avvogant spirit had envied man such blessedness,
and thus had fallen. Such ideas have their own value. But I should not care


to compel anyone to yield to them.
2 Cf. Luther, 1bid.tpp. 261, 262.


If


162 THE CHRISTIAN FAITH [$ 44


angels. For if they were all alike, and in that case no special
personal motive could be felt by one group, how is it to bé< ex-
plained that the one group sinned and the other did not ? It is
certainly no less difficult if we assume that,1 prior to the fall of one
group, all the angels may have been in a partially unstable state
of innocence, but that one group because of one deed have been
for ever judged and condemned while the other group, because of
their resistance, have been for ever confirmed and established,
so that henceforth they cannot fall. Lastly, with regard to the
condition of the fallen angels after the Fall, it is difficult to see
how the two following ideas can be held consistently : The fallen
angels, already oppressed by great ills and expecting still greater,
at the same time out of hatred to God and to relieve their feeling
of distress, engage in active opposition to God, while yet they are
unable to effect anything except by God’s will and permission,”
and thus would find far greater alleviation for their distress as well
as satisfaction for their hatred of God in absolute inactivity.

Finally, can the devil and his angels be thought of as a kingdom,
and thus working unanimously although only outwardly and mostly
in human affairs? Now, with the lmitations already outlined
* and generally acknowledged, such a kingdom is inconceivable unless
the overlord is omniscient and therefore knows in advance what
God will permit ; and besides not only does the evil in one man
mostly hinder the same evil in another, but in each man one evil
hinders another.

2. There are two ways, in particular, in which a doctrinal use
might be made of this conception. The evil in man may be traced
back to the prior evil in Satan and explained by it ; and the devil
may be represented as active in the punishment of sin. Our Con-
fessions, however, are too cautious to base anything concerning
this doctrine on so hazardous an idea. As regards the former,
they only group the devil with the wicked by making him their
leader, in which case the existence of evil in man is in no way
explained by its existence in Satan, and the latter requires just as
much elucidation as the former. In other passages, moreover, if
evil is traced back to the temptation of Satan,4 the purpose in some


NCieluthen od ape2o2.

* Mosh., Th. dogm., t.1. p. 417 sq. ; Calv., Instit. i. 14, 16.

* Aug., Conf. 19: Causa peccati est voluntas diaboli et malorum quacecens
avertit se a Deo.

“Conf. Belg. xiv.: verbis diaboli aurem praebens.—Conf. Helv. viii. :


instinctu serpentis et sua culpa.—Sol. decl. i.: seductione Satanae iustitia
concreata amissa est.


5 NEW TESTAMENT THOUGH? OF THE DEVIL 163


of them is less to provide an explanation than a modification of the
opinion that the devil was instrumental in putting quite another
creature in the place of the original man. But, indeed, the fact
that man allowed himself to be tempted presupposes aberration
and evil, so that the explanation is seen to be no explanation at ail.
If, again, here and there the power and might of the devil is in-
cluded under the punishment of sin, on the one hand we find that
this does not have any special bearing on the deliverance of man
from sin and its punishment, and we might as well speak simply of
the influence of evil apart from a personal overlord of evil; on the
other hand, if the power of the devil (and his greatest power lies
in tempting to sin) were the result of sin, then when he accom-
plished his greatest act of temptation he must have been powerless
—which is plainly inconsistent. Elsewhere, however, punishment
too is represented as something that the devil and sinful men have
in common. And again, the fairly frequent idea that the devil is
the instrument of God in the punishment of the wicked, is incon-
sistent with his antagonism to the divine purpose.


§ 45. In the New Testament Scriptures the Devil is, indeed, frequently
mentioned, but neither Christ nor the Apostles set up a new
doctrine concerning him, and still less do they associate the
idea in any way with the plan of salvation ; hence the only
thing we can establish on the subject for the system of Christian
doctrine is this: whatever 1s said about the Devil is subject
to the condition that belief in him must by no means be put
forward as a condition of faith in God or in Christ. Further-
more, there can be no question of the Devil having any influence
within the Kingdom of God.


I. There is not a single passage in the New Testament where
Christ or His Apostles definitely and indisputably refer to the devil
with the intention either of teaching anything new or peculiarly
their own, or of correcting and supplementing current beliefs. They
make use of the conception in its current popular form. If, never-
theless, we wished to formulate a Christian doctrine of the devil
we should be obliged to assume that this conception as known to
Christ and His disciples corresponded perfectly with the truth and
could not be improved. This position must certainly be taken up
by anyone who is unwilling to admit that Christ made use of what


1 Conf. Aug. xvii.: impios autem homines et diabolos condemnabit ut
sine fine crucientur.


164 THE CHRISTIAN FAITH [§ 45


we usually call accommodation. Such a complete development of
the idea is the more improbable because its chief characteristics
have no basis even in the Old Testament, their origin being wholly
apocryphal. It is apparent from the incidental way in which the
subject occurs that neither Christ nor His disciples desired either
to give support to the idea or vouch for its truth. For Christ
seems to introduce it for no particular reason into parables, maxims,
and short instructions dealing with quite other subjects. In the
parable of the Sower, the expressions 1 are of doubtful meaning,
and the hostility of man to the divine message would be just as
relevant as the hostility of the devil. If it were only a question of
his relation to the human soul and his influence on it, then the
uncertainty would be removed and we could draw up a doctrine
about him. But, at best, he is represented as a quite unknown cause
of rapid transitions from one state of feeling to another of an opposite
kind. It is equally impossible to base a doctrine on the parable
of the Tares in the Field. The Sower is like the Son of Man Who
sows openly by teaching: and the Sower of Tares does the same,
but by night, z.e. not openly. Thus here, too, we are brought to see
the real meaning of the name ‘the Slanderer.’ The Apostles, at
least, did not understand the parable to teach doctrinally that it
was the devil who sowed tares in the field tilled by Christ ; for
when speaking of false brethren and unworthy members of the
community, they never quote the devil as the cause of the evil,
but at most they deliver such men over to the devil. If we re-
member that ‘his seed’ is explained as ‘ children of the evil one,’ 2
we are reminded of an important passage ? where Christ tells the
hostile Jews that ‘they are of their father the devil.’ Obviously,
according to the Hebrew idiom, these expressions are used only of
the relations of likeness and affinity. Nobody can propose to take
the expression literally, as if they could be descended from the
devil in the same sense as they gloried in descending from Abraham,
or in the sense in which Christ, Whose words they were mocking,
had originally asserted that God was His Father. Thus we cannot
take this passage literally and assume the real existence of the devil
without either placing the devil on an equality with God, as the
Manicheans did, or else applying the phrase ‘Son of God’ to Christ
merely in the wider sense in which the Jews could really be termed
‘sons of the devil.’ There is certainly here a reference to a story


1 rovnpds in Matt. 131%, didBodos in Luke.
2 viol rod movnpotd Matt. 1338, 3 John 844,


§45] NEW TESTAMENT THOUGHT OF THE DEVIL 165


about the devil, but only as to something well known, and this
description, like the other, only stands here as related to the central
statement that ‘they were not of God.’ 1

The expression that ‘Satan had desired to have the disciples
that he might sift them ’ 2 bears the stamp of a proverb, and does
not imply that the devil is to be regarded as the overlord of the
wicked. The phrase, as a whole, is derived from Job, and in both
passages Satan is pictured as bargaining with God. So that here
what is being uttered is only a warning borrowed from a truly
Biblical idea, and there is no intention either to teach anything with
regard to Satan or to confirm that older belief.

The phrase ‘to be overreached by Satan’ is a similar pro-
verbial expression. Here certainly it is used in connexion with the
fact that one had been delivered over to Satan ; but apart from this
instance, it is applicable to any case in which something done from
a good motive proves to be detrimental to the good. Only, we
must not think here of Satan as simply bringing evil to light, but
as the one who fights against good. The ‘roaring lion’ of Peter 4
obviously hovers between these two meanings, for ‘ devouring,’
points to the deadly enemy, but ‘adversary’ to the accuser. So
that these three passages should be taken together, supplementing
each other perfectly and forming a useful adaptation of a varying
Biblical tradition. If we compare the relevant passages, we shall
find that the expression ‘ Prince of this world,’ ® used frequently by
Christ, admits equally well of a different interpretation. At any
rate, if Christ’s disciples did refer this saying to the devil, he is
passed over without any specifically Christian doctrine being opposed
to the popular tradition. For some New Testament writings refer
the ‘ binding of Satan’ to an earlier time,® and others, though
admittedly of doubtful interpretation, assume a still continuing
conflict with him.” Thus if Christ had intended to formulate a
doctrine in the above-quoted passages He certainly would have failed
in His intention.

The story of the Temptation is equally unsuited for the purpose.
Even if we must accept it as literal fact (and there is much to be
said against this), it does not give us material to construct a com-
plete idea of the devil or to apply it in any further way. In the two

il Ke) oboe 2 uke 227% Sot Wor..2 arrebeteae:

5 John 12%: 6 dpxwy rod Kdomou rovrou éxBdnOjoerax.—John 14°°: épxerac
6 Tod Kdopou dpxwr, Kal odx exer év éwol ovdév.—John 1611: 6 dpxwy Tob Kbomou TovTou


KEKpLTQL.


Seibert, 24) ude 6: Pe COnen6 ph, Ole:


166 THE CHRISTIAN FAITH [$ 45


passages where Christ is specially led to mention the devil,* the
question is of so-called ‘ possession,’ and therefore concerns the
natural explanation of this phenomenon, which has nothing to do
with faith. Though the first passage may be obscure, still it is
closely connected with the casting out of demons. The same is true
of the saying concerning the ‘ divided kingdom of Satan,’ and the
highly figurative representation of the return of an evicted spirit,
which is a continuation of the same story, is not intended in any
way to throw doubt on the certainty of salvation ; it bears on the
same realm of phenomena as ‘ possession’ and indicates primarily
the difference between the real and permanent healings of Christ
and the merely apparent and transitory healings of the Jewish
exorcists. In these cases and in others which may have happened
without being recorded there was no occasion to examine critically
the current ideas, nor is there any ground for regarding their use
as indicating an intention to sanction them as divine teaching. If
we consider that John in his Epistle ? sees the relation between the
devil and the sinner (doer of evil) exactly as Christ saw it in the
above-quoted discussions with the Jews, we must give a similar
explanation of the fact that John attributes the betrayal of Judas
to the devil, as Christ never does. The few remaining Apostolic
passages * cannot be used doctrinally any more than those already
cited. For if Christ and the Apostles had ever desired to combine
Christian piety with the fear of the devil, and, at the same time,
had wished to establish a particular doctrine drawn from and
corresponding to this element of the religious consciousness, they
would have had to allow proper space for the idea when treating
didactically of the origin and propagation of evil in mankind gener-
ally, when dealing with the manner in which sin remains in believers,
and when discussing the necessity of redemption. It is just at this
latter point that the question arises whether the Son of God was
not necessary in some way because of the power the devil had over
man. But of this there is not the slightest trace, nor do we find
any mention of the devil,> even when sin is being discussed, and we
should most expect it. Such a complete silence in every essentially
didactic passage ought to have been seriously considered.


1 Luke 1018, Matt. 1243, Luke 1174. +1) johns:

S21 Cotes als we mehessw2*

4 The passage Heb. 214-1° has little relevance here, for it is not said of the
devil that he has power over men, but only over death, so that we must
think here chiefly of the angel of death ; and men are not said to be in slavish
fear of the devil but of death.

° Cf. Matt. 151®, Rom, 512-18 77#., Jas, 112)


§ 45] ELEMENTS OF THE IDEA 167


2. But even if we could regard some or, indeed, all of the above-
quoted passages of Scripture as referring to the devil, there is still
no reason for our accepting this notion as a permanent element in
Christian doctrine and defining it accordingly so accurately that
everything attributed to the devil could be conceived as a con-
sistent whole. For Christ and His disciples did not hold this idea
as one derived from the sacred writings of the Old Testament, or
in any way acquired through Divine revelation ; it was drawn from
the common life of the period just as it is still present more or less
in all our minds in spite of our utter ignorance as to the existence
of such a being. Since that from which we are to be redeemed
remains the same (as does also the manner of our redemption)
whether there be a devil or no, the question as to his existence is
not one for Christian Theology but for Cosmology, in the widest
sense of that word. It is exactly similar to questions as to the
nature of the firmament and the heavenly bodies. In Christian
Dogmatics we have nothing either to affirm or deny on such sub-
jects ; and similarly we are just as little concerned to dispute the
conception of the devil as to establish it. The Biblical usage
merely shows that among the Jewish people the idea was really a
fusion of two or three quite different elements. The first element
is that of the servant of God who, while searching out the evil, has
his rank and function among the other angels and cannot be re-
garded as expelled from the presence of God. Another element is
that of the original source of evil in Oriental dualism, the concep-
tion being modified in such a way that the Jews alone were able
to assimilate it. Now this function to some extent suggests joy in
evil, and thus easily enough through some such fictitious story as
the apostasy, the former could become the latter, or rather the name
of the former pass over to the latter. It was obviously from these
two elements that the acute mind of Calvin composed his formulas,?
though they will not harmonize in one consistent view.

The third element, the angel -of death, though not quite so
certain, is also a combination of native and foreign ideas; this
angel, too, can be represented as having his kingdom in the under-
world. On the other hand, the spirits active in the possessed are
always represented differently, and are only indirectly brought into
connexion with the devil. The conception was probably developed


1 Tystit. i. 14, 17: Quamvis voluntate et conatu semper Deo aversetur
tamen nisi annuente et volente Deo nihil facere potest.—Legimus illum se
sistere coram Deo nec pergere audere ad facinus, nisi impetrata facultate . . .
18, Deus illi fideles cruciandos tradit, impios gubernandos.


168 THE CHRISTIAN FAITH [8 45


through the assimilation of these various elements ; but apart from
this it has obtained a strong hold by reason of the manifold enigmas
presented to introspection by sudden changes of feeling—so strong,
indeed, that we might almost say that it suggests itself to nearly
everyone who has not the gift for self-analysis of the more accurate
kind. For all too frequently we find that evil emotions arise in us
in a strange and abrupt manner, having no connexion with our
ruling tendencies, but up to a certain point gaining strength irre-
sistibly, so that we feel obliged to look upon them as not belonging
to us but alien, while at the same time we are unable to indicate
any external cause. And as good, for the most part unexpected,
its origin not being easily perceived, was attributed to the ministry
of angels, in the same way the origin of wickedness and evil, not
being discoverable, has been explained as due to the craft and
influence of the devil and of evil spirits. Thus the idea is always
recurring, especially when we reach the limits of our observations
in regard to evil. But since in this matter the Scriptures always
refer us to our own inner life, we ought to carry our observations
further ; and then more and more it would cease to be possible to
consider things as the work of the devil, and the conception would
thus gradually become obsolete. The same holds good of the inter-
locking and co-operation of evil,! which, at important junctures,
when it is a question of antagonism to some sudden development
of good, seems to reveal it as a kingdom and a power. But the
more the good establishes itself as a whole in history, the less often
will such antagonisms appear, and the more disintegrated will they
be, so that here too the devil will no more be thought of.

On the other hand, anyone seeking to put forward, as a part of
Christian doctrine, belief in a permanent influence of the devil either
in the Kingdom of God itself or in a permanent kingdom of Satan
opposed to the Kingdom of God, will not only be in direct contra-
diction to many of the above-quoted passages of Scripture, but will
also be making very dangerous assertions. For in the first case at
every difficult point he makes harder the endeavour, which cannot
be sufficiently encouraged for the sake of inward blessedness, to
explain all the phenomena (even the strangest) of the individual soul
by its own peculiar qualities and by the influences of common life.
And at the same time he gravely strengthens the already strong in-
clination of men to deny their own guilt. It would be bad enough
if anyone neglected due care for himself and others because of his


(Gay, QZ} ie,


§ 45] PARTIAL LEGITIMACY OF IDEA 169


trust in the protection of angels ; but it would certainly be more
dangerous if at will, in place of severe self-examination, he attri-
buted his growing wickedness to the influence of Satan—a purely
arbitrary proceeding, since no definite marks and limits can be given
and the merest caprice has free scope. If, then, the influence of
Satan in the strictest sense can only be directly inward, and must
therefore be magical, a firm belief in any such doctrine must destroy
the joyful consciousness of a sure inheritance in the Kingdom of
God ; for everything wrought by the Spirit of God must then be at
the mercy of the antagonistic influences of the devil, and all con-
fidence in the guidance of one’s own mind be abolished. Even if
we only believed in such influences as existing outside the Christian
Church, it would hinder the true Christian treatment of the in-
dividuals to whom the Gospel is to be preached. Moreover, belief
in a lasting kingdom of Satan, which still implies that individual
men are regarded as his instruments, is bound not only to impair
joy of heart and to endanger steadfastness in conduct, but also to
destroy Christian love. But those who actually go so far as to
maintain that living faith in Christ is in some way conditioned by
belief in the devil ought to be on their guard lest, by so doing, they
depreciate Christ and unduly exalt themselves. For the ultimate
meaning is that salvation by Christ would be less necessary if there
were no devil ; and so, on the one hand, salvation appears to be only
a help against an external enemy, while, on the other hand, man
would be well able to help himself if there were no devil and evil
had its seat solely in human nature.

Postscript —So long as it is not a question of connected doctrine
but of particular applications of this or that feature of a vague
notion, we cannot deprive any Christian of the right, not only
(within the limits defined above) to set forth elements of his own
religious self-consciousness in terms of this kind, but also to make
use of this idea in religious teaching—as indeed everything men-
tioned in the New Testament Scriptures proper may legitimately
be given a place in our religious teaching as well. The idea may be
so used if we find it suitable, or perhaps apparently indispensable,
in order to make clear the positive godlessness of evil in itself, or to
emphasize the fact that it is only in a higher protection that we can
find help against an evil the source of whose power our will and
intelligence seem unable to reach. So long as in this way the idea
finds support in the living tradition of religious language, there will
occasionally be a liturgical use of it which must, however, conform


170 THE CHRISTIAN FAITH [§ 46


in every respect to the scriptural type, since deviation from that
would only introduce more confusion, and this confusion would be
increased the more, on the one hand, the susceptibility of people to
the idea diminishes in course of time and, on the other hand, the
liturgical expressions tend to assume a scientific character or to
acquire confessional authority. The poetic use is therefore the
freest and the least harmful. For in poetry personification is quite
in place, and no disadvantage is to be feared from an emphatic use
of this idea in pious moods. It would therefore be inexpedient and
in many ways unjustifiable to wish to banish the conception of the
devil from our treasury of song.


SECOND DOCTRINE: PRESERVATION (CONSERVATION)


§ 46. The religious self-consciousness, by means of which we place
all that affects or influences us in absolute dependence on
God, coincides entirely with the view that all such things are
conditioned and determined by the interdependence of Nature.


1. It is not in the least meant that the pious self-consciousness
is realized with every stimulation of the sensuous consciousness,
any more than every perception causes us actually to visualize the
interrelatedness of nature. But whenever objective conscious-
ness reaches this degree of clarity we assume afresh the inter-
dependence of nature as universal and as determining everything
which has not led to our consciousness of it ; and in the same way
we recognize in the moments when the pious self-consciousness is
present that those in which it is lacking are really imperfect states,
and we postulate the feeling of absolute dependence as valid for
everything without exception, because we apply it to our own
existence in so far as we are a part of the world.

But neither is our proposition meant to fall short of the con-
ception of preservation, although in accordance with the nature of
self-consciousness it is limited to what affects us; and, indeed,
only the movements and changes of things stimulate us directly,
not the things themselves or their inner being. For every impulse
directed towards perception and knowledge which yet has the
qualities, essence, and being of things as its object, begins with a
stimulation of self-consciousness which thus accompanies the process
of apprehending ; and, consequently, the being and nature of things
belongs to that which affects us. Within this range our proposition
admits no distinction ; in each and every situation we ought to be


§ 46] PRESERVATION 171


conscious of, and sympathetically experience, absolute dependence
on God just as we conceive each and every thing as completely
conditioned by the interdependence of nature.

But we find the opposite idea to this very widely spread. Namely,
the idea that these two views do not coincide, but that each
excludes the other as its contradictory. It is said that the more
clearly we conceive anything to be entirely conditioned by the
interdependence of nature, the less can we arrive at the feeling
of its absolute dependence upon God; and, conversely, the more
vivid this latter feeling is the more indefinitely must we leave its
interrelatedness with nature an open question. But it is obvious
that, from our standpoint and in consistency with what we have
already said, we cannot admit such a contradiction between the
two ideas. For otherwise (since everything would present itself
to us as always in the system of nature), as our knowledge of the
world grew perfect, the development of the pious self-consciousness
in ordinary life would cease ; which is quite contrary to our pre-
supposition that piety is of the essence of human nature. And on
the other hand, conversely, the love of religion would be opposed to
all love of research and all widening of our knowledge of nature ;
which would entirely contradict the principle that the observation
of creation leads to the consciousness of God. And besides, prior
to the completion of both tendencies the most competent naturalist
would have to be the least religious of men, and vice versa. Now,
as the human soul is just as necessarily predisposed towards a
knowledge of the world as towards a consciousness of God, it can
only be a false wisdom which would put religion aside, and a mis-
conceived religion for love of which the progress of knowledge is to
be arrested.

The only apparent ground for this assertion is the fact that, as
a rule, the more strongly the objective consciousness predominates
at any given moment, the more at that identical moment the con-
sciousness of self is repressed and vice versa, because in the one case,
through absorption in ourselves, we lose consciousness of the object
affecting us, just as in the other case we are entirely merged in the
object. But this in no way prevents the one activity, after having
satisfied itself, from stimulating and passing over into the other.
We are clearly quite wrong if we allege, as a general experience, that
the incomprehensible as such is more conducive to the awakening
of the religious feeling than that which is understood. The favourite
example is the great natural phenomena, produced by elementary


172 THE CHRISTIAN FAITH [§ 46


forces ; but in point of fact the religious feeling is not destroyed
even by the completest confidence with which we accept this or
that hypothetical explanation of these phenomena. The reason
why these manifestations so readily arouse religious feeling lies
rather in the immensity of their operations both in the promotion
and destruction of human life and works of skill, and thus in the
awakening of the consciousness of the limitation of our activity
by universal forces. But this precisely is the most complete re-
cognition of the universal interrelatedness of nature, and thus it
turns out in fact to be the other way round, a support for our
thesis. It is certainly, however, an expedient often adopted by
human indolence to attribute what is not understood to the super-
natural immediately; but this does not at all belong to the
tendency to piety. Since the Supreme Being here takes the place
of the system of nature, we find ourselves tending rather to know-
ledge ; besides, in that case not everything but only the incompre-
hensible would be placed in absolute dependence upon God. Start-
ing from this men have imagined evil and destructive supernatural
powers in the same way as they have gone back to a highest good
Power ; which makes it immediately evident that this kind of
linking up (with the supernatural) has not arisen in the interests of
religion, for such a setting of one over against the other would
inevitably destroy the unity and completeness of the relation of
dependence.

As furthermore we regard everything stimulating us as an object
of the pious consciousness, it follows that not even the least and
most unimportant thing should be excluded from the relation of
absolute dependence. But here it shouldbe remarked that
frequently, on the one hand, an undue value is placed on expressly
tracing back the least detail to this relation ; while on the other
hand, with no greater justice, we often oppose such a relation.
The first mistake appears in the view that, because the greatest
events often arise from small, the smallest detail must be expressly
ordained by God. For it appears to be only an empty, and by no
means trustworthy, play of the fantasy, when we so often hear
people describing great events as arising from small causes, and
thereby drawing away our attention from the universal relatedness
in which the true causes really lie hidden. A clear judgment can
only be formed on the principle of the similarity of cause and effect
in the domain of history or of nature, and it is only under definite
conditions that individual changes with their causes can be severed


§ 46] THE INTERDEPENDENCE OF NATURE 173


from the universal interrelatedness and taken separately. But
as soon as the pious feeling combines with such a view, thought
has no choice but to recur to the universal interdependence of
nature ; otherwise an isolated and separate activity would be
ascribed in too human fashion to God. The second point, 7.e.
that the application of absolute dependence to the smallest matters
is felt to be objectionable, has its origin in the fear that religion
might be drawn into blasphemy, if, say, our free choices in little
things were to be traced back to divine appointment : for instance,
the point which foot shall be put forward first, or chance in matters
of no serious importance such as winning or losing in sports and
contests. Still, the incongruity here does not lie in the object, but
in our way of thinking about it: that is, in the isolation of single
events, because in cases of the first kind the apparent free choice
is sometimes only an individual instance of a general situation,
from which many similar events follow, and sometimes it is the
expression of a more general law by which many similar events
are controlled ; while in cases of the second kind, the issue can
always be regarded as submission to a universal will. Neither of
these can be regarded as insignificant, and thus no reason can be
found against treating both as subsumed under absolute dependence
on God.

2. If now we examine our proposition purely in itself, it must
be directly evident in its wider scope to everyone who accepts it
as a general principle of experience that the feeling of absolute
dependence can be aroused through stimulations of our sensuous
self-consciousness. For that feeling is most complete when we
identify ourselves in our self-consciousness with the whole world
and feel ourselves in the same way as not less dependent. This
identification can only succeed in so far as in thought we unite
everything that in appearance is scattered and isolated, and by
means of this unifying association conceive of everything as one.
For the most complete and universal interdependence of nature is
posited in this ‘ All-One ’ of finite being, and if we also feel ourselves
to be absolutely dependent, then there will be a complete coinci-
dence of the two ideas—namely, the unqualified conviction that
everything is grounded and established in the universality of the
nature-system, and the inner certainty of the absolute dependence
of all finite being on God. From this follows, on the one hand, the
possibility of pious self-consciousness in every moment of the
objective consciousness, and on the other the possibility of com-


‘


174 THE CHRISTIAN FAITH [§ 46


plete world-consciousness in every moment of pious self-conscious-
ness. For with regard to the latter, where a pious feeling is
actually existent, there the interdependence of nature is always
posited ; and therefore the effort to extend the idea of the latter
and perfect it in a world-representation will not be detrimental to
the former, but can be effected just in so far as the tendency
towards knowledge is predominant. And as regards the former,
wherever there is an objective idea, there is always a stimulated
self-consciousness ; and from this the pious self-consciousness can
develop without prejudice to the objective idea (with its world-
conception, which is more or less clearly co-posited), in proportion
as the tendency in each towards feeling is dominant. Now if we
conceive both tendencies as fully developed in a given man, then
each would with perfect ease call forth the other, so that every
thought, as part of the whole world-conception, would become in
him the purest religious feeling, and every pious feeling, as evoked
by a part of the world, would become a complete world-conception.
On the contrary, if the one did not call forth the other, but in some
way limited it, then the more completely the one developed, the
more would it destroy the other. It has been always acknowledged
by the strictest dogmaticians! that divine preservation, as the
absolute dependence of all events and changes on God, and natural
causation, as the complete determination of all events by the uni-
versal nexus, are one and the same thing simply from different
points of view, the one being neither separated from the other nor
limited by it. If anyone should detect in this an appearance of
Pantheism, he ought to bear in mind that so long as philosophy
does not put forward a generally accepted formula to express the
relation of God and the world, even in the province of Dogmatics,
directly we begin to speak not of the origin of the world but of its
co-existence with God and its relatedness to God, we cannot avoid
an oscillation between formulas, on the one hand, which approach
to the identification of the two, and formulas, on the other, which go
near to putting them in opposition to one another. Moreover, in
order not to confuse ourselves in this way, we ought to observe

1 Quenstedt, Syst. theol., p. 761: . . . ita ut idem effectus non a solo Deo
nec a sola creatura, sed una eddemque efficientia totali simul a Deo et creatura
producatur ... actum dico (sc. concursum Dei) non praevium actioni
causae secundae nec subsequentem . . . sed talis est actus, qui intime in ipsa
actione creaturae includitur, imo eadem actio creaturae est.—Ibid. p. 782:
Non est re ipsa alia actio influxus Dei, alia operatio creaturae, sed una et


indivisibilis actio utrumque respiciens et ab utraque pendens, a Deo ut causa
universali, a creatura ut particulari.


§ 46] DIVISIONS IN PRESERVATION 175


more carefully the difference between a universal and an individual
cause. For in the totality of finite being only a particular and
partial causality is given to each individual, since each is dependent
not on one other but on all the others; the universal causality
attaches only to that on which the totality of this partial causality
is itself dependent.

Postscript—In Dogmatics the analytical method originating
with the Scholastics has led to a division of our simple proposition
in a number of different ways into many elements and sections, and
it will not make much difference which of these divisions we select
in order to show its relation to our statement. Some have divided
the conception of preservation, which is expressed in our pro-
position as referring both to the whole and the parts, into the
following: the general, which is related to the whole world as a
unity ; the special, which is concerned with species ; and the most
special, which is concerned with individuals (generalis, specialis et
specialissima). This classification does not appear to be made in
the interest of religion (from which here everything should start),
for the simple reason that it leads to a question which is purely one
for natural science, 7.e. whether there is anything in the world
which cannot be brought under the idea of a species. But supposing
this question must be answered in the affirmative and the division
be made complete, nevertheless universal preservation must in-
clude everything, and the division thus becomes quite superfluous
to us, since our fundamental feeling rests solely on the finiteness of
being as such. But a further purpose of this division may be
surmised, if we take into account the addition usually made to the
third member of it—namely, that God sustains individual things in
their existence and their powers as long as He wills. For in that
case the species, as reproductions of individual things, are in a
sense immortal, but the individual is mortal; and the wish arose
to establish a difference between the preservation of what endures
and of what is mortal.

For those, however, who accept a beginning and an end of the
world there is absolutely no reason to differentiate between the
world and individual things. But in any case the proposition
must cover equally the beginning and the end; and we know
fairly certainly of our earth that there have been species on it
which are no longer extant and that the present species have not
always existed; so that our proposition must be stretched to
embrace these also. It really affirms nothing except that the


176 THE CHRISTIAN FAITH [§ 46


temporality or the duration of the finite is to be conceived solely
in absolute dependence upon God. But since the duration of
individual as well as of universal things is simply an expression
for the degree of their power as each coexists with all the rest, it
follows that the addition taken in itself contains nothing which our
statement had not expressed already. But the way in which the
addition is framed might easily give rise to the idea that the sustain-
ing will of God began or ended at some particular time, and in
anticipation of this it must be said that God, in sustaining as in
creating, must remain apart from all means and occasions of time.

Another similar division is to discriminate between the work
of God as preserving and as co-operating ; but the distinction is not
made in the same way by all teachers of doctrine, for some connect
the expression ‘ preservation’ only with matter and form, and ‘co-
operation’ with powers and actions ; others again connect preserva-
tion with the existence and powers of things, and co-operation only
with’activity. The fact, however, that the expression ‘co-operation’
contains a hidden meaning should not be overlooked, as if there
were in the finite an activity in and for itself and thus independent
of the sustaining divine activity. This tendency must be entirely
avoided and not merely covered over by indefiniteness.t If, how-
ever, such a distinction ought not to be drawn, and if the powers
of things are something as little separated from the divine sus-
taining activity as their being itself (the latter we only divide into
matter and form by an abstraction which has no place here), then
the difference between preservation and co-operation rests also on
a similar abstraction. For being posited for itself can only exist
where there is also power, just as power always exists only in
activity ; thus a preservation which did not include the placing
of all the activities of any finite being in absolute dependence on
God would be just as empty as creation without preservation. And
in the same way, if we conceived co-operation without conceiving
that the existence of a thing in its whole duration was dependent
on God, then this thing might be independent of God even at its
first moment of existence, and this would be equivalent to con-
ceiving preservation in such a way that it did not include creation
and positing it without creation. It should be added here that
even theologians who have treated the subject quite correctly on


1 E.g. Morus, i. p. 306: limites non definiuntur quousque operatur sol,
agricola, et ubi incipiat Deus . . . adjuvando et limitando efficit Deus, ut
fiat consilium suum,


§ 46] DIVINE GOVERNMENT 79


the whole have allowed themselves to be led into describing co-
operation as something more immediate than preservation,! so
that deeds, as distinct from the preservation of powers, proceed
from a divine activity. The result of this would be, if we took it
seriously, to reduce the preservation of power to nothing, for in the
system of nature power is always dependent on the activity of
the rest of things. Thus we can only say that, in the region of
absolute dependence on God, everything is equally direct and
equally indirect, some in one relation and some in another.

Some combine the idea of divine government immediately with
these two ideas. But if by that is meant the fulfilment of divine
decrees ? or the guidance of all things to divine ends, and if it be
taken as signifying anything else than that everything can happen
and has happened only as God originally willed and always wills,
by means of the powers distributed and preserved in the world—
this is already included in our proposition, and we cannot consider
it here. For here we are concerned in general with the description
of the feeling of absolute dependence, and must set completely
aside a view which is based upon the distinction between means
and end without reference to the question whether this distinction
can exist for God. On the one hand, for our Christian conscious-
ness it could only be the Kingdom of God, established by means
of redemption (7.e. something quite foreign to our present purpose),
to which everything else is related as its goal: and on the other,
if our self-consciousness is to represent finite existence in
general, and end and means are related to one another as that
which is posited for its own sake and that not posited for its own
sake, or more exactly as what is willed by God and what is not
willed by God, then we must take up into our religious self-conscious-
ness an antithesis of which our present discussion knows nothing.
The only thing then that this conception [divine government]
could suggest to us at this point would be that so far as the divine
preservation relates, as co-operation, to powers and _ activities
taken separately, we require a counterpart to it to cover the passive
state of finite things ; but since these are just as essential parts for
the attainment of the divine purpose, their absolute dependence
is included in the conception of government. Even this is, however,

1 Quenst., J.c.: Observandum quod Deus non solum vim agendi dat causis


secundis et etiam conservat, sed quod immediate influit in actionem et


effectum creaturae. ae '
2 Morus, i. p. 319: Gubernatio est opus Dei efficientis ut in mundo ipse
suum semper adsequatur consilium.


12


178 THE CHRISTIAN FAITH ($47


superfluous so far as we are concerned. For since preservation has
as its object the being of things, and in this, so far as they are
centres of power, the antithesis of self-activity and susceptibility
is included, the passive states are already subsumed under absolute
dependence ; and particularly when they also belong to that which
affects our self-consciousness, whether in the form of perception or
of sympathy, they are included in our general proposition. But,
in addition, the passive states of one thing are only the result of
the active states of others; while, on the other hand, the way in
which the active states emerge successively and the strength which
they display depends not only on each thing’s peculiar mode of
existence, but also on its concurrence with other things, hence on
the influence of others and on its own passive states. From this
we may think that perhaps we should differentiate better if we
said that what proceeds from the intrinsic characteristics of each
individual thing and what proceeds from its co-existence with all
other things are both alike to be placed in absolute dependence upon
God. But even this would be an abstraction without importance
for our religious self-consciousness, for which the two are not dis-
tinguished from one another as stimulating objects ; and thus we
should do better to include everything which stimulates our con-
sciousness together in the idea of finite being which is only relatively
individual and is conditioned in its individuality by the universal
co-existence. And this is wholly identical with what our proposition
denotes by the term interdependence of nature.


§ 47. It can never be necessary in the interest of religion so to interpret
a fact that its dependence on God absolutely excludes its being
conditioned by the system of Nature.


1. This proposition is so much a direct consequence of what
went before that there would be no reason to make an express
statement of it, but that ideas which have still a circulation in the
Christian Church must be considered in their appropriate place in
any Dogmatic. Now there is a general idea that the miracles which
are interwoven with the beginnings of Christianity or at least in
some form are reported in the Scriptures, should be regarded as
events of the kind described: and yet if the idea itself is inadmis-
sible, it cannot be applied to this or that particular fact. It is in
this way that theologians from of old have generally treated the
question. We have not to pass judgment here on its inherent
possibility, but only on the relation of the theory to the feeling of


§ 47] MIRACLE 179


absolute dependence. If, then, this relation is what our proposi-
tion declares it to be, we must in our field try, as far as possible, to
interpret every event with reference to the interdependence of
nature and without detriment to that principle.

Now some have represented miracle in this sense as essential
to the perfect manifestation of the divine omnipotence. But it is
difficult to conceive, on the one side, how omnipotence is shown to
be greater in the suspension of the interdependence of nature than
in its original immutable course which was no less divinely ordered.
For, indeed, the capacity to make a change in what has been
ordained is only a merit in the ordainer, if a change is necessary,
which again can only be the result of some imperfection in him or
in his work. If such an interference be postulated as one of the
privileges of the Supreme Being, it would first have to be assumed
that there is something not ordained by Him which could offer
Him resistance and thus invade Him and His work ; and such an
idea would entirely destroy our fundamental feeling. We must
remember, on the other hand, that where such a conception of °
miracles is commonly found, namely, in conditions where there is
least knowledge of nature, there, too, the fundamental feeling ap-
pears to be weakest and most ineffectual. But where a knowledge
of nature is most widely spread, and therefore this conception seldom
occurs, more is found of that reverence for God which is the expression
of our fundamental feeling. It follows from this that the most
perfect representation of omnipotence would be a view of the
world which made no use of such an idea.

Other teachers! defend the conception in a more acute but
scarcely more tenable way, by saying that God was partly in need
of miracles that He might compensate for the effects of free causes
in the course of nature, and partly that He might generally have
reasons for remaining in direct contact with the world. The latter
argument presupposes, for one thing, a wholly lifeless view of the
divine preservation, and for another, an opposition in general
between the mediate and immediate activities of God which cannot
be conceived without bringing the Supreme Being within the
sphere of limitation. The former sounds almost as if free causes
were not themselves objects of divine preservation, and (since
preservation includes in itself the idea of creation) had not come
into being and been maintained in absolute dependence upon God.
But if, on the contrary, they are in this condition there can be just


1 Cf. Storr, Dogm., § 25.


180 THE CHRISTIAN FAITH ($ 47


as little necessity for God to counteract their influences as to counter-
act the influences which a blind natural force exercises in the
domain of another natural force. But none of us understands by
‘the world’ which is the object of the divine preservation a
nature-mechanism alone, but rather the interaction of the nature-
mechanism and of free agents, so that in the former the latter
are taken into account just as in the latter the former is reckoned.

Moreover, the Biblical miracles, on account of which the whole
theory has been devised, are much too isolated and too restricted
in content for any theory to be based on them which should assign
them the function of restoring in the nature-mechanism what free
agents had altered. That one great miracle, the mission of Christ,
has, of course, the aim of restoration, but it is the restoration of
what free causes have altered in their own province, not in that of
the nature-mechanism or in the course of things originally ordained
by God. Nor does the interest of religion require that the free
cause which performs the function of restoration in the sphere of
phenomena should have a different relation to the order of nature
from that of other free causes.

Two other reasons may be put forward why an absolute sus-
pension of the interrelatedness of nature by miracles may be held
to be in the interests of religion. And it cannot be denied that it
is mostly for these reasons, even though they may never have been
formulated as actual Church doctrine, that this conception of
miracle has maintained its practical hold over many Christians.
The first is that of answer to prayer; for prayer seems really to be
heard only when because of it an event happens which would not
otherwise have happened: thus there seems to be the suspension
of an effect which, according to the interrelatedness of nature,
should have followed. The other is that of regeneration, which,
represented as a new creation, in part requires some such suspension
and in part introduces a principle not comprised in the system of
nature. Neither subject can be discussed in this place; but it
may suffice to remark in relation to the first, which more concerns
piety in general, that our statement places prayer, too, under divine
preservation, so that prayer and its fulfilment or refusal are only
part of the original divine plan, and consequently the idea that
otherwise something else might have happened is wholly meaning-
less. With regard to the second we need only refer here to what
was said above. If the revelation of God in Christ is not necessarily
something absolutely supernatural, Christian piety cannot be held


§ 47] MIRACLE AND CAUSATION 181


bound in advance to regard as absolutely supernatural anything
that goes along with this revelation or flows from it.

2. The more accurate definitions by which the acceptance of
such miracles is brought into connexion with the propositions and
concepts which indicate the complete dependence of the system of
nature on God show very clearly how little that idea is demanded
by our religious emotions. For the more they try definitely to fix
an absolute miracle, the further off they are from making it the
expression of a religious emotion, and, instead of genuine dogmatic
material, something of quite a different character 1 comes in. Speak-
ing generally, the question can most easily be considered if we start
from the point that the event in which a miracle occurs is con-
nected with all finite causes, and therefore every absolute miracle
would destroy the whole system of nature. There are, therefore,
two ways of looking at such a miracle—a positive way when we con-
sider the whole future, and a negative way when we consider it as
affecting in some sense the whole of the past. Since, that is, that
which would have happened by reason of the totality of finite causes
in accordance with the natural order does not happen, an effect
has been hindered from happening, and certainly not through the
influence of other normally counteracting finite causes given in the
natural order, but in spite of the fact that all active causes are
combining to produce that very effect. Everything, therefore,
which had ever contributed to this will, to a certain degree, be
annihilated, and instead of introducing a single supernatural power
into the system of nature as we intended, we must completely
abrogate the conception of nature.

From the positive point of view we must consider that some


1 Mosheim, op. c?t., p. 462, calls the divine activity which works miracles
“gubernatio immediata’ or ‘inordinata,’ and, by so doing, introduces an
antithesis between miracle and the sustaining activity of God, to the ad-
vantage of the last-named in the latter formula, but to its disadvantage in
the former. But religious feeling would equally refuse to interpose anything
between that which is and the divine activity through which it is, and to
impute something to the divine activity which is at the same time regarded
as unordained. At the same time, the expression conflicts with the general
explanation which he gives of ‘ gubernatio’—namely, that it stands for a
‘ directio virium alienarum,’ if, that is to say, the miracle is not to be ex-
plained by means of the relevant natural forces.—Reinhard calls (Dogm.,
p. 236) the same divine activity ‘providentia miraculosa,’ and explains it by
“cura divina, qua Deus aliquid efficit mutationibus a consuetudine naturae
plane abhorrentibus.’ If, as here, we look to find the antithesis in the divine
care, then preservation would be an absence of care; if in the custom of
nature, then the custom of nature is apparently something independent of
the divine providence. Teligious feeling would, necessarily, declare equally


against both views.


182 THE CHRISTIAN FAITH [8 47


event follows which is not to be explained by the totality of finite
causes. But as this event now enters into the interrelatedness of
nature as an active member, throughout the whole future everything
will be different from what it would have been had this single miracle
not occurred. Thus every miracle not only suspends the entire
continuity of the original order for all future time, but every later
miracle annuls all earlier ones, in so far as they have become part of
the continuity of active causes. But now, in order to describe the
origin of the effect, we have to allow for the entrance of a divine
activity apart from natural causes! Yet at whatever point we
admit the entrance of this particular divine activity, which must
always seem like magic, in each case there will always appear a
number of possibilities according to which the same result could
have been attained by natural causes if they had been opportunely
directed towards this end. In this way we shall be driven to hold
either that miracles have a purely epideictic tendency in view of
which God purposely did not so order the system of nature that


His whole will should be accomplished in it (a view against which we .


directed our earlier discussion of the relation between omnipotence
and this conception of miracle), or if the totality of finite causes
could not have been so directed, then what can be explained by
the order of nature can never rightly evoke in us the feeling of the
absolute dependence of all finite being.

Now, if others think it would be easier to establish this con-
ception of miracles by first dividing the divine co-operation into
ordinary and extraordinary (which, however, is only ostensibly
different from the unordered), and then attributing the former to
the natural and the latter to the supernatural, so that the negative
aspect of a miracle would be the withdrawal of the ordinary co-
operation,’ but the positive aspect the entrance of the extraordinary,
this means, on the one hand, that the ordinary co-operation is no
longer ordinary if it can be withdrawn, and is not to be definitely


* The formula that in such a case God acts without intermediary causes
is in contradiction to our fundamental feeling, if for no other reason than
that it represents God as under constraint within the ordinary course of
nature. At bottom, however, this use of terms which describes natural
causes as intermediary causes, is itself infected by the radical error of con-
ceiving the dependence on God of what happens as dependence on particular
finite causes—a, dependence of the same kind, only lying further back. And,
in fact, Storr (Dogm., p. 336), when seeking to show how God can act directly
on the world, and change the course of nature without abrogating natural
laws, seems to conceive Him in the manner of a finite free cause.


2 Quenstedt, J.c.: Deo concursum suum subtrahente cessat creaturae
actio.


§ 47] MIRACLE AND DIVINE CO-OPERATION 183


distinguished from the extraordinary ; only that we call that which
occurs more frequently the ordinary, and what seldom occurs, the
extraordinary, a relation which might equally well be reversed.
On the other hand, the miracle is effected in the first instance by
finite causes, even if by means of extraordinary divine co-operation ;
but since thereby something comes into existence which according
to its natural character would not have come into existence, it
follows that in this case either they are not causes, and the expression
‘co-operation’ is inaccurate, or they have become something different
from what they were formerly. In that case, every such extra-
ordinary co-operation is really a creation, on which afterwards the
re-establishment of actual things in their original state must follow
as a further creation cancelling the former one. Moreover, it should
be recognized with regard to these explanations that the one corre-
sponds more closely to the one class of Biblical miracle} and the
other to the other class, and therefore the different characteristics
of these events have had an important influence on the development
of these different formule. If, however, anyone finds it difficult
to accept this view, yet it must be admitted that although the older
theologians on the whole ? still maintain this conception of miracle,
the younger ones * do not maintain its exclusive validity, but also
admit the legitimacy of another hypothesis—namely, that God has
prepared miracles in nature itself in some way incomprehensible
to us; and this, in the interests of religion itself, we must admit to
be pure gain.

3. On the whole, therefore, as regards the miraculous, the
general interests of science, more particularly of natural science,
and the interests of religion seem to meet at the same point, 7.e. that
we should abandon the idea of the absolutely supernatural because
no single instance of it can be known by us, and we are nowhere
required to recognize it. Moreover, we should admit, in general,
that since our knowledge of created nature is continually growing,
we have not the least right to maintain that anything is impossible ;
and also we should allow, in particular (by far the greater number


1 Morus (op. cit.) describes it thus: aut enim mentio quidem fit adminiculi
naturalis ; aut ne fit quidem mentio talis, sed praegresso verbo res facta est.

2 Buddeus, Thes. de atheism., p. 291: Operatio, qua revera naturae leges,
quibus totius huius universi ordo et conservatio innititur, suspenduntur.
According to Thomas, p. I, cap. cx.: ex hoc aliquid dicitur miraculum, quod
sit praeter ordinem totius naturae creatae. ies

3 Cf. Reinhard, Dogmat., p. 238: the above-quoted expression ‘ consuetudo
naturae ’ is in this respect carefully chosen.—Morus treats the matter in the
same sense but superficially in his Commentary, part i. p. 97 sq.


184 THE CHRISTIAN FAITH [§ 48


of New Testament miracles being of this kind), that we can neither
define the limits of the reciprocal relations of the body and mind
nor assert that they are, always and everywhere, entirely the same
without the possibility of extension or deviation. In this way,
everything—even the most wonderful thing that happens or has
happened—is a problem for scientific research ; but, at the same time,
when it in any way stimulates the pious feeling, whether through
its purpose or in some other way, that is not in the least prejudiced
by the conceivable possibility of its being understood in the future.
Moreover, we free ourselves entirely from a difficult and highly
precarious task with which Dogmatics has so long laboured in
vain,! 7.e. the discovery of definite signs which shall enable us to
distinguish between the false and diabolical miracle and the divine
and true.


§ 48. Excitations of self-consciousness expressing a repression of life
ave just as much to be placed in absolute dependence on God
as those expressing an advancement of life.


1. This statement deals more particularly with the contrast
between the serene and the sad moments of life, but it follows so
directly from our principal proposition,” or rather is so completely
involved in it, that we should have had no reason for putting it
specially forward if long experience had not taught us that imperfect
piety has always found it difficult to harmonize the existence of
sad and unhappy experiences with the God-consciousness, whether
because it is overwhelmed by life’s repressions or led astray by
sceptical and unbelieving arguments. On this account almost every
religious doctrine, and particularly the Christian doctrine of faith,
must make it a special duty to show their compatibility. This has
generally involved, however, a false complacency towards these
imperfect emotions, partly by way of vindicating the Supreme
Being with respect to the existence of such experiences and partly
by admitting a variation in the absolute feeling of dependence in
relation to them. It is sufficient here to enter a protest against
both, as much against the counterfeit emotion itself as against the
weak and obscure treatment of it, in order that the simple and
complete apprehension of the fundamental feeling may not be
endangered. Now if sad experiences only occurred separately,
although frequently, and were such that we could trace no con-
nexion between them, then they would hardly have been able to

1 Cf. Gerhard, loc. th. loc. xxiii. § 271. 28 46.


§ 48] EVIL AND DEPENDENCE 185


produce such an effect ; but it is dependent on the fact that there
are conditions which bring a persistent and regularly renewed con-
sciousness of life’s obstacles. These, then, are what we usually
characterize by the term evil: and it is to be maintained that all
evil, in the full meaning of that word, is just as much wholly de-
pendent upon God as that which is in opposition to it, 7.e. good.
But clearly we must reckon moral evil under the term ‘ evil,’ since
where it exists it always shows itself to be an inexhaustible source
of life’s difficulties ; only here we have not to consider it as a human
activity but as a state. Therefore, just as later we shall have to
treat more fully the connexion of evil with moral evil and from a
different standpoint, here, in the reverse order, moral evil is to be
included under the term ‘evil.’ Thus it is to be considered now
apart from ethics, and only as it appears and is given as a state
affecting the self-consciousness as one of life’s obstacles ; and after
the present discussion it will not later be treated separately. There
is, however, a further division of evil which we need only consider
in order to make clear that, just as (we maintain) evil and good are
alike rooted in universal dependence on God, from this point of view
there is no difference between these two types or classes of evil.
To the one belong those conditions which we call natural evil, in
which human existence is partially negated. To the other, which
we name social evil, belong those conditions in which human
activity is in conflict with another activity and is partially over-
come and depressed ; and here the influence of moral evil specially
comes in. But clearly these two kinds of evil not only give rise to
each other (since where there is diminution of being activity will
more easily be depressed, and a depressed activity which is always
decreasing reacts again on the whole being), but they also overlap
in thought, for the being of man consists only in the totality of his
activities, and vice versa. The difference consists then principaily
in this, that the one is much more determined by the total forces
of nature, and the other by the collective conditions of human
activity.

2. In order to solve our problem within the prescribed limits we
do not at all require to enter deeply into teleological speculations
or, in addition to evil itself, to consider what has resulted from it ;
for it can never be proved that the results might not have been
caused in some other way. It is just as unnecessary for us to work
back from the idea of Preservation to that of Creation or beyond it,
to show that evil was unavoidable. But remaining strictly within


186 THE CHRISTIAN FAITH [§ 48


our province, we have only to show that apparent oppositions come
together under the universal dependence. And here two points
arise with regard to both kinds of evil. First, the relation of the
fluctuating and transitory to the permanent in all finite being.
Individual beings belong to the transitory in the form primarily of
a vital activity that takes a progressive development up to a certain
climax, from thence gradually decreasing until death. Since, re-
garded as a whole, every relation which determines development
arouses the consciousness of life as stimulated, and conversely what
tends to bring death nearer is interpreted as an arrest of life, there
is throughout the whole course a casual fluctuation between these
two. Clearly then, on the one hand, it is the same entire related-
ness of men with nature which determines both progress and arrest,
so that the one cannot be apart from the other. It is just the same,
again, in the sphere of social life, where, for example, a later forma-
tion of community life cannot grow and expand without the earlier
formation being repressed and brought to decay ; and thus there
are here again two modes of life, progress and limitation, each con-
ditioning the other. The second point is the relation of what is only
relatively self-existent and the corresponding and mutual limita-
tions of the finite. That is to say, there is no absolute isolation in
the finite : each is only self-existent as it conditions another, and is
in turn only conditioned in so far as it is self-existent. But another
thing is only conditioned by me if I can in some way cause it to
progress ; but then this equally implies that I can be a hindrance.
The whole relation can only be presented to consciousness in so far
as both terms (in both forms, that of self-existence and that of
conditionedness) are presented ; and consequently both obstacles
and progress are equally ordained by God. This is equally valid of
personal feeling and of sympathetic and social feeling. So that
without a very far-reaching misunderstanding, no one can find
difficulty in the fact that even what appears to him an evil (be it his
own, someone else’s, or one common to many) exists as a conse-
quence of absolute dependence, and therefore is to be regarded as
ordained by God. Otherwise we should in general be neither willing
nor able to think of the transitory and finite as existing through
God—that is, we could not think any world at all as dependent on
God; and in this way our fundamental proposition would be
denied.

Now this misunderstanding is due, on one side, to the fact that
we look at states themselves apart from their natural conditions ;


ee


§ 48] EVIL POTENTIAL GOOD 187


and it is increased by the fact that we wrongly represent these
influences which produce permanent life-repressions as if they were
a separate self-contained province and thus could be isolated and
eliminated—in short, that the world could exist apart from evil.
The fact is rather that the very same activity or condition of a thing
by which it enters on the one hand into human life as an evil, on
the other hand is a cause of good, so that if we could remove the
source of life’s difficulties the conditions of life’s progress too would
disappear. This is true even of moral evil which only functions as
evil in so far as it appears in external action: and it holds good not
only accidentally because sin produces good effects sometimes in
individuals and sometimes as a great historical lever, but as a
general truth since sin only comes to be done by reason of that
capacity of man to express his inner nature outwardly which is the
source of all good. On the other hand, since in the same way it
can be held as a general truth that in the universal system that
which is the source of most of life’s advancement, from some point
of view has an aspect of evil, and that in virtue of the very character-
istic which makes it helpful (as indeed all forces of nature and all
social relations which originate in intelligence, with the single ex-
ception perhaps of intelligence itself, may be said to have this two-
fold aspect of good and evil), it is absolutely correct to say in
another sense that evil as such is not ordained by God, because
evil in isolation is never found, and the same is true of good, but
each thing or event is ordained by God that it should be both.

There is an important point for us here—that it is an imperfec-
tion of self-consciousness when a limitation, as such, completely
and exclusively engrosses a moment of experience, whether this
imperfection be that of immediate self-consciousness or of that
which accompanies the activities of the objective consciousness ;
and in the same way it is an erroneous view when its being the
source of difficulties is regarded as the essence of any object that
exists in absolute dependence on God. And even this imperfection
is one which disappears with the increasing development of the
good, like every evil vanishing into the good itself—that is, in the
susceptibility of the sensuous consciousness in general for union
with the God-consciousness.

3. The usual dogmatic definitions which try under the headings
of preservation and co-operation to throw light on this subject,
certainly appear to have the same solution in view but to reach it
very inadequately. Thus, for this purpose they sometimes differ-


188 THE CHRISTIAN FAITH [§ 48


entiate a divine co-operation that is helpful from one that is not,
and sometimes a merely material co-operation from one that is also
formal. These terms seem to have been originally thought out
with special reference to the antithesis between good and evil, and
to the latter was assigned the co-operation which is not helpful
or only material. But apart from the fact that co-operation and
help are inseparable ideas, and no definite conception can be formed
of a co-operation which is not helpful, we must observe that if
co-operation with activity is in question there is no activity without
form, so that there can be no co-operation with an activity which is
not also a co-operation with the form of that activity, and a merely
material co-operation would be nothing more than preservation
without co-operation. The consequence of this would be that
all activity so described would be placed outside the relation of
absolute dependence. Hence, according to both these formulas,
evil seems to be stronger and more powerful than good, since the
latter can only be accomplished with the helpful or (in addition)
formal co-operation, while the former needs neither of them. But,
apart from this, I say that there can be no question in this place of
treating evil as a purely inward disposition prior to all activity,
because it could not then stimulate the self-consciousness of the
individual, much less could it stimulate the self-consciousness of
someone else. But, if we consider evil as active, then all sinful
actions are performed not only by means of the material powers of
men, but just like good actions, in a way appropriate to them ; so
that there is no ground for making such a distinction.

Suppose now that all social evil was in some way bound up with
moral evil, this distinction would no longer be applicable. But
how about natural evil? Since destructive events are precisely the
strongest expressions of natural forces, they are thus less able to
take place without helpful co-operation than other events, and just
as little without formal co-operation, since no specific form can be
ascribed to them. Thus if the intention is to maintain that in so
far as co-operation is admitted, evil, too, comes within the absolute
dependence on God, but that in so far as the co-operation is not
helpful or only material, God cannot be the originator, this inten-
tion has, strictly speaking, not been fulfilled, Consequently, it
appears to be a better expedient if we say that everything real
without exception is the result of divine co-operation, so that this
can suffer no diminution: but all evil, including moral evil as
such, has its ground in a mere defect ; and, a mere defect being a


§ 49] FREEDOM AND DIVINE ORDINANCE 189


partial non-ens, divine co-operation cannot be concerned with it.
If then each finite thing is ordained simultaneously by God as an
entity with its own dimensions, this does not mean that it exerts
activities outside this limit ; on the contrary, the divine co-opera-
tion would be lacking to these, and consequently it could not resist
external influences beyond this limit. But difficulties or obstacles
do not arise from the circumstance that no opposition can be
offered because divine assistance is lacking, but because an attack
is made in a manner which is beyond the finite thing’s power of
resistance, whereas divine co-operation is available for the attack.
Nothing remains but on the one hand to attribute the divine co-
operation equally to everything that happens, and on the other to
maintain that evil as such is not ordained by God, but only as
related to the good and as one condition of it.


§ 49. Whether or not that which arouses our self-consciousness and
consequently influences us, is to be traced back to any part of
the so-called nature-mechanism or to the activity of free
causes—the one 1s as completely ordained by God as the other.


1. The proposition is in itself only the expression of the un-
doubtedly generally admitted fact that we do not feel ourselves
less absolutely dependent on God when anything happens to us
through the actions of other men than in other cases. Also it is
completely contained in the principal proposition of this Second
Doctrine, and is only put forward in explanation in order to pre-
vent a not infrequent misunderstanding, namely, that the con-
sciousness of our free-will is in opposition to the feeling of absolute
dependence. The question first of all is as to the effect of free
actions, primarily on the lives of others but also on our own. But
however much freedom resides in determination of will and resolu-
tion, action, emerging as it does under influences beyond itself,
is always so conditioned that it only becomes what it is because it
belongs to the very same universal system which is the essential
indivisible subject of the feeling of absolute dependence ; and this
would lose its significance in the whole province of history if we
should think of free causes as excluded from this system. Indeed,
what was put incidentally above must here be brought out in its
full significance! Just because free causes form a part of the
general system, we must be able to assert the same of the moment
of activity itself and of the accompanying self-consciousness. It


USES OA, te


190 THE CHRISTIAN FAITH [§ 49


was in this sense that in our first elucidations of the fundamental
feeling we explained how the relative feeling of freedom and the
absolute feeling of dependence each involves and pervades the
other, so that the latter cannot exist apart from the former.

Let us consider now the moment of action, starting from the
point that every other free agent in the same position would have
acted differently, just as the same free agent would have acted
differently in another position, and that this position, whatever it
may be, is within the universal system. Then no one can doubt
that the results of free activity take place in virtue of absolute
dependence. What is certain, moreover, about the accompanying
self-consciousness is that we are only capable of the feeling of
absolute dependence as freely acting agents—that is to say, that we
are conscious of our freedom as something which is received and
is gradually developed in a universal system. Therefore in every
religious experience of free self-activity the self-consciousness must
contain both the feeling of absolute dependence and the relative
feeling of freedom.

In our proposition, the expression ‘ free causes’ clearly makes a
difference between freedom and causality in general, and implies
causes which are not free. And yet they are still causes. But
in the customary conception of the universal nature-mechanism
there is, strictly speaking, no causality apart from free causes. For
by it we imagine a coherence and interaction of things which only
react as such in so far as they have been acted upon ; and in that
case we can only think of each in its activity as a point of inter-
section: so that causality is only applicable to the first mover
existing outside this sphere. That is to say that, according to this
conception, free causes having been excluded, there is no causality
in finite things, while outside there is only the free infinite cause,
the divine causality which is presupposed as originally setting the
whole sphere in motion by a first push. If we include in this
mechanism all inferior life, animal and vegetable (since there can,
in this conception, be no question of a universal life of the heavenly
bodies), then free causes, by which we mean men, are the sole
finite causality, and it only needs one step to leave the divine
causality as the only one, 7.e. to hold what we have already shown
to be destructive of the feeling of absolute dependence, and with it
all piety—that men should regard themselves too as simply part
of this mechanism, and should treat consciousness of self-activity


i See § 4, 3.


§ 49] FREE FINITE CAUSALITY IQI


as only an unavoidable illusion. Fortunately, few have ever been
capable of this self-annihilating renunciation by which, after
robbing the whole world of life, they sacrifice their own selves also
to the completeness of their theory. By this method all causality
of the finite is transformed into appearance, and consequently there
is no ground for regarding individual finite being as existing for
itself, and therefore no reason why a finite being should come to
rest at one point rather than another in this universal flux of
moving and being moved ; but all things are either an indivisible
unity or else an innumerable multitude of points of transition, 7.e.
atoms.

Let us now attribute to ourselves free causality along with
absolute dependence, and causality also to every living being as
assuredly as we hold it to have being for itself; and let us see
complete absence of freedom only where a thing does not move
itself and moves other things only in so far as it is moved ; in that
case we should be able to regard the causality of living beings as
simply a diminished freedom, and we should have to say that true
causality only exists where there is life, and the complete absence
of freedom is also a complete absence of causality, since the im-
pulse which sets the lifeless thing in motion so that it moves other
things always comes itself from what is living. In our proposition,
then, the expression ‘ nature-mechanism’ is not used as our own,
for we should be wrong to reduce anything which stimulates our
self-consciousness and thus influences us to mere mechanism, to
active points of transition. It lies, however, outside our province
to inquire how far the sphere of true causality and therefore of life
extends, and how in each particular case the true cause is to be
discovered. But our self-consciousness, in so far as it is the con-
sciousness of a finite being and we distinguish in it a partial
consciousness of freedom and a partial feeling of dependence as
belonging together, from the feeling of absolute dependence as
including both, requires for every stimulation a finite causality
in the sphere of the universal system of nature which, as a con-
sequence of this, must be taken up into absolute dependence. For
this feeling would not retain its uniform character if there were
a sphere, 7.e. that of natural causes, in which finite and divine
causation met, and alongside it two others, that of mechanical or
rather apparent causation where only divine causality reigned
and finite causality was absent, and that of free causality where
only finite cause reigned and divine causality was absent. At the


192 THE CHRISTIAN FAITH [§ 49


same time we must observe, with reference to absolute dependence,
that we assume no sharp antithesis between freedom and natural
necessity in finite being, since anything which actually has a being
for itself moves itself in some sense or other, even if it has no part
in spiritual life ; but even in the most free cause its range is ordained
by God.

2. In the dogmatic terminology which now prevails, this truth
is expressed sometimes by the idea of preservation and sometimes
by the idea of co-operation. The most usual form of the first
kind is that God upholds each thing in its being, and therefore also
free causes as such. In this statement we can find everything
which we have ascertained, namely, that the activities of free beings
are determined from within, without prejudice to the absolute
dependence which is indicated by the expression preservation.
Considered in itself, however, this formula may be open to the
censure that it appears to obscure the essential difficulties in a
superficial way rather than actually solve them.

In a similar way a distinction is drawn in the concept of co-
operation between a co-operation after the manner of free cause
and a co-operation after the manner of natural cause.t But this
expression requires at least to be treated very cautiously if the
differences of finite being are not to be placed within the Supreme
Being and thus God Himself appear as the totality, a view which
can scarcely be differentiated from that of Pantheism. The mean-
ing can only be that God co-operates in every case with activities
which are appropriate to the nature of the active thing, but only
and always according to His own causality, which is entirely
different from that which belongs to the sphere of reciprocal action.

Postscript to this Doctrine—It seemed advisable to state these
separate propositions, though it must be admitted that they were
already implied in essence in the principal proposition of the
doctrine, for two reasons. First, because it is easy here to put
forward definitions which obscure the right relationship between
creation and preservation. This is done when the miraculous is
regarded as entirely supernatural, since in this way a secondary
creative act comes in which partially suspends preservation and
thus stands in opposition to it. The same result follows if we
believe that evil was less ordained by God than other things, be-
cause, in that case, of the things equally created by Him, He would
leave some in the lurch rather than others. And it occurs, finally, if


1 Concursus ad modum causae liberae, and ad modum causae naturalis.


§ 49] PIETY, SCIENCE, AND MORALITY 193


we oppose free causes to natural ones so strongly that the former
in their activity appear to be less dependent on God ; for then they
must derive their effectiveness partly from elsewhere while their
existence itself they derive from God, and thus an inequality is
introduced between creation and preservation.

Secondly, it was supremely important here to show the harmony
between the interests of piety and science on the one hand and
morality on the other. Indeed, morality must always be en-
dangered or must endanger religion if the absolute dependence be
so conceived that free self-determination cannot co-exist with it,
or vice versa. Scientific knowledge, however, is twofold—that of
natural science and that of history. Natural science is so hampered
by the assumption of the absolutely supernatural within the course
of nature that it would thereby be made entirely nugatory. History
deals more particularly with the opposition between good and evil,
and on account of the way in which they are clearly interwoven
one with another, necessarily becomes fatalistic (that is to say,
it must give up its relation to the idea of the good) if evil is either
not ordained by God or less ordained by Him than its opposite.
Our propositions, however, retain their purely dogmatic content
and do not trench upon the ground of speculation, in spite of these
connexions with it, because they are all implied in the principal
proposition. Their common relation to it is not everywhere equally
clear. It consists in this, that each in its own province puts forward
a greatest and a least and, showing that the feeling of dependence
holds good in an equivalent way for both limiting cases, establishes
this equivalence as the rule for all religious expression. The
antithesis between the ordinary and the miraculous goes back to
the greatest and least in the sphere of nature from which both are
to be explained ; the antithesis between good and evil goes back
to the greatest and least in the harmony of universal reciprocal
activity with the independent being of the individual ; the anti-
thesis between freedom and mechanism goes back to the greatest
and least in individualized life. It had, therefore, to be shown
that if at any of these points the similarity of treatment failed,
then the main proposition of the doctrine itself would fall to the
ground, and neither the conditioned feeling of dependence nor the
conditioned feeling of freedom could be combined with the absolute
feeling of dependence. Beyond these there are no difficult cases to
consider.


aS


SECOND SECTION


The Divine Attributes which are related to the Religious
Self-consciousness so far as it expresses the General
Relationship between God and the World.


§ 50. All attributes which we ascribe to God are to be taken as denoting
not something special in God, but only something special in
the manner in which the feeling of absolute dependence 1s to
be related to Him.


1. If an adequate expression of the absolute feeling of depend-
ence here indicated has been given in the expositions of the preceding
section, we cannot believe that the theory of the divine attributes
originally issued from a dogmatic interest. But history teaches
us concerning speculation that, ever since it took the divine essence
as an object of thought, it has always entered the same protest
against all detailed description, and confined itself to representing
God as the Original Being and the Absolute Good. And, indeed, it
has frequently been recognized that even in these concepts (of
which the first only is relevant here) there remains a certain in-
adequacy, in so far as they still contain an element of opposition
or other analogy with finite being. This method of treatment,
therefore, owes its origin first of all to religious poetry, particularly
to hymns and other lyrics, and also to the more uncultured experi-
ence of common life which harmonizes with poetry and tries to
vivify and establish the simple idea of the Supreme Being by the
employment of expressions which we use about finite beings. Both
methods proceed from religious interests, and have far more the

} As we can only deal here with Christian speculation it may be sufficient
to refer to Dionys. Areop., de myst. theol. cc. iv. and v.: Aéyouev ody &s 4 rdvrwv
airia kal imép rdvra odca otre dvovcrds €or ote Atwos. . . ov'TE woLoTnTa, 4) tmooéryTa
i) Oykov xe . . . odre Wux% éstw otre vols . . . ovire Aéyos eorwv, ore vénous. ..
ovre (7 ovire fon €or . . . ob Te Tv odk bvTwr, OddSE TL THY bvrwy eoTw, and to
Augustin., de Tvin. v. 1: ut sic intelligamus Deum, si possumus, quantum
possumus sine qualitate bonum sine quantitate magnum, sine indigentia
creatorem sine situ praesidentem sine habitu omnia continentem sine loco
ubique totum sine tempore sempiternum, sine ulla sui mutatione mutabilia
facientem. And Hilary, de Trin. ii. 7: Perfecta scientia est sic Deum scire,


ut licet non ignorabilem tamen inenarrabilem scias. Cf. Anselm, Pyroslog.
cc. Xvilil. and xxii.


194


§ 50] THE DIVINE ATTRIBUTES 195


aim of representing the immediate impression in its different forms
than of establishing scientific knowledge. Therefore, just because
both have been taken over from Judaism, it has been from the
beginning the business of Christian Dogmatics to regulate these
representations, so that the anthropomorphic element, to be found
more or less in all of them, and the sensuous which is mixed in with
many, may be rendered as harmless as possible, and that no retro-
gression towards polytheism should result. And in this direction
the age of Scholasticism contributed much that was profound and
excellent. But as afterwards Metaphysics came to be treated
separately and apart from Christian Doctrine, in conformity with
the nature of the subject, it was for long overlooked (as only too
easily happens in such divisions of territory) that these representa-
tions of divine attributes are not of philosophical but of religious
origin ; and they were taken over into that philosophical discipline
which went by the name of Natural Theology. There, however,
the more science developed a purely speculative character, the
more these representations, which had not arisen on the soil of
speculation were bound to be treated in a merely critical or sceptical
way. Dogmatic Theology, on the other hand, tried more and more
to systematize them, not, if it understood itself rightly, in order to
arrive at the consciousness that they contained a complete know-
ledge of God, but only to assure itself that the God-consciousness
which dwells in us in all its differentiations and as it realizes itself
at the prompting of different elements of life, was included in them.
As, however, the separation was not complete, and intercourse was
always lively and manifold between the two disciplines, much has
remained permanently under philosophical treatment which be-
longed only to the dogmatic, and vice versa. It is still therefore
always necessary to premise that, without making any speculative
demands but at the same time without bringing in any speculative
aids, we keep ourselves altogether within the limits of purely
dogmatic procedure, both with regard to the content of individual
definitions and also as to method.

2. It is precisely in this connexion that our proposition denies
in general the speculative character of the content of all the divine
attributes to be affirmed in Christian doctrine, just for that reason
and in so far as they are manifold. For if as such they present a
knowledge of the Divine Being, each one of them must express
something in God not expressed by the others; and if the know-
ledge is appropriate to the object, then, as the knowledge is com-


Tyo THE ‘CHRISTIAN FAITH [§ 50


posite, the object too must be composite.! Indeed, even if these
attributes only asserted relations of the Divine to the world, God
Himself, like the finite life, could only be understood in a multi-
plicity of functions ; and as these are distinct one from another,
and relatively opposed one to another, and at least partly exclusive
one of another, God likewise would be placed in the sphere of
contradiction. This does not fulfil the requirements of the specu-
lative reason, and definitions of this kind could not pass for specu-
lative propositions ; and just as little could the interests of religion
be satisfied if dogmatic definitions were interpreted in this way.
For if differentiations were assumed in God, even the feeling of
absolute dependence could not be treated as such and as always
and everywhere the same. For, in that case, there must be differ-
ences having their source in something beyond the difference of the
life-moments through which the feeling (of dependence) makes its
appearance in the mind. So that while we attribute to these
definitions only the meaning stated in our proposition, at the same
time everyone retains the liberty, without prejudice to his assent
to Christian Doctrine, to attach himself to any form of speculation
so long as it allows an object to which the feeling of absolute
dependence can relate itself.

3. But as concerns method, in the treatment of Dogmatics up
to the present a double procedure is found to predominate. First,
rules are put forward as to how one can arrive at right ideas of the
divine attributes, and then further, certain rubrics are given under
which the various conceptions of divine attributes are to be divided.
Now since both aim at systematizing these ideas, the same general
assumption has to be made. If the list of these attributes be
regarded as a complete summary of definitions to be related to God
Himself, then a complete knowledge of God must be derivable from
conceptions, and an explanation in due theoretic form would take
the place of that ineffability of the Divine Being which the Scrip-
tures—so far as they mention divine attributes—recognize so
clearly on every page that we need not quote passages. We have
therefore to strive after that completeness alone which guards
against letting any of the different moments of the religious self-


1 Mosheim, Theol. dogm. i. p. 232: Siessentia Dei vere differet ab attributis,
et si attributa realiter inter se differrent, Deus esset natura composita. Never-
theless many theologians come very near to admitting such differences in
God; e.g. Endemann, Instit., p. 51, who distinguishes ea attributa sine
quibus Deus nequit esse Deus and determinationes internas Dei, quae salva


eius essentia et actualitate abesse possunt, which he therefore calls analoga
accidentium.


§ 50] METHODS OF DIFFERENTIATION 197


consciousness pass without asking what are the divine attributes
corresponding to them. And with this procedure the classification
emerges of its own accord, because in each division only the
attributes belonging there can be subjects of exposition. All
the more necessary is it to make clear at this point how little is
lost for the real matter in hand when we set aside, as we do, the
apparatus which has hitherto been employed.

Now we may remark concerning these methods that there are
three accepted ways of arriving at the divine attributes—the way
of removal of limits (via eminentie), the way of negation or denial
(via negationis), and the way of causality (via causalitatis). Now it
is self-evident that these are by no means homogeneous or co-
ordinate. For in the first two a something apart from God must be
posited as an attribute ; and this, after it has been freed from all limi-
tations, is ascribed to Him, or else its negation is ascribed to Him ;
while on the other hand causality stands in the closest connexion
with the feeling of absolute dependence itself. And if the first two
be viewed in their relation to each other, it is clear that negation
by itself is no way to posit any attribute, unless something positive
remains behind the negation. In that case the negation will
consist simply in the fact that the limits of the positive are denied.
But in the same manner the way of the removal of limits is a negation,
for something is posited of God, but the limits which elsewhere
would be co-posited are not posited of God. The identity of these
two methods becomes quite obvious in the idea of Infinity, which
is at the same time the general form of absence of limits, for what
is posited as infinite is also freed from limitation ; but at the same
time it shows quite generally (by the fact that it is a negation in
which nothing is immediately posited but in which everything may
be posited which can be thought of as either limited or unlimited),
that by negation we can only posit an attribute in so far as some-
thing positive remains behind the negation. Both these methods
then can only be applied either haphazard with reference to the
question whether something, which as such could only be abso-
lutely denied of God, can be conceived as unlimited and posited as
a divine attribute ; or if this is to be avoided, the application of
these methods must be preceded by a definition as to what kind of
attribute-conceptions are rightly to be ascribed to God in an un-
limited fashion, and what kind simply must be denied of Him.
The third method, on the contrary, is certainly an independent
one. And even if we do not wish to maintain that all divine


198 THE CHRISTIAN FAITH [§ 50


attributes corresponding to any modification of our feeling of
dependence can equally be derived immediately from the idea of
causality, but rather here at the start must premise for one thing
that to this conception the other methods must first be applied,
i.e. that the finitude of causality must be denied and its productivity
posited as unlimited ; and again, that in so far as a plurality of
attributes is developed out of the idea of the divine causality, this
differentiation can correspond to nothing real in God; indeed,
that neither in isolation nor taken together do the attributes ex-
press the Being of God in itself (for the essence of that which has
been active can never be known simply from its activity alone)—yet
this at least is certain, that all the divine attributes to be dealt
with in Christian Dogmatics must somehow go back to the divine
causality, since they are only meant to explain the feeling of absolute
dependence.

Finally, with regard to the divisions of the divine attributes,
their great diversity shows how little certainty attaches to the whole
procedure and how little any division has been able to count on
general agreement ; but of some of them we can here give only brief
indications. Some?! put forward as chief division that into natural
(also called metaphysical, which of course in the case of God must
be the same thing) and the moral (which of course has a very
objectionable sound, since it leads to the inference that the moral
attributes do not belong to God in the same way).? Others first
of all divide all divine attributes into active and inactive; but
this is difficult to understand if God cannot be represented otherwise
than as living, for in the living as such all is activity. The one
class may indeed be described as inhering in God as determinations
of the most perfect Substance, which include no activity ad extra ;
yet even the inactive attributes can be thought as possessing a
purely inward activity ; and in that case this division coincides
with another, into absolute and relative attributes. Apart, how-
ever, from the fact that the presupposition of a creation in time
implies either that the active attributes first came into being along
with time or must previously have been inactive (and on this
assumption the division is meaningless), the result is always a
duality in God—a purely inner life in virtue of the inactive attri-
butes, and a life related to the world in virtue of the active attri-


1 Particular passages are not quoted, but the reader is referred to the
doctrine of the divine attributes in Mosheim, Reinhard, and Schott.


* It would belong to the Jocus which some designate as analogon acci-
dentium.


§ 50] METHODS OF DIFFERENTIATION 199


butes—and as in this way the two classes seem quite separated,
still a third class of attributes might seem to be needed to combine
them. Only if it be asked which are those inactive attributes,
we find that there is really no inner life described by them ; in part
they are simply formal, as unity, simplicity, eternity ; partly, like
independence and unchangeability, they are merely negative ; and
partly, as infinity and immeasurability, they are only the measure
and quality of the active attributes. In addition, these divisions
turn out not to be exhaustive, since often outside the division
isolated attributes are added as inferences, e.g. blessedness, glory,
majesty, or even that God is the Highest Good. Hence to avoid this
kind of thing it at first sight seems commendable that some should
from the outset divide the divine attributes into original and
derived ; and although it is not easy to see how such a division
could be made unless the attributes were themselves already given,
it might be all the more genuinely dogmatic on that account. Yet,
if it be generally conceded that the difference of the attributes is
nothing real in God, each attribute is then only another expression
for the whole Being of God, which remains always the same ; and
consequently all are original, and the derived are not attributes at
all in the same sense. But if the attributes so divided be developed
from the religious self-consciousness, and the division in this sense
be dogmatic, then again there would be no original attribute, but
all would equally be very much derived. In fact, however, the
division has not arisen from any such view, but from the view
which holds that in another respect the Divine Essence alone may
be regarded as original, and all the attributes derived. Such a
derivation of the divine attributes from the Divine Essence would
presuppose the latter as known, and would be a purely speculative
proceeding. True, even the purely dogmatic presentation of the
attributes can take no other form, except that here nothing can be
taken as fundamental save that in the Divine Essence which explains
the feeling of absolute dependence. But if the simple expression
that ‘everything depends upon God,’ is further supplemented by
the negative ‘ but He Himself upon nothing,’ at once a fresh opening
is given for a division into positive and negative attributes. And
since here in the basis of division the relationship between the highest
Essence and all other being is presupposed, it is evident that here
absolute or inactive or natural or metaphysical attributes can only
be considered as negative, and therefore, strictly taken, without
definite content.


200 THE CHRISTIAN FAITH [§ 51


4. From this discussion it follows: (a) that the presupposition
on which the idea is based that those attributes which express God’s
relation to the world have the appearance of mere additions and
accidents, i.e. the presupposition of a separation between what
God is, in and for Himself, and what He is in relation to the world,
is also the source of the idea that the purely internal (imnerlichen)
attributes can only be conceived negatively ; (0) that the rules laid
down to secure the collection of all the divine attributes in one
locus evoke conceptions which are quite foreign to the interests of
religion, and result in a confusion of what it was intended to dis-
tinguish. We may hope, therefore, to solve our problem equally
well without this apparatus and apart from any such collection if
only we treat each individual part of our scheme as adequately
as possible. Still, we too shall be able to make use of many of these
formulas in our own way. For instance, since we have not to do as
yet with the actual manifestation of religious self-consciousness in
the form of pleasure and pain, but only with what lies uniformly at
the root of these phenomena, 7.e. with the inner creative disposition
towards God-consciousness apart from the consideration whether it
is hindered or encouraged, we may call those attributes which come
up here ‘ original’ in so far as the tendency itself is original, and
we may call ‘ derived’ those which will come to our notice in the
Second Part. And in considering the manifestations of the religious
self-consciousness, if we find that everything which would destroy
His presence in us must specially be denied of God, and everything
which favours His presence in us specially be affirmed of Him, we
can say in our own way that thus divine attributes are formulated
by the methods of removal of limits and negation ; but those which
arise from present observation, and there will be such, are reached
by the method of causality. Still, this diverges fairly widely from
the general usage of those formule, which rather betrays an analogy
with speculation.


§ 51. The Absolute Causality to which the feeling of absolute depend-
ence points back can only be described in such a way that, on
the one hand, it 1s distinguished from the content of the natural
order and thus contrasted with it, and, on the other hand,
equated with it in comprehension.


1. We experience the feeling of absolute dependence as some-
thing which can fill a moment both in association with a feeling of
partial and conditional dependence and also in association with a


§ 51] THE DIVINE CAUSALITY 201


partial and conditioned feeling of freedom ; for self-consciousness
always represents finite being as consisting in this mingling of
conditioned dependence and conditioned freedom or of partial
spontaneity and partial passivity. But whenever dependence or
passivity is posited in a part of finite existence, then spontaneity
and causality is posited in another part to which the former is
related, and this condition of mutual relation of differently dis-
tributed causality and passivity constitutes the natural order. It
necessarily follows that the ground of our feeling of absolute de-
pendence, 7.e. the divine causality, extends as widely as the order
of nature and the finite causality contained in it ; consequently
the divine causality is posited as equal in compass to finite
causality. And further, the feeling of absolute dependence stands
in exactly the same relationship with the partial dependence-
feeling as with the partial freedom-feeling, and so in that relation-
ship the antithesis between these two last disappears ; but finite
causality is what it is only by means of its contrast with finite
passivity, so it is to be inferred that the divine causality is con-
trasted with the finite. The divine causality as equivalent in
compass to the sum-total of the natural order is expressed in the
term, the divine omnipotence ; this puts the whole of finite being
under the divine causality. The divine causality as opposed to
the finite and natural is expressed in the term, the divine eternity.
That is, the interrelationship of partial causality and passivity
makes the natural order a sphere of reciprocal action, and thus of
change as such, in that all change and all alteration can be traced
back to this antithesis. It is therefore just in the relationship in
which the natural causality is set over against the divine, that
the essence of the former is to be temporal; and consequently,
so far as eternal is the opposite of temporal, the eternity of God
will also be the expression of that antithesis.

In regard to what both terms according to general usage appear
to imply as to something more than, and transcending, divine
causality or the range of finite being—of this we shall speak in our
further elucidation of both concepts. Here it is to be noted gener-
ally, that since these two ideas—omnipotence and eternity—are
here related only to the divine causality, it may at once be proved
in their case also that the individual attributes in their differences
correspond to nothing real in God. It is always an inexactitude,
which as such must be pointed out when we present these as two
different attributes. For the divine causality is only equal in


202 THE CHRISTIAN FAITH (§ 51


compass to the finite in so far as it is opposite to it in kind, since if
it were like it in kind, as it is often represented as being in anthro-
pomorphic ideas of God, it too would belong to the sphere of inter-
action and thus be a part of the totality of the natural order. In
the same way, if the divine causality were not equal in compass
to the finite, it could not be set over against it without at the same
time disrupting the unity of the natural order ; because otherwise
for some finite causality there would be a divine causality, but not
for some other. Instead, therefore, of saying God is eternal and
almighty, we should rather say He is almighty-eternal and eternal-
almighty, or God is eternal omnipotence or almighty eternity.
Still, in view of unavoidable comparisons with the more exact
definitions of both attributes hitherto current, we must treat of
each by itself.

2. It is however natural that, as people always started with a
comparison of the divine causality with the finite, these two ideas
should, in religious poetry as well as in religious speech, have been
associated with two further ideas—the idea of eternity with that
of omnipresence, and the idea of omnipotence with that of omni-
science. If the two terms just dealt with completely corresponded
with the two members of the relationship set forth in our proposi-
tion, we should not have to deal in the same manner with the two
ideas just mentioned ; it would only be necessary to set forth pre-
cautionary rules to ensure that nothing should be included in the
thought of them contrary to the two principal ideas and to our
proposition. The situation, however, is not quite like that. The
idea of eternity does, of course, express a contrast to the causality
contained in the natural order, but primarily only as far as this
is conditioned by time ; and actually it is conditioned just as much
by space, and this no less in the case of the spiritual than of the
corporeal. True, if we think of their equality in compass or com-
prehension, this itself implies that the finite causality everywhere
in space is dependent upon the divine ; but the conception which
expresses contrast is obscured by this relationship, and the complete
expression of it is found only in eternity and omnipresence taken
together.

Further, with regard to the conception of omniscience, it
perhaps arose in the first place in the sphere of popular, poetical,
and religious teaching, to indicate the relationship between God
and that which goes on in man’s inner life. In Dogmatics, however,
it is always dealt with at this point, and taken in its widest applica-


§ 52] THE DIVINE ETERNITY 203


tion it belongs here ; for we are accustomed to make an antithesis
in the sphere of finite causality between living and ‘ dead’ forces,
and notwithstanding that in the doctrine of preservation even
conscious finite causality is brought under the divine, the possi-
bility is still not excluded (if once, rightly or wrongly, ‘dead’
forces are assumed) of conceiving the idea of omnipotence itself
after the analogy of ‘dead’ forces. Since consciousness is the
highest form of life known to us, this danger is averted by the idea
of omniscience. Naturally, however, these additional attributes
can just as little each for itself denote anything special and distinct
in God as those set forth at the beginning ; and as with reference
to that pair it appeared that the most correct expression was to
say that God, in His causality, was eternal omnipotence or the
almighty-eternal, so this other pair of ideas also would best be
included in a similar compound expression. But each of these two
ideas also must in itself be an expression for the Divine Essence,
because neither can betoken anything different in God; and thus
omnipresence too, when ascribed to the divine causality, is itself
eternity, and omniscience is itself omnipotence. But to express the
identity of all these attributes in the briefest manner, still another
usage may be chosen. If, that is, time and space everywhere
represent externality, and we here always presuppose a something
which, by extending itself in time and space, becomes an external
object, in the same way the antithesis to time and space may be
described as the absolutely inward. In the same way, if the term
“omniscience ’ well emphasizes the fact that omnipotence is not
to be thought of as a ‘ dead ’ force, the same result would be reached
by the expression ‘ Absolute Vitality.’ And this pair, inwardness
and vitality, would be just as exhaustive a mode of presentation,
and one perhaps even more secure against all admixture of alien
elements.


First DocTRINE: GOD IS ETERNAL


§ 52. By the Eternity of God we understand the absolutely timeless
causality of God, which conditions not only all that is temporal,
but time itself as well.

1. If the eternity of God be separated from His omnipotence,
which is here confined to its special relation to eternity, it becomes
only a so-called ‘inactive’ attribute ; and thus is often described
as infinity or immeasurability applied to time. To represent it


204 THE CHRISTIAN FAITH [§ 52


thus, however, would only encourage the representation of God
apart from the manifestations of His power, an idea quite out of
harmony with the religious consciousness and so quite empty for us.
Such an idea would in any case include the antithesis of rest or
idleness and activity, always suspect in relation to God, but in the
sphere of Christian religion quite inapplicable. The religious con-
sciousness, however (since we relate the world as such to God),
becomes actual only as consciousness of His eternal power. On the
other hand, poetical representations express the eternity of God as
an existence before all time ;? but this cannot be taken up into
didactic language without harm, for in this sphere a comparison of
more or less can only be made between similars ; but the divine
causality, since time itself is conditioned by it,? must so much the
more be thought of as utterly timeless.4 This is achieved through
expressions denoting the temporal, and therefore as it were pictori-
ally, since the temporal oppositions of before and after, older and
younger disappear in coincidence when applied to God.®

While, however, we relate the eternity of God to His omnipo-
tence, and make it equal and identical therewith, it still does not
by any means follow that the temporal existence of the world must
reach back into infinity, so that no beginning of the world can be
thought of.6 For as what now arises in time is yet grounded in the
omnipotence of God, and therefore willed and enacted by Him in
an eternal, 7.e. timeless, manner, the world also could be timelessly
willed to emerge .in the beginning of time. On the other hand, we
need not be anxious lest, if the world is given no beginning or end,
the difference between divine causality and causality within the
natural order should be cancelled, and the world be as eternal as
God. On the contrary, the eternity of God remains none the
less unique, since the antithesis between the temporal and the


1 Rom, 129, 2°Ps. 902:

3 Augustin., de Gen. c. Man. i. 3: Deus enim fecit et tempora . . . Quo-
modo enim erat tempus, quod Deus non fecerat, cum omnium temporum ipse
sit fabricator.—The same meaning seems to be indicated by the phrase
&pOapros Bacieds TOv alwvwy, 1 Tim. 117,

‘Aug., Conf. xi. 16: Nec tu tempore tempora praecedis, alioquin non
omnia tempora praecederes ; sed praecedis omnia celsitudine semper prae-
sentis aeternitatis.—Boeth., p. 137: Interminabilis vitae tota simul et per-
fecta possessio. Aeternum necesse est et sui compos praesens sibi semper
assistere, et infinitatem mobilis temporis habere praesentem.

5 Augustin., de Gen. ad litt. viii. 48: Nullo temporum vel intervallo vel
spatio incommutabili aeternitate et antiquior est omnibus, quia ipse est ante
omnia, et novior omnibus, quia idem ipse post omnia. The same as 2 Pet. 38,
in another form.

* Cf. Joh. Damasc., c. Man. vi.: od yap mpdrepov ph Oé\wv torepoy AOEAnoeV,
adn’ del HOedev ev TE bm’ abrod wpicuévy Katpo ylverOae Thy Krlow.


§ 52] ETERNITY AND TIME 205


eternal is not in the least diminished by the infinite duration of
time.t

2. But, of course, this relationship is much obscured by all
explanations of the eternity of God which either equate it with
apparent eternity,” 7.e. endless time, or even merely compare it
therewith. Even the common formula to the effect that the
eternity of God is the attribute in virtue of which He has neither
begun nor will cease to exist, is of this kind. For since here only
the terminal points of temporal duration are negated, while between
them the existence of God is made equivalent to a temporal one,
the intrinsically temporal character and the measurability of the
Divine Being, and therefore also His activity through time, are not
denied but rather indirectly affirmed. We must therefore reject
as inadequate all those explanations which abrogate for God only
the limits of time and not time itself, and would form eternity
from time by the removal of limits, while in fact these are opposites.
Even if poetical passages cannot describe eternity except by-
pictures of unending time,* the New Testament itself teaches us
how for didactic purposes these must be supplemented.® While
therefore it must be admitted of some theologians that, with
Socinus, only for other dogmatic reasons, they have here rejected
the perfectly scriptural statements of Augustine and Boethius, in
the case of others that rejection can only be explained as due to the
fear that if eternity be taken as timelessness nothing really is
affirmed at all. But this can only happen if eternity is placed
among the inactive attributes, while yet it is also thought that each
such attribute by itself alone expresses the Essence of the Divine
Being. On the other hand, it disappears if, as we demand, this
conception is combined with that of omnipotence. For, in that a
divine activity is posited, something may be posited, unknown
indeed and perhaps not clearly conceivable, but by no means
simply nothing. Indeed, finite being offers us some real help in

1 Augustin., de mus. vi.29: tempora fabricantur et ordinantur aeternitatem
imitantia.—Idem, de Gen. c. Man.i. 4: Non enim coaevum Deo mundum istum
dicimus, quia non ejus aeternitatis est hic mundus, cuius aeternitatis est
ee ih, Praelectt. cap. viii.: Nec vero in mundi creatione tempus primum
extitit . . . quamobrem ipsius quoque Dei respectu aliquid praeteritum
aliquid vero praesens, aliquid etiam futurum est. Mosheim, Theol. dogm. i.
p. 254: Aeternitas est duratio infinita. Cf. Cudw., Syst. intell., p. 780.—
Reinh., p. 104: Aeternitas est existentiae divinae infinita continuatio, which
assumes an inadmissible distinction between substance and existence in God.

3 Eckermann, Dogm. i. p. 123, calls it a necessity, because he compares


it with the immortality of the soul and the indestructibility of force.
malo DEesor® bs) Lozats 5 Cf. 2 Pet. 38 with Ps. go”.


206 THE CHRISTIAN FAITH [§ 53


conceiving the idea of eternity, since to a great degree time is
merely an adjunct to finite being in so far as it is caused, and to a
less degree in so far as it is cause. But in so far as finite being
produces time-series with their content, thus remaining the
same and identical with itself (as, eg., the Ego, as the enduring
ground of all changing spiritual states, especially of resolves, each
of which again as a moment of the Ego produces a concrete time-
series), then, as the enduring causal ground relatively to the
changing caused, it is posited as timeless. And with some such
kind of analogy we must rest content.


Postscript: THE UNCHANGEABILITY OF GOD


If the idea of eternity is thus conceived, there is no reason to
introduce unchangeability as a separate attribute: it is already
contained in the idea of eternity. For if God, in His relation to
the world, conditioning its absolute dependence, is completely time-
less, there is in His being no manifold of parts following one upon
another. It appears to be different if, setting out from a distinc-
tion between substance and existence in God, eternity is presented
merely as one aspect of unchangeability.t But for us it comes to
the same thing, since the other aspect is an inactive attribute which
expresses nothing actually present in the religious consciousness.
We may do better, therefore, to take the principle, that God is
unchangeable, merely as a cautionary rule to ensure that no
religious emotion shall be so interpreted, and no statement ? about
God so understood, as to make it necessary to assume an alteration
in God of any kind.


SECOND DOCTRINE: GOD IS OMNIPRESENT


§ 53. By the Omnipresence of God we understand the absolutely space-
less causality of God, which conditions not only all that is
spatial, but space itself as well.


1. This proposition is quite similar in verbal form to the fore-
going ; and the idea of omnipresence, indeed, is only taken up here
because the contrast between the divine causality and the finite
in the term eternity has been predominantly referred to time. It

+ Cf. Reinhard, Dogm., p. 105. If we regard unchangeableness in relation
to the essence of God, it is simplicity; if in relation to His existence, it is
eternity. But previously he had treated simplicity as a separate attribute,


and eternity was unendingness contemplated as belonging to God’s existence.
tee, Sy Oa, wor eee)


§ 53) THE DIVINE OMNIPRESENCE 207


seems unnecessary then to do more than to carry over in the same
form everything belonging to the former proposition, changing time
into space. In religious poetry from of old, indeed, this conception
has been more splendidly and more widely honoured than that of
eternity. Indeed, it must be said in general that far more religious
moments evoke the idea of omnipresence, and therefore it is a
more living idea and has a more general currency. The relation
of God and time expressed in the conception of eternity, on the
other hand, pervades the religious life to a lesser degree, and is
marked by a colder tone in consequence. This is probably due to
the fact that the majority of religious people are bound up in their
consciousness with the present. The equivalence of divine causality
with the whole content of the finite enables every act to excite the
religious consciousness, every act, that is, in which we take up into
ourselves a part of the natural order or identify ourselves with
such a part, every moment of our self-consciousness as it extends
over the whole world. And thus, whenever a person either moves
or is moved, he is also drawn to a conscious apprehension of the
power of the Highest directly near to him in all finite causality. It
is natural, then, that we are far more prone to transfer ourselves
in thought to the farthest point of space, which after all comes
immediately to our apprehension, than to go back to the remotest
time. And yet from our standpoint this difference appears un-
justifiable, however natural it may be; and it is incumbent on
Dogmatics as a scientific discipline to see whether it can remove
the discrepancy arising from the immediate juxtaposition in this
way of the two ideas. At the same time it must take care lest the
greater vividness of the conception now to be dealt with should
be associated with a large admixture of the sensuous, and should
be affected by it.

Now, just as the divine causality as eternity may easily appear
to have lost its invariableness if the non-existence of the finite
causality be asserted prior to its existence, in the same way a like
result easily appears to hold in connexion with space. For we
have to admit that finite causality is greater and less at different
points in space ; least, 7.¢. where the space is occupied with so-called
‘dead’ forces, and greater where there is a greater development of
life, and greatest where clear human consciousness is active, and so
upwards. Now as against this it must be said, first of all, that, of
course, no distinction in the almighty presence of God is hereby


1 Ps. 139, and elsewhere in the Psalter.


208 THE CHRISTIAN FAITH [§ 53


posited, but only in the receptivity of the finite being to the causal
activity of which the divine presence is related.1_ For thus the
receptivity of man is greater for it than that of any other earthly
being, but amongst men it is greatest in the religious. Yet even
this only becomes plain when it is remembered that, according to
the statement given in our proposition, the divine omnipresence
ought to be thought of as completely spaceless,? and consequently
not as greater or smaller at different places.

2. It is, however, difficult successfully to avoid all such defini-
tions as put something spatial into the divine omnipresence, if we
try to carry over the poetical and popular descriptions (which
almost always set forth the space-conditioning causality of God by
the figure of unlimited space itself), into the dogmatic sphere. It
is no less difficult if we begin by looking on the divine omnipresence,
without relation to the divine causality as an inactive attribute.
In relation to the first, we may not without advantage employ the
description of the divine causality, as current in Greek theology,
by the expressions ddvacracia and cvvovota—both, of course, related
to God’s almighty presence. For the negation of all remoteness
expresses the contrast with finite causality, which—as well in the
case of the spiritual as in that of the corporeal—becomes weakened
by distance from its place of origin or central point, so that each
force, as it is no longer present where it no longer works, is also less
as such where it effects less. This difference it is which is denied,
and thus an everywhere uniform self-identity of the divine causality
is affirmed. The relation to space, however, which lurks in the
expression ‘not outside one another,’ and thus also in ‘ everywhere
uniform self-identity,’ applies only to the finite as that which is
effected, but not to God. The same is to be noted of the term
gvvovoia, which can only lay down that finite causality is nowhere
without the divine, but not also that the divine with the finite is
in space. For not only is the cuvoveia évepyerixy related to finite
causality, but also the trocraricy in so far as it lays down the
divine omnipresence as the maintenance of things in their being


1 Joh. Damasc., de fid. orth. i. 13: atrds pev yap did wdvTwv apryGs Sijcer, Kal
dor pmeradlowor THs eavrod évepyelas Kara Thy éxdorou émitnoerdryTa Kal SexTiKhy
OUvapuv.

* Augustin., de div. quaest. xx. : Deus non alicubi est, quod enim alicubi
est, continetur loco ; et tamen quia est, et in loco non est, in illo sunt potius
omnia quam ipse alicubi. Nec tamen ita in illo, ut ipse sit locus.—Idem, Ep. 187,
1r: Et in eo ipso quod dicitur Deus ubique diffusus carnali resistendum est
cogitationi . . . ne quasi spatiosa magnitudine opinemur Deum per cuncta
diffundi, sicut aér aut lux.


§ 53] SPATIAL EXPRESSIONS UNDESIRABLE 209


and in their powers. Any other explanation would find it difficult
to avoid the suspicion of a mixture of the divine being with the
finite, and therefore a semblance of pantheism. This semblance
belongs also very strongly to the definition that God is everywhere
not ciycumscriptive but repletive. For when there is space-filling,
we cannot get away from the analogy with expansive forces, and
then the notion of an infinite extension to be predicated of God lies
too near ; and even the improvement which is introduced when we
say that this is not to be understood corporeally (as though the
existence of a finite in space were hindered by the divine space-
filling), but in a divine way, is seldom interpreted with proper
caution.! And if the expression used be that God includes all places
in Himself,” this easily suggests the opposite, namely, that God is
that which universally includes all things even spatially ; and if
this omnipresence be thought of as inactive instead of active, nothing
almost remains except that God is that which is in itself empty.
So, too, the kindred expression, that God Himself is the place of all
things, ought on this very account to be used only with the greatest
caution. Hence in this matter there remains a fundamental
improvement, one which removes the spatial element altogether,
namely, the formula that God is in Himself ;4 but, of course, along
with this it must be asserted that the effects of His causal being-in-
Himself are everywhere. The same result is reached indirectly
and, as it were, pictorially by the abrogation of spatial contrasts.®
As far as other matters are concerned, the distinction between the
divine omnipresence as an inactive and as an active attribute
almost inevitably destroys the essential self-identity of the divine
causality, and thus only produces confusion. If, for example, one
distinguishes between the omnipresence of God so far as related to
Himself and omnipresence in relation to the creatures,® and in


1 This is to be commended in Joh. Damas., /.c.: "Hori 5€ xal vonrds Tdm0s,
évOa voetrat Kal oT 7) vonTn Kal do war os priors, ‘evBamep mdperte Kal évepyel . .
6 wev ody Beds . . . NEyeTae Kal ev Térw elvat, Kal NévyeTar Téro0s Geo, évOa Exdydos a
évépyera avrov ylveras. ,

2 Hilar., d. f. Tvin. i. 6: Nullus sine Deo, neque ullus non in Deo locus
est.

8 Theoph., ad Aut. ii.: Oeds yap ob xwpeirat, GAN adrds éore Toros Tov Bru.

‘ Augustin., Ep. 187, 14: Nullo contentus loco, sed in se ipse ubique totus.

5 Augustin., de Gen. ad litt. viii. 48: incommutabili excellentique potentia
et interior omni re quia in ipso sunt omnia, et exterior omni re, quia ipse est
super omnia.—Hilar., /.c.: ut in his cunctis ‘originibus creaturarum Deus intra
extraque et supereminens et internus, id est circumfusus et infusus in omnia
nosceretur, cum... exteriora sua insidens ipse, rursum exterior interna
concluderet atque ita totus ipse intra extraque se continens neque infinitus
abesset a cunctis, neque cuncta ei, qui infinitus est, non inessent.

® radicaliter et relative. Cf. Gerh., loc. th. t. ili. p. 136.


14


210 THE CHRISTIAN FATIH [§ 53


addition accepts a creation in time, then before creation there would
only be the first kind of omnipresence and the other would be then
added. Or if one makes the world finite in space, and thus, of
course, at the limit supposes an always empty space outside, then
again the first kind of omnipresence stretches further than the
other, and it very easily comes to be said that in and for Himself
God is outside the world, but, in relation to the creatures He is
present only im the world—which introduces a similar inequality.
Here, too, the Socinians have gone furthest,1 but principally in
order to avoid the appearance of pantheism,? which they thought
could only be achieved in this way; for they could not quite
free themselves from spatiality in thinking of the being and activity
of God. And this becomes most clearly apparent when in defence
of this view it is alleged that it is a perfection in finite things if their
power extends further than their essence. As opposed to this, the
everywhere-ness of God must, of course, be related equally to His
essence and His power.


Postscript : THE IMMENSITY OF GOD


It follows clearly that we shall not need to treat further of this
term as the designation of a special divine attribute. Its use is
bound up with the greatest difficulties. Partly it is equated with
the infinity of God, and in part it is derived therefrom ; since of
course infinity regarded as substance yields immensity, but re-
garded as existence eternity. But just as when taken so time is
not done away in eternity, but only its limits; so too with im-
mensity, it is not space but its limits that are abrogated ;4 and
we should then in this way have only an omnipresence separated
from omnipotence, and consequently conceived as inactive but
always spatial. But if immensity is thought of as infinity itself,
this again is frequently presented as the attribute of all God’s
attributes. In that case we should have no reason whatever to
speak of it here, nor indeed would it ever come up for discussion ;
for in virtue of its negative content it could be no true attribute,
not even of the attributes, but only a reservation with regard to


1 Smalcius, vefut. Fvanc., p. 4: Essentia et praesentia Dei in locis omnibus
nulla datur, nec enim frustra in coelis Deus esse dicitur.

* Thom. Pisecius, respon. ad vat. Camp.: Virtutem Dei infinitam permeare
omnia scripturae testantur, non essentiam, cujus infinitate concessa universa
orbis machina, quam cernimus, corpus quoddam divinum esset.

* Cf. Gerh., loc. T. iii. p. 122, and Reinhard, Dogm., pp. 1oI-1o04,

*See Mosheim, Theol. dogm. i. p. 247: Quando infinitas cum respectu loci
seu spatii consideratur dicitur immensitas.


§ 54) THE DIVINE OMNIPOTENCE 2II


them. It would then have to repudiate for all the attributes every
analogy with the finite, and would be the general anti-anthropo-
morphic and anti-somatomorphic formula. As such it has guided
us even here and will do so also in the future, without our
finding it right on that account to erect it into an attribute. For
since here we have to do only with the causality of God, the con-
ception of the infinity of God is useful only as warding off analogy
with finite causality. But all finite causality is measurable in
time and space ; consequently we have made the Divine infinite
in the most proper sense, since we made it absolutely timeless
and non-spatial. And the term immensity is easily brought round
to equivalence with this proper meaning of infinity, if one only
says wmmeasurability ; because all measure may be resolved into
time and space determinations. Immensity is usually defined by
laying down, on the one hand, a being everywhere, and, on the
other, a warning that this is not to be taken to imply extension.
But once the activity of God has been separated from the being of
God, and only the latter regarded, there of course remains for this
immensity only a negation with no positive substratum which could
have emerged from religious emotion. Whereas, on the contrary,
it is self-evident that the contrast between the feeling of absolute
dependence and the feeling of either partial dependence or partial
freedom (both being equally spatial and temporal) includes in itself
the implication that the causality which evokes the former feeling
cannot be temporal and spatial.


THIRD DOCTRINE : GOD IS OMNIPOTENT


§ 54. In the conception of the divine Ommipotence two ideas are con-
tained : first, that the entire system of Nature, comprehending
all times and spaces, 1s founded upon divine causality, which
as eternal and omnipresent ts in contrast to all finite causality ;
and second, that the divine causality, as affirmed in our
feeling of absolute dependence, 1s completely presented in the
totality of finite being, and consequently everything for which
there is a causality in God happens and becomes real.


1. Since the natural order is naught but the twofold mutually
determined sum of the finite causing and the finite caused, the first
part of our proposition first of all implies that each finite given as
such, in virtue of its foundation in the divine omnipotence, effects
everything which the causality implanted in it makes it capable of


212 THE CHRISTIAN FAITH [§ 54


effecting in the sphere of universal causality. It is, however, equally
implied that every effect within the natural order is also, in virtue
ofits being ordained by the divine causality, the pure result of
all the causes within the natural order, according to the measure
in which it stands in relation with each of them. As now every-
thing that we can regard as a separate thing for itself within the
totality of finite being must be ‘ cause’ as well as effect, there is
never anything of any kind which can begin to be an object of the
divine causality, though previously—hence somehow independent
of God and opposed to Him—in existence. Rather on such a view
(whether it be that the activity of the divine omnipotence as
such begins in this way, or that by such opposition its activity
is interrupted, whether seldom or often matters not), the
foundation feeling of religion would thereby be destroyed.
If this is not the immediate result, it at once appears when
we extend our self-consciousness to cover the whole of finite
being and so represent that object also; for then there
would no longer be absolute dependence but only partial
dependence.

Further, since divine omnipotence can only be conceived as
eternal and omnipresent, it is inadmissible to suppose that at any
time anything should begin to be through omnipotence ; on the
contrary, through omnipotence everything is already posited
which comes into existence through finite causes, in time and space.
Similarly, because a thing can be recognized as having happened
through finite causation, it is not on this account the less posited
through the divine omnipotence, nor is that which cannot be traced
to finite causation the more on that account to be referred to
divine omnipotence. Thus the divine omnipotence can never in
any way enter as a supplement (so to speak) to the natural causes in
their sphere ; for then it must like them work temporally and
spatially ; and at one time working so, and then again not so,
it would not be self-identical and so would be neither eternal nor
omnipresent. Rather everything is and becomes altogether by
means of the natural order, so that each takes place through all
and all wholly through the divine omnipotence, so that all in-
divisibly exists through One.

2. The second part of our proposition rests upon the fact that
in our sphere we only come to the idea of the divine omnipotence
through the conception of the feeling of absolute dependence, and
we lack any point of connexion for making demands upon the


§ 54] THE-ACTUAL AND THE POSSIBLE 218


divine causality which extend beyond the natural order embraced
by this feeling. As against this it seems as though it might be said
that what we call ‘all’ consists of the actual and the potential,
and omnipotence must therefore embrace both of these ; but that
if it presents itself completely and exhaustively in the totality of
finite being, then it includes only the actual but not also the potential.
But how little the difference between actual and potential can exist
for God will appear very clearly, if we only notice in what cases we
ourselves chiefly apply it. We conceive, in the first place, much to
be possible in a thing by virtue of the general conception of the
species to which it belongs, which is not actual, however, because
excluded by its special character ; whilst in the case of other in-
dividuals of the same species other determinations, possible in virtue
of the idea of the species, remain excluded for the same reason.
Here, however, something appears to us as possible only because
we find that the particularity of the individual is a problem we are
never fully in a position to solve. But with regard to God such a
distinction between the general and the individual is not appli-
cable ; in Him the species exists originally as the sum-total of its
individual existences, and these in turn are given and established
together with their place in the species, so that what does not
hereby become actual, is also, so far as He is concerned, not potential.
In the same way, we say that much is possible by virtue of the
nature of a thing (when we take together its determinations by its
species and as an individual being), which yet does not become
actual because it is hindered by the position of the thing in the
sphere of general interaction. We rightly make this distinction
and attribute truth, as in the former case, to that which is thought
of in this way as being possible, because it is only by this indirect
method that we pass from the unfruitful sphere of abstractions and
put together a view of the conditioned development of individual
existence. On the other hand, if we could have taken into account
for each point the influence of the whole system of interaction, we
should then have had to say that what was not actual was also not
possible within the system of nature. In God, however, the one is
not separated from the other, that which exists for itself having
one ground and the system of interaction another, but both these
are grounded with and through each other, so that in relation to
Him only that is possible which has its foundation in both equally.
But every case which has any validity for us, may be reduced under
one of these heads. The idea of a potentiality outside the sum of


214 THE CHRISTIAN FATTH [§ 54


the actual ! has no validity even for our minds ; for not only does
the religious self-consciousness not lead us to such a point, but, in
addition, however we arrived at it, we should then have to accept
a self-limitation of the divine omnipotence which can never be
given in experience. Nor can we conceive any ground for such a
self-limitation, unless that which is thought of as potential could
enter into existence, not as an increase, but only in some way or
other as a diminution of the actual, whereby the whole assumption
is destroyed.”

3. Since in relation to God no distinction between the potential
and the actual can be allowed, it is easy to pass judgment on the
popular explanation of God’s omnipotence, which has often been
adopted even in scientific discussions, namely, that it is the attri-
bute in virtue of which God is able to effect all that is possible, or
all which contains no contradiction in itself. If, of course, contra-
diction is taken realitey and that is called contradictory which can
find no place in the whole of existence, this is perfectly correct ;
for all the compossible is certainly produced by the divine omni-
potence. Objection might still be made to the one point of saying
that, in virtue of omnipotence, God can effect, not does effect,
everything ; for thereby a distinction is made between ‘can’ and
‘will,’ and the explanation comes near to another, namely, that
omnipotence is the attribute by which God can do what He will.
There is, however, as little distinction between ‘can’ and ‘ will’ in
God, as between the actual and the possible.? For whichever is
greater than the other, the will or the ability, there is always a
limitation, which can only be done away with if both be made
equal in range. Moreover the very separation of each in itself, as
though, that is, ability were a different condition from will, is an
imperfection. For should I think of an ability without will, the
will must proceed from an individual impulse, and so also always
from a caused impulse ; and should I think of a will without


1 Statements such as that of Basil, hom. I. in hexaém.: rdv rod rayrds Tovrou
Snutoupyov ovx Evl Kboum ciumerpov exew Thy montikhy Sivauiv, aN els 7d amr elpom-
Adowov VirepiBaivovcay, we must explain by the limits of contemporary know-
ledge of the universe, in contrast to which we have already arrived at the
ametpomNdovov,

* Abelard rightly says, Intvod. iii. 5: Potest, quod convenit, non convenit
quod praetermittit, ergo id tantum facere potest, quod quandoque facit. Cf.
August., Enchirid. 24: Neque enim ob aliud veraciter vocatur omnipotens,
nisi quoniam quicquid vult potest.

3 Joh. Damasc., d. fid. orth. i. 8, calls God indeed dvvamy ovdevt METpYW
yropifouerny, udvy TO olxelw Bovyware werpouuévyny. But this is only meant to
bring out one side, for he says, i. 13: mdvra uev boa BédXe Sbvarar, oby Boa 5é
Ovvarac Oédee.


§ 54] MEDIATE AND IMMEDIATE OMNIPOTENCE 215


ability, the ability cannot be grounded in the inner power, but
must be given from without. And if, since in God there is no
willing through individual impulses, and no ability given from
without, waxing and waning, the two in God cannot be separated
even in thought, so also, since ‘ can’ and ‘ will’ together are neces-
sarily doing, neither willing and doing are to be separated, nor ‘ can’
and ‘do,’ but the entire omnipotence is, undivided and unabbrevi-
ated, the omnipotence that does and effects all. But it is useless
to say anything further on this view on account of its inevitable
separation between ‘can’ and ‘will.’ !

4. With the misunderstanding just exposed there are connected
many distinctions within the divine omnipotence, as well as divisions
of it, given currency especially by the scholastics, which can be
ruled out without loss. To these belongs, in the first place, the
contrast between a mediate and immediate, or absolute and ordered,
exercise of the divine omnipotence, 7.e. between cases when it acts
without or with intermediary causes. Now when individual
effects are referred some only to the former and some only to the
latter, the distinction is false. For everything which happens in
time and space has its determinations in the totality of that which
is outside it in space and before it in time, however much they may
be hidden, and so far come under the ordered power ; and if some,
to the exclusion of others, .be referred back to the immediate power,
the whole order of nature would be abrogated. If, however, we
think not of the individual but of the world itself as the effect of
the divine omnipotence, we have no choice but to recur to its
immediate exercise. Hence in so far as we can apply the idea of
creation in detail, we apply at the same time and equally the idea of
the absolute exercise of omnipotence ; but in so far as we use the idea
(rightly understood) of concurrence or preservation,’ in this aspect of
it, everything is referred to the ordered exercise of power which estab-
lishes the dependence of each individual on the totality of existence
eternally, and for the maintenance of the general interaction makes
use of the forces of individual things. There is no point, however,
which we can relate only to the absolute (which by way of stricter
contrast we ought to call not ‘ unordered ’ but ‘ ordering ’) exercise
of omnipotence and not to the ordered exercise and conversely.

1 This is true of all such formule as Deus absoluta sua potentia multa


potest, quae non vult nec forte unquam volet ; or Nunquam tot et tanta
efficit Deus, quia semper plura et majora efficere possit (cf. Gerh., loc. theol. i.


DP wls2ts):
2 Cf. § 38. 1 and § 45, Postscript.


216 THE CHRISTIAN FAITH [8 54


The case is similar with the distinction almost everywhere
drawn between the divine will as absolute and as conditioned. It
is clear that on this view ability is still made greater than will,
because in the former no such distinction is drawn; and there
arises a gradation, so that of what God can do some things He wills
absolutely, some under conditions, and still others not at all. But
it is by no means the case that God wills some things absolutely
and others conditionally ; just as with regard to every event there
is something of which one can say, if this were not then that event
would not be; so with regard to every individual thing—the fact
that it exists and that it exists in this way—-we can say that God
wills it conditionally, because everything is conditioned by some-
thing else. But that whereby something else is conditioned is
itself conditioned by the divine will ; indeed in such a way that
the divine will upon which the conditioning rests, and the divine
will upon which the conditioned rests is not different in each case,
but one only and the same; it is the divine will embracing the
whole framework of mutually conditioning finite being: and this
naturally is the absolute will, because nothing conditions it. In
this way everything individual would be willed by God condition-
ally, but the whole willed absolutely as a unity. On the other
hand, if for once we take an individual out of the order, and relate
it so to the divine will, we shall have to say that each individual
existing for itself, so far as we regard it not as conditioned by, but
as co-conditioning the whole, is so fully willed by God as what it
is, that everything else must be so, and cannot be otherwise than
as follows from its action ; which is as much as to say that it is
absolutely willed by God. In this respect, therefore, it can be said
that every individual, so far as it must be affected by the rest, is
also only conditionally willed by God ; but, of course, not as though
on that account it were any the less willed, or any the less came to
reality. Everything, however, so far as it is itself effective, and in
various ways conditions other things, is absolutely willed by
God.

But the whole idea of the divine omnipotence appears most
endangered, when an active and an inactive, and a free and a
necessary, divine will are set one over against the other. The
necessary will would be related to what God wills in virtue of His
essence, the free to that which, so far as His essence is concerned,
He could just as well not will ;1 where it is assumed that it does


* Gerh., loc. th. iii. p. 203: Ex necessitate naturae vult quae de se ipso vult,


§ 54] NECESSITY AND FREEDOM IN GOD atm


not belong to His essence to reveal Himself. Thus by means of
the necessary will God wills Himself, and by means of the free will
He wills what is other than Himself. But a ‘ self-willing’ of God
is always a most awkward formula, and almost inevitably raises
the hair-splitting question whether, just as the world exists by
reason of His free will, so also God exists because, by reason of His
necessary will, He wills Himself, or whether He wills Himself because
He is. Or, to express it rather differently, whether this self-willing
is more in the way of self-preservation, or more in the way of self-
approval, or (if both are taken together) after the manner of self-
love.1 Now since self-preservation can scarcely be thought of as
a real will unless there is something to be striven for or averted,”
and self-approval almost necessarily implies a divided conscious-
ness, it is easily seen that this self-willing can mean nothing but the
very existence of God posited under the form of will. But this,
which is in God purely inward and related solely to Himself, can
never come into our religious self-consciousness. In any case,
therefore, this necessary will of God, as in no way belonging here,
would fall under speculative theology. Moreover, it seems that this
contrast cannot be applied to God at all, and what has been brought
under the contrasted heads respectively is not really separable.
For where such a contrast exists the necessary must be unfree, and
the free be grounded in no necessity, and so arbitrary. Each, how-
ever, is an imperfection ; and consequently this contrast has its
place solely in that existence in which each being is co-determined
by the rest. We must therefore think of nothing in God as
necessary without at the same.time positing it as free, nor as free
unless at the same time it is necessary. Just as little, however,
can we think of God’s willing Himself, and God’s willing the world,
as separated the one from the other. For if He wills Himself, He
wills Himself as Creator and Sustainer, so that in willing Himself,
willing the world is already included ; and if He wills the world,
in it He wills His eternal and ever-present omnipotence, wherein
willing Himself is included; that is to say, the necessary will is
included in the free, and the free in the necessary. Obviously, too,


nulla re sive extra se sive intra se permotus. Libeve vult, quae de creaturis
vult, quae poterat et velle et nolle. ;

1 Wegscheider, Imstitt., §67: Voluntas necessaria, 7.e. actus voluntatis quae
e scientia necessaria promanare dicitur, amor nimirum quo Deus. . . se ipsum
complectatur necesse est. ;

2 Many, of course, still describe the divine will in this way, e.g. Mosheim,
Th. dogm., p. 277: actus appetendi quae bona sunt et aversandi quae mala


sunt.


218 THE CHRISTIAN FAITH (§ 54


there is nothing in the way in which God comes into our religious
self-consciousness which corresponds to this contrast, and it lacks
dogmatic content.

And finally as to the contrast between the active and inactive
divine will: it first of all contradicts the generally recognized
proposition that the divine will extends no further than divine
ability.1 For how should a true and real will be inactive unless it
lacked the ability ? But it is to be noted that the one all-embracing
divine will is identical with the eternal omnipotence ; and if then,
as eternal, it is timeless, the content of no definite time can quite
correspond with it, and so from this point of view the divine will
is always inactive. But it is also always active, because there is no
fraction of time which does not pass in fulfilment of it, and what
seems to resist or repress the divine will is always simply
co-operating in its temporal fulfilment.? If, then, we hold this fast
and distinguish between will and command, it is quite unnecessary
to dealwith the idea of a precedent and a consequent will, expressions
which again suggest the appearance of a change in the will of God.


POSTSCRIPT: THE INDEPENDENCE OF GOD


If the feeling of absolute dependence comprises a reference to
divine omnipotence, it is no longer necessary to bring out the
independence of God as a special attribute. For if one remains at
all true to the derivation of the word, it is, as the opposite of that
dependence in which we find ourselves, simply a negative attribute
and, as it were, a shadow-picture of omnipotence, and only states
that God has no foundation or cause of His being outside Himself,
which coincides with the scholastic ‘ aseitas,’ virtually ‘ existence-
from-self.’ If, now, this be changed into a formula of quite similar
content, namely, that in relation to God there can be no question
of a ground, one sees at once how this is already completely con-
tained in our two main conceptions, eternity and omnipotence.
But, of course, the term independence is dealt with in very different
ways. Some include in the idea that God is Lord over all. But


*Cf. Gerh., Joc. th. i. p. 154: Praeter voluntatem non indiget aliqua
potentia.

* On this are also based the formule of Augustine, to which we must
always come back, Enchirid. 26 : Omnipotentis voluntas semper invicta est—
nec nisi volens quicquam facit, et omnia quaecunque vult facit. 27: dum tamen
credere non cogamur aliquid omnipotentem Deum voluisse fieri, factumque
non esse.

* Reinhard’s Dogm., p. 106: Independentia est illud attributum, quo
nemini quicquam debet, et ipse solus est omnium rerum dominus.—Joh.
Damasc., de orth. fid. i. 19, can scarcely have regarded avre£ovatos (which, for


§ 55] THE DIVINE OMNISCIENCE 219


Lordship is connected with independence only on the presupposi-
tion that the independent is at the same time in need of something,
for otherwise one can be completely independent without having
even the slightest Lordship. Thus if the divine attributes are
to be separated at all, this combination is not practicable. Then if
“indebted to no one’ has only a moral sense, and denies the ap-
plicability of the conception of obligation in relation to God, the
conception is thereby divided, and there is, according to the usual
procedure, a physical and a moral independence. About the
latter we have nothing to say here ; and since ‘ to be Lord over all’
can be only an expression of omnipotence (if, that is, we leave
out in advance the moral consideration which here too enters, that
God as Lord cannot be obligated, 7.e. can stand under no law), we
have nothing left but the above-mentioned ‘ existence-from-self ’ of
God—a speculative formula which, in the dogmatic sphere, we can
only convert into the rule that there is nothing in God for which a
determining cause is to be posited outside God. But this is so
clearly defined in our first explanation,! that it is unnecessary to
bring it up specially here.


FourtH DOCTRINE: GOD IS OMNISCIENT


§ 55. By the divine Omniscience is to be understood the absolute
spirituality of the divine Omnipotence.

1. This explanation is quite in keeping with the manner in
which we arrived at this conception above.?- And yet even here
it is to be premised that everywhere it is chiefly intended much more
to bring out the truth that the divine causality should be thought
of as absolutely living than that a similarity should be definitely
established between God and that which we designate as spirit in
the existence presented to us. The former is essential if the feeling
of absolute dependence, or piety, is to be true and real ; for a lifeless
and blind necessity would not really be something with which we
could stand in relation ; and such a necessity, conceived as equal to
the whole of finite causality yet contrasted with it, would really
mean positing the latter alone, and thus declaring an absolute
dependence unreal, because as self-caused beings we are not abso-
lutely dependent on finite causality. But to define the similarity


the most part, corresponds to independent) as forming one predicate together
with avroxparyjs and dvevdens.
DiGi S 1A 4. 285 1,-2.


220 THE CHRISTIAN FAITH [$55


between God and the spiritual in a finite sense is certainly a problem
only to be solved by endless approximation ; for owing to the
intermixture of receptivity and passivity in some degree to be found
(even if unrecognized) in every available term, we inevitably co-
posit something which must then be got rid of again by the use of
some other term. If then here (where we are considering the feeling
of absolute dependence only in its essence, and so have to do with
the divine causality also only in its essence), Spirituality be de-
noted by the function of knowing, our first rule must be to exclude
from the spirituality of the Divine Essence everything which
necessarily contains in itself receptivity or passivity. Therefore
just as the divine will must not be thought of as a faculty of desire,
so the divine omniscience must not be considered as a perceiving
or experiencing, a thinking together or a viewing together. Now
since we are acquainted with no other kind of knowledge than that
in which spontaneity and receptivity pervade each other, only in
different degrees, we distinguish, according as one of the two pre-
dominates, between the knowledge which is chiefly constructed from
within and that which is chiefly derived from without ; and still
more, since the greater part of our thinking presupposes existence
as its object, and is related only slightly to our productive activity,
we distinguish between the purposive activity of thought upon
which production follows, and the observing activity which relates
to something already present. But this last distinction is com-
pletely inapplicable to God, for there are no objects of observation
for Him other than those which exist through His will, but the divine
knowledge is exclusively a knowledge of the willed and produced,
not a knowledge for which an object could be given from any other
source.t Indeed, since there is for Him no succession, it can never
be said that in Him the purposive thought-activity precedes the
will-activity.2. In consequence of the above, there can be in God
no distinction between resolving and the execution of the resolve
(where in our case purposive ideas remain wholly or in part ideal),
since otherwise the divine omnipotence would not perfectly express
itself in the finite. Just as little can any activities more analogous
with the corporeal or any kind of matter + be added to the divine


1 This is Calvin’s meaning, /nstit. iii. 23. 6: Quum nec alia ratione quae
futura sunt praevideat, nisi quia ut fierent decrevit ; where only the idea of
seeing beforehand is awkward. Erigena puts it better, de praedest., Pa l2ts:
Ea ergo videt quae facere voluit, neque alia videt, nisi ea quae fecit.

*Idem, ibid. p. 125: Non in eo praecedit visio operationem, quoniam
coaeterna est visioni operatio.

2 Cie $5302: “Cf. Anselm, Momnol. cap. xi.


§ 55] OMNISCIENCE AND WISDOM 221


thinking, so as to make its object real. Hence the divine thinking
is the same as the divine will, and omnipotence and omniscience
are one and the same. And since in God there is no duality be-
tween thought and word (nay, even the term ‘ word’ can only mean
the activity of the thought outwards), this precisely is the point
expressed in all formule which exhibit the divine Word as creating
and preserving ; and it is quite correct to say, as has been said
in multifarious ways, that everything exists by reason of God’s
speaking or thinking it.!

Since then this divine knowledge is recognized as the very
productivity of God, the creative as well as the preservative, it
follows at once that it is entirely the same divine knowledge which
constitutes the divine omniscience and the divine wisdom.? If
the two are separated, something out of our existence is transferred
to God, which even if we make it infinite can still be for Him only
an imperfection. Since it is the least part in the existence which
surrounds us that proceeds from our own activity, a knowledge of:
things independent of our influence upon them certainly is for us
a good anda perfection. But if in thought we shut off the sphere
of our formative production by itself, for all that it is so limited,
then it will always indicate an imperfection if the later cognition
by the artist of the whole of his works contains something besides
what was in his purposive idea, whether it be that the original
image or the formative activity was imperfect, or that the sphere
was not so completely shut off but that some foreign influence
could have told upon his works. But now the world as the whole
content of the divine formation and production is so self-enclosed
that there is nothing external which could gain an influence upon
it. Thus every distinction in content between wisdom and omni-
science must presuppose an imperfection in God. But even as to
form, a distinction between the two can hardly be granted; for
neither can the one have a more inner and the other a more out-
ward origin, nor can the one be more and the other less bound up
with the divine will. If omniscience is simply the absolute living-
ness of the divine will, this must be just as true of the divine

1 Hilar. in Ps. cxviti. sgm 4: Ergo omne ex quo vel in quo mundi totius
corpus creatum est, originem sumit ex dicto, et subsistere in id, quod est ex
verbo Dei, coepit.—Anselm, Monol. cap. xii.: Quicquid fecit, per suam


intimam locutionem fecit, sive singula singulis verbis, sive potius uno verbo
simul omnia dicendo.

2 Augustin., de div. qu. ad Simpl. ii. 2. 3: Quamquam et in ipsis hominibus
solet discerni a sapientia scientia . . . in Deo autem nimirum non sunt haec
duo sed unum.


222 THE CHRISTIAN FAITH [8 55


wisdom, if wisdom be a comprehensive name for the divine
purposes.

Hence it can only be from a special point of view that wisdom
is regarded as a special attribute, and in this respect there will be
something to say about it elsewhere. But it also follows, that finite
existence must merge as completely in the divine knowledge as in
the divine omnipotence, and that in finite existence the divine
knowledge is exhibited as completely as the divine omnipotence ;
so that when both are held one against another, there is nothing
left in the divine knowledge to which there is no correlative in
existence, or which stands in a different relationship to existence,
so that the latter would always have to be presupposed in order
that the former might be posited. Or, to put it briefly, God knows
all that is; and all that God knows is, and these two are not two-
fold but single ; for His knowledge and His almighty will are one
and the same.

2. It is in the light of what has already been said that the
further, and for the most part later, definitions concerning divine
omniscience must be judged. Of these it may, of course, be said in
general that they transfer to God human activities, so conceived
as still to include imperfection, and in such a way that by illimita-
tion the imperfection is by no means done away. The first case
where this holds good is when, in God’s knowledge of existence,
perception, memory, and prescience are distinguished, and then the
divine omniscience, as the absolutely perfect cognition of things,
is made up compositely of these three.1 For as the same thing
which now is present directly after is past, as it was previously
future, in God all these three kinds of knowledge must either be
simultaneous even for the same object, in which case the distinctions
would be quite blurred by their simultaneity ; or, if they remain
distinct and outside one another, they must follow one upon another
even in God, according as the thing known passes out of the future
into the past. And then this means that in the case of the divine
knowledge the rule that in God there is no change is broken.2 If


1So Reinhard, Dogm., § 25: Omniscientia divina est attributum, quo
omnium rerum cognitionem habet longe perfectissimam. But this very
superlative contains in it an analogy, and thus ascribes to the divine knowledge
a similarity with that of finite beings, thus making it temporal. From this
we get praescientia, visio, and reminiscentia.

* Augustin., /.c.: Quid est enim praescientia, nisi scientia futurorum ?
Quid autem futurum est Deo, qui omnia supergreditur tempora? Si enim
scientia Dei res ipsas habet, non sunt ei futurae sed praesentes, ac per hoc non
jam praescientia sed tantum scientia dici potest. Si autem sicut in ordine
temporalium creaturarum, ita et apud eum nondum sunt, quae futura sunt,


$55] FREE AND NECESSARY KNOWLEDGE 223


then we say (as indeed already by combining opposites we have
often sought to present the divine as raised above all opposition)
that the perfect knowledge of a thing’s existence for itself is the
same as the knowledge of the inner law of its development, and the
perfect knowledge of a thing’s place in the sphere of universal
interaction is one with the knowledge of the influence of all other
things on it, but that both these perfect kinds of knowledge form in
God one and the same timeless knowledge, determining the exist-
ence of the object, while with us both are incomplete and so
temporally distinct, because our knowledge does not determine the
existence of a thing, but is determined by it—then we have at least
an indication as to how to avoid as far as possible too great a human-
izing of the divine knowledge.!

Nor is a better scheme achieved by the division into free or
intuitive knowledge and mecessary knowledge or pure thought ; 2
for as the first member comprehends in itself those three modes of
thought already noticed, the other would comprehend that divine
knowledge which would have God Himself and all that is possible
for its object.* It must strike everyone as peculiar as well as most
unfortunate that under one name there should be comprised God’s
knowledge of Himself, and His knowledge of that which is merely
possible. For whether one thinks of the merely possible as including
only that which never becomes real, or whether one also includes
that which comes to reality, in abstraction from its reality, God
always remains that which is truest and most original, but the
simply possible that which is most shadow-like and ineffectual ;
so that such a combination almost assumes that God knows even
Himself only through an abstract shadow-like presentation.*


sed ea praevenit sciendo, bis ergo ea sentit, uno quidem modo secundum
futurorum praescientiam, altero vero secundum praesentium scientiam.
Aliquid ergo temporaliter accedit scientiae Dei quod absurdissimum et
falsissimum est.

1 Augustin., /.c. : Cum enim demsero de humana scientia mutabilitatem et
transitus quosdam a cogitatione in cogitationem, cum... de parte in
partem crebris recordationibus transilimus . . . et reliquero solam vivaci-
tatem certae atque inconcussae veritatis una atque aeterna contemplatione
cuncta lustrantis, immo non reliquero, non enim habet hoc humana scientia,
sed pro viribus cogitavero: insinuatur mihi utcumque scientia Dei; quod
tamen nomen, ex eo quod sciendo aliquid non latet hominem potuit esse rei
utrique commune,

2 Scientia libera or visionis and scientia necessaria or simplicis intelligentiae.

3 Gerhard, Joc. th. i. p. 148 note.

4 This is only very slightly modified by such a remark as that of Thomas
(in Gerh., /.c.): Deus se ipsum videt in se ipso, quia se ipsum videt per
essentiam suam: alia a se videt non in ipsis sed in se ipso, in quantum
essentia sua continet similitudinem aliorum ab ipso. Here the question is
rather of the actual, and the meaning really is that God knows about finite


224 THE CHRISTIAN FAITH [8 55


Thus we should have to admit besides a divine self-consciousness
partaking of the nature of intuitive knowledge and resembling it ;
the latter would be the living consciousness of God in His reality,
but the former an inactive and, as it were, passive element of the
Divine Essence. Only, since all are at one in asserting that God’s
essence and God’s attributes (and so also the active attributes) are
one and the same, this distinction comes to nothing, as also does
this aspect of pure thought in God. Next, the one description
appears to be formed very much on the analogy of the fact that
with us the indefinite idea of what is simply possible must have an
immediate sense-impression added to it, if it is to pass over into the
consciousness of an object as real. If now in all cases perceptual
knowledge is richer in content than pure thought (since the former
has a real existence corresponding to it and the latter has not), and
if none the less finite existence is dependent on divine thought, the
question inevitably arises why God, who must will to have the
absolute maximum of cognition in Himself, knows with intuitive
knowledge only some of what is possible, 7.e. that which at any time
becomes real, and not ali. And if we do not wish to fall back upon
simple arbitrariness, which in thought is always an imperfection,
and so a self-diminution of God, there can hardly be any other
answer to this question than that some of what is possible lacks the
possibility of existing along with the rest. But that, the existence
of which conflicts with the existence of all else, is also contradictory
to itself. Thus there is no divine knowledge of it even on the
traditional explanation of the divine omniscience, for the self-
contradictory is neither a thing nor cognizable. But if we look at
the matter from the point of view of the other description, that
intuitive knowledge is free, while the other is necessary, then
(since the free is something other than the necessary), God thereby is
brought under this antithesis, and the necessity whereby anything
not free exists in Him is not anything in Him (otherwise it would be
His freedom itself), but something outside and above Him—which
conflicts with the conception of the Supreme Being.
From the foregoing it is now very easy to conclude what is to
be held regarding the so-called mediate knowledge of God,! by means
of which He would know just what would have resulted had some-
thing happened which did not happen. It rests altogether upon


being in the same way that He knows about Himself without reference to the
possible.


1 Scientia media also futuribilium, or de futuro conditionato.


§ 55] NO DIVINE MEDIATE KNOWLEDGE 225


the assumption of a possible outside the real, which we have already
put aside. As soon, then, as we express it so, namely, that God
knows what would have resulted if at any point the impossible
had become real, this knowledge, as a whole, dissolves into nothing,
because what rests solely upon the becoming real of the impossible
is itself impossible. However, even apart from this it would follow
that if anywhere even for God anything is possible outside the real,
then infinitely much is possible at every point, and as each point is
co-determinant for all the rest, a different world arises for each case
from each point. The infinitely many times infinitely many
worlds which thus, infinitely often, are formed (amid which the
real world is lost as something infinitely small), are thus the object
of this mediate knowledge—an object which still multiplies itself
to infinity, if one considers that the necessary knowledge of God
already of itself contains an infinite number of worlds originally
different from the real world, for each of which again there obtains
a mediate knowledge just as full as that which relates to the real
world. So, measured thus, even the works of the divine omni-
potence appear in the divine omniscience as something infinitely
small in comparison with what omnipotence does not bring to
reality, and consequently there is in God eternally and imperish-
ably a mass of rejected thoughts ; and, if we accept this mediate
knowledge, the imperfection of a human artist, who, because his
formative capacity is fluctuating and uncertain, thinks out the
individual parts of his work in various ways other than as he after-
wards fashions them, will, freed from all limitations and made
infinite, be transferred to God. Looked at by itself, this whole
apparatus of rejected thoughts is simply a knowledge of nothing ;
and it can only have a meaning if we could suppose that God also
decides and produces by choice and deliberation, a view which
from of old every form of teaching in any degree consistent has
repudiated.! Hence it would have been far safer, if one does start
from what is human, to transfer to God, illimited and perfect, the
certainty of the perfect artist, who in a state of inspired discovery
thinks of nothing else, to whom nothing else offers itelf, save what
he actually produces. This also agrees very well with the story of
the Creation, which knows nothing of any intervening deliberation
and deciding choice, but keeps contemplation entirely to the end,


1 Joh. Damasc., d. f. orth. ii, 22: xph 5é ywwoxew, Bre érl Beod BovrAnow per
Aéyouer, mpoalperw dé kuplws ob Néyouev’ ot yap Bovreverar Deds* ayvolas ydp éort 70
Bovdever Oar’ mepi yap Tod y.wwwoKkomévou ovdels Bovheverat,


15


226 THE CHRISTIAN FAITH [§ 55


where it appears simply as absolute approval, without ascribing
to God any contemplation of what He did not make or any com-
parison of the real world with those possible worlds. If, however,
the edifying and tranquillizing effect of the conception of such
a mediate knowledge of God be alleged,t what that really amounts
to is this, that, if we lift ourselves up to the religious consciousness
in our pain over disappointed expectations, we should think that
our wishes were also among God’s thoughts, but amongst the
rejected. But (we may take it) true religious submission makes
no such demand as that God should have had our foolish thoughts
as His own, but is content with seeing from the result that our
plans were not contained in that original or rather eternal sanction.
The name ‘ mediate knowledge ’ does, however, call for special
consideration, since its reference can only be to the naming of the
other two kinds of knowledge. Should it be a mediate between
the necessary and the free, then God would be (as it were) more
tied up in thinking that which from a given point is possible than
in thinking the real, in spite of the fact that the last presents the
greatest degree of ‘ tied-up-ness,’ namely, the whole of the natural
order. Or if the free knowledge of God is at the same time the
productive, the mediate would present a transition from pro-
ductivity to the idle, ineffective activity of pure thought. Thus
the mediate, as a diminishing production, would be, as it were,
the divine preservation and co-operation restraining itself in all
directions, as in us the ever-stimulating idea of the real shades off
into that of the probable, still lively-coloured and affecting us
through hope and fear, and then loses itself in indifferent shadow-
pictures of the merely possible. But we may reasonably hesitate
to transfer such things from ourselves to God. If, however, this
knowledge is the mean between perceptual and pure thought, it
affords a passage from the former to the latter, which is incon-
ceivable without a diminution of living power. And so, even from
this point of view, we reach the final result, that the possible as
distinct from the real cannot be an object of the divine knowledge.
3. If one adds to this the fact that unquestionably there exists
at least a strong appearance as though, on the one side, a dual self-
consciousness—an original and a reflected—were attributed to
God, and as though, on the other, the piece-by-piece character of
His knowledge were being assumed, it follows that till now the
theory of these divine attributes has transferred to the Supreme
1 Reinhard, Dogm., p. 112.


§ 55] GOD’S KNOWLEDGE NOT DISCURSIVE a27


Being all the imperfections of our consciousness. The appearance
of a dual consciousness issues from the fact that the whole of God’s
knowledge about Himself (which is similar to His knowledge of all
that is possible, as it remains wholly separate from the Divine
activity) can only be thought of as objective and indeed on the
lines of our most abstract knowledge ; yet as such it cannot be
the only knowledge He possesses, but has necessarily beside it an
original knowledge. This, indeed, does not come out immediately
in the language of the Schools, but mediately, and as presupposed
wherever emotional excitations attributed to God in popular
preaching and religious poetry are treated dogmatically—which
means that there is all too easily suggested such a sensibility on
the part of the Supreme Being as destroys the basal relationship of
absolute dependence. But such excitation of itself always implies
the second imperfection we have to prove—the piece-by-piece
quality of knowledge in God. For it is only the influence of a
definite moment (which we feel is making such a demand upon us
that in relation to it something must happen) that evokes an emotion
in us. And so fora right theory on this point there is nothing left
but the formula that God is related to the object in an eternal
and omnipresent way, as in us the evocation of the emotion is related
to the momentary impression. Then there will no longer be any
cause either to introduce in the divine self-consciousness the above-
mentioned contrast between original and reflected, or even to make
a contrast between the latter and the objective, to avoid which the
above formula ! was chosen. The second point, namely, the piece-
by-piece character of the divine knowledge, still lurks curiously
in the treatment of the question whether even the trivial is an
object of the divine knowledge. For this question could simply
not have been raised if a start had been made from the formula
that God knows each in the whole, as also the whole in each—a
formula which utterly abolishes the contrast between great and
small, and which alone is correct because already given in the idea
of a settled natural order. This, however, follows of itself on the
customary method of illimitation, for in fact we consider even a
human consciousness more perfect the more there is present to
it in each individual moment.

And this leads us to consider still further, in the light of this
divine attribute, a subject which might really be regarded as
already done with,? namely, whether the divine knowledge about


1 Page 217, l, 29. 2§ 409.


228 THE CHRISTIAN FAITH [§ 56


the free actions of men can co-exist with their freedom. Most
thinkers, indeed, perhaps even the Socinians, would have felt
ashamed to answer the question in the negative, or even to raise it,
if they had reflected that in that case not only could there have
been no further question of an eternal decree of God regarding
salvation, but that history in general would become something
which God only gradually experienced, and consequently the idea
of providence must be wholly given up.! If, then, the temptation
to answer the question in the negative, and the need to raise it is
grounded in the interests of human freedom, it must be considered
that one’s own foreknowledge of free actions and the foreknowledge
of others must destroy freedom still more than divine foreknowledge
does. And yet we deem those people least free who cannot in
general know their actions beforehand, 7.e. those who are not
conscious of any definite course of action. But in such cases this
special foreknowledge is lacking only because foreknowledge is
lacking of the special relevant outer conditions and inner con-
ditions produced from without. In the same way we estimate the
intimacy of relationship between two persons by the foreknowledge
one has of the actions of the other, without supposing that in either
case the one or the other’s freedom has thereby been endangered.
So even divine foreknowledge cannot endanger freedom.


APPENDIX TO THE SECOND SECTION: SOME OTHER DIVINE
ATTRIBUTES


§56. Among the divine attributes usually mentioned, the Unity,
Infinity, and Simplicity of God especially might conveniently
come in here, as having no relation to the antithesis in the
excitations of the religious consciousness ; only they could
not be regarded as divine attributes in the same sense as those
already dealt with.


1. The attributes mentioned here are not related (as are those
to be dealt with in the Second Part of this Dogmatic) to the ease
or difficulty with which the consciousness of God develops in us
at different moments ; and so far they would belong here, if they


} The Socinian principle when fully applied really seems to imply this. We
may find directly contrasted formule in Augustine, de civ. Dei v. 9: Non est
consequens ut si Deo cevtus est causarum omnium ordo, ideo nihil sit in nostrae
voluntatis arbitrio ; and in Socin., Praelect. cap. viii.: Namque non entium
nullae sunt qualitates. Atqui ea quae nec fuerunt nec sunt, nec certo futura
sunt, nullo modo sunt, itaque ea Deo praesentia esse nequeunt. Eiusmodi
autem sunt voluntariae hominum actiones, quae nondum revera extiterunt.


§ 56) THE UNITY OF GOD 229


had any dogmatic content. But this they lack because, unlike
the other four, they do not issue from the relationship between the
feeling of absolute dependence and the sensibly stimulated self-
consciousness, nor are they statements about it. But even the
three attributes here appended stand in close relationship with
the four former ones, in so far at least as they negate, if only in a
pictorial way, the similarity of divine and finite causality ; but not
even such a place can be given them in Dogmatics. There arises
then only the question whether to turn these expressions out of our
province, and send them back to the speculative doctrine of God,
or whether there is really some meaning to be gained from them
for Dogmatics. This, however, must be examined in each instance
by itself, since we cannot maintain in advance that in this respect
they are in the same case.

And first as to the Unity of God—strictly taken it can never
be an attribute of a thing that it only exists in a definite number.
It is not an attribute of the hand to be dual ; but it is the attribute
of a man to have two hands, and of a monkey to have four. In
the same way it could be an attribute of the world to be ruled by
One God only, but not of God to be One only. And so if a divine
attribute is here in question, we must turn away from mere number ;
and in that case what we have first to insist upon is the general
expression that God has no equal,! which, of course, our language
can more distinctly express by ‘uniqueness.’ And inasmuch as
many similars are always of the same kind or species, the individual
beings representing the existence of the species and the species
the essence of the individuals, it might be said that the unity or
uniqueness of God is that attribute in virtue of which there is no
distinction of essence and existence. Now this as such could belong
only to speculative theology. But if, on the other hand, we abstract
from what in strictness must be understood by an attribute, and if
we consider that the excitations of the religious consciousness are
individual moments, while that upon which in those excitations we
feel ourselves absolutely dependent is not objectively given, then
this term ‘unity’ expresses the fact that all those excitations are
meant and comprehended as indications of One, and not of many.
And, indeed, if we go back to the earlier explanation of the original
meaning of the expression, ‘ God,’ ? what is stated in the expression


1Mosheim, Th. dogm. i. p. 241: Quando ergo dicimus Deum esse unum,
negamus Deum habere socium.
Ct. § 4, 4.


230 THE CHRISTIAN FAITH [§ 56


‘unity of God’ is that this homogeneity (Zusammengehérigkei) of
the religious excitations is given with the same certainty as these
excitations themselves. Since now it is only on the assumption of
this homogeneity that concepts of divine attributes can be developed
from observation of the content of religious moments, this expres-
sion, the ‘ unity of God,’ is not so much a single attribute as the
principle of monotheism,! lying from the first at the foundation of
all inquiry into the divine attributes, and can no more be proved
than the existence of God itself. In fact an attempt to discuss this
unity further or to prove it will scarcely be able altogether to escape
making a distinction between the idea of God and the idea of the
Supreme Being. Moreover, these attempts always occur in con-
troversy with Polytheism? and, indeed, proceed from the assump-
tion that the same idea underlies both. This assumption, however,
we have already discarded.

The term Infinity is likewise too negative to be a proper attribute-
conception ; and indeed it has been dealt with in very different
ways. The customary explanation, ‘negation of limits,’ 1s most
indefinite. For if one had already a description of the Supreme
Being, there could be no question at all of any possibility of con-
ceiving this as limited. But if this description is first formed by
means of the term ‘infinite’ itself, we can see that all we have is a
precautionary rule for the formation of ideas of divine attributes,
the rule, 7.e., that attributes which cannot be conceived as without
limits ought not to be ascribed to God ; and thus indirectly infinity
becomes an attribute of all the divine attributes. Hence every dis-
cussion leads over to other attributes which partake of infinity.*
Only it is a sign that even this rule is not being properly applied to
the formation of the divine attributes, if instead of taking omni-
potence as the infinity of the divine productivity and omniscience
as the infinity of the divine thought, one distinguishes rather
between an infinity of substance and an infinity of existence ; and
so a distinction which has to do with the finite only is made funda-
mental in the description of the Divine Being. For infinite does
not really mean that which has no end, but that which is in con-


1 It is rightly taken so in Rufinus, Expos. symb. : Deum non numero unum
dicimus sed universitate.

* Lactant., i. 3: Virtutis perfecta natura non potest esse nisi in eo, in quo
totumest . . . Deus vero si perfectus est . . . non potest esse nisi unus ut in
eo sint omnia.

* Mosheim, /.c., p. 299: Infinitas itaque sic absoluta nihil aliud est, quam
absentia finium in Deo.

4 Cf. Mosheim, ibid., and Reinhard, Dogm., § 33; 3.


§ 56] INFINITY AND SIMPLICITY 231


trast to the finite, 7.e. to that which is co-determined by other things.
Interpreted thus the term stands in the closest connexion with
the monotheistic basic rule stated above, and, under the form of
a cautionary predicate, expresses the difference of the divine
causality from all finitude. For already we have often seen how
this formula only produces confusion if it is treated as a means of
transferring to God by illimitation attributes which essentially are
only attached to the finite.

The idea of Simplicity too is constantly treated as a negative—
although regarded literally it is not so—-either as simply negating
matter of God or as excluding all idea of parts or of composition.!
As regards the former, it is pretty clear that, if God and the world
are to be kept distinct, in whatever way, all matter must belong to
the world. But simplicity strictly taken excludes not only material-
ity but also participation in everything by which we characterize
the finite spirit as such; and the finite spirit can in no way be
called simple in the strictest sense of the word,? but must belong
solely to the world, just as much as matter does. For the relative
separation of function itself conflicts with simplicity,? and each
temporal moment of spiritual manifestation 4 is just as really a
result of the mutual inherence of the relatively opposed as in the
case of matter, which we declare to be composite in this sense only
in so far as we can develop oppositions within it. As therefore
infinity on the one hand is an attribute of all the divine attributes,
so simplicity, as here expounded in general and in each particular
case, is the unseparated and inseparable mutual inherence of all
divine attributes and activities. And as on the other hand infinity
ensures that nothing shall be ascribed to God which can be thought
of only as limited, so simplicity ensures that nothing shall be
adopted which belongs essentially to the sphere of contrast and
opposition.

Postscript to this Section.—The whole circle of divine attributes
here dealt with thoroughly illustrates the characteristic feature of
this First Part of Dogmatic, namely, that of being derived from the


1The former in Reinhard, Dogm., § 33, 2. The latter in Mosheim, Th.
Dogm. i. p. 243.

2 What the older writers called povoedés and apepés.

3The Socinians consequently were not wrong when they maintained
that there is always a synthesis where there is either a connexion or union
of the diverse (see Vorst., Pavasceve, p. 50). But they were wrong to separate
the being of God from the will of God.

4 Augustin., Tvact. xix. 9 in Joan.: Non est Deus mutabilis spiritus .. .
Nam ubi invenis aliter et aliter, ibi facta est quaedam mors.


232 THE CHRISTIAN FAITH [§ 56


religious self-consciousness as it is presupposed in every Christian
religious life-emoment. This is clear for the following reasons
among others. In view of the teleological character of Christianity
we can conceive no completely developed moment of religious
experience which does not either itself pass over into some activity
or in a definite way influence activities already going on and com-
bine with them. Every such moment must be capable of descrip-
tion just as well under the form of this section as under that of the
first or third. So if one individual attribute of these, or all of them
together, were to condition a definite religious moment, out of it
it would have to be possible to derive either a sentiment or a so-
called duty towards God, or at least a course of action in general
or in relation to others demanded by this God-consciousness. This,
however, is not the case; and no proposition in the Christian
Doctrine of Morals can be based solely on the attributes dealt with
here, either individually or taken together, but there are always
others that go along with them. Hence even these attributes,
however completely viewed together and related to each other, can
in no way suffice as a description of the Divine Being. But it must
be clearly understood here in advance, that whatever additional
divine attributes may emerge later, those described here will always
have to be thought of as inhering in the others ; so that an activity
which does not admit of being conceived under the form of eternal
omnipotence ought not to be posited as divine.


THIRD SECTION


The Constitution of the World which is indicated in
the Religious Self-Consciousness, so far as it ea-


presses the General Relationship between God and
the World.


§ 57. The universality of the feeling of absolute dependence includes
in wtself the belief in an original perfection of the World.


1. By the perfection of the world nothing is to be understood
here except what we must name so in the interests of the religious
self-consciousness, namely, that the totality of finite existence, as it
influences us (including also those human influences upon the rest
of existence resulting from our place in the same), works together
in such a way as to make possible the continuity of the religious self-
consciousness. For since the religious self-consciousness can only
fill a moment when combined with an excitation of the sensuous
self-consciousness, and every such excitation is an impression
of the world, the demand that the God-consciousness should
be able to unite itself! with every sensuous determination of
the self-consciousness would be in vain unless all the world-
impressions (and this is only another way of saying the relation of
all other finite being to the being of men) concurred in making
the direction of the spirit to God-consciousness compossible with
them. The same also holds good from the other side of the
relationship, namely, from the determinability of the given through
our spontaneity, because this also is always accompanied by a
self-consciousness capable of such excitation. Inasmuch, however,
as we have laid down that the feeling of absolute dependence does
not diminish, still less cease, if we extend our self-consciousness to
a consciousness of the whole world ? (that is, so far as we represent
in it finite existence in general), this implies that all different grada-
tions of existence are comprehended in this feeling, and consequently
no closer definition of it could destroy that co-existence of the God-
consciousness with the consciousness of the world, nor the fact


1 See § 5, 5, pp. 24f. *CE § 8, 2, pp. 351.


234 THE CHRISTIAN FAITH (§ 57


of the former being excited by the latter. It must be premised,
however, that the term original does not refer to any definite condi-
tion of the world or of men nor of the God-consciousness in men,
all of which are a developed perfection admitting of a more and
less ; the question is rather of self-identical perfection prior to all
temporal development and based on the inner relations of the rele-
vant finite existence. Such perfection is affirmed in the above
sense, 7.e. it is laid down that all finite being, so far as it co-
determines our self-consciousness, is traceable back to the eternal
omnipotent causality, and all the impressions of the world we
receive, as well as the particular way (consequent on human nature)
in which the predisposition towards God-consciousness becomes
realized, include the possibility that the God-consciousness should
combine with each impression of the world in the unity of a moment.
This is implied in the certainty which is directly bound up with the
God-consciousness. For were the God-consciousness not grounded
thus inwardly, it would be something accidental, and so uncertain
and arbitrary. From this it also follows that this belief naturally
and necessarily belongs together with belief in the eternal omni-
present and living omnipotence, since both are related in exactly
the same way to our basic assumption. For, as the former belief
expresses the fact that in all excitations of the religious conscious-
ness, the consciousness of God, as united with consciousness of the
world, is related to One, so the latter belief asserts that in every
such excitation the world-consciousness as united with the God-
consciousness is related to All. And just as in belief in the eternal
omnipotence it is implied that the world is the complete revelation
of it, so in belief in the original perfection of the world it is implied
that through the feeling of absolute dependence the divine omni-
potence in all its livingness reveals itself everywhere in the world,
as eternal omnipresent and omniscient, without any distinction of
more or less, without even a contrast in respect of dependence
between one part and another.

2. Inasmuch as the selected terms are to be taken in this sense,
it at once follows that here any content of an actual life-moment
mediated through a definite world-impression must be disregarded,
since we have to do only with the original, ever-identical and en-
during, inner demands of the lower and higher self-consciousness,
and with the constitution of all given existence, as the perpetually
effective cause of the world-impressions co-determining the pre-
disposition to God-consciousness. And so we shall not directly


§ 57] THE PERFECTION OF THE WORLD 235


deal at all here with any temporal condition of the world and of
mankind in particular, whether past, present, or yet to come ; but
only with those relationships which uniformly underlie the whole
temporal development and throughout it remain the same. As to
what in the sphere of experience we call perfection or imperfection,
the former is simply that which by means of the original perfection
has already come to pass, the latter that which has not yet come
to pass by the same means ; both taken together, however, are the
perfection which is coming to pass. Hence we can say that for
each given moment the original perfection is in that which under-
lies it as pure finite causality ; but the definitive perfection is in
the totality of all the effects thereof, the development being thought
of as included in the moment. But now what underlies each
moment as finite causality is nothing but the totality of all en-
during forms of existence and all contrasted functions of the same ;
and consequently the original perfection is the coherence of all these
in virtue of which they are equal in compass to the divine causality,
and on account of the contrast evoke the consciousness of it.
The original expression of this belief, though in another form,
is the divine approval of the world ! which, in relation to the act of
creation as such, has for its object no temporal condition arising
out of an earlier one, but only the origin of finite existence, but
this, of course, as the source of the whole temporal development.
Hence, just as this divine approval cannot be abrogated by any-
thing temporal, so no more can the truth of our proposition be
prejudiced by the differing content of the temporal moments,
though they appear now as accomplished perfection, and now as
lessening imperfection. On the other hand, what is usually dealt
with in Dogmatics under this phrase is historical moments—for
instance, a paradisical condition of the world and a condition of
moral perfection of man, both of which lasted for a period of time ;
but it is clear that such a doctrine could not be given the same place
as that advanced here. For an actual condition, one therefore in
any case subject to change, cannot be related in the same way to the
divine omnipotence, as that in finite existence which lies at the
base of all succeeding conditions, and least of all one which has
altogether disappeared ; for then the divine omnipotence itself
could not have remained the same. Whereas if we on our part
were to take up into the idea of original perfection something
which, on closer scrutiny, revealed itself as changeable, it would be


1 Gen, 1°!,


236 THE CHRISTIAN FAITH [§ 58


only an oversight resting on an incorrect subsumption which could
be corrected as soon as discovered without making any change
in the doctrine. But even if the course of our presentation had
not led us to it, this idea of a historically given real perfection,
posited as original, is at all events to be found in Dogmatics ;
and we must therefore inquire whether, in fact, there is any place
at all for such a doctrine, or whether it always rests simply on a
misunderstanding.


§ 58. The belief described is to be set forth in two doctrines, of which
one deals with the perfection of the rest of the world in relation
to man, the other with the perfection of man himself.


1. The belief described is nothing but a statement of the
common factor in the religious excitations, only related to the finite
co-determining them (although this too is taken in its generality),
1.e. to the world-impressions which we receive ; hence this divi-
sion follows naturally. For the God-consciousness could not be
excited by these world-impressions if they were of a nature dis-
cordant with it, or if man were not so constituted that these 1m-
pressions reached, as it were, the region of his higher self-conscious-
ness, or again, unless there existed in him that relation of the lower
and the higher self-consciousness to each other which occasions
the whole process of the excitation of the God-consciousness.
Accordingly, these two conditions come to be considered each in
itself. It could of course be said that man himself, with his con-
stitution, is an integral part of the world, and that it is only in
virtue of this constitution that he is precisely the part he is; and
hence that the original perfection of man is already included in the
original perfection of the world. This is quite correct ; and in a
purely scientific inquiry, where what was in question was a view of
finite existence in itself, such a division would only be permissible
in so far as other divisions were made, and the idea of the perfection
of the world analysed into the perfection of all its different parts,
and their relations to one another. It is different in the dogmatic
sphere, where the original object is not the objective consciousness
at all but self-consciousness, especially in so far as in self-con-
sciousness man contrasts himself with the world, and stands in the
relationship of interaction to the rest of existence.

2. For the same reason there can even here be no question of
the original perfection of the world in itself and in relation to the
idea of finite existence, but only in relation to man. But if in


§ 58] PERFECTION RELATIVELY TO MAN 237


addition it were maintained that there is no other perfection of the
world—this being regarded purely teleologically, in the usual sense
of that word—such a position would call for a more precise explana-
tion, in order to avoid the appearance of representing man as the
central-point of all finite existence, in relation to which alone every-
thing had a perfection. This explanation would not be hard to
give, for, assuming an organic construction of the whole, all is just
as much for each as each for all ; hence it is true even of the most
remote thing (since, after all, its condition corresponds to the totality
of its mediate and immediate relationships) not only that it stands in
relationship with man, but also, on a complete view, that precisely
this relationship might be an expression of the peculiarity of its
nature. But we need not go into such explanations, for we have
not to advance any exhaustive doctrine of the perfection of the
world (which would be a task for cosmology) ; the belief to be set
forth here will not go beyond the sphere of religious excitations,
which is only touched by the relationships of the world to man.
But, in going back to the common ground of these relationships,
we at the same time lay it down that no still future development of
them can ever involve what would abrogate this belief. As regards
the perfection of man, it would not be in keeping to add that it also
is only to be interpreted in relation to the world. Man’s original
perfection is primarily meant rather in relation to God, 7.e. to the
presence in him of the God-consciousness, and his endowments
relatively to the world belong here only in so far as they awaken the
God-consciousness. The whole tone of the proposition, however,
certainly does imply that all those endowments, in virtue of which
man is this specific part of the world, belong here—a proposition
which, in the sphere of Christian morals, has regulative importance
averting a crowd of misunderstandings.

3. This of itself makes clear how natural it is that the doctrine
of the peculiar original perfection of man should have been much
more fully elaborated in Dogmatic than that of the perfection of
the world in relation to man. If, however, the latter be entirely
lacking, this certainly is no advantage to the former ; and not only
so, but the treatment of developed perfection, whether under the
heading of Divine Providence or otherwise, often takes a wrong
line, because a right idea of original perfection has not been taken
as basis. But the less urgent and therefore also the less elaborate
inquiry ought reasonably to precede the more important and more
complex as an introduction.


238 THE CHRISMAN FAITE [$ 59


First DocTRINE: THE ORIGINAL PERFECTION OF THE WORLD


§ 59. Every moment in which we confront externally given existence
involves the implication that the world offers to the human
spirit an abundance of stimuli to develop those conditions
in which the God-consciousness can realize itself, and at the
same time that in manifold degrees the world lends itself to
being used by the human spirit as an instrument and means of
expression.


1. It has been taken for granted above (§ 5, 3) that the God-
consciousness may develop in every state of consciousness which
has risen above animal confusion, so that in it there is expressed
the contrast between the self and the ‘given,’ and the contrast
between self-consciousness and objective consciousness, inasmuch
as the two elements in the antithesis confront each other simul-
taneously. The same holds good also of the contrast between
passive and active. But while in the sphere we are dealing with
the God-consciousness, owing to the teleological character of
Christian piety,! can unite with the passive only as it is related to
self-activity, the interposition of the passive none the less is neces-
sary to mark out clearly the moments of self-activity, because
clarity of consciousness only arises through a successive contrast of
distinct moments. Passive states, however, can only arise through
operative influences, and hence the original perfection of the world
in relation to men consists primarily in this, that in it is temporally
grounded the excitation of passive states which are to pass into
active states (these we name incentives), or, in other words, that they
sufficiently determine the receptivity of man to the awakening and
shaping of his self-activity. If now we take man first of all purely
on his inner side, as a self-active being in whom God-consciousness
is possible—that is, as spirit; then, from this point of view, his
bodily side, which is not the man himself, belongs originally to this
material world into which the spirit enters. Only gradually does it
become for the spirit instrument and means of expression—as later,
mediately through it, all other things likewise become instrument
and means of expression—but first of all and primarily it mediates
the stimulating influences of the world upon the spirit. Thus the
whole of this aspect of the original perfection of the world can be
summarily expressed by saying that in it there is given for the spirit

SSS Gy, ae Ayal S ie,


§ 59] THE WORLD KNOWABLE BY MAN 239


such an organism as the human body in living connexion with all
else—an organism which brings the spirit into contact with the rest
of existence.

Clarity of consciousness, however, is also conditioned by the
contrasted distinction of self-consciousness and objective con-
sciousness, and this is closely connected with the fact that different
kinds of influences can be related to the same self-consciousness, so
that the self-consciousness can be regarded as an entity existing
independently of every particular influence (upon this all experience
and eventually all science depend, though here we are only interested
in the latter for the sake of the former). Hence we may summarily
express this aspect of the original perfection of the world by the
concept of its knowability. The two aspects are essentially bound
up together, for without an organism such as ours there would be
no interrelation between finite spirit and corporeal existence, how-
ever suitably adapted to such interrelation the latter might be.
And without such an ordered distinction of existence the human
organism would be a meaningless phenomenon. So, then, the two
together are one: the knowability of existence is the ideal side of
the original perfection of the world, and the natural subsistence of
the human organism is the real side of the same perfection as
directly related to human receptivity.

2. We must now put the same series in the reverse order. For
if all self-activity in men were determined by the influences of the
(external) world it would be merely reaction, and every feeling of
freedom, even partial freedom, would be illusory. But if the
receptivity is at least living and individual, so that the same
influence is not the same thing for all, still more, if irrespective of
influence, we can attribute to the spirit an original self-activity
that is not simply immanent in the individual spiritual personality
(which indeed might be the root of that consciousness of species
which is so distinctively human), then to the perfection of the
world there belongs also such a receptivity for the influences of
the spiritual self-activity of man as is, considered in itself, un-
limited. This receptivity must naturally begin at the human
organism regarded as a constitutive part of the world; but from
this it broadens out more and more until it reaches those con-
stitutive elements of the world which are of such a nature that they
are subject to no other influences except that of being known—
which brings us to the borders of the preceding section. Though
we sum up this receptivity of the world under the two terms,


240 THE CHRISTIAN FAITH [8-59


instrument and means of expression, we do not in the least mean
to indicate a division, as if one thing could only be one and another
the-other. Rather the organism is itself both, the most immediate
instrument and the most immediate means of expression ; and so
every thing, if it is the one, is always the other also. Nevertheless,
these are the two relations through which the self-consciousness |
accompanying states of self-activity becomes a means of awakening
the God-consciousness. For it is only in connexion with his organs
that man realizes sovereignty over the world,! of which he can only
be conscious as something based upon the divine omnipotence ;
and it is only inasmuch as the simple activity of spirit is expressed
through the medium of space and time that it awakens, as a copy
thereof, the consciousness of the divine causality.’

3. That these two chief moments of the original perfection of
the world essentially go together is self-evident. For the first
moment would be simply an imperfection—that is, an arrangement
leading to nothing—apart from the second ; the knowability of the
world would be empty if it did not include in itself the expression
of its being known ; and the human organism would be lost among
the more imperfect kinds of existence as similar to them, even
though it were supposed to include the inner life of the spirit, if
there did not proceed from it a new power of organization into
which everything else could be taken up. On the other hand, the
receptivity of the rest of existence to the influence of the spirit
would be empty and meaningless unless the spirit could be filled
by it. But now both these together embrace completely the
relations of the world to the spirit as the seat of God-consciousness,
since in the existence presented to it the human spirit can find no
means other than this for developing this consciousness. And
indeed in this relation to the passive states which arise through the
influence of the world, taken in itself, the human spirit has precisely
the same means of development whether these states as life-moments
are pleasant or unpleasant, elevating or depressing ; and the same
holds good of its acquired instruments and gathered means of expres-
sion in so far as, being external, they are capable of reacting upon
men in various ways and of exciting passive states. For the relation
of either to man’s self-activity is not thereby altered, nor is the
God-consciousness as such more tardily aroused by the unpleasant
than by the pleasant.

Posiscript.—Two doctrines must be distinguished from the

i Gen, 174, 2 Gen, 128,


§ 59] DOCTRINE OF THE BEST WORLD 241


proposition here laid down: on the one hand, that known as the
doctrine of the Best World; and on the other, the assertion that
there was a perfection of the world which can be called original,
though not in the sense used above, but in the sense that prior to
its present condition it endured for a period of time and afterwards
became changed into its present imperfect condition.

The doctrine of the Best World originally belongs, especially
since Leibniz, to the so-called natural or rational theology, and
thus did not arise as a statement about the religious consciousness
but as a product of speculation. Hence there would have been no
mention of it here if various theologians ! had not taken it over in
the same form into Christian Dogmatics. The doctrine is concerned
not only with what lies at the basis of temporal existence but with
temporal existence itself, in which it is impossible to separate
between the historical (i.e. the activity of the human spirit) and the
natural (7.e. the activity of physical forces) ; and it maintains that,
notwithstanding all the mists and imperfections of the world, no
greater amount of being and of well-being could have been attained.
It is true, our two doctrines also imply the position that, since the
entire course of time can only be an unbroken activity of the whole
original perfection, the final result must be an absolute satisfaction,
and similarly each moment, taken in the whole, satisfactory as an
approximation. But this conviction, issuing as it does solely from
the religious consciousness, has no need to be introduced into
speculative theology exactly as it has been taken up into Christian
Dogmatics. So far as the latter is concerned we must stop at the
affirmation that the world is good, and can make no use of the
formula that it is the best; and this because the former assertion
signifies far more than the latter. The latter expression is con-
nected with the idea (which we have already rejected) of many
worlds all originally equally possible with the one which actually
came into existence, and also it seeks to represent the entire course
of time in the actual world as the result of mediate divine knowledge
(the idea of which we have also rejected), so that the whole pro-
ductive activity of God is assumed to be selective and therefore
secondary.

The second doctrine is to be found in the tradition of most
peoples—the fable of a Golden Age previous to actual history.
The essential element in it is always the belief that the world was
then of such a character as to assure satisfaction to man apart from


1 See, among others, Michaelis, T/. Dogm., § 55. CLS. 545022
16


242 THE CHRISTIAN FAITH [§ 59


any need on his part to develop self-activity. Something sunilar
—pbut with the addition that, if this state had endured, man would
not have died—has been found in the brief Old Testament indica-
tions of the life of Paradise,! which do not, however, indicate an age
but only a relatively short period in the life of the first man. Thus,
first of all, we should have to settle the conflict over interpretation
which has been waged so long, whether actual history is meant to
be recorded there, and hence whether there is a question of a
temporal condition or not. If the narrative is historical it would
as such have no place here, except in so far as such a temporal
condition (it may be held) presupposes as its ground another
original perfection which has been transformed into the one just
described, from which such a temporal process could no longer
follow ; or else, it may be argued, the original perfection described
here underlay the narrative, but now is no longer to be assumed.
The latter view has never been maintained, and would be contra-
dicted by the fact that the historical process nowhere presents
anything but functions of the original perfection as above described.
But the former view must be considered. Now, if it necessarily
implies that the original perfection of the world has not remained
the same, it fails to maintain the unity of the whole world-order
in its relation to the Creation and the continuity of the divine
Preservation. But apart from this undeniable and fundamental
error, it follows further that God approved that initial state even
with respect to that part which was capable of deterioration and
was in fact to deteriorate. Moreover, it seems contradictory that
those fundamental conditions under which the Redeemer was
actually ordained to come into the world and establish the invincible
Kingdom of God should be less perfect than those under which
the first man came into the world, since far greater things were to
come to pass in the former case than in the latter. If now we
examine this alleged primordial state of the world, we shall find
that it is in contradiction with the divine commission to man ; for
man could only attain to dominion over the earth by the develop-
ment of his powers, and the constitution of the world, which
occasioned this development and which implies a receptivity for
the influence of those developed powers, must be contemporaneous
with the divine command. Lastly, if history is essential to the
fashioning of the world by man, then from this point of view the
narrative belongs solely to pre-history, and its real content is simply


1 Gen, 22.,


§ 59] PARADISE 243


that an adaptation of nature for the existence of the human
organism preceded all development of human powers, and that
on our planet the very significant detrimental differences in this
adaptation could only come to light with the dissemination and
further development of the human race. And if perhaps it may be
concluded also from the narrative that there were at one time no
hostile contacts in the animal kingdom ! and nothing at all injurious
or useless to mankind,” it does not by any means follow that this
applied also outside the place where man originally lived, nor even
that later this place lost its peculiar advantages.

If, however, the result of exegetical inquiry should be that no
actual history is recounted in this passage, and if the story therefore
is to be regarded as a kind of poetry, it would come up for considera-
tion here in so far as it either contained a direct utterance of the
religious consciousness or was occasioned by it. Its statements
about the origin of sin do not concern us. Even the connexion
between sin and evil and sin and death, on which it evidently
proceeds, does not in and for itself need to be discussed here ; only,
with reference to the doctrine of the perfection of the world set
forth above, the following observations should be made. Even if
we accepted absolutely the idea that apart from sin there would
have been neither evil nor death, it would by no means follow from
this that the earth must originally have been adapted to an endur-
ing condition of sinlessness ; evil and death may none the less
have been preordained as certainly as God foreknew sin. And
other points must be considered. If we think away the gradual
decay of organic powers, the possibility that the organism may be
destroyed by external forces of nature, and disappearance through
death, what we are thinking of is no longer beings of our kind,
while yet real human history would only begin when all these
things were present. Again, care for the preservation of life and
the avoidance of what would disturb it, which is conditioned by
mortality, is among the most powerful motives of human develop-
ment, so that through mortality and the evils which are associated
with it more human activities due to our relations with the external
world have been developed than could be expected without mor-
tality, and (assuming that the totality of human life increases rather
than diminishes) the death of individuals does not lessen the fitness
of the world for man’s dominion over it, nor is it thereby hindered


1 Gen. 21* does not go quite so far.
2 Ibid. ver. 16; that is, if the tree (ver. 17) was not in itself harmful.


244 THE CHRISTIAN FAITH  [§ 60


in the development of its wealth of means of stimulation. Finally,
enduring sinlessness would have stood out far more strongly and
conspicuously if man, unimpeded in the development and use of
his powers, bore evil, and, combining God-consciousness with love
of his race, overcame the impulse to cling to his own life and
accepted death. In view of all this, no reason can well remain for
doubting that the original perfection of the world relatively to man
was at the beginning no other than what we have here described,
and that neither the Old Testament story ! nor the relevant indica-
tions in the writings of the New Testament ? compel us to hold
that man was created immortal, or that, with alteration in his
nature, the whole arrangement of the earth relatively to him was
altered as well.


SECOND DOCTRINE: THE ORIGINAL PERFECTION OF MAN


§60. The predisposition to God-consciousness, as an inner impulse,
includes the consciousness of a faculty of attaining, by means
of the human organism, to those states of self-consciousness
in which the God-consciousness can realize itself; and the
impulse inseparable therefrom to express the God-conscious-
ness includes in like manner the connexion of the race-
consciousness with the personal consciousness ; and both
together form man’s original perfection.


1. If the God-consciousness in the form of the feeling of absolute
dependence * can only become actual in connexion with a sensible
determination of self-consciousness, the tendency towards God-
consciousness would be altogether nugatory if the condition
necessary for it in human life could not be evoked ; and we should
be no more able to think of it as actual than in the case of the
beasts, because the confused state of man’s consciousness would
not exhibit the conditions under which alone that feeling could
emerge. Religious experience, however, consists precisely in this,
that we are aware of this tendency to God-consciousness as a living
impulse ; but such an impulse can only proceed from the true
inner nature of the being which it goes to constitute. Hence, at
least in so far as we are religious men, we reckon the whole range

aiGenm2 La

2 Rom. 5'*, based on Gen. 21", just as little excludes the possibility that
Adam may have been created mortal; and 1 Cor. 15°* actually indicates


death as such as existing before the advent of sin.
g Cf. § Sy Sho


§ 60] MAN’S ORIGINAL PERFECTION 245


of those states with which the God-consciousness can unite as
belonging to this true inner nature. And as it would be an
absolute imperfection of human nature—that is to say, a complete
absence of inner coherence—if the tendency were indeed present
latently, but could not emerge, so it is an essential element in the
perfection of human nature that those states which condition the
appearance of the God-consciousness are able to fill the clear and
waking life of man onwards from the time when the spiritual
functions are developed. And as we consider it an imperfect state
of religious life in the individual if many moments of clear sensibly-
determined self-consciousness occur without the God-consciousness
being combined with them, so we account it part of the original
perfection of man that in our clear and waking life a continuous
God-consciousness as such is possible ; and on the contrary, we
should have to regard it as an essential imperfection if the emergence
of the feeling of absolute dependence, though not abrogating any
feeling of partial dependence or freedom, were confined as such to
separate and scattered moments.

The God-consciousness, moreover, combines not only with those
sensible excitations of self-consciousness which express life-enhance-
ments or life-hindrances immediately arising out of the impression
of the world, but also with those which accompany the cognitive
activities, and finally with those which are connected with every
kind of outwardly directed action. Hence all these mental life-
functions and the relative disposition of the organism belong
together to the original perfection of man, though only in so far as
the demand which we make for God-consciousness is conditioned
by them, and in such a way that the first place always belongs to it.
Thus, first of all, there is the physical basis of spiritual life, 7.e. the
fact that the spirit, become soul in the human body, acts also on the
rest of the world in innumerable ways, and asserts its nature, just
as the other living forces assert their nature relatively to it, so that
life-feeling in general takes shape as the consciousness of inter-
action ; from which it follows that to the original perfection of
man this also belongs, that opposite life-moments, hindrances and
furtherances, have one and the same bearing on the excitation
of the God-consciousness. Next, there is the intellectual basis of
spiritual life, 7.e. the fact that the spirit by means of sense-impres-
sions can obtain that knowledge of existence which is one element
in its own nature, as also knowledge of what we ourselves by our
activity can produce in and from existence, and can express this


246 THE CHRISTIAN FAITH [§ 60


knowledge with actual consciousness in the most varied degrees of
general and particular ideas, and that thereby it arrives at the
accompanying consciousness of a natural order in connexion with
which the God-consciousness develops. Upon the agreement of
these ideas and judgments with the being and relations of things
depends all the influence of man on external nature which is more
than simply instinctive, and also the connexion between knowledge
and practical life. But though the knowledge of God, in this
sphere, is bound up pre-eminently and fundamentally with the idea
of a natural order, the excitation of the God-consciousness is not
at all imperilled though certain ideas should not agree with the
actual being of the object presented ; as indeed the comprehensive
interconnexion of all being would not be mirrored in our idea if we
did not assume that so long as the whole of existence is not reflected
in our thought every act of thought contains an element of error.

2. With regard to the impulse to express the God-consciousness
externally : there is, of course, no ‘inner’ which does not become
also an ‘outer,’ and thus there are expressions of the God-con-
sciousness, in which no relation to the race-consciousness can be
directly shown. But the question here is of those expressions
which aim at fellowship and on which all such fellowship is based.
Now the fellowship without which there can for us be no living and
vigorous piety is conditioned by these external expressions ; it
therefore is conditioned also by the inner union of the race-con-
sciousness and the personal self-consciousness, for as this is the
general source of all recognition of others as being of like nature
with ourselves, it is also the only source of the presupposition and
the ground of the fact that the ‘inner’ is known and grasped along
with and by means of the ‘outer’; hence we may justly regard
the two thus interrelated as belonging to the original perfection of
man. This inclusion of the race-consciousness in the personal self-
consciousness and the communicability of the ‘inner’ through the
‘outer,’ which is connected with it, is the fundamental condition
or basis of social life, for all human fellowship rests solely upon it ;
and even in this wider connexion it belongs here, for, in every other
kind of fellowship also, whatever its object, a man’s acts, because
accompanied by a sensible excitation of self-consciousness, may
contain at the same time a communication of his God-consciousness.
Nay more, the free and mobile outward life of man must be able in
its whole range to serve this external expression and communication
of the God-consciousness (though not in the case of each individual


§ 61] PERFECTION AND GOD-CONSCIOUSNESS 247


taken singly, but only in combination with others), for otherwise
there would be a sensuously stimulated self-consciousness with
which the God-consciousness could unite inwardly, but in conjunc-
tion with which it could not express itself outwardly ; and thus the
range of externalization and communication would be more narrowly
limited than that of the inner excitation. Such a discrepancy we
should have to call an original imperfection.

3. The statements in our proposition then include all the con-
ditions necessary for the continuous existence of the God-conscious-
ness in every human individual, and also for its communication
from one to the other in proportion to the different levels of human
fellowship, including also the perfection with which it can be com-
municated from the Redeemer and through Him to the redeemed :
hence the requirements of this section are fulfilled. In the know-
ledge of the elements of this original perfection as present in every
one we find a justification for the original demand that the God-
consciousness should exist continuously and universally; and
human nature, repeating itself identically through heredity in every
human being, is seen to be sufficient for its realization.1 We
found ourselves obliged to treat the two chief points as one whole
complete in itself, which is a fresh justification, in the sphere of the
God-consciousness, of a scientific method of treatment which every-
where aims at totality and is impossible on any other terms ; it is
justified both for Dogmatics proper, where we have to reduce the
whole of religious affections to loci communes,and for religious Ethics,
where we have to distinguish those types of conduct which show
the influence of the God-consciousness on our purposes ; also for
Practical Theology in general, which is concerned with the descrip-
tion and distinction of the different forms of fellowship in God-
consciousness. This is natural, for the whole procedure of Dog-
matics—in which, if we take the word in a rather wider sense than
usual, the last-mentioned discipline also is included—rests on what
we have here exhibited as the original perfection of man.


§ 61. Fulness of experience in the sphere of faith 1s due to the im-
dividual development, in virtue of this original perfection of
human nature, of each human life brought into existence by
procreation. But how, on the same presuppositions, the first
men developed, Iistory gives no account, and the hints we


1 Omnes homines in primo homine sine vitio conditi (Ambrose, de vocat,
Gent. i. 3).


248 THE CHRISTIAN FAITH [§ 61


have on that subject cannot form a religious doctrine im our
sense of the word.


1. To understand the fundamental aspects of human life as
set forth in the above description of man’s original perfection, 1.e.
so that everything is related to the God-consciousness, is un-
doubtedly a matter of faith ; for it depends entirely on the certainty
which accompanies religious éxperiences, by virtue of which alone
all other states of life attain certainty through sharing in those
experiences. If, on the contrary, we suppose a man to have religious
experiences, but unaccompanied by certainty, so that he can equally
well regard them as deceptive or veridical, he will not arrive at the
idea of original perfection given above, but will co-ordinate the
God-consciousness with other elements of life, or will possibly even
take original perfection to consist solely in the possibility of freeing
himself from the God-consciousness as a product of human imperfec-
tion ; and thus what one experiences as a furtherance another will
experience as a hindrance. Now matters of fact in the develop-
ment of man are never questions of faith but of history, and state-
ments concerning matter of fact, whether general or particular,
are not propositions of faith but historical statements, even when,
viewed directly, their subject-matter is the state of the God-con-
sciousness in an individual or a community. In this respect there
can be no distinction between the first men and ourselves. Every-
thing we know of the actual conditions of the first men and of their
course of development, including the manner in which the indwelling
tendency to God-consciousness became operative in them without
the stimulating influence of tradition, all this is in no sense faith
but history—unless we are prepared to alter completely the usage
of the word and, say, call history which is mingled with uncer-
tainties, ‘faith.’ Otherwise ‘faith’ would consist simply in
historical knowledge, and would be held and disseminated by
historical statements and portrayals. That even in their case we
should regard as an advance only those conditions which express
an increased value of the God-consciousness, is certainly a matter
of faith, but of the very same faith as is expressed in the concep-
tion of original perfection given above. There could only be
specific doctrines of faith concerning the first men in so far as their
unique manner of coming into being and of temporal existence
might modify the application of our conception to them. Even
then we should, of course, always have to maintain that the applica-


§ 61] OUR FIRST PARENTS 249


tion of our conception is limited to the sphere of procreation, and
could leave aside the question what in their case took its place,
except in so far as the relation thence arising between them and us
altered our God-consciousness in its combination with our race-
consciousness. The question arises, then, whether their history
has come down to us in such a form that we are compelled to lay
down such propositions.

2. Now it is clear that the Old Testament narrative,! on which
alone we have to depend, is far from putting forward a history of
this kind. For even if the question whether this narrative is meant
to be taken historically were answered entirely in the affirmative,
the particular points which it presents simply take for granted
most of what we chiefly want to know about the first men.
Especially, for one thing, speech, and the form of consciousness
determined by it, the acquisition of which by men after birth is the
surest proof that in their case the state of animal-like confusion is
already disappearing, is here everywhere assumed ; and in the
same way, the God-consciousness appears as already present, and
we learn nothing of the mode of its development. Even what is
recounted of the converse of God with man, instead of helping the
solution of the other problems, is itself a new and still more difficult
one. For we learn nothing more exact of the way in which God
made Himself intelligible to men, except that bodily form is quite
plainly ascribed to Him. But it is equally difficult to see how an
idea of God already existing could have been referred to such a
phenomenon as its object, or how on occasion of such a phenomenon
a true God-consciousness could have arisen. And indeed, even
with regard to external conditions, the description of the life of
Paradise is only helpful in a negative way, for though the question
how man could have supported life from the beginning raises no
particular difficulty, no information is given about how the first
men spent the time, or of the result in the expansion both of the
objective consciousness and of self-consciousness. Even what is
said about the naming of the animals? leaves us quite uncertain
whether the designation had any regard to the relation of the kinds
of animals to their species and of the species to the larger classes,
and if so, to what extent. The moral situation is equally undefined,
for their innocent lack of modesty, as well as their initial obedience
to the divine command, admits of the most diverse interpretations.
Since, then, besides all this, no measure of time is given, and conse-


1 Gen, 176 f. 27-374. 2 Gen. 2!9.


250 THE CHRISTIAN FAITH [§ 61


quently all materials for forming a historical picture are wanting,
we can only say that everything we are told about the first men
before the Fall is adequately elucidated by the conception of
original perfection which we have proposed.

3. If the narrative is regarded not as history but simply as an
ancient attempt to make good the lack of a historical account of
the beginnings of the human race, the particular points in it will
have inner truth for us in so far as they agree with the conception
which we have laid down. But all attempts to form a historical
picture of the first beginnings of human existence are bound to fail,
because, as we have no experience of an absolute beginning, we have
no analogy by which we could make the absolute beginning of
rational consciousness intelligible. We have no clear idea even of
the consciousness of the child in the first period of life. Yet we
cannot miss the fact that in the case of the child the arising of
consciousness out of unconsciousness coincides with the detachment
and separation of its life from community with the life of the
mother, and forthwith the environing spirit, already developed,
influences the spirit which is just arriving at conscious thought ;
the first man, on the other hand, can only be described as one to
whom this means of development was wholly lacking. The formula
which accords best with this analogy and with our experience of
the conditions of any as yet largely undeveloped human society is
that the first men are to be regarded as good-natured grown-up
children ;+ but this is really quite inappropriate and gives us no
clear view, for we cannot think of their spiritual development any
more than that of the child as proceeding purely from within out-
wards, and the bodily sustenance of adult primitive man required
from the outset activities which we can only conceive as acquired
by memory, association, and repetition. If it be suggested that
the first man was more like an animal and guided only by instinct,
we cannot understand the passage from this condition to one of
consciousness and thought without the assistance of a life which
was already intelligent, since it would be the beginning of a new
kind of existence wholly unconnected with what went before.
Attempts have been made to avoid this difficulty by means of two
ideas, the grounds of which, at least to some extent, are to be found
in the Old Testament narrative. One is the proposition, familiar
in many dogmatic systems, that the necessary capacities were from
the first present in man by creation, and were capable of extension

1Cf. de Wette, Sittenlehve, § 38, and Theol. Zeitschrift, ii. pp. 84-88. .


§ 61] THE NEWLY-CREATED MAN 251


from what was necessary for the preservation of life further and
higher to the genuinely spiritual level. But this really only means
that the first condition of man cannot be conceived as different
from the later conditions which are determined by previous con-
ditions ; that is to say, an absolutely first condition cannot be con-
ceived at all. Also, if we are unwilling to fall back on instinct, it is
unthinkable that there should be a consciousness of these created
capacities before they are applied, and again it is inconceivable
that, in a genuinely human situation, there should be an impulse
which would set them in motion without consciousness of them.
Certainly those theologians 4 do not lessen the difficulty (rather they
simply return to the starting-point and give a description of the
problem more than a solution) who are ready to make assertions
about an actual condition of the first man, but at the same time
represent the personal perfections which they ascribe to him as
mere potentialities, excluding everything which requires previous
exercise. The other expedient is as follows: it is supposed that
those things which secure for a human being, when born, fellowship
with those who are already grown and developed, the newly created
man obtained through a revealing and educative fellowship with
God or the angels. But if we examine this more closely it leads us
back, by one way or another, to the first idea. For if this educative
revelation were a purely inward influence, this would be immediately
connected with creation itself and indistinguishable from it, and
the true and proper life of man would, on this view, begin in much
the same way as on the view that there were abilities implanted at
creation. If, on the other hand, the fellowship in question is
external and mediated through human language, then of course
the grown-up child, with this environment, can through speech
learn also to think by innate human reason ; but if it is to be set
in motion in definite activities demanded by self-preservation, either
those higher Beings too must lead a completely human life so as
to bring the imitative impulse into play, or else we must assume
that the understanding is sufficiently developed to apprehend
the teaching and precept which would exert an educative
influence.

4. If, then, we are unable to form an intelligible idea of the first
states of development of primitive man, and if we cannot point to
anything compelling us to modify the application of our conception
to them in any special way, there is no reason why we should lay


1 Reinhard, Dogm., S§ 70, 73.


22 THE CHRISTIAN FAITH [§ 61


down any special doctrines concerning the first men. All that
follows is that we can only exhibit the validity of our conception
within the context of earlier and later generations, where human
existence begins in the manner with which we are familiar and
depends for its development upon human tradition. In this con-
nexion, our certainty of the original perfection of human nature,
as set out by us, furnishes ground for the assumption that the first
men themselves, when their influence on a second generation began,
stood at some quite definite point in the line of development
(though a point which we may be unable further to define), and
consequently they were in a position to influence the development
of the God-consciousness in the next generation ; that is to say,
self-communicating piety is as old as the self-propagating human
race. This assumption is implied in the consciousness that piety
is a universal element of human life.

If, then, following the Mosaic account of the creation, which
views all organic beings ‘after their kind,’! we take the expression
of the divine will given there with respect to man ? not as referring
exclusively to the first men in their unique position, but to them
only in so far as they were the first instances of the human species,
and if we ask whether the designation, ‘image of God’ (which
indisputably denotes the superiority of human nature over the
other creatures described), is in harmony with the conception we
have set forth, we can only answer ‘ yes’ with great caution. For
even though we can describe the living presence of the God-con-
sciousness as a being of God within us, which seems to be some-
thing much greater than a resemblance to God, yet this living
presence of the God-consciousness is something different. And
since this activity of the God-consciousness occurs in us only in
connexion with our physical and bodily organism, if we would
argue regressively from the likeness or image of God, as it is and
has been described here, to God Himself, then we should have to
accept one of two alternatives: either the whole world is related
to God in the same way as our whole organism is related to the
highest spiritual power in us, in which case it would be difficult to
see how God could fail to be identical with the world ; or else there
is something in God which at least corresponds to our psychical
organization, which is largely constituted by the so-called lower
psychical forces ; and in this way the idea of God would acquire a
strong and really defiling admixture of humanity, and attributes


1 Gen. qil. 21. 24 2 Gen. 126


§ 61] ORIGINAL RIGHTEOUSNESS 253


would have to be ascribed to God which can mean nothing when
taken as divine,! or else attributes would have to be ascribed to men
which could not be thought of as human.2 Here, then, is another
instance of the truth that Biblical expressions, especially when they
do not occur in a purely didactic context, can seldom be adopted in
the terminology of Dogmatics without more ado. Hence it is not
surprising that many of our theologians, taking what immediately
follows it as the explanation of the divine words regarding ‘ the
image of God,’ have, like the Socinians, connected the divine image
with man’s formative and governing relation to external nature
rather than with his own inner being.

The other common phrase, ‘ original righteousness,’ which is
not quite so scriptural, gives rise to other difficulties. These
difficulties arise not only because righteousness in the ordinary
sense is concerned only with more extended social relations, such as
a first human pair could not possibly have ; it is, in fact, concerned
primarily with the sphere of law proper which, starting from a state
of simple family life, could only reach development in later genera-
tions. But the difficulties in question arise even more because we
are accustomed to include righteousness under the general idea of
virtue ; yet a basal disposition is never called virtue, but only one
which arises through spontaneity. Here, however, it is a question
of just such a basal disposition, or of one present in man by creation,
from which a development should start such as can relate itself to
divine demands ; and it isa conformity to these demands, achieved
by an active attitude to them, which is so frequently called
“righteousness ’ in the Old Testament Scriptures : thus giving rise
to a very undesirable double meaning of the word. In this way
we should be led back, only too easily, to the idea of created
capacities, a result which could only be avoided by a most definite
explanation that in this connexion the word ‘ righteousness ’ has a
totally different meaning—a meaning which certainly can be traced
back to the usage of common life, inasmuch as we call a thing
‘just’ (right) when it corresponds to its definition. If now we
consider the divine decree ordaining the whole development of the
human race by means of redemption, and the fact that this was
included in the idea of human nature from the beginning, though
unknown to mankind itself, then it will be precisely those attributes


1So Quenstedt, Syst. Theol., p. 843, reckons as part of the original per-
fection conformitas appetitus sensitivt cum Det castitate. ;

2 Ibid. p. 844: In corpore primi hominis eluxit imago Dei. . . per im-
passibilitatem.


254 THE CHRISTIAN FAITH (§ 61


laid down in the proposition given above on which this capacity
for redemption depends.

5. In view of these considerations, it will be felt as very natural
that our symbolical documents and, in agreement with them, later
teachers of doctrine have wavered in their use of these expressions,
sometimes designating by them those original excellences of
human nature which lie at the root of all later development * and
sometimes asserting a definitely perfect condition of the first man,
thus laying down doctrines about the first man *—this condition
being regarded sometimes more as present by creation and some-
times as in part acquired. Now if we interpret the first class of
passages quoted in such a way that ‘ nature ’ in the second of them
is called ‘ good’ and ‘ holy’ because the perfections asserted in the
first passage develop out of it (as indeed the first passage itself
represents them as still in the future), then our proposition
makes clear how and why this development takes place. For even
the uniform temperamentum of the bodily functions can only
indicate, on the one hand, the uniformly easy control of the soul
over them in every direction ; and on the other hand, of course,
there must here be reckoned the resistance, equally adequate on
all sides, which the organism offers to external influences, thus
always maintaining itself in its original relation. This latter point
is not definitely included in our formula, because the power of the
God-consciousness does not immediately depend upon it ; rather
it shows itself to be so indifferent to the favourable or unfavourable
relations of bodily life to external nature that it has often been
maintained that piety flourishes best in sickness and poverty. In
fact, this sufficiency of the organism, and everything pertaining
exclusively to the natural side of man in his conflict with other

1 Apolog. Conf. i. (p. 20. Ed. Liicke) inclines in this direction: Justitia
originalis habitura erat non solum aequale temperamentum qualitatum
corporis, sed etiam haec dona, notitiam Dei certiorem timorem Dei fiduciam


Dei, aut certe rectitudinem et vim ista efficiendi; though even this shows
some confusion. And Solid. Decl., p. 643: In Adamo et Heva natura initio
pura bona et sancta creata est.

* Here belongs Solid. Decl., p. 640, in so far as it calls original sin a privatio
concreatae in Paradiso justitiae originalis seu imaginis Dei, ad quam homo
initio in veritate sanctitate atque justitia creatus fuerat ; and Conf. Belg. xiv. :
Credimus Deum ex limo terrae hominem ad imaginem suam bonum scilicet
iustum et sanctum creasse, qui proprio arbitrio suam voluntatem ad Dei
voluntatem componere et conformem reddere posset. Less clearly, Conf.
Helv. : Fuit homo ab initio a Deo conditus ad imaginem Dei in iustitia et
sanctitate veritatis, bonus et rectus.

5 Cf. Luther in Genes. i. § 187: ‘ To this inner perfection was later added
the soak beautiful and admirable strength and glory of the body and all its
members.


§ 61] ORIGINAL RIGHTEOUSNESS 255


natural forces, would be better dealt with under the heading of the
Perfection of the World in relation to mankind, on the same
principle as that which led us to discuss human mortality not in the
form of the question whether it conflicted with man’s proper perfec-
tion but rather as the question whether the perfection of the world
in relation to man was diminished by it. With regard especially
to the obedience of the lower powers of the soul to the higher (a
point which is always reckoned an essential part of original righteous-
ness) the question only arises here, where we are altogether dis-
regarding the actual condition of the first pair as individuals, in so
far as there resides in the lower functions a receptivity for the
impulses of the higher ; and this not only in the state of quiescence
but during their proper life-process. And this point is, of course,
brought out in our proposition, since the activities in which the
influence of the God-consciousness takes effect determine all its
communications. But when Augustine understands by the ex-
pression ‘ desire ’ 1 simply the proper life-process of these functions,
and at the same time holds that it cannot be thought of as co-existing
with original righteousness, he seems to be at least as much open
to blame as the Pelagians, if they considered the opposition between
the lower and higher faculties as man’s original condition, and
included all acquired perfection under the concept of the removal
of that opposition. For Augustine’s opinion presupposes also an
original contradiction between the spirit in man and that which is
necessary for his animal life.

But this leads us over to the other point of view—namely, the
representation of original righteousness or the divine image as an
actual condition of the first man. Now if, on this view, the state-
ment that man was created by God good, righteous, and holy,
means no more than that, in opposition to the Pelagian doctrine,
the first real state of man could not have been one of sin, we may
unreservedly assent. For sin must have been preceded by know-
ledge and recognition of the divine will, and in that case it must
have been preceded by free activity which was not sinful. But if
what is meant is a real power exercised by the higher faculties over
the lower, then (even if we do not conjoin with this the position of
Augustine referred to above), the greater this power is taken to be,
it is from this point of view impossible to conceive of anything but


1 Concupiscentia. The relevant passages are too many to give in detail,
but the use of the word is so varied that it would be hard to decide whether,
and if so how far, his doctrine goes beyond the proper bounds.


256 THE CHRISTIAN FAITH [§ 61


a growing intensification of that power in the same regard. This
is probably the real reason why the Roman Church has explained
man’s original state of sinlessness, not by the original perfection of
human nature, but rather by an extraordinary divine influence—an
explanation which clearly implies a Pelagian conception of human
nature assuch.!_ It may not be quite so harmful in its consequences,
but it confuses the idea of original perfection none the less, when
our dogmatic theologians maintain that the first pair, in their
original condition, were partakers of the Holy Spirit. Thus the
attempt to define more closely the primitive condition of the first
man seems to lead nowhere, whether he be considered as completely
corresponding with what we can recognize in later times as a pro-
gressive development of original perfection, or whether he be con-
sidered as completely corresponding to what appears to us a retro-
gressive state. The Pelagians, starting from the second of these
presuppositions, gain a double advantage—they admit no original
perfection which has been lost, and a progressive development can
take place from the point of departure which they accept ; but
they incur a double disadvantage—that the good for them is not
original, and that the Redeemer appears only as an individual
member in the development. The doctrine of the Church, on the
other hand, gains a double superiority—it postulates the good as
immediately produced by God, and, since with the loss of this
condition the development is broken and a new point of departure
is needed, the Redeemer can come in as the turning-point ; but it
incurs a double disadvantage—the good which was already actual
in the phenomenal world has been lost, in spite of the sustaining
divine omnipotence, and the sole purpose for which we are tempted
to form a picture of the original state of the first man, 7.e. in order
to have a starting-point for the genetic conception of all that
follows, is not attained. Hence we may take it as more to the
purpose not to define anything more accurately as regards the
condition of the first man, but simply to elicit the ever self-identical
original perfection of nature from the higher self-consciousness
viewed universally. But if we are to see everything that can de-
velop out of such original perfection all together in a single human
instance, it is not to be sought in Adam, in whom it must have
again been lost, but in Christ, in whom it has brought gain to all.


1Frenum extraordinarium. See Bellarmin., de Gratia pr. hom, cap. v.
ia e Melanchth., loc., p. 112: Adam et Eva erant electi, et tamen revera
amiserunt Spiritum Sanctum in lapsu.


SECOND PART OF
THE SYSTEM OF DOCTRINE


SECOND PART


Explication of the facts of the religious self-conscious-
ness, as they are determined by the antithesis.


INTRODUCTION


§62. The God-consciousness described in the foregoing occurs ws
the actual content of a moment of experience only under the
general form of self-consciousness, i.e. the antithesis of
pleasure and pain.

Note.—Cf. § 5.


I. The disposition to the God-consciousness can be repre-
sented as a continuous impartation of that consciousness, but
only in a degree that is infinitely small; with the consequence
that the transition to a definite and perceptible magnitude is always
dependent on some other fact of consciousness. Now, were such
a transition to take place in our self-consciousness apart from the
form of the antithesis, 7.e. neither as an advancement nor as an
arrestment of the God-consciousness, it would need to be a transition
that was continuous and uniform. This is conceivable if, inde-
pendently of any other fact of consciousness, the God-consciousness
were to rise noticeably above the infinitely small degree just re-
ferred to. The condition of the God-consciousness in such a case
would be one of constant repression, dull uniformity, any emergence
of vitality above a very low average being found only among the
other facts of consciousness. A constant uniformity in the God-
consciousness, however, is conceivable also in a state of existence
where an absolute facility existed of evoking it in its absolute
strength from every other fact of consciousness. The condition of
the God-consciousness in this case would be that of a blessed
uniformity of constant predominance. Clearly, however, our
religious consciousness is not such that more and less do not apply
to it ; on the contrary, it oscillates between these extremes, sharing,
as it does, the variations of our temporal life. True, this more
and less, simply as such, may seem to be of the nature of a
fluctuating difference rather than of an antithesis. Still, contrariety


254


260 THE CHRISTIAN FAITH [§ 62


of movement creates an antithesis ; for a movement from less to
more indicates that the disposition to the God-consciousness is
developing with increasing freedom, while one from more to less
is an arrestment of it and indicates that other impulses are more
powerful.

But now in this as in other provinces of experience (as there is
no such state as absolute blessedness or as complete abeyance of
the God-consciousness) pleasure and pain are by no means to be
regarded as so separate from each other that one of them might in
some circumstances actually exist without the other. If, then, the
determining power of the God-consciousness is felt to be limited,
pain is bound up with it, 7.e. is present even in the highest pleasure.
Whereas, if the consciousness that this power is arrested excites
pain, the God-consciousness is nevertheless willed as such a power,
and is thereby in and for itself an object of pleasure.

2. If, however, our proposition is to be understood as implying
that what emerges in actual consciousness, under whichever form
of the antithesis, as God-consciousness is always what has already
been described, namely, the feeling of absolute dependence, and
that no modification of the God-consciousness can be instanced
where this feeling might either be absent or have added to it any-
thing except what is related to and constitutes the antithesis in
question ; and if there is taken along with this our former assertion +
that in the Christian consciousness (the same has always held good,
however, of religion moulded by any other form of belief) the
feeling of absolute dependence never purely by itself fills a moment
of religious experience—then each of the two statements is ex-
plained by the other in this way, namely, that what was described
in our First Part (taken along with what in other forms of religion
develops otherwise out of the fact that, as often as the indwelling
God-consciousness really seeks to emerge, it appears either as
advanced or arrested in its functioning) likewise constitutes the
God-consciousness in its entire range, and that this fact must
govern our conception of the whole content of every moment of
religious experience, occur where it may. This assertion is
challenged mainly on the ground that in our use of the idea of
absolute dependence we have annulled every distinction between
human freedom and subordinate forms of finite being,? while yet
the God-consciousness surely (if one’s own acceptance of the divine
will and one’s love to God form part of the God-consciousness) has


r§ 29: 2 § 40.


§ 62] THE ANTITHESIS 261


a content which relates exclusively to human freedom and _pre-
supposes it. These elements, it is held, consequently cannot be
derived from the feeling of absolute dependence, and just as little
from the antithesis mentioned if it refers solely to that feeling. To
dispose of this objection in all its aspects, and thereby to sub-
stantiate our assertion with respect at least to all monotheistic
forms of faith, lies outside our present task.

One point, however, common to all forms of faith in so far as’
they all participate in the antithesis, may be adduced here. This,
namely, that absolute facility in the development of the God-
consciousness from any given stimulus and in every situation, which
is proposed as the end, is equivalent to constant communion with
God, while every retrograde movement is a turning away from
God. Now if, religion being admittedly an essential element of
life, only communion and not turning away can be willed, the latter
can be received into consciousness only if it is what was originally
in harmony with the divine will. In Christianity this proviso is
enunciated in the most general and fruitful way by the postulation

-of redemption as the work and dispensation of God, and hence also
of faith in redemption as conformity to the divine will.

3. Everything related to the Redeemer in the religious con-
sciousness of the Christian is peculiar to the distinctively Christian
articulation of the antithesis under discussion. No proposition,
as we have already said, describing the feeling of absolute depend-
ence apart from this antithesis, can be a description of a religious
moment in its entire content, for in every such moment that feeling
occurs only as a relative turning away from God or turning towards
Him. From these two statements we must go on to assert that
no proposition merely describing the condition of the individual life
with reference to this antithesis is a description of the entire content
of a religious moment, since in every such moment the condition
described must needs manifest itself in the emergence of the
feeling of absolute dependence. In the actual life of the Christian,
therefore, the two are always found in combination: there is no
general God-consciousness which has not bound up with it a relation
to Christ, and no relationship with the Redeemer which has no
bearing on the general God-consciousness. The propositions of the
first part, which lay less direct stress on what is distinctively
Christian, are on that account often treated as Natural Theology of
an original and universally valid kind, and as such are overrated
by those who are themselves less permeated by the distinctive


262 THE CHRISTIAN FAITH [§ 63


element in Christianity. Others, again, underrate these propositions
as attainable even apart from Christianity, and will only allow
those propositions which express a relation to the Redeemer to
rank as specifically Christian. Both parties are in error. For the
former propositions are in no sense the reflection of a meagre and
purely monotheistic God-consciousness, but are abstracted from
one which has issued from fellowship with the Redeemer. Similarly,
propositions expressing a relation to Christ are genuinely Christian
propositions only in so far as they recognize no other criterion for
relationship with the Redeemer than the measure in which the
continuity of the God-consciousness is produced thereby ; so that
a relationship with Christ, which resulted in the God-consciousness
losing its prominence or being, as it were, superseded (because
Christ alone and not God had a place in self-consciousness), might
indeed be a most intimate one, but strictly speaking it would not
belong to the sphere of religion at all.


§ 63. While in general the manner in which the God-consciousness
takes shape in and with the stimulated self-consciousness can’
be traced only to the action of the individual, the distinctive
feature of Christian piety les in the fact that whatever aliena-
tion from God there is in the phases of our experience, we are
conscious of it as an action originating in ourselves, which
we call Sin; but whatever fellowship with God there is, we
are conscious of it as resting upon a communication from the
Redeemer, which we call Grace.


1. Let us suppose an esthetic form of faith. It will reduce
both these arrestments and continued developments of the God-
consciousness, as indeed every other change in man’s experience,
to passive states, and represent them consequently as the effects of
external influences in such a manner that they will appear simply
to be appointed events, while the ideas of merit and guilt will
really not apply to them at all. Accordingly, we may say that
the controversy regarding freedom, as it is usually urged in this
sphere, is just the controversy as to whether our passive states are
to be regarded as subordinate to our active states or vice versa ;
and that freedom in the latter sense is the universal premiss of all
teleological forms of faith, which alone, by starting as they do from
the ascendency of spontaneous activity in man, are able to find
guilt in all arrestments of the disposition to the God-consciousness,


243 ©:


§ 63) SIN AND GRACE 263


and merit in every progression of it. More precise determinations,
however, of the ‘ how’ of either are not to be found in the common
nature of these forms of faith ; this only is self-evident, namely, that
if both arrestment of the impulse to the God-consciousness and
quickened development of it are to be equally the act of one and
the same individual, and consequently opposites are to be explained
by the same cause, then, in relation to the doer, the two must cease
to be opposed.

2. In Christian piety as described here there is no such initial
difficulty to be surmounted. The description given here, however,
is identical with the general exposition put forward above.! For if
the feeling of absolute dependence, which was previously in bondage,
has been set free only by redemption, the facility with which we
are able to graft the God-consciousness on the various sensuous
excitations of our self-consciousness also springs solely from the
facts of redemption, and is therefore a communicated facility.
And if the bondage of the feeling of absolute dependence did not
betoken its real absence (for absence would imply the impossibility
of such an act as is here designated sin), then in every portion of
life that could be regarded as a whole in itself, the God-consciousness
too was present in degree even if only as something infinitely small,
and thus whenever such a portion of life came to an end there took
place an act having relation to the God-consciousness. Not, how-
ever, an act involving the evocation of the God-consciousness as a
co-determinant of the moment, 7.e. not a turning to God (from
which an experience of communion with God always arises of
itself), but a turning away from God,? so that with the acceptance
of such a redemption there is always conjoined a backward look to
sin as prior to it. Now the fact that here communion with God
rests on an act extraneous to it by no means prevents our bringing
Christianity under the general category of teleological forms of
faith. For, on the one hand, communication and action are not
mutually exclusive, for corporate acts, e.g., have their origin for the
most part in a single person, and yet are acts also on the part of
the rest ; while, on the other hand, appropriation of redemption is
always represented as action, as a laying hold of Christ, or the like.?


1§ 11, 2 and 3.

2 Cf. Rom. 323. Conf. Aug. xix.: Voluntas . . . avertit se a Deo.

3 Augsb. Conf. xx.: ‘He therefore desires that we should embrace the
promise of God by faith.’ Melanchthon, Loci Comm. Theol. De Vocabulo
Fidei: ‘Si fides non est fiducia intuens Christum . . . non applicamus nobis
eius beneficium.’ De Fide: ‘Pia mens... intelligit hanc misericordiam
fide id est fiducia apprehendendam esse.’


264 THE CHRISTIAN FAITH [§ 63


In the case, however, of a religious consciousness contrariwise
regarding its derangements as coming from elsewhere, but com-
munion with God (into which these do not enter) as proceeding
from the individual’s own spiritual vitality, the term redemption
could be applied (and even that in a very subordinate sense) only
to that which sealed up the external sources of the derangements.
Redemption through Jesus, however, has never been thought of in
this way. And the further we carry the way of looking at things
just indicated, then the more the lack of communion with God is
taken to be merely fortuitous, the less definitely are sin and grace
as such (and as earlier and later) differentiated from each other,
and the more does the conception of redemption recede into the
distance, till all three disappear together. This disappearance
actually occurs when it is assumed that the unity of the sensuous
and the higher self-consciousness is the natural basic condition of
the individual—a condition in which the absence of the God-
consciousness in any particular moment remains merely accidental,
something which at once cancels itself out in corporate life,
inasmuch as all do not suffer from the same accident at once.
This, taken strictly, is the non-Christian view which recognizes no
need of redemption ; for in Christianity these two, sin and grace,
are valid ideas only on the basis of redemption and on the assump-
tion that it has been appropriated.

3. Moreover, the proposition cannot be taken as implying that
in the immediate Christian self-consciousness sin and grace are to
be referred to separate moments and to be kept absolutely apart
from each other;as mutually incompatible. On the contrary, as
the energy of the God-consciousness is never at its absolutely
highest any more than the engrafting of the God-consciousness on
the excitations of the sensuous self-consciousness is ever absolutely
constant, there is involved in this circumstance a limiting deficiency
of the God-consciousness, which is certainly sinful. Just as little,
however, in a truly Christian consciousness can the connexion with
redemption be utterly null, for in that case the Christian conscious-
ness would, until the connexion was re-established, be, contrary to
what is assumed, non-Christian. And as this connexion proceeds
originally from the Redeemer, so His communicated action is
implied throughout. Here, accordingly, while the elements we are
discussing are antithetic they are only such as in the religious life
of the Christian are conjoined in every moment, though always in
varied measure.


§ 64] THREE FORMS OF PROPOSITION 205


§ 64. For the purpose of our exposition, it is necessary to separate
the two subjects, so as to treat first of Sin and then of Grace ;
and of each in accordance with all the three forms of dogmatic
propositions.


1. In our exposition all doctrines properly so called must be
extracted from the Christian religious self-consciousness, 7.e. the
inward experience of Christian people. Since, however, it is the
case that every Christian is conscious both of sin and of grace as
always combined with each other and never dissociated, we may
well be asked what warrant we have for separating them, seeing
that if either be described by itself alone what results will not be
the description of a Christian consciousness. A description of the
sense of sin as the exclusive content even of merely detached
portions of life would only amount to a historical sketch, the
accuracy of which would require some sort of proof, but could find
no verification in the Christian consciousness itself ; such a descrip-
tion would therefore be no doctrine of the faith. Similarly the
description of an inherently absolute and continuous efficacy of the
God-consciousness would only be an anticipation ; no one could
point to such a state as actually brought about in him by redemp-
tion ; so that this again would be no doctrine of the faith. Grant-
ing both positions (on the understanding that in each case one of
the two elements is absolutely excluded), the separation of the two
is nevertheless necessary to our exposition ; only we must recognize
that it is not met with in any Christian consciousness, but is an
arbitrary expedient adopted here with a view simply to greater
clarity of thought. For although our dogmatic propositions as a
whole represent only the doctrine held to be valid in the Evangelical
Church of our time, yet the Christian self-consciousness which they
are meant to articulate with the utmost precision is not really
confined to any definite period, but is the universal, the always and
everywhere self-identical element in the Christian Church—so far,
that is to say, as dogmatic propositions do not relate to the
differentie of the Christian communions, as they do not wherever
the antithesis of sin and grace is in question. We must accordingly
describe the Christian consciousness with reference to its content,
composed of these antithetic elements, in such a way that even
the first moment of the genesis of the Christian consciousness and
everything that in later moments represents the first, may be com-
prised in our description. Now, in the case of those who are not


266 THE CHRISTIAN FAITH [§ 64


born in Christianity but come to accept it, it is obvious that their
appropriation of redemption, and therefore of grace, must be
preceded by a recognition of their need of redemption ; and this
emerges only in connexion with the consciousness of sin. In such
persons, accordingly, there is a consciousness of sin anterior to the
consciousness of grace; and since everything sinful in their later
life is connected with the sin that was present prior to grace, they
have in every moment of their later life the consciousness of sin as
of something present in them before grace was there. Nay, this
consciousness must be shared without exception even by those who
are born within Christendom, were it only in virtue of their cor-
porate feeling, the formula that sin is anterior to grace being simply
the expression of the human race’s need for redemption and of
its relation to Christ. Hence to vindicate our proposition we do
not even need to decide whether or not each individual born in
Christendom was at first outside of grace for a time, and, like
those not so born, attained to grace only after passing through a
state characterized exclusively by the consciousness of sin.

2. In pursuance, then, of this course of separating the con-
sciousness of sin and the consciousness of grace in our exposition,
we shall first describe by itself that element of the Christian self-
consciousness which is more and more to disappear through the
action of the other, and which, arising out of man’s common con-
dition anterior to the entrance of redemption, likewise represents
that condition. Thereafter we shall describe by itself that element
which is ever to be less and less limited by the other, and which,
arising out of redemption, likewise represents the total efficacy
thereof. The separation of these two elements common to all
Christian states of mind into which the antithesis has developed
is an obvious possibility for the simple reason that otherwise there
can scarcely be a full perception of the two implied relations. It is
more difficult, however, to show that, and how, the separation can
be managed in the other two types of dogmatic propositions without
disadvantage to their content. Thus, if, to begin with, we were
to speak of the world by itself and not in relation to man, then,
first, whether the antithesis in question had unfolded itself in man
or not, whatever in the world influences man would always be
the same, and there could accordingly be no special relationship
between the world and either member of the antithesis. But
again, such change as has been wrought in the world by human
activity is always as regards the world simply the work of the


§ 64) THREE FORMS OF PROPOSITION 267


whole man, and there least of all differences relating to the God-
consciousness would have to be taken into account. But what
we have to deal with in this connexion is always simply states of
the world in relation to man, and there it is evident that the world
will be a different thing to a man according as he apprehends it
from the standpoint of a God-consciousness completely paralysed
or of one absolutely paramount. It will accordingly be possible
to distinguish in the Christian life itself between what in our con-
ception of the world is to be placed to the account of sin, and what
to the account of grace. The like holds good also of the results of
man’s action upon the world as far as these are realities to himself
and come within his consciousness. For the more significance he
attaches to the antithesis, the more apparent will be to him the
homogeneous and self-coherent character of what has proceeded
from him because of sin and without the prompting of the God-
consciousness, and on the other hand of what, as resulting from the
operation of redemption, must bear the impress thereof. Finally,
as regards the divine attributes, it is of course evident that state-
ments concerning God cannot issue from a condition of alienation
from God, but are only possible when a man is in some sense turned
again towards Him ; for all statements concerning God presuppose
a turning towards Him. But not even where sin is viewed from
the standpoint of a paramount God-consciousness can we conceive
of divine attributes that have to do with sin apart from its dis-
appearance as a result of redemption. For since all divine attri-
butes are activities, attributes of the kind in question must be
activities making for the maintenance and confirmation of sin ;
but to admit such attributes would be to run counter to Christian
piety. Similarly, should we assume a divine agency as the source
of the God-consciousness but not as developing out of sin and
limited by sin, it too could only be formulated in terms of concepts
of the divine attributes from which the distinctively Christian
character had completely vanished ; so that within the range of
this particular type of concept that character would never appear
at all. Surely, however, it is natural for Christian piety, seeing as
it certainly does in redemption a divine measure, to make state-
ments concerning God that relate to the God-consciousness ; and
in fact it will be these very statements which set forth the trend
and aim of the divine causality, as reflected in our feeling of absolute
dependence in general, so that it is only in combination with them
that the ideas underlying our First Part attain to perfect precision


268 THE CHRISTIAN FAITH [§ 64


and vivid clearness. In order to discover these statements it is
certainly quite unnecessary to separate the two members of our
antithesis from each other ; yet a correct, and, in view of what has
already been said, perhaps a preferable, way of describing the
divine activity by means of which the God-consciousness attains to
supremacy, will be to ask, first, what divine attributes are to be
discerned in the state of sin—though, of course, only in as far as
there is therein an expectation of and preparation for redemption ;
and then, secondly, to what attributes the growing dominion of
the God-consciousness points back, as it comes to be formed out
of the state of sin through redemption. Even were these attributes
mere abstractions (as would obviously be less true of the latter
than of the former), yet, when viewed in combination—just as it
is the fusion of the two elements that constitutes the reality of the
Christian life—they would yield a truly living representation ; and
if we then view them in combination with the divine attributes
set forth in our First Part, the exposition of our God-consciousness
under this form will be complete.

3. This Second Part of Dogmatics might accordingly be arranged
in two ways. Thus we might take the three forms of dogmatic
proposition as our primary division, and then under each of them
treat first of what relates to sin, and secondly of what relates to
grace. Or, again, we might set forth these two elements of our
self-consciousness as the main heads, and treat first of sin under all
the three forms of proposition, and next of grace in the same way.
The latter scheme seems preferable inasmuch as the main division
will then be formed by what is found already divided in the
immediate Christian self-consciousness. This part of our work will
therefore have two aspects, in one of which we shall deal with the
consciousness of sin under all the three dogmatic forms, in the
other with grace on similar lines.


FIRST ASPECT OF THE ANTITHESIS


EXPLICATION OF THE CONSCIOUSNESS OF SIN


§65. The propositions to be enunciated here must all harmonize
with those of the same type in our First Part ; but they must
also have regard to the propositions of the Second Aspect,
which explicate the consciousness of grace, these last being
meanwhile held in reserve.


1. Any attempt to consider the fact of sin purely by itself is
at once confronted by an apparent antinomy. Thus were we from
our point of view to regard every arrestment of the God-conscious-
ness that takes place merely as the act of man, then, as being a
turning away from God, it would be in contradiction with the
disposition to the God-consciousness which is present in man as a
vital impulse, and is here assumed as such. Equal difficulty would
appear to lie in the necessity of the actual existence of sin being
consistent with divine omnipotence, since man’s turning from
God must like all else be ordained by God; for of course man
even in the state of sin is involved in the natural order, and it
is only in virtue of his position within that order—with the entire
range of which the divine causality is co-extensive—that sin can
develop in him at all. Again, if there are divine attributes related
to sin, indeed, but not in the way of giving it persistence and con-
firmation, how should even that, which from its very nature ought
not to continue, have come into being in association with all that
owes its being to the eternally omniscient divine omnipotence ?
Finally, if sin exists only where there is a powerlessness of the God-
consciousness, and if it develops in man in consequence of impres-
sions received from the totality of finite existence, how could this
fail to abrogate what we laid down as the original perfection of
man and the perfection of the world in relation to him ?

2. Although this antinomy can be only apparent (the two sets
of propositions alike having their source in our immediate self-
consciousness, which as the truth of our being cannot be in con-


tradiction with itself), yet it follows from this relationship that we
269


270 THE CHRISTIAN FAITH {§ 65


are here face to face with a large number of difficulties. For if we
are too readily disposed to exclude sin from the range of our absolute
dependence on God, we inevitably verge upon Manicheism ; while
if we seek to reconcile it with the original perfection of man, we
shall hardly avoid Pelagianism. It may, in fact, be said that in
the development of the Church’s doctrine there has been an almost
constant wavering between these antagonistic positions. Never-
theless, though this wavering cannot now be brought to rest, and
though no formula can be found which would not be felt by some
to lean more towards the latter extreme, and by others towards the
former, yet in a general way, at least, the second part of our pro-
position is as well adapted to smooth out the difficulties as the first
part of necessity raises them. Thus since in our statements about
sin we are to keep in view those still to be made about grace, we
may regard sin on the one hand as simply that which would not
be unless redemption was to be ; or on the other as that which, as
it is to disappear, can disappear only through redemption. In the
first case we obviate any seemingly inevitable risk of approximating
to Manicheism ; in the second we can scarcely, except by wanton-
ness, fall into Pelagianism. If, however, the danger indicated is not
perpetually to recur in consequence of our having to refer to the
terms recognized by the Church, we must claim the right to interpret
these terms in such a way as most adequately to secure ourselves
against the danger, or else, should they not lend themselves to this,
to replace them by others. In order to attain at least to an approxi-
mate solution of our problem we must have recourse to one or other
of these alternatives under all the three forms.


PIRST SECTION


SIN AS A STATE OF MAN


§ 66. We have the consciousness of sin whenever the God-consciousness
which forms part of an inner state, or is in some way added
to it, determines our self-consciousness as pain; and there-
fore we conceive of sin as a positive antagonism of the flesh
against the spint.

1. Without running counter to our method we cannot at the
outset give an objective elucidation of sin, but must revert to the
personal self-consciousness which attests an inner state as sin—a
procedure all the less open to objection because sin cannot emerge
in the life of the Christian apart from such a consciousness. To
lack this consciousness would simply be an additional sin, of which,
as such, we could not fail subsequently to become conscious. If,
then, it is our primary object to ascertain the characteristic element
in the consciousness of sinfulness, we ought not, within the sphere
of Christian piety, to look for it except in relationship to the God-
consciousness, and accordingly the only course open to us is to
reckon everything as sin that has arrested the free development
of the God-consciousness. Now, if in any particular moment under
examination God has formed part of our self-consciousness, but
this God-consciousness has not been able to permeate the other
active elements therein, thus determining the moment, then sin
and the consciousness of sin are simultaneous, and the sensuous
self-consciousness by reason of its having been gratified is affected
with pleasure, but the higher, owing to the impotence of the God-
consciousness, with pain. If, on the other hand, God has not
formed part of the moment at all, if, that is to say, the occurrence
of the moment excludes the God-consciousness, showing that the
God-consciousness cannot make the moment its own, which also
means that it cannot be supposed to accord and acquiesce in it, then
the consciousness of sin follows on the sin itself. Supposing, how-
ever, that the God-consciousness has determined the moment, and
that pleasure is present in the higher self-consciousness, still every
attendant feeling of effort implies a consciousness of sin—in some


271


292 THE CHRISTIAN FAITH [§ 66


degree, consequently, annulling that pleasure—since we thereby
are made aware that if the sensuous elements which have been
overcome had been reinforced from without, the God-consciousness
would have been unable to determine the moment. In this sense,
therefore—but only because there exists a living seed of sin ever
ready to burst forth—there is such a thing as an abiding conscious-
ness of sin, now preceding the sin itself as a warning presentiment,
now accompanying it as an inward reproof, or following it as
penitence. That no God-consciousness, however, should ever be
directed at all upon a moment such as that described could only
happen if in the person acting there were no relationship between
the moment and the class of actions under discussion (in which
case he would be in a state of innocence), or if the God-conscious-
ness were no longer active within him (which would be the state of
hardening).

2. If we conceive now a state in which the flesh, 7.e. the totality
of the so-called lower powers of the soul, were susceptible only to
impulses proceeding from the quarter of the God-consciousness, and
were never an independent motive principle, a conflict between the
two would not be possible, but we should again have conceived a
sinless state. In every moment in this self-consciousness the two
powers would be perfectly at one, every moment beginning in the
spirit and ending in the spirit, and the flesh serving only as a living
intermediary, a healthy organ, and never exhibiting anything not
initiated and directed by the spirit, whether as an act of its own or
as an intrusive extraneous element in an act proceeding from the
spirit. As long, however, as spirit and flesh have not in this sense
become one, they co-exist as two powers at issue with each other,!
and in so far as the spirit presses towards the perfect unity indicated,
this state can be characterized only as an incapacity of the spirit.
The possibility of this we left aside when treating of the original
perfection of man,” except that there those relationships, and no
others, had to be brought out which contain in themselves the
principles of progressive development. Since, however, the con-
sciousness of sin never exists in the soul of the Christian without
the consciousness of the power of redemption,® the former is never
actually found without its complementary half which we are to
describe later, and, if taken by itself alone, represents only that
state of a hopeless incapacity in the spirit, which prevails outside
the sphere of redemption.


1 Gal, 517, Rom. 738-28, * § 60, s Rom, 7% 8%,


§ 67] THE GERM OF SIN 273


This explanation of sin as an arrestment of the determinative
power of the spirit, due to the independence of the sensuous func-
tions, is certainly reconcilable with those explanations which describe
sin as a turning away from the Creator,! though less so with those
which interpret sin as a violation of the divine law.2 But it cannot
be of any great consequence to insist on a reconciliation with the
latter, for in the sense in which God and the eternal law might be
distinguished—as if one could turn away from the latter as froma
single and perhaps arbitrary act of God without turning away from
Himself—law is not an originally Christian term and must therefore
be merged in a higher. We should certainly require to widen it in
a very indefinite and arbitrary way if we had to bring under it all
that may count as sin not only in deeds, but in thoughts and words.
Our explanation, however, unifies this division in the most natural
way. For if a thought or word viewed otherwise than as an act
did form the content of a moment, it could only incorrectly be
called asin. An interpretation more Christian in its origin, and at
the same time directly in keeping with our own, is that which says
that sin consists in our desiring what Christ contemns and vice versa.*


§ 67. We are conscious of sin as the power and work of a time when
the disposition to the God-consciousness had not yet actively
emerged in us.


1. It is in reality already implied, in the relation of this pro-
position to all that has been said above, that in the period to which
the consciousness of sin points back, sin was not present in us in the
same way as we are now conscious of it. For in this latter form it
can be present only simultaneously with and as related to the God-
consciousness. If our God-consciousness is not yet developed, there
can be in us no resistance to it, but merely an independent activity
of the flesh which, though in time it will quite naturally come to
act as a resistance to the spirit, cannot at that stage be regarded as
sin in the proper sense, but rather as the germ of sin. This inter-
pretation we apply generally to individual persons in their earliest
stages of development, and in exactly the same way to whole
peoples and eras. Nevertheless, the proposition is not to be under-
stood as implying that all sin, whatever its content, is to be relegated
to that prior time ; it refers only to the state of sin in general.


1 Conf. Aug. xix.: Voluntas . . . quae avertit se a Deo.

2 For others of this type cf. Gerhard, Loc. Th. t. v. pp. 2 ff. ~*~

3 Aug., de vera velig. 31 : Non enim ullum peccatum committi potest, nisi
aut dum appetuntur ea quae ille contemsit, aut fugiuntur quae ille sustinuit.


18


274 THE CHRISTIAN FAITH [§ 67


The functions of the lower life which may come into conflict with
the spirit are not all developed prior to the God-consciousness, but
as they do develop without having the God-consciousness directed
upon them in their initial stages, the same result follows.

2. Resistance, as an activity by which an opposed activity is
to be neutralized, has naturally its degrees of more and less, and
is thus an intensive phenomenon conditioned by time, and when
present in anything that has life advances by repetition in time to
proficiency. Now our proposition goes back to the universal ex-
perience that in each individual the flesh manifests itself as a reality
before the spirit comes to be such, the result being, that, as soon as
the spirit enters the sphere of consciousness (and it is involved in
the original perfection of man that the independent activity of
the flesh cannot of itself prevent the ingress of the spirit), resist-
ance takes place, 7.e. we become conscious also of sin as the God-
consciousness awakes within us. The activity of the spirit, how-
ever, not merely in general, as present in the distinctive form of
human life, but also in particular, in its effort to win dominion over
the flesh, is likewise an intensive phenomenon, and, as a living
force, attains by repetition in time to proficiency. Thus the
strength which the spirit gradually acquires is the work and power
of the period subsequent to the awaking of the God-consciousness,
though of course in association with the previously given spiritual
forces to the promptings of which that awaking was due; while
the strength of the resistance made by the flesh and manifested in
the consciousness of sin, is due to the advantage gained by the
flesh during the prior time,! though again, of course, in association
with the corporate life upon which the amount of that advantage
depends. Now if the whole situation subsequent to the awaking
of the God-consciousness could be conceived as a progressive
ascendancy of the spirit over the flesh, self-consciousness could
hardly have such a phase as the consciousness of sin; and accord-
ingly this phase will be more and more attenuated as that concep-
tion becomes dominant, and vice versa. We actually find, however,
that our development is always an irregular one, and also that the
spirit is obstructed in its action by the flesh—the circumstance,
indeed, to which our consciousness of sin is due. This irregularity
is twofold. In the first place, the development of the spirit pro-
ceeds intermittently through widely separated moments of excep-
tional illumination and stimulation; and thus if, after such a


1 Gen. 871,


§ 68] INSIGHT AND WILL-POWER 275


moment, the activity of the spirit should seem less than it was
during the moment, or if the stimulation did not from the outset
correspond with the illumination, we become conscious of our state
as one of sin, since in the actual experience of the moment the flesh
overrides the effort of the spirit.1 Secondly, we are conscious of
the spirit as one, while the flesh is a manifold, and a manifold
composed of diverse elements, so that the spirit cannot stand in
a uniform relation to it. Since, however, the spirit’s demand is
always the same, the spirit itself, wherever it is less able to work
effectively, appears as a baffled and defeated force, and the subject
therefore as in a state of sin. The more thoroughly we trace back
the state of our spiritual life to a conscious beginning, to a general
‘taking command of one’s self ’—so to call it 2—which is repre-
sented in every decision of the will, then, whenever the act does not
correspond with that decision, the more conscious we are of a
domination of the flesh, and we cannot do otherwise than trace this
back to a time prior to that beginning.


§ 68. Although sin, as a result of the unequal development of insight
and will-power, can be conceived in such a way that its existence
does not invalidate the idea of the original perfection of man,
still we are bound to regard it as a derangement of our nature.


1. This proposition would seem to bring the entire life of the
spirit under the two contrasted categories of intellect and will, but
it is far from being intended here to make light of the third element
in our experience, namely, our immediate self-consciousness, which
in fact forms the starting-point in every part of our exposition.
Indeed, it is precisely the relationship of that self-consciousness to
the other two factors that serves as the measure of the disparity in
their development. Let us figure to ourselves the above-mentioned
‘taking command of one’s self’ in its most general form; it is
simply the discernment of the absolute superiority of those states
of mind which combine with the God-consciousness without ob-
structing it. That discernment cannot emerge without the in-
dividual’s appropriating it, and this takes place only through an
act of self-consciousness in which the said discernment, as giving
approval and recognition, becomes a command. Now the fact that
this excitation of the self-consciousness follows upon the discern-
ment more rapidly than it is able to determine our volitions, con-
stitutes just that inequality along with which sin and the con-


S URxoy aa. Gs, aon 722


276 THE CHRISTIAN FAITH [§ 68


sciousness of sin are given. It is true that there are two ways in
which at the very start we might conceive of this disparity as being
removed, and in either case there would be no consciousness of sin.
Thus if a man were to attain gradually to a discernment of the
relationship of his various inner states to the God-consciousness, but
only in the same measure as his recognition thereof could set the
will in operation, then for him no consciousness of sin could arise,
as indeed he could never imagine a more divine life than that which
he actually exhibits at every moment. Similarly, if the antithesis
were actually present in its full extent and clearly realized, but the
will were uniformly powerful enough to resist every impulse of the
flesh, then again a person having this experience could never come
to be conscious of sin as his own condition. Neither of these cases,
however, occurs in our experience ; in fact we can see quite well
why they cannot. Thus—to begin with the second case—the
antithesis presents itself to our understanding in the manner of a
general pattern or formula which in any particular instance is, so
to speak, recognized from afar ; and it is in this way too that the
immature begin to receive the said discernment from their elders
soon after their own earliest experiences of excitation. But the
impulse that the commanding recognition is to give to the will must
—just because the flesh has to do with the particular only, and
knows nothing of the general—in every given instance be a special
one ; and here the flesh has habit on its side as the real law in its
members,! whereas it is only gradually that the earlier happier
moments come to the succour of the spirit. If, however, we turn
to the first case, then, while we might perhaps regard this (though,
as a matter of fact, we never do find perfect equipoise, but always
advance and retreat) as a possibility in a single individual, it could
not be so in a communal life. For all would not take the same
path, and consequently each would necessarily see in the case of
others, and then recognize in his own, something for which at the
moment he had not the requisite will-power. Accordingly, since
_ without this disparity—as a counterpart to which we might also

imagine a lagging of the intelligence behind the will, though this
would be in appearance only—there could arise no consciousness of
sin, the latter is to be understood simply as issuing from the former ;
indeed, it would be impossible for any one to specify any other mode
of attaining to that consciousness. It is along the same lines that
we can understand what is unquestionably the most pernicious


D Rom 72s,


§ 68] SIN AND ORIGINAL PERFECTION 277


element of all, namely, how the resistance of the flesh reacts upon
the intelligence, so that for one thing the intelligence seeks to
palliate the inner states thus produced, on the pretext of their being
compatible with the God-consciousness ;! and for another the God-
consciousness, being seized upon when but in germ by the power
of the flesh, is altered and disintegrated to such a degree that every
state comes to be compatible with some aspect of it, and thus the
moral antithesis itself is lost.2_ If on this view idolatry may rightly
enough be thought to have the same origin as sin, no less rightly
will all anthropopathic ideas of God which attenuate the antithesis
or base it on distinctions of human law be regarded as survivals of
idolatry.

2. Nevertheless, we are not entitled to say that sin, on the view
taken of it here, would conflict with the original perfection of man,
and thus annul it. On the contrary, we must rather insist upon
the fact that sin in general exists only in so far as there is a con-
sciousness of it ; and this again is always conditioned by a good
which must have preceded it and must have been just a result
of that original perfection. The ‘bad conscience’ which we
may have within us is there, for one thing, only because of our
seeing the possibility of what is better—a conviction which must
accordingly have come to us in a different way ; and for another,
because of the mere fact of our having a conscience, 1.e. an inward
demand for harmony with the God-consciousness. Hence if in an
individual, at a time of life when the God-consciousness could have
been developed, or among a people still at an early stage of develop-
ment, the notion of that ‘ better’ has not been evolved in similar
fashion, we regard their imperfection and the power of the flesh
in them not as sin, but as grossness and ignorance. Sin, accord-
ingly, manifests itself only in connexion with and by means of
already existent good, and what it obstructs is future good.
Similarly, if the consciousness of sin comes about through the ex-
perience that the God-consciousness operates less effectively upon
a sensuous disposition than upon any other, even in that case, too, it
issues from a comparison with a previously existent good. And in
point of fact that is confirmed by what forms a counterpart to the
foregoing, namely, that a trace of the consciousness of sin lurks
even in the most exalted moments of religious experience, just
because the God-consciousness does not permeate our whole being
uniformly ; and this residuum is carried onwards to the time


1 Rom. 235, Ba OM too


278 THE CHRISTIAN FAITH ; [§ 68


following, since a moment of that kind cannot leave behind it
effects that will be homogeneous at every point. Thus the state
of-sin over its entire range actually presupposes the original perfec-
tion of man, and is indeed dependent upon it ; and, accordingly,
just as the latter conception expresses the unity of our development,
so sin in turn represents its intermittent and disjointed character,
though without in any way abrogating the unity itself.

3. Now if, after having thus found ourselves able to interpret
sin in its relation to the original perfection of man, we could like-
wise become perfectly certain of its inevitability, we should have
no choice but to acquiesce in the latter. The most natural thing
would then be to say that the consciousness which we characterize
as the consciousness of sin, taken in its widest compass and even
including the God-consciousness, vitiated as that may be and in
its distinctive nature subverted by disruption, is nothing but that
consciousness of good still lacking to us which arises within us, as a
result of individual acts and inner states. But this view, in nullify-
ing as it does not only the reality of sin but also the need of redemp-
tion, leaves so little room anywhere for the peculiar work of a
Redeemer that it can scarcely be regarded as a Christian view at all.
As a matter of fact, the certainty with which we are aware of the
good realized within us in some exceptional moment is at the same
time a conviction that we might evade every moment in which
the same degree of will-power is not demonstrably present ; while
again, every retrograde movement is a derangement of one originally
provided for in our nature ; and thus the experience of an abate-
ment in will-power and the consciousness that sin can be avoided,
as also the conception of sin as a derangement of our nature, are
so far one and the same. In order to affirm, however, that it is
possible to obviate entirely the active resistance of the flesh, we
require to have an assured belief in a development of power of the
God-consciousness that has proceeded continuously from its earliest
manifestation to a state of absolute strength, 7.e. a condition of
human perfection evolved without sin. This certainty is therefore
at once the basis of the full consciousness of sin as a derangement
of our nature, and of faith in the possibility of redemption by the
communication of the spiritual power so attested. For since even
our most perfect inner states still retain traces of sin (this is the
testimony of the universal consciousness of mankind), then he alone
to whom we do not ascribe that common consciousness of sin, and
in so far only as we are justified in not so ascribing it (such justifica-


”


§ 69] THE SOURCE OF SIN 279


tion being asserted in the above formula itself), can exercise redeem-
ing activity.1 It is of course true that the consciousness of sin
‘comes from the law,” but as the law in the very multitude of its
precepts is but an imperfect representation of the good, and even
in the unity of an all-embracing maxim does not show how it can
be obeyed, the knowledge of sin that arises out of it is ever in some
respects incomplete and in some uncertain; and it is only from
the absolute sinlessness and the perfect spiritual power of the
Redeemer that we gain the full knowledge of sin. And our belief
that sin is a derangement of human nature rests solely upon the
possibility that, on the assumption of the original perfection de-
scribed above, the God-consciousness could have developed pro-
gressively from the first man to the purity and holiness which it
manifests in the Redeemer.


§ 69. We are conscious of sin partly as having its source in ourselves,
partly as having tts source outside our own being.


1. The relation of the various dispositions and activities of sense
—a relation varying in a special way with every single person—to
the higher activity of the soul is based upon what we may pro-
visionally call an innate difference in these dispositions, which serves
in part to constitute the peculiar personality of the individual.
Such differences, however, we observe being handed on within the
same stock, and thus also coalescing when new families are formed
from various stocks, while we find them also established among
larger human masses as the distinctive characteristics of tribes and
peoples. Hence in virtue of this dependence of the specific con-
stitution of the individual life upon a larger common type, as also
of the later generations upon the earlier, the sin of the individual
has its source in something beyond and prior to his own existence.
Hence it is just the same even if such differences are held not to be
innate, but to be due to education alone, since the type of education
itself is determined by proclivities and experiences which precede
in time the life of the learner. On the other hand, as the swift
movement of a sensuous excitation towards its object without
ranging itself with the higher self-consciousness is unquestionably
the act of the individual, every single sin of the individual must
necessarily have its source in himself.

From the one point of view we distinguish between our good
nature—for many impulses even of sense do not seek to pass


TTROMs 77= 82, 2 Rom, 77.


280 THE CHRISTIAN FAITH [§ 69


beyond what the spirit itself demands of them—and our evil nature,
and we are conscious of each of these as something got and received
by us conjointly with others. From the other, we recognize our
evil nature as being also our own sin, since, instead of having
overcome it by our action, we voluntarily perpetuate it from one
moment to another.

2. The fact that one person is more disposed to reflection, his
external activity being either on the whole feeble, or, if vigorous,
yet crude and ignorant, and that another gives himself to external
activities, and, generally speaking, thinks but little, or thinks in a
dull and confused way—this, too, we place among the innate differ-
ences. True, by the social life around him the former will be
drawn into the sphere of activity ; while, as regards the latter, the
results of reflection that are accepted in his community will some-
how be lodged also in his mind; but the original idiosyncrasies
will continue to operate ; and in the case of the former, dawning
piety will combine more easily with his thought, though his modes
of action will remain carnal ; while, in the case of the latter, it will
be the intelligence that proves refractory ; and thus sin will take
a different form in each. Now, in whatever degree such diversity
is connected with the disposition natural to each, and in each prior
to all action, in the same degree the sin of each, as regards its
particular form, will be rooted in something beyond his own life.
On the other hand, in so far as every moment (be its content an
idea or an action in the narrower sense) owes its occurrence solely
to voluntary action—even a moment which, though the God-
consciousness has already become active, does not contain that
consciousness—the sin of each, as regards its reality, uniformly has
its source in himself.

3. It is true also of the development of the sensuous life, which
takes place in all men before that of the spiritual, that it does not
depend upon the individual alone. The coming of the Ego into
this world as a result of conception and birth cannot be regarded
by our immediate self-consciousness as our own act—though specula-
tion has sometimes sought to represent this as the primary apostasy,
and as due to ourselves. In truth, however, just as the coming of
the Ego is, with respect to each later generation, due to the action
of the one before it, so the sinful self-assertiveness of sense,
proceeding as it does from its earlier development, has a more
remote source than the individual’s own life. But once the God-
consciousness has emerged as a definite and effective agency, and


§ 69] ORIGINAL AND ACTUAL SIN 281


as capable of growth, then every moment in which it does not
manifest itself as such, and with a certain increment of power, even
if infinitesimal, in comparison with earlier moments of the same
kind, is an arrest upon the higher activity—an arrest originating
in the doer himself—and is a veritable sin.

Postscript—It is this twofold relation, found universally
though in varying proportion in all consciousness of sin, that forms
the essential and ultimate ground of the fact that the explication
of the Christian consciousness of sin in the teaching of the Church
falls into the two doctrines of ‘ original sin’! and ‘ actual sin.’ ?
And in fact the true significance of that division emerges clearly
from the foregoing exposition. Thus under the one head the state
of sin is considered as something received, something we bring with
us, prior to any act of our own, yet something in which our own
guilt is latent ; under the other, it is set forth as becoming apparent
in the sinful acts which are due to the individual himself, but in
which the received element brought with us is revealed. The
traditional terminology, however, is in every aspect unsatisfactory.
Thus, in the second expression (actual sin), the term ‘sin’ is, in
accordance with common usage, predicated of the real act, but the
adjective suggests the misleading idea that original sin is nothing
real, or at least that alongside of actual sin there is a type of sin
that is merely in seeming or that lies outside the sphere of action.
In the first term again, ‘original’ (Zvb) correctly expresses the
connexion of the later generations with the earlier, as well as with
the process by which the race is preserved ; but the word ‘sin’ is
misleading, being used here apparently in the same sense as in the
other expression ; in which case an earlier source would be pre-
dicated only of some actual sins and not of others. Such, however,
cannot be the true purport of the expression, since original sin in-
dicates that inherent quality of the acting subject which is a part
condition of all his actual sins and is anterior to all action on his
part.? Hence we might well wish for an alteration in these inexact
designations, which besides are not found in Scripture ; but such
alteration will have to be introduced with great caution—a process
to which the following treatment is meant to contribute ; and if
we would avoid breaking the historical continuity of doctrine, and
causing fresh misconstructions and misunderstandings, we shall have
to carry out the change by means of gradual adjustments.


1 Peccatum originis. 2 Peccatum actuale.
3 Peccatum enim originis non est aliquod delictum quod actu perpetratur :


282 THE CHRISTIAN FAITH [§ 70


First DOCTRINE: ORIGINAL SIN


§ 70. The sinfulness that is present in an individual prior to any
action of his own, and has its ground outside his own being,
is in every case a complete incapacity for good, which can be
vemoved only by the influence of Redemption.


Conf. Aug. 2: Docent quod—omnes homines secundum naturam pro-
pagati nascuntur . . . sine metu Dei sine fiducia erga Deum et cum concupi-
scentia, quodque hic morbus seu vitium originis vere sit peccatum damnans
et afferens nunc quoque aeternam mortem his qui non renascuntur per
baptismum et spiritum sanctum.—A pol. Conf. 1: hic locus testatur nos non
solum actus sed potentiam seu dona efficiendi timorem et fiduciam erga Deum
adimere propagatis secundum carnalem naturam ... ut cum nominamus
concupiscentiam non tantum actus seu fructus intelligamus sed perpetuam
naturae inclinationem.—Conf. Gall. ix. : Affirmamus quicquid mens humana
habet lucis mox fieri tenebras cum de quaerendo Deo agitur, adeo ut sua
intelligentia et ratione nullo modo possit ad eum accedere. Item...
nullam prorsus habet ad bonum appetendum libertatem, nisi quam ex gratia
et Dei dono acceperit.—Ewvpos. Simpl. viii.: Peccatum autem intelligimus esse
nativam illam hominis corruptionem ... qua concupiscentiis pravis im-
mersi . . . nil boni ex nobis ipsis facere imo ne cogitare quidem possumus.—
ix.: proinde nullum est ad bonum homini liberum arbitrium nondum
renato.—Conf, Angl. x.: Ea est hominis conditio, ut sese naturalibus suis
viribus ad fidem convertere et praeparare non possit. Quare absque gratia
Dei quae in Christo est ad facienda quae Deo grata sunt nihil valemus.—
Repetit. Conf.: Et haec depravatio est carere iam luce Dei seu praesentia Dei
quae in nobis fuisset, et est aversio voluntatis nostrae a Deo . . . et hominem
non esse templum Dei sed miseram massam sine Deo et sine iustitia.


1. This idea of a sinfulness present from the first in every human
being is in perfect accord with what has been set forth above. For
if, even in the life of the man who has been received into fellowship
with the redeemed, there is in the strict and precise sense no moment
in which the consciousness of sin, as something present and opera-
tive, would not form an essential part of his self-consciousness
were this latter clearly and fully realized, then a sinfulness which
is not completely overcome even by the power of redemption must
for that very reason be regarded as in itself literally infinite. And
if the disposition to the God-consciousness is thereby obscured and
vitiated,? then man, just because his God-consciousness, though
the best thing in him, is thus polluted and untrustworthy, must be
wholly incapable not only of developing, but even of consciously
aspiring to, such inner states as would harmonize with the proper


sed intime inhaeret infixum ipsi naturae substantiae et essentiae hominis
(Epitom., Art. I, p. 577, Ed. Rech.).
P§ 62, u: $64, rand. Eto


§ 70] INCAPACITY FOR GOOD 283


aim and object of the said disposition. Hence, as Christian piety
traces everything at all connected with the God-consciousness either
to sin or to grace,! everything in our inner states that is not sin
must be attributed to our share in redemption, and this redemption
must be regarded as the only thing that can remove the incapacity
referred to.

2. We admit then unreservedly this incapacity for good—good
being understood here solely as that which is determined by the
God-consciousness—between the limiting points of willing and
doing,? within which all self-activity proper must fall. Yet we
must not magnify our congenital sinfulness to such an extent as
would involve the denial of man’s capacity to appropriate redemp-
tion, for that capacity is the very least that can be predicated of
that disposition to the God-consciousness which is inherent in
man’s original perfection.? In the light of such a denial nothing
would remain of those higher gifts which constitute the prerogative
of human nature, and in which everything that distinguishes man
from brute must have some share ; these gifts would in fact be so
utterly extinct that we should have literally to say that man has
been born without human nature—an assertion that contradicts
itself as soon as it is made. Again, were we to affirm that the
capacity for redemption has been lost,* we should come into conflict
with our very belief in redemption. The capacity to appropriate
the grace offered to us is the indispensable condition of all the
operations of that grace, so that, without it, no improvement of
man would be possible; or else to render such improvement
possible, we should have to make another assumption—namely,
such a new creation of man, he remaining absolutely passive, as
alone could produce the capacity in question. But in that case this
creative act might equally be applied to the whole process, and
man’s complete sanctification effected in the same way, so that

ESiO2: Seo ite 228 Cte Anes

3 Cf. Conf. Belg. xiv., the two statements : Adeo ut ipsi (homini) tantum
exigua illorum (donorum omnium quae a Deo acceperat) vestigia reman-
serint : and, Nulla enim intelligentia nec voluntas conformis est divinae, nisi
quam Christus in illis fuerat operatus.

4 Solid. declar. ii. p. 656: ita ut in hominis natura post lapsum ante re-
generationem ne scintillula quidem spiritualium virium reliqua manserit aut
restet, quibus ille ex se ad gratiam Dei praeparare se, aut oblatam gratiam
apprehendere aut eius gratiae capax esse possit. This, however, as may be
readily discerned, is cancelled (so far at least as it conflicts with our statement)
by what follows (p. 771): Hoc Dei verbum etiam nondum ad Deum con-
versus externis auribus audire aut legere potest. In eiusmodi enim externis


rebus homo adhuc aliquo modo liberum arbitrium habet, ut . . . verbum
Dei audire vel non audire possit.


284 THE CHRISTIAN FAITH [§ 70


redemption would become superfluous. For these reasons the
incapacity spoken of is only to be referred to our personal
activity in the narrower and proper sense, and not to our recep-
tivity ; and if anyone chooses to speak of vital inward receiving as
the beginning of co-operation, we should not admit unconditionally
that original sin debars man from all initiative and co-operation in
spiritual things.!. In fact, however, the work of this vital recep-
tivity is not really initiation ; there must be first of all a drawing-
near of what is to be received, and similarly the said working is,
strictly, not a co-operation at all, but a yielding of the self to the
operation of grace. Our statement, moreover, has in its favour all
the invitations of the Redeemer, which in reality were appeals to
this receptivity ; and no less the universal practice of the heralds
of God’s kingdom, who invariably called upon men to receive the
grace of God. In fact, even if we start from the assumption of a
constantly increasing deterioration of mankind, we must neverthe-
less acknowledge with Augustine that some element of the original
good must still survive in human nature.”

3. Even within the sphere of voluntary action, however, thinkers
have always taken care to confine the incapacity in question to
what Christian piety regards as alone good in the strictest sense.
This again takes for granted that there is a distinction of praise-
worthy and blameworthy which is quite independent of a man’s
relationship to redemption ; in fact, just as the unredeemed may
have in themselves that which is commendable, so the redeemed
are conscious of having acquired it without the aid of grace. Now
this whole phase of life may very appropriately be described as
“ civil righteousness ’—the expression taken in a broad sense. For,
to begin with, all that lies nearest to what is determined and effected
by the God-consciousness has a communal reference, and evidence
that might be brought forward against this will always be merely
apparent ; while, again, the mind of the civil community cannot
apply the standard of the God-consciousness to the human actions
and inward states that bear upon the communal interest, but can
at most demand a spirit of patriotism in its highest purity and per-
fection. This spirit, however, while capable of evoking the most


1 Solid. declay., p. 643: Repudiantur ... qui docent . . . hominem ex
naturali nativitate adhuc aliquid boni ... reliquum habere, capacitatem
videlicet . . . in rebus spiritualibus aliquid inchoandi operandi aut cooperandi.

_* Enchirid. xii. : Quamdiu itaque natura corrumpitur inest ei bonum quo
privetur . . . quocirca bonum consumere corruptio non potest nisi con-
sumendo naturam.,


§ 71] CIVIL RIGHTEOUSNESS 285


consummate self-renunciation in the individual, is merely the self-
love of the nation or the country as a composite person, and may
be conjoined with animosity and injustice of all kinds towards
those who are outside the group, unless the reverse is dictated by
the group’s own selfish interest or love of honour—and these, again,
are but self-love. Hence the very best elements of this side of life,
so far as they subsist independently of the power of the God-con-
sciousness, can rank only as the mind, wisdom, and righteousness
of the flesh. Still, far too much is conceded, and an important
aspect of Christian piety greatly obscured, when the incapacity is
restricted to the so-called works of the First Table of the Decalogue
on the ground that it is these alone which man cannot perform
apart from redemption, and that the works of the Second Table
are identical with that civil righteousness of which man is capable
even without the aid of God’s Spirit. The truth is rather that the
latter works, in any sense in which the Christian can regard them
as fulfilling the divine law,! are in no sense external or carnal ;
they are truly spiritual works, and are possible only in virtue of an
efficacious and purified God-consciousness, so that in this respect
no distinction can be drawn between duties towards God and duties
towards our neighbour.’


§ 71. Original sin, however, is at the same time so really the personal
guilt of every individual who shares in it that rt is best repre-
sented as the corporate act and the corporate guilt of the human
race, and that the recognition of it as such 1s likewise recogni-
tion of the universal need of redemption.


Conf. Aug. ii. : Quodque hic morbus seu vitium originis vere sit peccatum
damnans et afferens nunc quoque aeternam mortem his qui non renascuntur.—
Apol. Conf. i.: Quodsi has tantas vires habet humana natura . . . quorsum
opus erit gratia Christi? Jb¢d.ii.: Quiaigitur...omnessuntsub peccato.. .
ideo data est promissio iustificationis propter Christum.—Conf. Basil. viii. :
Atque haec lues, quam originalem vocant, genus totum sic pervasit, ut nulla
ope nisi divina per Christum curari potuerit.—Con/. Gall. xi. : Credimus hoc
vitium vere esse peccatum, quod omnes et singulos homines, ne parvulis
quidem exceptis adhuc in utero matris delitescentibus, aeternae mortis reos
coram Deo peragat.—Conf. Belg. xv.: Credimus quod peccatum originis ita
foedum et execrabile est coram Deo, ut ad generis humani condemnationem


1 Matt. 2237-39, supplemented by John 13*4 and Col. 3”.

2We must accordingly adhere to the quite general statement in Mel-
anchthon, Loc. theol. (De lib. avb.): Non potest voluntas exuere nascentem
nobiscum pravitatem, nec potest legi Dei satisfacere.—(De pecc.) : Peccatum
originis est in natis ex virili semine amissio lucis in mente et aversio voluntatis
a Deo et contumacia cordis ne possint vere obedire legi Dei.


286 THE CHRISTIAN FAITH (§ 72


sufficiat.—Art. Smalc.: Si enim ista (sc. hominem posse naturalibus viribus
mandata Dei servare) approbantur, Christus frustra mortuus est, cum nullum
peccatum aut damnum sit in homine pro quo mori eum oportuerit.—Conf.
Bohem. iv.: Necessum esse ut omnes norint infirmitatem suam, quodque se
ipsos modo nullo servare possint, neque quicquam habere praeter Christum,
cuius fiducia sese redimant ac liberent.—Epitom. Artic., p. 575: Affirmamus
quod hanc naturae corruptionem ab ipsa natura nemo nisi solus Deus separare
queat.—Reiicimus . . . dogma quo asseritur peccatum originale tantummodo
reatum et debitum esse ex alieno delicto ... in nos derivatum.—Solid.
Decl., p. 639: Et propter hanc corruptionem .. . natura aut persona
hominis lege Dei accusatur et condemnatur . . . nisi beneficio meriti Christi
ab his malis liberemur.—Melanchth., Loc., p. 94: Propter quam corruptionem
nati sunt rei.


1. In not a few of these symbolical passages, and in many
theologians the doctrine of original sin appears to imply that the
sinfulness innate in all men, just in so far as received from an
external source, is yet in every case the individual’s own guilt ; a
guilt indeed which involves eternal punishment as its due, so that
the greatest possible accumulation of actual sins could add nothing
to the penal desert which attaches to everyone on account of this
so-called disease. Nor can we regard it as other than natural that
the doctrine in this form has been repudiated by many who, to
avoid recognizing as guilt anything that lies wholly outside a man’s
own action, prefer to describe original sin as an evil.

The doctrine, however, is given this incredible turn and acquires
its repellent and offensive tone only when, alike against the nature
of things, and in opposition to a true and generally recognized
principle,+ original sin is divorced from actual sin. Yet this is not
to be understood in the sense that original sin is not guilt until it
breaks forth in actual sins, for the mere circumstance that there
has been no opportunity for and no outward incentive to sin cannot
enhance the spiritual status of man ; it is to be understood rather
as implying that in the individual original sin is the sufficient
ground of all actual sins, so that only something else outside of him,
and not anything new within him, is needed for the generation of
actual sin. Original sin is purely a thing received only in the degree
in which the individual is not yet spontaneously active, and it
ceases to be such in the degree in which that activity is developed.
Up to that point, and in that measure, it is rightly termed origin-
ated,* as having its cause outside the individual. None the less,


* Melanchth., Loc., p. 110: Itaque semper cum malo originali simul sunt
actualia peccata.


? Peccatum originis originatum.


§ 71] THE GUILT OF ORIGINAL SIN 287


as every predisposition in man attains by exercise to proficiency
and thereupon grows, so, by the exercise due to the voluntary
action of the individual, is there growth in congenital sinfulness.
But this growing increment, similar in character to what was
originally inherited, namely, a persistent inward ground of sinful
actions, though on the one side a result of actual sin, is yet in this
respect, as an intensified sinfulness, always anterior to the actual
sins emanating from it, and is therefore original sin, though no
longer merely ‘originated’ but individually committed; it is, in fact,
like the sin of our first parents which is usually designated by the
term originating original sin,‘ since it brings forth and increases
sin in oneself and others. Since, then, this later sinfulness which
has issued from the individual’s own action is one and the same
with that which was congenital in origin, it follows that, just as the
supervening sinfulness has arisen within him from voluntary acts
based upon the original sinfulness, so the latter, which in fact falls
more and more into the background in comparison with the former,
and which always forms his starting-point, does not continue in
him, and therefore would not have arisen through him, apart from
his will. We are thus justified in calling it the guilt of the in-
dividual. From this point of view it may doubtless be said that
the foregoing can hold good of human beings only in so far as they
themselves have acted, but not in the same sense of children or the
unborn. Here certainly there is a distinction not to be overlooked.
Since, however, it is an accepted fact that actual sin proceeds un-
failingly from original sin, then wherever human life exists, actual
sin has its root within, and the link in virtue of which original sin is
guilt exists also in the immature, even though as yet it has not mani-
fested itself in time. So that of them it may be said that they will
be sinners because of what is already within them. That they are
not such in the same sense and degree as those in whom actual sin
has become permanent has probably never been seriously questioned,
more especially as the reference here is exclusively to guilt. But
this difference does not touch congenital sinfulness, and so far as
the confessional passages which refer to children are chiefly bent on
bringing this out, we can altogether adopt them as our own.

2. Now if the sinfulness which is prior to all action operates in
every individual through the sin and sinfulness of others, and if,
again, it is transmitted by the voluntary actions of every individual
to others and implanted within them, it must be something


1 Peccatum originis originans.


288 THE CHRISTIAN FAITH {§ 71


genuinely common to all. Whether, in fact, we regard it as guilt and
deed or rather as a spirit and a state, it is in either case common to
all; not something that pertains severally to each individual and
exists in relation to him by himself, but in each the work of all, and
in all the work of each; and only in this corporate character,
indeed, can it be properly and fully understood. Hence the
doctrinal statements that deal with it are not to be regarded as
utterances of the individual consciousness, which fall to be treated
rather under the doctrine of actual sin, but are utterances of the
corporate consciousness. This solidarity means an interdependence
of all places and all times in the respect we have in view. The dis-
tinctive form of original sin in the individual, as regards its quality,
is only a constituent part of the form it takes in the circle to which
he immediately belongs, so that, though inexplicable when taken
by itself, it points to the other parts as complementary to it.
And this relationship runs through all gradations of community—
families, clans, tribes, peoples, and races—so that the form of sin-
fulness in each of these points to that present in the others as its
complement ; and the aggregate power of the flesh in its conflict
with the spirit (it being the source of everything in human action
which is incompatible with the God-consciousness), is intelligible
only by reference to the totality of those sharing a common life,
and never fully in any one part; and whatever of that power
appears in the single unit, whether personal or composite, is not to
be attributed to, or explained by, that unit alone. The like holds
good also of time. What appears as the congenital sinfulness of one
generation is conditioned by the sinfulness of the previous one, and
in turn conditions that of the later ; and only in the whole series of
forms thus assumed, as all connected with the progressive develop-
ment of man, do we find the whole aspect of things denoted by the
term, ‘ original sin.’ Moreover, the interconnexion of places and that
of times condition each other and indicate dependence on each other.
And every man will readily testify that it is only in relation to the
totality of things that either the idea of the sinfulness of individuals
or his sense of sharing it becomes to him certain and adequate. It
is precisely in virtue of this connexion, in fact, that the individual
is the representative of the whole race in this regard, for the sinful-
ness of each points to the sinfulness of all alike in space and time,
and also goes to condition that totality both around him and after
him.


In this view, moreover, the various expressions used to denote


§ 71] ITS CORPORATE NATURE 289


original sin—all of which have a relative truth—most readily find
their mutual reconciliation. Thus it can be called guilt} with
perfect accuracy only when it is regarded simply as meaning the
totality of the whole race, since it cannot in similar fashion be the
guilt of the individual, so far at least as it has been engendered in
him. It is called corruption of one’s nature 2 as contrasted with
the original perfection, inasmuch as the latter in its true develop-
ment has to some extent been subverted by original sin ; original
defect,? inasmuch as it is the source of all individual perversions of
the relation between the spirit and the several functions of our
sensuous life ; original disease,4 inasmuch as on its account an
element of death is lodged in every action of the spiritual life ;
original evil, inasmuch as in the individual it is a persistently opera-
tive cause of impediments to life which is independent of his own
action. How difficult it is to describe original sin—I will not say
wholly, but even partially—as punishment ® need hardly be em-
phasized, not only because punishment is always something inflicted
while sin can never be inflicted, so that punishment in the person
who suffers it must always be that which is not sin; but also
because in every sin for which original sin is supposed to be the
penalty original sin itself is always presupposed, and thus in the
last resort the punishment would precede the sin.

3. Were the phase of consciousness denoted by the concept of
original sinfulness thus far developed not a corporate feeling, but
one personal to the individual, it would not have necessarily bound
up with it the consciousness of a universal need of redemption ; for
each individual would think himself thrown primarily on his own
particular group for the increase of his spiritual strength. Hence
the denial of the corporate character of original sin and a lower
estimate of the redemption wrought by Christ usually go hand in
hand. Nor would the connexion of the two things be stronger if the
original sinfulness could exist in us without our being conscious of it,
since the consciousness of sin would either not emerge in us at all,
or would do so only in consequence of each actual sin as it occurred,
and be referred to that alone. In such case the individual would
primarily be thrown upon his own resources, falling back from his

1 Reatus. , ;

2 Corruptio naturae. Another interpretation of this phrase will be referred


to later. we
3 Vitium originis. wi :
4Morbus originis. On morbus and vitium, cf. Cicero, Tusculanae dis-
putationes, Thi, 83), Mba Sere means
6 A pol. Conf. i.: Defectus iustitiae originalis et concupiscentia sunt poenae.


19


290 THE CHRISTIAN FAITH [§ 72


weaker moments to his assumed stronger moments. This, however,
is possible only where the God-consciousness has not evolved at all,
or where the disposition towards it has not been aroused by com-
munication—only in a sphere, that is to say, outside Christianity
and Christian teaching. It is only when the God-consciousness has
been attained that we acknowledge its pre-eminence among the
elements of consciousness and strive for its supremacy ; and when
this takes place, the antagonism of the flesh, as a permanent factor
determinative of the actuality of individual sins, must also become
a fact of consciousness. Of this antagonism we only gain a clear
understanding when we regard it as belonging to our consciousness
as universalized to represent that of the human race ; hence we must
either abandon all our struggle for the supremacy of the God-con-
sciousness or else recognize our need of a succour lying outside the
sphere of that universalized self-consciousness ; which means that
for us there will either be a surrender to the absolute futility of any
such struggle, or a presentiment of such succour. We can now see
the appropriateness of linking the first consciousness of sin, due to
the accession of the God-consciousness, with the first presentiment
of redemption. And how the two have been conjoined in the Pro-
testant Church from the outset is made clear by the passages cited.
Equally clear is the connexion between the conviction that powers
beyond the existing corporate human consciousness cannot be set in
motion on our behalf and in our midst, and the resolve to do one’s
best (with that consciousness but without redemption properly so
called) to overcome, even if only partially, the antagonism of the
flesh.

4. This inherent connexion between the consciousness of a
universal original sinfulness and the sense of our need of a redemp-
tion is broken and set awry—not without serious detriment to
genuine Christian piety—when the idea that original sin ought to be
punished is thrust between the two. If punishment be taken to
mean, not the intensification of sin itself—which in a teleological
form of faith could be regarded only as further guilt and sin, so that
here the connexion specified would not be inherent—but the evil
that issues from sin or is ordained as its concomitant, then the sense
of our need of redemption as mediated solely by a consciousness of
penal desert will not be so pure as that described above. This is
quite clearly the case where penal desert is affirmed solely in view
of the punishment itself, and where it is supposed that the fear of
punishment will evoke or at least deepen the felt need of redemption


§ 72] ORIGINAL SIN NOT PUNISHED 291


from sin ; for in that case the removal of the state of sin is desired,
not with a view to freeing the God-consciousness from obstruction
and widening its scope, but in order to secure particular states of the
sensuous consciousness and avert their opposites. One’s motive for
not willing the antagonism of the flesh, and for willing redemption,
would then be merely the sensuous consequences of each, and here
accordingly piety in the real sense fades out. Again, it might be
thought that the matter to be considered is not so much punishment
itself as one’s deserving to be punished, and that the feeling to be
stimulated is not so much fear of punishment as the dread of de-
serving it. But here, too, the relation to the sensuous is made the
standard for the spiritual, the assumption in this case being that if
a given individual is not in himself concerned to make the God-
consciousness supreme, he may be induced to do so by the considera-
tion that otherwise he will appear as one unworthy of sensuous well-
being. And this view is as great a danger to Christian piety as the
other. It is on these grounds that we have not adopted this idea
here. From the symbolical passages cited, however, we can see how
essential it is for them to deduce the need of redemption from the
consciousness of sinfulness, but also how easy it is for us, without
breaking that connexion, to set aside the irrelevant idea of the
penal desert of original sin. The latter idea will be discussed in
its proper place.


§ 72. While the idea that we have thus developed cannot be applied in
precisely the same way to the first human pair, we have no
reason for explaining universal sinfulness as due to an altera-
tion in human nature brought about in their person by the
jirst sin.


1. This proposition, which is merely precautionary and is not
meant to settle anything regarding the way in which sin originated
in the first human pair, really assumes that, agreeably to our earlier
explanation,| we are not required to formulate any doctrine,
properly so called, upon the subject. While we can universalize
our self-consciousness to represent the consciousness of the whole
human race, and thus bring it into connexion with the God-con-
sciousness, yet just because of what in our first parents was definitely
and precisely related to the fact that they were not born but created,
we cannot include them in that community of consciousness, their
consciousness being, so far, the opposite of ours. It is true that if


1Cf. § 15.


292 THE CHRISTIAN FAITH [§ 72


the point at issue were their sin during the further course of their
life, the diversity would gradually disappear, but it is otherwise with
a sinfulness which we assume to be prior to all action. Hence, since
we can have no experience in common with our first parents in this
regard, and have therefore no testimony of consciousness on the
matter to set forth, we have likewise no relevant doctrine to formu-
late.1 If, however, we had any knowledge from another source
(whether speculative or more historical) as to the relation between
sinfulness in them and their nature as created beings, it would of
course be necessary to inquire how such knowledge was related to
our doctrinal statements ; and, so far as such knowledge was not
purely historical, but interwoven with our own presuppositions and
theories, precautions could then be taken, as is done here, to prevent
the Christian from unwittingly framing doctrines incompatible with
his faith. After all, our consciousness of sin and its connexion with
the longing for redemption will always remain absolutely the same
whatever may have been the circumstances of the first pair, unless
it be maintained that so long as the begetting and training of
children was their task they had not yet sinned ; for in that case a
still larger area would be excluded from the sphere of our univer-
salized self-consciousness, since the elements of original sinfulness
might then have come together only by degrees. If, however, it is
assumed that they had already sinned at that stage, their earliest
offspring might, like ourselves, have a sinfulness existing prior to all
action of their own, and derived from a source outside their own
being. And this will sufficiently serve our purpose here, even
though we thereby gain no clear idea of how that sinfulness passed,
and still passes, from the first pair to their posterity. And, after
all, no special importance is attached to this point in our symbolical
books, which, while tracing the loss of innocence in all later human
beings to the rise of sin in the earliest, yet in some cases do not enter
upon further explanations as to the nature and mode of this in-
fluence, and in others actually renounce the problem.?

2. On the other hand, the question how sin originated in our
first parents after their God-consciousness had developed is, though
not a question arising directly out of the interests of Christian piety,
nevertheless a most natural one. Obviously we cannot answer it

ICES 600m:

* Conf. Aug. li. ; Apol. Conf. i.; Conf. Helv. viii. ; Conf. Belg. xv.; Art.
Smale. i.


* Conf. Gall. x.: Nec putamus necesse esse inquirere, quinam possit hoc
peccatum ab uno ad alterum propagari,


§ 72] THE FALL 293


in their case with the same assurance as we answer it in our own by
propositions elaborated here. To begin with, we cannot frame any
clear idea of how in them the sensuous functions gained power
before the spiritual ; for the first pair must from the outside have
stood upon a level similar to that on which, in those who are born,
the spirit already is a power. If, then, we are to regard the God-
consciousness as evolving in them from within or by means of a
communion with God which we cannot adequately figure to our-
selves, no reason can be given why it should have developed more
potently and rapidly as an inactive consciousness, but more tardily
and feebly as impulse to action. And the less so because, in the
case of such a development from within, we have no grounds what-
ever for assuming an unequal growth of intelligence and will such as
we might find where the two factors received unequal stimulus—the
one by communicated ideas, the other from customs already pre-
valent. Nor can we imagine any one-sided tendency—except that
of sex—inherent in the first pair in this or any other respect, since
otherwise the profusion of diverse characters which experience now
reveals could not have developed from them as being an epitome of
human nature. Since, then, in the nature of things, analogy fails
us here, all turns upon the endeavour to elucidate the genesis of sin
in the first pair apart from an already existent sinfulness. But
whether we take the narrative of the first sin literally or ascribe to
it a universal significance, the attempt seems doomed to failure.
The prevalent interpretations are that man sinned through the
seductions of Satan! and by a misuse of his own free will.? In the
present instance these two factors cannot well be separated com-
pletely, for sin is always a misuse of free will. On the other hand,
the more we ascribe to the action of Satan, the more nearly the
temptation approximates to magic or mere compulsion, and the
human act and therefore also the sin are correspondingly less. But
again, the less the temptation of Satan, the less is it possible to
explain the facts apart from a sinfulness already present, since mis-
use of free will by itself is no explanation, but forces us to assume
something else as prompting it. Then if we fall back directly upon
the suggestions of Satan, these again could not have taken effect
unless there was something already present in the soul which implied
a certain readiness to pass into sensuous appetite ; and any such


1 Conf. Belg. xiv.: verbis et imposturis diaboli aurem praebens. Cf.


Gerh., Loc. Th., t. iv. p. 294 sq.
? Augustin., Enchivid. 30: Homo libero arbitrio male utens et se perdidit


et ipsum,


294 THE CHRISTIAN FAITH (§ 72


inclination toward sin must therefore have been present in the first
pair before their first sin, else they would not have been liable to
temptation. Nor does it avail to break up the first sin into a
number of elements with a view to finding some infinitesimal part
as its germ ;! for when what we have to deal with is a definite act,
we must seek for something that will explain the act as a whole.
And this we can never find as long as we assume an inner state in
which there was no spontaneous activity of the flesh, and the God- |
consciousness alone held sway ; for in that case no sinful appetite
could ever have arisen in the pair themselves, nor could Satan have
made them believe that God had forbidden something out of
jealousy, but their trust in God must already have been extinguished.
But if such trust had died out, they must already have lost the
image of God,? and sinfulness must already have been present,
whether in the form of pride * or otherwise. Our last resource would
then be to explain the first sin as due to such a misuse of freedom
as had no ground whatever in the first man’s inward being, 1.e. to
say that he chose the evil without a motive. But either this must
have taken place prior to his having had any exercise in the good
at all, since even the briefest exercise would have induced a facility
which, in the absence of conflicting motives, would necessarily have
proved operative, in which case his sin must have been his first free
act—the least admissible of all positions ; or else there was an impos-
sibility that repetition of actions should produce any facility in the
first pair, and this again would imply that no confirmation in good
and no increase in the power of the God-consciousness was possible
for them 4—an idea that conflicts with every view of man’s original
perfection.

This difficulty of representing to ourselves the emergence of the
first sin without assuming a foundation for it in a prior sinfulness is
immensely aggravated if we consider the circumstances in which
the Mosaic narrative exhibits the first pair. For one thing, it is


1 Luther, on Gen. 3%, finds the beginning of sin in the fact that Eve tampers
with God’s word, and adds to God’s command the word ‘ perhaps’; as if
that would have been a sin unless the emergent wanton appetite had not lain
behind it. Others, like Lyra, insist rather upon the sensuous pleasure itself,
and regard the act of looking at the tree as the beginning of the sin; but here
a like criticism applies.

* Non est anima ad imaginem Dei, in qua Deus non semper est (Ambros.
Hexaém. vi. 18).

* Augustin., d. Gen. c. Man. ii. 22: Videmus his verbis per superbiam
peccatum esse persuasum.

* Origen. in Matth. x. 11: Idd re ab odk dv, dorelas Kal dmeraBdhrou Picews
ay dd Tob KaAod dméorpepev dv, mera Td Xpnuarloa Sikatos éx THs StKacoovvys avTod,
éml TO Tojom adiKklav.


§ 72] THE FALL 295


almost impossible to conceive of temptation, or of the abuse of free
will, amid such simplicity of life, and where the natural wants were
so easily satisfied ; since in such a condition of things no single
object could have offered an exceptionally strong allurement. And
again, it is quite impossible to imagine a direct intercourse with
God without an intensified love to God and an increased knowledge
of Him which must have preserved our first parents from the in-
fluence of foolish illusions. This has indeed been recognized from
early times. And, indeed, in view of the ease with which sin might
have been avoided, the more literally we accept the narrative, the
greater is the propensity to sin which must be assumed as already
present. Indirectly this appears to be assumed even by those who
assert that God did not will to confirm man in good prior to his
voluntary obedience.? For,. as such confirmation in good must
have been a special work of God, and not something effected by
the exercise of powers lodged in human nature, this fact, while
presupposing the above-mentioned incapacity to acquire facility
through exercise, also presupposes that, without such special divine
aid, the spiritual energy in man might quite as readily at any moment
have proved too weak to meet a sensuous impulse.

3. With this is connected the fact that, apart from the vitiating
power exercised even in our condition of innate sinfulness by actual
sin in strengthening inclination by habit, nothing of a peculiar or
novel nature took place in our first parents as a result of the first
sin ;? and that what is represented in our symbolical books as such
a result must be assumed to have preceded the sin. The under-
standing must have been involved in an utterly heathen darkness
before it could have credited a falsehood to the effect that God
grudged man the knowledge of good, and the will must have lacked
the energy to resist even the weakest enticement if the mere sight of
the forbidden fruit could exert such power over it. In fact, Adam
must have been sundered from God before his first sin ; for, when
Eve handed him the fruit he ate it without even recalling the divine
interdict ; and this presupposes a like corruption of his nature ; for
surely incorrupt nature could not have indulged appetite in express

1 Augustin., de cory. et grat. xii.: Adam et terrente nullo et insuper contra
Dei terrentis imperium libero usus arbitrio non stetit in tanta non peccandi
facilitate.

2See Gerhard, Loc. Th., t. iv. p. 302.

3 Conf. Helv. ix.: Post lapsum intellectus obscuratus est, voluntas vero
ex libera facta est serva.—Conf. Belg. xiv.: Homo se ipsum verbis diaboli


aurem praebens . . . a Deo, qui vera ipsius erat vita, penitus avulsit totamque
naturam suam corrupit.


296 THE CHRISTIAN FAITH (§ 72


disobedience to the divine command. Nor can it fairly be main-
tained that this reasoning hangs entirely on a literal interpretation
of the Mosaic narrative, for, whatever idea we may have of the first
sin, we must always assume the priority of some sinful element ;
and if we seek to understand that sin genetically, we must follow a
method akin to that adopted here. If, however, human nature in
the first pair was the same before the first sin as it appears subse-
quently alike in them and in their posterity, we cannot say that
human nature was changed as a result of the first sin, and the state-
ment of our symbolical books to that effect is one we must depart
from. No one can be asked to believe that in a single individual the
nature of the species could be changed and yet that individual re-
main the same ; for the terms ‘ individual ’ and ‘ species ’ lose their
meaning unless everything met with in the individual, whether suc-
cessively or simultaneously, can be understood from and explained
by the nature of the species. If an individual belonging to a certain
species manifests some attribute incompatible with the definition
of the species, then either the definition of the species has been
wrong from the start and needs to be corrected, or we were misled
as to the identity of the individual. Still less is it possible to
suppose that such an alteration of nature should have resulted from
an act of the alleged individual as such, since the individual can act
only im accordance with the nature of his species, but never can act
upon that nature. Hence we cannot well hold to the idea under
discussion without conceding a share in the matter to the devil ; and
if we do this, we find an equal difficulty in avoiding the Manichean
heresy.’ For if it is quite certain that an alteration in a determinate
nature cannot be effected by that nature itself, the actual alteration
can be apportioned between the man and the devil only in this way,
that the element of action is ascribed to the latter, and mere pas-
sivity, or receptivity, to the former. But in that case, it must be
further admitted that, if the individuals are to remain the same, it is
a mere confusion of speech to describe the outcome as merely an
alteration of their nature, and that it is more correct to say that the
human nature which God originally created was destroyed by the
devil through the first sin, when the nature acquired is the work of
the devil in the same degree as was the first sin, because the nature
created by God so remained purely passive as to allow itself to be
completely permeated by the alteration wrought by the devil. To
the view that of course in that case the counter-change to be wrought
CE, Gua,


§ 72) DANGER OF MANICHAISM 207


by redemption is once more a subversion of preceding nature, little
objection can be taken by those who maintain that the present
nature of man is incapable even of appropriating redemption.!
These things, however—alike the passivity of man in the event by
which his nature was subverted, and the power ascribed to Satan
of subverting the work of God and putting his own work in its place,
so as to bring an entire world of human beings under its partial
control—are quite unmistakable approaches to Manicheism. And
what is said on the other side in order to nullify this adjunct of the
Flacian teaching ? seems to have very little foundation indeed. For,
on the one hand, bare possibility is nothing except as there is a
transition to actuality, and if man now cannot act otherwise than
sinfully and perversely, and such self-determination to evil is the
work of Satan, the still remaining work of God, so far as it is actuated
by the work of Satan, now subsists only as an instrument of Satan,
and is therefore only seemingly the same as it was. On the other
hand, if the original work of God consisted not merely in man’s
ability to think, speak, and act, but also in the free will that sets
these capacities in operation, then if free will is lost, the work of
God no longer has any existence. To this difficulty of avoiding on
the ordinary line of thought everything of a Manichean character
is probably due the hypothesis which, while admitting a change in
human nature in consequence of the first sin, still regards it as
operating rather in a bodily way.’ In order to keep clear of the
idea that the change, namely, the loss of the power of the God-
consciousness, was not prior to the sin, it is not said to have been
preceded by any express interdict of God ; but in that case it is not
blameworthy in the first pair to have been unwilling to acknowledge
the authority of obscure sentiments: and the resolve to suppress
these, whatever the occasion of it, could not be reckoned sinful.
And thus the spiritual vitiation of man following upon the eating of
the forbidden fruit, and brought about by the effect thereof upon
the body, would have taken place without sin at all, and universal
sinfulness would be attributable to evil—a conclusion which, con-
flicting as it does with the essence of a teleological type of faith,
cannot be regarded as Christian, especially as the administration of


1 Solid. Decl. ii., p. 656.
2 Solid. Decl., p. 648: Asserimus id ipsum esse Dei opus, quod homo


aliquid cogitare loqui agere operari potest . .. quod vero cogitationes
verba facta eius prava sunt .. . hoc originaliter et principaliter est opus
Satanae.


3 Reinhard, Dogm., §§ 75-80.


298 THE CHRISTIAN FAITH [§ 72


a material antidote at the right time would have rendered redemp-
tion superfluous.

We must accordingly adhere to the position that the idea of
a change in human nature entailed by the first sin of the first pair
has no place among the propositions which rank as utterances
of our Christian consciousness. The less we found cause at a
previous stage ! to ascribe a high degree of religious morality and
religious enlightenment to the first pair before their first sin, and
the less we are able to explain the first sin as proceeding from a
perfectly sinless condition, the more decisively does every reason
disappear for admitting that a change in human nature was then
produced. The grounds of our renouncing that idea will be all the
stronger because it cannot be clearly presented to the mind, and on
the one hand merely begets the Manicheean heresy, while on the
other it drives many Christians, from mere dread thereof, into the
Pelagian heresy, in that they will rather deny the universal in-
capacity of all men apart from redemption for good than derive that
incapacity from such a change. The untenable character of the
theory of a change, moreover, becomes specially evident when we
go back to the rigid formule in which the older dogmaticians gave
unqualified expression to the confessional view.?. Thus the very first
statement, namely, ‘the person corrupts the nature,’ brings out
clearly the fact that, in the act in question, if the nature corrupted
in consequence of it was good, the person cannot have been good,
for good cannot corrupt good ; but if the nature was already bad,
its corruption had not been brought about by the action of the
person. Similarly on the other alternative : if the person no longer
was good (since in corrupting the nature it acted wrongly), while
the nature was good still, since it required to be corrupted, then all
wrong action on the part of all later individuals must be explicable
apart from the hypothesis that their nature had to be corrupted
beforehand. In that case all corruption would fall under the third
formula, namely, that persons corrupt themselves and one another ;
which manifestly is an adequate description of all the sin that ever
appears amongst men. Here, however, the nature is kept out of the
matter altogether ; whereas, if it is assumed that the nature had
already been corrupted, there can be no talk of its corrupting the

1 Cf. § 61.

2 Quenstedt, Syst. Theol., p. 913: Tribus autem modis fit peccatum
quando persona corrumpit. naturam, ut factum ab Adamo et Eva, quando


natura corrumpit personam, ut fit in propagatione peccati originis, quando
persona corrumpit personam, ut fit in peccatis actualibus.


§ 72] NATURE AND PERSON 299


person, since the person must necessarily have within itself the cor-
ruption of the nature. Finally, if the second formula, namely, ‘ the
nature corrupts the person,’ is meant to refer to the propagation of
original sinfulness, then, while it is true that individuals can only
be as their nature is, they are nevertheless such from the first ; and
the form of expression is faulty, since they must have been uncorrupt
before they could be corrupted. This, in turn, gives rise to fresh
doubts about the first formula, for it is inconceivable that the in-
dividual person should do more to the nature than the nature to it.
Were we to admit, however, and to admit as universally true that
the nature corrupts the individual, then since the nature has no
existence save in the totality of individuals, a fourth formula would
emerge, namely, that the nature corrupts itself ; a statement by the
use of which hardly anyone could indicate the thoughts he really
had in his mind.

4. If, accordingly, no change in human nature took place in the
person of the first pair as a result of their first sin, and what is
alleged to have developed from that sin must be assumed to have
been in existence before it ; and if this does not apply merely to
the case of some particular first sin, but a like situation emerges
(whatever the nature of that sin may have been) in the case of
every individual ; then the universal sinfulness that precedes every
actual sin in the offspring is to be regarded not so much as derived
from the first sin of our first parents, but rather as identical with
what in them likewise preceded the first sin, so that in committing
their first sin they were simply the first-born of sinfulness. It is true
that our confessional books adopt the derivation in question,’ but
in such matters we are the less obliged to follow them because our
consciousness of universal sinfulness, as set forth above,? is some-
thing inward and immediate, while that derivation of it gives a
purely external account on which the inward in no way depends,
and by which it cannot in any way be reinforced. But it is solely
on that inward experience that our consciousness of the need of
redemption depends; hence the derivation referred to is in no
sense an element of our faith. And as even the confessional books
for the most part do not engage in any detailed discussion as to
the nature and manner of that derivation,? we could not but feel

1 Conf. Aug. ii.; Apol. Conf. i.; Conf. Helv. viii.; Conf. Belg. xv. ; Art.
Smale. i., etc.

3 The Conf. Gall. x. says explicitly : Nec putamus necesse esse inquirere
quinam possit hoc peccatum ab uno ad alterum propagari. Similarly Calvin,


300 THE CHRISTIAN FAITH (§ 72


a difficulty if the derivation occurred in Scripture in conjunction
with statements of faith properly so called. But the classical
passage usually cited in its support 1 shows nothing of the kind.
The apostle refers to the origin of sin only with a view to
elucidating the doctrine of the restoration of life through Christ,
and the point of comparison is simply that each originates in
and emanates from one. It is true that the apostle sets forth
sin as dependent upon its first occurrence, and thus as something
continuous, so that the whole continuous process of sin was
introduced along with Adam’s sin, and if Adam had been able
to refrain from sin, we too could have refrained. Then if we
take also the previous statement, namely, that death passed upon
all men for that all sinned themselves, and observe how Paul, while
he certainly distinguishes between the sin of Adam and that of
those who had not sinned after the likeness of Adam’s transgression,
yet, though including all in one condemnation, describes Adam’s
contribution thereto as a small thing in comparison with what
Christ had done for the removal of sin ; we see that all this signally
agrees with the idea that corporate sin is the corporate act of the
human race, originating in the first human beings, and can be taken
away only by the activity of Christ, which likewise extends to all
mankind. In similar fashion Paul contrasts Adam and Christ in
another reference ;2 just as again he testifies that sin arises in us,
and that our mind can be defiled, in the same way as in the case of
Eve ;? whence it follows that in going back to the first man for an
explanation of sinfulness, we gain nothing of special importance, and
that in the passages cited the sole concern was to give due weight
to the relation between the earlier and the later dispensation.

We can thus readily dispense with all those artificial theories
which for the most part tend only to lay stress upon the divine
justice in imputing Adam’s sin to, and exacting its penalty from, his
posterity. To have done with them is all the more satisfactory
because they (e.g. those which assert that all mankind, as embraced
in Adam’s being,* participated in his sin) rest upon a particular


Instit. ii. 1, 7: Neque in substantia carnis aut animae causam habet con-
tagio: sed quia a Deo ita fuit ordinatum, ut quae primo homini dona con-
tulerat, ille tam sibi quam suis haberet simul et perderet. From which we
see clearly that Calvin’s main concern is to repudiate explanations which
might have links of connexion with non-Christian views.

STROM WS haa 2p Cori. 1524322- 2 | Corts

*Ambros., in Rom. v.: Manifestum in Adam omnes peccasse quasi in
massa.—Ex eo igitur cuncti peccatores quia ex ipso omnes sumus.—Hieron.,
in Hosea vi. 7: Et ibi in paradiso omnes praevaricati sunt in me in simili-
tudinem praevaricationis Adam,


§ 72] ADAM AND HIS POSTERITY 301


theory of the origin of individual souls, while, within our limits, we
have neither grounds nor materials for propounding any such theory.
Or else (e.g. those which most arbitrarily interpret God’s command
as a covenant made in the person of Adam with the entire human
race, the legal consequences of violating which fall also on his
posterity) they bring man’s relation to God and God’s imputation
of sin under the category of a merely external legal relationship, a
view which has had a most detrimental effect upon interpretation
of the work of redemption. This view is carried to its extremest
point when people assume what has often been asserted and is
widely current, though quite arbitrary and wholly groundless, that,
had our first parents only withstood their first temptation success-
fully, no second would have been imposed upon them, and they, and
we as well, would have remained for ever exempt from all tempta-
tion. The truth is rather that the temptation given in the Mosaic
narrative is a most trifling one, representing the simplest and most
primitive conditions ; and it is in the nature of things that the more
variously the powers of man came to be drawn upon, and the more
complicated his circumstances became, the more dangerous must his
temptations have been; while again, it seems the very acme of
inconsistency to say that the Redeemer could be tempted in His
earthly life, but that, if Adam and Eve had been victors in their
first conflict, they would have become proof against all temptation.
And indeed it is glaringly and intrinsically incompatible with all
that we can learn of the divine ways, to suppose that to such an
extent God should have made the destiny of the whole human race
contingent upon a single moment, the fortunes of which rested with
two inexperienced individuals, who, moreover, never dreamt of its
having any such importance.

5. If then, on the one hand, we discard the view that a change
took place in human nature itself, but, on the other, still maintain
that an incapacity for good is the universal state of men, it follows
that this incapacity was present in human nature before the first sin,
and that accordingly what is now innate sinfulness was something
native also to the first pair. This we admit ; yet it must be so con-
strued as to be compatible with the equally inherent original perfec-
tion of man, and in such a way that the state of the first human pair
is understood to have been throughout analogous to our own, as
described above.!_ Inno sense, therefore, are we substituting for the
idea of a longer or shorter state of perfectly active piety, the idea

1 CE, §§ 60, 61, 68,


302 THE CHRISTIAN FAITH [§ 72


that the first free act after the awakening of the God-consciousness
was sin—a conception already negatived by what has been said
above.! The truth is rather that the awakening of the God-con-
sciousness implies also the initiation of the good, which in turn could
not remain without consequences ? that proved operative even after
the first sin. In that case, however, there must have come for our
first parents a time when their sensuous nature on one side or another
would gain such strength that it could win the mastery as easily. as
lose it. For, while we cannot be expected to form a vivid idea of
the first man in his necessary diversity from us, yet there are two
points in which he resembles us, and to which in him, too, we can
fasten the rise of sin. Thus there was in the first pair, if not the
idiosyncrasies of personal constitution, yet the idiosyncrasies of sex ;
and, again, while we cannot conceive of the will lagging behind the
intelligence precisely as it does in ourselves, yet they were subject (in
their simple life possibly in a less degree) to changes of mood amid
which such shortcoming of will-power showed itself intermittently
on various sides. In the light of all this, the origin of sin and the
consciousness of it become quite intelligible.

Now, while the first appearance of sin in the first pair, due to
that original sinfulness, not only was in itself a single and trivial
event, but in particular was without any transforming influence upon
human nature, yet the growth of sin in consequence of the increase
of the human race by ordinary generation had its origin in the first
emergence of sin, and therefore in the original sinfulness itself. And
in its relation to redemption this is to be understood in the sense
that without the entrance into all mankind of an element free from
that sinfulness, nothing could be expected but that the disposition
to the God-consciousness inherent in human nature should be con-
stantly vitiated in its action, and everything that was developing
spiritually in man ever dragged downwards under the dominion of the
flesh. Finally, as regards the Mosaic narrative : in accordance with
the limits which we have assigned to Dogmatics, that science cannot
be expected to determine how the said record is to be interpreted,
and whether it purports to be history or allegory. Without en-
croaching upon the work of exegesis or criticism, however, we can


UCie S167 2s

2? Hugo of St, Victor, Opp. iii. 181: Paradisus est locus inchoantium et
in melius proficientium, et ideo ibi solum bonum esse debuit, quia creatura a
malo initianda non fuit, non tamensummum. This implies, of course, that
as soon as sin appeared, the state of Paradise must have come to an end
altogether,


§ 72] ADAM AND EVE 303


use the story, as the early theologians did,! in illustration of the uni-
versal process of the rise of sin as something always and everywhere
the same, and it is in this illustrative quality that, for us, the universal
significance of the narrative resides. There we find in Eve, on the
one hand, a clear representation of the independent activity and re-
volt of the sensuous element that develops so readily upon any ex-
ternal incentive by way of opposition to a divine command, and like-
wise a clear view of how there comes to be conjoined therewith an all
too easily effected vitiation of the already developed God-conscious-
ness. On the other hand, in Adam we see how easily sin is assimi-
lated by imitation even without any overpowering activity of sense,
and how this presupposes some degree of forgetfulness of God, trace-
able possibly to mere lack of thought. If, moreover, we bring the
story into connexion with the ideas of original perfection and original
sinfulness as formulated here, by connecting the earlier state with
the later, it sets before us in general how outside the sphere of redemp-
tion the good develops only alongside what is bad, and how this good in-
cludes that knowledge of the distinction between good and evil which
is essential to the development of man. It is plainly indicated in
the story that that knowledge was not bestowed prior to the sin, and
this,can easily be extended into the view that man could only have
remained without sin as long as he remained without that knowledge.

6. If, accordingly, for the contrast between an original nature
and a changed nature we substitute the idea of a human nature uni-
versally and without exception—apart from redemption—the same ;
and if, for the contrast between an original righteousness that filled
up a period of the first human lives and a sinfulness that emerged in
time (an event along with which and in consequence of which that
righteousness disappeared), we substitute a timeless original sinful-
ness always and everywhere inhering in human nature and co-exist-
ing with the original perfection given along with it—though in such
a way that from the concomitance and development of the two there
could issue no active righteousness properly so called, but at best a
vacillation between vitiated spiritual efforts and increasing and fully
matured sin ; if, finally, for the antithesis between an original guilt
and a transmitted guilt we substitute the simple idea of an abso-
lutely common guilt identical for all; then the confessional formule
in which this doctrine in its relation to the succeeding one is most


1 Augustin., de Gen. c. Man. ii. 21: Etiam nunc in unoquoque nostrum nil
aliud agitur, cum ad peccatum delabitur, quam tunc actum est in illis tribus,
serpente, muliere, et viro.


304 THE CHRISTIAN FAITH (§ 73


succinctly expressed may be qualified and supplemented as follows.
In the first place, we certainly admit a universal imputation of
the first sin, an imputation resting upon the belief that to
whatever human individual had fallen the lot of being the first,
he, too, would have committed the sin. So, too, had the actually
first man been one of those born later, he would have added his
quota to the deterioration above described, and therefore bears
the guilt thereof as does any other. Further, in the doctrine
of the Church the first sin of the first man, and that only, is
called ‘ originating original sin,’ and the sinful constitution of all
other men ‘ originated original sin ’—the bent and inward disposi-
tion thus bearing the name of ‘sin’ equally with the act itself; but
we transfer this to the relation between each earlier generation and
the one immediately succeeding it, and maintain that the actual sin
of the earlier is always the originating original sin for the later, while
the sinfulness of the later generation since it produces the actual sins
thereof, is also original sin, while yet as dependent upon the sin of
the earlier it is originated, and thus is originated original sin as well.
Finally, we make good another defect by applying the distinction of
‘ originating ’ and ‘originated’ also to actual sin in its relation to
original sin. On the one hand, we use this distinction to set forth
the interrelationship of all who are living at one time, the actual sin
of those who play a more vigorous and stimulating rdle being the
originating, that of the more passive the originated; on the other hand,
the collective sin of each generation is in turn originating with respect
to the sinfulness of the succeeding one, just as that collective sin itself
is rooted in the original sin originated by the earlier. In this com-
pact group of ideas sin in general, and original sin in particular, are
seen to be the corporate action and the corporate guilt of the whole
human race.


SECOND DocTRINE: ACTUAL SIN


§ 73. In all men, original sin is always issuing in actual sin.


Melanchthon, Loc. Th., p. 123: Semper cum peccato originali sunt
peccata actualia. Augustine c. Julian.: Lex ista quae est in membris .. .
manet in carne mortali . . . quia operatur desideria contra quae dimicant
fideles.—Conf. Gall. xi.: Dicimus praeterea hanc perversitatem semper edere
fructus aliquos malitiae et rebellionis, adeo ut etiam qui sanctitate excellunt
quamvis ei resistant, multis tamen infirmitatibus et delictis sint contaminati
quamdiu in hoc mundo versantur.


1. This proposition is to be taken in its most universal sense ;
it is only as we exclude Him from the context of universal sinfulness


§ 73] ACT UALSSIN (9 305


that we acquit even Christ of actual sin. Taken thus universally,
however, it is an expression of our Christian consciousness. The
more definitely and vividly anyone sets the Redeemer before him,
the more he realizes that he is at no moment free from sin. He
knows this, however, not simply from his own personal idiosyncrasy,
but in a universal way, e.g., inasmuch as he is a constituent portion
of humanity as a whole ; 7.e. he knows it through his consciousness as
enlarged to a racial consciousness, and thus knows it true of others as
well as of himself. And this consciousness goes back to that of
universal sinfulness; it is, in fact, simply the latter from
another point of view. For the disposition to sin, of which our
apprehension is at once inward and timeless, would not be a
reality at all unless it were constantly manifesting itself; and
conversely, that which does manifest itself would merely be
something adhering to us from without and therefore no sin,
unless it formed part of the manifestation and temporal process
of original sin. And just as all that is involved in original
sin must manifest itself somewhere in the measure in which
it is variously distributed among men, so it necessarily has
a part in every act (Bewegung) of every man in whom it is present
and makes some element thereof to be sin in manifestation. Thus
throughout the entire range of sinful humanity there is not
a single perfectly good action, 1.e. one that purely expresses the
power of the God-consciousness ; nor is there one perfectly pure
moment, 7.e. one in which something does not exist in secret
antagonism to the God-consciousness.

2. It would not at all harmonize with this universal conscious-
ness, however, were we to restrict actual sin to those cases in which
our sinfulness breaks forth externally in actions perceptible by
others as well as by ourselves. Such outbreakings of sin always
depend upon external conditions—conditions quite different from
those that have brought about this or that definite sinful state.
Just as those last, the external solicitations, can evoke only such
inner movements as are already prepared for in the personality of
the individual, so the sinfulness of one’s condition cannot depend
upon the occurrence of circumstances favourable or unfavourable
to its outward manifestation. In point of fact, the sinfulness of a
man’s condition is not in itself really aggravated by its finding
external expression, for actual sin in the precise sense is present
even where the sinful element shows itself only internally, and
enters into a moment of consciousness merely as a thought or a


20


306 THE CHRISTIAN FAITH (8 73


desire.! Just as love, as an inward affection, is the fulfilling of the
law, since it infallibly manifests itself in outward act on every given
opportunity, so, for the same reason, evil desire, though working
only within, is already actual sin. And this is a principle which, if
we take the term ‘ desire ’ in its widest sense, applies to all actual sin,
with the exception perhaps of those cases in which the activity of
the God-consciousness seems to be obstructed only by slothfulness ;
although these cases, too, may well be traced to a desire that only
awaits its opportunity. Any explanation of actual sin, whether
more or less general, will be valid only in so far as it teaches
that actual sin springs from an underlying sinfulness, and as
it can easily be united with the consciousness of the need of
redemption.?

While we regard the original sinfulness from which all actual
sin proceeds as the corporate act and the corporate guilt of
the human race—distributed among individuals in respect of
place and time not equally and uniformly, but unequally—
yet this means no more than that in one individual one type
of sin is specially predominant and another less so, while in
another individual the case is reversed, according as in each
case, conformably with his personal temperament, a weaker
enticement only is needed for one kind of sin than for another.
It must certainly not be taken to mean that, apart from
redemption, any given individual is so well secured by his person-
ality against any of the various forms of sin that he could not
possibly fall into it. On the contrary, our consciousness testifies
in each of us that neither he nor any other, if thrown upon his
own resources, has within him a perfect security against any form
of evil; for every observant person discovers in himself so many
anticipations and, so to say, germs of all evil that, if only the
incentive that must always be added to the original sinfulness in
order to produce actual sin could become strong enough, any kind
of evil, if not habitually yet in particular cases, might emerge as
actual sin.®


* Actio pugnans cum lege Dei (Melanchthon, /.c.) might also denote such
a movement, as yet entirely inward.

* Hence, the Christian consciousness can least of all be satisfied with
theories like that of Reinhard (Dogmatik, § 75): Peccatum est quaevis aber-
ratio a modo tenendae verae felicitatis.


_* Calvin, Inst. ii. 3.3 : Omnibus ejusmodi portentis obnoxia est unaquaeque
anima,


§ 74] ARE ALL SINS EQUAL ? 307


§ 74. There is no difference of worth between men in regard to sin,
apart from the fact that it does not in all stand in the same
velationship to redemption.


1. In harmony with what has been said above, all actual sins
must rank as equal not only in respect of their nature and character,
but also of their origin; for every such sin is a manifestation of
the universal sinfulness, and represents a victory, though but
momentary or partial, of flesh over spirit. The determining power
of the God-consciousness, which in sin is obstructed, may of course
be greater or less. Now if it is greater, then on the one hand the
spiritual life in which it is found as such must be stronger, and in
such a life, by reason of that strength, sin is increasingly in process
of disappearing, and is therefore less. On the other hand, however,
we may affirm that if the spiritual strength is greater, the resistance
of the flesh that overcomes it must be stronger, and therefore the
sin greater. Since, therefore, from different points of view we get
opposite results as to the one and the same case of sin, we must
either regard all sins as equal, because from opposite points of view
each is at once greater and less ; or we must first combine the two
points of view, whereupon we find that the determination of the
sinful quality of single moments becomes feasible only by reference
to the condition of the acting subject as a whole, 7.e. his state as
one in which sinfulness is on the increase or on the wane—which,
within the sphere of the Christian consciousness, means by reference
to the individual’s state of grace, precisely as our proposition
affirms. Apart from this, however, and each moment being taken
by itself, it remains true that what gives a moment the character of
sin is the self-centred activity of the flesh, whereas the content of the
sin does not enable us to differentiate ; for all activities of the flesh
are good when subservient to the spirit, and all are evil when
severed from it. The same result follows when we note that the
amount of sin is greater, the slighter the outward solicitations
which need to be overcome. For these, too, are not the same for
everyone ; to a more experienced subject a particular solicitation
may be insignificant which to others is strong and urgent. Doubt-
less, therefore, there are greater and lesser sins, though for us they
are so only with respect to the efficacy of redemption ; and, accord-
ingly, Church teaching has rightly excluded from this sphere the
doctrine of the equality of all sins. Taken by itself, however, the


1 Conf. et Expos. simpl. viii.: Fatemur etiam peccata non esse aequalia,
licet ex eodem corruptionis et incredulitatis fonte exoriantur. Melanchth.,


308 THE CHRISTIAN FAITH (§ 74


doctrine might possibly be defended. Hence most of the ordinary
classifications of sin, disregarding as they do the relationship to
redemption, assert a distinction among sins as concerns their form
and appearance, but do not assert a difference in their proper
quality as sins.

2. Surveying the diversities of actual sin with a view to arranging
them in distinct groups, we encounter at the outset the two principal
forms which are associated with the two main elements of original
sinfulness ;! thus actual sin may be either more an expression of
appetite or more a positive obscuration, i.e. a vitiation, of the God-
consciousness. We cannot wholly separate the two, for the one ever
evokes the other ; thus when in any social group, some definite form
of appetite breaks out predominantly, it is presently followed by a
transformation of the God-consciousness as a means of cloaking the
discordance. So Paul 2? explains how each of the two aggravates the
other ; and if we imagine the two at their climax—the superstitious
frenzy that heaps up all the products of idolatrous error, and the
passionate frenzy of unbridled lust—and if each of them inevitably
seems equally deserving of condemnation, it is clear that they must
have been equal in their original action and reaction upon each other.

As regards the division into outward and inward sins, what was
said above ° with a view to setting aside this distinction might be
open at most to the following objection. The external accomplish-
ment of an act of sin occupies a divisible portion of time, and for the
most part can be resolved into a succession of moments. Now just
as it is obvious that, if a reaction of the God-consciousness takes
place during that time, a different quality emerges, so the sinful
quality of an action—other things being equal—is the more aggra-
vated the longer the interval in which no such reaction supervenes.
What follows from this, however, is simply that there are some
sinful acts that point to a greater power of sin than others ; but in
no sense does it follow that anyone is incapable of committing acts
of the same sinful quality, though not of the same kind as these. On
the other hand, it remains true that in every individual there are
inward stirrings, sinful or akin to sin, which never take shape as
outward sins because at bottom and even inwardly they are the
workings of others’ thoughts and excitations rather than his own,


Loc. Th, p. 126: Ac stoicae illae disputationes execrandae sunt, quas servant
aliqui disputantes omnia peccata aequalia esse.


' Apol. Conf. i. (from Hugo of St. Victor) : Originale peccatum est ignor-
antia in mente et concupiscentia in carne.


TISGopEn, WA ° In section 2 of the foregoing paragraph.


§ 74] DIVERSITIES OF ACTUAL SIN 309


and thus belong to the communal life rather than to the individual
himself. But there will be no one whose life exhibits these only,
and when we discount them the distinction between outward and
inward sins is seen to be fortuitous rather than essential.

Again, when a distinction is drawn between intentional and un-
intentional sins, it is customary to regard the former as in general
the greater. But this is wrong. Unintentional sins, so far as they
are really actions and not mere consequences,! are sins either of
ignorance or of impetuosity. But if the ignorance is due to a
defective estimate of the ethical significance of our actions generally,
or the impetuosity due to a passionate tendency of one kind or
another ; and if, on the other hand, a transient incapacity during an
instant peculiarly unfavourable to one’s resisting a sensuous impulse
can be thought of as a completely isolated moment having no subse-
quent results ; then intentional sins of the latter type will be lesser
than unintentional sins of the former type. If, accordingly, some-
times the one class may be greater, and sometimes the other, the
two, considered in themselves, are equal.

The most important division of sins in the present reference is
unquestionably that of mortal and venial sins ; yet as these terms
do not themselves involve a rigorous antithesis, it is difficult to say
what the distinction really means. Some thinkers ascribe to them
the very sense which is indicated in our proposition as constituting
the only tenable distinction ; ? in which case we should have to dis-
cuss only how far the idea of punishment must have a place in the
definition or not. Certainly, such interpretations make it quite
clear that otherwise the distinction rests solely on the relationship
of the acting subject to redemption. But this agreement seems
once more to vanish when it is likewise asserted that even those
who have been brought within the scope of redemption can commit
mortal sins, but that the redemptive link is thereby severed 3—

1Tn the latter case they would not be sins at all, and in view of this some


qualification must be applied to the principle found in Melanchth., Loc. Th.,
p. 117: Nihil est peccatum nisi sit voluntarium. Haec sententia de civilibus


delictis tradita est . . . sed non transferendum est hoc dictum ad doctrinam
Evangelii de peccato.

2 Melanchth., op. cit., p. 332: Haec mala in renatis sunt . . . sed quia
persona accepta est . . . fiunt huic personae haec mala venialia peccata; and


p. 123: actualia peccata quae in non renatis omnia sunt mortalia. The most
definite statement of this view is found in Baumgarten, Theol. Str. ii. 484:
Since, however, we do not admit this, namely, that mortalia and ventalia are
to be distinguished by a discrimen objectivum, but rather take the relation-
ship of the person concerned to the reconciliation brought by Christ as the
ground of distinction, etc.

’ Melanchth., op. cit., p. 124: Necesse est autem discernere peccata quae


310 THE CHRISTIAN FAITH [§ 74


a view the possibility of accepting which cannot be discussed
here.

As, however, the possibility of restoring the redemptive tie must
not be excluded, we are brought back, on the one hand, to the older
definition, according to which only those non-venial sins are ab-
solutely mortal in the interval between which and death no restora-
tion of the redemptive link takes place ;1 while, on the other, we
must now make a distinction amongst venial sins themselves, since
even mortal sins under certain conditions become venial ; and thus
the intrinsic distinction is lost. If to this we add the fact that the
sin against the Holy Spirit is thought by many to be a sin which
renders impossible any restoration of the link with redemption,
then, instead of a simple antithesis we get the following gradation.
Sins in themselves venial are those of the forgiven which can hardly
be avoided in the present life,2 and always carry their remission
with them ;? moreover, all the sins of the unforgiven become venial
should the unforgiven be converted, as also all intentional sins of
the redeemed, should they return to grace. Mortal sins again,
strictly so called,* are those of the two last-named groups should
the connexion with redemption not be respectively effected or
restored ; while the only absolutely mortal sin—assuming that the
exegesis is correct—is that against the Holy Spirit. Obviously,
however, the difference between sins in themselves venial (requiring
as they do repentance and prayer for pardon) and the mortal sins of
the forgiven (which become venial if by repentance the forgiven
again attain to the temporarily lost state of grace), is the less pro-
nounced the shorter the interval between the lapse and the recovery.
Indeed, in the light of the qualification ‘against conscience,’ this
difference might be traced back to that between intentional and
unintentional sins. Since, however, even in the state of grace the
power of the will always lags behind the intelligence even though the
knowledge of the sinfulness of one’s ordinary states becomes deeper,


in je in hac vita manent ab illis peccatis, propter quae amittuntur gratia
et fides.

* Augustine, de Corr. et Grat. 35: Ego autem id esse dico peccatum ad
mortem, fidem quae per dilectionem operatur deserere usque ad mortem.

* Augustine, de Spiy. et Litt. 48: non impediunt a vita aeterna iustum
quaedum peccata venialia, sine quibus haec vita non ducitur.

* Baumgarten, loc. cit. : For, although we say that they are called venialia
because they always carry remission with them . . .

*Melanchthon, Joc. cit.: Est igitur actuale mortale in labente post re-
conciliationem actio interior vel exterior pugnans cum lege Dei facta contra
conscientiam. p, 276: nec potest stare cum malo proposito contra con-
scientiam fides,


§ 74] SIN AGAINST THE HOLY SPIRIT 311


it follows that intentional sins will occur which, being as they are
associated with progress, cannot bring about a complete lapse from
grace. Ignoring this aspect of progress, some rashly contend that
the regenerate can no longer sin knowingly—‘ knowing ’ implying
at all events the lowest degree of ‘intentional’ ; whereas all we are
entitled to say (on the analogy of what was said regarding the re-
lationship of the individual man to his nature) is that he cannot by a
single act (an act, moreover, not exempt from the influence of
divine grace) wholly dispossess himself of this state of grace. In the
last resort, accordingly, there is no essential distinction except that
which is based upon the relations of the acting subject to redemp-
tion. As regards the sin against the Holy Spirit, that no doubt
would form a species by itself ; but as long as the interpretation of
the passages upon which the conception rests! is in dispute, Dog-
matics must leave the ascertainment of the facts to the exegetes—
just as it must leave to the pastoral office the handling of the case
where a man believes himself guilty of the sin, and cannot presume
to decide either what the sin is or in whom it is found. In general,
however, it must repudiate the suggestion that there may be a sin
which, though repented of in view of redemption, yet cannot be
forgiven, as setting a limit to the universality of redemption.

3. A like result follows from a closer study of those gradations
of human states relatively to sin which, taken directly from passages
of Scripture, or indirectly from popular exposition, have passed into
Dogmatics. Thus the state of freedom,? in contrast to that of
bondage, is taken to be that in which (conceived in its ideal form)
only sin in itself venial is to be found, this being due to a link with
redemption so stable and vital that unintentional sins in such a
life always are less grave than any intentional sin. The very term
‘bondage,’ however, as applied to the state in which sin is pre-
dominant implies that the man, by reason of his inward recognition
of the God-consciousness, is not fulfilling the demands of the flesh
with entire acquiescence. But if we reflect that freedom, as a
consequence of the link with redemption, can grow only out of a
state of bondage, we can see how freedom, in its gradual develop-
ment through exercise, will still continue to exhibit traces of bondage.
From the state of bondage, again, it is customary to distinguish as
still worse the states of self-assurance, hypocrisy, and hardening.
But if there should supervene a state worse than bondage, the
inward recognition just referred to must needs have been utterly


1 Matt. 1281, Luke 12°, = "Rom)) 615 -22)182)


312 THE CHRISTIAN FAITH (8 74


stifled. Yet, since even in the state of freedom it momentarily
falls silent, when sins of impetuosity are done, such silence could
only serve to introduce an altogether distinct state if it could be
regarded as continuous, and the inner voice as irretrievably extin-
guished ; and this is in fact the sense of the term hardening \—a
state which manifests itself most distinctly in a conscious and fixed
will not to give effect to the God-consciousness. This condition,
however, can never be more than approximated to, for the dis-
position to the God-consciousness is a constituent element of human
nature,” so that, even in such a vitiation of that consciousness as
ascribes human vices to the gods, the soul is never wholly without
a dim sense of the presence of something incompatible with the
God-consciousness. But were we to assume that that consciousness
is dead beyond recall,? and thus that the hardened soul is altogether
impervious to grace, we should be placing a particularistic limitation
on the sphere of redemption. The consciousness of the divine law,
accordingly, cannot be wholly wanting except when the God-
consciousness has not developed, 7.e. at a period prior to the state
of bondage. If in the individual soul the development is obstructed
by the power of the sensuous, this may be a state of brutishness ;
but that, too, would belong to the state of bondage, for the obstruc-
tive element is identical with that which impedes the efficacy of
what has already developed. The states of self-assurance and
hypocrisy,* lying between the two extremes of freedom and harden-
ing, do not stand in markedly different relations to these extremes,
nor are they at all mutually exclusive ; they really belong to the
state of bondage, and are compatible with all its various degrees,
except the bondage present to a minor extent in the state of freedom.
Here too, then, we ultimately have only the antithesis of freedom
and bondage, and these in turn simply reflect the two diverse
relations to redemption.

4. The distinction amongst sins which our proposition sets forth
as the only essential one, if we also take account of the relationship
of actual sin to original sinfulness, can be most definitely expressed


* Reinhard’s explanation in Dogm. § 88, ‘Conditio hominis qui diutius
peccando tandem desiit propositis ad virtutem incitamentis moveri,’ requires to
be brought closer to the standpoint of religion, but even so would come to the
same thing.

* Augustine, de Spir. et Litt. 48: Nam remanserat utique id, quod anima
hominis nisi rationalis esse non potest; ita ibi etiam lex Dei non ex omni
parte deleta per iniustitiam.

* This is certainly not implied either in Heb. 38-13 (taken in relation to
Ex, 17%) orin’2 Com 314,

4 Cf., amongst others, Reinhard, Joc. cit.


§ 74] FREEDOM, BONDAGE, AND HARDENING 313


as follows. The actual sin of those who have been brought into
permanent connexion with the power of redemption is no longer
‘ originating ’ in themselves, or, through their ill-doing, in others.
It has been vanquished by the energy of the God-consciousness
implanted in them personally and spontaneously, so that where
it still shows itself it is seen to be on the wane, and has no further
contaminating power. Hence the sins of the regenerate are such
as do not obstruct the spiritual life either in themselves or in the
community. On the other hand, the sins of the unregenerate are
always ‘ originating,’ not only in the individuals themselves, since
every sin adds to the force of habit and thus to the vitiation of the
God-consciousness, but also beyond themselves, since like instigates
like, and the vitiated God-consciousness spreads and establishes
itself by communication to others. Thus whatever element of
spiritual life may exist in a society still outside the sphere of re-
demption, and may seek to expand and rise from lower stages to
higher, whether in political life or in science and art, has its progress
constantly thwarted by such sin, and dragged back into the whirl-
pool, so that the sin may be truly said to be detrimental to the
spiritual life of the community, or in other words to rob the com-
munity of spiritual life. If we incline to abrogate this antithesis,
and assume merely a difference between a larger freedom in some
and a lesser freedom in others without reference to a definite point
of demarcation at which a bondage characterized by a mere pre-
sentiment of freedom passes into a freedom merely showing traces
of bondage, we shall thereby be abandoning the attitude of at
least the stricter type of Christianity, and our position, in virtue of
its Pelagian tendency, would at last merge in naturalism, for once
that antithesis has been surrendered, redemption would come to
have no distinctive inner effect whatever. Such effect, however,
is so palpably present everywhere in Holy Scripture as an ultimate
fact of consciousness, that it is unnecessary to go back to particular
expressions and formule, such as ‘ being buried in the death of
Christ,’ or ‘ the new creature,’ or in the contrast between the carnal
and the spiritual man. If, however, we thought of describing the
latter contrast as one between a state in which sin still persists and
a state in which everything is sin, we should thereby warp the facts,
since there is no hard-and-fast distinction between the two; and,
besides, it would be unduly harsh to stigmatize as sin everything
noble and beautiful that has developed in heathenism. Here we
can only seek to supply what is defective in that statement of the


314 THE CHRISTIAN FAITH [§ 74


antithesis. We say then, in harmony with what was argued above,
that in all good works of the regenerate there remains some form of
venial sin, but it is, so to speak, merely the shadow of sin, that is—
if we consider the inward state as a whole—the not-willed but
actually repudiated after-effect of the force of habit, which can
only be overcome by degrees. On the other hand, in the sins of the
natural man, which as such are not yet forgiven, there is always the
now deeper and now fainter shadow of the good, namely, an
acquiescent presentiment or imagining of a state free from inward
conflict ; only a shadow, it is true, because these imaginings never
take practical shape or become permanently effective. So, too, in
heathenism the communal life, principally because of the vitiated
God-consciousness with which it was necessarily bound up, was
never able to produce anything higher. Similarly in the unen-
lightened man who has only an outward connexion with Christianity
we may indeed trace many a Christian feature, which nevertheless
is not in him a thing of living power, but merely the reflection of
what is present as a reality in others.


SECOND SECTION


THE CONSTITUTION OF THE WORLD IN RELATION TO SIN


§ 75. Once sin is present in man, he finds also in the world, as his
sphere, persistent causes of hindrance to his life, i.e. evils.
This section, accordingly, will deal with the Doctrine of Evil.


1. It is clear that in a system of doctrine the world cannot come
under discussion at all except as it is related toman. Even though,
in consequence of sin, the world were to suffer a change outside the
human relation, new elements being introduced or the old modified,
this could have no place whatever in Dogmatics. Only incidentally,
therefore, and only because the idea of such a change is frequently
brought into religious teaching, do we need to state that this is a
wholly untenable idea, deduced from certain Mosaic passages ! on
quite insufficient grounds. Even in its relation to man, in fact,
the world can only assume different characteristics in the manner
indicated in our proposition—partly by its appearing different to
him, and partly because the results of sin dissolve the original
harmony between the world and man. Thus the conception of the
original perfection of the world,? if brought into relation to the
original perfection of man, does not imply that the world is the
domain of evil. No doubt there must always have been a relative
opposition, making itself felt with varying intensity, between the
existent as externally given and the corporeal life of human indi-
viduals, otherwise human beings could not have been mortal ; 3
but as long as every moment of human activity might have been
a product of the original perfection of man, every moment being
determined by the God-consciousness, and all the sensuous and
bodily aspects of life being brought into in exclusive relation to it,
that opposition could never have been construed by the corporate
consciousness as an obstruction to life, since it could not in any
sense act as an inhibition of the God-consciousness, but at most
would give a different form to its effects. This holds good even of
natural death and the bodily afflictions that precede it in the shape
of disease and debility ; for what can no longer serve the guiding

1 Gen, 314. 16-18, 2 Cf. § 59. 3 On this, cf. § 59,


315


316 THE CHRISTIAN FAITH [§ 75


and determining higher consciousness, is not willed. Hence it is
not by death, but, as Scripture says, by the fear of death, that we
are subject to bondage.! If, however, the predominant factor is
not the God-consciousness but the flesh, every impression made by
the world upon us and involving an obstruction of our bodily and
temporal life must be reckoned as an evil, and the more so, the more
definitely the moment of experience terminates solely in the flesh
apart from the higher consciousness ; the reason being that there
is then a repression of the only principle which could in such a case
restore the harmony. Since, then, the relative opposition between
the external world and the temporal life of man is an inevitable
and universal fact, sin involves evil of the first type indicated above ;
the world, that is, appears otherwise to man than it would have
appeared had he had no sin. As regards the second type, which
must primarily have its source in human activity akin to sin, it is
obvious that an activity that was purely and simply an expression
of man’s original perfection could never turn out to be a hindrance
to the spiritual life. For, even if such activity, through the error
and against the intention of the agent, were to turn out a hindrance,
though only to the life of sense, then, since along with this would
necessarily go an incentive to correct the error, it would not be
regarded as an evil. Just as little again could the action of one
person prove a hindrance to another’s life, since, in virtue of the
God-consciousness that was supreme in all, each could not but
acquiesce in the other’s every action. But if that supremacy is
done away, there emerges opposition between the individual beings,
and what is a furtherance to one will often for that very reason
become a hindrance to another. So that here, too, evil arises only
with sin, but, given sin, it arises inevitably.

2. Now, anything that gives rise to obstructions in human
life so far as it is independent of human action, we call natural evil ;
while what in bringing about such obstructions is really due to
human action, we call social evil. The latter term is preferable to
‘moral’ evil ; for if we say ‘ moral’ we suggest that the bad also
as such (das Bése) is subsumed under the concept of evil.2 It is
true that social evils too presuppose sin ; what in one person issues
from sin becomes an evil for another, and probably for himself as
well; but precisely on that account it seems the more necessary
to insist, even by our use of terms, on the essential difference in the
reference involved in the two. The above division may not look

pele b 2s 2 Cf. § 48, 1.


§ 76] NATURAL AND SOCIAL EVIL BI7,.


quite satisfactory, since, ¢.g., disease may in many cases be a natural,
and in other cases a social, evil (this ambiguity being inherent in
general terms) ; indeed, we must often regard as one and the same
evil what should be ascribed partly to the one source and partly
to the other, and it would perhaps, therefore, be more accurate
to say that all evils arise from the two elements together or from
one of the two. Still, the main fact remains unaltered, namely,
the different way in which the two kinds of evil stand related to sin.
Both kinds, however, when viewed from the standpoint of the
original perfection of the world, are evils only because they either
diminish the wealth of stimuli which further men’s development or
make the world less tractable to human effort. Of the former class
are the evils of scarcity and want, of the latter those of oppression
and antagonism ; and everything that from our point of view may
be regarded as evil, together with all the deadening and derange-
ment of our spiritual powers in consequence of sin, must be traceable
to these two types.

3. As summarizing the foregoing, our proposition implies, first,
that without sin there would be nothing in the world that could
properly be considered an evil, but that whatever is directly
bound up with the transitoriness of human life would be appre-
hended as at most an unavoidable imperfection, and the operations
of natural forces which impede the efforts of men as but incentives
to bring these forces more fully under human control. Secondly,
it is implied that the measure in which sin is present is the measure
in which evil is present, so that, just as the human race is the proper
sphere of sin, and sin the corporate act of the race, so the whole
world in its relation to man is the proper sphere of evil, and evil
the corporate suffering of the race. Finally, the proposition signi-
fies that, apart from such evil, there is no other consequence of sin
that bears upon the relationship of the world to man, and that our
religious consciousness makes no claim to substantiate the theory of
some sort of magical effect which sin at its first appearance must
have produced upon the world as a whole.


§ 76. All evil is to be regarded as the punishment of sin, but only social
evil as directly such, and natural evil as only indirectly.

1. It would be altogether contrary to this proposition to admit
only such a connexion between evil and sin, as implied that evil
was the original and sin the derivative, 7.e. that it was the obstruc-

1 Cf. § 59.


318 THE CHRISTIAN FAITH [§ 76


tions to man’s sensuous life that first evoked in him the bad, and
repressed his God-consciousness. Such things are often enough
said in particular cases, and the morally bad derived from natural
imperfection, physical or psychical. Were it really so, however,
the Christian consciousness would necessarily be in conflict with
itself ; for to see an obstruction of life in any moment of experience
in which there was a disturbance merely of the sensuous conscious-
ness would of itself argue an impotence in the God-consciousness,
and therefore sin. The said theory, therefore, can hold good only
of an individual case as such, certain evils favouring the develop-
ment of certain forms of sin, but only because these evils themselves
have had their source in sin. To advance the view as universally
and exclusively true, however, would imply that the ultimate
ground of sin lies wholly outside human activity, in an original
ordainment of evil independent of such activity ; and this would
mean that sin was not the collective act of the human race, but in
the first instance the work of external nature, where evil was
supposed to have its basis, and ultimately a divine appointment.
This view, however, would not only take us beyond distinctly
Christian ground—since redemption would then be essentially
an emancipation from evil—but it would carry us out of the sphere
of the teleological, 7.e. the distinctively ethical religions, into that
of zsthetic or of nature-religion, where the guiding hope would be
merely that a joyous emergence of the God-consciousness might
possibly take place once we had become prosperous and happy.

In opposition to all this we record our consciousness that in the
admitted connexion between sin and evil, sin is ultimately always
the primary and original element, and evil the derivative and
secondary. For the term ‘punishment’ implies, first, an evil
actually existing in relation to some preceding badness (Bése).
This does not indeed exhaust the connotation of the term, and when
we use it in its true sense we really refer the said connexion to an
originator, and ascribe it to a free action on his part ; and it is
either in an improper sense, or because we actually refer the con-
nexion to the divine causality, that we apply the term punishment
to an evil that, instead of being inflicted upon a wrong-doer, rather
befalls him. Our formulated statement is accordingly the expres-
sion of our religious consciousness in so far as we refer that
connexion to the absolutely living and active divine causality as
described above, and do not seek to involve that causality in any
particular way in the antithesis of free and necessitated. And for


§ 76] NATURAL AND SOCIAL EVIL 319


that very reason this consciousness, of which probably no one can
divest himself, is essentially different from the partly one-sided
and partly perverted mode of it found in Judaism, and still more
in heathenism; for, when that ordained connexion between sin
and evil is divorced from the universal world-order and the system
of nature, and is represented as something individual and unequal
in its incidence, or is referred to some superinduced change in the
Supreme Being, we have a view which rests upon a vitiated God-
consciousness, and thus itself is of the nature of sin.

2. In distinguishing here between social evils and natural
evils we are proceeding upon the fact that the former alone are
dependent upon sin directly. It might no doubt be argued that the
expressions “ due to human activity ’ and ‘ due to sin’ do not mean
the same thing, since the root of evil is often not sin so much as
error. Nevertheless, when we try to conceive of an error absolutely
free from guilt, we find that the range of such errors is much narrower
than is usually supposed, so that, strictly speaking, we have to fall
back, not upon free human action at all, but upon merely passive
states which in reality belong to our natural imperfection. Evils
which could be explained in this way, because not due to sin, would
in fact fall into the category not of social but of natural evils.

The connexion of the latter group with sin, again, is only an
indirect one ; for death and pain, or at least analogous natural
maladjustments of the individual life to its environment, are found
where no sin exists. Natural evils, therefore, objectively con-
sidered, do not arise from sin; but as man, were he without sin,
would not feel what are merely hindrances of sensuous functions
as evils, the very fact that he does so feel them is due to sin, and
hence that type of evil, subjectively considered, is a penalty of sin.
That even the most serious maladjustments of this kind, considered
purely by themselves and from the standpoint of man’s natural per-
fection, are not punishments, but incentives rather to the develop-
ment of the spirit, is taught by Christ Himself with reference to the
man born blind ;! for what He says there regarding His own special
miraculous power is susceptible of universal application. Even if
we probe still more deeply, and assert that the obstructions to our
life, taken purely by themselves and before they become evils
through sin, are nevertheless rooted in the same evil as sin was said
above to be,? in the temporal frame and the spatial individualiza-
tion of existence, upon which the beginnings of all sin depend ; yet,


1 John 9°. 2 § 69.


320 THE CHRISTIAN FAITH [S77


even as thus connected in their common origin, sin would for us still be
first and evil second, as certainly as man is primarily an acting sub-
ject, and his activity not wholly dependent upon his passive states.

3. As the value of the Mosaic narrative must be estimated
in view of the fact that there can be no proper history of the first
man, and as a state of being which offered him abundant enjoyment
without effort on his part can be no genuine representation of the
original perfection of the world, it is possible that the true signifi-
cance of that symbolic narrative may be seen in its relation to the
contrasted states. Thus the fact that, ‘when man after the Fall
had to till the ground in the sweat of his brow—this in itself being
no evil, and therefore not a penalty of sin—the tilled ground brought
forth thorns and thistles for him, is certainly meant to indicate
that nature’s opposition to man’s moulding handiwork is to be
thought of only in connexion with an Similarly, the fact that
death, hitherto unknown to him, is put before him as the recom-
pense of transgression, and that the first case of death is represented
as the outcome of sin, seems to indicate that it is through sin alone
that natural imperfections come to be incorporated with social
evils. Now, as the Pauline account ! of the relationship of death,
and thus of all secondary natural evils, to sin turns wholly upon
that symbolical narrative, and can only be interpreted in the light
of it, it too (precisely on the analogy of sin) depicts the evil which
befell the first pair after the Fall as ‘ originating orginal evil,’ and
this again can be applied to every contribution which the individual
in consequence of his sin makes to the deterioration of the world.


§ 77. The dependence of evil upon sin, however, can be empirically,
established only as we consider a communal life in its en-
tirety ; on no account must the evils affecting the individual
be referred to his sin as thewr cause.


1. If sin as an organic whole can be rightly understood only as
the corporate action of the human race, its causal action relatively
to evil can only be understood from the same point of view. In
fact, the most definite expression of this conviction lies, for each of
us, in the general statement that throughout the human race as a
whole, increase of sin is necessarily attended by a corresponding
increase of evil (though as the effects of sin naturally ensue only by
degrees, it is often the children and grandchildren who first suffer
for the sins of the fathers),2 and that, in like manner, as sin


ayes GEL. IDSs Roy,


§ 77] SIN AND EVIL 321


diminishes, so will evil diminish. As the intercourse, however, of
the human race is even yet relatively limited, and many groups,
being in a manner outside the range of the sins of other groups,
form enclosed wholes by themselves, the same principle will hold
good of these as well. Following up this line, we shall next be able
to say of every nation, and indeed of every social class in it, so far
as it seems to stand by itself, that the measure of its sin will be also
the measure of the evil it suffers. Nor does this strict correspond-
ence with sin apply to social evils only ; for since large bodies of
men not seldom affect one another precisely as natural forces do,
and external nature obstructs the common efforts of all, these
influences are, in every large association of human beings, felt the
more intensely as evil, the more deeply it is involved in sin ; and,
in fact, even common evils not seldom acquire their peculiar cast
and character from the nature of the sin that predominates in the
society. All this becomes unmistakably clear only when we have in
view a circle of homogeneous communal life not too small in extent.

2. Now it would indicate not only a limited and erroneous but a
dangerous point of view—even if a view deeply rooted in Judaism
and Greek heathenism—were we to make a similar affirmation re-
garding the individual, namely, that for each the measure of his sin
is the measure of the evil that befalls him. For the very conception
of the community and fellowship of human life implies, as indeed
follows all but self-evidently from the manner in which sin produces
evil, that quite possibly only the merest fraction of the common
evil may fall upon the author of much of the common depravity.
Accordingly, to refer first to natural evils, we find Christ explicitly
declaring that, on the one hand, those operations of nature in which
the original perfection of the world is most clearly shown are by
divine appointment not less active where there is sin than where
there is righteousness ;+ and on the other, that natural evils,? and
accidental evils such as might almost be identified therewith,’ are
assuredly not linked to the sin of the individual—so far as we can
isolate it—in such a way as to warrant our measuring his sin by the
evil he suffers. And even if we go back to the view that sinfulness
and natural imperfections spring from a common root, yet the
individual’s share in the one seems to be quite independent of his
share in the other. Only in this way, indeed, can our assumption
hold good without subverting the completeness and constancy of
the natural order. Again, as regards social evils: were these to be

1 Matt. 54. 2 John 93. SrBukerca 6:
21


322 THE CHRISTIAN FAITH [§ 78


apportioned to each individual according to his share in the collective
wrong-doing, we should often, as by some magic process, have to
find justice in injustice.!_ In point of fact, Christ warns His disciples
of persecution and suffering in their work for the Kingdom of God,
but not assuredly in proportion to their sin. How indeed could
such a supposition be squared with the idea—an idea pervading the
New Testament, and, if rightly understood, essential to Christianity
—that within a common sphere of sin it is possible for one to suffer
for the rest, so that the evil due to the sin of many may all converge
upon one, and that penal suffering may fall pre-eminently upon one
who is himself most free from the common guilt and most resolute
in his battle with sin ?

Postscript.—From the point now reached, we find it possible
to estimate a position which I would characterize broadly as the
Cynical, but which has been maintained repeatedly and in various
forms in Christian times—namely, that all evils have sprung from
our social life and from men’s endeavours, by combining their forces,
to explore and dominate nature more effectively, and that in the
so-called state of nature these evils would virtually not have emerged
at all. In one aspect, this view seems to be a mere corollary of our
proposition. for since in social life the individual may have to
suffer for the many, it is impossible that evil could be the same in
the solitary state as it is in society. Clearly, too, the less a man is
inclined to activity, and therefore the less in touch with other men
and with external nature, the less exposed will he be to the evils
that result from such contact. If this view, however, is advanced,
not as a mere observation, but as counsel and warning to the effect
that a man would do well to act less in order to suffer less, it conflicts
with the spirit of Christianity in that it commends the maxim of the
slothful servant, and finds a higher ideal in being passive than in
being spontaneously active.


POSTSCRIPT TO THIS DOCTRINE


§ 78. The consciousness of this connexion does not demand a passive
endurance of evil on account of sin; nor does it entail an
endeavour either to bring about evil because of sin, or on the
other hand to do away with evil in itself.


1. This proposition, since it does not more exactly determine
anything in regard to the origin of the consciousness already eluci-
1Cf. Luke 1315.


§ 78] SUBMISSION TO EVIL 323


dated, or further define or analyse its non-active content, can only
be dealt with here as an addendum. But as the proposition has to
do with the issues of that consciousness in so far as the latter may
express itself in an impulse to deeds that react upon it, it is strictly
one that verges upon the sphere of Christian Ethics. At the same
time it is not taken from that sphere. A system of Christian Ethics
formulated independently, 7.e. not simply in relation to a definite
existing system of Christian doctrine, or as a series of practical
corollaries drawn from such a system, would hardly be capable of
directly combining the points which our proposition summarizes.
On the contrary, the question whether the Christian consciousness
enjoins a passive acceptance of all evil, or whether, on the other
hand, every other task imposed upon us should be laid aside until
some evil that we suffer from has been got rid of; or again, the
question whether a positive system of penal law is directly derived
from religion, and whether the sense of one’s own sin should induce
one to bring evil upon oneself, would all emerge at quite different
points in Christian Ethics. What entitles our proposition to a
place here is its distinctively dogmatic combination of the points
concerned.

2. Inevery instant of suffering the consciousness of the connexion
between evil and sin is present, and is indeed combined in the unity
of the moment along with our God-consciousness ; this association
of our feeling of absolute dependence with our state of suffering
constitutes the mood of religious submission, which is thus an
essential element of piety, but an element which wholly disappears
if we regard the said connexion as non-existent or as of minor im-
portance, and in face of our present difficulties in life look for corre-
sponding ameliorations in the future. Similarly, should this sub-
mission develop into something more positive, and should we become
willing that evil should continue or unwilling that it should cease
(on the pretext of not desiring to infringe the desires of God or to
be found in opposition to Him), then our submission would not be
grounded upon the connexion in question. Queer fancies of this
type, due to misconception, have always been repudiated by the
Christian Church, which has always set itself here against super-
stition and fanaticism. For the continuance of evil could assuredly
not be willed as a hindrance to life, since every such hindrance tends
to restrict on one side or another the activity that flows from the
God-consciousness. And still less in the sphere of redemption,
within which we confidently hope sin will disappear, could we desire


324 THE CHRISTIAN FAITH [§ 78


the continuance of evil, since, evil and sin being connected, we
should in that case either desire the continuance of sin itself or else
not desire the realization of that hope. On the other hand, it is no
less certain that the Christian consciousness could never give rise to
a moment of activity specially directed towards the cessation of
suffering as such—partly, of course, because such a moment would
really be determined by the interests of the lower side of life, and
partly because (since, in view of the aforesaid connexion, suffering
necessarily evokes the consciousness of sin) it is a disposition hostile
to sin itself that needs to be aroused. And at the same time, as
every restriction of spontaneous activity implies a still defective
domination over nature, we are confronted with the task of making
that domination effective. These, then, would be the two consistent
and practical results flowing from our sense of the connexion of sin
and suffering, whereas every activity directed against suffering in
itself would, precisely because of the end in view, be a sensuous one,
and also would only too easily take on a character of passionate
vehemence.

Further, there is thus exposed the unchristian or rather the
wholly irreligious nature of a certain other view—namely, that it is
evil alone which, from the outset, has evoked all the human activity
that goes to subjugate nature and to form social life. For if that
activity has been directed solely against evil, and has accordingly
sprung up only as a reaction against depressive influences without
any spontaneity, then this whole phase of life will be of a purely
sensuous kind, and will draw no incentive from the God-consciousness.
On such terms the truth would lie with those who think that religion
does not express itself in outward acts at all, and who so divorce
that entire sphere of things (as merely secular and purely a matter
of necessity) from the province of religion, as to make an irremedi-
able cleavage in life.

3. Finally, if on the one hand sin is essentially a corporate thing,
since every sin emanating from an individual implies the guilt of
others, so that corporate evil can be related only to corporate sin,
and on the other hand every increase of sin must be regarded as of
itself entailing an increase of evil; then our consciousness of this
divinely ordained connexion can furnish no grounds for our bringing
about evil as a result of observed sin ; for by its very nature such
procedure could not but interfere with the divine ordinance in
question. Whether there may, however, not be other grounds for
doing so is, of course, not the question here.


THIRD SECTION


THE DIVINE ATTRIBUTES WHICH RELATE TO THE CONSCIOUSNESS
OF SIN


§ 79. Divine attributes relating to the consciousness of sin, even if
only through the fact that redemption is conditioned by sin,
can only be established if at the same time we regard God as
the Author of sin.


1. To begin with, it is certain that we can arrive at ideas of
divine attributes only by combining the content of our self-con-
sciousness with the absolute divine causality that corresponds to
our feeling of absolute dependence. That in this manner we trace
the annulment of sin by redemption to the divine causality is a fact
that we may premise as given universally in the Christian con-
sciousness. But divine attributes that were there conceived as
operative would of course be operative primarily in redemption,
and it is only through redemption that they would be related to sin.
Now, if in relation to sin there are divine activities other than those
concerned in its removal, the existence of sin must in some sense be
due to the divine causality, and that causality must be determined
in a special way with respect to sin’s existence. We have already 4
discussed the fact that, in general, sin as an act, besides having
always a basis in the natural order (this term being taken here as
connoting the historical as well), also comes under the co-operative
agency of God; but this points only to the creative and preservative
omnipotence of God. If, nevertheless, because sin does exist and
in so far as it exists, we feel bound to posit a special divine activity
bearing upon it, we must not forget that in thus considering the
consciousness of sin pey se, we are moving in the region of the
abstract, and should therefore err were we to look for divine activities
bearing upon sin purely by itself. On the other hand, as regards
sin in its relation to redemption, we must—if this section is to have
any subject-matter at all—be able somehow to show that sin does
actually exist in virtue of certain special divine activities ; and what
is more, we must do so, keeping in mind the fact that we have


1 See § 48.
325


326 THE CHRISTIAN FAITH [§ 80


already ruled out as inadmissible any distinction in the divine
causality between causing and permitting, or between creating and
preserving.

2. Our task, accordingly, is to answer the question whether and
how far God can be regarded as the author of sin—sin too as such
(not merely, that is, as regards the material element in sinful
action)—yet always of sin as linked with redemption. If an affirma-
tive answer can be given, there will then be divine attributes in
virtue of which sin is ordained by God—not indeed sin in itself, but
in so far as redemption likewise is due to Him. These attributes
then will have as their counterpart those which we shall have to
look for under the like condition in the second division of this Part
—those, namely, in virtue of which God is the Author of redemption,
not in itself, however, but in so far as sin too is due to Him. The
conceptions of the divine attributes to be formulated here will
accordingly, on the one hand, be posited only on the assumption of
their being interwoven with those that come to us from an examina-
tion of the consciousness of grace ; for we assume it beforehand to
be out of the question that the two sets of conceptions could in
reality be so distinct as the mutual opposition of the two elements
of our Christian consciousness, when considered thus abstractly,
suggests. On the other hand, the divine attributes in question are
to be conceived of as attaching to the divine omnipotence only as
this has been described as the eternally omnipresent, for this is the
most general expression of that feeling of absolute dependence which
is regarded here as forming the basis of this first aspect of the
antithesis.


§ 80. As in our self-consciousness sin and grace are opposed to each
other, God cannot be thought of as the Author of sin in the
same sense as that in which He is the Author of redemption.
But as we never have a consciousness of grace without a con-
sciousness of sin, we must also assert that the existence of sin
alongside of grace is ordained for us by God.


1. If to the power of the God-consciousness in our souls, just
because we are conscious of it as not due to our own agency, we give
the name ‘ grace’ and (abstracting from the universal divine co-
operation without which sin itself were impossible) ascribe to it a
special divine impartation ; and if, again, the content of a moment
which lacks the determining activity of the God-consciousness, just
because we are conscious of it as an act of our own cut off from that


§ 80] HOW SIN IS ORDAINED BY GOD 327


divine impartation, is termed ‘sin ’—this of itself justifies the first
part of our proposition. The universal co-operation of God is the
same in either domain, but in the case of sin there is lacking that
specific divine impartation which gives to every approach to salva-
tion the character of grace. It might, of course, be said that as the
disappearance of sin is uniformly proportionate to the inflow of
grace, the relation between the two resembles that between two
species of animals one of which preys upon the other, the two
continuing in that relationship as ordained for both by one and the
same divine will. This, however, would be tantamount to denying
the specific divine impartation in question, and to affirming that
redemption is effected solely by the spontaneous efforts of man,
so that in the sphere of grace the human factor would be related to
the divine co-operation precisely as in that of sin. But while such
a view need not be regarded as in itself unchristian, since it might
still leave room for the influence of the specific activity of the
Redeemer, it nevertheless would not be the doctrine recognized by
the Church and therefore expressive of the Church’s corporate
feeling. Accordingly, if the antithesis in our self-consciousness
really implies a special divine impartation, the question what
divine activity in turn underlies the fact of sin as such, 7.e. as that
which evokes redemption, can be answered only by saying that no
evidence exists of any such activity.

2. No less true, however, is the second half of our proposition.
We are conscious of the said communicated power of being deter-
mined by the God-consciousness always and only as co-existing
with an incapacity of our own that reveals itself as a co-determining
factor, and we also know that, while the power overcomes the re-
sistance, it nevertheless leaves it still there. Hence we can con-
ceive of the divine will that imparts the power only as at the same
time having in it something which entails that sin even in the
process of disappearing should continue to exist side by side with
grace! For if the divine will without any such latent strain were
wholly directed against sin, the latter of necessity would vanish
altogether and at once. Now, the second part of our proposition
rests wholly upon the assumption that everywhere human evil exists
only as attached to good, and sin only as attached to grace. Were
it possible to speak of a type of sin absolutely unconnected with


1 Melanchthon, Loc., p. 121: Respondeo de renatis adultis omnes concedere
coguntur reliqua esse peccata. Cf. 1 John 18—Conf. Anglic. xv.: Sed nos
reliqui etiam baptizati et in Christo regenerati in multis tamen offendimus
omnes.


328 THE CHRISTIAN FAITH [§ 80


redemption, we should certainly not have to assume a divine activity
directed to the existence of such sin. But if it is the case that the
state of hardening is, strictly, not a human state at all,’ no such type
of sin really exists either within the narrower sphere of Christianity,
where everyone is brought into some kind of connexion with re-
demption, or outside that sphere, where even the most impotent _
and vitiated God-consciousness belongs to a corporate life that at
_the same time comprises a morally higher element which finds
expression in precept and law ; and, as a matter of fact, every such
corporate life, imperfect and sinful as it may be, has yet, in virtue
of its presentiments and aspirations, an inward link with redemp-
tion. Least of all, however, can we imagine that sin could have a
place in the creative dispensation of God apart from redemption,
since in the divine will bearing upon the existence of the whole
human race the two are ordained to stand in relationship to each
other. For the mere fact that the emergence of sin preceded the
advent of redemption in no sense implies that sin was ordained
and willed purely for itself; on the contrary, the very statement
that the Redeemer appeared when the fulness of the time was
come ? makes it quite clear that from the beginning everything had
been set in relation to His appearing. And if we add the fact that
the sin which persists outside direct connexion with redemption
never ceases to generate more sin, and that redemption often
begins to operate only after sin has attained to a certain degree, we
need have no misgiving in saying that God is also the Author of
sin—of sin, however, only as related to redemption.

3. The antinomy in these two statements, both of which are
expressions of our religious consciousness, is all the more difficult
to resolve because it is not in two different relations that they are
severally predicated ; on the contrary, both are postulated in
respect of one and the same relation, namely, as we trace the
potency of the God-consciousness to a special divine impartation.
It is true both statements are derived solely from the consciousness
of the Christian who has been brought into the actual fellowship of
redemption, and in this narrower field the antinomy appears easy
of solution if we say that, as sin is in fact present and continues to
exist prior to redemption, and as the divine impartation can operate
only in the forms of human life, we must infer that in the narrower
sphere sin can be overcome even by divine grace only in a time-
process. We cannot, however, claim to have dealt successfully


1 Cf. § 74, 3. 2 Gal. 44.


§ 80] MANICHAISM AND PELAGIANISM 329


with our problem unless we also bring the presence of sin in the
‘human race as a whole into connexion with our God-consciousness.
Precisely because the narrower sphere is in process of constant
expansion—and that, moreover, in virtue (under God) of the labours
of the forgiven—we cannot but have that outer field constantly in
view. In this reference, accordingly, our race-consciousness finds
expression solely in the antithesis between the Kingdom of God
and the world, and this again represents in the most general way
both the antithesis of sin and grace and their co-existence ; so that
in this necessary universalization of our consciousness we meet
again with the same antinomy, which accordingly must be solved
for the universalized consciousness as well.

4. Now every attempt to solve the antinomy by accepting one
statement and rejecting the other leads inevitably to a result
incompatible with the character of Christianity, drawing us, in fact,
into either the Pelagian or the Manichean heresy. We fall into
the latter when we put the first half of our proposition in such a way
as entirely to exclude the second. Thus if sin is in no sense grounded
in a divine volition and is nevertheless held to be a real act, we
must assume another will so far completely independent of the
divine will as to be itself the ultimate ground of all sin as such. Nor
will it matter greatly whether this will is the human will itself or
another ; for, if we still assume, what is certainly given in our self-
consciousness, the co-existence of sin and grace in the same indi-
vidual, that state of things can be regarded only as a conflict of
these two antithetic wills, which means that every activity of the
flesh would be an overcoming of the divine will—a view implying
in any case that the divine omnipotence is circumscribed, and there-
fore abrogated, and that the feeling of absolute dependence is
proclaimed an illusion. Or, again, were we, contrary to all inward
experience, to advance the opposed and clearly fanatical statement
that the influx of divine grace involves the complete disappearance
of sin proper, only a semblance of it being left behind, then wherever
real sin still existed the divine omnipotence would still be excluded
from the entire sphere of free action as such, and the two spheres—
that of the divine will and that of its antithesis—would stand
opposed to each other, even externally, in the most rigorous fashion.

Just as certainly, however, we should fall into the Pelagian
heresy were we to admit the validity of the second part only of our
proposition, and so do away with all distinction in the divine
causality, which would thus be identical alike in the activities of the


330 THE CHRISTIAN FAITH [§ 81


flesh and the energy of the God-consciousness. In that case the
spontaneous activity of man must be the same throughout ; the
antithesis between our native incapacity and the imparted energy
of the God-consciousness would disappear ; and, since the most
powerful element in us, equally with the power of the flesh, would
be the outcome of our own activity, the consciousness of incapacity
that forms part of our inward experience can indicate only a transi-
tional and even now evanescent state of the social life of mankind.
In such an indistinguishable ‘more or less’ of flesh and spirit,
redemption inevitably comes to occupy a very insecure position,
and it is virtually a matter of accident how much or how little
special influence is ascribed to the Redeemer, whether more as the
Author of redemption or as its occasion. This attenuation of the
specific difference between Redeemer and redeemed—this, as we
might almost call it, merely figurative use of the term ‘ grace ’—
marks the Pelagian heresy. Pelagianism, therefore, on the one
hand sacrifices the practical religious interest (which postulates
somewhere a perfectly pure impulse) to the theoretical (which
demands that every vital activity shall have the same relation to
the divine causality), and on the other feebly and through mere
stolidity surrenders all hope of perfect satisfaction. Manichzism
in turn is a surrender of the theoretical religious interest in the
reality of the divine omnipotence, in favour of the practical interest
attaching to the idea that evil is real in the most unqualified sense,
so as all the more to bring out the necessity that the perfect good
should counteract it redemptively. And this, too, is to despair of
reconciling the existence of sin with the divine omnipotence.


§ 81. If ecclesiastical doctrine seeks to solve this antinomy by the
proposition that God is not the Author of sin, but that sin is
grounded in human freedom, then this must be supplemented
by the statement that God has ordained that the continually
imperfect triumph of the spirit should become sin to us.


Conf. Aug. 19: Tametsi Deus creat et adiuvat naturam, tamen causa
peccati est voluntas malorum videlicet diaboli et impiorum, quae non ad-
juvante Deo avertit se ad alias res.—Sol. Decl., p. 647 : Neque Deus est creator
vel autor .peccati.—Melanchthon, Loc., p. 72: Non igitur Deus causa est
peccati, nec peccatum est res condita aut ordinata a Deo. P. 76: peccatum
ortum est a voluntate diaboli et hominis, nec factum est Deo volente.—Exp.
Simpl. viii.: scientes . . . mala non esse quae fiunt respectu providentiae
Dei voluntatis et potestatis Dei, sed respectu Satanae et voluntatis nostrae
voluntati Dei repugnantis.—Conf. Hungary. (Ed. Aug., p. 251): Sicut im-
possibile est contrarie inter se pugnantia ... causam efficientem for-


§ 81] THE CREATIVE WILL AND SIN 331


malemque esse posse sibi contrariorum . . . ita impossibile est Deum, qui est
lux, justitia . . . causam esse tenebrarum peccati . . . sed horum omnium
causa Satanas et homines sunt. Quaecunque enim Deus prohibet et propter
quae damnat facere ex se et per se non potest.


1. The use of the terms ‘Creator’ and ‘creation,’ as bearing
upon sin, was made possible only through that scholastic misuse of
abstract terms which gave to the controversy about original sin the
peculiar turn represented by the question whether it was a sub-
stance or an accident. That usage, however, is as it stands quite
inadmissible, since sin is not an independent entity, and does not
form an independent process. And just as little—least of all if
we distinguish between ‘creation’ and ‘ preservation ’—can we
apply the said terms to the sinful nature, since that nature does not
start with sin, but sin first makes its appearance in the course of
life. If, however, we still keep to the statement that God is not
the Cause or the Author of sin, we find that such denial, taken
strictly, involves two distinct ideas, one of which stands out more
prominently in the first two, the other in the last two, citations
given above.

The first is that, as in God thought and creation are one,! and as
sin cannot be a divine thought or purpose, there cannot be in God
any creative will in relation to sin or the sinful nature. But the
same might be said of every finite nature. The sinful nature is
a blending of the being and not-being of the God-consciousness,
but in the same way every finite nature is a blending of being and
not-being ; and not-being can no more than sin be the divine
purpose. Yet in relation to every finite nature there is a creative
divine will—not, however, as something existing purely by itself,
but as comprised in the will that creates the finite God-consciousness
in its entirety, and thus embraces redemption likewise. Hence
the first or negative clause of the Church’s doctrine requires modi-
fication in the sense that the negation is not to be taken as implying
that sin must be referred to another creative will which is actually
such in the same sense as God is Creator in general, 7.e. in virtue
of a timeless eternal causality ; for, were the negation so taken,
the same would hold good in every case of individual differentiated
being, and ultimately therefore of the entire aggregate of such.
In that case we should be forced to choose between a demiurge—
distinct from God—as the creator of the world, who created also the
sinful nature as such, and an evil primordial being—opposed to God


1 § 4o, I and § 55.


332 THE CHRISTIAN FAITH [§ 8x


—in whom lay the timeless causality of sin, but who must also have
been the creator of finite being, and that not merely in part, as some
have idly said, but wholly! From this point of view, accordingly,
we are shut up to the choice between saying that for sin there is no
eternal causality at all, and finding that eternal causality in God.

A transition from the first main idea of our proposition to the
second is found, however, in the theory that traces the sinful state
in its entirety to the loss of the God-consciousness originally imparted
to human nature by God Himself.2 Thus, while generally the
cessation of anything must be due to the same divine will from
which it took its rise—otherwise, indeed, there would be no finite
being at all—yet it would seem that there must be a difference in
the case of the God-consciousness, the cessation of which, 2.e. of
the presence of God in man, could not be due to the divine causality.
Now this plea might no doubt hold good were sin a complete cessa-
tion of the God-consciousness, and if the sinful nature were wholly
sin. But in the sinful nature the bad exists only correlatively with
the good, and no moment is occupied exclusively by sin; for sin
actually presupposes the God-consciousness, so that the sinful
nature always retains the presence of God as something imparted,
though only in the most limited degree. Hence in this respect,
too, the limitation of the God-consciousness, as well as its imparta-
tion, may be grounded in one and the same divine will.

The second thought taken as starting-point is that God cannot
possibly have brought about, and therefore cannot be the Author
of, what He Himself forbids. Now we must of course admit that
the will of God which commands other beings, though we call it
will, is not identical with His efficient will. For the divine com-
mand does not manifest itself in addition as a will that, in all cases
falling under the command, effects what is in conformity with it ;
in fact, the Scripture actually says that the commanding will of
God does not of itself secure obedience, and we are all clearly


1 It is quite clear that in bringing the devil into the matter our confessional
documents had not this in view. For they regard the devil as coming under
the same category as man, namely, that of a free finite being, so that his sin,
too, is to be thought of as grounded in his freedom, and his relation to human
sin is by no means to be regarded as prejudicing the fact that man’s sin is
grounded in his own freedom. Thus the introduction of the devil brings no
Manichean element whatever into the Church’s doctrine, especially as that
See none the more easily obviated if we leave the devil out of account.

ACS SS Ye.

* Calvin., Inst. i. 18. 4: Perperam enim miscetur cum praecepto voluntas,
quam longissime ab illo differre innumeris exemplis constat.

4 Rom, 78f- 16-18,


§8r] GOD’S COMMANDING AND EFFICIENT WILL 333


conscious of the difference between the state in which what is given
us is only the commanding will of God, and that in which God’s
efficient will is added as well.1 And we are quite as clearly con-
scious that the difference between the will of God as commanding
and His will as accomplishing what is commanded is altogether
unlike that, e.g., in the narrative of the creation, between God’s
utterance of this fiat and the will that carries it out. A further
reason why the commanding will of God is not as such an operative
will is that sin is committed only where there exists a commanding
divine will to which some active impulse is the opposition. For if
sin be committed by one who thinks he is fulfilling the divine will,
then what is sin is not the act itself, but only the mistaken thought,
and even this is sin only where it has arisen in antagonism to God’s
commanding will. This holds good likewise when sin is com-
mitted inadvertently. Thus all sin lying between the extremes of
innocence and hardening ? presupposes the consciousness of a com-
manding will. Now, though the commanding is not identical
with the efficient will, yet the latter cannot be opposed to the
former ; for the prohibition could not be genuine if God Himself
brought the transgression of it to pass. Here, however, we must
not forget that the divine commanding will was posited solely as
an absolutely perfect will, to which accordingly even what is
effected in us by divine grace as efficient divine will never wholly
corresponds. If then this shortcoming in us be described as sin
still clinging to us,® then even from this point of view the negative
part of the Church’s doctrine will require modification. We must
say that the negation is to be understood only in the sense that a
want of conformity to the commanding will of God can none the
less be brought about by His efficient will, and that so far sin
is grounded in the divine causality.

2. As regards the second or affirmative part of the Church’s
doctrine, it is no doubt perfectly accurate ; but we cannot regard
it as fitted to nullify those limitations of the first part which we had
to claim on behalf of our religious consciousness. It is, in fact,
only in view of these limitations that we are able to interpret the
combination of both facts in the sense that sin, so far as there is no
divine causality for it, is not grounded in human freedom either.
This is the only conclusion that agrees with the relationship we have
formulated between the divine eternal causality and the temporal
and finite causality. But the fact of sin’s being grounded in our


Seta ASF 2Cfy S100) ls § 743: Ch, OEY Sh £ Chasis igen


334 THE CHRISTIAN FAITH [§ 81


freedom is all the more compatible with its being rooted likewise
in the divine causality because, with regard to the feeling of absolute
dependence, we recognize no difference between the greater and
the less activity of temporal causality.! It is only the temporal
cause that is stated in this part, and the statement is first and fore-
most intended to obviate the idea that, if no divine causality
can be assumed for sin, the consciousness of sin is a mere delusion.
Sin is therefore referred to that highest degree of inward activity
which constitutes the distinctive element in our being. What
then is here asserted is that in the whole range of life between the
inward state of the Redeemer, in whom no break in the supremacy
of the God-consciousness could issue from His highest spiritual
activity, and those states of human disorder in which the spiritual
functions are brought under the power of disease, and responsi-
bility ceases owing to a lack of freedom, free self-development is
always attended by sin. Hence if this whole form of existence—
the life of the natural man—subsists in virtue of divine appoint-
ment, sin, as proceeding from human freedom, has also a place in
that appointment.

Next, our proposition affirms for the sphere of finite causality
as well, that we cannot truly regard ourselves as merely passive
and extraneously determined in our acts of sin.2 The very phrase
‘freedom of the will’ conveys a denial of all external necessity,
and indicates the very essence of conscious life—the fact, namely,
that no external influence determines our total condition in such a
way that the reaction too is determined and given, but every
excitation really receives its determinate quality from the inmost
core of our own life, from which quality, again, proceeds the re-
action, so that the sin proceeding from that core is in every case
the act of the sinner and of no other. In like manner, the ex-
pression ‘ freedom of the will ’ negatives the idea that the individual
is in all cases pre-determined by the common nature of man. In
reality, the common elements of our nature are the results of a
process of development, and the expression in question marks out
each individual as ab imitio distinct and apart from all others.
Hence no one can transfer the guilt from himself to common human
nature ; a man’s particular sinful self-determinations are his own
acts, alike whether they issue from the sinfulness that is part and
parcel of the principle of his individual will, or whether by means
of them that sinfulness itself becomes more and more confirmed in

* Cf. § 49. Ce (ES, aes


§ 81] SIN AND DIVINE CAUSALITY 635


him. None of these cases of determination, however, excludes the
possibility of sin being related to the divine causality.

Besides, the proposition must only be interpreted in a sense
compatible with the fact that sin is a state of bondage.! If the
bondage ceases when redemption begins to operate—a process
that cannot be conceived as independent of divine causality—
but in such a manner that the operation annuls the bondage only
by degrees, and is therefore permanently limited in scope by it,
then we are again shut up to the conclusion that the sin which is
rooted in a freedom thus linked with impotence is as such ordained
by God—unless, indeed, we are positively to assume that divine
action can be limited by what does not depend upon the divine
causality.

3. Since then the Church doctrine, as an accurate expression
of our self-consciousness, does not exclude the possibility of God’s
being in some sense the Author of sin, and since we are drawn by
opposed interests to both alternatives ; then in seeking to solve this
apparent antinomy we have no choice—if we are to keep the divine
omnipotence unlimited and unabridged—than to assert that sin,
in so far as it cannot be grounded in the divine causality, cannot in
that measure exist for God, but that, in so far as the consciousness
of our sin is a true element of our being, and sin therefore a
reality, it is ordained by God as that which makes redemption
necessary. The more closely these two things are capable of being
unified in the sphere of actual fact—in the same way as the diverse
elements of our Christian consciousness form a unity within us—
and the more definitely we can keep them apart in our thinking,
so that neither will seem to involve the contrary of the other, the
more completely shall we find all difficulties disappear, and that
without our either in Manichzan fashion ascribing to sin a reality
independent of and opposed to God, or with the Pelagians mini-
mizing and by degrees annulling the antithesis of sin and grace.
Now the latter part of the Church’s formula asserts the reality of
sin as our own act, while the first declares that sin is not brought
about by God. If then, with that formula, and with the problem
still set us, we collate the passages cited from the confessional
documents, we note that certain of these bring out that the temporal
source of sin lies in human freedom, while they,do not say that sin
involves a divine eternal causality as well; in others, again, what
comes out is that sin cannot have its source in the divine will,


1Cf. § 74.


336 THE CHRISTIAN FAITH [§ 81


though they do not assert that, in so far as such a source is actually
lacking, it does not exist for God. Now the more fully those one-
sided views are both developed, the more do the difficulties in-
crease, and we must either resort to over-subtle distinctions in
which our immediate religious self-consciousness does not recognize
itself, and which cannot be combined in a single organic view, or
else we must renounce all deeper inquiry, and so arrest the develop-
ment of theology.

In endeavouring, therefore, to obviate this one-sidedness by
combining the two points of view, we ask first—starting with the
former group—what is that element in sin for which, so far as it is
rooted in human freedom, we might look to find also an eternal
divine causality? Well, in every distinct moment of sin there is
for one thing the manifestation of a sensuous natural impulse,
in which of course the eternal divine causality is implicated ; and,
for another, we posit the God-consciousness as capable of being
related to that impulse—else there would be no question of sin at
all—and the God-consciousness of course goes back to the divine
causality in the primordial revelation. But these two elements
taken together do not constitute sin; it follows that so far this
divine causality does not bear directly upon the sin. In so far as
the sin consisted in the impotence of the God-consciousness, it
would be a mere negative, i.e. something that could be neither a
divine thought nor the result of a divine act ;! however, a mere
negation of power does not amount to sin, and, in fact, the mind is
never satisfied to have sin explained as simply a defect.2 The
defect becomes sin for us only in virtue of the fact that the God-
consciousness, impotent against the sensuous impulse, disavows
as consciousness of the divine will that state of defect, whether
simultaneously or before or after; for, without such disavowal,
which is simply the recognition of a commanding or prohibiting
divine will, there is no sin. We shall accordingly be able to say
that, as the recognition of the commanding will is wrought in us by
God, the fact that the inefficacy of the God-consciousness becomes
sin in us is likewise wrought by Him, and indeed wrought with a
view to redemption.* For the consciousness of an as yet meagre
potency of the God-consciousness would be that of a state that
must needs be transcended, but the consciousness of a state in which


} Melanchthon, Loci. Th., p.m. 76: Etsi enim sustentat naturam, tamen
defectus illi in mente non efficiuntur ab ipso.
2 Ch, S63; SiGale 322)


§ 81] SIN AS SIN FOR US 337
there is antagonism to the divine will is a consciousness of some-
thing that must be wholly annulled.

Taking up now the other standpoint, let us ask what meaning
compatible with sin’s being our own act we can give to the idea that
sin is not brought about by God. If sin is not to be attributed to
the divine causality on the alleged ground of its being a negation,
we must bear in mind that, in accordance with what has been said
above, it shares that feature with all finite being, and may therefore
be none the less our own act, as finitude is the very stuff of our
experience ; yet negation too is eternally wrought by God within
and along with the whole development of the God-consciousness.
Again, 1f the reason why there can be no divine causality for sin is
that it is out of harmony with the commanding will of God, let us
remember that it has this in common with all the good that is in-
dubitably originated by God, to which sin is always attached, as
indeed it is present in association with all good whatever ; and even
so it is still our own act, as yet out of connexion with redemption.
Only if sin were a thing absolutely contradictory to the commanding
will of God, such as would utterly annul sin in us, would it be
impossible to think of the efficient will of God as related to sin.
Sin, however, is never such, else it would imply the state of absolute
hardening which, as we have seen, does not lie within the human
sphere at all. Hence our supplementary clause is fully justified,
for it is through the commanding will of God present within us that
the impotence of the God-consciousness becomes sin for us. By
that will, accordingly—though it may be impossible to ascribe any
particular act of sin to.a divine causality specially pertaining to it
—sin has been ordained by God, not indeed sin in and of itself, but
sin merely in relation to redemption ; for otherwise redemption
itself could not have been ordained.

4. Nevertheless, if it be held that sin arose out of a sinless state
of morally perfect activity, we must concede that our proposition
does not solve the difficulties. On the assumption of a state of
that kind, we must either have recourse to the theory of such a with-
drawal of God’s hand as would imply a special divine act veritably
giving rise to sin, or else we must represent sin as a revolt—surely


1 Only in this sense can we accept the formula of the Augsburg Confession :
voluntas non adjuvante Deo avertit se ad alias res. The original German
phrase, which, however, has been altered in the revised German Confession,
certainly points to a more positive sense : alsbald so Gott die Hand abgethan
(‘as soon as God withdraws His hand’). For this withdrawal of God's
hand, as a special divine act, would then be the primary condition of sin.


22


338 THE CHRISTIAN FAITH [§ 82


least explicable in such a state—directed towards the complete sub-
version of the commanding will of God. Hence thinkers who pro-
ceed on that assumption usually resort to the idea that, as God is
not the Author of sin, and nevertheless sin actually exists, it exists
by His ‘ permission.’ A term such as this, however, derived as it is
from human government and its conditions, is admissible only in a
sphere of divided causation. But eternal causality is like no other,
and all temporal causality must be uniformly related to it. More
confusing still than the idea of permission, however, is the hypo-
thesis that, though God may have ordained sin, He ordained it only
as an indispensable means to wider ends of high moment, making
the evils consequent upon sin a source of more than countervailing
gain, and through Christ completely effacing the mischief of sin
itself. But quite apart from the fact that the antithesis of means
and end cannot exist for a purely creative and all-creating will, we
could not well imagine a more fallacious way of presenting Christian-
ity than to say that Christ came only to make good the mischief
arising from sin, while God, looking to the manifold gains to come
thereby, could not dispense with sin itself. As against this, our
own theory is that sin was ordained only in view of redemption,
and that accordingly redemption shows forth as the gain bound up
with sin ; in comparison with which there can be no question what-
ever of mischief due to sin, for the merely gradual and imperfect
unfolding of the power of the God-consciousness is one of the
necessary conditions of the human stage of existence.


§ 82. What has been said concerning the divine causality with regard
to sin holds good also with regard to evil, in virtue of its
connexion with sin.

Sol. Decl., p. 641: Poenae vero peccati originalis, quas Deus filiis Adae
ratione huius peccati imposuit, hae sunt, mors, aeterna damnatio et praeter
has aliae corporales spirituales temporales atque aeternae acrumnae et
miseriae. P. 819: Ut enim Deus non est causa peccati, ita etiam non est
poenae.—Conf. Bohem. iv.: Insuper docent, omnia incommoda et adflictiones
quibus hic quatimur conflictamurque meritissimo iure a Deo ob peccata
hominibus infligi.

1. The parallelism expressed in this proposition is for the most
part recognized and assented to, but it is only sparingly dealt with
in the symbolic documents, and seldom consistently developed in
the systems of doctrine. This is more or less due to the fact that
the treatment of the subject has had mixed up with it two irrelevant


1 Cf. Reinhard, Dogm. § 75.


§ 82) DIVINE CAUSALITY AND EVIL 339


matters, and these we would eliminate at once. To begin with,
everywhere in the discussion we meet with the misleading assump-
tion that God has conjoined evil with sin in the purely arbitrary
fashion exemplified in the penalties of human law ; and with this,
again, has been combined the idea of eternal penal suffering—a
procedure which, though compatible with the assumption just in-
dicated, we for our part cannot follow, since we are here concerned
only with what is given in our self-consciousness, and as yet we lack
all the data for the discussion of the latter problem. Just as little,
however, have we any occasion to suggest the idea of an arbitrary
penal law instituted by God. Were we to apply the previously
cited Mosaic passages ! to this point, we should also have to make
room for the fantastic notion that the nature of the physical world
had been changed by the entrance of sin. In the economy of the
world, resting as it does upon the divine causality, it is impossible
that one thing should be more and another less arbitrary ; every-
thing is equally arbitrary, or else equally not so.

2. Now, keeping to what is given in our self-consciousness on
the matter, we find there two opposed interpretations of evil. One
is that we ascribe evil to ourselves as the consequence of our sins,
thereby denying that God is the Author of evil in the same sense as
He is the Author of the original perfection of the world ; and this
view is amply justified by the fact that the latter conception
implies, not that the world is the domain of evil, but rather that
everything involved in the relative antagonism between our own
life and other things operates merely as a stimulus. The other
interpretation is that we acquiesce in all the evils of life as the ex-
pression of a divine decree passed upon us. Now, this acquiescence
justifies itself most completely in those cases where we can regard
evils affecting us as linked up with the atoning sufferings of Christ
—as indeed all fellowship with Christ must be capable of being
regarded as a fellowship in His sufferings. Observe, however, that
the said evils, if viewed purely and exclusively in this light, could
not really be regarded as evils in which we must simply acquiesce,
but would rather be calls and incentives to a definite spiritual
activity—challenges to be embraced with joy. Since, however, we
are at the same time conscious of evil, and the said interpretation
is also applied in cases where there is no special link between that
evil and our participation in Christ’s redemptive work ; this clearly
implies the assumption that evil as such has its origin in God—not

ES, SED FUER SS NG die


340 THE CHRISTIAN FAITH [§ 82


indeed evil taken purely by itself, but only in its relation to sin, as
that which alone runs counter to the simple and unqualified inter-
pretation of the hindrances of our sense-life as being but incentives
to action. Here again therefore the true solution is to be found,
not in the view that, as evil is grounded in our freedom through the
medium of sin, it is not derived from God, but rather in the view that,
as we posit everywhere the eternal along with the temporal causality,
evil likewise, just in so far as it is grounded in our freedom, is at the
same time ordained by God, while if it is not ordained by God, it
cannot properly exist at all. It cannot be grounded in God in so
far as it takes the form of a conflict of finite beings, for these are
ordained by God not in their particularity, but solely in their mutual
dependence and measure. So far therefore it does not really exist,
but is for us merely a semblance arising from our way of isolating
things. God has ordained, however, that the natural imperfections
are regarded by us as evil in proportion as the God-consciousness is
not yet dominant within us, as also that sin develops into social evil
in proportion as it is dominant, while at the same time both sin
and evil are likewise grounded in our freedom.

3. The two facts, however—that connexion of evil with sin
which is grounded in our freedom, and the divine causation of evil
in relation to sin—become explicable only when we look at sin as
corporate action and at evil as corporate suffering. The individual
cannot say, except incidentally, that the evils from which he suffers
are traceable to his own freedom ; the truth is that wherever the sin
is with which evil is linked, there too is the freedom from which it
issues. But as no sin belongs exclusively to the individual, the said
connexion can be exhibited only in the context of a corporate life,
and that the more clearly the more independent and self-contained
this corporate life is. Taken strictly, therefore, even this explana-
tion only covers those whose existence is due to natural generation
and who depend upon a corporate life from the outset ; whereas,
with regard to the first human being, considered by himself, it is
difficult to represent the divine causality present in evil as combined
with the fact that evil originated in his own freedom; and the
difficulty is all the greater the more necessary we find it to assume
an initial condition free from natural imperfections. In that case
it is, in fact, hardly possible to avoid the thought of an arbitrary
decree of God linking evil with sin—and indeed the attempt to
explain our present human evils from the natural properties of
the forbidden fruit does not evade it either; in which case


§ 83] THE DIVINE HOLINESS 341


the confessional statement quoted above can claim no sort of
validity.

Postscript.—We can exhibit divine attributes only as modes of
the divine causality ; it follows that, were God in no sense the
Author of sin and evil, there could be no divine attributes in virtue
of which sin and evil would exist. If, however, we have satisfactorily
proved the existence of that causality, we must also enunciate
divine attributes or modes of action of a peculiar type and distinct
from those hitherto laid down—all the more that sin and evil are
on the one hand ordained by God, and on the other are to be done
away by redemption. Now, if we had to formulate the concepts
of these attributes for the first time, we might hesitate as to whether
it were better to propose two—one for sin and the other for evil—
or one only, since evil depends solely upon sin. But in point of
fact, the religious consciousness has long ago attained to clearness
about this situation, and has expressed this aspect of the divine
causality in the twin concepts of holiness and justice. This might
doubtless be criticized on the ground that in our ordinary language
the former concept does not relate to sin alone so much as to the
antithesis between good and bad, and similarly the latter not so
much to evil alone as to the antithesis between reward and punish-
ment. But in fact the two terms, especially the first, have been
defined and explained in so many other ways as well, and even—
reward and punishment being simply the outflow of the divine
pleasure and displeasure—brought so close to each other in meaning,
that the following discussion of them will best show how relevant
they are at our present stage, and how no other meaning can be
held to than that which we shall attach to them here.


First DoctrRINE. Gop 1s HoLy


§ 83. By the holiness of God we understand that divine causality through
which in all corporate human life conscience 1s found con-
joined with the need of redemption.


1. We use the term ‘conscience’ to express the fact that all
modes of activity issuing from our God-consciousness and subject to
its prompting confront us as moral demands, not indeed theoretic-
ally, but asserting themselves in our self-consciousness in such a way
that any deviation of our conduct from them is apprehended as
a hindrance of life, and therefore as sin. In thus limiting our atten-
tion to the God-consciousness, we are true to the spirit of our theology


342 THE CHRISTIAN FAITH [§ 83


generally. We may certainly assume as a known fact that conscience
is elsewhere explained by a corresponding relation to the idea of the
good ; here we have but to say in passing that the two explanations
are in no real sense different. Thus, if it ever were to occur that
under the idea of the good the natural conscience made other
demands than in the same community are insisted on by the God-
consciousness prevailing there, so that the two were in conflict, we
should simply have to attribute the fact to a defect in their develop-
ment or in their application, just as we do where the natural con-
science in any one region or period is not identical with that of
another, or where different forms of faith differ in the moral demands
they make. In the Evangelical (Protestant) Church, however, we
are not troubled with any such conflict, for there it is readily ad-
mitted that the modes of action emanating from our God-conscious-
ness are identical with those developed from the idea of the good.
Now we need give no proof of the fact that, wherever these demands
or a law of this kind is referred to the God-consciousness, conscience
also is very markedly traced to divine causality, and, as the voice of
God within, is held to be an original revelation of God; it is one of
those inward experiences which we may assume to be universal in
this sphere. None the less, conscience is not identical with the fact
of the God-consciousness in man, as constituting the original per-
fection of his nature ; for apart from the discrepancy between the
form of the God-consciousness as understanding and its emergence
as will, and indeed apart from this discrepancy as combined with a
tendency to agreement, there would be no conscience at all; and
similarly apart from conscience, nothing that results from that dis-
crepancy would be sin for us. Thus the divine causality, in virtue
of which conscience exists, falls wholly within the sphere of the
antinomy in which we now live, and is no less certainly the divine
causality through which sin exists, though for us it is owing to
conscience alone that a given state, and that as something due only
to ourselves, becomes sin.t And if in addition to this causality,
and to the universal co-agency of God we were to postulate another
divine causality as the ground of sin, we should have to assume two
divine activities antagonistic to each other. It follows, therefore,
that the causality we have postulated is the whole and sole divine
causality which sin as such implies.

2. Now if our explanation signifies that conscience is present


Ch am Rete riats: where the holiness of God is associated with the
demand that we should no longer live according to our lusts in ignorance.


§ 83] CONSCIENCE 343


only along with the need of redemption, then while this is certainly
the purely Christian account of the matter, it must not be taken to
mean that we would assume the presence of conscience only where
the need of redemption is recognized; on the contrary, treating
here as we do of the divine causality, we start from the assumption
that redemption through Christ is ordained for the whole human
race, and that all mankind are in the state of needing redemption.
If, instead of that state, we were to imagine a gradual development
in the power of the God-consciousness, then, while even there we
might find the discrepancy above referred to, yet, as progress would
in that case approximate very closely to the practice of an art, the
laying down of a demand such as conscience makes would be super-
fluous—just as art of every kind develops without any such demand ;
indeed, as conscience always entails pain, it would be a piece of
cruelty. In point of fact, it is with a view to redemption that men
are in common held under the power of conscience, which always
involves the sense of their incapacity ; and so, too, later, it is because
conscience still continues to stimulate the sense of sin within them
that they are held steadily to redemption. If, however, we could
ever think of the will as being perfectly at one with the God-con-
sciousness, so that nothing was striven after but what was prompted
by the latter, then—granted that the still remaining defects of per-
formance were due solely to the mental or bodily organism sub-
serving the will—conscience in its distinctive character would cease
to exist. Hence, too—to speak here only incidentally or provision-
ally—if we think it an adequate description of the inward state of
the Redeemer to say that He had at all times a perfectly satisfied
conscience, we must take the phrase as meaning a conscience
that was always silent, so that He can have had a conscience
only in the form of fellow-feeling, and not as something personally
His own.

What we have said partly explains why we find the proper
sphere of conscience in corporate life. For, granted that a single
generation of men were to attain to the consummate strength and
purity of will above referred to, it would of necessity influence the
succeeding generation by awaking conscience in the adolescent ;
and the same thing would apply to the greater differences in develop-
ment within a single generation. On the other hand, a conscience
manifesting itself solely in each individual by himself would be too
variable to secure the certainty of its judgments and of their being
attributable to the divine causality. The true conscience, however,


344 THE CHRISTIAN FAITH [§ 83


emerging in a society as the same thing in all and for all, is law—
primarily moral law, though ever finding outward expression in
civil law. Thus the holiness of God is the divine causality that
legislates in the corporate life of man, and since the law, especially
as traced to its inward source, is always for us the absolutely holy,
and the whole historical process is ordained by this divine causality,
no exception can well be taken to our regarding that causality as
a distinctive divine attribute, or to our designating it exclusively
by the name ‘ holiness.’

3. The customary and popular interpretation of the term as
used in the liturgical and homiletical field, however, is that the
holiness of God consists in His being well-pleased with what is good
and displeased with what is bad. That interpretation may be under-
stood in two ways. Its implication is doubtless that the terms
‘good’ and ‘ bad’ are predicates of the actions of free finite beings.t
But as taken so, the interpretation can only be given a place in
scientific discourse with great modifications. Pleasure and dis-
pleasure in their very antithesis always imply an element of passivity,
and unless this is eliminated, the attribute of holiness will involve
some disturbance of our feeling of absolute dependence, since a
divine state would then be determined by human action, and thus
the relation between God and man so far become one of reciprocity.
Again, the attribute as so interpreted would be a purely inward and
quiescent one—such indeed as our immediate religious consciousness
gives us no occasion to postulate. Both points might no doubt
be disposed of if, of these human states of pleasure and displeasure,
we transferred to God only the active aspect, namely, their outward
manifestation in the effort to effect or prevent something. But as
we find this twofold aim only in redemption, and as it would be
altogether a departure from the usage of the Church to say that
redemption is grounded principally in the divine holiness, then,
unless we are to surrender the term altogether, we must again come
back to the view that the manifestation of the divine displeasure, if
detached from the effectuation of the good, is simply the effectuation
of this displeasure in the acting subject by means of conscience and
law. If, however, the interpretation is taken to mean that God’s
pleasure in the good and displeasure with the bad form the basis of
His creative activity and determine it,? it follows that the bad, in-


* Henke, Lineam., p. 66: Deus ab omni labe et vitio purissimus, omnis
pravi osor irreconciliabilis, boni rectique amantissimus.

* As indicated by Mosheim, Th. Dogm.i. p. 292: Sanctitas est immutabile
propositum voluntatis Dei perfectionibus suis congruenter agendi; and


§ 84] THE DIVINE JUSTICE 345


asmuch as being the object of displeasure it is opposed to the good,
cannot exist, and so cannot be regarded as a thought of God ;!
in other words, there is no reality in, nor any divine idea of, the bad.
This we may lay down without misgiving, with the necessary conse-
quence that in the same sense finite being cannot from itself generate
the bad,? 7.e. that the bad as an actual antithesis to the good has no
existence at all, and that therefore that displeasure with the bad
which is wrought in us by the divine causality is, strictly speaking,
only our own displeasure in the fact that the effective power of the
God-consciousness falls short of the clearness of our apprehension.
Thus what is tenable in both interpretations, when taken together,
corresponds exactly with what we have laid down, and we are in
this way able to refer the conception of God’s holiness directly to
His omnipotence and omniscience, and regard these as holy. With
this, again, agree those other interpretations which ascribe to God’s
holiness the function of demanding from His creatures what is
perfectly good ; 3 for that demand is made upon them only in virtue
of the law or the moral feeling implanted in them. Some of these
interpretations bring into the conception the inward purity of God
as the ground of the demand ; such of them, however, as confine
themselves to that purity, or go back even to God’s perfect
self-love,* while they might be relevant in a speculative or a so-
called natural theology, have no place in a systematic statement of
Christian doctrine.


SECOND DOCTRINE. GoD Is JUST


§ 84. The justice of God is that divine causality through which in the
state of universal sinfulness there 1s ordained a connexion
between evil and actual sin.


1. This interpretation undeniably is much narrower and more
limited than that yielded by the method of other theologians, and
therefore requires special vindication. To begin with, here too


Ammon, Summa Theol. Chr., p. 92: Consensus voluntatis liberrimae per-
fectissimus cum legibus intellectus sapientissimi,

MCI § 5502 Cit, S Oy, 7

3 Quenstedt, Syst. Th. i. p. 420: Sanctitas Dei est summa omnisque omnino
labis aut vitii expers in Deo puritas munditiem et puritatem debitam exigens
a creaturis.

4 Buddeus, Instit., p. 252 : Quando Deus se ipsum amore purissimo amare
concipitur ut simul ab omni imperfectione secretus censeatur amor ille
vocatur sanctitas. Something similar was said by Hilary, on Psalm cxliv. ; he
would take the divine holiness as signifying especially the non-existence of
all self-seeking elements in God.


346 THE CHRISTIAN FAITH [§ 84


use is made of the position that justice is of two kinds, namely,
legislative (or distributive) and retributive. The former of these,
however, cannot be brought under our definition at alle a= Intitact:
the thinkers referred to seem to have forgotten that the terms ‘law ’
and ‘justice’ always imply a relation to something given. Human
legislation and distribution can be just, and may be said to be just,
only in view of an already given situation to which it is attached
and upon which it is based. Divine legislation and distribution,
however, is primordial and creative ; it is that from which existent
things themselves and their relationships all alike proceed, which
needs nothing to attach itself to, and which in its perfection accord-
ingly cannot be described as justice at all, but would more aptly be
designated wisdom 1—a divine attribute that we cannot deal with
till a later stage. Hence the divine justice can be retributive
only. But even of retributive justice our interpretation covers only
the half ; for the term is used to denote not only the punishment of
wickedness, but also the rewarding of goodness, while our definition
has nothing to say of a connexion between well-being and the power
of the God-consciousness, but refers only to that between evil and
sin—precisely that connexion, in fact, which we call punishment.
Now we might concede the omission, and even excuse it as involved
in the very process of abstraction in which we are engaged when
discussing one element of our Christian consciousness, namely, the
consciousness of sin, and for the time putting aside the other ;
but at most we should thereby be exposing an inconvenience of our
method, which here forces us to split a divine attribute in two. In
point of fact, however, our Christian consciousness recognizes no
reward proceeding from the divine justice ; anything that might
possibly be called reward is for us something unmerited, and attri-
butable to the divine grace. The rewarding side of the divine
justice can have no other object than Christ, and Him only as one
who is different from all other men. From our own religious
consciousness, therefore, we can know only of God’s punitive


} Something of this kind seems to have been in the minds of the theo-
logians who apply the term ‘internal’ justice to the divine holiness, while to
justice itself they give the name ‘ external’ justice. On that view, it is holiness
itself that is the legislative activity of God ; or else, if external justice is in
turn divided into legislative and retributive, the former refers to holiness as
the supreme perfection that constitutes the ground of law, the latter to
holiness as displeasure at what is bad.

* Rom. 44-16; cf. Matt. 2014. 18. While in 2 Tim. 4® the conferring of the
reward is ascribed to God as judge, yet He is there represented rather as an
umpire—a symbol that is not relevant here.

= Phily2 320s Heys):


§ 84] JUSTICE AS RETRIBUTIVE 347 .


justice ; His rewarding relatively to ourselves we must simply
leave out of account. For while Christ Himself seems more often
and more variously to portray the rewarding action of God,! yet
the increase of a man’s powers and the expansion of his field of
action—two things, be it noted, corresponding exactly to each
other—are no more a reward in the proper sense (i.e. one that might
be contrasted with evil as conjoined with sin) than the increase of
wickedness could in the proper sense rank as a punishment.

2. Now, if the conception of divine justice has to do only with
the connexion of evil with sin, it would surely seem natural that it
can apply solely to the sphere of sin ; and in that case the postscript
(p. 341) may well appear superfluous. It is clear that if we formed
part of a sinless corporate life we should never have an idea of this
side of the divine causality at all, for it is only through our con-
sciousness of sin that we come to the idea of the divine justice. The
term itself, however, likewise implies that as sin diminishes the
connexion between sin and evil is done away in an equal degree ;
and done away, moreover, quite independently of whether there is
any change in the material side of man’s condition; and this
abrogation, 1.e. the forgiveness of sin, falls under the very same
divine causality ;? for it is in this that the recompense of Christ
lies. Our restriction of the connexion itself to actual sin rests
partly on the fact that, as the original sinfulness still remains un-
changed in the corporate life of man, the connexion with evil could
not possibly be annulled were it due to that sinfulness ; partly also
on the fact that the connexion exists only in so far as it has a place
in our consciousness, while the consciousness of the original sinful-
ness exists in us only in and along with actual sin. Moreover, it is
only with actual sin that we must connect not merely the existence
of social evil—for it is only definite sinful tendencies of individuals
which in corporate life develop into persistent causes of hindrance
—but the fact that natural imperfections are regarded as evils.
Hence in the measure that sin is done away, not only does evil occur
no more, but even the sin which has become actual operates no
longer as a hindrance to life, but as a helpful incentive. The
formation and annulment of the connexion of sin and evil, accord-
ingly, involves two things : first, that the entire constitution of the
world, in so far as evil depends upon it, is related in the most


1 Matt. 2571.
2 Hence in 1 John 1° forgiveness too is attributed to God’s justice.


3 Rom. 828,


348 THE CHRISTIAN FAITH [§ 84


definite way to human freedom as that in which sin is grounded ;
and secondly, that in our consciousness the two are connected not
merely occasionally, but essentially and universally. Since there-
fore the divine justice, thus regarded, is a form of the divine causality
that remains self-identical throughout our whole experience, and
covers the whole province of finite intelligence known to us,
so that, together with the form of the divine causality treated
in the foregoing paragraph, it regulates everything that upon
this side of our antithesis bears upon the ethical, we seem
to be perfectly justified in setting it forth as a distinct divine
attribute.

To deal now with the first element in the attribute, namely, the
relation of the entire world-order to human freedom ; it will be
universally admitted that the relation in question is to be found
only in a corporate life. Only to the extent that such a corporate
life is a unity complete in itself, and most perfectly therefore in
human life considered as an integral whole, does this divine causality
reveal itself in such a world-order that the hindrances to life that
issue from sin cannot be averted or removed by any circumstances
of the external world, however favourable. On the other hand, if
we regard the individual as the proper object of the divine justice,
we degrade that attribute to the status of a mere counterpart of
civil justice, which we so often feel to be injustice. In fact, if we
are determined to see the consummate justice of God only in the
punishment of every particular offence—or, let us say, in the re-
warding of every particular virtue or perfect act of virtue on the
part of an individual—then as, e.g., intemperance and falsehood are
clearly not always punished by contempt or disease, and as, more-
over, the very same evil which, falling upon one person, is inter-
preted as the punishment of his sin, may also fall upon others to
whom without grave injustice we could not attribute the same sin,
we find ourselves in a difficulty from which we can hardly escape
except by asserting that the divine justice cannot fully reveal itself
here below but will attain to completeness only in the life to come.
That is an idea which—though attempts have been made to clear
it of the charge of involving God Himself in a temporal process—
only puts the difficulty further away, for we have no evidence of
such disparity of suffering there as would counterbalance the dis-
parities between doing and suffering here. If, however, we posit
the idea of a corporate penalty along with that of a corporate guilt,
we reach a complete vindication of the principle that all sin is re-


§ 84] NATURAL AND ARBITRARY PENALTIES 349


flected in evil, and that all evil can be explained by sin ; and this is
precisely the connexion set forth above.

As regards the second element, namely, that in our consciousness
this connexion between sin and evil is actually and even universally
made—this is really the consciousness of penal desert, which in the
human mind is as truly the creation of the divine justice as conscience
is the creation of the divine holiness. The universality of that
consciousness, however, manifests itself most unmistakably in the
fact that domestic, civil, and social penalties everywhere flow from
it, and indeed represent an affirmation of the connexion between sin
and evil, just as the gradual mitigation of these penalties in con-
sequence of the progressive disappearance of sin from corporate life
represents the abrogation of it ; both features thus appearing as
conjoined in the divine justice.

3. The classification of penalties as natural and arbitrary—a
classification which indeed could not be fully demonstrated or
applied in the realm of finite and temporal causation—is one which
we find here no reason whatever to adopt. In point of fact natural
penalties, grounded as they are in the creative and regulative divine
causality, are arbitrary in the only sense in which that word can be
applied to God; while those which we might most properly call
arbitrary, namely, the evils that do not correspond to the actions of
those affected by them, are in reality natural ; for this non-equival-
ence has its source in the world-order as a whole. With a different
usage of the terms, again, we apply the adjective ‘ natural’ to the
penalties determined by the relation of the world-order to our free-
dom, while those that flow from human freedom itself we designate
‘arbitrary.’ But if we regard both kinds as divine, the distinction
disappears ; for penalties inflicted by man, no less than the other
group, take place in accordance with the divinely ordained spiritual
development of mankind. In fact, the two kinds, as being equally
of divine appointment, are essentially correlative and comple-
mentary ; for the ‘arbitrary’ without the ‘natural’ would lack
reality, and the latter without the former would lack significance.
Of penalties in the future life it is here impossible to say anything
whatever ; nor can we determine how far they are to be regarded
as ‘arbitrary’ rather than ‘natural,’ or vice versa. The idea of
these penalties is not taken directly from our self-consciousness ;
and only in another section of our work shall we be able to inquire
how the distinctively Christian form of this pre-Christian and widely
diffused idea is related to a universal ground or reason which we


350 THE CHRISTIAN FAITH [§ 84


must certainly assume to exist, and, again, how far it is possible
in this matter to go back to the conception of divine justice, whether
interpreted as here or otherwise.

The case is different with certain other classifications sometimes
applied to the subject, e.g. those based upon the various purposes
of punishment. (1) To begin with, it seems clear that penalties
cannot be ordained by God as reformative. Thus, suppose that an
excess of sensuousness is counteracted only by means of sensuous
feeling itself, then, e.g.,an appeal to fear as against pleasure cannot
possibly issue in a higher energy of the God-consciousness and a
greater freedom of the spirit ; indeed, all that could be effected in
this way would be such a fresh distribution of sensuous motives as
would, in accordance with the individual’s nature, be felt as less dis-
agreeable. It is also obvious that if the God-consciousness could be
strengthened by punishment, a system of divine penalties as perfect
as possible could have been made to serve instead of redemption.
(2) We have, secondly, just as little right to suppose that the purpose
of divine punishment is merely vengeful or retributive. Funda-
mentally, badness (or wrong) and evil are incommensurable ; it is
only when a bad action brings evil upon another person that it is
commensurable with a retributive evil. But this retributive evil
is inflicted only in so far as the injured person regards his pleasure
in the suffering of the injurer as removing or assuaging his own pain.
Hence under the conditions of antiquity it is the custom everywhere
that a penal evil can be bought off by conferring some other pleasure
on the injured person. It was partly in this practice that the
criminal jurisdiction of the State took its rise, replacing the vendetta
by milder measures. Divine penalties of such a type, however,
could be believed in only at a very primitive stage of development
—a stage at which the Deity is still thought of as susceptible to
irritation, and as not above feeling an injury or having other passive
states ; and what has all along been preached, sometimes with
apparent profundity, regarding the mysterious nature of the divine
wrath and the fundamental necessity of divine retribution, cannot
be made clear to the mind. And we can leave the matter there all
the more confidently because (3) the consciousness of deserving
punishment, as superinduced in us by divine justice, is fully ex-
plained by the remaining purpose of punishment, namely, to prevent
or to deter. Punishment is, in fact, that which must of necessity
be interposed wherever and in so far as the power of the God-con-
sciousness is as yet inactive in the sinner, its object being to prevent


§ 84] RELATION OF HOLINESS AND JUSTICE 351


his dominant sensuous tendencies from meanwhile attaining com-
plete mastery through mere unchecked habit. Further, what is
said, with reference to the Mosaic legislation, as to the people’s being
kept solidly together under the law applies generally to all criminal
jurisdiction among all peoples, and equally to the natural penalties set
forth also in the Mosaic legislation. Hence it is only relatively to the
dispensation of redemption, and in so far as redemption has still to
become operative, that the divine justice can be fully understood.
4. From what has just been said we see, on the one hand, how
clearly the divine holiness and the divine justice are connected,
and, on the other, how necessary it is to keep them separate. They
are connected in the most intimate way as expressions of the divine
causality as bearing upon sin in its relation toredemption. On the
very same principle, according to which we say of sin that in the
sense in which it cannot have its cause in God it cannot exist at all,
we say of evil that if it cannot be grounded in God, 7.e. if it bea real
negation of the original perfection of the world for man, it likewise
cannot exist at all. Similarly, just as with regard to sin, so too
with regard to evil, we assert that so far as it is real, it must have
its source in the divine causality. And, again, just as the conscious-
ness of sin as necessarily entailing penalty—a consciousness due to
the divine justice—is possible only on the assumption that con-
science is due to the divine holiness, so, without that consciousness
of penal liability, conscience would have no means of gaining a
secure hold in any human soul still under the dominion of the flesh,
and thus no means of generating there a consciousness of the need
of redemption. But for the same reason it is also necessary that
the distinction of the two concepts should be maintained here where,
though we are dealing with elements of ‘the religious consciousness
which are provisionally abstracted from redemption, we must
nevertheless premise the fact of redemption as that on which every-
thing turns. For suppose matters brought to the point that both
the natural imperfections and the sins of the world were no longer
evils to us, but merely incentives ; that we therefore felt nothing at
all to be evil in relation to ourselves, and that accordingly the
justice of God was not immediately present even in our own purely
personal religious experience ; yet we should still require conscience,
and should therefore constantly revive within us the consciousness
of God’s holiness. Similarly, even while we still need both, we keep
them rigorously apart. For our displeasure with what is bad, 2.e.
the reflection in us of God’s holiness, is absolutely pure and satisfy-


352 THE CHRISTIAN FAITH [§ 84


ing only when not affected by anticipations of punishment ; and
the consciousness of penal desert is so firmly rooted in our corporate
sense that we always acquiesce in punishment, even although our
personal moral feeling regarding any particular occasion of it has
been entirely corrected and purified, and our will has completely
escaped from the bondage it implies. Precisely on this account,
therefore, that form of the God-consciousness (i.e. the concept of
divine justice) is no more transient in us than the form represented
by the conception of the divine holiness, for it permanently con-
serves the same truth for our corporate sense, to which, in fact, it
is in its origin specially related. Were it, however, to be said that
the two conceptions, having to do merely with the natural imperfec-
tion of man, would apart from that sphere be nothing at all in God,
and even within that sphere would cease to be of valid application
as soon as the said imperfection was finally done away, and that
accordingly they are not divine attributes in the same sense as those
dealt with in the first part of our system—we should reply as
follows. First of all, the same would hold good of the divine attri-
butes which are subsequently to be developed from the second
aspect of the antithesis, for to these also it is essential that they
refer back to the first aspect ; and, in fact, the same objection might
be made to all the so-called moral attributes of God so far as they
have any reference to the antithesis at all. But we have never
attached great importance to these mere general phrases ; so I shall
only call attention to these special considerations bearing on the
conceptions of the two attributes before us. First, as regards God’s
holiness : apart from its implication of that in virtue of which sin
does not exist for God, and from the fact that it forms so far a
general characteristic of God’s consciousness of His works, and so of
His omnipresence and omniscience, holiness is an essential element
in our consciousness of God, for we can be cognizant of the absolute
power of the God-consciousness only as we are cognizant of the state
of sin as removed by redemption. The same is true also of the
divine justice, since the Redeemer’s merit is only the other side of
sin’s desert of punishment, and just as the former has always been
present in the latter as a premonition of it, so the latter will always
be present in the former as recollection. And no less is the relation
of God’s government of the world to our freedom one with its
relation to redemption, while this whole interrelated system of the
spiritual and the sensuous is the domain of what is accordingly the
equally omnipresent and eternal justice of God.


§ 85] THE DIVINE MERCY 353


APPENDIX : THE MERCY OF GOD


§ 85. To attribute mercy to God is more appropriate to the language
of preaching and poetry than to that of dogmatic theology.


1. For one thing, preaching and poetry can afford to be less
precise in their use of anthropopathic terms. And mercy is
certainly such a term in a pre-eminent degree, since in the human
sphere we apply it exclusively to a state of feeling specially evoked
by the sufferings of others and finding outlet in acts of relief. Such
helpful ministration is, no doubt, an ethical activity, but here it is
conditioned by a sensuous sympathy, namely, the pain produced in
us by hampered conditions in the lives of others ; and, in fact, if
the help tendered does not spring from such a feeling we do not call
it mercy. In this sense mercy is the counterpart of ‘ kindness,’ 7.e.
the helpfulness in which the correlative sensuous sympathy, namely,
pleasure in some furtherance of life in the case of others, plays a
part ; and here, too, help given without such feeling behind it would
not be called kindness. Thus neither of these qualities, as so under-
stood, can be applied to God without our bringing Him under the
antithesis of the agreeable and the disagreeable. And even if we
were to overlook this and use the two terms solely of the respective
acts of helpfulness, yet it would be out of keeping with the character
of teleological (ethical) religions were we to admit, in a rigorously
formulated system of doctrine, a divine causality bent upon a
sensuous furtherance of life simply as such. Nor can the difficulty
of finding a place for the conception of mercy in God be due to our
looking for it at this particular stage of our inquiry. For, as mercy
obviously presupposes evil and the consciousness of evil, the dis-
cussion of it could not well come before that of evil ; while, again,
as mercy always implies some degree of separateness between the
two parties involved—for within a closer group, as between father
and children, we do not speak of mercy—the objects of God’s mercy
cannot be those who are already enjoying, and in so far as they are
enjoying, their part in redemption.

2. Again, from a somewhat different point of view, the merciful
God is for the most part contrasted with the jealous God. Now, as
wrath and jealousy have obviously to do with offence and sin, mercy
would in such case be the repression of jealousy by compassion. If,
accordingly, we once more set aside the fact that this involves an
emotional state, and think only of the withholding of punishment,


23


354 THE CHRISTIAN FAITH [§ 85


we must nevertheless here too set aside the idea that the punish-
ment which is related to redemption is revoked merely on the
ground of pain or defect experienced by some other. Thus, these
eliminations having been made, all that remains is God’s readiness
to remit the punishment altogether. Yet, even so, we cannot allow
mercy to rank as a distinct attribute, since we have ascribed that
remission as well as the enactment of the penalty to the divine
justice. Should this procedure be regarded as wrong, however, and
mercy in the sense indicated be taken after all as a distinct attribute,
then mercy and justice would each delimit the other. Where
justice ceased, mercy would begin, and vice versa—a relation that
cannot subsist between divine attributes. It is true that the
classical passage for the use of the word in the New Testament }
best agrees with that interpretation, for kindness to the unthankful
is the suppression of jealousy by compassion. But the point of
Christ’s saying is the demand made upon the hearers, and in speak-
ing of self-discipline it was natural that the analogous element in
God to which He directed their minds should there be referred to
by the same term.
1 Lk, 635.


SECOND ASPECT OF THE ANTITHESIS :
EXPLICATION OF THE CONSCIOUSNESS OF GRACE


INTRODUCTION


§ 86. The more distinctly conscious we become that the misery involved
im our natural state cannot be removed ether by the recognition
that sin 1s inevitable, or by the assumption that it is decreas-
ing of itself, the higher becomes the value we place upon
Redemption.


1. Unmistakable evidences of the consciousness of this in-
sufficiency are to be found in almost all other religions, from the
lowest to the highest. They all prescribe either sacrifices and
purifications, or mortifications and penances, or both. Manifestly
these are all devices for getting rid temporarily of the misery caused
by sin, in the different forms which it assumes in different religions.
By the degree in which this is actually effected, the more believing
man is distinguished from the less believing. For, with the excep-
tion of those sacrifices which have no relation at all to evil, all
sacrifices and purifications—unless we are to suppose that they
come simply from an utterly confused superstition—are based upon
the conviction that both the admissions referred to in the proposi-
tion need to be accompanied by an acknowledgment in the form
of an act, it may be only a symbolical act, in order to get rid of the
misery. But ina teleological religion this is not permissible. Such
a religion sets down as a fact the ineffectiveness of the God-con-
sciousness itself, and so finds here only a contradiction from which
no effect can proceed ; all that can be done is to admit the state
of sin.1 Mortifications and arbitrary exercises are less symbolical,
and have in a greater degree a real content ; their purpose every-
where doubtless is to exhibit power over the flesh by means of
actions the demand for which does not arise of itself in the ordinary
course of life ; to supplement, that is, in some way the imperfect
manifestation of this power in the demands which life makes of
itself. This would be superfluous if the inevitableness of sin itself
sufficiently gave peace of mind. Moreover, the wildest superstition


1 That this is the sense of Heb. 10!" is not open to doubt.
355


356 THE CHRISTIAN FAITH [§ 86


~e)


reveals itself wherever these exercises are not so treated as to corre-
spond to the given situation. But since in the life of any society
demands are evolved every moment which it is our duty to fulfil,
these arbitrary supplementary activities, by taking up time, in-
evitably prevent the full performance of duty. Thus through the
very activities which are supposed to get rid of the misery, new
misery is created.

But, even quite apart from the question whether performances
of both kinds are not usually designed rather to avert punishment
than to remove guilt, their futility as means to peace of mind is
obvious. Hence every unsatisfied longing which still remains
in spite of them is the expression of an inclination towards
Christianity; it indicates the likelihood that a Redeemer, in
whom is offered not the shadow but the reality, will be accepted.

2. Let us now consider the religious consciousness of the
Christian. It is composed of the consciousness of sin which we have
expounded above, and the consciousness of grace which we have
still to expound but which we assume to be familiar. In it, too,
we find both elements. First, the recognition that sin is inevitable
for us, in so far at least as that it is not in our power at any particular
moment to be sinless. But no less, the assumption that it is
growing less, since this is essentially involved in the consciousness
that the strength of our God-consciousness is growing greater.
But in spite of this connexion these two elements belong not to the
consciousness of grace, or that by which the misery is taken away,
but on the contrary to the consciousness of sin, or to the misery
itself. For to be conscious that the disappearance of sin is a thing
of the future is the same thing as to have it still actually present ;
and, more completely still, the consciousness of its inevitableness
is also that of its power over us. Both therefore indicate our
need of redemption, and so cannot carry in themselves the removal
of the misery—that would require that it should be established and
provable in some special way that the consciousness of sin can be
taken away by means of itself.

Let, us “suppose, on the other hand, that the misery has been
removed from some other side ; and add, further, that even the
consciousness that sin must inevitably remain while it is gradually
disappearing does not hinder the removal of the misery: just on
that account the worth of the removal is the greater. But this
can be rightly recognized only if we consider both elements in the
natural condition of man as he shares in the corporate life of sin.


§ 86] THE MISERY OF SIN 357


In this condition the opinion that sin, because inevitable, does not
involve guilt or deserve punishment cannot be derived from the
God-consciousness ; rather would this have first to be destroyed,
that is, the consciousness that God is holy and righteous would
have to be rooted out—which would be a new guilt. Just as little
can we deduce the absence of guilt and of liability to’punishment
by asserting that the future already exists in the present, the dis-
appearance of sin in its continuance. For if we are to go beyond
the present content of our self-consciousness, we are just as much
entitled, indeed we are equally constrained, to say that our present
consciousness will be continued in our future consciousness, and
with it the misery. So we are bound to maintain that all such
statements as that God forgives sin because it is inevitable, if only
it is decreasing, can never establish that removal of the misery of
which they would persuade us. They always come back to a
forgiveness of sin, arbitrarily, by ourselves; and, at best, they
are a recourse to the divine compassion,! but without first positing
redemption, and so also without reconciling compassion with
righteousness. For even if we admit that in the natural state there
does occur an increase in the strength of the God-consciousness, even
if it is only in so far as it co-operates in the effort after civil
righteousness :? it must result from this that the more sin de-
creases the sharper becomes the feeling for right and wrong. Conse-
quently no increasing satisfaction arises—which is the only thing
which could legitimately offer any guarantee for the removal of the
misery. And here it is to be observed that those who think to
remove the misery in this way, without redemption, are least in
agreement on the question whether human life on the whole is
developing towards a greater perfection (so that brutality, where it
has once been overcome, does not return), or whether the race is
destined, partially, by whatever revolutions it may be, to be con-
tinually thrown back, to begin its career all over again.

3. If, nevertheless, such presentations of the forgiveness of
sins secure acceptance as Christian, what is specifically Christian
must have been long since, and in many quarters, displaced, before
conceptions so little Christian could creep in ; or it must have been
supposed that the effectiveness of redemption begins only after the
misery has already been removed. But this is the less arguable
inasmuch as peace of mind presupposes a decrease of sin, and conse-
quently an increase of activity pleasing to God. So that to exhibit

UCEIS 85, 2. 2 Cf. § 70, 2 and 3.


358 THE CHRISTIAN FAITH [§ 87


this, and to evoke it, would then be no part of the Redeemer’s work.
Yet it is possible, on the other hand, that even a truly Christian
piety may have come to regard this matter in so unchristian
an aspect only because it wished to oppose false conceptions of
the way in which the misery is removed by redemption, by setting
forth another explanation, which at least makes room for the fact
that the activity of the God-consciousness, out of which the de-
crease of sin arises, is determined by the Redeemer. Coming
nearest to this false peace, and therefore attributing the lowest
imaginable value to redemption, is the view that an increasing
activity of the God-consciousness is possible without any special
divine help, developing simply out of the natural state of man ;
but that, in spite of the inevitableness of sin, sinners would have
no right to be at peace regarding the sin still remaining without a
special divine assurance about it—so that in essence the Redeemer
is represented only as the herald of this divine promise. It does
not need to be stated how little historical justification there is for
this view in the Christian Church ; it need only be remarked how
little reason can be advanced for the demand that we should
believe in one who does no more than announce forgiveness, and
how difficult it is to understand why such an assurance should
have been given only after so long a time and in sucha way. From
this lowest value on, the felt content of redemption grows the
greater, the greater the share attributed to the Redeemer in the
cessation of the misery as well as in the rise of what approximates
state of blessedness.


§ 87. We are conscious of all approximations to the state of blessedness
which occur in the Christian life as being grounded in a new
divinely-effected corporate life, which works in opposition to
the corporate life of sin and the misery which develops in tt.


1. This proposition is not to be regarded as a complete state-
ment of specifically Christian piety, since in it no mention is made
of the fact that every approximation to the state of blessedness
essentially includes a relation to Christ. But it does undeniably
express the content of the consciousness of divine grace, as it
stands in antithesis to the consciousness of sin. For approxima-
tion to the condition of blessedness is the real opposite of the misery,
and this approximation is accepted as divine grace in the same
sense and degree in which the corporate life in which such elements
of experience become ours is posited as due to divine agency.


§ 87] APPROXIMATIONS TO BLESSEDNESS 359


Consequently all further exposition of what is specifically Christian
can easily be attached to this proposition. The relation between
approximation to blessedness and removal of misery may, it is true,
be presented in a twofold way. First, it may be held that not the
slightest approximation to blessedness can occur so long as there
is even the slightest misery present, which is as much as to say, so
long as sin, and with it evil (or vice versa), still occurs in the sphere
of human life. This is the view of those who choose to regard
the world, even under the influence of redemption, as nothing
but a vale of woe; fortunately they never work out their view
consistently. This view, according to which (if we take it strictly)
all the effects of redemption can be developed only beyond this
present life, will not be advocated here, as is at once clear from the
wording of the proposition, in which the beginning of blessedness
is attributed to the new corporate life simply in virtue of its
opposition to the corporate life of sin—the latter still persisting in
the sphere of its activity. But further, that conception does not
express the truth of the Christian consciousness as it has been
witnessed to from the beginning.t Rather, there is always in the
God-consciousness, whatever its strength, a blessedness corre-
sponding to that strength ; and even in its beginnings this blessed-
ness removes the misery, though, of course, this can arise again
with sin, but only to be again removed.” So that we can completely
equate the two aspects, and say that the same condition is the
removal of misery (when we regard man in his relation to the cor-
porate life of sin), and the beginning of blessedness (so far as he
belongs to the new corporate life).

2. In indicating only in a quite general way the place of these
approximations in the Christian life we wish to begin with to
forestall all one-sided conceptions, which suggest that such ap-
proximations can only: occur in the form of particular activities or
states, and that they are confined, say, to the moments of devotional
meditation or ascetic practices. On the contrary, there is an
element of blessedness in moments of meditation only when they
pass over into thought or act, and in ascetic practices only in so far
as they are not properly, or at least not exclusively, ascetic, but are
in some way connected with our ordinary vocational activity. The
element of blessedness exists just as much in moments of activity
proper and of thought proper, though in the former only in so far as
they do not proceed from such motives as have their roots altogether

johnirt*.x johni3tt:*) Phils 4% BCLS 74,. 12


360 THE CHRISTIAN FAITH [§ 87


in the world-consciousness or in such as satisfy mere civil righteous-
ness ; and similarly, it is not present in the latter in so far as they
merely develop the world-consciousness : but in both only in so far
as they have their ground in the God-consciousness, newly awakened
to life. Without this the religious man cannot experience a growing
blessedness.

3. If now anyone maintains that our proposition, taken by itself,
really applies equally well to all forms of faith, provided only they
involve a fellowship, this is true only in so far as thereby there is
laid upon them the duty of proving that their corporate life is due
to divine agency. But this by no means assumes that there is a
difference between the growing blessedness which then began to de-
velop in the Christian fellowship and that which proceeded directly
from Christ Himself. We shall come immediately to the point that
to regard our corporate life as divinely-created, and to derive it
from Christ as a divinely-given One, are the same thing ; just so, at
that time, to believe that Jesus was the Christ, and to believe that
the Kingdom of God (that is, the new corporate life which was to be
created by God) had come, were the same thing. Consequently, all
developing blessedness had its ground in this corporate life. Just as
little can one regard it as an approximation to the Roman Catholic
point of view, that this change in the personal state should be
ascribed directly to the common or corporate life. We cannot as yet
bring out here its real antagonism to the Roman Catholic view ;
that must wait until we come to describe more closely, on the one
hand, the process in detail ; on the other, the nature of the com-
munity. And so the proposition as such is one which applies equally
to the most various conceptions of Christianity. Two things only
it excludes. First, the idea that one can share in the redemption
and be made blessed through Christ outside the corporate life which
He instituted, as if a Christian could dispense with the latter and
be with Christ, as it were, alone. This separatism disregards the
fact that what owes its origin to divine agency can nevertheless
be received only as it appears in history, and also can continue to
function only as a historical entity. We can therefore only describe
it as fanatical ; it can, in self-consistency, only arise sporadically,
and so must also continually disappear again. It destroys the
essence of Christianity by postulating an activity of Christ which is
not mediated in time and space ; and at the same time it so isolates
itself that what has been achieved in it can have no continuing
influence. The second thing excluded is the supposition that,


§ 88] THE NEW CORPORATE LIFE 361


without the introduction of any new factor, and within the corporate
life of sin itself, the better individuals could attain to such an ap-
proximation to blessedness as would remove the misery. If this
idea be taken strictly, then either another purpose must be assumed
for the appearance of Christ, quite apart from the blessedness of man
(in which case this would, at any rate, not be a religious purpose) ;
or it would have no specific purpose at all (in which case it would be
wrong to name anything after Christ). From our standpoint, the
only verdict of the Christian consciousness on this supposition must
be that it is based upon an inadequate consciousness of sin. For if sin
be posited as corporate act and corporate guilt, then, not only is every
activity of the individual involved in the production and renewal
of sin, however strong an opposition to individual sins it may include,
but also every combination even of the relatively best individuals
remains only an organization within the corporate life of sin itself.
On the other hand, if the supposition is not to be taken strictly,
then it may be Christian in the measure in which it regards Christ
as a new factor in the situation, and the corporate life as one formed
out of the corporate life of sin.


§ 88. In this corporate life which goes back to the influence of Jesus,
redemption is effected by Him through the communication of
His sinless perfection.


1. At the present time it cannot be maintained that this way of
understanding redemption is the only one which is current in the
Protestant Church. And we by no means wish to refuse to recognize
as Protestant Christians those who do not accept the idea of such
a communication, provided only that they trace every approxima-
tion to blessedness back to Christ, and seek to find it in a fellowship
which makes it a principle that, for redemption, nothing need be
sought beyond His influence, and also that nothing in that influence
is to be neglected. We, however, hold to this conception as the
original one, taken over from the primitive Church into our Church,
and at the same time as that which most definitely excludes all
sneaking complacence, and alone consorts with the stricter inter-
pretation of the corporate life of sinfulness, as may be clearly seen
from what immediately precedes. The two things hang together in
the closest way. The less specific and absolute perfection we ascribe
to the Founder of the new corporate life, while at the same time
expecting nothing new that goes beyond Him, the easier must it seem
to us to overcome what demanded of Him no greater equipment.


362 THE CHRISTIAN FAITH [§ 88


And the less importance we attach to what proceeds from the
natural state of man, the less occasion there is to postulate anything
specifically different in Him who inaugurates the better state. For
the development of the one view—and this is all that is required of
a system of doctrine, for that the view should become more generally
accepted can be only the result of its presentation—does not require
that the other should be refuted, but only that the relation which exists
between them should be clearly set forth again at its most significant
points. Just as little can there be any question here of proofs in
the proper sense. Not, of course, because Protestant theology, as an
undertaking within the Protestant Church, itself presupposes the
Protestant faith, but because no single modification of it is capable
of proof; it is simply a statement with regard to the stronger or
weaker impression which one fact makes in comparison with
another. Examples of such differences occur everywhere in the
field of history, and always so that it is possible for everyone to be
firmly convinced that his impression is the right one, while yet no
one can prove its rightness.

2. We set aside, then, all thought of proof. Even of proof from
Scripture—not only because of the ambiguity of most of its state-
ments, but because in that way we could prove only the assertion
that this is the original form of the Christian faith. Even so, what
we must not omit here remains difficult enough ; and that is, to
unfold the way in which this faith originated, along with its content.
That is, we must show, without recourse to compulsion by means
of miracle or prophecy (which is a thing alien to faith), how the
conviction could arise, both originally and now, that Jesus possessed
a sinless perfection, and that there is a communication of this per-
fection in the fellowship founded by Him. For it is obvious that
in the certainty regarding these two points (and certainty about
the one involves a related and parallel certainty about the
other), there is removal of the misery and growing blessedness.
First, then, our proposition is by no means to be understood as
asserting that at a time when the consciousness of sin was power-
fully aroused, both as a personal and as a corporate consciousness,
in many minds, it was only necessary that an exceptional moral
excellence should be adequately manifested in a public life, for the
sinless perfection longed for as the only possible help to be attri-
buted to such an individual—a view which might be expressed by
saying that it was faith that made Jesus the Redeemer. For in
such faith the arbitrary decision of the believer would have become


§ 88] JESUS’ SINLESS PERFECTION 363


more marked on every transference of it, since it would not
have been supported by the original impression made by His
person ; and consequently the certainty would have become less.
Gradually the thought would more and more have gained ground
that another might come, to whom that conception might be trans-
ferred with better right. So that in this way there could only arise
a decreasing faith in Jesus, and thus an increasing unbelief. And
the only remedy for this would be, that the immediate impression
made by the community should be such that sinless perfection
could be claimed for it, and then, for its sake, for its founder also.
It would not be enough even, that the pure and perfect potency of
the God-consciousness should have been actually present in Jesus,
but faith in it nevertheless only the work of that longing, eager for
satisfaction. For even so He would have been made Redeemer by
believers.1 On the contrary, our proposition depends upon the
assumption that the very recognition of that perfection was its own
work, so that it is just as possible that in some persons the full con-
sciousness of sin and the longing which goes with it are first aroused
by means of that recognition,” as that in others they are already
present. It is only in this way, too, that we can regard the
founding of the new corporate life as something more than a special
act, without which that exceptional peculiarity could still have
existed in Jesus. Rather, just as the latter could have been mani-
fested only in act, so the former is its essential work.

If, however, the faith of the later generations, and consequently
of our own, is to be the same as the original one and not a different
faith—and in the latter case, not only would the unity of the
Christian Church be imperilled, but also all references to the original
testimonies of the faith—then it must still be possible to have the
same experiences ; and the recognition of the sinless perfection
in Jesus Christ, definitely constraining us to the new corporate life,
must in the same way be still His work. But there is given to us,
instead of His personal influence, only that of His fellowship, in
so far as even the picture of Him which is found in the Bible also
originated in the community and is perpetuated in it. Our pro-
position, therefore, depends upon the assumption that this influence
of the fellowship in producing a like faith is none other than the
influence of the personal perfection of Jesus Himself.*

3. It is no less difficult to expound the second part of our


1 Contrary to the claim of Christ, John 151°.
BCies TA 2: SiC S LAY he


364 THE CHRISTIAN FAITH [§ 88


proposition, namely, that in the corporate life founded by Christ
there is a communication of His sinless perfection ; while we attri-
bute this to no single individual in the fellowship except Christ.
For, since those who companied with Christ are no longer with us,
and we cannot concede to any group of individuals, however well
they may have been selected to complement each other, the right
to lay down dogmas, that is, rules of faith or life, with any claim
whatsoever to infallibility or enduring validity ; since, on the
contrary, our historical interpretation is based upon the view that
the influence of distinguished individuals upon the mass is to be
thought of as declining : where and of what sort are we to suppose
this communication to be? If we regard the mass as a whole,
it manifestly shares so largely in the general sinfulness, and this at
certain times so saliently and in such specially heightened measure,
that it is doubtful whether there is less of this sinfulness at any one
point rather than another, and whether it might not therefore have
been better for the shaping of human affairs if Christianity had not
become such a widely spread historical force. Against these objec-
tions, brought forward with much plausibility by its opponents,
faith alone can prevail ; it must consequently assume that all this
represents only the non-existence of the new corporate life, and
so the existence of the sinful life in which the new really exists but
only in hidden fashion. Thus our proposition depends upon the
assumption that in the Christian fellowship, outwardly so con-
stituted, there is still that communication of the absolutely potent
God-consciousness in Christ as a thing which is inward, and yet,
since faith can rest upon nothing except an impression received,
capable of being experienced. This experience is made up of two
elements, one of which belongs to the personal consciousness, the
other tothe common consciousness. The former is that the individual
even to-day receives from the picture of Christ, which exists in the
community as at once a corporate act and a corporate possession,
the impression of the sinless perfection of Jesus, which becomes for
him at the same time the perfect consciousness of sin and the removal
of the misery. And this is already in itself a communication of
that perfection. The second element is that in all those aberra-
tions of the Christian Church, however much they may resemble
the sinful corporate life, there is still a tendency issuing from that
perfection ; a tendency which in every manifestation—nay, con-
stantly even in the setting up of the concepts of truth and goodness
—falls more or less a prey to non-existence, but which in its deepest


§ 89] SUPERNATURAL AND NATURAL 365


inwardness, or as an impulse, corresponds to its origin, and conse-
quently, in spite of all reactions, will also increasingly make
itself manifest. And this impulse given by His historical life, an
impulse which, regarded from within, is perfectly pure, is, just like
the first element, a true and effective communication of the per-
fection of Christ.

4. In the corporate life of sinfulness sin propagates itself natur-
ally, so that an unhindered potency of the God-consciousness in
Jesus cannot be understood simply as a product of that life. This
God-consciousness, manifesting itself in this potency, can have
come into existence only outside the sinful corporate life. And
since the whole human race is included in this sinful corporate life,
we must believe that this God-consciousness had a supernatural
origin, though only in the sense which has been postulated above.
So, too, in relation to the Redeemer Himself, the new corporate life
is no miracle, but simply the supernatural becoming natural, since
every exceptional force attracts mass to itself and holds it fast.
But in relation to the corporate life of sinfulness, which hitherto had
included everything and dominated every formation, the new is
something that has come into being supernaturally. The same is true
of the passage of every individual from the old corporate life into
the new. In relation to the new creation itself such a passage is
not supernatural ; such effects follow as of course from its nature.
But it is something which has come about supernaturally, so far as
its relation to the earlier life of this individual is concerned.

To sum up: in this whole matter we posit, on the one side, an
initial divine activity which is supernatural, but at the same time
a vital human receptivity in virtue of which alone that supernatural
can become a natural fact of history. This is the link which connects
the corporate life before the appearance of the Redeemer with that
which exists in the fellowship with the Redeemer, so as adequately to
bring out the identity of human nature in both. And so, in this
whole context, the appearance of the Redeemer in the midst of this
natural development is no longer a supernatural emergence of a
new stage of development, but simply one conditioned by that
which precedes—though certainly its connexion with the former
is to be found only in the unity of the divine thought.


§ 89. In the sense in which it can be said that sin is not ordained by
God and does not exist for Him,? the term Redemption would
ICH, ISDH She 25h S.Sde


366 THE CHRISTIAN FAITH [§ 89


not be suitable for this new communication of a powerful
God-consciousness. And so from that point of view the
appearance of Christ and the institution of this new corporate
life would have to be regarded as the completion, only now
accomplished, of the creation of human nature.


r. It requires no further explanation, that the conception of
redemption is related in the closest way to the consciousness of
sin, and that when it is used as an expression for the complete work
of Christ, there is included along with the removal of the misery,
which alone is properly described as redemption, a growing blessed-
ness as well. For that reason alone the expression is inadequate,
and an unsuitable one in this respect, that a word is used for the
whole (the imparting of blessedness) which properly applies only
to the beginning of it. But there is no objection to its use if this is
understood. For it is certain that in our Christian consciousness
the divine grace as such is always thought of in connexion with
sin; while sin itself is always conceived of as including our in-
ability to do what our God-consciousness requires us to strive after.
So nothing in the divine grace is overlooked if it is described as the
removal of sin, in so far as sinis that inability. But if the expression
is to be used not only for the effect, but also for the purpose, of the
appearance of Christ, in so far as that appearance is ordained of
God, then, since we cannot separate it from its connexion with sin
and the consciousness of sin, this is only possible in so far as we can
regard the consciousness of sin as ordained of God. How far this
is possible has already + been explained, but it now becomes clearer
—God has ordained that the earlier insuperable impotence of the
God-consciousness shall become for us, as our own act, the con-
sciousness of sin, in order to intensify that longing without which
even the endowment possessed by Jesus would have met with no
living faculty for the reception of what He communicates. But,
on the other hand, that God is not the creator of sin is, not only
strictly true, but also the definite teaching of the Church. The
ground for this assertion is best expressed in the formula that evil
cannot be a creative thought of God. It follows that the term re-
demption is not so suitable to describe the divine decree as it is to
describe the effect of the decree, for the Almighty cannot ordain one
thing for the sake of another which He has not ordained. From this
standpoint, which is also that of the Church, no better expression

1 Cf. § 80.


§ 89] CHRIST THE SECOND ADAM 367


apparently can be found for the divine decree than a Biblical one
which at the same time indicates the effect asa whole. As every-
thing which has been brought into human life through Christ is pre-
sented as a new creation,! so Christ Himself is the Second Adam, the
beginner and originator of this more perfect human life, or the com-
pletion of the creation of man. This at the same time indicates
in the most definite way that it was impossible to attain to this
higher life out of the natural order which had its beginning in Adam.
2. That this formula is exactly equivalent in meaning to the
first, and attributes to Jesus, as the One in whom the human creation
is perfected, the same peculiar dignity and character as does the
other when it is fully understood, need not be set forth at length.
For this Second Adam is altogether like all those who are descended
from the first, only that from the outset He has an absolutely potent
God-consciousness. With this He enters the existing historical
order of human nature, in virtue of a creative divine causality. It
follows that, according to the law of this order, His higher perfec-
tion must work in a stimulating and communicative way upon the
nature which is like His own, in the first place to bring to perfection
the consciousness of sinfulness by contrast with itself, and then
also to remove the misery, by assimilation to itself. Now this
Second Adam, though He does not belong to the former order, but
in relation to it has come into being supernaturally, is yet placed
in the historical order, and that too as an individual man. So in
His whole activity He stands under the law of historical develop-
ment, and that activity is brought to perfection through gradual
expansion, from the point at which He appears, over the whole.
That in this way the creation of man is, as it were, divided into
two stages has analogies enough in history,” and also it has always
been asserted of the material creation whenever the distinction has
been made between a first and a second creation. At the same
time this formula serves as a corrective to the confusions which arise
only too easily from improper use of the others. How easily the
view recurs which was already attacked by Paul,’ that sin is whole-
some, if it is true that it was on account of sin that Christ had to be
sent, and so the imparting of blessedness depends upon sin! More-
over, when considered more closely, this formula is a more precise
and direct expression of our Christian self-consciousness than the
first. For to begin with, certainly the most exact term for the


425 Cors 5+ 4 2 Here, too, belongs what has been said above, § 13, I.
% Rom, 61,


368 THE CHRISTIAN FAITH [§ 89


condition outside fellowship with Christ is consciousness of sin and
of need of redemption, inasmuch as and so far as this too is ordained
by God. But in fellowship with Christ everything which belongs
to a sinfulness no longer productive, is also, just for that reason, no
longer in the same sense a consciousness of sin, because it is no
longer a being fleshly-minded, but simply an incapacity for what
has only just come to be ; and the consciousness of the Redeemer
is the consciousness of One who makes us strong.?

3. But in the case of this expression also the demand certainly
cannot be set aside that here again the conception of creation must
be referred back to that of preservation. Not only is the man Jesus
called the Second Adam, which can only mean the second Created
One, but also all those born again are called the new creation, and
thus that is represented as a creation which, quite correctly, we
describe as originally a preservation, that is, as a preservation of the
ever-prevailing power of Christ for redemption and blessing: but
conversely, the appearance of Christ Himself is to be regarded as a
preservation, that is, as a preservation of the receptivity, implanted
in human nature from the beginning and perpetually developing
further, which enables it to take into itself such an absolute potency
of the God-consciousness. For although at the first creation of the
human race only the imperfect state of human nature was mani-
fested, yet eternally the appearance of the Redeemer was already
involved in that. So that, in whatever sense its fulfilment has
to be conceived, the unity of the divine decree comes out with
equal clearness whether we say that God ordained sin for men
relatively to redemption, or that He put human nature under the
law of earthly existence in the sense that, just as the sensuous
self-consciousness developed first in each individual, while the God-
consciousness came only later, and up to a point gradually took
possession of the sensuous self-consciousness and subjugated it, so
too the God-consciousness in the race to begin with was inadequate
and impotent, and only later broke forth in perfection in Christ,
from whom it continually extends its authority, and proves its
power to bring peace and blessedness to men.

Further, from this standpoint the relation of Christ to those who
lived before His appearance, or who are separated by distance from
the corporate life inspired by Him—always an important question
for Christian thought—becomes clearer. If the first stage in crea-
tion is ordained by God only in view of the second, obviously the

1 Phil. 433,


§ go] THE THREE FORMS OF PROPOSITION 369


same must be true of everything that forms part of the same natural
order with it. Accordingly, in the ordaining view of God every-
thing which belongs to the first period of the world must have a
share in the relation to the Redeemer. At the same time it appears
the more natural that this otherwise hidden relation should become
specially evident at particular points, which is just the assumption
that prompts a search for types and prophecies.


§ 90. The propositions which work out, according to the three points
of view given im § 30, the content of the consciousness of grace
here presented, also complete the system of Christian doctrine
within the limits here prescribed for it.


1. In elaborating, in what follows, this content, we shall hold to
these three forms. In itself, there is no objection to the first and
original one, and it is obvious that with a method of procedure
which is in any degree correct nothing of any significance in Christian
doctrine can escape our notice. But it is difficult to see how we
are to distinguish between the first, or the direct description of the
gracious state of the redeemed, and the second, or the description
of what has come into the world through redemption. For this
last is simply the corporate life founded by Christ and its relation
to that part of the world of men which finds itself excluded there-
from. The gracious state of the redeemed, again, is simply their
activity just in this corporate life and the way in which they are
affected by the opposition which still exists to it ; so that the two
spheres seem to be exactly the same. Connected with this is the
fact that here it is less clear that the description of the state must
come first. For, on the one hand, it is only out of this new corporate
life that the communication of the divine grace comes to each in-
dividual, and so it seems necessary that this should be recognized
first. Yet, on the other hand, the corporate life is made up of the
redeemed as such, and it seems impossible to understand if we have
not first considered the peculiar quality of these. None the less
both difficulties disappear at once when we come to look into the
matter more closely. It is true that the corporate life consists
solely of redeemed individuals, but it has its significance for the
world only through its organization. Considered as an organiza-
tion it belongs to the second form of presentation. The state of the
individuals as such, on the other hand, as contrasted with their
state in the corporate life of sinfulness, is to be worked out rather
from the first standpoint. And if in doing so we must in a certain


24


370 THE CHRISTIAN FAITH [§ 90


sense presuppose acquaintance with the corporate life, yet it is not
a dogmatic knowledge of it. Nor indeed can it be maintained that
such acquaintance is really presupposed, since that state of grace
was called into being, along with the corporate life, or indeed before
it, by the first proclamation of the Gospel. Thus both methods of
presentation are possible, and can be kept apart, even though mutual
relations between them are inevitable.

2. Finally, as regards the divine attributes which are to be dealt
with in the last section, it would be a very strong objection to the
propriety of our whole disposition of the subject if, after we had
completed the argument, there still remained divine attributes which
represent a factor in our Christian self-consciousness, yet can be
definitely distinguished from those with which we have been dealing.
So for the present we refuse to admit this, and on the contrary regard
it as a good sign that we have reduced the large number of indefinite
terms denoting attributes to a smaller number of clear formule,
and also have definitely excluded all that is merely speculative.
The event must show whether we have really done this. But
here we have not only to supply what before was lacking, but
also, as we have remarked above,! to give their full content (since
we are only now for the first time moving in the sphere of the potent
God-consciousness) to all those manifestations of the feeling of
absolute dependence which could only be indefinitely described in the
first part. For in Christianity it is only relatively to the Kingdom
of God that we are conscious of the divine omnipotence and eternity,
as well as of the attributes which depend upon them. It is.another
question whether in fact the whole doctrine of God which answers
to the Christian faith can be dealt with simply by an enumeration of
the divine attributes, and whether we ought not rather in addition
to set forth the significance of the divine decrees. But this question
arises only if we take cognizance of other treatments of Christian
doctrine. For a proposition indicative of a divine decree is not as
such an expression of the immediate self-consciousness. But if we
can bring rightly and completely into consciousness what has come
into the world through redemption, then we shall thereby have
given the content of the divine decrees also.

1§ 29, and p. 272.


FIRST SECTION


THE STATE OF THE CHRISTIAN AS CONSCIOUS OF THE
DIVINE GRACE


§ 91. We have fellowship with God only in a living fellowship with
the Redeemer, such that in it His absolutely sinless perfection
and blessedness represent a free spontaneous activity, while
the recipient's need of redemption represents a free assimilative
recephivity.

1. This is the basic consciousness that each Christian has of his
own state of grace, even where the most dissimilar views of Christi-
anity prevail. The consciousness of one who in no degree relates
the potency of the God-consciousness which he finds in himself to
Jesus is not Christian at all; while, if he does so relate it, but
without in any degree recognizing the contrast noted in our pro-
position, then, since he finds in himself, not merely no sin, but
not even imperfection, and is altogether spontaneous and independ-
ent in his activity, he must have left the state of grace behind him,
and have himself become a Christ. If, on the other hand, a man
relates his state, as touching fellowship with God, to Jesus, but
without finding in himself any living receptivity for Him, then he
certainly believes in Christ in so far as he assumes Him to possess
a saving influence, but as yet he does not find himself a recipient
of grace, for he cannot have experienced any change through Christ.
For there can be no change in a living being without his own
activity ; hence, without such activity—that is, in a purely passive
way—no influence exerted by another can really be received. Or
again, if a man’s own activity were one of opposition, if it were
simply resistance, then the grace would necessarily have been im-
parted against his will, that is, by compulsion, and so would not be
blessedness. Thus all real vital fellowship with Christ, in which He
is in any sense taken as Redeemer, depends on the fact that living
receptivity for His influence is already present, and continues to be
present. And this holds true equally for every moment and

1 Cf. § 63.


a7z


372 THE CHRISTIAN FAITH [§ 91


degree ; for, once arrived at the limit, the connexion would
necessarily break off of itself.

But it cannot be denied that our proposition leaves plenty
of scope for the most various interpretations of this relation-
ship, provided they all keep within the limits laid down. One
man may regard the relationship as absolutely the same at all
moments, so that all the influences already felt in no way alter its
character ; another may believe that in the recipient of grace
there gradually arises a co-operative self-activity, so that the
new Ego considered in its self-identity is a self-active entity and
more and more develops itself in that character, and only the
person as such, considered as the subject of change, is the seat
of pure receptivity ; for which reason he is conscious of the potency
of the God-consciousness as something constantly his own,
though of course derived from Christ. Indeed, if we go back to
the distinction between the personal self-consciousness and the
common consciousness and accept our proposition as expressing
the common Christian consciousness, but add that every adult
Christian can and ought to be conscious of himself personally
as free and self-active in the Kingdom of God, while at the same
time he has only become such within the corporate life whose
consciousness is rightly defined in our proposition—this view also
would lie within the limits stated. But, of course, these views are
not all equally current in the Church.

2. If then a statement such as we have given is equally valid for
all elements, however widely they may differ, within the corporate
life founded by Christ, it indicates only one possible division of
our subject-matter. We must first explain how in virtue of
this consciousness we conceive the Redeemer, next how we conceive
the redeemed. The order fixes itself, for whatever in the state
of the Christian contrasts with his former state in the fellowship of
sinfulness can only be explained by the influence of the Redeemer.
Hence the content of this section falls into two divisions. To the
first belong all propositions concerning Christ which are immediate
expressions of our Christian self-consciousness. If any teaching
concerning Christ is given in other treatments of Protestant
doctrine, but not here, that omission is not an arbitrary judgment
on our part but sure internal evidence that such teaching is lack-
ing in purely dogmatic content, and for that reason possessed only
of a subordinate explanatory or subsidiary value (for if it could
have come in under our plan, it would assuredly by our method


§ 91] DIVISIONS OF THIS SECTION 373


have found a place for itself). The second division must contain
all propositions which directly describe the relation of grace to
sinfulness in the human soul, and this as mediated by the entrance
of the Redeemer. This division was, above,! marked off from the
second section ; accordingly, we must include here everything
by means of which the individual obtains and takes a share in the
Christian fellowship—only, however, so far as it is regarded as his
personal quality or mode of action.


EAN OVO), At


First DIvIsSION. CHRIST


§ 92. The peculiar activity and the exclusive dignity of the Redeemer
imply each other, and are inseparably one in the self-con-
sciousness of believers.


1. Whether we prefer to call Christ the Redeemer, or to regard
Him as the one in Whom the creation of human nature, which
up to this point had existed only in a provisional state, was per-
fected, each of these points of view means only that we ascribe
to Him a peculiar activity, and that in connexion with a peculiar
spiritual content of His person. For if His influence is only of the
same kind as that of others, even if it is ever so much more complete
and inclusive, then its result also, that is, the salvation of mankind,
would be a work common to Him and the others, although His
share might be the greater ; and there would be, not one Redeemer
over against the redeemed, but many, of whom one would only be
the First among those like Him. Nor would the human creation
then be completed through Him, but through all of those redeemers
together, who, in so far as their work implies in them a peculiar
quality of nature, are all alike distinguished from the rest of man-
kind. It would be just the same, if His activity were indeed peculiar
to Himself, but this less in virtue of an inner quality belonging to
Him than of a peculiar position in which He had been put. The
second form of expression, that the human creation had been com-
pleted in Him, would then be altogether without content, since it
would be more natural to suppose that there are many like Him,
only they did not happen to occupy the same position. In that
case He would not even be properly Redeemer, even though it
could be said that mankind had been redeemed through His act
or His suffering, as the case might be. For the result, namely,
salvation, could not be something communicated from Him (since
He had nothing peculiar to Himself); it could only have been
occasioned or released by Him.

Just as little could the approximation to the condition of
blessedness be traced to Him, if He had indeed had an exclusive


dignity, but had remained passive in it, and had exercised no
374


§ 92] HIS ACTIVITY AND DIGNITY Sy Ae)


influence corresponding to it. For (apart from the fact that it is
incomprehensible how His contemporaries, and we after them,
should ever have come to attribute such an influence to Him,
especially when the manner of His appearance was what it was),
supposing that the blessedness could have been communicated
merely through men’s observing this dignity, although there were
united with it no influence acting on others, then in the observers
there must have been something more than receptivity; His
appearance would have to be regarded rather as merely the occasion
for this idea, spontaneously produced by themselves.

2. Thus the approximation to blessedness, out of the state of
misery, cannot be explained as a fact mediated through Jesus, by
reference to either of these elements without the other. It follows,
therefore, that they must be most intimately related and mutually
determined. So that it is vain to attribute to the Redeemer a
higher dignity than the activity at the same time ascribed to Him
demands, since nothing is explained by this surplus of dignity.
It is equally vain to attribute to Him a greater activity than
follows naturally from the dignity which one is ready to allow to
Him, since whatever results from this surplus of activity cannot
be traced to Him in the same sense as the rest. Therefore every
doctrine of Christ is inconsistent, in which this equality (of dignity
and activity) is not essential, whether it seeks to disguise the detrac-
tion from the dignity by praising in Him great but really alien
activities, or, conversely, seeks to compensate for the lesser influence
which it allows Him by highly exalting Him, yet in a fashion which
leads to no result.

3. If we hold fast to this rule, we could treat the whole doctrine
of Christ either as that of His activity, for then the dignity must
naturally follow from that, or as that of His dignity, for the activity
must then result of itself. This is indicated by the two general
formule above. For that the creation of human nature has been
completed in His person is in and by itself only a description of His
dignity, greater or less, according as the difference between the con-
dition before and after is regarded as greater or less ; but the activity
follows of itself, if indeed the creation is to continue to exist.
Again, that He is the Redeemer similarly describes His activity,
but the dignity follows of itself to just the same degree. Never-
theless, it is not advisable to choose one of these methods of treat-
ment to the exclusion of the other ; this would involve at once both
giving up the (traditional) language of the Church, and making a


376 THE CHRISTIAN FAITH [§ 92


comparison between our statements and other treatments of
doctrine more difficult. Some of the churchly formule deal with
the activity of Christ ; others are concerned with His dignity ; hence
the strongest assurance that the two classes agree is to be found
in the fact that the subject should be treated separately from both
standpoints. The more what is peculiar in each of them is related
to the other, the more probable it is that the propositions which are
laid down reproduce with purity an original self-consciousness.
The common measure of both, namely, the extent to which activity
and dignity are embraced in one presentation, is to be found in the
first place in the presentation of the result in individual lives, and
next in the presentation of the Church, which must be just as
complete a revelation of the dignity of the Redeemer as the world
is a complete revelation of the attributes of God.

This division falls accordingly into two doctrines—that of the
Person of Christ, and that of His Work. These two are quite
different so far as the individual propositions are concerned, but
their total content is the same; from each point of view the
content both of the second division and of the second section may
be regarded as that which came to pass through Christ.


First DOcTRINE : THE PERSON OF CHRIST


§ 93. Lf the spontaneity of the new corporate life is original in the
Redeemer and proceeds from Him alone, then as an historical
individual He must have been at the same time ideal (i.e. the
ideal must have become completely historical in Him), and
each historical moment of His experience must at the same
tume have borne within it the rdeal.


1. If the peculiar dignity of the Redeemer can be measured
only by His total activity as resting upon that dignity, while this
activity can be seen in its completeness only in the corporate life
He founded ; if, further, on the one hand, all other religious com-
munities are destined to pass over into this one, so that all religious
life existing apart from this is imperfect, whereas in this there is
perfection ; if, on the other hand, this life itself, at all times and
even in its highest development, has no other relation to the Re-
deemer than that which has been indicated above,! so that it can
be all that it is only in virtue of its susceptibility to His influence :
then the dignity of the Redeemer must be thought of in such a
way that He is capable of achieving this. But inasmuch as His
activity, so far as we can relate it directly and exclusively to His
person, is to be considered in the first place in His public life, but in
this life there are no conspicuous isolated acts which definitely
stood out in separation from the rest of it, the true manifestation
of His dignity, which is identical with His activity in the founding
of a community, lies not in isolated moments, but in the whole
course of His life. These are the two truths which, in our proposi-
tion, are not simply laid down but are also fully and at every point
related to each other.

2. Now, if we live in the Christian fellowship, with the conviction
which is common to all Christians, that no more perfect form of the
God-consciousness lies in front of the human race, and that any
new form would simply be a retrograde step; and, further, that
every increase in the activity of the God-consciousness within the
Christian fellowship proceeds, not from any newly-added power,


1§ or.
377


378 THE CHRISTIAN FAITH [§ 93


but always and only from an ever-active susceptibility to His
influence, clearly every given state of this corporate life must
remain no more than an approximation to that which exists in the
Redeemer Himself ; and just this is what we understand by His
ideal dignity. But this corporate life is not concerned with the
multifarious relationships of human life—as though Christ must
have been ideal for all knowledge or all art and skill which have
been developed in human society—but only with the capacity of
the God-consciousness to give the impulse to all life’s experiences
and to determine them. Hence we do not make the ideality of
the Redeemer cover more than this. To this, it is true, it might
still be objected that, since the potency of the God-consciousness
in the corporate life itself remains always imperfect at best, we
must certainly attribute an exemplary (vorbildliche) dignity to the
Redeemer, but ideality (Urbildlichkect) (which, properly, asserts
the existence of the concept itself), that is, absolute perfection, is
not necessarily to be attributed to Him, not even according to the
principle laid down above, for it is not necessary to explain the
result, which always remains imperfect. Rather, it might be
argued, this is the fundamental exaggeration into which believers
fall when they regard Christ in the mirror of their own im-
perfection ; and this exaggeration continually perpetuates itself
in the same manner, since believers in all ages read into Jesus
whatever they are able to conceive as ideal in this sphere. But
in this connexion there are two things to be observed. First,
that on this view (if clearly realized) there must be developed
at least a wish—for the absolutely perfect is always at least an
object of aspiration—the more the individual subordinates his
personal consciousness to the God-consciousness, even a hope,
that some day the human race, if only in its noblest and
best, will pass beyond Christ and leave Him behind. But this
clearly marks the end of Christian faith, which on the contrary
knows no other way to a pure conception of the ideal than
an ever-deepening understanding of Christ. If, on the other hand,
this consequence is not consciously realized, or is definitely rejected,
then this limitation of the ideal to the merely exemplary can only
be a misunderstood rule of prudence, the apparent ground for
which will reveal itself later. Second, we must reflect, on the
one hand, that as soon as we grant the possibility of a continued
progress in the potency of the God-consciousness, while denying
that its perfection exists anywhere, we can also no longer maintain


§ 93] THE TDEALITY OF CHRIST 379


that the creation of man has been or will be completed, since un-
doubtedly in progress thus continual perfection remains always
only a bare possibility. And this would be to assert less of man
than of other creatures—for it may be said of all more limited kinds
of being that their concept is perfectly realized in the totality of
individuals, which complete each other. But this cannot hold of a
species which develops itself freely, if the perfection of an essential
vital function be posited in the concept but actually found in no
individual ; for perfection cannot be obtained by adding together
things that are imperfect. And, on the other hand, it is to be con-
sidered how difficult it would necessarily be to indicate a difference
between a true ideal and such an example in which there at the
same time resides the power to produce every possible advance in
the totality. For productivity belongs only to the concept of the
ideal and not to that of the exemplary. We must conclude, then,
that ideality is the only appropriate expression for the exclusive
personal dignity of Christ.

With regard to the above statement, however, that the thought
either of desire or of ability to go beyond Christ marks the end of
the Christian faith, here, too, it is not easy to distinguish, among
the various conceptions of it which leave room for the perfecti-
bility of Christianity, between those which, although they do not
seem so, nevertheless are still Christian, and those which are not, yet
wish to pass as such. Everyone recognizes that there is a great
difference between two classes. There are those who say it is not
only possible but our duty to go beyond much of what Christ
taught His disciples, because He Himself (since human thought is
impossible without words) was seriously hindered by the imperfec-
tion of language from giving real expression to the innermost
content of His spiritual being in clearly defined thoughts ; and the
same, it may be held, is true in another sense of His actions also, in
which the relations by which they were determined, and therefore
imperfection, are always reflected. This, however, does not prevent
us from attributing to Him absolute ideality in His inner being, in
the sense that that inner being may always transcend its manifesta-
tion, and what is manifested be only an ever more perfect pre-
sentation of it. But there is another class: those who are of
opinion that Christ is no more even in His inner being than could
be manifested of it, while the fellowship of doctrine and life which
takes its origin from Christ, with the testimonies to Him which it
preserves, has in virtue of special divine guidance so fortunate an


380 THE CHRISTIAN FAITH [§ 93


organization that both doctrine and life can easily be re-modelled
in accordance with any more perfect ideal which later generations
might conceive, without the fellowship needing to lose its historical
identity, so that the necessity of founding new religious fellowships
has been for all time done away. A single step more, and even
the first presuppositions of the Christian faith will be removed ; and
that step may quite consistently be taken. For if Christ was so
much under the constraint of what was necessarily involved in His
appearance in history, then both He Himself, and His whole
achievement as well, must be capable of being explained simply
by what was historically given Him. That is, Christianity in
its entirety can be explained by Judaism at the stage of
development which it had then reached—the stage at which it was
possible for a man like Jesus to be born of it. Accordingly, Chris-
tianity was nothing but a new development of Judaism, though a
development saturated with foreign philosophies then current, and
Jesus was nothing but a more or less original and revolutionary
reformer of the Jewish law.

3. But however certain it may be that the source of such a cor-
porate life, continually advancing in the power of its God-conscious-
ness, can lie only in the ideal, it is not on that account any easier to
understand just how the ideal can have been revealed and mani-
fested in a truly historically-conditioned individual. Even generally
considered, we are compelled to keep the two ideas separate, and,
whether we are speaking of works of art or of the forms of nature,
we regard each separate one only as a complement of the rest and
as requiring completion by them. But if sin is posited as a corporate
act of the human race, what possibility then remains that an ideal
individual could have developed out of this corporate life? The
way of escape, which suggests that the ideal might be produced by
human thought and transferred more or less arbitrarily to Jesus, is
already cut off. In that case Christianity would be founded upon
an imperfect ideal ; it would therefore have to give up its claim to
take up into itself all forms of faith and to develop out of itself more
and more perfection and blessedness. But if our aim is to make
room in human nature before Christ, and apart from Him, for the
power of producing within itself a pure and perfect ideal—then
human nature, since there is a natural connexion between reason and
will, cannot have been in a condition of universal sinfulness. Hence,
if the man Jesus was really ideal, or if the ideal became historical and
actual in Him—the one expression means the same as the other—in


§ 93] HIS DEVELOPMENT 381


order to establish a new corporate life within the old and out of it,
then certainly He must have entered into the corporate life of sinful-
ness, but He cannot have come out of it, but must be recognized in
it as a miraculous fact (eine wunderbare Erscheinung), and yet (in
harmony with the analogies established above)! only in the meaning
of the word ‘ miracle ’ which has here once for all been determined.
His peculiar spiritual content, that is, cannot be explained by the
content of the human environment to which He belonged, but only
by the universal source of spiritual life in virtue of a creative divine
act in which, as an absolute maximum, the conception of man as the
subject of the God-consciousness comes to completion. But since
we can never properly understand the beginnings of life, full justice
is done to the demand for the perfect historicity of this perfect ideal,
if, from then on, He developed in the same way as all others, so that
from birth on His powers gradually unfolded, and, from the zero
point of His appearance onwards, were developed to completeness
in the order natural to the human race. This applies also to His
God-consciousness, with which we are here specially concerned ;
which certainly, in the case of others as little as in His, is infused by
education—the germ of it is found originally in all—but which in
Him too, as in all, had to develop gradually in human fashion into a
really manifest consciousness, and antecedently was only present as
a germ, although in a certain sense always present as an active
power. So even during this period of development, after it had
actually become a consciousness, it could exert its influence over the
sensuous self-consciousness only in the measure in which the various
functions of the latter had already emerged, and thus, even regarded
from this side, it appeared as itself something that was only gradually
unfolding to its full extent. If we make the mistake of thinking
that, on account of His ideal nature, we must deny this and assume
that from the very beginnings of His life He carried the God-con-
sciousness as such within Himself—then from the very outset He
must have been conscious of Himself as an Ego ; indeed (the deduc-
tion is very simple), He must have been master of language from the
first, at least so far as its more abstract part is concerned, and
before He ever spoke ; thus His whole earliest childhood must have
been mere appearance. This excludes the thought of a true human
life and quite definitely adopts the error of Docetism ; and on these
terms we should have to separate in time that in which Christ is like
all men from what in Him is ideal, allotting to the former the whole


$13, 1.


382 THE CHRISTIAN FAITH [§ 93


period of development up to the beginning of mature manhood, and
only then allowing the ideal to come in over and above. But this
latter is then inconceivable without an absolute miracle. Nay
more, sin too would then, at that earlier stage, be at least possible
in Him, and therefore also certainly actually present, even if only
in the faintest degree ; and thus Jesus would be Redeemer and
redeemed in one person—with all the further consequences of that.

The pure historicity of the person of the Redeemer, however, in-
volves also this fact, that He could develop only in a certain simi-
larity with His surroundings, that is, in general after the manner of
His people. For since mind and understanding drew their nourish-
ment solely from this surrounding world, and His free self-activity
too had in this world its determined place, even His God-conscious-
ness, however original its higher powers, could only express or com-
municate itself in ideas which He had appropriated from this sphere,
and in actions which as to their possibility were predetermined in it.?
If we wished to deny this dependence of development upon sur-
roundings, we should logically have to assume an empirical omni-
science in Christ, in virtue of which all human forms of thought, as
well as languages, would have been equally familiar to Him, so that
He would have lived in whatever is true and right in each of these
just as much as in that of His native land. We should also have to
add the same omniscience relatively to the various human relation-
ships and their management. And this, too, would mean the loss
of true humanity.

4. Further, whatever is involved in the ideality of the
contents of His personal spiritual life must also be compatible
with this purely human conception of His historical existence.
Thus, in the first place, His development must be thought of as
wholly free from everything which we have to conceive as conflict.
For it is not possible that, where an inner conflict has ever at
any time taken place, the traces of it should ever disappear
completely. Just as little could the ideal have been recognized
as present where even the slightest traces of this conflict betrayed
themselves. The power with which the God-consciousness, so far
as it was developed at each particular moment, determined that
moment could never have been in doubt, or disturbed by the
memory of an earlier conflict. Nor could He ever have found
Himself in a condition through which a conflict could have been


* It will doubtless be generally recognized that this is implied in the state-
ment in Gal. 44, that Christ was made under the law.


§ 93] NOrSPIRIT UAL CONFLICT IN CHRIST 383


occasioned in the future, that is, there could have been in Him, even
from the beginning, no inequality in the relation of the various
functions of sensuous human nature to the God-consciousness. Thus
at every moment even of His period of development He must have
been free from everything by which the rise of sin in the individual
is conditioned.t. Two things, further, are quite well possible
together : first, that all powers, both the lower ones which were to be
mastered and the controlling higher ones, emerged only in gradual
development, so that the latter were able to dominate the former
only in the measure of their development ; and, secondly, that the
domination itself was nevertheless at each moment complete in the
sense that nothing was ever able to find a place in the sense-nature
which did not instantly take its place as an instrument of the
spirit, so that no impression was taken up merely sensuously into
the innermost consciousness and elaborated apart from God-con-
sciousness into an element of life, nor did any action, that can really
be regarded as such, and asa real whole, ever proceed solely from the
sense-nature and not from the God-consciousness. What we couldlay
down above? only as a possibility, namely, a sinless development of a
human individual life, must have become actual in the person of
the Redeemer in virtue of this undisturbed identity of the relation-
ship, so that we can represent the growth of His personality from
earliest childhood on to the fulness of manhood as a continuous
transition from the condition of purest innocence to one of purely
spiritual fulness of power, which is far removed from anything
which we call virtue. For in the condition of innocence there
is an activity of the God-consciousness, but only an indirect one,
which, though still latently, restrains every movement in the sense-
experience which must develop into opposition. The nearest
approximation to this, which not seldom occurs in our experience,
we usually call ‘a happy childlike nature.’ The adult fulness of
power, on the other hand, although its growth is gradual and the
result of practice, is distinguished from virtue in this respect, that
it is not the result of a conflict, inasmuch as it does not need to be
worked out either through error or through sin, nor even through
an inclination to either. And this purity must on no account be
regarded as a consequence of outward protection, but must have its
ground in the Man Himself, that is, in the higher God-consciousness
implanted in Him originally. Otherwise, since such outward
protection depends upon the actions of others, the ideal in Him
Cf. §§ 67-69. 2§ 68, 1.


384 THE CHRISTIAN .FAITH [§ 93


would be produced rather than productive, and He Himself would be
just as much the first from the totality redeemed, as afterwards
Himself the Redeemer.

Secondly, so far as what is conditioned by race in His person is
concerned, Christ could hardly be a complete man if His personality
were not determined by this factor ; but such determination in no
way concerns the real principle of His life but only the organism.
Racial peculiarity is in no way the type of His self-activity ; it
is only the type of His receptivity for the self-activity of the spirit ;
nor can it have been like a repelling or exclusive principle in Him,
but must have been united with the freest and most unclouded
appreciation of everything human, and with the recognition of
the identity of nature and also of spirit in all human forms ; also
it must have been without any effort to extend what in Him was
racial beyond its appointed limits. And it is only when we have
guarded ourselves thus that we can say that the racial too in Him
is ideally determined, both in itself and in its relation to the whole
of human nature.

5. Here we can only call attention in passing and by
anticipation to the influence which this conception of the
ideality of the Redeemer in the perfectly natural historicity
of His career exercises on all the Christian doctrines current
in the Church, all of which must be formulated differently if
that conception more or less is given up. To begin with, the
fact that all doctrines and precepts developed in the Christian
Church have universal authority only through their being
traced back to Christ, has no other ground than His perfect
ideality in everything connected with the power of the God-con-
sciousness. In so far as this is set aside, there must be conceded a
possibility of doctrines and precepts arising in the sphere of piety
which go beyond the utterances of Christ. Similarly, the preaching
of the written word, in so far as it contains only glorification of
Christ, and the sacrament of the altar, can be regarded as permanent
institutions in the Christian Church only if we premise that the
whole development and maintenance of Christian piety must always
proceed from vital fellowship with Christ. Nor could Christ be
presented as a universal example unless His relation to all original
differences in individuals were uniform—for otherwise He would
necessarily be more of an example for some than for others. This
only becomes possible through His ideality. But just as little could
He be a universal example, unless every moment of His life were


§ 94] THE GOD-CONSCIOUSNESS OF CHRIST 385


ideal. Otherwise it would be necessary first to distinguish the ideal
from the non-ideal, which could only be done according to an external
law, which (it follows) would be superior to Him. That law would
come in, unless (as His ideality implies) what is racially determined
in Him had been limited ; otherwise we should have to consent to
adopt into the Christian norm of life all that is simply Jewish in His
life. Moreover, these points, cardinal for the Christian fellowship,
are not doctrines which became current only through later develop-
ments ; they are the original doctrines of His disciples, closely
bound up with the way in which they applied to Jesus the idea
of the Messiah, and such as are easily brought into connexion
with His own utterances, so far as these are accessible to us.


§ 94. The Redeemer, then, 1s like all men in virtue of the identity of
human nature, but distinguished from them all by the constant
potency of His God-consciousness, which was a veritable exist-
ence of God in Him.


1. That the Redeemer should be entirely free from all sinfulness
is no objection at all to the complete identity of human nature in
Him and others, for we have already 1 laid down that sin is so little
an essential part of the being of man that we can never regard it
as anything else than a disturbance of nature. It follows that the
possibility of a sinless development is in itself not incongruous
with the idea of human nature ; indeed, this possibility is involved,
and recognized, in the consciousness of sin as guilt, as that is uni-
versally understood. This likeness, however, is to be understood in
such a general sense that even the first man before the first sin stood
no nearer the Redeemer, and was like Him in no higher sense, than
all other men. For if even in the life of the first man we must
assume a time when sin had not yet appeared, yet every first
appearance of sin leads back to a sinful preparation.2 But the
Redeemer too shared in the same vicissitudes of life, without which
we can hardly imagine the entrance of sin at a definite moment even
in Adam, for they are essential to human nature. Furthermore,
the first man was originally free from all the contagious influences
of a sinful society, while the Redeemer had to enter into the corporate
life when it had already advanced far in deterioration, so that it
would hardly be possible to attribute His sinlessness to external
protection—which we certainly must somehow admit in the case of
the first man, if we would not involve ourselves in contradictions.

1§ 68, above. Oa Nope


25


386 THE CHRISTIAN FAITH [§ 94


Of the Redeemer, on the contrary, we must hold that the ground of
His sinlessness was not external to Himself, but that it was a sin-
lessness essentially grounded in Himself, if He was to take away,
through what He was in Himself, the sinfulness of the corporate
life. Therefore, so far as sin is concerned, Christ differs no less from
the first man than from all others.

The identity of human nature further involves this, that the
manner in which Christ differs from all others also has its place in
this identity. This would not be the case if it were not involved
in human nature that individuals, so far as the measure of the
different functions is concerned, are originally different from each
other, so that to every separate corporate life (regarded in space
as well as in time) there belong those who are more and less gifted ;
and we only arrive at the truth of life when we thus correlate those
who differ from each other. In the same way, therefore, all those
who in any respect give character to an age or a district are bound
up with those over whom (as being defective in that particular
respect) they extend an educative influence, even as Christ is bound
up with those whom His preponderatingly powerful God-conscious-
ness links to the corporate life thus indicated. The greater the
difference, and the more specific the activity, the more must these
also have established themselves against the hindering influences of
a worthless environment, and they can be understood only by refer-
ence to this self-differentiating quality of human nature,! not by
reference to the group in which they stand; although by divine
right they belong to it, as the Redeemer does to the whole race.

2. But in admitting that what is peculiar in the Redeemer’s
kind of activity belongs to a general aspect of human nature, we by
no means wish to reduce this activity, and the personal dignity by
which it is conditioned, to the same measure as that of others. The
simple fact that faith in Christ postulates a relation on His part
to the whole race, while everything analogous is valid only for
definite individual times and places, is sufficient to prove this.
For no one has yet succeeded, in any sphere of science or art, and
no one will ever succeed, in establishing himself as head, universally
animating and sufficient for the whole human race.

For this peculiar dignity of Christ, however, in the sense in which
we have already referred back the ideality of His person to this
spiritual function of the God-consciousness implanted in the self-
consciousness, the terms of our proposition alone are adequate ; for

1 Cf. § 13.


§ 94] TEESE XISEENCE OB GOD IN CHRIST 387


to ascribe to Christ an absolutely powerful God-consciousness, and
to attribute to Him an existence of God in Him, are exactly the
same thing. The expression, ‘the existence of God in anyone,’
can only express the relation of the omnipresence of God to this
one. Now since God’s existence can only be apprehended as pure
activity, while every individualized existence is merely an inter-
mingling of activity and passivity—the activity being always
found apportioned to this passivity in every other individualized
existence—there is, so far, no existence of God in any individual
thing, but only an existence of God in the world. And only if
the passive conditions are not purely passive, but mediated
through vital receptivity, and this receptivity confronts the
totality of finite existence (so far, 7.¢, as we can say of the
individual as a living creature that, in virtue of the universal
reciprocity, it in itself represents the world), could we suppose an
existence of God in it. Hence this clearly does not hold of what is
individualized as an unconscious thing ; for since an unconscious
thing brings no living receptivity to meet all the forces of conscious-
ness it cannot represent these forces in itself. But just as little
and for the same reason can what is conscious but not intelligent
represent them, so that it is only in the rational individual that an
existence of God can be admitted. How far this is also true similarly
and without distinction if we regard reason as functioning in
objective consciousness lies outside our investigation. But so far
as the rational self-consciousness is concerned, it is certain that the
God-consciousness which (along with the self-consciousness) belongs
to human nature originally, before the Redeemer and apart from all
connexion with Him, cannot fittingly be called an existence of God
in us, not only because it was not a pure God-consciousness (either
in polytheism or even in Jewish monotheism, which was everywhere
tinctured with materialistic conceptions, whether cruder or finer),
but also because, such as it was, it did not assert itself as activity,
but in these religions was always dominated by the sensuous self-
consciousness. If, then, it was able neither to portray God purely
and with real adequacy in thought, nor yet to exhibit itself as pure
activity, it cannot be represented as an existence of God in us. But
just as the unconscious forces of nature and non-rational life become
a revelation of God to us only so far as we bring that conception
with us, so also that darkened and imperfect God-consciousness by
itself is not an existence of God in human nature, but only in so far
as we bring Christ with us in thought and relate it to Him, So


388 THE CHRISTIAN FAITH [§ 94


that originally it is found nowhere but in Him, and He is the only
‘other ’’ in which there is an existence of God in the proper sense,
so far, that is, as we posit the God-consciousness in His self-con-
sciousness as continually and exclusively determining every moment,
and consequently also this perfect indwelling of the Supreme
Being as His peculiar being and His inmost self. Indeed, working
backwards we must now say, if it is only through Him that the human
God-consciousness becomes an existence of God in human nature,
and only through the rational nature that the totality of finite powers
can become an existence of God in the world, that in truth He alone
mediates all existence of God in the world and all revelation of God
through the world, in so far as He bears within Himself the whole
new creation which contains and develops the potency of the God-
consciousness.

3. But if as a person of this kind He needs to have the whole
human development in common with us, so that even this existence
of God must in Him have had a development in time, and as the
most spiritual element in His personality could only emerge into
manifestation after the lower functions ; yet He cannot have entered
life as one for whom the foundations of sin had already been laid
before His being began to be manifested. We have envisaged this
earlier establishment of sin for all of us, without entering upon
natural-scientific investigations into the origin of the individual
life, and the coming together in us (if we may use the phrase) of
soul and body, but simply by holding to the general facts of experi-
ence ; so here, too, we seek to combine with these facts only the
relatively supernatural, which we have already admitted in general
for the entrance of the Redeemer into the world.

The origin of every human life may be regarded in a twofold
manner, as issuing from the narrow circle of descent and society
to which it immediately belongs, and as a fact of human nature in
general. The more definitely the weaknesses of that narrow circle
repeat themselves in an individual, the more valid becomes the
first point of view. The more the individual by the kind and degree
of his gifts transcends that circle, and the more he exhibits what is
new within it, the more we are thrown back upon the other explana-
tion. This means that the beginning of Jesus’ life cannot in any
way be explained by the first factor, but only and exclusively by
the second ; so that from the beginning He must have been free from
every influence from earlier generations which disseminated sin

1 Cf. § 69.


§ 95] THE ECCLESIASTICAL CHRISTOLOGY 389


and disturbed the inner God-consciousness, and He can only be
understood as an original act of human nature, i.e. as an act of
human nature as not affected by sin. The beginning of His life
was also a new implanting of the God-consciousness which creates
receptivity in human nature ; hence this content and that manner
of origin are in such a close relation that they mutually condition
and explain each other. That new implanting came to be through
the beginning of His life, and therefore that beginning must have
transcended every detrimental influence of His immediate circle ;
and because it was such an original and sin-free act of nature, a
filling of His nature with God-consciousness became possible as
its result. So that upon this relation too the fullest light is thrown
if we regard the beginning of the life of Jesus as the completed
creation of human nature. The appearance of the first man con-
stituted at the same time the physical life of the human race ; the
appearance of the Second Adam constituted for this nature a new
spiritual life, which communicates and develops itself by spiritual
fecundation. And as in the former its originality (which is the
condition of the appearance of human nature) and its having
emerged from creative divine activity are the same thing, so also
in the Redeemer both are the same—His spiritual originality, set
free from every prejudicial influence of natural descent, and that
existence of God in Him which also proves itself creative. If the
impartation of the Spirit to human nature which was made in the
first Adam was insufficient, in that the spirit remained sunk in
sensuousness and barely glanced forth clearly at moments as a
presentiment of something better, and if the work of creation has
only been completed through the second and equally original
impartation to the Second Adam, yet both events go back to one
undivided eternal divine decree and form, even in a higher sense,
only one and the same natural system, though one unattainable
by us.


§ 95. The ecclesiastical formule concerning the Person of Christ need
to be subjected to continual criticism.


1. The ecclesiastical formule are, on the one hand, products
of controversy, in that, although the original consciousness was
the same in all, yet the thought expressive of it took different forms
with different thinkers, according as they linked their presentation
of what was new to one or another of the existing conceptions. In
this way it was possible for Jewish or heathen elements or pre-


390 THE CHRISTIAN FAITH [§ 95


suppositions to creep in, even though it were unconsciously, and to
evoke corrective opposition. Even the later development of the
original formule partly took the same road, in order to guard
against misunderstandings which might arise from rhetorical or
poetic expressions in doctrinal language ; partly it proceeded with
that over-subtlety which was later brought to perfection in
Scholasticism, and which, utterly disregarding the true interests of
Dogmatic, propounded difficult questions simply for the sake of
definitions. The result inevitably was that Dogmatic was over-
loaded with a multitude of definitions, which have absolutely no
other relation to the immediate Christian self-consciousness than
that indicated by the history of controversy. The realization of
this has produced in some minds a distaste for everything which
had a controversial origin ; they will only admit such expressions
as lie outside all controversy and obviate in advance, wherever
possible, all future controversy ; they are in the keenest antagonism
to the tendency of others, who want to retain everything now
existing just as it has come to be. So that without a process of
elimination and compromise neither adjustment nor progress is
possible.

2. For this unavoidable critical process, two rules (in view of
the opposing parties) must be adopted. The rule for the one party
is this : a thing no longer really exists, but becomes mere matter of
history, when it can exercise no further activity owing to the situa-
tion to which it properly belonged being no longer present. The
rule for the other party is this : if we go back to formule which are
simple, but just on account of their simplicity are too indefinite for
didactic purposes, we gain a merely apparent satisfaction, which
lasts only until the disagreement which has remained hidden under
the identity of the formula breaks out somewhere or other. The
task of the critical process is to hold the ecclesiastical formule to
strict agreement with the foregoing analysis of our Christian self-
consciousness, in order, partly, to judge how far they agree with it
at least in essentials, partly (with regard to individual points), to
inquire how much of the current form of expression is to be retained,
and how much, on the other hand, had better be given up, either
because it is an imperfect solution of the problem or because it is
an addition not in itself essential, and harmful because the occasion
of persistent misunderstandings.


§ 96] THE DIVINE AND HUMAN NATURES 3g1


§ 96. Furst Theorem.—In Jesus Christ divine nature and human
nature were combined into one person.


Augsb. Conf., Art. 3: That the two natures, divine and human, in-
separably united in one person are One Christ.—Conf. Angl. ii. (p. 1273):
ita ut duae naturae divina et humana integre atque perfecte in unitate
personae fuerint inseparabiliter coniunctae, ex quibus est unus Christus, etc.—
Expos. simpl. xi.: Agnoscimus ergo in uno atque eodem domino nostro
duas naturas divinam et humanam, et has dicimus conjunctas et unitas esse

. In una persona, ita ut unum Christum ... veneremur.. . juxta
divinam naturam patri juxta humanam vero nobis hominibus consubstantialem.
—Conf. Gallic. xv. p. 116: Credimus in una eademque persona, quae est
Jesus Christus, vere et inseparabiliter duas illas naturas sic esse conjunctas ut
etiam sint unitae.—Conf. Helv. xi. p.96: Hic Christus ... cum... totum
hominem anima et corpore constantem assumsisset, in una individuaque
persona duas sed impermixtas naturas—frater noster factus est.—Sol. decl.
viii.: Credimus iam in una illa indivisa persona Christi duas esse dis-
tinctas naturas divinam videlicet quae ab aeterno est, et humanam quae
in tempore assumta est in unitatem personae filii Dei.—Symb. Nic. : "Iqcotv
Xpiorov, Tov €x Tot marpos yevynbévra mpd wavTwv Tov aluwvwy .. . Oedv ddnOuvdy.. .
rov Ol nuds .. . KateNOdvTa . . . Kal capkwhévra, etc. Symb. Quic. 28,29: ...
Quia dominus noster Jesus Christus dei filius Deus pariter et homo est.
Deus est ex substantia patris ante secula genitus, homo ex substantia matris
in seculo natus.


1. Although only a few of the credal passages quoted here
indicate the object of this presentation of the unique personality
of the Redeemer, yet it is unmistakable that the tendency is the
same as in the propositions so far laid down, namely, to describe
Christ in such a way (frater, consubstantialis nobis) that in the new
corporate life a vital fellowship between us and Him shall be possible,
and, at the same time, that the existence of God in Him shall be
expressed in the clearest possible way ; from which it follows at
once that the most unconditional adoration and brotherly com-
radeship are united in our relation to Him. With this we are
in complete agreement. Yet, on the other hand, there is almost
nothing in the execution of this aim against which protest must not
be raised, whether we regard the scientific character of the expression
or its suitability for ecclesiastical use.

With regard to the first : to begin with, we must warn the reader
against the very confusing description of the subject that results
when the expression ‘ Jesus Christ ’ is used, to indicate not only the
subject of the union of the two natures (at which point the first


1The page-numbers for the Reformed Confessions refer to the Augusti
Corpus etc,


3092 THE CHRISTIAN FAITH [§ 96


four passages properly stop), but also the divine nature of the
Redeemer from all eternity before its union with the human nature ;
so that this union no longer appears as an element that goes to
constitute the person, Jesus Christ, but rather as an act of this
person Himself. This confusion has, most glaringly, passed over
from the two passages drawn from the ancient creeds into the
Helvetic Confession.1 But the New Testament knows nothing of
this usage ; even the expression ‘ Son of God’ it uses (when it speaks
independently) only of the subject of this union,? and not of the
divine element in it before the union. So our proposition has held
to what is correct. The expression ‘ Jesus Christ ’ itself only became
a single proper name originally through misuse (though this hap-
pened very early), since properly Christ is only the description of
the real dignity added to the proper name ; but even in the com-
bination it is obvious that the historical and the ideal are both com-
prised. But far worse than this ambiguous description of the subject
is this (which cannot possibly be justified on any strictly scientific
investigation), that the expression ‘nature’ is used indifferently
for the divine and the human. Any other expression that was used
indifferently of both would lead one to suspect that such a formula
was bound to become the source of many confusions. For how
can divine and human be thus brought together under any single
conception, as if they could both be more exact determinations, co-
ordinated to each other, of one and the same universal? Indeed, even
divine spirit and human spirit could not without confusion be brought
together in this way. But the word ‘nature’ is particularly ill-
adapted for such a common use, even if we leave Latin and Greek
etymology completely out of account and simply take our stand on
our own use of the word. For in one sense we actually oppose
God and nature to one another, and hence in this sense cannot
attribute a nature to God. Nature in this sense is for us the
summary of all finite existence, or, as in the opposition of nature and
history, the summary of all that is corporeal, and that goes back
to what is elementary, in its various and discrete phenomena, in
which all that we so describe is mutually conditioned. Over
against this divided and conditioned we set God as the uncondi-
tioned and the absolutely simple. But just for this reason we


1The Belgic Confession, too, shares in the same confusion, x. p. 176:
Necesse itaque eum qui Deus sermo filius et Jesus Christus nominatur jam
tum extitisse cum ab ipso omnia crearentur.

* No one, we may suppose, will cite John 118 or 17° as instances against this
assertion.


§ 96] NATURE AND PERSON 393


cannot attribute a nature to God in the other sense. For always,
whether we use the word generally, as when we speak of animal
and vegetable nature, or of an individual, as when we say that a
person has a noble or an ignoble nature, always we use it solely
of a limited existence, standing in opposition to something else,
an existence in which active and passive are bound up together,
and which is revealed in a variety of appearances, in the latter case
of individuals, in the former of vital factors. And upon closer
consideration it is hardly to be denied that this expression, if we go
back to the original Greek word,! bears in itself traces of heathen
influence, though possibly of unconscious influence. For in poly-
theism, which represents the Godhead as no less split up and
divided than finite existence appears to us, the word ‘nature’
has certainly the same meaning in the expression divine nature
as it has elsewhere. The fact ought to have been a warning, that
the heathen sages themselves had already risen above this
imperfect representation of God, and said of Him that He was to be
thought of as beyond all existence and being.

It is no better with the relation which is here set forth between
nature and person. For in utter contradiction to the use elsewhere,
according to which the same nature belongs to many individuals or
persons, here one person is to share in two quite different natures.
Now if ‘ person’ indicates a constant unity of life, but ‘nature’ a
sum of ways of action or laws, according to which conditions of life
vary and are included within a fixed range, how can the unity of
life coexist with the duality of natures, unless the one gives way
to the other, if the one exhibits a larger and the other a narrower
range, or unless they melt into each other, both systems of ways of
action and laws really becoming one in the one life ?—if indeed
we are speaking of a person, 7.¢. of an Ego which is the same in all
the consecutive moments of its existence. The attempt to make
clear this unity along with the duality naturally but seldom results
in anything else than a demonstration of the possibility of a
formula made up by combining indications out of which it is
impossible to construct a figure. On the other hand, as soon as
the same writer avoids this formula of two natures, he not seldom
says something which one can follow, and of which the figure can


1 gor. This censure seems also to fall on a writing which is merely
deutero-canonical, for in 2 Pet. 1* the expression is found, @elas picews
kowwvol. But the immediate context of itself shows that these words cannot
be taken so precisely as must be done in the case we are dealing with, where
an important dogmatic definition is in question.


304 THE CHRISTIAN FAITH [s 96


be drawn (nachzeichnen).1 Hence all the results of the endeavour to
achieve a living presentation of the unity of the divine and the
human in Christ, ever since it was tied down to this expression,
have always vacillated between the opposite errors of mixing the
two natures to form a third which would be neither of them, neither
divine nor human, or of keeping the two natures separate, but either
neglecting the unity of the person in order to separate the two
natures more distinctly, or, in order to keep firm hold of the unity
of the person, disturbing the necessary balance, and making one
nature less important than the other and limited by it. The same
thing comes out even in the vacillation between the expressions
‘connexion’ and ‘union ’—in the latter there is a tendency to
wipe out the difference of the natures, while the former makes the
unity of the person doubtful. The utter fruitlessness of this way of
presenting the matter becomes particularly clear in the treatment
of the question whether Christ as one person formed out of two
natures had also two wills according to the number of the natures,
or only one according to the number of the person. For if Christ
had only one will, then the divine nature is incomplete if this is a
human will; and the human nature, if it is a divine will. But
if Christ has two wills, then the unity of the person is no more than
apparent, even if we try to conserve it by saying that the two wills
always will the same thing. For what this results in is only agree-
ment, not unity; and, in fact, to answer the problem thus is to
return to the division of Christ. And one or the other will is always
simply a superfluous accompaniment of the other, whether it be
the divine will that accompanies the human or vice versa. And
manifestly, as we are accustomed to take reason and will together
the same question may be raised with regard to the reason ; then
all that has just been said repeats itself, since each nature is in-
complete without the reason that belongs to it, and a unity of the
person is as little compatible with such a twofold reason as with a
twofold will; and it is equally unthinkable that a divine reason,
which as omniscient sees everything at once, should think the same
as a human reason, which only knows separate things one after the
other and as a result of the other, and that a human will, which
always strives only for separate ends and one for the sake of the

1 Cf. Joann. Damasc. iii. 19: GAN ovK dvdyKn Tas dddjAaLs Evwbelcas picers Kab’
imdactacw éxdorny ldlay KexrjoOa brooracw. Sivavrac yap els play cvvdpagrovoat
Umdoracw unre avumdcraro. elvar pnre ldudfovcav éxdarn exew vadoraciv, adda play


kal rhy avrhy auddrepar,—and lil. 2: Nédyos capkl éeWuxwuevy Kai év adr@ rd elvat
Aaxovon évwhels Kal’ vrdoraci.


§ 96] TRESDOCLRINE OF THE TRINITY 395


other, should will the same as a divine will, whose object can be
nothing but the whole world in the totality of its development.

Finally, for the scientific perfection of dogmatic terminology
it is also necessary that related doctrines should be capable of easy
comprehension in their relations to each other ; if so, the way in
which this formula is related to the formule of the doctrine of
the Trinity is no great recommendation of it. There the expression
‘unity of nature’ alongside of the trinity of Persons has been avoided,
and ‘unity of essence’ used instead. But, however praiseworthy
this may be, since the term ‘essence ’ is certainly much more appro-
priate to the Godhead than the term ‘ nature,’ yet the question in-
evitably arises what the relation is between what in Christ we call
His divine nature and that unity of essence which is common to all
three Persons of the Trinity, and whether each of the three Persons,
outside their participation in the Divine Essence, has also a nature
of its own as well, or whether this is a peculiarity of the Second
Person. No satisfactory answer to this is to be found either here
or in the doctrine of the Trinity. But the matter becomes still
more confused through the introduction in the Dogmatic of the
whole Western Church of another usage of the word ‘ Person,’ accord-
ing to which, in the one case, we have three Persons in one Essence
and in the other one Person out of two natures. If now we carry
over into the doctrine of the Trinity the explanations which are
usually given of the word ‘ Person’ in the doctrine of Christ—and
there is sufficient reason for this, since it is asserted that Christ
did not become a Person only through the union of the two natures,
but the Son of God only took up human nature into His Person
then the three Persons must have an independent anterior existence
in themselves ; and if each Person is also a nature,! we come almost
inevitably to three divine natures for the three divine Persons
in the one Divine Essence. If, on the other hand, the same word
‘Person’ means something different in the one doctrine from what it
means in the other, so that in the Person of Christ we have still
another Person in the other sense of the word, the confusion is just
as great.

2. It lies in the nature of the case, that after this formula had
once secured recognition as the foundation for all other definitions
regarding the Person of Christ, an involved and artificial mode of
procedure was inevitable if terms so indefensible were to be kept
as innocuous as possible. The almost inevitable consequence was

1 The formule here are taken from Reinhard, Dogmatik, § 92, p. 347.


396 THE CHRISTIAN FAITH [§ 96


that, as this foundation itself contains an apparent contradiction, the
whole development was bound to resolve itself into a disproof of this
reproach couched in a series of negative terms—terms which no
more express or reproduce the actual content of our immediate
impression than they contain a knowledge of Christ in the form of
intuition—that is, of objective consciousness (though indeed it would
be less of a recommendation to us than to others if they could do
this last). Accordingly we are compelled to put a very low estimate
upon the value of this theory for ecclesiastical use. It cannot give
any guidance in the proper preaching of Christ, for it takes a purely
negative form ; at most it might serve homiletical diction as a test
of whether in the glorification or the vivid presentation of Christ
elements may not have been introduced which transgress the pre-
scribed limits. But even in this connexion the definitions of the
Schools have long since become a dead letter in which no one any
longer can find refuge. For the devotional phraseology even of the
most orthodox teachers, in so far as they are not content simply to
hand on the letter of tradition but aim at edification and confirma-
tion in a living faith, is so remote from the terminology of the schools
that it would hardly be possible to find any current terms to bridge
the gulf. No less unfruitful does this development appear when we
regard the divergent opinions which prevail among us, some of them
docetic in character, since they identify the Redeemer so closely
with God that the truth of His humanity is obscured ; some of them
Ebionite, inasmuch as they leave no room for any essential distinc-
tion between Christ and an exceptional man. They are utterly
unsuitable for use in determining in either direction the boundary
between what is Christian but appears unchristian, whether owing
to its own gaucherie or to the misrepresentation of opponents, and
what has ceased to be Christian altogether, because it is naturalistic
or fanatical.

3. It must be remembered, further, that in the original construc-
tion of Protestant theology nothing was done for this article—the
old formule were simply repeated. For although the question
was at once taken up again on one particular side in the contro-
versies between the two Protestant parties, this could not lead to a
complete new revision, since the matter arose only @ propos of another
point in dispute ; nor did what on this occasion was actually estab-
lished secure symbolical recognition anywhere within the sphere of
the Augsburg Confession. And so, if Dogmatics are to be ever more
completely purged of scholasticism, the task remains of construct-


§ 96] CHRISTOLOGICAL FORMULE 397


ing a scientific statement of this particular doctrine also, in which
the impression of the peculiar dignity of the Redeemer that we have
obtained from the testimonies borne to Him shall not be reflected
merely in negative formule, and which at the same time (at least
as much as with other dogmatic definitions) shall approximate to
what can be presented to Christian congregations in religious teach-
ing. We hope that above ! we have laid the foundation for such a
revision, which attempts so to define the mutual relations of the
divine and the human in the Redeemer, that both the expressions,
divine nature and the duality of natures in the same Person (which,
to say the least, are exceedingly inconvenient) shall be altogether
avoided. For if the distinction between the Redeemer and us
others is established in such a way that, instead of being obscured
and powerless as in us, the God-consciousness in Him was absolutely
clear and determined each moment, to the exclusion of all else, so
that it must be regarded as a continual living presence, and withal a
real existence of God in Him, then, in virtue of this difference, there
is in Him everything that we need, and, in virtue of His likeness to
us, limited only by His utter sinlessness, this is all in Him in such a
way that we can lay hold of it. That is to say, the existence of God
in the Redeemer is posited as the innermost fundamental power
within Him, from which every activity proceeds and which holds
every element together ; everything human (in Him) forms only
the organism for this fundamental power, and is related to it as the
system which both receives and represents it, just as in us all other
powers are related to the intelligence.* If this form of expression
is very different from that of the language of the Schools as used
hitherto, yet it rests equally upon the Pauline phrase ‘ God was in
Christ ’ and the Johannine ‘the Word became flesh’ ; for ‘ Word’ is
the activity of God expressed in the form of consciousness, and
‘flesh’ is a general expression for the organic. In so far as all
human activity of the Redeemer depends, as a connected whole,
upon this existence of God in Him and represents it, the expression
(that in the Redeemer God became man) is justified as true exclu-
sively of Him ; and similarly every moment of His existence, so far
as it can be isolated, presents just such a new incarnation and
incarnatedness of God, because always and everywhere all that is
human in Him springs out of that divine. And it would be difficult


*§ 94.
2 Precisely as in the Symbol. Quic. 25: Nam sicut anima rationalis et
caro unus est homo, ita et Deus et homo unus est Christus.


398 THE CHRISTIAN FAITE [§ 97


for anyone to prove that there is anything docetic or Ebionite in
this description. It could be called Ebionite only by one who feels
that he must insist upon an empirical emergence of divine pro-
perties if he is to recognize a superhuman element in the Redeemer ;
and the only thing that could be regarded as docetic is that in the
Redeemer the God-consciousness is not imperfect. But neither
objection would find any support even in the letter of the accepted
ecclesiastical doctrine. Hence even in dealing with the ecclesi-
astical propositions now to follow, our criticism must be related to
the form of statement just given, in order at each point to show how
far the intention of these propositions agrees in meaning with our
form of statement, and how far the unsuitability and difficulty of
those formule has, on the one hand, prevented the exposition from
answering fully to the intention, and on the other has given scope
for subtle inanities.


§ 97. Second Theorem.—In the uniting of the divine nature with the
human, the divine alone was active or self-imparting, and the
human alone passive or in process of being assumed ; but
during the state of union every activity was a common activity
of both natures.


1. If we take an objective view of the task of presenting Christ
clearly as such a unity of both natures, it is natural and indeed in-
evitable that we should separate from one another the act of union
and the state of union. For the former was only the beginning of the
Person of Christ as it came to manifestation in the world, and accord-
ingly must be expressed by a reference to the previous non-existence
of that Person; while the latter, as the specific existence of the
Person, must be described by a formula which is equally appropriate
to all moments of it. But for our task the description of the first
beginning, since we are not directly affected by it, seems a work of
supererogation. This accordingly is better omitted : such exercises
are always of doubtful value. Thus the inclusion of this theorem
calls for special justification. But, in the first place, it is quite in
order to refer back to its beginnings such a difference as that
between Christ and all other men, because it does make a difference
if it is recognized as original ; and, again, the expression must be
quite differently phrased if the difference is a later accession and
hence only a subsequent condition of a person originally entirely
like ourselves. And since if we reproduce the impression made


§ 97] THE ACT OF UNION 309


upon us we cannot but deny the latter suggestion, the necessity
arises of presenting the first moment also as continuous with every
later one. And so both the theorems set forth above, while they
definitely insist on the distinction between beginning and further
career, must be understood only as they merge in each other. For,
on the one hand, the beginning of the Person is at the same time
the beginning of its activity ; on the other, every moment so far as
it can be isolated and considered in itself is a new coming into being
of this specific personality. And as every activity of Christ must
exemplify the same relation as that which marks the act of union
(which, indeed, is only a union for such activities), that is, that the
impulse springs from the divine nature ; so also conversely the act
of union must exemplify the same relation as that through which
every activity of Christ exists (since every activity is only an in-
dividual manifestation of this union)—that is, that both natures
work together into one. By this canon alone must both the
formule presented in our theorem be judged and applied, as
well as all others which appear elsewhere and are derived from
them.

2. There are manifold objections to the expression by which it
is sought to describe more nearly the active participation of the
divine nature in that act of union—namely, that in it the divine
nature has assumed the human into the unity of its Person.! Not
only on account of the expression ‘ divine nature,’ but, in the first
place, because it makes the personality of Christ altogether de-
pendent upon the personality of the second Person in the Divine
Essence. For since the Sabellians denied this, but yet believed no
less than orthodox Christians in the union of the divine with the
human in Christ, it seems an injustice to all who may perhaps
approximate to the Sabellian view to attach the expression for
this belief to the orthodox Trinitarian doctrine: especially as the
original faith-constituting impression made upon the disciples, even
as they grasped it in thought and reproduced it, was not connected
with any knowledge of a Trinity. But the worst is, that the
human nature in this way can only become a Person in the sense
in which this is true of a Person in the Trinity, so that we are con-
fronted with the dilemma, that either the three Persons must, like
human persons, be individuals existing independently by themselves,


1 Reinhard’s phrasing is particularly infelicitous (Dogm. § 91) : Qui (filius
Dei) cum natura guadam humana quam sibi adiunxerit unam efficiat
personam.


400 THE CHRISTIAN FAITH [§ 97


or Christ as man was not such an independent individual—an
assertion which gives us a completely docetic picture of Him. It
is, therefore, much safer (as it is also analogous to the origin and
development of faith) to establish the doctrine of Christ inde-
pendently of that doctrine of the Trinity. It is true that even our
first proposition might still be regarded as docetic—as if, that is to
say, the truth of the human nature in Christ were already lost when
we say that in the origin of the Person of Christ the human nature
was altogether passive, since obviously in the origin of every other
human person it takes an active part, in that its body-forming
power shapes itself into a new unity ot human existence in the com-
pleteness of all vital functions. But if we call to our help the canon
set forth above, according to which the act of the union also must
have been once a common activity of both—of the self-imparting
Divine Essence,! and of the human nature appointed to be assumed
by it—then the position is that the human nature certainly cannot
have been active in being assumed by the divine, in such a way
that (to put it so) the being of God in Christ was developed out of the
human nature, or even in such a way that there was in the human
nature a capacity to draw down the divine to itself; only the
possibility was innate in it (and must have remained in it intact
even during the dominion of sin) of being assumed into such a
union with the divine, but this possibility is far from being either
capacity or activity. On the other hand, in accordance with our
canon we must add that the human nature can have been assumed
by the divine only as engaged in a person-forming activity, since
the divine activity is not person-forming in the way of generation.
In speaking, therefore, of the origin of the specific personality of
Christ, that is, of the implanting of the divine in the human nature,
it must be said that in this the latter was only receptive and could
only take a passive part, since no person-forming activity of human
nature apart from any activity of the divine nature could ever have
produced anything but an ordinary human person. But in so far
as Christ none the less was also a perfectly human person, the forma-
tion of this person also must have been an act of the human nature ;
and so the whole process must have been a common act of the two
natures. This is recognized by all dogmatic theologians who, re-
jecting the opinion that the body of Christ was completely formed


In the proposition itself, even after expressing unqualified disapproval of
the term ‘divine nature,’ I allowed it to stand, purely for convenience’ sake.
But here in the detailed discussion that consideration is irrelevant, and hence
1 have reverted to the simplest term.


§ 97] THE ORIGIN OF CHRIST’S PERSON 4ot


in a single moment, or that in essentials it came down from heaven
with the divine,? reckon the gradual formation of the organism
from the first beginnings of life onwards as part of the truth of the
human nature of Christ. But during this development the human
nature was not altogether passive ; hence there was also a physical
activity of this nature at the first beginnings of life alongside of its
merely passive attitude relatively to the divine activity.

On the other hand, doubts of an altogether opposite kind might
be raised against a special divine activity in the origin of the Person
of Christ, namely, that this activity must either have occurred in
time (which conflicts with the first canon, that God must remain
outside every temporal medium), or it would not have been a special
and immediate activity (in which case the already admitted super-
natural quality would again be endangered). So we see how either
of two errors could be chosen even by those of genuinely Christian
temper. In order to avoid entangling the Eternal in temporality,
one may decide to make it a condition in presenting the peculiar
dignity of Christ that it must be possible to regard Him like any
other person as a product of the human nature. And in order
at the same time to leave room all the more assuredly for an im-
mediate divine activity, one might propose the view that even the
humanity of Christ did not begin at any particular time—an inter-
pretation which necessarily borders on docetism and threatens the
true historicity of Christ no less than the opposite view does His
ideality. But vacillation between these two views will be alto-
gether avoided if it be admitted that the uniting divine activity
is also an eternal activity, but that, as in God there is no distinction
between resolve and activity, this eternal activity means for us
simply a divine decree, identical as such with the decree to create
man and included therein; but the aspect of this decree which is
turned towards us as activity, or its manifestation in the actual
beginning of the life of the Redeemer, through which that eternal
decree realized itself, as at a single point of space so also at a moment
of time, is temporal. So that the temporality has reference purely
to the person-forming activity of the human nature, during which

1 Joann. Damase. iii. 2: kal rére érecklacey én’ abrhy 7 Tod Beod . . . évurda-
raros copia kat Stvapues, 6 vids Tod Oeod .. . Kal cuvérntev éavT@ . . . odpKka
ePuxwuevny .. . od Tals KaTa muKpdv MpocOjKas amapTifouévou TOU oXMaATOS, an’
if’ &v TedewOévros. On the other point, see Athanas., ad Epict. (ed. Patav.),
i. p. 731: wé0ev dé mau jpevéavrd Tues tony acéBerav . . . Wore elrety, wij VEWTEPOV
elvat TO cua THs TOD Nbyou Bedrnros GANA cuvatdoy avr@ did mavTos yeyerfabat,


ére.dn €x THs ovolas THS coplas cvvéoTn.
2 See Gerhard, /oc. ili. p. 421.


26


402 THE CHRISTIAN FAITH [§ 97


it was taken up into the union ; and we can with equal justice say
that Christ even as a human person was ever coming to be simul-
taneously with the world itself.t

The presentation of this act of union and of the relation of the
two natures in the union involves two other formule, one asserting
the impersonality of the human nature in Christ before its union
with the divine ; the other affirming His supernatural conception.

With regard to the first of these, the statement that the human
nature of Christ in itself is zmpersonal, or that it has no subsistence
of its own, but subsists only through the divine, is, in this scholastic
dress, very clumsy and obscure. It is not an easily solved problem,
to think of something as the human nature of Christ and yet as
impersonal, since the nature in which we all share can only be
called the nature of an individual in so far as it has become personal
in him. But if we go into the idea, there must arise the new diffi-
culty, how, in view of this impersonality, the human nature in
Christ can fail to be more imperfect in Him than in us all? But
this confusion disappears when the matter is rightly conceived.
The term ‘human nature’ can properly mean only this life-form
as a unity, as in essence it is person-forming and has its existence
in the changing course of personal life. Hence the origin of each
individual of our species is to be regarded as an act which human
nature as a living force brings about by itself. The meaning is
this—that since by this act there could be given to a person at the
start only the germ of the imperfect and obscure God-consciousness,
not the absolutely powerful God-consciousness itself, while in the
Person of Christ this last must have been included in the develop-
ment right from the very beginnings of life, therefore without the
accession of the uniting divine activity the Person of Christ would
not have come into being. But the expression remains an un-
fortunate one, that the human nature of Christ would have been
impersonal—all that it means is that the human nature would not
have become this personality of Christ, but that that divine influence
upon the human nature is at one and the same time the incarnation
of God in human consciousness and the formation of the human
nature into the personality of Christ. In the same way, the ex-


1 Of the two terms employed by the Greek Fathers for this act of union,
évedpkwots is much to be preferred to évowudrwors. The latter in part admits
of the idea that the Aédyos was implanted in a body already complete, in part
the idea that the Aéyos was only allied to a body, but Himself took the
place of the soul. Neither idea is present in évodpxwots. Hence, where the
subject is handled properly, this term and the corresponding ‘incarnatio’ are
much more common than ‘corporatio’ and évawudrwors.


§ 97] THE VIRGIN BIRTH 403


pression ‘this human nature would have remained impersonal ’
(which likewise is only apparently negative) merely indicates the
permanency of that same divine influence and of whatever follows
from it in the Person of Christ. But the formula was shaped with
special reference to those who hold that the Word was united with
the Person of Jesus only long after His Person had reached maturity
—and who therefore assume a personality for His human nature
apart from this union.

It is involved in this formula that in the origin of the Person of
Christ a supernatural activity was operative. The second formula
agrees with it, in that it adds to this yet another supernatural
element—namely, the complete exclusion of the male activity im the
conception of Christ. For this is a second element: the being of
God in Christ cannot possibly be explained by the fact that no male
activity had any share in His conception. This position must
be considered from a twofold point of view : first, with reference to
the available New Testament testimonies on the subject ; next, with
reference to its dogmatic value. Those stories! are never again
referred to in the further course of the history of Christ ; nor does
any apostolic passage appeal to them. They conflict with the two
genealogies of Christ, which go back to Joseph in a simple and
straightforward way without taking any account of these stories.
So far as John is concerned, they conflict not only with his silence
concerning the fact itself, but also with the way in which he relates,
without any corrective remark, that Jesus was called the son of
Joseph by His countrymen and acquaintances.” The same sort of
thing is also found in both Matthew and Luke.? Anyone who
takes the stories of a Virgin Birth as literally exact has of course one
miracle more to stand for ; but probably no one will wish to main-
tain that such acceptance of them introduces into our faith an
element at variance with its true nature—though certainly those
who delight in parallels between these birth-narratives and the
various Jewish and heathen legends of the supernatural conception
of distinguished men go as far as they can in that direction. On
the other hand, others have doubts about basing a doctrine, in these
circumstances, solely upon these stories, and even, it may be, about
setting it up as an indispensable part of the creed. They rather
find themselves constrained to conclude from the available evidence
that among the original followers of Christ no great value was


1 Matt. 118-25 and Luke 11-34,
2 John 6%. Matt. 135°, Luke 43.


404 THE CHRISTIAN FAITH [§ 97


attached to this circumstance, nor was there any quite fixed and
generally recognized tradition on the subject. And if they do so,
we-are bound to grant them that it is quite possible to believe in
Christ as Redeemer without believing in His supernatural conception
in this sense.

So far as the second point of view is concerned—that of the
dogmatic value of this belief—first, not only are the passages in the
ancient creeds 1 so expressed that they betray virtually no trace of
a dogmatic purpose, but the same is true also of the modern creeds
borrowed from them.? The additions made in the latter to the
expressions sometimes adopted from the old creeds, sometimes pre-
supposed as accepted,* have at most here and there a slight dogmatic
colouring, either with reference to original sin or to the implanting
of the divine in human nature—the only points on account of which
the fact can have importance for the Christian faith. A closer
consideration will show, however, that it is without any real bearing
upon either question. For we have already claimed that the
Person of Christ is supernatural, in our sense of the term, in both
these relations; and thus, although this was not definitely ex-
pressed, it has been indicated that no adequate explanation of His
origin can be found in an act of the person-forming power of human
nature, mediated through a double-sided sexual activity. For, as
has been said above,‘ the sinfulness of every individual has its root
in the previous generation. It follows that the Redeemer could not
come into being through natural procreation, since He must not
Himself belong to the corporate life of sinfulness. The same is true
also with regard to the other point. For the reproductive power of
the species cannot be adequate to produce an individual through
whom something is to be introduced, for the first time, into the
species, which was never in it before. For that it is necessary to


1 Symb. vom.: tov yevvidevra éx mvevdpuaros aylov Kat Mapias rhs mapbévov'
quinatus est de spiritu sancto ex Maria virgine.—Symb. Nic. Const. : capxw6évta
éx mvevpatos aylov kal Maplas rs mapOévou Kal évavOpwricarvra.

2 Conf. Aug. 8: natus ex virgine Maria.—Exp. simpl. xi. p. 26 : non ex viri
coitu sed conceptum purissime ex spiritu sancto et natum ex Maria semper
virgine.—Conf. Helv. xi. p. 96: carnem . . . ex intacta virgine Maria, spiritu
cooperante, sumens.—Conf. Gallic. xiv. p. 116: cuius caro sit vere semen
Abrahae et Davidis, quamvis arcana et incomprehensibili spiritus sancti virtute
fuerit suo tempore in utero beatae illius virginis concepta.—Conf. Anglic. ii.
p.127: in utero beatae virginis ex illius substantia naturam humanam assumsit.
—Conf. Belg. xviii. p. 180: conceptus in utero beatae virginis Mariae idque
viytute spiritus sancti absque viri opere.

* Even where the subject is not mentioned at all, as in the Symb. Quic. and
Pee ungay., no definite intention need be suspected.

ee § 69.


§ 97] THE VIRGIN BIRTH 405


postulate, in addition to this reproductive power, a creative activity
combined with the human activity ; only thus can the influence of
the sexual activity in procreation be neutralized—an influence
which would involve participation in the universal sinfulness. In
this sense everyone who assumes in the Redeemer a natural sinless-
ness and a new creation through the union of the divine with the
human, postulates a supernatural conception as well. But where
natural procreation is inadequate, there its partial neutralization
must also be inadequate. For the being of God in a life cannot
be explained by its origin from a virgin without sexual intercourse ;
and equally the absence of any paternal share in the new life cannot
free that life from participation in the corporate life of sinfulness
so long as the maternal share remains altogether what it is by nature.
And so before long the complementary idea was formed, that in the
same way Mary too must have been free from inherited sinfulness.
But for one thing, the same affirmation must be made, and for the
same reason, about the mother of Mary, and so right back through
the generations. And for another, in so far as every psychical
factor has also its physical counterpart, every actual sin of Mary
must have exercised an influence upon the child so long as its life
was enclosed within hers. Since, therefore, there is no doctrine or
tradition of a continuous series of mothers who were conceived, and
who remained, without sin, the absence of the male share in the
begetting of the Redeemer is in both connexions inadequate ; and
consequently the assumption of a Virgin Birth is superfluous. Con-
sequently everything rests upon the higher influence which, as a
creative divine activity, could alter both the paternal and the
maternal influence in such a way that all ground for sinfulness was
removed, and this although procreation was perfectly natural—as
indeed only this creative divine activity could avail to give com-
pleteness to the natural imperfection of the child who was begotten.
The general idea of a supernatural conception remains, therefore,
essential and necessary, if the specific pre-eminence of the Redeemer
is to remain undiminished. But the more precise definition of this
supernatural conception as one in which there was no male activity
has no connexion of any kind with the essential elements in the
peculiar dignity of the Redeemer ; and hence, in and by itself, is
no constituent part of Christian doctrine. Whoever accepts this
definition, therefore, accepts it only on the ground of the narratives
involving it contained in the New Testament writings; hence
belief in it, like belief in many matters of fact which have just as


406 THE CHRISTIAN FAITH [§ 97


little necessary connexion with the dignity and the work of the
Redeemer, belongs solely to the doctrine of Scripture ; and everyone
has to reach a decision about it by the proper application of those
principles of criticism and interpretation which approve themselves
to Him. But anyone who accepts a supernatural conception in our
sense of the term can hardly, at least, find any reason in the super-
natural element which they contain for denying the historical
character of these narratives, or for departing from the literal
interpretation of them. Similarly anyone who cannot accept them
as literally and historically true is still quite free to hold to the
doctrine proper of the supernatural conception. But if it is super-
fluous to set up a doctrine of the Virgin Birth proper, it is also inad-
visable to do so, for this involves one all too easily in investigations
of a purely scientific character which lie quite outside our sphere.’

And now in order to avoid misunderstanding, it is necessary to
say only this further about a conception which has come to prevail
everywhere in Christendom. First, this physiologically supernatural
element does not, in itself, imply what we demand of the divine
influence in the conception of the Redeemer ; nor has it any influence
upon the racial character of Jesus’ personality—it neither abolishes,
in itself, that which carries with it a participation in sinfulness, nor
does it rob Him of what belongs to His historicity. Secondly, for
the same reasons, we must avoid spinning out the notion, which, as
we have seen, has no other basis than the Gospel narratives, further
than these narratives require ; hence the assertion that Mary re-
mained a virgin is to be rejected as completely baseless. Thirdly,
the notion must not be based upon—and just as little made the
basis of—a condemnation of the sexual impulse, as if its satisfaction
were something sinful and productive of sin. Lastly, even if we
take the narratives literally and in a historical sense, we must not
assume that their terminology is pedantically exact ; in particular,
we must keep in mind that the angel could not then speak to Mary
of the Holy Spirit in the more precise New Testament sense.?
Therefore all ingenious explanations as to why this activity is
attributed specially to the Holy Spirit are out of place. But only
completely uninitiated persons could, in spite of the clear distinc-


' Consider, ¢.g., the expressions italicized in the quotations given above
from the creeds.

* Joann. Damasc., rightly understood, agrees with this (i. 19, iii. 11) 7p wey
évoapkdoer ToD Néyou ore 6 marhp obre Td mveDua Kar ovdéva Adyor KeKoWwdyyKeY el
vn Kar’ evdoxiav, although elsewhere he speaks differently and less precisely.

* Cf. Gerh., Joc. i. p. 416, whose explanations depend principally upon
Hilarius, de fid. trin. ii.


§ 97] THE STATE OF UNION 407


tion always made by the teachers of the Church,! so confuse the
relation as to call Jesus the son of the Holy Spirit.

3. The second formula of our proposition, which describes the
state of union of the two natures, can also be rightly understood
only by the help of the canon we have laid down. Otherwise it
would be easy to regard the association of the two natures as one
on equal terms ; and, since an absolute equilibrium between them
cannot be assumed, also to suppose an occasional preponderance on
the side of the human nature. The nature of the association, how-
ever, must at every moment be such that the activity proceeds from
the being of God in Christ, and the human nature is only taken up
into association with it. If we think here of the antithesis—and it
must certainly not be overlooked—between predominantly active
and predominantly passive moments in human life, we might well
be apprehensive that we are still losing, in this way, the complete-
ness of the human nature in Christ, since of course passive states
cannot proceed from the divine in Him, from which yet everything
must proceed—and so passive states would necessarily be lacking
in Him. To take this point now in its widest reference, we find
one passive condition posited as necessary, almost as constant, in
Christ, so that in a sense all His actions depend upon it—namely,
sympathy with the condition of men ; yet at the same time in every-
thing which proceeded from this we shall most distinctly recognize
the impulse of the reconciling being of God in Christ ; which accord-
ingly seems to be conditioned by a passive state which could only
take its rise in the human nature. Now if that were really the case,
and Christ could have come to all those actions, and therefore
strictly speaking to the whole work of redemption, only through an
almost accidental feeling [7.e. sympathy], then inevitably our whole
idea of the Redeemer would thereby become something different
from that which up till now we have represented to ourselves. But
our canon also compels us to think of the human nature of Christ
in such feelings, not as moved for and through itself, but only as
taken up into association with an activity of the divine in Christ.
Now this ‘ divine’ is the divine love in Christ which, once and for
all or in every moment—whichever expression be chosen—gave
direction to His feelings for the spiritual conditions of men. In
virtue of these feelings, and in consequence of them, there then
arose the impulse to particular helpful acts. So that in this inter-
relation every original activity belongs solely to the divine, and


1 Many passages in Gerh., loc. cit.


408 THE CHRISTIAN FAITH [§ 97


everything passive solely to the human. For even the human
activities conditioned by those impulses carry in themselves the
quality of passivity. There must certainly, however, have been,
even in the life of Christ, other passive states which did not proceed
from any spiritual impulse, but only from the natural connexion
of the human organism with external nature. Now to these
states we must, also in accordance with our canon, apply the
formula originally intended’ only for the act of union, that the
human nature is not the personal nature of Christ before it has been
taken up into union with the divine. For all such states were still
impersonal so long as they were simply passive ; but their assump-
tion into the innermost personal consciousness and their permeation
by a divine impulse were so entirely one and the same thing that
before such permeation they would have been assumed only as an
external and alien element. So that, to sum up, we may say that
there can have been no active state in Christ which, regarded as
existing for itself, did not arise from the being of God in Him, and
was not perfected by the human nature ; and similarly no passive
state whose transformation into activity—which first made it a
personal state—did not follow the same course.

Against this, of course, the objection might be urged, that if we
distinguish individual moments, and ascribe to the divine in Christ
the rise of all the activities which follow each other thus in time,
then this divine in Christ, in contradiction to what can properly be
asserted of a being of God, is being described as a temporal thing,
with an activity which arises and passes away. But this difficulty
too is resolved if, carrying further (under the guidance of our canon)
the answer already 4 given to the same objection with regard to the
act of union, we say that even during the union the Divine Essence
in Christ retained its identity, only becoming active in temporal
fashion, and that only that side of this activity is temporal which
had already become human and passed over into the sphere of out-
ward appearance. So that in Christ Himself the original assumptive
divine activity and the divine activity during the union are not to
be distinguished ; but all activities, in so far as distinguishable in
time, are simply developments of the human activities. Every
outward activity of Christ, whether it is to be regarded rather as an
activity of the intellect or as one of the will, was in its aspect of
human growth a result of the temporal development ; and only in
so far as all emergent activity of Christ is to be regarded thus can we


1 In 2 of this section.


§ 97] DIVINE AND HUMAN FACTORS 409


rightly ascribe to Him a perfect human soul, but a soul inwardly
impelled by this special being of God in Him, which, retaining its
unchangeable identity, permeates that soul in the variety of its
functions and moments, as that variety continually develops.
This, too, is the meaning of the phrase of the Schools, that the union
is a personal one. It is not a special nature which comes into being
in this way, one which could and must be distinguished from other
human existence ; what comes into existence through the being of
God in Christ is all perfectly human, and in its totality constitutes
a unity, the unity of a natural life-story, in which everything that
emerges is purely human, and one thing can be deduced from another,
since every moment presupposes those which have gone before, yet
in which everything can be completely understood only upon the
presupposition of that union through which alone this Person could
come into being, so that every moment also reveals the divine in
Christ as that which conditions it. And if, after all that has been
said, we define the spheres of our two propositions in relation to each
other, then we shall have to say that the first applies exclusively to
the very earliest beginning of the existence of Christ when the life
was coming into being as a simple entity, and consequently that it
holds only of the time before the historical appearance of Christ.
And similarly the latter applies exclusively after this appearance ;
for only when the human element is absolutely complete, and
there is no more growth in its coexistence with the being of God in
Him, can it be purely co-operative in its action. And so it is com-
prehensible that for the time filled by this historical appearance
there should be two different modes of interpretation, which,
although quite consistent with each other, yet when their true
relation is not recognized, seem to be incompatible. One of these
pays such exclusive attention throughout to the initiatory divine
factor that it is in danger of losing sight altogether of the human
context ; the other attempts everywhere to grasp the human context
so completely that'it comes near losing sight of the underlying
divine factor.

4. In agreement with both formule of our proposition are,
further, the old canons—they have only a negative but no real


1The same view is expressed, among others, by Joann. Dam., if only he
be rightly understood (iii. 7; p. 215 seq.): Ioréov dé, ws ef Kal mepixwpety ev
adAHAas TAS TOD KUpiov Picers Papev, GAN oldamev Orws ex THs Oelas picews 7 TeEpt-
xépynos yéyovev’ atirn méev yap Sud mdvrwy dijxer KaOcds BotNerat Kal Tepixwper, di
abrfs 6€ obdév. kal atirn wey Tov olkelwy alynudtwr TH capKt pmeradldwor (of which
more below) pévovea a’rh arabs, Kal Tay THs capkds rabdy (to which everything
temporal belongs) dpuéroxos.


410 THE CHRISTIAN FAITH [§ 97


positive value—which as a result of the discussions in the Councils
are expounded even in the oldest systematic treatises.1 It is
obvious that underlying the earliest threefold statement of the
points in question? is the idea that the divine nature in Christ
cannot in any way be separated from the human nature in Him,
so as to permit of the sundering of the two. Every such separation,
even if in accordance with these formule it were understood only
in a temporal or spatial sense, could still be only a separation of the
activities ; and if such a separation were possible, then there would
have to be in Christ, on the one hand, human activities in no way
dependent upon the impulse of the divine, and on the other, divine
activities which would have nowhere betrayed themselves in His
human nature. But these could have given no proof of their
derivation from the act of union, since they would bear in them-
selves no similarity to this; accordingly these formule exclude
just what our canon also excludes. The other threefold statement ®
quite clearly has the purpose of rejecting any idea of an alteration
of one nature by the other. Through any such alteration—which
of course could only have proceeded from the human nature—the
divine would have become something conditioned in space and
time ; and similarly, if the human had been altered by the divine,
the Person would have lost its identity with the rest of the human
race. In neither case would there have been a union of the divine
with the human. Here too the aim, therefore, is the same as that
which guides us in seeking to understand the divine factor in the
union in the only way which is compatible with the integrity of the
human, and vice versa. None the less, these two formule are not
for us to-day ; they are altogether based upon the conception of
divinity as a nature, which can only serve to introduce confusion
everywhere.

It is time that, along with these negative formule, we consigned
to the history of dogma also the extremely empty and formal theory,
that propositions about Christ, to be correct, must be differently
constructed according as we are speaking of the whole Person of
Christ, or only of one of the two natures. Such rules, if they are
to be normative for the language of edification, imposing the
limits within which it must move, could only be of value in
times of heresy-hunting ; but heresy-hunting in this form is hardly
likely to recur. In general, we must recognize that we are no longer


1E.g. Joann. Dam. iii. 3 ff. 2 axwplorws, ddiacpérws, and ddvaordrws.
3 dvahNowwTws, arpémrws, and dovyxvrws,


§ 97] THE COMMUNICATIO IDIOMATUM ATI


at the same stage as the men of these far-off days, when the more
exact technical terminology was only being gradually developed
out of the popular presentations of eminent men. Now that the
system of doctrine has been completed, and development within
the Schools goes its own way, Christian preachers must have the
freedom granted to the poets, to make use of terms which cannot
find a place in the terminology of technical theology, provided that
in their immediate context, from which they must not be torn, they
are unobjectionable, and that they involve nothing which would
lessen the dignity of the Redeemer or offend people’s feeling for that
dignity. If, on the other hand, these rules are meant to be used only
in technical theology itself, in order that at every point it may more
easily determine whether individual formule are or are not con-
sistent with the general propositions, then they depend too much upon
the use of the expression ‘ nature,’ for the divine as well as for the
human, to be useful when once that mode of expression has been
abandoned. And we possess a far better canon in the formula that
in Christ the creation of man first reaches completion. For what
distinguishes Christ from all others is that which is innermost in
Him ; hence the indwelling being of God in Him must be related to
the whole human nature in the same way as that which previously
was innermost was related to the whole human organism—an
analogy which, even if not clearly expressed, runs through the
whole foregoing presentation of the subject.

5. It follows at once from the character of the being of God in
Christ as now set forth, and from the necessity of ceasing to treat
the Supreme Being as a nature, as well as from our previous teaching
on the divine attributes, that the theory of a mutual communica-
tion of the attributes of the two natures to one another also is to be
banished from the system of doctrine, and handed over to the history
of doctrine. For in so far as we arrive at our ideas of divine attri-
butes only by analogy, the attribution of these to human nature,
if that nature is not to be destroyed by the infinity of these
attributes, is merely an assertion of absolute human excellence.
But on the other hand, in so far as each particular attribute is
simply a negation of the essence of man, and it is only when viewed
all together as one that they can represent the Divine Essence,
it is impossible to predicate of human nature even the individual
features of this collective view. For example, if we were to
attribute to human nature the identity of omniscience and omni-
potence, so that one and the same omniscient omnipotence and


412 THE CHRISTIAN FAITH [§ 97


omnipotent omniscience of the divine nature should have permeated
the assumed human nature,! as heat permeates iron, then during
this communication nothing human could have been left in Christ,
since everything human is essentially a negation of omniscient
omnipotence. If in consequence we fall back upon regarding the
divine attributes as altogether or for the most part quiescent—
though the former alternative alone is consistent, not even the
miracles being traced to an exceptional activity of the divine
attributes —the emptiness of this whole theory comes out most
clearly. For since divine attributes are simply activities, in what
consists the communication of these when they are inactive ?
Moreover, in that case the union of the natures would altogether
cease to be a dogmatic idea in the stricter sense, for it cannot possibly
be a statement regarding an impression received from Christ, since
the quiescent attributes cannot make themselves perceptible even
indirectly. It is the same with the communication of human
attributes to the divine nature. On the one hand, all statements
regarding our God-consciousness are just such an attribution,
inasmuch as all divine attributes are drawn, by analogy, from
human. But apart from this, it would necessarily mean the
negation of the Divine Essence, if to the divine nature there were to
be ascribed any human quality (and in any way) which had to be
excluded in the original formation of our conceptions of divine
attributes. If, for example, to the divine nature there were to be
communicated anything human in the way of capacity for suffer-
ing, in such a communication no room is left for anything divine ;
nay, every notable human excellence, even, is a diminution of the
capacity for suffering, and even what most inwardly resembles the
divine in man does not so much suffer as give its activity a re-
active form. It has been believed that the capacity for suffering
must be attributed even to the divine nature in Christ, partly on
the ground that otherwise redemptive power would be lacking to
His suffering ; * not only, however, has this older assertions against
it,* but equally it depends, as we shall show later, upon wrong ideas


1 See Sol. decl., p. 778: cum tota divinitatis plenitudo in Christo habitet
ut in proprio suo corpore etiam .. . in assumpta humana natura divinam
suam virtutem exerceat . . . idque ea quodammodo ratione qua . . . ignis in
ferro candente agit.

2 See Reinh., Dogm., § 97, 2 and 6.

3 Sol. decl., p. 771: Si enim persuaderi mihi patiar ut credam solam
humanam naturam pro me passam esse, profecto Christus mihi non magni
pretii salvator erit, sed ipse tandem salvatore eget.

4 Joann. Dam. iii. 7 : atrn mev (7) Bela vous) Tv oikelwy adbynudrwv TH capKl
MeTadldwor wévovta avTh amadis, Kal Tov THs capKds TAPdy auéroxos. ;


§ 98) SINLESSNESS AND PERFECTION 413


of the work of redemption. And so it might well be said that this
doctrine of the mutual communication of attributes, truly and
completely worked out, must cancel again the union of the two
natures, since in virtue of that communication each nature would
cease to be what it is. The rejection of this theory, however, by
no means involves a preferring the Reformed school to the Lutheran.
For if the former speaks, instead, of contrasted attributes of two
natures in one person, it is rightly met with the objection that it
is dividing Christ, since contrasted things cannot be one, nor can
the natures be one either, if their attributes are held apart. But
the other school is chargeable with a similar division. For if the
communication is to be a real one, then through it there arise in
each nature two kinds of activities, which cannot really form a
series—e.g. in the human nature of Christ there would have to
be ideational activities both in the manner of a limited con-
sciousness and in that of the communicated omniscience. Both
doctrines, therefore, are equally to be rejected, since they both
depend upon the false idea of a divine nature to which it is
possible to ascribe a group of attributes.


§ 98. Third Theorem.—Chnist was distinguished from all other men
by His essential sinlessness and His absolute perfection.


1. By essential sinlessness we are to understand a sinlessness
which has its adequate ground within His personality itself, so
that it would have been altogether the same whatever the outward
relations might have been (and among outward relations we may
include also whatever belongs to the body). This expression at
least sets forth with sufficient definiteness the point at issue, since
it follows from what has been said that this inner ground can be
none other than the union of the divine and the human in His
Person. That which in individual cases we experience immediately
we must conceive to be possible also in general. We have imme-
diate experience of the fact that by a favourable combination of cir-
cumstances sin, even inward sin, may be prevented from becoming
actual. But this happens in such a way that therein we not only
remain conscious of ourselves as sinful men, but are even confirmed
in this consciousness through this very perception, for it implies a
recognition that in our case the zner ground for the prevention of
sin is lacking. Such sinlessness, which in comparison with essential


1 Conf. Gall. xv. p. 116: manente tamen unaquaque illarum naturarum
in sua distincta proprietate, etc. Similarly, Conf. Belg. xix.


414 THE CHRISTIAN FAITH [§ 98


sinlessness is no more than accidental, would therefore not express
the peculiar excellence of the Redeemer; and not only so, but
where the inward possibility of sinning is posited, there too is
posited in addition at least an infinitely small amount of the reality
of sin, in the form of tendency. So that one who can be content
with such accidental sinlessness in the Redeemer may also let pass
actual sin in Him, provided it does not make itself so perceptible ’
that someone for a moment might claim superiority to Christ.
At the same time, the usual formule of technical theology do not
mark the distinction with the required sharpness, and the quarrel
which has been waged between them seems a perfectly empty one.
It is true that the formula, potwit non peccare, asserts the essential
pre-eminence of Christ, if taken as affirming a contrast to the state
of all other men. For these, one and all, can never not-sin; sin
creeps into everything—which, strictly speaking, must then have
been the case with Christ also (to the extent of the infinitely small
amount referred to above), if a real possibility of sinning is ascribed
to Him. But the formula does not express that pre-eminence,
as soon as it is taken to mean something different from the other
formula, non potuit peccare ; for when made a contrast to this it
involves the possibility of sinning. But exactly the same holds
true of the latter formula ; it too may be used by one who is only
assuming a general divine protection exerted over the Redeemer.
Thus it too corresponds to the content of our formula only if it be
taken as the equivalent of the first in the sense indicated.

But, even on the basis of our formula, it remains difficult to deter-
mine what it excludes from Christ, and that in such wise as to pre-
serve intact all that must belong to Him in virtue of His likeness to
us. And this point is indisputably one from which it must be
possible to develop much that is essential for Christian ethics ;
for everything depends on determining the point where sin begins.
A special difficulty arises here from the fact that even in the earliest
documents of the faith it is asserted that Christ was tempted in all
points, a statement which in the light of the conclusion reached
above ? involves sin in Him, if we take it as meaning that there
was even an infinitely small element of struggle involved. On the
other hand, susceptibility to the contrast of the pleasurable and
the painful belongs to the reality of human nature, so that it must
be possible for pleasure and pain to exist in a sinless way, and the
beginning of sin must lie between the moment at which pleasure

1 John 84°, EKG Mole is


§ 98] THE TEMPTATIONS OF CHRIST 415


and pain exist in this sinless way and that at which struggle begins. -
If, at the same time, we remember that in Christ every impulse
must have been determined by the God-consciousness, it follows
that in Him, too, pleasure and pain must have been possible, but
not so that they determined the impulse ; that is, they must have
been present only as the result of an impulse which was determined
in the manner appropriate to Him. They ave such results when
as sensation or feeling they remain wholly within the limits of the
quiescent consciousness, but not when they pass over into desire
or repulsion. Now temptation consists just in the approximation
of these two, and Christ can have been tempted without prejudice
to His essential sinlessness only if pleasure and pain came to Him
as intensified sensation, while His essential sinlessness explains
why they never could become anything more than symptoms
of a state, but without any determinative or co-determinative
power ; but not if they came so that the transition from the one
sort to the other ever really took place.t Only, as this rule must
hold good for every moment of Christ’s life without exception,
it must be observed that this way of expressing it is applicable only
to a developed consciousness, and that the childhood of Christ as
well can only have had the character of perfect innocence if this
rule held good then also in proportion to the stage of development
reached at the moment. So that in respect of sin Christ was at all
times equally different from all other men, and at all times equally
essentially free from sin.

It belongs further to this sinlessness, that Christ can neither
have originated real error Himself, or even have accepted the error
of others with real conviction, and as well-established truth. Nor
is it necessary to restrict this principle to the sphere of His proper
vocation ; only we must hold fast to the distinction between the
acceptance and the propagation of ideas which were definitely
maintained by others (in regard to these one neither makes any
investigation nor accepts any responsibility), and the forming of
a judgment which in some connexion thereafter determines one’s
mode of action. In the latter case, error always presupposes either
a precipitancy which nothing but irrelevant motives could have


1In the treatment of this question I could take no special account of the
story of the Temptation, for to me it is impossible to regard it as historical.
Obviously its content, taken literally, is such that in comparison Christ must
often have been much more strongly tempted in the course of His active life.
And hence the narrator is by no means to be blamed who indicates (Luke 41°)
that this is not to be regarded as for Him the end of all temptation.


416 THE CHRISTIAN FAITH [§ 98


occasioned, or an obscured sense of truth which partly has its basis
in the universal sinfulness, but partly too is in each single case
bound up with the special sinfulness of the individual.

Closely connected with this doctrine of the essential sinlessness
of Christ is the idea of the natural immortality of Christ—namely,
that Christ would not have been subject to death in virtue of His
human nature ; an idea which has not, it is true, been fixed by being
included in any of the creeds, nor is really based on passages in the
Bible,t but yet has found very general acceptance. But the only
basis for the conception is that when death is regarded as the wages
of sin, he who is free from all connexion with sin must also have
been free from the dominion of death. When we take into account
what has already been said above ? about the natural immortality
of Adam and the connexion of all natural evils with sin, nothing
more can be inferred from the sinlessness of Christ than that death
can have been no evil for Christ. We must hold to this position,
and instead of the idea in question take our side with those who
acknowledge that immortality was conferred upon Christ’s human
nature only with the Resurrection. All the more that mortality
and the capacity for physical suffering are so closely connected that
such a natural immortality in Christ would make the capacity of
human nature in His Person for suffering a mere empty phrase, and
no great worth could be attached to His physical sufferings without
self-contradiction.

Yet this idea is not represented as simply an inference from the
sinlessness of Christ ; it is held that it alone reveals to us the true
significance of all the statements which set forth His death as a
voluntary one, and thus brings out fully the higher significance of
His suffering and death. But precisely from this point of view the
idea is a highly dubious one. For one who cannot naturally die
cannot be put to death by force either ; it would therefore have
been necessary that Christ by a miracle should first have made Him-
self mortal, in order that it should be possible to put Him to death ;
so that His death would have been, almost directly, His own act.

2. Now so far as the absolute perfection of His human nature
during the period of His manhood is concerned, special emphasis
is very often laid upon intellectual and physical excellence, especially

1 What Christ Himself says in John 1017-18 expresses, not a physical, but a
social and ethical relation.

2 Cf. § 59, Postscript.


* Conf. Belg. xix. p. 181: et quamvis eidem naturae immortalitatem
resurrectione sua dederit, etc.


§ 99] HIS PHYSICAL EXCELLENCES 417


in the older treatments of the subject. But—since here no records
come to our aid which would transform every such proposition into
a historical one, and so remove it from the sphere of doctrine
altogether—it may well be doubted whether the impression which
we receive from Christ is sufficient to justify us in postulating for
Him qualities which we cannot deduce from the union of the divine
with the human nature. Only one thing can be said if we deduce
the temporal appearance of this creative activity, as an individual
fact, from the general divine ordination. And this is that, just
as the Redeemer could appear only at a particular time and only
out of the midst of this people, so, too, the divine activity would
not have assumed the human nature and created the Person of the
Redeemer in such a way that any deformity could have resulted.
It is natural enough, therefore, to ascribe to the Redeemer a
physical ideality also; but since the physical aspect of His appear-
ance was to be of no significance in itself, but only as the organ
of that union, the ideality must be restricted solely to this. From
this assumption, and from the undisturbed and continuous in-
fluence of a pure will, there is to be inferred only a healthiness
which is equally remote from a disproportionate strength or
dominance of individual physical functions and from morbid
weakness, inasmuch as by both of these the balanced aptitude
of the organism for all demands of the will is impaired. To this
accordingly we must restrict ourselves, and all the more reject all
prying questions,! because our ideas of the relation between body
and soul are still open to important corrections. And thus, if the
ancients have not seldom something to say about the beauty of
the Redeemer,? this is an idea which lies very near the frontier
which we must not touch, and we may disregard it as an un-
conscious after-effect of heathen notions.


§ 99. The facts of the Resurrection and the Ascension of Christ, and
the prediction of His Return to Judgment, cannot be laid down
as properly constituent parts of the doctrine of His Person.


1. When we compare with the canon for dogmatic statements


1It is a divine provision, certainly of the highest significance, but not
sufficiently recognized, that neither a trustworthy tradition regarding the
external aspect of Christ’s person, nor an authentic picture of it, has come
down to us. For the same reason, we may be sure, we lack an exact
description of His manner of life and a connected narrative of the events
of His career. er

* E.g. Chrysost., in ep. ad Col. Homil. viii.: otrws fv kadds, ws ovde elvac
elmety,


27


418 THE CHRISTIAN FAITH [§ 99


laid down above,! the propositions, on the one hand, concerning
the Person of Christ which we have so far set forth, and on the
other the statements contained in the oldest creeds * expressing
these facts (i.e. Resurrection, Ascension, and Judgment), it will
be seen that the former correspond to both the requirements in-
sisted on, and the latter to neither. For if the redeeming efficacy
of Christ depends upon the being of God in Him, and faith in
Him is grounded upon the impression that such a being of God
indwells Him, then it is impossible to prove any immediate con-
nexion between these facts and that doctrine. The disciples
recognized in Him the Son of God without having the faintest
premonition of His resurrection and ascension, and we too may
say the same of ourselves ; moreover neither the spiritual presence
which He promised nor all that He said about His enduring influ-
ence upon those who remained behind is mediated through either of
these two facts. This may well depend upon His sitting at the
right hand of God—by which, however, since the expression may
be strictly an impossible one, we must understand simply the
peculiar and incomparable dignity of Christ, raised above all conflict
—hbut not upon a visible resurrection or ascension, since of course
Christ could have been raised to glory even without these inter-
mediate steps ; and if so, it is impossible to see in what relation
both these can stand to the redeeming efficacy of Christ. It is
true, on the one hand, Paul seems to attribute to the resurrection,
just as much as to the death, a share of its own in redemption ; 3
yet on the other, the way in which he brings it forward as a guarantee
of our own resurrection + shows that he in no sense thinks of it as
having an exclusive connexion with the peculiar being of God in
Christ. Also, it is never adduced as an evidence of the divine
indwelling in Christ ; for it is everywhere ascribed, not to Himself,
but to God.’ No more does John adduce the visible ascension as a
proof of the higher dignity of Christ. Hence we may safely credit
everyone who is familiar with dogmatic statements with a recogni-
tion of the fact that the right impression of Christ can be, and has
been, present in its fulness without a knowledge of these facts.

So far as the Return to Judgment is concerned, we can treat of


+ ot $29 3- rr ; “Pe
, Symb. Nic. = Kal avaoravra év rH Tpirn huepa Kata Tas ypapds’ Kal dveOdvra,
els Tovs ovpavovs Kal Kabefouevoy x dekiGv Tod marpos* Kal madw Epxdmevov meta OdEns
kpivat (avras Kal vexpovs,
3 Rom, 425, Seri Core rte 8)
® Acts 274 38 410 r040, Rom. 44, 1 Cor. 614 1515, 2 Cor. Ais,


§ 99] RESURRECTION, ASCENSION, AND JUDGMENT 419


the doctrinal significance of this idea only at a later point. Here it
need only be remarked that although the Judgment, in so far as
we regard it as a transferable divine act, is so closely bound up with
the work of redemption that it is not easy to think that God could
hand it over to any but the Redeemer, yet this implies nothing
greater in the Person of Christ than already we ascribe to Him apart
from this ; and in any case it does not really belong to the work of
redemption itself, since of course those who believe do not come
into judgment. But considered as the Return of Christ it is con-
nected with the ascension as its counterpart. Just as the latter is
only an accidental form for effecting the sitting at the right hand of
God, so also the promise of return is only an accidental form for the
satisfaction of the longing to be united with Christ. And just as the
incomprehensible and miraculous in the ascension cannot be made
dependent on the divine in Christ, which reveals itself as the impulse
to all His free actions, and since the ascension is nowhere presented
as His act, no more can the miraculous in the Return depend upon
it. So that the dissimilarity between our propositions above
(those, that is to say, which we have recognized as such) and these
assertions must be clear to everyone.

It is somewhat different with Christ’s so-called Descent into
Hell.t. This—according to its dominant idea—would certainly
belong to His redemptive activities if only we could regard it as a
fact. It would then have to be regarded as an exercise of His
prophetic and high-priestly office towards those who had died before
His appearance. But for one thing the only passage which seems
to treat of this descent ? is far from including anything of the kind,
and for another the transaction, even with this extended interpre-
tation of the passage, would not correspond to the task to be accom-
plished, as we are bound to understand it. For all those also who
have died since His appearance without having heard the preaching
of the Gospel have the same claims as the others. Moreover, the
expressions used in that passage in no way compel us to assume such
an otherwise unattested fact, any more than they fix the time at
which it is supposed to have happened. For these reasons the
Descent has been completely omitted from our proposition.

2. Belief in these facts, accordingly, is no independent element
in the original faith in Christ, of such a kind that we could not


1 Symb. Rom.: xateOdvra els ra karwra only in one Greek, but in several


old Latin copies; Symb. Quic. 36: descendit ad inferos.
2 Pet. 31%. Eph. 4° should certainly not be adduced here.


420 THE CHRISTIAN FAITH [§ 99


accept Him as Redeemer or recognize the being of God in Him, if
we did not know that He had risen from the dead and ascended to
heaven, or if He had not promised that He would return for judg-
ment. Further, this belief is not to be derived from those original
elements ; we cannot conclude that because God was in Christ He
must have risen from the dead and ascended into heaven, or that
because He was essentially sinless He must come again to act as
Judge. Rather they are accepted only because they are found in
the Scriptures ; and all that can be required of any Protestant
Christian is that he shall believe them in so far as they seem to him
to be adequately attested. Here the sacred writers are to be re-
garded only as reporters ; accordingly belief in these statements
belongs, immediately and originally, rather to the doctrine of Scrip-
ture than to the doctrine of the Person of Christ. Yet an indirect
connexion with that doctrine is not to be denied to such belief, in so
far, that is, as our judgment about the disciples as original reporters
reacts upon our judgment about the Redeemer. Anyone, for
example, who, in view of the miraculous element involved, and to
avoid accepting the resurrection of Christ as literal fact, prefers to
suppose that the disciples were deceived and took an inward ex-
perience for an outward, ascribes to them such weakness of intellect
that not only is their whole testimony to Christ thereby rendered
unreliable, but also Christ, in choosing for Himself such witnesses,
cannot have known what is in men. Or, if we suppose that He
Himself wished or arranged that they should be constrained to
regard an inner experience as outward perception, then He Himself
would be an originator of error, and all moral conceptions would be
thrown into confusion if such a higher dignity as His were compatible
with this. With the ascension it is different, so far at least as we
have no adequate reason for maintaining that we have before us a
direct report from an eyewitness of what actually happened, and
least of all from an apostolic eyewitness. If, nevertheless, it is
affirmed that Christ did rise from the dead, but was not taken up
into heaven, but lived in concealment for an indeterminate time, so
that He must have arranged something which could be regarded as
an ascension to heaven, then the case is just the same as with the
resurrection. Least closely connected with the doctrine of the
Person of Christ proper is the promise of His Return, especially as
it is promised for the sake of an office to be fulfilled, and so far would
belong to the next section, if only that office were one directly
tT Sobmy22cs


§ 99] NEW TESTAMENT CHRISTOLOGY 421


belonging to His vocation as Redeemer. Only if exegesis brought
out clearly that a time had been fixed for this Return which has
now long since elapsed, or if it were described in a way whose
impossibility we could prove, would this necessarily react, if not
on the doctrine of the Scriptures, yet certainly on that of the
Person of Christ.

Postscript to this Doctrine.—The presentation of the Person of
Christ given above, first in our own quite independent form of
expression, then in closer connexion with the accepted forms of the
Church, is, in essentials, so widespread and so long current in the
Christian Church, that it must be regarded as the general faith of
Christians. All the more that even many of those who content
themselves with a lesser idea of the Redeemer reject this dominant
view only because they are suspicious of the miraculous in general
—whether they overlook the distinction which we have laid down,!
or reject it—or because they believe that along with it they must
accept a doctrine of the Trinity which is offensive to them on
account of its polytheistic complexion. It is therefore to be hoped
that many will find it easier to accept, in a freer presentation, a view
by which they are repelled when they find it invested in hard
scholastic forms.

It cannot, however, be definitely proved that the same form of
doctrine prevailed universally in Christendom where the same faith
about the relation to the Redeemer underlay it, the reason being
that neither understanding nor terminology had sufficiently de-
veloped for that. Also it is undeniable that alongside this view of
the Redeemer other different and lesser ones were current in
Christendom very early. For both these reasons the question can-
not be avoided whether the view of the Church can really be vindi-
cated as the original one by statements of Christ Himself and of
the Apostles, or whether they are right who assert that it is a view
which arose later. Here it must be premised, that even supposing
the originality of our doctrine were not proved, it still would not
follow that it is false or arbitrarily invented, provided only that
those original testimonies are not demonstrably at variance with it.
But the question itself, it must be admitted, is so complicated that
it cannot be decided in a manner which could win general accept-
ance, so long as, on the one hand, the most various opinions exist
alongside each other as to the way in which the New Testament
writings came into existence and as to who their authors were, and,

eT Ciaseuse


422 THE CHRISTIAN FAITH [§ 99


on the other hand, exegetical methods are so various and so arbitrary.
So long as it is possible to dispute interminably over the meaning
of particular passages, it is useless to have recourse to particular
sayings of Christ’s own to prove His essential sinlessness + or the
being of God in Him But anyone who in the interpretation of
particular passages is not content merely with a sense in harmony
with his own theory, but keeps an open mind for a true impression
of the whole, will scarcely be able to ascribe to the sayings of Christ
about His relation to men and to His Father 3 (having regard to the
way in which they complete and pervade each other) a lesser content
than that set forth in our propositions, although perhaps not pre-
cisely in the sense of the ecclesiastical formule relating to the
doctrine of the Trinity. And at the same time these sayings are not
of such a kind that they destroy the reality of Christ’s human exist-
ence, as if in His temporal consciousness He had, say, a recollection
of a separate existence of the divine in Him, before His incarnation.*

In entire agreement with this is the double appellation, Son of
Man and Son of God, which Christ gives to Himself. For He could
not have given Himself the first name, if He had not been conscious
of sharing completely in the same human nature as others ; but it
would have been meaningless to claim it specially for Himself, if He
had not had a reason for doing so which others could not adduce—
if, that is, the name had not had a pregnant meaning, which was
meant to indicate a difference between Him and all others.> Simi-
larly the connexion between the appellation Son of God and what
Christ says about His relation to His Father shows that He did not
use it of Himself in the same sense in which it had already been
used of others &—as indeed is clearly involved in the expression
‘only-begotten ’’ which comes from Christ Himself.7 Only if we
destroy this natural connexion between two designations which
manifestly refer to each other, will it become easier to admit lesser


1 John 84°. Wounerose ee:

3 John 5l. 24, 26 824. 36 tgit. 20 I 10. 21-23

* An indication of this sort might be found in John 175, but John 519. 20
makes this interpretation almost impossible. But even apart from that
it would be open to suspicion, because the petition has remained unfulfilled,
since in spite of all the labour expended no one has yet reached a clear
consciousness on the matter, and no one ever will.

°It is a strange idea that this designation was intended to refute the
popular opinion that no one would know whence the Messiah came ; not less
strange is the other, that it was intended to refer to a vision in Daniel (713)
where one /ike a Son of man—manifestly by contrast with the beasts mentioned
earlier—comes in the clouds of heaven before the Ancient of days.

®§ Compare especially John 10%5f.,

D \ovevay 3e.


§ 99] NEW TESTAMENT CHRISTOLOGY 423


interpretations and to associate them with Ebionite theories. While,
on the other hand, those passages in which a high degree of grief is
ascribed to Christ,! or in which something is told of Him which
seems to imply passionate excitement,” are really only details which
—so far from being evidence against His sinlessness, or incompatible
with the being of God in Him—manifestly caused no one to doubt
Him, because everyone habitually interprets such individual
moments in harmony with the total impression he has already
received. So they serve only to remind us that faith in Jesus as
Redeemer was not based on details, but develops out of a total
impression—from which it follows only that there are no details in
existence which could have prevented that impression. But that
the faith even in the first generation of His disciples had the same
content as we have set forth here, is proved, not only by the most
various testimonies which ascribe to Christ perfect purity 3 and
fulness of power,* but also by the way in which Paul describes Him,
in contrast with Adam, as the originator of a new human worth,
and by the Johannine presentation of the Adyos, as well as by the
theory set forth in the Epistle to the Hebrews.

Now of course even these testimonies could be weakened by
artificial interpretations, by tearing them out of their context and
combining them with what is irrelevant. But it is not sufficient to
show merely that this expression and that other may have less
significance ; it must also be made clear how it can have come
about that an ordinary relation was described in extraordinary and
inappropriate terms, and how the original sense of these was so
early lost in the tradition. So long as this cannot be done better
than it is by entirely arbitrary hypotheses, the belief will probably
hold the field that the faith of the Church is also the original faith
and is founded upon the sayings of Christ about Himself.

Now if this is in general the sufficiently clear result of an examina-
tion of Scripture, our Dogmatic can not only easily dispense with
the whole arsenal of particular statements which have been set forth
under various rubrics > as proving the being of God in Christ, but put
them aside all the more readily that they give no help in presenting
the subject in the best way, but rather hide what is important and
certain under what is untrustworthy. For what is the use of
ascribing divine titles to Christ, if He Himself calls attention to an


1 Matt. 2637, Luke 19%. Saf Glnenr es 353
PuCOnNn- a trets 224, eb. Lo 7-csn8 Ola. S Phileas,
5 dvouaorikds, liwuarik@s, évepynriKas, and AarpeuTiKds.


424 THE CHRISTIAN FAITH [§ 99


improper use of the word ‘ God’ [John 1034-38] 2? But appellations
which express the unity of the divine and the human in so definite
and unambiguous a way as the later ‘God-man’ do not occur in
Scripture ; all the predicates which can be cited in this connexion
are more or less uncertain in meaning.! So, too, as far as the divine
attributes are concerned, it is natural that, since Christ is always
spoken of as a man, only such attributes are ascribed to Him as
express exalted humanity, so that it is easy to explain them as
nothing but very permissible hyperbolical expressions. Since,
further, it is difficult to distinguish between worship in the strict
sense and the utterances of a deep, but not properly divine, adora-
tion, if we were to proceed on that line everything would depend
upon the divine activities asserted of Christ. But creation and pre-
servation are only ascribed to Christ ? in such a way that it must
remain doubtful whether they do not mean that He is active cause
only in so far as He is final cause. Finally, in the Resurrection and
the Last Judgment, Christ is everywhere distinguished from God,
for He appears only as a deputy with full powers, and hence His
power is represented as resting in the Father, just as the appoint-
ment proceeds from the Father originally. Exactly the same is true
of the sending of the Spirit, which Christ ascribes, now to Himself,
now to the Father, who sends it at His request.2 So that without
those great supreme testimonies all these details would have little
effect.

1 It is obvious that no reference can be made here to the miraculous signs
of the Old Testament, heavenly voices and appearances, by which the Son of
God is to be recognized. For in any case they could have nothing to say
about the Person of Christ ; at most they might have to be considered apropos
of the doctrine of the Trinity.


2x Cor. 8, Col. 118-17, Heb. 14.
3 Luke 244° and John 15?: ©; cf. John 1416. 86,


SECOND DocTRINE: THE WorK OF CHRIST


§ 100. The Redeemer assumes believers into the power of His God-
consciousness, and this is His redemptive activity.


1. In virtue of the teleological character of Christian piety, both
the imperfect stage of the higher life, as also the challenge of it,
appear in our self-consciousness as facts due to our own individual
action—though we do not feel responsible for the latter in the same
way as for the former. In virtue, however, of the peculiar character
of Christianity this challenge is also apprehended in our self-con-
sciousness as the act of the Redeemer.? These two points of view
can be reconciled only by supposing that this challenge is the act of
the Redeemer become our own act. And this, accordingly, is the
best way of expressing the common element in the Christian con-
sciousness of the divine grace. Hence, from this point of view, the
peculiar work of the Redeemer would first be to evoke this act in us.
But if we regard the matter more closely, it is clear that what we
have thus described is in every case an act both of the Redeemer
and of the redeemed. The original activity of the Redeemer, there-
fore, which belongs to Him alone, and which precedes all activity
’ of our own in this challenge, would be that by means of which He
assumes us into this fellowship of His activity and His life. The
continuance of that fellowship, accordingly, constitutes the essence
of the state of grace; the new corporate life is the sphere
within which Christ produces this act ; in it is revealed the con-
tinuous activity of His sinless perfection.

But His act in us can never be anything but the act of His sin-
lessness and perfection as conditioned by the being of God in Him.
And so these too in addition must become ours, because otherwise
it would not be His act that became ours. Now the individual life
of each one of us is passed in the consciousness of sin and imperfec-
tion. Hence we can know the fellowship of the Redeemer only in
so far as we are not conscious of our own individual life ; as impulses’
flow to us from Him, we find that in Him from which everything
proceeds to be the source of our activity also—a common possession,

1 Cf. § 88. Ci wSiOs sean aie.


425


426 THE CHRISTIAN FAITH [§ 100


as it were. This too is the meaning of all those passages in Scrip-
ture which speak of Christ being and living in us,! of being dead to
sin,? of putting off the old and putting on the new man.* But
Christ can only direct His God-consciousness against sin in so far
as He enters into the corporate life of man and sympathetically
shares the consciousness of sin, but shares it as something He is to
overcome.t This very consciousness of sin as something to be over-
come becomes the principle of our activity in the action which He
evokes in us. But our own immediate experience in being thus
assumed into the fellowship of Christ will be explained in the first
Doctrine of the second main Division, which deals with forgiveness.
And the further development of this fellowship in time, through a
series of common actions, is the subject of the second Doctrine,
dealing with sanctification. Here we have only to explain more
exactly what the Redeemer does and how He accomplishes it.

2. All Christ’s activity, then, proceeds from the being of God in
Him. And we know no divine activity except that of creation,
which includes that of preservation, or, conversely, that of pre-
servation, which includes that of creation. So we shall have to
regard Christ’s activity too in the same way. We do not, however,
exclude the soul of man from creation, in spite of the fact that the
creation of such a free agent and the continued freedom of a being
created in the context of a greater whole is something which we
cannot expect to understand ; all that we can do is to recognize
the fact. The same is true of the creative activity of Christ, which
is entirely concerned with the sphere of freedom. For His assump-
tive activity is a creative one, yet what it produces is altogether
free. Now the being of God in Him as an active principle is
timeless and eternal, yet its expressions are all conditioned by the
form of human life. It follows that He can influence what is free
only in accordance with the manner in which it enters into His
sphere of living influence, and only in accordance with the nature of
the free. The activity by which He assumes us into fellowship with
Him is, therefore, a creative production in us of the will to assume
Him into ourselves, or rather—since it is only receptiveness for His
activity as involved in the impartation >—only our assent to the
influence of His activity. But it is a condition of that activity
of the Redeemer that the individuals should enter the sphere of

Mi Gal 220 ROM Saou OMDB es .a24 Cone o-


2 Rom. 62: & 44, r Pet. 224,
2 Coli pher4saass qNohien6ss: ° John 16}°,


§ 100] CHRIST’S REDEMPTIVE ACTIVITY 427


His historical influence, where they become aware of Him in His
self-revelation. Now this assent can only be conceived as condi-
tioned by the consciousness of sin ; yet it is not necessary that this
should precede entrance into the sphere of the Redeemer. Rather
it may just as well arise within that sphere as the effect of the
Redeemer’s self-revelation, as indeed it certainly does come to
full clarity only as we contemplate His sinless perfection. Accord-
ingly, the original activity of the Redeemer is best conceived as a
pervasive influence which is received by its object in virtue of the
free movement with which he turns himself to its attraction,
just as we ascribe an attractive power to everyone to whose edu-
cative intellectual influence we gladly submit ourselves. Now, if
every activity of the Redeemer proceeds from the being of God in
Him, and if in the formation of the Redeemer’s Person the only
active power was the creative divine activity which established
itself as the being of God in Him, then also His every activity may
be regarded as a continuation of that person-forming divine influence
upon human nature. For the pervasive activity of Christ cannot
establish itself in an individual without becoming person-forming
in him too, for now all his activities are differently determined
through the working of Christ in him, and even all impressions are |
differently received—which means that the personal self-conscious-
ness too becomes altogether different. And just as creation is not
concerned simply with individuals (as if each creation of an indi-
vidual had been a special act), but it is the world that was created,
and every individual as such was created only in and with the
ewhole, for the rest not less than for itself, in the same way the
activity of the Redeemer too is world-forming, and its object is
human nature, in the totality of which the powerful God-conscious-
ness is to be implanted as a new vital principle. He takes posses-
sion of the individuals relatively to the whole, wherever He finds
those in whom His activity does not merely remain, but from whom,
moving on, it can work upon others through the revelation of His
life. And thus the total effective influence of Christ is only the
continuation of the creative divine activity out of which the Person
of Christ arose. For this, too, was directed towards human nature
as a whole, in which that being of God was to exist, but in such a
way that its effects are mediated through the life of Christ, as its
most original organ, for all human nature that has already become
personal in the natural sense, in proportion as it allows itself to be
brought into spiritual touch with that life and its self-perpetuating


428 THE CHRISTIAN FAITH [§ Loo


organism. And this in order that the former personality may be
slain and human nature, in vital fellowship with Christ, be formed
into persons in the totality of that higher life.

Let us now look at the corporate life, or at the fellowship of
the individual with the Redeemer. We may best describe its be-
ginning, since it is conditioned by a free acceptance, by the term
calling—the whole official activity of Christ began with just such
a call. But the share of the Redeemer in the common life, viewed
as continuing, we are fully justified in calling soul-bestowal
(Beseelung), primarily with reference to the corporate life—as
indeed the Church is called His Body. In just the same way
Christ is to be the soul also in the individual fellowship, and each
individual the organism through which the soul works. The two
things are related as in Christ the divine activity present in the act
of union is related to that activity in the state of union, and as in
God the activity of creation is related to that of preservation.
Only that here it is still clearer how each moment of a common
activity can be regarded also as a calling, and likewise how the
calling proper can be regarded as soul-bestowal. But this formula,
too, we shall employ in another place.

3. This exposition is based entirely on the inner experience of
the believer ; its only purpose is to describe and elucidate that
experience. Naturally, therefore, it can make no claim to be a
proof that things must have been so; in the sphere of experience
such proof is only possible where mathematics can be used, which
is certainly not the case here. Our purpose is simply to show that
the perfect satisfaction to which we aspire can only be truly con-
tained in the Christian’s consciousness of his relation to Christ in so
far as that consciousness expresses the kind of relation which has
been described here. If this content be lacking in the Christian
consciousness, then either the perfect satisfaction must come from
some other quarter, or it does not exist at all, and we must be
content with an indefinite appeasement of conscience, such as may
be found without any Redeemer ; and in that case there would be
no special possession of divine grace in Christianity at all. Now
these negations cannot be logically refuted ; they can only be re-
moved by actual facts: we must seek to bring doubters to the
same experience as we have had.

Now such a presentation of the redeeming activity of Christ as
has been given here, which exhibits it as the establishment of a new
life common to Him and us (original in Him, in us new and derived),


§ 100] HIS MYSTICAL INFLUENCE 429


is usually called by those who have not had the experience,
‘mystical.’ This expression is so extremely vague that it seems
better to avoid it. But if we are willing to keep so close to its
original use as to understand by it what belongs to the circle of
doctrines which only a few share, but for others are a mystery, then
we may accept it. Provided that we recognize that no one can be
received into this circle arbitrarily, because doctrines are only
expressions of inward experiences—whoever has these experiences
ipso facto belongs to the circle ; whoever has not, cannot come in at
all. But an analogy to this relation may be pointed out in a sphere
which is universally familiar. As contrasted with the condition
of things existing before there was any law, the civil community
within a defined area is a higher vital potency. Let us now suppose
that some person for the first time combines a naturally cohesive
group into a civil community (legend tells of such cases in plenty) ;
what happens is that the idea of the state first comes to conscious-
ness in him, and takes possession of his personality as its immediate
dwelling-place. Then he assumes the rest into the living fellowship
of the idea. He does so by making them clearly conscious of the
unsatisfactoriness of their present condition by effective speech.
The power remains with the founder of forming in them the idea
which is the innermost principle of his own life, and of assuming
them into the fellowship of that life. The result is, not only that
there arises among them a new corporate life, in complete contrast
to the old, but also that each of them becomes in himself a new
person—that is to say, a citizen. And everything resulting from
this is the corporate life—developing variously with the process of
time, yet remaining essentially the same—of this idea which
emerged at that particular point of time, but was always pre-
destined in the nature of that particular racial stock. The analogy
might be pushed even further, to points of which we shall speak
later. But even this presentation of it will seem mystical to those
who admit only a meagre and inferior conception of the civic state.

Let us be content, then, that our view of the matter should
be called mystical in this sense ; naturally everything to be de-
rived from this main point will be called mystical too. But just
as this mystical view can substantiate its claim to be the original
one, so too it claims to be the true mean between two others, of
which I shall call the one the magical way, and the other the
empirical. The former admits, of course, that the activity of Christ
is redemptive, but denies that the communication of His perfection


430 THE CHRISTIAN FAITH (§ 100


is dependent on the founding of a community ; it results, they
maintain, from His immediate influence upon the individual :
and-for this some take the written word to be a necessary means,
others do not. The latter show themselves the more consistent,
but the more completely they cut themselves loose from every-
thing originating in the community the more obvious becomes the
magical character of their view. This magical character lies in an
influence not mediated by anything natural, yet attributed to a
person. This is completely at variance with the maxim every-
where underlying our presentation, that the beginning of the
Kingdom of God is a supernatural thing, which, however, becomes
natural as soon as it emerges into manifestation ; for this other
view makes every significant moment a supernatural one.
Further, this view is completely separatist in type, for it makes
the corporate life a purely accidental thing ; and it comes very
near being docetic as well. For if Christ exerted influence in
any such way as this—as a person, it is true, but only as a
heavenly person without earthly presence, though in a truly
personal way—then it would have been possible for Him to work
in just the same way at any time, and His real personal appear-
ance in history was only a superfluous adjunct. But those who
likewise assume an immediate personal influence, but mediate it
through the word and the fellowship, are less magical only if they
attribute to these the power of evoking a mood in which the in-
dividual becomes susceptible to that personal influence. They are
more magical still, if these natural elements have the power of dis-
posing Christ to exert His influence ; for then their efficacy is ex-
actly like that attributed to magic spells. The contrary empirical
view also, it is true, admits a redemptive activity on the part of
Christ, but one which is held to consist only in bringing about an
increasing perfection in us ; and this cannot properly occur other -
wise than in the forms of teaching and example. These forms
are general ; there is nothing distinctive in them. Even suppose
it admitted that Christ is distinguished from others who contribute
in the same way to our improvement, by the pure perfection of His
teaching and His example, yet if all that is achieved in us is some-
thing imperfect, there remains nothing but to forgo the idea of
redemption in the proper sense—that is, as the removal of sin—
and, in view of the consciousness of sin still remaining even in our
growing perfection, to pacify ourselves with a general appeal to the
divine compassion. Now, teaching and example effect no more


§ 101] HIS RECONCILING ACTIVITY 431


than such a growing perfection, and this appeal to the divine
compassion occurs even apart from Christ. It must therefore be
admitted that His appearance, in so far as intended to be some-
thing special, would in that case be in vain. At most it might be
said that by His teaching He brought men to the point of giving up
the effort, previously universal, to offer God substitutes for the
perfection they lacked. But since the uselessness of this effort can
be demonstrated, already in our natural intelligence we have the
divine certainty of this, and had no need to obtain it elsewhere.
And probably this view is chiefly to blame for the claim of philo-
sophy to set itself above faith and to treat faith as merely a transi-
tional stage. But we cannot rest satisfied with the consciousness of
growing perfection, for that belongs just as much to the conscious-
ness of sin as to that of grace, and hence cannot contain what is
peculiarly Christian. But, for the Christian, nothing belongs to
the consciousness of grace unless it is traced to the Redeemer as its
cause, and therefore it must always be a different thing in His case
from what it is in the case of others—naturally, since it is bound up
with something else, namely, the peculiar redemptive activity of
Christ.


§ ror. The Redeemer assumes the believers into the fellowship of His
unclouded blessedness, and this is His reconciling activity.


1. If this assumption into the fellowship of Christ’s blessedness
were independent of the assumption into the power of His God-
consciousness, or even if the former were to follow from the latter,
the teleological nature of Christianity would be changed. But
just as in God blessedness and omnipotence are balanced, mutually
conditioned, and yet also independent of each other, so also in
the Person of Christ blessedness and the power of the God-con-
sciousness must be balanced in the same way, one conditioning
the other and each independent of the other. Accordingly we can
say that it must be the same with the effective influence of Christ.
Either this must be simply admitted, or else there must be two
contrasted ways of regarding Christianity, complementary to each
other, one of them presenting it as an effort after blessedness for
the sake of the power of the God-consciousness, the other vice
versa. But since the effective influence of Christ arises only in so
far as a receptivity or a longing for it pre-exists in its object, so
the reconciling activity can only manifest itself as a consequence of
the redemptive activity because the consciousness of sin, in itself


432 THE CHRISTIAN FAITH [§ 101


and not as a source of evil, forms the necessary basis of that
longing, inasmuch as in the case of the individual evil is not
connected with sin. So if we think of the Redeemer’s activity
as an influence upon the individual, we are bound to make
the reconciling factor follow upon the redemptive and issue
from it. But we equate the two thus far, that the communi-
cation of blessedness no less than the communication of per-
fection is given immediately in the assumption into vital fellow-
ship with Christ.

2. Now in view of the exact parallel between this proposition
and the preceding one, so that regarded in and by themselves they
might fittingly have been run together into one, this seems hardly
to need éxplanation. On the one hand, every activity in Christ
proceeded from the being of God in Him, and this activity was
never hindered by any resistance of His human nature. Similarly,
the hindrances to His activity never determined any moment of
His life until the perception of them had been taken up into His
inmost self-consciousness, which was so completely one with His
powerful God-consciousness that they could appear in it only as
belonging to the temporal form of the perfect effectiveness of His
being. On the other hand, it was still less possible that hindrances
arising out of His own natural or social life could be taken up in
this innermost consciousness as hindrances; they could be no
more than indications of the direction set for His activity.
Similarly, the redeemed man too, since he has been assumed into
the vital fellowship of Christ, is never filled with the consciousness
of any evil, for it cannot touch or hinder the life which he shares
with Christ. All hindrances to life, natural and social, come to him
even in this region only as indications. They are not taken away,
as if he were to be, or could be, without pain and free from suffering,
for Christ also knew pain and suffered in the same way. Only
the pains and sufferings do not mean simple misery, for they do
not as such penetrate into the inmost life. And this holds good also
of his consciousness of the sin still occurring in his life. It cannot
have its source in his new life ; he refers it therefore only to the
corporate life of general sinfulness, which still has a place in him.
Not that it is not pain and suffering, so far as he clings to his own
personality ; but it reaches the life of Christ in him only as an
indication of what he has to do; consequently there is in it no
misery. The assumption into vital fellowship with Christ, there-
fore, dissolves the connexion between sin and evil, since morally


§ ror] CORPORATE BLESSEDNESS 433


the two are no longer related to each other, even if from the merely
natural point of view the one is the consequence of the other.
Morally, however, each of them by itself is regarded solely in
relation to the task of the new life. Hence, just as the redemptive
activity of Christ brings about for all believers a corporate activity
corresponding to the being of God in Christ, so the reconciling
element, that is, the blessedness of the being of God in Him, brings
about for all believers, as for each separately, a corporate feeling
of blessedness. Therein, too, their former personality dies, so far as
it meant a self-enclosed life of feeling within a sensuous vital unity,
to which all sympathetic feeling for others and for the whole was
subordinated. But what remains as the self-identity of the person
is the peculiar way of apprehending and perceiving, which as in-
dividualized intelligence so works itself into the new common life
that relatively to this factor also the activity of Christ is person-
forming, in that an old man is put off and a new man is put on.
Here too, if we wish to note similarities between the activity of
Christ in forming the new corporate life and the divine activity in
forming the personality of Christ, we shall be able to distinguish
a first moment, which corresponds to the act of union as first
beginning, and as such can only look back to what preceded, and
a second, which represents the state of union, and, as expressing
continuance, also looks forward to the future. Now here the be-
ginning is the disappearance of the old man, and so also of the
old reference of all evil to sin, that is, the disappearance of the
consciousness of deserving punishment. Consequently the first
thing in the reconciling aspect is the forgiveness of sins.t_ For in
the unity of life with Christ all relation to the law ceases, since the
general movement contrary to sin, proceeding from Him, begins.
But the state of union is the real possession of blessedness in the
consciousness that Christ in us is the centre of our life, and this in
such a way that this possession exists solely as His gift, which,
since we receive it simply by His will that we should have it, is
His blessing and His peace. But the same thing is true here again,
that efch moment or aspect may at the same time be regarded in
accordance with the formula of the other. For in the first moment
the whole development is already implicitly contained, but at the
same time in every later moment the first persists; for the fact
that this possession of blessedness is pervaded throughout by sin
(a fact which our recurrence to Christ makes it all the more
1 Rom. 8}, I John 18. 9 21. 2 2 Gal. 219-21 522-24:


28


434 THE CHRISTIAN FAITH [§ 101


impossible for us to overlook) always points on in turn to the
forgiveness of sins.

3. Obviously our proposition is mystical in the same sense as the
previous one, and its truth also can only be proved in experience.
But in the same sense it too stands intermediate between a magical
view, which destroys all naturalness in the continuous activity of
Christ, and an empirical, which reduces it altogether to the level of
ordinary daily experience, and thus does not make its supernatural
beginning and its distinctive peculiarity the fundamental things
in it.

The latter view likewise starts from the connexion between sin
and evil, and rightly infers that when sin is taken away so also is
evil. But since this connexion principally holds good for social
evil alone, and is exact even for this only if we consider a large
corporate life as a rounded whole, whereas in every individual part
of that life inward improvement may well be accompanied by
increasing evil, because of its connexion with the rest, the
growing improvement of the individual can furnish no guarantee at
all that he is being set free from evil and cannot form a basis of
blessedness. Even along with increasing perfection the fact remains
not only that he encounters hindrances to life, but that they are
such as in the light of the sin still present in him have the aspect of
punishment. It follows that this reconciliation only very accident-
ally takes the form of enjoyment and possession ; in essence it can
never be set forth as more than hope. But in either form it is not,
so far as content is concerned, anything peculiarly Christian, nor
can it as enjoyment have a greater strength, or as hope possess a
higher degree of certainty, within Christianity than without. And
how slight this is everywhere, history clearly shows. For, alto-
gether apart from Christianity, the dispute is constantly recurring
as to whether evil in the world is really growing less, or only changing
its form while in sum remaining what it has ever been. Not only
so, but within the Christian Church itself the same doubt constantly
reappears, and this the more strongly the less experience there is
of the enjoyment of the unclouded blessedness of Christ, 4nd the
more recourse is had to that general hope. And, quite contrary to
Christ’s own assurance,! that blessedness is relegated to the life
beyond time, and thus clearly declared to be independent of the
gradual improvement. But in that case Christ has part in our
blessedness or salvation only through His influence upon this pro-

+ Johnes*s,


§ Ior] MAGICAL IDEAS OF RECONCILIATION 435


gressive improvement, which means that a specific difference
between Him and other men is of little importance.

Only those views of Christ’s reconciling activity appear to be
magical which make the impartation of His blessedness inde-
pendent of assumption into vital fellowship with Him. This means
that the forgiveness of sins is made to depend upon the punishment
which Christ suffered, and the blessedness of men itself is presented
as a reward which God offers to Christ for the suffering of that
punishment. Not, of course, that the thought of our blessedness
as a rewarding of Christ is altogether to be rejected—on the contrary,
we shall have to speak of that later. Nor that all connexion between
the suffering of Christ and the forgiveness of sins is to be denied.
But both ideas become magical when blessedness and forgiveness
are not mediated through vital fellowship with Christ. For
within this fellowship the impartation of blessedness, as explained
above, is a natural one; whereas without this the rewarding of
Christ is nothing but divine arbitrariness. And this in itself is
always something magical, but it is especially so when something
so absolutely inward as blessedness is supposed to have been
brought about externally, without any inner basis. For if it is
independent of life in Christ, then, since man does not have the
source of blessedness in himself, it can only have been infused into
each separate individual somehow or other from without. In no
less magical a way is the forgiveness of sins achieved, if the conscious-
ness of deserving punishment is supposed to cease because the
punishment has been borne by another. That in this way the ex-
pectation of punishment might be taken away is conceivable ; but
this is merely the sensuous element in the forgiveness of sins. The
properly ethical element, the consciousness of deserving punish-
ment, would still remain. And this therefore would have to dis-
appear as if conjured away, without any reason. And to what
extent something even of this view has passed over into Church
doctrine is a question we shall have to discuss below.

4. Now if we compare the connected view here set forth with
the two alternative views which have just been cited, they certainly
suggest the reflection that in our view, the suffering of Christ has
nothing to say, so that there has not even been an opportunity to
raise the question whether, and to what extent, it belongs to
redemption or to reconciliation. But the only conclusion to be
drawn from this postponement of the question is that no reason
existed for adducing it as a primitive element either in the one


436 THE CHRISTIAN FAITH [§ Lor


place or in the other. And this is so far correct, that otherwise
no complete assumption into vital fellowship with Christ, such as
makes redemption and reconciliation completely intelligible, would
have been possible before the suffering and death of Christ. As
an element of secondary importance, however, it belongs to both ;
immediately to redemption, and to reconciliation only mediately.
The activity of Christ in founding the new corporate life could
really emerge in its perfect: fulness—although belief in this per-
fection could exist even apart from this—only if it yielded to no
opposition, not even to that which succeeded in destroying His
person. Here, accordingly, the perfection does not lie properly
and immediately in the suffering itself, but only in His giving up
of Himself to it. And of this it is only, as it were, a magical
caricature, if we isolate this climax, leave out of account the
foundation of the corporate life, and regard this giving up of
Himself to suffering for suffering’s sake as the real sum-total of
Christ’s redemptive activity. But so far as reconciliation is con-
cerned, our exposition makes it obvious that, in order to effect
assumption into the fellowship of His blessedness, the longing of
those who were conscious of their misery must first be drawn to
Christ through the impression they had received of His blessedness.
And here too the situation is that belief in this blessedness might
be present even apart from this, but that none the less His blessed-
ness emerged in its perfect fulness only in that it was not overcome
even by the full tide of sufferimg. The more so that this suffering
arose out of the opposition of sin, and that therefore the Redeemer’s
sympathy with misery, ever present, though without disturbing His
blessedness, from the time of His entrance into the corporate life
of sin, had here to enter on its greatest phase. And here it is not
the giving up of Himself to suffering, as something that forms part
of the redemptive activity, but the suffering itself which is the full
confirmation of belief in the Redeemer’s blessedness. But here
again it is only a magical caricature of this which, completely over-
looking the necessity of an imperturbable blessedness in Christ,
finds the reconciling power of His suffering precisely in the fact that
He willingly gave up even His blessedness, and experienced, even if
only for moments, real misery. So far as Church doctrine is not
wholly free from this idea either, we shall return to the matter
below.

The climax of His suffering, we hold then, was sympathy
with misery. This, however, at once involves the further conclusion


§ 101] THE BLESSEDNESS OF CHRIST 437


that no suffering which is not bound up with the redemptive
activity of Christ can be regarded as belonging to reconciliation,
because suffering of that sort would also have no connexion with
the Redeemer’s opposition to misery, and so it could belong to
the reconciliation only in a magical way. Now Christ’s sufferings
can be thought of in this connexion with His redemptive activity
only when regarded as a whole and a unity; to separate out any
particular element and ascribe to it a peculiar reconciling value,
is not merely trifling allegory if done in teaching, and worthless
sentimentality in poetry ; probably it is also seldom free from a
defiling admixture of superstition. Least of all is it proper to
ascribe such a special reconciling value to His physical sufferings ;
and that for two reasons. On the one hand, these sufferings in
themselves have only the loosest connexion with His reaction against
sin. On the other hand, our own experience teaches us that an
ordinary ethical development and robust piety have as their reward
the almost complete overcoming of physical sufferings in the presence
of a glad spiritual self-consciousness, whether personal or corporate.
Certainly they can never suppress that consciousness, nor make a
moment of blessedness any less blessed. But in order that the
exposition just given may serve as an all-round test in scrutiniz-
ing Church formule, it must be brought into relation to our general
formula of the creation of human nature as completed through
Christ, so as to convince ourselves that in this twofold activity of
Christ such creation is really fully accomplished. For whatever in
human nature is assumed into vital fellowship with Christ is assumed
into the fellowship of an activity solely determined by the power of
the God-consciousness, therefore adequate to every new experience
and extracting from it all it has to yield. It is at the same time
assumed into the fellowship of a satisfaction which rests in that
activity and which cannot be disturbed by any outside influence.
Now that each assumption of this sort is simply a continuation of
the same creative act which first manifested itself in time by the
formation of Christ’s Person ; that each increase in the intensity
of this new life relatively to the disappearing corporate life of
sinfulness is also such a continuation, must now be clear; and
that in this new life man achieves the destiny originally
appointed for him, and that nothing beyond this can be
conceived or attempted for a nature such as ours—all this
requires no further exposition.

However exactly this presentation of the subject may correspond


438 THE CHRISTIAN FAITH [§ 102


to the immediate consciousness of the Christian, so that it recognizes
itself in it, still it is inevitable that, as it stands half-way between
the empirical and the magical interpretations, it should be mistaken
by each of these for the opposite one. For, on the one hand, since
a spiritual thing like the foundation of a corporate life must be
spiritually achieved, and there is no spiritual influence but the
presentation of oneself in word and deed, the Redeemer could only
enter into our corporate life by means of such self-presentation,
thereby attracting men to Himself and making them one with Him-
self. Now to warn those who lean to the side of magic, this touch-
stone must be kept before them, whether their conception really
agrees with the possibility of conceiving the effective influence of
Christ under this historical natural form. And nothing is easier
than for them to misunderstand this, and to imagine that Christ
must work simply in the ordinary human way as teacher and ex-
ample, the divine in Him being altogether left out of account. But
on the other hand, the distinction between such a Christ and Christ
as we here understand Him, can only be made plain by reference to
‘Christ in us,’ whereas the relation of teacher and pupil, like that
of pattern and imitation, must always remain an external one. If,
however, those who lean to the empirical view were asked whether
they too had a real experience of vital fellowship with Christ, they
would only too easily misunderstand the question, and suppose
that they were being asked to assent to the objectionable magic
view. For that reason we shall leave wide room on both sides open,
not only for the Christian Church as a whole, but also for the Pro-
testant Church, in which all these differences are present, in order
that, wherever there is a recognition of Christ—and the danger
of letting this go is just as great on the side of the magical
extreme as on that of the empirical—and so long as such an
extreme has not yet been reached, we may always be able to
maintain fellowship, and by means of it bring all ever nearer
to the centre.


§ 102. Church doctrine divides the whole activity of Christ into three
offices, the prophetic, the priestly, and the kingly.

1. At first sight this division has against it the appearance
of being very arbitrary. It looks as if from the great number
of Biblical expressions used by Christ Himself one in particular
had been chosen and the others set aside, and to this one two others
added, which were used, not by Christ Himself, but only by His


§ 102] THE THREE OFFICES 439


disciples.t If then pictorial expressions are to be used at all,
unquestionably the picture of the Shepherd, which was used by
Christ Himself and repeated by Peter, has a better right (it will be
said) than the expressions ‘ High Priest’ and ‘ Prophet.’ Now if
this really were the case—that out of a number of equally justifiable
expressions, all of them pictorial, these had been selected, more or
less by accident—then it would be surprising (since pictorial ex-
pressions are always hard to define, and therefore in a dialectical
discussion almost inevitably involve great inconveniences) that
such a presentation had been able to maintain itself for so long
without being supplanted by some other even if it were one no
less arbitrary ; and not only so, but one would reasonably hesitate
to make any further use of this form of expression in a strictly
theological treatment. But these expressions are not to be put
on one level with other pictorial expressions ; manifestly their
purpose is to be sought in the comparison they indicate between
the achievements of Christ in the corporate life founded by Him
and those by which in the Jewish people the theocracy was repre-
sented and held together, and this comparison is not even to-day
to be neglected in the system of doctrine. For even if it is equally
true that this presentation is rather characteristic of the earliest
formative period of the faith (when it certainly was necessary to
bring the anti-Jewish element in Christianity into evidence under
the Jewish form itself) than fitted to be a persistent type of
doctrine, this would only mean that these forms alone cannot
suffice for us. When we have, however, developed the subject in
our own way, as above, on the basis of our own Christian ex-
perience, it is still worth while to preserve a continuity with those
original presentations, for the first theoretical interpretation of
Christianity was based upon a comparison of the new Kingdom of
God with the old. And so we have to show that our conception is
in agreement with that which the earlier Christians formed for
themselves, when they represented the offices of Christ as new
and intensified forms of those through which in the old covenant
the divine government was revealed.

2. Of course we are here concerned rather with the idea of
these authorities [prophet, priest, and king] in Judaism than with


1 Apart from the Epistle to the Hebrews, the conception of the ‘ High
Priest ’ occurs (but only indirectly) in Paul (Rom. 51), and in Peter (1 Pet.
2%), and in John (1 John 21); Christ calls Himself a prophet in Luke 133, and
less directly in similar passages.


440 THE CHRISTIAN FAITH [§ 102


their historical development. The kings were properly the repre-
sentatives of the God of Israel; to them the government was
entrusted, in order that the people might be held together and the
common life, where necessary, renewed and purified. The priests
were the guardians of the temple and the shrines, and presided over
the immediate relation of the people to God, bringing requests and
offerings before Him, and bringing back from God forgiveness and
blessing. The prophets were men specially called and sent forth
by God, belonging to both sides, God and man, and mediating
between them, but not so constantly as the priests. For although
there were schools of the prophets, yet there was no uninterrupted
succession of prophets in the narrower sense. In the hour of need
the prophet arose, now from the ranks of either kings or priests,
now from the midst of the people, with a message of warning when
one of the appointed authorities had erred from the right path, of
revival when the original spirit threatened to be extinguished by
the dead letter. Now in order to make clear the relation of the
Kingdom of heaven to this earthly theocracy, Christ, on whom
alone the Kingdom rests, is represented as uniting all these three
offices in Himself. The meaning of this is that in this Kingdom
of God (which, it is always understood, is not of this world) the
establishment and maintenance of the fellowship of each individual
with God, and the maintenance and direction of the fellowship of
all members with one another, are not separate achievements but
the same ; and further, that these activities and the free dominion
of the Spirit in knowledge and doctrine do not spring from a different
source but from the same.

3. Now in what way the whole redemptive and reconciling
activity of Christ, as just described,! is completely reproduced in
terms of these three offices, can be shown only in the exposition
which follows. But so much at least we can point out here and
now—that if we ascribe to the Redeemer only one of these three
functions, and neglect the others, or, alternatively, completely
exclude one of them, then that harmony between the old covenant
and the new is destroyed, and the peculiar quality of Christianity
is endangered. For to claim for Christ the prophetic office alone
means limiting His effective influence to teaching and admonition
relatively to a form of life already in existence either before Him or
apart from Him, and to a relation to God already established apart
from Him at some other point ; and on such an interpretation the


1 §§ too and Iol.


er Te ee ee ee.


§ 103] THE PROPHETIC (OFFICE 441


peculiar element in Christianity is seriously overshadowed. It is
just the same if we ascribe to Him the two formative activities, but
exclude Him from the prophetic activity, with its character of direct
spiritual stimulation. For then one cannot see how, if the power
of the living word is to have no share in the work, the Kingdom
of God can arise except in some magical way. If, on the other
hand, we exclude the kingly office, then the other two taken
together, though certainly they unite each redeemed individual
closely to the Redeemer, yet supply no relation to a corporate life,
and so produce only an unpleasing and even, when more closely
observed, an unchristian separatism. Lastly, if the high-priestly
office is passed over, but the other two retained, then the prophetic
activity could be related only to the kingly, and consequently, if
we are to remain true to the original type, all religious content
would be lacking. On the other hand, if Christ be represented
solely as High Priest, it would be almost impossible to avoid the
magical conception of His influence. Similarly, if we retain only the
kingly dignity, and think of Christ solely as forming and directing
the Church, the immediate relation of the individual to the Redeemer
would be endangered, and we should have strayed in the direction
of the Roman Church, which makes this relation dependent at once
upon the Church and upon those who direct its government. Now
where there is revealed an interdependence of this sort, there is
also a presumption that what is so bound up together is also
complete.


§ 103. First Theorem.—The prophetic office of Christ consists in
teaching, prophesying, and working miracles.


1. These three activities also constituted the dignity of the
Old Testament prophets. Certainly the essential thing was always
stimulus by means of teaching and admonition ; but in all im-
portant instances, where the teaching had some definite occasion,
it at once became prophecy (since the idea of the divine retribution
was dominant), now threatening, now promising, in agreement
with the original type created when the law was given. But since
the prophets never appeared except in connexion with crimes or
public misfortunes, which might be supposed always to involve
the guilt of those to whom they had to speak, they required, in
default of an outward vocation to which they might have appealed,
some special proof of their authority. Hence miracles were ex-
pected or assumed as a token of their divine mission. It was only


442 THE CHRISTIAN FAITH [§ 103


the absence of this third mark of a prophet that made it possible
for the Baptist to say that he was no prophet,! in spite of his
very definite divine vocation. For he certainly had taught and
prophesied,? but the gift of miracles had not been granted him,?~
and hence he would not be troubled with a useless question
about it.

In Christ these three signs of a prophet did not follow one from
the other; all three were one from the very outset. For the
preaching of the Kingdom of God was both teaching and prophecy,
and the Kingdom of God itself is properly the miracle accomplished
by Christ ; but since its fulfilment began simultaneously with the
preaching, all three elements were present in one and the same germ,
and we can differentiate them only as this germ develops further.

2. That the prophetic voice had fallen silent was a fact which
had long been generally admitted when Jesus appeared. Instead,
there was then a tradition of doctrine in the schools of the scribes.
This made no claim to be anything more than tradition ; it was
gradually extended by the subtle combinations of distinguished
scholars, and in connexion with it there was also an official
practice of teaching in the synagogues. But Christ could not
belong to any of the sects into which the scribes were divided ; as
little could He undertake any official activity which would have
involved Him in other duties, and have limited Him in a way
incompatible with His appointed work. But since, outside the
activity of the scribes, there was complete freedom of teaching,
He was able to come before the people in a regular way, as soon as
He had reached the age required by custom. Thus no exception
to His competence to teach could be taken by any public authority.
The teaching office of Christ, therefore, means only His determina-
tion to make the fullest possible use of this freedom. Thus for
Him no other occasion was needed for any particular act of teaching
than the presence, individually or in groups, of those who were
anxious to be taught ; His conversation was all of the nature of
teaching, so far as the subject and the conditions permitted. And
to this extent it must certainly be admitted that Christ taught,
in this wider sense, even before His public ministry began ; still,
that He taught publicly as a boy remains a mistaken view, and one
entirely without foundation in the Gospel story, but resembling
the apocryphal stories. Similarly, there is really only one Gospel


Plolmen2t 2 Matt. 310. 16. 17,
*Jjohnareth 4 Luke 246. 47,


§ 103] CHRIST AS TEACHER 443


testimony ' which connects the beginning of His public appearance
with His reception of the baptism of John; and the explanation
which Jesus Himself gives of this circumstance forbids the sup-
position that by this baptism He became something which He had
not been before, or that He received an authority or a consecration
which was not already His. The former supposition is incompatible
with belief in the originality of the divine in His person ; and for
the latter there is no external authority of any kind in the rite
instituted by John. The only value, therefore, which we can
attribute to this transaction is that it helps us to understand His
public appearance historically : He marked His more open transi-
tion from seclusion to public life by an act of confession which
inevitably evoked a more definite opinion about Him, to which He
was able to attach His teaching. For the people His work as a
teacher came to an end with His arrest, but for the disciples only
with His ascension. It seems to have been His chief work in the
days of the resurrection, partly to expound the Scripture to His
disciples, without doubt establishing the way in which they were
afterwards to make use of it among their people ; partly also to
complete His injunctions as to the corporate life deriving from
Him, and so to establish that life more securely. It is obvious,
therefore, how essentially this teaching activity on Christ’s part
belonged to the redemptive activity described above. But so far
as the source of the teaching is concerned, that of the prophets’
teaching (although their participation in teaching came to them
in the form of a special divine call) was always simply the law ;
their calling was entirely concerned with the relation between God
and the people, and the end to which they worked was a purely
national one. Now it was part of Christ’s regard for the law not
to destroy the law ; hence He recognized and affirmed the national
obligation towards it. Nevertheless, just as His inspiration was
not a transient one, dependent on individual occasions supplied by
the state of the people, and just as He is not to be regarded as merely
a product of human nature in a specifically national form, so too
the inner development of His thoughts could not be dependent
on the law. Moreover, to regard His teaching as a purification
and a development of the ethics current among the people, springing
out of universal human reason, is part of the empirical conception
we have rejected. Rather, the source of His teaching was the
absolutely original revelation of God in Him. In Him the contrast


1 Luke 44; but compare also Acts 17). ??,


444 THE CHRISTIAN FAITH | [$ 103


between learning and teaching was only the contrast between the
influence of the divine principle in Him upon the receptivity of
His spiritual organ (so as to yield a pure apprehension of the human
conditions confronting Him in their bearing on man’s relation to
God) and the influence of the same principle upon the spontaneity
of His spiritual organ. But since receptivity always involves
spontaneity, His teaching was already forming itself imperceptibly
in His learning ; and this first development of His own thought
was already the source of His astonishing questions.1 Naturally,
however, after spontaneity had gained the upper hand, and teaching
had come to be His constant preoccupation, the law no less than
the Messianic hopes was the point of connexion at which He de-
veloped His preaching of the new corporate life to be founded by
Him—the Kingdom of God.

Hence, if the content of Christ’s teaching is to be specially stated
here (although in point of fact our task throughout has been simply
to expound that teaching), then here also we should first have to
recur to the prophetic element. The prophet felt it incumbent on
him to do full justice by his preaching to the impulse which he felt
had come to him from God, and to pass on its full content to his
hearers—always a limited and definite task. In the same way,
Christ’s self-determination to teach was the task of satisfying fully
the powerful (which also means the creative) God-consciousness, as
it took shape in His spiritual organ, and of so reproducing it in His
teaching that thereby the assumption of men into His fellowship
might be effected. No other measure is applicable here of the
success of His teaching, and consequently of its perfection. Natur-
ally His discourses were sometimes more general in character, some-
times more detailed ; sometimes they were more the pure outflowing
of what was in Him, sometimes they had a closer bearing on some
outward occasion; and the attempt has for long been made to
distinguish the more essential from the more subordinate and
accidental, though in very different ways. We can only say that
everything is essential so far as it is connected with His self-presenta-
tion, for it was only by the proclamation of His peculiar dignity that
men could really be invited to enter into the fellowship offered them.
And so these three parts are inseparable from one another as con-
stituting the essence of His teaching—the doctrine of His Person,
which is at the same time, in its outward aspect, the doctrine of
His calling, or of the communication of eternal life in the Kingdom


1 Luke 24",


§ 103] CHRIST THE END OF PROPHECY 445


of God, and in its inward aspect, the doctrine of His relation to
Him Who had sent Him, or of God as His Father, revealing Himself
to Him and through Him. So that everything which belongs to
His high-priestly and kingly office must likewise appear in His
teaching, since He proclaimed His mission to raise men to fellow-
ship with God and to rule spiritually. And only that is accidental
in His teaching which contains least of this, and keeps most to the
historical situation, and bears on the given national factor. To
emphasize the latter above the former leads very easily to a
dangerous distinction between a teaching of Christ and a teaching
about Christ (as something merely additional), and undeniably
imperils what is specifically Christian, as if all that is involved
were some improvements upon natural ethics and natural theology
—which, besides, are represented as if human reason must have
found them out by itself. But with this proviso, there is room
enough for Christians of different temperaments to hold for their
own use predominantly to one or another of these elements.

But further, this original revelation of God in Christ is so ade-
quate and also so inexhaustible, that, so far as this first aspect is
concerned, Christ is manifestly at once the climax and the end of all
prophecy. No presentation of our relationship to God can arise
outside the sphere in which Christ is recognized, which would not
fall short of that revelation ; nor can any possible advance within
the Christian Church ever bring us to the point either of perceiving
anything imperfect in the teaching of Christ Himself, for which we
could substitute something better, or of conceiving anything which
aids man’s understanding of his relation to God more spiritually,
more profoundly, or more perfectly than Christ has done. Indeed,
with the assumption that Christian doctrine is capable of being
perfected in a way which implies our transcending Christ, the
assumption of Christ’s peculiar dignity would have to be given up.
Even the most admirable later achievements in this sphere can
never be more than a correct development of what lies undeveloped
in His utterances, as we possess them, or, as the connexion of
thought assures us, must even then have been before His mind.
Now if Christ is the climax of all prophecy because of the perfec-
tion of His preaching, proceeding from a divine impulse, He is so
also because even as teacher He is not one among many of His like.
And He is the end of all prophecy, because no new teaching can
arise which, after His, would not be false ; that is to say, from now
on all true teaching in this sphere goes back, not to Moses and the


446 THE CHRISTIAN FAITH [§ 103


law, but to the Son. He is also the end of prophecy for this reason,
that now there can be no such thing as an independent personal
inspiration, but only a being inspired by Him.

This only remains to be said, that, like the teaching of the pro-
phets, His too was always the direct utterance of His whole being,
hence not to be separated from the total impression His being made.
And from this it follows for His teaching, that (since His inspiration
was not transient but constant) every utterance of His moved
spirit in speech and accompanying expression contains elements of
teaching, and serves as confirmation of His teaching proper, inas-
much as it bears witness to the being of God in Him.

3. The prediction of the Old Testament prophets, so far as we
can form conclusions about the whole from what remains to us, was
of two kinds. One kind was special prediction, directed to an
individual event ; since it rested upon the two chief concepts of
the Jewish religion, the divine election of the people and divine
retribution, it was for the most part hypothetical, and formed an
addition to teaching which conveyed warning, encouragement, and
comfort, in accordance with the spirit of the law. The other kind
rose above the individual event to an exposition of the universal,
and as such claimed absolute value—this was Messianic prediction.
The first kind was a foretelling in the proper sense ; in its more
or less definite assertions it attained now a higher, and now a
lower degree of accuracy. In Messianic prophecy, the individual
assertions, more or less, are nothing but an external vesture, so
that it often remains uncertain whether this point or that does or
does not really belong to the prediction itself. But its essence
consists in this, that it spoke of the future of God’s true messenger.
The idea of that messenger could be grasped by individuals only
in limited fashion, by each in his own way; but rightly under-
stood it always involved the end of those two Jewish conceptions
of retribution and election. Now Christ, as the Messiah appearing
in person, could only predict messianically concerning what had
not yet appeared but would be fulfilled by means of the same
activity as that from which the prediction itself proceeded ; that
is, He could predict only concerning the further development of
His Kingdom or its completion. Hence this prediction was pre-
cisely the same thing as His teaching ; in this sense He prophesied
without foretelling.. But neither could He foretell the merely
accidental, for everything so to be described is without value in

BPACTSHIs


§ 103] _ HIS PREDICTIONS 447


His Kingdom, and thus could not be the object either of investi-
gation or of premonition. He could foretell, therefore, only the
end of such institutions as rested upon those limited concepts
of election and retribution; and this He did, not hypothetic-
ally, but with the perfect accuracy belonging to His infallible
perfection. His certainty in this foretelling, indeed, must be
identical with the certainty of His own mission. In both con-
nexions, therefore, Christ is the climax of prophecy. And just as
He is the climax, so too He is the end. For essential prophecy has
now been completely fulfilled, since the Spirit has been poured out ;
nothing essential can be thought of which is still lacking to the
kingdom of God ; to point forward to anything new which is still
to occur would necessarily be to preach another gospel. It is just
the same with the foretelling. Apostolic prediction—what there
is of it \—we can regard only as an interpretation or an echo of
Christ’s prediction ; there was only one occasion for it which did
not yet exist in His time—namely, the application to hostile
heathendom of prophecies similar to those which He had uttered
against Judaism. For the rest, along with those limited concepts
there disappeared the basis and support for all prophecy such as is
attached exclusively to a heightened excitation of the devout soul.
All that remains is such prophecy as can arise from an intelligent
and comprehensive view of human relations and from a true and
deep sympathy. But to no prediction, whatever its content, and
however great its accuracy, and however wonderfully the pictures
of an excited faculty of premonition may occasionally come true,
can we ascribe a sacred character.

If this proposition has not hitherto received such definite
doctrinal expression in the Protestant Church as in consistency it
has been given here, perhaps such expression is also more necessary
now than before, and in all likelihood it will meet with little opposi-
tion in the Church itself. And this, not only because it essentially
belongs to the naturalization of the Kingdom of God in the world,
but because the whole previous practice of our Church shows that it
invariably regards any claim to the gift of prophecy as symptomatic
of fanaticism. For us at present, therefore, it remains only to
interpret the prophecies of Christ and the Apostles. But that is a
task which can only be done in accordance with the rules of the art
of interpretation, not with an arbitrariness which would be justified


1 J do not include here the Revelation of John ; I cannot admit its apostolic
origin.


448 THE CHRISTIAN FAITH [§ 103


only in the measure in which it itself was prophecy. But all fore-
tellings, both those derived from the historical sense and those
derived from inexplicable capacities for premonition, must be left
to the natural science of mind.

4. Although it was laid down that even wonders and signs were
not to protect the prophet who spoke against Jehovah and His
law,! yet this very fact makes it clear that when people thought of
a prophet they always thought also of wonders and signs.” With
reference to the Redeemer, we might of course ? surmise it to be
natural in a higher order of things that He should have even
miraculous powers at His command ; but from this comparison with
the Jewish prophets it is clear in what sense Christ Himself and His
disciples could appeal to His miracles, and yet why Christ, when
signs and wonders were demanded of Him, refused to do them.
For even the wonders of the prophets were not intended to evoke
faith in their Messianic prophecies, and could not do so; their
purpose was to evoke faith in their conditional predictions in order
to induce people to do what had to be done. But Christ gave no
such conditional predictions about Himself, and faith in His relation
to the Messianic idea was meant to proceed solely from the direct
impression made by His Person.4 That is why Christ never availed
Himself of His miraculous powers in any definite connexion with
the demands He made or His statements about Himself,® but (in
the same way as everyone avails himself of his natural powers)
according as opportunity offered of doing good by them.

In those days the true recognition of Christ might in individual
instances be evoked by miracles ; elsewhere it found a confirmation
in them ; but it might never be properly based upon them. Hence
for us, so far as our faith is concerned, they cannot but be altogether
superfluous. For miracles can only direct the spiritual need to a
definite object in virtue of their immediate impressiveness, or, if
it has already been directed thither, justify this inner relation in
an external way. This impressiveness, however, is lost in pro-
portion as the person who is to believe is at a distance from the
miracle itself in space and time. What takes the place of miracles
for our time is our historical knowledge of the character, as well as
of the scope and the duration, of Christ’s spiritual achievements.

1 Deut. 131-5, 2 See above (§ 103. 1).

3 Cf. § 14, Postscript, pp. 70 ff. Aare ty MOLES olin Et Ato A416 OS 690735 026"

* Even John 11 is no exception to this, although I cannot argue the point


here.
§ This last must also be the sense of John 2079. 31,


§ 103] HIS MIRACLES 449


In this we have an advantage over the contemporaries of the Re-
deemer, and a witness whose power increases exactly in proportion
as the impressiveness of the miracles is lost. But what does this
mean except that our attention is directed away from the individual,
more physical, miracles to the general spiritual miracle, which
begins with the person of the Redeemer and is completed with the
completion of His Kingdom? Our faith in the external miracles
wrought by Christ, as deeds which were not wrought by Him in
accordance with rules learned anywhere, and whose success cannot
be traced to natural laws recognized by us as valid for all time—
this faith belongs not so much to our faith in Christ directly as to
our faith in Scripture.

For we cannot include these phenomena in the field of nature
familiar to us without having recourse to presuppositions such that
the trustworthiness of the whole body of our records concerning
Christ is imperilled.t_ And this conviction will probably be the result
of the controversy now being waged on this question, and as a con-
viction will be the more living and the more universal the greater
the candour and the intelligence with which the controversy is
carried on.

{f we confine ourselves to these individual miracles, then we
cannot make it so clear as we did in the case of teaching and prophecy
that Christ is also the climax of miraculous activity. For in Christ’s
miracles we have nothing which definitely raises them, in and by
themselves, above other similar miracles of which we have stories
from many various times and places. But if we consider the total
spiritual miracle, then we must declare Him to be the climax, all
the more definitely that we recognize that—apart from Him—this
total spiritual miracle could not have been achieved by all the powers
of spiritual nature as we know it. But equally certainly Christ is
also the end of miracle. For the surer it is that by Christ redemption
has been completed, so that whatever is yet in store for the human
race, so far as fellowship with God is concerned, is to be regarded
only as a further development of Christ’s work, not as a new revela-
tion, the more reason we have for rejecting everything that claims
to offer miraculous evidence for a new achievement in the sphere
of spiritual life. Only new natural epochs—or even new historical
epochs, so long as they are not in the sphere of religion—could still
be announced by miracles; and in that case to pass judgment
on such miracles is purely a matter for natural science,

1 Cf. § 99.
29


450 THE CHRISTIAN FAITH [§ 103


On this point too we can scarcely say there is a fixed doctrine
in the Protestant Church. Yet Luther’s words? on the matter
show clearly enough that he did not regard the great change in the
Church which he helped to bring about (in spite of the fact that, at
least in a subordinate sense, it was the beginning of a new corporate
life) as a point of development such that it needed to be supported
by the power of working miracles. Also this doctrine has the
support of a maxim which we may regard as having become dominant
in the Protestant Church by tacit agreement, namely, that we
assume the presence of superstition wherever new miracles are re-
presented and believed to have occurred for the confirmation of
Christianity. Against this it might be objected that our proposi-
tion certainly cannot be admitted strictly and literally, since the
miracles of the disciples of Christ were just as well attested as His
own, and He manifestly bequeathed to them His power of working
miracles. And since (it might be argued) it can in no sense be
proved that these miraculous gifts were suddenly to die out with the
death of the Apostles, so much anyhow is certain, that Christ Him-
self did not claim to be the end of miraculous powers, while it must
be left undecided whether these gifts really have gradually died
out, or whether perhaps they do not still persist in the Church, or
at least revive periodically. To this the answer is that the same
thing holds true of the miracles of the Apostles as of their prophecies,
and that Christ transmitted to them the power of working miracles
only as a sign to accompany the earliest preaching. Even if it
cannot be strictly proved that the Church’s power of working
miracles has died out (and this the Roman Church denies), yet in
general it is undeniable that, in view of the great advantage in power
and civilization which the Christian peoples possess over the non-
Christian, almost without exception, the preachers of to-day do
not need such signs. And in every individual case it will always
be possible to show that alleged miracles, whatever spiritual aim
may be ascribed to them, would always be inadequate to it, and
consequently that they are superfluous. Indeed, the Roman
Church itself, by the manner in which in one case it limits miracles,
and in another scrutinizes them, betrays no great confidence in the
principle which it sets up.


__,. the same signs as the Apostles did might easily happen even to-day
if there were any need’ (W.A. xi. pp. 1294, 1339) ;


§ 104] THE HIGH PRIEST 451


§ 104. Second Theorem.—The priestly office of Christ includes His
perfect fulfilment of the law (i.e. His active obedience), His
atoning death (i.e. His passive obedience), and His inter-
cession with the Father for believers.


1. The difficulty of presenting the total activity of Christ
under these forms of the old covenant occurs chiefly in this section.
For one thing, the analogy between that part of the effective in-
fluence of Christ which must be assigned to this section, if a place
is to be found for it at all, and the functions of the High Priest,
is less conspicuous. For another, many aspects of the functions
of the High Priest, which must be paralleled in Christ, reveal them-
selves in activities of the Redeemer which one would be more inclined
to assign to one of the other two offices. Thus the extraordinary,
but most significant, function of the High Priest, that of receiving
instructions from Jehovah in the Holy of Holies, has no direct
analogy in the work of Christ. In so far as Christ received from
His Father all instructions which He imparted to His followers,1
this must be reckoned chiefly to His prophetic activity. The
benedictions which the High Priest pronounced over the people
remind us of what we have already ascribed to the reconciling
activity of Christ, but Church doctrine does not expressly include
it in that activity. Yet since the benediction of Christ cannot be
simply a wish, but must be a real gift, His benediction must be
involved in His governing and directing activity ; indeed, the
Epistle to the Hebrews undoubtedly conceives of a kingly activity
in addition to the high-priestly. So there remain only symbolical
actions. Among these the functions of the Day of Atonement are
the most impressive. But we cannot think of relating any of these
to the special functions of Christ which have just been mentioned.
While if we regard the High Priest as being at the same time the
head of the priesthood, so that its performances are traceable to
him, then he would be the agent of the people with Jehovah, and
this would be completely expressed by the idea of representation.
On the other hand, nothing is said directly about a legal perfection
of the High Priest, and the atoning death of Christ, regarded as a
sacrifice, has nothing corresponding to it. So far as the first point
is concerned, two things should be kept in mind. First, that
personal physical perfection was essential in the High Priest. The
nearest direct parallel to this in the doctrine of the person of Christ

1 John 716 g26 178,


452 THE CHRISTIAN FAITH [§ 104


is, of course, His sinless perfection. And second, and chiefly, that
before the High Priest entered upon the official performances of the
Day of Atonement—and to these, as his most characteristic duties,
we must pay particular attention—he had to purify himself in
many different ways, and to bring a sin-offering for himself and his
house, in virtue of which he was then held to be legally perfect.
And so far as the other point is concerned, the fact that Christ
offered Himself is to be disregarded in this connexion. For in so far
as He Himself was the offering, He is to be compared to the sacri-
ficial animal. Not only is this mode of expression found in various
places in the Bible,! but this twofold reference has also passed over
into confessional documents,” so that it is the more necessary for us
to distinguish the two aspects from each other ; and yet here we
should have to think of Christ principally as the sacrificer, not as the
offering. As the sacrificer, however, He is active, and His suffering
can be only an accompaniment, and can have its ground solely
in sympathy with sin, which of course we may also presuppose
in the High Priest, especially in his acts of atonement. Yet here a
new difficulty arises, namely, that both the active and the passive
obedience of Christ belong entirely to His self-presentation, and
consequently to His prophetic office ; just as His intercession or
representation, since it cannot be thought of as lacking in effect,
seems to coincide wholly with His government. Here too, then,
we shall have to make a distinction on both sides, and set forth the
representation of Christ here only in so far as it is something different
from His government, and His twofold obedience only in so far as
it is something different from His self-presentation or His pro-
clamation of the divine will by word and deed.

2. If we begin by dividing the obedience of Christ into active
and passive, we are by no means to imagine that these two are
so divided that they occupied different parts of His life, as is
commonly supposed—that the passive obedience began only with
His arrest, while the active had expressed itself from the beginning
of His public life up to that point. For not only can there be no
suffering at all without reaction, which is always activity ; we have
already established the special conclusion with regard to Christ,’


DE phase. nebo.

* Maneat ergo hoc in causa, quod sola mors Christi est vere propitiatorium
sacrificium (A pol. Conf. p. 255). Oblatio Christi semel facta, perfecta est
redemtio propitiatio et satisfactio pro omnibus peccatis (Conf. Angl. xxxi,
p- 138). Similarly Conf. Tetrap. xix. p. 354; Declar. Thorun. p. 425,

3 See § 94, 2, .


§ 104] ACTIVE AND PASSIVE OBEDIENCE 453


that we can separate off no moment in His life which does not
contain His powerful God-consciousness, and that this can manifest
itself only as activity—activity which, even where it appears as
reaction (and this of course it does in His sufferings proper), could
never be anything else than the most perfect fulfilment of the divine
will ; as indeed His perfect submission, without complaisance on
the one side, or bitterness or ill-humour on the other, is the crown
of His active obedience. Similarly, there is never any activity
without some definite occasion— which always presupposes a
passive state ; and just as little is there ever any activity without
limits to what is effected by it—and these limitations also are felt
as suffering. Now both those occasions and those limitations came
to Christ out of the corporate life of universal sinfulness ; and thus
every instance of opposition which He experienced during His
active life, every snare of His adversaries, and equally the in-
difference with which many passed Him by, became for Him suffer-
ing, because in it He had a sympathetic feeling of the world’s sin,
and thus carried that sin ; so that this suffering accompanied Him
throughout His whole life. Looked at more closely, then, active
and passive obedience were bound up with each other at every
moment. The one term, therefore, describes simply the condition,
pleasing and completely satisfying to God, in which Christ was
receptive towards everything which came to Him from the corporate
life of sin, in.that He accepted everything solely as it was related
to the task to be discharged by means of the potency of his God-
consciousness, in the most perfect and the purest way. The other
describes the parallel condition of His self-activity relatively to
everything which it was incumbent on Him to do for the corporate
life which He had come to call into being—the meaning of all this
being that He never conceived any other purpose than this. But
both receptivity and self-activity, and hence both active and passive
obedience, were present in all the moments of Christ’s life. The
action of Christ without the suffering could not have been re-
demptive, nor the suffering without the action reconciling ; and
on that account redemption cannot be ascribed to the active
obedience alone, nor reconciliation to the passive obedience alone,
but both to both.

3. In comparing Christ, as regards His active obedience as thus
defined, with the High Priest, we must, of course, consider only
the original institution of this office, not what it degenerated into
in reality. The High Priest, in virtue alike of his setting-apart and


454 THE CHRISTIAN FAITH [§ 104


of the seclusion of his life in the precincts of the temple, was very
favourably situated. It was not easy for him to neglect anything
pertinent to his calling, nor was anything likely to be demanded of
him which was out of keeping with his dignity and thus apt to
injure it. Also it was much easier for him than for anyone else to
keep clear of ceremonial defilements. These privileges had to be
granted to human weakness if, in relation to his people, he was
to represent even symbolically that which Christ actually was in
relation to men. For the people were in constant danger, indeed
almost in constant consciousness, of defilement. But the High
Priest through his setting-apart was relieved of all worldly affairs,
and even of the most natural duties, if to fulfil them involved even
a slight defilement. It was his function to represent the pure
man, who as such was alone authorized to officiate at the yearly
sacrifice of atonement, by way of supplement to all the sacrifices
which the people were ceaselessly offering through the priesthood as
a whole. Thus the people, living at a greater or less distance from
the temple, seemed to itself to be living also at a greater distance
from God—a distance which was only temporarily lessened by the
alternation of the times of divine service and those of ordinary
business. But the function of the High Priest was to counter-
balance these fluctuating movements by remaining constantly in
the immediate neighbourhood of the temple, even although he
actually entered it only at prescribed times and for prescribed
purposes. Now just this is the essential thing in the high-
priestly significance of the active obedience of Christ. For that
it is His action alone which completely corresponds to the divine
will, and gives pure and full expression to the dominion of the God-
consciousness in human nature—this is the basis of our relationship
to Him; and on the recognition of this everything specifically
Christian is based. What this implies is that, apart from connexion
with Christ, no individual man, nor yet any part of the corporate
life of men is at any time, in and for itself, righteous before God or
an object of His good pleasure. And just as of the whole Jewish
people the High Priest alone appeared immediately before God, and
God saw the whole people as it were only in him, so Christ too is
our High Priest because God sees us, not each of us for himself, but
only in Christ. In living fellowship with Christ no one wishes to
be anything for himself, nor yet to be regarded by God as any-
thing. Each one wishes to appear only as animated by Christ,
and as a part of His work which is still in process of development ;


§ 104] CHRIST’S HIGH-PRIESTLY WORK 455


so that even that which has not yet been altogether united with
Him is still related to the same animating principle, because it is
yet to be animated by Him some day. Thus, just as the High
Priest was then, so Christ is now, the One who presents us pure
before God in virtue of His own perfect fulfilment of the divine
will. Because of His life in us, the impulse to the fulfilling of that
will is also active in us, so that in this connexion with Him we too
are objects of the divine good pleasure. This is the meaning
(characteristic of our view, and from a Christian standpoint un-
objectionable) of the often misunderstood expression, that Christ’s
obedience is our righteousness, or that His righteousness is imputed
to us.1 Such an expression is very easy to misunderstand, and it
certainly cannot be thoroughly defended except on the assumption
of a common life—which for that matter is also most definitely
assumed in the conception of the High Priest. Thus we are also
enabled to distinguish the prophetic value of Christ’s obedience
from the high-priestly. To the prophetic office of Christ belongs
everything which is proclamation, and so self-presentation as well,
not in words only, but also in deed. This, however, is addressed to
men in view of their opposition to Christ, in order to make them
susceptible of union with Him. Hence the obedience of Christ in
this aspect of it is held up? even for all who are in the Church,
and bears on the distinction between Christ and them which
still persists. But the high-priestly value of His obedience re-
lates to His union with us, in so far, that is, as in virtue of the
vital fellowship existing between Him and us His pure will to
fulfil the divine will is active in us also, and we therefore share
His perfection, if not in execution, at least in impulse.? Our union
with Him, accordingly, although it never attains more than relative
manifestation, is yet recognized by God as absolute and eternal,
and is affirmed as such in our faith.

There are only two things in the ordinary presentation against
which we must still be on our guard. First, the active obedience
of Christ must not be presented as the perfect fulfilment of the
divine Jaw. For law always denotes a distinction and a severance
between a higher will which commands, and an imperfect will


1Eam ob causam ipsius obedientia . . . qua nostra causa sponte se legi
subjecit, eamque implevit, nobis ad iustitiam imputatur (Sol. decl., p. 585).
Jesus Christus nobis imputans omnia sua merita, et tam multa sancta opera,
quae praestitit pro nobis ac nostro loco est nostra iustitia (Conf. Belg. xxii.
p. 183).

2 Pini ao oory Tee.

® Ci.e$:38, 3;


450 THE CHRISTIAN FAITH [§ 104


which is subordinate to it. In this sense the claim must certainly
be made for Christ that He was not subject to the law, since, even
if in view of the two natures a twofold will be ascribed to Him, yet
the-two even so must be in complete agreement.1 But just as
little can it be said that He willingly subjected Himself to the law ;
for not even willingly could He bring Himself so to differ from the
divine will that it could become a law for Him. The active obedi-
ence of Christ was rather His perfect fulfilment of the divine will.?
But if what is in question is the Mosaic law, in so far as it chiefly
prescribed performances and abstentions, then to this He certainly
was subject so far as His personality was concerned,® so that it
cannot be said that He undertook its fulfilment willingly. But
the high-priestly worth of His obedience could not have consisted
in this alone, except in so far as it was part of His fulfilment of the
divine will. The second point is this, that if we are to express
ourselves with any accuracy we cannot say, either, that Christ
fulfilled the divine will in our place or for our advantage. That is
to say, He cannot have done so im our place in the sense that we
are thereby relieved from the necessity of fulfilling it. No Christian
mind could possibly desire this, nor has sound doctrine ever asserted
it. Indeed, Christ’s highest achievement consists in this, that He so
animates us that we ourselves are led to an ever more perfect
fulfilment of the divine will. Not only so; but He cannot have
done it in the sense that the failure to please God which is present
in us in and for ourselves, should or could, as it were, be covered by
Christ’s doing more than was necessary to please Him. For only
that which is perfect can stand before God; hence even Christ
Himself had (to put it so) nothing to spare, which could be distri-
buted among us, whether we regard the completeness of His fulfil-
ment in outward acts (which, moreover, for reasons which will
emerge more clearly later, would be quite un-Protestant) or whether
we regard only the purity of the inward sentiment.

Neither can He have fulfilled the divine will in any way for our
advantage, as if by the obedience of Christ, considered in and for
itself, anything were achieved for us or changed in relation to us.
The true view is that the total obedience—S.co/wpa—of Christ
avails for our advantage only in so far as through it our assumption
into vital fellowship with Him is brought about, and in that fellow-


1 But this, of course, is not what is meant in Sol. decl., p. 605: tam non


fuit legi subjectus, quam non fuit passioni et morti obnoxius, quia dominus
legis erat.


Sohn 47522 O-. Galias Sjobnwns2 stata:


a ee en ef


§ 104] HIS PASSIVE OBEDIENCE 457


ship we are moved by Him, that is, His motive principle becomes
ours also—just as we also share in condemnation for Adam’s sin
only in so far as we, being in natural life-fellowship with him and
moved in the same way, all sin ourselves.}

4. We come now to the passive obedience of Christ. It has
already been stated above that the resemblance to the High Priest
is here only a very general one. So we cannot use it to explain
the connexion between the passive obedience of Christ and His
redeeming and reconciling activity, especially since nothing is said
about the High Priest enduring evil, while this is assumed to be the
important element in the passive obedience of Christ, with the
result that His feeling as sacrificer and His suffering as sacrificed
or as sacrifice are confused. If for the present we allow this con-
fusion, we are thrown back upon the fact that in every human
society, so far as it can be regarded as a self-enclosed whole, there
is as much evil as sin; and that while the evil is certainly the
punishment of the sin, yet each individual does not wholly and
exclusively suffer precisely the evil which is connected with his
personal sin.? Therefore it can be said, in every case in which
anyone suffers evil not connected with his own sin, that he suffers
punishment for others ; and as the causality of this sin has now
exhausted itself, these others, in virtue of his punishment, can no
longer be affected by the evil. Now in order that Christ should
assume us into the fellowship of His life, it was necessary that He
should first have entered into our fellowship. He without sin, so
that no evil could arise from the presence of sin in Him, must enter
into the fellowship of the sinful life where, along with and as a fruit
of sin, evil is constantly arising. Hence it must be said of Him,
that His suffering in this fellowship, if occasioned by sin—and from
merely natural evils He never suffered—was suffered for those with
whom He stood in fellowship, that is, for the whole human race,
to which He belongs, not only because no particular fellowship
within the human race can be completely isolated, but also by His
own deliberate choice. Not only was the distinction between Jews
and Gentiles abolished, in real fact, alike by His manifestation as
ideal man and more particularly in His consciousness ; but for one
thing His activity had already, at least indirectly, a bearing on the
Gentiles, and for another thing, and especially in the last days of His
life, He was surrounded by Judaism and heathendom, as political
and religious authorities, causing His suffering, and representing


1 Rom, 512 18, BEES 97.


458 THE CHRISTIAN FAITH [§ 104


the sin of the whole world. If we abstract from those evils which
did not properly have any high-priestly character, and regard
only the suffering which He experienced as High Priest, it is obvious
that the sympathy with sin, conditioned as it is in Him as human
experience by this situation, must have been brought to its climax
in this alliance of the two chief classes of sinners against His sinless
personality. Now just as this sympathy with human guilt and
liability to punishment was the initiatory motive in redemption
(as every definite human activity is preceded by a determining
impression), so too the highest degree of just this sympathy was the
direct inspiration of the greatest moment in the work of redemption.
And as victory over sin rose out of this,! and along with sin its
connexion with evil has also been overcome, by the substitution of
equivalents we may say that through the suffering of Christ punish-
ment is abolished, because in the fellowship of His blessed life even
the evil which is in process of disappearing is no longer at least
regarded as punishment.’

What has now been set forth is the real meaning of the state-
ments that Christ by His willing surrender of Himself to suffering
and death satisfied the divine justice, as that which had ordained
the connexion between sin and evil, and thus set us free from the
punishment of sin.? Everywhere within the specific sphere of
Christianity this is easily intelligible and easily defensible, though
the statements are often criticized from without. And from this
presentation it must be possible to deduce whatever in the way of
appropriation of Christ’s suffering (as distinct from its exemplary
value, which belongs to His prophetic office) has proved fruitful in
Christian piety. Even that form of the doctrine which sometimes
appears one-sided, and which concentrates the whole power of
redemption almost exclusively in the suffering of Christ, and so
finds satisfaction in this alone, may readily be understood in this
light. For in His suffering unto death, occasioned by His steadfast-
ness, there is manifested to us an absolutely self-denying love ; and
in this there is represented to us with perfect vividness the way in
which God was in Him to reconcile the world to Himself, just as it

PRohner22.: 2 Rom. 828,

* Deus ergo propter solum Christum passwm et resuscitatum propitius
est peccatis nostris, etc. (Hxpos. simpl. xv. p. 41). Hunc ... credimus.. .
unica sui ipsius oblatione Deo .. . pro nostris . . . peccatis satisfecisse . . .
sicque morte sua triumphum egisse, etc. (Conf. Mylhus. iv. p. 104). Profite-
mur quod . . . anima et corpore passus est, ut pro populi peccatis plane


satisfaceret, etc. (Conf. Scot. ix. p.149). Ad haec passus mortuus et sepultus,
ut pro me satisfaceret meamque culpam persolveret (Catech. maj., p. 495).


§ 104] SUFFERING AND PUNISHMENT 459


is in His suffering that we feel most perfectly how imperturbable
was His blessedness. Hence it may be said that the conviction
both of His holiness and of His blessedness always comes to us
primarily as we lose ourselves in the thought of His suffering. And
just as the active obedience of Christ has its properly high-priestly
value chiefly in the fact that God regards us in Christ as partners
in His obedience, so the high-priestly value of His passive obedience
consists chiefly in this, that we see God in Christ, and envisage
Christ as the most immediate partaker in the eternal love which
sent Him forth and fitted Him for His task.

Although it seems now hardly necessary to stay to compare
this simple presentation with those artificial constructions } which
never tire of bringing together all sorts of reasons to prove the
necessity or the appropriateness of Jesus’ suffering and death, yet
there still remain serious misunderstandings which we must dispose
of. The first is this, that although it is in a specially impressive
way from His suffering that we gain a true understanding of Christ,
yet this is no justification for the triviality of the so-called ‘ wounds-
theology,’ once very widespread but now almost obsolete, which
thought to find the deep import of the suffering of Christ in its
sensuous details, and hence, for the sake of allegorical trivialities,
broke up into details the totality of Christ’s suffering. Underlying
this was a confusion of thought ; what can only be attributed to
Christ as a sacrifice or victim was transferred to His high-priestly
dignity. The victim has no independent activity ; it is completely
passive in everything which happens to it. So Christ too was per-
fectly passive in respect of those details of His suffering as to which
He had no choice, and which consequently are not to be regarded
as being for Him significant elements in experience. The second
misunderstanding is to take the formula, that through the suffering
of Christ the punishment of sin is taken away—a formula perfectly
correct when interpreted as explained above—to mean that He bore
the punishment, that is, that His suffering was equal to the sum of
the evils constituting the amount of the punishment for the sins
of the human race, since otherwise the divine righteousness would
not have been satisfied. From which it naturally follows, since
the total sin of the human race cannot be reckoned anything less
than infinite, that the suffering also was infinite. If now the suffer-
ing of Christ and His death, although limited to a definite space of
time and relative to a capacity for suffering infinitely diminished

1 Among others, Reinhard, Dogm., §§ 107 and 108, pp. 401 ff.


460 THE CHRISTIAN FAITH [§ 104


by His higher spiritual power, is thus to be equated to the total of
human suffering for sin, postulated as infinite, then it is scarcely
possible to avoid the supplementary assumption that the divine
nature in Him also shared in the suffering. This presentation of
the matter, contradicting as it does the incapacity of the divine
nature for suffering (a truth long recognized even in this doctrine),
certainly can offer no defence to any serious attack by its opponents.
But this misunderstanding only reaches its height in the view that
the suffering of Christ is a transference of punishment in the still
more exact sense that God (who nevertheless, according to the
doctrine of the Church itself, is not in general the Author of punish-
ment) appointed His suffering for the Redeemer as punishment, so
that Christ is supposed to have felt the primary and most direct
punishment of sin, namely, the divine wrath, as striking Him and
resting upon Him. This theory, on the one hand, deprives the
human consciousness of Christ of all human truth, by regarding
as His personal self-consciousness what from the nature of the case
could in Him be only sympathy.2. And, on the other hand, it is
obviously based on the assumption that there is an absolute necessity
in the divine punishment, without any regard to the natural con-
nexion of punishment with moral evil. This again can hardly be
divorced from a conception of the divine righteousness which has
been transferred to God from the crudest human conditions. Now
if we take these two elements together, as they are united in the
phrase vicarious satisfaction, we must surely admit that it is not
fitting to stamp it as the phrase in which these aspects of the high-
priestly work of Christ should be comprised. But perhaps the
protest against this expression (which, of course, has already been
attacked on many sides, yet continues to be the expression current
in the Church) cannot be set forth more effectively than by demon-


1 This is expressed, not obscurely, in the whole context of the passage
quoted above from the Sol. decl., p. 696, although throughout, so far as words
are concerned, the proposition that the divine nature does not suffer is not
abrogated. For it is at the same time maintained that the human nature
became capable of suffering this only through its union with the divine, which
is the same as saying, through the divine. With this, further, agrees the fact
that this credal document—which of course is open to serious criticism—also
teaches practically the opposite of the view here set forth: Reiicimus .. .
quod fides non respiciat tantum obedientiam Christi, sed divinam ipsius
naturam, quatenus videlicet ea in nobis habitet et operetur, et quod per hanc
inhabitationem nostra coram Deo peccata tegantur (p. 697).

* It has given me much pleasure to read that the late J. J. Hess, too, could
not bring himself to regard the passage Matt. 2746 as a description by Christ of
His own state of misery, but only as the first words of the Psalm, quoted with
reference to what follows.


et +


§ 104] VICARIOUS SATISFACTION 461


strating how it would have to be reinterpreted if it is to be accepted
at all. Instead of taking it as a single expression which refers
equally both to the active and to the passive obedience—as it claims
to do—we must divide it up, and apply ‘ vicarious’ only to the
passive, and ‘ satisfaction ’ only to the active obedience. For Christ
certainly made satisfaction for us by becoming, through His total
action, not only the beginning of redemption in time, but also the
eternally inexhaustible source, adequate for every further develop-
ment, of a spiritual and blessed life. But this satisfaction is in no
sense ‘ vicarious’ ; it could not have been expected of us that we
should be able to begin this life for ourselves, nor does the act of
Christ set us free from the necessity of pursuing this spiritual life
by our own endeavour in fellowship with Him. On the other hand,
the suffering of Christ is certainly vicarious, and that with respect
to both its elements. For He had sympathy with sin in perfect
measure even in regard to those who had not yet themselves become
miserable through consciousness of it. While the evils which He
suffered were vicarious in this general sense, that one in whom there
is no moral evil ought not to suffer ; hence when he does experience
evil, he is struck instead of those in whom the moral evil is. But
this ‘ vicarious ’ quality in no way makes ‘ satisfaction’ ; so far as
the first element is concerned, because those who are not yet miser-
able must first become so in order to be able to be received by Christ ;
so far as the other element is concerned, because it does not exclude
other suffering of the same sort. Mather, all those who are assumed
into the fellowship of Christ’s life are called to share the fellowship
of His suffering,! until the time when sin has been completely over-
come and through suffering satisfaction has been made in the corpor-
ate life of humanity. Until then all suffering, even on the part of
one who is only relatively innocent, always has a vicarious character.
If, however, we wish to regard these two aspects of the high-priestly
office of Christ in their indivisibility (that is, so far as it is possible
to include the suffering under the activity), then we may turn the
expression about, and call Christ our satisfying representative: in
the sense, first, that in virtue of His ideal dignity He so represents,
in His redemptive activity, the perfecting of human nature, that in
virtue of our having become one with Him God sees and regards
the totality of believers only in Him ; and, second, that His sym-
pathy with sin, which was strong enough to stimulate a redemptive
activity sufficient for the assumption of all men into His vital


1 Matt, TO24=28) John TERE


462 THE CHRISTIAN FAITH [§ 104


fellowship, and the absolute power of which is most perfectly
exhibited in His free surrender of Himself to death, perpetually
serves to make complete and perfect our imperfect consciousness
of sin. It was just like the complementary sacrifice of the High
Priest : that had special reference to those trespasses which had
not been consciously recognized, so that his sympathy, regarded
as the source of his action, took the place of that consciousness,
and the people then felt themselves as free from all anxiety about
divine punishment for the sins they had committed as if each one
himself had fulfilled everything that the law required where there
was consciousness of sin.

Only one misunderstanding still remains to be guarded against
at this point ; we must not set forth Christ’s surrender of Himself
to death as a free decision on His part in any other sense than
that which is here taken as fundamental, namely, that His self-
surrender was identical with His persistence in redemptive activity.
For otherwise the suffering of Christ, so far as it must be regarded
as His own act, appears arbitrary, because in that case He must
simply have appointed Himself to the suffering as such ; and that
which, if regarded as a divine ordinance, would be that irrational
necessity of retribution which we have already disposed of, would,
as the free act of Christ, be an arbitrary self-torture—a pattern
for the arbitrary mortifications of the Roman Church, by the
transference of which it is possible for one person to set another
free from punishment. But in addition to this, we should still
need to take precautions—and it is impossible to see how our
precautions could be successful—lest the example of Christ might
be taken to afford a justification of voluntary death, even of the
sort which is absolutely unchristian. For if we wish to assert the
reality of human moral nature in Christ, we must not ascribe to
Him, even in this connexion, any other rules of conduct than
such as we have to recognize as valid for us all; otherwise
there would be a danger that His life would cease to be an ex-
ample, and consequently that it would cease to be an ideal. Thus,
so far as self-preservation is a duty at all, it must be true of Christ
also that lif He foresaw His death, and if there was any means
of avoiding it without dereliction of duty, He was bound to make
use of it, as He had done previously.1_ The only thing He was not
bound to do was to ask for the help of angels,” or in this struggle to
call to His aid any miraculous power. He must therefore have

‘Luke 4°°, John 899, aMatt, 2653:


§ 104] CHRIST’S REPRESENTATION OF US 463


accepted it as a duty involved in His vocation to appear in the holy
city for this feast, in spite of the foreknowledge He possessed ; }
and beyond question it was an element in the development of this
great crisis that Christ met His death in His zeal for His vocation
relatively to His Father’s law, just as truly as His opponents
—at least the best among them—condemned Him to death in their
professional zeal for the law. If, nevertheless, we wish to regard
even this from the standpoint of the divine decree, then we must
concede that it behoved the Perfecter of faith to die a death which
should be not simply an occurrence, but at the same time a deed
in the highest sense of the word, in order that in this too He might
proclaim the full dominion of the spirit over the flesh. By a natural
death, whether due to accidental illness or the result of the weak-
ness of old age, this could have become evident only accidentally
and in a lesser degree. But this danger, too, of presenting the volun-
tary character of Jesus’ death in a doubtful light, will best be avoided
by keeping to the method we have hitherto followed, and making
real use of it. For the atoning sacrifice of the High Priest was
also a free action, though a professional one, on the one side con-
ditioned by the sin of the people, and on the other following an
established divine ordinance without arbitrariness of any kind.

5. Finally, Christ’s representation of us before God, if we take
the word in its usual meaning (that is, as either, more generally,
the direction of another’s business, or, more specifically, and more
in the dominant Biblical sense, the bringing of the wishes of another
before a third party and urging him to grant them), seems hardly
to be at all separable from His kingly office. For how can that
which Christ is thought of as obtaining from His Father be separated
from that which He Himself as king brings about, and determines by
laws and ordinances of government ? If then the phrase is to have
any reality, if it is not as an undefined middle term to introduce
confusion into our treatment, it must be confined to things which
either do not belong at all, or at least do not wholly belong, to
the Kingdom of Christ ; either this, or as a part of His activity
it too must have been carried on during His earthly life, just like
other parts—otherwise He would not have been a perfect High
Priest. The New Testament passages upon which the use of the
term is chiefly based ? give little definite guidance, since it is not


1 Matt. 167 and elsewhere ; cf. John 117°; cf. ver. 56.

2 Rom. 834, Heb. 72°, 1 John 21; but it is to be noticed that both the
expressions found here, trepeyrvyxavew and mapdxdyrTos, are also used elsewhere
of the Holy Spirit,


464 THE CHRISTIAN FAITH [§ 104


clear that in all of them the reference is to the High Priest ; they
seem rather to proceed from different points of view. Hence we
had better keep to the conception of the high-priestly function,
and bring in chiefly His appearing before God on our behalf. And,
if in doing so the distinction mentioned above is observed, then the
representation will consist chiefly of two things: Christ appears
before the Father, first, to establish our fellowship with Him, and
then, further, to support our prayer before the Father. For the
Kingdom of Christ extends only over those who have already been
assumed into vital fellowship with Him ; while the gradual addition
of individuals to this realm depends upon the divine Providence
with regard to them. But just as in general this fellowship is
sought for us by Christ, and is granted by God for His sake, so it
is not only in His high-priestly prayer that we have the memor-
able fact of this representation ; that is indicated also in every-
thing which He says about His prayer,? not even excluding
statements which seem to be contradictory, and also in what is
said about His prayer by others. As regards the rest, if we
proceed wholly on the principle that whatever does not belong
to the Kingdom of God must also be excluded: from the subjects
of our prayer,* then in the spiritual sphere there are some things
which are not so exclusively spiritual in character that they are
not also interwoven with the general world order, and some
which are not entirely determined by the general rules and
ordinances properly to be deduced from the kingly dignity of
Christ. And when He bids us pray to the Father ourselves,
the fact that it is to be prayer in His name involves the
certainty of a co-operation on the part of Christ which hallows
our prayer by purifying and perfecting our consciousness of
God. Now this co-operation is His representation of us, in the
sense that it is only through Him that our prayer comes accept-
ably and effectively before God. In virtue, therefore, of that
relation to us which is based upon His peculiar dignity, He remains
the representative of the whole human race, for, like the High
Priest, He brings our prayer before God and conveys to us the divine
blessings. Faith in that part of this work which lies beyond Christ’s
earthly career is in no sense dependent on knowledge—which is
denied us—-of the character of His exalted life, but only on the


1 Heb. 9 EP |frolavale w7BiP ilo ae78 Maier ea
Syke Sai and elsewhere ; Heb. 57,
4 Matt, 6°3,


§ 104] THE END OF PRIESTHOOD 468


content and dignity of His personality in relation to God and to us,
as these have been set forth above.

6. Now just as, in accordance with all that has been said, Christ
is the climax of the priesthood, and far beyond all comparison even
with the High Priest, so He is also the end of all priesthood. For
that which is the essential thing in the conception of priesthood,
that of which every earlier priesthood was only an imperfect in-
dication, has been given absolutely and once for all in Christ ; for
He is the most perfect mediator for all time between God and every
individual part of the human race, of which no one, in and for
himself, could be in any sense an object for God, nor could enter
into any connexion with Him. WHence, now that the true and
eternal priesthood is known, there is no place for any arbitrarily
devised priesthood—a mere copy of the real—nor for any further
sacrifice ; all human institutions of this sort are abolished. But
at the same time, the high-priesthood of Christ has passed over to
the fellowship of the faithful, so that Christians as a whole are called
a priestly nation.t Two things are clearly involved in this. First,
that among themselves all distinction between priests and laity is
abolished. Even the Apostles never claim for themselves anything
that can properly be called priestly, so that the revival of the priest-
hood in the Church must be viewed as one of the greatest mis-
apprehensions. But second, Christendom as a whole, as the
human race already united to the Redeemer, stands to the rest of
humanity in the relation in which the priests stood to the laity.
For it is only in so far as there exists a real vital fellowship with
Christ at least in one part of the race that there is also a relationship
between Him and the rest. Hence in this sense the Christian
community, as inseparable from Christ, appears before God for the
whole race and represents it. On the other hand, there can be no
talk at all of any special intercession and representation on the part
of individuals in the community of the perfected.” Similarly, all
the activity of Christendom as a whole on behalf of the Gospel
belongs to the active obedience of Christ, but nothing follows from
this as to a meritoriousness of individual good works done by the
faithful. The same is true also of all sufferings for the sake of the
Gospel in the widest sense : they belong to the atoning suffering of

MT Retea Aer

2 Credimus quoniam Jesus Christus datus est nobis unicus advocatus . .
quicquid homines de mortuorum sanctorum intercessione commenti sunt nihil


aliud esse quam fraudem et fallacias satanae, ut homines a recta precandi
forma abduceret (Conf. Gallic. xxiv. p. 119).


3°


466 THE CHRISTIAN FAITH [§ 105


Christ,! but nothing follows from this as to arbitrary mortifications
—any more than there was anything arbitrary in Christ’s suffering.
Hence Christ remains the end of the priesthood, for all this is high-
priestly only in so far as it is really at the same time Christ’s doing
and suffering. These last-mentioned inferences—and they are
perfectly natural—ought surely of themselves to suffice to secure
its place in our system for a mode of presentation which has been
attacked by almost all modern dogmatic theologians since Ernest.’


§ 105. Third Theorem.—The kingly office of Christ consists in the fact
that everything which the community of believers requires for
its well-being continually proceeds from Him.


1. The term ‘king’ has, and had in the time of Christ, many
meanings; and there is a great difference between its strict
official use and its vague polite use. It is, therefore, impossible
to base our presentation upon an exegetical decision on the ques-
tions in what sense Christ was asked whether He was a king,? and
whether He answered in the same sense or another. Rather we
must keep to the recollection, not yet extinct, that the conception of
king was opposed on the one hand to that of a tyrant, whose power
was just as unlimited, but not natural; and on the other hand, to
that of the authorities of a society, who possessed only a limited
and delegated power, conferred on them by the governed them-
selves. A tyranny, on the other hand, always involved the possi-
bility, not to say the assumption, that the power which had been
arbitrarily seized was also selfish, and might have other aims than
the free development and the natural prosperity of those over whom
it was exercised. In contrast with both, the lordship of Christ is as
unlimited as that of the animating principle always is when it is
neither outwardly hindered nor inwardly weakened. Moreover, it
is in the interest of those over whom it is exercised, as obviously
follows from the facts that it is nothing but the lordship of that
element whose weakness in themselves men deplore, and that sub-
mission to His lordship must always be voluntary. But the kingly
power has this in common with the other two, that its object
cannot be an individual as such, but only a society, and the in-
dividual only in so far as he belongs to the society. Individuals,
then, submit voluntarily to the lordship of Christ ; but in so doing
they at the same time enter a society to which they did not previously


GMC OIE TS AO, 2 See his Diss. de triplict munere Christi.
$ John 18%, Matt. 2711,


$ 105] CHRIST’S OFFICE AS KING 467


belong. So that, in attributing a kingly dignity to Christ, we are
eo ipso declaring ourselves definitely opposed to the contention that
Christ did not intend to found an organic community, but that the
society of believers came into being, or was formed, later, without
His injunction. But since, at the same time, no one enters this
community except by submitting himself to Christ’s lordship, it
follows that Christ Himself initiated this Kingdom, and is thus
without any predecessor in His kingly dignity.

Christ Himself, however, indicates still another contrast, when
He describes His Kingdom as not of this world, and so distinguishes
it in yet another way from both those others. This negative
description involves in the first place that His kingly power is not
immediately concerned with the disposal and arrangement of the
things of this world—which means that nothing remains as the
immediate sphere of His kingship but the inner life of men indi-
vidually and in their relation to each other. It involves further,
that for the exercise of His lordship He makes use of no means
which are dependent upon the things of this world, z.e. of no con-
straint which requires superiority in material forces, nor yet of
enticements or threatenings of any kind which require support of
that kind and make a merely sensuous appeal—for that, too,
belongs to this world. But this is by no means to say that the
kingly power of Christ began only after He had been raised above
the earth, still less—as might be held—that it covers only His
exalted life ; He Himself says, not that He will be a king, but that
He is one ; and not only did He prove Himself a king during His
earthly life—by giving laws for His community, by sending out
His servants for its extension, by imposing rules of conduct and
giving directions as to the way in which His commanding will
should be carried out }—but His kingly power is and remains
everywhere and always the same. For those laws and directions
do not grow old, but remain valid, with undiminished force, in the
Church of Christ ; and if for the future He refers His disciples to
His spiritual presence, yet even that does not make a distinction
between different times. For even His original influence was
purely spiritual, and was mediated through His bodily appearance
not otherwise than even now His spiritual presence is mediated
through the written Word and the picture it contains of His being
and influence—so that even now His directive control is not simply a
mediate and derived one. So that, keeping in mind what was said


1 Matt. roots 1815-20 2 19-20,


468 THE CHRISTIAN FAITH [§ 105


above, we may say that His government of us bears the same relation
to our activity in His name as His representation of us does to our
prayer in His name. Indeed, it is also obvious that since He stands
to the totality of believers in exactly the same relation as the divine
nature in Him does to the human, animating and taking it up into
the fellowship of the original life, His lordship too is in the strictest
sense a sole lordship, for no one else is in a position to share it.
Thus, just as Christ has no predecessor in the society governed by
Him, but is its original founder, so too He has in it no successor
and no representative. For He exercises His lordship through
ordinances which He Himself established,! and has Himself declared
these to be sufficient,? so that nothing is now necessary but the
right application of these ; and to apply them is the common task
of those who are ruled by Christ, just because they are His subjects.
Even if at any time they could transfer this task, either to one
individual or to several—though of course they could not do so
without giving up their vital relation to Christ—yet any such
individual would be only their representative, and not a repre-
sentative of Christ. So that among believers there is nowhere any
lordship other than His alone.

2. The difficulty in regard to this part of the work of Christ
consists especially in defining aright the kingly power of Christ
in relation to the general divine government (a difficulty which
cannot be overlooked once the subject is somewhat more closely
scrutinized from a theoretical point of view), and further in defining
it aright relatively to secular government (a difficulty which at
once emerges in the practical treatment of the question).

The customary division of the Kingdom of Christ into the king-
dom of power, the kingdom of grace, and the kingdom of glory helps
us little. We have first to break it up so as to comprehend under
the two latter the proper object of Christ’s kingly activity, namely,
the world which has become participant in redemption, while under
the kingdom of power we understand the world as such, and in
itself. But in taking this position, we seem to lend ourselves to
the extravagant notion that there belonged to Christ a kingdom of
power, as it were, before the kingdom of grace, and independent of it.
Now, to say the least, such a kingdom could not possibly belong
to His redemptive activity ; and if the Apostles knew of such a


Sepa s i 2 Matt. 2129, John 159. 10 174,
° Expos. simpl. xvii. p. 50: Ecclesia non potest ullum aliud habere caput
quam Christum . . . Nam ut ecclesia corpus est spirituale, ita caput habeat


sibi congruens spirituale utique oportet.


§ 105] HIS KINGLY POWER 469


kingdom belonging to the Word,! it must have been a knowledge
which, because unconnected with redemption, could not belong to
Christian piety either. Anyone who thinks it necessary to inter-
pret the expressions which they use with reference to Christ as the
Word made flesh, the God-man and the Redeemer,? or which Christ
uses of Himself,’ as if they attributed to Him the governance of the
whole world, involves himself in a contradiction, not only with all
the passages in which Christ Himself offers petitions to the Father
and refers to what the Father has retained in His own power, but
also with all passages which express His intention to establish an
immediate relationship, both of petition and response, between
believers and the Father. It is true that occasionally there is to
be found even within the Protestant Church a form of doctrine,
and here and there, in conjunction with it, even a type of Church
service which leaves room (all the prayers being addressed solely
to Christ) only for a relationship of believers to Christ, to the
exclusion of the Father. But we must, with Scripture and very
much more with the Church, pronounce this a dubious innovation.
If, however, this rock is to be avoided, by the power of Christ we
can understand only that power which begins with the kingdom of
grace and is essentially included in it. And this itself is a power
over the world only in so far as believers are taken out of the
midst of the world, and the fellowship of believers or the kingdom
of Christ can increase only as the world (as the antithesis of the
Church) decreases, and its members are gradually transformed into
members of the Church, so that evil is overcome and the sphere of
redemption enlarged. But even this is a power of Christ over the
world which proceeds only from the kingdom of grace, 1.e. it exists
in virtue of the influence of the command to preach given by Christ
and perpetually valid in the Church. On the other hand, what
part of the world, or what individual, becomes ripe for the fruitful-
ness of this preaching before other parts, or before other individuals,
is a matter belonging to the kingdom of power, which the Father has
retained for Himself.4 Accordingly, the only things which remain
subject to Christ’s direct control are the forces of redemption
implanted in the Church; and it would be a rather unfruitful
distinction, and not even correctly described, if we called His King-
dom a kingdom of grace in so far as these forces show themselves
effective in a purely inward way, for sanctification and edification,


at [olavotaies Se Zeb les
Wile yitiy Te PEO S hi, [olan bia ace SeNCtS ie | Onn Oss


470 THE CHRISTIAN FAITH [§ 105


and a kingdom of power in so far as they are employed in the
overcoming of the world ; for these two things it is quite impossible
to separate from each other. The distinction, however, between
the kingdom of grace and the kingdom of glory is usually taken to
be that the latter follows upon the former, so soon as all Christ’s
subjects have been placed in full possession of all the benefits won
for them, and no longer have any contact with the world—an
assumption which we shall consider more closely later. Here it need
only be remarked, with reference to the kingly dignity of Christ,
that if the assumption is taken strictly then there can be no other
activity in this Kingdom than one of expressive representation, in
which case the exercise of a general directive power is reduced to a
minimum. Hence we can certainly regard it as a glory of Christ
that He has no more to suffer, even in sympathy, with the whole
body of believers, because it has been finished and perfected ; but
in no sense is this a condition which should be described as a King-
dom. Thus there remains only the one kingdom of grace as Christ’s
true kingdom, as indeed it is the only one a consciousness of which
really emerges in our moods of devotion, the only one of which we
require knowledge for our guidance, because our active faith must
be directed towards it. The two other terms in the customary
division we can use only to determine the scope of this very kingdom
of grace. In calling it a kingdom of power we are asserting, not
only that the extension of the influence of Christ over the human
race knows no limits, and that no people is able to offer it a per-
manently effective opposition, but also that there is no stage of
purity and perfection which does not belong to Christ’s Kingdom.
And in calling it a kingdom of glory we are confessing our belief
—of course in connexion with that highest purity and_per-
fection, only approximately given in experience—in an unlimited
approximation to the absolute blessedness to be found in Christ
alone.

So far as the distinction between the kingly power of Christ and
civil government is concerned, it would seem, after what has been
said, that nothing is easier than to distinguish exactly between the
two in conception. For civil government is unquestionably an
institution which belongs to the general divine government of the
world,’ and even by His own declaration is accordingly as such
alien to Christ’s Kingdom. On the other hand, civil government
is a legal thing, and exists everywhere, even where there is no


* Rom, 13) 2,


§ 105] - SECULAR GOVERNMENT 471


Christian religion. Hence, since it springs out of the corporate
life of sinfulness, and everywhere presupposes this (for of course
for the sanction of its laws it reckons upon the force of sensuous
motives), it cannot as such have the slightest authority in the
Kingdom of Christ. On this view the two powers seem to be
held entirely apart from each other, so that the sole lordship of
Christ in His Kingdom remains secure although His followers
conduct themselves in worldly affairs in accordance with the
regulations of the secular government, and regard everything
that comes to them from it as coming from the divine govern-
ment of the world. But how greatly the situation is altered
as soon as we think of the secular government as exercised by
Christians over Christians, is clearly to be seen in the fact that,
on the one side, the Church has attempted to control the secular
government in the name of Christ, while on the other, the Christian
magistracy as such has claimed for itself the right to regulate the
affairs of the society of believers. In order not to introduce at this
point anything which belongs to Christian Ethics—from which even
the theological principles of Church Law must be derived—the only
question we shall here have to propound is whether the Kingdom of
Christ is changed in extent through the entrance of this new material
relationship. Now it is certainly true that Christ must completely
control the society of believers, and consequently that every member
of the society must show himself, wholly and in every part of his
life, to be governed by Christ. But since this depends entirely upon
the inner vital relationship in which each individual stands to
Christ, and since there can be no representative who exercises the
kingly office of Christ in His name, this simply means that everyone,
whether magistrate or private citizen, has to seek in the directions
given by Christ, not indeed right directions for his conduct under
civil government (for this is always a matter of the art of politics),
but certainly the right temper of mind even in this relationship.
On the other hand, it also remains true that no one can exert influ-
ence upon the society of believers except in the measure in which
he is a pre-eminent instrument of Christ’s kingly power,? since
otherwise the sole lordship of Christ would be imperilled. And this


1 Aug. Conf. xvi.: Quia Evangelium tradit iustitiam aeternam cordis,
interim non dissipat politiam aut oeconomiam, sed maxime postulat con-
servare tanquam ordinationes Dei et in talibus ordinationibus exercere
caritatem.

2 This is also the basis of the rule of Peter, Acts 171, and of the procedure
of the Church as related in Gal, 27 %,


472 THE CHRISTIAN FAITH [§ 105


does not at all depend on his outward vocation ;+ one who is called
as a bond-servant is not therefore a bond-servant in the society, but
a freedman of the Lord, and similarly he who is called as a lord does
not therefore become a lord in the society, but only a bond-servant
of Christ like everyone else.2. So that the civil contrast between
magistrate and private citizen loses all significance in the Church ;
it makes no difference to a man’s relationship to the kingly power
of Christ. ;

3. In this way, then, we have separated the kingly power of
Christ, on the one hand, from the power which the Father has re-
tained for Himself, while on the other we have set it beyond all the
resources of the civil power. The latter is undoubtedly the way in
which what Luther called ‘ the two swords’ should be kept separate
from each other. We may therefore say of this part also of the
work of Christ, as of the former ones, that He is the climax and the
end of all spiritual kingship ; and this will hold true in and for itself
as well as relatively to this separation. In and for itself we must
compare His lordship with every other purely spiritual power, and
all the relationships of master and scholars, pattern and imitators,
law-giver and law-receivers, we must put far below it—they stand
on a vastly lower level, and are only concerned with individual
parts of the life of the human spirit. The same is true of the
founders of other religions, who neither evoked a temper of mind
opposed to former habits and customs, as Christ did (rather they
accommodated themselves to these in various ways), nor, as Christ
did, called the whole human race under their lordship. In the
same way He is the end of all such kingship, for there is just as
little possibility of a similar kingdom after His, as there is that a
similar one should now exist or should ever have existed alongside
of it. But He is both climax and end, only in so far as the above-
mentioned separation is maintained. For it is part alike of the
purity and of the perfection of His spiritual power that sensuous
motives can have no share whatever init. That is why Christianity
is neither a political religion nor a religious state or a theocracy.
The former are those religious fellowships which are regarded as
the institutions of a particular civil society, and which rest upon
the assumption that the religion is derived from civil legislation, or

1 Expos. simpl. xxx. p. 91: Si magistratus sit amicus adeoque membrum
ecclesiae, utilissimum excellentissimumque membrum est, quod ei permultum
prodesse eamque peroptime iuvare potest.


; TiC ory a2: : ;
’ Heb. 1227: even r Cor. 1528 does not contradict this.


§ 105] HUMILIATION AND EXALTATION 473


is related as a subordinate movement to the same higher impulse
which first called the civil organization into being, so that for the
sake of the civil society its members also unite in a religious fellow-
ship, which therefore is animated by the common spirit of the
society and by patriotism—these being ‘ fleshly motives’ in the
Scriptural sense. Theocracies, on the other hand, are religious
fellowships which as such have subordinated the civil society to
themselves ; in which consequently political ambition aims at pre-
eminence within the religious fellowship, and there is the underlying
assumption that the religious society, or the divine revelation
upon which it rests, was able to call into being the civil society—
which in this sense is possible only for religious fellowships which
are nationally limited. To both, then, political religions as well as
theocracies, Christ puts an end through the purely spiritual lordship
of His God-consciousness ; and the stronger and the more extensive
His Kingdom becomes, the more definite becomes the severance
between Church and State, so that in the proper outward separation
—which, of course, may take very different forms—their agreement
is ever more perfectly worked out.

Postscript to this Division.—Only after we have concluded our
treatment of the whole of the doctrine of Christ are we in a position
to see what kind of meaning is to be given to the two contrasted
states of humiliation and exaltation ascribed to Him. For these
expressions, when taken as precisely as a place in the system must
involve, cannot be applied either to the relationships of the Person
by itself, or of the Work by itself, nor to the relationship of the
Work to the Person. In the first place, the term ‘ humiliation,’ taken
strictly, presupposes a higher being which existed previously. But
what this is, we cannot discover, so long as we abide by the unity of
the Person. It may rightly be called an exaltation, that Christ
became the first-fruits of the resurrection, and sits at the right hand
of God ; and in comparison His earthly condition may be called a
lower one—but not a humiliation, for the Person of Christ began
only when He became man. On such terms the Person of Christ
is divided, and since the divine in Him is regarded as something
special existing from eternity, its descent to earth takes on the
appearance of a humiliation. But to the absolutely highest and
eternal — which necessarily remains always  self-identical — no
humiliation can possibly be attributed. It would follow from this
that, from the same point of view, the indwelling of the Holy Spirit
in the fellowship of believers must also be a humiliation—all the


474 THE CHRISTIAN FAITH [$ 105


more that human nature in us is not pure and sinless as it was in
the Person of Christ. Nay more, in view of the omnipresence of
God in all finite creatures, creation itself would be a humiliation ;
and this, although the glorification of God is actually given as the
purpose of creation. But if we accept the term ‘ humiliation ’ instead
of the more exact ‘ state of lowliness,’ but hold fast to the unity of
the Person, even so the antithesis reveals itself as a mere deception,
or at least as merely an appearance for others but not a reality for
Christ Himself. For how can one have been conscious of the lowli-
ness of His state who speaks of His relationship to God the Father
in such a way ! that even to be set at His right hand could not be
regarded as an exaltation? If, further, we think of the customary
conception of the two natures and of a mutual impartation of the
attributes of each, we cannot refer the humiliation to the union of
the two natures (for that remains even if the humanity of Christ
be exalted to the right hand of God), but only to the divine nature,
either in so far as it refrains from the use of its attributes, or in so
far as along with them it must accept those of the human nature.
Now the latter circumstance remains unaltered in the state of exalta-
tion as well. For since the distance between God and every finite
being is infinite, it remains unchanged whether we think of humanity
in its present state or in advanced development. The former has
only slightly more plausibility. For if (and this is involved in this
mode of presentation) even in the state of lowliness exceptions to the
non-use of divine attributes occurred in virtue of the free will of
Christ,?then of course the renouncement of them itself must have been
voluntary. Indeed, we must assert this, even without any regard
to exceptions ; for no compulsion can be laid upon the divine nature.
In fact, we must rather say that a compulsion to make use of those
attributes against His free will would have been a humiliation. But
we cannot imagine that even in the state of exaltation Christ makes
a more complete use of them. For if all the attributes of the divine
nature are active without intermission in the human nature, then’
all activities of the human nature must be at rest without inter-
mission ; which is the same as saying that so far as its activity was
concerned the human nature was absorbed by the divine, and there
remained only its passive aspect—and this is quite contrary to the
original assumption. But how, again, could we conceive an un-


1 John 152 434 517. 20f- 657 829 1530. 36 etc. etc,
* Sol. decl., p. 767 : divinam ssuam majestatem pro liberrima voluntate
quando et quomodo ipsi visum fuit etiam in statu exinanitionis manifestavit,


§ 105] UNTENABILITY OF THE FORMULA 475


interrupted use of the divine qualities, if we are really to think of
Christ as representing us before the Father, and making requests
for us in view of sin—that is, as sympathetically sharing in the
conflicts of the warring Church ? So that even here there remains
only a less or more, which cannot justify the use of such expressions.
And it hardly need be said that this antithesis cannot be related
to the functions of Christ either. For even if we were to say that
the kingly function is by far the highest, even so the prophetic and
the priestly were next to it, and were not opposed to it as lowly
functions—for it was in no lowly attitude that Christ exercised the
prophetic activity.

If now, in view of the complete untenability of this formula, we
inquire what its origin was, the answer is that its only basis is a
passage of Scripture,! whose devotional and—when we regard the
whole context—rhetorical character indicates no intention that the
expressions used should be set up as a fixed didactic formula.
Besides, it would follow from this passage that the exaltation of
Christ is simply a reward appointed Him by God for the humiliation,
without direct connexion either with His peculiar dignity or with
the completion of His work. But the way in which Paul here sets
up Christ as an example is quite compatible with the view that his
starting-point was simply the appearance of lowliness in Christ’s life
as well asin His death. In the transmission of doctrine, accordingly,
we are perfectly entitled to set this formula aside ; it may justly
be entrusted to history for safe keeping.


1 Phil. 2°%. None of the other passages cited in this connexion contributes
anything to the question.


SECOND DIVISION: THE MANNER IN WHICH FELLOWSHIP WITH
THE PERFECTION AND BLESSEDNESS OF THE REDEEMER
EXPRESSES ITSELF IN THE INDIVIDUAL SOUL


§ 106. The self-consciousness characterizing those assumed into living
fellowship with Christ may be set forth under both conceptions,
Regeneration and Sanctification.


1. If it be the essence of redemption that the God-consciousness
already present in human nature, though feeble and repressed,
becomes stimulated and made dominant by the entrance of the
living influence of Christ, the individual on whom this influence is
exercised attains a religious personality not his before. Before this
the God-consciousness was evinced only casually in isolated flashes,
never kindling to a steady flame. The God-consciousness was not
in a position to take constant control of the various elements of
life. Even those elements actually controlled by it were in fact
always quickly submerged by elements of a contrary nature ; whereas
a devout personality must be taken to mean one in which every
mainly passive element is part of the relation to the God-conscious-
ness produced by the influence of the Redeemer ; and every active
element is due to an impulse of the same God-consciousness. Life
thus comes under a different formula, making it a life that is new ;
hence the phrases ‘a new man,’ ‘a new creature,’ } which bear the
same sense as our phrase ‘a new personality.’ This new life of
course presents itself as something in process of becoming, for the
individual identity persists and the new life can only, as it were,
be grafted on to the old. And yet the situation in which the new
life is present as something in process of becoming, when related in
memory to the situation in which it was not present at all, can be
attached and bound together with the old into one continuous
personal life only by assuming a turning-point at which the continuity
of the old ceased, and that of the new began to be in process of
becoming. This is the essence of the conception ‘ regeneration.’
Similarly from another point of view the growing continuity of the
new life in which the elements answering to its formula are more


2 COKs nimi harAaas
476


§ 106] REGENERATION AND SANCTIFICATION 477


and more integrated and the elements representing the old life
recur ever more feebly and rarely is denoted by the expression
“ sanctification.’

If now in this connexion we recall what was said before, namely,
that the relation of Christ to the rest of humanity is exactly the same
as the relation within His personality of its divine to its human
element, we may add that these two conceptions, regeneration and
sanctification, set forth just the same distinction as between the act
of uniting and the state of union ; except that in that instance first
of all one Person originated intact, and so the state of union too was
an unbroken continuity, and an uninterrupted diffusion through
the human nature ; which would, accordingly, happen in this in-
stance too were it not that, through the identity of the subject with
the earlier personality, elements from the life of sinfulness are still
present as a hindrance. And as in that former instance one could
not exist without the other, so here we cannot isolate regeneration
or sanctification.

2. The formulation of this division being thus generally justified,
we need only add to what has already been said ! one remark about
the order adopted. The part which has just been concluded,
dealing with the kingly office of Christ, might of itself have led in
the most natural way to a description of the new corporate life
over which He holds sway ; and as the incitements that bring about
this assumption into living fellowship with Christ come to each man
only from this corporate life, and as the sanctification of each de-
pends on the effective influence upon him of the whole, this doctrine
might very well have been treated in the next section. But the
other arrangement is equally correct. For, the entrance of Christ
into humanity being its second creation, humanity thus becomes
a new creature, and one may regard this entrance as also the
regeneration of the human race, which to be sure only actually
comes to pass in the form of the regeneration of individuals. And
as the community of believers in its true essence consists only of
the totality of the sanctified elements of all who are assumed into
living fellowship with Christ, so again the sanctification of the
individual includes everything by which the fellowship is con-
stituted and maintained and extended. In view of this symmetrical
interlocking, the order taken justifies itself for one reason, because
while individuals are indeed originally laid hold of by Christ, yet
at the same time it is always by an influence of Christ Himself,

1 Above, § go, I and § 91, 2.


478 THE CHRISTIAN FAITH [§ 107


mediated by His spiritual presence in the Word, that individuals
are assumed into the fellowship of the new life ; but, above all,
because the earlier place is more suitable for what in one aspect
relates back to the old corporate life of general sinfulness but in
another aspect lies at the base of the new common life under grace.
This double reference holds for both of the conceptions to be dis-
cussed in this Division. While regeneration is for the individual
the turning-point at which the earlier life as it were breaks off and
the new begins, it can also be regarded as the vanishing of the old
life in a fashion explicable only by the redeeming activity of Christ,
which, be it noted, takes effect in such wise that simultaneously
therewith the power of the new life is implanted in the soul. The
treatment of the theme has therefore both a backward reference to
the previous division of the subject and an anticipation of the
main lines of the next Section, where the power of the new life is
considered as the common spirit which animates the whole. Sancti-
fication also has two aspects : from one point of view it is measured
by the degree in which the common sinfulness is more or less rapidly
overcome in the individual soul; from the other it is measured
by the relation of the individual soul to the new corporate life in
the service of which it makes more or less rapid progress.


First DOCTRINE : REGENERATION


§ 107. Assumption into living fellowship with Christ, regarded as a
man’s changed relation to God, is his Justification ;  re-
garded as a changed form of life, it is his Conversion.


I. Seeing that we are here concerned simply with the situation
of the individual in his transition from the corporate life of sinful-
ness to a living fellowship with Christ, we must use this situation
to explain the necessary connexion of the two elements just specified.
‘Form of life’ is to be understood simply as the fashion in which
the time-elements of life happen and arrange themselves ; and self-
consciousness is viewed as passing into action, that is to say, as
basis of the will. In the condition left behind, the stirrings of a
self-consciousness suffused with a consciousness of God were never
determinative of the will, being but casual and fleeting ;_ the
sensuous consciousness alone was determinative. When life is
linked to Christ it is the other way about, and this change is ex-
pressed by the term ‘conversion.’ Asa matter of fact, our relation
to God is really an affair of the quiescent self-consciousness, looking


§ 107] JUSTIFICATION AND CONVERSION 479


at itself reflected in thought and finding a consciousness of God
included there. Now we know that only one relationship to the
divine holiness and righteousness is proper to the corporate life of
sinfulness, namely, the self-consciousness of guilt and merited
punishment.! Obviously this relation must vanish at the very
beginning of living fellowship with Christ, and not at some later
stage of its development towards perfection, for the two are con-
tradictory ; there can be no true consciousness of fellowship with
Christ as long as that other consciousness persists.

It is clear also that the two elements cannot be held separate
in such a manner that a conversion could even be imagined without
justification, or a justification without conversion. Justification
would then be a resolve to forgive oneself on the ground that sin is
unavoidable, a vanishing of the old relation to God without any
new relation taking its place, and therefore not really justification
at all but a complete cessation of the God-consciousness within the
self-consciousness—that is, hardening. A new relation can arise
only through the union with Christ which effects conversion too.
Equally inconceivable is a new direction of the will, based on becom-
ing one with Christ, in which the consciousness of guilt and punish-
ability persists. The new man would then have to remain altogether
unconscious, or, to put it otherwise, there would have to be an
assumption into fellowship with the perfection of Christ that did
not include fellowship with His blessedness. If this ever seems to
happen, the explanation is either that the consciousness of guilt is
merely a delusive carrying-forward of past feelings into the present,
or that ‘conversion’ has been a mere desire to become better by
one’s own resources, without any genuine living fellowship with
Christ. Conversion and justification, being thus utterly insepar-
able, must also be regarded as happening simultaneously, and
each is the infallible criterion of the other.

2. In the fuller treatment of these matters much diversity is
found in the text-books, identical expressions being taken by
different writers in different senses; and the present writer may
be open to the charge that he, too, chooses his terms arbitrarily.
For, to compare the expressions ‘regeneration’ and ‘ conversion,’
there is no real indication that the second conception is just a part
of the first ; it is quite as legitimate to put it the other way about.
Still less is there anything in the expression ‘justification ’ pointing
to the beginning of a new form of life ; if we consider that the

1 Cf, §§ 83 and 84.


480 THE CHRISTIAN FAITH [§ 108


condition being superseded is one governed by law, the expression
rather suggests that this condition is to continue than that it is to
lapse. Moreover, other expressions as significant and as scriptural
as conversion might also put in a claim to be preferred ; and in view
of the great wealth of expression, mainly pictorial, of which Biblical
writers ! avail themselves in this connexion, variation is unavoid-
able. The important matter is the exact exposition of the actual
meaning of the expressions rather than any particular choice of
words. The choice made here is justifiable on the one hand because
regeneration expresses in the most definite way the beginning of a
consistent life ; and on the other hand because the relation to the
past, which in the general expression ‘ regeneration ’ falls very much
into the background, comes to be the ruling consideration in the
more particularized expressions ‘conversion’ and ‘justification.’ The
use of the word ‘ conversion’ for the transformation, the right-about-
turn to better things, makes evident that it is the beginning of a
new page, a new order in contrast to the old. Justification, too, pre-
supposes something in respect of which a person is justified ; and
since no error is possible to the Supreme Being it must be assumed
that something has happened to a man between his former and his
present state by which the divine displeasure has been removed
and without which he could not have become the object of divine
favour. However, it seems inadvisable to introduce still other
figurative expressions from the Bible ; for without a fine-spun and
unprofitably lengthy discussion one could not distinguish all the
various aspects of what is, after all, only a momentary point of
departure ; not to speak of the fact that enlightenment and renewal
can be used just as well of what is continuous and permanent, and
referred to the sphere of sanctification.

The order seems, in view of the symmetry of the definition, a
matter of entire indifference ; many considerations, however, make
it more convenient to begin with conversion.


First THEOREM : CONVERSION


§ 108. Conversion, the beginning of the new life in fellowship with
Christ, makes itself known in each individual by Repentance,
which consists in the combination of regret and change of


_ 1 £E.g. ‘ enlightenment,” Eph. 3° 514, Heb. 6*-°; “renewal,” Eph. 478,
Dit e erle bos


§ 108] CONVERSION 481


heart ; and by Faith, which consists in the appropriation
of the perfection and blessedness of Christ.

Conf. Aug. xii.: Constat autem poenitentia proprie his duabus partibus,
altera est contritio seu terrores incussi conscientiae agnito peccato, altera est
fides.—A pol. Conf. v.: Nos igitur constituimus duas partes poenitentiae
videlicet contritionem et fidem. Si quis volet addere tertiam videlicet .. .
mutationem totius vitae ac morum in melius non refragabimur.—Expos. simpl.
xiv. p. 36: Per poenitentiam autem intelligimus mentis in homine peccatore
resipiscentiam verbo evangelii et spiritu s. excitatam fideque vera acceptam,
qua protinus homo agnatam sibi corruptionem peccataque omnia sua...
agnoscit ac de his ex corde dolet, eademque coram Deo deplorat et...
execratur cogitans iam sedulo de emendatione. Et haec quidem est vera
poenitentia, sincera nimirum ad Deum et omne bonum conversio, sedula vero
a diabolo et omni malo aversio. Diserte vero dicimus hance poenitentiam
merum esse Dei donum et non virium nostrarum opus.—Ibid. xv. p. 48: Qua
propter loquimur in hac causa . . . de fide viva vivificanteque, quae propter
Christum quem comprehendit viva est.—Repetit. Conf. p. 147 (Twesten):
Ostendimus supra, fide significari fiduciam acquiescentem in filio Dei, propter
quem recipimur et placemus.—Melanchth., loc. s. t. de voc. fides: Fides est
fiducia applicans nobis beneficium Christi . . . fiducia est motus in voluntate,
quo voluntas in Christo acquiescit.—Jbid. : Quibuscunque verbis alii uti volent,
rem retinere cupimus.


1. The definition found in these citations from confessional
literature certainly does not appear to tally with that given formally
here ; for the word penitentia rather corresponds merely to re-
pentance—that is, to only one part of conversion ; and in the Swiss
Confession the word conversio, which corresponds to our word
conversion, expresses only one part of it, namely, penitentia.
And even if we enter the caveat that although turning away from
evil is not explicitly mentioned, it is understood to be implied,
still these two together—turning away from evil and turning to God
and the good—include only that part of conversion which we define
as change of heart. It must be noted, too, that while aversio and
conversio taken together are here regarded as equivalent to the
whole experience, yet, in fact, this experience is already reckoned
to include both the painful recognition of sin which precedes the
turning away, and the faith which precedes the turning towards,
so that turning away and turning towards do not really give a com-
plete account of the matter. In the Augsburg Confession, besides
faith we meet only contrition, equivalent to our regret. But in the
Apology ‘change for the better’ is added, which of course in its
permanent aspect means sanctification, but, regarded as a new
beginning, has its place here and corresponds to our expression
‘change of heart.’ If we gather all the elements of the Con-


31


482 THE CHRISTIAN FAITH [§ 108


fessions together, the general result is identical with our own state-
ment. Our general definition is sufficiently justified by prevalent
devotional usage, and certainly is greatly to be preferred to the
expression penitentia or repentance, because that word has no
definite reference to the actual beginning of a new form of life, and
also because it sounds very awkward to hear faith (a word that we
obviously use in exactly the same sense as the Confessions) reckoned
as a part of repentance. And indeed we find the expressions
‘repentance ’ and ‘conversion ’ made interchangeable in other places
in the Apology.) Another point of difference is best seen in certain
passages in the confessional documents where contrition and faith
as the two constituents of conversion are alluded to as ‘ mortification ’
and ‘revival.’ 2 Clearly ‘ mortification’ here is regret or contrition
and ‘ revival’ is faith ; but if so, no notice is taken of what we have
called change of heart. Nevertheless, no genuine laying hold of
Christ in faith is even conceivable without such an alteration in the
innermost aspirations and endeavours, nor any contrition other than
a passing wave of emotion; and so in both connexions change
of heart too is silently taken for granted. Lastly, it must be
emphasized that our general expression ‘ conversion,’ as well as the
narrower terms ‘repentance,’ ‘regret,’ and ‘ change of heart,’ are all
employed in Church usage, not only as denoting what happens at the
beginning of the new life, but also for what occurs in the course of
the new life in connexion with the sin that still remains. All the
same, it follows from the explanations previously given 3 that there
must be a very great difference between what constitutes turning
away from sin in the two differing cases of one who is not yet, and
one who already is, in fellowship with the Redeemer. In the latter
case, the connexion with the Redeemer and the correspondingly
changed disposition may become clouded over and less effective, but
neither is utterly lost. In their case no sin can come to conscious-
ness unaccompanied by regret, yet they do not require to begin the
new life all over again, nor is change of heart in the strictest sense
necessary. On the other hand, in regard to faith, it is clear that
faith is a permanently enduring state of mind, and that at this
point in the treatment of the doctrine of conversion, strictly under-


‘See p. 168: Ostendendum est quod scriptura in poenitentia seu con-
versione has duas partes ponit.

2 Apol. Conf., ibid. : Paulus fere ubique cum describit conversionem, facit
has duas partes mortificationem et vivificationem . . . sunt ergo hae duae
partes contritio et fides.


S74:


§ 108] FAITH 483


stood, only the origin of faith is in question. For appropriation,
taking possession,! is a single act ; whereas faith in its duration is
the resulting, abiding consciousness of being in possession. . Thus
the beginning of divinely created faith essentially belongs to con-
version ; its duration is the constant basis of the new life. ‘hus,
even though treating regeneration and sanctification more or less
separately, we begin by bringing out their necessary interconnexion,
and the continuity of the divine action throughout the whole course
of the new creation.

The Roman Church does not count faith as an element in con-
version, but puts in its stead confession and satisfaction, in spite of
the fact that confession, rightly understood, is included in regret,
and that satisfaction is a sheer impossibility. ‘The reason lies
partly in her doctrine of the Church and partly in the different
sense in which the Church uses the word ‘ faith,’ understanding by
it only/the divinely imparted and humanly accepted knowledge of
man’s destiny ; its assertion being accordingly that faith precedes
repentance and conversion.? This difference of language is un-
fortunate, increasing, of course, the difficulty of comparing clearly
the points of divergence ; and it is unfortunate too that in ordinary
life this same word ‘ faith’ is so often used for a conviction that is
without either influence on the will or adequate foundation.
Nevertheless, we cannot let the word drop, but must rather maintain
all the more strenuously its well-won title. The justice of our own
usage is easily demonstrable. The expression has become estab-
lished among us as the translation of the word by which the original
language of Scripture defines the inward condition of one who
feels content and strong in fellowship with Christ. Moreover, the
controversy with the Roman Church about good works has given
the word an additional historical value for us.

2. Repentance and faith, then, are to be taken as covering the
whole experience of conversion. Now, since every turning-point
is at once the end of one movement and the beginning of the reverse,
in these two things, taken together, existence in the common life
of sin ceases, and existence in fellowship with Christ begins. Since
some activity of the self is an essential element in both, and opposed


1 Expos. simpl. xv. p. 42: fides Christum recipit.

2 Catech. Rom. praef. 27: Cum enim finis qui ad beatitudinem homini
propositus est altior sit, quam ut humana mentis acie perspici possit, necesse
ei erat ipsius a Deo cognitionem accipere. Haec vero cognitio nihil aliud est
nisi fides.—Jbid. p. II. de poenit. 8: Verum in eo quem poenitet, fides poeniten-
tiam antecedat necesse est . . . ex quo fit, ut nullo modo poenitentiae pars
recte dici possit. :


484 THE CHRISTIAN FAITH [§ 108


activities cannot accompany, but must succeed one another, the
turning-point must be a twofold inactivity, a state of being no longer
active in one direction and not yet active in another. In the
spiritually living existence of the subject nothing is left in place of
the vanishing activity except its inert echo in feeling, and nothing is
present in respect of the activity not yet begun except inert antici-
pation of it in desire. The first is regret—which certainly expresses
an existence in fellowship with sin, an existence, however, in
which there is no activity of the self—for where regret is, the
regretted condition has been abjured—but simply the retention in
consciousness of something that is past. At every moment in
which it is no more than an approach to complete transition, this
consciousness witnesses to a disturbance and obstruction of life
proper, and is felt as pain. The regret that goes with conversion,
relating not to particulars but to a general condition, and abjuring
that condition finally is, considered apart from everything else,
the purest and most perfect pain, which, if allowed to reach its
limit, might bring life itself to an end.t This is to be noted, how-
ever, that regret arising out of the knowledge of sin given by the
law is not the same as that directly appertaining to conversion.
The law, after its wont, goes into particulars, and the regret evoked
by it is only regret for particular motions and affections and not for
the general condition and its deepest cause. Nor is there anything
in this connexion out of which a new and opposite movement of life
might develop. The outcome of such regret is therefore death or
despair. However large the previous experience of this regret
may have been the true conversion-regret must always eventually
arise out of the vision of the perfection of Christ, and this beginning
of regeneration must be due to Christ’s redeeming activity. It is
only on this view of repentance and faith that their interconnexion
is clear, their origin thus being the same. Christ awakens a
wholly perfect regret just in so far as His self-imparting perfection
meets us in all its truth, which is what happens at the dawn of faith.
And Christ can, in fact, lay hold of us in His receiving activity only
if and when His soul-stirring exhibition of Himself to us leads us to
abjure utterly our previous condition. In the same way, regret
and faith being directly interdependent, the beginning is present
of existence in living fellowship with Christ. For our attitude here


1 Apol. Conf. v. p. 169: Mortificatio significat veros terrores quos sus-
tinere natura non posset, nisi erigeretur fide. Ita hic (Col. 24) exspolia-
tionem corporis peccatorum vocat, quam nos usitate dicimus contritionem,
quia in illis doloribus concupiscentia naturalis expurgatur.


§ 108] REGRET FOR SIN 485


cannot be different from that of the human nature of Christ in its
act of uniting with the quiescent consciousness of being accepted.
This attitude is not only originally joyful and—unlike regret—
uplifting,1 but it includes also in its steady progress a stimulation
of the will, and develops into an activity of the will; and so with
the dawn of faith conversion is complete. Still, in between that
quiescent consciousness and real activity there comes desire, in two
interconnected forms. There remains over from regret the con-
tinual abjuration of the fellowship of the sinful life, and there is
also the desire to receive the impulses that come from Christ. This
desire, acting in two directions, is the change of heart effected by
Christ which binds regret and faith together and represents the true
unity of conversion. One may include the negative ray of desire
along with regret in the concept repentance, and count the positive
ray as a part of revival, or one may with equal justice give desire
a middle place of its own.

Regret that lies outside Christianity and has no reference to the
consciousness of God is beyond the scope of our discussion. But
within the sphere of Christian piety, if we carry our examination
further back into the common life of sinfulness, we find many
sorts of regret. Such regrets, too, can be traced back more or less
directly to the vision of Christ, and are not always limited to some
particular, but may show genuine pain at the general human state
of sinfulness as illustrated in one’s own person; but they do not
develop into a continuous inward movement amounting to the
dawn of living faith. All the same such stimulations, arising as
they do from the influence of the common Christian life, even
though they are only an unconnected and casually-appearing
mixture of elements, are to be regarded as divinely caused, and
indeed involved in the divine ordinance which places all men in
relation to the Redeemer ; and in this sense such a condition is
ascribed to the preventent grace of God. In the same way a change
of heart may appear before it is permanently bound up with con-
version ; and, all the more because the insight which rejects former
desires is looking back to the figure and teaching of Christ, this
too is to be regarded as a work of preparatory grace. Nor do we
find such regret and change of heart always separately ; they may be


17Tbid.: Et vivificatio intelligi debet . . . consolatio quae vere sustentat
fugientem vitam in contritione.

2 This is never more than an inexact phrase, for according to our general
formula all divine grace is always prevenient ; and it would be more correct
to say ‘ preparatory.’


486 THE CHRISTIAN FAITH [§ 108


related to one another without losing their preparatory character.
The higher character which both possess is only recognized from
the simultaneous dawning of faith; and perfect and effective
divine grace is seen only in the union of all three—regret, change of
heart, and faith. There are similar preliminary approximations to
faith. For, even when the perfection of the Redeemer is not re-
cognized as more than human, it would be wrong to regard as an
adverse judgment of human reason such a sense of its compelling
power as sets Him on a different plane from other sages or God-
gifted men, and such a satisfaction in the idea of His Kingdom as
sets it high above other earthly aims. A presentiment of His
higher dignity may be already implied in this, and an inward sur-
render may arise out of it. This, too, is a gracious work of pre-
paration, and of faith also it is true that its higher character, as it
dawns, is recognizable only in its unity with the other elements of
conversion.

From all this it follows naturally that since imperfect regret
and change of heart may quite easily occur even when the soul has
conceived a higher idea of the Redeemer, conversion cannot be
distinguished either in and for itself, or by any particular mark, from
the effects of preparatory grace. Only gradually can each con-
sciousness reach certainty for itself, and its peace of heart become
fixed. Even approximations to faith are bound to have an influ-
ence on conduct indistinguishable with any certainty from the
beginnings of sanctification, because in accordance with the laws of
organic nature the true life of Christ in us announces itself at first
only in weak and intermittent impulses, and then gradually a
unified activity emerges. The only marks we can point to are
steady progress in sanctification taken in its full meaning, and
active participation in the extension of Christ’s Kingdom. What
is incomplete is usually in its very nature fluctuating. And it is
scarcely thinkable that a man should be received into unity of life
with Christ without very soon actively proving himself an instru-
ment of His redeeming activity. When therefore the Redeemer
calls the decisive working of divine grace a new birth, we must take
part of the meaning to be that just as in the natural life birth is not
the absolute beginning, so here a period of hidden life precedes it,
and at first even the newly-born life remains unconscious, only
gradually learning to know itself as a real personality in a new world.
Keeping to the illustration given us by the Redeemer Himself,
we must rest assured that even though neither we nor others can


§ 108] TYPES OF CONVERSION 487


point out the very beginning of our new life, and its moment in time
is as little to be determined as the point in space from which the
wind begins to blow, still the fact of the distinction between the
new life and the old remains, and of our share in the new we become
ever more certain.

3. The idea that every Christian must be able to point to the
very time and place of his conversion is accordingly an arbitrary
and presumptuous restriction of divine grace, and can only cause
confusion. In its most definite form it is found in the assertion
of an otherwise worthy party in the Church that every true Chris-
tian must be able to allege, as the beginning of his state of grace, a
penitential crisis of soul, that is to say, a surging up of regret to
the limit of despairing self-abhorrence, followed by a feeling of
divine grace reaching to the limit of inexpressible felicity ; all
steadfastness of heart being mere illusion, and all evidences of sancti-
fication deceitful works of men. This view never became part
of the general teaching of the Church ; it is no more than a dubious
aberration. In this connexion two points can be made here. In the
first place, the true change of heart, complete because covering all
the ground from regret to faith, need by no means invariably
spring from a flood of regret that almost wrecks the whole being
by its painful emotion. On the one hand, the capacity of people
for emotion is very various. ( What to an insusceptible nature is a
very intense degree of excitement seems but a trifle to one more
emotionally constituted, and in this respect the same person
differs from time to time. )In sucha matter no definition or summary
statement is possible. On the other hand, the experiences recorded
in the autobiographies of many religious men show that even if
a shattering storm of feeling occur which is reckoned by themselves
to be the moment of their conversion, often enough they sink back
again into a state of futility and uncertainty ; and so the supposed
value of that moment seems entirely doubtful. Even in these
cases steadfastness of soul comes only gradually. Further, self-
abasement being not a pure judgment but also feeling must as
the spiritual side of regret be distinguished from pain, its sensuous
side, and these may stand in very various relations to each other.
One practised in the estimation of sensuous susceptibilities may
have the strictest and profoundest judgment of self-abasement
without any corresponding intensity of feeling. So, on the one
hand, care must be taken, if intensity of feeling gives a pre-
dominantly sensuous colouring to the whole condition, lest regret,


488 THE CHRISTIAN FAITH [§ 108


being not yet pure and in its inmost fibre free from sensuous
admixture, may thereby be unfitted to have life-giving faith as its
immediate result. And, on the other hand, the oftener and more
strongly such imperfect regret occurs before conversion, the easier
it is for the relation between self-abasement and pain to take a
quite different form within genuine repentance. The very thing
that evokes the utter self-abasement to which faith and the positive
pole of change of heart attach themselves, may be allowed a place
only as a kind of memory of former suffering and a shadowy image
of already felt pain. This is new evidence of the inadmissibility
of the demand that everyone must be able to distinguish, in the
phenomena of consciousness, between the working of grace as
initiating the new life and the preparatory work of grace. (Hence
we can concede the reality of this conception of an agonizing crisis
of repentance only as denoting the whole change of conditions,
from the first challenging and preparatory effects of grace on to the
unchangeable fixing of the heart in faith. ) Whether these are spread
over a longer or compressed into a shorter interval, and how far
during this period particular oscillations may differ in amplitude,
and whether the final oscillation must be the largest—all these
questions are left quite undetermined.

The second point we can determine is this. A constituent part
of living fellowship with Christ is a share in His blessedness. This
too, then, must be included from the very beginning in the dawn of
faith ; all the more because the unblessedness that clings to regret
can be relieved only by its opposite, namely, blessedness. The
two chief elements in conversion can still be very closely linked
together, and even in perfect regret no great pain need be felt.
Thus many and various relations are possible between the pain of
repentance and the joy of conscious fellowship with Christ ; among
them this one, that if a glorious outpouring of joy be found along
with a faint measure of sorrow, the suffering may become almost
imperceptible. Undeniably there are types of conversion which
seem to be mainly a happy rescue from despair. But there are
others in which no such agonizing crisis occurs, and which are
experienced as an almost unalloyed blessing from above, the painful
element in regret being suppressed to a point just short of actual
disappearance.

4. Although some teachers in English and German Churches
have recently declared that no conversion whatever is needed in
the case of those born in the bosom of the Christian Church and


§ 108] CONVERSION AND BAPTISM 489


already as children received into its fellowship, since they are
already members of the body of Christ and recipients of regeneration
in baptism, we must in accordance with almost the whole trend of
our discussion withhold our agreement. For everything we said
regarding the original cause of the beginning of sin in man holds
good just as much about those born within the Christian Church
as about others. The former, too, reveal a tendency to drag down
the divine, which of course influences them like others through the
Christian community, to the sphere of the sensuous. It may,
indeed, be fitly said that in Christian children sensuous representa-
tions of the divine spontaneously develop, sometimes of the pagan,
idly frivolous kind, sometimes Judaic and gloomily fearful. If,
therefore, in spite of infant baptism, sin thus shows its power in
them, they need conversion as much as anyone born outside the
Church. The only difference really present is that in the case of
others it is a matter of chance how and when the gospel call reaches
their ears, whereas Christian children are already called in virtue
of their standing in a natural and orderly relation to the working of
divine grace. This in no way invalidates the natural order we
described, namely, the sequence of preparatory and quickening
grace; and where this order obtains conversion takes place.
Furthermore, the opinion referred to finds at most an apparent
support in our confessional statements ; fundamentally they are
in entire agreement with our position. This may be seen partly in
the fact that they never raise any distinction in connexion with the
doctrine of conversion, between those born inside and outside the
Church, and partly because they expressly ascribe to our baptism
only the beginning of the divine work of grace.2 That the same
effect occurs within the Church even without previous baptism is
evident from the facts about persons baptized in heart alone. It
is true that some passages seem to approach more nearly to the
opinion in dispute.* But if we recall how differently they speak of
regeneration, saying that in it the Holy Spirit opens our eyes to the


1 Compare, in the A pology for the Augsburg Confession, the whole treatment
of the conceptions repentance, confession, and satisfaction.

2 Apol. Conf. i.: Addidit etiam (Lutherus) de materiali quod spiritus
sanctus datus per baptismum inciprt mortificare concupiscentiam et novos
motus creat (and obviously only incipit creare) in homine.—Ibid. iv. : Igitur
necesse est baptizare parvulos, ut applicetur iis promissio salutis.

8 Expos. simpl. xx.: Assignantur haec omnia baptismo. Nam intus
regeneramur purificamur et renovamur a Deo per spiritum sanctum,
foris autem accipimus obsignationem, etc.—Conf. Gallic. xxxv. p. 123:
Quamvis baptismus sit fidei et resipiscentiae sacramentum, tamen.. .
affirmamus ... infantes . . . esse baptizandos.


490 THE CHRISTIAN FAITH [§ 108


understanding of divine mysteries,! and that sanctification begins
with regeneration, it is clear that they are really seeking to connect
with regeneration the original baptism of adults who asked for it,
and only loosely by indulgence let their statement serve for infant
baptism too. Nowhere in the testimony of such Churches is any-
thing more intended than what Calvin? himself has said. With
him indeed we have been in pretty close agreement ; his phrase
“seed of repentance and faith ’ might have been our text.

It is evident enough that one can all too easily lapse unawares
into the region of magic, if regeneration be brought into connexion
with our particular method of administering the sacrament of
baptism. We need only look at the answer we should have to
give to the question how, in our commonly adopted practice of the
rite, the receiving activity of Christ and the passive condition of
him who is received are related to one another.

5. As regards the first of these, we again become conscious of
an inconvenience in our arrangement, for in the public teaching of
the Church regeneration is usually ascribed to the Divine Spirit,
of whom we have not yet treated, and, to mention what we have
already said would be our next topic, the divine activity in justi-
fication is usually ascribed to God the Father. But here again we
must recall our fundamental proposition, that the whole procedure
in redemption, the same for all races, Jew and Gentile, is also the
same for all ages, and that the essential identity of redemption and
of the Christian fellowship would be imperilled if our faith had either
another content or another origin—the one implies the other—than
it had in the case of the first disciples. If faith arises in the same
way, conversion must happen in the same way. Now in the first
disciples both were effected by the Word in its widest sense, that
is, by the whole prophetic activity of Christ. And we must be able
to understand this that we have in common with them, if need be
without a doctrine of the Holy Spirit, just as the disciples under-
stood their own condition without any such doctrine. The constant
factor is above all the divine power of the Word—taking the
expression in its widest sense—by which conversion is still effected
and faith still arises. The difference is simply that the self-revela-
tion of Christ is now mediated by those who preach Him ; but they

1 Expos. simpl. ix. : In regeneratione intellectus illuminatur per Spiritum
sanctum ut et mysteria et voluntatem Dei intelligat.

* Institutt. 1x. 16. 20: Baptizantur in futuram poenitentiam et fidem,


quae etsi nondum in illis formatae sunt, arcana tamen spiritus operatione
utriusque semen in illis latet.


§ 108] THE SPIRIT AND THE WORD 491


being appropriated by Him as His instruments, the activity really
proceeds from Him and is essentially His own. This is definitely
and uncompromisingly asserted in most of our Confessions, though
with references to the Holy Spirit which will become clear to us
only later in our discussion. If other passages 2 seem to be less
convincing, still they draw attention to exceptions which when
looked at more closely are only apparent. For if one ventures
to make a merely relative separation between the Word itself and
the public ministry of the Word, and to recall that all Christians
are summoned to a common ministry of the Word, it is with a view
to affirming boldly that no example can be given of conversion
apart from the mediation of the Word: and we need cherish no
misgiving that to assert this strenuously is to limit the divine
omnipotence. For the second creative act is recognized as a work
of the divine omnipotence just because only through the power
revealed in it the business of conversion is carried through in all
believers. The miracle of the appearance of Christ, who could
Himself work only in the form of the Word, would be insufficient
if some had to be converted otherwise than through influences
proceeding from Him; indeed, in that case they would not be
included in the priestly intercession of Christ. Again, if it were
possible that Christ should reveal Himself to some immediately
and inwardly without the Word, this could happen to all; which
would amount to redemption through the mere idea of the Redeemer,


1 Augsb. Conf. v: To win such faith God has appointed preaching, by
means of which the Holy Spirit awakens and comforts the heart and imparts
faith —Avt. Smalc. vii. : Constanter tenendum est Deum nemini spiritum vel
gratiam suam largiri nisi per verbum et cum verbo externo et praecedente :
and it is here to be remarked that the communication of the Spirit is de-
scribed as a consequence or result—ut ita praemuniamus nos contra En-
thusiastas, qui iactitant se ante verbum et sine verbo spiritum habere.—
Expos. simpl. xiv.: Per poenitentiam autem intelligimus mentis in homine
peccatore resipiscentiam, verbo evangelii et spiritu sancto excitatam. Ibid.
xvi. : Haec autem fides merum est Dei donum, quod solus Deus ex gratia
sua... donat, et quidem per Spiritum sanctum mediante praedicatione
Evangelii.—Conf. Gall. xxv.: Credimus quoniam non nisi per Evangelium
fimus Christi compotes.—Conf. Belg. xxiv.: Credimus veram hanc fidem
per auditum verbi Dei et Spiritus sancti operationem homini insitam eum
regenerare.

2 Expos. simpl. i.: Quamquam enim nemo veniat ad Christum, nisi qui
trahatur a patre ac intus illuminetur per spiritum sanctum, scimus tamen
Deum omnino velle praedicari verbum Dei. Equidem potuisset per spiritum
sanctum suum aut per ministerium angeli instituisse Cornelium, etc.—Ag-
noscimus interim Deum illuminare posse homines etiam sine externo ministerio,
etc.—Conf. Helv. xiv. : Quae (ecclesia) externis . . . ritibus ab ipso Christo
institutis et verbi Dei... publica disciplina .. . ita construitur, ut in
hanc sine his nemo nisi singulari Det privilegio censeatur.

enylonmeug. 0:


492 THE CHRISTIAN FAITH [§ 108


making the actual appearance of Christ superfluous. For the
present day this is the specially relevant reason for the position we
take, which has behind it the whole apostolic usage and the express
witness of Scripture,! and is no mere design of strengthening our
case in opposition to certain visionaries. All the same, this state-
ment was needed in order to expose fully the danger of fanaticism
on this point. For if it be allowed that there are divine workings
of converting grace in no actual historical relation to the personal
efficacy of Christ (even though it is as workings of Christ that they
come to consciousness), there would be no security that this inward
mystic Christ was identical with the historical Christ. Every
exposition of the matter, therefore, which deprives the Word of
its sole place in conversion not only wipes out all lines of demarca-
tion (for then everyone with unrestrained caprice can profess that
anything and everything is Christian and due to Christ), but also
dissolves all fellowship; for every individual, who is inwardly
and independently enlightened, must also be perfectly complete
in himself, with no inducement to, or need of, fellowship. All
essentially separatist tendencies spring from ideas of this kind. The
influence of Christ, therefore, consists solely in the human com-
munication of the Word, in so far as that communication embodies
Christ’s word and continues the indwelling divine power of Christ
Himself. This is in perfect accord with the truth that, in the con-
sciousness of a person in the grip of conversion, every sense of
human intermediation vanishes, and Christ is realized as immedi-
ately present in all His redeeming and atoning activity, prophetic,
priestly, and kingly. In this sense everything that in any way
contributes to conversion, from the first impression made on the
soul by the preaching of Christ on to its final establishment in faith,
is the work of Christ. These divine workings of grace are super-
natural in so far as they depend upon and actually proceed from
the being of God in the Person of Christ. At the same time, being
historical and formative of history, they are natural in so far as
they have a general natural connexion with the historical life
of Christ ; and in detail each working that establishes a new
personality is bound up in its efficacy with the historical totality
of Christ’s effects.

6. As regards the state of the subject himself during conversion,
we may take conversion to be the moment at which the entry into
living fellowship with Christ is complete. This moment is the


1 Rom. ro!?, Tit, 13.


§ 108] CONVERSION AS PASSIVE 493


beginning of a higher form of life which only Christ can communicate,
because only in Him is it originally present. It seems obvious, then,
that here no causal agency can be attributed to the person who is
being taken up into fellowship, for the higher form cannot be in
any way derived from lower stages of life as present either in the
individual or in a group of people yet to be converted. On the
other hand, if we remember that the converted person, both after-
wards within the living fellowship of Christ and even beforehand in
the common life of sin, is, as an individual of reasonable perceptions,
spontaneously active, and that in general there is never in any living
being a complete moment wholly devoid of spontaneous activity,
two questions are inevitable. The first is: How is the ordinary
natural action of the subject going on at the moment of conversion
related to the work of Christ which produces change of heart and
faith ? The second is: How is the presupposed passive condition
during conversion related to the spontaneous activity which ensues
in fellowship with Christ ?

In regard to the first question, we may, without abandoning our
fundamental assumption, regard the natural spontaneous action of
the subject in that moment as non-co-operative. All that prepara-
tory grace has already brought to pass within him of course co-
operates, but this is itself part of the divine work of grace and not
of his own action.1 Anything proceeding purely from his own inner
life could co-operate only so far as the efficacy of divine grace was
actually conditioned by these activities of his own. It cannot
indeed be denied that this may happen. For the Word through
which the influence of Christ is mediated can mediate only by
making an impression on men, and for this the activity of his sense-
faculties as well as of the inner functions of his consciousness is
required. In so far as the activity of all these functions depends
on the free will of man, the capacity of apprehension must therefore
be allowed to exist in his natural condition. But as regards what


1 Sol. decl., p. 674: Ex his consequitur, quam primum Spir. s. per verbum
et sacramenta opus suum regenerationis et renovationis in nobis ¢nchoavtt,
quod revera tunc per virtutem Spir. s. cooperari possimus ac debeamus.—Hoc
vero ipsum non est ex nostris carnalibus et naturalibus viribus, sed ex novis
illis viribus, quae Spir. s. in nobis in conversione inchoavit. What is said
expressly of the period after conversion holds good all the more for the period
preceding it.—Jbid., p. 681: . . . hominem ex se ipso aut naturalibus suis
viribus non posse aliquid conferre vel adjumentum adferre ad suam con-
versionem,

2 Tbid., p. 671: In eiusmodi enim externis rebus homo adhuc etiam post
lapsum aliquo modo liberum arbitrium habet, ut . . . verbum Dei audire vel
non audire possit.


494 THE CHRISTIAN FAITH [§ 108


happens after the Word has made its impression on the soul, in the
attainment of its aim for men, here we cannot concede man’s
natural co-operation. Even the consent accompanying the recep-
tion of the Divine Word, as far as it is directed to what is essential
and characteristic in it, can be ascribed only to the antecedent work
of grace. On the other hand, if it should be held that the natural
activity which goes on during Christ’s working of conversion is of
the nature of resistance, it must be, if not disapproval, at least
indifference ; that is to say, the activity remains directed to other
matters, and as far as the operation of Christ is concerned, negligible.
If conversion is effected during such a condition it is certainly not
in virtue of the Word so received. To assume an entire lack of
relation between man’s personal activity and the higher operation
of Christ therefore yields no satisfactory result, and the problem
remains to find room for an activity in real relation to the work of
Christ, and yet neither co-operation nor resistance. If now we
take as starting-point that organic co-operation which we admitted
to go on before apprehension of the Word, and that minimum of
opposition consisting in the direction of the will to other things,
which we rejected, it is clear that the two cannot coexist. That
co-operation of the mental organism in the reception of the Word
implies a consent of the will; and this is just a surrender to the
operation of Christ or giving rein to a lively susceptibility thereto.
This middle stage, to which we have recourse in all similar cases—
a passive condition, yet including that minimum of spontaneous
activity which belong to every complete moment—meets the con-
ditions of the problem perfectly. The solution, however, is
invalidated if this susceptibility be again divided into active and
passive, and only the latter allowed as applicable to our case ; for
then one would simultaneously have to find room for another
spontaneous activity, and the whole difficulty would return.!

Let us now go back to the other question. Since the whole life
of the Redeemer, because solely determined by the being of God
in Him, is activity, and not passivity, it is clear that in fellowship
with His life no moment can be purely passive, because everything
in it that proceeds from Him and becomes an impulse is necessarily
activity. Spontaneous activity in living fellowship with Christ
begins in the moment of being received into His fellowship. There


‘Cf., inter alia, Gerhard, t. v. p. 113, and Sol. decl., p. 662: Et hoc ipsum
vocat (Lutherus) capacitatem non activam sed passivam, which are not really
Luther’s words.


§ 108] CONVERSION EVOKES ACTIVITY 495


is no interval. Conversion may be said to be just the evocation of
this spontaneous activity in union with Christ. The lively sus-
ceptibility passes into quickened spontaneous activity. Every
heightening of that lively susceptibility is a work of preparatory
grace. The grace that effects conversion changes it into quickened
spontaneous activity. If we trace this element backwards from
the point at which it first appears already heightened by the pre-
paratory work of grace, and ask in what the first beginning of life
has consisted by which it can be differentiated from pure passivity,
we can only point to that desire for fellowship with God, never
entirely extinguished, though pushed back to the very frontiers of
consciousness, which is part of the original perfection of human
nature. As this is what we regard as the first point of attachment
for every Operation of divine grace, the only thing we are ruling out
is a passivity that would be entirely foreign to human nature, in
virtue of which a person would resemble a lifeless object in the
matter of conversion,! and we are saying nothing about that in our
Christian self-consciousness which we ascribe to the grace of God
in Christ. For mere desire is not an act ; it is but the anticipatory
feeling of an act that may possibly happen if a certain impulse occurs
later. It is exactly what shows itself as the feeling of need for
redemption, a feeling without which there could be no dissatisfac-
tion with the common state of sinfulness, but only a universal com-
placent recognition of the inevitability of sin. Hence this desire is
simply the ineradicable residuum in human nature of the original
impartation of the divine which makes human nature what it is,
and not in itself but only in so far as it is stirred up to some definite
degree of strength does it give rise to the contrast between nature
and grace. Indeed, the parallel between the beginning of the
divine life in us and the incarnation of the Redeemer comes out
here too. In Him the passivity of His human nature in that
moment was just such a lively susceptibility to an absolutely power-
ful consciousness of God, accompanied by a desire to be thus seized
and determined, which became changed through the creative act
into a spontaneous activity constituting a personality. In the same
way our desire is heightened in conversion by the self-communica-
tion of Christ till it becomes a spontaneous activity of the self that
constitutes a coherent new life.


1 Sol. decl., p. 662: Antequam autem homo per Spir. s. . . . regeneratur
. ex sese ad conversionem nihil . . . cooperari potest, nec plus quam lapis
truncus aut limus.


496 THE CHRISTIAN FAITH [§ 109


SECOND THEOREM: JUSTIFICATION


§ 109. God’s justifying of one who is converted to Him includes the
forgiving of his sins, and the recognizing of him as a child of
God. This transformation of his relation to God, however,

follows only in so far as he has true faith in the Redeemer.
Augsb. Conf. iv.: ‘ And it is taught that we attain the forgiveness of sins
and are counted just before God out of grace for Christ’s sake through faith.’—
Conf. Tetrap. iii.: . . . nostri hance totam (iustificationem) divinae bene-
volentiae Christique merito acceptam referendam solaque fide percipi
docuerunt.—Expos. simpl. xv.: Ilustificare significat peccata remittere, a
culpa et poena absolvere in gratiam recipere et iustum pronunciare. .. .


Certissimum est autem omnes nos. . . iustificari solius Christi gratia, et
nullo nostro merito aut respectu . . . Quoniam vero iustificationem hanc
recipimus non per ulla opera sed per fidem . . . ideo docemus . . . hominem


iustificari sola fide in Christum.—Cowf. Gallic. xviii: Credimus totam nostram
iustitiam positam esse in peccatorum nostrorum remissione, quae sit etiam

. unica nostra felicitas. Itaque ... insitd’ Jesu Christi obedientia
acquiescimus, quae quidem nobis imputatur, tum ut tegantur omnia nostra
peccata, tum etiam ut gratiam coram Deo nanciscamur.—IJbid. xx. : Credimus
nos sola fide fieri huius iustitiae participes. . . . Itaque iustitia quam fide
obtinemus pendet a gratuitis promissionibus, quibus nos a se diligi Deus
declarat et certificatur.—Conf. Belg. xxii.: Interim proprie loquendo nequa-
quam intelligimus ipsam fidem esse quae nos iustificat, ut quae sit duntaxat
instrumentum, quo Christum iustitiam nostram apprehendimus.—ZJd7d.
Xxxlli. : Credimus nostram beatitudinem sitam esse in peccatorum nostrorum
propter Jesum Christum remissione atque in ea iustitiam nostram coram
Deo contineri.—John 11, Gal. 37¢ 4°.

1. In the treatment of this subject, too, the language of the
Confessions cited is not quite consistent, and so the diction of our
proposition does not conform to that of every quotation. Some, like
us, use the word ‘ justification ’ for the larger conception ; others use
for that ‘ forgiveness of sins,’ understanding by that phrase the whole
state of blessedness, and accordingly counting justification, if it is
to be regarded as something additional, as a special element therein.
In this connexion it is evident that forgiveness in itself is just the
removal of something negative, and therefore can be no full de-
scription of complete blessedness. Indeed, from our point of view,
strictly speaking, one relation to God is abolished but no other
established, unless indeed an earlier relation had come into exist-
ence ; otherwise, though one has forgiven the other, both remain as
far apart asever. The term ‘justification,’ however, applied to the
same experience has, as bearing on inquiry into what happens, a
more positive sound, leaving aside for the moment the question of
accuracy. It is therefore better fitted either, as in the Augsburg


§ 109] JUSTIFICATION 497


Confession, to describe a positive element accompanying that
negative one, or, as is preferred here, to describe the whole, and
leave a place for a positive element alongside of forgiveness. This
method of description has been chosen because, where sin has to be
presumed, an act of justification (however it comes about) must
include forgiveness ; at the same time, since justification includes
something more than forgiveness, this too has to be specified. This
several Confessions express positively, but the others in a rather
indeterminate and inconvenient fashion, by ‘attaining grace,’
“received into grace ’—indeterminate, because the content of the
additional factor is not explained ; and inconvenient, because the
same expression ‘ grace,’ used everywhere in this connexion for the
divine activity itself, is thus made to signify merely its result.
Our designation of this positive element is unquestionably more
exact, but (even though works on Dogmatics frequently use the
terms ‘sonship’ or ‘ adoption’) it is in this connexion so little an
accepted credal definition that we need to point back to passages
in which its content has been established in the most precise way
and in the same connexion. Our designation has, indeed, this
drawback, that it is in verbal agreement neither with the ordinary
nor with the other and more special expression ; but this difficulty
vanishes as soon as the actual interrelations of the subject are
understood.

The Roman Church differs entirely from the Protestant in its
use of the expression ‘ justification ’ : instead of something correlated
to conversion, and therefore included in regeneration, it makes
‘justification ’ mean something more general than these, including
both them and sanctification. If we recall how, on the other hand,
the existence of faith is placed anterior to conversion, we can per-
ceive how the two things go together : faith and justification are kept
as far apart as possible, in order the more easily to show man’s
justification to be dependent on his sanctification. But even apart
from this, it cannot be advisable virtually to abolish the difference
between the divine work on man and the divine work in man.
The previous life void of divine influence is what is here given in
experience, and we are faced by the task of rightly distinguishing
the turning-point which is the source of everything later from the
results that flow from it.

2. For the self-consciousness at rest in contemplation, justifica-
tion is the same thing that conversion is for the self-consciousness
passing into movement of will; an analogy is therefore to be


32


498 THE CHRISTIAN FAITH [§ 109


expected between the two aspects of both. Repentance, as the self-
consciousness moved by the consciousness of sin, comes to rest in
forgiveness in the same way as the faith which from its birth is
active through love is in thought the consciousness of being a child
of God, and as this itself is identical with the consciousness of living
fellowship with Christ. That this is not to be interpreted as meaning
that forgiveness could precede faith is stated in the theorem itself :
it means simply that forgiveness, like repentance, denotes the end
of the old state ; as also being a child of God, like faith, expresses
the character of the new. Each, of course, like both elements of
conversion, is dependent on the whole activity of Christ, but
directly and for itself expresses merely the relation of the man to
God. In the common life of sinfulness the individual as a human
being has no other relation to God except (in view of His holiness
and justice) a consciousness of being guilty before Him and meriting
punishment. It is obvious that this consciousness must cease as
soon as, through and along with faith, living fellowship with Christ
begins. If we ask how this happens, the easiest answer certainly
is that the longer and more uninterruptedly we are under the sway
of Christ, the sooner do we forget sin, because it no longer emerges ;
and if sin does not come into consciousness, neither does the sense
of guilt and of deserving punishment. Yet, for one thing, this
would be to place the change in our relation to God at the end of the
process of sanctification, during which the sense of deserving punish-
ment and therefore the lack of blessedness would continue. And
besides, the forgetting of guilt is not the consciousness of forgive-
ness ; for even if this last is no more than the abolishing of a previous
consciousness, it is also a real consciousness in which the memory of
sin is an essential factor.

If, however, justification and conversion are simultaneous,
forgiveness must be our present possession, even while sin and the
consciousness of it are also present. But if the relation of sin to
the holiness and justice of God is to cease, it and the consciousness
of it must be transformed. Now, one who has let himself be taken
up into living fellowsnip with Christ is, in so far as he has been thus
appropriated, a new man; and both are one and the same con-
sciousness. Sin in the new man is no longer active ; it is only the
after-effect of the old man. The new man thus no longer takes sin
to be his own ; he indeed labours against it as something foreign
to him. The consciousness of guilt is thus abolished. His penal

MOG Say ate


§ 109] FORGIVENESS AND ADOPTION 499


desert must vanish with this ; while for the rest, there lies in living
fellowship with Christ, immediately and not just as a vague some-
thing in the future, a readiness for and a right to fellowship with
the sufferings of Christ, which make it impossible for him to keep
regarding social and still less natural evils as punishment,! or to go
on fearing future punishment—impossible, for he is at the same
time received into the fellowship of the kingly office of Christ. Thus,
owing to faith, the consciousness of sin will become the conscious-
ness of forgiveness of sin. And in regard to the second element of
conversion, Christ cannot live in us without His relation to His
Father being formed in us also and making us sharers in His son-
ship ; this is the power to be children of God that flows from Him,
and it includes the guarantee of sanctification. For it is the
children’s right to be brought up to a free, active share in the home-
life ; and it is the law of childhood that through the shared life
the likeness of the father develops in the child.

The two elements are therefore inseparable. Divine adoption
would be nothing without forgiveness, for to deserve punishment
begets fear, and fear slavery. And forgiveness without adoption
would not fix a settled relation to God. The two, however, in their
indissoluble connexion, constitute that complete transformation of
the relation to God which, as bound up with the putting off the old
man, is forgiveness, and as bound up with the putting on the new
man is adoption. The two are so mutually conditioned that either
can be regarded as first in order. One can say if one likes that the
feeling of the old life must first be wiped out before the new life
can begin to take shape ; but just as well that only in the new life
is found the right and the power to throw off the old. It is equally
true to assert that after a man is forgiven he is made a child of God,
and that after he is received among God’s children he obtains the
forgiveness of sins.

3. This exposition of the matter is indeed readily liable to
the misconstruction that each man justifies himself, although in
point of fact it traces everything back to the influence of Christ.
But truly, deriving justification entirely as it does from conversion,
it would appear to ascribe both justification and conversion wholly
to Christ and so to harmonize completely with the view that the two
elements of regeneration are related to one another as sharing
respectively in the perfection and in the blessedness of Christ, and
are thus referred entirely to Him. That is a position for which an


1 Rom, 82% 39-89.


500 THE CHRISTIAN FAITH [§ 109


exact confessional basis can be found,! although it certainly diverges
far from the prevailing fashion of basing justification alone on a
divine activity and attributes both forgiveness and adoption in a
special way to God.2. The same thing is demanded by our own
method of statement, where justification is described as a change
in the relation to God. For in that, of course, an activity of God
is implied, and man can be conceived only as passive. In regard
to this last point we have already put ourselves in harmony with
the prevailing view by not ascribing everything in this connexion
to the activity of the convert, even though it be an activity con-
ditioned and evoked by Christ (as if justification were a part of
sanctification or its result), but by deriving it entirely from the
influence of Christ producing faith in man’s living susceptibility.
In regard to the first point, however, we have to see how the formula
of a divine act of justification stands related to what has been
said.

In this connexion it is clear, first, that we cannot conceive this
divine activity as independent of the agency of Christ in con-
version, as if one might exist without the other. This follows from
the position already taken, that justification itself and conversion
are interdependent ; just as in the Church formula which declares
faith to be the receptive organ for this act of justification, which it
could not be if the act were not received. In devotional poetry and
prose this connexion is usually set forth in its bearing on the inter-
cession of Christ, as if Christ indicated to God those in whom He
had wrought faith and urged Him to give them their share in
forgiveness and adoption. This is of course a very poetic manner
of putting things, for it is materializing things greatly to imagine
Christ pointing out something to God. But neither in this positive
nor in the other negative formula is there any dependence of the
divine activity on the activity of Christ or its result, not even in the
intermediate form of its being motived by Christ. For the decision
as to who is to attain to conversion and when we have already

‘Conf. Belg. xx.: Necessarium est enim aut omnia quae ad salutem
nostram requiruntur in Jesu Christo non esse, aut si in eo sunt omnia, tum
eum, qui fide Jesum possidet, totam salutem habere.

* This is also scriptural, if we venture to assume that the expression


‘justify,’ as here expounded, corresponds to the Pauline dicaréoar; this comes
out most strikingly in Rom. 8°,


’ Confessional formule, too, state this inseparability, though often
hesitatingly, and in language the content of which becomes clear only after
a careful comparison, e.g. Expos. simpl. xv.: Itaque iustificationis bene-
ficlum non partimur partim gvatiae Dei vel Christo partim nobis . . . sed
in solidum gvatiae Dei an Christo per fidem tribuimus.


§ 109] THE JUSTIFYING DECREE 501


assigned, not to the realm of grace, making it depend on Christ,
but to the realm of power, making it depend on God; which is
the Father’s drawing men to the Son.

In the second place, if we would as far as possible avoid figurative
language and speak in exact dogmatic terms, we can as little here as
elsewhere admit an act in time eventuating at a particular moment
or an act directed upon an individual. All that can be individual
or temporal is the effect of a divine act or decree, not the act or
decree itself. Only in so far as the dogmatic treatment makes
its starting-point the self-consciousness of the individual, and
therefore in this case the consciousness of an alteration in the relation
to God, can we think of the justifying action of God as bearing on
the individual. Because everyone connects this alteration with
others involved in it, that bearing appears simultaneous with these
others ; but only thus far and in this respect is such an individual-
izing and temporalizing of divine activity permissible. It must
never be regarded as something in and for itself, as if the justi-
fication of each individual rested on a distinct and separate divine
decree—not even though it should be described as determined from
all eternity and only passing into reality at a fixed point in time.
There is only one eternal and universal decree justifying men for
Christ’s sake. This decree, moreover, is the same as that which
sent Christ on His mission, for otherwise that mission would have
been conceived and determined by God without its consequences.
And once more, the decree that sent Christ forth is one with the
decree creating the human race, for in Christ first human nature
is brought to perfection. Indeed, since thought and will, will and
action are not to be sundered in God, all this is one divine act
designed to alter our relation to God; its temporal manifesta-
tion is seen in the incarnation of Christ from which the whole
new creation proceeds, and in which it has its starting-point.
Thenceforward the promulgation in time of this divine act is
really a continuous one, but in its effects it appears to us in
as many points separated and (as it were) strung out from one
another, as there are different people whose union with Christ is
accomplished.

Turning now to justification in its two elements, we must
similarly say that to admit an individual decree of forgiveness and
adoption would be to subject God to the antithesis of abstract and
concrete, or universal and particular, since the decree of redemption


1 Cf. Gerhard, iv. p. 147.


502 THE CHRISTIAN FAITH [§ 109


is just the universal in its two particular bearings. Besides, the
consciousness of guilt and of penal desert being ordained for men
by God only in relation to redemption, that is, only as something
which everywhere and for everyone vanishes with the entrance of
redemption into his life, no special decree or act is necessary for its
cessation. All that is needful is that the consciousness of its
cessation should arise in the individual. How this happens in
connexion with conversion has been shown. Similarly with refer-
ence to adoption, it is already implied in the divine decree of
redemption or of the new creation of human nature that God is
gracious to the human race in His Son; hence an individual act
making the individual an object of the divine love is not necessary.
All that is needful is that the consciousness of this relation should
arise in the individual; and this happens in the way already
described. Thus we have to posit only one universal justifying
divine act bearing on redemption, and this realizes itself gradually
in time.

In the third place and finally, we cannot pass over the fact that
this exposition seems to conceal one other divergence from the
view prevailing in our Church. For in our Church the divine act
is regarded as declaratory ; the converted man ‘is declared just ’
by God ; and in such an exposition no room at all seems to be left
for this phrase which indicates the opposition between our own
Church and the Roman. But the truth is this. The phrase in
question certainly goes back to what is here denied, namely, a
multiplicity of divine justifying acts or decrees. For in regard to
a single universal decree it is not easy to conceive how it could be
declaratory in particular cases. God ordained the Redeemer
because through Him sin was to be taken away and men become
children of God. But in God thought and will are one. He expresses
thought by deed, and through preaching the deed propagates the
thought. A special act, therefore, by which God—so we should
have to state the matter—declared to Himself what He in another
act performs, would be an utterly empty thing. This form of
representation, so common in the Old Testament, is simply one of
its anthropomorphisms. Looked at more closely, however, any
individual declaratory act is in the same case. It cannot as such
prevent a recurrence of the consciousness of being concerned in
the production of sin, and to that extent would be vain. So also
would be a declaration of sonship ; for that is not in itself capable
of preventing a man from being conscious of sharing in enmity to


§ 109] SHES USTIpvING ACT 503


God. Such an act attains reality only as combined with the influ-
ence of Christ in effecting conversion. But this also being traceable
to the universal divine ordinance, the declaratory act is again
merged in the creative act. Since, however, with faith there arises
a simultaneous consciousness of forgiveness and of adoption, it is
quite right to say that every act of conversion is for the man himself
a declaration of the universal divine decree to justify for Christ’s
sake. But as regards our relation to the Roman Church, it is only
superficially that our opposition to it seems to lie in this point of
the declaratory character of the divine justifying act, and that
Church will assuredly be very far from accepting the mode in which
this character is here denied. For we still hold to this, that a man
is justified as soon as faith has been wrought in him ;! the interest
of Rome, on the contrary, is to establish that this takes place
afterwards by means of good works.

4. The final point in regard to this distinctively Protestant
doctrine that we are justified by faith—that is, that the application
of the universal divine justifying act to the individual is bound up
with and conditioned by the dawn of faith—is this. The doctrine
is all the more necessary if justification be conceived as a purely
declaratory act. Otherwise colour might be lent to the notion that
a man has redemption assigned to him in a method which is arbitrary
—a method, that is, which, as far as he himself is concerned, is
baseless. Yet even if we do not sunder the effective and the de-
claratory, it is needful to fix the point when, and the manner how,
the justifying divine act completes itself in man. On this our
theorem makes these pronouncements.

The first is that although once forgiveness and adoption exist,
the man is the object of divine favour and love, this does not
happen until he lays hold believingly on Christ.2- This does not in
the least mean that previously he was the object of divine dis-
pleasure and wrath, for there is no such object. But the word
‘overlooked’ [English A.V. ‘winked at’], used in another con-
nexion, has here its specific sense, inasmuch as for God the individual
is not previously a personality at all in this reference, but merely
a part of the mass out of which persons come to exist through


1 Conf. Belg. xxiv.: Fide utique in Christum iustificamur, et quidem
priusquam bona opera praestiterimus.—A pol. Conf. ii.: . .. quod fides
sit ipsa iustitia, qua coram Deo iusti reputamur .. . quia accipit pro-
missionem . . . seu quia sentit quod Christus sit nobis factus a Deo sapientia
iustitia sanctificatio et redemtio.

2 Atqui extra controversiam est neminem a Deo extra Christum diligi


504 THE CHRISTIAN FAITH [§ 109


the continuance of the creative act from which came the
Redeemer.!

But since faith arises only through the agency of Christ, it is
clearly implied in our theorem that no natural constitution of man,
nothing that takes shape in him independently of the whole series
of gracious workings mediated by Christ, alters his relation to God,
or effects his justification, and that no merit of any kind avails for
this. From this it follows immediately that before justification all
men are equal before God, despite the inequalities of their sins or
their good works ; this is in harmony with the self-consciousness of
everyone who finds himself in fellowship with Christ, as he reviews
his former share in the common life of sin.

The second point is this. Since, as has been laid down, sharing
in the blessedness of Christ is involved in justification, as sharing in
His perfection is involved in conversion, and since faith needs no
supplement, it follows that faith gives blessedness (saves), and
indeed in such wise that the blessedness cannot be increased from
any quarter, 7.¢. faith alonesaves. For anything that could increase
the blessedness could have originated it. This blessedness indeed
is such that only in the smallest degree does it admit of maxima or
minima, but as far as possible is constant. For just as the union
of the divine with the human nature in Christ remained the same
through all experience and development, so our union with Christ
in faith remains always the same.

On the other hand—and this is the third pronouncement—our
exposition of the facts certainly does not lead up to the customary
formule that faith is the causa instrumentalis, or the dpyavov
Anmruxov Of justification. These formule, liable to many mis-
understandings, are not greatly fitted to throw light upon the
subject. A productive cause has no place as an essential constituent
in the course of the series of activities for which it is employed.
Having done its part, it is laid aside. But faith abideth always.
A receptive organ, on the other hand, belongs to the sphere of nature ;
and the above formula might give the impression that faith is
something which everyone has to produce in order that divine
grace may become effective ; whereas we bring with us nothing
except our living susceptibility, which is the real receptive organ.
It is perhaps this formula that has betrayed many theologians into


‘Sola gratia redemtos discernit a perditis, quos in unam _perditionis
concreverat massam ab origine ducta causa communis (Augustin., Enchir,
Xxix.),


§ 110] SANCTIFICATION 505


maintaining the position that faith must be our own work, and
that only when this work has been accomplished can the operation
of divine grace begin.


SECOND DOCTRINE: SANCTIFICATION


§ 110. In living fellowship with Christ the natural powers of the
regenerate ave put at His disposal, whereby there is produced
a life akin to His perfection and blessedness ; and this ts
the state of Sanctification.


1. The retention of the term ‘sanctification ’ is justified because
it is scriptural. But as it depends on a rather indefinite concept of
the holy, a concept which divergent interpretations and usages
have made yet more intricate, a still further exposition is necessary
if it is to be used in Dogmatics. The first etymological considera-
tion that has to be taken into account is the Old Testament use of
the word for everything separated from ordinary social life and
devoted to some use relating to God. This relation to God, how-
ever, makes no difference in any activity due to an impulse pro-
ceeding from Christ ; for since it is produced by the absolutely
powerful God-consciousness of Christ, it of itself includes severance
from participation in the common sinful life. And fellowship being
essential to human nature, this of itself supplies a basis for an active
tendency to a new common life ; just as, owing to its Old Testament
use noted above, the expression carries with it the priestly dignity
of all Christians and represents the new common life as a spiritual
temple. So that the state of sanctification too may be regarded
as service in this temple. This close connexion with characteristic-
ally Christian ideas makes the retention of the old term in the
vocabulary of Dogmatics all the more desirable in view of the
temptation at this point to snatch at expressions which tend to
obscure what is peculiarly Christian in the spirit of the new life,
and make it harder to distinguish the Christian development
from a gradual attainment of perfection along purely natural
lines.

The second consideration is the connexion of the term with
holiness as a Divine attribute ; for of course we hold by the inter-
pretation of this given above.! It is, however, also clear that the
regenerate man, through the manner of life that we are now going
to describe in more detail, develops a conscience also in others, in

i CPPS Be


506 THE CHRISTIAN FAITH [§ 110


proportion as all his activities diverge from what happens in the
common sinful life.

In both its aspects, however, we cannot call this condition
holiness—that is, being holy—but sanctification, which means becom-
ing holy, sanctifying oneself ; which we call sanctification, because
it is a striving for holiness. If the meaning were being holy, it
would imply that a complete transformation had occurred at the
moment of regeneration, every link with the sinful common life
entirely ceasing, and the whole nature being completely and instan-
taneously penetrated by the life of Christ and brought under His
sway. This change would then be all a part of regeneration, and
there would be no doctrine to state about what later develops
out of it.

Sanctification, then, being understood to be progressive—so that
the content of time-experience becomes from the turning-point of
regeneration ever further removed from what preceded that crisis,
and ever approximates more to pure harmony with the impulse
issuing from Christ, and therefore to indistinguishability from
Christ Himself—we have the two points of view from which sancti-
fication has to be considered.

2. First then, if we compare the state of one who is in process
of being sanctified with what existed before regeneration, it is pre-
ferable to dwell not on points of difference from the moments in
which the mastery of sinfulness was earlier manifested, but rather
on the difference from those moments which previously came under
preparatory grace. These preparatory workings we cannot limit
to approximations to repentance and faith in thought and emotion ;
they are also to be seen in action ; for it is contrary to nature that
lively thoughts and strong feelings should have no influence on
concurrent actions—stronger or weaker, of course, in proportion to
their affinity. Indeed, it is possible that with the frequent repetition
of similar influences, the active effects occur more and more easily
and become habits. In each separate case, however, the impulse
to the alteration of action comes from without and remains effective
only for so long as the momentary emotion endures ; it is not ina
position to reproduce itself from within, as witness the common
feeling of having under external compulsion done something quite
foreign to one’s nature. Such actions are not the doer’s own ; they
belong to an external life that is showing its power within him.
Deeds therefore which resemble those of the state of sanctification,
but are not rooted in the regeneration of the doer, are properly


§ 110] THE NEW LIFE AND THE OLD 507


deeds of the Christian common life exercising its power over the
individual. It is thus also with habits formed in the same way, as
is best seen by reference to the illustration used in Scripture about
strangers and fellow-citizens.1 The latter out of the inner power
of their common indwelling characteristic spirit establish law and
custom among themselves, and thus their acts are wholly in
character. Strangers have no part in the formation of either ; they
have no formative power in themselves and merely accommodate
themselves to custom, acting in many ways according to it even
when no demand has been made on them. But if they return to
their own country where these foreign influences no longer surround
them, they divest themselves with the utmost ease of every adopted
habit. It is therefore not the form, and still less the numerical
value of separate actions or series of actions that differentiates the
state of sanctification from the condition before regeneration. It
is the fact that unwillingness to remain in the common life in which
sin is ever being propagated has become a power of repulsion, con-
stantly at work in the form of an essential tendency of being, while
in itself this is but the consequence of having surrendered to the
receptive influence of Christ ; a surrender which throughout the
entire sphere of spontaneous activity has consolidated itself as a
steadfast willingness to be controlled by Him.

This is still the only tenable distinction if, conversely, we look
back on the old life from the standpoint of the new. That strength
of the God-consciousness is not original ; it is a gift which becomes
ours only after sin has developed its power ; and what has emerged
in time can be removed in time only by its opposite. Hence not
merely is approximation to the goal delayed by the fact that what
have become habitual and therefore often and easily provoked sins
have to be countered by the aforesaid power of repulsion, but inas-
much as the sinfulness of each has a ground in existence prior to
him and external to him, his sin cannot be perfectly blotted out,
but remains always something in process of disappearance. In so
far as it has not yet disappeared, it may make itself visible, and
acts will occur within the state of sanctification similar to those
common before regeneration, where what emerges is the power of
the sinful common life, whereas the traces of preparatory grace lie
deeply hidden. Nay more; since even in sanctification growth
does not take place without a preliminary struggle between the old
man and the new, this struggle cannot at any point in its whole

Bphyaeh.


508 THE CHRISTIAN FAITH [§ 110


course be viewed as an even advance to increase in the power of the
one and decrease in the power of the other. By the influence of the
sinful common life around us our own sinfulness is constantly being
stirred up again. In itself it might be steadily limited by the
growth of the new man, but this cannot equally be said of the
reinforcements it receives from without. At least in view of the
variegated changes in this sphere, where in the most irregular and
unforeseen ways the individual life is held in grip, more firmly or
more slackly, by the common sinful life, it could only be explained
by a special miracle, and not by the ordinary course of divine grace
among men, if in that struggle there were not special moments
when the power of sin came out more strongly than in the earlier
moments. Even after regeneration, then, many and varied con-
ditions appear, among others repentance, and this by no means
always merely in the form of slight compunction for trifles. But
this repentance is distinguished from every previous repentance by
the fixed inward resolution to be no longer under the power of sin,
and is to be conceived as a vanishing quantity in the same way as
the repentance which, so long as even in obedience some opposition
to the impulses proceeding from Christ makes itself felt, accompanies
all actions which appear as fruits of this obedience, yet also show
traces of opposition. Even if these intermittent evidences of the
continued presence of sin make particular instants, as compared
with others, seem relapses, none the less a settled consciousness
remains that the longer the series of such fluctuations observed, the
greater is the advance seen to be on the whole, and that the certainty
of faith as an understanding of what union with Christ means and
as a delight in that union is always increasing, so that in the powers
put at Christ’s disposal sin can never win fresh ground, while all
the time it is being dislodged from its former positions. It is chiefly
by this fact, that sin can win no new ground, that the state of
sanctification is most definitely distinguished from all that went
before.

3. If now, on the other hand, we consider how this condition
approximates to likeness to Christ, there has above been drawn a
boundary line which it is not given to us to overstep. From the
beginning of His incarnation onwards Christ developed in every
way naturally yet constantly and uninterruptedly in organic union
with the indwelling principle of His life, and in its service. To no
other who brings with him a personality that has shared the common
life of sinfulness is this vouchsafed. This difference from Christ


g§110] LIKENESS AND UNLIKENESS TO CHRIST 509


must, strictly speaking, be there at every moment, and it will come
into actual consciousness in proportion to the clarity of our self-
consciousness in relation to the divine—that is, our illumination.
For wherever there is imperfection, especially such as not merely
represents the form of development in time, but is a real imperfec-
tion touching the relation between deed and motive, there will also
be a basis for the recollection, and to that extent for an actual
realization, of the old life; and therefore even in moments really
involving an advance in likeness to Christ, there will also exist a
consciousness of sin. But this does not prevent union with Christ
from being operative in every moment of the state of sanctifica-
tion ; and thus at every moment that life merits the description
given in our proposition.

This is already involved in the analogy suggested—namely,
that regeneration may be regarded as the divine act of union with
human nature and sanctification as the state constituted by that
union. Just as that act of union would have been an empty
illusion had it not produced an enduring state of living union in
which the two elements were inseparable, the human nature in all
its performances proving itself the instrument of the divine power,
so the activity of divine power in Christ that in regeneration flows
out from Him and unites individuals to Himself would be nothing
at all, would be indistinguishable from the most fleeting and super-
ficial impulses, and as far as possible from being the end of the old
life and the beginning of the new, unless that act showed itself
operative in every moment in time, making every moment a re-
capitulation of the first, and, as it were, a being laid hold of afresh
by the receptive activity of Christ—every moment thus including
in itself a new determination to live not for self but in fellowship
with Christ. Taken together, these two things involve the sinless
perfection of Christ and, for the introspective self-consciousness,
His blessedness. To make clear here, too, the limits of the likeness
and the difference, we shall have to distinguish a constant and a
variable within this growing correspondence between the elements
of our life and the impulses proceeding from Christ. Viewed as a
renewal of regeneration every moment is like every other, and is a
participation in the perfection and blessedness of Christ ; for with-
out this no reception into fellowship with Him is possible. This
constant is in its one aspect the ever self-renewed willing of the
Kingdom of God, on which every single act and resolve of Christ
was based. In its other aspect it is the consciousness of the union


510 THE CHRISTIAN BATH [§ 111


of the Divine Essence with human nature through Christ, as was
the case in Christ in every detail of His self-consciousness. All this
is participation in blessedness, since union with the Supreme Being
is absolute satisfaction ; it is equally participation in sinless perfec-
tion, for the kingdom of God excludes all sin, yet includes strength
for all good. The variable factor, i.e. everything else occurring
as a particular item in the life of the regenerate, lies within the
limits so drawn. Particular actions show in their execution more
or less sin, and so do particular purposes. The actual individual
self-consciousness bears witness to this in many a moment of
sorrow, where the sorrow is assuaged by the simultaneous presence
of the constant factor. At other moments the self-consciousness
is a joy that passes into humility because its only right to exist is
found in what assuages the sorrow lying so near it.

Any further doctrine there is to formulate concerning the state
of sanctification must bear upon this antithesis between the element
that belongs to the starting-point and the element that belongs
to the goal.


First THEOREM: THE SINS OF THE REGENERATE


§ 111. Since they are continually being combated, the sins of those in
the state of sanctification always carry their forgiveness with
them and have no power to annul the divine grace of
regeneration.


1. Taking together the two propositions just laid down, namely,
that in the state of sanctification no new sins develop, and that in
all moments, in all acts and works, even in the best and likest to
Christ, some trace of sin exists belonging to the former state, it
becomes clear that in the state of sanctification there can be no sin
which could make regeneration nugatory. For every sinful act
includes a resistance on the part of the new man, albeit not a per-
sistent or successful resistance ; and therefore in such acts, just as
much as in those where the old man is overborne, the new man is
seen to be active, and therefore still alive. It is, of course, only in
moments of defeat that anyone has ever fancied that the state of
grace might be lost ; yet in this region there is no definite contrast
between defeat and victory, but only a distinction of less or more in
which no definite point can be fixed at which the result begins to be


1 Expos. simpl. xvi.: Sunt multa praeterea indigna Deo, et imperfecta
plurima inveniuntur in operibus etiam sanctorum.—Conf. Belg. xxiv.: Nullum
enim opus facere possumus, quod non est carnis vitio pollutum.


§ 111] THE SINS OF THE REGENERATE 511


fatal. If we do seek to establish such a contrast, pronouncing this
a sinful act and that a good work, we are merely naming it by its
preponderating quality. In some cases, indeed, the difference seems
almost infinite ; yet if the sin be the deed of a regenerate man, it
cannot be the same sin as a sin ever so like it in the unregenerate ;
if only for this reason, that in it as in his good works a constant
element is present. Everyone who observes himself or others will
note acts which fluctuate between the two descriptions, and cases
in which it is adventitious circumstances that tip the balance one
way or the other, making the same action at one time a good work
though on the point of becoming a sin, and at another time a sin
instead of a good work. The state of grace cannot possibly be lost
in the first case and not in the second. The principle we here go by,
namely, that in the state of sanctification no new sin can develop,
seems rather indefinite. No action is quite identical with any
previous action, and it is not every sin that is a novelty. The
labelling, therefore, of any given action as novel seems to depend on
a rather arbitrary estimate of the degree in which it is to be regarded
as akin or similar to previous actions—a point of which, strictly
speaking, a man can judge only for himself. This, and no more,
can be laid down in general terms. Taking regeneration in the
sense we have given it, and assuming that only subsequent to it a
sense-function develops which previously was latent, or that rela-
tions are formed so entirely new that they awaken an echo in those
elements of our being in which sin previously resided, everyone must
confess that it is inconceivable that such a function or such relations
should develop in sinful fashion. And in the same way, if in an
individual we conceive of any function or relation whatsoever which
by personal idiosyncrasy or the influence of training and social
morality, was kept so constantly pure even before regeneration that
no sin ever arose out of it, it is unthinkable that after regeneration
sin should effect an entrance at that point. What follows is clear
enough. In every case where sin appears to have entered we must
say either that the sin is not really new, but belongs to a former
period and has simply been revived ; or else that regeneration has
not been of a right and true kind, inasmuch as sinfulness has borne
new fruit.

Also from another point of view we must reject the proposition
contradictory of ours. The assertion that a regenerate man,
though a new man, might by an act lose the grace of regeneration
stands in the closest connexion with the idea already rejected, that


512 THE CHRISTIAN FAITH [§ 111


our first parent could by an act lose the characteristics he still had
while acting. If the reply be made that grace is not lost by the act
of the new man, but by his not acting, this again conflicts with the
assumption that regeneration is the beginning of the life of Christ
in us, a life which necessarily is action. In fact, it is evident, just
as before, that however such a destructive action might be con-
ceived, the grace of regeneration would have to have been lost
previously. Indeed, loyalty to the concept of regeneration permits
us another analogy. It would be through the co-operation of the
very impulses proceeding from Christ that a man would have to
proclaim his severance from living fellowship with Christ, just as,
in the case of the Evil Spirit, it was through the very powers that
made him most akin to God that he broke away from that relation
—the same result following in each case.

Finally, if we return to the problem of how we are definitely
to differentiate the condition of sanctification (whether it can be
lost or not) from the condition obtaining within the common life
of sinfulness (though under the influence of preparatory grace), the
problem forces us to make a distinction between the work of divine
grace on men and in and through men. If the latter be not a purely
momentary thing, ever ebbing again, and equivalent to no more
than inspiration, it goes without saying that it must be continuous ;
for if even this work of grace could be imagined as ceasing, its
duration, whether long or short, would always make it a mere
inspiration. The proposition contradictory of ours, therefore, must
choose between a self-effected alteration of man’s own nature, and
a voluntary self-withdrawal of divine grace previous to the decisive
action, just as before the fall of man a withdrawal is supposed
to have taken place of an extraordinary, restraining divine
grace. It seems impossible, therefore, that the doctrine opposed to
ours can in this conceptual form be derived from the self-conscious-
ness of one who is conscious of divine grace. For even if we concede
that a moment of regeneration is not capable of being definitely
isolated in perceptible self-consciousness, and also that the assur-
ance of a form of life antagonistic to the former condition does not
at once supervene, still we must agree that in actual experience the
manifestations of the new life become ever more continuous, and
that confidence in the endurance of this living union with Christ
thus becomes more and more a feature of the perceptible self-con-
sciousness, for in spite of all fluctuations an increasing sway of the
life of Christ over the flesh marks out the state of sanctification


§ 111] FALLING AWAY 513


This natural confidence answering to the fact of regeneration can be
expressed in thought only by the first half of our theorem, and not
by its contradictory.

2. Even though they are backed by teachers of repute, and have
made their way into more than one confessional document, the
opposing formule, that faith may be lost,! that justification may
be lost, and that grace may be lost,? have the less claim on our
acceptance that other credal statements clearly expressing the con-
fidence of our theorem are (in part explicitly, in part by implication)
on our side.*

If we compare these differing statements with one another,
certain facts emerge. First, the concept of falling away and the
fallen, and the intrusion of a reference to baptism show that the
formule opposed to ours are connected with old ecclesiastical
decisions which rightly stood out against a harsh desire to exclude
certain people. But those falling away, lapsing outwardly from
the faith and forsaking the Church, had not necessarily lost faith
inwardly : they abjured only outwardly through fear: that is to
say, it was merely in courage they were imperfect. Nor were the


1 Epit. artic. iv.: Credimus . . . cum dicitur renatos bene operari libero
et spontaneo spiritu, id non ita accipiendum esse, quod. . . nihilominus
tamen fidem retineat (scil. homo renatus) etiamsi in peccatis ex proposito
perseveret.—Ibid.: reprobamus dogma illud, quod fides in Christum non
amittatur . . . etiamsi (homo) sciens volensque peccet.

2 Melanchth., Joc. pp. 124 and 276: Necesse est autem discernere peccata
quae in renatis in hac vita manent ab illis peccatis, propter quae amittuntur
gratia et fides . . . est igitur actuale mortale in labente post reconcilia-
tionem actio interior vel exterior pugnans cum lege Dei facta contra conscien-
tiam—nec potest stare cum malo proposito contra conscientiam fides.—A ugs.
Conf. xii.: ‘. . . that those who have sinned after baptism can always, if they
are converted, receive forgiveness. . . . Hereby those are repudiated who teach
that such as have once become religious can never fall away.’—Declar. Thorun.
xi. p. 421: Quasi statuamus semel iustificatos Dei gratiam eiusve certitudinem

. non posse amittere quamvis in peccatis pro lubitu volutentur. Cum
contra potius doceamus, ipsos etiam renatos quoties in peccata contra con-
scientiam recidunt, in iisque aliquamdiu perseverant, nec fidem vivam nec Dei
gratiam iustificantem nedum elus certitudinem . . . pro illo tempore retinere,
etc.—Reinh., Dogm., § 127, is careful to take the main proposition, ipsum tamen
justificationis decretum in Deo mutabile non est, along with that (zb7d. 2.) that
a man can be justified more than once in his life. For as often as he receives
faith once more after the occurrence of a moral lapse the decretum justificans


related to this faith must again take place in God. See § 128: .. . iusti-
ficatio . . . neglecta fide iterum potest amitti. ; ‘

3 Expos. simpl. xvi.: Eadem (fides) retinet nos in officio.—Conf. Gall.
xxi.: . . . credimus fidem electis dari, ut non semel tantum in rectam viam


introducantur, quin potius ut in ea ad extremum usque pergant.—Sol.
decl., p. 802: Deus proposuit se iustificatos etiam in multiplici et varia
ipsorum infirmitate ... defensurum . . . et si lapsi fuerint, manum sup-
positurum ut ad vitam conserventur.—Augustine’s sentence is relevant at
this point: Ego autem id esse dico peccatum ad mortem, fidem quae per
dilectionem operatur deserere usque ad mortem (De corr. et grat. 35).


oo


514 THE CHRISTIAN FAITH (§ x11


baptized all regenerate then any more than now. Such, therefore,
as forsook Christianity, to enjoy perhaps more sensual freedom,
had not been completely laid hold of and were not yet possessed
of genuine faith and justification. Secondly, as soon as this same
concept ‘falling away’ is applied to our present circumstances in
the same sense that it involves loss of faith or justification, the
question what sort of sin it is that occasions this loss is answered in
very different ways. To sin with knowledge and with will, to sin
deliberately, and to continue in deliberate sin, are widely different.*
Taking the two extremes, the first belongs to that fluctuating less or
more found in everyone who is in the state of sanctification, where
even the imperfection of a good work is often enough known and
willed ; the second, deliberate continuance in a knowing and com-
plete resistance, is obviously a case where regeneration has been
only apparent. Thirdly, it is beyond doubt that if the doctrine of
the inadmissibility of justifying divine grace (or, better expressed,
the absolute trustworthiness of such grace) has not become an
accepted dogma of the Church, this is entirely due to the controversy
with the Roman Church and the polemic against fanatical sects ; as
indeed every dogmatic proposition which cannot be made good by
analysis of the Christian self-consciousness must have its basis
either in speculation or in some similarly external ground. This is
clear enough for the further reason that it also covers the case of
one continuing in sin deliberately. The fanatical caricature of this
doctrine, which rests solely on an inward certainty of feeling, and
enlarges the thesis by inverting it and giving it the form that what-
ever the regenerate man does is right or at least permissible, is quite
familiar, but finds no support in the formula here adopted. So, too,
the inference that the Roman Church seeks to draw from the doctrine
of justification by faith is amply guarded against by our presupposi-
tion that the regenerate continuously struggles against sin. As for
the wanton abuse of the doctrine, there is just as much excuse for it
in the doctrine that one can always be converted again if one falls
from grace as in the doctrine that the sins which may be committed
by a regenerate man do not annul his state of grace. It is, however,
much more in accord with our line of argument to meet the objec-
tion in view by saying that one who seeks such a subterfuge does
not really want to struggle against sin and is therefore not regenerate ;
this whole doctrine has nothing whatever to do with his case. No
ground therefore remains for seeking to improve upon the simple


1 See above, § 74.


§ 111] FORGIVENESS OF THE REGENERATE 515


unforced utterance of the evangelical Christian self-consciousness
by a preamble made up of additions untenable in themselves and
confusing in their effect.

3. Neither is the declaration that in the state of sanctification
sins always carry their forgiveness with them intended to mean that
the regenerate man is conscious of forgiveness while he is sinning,
or that he sins in and with this consciousness ; the sin must come
to consciousness as an accomplished fact and as accompanied by
repentance ; for forgiveness and repentance are mutually dependent.
But this is certain, that resistance, even if not fortunate and vic-
torious, is a presage of repentance, and hence too of the consciousness
of forgiveness. The real meaning is simply that what is true of the
concept of justification as a whole is true of this particular part of
it. The gracious forgiveness of sins is not an individual decree or
act bearing on the single life, nor is it merely declaratory ; it is one
that emancipates from the sphere of guilt and penal desert, and
one that is general—being fulfilled, indeed, at some point of time
for each individual, but being then really fulfilled, and needing no
repetition. For the divine omniscience cannot in the act of for-
giving sins regard them as altogether blotted out at the moment
of regeneration, but only as gradually vanishing. If conversion be
this turning-point, yet so that sin none the less reappears later,
then even subsequent to it there must in consciousness be a relation
to this act, though naturally an altered relation. In the life under
the dominion of common sinfulness, sin is common guilt, and sins
are not reckoned separately to individuals ; each has his share in
the common guilt and nothing is separately forgiven him. In
the state of sanctification the converse is the case. Redemption
is possible only in the form of a common life, and sin has its basis,
strictly speaking, not in this common life, but only in the individual,
in so far as he still has something in him of the old common life of
sin. His is therefore not a guilt appertaining to the common life
but to him as an individual, and it is so reckoned. It is only an
apparent contradiction that sins are reckoned to him, and are yet
always forgiven; not only because forgiveness itself is always a
kind of reckoning, but because it is the only kind of reckoning that
enters here. Sins are reckoned personally to the natural person
who has passed out of the sinful common life into the new life, and
indeed more personally to him than to one who still belongs to the
old common life; they are not reckoned to the new man who,
identifying himself with the whole through the feeling of com-


516 THE CHRISTIAN FAITH [§ 111


munity, does not carry in himself the sense of guilt. They are
forgiven him because they can be reckoned only to the old man that
he no longer is. Hence also he has the consciousness of forgiveness
as soon as he is conscious of himself as being within the new common
life. For in virtue of his willing the Kingdom of God and repudi-
ating sin the continuity of the new life has not been interrupted,
having always produced simultaneously some degree of resistance
to sin. It is self-evident that this consciousness, in whatever
degree it may be felt, cannot be simultaneous with sinning, that the
repudiation of sin can make itself felt only after the event, and that
the consciousness of forgiveness presupposes regret.

4. Since in dealing with the subject one can hardly avoid diverging
into Christian Ethics, less might be said here about the struggle
with sin itself, were it not that in this connexion too misunder-
standings have arisen. It has now been made quite clear that in
the state of sanctification the danger each is in of falling into sin
comes from those departments of the sensuous life which before
regeneration had exercised most power, and has its seat in those
relations where habits in accordance with inclination were most
easily formed. This sphere, within which le the enticements which
always are hardest to resist entirely, is the sphere of temptation
for the individual. Now in everyone the activity of the life of Christ,
issuing from His will for the Kingdom of God, defines itself by the
demands that meet him in virtue of his position within the common
life. That will takes shape in certain fixed aims ; and these come
to constitute a continuous will as the law of Christian morality
begins to embrace the whole of life. Hence the sphere of temptation
must lie within this sphere of vocation, taking that word in its
widest sense. There can be no struggle against our own sin other
than the struggle against the sin we actually encounter in the
course of our activity in the Kingdom of God; and any action
taken against such sin is part of this activity. The struggle there-
fore consists simply in this, that we seek to reject or conquer the
temptations that arise in the course of this activity; and this formula
must cover the whole campaign against whatever sins are possible
within the varying course of the state of sanctification. Otherwise
two differing yet parallel demands would arise, neither of which at
any given moment could be fulfilled without infringing on the other.
Both points can be made clear, as follows. The right use of divine
forgiveness is conditioned in every case by the struggle against
sin ; but the right use of divine adoption by which, within the state


§ 112] THE GOOD WORKS OF THE REGENERATE 517


of sanctification, even after sin, that is to say at every moment (for
there is always some sin remaining), one can still say he is a child
of God, is conditioned by the liveliness and activity of faith. And
since forgiveness and adoption are one and the same, what condi-
tions each must also be one and the same. There is therefore no
such thing as a struggle at random against possible future sins,
which could only mean the suppression or weakening of sensuous
powers developed in a natural way, and injury to them as instru-
ments of the spirit. Nor are there exercises in repentance consist-
ing of special acts which do not arise out of our business in the
Kingdom of God. Still less is there room for an arbitrary flight
from the sphere of temptation which would be at the same time a
flight from the sphere of duty ; no such step could issue from our
being taken up into living fellowship with Christ. Fellowship with
Him is always a fellowship with His mission to the world, and this
such a withdrawal would contradict. What remains as the one
right course, is resistance to the temptations that actually occur.


SECOND THEOREM: THE GooD WoRKS OF THE REGENERATE


§ 112. The good works of the regenerate are natural effects of faith,
and as such are objects of divine good pleasure.


A pol. Conf. iii. : Deinde docemus, quomodo Deo placeat, si quid fit, vide-
licet non quia legi satisfacimus, sed quia sumus in Christo.—A rtic. Smale, xiii. :
Hance fidem sequuntur bona opera. Et quod in illis pollutum et imperfectum
est, pro peccato et defectu non censetur, idque etiam propter Christum :
atque ita totus homo, cum quoad personam suam tum quoad opera sua iustus
et sanctus est. . . . Dicimus practerea, ubi non sequuntur bona opera, ibi
fidem esse falsam.—E*wvpos. simpl. xvi.: Docemus enim vere bona opera
enasci ex viva fide . . . et a fidelibus fierl secundum voluntatem vel regulam
verbi Dei. . . . Etenim non probantur Deo opera et nostro arbitrio delecti
cultus, . . . placent vero approbanturque a Deo quae a nobis fiunt per fidem,
quia illi placent Deo propter fidem in Christum, quia faciunt opera bona. . .
docemus Deum bona operantibus amplam dare mercedem. . . . Referimus
tamen hanc mercedem non ad meritum hominis accipientis.—Conf. Mylhus.
vili.: . . . quamvis haec (fides) per opera caritatis se sine intermissione
exerceat . . . attamen iustitiam et satisfactionem pro peccatis nostris non
tribuimus operibus quae fidei fructus sunt.—Conf. Belg. xxiv.: Atque haec
opera, quae a bona fidei radice proficiscuntur, coram Deo bona eique accepta
sunt. .. . Facimus igitur bona quidem opera, sed neutiquam ut iis pro-
mereamur. . . . Interim tamen non negamus Deum bona opera remunerari.
—Conf. Angl. xiv. : Opera, quae supererogationis appellant, non possunt sine
arrogantia et impietate praedicari.


t. The discussions, so common in our confessional documents
and in all older expositions of doctrine, of the idea that good works


518 THE CHRISTIAN FAITH [§ 112


are not necessary for justification, we must regard as irrelevant to
the subject ; for if even the first point in the doctrine of regeneration
be conceded, the idea is such as could occur to no one. Justifica-
tion and conversion are mutually conditioned ; hence as conversion
cannot be conditioned by good works, neither is justification. And
it would be odd to put the further question whether eternal life
and blessedness are conditioned by good works. Both begin along
with faith, for both are included in what we have seen to be the
constant element existing in the soul from the moment of regenera-
tion onwards. We cannot argue this particular point with anyone
who dissents ; we should first have to refute him on other points.
Anyone who holds that good works are necessary to blessedness,
because for him faith is mere knowledge, is using a different
vocabulary from ours, or holding an entirely different doctrine of
redemption.

The most remarkable misconception, however, is that which,
in the course of this controversy, has led to the extravagant position
that good works are injurious to salvation—a position only half-
heartedly surrendered, as if there might be something in it, if only
the proposition were defined more closely and with more propriety,*
so as to avoid all offence. The fact is, that works which would be
injurious if a man put his trust in them would not be good works
at allin our sense. Anyone who does truly good works has blessed-
ness already in his faith, and therefore cannot find himself wanting
first to rely upon his works.

On the other hand, the positive statement that good works
are the natural effect of faith is so closely bound up with all that
has been said above that it needs no explanation. Allowing our-
selves to be taken up into living fellowship with Christ, we are laid
hold of by the union of the divine with the human nature in His Per-
son, and consent to this becomes a constant and active will to main-
tain and extend this union. Anything this will produces is a good
work, were it only an incipient resistance to sin. Thus it is a needless
anxiety that wants to deny that faith is conserved or retained by
good works.” If we imagine the retention of faith as if its implanting
were something transitory (which it really is not, any more than


lEpit. Artic. iv.: Repudiamus . . . nudamhanc offendiculi plenam .. .
eran bona opera noxia esse ad salutem, See also what immediately
ollows.

* Ibid. : Credimus fidem in nobis conservari aut retineri non per opera,
sed tantum per Spiritum Dei. The latter remark is not yet relevant, but is
quite true. All the same, the Holy Spirit has no other way of giving strength
to faith than by activity in works.


§ 112] FAITH AND GOOD WORKS 519


any act of recognition), then we can only conceive the life of faith
as a series of moments in which faith is always the same and un-
altered. But it is impossible to conceive two moments of faith
thus separated from one another without the first producing a
good work before the second has come into existence. Hence the
retention of faith, if for the moment we speak of such a thing, is
always mediated by good works. The right thing to say is this,
that our union with Christ in faith is, though not as completely, yet
quite as essentially, an active obedience as His life was an active
obedience of the human nature to the indwelling being of God
within Him; and our reception into living fellowship with Him
is the fruitful germ of all good works in the same way as the act of
uniting was in His case the germ of all redeeming activity. This
may also be expressed by saying that the regenerate cannot but do
good works in virtue of faith; and it is surely a vain misunder-
standing thereupon to interject the question: Are good works
also free? To ask that involves the assumption that the weakest
will, though the will most easily forced to change, is the most
free, and that the hero of faith, who does not know how to describe
his condition better than by saying that he ‘can do no other,’ is
not free. The whole living susceptibility which is the condition of
men in conversion is clearly a free condition ; so is the will for the
Kingdom of God arising from conversion, for there is no will without
freedom. To be continuously and receptively open to the influence
of Christ, and continuously active in will for His Kingdom, is the
life-process of the new man.

2. Connected with this is the question how far the good works
of the regenerate man are his own in such a sense that they can be
reckoned to him. We shall disregard to begin with the part of the
question which concerns the possibility of reward, and first answer
that which concerns the authorship of good works. If we recall
at this point the fact that there is no redemption which does not
establish a new common life to which everyone appropriating
redemption essentially belongs, two questions arise: How far do
the good works belong to the individual doing them or to Christ ?
And how far to the community or to the individual? In regard
to the first question it is self-evident that in virtue of the living
fellowship existing between them, what belongs to Christ in a good
work cannot be separated from what belongs to the individual ;
for this would be to dissolve the fellowship. A formula, however,
has to be found which will bring out the participation of both.


520 THE CHRISTIAN FAITH [§ 112


Now conversion is the beginning of sanctification, and in it Christ
alone is active, the individual being merely in a state of living
susceptibility ; yet in conversion the new life comes into being.
Hence every moment of active faith must be ascribed to Christ
in so far as the analogy with its commencement holds good, that
is, in so far as in that moment new life comes into being or is en-
hanced ; in short, in so far as it contains progress. For if we could
ourselves make the new life grow, we could make it begin. But
as in that turning-point the. new man came into being, and the will
for the Kingdom of God thus arising is our own will, every moment in
the activity of faith is to be ascribed to us and is our work, in so far
as it is an expression of this implanted will. To call the divine
grace in sanctification co-operative grace on this account is an
incorrect expression, even apart from its unhappy suggestion that
grace is thus assigned a secondary place in the authorship of good
works. For the fact is not that divine grace is working along with
what is a good work of our own, but that divine grace has here been
at work from the beginning, and what is its own it effects by itself.
The expression, however, intends to make out a third kind of grace
in addition to preparatory and effectual grace, and especially to
indicate that the regenerate man has become spontaneously active.
This intention is undoubtedly right, but since this third kind is
no less effectual than the second, a different word would describe
it better than co-operative. Now while this formula obviously
applies primarily only to the determination of the will (for in the
execution of the act imperfection and sin are always present, and
they cannot therefore be ascribed to Christ), it has already been
allowed that even in particular resolves something impure may
mingle ; hence we shall have to confine it to whatever in a good
work is of the nature of progress. If, however, we consider the
relation of the individual to the Christian common life, everything
shows as absolutely common; and it would be a misconceived
interest to try to define the participation of each in the common
activity.

3. From all this it is very easy to understand in what sense
good works are the object of divine good-pleasure. The actual
deeds, as they come into view, cannot be so, for they are at the same
time good works and sins. The object of good-pleasure is only
that element in them which is an activity of faith and an expression
of our living fellowship with Christ. Thus it is only the love in
our good works that is pleasing to God, this being, in the will for the


§ 112] GOOD WORKS MERIT NO REWARD 521


Kingdom of God, at once love to men and love to Christ and love to
God; while at the same time it is Christ’s love working in and
through us. Now, since what is sometimes there and sometimes
not cannot be an object of divine good-pleasure, this latter must
rest especially on the element that remains constant through all
moments in the state of sanctification, while also it draws to itself
and assimilates what is changing. It is therefore quite right to say
that it is really only the person, and the person only as God regards
him in Christ, that is the object of divine good-pleasure ; the works
are so regarded merely for the person’s sake. This consciousness,
necessarily involved in the will for the Kingdom of God, is the
blessedness which accompanies that will.

In this light, the question whether God rewards good works
appears very superfluous. What is our own feeling? If sonship
is involved in regeneration, and blessedness in sonship, can the
regenerate man desire or obtain a further reward? He already
possesses the implicit guarantee for every advance in sanctifica-
tion. Nor can he desire any ; for inward spirit and reward cannot
really be related to each other ; and besides, the works are sin too,
and merit no reward. This is why it is rightly held that the state
of grace leaves no room for reward. It is quite improper to give
the name ‘reward’ to a widening of one’s circle of influence, or,
what is the same thing, an enhancement of one’s powers ; that
merely offers us a further opportunity of doing things for which a
reward is given. Asa matter of fact, in all the citations from Con-
fessions which admit the idea of reward, one has the feeling that
they are only half convinced. There is all the less reason for
conceding the point that the idea of reward can be no motive to
progress in sanctification.

4. Although we have already made a distinction in the activities
of faith between what is an expression of our actual condition, and
what constitutes an advance, this cannot be stretched to mean
that there are two kinds of good works—-those that spring from
existing powers, and those that increase power. There are not
two kinds. If there were, we should be entangled in an inter-
minable and insoluble struggle. We should have to try at every
moment to do some work of each kind, and yet one of the new kinds
would always have to be postponed to the other. It can be shown,
rather, that in this sphere there can be no actions specially aimed at
enhancing our powers. With faith the will for the Kingdom of
God has come into existence. This creates for every believer,


522 THE CHRISTIAN FAITH [§ 112


in view of his individual situation in the world, challenges to
activity in the Kingdom of God, answering to the powers at his
command and his knowledge of the conditions by which he 1s
surrounded. The sum-total of these relations constitutes his sphere
of vocation, the idea of which is intimately bound up with his will
for the Kingdom of God: and all the good works of each individual
must lie within this sphere ; nothing outside vocation can be a good
work. At certain periods of life and in certain relations, acts
directed towards the discipline and the enhancement of power are
_part of a man’s vocation, and are justified on that score ; but real
discipline and enhancement of power is found in the actual pursuit
of one’s vocation, as is the case with all finite spiritual powers ;
and the more we consider the inner meaning of things, the more we
shall see that there can be no other way of it. For the power of
faith cannot be strengthened by special acts not prompted by
Christ, while those which He does prompt belong essentially to
vocation, and go to achieve something for the Kingdom of God.
Just because there are sinful ways, as well as ways well-pleasing to
God, of enhancing spiritual and sensuous powers, we must see to it
that everything that may be done for this end is justifiable as an
act of vocation. Accordingly, if by means of grace we understand
such activities as advance sanctification, and by good works the
fruits of sanctification, it follows that we recognize no means of
grace but such as are at the same time good works, and that all
good works must likewise be means of grace. There are no purely
ascetic acts, nor are there arbitrary good works—that is, good works
lying outside our vocation. Still less are there any such as, after
he had done justice to his vocation, a man might do by way of
supplement.

5. If the foregoing is the essence of sanctification, so that all
activity in the Kingdom of God and every inward development
of personality proceeds from the living power of faith and its action
through love, it can hardly be more than an accident of memory if
at this point a question crops up as to the necessity and use of law,
in whatever sense that term be taken. Something like legisla-
tion will always exist in Christian life in order in certain spheres to
guide the actions of those who lack insight. This is where civil
law and the regulations applying to every kind of art and handi-
craft come in. Such legislation is a good work in so far as it has
its basis in love ; and since it is a proceeding that involves and makes
large demands on spiritual powers, it is also a means of grace. But


§ 112] THE ABROGATION OF LAW 523


to law itself we can concede no value in the sphere of sanctification,
for love always is, and does, much more than law can be or do.
Law does not even suffice to produce the recognition of sin in
those who are being sanctified, for in itself it does not pierce behind
the outward act to the inward mood and temper. In Christ we
have a far more perfect means of recognizing sin. And Paul }
himself no longer grants even this necessity for law once faith has
been revealed. Still less can law hold before us the goal of sancti-
fication. That goal can only be behaviour ? exhibiting in all its
details the strength and purity of inward disposition, and law, as a
collection of separate precepts,? can never let us see this. Paul
therefore cites as works of the Spirit things that cannot be defined
or measured by any law, for to call propositions expressive of the
inward spirit commandments is a most inaccurate form of language.
The two commandments cited 4 by Christ as containing the whole
law are not really commands. Nor do even they set forth the goal
of sanctification in its full purity, for they exhibit love to God and
love to our neighbour as two separate things alongside of each
other. As for Christ’s one commandment,® He really means by
calling it so to contrast it with the whole law of commandments :
for His is no command ; its real analogy * is found in His own
redeeming love.

Hence one may justly say that in the Christian Church it is
neither necessary nor advisable to begin instruction about sin,
and still less about sanctification, with the Decalogue. In either
case, this can only lead to imperfect and superficial ideas. Even
though one endeavours to import into the Decalogue all kinds of
things that are not there, such a method is for one thing an oppor-
tune illustration of bad, arbitrary exegesis ; and besides, the same
result can be more easily and logically derived from the moral


1 Gal. 32° 518 even though he here speaks of the flesh lusting against the
spirit.
4 2 Eph. 418, where we are expressly pointed to the standard set by Christ.

3 yduos évtod@v év Séyuace (Eph. 21°).—Sol. decl. vi.: observandum est,
quando de bonis operibus agitur, quae /eg: Dei sunt conformia. .. quod
hoc loco vocabulum legis unam tantum rem significat : immutabilem scilicet
voluntatem Dei, secundum quam homines omnes vitae suae rationes instituere
debeant.—In this whole discussion, de tevtio usu legis, which, contrary to our
own view, upholds the notion of law within Christendom, we best see the
inexactitude of the idea underlying it, and the sort of confusion it inevitably
sets up.

WW A GPP Ee * Johner5*2:

6 Conf. Gall. xxiii.: Credimus omnes legis figuras adventu Jesu Christi
sublatas esse, quamvis earum veritas et substantia nobis in eo constat, in quo
sunt omnes impletae.


524 THE CHRISTIAN FAITH [§ 112


law of reason as developed under the influence of Christianity—
a law which formulates, not acts, but modes of action.!_ Christian
Ethics, however, will answer much better to its true relation to
Dogmatics, and so to its own immediate purpose, if it drops the
imperative mood altogether, and simply gives an all-round descrip-
tion of how men live within the Kingdom of God.


? One cannot say with truth of anylaw: Lexinculcat . . . esse voluntatem
et mandatum Dei ut in nova vitaambulemus, Here obviously the Mosaic Law
is meant.


SECOND SECTION


THE CONSTITUTION OF THE WORLD IN RELATION TO REDEMPTION


§ 113. All that comes to exist in the world through redemption is
embraced in the fellowship of believers, within which all
regenerate people are always found. This section, therefore,
contains the doctrine of the Christian Church.


1. In reckoning the two expressions—the fellowship of believers
and the Christian Church—as equivalent, our proposition seems
to be in opposition to the Roman Symbol; but neither earlier
versions of the latter nor the Nicene Creed know anything of using
the two side by side yet with a distinction. What is evident is
that fellowship may be taken in a narrower or a wider sense. For,
if the regenerate find themselves already within it, they must have
belonged to it even before regeneration, though obviously in a
different sense from actual believers. If this were not so, no
accession to or extension of the Church could be imagined except
by an absolute breach of continuity—that is, in a way unknown
to history. But the truth is that the new life of each individual
springs from that of the community, while the life of the community
springs from no other individual life than that of the Redeemer.
We must therefore hold that the totality of those who live in the
state of sanctification is the inner fellowship ; the totality of those
on whom preparatory grace is at work is the outer fellowship, from
which by regeneration members pass to the inner, and then keep
helping to extend the wider circle. It would, however, be quite a
novel and merely confusing use of terms to try to assign the two
expressions in question respectively to the two forms of fellowship.

Further, no particular form of fellowship is here definitely
asserted or excluded ; every form, perfect and imperfect, that has
ever been or that may yet appear, is included. This, and this
only, is assumed, that wherever regenerate persons are within reach
of each other, some kind of fellowship between them is bound to
arise. For if they are in contact, their witness to the faith must in
part overlap, and must necessarily involve mutual recognition and


a common understanding as to their operation within the common
525


526 THE CHRISTIAN FAITH [§ 113


area. What was stated at the beginning of our treatment 1 of the
consciousness of grace, namely, that it always proceeds from a
common life, was meant exclusively in this far-reaching sense ;
but now that very statement finds for the first time its full explana-
tion. For if, when regenerate, we did not find ourselves already
within a common life, but had to set out to discover or constitute it,
that would mean that just the most decisive of all the works of
grace was not based on a life in common.

2. The more closely our proposition stands connected with
that just cited (§ 87), the more difficult does it seem to make it
harmonize with the dictum that our dogmatic propositions should
express only what is identical in primitive Christian piety and in
our own. For how did men find themselves to be already within
the fellowship, who received Christ in faith as the result of His
personal influence ? On this point we remark that a collective
need for redemption and expectation of it already existed, which
was prepared to recognize the contrast between itself and One
who came offering help. Thus the outer fellowship arose simul-
taneously with the public appearance of Christ. The power to
form the inner was in Him alone, until gradually the inner took
shape from the outer, first of all in the disciples who constantly
accompanied Him. As to the question that may be interjected,
whether Christ had in fact any intention of founding such a fellow-
ship, it is clear enough that He could not have exercised any activity
whatever of an attractive and therefore redemptive kind, without
such a fellowship arising. Hence there is not the least need to
prove when and how He actually did found it. The self-organizing
faculty recognizably present in every spiritual relation belongs to
the natural form assumed by the supernatural in Christ ; and the
essence of the resulting organization must be explicable, partly
by the influence of Christ on individuals who thus become His
instruments, and partly by His peculiar dignity, which is to be
manifested in this organization over against the world. The above
question, however, is explained by inward experiences seemingly
due to the immediate influence of Christ unconditioned by the
fellowship ; and, from an opposite point of view, by the need to
guard against collisions between different fellowships within the
same circle—on which account also men sometimes wish to recog-
nize only civil society, but not religious. On this point what is
needful has already been said ;? also upon the relation to civil

ISIS 7 * §§ 100 and 105.


§ 113] THE CHRISTIAN CHURCH 527


society of the individuals who are bound up with Christ.!_ And as
no redeeming work can take effect on individuals without a fellow-
ship arising, this fellowship cannot consist in anything else than all
the factors belonging to the state of sanctification of all under grace.

3. The Christian self-consciousness expressed in our proposition
is the general form, determined by our faith in Christ, taken by our
fellow-feeling with human things and circumstances. This becomes
all the clearer if we combine with it the corresponding negative
expression. For if, leaving redemption out of account, the world
is, relatively to humanity, the place of original perfection of men
and things which yet has become the place of sin and evil ; and if,
with the appearance of Christ a new thing has entered the world,
the antithesis of the old ; it follows that only. that part of the world
which is united to the Christian Church is for us the place of attained
perfection, or of the good, and—relatively to quiescent self-conscious-
ness—the place of blessedness. This is so, not in virtue of the
original perfection of human nature and the natural order, though
of course it is thus conditioned, but in virtue solely of the sinless
perfection and blessedness which has come in with Christ and
communicates itself through Him. With this goes the converse,’
that the world, so far as it is outside this fellowship of Christ, is
always, in spite of that original perfection, the place of evil and
sin. No one, therefore, can be surprised to find at this point the
proposition that salvation or blessedness is in the Church alone,
and that, since blessedness cannot enter from without, but can be
found within the Church only by being brought into existence there,
the Church alone saves. For the rest, it is self-evident that the
antithesis between what is realized in the world by redemption
and all the rest of the world is acute in proportion to the complete-
ness with which the peculiar dignity of Christ and the full content of
redemption is apprehended. It disappears or loses itself in a vague
distinction between better and worse only where the contrast be-
tween Christ and sinful man is similarly obliterated or toned down.

4. This, too, affords the best proof that our proposition is simply
an utterance of the Christian self-consciousness. For if the Christian
Church were in its essential nature an object of outward perception,
that perception might be passed on without involving attachment
to the fellowship. But the fact is that those who do not share our
faith in Christ do not recognize the Christian fellowship in its
antithesis to the world. Wherever the feeling of need of redemption

1§ 106, 2. aGale rset jolts.


528 THE CHRISTIAN FAITH [§ 114


is entirely suppressed, the Christian Church is misconstrued all
round ; and the two attitudes develop part passu. With the first
stirrings of preparatory grace in consciousness, there comes a
presentiment of the divine origin of the Christian Church ; and
with a living faith in Christ awakens also a belief that the Kingdom
of God is actually present in the fellowship of believers. On the
other hand, an unalterable hostility to the Christian Church is
symptomatic of the highest stage of insusceptibility to redemption ;
and this hostility hardly admits even of outward reverence for the
person of Christ. But faith in the Christian Church as the Kingdom
of God not only implies that it will ever endure in antithesis to the
world, but also—the fellowship having grown to such dimensions
out of small beginnings, and being inconceivable except as ever at
work—contains the hope that the Church will increase and the world
opposed to it decrease. For the incarnation of Christ means for
human nature in general what regeneration is for the individual.
And just as sanctification is the progressive domination of the
various functions, coming with time to consist less and less of
fragmentary details and more and more to be a whole, with all its
parts integrally connected and lending mutual support, so too the
fellowship organizes itself here also out of the separate redemptive
activities and becomes more and more co-operative and interactive.
This organization must increasingly overpower the unorganized
mass to which it is opposed.


§ 114. In a comprehensive summary of what our Christian self-con-
sciousness has to say about the fellowship of believers, we
must first treat of the origin of the Church, the way in which
it lakes shape and disengages itself from the world ; then the
way im which the Church maintains itself in antithesis to
the world ; and finally the abrogation of this antithesis, or
the prospect of the Church's consummation.


1. These three points certainly do not seem to have the same
relation to our Christian self-consciousness. The second is the sphere
of everyday experience ; our spiritual life proceeds within the limits
of this antithesis. In proportion as we know how to distinguish
within ourselves between what appertains to the fellowship of
believers and what still appertains to the world, our Christian
common feeling will rightly separate, in what happens around us,
what belongs to the Church and to the world. This all contributes
to our propositions concerning the maintenance of the Church


§ 114] DIVISIONS OF THE SUBJECT 529


co-existently with the world. Propositions even with the same con-
tent would be inadmissible if drawn from other quarters. As in indi-
viduals the distinction between what belongs to sin and to grace is
drawn, not from the outward aspect of the act open to perception,
but from the constitution of the inward motives, so affirmations
concerning the Christian Church can be rightly made only by those
who know its inner life through personal participation in it. The
affirmations of our self-consciousness, however, about the con-
summation of the Church, if indeed there are any, are certainly
only most unreliable ones ; and as to the origin of the Church only
historical evidence can be accepted, with which we cannot deal here.
To begin then with this last point : the Christian fellowship gradu-
ally expands as individuals and masses are incorporated into
association with Christ. The general fact has been established that
the new life of the individual arises out of the common life within
the outer circle of which it lies. And this holds good also of the
new life of the first disciples, when as yet the power of the inner
circle was entirely confined to Christ. The origin of the Christian
Church is thus the same thing as happens daily before our eyes.
On the principle that the redeeming activity must lay hold of every-
thing gradually, it is of no consequence that we should establish a
technical rule for the exact how and why of this expansion. Rather,
since at any one moment the redeeming activity is reaching out
from the community to cover a far larger number than are at that
time actually led to conversion, our starting-point must be a right
grasp of the distinction between the converted and all the rest ; to
have this is to understand the beginnings of the Church. Here
certainly we have a self-consciousness which has to be grasped in
thought, namely, the antithesis which is established in our fellow-
feeling and sympathy between the previous inclusion of all in the
common state of sinfulness, and the new differentiation between
those under grace and others. As regards the consummation of the
Church: if we go by personal experience, all that is given in our
self-consciousness is, we must grant, just growth in sanctification,
without any presentiment that an entire harmony of all our
faculties, and the consummation of the individual life as an instru-
ment of Christ’s life in us, will, after the old man has been completely
eradicated, finally emerge. In the same way, if we go by corporate
feeling, the Church only confronts us as something growing out of
the world and gradually, of itself, expelling the world—the presenti-
ment of the consummation being always held up by the indestruct-


34


530 THE CHRISTIAN FAITH [§ 114


ible element of sympathy due to the fact that the old man is always
born again with each new individual. Thus the consummation of
the Church, even as a presentiment, requires as a condition that the
propagation of the race should cease : it therefore founders on the
rock of our racial consciousness ; and it looks as if everything put
forward as Christian doctrine on this point must derive from some
other source than the Christian self-consciousness. In that case it
would have no right to a definite place in our exposition, but,
resting as it must on an objective consciousness, could, in view of
its source, come in only in subordinate wise.1 Yet two points may
still be noted in this reference. For one thing, we are far from being
in a position fully to realize as a presentiment the alternative con-
ception of an advance asymptotically approaching the consumma-
tion in infinite time, an advance always limited by the appearance
of new generations ; nor does this conception supply what is lacking
in the presentiment of the imperfect sanctification of our own self
at the end of life. And in the second place, even if this presenti-
ment cannot in itself furnish any doctrine in our sense, because it
is not an isolable moment of self-consciousness, still the admission
of it can yield a proof, as the other form of infinite approximation
cannot, that we have rightly appreciated what underlies it and the
doctrine of the maintenance of the Church, namely, the essential
nature of the Kingdom of God. The proof is that the truth of the
exposition holds good even in an attempt to consider the Church
in itself apart from its antithesis to the world; to this extent this
attempt is necessary and natural.

2. Between these three main divisions of the subject there is an
analogous dissimilarity, not to be overlooked, which may be put
thus. In discussing the second we find ourselves entirely, and all
but exclusively, within the sphere of the redeeming activity of
Christ, for this is the actual boundary of the Kingdom of Christ.?
Yet if we were to conceive the absolute consummation extensively
as well as intensively, the dissimilarity between Him and us would
be entirely abrogated, and His lordship would cease.? This is an
additional confirmation of the view that this is not matter for
Christian doctrine in the strictest sense of the word. Especially
as in the consummation itself no sense of need can be supposed to
persist in self-consciousness, so that the consummation can be


e 1 Cf. our former treatment of the facts of the resurrection and ascension of
‘hrist.


Ci $ 108: 31 John 32,


§ 114] THE DOCTRINE OF THE CHURCH 531


regarded as specifically Christian only in so far as it remains the
consummation of a common life dependent on Christ. And while
presumably in this consummation natural changes would be in-
volved which lie outside the sphere of the kingly dominion of Christ
and belong to the divine government of the world, yet about this
bodily side of the matter—which would be the point at issue—we
have here nothing to say. Hence, take 1t how we will, we find our-
selves here at the limit of Christian doctrine, and can say nothing
definite without overstepping it. So too with regard to the
emergence of the Christian Church, alike at its beginning and all
the way along. For while the power of the Divine Word and of the
Love that seeks the salvation of men remains always the same in
the great inward act of preaching, the difference in its efficacy rests
on different conditions of susceptibility ; and this again depends
on the circumstances in which the divine government of the world
places different persons. This cannot but seem very natural; for
in the passing of either individuals or masses from the world into
the Church the divine government of the world plays a part and
necessarily in the form of activity. Hence our sympathetic appre-
ciation of the matter would be very incomplete if it did not accept
the difference that arises as resulting from the divine government
of the world. At this point, however, we must bring in another
element, to supplement a defect in our previous exposition. We
formerly considered the activity of the Redeemer and its operation
in the soul of the individual apart from the life of the community ;
and thus later, in the doctrine of sanctification, it was still possible
for us to consider the individual merely as a separate being, acting
independently in living fellowship with Christ. Now of course it is
by the very same act that the individual is regenerated and that
he becomes a spontaneously active member of the Christian Church.
But this second aspect of the matter we previously ignored : hence
we must now discuss that act anew and independently of our earlier
exposition, in view of the fact that it forms the basis of the relation
of the individual to the larger whole. And here our attention is
at once focused on the most definite thing in our whole self-con-
sciousness, where we always distinguish and combine both things—
our independent personality in living fellowship with Christ, and
our life as an integral constituent of a whole.

From both points of view the doctrine of the Church, in its
continuous existence alongside of the world, is the essential kernel
of this whole section. Hence it is appropriate to establish this


532 THE CHRISTIAN CHURCH [§ 115


doctrine first, and then to treat the other two subjects more by the
way of appendix. In adopting the order natural to an historical
review, we shall attain greater vividness and simplify many problems.


First DIVISION: THE ORIGIN OF THE CHURCH


§ 115. The Christian Chi: 2: sakes shape through the coming together
of regenerate individuals to form a system of mutual inter-
action and co-operation.


1. In the light of the practice of the Protestant Church for the
strengthening of its fellowship, whether by the reception of the
instructed youth of the community and by mission work, or in the
transfer of individual members from other Christian communions,
our proposition certainly gives right expression to the prevailing
sentiment and practical methods. The practical methods are
always determined with reference to regeneration ; in each case,
naturally, in accordance with the manner in which this conception
is understood ; and thus (though in most cases one cannot as yet
be certain on|the point) the prevailing assumption is that regenera-
tion has come about. At least the freer a community is within its
own sphere, the more strictly will it insist that those about whose
regeneration there are good reasons for misgiving are not to be
received as members. This would not be necessary, and indeed
would be inexpedient, if those received were only being introduced
into a communion where preparatory grace was at work. Now
with regeneration there is always imparted a strong will for the
Kingdom of God. It must therefore be a conviction common both
to receivers and received, that all exert the same kind of activity ;
and since, belonging to the same locality, they have the same sphere
of influence, every such act raises the problem afresh of ordering
this common activity aright. That at the same time a mutual
influence is provided for, is due not only to the fact that in each
there remains much of the world, against which the common activity
of the rest must be brought to bear ; but also to the fact that, as
none credits himself with a complete and perfect apprehension: of
Christ, each individual regards that of others as complementary
to his own ; and so a mutual and reciprocal presentation results.
From this everything must be derivable that can be represented
as an element in the life of the Church.

2. It seems harder, certainly, to apply all this to the original
emergence of the fellowship emanating from Christ. But if we


§ 116] Se VHasOnIGIN, OF THE CHURCH 533


recur to the fact that already, when the activity of Christ began,
there was a fellowship of those who waited for the fulfilment of
their Messianic hopes, while we certainly do not assert that this was
the Christian Church before Christ, yet it was a religious fellowship ;
there was an interchange of kindred impulses of the spirit and
community in all things relating thereto. Now when several of
its members came to recognize Christ, they felt no reason to dissolve
their fellowship. But as it had now gained a relation to Christ
which could not but create a mutual influence among them in the
sense explained, they came at the same time to exercise a combined
influence upon their fellow-members who had not yet attained to
the recognition of Christ. These latter thus formed the outer
circle, receiving from the first the preparatory operations of grace,
in contrast to the inner circle from which these operations proceeded
all the more forcibly that they were exactly adapted to the situation.
This combined influence, however, remained subordinate and
fragmentary as long as a common susceptibility to the influence of
Christ was the predominant factor in their association. In this
respect we may say that although a number of regenerate persons
were there, yet as long as Christ’s personal activity lasted, the
Church remained unconstituted, merely latent in the association
of these individuals with Him.


§ 116. The origin of the Church becomes clear through the two
doctrines of Election and Communication of the Holy Spirit.


1. Were it not for the connexion already established, it might
perhaps seem strange to find these two conceptions thus put side
by side, for they do not sound as if they were at all related; and
as regards their meaning, the idea of election does not seem any more
closely bound up with the communication of the Holy Spirit than
with, say, conversion or justification. Now, however, it cannot
surprise us. The first conception has to do with what, as was
argued, in the origin of the Church, is matter of the divine govern-
ment of the world, namely, the fact that those who are to form the
Church must be separated out from the world. This, then, is how
we view the origin of the Church, when we look backwards to the
region from which its members come. The second conception has
to do with what, in the individual, is the basis of the continuity
of the Church’s co-operation and interaction. Now since this
constitutes the very essence of the Christian Church, this concep-
tion gives the view of the Church’s origin which looks forward to


534 THE CHRISTIAN FAITH [§ 116


the common life so arising. This common life can attain and keep
true vital unity, like that of a coherent or so-called moral per-
sonality, only through the identity of that which stirs and strives
in each and every individual. Through this principle, therefore,
communicated to individuals as elect, the whole life and work of
the Church must be explicable.

The two conceptions, however, have this in common, that they
do not fit the situation in which the effective power of the new life
was not as yet communicated to others, but existed solely in
Christ ; except in the sense in which it may be said also of Christ
that He was elect, and that He possessed the Holy Spirit. Really,
however, this is to assume the antithesis between the outer circle,
which is the area of the preparatory operations of grace, and the
inner circle from which these operations proceed. For those who
are drawn within the first circle by the preaching of the gospel are
not usually, in the language of the Bible or of the Church, termed
‘elect,’ unless it is as a result of the arrangements of the divine
government of the world that they are thus differentiated fiom
the rest. They are termed ‘called,’ and the other term is left for
those who through regeneration are brought into the inner circle.
Similarly, of this inner circle the Holy Spirit is the bond by means
of which the influences exerted by individuals upon those in the
outer circle form a unity, and their mutual interaction becomes, as
it were, an organic system. As to the ‘ called,’ however, we do not
regard the Holy Spirit as having yet been communicated to them,
or dwelling in and moving them.

2. Now, as regards the term ‘election’ as applied first of all to
the individual, the real problem is the same. All men for us are
in the state of common sinfulness, in which everything is common
guilt. All thus are absolutely equal: none has any advantage in
reference to the new life communicated by Christ. All are first
drawn within the circle of preparatory grace ; but, for one thing, the
differences between them which thus arise are not attributable
to themselves ; and for another, there is favour shown already in
the fact that some are called and others are not. Hence for this
discussion we can take both together, election and the calling that
precedes and relates to it. Thus everywhere, in the light of the
partial success and partial failure of preaching, we can see a pre-
ference of some to others introduced by the divine government of
the world without any ground for it in the persons themselves ;
and this can be followed out, in large things and small, not only


g 116] ELECTION AND THE GIVING OF THE SPIRIT 535


in this sphere but also in others, which, however, lie beyond the
scope of our present subject. If we conceive the incarnation of
Christ as the beginning of the regeneration of the whole human
race, then the erection of a permanent place for the preaching of
the Gospel amongst a people through the instrumentality of the
firstfruits from its own midst is the beginning of that people’s
regeneration. Such a nation, then, has an advantage over those
among whom the voice of preaching has had no effect. But
we cannot ascribe this to a difference in merit in nations any
more than in individuals. In the case of individuals the same
thing happens, whether they have come in from outside or have
been born within the outer circle of the fellowship. Now
we certainly ascribe this to a divine ordinance, as the Redeemer
Himself did ;+ it is equally our part to acquiesce in it, for other-
wise we should be (and that, too, in our moral consciousness) in
contradiction to our God-consciousness. But we have no reason
for doing so except that we rest in the will of God ; about which all
that we can say is, that it was not determined by the merits of any-
one, so that the issue cannot be regarded in the one event as reward
or in the other as punishment. For our feelings, as in the con-
ception of election, everything else remains wholly undefined.

3. After what has been said, the expression ‘ Holy Spirit ’ must
be understood to mean the vital unity of the Christian fellowship
as a moral personality ; and this, since everything strictly legal
has already been excluded, we might denote by the phrase, its
common spirit. Accordingly, it should not really be necessary again
to give the explicit assurance that by the phrase we mean to describe
exactly what even in Scripture is called the Holy Spirit and the
Spirit of God and the Spirit of Christ, and in our Church doctrine
is also presented as the third Person in the Godhead. That we
have not here to deal with this last point is at once evident from
our arrangement of this whole treatise.

But in the Christian Church, as individual influences no longer
proceed directly from Christ, something divine must exist. This
something we call accordingly the Being of God in it, and it is
this which continues within the Church the communication of the
perfection and blessedness of Christ. All this, already indicated
in a preliminary way, will be more precisely expounded later.
Already it is apparent that the communication of the sinless per-
fection and blessedness which, as an absolute and continuous willing


1 John 6%,


536 THE CHRISTIAN FAITH [§ 117


of the Kingdom of God, is the innermost impulse of the individual,
must also be the common spirit of the whole, or there could be no
common spirit at all. Were there any other than this, that im-
pulse would be subordinate to it and thus to what is less perfect
than itself; in every corporate life all that is personal must be
subordinated to the common spirit. On the other hand, if there were
no common spirit, the Christian Church would be no true common
or corporate life ; yet this is what it has professed to be from the
beginning as regards the divine Spirit dwelling in it, and this is how
it has been accepted in the self-consciousness of every effective
member. This will for the Kingdom of God is the vital unity of the
whole, and its common spirit in each individual ; in virtue of its in-
wardness, it is in the whole an absolutely powerful God-consciousness,
and thus the being of God therein, but conditioned by the being of
God in Christ.


First DOCTRINE: ELECTION


§ 117. In accordance with the laws of the divine government of the
world, so long as the human race continues on earth, all
those living at any one time can never be uniformly taken
up into the kingdom of God founded by Chnist.


1. By ‘ uniformly ’ here is not meant an equality in the strength
of faith or in the degree in which all the natural powers are put at
the disposal of the common will: for in that sense the proposition
would be quite obvious; it would occur to no one to desiderate
such an equality. The absence of uniformity refers to the definite
distinction between the inner and outer circles of the Christian
fellowship. Now all other fellowships of faith are destined to pass
into the Christian fellowship ; and if we assume that those born
within the fellowship in due time come under the influence of pre-
paratory grace, a time can be imagined when all whose consciousness
has reached the necessary point of development will belong to that
outer circle. But in this there is not involved any share in the
perfection and blessedness of Christ. Hence these are definitely
distinguished from the spontaneously active members of the fellow-
ship. This tallies exactly with the distinction already drawn
between calling and election. ‘Two points are involved here, both
to be regarded (the one more definitely, the other also in some
measure) as laws of the divine government of the world. One
such law obviously is, that what proceeds from a single point
spreads only gradually over the whole area. Less obvious perhaps


§ 117] ELECTION 537


is this, that the state of grace cannot be inborn, but that even
Christian children at birth essentially resemble all other sons of
Adam. Any difference would be an exception not explicable by
the fundamental fact of Christianity: it would be a new, independent
miracle ; and, besides, it would shatter the conception of race.

2. Even suppose that Christ, when He made a beginning of
preaching the Kingdom of God with a reference to His own Person,
had everywhere found an equal feeling of need for redemption ;
yet in one respect, relatively to His Person, some would have been
prepared by the Baptist, others not; and in another respect,
relatively to His interpretation of the Kingdom of God, some were
specially wedded to the existing idea, and thus disposed to reject
His, while others were not. Thus He could not but exert His
influence with the most varied degrees of effectiveness : indeed,
though always within definite limits,| He at times moved about
and widened the circle of His preaching, and at other times tarried
in one place to consolidate His work. Nay, even where He was
asked to depart,? that fact must have worked to the unmerited
disadvantages of many who would otherwise have come naturally
to join Him. But all this is rooted in the divine government of
the world. And we find the same absence of uniformity in connexion
with the subsequent preaching of apostolic times and on to the
present day. For the tendency to enlarge the Church outwardly—
a tendency which dwells in the whole body but especially appears
in individuals—is in itself quite uniform, proceeding as it does from
the equality of all in the state of sinfulness ; but in practice it is
subordinated, partly to the social circumstances that must offer
a point of attachment, partly to that secret attraction and repulsion 3
which equally with these circumstances are subject to the divine
government of the world. It could not be otherwise if the super-
natural in Christ is to become natural, and the Church to take
shape as a natural historical phenomenon.

3. If we consider the propagation of the Church from one
generation to another, here too we find that the regeneration of
individuals is bound up with the natural circumstance (also rooted
in the divine government of the world) that every two successive
generations overlap. <A similar absence of uniformity thus arises,
as each person sooner or later arrives within this inner circle among
different and more or less suitable surroundings and influences.
Thus two things always happen. Among those living within the

PNMiatt arses, aiViatte sss SENCtSe Ole


538 THE CHRISTIAN FAITH [§ 117


circle of the Church there are in every period many who do not yet
belong to it ; and of these it will be possible to say that they might
already have been members of the Church if their path in life had
been otherwise guided. Of course in any given nation a long series
of generations, living on the whole in the state of sanctification, has
an influence on those that follow, as natural tendencies to passion
are mitigated ; yet this never is more than an improved form of
general sinfulness, and at some point self-knowledge and penitence
must enter. Yet we grant that if an early and corresponding
recognition of the Redeemer also ensues, a time can be imagined in
which (although the birth of body and of spirit never coincide in
time, and nature and grace never cease to be distinguishable) the
development of living faith is as nearly as possible coincident with
the first development of moral ideas and sentiments. Such a time
is the nearest possible approximation to the human development of
Christ. In such a situation, each will attain far earlier to the
possession and enjoyment of his appropriate share in the higher
life. Yet even so differences will remain, such that some will as yet
have failed to attain to enjoyment though their companions of the
same age have long possessed it.

4. While we denote this ordinance by the phrase ‘ divine
election,’ because we hold firmly that its final ground lies in the
divine good-pleasure, this does not hinder us from inquiring by
what this divine good-pleasure is determined. Especially as we
are not in a position to say that God makes no distinctions, but
that some human wills place hindrances in the way; for at first
the will itself develops gradually, not without being influenced by
external relations, until it reaches a greater or smaller degree of
excitability. Paul long ago broke ground in this inquiry,! and
tried to formulate the law by which the apostolic Church to begin
with filled up with those who previously were heathen, while the
great majority of the Jewish people remained outside. The demand
for such an investigation has become still more pressing since whole
peoples have accepted Christianity, of whom a considerable pro-
portion at least attained regeneration, while on the other hand
many a member of nations long Christian remained provisionally
excluded from that inner circle. There is besides the fact that the
end of life is appointed so differently for different people. To
many born in the Christian Church who have already experienced
many operations of preparatory grace, it comes before these im-


1 Rom, ro and 11;


§ 118] A POSSIBLE INSOLUBLE DISCORD 539


pressions can be gathered up and intensified in regeneration so as
to constitute the beginning of a spiritual life. Many are called
away, their length of life divinely fixed, from places where the
gospel has only just begun to be heard. Thus obviously it is
the divine government of the world which appoints that many—
whether many or few really make no difference, since their attitude
to the proffer of divine grace is in any case the same—die un-
regenerate simply because the course of their life is run. We
cannot say, then, that God has definitely not willed this ; for it
has its basis in the relation between the order of nature dependent
on Him and His decree of redemption through Christ, which to us
is equally matter of inward certainty. We cannot therefore resist
the conclusion that if God had not willed this definitely and un-
conditionally, He would either have established a different order of
nature for human life, or a different way of salvation for the human
spirit. His ordinance being of such a nature, we are of course called
upon to accept even this divine will as consciously as possible and
without inward dissent.


§ 118. While Christian sympathy 1s not disquieted by the earlier and
later adoption of one and another individual into the fellow-
ship of redemption, yet on the other hand there does remain
an insoluble discord if, on the assumption of survival after
death, we are to think of a part of the human race as entirely
excluded from this fellowship.


1. Regarding ourselves as members of the Church over against
the world, with these two elements in our self-consciousness, the
consciousness of sin and the consciousness of grace, we find that in
virtue of the latter, in which we are given perfect certainty of the
divine decree for our blessedness, we stand opposed to all those in
whom this consciousness has not yet developed. On the other
hand, in virtue of the consciousness of sin we are on exactly the
same footing as they ; for the consciousness of forgiveness belongs
to the other element, and yet keeps ever present to our minds that
original something which belongs to the consciousness of a nature
in which all share. If therefore that equal natural incapacity
out of which, in everyone, the consciousness of the need for re-
demption may spring, is in one case reinforced, but in another left
to itself, in one case absorbed into the revelation of the divine decree


1 Once for all in connexion with this doctrine I refer the reader to my
treatise on ‘ Election.’


540 THE CHRISTIAN FAITH [§ 118


of pardon, but in another not so absorbed—this non-uniformity
within the same human race (no section of which is definitely
distinguished from any other in respect of the divine activity of
Christ) is of such a kind that to accept it we must either again
reduce our God-consciousness to a mere idiosyncrasy, or else attach
much less value to the difference between those blessed by grace
and others, almost making it a merely accidental more or less.
Otherwise the blessedness springing from the consciousness of
grace would of necessity be swallowed up in the sympathetic feeling
of unblessedness that accompanies humiliation.

All this takes on a quite different aspect as soon as we venture
to hold that at each particular point this antithesis is merely a
vanishing one, so that everyone still outside this fellowship will
some time or another be laid hold of by the divine operations of
grace and brought within it. In that case there is no longer a
cleavage in our race-consciousness ; the merely gradual passage of
individuals into the full enjoyment of redemption is for our race-
consciousness just what the gradual progress of sanctification is
for our personal self-consciousness, namely, the natural form
necessarily taken by the divine activity as it works itself out
historically and, as we have seen, the inevitable condition of all
activity in time of the Word made flesh.

Any possible objection to this is met by the two following
considerations. The first is an application we make of the pro-
position stated above, namely, that the incarnation of Christ is
analogous to the regeneration of the whole race considered as a
unity. No one can say that it would have been better for the whole
race if Christ had been born sooner, and the new spiritual common
life sooner begun. It would certainly have been better had it been
possible for this new life to emerge in the same purity and power
at an earlier date. But when we read that ‘ when the fulness of
the time was come’ Christ was born,! this means that the divine
fore-ordination concerning the whole human race and the special
determination of the point in time when the Redeemer should be
manifested are so much a single indivisible revelation of divine
omnipotence that the spiritual life conditioned by this determina-
tion of time is certainly also the absolutely greatest, and gives
expression to the entire idea of the essential nature of humanity.
Now the same thing can be said of the individual. Each man,
when his time is fully come, is regenerated ; and then his new life,

1 Gal. 44,


§ 118] EACH REGENERATED IN HIS TIME 541


conditioned by this fixation of time, is, however late its appear-
ance, an absolute maximum, and fully expresses the entire idea
of his personality, dependent as this is on its position within the
race asa whole. In harmony with this belief, therefore, we cannot
imagine, even of an individual, that it would have been better for
him to have been regenerated earlier. Nor is there any reason to
fear that this will lead to slackness in witnessing to Christ, or under-
mine training and teaching, on the ground that it is useless to press
the gospel on people before their time is come. This has been
clearly shown by Augustine, and no such application of the doctrine
will readily be made seriously by anyone who is truly being sancti-
fied, that is to say, it will not be entertained by anyone who is
capable of bearing witness or taking part in teaching and training.
For one thing, such a person is moved by an inner impulse ? irre-
spectively of any distinct result he may anticipate ; and for another,
he is well aware that the gracious operations of the Spirit that issue
from every regenerate person are a sine qua non of the regeneration
of each when his time is fully come.

The second consideration is an application of the truth that in
regeneration each person becomes a new creature. If that is so,
sympathetic concern about a regeneration that occurred too late is
meaningless, for there is nothing originally present to think about ;
just as it would be a waste of pity, on the assumption of a creation
of the world in time, to sigh that it was not created sooner. And
even if someone inclined to say that for him the earlier period is not
a void but a horror, yet this horror vanishes in the certainty of the
forgiveness of sins just as completely whether that period was long
or short. And although such a regret may occasionally be felt on
the ground that the new life cannot now endure so long as if it had
developed sooner, this too is a mere delusion, revealing a lack of
acquaintance with the nature of the new life. For that life is in
itself eternal, and gains no increment by the duration of time. No
one who is maturely sanctified has such feelings ; they belong to a
morbid condition. Only beginners can be troubled by such after-
pains, and when peace comes they die away of themselves ; so that
there is no reason why we should take account of them in the
sphere of doctrine. Rather must the earliest to be regenerated and
the latest each count himself of the same worth as the other, even
though in the one case it happened in the morning of childhood,
and in the other only after a long course of experience. For while


1 Throughout in his De correptione et gratia. 22 (Cor 5 taee,


542 THE CHRISTIAN BAITH [§ 118


the one represents a more exact model of the original union of the
Divine with human personality, the other gives a better picture of
the ultimate penetration of the entire human nature by the redeem-
ing power of Christ, involving as that power does the total effective
influence of all those previously regenerated. Every appearance
of difference must more and more vanish as a common feeling and
common spirit gets the upper hand in both, leaving each to appro-
priate all that is the other’s. There is no ground to fear that this
will occasion any indifference towards the operations of preparatory
grace, or lead men to put off repentance and conversion to the in-
definite future. Anyone desiring to take this course is not putting
off conversion because of anything in Christian doctrine, but because
even yet he wants to have a share in the common life of sin more
than in the Kingdom of God. To withhold this doctrine from such
aman is no help to him ; we must find what will awaken his longing
for the Kingdom of God.

Summing up, we may conclude that if only everyone who has
lagged behind us is some time or another taken up into living fellow-
ship with Christ, our sympathetic concern can accept the fact with
perfect satisfaction without any contradiction arising between it
and our God-consciousness.

2. It is self-evident, however, that these considerations are no
longer applicable, once we come to think of a portion of our race as
destined to be entirely shut out from this fellowship and the higher
state dependent thereon. Nor can the idea be admitted (here we
are strictly in accord with all that we have just been saying) that
we may make a distinction according as we do or do not assume a
future life. For if this life as such is eternal, the possession and the
deprivation of it cannot be thrown into greater contrast by raising
the question of its endless or insignificant duration, if it be the case
that one does attain the blessedness in which alone life’s value lies,
and another does not. Assuming this for the moment, the discord
can be resolved only in one of the two following ways. We may
justify the concurrent existence of such equality and inequality
between ourselves and others and try to trace it back to a law;
and this would show the opposition indicated to be an illusion. Or
we may explain as an illusion one of the two—either the original
equality, or the inequality due to the divine assignment.

As regards the first point, two arguments may be tried. To
begin with, if equality is the original appointed plan for human
nature, but inequality of the kind noted just as much results from


§ 118] EQUALITY AND INEQUALITY OF MEN 543


the plan, contradiction between the two can only be stated in the
form of some censure of the appointed plan ; which is meaningless,
for unless we were men we should not be at all. But the inequality
that first arises through the intervention of Christ cannot have its
seat in the human nature underlying the common life of sinfulness,
unless, contrary to our assumptions, we go back to Pelagian prin-
ciples, and admit either powers of attraction in one class of people
or powers of repulsion in the other. And apart from this, we should
still be thrown back upon an inequality in the distribution of
endowments that can have its basis only in the divine good-
pleasure. Conversely, if the equality is held to have the same basis
as the inequality, namely, the divine plan of salvation, this means
that in respect of redemption God has put all men under sin,
although only for some does redemption accrue. In that case, the
reception of the one and the exclusion of the other has its ground
in such divine arbitrariness, that we must rightly describe the
ordinance as sheer caprice. And even if the concurrent existence of
the equality and inequality can be thus made conceivable, yet those
who, to our advantage, are rejected, are and inevitably remain
objects of sympathy ; and the more our race-consciousness equals
our personal consciousness, this sympathy extinguishes the blessed-
ness belonging to the latter, for it is a fellow-feeling with misery.
An escape from this difficulty and a faultless solution of it have been
thought to lie in the hypothesis that the plan of salvation, which is
the ground both of the equality of incapacity and the inequality of
help received, is intended to bring home to one class the divine
mercy and to the other the divine justice, so that within the human
race there might be given a complete divine manifestation in both
respects: justice toward the lost and mercy toward the saved.
Against this, however, it may be pointed out that the solution does
not cover the special case in which divine justice also would be
completely manifested if all that is possible through redemption
were actually realized ; for then it would show itself compensatory
toward Christ, but punitive toward all as long as they belonged to
the common life of sinfulness. We cannot, however, concede in
general that the revelation of divine attributes is pieced-out or


1 Conf. Gallic. xii. : Credimus ex hac corruptione . . . deum alios quidem
eripere, quos .. . in Jesu Christo elegit : alios vero in ea corruptione et
damnatione relinquere, in quibus iustitiam suam demonstret, sicut in allis
divitias misericordiae suae declaret.—Conf. Belg. xvi.: Credimus . . . deum
se . . . demonstrasse . . . misericordem et iustum. Misericordem quidem
eos... servando, quos.. . elegit . . . iustum vero reliquos in...
perditione . . . relinquendo.


5.44 THE CHRISTIAN FAITH [§ 118


partial ; for then they would be limited, and God would be an un-
limited Being with limited attributes. Justice and mercy must not
exclude one another. Mercy in the case of the same people must
show itself as justice. And in thought this is incompatible with
the permanent exclusion of some from the communicated blessed-
ness of Christ.

Thus all that remains is the second line of thought, namely, that
one of the two, either the equality or the inequality of the two
sections of mankind, should be explained as an illusion. But the
inequality between those taken up into living fellowship with Christ
and those excluded from it cannot possibly be regarded as an illusion
without sacrificing the essential content of our Christian conscious-
ness. It is otherwise with regard to the equality which we find in
the consciousness of sin. This would be an illusion if there were
really an original inequalityin men, that is, if from the very beginning
there were a cleavage in humanity. For once we realize this, the
contradiction vanishes, those originally not on the same footing as
ourselves not being possible objects of our sympathy, and the unity
of human nature as hitherto understood being a delusion. But if
it is then supposed that only in the one class and not in the other
is there a sensitiveness and susceptibility for divine grace, or that
only in the one class and not in the other is there an invincible
opposition to divine grace, we land in assumptions leading to
Manicheanism which are just as much opposed to our interpretation
as the Pelagian assumptions above referred to. Indeed, redemption
itself then takes on a quite different form. For Christ would then
really have come only to develop and bring to light an already
existing disparity ; His real function becomes that of judge, and
what may be called redemption is merely the form of one side of
this function. There is thus no way of resolving this discord if on
the ground of our Christian consciousness we must accept the fact
that part of our race is utterly excluded. If our proposition indi-
cates that the discord would be greater on the assumption prevailing
throughout the Christian Church of personal survival after death
than if we could adopt the opposite view, the reason is simply this.
In the present life, while we do recognize the state of grace as a
communication of the perfection and blessedness of Christ, it is this
merely in innermost principle: for if, in anyone under grace, his
total self-consciousness in time be considered, it is always found to
include also a consciousness of sin. The inequality is therefore not
present for others, because in the only thing that is open to their


§ 118] CONDITIONAL IMMORTALITY 345


observation, namely, the temporal consciousness, they recognize
merely a distinction of less and more, and of this they think less,
the less they have been captured by the operations of preparatory
grace. On the other hand, when we take the life beyond into
account, we have then to conceive of a complete development
of blessedness and woe, which means that the antithesis is
stretched to its utmost ; and the more even now we are pre-
occupied with the anticipation of the future life the deeper must
our sympathy be with a future of woe, and therefore the harsher
the discord.

3. There is a certain affinity between the thought of this last
paragraph and two other attempts to solve the problem. One,
while admitting the survival of those who attain to the communica-
tion of Christ’s blessedness, holds that the excluded perish utterly
at death, so that they are only to be considered as physically like
children who die ere it is theirs to enjoy the light of day. This
indeed lessens the inequality, for a brief unhappiness offers a smaller
contrast than an endless woe. But apart from the point that this
makes redemption primarily the cause of immortality, thus attri-
buting to it a physical effect foreign to its nature and definition
(since otherwise here too we should have a fundamental cleavage in
human nature), still there remains the particularizing character of a
redemption which can only secure for some both blessedness and
immortality, but not for all. The other attempt seeks to lessen the
inequality on a different side, conceding that after the present life
even the unregenerate may attain, by a faithful use of the natural
light that was given them, to a certain perfection and happiness, if
only a subordinate degree. They would only be excluded from a
higher stage.1 But in that case one cannot see why they should
not stay, or receive a place, within the sphere of preparatory grace,
and why this grace should not sooner or later reach its goal. Other-
wise redemption remains particularized in this case also, and we are
once more confronted (in a new form) by a divine caprice that
makes perfect harmony impossible.

In the light of these explanations, the following theorems
of Church doctrine have now to be more closely defined’ and
reviewed.

1Cf. Reinhard, Dogmatik, § 116, 3.


39


546 THE CHRISTIAN FAITH [§ 119


First THEOREM: PREDESTINATION


§ 119. The election of those who are justified is a divine predestination
to salvation in Christ.

Conf. Saxon., Twest., p. 157: Utrumque certissimum sit agentem poeni-
tentiam propter filium Dei gratis fide accipere remissionem peccatorum et
iustificationem et hunc esse haeredem vitae aeternae.—IJbid., p. 162: Vult
deus intelligi, genus humanum a deo conditum esse . . . non ad aeternum
exitium, sed ut colligat sibi in genere humano ecclesiam, cuiin omni aeternitate
communicet suam sapientiam bonitatem et laetitiam.—Eywvpos. simpl. x.:
Deus ab aeterno praedestinavit vel elegit libere . . . sanctos quos vult
salvos facere in Christo . . . Ergo non sine medio, sed in Christo . . . nos
elegit deus, ut qui jam sunt in Christo insiti per fidem, illi ipsi etiam sint
electi, reprobi vero qui sunt extra Christum.—Conf. Angl. xvii.: Prae-
destinatio ad vitam est aeternum dei propositum, quo... constanter
decrevit, eos quos in Christo elegit . . . per Christum ad aeternam salutem
adducere.—Sol. decl. xi.: Praedestinatio pertinet tantum ad filios dei, qui
ad aeternam vitam consequendam electi et ordinati sunt.—Conf. March. :
‘... that God the Almighty... has chosen and ordained to eternal life all
who thus steadfastly believe on Christ. . . . Thus too has God according to
His strict justice from eternity passed over all who do not believe in Christ,
and prepared for them the eternal fire of hell.’


1. Let us consider the self-consciousness we possess as regenerate
persons in this aspect. From the very beginning of our progress
in sanctification, it is one with our feeling of absolute dependence,
and is bound up with that feeling not only in so far as we are con-
scious of our activity in the Kingdom of God as an activity divinely
produced by means of Christ’s mission, but also in so far as the
course of each man’s progress is one with the position assigned him
in the general context of human relationships. The natural ex-
pression for this fact is to say that the ordinance according to which
redemption realizes itself in each life is one and the same thing
with the carrying out of the divine government of the world in
respect of that person. This holds not only for the period subse-
quent to regeneration, but also for the previous period spent under
the influences of preparatory grace (which equally belongs to the
realization of his redemption), and therefore also to the moment of
regeneration which binds these two periods together. The self-
consciousness that thus expresses itself is, however, not a personal
and merely individual consciousness, but the common feeling of all
who find themselves within the circle of Christ’s influence. It is
therefore correctly extended to all who may be approaching the
point of being drawn into this circle. If then the very same thing
holds good of them at the moment of their regeneration, it follows


§ 119] PREDESTINATION 547


that the individual’s being drawn, each in his turn, into the fellow-
ship of Christ is simply the result of the fact that the justifying
divine activity is in manifestation determined by, and forms part
of, the general government of the world. It would be contrary to
this if anyone were to assert that his conversion and sanctification
would have taken place in the same way and at the same time, even
if his course in life had lain in a quite different environment. How
our proposition is in harmony with the consciousness of freedom
has already been shown,! and in that inference it might also have
been stated thus: that the manner and the time of each indi-
vidual’s regeneration is determined by what is peculiar to his own
inner life, that is, his freedom, and by his relations to the natural
and historical development of justifying divine grace, that is, his
place in the world. Primarily, then, the kingdom of grace or of
the Son is absolutely one in origin with the kingdom of omniscient
omnipotence, or of the Father :* and since the whole government
of the world is, like-the world itself, eternal in God, nothing happens
in the kingdom of grace without divine fore-ordination. This
therefore is given from the start in and through the self-conscious-
ness of those under grace: and whether they choose to say that
their state is a work of divine grace in Christ, or that it is a con-
sequence of divine fore-ordination, the one statement in thought
implies the other.

2. But as regards those we find outside the fellowship of Christ
—they cannot so affect us as to give us reasonable cause to make
any statement about them in this connexion. We are indeed
aware that the preaching of Christ which continually sounds forth
from the Church is a living and not unfruitful influence: we see
the operations of preparatory grace thus beginning in individuals :
we see these individuals going on to become members of the Church
whose advancing sanctification leaves no doubt as to their justifica-
tion ; thus in their case also the divine fore-ordination is revealed.
But about those in whom these operations have not appeared we
have no ground for anything more than this negative statement,
describing simply their relations, up to that point, to the Kingdom
of God and the operations of grace issuing therefrom.? As regards
divine fore-ordination, this involves only what has been already


2 4; $46 8 49. ; tp ras
2 Sol. decl. xi.: Pater enim trahit hominem virtute spiritus sui juxta


ordinem a se decretum et institutum. ;
3 So in Acts 241 and 1348 it is certainly not meant that of those who did not


then believe, none could possibly become believers at some later time,


548 THE CHRISTIAN FAITH [§ 119


explained,! namely, that there are always some in whom as yet it
has not attained its aim—that is, the initiation of blessedness in
Christ. But by this path we can never arrive at the idea that for
them, or some of them, there is a fore-ordination of an opposite
kind. That ‘many are called and few are chosen’? holds true
at every particular turn in the preaching of the Kingdom of God,
and at every time, which means at the present time ; and so one
has always a right to say that the majority are not yet to be regarded
as chosen—not, that is to say, at the present time. For naturally
at any particular moment the majority are being held in reserve
for some later moment ; this is in accordance with the order of the
divine decree, since in every process of development in time there
is necessarily a successiveness even of what is originally simul-
taneous. Only in this limited sense, therefore—that is, only at each
point where we can make a comparison between those laid hold of
by sanctification and those not yet laid hold of—ought we to say
that God omits or passes over some, and that He rejects those He
passes over, and hence that election always and only appears with
reprobation as its foil. From the position we take, the term ‘ pass
over ’ is the most fitting ; it merely negatives a definite act, not as
if those passed over were outside all divine activity and all divine
decree, but this activity (by reason of the total divine order) takes
shape so entirely in remote inner and outer preparations that they
appear to us to be passed over. Those not yet included are for us
just this undefined element. Not possessing spiritual personality,
they are sunk in the mass of the sinful common life, and as long as
in their case the divine fore-ordination does not come to light, they
are just where the whole Church was to begin with. On this
account we can never cease to regard them as objects of the same
divine activity that gathered the Church together, and as embraced
along with us all under the same divine fore-ordination. And
since we have denied the possibility of any relapse from fellowship
with Christ into the common life of sin, whereby that fellowship
were wholly abjured, and have declared this an illusion, it follows
that no divine fore-ordination can be admitted as a result of
which the individual would be lost to fellowship with Christ.
Thus we, may reasonably persist in holding this single divine

Cia Snug. ; 2 Matt. 2214,

* . . . quando ipsa electio, nisi reprobationi opposita, non staret (Calv.,
Tnstit. WI. xxiii. 1). Only he does not take it in our limited sense, but rather


says roundly that this limitation, for which the reason is given above, is
brought in inscite nimis et pueriliter, yey


§ 119] REPROBATION 549


fore-ordination to blessedness, by which the origin of the Church is
ordered.

3. Itis therefore only as it were in an appendix, not here strictly
relevant, that we can deal with the other idea of there being a two-
fold fore-ordination—on the one hand to blessedness, on the other to
damnation.1_ The only point of attachment for it in the foregoing
discussion is the possibility of death intervening in some individual
case before fore-ordination has fulfilled itself. Suppose an indi-
vidual in whom noteworthy influences of preparatory grace are
to be seen, but about whom it may be equally certain that he is
not yet in the state of sanctification ; then it is very natural to
think that it is in virtue of a divine ordinance that he did not
attain to fellowship with Christ and the enjoyment of blessed-
ness. If, however, we proceed on the definite assumption that all
belonging to the human race are eventually taken up into living
fellowship with Christ, there is nothing for it but this single divine
fore-ordination. We infer from it that for such an one this fore-
ordination has not been fulfilled during his lifetime, but not by
any means that a different fore-ordination is being fulfilled by his
death ; rather, the state in which he dies is only an intermediate
state. Such is the faith in Christ which ascribes to Him a claim
and power over the whole human race, without at the same time
needing to admit any blind divine preference, and in which there is
encountered no contradiction between the end in view in the divine
plan of salvation and the result accomplished by the divine govern-
ment of the world. But as soon as people proceed on the opposite
assumption (as is obviously done in our Confessions),? namely,
that death is the end of the divine gracious working, the proposi-
tion given above ceases to be a fitting statement ; and, if every-
thing is to be neat and logical, we must admit a fore-ordination by
which some are predestined to damnation, as others to blessed-
ness. If, however, even on this assumption, it is still urged that the
fore-ordination only holds of those who are saved, the others being
simply passed over or left where they are, we must reply that, if the
only conceivable meaning of fore-ordination is a divine decree that

1Calv., Institt. 111. xxi. 5: Praedestinationem qua deus alios in spem
vitae adoptat, alios adiudicat aeternae morti, nemo . . . simpliciter negare
audet.—Non enim pari conditione creantur omnes, sed aliis vita aeterna aliis
damnatio aeterna praeordinatur. Itaque prout in alterutrum finem quisque
conditus est, ita vel ad vitam vel ad mortem praedestinatum dicimus.

2 So, too, Melanchthon, Joc. d. praed., when he says : Deus volens non perire


totum genus humanum semper propter filium ... vocat... et recipit
assentientes, means by this only the time ante novissimum diem.


550 THE CHRISTIAN FAITH [§ 119


conducts man to his very end,! this is an impossible view at least
without forced artificiality. Similarly when, identifying fore-
ordination with election, some deny that there is any fore-ordination
in respect of the wicked, but merely foreknowledge °—as if a
foreknown passing-over were not also a fore-ordination. For if
it be asserted that the individual persons elected are fore-ordained,?
it follows, if the rest are merely covered by foreknowledge, that in
respect of them there is no divine will at all. And even if it be
ever so strongly argued that electing fore-ordination is not to be
considered as something wholly abstract, but as taking place in
Christ, it none the less follows, if in Christ some cannot be elect
but merely passed over, that the universality of redemption must
be limited in proportion. To sum up, the only possible conclusion
is that if—on the presupposition that for those who die outside
fellowship with Christ there is no further possibility of entrance
into it—it is yet desired to assert that the excluded are simply
passed over, they must then be regarded as not having any exist-
ence at all. Now this is quite right if the whole proposition be
taken as dealing with the sphere of the new creation, for in that
sphere the excluded persons are not to be found. But then on that
view even the elect are not there to begin with, but only after each
comes to be in his own time and according to his own fore-ordina-
tion ; and the expression ‘ fore-ordination ’ cannot then be applied
to real individuals. Indeed, the proposition would have to run as
follows. There is a single divine fore-ordination, according to which
the totality of the new creation is called into being out of the general
mass of the human race. In itself this formula is equally adapted
to all assumptions—to that according to which the non-elect perish
at death, to our own, and to that with which we are now dealing.
All that our assumption adds to it is this, that the totality of the
new creation is equal to the general mass ; what the first adds is
that the general mass eventually becomes equal to the totality of


1 Praedestinationem vocamus aeternum dei decretum, quo apud se
constitutum habuit quid de wnoquogue homine fieri vellet (Calv., Institt.
III. XXiil. 5.

* Sol. decl. xi.: Aeterna vero electio seu praedestinatio dei ad salutem
non simul ad bonos et ad malos pertinet,—and all that follows.

® Sol. decl. xi.: Et quidem deus illo suo consilio non tantum in genere
salutem suorum procuravit, verum etiam omnes et singulas personas electorum

. ad salutem elegit.

* At this point the Augustinian formula already cited is entirely apposite :
Sola gratia redemtos discernit a perditis, quos in unam perditionis concreverat
massam ab origine ducta causa communis (Enchir, xxix.). To suit our pur-
pose, we have to alter this only slightly, as follows: Praedestinatio discernit
redemtos a communi perditionis massa.


£220} THE GROUNDS OF ELECTION 551


the new creation; the last, on the other hand, lets the general
mass remain the more extensive. But in harmony with this one
must also say of the redeeming power of Christ that it suffices to
save from common ruin the totality of the new creation contained
in the human race. And a composite formula is always unsound
which gives foreknowledge a wider compass than fore-ordination,
for no such disparity can exist. God always predetermines the
condition just as He foresees that which is conditioned; and it
follows that if He foresees what is conditioned, namely, the lostness
of men, and (speaking very humanly) does not alter what conditions
it, namely, the particular constitution of the individual in its rela-
tion to his position in the course of the spread of the gospel, then He
has also fore-ordained what is conditioned. If the one conception
be applied to individuals of both sections of mankind, so must the
other. In one section individuals are both foreknown and fore-
ordained as elements of the mass out of which the children of the
Kingdom are to be formed. In the other they are foreknown and
fore-ordained as the new creatures that are to be formed out of the
mass. Hence the formula suggested as a way out of the difficulty
would still deviate from the Confessions of both divisions of the
Protestant Church. For, as both definitely agree in excluding one
section of the human race, so they agree also in referring the ex-
pression ‘ fore-ordination ’ to the individual in his whole actuality ;
and if the matter is to end there, the logicality of Calvin’s formula
incontestably ought to be preferred. The assumption on which it
rests has certainly become more and more generally accepted in
the Church, but whether it is a necessary or optional assumption
is a point to be discussed only when we come to treat of the con-
summation of the Church, and not here, where we are dealing with
its origin.


SECOND THEOREM: THE GROUNDS OF ELECTION


§ 120. Election, viewed as influencing the divine government of the
world, is grounded in the faith of the elect, foreseen by God :
viewed as rooted in the divine government of the world, tt
is solely determined by the divine good-pleasure.


Canon. Dordy., Art. ix.: Eadem haec electio facta est non ex praevisa
fide.—Art. x.: Causa vero huius gratuitae electionis est solum Dei bene-
placitum.—Conf. March.: ‘That God... purely of grace... has
ordained to eternal life and elected all who thus steadfastly believe in Christ,
His own know and understand right well.’ Note that (thanks to Prince


552 THE CHRISTIAN FAITH [§ 120


Sigismund) it is repudiated as Pelagian that God has elected some, simply on
account of the faith He foresaw.—Collog. Lips., p. 404 (Brandb. and Hess.) :
‘That God. .. in Jesus Christ . . . has elected some whom He . . . leads to
faith in Christ and renews and preserves in the same to the end.’—(Kursax) :
‘That God had chosen from eternity those whom He saw. . . would believe in
Christ and continue in faith to their end . . . and that He found no cause
or occasion for this choice in the elect themselves.’


1. The antithesis set up here relatively to election applies
quite generally to all free actions. Every such action contributes
something to the further course of the divine government of the
world ; for everything within range of it would be more or less
different if it were different. At the same time every act is also
in its determined place in time and space the result of the divine
government of the world in its course up to that point. The con-
sideration of election from this point of view, however, rests on
the fact that the Kingdom of God and the divine procedure in its
harvesting and propagation is represented as a special divine
activity by itself, apart from the divine government of the world
in general, and that then (all men on account of sin being originally
equal in respect of redemption) the question arises why one is
chosen and not another. We have the same title and reason to
raise this question, whether the view that all are elect is adopted
or not ; though in the first case a more exact expression would be :
‘Why is one already, and another not yet regenerated?’ Now
looking back upon what was formerly said about the supernatural
becoming natural, this can only be decided in the light of nature ;
and all we can say is that if any one is regenerated, it can be then
inferred that in his case the preaching of the gospel at its maxi-
mum of power and the maximum of his susceptibility must have
coincided in time. But the answer gives no satisfaction, for this
again depends on conditions that are under divine control. And
if at this point the question is again raised why circumstances were
so controlled that one was regenerated and another not, we must
either seek the ground for the determination absolutely at the
beginning, before there was anything at all, which means holding
firmly to belief in a divine good-pleasure ; or else we must seek it
at the end, in the final result, which means that we hold firmly to
a divine foreknowledge. Obviously, however, these two are not
separable. For there is no foreknowledge in God that is not
connected with a divine good-pleasure ;! and just as little is there
a good-pleasure in any particular thing apart from its entire con-


WCE §$ 55,1.


§ 120] THE DIVINE FOREKNOWLEDGE 553


text, which in the case of everything temporal necessarily includes
foreknowledge. In the credal passages quoted, however, and in
other similar passages, there is on this point a remarkable hesita-
tion. Good-pleasure and foreknowledge are contrasted ; yet what
has been excluded is almost always brought in again by way of
some cautious formula. The form of our proposition is meant to
do away with this uncertainty and confusion.

2. If the moments of regeneration are chiefly to be regarded
as extending the union of the divine with the human nature, and
the justifying divine activity as the temporal and particularized
continuation of the general act of union begun in the incarnation of
Christ, we must admit that the divine procedure will follow the same
rule in the one case as in the other. Therefore if the question be
ventured, why then for this union with human nature there was
chosen precisely Jesus of Nazareth, or rather (since it was only
through this union that He became what He was) why exactly
this and no other person-creating act of human nature was chosen,
at exactly this time—the question must be capable of being
answered in a quite analogous way. If we recall that this act was
itself a becoming natural of the supernatural, and if we remember
the kind of effects that were to proceed from it, we cannot answer
in any other way than this: that time and place were chosen
as the absolutely best, that is as yielding the maximum operative
effect. Now to answer the question thus is obviously to postulate
foreseen faith as the ground of individual election. or by the same
rule they must be chosen, and the time of their conversion deter-
mined, so as to make their share in the furtherance of the work of
redemption the greatest possible. In the same way, if we take a
large view of election not merely as the determination of the order
in which individuals are regenerated, but as the election of nations
to have the gospel firmly rooted in their midst, this too will be
determined in just such a way as to attain the extensive and
intensive maximum for the whole course of the historical develop-
ment. But everything that the individual or a community can do
by word or deed for the extension of the Kingdom of God, being a
continuation of, and therefore included in, the prophetic activity
of Christ, may be summed up in the terms ‘ proclamation’ or
‘preaching.’ And preaching, in this meaning and compass,
springs from,! and is the natural utterance of, faith. It is thus
quite the same thing whether we say that the divine election is


1 Rom, rot’, 2: Cor. 41%.


554 THE CHRISTIAN FAITH [§ 120


determined through the foreseen efficaciousness of preaching, or
through the foreseen occurrence of the maximum power of faith.

It is true all the same that in the common use of the formula
this moment of regeneration is what is least prominent, and what is
stressed is the permanence and steadiness of faith rather than its
active power. But the inadequacy of the formula taken in this
restricted sense must strike everyone. On this reading it does not
get right back to the idea of the Kingdom of God, or to the origin of
the Church, which, according to the Scripture passage ! that forms
the basis of most discussions of the subject, is the natural point at
which the question arises. In fact, an entirely atomistic view of the
work of redemption underlies the whole position, if it is always and
only the individual as such that is spoken of ; and no such limitation
can possibly yield a right view. This becomes very clear if along
with this formula we take two others which are supposed to explain
and support it. First, it follows from the formula that if some
are not elected at all, they are those in whom effectual grace would
not in any case have had firm root. But it is also said of them that
God has determined to harden and reject those who persist in
repelling His word.? If the combination of these formule is to
lead anywhere, it must be possible to prove a difference between the
natural aversion which is the ground of non-election and the anti-
pathy caused by God which is its result. The impossibility of this
makes the formula useless, whether as a canon for the investiga-
tion of Christian history, or for conducting fruitful self-examina-
tion. On the other hand, if, after stating that God elects those
whom He sees to be such as will continue in faith, it be also said
that He has determined to strengthen and confirm those whom He
elects, it is equally impossible to define a difference and boundary
line between the former merely foreseen steadfastness, and the
latter, which is imparted by God Himself. If, however, it is the
intention of the formula to avoid every imputation of Pelagianism,
and therefore to reckon the former too as divinely effected (there
being no foreknowledge in God that is not operative), the final
conclusion is that God has elected only those whom He has also
determined to strengthen in faith. Now this is an altogether empty
formula, unless one is conceiving faith as also including its operative
effect. The same holds good of the more modest formula that


1 Rom. to and 11.

* Sol. decl. xi. : In codem suo consilio decrevit, quod eos qui per verbum
vocati illud repudiant ... et obstinati in illa contumacia perseverant,
indurare reprobare et aeternae damnatione devovere velit.


§ 120] THE DIVINE GOOD-PLEASURE 555


regard to faith cannot be excluded from the divine decree of
election.!

No one, however, will desire to stretch the application of our
first formula so far as to insist on our proving that the maximum
fruit of redemption could have been secured only by just exactly
the course of election which as a matter of fact has gone to edify
the Church. No proof is possible, for there is no alternative with
which the comparison can be made. Hence what we have in this
formula is faith speaking about what is fundamental to the con-
ception of history and to true self-scrutiny.

3. The answer, however, which has just been given in reference
to what can be regarded as divine election in the incarnation of
Christ may also be traced back to the second formula of our pro-
position. For if we say that that point was chosen from which
the maximum of efficacy could develop, it may also be said that
that point only had this peculiarity because the general situation
had become just what it was. But this situation divine guidance
might have made different, and then a different point would have
had this peculiarity. Christ therefore was determined as He was,
only because, and in so far as, everything as a whole was deter-
mined in a certain way; and conversely, everything as a whole
was only so determined, because, and in so far as, Christ was
determined ina certain way. To say this is obviously to take our
stand upon the divine good-pleasure, and to say that the deter-
mination in both cases is what it is simply through the divine good-
pleasure. Indeed, whenever we form an inclusive idea of natural
causality as a self-enclosed whole and go back to its basis in the
divine causality, we can reach no ground of determination for the
latter except the divine good-pleasure. Just as the whole world
was so ordered by God that He could say it was all very good, that
is, in accordance with His good-pleasure, and as the individual is
in this regard not separable from his connexion with the rest of
being—so, viewing the Kingdom of God as a self-enclosed whole,
we can only say that, as it is, it is simply determined through the
divine good-pleasure. And everything appertaining to it is so
determined—Christ as He actually is, and the whole actual inward
manifold of the human race in space and time, out of which through
Christ the Kingdom of God is formed. ‘There is, of course, nothing
to hinder it being also said that the order in which the relationship


1Dicimus fidei intuitum decreto electionis esse includendum (Gerh., iv.
p- 207).


556 THE CHRISTIAN FAITH [§ 120


to Christ comes to be realized in each individual case conforms to
that manifold, and is determined by it ; but in that case it must
also be possible to say, conversely, that the manifold of the human
race conforms to that order, and is determined with relation to it so
that, within it, redemption through Christ develops on precisely
this scale and in this order. Both statements are equally true, and
at the same time, because standing in contrast, they are equally
false. Summing up everything, therefore, all that can rightly be
said is that both, in their relation to one another, and also each by
itself, are in the above sense ordered according to the divine good-
pleasure. It has been well-pleasing to God that human nature
should show itself in this determined multiplicity of thus deter-
mined individual beings ; and no other ground for it can be given.
For every other explanation would involve conditioning assump-
tions ; and these in turn would always themselves be conditioned
by the all-embracing divine good-pleasure. Similarly it has been
His good-pleasure to make the dispensation of human affairs perfect
through Christ. He might from the very beginning have arranged
the whole march of the human race differently ; only it would then
have been a different human race, for when once one thing is fixed,
everything else is fixed along with it in just one way. Every
attempted logical proof of the necessity of redemption in this form
assumes something the necessity of which itself requires similar
proof. For the religious there is no path of escape from this circle
of necessities, each leading back to and conditioned by the others,
except by way of this one all-inclusive divine good-pleasure. Ac-
cordingly, all that remains to us is the task of linking up at every
point this divine good-pleasure (which is necessarily implicit in our
God-consciousness) with what we perceive of the actual course of
the work of redemption, and of resting trustfully upon it, however
we may be moved by what happens. Indeed, faith in Christ is
itself nothing else than sharing in this divine good-pleasure which
abides on Christ and the salvation grounded in Him ; and the con-
sciousness of divine grace, or the peace of God in the redeemed
heart, is nothing else than just this quiet acceptance of the divine
good-pleasure in respect of the arrangement of events which led to
oneself being taken up into the sphere of redemption. Just as in
the world in general we meet with the most manifold gradation of
life, from the lowest and most imperfect forms up to the highest
and most perfect, and cannot doubt but that this very multiplicity
is the richest fulfilment, in time and space, of the divine good-


§ 120] THE DIVINE DECREE 557


pleasure ; and as such gradations also occur within the sphere of
human nature : so within the sphere of spiritual life resulting from
redemption we shall readily expect all that lies between the greatest
and the least, and find peace in regarding all this abundance, linked
up in living fellowship, as the object of the divine good-pleasure.

4. We have already seen how these grounds of election are
arrived at, and how they seem to be in opposition to one another
because they have opposite points of departure. The previous
exposition will have removed this apparent contradiction, as our
proposition requires, by exhibiting it in formule which have an
equivalent content, but merely are construed from different angles,
so that in accepting the one there is no necessity to reject the
other. But it is only possible to show them thus to be in agreement,
if both are freed from untenable elements attracted in large measure
by their very opposition. What has to be detached from the first
is any appearance of the divine decree being dependent on what
would obviously be a human kind of foreknowledge on the part of
God, the object of which would then be independent of the divine
decree, whereas in fact that decree must be guided by His fore-
knowledge. For if a determination of the divine decree by faith
foreseen be opposed to a determination by the free divine good-
pleasure, the inference is hardly to be avoided that faith is grounded,
independently of the divine influence, in the free will of man ; and
this semblance of Pelagianism cannot be removed by any kind of
artificial qualifications, so as to leave the formula any definite
content at all. As against this, what we say is that faith foreseen
determines the divine decree in so far as it has been the divine
good-pleasure to allow to issue from this point such an activity in
behalf of the Kingdom of God as is conditioned by precisely this
strength and timeousness of faith. The other formula, to the effect
that the divine good-pleasure draws on one person and leavesanother
behind, if set up in contrast to the first, seems only too easily to
imply favouritism to the one and repression of the other ; and this
in such wise that on such a beginning the end must follow, no matter
what may happen in between. There is thus an appearance of
divine caprice in an unconditioned divine decree concerning in-
dividuals, as though it meant an urgent support of the one person
with irresistible aid and a predetermined abandonment of the
other ; and this is so difficult to guard against without the whole
formula falling to pieces, that the simplest plan is just to accept
it, As against this, our exposition knows of no unconditioned divine


558 THE CHRISTIAN FAITH [§ 120


decree regarding the individual, for all individuals are mutually
conditioned ; it knows only a single unconditioned decree by which
the whole, as an undivided system, is what it is in virtue of the
divine good-pleasure. Not at all as if the individual has somehow
some kind of existence apart from this divine decree, which then
simply does or does not save him. On the contrary, each individual
comes into existence only because and in so far as an element of
just such a kind, and of such active powers, is given a place in the
whole, in accordance with the divine good-pleasure. Each, there-
fore, is fashioned in readiness to become a member of the Christian
fellowship, because he is foreseen as a believer. If now we view
our two formulas in combination, they contain two rules by which
these disadvantageous inferences are made impossible. The first
is that no individual becomes anything whatever for himself, alone
and apart from his place in the whole, in consequence of a special
divine decree relating to him. In the second place, viewed as part
of the general context of things, everything, and in particular the
way in which redemption is realized, is the perfect manifestation at
once of the divine good-pleasure and of the divine omnipotence.
Postscript to this Doctrine—From the point at which we have
arrived let us return once more to the assumption that a section
of the human race remains shut out for ever from the sphere of
redemption, or (to express it as it touches most closely the proper
content of our doctrines) that the Christian Church only arises out
of the human race in such wise that a section of mankind is for ever
lost to it. On the one hand, it cannot be denied that at this point
a perfect acquiescence in the divine good-pleasure is hard to attain,
for racial and personal consciousness are here affected by contrary
emotions, and the resulting inevitable and ever-renewed sadness is
such as to prevent an unalloyed communication of the blessedness of
Christ. And another problem arises, namely, how so to conceive
the matter that human nature shall still remain identical in all.
Of course if in Manichzan fashion we are prepared to make a cleavage
in human nature, that sadness must die out, since the others are
no longer our fellows in the old sense. On the other hand, unless
our Christian self-consciousness is to be essentially modified, the
almost equally insoluble problem arises how so to conceive this
as that nevertheless Christ is still sent not only to, but also for, the
whole human race. This is only the case if it be admitted that at
some time or another some trace of His activity actually makes itself
felt in everyone. But it is easy to see that the difficulty is of a


§ 120] GOOD HOPE FOR ALL 559


very different sort according as we are dealing with those who have
already experienced the influences of the Christian Church, or
with those who have remained outside all connexion with it. It
may therefore be advisable to make a corresponding distinction
within the assumption itself. As regards the former class no
incapacity for redemption must in any sense be ascribed to them ;
rather, as often as some operation of preparatory grace has been
vouchsafed to them up to the point of communication, they have
already and by that very fact become instruments for spreading the
Kingdom of God ; for every such communication bears witness to
the grace of Godin Christ. But the less we are in a position instantly
to mark a man’s transition to the state of sanctification, and must
be careful to recognize the possibility of an imperceptible occurrence
of regeneration no less than of a sudden one, the more we are com-
- pelled to recognize, with regard to all who already belong outwardly
to the Christian fellowship, the wisdom of the caution that we
should not lightly reckon anyone among the rejected ;1 so that
there is no conceivable case to which the assumption we are dis-
cussing can be confidently applied. As regards those outside the
Church, it is an essential of our faith that every nation will sooner
or later become Christian, as indeed this was Paul’s hope for his
own people, which had so often obstinately refused the divine
grace. In so far therefore as we view the individual in his national
idiosyncrasy, reckoning the spirit he thus shares an essential element
in his personality, to that extent we may say that he bears within
himself this predetermination to blessedness. This holds good the
more as he himself possesses more of those qualities of the common
spirit to which, in his race, the acceptance of faith can attach itself,
and the less as he possesses more of those qualities on which the
race’s procrastinating resistance depends. This more and less,
obviously corresponding to the faith foreseen, means for us of
course simply this : that the same people, if alive at the time when
the gospel first appeared among their nation, would have been laid
hold of by it, one man at the very outset, another at some later stage.
None the less, from the fact that out of these circumstances we can
only construct a formula which expresses nothing real, it does not
follow that it could have no other significance in the divine fore-
ordination (even without our having on this account to take refuge
in the scientia media of God) : for in those individuals these qualities


1 Expos. simpl. x.: Bene sperandum tamen est de omnibus, neque temere
eprobis quisquam est adnumerandus,


560 THE CHRISTIAN FAITH [§ 121


are real. Rather, if all in this fashion are included in the divine
fore-ordination to blessedness, then the high-priestly dignity of
Christ for the first time comes out in its whole efficacy—an efficacy
which implies that God regards all men only in Christ. This very
point can be applied also to the previously considered case. So
that at least this result clearly emerges, that if we take the uni-
versality of redemption in its whole range (which cannot really be
conceived without this high-priestly dignity of Christ and all its
consequences), then we must also take fore-ordination to blessed-
ness quite universally ; and that limits can be imposed on neither
without curtailing the other.


SECOND DOCTRINE: THE COMMUNICATION OF THE HOLY SPIRIT


§ 121. All who are living in the state of sanctification feel an inward
impulse to become more and more one in theiy common
co-operative activity and reciprocal influence, and are
conscious of this as the common Spirit of the new corporate
life founded by Christ.


1. This fact itself is expressed in the most definite way in all
the scriptural accounts of the first planting of the Christian Church ;
and the favourable impression made on non-Christians is always
represented as due to this unity ; + and this quality of fellowship is
brought into the closest connexion with the new life of every indi-
vidual. Indeed, all informing pictures of the Christian fellowship
agree in describing every individual as an integral constituent of
the whole, and attributing everything to one spirit moving in, and
animating, the whole.? And if adherents of the twofold separatist
tendency already frequently censured, the naturalistic and the
fanatical or visionary, should wish to object that this properly
holds good only of the first period of the Christian Church and is
by no means essential to it, but must more and more die out, since
every reason for thus holding together drops away when once the
new life is firmly established and can perfect itself out of the common
source in each individual by himself, they may be answered as
follows.

In the first place, that which can cease or fall into the background
through the gradual strengthening of individuals is only one element
in one half of what our proposition affirms ; it is only that element


1 Acts r18ff. 242m. 432m. Bes -14 931
2 Romerg’s$s1nCorsnzst. , Eph. PACITY TEDL IES PE


§ 121] THE IMPARTATION OF FELLOWSHIP 561


of the reciprocal influence which comes under the analogy! of
teaching and learning, or of imparting and receiving. For if any-
one is properly taught of God he does not require someone else to
teach him. This element in fellowship is also, in one particular
respect, always on the way to cessation 2—if, that is, one is always
in contact with the same people. But as new persons are always
arriving, this element in fellowship also runs on ; those who were
previously receivers now imparting, as givers, to later comers.
And this mutual influence has a further element, namely, a
reciprocity of impartation and comprehension among equals.
This is based on the fact that, owing to varied personal idiosyncrasies,
the new life itself is something different in every case ; and every-
one, just as he would fain take Christ wholly to himself, strives also
to take to himself as far as possible all that Christ has effected ;
and thus again each is moved by Christ (as he personally conceives
Him) to manifest the power of Christ working in him, which indeed
is what happens in all the good works of the regenerate. Still less
does the other element, the co-operative activity, ever tend to cease.
On the contrary, it is bound to be facilitated and to expand in
proportion as the new life gains strength in each. [And obviously,
in proportion as the will for the Kingdom of God originated simul-
taneously with living faith in Christ is more definitely formed
within each and develops into a system of purposes, so will each
necessarily appropriate the help of all kindred forces. And thus,
through this interweaving of what is co-operative and what is
reciprocal, and in virtue of the identity of the new life in all, there
arises a disposition to a common work or undertaking—a work that
can be carried forward approximatingly towards its goal only by
means of the conjunction of every power and activity ; a work
which would by no means cease though the whole human race were
received into the fellowship of redemption, because it ever remains
as in itself an infinite and ever-changing exemplification of what is
common in the individual and what is individual in the common.
For this is the essential thing in the life of a people ; and it is asa
people, or a household of God,* that Christians have always wished
to be regarded.

In the second place, there are, it is true, in this regard two
opposite kinds of human association: those which of themselves
tend to come to an end, and within which therefore no increasing
unity is striven for; and those which seek to persist, in which

1 John 6%, 2 Eph, 41-13, 3 Eph, 2! Tit. 214, ¢ Pet. 2°,
36


562 THE CHRISTIAN FAITH [§ 121


therefore the mitigation of differences must be an object, and unity
must be held fast. The former are always merely accidental.
Partly they are those which by their very nature can be given
neither definite form nor definite limits, as in all associations within
a free society, though even there under certain circumstances some-
thing like a common spirit comes to exist ; partly they are those
formed solely in connexion with some particular joint-undertaking
without any inward unity of spirit, in such a way that each is left
free to seek his own personal ends. It may be there are even
religious fellowships approaching this in character ; of the Christian
fellowship it certainly does not hold true. For what each recognizes
in the other is a common love to Christ ; and this supplies a unifying
principle that is uninterruptedly at work.

2. If now we denote this striving for unity by the expression
‘common spirit,’ we mean by this exactly what we mean in any
earthly system of government, namely, the common bent found in
all who constitute together a moral personality, to seek the advance-
ment of this whole ; and this is at the same time the characteristic
love found in each for every other. Hence up to this point no
objection can easily be made to our proposition. But if one com-
pares its content as there explained with the heading, and rightly
infers thence that this common spirit is meant as the Holy Spirit,
and the communication of it as the communication of the Holy
Spirit, then the suspicion may easily arise that the expression Holy
Spirit ’ is being taken in an entirely different sense from that given
it in Scripture. But the thought-forms that have arisen owing to
the place of the Holy Spirit in the doctrine of the Trinity (partly
to explain it, partly to refute it, as, for example, when the Holy
Spirit is represented as a separate higher Being, indeed, but only a
created one) ought none of them to be taken as equivalent to New
Testament statements, which as a matter of fact represent the
Holy Spirit to us as always and only in believers. He is promised
to the whole community,! and where an original communication of
the Spirit is spoken of, it comes by a single act to a multitude of
people,’ who eo ipso become an organic whole, who are urged on
to like activity and stand in for each other. In all, however, He
is represented as being one and the same, the various effects produced
by Him in various people being distinguished from Himself as His
gifts.’ And this is not meant as if merely to indicate an advantage
or superiority which some individuals possess ; which would natur-


1 ff. 4.5 2 .
John 167#., Acts 145, John 207%: 23, Acts 24, sr Cor, 123,


$121] THE SPIRIT IN THE NEW TESTAMENT 563


ally mean that the Spirit was a particular quality of the personality
of each, resembling and generically the same as the quality of
anyone else’s ; which is how we conceive the matter in the case of
special talents and perfections. No: on the one hand the Spirit
is represented as a true unity through which the multitude of
Christians also become a unity and the many individual personalities
become a true common life or moral personality ; and, on the other
hand, the Spirit is not assigned to people as it were in a random and
unconnected fashion—a phenomenon here one moment and gone
the next. The presence of the Spirit rather is the condition of
anyone’s sharing in the common life ;+ for, only when this common
spirit of the whole begins to show itself at work in a given person
can it be known that he is a constituent part of the whole ;? just
as if anyone joins himself to the whole, it can be taken as certain
that he will receive a communication of the Holy Spirit. Now in
the sphere of thought there has always been controversy over
questions of this kind, as to how far what exists in many is still
one, or whether and in what degree it can be rightly said that an
idea or a motion of the will common to many is one, or is something
particular in each. Here we do not have to decide such differences
of opinion, whether on their own account or because we had pre-
maturely represented one view or the other as incompatible with
this element of the Christian faith. We prefer not to enter on this
field at all, but merely to lay down two points as expressions of
our Christian self-consciousness. The first is that the unity of the
Spirit is to be understood in the same sense as the unity which
everyone attributes to the characteristic form taken by human
nature in a nation; even those who ascribe being only to the
separate individual may still say that each man’s personality is the
national character modified by the original basis of his own nature.
Similarly, we say that the new life of each is an activity of this
common spirit manifested in the same fashion in all others, an
activity conditioned by the state in which regeneration finds him ;
and the Christian Church is one through this one Spirit in the same
way that a nation is one through the national character common to
and identical in all. The second point is that this common spirit
is also one, because in all derived from one and the same source,
namely, Christ ; for everyone is conscious of the communication of
the Spirit as being connected in the closest fashion with the rise of
faith in him, and everyone recognizes that the same is true for all


17 Cor. 122, Rom. 8°. 2 Acts 1047, 193, sActs 2°:


564 THE CHRISTIAN FAITH [§ 121


the others. For faith only comes by preaching, and preaching
always goes back to Christ’s commission and is therefore derived
from Him. And as in Christ Himself everything proceeds from
the Divine within Him, so also does this communication, which
becomes in everyone the power of the new life, a power not different
in each, but the same in all.

3. Another possible objection is this. Starting from the point
that all other religious fellowships are destined to lose themselves
in Christianity, and hence that all nations are destined to pass over
into the Christian fellowship, the common spirit of the Christian
Church would then be the common spirit of the human race. Now
by analogy with the common spirit of a nation such a thing as this
latter must exist, and we do not know how to describe it otherwise
than by the expressions, racial consciousness, or love of humanity
as a species. But in that case the race is one in the same sense as
the Church is one, and as there cannot be two living unities for the
same whole, what we wish to denote by the expression ‘ Holy Spirit ’
would be exactly the same thing as the racial consciousness. This
would mean either that the latter was something supernatural,
which no one would desire to maintain, or that the former must be
natural, and if derived from Christ, then from the human in Him.
This would make the communication of the Holy Spirit nothing
more than the awakening by Christ of a pure racial consciousness.
For the subject about to be dealt with, this is the most logical form
of the view which regards the awakening and expansion of a universal
love to men as the proper and essential fruit of the appearance of
Christ. To us, however, not only is it certain that our participa-
tion in the Holy Spirit really belongs to the things which we are
conscious of having had imparted to us by Christ, but also that in
Christ everything derives from the absolute and exclusive power of
His God-consciousness. And if on the other hand we take into
account our self-consciousness as still betraying our participation
in the common life of sinfulness, we find in it such a variety of
interests belonging to the merely individual though also enlarged
personality that the pure racial consciousness cannot prevail as a
practical motive any more than could a law of morality couched
in different terms ; it merely serves as a barrier against personal
and social selfishness. Of course it was first through Christ (as
Founder of a society which is capable of embracing all men, and
which, while attaching individuals to itself, looks simply to the fact
of their being human) that the racial consciousness, along with the


§ 122] CHRIST’S DEPARTURE AND THE SPIRIT 565


God-consciousness and with the same object in view, has become a
powerful practical motive. But just for this reason, this power is
no mere natural principle that would have developed of itself out
of human nature as human nature would have remained without
Christ. On the contrary, we recognize it for the most authentic
expression of the Holy Spirit as a consciousness of the need to be
redeemed that is alike in all, and of the capacity, alike in all, to be
taken up into living fellowship with Christ ; and the universal love
of humanity we know only as one and the same thing with the will
for the Kingdom of God in its widest compass. It is only in this
sense that for us the common spirit of the Christian Church, and
every Christian’s universal love for men as a love alike for those
who have already become citizens of the Kingdom of God and for
those to whom this experience is yet to come, are the same One
Holy Spirit.


§ 122. Only after the departure of Christ from earth was it possible
for the Holy Spirit, as this common spint, to be fully com-
municated and received.

1. Let us compare this proposition with what is most often
taught on this point and is stated not only when the subject is dealt
with in presence of a congregation, but predominantly in the public
teaching given, where the procession of the Holy Spirit is indeed
set forth in the doctrine of the Trinity as timeless and eternal, but
the outpouring of the Spirit, as the beginning of His activity within
the Christian Church, is connected with the event of Pentecost.
The first point needing defence is this, that as has at least been
indicated in our argument, the Holy Spirit must already have been
at work, even though incompletely. Now it certainly is true that
Christ Himself makes His going away a condition of the sending
of the Spirit ; + but it is equally true that He Himself communicated
the Spirit to them before His final departure from earth,” and indeed
that He even assumed that the Spirit had been already present
with them ; for whatever is a divine revelation in the soul relatively
to Christ ? is also a work of the Spirit. Now these various state-
ments are not easily to be harmonized, unless what Christ is said to
have expected at His Ascension in Jerusalem * was simply a com-
plete filling with the Spirit. If now we start from the position that
the Holy Spirit is the inmost vital power of the Christian Church as
a whole, we must go back to the two most elemental aspects of life,


1 John 167, 2 John 20”, 3 Matt, 1627, SENG (Si legeue:


566 THE CHRISTIAN FAITH [§ 122


the living susceptibility and the free spontaneous activity ; for
these together, in their reciprocal relations, are that by which life
is constituted—life being the more complete and the more fully
developed, the larger the sphere covered by each of the two, and
the more exact their mutual correspondence. In company with
Christ the susceptibility of the disciples developed, and in their
steady apprehension of what He offered to them there was laid
the foundation of their future effectiveness as workers for the King-
dom of God. Hence, as they related their apprehension entirely
to the Kingdom of God preached by Christ, each recognized this
susceptibility in the others as the very same thing, grounded and
upheld in the same way in them all. There came to be among them
a fellowship in apprehension, and as face to face with Christ each
was able to represent the rest in question and answer,! this suscepti-
bility revealed itself as an essential factor in the common spirit.
In this sense the right apprehension of Christ is itself ascribed to
the Holy Spirit.2. On the other hand, they had at that time no
really spontaneous activity of their own. What Christ suggested
to them in that line was practice, not performance proper, and just
for that reason it was not free activity, but one that needed on each
occasion a new special impetus. One step in the transition towards
complete spontaneity is shown in the communication of the Spirit,
just referred to, in the forty days after the Resurrection. For the
right binding and loosing of sin is in the main just an expression
of a fully formed susceptibility for what relates to the Kingdom of
God. This expression, however, is inconceivable except as having
a reaction on those whose sins are bound or loosed; it therefore
marks a transition to free spontaneous activity ; and obviously
the susceptibility reveals itself most distinctly as the common
spirit in expressions which presumably are unanimous.

2. The common spirit was, however, as yet incomplete ; hence
during the personal presence of Christ there can have been no com-
pletely common life representing at that time the Kingdom of God.
And this, as a matter of fact, was the case. For the more a common
life depends on an individual life, the less is it an existence in
common. In part it is so far not equipped for permanent identity
amid the changes of death and birth ; in part a common life ought
to be one whole, but not an individual person. The more all depend
on one, each receiving his impetus from him, the more all are merely
his tools or members, and the whole is just the enlargement of this

1 Matt: 167% John 148% 112e. Bt Corcres.


§ 122] CHRIST AND HIS DISCIPLES 567


one personality. Or if we consider the multiplicity of individual
lives, the whole is really more like a household or a school than an
existence in common. The ancients viewed the State in which all
are unconditionally subject to the will of an individual, as an en-
larged household, where various living tools move at the command
of one master ; and school for us means a spiritual life in common
which entirely depends on the thinking power and art of making
disciples possessed by an individual, who puts a common stamp
on them all. In this sense, of course, Christ’s life in company with
His disciples was both a household and a school. But a house is
scattered on the master’s death, and if its members are not caught
up in some new bond, they disperse. So, too, in a school, if no
other common motive comes to replace the original thirst forlearning
and personal attachment, no further progress takes place after the
master’s death, and the previous bond of union gradually dissolves.
We find the disciples in the mood thus to disperse after Christ’s
death, and up to the time of His Ascension their life together was so
much interrupted and decreased as to become quite formless. But
even when Christ was alive it could not but be that each felt mainly
dependent on Him, and sought to receive from Him; no one of
them all considered himself ripe for free spontaneous activity in
the Kingdom of God yet to be formed.

3. If we do not wish to insist that the Holy Spirit is a divine
communication of a quite specific kind, which though conditioned
by Christ is yet not thus homogeneous with His earlier influence,
it is certainly possible to argue that the distinction here sought to
be drawn is untenable. For according to our own statements, in
the living fellowship of the regenerate with Christ everything derives
from Him, which means that, strictly speaking, there is to be found
in every Christian only susceptibility, not spontaneous activity.
And hence, it may be said, the life in common is no more now than
then a common existence ; for the spontaneous activity then as now
was wholly in Christ, and believers’ life together even yet is just
the mutual impartation of what each has received from Christ.
But to this it must be rejoined that when formerly we studied the
way redemption is realized in the case solely of the individual by
himself, that was an incomplete view of the matter, and at the
moment we safeguarded ourselves by a reference to what we are
now considering. We said that ab initio preparatory operations
of grace arising out of the common existence reach everyone. The
statement that everything in the regenerate derives from Christ


568 THE CHRISITAN FAITH [§ 122


held good of the communication of His sinless perfection, which
simply consists in a pure will directed to the Kingdom of God ; in
particular aims and purposes this is no longer present. If therefore
we ask how our particular aims arise out of that pure will, the answer
is that it happens only in the common life. They no longer come
to anyone directly from Christ ; no one is given a special command
by Christ, as was the case with the disciples. But as no isolated
individual can achieve anything in the Kingdom of God, so no one
can really form any purpose but one in which he foresees that he
will have the support of others and of which the germ is therefore
already present in others. And again, through every such common
movement only so much progress will actually be made as has a
true common consciousness behind it. Here therefore there is more
in the individual than susceptibility, and his really spontaneous
energetic activity is more than the activity of Christ merely passing
through him. But the common spirit expressed in this spontaneous
activity is only the Holy Spirit in so far as the activity it induces
is a prolongation of Christ’s own activity. And no more than in
Christ’s lifetime is the individual’s susceptibility open merely to
what proceeds directly from Christ ; it is also a susceptibility to the
spontaneous activity of others.

If now we wish to apply here the general canon that everything
essentially connected with our participation in redemption must be
the same in us as in the first disciples, we shall say that as long as
all spontaneous activity was in Christ alone, but in them mere
susceptibility, the Kingdom of God in the narrower sense was
confined to Christ alone—the disciples representing only the outer
circle of the preparatory workings of grace, where there is nothing
but susceptibility. And just as then in the disciples, so now in
everyone the reminiscent apprehension of Christ must grow into a
spontaneous imitation of Him. This common spontaneous activity
—which indwells all and in each is kept right by the influence of
all, and prolongs the personal action of Christ—in its unity and
identity we have full right to call the common spirit of the Christian
Church ; it corresponds to all that Christ promised by the Holy
Spirit and to everything that is represented as the Spirit’s working.
Taking everything together, we are thus able to say how it was
that after Christ’s departure the disciples’ common apprehension of
Christ changed into a spontaneous prolongation of His fellowship-
forming activity, and how it was only through this activity so
related to the fixed apprehension of Christ becoming the imperish-


§ 123] THE COMMON SPIRIT 569


able common spirit, that the Christian Church arose. So, too,
everyone within the circle of preparatory grace, who through the
influence of Christian life upon him and in the activity of others
flowing through him, possesses this Christian common spirit merely
in the form of susceptibility, must, when through faith the rule of
the Kingdom of God has been established in his life, refashion his
attitude to the apprehension of Christ accepted within the common
life into a spontaneous activity of this kind; and this is the com-
munication of the divine Spirit. If now the justifying divine
activity be conceived under the form of particular divine actions,
we should have to say that now this communication is in each case,
as it were, the latest element or stage of this activity ; in the life-
time of Christ this final act was, so to speak, put off until after His
departure from the earth. But as we do not admit the reality of
any individual and temporal divine acts, we are not compelled
to adopt any such paradoxical formula; and we shall state the
parallel between the first disciples and ourselves equally well if we
say that already, even when Christ was with them, and just because
they were taken up into living fellowship with Him, they had the
principle of the new life, and had it not merely as susceptibility but
also as spontaneous activity ; although as long as Christ was with
them it took the form exclusively of a continuous desire to receive
from Him, and therefore only afterwards could become truly
common and manifest itself as Holy Spirit. It is these aspects
that are described with more precision in the following theorems.


§ 123. First Theorem.—The Holy Spirit is the union of the Divine
Essence with human nature in the form of the common Spirit
ammating the life in common of believers.


1. When in connexion with the doctrines of Christ we were
discussing the union in Him of the divine with the human, we put
entirely aside the question whether or not this divine, apart from
its union with human nature, was something special, as being the
second Person in the Godhead, and something relatively distinct
in the Divine Essence. So here too, in proposing a similar formula
for the Holy Spirit, we must (although the Trinity is now completely
before us) in the same way leave this consideration out of account.
What we have to treat here is simply this relation between the
highest Essence and human nature, in so far as in its operations
it meets us within our Christian self-consciousness. Since these
operations are fully expounded only in the next division, and the


570 THE CHRISTIAN FAITH [$ 123


content of the following section has already been prescribed for us,
a summary view of these relations in the doctrine of the Trinity
can only be given at the close of our whole exposition. But in
advance we must here make a different point. Our discussion is
not in the least meant to embrace all the passages in our Holy
Scriptures where this expression occurs, or all the ways in which
it is used in dogmatic works. Here we have only to do with the
Holy Spirit in the Christian Church, and do not raise the question
whether, as used apart from this relation, the expression means
the same thing or not. But this is equivalent to saying that the
Holy Spirit here discussed is not the same as the Spirit to whom a
participation in the creation of the material world is ascribed, or
the Spirit whose indwelling is the cause of all sorts of extraordinary
talents,? or even the Spirit mentioned in connexion with the incarna-
tion of Christ, at least so far as a physical effect is there ascribed to
Him,? even though, strictly speaking, a connexion with the Christian
Church does exist here. Indeed, we even put aside the common
way of speaking of the Holy Spirit as already active in the prophets
before the appearance of Christ,4 so as not to feel compelled to
identify the common spirit of the Jewish theocracy and that of
the Christian Church. And here, however much the letter of
Scripture may seem to contradict us, the spirit of the New Testa-
ment is on our side. In Christ’s promises of the Holy Spirit of
truth ° there is nowhere the slightest whisper that this Something
had been present earlier and had vanished only temporarily, or
indeed that He is anything at all except as He is for the disciples of
Christ. Otherwise the disciples would obviously have been prophets,
and Christ could hardly have said that prophecy ended with John.®

2. If now (provisionally leaving on one side what we have
established in the two last propositions) we return to the point
that in the Church from the beginning, and therefore already in the
New Testament, all the powers at work in the Christian Church—
and not merely the miraculous gifts, which in this connexion are
quite accidental—are traced to the Holy Spirit ;? and if we ask
what is thus supposed to have been present from the very start,
the following admissions have to be made.

First, these powers are not to be found outside of the Christian
Church, and hence they neither arise from the general constitution


} Gen. 17, Ps. 33°; cf. Augustin., de Gen. ad litt. cap. 4.

ec Exons 2 Matt, 12° slnke 132:

= Isa. 3428614) Mace 35: Sy OnmbE eS ores

§ Matt, 1113, Luke 1618, ri Comsr2, Epheria.2 simmers


§ 123] THE SPIRIT AND HUMAN NATURE 571


of human nature (which would make Christ superfluous) nor from
any other divine arrangement.! Second, this Spirit is not some-
thing supernatural and mysterious though not immediately divine,
a higher yet created essence putting itself in secret ways into rela-
tion with men. The Church has properly rejected this in the same
way and on the same grounds as all representations of Christ with
an Arian bias. For as in Christ, too, the human would be no more
human if we had to conceive it united with a higher nature in one
person, so our own life and the life of other believers would no
longer seem to be humanly interconnected if we had to conceive
our consciousness and action as determined by the influence of
a superhuman nature. Third, the Holy Spirit is not something
that, although divine, is not united with the human nature, but
only somehow influences it from without. For whatever enters us
from without does so only through the senses and never becomes
more than an occasion for our action. What action is to follow on
this occasion is determined from within, and only this, and not the
former region of the senses, is the sphere of the Holy Spirit. That
occasions are given us from without does not preclude the unity
of our self-consciousness and self-determination. But this unity
would at once be dissolved if determinations were given from
without. And if there are passages in Scripture largely influenced
by prophetic language that in terms seem clearly to assert such an
external influence,” these have the letter of other passages quite as
definitely against them.’ There is indeed no way of imagining how
the Spirit’s gifts could be within us,4 and He Himself remain with-
out, or how He is to influence us from without except through
human speech and significant action—which just means that He is
already within, and influencing, someone else. And the man on
whom the Spirit works is not thereby made a participator in the
Spirit. Only one im whom and through whom He works ® has
received the Spirit. Thus in everyone He brings His gifts to pass,
and we are not conscious of the gifts as inward, but the power that
effects them as outward: what we do is to distinguish him on
whom the Holy Spirit is still at work, as thus being one in whom no
gift is yet produced, from one within the state of sanctification,
in whom the Holy Spirit is producing gifts.6 Thus, as Scripture also
says, we are conscious both of the Spirit and of His gifts as some-


1 Gal. Q2-6. 2 Acts zo 23 829+ 39 Tol: 44
3 Mark 134, Rom. 8-11, 1 Cor. 61°, Gal. 48, Jas. 4°.
1 Cor 12". “SNGiSHtOn- <1, 6 Gal. 522, Eph. 5°,


572 THE CHRISTIAN FAITH [§ 123


thing inward ; of the gifts as being different in different individuals,
but of the Spirit being one in different people in spite of the difference
of gifts. This explains the testimony of the first possessors of the
Holy Spirit, who describe Him as a specific divine efficacious
working in believers, though not one to be separated from the
recognition of the being of God in Christ. The two things are
strictly interdependent. For if in the Person of Christ nothing
divine had entered into human nature, while there were something
divine in the gifts of the Holy Spirit, then this divine element
could not proceed from Christ, but would have to be communicated
individually in some utterly miraculous fashion. In that case,
however, it would always be thus communicable, although, on
account of the absolute arbitrariness of the proceeding, no such
supposed possessor of the Spirit would be able to make any claim
whatever to be recognized as such by others. Thus all reciprocal
influence and co-operative activity would be abolished, and every-
one who had the Spirit would have Him all by himself; an idea
that the Church repudiated from the very first as contradicting its
self-consciousness. If, on the other hand, something divine did
really enter human nature through Christ, but did not remain
in human nature on earth after the disappearance of His Person,
then nothing could remain in human nature of that which in Christ
was dependent on the being of God in Him; and so there would
be no communication of the sinless perfection and untroubled
blessedness of Christ.

3. That the testimony of the first disciples agrees with what
has been stated in the two last propositions concerning our con-
sciousness is clear ; and all that remains is to justify by means of
both of them the language of the proposition we are now dis-
cussing. Now if the Holy Spirit is an effective spiritual power
in the souls of believers, we must either represent Him as bound up
with their human nature, or we shall have to surrender the unity
of their being, if on the one hand they are such that in them human
nature shows itself in operation, and on the other, such that in
them the Holy Spirit is acting in separation from human nature.
To adopt such a view would produce so entire a dualism within
human life that it could never be maintained. The theory of a
definite activity of the Holy Spirit has indeed been carried to
this extreme, not, however, when this supposed activity was still
taking place, but only long after it had ceased. All that remains
to explain is the fact that this union is realized in the form of a


§ 123] THE SPIRIT A COMMON LIFE 573


common spirit. Now everything (even in human nature viewed
apart from redemption) that as spiritual power is absolutely the
same in all individuals of a race and is incapable of any individual-
izing modification, and above all, reason, we regard as something
not varied according to the individual, but as in all and in each the
same. Now if we separate the Spirit from the gifts, which are of
course individually modified and personal, then the Spirit is, in
all who share in Him, one and the same, without being increased
when the participants multiply, or being diminished when they
grow fewer, and without being anything whatever in one that He
is not in another; except that, still being the same, He shows
Himself stronger in one, and it may be weaker in another. He is,
however, not only one in all in so far as His life and work in one
cannot be distinguished from His life and work in another, but as
already explained, because, as no one can attain the new life except
in and through the fellowship, he has his share in the Holy Spirit,
not in his personal self-consciousness viewed by itself, but only in
so far as he is conscious of his being part of this whole—that is,
he shares the Spirit as a common consciousness. Hence also the
union of the divine with the human nature in believers is not a
person-forming union, otherwise it would be indistinguishable from
the union of the natures in Christ, and the distinction between
Redeemer and redeemed would be lost. If we consider the in-
dividual as existing in an inborn and hereditary common life, no
such distinction obtains there, as the formula stated above shows.1
But if the reference be to the common life into which the individual
only enters after his personality has reached a certain point of
development, it cannot in that case be said that the personality
is simply the common spirit taking a specific form, though more
and more it comes to be just that. If we could isolate the new life
of the individual that begins with regeneration and construct it
by itself, then we should certainly be able to describe it as a life
absolutely determined by the Holy Spirit, and the new creature
would simply be the Holy Spirit Himself in conscious possession of
this specific complex of natural human powers. But as a matter
of fact, the new life is not a self-identical whole and does not uni-
formly penetrate the entire organism of the personality. On the
contrary, the person, the continuous unity of self-consciousness, is a
mingled separation and union of the divine and the human ; and
even if someone were actually to reach the point of having the


ws T2T, 2¢


574 THE CHRISTIAN FAITH [§ 124
new life diffuse itself over his entire essence, yet the portion of his
life spent before his regeneration would still form part of his per-
sonality. Finally, the divine activity constituting the new life in
the individual is common spirit for this additional reason, that it is
in each without regard to personal peculiarities, provided only he
belongs to the fellowship through the influence of which his re-
generation was conditioned, and out of which, by preaching in the
widest sense of the word, this new life was transmitted to him,
exactly as it took shape in the disciples through the power of the
self-communicating life of Christ; partly, too, because it only
takes possession of the individual with a view to fellowship, and
moulds him solely for one end—in order that, and in the manner
that, it may best work through him for the whole.


§ 124. Second Theorem.—Every regenerate person partakes of the
Holy Spirit, so that there is no living fellowship with Christ
without an indwelling of the Holy Spint, and vice versa.


1. Up to this point the question as to how redemption is realized
in the human soul has been answered by saying that it happens
through being taken up into living fellowship with Christ. Now
the demand is made that everyone must partake of the Holy Spirit.
This, however, is not at all to be understood as meaning that
the experience is actually in two parts, and that some new and
special thing happens to a regenerate person when he becomes a
partaker in the Holy Spirit. Neither in fact nor in point of time
are the two things to be distinguished, but in strictness we must
say that everyone, as regenerate, also receives a share in the Holy
Spirit. For being taken up into living fellowship with Christ in-
cludes at the same time being conscious both of our sonship with
God and of the Lordship of Christ ; and both in Scripture are
ascribed to the indwelling of the Holy Spirit. We therefore cannot
imagine how one could exist were the other absent. If, to indulge
in a flight of fancy, we suppose that we could find ourselves placed
in a similar common life representative of the Kingdom of God,
and led by the Holy Spirit as its common spirit, with only this
difference that we knew nothing of any such Founder as Christ is ;
yet we should not, when contrasting that condition and the sinful
common life, be able to derive the first from the second; and at
the same time, since in all the members of that common life sin,
while not willed, is yet present, we should have to hold that the


tt Corsre? Gala’


$124] ALL BELIEVERS PARTAKE OF THE SPIRIT 575


sinful common life is not something grounded within itself (that is
to say, something such as it was in its first origin), for otherwise it
must have been capable of originating in the same way also at other
points. This, we remark in passing, is also the reason why those
who start from so imperfect and partial a divine revelation always
so easily recognize one another, even in their hostility. So long,
therefore, as we do not admit that other similar kingdoms of God
may arise independently of the Christian Church at other times or
places, we are compelled to accept for it a single origin outside of
the common life of sin, from which the divine communication found
within it is derived. Membership in this common life therefore
means at the same time being set within the sphere of operation
of the sole Founder. Thus we find expressed the belief that such
an outpouring of the Spirit would only have been possible after the
appearance of the Son of God, and on the basis of His personal
influence ; and this carries with it the implication that our partici-
pation in that Spirit and our own bond with the living influence of
Christ are one and the same thing.

On the other side, the same thing holds good. If we begin
with Christ and hold to the proposition that the union of the
Divine with His human personality was at the same time an enrich-
ment of human nature as a whole, it follows not only in general that
even after His departure this union must continue, but also (since
this continuation is to proceed from the union itself) that wherever it
exists there must be a bond with Christ, and vice versa. And since
after the departure of Christ the enlarged range of connexion with
Him can only proceed from the fellowship of believers, these three
facts—being drawn by that union into the fellowship of believers,
having a share in the Holy Spirit, and being drawn into living
fellowship with Christ—must simply mean one and the same thing.

2. In this connexion it is very natural to ask what is the relation
between the two expressions used by the same apostle, that Christ
liveth in us, and that we are led by the Spirit.1 When the same
Apostle says that those who are led by the Spirit are God’s children,
either he is contradicting (and that no one can believe) him who
says that those who have received Christ are God’s children, or else
here too these two things, the life of Christ in us and the leading
of the Holy Spirit in us, are one, both within that third thing, being
children of God. Either there are two different kinds of children
of God (which we should all deny as much as Paul or John), or else


1 Gal. 229, Rom, 814,


576 THE CHRISTIAN FAITH [§ 124


these two things are the same. If we are to answer the question
from the connexion in which the expressions are used in the Church,
we notice to begin with that the second is peculiar and characteristic
in a higher degree than the first, and has therefore obtained a
larger place in the language of the Schools and in the usage of
devotional religion which attributes special value to what is easily
understood. On the other hand, the first is very far from prominent
in the language of the Schools, and has won a special place in the
devotional vocabulary usually known as ‘mystical.’ Now, if we con-
sider that the Holy Spirit is also called the Spirit of Christ, it follows
at once that we say more particularly in one context that the Spirit
of Another lives in us, and in a different context that the Other
Himself lives in us, without intending to mean anything different
by the two phrases. Indeed, in any case nothing different could be
meant. If we add the thought of the union of the Divine and the
human in Christ, obviously the human can be in us only as a rightly
apprehended picture or representation, but the Divine as a powerful
impulse, even although in us it does not, as in Him, exclusively
determine our whole personality, but only works in and along with
His rightly apprehended picture, which again can only take shape
in our minds in the measure of truth and perfection in which the
Divine glorifies it before our thought. But just this is the work of
the Holy Spirit—to bring Christ into memory and glorify Him in us.
Thus however they are regarded, the two things are one and the same.

The same result is reached if we compare the content of the two
expressions with reference to the effects they indicate. If we con-
ceive ourselves as perfectly within the living fellowship of Christ,
then all our actions can be regarded as His. But the Holy Spirit
also, when leading us through the knowledge of Christ into all
truth, cannot possibly lead us to any other actions than those in
which Christ can be recognized ; the fruits of the Spirit are there-
fore nothing but the virtues of Christ. To recognize in our souls
any leading of the divine Spirit which could not be brought into
connexion with what Christ’s words and life have conveyed to us
as His way of acting, is to open the door to every sort of visionary
fanaticism that the Protestant Church from the very start has most
steadily opposed. The leading of the Holy Spirit is never other
than a divine incitement to realize the standard of what Christ, in
virtue of the being of God in Him, humanly was and did. And the
life of Christ in us is nothing but activity in behalf of the Kingdom
of God which embraces men all together in the grasp of the love


§ 124] CHRIST AND THE SPIRIT 577


flowing from Him ; that is, it is the power of the Christian common
spirit.

From this it is also clear how, if to believe in Christ and to have
Christ living in one are the same thing, it may be said on the one
hand that the Holy Spirit produces faith, and on the other hand
that the Holy Spirit comes through faith.1 For through the
activity of those who already have a share in the Spirit, He effects
faith in others who are brought by them to recognize what is divine
and saving in Christ ; in these, thereby, the Holy Spirit becomes
the moving principle. And so, since the Divine Essence was bound
up with the human person of Christ, but is now (His directly personal
influence having ceased) no longer personally operative in any in-
dividual, but henceforward manifests itself actively in the fellowship
of believers as their common spirit, this is just the way in which the
work of redemption is continued and extended in the Church.

3. If then in content the two aforesaid expressions mean the
same thing, we must not censure either those Christians who prefer
to describe their experiences in the sphere of grace as the immediate
being and life of Christ within them, nor those who rather (and
almost exclusively) find the explanation of their new life in the
indwelling of the Spirit of God. Dogmatic terminology is bound
not only to keep both forms, but also to point out the appropriate
way of using each, so as to indicate the dangers of a one-sided use ;
and this in order that the former, believing themselves to enjoy the
immediate influence of Christ, may not break away from the fellow-
ship, or the latter fancy that the Spirit active in the fellowship could
carry them on when severed from Christ or lead them beyond Him.

It is difficult, however, to leave this subject without raising
the question whether the outpouring of the Spirit is to be con-
ceived as a new divine revelation, and one which, although con-
ditioned by the incarnation of Christ, yet in its characteristic nature
is equally original, or whether it is not rather a fact not merely
dependent on the appearance of Christ, but its natural consequence.
In the latter case the appearance of Christ would be, in the sense
already indicated, the one and only supernatural foundation of
Christianity ; and following on this the whole further development
of the spiritual life would issue naturally from that one source.
In the former case, the original outpouring of the Spirit would be
a second miracle of the same kind, and equally essential. The
question is, of course, not one for Dogmatics in the narrowest sense,

Lp CoreiatpGalesca-


37


578 THE CHRISTIAN FAITH [§ 125


since we cannot decide it from our Christian self-consciousness ;
for to-day the communication of the Holy Spirit to the individual
presents itself to each as a natural effect of the presence and activity
of the Spirit in the whole formed by the Christian fellowship. But
this implies that the acceptance of the former view would have
to be based on quite irrefutable testimony. Now the phenomena
of Pentecost! of course bear distinctly enough the mark of
the miraculous. But, for one thing, later communications of the
Spirit through preaching (and this is quite analogous to our present
situation) are described in exactly the same way and with emphasis
on the identity of the phenomena ;? so that in this case the mira-
culous does not belong to the essence of the matter, and we can
argue thence that it did not at Pentecost either. On the other
hand, it is difficult to assert that the Pentecostal outpouring was
the first communication of the Spirit to the disciples, for we are
told that already on an earlier occasion Christ had communicated
the Spirit to them, and neither the language used nor the treat-
ment of it in the creeds permits us to regard it as a mere promise.
On every account, therefore, we do well here to regard the miraculous
as not of the essence of the matter but as belonging to the circum-
stances of the time, and leave the whole question to exegesis. But
apart from these accompanying phenomena, the communication
of the Spirit cannot be any more or less a miracle in one case than
in another ; and in this connexion it may be said that while the
gradual dissemination of the Spirit may be in no case a miracle,
if regarded as the effect of the living power of the Church, and was
no miracle when effected by the living power of Christ, it always is
a miracle if regarded as a sudden leap from partially aroused sus-
ceptibility into a common and coherent spontaneous activity. As
such it broke forth on the day of Pentecost, bearing in token of this
originality the miraculous in its train ; and even to-day, in similar
cases, the more conversion appears to be something sudden, the
more are we inclined to regard anomalous accompanying circum-
stances as miraculous in character.


§ 125. Third Theorem.—The Christian Church, animated by the Holy
Spirit, is in its purity and integrity the perfect image of the
Redeemer, and each regenerate individual is an indispensable
constituent of this fellowship.

I, Fixing our attention on the Redeemer in the maturity of

His human life, we see in the totality of His powers an organism

EN IS BES SA Ctop tos ante: 3 John 2072,


§ 125] THE CHURCH AS IMAGE OF CHRIST 579


adequate to the impulses proceeding from the being of God within
Him. The individual as regenerate can never in this respect be
regarded even as an image of Him, because the condition of varied
sinfulness in which divine grace found him does not permit of an
exact correspondence in the relationship of his psychical capacities
to the impulses of the Spirit. But if the Christian Church is a true
common life, a unified or, as we say, a moral personality though
not indeed an inherited or natural one, it cannot on this latter
account be the same as a personality arising from the person-
forming activity of Nature, for in the two cases growth and decay
are related in very different fashion ; but none the less it can and
must be an image of such a personality. For since the Divine
Essence is one and everywhere self-identical, then, even if its mode
of being in the individual, Christ, and in the common life is not the
same, it follows that the impulses proceeding from it must be the
same in both cases. Hence the modes both of comprehension and
of action are the same in the Church as in the Redeemer, because
there are present in every member, and therefore in the whole,
the very same powers which in Christ’s case were taken up into
unity with the divine principle. Such an aggregate of human
powers in a certain sense exists in every organized mass of people,
where the most important contrasts which human life offers are
ordinarily found side by side. In the primitive Church, too, in
spite of its limited size, the same truth was exemplified by the fact
that it very quickly spread among Jews and pagans, and thus
included what in this respect was the most significant contrast
of all, with the result that thus every further development through
the inclusion of minor contrasts was prepared for and introduced.
If, however, we are seeking the image in its true perfection, we
must regard the Church in its absolute purity and integrity. Mani-
festly we see its purity only if what we view as an element of the
Church is not the entire life of regenerate individuals, even subse-
quently to regeneration, but only that in their life which constitutes
its good works, and not that which belongs to its sins. It follows
at once that the absolute integrity of the Church is only to be seen
in the totality of the human race. For just as in the first pair
(viewed as the common ancestors of all) there can be imagined no
distinct differences of temperament or constitution simply because
it was from them that all differences, whether climatic or more
individual, were to develop, and therefore their perfect image is
found only in the fundamental types of all human races taken


580 THE CHRISTIAN FAITH [§ 125


together, and of all the tribes into which they are subdivided—
which tribes again are completely represented only by the totality
of all the individual beings belonging to them—so too is it in regard
to Christ as the actually given spiritual archetype and original.
If we recall our explanations regarding His sinless perfection on the
one hand and the basis of the sinfulness of all others on the other
hand, it follows that each individual is not merely in each of his
individual characteristics an imperfect image ; even considered as
a whole he is an image of a one-sided and partial kind, which requires
to be supplemented on every side. From this it follows of itself
that the perfect image of Christ is only to be found in the sum-total
of all the forms of spiritual life based on the varieties of natural
foundation ; for it is only so that one-sided tendencies fully supple-
ment each other, and the imperfections compatible with one are
cancelled by the others. We reach the same result if we regard the
work of Christ rather than His Person, and in that relation view the
Church as an organic body, equipped for a sum-total of activities
in which the perfection of each vital function is conditioned by the
integrity of the various members.t For various functions can be
properly apportioned only if the apportionment is based on a
variety of gifts, and this again, if it is to arise in a natural way,
presumes a variety present in the personal living unity. In this
way the two facts harmonize well, that the Church is called the
body of Christ, ruled by the Head,? and that the more it becomes
externally complete and inwardly perfect, the more it is also said
to become the image of Christ.?

2. From this there now follows the second half of our proposi-
tion. In reference to this last point it can indeed be said without
hesitation that everything any single person contributes by his
activity to the maintenance and growth of the whole can only be
replaced by the concurrence of several others, else Christ would
have been wrong in saying of each that he was all the same an
unprofitable servant. Yet, in reference to what was said earlier,
in spite of all his imperfection and one-sidedness every individual,
as a subordinate unit in the whole, is a part irreplaceable by any
other. For even in the sphere of the new man there are several
fundamental forms, corresponding to what are national peculiari-
ties in the natural man; and each of these fundamental types
includes a multitude of subordinate varieties which we can neither
count nor measure, but which nevertheless our Christian senti-

+1 Cor, 12,  * Eph, 1%, Col, 1, * Eph, 42%, 1 John 3%, 4 Luke 1719,


§ 125] THE CHURCH AS IMAGE OF CHRIST 581


ment (just as in the natural sphere our race-consciousness does)
compels us to regard as integral and each a whole by itself. And
for this we find a justification not only in the Biblical figures already
cited, but also in the recognition we are commanded to give all
such peculiarities, without limit or exception.! Accordingly, we
must say also of the development of the Christian fellowship in
time that nothing would happen in the Church as it does, unless
each individual were what he is. With this is connected the fact
that everything in it is common action and common work, there-
fore common merit and common guilt ; not manifested in indivi-
duals, however, in quite the same ways. Accordingly, the Church
only gradually attains to be the perfect image of Christ, and the
divine ordinance seen in the gradual addition of individual
members and the widening compass of the whole can be expressed
in the formula that the advance comes about in such a way that
not only is the whole, at every particular moment viewed by itself,
as complete and inclusive as possible, but also each moment contains
within itself a basis for the largest possible integration in the moment
succeeding. At the same time this is only grasped by faith and can
never be proved by experience.

Postscript to this Division.—The immediately foregoing dis-
cussion concludes our treatment of the many points that have
emerged, some of them indirectly related to the previous doctrine,
others directly ; a parallel having been shown to exist between the
relations of the doctrine of regeneration to the present doctrine and
to the preceding one, there can be nothing strange in our thus
grouping them together under one Division. Rather it must appear
quite natural that the elect are elected to receive the communica-
tion of the Spirit. At the same time, this discussion forms the
transition to the next Division. In the present Division, we could
mention no more than the communication of the Holy Spirit ; in
the next, since the Church can be preserved only by the same
principle to which it owes its origin and renewal, the continuous
operation of the Holy Spirit will be described as we deal with the
fundamental features of the Church’s life. What will then be set
forth will be identical with the content of the doctrine of sanctifica-
tion in the same sense that the subject-matter just treated of is
identical with the content of the doctrine of regeneration.


TTECOr laa


SEcoND DIVISION : THE SUBSISTENCE OF THE CHURCH ALONGSIDE
OF THE WORLD


§ 126. The fellowship of believers, animated by the Holy Spint,
vemains ever self-identical in its attitude to Christ and to
this Spirit, but in its relation to the world it 1s subject to
change and variation.


1. If the fellowship of believers, as an historical body within
the human race, is to exist and persist in continuous activity, it
must unite in itself two things—a self-identical element, whereby
it remains the same amid change, and a mutable element, in which
the identity finds expression. If we consider it merely in its co-
existence with the rest of contemporary human life, summarily
described in Scripture as ‘the world,’ we might apparently say
that the Church can just as well be known by its difference from
the world as the world can by its difference from the Church. And
certainly amongst believers there are not wanting those who think
that they and their like are recognizable chiefly from the fact that
they are not what the world is. This, however, is a view inclining
equally to separatism and to legalistic righteousness. For the
sinful common life, with the exception of the feeling of need sur-
viving in the mass of men (a feeling which constitutes the Church’s
elemental claim upon the world and strictly is characteristic of
the Church itself), is really nullity and a purely negative thing ; as
has been made sufficiently clear by our whole account of sin.t
Hence it is quite true that the world, as being formless and con-_
fused, can be recognized by believers from the fact that it is ex-
cluded from a share in the being of the Church. But the converse
does not hold. The usage of Scripture in entitling ‘ world’ that
part of the human race which is not yet Church is very natural,
for the whole human race had been so described, and this particular
part only remained what the whole had always been ; unfortun-
ately, however, it may easily give rise to the impression that the
world in this sense is as much a whole as the Church is. Whereas,
in fact, it is only an aggregate of individual elements which in many
respects are antagonistic to each other, and which unite only in
accidental and temporary ways. This erroneous impression is
only heightened when the Church, as it confronts the world, is
constantly described as a ‘little flock ’—that is, as also being on
its side an aggregate, and one of no importance. It would there-
fore be best that this use of the term ‘ world’ should disappear


1 8§ 65 ff.
582


§ 126] THE CHURCH SELF-IDENTICAL AND MUTABLE 583


from the devotional field and be kept for the field of Dogmatics,
where its true significance can be more easily defined and conserved.

The self-identity of the Christian Church, however, can cover
no more than the fact that the mode in which the divine exists in
the human ever remains the same, and that the goal also remains
the same to which the Church throughout all its movements is
seeking to approximate. In Christ also the union of the divine
with the human was ever the same; and, since in His case there
can be no question of approximation, the adaptation of what in
Him underwent human development to the divine impulse in Him
was the same too ; but all else was determined in accordance with
the laws of the temporal by His position in the world. Similarly,
the relation of the Holy Spirit to the Church as its common spirit
remains the same, and the Church is ever self-identical as the
locus of the Spirit in the human race, as also in this further respect
that it is always to the same likeness of Christ that the Church
is striving to be conformed.

Turning to the mutable, however, we note that even in Christ,
though strife and conflict were absent, this element was not as such
determined by the divine in Him—the divine being incapable of
any temporal determination—but by the human nature conjoined
toit. So, too, in the case of the Church, the mutable as such is not
determined by the Holy Spirit but by human nature, on which and
through which the Spirit works. Now if we apply the term ‘ world’
to human nature in the whole extent in which it is not determined
by the Holy Spirit, we may also say that everything mutable in
the Church is as such determined by the world, but not uniformly.
For whatever has been or is gradually being realized in man through
the Holy Spirit is as it is because the world, operated on by the
Holy Spirit, was as it was. In all gifts of the Spirit there is re-
cognizable a definite basis in human nature, causing it inevitably
to take the form it does, and throughout the entire development
of the new man the kind and the degree of progress depends on the
development of nature in the person concerned and on the char-
acter of his environment. Similarly, the form which the Christian
fellowship takes in a particular nation depends on that nation’s
peculiar characteristics, for otherwise no reason could be found in
the Holy Spirit why it should impress on the Christian fellowship
different forms in different places. All this has its ground of
determination in the world owing to the law that Christianity must
develop as a force in history, and the world as it appears in Chris-


584 THE CHRISTIAN FAITH [§ 126


tianity is the world as it has been seized upon and permeated by
the Holy Spirit. On the other hand, everything that exists within
the Church because it is found in those through whom the Holy
Spirit works, yet is not due to the Spirit’s action, is determined
by the world as opposed to the Spirit, and represents the encroach-
ment of the world upon the Church’s sphere. This includes not
merely what may in a stricter sense be called the sins of the re-
generate, but also every hampering and distorting influence which
their sinfulness opposes to the Holy Spirit’s action, as well as all
mistaken and perverse elements that may find their way into the
religious consciousness. Now it is true that all such things are in
process of disappearing, but they constantly revive as often as the
Holy Spirit takes possession of a new field ; just as both things, the
signs of having been apprehended by the Spirit and of resistance
thereto, are equally found in the sphere of the preparatory opera-
tions of grace. The same is true of such differences in the Christian
fellowship as are due to the diversities of human nature. Not only is
what arises thence, in consequence of the sinfulness persisting in the
Church, destined to disappear, but the closer the fellowship is the
more will each seek what is his neighbour’s and take it up into his
own life, with the natural result that differences are correspondingly
lessened. But while this happens more or less in each generation,
the next is none the less confronted by an undiminished task.

2. If the self-identical element in the Christian Church be con-
sidered simply by itself, as something which in a way may be
regarded as a manifold, it forms the subject of the disciplines of
Christian Dogmatics and Christian Ethics. For if we wish to exhibit
that likeness of Christ to which we are ever more striving to approx-
imate, we find it in the outlines of the Christian life laid down in
the latter discipline, including as one of its integral parts the develop-
ment of the Christian consciousness. And if we wish to exhibit the
self-identity of the Christian Church as the locus of the Holy Spirit,
we must present it as inclusive of the truth into which the Holy
Spirit alone can lead. Both, however, can only be presented with
differences of time and space ; so that all we can say is that in these
disciplines and their adjuncts what we are really trying to express
is this self-identical element, yet for this purpose we have only these
variable means of expression. The same, however, holds true of all
aspects of Christian life, in so far as they are based on the truth
taught by the Spirit and contain features of Christ’s likeness. But
the totality of these aspects is just the historical reality of the


§126] MUTABLE ELEMENTS DUE TO THE WORLD 585


Christian Church throughout its whole career, and to this we should
have to resort for material if we wished to exhibit the changing and
mutable element ; and this we cannot do without at the same time
bringing in what is unchanging and self-identical. This is the more
evident because the efforts which give rise to these varying forms of
Dogmatics and Ethics are all themselves a minor part of the Church’s
history. Thus neither element can be exhibited apart from the
other. Ifthe attempt were made to set forth the self-identical and
invariable element in Christianity in complete abstraction from the
historical, it would scarcely be distinguishable from the undertaking
of people who imagine that they are expounding Christianity when
in point of fact what they offer is pure speculation. And if anyone
tried to present solely the variable in Christian history in complete
abstraction from the self-identical, his aim would apparently be the
same as that of people who, penetrating no further than the outer
husk of things, permit us to see in the history of the Church nothing
but the complex and pernicious play of blinded passion.

The two aspects or elements, then, cannot be exhibited apart
from each other without making the real nature of the Church
unrecognizable ; on the other hand, we cannot here treat of both
together in the way just indicated. Consequently, in the doctrine
of the Church in its coexistence with the world, we can only state
first those chief activities through the continuous exercise of which
the temporal development of this whole really becomes the develop-
ment of the Christian Church, and which thus form its essential
and invariable features. Thereafter we shall treat of those charac-
teristics of the fellowship whereby during its coexistence with the
world it is distinguishable from that which it can only become even
in appearance after this hampering antithesis between Church and
world has passed away, but which—as being the same under both
forms—inwardly viewed it already is. The former invariable
element is due to the fact that the Church can only persist and
reach its perfection through that to which it owes its very existence ;
the latter variable element, however, being conditioned by the
world, is chiefly traceable to the material which the world offers to
the instreaming influence of the principle by which the Church is
constituted. This division of the subject, therefore, falls into two
halves—one of which comprises the essential and (in spite of its co-
existence with the world) immutable features of the Church, while
the other sets forth the mutable element which belongs to the Church
in virtue of its coexistence with the world.


First Hatr: THE ESSENTIAL AND INVARIABLE FEATURES OF
THE CHURCH


§ 127. The Christian fellowship, in spite of the mutability inseparable
from its coexistence with the world, is, nevertheless, always
and everywhere self-identical, inasmuch, first, as the witness
to Christ remains in it ever the same, and this is found in
Holy Scripture and in the Ministry of the Word of God ;
inasmuch, secondly, as the formation and maintenance of
living fellowship with Christ rests upon the same ordinances
of Christ, and these ave Baptism and the Lord’s Supper ;
inasmuch, finally, as the reciprocal influence of the whole
on the individual, and of individuals on the whole, is always
uniformly ordered, and this 1s seen in the Power of the Keys
and im Prayer in the Name of Jesus.


1. To begin with, we must put aside the objection which asks
how the unity and identity of the Church can rest upon these
features, every one of which is a subject of controversy, several of
which indeed have assumed such different forms in different parts
of Christendom as to give rise to special and mutually exclusive
communions, while others are totally rejected by particular com-
munions which still claim to be recognized as Christian. In the
first place, this is merely a very direct confirmation of what was
said above, namely, that it is impossible to exhibit either of the
two elements wholly apart from the other. Nay, if we go by what
was indicated in the Introduction regarding the relations between
Catholicism and Protestantism, it will seem entirely natural that on
almost all these subjects Evangelical teaching must find itself in
opposition to Roman. The same is true of several smaller com-
munions which in essence certainly are Protestant, and which in
their antagonism to the Roman Church leave us far behind. But
here we must distinguish between what is inward and what is out-
ward. For no Christian communion will admit that any such body
can exist apart from witness to Christ, in the sense that what is
essential in such witness must everywhere be the same, any more
than it could exist without a continuous living fellowship with


Christ, implying a bond between the changing generations due to
586


§ 127] NEW TESTAMENT CHRISTIANITY 587


their sharing the newly arisen life. Further, wherever it is possible
to speak of a perfect fellowship resting upon a common spirit, we
must also assume a reciprocal influence of the whole and individuals
oneach other. In part, therefore, differences only concern the way
in which the outward is conformed to the inward; in part they
consist in varying ideas as to the necessity and exact character of
the connexion which must always exist between the inward and an
outward possessing some particular form or other. With regard
to these differences, the most important point is this, that we should
judge correctly whether they are rooted in the spatial and temporal
variations found in man’s spiritual nature, or are to be viewed as
defects, because due to encroachments of the world upon the
Church. The latter sort are to be resisted the more stoutly in pro-
portion as such encroachments invade the innermost sanctuary of
the Church ; the former cancel each other where there is mutual
recognition.

2. Thereafter some explanations will have to be given of the
relationships in which the Church institutions named above are
placed in our statement, and the way in which they are combined.
If we start from the principle that our Christianity ought to be the
same as that of the Apostles, our Christianity too must be generated
by the personal influences of Christ, for spiritual states depend on
the mode of their origination. These influences, however, cannot
now emanate from Him directly, for in that case they could not
be recognized with such certainty as having emanated from Him
supernaturally as to need no confirmatory proof of their identity
with those felt by the Apostles, to which, as we have them in the
New Testament representations of Christ’s personality, we have
always to return. Apart from these influences no activity for the
Kingdom of God could have been evoked even in the disciples by
the imparting of the Holy Spirit ; hence the influence of these repre-
sentations of Christ will always be an indispensable pre-condition
of the Holy Spirit being imparted. This principle, it is true,
scarcely appears to cover the whole of the New Testament, nor need
all that is taught on the subject be developed from it. But leaving
this last point to be dealt with later, on the former it may be said
that for the purpose stated not even the fixed written letter of the
New Testament appears to be necessary ; the further possibility of
oral propagation must be admitted, for no more can be guaranteed
than the unimpaired identity of the tradition. And so far we can
agree that the actual form in which the personality of Christ is set


588 THE CHRISTIAN FAITH rg rey


before us does not belong unconditionally to the esse but rather to
the bene esse of the Church. As regards the larger and not strictly
evangelistic part of the New Testament writings, they furnish proof
on the one hand that the Church-forming self-activity which He
promised to men really flowed from the impressions left by Christ
Himself and from the witness He bade the disciples give ; and in
this sense they are the source of what we now possess. On the other
hand, they form a supplement to those direct utterances of Christ ;
for we can argue back from the ordinances and actions of the
disciples to teachings and injunctions of Christ as their source.
Scripture, however, as we actually have it—each single book and
the whole collection as a treasure preserved for all later generations
of the Church—is invariably a work of the Holy Spirit as the common
spirit of the Church, and is only one special instance of the witness
to Christ described in general terms in the paragraph we are ex-
pounding. For oral and written teaching and narrative concerning
Christ were originally the same, and only differed by accident.
Scripture now stands by itself, for its preservation unchanged
guarantees in a special manner the identity of our witness to Christ
with that originally given. Yet it would be a mere lifeless posses-
sion if this preservation were not an ever-renewed self-activity of
the Church, which reveals itself also in living witness to Christ that
either goes back to Scripture or harmonizes with Scripture in meaning
and spirit. And this witness alone, taken universally as the duty
and calling of every member of the Church—and viewed provision-
ally apart from definite forms of any kind—is what is understood
here bythe phrase ‘the Ministry of the Word of God.’ But taken
in this general sense and thus related to each other, these two first
features of the Church are essential ; for otherwise faith could only
be evoked by direct influences [of Christ], in which case we could
look for no identity and could have no guarantee of truth. This
Ministry, however, by no means acts only on the outside world ; in
its operation within the Church equally it is an organic structure,
traceable to Christ Himself, for the communication of life and power.

For the same reason, namely, that we have nothing more to
expect from unmediated personal influences of Christ, the linking-
up of living fellowship with Christ, and its renewal, must come from
the Church and be traceable to its actions ; but only to such actions
as must also be regarded as activities of Christ—lest Christ should
be thought to play a merely passive réle, and be overshadowed by
the Church. And this communal character is the peculiarity of


§ 127] THE SACRAMENTS AND PRAYER 589


both sacraments. For although baptism as originally instituted
was not the first beginning of contact between the Church and the
individual, yet it is only through baptism that all that precedes
receives such confirmation as thereby to inaugurate a continuous
and conscious living fellowship with Christ. And while the Lord’s
Supper is not the only means of maintaining living fellowship with
Christ—and provisionally we are not regarding it here as an isolable
action which even in isolation has a specific effect—yet we take it
as being the highest of its kind, and subsume under it every other
enjoyment of Christ as either an approximation to it or a prolonga-
tion of it. Hence we here keep more to this underlying idea than
to outward forms in which the idea is realized.

In like manner, the entire influence of the whole fellowship on
the individual is concentrated in the forgiveness of sin. For in
view of the relationship obtaining between the sins of the regener-
ate and their good works, these last can be recognized only in the
measure in which the sin still clinging to them is removed. But
good works are at once the fruit and the seed of the gifts of the
Spirit developing in each life, so that the forgiveness of sin first
assigns them their place in the fellowship of believers. Finally, as
regards Prayer in the Name of Jesus, representing as it does the
influence of individuals on the whole, apart from which a whole
animated by a common spirit and in that sense self-contained could
manifest no progress—there can be no Prayer in the Name of Jesus
except in connexion with the things of His Kingdom. Hence its
efficacy, promised by Christ even to the smallest gathering of
individuals, secures their influence upon the whole. If we regard
such prayer as representing all influences of the kind, this rests on
the assumption, self-evident to every Christian, that prayer neces-
sarily includes and presupposes personal activity in bringing about
what is prayed for. Thus without the two last-named features,
there could be in the common life neither order nor progress and
success.

3. That we have here given a complete view of the elements
on which the unity and identity of the Christian Church rest in
every time and place is best seen if we recur to the relation of the
Church to Christ. On the one hand, as the organism of Christ—
which is what Scripture means by calling it His Body—it is related
to Christ as the outward to the inward, so that in its essential
activities it must also be a reflection of the activities of Christ. And
since the effects produced by it are simply the gradual realization


590 THE CHRISTIAN FAITH [§ 127


of redemption in the world, its activities must likewise be a con-
tinuation of the activities of Christ Himself. These we have re-
duced to the scheme of the Threefold Office ; and in the same way
it must be possible to show that the three offices of Christ are
reflected and carried on in the essential activities of the Church
as stated above.

Prayer in the Name of Jesus, embracing as it does the full
vocational activity of each individual Christian, is a reflection of
Christ’s kingly activity, both as it is in itself and as concerns the
relation between His rule and that of the Father. It is the latter,
inasmuch as it concludes with the reverently submissive utterance
of the thoughts of each regarding the extension of the Kingdom of
God or the assaults of the world. It is the former, inasmuch as it
comprehends all purposes flowing from the energies of the God-
consciousness. And in the Power of the Keys there is attached to
the forgiveness of sins, rightly understood, all that has to do with
Church order and the estimate of persons in the Church which flows
from the common consciousness. Thus we have here the continua-
tion of that kingly activity of Christ which began with His choice
of the disciples and His giving of ordinances for the fellowship that
was to be.

Further, since the prophetic activity of Christ consists in His
self-presentation and His invitation to enter the Kingdom of God,
the Holy Scriptures are the permanent reflection of His prophetic
activity, inasmuch as in their composition and preservation, re-
garded as the work of the Church, they form the most direct exhibi-
tion of Christ. The Ministry of the Word we cannot but regard as
also a continuation of His prophetic work, for it essentially consists
in the applied presentation of Christ and invitation in His name.

If, finally, the essential element in Christ’s priestly office—to
distinguish this as clearly as possible from the prophetic and kingly
offices—lies supremely in this, that He mediates the fellowship of
men with God, there will be no difficulty in acknowledging that
both sacraments have arelation thereto. In this sense, that baptism
owing to its more symbolical character is related more as a reflection,
the Lord’s Supper owing to its more real content as a continuation.

This arrangement also shows that everything essentially belong-
ing to Christ’s activity has its reflection and continuation in the
Church, for the first three features pertain to His redemptive, the
other three to His reconciling, activity. Nor in our Evangelical
interpretation of Christianity shall we have to indicate any other


§ 128] HOLY SCRIPTURE 591


feature of the Church which could claim to stand on the same level
as these institutions. On the contrary, we shall neither place tradi-
tion beside Scripture nor subordinate the Ministry of the Word
to any kind of symbolical rites ; we shall neither acquiesce in the
multiplication of sacraments nor by attributing magical effects to
them destroy the analogy they bear to the other features of the
Church ; we shall neither limit Prayer in the Name of Jesus by
invocation of the saints nor permit any special representation of
Christ—whether individual or collegial—to usurp the place of the
Power of the Keys.


First DocTRINE: Hoty SCRIPTURE


§ 128. The authority of Holy Scripture cannot be the foundation of
faith in Christ ; rather must the latter be presupposed before
a peculiar authority can be granted to Holy Scripture.


1. The polemical first part of this proposition is solely due to
the fact that what we here deny is actually asserted. Possibly as
a matter of fact it is more widely held than definitely stated, for
all text-books and Confessions which put the doctrine of Scripture
as the source of Christian faith in the foreground seem distinctly
to favour this view. Hence it is necessary thoroughly to expose
the underlying misconception. If faith in Jesus as the Christ or
as the Son of God and the Redeemer of men is to be based on the
authority of Scripture, the question arises how this authority itself
is to be based; for obviously the thing must be so done as to im-
press the conviction on unbelieving hearts, so that they too may by
this path come to faith in the Redeemer. Now if we have no point
of departure but ordinary reason, the divine authority of Scripture
to begin with must admit of being proved on grounds of reason
alone ; and as against this two points must be kept in mind. First,
this always involves a critical and scientific use of the understand-
ing of which not all are capable ; on this theory, therefore, only
those so gifted can attain to faith in an original and genuine way,
while all others would merely have faith at second-hand and on the
authority of the experts. Now even in the sphere of faith we might
accept such a graded distinction if we were speaking of insight into
doctrine or a correct judgment upon different doctrinal interpreta-
tions ; but to accept it with regard to the possession of genuinely
saving faith is incongruous with that equality of all Christians
which the Evangelica] Church proclaims, and would, as in the Church


592 THE CHRISTIAN FAITH [§ 128


of Rome, demand from the laity an unqualified and submissive trust
in those who alone have access to the grounds of faith. For the
right to the Word of God, which we grant to all Christian people,
and the zeal with which we seek to maintain it in vital circulation,
has nothing to do with the idea that each individual ought to be
able to prove that the books of Scripture contain a divine revela-
tion. Secondly, if such proof could be given and if faith could be
established in this fashion—if, that is to say, faith, given a certain
degree of culture, could be implanted by argument—then on such
terms faith might exist in people who feel absolutely no need of
redemption, that is quite apart from repentance and change of
mind ; which means that, having originated in this way, it would
not be genuine, living faith at all. In other words, a conviction of
this kind, gained through demonstrative proof, would in itself have
no value, for of itself it would not result in true living fellowship
with Christ. But where the need of redemption is really felt, the
faith that makes alive may spring even from a message about Christ
which is in no way bound up with the conviction that the books
of Scripture possess a special character, but may rest on any
other sort of witness that is accompanied by real perception
of Christ’s spiritual power—may rest, that is, simply on oral
tradition.

2. With respect to the grounds of faith, then, we can admit no
distinction between different classes. And no more can we admit
a distinction between different periods of time; the grounds of
faith must be the same for us as for the first Christians. If it be
said that in their case, from the Apostles onward, their grounds of
faith sprang from their belief in Scripture, that is, in the Old Testa-
ment and especially in the prophecies of Christ it contains, we need
only add to what was said above on this point that although the
Apostles, at the outset of their connexion with Jesus, do describe
Him as the Figure whom the prophets foretold, it is impossible to
take this as meaning that they had been led to faith in Him by the
study of these prophecies and by the comparison of their contents
with what they saw and heard in Jesus. On the contrary, it was a
direct impression which awakened faith in souls prepared by the
testimony of the Baptist, and their description of Jesus was only an
expression of this faith combined with their faith in the prophets.
Even in their preaching they took the same line. There they first
express their faith communicatively by recurring to Jesus’ words
and deeds ; then they adduce prophetic testimonies in confirmation,


§ 128] BAITH AND SCRIPTURE 593


And just as their faith sprang from Christ’s preaching of Himself,
so in the case of others faith sprang from the preaching of Christ
by the Apostles and many more. The New Testament writings
are such a preaching come down to us, hence faith springs from
them too ; but in no sense conditionally on the acceptance of a
special doctrine about these writings, as having had their origin
in special divine revelation or inspiration. On the contrary, faith
might arise in the same way though no more survived than testi-
monies of which it had to be admitted that, in addition to Christ’s
essential witness to Himself and the original preaching of His
disciples, they also contained much in detail that had been mis-
interpreted, or inaccurately grasped, or set in a wrong light owing
to confusions of memory.

Thus, in order to attain to faith, we need no such doctrine of
Scripture, and the attempt to force unbelievers into faith by means
of it has had no success. It follows that, just as the Apostles
already had faith before they arrived at that condition of mind,
other than faith itself, in which they were able to take a share in
producing the New Testament, in our case too faith must pre-
exist before, by reading the New Testament, we are led to postulate
a special condition of the apostolic mind in which its books were
written, and a resulting special character of the books themselves.
A doctrine of this kind can only be made credible to those who
already are believers.

3. Hence throughout the whole of the foregoing exposition of
faith we have assumed no more than faith itself, present in a feel-
ing of need (in whatever source that feeling may have originated),
and Scripture we have adduced only as expressing the same
faith in detail; and it is only now that for the first time we
are treating of Scripture in its natural connexion with the
Christian Church and considering the question of its difference from
other books. None the less, the old method, whether used in Con-
fessions or in text-books, of placing the doctrine of Scripture first
is not wholly censurable, if by Scripture proof of doctrine nothing
more be meant than showing that a proposition so proved gives
expression to an original and authentic element in Christian piety,
and if precautions be taken to avoid the impression that a doctrine
must belong to Christianity because it is contained in Scripture,
whereas in point of fact it is only contained in Scripture because it
belongs to Christianity. Were we to rest content with the former
position, Dogmatic Theology would continue to be a mere aggregate

38


504 THE CHRISTIAN FAITH [§ 129


of detached propositions, the inner connexion of which was left
obscure. Either, its relation to the common faith of the Church
would then be what has already been indicated ; true and complete
certainty of faith would only exist where there was ability to prove
the divinity of Scripture, while all who lacked this degree of scientific
culture would believe simply on authority ; and thus piety would
spring from, and depend on, science. Or, where the laity break
away and base their faith on their experience, rejoicing in its
vitality, the scientific exposition of faith would become something
which, for the fellowship of the Church, is empty and worthless.
Hence for the purpose of our argument it was important to get its
true aim quite clear, independently of Scripture ; and only to bring
in the doctrine of Scripture at a point where its proper authority
can be plainly seen to rest on the relation between the self-identical
and the mutable and in its true connexion with the other essential
features of the Church.


§ 129. The Holy Scriptures of the New Testament are, on the one hand,
the first member in the series, ever since continued, of presenta-
tions of the Christian Faith ; on the other hand, they are the
norm for all succeeding presentations.


1. That the Holy Scriptures are the first member in the series
in question implies that the succeeding members are homogeneous
with the first ; and this holds true alike of form and content. The
New Testament writings are usually divided into historical and
doctrinal books ; this, however, is really correct only if the division
is based not on the subject-matter preponderant in each case, but
on the outward form. In the historical books the discourses of
Christ and the Apostles form a very important part, and the apos-
tolic letters with few exceptions are only intelligible in so far as
either they contain historical elements or we can form from them a
picture of the historical situation. Whether we retain this division
or discard it and look more at the form of particular elements in
these books, we can only say that all that has approved itself in
the way of oral presentation of Christian piety in later ages of the
Church has kept within the lines of these original forms,or is attached
to them as an explanatory accompaniment. Even religious poetry,
in the lyrical form which alone is genuinely churchly, has its germ
in the New Testament; on the other hand, all explanatory and
systematizing works, which as presentations of Christian piety
have less originality and independence, are only aids to the under-


§ 129] SCRIPTURE AS NORM OF DOCTRINE 595


standing of the original testimonies or compilations drawn from
them.

As regards content, however, the general rule is first of all to
be applied that in every kind of fellowship the individual element
approves itself only in so far as it gives expression to the common
spirit. Here too, accordingly, everything of the kind which persists
in influence alongside of Holy Scripture we must regard as homo-
geneous with Scripture ; while nothing that does not persist can
be given a place in the series.

2. But if in the historical development of the Christian Church
redemption is being ever more completely realized in time, and the
Holy Spirit is thus pervading the whole ever more perfectly, it
looks as if the first of this or any other series cannot be the norm for
all succeeding members ; for in any such development each later
member must be more perfect than the preceding. There is truth
in this, but only when we are comparing two whole phases of the
development, each in its entirety. If we consider the Church during
the Apostolic Age as a unity, its thinking as a whole cannot supply
a norm for that of later ages. For owing to its naturally most
unequal distribution of the divine Spirit, as well as to the further
fact that not everyone was equally productive in religious ideas
even in the measure of his participation in the common spirit, it
was very easily possible (since Jewish and pagan views and maxims
were still uneradicated and their antagonism to the Christian
spirit could only be recognized gradually) that expositions of
religion might be produced which, strictly speaking, were rather
Judaism or paganism coloured by Christianity than Christianity
itself, 7.e. were, if considered as Christian, in the highest degree
impure. Contemporary with all this very imperfect material,
however, were the presentations given in preaching by the im-
mediate disciples of Christ. In their case, the danger of an uicon-
sciously debasing influence from their previous Jewish forms of
thought and life on the presentation of Christianity by word and
act was averted, in proportion as they had stood near to Christ,
by the purifying influence of their living memory of Christ as a
whole. Thereby every idea which had attained that clearness in
consciousness which must precede oral exposition, was at once
forced to betray any antagonism it might have to the spirit of
Christ’s life and teaching. This holds good, in the first place, of
their narratives of Christ’s words and deeds, which fixed the
standard that was to have the widest purifying influence. But it


506 THE CHRISTIAN FAITH [§ 129


also holds pre-eminently of all that the Apostles taught and ordained
for Christian churches, as acting in Christ’s name ; though it must
not be forgotten that even when acting merely as individuals, each
of them found not only his complement but his corrective in one
of the other Apostles.1 Thus in the Apostolic Age what is most
perfect and what is most imperfect stood side by side as canonical
and apocryphal (both these words taken in the sense indicated by
the discussion above)—-two extremes which can never reappear in
the same form in any later age. Church presentations of Chris-
tianity could not but diverge ever more widely from the apocryphal,
since the influence of foreign elements on the Church decreased—
even though in matters of detail there were ever new accretions
from the realm of Judaism—in proportion as the bulk of Christians
came to be born and nurtured in the bosom of the Church. On the
other hand, the Church could never again reproduce the canonical,
for the living intuition of Christ was never again able to ward off
all debasing influences in the same direct fashion, but only deriva-
tively through the Scriptures and hence in dependence on them.
If then we take both together—canonical and apocryphal—the
Apostolic Age itself comes under the general rule ; the influence of
the canonical evidently becomes surer and wider as the apocryphal
disappears even in outlying parts of the Church ; thus viewed as a
whole, the later presentation is also the more perfect. On the other
hand, if we take the canonical by itself, it has an authority normative
for all later times. Such authority we do not ascribe uniformly
to every part of our Holy Scriptures, but only in proportion as the
writers attained to the condition just described, so that casual
expressions and what are merely side-thoughts do not possess the
same degree of normativeness as belongs to whatever may at each
point be the main subject. Nor is it meant that every later pre-
sentation must be uniformly derived from the Canon or be germin-
ally contained in it from the first. For since the Spirit was poured
out on all flesh, no age can be without its own originality in Christian
thinking. Yet, on the one hand, nothing can be regarded as a pure
product of the Christian Spirit except so far as it can be shown to
be in harmony with the original products; on the other, no later
product possesses equal authority with the original writings
when it is a question of guaranteeing the Christian character
of some particular presentation or of exposing its unchristian
elements.


1 Cf. Gal, 2ut,


§ 130] THE INSPIRATION OF SCRIPTURE 597


§ 130. First Theorem.—The individual books of the New Testament
ave wnspired by the Holy Spirit, and the collection of them
took place under the guidance of the Holy Spirit.

Conf. Helv. i.: Scriptura canonica, verbum Dei Spiritus. traditaet .. .
mundo proposita, etc.—Conf. Gall. v.: Credimus verbum his libris compre-
hensum ab uno Deo esse profectum.—Conf. Scot. xviii. : Spiritus dei per
quem s. scripturae litteris sunt mandatae.—Conf. Belg. iii.: Confitemur
sanctos Dei viros divino afflatos spiritu locutos esse. Postea vero Deus
. . . servis suis mandavit, ut sua illa oracula scriptis consignarent.—Decl.
Thor. : Profitemur . . . nos amplecti sacras canonicas .. . scripturas.. .
instinctu spiritus s. primitus scriptas, etc.

1. It is not easy to assign exact limits of meaning to the ecclesi-
astical term ‘inspiration’ in general, and here we merely wish to
make some preliminary observations before entering on a special
discussion of the subject. The word @edrvevoros, which is used of
the Old Testament writings,! and which historically constitutes the
most definite basis of usage, may very easily lead to a conception
of the Holy Spirit as occupying a relation to the writer which has
special reference to the act of writing but is otherwise non-existent.
This suggestion attaches less to the phrase ird amvevmaros ayiov
epopevor.2 Here the interpretation that these men were always
so ‘moved,’ speaking and writing in what was thus a permanent
state, is in itself quite as natural as one to the effect that they were
only ‘moved’ to speak and write. Since the ecclesiastical term
is not strictly scriptural and is, besides, figurative, it is necessary
to define it by relation to cognate terms, which also describe ways
of arriving at ideas. Here on the one side what is known by
inspiration along with what is learnt stands over against what is
excogitated, the latter being that which proceeds entirely from a
man’s own activity as contrasted with what is due to influence
coming from without. On the other side, again, stands what is
known by inspiration in contrast to what is learnt ; the latter is
derived from external communication, while the former, being as it
is originalin the eyes of others, depends for its emergence solely on
inward communication. Hence the presentation of what has been
learnt may approximate to any extent to the merely mechanical,
whereas in the forthcoming of what is known by inspiration there
may be manifested the whole freedom of personal productivity.

The general custom of calling Holy Scripture as such ‘ Revela-
tion,’ however, leads frequently to the two ideas being treated as


Nox A Maal, Ge ap ete 11


5098 THE CHRISTIAN FAITH [$ 130


interchangeable, which cannot fail to produce confusion. For if
this is taken to mean that the sacred writers, being under inspira-
tion, were informed of the content of what they wrote in a special
divine manner, there is no foundation for any such statement,
whether we consider the act of composing a sacred book itself or
the excitation of thought preceding or underlying it. All that they
teach derives from Christ ; hence in Christ Himself must be the
original divine bestowal of all that the Holy Scriptures contain—
not, however, in isolated particulars, by way of inspiration, but
as a single indivisible bestowal of knowledge out of which the
particulars evolve organically. Thus the speaking and writing of
the Apostles as moved by the Spirit was simply a communica-
tion drawn from the divine revelation in Christ.

Our paragraph, however, ascribes to the Holy Spirit not merely
the composition of the individual books, but also their collection
to form the New Testament Canon, and in referring to the latter
point it employs a different expression. This distinction is primarily
due to the fact that we regard the composition of a book as the
voluntary act of an individual, whereas the formation of the Canon
is the result of a many-sided collaboration and controversy within
the Church ; so that it becomes impossible to ascribe uniformly
to the Holy Spirit all the factors contributing thereto. These two
expressions will not be interpreted by everyone precisely in our
sense ; some will be content to assert merely a guiding influence of
the Spirit even in the matter of composition ; others will hold that
even in the collection of the books the influence of the Spirit
amounted to inspiration.

2. If now we go back to the conception of the Holy Spirit as
the common spirit of the Church, and hence the source of all
spiritual gifts and good works, it follows that all thinking, so far
as it pertains to the Kingdom of God, must be traced back to and
inspired by the Spirit. This holds good of the thinking of the Apos-
tolic Age as inclusive of the two opposites—the apocryphal and the
canonical ; in this sense, that in the former only isolated traces of
connexion with the common life of Christians derive from the
Spirit, while in the latter His activity is merely more closely
delimited by the individual in whom He is working, with scarcely
any weakening or alteration ; yet so that in no case the difference
between the individual and Christ is cancelled. While the interval
between the apocryphal and the canonical is filled by gradual
stages, the action of the Spirit is most profound and concen-


§ 130] THE SPIRIT AND SCRIPTURE 599


trated within the circle of those singled out by Peter, with the
assent of the whole community,' as men who had companied with
Christ from shortly after the start of His public life. For the in-
dividual members of this apostolic class, as we may call it, were so
much regarded as being on an equality with each other that without
offence to conscience the number of the original Apostles could be
filled up from among them by simple lot ; their steadfastness was
a guarantee alike of the purity of their zeal and of their full under-
standing. But even within their circle no one can miss the im-
portant difference between aspects of personality that affect merely
the private life of individuals and such as could be employed in
the control of Christian affairs. It is with reference to the former
that even in Apostles human nature most easily betrays itself,
while in the latter sphere there could not but be a keener intention
to let the Spirit of the whole exert an exclusive rule. Hence what
is here spoken or done can be described as inspired in a much
stricter and more definite sense. On the other hand, we should
recklessly break up the unity of life characteristic of these apostolic
men if, in order to bring out emphatically the inspiration of the
Holy Scriptures, we were to assert that they were less animated and
moved by the Holy Spirit in other parts of their apostolic office
than in the act of writing, or in the composition of writings (also
concerned with the service of the churches) which were not destined
to be included in the Canon ; or again that they enjoyed His aid
very much more in the public addresses or parts of addresses which
were eventually preserved in the Acts of the Apostles than at any
other time; or that this difference, with or without their know-
ledge, was to be explained by the fact that over and above their
immediate purpose these writings were meant to have a bearing
on all subsequent ages. Thus the peculiar inspiration of the
Apostles is not something that belongs exclusively to the books of
the New Testament. These books only share in it ; and inspira-
tion in this narrower sense, conditioned as it is by the purity and
completeness of the apostolic grasp of Christianity, covers the whole
of the official apostolic activity thence derived.

If we consider the inspiration of Scripture in this context as a
special portion of the official life of the Apostles which in general
was guided by inspiration, we shall hardly need to raise all those


1 Acts 121f.; cf. John 1527, Paul does not belong to this circle, and if the
Church has never regarded him as the inferior of the other Apostles in respect
of inspiration, it thereby ascribes to him the same prerogatives as to them,
although in a sense he had acquired them in a different way.


600 THE CHRISTIAN FAITH [§ 130


difficult questions about the extent of inspiration which so long
have been answered solely in a manner that removed the whole
subject from the domain of experiential insight. Nothing but an
utterly dead scholasticism could try to draw lines of demarcation
anywhere on the pathway lying between the first impulse to write
and the actually written word, or wish to represent the written
word in its bare externality as a special product of inspiration.
The natural standard here is the analogy of the doctrine of Christ’s
Person; at least, if we start with the fact that in the vocational
life of the Apostles the whole activity of the common spirit ruling
in the Church approximated as closely as possible to the person-
forming union of the Divine Essence with human nature which
constituted the Person of Christ (this without prejudice to the
specific difference that obtains between the two modes of union),
and that only in the light of this standard can what is outward in
the actions of the Apostles be regarded as partially different in
origin from the inward it was meant to express. This being
assumed, it at once follows that we must reject the suggestion that
in virtue of their divine inspiration the sacred books demand a
hermeneutical and critical treatment different from one guided
by the rules which obtain elsewhere. This at the same time dis-
poses of all other difficulties.

3. If the inspiration of Scripture be thus traced to the influence
of the Holy Spirit on the official activities of the Apostles, it might
easily appear as though this held good merely for the doctrinal
but not for the historical books, since what is in question in the
latter case is not the communication of the writer’s own thoughts ;
everything depends rather on the sifting and arrangement of exact
recollections. But for one thing the thoughts of the Apostles were
to be no more than developments of what Christ had said, and these
sayings, being elicited by special circumstances, could only be fully
understood in their historical context. And this clearly means
that a pure and complete apprehension of the various aspects of
Christ’s life is an essential precondition of the Apostles’ official
action as a whole. At the same time it is impossible to conceive of
any incident in Christ’s public life as wholly unaccompanied by
quickening and instructive speech ; all His actions were presenta-
tions of Himself, and as such were fruitful for His proclamation
of the Kingdom of God. Yet these incidents could be interpreted
in very different ways; they could be so interpreted by some
observers that the resulting natural impression helped them to


§ 130] NARRATION AND DOCTRINE 601


recognize Christ’s divine dignity ; by others they could be inter-
preted so perversely as to yield an impression which was apocryphal
and distorted and could even be used as proof against His Messianic
position. Thus the correctest view of the facts of Christ’s life—
traceable in a certain sense directly to the divine Spirit—we natur-
ally find in just that circle of people who had followed Christ’s
public life with the growing confidence that in Him they had found
the Promised One, so that in the same circle both things are in-
separably united—the right view of Christ and the right develop-
ment of His teaching and precepts. For the same reason it was
afterwards a matter of the utmost importance for the whole Church
to ascertain and select the right memories of Christ’s life, asking
how each supposed memory agreed with the view of the Kingdom
of God He had brought. Hence we must conceive the memory of
the Apostles subserviently to this general aim as also under the
influence of the Holy Spirit ; nor can we in this respect make any
distinction between the apostolic teachings and the evangelical
narratives ; indeed, we find the Apostles themselves narrating
both orally and in writing. Even though their teaching arose out
of definite official relationships, that is to say, out of their vocational
action in the narrower sense, yet narration too sprang from an
effort to promote the good of the whole Church, 7.e. from their
vocational action in the wider sense. This has no bearing on the
question whether evangelistic narration was a special Church
function, whether co-ordinate with or subordinate to the preaching
of the Apostles. But the reproduction of memories, be it oral or
written, can never quite be separated from historical composition,
as may be seen from the narration even of one isolated fact ; and
the effort to exhibit the Redeemer in His habit as He lived is also
the work of the Spirit of truth, and only so far as it is so can such
narrative have a place in Holy Scripture. If, on the other hand,
we consider that what happened first was the communication of
just such isolated narratives, their collection in wholes like our
Gospels following later, we must concede both possibilities—that
the narrator presents only what he himself had experienced in this
or that connexion, and that with his personal experiences he mingles
what he has heard credibly from others ; nay more, that one who
himself had had no experience in the matter might yet, moved
by the same impulse and the same Spirit, put together material
which he had derived from the pure and original knowledge of
others as fruitfully as an original witness could have done. If


602 THE CHRISTIAN FAITH [§ 130


what was principally needed was the right selection and arrange-
ment of historical facts already to hand, the influence of the Holy
Spirit in and throughout such work is entirely analogous to His
influence in the selection of individual books for the Canon.

4. Lastly, we have to consider the part taken by the Holy
Spirit in the collection of these books. Here the first difference
which must strike everyone is this, that although all the particular
books in the collection belong to the Apostolic Age, the actual
collection of them certainly does not ; we cannot therefore have
had handed down to us any strictly apostolic indication of what is
canonical and normative. In discriminating, therefore, we can
hardly use any analogy but this, that we should conceive of the
Spirit as ruling and guiding in the thought-world of the whole
Christian body just as each individual does in his own. Every man
knows how to distinguish his own noteworthy thoughts, and how
so to preserve them that he can count on bringing them up later
in his mind: the rest he puts aside partly for later elaboration ;
others he simply disregards and leaves it a matter merely of accident
whether they ever again present themselves to his mind or not.
Indeed, he may occasionally reject some of his ideas entirely, either
just when they occur or later. Similarly, the faithful preservation
of the apostolic writings is the work of the Spirit of God acknow-
ledging His own products; He distinguishes what is to remain
unchangeable from what has in many respects undergone trans-
formation in the later development of Christian doctrine. On the
other hand, He rejects the apocryphal in part immediately on its
appearance, and partly He ensures that both this sort of product
and the taste for it shall gradually disappear from the Church.
The one apparent difficulty is this, that in history certain books
underwent varying vicissitudes; at first they were accepted as
canonical and later were rejected as uncanonical, or wice versa.
But for one thing what changed here was not the judgment of the
whole Church ; rather a book which had been accepted in one
region and rejected in another was later universally accepted or
universally rejected. And much might well be thought worthy of
rejection for the Church organized as a great unity or in combination
with the other books, which was acceptable or the reverse in isolated
communities and judged merely by its own influence. On the
other hand, this proves no more than that Holy Scripture as a
collection came into existence only gradually and by approximation.
The same influence reveals itself even yet in the Church’s careful


€ 130] THE CANON 603


estimate of the different grades of normative authority to be con-
ceded to particular portions of Scripture, as also in decisions regard-
ing all sorts of lacune and interpolations ; so that the judgment of
the Church is only approximating ever more closely to a complete
expulsion of the apocryphal and the pure preservation of the
canonical. The influence directly stimulating this approximation
guides also the whole course of procedure, and that influence is
simply the Holy Spirit ruling in the Church. But all vacillations
of judgment, everything that makes approximation more difficult,
can have no other source than the influence which is exerted on the
Church by the world.

Hence if it is sought to distinguish in this connexion between
points that have been decided once for all and others which the
Church might yet take up, we cannot be too cautious. As history
shows, the sense for the truly apostolic is a gift of the Spirit that is
gradually increasing in the Church ; hence at an early stage much
may, through the mistakes of individuals, have crept into the
sacred books which a later age can recognize as uncanonical and
definitely prove to be so. But even as regards the collection as a
whole, the mere fact that ever since it has existed in the Church
as a collection, and has always retained its identity as such, is no
guarantee that its limits have been irrevocably fixed. Its fixation
(which we have the less right to regard as an absolute miracle or an
altogether isolated work of the Holy Spirit that we are not entirely
ignorant of how it came about) must rather be viewed as but one
incident in a process which can only be fully vindicated through
its ever-renewed confirmation as the Church perseveres in its task of
inquiry, but otherwise is liable to correction. Hence even though
the Canon is fixed in many Confessions of our Church,! this ought
not to prevent further unrestricted investigation of the matter ;
critical inquiry must ever anew test the individual writings of
Scripture with a view to decide whether they rightly keep their
place in the sacred collection. Doubt of the genuine can only
issue in ever greater certainty. Even the fact that writings un-
deniably apostolic and others approximately so have perished is no
argument to the contrary, for we are entitled to believe that nothing
essential to the preservation and well-being of the Church has thus
been lost. We are at least equally entitled to believe that it can
only promote the welfare of the Church if Holy Scripture be dis-
tinguished clearly from what does not belong to it.

1 Conf. Gall. iii, ; Conf. Angl. vi.; Conf. Belg. iy.


604 THE CHRISTIAN FAITH [§ 131


§ 131. Second Theorem.—As regards their origin the New Testament
Scriptures are authentic, and as a norm for Christian
Doctrine they are sufficient.

Art. Smalc. ii.: Regulam autem aliam habemus, ut videlicet verbum Dei
condat articulos fidei et praeterea nemo, ne angelus quidem.—Conf. Gall. iv. :
Hos libros agnoscimus esse canonicos, id est, ut fidei nostrae normam et
regulam habemus, idque non tantum ex communi ecclesiae consensu, sed
etiam multo magis ex testimonio et intrinseca Spiritus sancti persuasione.—
Expos. simpl. i.: Credimus . . . scripturas canonicas . . . ipsum verum esse
verbum Dei, et auctoritatem sufficientem ex semetipsis non ex hominibus
habere. ... Et in hac scriptura... habet ... ecclesia plenissime ex-
posita, quaecunque pertinent cum ad salvificam fidem tum ad vitam Deo
placentem recte informandam.—Conf. Axgl. vi.: Scriptura sacra continet
omnia quae ad salutem sunt necessaria, ita ut quicquid in ea nec legitur,
neque inde probari potest, non sit a quoquam exigendum ut tamquam
articulus fidei credatur.—Conf. Belg. vii. : Credimus sacram hanc scripturam
Dei voluntatem perfecte complecti, et quodcunque . . . credi necesse est,
in illa sufficienter edoceri. . . . Idcirco toto animo reiicimus quicquid cum
certissima hac regula non convenit.—Conf. Maych. ii.: ‘At the beginning

. they confess that they hold .. . the true infallible and solely saving
Word of God as it . . . is contained in the Holy Bible, which is and ought
to be the one standard for all believers . . . which is perfect and sufficient for
salvation and for the decision of all religious controversy, and abides for
ever.’

1. From the foregoing explanation it follows that the authori-
tative character of Scripture does not in the least depend on each
book having been written by the particular person to whom it is
ascribed. A book might, owing to a later judgment, be wrongly
attributed to a certain author in all the surviving MSS., and in this
sense be unauthentic, and yet it might belong to the circle where
alone we can expect to find canonical writings and hence would
none the less remain an integral part of Holy Scripture. Nay more,
at its very first appearance a writing (owing to a fiction permitted
by the author’s moral sense and sanctioned by the feeling of his
contemporaries) might have borne in its title the name of someone
other than its real author, and yet a book of this character might
be an authentic part of the Bible. It is only if such a self-descrip-
tion were positively intended to mislead that the book could not
be recognized as fitted to supplement the normative presentation
of Christianity. Hence even if many of the doubts that have been
raised as to the correct statement of authors’ names should be
confirmed, we should have no right, much less would it be our duty,
to expel those books from the Canon.


There is, however, no way of forming a list of authors to whom


§ 131] THE NEW TESTAMENT AUTHENTIC 605


particular books must belong in order to be canonical, or of indicat-
ing a class of persons all of whose productions would have a right to
canonicity. On the contrary, if even now writings should be dis-
covered which were attributable with the highest degree of human
certainty to an immediate disciple of Christ or even to an Apostle,
we should not without more ado incorporate them in the New
Testament, but at most attach them to it as an appendix. Not
even the early Church—especially as it is unable to prove apostolic
sanction for the separate books 1—can bind us by its decisions,
even had such decisions about the Canon been unanimous ; hence
the first part of our theorem can scarcely be taken as expressing
anything more precise than what is indicated in the confessional
statements quoted above, namely, that we trust universal Christian
experience as the testimony of the Holy Spirit that the Canon we
have received from Church tradition has not by deceit or ignorance
had introduced into it such constituent parts as belong to either an
apocryphal or an heretically suspect zone of Christianity, to which
such pre-eminent dignity could not be ascribed without danger.
But in saying so we concede that not all the books of the New
Testament are equally fitted, by content and form, to vindicate
their place in the Canon.

Since, however, this fixation of the Canon was arrived at only
gradually, and we know besides that the imperfections and errors
present in the Church could only gradually be brought to light and
removed by the action of the Holy Spirit, we must show our trust
by practising the greatest freedom as well as the strictest con-
scientiousness in our treatment of the Canon. This means, first,
that all inquiries intended to ascertain the authors of the books we
have, and the genuineness or the reverse of particular passages, must
pursue an unhampered course, and that no doubts which may
arise should either be accepted by unfriendly prejudice or rejected
without scrutiny. Not only is this a part of a complete knowledge
of Scripture ; it is not without influence on the interpretation and
the use of individual passages. It means, secondly, that we refuse
to be perverted from the purest hermeneutical methods, as would
be the case if we knowingly preferred to put an artificial interpreta-
tion on a passage rather than construe it in a sense suggestive of a
less pure view of Christian faith. Under no other circumstances


1The accounts given by Irenzus, iii. 1, and Eusebius, H.F. ii. 15, iii. 24,
39, v. 8, and elsewhere, are bound, as time goes on, to be less and less regarded
as, based on trustworthy information.


606 THE CHRISTIAN FAITH [§ 131


could we take the credit of being as actively engaged (though within
a smaller field of controversial questions and with better equipment
and a more cultivated sense) in the discrimination of Scripture as
those were who first made the decisive selection of Holy Scripture
out of the whole mass of early Christian writings.

2. To understand the second half of our paragraph in its whole
range, we must first go back to the influence originally exerted by
the writings of the New Testament. The doctrinal books were
meant to bear upon the actual circumstances of Christian people,
so that the utterances of the Apostles went to form both the
dominant ideas and the purposes of believers ; the historical books
were meant simply to rehearse the similarly influential words and
deeds of Christ and the Apostles. Hence they must become the
regulative type for our religious thinking, from which it is not of
its own motion to depart. And when Holy Scripture is described
as ‘ sufficient ’ in this regard, what is meant is that through our use
of Scripture the Holy Spirit can lead us into all truth, as it led the
Apostles and others who enjoyed Christ’s direct teaching. So that
if one day there should exist in the Church a complete reflection of
Christ’s living knowledge of God, we may with perfect justice regard
this as the fruit of Scripture, without any addition of foreign
elements having had to come in. Of course the effects of what was
due to the previous action of Scripture are here reckoned to the
account of Scripture itself. Thus it is as representing each indi-
vidual’s personal understanding of Scripture that, in the measure
of his command of thought and speech, his true expressions of
Christian piety take shape. And the interpretation of Christian
faith which validates itself in each age as having been evoked by
Scripture is the development, suited to that moment, of the genuine
original interpretation of Christ and His work, and constitutes the
common Christian orthodoxy for that time and place.

To this constitutive influence of Scripture, the second or critical
influence—and when we speak of the normative place of Scripture,
it is often this alone we have in view—-is related in a merely sub-
ordinate way ; almost, so to speak, as its shadow. True, we can
imagine thinking which is independent of the action of the Holy
Spirit through Scripture and yet is religious in its content as well as
Christian in its original roots, yet the results of which are trivial
and infertile, or erroneous and all but heretical. All such thinking,
originating as it does in the immature or confused state of mind of
those who receive and develop it, must be tested by Scripture, and


§ 137] SCRIPTURE A SUFFICIENT NORM 607


can only prove that at least it means to be Christian by seeking to
base itself on Scripture and so acknowledging the test. But clearly
this critical aspect of the normative use of Scripture must decrease
as the productive increases, and as the perfected understanding of
Scripture renders its misinterpretation more difficult.

As regards the scientific expression of Christian faith in Dogmatic
proper, it is no doubt undertaken solely by persons of a scientific
turn ; but they are always persons who desire to be instruments of
the Spirit that acts in and through Scripture, in systematizing what
is fragmentary in scriptural expressions and in harmonizing different
presentations—the original ones and those directed against Judaism
and Paganism—with each other, and in supplementing one by
another. Here too, therefore, the productive, normative power of
Scripture is shown, although in itself Scripture scarcely even suggests
the distinction between a more popular and a more scientific ter-
minology. On the other hand, strong suspicion cannot but be felt
of a Dogmatic which, after pursuing its own line all along, objects
to anything more than a critical use of Scripture for the purpose of
proving that certain isolated details in its structure can be paralleled
from the Bible and that no part of the system contradicts the
language of Scripture properly understood. Only, it ought not to
be demanded even in the former case that each individual dogmatic
locus must be represented in Scripture by a passage specially
devoted to it.

3. If we take strictly the phrase that Scripture as norm is
sufficient, it follows that Scripture can contain nothing superfluous.
What is superfluous is confusing and hence of no more than negative
value ; also it tempts the mind into comparisons that lead nowhere.
But Scripture does contain much that is little more than repetition,
indeed frequent repetition, of what is said elsewhere, and this
appearance of superfluity is all the more curious when contrasted
with the lack of it in a dogmatic system apparently just as incom-
plete. This, however, is to be expected from the nature of the
case, for Scripture did not come into existence all at once ; and in
this regard our paragraph gives expression to the conviction, which
is fundamental to the right use of Scripture and is ever anew con-
firmed by a sound hermeneutical method, that repetitions in the
historical books are all the better guarantee of the authenticity of
tradition, while quite possibly they may supplement each other.
The same holds of repeated discussions of the same topics in the
doctrinal books. For, even assuming that in different passages the


608 THE CHRISTIAN FAITH [§ 132


writer was not dealing with different situations and relationships,
the identity of the Spirit in varied circumstances and individuals is
thereby attested all the more powerfully.


§ 132. Postscript to this Doctrine.—The Old Testament Scriptures
owe their place in our Bible partly to the appeals the New
Testament Scriptures make to them, partly to the historical
connexion of Christian worship with the Jewish Synagogue ;
but the Old Testament Scriptures do not on that account share
the normative dignity or the inspiration of the New.


1. Our exposition of this doctrine diverges from custom in this
respect, that in the two theorems the New Testament writings alone
were treated of ; and this postscript has to justify this divergence
and give it clear expression. Intentionally, however, it is an-
nounced as a postscript, because it is merely polemical and therefore
will have lost its relevance as soon as the difference between the
two Testaments is generally recognized. That time is as yet appar-
ently distant, and in a Church system it would be correspondingly
hazardous to include, as a theorem proper, a proposition of so
dissentient a character. Especially as the same view is dominant
outside the Schools ; very often, and sometimes even by emphatic
preference, Old Testament passages are made the basis of Christian
exhortation, and the New Testament seemingly is allowed an
influence merely proportional to its size. This is done from opposite
motives alike by people who attach less value to the distinctive
features of Christianity and by those who recognize it alone and
exclusively as charged with redemptive power. It is only to the
latter that we seek to justify our position ; the former are outside
our province.

2. As regards the inspiration of the Old Testament writings, we
must first of all distinguish between the Law and the Prophets. If
the Apostle is right in representing the Law as, although a divine
ordinance, yet something that came in between the promise to
Abraham’s seed and its fulfilment,! and in asserting further that
the Law lacks the power of the Spirit from which the Christian life
must flow,? then it cannot well be maintained that the Law was
inspired by the same Spirit of which the same Apostle says that it
is no longer communicated through the Law and its works,? but
God sends it into our hearts only through our connexion with
Christ. Similarly, nowhere and in no sense does Christ represent

PiGaleasues * Rom. 78. and 83, SiGales2)


§ 132] THE SPIRIT IN THE OLD TESTAMENT 609


the sending of the Spirit, with whose witness He combines the
witness of the disciples, as the return of what had been there already
and had merely disappeared for a while. But on the Law there
depend all the historical books subsequent to its being given. For
if Messianic prophecy as that which has most affinity with Chris-
tianity be confronted with the Law as that which has least, no one
will venture to hold that what the Jewish historical books contain
is the history of Messianic prophecy rather than of the Law. Nay,
even in the prophetic books most of the contents relate to the legal
dispensation and the circumstances of the people as such, and the
Spirit in which they originate is simply the spirit of the people ;
it is therefore not the Christian Spirit, which as One Spirit was to
break down the wall of partition between this people and all others.
So that only Messianic prophecy would remain as capable of sharing
in inspiration in our sense. But if we consider that it is only at
isolated moments that the prophets rise to inspiration, and that it
is Only in this reference that the Spirit moving and animating them
is called holy,? our conclusion surely must be that this title is merely
given in an inexact sense, to indicate that this common spirit,
bound up as it was with a conscious need of redemption, and reveal-
ing itself in the premonition of a more inward and spiritual Reign
of God, carried in itself, and could kindle and sustain even outside
itself, the highest receptivity for the Holy Spirit.

Let us inquire, secondly, as to the normative dignity of the Old
Testament, first of all in the productive sense. Here it cannot on
the whole be denied that the religious sense of Evangelical Christians
recognizes in the main a great difference between the two Testa-
ments. Even the noblest Psalms always contain something which
Christian piety is unable to appropriate as a perfectly pure expression
of itself, so that it is only after deluding ourselves by unconscious
additions and subtractions that we can suppose we are able to
gather a Christian doctrine of God out of the Prophets and the
Psalms. On the other hand, a strong inclination to the use of Old
Testament texts in expressing pious feeling is almost invariably
accompanied by a legalistic style of thought or a slavish worship
of the letter. Lastly, as regards the critical aspect of the normative
use of Scripture, probably there are few Christian doctrines which
at a certain period it was not attempted to prove by Old Testament
passages. But how was it really possible that in an age merely of
premonition any truth connected with the doctrine of redemption

1 John 1426 and 1575 27, 2 IE Mh


39


610 THE CHRISTIAN FAITH [§ 132


through Christ could have been set forth so clearly that it could be
used with advantage side by side with what was said by Christ
Himself, and, after the completion of His redeeming work, by His
disciples ? Or if it be thought that inspiration does make this
possible, would not in consequence an entirely different reception of
the Saviour and the form in which He preached the Kingdom of
God have been prepared for among the Bible-reading part of His
nation? The effect is in no sort of keeping with the cause to which
it is ascribed. Further, the history of Christian theology shows
only too clearly on the one hand how gravely this effort to find our
Christian faith in the Old Testament has injured our practice of
the exegetical art, and how on the other it has submerged the later
development of doctrine and the controversies regarding its more
exact definition under a flood of useless complications. Thus a
thoroughgoing improvement is only to be looked for when we
utterly discard Old Testament proofs for specifically Christian
doctrines, preferring to put aside what chiefly rests on such support.

3. But if a practice which has so long been prevalent in the
Church is to be reformed, it is necessary to show how the practice
arose. There are two grounds on which this external equating of
both Testaments rests. In the first place, not only did Christ Him-
self and the Apostles give instruction on portions of the Old Testa-
ment that had been read aloud, but the same custom was perpetuated
in Christian public gatherings, before the New Testament Canon
had been formed and even later. But from this it by no means
follows that a similar homiletical use of the Old as well as of the
New Testament ought still to be continued, or that we must put it
down to the corruption of the Church that the Old Testament is
not so much read by Christians of our time as the New. On the
contrary, the ecclesiastical status of the Old Testament was due to
its historical connexions, so that its gradual retirement into the
background lies in the nature of the case; and these historical
connexions are very far from vouching adequately for the normative
dignity or the inspiration of the books of the Old Testament. The
Pauline passages which testify to the value of the Old Testament !
relate chiefly to the usage above described ; and the freedom with
which the Apostle employs it is in perfect agreement with our con-
tention, so that we might well call him as a witness in support of
the position that Old Testament proofs are no longer required.

The second ground is that Christ and the Apostles themselves


1 Rom, 154, r Cor, 1014, 2 Tim, 316,


§ 133] THE MINISTRY OF THE WORD 611


refer to the books of the Old Testament as divine authorities favour-
able to Christianity. But from this it does not in the least follow
that for our faith we still need these earlier premonitions, since we
have actual experience ; and the New Testament approves of men
ceasing to believe on the ground of such witness when once they
have gained immediate certainty through their own perception.}
Only, for that very reason historical fidelity and completeness of
view demand that what Christ and His first preachers appealed
to should be preserved. This, however, scarcely covers more than
the prophetic books and the Psalms; which would justify the
practice of adding these to the New Testament as an appendix.
But in the time of Christ these books did not exist separately, but
only as parts of the sacred collection ; they are often cited exclusively
in that character ; certain quotations, moreover, occur from other
books. Hence, although for us the Old Testament cannot be an
indivisible whole as it was for the Jews, there can be no objection
to its being added in its entirety to the New Testament. None the
less, the real meaning of the facts would be clearer if the Old Testa-
ment followed the New as an appendix, for the present relative
position of the two makes the demand, not obscurely, that we
must first work our way through the whole of the Old Testament
if we are to approach the New by the right avenue.


SECOND DOCTRINE: THE MINISTRY OF THE WORD OF GOD


§ 133. Those members of the Chnistian fellowship who maintain chiefly
the attitude of spontaneity perform by self-communication
the Ministry of God’s Word for those who maintain chiefly
the attitude of receptivity ; and this Mimstry is partly an
indeterminate and occasional ministry, partly formal and
prescribed.


I. The assumption, true for every corporate fellowship, that the
common spirit is unequally distributed, we have already ? made
for the fellowship of the Christian Church. This distinction between
strength and weakness, between purity and impurity in the presenta-
tion and grasp of truth (each of these antitheses viewed in itself and
also in combination with the other) can be seen in the early Church ;
and in each province of the Church it is mosi clearly marked at the
beginning and gradually diminishes. Yet in every part of the
Church it will long remain important enough as an ineqnality of


1 John 4%, *§ 129, 2,


612 THE CHRISTIAN FAITH [§ 133


persons. And even if it had wholly ceased to exist as such, none
the less in each individual so much of inequality of feeling and mood
remains that at one moment he finds himself spontaneously active
and at another only stimulated receptively. The suggested anti-
thesis, then, is always present, and the problem thus raised has to
be solved. For those who are even momentarily weak and impure
only belong to the fellowship in so far as they have a receptive
capacity to be purified and strengthened, and the fellowship can
retain them only as there are those within it who spontaneously
supply to them purification and strengthening. This must here
be considered—apart from the distinction of an outer and an
inner circle within the Church !—as a distinction even among the
regenerate themselves.

That the relation of the spontaneously active to the receptive
is a communication from the former to the latter, and that every
such communication is a service and supply of the Word of God,
may be shown as follows. There can be no self-communication
except through self-presentation acting by way of stimulus; the
imitatively received movement of the self-presented person be-
comes in the receptively stimulated person a force that evokes the
same movement. If this produces a purifying or strengthening,
it can only be an effect such as is found in all similar cases where
one common spirit works in each of many—an effect of the Holy
Spirit working in each of many Christians. And as the Spirit,
taking all from Christ, is ever the same Spirit as inspired the
Scriptures, no expression of the individual can evoke a similar
effect except in so far as it is analogous to Scripture and hence can
justify itself as scriptural. Thus with equal justice it may be said
that every self-communication that makes for salvation is certainly
also scriptural, and every scriptural one is also edifying. For no
true Christian can wish to retain anything in his inner life, and
at work there, in which he does not recognize Christ ; so, too, no
one can wish, in his self-communication within the Christian
fellowship, to commend and disseminate himself and his own things,
but rather Christ alone and whatever of Christ lives in him.
Similarly, no one can wish to take up anything into his life for
self-advancement, save as he takes it from Christ. Hence with
every communicative and stimulating activity within the Christian
fellowship is bound up self-knowledge (to call it self-denial would
be inaccurate), to the effect that the communicated gifts are not to

1Cf, § 115, 2 and § 116, 1,


§ 133] THE INFLUENCE OF THE STRONGER 613


be ascribed to the person communicating them, or to any private
divine revelation of his own. Everything must be traceable to the
view of Christ given in Scripture, so that the individual can only
act as the recollecting and developing organ of Scripture ; other-
wise unchristian personal claims and separatist influences would
break the fellowship in pieces. So, too, a genuinely Christian
receptivity will disdain to take the words and acts of any mere
individual as example, or to receive them as truth. And this
critical attitude, to avoid being deceived, will not hesitate to make
distinctions even within what is scriptural ; as in a case where some
particular point can be defended by a single Biblical passage, but is
out of harmony with the spirit of the whole.

2. If now we consider this influence of the stronger on the
weaker, we can see that it embraces the whole Christian life. Even
the acts of individuals, in so far as expressive of the same Spirit,
are an offering to others of the Word of God; as follows indeed
from what was said above! regarding Christ’s prophetic office,
on which this Ministry depends. Hence the distinction stated at
the close of our paragraph is important. All the personal in-
fluences just indicated, occurring separately in individual lives,
often unintended in part and in part unsought, are the indeterminate
and relatively fortuitous ministry of which we cannot speak here,
because it belongs to Christian Ethics. But although we have
here to do exclusively with the formal and ordered Ministry, the
other had to be mentioned ; for the Evangelical conception of the
ordered Ministry has its firmest basis in the fact that in all essential
respects it is homogeneous with that which is more general and
indeterminate. This view, which forbids any sharp distinction
between those who discharge the ordered Ministry and other
Christians, we find in Scripture itself. When Paul enumerates
the different gifts and offices, he mixes both kinds together in-
distinguishably.2. So, too, many persons were called by Christ
into His discipleship in a more indefinite fashion as contrasted with
the definite relationship in which the Twelve stood to Him, or the
Seventy-and-two who were sent out on a definite Ministry. In the
early Church, too, the Ministry of the Apostles was an ordered one,
for they kept to a definite number? and acted upon common
decisions. The same is true of the office of deacons at first in
Jerusalem # and on the same model in other churches. But the
polemical effort of Stephen in defence of Christianity was no part


1§ 103, ean (Clove, 12s Oe) 3 Acts 117, Acts 62,


614 THE CHRISTIAN FAITH [§ 134


of the definite Ministry assigned to him; he was acting ad extra
simply as an individual. So, too, the general and indeterminate
ministry within the churches was recommended to, and demanded
of, all suited for it.1_ Indeed, the distinction lies in the nature of the
case ; not that higher and special qualities necessarily belong to the
regular Ministry: but if even in civil society the common life
cannot be wholly resolved into definite functions assigned to each
by the society as a whole, much less is this compatible, in the fellow-
ship of the Church, with religious influence and communication.
For, on the one hand, the Holy Spirit can never be inactive, and
therefore can never be tied in its activities to definite times ; rather
it moves each believer to do whatever comes to hand. On the
other hand, even so spiritual a society cannot be regarded as well-
ordered unless there be a division of labour ; otherwise none of the
different gifts could attain to its maximum of activity. Especially
as the division can be made with more ease and certainty in
proportion as the One Spirit guides in completer harmony the
judgments of different minds.


§ 134. First Theorem.—There is in the Christian Church a public
Ministry of the Word, as a definite office committed to men
under fixed forms ; and from this proceeds all organization
of the Church.


Conf. Aug. v.: ‘For the obtaining of this faith, the ministry of teaching
the Gospel . . . was instituted by God; even as by the Word and Sacra-
ments, as by instruments, the Holy Spirit is given ; who worketh faith, where
and when He pleaseth.’ xiv. ‘Concerning Church Government they teach
that no man should publicly in the Church teach or preach or administer
the Sacraments without a regular call.’—Conf. Saxon. (p. 196 Tw.) : Agimus
autem gratias Deo... quod... conservavit publicum ministerium et
honestos congressus, qui ipse etiam distinxit quaedam tempora.—Expos.
simpl. xviii.: Deus ad colligendam vel constituendam sibi ecclesiam
eandemque gubernandam et conservandam semper usus est ministris. .. .
Nemo autem honorem ministerii ecclesiastici usurpare sibi ... debet.
Vocentur et eligantur electione ecclesiastica et legitima ministri ecclesiae.

. Eligantur autem . . . homines idonei, etc.—Conf. Helv. xv.: Atque
hanc ob causam ministros ecclesiae cooperarios esse Dei fatemur, per quos
ille cognitionem sui et peccatorum remissionem administret, homines ad
se convertat erigat consoletur ... ita tamen ut efficaciam in his omnem
Deo, ministerium ministris adscribamus.—Conf. Gall. xxix. : Credimus veram
ecclesiam gubernari debere ea disciplina, quam Dominus noster Jesus Christus
sancivit, ita videlicet ut in ea sint pastores presbyteri et diaconi, ut doctrinae
puritas retineatur, vitia cohibeantur, pauperibus consulatur et sacri coetus
habeantur.—Conj. Angl. xxiii.: Non licet cuiquam sumere sibi munus publice
praedicandi . . . nisi prius fuerit legitime vocatus et missus.


1 Eph, 42%, 529,


§ 134] THE PUBLIC MINISTRY 615


1. If in our inquiry as to the origin of this public Ministry we
go back to the commission given by Christ to the Apostles,! we find
that this commission was chiefly directed to those without ; for
any instance of a Ministry internal to the Church might be taken
as coming under the more general and indeterminate ministry.?
The internal, however, grew out of the external, for the newly
converted required steady teaching and admonition ; so that the
internal was included in Christ’s commission as the natural pro-
longation of the external. It was the Apostles themselves, how-
ever, who proposed a division of this internal Ministry and left it
to the whole body to transfer the ministry of serving tables to
others ;* thus the teaching office became something entrusted to
the Apostles by the community, just as the community had formerly
transferred both offices combined to the new member of the Twelve.
Thus both offices have been perpetuated in the Church as the main
branches of the public Ministry, for it is self-evident that the
diaconate can be a Church office only if it be a supplying of the
Word ; that is, if it be an expression and manifestation of Christian
brotherly love in act. But the triple division, however construed,
is arbitrary ; in essence it must reduce to that double division
between teaching and serving tables which really rests on the fact
that the gifts requisite for the one task are as nearly as possible
independent of those which constitute qualifications for the other.
Indeed, from the first, women have always taken part in the public
service of tables,4 but have always been excluded from the public
discharge of the office of teaching.

2. No individual or small group of individuals can represent
Christ : all the more must we regard this transference of offices as
deriving solely from the whole body, and the formation of the clergy
into a self-contained and self-propagating corporation has no
Scriptural basis of any kind. When it is a case of propagation,
Scripture signalizes only two points—determination of the qualities
requisite for the performance of the task, and selection from among
those who are known to be so qualified. Here, then, there remains
a wide freedom of choice in assigning different tasks to different
people, without infringement of the principle that it is the whole
body that organizes the discharge of its functions and distributes
these amongst its members. Such distribution is impossible
without a definite fixing of objects and an exact delimitation of the


PiMatts Loot, 2 E.g. Matt, 1815-20,
3 Acts 62. 47 Tim, 5°» 1° Luke 8%,


616 THE CHRISTIAN FAITH [§ 134


area within which each is to function. It must be decided what is
transferable and what is not; we therefore indirectly subsume
the indeterminate ministry under organization, so as to soften the
contrast between the two ; as is also done when temporary associa-
tions of more closely related individuals are formed, from time to
time, in the interest of what has not been transferred. But even
the Ministry of the Word can never be transferred in so exclusive a
sense that self-communication of the same kind could not take place
between individuals apart from the public Ministry ; this would be
to lord it over conscience! and quench the Spirit.2 From the
transference there arise two sorts of relationship—that of each
needy soul to a variety of communicators as determined by his
peculiar needs and their methods, and that of each communicator
to various receptive souls with reference to some definite need and
within the area assigned to him. It is—if we think of a great
continuous mass of Christian life—through these two relation-
ships taken together that churches are delimited and separated ;
each as an area in which there are present all the gifts needed for
the promotion of Christian life, and in which all the transferable
tasks are advantageously distributed. The ramification of Church
offices, as well as the forms under which they are transferred, may
be very different; and the theory of such matters belongs to
Practical Theology. Here we need only say in general terms that
they are good in proportion as, on the one hand, the distribution
takes place, and is recognized, as the act of the whole body directly
or indirectly ; and as, on the other, the most spiritual Ministry
of all—namely, the ordered presentation of the Word of God—
keeps its place as the mid-point, from which all radiates out and
to which all is in relation.

3. Without this ordered public Ministry and the constitution of
the churches that goes along with it, Christian communication
would merely be isolated and sporadic in character, and to all
appearance fortuitous. In fact, however, it would be impossible
to avoid a confusing uncertainty, leading to a fruitless and self-
consuming waste of varied forces, were the receptive soul with his
needs not referred to definite communicators, and conversely were
communicators with their gifts not referred to definite circles of the
receptive. But even granting that in the power of the Spirit each
gifted person were doing everything possible to employ his gifts
for the common good, and similarly that each needy soul had dis-


*2 Cor, 14, * x Thess. 51°,


§ 135] PUBLIC WORSHIP 617


cernment enough to try the spirits—in other words, that individuals
left nothing undone that might be done, a state of matters only
imperfectly realized by the very best distribution of forces—still,
everything would rest on the stimulation of personal religious
feeling and of individual sympathy. No true common conscious-
ness, no living conviction of the identity of the one Spirit present
in all, could arise thus. But without it there could be for us no
recognition of the Holy Spirit in ourselves or any proper conscious-
ness of the nature of our vital fellowship with Christ ; to ensure
that, we must be conscious of ourselves as members of His Body.
Hence nothing but an utterly superficial view of Christianity will
find it possible to reduce Christian fellowship to the area of domestic
life and to silent, private relationships devoid of publicity. On the
contrary, public gatherings for common confession and common
edification are the principal thing, and the transference to certain
persons of predominance and leadership in these gatherings is
merely a side-issue. Indeed, so far as this point is concerned, a
Church fellowship can be quite in the evangelical spirit which knows
nothing of such transference, and concedes to every Christian the
right of leadership.


§ 135. Second Theorem.—The public worship and service of the
Church is in all its paris bound to the Word of God.


1. Even the isolated and informal communications of Christian
people must, in so far as what they communicate is due to the Holy
Spirit, be explanations and active manifestations of the Word of
God. If the same is to be true of the public Ministry, not in the
same fashion merely, but in a fashion peculiar to itself, it must be
owing to the fact that this characteristic of being bound to the Word
of God definitely enters into the form of public communication.
As regards doctrine, this is secured in part directly by the individual
expositions of religious truth being so arranged throughout as
evidently to be interpretations of particular passages of Scripture ;
partly indirectly through the Creed, which is a brief compendium of
doctrine based on Scripture, and which (assuming its scriptural
character) ought to be controllingly present to every mind; by
which, too, it ought always to be possible to have the doctrine
tested. Both securities, however, must inevitably degenerate into
empty forms, easily circumvented, unless the free and informal
communication prevailing in the same circle of persons is itself
scriptural. If it is not, the Creed will usually assert itself as the


618 THE CHRISTIAN FAITH iS 135


authentic sense of Scripture, so as to prevent any still wider
divergence therefrom ; but the result is an unevangelical worship
of the letter, and the deeper penetration of Scripture is made
impossible.

The same scriptural character is required of Christian poetry if
its creations (although originally meant only for the individual)
are to pass into public Church use. It comes out in one way in
the psalmodic type of Christian verse, which, attaching itself as
it does more or less loosely to paraphrastic translations of the
Psalms in the style of the earliest Christian hymns, treats of par-
ticular passages and situations in Scripture. It comes out differ-
ently in the confessional type, which points back to the ecumenical
Creeds and clothes the sum of common doctrine in poetic harmonies.
The more Christian poetry departs from these two basal forms and
represents purely individual aspects of the religious life, the more
its influence is confined to small coteries.

Under the conception of public Ministry we have subsumed
everything that is the act of the Christian body as such, and the
demand for scripturalness must cover such acts too. Hence these
active public communications also are seen to be bound to the Word
of God; in part directly, since particular admonitions rest on
definite exhortations contained in Scripture and seek to realize
them, or are attached to scriptural models; in part indirectly,
through the fixing of Church rules which, derived like the Creed
from Scripture, seek to establish an order of Christian life in relation
to public worship and service—an order to which all public active
communication must be conformed, and from which it can be
known which actions of the individual the Church acknowledges as
its own, and which it does not.

2. Thus we can see how Confessions or Symbols and Church
rules or Canons arise in the Church, not so much as standards by
which to test the varied presentations of faith in word and act, as
rather the more certainly to secure that the individual shall con-
form to the original utterances of the Spirit. But it by no means
follows that in every age it is possible for them to correspond as
perfectly to this ideal as in the period of their formation. That this
is not the case is a consequence of the simple fact that they are
always the work of the whole Church—using that word as embracing
the antithesis used above—not merely of the spontaneous and
communicative but also (at least indirectly) of the needy and
receptive : and this not merely in the sense that while they originate


§ 136] BAPTISM 619


with the communicative they yet owe their influence solely to
the freely given recognition of the needy, but also because a diffused
knowledge of the spiritual state of the needy—in other words,
the special circumstances of the moment—was one motive in their
production. Hence from the nature of the case every product of
the kind falls short of its ideal, the reason being that the progress
of the Church is faltering and that at every moment the effects
of reactionary tendencies are a part of the situation. They have
validity for us only with the reservation that their scriptural
character must always be liable to scrutiny. Hence the public
worship and service of the Church must always have attached to it
a highly developed organization designed to keep up the expert
interpretation of Scripture and to bring it to perfection by ceaseless
industry. This need not mean that everywhere and in every age
those who are charged with the public Ministry must form a special
class within the Christian fellowship. On the contrary, our two
theorems show that the ecclesiastical distinction, strongly marked
as it may be in particular cases, between those who discharge the
public Ministry and those to whom they minister is always sub-
ordinate on the one hand to the unity and identity of the Spirit in
both, on the other to the fact that both are directly dependent on
Scripture. This, as also the unfailing affinity between activities
which are sporadic and informal and those officially assigned and
ordered, means that the antithesis between the two types of member
is an ever-decreasing one. If we further consider that on its critical
side the normative use of Scripture must one day cease, the
antithesis of the two types, in so far as personal, is lost in a direct
assurance, common to both, as to the scriptural character both of
the accepted doctrines and the canons of practice.


THIRD DOCTRINE: BAPTISM


§ 136. Baptism as an action of the Church signifies simply the act
of will by which the Church receives the individual into tts
fellowship ; but inasmuch as the effectual promise of Christ
vests upon tt, it 1s at the same time the channel of the divine
justifying activity, through which the individual is received
into the living fellowship of Chnst.

1. We have already! put the case for what is essential in this
paragraph, namely, that the reception of an individual into the


MSeL tA e2s


620 THE CHRISTIAN FAITH [§ 136


Christian fellowship and his justification or regeneration must be
one and the same act. Otherwise, if reception into the Church
were solely an act of the Church, then, since the act in question
cannot be conceived as taking place without the Holy Spirit, the
Supreme Being in preparing His union with human nature under
the form of the common Spirit, would be in a state of passivity.
But the outpouring of the Holy Spirit is conditioned by Christ,*
and rests on His promise ; the same must therefore hold good of the
impartation of the Spirit to the individual, even if (as is essential
to the unity of the Church) the Spirit comes to all from Christ in the
same manner. Thus the Church is relieved of a great uncertainty
by the fact that Christ Himself enjoined baptism as the act of
reception into the Church. For now every such reception is an act
of Christ Himself, if performed in the manner He enjoined and
according to His command. Hence the Church can neither depart
from this form of reception through baptism nor, on the other hand,
doubt that in every case where the command of Christ is properly
carried out, His promise will be fulfilled that with such reception
the salvation of the person received begins. The latter would be to
doubt the redeeming power of Christ Himself; the former would
be an audacious notion which could not possibly be derived from
the Holy Spirit, for the Spirit takes all from Christ.

This fixes it that baptism must be retained by the Church in the
form in which it received it. But it is impossible either to obtain
or to give any information as to whether, or how, the outward form
of the act is connected with its inward content and purpose. On
that point we can only say that if Christ had enjoined an utterly
different outward rite for the same purpose, we should regard it as
equally sacred and expect from it the same results. Only so much
is certain, that if Christ had specially instituted something that was
altogether new, it would be incumbent on us in that case to seek
for a relationship of the closest possible kind between the outward
rite and the alleged inward result ; for it is only under the severest
compulsion that we could bring ourselves to suppose that any in-
stitution of Christ was purely arbitrary. It is otherwise inasmuch
as He attached His institution to something already in existence,
and since baptism was already historically conditioned by its con-
nexion with the preaching of John. This historical basis is per-
fectly sufficient, without our being tempted to develop the symbolism
universally recognized in that sphere further than is done in Scrip-


DS 124593.


§ 136] THE BAPTISM OF JOHN 621


ture, or to regard the symbolism as so essential as to justify the
position that the act itself is only complete and can only secure its
purpose when even outwardly it is so performed as perfectly to
bring out its importance.

2. In spite of this undeniable connexion between the baptism of
Christ and that of John, we can scarcely hold that the two are pre-
cisely the same without in some degree lessening the importance of
the former.t_ Even if in John’s baptism the idea of the Kingdom
of God as coming through redemption was fundamental, yet prior
to his recognition of Jesus in the act of baptizing Him the person
of the Redeemer was undetermined alike for John and for those
whom he baptized. Hence we should at least have to distinguish
between his baptism before and after this incident, in the sense that
the former, to equal Christian baptism, needed supplementing.
This distinction, however, could only be important if John later had
baptized in Jesus’ name, which, all things considered, we have more
reason to deny than to assert. Thus it can scarcely be conceded
that the baptism of John can have been either reception into the
Christian Church or a bath of regeneration ; in other words, it could
only be construed as being identical with Christian baptism if we
regarded both as equally ineffectual, or if, virtually abrogating the
distinction between the old covenant and the new, we held that
John, without any definite relation to Christ, was able to give
precisely what Christ gave.

On the other hand, not only is it impossible to maintain that for
those baptized by John the recognition of Jesus as the Christ was
an insufficient additional step,and a new baptism indispensable,
but it is not even clear that so long as the Redeemer lived, baptism
was invariably essential for entering into fellowship with Him. It
rather appears that when by word He imparted forgiveness to some-
one, and called him to follow Him, this acceptance was itself the
act of Christ, and baptism would have been no more than an utterly
meaningless supplement. Indeed, it is impossible to hold that even
the Apostles had received the baptism of John, not to say all the
disciples of Christ, especially those from Galilee ; still less that
Christ Himself baptized any single person on whom it would then
have been incumbent to baptize others. Hence we must apply


1 See Gerhard, Loc. ix. p. ror f. 2 Cf. John 377%--and Acts 193:>.

3 As Zwingli does, de ver. velig. p. 208: Quid vero distent Joannis baptis-
mus et Christi multa tum olim tum nunc est quaestio, sed inutilis plane, nam
discrimen omnino nullum est. , . , Nihil efficiebat Joannis tinctio , , . nihil
efficit Christi tinctio, etc, 4 John 4”,


622 THE CHRISTIAN FAITH [§ 136


at this point the distinction between the Church as it still awaited
institution and the Church as it already existed, and it is no matter
tor surprise if many of the Christians who had not been won by the
already existing Church were unbaptized. The personal choice of
Christ as an act of His will must have been completely sufficient of
itself to secure both the blessings which our paragraph ascribes to
baptism—namely, the application of the divine decree of redemp-
tion to the individual, and the placing of the individual in fellow-
ship with all who already believe. This makes it as clear as possible
that baptism as Christ’s universal ordinance has taken the place
of His particular personal choice.

3. Suppose we hold to this point of view and conceive each act
of baptism, if it is to have this effect, as a decision of the whole
Church, to which through the action of the Holy Spirit in its fulness
there attaches the highest canonical authority ; so that the Church
could baptize no one who was not as mature and as ready actually
to begin a new spiritual life in fellowship with Christ as everyone
chosen by Christ Himself must have been. There would in that
case be no occasion to raise questions as to the possibility that
baptism and regeneration might be separated from each other ; we
could assert without more ado that everyone is regenerated in
baptism, and only so. For since the Holy Spirit was bestowed on
the whole body of disciples, it might be held that the divine activity
in regeneration and justification was so exclusively attached to the
administration of baptism that everyone whom in baptism the
Church presents to God not only is acknowledged by Him, sub-
sequently as it were, but in and with baptism itself is given a share
in the Holy Spirit and divine sonship. In fact, however, this is not
the case ; baptism is only granted and administered by a relatively
self-contained part of the Church, in a transitional phase of its
development, for none of whose particular actions therefore any
such canonical perfection can be claimed. Hence no particular act
of baptism can do more than approximate more or less to perfect
correctness. And if we add that the moment of the individual’s
regeneration cannot humanly be exactly determined and still less
exactly foreseen, it will appear that the supposed incorrectness in
the administration of baptism is traceable to the fact that the
Church does not approach the baptism of a catechumen in quite the
same way as the soul of the catechumen himself (though all is
mediated through the activities of the Church) moves on to regenera-
tion. And thus, what on the formal view of the Church’s action


§ 136] BAPTISM AND REGENERATION 623


would be an absolutely simple process now falls apart into two series
of events, with two different terminations. Now if it were demon-
strable that the series of the Church’s actions which lead up to
regeneration were, just because derived less personally and more
directly from the power of the Word of God, more closely representa-
tive than the other series of the influence of the whole body, and
that accordingly what would be most perfect in this imperfect state
of things would be that the administration of baptism should always
be attached to the rightly discerned moment of regeneration, yet it
is undeniably in the nature of the case that the inclination of the
Church to baptize will sometimes run ahead of the inward workings
of the Spirit for regeneration and sometimes lag behind them,
according as those whose office it is to baptize lean to one estimate
or the other of the catechumen’s inward state. Hence—as if to
mitigate our dissatisfaction with this imperfect state of things—
already in the Apostolic Age we find both forms of variation: the
impartation of the Spirit before baptism and of baptism before the
Spirit ; it is obvious, besides, that the distance between the one and
the other may be greater now than it was then. In every case,
however, where the decisive gracious workings of the Spirit precede,
there is a peremptory summons to let baptism follow immediately
as reception into the fellowship; and, conversely, the priority of
baptism is only justified by the assured faith, based on the living
activity of the Church, that the regeneration of the person received
will now result from the influence of the whole body. Thus taken
as a whole, the number of the baptized and of the regenerate should
always be identical ; yet, owing to the above-mentioned variations,
though in an ever-diminishing ratio to the whole as the Church
becomes more perfect, there will always be some regenerate persons
who are not yet baptized but who might well have claimed to be
received earlier into the Church ; similarly there will be baptized
persons who are not yet regenerate but in the most active way are
being commended to divine grace for regeneration by the prayers
of the Church. Hence the relation of the two elements is always
at bottom essentially the same, and both must be conceived as
absolutely correlative, however they may now and then diverge in
time.

4. It is easy to see from this how widely opinions about the
worth and effects of baptism may differ without our being justified
in stigmatizing as unchristian those that diverge farthest on the one
side or the other. If we start with the fact that, in the actual state


624 THE CHRISTIAN FAITH [§ 136


of the Church, baptism and regeneration do not always coincide, it
is only giving emphatic expression to this fact if we say that even
if they did coincide it would be an accident, and that a man is by no
means regenerate simply because he has had baptism administered
to him. The same position to which, when rightly understood,
there is nothing to object, may also be expressed by saying that
baptism of itself produces no inward result, but is only an external
sign of entrance into the Church.! This also is true ; but only if the
external particular action, the exact moment of which is for the
most part externally conditioned either by general regulations for
public worship or by special circumstances, be viewed as quite in-
dependent of the activity of the Spirit in the Church. In other
words the statement is true, but only as indicating the imperfection
of the Church in the matter of baptism ; but if taken as a complete
and general description of baptism, it is false. Without the action
of the Spirit, baptism with water is certainly no more than an
external rite which Christ Himself declares to be insufficient ; ? but,
as was the case with its first administration in the Church proper on
the first day of Pentecost, so ever after baptism is meant to be
evoked by the action of the Spirit and bound up therewith in the
closest possible way. If, however, on the ground that baptism by
itself does not produce regeneration, which alone matters, this
position be further extended to mean either that baptism is super-
fluous and were best omitted, or at least that there is no better
reason for retaining it than a laudable reverence for ancient institu-
tions, such a view as this last would so entirely reverse the relation-
ship indicated above between the baptism of John and Christian
baptism that the latter would seem to be no more than an appendix
to the former—an appendix always more meaningless, too, as time
went on. But the former view, that baptism is superfluous, by
destroying all connexion between the influences of the Christian
fellowship (and on these influences baptism sets the crown) and the
inward development of the individual up to regeneration, or at least
by refusing it any outward expression, really destroys the Church
itself, at least as an external institution ; and in all outward respects
the Christian fellowship takes on as shadowy and all but fortuitous
an aspect as in the case of the Society of Friends. Still, even this


1 Zwingh, /.c. p. 220: Externa vero res est quum tinguntur . .. ac
verae rei signum ac ceremonia. . . . Sic sunt ceremoniae exteriora signa,
quae accipientem aliis probant, eum se ad novam vitam obligavisse, etc.

* And that, as is shown by the connexion in which John 3? occurs, even
when it is a confession of repentance,


§ 136] BAPTISM AND REGENERATION 625


view cannot be called absolutely unchristian ; for it disparages
baptism as no more than outward in order to exalt the sole worth
ot what is inward, namely, regeneration.1

On the other hand, if we start from the fact that regeneration
and entrance into the fellowship of believers are essentially bound
up together and reciprocally conditioned—the more so that it is
from this fellowship that all the influences of the Spirit which produce
regeneration are derived—the most natural and most original state-
ment of this is to say that one and the same series of Church actions
terminates in both things—baptism and regeneration. Now this
certainly is also true; but, as has been shown, it is true only as
describing a certain ideal perfection of the Church, which is not at
any single point really given, and cannot really be manifested in any
single action. From this a further inference may be drawn. It
may be held that the one termination and goal must be conditioned
by the other ; but that baptism cannot be conditioned by regenera-
tion (for as regeneration is only recognizable in the facts of the new
life, this would presuppose that the influence of the Church acted on
the individual prior to his being received into it, which is absurd),
therefore regeneration must be conditioned by baptism. Also since
the earlier inward states of the individual preparatory to regenera-
tion are evoked by earlier influences and actions of the Church,
regeneration itself can only be evoked by the last action of the
Church in the series, namely, baptism. This reasoning also is true
and accurate if taken in a purely spiritual sense, and if even in the
case of baptism as the final item in the series regard is paid solely
to an inward reality which is not bound up with any particular
moment of time—I mean the self-expanding movement of the
Church, which can only attain its goal through the regeneration of
new members. If we consider further that the inner fact of re-
generation does not become fully certain in time to a man’s own
consciousness except through his progressive sanctification,? and
that for a while it may often be imperilled by whatever interrupts
or hinders sanctification, it must be admitted in this reference also
that regeneration, as an inner possession, is conditioned by baptism.
The personal self-consciousness, if uncertain and vacillating, may be


1 The attitude to the Church which this view represents is revealed in the
classical passage in Robert Barclay’s A polog. Theol. xii. p. 269: Ea hac in re
sicut in plerisque aliis inter nos et adversarios stat differentia, quod frequenter
nedum formam et umbram substantiae et virtuti praeponunt, sed umbram
saepe opposite ad substantiam stabiliunt.

ACiSS 105, 3:


40


626 THE CHRISTIAN FAITH [§ 137


strengthened and confirmed by the common consciousness of the
Church expressed in baptism and hallowed by prayer in the name
of Christ. The statement, however, is false if taken in a temporal
sense and related to the outward action, all the more if this action
be conceived in abstraction from the motives on which it is based,
as well as from their antecendent influence. For then what emerges
is the monstrous position that God must necessarily justify the man
to whom the Church grants baptism, however little ground there
may be for that in his inward condition. Such distortions of the
truth we cannot all the same describe as absolutely unchristian,
though they come very near to magic and therefore are censurable
and dangerous and have done most to provoke the above-cited
assertions, which are one-sided in the opposite sense. For the power
thus ascribed to the Church is after all traced back to Christ Himself,
and the fruit of baptism is represented as being not merely the
remission of sin but also living union with Christ.

In the following paragraphs we shall develop what can be put
forward as Church doctrine within these limits, allowing for the
necessary margin of freedom.


§ 137. First Theorem.—Baptism bestowed according to the institution
of Christ confers, along with citizenship in the Christian
Church, salvation also as conditioned by the divine grace in
regeneration.


Conf. Aug. ix.: De baptismo docent quod sit necessarius ad salutem,
quodque per baptismum offeratur gratia dei.—Art. Smalc. v.: Baptismus nihil
est aliud quam verbum dei cum mersione in aquam secundum ipsius institu-
tionem et mandatum. . . . Quare non sentimus cum Thoma qui dicit deum
spiritualem virtutem aquae contulisse . . . quae peccatum per aquam
abluat. Non etiam facimus cum Scoto, qui docet baptismo ablui peccatum

. et hanc ablutionem fieri tantum per Dei voluntatem, et minime per
verbum et aquam.—Conf. Saxon: Ego baptizo te, id est ego testificor hac
mersione te ablui a peccatis et recipi iam a vero deo . . . quem agnoscis

. et certo statuis tibi tribui beneficia, quae in evangelio promisit, te esse
membrum ecclesiae dei.—Luth. Catech. maj.: Sola fides personam dignam


facit, ut hanc salutarem et divinam aquam utiliter suscipiat. . . . Eo enim
quod te aqua perfundi sinis baptismum nondum percepisti aut servasti
ut inde aliquod emolumenti ad te redeat. . . . Deinde hoc quoque dicimus


non summam vim in hoc sitam esse, num ille qui baptizetur credat necne ; per
hoc enim baptismo nihil detrahitur.—Eypos. simpl. xix.: In baptismo enim
signum est elementum aquae, ablutioque illa visibilis quae fit per ministrum,
Res autem significata est regeneratio vel ablutio a peccatis. Baptizari in


1Ita baptismus intuendus est et nobis fructuosus faciendus, ut in hoc


freti corroboremur et confirmemur, quoties peccatis aut conscientia gravamur.
Luther, Catech. maj.


§ 137] THE EFFECTS OF BAPTISM 624


nomine Christi est inscribi initiari et recipi . . . in haereditatem filiorum Dei

. et donavi varia dei gratia ad vitam novam.—Conf. Gallic. xxxv.:
Baptismus nobis testificandae nostrae adoptioni datus, quoniam in eo
inserimur Christi corpori, ut eius sanguine abluti, simul etiam ipsius spiritu

. renovemur . . .—Conf. Belg. xxxiv.: Mandavit ut omnes qui sui sunt

. . baptizentur, ut eo significet, quod sicuti aqua in nos infusa . . . sordes
abluit, sic et sanguis Christi per Spir. s. idem praestat interne in anima,
adspergens eam et a peccatis suis eam mundans, nosque ex filiis irae in filios
dei regenerans.—Collog. Lips., p. 400: ‘Although the grace of God doth not
work salvation through baptism ex opeve opervato . . . or through the mere
outward washing; yet is it done in virtue of the word of institution and
promise by means of baptism.’

1. In the statements of the two Protestant Churches there is
obvious a certain vacillation of opinion, so that if we compare the
different passages it is not easy to decide whether in baptism some-
thing is given and communicated from the one side and acquired
on the other, or whether something is merely indicated and attested
or offered. Of this vacillation our paragraph shows no trace ; it
places itself on the side of those who ascribe most to baptism ;
hence the greater the effect attributed to baptism, the more im-
portant it is to determine how much belongs to the institution of
Christ to which such an effect is attached. Here we may first of
all distinguish between the action itself and the intention with which
it is performed : the first by itself alone is only the external side of
baptism, the second the internal; and since the alleged effect is
something purely spiritual and inward, this means that the external
action simply by itself cannot produce the effect, and the connexion
between the two is mediated solely by the intention on which the
whole is based. According to the words of Christ Himself 1 and the
interpretation of them in act given by His disciples,” this effect 1s
reception into the fellowship of disciples; for only within this
fellowship is that ‘ teaching them to hold ’ all that Christ commanded
to be found which differs from the evocation of faith or ‘ making
disciples.’ Only, the effect of the action does not depend on the
intention being pure and unmixed, or on its always being definitely
present to the mind of the person by whom baptism is administered.$
For the action is not the action of any single individual ; the in-
dividual only performs it in virtue of the authority therefor which
he has received from the Church, and thus as an action of the
Church. But the intention of the Church in bestowing this authority
can have been none other than the right and true intention indicated


1 Matt. 2819 20, 2 Acts 241. 47,
3 Here the canon is applicable: Licet uti sacramentis quae per malos
administrantur. Conf. Aug. vii. and elsewhere.


628 THE CHRISTIAN FAITH (§ 137


above. On this assumption, it is a general principle for all ages
during which the Church may continue to be divided into a number
of relatively antagonistic communions, that baptism which anyone
of them causes to be administered is valid not only for the ad-
ministering Church itself but for all Churches whatsoever, because
in baptizing they all have the intention to receive into the Christian
Church. Nay, even supposing some one Church were to add to the
action something having a special relevance to its own party
interest, the other Churches might certainly correct this necessarily
improper addition, and deny its value, but they would not on that
account challenge the validity of the action as a whole, provided the
institution of baptism was not itself challenged. This principle
is rightly taken to cover heretical parties also; for they regard
themselves as the true Christians, and their intention always is to
receive those baptized into Christendom. It is true, in doing so
they likewise intend to propagate their heresy ; but all the orthodox
Church need do is to counteract such heresy strongly in the minds
of the persons baptized, without having on that account to destroy
the original common Christian foundation that has been laid.

As regards the action itself, what ought principally to be noted
in the descriptions given of it in the passages cited is this, that not
only does the water not have any importance in itself apart from
the action, but even the external action, be it complete or partial
immersion—and to the latter type belongs every kind of laving
or sprinkling with water—is connected with the intention solely
through the accession of the Word of God ; without this the action
would be incomplete. Obvious as this may be, we would not
thereby assert that in His institution Christ gave command that
specific words should be pronounced during the outward action, and
that a baptism therefore is invalid which is lacking in the words
meant to be uttered uniformly, always and everywhere. What we
do hold is that along with the action there must go a presentation
of the Word of God on which discipleship rests, and this in point of
fact is the Word of Father, Son, and Spirit ; and through appeal to
this Word, as of equally sacred significance for baptizer and baptized,
baptism has its higher significance conserved, for that appeal ex-
presses the intention of the Church and the assenting wish of the
catechumen. The utterance of the regular formula, however, can
only be described as an ancient Church tradition ; the only general
rule we can state is this, that as no man performs baptism except
by the authority of the Church, he ought to perform it in a manner


§ 137] BAPTISM AND THE WORD 629


consonant with his authority. Hence it cannot be right to make
the validity of baptism administered by different religious parties
depend on their keeping the formula unchanged, as though in
baptism the formula were the substantial thing.1 Such a demand
would certainly bring us into conflict with baptism as performed
by Christ’s disciples during His lifetime, for they cannot at that
time have baptized in the name of the Holy Spirit.2. Nay, it will
probably never be possible to make out whether later, from Pente-
cost onwards, the Apostles themselves used the formula, or felt
that Christ’s teaching enjoined them to use it. Occasion has been
found in hypothetical cases of extreme urgency, such as could never
really occur, to raise the question whether in such a case something
else might not be substituted for water ; but it might also be asked
whether, if a case arose in which for the sake of the baptized person
signs had to be substituted for words, such signs would be valid as
reproducing not the words themselves but only their meaning,
whereas spoken words differing from the formula but the same in
meaning would be invalid. What, however, is much the most essential
point in the relation to the Word of God that goes to constitute
baptism, is just that the Word must be known to the baptized
person and acknowledged by him. For obviously this implies that
his being made a disciple, which can only take place through the
power of the Word, preceded baptism ; this is the practice which
everywhere we find observed by the Apostles, so far as our informa-
tion goes. Indeed, apart from this the action cannot be regarded
as complete. For just as it is only through the accession of the
Word to the external rite that the Church expresses her intention,
so, too, it is only through his appropriation of the Word that the
baptized person’s assent to this intention is expressed.

z. From what has now been said regarding the nature of the
action, and especially from the fact that the baptized person is
asked to give a confession of the Word joined to the action, it follows
very clearly that the baptized person’s faith is a precondition of the
action really being what it is intended to be. So much lies before
us in Christ’s two sayings about baptism.’ For even if in the first
saying we seek to combine ‘ making disciples’ and baptizing as
closely as possible, what we there have is a later elaboration which
only reached its final stage in the second saying, and which from the
outset could only represent an approximation to faith ; and even in


1Cf. Gerhard, Loc. Theol. ix. p. 90. SD \fohaiy Ge on,
3 Matt. 281%. 20 and Mark 161°,


630 THE CHRISTIAN FAITH [§ 137


baptism this approximation could only be fully realized if the
baptized person were prepared to make confession of the Word
that accompanies baptism. Similarly, the faith which in the other
passage Christ makes an antecedent of baptism must be the very
faith of which we have been speaking all along. Peter, indeed, seems
to demand merely repentance, not faith, before baptism ;? still,
it was repentance for the part which his hearers, as members of the
Jewish nation, had had in the rejection of Christ, a repentance
which had only been rendered possible through the acknowledgment
of Christ and adoption of His cause which they owed to Peter’s
address ; and this of itself must involve faith. Peter brings in this
demand at the close of his sermon ; he must therefore have started
with the same assumption as Paul,? and been convinced that his
preaching had already produced faith in every case where this was
a possibility. Similarly, our thought of the Church, as constantly
engaged in preaching, must be that it ought to conclude preaching
by baptism, but not interrupt preaching to baptize. Now in the
quoted credal passages it is also stated that baptism is proper
and complete even without faith, and it tallies with this that other
thinkers represent faith as the fruit and consequence of baptism.
But against both views we must enter a protest. Baptism is re-
ceived wrongly if it be received without faith, and it is wrongly
given so. True, the ordinance loses none of its significance, whether
considered as originally an institution of Christ or in its more definite
form as an ordinance of the Church ; but this is so only because the
Church can never have laid down that it is a matter of indifference
whether those baptized are believers or not. For the same reason,
baptism as an act of the mere individual has never been such that
the Church could approve of it and regard it quite as its own; in
any case such acts of baptism fall under the head of imperfect ©
Church administration. But if this only means that even in such
cases baptism need not be repeated, the point is one which requires
to be stated more emphatically, lest we should seem to be ignoring
what are manifest imperfections. Baptism, that is to say, is in-
effectual only when it is imparted prematurely, before the work of
preaching is complete and has awakened faith. It is different with
the assertion that faith springs from baptism as its fruit. This is
obviously in contradiction to the whole practice of the Apostles

BEANGEST Docs 2 Rom. rol,

® See Gerhard, Loc. Theol. ix. p. 152, where the statement is made that


baptism kindles faith in the heart of the person baptized, but not the slightest
proof is given of the connexion between the two things.


§ 137] BAPTISM AND FAITH 631


and the whole experience of the Church as it grew in consequence
of mass-baptism ; nay, even in the individual case, where one who
is still an unbeliever has been baptized too early, the Church does
not rely on baptism alone but carries on the work of preaching in
the full sense of the word ; and if in these circumstances faith arises
later, no simple Christian mind will ascribe this to the wrongly
administered baptism, but to what subsequently to baptism has
been done by the Church.

As regards complete baptism, which implies the existing faith
of the person baptized, what we say is that it effects salvation, but
only along with citizenship in the Christian Church ; that is to say,
only in so far as it mediates reception into the fellowship. To this
it might be objected that if baptism presupposes faith, then salva-
tion precedes baptism, for we ourselves have explained faith as
the appropriation of the perfection and blessedness of Christ ;1 and
a study of this objection is peculiarly fitted to cast light on the whole
problem. It goes back to the relation of this Section to the second
Division of the previous Section. Faith as an inward state of the
individual is the appropriation just described, but the influence of
the appropriated perfection of Christ and the enjoyment of His
appropriated blessedness become real only within the fellowship of
believers ; hence the man in whom faith develops also has the desire
to enter the fellowship. In this sense baptism as direct reception
into the fellowship of believers is also named the seal of divine
grace,” because the real enjoyment of grace is thereby guaranteed.
Hence all such persons can be regarded as seeking baptism which
then the Church grants, just as conversely in other cases the Church
offers it and those who have become believers receive it. In the
same way we called baptism the channel of God’s justifying action,
because it is only within the fellowship that an individual can come
to have the forgiveness of sins, which is essentially conditioned by
the influence of the new communal life, and divine sonship, which
is essentially conditioned by fellow-citizenship with the saints. If
we want to separate in word what is inseparable in fact, we may on
the one hand say that where faith is, conversion must have been ;
and where complete regeneration is, there too is justification.
Hence if faith was there before baptism, all that is ordinarily re-
presented as the fruit of baptism was there also; thus baptism
would really effect nothing, but only attest and point to what had
been effected already ; and thus the one class of credal passages

1 See § 108, 2 Heidelb. Catech., Quest. 69-72.


632 THE CHRISTIAN FAITH [§ 137


can take the form they do without in the least impairing the true
force of baptism. On the other hand, it may be said that even if
faith is not yet present at the time of baptism, yet it will arise not
merely after baptism but—baptism being the first item in the whole
series of influences which the Church brings to bear on the baptized
—through baptism. Thus every sort of connexion between personal
spiritual life and the perfection and blessedness of Christ would arise
out of baptism ; the more so that if (to suppose the case) a regenerate
person remained unbaptized and hence was not received into the
Christian fellowship, we should have to admit that he could have
no real share in the perfection and blessedness of Christ because
he had neither come under Christ’s fellowship-forming action nor
shared in His blessedness as mediated through the communal con-
sciousness. This, it is true, would hold good in a still greater degree
if it were the personal desire of the person in question to remain
outside the fellowship, and in a less degree if it were only through
an ecclesiastical oversight that, although regenerate, he was not yet
baptized. Hence the other set of our credal passages is able to
ascribe to baptism both faith and all that flows from faith without
giving to its mode of operation the least colour of magic. The
meaning is not that the outward performance works even in the
faintest degree ex opere operato, whether by itself or in conjunction
with the utterance of certain words (the utterance would itself in
that case be no more than an outward performance), but that it
works solely in union with the Word which ordains baptism for the
Church and along with the Church, and which is uninterruptedly
active in the Church throughout its whole extent. And as our
paragraph only asserts the efficacy of baptism in connexion with
divine grace in regeneration, and thus links up the act of the Church
with what is going on in the individual soul, magical conceptions
are very definitely barred out. But it distinctly ascribes a saving
efficacy to baptism, as the conferring of Christian citizenship, and
this is a rejection of the view according to which baptism is a merely
external act. Thus our paragraph lends itself to both readings of
the credal phrases, which otherwise mutually impute responsibility
for one or other of the misconceptions we have been discussing.

4. Hence we may say that everything that is taught about the
efficacy of baptism is perfectly clear if we only assume a correct
and sound administration of the sacrament ; in that case there is
absolutely no reason to ascribe to it magical effects or to depress it
into a merely outward usage. It is only the assumption of a wrong


§ 138] INFANT BAPTISM 633


administration that raises difficult questions: that is, if our aim is
to formulate doctrines which shall be equally valid for both cases.
For then one party sets up a principle which obviously isolates the
outward aspect, namely, that the effects of divine grace ought not
to be made dependent on any external act ;1 the other urges the
principle, plainly favourable to magic, that no state of human con-
sciousness can make inoperative divine promises which have been
attached to an external act ;? both without sufficiently remember-
ing that God is not a God of disorder in the assemblies of His people.
Hence everything depends on a sound rule of administration.
Against the Donatists it is rightly taught that the validity of
baptism does not depend on the state of heart in him who performs
it ; but the same cannot be said equally regarding the saving virtue
of baptism. If the person baptizing is not a pure organ of the
Church in judging of the inward state of the person baptized, the
saving virtue of baptism must be impaired in every case. Every
such baptism, however, is an act of sin; and the oftener it occurs,
the more imperfect the Church is. Hence the first rule is that not
only the decision when baptism should take place, but its administra-
tion too, ought to rest in the hands of the ministers of the Word in
the strict sense ;% for obviously the person who must have the
most vivid conviction of the faith evoked in the candidate for
baptism is also the best organ of the Church in performing the act
itself. And for the same reason baptism is not put at the mercy of
some one hour of exalted feeling ; it is only performed as a well-
considered act at a prearranged time, no exception being permissible
except under special circumstances. The rule to follow will always
be this, that the administration must be conditioned by the sympathy
of the Church (for of those operations of the divine Spirit on the
soul which may be trusted to evoke faith there can scarcely be
knowledge proper), and that when such sympathy is absent, it is
best to wait for the recognizable tokens of faith.


§ 138. Second Theorem.—Infant Baptism is a complete Baptism
only when the profession of faith which comes after further
instruction 1s regarded as the act which consummates it.

Conf. Aug. ix.: docent ... quod pueri sint baptizandi, qui per bap-
tismum oblati deo recipiantur in gratiam Dei. Damnant Anabaptistas, qui
improbant baptismum puerorum et affirmant pueros sine baptismo salvos

1 Zwingli, de ver. velig., p. 200: Nam hac ratione libertas divini spiritus
alligata esset, qui dividit singulis ut vult.


* Catech. Rom. ii. de bapt. 58. le,
3 Expos, simpl. xx. : Baptismus autem pertinet ad officia ecclesiastica.


634 THE CHRISTIAN FAITH [§ 138


fieri.—Art. Smalc. v.: . . . docemus infantes esse baptizandos. Pertinent
enim ad promissam redemtionem per Christum factam; et ecclesia debet
illis baptismum et promissionis illius annunciationem.—Expos. simpl. xx. :
Cur non per sanctum baptisma initiarentur, qui sunt peculium et in ecclesia
Dei.—Conf. Gallic. xxxv.: Praeterea quamvis baptismus sit fidei et re-
sipiscentiae sacramentum, tamen cum una cum parentibus posteritatem
etiam illorum in ecclesia Deus recenseat, affirmamus infantes sanctis paren-
tibus natos esse ex Christi auctoritate baptizandos.—Conf. Belg. xxxiv. :

. quos (infantes) baptizandos et foederis signo obsignandos esse credimus.
Quin etiam revera Christus non minus sanguinem suum profudit ut fidelium
infantes quam ut adultos ablueret, ideoque signum seu sacramentum ejus
quod Christus pro eis praestitit, suscipere debent.—Decl. Thorun., p. 429:
. . . Quamvis necessitatem illam adeo absolutam non esse statuamus, ut
quicunque sine baptismo ex hac vita excesserit sive infans sive adultus . . .
propterea necessario damnandus sit.


1. Thus far we have treated of baptism in general, without
even considering the difference between the original institution
and the present almost universal practice of the Christian Church,
though certainly with the intention that the propositions laid down
should not be limited in their application to the baptism of adults
but be valid for every baptism that means to be genuinely Chris-
tian. Hence we insisted on at least incipient faith and (in line with
former paragraphs! and therefore necessary) repentance also as
preconditions of baptism. With this the practice of the Apostolic
Age completely agrees, as far as we know; for every trace of
infant baptism which people have professed to find in the New
Testament must first be inserted there. Similarly, in the absence
of definite information it is difficult to explain how such a diver-
gence from the original institution could arise and could prevail
over so wide an area. It might be difficult to specify one sufficient
reason for the change, but there might well be a multiplicity of
reasons which, taken together, were able to win over Christian
feeling. First, the desire to be able to include among those who
die in the Lord those Christian children who had died before the
age of instruction.? Next, to make the Christian community more
definitely responsible for the children of Christian parents in cases
where the parents might not themselves be in a position to imple-
ment the obligations of the congregation. And finally, in order to
separate off Christian children from Jewish and pagan youth. These
may from the first have been the strongest motives. When, how-
ever, it became an established custom to regard children who had re-
ceived baptism as for that reason members of the Church, it was felt
as being in itself a source of comfort that in this act there should be


1 Those referring to regeneration, §§ 107-109, 2" Thess, /4"%


§ 138] INFANT BAPTISM 635


expressed a firm confidence that children born of Christian parents
would not miss the nurturing care of the Holy Spirit. Our credal
passages, however, view infant baptism entirely apart from history
and undertake to vindicate it in and for itself, but they do so
ineffectively and on grounds that are mutually destructive. If the
children are already God’s possession, they have no need of baptism
in order to be thus offered to God and received by Him to grace ;
and conversely, if they need baptism for this, the justification of
its being administered to them cannot lie in the fact that already
they are God’s possession. Similarly it needed to be specially
proved (for it does not prove itself) that God reckons offspring
along with parents as forming part of the Church; also a certain
qualification—which is not mentioned—needs to be attached to
the principle that we ought to baptize children because Christ
shed His blood for them also. On these grounds we should have to
baptize all men whatsoever, as we could lay hold of them. The
missing qualification of this last position rests ultimately on the
peculiar situation of the children of Christian parents, as the special
justification of the former position does also ; hence it can be seen
that our paragraph is an effort to supply these defects and at the
same time to solve the contradictions first alluded to. For while,
if we take it in close connexion with the previous paragraph, it
gives an inadequate explanation of infant baptism, which here is
administered in the absence of repentance and faith in those
baptized, yet it tacitly admits that infant baptism cannot produce
in those baptized the effects of which repentance and faith are
the necessary conditions. And just as we cannot suppose that
before baptism children are subject to misery due to a conscious-
ness of sin which is growing into penitence, we cannot after
baptism ascribe to them blessedness due to a dawning sense of
divine sonship. Hence there need be no talk of proving that even
in such children faith can be produced by baptism. Our paragraph
shows, nevertheless, why there is occasion to administer baptism in
this form, namely, because in the case of such children we have
reason to count upon their future faith and their confession of it.
With this is bound up the question how far we may consider them
as reckoned by God part of the Church ; the answer being that it
is part of Church order to bring them, as the outer circle most
intimately entrusted to us, into direct relation to the Word of
God, and to maintain them therein until faith awakens. It is from
this point of view that the contradictions referred to are most


636 THE CHRISTIAN FAITH [§ 138


easily resolved. For we only wish to avoid saying that we baptize
children because they are already in the Church and in order to
commend them to divine grace ; we baptize them rather because
already they are marked out for it by their natural connexion with
the Christian order in which God has placed them, and with a view
to bringing them into the Church. The full truth of both aspects
is expressed by saying that for us personal confession of faith is the
goal of infant baptism, a goal which it must reach, and by reaching
which it has to vindicate itself. On the other hand, it is certain
that where this point is not carefully attended to, the ecclesiastical
custom of baptizing infants is largely responsible for the fact that
some people attribute magical powers to baptism, while others
disparage it as a purely external custom.

2. Clearly then this sort of baptism merely by itself, while a
bond between the individual and the Kingdom of God, does not
straightway imply the possession and enjoyment of salvation but
only a normal preparatory operation of the Holy Spirit. Hence
any such act taken by itself is in no sense to be equated with
baptism according to Christ’s original institution, where a personal
confession of faith is included in the act itself. Yet this defect
does not render the act invalid, as though it were positively wrong ;
and the Anabaptist assertion that, in the case of persons baptized
so, baptism must be repeated, has rightly been felt to give offence.
On such terms no baptism at all would be secure except such as
in the early Church—and it was certainly not a laudable custom—
was administered shortly before death ; for there can be no surer
sign of real regeneration than steady progress in Christian sanctifica-
tion. Thus infant baptism is the same as any other baptism
which has erroneously been imparted prior to the full faith of the
person baptized and yet is valid; only, its proper efficacy is sus-
pended until the person baptized has really become a believer.
Our paragraph, however, has still to vindicate itself on the point
that we made these imperfect baptisms in detail a reproach to the
Church, whereas we now are seeking to find a legitimate place for
them as a whole. But this is one of those cases in which conscious
divergence must be judged more leniently than unconscious. The
latter is at all events overhasty, and on the other hand, it repre-
sents as a believing Christian one who as yet is not so; the former,
on the contrary, is a Church rule, and by its forward reference
to the personal profession of faith it definitely marks off those
baptized in this way from those who already believe. It is there-


§ 138] ANABAPTIST DOCTRINE 637


fore unjust to infant baptism when confirmation—which for us is
simply the depositing and acceptance of a personal profession of
faith, and thus supplies a lack in baptism—is regarded as non-
essential ; for it is only as combined with confirmation that infant
baptism answers to Christ’s institution. Hence our paragraph,
by making confirmation a part of the administration of baptism,
lays it as a duty on the Church to give confirmation very close
attention, in order that, so far as the Church can secure it, the
later rite may approve itself the true and worthy consummation of
infant baptism. It is equally unjust when confirmation is torn
away from this context and represented as a sacrament by itself.
Whatever we ought to think otherwise of the importance and
benefit of confirmation, to isolate it is to render infant baptism
incomplete and ineffectual.

Still, we cannot affirm the necessary character of a baptism
thus divided into two parts, as is done when the Anabaptists or
Baptists are condemned on the ground that they believe that
children dying unbaptized may be saved. In this matter we take
sides unhesitatingly with the last credal passage quoted above.
It is certainly the case that as soon as large numbers of children
born of Christian parents had to be nurtured in the Christian
Church, a situation emerged which previously had been unknown ;
and it seems as if it were in the highest degree natural to mark this
by a symbolic act, the more so that nearly everywhere just such
acts are performed to indicate that the newly-born do not belong
exclusively to their parents, but corporately to the whole fellowship.
Besides, nothing was more natural than to select baptism for this
purpose. Hence it would have been quite intelligible if, to recover
touch with Christ’s institution, infant baptism had been abolished
at the Reformation ; and this we might do even yet, without thereby
losing continuity with a fellowship in whose history there was a
period when nothing prevailed except infant baptism—provided
only we did not declare infant baptism to be invalid. And we
might equally well give up the practice altogether without doing
our children any injury. For it is only if we ascribe magical powers
to baptism that we can believe that it confers a claim relating to
the life after death, quite irrespectively of its influence on this life.
Hence no one who does not believe in such magical powers can
suppose that there is any difference between children who have been
baptized but die before renewing their baptismal covenant, and
children who pass out of time without any baptism at all. It


638 THE CHRISTIAN FAITH [$ 139


would therefore be a natural thing to leave it to each Evangelical
household to decide whether it will present its children for baptism
in the ordinary way or only when they make a personal profession of
faith ; and we ought to make it known that in regard to this point
we cancel the sentence of condemnation passed on the Anabaptists,
and that on our side we are prepared to enter into Church fellowship
with the Baptists of to-day, if only they will not pronounce our
infant baptism absolutely invalid, even when supplemented by
confirmation. On this point it should easily be possible to reach an
understanding.


FourtH DoctTRINE: THE LoRD’sS SUPPER


§ 139. Christians in partaking of the Lord’s Supper experrence a
peculiar strengthening of the spiritual life; for therein,
according to the institution of Christ, His body and blood
are administered to them.


I. Our paragraphs ought in every case to contain simply the
expression of our Christian consciousness ; hence at this point
we must start with the experience we ourselves have of this sacra-
mental action, and (proving that we do not regard the experience
as a purely personal thing) expect all believers to have. Only
thereafter can we take up the further question how this experience
first originated. The two questions hang together only in this
respect, that the experience would not repeat itself perpetually,
or at least the interpretation and treatment of the subject would
have taken a quite different line, if there had not been some need
which thus found satisfaction. To keep touch with the previous
Doctrine, the subject of the present one would be utterly devoid
of content if the salvation beginning with rightly administered
baptism were so conferred that automatically it sustained itself
unimpaired and adequately secured its own growth. The analogy
of all life, however, argues the contrary ; and it lies in the indis-
soluble bond between entrance into the living fellowship of Christ
and entrance into the fellowship of believers that each of these two
must be supported by the other. But just for that reason the
mode in which the Church coexists with the world, as well as the
hampering influence of the world on the Church, demands that this
fellowship should periodically be nourished and strengthened ;
and it is the satisfaction of this need that believers seek in the
sacrament of the altar. If now we provisionally regard the fellow
ship of believers with each other and the fellowship of each individual


§ 139] THE LORDS SUPPER 639


with Christ as being each of them separate and by itself, the latter
fellowship will be fortified against the influences of the world by
every moment of devout self-recollection in the believer’s life,
during which on the one hand he closes his heart to worldly influences
and on the other presents Christ to himself, out of Scripture—for
it is always out of Scripture, directly or indirectly, that the thing
is done. Over and above this, the fellowship of believers with each
other is strengthened by every energetic and affecting manifestation
of Christian love in any sphere of the common life. But each of
these kinds of fellowship should influence the other; therefore
between lonely contemplation and common active life there lies
that intermediate sphere which we describe by the general term,
public worship. This, viewed on one side, is simply the common
life itself, withdrawing from outward activity to communicative
representation of what is inward; viewed on the other side it is
simply contemplation itself, moving out of privacy and expanding
into the communal. Here, therefore, the two kinds of fellowship
unite—that of believers with each other and that of each soul with
Christ ; and hence it is clear that everything that takes place here
must have effects on both ; while at the same time every effect one
kind of fellowship has on the other seems necessarily to emanate
from this intermediate sphere and to pass through it. It is to this
sphere that the Lord’s Supper too belongs ; for Christ instituted
it as a communal act, which, while it is a presenting of Himself, is
certainly a strengthening of both kinds of fellowship. For this
reason, in the Church it is invariably celebrated in gatherings of
the congregation : every other sort of celebration is an exceptional
case, which ought also to be representative of the congregation
assembled together.

But as it is only through trust in what other people profess
as their experience that the individual can come to have the same
experience as his own, we are led back by an unbroken tradition
to the beginnings of the Church, and to the Supper itself as Christ
held it with His disciples. Now from of old the essential thing has
been held to be the bestowal of Christ’s body and blood, and else-
where He makes participation in His flesh and blood essential for
having life. These two, accordingly, are the principal points which
have first to be discussed—namely, how the Supper as the bestowal
of Christ’s body and blood is related to the purely spiritual partici-
pation, and how the Supper as an element in public worship is dis-
tinguished from other parts thereof.


640 THE CHRISTIAN FAITH [§ 139


2. To begin with the second point, it is pretty clear that Christen-
dom as a whole in its public teaching and practice has from of
old regarded the Supper as the climax of public worship. The
rounded whole of our united experience in public worship would
seem to us incomplete unless at definite points—and most often
at the highest and holiest points—the Supper held its place as the
most intimate bond of all. Similarly we should feel it to be a
morbid thing—whether in the case of individuals or of entire
congregations—if any other element of worship were to have attri-
buted to it a greater power of sustaining and heightening blessed-
ness than the Supper has. But we cannot rest satisfied with this ;
we must inquire as to the specific difference between what has
come to be practised in the Church (even though it were with an
unerring sense for the common good) and what Christ has thus
ordained ; and the difference appears to be this. In all other
elements of public worship the aforesaid twofold effect on the
fellowship of believers with each other and on the fellowship of
each with Christ respectively is unequal ; and for that reason they
seem one-sided. The more markedly an individual stands out
and draws others to himself, or the more powerfully a common mood
of feeling finds expression and is heightened by being communicated
to others, the intenser is the reaction on the common life. But
what the effect on the fellowship of each soul with Christ will be
depends on the personal spontaneity with which each brings that
which has been publicly represented and expressed to bear on his
relation to Christ and inwardly digests it. Each of the two kinds
of effect, that is, depends on something else ; hence one may be
strong while the other is weak. In the Supper, on the other
hand, it is impossible for the two to be separated or distinguished ;
the Supper rests on nothing that is individual or peculiar, which
might turn the effect to one side or the other; nor does the distri-
buting minister exert any personal force on the receivers, or the
receivers individually exert any special and inward spontaneity.
Rather it is simply the whole redeeming love of Christ to which we
are pointed there ; and as the distributing minister is nothing more
than the organ of Christ’s institution, the receivers uniformly find
themselves simply in a state of completely open receptivity for
Christ’s influence. Without the special interposition of any in-
dividual, therefore, every effect flows directly and undividedly from
the Word of institution in which the redeeming and fellowship-


1 Cf. Conf. Saxon., pp. 170 f.


§ 130] DISTINCTIVENESS OF THE SUPPER 641


forming love of Christ is not only represented but made newly
active, and in trustful obedience to which the sacramental
action is ever anew performed. It is in this undivided and
exclusive immediacy and in the resulting freedom of its effects
from dependence on changing personal moods and circumstances,
that the Supper differs from all other elements of public
worship.

As regards the second point, it is clear that in the discourse,}
where Christ recommends as essential the eating of His flesh and
the drinking of His blood, He had in mind neither the Supper nor
any other definite act. He wished rather to indicate in how pro-
found a sense He Himself must become our being and well-being ;
and clearly, if we compare His words here with that other saying
that we must be related to Him as the branch to the vine,? there
is no difference between the two except this—that the latter lays
stress more on the continuity of the relationship, the former on
its periodical renewal. Nor can anyone doubt that the same ex-
pression may be used to denote the periodically recurring effect of
the Supper ; and not merely the effect which it has on the fellow-
ship of the individual with Christ, as a repeated nourishing of
personal spiritual life out of the fulness of Christ’s life, but the
effect which it is also bound to exert on our fellowship with each
other. For, as it is a simultaneous act of many, and has the same
effect in all, the consciousness of benefit in each is accompanied by
a sympathetic sense that the same thing is happening to others ;
and as each knows that the others are being united more closely
with Christ, he feels himself more closely united with them. This
is not in any sense an exclusive relation to each other of those who
are communicating at any one time ; as explained above, each re-
presents to the others the whole congregation. But while indis-
putably the spiritual participation in the flesh of Christ referred to
above can take place more generally in a variety of ways, the Lord’s
Supper is distinct from all else in this respect that in it the same
result is bound up with this definite action, blessed and hallowed
by the word of Christ. In itself this is not something unintelligible
to believers or requiring special explanation, all the more that it
follows the analogy of all important memorial rites; and deeply
as the external side of the action, in its actual form, appeals to us
by its varied significance, we yet can easily concede that if it had
pleased Christ to give His ordinance a different form we should

VJohn 657 56, 2 ohneis= =,


4I


642 THE CHRISTIAN FAITH [§ 139


nevertheless expect from it the same result, and that that outward
form would soon have come to possess a like suggestiveness of
meaning. Hence anything that is obscure and, in the degree in
which it is explained, more or less unintelligible is to be found solely
in the terms used by Christ in relating the outward action to the
effect as above described.

3. With a view to more exact discussion of this, assuming (as
our paragraph does) that the effect of the action depends on the
action being in harmony with Christ’s institution, we must first
clear up our minds on the point, what precisely such harmony
implies. Even if different parties did not protest that the Supper
as celebrated by others than themselves was no Supper at all, the
variety of eucharistic practice within the Church sufficiently
declares that on this point no agreement has so far been reached.
It is not difficult, however, to show that such agreement is im-
possible. As regards both the action and the elements used there
are a material and a formal identity which, owing to changed modes
of life, cannot be attained together, but only one at the cost of the
other ; and in such a situation it is virtually impossible that all
should make their choice on the same principle. In general it may
be said that insistence on material identity betrays an imperfect
inward state, and a truly spiritual Christianity without troubling
about the matter would be content if only the rite were so arranged
as to represent the original action in its essential features. On the
one hand, the historical unity and continuity of the ordinance
would be endangered, and there would be no limit to the arbitrary
variations introduced, if we were to be wholly indifferent to material
identity. On the other, the representation of the original action
may be made to depend on quite different points. Hence the
problem to be solved can hardly be stated otherwise than by saying
that we ought to try for just so much of each sort of identity as can
be obtained without sacrifice on the other side. Thus in regard to
the elements, we ask that in the Supper there should be eaten what,
as used, can rightly be called bread, but not that it should be pre-
pared from the ordinary materials or in the ordinary way ; on the
other hand, that in what is drunk there should be wine of the
grape, but not the common drink of this place or that, even sup-
posing the common drink to be something different from wine.
In regard to the action, we consider it essential that all the com-
municants should eat and drink in the same way, and that bread
and wine should be distributed and received, also that the action


§ 130] A PERMANENT RITE? 643


as a common meal should follow upon a devotional address and
common prayer. But that it should take place in the evening and
be merely the conclusion of another more complete meal, in itself
of a worshipping character, so that what is partaken of in the Supper
is only what remains over from the former meal—this, it would
seem, we cannot insist on, for under present conditions it is un-
attainable. Indeed, if, still keeping to the last point, it were held
that the Supper had such a close relation to the Jewish feast of the
Passover that no representation of the impression originally made
could be attained unless the Passover too were represented in all its
original significance, it would be easy to infer that in that case the
Supper can never again be what in Christ’s institution it was, and
therefore cannot really have been ordained by Him for the Church
as an independent and never-ending institution. This objection
is so natural that it may yet easily make itself more audible in the
Evangelical Church than has hitherto been the case, and it of
course raises the question on what in this matter our faith really
rests. It can hardly be maintained that the intention to insti-
tute a permanent rite is revealed with perfect clearness in the
words of Christ, as they have actually been preserved. On the
contrary, some of the narratives contain no such injunction ;!
in others it is only indistinctly expressed ;? and as the Apostles
deduced no such command from Christ’s words at the foot-washing,?
they could (it is said) have had no more right to make of the Supper
a perpetual and universal institution.4 But as it is obvious that
they did the one and did not do the other, we may well keep to the
procedure they actually enjoined, without having to decide whether
Christ expressly gave them still other injunctions touching the
Supper,® or whether they deduced such injunctions from His words,
or whether it was simply by. their direct impressions of the case or
by the accompanying circumstances that they were led to take
different courses in regard to the Supper and in regard to the foot-
washing. In the last of these cases we should not be able to view
the Supper as in quite the same sense directly instituted by Christ,
but we should still have to hold that the Apostles acted in His
sense—unless, indeed, we are going to give up their canonical
authority in a matter which touches the very heart and core of


their vocation.

1 Matt. 26°¢-?8 and Mark 14?7-?}, 2ke 2222 20-an det Conpileusss
Spon 3st =. 20) 4 Cf, R, Barclay, A pol. Th, xiii.
C Cham Con ress


644 THE CHRISTIAN FAITH [§ 140


§ 140. With regard to the connexion between the bread and wine and
the body and blood of Christ in the Lord’s Supper, the Evan-
gelical (Protestant) Church takes up an attitude of definite
opposition only, on the one hand, to those who regard this
connexion as independent of the act of participation, and, on
the other hand, to those who, regardless of this connexion,
would not admit any conjunction between participation im
the bread and wine and spiritual participation 1m the flesh
and blood of Christ.


Augs. Conf., Art. 10: ‘ On the Lord’s Supper accordingly it is taught that
the true body and blood of Christ is veritably present in the Supper under
the form of bread and wine, and is there distributed and received.’—A pol. Conf.
iv.: Quod in coena domini vere et substantialiter adsint corpus et sanguis
Christi, et vere exhibeantur cum illis rebus, quae videntur, pane et vino his
qui sacramentum accipiunt. . . . Cum enim Paulus dicat panem esse partici-
pationem corporis domini, sequeretur panem non esse participationem cor-
poris sed tantum spiritus Christi, si non adesset vere corpus domini.—A rt.
Smalc. vi.: De sacramento altaris sentimus panem et vinum in coena esse
verum corpus et sanguinem Christi, et non tantum dari et sumi a pilis sed
etiam ab impiis Christianis.—Evwvpos. simpl. xix.: In coena domini signum
est panis et vinuni sumtum ex communi usu cibi et potus, res autem signifi-
cata est ipsum traditum domini corpus, et sanguis eius effusus pro nobis, vel
communio corporis et sanguinis domini.—J/b7d. xxi.: Foris offertur a ministro
panis, et audiuntur voces domini, etc., ergo accipiunt fideles et edunt, etc. :
intus interim opera Christi per spiritum sanctum percipiunt etiam carnem
et sanguinem domini et pascuntur his in vitam aeternam.—Conf. Gallic.
xxxvill.: Dicimus itaque ... panem illum et vinum illud, quod nobis in
coena datur, vere nobis fieri spirituale alimentum, quatenus videlicet velut
oculis nostris spectandum praebent carnem Christi nostrum cibum esse et
eiusdem sanguinem nobis esse potum.—Itaque fanaticos illos omnes reiicimus
qui haec signa et symbola repudiant.—Comf. Anglic. xxviii.: Panis et vini
transsubstantiatio in Eucharistia ex sacris litteris probari non potest, sed
apertis scripturae verbis adversatur. .. . Corpus Christi datur accipitur
et manducatur in coena tantum coelesti et spirituali ratione. Medium
autem, quo corpus Christi accipitur et manducatur in coena, fides est.


1. If the question in view here were a merely exegetical one,
Dogmatic might await the close of hermeneutical discussion, and
then accept the result just as it does other propositions which are
not dogmatic in the full sense because what they contain is not state-
ments about our immediate self-consciousness but facts which we
receive on testimony. It is only as a fact in this sense that we
could accept the conclusions of exegesis on the meaning of the
words, “This is My body,’ etc. But the question is far from being
purely exegetical. The language of the different narratives is not
uniform ; hence (this belongs to historical criticism) we must first


V iA


§ 140] EVANGELICAL AND ROMAN DOCTRINE 645


of all ascertain what kind of expressions Christ can have used, from
which these reports may have arisen ; only then will the time have
come for inquiring into the sense of Christ’s ipsissima verba as thus
ascertained. Here we may start from very different points of view,
and it is improbable that we shall be able to fix Christ’s original
language in a way to satisfy everyone. Also we are specially
bound in dealing with the different views valid within the Evan-
gelical Church to set forth the conviction, fundamental to the Union
[of the Lutheran and Reformed Churches], that these differences
are not such as to prevent common participation in the Supper.
Hence we must endeavour to settle points of controversy as well as
may be, and then set forth the principles on which we, so to speak,
abolish the differences prevalent within our Church ; whereas we
should still retain, on the one hand, the points of difference with the
Catholic Church brought out in the credal passages quoted above,
and, on the other, with communions and individual thinkers who
deny all reality to the sacrament.

Now, to fix the points of controversy, since the differences are
all due to the words of Christ just cited, and we can only recur here
to what has already been made out in the previous paragraph, the
question arises how the meaning of His words bears first on partici-
pation in the bread and wine, and next, on the strengthening of
spiritual life expected from that ; a second question is, how far
insight into the meaning of these words is requisite to the complete-
ness of the action, and hence how far agreement in their interpreta-
tion is requisite to its communal character. To the last of these
questions we can only reply by saying that the interpretation of
Christ’s words is essential just in so far as the expected result—
namely, the strengthening of spiritual life—depends on it; and
agreement is only beneficial if differences have to be reconciled which
might hinder the common performance of the rite. Regarding
the first question we can only say—whether the difficult words
uttered by the Redeemer be referred more to the bodily action or
to the spiritual effect—that any explanation of them which can
establish its own exegetical validity may be accepted as sound,
provided it does not endanger for the believer the bond between
the action and its effect.

2. The first kind of antagonism stated in our paragraph is that
to the Catholic Church. It is on the whole wrong to look for this
chiefly in the doctrine of transubstantiation. For the real issue it
is an unimportant point of difference whether the body and blood


646 THE CHRISTIAN FAITH [§ 140


of Christ are partaken of corporeally along with the bread and wine,
or the body and blood of Christ are produced in place of bread and
wine for corporeal reception. The only distinction between the
two is this, that in the one case bread and wine are also partaken
of, while in the other we do not partake of them also ; and for the
intended result this is quite immaterial. And if there had only
been a willingness to give up the further notion that this change
in the elements persists even apart from the act of reception, or
that even what is not partaken of in the Supper undergoes the same
change as the rest of the elements, the Saxon Reformers, as may be
seen from the third passage quoted above, would have had little
to object. On the other hand, if a disposition had been shown in
any quarter to take so physical a view of consubstantiation as that
the body and blood of Christ are present in the bread and wine,
after the words of Christ have been spoken over them, even when
they are not partaken of in the Supper, Luther would have made a
serious protest. Even where he is setting forth his own view in the
strongest antagonism to the Reformed doctrine, he nowhere affirms
any such presence of the body and blood outside the eucharistic
action ; on the other hand, ever since the rise of the doctrine of
transubstantiation in the Catholic Church, this assumption of a
physical and permanent change has been fundamental in all
casuistical discussion. Essentially, therefore, what, on this side,
provoked persistent opposition was every kind of elevation and
adoration of the consecrated elements, as well as every pretension
thereby to achieve something apart from actual participation ;
and similarly, everywhere within the Evangelical Church it would
be distinctly denied that partaking of the consecrated elements
outside the celebration of the sacrament conduces either to salva-
tion or to judgment. Hence the chief reason why (apart from its
exegetical unsoundness) we reject the theory of the Catholic Church
is that, advancing beyond common participation, it seeks by its
so conceived union of the elements with the body and blood of
Christ to attain quite different ends, and to attach magical spiritual
effects to an effect that is bodily.

3. By the second antithesis indicated in our paragraph the
Evangelical Church marks itself off from the Sacramentarians—
taking that word not, of course, in the sense used by Luther and
other theologians in the heat of controversy as applying even to
the adherents of the Helvetic and the Gallic Confessions (their
opinions lie wholly within the limits laid down in our paragraph)


’


SE


§ 140] THE SOCINIAN VIEW 647


but as denoting those who reject the sacrament. They assert that
partaking of the bread and wine indicated by the phrase ‘ body and
blood ’ is only a shadowy emblem of that spiritual participation in
the body and blood of Christ which is in no sense bound up with
any such sacramental action, and that as soon as we have the
assurance of this spiritual reality, the merely figurative action is
better given up. Now we own that spiritual participation, to which
Christ invited men long before the institution of the Supper as to
something not merely future, is in no sense bound up by His in-
stitution exclusively with the sacrament or confined to it. None
the less we confide in Christ’s word that in the later institution
that invitation is so realized in fact by His power that every believer
may count on finding spiritual participation in the sacramental
action, and that the action, if it be rightly administered in all
respects, gives believers certain and infallible access thereto. Hence,
as the most perfect common spiritual participation, the Supper is
related to private participation in Christ apart from the Supper as
the organized is related to the accidental, just as organized edifica-
tion in public worship is related to edification which is individual
and sporadic. But the opposed view, even when it does not deny
that spiritual participation may be found in the sacramental action
also, none the less protests that the conjunction of the two things
is uncertain and purely fortuitous ; otherwise it would not seek to
dissuade men from communicating. And in this it misconceives
the value of Christ’s institution.

Almost the same thing might be said of those who desire that
the Supper should be permanently retained in the Church as Christ
commanded, yet abolish its connexion with spiritual participation
in the body and blood of Christ, declaring it to be no more than a
custom whereby we bear witness, or make a profession of faith.
These we oppose, partly because they do not even regard the Supper
as the climax of public worship, believing as they do that in the
Supper they receive absolutely nothing ;* which means that to this
gathering of people (which is pre-eminently a gathering in Christ’s


1 Catech. Racov., Qu. 334-345. Zwingli is not to be confused with this
party. He does call participation in the bread and wine in the Supper merely
a thankful remembrance, but at the same time he always assumes a spiritual
participation: Cum ad coenam domini cum hac spirituali manducatione
venis . . . ac simul cum fratribus panem et vinum, quae jam symbolicum
Christi corpus sunt, participas, jam proprie sacramentaliter edis cum scilicet
intus idem agis quod foris operaris (Expos. fid. chr. Opp. ii. 555).

2 Apparet coenam domini non eo institutam esse ut aliquid illic sumamus
(Catech. Racov., Qu. 338).


648 THE CHRISTIAN FAITH [§ 140


name) they would not even apply the general promise given by
Christ to all such: partly because on their showing the Supper
would not be the same thing in every age. For not only was there
no one present at the original institution before whom the disciples
could bear witness, but the ancient Church did not admit non-
Christians as spectators; while in their congregational relation-
ships, apart from the sacrament, there is no lack of opportunities
for Christians to make themselves known to each other as members
of the Church.

4. If we leave open to the Evangelical Church the whole inter-
vening ground between these two views—the one ascribing a magical
value to the sacrament, the other depressing it into a bare sign—the
historical reason for this is first of all that at the very beginning of
Protestantism two views developed, one of which (within these
limits) approximated most to the Catholic view, the other to the
Socinian ; while on the other hand both clung to a consciousness
of common antagonism to the other two. In part there were ever-
renewed efforts to reconcile their differences ; in part out of these
very efforts there arose a third Protestant view intermediate between
both. Hence wherever these two views came in contact, the
common conviction came in time to prevail that as they all looked
for the same result under the same conditions—namely, the presence
of true and living faith—each side must believe that the other had
the same right as itself to expect this result, since neither could be
certain that it was interpreting the connexion between the action
and the result (so far as its production is beyond our power) pre-
cisely as the Redeemer intended it, while yet each side was eager to
conform to the mind of the Redeemer as closely as possible. This
conviction rests simply on a recognition of the exegetical difficulties
attaching to the manner in which Christ speaks of His body and
blood in offering the bread and wine. One side in interpreting
words of such significance will admit nothing but literal explanation,
which yet they cannot apply consistently owing to the fact that the
reports of Christ’s words differ—‘ this ’ in one case having ‘ blood ’
as its predicate, ‘cup’ having ‘testament’ in the other. So that
our Supper and the original Supper cannot be the same if the offered
body is literally the same as the body offering it. From this the
other side argues that this equating of the bread and the body is
only to be taken loosely, the former being a sign of the latter.
They have then to explain not merely why in that case a special
sign of the blood had to be offered in addition to the sign of the


a te


§ 140] LUTHER, ZWINGLI, AND CALVIN 649


body, but also whether the disciples (assuming that they were
meant to understand Christ’s language) were intended to interpret
His words analogously to previous words of His own, or rather in the
light of the Old Testament rite to which Christ’s institution was
attached. These problems have not so far all been solved by either
side ; yet it is possible that new attempts may still be made deserving
of a place among the helpful efforts of the Evangelical Church, and
that an adequate explanation may at last render all other imperfect
ones superfluous. The three views, however, which have stood out
from among these imperfect attempts and established their position
most firmly may best be exhibited as follows. The first or Lutheran
view declares that with the bread and wine Christ conjoined for
participation the real presence of His body and blood, but only
for the action of bodily partaking in both elements. The second or
Zwinglian view declares that Christ conjoined nothing with the
bread and wine in themselves ; by His command He merely con-
joined spiritual participation in His flesh and blood with the action
of partaking in the bread and wine. The third or Calvinistic view
declares that while it is true that Christ conjoined something
exclusively with the action of eating and drinking, this was not
merely spiritual participation, available quite apart from the
sacrament ; it was a real presence of His body and blood not to be
had anywhere else.1 The second view recognizes two things only,
bodily participation and the spiritual effect, both linked together
by the Word. Beyond all question this view is the clearest and the
easiest to grasp, for it sets up an exact analogy between the Lord’s
Supper and baptism, and leaves the real presence of body and blood
(which it is scarcely possible to describe) altogether out of account,
so that by sacramental participation it can only mean the con-
junction of spiritual participation with bodily participation as
defined above. But even though we emphasize the words of
Zwingli as just quoted, even though many other expressions by
which it might be thought he meant to minimize or even abolish
the powers of the sacrament be explained in the light of his polemic
against Roman doctrine ?—still this view leaves it unexplained

1Itaque si per fractionem panis dominus corporis sui participationem
vere repraesentat, minime dubium esse debet quin vere praestet atque
exhibeat (Calv., Institt. Iv. xvii. Io). .. . Dico igitur in coenae mysterio
per symbola panis et vini Christum vere nobis exhiberi, adeoque corpus et
sanguinem eius . . . quo scilicet primum in unum corpus cum ipso Coales-
camus, deinde participes substantiae eius facti in bonorum omnium com-


municatione virtutem quoque sentiamus (zbzd. II). ;
2Sacramentum vim nullam habere potest ad conscientiam lberandam.


650 THE CHRISTIAN FAITH [§ 140


why, if Christ meant no more than this, He made use of these
particular expressions. In addition to these two things, both the
other views recognize a third thing, namely, a real presence of
Christ’s body and blood. According to Luther, through a special
and secret power of the Word this presence is so conjoined with the
elements of bread and wine as to yield what resembles bodily
participation ; according to Calvin, it merely is so conjoined with
the believer’s spiritual participation as to yield a peculiar sacra-
mental intensification thereof, to effect which no other power is
required than the power of the divine promise familiar to us all.
In both theories this supposed third thing explains why Christ
had to use such very peculiar expressions in stating His intention.
But, apart from the fact that Luther’s view is too near the Roman
type not to have encouraged the transference of many superstitious
ideas, the mode in which the body of Christ is partaken of along
with the bread, as well as the mode in which this sacramental
participation differs on the one hand from bodily participation in
the symbolic elements, and on the other from spiritual participation
in the flesh and blood, is so difficult to make intelligible that while
formule about it can be composed out of unscripturally devised
words, the fact itself can never be made clear. The Calvinistic
theory escapes many of these difficulties by holding aloof, alike from
the over-intellectual bareness of the Zwinglian view and from the
mysterious sensuousness of the Lutheran; but no more than the
latter does it succeed in making it clear that we have an interest
in the body and blood of Christ, and no more than the former does
it yield any explanation of the kind of relation obtaining between
the body and the blood, or the ground of distinction between them.
Hence, although this view has had a strong power of attraction,
it provides new excuses for vacillating between the charm of sym-
bolism which allures men to seek more in the sacrament than is
brought out in the explanation itself, and on the other hand resting
satisfied with something more external, on the ground that it is
impossible to make out what the peculiar significance of the Supper
is. We need not therefore expect that this view will become
universally predominant in the Evangelical Church. As a result
of the steady unprejudiced work of interpreters we may rather
expect yet another view to emerge which will not make ship-


. Toto igitur coelo errant qui sacramenta vim habere mundandi putant.
. Sunt ergo sacramenta signa sive cerimoniae, quibus se homo ecclesiae
probat (De vera et falsa relig.).


JL


§141] FELLOWSHIP WITH CHRIST CONFIRMED 651


wreck on any of these rocks. Till then it will not be possible to
state any common Church doctrine except regarding the effects
of the Supper, and all that can be set forth under that head is the
contents of the following two paragraphs.


§ 141. First Theorem.—Participation in the body and blood of Christ
in the Lord’s Supper conduces in the case of all believers to
confirm their fellowship with Christ.


Luther’s Larger Catech., 247: ‘For this reason we go to the sacrament,
because we there receive the treasure through and in which we secure forgive-
ness of sin.’—248 : ‘ Hence it is well named a food of the soul, which nourishes
and strengthens the new man.’—Evxvpos. simpl. xxi.: Est ea spiritualis
manducatio corporis Christi. . . qua manente in sua essentia corpore et
sanguine domini ea nobis communicantur spiritualiter . . . per spiritum s.
qui videlicet ea quae per carnem et sanguinem domini pro nobis in mortem
tradita parata sunt, ipsam remissionem peccatorum liberationem et vitam
aeternam applicat et confert nobis ita ut Christus in nobis vivat.—Conf.
Scot. xxi.: Sed unio haec et conjunctio quam habemus cum corpore et
sanguine Jesu Christi in recto sacramenti usu operatione spiritus sancti
efficitur, qui nos vera fide supra omnia quae videntur vehit, et ut vescamur
corpore et sanguine Jesu Christi semel pro nobis effusi et fracti efficit.—
Conf. Belg. xxxv.: Convivium hoc mensa est spiritualis, in qua Christus
seipsum nobis cum omnibus bonis suis communicat efficitque ut in illa tam
ipsomet quam passionis mortisque ipsius merito fruamur.—Melanchth., Joc.
theol.: Ad hoc igitur prodest manducatio poenitentiam agenti, videlicet ad
fidem confirmandam.—Calv., Imstitt. Iv. vii. 5: In hunc modum dominus
voluit . . . vera etiam sui communicatione fieri ut vita sua in nos transeat
et nostra fiat... . Ibid. 11: Per effectum autem redemtionem iustitiam
sanctificationem vitamque aeternam . . . intelligo.


I. The one benefit of this participation is stated as being the
confirming of our fellowship with Christ ; and this includes the con-
firming of Christians in their union with each other, for the latter
rests so entirely on their union with Christ that the union of an
individual with Christ is unthinkable apart from his union with
believers. In the credal passages just quoted this is made less
prominent than could be wished, owing to the fact that in such dis-
cussions the question of the benefit of the sacrament customarily
came up only in connexion with the questions we discussed above,
where each individual participant is considered only as an individual.
Hence light on the subject now before us is only to be sought from
the enumeration of the benefits won by Christ, or under the all-
embracing idea of sanctification. The general expressions for the
effects of participation which stand out most clearly are confirmation


Gf Conaloler2-"


652 THE CHRISTIAN FAITH [§ 141


in faith, and the nourishment of the new man or the passing over
of Christ’s life into ours. Essentially both are the same, for living
faith in Christ is simply the consciousness of our union with Him.
It is usual, however, to emphasize two points specially—namely,
that in the Supper we have renewed or confirmed to us the forgive-
ness of sins, and that we experience a heightening of the powers
that make for sanctification. The two things really cannot be
separated, and both rest on the fact that owing to the incomplete
removal of sin even the new spiritual life has its progress interrupted
by tendencies of a partially retrograde kind. For just as regenera-
tion only becomes really firm and sure through our being in the
status of sanctification, so, too, when union with Christ has been
disturbed by sin, the certainty that the sin has been forgiven can
only be made really secure through the feeling of restored and
strengthened life. And for this the representation of the whole
body of believers natural in the action of the Supper is an important
factor. For it cannot but give rise in each individual to a strong
excitation of the common Spirit, as well as to a heightened con-
sciousness both of his general and his special vocation within this
fellowship ; and this cannot but be accompanied by a new impulse
to develop his gifts.

As regards the relation of the Supper to the forgiveness of sins,
it must first be observed that in this respect no distinction ought to
be drawn between original and actual sin, as if baptism referred
only to original sin and the Supper only to actual. Apart from the
fact that baptism cannot be completed until a time when actual sin
has already issued from original, and that it could not be an index
of the beginning of the new life unless in consequence of it actual
sin ceased to hinder fellowship in the blessedness of Christ—apart
from this, baptism as the seal of regeneration has itself a relation
to all actual sins, inasmuch as the sins of the regenerate are always
ipso facto forgiven.! But so it is, too, with the Supper ; just as it
is original sin which is perpetually being manifested in the actual
sin which obstructs vital fellowship with Christ, so it is the forgive-
ness of original sin that we ever anew require to have confirmed to
us. In the second place, the forgiveness of sins ought not to be
divided in two, nor ought the sin-pardoning power of the sacrament
of the altar to be regarded as of a special character, as though sins
were first forgiven in one way through the justifying action of God
in regeneration and then in another way through the special presence

- Cia Smhiths


: /
R /
TS, ae eae om


§ 141] THE SUPPER AND FORGIVENESS 653


and communicative action of Christ in the sacrament.! On the
contrary, there is but one and the same sin-pardoning power ; and
just as regeneration is nothing but the general and ever-active
relation of Christ to the totality of the human race, as that relation
first comes in touch with the individual life, so the forgiveness of
sins in the Supper is simply this living relationship as it reveals
itself at a moment when Christ is presented in common to a number
of individual believers.

In this connexion it may appear an enigma (for this does not
rest on Christ’s institution) why, on their confession of sin, the
Church should declare forgiveness to those communicating at any
given time, before they have taken the sacrament. As an anticipa-
tion, however, this declarative act belongs to the Supper in the
same way as, conversely, confirmation belongs to baptism as its
subsequent consummation. Hence the practice in the Evangelical
Church, which at first obtained here and there,” of regarding absolu-
tion as a sacrament by itself, was soon given up. The confession
of sin has no public ecclesiastical character save in relation to the
Supper, and the wish to participate in the Supper cannot be other-
wise expressed than through confession, for apart from sin there
would be no need to renew our union with Christ. But when the
Church proclaims the forgiveness of sin in connexion with such con-
fession, what it really does is first to declare that the man who at
this very moment feels the need of renewing his fellowship with
Christ is put by the Church on an equal footing with those who
already have satisfied that need, and next to give the needy soul
thereby an assurance that he will find the satisfaction of his need
in the sacrament. Hence every evangelical Christian will probably
find that the sense of forgiveness which follows absolution imparted
by the Church is no more than a shadow of that which he enjoys
in partaking of the Supper itself, for it is there combined with the
sense of a new influx of living spiritual power out of Christ’s fulness,
such as really removes the obstructions of the new life and the
lingering effects of sinfulness in general.

2. The consequences of all this for the procedure of the Church


1 Conf. Saxon., p. 173: Monemus etiam ne existiment propter hoc opus

. remitti peccata, sed ut fiducia intueantur mortem et meritum filii Dei

. et statuant propter ipsum nobis peccata remitti.

2 Melanchth., Joc. theol.: Numerantur haec sacramenta, baptismus, coena
domini, absolutio. The same thing is meant by the order of Articles 8-13
in the Augsburg Confession. Hence, too, the Apology says: Vere igitur sunt
sacramenta baptismus, coena domini, absolutio, quae est sacramentum
poenitentiae,


654 THE CHRISTIAN FAITH [$ 141


in the sacramental action are as follows. First, the Supper refers
back to baptism, and therefore, as long as infant baptism is main-
tained, there can be no participation in the Supper before confirma-
tion in the Protestant sense of that word. The communicating of
children, in whom neither the consciousness of sin nor the conscious-
ness of grace can be properly developed, is for that reason a grave
abuse infested with superstition. Secondly, on none of the different
views can participation in the Supper take place without Christ being
presented in the spirit ; hence there can rightly be no eucharistic
action designed for those whose mental condition is defective or
whose consciousness is obscured or on the very point of disappearing.
Thirdly, the Supper was instituted by Christ as a common action ;
hence it should always be held so in the Church. Fourthly and
lastly, the doctrine of the Greek and Roman Churches that the con-
junction of the body of Christ with the bread even apart from its
use in the sacrament constitutes a perpetual sacrifice offered to
God, finds no support on our side and is for ever excluded ; even
when allowance is made for the mitigating explanation that this
repetition (as it were) of the sacrifice of Christ upon the cross is
merely a memorial thereof.2, We know nothing of merits or satis-
factions as intended here. The evasive suggestion that such
sacrifice is not different from but identical with that accomplished
on the cross,4 has for us no value whatever, for in that case we
should have to separate altogether the sacrifice in the death of
Christ from the obedience in His life,> and His original sacrifice
would then be just as arbitrary a transaction and just as magical
as the sacrifice of the Mass. In any case this latter sacrifice would
have to be regarded as supplementary to Christ’s original sacrifice ;
the consequence of which would be, for one thing, that apart from
this supplement God would not behold believers in Christ, and thus
justification would be cancelled all over again, in defiance of the
fact that the circumstances which alone could bring this about must
already have been present to God’s foreknowledge in His justifying
action. Along with this goes a second consequence, namely, that


M"EkOeots 6p005. mis. 107. Catech. Rom. ii. 77: Ut ecclesia perpetuum
sacrificium haberet, quo peccata nostra expiarentur,
_ *Sacrosanctum missae sacrificium esse non solum nudam commemora-
tionem sacrificii quod in cruce factum est, sed vere etiam propitiatorium
sacrificium.,

* Qui hoc sacrificium offerunt, quo nobiscum communicant, dominicae
passionis fructus merentur et satisfaciunt (ibid. 79).

_* Unum itaque et idem sacrificium esse fatemur et haberi debet, quod in

missa peragitur et quod in cruce oblatum est (ibid. 53).

® Heb, 210.17 32 58.


wy


§ 142] UNWORTHY PARTICIPATION 655


redemption—not merely as concerns its realization in men, viewed,
that is, in its temporal aspect (where the matter is self-evident), but
even when taken as the ground of the divine good-pleasure, i.e. in
its eternal aspect—is only made complete through this supplement-
ary action of the Church. And this means that in part men redeem
themselves, for the priestly work of Christ would be insufficient
apart from the sacrifice of the Mass. Hence, while there is no
longer any need to describe the Mass as idolatrous, we persist in
rejecting unconditionally the whole idea of a sacrifice subsequent
to the end of all sacrifices ; issuing as it does from a demonstrable
misunderstanding, it confuses faith and therefore necessarily
encourages superstition, and in particular falsifies the idea of the
priesthood of all believers. It is thus that we regard it simply in
itself, and irrespectively of the doctrine of transubstantiation, with
which, of course, it hangs together.


§ 142. Second Theorem.—Unworthy participation in the Lord’s Supper
conduces to yudgment for the partaker.

A pol. Conf. iv. : Christus ait (1 Cor. 11!) : illos sibi iudicium manducare
qui manducant indigne, ideo pastores non cogunt hos qui non sunt idonei, ut
sacramentis utantur.—Conf. Belg. xxxv.: Nemo itaque ad hanc mensam se
sistere debet, qui prius sese recte non probaverit, ne de hoc pane edens et de
hoc poculo bibens iudicium sibi edat et bibat.—Catech. Heidelb. \xxxi. :
Hypocritae autem et qui non vere resipiscunt, damnationem sibi edunt et
bibunt.

1. It is not easy to explain to oneself clearly how this paragraph
is to be applied. In the first place, it is difficult to form an exact
idea from what quarter the unworthiness indicated could arise ; for
one who is not a member of the Church has no access to the sacra-
ment, while every true member of the Church is a partaker all the
more worthy that the Supper through Christ’s institution so pos-
sesses a peculiar and independent power which marks it off from all
other expressions and media of piety, that everyone must feel
stimulated to the most appropriate mood of feeling. What first
suggests itself, however, is this. The Supper was instituted as a
common action and is publicly administered by the ministers of the
Word, hence by Church order definite times and seasons must be
appointed for it. Such order has the look of a summons, and it is
possible that individuals—whether from custom merely or to meet
the views of others—obey this summons without an inward longing
for communion being awakened by any sense of their own spiritual


1 Heidelb. Catech., Qu. 80; Artic. Smale, ii., de Missa; Expos. simpl. xxi.


656 THE CHRISTIAN FAITH [§ 142


deficiencies. In its origin such participation is unworthy, for it has
no connexion with the purpose of the institution ; without a lively
sense of personal relationship to Christ there can be no active recol-
lection of Him, as He is represented in the Supper. This will
always be lacking whether we conceive the inward state in question
as one of dull thoughtlessness not banished even by the action
itself, or as the steady presence in consciousness of alien motives,
which can hardly fail to be accompanied by a real, even if temporary,
disbelief in the power and greatness of the sacrament.

2. If, however, the judgment described as a consequence of this
unworthiness be taken as meaning consignment to eternal damna-
tion, then it seems impossible to establish any connexion between
the two things. Indeed, assuming that unworthy participation is
an actual possibility and is attended by these dangers, and on the
other hand that saving spiritual participation in Christ’s flesh and
blood may be had elsewhere than in the sacrament, it looks as if we
might well wish that the sacrament had never been instituted, and
that we had been relegated solely to the extra-sacramental partici-
pation just referred to. But let us put the idea of eternal damnation
provisionally on one side and concentrate on the question of un-
worthiness. In that case the thoughtlessness which turns so rich
an opportunity into a meaningless external performance, and the
insincerity which masks unfitting motives by an action so sacred,
are a degradation of it which is eminently calculated to induce a
condition of unreceptivity and hardening, such as we have every
reason to regard as one element in damnation. This entirely
justifies the wording of our paragraph. The Supper, that is to say,
is seen to be a means of discrimination ; fit and worthy participa-
tion in it promotes living fellowship with Christ, while participation
of an unworthy kind is always rendering more ineffectual what
is the most powerful means by which such fellowship can be
strengthened, and thereby is always enhancing the power of hind-
rances. If now we consider how insuperable thoughtlessness must
be, and still more how shameless insincerity must be, if they prove
stronger than what is so sacred, and how little faith can keep hold
of the Redeemer if what He has instituted can thus be torn away
from its purpose, we shall find it quite possible to understand the
fear‘ul awe into which the devotional language of the ancient
Church falls when treating of this subject. All the more essential
is it that the public teaching of the Church should refrain from
discouraging pronouncements not necessitated by the facts,


§ 143] LUTHERAN AND CALVINISTIC VIEWS 657


3. It is worth while to look back once again from this point at
the distinction between the Lutheran and the Calvinistic view of the
Supper, and feel how incapable it is of excusing a breach of Church
fellowship. Neither of the two is at all successful in clearing up the
third element which they accept, and which we have indicated by
the phrase ‘sacramental participation.’ But a reference to our
paragraph makes plain how much the distinction between them
amounts to. The Lutheran view insists upon it that as sacramental
participation in the body and blood is bound up with participation
in the bread and wine, it is shared in by worthy and unworthy com-
municants alike ; only that in the one case it conduces to judgment,
but in the other to spiritual participation and, thereby, to salvation.
The Calvinistic theory, which attaches sacramental participation to
spiritual, can only rejoin that in such sacramental participation the
unworthy have no share. If this is the one point of distinction that
can be clearly formulated, the difference will become quite negligible,
once unworthy participation has disappeared from actual practice.
Such difference in doctrine in any case would vanish of itself, as the
two Churches approximate to perfection, and is therefore no justi-
fication of their separate existence ; for unworthy participation
always is an evidence of imperfection in the Church. If the action
of those who come to the sacrament is in harmony with the common
sentiment of the whole body, and if the Church administering the
sacrament develops a perfect sympathy between the whole body
and the inward state of each member, no one in that case will seek
to come to the sacrament unworthily, and the congregation will offer
it to none whose participation would be unworthy. As the Church
really advances to a better state, the only cases which tend to recall
the difference between the two theories are bound to become fewer
in number and gradually to disappear.


APPENDIX TO THE LAST TWO DOCTRINES: THE NAME
“SACRAMENT ”


§ 143. The Evangelical (Protestant) Church uses the name ‘ Sacrament’
only for these two institutions, Baptism and the Lord's
Supper, which were instituted by Christ Himself and which
represent His priestly activity.


rt. It is natural enough that a term taken over from a realm
wholly foreign to theology should have no exact delimitation.
Hence it was only very gradually that the Roman Church reached


42


658 THE CHRISTIAN FAITH [§ 143


its seven sacraments, and it was also by gradual steps that we fixed
upon these two. Now the fundamental elements in the meaning
of the term ‘sacrament’ we must accept very cautiously, for the
word, although based on the New Testament representation of a
good soldier of Christ, has given prominence to one of its elements
which is of most precarious application. Hence we may well wish
even more unreservedly than Zwingli did + that Church terminology
had never adopted the word, and also that it might be found possible
to dispense with it. This might be done by way of approximation
to the Eastern Church, which has never adopted it, and which
instead uses the term ‘ mysteries’; but anything of the kind will
certainly have to wait to a later time. A wish, however, is only
rational in so far as it contributes to its own fulfilment ; we have
therefore prepared a way here for the change by treating of baptism
and the Supper each by itself and without any definite relation to
the term ‘ sacrament,’ though as it is familiar we have used it now
and then for convenience. The ordinary procedure (to begin with
an explanation of this so-called general notion) is always tending
to confirm the false idea that it is a strictly dogmatic conception
expressive of something that is essential to Christianity, and that
it is from the fact that they are exemplifications of this conception
that baptism and the Supper derive their special value. That
prejudice we may at least claim is not fostered by the treatment
adopted here, for even the close relation we have established between
baptism and the Supper has been kept quite independent of this
traditional term (sacrament), and—like that between the two other
pairs of doctrines in this Division—been based solely on a common
relation to one of the essential activities of Christ’s vocation. So
that it has the look of a mere accident that this middle pair of our
six doctrines bears a common name, while the other pairs do not.

2. In any case it would be a fruitless proceeding to enter upon
an etymological examination of the name, and seek thereby to
decide what can and what cannot be subsumed under it. The
controversy with the Roman Church, too, is quite an empty one,
if it concerns merely the interpretation of the name and does no
more than raise the question whether our interpretation is right or
theirs, which applies the name to five other ordinances. The con-
troversy has a meaning only if in some vital connexion our opponents
are trying to give those five other actions an equal place with these
two. In fact, however, there is an obvious dissimilarity among the


1 De vera et falsa velig., p. 194.


$1431 THE NAME ‘SACRAMENT 659


actions and situations which for the Roman Church are embraced
under the term ‘sacrament,’ while the closeness of the connexion
between the two to which our Church restricts the term has already
been shown. Hence, if the name is still to be used, nothing remains
but to fix its meaning in a purely arbitrary way without regard to
its original sense, as a communal designation of these two institu-
tions. The usage of the Evangelical Church at first was not fixed
either ; not only was absolution received as a third sacrament, but
Melanchthon also proposed to make ordination a sacrament as well.1
Absolution, however, failed to keep its place, and the latter sugges-
tion obtained no support. In general we think it more correct (and
it is wholly on this model that our eucharistic service has been
formed) to regard the absolution as a part of the communion
service, as contrasted with which it has lost its sacramental inde-
pendence ; and it was equally correct to take confirmation as a
part of baptism, once confirmation had had restored to it a definite
significance. Baptism, however, was also a consecration to the
true priesthood common to all Christians, whereas the Ministry of
the Word in the narrower official sense is not common to all ; hence
dedication to it is not to be put on the same level as baptism.
Marriage was only brought in because Scripture uses of it the term
‘mystery,’ which the term ‘sacrament’ displaced; but not only
has it as a permanent state no similarity to our two ordinances, so
that by analogy only consecration to marriage could be called a
sacrament but not marriage itself, but in addition it has no place
here because as a divine moral institution it has existed from the
beginning quite irrespective of the mission of Christ. Finally, as
regards the virtue sought to be attributed to extreme unction as a
usage of the Apostolic Age, this could only be based upon the efficacy
of the Church’s prayer in the name of Jesus, and the benediction
of marriage could only rank as prayer of the same kind. Clearly
enough, then, these other usages are distinct from our two sacra-
ments. What is common to both, let the Church name them as it
may, will always be this, that they are continued activities of Christ,
enshrined in Church actions and bound up therewith in the closest
way. By their instrumentality He exerts His priestly activity on
individuals, and sustains and propagates that living fellowship
between Him and us in virtue of which alone God sees individuals
in Christ.

3. We cannot quite ignore here the connexion between our two


1 Loc. theol., de num. sacvam.


660 THE CHRISTIAN FAITH [§ 144
sacraments and two Old Testament institutions, namely, circum-
cision and the Passover ; a connexion which has been emphasized
more or less at different times, but which has often been quite
wrongly conceived. It is an entirely erroneous idea, for instance,
that circumcision and the Passover had any particular relation to
each other, as baptism and the Supper have. Circumcision as an
Abrahamitic institution had no other relation to the Passover than
to other Mosaic institutions. Apart from this, it is going much too
far to assert that baptism took the place of circumcision and the
Supper that of the Passover. Baptism was instituted quite inde-
pendently of circumcision ; moreover, circumcision was not put a
stop to by baptism but by the preponderance of Gentile Christians
over Jewish Christians, as well as by the intermingling of the two.
The Supper did indeed attach itself to the Passover, but it was at
once separated from it ; while the Passover continued to be cele-
brated by Jewish Christians without any relation to the Supper.
Still, it is not impossible that a closer examination of the original
relation between the two might be the very thing to yield a more
correct understanding of the difficult expressions used by Christ
in instituting the Supper. Anda comparison of the two New Testa-
ment institutions with those of the Old Testament has the very
definite result of bringing out with great clearness the real differ-
ence between the old covenant and the new.


FirtH DocTRINE: THE POWER OF THE KEYS


§ 144. By reason of its coexistence with the world there exists in the
Church a legislative and an administrative power, which is an
essential effluence from the kingly office of Christ.


1. If the Church were completely self-contained, so that in
none of those who belonged to it there survived anything of the
world, the soul of each Christian in the whole system of its powers
rather being a perfect organ of the Holy Spirit, then always and
everywhere all events in the Church would happen of themselves
as the Spirit prompted. Owing to the identity of the Spirit in all,
everything that happened would show a spontaneous consistency ;
there would exist no difference between the general will and that of
individuals, and there would nowhere be any occasion for law. If
general conceptions were applied to Church affairs, those so applying
them would in reality only be formulating the ways in which men
actually behaved. This ideal, however, has never been realized


§ 144] THE POWER OF THE KEYS 661


except in Christ Himself; hence the utterances and impulses of
the Spirit, when resisted, take the form of law and are accepted as
such. This being the case, the analogous activities of Spirit-filled
men also take on a relation to law as well as to the resistance which
law implies, and assume the form of executive power. Not in any
external fashion, as with civil authority (for an external apart from
an internal out of which it springs has not the slightest value
for the Church), but owing simply to the natural predominance of
the common Spirit over persons—a predominance such as every
member of a community feels has won his free assent. Should
there be someone who does not feel this, or who in his own person
is consciously antagonistic to the challenge of the common Spirit,
that fact denotes an anti-church element in his life, and the pre-
dominance of the common Spirit must be re-established inwardly
before the person in whose case it was infringed can again be
acknowledged as a true member of the Church. Now this power
of producing without any external means a steady voluntary sub-
mission, is the very power exerted by Christ ; and in every case
where men were united to Him this power was manifested precisely
in the fact that impulses coming from Him were recognized as law,
and that His judgments regarding men were felt to be final pro-
nouncements on what is in man—the new community thus becoming
His Kingdom. In this respect, too, the Spirit actualizes in the
Church what is to be received out of Christ’s fulness. Or to put
it otherwise, when Christ breathed the Spirit on the community of
His people, He thereby conveyed this power to it—a power which
cannot be conceived apart from this original ruling influence of
Christ, and without which the union of the Divine Essence with
human nature exemplified in the Church must either be much more
or much less than is involved in the conception of a guiding common
Spirit.

2. At first this explanation does not at all seem to lead up to
what is generally understood by the Power of the Keys, for that
spiritual power is ordinarily taken to refer to the expansion and
maintenance of the Church, in the sense that it rests with the
Church to decide who shall and who shall not be received into the
Christian fellowship, and also who shall remain there or be expelled
—a matter so far not even mentioned here, but left to be inferred
by way of appendix to the foregoing. But the two things can
easily be combined, and the path we are now taking is merely that
which enables us better to subsume the whole of Church govern-


662 THE CHRISTIAN FAITH [§ 145


ment, as is fitting, under one conception. If we start with the kind
of resistance mentioned above, every case of permanent submission
produced subsequently by the Church’s legislative authority is a
new conquest for the common Spirit, which thereby wins a place
for itself in an individual life which previously was, at best, a dis-
puted possession hovering on the border between Church and
world. By every such removal of hesitation through legislative
action, the Church’s realm is extended. But it is also through
such action that the first entrance of the individual into the Church
is brought about, for regeneration is the effect of the same cause,
for the first time presenting to men the preponderance of the God-
consciousness as the law of spiritual life. The same is true of the
power which applies this law in particular judgments and pro-
nouncements ; these define the place taken in the community by
each individual as a consequence of his inward state, and determine
whether much or little can be entrusted to him.

Another peculiarity seems to be that we formerly?! described
the Power of the Keys as a prolongation of Christ’s kingly activity,
whereas it is here taken more as an effluence thereof, mediated by
the Spirit. But in this respect there is no more than a slight differ-
ence between the institutions treated of in this Division. The
mediation of the Spirit comes in in every case, otherwise these
institutions would not be actions of the Church; and the actions
are all of them effluences of Christ, for it is always from Christ that
the Spirit draws. It is less easy to describe this power as a pro-
longation of Christ’s activity, for the difference between legislative
and administrative activities essentially relates to the organized
community, while Christ’s own activity preceded it. If, then, the
difference has no application to His case, the Power of the Keys as
thus defined cannot in the strictest sense be called a prolongation of
His activity, although it does develop the outline of the common


life as Christ drew it, and that without absorbing alien accretions
from without.


§ 145. Theorem.—The Power of the Keys is the power in virtue of
which the Church decides what belongs to the Christian life,
and disposes of each individual in the measure of his con-
formity with these decisions.

Conf. Aug. de abus. vii.: Sentiunt potestatem clavium esse . . . mandatum


Dei praedicandi evangelii, remittendi et retinendi peccata et administrandi
sacramenta.—Ibid, : Respondent quod liceat Episcopis seu pastoribus facere


Sin276


§ 145] THE POWER OF THE KEYS 663


ordinationes ut res ordine gerantur in ecclesia.—Expos. simpl. xiv.: De
clavibus regni Dei . . . simpliciter dicimus omnes ministros legitime vocatos

- exercere.. . usum clavium, cum... populum . . . increpant inque
disciplina retinent.—Jbid. xviii.: Atqui debet interim iusta esse inter
ministros disciplina. Inquirendum enim diligenter in doctrinam et vitam
ministrorum in synodis.—Conf. Basil. xvi.: Ipsa pascendi gregis auctoritas,
quae proprie clavium potestas est . . . cunctis aeque inviolabilis esse, et

. electis tantum et idoneis administrandum committi debet.—Conf. Gall.
XXxil. seq. : Credimus expedire, ut . . . ecclesiae alicuius praefecti inter se
dispiciant qua ratione totum corpus commode regi possit . . . eas tantum
leges admittimus, quae fovendae concordiae et unicuique in obedientia
debita retinendo subserviunt, qua in re sequendum nobis putamus quod
dominus noster . . . de excommunicatione statuit quam quidem approbamus
et una cum suis appendicibus necessariam esse arbitramur. Rom, 161”.
Cf. Conf. Belg. xxxii—Conf. Tetrapol. xiii.: Hi (ministri) claves habent regni
coelorum ligandi et solvendi peccata remittendi et retinendi potestatem, sic
tamen ut nihil nisi ministri Christi sint, cuius hoc ius solius et proprium
est.—Conf. Saxon.: Et ad ministerium haec pertinent . . . exercere iudicia
ecclesiae legitimo modo de iis qui manifestorum criminum in moribus aut
doctrina rei sunt, et contra contumaces sententiam excommunicationis ferre,
et conversos rursus absolvere et recipere. Haec ut rite fiant, etiam con-
sistoria in ecclesiis nostris constituta sunt.


1. The term Office or Power of the Keys, in combination with
the terms ‘ bind’ and ‘ loose,’ occurs in a discourse of Christ ! which
bears upon the first part of our paragraph ; the terms ‘ bind’ and
“loose ’ occur in another and related discourse,? where, at least
judged by the context, they bear upon our second part ; and this
again is very like a third passage,’ which probably has to do with
the second part exclusively. To say that this or that shall be bound,
means that it shall be fixed by command and prohibition, while
that is loosed which is exempt from such rule and is left to the
self-determination of each individual #—the common feeling of the
whole body taking the same attitude to one who adopts one course
and to another who adopts the opposite, provided only that a good
conscience can be assumed in both cases. Now here we have the
legislative activity of the Church described in the previous para-
graph, and its limitations as well. The common feeling of the
body has no occasion to express itself in a determinative way
except when, through the imperfect permeation of the Holy Spirit,
there is not being realized in certain members something which
common feeling demands as an essential manifestation of faith, or
when, in certain lives, there is still going on what, if left uncensured,

1 Matt. 16}°. 2 Matt. 1818, = jonni20",


4 Conf. Aug. de abus. vii. : Necesse est enim retineri in ecclesiis doctrinam
de libertate christiana.


664 THE CHRISTIAN FAITH [§ 145


would tend to injure the Spirit’s action in others. But it is equally
essential, and equally pertinent to the same legislative activity,
that things should be ‘loosed’ which presumption or spiritual
arrogance might seek to bind. The unity of the Church cannot
continue to exist if individuals try to make their personal modes
of acting or thinking obligatory, as the only proper expression of
the common Spirit. Now if people insist on taking the scriptural
passage referred to (and it is the chief Biblical authority for the
doctrine) in the literal sense that Christ conferred this power on
Peter alone, we should have to carry through that view strictly ;
and then, with the death of Peter, the legislative activity of the
Church would have come to an end—in so far, that is to say, as it
rests on this injunction of Christ. Nobody will doubt that in that
case it was bound to reappear ; for otherwise, if we suppose every-
thing to have been decided for all time in the first generation, this
could only have come about in a supernatural fashion which would
destroy the genuinely historical character of events ; and this could
never have led up to a free and living development. It follows
that if this were the literal sense of Christ’s words, the legislative
activity of the Church could not be based on them alone. But it
would not for that reason cease to be a prolongation of Christ’s
activity. It would still be an effluence from His will that a com-
munity should exist, and without legislative activity its existence
is impossible. Peter himself cannot have understood Christ’s
words in any such sense, for, when general pronouncements became
necessary, he did not arrogate to himself alone the right of making
them, but brought the questions at issue before the community.
Even in the second passage quoted from Scripture, the ecclesiastical
activity which applies the law in judgments and represents law
executively is ultimately attributed to the community; hence
it goes without saying that even earlier individuals must have
worked in the name of the community, and as its organs; the more
so that the Redeemer certainly did not mean to give any irritated
person the right to call his brother to account. But once we regard
the individual as the organ of the community in dealing with a
brother, every sin against the whole body is also done against the
individual ; and the natural organ of the whole body in each case
is the individual who first has certain knowledge of the facts. If
we further bring in the third Scripture passage quoted—and it is
always reckoned as bearing on our problem—it may no doubt at first
sight be interpreted as meaning that the forgiveness of sins is first


§ 145] THE POWER OF THE KEYS 665


imparted in baptism, and that one whose baptism is postponed
to a later time therefore has his sins longer retained. We have
no desire to exclude this; clearly the right administration of
baptism (or, as now with us, of confirmation), which is to be ex-
pected from the action of the Spirit, also belongs in essence to the
Power of the Keys. But this certainly does not exhaust the
meaning of the passage. The Apostles themselves and the Early
Church after them applied it to persons who had already been
received into the Church ; ? further, the passage contains the promise
given by Christ with regard to every judgment declaring whether
or not a given person is in that fellowship with Christ in which sin
disappears. Now all regenerate persons are in this fellowship ;
hence their actual sins, which alone could evoke a judgment of the
Church, are already forgiven. If we add the fact that no one
simply as an organ of the Spirit is within the Church, and that
activity within the Church can only take place through powers
which are themselves channels of the Spirit, 7.e. spiritual gifts (since
there must be sin where there are still vestiges of resistance to the
Spirit’s indwelling), it is clear that the Redeemer’s promise entails
that the Church will judge rightly on the question what, and how
much or how little, is to be entrusted to the individual member
of the Church, and to what extent his influence on the Church or
his collaboration with it ought to be restricted, if the minimum of
disturbance is to result from his inward state. Thus all that
belongs to the second part of our paragraph we find based on the
words of Christ.

2. If now we survey the credal passages quoted above, we find
that they refer to the same principal points which we have seen to
be constitutive of the Office of the Keys, though not everywhere
expressed quite definitely or distinguished with equal clearness ;
and all that need be added by way of comment is the following.

First, we often find the Ministry of the Word taken as part of
the Office of the Keys. This is obviously the case with regard to
the administration of the sacraments, which is so closely bound up
with the forgiveness of sins ; and what we have already conceded
respecting baptism must hold good also of the Supper, namely, that
its right administration belongs to the Office of the Keys. It is,
however, a mere misunderstanding to say the same of preaching


1Cf. Matt. rol4-15, For wheresoever the disciples thus withdrew, there
no community arose, and sins were retained in every case.
AGtse 70-8 eT COL. 5 es


666 THE CHRISTIAN FAITH [$ 145


considered by itself ; yet viewed as a special instance of the general
principle formulated above, it does belong to the Office of the Keys
to determine rightly who is to be admitted to the Ministry of the
Word of God—a matter which incontestably must be regarded as
one of the most important aspects of the Office. Assuming this, we
cannot but judge it natural that with this Ministry nearly every-
where the Church should have combined the administration of both
sacraments.

Secondly, many of the credal passages, taken by themselves,
appear to suggest that the whole Office of the Keys resides in the
whole body of Ministers of the Word. If it were so and if (the
testing and the authorization of ministers of the Word being, as it
is, an essential part of the whole Office) the entire body of Church
teachers were a self-propagating organism and thus in exclusive
possession of the Power of the Keys, then the distinction between.
the clergy (in this narrower sense) and the laity would be sharpened
to such a degree that the difference between us and the Roman
Church would entirely disappear. This, however, cannot be the
intention ; for Christ Himself assigns one part of the function to
the congregation, and from the very outset the congregation was
given a share in the most important tasks of administration.?
Indeed, the very passage which gives ministers exclusive power to
execute the congregation’s judgment takes for granted that it is
by the congregation that the judgment is pronounced. As for
legislative action, it cannot occur until there has developed in
the Church an important distinction or antithesis; but this
distinction is not the same. It is specially incumbent on those
entrusted with preaching to train themselves to be ever more
perfect interpreters of the Word of God in Scripture, but it is one
thing to explain the words of Christ and the Apostles rightly and
quite another to apply them profitably in more or less general
forms under very different conditions of life ; so, too, it is in one
way that Scripture is applied from the pulpit and in quite another
that rules for the life of the congregation under definite circum-
stances are evolved in a spirit of loyalty to Scripture, even though
they often cannot be supported by any particular Scripture passage.
Hence the distinction between one who grasps the religious meaning
of life’s conditions and tasks swiftly and surely enough to tell how
the law bears on them, and one who accepts the law as law because
he hears in it the sound of his own true inner voice, is a quite


l Acts 115-23 62-6


§ 145] CHURCH LEGISLATION AND ADMINISTRATION 667


different distinction from that between minister and hearer. Hence
in public teaching it is best to avoid giving even an impression that
Church legislation and administration ought to belong chiefly to
ministers. We must not then overlook those passages which
assign the duty of consulting on the government of the whole body
to the leaders of congregations, and among the leaders reckon not
only elders but deacons, in spite of the fact that they have no part
in the teaching office.1. Thus both legislative action and adminis-
trative action derive ultimately from the congregation.

Thirdly, while so much can be gathered from our credal pas-
sages, they do not make clear the scope or manner in which this
whole Office resides in the congregation, or how the congregation
exercises it. In point of fact, it exercises it not merely indirectly,
by ordering and distributing the offices to which legislation and
judgment are formally assigned (for how could the holders of these
offices come to have such abilities and faculties, unless they have
previously had some experience of them ?), but each individual as
such also exercises a punitive office, in an independent and informal
manner, by the judgments he passes upon what goes on in the
congregation, and by praise or blame. Not only so: legislative
action is exerted by each through everything he does that goes to
form public opinion ; and public opinion must always be the living
fount of expressly legislative acts, for these acts are simply a definite
way of gaining recognition for public opinion in Church affairs. If
in this sphere anything be attempted which is not a pure expression
of the way in which, at a particular time and place, human nature
in union with the divine Spirit is seeking to give actual form to
itself and its concerns, then the attempt fails, and the law, which is
thus incapable of securing its own recognition, simply reveals an
imperfection in the Church. Inevitably the Church is disturbed,
and it is only through controversy that agreement (all the more
conscious for what has occurred) can be regained, and along with it
a less ambiguous state of the whole body.

Fourthly, the direct consequence of the foregoing is nowhere
expressed so clearly that we feel dispensed from stating it, although
in a sense it takes us back to what we first said regarding our present
enterprise—namely, that all legislative acts within the congregation
are always subject to revision. For just as there was a time when
none of the now prevailing usages could have been made law,
because the law would not have been acknowledged, so, too, a time


SESS By


668 THE CHRISTIAN FAITH [§ 146


may come when the law will be acknowledged no longer ; and if it
still struggles to keep up its legal validity, the outcome will be false
appearances, of an injurious kind. This is by no means to assert
that every enactment publicly made a rule of faith or life is equally
mutable, but only that none should rank as immutable ; for we
may be sure that certain items will always reassert their validity.
If, finally, the right to pronounce excommunication be also reckoned
as part of administrative action, this right must be understood in
a very limited sense. If this aspect of the Office of the Keys be
traced back to the undivided rule of Christ, it is true that in addition
to choosing Apostles and calling disciples and entrusting tasks
to both, we find Christ pronouncing woes on the Scribes and
Pharisees and on places that had not received Him. These, how-
ever, were persons who had not yet been received into His fellow-
ship ; He needed only to withdraw from them but not to expel
them; indeed, He Himself did not cast out the prodigal son.
Thus we can have no such thing as complete excommunication,
breaking off all fellowship. Every condition which might rightly
provoke a judgment excluding from all share in the life of the
Church ought to be regarded as merely temporary, and no judgment
should seek to terminate the influence of the Church on the in-
dividual who has once been received into its bosom.


StxtH DOCTRINE: PRAYER IN THE NAME OF CHRIST


§ 146. The right prevision which it befits the Church to have of what
will be salutary for it in its coexistence with the world
naturally becomes Prayer.


1. The manner in which the Church forms and propagates
itself in history necessarily involves that, owing to the influence
of worldly factors both within (for something of the world still
clings to every member) and without, there will arise within it
more or less marked obstructions and fluctuations. The same
holds good of its external task of absorbing the world into itself,
for here too it fails to attain to a uniform or an easily discernible
progress. The common consciousness of this is therefore a con-
sciousness of the imperfection of the Church. As, however, the
desire fully to attain the ends of Christ’s coming lives on in the
Church unbrokenly, the consciousness of the Church’s imperfec-
tion, closely in touch with this impulse, becomes the consciousness
of a defective state ; and this, being as it is simply the correct self-


§ 146] PRAYER IN THE NAME OF CHRIST 669


knowledge of the Church in relation to its love for the Redeemer,
must necessarily in the measure of its purity be regarded as an
effect of the divine Spirit. Now as the consciousness of the Church
thus moves to and fro between the present and the future, it
enters in a twofold way into combination with the God-conscious-
ness. In view of the fact that every success attained is due not
solely to its own activities but also to the divine government of
the world, it becomes thankfulness or resignation for what in the
present is the outcome of previous exertions, according as the
average result of human effort is surpassed (thankfulness) or un-
achieved (resignation). But for that which still remains undecided
it becomes prayer—+.c. the inner combination with the God-con-
sciousness of a wish for full success.

If we always considered and kept clearly in view the fact that
in every case we arrive either at resignation or thankfulness (both
of which are inward states in which our share in the perfect blessed-
ness of the Redeemer finds expression, so that in this respect we are
perfectly sure of good either way), then the Church, wholly intent
on its own activities, would do well to refrain from wishes altogether.
And since everything that seems fixed and done with is only a
point of transition, so that what at first is accepted with resigna-
tion makes itself felt later as a subject for thankfulness and vice
versa, both resignation and thankfulness ought to disappear—the
Church leaving all such transitional stages behind and_ holding
fast exclusively to the irrefragable certainty of ultimate success,
and thus through joy in God attaining to perfect peace. But the
mind of man (ever anticipating as it does the temporal development
of things) is unable to refrain from painting what is possible in a
variety of imaginative pictures and comparing their values for its
own projects, or from coming to cling by preference to those from
which it expects most advantage; and as long as this mental
activity lasts, it is bound to combine with the God-consciousness
and become prayer. This is always going on, so that we have no
cause to regard the injunction to pray without ceasing 1 as hyper-
bole. If we did not pray, that could only be due to a disappear-
ance either of our interest in the Kingdom of God, which evokes
these ideas of an advantageous but uncertain future, or of our God-
consciousness, which keeps present to our mind the absolute powers
of the divine world-government.

2. The injunction of the Apostle just mentioned seems rather to


iste dihessans


670 THE CHRISTIAN FAITH [§ 146


be addressed to the individual, as indeed it is only in this individual
mind that the play of fancy over the as yet indeterminate events
of the future occurs. In individuals, however, even correctness of
prevision in no way leads to prevision turning into prayer ; differ-
ences here are usually due to the importance of the matters at stake.
So that it is only in a minor degree that our paragraph is elucidated
by what has so far been said. It will be different if we note care-
fully the relation of the Church to the individual at this point. The
individual here has in view first of all his own sanctification, and
next the activity within the whole body made incumbent on him
by the gifts he has already received. Each of these is a manifold,
the separate parts of which it is impossible to promote equally
by each act, and very soon there comes home to everyone the
experience that while his purposes and hopes may be veering in one
direction, there come to him, from the divine government of the
world, demands and challenges which bend him in another. Hence
he cannot trust his own presentiment of what is for the moment
best for him personally. No more can the individual from his
standpoint reach certainty of judgment as to what is advantageous
for the whole body in the actual state of its total task. True,
individuals will differ in this respect ; and only those would rightly
be judged fitted to exert a definite influence on the whole body who
have developed their capacities on this side into a gift analogous
to that of the prophet. Besides, this presentiment as found in the
corporate consciousness might be more sure and certain in those
times when the individual still formed a large part of the whole 4
and was able to apprehend it as a whole. So that from Christ
onwards (and He must be conceived as having possessed this
faculty, humanly considered, in the highest possible perfection)
this gift must be regarded as present approximately, but certainty
of insight diminishes in proportion as a personal element enters
more and more into the individual’s premonition of the future.
What is true of the individual will also be true of every group of
people, whether freely associated or constituted by nature, in pro-
portion as they form a smaller or larger part of the whole, and
feel for the others a less or more disinterested love. Hence, when
matters have reached that point, we must say, on the one hand, of the
whole body that, as personal consciousness and common conscious-
ness are here no longer distinct but completely one, it forms the
most faithful likeness of Christ, and therefore that it is in the whole
S Cre Actser 6% 1%


§ 147] THE PREVISION OF THE CHURCH 671


body, revealed as a unity, that the most sure and certain prevision
will be found. On the other hand, the Church is the common home
of all those imperfect presentiments which, in their differing im-
perfections, are so often controversially opposed to each other.
It is first of all incumbent on the Church to compare itself with that
perfect reflexion of Christ which in its temporal consciousness it
is not yet, and to make it its prayer that those of its members
may gain an ever larger influence who are the most fully developed
organs of the divine Spirit for rightly discovering and introducing
whatever may be necessary for the increase and progress of the
Kingdom of God. This is the one presentiment of the Church
which it is absolutely right should become prayer, and in which
therefore all individuals are at one with the whole body. In the
next place, the Church’s duty is first to reconcile the uncertain
elements of prevision (so far as they may be discordant) which flow
from the imperfect common consciousness of individuals, and then
to appease the feeling of uncertainty by turning it into prayer.
Both these things are done through the gathering together of
individuals for common prayer; for through the very form of
common religious action each individual feels himself drawn away
from what is more personal in origin to that which could be the
same in all, and is guided by the content and meaning of such
common action to that which lays hold on all equally. Both
results are aided by the fact that when a difference emerges between
personal presentiments and wishes, each joins in prayer for the
others that, through the facts of the divine world-government,
they may be led ever more into pure joy in God, whether in the form
of resignation or that of thankfulness. And to this all Church
prayers may be reduced.


§ 147. Theorem.—Every prayer im the name of Jesus—but only such
prayer—has the promise of Christ that tt is heard.


Expos. simpl. xxiii. : Oratio fidelium omnis per solum Christi interventum
soli deo fundatur ex fide et caritate—Conf. Belg. xxvi.: Proinde secundum
mandatum Christi patrem coelestem per unicum mediatorem nostrum
invocamus . . . certo persuasi nos ea omnia impetraturos, quae a patre in
nomine ipsius petierimus.—Catech. Heidelb, cxvii.: . . . huic firmo funda-
mento innitamur, nos a deo, quamquam indignos propter Christum tamen
certo exaudiri.


1. When we use the phrase ‘ praying in the name of Jesus,’
we may have more in mind praying about the concerns of Jesus or


lebanese


672 THE CHRISTIAN FAITH (§ 147


praying in His sense and spirit ; but in fact the two things cannot
really be separated. If we could desire to further men’s spiritual
welfare otherwise than in His sense, we should have to conceive
that welfare otherwise than as He did; in which case it would
not be His concerns that were being thus laid before God in prayer.
So far, then, it is true that every prayer is prayer in Jesus’ name
where the petition (whatever it be) is offered with reference to the
Kingdom of God. But the more definite the prayer is, the more
necessary it becomes that its object should be conceived of as in
agreement with the order according to which Christ rules His
Church, so that the person who prays may as such be regarded as a
true and acceptable representative of Christ. It follows that none
can be true prayer in Jesus’ name except that which springs from
the self-consciousness of the Church as a whole, 7.e. such prayer
as in its content keeps the whole condition of the Church in view.
Prayer of this kind certainly belongs to the common prayer of the
Church at any given moment, and that such prayer is heard it is
impossible to doubt. If the Church’s need has been rightly appre-
hended, and if the dominating presentiment has arisen out of the
Church’s whole consciousness of its own inner condition and out-
ward circumstances, then the prayer is charged with the full truth :
it represents Christ’s knowledge of His spiritual body and defines
His ruling activity. Hence, in view of the power received by the
Son from the Father, its content cannot but be fulfilled. Every
other prayer springing from a less perfect Church consciousness,
even though it touch equally Christ’s concerns and arise from a
sincere endeavour to act in His spirit, can look for fulfilment only
in the measure in which it harmonizes with the normative prayer
as just described ; indeed, it is only thus far that it ought to claim
fulfilment. Such prayer, accordingly, can only gain confidence
by subordinating itself to prayer that is normative and seeking
to be heard only on that condition. An example of such ‘ condi-
tional ’ prayer (as it is best named) used by Christ } is found in more
than one book of Scripture; but it merely concerns times and
seasons, and therefore does not conflict with what we said above
as to the utterly right character of His presentiments. From it
we can see how such prayer may be without sin, including as it does
resignation as a corrective of its own uncertainty, and only desiring
to be heard in so far as what is asked for could form part of a nor-
mative prayer. So understood, our views are in perfectly natural
1 Matt. 26428.,


en THE HEARING OF PRAYER 673


accord with the explanation ordinarily given, for the most part, with
respect to conditional prayer, namely, that the man is praying
in Jesus’ name who only desires to be heard for Christ’s sake, or in
so far as what is asked for is God’s will relatively to the divine
purpose in Christ.

2. Still, the objection is constantly put forward that if this
explanation really exhausts the matter, then the whole doctrine of
the hearing of prayer is a delusion. The objection assumes that
we really believe that by prayer we can exert an influence on God,
His will and purpose being thereby deflected. Now this conflicts
with our primary and basal presupposition that there can be no
relation of interaction between creature and Creator ; and a theory
of prayer which starts with ideas like those just indicated we can
only describe (even though it be held by Christians as devoted as
they are believing) as a lapse into magic. True, the promises of
Christ ! are adduced in support ; but either the promises them-
selves are misunderstood, or the conditions to which the promise is
attached are not fully taken account of. For how could one fail
to have doubts regarding what—to use the ordinary phrase—can
only be called a future accident, unless in another respect he took it
to be necessary ? And what can the Christian as such take to be
necessary except that without which a regenerate person could not
be sustained in the state of sanctification, or the Kingdom of Christ
persist and advance ? But this simply means that in this way we
are brought back to unconditional prayer. When Christ makes
faith the condition of prayer being heard, He does not in the least
by faith mean a separate faith that prayer 7s heard, but faith in
Himself, in the full sense of the word, therefore faith in the imperish-
able and supreme value of the Kingdom of God He was founding.
In faith so understood all that has here been set forth is embraced.
Thus by repelling all magical conceptions of the hearing of prayer,
we do the promises of Christ no wrong. For as we do not grant
that things, the prayer for which is heard, take place for that reason,
even contrary to the original will of God, because prayer has been
offered about them, so we do not assert that they would have
taken place even had there been no prayer. But between prayer
and its fulfilment there exists a connexion due to the fact that both
things have one and the same foundation, namely, the nature of
the Kingdom of God. In that Kingdom the two are one—prayer
as Christian presentiment growing out of the whole action and

1 Matt. 1720 and 2472 32,


43


674 THE CHRISTIAN FAITH [§ 147


influence of the divine Spirit, and fulfilment as expressive of Christ’s
ruling activity in relation to the same object. Seen thus, fulfilment
would not have come had there been no prayer ; for then the point
would not yet have arrived in the development of the Kingdom of
God on which the fulfilment must follow. But fulfilment does not
come because prayer was offered (as though prayer could here be
regarded isolatedly as a cause in itself), but because the right
prayer can have no other object than what is in line with the divine
good-pleasure. Neither would it have come, in virtue of the divine
decree, even had there been no prayer (as though the divine decree
bore upon particulars apart from their natural nexus) ; it comes
because the inward state that gives rise to prayer itself forms
part of the conditions under which it was possible for the result
effectually to emerge.

This view of the case meets another objection to the doctrine
of the hearing of prayer, namely, that it is fitted to depress the
activity of believers, or, to express it more fully, that if we believe
in the hearing of prayer we are certain to separate ‘ praying ’ from
‘working’ and substitute prayer for work all through. Over
against the formula ‘ pray, and thou needst not work’ is set (if
the hearing of prayer be denied) the other, ‘ work, and leave no
time for prayer.’ We are bound to reject both views, for, according
to the explanation just given, right prayer only arises when we are
engaged in the activities that go to fulfil our Christian vocation.
Thus every true moment of prayer rests on a moment or element of
action, so that prayer cannot destroy action without being itself
destroyed ; on the other hand, the presentiment expressed in
such prayer as originates otherwise is bound to be purely arbitrary,
and can carry with it no certainty whatever that it is in harmony
with the ruling activity of Christ. No more can action destroy
prayer, for action of such a kind could not be directed upon the
Kingdom of God. The agent is readily satisfied with what he
himself can achieve ; and such action could give no guarantee of
its being under the influence of Christ’s rule.

3. In thus interpreting prayer solely by its bearing on the
concerns of the Kingdom of God, we started with the assumption
that prayer in the name of Jesus is the only kind natural to the
Christian. At the same time, our paragraph does refer to another
kind, familiar to us all from common experience. Now, to prayer
of this sort we can allow no share in Christ’s promise, yet it is so
far suggested by conditional prayer in Jesus’ name that it ought


§ 147] PRAYER IN JESUS’ NAME 675


not to be rejected. For human feelings and emotions always
exist in combination with the God-consciousness, and in this com-
bination they will always find for themselves a less passionate and
more spiritual expression than without it. This sort of prayer (be
it the prayer of piety, or of self-love, whether in its nobler or its
more inordinate form) is not specifically Christian ; whereas the
hearing of prayer is a special promise of the Redeemer to His people.
Hence such prayer can only share in the promise in so far as it
stands in a close relation to the subject of the promise, 7.e. in so far
as the wishes laid before God can also be regarded as needs of the
Church. The prayers of ‘ piety’ (pietas) come nearest to this.
For the higher place we give an individual, the more easily we may
be seduced to believe that it is a distinct loss for the Kingdom of
God that he should be snatched away from his sphere of influence,
or hindered in his work. But on closer inspection we shall always
be compelled to own that except Christ Himself no individual is
indispensable to the Kingdom of God. At a still greater distance
stand all wishes relating to our own external welfare or that of
others, where too we are less easily deceived. But yet, as long
as we have not attained to simple resignation that excludes all
wishes, it is natural and wholesome for us even as Christians to
combine these wishes with the God-consciousness.! It is whole-
some for us, however, only as we are led to simple resignation by the
feeling that we cannot spread these wishes before God in the name
of Jesus. Nay, if this is not the result, the prayer in question
would have to be changed, almost in the moment of utterance, into
a prayer for resignation ; and this would be prayer in Jesus’ name.
But every such prayer is simply an item in the individual discipline
of the soul; it is therefore best that it should be confined to the
circle of personal and domestic life, which is its natural sphere.
But public and common Christian prayers ought always to be
representative of the pure type of prayer in Jesus’ name, without
bringing in subjects the connexion of which with the progressive
development of the Kingdom of God is doubtful. Otherwise it
would be part of the public cure of souls by means of public prayer
to turn common wishes, springing from some worldly interest, into
prayer for resignation. This is the rule which all public inter-
cessions should follow, and scriptural injunctions on the subject ?
must be interpreted in the light of the promise of Christ here treated
as fundamental.
lr Pet, 57: cf, Matt, 6% 82, *y Tim, 2!4, Phil. 4°


SrEconp HALF: THE MUTABLE ELEMENT CHARACTERISTIC OF THE
CHURCH IN VIRTUE OF ITS COEXISTENCE WITH THE WORLD


§ 148. The fact that the Church cannot form itself out of the midst of
the world without the world exercising some influence on the
Church, establishes for the Church itself the antithesis between
the Visible and the Invisible Church.


1. If every person in the world who has been laid hold of by the
Spirit of Christianity were instantly so to become a possession of
the Spirit that every element in his life was solely determined by his
reception of the Spirit’s influence, and he became entirely free from
vestigial traces of his former life, it would certainly mean that the
world might persist alongside of the Church, opposing the Church’s
further advance ; and in this way the world might modify the
Church’s action and throw it back upon itself. But yet the Church,
as actually existing, would none the less be without any worldly
admixture ; the two would be entirely separate and mutually
exclusive societies. In point of fact, however, regeneration is not
a sudden transformation ; even though delight in God’s will has
become the man’s proper self,! there remains in him everywhere an
activity of the flesh striving against the Spirit ; and thus even in
those who taken together compose the Church, there is always
something that belongs to the world.2 Hence Church and world
are not spatially or externally separate ; at each point of human life
as we see it, wherever there is Church, because there faith and
fellowship in faith are to be found, there is world as well, because
there exist also sin and fellowship in universal sinfulness. Each
visible part of the Church, accordingly, when more closely examined,
is a mixture of Church and world; and only if we could isolate
and collect the effects of the divine Spirit in men, should we have
the Church in its purity. Now not merely are these effects certainly
present, inasmuch as the Holy Spirit is only given in this active
union with human nature; they also form a connected and co-
operative whole. Yet they cannot be exhibited in isolation ; it is
only invisibly that they are contained within the whole complex
as the element in it which opposes the world and separates it from


aed SKoyvely GEA IR oe jKelavey 21CEy Set 20 51,
676


*


§ 148] THE CHURCH VISIBLE AND INVISIBLE 677


the world. Thus the invisible Church is the totality of the effects
of the Spirit as a connected whole ; but these effects, as connected
with those lingering influences of the collective life of universal
sinfulness which are never absent from any life that has been taken
possession of by the divine Spirit, constitute the visible Church.

2. By the Invisible Church is commonly understood the whole
body of those who are regenerate and really have a place within
the state of sanctification ; by the Visible Church, all those besides
who have heard the gospel and therefore are called, and who confess
themselves outwardly members of the Church, or who (as we should
prefer to express it) form the outer circle of the Church, inasmuch
as they receive preparatory gracious influences through the medium
of an externally constituted relationship.1 But if this externally
constituted relationship be taken as consisting in the fact that they
have received baptism and call themselves Christians, it must be
pointed out that according to Christ’s original intention there was
not to be any such visible Church, since only those were to be
baptized who had repented and were mature enough to receive,
in and with baptism, the forgiveness of sins and the bestowal of the
Spirit. Thus the called too were to remain outside the Church
until both the community and they themselves were at one in the
conviction that a living fellowship had been established between
Christ and them ; and the outer circle aforesaid was to be composed,
not of members of the Church, but of candidates for the Church.
It may be urged that this original arrangement cannot now be
restored, not merely because of infant baptism, but much more
because the nations have been Christianized en masse and Chris-
tianity has been given civil privileges, and that therefore the
arrangement may in a way be regarded as having been altered by
Christ Himself. Yet this would not make it any more fitting to
describe the fellowship of the regenerate as invisible. Even though
the moment of regeneration cannot be fixed, and many Christians
may feel uncertainty regarding many other Christians, questioning
whether they really are in the state of sanctification ; still, this
uncertainty regarding some cannot make the whole invisible. On
the contrary, the fellowship or community of those who, just because
most firmly settled in the state of sanctification, are most strenuously
opposed to the world, cannot but in this sense be the most visible of
all.2. The body, then, which in ordinary usage is known as the
invisible Church is for the most part not invisible, and what is

CES 115, 2: 2 Matt. 514,


678 THE CHRISTIAN FAITH [§ 149


known as the visible is for the most ‘part not Church. On the
other hand, as we have explained it, the antithesis affirms some-
thing true and necessary. Even if it were possible to keep all the
non-regenerate outside the Church, the whole body of the regenerate
would only constitute the visible Church in our sense of the term,
and, because visible, would for that very reason not be pure from
alien admixture. The pure Church cannot everywhere. be made
visible ; but it is necessary to treat of it separately as the peculiarly
active element in the other. The institutions dealt with in the
doctrines of the First Half are the principal organs of the invisible
Church, and most of all represent its forces at work within the visible.
Here we treat of those general conditions of the visible Church which,
as perpetually self-renewing consequences of the persistence of the
world within the Church, do most to bring to clear consciousness
the antithesis between the visible Church and the invisible.


§ 149. The antithesis between the Visible and the Invisible Church may
be comprehended in these two propositions : the former ts a
divided church, while the latter is an undivided unity; and the
former is always subject to error, while the latter 1s infallible.


1. If we merely recur to what was said above regarding the
sphere and manner in which the sinless perfection of Christ is com-
municated,! we are in a position to assert that what is innermost
in every truly regenerate life is simply the whole truth of redemption;
and it is solely as limited to this domain that we affirm the infalli-
bility of the invisible Church. There is first of all the consciousness
of divine sonship in living fellowship with Christ, a consciousness
which each has for all and all for each ; and to this is essentially
attached the consciousness that in them and for their good there is
being vouchsafed a leading into all truth.2. But when this inner-
most consciousness comes to be particularized in definite ideas, it
no longer has the same full truth; for the individual’s ideas are
the outcome of his previous life and are formed out of his previous
thought and interests, and for this reason regeneration cannot be
a sudden transformation of his whole style of thinking. Hence the
outward expression of the inner truth becomes more or less dis-
torted, and of its organized form the Spirit takes possession only
gradually. The same holds true of the bent imparted to the will
by the life of Christ within us ; it is the pure bent of Christ Himself,
against sin and for the dissemination of His life. But when this


* Cf. § 88, 3. 2 John 1618,


§ 149] THE CHURCH VISIBLE AND INVISIBLE 679


takes shape in particular acts, it comes to be mediated not only
through the view taken of a specific situation, but also through the
purpose in which the action is pre-formed. Both of these, again,
are conditioned by ideas formed during the period when the will
was still the slave of sense ; hence they can no longer give pure
expression to the new inward impulse. Thus, starting from the
point to which the new life attaches itself, the pure and the impure
very soon separate, and appear as the visible and the invisible ;
for that which passes over into the phenomenal consciousness is
eo 1pso no longer pure. Yet both belong to the Christian fellowship ;
for to say that redemption is being realized in anyone, and that he
is beginning to form a part of the believing fellowship, are the same
thing. Someone may say that he acknowledges the distinction
between the pure and the impure as a distinction between the
visible and the invisible, but that the invisible is not really a fellow-
ship, because what is absolutely inward is absolutely isolated too,
and a fellowship (which only becomes possible through means of
self-expression) cannot from its very nature be the pure and the
true. This objection certainly has to be admitted inasmuch as the
invisible Church is not a fellowship by itself alone, entirely separate
from the visible. But even in the ordinary usage of these terms,
this is not the case ; there as for us the invisible Church as a fellow-
ship (and in our reading of these matters the conception of fellow-
ship is given greater prominence than ever) is mediated through the
visible. But in daily experience everyone will certainly make a
distinction between the two. In the one case, reaching over and
abstracting from the confused multiplicity of particular acts (our
neighbour, too, contemplating us in exactly the same way), we each
of us enter into a mutually strengthening and supporting union
with the innermost impulses of the other, and thus constitute an
element of the invisible Church; in the other, we enter into a
fellowship of these very particular acts and forms of self-expression,
so as uniformly to occupy a common area with those who have
closest affinity with ourselves and to repel what is alien—and thus
constitute an element of the visible Church.

It need not be explained that in the infallibility of the invisible
Church we include also its purity, and in the fallibility of the
visible also its sin. This is due partly to the fact that particular
acts have underlying purposes that determine their range and are
themselves subject to the imperfection of the ideas present in the
mind, partly to the fact that the development of religious ideas also


680 THE CHRISTIAN FAITH [§ 149


depends on activities of will, which are affected by the lack of purity
in particular resolves.

2. Closely connected with this is the fact that the invisible
Church is everywhere essentially one, while the visible is always
involved in separation and division. The innermost consciousness
and impulses of believers are nothing but the presence and living
movements of the Spirit itself ; their fellowship is nothing but the
Spirit’s knowledge of itself; and this fellowship must extend
wherever the Spirit is the same, 7.e. over the whole of Christendom.
Since it is only an invisible fellowship, it lacks everything that
might give it a definite form, and everywhere and always it is simply
the direct relationship to one another of all in whom the Spirit
dwells and who, meeting and touching as they do in their innermost
being, include in their fellowship all like souls. That is to say, it is
the common striving of all to recognize everywhere the same Spirit
through what is outward, and draw it to themselves. But particular
forms of outward expression, ideas no less than acts, which are the
channels through which this one fellowship is mediated, are also in
themselves the divisive element in the visible fellowship ; not only
because, by the laws of physics, attractive force radiating out from
the chief controlling points must find its limit somewhere, so that
the connexion is broken, but principally because the uniting con-
sciousness of affinity, being bound up with what to our perception
are sensible differences between men, takes the form of self-love,
thus imposing limit and division.

And here it once more appears, as we have elsewhere shown,
that the Christian fellowship as being one cannot possibly impose
limits on itself, 2.e. cannot actively will to have other fellowships
alongside of it. That would mean either that the attractive power
of Christ stopped at a certain point, His living fellowship thus
narrowing itself to a certain circumference, in which case He would
not have been inspired and endowed as Saviour of the whole human
race ; or the impulse emanating from Him would of necessity be
confined in self-love to the fellowship of believers, thus keeping
others alongside of them who would not share the same advantages ;
and such love could not be identical with the love of Christ.

3. It can, however, be easily shown that in these paragraphs
we have stated the whole difference between the visible and the
invisible Church. Whether we start from the life of Christ within
us or from the action of the Spirit within us, they both issue simply
in the twofold fact that everything human in the individual is ap-


§ 150] PLURALITY OF CHURCHES 681


propriated by the divine, and then as appropriated enters actively
into the communal spiritual life. Now if the still worldly element
in the individual has a disturbing influence on this activity, one of
these activities must thereby be obstructed and diverted ; indeed,
it will be possible everywhere to trace what seems mere negation
or omission to what is positively real, namely, an act. But all
action within the fellowship is productive of fellowship, which
can only continue to exist through actions bearing upon it ; thus
whatever disturbs such action must carry with it division. Similarly,
if the Spirit present in each is one that leads into all truth, every-
thing in the individual that works disturbingly must be a lapse into
untruth. The fact that at this point our paragraph includes in
untruth any aberration of the will in sin is justified by the con-
sideration that when we speak of the Church, we have the actions
of individuals in view only so far as they take place within the
fellowship. And there they can only be disturbing in so far as
they are perceived by others and constitute a process; which
again can only be the case when they are adopted as guiding maxims,
and maxims that contradict the basal forms of self-expression
characteristic of the new life or are asserted as false subsumptions
under maxims that are sound—in either case, therefore, in so far as
they can be traced to error. On the other hand, isolated sins which
spring from no purpose disappear in the life of the fellowship,
without leaving a trace. There is no influence arising from the
still worldly element: within us able to disturb our relationships in
the Church, other than those influences which confuse the Spirit—
error affecting the Spirit as it leads into truth, and division as it
binds and unites. Not only so, these two things are so closely
connected that it is only through the presence of either that the
other can be detected. Much may appear to be a disturbance of
fellowship and yet not be so, unless it is also a defection from
truth ; so, too, nothing that seems to be error or sin really is so
unless it at the same time disturbs fellowship.


First DocTRINE: THE PLURALITY OF THE VISIBLE CHURCHES
IN RELATION TO THE UNITY OF THE INVISIBLE


§ 150. Whensoever separations actually occur in the Christian Church,
there can never be lacking an endeavour to unite the separates.


1. If every worldly element present in individuals is as such
disturbing to fellowship, the visible Church always and everywhere


682 THE CHRISTIAN FAITH [§ 150


has dispersed within it germs of division. But each of those germs
in itself is infinitely small; and in the measure in which these
elements fall apart or unite to form masses, there will in the latter
case appear in the Church more or less division, while in the former
nothing more will result than temporary disturbance in restricted
circles. It is obvious that from the outset those elements united
most powerfully and became most strongly antagonistic to each
other, which sprang from the former religious life of the first Chris-
tians as Jews and Gentiles. Hence even in the age of primitive
Christianity, which we can scarcely help regarding as an exception
to the general divisive tendencies characteristic of the visible
Church, the basis of a separation between Jewish and Gentile
Christians existed in so developed a form that only the counter-
force of the community-forming principle operating in its primitive
strength could delay its actual outbreak. From this it is clear that
the more the uniting Spirit pervades the mass and drives the worldly
elements in it apart, the more these elements will lose their divisive
force. Hence this force was never again present, in particular
differences that arose in the course of the development of doctrine,
with the strength it possessed in the age of heresies and the General
Councils. But, on the other hand, the tendency to division invari-
ably becomes active in proportion as aberrations, which otherwise
would fade away of themselves, almost unnoticed, are strengthened
by some selfish motive.

2. Yet even in the state of division each part of the visible
Church remains a part of the invisible, for in it are found the
confession of Christ and therefore also the activity of the Spirit.
Hence the impulse from which the division sprang will gradually
weaken, and where these different parts of the Church are in contact
with each other, the community-forming principle which is the same
in all will bring its influence to bear against division, and an impulse
towards reunion will arise which of course in the Church as we see
it is subject to the same changes and vacillations as its opposite.
Indeed, even when this impulse fails entirely to make itself per-
ceptible in history, it is none the less moving sporadically in indi-
viduals ; we cannot but assume this if we are right in believing that
the Holy Spirit cannot wholly disappear or be banished from any
part of the Church, nor can it ever neglect any of its essential
functions.

Still, the undeniable experience that apart from this there are
frequently also efforts at union which do not originate in the Spirit


§ 151] SUSPENSION OF FELLOWSHIP 683


of the Church, and the success of which cannot therefore be regarded
as a gain, reminds us that there may also be divisions which are not
due to the worldly elements in the Church, but must ultimately
be reckoned among the effects of the Holy Spirit. So that the
truth we have established can only be of subordinate importance,
and seems to call for further definition. But just as those unions
may be only apparent, and the united elements may certainly tend
to separate from the whole body in some other fashion, so too that
which is in fact only seeking closer union within the great fellowship
in a way that will do it’no injury, or again that which is really a
return to a formerly abandoned fellowship with earlier forms of
the Church, may seem to be a division, and yet not be such. Hence
it is universally true that the Spirit unites, and that it is the fleshly
mind that disunites. But the application of this may be difficult ;
and when several communions separated from each other exist
side by side in Christendom, it must be left to criticism to decide
on which side the disuniting principle is entrenched, and which
therefore is responsible for division. This is a question which it
will often be as difficult to solve as the question which of two sides
in a war has been the aggressor.


§ 151. First Theorem.—The complete suspension of fellowship between
different parts of the Visible Church is unchristian.


1. What was said in the Introduction ! about religious fellowship
as such, can also be said of Christendom in view of its wide ex-
pansion over so great a number of peoples and tongues, namely,
that no uniform sort of connexion between its various members is
possible, not merely owing to unlike internal affinities and external
contacts, but also owing to the unequal distribution of the common
Spirit. It is natural that the first of these unlikenesses should be
connected with the influence of language and of the whole system
of social relationships, and that Christians who speak the same
language and belong to the same nation should form a separate
communion. But such national and territorial Churches are simply
the form in which alone, by the appointed divine order, a larger
fellowship is possible ; and they by no means involve a suspension
of fellowship with other Christians, for fellowship can exist after
as well as before, once the natural conditions for it are present. The
same is true of those societies (always strongly marked in external
form) of Christian people who, drawn by various affinities, gather

1 § 6,


684 THE CHRISTIAN FAITH [§ 151


specially round those who give a strongly original expression to their
individual thought ; for this too can happen without any existing
fellowship with other parts of the Church being suspended. It
only begins to be suspended when more restricted societies which
have originated in the manner just described get into antagonism
to each other, and find themselves unable to enjoy their own peculiar
life without drawing apart from others and shutting the door upon
them. Such a polemical relationship is certainly a suspension of
fellowship, and yet only in part. Even though controversy should
actually break out over their incompatible peculiarities, it really
depends solely on the interest which each side has in the other, and
thus is merely the mode in which under the given conditions fellow-
ship can exist between them. Nay, since it is implied in the case
that the lowest common denominator on which in controversy they
fall back is a Christian principle, they cannot fail (if each side
is to understand itself and the other) to distinguish the non-con-
troversial region from the controversial, by saying that they main-
tain a different kind of fellowship in the former region and in the
latter. Hence a complete suspension of fellowship only arises when
each of the two communions refuses to recognize in the other any
element that is identical simply because it is Christian; that is to
say, when all religious communications between the two have
ceased, and no sort of Church hospitality obtains between them
which would not be shown by either to non-Christians. In that
case, all they still have in common is the empty name of Christianity.

z. A complete suspension of fellowship in this sense is un-
christian as long as the communion that has been cut off retains its
historical connexion with the preaching of the gospel by which it
was founded, and does not, itself breaking the connexion, trace the
origin of its present form to a different revelation. For as long as
in any given communion the acknowledgment of Christ is still found,
the action of Christ must be telling there, in however hampered a
form ; while, if we cast loose from this, then, since all who have been
received into the living fellowship of Christ ought to have fellow-
ship with each other, we are excluding and separating ourselves
from the unity of the invisible Church.! On this principle, even
heretics in the narrower sense (much more, later degenerate forms
in which other communions say they find heresy) are still part of


* Quidam ita perturbant ecclesiae pacem, ut conentur ante tempus separare
se a zizania, atque hoc errore excaecati ipsi potius a Christi unitate separentur,
August., de fide et opp. c. 4.


§ 152] SUSPENSION OF FELLOWSHIP 685


the Church, and fellowship with them ought not to be completely
suspended. Indeed if, to fix a limiting point, we consider that in the
most heretical of all, e.g. Manichaeism, elements non-Christian in
origin are mingled with Christian, and if, on the other hand, the
Indians (say) were ready to acknowledge Jesus as one of their many
divine incarnations (which would be merely the introduction of one
Christian ingredient in an unchristian whole), we should not own the
latter as Christians in any sense,! but neither should we describe
them as heretics. Thus for external fellowship we can fix no other
limit than this, that we ought not to break completely with any
communion which persists in attaching itself to the Christian tradition
and on its side cherishes the desire to belong to the Christian Church.

Clearly, too, between all religious bodies of which this holds
there is no complete suspension of true Church fellowship ; and so
round the whole compass of the field there is exhibited the unity of
the Church invisible. But this all-pervading fellowship consists not
merely in the fact that each acknowledges the scriptural baptism
of the others, but in this, that all can look back in common to a
primitive period of the Church which in the main extends much
farther down than Scripture and the Apostolic Age; that each
accords to the others the right to expansion at the cost of the non-
Christian world ; and that they accept each other, if not in the
fellowship of other forms of Christian work, at all events in the
fellowship of this work of extension.


§ 152. Second Theorem.—All separations in the Church are merely
temporary.


1. If between the separate portions of the Church, fellowship is
not completely suspended—if, that is, each separation is relative—
we must recognize (if each part is conceived as having a life of its
own) that in each there is a twofold movement : at one time the
motive of unity is more prominent, at another this weakens and the
motive of separation becomes stronger. This of itself implies the
possibility that if a moment of the first kind should coincide with
the emergence of a new antithesis within the whole, the previously
active motive of separation might merge in the latter, and the
particular Church which had hitherto stood by itself thus throw
itself wholly on one side of the new antithesis, so becoming an integral
part of it, and its previous character passing over with it as a merely
subordinate feature. Or the Church in question may break up

1 It is probably only to individuals of this kind that 1 John 4? refers,


686 THE CHRISTIAN FAITH [§ 152


altogether, some of its members turning to one side of the new
antithesis and some to the other. In this case, however, the old
antithesis will gradually lose its intensity, having become sub-
ordinate to the new one. And even without this, if any of the other
circumstances change, the interest felt in the old antithesis may so
decline that it no longer retains power to hold a special communion
together. Or, to assume the best that could be said of such a
particular Church, namely, that it rests on some spiritual peculiarity
which the Spirit appropriates as a special instrument, even such a
case, spatially limited as it is, is one of merely transient validity.
This is a view, however, which it is only possible to take of such
communions as show Christian piety assuming all round an in-
dividual form; there must be greater transience in proportion as
the unity that forms the core of the particular communion is small
and inadequate. Hence no special communion ought ever to be
based on the peculiarities of a specially prominent individual, and
no communion has the prospect of long life which seeks to base
itself merely on divergent moral practice in the absence of relatively
different doctrine, or conversely simply on certain peculiar doctrines
in the absence of different ways of life.

To the more fixed divisions belong also those which rest on
physical grounds and are delimited by national affinities or by
language. And yet for one thing these natural forms are themselves
temporary ; for another, Christianity more than anything else has
exerted a helpful influence on the inter-communion of languages and
peoples. Hence inward forces of division often overflow these
limits; at one time they bind together the Churches of different
peoples and tongues in a whole of like spirit and form, at another
they sever in opposition elements that naturally belong together.

2. From this it follows of itself that the zeal with which the in-
dividual clings to his particular communion can only be genuine, in
the sense that no injury is thereby done to full interest in the all-
combining unity of the Church invisible, if it is kept within certain
limits. The essential thing is that each should love the special form
of Christianity to which he adheres only as a transient form of the
one abiding Church, though a form that involves a temporary being
of its own. A love so qualified is very far from indifference, for it
starts with the fact that it is only through his special communion
that each stands in union with the whole Church. But equally it is
very unlike the partisan assumption, often to be met with when


1 Cf. 1 Cor, 112,


§ 153] FALLIBILITY AND INFALLIBILITY 687


the ardour of ecclesiastical antagonism has risen to a certain point,
that antagonism can only be removed by the other side coming
over to our side. The extremes here (which need not now be
touched upon) we usually describe by the terms ‘ indifferentism ’
and ‘ proselytizing.’ But to accept in advance the position that a
form already acknowledged to be temporary will one day actually
disappear is not indifferentism in the least : that can only be charged
on one who is unable to regard his relationship to the communion
to which he belongs as more than casual, and is unconscious of
having any inward reason for decision one way or the other. Nor
is the effort to commend one’s own communion in the strongest way
to members of other communions what we call proselytizing in the
bad sense, otherwise Christianity as such, and Evangelical Christi-
anity in particular, would have been objectionable from the first.
No: nature itself prompts to such efforts whenever in another com-
munion we see an enervation or corruption of Christian piety.
Indeed, in the partisan assumption just mentioned, this very fact is
accepted generally, and therefore the effort, if organized on this
basis, is justified as an effort operating on universal lines ; and for that
reason it ought not to be charged upon the members of an opposed
communion as unchristian. Proselytizing of the objectionable type
is that which regards the extension of one’s own communion as an
absolute end, and uses individuals for this purpose as mere means.


SECOND DOCTRINE: THE FALLIBILITY OF THE VISIBLE CHURCH
IN RELATION TO THE INFALLIBILITY OF THE INVISIBLE


§ 153. As in every branch of the Visible Church error is possible, and
therefore also in some respects actual, so also there is never
lacking in any the corrective power of truth.


1. Every error, in so far as it is an act of thought completed
with knowledge and will yet not in agreement with the object
thought of, is sinful in character, and hence must be in general
overcome or prevented by the increasing action of the Holy Spirit,
not directly, but by the Spirit’s counteracting its sinful cause. Yet
here we speak solely of truth and error in the religious sphere.
What was said above! regarding the absolute purity of impulse
must be applied here ; yet error is possible everywhere, alike in the
formation of religious ideas and in the religious formation of pur-
poses, and possible on every point. If a sensuous movement of


1§ 110, 3.


688 THE CHRISTIAN FAITH § 153


feeling should pervert a purpose unconsciously, it is possible that
the will, as it bears on religious ideas, may be perverted at the same
time, and error must then enter into every part of the execution
of the purpose. And so long as the view we take of our relations
within the Church may be corrupted in this fashion, no purpose
can be formed wholly without error, so that no real element of life
in its fulness has its being in pure truth ; in every act of the religious
consciousness truth is more or less infected with error. The
formule just used reflect the whole circle and compass of error as
it mingles with the action of the Spirit of truth, and at every point
each individual will find the source of falsification in himself ; his
own consciousness will not suffer him to doubt that error is every-
where real, although in particular cases it may be reduced to scarcely
perceptible dimensions.

It is equally certain, however, that even if in this or that quarter
of the Church error has accumulated in mass, yet we cannot suppose
that any part of the Church, organized as a separate whole, could
be wholly devoid of the action of the Spirit of truth. Where ac-
knowledgment of Christ forms the basis of common life, a foundation
is thereby laid for all worship of God in spirit and in truth, even if
corruption of such worship should be the most conspicuous feature
of the body in question. This follows from the simple fact that in
no branch of the visible Church (even though the sacraments were
absent or had to be regarded as absent in consequence of the
abnormal style of their administration) is there lacking the recogni-
tion of Scripture or the Ministry of the Word of God. Hence in
every communion there are at least some who rise superior to pre-
vailing errors, and in whom the germs are to be found of a more
precise development of truth.

2. Our statement, however, assumes the presence of error every-
where, if only in a minute degree, and thus appears to contradict
what we formerly asserted about Scripture.! For if even Scripture
be so exposed to the possibility of error as in some degree to contain
it, it cannot be the norm of all religious thinking ; for its normative
authority, thus communicated to error, could only spread and con-
firm it. In that case truth would have to find within the Church
some other firm seat, so as to bring its corrective forces to bear on
the errors contained in Scripture itself. But at the moment we
have to do not with Scripture as it lies before us now, but with its
origin ; and in perfect consistency with what has just been said


+ §$ 129 and 131,


§ 154] THE VISIBLE CHURCH AND TRUTH 689


we can easily make the admission that even in the religious think-
ing of the Apostles the general possibility of error became a reality
here and there without affecting Scripture, for Scripture precisely
as a collection of all that was freest of error was brought together
under the Spirit’s guidance. Nay, Scripture itself testifies 1 to the
fact that human error occurred as a passing phenomenon even in
the thought of the Apostles, and allows us to surmise from this how
perhaps still oftener the first movements of error may have been
suppressed before their influence could make itself felt. Hence in
the second place (in order not to sever its natural connexion with the
rest of things) we may well admit as regards Scripture that among
the many peripheral ideas which prevailed at the time yet were not
ultimately given a place in the Bible, but none the less belonged to
the thought-processes of the sacred writers, slight traces of human
error might have been found. This does not in any way detract
from the normative authority of Scripture, or from the influence of
the Holy Spirit in its composition.


§ 154. First Theovem.—No presentation of the Christian religion
issuing from the Visible Church contains pure and perfect
truth.


1. If it be the case that Scripture itself is not such a presenta-
tion issuing from the visible Church, but rather itself constituted
the visible Church, Scripture does not so far come under the scope
. of our paragraph. But the objection might well be raised that the
very principles which our paragraph affirms suggest that error will
be at its minimum in all acts of ordination, and hence in the appoint-
ment of those persons in whose hands the duty is placed of purifying
pre-existing ideas for the dissemination of Christian truth. If each
of these persons, taken by himself, was exposed to error, then in
the discharge of this duty the controlling power of the common
Spirit must have manifested itself in the fact that wrong individual
tendencies in the community cancelled each other out. This, how-
ever, would imply that every such tendency found its exact counter-
weight in some other. It is true that in the whole body all possible
tendencies exist ; but if the whole be divided by inner differences,
the onesidedness of each part of the whole cannot find its corrective
opposite within itself ; each particular Church may err even in its
official presentations of truth. But from this it does not follow
that if there was a time when the Church was as yet undivided, the

1 Acts 1014 16’, Gal. 21.


44


690 THE CHRISTIAN FAITH [§ 154


presentations then given were pure and perfect truth. For the
tendencies which cancel each other are not all present in the Church
at the same time ; ages too can be onesided, in ways that can only
be cancelled in a later age. Indeed, if we are bound to hold (and
it is a position which alone can justify the existence of the Evangelical
Church) that specially inspired individuals may exert on the whole
body a reforming influence, and an influence which at first was not
official, it at once follows that what has its seat in the official
organization of the body is not the reforming power, but the need
for reformation. This is a condition of things which may arise any-
where and may recur periodically, wherever and as long as the relation
between the whole body and individuals varies between preponder-
ating spontaneity and receptiveness on the one side or the other.
2. No definition of doctrine, then, even when arrived at with
the most perfect community of feeling, can be regarded as irre-
formable and valid for all time. This is pre-eminently true of
definitions which arose after controversy as presentations put forth
by a larger or smaller majority, for controversy more than anything
else rouses all those impulses that lead to error. Hence no one can
be bound to acknowledge the contents of such presentations as
Christian truth except in so far as they are the expression of his
own religious consciousness, or commend themselves to him by their
scriptural character. On the other hand, the revision of the
Church’s public doctrine is a task in which every individual is bound
to take a share, testing the established ideas and propositions in the
measure of his power and the helps at his command ; he has rights
in this matter, in the exercise of which he must be left free. Still,
through the whole course of this work there runs a natural agree-
ment with regard to the principles on which, and the aims with
which, error is to be counteracted ; but even this agreement is a
thing of gradual formation in each Church, and can only arise when
the Church has come to self-consciousness. Hence we must always
reflect with satisfaction that as regards the doctrines which had
come to be matters of controversy, the incipient Evangelical Church
declined to submit to the decisions of a General Council; but we
can no longer approve of its having none the less accepted all the
ecumenical Creeds ; for these Creeds are but the product of similar
Councils, which besides were due to divisions within the Church,
and hence were not pre-eminently fitted for the ascertainment of
truth. Similarly, it is a matter for satisfaction that the convictions
then held were set forth in brief Confessions for the whole of Chris-


$ 155] THE REMOVAL OF ERROR 69t


tendom, which was the first thing to give reforming influences acting
on the whole body their assured place ; but it is a matter of regret
that by means of these very documents (as if they had been irre-
formable) an effort was subsequently made to hinder the perform-
ance of the very task to which they owed their birth.


§ 155. Second Theorem.—All errors that are generated in the Visible
Church come to be removed by the truth which never ceases to
work on tt.


1. This paragraph is so closely connected with the previous one
that, on the whole, no objection can reasonably be made to it. If,
however grave it be, error is only attached to truth in the way just
described, its influence within each organic part of the whole body
must diminish in proportion as the Holy Spirit takes possession of
the organism of thought ; and error is restrained by two forces,
prevalent in different degrees at different times: in the individual
whose errors are peculiar to himself, it is restrained by the influence
of public thought, which makes its pressure felt on him from every
side, while in the mass of believers it is restrained by the influence —
of men of spiritual distinction, spreading clear views ever more
widely. If it be thought, however, that in addition to such error
im the truth, there exists in Christendom also absolute error from
the truth, and that different methods must therefore be adopted
for dealing with 7, the matter really stands thus. Not merely may
certain ideas issue from an imperfect faith in Christ—they may
even be directed against other ideas that reveal a faith more perfect—
yet none the less underlying them may be that truth which in the
Church remains ever the same. On the other hand, conceptions
and maxims which in no sense issue from the Christian consciousness,
and of which accordingly it cannot be said that they constitute
merely error 77 the truth, belong to Christendom only in so far as
those who cherish them have become subject in other ways to the
influence of the Christian Spirit, although as yet they are not
definitely aware of the fact. For where no relation to the Spirit
exists of any kind, there no part of the visible Church exists ; and
in that case the Church has to do with the wrong ideas of individuals
only in so far as they offer a point of attachment for its self-
expanding action. In the first case, however, even where there is
absolutely no Christian truth on which it seems to rest, error is only
a forerunner of such expansion, for it means that already a point
exists from which the Christian consciousness may spread.


692 THE CHRISTIAN FAITH oteeee


2. But of course it is impossible for our paragraph to fix times
and seasons ; indeed, in the history of Christendom one can actually
mark off important periods in which error grows and gains the
upper hand, while truth is forced back. Yet such phenomena are
more calculated to suggest a revision of our judgment on previous
apparently favourable conditions than to justify the view (incom-
patible with belief in the Kingdom of Christ) that the truth had
disappeared from the Church or been even partially lost. It all
comes to this, that the progress of truth and the consequent removal
of error within the Church visible takes either of two forms—one
when the truth gradually destroys the opposed error, the other
when the error which unconsciously has clung to the expression of
real truth is, with all its effects, cut away from the truth; while
the truth, although seeming to lose in power and influence, is
purified and thereby exerts a completer influence.

Irrespectively of this, history often exhibits an apparent diminu-
tion of the domain of truth due to apostasy, usually under the
pressure of external violence. But if the apostasy is more than
apparent, it means that the Christianity rejected was itself merely
apparent ; for there is no conceivable point of contact between
violence of any kind and living fellowship with Christ. Hence the
Christian consciousness can never really be repressed in this way,
much less wholly exterminated.


§ 156. Appendix to these two Doctrines.—The assertion that the true
Church began with the beginning of the human race and
remains one and the same on io the end of it, must not be taken
as umplying that the Christian Church properly so-called is
in itself only part of a larger whole.

Augsburg Conf. vii.: ‘. . . that a holy Christian Church must ever be and
abide . . . in which the Gospel is purely preached and the holy sacraments
are administered in harmony with the Gospel.’—A pol. Conf. iv.: At sic dis-
cernit Paulus ecclesiam a populo legis, quod ecclesia sit populus spiritualis.
. . . In populo legis praeter promissionem de Christo habebat et carnale
semen promissiones rerum corporalium. . . . Igitur illi tantum sunt populus
juxta evangelium qui hanc promissionem spiritus accipiunt.—Expos. simpl.
xvii. : Quando autem Deus ab initio salvos voluit fieri homines . . . oportet
omnino semper fuisse, nunc esse et ad finem usque seculi futuram esse
ecclesiam.—Haec aliter fuit instituta ante legem inter patriarchas, aliter sub
Mose per legem, aliter a Christo per evangelium.—Agnoscimus hic tamen
diversa fuisse tempora, diversa symbola promissi et exhibiti Messiae.—Conf.
Scot. v.: Credimus Deum . . . omnibus aetatibus ecclesiam suam ab Adamo
usque ad adventum Christi in carnem vocasse.—Conf. Belg. xxvii. : Credimus


—unam ecclesiam catholicam. . . . Haec porro ecclesia et ab initio mundi
fuit et usque ad eius finem perdurabit.


§ 156] THE CHURCH NOT OLDER THAN CHRIST 693


I. It is not merely the last-quoted Confessions on the Reformed
side which definitely assert the unity of the Old Testament and the
New Testament Church ; the same is the case on the Lutheran side.
Some people might infer the opposite from the language of the
Augsburg Confession, but the same view as the Reformed is unmis-
takably expressed in the authentic explanation of that Confession
—the Apology. Only in the Saxon Confession does Melanchthon
appear in a more cautious mood ; in his examples there he goes no
further back than the birth of Christ. But he really does this in-
tentionally ; his inconsistency is only apparent, for, after all, Christ
could not have exerted any redeeming influence on Simeon and
Hannah and the others there named.t_ But Melanchthon indubit-
ably regards the faith of Simeon and the Messianic faith of earlier
times as being of the same type. If this unity of the Church from
the beginning were to be understood (as appears from one passage)
in the sense that Christ was the same for the third period as Moses
was for the second, our divergence from these credal statements
would be even greater. But we appeal to what was said above on
this subject.2 The one point we are concerned about is to define
more exactly the difference between our paragraph and these credal
passages. Both sides start from the position that the Church only
exists where there is faith in Christ ; the Confessions, however, assert
that this Church has been in existence from the beginning of the
world, whereas we hold that it only began with the personal action
of Christ. The Confessions therefore must assume that faith in
Christ existed before His personal action, but we make such faith
conditional on, and derive it from, His personal action: this, then,
is the first point we have to decide. But along with this goes the
fact that, while we both start from the position that faith saves, the
Confessions assert that the personal action of Christ is not necessary
to effect human salvation, but we hold that the saving love of God did
not become effective till Christ appeared ; and the question arises
whether, in point of fact, we have to choose between these positions,
and on what principle in this instance the choice is to be arrived at.
Now these paragraphs are not in themselves utterances of our immedi-
ate consciousness ; also by its negative form our paragraph shows
that it has been constructed simply in contrast to positions which
we do not share ; hence, in the comparison now to be undertaken, we
can recognize no other criterion than agreement with what has already
been established as the expression of our immediate consciousness.


1 Repetit. Conf. (ed. Twesten), p. 164. US Ted, Oe


604 THE CHRISTIAN FAITH [§ 156


2. As regards the first point, we have already shown ! that the
fulfilment of Old Testament prophecies does not constitute them
grounds of faith for us, in the sense that we believe in Christ because
He was foretold as that which He was later found to be ; this could
be no ground of faith in our evangelical sense. But this certainly
does not make it impossible that before Christ appeared, promises as
such might have become for men a ground of salvation. Given an
acute sense of sin and of the need of redemption, this yearning
might (if a Redeemer were promised) attach itself to the promise,
and a presentiment might arise of the salvation of future ages in
fellowship with Him—a presentiment which as sympathetic joy
might in a sense overcome the feeling of personal unblessedness.
Even granting so much, this was no more than a shadow-life, a
dim premonition of the Christian Church, not the Christian Church
itself. All we say is that the Church exists wherever there is faith,
because faith is the complete appropriation of Christ and is, in
addition, of an essentially fellowship-forming character. In the
case in question, it is true, we can in a way admit the appropriation
of Christ’s blessedness, not however the appropriation of His per-
fection. And this faith in the Messianic promises was never any-
where in the Old Testament a fellowship-forming thing ; that the
existing fellowship rested on the Law is obvious historical fact.
Hence it is no adequate statement of the difference merely to
concede that there was one kind of symbols so long as the Messiah
was promised and another after He appeared; on the contrary,
faith itself changed in kind, and in the time of the Law true New
Testament faith was merely in the future. Indeed, the position
conceded above is incapable of proof, namely, that Messianic
promises in the Old Testament really contained the idea of a Re-
deemer in the sense that we, along with the Protestant Confessions,
accept, or that in this sense they offered a Redeemer to the con-
sciousness of sin as we understand it. But if it is sought not merely
to affirm all this, but actually in respect of the perfection of Christ
as it works upon us and of the bond of brotherly love to identify
faith before Christ appeared with faith as we know it, it will have
to be admitted that the hearers of the promise were able to con-
struct the idea of sinless perfection out of extremely imperfect
indications, and not merely construct it but put it in action. And
this, of course, leads to the position that the actual appearance of
Christ was not necessary for our salvation, and that nothing more

1 § 14, Postscript. 2 Cf, Gal, 32% 23,


§ 156] THE PRAEPARATIO EVANGELICA 695


was requisite than that all the time the promise should be kept
alive.

3. However little we may agree with this, it looks as if equally
inconvenient consequences followed from our own position that
men did not attain to salvation before Christ appeared. The
inference, however, that the saving love of God only began with the
appearance of Christ, we must forthwith qualify (as our principles
demand) by saying that it was only the temporal manifestation of
that love which then began. Put thus, there can be no objection
to its acceptance ; for it simply means that we and the whole human
race find ourselves in the same case as even now every individual
does who for the first time comes to enjoy redeeming love through
becoming regenerate. In the same way, until the appearance of
Christ humanity was in a condition of living under preparatory
grace—the whole of humanity, and not merely that descending
succession of persons through which we are led by the Jewish
historical books, from Adam and the patriarchs to the founding of
Mosaism. For this preparatory grace was manifested in every
place where, and in the measure that, there were to be found the
workings of the divine holiness and righteousness ; and from this
point of view we obtain that very equality between Jews and
Gentiles which Paul took as his starting-point. This harmonizes
more closely than may at first sight appear with the mode in which
Paul relates Christ’s appearance to the promise and the faith of
Abraham, when he argues that the preparatory divine grace was
not manifested in a special or exclusive fashion in the statutory Law,
but pre-eminently in the fact that monotheism should have had a
place kept for it ; and action so motived is faith, which can equally
well be regarded as obedience. It therefore was reckoned to
Abraham for righteousness, because he now became the instrument
of preparatory divine grace, and in this relation to future generations
could through his faith be an object of the divine favour. In this
sense, then, we may also accept a justification for Christ’s sake
before Christ, analogous to blessedness in sympathy with the future ;
and thus scattered rudiments of the Church, although not the Church
itself. But if for the position that from the beginning of the human |
race there has existed a true Church, there be substituted the position
merely that from the beginning there has never been any source of
salvation for men, or any ground of divine favour towards men,
other than Christ—to this there can be no objection.


TuirD DIVISION: THE CONSUMMATION OF THE CHURCH


§ 157. Since the Church cannot attain to tts consummation im the
course of human life on earth, the representation of ats con-
summated state is directly useful only as a pattern to which
we have to approximate.


1. The Holy Spirit, as the common vital principle of the Church,
is of itself the sufficient reason of this consummation; but, His
action being subject to the laws of temporal life, the consummation
can only arrive when all opposition is so completely overcome that
in the field of His activity nothing in time remains which is hostile ;
when, that is to say, all the influences of the world upon the Church
have exhausted themselves. This implies first of all that Chris-
tianity has spread over the whole world,! in the sense that no other
religion survives as an organized fellowship. As long as these
antiquated and imperfect forms of religion persist alongside of
Christianity, striving to maintain themselves side by side with the
Church, their character will be so deeply impressed on their adherents
that when these have been captured by Christianity, whether
individually or in the mass, they will (even if it be unconsciously)
carry over many corrupting elements, which must prove a source
of division and error. Now our self-consciousness testifies that in
general the origination of faith in the Redeemer is not conditioned
by any special circumstance, but depends solely on the common
consciousness of sin which can be evoked in all, as well as on the
equally universal faculty, due to the sameness of human nature
everywhere, of receiving a specific impression from the Redeemer.
We therefore cherish the hope that the expansion of Christianity
will be accelerated in proportion as the glory of the Redeemer is
ever more clearly reflected in the Church itself.2 It is an undeniable
possibility that this might take place in the course of human history ;
yet we cannot forget that during all that time the propagation of
the species goes on, and that sin develops anew in each generation.
Thus even assuming that the power of sin is being ever more widely
and thoroughly repressed, and hence more easily broken, the Church
is thus ever anew admitting worldly elements. Thus it is always


TRO en 125.928) 2 Eph, 12%. 28 221. 22
696


§ 157] THE CONSUMMATION OF THE CHURCH 697


involved in the conflict described above, and hence is never per-
fected. In this state it is usually designated the Church militant,
because it has not only to stand on the defensive against the world
but must seek to conquer the world. Just for that reason, as
conceived in the state of consummation it is called the Church
triumphant, because all that in this sense was worldly has now been
wholly absorbed in it, and no longer exists as its opposite.

2. Strictly speaking, therefore, from our point of view we can
have no doctrine of the consummation of the Church, for our
Christian consciousness has absolutely nothing to say regarding
a condition so entirely outside our ken. We have recognized
Christ as the end of prophecy;! which implies that even the
Church does not acknowledge any gift of the Spirit enabling her to
form a prophetic picture of a future on which (since it lies altogether
beyond human experience) our action can exert no influence what-
ever ; indeed, in the absence of all analogy we could hardly under-
stand the picture aright or retain it securely. None the less, these
prophetic pictures fill a great place in the Church, and it is incum-
bent on us, before pronouncing for their exclusion from this ex-
position, to inquire as to their source. In the first place, reference
must be made to the New Testament predictions of the consumma-
tion of the Church, all of which we certainly must trace back to
prophetic utterances of Christ. Now if these are to be treated by
the rules of art, and yet not to be made doctrines proper, but only
propositions which we receive on testimony, yet which do not stand
in so intimate a relation with our faith as do similar propositions
regarding the Person of the Redeemer, we shall hardly be able to
give them a place in our Dogmatic, or at least only in so far as they
concern the Redeemer and our relation to Him. While, however,
these propositions are not doctrines of faith, since their content
(as transcending our faculties of apprehension) is not a description
of our actual consciousness, the matter takes on another aspect if,
abstracting from the fact that they transcend our present conditions,
we concentrate on the point that they must contain no reference
to anything in our present state due to the influences of the world.
That these influences may be restrained, in a higher degree than
the mere co-operation of individuals could secure, is the constant
object of our prayers; and the consummated Church is accord-
ingly the sphere where such prayer is answered in full measure.
Hence this idea of the consummation of the Church is rooted


1§ 103, 3.


698 THE CHRISTIAN FAITH [§ 158


in our Christian consciousness as representing the unbroken fellow-
ship of human nature with Christ under conditions wholly un-
known and only faintly imaginable, but the only fellowship
which can be conceived as wholly free from all that springs from
the conflict of flesh and spirit.


§ 158. As the belief in the immutability of the union of the Divine
Essence with human nature in the Person of Christ contains
in itself also the belief in the persistence of human per-
sonality, this produces in the Christian the impulse to form
a conception of the state that succeeds death.


1. The meaning of this paragraph cannot be that belief in the
continued existence of personality after death or (as we usually
express it) the immortality of the soul arose in the way here indi-
cated ; for traces of that belief exist everywhere, and especially
in the times of Christ and the Apostles it was prevalent among the
Jewish people. The only thing the paragraph can mean is that
apart from this connexion the belief could not have been given a
place in our Christian Dogmatic. Indeed, the whole of the pre-
ceding argument has been set forth and proved without reference
to this belief, and only one paragraph, that on the ascension of
Christ (which is not directly a doctrine of faith) points in its direc-
tion. So that the reader who so far has found his Christian con-
sciousness reflected in our exposition must own—assuming the facts
of Christianity and our acquaintance with them—that faith in the
Redeemer as it is here described may develop out of a sense of sin
calling for redemption, and that from it we might infer the com-
munication of Christ’s blessedness at every moment of life, includ-
ing the last moment of all, even though we had no conception what-
ever of a life after death. Thus the question naturally arises
whether, and how, this belief would have come to be bound up
with our religious consciousness, had not the Redeemer accepted
and sanctioned it. Only two possibilities are open. Either the
survival of personality would have been ascertained as a truth
through the activities of knowledge, that is by way of objective
consciousness ; or it might have been given us originally in our
immediate self-consciousness, whether vitally bound up with the
God-consciousness which everywhere is fundamental, or inde-
pendently thereof and by itself. As regards the first, it would
mean that the doctrine of immortality belonged to the higher
natural science, and in that case the certainty of it could only exist


eM Sele


§ 158] BELIEF IN IMMORTALITY 699


for those who had mastered scientific method, while others got it
from them at second hand. But this evidently is not how matters
stand ; it is undeniable that on the scientific plane the belief has
always been attacked by some people as vehemently as it has been
defended by others. Indeed, anyone who considers the so-called
rational proofs of immortality more closely will scarcely find it
possible to believe that the idea itself originated with science.
It came from some other source, and what science did was to seek
to combine it with other scientific results; and from the nature
of the case any such procedure must always be liable to attack.
Hence in the event of Dogmatic wishing to make a further use of
the idea of immortality, it is not entitled to adopt these proofs ; still
less is it obliged to scrutinize them and supply their defects. On the
contrary, its duty would be to await scientific demonstration of the
idea, leaving the matter on one side till this was forthcoming.
Otherwise, Dogmatic would be made dependent on a philosophical
theory still under dispute.

As regards the second possibility, if belief in immortality were
bound up with the God-consciousness in general, it would be a
serious error on our part not to have developed it at the outset
when dealing with that subject. This error, however, would have
revealed and revenged itself before now, which in point of fact it
has not done—a circumstance not calculated to predispose us to
believe that the two things are really bound up together. True,
there is an impious denial of immortality which is bound up with
the denial of God; both things go along with a materialistic or
atomistic type of thought ; but there is also a surrender of the
survival of personality which is of a quite different sort, and which,
far from regarding spiritual activity as a mere phenomenon of
matter, or making matter superior to spirit, strictly regards spirit
as the power which produces living matter and conforms it to
itself. From this point of view it may similarly be affirmed both
that the God-consciousness constitutes the essence of every life
which in the higher sense is self-conscious or rational, and that
while spirit is essentially immortal in such productivity, yet of such
productivity the individual soul is only a transient act, and thus
essentially perishable ; in which case every ‘act’ over and above
the definite point reached by evolution and transcending the
definite realm of human existence (to which personality belongs)
would forfeit all significance. Between such a surrender of the
survival of personality and the predominance of the God-con-


700 THE CHRISTIAN FAITH [§ 158


sciousness (even a predominance which insisted on the purest
morality and the loftiest spirituality of life) there would be no in-
congruity whatever. Added to this is the fact that there certainly
is a belief in personal survival which is in harmony with the general
spirit of piety, a belief which regards the presence of the God-
consciousness in the human soul as explaining why the soul cannot
share the general lot of transience ; but there is also a belief which
is impious. For how could this belief have any affinity with the
God-consciousness, if it merely issued from an interest in the sense-
aspect of life, even were that interest in some degree ennobled
and refined ? And yet this invariably is the case when immortality
is postulated for the sake of retribution, on the assumption that no
such thing exists as a pure and direct impulse to piety and morality,
but both are sought only as means to the attainment of perfect
felicity in a world to come. If then it must be admitted that
there is a way of denying the survival of personality in following
which we may be more deeply pervaded by the God-consciousness
than if we accepted it, we must not continue to assert that this
belief and the God-consciousness are bound up together.

2. None the less, it may well be held that belief in the survival
of personality is bound up with faith in the Redeemer. The
Redeemer ascribes such survival to Himself in everything that He
says about His return or reunion with His people ; and (since He
can only say these things of Himself as a human person, because
only as such could He have fellowship even with His disciples) it
follows that in virtue of the identity of human nature in Him and in
us, the same must hold good of ourselves. Self-evident as this may
seem, we must nevertheless inquire whether objections can be made,
and what these objections are, whether to the correctness of the
underlying assumption or the legitimacy of the inference. Objec-
tions of the former kind could only relate to a divergent interpreta-
tion of Christ’s sayings, and so far they would not be matters for
discussion here, but would belong to exegesis. Here it need only be
said that even if in good faith one were to maintain that, in one way
or another, the relevant sayings of Christ are all figurative, and not
to be interpreted strictly, and that He nowhere claims personal sur-
vival, yet faith in Christ as we have here presented it would certainly
still be possible. (For although the surrender of personal survival
as just described would then be common to Christ and to ourselves,
yet this would not necessarily abolish the specific difference between
Him and us.) None the less, a complete transformation of Chris-


§ 158] THE PERSONAL SURVIVAL OF CHRIST 701


tianity would be the result were such a mode of interpretation to
prevail within the Church and be made fundamental to the Christian
faith. And this of itself implies that we cannot assume that such
an interpretation could be put forward in good faith. The case
would not be greatly altered were anyone to impugn the legitimacy
of the inference referred to above on the ground that even if Christ
did ascribe personal survival to Himself, it was an opinion which He
merely took over from current belief without definite personal con-
viction, making no other use of it than He did of similar opinions in
similar cases ; so that His utterances on the point do not belong to
the type which is so closely bound up with His assurance regarding
His own dignity and destiny that neither of these could really be
believed in if those utterances were rejected. In fact, it would
scarcely be possible for anyone to hold sincerely that it was without
personal conviction that Christ rejected the view of the Sadducees,
or that His faith in the irresistible progress of His Word did not
depend on His faith in the persistence of His personality. But if we
cannot deny His firm conviction on the subject, the only further
objection that could be suggested is that the survival of His person-
ality (His belief in which we, in that case, should have to share)
implies nothing for our own; on the ground that His survival
depends exclusively on what is peculiar to Him, namely, the union
of the Divine Essence with human nature which alone constitutes
His human person, and that therefore we must say that just
because the Redeemer is immortal, all other men are not. Such an
explanation would be docetic, and none the less docetic that it is
so only in one particular respect. For the difference between an
immortal and a mortal soul cannot consist, or reveal itself, solely in
the fact that at some time or other one of them really dies ; the
activities and states of each must always and in every respect be
different from those of the other. Hence, if the soul of the Redeemer
were imperishable, but our souls perishable, it could not justly be
said that as man He was like us in all points, except sin. For if it
were to be maintained that originally it was the nature of the human
soul to be immortal, but that each soul becomes mortal by the
transmission of sin, this would imply that the whole original work
of God had been destroyed by sin, and its place taken by something
else. Hence we must put aside a distinction favoured by some, to
the effect that all souls become mortal through sin, and at death
perish with the body, but that through fellowship with Christ be-
lievers obtain a share in immortality and pass through death to life


702 THE CHRISTIAN FAITH [§ 158


along with Him. Either this goes back to an assumption which is
Manichean in spirit, namely, that those who do not attain to living
fellowship with Christ could not in any case have become immortal ;
or, if the others are like them in nature, that very nature must have
been made totally different by regeneration. Nothing remains
therefore but to say that if we take the utterances of the Redeemer
about His eternal personal survival as being imbued with His
perfect truth, as His disciples undeniably did, then all who are of
human race can look forward to survival too. Evenso the Redeemer
continues to be the mediator of immortality, only not exclusively
for those who believe on Him here, but for all, without exception ;
in this sense, that if personal immortality did not belong to human
nature, no union of the Divine Essence with human nature to form
such a personality as that of the Redeemer would have been
possible ; and conversely, that since God had determined to perfect
and redeem human nature through such union, human individuals
must all along have possessed the same immortality as the Redeemer
was conscious of. Such is the true Christian assurance concerning
this belief ; every other guarantee for it, even were it clearer than
efforts at proof would so far lead us to expect, must remain alien
to the Christian mind, at least until this belief comes to be one of
the ideas constituting the complete and universal body of human
conviction.

3. This belief naturally is accompanied by a desire to form and
keep clear ideas as to the condition of personality after death. But
it is wholly impossible for us to claim that in this we shall definitely
succeed. The question as to the conditions of existence after death
(and a knowledge of them must form the basis of any clear concep-
tion) is a purely cosmological question ; and space and spatialities
are so closely connected with times and seasons that equally with
these they lie outside the range of those communications which the
Redeemer had to make to us. Hence all the indications He gives
are either purely figurative,! or otherwise so indefinite in tenor that
nothing can be gathered from them more than what for every
Christian is so much the essential thing in every conception he may
form of existence after death, that without it such existence would
be mere perdition—namely, the persistent union of believers with
the Redeemer. Similarly, what the Apostles say on the subject is
said merely by way of dim presentiment, and with the confession


* The sayings | refer to are familiar to everyone, and are too numerous to
be cited in detail.


§ 159] THE LAST THINGS 703


that definite knowledge is lacking. True, then, as it may be that
each moment of our present life is intrinsically more perfect and
wise the more completely and clearly it embraces both past and
future, we should not seek to determine our purposes by picturing
to ourselves the form of our future life. Such efforts, which spring
from the interest of our sensuous self-consciousness in the survival
of personality, are always sensuous in character, even when nobler
than those of Judaism and Islam; and we must carefully guard
ourselves against allowing them an influence (as though they derived
from our Christian faith) which may only too easily injure Christian
faith and life, and thereby spoil for us the present. Hence, as re-
gards the idea of the future life, what we shall chiefly have to do is
to scrutinize carefully the propositions put forward by others, as
well as the opinions which have become dominant.


§ 159. The solution of these two problems, to represent the Church in
ats consummation and the state of souls in the future life, is
attempted in the ecclesiastical doctrines of the Last Things ;
but to these doctrines we cannot ascribe the same value as to
the doctrines already handled.


1. The phrase, ‘the Last Things,’ which has been somewhat
generally accepted, has a look of strangeness which is more con-
cealed by the word ‘Eschatology’; for the term ‘things’
threatens to carry us quite away from the domain of the inner life,
with which alone we are concerned. This of itself indicates that
something is being attempted here which cannot be secured by
doctrines proper in our sense of the word. The terms have this in
common, that if the beginning of a wholly new and ever-enduring
spiritual form of life be represented as from our point of view ‘the
last thing,’ that endless duration appears merely as the end of a
time-life which, as contrasted therewith, is almost a vanishing
quantity. This can only be justified by bringing in the idea of
retribution, and that idea accordingly becomes dominant. On
the other hand, if the same endless duration be regarded as the
further development of the new life begun here, the brief time-life
appears rather as its preparatory and introductory first stage. The
former view, insisting on the idea of retribution, appeals for sup-
port chiefly to those passages in which Christ represents Himself
as one to whom judgment has been committed ; the latter, based
on the idea of development, to passages in which He says that He
is come to save. Indisputably this latter view is more closely akin


704 THE CHRISTIAN FAITH [§ 159
to the premonition of personal survival as that is demonstrably
present in the Christian consciousness ; on the other hand, the
former is more in harmony with the idea of the consummation of
the Church, an idea which, in order to find a point of attachment
in our present life as a whole, insists on the exclusion of all that can
be called ‘world’ even from the Church’s environment. Thus
doctrines of the Last Things have connexions equally with both
these problems ; each doctrine relates to both. If we tried to form
a Christian idea of a state subsequent to this life, and it failed to
agree with our idea of the consummation of the Church, we could
not believe that it really expressed the absolutely final stage ; we
should have to suppose that there still remained a further develop-
ment, in which the Church would be perfected. Conversely, if
we viewed the consummation of the Church as arriving within the
present course of human affairs, we should have to add something
in thought for the state after death, in order to give it a content of
its own; the material for this, however, could not be drawn from
our Christian consciousness, for its contents are all of the other kind.
Hence it was in the nature of the case that both elements should be
thus conjoined—the consummation of the Church (which we cannot
regard as possible in this life) being placed in that future life of
which we cannot but form a conception, and the idea of that life
(based as it must be on fellowship with Christ) being filled out with
content from the perfected state of the Church. It must be so, if
the new form of life is decisively to transcend the present.

At the same time we are not in a position to exhibit the con-
fluence of the two factors, or to guarantee it. The consummated
Church cannot be thought of as analogous to the Church militant ;
nor do we know whether into the future life we ought to project
the idea of an interdependent common life and work, to which no
proper goal can be assigned. On the other hand, if we seek to
conceive the future life by analogy with the present, as an ascend-
ing development, we cannot but have doubts whether any such
development is possible in the consummated Church. Thus the
solution of one problem seems never exactly to fit the other. We
encounter the same difficulty if we keep to the indications of
Scripture. There much is said by way of representing the con-
summated Church; but it is not so said that we can affirm with
certainty that it ought to be dated subsequently to the end of all
earthly things ;+ and for that reason from of yore many Christians

TP John 6'8=°s" Acts 1°97 Eph a,


§ 159] DIFFICULTIES FOR THOUGHT 705


have actually expected the consummation of the Church here on
earth. Other passages are meant rather to describe the life after
death,! but whether they are also a representation of the con-
summated Church may be doubted.

2. Hence the following paragraphs, which treat of the Last
Things, cannot have ascribed to them at all the same value as the
previous doctrines. It is certainly not to be denied that we are
conscious of our spiritual life as being the communicated perfection
and blessedness of Christ, or that of itself this implies that in every
case only the perfect is the originally real, whereas the imperfect
owes its being to it ; or that this conviction is likewise faith in the
reality of the consummated Church, yet only as an actively motive
force within us, which is the really operative element in every
aspect or moment of life which promotes the Church. If, however,
the distinction (ineradicably bound up with our self-consciousness)
between inner principle and outward manifestation be abolished
(this active principle being also conceived as somehow attaining
to expression in space and time), the position stands on a less
firm foundation. Similarly, the equating of all human individuals
with Christ implies that the general premonition of the imperish-
ability of spirit, even in individual form, becomes certain for the
Christian mind; but this in no way involves any particular way
of conceiving survival. Indeed, we cannot really make a picture
of it either in the form of an infinitely progressive development or
in that of an unchanging completeness ; to such a task our sensuous
imagination is unequal. If, on the other hand, we treat these
paragraphs, irrespectively of their source in our self-consciousness,
as matters simply to be received on the authority of Scripture, even
so they are not comparable to the doctrine of Christ’s resurrection ;
for what is in question there is statements made by the disciples
regarding a fact connected in the closest possible way with their
vocation. True, if we had evidence to show how, in ways we could
reproduce, Christ formed these two conceptions in His own mind,
we should endeavour with perfect confidence to appropriate His
thought for ourselves; for here too we should ascribe to Him
nothing less than a perfectly developed human power of pre-
monition, free from all uncertainty due to sin. But the content of
these paragraphs cannot be so derived. We nowhere find in His
teaching a connected and unambiguous treatment of these subjects,
obviously meant to convey definite instruction about them. In

DP COrt5 seb ntl. 325,
45


706 THE CHRISTIAN FAITH [§ 159


each particular saying either the subject is doubtful, or the outline
drawn is indistinct and the interpretation in a variety of ways
uncertain. Hence there is nothing for it but that we should bring
up those thought-forms which early became prevalent in the Church
and passed over into our Confessions without being submitted to
‘a fresh scrutiny, and should adduce them, under the title of prophetic
doctrines, merely as the efforts of an insufficiently equipped faculty
of premonition, adding reasons for and against. But we give fair
warning that in any new forms which these doctrines may assume, ©
the fancy (for to it belongs everything alien to the scope of our
present experience which is set forth as object of a possible future
experience), if it is to remain Christian, must place itself under the
protection of exegesis, and only elaborate the material which exegesis
supplies. What it must not do is to let itself become the play-
thing of caprice or of alleged new revelations.

3. Under the circumstances, an exact construction of these
paragraphs in a closely knit context is not to be thought of. We
must be content to assume their sense as generally acknowledged,
and let the facts prove that in their regard matters really are as I
have indicated. This means exhibiting the two points—personal
survival and the consummation of the Church—in their relation to
each other, in a picture appealing to the sensuous imagination.
Hence, in the first place, the survival of personality, above all, as
the abolition of death, is represented under the figure of the resur-
rection of the flesh. The consummation of the Church, on the other
hand, is represented in a twofold manner—first, as conditioned
by the fact that no further influence upon the Church can now be
exerted by those who form no part of the Church, it is introduced
in its character as the separation of believers from unbelievers, by
the Last Judgment. But as excluding (in contrast to the Church
militant) all the activities of sin and all imperfection in believers,
it is represented as eternal blessedness. Since the survival of per-
sonality, and therefore also the resurrection of the flesh, had to be
taken as applying to the whole human race, and some mode of
existence had to be found for those separated from believers, over
against eternal blessedness stands (also introduced by the Last
Judgment) the eternal damnation of the unbelieving. It is clear
that, as this last pictorial representation is not an anticipation of
any object of our future experience, it cannot be given the form of a
special doctrine ; all we can do is to treat it as the shadow of eternal
blessedness or the darker side of judgment, These separate pictures


§ 160] THE RETURN OF CHRIST +» 707


fit together into a single imaginative picture, for this reason that
the new form of existence is conditional on the Return of Christ, to
which everything which belongs to the completion of His work
must be related. Hence it seems entirely natural to begin with the
Return of Christ, which introduces all the rest ; in this way the other
items develop out of it, and in relation to it, in their natural
sequence.


First PROPHETIC DOCTRINE: THE RETURN OF CHRIST


§ 160. Since the disciples of Christ could not consider the comforting
promises of His Return* as having been fulfilled by the days
of His resurrection, they expected this fulfilment at the end
of all earthly things? Now since with this is bound up
the separation of the good and the bad, we teach ‘a Return
of Chnist for Judgment.’

Symb, Roman.: 60ev, épxerar xpivew fGvras Kal vexpo’s.—Symb. Nic.: kai
madi épxdmevov wera SdEns Kpivar (@vTas Kal vexpovs* o§ THs Baowelas ovK orat
réhos.—It is solely to this point that the Augsburg Confession refers, Art. 3.
A much fuller statement in Evpos. simpl. xi. Ex coelis autem idem ille
redibit in judicium, etc.—Conf. Belg. xxxvii.: Credimus . . . dominum
nostrum Jesum Christum a coelo corporaliter et visibiliter sicut ascendit
magna cum gloria et majestate venturum, ut se vivorum atque mortuorum
declaret iudicem.

1. From the days immediately subsequent to Christ’s resurrec-
tion we have no record of His having repeated promises of this
kind; rather He speaks exclusively of His entering into His
glory, and refers His disciples to His spiritual presence. But this
could not cause doubt in the disciples’ minds, leading them to
explain the former promises as having been fulfilled already ; for
His words in their context had pointed too clearly to a Return of
Christ, in which He would manifest Himself to the whole world.
Hence the disciples were so deeply impressed by a definite assurance ®
(although not given them in Christ’s name) which interpreted these
sayings of His literally, that later, when the destruction of Jeru-
salem occurred (in distinctly prophesying which Christ had spoken
also of His own future), the question was not even raised among
Christians whether all those sayings might not be referred to


1 Omitting all the passages which are obviously parabolic, we have the
following ;) Matt. 16%7- 2° 2470 o531f. Mark 13°®.,, Luke 217%. 38. John
14°- 18 1618,

2 Core 51292 Thess, 17-292% 2elims 47, 1) Pet45°18 2 Pet. 310.

3 John 212. 28 is surely not sufficiently definite in its terms.

4 Matt, 2879, Luke 247°, John 201”, © Acts 141


708 THE CHRISTIAN FAITH [§ 160


Christ’s future understood in a non-literal way. Accordingly, after
everything Chiliastic had been purged out, the opinion very early
became fixed and almost universally accepted that the Return of
Christ would coincide with the close of the present state of the earth.

2. If, however, we consider more carefully such passages as
are most generally taken to refer to this subject, and also are most
explicit, it turns out either that they excite the suspicion (some owing
to the dates they fix, the others on account of their predominantly
ethical tone) that they are not to be taken literally, or that, even
if we interpret the personal Return literally, still there is much
else in the context which cannot be taken literally on any terms,
because any interpretation of the kind would destroy the whole
unity of the discourse. Yet, apart from this literal exegesis we
have no Biblical warrant for the position that the reunion of be-
lievers with Christ (which is the essential content of our belief in
personal survival) is conditional on such a personal Return ; in-
deed, elsewhere He Himself speaks of the first without any mention
of the second! Still less have we Biblical warrant for believing
that there is bound up with both a prior universal separation of the
good and the bad (of which even Paul says not a word 2), or for
thinking that this event, due to a definite reappearance of Christ,
will be accompanied by the termination of our present form of
existence. Thus all that might go to form a definite picture falls
asunder ; and, as the essential content of our paragraph, there
remains simply this—that (if we substitute the efficacious activity
of Christ for His bodily presence) the consummation of the Church,
regarded as the cessation of its wavering growth and development,
is possible only through a sudden leap to perfection, and on condi-
tion that procreation ceases, as also the coexistence of the good
and the bad; and that, therefore, this leap to perfection must
simply be regarded as an act of Christ’s kingly power. This is
certainly rooted deeply in Christian faith ; even if it does not of
itself emerge as a distinct idea in every mind, yet all feel attracted
by it when presented to them. For in Christ the Divine Essence
is permanently united with human nature ; hence human nature
cannot be so inseparably restricted to a particular planet as to be
involved in that planet’s destruction as resulting: from cosmic
laws. On the contrary, everything pertaining to it must be capable
of being conceived in the light of this union and as an effect of it.

So that in this doctrine everything that is figurative and


1 john 72%: tr Cor, 15798. Thess; 4i*#,


§ 161] THE RESURRECTION OF THE FLESH 709


necessarily uncertain in quality flows from our interest in personal
survival, whereas everything that can be stated with assurance
relates to the consummation of the Church.


SECOND PROPHETIC DocTRINE: THE RESURRECTION OF
THE FLESH

§ 161. Not only did Christ sanction, by figurative utterances + and
also by His teaching,? the idea, prevalent among His race,
of the resurrection of the dead, but He further in His utter-
ances ascribed this awakening from death to His own agency ;
and it is an extension of this His teaching—a perfectly
natural extension based on kindred utterances—to say
that the general awakening of the dead will in a sudden
manner interrupt the usual course of human life on earth.®


1. We are so much aware of the connexion of all our mental
activities, even the most inward and profound, with those of the
body, that we really cannot form the idea of a finite spiritual life
apart from that of a bodily organism. Indeed, the spirit we only
conceive as soul when in the body, so that it is impossible to speak
of the soul’s immortality in the strict sense apart from bodily life.
Since the activity of the spirit as a definite soul ceases at death
simultaneously with the bodily life, it is only with bodily life that
it can recommence. Indisputably, however, the idea of the resur-
rection of the flesh implies something more than this ; it implies
such an identity of life that life after resurrection and life before
death constitute one and the same personality ; and this formed
part especially of the Jewish conception of the matter.* Cleggly,
too, the soul as an individual entity only persists by itself in the
continuity of consciousness, which again appears to us as condi-
tioned by memory ; and memory in its turn is as much bound up
with bodily states as any other mental activity. We cannot then
conceive how under absolutely different bodily conditions such a
unifying memory could get to work; yet in its absence the soul
itself would not be the same. But insistence on this appears to
bring us back to the position which we rejected above-namely,
that the human mind is rigidly restricted to the surface of this
globe. On the one hand, every organism is a product of the planet
on which it appears, and dependent on the specific nature of that


1 Matt. 253!M-, John 52% 29 640. 54, 2 Matt. ages.
Sere Corals caer hess, 4ao 2°, ‘Sake 2028-887


710 THE CHRISTIAN FAITH [§ 161


planet ; hence the similarity of the future body to the present
would imply a similarity of the two worlds; but even memory,
again, in virtue of its organic aspect is dependent on the near
affinity of impressions ; thus, for example, in the present life our
memory of a definite period of time grows extremely faint once the
whole scene has changed. If we further add that, the greater the
excellence of the future life, the less could a definite volition come to
the aid of such memory, it must be owned that the more the soul in
itself remains the same, the more must the future life be a simple,
easily attachable prolongation of the present. But, in that case, the
other point of departure for all these eschatological ideas—namely,
the consummation of the Church—gets less than justice ; for in such
a life as that just described no consummation is possible. Hence
the latter interest compels us, if we wish to escape the other
extreme, once again to limit more strictly the similarity between the
future organism and the present ; and it is on this that the descrip-
tion of the resurrection body as immortal! and without sex? is
based. The first of these qualities, which of itself implies a world
of a quite different constitution, completely gets rid of that interest
in bodily self-preservation which by experience we know to be so
fruitful a seed of strife between flesh and spirit. The second quality,
in addition, guards against the entrance into the consummated
Church of new souls called into being through procreation ; for we
cannot conceive of such souls not being handicapped by natural
forces in the development of spirit, 7.e. we cannot conceive them
without sin. But obviously both qualities are inimical to the
identity of the soul and the continuity of consciousness. The
immortal body will then at every moment and in every function
reveal its difference from the mortal ; and the soul in that case will
be all the less capable of appropriating the share which the mortal
body had in the formation of our present consciousness, and of
retaining itin memory. And as regards the second quality, it is im-
possible to see how, if the relations of sex cease, the organic system
on which they rest can be retained ; or, again, how a male and a
female soul can as such fail to be different. And thus, if owing to
changed organization each soul ceased to be either male or female,
no soul would be the same as before. Thus it is clear that in our
doctrine both points of departure must be provided for, but that
the two really represent different interests ; for the resurrection of
the flesh must be conceived in one way if individuals are to remain


* 1 Cor, 15%. 2 Matt. 2230,


§ 161] THE INTERMEDIATE STATE gk


absolutely the same, and in another if one and all they are to be
merged in the consummated Church. Hence the different items
cannot be combined in an idea capable of clear representation ;
any idea we can form suffers from the indeterminateness peculiar
to these doctrines, a characteristic harmonizing with the special
name we have given them.

2. The general and simultaneous resurrection of all men implies
that those who rise have existed since death in a state different from
that which they enter by resurrection ; and upon this implication
rests the reality of the idea of a Last Judgment. It is naturally to
this intermediate state, as immediately impending, that our sense-
bound interest in the survival of the individual is primarily
directed ; and the question arises whether at our point of view we
possess any rule by which to guide efforts at explanation, or are at
all bound to supervise them. The first would be the case only if we
found something laid down about this state in the New Testament ;
but all the passages ! which might be reckoned in here are either of
uncertain doctrinal character or of doubtful meaning. The second
would be necessary if such explanations contained anything incon-
sistent with our Christian consciousness. Now, the intermediate
state can be conceived of in a purely negative way, as meaning
simply that the old life-activities have ceased and the new have not
yet begun—and this is the idea of the sleep of the soul. To this our
Christian consciousness can make no distinct objection ; but while
thereby, on the one hand, all Christians are made equal (since, alike
for those who first fell asleep and for the last, the interval is nil),
yet on the other hand, if the waking of the soul is to be conceived
as synchronous with the origin of the new body, it is difficult to
imagine how recollection of the former state can simultaneously be
implanted and retained. If the intermediate state be conceived as
a conscious state, Christian faith certainly will insist that it cannot
be a state devoid of fellowship with Christ ; for in that case it would
be a lapse from grace which could not be regarded otherwise than
as punishment, and would mean the reintroduction of an idea which
the Evangelical Church discarded soon after its formation.’ But if

1 Luke 16228- 2348, 1 Pet. 319- 20

2 Art. Smalc. ii.: Quapropter purgatorium ... mera diaboli larva est.
Pugnat enim cum primo articulo qui docet Christum solum et non hominum
opera animas liberare. Et constat etiam de mortuis nihil nobis divinitus
mandatum esse.—Expos. simpl. xxvi.: Quod autem quidam tradunt de igne
purgatorio, fidei christianae, credo remissionem peccatorum et vitam aeternam


purgationique plenae per Christum, et Christi domini sententiis (John 5**
131°) adversatur.


7i2 THE CHRISTIAN FAITH [§ 161


the intermediate period is to be conceived as one of fellowship with
Christ, it must be freed from all resemblance to ancient or even
Jewish notions of an impoverished sort of life in the underworld.
For all the obstacles to blessed fellowship with Christ, which in this
life arise from the sense-world, have fallen away ; the intermediate
state, therefore, must be a state of enhanced perfection. But in
that case it is difficult not to regard the general resurrection of the
dead as superfluous, and reunion with the body as a retrograde step.
Indeed, it looks as if in consistency only one way of escape were ieft
open, namely, to suppose that in the intermediate state each in-
dividual soul by itself is in fellowship with the Redeemer, but that
the fellowship of the blessed with each other, and hence too the
activity of individuals, is conditional on the resurrection of the
flesh, which therefore is necessary to perfection. Still, even on this
supposition, the existence of the Church remains interrupted till the
resurrection, as the existence of the individual does on the former
supposition ; and so one of the two elements comes to be more en-
dangered as the other is better secured. Hence some have taken
the simultaneous general resurrection in a merely figurative sense,
and have wished to infer from other scriptural passages! that for
each individual the future life begins immediately after death.” But
for one thing this means that the soul is already in possession of the
new body when it parts from the old, an idea we find widely
accepted ; on the other hand, the simultaneous Last Judgment and
also (since its alleged purpose has wholly lapsed) the personal Return
of Christ must in that case be taken just as figuratively as the
simultaneous general resurrection. Thus we cannot help wavering
between this more Biblical idea, which represents the action of
Christ, in conjunction with great cosmic changes, as suddenly giving
existence to the future life and the Church triumphant as a great
whole (though at the cost of unbroken continuity), and the less
Biblical view which (though in a fashion which compels us to ask
for scientific proof, since so much emphasis is laid on exact affinity
with the conditions of earthly life) maintains the continuity of
personality as strictly as possible, the consummated Church only


growing little by little out of the earthly life which goes on alongside
of it.


1 Directly, tl I i x 48; indi
er y, though not with certainty, from Luke 234%; indirectly from
* Expos. simpl. xxvi,: Credimus enim fideles recte a morte corporea


migrare ad Christum ... Credimus item infideles recte praecipitari in
tartara.


§ 162] THE LAST JUDGMENT 713


3. If we now turn to the general resurrection, and the pre-
dominant modes of conceiving the subjects treated of in the follow-
ing doctrines, there is one more difficulty to be solved. If saved and
unsaved enter upon utterly different states, there is an unanswerable
case for holding that the new bodies which they receive cannot be
the same in both cases. The organism must be adapted to the
conditions of life which are impending ; and this gives rise to a new
difficulty if we seek to conjoin the idea of the general resurrection
with that of the Last Judgment. If both classes equally become
different at the resurrection, sentence has already been pronounced
upon them before the judgment comes on, and judgment becomes
superfluous ; the more so that such a difference in bodies which
originate simultaneously could not be produced by the action of
identical cosmic forces combined with differences of a purely ethical
kind, but only by a directly creative divine fiat. On the other
hand, if those destined to bliss and those destined to perdition are
still alike at the resurrection, the resurrection is not an execution of
the judgment, and since in one class or the other or in both inward
changes must later take place which transform the organism, the
reality of the idea of the Last Judgment depends solely on these
changes occurring simultaneously, but there is no further need for
the simultaneity of the resurrection of the dead and the transforma-
tion of the living.

Taking all these considerations together, we find that the various
ideas of how the future life is attached to the present aré incapable
of being made perfectly definite. As the essential content of the
doctrine there remains only this, that the ascension of the risen
Redeemer was possible only if all other human individuals too can
look forward to a renovation of organic life which has links of attach-
ment to our present state; and further, that the development of
the future state must be posited on the one hand as dependent on
Christ’s divine power and on the other as a cosmic event for which
arrangements have been made in the universal divine world-order.
The first of these last two ideas is certified as implied in the faith
underlying the endeavour to form ideas on this matter ; the second
hovers before the mind as indicating a problem we can never
completely solve.


THIRD PROPHETIC DocTRINE: THE LasT JUDGMENT


§ 162. The idea of the Last Judgment, the elements of which are like-
wise found in the utterances of Christ, 1s meant to set forth


714 THE CHRISTIAN FAITH [§ 162


the complete separation of the Church from the world, imas-
much as the consummation of the former excludes all in-
fluences of the latter upon tt.


1. The main element in the idea of the Last Judgment, namely,
that Christ will utterly separate the believing and the unbelieving
from each other, so that they are consigned to quite different places
and can exert no further influence on each other, does not at all
involve the consummation of the Church. As has been shown,
the imperfections of the Church are due much less to the influence
of unbelievers mingling with believers in this world than to the
carnal elements still present in the regenerate themselves. Hence
if at the resurrection believers were the same in soul as at their
departure from this life, they would enter the new life, in spite of the
supposed separation, as persons in whom sin, though in process of
disappearing, was still at work. Thus the value which in this
respect is attributed to separation rests solely on an incorrect read-
ing of the distinction between the visible and the invisible Church.?
But if this distinction, as we have understood it, is to cease with the
beginning of the new life, it follows that at that point the regenerate
themselves must discard those elements of sinfulness and carnality
which still cling to them. But this is not effected by the outward
separation itself, and it was for this reason that in his own exegetical
fashion Origen * sought to interpret one of the relevant passages as
indicating an immer separation. Apart from the fact that to have
all worldly and carnal motives and ideas so abruptly torn away
would so far endanger the continuous identity of personal life, such
an inner separation would simply be completed sanctification ;
and, as all sanctification must flow from vital fellowship with the
Redeemer, the Christian consciousness is unable to recognize itself
in any view from which this is absent. Indeed, in any such abrupt
cessation of sanctification, not mediated by our own spontaneous
action, we cannot help finding something magical, which, had it
only been applied to each individual earlier, would have made super-
fluous the whole redemption which depends on living fellowship
with Christ. Thus it always seems as if one of these two things
excluded the other. John does appear to offer a mediating idea
which might reconcile the discord ;4 for if the inner separation is
effected by the perfect knowledge of Christ consequent on His

ICh1§ T2605 Te 2UCL SpA Shear


3 Comment. in Matt. x. 36-40 ses
= Bie at att. X. 2 (on Matt. 13 ), ed. R., vol. iii. p. 444.


§ 162] FUTURE SEPARATION 715


Return, it is a work of redemption. But if considered more closely,
this suggestion too breaks down. Ifthe Return of Christ effects this
change only in proportion to each person’s receptivity, it still
remains that such receptivity is not equally great in all the regener-
ate when they leave this world. So that the complete purification
of the soul due to the appearance of Christ would not be wrought in
each case with equal instantaneousness, but more swiftly in some
and more slowly in others. Hence even this separation would not
be simultaneous ; it would only come to be gradual after the new
life began. If, on the other hand, whether the degree of receptivity
for the knowledge of Christ be higher or lower is a matter of no
importance, the inner separation certainly would be effected
abruptly ; but the same change would necessarily be produced in
the unbelieving, for Christ appears to them also at His Return, and
in them, too, the receptivity in question is present, even in the
worst of cases, in some infinitely small degree. In that case, we
should find this growing on our hands into a sudden recovery of all
souls for the kingdom of grace, which, while making the separation
of persons meaningless, would in itself not be wholly free from an
admixture of magic.

2. If now we turn back to the idea of a separation between
persons according as they have reached the close of life in a state of
belief or unbelief (and it is this idea which has become dominant,
because it seems to be approved by Christ’s own words), we can
hardly deny that it is better fitted to bring about the blessedness of
believers in the new life than their perfection. For if the influences
emanating from the unbelievers mingled with believers are received
by the regenerate solely in their character as organs of the Holy
Spirit, and lead solely to action derived from, and determined by,
the Spirit, many perfections will be evoked thereby, such as we find
likewise in the Christ’s pattern life—perfections which apart from
such influences could never have developed. But it seems to be
otherwise as regards blessedness. The evils due to sin always spread
over the entire common and corporate life ; hence even in the next
life believers, if involved in the same common life with unbelievers,
would have to suffer from the evils these brought with them. But
here too people have not recurred as they should have done to the
idea of living fellowship with Christ. During His sojourn here
Christ also partook in the common life shared by sinners, but we do
not suppose that, apart from sympathy and bodily pain, He was a
sufferer. Similarly, those united to Him in living fellowship will


716 THE CHRISTIAN FAITH [§ 162


experience nothing which tends to hamper their spiritual life and
could therefore be felt by them as evil—just as Christ Himself never
felt bodily pain and sympathy as evils. Besides, even bodily pain
(if a possibility at all in the life after resurrection) would necessarily
be capable of being produced in other ways than through sin, so that
separation would be no guarantee against it. Sympathy, too, would
still be inseparably bound up with identity of nature ; so that the
blessed would still have sympathy with the others, though wholly
separate from them. Thus the separation contemplated at the
Last Judgment remains, even from this point of view, both inade-
quate and superfluous. All that might be said is that it takes place
for the sake not of the blessed but of the others, whether to ensure
that they reap no benefit from what the good might do to alleviate
the evils pervading the fellowship of the new world, or lest in that
very fellowship they might find means of themselves attaining to
communion with Christ. But either this would mean attributing
jealousy to the Supreme Being, an idea against which even the
higher paganism protested ; or it must rest solely on that familiar
and widespread idea of the divine righteousness which in its one-
sidedness looks so like caprice that before we could feel ourselves
entitled, not to say obliged, to regard the idea as in harmony with
the mind of Christ, it would have to be much less equivocal in its
origins, the expression given to it much more decisive, and the
Apostles’ use of it much more comprehensive.

3. The idea of the Last Judgment, then, we are unable to state
in a final form which perfectly satisfies both demands. None the
less, in view of its almost universal prevalence in Christendom, we
must try to elicit its essential meaning. By way of preliminary it
may be remarked that in so far as it can be traced to an all but
vengeful desire to enhance the misery of unbelievers, and to exclude
them from all the redemptive influences of the good, or again so far
as there has contributed to its prevalence a fear lest, even after
attaining perfected fellowship with Christ, we might be pained by
the company of the bad, it springs from an unpurified Christian
temper and obscures the essential meaning of the whole conception.
It follows that this essential meaning can only be what remains over,
when we have completely freed our thought from fear and vengeful-
ness. This appears to consist in the following two points. First,
once our fellowship with Christ has been perfected, we are so com-
pletely freed from evil that even though evil men and evil things be
present, both as such are for us non-existent. Wrong and evil being


§ 163] ETERNAL BLESSEDNESS Vk


thus wholly shut out from the common consciousness of believers,
that consciousness can embrace nothing but the untroubled and
unimpeded fulness of divine grace ; the Church is really then a
wholly self-enclosed body, so that an outlook (and of this we can
never rid ourselves here) that dwells upon opposition and contrast
will there give place utterly to one for which evil has ceased to exist,
because God cannot originate it. Secondly, if we conceive the
Church as consummated, but at the same time suppose that there
still exists a part of the human race which has not been captured
and pervaded by its spirit, such a supposition is possible only on the
assumption that the part in question is completely isolated from all
influences issuing from the Church, which means shut off from all
contact with it. There is indeed one discourse of Christ,! at least
very closely related to this theme, which clearly implies that every
influence (even the faintest) passing from the seats of the blessed to
those who during their earthly life have failed to turn to God,
touches them to better issues.


FourTH PROPHETIC DOCTRINE: ETERNAL BLESSEDNESS


§ 163. From the resurrection of the dead onwards, those who have
died in fellowship with Christ will find themselves, through
the vision of God, in a state of unchangeable and unclouded
blessedness.


1. The state of believers after their full reinstatement in life
may be conceived under two forms, either as a sudden and unvary-
ing possession of the highest, or as a gradual ascent to the highest—
an ascent, however, which like the development of Christ Himself
must be thought of as without retrogression and without conflict.
Both views have their own special difficulties, when we try to fill
in the general outline and to shape the mere formula into a clear
imaginative picture. As regards the first, we can hardly explain
to ourselves how the consummation can be reached by us, or im-
planted in us, just at the resurrection, without destroying all con-
nexion with our present life ; which would not be the case if this
life were gradually forgotten, like our childhood, as we grew by
degrees in perfection. Still more, if we are to conceive a perfection
incapable of any further increase—and this in a finite being com-
pletely severed from all that admitted of cultivation, or required
it—then we find it embarrassingly difficult to imagine how this

bE ukernor2s*


718 THE CHRISTIAN FAITH [§ 163


being, now deprived of every object for its activity, could express its
perfection. We cannot separate communal life from man’s nature
as such, still less can the Christian conceive himself apart from such
a life: for the fellowship of believers with each other and that
of each with Christ are one and the same thing. Not only so;
a common life, devoid of every object of common activity, a life
which therefore must limit itself exclusively to the mutual pre-
sentation of the contents of the inner life, can scarcely be thought of
as an absolutely perfect state. It is true, we have in our present
life an element which is akin to such a state, namely, common
worship, and all esthetic representations of the God-consciousness.
But we find it deplorable that for such things pious Christians
should neglect their practical obligations ; such a life impresses
us as meagre ; hence we cannot bring ourselves to think that the
highest perfection of existence can be reduced to such an alterna-
tion of giving and receiving empty and aimless representations.
Instead, our imagination strains to discover some work which in
that life might be entrusted to us. On the given assumptions,
however, nothing remains but either the cultivation of some external
nature or the oversight of some less perfect spiritual world—both
such that occupation with them could not disturb our bliss. But
we do not find in Scripture any encouragement to such an idea,
nor have we the power to fill out such a formula with real meaning.
It is no easier, supposing we try to imagine that at the resur-
rection there will begin a perfection which rises up and up to infinity.
We can hardly conceive such a thing without inequalities and
variations, and, even were it not so, at all events not without such a
dissatisfaction with what is present as naturally goes along with
the expectation of something better yet to come; and this after
all is a sense of imperfection, and therefore in free beings a sense
somehow of guilt. Indeed, progress can scarcely be thought of
apart from external relations and conditions of development. But
if once we open this sluice, there sweep in at once diversities among
those who are the same in kind, the antithesis of the pleasant and
the unpleasant, and, as a consequence, everything that character-
izes human life here below. In fact, nothing remains (and perhaps
on these assumptions it is a position we cannot avoid without
inconsistency) but that we should accept the change from life to
death as itself an element in that future experience. This makes it
clear that what we have conceived in this form is not the consum-


1 Matt, 1978 and 2 Tim, 212 cannot really be taken in that sense,


§ 163] GOD-CONSCIOUSNESS PRESENT AND FUTURE 719


mation of the Church, but merely a gradually self-amending and
self-purifying repetition of the present life. Thus the problem
remains unsolved.

2. If now, selecting either form, we inquire as to the real vital
content of this future state, and concede at the start that this
content, so far as our activity is concerned, is limited to repre-
sentation ; then, in order to gain a clear imaginative picture, we
should have to know what there will be for us to represent there ;
i.e. what influences will affect us and be taken in by us. To this
question the usual answer is to say that eternal life will consist in
the vision of God.1_ This we can only take to mean the completest
fulness of the most living God-consciousness : the next question is
how this will be distinguished from our present God-consciousness.
The simplest reply would be that while our God-consciousness now
is always a mediated one, inasmuch as we have it only in and with
some other element, there it will be unmediated. But this can
scarcely be harmonized with the retention of personality. For as
self-conscious individuals we can only have the God-consciousness,
if it is really to be ours, along with our self-consciousness ; and
even if the latter has to be distinguished from the former, this will
only be conceivable in one of two ways. Either we merely dis-
tinguish our self from our God-consciousness, as the subject in which
the God-consciousness dwells, without our self-consciousness having
any other content ; and this is an idea which hardly anyone will
tolerate. Or our self-consciousness, as being changeable and
constantly affected, must differ from the other conceived as some-
thing which remains ever the same. Hence, if the individual life
is to persist in human nature and even in finite nature as such, our
God-consciousness must always remain a mediated one ; and it is
exclusively within this sphere that we shall have to seek the dis-
tinction between its present and its future form. In that case,
nothing remains but that (even here we strive after it, though with
a sense of inability to attain) we should have an unimpeded know-
ledge of God in all and along with all; and also, so far as finite
nature allows it, that we should steadily have knowledge of all that
wherein and whereby God makes Himself known ; and this without
conflict arising between this desire in uS and in any other, or between
the steady God-consciousness and consciousness in any other of
its aspects. This certainly would be pure and assured vision ;


1 A thought first derived from Matt. 58 and 2 Cor. 5’, but with what justice
is disputed,


720 THE CHRISTIAN FAITH [g 163


it would render us completely at home with God. Only, we can no
more understand how we are to find ourselves at this point just at
the resurrection without thereby imperilling the continuity and
identity of our existence, than we can see how, if we start there at
the point we have attained here, we can ever reach the consum-
mation. Thus we can take our departure from either point—from
the problem of imagining an unchangeably identical blessedness, or
from that of conceiving an endlessly progressive advance. But we
really can solve neither problem ; and we therefore always remain
uncertain how the state which is the Church’s highest consum-
mation can be gained or possessed in this form by individual
personalities emerging into immortality.


APPENDIX : ON ETERNAL DAMNATION


The figurative sayings of Christ, which have led to a state of
irremediable misery for those who die out of fellowship with
Christ } being accepted as the counterpart of eternal bliss, will,
if more closely scrutinized, be found insufficient to support any
such conclusion. Either these passages cannot without extreme
arbitrariness be separated from others which must allude to some
earlier event,? or they are countered by others which forbid us to
think of the definitive victory of evil over one part of the human
race, and from which we must rather infer that before the general
resurrection evil will have been completely overcome.® Still less
can the idea of eternal damnation itself bear close scrutiny,
whether considered in itself or as it is related to eternal bliss. If
we once agree that eternal damnation cannot mean condemnation
to bodily pains and sufferings, for the simple reason that (if human
nature is not to be utterly destroyed) the alleviating influence of
custom must be allowed for; and if the sense of ability to bear
what has been inflicted entails some satisfaction, so that what
results on the whole is something less than pure and irremediable
misery—if all this be so, there is scarcely any firm ground on which
we can stand. If the misery is of a spiritual kind, and if accord-
ingly it consists of the pains of conscience, then the lost are better
by far in their damnation than they were in this life ; yet although
they are better, they are to be more wretched. We cannot imagine
this ; for even if such a lot were in keeping with divine justice,

1 Matt. 254°, Mark 944, John 529,


> Cf. Matt. 249°34 and John 524. 25,
Sra Coner5 esas:


§ 163] ETERNAL DAMNATION Var


still there would be no way of preventing the self-approval of the
awakened and quickened conscience from supplying a counter-
weight to misery. Indeed, we cannot imagine how the awakened
conscience, as a living movement of the spirit, could fail to issue in
some good. If it be rejoined that what is to be regarded as the
source of everlasting torment is not any sharpened feeling for the
difference between good and evil, but only the consciousness of
self-forfeited bliss, yet such a consciousness could not be living
and acute except in so far as bliss could be pictured in the mind ;
nor could it be torturing unless a capacity were present to share in
the blessed state. But this capacity would itself imply a moral
improvement, and the mental picture of bliss would constitute an
enjoyment by which the misery was lessened.

If we now consider eternal damnation as it is related to eternal
bliss, it is easy to see that once the former exists, the latter can
exist no longer. Even if externally the two realms were quite
separate, yet so high a degree of bliss is not as such compatible
with entire ignorance of others’ misery, the more so if the separa-
tion itself is the result purely of a general judgment, at which both
sides were present, which means conscious each of the other. Now
if we attribute to the blessed a knowledge of the state of the damned,
it cannot be a knowledge unmixed with sympathy. If the per-
fecting of our nature is not to move backwards, sympathy must
be such as to embrace the whole human race, and when extended
to the damned must of necessity be a disturbing element in bliss,
all the more that, unlike similar feelings in this life, it is untouched
by hope. For, reflect as we may that if eternal damnation exists
at all, it must be just, and that the vision of God embraces also
His righteousness, yet even so sympathy persists ; indeed, even in
this life we rightly expect a deeper sympathy to be shown to
merited than to unmerited suffering. In some form or other
personal survival includes memory of our former state, in which
it will always happen some of us were associated with some of them
in a common life ; and sympathy will be all the stronger because
in that earlier time there was a point when we were as little re-
generate as they. In the divine government of the world every-
thing is inseparably conditioned by everything else ; hence we
cannot ignore the fact that the circumstance of our having enjoyed
helpful dispensations was due to the very same disposition of things
as insured that such help should not reach them. Thus our sym-
pathy cannot fail to be attended by the bitter feeling always

46


522 THE CHRISTIAN FAITH ig 163


present when we see a real connexion between our own gain and
another’s loss.

From whichever side we view it, then, there are great diffi-
culties in thinking that the finite issue of redemption is such that
some thereby obtain the highest bliss, while others (on the ordinary
view, indeed, the majority of the human race) are lost in irrevocable
misery. We ought not to retain such an idea without decisive
testimony to the fact that it was to this that Christ Himself looked
forward; and such testimony is wholly lacking. Hence we ought
at least to admit the equal rights of the milder view, of which like-
wise there are traces in Scripture ;1 the view, namely, that through
the power of redemption there will one day be a universal restoration
of all souls.


POSTSCRIPT TO THE PROPHETIC DOCTRINES


What seems to emerge from these considerations is this. Both
elements—the consummation of the Church and personal survival
—can each for itself be taken up with perfect truth in our Christian
consciousness ; it is certain, too, that the consummation of the
Church can never be manifested in this life, and that the state
attained in the next life must bear a different relation to the con-
summation of the Church from that of our present state. And yet
the combination and correlation of these two elements yields no
firmly outlined or really lucid idea, nor can any such idea of either
the one element or the other be developed out of the intimations of
Scripture. If we try to use the idea of the consummation of the
Church so as to determine, from its relation to what as yet is un-
consummated, the relation of the single life in the next world to the
single life here, or the difference between the two, we can reach no fixed
conclusion. And if we seek, by means of the idea of the future life,
to assign a place to the consummated Church where it will no longer
be a productive factor but a product only, again we fail. The one
point of view will always tend to merge in what is mythical, 7.e. in
the historical presentation of what is supra-historical ; the other
point of view will always approximate to what is visionary, 7.e. the
earthly presentation of what is more than earthly. These were
everywhere the forms of prophetic thought, which in its higher
import makes no claim to furnish knowledge in the strict sense, but
: meant only to give stimulating expression to principles already
cnown.


Usk COT mms es


THIRD: SECTION


THE DIVINE ATTRIBUTES WHICH RELATE TO REDEMPTION


§ 164. When we trace to the divine causality our consciousness of
fellowship with God, restored through the efficacy of redemption,
we posit the planting and extension of the Christian Church as
the object of the divine government of the world.


1. This is the only meaning which can be attached to the con-
ception of the government of the world, as we are able to employ it
here. For our Christian consciousness, all other things have exist-
ence only as they are related to the efficacy of redemption—either
as part of the organization in which the reawakened God-conscious-
ness finds expression, or as so much raw material which this organiza-
tion is to elaborate. The word ‘ govern,’ however, means to set
in motion, and direct, forces whose presence is due to other causes ;
hence the term may easily mislead us into thinking even here of a
divine direction of earthly forces conceived of as already existing,
as also into separating the government of the world from creation
in such a way that it comes to look like something that has super-
vened later or been interjected, and as if from the creation onwards
everything could have happened otherwise than in point of fact it
did happen. The Christian faith that all things were created for
the Redeemer } implies on the contrary that by creation all things
(whether as prepared for or as overruled) were disposed with a view
to the revelation of God in the flesh, and so as to secure the com-
pletest possible impartation thereof to the whole of human nature,
and thus to form the Kingdom of God. Similarly, the world of
nature is not to be considered as going its own way on the strength
of the divine preservation, the divine government only exerting
influence on it through special isolated acts, so as to bring it into
harmony with the kingdom of grace. To us, rather, the two things
are absolutely one, and we have the certainty that from the
beginning the whole disposition of nature would have been different
had it not been that, after sin, redemption through Christ was
determined on for the human race.

Colne.


733


724 THE CHRISTIAN FAITH [§ 164


2. The conception of divine government laid down in our
paragraph seems, it is true, to belong to a time when nothing
suggested the existence of any other form of spiritual life than that
of man, with the exception of angels. The angelic nature, how-
ever, glorious as were the descriptions given of it, was placed
beneath the human by the first Christians owing to its defective
union with the Divine Essence, and put in exclusively subservient
relations to men. But even though we assume most willingly that
the world forms the richest revelation of God of which it is possible
to conceive, though we had become fully persuaded that on every
one of the planets organic life is developed up to the level of
rationality ; still the subject of angels would be one on which we
had nothing to say. Even if our racial consciousness were able to
transcend the human and embrace intelligence of every kind, yet
such extra-human intelligence does not affect us in such wise as to
compel us to expand our ideas of the divine government, so long as
we receive no clear impression of how such intelligence operates
in time. No such impression is given us, however ; it is therefore
only within the compass of our own world that the divine govern-
ment is known by us—within the sphere, that is, in which re-
demption makes its power felt. Now the element in our conscious-
ness which becomes the sense of sin does not carry us back directly
to the divine causality, so that the conception of the divine pre-
servation of the world derives its full meaning exclusively from the
relation obtaining between the divine causality and that element
in our consciousness which becomes the sense of grace. Hence we
can say, regarding two points formerly made out 1—both the essence
of things in their relations to each other and the order of reciprocal
interaction between them—that they exist through God (in so far
as they do exist) relatively to the redeeming revelation of God in
Christ, by which the human spirit is developed to perfection.
Everything in our world, that is to say—human nature in the first
place and all other things in direct proportion to the closeness of
their connexion with it—would have been disposed otherwise, and
the entire course of human and natural events, therefore, would
have been different, if the divine purpose had not been set on the
union of the Divine Essence with human nature in the Person of
Christ, and, as a result thereof, the union of the Divine Essence with
the fellowship of believers through the Holy Spirit. And with
respect to our conclusion as to the idea of the unity and identity of

* Cf. § 46, Postscript, p. 175.


§ 164] DIVINE GOVERNMENT OF THE WORLD 725


the Church in all ages, we must mark off two periods in the divine
government of the world—one before the union just mentioned was
realized in time and space, when all was merely preparatory and
introductory ; the other subsequent to its being realized, and this
a period of development and fulfilment.

3. In the divine causality there is no division or opposition
anywhere, nor can we regard the government of the world as other
than a unity, directed towards a single goal. Hence the Church,
or the Kingdom of God in its whole extent as well as in the whole
course of its development, forms the one object of the divine world-
government ; whereas any particular thing is such an object only
in the other and for it. True, we cannot avoid affirming the in-
dependent existence of the particular as an element within this
whole ; but we instantly leave the right track when we assume for
this particular a special divine causality in any way separate from
connexion with the whole, and thus view the particular in question
as the special object or result of divine government, to which other
things therefore are subordinated as means. As a_ necessary
correction, rather, we must at once subordinate it to other things ;
each particular thus appearing, simultaneously and equally, as
both conditioning and conditioned, a point at which the threads
of relation cross. Even the Redeemer, while He does represent
particular disciples at particular junctures of their life as objects of
the divine care, always in doing so has their vocation (1.e. their
activity in the Kingdom of God) in view as that on which strictly
the divine care is bent.

Hence for us the usual division of divine Providence into
generalis, specialis, and specialissima is nearly useless. The first is
supposed to cover everything, the second the whole human race,
and the third the saints or the Kingdom of God ; but for us it is
only under the third that everything can be subsumed, for to its
object all else is referred. In any case, the term ‘ providence ’ is
of foreign origin and was first taken over from heathen authors
into later Jewish writings and adopted later by Church teachers,
not without many disadvantages for the clear exposition of the
authentic Christian faith, a circumstance which would have been
avoided by the use of the scriptural terms ‘ predestination,’ ‘ fore-
ordination.’ These words express far more clearly the relation of
each single part to the connected whole, and represent the divine
rule of the world as an inwardly coherent order. They do so in a

1 Cf, § 156,


726 THE CHRISTIAN FAITH [$ 165


way by no means equivalent in meaning to the equally unchristian
term ‘ fate,’ which always implies that the particular is determined
by the co-operation of all other things without the least respect to
what would have issued from the independent existence of the
object. Similarly, the term ‘ providence ’ chiefly suggests that the
particular is determined without respect to what would naturally
have resulted from its coexistence with other things; and this
onesidedness, too, is foreign to the idea of predestination. Scripture
itself does not hesitate to admit that even sin is embraced under
divine fore-ordination, in spite of its really being contrary to the
notion of the Kingdom of God ; it reckons sin, however, as among
the preparatory and introductory elements of the divine govern-
ment of the world; and we can also recognize as perfectly self-
consistent the divine decree that all men should share this earlier
state previous to the new creation, so partaking in the powers
thereof only by way of contrast—a form of experience that runs
through the whole of human life. Only, the difficulty which we
encountered above of forming the idea of eternal damnation now
reappears ; the problem being how to combine this idea with that
of a divine government which is a unity in itself and is directed to
a single end.


§ 165. The divine causality presents itself to us in the government of
the world as Love and as Wisdom.


1. The one and undivided divine causality cannot without
anthropomorphic error be represented in a circle of divine attri-
butes ; hence, to bring clearly to consciousness its nature and its
aim we must look for differences which, as being human, depend
on some antithesis. Now in all human causality we distinguish
between the underlying temper or disposition and the more or less
corresponding form in which it is given effect to. By the former,
what is innermost in the spontaneously active being as a unity is
represented as will stimulated in a particular way; the latter is
traceable rather to the understanding, and shows us the spontaneous
activity in relation to its object as a multiplicity. The divine
attributes named in the paragraph above are conceived on the lines
of this human distinction, thus corresponding to the meaning we
have attached to the divine government of the world. Love, that
is to say, is the impulse to unite self with neighbour and to will to
be in neighbour ; if then the pivot of the divine government is
redemption and the foundation of the Kingdom of God, involving


§ 166] THE DIVINE LOVE V2,


the union of the Divine Essence with human nature, this means that
the underlying disposition cannot be conceived otherwise than as
love. By wisdom, on the other hand, is understood the right out-
lining of plans and purposes—these regarded in their manifold
characteristics and in the whole round of their reciprocal relations.
Hence, since the divine government manifests itself in the self-
consistent ordering of the whole sphere of redemption, alongside
of the divine love we rightly place wisdom as the art (so to speak)
of realizing the divine love perfectly.

2. These two attributes, love and wisdom, are of course separable
in human life, and this the more easily that owing to the distinction
between understanding and will which is essential to man, it is only
in a few persons (and never completely even in them) that disposi-
tion and the formation of purposes merge in each other; either
ability of understanding more or less lags behind purity of will, or
vice versa. No such dualism can be conceived of in the Divine
Essence ; hence the two attributes are never separate in any way ;
they are so entirely one that each may be regarded as being in-
trinsically contained in the other. Without ascribing any limita-
tion to God, therefore, we may assert that the divine wisdom is not
capable of producing any other disposition of things, or any other
ordering of their course, than that in which the divine love is most
perfectly realized ; and just as little is the divine love capable of
leading to self-impartations other than those in which it itself finds
perfect satisfaction, and in which accordingly it presents itself as
absolute wisdom. This agreement must be brought out still more
clearly in the two doctrines that follow.


First DocTrRINE: THE DIvINE LOVE


§ 166. The divine love, as the attribute in virtue of which the divine
nature imparts itself, is seen in the work of redemption,

Conf. Basil. v.: Status huius scripturae canonicae totius is est, bene
Deum hominum generi velle et eam benevolentiam per Christum Dominum
declarasse . . . quae fide sola recipiatur.

1. The two points indicated in the paragraph are not infre-
quently questioned even in the circles to which we belong. That
the Supreme Being imparts Himself, and that this constitutes the
very essence of divine love, is a position rejected by many as
mystical ; and the second point, that, namely, which restricts to
the channel of redemption a divine self-impartation alleged to be


728 THE CHRISTIAN FAITH [§ 166


going on everywhere, is rejected as unduly exclusive, and as con-
fining the manifestations of the divine perfection to too narrow a
range. Moreover, those who diverge from us in this way are
chiefly people who, generally speaking, tend to conceal the distinctive
features of Christianity rather than give them prominence. As
regards the first point, such thinkers recognize the divine love in
all those arrangements of Nature and all those dispositions of human
affairs which protect life or further it. And yet, apart from re-
demption, and taken only in this sense, the divine love must always
remain a matter of doubt. Supposing we regard the single life as
its object, then, if we are not going to lapse into the grossest par-
ticularism, it is impossible from such aids to life to infer the divine
love ; they involve restraints upon the lives of others ; so that the
presence of love would always imply the presence of its opposite.t
Indeed, this is true not merely of helps and hindrances to sensible
well-being ; it applies also to the spiritual development of the single
life ; in very many respects favour to one involves the neglect of
others. But if we put the single life aside and rather consider
humanity—that is to say, our racial consciousness—then (since in
this case helps and hindrances of individuals cancel each other,
because each conditions the other) we shall be all the readier to
return to the position that divine love does not reveal itself un-
equivocally except where it shows a generally protective and foster-
ing care of what is highest and most specific in man, namely, his
God-consciousness. And this, to Christian eyes, seems everywhere
outside the sphere of redemption to be in a depressed condition.
Thus we again find ourselves in the sphere of the divine self-imparta-
tion. So that, even when we are only seeking to exhibit the divine
love as beneficent and protective, we cannot as Christians afford
to insist on anything less or lower than that impartation of God in
Christ and the Holy Spirit whereby the God-consciousness is re-
newed and made perfect. For even though every form of the God-
consciousness, however imperfect (indeed, even its latent presence
as something merely longed for), ranks for us as a divine impartation
to human nature, it yet is not such that we can rest in it. On the
contrary, such a divine impartation viewed from whatever side
appears merely as a transitional stage, to which belong only human
states that are provisional and imperfect.

2. On the other hand, it is objected to our paragraph, for one
thing, that it was not necessary to wait for redemption in order to

1Cf. § 85, I.


§ 166] LOVE AND REDEMPTION - 729


perceive the divine love even in its character as a divine self-im-
partation, and for another that it is in the highest degree unsym-
pathetic. and ungrateful to find that love solely and exclusively in
redemption. Now as regards the first point, people say that an
impartation of God occurs in whatever in man can be taken as be-
longing to the image of God, therefore in reason with all its endow-
ments—nay, in everything on which the original perfection of man
is based, as well as in all those germs of spiritual development with
which our nature is endowed. To this, it is granted, there certainly
also belongs that God-consciousness which underlies piety ; but if
we were on that account to bind up the knowledge of divine love
with redemption alone, we should be attaching the highest worth
of all to what is really less important. For, it is argued, the differ-
ence in God’s dealings with creatures incapable of God-conscious-
ness, and with such as develop this consciousness even in the feeblest
and most imperfect way, is greater by far than that existing between
His dealings with the latter and with those whom we call regenerate ;
for obviously the difference between the content of the God-con-
sciousness in the last two classes is far less than that between the
first two. To this we may reply that in virtue of their capacity for
the God-consciousness all men certainly are also objects of the
divine love; but the divine love does not realize itself in them
simply as such ; rather, starting from the fear of God (which was,
of course, the prevailing religious temper under the law) they at
most get through to the negative consciousness that the Supreme
Being is devoid of jealousy—which is still very far from being a
recognition of the divine love. That only comes with the efficacious
working of redemption, and it comes from Christ. As for those who
still (this we can say in a true sense of the whole non-Christian
world) hover between idolatry and godlessness, just in so far as
they do not love God, He cannot love them. And thus here, too,
we come back to the position that He loves them only as He sees
them in Christ, just as it is only when they themselves are in Christ
that they come to a knowledge of the divine love.

As regards the second point, it is urged that even if wherever
self-consciousness as such includes God-consciousness, the love of
God first comes out in redemption, yet elsewhere it reveals itself
in much that is exactly the same outside Christianity as within,
and pre-eminently in all the triumphs of human knowledge and
mastery of Nature. But to this we reply that all human life is to
be pervaded by the powers of redemption, and that it is only as so


730 THE CHRISTIAN FAITH [$ 167


pervaded that it reaches perfection. So that no human good of
any kind is conformed to the relevant divine will, except as it is
thus brought into connexion with that predominance of the God-
consciousness in our soul which we owe to Christ. On the other
hand, nothing which does not represent the divine will can reveal
the divine love. Our paragraph, therefore, has only to be taken in
the sense made inevitable by what went before! to justify itself
perfectly.


§ 167. God is Love.
1 John 47%,


1. Already it has been stated repeatedly that in God there can
be no distinction between essence and attributes, and that just for
that reason the conception ‘ attribute ’ is not particularly well fitted
to set forth the Divine Essence. Still, this also implies that, in so
far as anything true is predicated of God by means of what we posit
as a divine attribute, what is thus truly predicated must also express
the Divine Essence itself. On this account it must necessarily be
possible to form similar propositions, affirming of Him all other
attributes, if these as such have any claim to be posited at all.
However, no such propositions occur in Scripture, nor has it ever
been laid down in Church doctrine that God is eternity, or omni-
potence, or the like. And while certainly we might venture to say
that God is loving omnipotence or omnipotent love, yet we must
admit that in the first of these forms as much as in the second love
alone is made the equivalent of the being or essence of God. Hence
it is in this exclusive form that our paragraph has to be established
and justified, namely, that love alone and no other attribute can
be equated thus with God. Only, it is understood that here also
we wish to have nothing to do with any conception of God reached
by way of speculation, but that what we have to show is merely
why this attribute is thus distinguished from the others which we
have come to affirm in the course of our argument.

2. To begin with, as regards the attributes which we arrived at
in the first part of this work, they made then no claim to rank as
such designations of the Divine Essence that they could be substi-
tuted for the name ‘God.’2 Even although we explain omni-
potence as the attribute in virtue of which all finite things are
through God as they are, while we certainly in that case posit the


1§ 164. 2 Cf, § 56, Postscript.


§ 167] LOVE THE ESSENCE OF GOD 731


divine act in its entirety, it is without a motive, and therefore
as an action wholly indeterminate in character ; and it can only be
incorrectly, and under the influence of quantitative standards of
measurement, that we name God omnipotence. The finite as such
is not merely a manifold; it is also something mutable, and is
invariably given to us solely in impermanent states or stages of
transition. So that the statement in question really conveys
nothing but what the finite is through God, as willed and posited
by Him; and unless we pass out beyond the finite sphere we all
the time remain uncertain as to the nature of the will of God which
as such is implied in omnipotence. The same thing of course holds
true of the other divine attributes treated of in the same context.
We arrived at each of them by abstraction from the definite feeling-
content of our God-consciousness ; hence, if we are not to project
them in thought into the attributes yielded by reflection on this
feeling-content (as happens in the formula that God is omnipotent
or eternal love), but rather to take them strictly by themselves,
we are bound to say that belief in God as almighty and eternal is
nothing more than that shadow of faith which even devils may have.

Nor are the two attributes (holiness and justice) discussed in our
Second Part, under its second aspect, such as originally could stand
as expressions of the Divine Essence. For we cannot say that God
in Himself is justice or holiness ; for neither of these attributes can
be conceived apart from a relation to evil as well as to the antithesis
between evil and good. And neither the antithesis nor its solution
has any existence for God, considered solely in Himself. Hence the
action of these attributes separately from the others is exclusively
limited to a certain sphere, and it is only when we cancel this separa-
tion and resolve them into those attributes which we are now dis-
cussing as the result of the second half of our exposition, that they
are recognizable as divine attributes at all. So that what was
formerly considered as the work of divine holiness and justice is
now properly (even though it be more by way of preparation than of
fulfilment) reckoned in as part of the work of redemption. Thus
both of these attributes, like the others, merge for us in the divine
love, this last viewed solely in its preparatory manifestations ; and
the divine love is holy and just love inasmuch as essentially it
begins with these preparatory stages ; in the same way it is almighty
and eternal love. Love and wisdom alone, then, can claim to be
not mere attributes but also expressions of the very essence of


Sasa 2a


ae THE CHRISTIAN FAITH [§ 168


God, while yet we do not say God is wisdom precisely as we do God
is love; and the point is one which we can elucidate as follows,
even before we deal with the conception of wisdom. If we look
at the way in which we become aware of the two attributes re-
spectively, it turns out that we have the sense of divine love directly
in the consciousness of redemption, and as this is the basis on
which all the rest of our God-consciousness is built up, it of course
represents to us the essence of God. But the divine wisdom does
not enter consciousness thus directly, but only as we extend our
self-consciousness (as personal, but even more as racial conscious-
ness) to cover the relation of all the elements of reality to each
other. Indeed, since the two attributes cannot be conceived
in separation from each other, and since love is not the perfection
of wisdom but wisdom the perfection of love, it follows that love
would not be implied in so absolute a degree if we thought God as
wisdom, as wisdom would be if we thought Him as love. For where
almighty love is, there must also absolute wisdom be.


SECOND DOCTRINE: THE DIVINE WISDOM


§ 168. The divine wisdom is the principle which orders and deter-
mines the world for the divine self-imparting which is
- evinced in redemption.


1. The special relationship, previously lacking,! which is re-
quired to justify our positing the divine wisdom as an attribute
distinct from the divine omniscience, is found in this connexion of
wisdom with the divine love. Yet it remains true that, no less
definitely than was brought out in that earlier context, the divine
omniscience indicates in God precisely the same as the divine
wisdom does ; only that the timeless relation involved naturally
has for us a twofold aspect, wisdom being the word that looks
forward, omniscience the word that looks backward. Moreover,
the latter is in the same relation to the divine love as the former ;
all existence being posited in God simply as that which is mediated
by His love. All this forms a supplement to what I have written
elsewhere ? for another discipline as to the relation between love
and wisdom—in this respect, that the antecedent word is also
directly the creative word. From the fact that we take the divine
love as being also wisdom it follows, first of all, that we cannot


CEES 55 ape obs
*In my article on the scientific treatment of the conception of virtue
see Werke.


§ 168] THE DIVINE WISDOM 733


possibly regard all finite being in its relation to our God-conscious-
hess except as (whatever else be the meaning we give to the term
“world ’) an absolutely harmonious divine work of art. Even in
human affairs the primary work of wisdom is correctly and com-
pletely to outline the idea which the work of art is to embody, so
that actions proper are only traceable to wisdom in proportion as
both in the context of a man’s life and in themselves they can be
regarded as works of art or parts thereof; and he would be the
most perfect man all of whose plans for works or actions formed
a complete whole of self-communicative presentation. Similarly,
the divine wisdom is nothing but the Supreme Being viewed as
engaged in this absolute (not compositely, but simply and origin-
ally, perfect) self-presentation and impartation.1 Only we must
think away all division between those two ; there is no distinction
between divine works and acts, nor is it the case that (as with us
men) impartation preponderates in acts, but presentation in works.
It is only for our minds that divine acts are primarily impartation
and then become presentation, and divine works the reverse. The
sending of Christ, however, is for us primarily divine impartation,
and it is for this reason that the term ‘impartation’ is put first.
The growth of our consciousness of the wisdom of God consists in
this, that His impartation in its temporal progress becomes for us
ever more and more a perfect presentation of the almighty love of
God.

Next, we must be on our guard lest we again falsify the con-
ception we have reached, by introducing the contrast of end and
means. The reason for caution lies in what has just been said.
Every human work of art is the more perfect, the more it conforms
to the idea that elements within it should not be distinguishable
as end and means, but are all reciprocally related as parts to the
whole ; whereas means remain external to it. In a still higher
degree of perfection, this manifestly applies to a complete human
life. How then could it be that divine wisdom did not exclude
the contrast of end and means even more completely ? There is
nothing outside the world which could be used as means; all
things within it, rather, are so ordered that viewed in connexion
with one another they each stand related as parts to the whole ;
while every particular in itself is so entirely both things—means and
end—that each of these categories is constantly abrogating itself
and passing over into the other. So generally recognized is this

1 Acts 1724-28,


734 THE CHRISTIAN FAITH [§ 168


that no one imagines that in God, as distinct from wisdom (taken
exclusively as meaning rightness of purpose) there is to be found
sagacity as well, in the sense of perfectness in the choice and use of
means. Yet it is common enough, and equally confusing, for
people to include sagacity as an additional element in the idea of
divine wisdom, and to interpret wisdom as meaning the divine
perfectness alike in the fixing of ends and the determination of
means. Means are never employed except where the agent has to
have recourse to something not originated by himself. Nor can we
easily conceive the determination of means otherwise than in the
form of choice, which means reverting to that very mediate know-
ledge which we discarded. With this is in keeping also the fact
that both the wisdom and the omniscience of God are each
equivalent to the other and to the divine creativeness, and
that we cannot set this equivalence aside without spoiling the
conceptions themselves, and vice versa.

2. Our recognition of redemption as the real key to the under-
standing of the divine wisdom is itself the specifically Christian view
of this subject. Our Christian consciousness, however expanded,
cannot transcend that which stands in relation to us; and all the
divine ordering of the world within this sphere, if we would truly
appropriate it, we can only interpret by reference to the revelation
of God in Christ and the Holy Spirit. But this ought never to de-
generate into an inquisitive search (unfriendly to scientific inquiry)
with a view to discovering particular aids to the Kingdom of God
in particular events ; for in such a case we should always be dealing
merely with transition stages, of whose value for the whole we were
utterly ignorant. But we shall do well to be on our guard against
ascribing to divine wisdom the divine ordering of external and
physical nature, as well as institutions for the all-round development
of the human mind, in such a manner as to separate them from the
sphere of redemption. Anything wholly out of touch with redemp-
tion, and not at the same time totally isolated from human life (a
description which would not hold true of any part even of external
nature), might just as easily be injurious to the progress of redemp-
tion, and in that case would not be pre-formed by the divine wisdom.
How could we think we had fathomed the divine wisdom, if we had
no better grasp of its manifestations than to suppose that, even if
only occasionally, it could conflict with the highest interests of
man? Hence everything in the world, in proportion as it is attri-
buted to divine wisdom, must also be related to the redemptive or


§ 169] WISDOM AND REDEMPTION 435


new-creating revelation of God. Thus the proper work of divine
wisdom is precisely the spread of redemption ; or, to put it other-
wise, it is on the one hand the mode and the order in which election
is carried out, and the regeneration of individuals as well as of whole
masses of humanity effected, and on the other hand the changing
transformation of the Christian fellowship, as often as living
Christian piety enters, or ought to enter, into combination with this
or that new aspect of human experience. Hence every effort to
penetrate those depths of the divine wisdom still hidden from us,
is in itself to be approved. Nor does it cease to be praiseworthy
though at times it tends to go too much into detail (for what may
be regarded as detail in the sphere of divine grace is not too small
to be considered an object of divine wisdom) ; it is censurable only
when we obscure the absolute unity of divine wisdom by intro-
ducing the contrast of end and means.


§ 169. Theorem.—The divine wisdom ts the ground in virtue of which
the world, as the scene of redemption, is also the absolute
revelation of the Supreme Being, and ts therefore good.


1. This proposition, which we indicated at an earlier point ! but
can only now set forth, and which rather summarizes in sharper
outline what has already been said than contains anything new,
makes in essence the demand that we should not look for a larger
divine impartation than has been effected in the human race by
means of redemption through Christ. And in this sense it has to be
tested first by two propositions, which we find at either end of this
Second Part of our exposition. In the first place, sin invariably
brings with it a diminution of the God-consciousness, and therefore
of the divine impartation. Now if we suppose a real condition of
purity or even of moral and spiritual perfection to have existed
before sin (a condition which might or might not be interrupted
by sin), our paragraph would compel us to suppose that if no fall
had taken place, no redemption would have been necessary, which
means that the impartation of the Divine Essence would have been
less than is now the case, owing to the presence not only of sin but
of redemption. In the second place, as long as the unregenerate
live here in company with the pious, they too experience gleams of
blessedness through the God-consciousness latent in them; and
these make their presence felt powerfully as preparatory workings
of grace. Now if we suppose that all who had not thus attained

1 See § 59, Postscript.


736 THE CHRISTIAN FAITH [§ 169


to regeneration would have to bear an eternity of unmitigated
wretchedness in hell, our paragraph would compel us to assert that
even so the sum-total of the divine impartation would be larger
than if the regeneration of those also who in this life had not been
brought so far, had remained a possibility after death.

2. These implications of our paragraph we must consider from
yet another side. If Christ be placed at the summit, as the in-
dividual who was entirely pervaded by the God-consciousness and
therefore taken up into full unity with the Highest, everywhere else
there exists only an imperfect and unequal pervasion, which de-
creases steadily within the sphere of rational being throughout the
various areas in which corporate life is being prepared for re-
demption, and in irrational and inanimate nature (if this be taken
as having independent existence) wholly disappears. And yet,
according to our paragraph, this limited and sporadic impartation of
the Supreme Being is the whole outcome in which the divine wisdom
exhausts itself and the divine love finds complete satisfaction. In
that case, we cannot but be extremely doubtful whether the non-
rational and non-conscious is to be taken as in itself an object of
the divine love merely on the ground that we find it within the
domain ordered by the divine wisdom ; or whether it is excluded
even from the divine wisdom since it can have no part in the divine
love. For the plea that reason needs all these different stages of
subordinate being as a substructure for its own life, is always un-
satisfying ; it means that here the divine wisdom is assumed to be
conditioned. Hence we must add, that whatever in itself is insus-
ceptible of divine impartation shall yet be brought into vital con-
nexion with that in which such impartation can dwell. Thence it
follows that so long as this vital connexion is not in operation all
round, so long as the Spirit is not yet expressing and presenting
itself somehow even in all that is non-rational, the divine wisdom
cannot exhibit itself as everywhere present. But when through us
the world is become fully ready for us, it will appear clearly that
nothing can really be save as it is also an object of the divine love.

3. It is only thus, by relation to the divine love, that the divine
attributes expounded in the First Part gain their full significance.
The divine wisdom, as the unfolding of the divine love, conducts us
here to the realm of Christian Ethics ; for we are now confronted
with the task of more and more securing recognition for the world
as a good world, as also of forming all things into an organ of the
divine Spirit in harmony with the divine idea originally underlying


§169]} THE WORLD A REVELATION OF WISDOM VG)


the world-order, thus bringing all into unity with the system of
redemption. The purpose of this is that in both respects we may
attain to perfect living fellowship with Christ, both in so far as the
Father has given Him power over all things and in so far as He ever
shows Him greater works than those He already knows. Hence
the world can be viewed as a perfect revelation of divine wisdom
only in proportion as the Holy Spirit makes itself felt through the
Christian Church as the ultimate world-shaping power.


47


CONCLUSION


THE DIVINE TRINITY


§170. All that is essential in this Second Aspect of the Second Part of
our exposition 1s also posited in what is essential in the
doctrine of the Trinity ; but this doctrine itself, as ecclestastic-
ally framed, is not an immediate utterance concerning the
Christian self-consciousness, but only a combination of
several such utterances.

Symb. Quic.: Fides autem catholica haec est, ut unum Deum in trinitate
et trinitatem in unitate veneremur.—Conf. Aug. i.: ‘Firstly we teach. . .
according to the decree of the Nicene Council that there is one single Divine
Essence .. . and yetin the same single Divine Essence there are three Persons,
equal in power, equal in eternity, etc. —Ewvp. simpl. iii.: Eundem nihilo-
minus Deum... credimus . . . personis inseparabiliter et inconfuse esse
distinctum, Patrem, Filium et Spiritum sanctum, etc.—Conf. Gallic. vi.:
Scriptura nos docet, in illa singulari et simplice essentia divina subsistere
tres personas, Patrem, Filium et Spiritum sanctum.—Conf. Hung. : Hune
unum et solum Deum tres in coelo testes Patrem, Filium et Sp. s. esse
credimus : qui, licet tres sint subsistentibus suis proprietatibus et officiis
dispensatoriis, tamen hi tres unum quoque sunt.

1. An essential element of our exposition in this Part has been
the doctrine of the union of the Divine Essence with human nature,
both in the personality of Christ and in the common Spirit of the
Church ;1 therewith the whole view of Christianity set forth in
our Church teaching stands and falls. For unless the being of God
in Christ is assumed, the idea of redemption could not be thus con-
centrated in His Person. And unless there were such a union also
in the common Spirit of the Church, the Church could not thus
be the Bearer and Perpetuator of the redemption through Christ.
Now these exactly are the essential elements in the doctrine of the
Trinity, which, it is clear, only established itself in defence of the
position that in Christ there was present nothing less than the
Divine Essence, which also indwells the Christian Church as its
common Spirit, and that we take these expressions in no reduced
or sheerly artificial sense, and know nothing of any special higher
essences, subordinate deities (as it were) present in Christ and the


1 Cf. § 94 and § 123.
738


§ 170] ORIGIN OF TRINITARIAN DOCTRINE 739


Holy Spirit. The doctrine of the Trinity has no origin but this ;
and at first it had no other aim than to equate as definitely as
possible the Divine Essence considered as thus united to human
nature with the Divine Essence in itself. This is the less doubtful
that those Christian sects which interpret the doctrine of redemption
differently are also necessarily without the doctrine of the Trinity—
they have no point of belief to which it could be attached—which
could not possibly be the case if even in Catholic doctrine there
existed at least some other points than this to which the attach-
ment could be made. It is equally clear from this why those
divergent sects which are chiefly distinguishable by their denial of
the Trinity are not thereby forced into still other divergences in the
doctrine of God and the divine attributes, as must have been the
case if the doctrine of the Trinity were rooted in a special view of
the nature of the Supreme Being as such. But on the other hand,
they are forced to set up a different theory of the Person of Christ,
and hence also of man’s need for redemption and of the value of
redemption. In virtue of this connexion, we rightly regard the
doctrine of the Trinity, in so far as it is a deposit of these elements,
as the coping-stone of Christian doctrine, and this equating with
each other of the divine in each of these two unions, as also of both
with the Divine Essence in itself, as what is essential in the doctrine
of the Trinity.

2. But at this point we would call a halt ; we cannot attach the
same value to the further elaboration of the dogma, which alone
justifies the ordinary term. For the term ‘ Trinity ’ is really based
on the fact that each of the two above-mentioned unions is traced
back to a separate distinction posited independently of such union,
and eternally, in the Supreme Being as such ; further, after the
member of this plurality destined to union with Jesus had been
designated by the name ‘Son,’ it was felt necessary to posit the
Father in accordance therewith as a special distinction. The
result was the familiar dualism—unity of Essence and trinity of
Persons. But the assumption of an eternal distinction in the
Supreme Being is not an utterance concerning the religious conscious-
ness, for there it never could emerge. Who would venture to say
that the impression made by the divine in Christ obliges us to con-
ceive such an eternal distinction as its basis ? Anyone who were
to find this task set us in the Johannine conception of the Logos, as
if that conception definitely included one element of the doctrine
of the Trinity and the completion of the doctrine were called for by


740 THE CHRISTIAN FAITH [§ 170


that simple fact, would be in so difficult a position that he could
hardly maintain his ground. For one thing, it is in this very passage
that Arianism sought a foothold ; and the exegesis of both sides in that
controversy is so exposed to equal though opposite objections that
we cannot help saying that if either of the two antagonistic views
was in John’s mind as fundamental to the passage, it must be
confessed that he went to work to express it in a highly unsatis-
factory and ineffective manner. On the other hand, if the Trinity
had been in the Apostle’s mind, his exposition would very easily
have lent itself to a similar introduction of the Holy Spirit, whose
name occurs so often in Christ’s discourses as reported by John ;
nor would he have lacked opportunity elsewhere to bring in this
other member, and to speak of the place of the Spirit as that which
was in the beginning with God and was God. Assuming, however,
that John here declares of the divine united in Christ with human
nature that it existed in God from all eternity in a distinct form, it
does not follow by any means that this was meant in the sense of
the doctrine of the Trinity, and that that doctrine is therefore the
true and the only natural completion of the Johannine statements.
For underlying the elaboration of the doctrine is not merely a
desire to reproduce very exactly our Christian consciousness that
the Divine Essence in both forms of union is the same, and also is
equal to the being of God per se; rather, it was only after the dis-
tinction had been eternalized and made antecedent to the union
that there arose a need to guard against the semblance of polytheism,
and to secure that this, in a sense separated, being of God was none
the less embraced within the unity of the Divine Essence. But of
such a need there is in John no trace whatever, which means that
he was not on the way to the doctrine of the Trinity as we have it.

3. Hence the second part of our paragraph must not be under-
stood as meaning that the orthodox doctrine of the Trinity is
to be regarded as an immediate or even a necessary combination
of utterances concerning the Christian self-consciousness. On the
contrary, the intermediate step has been taken of eternalizing, in
separation, the being of God in itself, and the being of God which
makes union with human nature possible. Now if this arose so
definitely out of the utterances of Christ Himself and of the Apostles
concerning Him that we had to accept it on their testimony, the
doctrine of the Trinity in that case would be a fully elaborated
doctrine of this type, and we should accept it as a combination of
testimonies regarding a supersensible fact ; but it would no more


§ 170] CRITICISM OF ORTHODOXY 741


be a ‘doctrine of faith’ in the really original and proper sense of
that phrase than the doctrines of the resurrection and ascension of
Christ ;1 and it would resemble these last also in this respect that our
faith in Christ and our living fellowship with Him would be the
same although we had no knowledge of any such transcendent fact,
or although the fact itself were different. But the exegesis meant
to establish the position just mentioned has never been able to
entrench itself so strongly as to escape constant attacks upon it.
Hence it is important to make the point that the main pivots of the
ecclesiastical doctrine—the being of God in Christ and in the
Christian Church—are independent of the doctrine of the Trinity.

Let it be supposed that we further elaborate our knowledge of
this supersensible fact and—to avoid the idea that the said distinc-
tion within the Supreme Being led to nothing up to the beginning
of the union—teach besides that both the Second and the Third
Person in the Trinity were implicated even in the creation of the
world, while the Second Person was also the subject thereafter of all
the Old Testament theophanies, and it was from the Third Person
that the whole prophetic movement of the Old Testament received
its impulse. Then these statements are still further removed from
being utterances about our Christian consciousness. And we can wait
all the more calmly to see whether the exegetical results on which
these expansions of the doctrine rest are any more fully confirmed
by the latest work on the subject than has hitherto been the case.

Postscript.—lf success ever had attended, or ever could attend,
the attempt to exhibit or prove a trinity in God from general
conceptions or a prio (an effort perhaps stimulated by Church
doctrine, apart from which it would hardly occur to anyone, but
yet without any relation to the facts of redemption or any appeal
to Scripture), still such a doctrine of the Trinity even though worked
out with much greater elaboration than the ecclesiastical doctrine
(bound up as it is with the basal facts of Christianity) has ever
obtained or ever could obtain, could find no place in a Christian
Dogmatic. Even although it kept strictly to the use of the same
terms in denoting both the trinity and the unity as are employed
in the ecclesiastical doctrine, we should firmly maintain that as a
doctrine it was different. For deductions of that kind, standing in
no connexion with those basal facts, do not merely show it to be
quite different from the other in origin ; on that very account they
are of no sort of use in Christian doctrine. Therefore we must

1 Cf. § 99.


742 THE CHRISTIAN FAITH [$171


simply put them aside as ‘ philosophemes ’ ; nor are we in any way
called upon to submit them to criticism, whether they originate
with ancient ! or modern ? Church teachers.


$171. The ecclesiastical doctrine of the Trinity demands that we
think of each of the three Persons as equal to the Divine
Essence, and vice versa, and each of the three Persons as
equal to the others. Yet we cannot do either the one or the
other, but can only represent the Persons in a gradation,
and thus either represent the unity of the Essence as less
veal than the three Persons, or vice versa.

Symb. Quic.: Fides autem catholica haec est ut unum deum in trinitate,
et trinitatem in unitate veneremur.—Patris, filii et spiritus sancti una est
divinitas, aequalis gloria, aequalis maiestas.—Et in hac trinitate nihil prius
aut posterius nihil maior aut minus, sed totae tres personae coaeternae sibi
sunt et coaequales. . . . Neque confundentes personas neque separantes
substantiam.—Awugs. Conf. 1.: ‘That there is one Divine Essence, which is
named and truly is God, and yet in this same one Divine Essence there are
three Persons. . . . And by the word Person is understood not a part, not an
attribute inhering in something else, but what subsists in itself (sed quod
proprie subsistit), as the Fathers have used the word in this matter.’—Conf.
Belg. vili.: . . . qui est unica essentia, in qua tres sunt personae incom-
municabilibus proprietatibus ab aeterno revera ac reipsa distinctae.

1. There can be no doubt that from this assumption of eternal
distinctions in the Divine Essence, there necessarily follows the
implication of the double equality of the divine in all three Persons,
and of the divine in each Person with the Supreme Being as a
unity. If divinity or power and glory were less in all the three
Persons together than in the Supreme Being conceived as a unity,
the three Persons would not be in but under the Supreme Being.
In that case, the divine in them would only improperly be called
divine, and our living fellowship with Christ as well as our participa-
tion in the Holy Spirit would not be fellowship with God. The
result would be the same if the divine in the Persons themselves
were not the same, only the divine in (say) the Father being truly
and properly divine, but the divine in Christ and the Holy Spirit
unreal and subordinate. In that case our indwelling sense of need
for redemption would necessarily take a different form of ex-
pression, if indeed as a hindrance to fellowship to God it would in
any way be met by a redemption which did not bring us to fellow-
ship with God. In short, everything most important in Christianity


: E.g. Anselm, Monolog. ep. 29-61.
* E.g. Daub, Theolog., §§ 126, 127.


§ 171] ECCLESIASTICAL DOCTRINE 743


would be changed. On those assumptions, no other definition
can be reached than that posited by the ecclesiastical doctrine,
and the ever-renewed zeal shown in its defence is perfectly
intelligible.

2. The cited credal passages undeniably assert, to begin with,
that power and divinity is not less in any of the three Persons than
in the other two ; and this obviously would be sufficient to bar out
all inequalities, if it were not for the inconsistency which emerges
as soon as side by side with this equality the attempt is made to
perpetuate the method of distinguishing the Persons. For it is
then necessary to make this equality a canon to be followed in
setting forth the difference between the Persons, in the sense that
no element implying an inequality of the kind described can be
admitted. If, however, Father and Son are distinguished by the
fact that the Father eternally begets, but is Himself unbegotten,
while the Son is begotten from all eternity but not Himself be-
getting, then (although this eternal generation is as different as
possible from any generation that is temporal or organic in char-
acter), the term itself, if it means anything at all, must at least
indicate a relationship of dependence. Hence if power has dwelt
in the Father from all eternity to beget the Son as a second divine
Person, whereas in the Son no such power dwells, and no relation-
ship of dependence in which the Father stands to Him can be
adduced as a counterweight, undeniably the power of the Father is
greater than that of the Son, and in addition the glory which the
Begetter has with the Begotten must be greater than that which
the Begotten has with the Begetter.

The same holds true of the Spirit, whether as in the Greek dogma
He proceeds from the Father only, or, as the Latin Church teaches,
from the Father and the Son. In the former case, the Son has a
twofold incapacity as compared with the Father: He does not
beget, nor does a Person proceed from Him. In the latter case
the Spirit alone exhibits this twofold dependence—for ‘ pro-
cession’ too is a relation of dependence, though meant to be a
different one from being begotten, in spite of the fact that no one
has ever succeeded in making clear what the difference between the
two is. In this case, however, the Son has one capacity in common
with the Father which places Him above the Spirit, whereas in the
former case the Spirit is equal to the Son. Whichever way we take
it, then, the Father is superior to the other two Persons, and the
only subject of controversy is whether these two are equal to


744 THE CHRISTIAN FAITH [§ 171


each other, or one of them subordinate to the other. But if such
distinctions are made, the equality of the Persons is lost.

3. Similarly, the position that the divinity in all the three
Persons is the same with that of the one Divine Essence ought to be
the rule which controls our ideas of the relationship between the
trinity of the Persons and the unity of the Essence. But if we
are to take along with this what has just been dealt with, namely,
the position that the Persons are distinguished from each other
by peculiar properties not predicable of the Divine Essence in
itself, while the Divine Essence itself has existence only in these
three Persons, but not outside or apart from them (whether as a
fourth Person or impersonally), and even in them does not distri-
bute different attributes to different Persons,! but resides in each
Person whole and undivided, on such terms the desired equality
cannot result. For such a relationship as is here asserted we have
no closer analogy, on which to form our thought of it, than that of
the conception of a species with the individual members it con-
tains; for the conception of a species is similarly present whole
and undivided in its individuals, but nowhere outside them. It
is true, this has always been a moot point ; some thinkers admit
the analogy,” others reject it. But if the relationship is not to be
conceived as of this type, then, as even its opponents allow,4 we
really are not in a position to form any definite ideas on the sub-
ject, and hence can have no interest in it. If, on the other hand,
we do adopt the analogy, no equality is possible between the unity
and the trinity ; either more realistically we must make the unity
superordinate as the essence common to all three, in which case the
distinction of Persons appears subordinate and falls into the back-
ground, while the divine monarchia stands out ; or more nominal-
istically we must make the trinity superordinate, in which case the
unity as being abstract falls into the background. Then what has
immediate existence for our religious consciousness—namely, the


_1 Passages like the following: . . . filium eius (sc. patris) sapientiam .. .
spiritum s. eiusdem virtutem potentiam et efficaciam (Conf. Gallic. vi.), even
if credal, are too vague to be taken into account.

216 ovola piow onualver, 7d dé brboracts idubryras (Greg. Naz., Encom. Athan.).
“Ov exer Abyor 7d Kowdv mpds 7d Lov, TodToy exer 7) ovola mpos Thy birécracww (Basil,
Ep. ccxiv.). Kard ye rhv rov rarépwy didackanlav, iv exec Stahopay 7d Kowwdv brép
TO tStov, 7) 7d yévos Umep Td eldos H) Td Aromov, Tavryy 7 ovola mpds Thy brdoracw exer
(Theodoret, Dial. I. ed. Hal. iv. p. 7).

_* Non itaque secundum genus et species ista dicimus. . . . Nec sic ergo
Trinitatem dicimus tres personas unam essentiam tanquam ex una materia tria
quaedam subsistant (Augustine, de Trin. vii. 11)


... propter ineffabilem coniunctionem haec tria simul unus Deus
(Augustine, zb7d. 8).


§ 171] UNITY, TRINITY, AND CAUSALITY 745


divinity of the Holy Spirit and the divinity of Christ, as also the
relation of Christ as Son to the Father—comes to the front ; but
so, too, does the danger of falling into tritheism. Between these
two lines of thought (for we must always start either from the
unity or from the trinity) no genuinely middle course seems possible
which would not really be an approximation to one or the other.
But from our assumptions neither the subordination of the unity
to the trinity nor the converse follows ; hence as regards the dis-
tinctions existing in the Supreme Being from all eternity there is
nothing for it but either to accept one of the two courses indicated,
which conflicts with what the credal passages insist on, or, if we
shrink from what they insist on, to conclude that it is impossible
for us definitely to reach either point—the unity or the trinity ;
we remain hesitating between the two.1 In these circumstances
the doctrine can do little to secure those two main points (which
alone are in question), or to place them in a clearer light.

4. It still remains to show how unity and trinity are related to
the divine causality (apprehended in our self-conscious feeling of
absolute dependence) alike in redemption and sanctification and
generally in creation and preservation. The divine causality must
not be divided between the Persons, however natural it might be to
say that the Father alone is Creator and Preserver, the Son alone
Redeemer, and the Spirit alone Sanctifier. And if it is to be kept
undivided, we reach here the same conclusion as before, either that
these causalities all belong to the one Divine Essence as such, and
to the Persons only in so far as they are in the Essence, but not in
so far as they are distinct from each other, or they belong to the
three Persons as such, and to the unity of the Essence only in so far
as it consists of the Persons. The former view failed to establish
itself, obviously because in it the trinity falls more into the back-
ground than was permitted by the ruling tendencies of the time ; ?
for it may almost be said that the Persons have reality only in the
previously mentioned special acts. The Father is real, in so far as
He begets the Son from all eternity, but creation and preservation
would appertain solely to the unity of the Divine Essence. The
Son, it is true, would not be merely begotten, or the Spirit merely

1 Ov POdvw 7d év vojoa Kal Tots TpLol mepiAduTroua, od POdvw Tad Tpia SieNeiv, Kal
els 70 ev dvadépouat (Greg. Naz., f.c.).

2 That the tendency of Church teaching tends to emphasize the Persons
rather than the unity of the Essence may be seen clearly enough from the
following words of the Symb. Quic., 19: Sicut singillatim unamquamque


personam et deum et dominum confiteri christiand veritate compellimur, ita
tres deos aut dominos dicere catholica religione prohibemur,


746 THE CHRISTIAN FAITH [§ 171


breathed into being, for the former also became man and the latter
was also poured forth; but the justifying divine activity would
not be that solely of the Son or the sanctifying divine activity that
of the Spirit ; both would belong to the unity of the Divine Essence.
Hence the second view came to be accepted universally, that the
whole divine causality belongs to the three Persons ; but the form
it took in ecclesiastical doctrine appears to suffer from a hidden
contradiction. For if the divine causality belongs to the Persons
as such, it belongs to each of them in so far as distinct from the
others ; and hence the same causality is, in the first Person, that of
the Unbegotten, in the second that of the Begotten, and thus is in
each case triple, because issuing in each case from that which is
personally distinctive, though but one in effect ; much as Christ
executes the same thing with His two wills, the three Persons execute
the same thing each in its own way, and thus each by its own act.
This consistent scheme, however, failed to commend itself, obviously
because the divine unity is obscured in a wholly nominalistic way,
and almost nothing is left for it but to represent the equality of the
three in essence and will. On the other hand, the accepted view
that those causalities do indeed belong to the three Persons as such,
but that each causality is one and the same in all three, and not a
peculiar causality in each, means that the causality is really traced
back, not to the Persons, but after all to the Divine Essence in its
unity. Thus, once the eternal trinity in the unity is assumed, from
this angle we arrive simply at the same difficulty as before, of
choosing between the preponderance of the one and the subordina-
tion of the other, or vice versa.

5. If we now consider the manner in which this doctrine is
handled almost everywhere in dogmatic expositions, it becomes
still clearer to how slight an extent what is insisted on in general
formule may be given effect to in the developed statement. In the
first place, the doctrine of the Essence and attributes of God is
treated apart from the trinity, God being considered in His unity.
Here, however, the particular attribute under consideration is not
shown within the unity, as triply divided or separated in a definite
way. Instead, the doctrine of the Persons is later treated of by
itself, apart from any such connexion and without being prepared
for by the consciousness of the being of God in Christ and in the
Christian Church. It is so treated of, however, that when it is
shown that this or that attribute also belongs to the three Persons,
the proof is specially led only for the Son and the Spirit, while that


§ 172] FUTURE TRANSFORMATION OF THE DOCTRINE 747


it belongs to the Father is usually held to be self-evident. But if
the equality of the Persons is asserted not merely as a formula but
as an operative rule, such self-evidence must hold either of all three
Persons or of none. The pre-eminence given to the Father in this
respect proves that He is after all conceived as standing in a different
relation to the unity of the Essence ; so that those who feel it to be
superfluous to prove that divine attributes and activities belong to
the Father, while they insist on proof for the Son and the Spirit,
are all of them far from being strict Trinitarians ; for they identify
the Father with the unity of the Divine Essence, but not the Son
or the Spirit. This can be traced right back to the idea of Origen,
that the Father is God absolutely, while Son and Spirit are God only
by participation in the Divine Essence !—an idea which is positively
rejected by orthodox Church teachers, but secretly underlies their
whole procedure.


§ 172. We have the less reason to regard this doctrine as finally settled
since it did not receive any fresh treatment when the Evan-
gelical (Protestant) Church was set up; and so there musi
still be in store for it a transformation which will go back to
ats very beginnings.

1. If we reflect, on the one hand, that the formule now accepted
in the doctrine of the Trinity originated at a time when Christendom
was still being recruited by mass-conversion from heathendom, and
consider how easily, when it became necessary to speak of a plurality
or distinction in God, unconscious echoes of what is pagan could
find their way in, it is not surprising that the descriptions of such
plurality should from the start have been vacillating and liable to
misconception, and such as were no longer suited to later times, when
no further admixture of heathenism was to be feared. Cautions
could not but be attached to the use of such descriptions, to guard
against aberrations on different sides ; but even so it is seldom that
such cautions do not approximate to one extreme in seeking to
guard against the other. Also they must lose their value once the
danger of misunderstanding to which they relate has disappeared,
and in that case the sinister suggestion they contain of the opposite
error will come out all the more emphatically. If we take the
original tendency of the doctrine, namely, to make clear that it is
no hyperbolical expression of our consciousness of Christ and of the


1 ’ 1 a 2 cot \ \ \ ry ’ 60 eee en 6 L
at’té0eos 6 Beds ort. . . Wav Oe TO Tapa 7d airdbeos MEeTOXT THS Exelvou GeoTnTOS
Ocoroovmevov xt. Comm. in Joann, (ed. R. iv. p. 50), where the connexion
puts it beyond doubt that a’rddeos is the Father. Cf. de princ. i. vol. 1. p. 62.


748 THE CHRISTIAN FAITH [§ 172


common Spirit of the Church to assert that God is in both, the first
task of the doctrine is clearly this—to define this peculiar being of
God in that which is other, in its relation both to the being of God
in Himself and to the being of God in relation to the world in
general. And obviously there is no prospect of ever so accomplish-
ing this task that a formula adequate for all time could be con-
structed, and every departure therefrom repudiated as unchristian.
We have only to do with the God-consciousness given in our self-
consciousness along with our consciousness of the world ; hence we
have no formula for the being of God in Himself as distinct from the
being of God in the world, and should have to borrow any such
formula from speculation, and so prove ourselves disloyal to the
character of the discipline at which we are working. Further, if
we feel that our dogmatic expressions for the relation of God to the
world inevitably suffer in every case from faults of anthropo-
morphism, how could we suppose that we should have more success
with the more intricate task of distinguishing the peculiar being of
God in Christ as an individual, and in the Christian Church as an
historical whole, from the omnipotent presence of God in the world
in general, of which these are parts? Rather we shall have to put
up with the fact that the problem can only be solved approximately,
and that formule which have antagonistic points of departure must
always remain opposed in tendency ; for interest in the problem is
bound always to spring up afresh.

2. This being so, it might seem very surprising that while so
many other problems of later origin have been solved in a tolerably
satisfactory way, precisely this one, so comprehensive in character,
has remained so long stationary at the very unsatisfactory point to
which it was brought at (so to say) the first rush. But the fact is,
those later questions—particularly that of the Person of Christ and
of the gracious operations of the Spirit—dealt with the same subject
on the side next to the direct interests of faith ; and the Trinitarian
definitions proper (all the more that they were made fundamental
in the discussions just referred to) had to remain as they had
already come to be, in spite of the undeniable fact that impassioned
polemical zeal—so prone to error—had had only too large a share
in their construction. But if the doctrine of the Trinity is not
even yet free from vacillations as indicated above between equality
and subordination on the one hand, and on the other between
Tritheism and such a Unitarianism as must obscure all over again
what was felt to be of the very first importance, namely, the eternal


§ 172] ANTI-TRINITARIANISM 749


distinctness of the Persons, we ought not to feel too much surprise
that anti-trinitarian opinions should ever and again emerge and
should occasionally gain ground ; nor ought we to be precipitate
in condemnation. It is here as with the doctrine of God in general :
many not merely profess to be but actually think they are opposed
to every belief in God, when in fact they are simply repelled by
ordinary presentations of the subject, but have by no means parted
with all those spiritual affections which spring from the God-con-
sciousness. Similarly, it is natural that people who cannot reconcile
themselves to the difficulties and imperfections that cling to the
formule current in Trinitarian doctrine should say that they re-
pudiate everything connected with it, whereas in point of fact their
piety is by no means lacking in the specifically Christian stamp.
This is the case often enough at the present moment not only in
the Unitarian societies of England and America, but also among
the scattered opponents of the doctrine of the Trinity in our own
country. That circumstance supplies a further reason why we
should strive to secure freedom for a thoroughgoing criticism of the
doctrine in its older form, so as to prepare the way for, and introduce,
a reconstruction of it corresponding to the present condition of
other related doctrines.

3. The position assigned to the doctrine of the Trinity in the
present work is perhaps at all events a preliminary step towards
this goal. One who is a believer in the ecclesiastical sense of that
word can scarcely arm himself with the equanimity needful alike
for an impartial criticism of the old procedure and for a new con-
struction, until he has become convinced that it is possible for our
faith in the divine present in Christ and in the Christian communion
to find fit theological expression, even before anything has been
heard of those more exact definitions which go to form the doctrine
of the Trinity. But this independence of mind can never attain to
clearness so long as that doctrine is dealt with before the chief points
of faith just mentioned; for that arrangement of topics only too
easily leads to an impression (utterly contradicted by the history
of the Church) that acceptance of the doctrine of the Trinity is the
necessary precondition of faith in redemption and in the founding
of the Kingdom of God by means of the divine in Christ and in the
Holy Spirit. Not to speak of the fact that the theological character
of the entire presentation is distorted, and that neither the criticism
nor the points of attachment needed for the new construction can
be placed on a right foundation if the doctrine in question (which


750 THE CHRISTIAN FAITH [§ 172


is not directly a statement about our Christian consciousness at all)
is set up as a fundamental doctrine, and therefore, of course, arrived
at in a speculative way. The same speculative tone then comes to
be imported into the doctrine of the Redeemer and of the Holy
Spirit, as being dependent on the doctrine of the Trinity ; and thus
the door is opened wide to the influx of speculative elements.

We ought not, however, to rest satisfied with this preliminary
step ; we must at least give some indications of what yet remains to
do. And on the present state of the question we may base, I think,
the following reflections. The first unsolved difficulty lies in the
relation of the unity of the Essence to the trinity of the Persons ;
and here everything depends on the original and eternal existence
of distinctions within the Divine Essence. Hence it would first
be necessary to inquire whether this idea is so clearly and definitely
present in passages of the New Testament that we are bound to
regard it as a self-descriptive utterance of Christ and of the divine
Spirit that guided the thinking of the Apostles. Of this there can
scarcely be a better test than to ask whether these passages could
not also be explained by the Sabellian view set up in opposition to
our ecclesiastical interpretation. If this question must be answered
in the negative, nothing is left but to try whether the ecclesiastical
doctrine could not, without injury to the essential presuppositions
mentioned above, be stated in formule which should not contradict
the Biblical passages and yet should avoid the rocks on which the
ecclesiastical presentation comes to grief. If, on the other hand, the
question can be answered affirmatively, so that it is no longer
possible to hold that the ecclesiastical doctrine, even if not purely
exegetical in origin, can at least be sustained by purely exegetical
proof, then the Athanasian hypothesis is simply on a par with the
Sabellian ; and the question must be raised whether the latter
cannot render us equal service, without involving us in equally
insoluble difficulties. In other words, the question is whether
formule cannot be devised which, without asserting eternal dis-
tinctions in the Supreme Being, are yet equally capable of exhibiting
in their truth both unions of the Essence with human nature.
Only, no mutability must thereby be ascribed to the Supreme
Being ; and although the activities of the Supreme Being in effect-
ing the unions are represented as taking place in time, this must
be done no otherwise than we do it everywhere else ; for we cannot
conceive the divine causality otherwise than as decree in its eternity,
while yet we cannot represent its fulfilment otherwise than as in


§ 172] FATHER, SON, AND SPIRIT 751


time. The second difficulty suggested by the ecclesiastical doctrine
was this, that the designation of the First Person as Father, as well
as the relations of the First Person to the other two Persons, seems
rather to set forth the relation of the Persons to the unity of the
Essence than to be consistent with the equality of the three Persons.
Here the question really comes to be, whether it was right at the
outset to give the name ‘ Son of God’ solely to the divine in Christ,
and to relate the term ‘ Father’ to one of the distinctions in the
Divine Essence and not rather to the unity of the Divine Essence as
such. If it transpires that by ‘ Son of God’ Scripture always and
exclusively means the whole Christ Himself, and recognizes no differ-
ence between ‘ God,’ as denoting the Supreme Being, and ‘ the Father
of our Lord Jesus Christ,’ but uses the latter name in exactly the
same sense as the former, we should then have to try whether a
similar question might not be raised with regard to the Holy Spirit,
with a similar answer, leading to such forms of statement as would
solve our second difficulty. If the results of both problems com-
bined in one, a new construction could easily be arrived at; if
otherwise, we should have to seek new solutions, as we could, of
the remaining differences. This is of itself a sufficient explanation
why we are here unable to go beyond these indications in such
a way as to complete the whole task.


a
a : ‘
_ —


; Sees CLO aS Tui a


7
: + 5 n t : i = 4 Prove Grir att ATE: b :
= Pr o,.h Onl ae iba Sl? afi 1a ee
a L a Fy aR Ine Gyyz8 oF) 5 como Cart ore nai


eure] ¢ ty (acetal “se ARG iSeries’
ar We Ligeia ee T. ie otal >a) te meaieae re |
sere! Py darabh «ty wily hel ae )
. ivi or yeeiad fe Be int reltpg ¢ “Tey mas f ‘
> ‘ Ton wtl atte ett ff Gs 4yikaty eer eee
- Cis er lide? i ry Pat BE “wv cere eo?
ap lits + river ive Lie Pe pales ten
Pet ihe “tae ee oer pretense” 7
AVF ee We oe a ay Sap ae aieeiad
Milare o7! 18 - pet ot hed SF rire’? rat
Wel) @ « iv «dhe. lian alee +s
en? 49 *aioi nee © Val ci ee Ge ,
MP Viitlves 4) itped «I Senay, Se
wre ors rhe Mim: Gatien ae ;
eo ey) ae by Orit wl £ es 2 Bias hit = 1 '
ee eT, ee
Siiv “ht bf eel @ bes i ke Align ae


ve fare Ts as


4 > 5 idk SEG GA) ert ae dpa e: esta


.


INDEXES


A. SUBJECTS


Abraham, 61.
Activity, 13 ff.
Actual sin, 281, 304 ff.; diversities


of, 308 ff.
Adoption, 499 ff., 517.
Affections, religious, set forth in


doctrine, 76 ff., 127 f.

Anabaptists, 636 ff.

Angels, 156 ff.

Antithesis, of sin and grace, 123 ff. ;
first aspect of, 269 ff. ; second
aspect of, 355 ff.

Apologetics, 4 f., 52, 59.

Arianism, 740.

Ascension of Christ, 417 ff.

Atheism, 135 f.

Attributes, divine, their denotation,
194 ff. ; divisions of, 198 f. ; re-
lated to sin, 267f., 325 ff. ; related
to redemption, 723 ff.


Baptism, 489, 619 ff., 652; of John,
621 ; and regeneration, 621 ff. ;
its effects, 626 ff.; of infants,
634 ff.

Blessedness, 23 ; eternal, 717 ff.


Canon, the, 598, 602 ff.

Catholicism, Roman, 89, 101 ff., 139,
256, 360, 483, 497, 503, 514;
distinction of, from Protestant-
isi TOS. 17 5809 645 tf.
654, 658 f., 666; Greek, 654.

Causality, absolute, 200 ff., 211 ff.

Christ, belief in, 46; redemption
accomplished by, 52 ff.; not
absolutely supernatural, 62 ff. ;
as Redeemer, 68 ff.; sinless
perfection of, 361 ff, 371 £.,
Bost mais itasesas thessecond
Adam, 367 ff., 389; Person of,
B77. as ideal, 3771. ;\ de-
velopment of, 380 ff. ; His God-
consciousness, 385 ff. ; His two
natures, 391 ff. ; work of, 425 ff.


48


Christianity, perfection of, 33, 37f.,
39 f.; relation to other faiths,
42 f., 56 ff.; definition of, 52 ff.

Christology, of New Testament,
420 ff.

Church, introductory conception of,
Zulia aS vaseriellowshipyezor
membership in, 68 ff. ; doctrine
Ola Seisethens


origin of, 532 ff. ; as
image of Christ, 579 ff.; and
the world, 584 ft.; visible and
invisible, 676 ff. ; consummation
of, 606 ff.
Church History, 92 f.
Communicatio tdiomatum, 410 ff.
Confessions, 89; as test of doctrine,
TN) tic
Confirmation, 637.
Conscience, 341 ff.
Consciousness, racial, 27, 246, 564.
Consubstantiation, 646.
Conversion, 478 ff., 481 ff.


Co-operation, of God, 176f., 182,
NSOseODe
Creation, 142 ff., 225; narrative of,


150 f., 252; out of nothing, 153;
Christ,


man’s completed in
366 ff.

Creed, the, 617 f.

Damnation, eternal, 720 ff,

Death, and sin, 243 f.

Decalogue, 285, 351, 523.

Decrees, of God, 501, 557.

Dependence, feeling of absolute,
Tih we LO the 4 AO, er eGy an.
passim.

Descent into Hell, 419.

Devil, the, 161 ff., 293 ff.

Docetism, 99, 381 f., 396, 398, 400,


401, 430.

Doctrine, 50; grounded in religious
affections, 76 ff.; as didactic,
78 ff. ; in contrast to preaching,
87.


754


Dogmatic propositions, 78 ff. ; two-
fold value of, 83 ff. ; collocation
of, 85 ff. ; three forms of, 125 f.,
TAO, 205 tb., 300;

Dogmatics, definition of, 3 ff. ; forms
Of soos as a) Ssclence, | SSiit.;
method of, 94 ff.; system of,
112 ff.; language and arrange-
ment of, 118 ff.; contents of,
136; sources of, 137.

Doing, or action, 7 ff.


Eastern Church, 78, I0f.

Ebionism, 99 ff., 396, 398.

Election, 533 ff., 536 ff. ; grounds of,
pat tis

Error, removal of, 691 f.

Eschatology, 703 ff.

Essence, in doctrine of Trinity, 395.

Eternity, of God, 201 ff.


Imes, spin “(Glbwigaghn, iar, Sid;
584 f.
Evangelical Church, see Protestant-


ism.

Byalisduita and isin) e243it.. 320) i.
A2de Ee GOCtrINe FOL si5mt-— aS
punishment, 317 ff., 347 ff. ; and
divine causality, 338 ff.

Exaltation, of Christ, 473 ff.

Exegesis, 92 f.


Faith, 10; in Jesus, 68 ff., 483.

Fall, the, 292 ff.

Falling away, 513 f.

Feeling, 6 ff., and passim.

Fellowship, essential to religion,
20 ih. Varieties sotm aiuto edi
the Church, 525 f., 561 ff. ; with
Christ, 651 ff.

Blesh} thes 272e.

Foreknowledge, 552 ff.

Fore-ordination, see Predestination.

Forgiveness, of sins, 496 ff., 515 ff.,


651 ff.
Breedom yy tAiit., 132) teecOmtamecne
in God, 216f.; human, and


divine foreknowledge, 227 f.
Free will, 293.


God, the Whence of our existence,
TOV; Clernitys | Ofc Odetins
holiness of, 341 ff., 731 ; infinity
Ol, 230 justice Nol, as4i5tt =
73%; love of, 726 ff. ; mercy of,
353 f.; omnipotence of, 201 ff.,
211 ff., 730 f. ; omnipresence of,
202 f., 206 ff. ; ommiscience of,
202 f., 219 ff.; unchangeability
of, 206 ; unity of, 229 f. ; will of,
216 ff. ; wrath of, 350; see also
Divine Attributes and Trinity.


INDEX TO SUBJECTS


God-consciousness, and
passim.

Godlessness, 54 f., 135 f.

Good-pleasure, of God, 555 ff.

Good Works, 517 ff.; reward of, 521 f.

Government, divine, 117f., 531,
HOR Bic

Government, secular, 470 ff.

Grace, 262 ff., and passim.

Greek philosophy, 62.


17, 47, 55,


Hardening, 311 f.

Heathenism, 60 f., 100.

Heresy, 95 ff.

Heterodoxy, 110.

High Priest, Christ as, 451 ff., 659.
Holiness, of God, 341 ff., 731.


Holy Scripture, 75f.; as test of
doctrine, 112 ff., 588, 591 ff.,
606 ff.


Holy Spirit, 490 f. ; communication
Of, 533 ff, 560 4fj2e ms themNew
Testament, 562 f.; and Christ’s
departure, 565 ff. ; asa common
Spirit, 569 ff., 612 ; all believers
share in, 574 ff.; and Scripture,
607 fia; in “Lrinity733ntee (sim
against, 310 f.

Human nature, 63 f.

Humiliation, of Christ, 473 ff.


Idol-worship, 34 ff., 135.

Immensity, of God, 210 f.

Immortality, of Christ, 416, 700 f. ;
of Christians, 542 ff., 698 ff. ;
conditional, 545, 701.

Impersonality, of Christ’s human
nature, 402 f.

Independence, of God, 218 f.

Individual, 47.

Infallibility, of the Church, 687 ff.

Infinity, of God, 230 f.

Inspiration, 75f.; of
597 ff.

Intermediate State, 711 f.


Scripture,


Judaism,.37;.743 ft) 40; OOrt. 100),
TGs 133, 157, 321, 387.
Judgment, final, 417 ff., 713 ff.
Justice, of God, 345 ff., 731.
Justification, 478 ff., 496 ff.


Keys, power of, 590, 660 ff.

King, Christ as, 466 ff., 660 ff.

IXnowing, or knowledge, 7 ff. ; God’s,
219 ff.; His mediate, 224 ff.


Law, the, 76, 522 f., 608 ff. ; Christ’s


fulfilment of, 451 ff.; in the
Church, 660 f.
Lord’s Supper, 638 ff.; divergent


INDEX TO SUBJECTS


views of, 644 ff., 657; benefits
of, 651 ff. ; unworthy participa-
tion in, 655 ff.

Love, of God, 726 ff.

Lutheran Church, 107.


Magical views, of redemption, 429 ff. ;
of reconciliation, 434 ff., 438.


Man, original perfection of, 237,
244 ff.

Manicheism, 98 ff., 270, 296 ff., 329,
332, 335-


Mass, the, 654 f.

Mercy, of God, 353 f.

Ministry, of the Word, 588, 611 ff.,
665 f.

Miracle, 71 ff., 178 ff., 448 f.

Misery, of sin, 355 ff.

Mohammedanism, 37, 44, 58, 133.

Monotheism, 34 ff., 43, 62.

Moses, 44, 58, 61 f.

Mystery-cults, 43, 50.

Mystical influence of Christ, 429 ff.

Mythology, 50 f.


INPUT, 9G AO, TAG, Wie, BA siin
system of, 138 1., 170 ff., 181.

Nature, in Christology, 392 f.

Necessity, 216 f.

New Testament, 76, 81; as test of
doctrine, 115 f.


Obedience, of Christ, 451 ff.

Offices, of Christ, 438 ff.

Old Testament, 62, I15 ; insufficient
basis of doctrine, 608 ff.

Omnipotence, 201 ff., 211 ff., 730 f.

Omnipresence, 202 f., 200 ff.

Omniscience, 202 f., 219 ff.

Original Sin, 281 ff.; as incapacity
for good, 282 ff.; as guilty,
285 ff. ; corporate, 288 ff.; not
punished, 290 f.

Orthodoxy, 110.


Pantheism, 38 f., 174, 192.

Paradise, 242 ff., 249.

Parents, our first, 248 ff.; their fall,
292 ff. ; effect of their sin, 295 ff.

Patristic thought, 117.


Pélagianism, 97, 255f., 270, 298,
329, 335.

Perfection, original, 237, 244 ff.,
gig] ie

Rersonweot Christ, 3774s in
Christology, 393 ff. ; in Trinity,


739 ff.
Philosophy, 93.
Philosophy of religion, 4 f., 31 ff., 59.
Piety, or religion, 5 ff., and passim.
Pleasure and pain, 18 ff.


fee}
Poetry, 78 f.
Poly theism, 26934 ff. 43,05 heenss,
387.


Possible, the,-213 f., 223 ff.

Prayer, 180; in Christ's name, 590,
668 ff. ; hearing of, 671 ff.

Preaching, 77 i281.) 85 tt.) 5.513%

Predestination, 546 ff.

Preservation, 142 ff., 170 ff.

Proof, of Christianity, 59 f.

Prophecy, 73 ff., 4406 f.

Prophet, Christ as, 441 ff.

Protestantism, 89; distinction of,
from Catholicism, 103 ff., and
passim.

Protevangelium, 64.

Providence, 725 f.

Psychology, 8.

Punishment, divine, 349 ff.


Receptivity, 13 ff.

Reciprocity, 14.

Reconciliation, 431 ff.

Redemption, 54 ff., 425 ff.

Reformed (Calvinistic) Church, 107.

Regeneration, 180, 476, 478 ff., 541 f.

Regret for sin, 484 ff.

Religion, nature of, 5 ff., 12 ff., 29 f. ;
teleological and esthetic, 39 ff. ;
founders of, 44 ff., 50 ff. ; positive
and revealed, 47 ff.; natural,
48 ; lower forms of, 47 ff.

Religions, History of, 42.

Religiosity, 30.

Repentance, 481 f.

Representation, by Christ, 463 f.

Reprobation, 547 ff.

Resurrection, of Christ, 417 ff.; of
the flesh, 709 ff.

Return of Christ, 417 ff., 707 ff.

Revelation, 47 ff., 62 ff.

Rhetoric, 78 f.

Righteousness,
civil, 284 f.


OnIgina) ee helues


Sabellianism, 399, 750.

Sacrament, 657 ff.

Sanctification, 505 ff.

Satisfaction, vicarious, 460 ff.

Science, 6.

Self-consciousness, 6,
passim.

Simplicity, of God, 231.

Sin, and grace, 262 ff.; as a human
state, 271 ff. ; consciousness of,
271 ff.; a derangement, 275 ff. ;
source of, 279ff.; and evil,
320 ff., 345 ff.; ordained by
God, 326 ff.; in the regenerate,
510 ff.

Son of God, 392.


19, and


750


Sorrow, 184 ff.

Space, 206 ff.

State, the, 4, 6.

Supernatural, the, 62 ff., 365.

Supra-rational, the, 64 ff.

Supreme Being, 81f.,
passim.


230, and


Teacher, Christ as, 442 ff.
Teaching, Christian, 87.

Theism, 39.

Theistic proofs, 136 f.

Time, 204 f.

Transubstantiation, 645 f.
Trinity, the, 144, 395, 399, 738 ff.


Unchangeability, of God, 206.
Unitarianism, 748 f.
Unity, of God, 229 f.


INDEX TO AUTHORS AND SOURCES


Virgin Birth, 403 ff.
Vocation, 518.


Western Church, 78, 89, 101.
Will, of God, 216 ff. ; in Christology,


394.

Wisdom, of God, 221 f., 727, 732 ff.

Word, the, 154, 156, 221, 397, 491 ff. ;
ministry of, 611 ff

Work, of Christ, 425 ff.

World, propositions relating to,
125 f.; constitution of, 233 ff.
original perfection of, 233 ff.,


B. AUTHORS AND SOURCES


Abelard, 214.
Ambrose, 247, 294, 300.
Ammon, 345.
Anselm, 152, 154, 194,
Apologists, 62.
Aquinas, 183, 223.
Aristotle, 153.
Athanasius, 401.
Augusti Corpus, 391.
Augustine, 137, 153,
2045) 205,208.) 200, 204)
PWS PUD PN, PIE PIORS§ DEV
273, 284, 293, 294, 295, 303,
310, 312, 504, 513, 541, 550,
684, 744.


220, 221, 742.


154, 155, 194,
218,
255;
304,


579,


Barclay, Robert, 625, 643.
Basil, 214.

Baumgarten, 309 f.
Baumgarten-Crusius, 7.
Bellarmine, 256. -
Bernard, 161.

Boethius, 204, 205.
Bretschneider, 92.
Buddeus, 183, 345.


Calvin, 146, 150, 159, 162, 167, 220,
299, 306, 332, 490, 503, 548, 549,
550, 649, O51.

Chrysostom, 160, 417.

Cicero, 289.

Clement of Alexandria, 62, 134.


Creeds, Confessions, Catechisms,
etc. :
Apostles’ Creed, 142, 144, 404,
419, 525, 707.


238 ff.; in relation to man,
236 fi) (they best, 4241 eas
related to sin, 315 ff. ; as related
to redemption, 525 ff. ; and the
Church, 584 ff.

Worship, public, 687 ff.

Wrath, of God, 350.

Creeds (continued )—

Athanasian Creed, 144, 391, 397,
404, 419, 738, 742.

Creed of Constantinople, 144.

Nicene Creed, 391, 404, 418, 525,
7O7.

Confessio Angl., 144, 282, 327,
404, 452, 517, 546, 603, 604,
614, 644.

Conf. Augs.,. 143, TAAR 16358203)
273; 282, 285, 292, 299, 339,
337,- 39%, 396, 404, 471) 481,
513, ©©4, 620) "6279" O3RnO4A.
653, 662 f., 692, FO 7385 742s

Conf. Basil., 285, 663, 727.

Conf. Belg., L 52s Eo eee OZ eon Ae


282) 285, Z2O2 ts, 205) 1200) eSOn,
404, 413, 416, 455, 472, 496, 500,
503, 510, 517, 543, 597, 603, 604,
626, 634, O50 055.6 0029071
602 1. 707, 742.

Conf. Bohem., 142, 144, 286, 338.


Conf. Gall;} VAs i. 282.235) 202,
299) 30459391, 404,50 4137405,
489, 491, 496, 513, 523, 543,
597, 603 f., 614, 626, 634, 644,
663, 738, 744.

Conf. Helv., 162) 254, 292; 205,
299, 391f., 404, 481, 491, 597,
614.


Conf. Hung., 144, 330, 404, 738.
Conf. March., 546, 551, 604.


Conf. Mylhus., 458, 517.

Conf. Sawxon., 546, 614, 626, 640,
653, 663.

Conf. Scot., 144, 458, 597, 651.


INDEX TO AUTHORS AND SOURCES


Creeds (continued)—

Conf. Tetrap., 452, 496, 663.

Apol. Conf. Augs., 158, 254, 282,
285, 289, 292, 299, 308, 452,
481f. 484f, 489f. 491, 496,
$00, 503, 517, 644, 653, 655, 692.

Art. Smalc., 158, 286, 292, 299,
491, 517, 604, 626, 634, 644, 655,
7X1.

Canon. Dordy., 551.

Colloq. Lips., 552, 626.

Declar. Thorun., 452, 513, 597, 634.

Eptiom. Artic,, 282, 285, 513, 518.

Expos. Simpl., 143, 282, 307, 330,
391, 458, 468, 481, 483, 489, 491,
496, 510, 513, 517, 546, 604, O14,
626, 633 f., 644, 651, 655, 663,
O7UNOO2 FOV 071 Ul. 7386

Repetit. Conf., 282, 481, 693.

Solid. declar., 162, 254, 283f., 286,
297, 330, 338, 391, 412, 455f.,
460, 474, 493f., 495, 513, 523,
546 f., 550.

Cat. Genev., 142.

Cat. Heidel., 631, 655, 671.

Cat. Major (Lutheri), 458, 626,
651.

Cat. Racov., 647.

Cat. Rom., 033, 054.

"Exdeots 6p000. ic., 654.

Cudworth, 205.


Daub, 742.

Delbriick, 12.

de Wette, 250.
Dionysius Areopag., 194.


Eckermann, 205.
Endemann, 196.
Erigena, 220.
Ernesti, 466.
Eusebius, 605.


Flacius, 297.


Gerhard, 184, 209, 210, 215, 216, 218,
223, 273, 293, 295, 401, 406, 407,
494, 501, 555, 621, 629, 630.

Gregory of Nazianzus, 744 f.


Henke, 344.

Hess, 460.

Hilary, 152, 153, 154, 194, 209, 221,
_ 345, 406.

Hippolytus, 154.

Hugo of St. Victor, 302, 308.


Irenzus, 605.


Jerome, 300.


TOS,
John of Damascus, 152, 154, 204,
AN, PROG), Pug Pty AAG. stevl.


401, 406, 409, 410, 412.


Lactantius, 230.
Leibniz, 241.
Luther, 150, 152, 154, 156, 159, 161,


162, 294, 450, 489, 494, 646,
649 f.

Lyra, 294.

Melanchthon, 133, 134, 256, 263,
ZO 5 Bloom SOAs BOOn 3079) 3005
Gl, G27,  FBOs. HO AES, HES


549, O51, 653, 659, 693.
Mendelssohn, M., 49.
Michaelis, 241.
Morus, 156, 176, 177, 183.
Mosheim, 162, 181, 196, 198, 205, 210,
Diy, BG), PROV Pain. yi


Nemesius, 146.
Origen, 155, 294, 714, 747.
Philo, 151.


Photius, 152.
Pisecius, 210.


Plato, 39.

Quenstedt, 174, 177, 182, 253, 298,
345.

Reinhard) 137, 157, 160; 181, 183,


198, 205, 206, 210, 218, 222, 226,

PO, Bit, Disihis ACY, BOO), GUA, Zisye

395, 399, 412, 459, 513, 545.
Rufinus, 230.


Sack, 3.

Schleiermacher, 1, 3, 5, 20, 44, 88,
TOS a Del,

Schott, 198.

Schwarz, viii.

Smalcius, 210.

Socinians, 210, 228, 231, 253, 646 f.

Socinus, 205, 228.

Steffens, 7.

Storr, 179, 182.


Theodoret, 744.
Theophilus, 209.


Vorstius, 231.
Wegscheider, 217.


Zwingli, 134, 621, 624, 633, 647, 649f.,
658.


758 INDEX TO SCRIPTURE REFERENCES


C. SCRIPTURE REFERENCES


Genesis, 1, 1503 1%, 570; 7%, 150;'| Mark, 94, 7205 134 578s a


TNS Cer AGO 2 AKO Deu ZOTAR PA OA Sam On COZ:
p27 34g = 178, 240 > 194, 235°; | Lake, 18" 4s 7) 32a ee
2, 159; 23, 152; 27=-3"4, 249; 442; 247, 444; 41%, 415; 4%,
Zt) 242, 238 17, 243 5 29 24a 443; 47% =403 ; -4°9 402 700",
218243, 240 5) 3) 20k Ss Ges 464; CPE 3544) SONG se I0
3345~ 380615253307" Bees 16675. “E126 SEG taht ee
gie48. 315) 3305.8" 274° 13NS) 322") lg aet ope
EXQdUS aL 743 02-2 Os Onmnail a, EYE, ARRAN GO OLE Sig <
7 Oem so ZOO. LO pote 7 Tike eel 7o ea COM Olen
Deuteronomy, 61°, 160 ; 13!-°, 448. AZ3N2073522 5 79) ee hates
Wolo, Bye%, BG LOR, exoy 22 SOO OAs De! em O Sete og
Psalms, 133% 570.5 33°", 15i 5 OC As 238, 7 Fiz ea
ZOE OS LO? => ZO 5 LOS TOT DA AD Ae
I51 ; 139, 207; 144, 345. Jobin, 9122) 400) gall 2100. ai ee
Isaiah, 347°5570 ; 457*, 1515 61% 570. CMS anemone, Sites 22; SarEN,
Jeremiahy 1024) 151) 2612061 44o°5) At) 74" Nie eGo mere
Sane oye Ae Droloy FASS TON 5 SATA eo Ag Ore
Danielin7it422., 327624 git fo? sae ooo cee
Hosea, 67, 300. B22 (621 + 42 02 TaO2O) aces
Micah, 3°, 570. AO, ATA 3 405 443, OL in mbal
Zechariah, 1}2, 159, 422 ATA (GS°R A Game tocnen
HOES ASC oilers ie. Leavin. iii &
Matthew, 118, 570; 118-25, 403; 524s 25, 720 3 524 26 422; 528+ 20,
310-1617, 44a; 58) 719; 514 709; 52%, 7203; 539, 456; 638,
OF 7s 51820, HO Pe Oph Oey 456; 6%, 7095 GS) 4osie toe
AOA 5, §8°5, 995375 “10825 407; 409, 535 3n 0? S0ng 6S Es ear:
TOS, MOUS NOU 2204 3) eto: 2S. Ga 88 GOR: (O° 5700) se Oana ae
665 ; 1o%4-28 461; 1113, 570; 688 69 Go, 448; 716, 451 ; 725. 26,
Tr?" 469; 121% 20 yas 7281 448; 739, 629; 812 85; 924
BEL; 12h 160g 1305 Ga 422; 83%, 453-5 82 aga oe
LS AE OO umemichan adcnee ntsyiy 422°) 834) TOA Sa", ALAN Ace re ae
4035 15%, 1665 (1545375 165; 8°, 462; 9%, 319, 321;
NOL >a" OO se 1Olo AAS e560 caatore TODAS | ATO) ee 1020s mo G amet AG
KO MOM NCORR HOH io SE LO 80=8 2 TAZ 2 eLOl 20d Damas ons
IS MO KEVA Fie Si Gigyc B22 ee LOSSs AT At ORR AAD ae
HG ways OO Zion, Omg < lias ed Ot emo Sem ee Te
1K COs UGE Gis Bok oul AAG 5 UIT eS. AS32345 AS poet
346; 2179 468; 2121-22, 673; MO NSS SI Se ar | Gata
2214, 548; 2230 710 3 2230-32, 1314 15, 643 3 1334, 285 -- 14%
709; 2237-39, 286 5235 2420 707 ; rae, 133 = 148: 9 Lift.
GOT 5) 24’ 72075" 25", 347 SOO. E4422 eal dle Aor
25° 1585 25°18 707, “700% AO45 “14te I 670.5 LA eae
BIS, YEO AULD Gites  ayGn". 147° 422 1426, 609 ; 142,
423; 26%, 672; 265%, 168, 165; 14°, 424; 15%, 424, 456;
462; 27, 4005) 2748. “460 r54*, OAT 5 15) 450, th edeaes
2818, 469; 281% 20, 467, 627, 158 456; 159 20 468 ; 151},


629); 2870 707. ASO 59 1522 S23 ce 11528 Ota


INDEX TO SCRIPTURE REFERENCES


migas-e1 461 fi ip ece 27 609 ; Woe
5OOm) LOG 505s; TOM 562.6570 .


HOLL wRDOS he lol NO Sin OLE:
Op NO, AKO GR Noi hie
NOLS A On mals a 2Ont eta AOS)
7302, 422, 409 5) 178,451;
P7404 pa 077, A225 1770s 401 |
1721-23, 422: 1722, 469; 1723,
AZO iT * SAGO; 8709 su) 189°)
AGO ZOO 7a Z2OR- SOS ab 78.0


2022+ 23, 562 2 2023, 663 2030+ 31
448 ; 212223 707,

EXCUB), EOD Eey3 GO 9 TL isis
TOA* \4A0;, 400 5,18, 5055 17%,
707 9 y ist. 560 : pis =28) 666 :
117, 613; 124, 471; 12+ 22 443;
SoG OO Ee 7S a2 SATS
Zam OZ ee Ee eA On mE an OOmE2 se
SOR OSO sy nen OO 5475027;
ete OO aster O2 77 oe ALS
47, 418 5 4°? 560 ; 512-74, 560 ;
OF} Gig, Orns IO, ieleia, ee hy
7O 2 G20-23. 665 ¢ B29 39" 571 .
OF WEL 70 ; oy 560 ; 1014, 689 ;
THO, Bape 8 WO, INS 3 a, Gy ALE
TOR ab ping 10"? 503, 578 ;

B78) 130 547) 10°,
Bay O70 5) Ot, O39 5 17 ak 2,
PE scenl 7 no S45 hoe 8 FO);
HOPS OS ILO a5) O21.

Romans, 118, 277; 128f 55 ;
Bam Oda tes, Sane Tat BS 308 |;
Tae, Dylgh gil- 12. 61; Bos Dopp
Beuaee 61 c Seo. AAR & 4* 16) B4015

ity EA, MUS BI, NSS)

512, 244, Any s plete: B20 UIT


Ones
poets


1115,


9
20s


EoOge ba 2) S005) 51-4 57.5) 0,
367 ; 62: & 11 426; 618-22, 3r1;
Fen C085 7", 279 5 7", 160.
g8t-, 332; 718-18 332; 717, 676;
718, 275 78-23, 272; 720 676;
Fea ye 296 5. 78, 276:
7, 272; 81, 433; 8°, 272, 279,
Rit eerSe, MeOOS se O25 OB, 5715
810 426; 811, 571; 84 ozs ;
SAA PAOON EO =34754 50 60. 1500);
See mOgn ot us. 4OOr, LOvand it,
538, 554; 1077, 492, 553, 630;
T125: 26 696; 123-8 560; 13}: 2
470 ; 15%, O10.

Tr G@ormihians, 122, 686.; 5*°7°, 665 ;


759


614, 418; 61, 571; 728, gyo;
CUmAZA a LOlL SOLO me LOM ORT
Ts LW ALS oyley spy,
570, 580, 12%, 563, 566, 574;
WA, Wrage eo HOLE Ae
AE ote Tig (eins Sie
Oba ee dee OL gs f.tAl S775
Sao me D meT 52 oma yemeT Eee)
A418 5 1520f, 708; 1521+ 2 300;
1523ft+, 705; 152526 729; 1526
FLED ANEIR NG SUI AKO
1551 82 OQ; 1555, 722° [Boe
244.

2 Corinthians, 15, 466; 124, 616;
ZiT RTOs oth ees 2d Se OOn:
4M, 4605 4s 5534 4 aie
Se 707 Ge nt ReO 5) Senate
pat OL SY 307, 470 aes
GYAN Bikes APIS SUR, eleays sit
LOO miei TO Si aloe AZO.

Galatiansiet*) 52700272 4g es eles
D805. 2S S003 nee Asay
2 AZO) 575 5 35) COB snes
ys 8 Gye Gators seg Ou,


YUE SERIE OOD SES Biles 232 Ch
O43 2 52 3oa 490: eas OAs
328, 382, 456, 540; 4°, 496; 4%,


Cy SAG BMS PPS BN, B23
Se, Gye s ty Whey

IB EN, IE yids hE (eyeyeyc
Tease 580 ; gis-18 Or = Bibs Lys wh
217 ae 560 : 219. 507, 561 :
272. 22, 696; 3°, 480; 4, 704;
4°, 419; 490%, 561, 42-8, 468 ;


41°, 523, 580; 41°, 560; 4%, 426;

Ae PACO se Aa WAZ Ord 7, Ol naa OLAN,

i ZS ey Geta. ica, Roy
~614; 61122, 165 ; 6, Tso.

Philippians wate Sea el eee eee hs

ILS AGT © 29 10° 346; DBS. 283,


Biss SPA O55 Zh, Ses 2h

675; 438, 283, 368, 423.
COlOSSIaTIG ele re AG ee Ooms

Waa GR Byte I adeep A.


484 ; 37°, 426; 378, 285.

1 Thessalonians, 4-18 709 ;
708 7 4i*, 634 51517, 669 5-519, G16.

2 Thessalonians, 1°4° 707; 2°) 707 ;
2G

TD ADibaaOsoyy, aE eloy Le te Leyes 5 EN
615.


4ff.
Aeon


760


A Meinung 1 exes BS. pigs gle
597, 610 ; 4%, 707; 4%, 346.

Ants e123 9492)-6 214 Oreo FSO.

IORI, WE AOS no Yee
ADA ee eet S05) 62°28 AG «
210 654; 214-16 166; 215 Bi 2
BUI RIO54 FT 3 ROSA ys 3° Fes Le |
51, 404.5) 5°; O54 7,804: 48615 56%,
480 ; Gf. 463; Ge at, AD2" Oe
423; 9", 464; 9% 452 + 101%
BiG W242 NEO TAY Alyn.

James, NEO BM Wei o 7h
571.


2
ites


PRINTED BY MORRISON AND GIBB LTD,


INDEX TO SCRIPTURE REFERENCES


Te Texeweyy, Gea erie BEM) ci) 2 Be
405, 501; 2" 430) 455 5
423; 224 A208 319, 419; 319. 20)
(pais ENE Ome Ae oy) oxi
OSs Bs, WOKS EOC ako).

2) Peter) 303 3 024.597 600 res
LOSE 35205 oho.

Tjobn,) 2% 3225) (ee) Asan
DOs Wy SG BE eo) HOS <
260%. 4935. Sl S30n Ss 80rm aes
hy WOOF OE Be) 3 1, aK 2
Hi ROLES BSR LEO. Kar

Jude, 6, 165.


?


22
2";


» EDINBURGH AND LONDON


WWE] ae Babee ER REY £


Se
1928 / The Christian faith


8381


. Schleiermacher, Friedrich
“°° The Christian faiths


RESR CORRE :
Wis tiish3tatgs
